^resented  to 


I  orouto, 
<j 

By  ^Frederick, 
November.  1885 


to 

(Ehe  l^tbrarg 

nf  the 

toerstt    of  (Eorartto 


Wycliffe  College  Library 


CLARK'S 


FOREIGN 


THEOLOGICAL   LIBRARY, 


FOUETH  SERIES. 
VOL.  XIV. 


on  t!)e 

YOL.  I. 


EDINBURGH: 
T.   AND    T.    CLARK,    38,    GEORGE   STREET. 

MDCCCLXXXIV. 


PRINTED   BY  MORRISON  AND  GIBB, 
FOR 

T.   &   T.  CLARK,    EDINBURGH. 

LONDON,       ....  HAMILTON,    ADAMS,    AND  CO. 

DUBLIN,        ....  GEORGE  HERBERT. 

NEW   YORK,  .          .          .          SCRIBNER  AND   WELFOBD. 


BIBLICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON 


THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


BY 


FRANZ    DELITZSCH,    D.B., 


PROFESSOR   OF   T1IEOLOGV. 


from  ilje 

BY 
THE    EEV.     JAMES     MARTIN,     B.  A. 


VOL.  I. 


EDINBURGH: 
T.  &  T.  CLARK,  38,  GEORGE  STREET. 

MDCCCLXXXIV. 


TABLE   OF   CONTENTS. 


PACK 

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT,  .        1 


THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 
INTKODUCTION. 

Time  of  the  Prophet,             .  .            .            .            .            .31 

Arrangement  of  the  Collection,  .....         53 

The  Critical  Questions,          .  .            .            .             .            .56 

Exposition  in  its  existing  state,  .            .            .            .            .63 

EXPOSITION. 
FIKST  HALF  OF  THE  COLLECTION  (CHAP.  I.-XXXIX.). 

I.  PROPHECIES  RELATING  TO  THE  ONWARD  COURSE  OF  THE  GREAT 

MASS  OF  THE  PEOPLE  TOWARDS    HARDENING  OF  HEART 

(CHAP,  i.- vi.) : 
Opening  Address  concerning  the  Ways  of  Jehovah  with  His 

Ungrateful  and  Rebellious  Nation  (Chap.  i.  2  sqq.),  .         73 

The  Way  of  general  Judgment ;  or  the  Course  of  Israel  from 

False  Glory  to  the  True  (Chap,  ii.-iv.),       .  .  .       110 

Judgment   of    Devastation   upon    the   Vineyard   of   Jehovah 

(Chap  v.),  .  .  «    '         .  •  .159 

The  Prophet's  Account  of  his  own  divine  Mission  (Chap,  vi.),  .       188 


Vl  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

II.  CONSOLATION  OF  EMMANUEL  IN  THE  MIDST  OF  THE  ASSYRIAN 

OPPRESSIONS  (CHAP,  vn.-xn.) : 

Divine  Sign  of  the  Virgin's  wondrous  Son  (Chap,  vii.),  .      206 

Two  Omens  of  the  Immediate  Future  (Chap.  viii.  1-4),  .      228 

Esoteric  Addresses  (Chap.  viii.  5-xii.)  : 

A.  Consolation  of  Immanuel  in  the  coming  Darkness  (Chap. 

viii.  5-ix.  6),      .  .  ,  .  .  .      231 

B.  Jehovah's  outstretched  Hand  (Chap.  ix.  7-x.  4), .  .       255 

C.  Destruction  of  the  imperial  Kingdom  of  the  World,  and 

Rise  of  the  Kingdom  of  Jehovah  in  His  Anointed  (Chap. 

x.  5-xii.),  ..•:,«  -  .  .  .264 

III.  COLLECTION  OF  ORACLES  CONCERNING  THE  HEATHEN  (CHAP. 

xm. -xxm.)  : 
Oracle  concerning  the  Chaldeans,  the  Heirs  of  the  Assyrians 

(Chap.  xiii.  1-xiv.  27),       *  „  .  .  .294 

The  Oracle  concerning  Philistia  (Chap.  xiv.  28-32),      .  .      317 

The  Oracle  concerning  Moab  (Chap.  xv.  xvi.),  .  .  .       321 

The  Oracle  concerning  Damascus  and  Israel  (Chap,  xvii.),         .      339 
Ethiopia's  Submission  to  Jehovah  (Chap,  xviii.),  .  .      347 

The  Oracle  concerning  Egypt  (Chap,  xix.),       .  .  .       354 

Symbol  of  the  Fall  of  Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  and  its  Interpreta 
tion  (Chap,  xx.),    .  .  .  .      370 
The  Oracles  concerning  the  Desert  of  the  Sea  (Babylon)  (Chap. 

xxi.  1-10),  .  .  .  .  .  .376 

The  Oracle  concerning  the  Silence  of  Death  (Edom)  (Chap.  xxi. 

11,  12),      .  .  .  .  '         .  .  .      383 

The  Oracle  in  the  Evening  (against  Arabia)  (Chap.  xxi.  13-17),       386 

The  Oracle  concerning  the  Valley  of  Vision  (Jerusalem)  (Chap. 

xxii.  1-14),  .  .  ...  .  .389 

Against  Shebna  the  Steward  (Chap.  xxii.  15-25),         .  ..      398 

The  Oracle  concerning  Tyre  (Chap,  xxiii.),        .  .  .      404 

IV.  FINALE  OF  THE  GREAT  CATASTROPHE  (CHAP.  XXIV.-XXVIL),       .      421 
The  Judgment  upon  the  Earth  (Chap,  xxiv.),    .          •  .         •    •      424 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.  Vll 

PAGE 

The  Fourfold  Melodious  Echo  (Chap.  xxv.  xxvi.)  : 

A.  First  Echo :  Salvation  of  the  Nations  after  the  Fall  of  the 

imperial  City  (Chap.  xxv.  1-8),  .  .  .       436 

B.  Second  Echo :  The  Humiliation  of  Moab  (Chap.  xxv.  9-12),       441 

C.  Third  Echo  :  Israel  brought  back,  or  raised  from  the  Dead 

(Chap,  xxvi.), '.      443 

D.  The  Fourth  Echo  :  The  Fruit-bearing  Vineyard  under  the 

Protection  of  Jehovah  (Chap,  xxvii.  2-6),          .  .455 

Jehovah's  chastising  and  saving  Course  towards  Israel  (Chap. 

xxvii.  7-13), 457 


INTRODUCTION 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 


| HE  prophetical  histories  are  followed  in  the  Old 
Testament  canon  by  the  prophetical  books  of  pre 
diction.  The  two  together  form  the  middle  portion 
of  the  threefold  canon,  under  the  common  name  of 
On  account  of  their  relative  position  in  the  canon,  the 
former  are  also  described  as  WfihKVJ  WWty  the  first  prophets, 
and  the  latter  D>3nn&5n?  the  last  prophets.  In  the  Masora  this 
central  portion  is  sometimes  designated  as  NPiftP£'tf,  possibly 
because  it  exhibits  a  complete  and  homogeneous  whole.  The 
first  prophets  are  in  that  case  distinguished  from  the  last,  as 

Knwj?  Nnob^K  and  N$n  untitafc 

The  thorah  is  indeed  also  a  prophetical  work,  since  Moses, 
the  mediator  through  whom  the  law  was  revealed,  was  for  that 
very  reason  a  prophet  without  an  equal  (Deut.  xxxiv.  10) ;  and 
even  the  final  codification  of  the  great  historical  law-book 
possessed  a  prophetical  character  (Ezra  ix.  11).  But  it  would 
not  have  been  right  to  include  the  thorah  (Pentateuch)  in  that 
portion  of  the  canon  which  is  designated  as  "the  prophets" 
(nebiim),  inasmuch  as,  although  similar  in  character,  it  is  not 
similar  in  rank  to  the  other  prophetical  books.  It  stands  by 
itself  as  perfectly  unique — the  original  record  which  regulated 
on  all  sides  the  being  and  life  of  Israel  as  the  chosen  nation, 
and  to  which  all  other  prophecy  in  Israel  stood  in  a  derivative 
relation.  And  this  applies  not  to  prophecy  alone,  but  to  all  the 
later  writings.  The  thorah  was  not  only  the  type  of  the  pro 
phetic  histories,  but  of  the  non-prophetic,  the  priestly,  political, 

VOL.  I.  A 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 


and  popular  histories  also.  The  former  followed  the  Jehovistic 
or  Deuteronomic  type,  the  latter  the  Elohistic.  The  thorah 
unites  the  prophetical  and  (so  to  speak)  hagiographical  styles 
of  historical  composition  in  a  manner  which  is  peculiar  to  itself, 
and  not  to  be  met  with  in  any  of  the  works  included  among  the 


Those  who  imagine  that  it  is  only  because  of  their  later 
origin,  that  the  historical  works  which  are  found  among  the 
hagiographa  have  not  found  their  appropriate  place  among  the 
"  first  prophets,"  have  evidently  no  idea  whatever  of  this  diver 
sity  in  the  style  of  historical  writing.  Ezra  —  whom  we  have 
good  reason  for  regarding  as  the  author  of  the  larger  "  book  of 
the  Kings,"  which  the  chronicler  refers  to  under  the  title  of 
"  the  story  of  the  book  of  the  Kings"  (midrash  sepher  liam- 
melacim,  2  Chron.  xxiv.  27),  a  compilation  relating  to  the 
history  of  Israel,  to  which  he  had  appended  the  history  of  the 
time  of  the  restoration  as  the  concluding  part  —  is  never  called 
a  prophet  (nabi),  and  in  fact  was  not  one.  The  chronicler  — 
who  not  only  had  before  him  our  book  of  Samuel,  which  has 
been  so  arbitrarily  divided  into  two  parts,  and  our  book  of 
Kings,  which  has  been  just  as  arbitrarily  divided  in  the  same 
manner,  but  used  as  his  principal  authority  the  book  of  Ezra 
just  referred  to,  and  who  worked  out  from  this  the  compendium 
of  history  which  lies  before  us,  concluding  with  the  memorabilia 
of  Ezra,  which  we  possess  in  a  distinct  form  as  the  book  of 
Ezra  —  also  asserts  no  claim  to  be  a  prophet,  and,  judging  from 
the  liturgico-historical  purpose  of  his  work,  is  more  likely  to 
have  been  a  priest.  Nehemiah,  from  whose  memorabilia  our 
book  of  Nehemiah  is  an  extract  arranged  in  conformity  with 
the  book  of  Ezra,  was,  as  we  well  know,  not  a  prophet,  but  a 
Tirsdta?  i.e.  a  royal  Persian  governor,  and  at  the  same  time  an 
Israelitish  patriot,  whose  prayerful  heart  was  set  upon  the 
welfare  of  his  people,  and  who  had  performed  good  service  in 
connection  with  the  restoration  of  Jerusalem  by  the  erection  of 
buildings  and  the  introduction  of  reforms.  The  book  of  Esther, 
with  its  religious  features  kept  as  they  are  in  the  background, 

1  The  title  Tirshaiha  is  probably  to  be  explained  according  to  the 
Armenian  tir-sat,  "  lord  of  the  kingdom  or  province."  Shatha  is  another 
form  of  the  terminations  to  such  names  of  towns  as  Artaxata  (==  Artasata, 
for  sat  is  equivalent  to  the  Persian  khsatra),  Samosata,  etc. 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  3 

is  as  far  removed  as  possible  from  the  prophetic  style  of  his 
torical  composition :  it  differs  indeed  from  this  quite  as  much 
as  the  feast  of  purim — that  Jewish  carnival — differs  from  the 
feast  of  passover,  the  Israelitish  Christmas.  It  does  appear 
surprising,  however,  that  the  book  of  Ruth  should  stand  among 
the  hagiographa.  This  little  book  is  so  similar  in  character  to 
the  concluding  portion  of  the  book  of  Judges  (ch.  xvii.-xxi.), 
that  it  might  be  placed  between  Judges  and  Samuel.  And  in 
all  probability  it  did  stand  there  originally,  but  for  liturgical 
reasons  it  was  added  to  the  so-called  five  megilloth  (festal  rolls), 
which  follow  one  another  in  our  editions,  so  to  speak,  according 
to  the  calendar  of  feasts  of  the  ecclesiastical  year :  for  the  Song 
of  Solomon  is  the  lesson  for  the  eighth  day  of  the  feast  of 
passover ;  Ruth,  that  of  the  second  day  of  the  feast  of  Slialuoth 
(pentecost)  ;  Kinoth  (Lamentations),  that  of  the  ninth  Abib  ; 
Koheleth  (Ecclesiastes),  that  of  the  third  day  of  the  feast  of 
tabernacles  ;  and  Esther,  that  of  the  feast  of  purim,  which 
fell  in  the  middle  of  Adar. 

This  is  also  the  simplest  answer  to  the  question  why  the 
Lamentations  of  Jeremiah  are  not  placed  among  the  prophetic 
writings,  and  appended,  as  we  should  expect,  to  the  collection 
of  Jeremiah's  prophecies.  The  Psalms  are  placed  first  among 
the  hagiographa — although  David  might  be  called  a  prophet 
(Acts  ii.  30),  and  Asaph  is  designated  "the  seer" — for  the 
simple  reason  that  they  do  not  belong  to  the  literature  of 
prophecy,  but  to  that  of  the  shir  Jehovah,  i.e.  the  sacred 
(liturgical)  lyric  poetry.  Their  prophetic  contents  rest  entirely 
upon  a  lyric  ground,  whereas  it  is  the  very  reverse  with  the 
Lamentations  of  Jeremiah,  the  lyric  contents  of  which,  though 
less  prophetic  in  themselves,  presuppose  throughout  the  official 
position  and  teaching  of  Jeremiah  the  prophet.  The  canonical 
nebiim  or  prophets  embrace  only  the  writings  of  such  persons 
as  were  called  to  proclaim  the  word  of  God  publicly,  whether 
in  writing  or  by  word  of  mouth ;  not  like  the  priests,  according 
to  definite  modes  prescribed  by  the  law,  but  in  a  free  unfettered 
manner,  by  virtue  of  a  special  gift  and  calling.  The  word  nabi 
is  to  be  regarded,  as  we  may  judge  from  its  Arabic  flexion,  not 
as  a  passive,  but  as  an  active  form ;  in  fact,  as  an  emphatic 
form  of  the  active  participle,  denoting  the  proclaimer,  publisher, 
speaker,  namely,  of  God  and  of  His  secrets.  The  oldest  use  of 


4  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

the  word  (i-id.  Gen.  xx.  7,  cf.  xviii.  17-19,  and  Ps.  cv.  15), 
which  was  revived  by  the  chronicler,  is  incomparably  less 
restricted  in  its  meaning  than  the  later  use.  But  when  used 
to  designate  the  middle  portion  of  the  Old  Testament  canon, 
although  the  word  is  not  so  limited  as  in  Amos  vii.  14,  where 
it  signifies  a  man  who  has  passed  through  a  school  of  the 
prophets  and  been  trained  in  intercourse  with  other  prophets, 
and  has  made  prophetic  teaching  from  the  very  first  the  exclu- 
sive  profession  of  his  life ;  yet  it  is  employed  in  a  sense  con 
nected  with  the  organization  of  the  theocratic  life,  as  the  title 
given  to  those  who  stood  forward  as  public  teachers  by  virtue 
of  a  divine  call  and  divine  revelations,  and  who  therefore  not 
only  possessed  the  gift  (charisma)  of  prophecy,  but  performed 
the  duties  of  a  prophet  both  in  preaching  and  writing,  and 
held  an  office  to  which,  at  least  on  Ephraimitish  soil,  the  insti 
tution  of  schools  of  the  prophets  gave  the  distinct  stamp  of  a 
separate  order.  This  will  serve  to  explain  the  fact  that  the 
book  of  Daniel  was  not  placed  among  the  nebiim.  Daniel 
himself  was  not  a  prophet  in  this  sense.  Not  only  was  the 
mode  in  which  the  divine  revelations  were  made  to  him  a 
different  one  from  the  prevailing  fairlwout  TrpotyrjTiKr),  as  Julius 
Africanus  observes  in  his  writing  to  Origen  concerning  Susanna, 
but  he  did  not  hold  the  office  of  a  prophet ;  and  for  this  reason 
even  the  Talmud  (&.  Megitta,  3a),  when  speaking  of  the  rela 
tion  in  which  the  prophets  after  the  captivity  stood  to  him, 
says,  "  They  stood  above  him,  for  they  were  prophets ;  but  he 
was  not  a  prophet."  "  A  distinction  must  be  drawn,"  as 
Witsius  has  said,  "  between  the  gift  of  prophecy,  which  was 
bestowed  even  upon  private  persons,  and  consisted  in  the 
revelation  of  secret  things,  and  the  prophetic  office,  which  was 
an  extraordinary  function  in  the  church,  committed  to  certain 
persons  who  were  set  apart  by  a  special  call  from  God." 1 

The  reason,  therefore,  why  all  the  historical  and  prophetic 
books  which  are  to  be  found  among  the  hagiographa  (cethubim, 
which  the  son  of  Sirach  speaks  of  in  his  prologue  as  "  other 
books  of  our  fathers,"  and  "  the  rest  of  the  books")  were 
excluded  from  the  second  or  middle  part  of  the  Old  Testament 
canon  called  nebiim}  rested  upon  a  primary  distinction  between 
writings  that  were  strictly  prophetic  and  writings  that  were 
1  See  my  article  on  Daniel  in  Herzog's  Cyclopxdia. 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  5 

not  so, — a  distinction  which  existed  in  the  domain  of  history  as 
well  as  in  that  of  prophecy.  Thus  the  historical  books  from 
Joshua  to  Kings,  and  the  prophetical  books  from  Isaiah  to 
Malachi,  were  separated,  as  works  written  by  men  whose 
vocation  in  life  was  that  of  a  prophet  and  therefore  works  of 
a  prophetical  character,  from  such  books  as  Chronicles  and 
Daniel,  which  were  written  indeed  under  the  influence  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  but  not  in  the  exercise  of  a  prophetical  calling 
received  through  a  prophetical  impulse  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
The  two  different  kinds  of  historical  composition  are  also 
perfectly  unmistakeable.  Each  of  them  has  its  own  peculiar 
history.  The  best  designation  for  the  non-prophetical,  taking 
into  account  its  history  and  remains,  would  be  the  rational  or 
annalistic.  Of  course  it  is  quite  possible  for  a  prophetical 
history  like  the  book  of  Kings,  or  an  annalistic  history  like 
that  of  Chronicles,  to  embrace  within  itself  certain  ingredients 
which  really  belong  to  the  other  historical  style ;  but  when  we 
have  once  discovered  the  characteristics  of  the  two  styles,  it  is 
almost  always  possible  to  single  out  at  once,  and  with  perfect 
certainty,  those  ingredients  which  are  foreign  to  the  peculiar 
character  of  the  work  in  which  they  are  found,  and  have  simply 
been  made  subservient  to  the  writer's  plan.  It  is  very  neces 
sary,  therefore,  that  we  should  look  more  minutely  at  the  two 
styles  of  historical  writing,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the 
literature  of  the  books  of  prophecy  gradually  arose  out  of  the 
literature  of  the  prophetical  books  of  history,  and  so  eventually 
attained  to  an  independent  standing,  though  they  never  became 
entirely  separate  and  distinct,  as  we  may  see  from  the  book  of 
Isaiah  itself,  which  is  interwoven  with  many  fragments  of 
prophetico-historical  writing. 

The  oldest  type  of  non-prophetic  historical  writing  is  to  be 
found,  as  we  have  already  observed,  in  the  priestly  Elohistic 
style  which  characterizes  one  portion  of  the  Pentateuch,  as 
distinguished  from  the  Jehovistic  or  Deuteronomic  style  of  the 
other.  These  two  types  are  continued  in  the  book  of  Joshua ; 
and  taken  as  a  whole,  the  Jehovistic,  Deuteronomic  type  is  to 
be  seen  in  those  sections  which  relate  to  the  history  of  the  con 
quest;  the  priestly,  Elohistic,  in  those  which  refer  to  the  division 
of  the  land.  At  the  same  time,  they  are  coloured  in  many 
other  ways  ;  and  there  is  nothing  to  favour  the  idea  that  the 


6  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

book  of  Joshua  ono-ht  to  be  combined  with  the  Pentateuch,  so 

O  ' 

as  to  form  a  hexateuchical  whole.  The  stamp  of  prophetic 
history  is  impressed  upon  the  book  of  Judges  at  the  very  out 
set  by  the  introduction,  which  shows  that  the  history  of  the 
judges  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  mirror  of  the  saving  government 
of  God ;  whilst  the  concluding  portion,  like  the  book  of  Ruth, 
is  occupied  with  Bethlehemitish  narratives  that  point  to  the 
.Davidic  kingdom,  the  kingdom  of  promise,  which  formed  the 
direct  sphere  of  prophecy.  The  body  of  the  book  is  founded, 
indeed,  upon  oral  and  even  written  forms  of  the  saga  of  the 
judges ;  but  not  without  the  intervention  of  a  more  complete 
work,  from  which  only  extracts  are  given,  and  in  which  the 
prophetic  pencil  of  a  man  like  Samuel  had  combined  into  one 
organic  whole  the  histories  of  the  judges  not  only  to  the  time  of 
Samson,  but  to  the  entire  overthrow  of  the  Philistian  oppres 
sion.  That  the  books  of  Samuel  are  a  prophetico-historical  work, 
is  expressly  attested  by  a  passage  in  the  Chronicles,  of  which 
we  shall  speak  more  fully  presently;  but  in  the  passages  relat 
ing  to  the  conflicts  with  the  four  Philistian  children  of  the 
giants  (2  Sam.  xxi.  15  sqq.  =  1  Chron.  xx.  4  sqq.),  and  to  the 
Davidic  gilborim,  i.e.  the  heroes  who  stood  nearest  to  him 
(2  Sam.  xxiii.  8  sqq.  =  1  Chron.  xi.  11  sqq.),  they  contain  at 
least  two  remnants  of  popular  or  national  historical  writing,  in 
which  we  discern  a  certain  liking  for  the  repetition  of  the  same 
opening  and  concluding  words,  which  have  all  the  ring  of  a 
refrain,  and  give  to  the  writing  very  much  of  the  character  of 
an  epic  or  popular  ode,  suggesting,  as  Eisenlohr  has  said,  the 
legend  of  Roland  and  Artus,  or  the  Spanish  Cid.  We  find 
more  of  these  remains  in  the  Chronicles — such,  for  example,  as 
the  list  of  those  who  attached  themselves  to  David  in  Ziklag, 
and,  in  fact,  during  the  greater  part  of  Saul's  persecutions. 
It  commences  thus  :  "  And  these  are  they  that  came  to  David 
to  Ziklag,  whilst  still  hard  pressed  on  the  part  of  Saul  the  son 
of  Kish ;  and  they  belong  to  the  heroes,  those  ready  to  help  in 
war,  armed  with  bows,  both  with  the  right  hand  and  the  left 
hand  using  stones  and  arrows  by  means  of  the  bow."  Some  of 
these  fragments  may  have  fallen  singly  and  unwrought  into  the 
hands  of  the  later  historians ;  but  so  far  as  they  are  tabulated, 
the  chronicler  leaves  us  in  no  doubt  as  to  the  place  where  they 
were  chiefly  to  be  found.  After  giving  a  census  of  the  Levites 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  7 

from  thirty  years  old  and  upwards,  in  1  Chron.  xxiii.  2-24<3,  he 
adds,  in  ver.  24&  and  the  following  verses,  in  a  fragmentary 
manner,  that  David,  taking  into  account  the  fact  that  the  hard 
work  of  past  times  had  no  longer  to  be  performed,  lowered  the 
age  for  commencing  official  service  to  twenty,  "  for  in  the  last 
words  of  David  (dibre  David  ha-acheronim)  the  descendants  of 
Levi  are  numbered  from  the  twentieth  year  of  their  age."  He 
refers  here  to  the  last  part  of  the  history  of  David's  life  in  the 
"  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel "  (seplier  malce  Israel),  which  lay 
before  him  ;  and  from  what  other  work  such  lists  as  these  had 
been  taken  into  this  his  main  source,  we  may  learn  from  1  Chron. 
xxvii.  24,  where  he  follows  up  the  list  of  the  tribe-princes  of 
Israel  with  this  remark  with  reference  to  a  general  census  which 
David  had  intended  to  take :  "  Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  began 

o 

to  number,  but  he  did  not  finish  it ;  and  there  arose  a  bursting 
forth  of  wrath  upon  Israel  in  consequence,  and  this  numbering 
wa-s  not  placed  in  the  numbering  ("ISDD3,  read  ")SD3,  '  in  the 
book')  of  the  chronicles  (dibre  hayyamim)  of  David."  Conse 
quently  the  annals  or  chronicles  of  David  contained  such 
tabular  notices  as  these,  having  the  character  of  popular  or 
national  historical  composition  ;  and  they  were  copied  from 
these  annals  into  the  great  king's-book,  which  lay  before  the 
chronicler. 

The  official  annals  commenced  with  David,  and  led  to  those 
histories  of  the  kingdom  from  which  the  authors  of  the  books 
of  Kings  and  Chronicles  for  the  most  part  drew  their  materials, 
even  if  they  did  not  do  so  directly.  Saul's  government  con 
sisted  chiefly  in  military  supremacy,  and  the  unity  of  the  king 
dom  as  renewed  by  him  did  not  embrace  much  more  than  the 
simple  elements  of  a  military  constitution.  But  under  David 
there  grew  up  a  reciprocal  relation  between  the  throne  and  the 
people,  of  the  most  comprehensive  character ;  and  the  multipli 
cation  of  government  offices  followed,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
from  the  thorough  organization  of  the  kingdom.  We  find 
David,  as  head  of  the  kingdom,  asserting  his  official  supremacy 
on  all  hands,  even  in  relation  to  religious  affairs,  and  meet  with 
several  entirely  new  posts  that  were  created  by  him.  Among 
these  was  the  office  of  mazcir  (recorder  in  Eng.  ver. :  TK.),  i.e.  as 
the  LXX.  have  often  rendered  it,  vTro/jLv^fjiaToypa^o^  or  (in 
'2  Sam.  viii.  16)  eVt  r&v  vTrofAi'rjfjLaTcov  (Jerome:  acoinineiitariis, 


B  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

a  thoroughly  Roman  translation).  The  Targums  give  a  similar 
rendering,  »jn3T£$J  N3OD,  the  keeper  of  the  memorabilia  (i.e.  of 
the  "  book  of  records  "  or  annals,  2  Cliron.  xxxiv.  8,  cf.  Ezra 
iv.  15,  Esther  vi.  1).  The  mazcir  had  to  keep  the  annals  of 
the  kingdom  ;  and  his  office  was  a  different  one  from  that  of 
the  soplwr,  or  chancellor.  The  sopher  (scribe  in  Eng.  ver. :  TR.) 
had  to  draw  up  the  public  documents ;  the  mazcir  had  to  keep 
them,  and  incorporate  them  in  the  connected  history  of  the 
nation.  Both  of  these  offices  are  met  with  throughout  the 
whole  of  the  East,  both  ancient  and  modern,  even  to  the 
remotest  parts  of  Asia.1  It  is  very  evident  that  the  office  in 
question  was  created  by  David,  from  the  fact  that  allusions  to 
the  annals  commence  with  the  chronicles  (dibre  hayyamim)  of 
David  (1  Chron.  xxvii.  24),  and  are  continued  in  the  sepJier 
dibre  Shelomoh  (a  contraction  for  sepher  dibre  hayyamim  Shelo- 
moh,  "book  of  the  chronicles  of  Solomon,"  1  Kings  xi.  41). 
The  references  are  then  carried  on  in  Judah  to  the  end  of  the 
reign  of  Jehoiakim,  and  in  Israel  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of 
Pekah.  Under  David,  and  also  under  Solomon,  the  office  of 
national  annalist  was  filled  by  Jehoshaphat  ben-Ahilud.  The 
fact  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  annals  of  David  and 
Solomon,  the  references  are  always  made  to  annals  of  the 
"  kings  of  Judah "  and  "  kings  of  Israel,"  admits  of  a  very 
simple  explanation.  If  we  regard  the  national  annals  as  a  com 
plete  and  independent  work,  they  naturally  divide  themselves 
into  four  parts,  of  which  the  first  two  treated  of  the  history 
of  the  kingdom  in  its  unity ;  the  last  two,  viz.  the  annals  of 
the  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel,  of  the  history  of  the  divided 
kingdom.  The  original  archives,  no  doubt,  perished  when 
Jerusalem  was  laid  in  ashes  by  the  Chaldeans.  But  copies 
were  taken  from  them  and  preserved,  and  the  histories  of  the 
reigns  of  David  and  Solomon  in  the  historical  books  which 
have  come  down  to  us,  and  are  peculiarly  rich  in  annalistic 

1  The  office  of  national  annalist  among  the  ancient  Persians  (see  Bris- 
Eonius,  De  reyno  Persarum,  i.  §  229),  and  that  of  waknjinuwis,  or  historian, 
which  still  exists  at  the  Persian  court,  are  perfectly  similar  in  character. 
The  Chinese  have  had  their  national  historians  from  the  time  of  the  Emperor 
Wu-ti  of  the  Han  dynasty  (in  the  second  century  after  Christ),  and  the 
annals  of  each  dynasty  are  published  on  its  extinction.  The  same  insti 
tution  existed  in  the  kingdom  of  Banna,  where  the  annals  of  every  king 
\vere  written  after  his  death. 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  9 

materials,  show  very  clearly  that  copies  of  the  annals  of  David 
and  Solomon  were  taken  and  distributed  with  special  diligence, 
and  that  they  were  probably  circulated  in  a  separate  form,  as 
was  the  case  with  some  of  the  decades  of  Livy. 

Eichard  Simon  supposed  the  ecrivains  publics  to  be  pro 
phets  ;  and  upon  this  hypothesis  he  founded  an  exploded  view 
as  to  the  origin  of  the  Old  Testament  writings.  Even  in  more 
recent  times  the  annals  have  occasionally  been  regarded  as 
prophetic  histories,  in  which  case  the  distinction  between  pro 
phetic  and  annalistic  histories  would  unquestionably  fall  to  the 
ground.  But  the  arguments  adduced  in  support  of  this  do  not 
prove  what  is  intended.  In  the  first  place,  appeal  is  made  to 
the  statements  of  the  chronicler  himself,  with  regard  to  certain 
prophetic  elements  in  the  work  which  constituted  his  principal 
source,  viz.  the  great  king's-book ;  and  it  is  taken  for  granted 
that  this  great  king's-book  contained  the  combined  annals  of 
the  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel.  But  (a)  the  chronicler  speaks 
of  his  principal  source  under  varying  names  as  a  book  of  the 
kings,  and  on  one  occasion  as  dibre,  i.e.  res  gestce  or  histories, 
of  the  kings  of  Israel  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  18),  but  never  as  the 
annals  of  the  kings  of  Israel  or  Judah  :  he  even  refers  to  it  once 
as  midrasli  seplier  hammelacim  (commentarius  libri  regum),  and 
consequently  as  an  expository  and  more  elaborate  edition  either 
of  our  canonical  book  of  Kings,  or  else  (a  point  which  we  will 
leave  undecided)  of  an  earlier  book  generally,  (b)  In  this 
midrash  the  history  of  the  kings  was  undoubtedly  illustrated  by 
numerous  comprehensive  prophetico-historical  portions  :  but  the 
chronicler  says  expressly,  on  several  occasions,  that  these  were 
ingredients  incorporated  into  it  (2  Chron.  xx.  34,  xxxii.  32)  ; 
so  that  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  them  with  regard  to 
the  prophetic  authorship  of  his  principal  source,  and  still  less  as 
to  that  of  the  annals.  We  do  not,  in  saying  this,  dispute  for 
a  moment  the  fact,  that  there  were  prophetic  elements  to  be 
found  among  the  documents  admitted  into  the  annals,  and 
not  merely  such  as  related  to  levitical  and  military  affairs, 
or  others  of  a  similar  kind;  nor  do  we  deny  that  the  inter 
position  of  great  prophets  in  the  history  of  the  times  would 
be  there  mentioned  and  described.  There  are,  in  fact,  distinct 
indications  of  this,  of  which  we  shall  find  occasion  to  speak 
more  fully  by  and  by.  But  it  would  be  the  greatest  literary 


10  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

blunder  that  could  be  made,  to  Imagine  that  the  accounts  of 
Elijah  and  Elisha,  for  example,  which  have  all  the  stamp  of 
their  Ephraimitish  and  prophetic  authorship  upon  the  forefront, 
could  possibly  have  been  taken  from  the  annals ;  more  espe 
cially  as  Joram  the  king  of  Israel,  in  whose  reign  Elisha  lived, 
is  the  only  king  of  the  northern  kingdom  in  connection  with 
whose  reign  there  is  no  reference  to  the  annals  at  all.  The 
kind  of  documents,  which  were  principally  received  into  the 
annals  and  incorporated  into  the  connected  history,  may  be 
inferred  from  such  examples  as  2  Chron.  xxxv.  4,  where  the 
division  of  the  Levites  into  classes  is  taken  from  "  the  writing 
of  David"  and  "  the  writing  of  Solomon :"  whether  we  suppose 
that  the  documents  in  question  were  designated  royal  writings, 
because  they  were  drawn  up  by  royal  command  and  had  received 
the  king's  approval ;  or  that  the  sections  of  the  annals,  in  which 
they  were  contained,  were  really  based  upon  documents  written 
with  the  king's  own  hand  (vid.  1  Chron.  xxviii.  11—19).  When 
we  bear  in  mind  that  the  account  given  by  the  chronicler  of 
the  arrangements  made  by  David  with  reference  to  priests  and 
Levites  rests  upon  the  annals  as  their  ultimate  source,  we  have, 
at  any  rate,  in  2  Chron.  xxxv.  4  a  confirmation  of  the  national, 
and  so  to  speak,  regal  character  of  the  year-books  in  question. 
A  second  argument  employed  to  prove  that  the  annals  were 
prophetic  histories,  is  the  fact  that  otherwise  they  would  not 
have  been  written  in  a  theocratic  spirit,  especially  in  the  king 
dom  of  Israel.  But  (1)  their  official  or  state  origin  is  evident, 
from  the  fact  that  they  break  off  just  where  the  duties  of  the 
prophets  as  historiographs  really  began.  For  fourteen  of  the 
references  to  the  annals  in  our  book  of  Kings,  from  Reho- 
boam  and  Jeroboam  onwards,  are  to  be  found  in  the  history 
of  the  kings  of  Judah  (it  being  only  in  the  case  of  Ahaziah, 
Amaziah,  and  Jehoahaz  that  the  references  are  wanting),  and 
seventeen  in  the  history  of  the  kings  of  Israel  (the  reference 
failing  in  the  case  of  Joram  alone) ;  whilst  in  both  lines  the 
annals  do  not  reach  to  the  last  king  in  each  kingdom,  but  only 
to  Jehoiakim  and  Pekah,  from  which  we  may  conclude  that  the 
writing  of  annals  was  interrupted  with  the  approaching  over 
throw  of  the  two  kingdoms.  Now,  if  (6)  we  examine  the  thirty- 
one  references  carefully,  we  shall  find  that  sixteen  of  them 
merely  affirm  that  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  the  king  in  question, 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  11 

what  he  did,  are  written  in  the  annals  (1  Kings  xiv.  29 ; 
2  Kings  viii.  23,  xii.  20,  xv.  6,  36,  xvi.  19,  xxi.  25,  xxiii.  28, 
xxiv.  5;  1  Kings  xv.  31,  xvi.  14;  2  Kings  i.  18,  xv.  11,  21, 
26,  31).  In  the  case  of  four  Israelitish  kings,  it  is  simply 
stated  in  addition  to  this,  that  their  geburah  (might,  heroism, 
i.e.  their  bravery  in  war)  is  written  in  the  annals  (1  Kings  xvi. 
5,  27 ;  2  Kings  x.  34,  xiii.  8).  But  in  the  accounts  of  the  fol 
lowing  kings  we  find  more  precise  statements  as  to  what  was  to 
be  read  in  the  annals  concerning  them,  viz. :  Abijam  carried  on 
war  with  Jeroboam,  as  might  be  read  in  them  (1  Kings  xv.  7) ; 
in  the  case  of  Asa  they  contained  an  account  of  "  his  heroism, 
and  all  that  he  did,  and  the  cities  which  he  built"  (1  Kings 
xv.  23)  ;  in  that  of  Jehoshaphat — "  the  heroic  acts  that  he 
performed,  and  what  wars  he  carried  on"  (1  Kings  xxii.  46) ; 
in  that  of  Hezekiah — "  all  his  heroism,  and  how  he  made  the 
pool,  and  the  aqueduct,  and  brought  the  water  into  the  city" 
(2  Kings  xx.  20)  ;  in  that  of  Manasseh — "  all  that  he  did,  and 
his  sin  in  which  he  sinned"  (2  Kings  xxi.  17) ;  in  that  of  Jero 
boam — "  what  wars  he  waged,  and  how  he  reigned"  (1  Kings 
xiv.  19);  in  that  of  Zimri — "his  conspiracy  that  he  set  on 
foot"  (1  Kings  xvi.  20);  in  that  of  Ahab— "all  that  he  did, 
and  the  ivory  house  which  he  erected,  and  all  the  towns  that 
he  built"  (1  Kings  xxii.  39)  ;  in  that  of  Joash — "  his  heroism, 
how  he  fought  with  Amaziah  king  of  Judah"  (2  Kings  xiii. 
12,  xiv.  15)  ;  in  that  of  Jeroboam  n. — "his  heroism,  how  he 
warred,  and  how  he  recovered  Damascus  and  Hamath  to  Judah 
in  Israel"  (2  Kings  xiv.  28) ;  and  in  that  of  Shallum— «  his 
conspiracy  which  he  made"  (2  Kings  xv.  15).  These  refer 
ences  furnish  a  very  obvious  "proof,  that  the  annalistic  history 
was  not  written  in  a  prophetico-pragmatical  form;  though  there 
is  no  necessity  on  that  account  to  assume,  that  in  either  of  the 
two  kingdoms  it  stooped  to  courtly  flattery,  or  became  the  mere 
tool  of  dynastic  selfishness,  or  of  designs  at  variance  with  the 
theocracy.  It  simply  registered  outward  occurrences,  entering 
into  the  details  of  new  buildings,  and  still  more  into  those  of 
wars  and  warlike  deeds;  it  had  its  roots  in  the  spirit  of  the 
nation,  and  moved  in  the  sphere  of  the  national  life  and  its 
institutions ;  in  comparison  with  the  prophetic  histories,  it  was 
more  external  than  ideal, — more  purely  historical  than  didactic, 
— more  of  the  nature  of  a  chronicle  than  written  with  any 


12  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

special  bias  or  intention :  in  short,  it  was  more  distinctly  con 
nected  with  political  than  with  sacred  history. 

From  the  time  of  Samuel,  with  whom  the  prophetic  period 
in  the  history  of  the  legally  constituted  Israel  strictly  speaking 
commenced  (Acts  iii.  24),  the  prophets  as  a  body  displayed 
great  literary  activity  in  the  department  of  historical  composi 
tion.  This  is  evident  from  the  numerous  references  made  by 
the  author  of  the  Chronicles  to  original  historical  writings  by 
prophetic  authors.  At  the  close  of  the  history  of  David  he 
refers  to  the  dibre  (Eng.  ver.  "  book")  of  Samuel  the  seer, 
Nathan  the  prophet,  and  Gad  the  seer;  at  the  close  of  the 
history  of  Solomon  (2  Chron.  ix.  29),  to  dibre  (Eng.  ver. 
u  book")  of  Nathan  the  prophet,  nebuoth  (Eng.  ver.  "  the 
prophecy")  of  Ahijah  the  Shilonite,  and  cliazoth  (visions)  of 
Ye'di  (Ye'do ;  Eng.  ver.  Iddo)  the  seer ;  in  the  case  of  Keho- 
boam  (2  Chron.  xii.  15),  to  dibre  of  Shemaiah  the  prophet 
and  flddo  the  seer  ;  in  that  of  Abijah  (2  Chron.  xiii.  22),  to  the 
midrash  (Eng.  ver.  "  story")  of  the  prophet  'Iddo  ;  in  that  of 
Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xx.  34),  to  dibre  of  Jehu  ben  Hanani, 
which  were  included  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  Israel ;  in  that 
of  Uzziah  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  22),  to  a  complete  history  of  that 
king,  which  had  been  composed  by  Isaiah  ben  Amoz ;  in  that 
of  Hezekiah  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  32),  to  a  cliazon  (Eng.  ver. 
"  vision")  of  Isaiah,  which  was  to  be  found  in  the  book  of  the 
kings  of  Judah  and  Israel ;  and  in  that  of  Manasseh  (2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  19),  to  dibre  of  Hosai.  The  question  might  be  raised, 
indeed,  whether  the  dibre  referred  to  in  these  passages  are  not 
to  be  understood — as  in  1  Chron.  xxiii.  27,  for  example — as  sig 
nifying  the  historical  account  of  such  and  such  a  person  ;  but 
the  following  are  sufficient  proofs  that  the  chronicler  used  the 
expression  in  the  sense  of  historical  accounts  written  by  the 
persons  named.  In  the  first  place,  we  may  see  from  2  Chron. 
xxvi.  22  how  customary  it  was  for  him  to  think  of  prophets  as 
historians  of  particular  epochs  of  the  history  of  the  kings ; 
secondly,  even  in  other  passages  in  which  the  name  of  a  pro 
phet  is  connected  with  dibre, — such,  for  example,  as  2  Chron. 
xxix.  30,  xxxiii.  18, — the  former  is  the  genitive  of  the  subject 
or  author,  not  of  the  object  ;  thirdly,  in  the  citations  given 
above,  dibre  is  used  interchangeably  with  nrr^,  which  requires 
still  more  decidedly  that  it  should  be  understood  as  denoting 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  13 

authorship  :  and  fourthly,  this  is  placed  beyond  all  doubt  by 
the  alternation  of  midrash  Iddo  (2  Chron.  xiii.  22)  with  dibrt 
Iddo  (2  Chron.  xii.  15).  At  the  same  time,  it  is  evident  that 
these  accounts,  which  are  called  by  prophets'  names,  were  not 
lying  before  the  chronicler  in  the  form  of  separate  writings  in 
addition  to  the  work  which  constituted  his  principal  source, 
from  the  fact  that,  with  the  exception  of  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  18,  19, 
he  never  quotes  the  two  together.  They  were  incorporated  into 
the  midrash  sepher  hammelaJdm  ("  the  story  of  the  book  of  the 
kings,"  Eng.  ver.),  which  lay  before  him  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  27), 
though  not  without  showing  their  prophetic  origin  in  distinction 
from  the  annalistic  sources  of  the  work  in  question ;  and  inas 
much  as  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  authors  of  our  canonical 
books  of  Samuel  and  Kings  should  have  made  no  use  of  these 
prophetic  records,  the  question  is  allowable,  whether  it  is  still 
possible  for  critical  analysis  to  trace  them  out  either  in  whole  or 
in  part,  with  the  same  certainty  with  which  it  can  be  affirmed 
that  the  list  of  officers  which  is  employed  as  a  boundary-stone 
in  2  Sam.  xx.  23-26,  and  the  general  survey  of  Solomon's 
ministers  and  court  in  1  Kings  iv.  2-19,  together  with  the 
account  of  the  daily  provision  for  the  royal  kitchen  in  1  Kings 
iv.  22,  23,  and  the  number  of  stalls  for  the  king's  horses  in 
1  Kings  iv.  26,  27,  and  others  of  a  similar  kind,  were  taken 
from  the  annals. 

This  is  not  the  place  in  which  to  enter  more  minutely  into 
such  an  analysis.  It  is  quite  sufficient  for  our  purpose  to  have 
exhibited,  in  the  citations  we  have  made  from  the  Chronicles, 
the  stirring  activity  of  the  prophets  as  historians  from  the  time 
of  Samuel  onwards ;  although  this  is  evident  enough,  even 
without  citations,  from  the  many  prophetico-historical  extracts 
from  the  writings  of  the  prophets  which  we  find  in  the  book 
of  Kings.  Both  authors  draw  either  directly  or  indirectly  from 
annalistic  and  prophetic  sources.  But  when  we  look  at  the 
respective  authors,  and  their  mode  of  rounding  off  and  working 
up  the  historical  materials,  the  book  of  Kings  and  the  Chronicles 
exhibit  of  themselves,  at  least  as  a  whole,  the  two  different 
kinds  of  historical  composition  ;  for  the  book  of  Kings  is  a 
thoroughly  prophetic  book,  the  Chronicles  a  priestly  one. 
The  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  formed  his  style  upon  the 
model  of  Deuteronomy  and  the  prophetic  writings ;  whilst  the 


14  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

chronicler  so  thoroughly  imitated  the  older  dilre-Jiayyamim 
style,  that  it  is  often  impossible  to  distinguish  his  own  style 
from  that  of  the  sources  which  came  either  directly  or  in 
directly  to  his  hand ;  and  consequently  his  work  contains  a 
strange  admixture  of  very  ancient  and  very  modern  forms. 
The  observation  inserted  in  2  Kings  xvii.  7  sqq.  shows  clearly 
enough  in  what  spirit  and  with  what  intention  the  writer  of 
the  book  of  Kings  composed  his  work.  Like  the  author  of  the 
book  of  Judges,  who  wrote  in  a  kindred  spirit  (see  Judg.  ii.  11 
sqq.),  he  wished  to  show,  in  his  history  of  the  kings,  how  the 
Israel  of  the  two  kingdoms  sank  lower  and  lower  both  inwardly 
and  outwardly  till  it  had  fallen  into  the  depths  of  captivity, 
in  consequence  of  its  contempt  of  the  word  of  God  as  spoken 
by  the  prophets,  and  still  more  because  of  the  radical  evil  of 
idolatry ;  but  how  Judah,  with  its  Davidic  government,  was 
not  left  without  hope  of  rescue  from  the  abyss,  provided  it 
would  not  shut  its  heart  against  such  prophetic  preaching  as 
was  to  be  found  in  its  own  past  history.  The  chronicler,  on 
the  other  hand,  whose  love  to  the  divinely  chosen  monarchy  and 
priesthood  of  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Levi  is  obvious  enough, 
from  the  annalistic  survey  with  which  he  prefaces  his  work, 
commences  with  the  mournful  end  of  Saul,  and  wastes  no 
words  upon  the  path  of  sorrow  through  which  David  reached 
the  throne,  but  passes  at  once  to  the  joyful  beginning  of  his 
reign,  which  he  sets  before  us  in  the  popular,  warlike,  priestly 
style  of  the  annals.  He  then  relates  the  history  of  Judah  and 
Jerusalem  under  the  rule  of  the  house  of  David,  almost  without 
reference  to  the  history  of  the  northern  kingdom,  and  describes 
it  with  especial  completeness  wherever  he  has  occasion  to  extol 
the  interest  shown  by  the  king  in  the  temple  and  worship  of 
God,  and  his  co-operation  with  the  Levites  and  priests.  The 
author  of  the  book  of  Kings  shows  us  in  prophecy  the  spirit 
which  pervaded  the  history,  and  the  divine  power  which  moulded 
it.  The  chronicler  exhibits  in  the  monarchy  and  priesthood  the 
two  chambers  of  its  beating  heart.  In  the  former  we  see 
storm  after  storm  gather  in  the  sky  that  envelopes  the  history, 
according  to  the  attitude  of  the  nation  and  its  kings  towards 
the  word  of  God  ;  with  the  latter  the  history  is  ever  encircled 
by  the  cloudless  sky  of  the  divir-e  institutions.  The  writer  of 
the  Chronicles  dwells  with  peculiar  preference,  and  a  certain 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  J  5 

partiality,  upon  the  brighter  portions  of  the  history ;  whereas, 
with  the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings,  the  law  of  retribution 
which  prevails  in  the  historical  materials  requires  that  at  least 
an  equal  prominence  should  be  given  to  the  darker  side.  In 
short,  the  history  of  the  book  of  Kings  is  more  inward,  divine, 
theocratic  in  its  character ;  that  of  the  Chronicles  more  out 
ward,  human,  and  popular.  The  author  of  the  book  of  Kings 
writes  with  a  prophet's  pen  ;  the  chronicler  with  the  pen  of  an 
annalist. 

Nevertheless,  they  both  of  them  afford  us  a  deep  insight 
into  the  laboratory  of  the  two  modes  of  writing  history ;  and 
the  historical  productions  of  both  are  rich  in  words  of  the 
prophets,  which  merit  a  closer  inspection,  since  they  are  to 
be  regarded,  together  with  the  prophetico-historical  writings 
quoted,  as  preludes  and  side-pieces  to  the  prophetic  literature, 
properly  so  called,  which  gradually  established  itself  in  more  or 
less  independence,  and  to  which  the  nebiim  acharonim  (the  last 
prophets)  belong.  The  book  of  Kings  contains  the  following 
words  and  sayings  of  prophets  :  (1)  Ahijah  of  Shilo  to  Jero 
boam  (1  Kings  xi.  29-39);  (2)  Shemaiah  to  Behoboam  (1  Kings 
xii.  22-24)  ;  (3)  a  man  of  God  to  the  altar  of  Jeroboam 
(1  Kings  xiii.  1,  2)  ;  (4)  Ahijah  to  the  wife  of  Jeroboam 
(1  Kings  xiv.  5-16)  ;  (5)  Jehu  ben  Han  an  i  to  Baasha  (1 
Kings  xvi.  1-4)  ;  (6)  a  prophet  to  Ahab  king  of  Israel  (1 
Kings  xx.  13,  14,  22,  28)  ;  (7)  a  pupil  of  the  prophets  to 
Ahab  (1  Kings  xx.  35  sqq.)  ;  (8)  Elijah  to  Ahab  (1  Kings 
xxi.  17-26);  (9)  Micha  ben  Yimla  to  the  two  kings  Ahab 
and  Jehoshaphat  (1  Kings  xxii.  14  sqq.)  ;  (10)  Elisha  to  Je- 
horam  and  Jehoshaphat  (2  Kings  iii.  11  sqq.)  ;  (11)  a  pupil  of 
Elisha  to  Jehu  (2  Kings  ix.  1-10)  ;  (12)  a  massa  concerning 
the  house  of  Ahab  (2  Kings  ix.  25,  26)  ;  (13)  Jehovah  to 
Jehu  (2  Kings  x.  30) ;  (14)  Jonah  to  Jeroboam  II.  (indirectly ; 
2  Kings  xiv.  25-27)  ;  (15)  leading  message  of  the  prophets 
(2  Kings  xvii.  13)  ;  (16)  Isaiah's  words  to  Hezekiah  (2  Kings 
xix.  xx.)  ;  (17)  threat  on  account  of  Manasseh  (2  Kings  xxi. 
10-15)  ;  (18)  Hulclah  to  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxii.  14  sqq.)  ;  (19) 
threat  of  Jehovah  concerning  Judah  (2  Kings  xxiii.  27).  Of 
all  these  prophetic  words  and  sayings,  Nos.  2,  9,  and  18  are 
the  only  ones  that  are  given  by  the  chronicler  (2  Chron.  xi. 
2-4,  xviii.,  and  xxxiv.),  partly  because  he  confined  himself  to 


i  5  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

the  history  of  the  kings  of  Judah,  and  partly  because  he  wrote 
with  the  intention  of  supplementing  our  book  of  Kings,  which 
was  no  doubt  lying  before  him.  On  the  other  hand,  we  find 
the  following  words  of  prophets  in  the  Chronicles,  which  are 
wanting  in  the  book  of  Kings  :  (1)  words  of  Shemaiah  in  the 
war  between  Rehoboam  and  Shishak  (2  Chron.  xii.  7,  8)  ; 
(2)  Azariah  ben  Oded  before  Asa  (2  Chron.  xv.  1-7)  ;  (3) 
Hanani  to  Asa  (2  Chron.  xvi.  7-9)  ;  (4)  Jahaziel  the  Asaphite 
in  the  national  assembly  (2  Chron.  xx.  14-17);  (5)  Eliezer 
ben  Dodavahu  to  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xx.  37)  ;  (6)  letter  of 
Elijah  to  Jehoram  (2  Chron.  xxi.  12-15)  ;  (7)  Zechariah  ben 
Jehoiada  in  the  time  of  Joash  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  20)  ;  (8)  a  man 
of  God  to  Amaziah  (2  Chron.  xxv.  7-9)  ;  (9)  a  prophet  to 
Amaziah  (2  Chron.  xxv.  15,  16)  ;  (10)  Oded  to  Pekah  (2 
Chron.  xxviii.  9-11).  To  extend  the  range  of  our  observation 
still  further,  we  may  add,  (1)  the  address  of  the  maleach 
Jehovah  in  Bochim  (Judg.  ii.  1-5)  ;  (2)  the  address  of  a  prophet 
(ish  nali)  to  Israel,  in  Judg,  vi.  8-10 ;  (3)  that  of  a  man  of 
God  to  Eli  (1  Sam.  ii.  27  sqq.)  ;  (4)  Jehovah  to  Samuel  con 
cerning  Eli's  house  (1  Sam.  iii.  11-14)  ;  (5)  Samuel  to  Israel 
before  the  battle  at  Ebenezer  (1  Sam.  vii.  3) ;  (6)  Samuel  to 
Saul  in  Gilgal  (1  Sam.  xiii.  13,  14)  ;  (7)  Samuel  to  Saul  after 
the  victory  over  Amalek  (1  Sam.  xv.)  ;  (8)  Nathan  to  David 
concerning  his  wish  to  build  the  temple  (2  Sam.  vii.) ;  (9) 
Nathan  to  David  after  his  adultery  (2  Sam.  xii.)  ;  (10)  Gad  to 
David  after  the  numbering  of  the  people  (2  Sam.  xxiv.). 

If  we  take  a  general  survey  of  these  prophetic  words  and 
sayings,  and  compare  them  with  one  another,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  some  of  them  have  come  down  to  us  in  their  original 

O 

form ;  such,  for  example,  as  the  address  of  the  man  of  God  to 
Eli,  in  the  first  book  of  Samuel,  and  the  words  of  Samuel  to 
Saul  after  the  victory  over  Amalek.  This  is  guaranteed  by 
their  distinct  peculiarity,  their  elevated  tone,  and  the  manifest 
difference  between  them  and  the  ordinary  style  of  the  historian 
who  relates  them.  In  the  case  of  others,  at  least,  all  that  is 
essential  in  their  form  has  been  preserved ;  as,  for  example,  in 
the  addresses  of  Nathan  to  David  :  this  is  evident  from  the 
echoes  that  we  find  of  them  in  the  subsequent  history.  Among 
the  sayings  that  have  been  handed  down  verbatim  by  the  author 
)f  the  book  of  Kings,  we  may  include  those  of  Isaiah,  whose 


n 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  17 

originality  several  things  combine  to  sustain, — viz.  the  massa 
in  2  Kings  ix.  25,  26,  the  construction  of  which  is  peculiar  and 
primitive ;  together  with  a  few  other  brief  prophetic  words, 
possibly  in  all  that  is  essential  the  words  of  Huldah :  for  it  is 
only  in  the  mouth  of  Huldah  (2  Kings  xxii.  19 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv. 
27)  and  Isaiah  (2  Kings  xix.  33),  and  in  the  massa  referred  to, 
that  we  meet  with  the  prophetic  "  saith  the  Lord"  (nin?  DM), 
which  we  also  find  in  1  Sam.  ii.  30,  with  other  marks  of  ori 
ginality,  whilst  its  great  antiquity  is  attested  by  Gen.  xxii.  16, 
the  Davidic  Psalms,  and  2  Sam.  xxiii.  1.  In  some  of  these 
sayings  the  historian  is  not  at  all  concerned  to  give  them  in 
their  original  words :  they  are  simply  prophetic  voices  generally, 
which  were  heard  at  a  particular  time,  and  the  leading  tones 
of  which  he  desires  to  preserve, — such,  for  example,  as  Judg. 
vi.  8-10,  2  Kings  xvii.  13,  xxi.  10-15.  Keproductions  of 
prophetic  witnesses  in  so  general  a  form  as  this  naturally  bear 
the  stamp  of  the  writer  who  reproduces  them.  In  the  books 
of  Judges  and  Kings,  for  example,  they  show  clearly  the 
Deuteronomic  training  of  their  last  editors.  Bat  we  can  go 
still  further,  and  maintain  generally,  that  the  prophecies  in  the 
books  of  Samuel,  Kings,  and  Chronicles  contain  marked  traces 
of  the  historian's  own  hand,  as  well  as  of  the  sources  from 
which  they  were  indirectly  drawn.  Such  sayings  as  are  com 
mon  to  the  two  books  (Chronicles  and  Kings)  are  almost  word 
for  word  the  same  in  the  former  as  in  the  latter ;  but  the  rest 
have  all  a  marked  peculiarity,  and  a  totally  different  physiog 
nomy.  The  sayings  in  the  book  of  Kings  almost  invariably 
begin  with  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  or  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel "  (also  Judg.  vi.  8,  and  2  Kings  xix.  20,  before 
the  message  of  Isaiah)  ;  and  nothing  is  more  frequent  in  them 
than  the  explanatory  phrase  ^VX  1^,  and  such  Deuteronomic 
expressions  as  D^n,  fcOttnn,  T2  fro,  and  others ;  to  which  we 
may  add  a  fondness  for  similes  introduced  with  "  as "  (e.g. 

1  Kings  xiv.   10,  15  ;    2   Kings  xxi.   13).      The  thought  of 
Jehovah's  choosing  occurs  in  the  same  words  in  1  Kings  xi.  36 
and  2  Kings  xxiii.  27  ;  and  the  expression,  "  that  David  may 
have  a  light  alway,"  in  1  Kings  xi.  36,  is  exclusively  confined 
to  the  Deuteronomic  author  of  the  work  (vid.  1  Kings  xv.  4, 

2  Kings  viii.  19,  cf.  2  Chron.  xxi.  7).     The  words,  "  I  exalted 
thee  from  among  the  people,  and  made  thee  prince  over  my 

VOL.  I.  B 


18  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

people  Israel/'  are  not  only  to  be  found  in  the  second  address 
of  Ahijah  in  1  Kings  xiv.  7,  but,  with  slight  alteration,  in  the 
address  of  Jehu  in  ch.  xvi.  2.  The  words,  "  Him  that  dieth 
in  the  city  shall  the  dogs  eat,  and  him  that  dieth  in  the  field 
shall  the  fowls  of  the  air  eat,"  are  found  in  the  same  form 
in  Ahijah's  second  address  (1  Kings  xiv.  11),  in  Jehu's  address 
(ch.  xvi.  4),  and  in  that  of  Elijah  to  Ahab  (ch.  xxi.  24).  The 
threat,  "  I  will  cut  off  all  that  pisseth  against  the  wall,  that  is 
shut  up  and  that  is  free  in  Israel,  and  will  sweep  behind 
the  house  of  Jeroboam,"  is  found,  with  trifling  variations,  in 
Ahijah's  second  address  (1  Kings  xiv.  10),  in  Elijah's  address 
to  Ahab  (ch.  xxi.  21),  and  in  Elisha's  address  to  Jehu  (2  Kings 
ix.  8)  ;  whilst  it  is  evident  from  1  Kings  xvi.  11  and  2  Kings 
xiv.  26,  that  the  form  of  the  threat  is  just  in  the  style  of  the 
Deuteronomic  historian.  There  can  be  no  question,  therefore, 
that  nearly  all  these  prophetic  sayings,  so  far  as  a  common 
impress  can  exist  at  all,  are  of  one  type,  and  that  the  common 
bond  which  encircles  them  is  no  other  than  the  prophetic 
subjectivity  of  the  Deuteronomic  historian.  A  similar  con 
clusion  may  be  drawn  with  regard  to  the  prophetic  sayings 
contained  in  the  Chronicles.  They  also  bear  so  decidedly  the 
evident  marks  of  the  chronicler's  own  work,  that  Caspari  him 
self,  in  his  work  upon  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war,  is  obliged  to 
admit  that  the  prophetic  address  in  2  Chron.  xv.  2-7,  which  is 
apparently  the  most  original  of  all,  recals  the  peculiar  style  of 
the  chronicler.  At  the  same  time,  in  the  case  of  the  chronicler, 
whose  principal  source  of  information  must  have  resembled  his 
own  work  in  spirit  and  style  (as  we  are  warranted  in  assuming 
by  the  book  of  Ezra  especially),  it  is  not  so  easy  to  determine 
how  far  his  own  freedom  of  treatment  extended  as  it  is  in  the 
case  of  the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings,  who  appears  to  have 
found  the  greater  part  of  the  sayings  given  in  mere  outline  in 
the  annals,  and  in  taking  them  thence,  to  have  reproduced 
them  freely,  in  the  consciousness  of  his  own  unity  of  spirit 
with  the  older  prophets. 

If  these  sayings  had  been  handed  down  to  us  in  their 
original  form,  we  should  possess  in  them  a  remarkably  impor 
tant  source  of  information  with  regard  to  the  historical  develop 
ment  of  the  prophetic  ideas  and  modes  of  expression.  We 
should  then  know  for  certain  that  Isaiah's  favourite  phrase, 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  19 

"  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it,"  was  first  employed  by  Ahijah 
(1  Kings  xiv.  11)  ;  that  when  Joel  prophesied  "  in  Jerusalem 
shall  be  deliverance  "  (Joel  ii.  32),  he  had  already  been  pre 
ceded  by  Shemaiah  (2  Chron.  xii.  7)  ;  that  Hosea  (in  ch.  iii. 
4,  5,  cf.  v.  15)  took  up  the  declaration  of  Azariah  ben  Oded, 
"  And  many  days  will  Israel  continue  without  the  God  of 
truth,  and  without  a  teaching  priest,  and  without  law ;  buf 
when  it  turneth  in  its  trouble,"  etc.  (2  Chron.  xv.  3,  4,  where, 
as  the  parallel  proves,  the  preterites  of  ver.  4  are  to  be  interpreted 
according  to  the  prophetic  context)  ;  that  in  Jer.  xxxi.  16,  "for 
thy  work  shall  be  rewarded,"  we  have  the  echo  of  another  word 
of  the  same  Azariah  ;  that  in  the  words  spoken  by  Hanani  in 
2  Chron.  xvi.  9,  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro  through 
out  the  whole  earth,"  he  was  the  precursor  of  Zechariah  (ch.  iv. 
10)  ;  and  other  instances  of  a  similar  kind.  But,  with  the  influ 
ence  which  was  evidently  exerted  upon  the  sayings  quoted  by 
the  subjective  peculiarities  of  the  two  historians  (compare,  for 
example,  2  Chron.  xv.  2  with  xiii.  4  and  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9 ; 
2  Chron.  xii.  5  with  xxiv.  20;  also  ver.  7  with  2  Chron.  xxxiv. 
21,  and  the  parallel  2  Kings  xxii.  13  ;  and  2  Chron.  xv.  5,  "In 
those  times,"  with  Dan.  xi.  14),  and  with  the  difficulty  of  tracing 
the  original  elements  in  these  sayings  (it  is  quite  possible,  for 
example,  that  the  thought  of  a  light  remaining  to  David,  1 
Kings  xv.  4,  2  Kings  viii.  19,  was  really  uttered  first  of  all  by 
Ahijah,  1  Kings  xi.  36),  it  is  only  a  very  cautious  and  sparing 
use  that  can  be  made  of  them  for  this  purpose.  It  is  quite 
possible,  since  Deuteronomy  is  the  real  prophet's  book,  as  com 
pared  with  the  other  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  that  the  pro 
phets  of  the  earlier  regal  times  took  pleasure  in  employing 
Deuteronomic  expressions ;  but  it  cannot  be  decided  whether 
such  expressions  as  "  put  my  name  there,"  in  1  Kings  xi.  36, 
and  tf  root  up  Israel,"  etc.,  in  1  Kings  xiv.  15,  received  their 
Deuteronomic  form  (cf.  Deut.  xii.  5,  21,  xiv.  24,  xxix.  27) 
from  the  prophet  himself,  or  from  the  author  of  the  book  of 
Kings  (cf.  1  Kings  ix.  3,  and  the  parallel  passages,  2  Chron. 
vii.  20,  ix.  7,  2  Kings  xxi.  7,  8).  At  the  same  time,  quite 
enough  of  the  original  has  been  retained  in  the  prophecies  of 
these  earlier  prophets,  to  enable  us  to  discern  in  them  the  types 
and  precursors  of  the  later  ones.  Shemaiah,  with  his  threat 
and  its  subsequent  modification  in  the  case  of  Asa,  calls  to  mind 


20  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

Micah  and  his  words  to  Hezekiah,  in  Jer,  xxvi.  17  sqq.  The 
attitude  of  Hanani  towards  Asa,  when  he  had  appealed  to  Aram 
for  help,  is  just  the  same  as  that  which  Isaiah  assumed  towards 
Ahaz ;  and  there  is  also  a  close  analogy  in  the  consequences  of 
the  two  events.  Hosea  and  Amos  prophesy  against  "  the  high 
places  of  Aven  "  (Hos.  x.  8),  and  "  the  altars  of  Bethel "  (Amos 
iii.  14,  ix.  1),  like  the  man  of  God  in  Bethel.  When  Amos 
leaves  his  home  in  consequence  of  a  divine  call  (ch.  vii.  15) 
and  goes  to  Bethel,  the  headquarters  of  the  image-worship  of 
the  Israelites,  to  prophesy  against  the  idolatrous  kingdom ;  is 
there  not  a  repetition  in  this  of  the  account  of  the  prophet  in 
1  Kings  xiii.  ?  And  when  Hanani  is  cast  into  prison  on  account 
of  his  denunciation  of  Asa ;  is  not  this  a  prelude,  as  it  were, 
to  the  subsequent  fate  of  Micah  ben-Imlah  (1  Kings  xxii.)  and 
Jeremiah  (Jer.  xxxii.)  ?  And  so,  again,  Ahijah's  confirmation 
and  symbolical  representation  of  what  he  predicted,  by  the 
rending  in  pieces  of  a  new  garment  (the  symbol  of  the  kingdom 
in  its  unity  and  strength),  has  its  analoga  in  the  history  of  the 
earlier  prophets  (1  Sam.  xv.  26-29)  as  well  as  in  that  of  the 
latest  (e.g.  Jer.  xxii.).  It  is  only  such  signs  (mophetliim),  as 
that  by  which  the  prophet  who  came  out  of  Judah  into  Bethel 
confirmed  his  prophecy,  that  disappear  entirely  from  the  later 
history,  although  Isaiah  does  not  think  it  beneath  him  to  offer 
Ahaz  a  sign,  either  in  the  depth  or  in  the  height  above,  in 
attestation  of  his  prophetic  testimony. 

There  was  no  essential  difference,  however,  between  the 
prophets  of  the  earlier  and  those  of  the  later  times ;  and  the 
unity  of  spirit  which  linked  together  the  prophets  of  the  two 
kingdoms  from  the  very  first,  notwithstanding  the  inevitable 
diversity  in  their  labours  in  consequence  of  the  different  cir 
cumstances  in  which  they  were  placed,  continued  all  through. 
Still  we  do  meet  with  differences.  The  earlier  prophets  are 
uniformly  occupied  with  the  internal  affairs  of  the  kingdom, 
and  do  not  bring  within  their  range  the  history  of  other 
nations,  with  which  that  of  Israel  was  so  intimately  interwoven. 
Their  prophecies  are  directed  exclusively  to  the  kings  and 
people  of  the  two  kingdoms,  and  not  to  any  foreign  nation  at 
all,  either  to  those  immediately  adjoining,  or  what  we  certainly 
might  expect,  to  Egypt  and  Aram.  The  Messianic  element  still 
remains  in  a  somewhat  obscure  chrysalis  state :  and  the  poetry 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  21 

of  thoughts  and  words,  which  grew  up  afterwards  as  the  result 
of  prophetic  inspiration,  only  just  manifests  itself  in  certain 
striking  figures  of  speech.  It  is  indeed  true,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  that  it  is  hardly  possible  to  pronounce  a  decided 
opinion  respecting  the  delivery  of  these  earlier  prophets ;  but 
from  a  sufficiently  reliable  and  general  impression,  we  may 
trace  this  distinction  between  the  prophecy  which  prevailed  till 
about  the  reign  of  Joash  and  that  of  the  later  times,  that  the 
former  was  for  the  most  part  prophecy  in  irresistible  actions, 
the  latter  prophecy  in  convincing  words.  As  G.  Baur  has 
observed ;  in  the  case  of  the  older  prophets  it  is  only  as  the 
modest  attendants  of  mighty  outward  acts,  that  we  meet  with 
words  at  all  concerned  to  produce  clear  inward  conviction. 
For  this  very  reason,  they  could  hardly  produce  prophetic 
writings  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.  But  from  the  time 
of  Samuel  downwards,  the  prophets  had  made  the  theocratic 
and  pragmatic  treatment  of  the  history  of  their  own  times  a 
part  of  the  regular  duties  of  their  calling.  The  cloistral,  though 
by  no  means  quietistic,  retirement  of  their  lives  in  the  schools 
of  the  prophets,  was  very  favourable  to  this  literary  occupation, 
more  especially  in  the  northern  kingdom,  and  secured  for  it 
unquestioned  liberty.  We  may  see,  however,  from  2  Chron. 
xx.  34,  that  the  prophets  of  Judah  also  occupied  themselves 
with  writing  history;  for  the  prophet  Jehu  was  a  Judaean, 
and,  as  we  may  infer  from  2  Chron.  xix.  1-3,  had  his  home 
in  Jerusalem. 

The  literature  of  the  prophetic  writings,  strictly  so  called, 
commenced  in  the  time  of  Jehoram  king  of  Judah  with  a 
fugitive  writing  against  Eclom ;  if,  as  we  think  we  have  proved 
elsewhere,  the  vision  of  OBADIAH  was  occasioned  by  the  cala 
mity  described  in  2  Chron.  xxi.  16,  17,  to  which  Joel  and 
Amos  also  refer.  He  was  followed  by  JOEL,  who  had  Oba- 
diah's  prophecy  before  him,  since  he  introduces  into  the  wider 
and  more  comprehensive  range  of  his  announcement,  not  only 
Obadiah's  prophetic  matter,  but  Obadiah's  prophetic  words. 
We  may  also  see  from  Joel's  writings  how  the  prophetic  litera 
ture,  in  the  stricter  sense,  sprang  out  of  prophetical  histories ; 
for  Joel  himself  relates  the  result  of  the  penitential  worship, 
which  was  occasioned  by  his  appeal,  in  a  historical  statement 
in  ch.  ii.  18,  19  a,  through  which  the  two  halves  of  his  writ- 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

ings  are  linked  together.  The  time  when  he  prophesied  can 
be  distinctly  proved  to  have  been  the  first  half  of  the  reign 
of  Joash  king  of  Judah.  Obadiah  and  Joel  were  both  of 
them  contemporaries  of  Elisha.  Elisha  himself  did  not  write 
anything,  but  the  schools  under  his  superintendence  not  onlv 
produced  prophetic  deeds,  but  prophetic  writings  also ;  and  it 
is  a  characteristic  circumstance,  that  the  writings  which  bear 
the  name  of  JONAH,  whom  an  ancient  Haggada  describes  as 
one  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  belonging  to  Elisha' s  school, 
belong  far  less  to  the  prophetic  literature  in  the  strict  sense  of 
the  term  than  to  the  prophetical  histories,  and  in  fact  to  the 
historical  writings  of  prophets.  At  what  period  it  was  that 
Jonah's  mission  to  Nineveh  took  place,  may  be  gathered  to  some 
extent  from  2  Kings  xiv.  25,  where  Jonah  ben-Amittai,  the 
prophet  of  Gath  ha-Hepher,  in.  the  territory  of  Zebulun,  is 
said  to  have  predicted  the  restoration  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel 
to  its  promised  boundaries, — a  prediction  which  wTas  fulfilled 
in  Jeroboam  ben-Joash,  the  third  in  succession  from  Jehu, 
and  therefore  was  uttered  at  the  commencement  of  the  rei^n 

o 

of  Jeroboam  II.,  if  not  under  Joash  himself.  The  mission  to 
Nineveh  may  possibly  belong  to  a  somewhat  earlier  period  than 
this  prediction,  namely,  to  the  time  of  the  older  Assyrian  king 
dom,  which  was  fast  approaching  its  dissolution.  Eusebius  is 
probably  correct  in  making  Sardanapalus  the  last  ruler  of  the 
old  kingdom  of  Ninos,  who  was  overcome  by  Arbaces  the  Mede, 
a  contemporary  of  Jeroboam  II.  A  glance  at  the  book  of 
AMOS,  on  the  other  hand,  will  show  us  that,  at  the  time  when 
he  prophesied,  a  new  Asshur  was  arising,  and  had  already  made 
considerable  conquests.  The  date  given  in  Amos  i.  1,  "  two 
years  before  the  earthquake,"  does  not  afford  us  any  clue. 
But  if  Amos  prophesied  "  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  king  of  Judah, 
and  Jeroboam  ben-Joash  king  of  Israel ;"  assuming  that  Jero 
boam  II.  reigned  forty-one  years,  commencing  with  the  fifteenth 
year  of  Amaziah  (2  Kings  xiv.  23),  and  therefore  was  contem 
porary  with  Amaziah  for  fourteen  years  and  with  Uzziah  for 
twenty-seven,  it  must  have  been  in  the  last  twenty-seven  years 
of  Jeroboam's  reign  that  Amos  prophesied.  At  the  time  when 
his  ministry  began,  the  kingdom  of  Israel  was  at  the  summit  of 
its  greatness  in  consequence  of  the  successes  of  Jeroboam,  and 
the  kingdom  of  Judah  still  continued  in  the  depression  into 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  23 

which  it  had  fallen  in  the  time  of  Amaziah ;  and  to  both  of 
them  hft  foretells  a  cv>mmon  fate  at  the  hands  of  Asshur,  which 
is  indicated  clearly  enough,  although  not  mentioned  by  name. 
The  commencement  of  the  ministry  of  HOSEA  coincides  at  the 
most  with  the  close  of  that  of  Amos.  The  symbolical  portion 
(ch.  i.-iii.),  with  which  his  book  commences,  brings  us  to  the 
five  last  years  of  Jeroboam's  reign ;  and  the  prophetic  addresses 
which  follow  are  not  at  variance  with  the  statement  in  ch.  i.  1, 
which  is  by  a  later  hand,  and  according  to  which  he  still  con 
tinued  to  prophesy  even  under  Hezekiah,  and  therefore  until 
the  fall  of  Samaria,  which  occurred  in  the  sixth  year  of  Heze- 
kiah's  reign.  Hosea,  the  Ephraimitish  Jeremiah,  was  followed 
by  ISAIAH,  who  received  his  call,  if  ch.  vi.  contains  the  ac 
count  of  his  prophetic  consecration,  in  the  last  year  of  Uzziah's 
reign,  and  therefore  twenty-five  years  after  the  death  of  Jero 
boam  ii.,  and  continued  his  labours  at  least  till  the  second 
half  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  possibly  to  the  commencement  of 
that  of  Manasseh.  His  younger  contemporary  was  MICAH  of 
Moresheth,  whose  first  appearance  took  place,  according  to  ch. 
i.  1,  within  the  reign  of  Jotham,  and  whose  book  must  have 
been  written,  according  to  the  heading  "  concerning  Samaria 
and  Jerusalem,"  before  the  fall  of  Samaria,  in  the  sixth  year 
of  Hezekiah's  reign  (with  which  the  account  in  Jer.  xxvi.  17 
sqq.  also  agrees) ;  so  that  his  labours  began  and  ended  within 
the  incomparably  longer  period  of  Isaiah's  ministry.  This  also 
applies  to  NAHUM,  whose  "  burden  of  Nineveh"  closes  the 
prophetic  writings  of  the  Assyrian  age.  He  prophesied  after 
the  defeat  of  Sennacherib,  when  the  power  of  Asshur  was 
broken,  and  also  the  yoke  upon  Judah's  neck  (ch.  i.  13), 
provided,  that  is  to  say,  that  Asshur  did  not  recover  itself  again. 
HABAKKUK  is  linked  on  to  Nahum.  He  was  the  last  prophet 
of  Isaiah's  type  in  the  book  of  twelve  prophets,  and  began  to 
foretell  a  new  era  of  judgment,  namely  the  Chaldean.  He 
prophesied  in  the  time  of  Josiah,  before  Zephaniah  and  Jere 
miah,  and  possibly  even  as  early  as  the  time  of  Manasseh. 
With  ZEPHANIAH  the  line  of  prophets  of  Jeremiah's  type 
begins.  He  resembles  Jeremiah  in  his  reproductive,  and,  as 
it  were,  mosaic  use  of  the  words  of  the  older  prophets.  As 
JEREMIAH  was  called,  according  to  Jer.  i.  2,  in  the  thirteenth 
year  of  Josiah's  reign,  his  minis lry  commenced  before  that  of 


24  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

Zephaniah,  since  we  are  compelled  by  internal  grounds  to 
assign  the  prophecies  of  the  latter  to  the  period  subsequent  to 
the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah's  reign.  Jeremiah's  labours  in 
Judsea,  and  eventually  in  Egypt,  extended  over  a  period  of 
more  than  forty  years.  He  gave,  as  a  warrant  of  the  threats 
contained  in  his  last  prophetic  address  in  ch.  xliv.,  the  approach 
ing  fall  of  Pharaoh  Hophra,  who  lost  his  throne  and  life  in  the 
year  570  B.C.,  upon  the  very  spot  where  his  great-grandfather 
Psammetichus  had  obtained  forcible  possession  of  the  throne  of 
Egypt  a  century  before.  Contemporaneous  with  Jeremiah  was 
EZEKIEL,  who,  though  not  personally  acquainted  with  him,  so 
far  as  we  know,  laboured  in  the  very  same  spirit  as  he  among  the 
exiles  of  Judah.  According  to  ch.  i.  1,  2,  the  year  of  his  call 
was  the  thirtieth  year,  viz.  of  the  era  of  Nabopolassar,  which 
was  really  the  fifth  year  after  the  captivity  of  Jehoiachin, 
B.C.  595.  The  latest  date  given  in  connection  with  his  mini- 
strv  (ch.  xxix.  17)  is  the  seven-and-twentieth  year  of  the  cap 
tivity,  which  was  the  sixteenth  year  from  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  the  time  between  Nebuchadnezzar's  raising  of  the 
siege  of  Tyre  and  his  expedition  against  Egypt.  We  are 
aware,  therefore,  of  twenty-two  years  of  active  life  on  the  part 
of  this  prophet,  who  may  have  been  older  when  called  than 
Jeremiah,  who  was  youthful  still.  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  were 
the  two  great  prophets  who  spread  their  praying  hands  over 
Jerusalem  as  a  shield  as  long  as  they  possibly  could,  and  when 
the  catastrophe  was  inevitable,  saved  it  even  in  its  fall.  Their 
prophecies  bridged  over  the  great  chasm  of  the  captivity  (though 
not  without  the  co-operation  of  the  "  book  of  consolation,"  Isa. 
xl.-lxvi.,  which  was  unsealed  in  the  time  of  exile),  and  prepared 
the  way  for  the  restoration  of  the  national  community  when 
the  captivity  was  over.  Into  this  community  HAGGAI  infused 
a  new  spirit  in  the  second  year  of  Darius  Hystaspis,  through 
his  prediction  of  the  glory  which  awaited  the  newly-built  temple 
and  the  house  of  David,  that  was  raised  to  honour  once  more 
in  the  person  of  Zerubbabel.  ZECHARIAH  began  to  prophesy 
only  two  months  later.  His  last  prophetic  address  belongs  to 
the  third  year  of  Darius  Hystaspis,  the  year  after  the  edict 
requiring  that  the  building  ot  the  temple  should  be  continued. 
The  predictions  of  the  second  part  of  his  book  (ch.  ix.-xiv.) 
were  hardly  delivered  publicly :  they  are  throughout  eschato- 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  25 

logical  and  apocalyptical,  and  take  earlier  situations  and  pro 
phetic  words  as  emblems  of  the  last  days.  Prophecy  was  now 
silent  for  a  long  time.  At  length  the  last  prophetic  voice  of  the 
old  covenant  was  heard  in  MAL'ACHI.  His  book  coincides 
with  the  condition  of  things  which  Nehemiah  found  on  his 
second  sojourn  in  Jerusalem  under  Darius  Notus;  and  his 
peculiar  calling  in  connection  with  the  sacred  history  was  to 
predict,  that  the  messenger  who  was  appointed  to  precede  the 
coming  of  Jehovah  would  soon  appear, — namely,  Elijah  the 
Tishbite, — and  that  he,  the  forerunner,  a  pioneer,  would  then 
be  followed  by  the  Lord  Himself,  as  "  the  Angel  of  the  cove 
nant,"  i.e.  the  Messenger  or  Mediator  of  a  new  covenant. 

This  general  survey  will  show  very  clearly  that  the  arrange 
ment  of  the  nebiim  acJiaronim  (last  prophets)  in  the  canon  is 
not  a  strictly  chronological  one.  The  three  "  major"  prophets, 
who  are  so  called  on  account  of  the  comparative  size  of  their 
books  of  prophecy,  are  placed  together;  and  the  twelve  "minor" 
prophets  are  also  grouped  together,  so  as  to  form  one  book 
(monobiblos,  as  Melito  calls  it),  on  account  of  the  smaller 
extent  of  their  prophetic  books  (propter  parvitatem  colligati, 
as  b.  Bathra  says).  To  this  the  name  of  "the  twelve,"  or 
"  the  twelve-prophet-book,"  was  given  (vid.  Wisd.  xlix.  10 ; 
Josephus,  c.  Apion,  i.  8 ;  cf.  Eusebius,  h.  e.  iii.  10).  In  the 
collection  itself,  on  the  other  hand,  the  chronological  order  has 
so  far  been  regarded,  that  the  whole  is  divisible  into  three 
groups,  representing  three  periods  of  prophetic  literature,  viz. 
prophets  of  the  Assyrian  period  (Hosea  to  Nahum),  prophets 
of  the  Chaldean  period  (Habakkuk  and  Zephaniah),  and  pro 
phets  after  the  captivity  (Haggai  to  Malachi).  And  there  is 
also  an  obvious  desire  to  pair  off  as  far  as  possible  a  prophet  of 
the  kingdom  of  Israel  with  one  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  viz. 
Hosea  and  Joel ;  Amos  and  Obadiah ;  Jonah  and  Micah ; 
Nahum  and  Habakkuk  (for  the  Elkosh  of  Nahum,  if  not  the 
town  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Tigris  near  to  Mosul,  was  at 
any  rate,  according  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  a  Galilean  town). 
Hosea  is  placed  first,  not  because  the  opening  word  techillath 
made  this  book  a  very  suitable  one  with  which  to  begin  the 
collection ;  still  less  because  Hosea  was  the  first  to  be  called  of 
the  four  prophets,  Hosea  and  Isaiah,  Amos  and  Micah,  as  b. 
Bathra  affirms ;  but  for  the  very  same  reason  for  which  the 


26  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE 

Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  placed  first  among  the  Pauline  epistles, 
viz.  because  his  book  is  the  largest  in  the  collection, — a  point  of 
view  which  comes  out  still  more  prominently  in  the  Septuagint, 
where  Hosea,  Amos,  Micah,  Joel,  and  Obadiah  follow  one 
another,  the  first  with  fourteen  chapters,  the  second  with  nine, 
the  third  with  seven,  the  fourth  with  three,  and  the  last  with 
one,  and  then  a  new  series  commences  with  Jonah.  But  the 
reason  why  Joel  is  placed  next  to  Hosea  in  the  Hebrew  canon, 
may  possibly  be  found  in  the  contrast  which  exists  between  the 
lamentations  of  the  former  on  account  of  the  all-parching  heat 
and  the  all-consuming  swarms  of  insects,  and  the  dewy,  ver 
dant,  and  flowery  imagery  with  which  the  book  of  Hosea  closes. 
Amos  then  follows  Joel,  because  he  not  only  takes  up  again  his 
denunciations  of  judgment,  but  opens  with  one  of  the  utter 
ances  with  which  Joel  closes  (ch.  iv.  16)  :  "Jehovah  will  roar 
out  of  Zion,  and  utter  His  voice  from  Jerusalem."  Then 
follows  Obadiak,  on  account  of  the  reciprocal  relation  between 
Obad.  19  and  Amos  ix.  12.  And  Jonah  is  linked  on  to  Obadiah  : 
for  Obadiah  begins  thus,  "We  have  heard  tidings  from  Jehovah, 
and  a  messenger  is  sent  among  the  nations ;"  and  Jonah  was 
such  a  messenger.  Such  grounds  as  these,  the  further  study 
of  which  we  must  leave  to  the  introduction  to  the  book  of  the 
twelve  prophets,  also  had  their  influence  upon  the  pairing  of 
the  prophets  of  Judah  with  those  of  Israel.  The  fact  that 
Zeplianiali  follows  Habakkuk  may  be  accounted  for  from  a 
similar  ground,  which  coincides  in  this  case  with  the  chrono 
logical  order ;  for  a  catchword  in  Zephaniah's  prophecy,  "  Hold 
thy  peace  at  the  presence  of  Jehovah"  (i.  7),  is  taken  from  Hab. 
ii.  20.  The  prophets  after  the  captivity  (callod  in  the  Talmud 
nebiim  horacharonim,  the  last  prophets),  which  necessarily  fol 
lowed  one  another  in  the  order  determined  by  the  date  and 
contents  of  their  books,  bring  the  whole  to  a  close. 

The  so-called  greater  prophets  are  attached  in  the  Hebrew 
canon  to  the  book  of  Kings ;  and  in  both  the  Hebrew  and 
Alexandrian  canons  Isaiah  stands  at  the  head.  Isaiah,  Jere 
miah,  Ezekiel — this  is  the  order  in  which  they  follow  one 
another  in  our  editions,  in  accordance  with  the  time  of  their 
respective  labours.  In  German  and  French  codices,  we  occa 
sionally  meet  with  a  different  arrangement,  viz.  Kings,  Jere 
miah,  Ezekiel,  Isaiah.  This  is  the  order  given  in  the  Talmud, 


PROPHETICAL  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  27 

b.  Batlira,  14£>.  The  principle  upon  which  it  is  founded  is  the 
kindred  nature  of  the  contents,  which  also  helped  to  determine 
the  order  of  the  twelve.  Jeremiah  follows  the  book  of  Kings, 
because  nearly  all  his  predictions  group  themselves  around  the 
Chaldean  catastrophe,  with  which  the  book  of  Kings  closes  ; 
and  Isaiah  follows  Ezekiel,  whose  book  closes  in  a  consolatory 
strain,  because  that  of  Isaiah  is,  as  the  Talmud  says,  nothing 
but  consolation.  But  the  other  arrangement,  adopted  in  the 
Masora  and  MSS.  of  the  Spanish  class,  has  prevailed  over  this 
talmudic  order,  which  has  been  appealed  to,  though  without 
any  good  ground,  by  the  opponents  of  the  authenticity  of  Isa. 
xl.— Ixvi.  as  supporting  their  conclusions.1 

1  Isaiah  was  regarded  as  the  consolatory  prophet  pre-eminently,  and 
more  especially  on  account  of  ch.  xl.-lxvi.,  so  that,  according  to  6. 
Berachoih,  575,  whoever  saw  Isaiah  in  a  dream  might  look  for  consolation  ; 
and,  according  to  the  Midrash  on  the  Lamentations,  Isaiah  hud  previously 
rcclincii  all  the  evils  that  Jeremiah  foretskl. 


THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


Qui  sancto  Isai%  inspirasti  ut  scriberet,  inspira  qussso  mihi  ut  quod 
jcripsit  intelligam,  quid  jam  inspirasti  ut  credam ;  nisi  enim  crediderimust 
non  intelligemus. — AELREDUS  (f  1166). 


INTKODUCTION. 

(MORE  ESPECIALLY  TO  THE  FIRST  PART.    CHAP.  i.-xxxix.)» 


TIME  OF  THE  PKOPHET. 

'HE  first  prerequisite  to  a  clear  understanding  and 
full  appreciation  of  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  is  a 
knowledge  of  his  time,  and  of  the  different  periods 
of  his  ministry.  The  first  period  was  in  the 
reigns  of  Uzziah  (B.C.  811-759)  and  Jotham  (759-743).  The 
precise  starting-point  depends  upon  the  view  we  take  of  ch.  vi. 
But,  in  any  case,  Isaiah  commenced  his  ministry  towards  the 
close  of  Uzziah's  reign,  and  laboured  on  throughout  the  sixteen 
years  of  the  reign  of  Jotham.  The  first  twenty-seven  of  the 
fifty-two  years  that  Uzziah  reigned  run  parallel  to  the  last 
twenty-seven  of  the  forty-one  that  Jeroboam  11.  reigned  (B.C. 
825-784).  Under  Joash,  and  his  son  Jeroboam  n.,  the  king 
dom  of  Israel  passed  through  a  period  of  outward  glory,  which 
surpassed,  both  in  character  and  duration,  any  that  it  had 
reached  before ;  and  this  was  also  the  case  with  the  kingdom 
of  Judah  under  Uzziah  and  his  son  Jotham.  As  the  glory  of 
the  one  kingdom  faded  away,  that  of  the  other  increased.  The 
bloom  of  the  northern  kingdom  was  destroyed  and  surpassed  by 
that  of  the  southern.  But  outward  splendour  contained  within 
itself  the  fatal  germ  of  decay  and  ruin  in  the  one  case  as  much 
as  in  the  other ;  for  prosperity  degenerated  into  luxury,  and 
the  worship  of  Jehovah  became  stiffened  into  idolatry.  It  was 
in  this  last  and  longest  time  of  Judah' s  prosperity  that  Isaiah 

1  See  my  article  on  Isaiah  in  the  Bible  Cyclopedia,  edited  by  Professor 
Fairbaira. 


32  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

arose,  with  the  mournful  vocation  to  preach  repentance  without 
success,  and  consequently  to  have  to  announce  the  judgment 
of  hardening  and  devastation,  of  the  ban  and  of  banishment. 
The  second  period  of  his  ministry  extended  from  the  commence 
ment  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz  to  that  of  the  reign  of  Hezekiah. 
Within  these  sixteen  years  three  events  occurred,  which  com 
bined  to  bring  about  a  new  and  calamitous  turn  in  the  history 
of  Judah.  In  the  place  of  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  which  had 
been  maintained  with  outward  regularity  and  legal  precision 
under  Uzziah  and  Jotham;  as  soon  as  Ahaz  ascended  the 
throne,  open  idolatry  was  introduced  of  the  most  abominable 
description  and  in  very  various  forms.  The  hostilities  which 
began  while  Jotham  was  living,  were  perpetuated  by  Pekah  the 
king  of  Israel  and  Eezin  the  king  of  Damascene  Syria ;  and  in 
the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war,  an  attack  was  made  upon  Jeru 
salem,  with  the  avowed  intention  of  bringing  the  Davidic  rule 
to  an  end.  Ahaz  appealed  to  Tiglath-pileser,  the  king  of 
Assyria,  to  help  him  out  of  these  troubles.  He  thus  made  flesh 
his  arm,  and  so  entangled  the  nation  of  Jehovah  with  the  king 
dom  of  the  world,  that  from  that  time  forward  it  never  truly 
recovered  its  independence  again.  The  kingdom  of  the  world 
was  the  heathen  state  in  its  Nimrodic  form.  Its  perpetual 
aim  was  to  extend  its  boundaries  by  constant  accretions,  till  it 
had  grown  into  a  world-embracing  colossus ;  and  in  order  to 
accomplish  this,  it  was  ever  passing  beyond  its  natural  boun 
daries,  and  coming  down  like  an  avalanche  upon  foreign  nations, 
not  merely  for  self-defence  or  revenge,  but  for  the  purpose  of 
conquest  also.  Assyria  and  Rome  were  the  first  and  last  links 
in  that  chain  of  oppression  by  the  kingdom  of  the  world,  which 
ran  through  the  history  of  Israel.  Thus  Isaiah,  standing  as  he 
did  on  the  very  threshold  of  this  new  and  all-important  turn  in 
the  history  of  his  country,  and  surveying  it  with  his  telescopic 
glance,  was,  so  to  speak,  the  universal  prophet  of  Israel.  The 
third  period  of  his  ministry  extended  from  the  accession  of 
Hezekiah  to  the  fifteenth  year  of  his  reign.  Under  Hezekiah 
the  nation  rose,  almost  at  the  same  pace  at  which  it  had  pre 
viously  declined  under  Ahaz.  He  forsook  the  ways  of  his 
idolatrous  father,  and  restored  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  The 
mass  of  the  people,  indeed,  remained  inwardly  unchanged,  but 
Judah  had  once  more  an  upright  king,  who  hearkened  to  the 


INTRODUCTION.  33 

word  of  the  prophet  by  his  side, — two  pillars  of  the  state,  and 
men  mighty  in  prayer  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  20).  When  the  attempt 
was  afterwards  made  to  break  away  from  the  Assyrian  yoke,  so 
far  as  the  leading  men  and  the  great  mass  of  the  people  were 
concerned,  this  was  an  act  of  unbelief  originating  merely  in 
the  same  confident  expectation  of  help  from  Egypt  which  had 
occasioned  the  destruction  of  the  northern  kingdom  in  the  sixth 
year  of  Hezekiah's  reign  ;  but  on  the  part  of  Hezekiah  it  was 
an  act  of  faith  and  confident  reliance  upon  Jehovah  (2  Kings 
xviii.  7).  Consequently,  when  Sennacherib,  the  successor  of 
Shalmaneser,  marched  against  Jerusalem,  conquering  and  de 
vastating  the  land  as  he  advanced,  and  Egypt  failed  to  send 
the  promised  help,  the  carnal  defiance  of  the  leaders  and  of  the 
great  mass  of  the  people  brought  its  own  punishment.  But 
Jehovah  averted  the  worst  extremity,  by  destroying  the  kernel 
of  the  Assyrian  army  in  a  single  night ;  so  that,  as  in  the  Syro- 
Ephraimitish  war,  Jerusalem  itself  was  never  actually  besieged, 
Thus  the  faith  of  the  king,  and  of  the  better  portion  of  the 
nation,  which  rested  upon  the  word  of  promise,  had  its  reward. 
There  was  still  a  divine  power  in  the  state,  which  preserved  it 
from  destruction.  The  coming  judgment,  which  nothing  in 
deed  could  now  avert,  according  to  ch.  vi.,  was  arrested  for  a 
time,  just  when  the  last  destructive  blow  would  naturally  have 
been  expected.  It  was  in  this  miraculous  rescue,  which  Isaiah 
predicted,  and  for  which  he  prepared  the  way,  that  the  public 
ministry  of  the  prophet  culminated.  Isaiah  was  the  Amos  of 
the  kingdom  of  Judah,  having  the  same  fearful  vocation  to  fore 
see  and  to  declare  the  fact,  that  for  Israel  as  a  people  and  king 
dom  the  time  of  forgiveness  had  gone  by.  But  he  was  not  also 
the  Hosea  of  the  southern  kingdom ;  for  it  was  not  Isaiah, 
but  Jeremiah,  who  received  the  solemn  call  to  accompany  the 
disastrous  fate  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  with  the  knell  of 
prophetic  denunciations.  Jeremiah  was  the  Hosea  of  the  king 
dom  of  Judah.  To  Isaiah  was  given  the  commission,  which 
was  refused  to  his  successor  Jeremiah, — namely,  to  press  back 
once  more,  through  the  might  of  his  prophetic  word,  coming  as 
it  did  out  of  the  depths  of  the  strong  spirit  of  faith,  the  dark 
night  which  threatened  to  swallow  up  his  people  at  the  time  of 
the  Assyrian  judgment.  After  the  fifteenth  year  of  Hczekiah's 
reign,  he  took  no  further  part  in  public  affairs ;  but  he  lived 

VOL-  I  C 


34  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

till  the  commencement  of  Manasseli's  reign,  when,  according 
to  a  credible  tradition,  to  which  there  is  an  evident  allusion  in 
Heb.  xi.  37  ("  they  were  sawn  asunder"),1  he  fell  a  victim  to 
the  heathenism  which  became  once  more  supreme  in  the  land. 

To  this  sketch  of  the  times  and  ministry  of  the  prophet  we 
will  add  a  review  of  the  scriptural  account  of  the  four  kings, 
under  whom  he  laboured  according  to  ch.  i.  1 ;  since  nothing 
is  more  essential,  as  a  preparation  for  the  study  of  his  book,  than 
a  minute  acquaintance  with  these  sections  of  the  books  of  Kings 
and  Chronicles. 

I.  HISTORICAL  ACCOUNT  OF  UZZIAH-JOTHAM. — The 
account  of  Uzziah  given  in  the  look  of  Kings  (2  Kings  xv. 
1-7,  to  which  we  may  add  xiv.  21,  22),  like  that  of  Jeroboam  II., 
vs  not  so  full  as  we  should  have  expected.  After  the  murder 
of  Amaziah,  the  people  of  Judah,  as  related  in  ch.  xiv.  21,  22, 
raised  to  the  throne  his  son  Azariah,  probably  not  his  first 
born,  who  was  then  sixteen  years  old.  It  was  he  who  built 
the  Edomitish  seaport  town  of  Elath  (for  navigation  and  com 
merce),  and  made  it  a  permanent  possession  of  Judah  (as  in  the 
time  of  Solomon).  This  notice  is  introduced,  as  a  kind  of 
appendix,  at  the  close  of  Amaziah's  life  and  quite  out  of  its 
chronological  position,  because  the  conquest  of  Elath  was  the 
crowning  point  of  the  subjugation  of  Edom  by  Amaziah,  and 
not,  as  Thenius  supposes,  because  it  was  Azariah' s  first  feat  of 
arms,  by  which,  immediately  after  his  accession,  he  satisfied  the 
expectations  with  which  the  army  had  made  him  king.  For 
the  victories  gained  by  this  king  over  Edom  and  the  other 
neighbouring  nations  cannot  have  been  obtained  at  the  time 
when  Amos  prophesied,  which  was  about  the  tenth  year  of 
Uzziah's  reign.  The  attack  made  by  Amaziah  upon  the  king 
dom  of  Israel,  had  brought  the  kingdom  of  Judah  into  a  state 
of  dependence  upon  the  former,  and  almost  of  total  ruin,  from 
which  it  only  recovered  gradually,  like  a  house  that  had  fallen 
into  decay.  The  chronicler,  following  the  text  of  the  book  of 
Kings,  has  introduced  the  notice  concerning  Elath  in  the  same 
place  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  1,  2  :  it  is  written  Eloth,  as  in  1  Kings 

1  According  to  &.  Jebamoth,  49&,  it  was  found  in  a  roll  containing  the 
history  of  a  Jerusalem  family ;  and  according  to  Sanliedrin,  103&,  in  the 
Targuru  on  2  Kings  xxi.  16. 


INTRODUCTION.  35 

ix.  26,  and  the  Septuagint  at  2  Kings  xiv.  22).  He  calls  the 
king  Uzzialm;  and  it  is  only  in  the  table  of  the  kings  of 
Judah,  in  1  Chron.  iii.  12,  that  he  gives  the  name  as  Azariah. 
The  author  of  the  book  of  Kings,  according  to  our  Hebrew 
text,  calls  him  sometimes  Azariah  or  Azariahu,  sometimes 
Uzzidli  or  Uzzialm ;  the  Septuagint  always  gives  the  name  as 
Azarias.  The  occurrence  of  the  two  names  in  both  of  the 
historical  books  is  an  indubitable  proof  that  they  are  genuine. 
Azariah  was  the  original  name  :  out  of  this  Uzziah  was  gra 
dually  formed  by  a  significant  elision  ;  and  as  the  prophetical 
books,  from  Isa.  i.  1  to  Zech.  xiv.  5,  clearly  show,  the  latter 
was  the  name  most  commonly  used. 

Azariah,  as  we  learn  from  the  section  in  the  book  of  Kings 
relating  to  the  reign  of  this  monarch  (2  Kings  xv.  1-7), 
ascended  the  throne  in  the  twenty-seventh  year  of  Jeroboam's 
reign,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  his  sole  government, 
the  twenty-seventh  from  the  time  when  he  shared  the  govern 
ment  with  his  father  Joash,  as  we  may  gather  from  2  Kings  xiii. 
13.  The  youthful  sovereign,  who  was  only  sixteen  years  of  age, 
was  the  son  of  Amaziah  by  a  native  of  Jerusalem,  and  reigned 
fifty-two  years.  He  did  what  was  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God, 
like  his  father  Amaziah  ;  i.e.  although  he  did  not  come  up  to  the 
standard  of  David,  he  was  one  of  the  better  kings.  He  fostered 
the  worship  of  Jehovah,  as  prescribed  in  the  law  :  nevertheless 
he  left  the  high  places  (bamoth)  standing ;  and  while  he  was 
reigning,  the  people  maintained  in  all  its  force  the  custom  of 
sacrificing  and  burning  incense  upon  the  heights.  He  was 
punished  by  God  with  leprosy,  which  compelled  him  to  live  in 
a  sick-house  (chophshnth  =  chophshith :  sickness)  till  the  day  of 
his  death,  whilst  his  son  Jotham  was  over  the  palace,  and  con 
ducted  the  affairs  of  government.  He  was  buried  in  the  city 
of  David,  and  Jotham  followed  him  on  the  throne.  This  is 
all  that  the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  tells  us  concerning 
Azariah :  for  the  rest,  he  refers  to  the  annals  of  the  kings  of 
Judah.  The  section  in  the  Chronicles  relating  to  Uzziah 
(2  Chron.  xxvi.)  is  much  more  copious  :  the  writer  had  our 
book  of  Kings  before  him,  as  ch.  xxvi.  3,  4,  21,  clearly  proves, 
and  completed  the  defective  notices  from  the  source  which  he 
chiefly  employed, — namely,  the  much  more  elaborate  midrash. 
Uzziah,  he  says,  was  zealous  in  seekin^  Elohim  in  the  davs 


36  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  Zechariah,  who  had  understanding  in  divine  visions ;  and  in 
the  days  when  he  sought  Jehovah,  God  made  him  to  prosper. 
Thus  the  prophet  Zechariah,  as  a  faithful  pastor  and  counsellor, 
stood  in  the  same  relation  to  him  in  which  Jehoiada  the  high 
priest  had  stood  to  Joash,  Uzziah's  grandfather.  The  chronicler 
then  enumerates  singly  the  divine  blessings  which  Uzziah  en 
joyed.  First,  his  victories  over  the  surrounding  nations  (passing 
over  the  victory  over  Edom,  which  had  been  already  mentioned), 
viz. :  (1)  he  went  forth  and  warred  against  the  Philistines,  and 
brake  down  the  wall  of  Gath,  and  the  wall  of  Jabneh,  and  the 
wall  of  Ashdod,  and  built  towns  UasJidod  and  VpkeUstim  (i.e.  in 
the  conquered  territory  of  Ashdod,  and  in  Philistia  generally)  ; 
(2)  God  not  only  gave  him  victory  over  the  Philistines,  but  also 
over  the  Arabians  who  dwelt  in  Gur-Baal  (an  unknown  place, 
which  neither  the  LXX.  nor  the  Targumists  could  explain), 
and  the  Mehunim,  probably  a  tribe  of  Arabia  Petrsea  ;  (3)  the 
Ammonites  gave  him  presents  in  token  of  allegiance,  and  his 
name  was  honoured  even  as  far  as  Egypt,  to  such  an  extent 
did  his  power  grow.  Secondly,  his  buildings :  he  built  towers 
(fortifications)  above  the  corner  gate,  and  above  the  valley  gate, 
and  above  the  Mikzoa,  and  fortified  these  (the  weakest)  por 
tions  of  Jerusalem  :  he  also  built  towers  in  the  desert  (probably 
in  the  desert  between  Beersheba  and  Gaza,  to  protect  either 
the  land,  or  the  flocks  and  herds  that  were  pasturing  there) ; 
and  dug  many  cisterns,  for  he  had  large  flocks  and  herds  both 
in  the  shephelah  (the  western  portion  of  Southern  Palestine) 
and  in  the  mishor  (the  extensive  pasture-land  of  the  tribe  terri 
tory  of  Keuben  on  the  other  side  of  the  Jordan)  :  he  had  also 
husbandmen  and  vine-dressers  on  the  mountains,  and  in  the 
fruitful  fields,  for  he  was  a  lover  of  agriculture.  Thirdly,  his 
well-organized  troops :  he  had  an  army  of  fighting  men  which 
consisted — according  to  a  calculation  made  by  Jeiel  the  scribe, 
and  Maaseiah,  the  officer  under  the  superintendence  of  Hananiah, 
one  of  the  royal  princes — of  2600  heads  of  families,  who  had 
307,500  men  under  their  command,  "  that  made  war  with  mighty 
power  to  help  the  king  against  the  enemy."  Uzziah  furnished 
these,  according  to  all  the  divisions  of  the  army,  with  shields, 
arid  spears,  and  helmets,  and  coats  of  mail,  and  bows,  even 
with  slinging-stones.  He  also  had  ingenious  slinging-machines 
(lalistae)  made  in  Jerusalem,  to  fix  upon  the  towers  and  rain- 


INTRODUCTION.  37 

parts,  for  the  purpose  of  shooting  arrows  and  large  stones. 
His  name  resounded  far  abroad,  for  he  had  marvellous  success, 
so  tli at  he  became  very  powerful. 

Up  to  this  point  the  chronicler  has  depicted  the  brighter 
side  of  Uzziah's  reign.  His  prosperous  deeds  and  enterprises 
are  all  grouped  together,  so  that  it  is  doubtful  whether  the 
history  within  these  several  groups  follows  the  chronological 
order  or  not.  The  light  thrown  upon  the  history  of  the  times 
by  the  group  of  victories  gained  by  Uzziah,  would  be  worth 
twice  as  much  if  the  chronological  order  were  strictly  observed. 
But  even  if  we  might  assume  that  the  victoiy  over  the  Philis 
tines  preceded  the  victory  over  the  Arabians  of  Gur-Baal  and 
the  Mehunim,  and  this  again  the  subjugation  of  Ammon,  it 
would  still  be  very  uncertain  what  position  the  expedition 
against  Edom — which  was  noticed  by  anticipation  at  the  close 
of  Amaziah's  life — occupied  in  relation  to  the  other  wars,  and 
at  what  part  of  Uzziah's  reign  the  several  wars  occurred.  All 
that  can  be  affirmed  is,  that  they  preceded  the  closing  years  of 
his  life,  when  the  blessing  of  God  was  withdrawn  from  him. 

The  chronicler  relates  still  further,  in  ch.  xxvi.  16,  that  as 
Uzziah  became  stronger  and  stronger,  he  fell  into  pride  of 
heart,  which  led  him  to  perform  a  ruinous  act.  He  sinned 
against  Jehovah  his  God,  by  forcing  his  way  into  the  holy 
place  of  the  temple,  to  burn  incense  upon  the  altar  of  incense, 
from  the  proud  notion  that  royalty  involved  the  rights  of  the 
priesthood,  and  that  the  priests  were  only  the  delegates  and 
representatives  of  the  king.  Then  Azariah  the  high  priest, 
and  eighty  other  priests,  brave  men,  hurried  after  him,  and 
went  up  to  him,  and  said,  "  This  does  not  belong  to  thee, 
Uzziah.  to  burn  incense  to  Jehovah ;  but  to  the  priests,  the 
sons  of  Aaron,  who  are  consecrated  to  burn  incense  :  go  out  of 
the  sanctuary,  for  thou  sinnest ;  and  this  is  not  for  thine  honoul 
with  Jehovah  Elohim  !  "  Then  Uzziah  was  wroth,  as  he  held 
the  censer  in  his  hand ;  and  while  he  was  so  enraged  against  the 
priests,  leprosy  broke  out  upon  his  forehead  in  the  sight  of  the 
priests,  in  the  house  of  Jehovah,  at  the  altar  of  incense.  When 
Azariah  the  high  priest  and  the  rest  of  the  priests  turned  to 
him,  behold,  he  was  leprous  in  his  forehead  ;  and  they  brought 
him  hurriedly  away  from  thence, — in  fact,  he  himself  hasted 
to  go  out. — for  Jehovah  had  smitten  him.  After  having  thus 


38  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

explained  the  circumstances  which  led  to  the  king's  leprosy, 
the  chronicler  follows  once  more  the  text  of  the  book  of  Kings, 
—where  the  leprosy  itself  is  also  mentioned, — and  states  that 
the  king  remained  a  leper  until  the  day  of  his  death,  and  lived 
in  a  sick-house,  without  ever  being  able  to  visit  the  temple 
again.  But  instead  of  the  statement  in  the  book  of  Kings, 
that  he  was  buried  in  the  city  of  David,  the  chronicler  affirms 
more  particularly  that  he  was  not  placed  in  the  king's  sepulchre  ; 
but,  inasmuch  as  he  was  leprous,  and  would  therefore  have 
defiled  it,  was  buried  in  the  field  near  the  sepulchre.  But 
before  introducing  this  conclusion  to  the  history  of  Uzziah's 
reign,  and  instead  of  referring  to  the  annals  of  the  kings  of 
Juclah,  as  the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  has  done,  or  making 
such  citations  as  we  generally  find,  the  author  simply  states, 
that  "  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Uzziah,  first  and  last,  did  Isaiah 
the  prophet,  the  son  of  Amoz,  write." 

It  cannot  possibly  be  either  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  of  the 
time  of  Uzziah,  or  a  certain  historical  portion  of  the  original 
book  of  Isaiah's  predictions,  to  which  reference  is  here  made  ; 
for  in  that  case  we  should  expect  the  same  notice  at  the  close 
of  the  account  of  Jotham's  reign,  or,  at  any  rate,  at  the  close 
of  that  of  Ahaz  (cf.  ch.  xxvii.  7  and  xxviii.  26).  It  is  also 
inconceivable  that  Isaiah's  book  of  predictions  should  have  con 
tained  either  a  prophetical  or  historical  account  of  the  first  acts 
of  Uzziah,  since  Isaiah  was  later  than  Amos,  later  even  than 
Hosea;  and  his  public  ministry  did  not  commence  till  the  close 
of  his  reign, — in  fact,  not  till  the  year  of  his  death.  Conse 
quently  the  chronicler  must  refer  to  some  historical  work  dis 
tinct  from  "  the  visions  of  Isaiah."  Just  as  he  mentions  two 
historical  works  within  the  first  epoch  of  the  divided  kingdom, 
viz.  Shemaiah's  and  Iddo's, — the  former  of  which  referred  more 
especially  to  the  entire  history  of  Rehoboam,  and  the  latter  to 
the  history  of  Abijah, — and  then  again,  in  the  second  epoch,  an 
historical  work  by  Jehu  ben  Hanani,  which  contained  a  com 
plete  history  of  Jehoshaphat  from  the  beginning  to  the  end ; 
so  here,  in  the  third  epoch,  he  speaks  of  Isaiah  ben  Amoz,  the 
greatest  Judsean  prophet  of  this  epoch,  as  the  author  of  a 
special  history  of  Uzziah,  which  was  not  incorporated  in  his 
"  visions"  like  the  history  of  Hezekiah(cf.  ch.  xxxii.  32),  but 
formed  an  independent  work.  Besides  this  prophetical  history 


INTRODUCTION.  39 

of  Uzziab,  there  was  also  an  annalistic  history,  as  2  Kings  xv.  <\ 
clearly  shows  ;  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  annals  of  Uzziah 
were  finished  when  Isaiah  commenced  his  work,  and  that  they 
were  made  use  of  by  him.  For  the  leading  purpose  of  the 
prophetical  histories  was  to  exhibit  the  inward  and  divine  con 
nection  between  the  several  outward  events,  which  the  annals 
simply  registered.  The  historical  writings  of  a  prophet  were 
only  the  other  side  of  his  more  purely  prophetic  work.  In  the 
light  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  former  looked  deep  into  the 
past,  the  latter  into  the  present.  Both  of  them  had  to  do  with 
the  ways  of  divine  justice  and  grace,  and  set  forth  past  and 
present,  alike  in  view  of  the  true  goal,  in  which  these  two  ways 
coincide. 

Jotham  succeeded  Uzziah,  after  having  acted  as  regent,  or 
rather  as  viceroy,  for  several  years  (2  Kings  xv.  32-38).  He 
ascended  the  throne  in  the  second  year  of  Pekah  king  of  Israel, 
in  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  his  age,  and  reigned  for  sixteen 
years  in  a  manner  which  pleased  God,  though  he  still  tolerated 
the  worship  upon  high  places,  as  his  father  had  done.  He 
built  the  upper  gate  of  the  temple.  The  author  has  no  sooner 
written  this  than  he  refers  to  the  annals,  simply  adding,  before 
concluding  with  the  usual  formula  concerning  his  burial  in  the 
city  of  David,  that  in  those  days,  i.e.  towards  the  close  of 
Jotham's  reign,  the  hostilities  of  Rezin  of  Damascus  and  Pekah 
of  Israel  commenced,  as  a  judgment  from  God  upon  Judah. 
The  chronicler,  however,  makes  several  valuable  additions  to 
the  text  of  the  book  of  Kings,  which  he  has  copied  word  for 
word  down  to  the  notice  concerning  the  commencement  of  the 

O 

Syro-Ephraimitish  hostilities  (vid.  2  Chron.  xxvii.).  We  do 
not  include  in  this  the  statement  that  Jotham  did  not  force  his 
way  into  the  "holy  place  in  the  temple :  this  is  simply  intended 
as  a  limitation  of  the  assertion  made  by  the  author  of  the  book 
of  Kings  as  to  the  moral  equality  of  Jotham  and  Uzziah,  and 
in  favour  of  the  former.  The  words,  "  the  people  continued  in 
their  destructive  course,"  also  contain  nothing  new,  but  are 
simply  the  shorter  expression  used  in  the  Chronicles  to  indi 
cate  the  continuance  of  the  worship  of  the  high  places  during 
Jotham's  reign.  But  there  is  something  new  in  what  the 
chronicler  appends  to  the  remark  concerning  the  building  of 
the  upper  gate  of  the  temple,  which  is  very  bold  and  abrupt  as 


40  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

it  stands  in  the  book  of  Kings,  viz.,  "  on  the  wall  of  the  Ophel 
he  built  much  (i.e.  he  fortified  this  southern  spur  of  the  temple 
hill  still  more  strongly),  and  put  towns  on  the  mountains  of 
Judah,  and  erected  castles  and  towers  in  the  forests  (for  watch- 
towers  and  defences  against  hostile  attacks).  He  also  fought 
with  the  king  of  the  Ammonites ;  and  when  conquered,  they 
were  obliged  to  give  him  that  year  and  the  two  following  a 
hundred  talents  of  silver,  ten  thousand  cors  of  wheat,  and  the 
same  quantity  of  barley.  Jotham  grew  stronger  and  stronger, 
because  he  strove  to  walk  before  Jehovah  his  God."  The 
chronicler  breaks  off  with  this  general  statement,  and  refers, 
for  the  other  memorabilia  of  Jotham,  and  all  his  wars  and  enter 
prises,  to  the  book  of  the  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah. 

This  is  what  the  two  historical  books  relate  concerning  the 
royal  pair — Uzziah- Jotham — under  whom  the  kingdom  of  Judah 
enjoyed  once  more  a  period  of  great  prosperity  and  power, — 
"  the  greatest  since  the  disruption,  with  the  exception  of  that  of 
Jehoshaphat;  the  longest  during  the  whole  period  of  its  existence, 
the  last  before  its  overthrow "  (Caspari).  The  sources  from 
which  the  two  historical  accounts  were  derived  were  the  annals  : 
they  were  taken  directly  from  them  by  the  author  of  the  book 
of  Kings,  indirectly  by  the  chronicler.  No  traces  can  be  dis 
covered  of  the  work  written  by  Isaiah  concerning  Uzziah, 
although  it  may  possibly  be  employed  in  the  midrash  of  the 
chronicler.  There  is  an  important  supplement  to  the  account 
given  by  the  chronicler  in  the  casual  remark  made  in  1  Chron. 
v.  17,  to  the  effect  that  Jotham  had  a  census  taken  of  the 
tribe  of  Gad,  which  was  settled  on  the  other  side  of  the  Jordan. 
We  see  from  this,  that  in  proportion  as  the  northern  kingdom 
sank  down  from  the  eminence  to  which  it  had  attained  under 
Jeroboam  II.,  the  supremacy  of  Judah  over  tile  land  to  the 
east  of  the  Jordan  was  renewed.  But  we  may  see  from  Amos, 
that  it  was  only  gradually  that  the  kingdom  of  Judah  revived 
under  Uzziah,  and  that  at  first,  like  the  wall  of  Jerusalem, 
which  was  partially  broken  down  by  Joash,  it  presented  the 
aspect  of  a  house  full  of  fissures,  and  towards  Israel  in  a  very 
shaky  condition ;  also  that  the  Ephraimitish  ox-  (or  calf-)  wor 
ship  of  Jehovah  was  carried  on  at  Beersheba,  and  therefore 
upon  Judsean  soil,  and  that  Judah  did  not  keep  itself  free  from 
the  idolatry  which  it  had  inherited  from  the  fathers  (Amos  ii. 


INTRODUCTION.  41 

4,  5).  Again,  assuming  that  Amos  commenced  his  ministry 
at  about  the  tenth  year  of  Uzziah's  reign,  we  may  learn  at 
least  so  much  from  him  with  regard  to  Uzziah's  victories  over 
Edom,  Philistia,  and  Ammon,  that  they  were  not  gained  till 
after  the  tenth  year  of  his  reign.  Hosea,  on  the  other  hand, 
whose  ministry  commenced  at  the  very  earliest  when  that  of 
Amos  was  drawing  to  a  close,  and  probably  not  till  the  last  five 
years  of  Jeroboam's  reign,  bears  witness  to,  and  like  Amos  con 
demns,  the  participation  in  the  Ephraimitish  worship,  into  which 
Judah  had  been  drawn  under  Uzziah-Jotham.  But  with  him 
Beersheba  is  not  referred  to  any  more  as  an  Israel itish  seat 
of  worship  (ch.  iv.  15) ;  Israel  does  not  interfere  any  longer 
with  the  soil  of  Judah,  as  in  the  time  of  Amos,  since  Judah 
has  again  become  a  powerful  and  well-fortified  kingdom  (ch. 
viii.  14,  cf.  i.  7).  But,  at  the  same  time,  it  has  become  full  of 
carnal  trust  and  manifold  apostasy  from  Jehovah  (ch.  v.  10, 
xii.  1) ;  so  that,  although  receiving  at  first  a  miraculous  deli 
verance  from  God  (ch.  i.  7),  it  is  ripening  for  the  same  destruc 
tion  as  Israel  (ch.  vi.  11). 

This  survey  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  in  the  time  of  Uzziah- 
Jotham  by  the  Israel  itish  prophet,  we  shall  find  repeated  in 
Isaiah;  for  the  same  spirit  animates  and  determines  the  verdicts 
of  the  prophets  of  both  kingdoms. 

II.  HISTORICAL  ACCOUNT  OF  AHAZ  AXD  THE  SYRO- 
EPHKAIMITISH  WAR. — The  account  of  Ahaz,  given  in  the 
book  of  Kings  and  in  the  Chronicles  (2  Kings  xvi.,  2  Chron. 
xxviii.),  may  be  divided  into  three  parts :  viz.,  first,  the  general 
characteristics;  secondly,  the  account  of  the  Syro-Ephraim itish 
war ;  and  thirdly,  the  desecration  of  the  temple  by  Ahaz,  more 
especially  by  setting  up  an  altar  made  after  the  model  of  that 
at  Damascus.1  (1.)  2  Kings  xvi.  1-4.  Ahaz  ascended  the  throne 
in  the  seventeenth  year  of  Pekah.  He  was  then  twenty  years 
old  (or  twenty-five  according  to  the  LXX.  at  2  Chron.  xxviii. 
1,  which  is  much  more  probable,  as  he  would  otherwise  have 
had  a  son,  Hezekiah,  in  the  tenth  year  of  his  age),  and  he 
reigned  sixteen  years.  He  did  not  please  God  as  his  forefather 
David  had  done,  but  took  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  and 

1  On  the  temple  at  Damascus,  whose  altar  Ahaz  imitated,  see  the  Com 
mentary  on  the  Book  of  Job. 


42  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

even  made  his  son  pass  through  the  fire  (i.e.  burnt  him  in 
honour  of  Moloch),  according  to  the  abominations  of  the  (Ca- 
naanitish)  people  whom  Jehovah  had  driven  out  before  Israel ; 
and  he  offered  sacrifice  and  burnt  incense  upon  the  high  places, 
and  upon  the  hills,  and  under  every  green  tree.  The  Deutero- 
nomic  colouring  of  this  passage  is  very  obvious.  The  corre 
sponding  passage  in  the  Chronicles  is  2  Chron.  xxviii.  1-4, 
where  the  additional  fact  is  mentioned,  that  he  even  made 
molten  images  for  Baalim,  and  burnt  incense  in  the  valley  of 
Hinnom,  and  burnt  his  children  in  the  fire  ("his  children" 
a  generic  plural  like  "  the  kings"  in  ver.  16,  and  "  the  sons"  in 
2  Chron.  xxiv.  25 :"  burnt"  "W?*_l,  unless  the  reading  "W-l  be 
adopted,  as  it  has  been  by  the  LXX.,  "  he  caused  to  pass 
through.")  (2.)  2  Kings  xvi.  5-9.  Then  (in  the  time  of  this 
idolatrous  king  Ahaz)  the  following  well-known  and  memorable 
event  occurred :  Kezin  the  king  of  Aram,  and  Pekah  the  soi? 
of  Ivemaliah  king  of  Israel,  went  up  against  Jerusalem  to  war, 
and  besieged  Ahaz,  "  but  could  not  overcome  him,"  i.e.9  as  we 
may  gather  from  Isa.  vii.  1,  they  were  not  able  to  get  posses 
sion  of  Jerusalem,  which  w7as  the  real  object  of  their  expedition 
"  At  that  time"  (the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  proceeds  to 
observe),  viz.  at  the  time  of  this  Syro-Epraimitish  war,  Rezin 
king  of  Aram  brought  Elath  to  Aram  (i.e.  wrested  again  from 
the  kingdom  of  Judah  the  seaport  town  which  Uzziah  had 
recovered  a  short  time  before),  and  drove  the  Judasans  out  of 
Elath  (sic) ;  and  Aramaeans  came  to  Elath  and  settled  there 
unto  this  day.  Thenius,  who  starts  with  the  needless  assump 
tion  that  the  conquest  of  Elath  took  place  subsequently  to  the 
futile  attempt  to  take  Jerusalem,  gives  the  preference  to  the 
reading  of  the  Keri,  "  and  Edornites  (Edomina)  came  to  Elath," 
and  would  therefore  correct  laram  (to  Aram)  into  I'edom  (to 
Edom).  "  Rezin,"  he  says,  "  destroyed  the  work  of  Uzziah, 
and  gave  Edom  its  liberty  again,  in  the  hope  that  at  some 
future  time  he  might  have  the  support  of  Edom,  and  so  operate 
against  Judah  with  greater  success."  But,  in  answer  to  this, 
it  may  be  affirmed  that  such  obscure  forms  as  B^"1^.  for  E^Entf 
are  peculiar  to  this  account,  and  that  the  words  do  not  denote 
the  restoration  of  a  settlement,  but  mention  the  settlement  as 
a  new  and  remarkable  fact.  I  therefore  adopt  Caspari's  con 
clusion,  that  the  Syrian  king  transplanted  a  Syrian  colony  of 


INTRODUCTION.  43 

traders  to  Elath,  to  secure  the  command  of  the  maritime  trade 
with  all  its  attendant  advantages;  and  this  colony  held  its 
ground  there  for  some  time  after  the  destruction  of  the  Damas 
cene  kingdom,  as  the  expression  "to  this  day,"  found  in  the 
earlier  source  of  the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings,  clearly  implies. 
But  if  the  conquest  of  Elath  fell  within  the  period  of  the 
Syro-Ephraimitish  war,  which  commenced  towards  the  end  of 
Jotham's  reign,  and  probably  originated  in  the  bitter  feelings 
occasioned  by  the  almost  total  loss  to  Judah  of  the  country  on 
the  east  of  the  Jordan,  and  which  assumed  the  form  of  a  direct 
attack  upon  Jerusalem  itself  soon  after  Ahaz  ascended  the 
throne ;  the  question  arises,  How  was  it  that  this  design  of  the 
two  allied  kings  upon  Jerusalem  was  not  successful?  The 
explanation  is  given  in  the  account  contained  in  the  book  of 
Kings  (vers.  7-9)  :  "  Ahaz  sent  messengers  to  Tiglath-pelezer 
(sic)  the  king  of  Asshur,  to  say  to  him,  I  am  thy  servant,  and 
thy  son ;  come  up,  and  save  me  out  of  the  hand  of  Aram,  and 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Israel,  who  have  risen  up  against 
me.  And  Ahaz  took  the  silver  and  the  gold  that  was  found 
in  the  house  of  Jehovah,  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  palace, 
and  sent  it  for  a  present  to  the  king  of  Asshur.  The  king 
hearkened  to  his  petition ;  and  went  against  Damascus,  and 
took  it,  and  carried  the  inhabitants  into  captivity  to  Kir,  and 
slew  Kezin."  And  what  did  Tiglath-pileser  do  with  Pekah? 
The  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  has  already  related,  in  the 
section  referring  to  Pekah  (2  Kings  xv.  29),  that  he  punished 
him  by  taking  away  the  whole  of  the  country  to  the  east  of  the 
Jordan,  and  a  large  part  of  the  territory  on  this  side  towards 
the  north,  and  carried  the  inhabitants  captive  to  Assyria.  This 
section  must  be  supplied  here, — an  example  of  the  great  liberty 
which  the  historians  allowed  themselves  in  the  selection  and 
arrangement  of  their  materials.  The  anticipation  in  ver.  5 
is  also  quite  in  accordance  with  their  usual  style :  the  author 
first  of  all  states  that  the  expedition  against  Jerusalem  was  an 
unsuccessful  one,  and  then  afterwards  proceeds  to  mention  the 
reason  for  the  failure, — namely,  the  appeal  of  Ahaz  to  Assyria 
for  help.  For  I  also  agree  with  Caspari  in  this,  that  the 
Syrians  and  Ephraimites  were  unable  to  take  Jerusalem, 
because  the  tidings  reached  them,  that  Tiglath-pileser  had  been 
appealed  to  by  Ahaz  and  was  coming  against  them;  and  thev 


44  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

were  consequently  obliged  to  raise  the  siege  and  make  a  speedy 
retreat. 

The  account  in  the  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  5-21) 
furnishes  us  with  full  and  extensive  details,  with  which  to 
supplement  the  very  condensed  notice  in  the  book  of  Kings. 
When  we  compare  the  two  accounts,  the  question  arises, 
whether  they  refer  to  two  different  expeditions  (and  if  so, 
which  of  the  two  refers  to  the  first  expedition  and  which  to  the 
second),  or  whether  they  both  relate  to  the  same  expedition. 
Let  us  picture  to  ourselves  first  of  all  the  facts  as  given  by 
the  chronicler.  "  Jehovah,  his  God,"  he  says  of  Ahaz,  "  deli 
vered  him  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Aram,  and  they  (the 
Aramaeans)  smote  him,  and  carried  off  from  him  a  great  crowd 
of  captives,  whom  they  brought  to  Damascus ;  and  he  was  also 
given  into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Israel,  who  inflicted  upon 
him  a  terrible  defeat."  This  very  clearly  implies,  as  Caspari 
has  shown,  that  although  the  two  kings  set  the  conquest  of 
Jerusalem  before  them  as  a  common  end  at  which  to  aim, 
and  eventually  united  for  the  attainment  of  this  end,  yet  for 
a  time  they  acted  separately.  We  are  not  told  here  in  what 
direction  Eezin's  army  went.  But  we  know  from  2  Kings 
xvi.  6  that  it  marched  to  Idumsea,  which  it  could  easily  reach 
from  Damascus  by  going  through  the  territory  of  his  ally, 
— namely,  the  country  of  the  two  tribes  and  a  half.  The 
chronicler  merely  describes  the  simultaneous  invasion  of  Judasa 
by  Pekah,  but  he  does  this  with  all  the  greater  fulness. 

"  Pekah  the  son  of  Kemaliah  slew  in  Judah  a  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  in  one  day,  all  valiant  men,  because  they  for 
sook  Jehovah,  the  God  of  their  fathers.  Zichri,  an  Ephraim- 
itish  hero,  slew  Ma'asejahu  the  king's  son,  and  Azrikam  the 
governor  of  the  palace,  and  Elkanah,  the  second  in  rank  to  the 
king.  And  the  Israelites  carried  away  captive  of  their  brethren 
two  hundred  thousand  women,  boys,  and  girls,  and  took  away 
much  spoil  from  them,  and  brought  this  booty  to  Samaria." 
As  the  Jewish  army  numbered  at  that  time  three  hundred 
thousand  men  (2  Chron.  xxv.  5,  xxvi.  13),  and  the  war  was 
carried  on  with  the  greatest  animosity,  these  numbers  need 
not  be  regarded  as  either  spurious  or  exaggerated.  Moreover, 
the  numbers,  which  the  chronicler  found  in  the  sources  he  em^ 
ployed,  merely  contained  the  estimate  of  the  enormous  losses 


INTRODUCTION.  45 

sustained,  as  generally  adopted  at  that  time  on  the  side  of 
Judah  itself. 

This  bloody  catastrophe  was  followed  by  a  very  fine  and 
touching  occurrence.  A  prophet  of  Jehovah,  named  Oded 
(a  contemporary  of  Hosea,  and  a  man  of  kindred  spirit),  went 
out  before  the  army  as  it  came  back  to  Samaria,  and  charged 
the  victors  to  release  the  captives  of  their  brother  nation,  which 
had  been  terribly  punished  in  God's  wrath,  and  by  so  doing  to 
avert  the  wrath  of  God  which  threatened  them  as  well.  Four 
noble  Ephraimitish  heads  of  tribes,  whose  names  the  chronicler 
has  preserved,  supported  the  admonition  of  the  prophet.  The 
army  then  placed  the  prisoners  and  the  booty  at  the  disposal  of 
the  princes  and  the  assembled  people :  "And  these  four  memo 
rable  men  rose  up,  and  took  the  prisoners,  and  all  their  naked 
ones  they  covered  with  the  booty,  and  clothed  and  shod  them, 
and  gave  them  to  eat  and  drink,  and  anointed  them,  and  con 
ducted  as  many  of  them  as  were  cripples  upon  asses,  and 
brought  them  to  Jericho  the  palm-city,  to  the  neighbourhood 
of  their  brethren,  and  returned  to  Samaria."  Nothing  but  the 
rudest  scepticism  could  ever  seek  to  cast  a  slur  upon  this 
touching  episode,  the  truth  of  which  is  so  conspicuous.  There 
is  nothing  strange  in  the  fact  that  so  horrible  a  massacre  should 
be  followed  by  a  strong  manifestation  of  the  fraternal  love, 
which  had  been  forcibly  suppressed,  but  was  now  rekindled 
by  the  prophet's  words.  We  find  an  older  fellow-piece  to  this 
in  the  prevention  of  a  fratricidal  war  by  Shemaiah,  as  described 
in  1  Kings  xii.  22-24. 

Now,  when  the  chronicler  proceeds  to  observe  in  ver.  16, 
that  "  at  that  time  Ahaz  turned  for  help  to  the  royal  house  of 
Assyria"  (make  asslmr),  in  all  probability  this  took  place  at 
the  time  when  he  had  sustained  two  severe  defeats,  one  at  the 
hands  of  Pekah  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem ;  and  another  from 
Kezin  in  Idumsea.  The  two  battles  belong  to  the  period  before 
the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  appeal  for  help  from  Assyria 
falls  between  the  battles  and  the  siege.  The  chronicler  then 
mentions  other  judgments  which  fell  upon  the  king  in  his 
estrangement  from  God,  viz. :  (1)  "  Moreover  the  Eclomites 
came,  smote  Judah,  and  carried  away  captives  ;"  possibly  while 
the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  was  still  going  on,  after  they  had 
welcomed  Rezin  as  their  deliverer,  had  shaken  off  the  Jewish 


46  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

yoke,  and  had  supported  the  Syrian  king  against  Judah  in 
their  own  land ;  (2)  the  Philistines  invaded  the  low  land 
(shephelah)  and  the  south  land  (negel)  of  Judah,  and  took 
several  towns,  six  of  which  the  chronicler  mentions  by  name, 
and  settled  in  them  ;  for  "  Jehovah  humbled  Judah  because 
of  Ahaz  the  king  of  Israel  (an  epithet  with  several  sarcastic 
allusions),  for  he  acted  without  restraint  in  Judah,  and  most 
wickedly  against  Jehovah."  The  breaking  away  of  the  Philis 
tines  from  the  Jewish  dominion  took  place,  according  to  Caspari, 
in  the  time  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war.  The  position  of 
ver.  18  in  the  section  reaching  from  ver.  5  to  ver.  21  (viz.  ver. 
18,  invasion  of  the  Philistines ;  ver.  17,  that  of  the  Edomites) 
renders  this  certainly  very  probable,  though  it  is  not  conclusive, 
as  Caspari  himself  admits. 

In  vers.  20,  21,  the  chronicler  adds  an  appendix  to  the  pre 
vious  list  of  punishments :  Tiglath-Pilnezer  (sic)  the  king  of 
Asshur  came  upon  him,  and  oppressed  him  instead  of  strength 
ening  him ;  for  Ahaz  had  plundered  both  temple  and  palace, 
and  given  the  treasures  to  the  king  of  Asshur,  without  receiving 
any  proper  help  in  return.  Thenius  disputes  the  rendering, 
"He  strengthened  him  not"  (cf.  Ezek.  xxx.  21);  but  Caspari 
has  shown  that  it  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  facts  of  the 
case.  Tiglath-pileser  did  not  bring  Ahaz  any  true  help  ;  for 
what  he  proceeded  to  do  against  Syria  and  Israel  was  not  taken 
in  hand  in  the  interests  of  Ahaz,  but  to  extend  his  own  imperial 
dominion.  He  did  not  assist  Ahaz  to  bring  either  the  Edomites 
or  the  Philistines  into  subjection  again,  to  say  nothing  of  com 
pensating  him  for  his  losses  with  either  Syrian  or  Ephraimitish 
territory.  Nor  was  it  only  that  he  did  not  truly  help  him :  he 
really  oppressed  him,  by  making  him  a  tributary  vassal  instead 
of  a  free  and  independent  prince, — a  relation  to  Asshur  which, 
according  to  many  evident  signs,  was  the  direct  consequence  of 
his  appeal  for  help,  and  which  \vas  established,  at  any  rate,  at 
the  very  commencement  of  Hezekiah's  reign.  Under  what 
circumstances  this  took  place  we  cannot  tell;  but  it  is  very 
probable  that,  after  the  victories  over  Rezin  and  Pekah,  a 
second  sum  of  money  was  demanded  by  Tiglath-pileser,  and 
then  from  that  time  forward  a  yearly  tribute.  The  expression 
used  by  the  chronicler — "  he  came  upon  him" — seems,  in  fact, 
to  mean  that  he  gave  emphasis  to  this  demand  by  sending  a 


INTRODUCTION.  47 

detachment  of  his  army ;  even  if  we  cannot  take  it,  as  Caspari 
does,  in  a  rhetorical  rather  than  a  purely  historical  sense,  viz. 
as  signifying  that,  "  although  Tiglath-pileser  came,  as  Ahaz 
desired,  his  coming  was  not  such  as  Ahaz  desired,  a  coming  to 
help  and  benefit,  but  rather  to  oppress  and  injure." 

(3.)  The  third  part  of  the  two  historical  accounts  describes 
the  pernicious  influence  which  the  alliance  with  Tiglath-pileser 
exerted  upon  Ahaz,  who  was  already  too  much  inclined  to 
idolatry  (2  Kings  xvi.  10-18).  After  Tiglath-pileser  had 
marched  against  the  ruler  of  Damascus,  and  delivered  Ahaz 
from  the  more  dangerous  of  his  two  adversaries  (and  possibly 
from  both  of  them),  Ahaz  went  to  Damascus  to  present  his 
thanks  in  person.  There  he  saw  the  altar  (which  was  re 
nowned  as  a  work  of  art),  and  sent  an  exact  model  to  Uriah 
the  high  priest,  who  had  an  altar  constructed  like  it  by  the 
time  that  the  king  returned.  As  soon  as  Ahaz  came  back  he 
went  up  to  this  altar  and  offered  sacrifice,  thus  officiating  as 
priest  himself  (probably  as  a  thanksgiving  for  the  deliverance 
lie  had  received).  The  brazen  altar  (of  Solomon),  which  Uriah 
had  moved  farther  forward  to  the  front  of  the  temple  building, 
he  put  farther  back  again,  placing  it  close  to  the  north  side  of 
the  new  one  (that  the  old  one  might  not  appear  to  have  the 
slightest  preference  over  the  new),  and  commanded  the  high 
priest  to  perform  the  sacrificial  service  in  future  upon  the  new 
great  altar ;  adding,  at  the  same  time,  "  And  (as  for)  the 
brazen  altar,  I  will  consider  (what  shall  be  done  with  it)." 
"And  king  Ahaz,"  it  is  stated  still  further,  "broke  out  the 
borders  of  the  stools,  and  took  away  the  basons  ;  and  the  sea  he 
took  down  from  the  oxen  that  bare  it,  and  set  it  upon  a  stone 
pedestal  (that  took  the  place  of  the  oxen).  And  the  covered 
sabbath-hall  which  had  been  built  in  the  temple,  and  the  outer 
king's  entrance,  he  removed  into  the  temple  of  Jehovah  before 
the  king  of  Assyria."  Thenius  explains  this  as  meaning  "he 
altered  them"  (taking  away  the  valuable  ornaments  from  both), 
that  he  might  be  able  to  take  with  him  to  Damascus  the  neces 
sary  presents  for  the  king  of  Asshur.  Ewald's  explanation, 
however,  is  better  than  this,  and  more  in  accordance  with  the 
expression  "  before,"  viz.  "  in  order  that  he  might  be  able  to 
secure  the  continued  favour  of  the  dreaded  Assyrian  king,  by 
continually  sending  him  fresh  presents."  But  UDH  does  not 


48  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

mean  to  alter,  and  'n  ITa  =  n  TOl  would  be  an  unmeaning 
addition  in  the  wrong  place,  which  would  only  obscure  the 
sense.  If  the  great  alterations  mentioned  in  ver.  17  were 
made  for  the  purpose  of  sending  presents  to  the  king  of 
Assyria  with  or  from  the  things  that  were  removed,  those 
described  in  ver.  18  were  certainly  made  from  fear  of  the 
king ;  and,  what  appears  most  probable  to  me,  not  to  remove 
the  two  splendid  erections  from  the  sight  of  the  Assyrians,  nor 
to  prevent  their  being  used  in  the  event  of  an  Assyrian  occu 
pation  of  Jerusalem,  but  in  order  that  his  relation  to  the  great 
king  of  Assyria  might  not  be  disturbed  by  his  appearing  as  a 
zealous  worshipper  of  Jehovah.  They  were  changes  made 
from  fear  of  man  and  servility,  and  were  quite  in  keeping 
with  the  hypocritical,  insincere,  and  ignoble  character  of  Ahaz. 
The  parallel  passage  in  the  Chronicles  is  2  Chron.  xxviii. 
22-25.  "  In  the  time  of  his  distress,"  says  the  chronicler  in 
his  reflective  and  rhetorical  style,  "  he  sinned  still  more  griev 
ously  against  Jehovah :  he,  king  Ahaz.  He  sacrificed  to  the 
gods  of  Damascus,  who  had  smitten  him.  For  the  gods  of  the 
kings  of  Aram,  he  said,  helped  them ;  I  will  sacrifice  to  them, 
that  they  may  also  help  me.  And  they  brought  him  and  all 
Israel  to  ruin.  And  Ahaz  collected  together  the  vessels  of  the 
house  of  God,  and  cut  them  in  pieces,  and  shut  the  doors  of  the 
house  of  Jehovah,  and  made  himself  altars  in  every  corner  of 
Jerusalem.  And  in  every  town  of  Judah  he  erected  high 
places  to  burn  incense  to  other  gods,  and  stirred  up  the  dis 
pleasure  of  Jehovah  the  God  of  his  fathers."  Thenius  re 
gards  this  passage  as  an  exaggerated  paraphrase  of  the  parallel 
passage  in  the  book  of  Kings,  and  as  resting  upon  a  false  in 
terpretation  of  the  latter.  But  the  chronicler  does  not  affirm 
that  Ahaz  dedicated  the  new  altar  to  the  gods  of  Damascus, 
but  rather  that  in  the  time  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  he 
attempted  to  secure  for  himself  the  same  success  in  war  as  the 
Syrians  had  obtained,  by  worshipping  their  gods.  The  words 
of  Ahaz,  which  are  reported  by  him,  preclude  any  other 
interpretation.  He  there  states — what  by  no  means  contradicts 
the  book  of  Kings — that  Ahaz  laid  violent  hands  upon  the 
furniture  of  the  temple.  All  the  rest — namely,  the  allusion  to 
his  shutting  the  temple-gates,  and  erecting  altars  and  high 
places  on  every  hand — is  a  completion  of  the  account  in  the 


INTRODUCTION.  49 

book  of  Kings,  the  historical  character  of  which  it  is  impossible 
to  dispute,  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war 
took  place  at  the  commencement  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  who 
was  only  sixteen  years  old  at  the  time. 

The  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  closes  the  history  of  the 
reign  of  Ahaz  with  a  reference  to  the  annals  of  the  kings  of 
Judah,  and  with  the  remark  that  he  was  buried  in  the  city  of 
David  (2  Kings  xvi.  19,  20).  The  chronicler  refers  to  the 
book  of  the  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel,  and  observes  that  he 
was  indeed  buried  in  the  city  (LXX.  "  in  the  city  of  David  "), 
but  not  in  the  king's  sepulchre  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  26,  27).  The 
source  employed  by  the  chronicler  was  his  midrash  of  the  entire 
history  of  the  kings ;  from  which  he  made  extracts,  with  the 
intention  of  completing  the  text  of  our  book  of  Kings,  to  which 
he  appended  his  work.  His  style  was  formed  after  that  of  the 
annals,  whilst  that  of  the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  is  formed 
after  Deuteronomy.  But  from  what  source  did  the  author  of 
the  book  of  Kings  make  his  extracts  I  The  section  relating  to 
Ahaz  has  some  things  quite  peculiar  to  itself,  as  compared  with 
the  rest  of  the  book,  viz.  a  liking  for  obscure  forms,  snch  as 
Eloth  (ver.  6),  hakkomim  (ver.  7),  Dummesek  (ver.  10),  and 
Aromim  (ver.  6);  the  name  Tiglatli-peleser ;l  tpD  instead  of  TD, 
which  is  customary  elsewhere;  the  rare  and  more  colloquial  term 
jehudim  (Jews)  ;  the  inaccurate  construction  nUDDn  nrUDSirns 
(ver.  17) ;  and  the  verb  "ij93  (to  consider,  ver.  15),  which  does 
not  occur  anywhere  else.  These  peculiarities  may  be  satisfac 
torily  explained  on  the  assumption  that  the  author  employed  the 
national  annals ;  and  that,  as  these  annals  had  been  gradually 
composed  by  the  successive  writings  of  many  different  persons, 
whilst  there  was  an  essential  uniformity  in  the  mode  in  which 
the  history  was  written,  there  was  also  of  necessity  a  great 
variety  in  the  style  of  composition.  But  is  the  similarity 
between  2  Kings  xvi.  5  and  Isa.  vii.  1  reconcilable  with  this 
annalistic  origin  ?  The  resemblance  in  question  certainly 
cannot  be  explained,  as  Thenius  supposes,  from  the  fact  that 

1  This  mode  of  spelling  the  name,  also  the  one  adopted  by  the  chronicler 
(Tiglath-pilnezer),  are  both  incorrect.  Pal  is  the  Assyrian  for  son,  and 
according  to  Oppert  (Expedition  Scientifique  en  Mesopotamie),  the  whole 
name  would  read  thus :  Tiylath-palli-sihart  i.e.  reverence  to  the  son  of  the 
zodiac  (the  Assyrian  Hercules). 

VOL.  I.  D 


50  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Isa.  vii.  1  was  also  taken  from  the  national  annals  ;  but  rather 
on  the  ground  assigned  by  Caspari, — namely,  that  the  author 
of  the  Chronicles  had  not  only  the  national  annals  before  him, 
nit  also  the  book  of  Isaiah's  prophecies,  to  which  he  directs  his 
readers'  attention  by  commencing  the  history  of  the  Syro- 
Kphraimitish  war  in  the  words  of  the  portion  relating  to  Ahaz. 
The  design  of  the  two  allies,  as  we  know  from  the  further 
contents  of  Isa.  i.,  was  nothing  less  than  to  get  possession  of 
Jerusalem,  to  overthrow  the  Davidic  government  there,  and 
establish  in  its  stead,  in  the  person  of  a  certain  ben-Tab'el 
(u  son  of  Tabeal,"  Isa.  vii.  6),  a  newly  created  dynasty,  that 
would  be  under  subjection  to  themselves.  The  failure  of  this 
intention  is  the  thought  that  is  briefly  indicated  in  '2  Kings 
xvi.  5  and  Isa.  vii.  1. 

III.  HISTORICAL  ACCOUNT  OF  HEZEKIAH,  more  especially 
of  the  first  six  years  of  his  reiyn. — The  account  given  of  Heze- 
kiah  in  the  book  of  Kings  is  a  far  more  meagre  one  than  we 
should  expect  to  find,  when  we  have  taken  out  the  large  section 
relating  to  the  period  of  the  Assyrian  catastrophe  (2  Kings 
xviii.  13-xx.  19),  which  is  also  found  in  the  book  of  Isaiah, 
and  which  will  come  under  review  in  the  commentary  on  Isa. 
xxxvi.-xxxix.  All  that  is  then  left  to  the  author  of  the  book  of 
Kings  is  ch.  xviii.  1-12  and  xx.  20,  21 ;  and  in  these  two  para 
graphs,  which  enclose  the  section  of  Isaiah,  there  are  only  a 
few  annalistic  elements  worked  up  in  Deuteronomical  style. 
Hezekiah  began  to  reign  in  the  third  year  of  Hosea  king  of 
Israel.  He  was  twenty-five  years  old  when  he  came  to  the 
throne,  and  reigned  twenty-nine  years.  He  was  a  king  after 
the  model  of  David.  He  removed  the  high  places,  broke  in 
pieces  the  statues,  cut  down  the  Asheroth,  and  pounded  the 
serpent,  which  had  been  preserved  from  the  time  of  Moses,  and 
had  become  an  object  of  idolatrous  worship.  In  his  confidence 
in  Jehovah  he  was  unequalled  by  any  of  his  followers  or  pre 
decessors.  The  allusion  here  is  to  that  faith  of  his,  by  which 
he  broke  away  from  the  tyranny  of  Asshur,  and  also  recovered 
his  supremacy  over  the  Philistines.  AYe  have  no  means  of 
deciding  in  what  years  of  Hezekiah's  reign  these  two  events — 
the  revolt  from  Asshur,  and  the  defeat  of  the  Philistines — 
occurred.  The  author  proceeds  directly  afterwards,  with  a 


INTRODUCTION.  51 

studious  repetition  of  what  he  has  already  stated  in  ch.  xvii.  in 
the  history  of  Hosea's  reign,1  to  describe  Shalmanassar's  expedi 
tion  against  Israel  in  the  fourth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign  (the 
seventh  of  Hosea's),  and  the  fall  of  Samaria,  which  took  place, 
after  a  siege  of  three  years,  in  the  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah's 
reign,  and  the  ninth  of  Hosea's.  But  as  Shalmanassar  made 
no  attack  upon  Judah  at  the  time  when  he  put  an  end  to  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  the  revolt  of  Hezekiah  cannot  have  taken 
place  till  afterwards.  But  with  regard  to  the  victory  over  the 
Philistines,  there  is  nothing  in  the  book  of  Kings  to  help  us 
even  to  a  negative  conclusion.  In  ch.  xx.  20,  21,  the  author 
brings  his  history  rapidly  to  a  close,  and  merely  refers  such  as 
may  desire  to  know  more  concerning  Hezekiah,  especially  con 
cerning  his  victories  and  aqueducts,  to  the  annals  of  the  kings 
of  Judah. 

The  chronicler  merely  gives  an  extract  from  the  section  of 
Isaiah  ;  but  he  is  all  the  more  elaborate  in  the  rest.  All  that 
he  relates  in  2  Chron.  xxix.  2-xxxi.  is  a  historical  commentary 
upon  the  good  testimony  given  to  king  Hezekiah  in  the  book 
of  Kings  (2  Kings  xviii.  3),  which  the  chronicler  places  at  the 
head  of  his  own  text  in  ch.  xxix.  2.  Even  in  the  month  Nisan 
of  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  Hezekiah  re-opened  the  gates  of 
the  temple,  had  it  purified  from  the  defilement  consequent 
upon  idolatry,  and  appointed  a  re-consecration  of  the  purified 
temple,  accompanied  with  sacrifice,  music,  and  psalms  (ch.  xxix. 
3  sqq.).  Hezekiah  is  introduced  here  (a  fact  of  importance  in 
relation  to  Isa.  xxxviii.)  as  the  restorer  of  "  the  song  of  the 
Lord"  (Shir  Jehovah),  i.e.  of  liturgical  singing.  The  Levitical 
and  priestly  music,  as  introduced  and  organized  by  David,  Gad, 
and  Nathan,  was  heard  again,  and  Jehovah  was  praised  once 

1  The  Chalor  nehar  Gozan  (Eng.  ver.:  Habor  ly  the  river  of  Gozan), 
which  is  mentioned  in  both  passages  among  the  districts  to  which  the 
Israelitish  exiles  were  taken,  is  no  doubt  the  Chabur,  which  flows  into  the 
Tigris  from  the  east  above  Mosul,  and  of  which  it  is  stated  in  Merasid  ed. 
Juynboll,  that  "  it  comes  from  the  mountains  of  the  land  of  Zauzdn,"  a 
district  of  outer  Armenia  lying  towards  the  Tigris,  which  is  described  by 
Edrisi  in  Jaubert's  translation,  Pt.  ii.  p.  330.  Another  river,  on  the  banks 
of  which  Ezekiel's  colony  of  exiles  lived,  is  the  Chebar,  which  flows  from 
the  north-east  into  the  Euphrates,  and  the  source  of  which  is  in  the  Meso- 
potamian  town  of  Ras-el-'ain,  a  place  celebrated  through  the  marvellous 
Bprings  of  this  Chaboras,  the  praises  of  which  have  often  been  sung. 


52  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

more  in  the  words  of  David  the  king  and  Asaph  the  seer. 
The  chronicler  then  relates  in  ch.  xxx.  how  Hezekiah  appointed  a 
solemn  passover  in  the  second  month,  to  which  even  inhabitants 
of  the  northern  kingdom,  who  might  be  still  in  the  land,  were 
formally  and  urgently  invited.  It  was  an  after-passover,  which 
was  permitted  by  the  law,  as  the  priests  had  been  busy  with 
the  purification  of  the  temple  in  the  first  month,  and  therefore 
had  been  rendered  unclean  themselves  :  moreover,  there  would 
not  have  been  sufficient  time  for  summoning  the  people  to 
Jerusalem.  The  northern  tribes  as  a  whole  refused  the  invita 
tion  in  the  most  scornful  manner,  but  certain  individuals 
accepted  it  with  penitent  hearts.  It  was  a  feast  of  joy,  such 
as  had  not  been  known  since  the  time  of  Solomon  (this  state 
ment  is  not  at  variance  with  2  Kings  xxiii.  22),  affording,  as  it 
did,  once  more  a  representation  and  assurance  of  that  national 
unity  which  had  been  rent  in  twain  ever  since  the  time  of 
Rehoboam.  Caspari  has  entered  into  a  lengthened  investiga 
tion  as  to  th*1  particular  year  of  Hezekiah' s  reign  in  which  this 
passover  was  held.  He  agrees  with  Keil,  that  it  took  place 
after  the  fall  of  Samaria  and  the  deportation  of  the  people  by 
Shalmanassar ;  but  he  does  not  feel  quite  certain  of  his  con 
clusion.  The  question  itself,  however,  is  one  that  ought  not 
to  be  raised  at  all,  if  we  think  the  chronicler  a  trustworthy 
authority.  He  places  this  passover  most  unquestionably  in  the 
second  month  of  the  first  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign ;  and  there 
is  no  difficulty  occasioned  by  this,  unless  we  regard  what 
Tiglath-pileser  had  done  to  Israel  as  of  less  importance  than  it 
actually  was.  The  population  that  was  left  behind  was  really 
nothing  more  than  a  remnant ;  and,  moreover,  the  chronicler 
draws  an  evident  contrast  between  tribes  and  individuals,  so 
that  he  was  conscious  enough  that  there  were  still  whole  tribes 
of  the  northern  kingdom  who  were  settled  in  their  own  homes. 
He  then  states  in  ch.  xxxi.  1,  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  towns 
of  Judah  (whom  he  calls  "  all  Israel,"  because  a  number  of 
emigrant  Israelites  had  settled  there)  went  forth,  under  the 
influence  of  the  enthusiasm  consequent  upon  the  passover  they 
had  celebrated,  and  broke  in  pieces  the  things  used  in  idolatrous 
worship  throughout  both  kingdoms;  and  in  ch.  xxxi.  2  sqq.,  that 
Hezekiah  restored  the  institutions  of  divine  worship  that  had 
been  discontinued,  particularly  those  relating  to  the  incomes  of 


INTRODUCTION.  53 

the  priests  and  Levites.  Everything  else  that  he  mentions  in 
ch.  xxxii.  1-26,  31,  belongs  to  a  later  period  than  the  four 
teenth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign ;  and  so  far  as  it  differs  from 
the  section  in  Isaiah,  which  is  repeated  in  the  book  of  Kings,  it 
is  a  valuable  supplement,  more  especially  with  reference  to  Isa. 
xxii.  8-11  (which  relates  to  precautions  taken  in  the  prospect 
of  the  approaching  Assyrian  siege).  But  the  account  of 
Hezekiah's  wealth  in  ch.  xxxii.  27-29  extends  over  the  whole 
of  his  reign.  The  notice  respecting  the  diversion  of  the  upper 
Gihon  (ch.  xxxii.  30)  reaches  rather  into  the  period  of  the  re 
turn  after  the  Assyrian  catastrophe,  than  into  the  period  before 
it ;  but  nothing  can  be  positively  affirmed. 

Having  thus  obtained  the  requisite  acquaintance  with  the 
historical  accounts  which  bear  throughout  upon  the  book  of 
Isaiah,  so  far  as  it  has  for  its  starting-point  and  object  the 
history  of  the  prophet's  own  times,  we  will  now  turn  to  the 
book  itself,  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  such  an  insight  into 
its  general  plan  as  is  necessary  to  enable  us  to  make  a  proper 
division  of  our  own  work  of  exposition. 

ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  COLLECTION. 

We  may  safely  enter  upon  our  investigation  with  the  pre 
conceived  opinion  that  the  collection  before  us  was  edited  by 
the  prophet  himself.  For,  with  the  exception  of  the  book 
of  Jonah,  which  belongs  to  the  prophetico-historical  writings 
rather  than  to  the  literature  of  prediction,  or  the  prophetical 
writings  in  the  ordinary  acceptation  of  the  term,  all  the 
canonical  books  of  prophecy  were  written  and  arranged  by  the 
prophets  whose  names  they  bear.  The  most  important  to  our 
purpose  is  the  analogy  of  the  larger  books  of  Jeremiah  and 
Ezekiel.  No  one  denies  that  Ezekiel  prepared  his  work  for 
publication  exactly  as  it  lies  before  us  now  ;  and  Jeremiah  in 
forms  us  himself,  that  he  collected  and  published  his  prophecies 
on  two  separate  occasions.  Both  collections  are  arranged 
according  to  the  two  different  points  of  view  of  the  subject- 
matter  and  the  order  of  time,  which  are  interwoven  the  one 
with  the  other.  And  this  is  also  the  case  with  the  collection 
of  Isaiah's  prophecies.  As  a  whole,  it  is  arranged  chrono 
logically.  The  dates  given  in  ch.  vi.  1,  vii.  1,  xiv.  28,  xx.  1, 


54  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

xxxvi.  1,  are  so  many  points  in  a  progressive  line.  The  three 
principal  divisions  also  form  a  chronological  series.  For  ch. 
i.-vi.  set  forth  the  ministry  of  Isaiah  under  Uzziah-Jotham  ; 
ch.  vii.-xxxix.,  his  ministry  under  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah  down  to 
the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  the  latter ;  whilst  ch.  xl.-lxvi., 
assuming  their  authenticity,  were  the  latest  productions  of  the 
deepest  inner-life,  and  were  committed  directly  to  writing.  In 
the  central  part,  the  Ahaz  group  (ch.  vii.-xii.)  also  precedes 
the  Hezekiah  group  (ch.  xiii.-xxxix.)  chronologically.  But 
the  order  of  time  is  interrupted  in  several  places  by  an  arrange 
ment  of  the  subject-matter,  which  was  of  greater  importance 
to  the  prophet.  The  address  in  ch.  i.  is  not  the  oldest,  but  is 
placed  at  the  head  as  an  introduction  to  the  whole.  The  con 
secration  of  the  prophet  (ch.  vi.),  which  ought  to  stand  at  the 
beginning  of  the  Uzziah-Jotham  group,  if  it  relates  to  his 
original  consecration  to  his  office,  is  placed  at  the  end,  where 
it  looks  both  backwards  and  forwards,  as  a  prophecy  that  was 
in  course  of  fulfilment.  The  Ahaz  group,  which  follows  next 
(ch.  vii.-xii.),  is  complete  in  itself,  and,  as  it  were,  from  one 
casting.  And  in  the  Hezekiah  group  (ch.  xiii.-xxxix.)  the 
chronological  order  is  frequently  interrupted  again.  The  pro 
phecies  against  the  nations  (ch.  xiv.  24-xxii.),  which  belong  to 
the  Assyrian  period,  have  a  massa  upon  Babel,  the  city  of  the 
world's  power,  for  their  opening  piece  (ch.  xiii.-xiv.  23);  &  massa 
upon  Tyre,  the  city  of  the  world's  commerce,  which  was  to  be 
destroyed  by  the  Chaldeans,  for  their  finale  (ch.  xxiii.) ;  and  a 
shorter  massa  upon  Babel,  for  a  party-wall  dividing  the  cycle 
into  two  halves  (ch.  xxi.  1-10)  ;  and  all  the  prophecies  upon  the 
nations  run  into  a  grand  apocalyptic  epilogue  (ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.), 
like  rivers  into  a  sea.  The  first  part  of  the  Hezekiah  group, 
the  contents  of  which  are  pre-eminently  ethnic  (ch.  xiii.-xxvii.), 
are  interwoven  with  passages  which  may  not  have  been  com 
posed  till  after  the  fifteenth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign.  The 
grand  epilogue  (ch.  xxxiv.  xxxv.),  in  which  the  second  portion 
o'f  the  Hezekiah  group  dies  away,  is  also  another  such  passage. 
This  second  part  is  occupied  chiefly  with  the  fate  of  Judah, 
the  judgment  inflicted  upon  Judah  by  the  imperial  power  of 
Assyria,  and  the  deliverance  which  awaited  it  (ch.  xxvii.-xxxiii.). 
This  prediction  closes  with  a  declaration,  in  ch.  xxxiv.  xxxv., 
on  the  one  hand,  of  the  judgment  of  God  upon  the  world  of 


INTRODUCTION.  55 

Israel's  foes  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  redemption  of 
Israel  itself.  This  passage,  which  was  composed  after  the 
fifteenth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  is  followed  by  the  historical 
portions  (ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.),  which  enclose  in  a  historical  frame 
the  predictions  of  Isaiah  delivered  when  the  Assyrian  cata 
strophe  was  close  at  hand,  and  furnish  us  with  the  key  to  the 
interpretation  not  only  of  ch.  vii.-xxxv.,  but  of  ch.  xL-lxvi. 
also. 

Taking  the  book  of  Isaiah,  therefore,  as  a  whole,  in  the 
form  in  which  it  lies  before  us,  it  may  be  divided  into  two 
halves,  viz.  ch.  i.  to  xxxix.,  and  ch.  xl.  to  Ixvi.  The  former 
consists  of  seven  parts,  the  latter  of  three.  The  first  half  may 
be  called  the  Assyrian,  as  the  goal  to  which  it  points  is  the  down 
fall  of  Asshur ;  the  second  the  Babylonian,  as  its  goal  is  the 
deliverance  from  Babel.  The  first  half,  however,  is  not  purely 
Assyrian ;  but  there  are  Babylonian  pieces  introduced  among 
the  Assyrian,  and  such  others,  as  a  rule,  as  break  apocalyptically 
through  the  limited  horizon  of  the  latter.  The  following  are 
the  seven  divisions  in  the  first  half.  (1.)  Prophecies  founded 
upon  the  growing  obduracy  of  the  great  mass  of  the  people  (ch. 
ii.-vi.).  (2.)  The  consolation  of  Immanuel  under  the  Assyrian 
oppressions  (ch.  vii.-xii.).  These  two  form  a  syzygy,  which  con 
cludes  with  a  psalm  of  the  redeemed  (ch.  xii.),  the  echo,  in  the 
last  days,  of  the  song  at  the  Red  Sea.  The  whole  is  divided 
by  the  consecration  of  the  prophet  (ch.  vi.),  which  looks  back 
wards  and  forwards  with  threatenings  and  promises.  It  is 
introduced  by  a  summary  prologue  (ch.  i.),  in  which  the  prophet, 
standing  midway  between  Moses  and  Jesus  the  Christ,  com 
mences  in  the  style  of  the  great  Mosaic  ode.  (3.)  Predictions 
of  the  judgment  and  salvation  of  the  heathen,  which  belong,  for 
the  most  part,  to  the  time  of  the  Assyrian  judgment,  though 
they  are  enclosed  and  divided  by  Babylonian  portions.  For,  as 
we  have  already  observed,  an  oracle  concerning  Babel,  the  city 
of  the  world-power,  forms  the  introduction  (ch.  xiii.-xiv.  23)  , 
an  oracle  concerning  Tyre,  the  city  of  the  world's  commerce, 
which  was  to  receive  its  mortal  wound  from  the  Chaldeans,  the 
conclusion  (ch.  xxiii.) ;  and  a  second  oracle  on  the  desert  by 
the  sea,  i.e.  Babel,  the  centre  (ch.  xxi.  1-10).  (4.)  To  this  so 
thoughtfully  arranged  collection  of  predictions  concerning  the 
nations  outside  the  Israelitish  pale,  there  is  attached  a  grand 


5(5  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

apocalyptic  prophecy  of  the  judgment  of  the  world  and  the  last 
things  (ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.),  which  gives  it  a  background  that 
fades  away  into  eternity,  and  forms  with  it  a  second  syzygy. 
(5.)  From  these  eschatological  distances  the  prophet  returns  to 
the  realities  of  the  present  and  of  the  immediate  future,  and 
describes  the  revolt  from  Asshur,  and  its  consequences  (ch.  xxviii.- 
xxxiii.).  The  central  point  of  this  group  is  the  prophecy  of  the 
precious  corner-stone  laid  in  Zion.  (6.)  This  is  also  paired  off 
by  the  prophet  with  a  far-reaching  eschatological  prediction  of 
revenge  and  redemption  for  the  church  (ch.  xxxiv.  xxxv.),  in 
wrhich  we  already  hear,  as  in  a  prelude,  the  keynote  of  ch. 
xl.-lxvi.  (7.)  After  these  three  syzygies  we  are  carried  back, 
in  the  first  two  historical  accounts  of  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.,  into  the 
Assyrian  times,  whilst  the  other  two  show  us  in  the  distance 
the  future  entanglement  with  Babylon,  which  was  commencing 
already.  These  four  accounts  are  arranged  without  regard  to 
the  chronological  order,  so  that  one  half  looks  backwards  and 
the  other  forwards,  and  thus  the  two  halves  of  the  book  are 
clasped  together.  The  prophecy  in  ch.  xxxix.  5-7  stands 
between  these  two  halves  like  a  sign-post,  with  the  inscription 
"  To  Babylon  "  upon  it.  It  is  thither  that  the  further  course  of 
Israel's  history  tends.  There,  from  this  time  forward,  is  Isaiah 
buried  in  spirit  with  his  people.  And  there,  in  ch.  xl.-lxvi., 
he  proclaims  to  the  Babylonian  exiles  their  approaching  deli 
verance.  The  trilogical  arrangement  of  this  book  of  consola 
tion  has  been  scarcely  disputed  by  any  one,  since  it  was  first 
pointed  out  by  Kiickert  in  his  Translation  and  Exposition  of 
Hebrew  Prophets  (1831).  It  is  divided  into  three  sections,  each 
containing  three  times  three  addresses,  with  a  kind  of  refrain 
at  the  close. 


THE  CRITICAL  QUESTIONS. 

The  collection  of  Isaiah's  prophecies  is  thus  a  complete  work, 
most  carefully  and  skilfully  arranged.  It  is  thoroughly  worthy 
of  the  prophet.  Nevertheless,  we  should  be  unable  to  attribute 
it  to  him  in  its  present  form,  (1)  if  it  were  impossible  that  ch. 
xiii.-xiv.  23,  xxi.  1-10,  xxiii.,  xxiv.-xxvii.,  xxxiv.,  xxxv.,  could 
have  been  composed  by  Isaiah,  and  (2)  if  the  historical  accounts 
in  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.,  which  are  also  to  be  found  in  2  Kings  xviii. 


INTRODUCTION.  57 

13-xx.  19,  have  been  copied  from  the  hook  of  Kings,  or  even 
directly  from  the  national  annals.  For  if  the  prophecies  in 
question  be  taken  away,  the  beautiful  whole  unquestionably 
falls  into  a  confused  guodlibet,  more  especially  the  book  against 
the  nations  ;  and  if  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.  were  not  written  directly 
by  Isaiah,  the  two  halves  of  the  collection  would  be  left  without 
a  clasp  to  bind  them  together.  It  would  be  irregular  to  think 
of  deciding  the  critical  questions  bearing  upon  this  point  now, 
instead  of  taking  them  up  in  connection  with  our  exegetical 
inquiries,  At  the  same  time,  we  will  put  the  reader  in  posses 
sion  at  once  of  the  more  general  points,  which  cause  us  to 
dissent  from  the  conclusions  of  the  modern  critics,  who  regard 
the  book  of  Isaiah  as  an  anthology  composed  of  the  productions 
of  different  authors* 

The  critical  treatment  of  Isaiah  commenced  as  follows  : — It 
began  with  the  second  part.  Koppe  first  of  all  expressed  some 
doubts  as  to  the  genuineness  of  ch.  1.  Doderlein  then  gave 
utterance  to  a  decided  suspicion  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the 
tvhole ;  and  Justi,  followed  by  Eichhorn,  Paulus,  and  Bertholdt, 
raised  this  suspicion  into  firm  assurance  that  the  whole  was 
spurious.  The  result  thus  obtained  could  not  possibly  continue 
without  reaction  upon  the  first  part.  Eosenmiiller,  who  was 
always  very  dependent  upon  his  predecessors,  was  the  first  to 
question  whether  the  oracle  against  Babylon  in  ch.  xiii.-xiv.  23 
was  really  Isaiah's,  as  the  heading  affirms ;  and  to  his  great 
relief,  Justi  and  Paulus  undertook  the  defence  of  his  position. 
Further  progress  was  now  made.  With  the  first  oracle  against 
Babylon  in  ch.  xiii.-xiv.  23,  the  second,  in  ch.  xxi.  1-10,  was 
also  condemned ;  and  Rosenmiiller  was  justly  astonished  when 
Gesenius  dropped  the  former,  but  maintained  that  the  argu 
ments  with  regard  to  the  latter  were  inconclusive.  There  still 
remained  the  oracle  against  Tyre  in  ch.  xxiii.,  which  might 
either  be  left  as  Isaiah's,  or  attributed  to  a  younger  unknown 
prophet,  according  to  the  assumption  that  it  predicted  the 
destruction  of  Tyre  by  Assyrians  or  by  Chaldeans.  Eichhorn, 
followed  by  Rosenmiiller,  decided  that  it  was  not  genuine. 
But  Gesenius  understood  by  the  destroyers  the  Assyrians ;  and 
as  the  prophecy  consequently  did  not  extend  beyond  Isaiah's 
horizon,  he  defended  its  authenticity.  Thus  the  Babyloninn 
scries  was  set  aside,  or  at  any  rate  pronounced  thoroughly 


58  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

suspicious.  But  the  keen  eyes  of  the  critics  made  still  further 
discoveries.  Eichhorn  found  a  play  upon  words  in  the  cycle  of 
predictions  in  ch.  xjxiv.-xxvii.,  which  was  unworthy  of  Isaiah. 
Gesenius  detected  an  allegorical  announcement  of  the  fall  of 
Babylon.  Consequently  they  both  condemned  these  three 
chapters ;  and  it  had  its  effect,  for  Ewald  transferred  them  to 
the  time  of  Cambyses.  Still  shorter  work  was  made  with  the 
cycle  of  predictions  in  ch.  xxxiv.  xxxv.,  on  account  of  its  rela 
tion  to  the  second  part.  Rosenmiiller  pronounced  it,  without 
reserve,  "  a  song  composed  in  the  time  of  the  Babylonian 
captivity,  when  it  was  approaching  its  termination."  This  is 
the  true  account  of  the  origin  of  the  criticism  upon  Isaiah. 
It  was  in  the  swaddling-clothes  of  rationalism  that  it  attained 
its  maturity.  Its  first  attempts  were  very  juvenile.  The 
names  of  its  founders  have  been  almost  forgotten.  It  was 
Gesenius,  Hitzig,  and  Ewald,  who  first  raised  it  to  the  eminence 
of  a  science. 

If  we  take  our  stand  upon  this  eminence,  we  find  that  the 
book  of  Isaiah  contains  prophecies  by  Isaiah  himself,  and  also 
prophecies  by  persons  who  were  either  directly  or  indirectly  his 
disciples.  The  New  Testament  passages  in  which  the  second 
half  of  the  book  of  Isaiah  is  cited  as  Isaiah's,  are  no  proof  to 
the  contrary,  since  Ps.  ii.,  for  example,  which  has  no  heading 
at  all,  is  cited  in  Acts  iv.  25  as  David's,  merely  because  it  is  con 
tained  in  the  Davidic  Psalter,  and  no  critic  would  ever  feel  that 
he  was  bound  by  that.  But  many  objections  present  themselves 
to  such  a  conclusion.  In  the  first  place,  nothing  of  the  kind  can 
be  pointed  out  in  any  of  the  other  canonical  books  of  prophecy, 
except  indeed  the  book  of  Zechariah,  in  which  ch.  ix.-xiv.  is  said 
to  stand  in  precisely  the  same  position  as  Isa.  xl.-lxvi.,  accord 
ing  to  Hitzig,  Ewald,  and  others;  with  this  difference,  however, 
that  Isa.  xl.-lxvi.  is  attributed  to  a  later  prophet  than  Isaiah, 
whereas  Zech.  ix.-xiv.  is  attributed  to  one  or  two  prophets 
before  the  time  of  Zechariah.  But  even  De  Wette,  who  main 
tained,  in  the  first  three  editions  of  his  Introduction  to  the  Old 
Testament,  that  Zech.  ix.-xiv.  was  written  before  the  captivity, 
altered  his  views  in  the  fourth  edition  ;  and  Kohler  has  lately 
confirmed  the  unity  of  the  book  of  Zechariah  after  an  unbiassed 
investigation.  It  is  Zechariah  himself  who  prophesies  of  the 
last  times  in  ch.  ix.-xiv.,  in  images  drawn  from  the  past,  and 


INTRODUCTION.  59 

possibly  with  the  introduction  of  earlier  oracles.  It  remains, 
therefore,  that  not  a  single  book  of  prophecy  is  open  to  any 
such  doubts  as  to  the  unity  of  its  authorship ;  and  Hitzig 
admits  that  even  the  book  of  Jeremiah,  although  interpolated, 
does  not  contain  spurious  sections.  Nevertheless,  it  is  quite 
possible  that  something  extraordinary  might  have  taken  place 
in  connection  with  the  book  of  Isaiah.  But  there  are  grave 
objections  even  to  such  an  assumption  as  this  in  the  face  of 
existing  facts.  For  example,  it  would  be  a  marvellous  occur 
rence  in  the  history  of  chances,  for  such  a  number  of  predictions 
of  this  particular  kind  to  have  been  preserved, — all  of  them 
bearing  so  evidently  the  marks  of  Isaiah's  style,  that  for  two 
thousand  years  they  have  been  confounded  with  his  own 
prophecies.  It  would  be  equally  marvellous  that  the  historians 
should  know  nothing  at  all  about  the  authors  of  these  pro 
phecies  ;  and  thirdly,  it  would  be  very  strange  that  the  names 
of  these  particular  prophets  should  have  shared  the  common 
fate  of  being  forgotten,  although  they  must  all  have  lived 
nearer  to  the  compiler's  own  times  than  the  old  model  prophet, 
whose  style  they  imitated.  It  is  true  that  these  difficulties  are 
not  conclusive  proofs  to  the  contrary ;  but,  at  any  rate,  they 
are  so  much  to  the  credit  of  the  traditional  authorship  of  the 
prophecies  attacked.  On  the  other  hand,  the  weight  of  this 
tradition  is  not  properly  appreciated  by  opponents.  Wilful 
contempt  of  external  testimony,  and  frivolity  in  the  treatment 
of  historical  data,  have  been  from  the  very  first  the  fundamental 
evils  apparent  in  the  manner  in  which  modern  critics  have 
handled  the  questions  relating  to  Isaiah.  These  critics  approach 
everything  that  is  traditional  with  the  presumption  that  it  is 
false;  and  whoever  would  make  a  scientific  impression  upon 
them,  must  first  of  all  declare  right  fearlessly  his  absolute 
superiority  to  the  authority  of  tradition.  Now  tradition  is 
certainly  not  infallible.  No  more  are  the  internal  grounds  of 
the  so-called  higher  criticism,  especially  in  the  questions  relating 
to  Isaiah.  And  in  the  case  before  us,  the  external  testimony  is 
greatly  strengthened  by  the  relation  in  which  Zephaniah  and 
Jeremiah,  the  two  most  reproductive  prophets,  stand  not  only 
to  ch.  xl.-lxvi.,  but  also  to  the  suspected  sections  of  the  first 
half.  They  had  these  prophecies  in  their  possession,  since  they 
evidently  copy  them  and  incorporate  passages  taken  from  them 


60  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISATAH. 

into  their  own  prophecies  ;  a  fact  which  Caspari  has  most 
conclusively  demonstrated,  but  which  not  one  of  the  negative 
critics  has  ventured  to  look  fairly  in  the  face,  or  to  set  aside  by 
counter-proofs  of  equal  force.  Moreover,  although  the  sus 
pected  prophecies  do  indeed  contain  some  things  for  which 
vouchers  cannot  be  obtained  from  the  rest  of  the  book,  yet  the 
marks  which  are  distinctly  characteristic  of  Isaiah  outweigh  by 
far  these  peculiarities,  which  have  been  picked  out  with  such 
care  ;  and  even  in  the  prophecies  referred  to,  it  is  Isaiah's  spirit 
which  animates  the  whole,  Isaiah's  heart  which  beats,  and 
Isaiah's  fiery  tongue  which  speaks  in  both  the  substance  and 
the  form.  Again,  the  type  of  the  suspected  prophecies — which, 
if  they  are  genuine,  belong  to  the  prophet's  latest  days — is  not 
thoroughly  opposed  to  the  type  of  the  rest ;  on  the  contrary, 
those  prophecies  which  are  acknowledged  to  be  genuine,  present 
many  a  point  of  contact  with  this ;  and  even  the  transfigured 
form  and  richer  eschatological  contents  of  the  disputed  prophecies 
have  their  preludes  there.  There  is  nothing  strange  in  this  great 
variety  of  ideas  and  forms,  especially  in  Isaiah,  who  is  con 
fessedly  the  most  universal  of  all  the  prophets,  even  if  we  only 
look  at  those  portions  which  are  admitted  to  be  genuine,  aid 
who  varies  his  style  in  so  masterly  a  way  to  suit  the  demands 
of  his  materials,  his  attitude,  and  his  purpose.  One  might 
suppose  that  these  three  counter-proofs,  which  can  be  followed 
up  even  to  the  most  minute  details,  would  have  some  weight-, 
but  for  Hitzig,  Ewald,  and  many  others,  they  have  absolutely 
none.  Why  not?  These  critics  think  it  impossible  that  the  world 
wide  empire  of  Babel,  and  its  subsequent  transition  to  Medes 
and  Persians,  should  have  been  foreseen  by  Isaiah  in  the  time 
of  Hezekiah.  Plitzig  affirms  in  the  plainest  terms,  that  the 
very  same  caligo  futuri  covered  the  eyes  of  the  Old  Testament 
prophets  generally,  as  that  to  which  the  human  race  was  con 
demned  during  the  time  that  the  oracle  at  Delphi  was  standing. 
Ewald  speaks  of  the  prophets  in  incomparably  higher  terms ; 
but  even  to  him  the  prophetic  state  was  nothing  more  than  a 
blazing  up  of  the  natural  spark  which  lies  slumbering  in  every 
man,  more  especially  in  Ewald  himself.  These  two  coryplicei  of 
the  modern  critical  school  find  themselves  hemmed  in  between 
the  two  foregone  conclusions,  "There  is  no  true  prophecy," 
and  "There  is  no  true  miracle."  They  call  their  criticism 


INTRODUCTION.  61 

free ;  but  when  examined  more  closely,  it  is  in  a  vice.  In 
this  vice  it  has  two  magical  formularies,  with  which  it  fortifies 
itself  against  any  impression  from  historical  testimony.  It 
either  turns  the  prophecies  into  merely  retrospective  glances 
(vaticinia  post  eventum),  as  it  does  the  account  of  miracles  into 
sagas  and  myths ;  or  it  places  the  events  predicted  so  close  to 
the  prophet's  own  time,  that  there  was  no  need  of  inspiration, 
but  only  of  combination,  to  make  the  foresight  possible.  This 
is  all  that  it  can  do.  Now  we  could  do  more  than  this.  We 
could  pronounce  all  the  disputed  prophecies  the  production  of 
other  authors  than  Isaiah,  without  coming  into  contact  with 
any  dogmatical  assumptions :  we  could  even  boast,  as  in  the 
critical  analysis  of  the  historical  books,  of  the  extent  to  which 
the  history  of  literature  was  enriched  through  this  analysis  of 
the  book  of  Isaiah.  And  if  we  seem  to  despise  these  riches, 
we  simply  yield  to  the  irresistible  force  of  external  and  internal 
evidence.  This  applies  even  to  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.  For  whilst  it  is 
true  that  the  text  of  the  book  of  Kings  is  the  better  of  the  two, 
yet,  as  we  shall  be  able  to  prove,  the  true  relation  is  this,  that 
the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  did  not  obtain  the  parallel 
section  (2  Kings  xviii.  13— xx.  19)  from  any  other  source  than 
the  book  of  Isaiah.  We  have  similar  evidence  in  2  Kings 
xxiv.  18  sqq.  and  xxv.,  as  compared  with  Jer.  lii.,  that  the  text 
of  a  passage  may  sometimes  be  preserved  in  greater  purity  in 
a  secondary  work  than  in  the  original  work  from  which  it  was 
taken.  It  was  Isaiah's  prophetico-historical  pen  which  com 
mitted  to  writing  the  accounts  in  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.  The  prophet 
not  only  wrote  a  special  history  of  Uzziah,  according  to  2  Chron. 
xxvi.  22,  but  he  also  incorporated  historical  notices  of  Isaiah 
in  his  "  vision"  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  32).  We  reserve  the  fuller 
demonstration  of  all  this.  For  whilst,  on  the  one  hand,  we 
consider  ourselves  warranted  in  rejecting  those  tendencies  of 
modern  criticism,  to  which  naturalistic  views  of  the  world  have 
dictated  at  the  very  outset  full-blown  negative  results,  and  we 
do  so  on  the  ground  of  supernatural  facts  of  personal  experi 
ence  ;  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  very  far  from  wishing  to  dis 
pute  the  well-founded  rights  of  criticism  as  such.  For  centuries, 
yea,  for  thousands  of  years,  no  objection  was  raised  as  to  the 
Davidic  origin  of  a  psalm  headed  "  a  psalm  of  David"  to  say 
nothing  of  a  prophecy  of  Isaiah ;  and  therefore  no  sucli  objection 


62  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


refuted.  Apart  from  the  whims  of  a  few  individuals,1 
which  left  no  traces  behind  them,  it  was  universally  assumed  by 
both  Jewish  and  Christian  writers  down  to  the  last  century, 
that  all  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old  Testament  had  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  their  one  auctor  primarius,  and  for  their  immediate 
authors  the  men  by  whose  names  they  are  called.  But  when 
the  church  in  the  time  of  the  Reformation  began  to  test  and 
sift  what  had  been  handed  down ;  when  the  rapid  progress 
that  was  made  in  classical  and  oriental  philology  compelled  the 
students  of  the  Scriptures  to  make  larger  if  not  higher  demands 
upon  themselves ;  when  their  studies  were  directed  to  the  lin 
guistic,  historical,  archaeological,  sesthetic — in  short,  the  human — 
side  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  attempt  was  made  to  comprehend 
the  several  aspects  presented  by  sacred  literature  in  their  pro 
gressive  development  and  relation  to  one  another, — Christian 
science  put  forth  many  branches  that  had  never  been  anticipated 
till  then ;  and  biblical  criticism  sprang  up,  which  from  that  time 
forward  has  been  not  only  an  inalienable,  but  a  welcome  and 
even  necessary,  member  in  the  theological  science  of  the  church. 
That  school  of  criticism,  indeed,  whict  will  not  rest  till  all 
miracles  and  prophecies,  which  cannot  be  set  aside  exegetically, 
have  been  eliminated  critically,  must  be  regarded  by  the  church 
as  self-condemned ;  but  the  labour  of  a  spiritual  criticism,  and 
one  truly  free  in  spirit,  will  not  only  be  tolerated,  because  "the 
spiritual  man  discerneth  all  things"  (1  Cor.  ii.  15),  but  will  be 
even  fostered,  and  not  looked  upon  as  suspicious,  although  its 
results  should  seem  objectionable  to  minds  that  are  weakly 
strung,  and  stand  in  a  false  and  fettered  attitude  in  relation  to 
the  Scriptures.  For  it  will  be  no  more  offended  that  the  word 
of  God  should  appear  in  the  form  of  a  servant,  than  that  Christ 
Himself  should  do  so ;  and,  moreover,  criticism  not  only  brings 
any  blemishes  in  the  Scriptures  to  the  light,  but  affords  an 
ever-deepening  insight  into  its  hidden  glory.  It  makes  the 
sacred  writings,  as  they  lie  before  us,  live  again ;  it  takes  us 
into  its  very  laboratory  ;  and  without  it  we  cannot  possibly 
obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  historical  production  of  the  biblical 
books. 

1  E.g.  that  of  Abenezra,  who  regarded  king  Jehoiakim,  who  was  set  free 
in  the  thirty -seventh  year  of  his  Babylonian  captivity,  ?.s  the  author  of  Isa. 
xl.-L*, 


INTRODUCTION.  63 

EXPOSITION  IN  ITS  EXISTING  STATE. 

It  was  at  the  time  of  the  Reformation  also  that  historico- 
grammatical  exposition  first  originated  with  a  distinct  conscious 
ness  of  the  task  that  it  had  to  perform.  It  was  then  that  the  first 
attempt  was  made,  under  the  influence  of  the  revival  of  classi 
cal  studies,  and  with  the  help  of  a  knowledge  of  the  language 
obtained  from  Jewish  teachers,  to  find  out  the  one  true  meaning 
of  the  Scriptures,  and  an  end  was  put  to  the  tedious  jugglery 
of  multiplex  Scriptures  sensus.  But  very  little  was  accomplished 
in  the  time  of  the  Reformation  for  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah. 

Calvin's  Commentarii  answer  the  expectations  with  which 
we  take  them  up ;  but  Luther's  Scholia  are  nothing  but  col 
lege  notes,  of  the  most  meagre  description.  The  productions 
of  Grotius,  which  are  generally  valuable,  are  insignificant  in 
Isaiah,  and,  indeed,  throughout  the  prophets.  He  mixes  up 
things  sacred  arid  profane,  and,  because  unable  to  follow  pro 
phecy  in  its  flight,  cuts  off  its  wings.  Aug.  Varenius  of  Rostock 
wrote  the  most  learned  commentary  of  all  those  composed  by 
writers  of  the  orthodox  Lutheran  school,  and  one  that  even  now 
is  not  to  be  despised  ;  but  though  learned,  it  is  too  great  a 
medley,  and  written  without  discipline  of  mind.  Carnpegius 
Vitringa  (t  1722)  threw  all  the  labours  of  his  predecessors  into 
the  shade,  and  none  even  of  his  successors  approach  him  in 
spirit,  keenness,  and  scholarship.  His  Commentary  on  Isaiah 
is  still  incomparably  the  greatest  of  all  the  exegetical  works 
upon  the  Old  Testament.  The  weakest  thing  in  the  Commen 
tary  is  the  allegorical  exposition,  which  is  appended  to  the 
grammatical  and  historical  one.  In  this  the  temperate  pupil 
of  the  Cocceian  school  is  dependent  upon  what  was  then  the 
prevalent  style  of  commentary  in  Holland,  where  there  was  an 
utter  absence  of  all  appreciation  of  the  "  complex-apoteles- 
matical "  character  of  prophecy,  whilst  the  most  minute  allusions 
were  traced  in  the  prophets  to  events  connected  with  the  history 
of  both  the  world  and  the  church.  The  shady  sides  of  the 
Commentary  are  generally  the  first  to  present  themselves  to  the 
reader's  eye ;  but  the  longer  he  continues  to  use  it,  the  more 
highly  does  he  learn  to  value  it.  There  is  deep  research  every 
where,  but  nowhere  a  luxuriance  of  dry  and  dead  scholarship. 
The  author's  heart  is  in  his  work.  He  sometimes  halts  in  his 


64  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

toilsome  path  of  inquiry,  and  gives  vent  to  loud,  rapturous 
exclamations.  But  the  rapture  is  very  different  from  that  of 
the  Lord  Bishop  Robert  Lowth,  who  never  gets  below  the 
surface,  who  alters  the  Masoretic  text  at  his  pleasure,  and  goes 
no  further  than  an  aesthetic  admiration  of  the  form. 

The  modern  age  of  exegesis  commenced  with  that  destructive 
theology  of  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  which 
pulled  down  without  being  able  to  build.  But  even  this  demo 
lition  was  not  without  good  result.  The  negative  of  anything 
divine  and  eternal  in  the  Scriptures  secured  a  fuller  recognition 
of  its  human  and  temporal  side,  bringing  out  the  charms  of  its 
poetry,  and,  what  was  of  still  greater  importance,  the  concrete 
reality  of  its  history.  Rosen m tiller's  Scholia  are  a  careful, 
lucid,  and  elegant  compilation,  founded  for  the  most  part  upon 
Vitringa,  and  praiseworthy  not  only  for  the  judicious  character 
of  the  selection  made,  but  also  for  the  true  earnestness  which  is 
displayed,  and  the  entire  absence  of  all  frivolity.  The  decidedly 
rationalistic  Commentary  of  Gesenius  is  more  independent  in  its 
verbal  exegesis ;  displays  great  care  in  its  historical  expositions  ; 
and  is  peculiarly  distinguished  for  its  pleasing  and  transparent 
style,  for  the  survey  which  it  gives  of  the  whole  of  the  literature 
bearing  upon  Isaiah,  and  the  thoroughness  with  which  the 
author  avails  himself  of  all  the  new  sources  of  grammatical  and 
historical  knowledge  that  have  been  opened  since  the  days  of 
Vitringa.  Hitzig's  Commentary  is  his  best  work  in  our  opinion, 
excelling  as  it  does  in  exactness  and  in  the  sharpness  and 
originality  of  its  grammatical  criticisms,  as  well  as  in  delicate 
tact  in  the  discovery  of  the  train  of  thought  and  in  thorough 
ness  and  precision  in  the  exposition  of  well-pondered  results ; 
but  it  is  also  disfigured  by  rash  pseudo-critical  caprice,  and  by 
a  studiously  profane  spirit,  utterly  unaffected  by  the  spirit  of 
prophecy.  Hendewerk's  Commentary  is  often  very  weak  in 
philological  and  historical  exposition.  The  style  of  description 
is  broad,  but  the  eye  of  the  disciple  of  Herbart  is  too  dim  to 
distinguish  Israelitish  prophecy  from  heathen  poetry,  and  the 
politics  of  Isaiah  from  those  of  Demosthenes.  Nevertheless,  we 
cannot  fail  to  observe  the  thoughtful  diligence  displayed,  and 
the  anxious  desire  to  point  out  the  germs  of  eternal  truths, 
although  the  author  is  fettered  even  in  this  by  his  philosophical 
standpoint.  Ewald's  natural  penetration  is  universally  recog- 


INTRODUCTION.  65 

nised,  as  well  as  the  noble  enthusiasm  with  which  he  dives  into 
the  contents  of  the  prophetical  books,  in  which  he  finds  an 
eternal  presence.  His  earnest  endeavours  to  obtain  deep  views 
are  to  a  certain  extent  rewarded.  But  there  is  something 
irritating  in  the  self-sufficiency  with  which  he  ignores  nearly 
all  his  predecessors,  the  dictatorial  assumption  of  his  criticism, 
his  false  and  often  nebulous  pathos,  and  his  unqualified  identi 
fication  of  his  own  opinions  with  truth  itself.  He  is  a  perfect 
master  in  the  characteristics  of  the  prophets,  but  his  translations 
of  them  are  stiff,  and  hardly  to  any  one's  taste.  Umbreit's 
Practical  Commentary  on  Isaiah  is  a  useful  and  stimulating 
production,  exhibiting  a  deep  aesthetic  and  religious  sensibility 
to  the  glory  of  the  prophetic  word,  which  manifests  itself  in 
lofty  poetic  language,  heaping  image  upon  image,  and,  as  it 
were,  never  coming  down  from  the  cothurnus.  Knobel's  prose 
is  the  very  opposite  extreme.  The  precision  and  thoroughness 
of  this  scholar,  the  third  edition  of  whose  Commentary  on 
Isaiah  was  one  of  his  last  works  (he  died  25th  May  1863), 
deserve  the  most  grateful  acknowledgment,  whether  from  a 
philological  or  an  archaeological  point  of  view ;  but  his  peculiar 
triviality,  which  amounts  almost  to  an  affectation,  seems  to  shut 
his  eyes  to  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  work,  whilst  his  excessive 
tendency  to  "  historize  "  (historisiren,  i.e.  to  give  a  purely  his 
torical  interpretation  to  everything)  makes  him  blind  even  to 
the  poetry  of  the  form.  Drechsler's  Commentary  was  a  great 
advance  in  the  exposition  of  Isaiah.  He  was  only  able  to  carry 
it  out  himself  as  far  as  ch.  xxvii. ;  but  it  was  completed  by 
Delitzsch  and  H.  A.  Hahn  of  Greifswald  (f  1st  Dec.  1861), 
with  the  use  of  Drechsler's  notes,  though  they  contained  very 
little  that  was  of  any  service  in  relation  to  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  This 
was,  comparatively  speaking,  the  best  commentary  upon  Isaiah 
that  had  appeared  since  the  time  of  Vitringa,  more  especially 
the  portion  on  ch.  xiii. -xxvii.  Its  peculiar  excellency  is  not  to 
be  found  in  the  exposition  of  single  sentences,  which  is  un 
satisfactory,  on  account  of  the  comminuting,  glossatorial  style 
of  its  exegesis,  and,  although  diligent  and  thorough  enough,  is 
unequal  and  by  no  means  productive,  more  especially  from  a 
grammatical  point  of  view ;  but  in  the  spiritual  and  spirited 
grasp  of  the  whole,  the  deep  insight  which  it  exhibits  into  the 
character  and  ideas  of  the  prophet  and  of  prophecy,  its  vigorous 

VOL.    I.  E 


66  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

penetration  into  the  very  heart  of  the  plan  and  substance  of 
the  whole  book.  In  the  meantime  (1850),  there  had  appeared 
the  Commentary  written  by  the  catholic  Professor  Peter  Schegg, 
which  follows  the  Vulgate,  although  with  as  little  slavishness 
as  possible,  and  contains  many  good  points,  especially  the  re 
marks  relating  to  the  history  of  translation.  At  the  same  time 
there  also  appeared  the  Commentary  of  Ernst  Meier,  the 
Tubingen  orientalist,  which  did  not  get  beyond  the  first  half. 
If  ever  any  one  was  specially  called  to  throw  fresh  light  upon 
the  book  of  Isaiah,  it  was  C.  P.  Caspari  of  Christiania ;  but  all 
that  has  yet  appeared  of  his  Norwegian  Commentary  only 
reaches  to  the  end  of  ch.  v.  Its  further  progress  has  been 
hindered  partly  by  the  exhaustive  thoroughness  at  which  he 
aimed,  and  the  almost  infinite  labour  which  it  involved,  and 
partly  by  the  fact  that  the  Grundtvig  controversy  involved  him 
in  the  necessity  of  pursuing  the  most  extensive  studies  in 
ecclesiastical  history.  In  the  meantime,  he  has  so  far  expanded 
his  treatise  om  Serapherne  (on  the  Seraphim),  that  it  may  be 
regarded  as  a  commentary  on  Isa.  vi. ;  and  rich  materials  for 
the  prophetic  sayings  which  follow  may  be  found  in  his  con 
tributions  to  the  introduction  to  the  book  of  Isaiah,  and  to  the 
history  of  Isaiah's  own  times,  which  appeared  as  a  second 
volume  of  our  biblico  -  theological  and  apologetico  -  critical 
Studien  (1848),  his  Programme  on  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war 
(1849),  and  his  comprehensive  and  by  no  means  obsolete  article, 
entitled,  "Jeremiah  a  witness  to  the  genuineness  of  Isa.  xxxiv., 
and  therefore  also  to  that  of  Isa.  xl.— Ixvi.,  xiii.— xiv.  23,  and 
xxi.  1—10,"  which  appeared  in  the  Zeitsclirift  fur  d.  ges.  luth. 
TJieologie  u.  Kirclie  (1843),  together  with  an  excursus  on  the 
relation  of  Zephaniah  to  the  disputed  prophecies  of  Isaiah. 

We  shall  reserve  those  works  which  treat  more  particularly 
of  the  second  part  of  the  book  of  Isaiah  for  our  special  introduc 
tion  to  that  part.  But  there  are  two  other  distinguished  com 
mentaries  that  we  must  mention  here,  both  of  them  by  Jewish 
scholars :  viz.  that  of  M.  L.  Malbim  (Krotoshin  1849),  which 
is  chiefly  occupied  with  the  precise  ideas  conveyed  by  synony 
mous  words  and  groups  of  words ;  and  that  of  S.  D.  Luzzatto 
of  Padua, — a  stimulating  work,  entitled  Profeta  Isaia  volgariz- 
zato  e  commentate  ad  uso  degli  Israeliti,  which  aims  throughout 
at  independence,  but  of  which  only  five  parts  have  yet  appeared. 


EXPOSITION. 


IN  passing  to  our  exposition  of  the  book,  tlie  first  thing 
which  strikes  us  is  its  traditional  title  —  Yeshaiah 
(Isaiah).  In  the  book  itself,  and  throughout  the 
Old  Testament  Scriptures,  the  prophet  is  called 
Yeshayahu ;  and  the  shorter  form  is  found  in  the  latest  books 
as  the  name  of  other  persons.  It  was  a  common  thing  in  the 
very  earliest  times  for  the  shorter  forms  of  such  names  to  be 
used  interchangeably  with  the  longer ;  but  in  later  times  the 
shorter  was  the  only  form  employed,  and  for  this  reason  it  was 
the  one  adopted  in  the  traditional  title.  The  name  is  a  com 
pound  one,  and  signifies  "  Jehovah's  salvation."  The  prophet 
was  conscious  that  it  was  not  merely  by  accident  that  he  bore 
this  name;  for  JJK^  (he  shall  save)  and  njw  (salvation)  are 
among  his  favourite  words.  It  may  be  said,  in  fact,  that  he 
lived  and  moved  altogether  in  the  corning  salvation,  which  was 
to  proceed  from  Jehovah,  and  would  be  realized  hereafter,  when 
Jehovah  should  come  at  last  to  His  people  as  He  had  never 
come  before.  This  salvation  was  the  goal  of  the  sacred  history 
(Heilsgeschichte,  literally,  history  of  salvation) ;  and  Jehovah 
was  the  peculiar  name  of  God  in  relation  to  that  history.  It 
denotes  "  the  existing  one,"  not  however  "  the  always  existing," 
i.e.  eternal,  as  Bunsen  and  the  Jewish  translators  render  it,  but 
"  existing  evermore,"  i.e.  filling  all  history,  and  displaying  His 
glory  therein  in  grace  and  truth.  The  ultimate  goal  of  this 
historical  process,  in  which  God  was  ever  ruling  as  the  abso 
lutely  free  One,  according  to  His  own  self-assertion  in  Ex.  iii. 
14,  was  true  and  essential  salvation,  proceeding  outwards  from 
Israel,  and  eventually  embracing  all  mankind.  In  the  name 
of  the  prophet  the  tetragrammaton  mn*  is  contracted  into  VT 

87 


68  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

(pp)  by  the  dropping  of  the  second  n.  We  may  easily  see  from 
this  contraction  that  the  name  of  God  was  pronounced  with  an 
a  sound,  so  that  it  was  either  called  Yahveh,  or  rather  Yahaveh, 
or  else  Yahvtih,  or  rather  Yahavdh.  According  to  Theodoret,  it 
was  pronounced  9Iaj3e  (  Yahaveh)  by  the  Samaritans ;  and  it  is 
written  in  the  same  way  in  the  list  of  the  names  of  the  Deity  given 
in  Epiphanius.  That  the  ah  sound  was  also  a  customary  pronun 
ciation,  may  not  only  be  gathered  from  such  names  as  Jimnah, 
Jimrah,  Jishvah,  Jishpah  (compare  Jithlah,  the  name  of  a  place), 
but  is  also  expressly  attested  by  the  ancient  variations,  Jao9 
Jeuo,  Jo  (Jer.  xxiii.  6,  LXX.),  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the 
other  hand  by  the  mode  of  spelling  adopted  by  Origen  (Jaoia) 
and  Theodoret  (Aia,  not  only  in  qucest.  in  Ex.  §  15,  but  also  in 
Fab.  liceret.  v.  4 :  "  Aia  signifies  the  existing  one ;  it  was  pro 
nounced  thus  by  Hebrews,  but  the  Samaritans  call  it  Jabai, 
overlooking  the  force  of  the  word").  The  dull-sounding  long  a 
could  be  expressed  by  omega  quite  as  well  as  by  alpha.  Isidor 
follows  these  and  similar  testimonies,  and  says  (Orig.  vii.  7), 
"  The  tetragrammaton  consisted  of  ia  written  twice  (ia,  la),  and 
with  this  reduplication  it  constituted  the  unutterable  and  glorious 
name  of  God."  The  Arabic  form  adopted  by  the  Samaritans 
leaves  it  uncertain  whether  it  is  to  be  pronounced  Yahve  or 
Yahva.  They  wrote  to  Job  Ludolf  (in  the  Epistola  Samari- 
tana  Sichemitarum  tertia,  published  by  Bruns,  1781),  in  oppo 
sition  to  the  statement  of  Theodoret,  that  they  pronounced  the 
last  syllable  with  damma ;  that  is  to  say,  they  pronounced  the 
name  Yahavoh  (  Yahvoli),  which  was  the  form  in  which  it  was 
written  in  the  last  century  by  Velthusen,  and  also  by  Muffi  in 
his  Disegno  di  lezioni  e  di  ricerche  sulla  lingua  Ebraica  (Pavia, 
1792).  The  pronunciation  Jehovah  (  Yehovah)  arose  out  of  a 
combination  of  the  keri  and  the  chethib,  and  has  only  become 
current  since  the  time  of  the  Reformation.  Genebrard  de 
nounces  it  in  his  Commentary  upon  the  Psalms  with  the  utmost 
vehemence,  in  opposition  to  Beza,  as  an  intolerable  innovation. 
"  Ungodly  violators  of  what  is  most  ancient,"  he  says,  "  pro 
faning  and  transforming  the  unutterable  name  of  God,  would 
read  JOVA  or  JEHOVA, — a  new,  barbarous,  fictitious,  and  irre 
ligious  word,  that  savours  strongly  of  the  Jove  of  the  heathen." 
Nevertheless  this  Jehova  (Jova)  forced  its  way  into  general 
adoption,  and  we  shall  therefore  retain  it,  notwithstanding  the 


EXPOSITION.  69 

fact  that  the  o  sound  is  decidedly  wrong.  To  return,  then  :  the 
prophet's  name  signifies  "  Jehovah's  salvation."  In  the  Sep- 
tuagint  it  is  always  written  'Haaia^  with  a  strong  aspirate  ; 
in  the  Vulgate  it  is  written  Isaias,  and  sometimes  Esaias. 

In  turning  from  the  outward  to  the  inward  title,  which  is 
contained  in  the  book  itself,  there  are  two  things  to  be  observed 
at  the  outset:  (1.)  The  division  of  the  verses  indicated  by  soph 
pasuk  is  an  arrangement  for  which  the  way  was  prepared  as 
early  as  the  time  of  the  Talmud,  and  which  was  firmly  estab 
lished  in  the  Masoretic  schools ;  and  consequently  it  reaches  as 
far  back  as  the  extreme  limits  of  the  middle  ages — differing 
in  this  respect  from  the  division  of  verses  in  the  New  Testa 
ment.  The  arrangement  of  the  chapters,  however,  with  the 
indications  of  the  separate  sections  of  the  prophetic  collection, 
is  of  no  worth  to  us,  simply  because  it  is  not  older  than  the 
thirteenth  century.  According  to  some  authorities,  it  originated 
with  Stephen  Langton,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  (f  1227) ; 
whilst  others  attribute  it  to  Cardinal  Hugo  of  StCaro  (f  1262). 
It  is  only  since  the  fifteenth  century  that  it  has  been  actually 
adopted  in  the  text.  (2.)  The  small  ring  or  star  at  the  com 
mencement  points  to  the  footnote,  which  affirms  that  Isa.  i. 
1-28  (where  we  find  the  same  sign  again)  was  the  haphtarah,  or 
concluding  pericope,  taken  from  the  prophets,  which  was  read 
on  the  same  Sabbath  as  the  parashah  from  the  Pentateuch,  in 
Deut.  i.  1  sqq.  It  was,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  a  very 
thoughtful  principle  of  selection  which  led  to  the  combination 
of  precisely  these  two  lessons. 

Title  of  the  collection,  as  given  in  ver.  1 :  "  Seeing  of  Yesha- 
yahu,  son  of  Amoz,  which  he  saw  over  Judah  and  Jerusalem  in 
the  days  of  '  Uzziyahu,  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Yehizfciyahu,  the 
kings  of  Judah"  Isaiah  is  called  the  "  son  of  Amoz."  There 
is  no  force  in  the  old  Jewish  doctrine  (b.  Megilla  15a),  which 
was  known  to  the  fathers,  that  whenever  the  name  of  a 
prophet's  father  is  given,  it  is  a  proof  that  the  father  was  also 
a  prophet.  And  we  are  just  as  incredulous  about  another  old 
tradition,  to  the  effect  that  Amoz  was  the  brother  of  Amaziah, 
the  father  and  predecessor  of  Uzziah  (b.  Sota  106).  There  is 
some  significance  in  this  tradition,  however,  even  if  it  is  not 
true.  There  is  something  royal  in  the  nature  and  bearing  of 
Isaiah  throughout.  He  speaks  to  kings  as  if  he  himself  were 


70  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

a  king.  He  confronts  with  majesty  the  magnates  of  the  nation 
and  of  the  imperial  power.  In  his  peculiar  style,  he  occupies 
the  same  place  among  the  prophets  as  Solomon  among  the  kings. 
Under  all  circumstances,  and  in  whatever  state  of  mind,  he  is 
completely  master  of  his  materials — simple,  yet  majestic  in  his 
style — elevated,  yet  without  affectation — and  beautiful,  though 
unadorned.  But  this  regal  character  had  its  roots  somewhere 
else  than  in  the  blood.  All  that  can  be  affirmed  with  certainty 
is,  that  Isaiah  was  a  native  of  Jerusalem  ;  for  notwithstanding 
his  manifold  prophetic  missions,  we  never  find  him  outside 
Jerusalem.  There  he  lived  with  his  wife  and  children,  and,  as 
we  may  infer  from  ch.  xxii.  1,  and  the  mode  of  his  inter 
course  with  king  Hezekiah,  down  in  the  lower  city.  And  there 
he  laboured  under  the  four  kings  named  in  ver.  1,  viz.  Uzziah 
(who  reigned  52  years,  811-759),  Jotham  (16  years,  759-743), 
Ahaz  (16  years,  743-728),  and  Hezekiah  (29  years,  728-699). 
The  four  kings  are  enumerated  without  a  Vav  cop. ;  there  is  the 
same  asyndeton  enumerativum  as  in  the  titles  to  the  books  of 
Hosea  and  Micah.  Hezekiah  is  there  called  Yeliizkiyah,  the 
form  being  almost  the  same  as  ours,  with  the  simple  elision  of 
the  concluding  sound.  The  chronicler  evidently  preferred  the 
fullest  form,  at  the  commencement  as  well  as  the  termination. 
Roorda  imagines  that  the  chronicler  derived  this  ill-shaped  form 
from  the  three  titles,  where  it  is  a  copyist's  error  for  ^'iptrn  or 
nsj?mi ;  but  the  estimable  grammarian  has  overlooked  the  fact 
that  the  same  form  is  found  in  Jer.  xv.  4  and  2  Kings  xx.  10, 
where  no  such  error  of  the  pen  can  have  occurred.  Moreover, 
it  is  not  an  ill-shaped  form,  if,  instead  of  deriving  it  from  the 
pielj  as  Eoorda  does,  we  derive  it  from  the  kal  of  the  verb 
("  strong  is  Jehovah,"  an  imperfect  noun  with  a  connecting  i, 
which  is  frequently  met  with  in  proper  names  from  verbal  roots, 
such  as  Jesimiel  from  sim,  1  Chron.  iv.  36  :  vid.  Olshausen, 
§  277,  p.  621).  Under  these  four  kings  Isaiah  laboured,  or,  as 
it  is  expressed  in  ver.  1,  saw  the  sight  which  is  committed  to 
writing  in  the  book  before  us.  Of  all  the  many  Hebrew  syno 
nyms  for  seeing,  njn  (cf.  cernere,  Kpiveiv,  and  the  Sanscrit  and 
Persian  kar,  which  is  founded  upon  the  radical  notion  of  cutting 
and  separating)  is  the  standing  general  expression  used  to  denote 
prophetic  perception,  whether  the  form  in  which  the  divine 
revelation  was  made  to  the  prophet  was  in  vision  or  by  word. 


EXPOSITION.  71 

In  either  case  he  saw  it,  because  he  distinguished  this  divine 
revelation  from  his  own  conceptions  and  thoughts  by  means  of 
that  inner  sense,  which  is  designated  by  the  name  of  the  noblest 
of  all  the  five  external  senses.  From  this  verb  chazah  there 
came  both  the  abstract  chazon,  seeing,  and  the  more  concrete 
cliizzayon,  a  sight  (visum),  which  is  a  stronger  form  of  cliizyon 
(from  chazai  =  chazah).  The  noun  cliazon  is  indeed  used  to 
denote  a  particular  sight  (comp.  Isa.  xxix.  7  with  Job  xx.  8, 
xxxiii.  15),  inasmuch  as  it  consists  in  seeing  (visio) ;  but  here 
in  the  title  of  the  book  of  Isaiah  the  abstract  meaning  passes 
over  into  the  collective  idea  of  the  sight  or  vision  in  all  its 
extent,  i.e.  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  that  was  seen.  It  is  a 
great  mistake,  therefore,  for  any  one  to  argue  from  the  use  of 
the  word  cjiazon  (vision),  that  ver.  la  was  originally  nothing 
more  than  the  heading  to  the  first  prophecy,  and  that  it  was  only 
by  the  addition  of  ver.  Ib  that  it  received  the  stamp  of  a  general 
title  to  the  whole  book.  There  is  no  force  in  the  argument. 
Moreover,  the  chronicler  knew  the  book  of  Isaiah  by  this  title 
(2  Chron.  xxxii.  32)  ;  and  the  titles  of  other  books  of  prophecy, 
such  as  Hosea,  Amos,  Micah,  and  Zephaniah,  are  very  similar. 
A  more  plausible  argument  in  favour  of  the  twofold  origin  of 
ver.  1  has  been  lately  repeated  by  Schegg  and  Meier,  namely, 
that  whilst  "  Judah  and  Jerusalem"  are  appropriate  enough  as 
defining  the  object  of  the  first  prophecy,  the  range  is  too 
limited  to  apply  to  all  the  prophecies  that  follow ;  since  their 
object  is  not  merely  Judah,  including  Jerusalem,  but  they  are 
also  directed  against  foreign  nations,  and  at  ch.  vii.  the  king  of 
Israel,  including  Samaria,  also  comes  within  the  horizon  of  the 
prophet's  vision.  And  in  the  title  to  the  book  of  Micah,  both 
kingdoms  are  distinctly  named.  But  it  was  necessary  there, 
inasmuch  as  Micah  commences  at  once  with  the  approaching 
overthrow  of  Samaria.  Here  the  designation  is  a  central  one. 
Even,  according  to  the  well-known  maxims  a  potiori,  and  a 
proximo,  jit  denominatio,  it  would  not  be  unsuitable ;  but  Judah 
and  Jerusalem  are  really  and  essentially  the  sole  object  of  the 
prophet's  vision.  For  within  the  largest  circle  of  the  imperial 
powers  there  lies  the  smaller  one  of  the  neighbouring  nations  ; 
and  in  this  again,  the  still  more  limited  one  of  all  Israel,  in 
cluding  Samaria  ;  and  within  this  the  still  smaller  one  of  the 
kingdom  of  Juclah.  And  all  these  circles  together  form  the 


72  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

circumference  of  Jerusalem,  since  the  entire  history  of  the 
world,  so  far  as  its  inmost  pragmatism  and  its  ultimate  goal 
were  concerned,  was  the  history  of  the  church  of  God,  which 
had  for  its  peculiar  site  the  city  of  the  temple  of  Jehovah,  and 
of  the  kingdom  of  promise.  The  expression  "  concerning  Judah 
and  Jerusalem"  is  therefore  perfectly  applicable  to  the  whole 
book,  in  which  all  that  the  prophet  sees  is  seen  from  Judah- 
Jerusalem  as  a  centre,  and  seen  for  the  sake  and  in  the  interests 
of  both.  The  title  in  ver.  1  may  pass  without  hesitation  as  the 
heading  written  by  the  prophet's  own  hand.  This  is  admitted 
not  only  by  Caspari  (Micah,  pp.  90-93),  but  also  by  Hitzig 
and  Knobel.  By  if  ver.  1  contains  the  title  to  the  whole  book, 
where  is  the  heading  to  the  first  prophecy  I  Are  we  to  take 
"1K>*K  as  a  nominative  instead  of  an  accusative  (qui  instead  of 
quam,  sc.  visionem),  as  Luzzatto  does  ?  This  is  a  very  easy  way 
of  escaping  from  the  difficulty,  and  stamping  ver.  1  as  the 
heading  to  the  first  prophetic  words  in  ch.  i. ;  but  it  is  un 
natural,  as  ntn  -i^N  Jlin,  according  to  Ges.  (§  138,  note  1),  is 
the  customary  form  in  Hebrew  of  connecting  the  verb  with  its 
own  substantive.  The  real  answer  is  simple  enough.  The 
first  prophetic  address  is  left  intentionally  without  a  heading, 
just  because  it  is  the  prologue  to  all  the  rest ;  and  the  second 
prophetic  address  has  a  heading  in  ch.  ii.  1,  although  it  really 
does  not  need  one,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  out  more  sharply 
the  true  character  of  the  first  as  the  prologue  to  the  whole. 


FIRST  HALF  OF  THE  COLLECTION. 

CHAP.    I.-XXXIX. 


PART    I. 

PROPHECIES  RELATING  TO  THE  ONWARD  COURSE  OF  THE 
GREAT  MASS  OF  THE  PEOPLE  TOWARDS  HARDENING  OF 
HEART  (CHAP.  I.-VL). 

OPENING  ADDKESS  CONCERNING  THE  WAYS  OF  JEHOVAH  WITH 
HIS  UNGRATEFUL  AND  REBELLIOUS  NATION. — CHAP.  I.  2 

SQQ. 

THE  difficult  question  as  to  the  historical  and  chronological 
standpoint  of  this  overture  to  all  the  following  addresses,  can 
only  be  brought  fully  out  when  the  exposition  is  concluded. 
But  there  is  one  thing  which  we  may  learn  even  from  a  cursory 
inspection  :  namely,  that  the  prophet  was  standing  at  the  event 
ful  boundary  line  between  two  distinct  halves  in  the  history  of 
Israel.  The  people  had  not  been  brought  to  reflection  and 
repentance  either  by  the  riches  of  the  divine  goodness,  which 
they  had  enjoyed  in  the  time  of  Uzziah-Jotham,  the  copy  of 
the  times  of  David  and  Solomon,  or  by  the  chastisements  of 
divine  wrath,  by  which  wound  after  wound  was  inflicted.  The 
divine  methods  of  education  were  exhausted,  and  all  that  now 
remained  for  Jehovah  to  do  was  to  let  the  nation  in  its  existing 
state  be  dissolved  in  fire,  and  to  create  a  new  one  from  the 
remnant  of  gold  that  stood  the  fiery  test.  At  this  time,  so 
pregnant  with  storms,  the  prophets  were  more  active  than  at 
any  other  period.  Amos  appeared  about  the  tenth  year  of 
Uzziah's  reign,  the  twenty-fifth  of  Jeroboam  II. ;  Micah  pro- 

73 


74  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

phesied  from  the  time  of  Jotham  till  the  fall  of  Samaria,  in 
the  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign  ;  but  most  prominent  of  all 
was  Isaiah,  the  prophet  par  excellence,  standing  as  he  did  mid 
way  between  Moses  and  Christ. 

In  the  consciousness  of  his  exalted  position  in  relation  to 
the  history  of  salvation,  he  commences  his  opening  address  in 
Deuteronomic  style.  Modern  critics  are  of  opinion,  indeed,  that 
Deuteronomy  was  not  composed  till  the  time  of  Josiah,  or  at  any 
rate  not  earlier  than  Manasseh ;  and  even  Kahnis  adduces  this 
as  a  firmly  established  fact  (see  his  Dogmatik,  i.  277).  But  if 
this  be  the  case,  how  comes  it  to  pass,  not  only  that  Micah  (ch. 
vi.  8)  points  back  to  a  saying  in  Deut.  x.  12,  but  that  all  the 
post-Mosaic  prophecy,  even  the  very  earliest  of  all,  is  tinged 
with  a  Deuteronomic  colouring.  This  surely  confirms  the  self- 
attestation  of  the  authorship  of  Moses,  which  is  declared  most 
distinctly  in  ch.  xxxi.  9.  Deuteronomy  was  most  peculiarly 
Moses'  own  law-book — his  last  will,  as  it  were :  it  was  also  the 
oldest  national  book  of  Israel,  and  therefore  the  basis  of  all 
intercourse  between  the  prophets  and  the  nation.  There  is  one 
portion  of  this  peculiarly  Mosaic  thorah,  however,  which  stands 
not  only  in  a  more  truly  primary  relation  to  the  prophecy  of 
succeeding  ages  than  any  of  the  rest,  but  in  a  normative  rela 
tion  also.  We  refer  to  Moses'  dying  song,  which  has  recently 
been  expounded  by  Volck  and  Camphausen,  and  is  called  shirath 
haazinu  (song  of  "  Give  ear"),  from  the  opening  words  in  ch. 
xxxiL  This  song  is  a  compendious  outline  or  draft,  and  also 
the  common  key  to  all  prophecy,  and  bears  the  same  funda 
mental  relation  to  it  as  the  Decalogue  to  all  other  laws,  and  the 
Lord's  Prayer  to  all  other  prayers.  The  lawgiver  summed  up 
the  whole  of  the  prophetic  contents  of  his  last  words  (ch.  xxvii.- 
xxviii.  xxix.-xxx.),  and  threw  them  into  the  form  of  a  song, 
that  they  might  be  perpetuated  in  the  memories  and  mouths  of 
the  people.  This  song  sets  before  the  nation  its  entire  history 
to  the  end  of  time.  That  history  divides  itself  into  four  great 
periods :  the  creation  and  rise  of  Israel ;  the  ingratitude  and 
apostasy  of  Israel ;  the  consequent  surrender  of  Israel  to  the 
power  of  the  heathen ;  and  finally,  the  restoration  of  Israel, 
sifted,  but  not  destroyed,  and  the  unanimity  of  all  nations  in 
the  praise  of  Jehovah,  who  reveals  Himself  both  in  judgment 
and  in  mercy.  This  fourfold  character  is  not  only  verified  iu 


CHAP.  I.  2  SQQ.  75 

every  part  of  the  history  of  Israel,  but  is  also  the  seal  of  that 
history  as  a  whole,  even  to  its  remotest  end,  in  New  Testament 
times.  In  every  age,  therefore,  this  song  has  presented  to 
Israel  a  mirror  of  its  existing  Condition  and  future  fate.  And 
it  was  the  task  of  the  prophets  to  hold  up  this  mirror  to  the 
people  of  their  own  times.  This  is  what  Isaiah  does.  He 
begins  his  prophetic  address  in  the  same  form  in  which  Moses 
begins  his  song.  The  opening  words  of  Moses  are  :  "  Give 
ear,  O  ye  heavens,  and  I  will  speak ;  and  let  the  earth  hear  the 
words  of  my  mouth"  (Deut.  xxxii.  1).  In  what  sense  he 
invoked  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  he  tells  us  himself  in  Deut. 
xxxi.  28,  29.  He  foresaw  in  spirit  the  future  apostasy  of  Israel, 
and  called  heaven  and  earth,  which  would  outlive  his  earthly 
life,  that  was  now  drawing  to  a  close,  as  witnesses  of  what  he 
had  to  say  to  his  people,  with  such  a  prospect  before  them. 
Isaiah  commences  in  the  same  way  (ch.  i.  2a),  simply  trans 
posing  the  two  parallel  verbs  "  hear"  and  "  give  ear  :"  "Hear, 
0  heavens,  and  give  ear,  0  earth;  for  Jehovah  speaketh  /"  The 
reason  for  the  appeal  is  couched  in  very  general  terms :  they 
were  to  hear,  because  Jehovah  was  speaking.  What  Jehovah 
said  coincided  essentially  with  the  words  of  Jehovah,  which  are 
introduced  in  Deut.  xxxii.  20  with  the  expression  6t  And  He 
said.'*  What  it  was  stated  there  that  Jehovah  would  one  day 
have  to  say  in  His  wrath,  He  now  said  through  the  prophet, 
whose  existing  present  corresponded  to  the  coming  future  of  the 
Mosaic  ode.  The  time  had  now  arrived  for  heaven  and  earth, 
which  are  always  existing,  and  always  the  same,  and  which  had 
accompanied  Israel's  history  thus  far  in  all  places  and  at  all 
times,  to  fulfil  their  duty  as  witnesses,  according  to  the  word  of 
the  lawgiver.  And  this  was  just  the  special,  true,  and  ultimate 
sense  in  which  they  were  called  upon  by  the  prophet,  as  they 
had  previously  been  by  Moses,  to  "  hear."  They  had  been 
present,  and  had  taken  part,  when  Jehovah  gave  the  thorah  to 
His  people :  the  heavens,  according  to  Deut.  iv.  36,  as  the 
place  from  which  the  voice  of  God  came  forth ;  and  the  earth, 
as  the  scene  of  His  great  fire.  They  were  solemnly  invoked 
when  Jehovah  gave  His  people  the  choice  between  blessing 
and  cursing,  life  and  death  (Deut.  xxx.  19,  iv.  26).  And  so 
now  they  are  called  upon  to  hear  and  join  in  bearing  witness 
to  all  that  Jehovah,  their  Creator,  and  the  God  of  Israel,  had 


76  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

to  say,  and  the  complaints  that  He  had  to  make  :  "  /  have 
brought  up  children,  and  raised  them  high,  and  they  have  fallen 
away  from  me"  (ver.  2b).  Israel  is  referred  to ;  but  Israel  is  not 
specially  named.  On  the  contrary,  the  historical  facts  are 
generalized  almost  into  a  parable,  in  order  that  the  appalling 
condition  of  things  which  is  crying  to  heaven  may  be  made  all 
the  more  apparent.  Israel  was  Jehovah's  son  (Ex.  iv.  22,  23). 
All  the  members  of  the  nation  were  His  children  (Deut.  xiv.  1, 
xxxii.  20).  Jehovah  was  Israel's  father,  by  whom  it  had  been 
begotten  (Deut.  xxxii.  6,  18).  The  existence  of  Israel  as  a 
nation  was  secured  indeed,  like  that  of  all  other  nations,  by 
natural  reproduction,  and  not  by  spiritual  regeneration.  But 
the  primary  ground  of  Israel's  origin  was  the  supernatural  and 
mighty  word  of  promise  given  to  Abraham,  in  Gen.  xvii.  15, 
16;  and  it  was  by  a  series  of  manifestations  of  miraculous 
power  and  displays  of  divine  grace,  that  the  development  of 
Israel,  which  dated  from  that  starting-point,  was  brought  up  to 
the  position  it  had  reached  at  the  time  of  the  exodus  from 
Egypt.  It  was  in  this  sense  that  Israel  had  been  begotten  by 
Jehovah.  And  this  relation  between  Jehovah  and  Israel,  as 
His  children,  had  now,  at  the  time  when  Jehovah  was  speaking 
through  the  mouth  of  Isaiah,  a  long  and  gracious  past  behind 
it,  viz.  the  period  of  Israel's  childhood  in  Egypt ;  the  period  of 
its  youth  in  the  desert ;  and  a  period  of  growing  manhood  from 
Joshua  to  Samuel :  so  that  Jehovah  could  say,  "  I  have  brought 
up  children,  and  raised  them  high."  The  piel  (giddel)  used 
here  signifies  "  to  make  great ;"  and  when  applied  to  children, 
as  it  is  here  and  in  other  passages,  such  as  2  Kings  x.  6,  it 
means  to  bring  up,  to  make  great,  so  far  as  natural  growth  is 
concerned.  The  pilel  (romem),  which  corresponds  to  the  piel 
in  the  so-called  verbis  caw's,  and  which  is  also  used  in  ch.  xxiii.  4 
and  Ezek.  xxxi.  4  as  the  parallel  to  giddel,  signifies  to  lift  up, 
and  is  used  in  a  "  dignified  (dignitative)  sense,"  with  reference 
to  the  position  of  eminence,  to  which,  step  by  step,  a  wise  and 
loving  father  advances  a  child.  The  two  verses  depict  the 
state  of  Israel  in  the  times  of  David  and  Solomon,  as  one  of 
mature  manhood  and  proud  exaltation,  which  had  to  a  certain 
extent  returned  under  Uzziah  and  Jotham.  But  how  base  had 
been  the  return  which  it  had  made  for  all  that  it  had  received 
from  God :  "  And  they  have  fallen  away  from  me"  We  should 


CHAP.  i.  a.  77 

have  expected  an  adversative  particle  here ;  but  instead  of  that, 
we  have  merely  a  Vav  cop.,  which  is  used  energetically,  as  in 
ch.  vi.  7  (cf.  Hos.  vii.  13).  Two  things  which  ought  never  to 
be  coupled — Israel's  filial  relation  to  Jehovah,  and  Israel's  base 
rebellion  against  Jehovah — had  been  realized  in  their  most 
contradictory  forms.  The  radical  meaning  of  the  verb  is  to 
break  away,  or  break  loose ;  and  the  object  against  which  the 
act  is  directed  is  construed  with  Beth.  The  idea  is  that  of 
dissolving  connection  with  a  person  with  violence  and  self- 
will  ;  here  it  relates  to  that  inward  severance  from  God,  and 
renunciation  of  Him,  which  preceded  all  outward  acts  of  sin, 
and  which  not  only  had  idolatry  for  its  full  and  outward  mani 
festation,  but  was  truly  idolatry  in  all  its  forms.  From  the 
time  that  Solomon  gave  himself  up  to  the  worship  of  idols, 
at  the  close  of  his  reign,  down  to  the  days  of  Isaiah,  idolatry 
had  never  entirely  or  permanently  ceased  to  exist,  even  in 
public.  In  two  different  reformations  the  attempt  had  been 
made  to  suppress  it,  viz.  in  the  one  commenced  by  Asa  and 
concluded  by  Jehoshaphat ;  and  in  the  one  carried  out  by 
Joash,  during  the  lifetime  of  the  high  priest  Jehoiada,  his  tutor 
and  deliverer.  But  the  first  was  not  successful  in  suppressing 
it  altogether ;  and  what  Joash  removed,  returned  with  double 
abominations  as  soon  as  Jehoiada  was  dead.  Consequently  the 
words,  "  They  have  rebelled  against  me,"  which  sum  up  all  the 
ingratitude  of  Israel  in  one  word,  and  trace  it  to  its  root,  apply 
to  the  whole  history  of  Israel,  from  its  culminating  point  under 
David  and  Solomon,  down  to  the  prophet's  own  time. 

Ver.  3.  Jehovah  then  complains  that  the  rebellion  with  which 
His  children  have  rewarded  Him  is  not  only  inhuman,  but  even 
worse  than  that  of  the  brutes  :  "  An  ox  knoweth  its  owner,  and 
an  ass  its  master  s  crib :  Israel  doth  not  know,  my  people  doth  not 
consider"  An  ox  has  a  certain  knowledge  of  its  buyer  and 
owner,  to  whom  it  willingly  submits ;  and  an  ass  has  at  least  a 
knowledge  of  the  crib  of  its  master  (the  noun  for  "  master"  is 
in  the  plural :  this  is  not  to  be  understood  in  a  numerical,  but 
in  an  amplifying  sense,  "  the  authority  over  it,"  as  in  Ex.  xxi. 
29  :  vid.  Ges.  §  108,  2,  b,  and  Dietrich's  Heb.  Gram.  p.  45), 
i.e.  it  knows  that  it  is  its  master  who  fills  its  crib  or  manger 
with  fodder  (evus,  the  crib,  from  avas,  to  feed,  is  radically  asso 
ciated  witn  (JHZTVV,  vulgar  irdOvrj,  Dor.  and  Lac.  ira-rv^  and  is 


78  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

applied  in  the  Talmud  to  the  large  common  porringer  used  by 
labourers).1  Israel  had  no  such  knowledge,  neither  instinctive 
and  direct,  nor  acquired  by  reflection  (hithbonan,  the  reflective 
conjugation,  with  a  pausal  change  of  the  e  into  a  long  a,  accord 
ing  to  Ges.  §  54,  note).  The  expressions  "  doth  not  know'' 
and  "  doth  not  consider"  must  not  be  taken  here  in  an  object 
less  sense, — as,  for  example,  in  ch.  Ivi.  10  and  Ps.  Ixxxii.  5, — viz. 
as  signifying  they  were  destitute  of  all  knowledge  and  reflec 
tion  ;  but  the  object  is  to  be  supplied  from  what  goes  before  : 
they  knew  not,  and  did  not  consider  what  answered  in  their 
case  to  the  owner  and  to  the  crib  which  the  master  fills," — 
namely,  that  they  were  the  children  and  possession  of  Jehovah, 
and  that  their  existence  and  prosperity  were  dependent  upon 
the  grace  of  Jehovah  alone.  The  parallel,  with  its  striking 
contrasts,  is  self-drawn,  like  that  in  Jer.  viii.  7,  where  animals 
are  referred  to  again,  and  is  clearly  indicated  in  the  words 
"  Israel"  and  u  my  people."  Those  who  were  so  far  surpassed 
in  knowledge  and  perception  even  by  animals,  and  so  thoroughly 
put  to  shame  by  them,  were  not  merely  a  nation,  like  any  other 
nation  on  the  earth,  but  were  "  Israel,"  descendants  of  Jacob, 
the  wrestler  with  God,  who  wrestled  down  the  wrath  of  God, 
and  wrestled  out  a  blessing  for  himself  and  his  descendants ; 
and  "  my  people,"  the  nation  which  Jehovah  had  chosen  out 
of  all  other  nations  to  be  the  nation  of  His  possession,  and  His 
own  peculiar  government.  This  nation,  bearing  as  it  did  the 
God-given  title  of  a  hero  of  faith  and  prayer,  this  favourite 
nation  of  Jehovah,  had  let  itself  down  far  below  the  level  of 
the  brutes.  This  is  the  complaint  which  the  exalted  speaker 
pours  out  in  vers.  2  and  3  before  heaven  and  earth.  The  words 
of  God,  together  with  the  introduction,  consist  of  two  tetras- 
tichs,  the  measure  and  rhythm  of  which  are  determined  by  the 
meaning  of  the  words  and  the  emotion  of  the  speaker.  There 
is  nothing  strained  in  it  at  all.  Prophecy  lives  and  moves 
amidst  the  thoughts  of  God,  which  prevail  above  the  evil 
reality :  and  for  that  very  reason,  as  a  reflection  of  the  glory 

1  Nedarim  iv.  4  jer.  Demai  viii.  The  stable  is  called  repJiefh.  Even  in 
jer.  SUebuoih  viii.  1,  where  cattle  are  spoken  of  as  standing  Uevus,  the  word 
signifies  a  crib  or  manger,  not  a  stable.  Luzzatto  tries  to  prove  that  evus 
signifies  a  threshing-floor,  and  indeed  an  enclosed  place,  in  distinction  from 
geren  ;  but  he  is  mistaken. 


CHAP.  I.  4.  79 

of  God,  which  is  the  ideal  of  beauty  (Ps.  1.  1),  it  is  through 
and  through  poetical.  That  of  Isaiah  is  especially  so.  There 
was  no  art  of  oratory  practised  in  Israel,  which  Isaiah  did  not 
master,  and  which  did  not  serve  as  the  vehicle  of  the  word  of 
God,  after  it  had  taken  shape  in  the  prophet's  mind. 

With  ver.  4  there  commences  a  totally  different  rhythm. 
The  words  of  Jehovah  are  ended.  The  piercing  lamentation 
of  the  deeply  grieved  Father  is  also  the  severest  accusation. 
The  cause  of  God,  however,  is  to  the  prophet  the  cause  of  a 
friend,  who  feels  an  injury  done  to  his  friend  quite  as  much 
as  if  it  were  done  to  himself  (ch.  v.  1).  The  lamentation  of 
God,  therefore,  is  changed  now  into  violent  scolding  and 
threatening  on  the  part  of  the  prophet;  and  in  accordance 
with  the  deep  wrathful  pain  with  which  he  is  moved,  his  words 
pour  out  with  violent  rapidity,  like  flash  after  flash,  in  climactic 
clauses  having  no  outward  connection,  and  each  consisting  of 
only  two  or  three  words. — Ver.  4.  "  Woe  upon  the  sinful  nation, 
the  guilt-laden  people,  the  miscreant  race,  the  children  acting  cor 
ruptly  !  They  have  forsaken  Jehovah,  blasphemed  Israel's  Holy 
One,  turned  away  backwards"  The  distinction  sometimes 
drawn  between  hoi  (with  He)  and  oi  (with  Aleph) — as  equivalent 
to  oh !  and  woe  ! — cannot  be  sustained.  Hoi  is  an  exclamation 
of  pain,  with  certain  doubtful  exceptions;  and  in  the  case  before 
us  it  is  not  so  much  a  denunciation  of  woe  (vce  genii,  as  the  Vul 
gate  renders  it),  as  a  lamentation  (y&  gentem)  filled  with  wrath. 
The  epithets  which  follow  point  indirectly  to  that  which  Israel 
ought  to  have  been,  according  to  the  choice  and  determination 
of  God,  and  plainly  declare  what  it  had  become  through  its 
own  choice  and  ungodly  self-determination.  (1.)  According  to 
the  choice  and  determination  of  God,  Israel  was  to  be  a  holy 
nation  (goi  kadosh,TZx.  xix.  6);  but  it  was  a  sinful  nation — gens 
peccatrix,  as  it  is  correctly  rendered  by  the  Vulgate.  NtDh  is  not 
a  participle  here,  but  rather  a  participial  adjective  in  the  sense 
of  what  was  habitual.  It  is  the  singular  in  common  use  for 
the  plural  D'Kian,  sinners,  the  singular  of  which  was  not  used. 
Holy  and  Sinful  are  glaring  contrasts :  for  kadosh,  so  far  as 
its  radical  notion  is  concerned  (assuming,  that  is  to  say,  that 
this  is  to  be  found  in  kad  and  not  in  dosh :  see  Psalter,  i.  588,  9), 
signifies  that  which  is  separated  from  what  is  common,  un 
clean,  or  sinful,  and  raised  above  it.  The  alliteration  in  hoi  goi 


80  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

implies  that  the  nation,  as  sinful,  was  a  nation  of  woe.  (2.)  In 
the  thorah  Israel  was  called  not  only  "  a  holy  nation,"  but  also 
"  the  people  of  Jehovah"  (Num.  xvii.  6,  Eng.  ver.  xvi.  41),  the 
people  chosen  and  blessed  of  Jehovah ;  but  now  it  had  become 
"  a  people  heavy  with  iniquity."  Instead  of  the  most  natural 
expression,  a  people  bearing  heavy  sins ;  the  sin,  or  iniquity, 
i.e.  the  weight  carried,  is  attributed  to  the  people  themselves 
upon  whom  the  weight  rested,  according  to  the  common  figu 
rative  idea,  that  whoever  carries  a  heavy  burden  is  so  much 
heavier  himself  (cf.  grams  oneribusy  Cicero).  JW  (sin  regarded 
as  crookedness  and  perversity,  whereas  NEn  suggests  the  idea 
of  going  astray  and  missing  the  way)  is  the  word  commonly 
used  wherever  the  writer  intends  to  describe  sin  in  the  mass 
(e.g.  ch.  xxxiii.  24;  Gen.  xv.  16,  xix.  15),  including  the  guilt 
occasioned  by  it.  The  people  of  Jehovah  had  grown  into  a 
people  heavily  laden  with  guilt.  So  crushed,  so  altered  into  the 
very  opposite,  had  Israel's  true  nature  become.  It  is  with  de 
liberate  intention  that  we  have  rendered  ^  a  nation  (Nation), 
and  DV  a  people  (Volk):  for,  according  to  Malbim's  correct  defi 
nition  of  the  distinction  between  the  two,  the  former  is  used 
to  denote  the  mass,  as  linked  together  by  common  descent, 
language,  and  country;  the  latter  the  people  as  bound  together 
by  unity  of  government  (see,  for  example,  Ps.  cv.  13).  Conse 
quently  we  always  read  of  the  people  of  the  Lord,  not  the 
nation  of  the  Lord ;  and  there  are  only  two  instances  in  which 
goi  is  attached  to  a  suffix  relating  to  the  ruler,  and  then  it 
relates  to  Jehovah  alone  (Zeph.  ii.  9  ;  Ps.  cvi.  5).  (8.)  Israel 
bore  elsewhere  the  honourable  title  of  the  seed  of  the  patriarch 
(ch.  xli.  8,  xlv.  19  ;  cf.  Gen.  xxi.  12)  ;  but  in  reality  it  was  a 
seed  of  evil-doers  (miscreants).  This  does  not  mean  that  it  was 
descended  from  evil-doers ;  but  the  genitive  is  used  in  the  sense 
of  a  direct  apposition  to  zera  (seed),  as  in  ch.  Ixv.  23  (cf. 
ch.  Ixi.  9,  vi.  13,  and  Ges.  §  116,  5),  arid  the  meaning  is  a 
seed  which  consists  of  evil-doers,  and  therefore  is  apparently 
descended  from  evil-doers  instead  of  from  patriarchs.  This 
last  thought  is  not  implied  in  the  genitive,  but  in  the  idea  of 
''  seed ; "  which  is  always  a  compact  unit,  having  one  origin, 
and  bearing  the  character  of  its  origin  in  itself.  The  render 
ing  brood  of  evil-doers,  however  it  may  accord  with  the  sense, 
would  be  inaccurate ,  for  "  seed  of  evil-doers  "  is  just  the  same 


CHAP.  I.  4.  81 

as  "  house  of  evil-doers  "  in  ch.  xxxi.  2.  The  singular  of  the 
noun  C^inP  is  219,  with  the  usual  sharpening  in  the  case  of 
gutturals  in  the  verbs  JTJJ,  JHO  with  patach,  JHE  with  kametz  in 
pause  (ch.  ix.  16,  which  see), — a  noun  derived  from  the  hipldl 
participle.  (4.)  Those  who  were  of  Israel  were  "  children  of 
Jehovah"  through  the  act  of  God  (Deut.  xiv.  1)  ;  but  in  their 
own  acts  they  were  "  children  acting  destructively "  (bdnim 
mashchithim),  so  that  what  the  thorah  feared  and  predicted  had 
now  occurred  (Deut.  iv.  16,  25,  xxxi.  29).  In  all  these  passages 
we  find  the  hiphil,  and  in  the  parallel  passage  of  the  great  song 
(Deut.  xxxii.  5)  the  piel — both  of  them  conjugations  which  con 
tain  within  themselves  the  object  of  the  action  indicated  (Ges. 
§  53,  2)  :  to  do  what  is  destructive,  i.e.  so  to  act  as  to  become 
destructive  to  one's  self  and  to  others.  It  is  evident  from  ver. 
2b,  that  the  term  children  is  to  be  understood  as  indicating 
their  relation  to  Jehovah  (cf.  ch.  xxx.  1,  9).  The  four  inter- 
jectional  clauses  are  followed  by  three  declaratory  clauses, 
which  describe  Israel's  apostasy  as  total  in  every  respect,  and 
complete  the  mournful  seven.  There  was  apostasy  in  heart : 
"  They  have  forsaken  Jehovah."  There  was  apostasy  in  words: 
"  They  blaspheme  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.''  The  verb  literally 
means  to  sting,  then  to  mock  or  treat  scornfully ;  the  use  of 
it  to  denote  blasphemy  is  antiquated  Mosaic  (Deut.  xxxi.  20 ; 
Num.  xiv.  11,  23,  xvi.  30).  It  is  with  intention  that  God  is 
designated  here  as  "the  Holy  One  of  Israel," — a  name  which 
constitutes  the  keynote  of  all  Isaiah's  prophecy  (see  at  ch.  vi.  3). 
It  was  sin  to  mock  at  anything  holy ;  it  was  a  double  sin 
to  mock  at  God,  the  Holy  One  ;  but  it  was  a  threefold  sin 
for  Israel  to  mock  at  God  the  Holy  One,  who  had  set  Himself 
to  be  the  sanctifier  of  Israel,  and  required  that  as  He  was 
Israel's  sanctification,  He  should  also  be  sanctified  by  Israel 
according  to  His  holiness  (Lev.  xix.  2,  etc.).  And  lastly, 
there  was  also  apostasy  in  action  :  "  they  have  turned  away 
backwards;"  or,  as  the  Vulgate  renders  it,  alalienati  smit.  life 
is  the  reflective  of  lit,  related  to  it;  and  11D,  for  which  it  is  the 
word  commonly  used  in  the  Targum.  The  niphal,  which  is 
only  met  with  here,  indicates  the  deliberate  character  of  their 
estrangement  from  God;  arid  the  expression  is  rendered  still 
more  emphatic  by  the  introduction  of  the  word  "  backwards  " 
(achor,  which  is  used  emphatically  in  the  place  of  Vinso).  In 
VOL.  I.  f 


82  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

all  their  actions  they  ought  to  have  followed  Jehovah  ;  but  they 
had  turned  their  backs  upon  Him,  and  taken  the  way  selected 
by  themselves. — Ver.  5.  In  this  verse  a  disputed  question  arises 
as  to  the  words  HD'py  (n?D?  the  shorter,  sharper  form  of  HD, 
which  is  common  even  before  non-gutturals,  Ges.  §  32,  1):  viz. 
whether  they  mean  "wherefore,"  as  the  LXX.,  Targums, 
Vulgate,  and  most  of  the  early  versions  render  them,  or  "  upon 
what,"  i.e.  upon  which  part  of  the  body,  as  others,  including 
Schroring,  suppose.  Luzzatto  maintains  that  the  latter  render 
ing  is  spiritless,  more  especially  because  there  is  nothing  in  the 
fact  that  a  limb  has  been  struck  already  to  prevent  its  being 
struck  again  ;  but  such  objections  as  these  can  only  arise  in 
connection  with  a  purely  literal  interpretation  of  the  passage. 
If  we  adopted  this  rendering,  the  real  meaning  would  be,  that 
there  was  no  judgment  whatever  that  had  not  already  fallen 
upon  Israel  on  account  of  its  apostasy,  so  that  it  was  not  far 
from  utter  destruction.  We  agree,  however,  with  Caspari  in 
deciding  in  favour  of  the  meaning  "to  what"  (to  what  end). 
For  in  all  the  other  passages  in  which  the  expression  occurs 
(fourteen  times  in  all),  it  is  used  in  this  sense,  and  once  even 
with  the  verb  hiccdh,  to  smite  (Num.  xxii.  32),  whilst  it  is  only 
in  ver.  6  that  the  idea  of  the  people  as  one  body  is  introduced ; 
whereas  the  question  "  upon  what "  would  require  that  the 
reader  or  hearer  should  presuppose  it  here.  But  in  adopting 
the  rendering  "  whereto,"  or  to  what  end,  we  do  not  understand 
it,  as  Malbim  does,  in  the  sense  of  cui  bono,  with  the  underlying 
thought,  "  It  would  be  ineffectual,  as  all  the  previous  smiting  has 
proved;"  for  this  thought  never  comes  out  in  a  direct  expression, 
as  we  should  expect,  but  rather — according  to  the  analogy  of  the 
questions  with  lamah  in  Ezek.  xviii.  31,  Jer.  xliv.  7 — in  the  sense 
of  qua  de  causa,  with  the  underlying  thought,  "  There  would  be 
only  an  infatuated  pleasure  in  your  own  destruction." — Ver.  5a 
we  therefore  render  thus  :  "  Why  would  ye  be  perpetually 
smitten,  multiplying  rebellion?'9  *lty  (with  tiphcJiah,  a  stronger 
disjunctive  than  tebir)  belongs  to  *3£ ;  see  the  same  form  of 
accentuation  in  Ezek.  xix.  9.  They  are  not  two  distinct  inter 
rogative  clauses  ("  why  would  ye  be  smitten  afresh  1  why  do  ye 
add  revolt?" — Luzzatto),  but  the  second  clause  is  subordinate 
to  the  first  (without  there  being  any  necessity  to  supply  chi, 
"  because"  as  Gesenius  supposes),  an  adverbial  minor  clause 


CHAP.  I.  6.  83 

defining  the  main  clause  more  precisely ;  at  all  events  tins  is 
the  logical  connection,  as  in  ch.  v.  11  (cf.  Ps.  Ixii.  4,  "delight 
ing  in  lies/'  and  Ps.  iv.  3,  "loving  vanity")  :  LXX.  "  adding 
iniquity."  Sarah  (rebellion)  is  a  deviation  from  truth  and  rec 
titude;  and  here,  as  in  many  other  instances,  it  denotes  apostasy 
from  Jehovah,  who  is  the  absolutely  Good,  and  absolute 
goodness.  There  is  a  still  further  dispute  whether  the  next 
words  should  be  rendered  "  every  head "  and  "  every  heart," 
or  "  the  whole  head "  and  "  the  whole  heart."  In  prose  the 
latter  would  be  impossible,  as  the  two  nouns  are  written  with 
out  the  article ;  but  in  the  poetic  style  of  the  prophets  the 
article  may  be  omitted  after  col,  when  used  in  the  sense  of  "the 
whole"  (e.g.  ch.  ix.  12:  with  ivhole  mouth,  i.e.  with  full  mouth). 
Nevertheless  col,  without  the  article  following,  never  signifies 
"  the  whole  "  when  it  occurs  several  times  in  succession,  as  in 
ch.  xv.  2  and  Ezek.  vii.  17,  18.  AVe  must  therefore  render 
ver.  5b,  "  Every  head  is  diseased,  and  every  heart  is  sick" 
The  Lamed  in  locholi  indicates  the  state  into  which  a  thins 

o 

has  come:  every  head  in  a  state  of  disease  (Ewald,  §  217,  d: 
locholi  without  the  article,  as  in  2  Chron.  xxi.  18).  The  pro 
phet  asks  his  fellow-countrymen  why  they  are  so  foolish  as 
to  heap  apostasy  upon  apostasy,  and  so  continue  to  call  down 
the  judgments  of  God,  which  have  already  fallen  upon  them 
blow  after  blow.  Has  it  reached  such  a  height  with  them, 
that  among  all  the  many  heads  and  hearts  there  is  not  one 
head  which  is  not  in  a  diseased  state,  not  one  heart  which  is 
not  thoroughly  ill?  (davvai  an  emphatic  form  of  daveh.)  Head 
and  heart  are  mentioned  as  the  noblest  parts  of  the  outer  and 
inner  man.  Outwardly  and  inwardly  every  individual  in  the 
nation  had  already  been  smitten  by  the  wrath  of  God,  so  that 
they  had  had  enough,  arid  might  have  been  brought  to  reflection. 
This  description  of  the  total  misery  of  every  individual  in 
the  nation  is  followed  by  a  representation  of  the  whole  nation 
as  one  miserably  diseased  body.  Yer.  6.  "  From  the  sole  of 
the  foot  even  to  the  head  there  is  nothing  sound  in  it :  cuts, 
and  stripes,  and  festering  wounds ;  they  have  not  been  pressed 
out,  nor  bound  up,  nor  has  there  been  any  soothing  with  oil.''' 
The  body  of  the  nation,  to  which  the  expression  "  in  it" 
applies  (i.e.  the  nation  as  a  whole),  was  covered  with  wounds 
of  different  kinds  :  and  no  means  whatever  had  been  applied 


84  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

to  heal  these  many,  various  wounds,  which  lay  all  together, 
close  to  one  another,  and  one  upon  the  other,  covering  the 
whole  body.  Cuts  (from  JJSa,  to  cut)  are  wounds  that  have 
cut  into  the  flesh — sword-cuts,  for  example.  These  need 
binding  up,  in  order  that  the  gaping  wound  may  close  again. 
Stripes  (chabburdhy  from  chdbar,  to  stripe),  swollen  stripes, 
or  weals,  as  if  from  a  cut  with  a  whip,  or  a  blow  with  a 
fist:  these  require  softening  with  oil,  that  the  coagulated 
blood  or  swelling  may  disperse.  Festering  wounds,  maccdh 
teriydli,  from  tdrdh,  to  be  fresh  (a  different  word  from  the 
talmudic  word  t're,  Chullin  45&,  to  thrust  violently,  so  as  to 
shake)  :  these  need  pressing,  for  the  purpose  of  cleansing 
them,  so  as  to  facilitate  their  healing.  Thus  the  three 
predicates  manifest  an  approximation  to  a  cJiiasm  (the  cross 
ing  of  the  members)  ;  but  this  retrospective  relation  is  not 
thoroughly  carried  out.  The  predicates  are  written  in  the 
plural,  on  account  of  the  collective  subject.  The  clause 
|DB>3  H33T  NT),  which  refers  to  mun  (stripes),  so  far  as  the 
sense  is  concerned  (olive-oil,  like  all  oleosa,  being  a  dispers 
ing  medium),  is  to  be  taken  as  neuter,  since  this  is  the 
only  way  of  explaining  the  change  in  the  number :  "  And 
no  softening  has  been  effected  with  oil."  Zoru  we  might 
suppose  to  be  a  pual,  especially  on  account  of  the  other 
puals  near :  it  is  not  so,  however,  for  the  simple  reason  that, 
according  to  the  accentuation  (viz.  with  two  pashtahs,  the 
first  of  which  gives  the  tone,  as  in  tohu,  Gen.  i.  2,  so  that 
it  must  be  pronounced  zoru),  it  has  the  tone  upon  the  penul 
timate,  for  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  discover  any 
reason,  if  it  were  derived  from  zdrdh.  For  the  assumption 
that  the  tone  is  drawn  back  to  prepare  the  way  for  the 
strong  tone  of  the  next  verb  (chubbdshu)  is  arbitrary,  as  the 
influence  of  the  pause,  though  it  sometimes  reaches  the  last 
word  but  one,  never  extends  to  the  last  but  two.  Moreover, 
according  to  the  usage  of  speech,  zordh  signifies  to  be  dis 
persed,  not  to  be  pressed  out;  whereas  zur  and  zdrar  are 
commonly  used  in  the  sense  of  pressing  together  and  squeez 
ing  out.  Consequently  zoru  is  either  the  kal  of  an  intran 
sitive  zor  in  the  middle  voice  (like  boshu),  or,  what  is  more 
probable  —  as  zoru,  the  middle  voice  in  Ps.  Iviii.  4,  has  a 
different  meaning  (abalienati  sunt :  cf.  ver.  4)  —  the  kal  of 


CHAP.  I.  7.  85 

zdrar  (=  Arab.  constringere\  which  is  here  conjugated  as 
an  intransitive  (cf.  Job  xxiv.  24,  rommu,  and  Gen.  xlix.  23, 
where  robbu  is  used  in  an  active  sense).  The  surgical  treat 
ment  so  needed  by  the  nation  was  a  figurative  representation 
of  the  pastoral  addresses  of  the  prophets,  which  had  been 
delivered  indeed,  but,  inasmuch  as  their  salutary  effects  were 
dependent  upon  the  penitential  sorrow  of  the  people,  might 
as  well  have  never  been  delivered  at  all.  The  people  had 
despised  the  merciful,  compassionate  kindness  of  their  God. 
They  had  no  liking  for  the  radical  cure  which  the  prophets 
had  offered  to  effect.  All  the  more  pitiable,  therefore,  was 
the  condition  of  the  body,  which  was  sick  within,  and  diseased 
from  head  to  foot.  The  prophet  is  speaking  here  of  the 
existing  state  of  things.  He  affirms  that  it  is  all  over  with 
the  nation;  and  this  is  the  ground  and  object  of  his  reproach 
ful  lamentations.  Consequently,  when  he  passes  in  the  next 
verse  from  figurative  language  to  literal,  we  may  presume 
that  he  is  still  speaking  of  his  own  times.  It  is  Isaiah's 
custom  to  act  in  this  manner  as  his  own  expositor  (compare 
ver.  22  with  ver.  23).  The  body  thus  inwardly  and  outwardly- 
diseased,  was,  strictly  speaking,  the  people  and  the  land  in 
their  fearful  condition  at  that  time.  This  is  described  more 
particularly  in  ver.  7,  which  commences  with  the  most  general 
view,  and  returns  to  it  again  at  the  close.  Ver.  7.  "  Your  land 
.  .  a  desert ;  your  cities  .  .  burned  ivith  fire ;  your  field  .  . 
foreigners  consuming  it  before  your  eyes,  and  a  desert  like 
overthrowing  by  strangers"  Caspari  has  pointed  out,  in  his 
Introduction  to  the  Book  of  Isaiah  (p.  204),  how  nearly  every 
word  corresponds  to  the  curses  threatened  in  Lev.  xxvi.  and 
Deut.  xxviii.  (xxix.)  ;  Mic.  vi.  13-16  and  Jer.  v.  15  sqq.  stand 
in  the  very  same  relation  to  these  sections  of  the  Pentateuch. 
From  the  time  of  Isaiah  downwards,  the  state  of  Israel  was 
a  perfect  realization  of  the  curses  of  the  law.  The  prophet 
intentionally  employs  the  words  of  the  law  to  describe  his  own 
times ;  he  designates  the  enemy,  who  devastated  the  land, 
reduced  its  towers  to  ashes,  and  took  possession  of  its  crops,  by 
the  simple  term  zarim,  foreigners  or  barbarians  (a  word  which 
would  have  the  very  same  meaning  if  it  were  really  the  re 
duplication  of  the  Aramaean  bar ;  compare  the  Syriac  baroye, 
a  foreigner),  without  mentioning  their  particular  nationality. 


86  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

He  abstracts  himself  from  the  definite  historical  present,  in 
order  that  he  may  point  out  all  the  more  emphatically  how 
thoroughly  it  bears  the  character  of  the  fore-ordained  curse. 
The  most  emphatic  indication  of  this  was  to  be  found  in  the 
fact,  which  the  clause  at  the  close  of  ver.  7  palindromically 
affirms,  that  a  desolation  had  been  brought  about  "like  the 

/  O 

overthrow  of  foreigners."  The  repetition  of  a  catchword  like 
zarim  (foreigners)  at  the  close  of  the  verse  in  this  emphatic 
manner,  is  a  figure  of  speech,  called  epanapJiora,  peculiar  to 
the  two  halves  of  our  collection.  The  question  arises,  however, 
whether  zarim  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  genitive  of  the  subject, 
as  Caspari,  Knobel,  and  others  suppose,  "such  an  overthrow 
as  is  commonly  produced  by  barbarians "  (cf.  2  Sam.  x.  3, 
where  the  verb  occurs),  or  as  the  genitive  of  the  subject,  "  such 
an  overthrow  as  comes  upon  barbarians."  As  mahpechdh  (over 
throw)  is  used  in  other  places  in  which  it  occurs  to  denote  the 
destruction  of  Sodom,  Gomorrah,  etc.,  according  to  the  primary 
passage,  Deut.  xxix.  22,  and  Isaiah  had  evidently  also  this 
catastrophe  in  his  mind,  as  ver.  8  clearly  shows ;  we  decide  in 
favour  of  the  conclusion  that  zarim  is  the  genitive  of  the  object 
(cf.  Amos  iv.  11).  The  force  of  the  comparison  is  also  more  ob 
vious,  if  we  understand  the  words  in  this  sense.  The  desolation 
which  had  fallen  upon  the  land  of  the  people  of  God  resembled 
that  thorough  desolation  (subversio)  with  which  God  visited 
the  nations  outside  the  covenant,  who,  like  the  people  of  the 
Pentapolis,  were  swept  from  off  the  earth  without  leaving  a 
trace  behind.  But  although  there  was  similarity,  there  was 
not  sameness,  as  vers.  8,  9  distinctly  affirm.  Jerusalem  itself 
was  still  preserved ;  but  in  how  pitiable  a  condition }  There 
can  be  no  doubt  that  bath-Zion  ("  daughter  of  Zion,"  Eng. 
ver.)  in  ver.  8  signifies  Jerusalem.  The  genitive  in  this  case 
is  a  genitive  of  apposition :  "  daughter  Zion,"  not  "  daughter 
of  Zion"  (cf.  ch.  xxxvii.  22  :  see  Ges.  §  116,  5).  Zion  itself  is 
represented  as  a  daughter,  i.e.  as  a  woman.  The  expression 
applied  primarily  to  the  community  dwelling  around  the  fortress 
of  Zion,  to  which  the  individual  inhabitants  stood  in  the  same 
relation  as  children  to  a  mother,  inasmuch  as  the  community 
sees  its  members  for  the  time  being  come  into  existence  and 
grow:  they  are  born  within  her,  and,  as  it  were,  born  and  brought 
up  by  her.  It  was  then  applied  secondarily  to  the  city  itself. 


CHAP.  I.  8.  87 

with  or  without  the  inhabitants  (cf.  Jer.  xlvi.  19,  xlviii.  18; 
Zech.  ii.  11).  In  this  instance  the  latter  are  included,  as  ver.  9 
clearly  shows.  This  is  precisely  the  point  in  the  first  two  com 
parisons.  Ver.  Sa.  "  And  the  daughter  of  Zion  remains  like  a  hut 
in  a  vineyard ;  like  a  hammock  in  a  cucumber  field"  The  vine 
yard  and  cucumber  field  (rnikshah,  from  kisshu,  a  cucumber, 
cucumiSj  not  a  gourd,  cucurbita ;  at  least  not  the  true  round 
gourd,  whose  Hebrew  name,  dalaath,  does  not  occur  in  the  Old 
Testament)  are  pictured  by  the  prophet  in  their  condition 
before  the  harvest  (not  after,  as  the  Targums  render  it),  when 
it  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  watched.  The  point  of 
comparison  therefore  is,  that  in  the  vineyard  and  cucumber 
field  not  a  human  being  is  to  be  seen  in  any  direction ;  and 
there  is  nothing  but  the  cottage  and  the  night  barrack  or 
hammock  (cf.  Job  xxvii.  18)  to  show  that  there  are  any  human 
beings  there  at  all.  So  did  Jerusalem  stand  in  the  midst  of 
desolation,  reaching  far  and  wide,  —  a  sign,  however,  that 
the  land  was  not  entirely  depopulated.  But  what  is  the 
meaning  of  the  third  point  of  comparison?  Hitzig  renders 
it,  "like  a  watch-tower;"  Knobel,  "like  a  guard-city.'*  But 
the  noun  neither  means  a  tower  nor  a  castle  (although  the 
latter  would  be  quite  possible,  according  to  the  primary  mean 
ing,  cingere)  ;  and  nezurdh  does  not  mean  "  watch  "  or  "  guard." 
On  the  other  hand,  the  comparison  indicated  (like,  or  as)  does 
not  suit  what  would  seem  the  most  natural  rendering,  viz. 
"  like  a  guarded  city,"  i.e.  a  city  shielded  from  danger.  More 
over,  it  is  inadmissible  to  take  the  first  two  Caphs  in  the  sense  of 
sicut  (as)  and  the  third  in  the  sense  of  sic  (so) ;  since,  although 
this  correlative  is  common  in  clauses  indicating  identity,  it 
is  not  so  in  sentences  which  institute  a  simple  comparison. 
We  therefore  adopt  the  rendering,  ver.  86,  "  As  a  besieged 
city"  deriving  nezurdh  not  from  zur,  niphal  ndzor  (never  used), 
as  Luzzatto  does,  but  from  ndzar,  which  signifies  to  observe 
with  keen  eye,  either  with  a  good  intention,  or,  as  in  Job  vii.  20, 
for  a  hostile  purpose.  It  may  therefore  be  employed,  like  the 
synonyms  in  2  Sam.  xi.  16  and  Jer.  v.  6,  to  denote  the  recon 
noitring  of  a  city.  Jerusalem  was  not  actually  blockaded  at 
the  time  when  the  prophet  uttered  his  predictions ;  but  it  was 
like  a  blockaded  city.  In  the  case  of  such  a  city  there  is  a 
desolate  space,  completely  cleared  of  human  beings,  left  between 


88  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

it  and  the  blockading  army,  in  the  centre  of  which  the  city  itself 
stands  solitary  and  still,  shut  up  to  itself.  The  citizens  do  not 
venture  out ;  the  enemy  does  not  come  within  the  circle  that 
immediately  surrounds  the  city,  for  fear  of  the  shots  of  the 
citizens ;  and  everything  within  this  circle  is  destroyed,  either 
by  the  citizens  themselves,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  finding 
anything  useful,  or  else  by  the  enemy,  who  cut  down  the 
trees.  Thus,  with  all  the  joy  that  might  be  felt  at  the  pre 
servation  of  Jerusalem,  it  presented  but  a  gloomy  appearance. 
It  was,  as  it  were,  in  a  state  of  siege.  A  proof  tliAt  this  is  the 
way  in  which  the  passage  is  to  be  explained,  may  be  found  in 
Jer.  iv.  16,  17,  where  the  actual  storming  of  Jerusalem  is 
foretold,  and  the  enemy  is  called  nozerim,  probably  with  refer 
ence  to  the  simile  before  us. 

For  the  present,  however,  Jerusalem  was  saved  from  this 
extremity. — Ver.  9.  The  omnipotence  of  God  had  mercifully 
preserved  it :  "  Unless  Jehovah  of  hosts  had  left  us  a  little  of 
what  had  escaped,  we  had  become  like  Sodom,  we  ivere  like 
Gomorrah'9  Sand  (which  is  rendered  inaccurately  crTrep/ma 
in  the  Sept. ;  cf.  Rom.  ix.  29)  was  used,  even  in  the  early 
Mosaic  usage  of  the  language,  to  signify  that  which  escaped 
the  general  destruction  (Deut.  ii.  34,  etc.) ;  and  ByE3  (which 
might  very  well  be  connected  with  the  verbs  which  follow  : 
"  we  were  very  nearly  within  a  little  like  Sodom,"  etc.)  is  to 
be  taken  in  connection  with  sand,  as  the  pausal  form  clearly 
shows:  "a  remnant  which  was  but  a  mere  trifle"  (on  this 
use  of  the  word,  see  ch.  xvi.  14  ;  2  Chron.  xii.  7  ;  Prov.  x.  20  ; 
Ps.  cv.  12).  Jehovah  Zebaoth  stands  first,  for  the  sake  of  em 
phasis.  It  would  have  been  all  over  with  Israel  long  ago,  if  it 
had  not  been  for  the  compassion  of  God  (vid.  Hos.  xi.  8). 
And  because  it  was  the  omnipotence  of  God,  which  set  the  will 
of  His  compassion  in  motion,  He  is  called  Jehovah  Zebaoth, 
Jehovah  (the  God)  of  the  heavenly  hosts, — an  expression  in 
which  Zebaoth  is  a  dependent  genitive,  and  not,  as  Luzzatto 
supposes,  an  independent  name  of  God  as  the  Absolute,  em 
bracing  within  itself  all  the  powers  of  nature.  The  prophet 
says  "  us"  and  "  we."  He  himself  was  an  inhabitant  of 
Jerusalem ;  and  even  if  he  had  not  been  so,  he  was  never 
theless  an  Israelite.  He  therefore  associates  himself  with  his 
people,  like  Jeremiah  in  Lam.  hi,  22.  Pie  had  had  to  ex- 


CHAP.  i.  in,  11.  89 

perience  the  anger  of  God  along  with  the  rest ;  and  so,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  also  celebrates  the  mighty  compassion  of  God, 
which  he  had  experienced  in  common  with  them.  But  for  this 
compassion,  the  people  of  God  would  have  become  like  Sodom, 
from  which  only  four  human  beings  escaped  :  it  would  have 
resembled  Gomorrah,  which  was  absolutely  annihilated.  (On 
the  perfects  in  the  protasis  and  apodosis,  see  Ges.  §  126,  5.) 

The  prophet's  address  has  here  reached  a  resting-place. 
The  fact  that  it  is  divided  at  this  point  into  two  separate 
sections,  is  indicated  in  the  text  by  the  space  left  between 
vers.  9  and  10.  This  mode  of  marking  larger  or  smaller 
sections,  either  by  leaving  spaces  or  by  breaking  off  the  line, 
is  older  than  the  vowel  points  and  accents,  and  rests  upon  a 
tradition  of  the  highest  antiquity  (Hupfeld,  Gram.  p.  86  sqq.). 
The  space  is  called  pizka ;  the  section  indicated  by  such  a 
space,  a  closed  parashah  (sethwnah)  ;  and  the  section  indicated 
by  breaking  off  the  line,  an  open  parashah  (pethuchah).  The 
prophet  stops  as  soon  as  he  has  affirmed,  that  nothing  but  the 
mercy  of  God  has  warded  off  from  Israel  the  utter  destruction 
which  it  so  well  deserved.  He  catches  in  spirit  the  remon 
strances  of  his  hearers.  They  would  probably  declare  that  the 
accusations  which  the  prophet  had  brought  against  them  were 
utterly  groundless,  and  appeal  to  their  scrupulous  observance 
of  the  law  of  God.  In  reply  to  this  self-vindication  which  he 
reads  in  the  hearts  of  the  accused,  the  prophet  launches  forth 
the  accusations  of  God.  In  vers.  10,  11,  he  commences  thus: 
"  Hear  the  word  of  Jehovah,  ye  Sodom  judges ;  give  ear  to  the 
law  oj  our  God,  0  Gomorrah  nation  !  What  is  the  multitude 
of  your  slam-offerings  to  me  ?  saith  Jehovah.  1  am  satiated 
with  whole  offerings  of  rams,  and  the  fat  of  stalled  calves ;  and 
blood  of  bullocks  and  sheep  and  he-goats  I  do  not  like.11  The 
second  start  in  the  prophet's  address  commences,  like  the  first, 
with  "  hear"  and  "  give  ear."  The  summons  to  hear  is  ad 
dressed  in  this  instance  (as  in  the  case  of  Isaiah's  contemporary 
Micah,  ch.  iii.)  to  the  kezinim  (from  Mzdh,  decidere,  from 
which  comes  the  Arabic  el-Kadi,  the  judge,  with  the  sub 
stantive  termination  in:  see  Jeshurun,  p.  212  ss.),  i.e.  to  the 
men  of  decisive  authority,  the  rulers  in  the  broadest  sense,  and 
to  the  people  subject  to  them.  It  was  through  the  mercy  of 
God  thai  Jerusalem  was  in  existence  still,  for  Jerusalem  was 


90  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

•*  spiritually  Sodom,"  as  the  Kevelation  (xi.  8)  distinctly  affirirs 
of  Jerusalem,  with  evident  allusion  to  this  passage  of  Isaiah. 
Pride,  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  unmerciful  conduct,  were  the 
leading  sins  of  Sodom,  according  to  Ezek.  xvi.  49  ;  and  of 
these,  the  rulers  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  crowd  that  was  subject 
to  them  and  worthy  of  them,  were  equally  guilty  now.  But 
they  fancied  that  they  could  not  possibly  stand  in  such  evil 
repute  with  God,  inasmuch  as  they  rendered  outward  satis 
faction  to  the  law.  The  prophet  therefore  called  upon  them 
to  hear  the  law  of  the  God  of  Israel,  which  he  would  announce 
to  them :  for  the  prophet  was  the  appointed  interpreter  of  the 
law,  and  prophecy  the  spirit  of  the  law,  and  the  prophetic 
institution  the  constant  living  presence  of  the  true  essence  of 
the  law  bearing  its  own  witness  in  Israel.  "  To  what  purpose 
is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  me  ?  saith  Jehovah." 
The  prophet  intentionally  uses  the  word  "IBS*',  not  "IOK :  this 
was  the  incessant  appeal  of  God  in  relation  to  the  spiritless, 
formal  worship  offered  by  the  hypocritical,  ceremonial  right 
eousness  of  Israel  (the  future  denoting  continuous  action, 
which  is  ever  at  the  same  time  both  present  and  future). 
The  multitude  of  zebdchim,  i.e.  animal  sacrifices,  had  no  worth 
at  all  to  Him.  As  the  whole  worship  is  summed  up  here  in 
one  single  act,  zebdchim  appears  to  denote  the  shelamim^  peace- 
offerings  (or  better  still,  communion  offerings),  with  which  a 
meal  was  associated,  after  the  style  of  a  sacrificial  festival, 
and  Jehovah  gave  the  worshipper  a  share  in  the  sacrifice 
offered.  It  is  better,  however,  to  take  zebachim  as  the  general 
name  for  all  the  bleeding  sacrifices,  which  are  then  subdivided 
into  foloth  and  cheleb,  as  consisting  partly  of  whole  offerings,  or 
offerings  the  whole  of  which  was  placed  upon  the  altar,  though 
in  separate  pieces,  and  entirely  consumed,  and  partly  of  those 
sacrifices  in  which  only  the  fat  was  consumed  upon  the  altar, 
namely  the  sin-offerings,  trespass-offerings,  and  pre-eminently 
the  sheldmim  offerings.  Of  the  sacrificial  animals  mentioned, 
the  bullocks  (pdrirri)  and  fed  beasts  (memim,  fattened  calves)  are 
species  of  oxen  (bakar)  ;  and  the  lambs  (cebdsliim)  and  he-goats 
(atturim,  young  he-goats,  as  distinguished  from  seir,  the  old 
long-haired  he-goat,  the  animal  used  as  a  sin-offering),  together 
with  the  ram  (ayil,  the  customary  whole  offering  of  the  high 
priest,  of  the  tribe  prince^  and  of  the  nation  generally  on  all  the 


CHAP.  I.  12,  13.  91 

high  feast  days),  were  species  of  the  flock.  The  blood  of  these 
sacrificial  animals — such,  for  example,  as  the  young  oxen,  sheep, 
and  he-goats — was  thrown  all  round  the  altar  in  the  case  of  the 
whole  offering,  the  peace-offering,  and  the  trespass-offering ;  in 
that  of  the  sin-offering  it  was  smeared  upon  the  horns  of  the 
altar,  poured  out  at  the  foot  of  the  altar,  and  in  some  instances 
sprinkled  upon  the  walls  of  the  altar,  or  against  the  vessels  of 
the  inner  sanctuary.  Of  such  offerings  as  these  Jehovah  was 
weary,  and  He  wanted  no  more  (the  two  perfects  denote  that 
which  long  has  been  and  still  is  :  Ges.  §  126,  3)  ;  in  fact,  He 
never  had  desired  anything  of  the  kind.  Jeremiah  says  this  with 
regard  to  the  sacrifices  (ch.  vii.  22)  ;  Isaiah  also  applies  it  to 
visits  to  the  temple  :  Ver.  12.  u  When  ye  come  to  appear  before  my 
face,  who  hath  required  this  at  your  handy  to  tread  my  courts  ?" 
rriN")7  is  a  contracted  infinitive  niplial  for  fliN"jr6  (compare  the 
hiphil  forms  contracted  in  the  same  manner  in  ch.  iii.  8, 
Kxiii.  11).  This  is  the  standing  expression  for  the  appearance 
Df  all  male  Israelites  in  the  temple  at  the  three  high  festivals, 
RS  prescribed  by  the  law,  and  then  for  visits  to  the  temple 
generally  (cf.  Ps.  xlii.  3,  Ixxxiv.  8).  "  My  face"  (panai)  : 
according  to  Ewald,  §  279,  c,  this  is  used  with  the  passive  to 
designate  the  subject  ("  to  be  seen  by  the  face  of  God")  ;  but 
why  not  rather  take  it  as  an  adverbial  accusative,  "  in  the  face 
of,"  or  "in  front  of,"  as  it  is  used  interchangeably  with  the  pre 
positions  ?,  DN?  and  *?$  ?  It  is  possible  that  ^^  is  pointed 
as  it  is  here,  and  in  Ex.  xxxiv.  24  and  Deut.  xxxi.  11,  instead 
of  rriK-^—like  TOT  for  ^,  in  Ex.  xxiii.  15,  xxxiv.  20,— for  the 
purpose  of  avoiding  an  expression  which  might  be  so  easily  mis 
understood  as  denoting  a  sight  of  God  with  the  bodily  eye.  But 
the  niplial  is  firmly  established  in  Ex.  xxiii.  17,  xxxlv.  23,  and 
1  Sam.  i.  22  ;  and  in  the  Mishnah  and  Talmud  the  terms  PIJ&O 
and  1VKT  are  applied  without  hesitation  to  appearance  before 
God  at  the  principal  feasts.  They  visited  the  temple  diligently 
enough  indeed,  but  who  had  required  this  at  their  hand,  i.e. 
required  them  to  do  this  ?  Jehovah  certainly  had  not.  "  To 
tread  my  courts"  is  in  apposition  to  this,  which  it  more  clearly 
defines.  Jehovah  did  not  want  them  to  appear  before  His  face, 
i.e.  He  did  not  wish  for  this  spiritless  and  undevotional  tramping 
thither,  this  mere  opus  operatum,  which  might  as  well  have  been 
omitted,  since  it  only  wore  out  the  floor. — Ver.  13a.  Because 


02  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAHT. 

they  had  not  performed  what  Jehovah  commanded  as  lie  com 
manded  it,  He  expressly  forbids  them  to  continue  it.  "  Continue 
not  to  bring  lying  meat-offering ;  abomination  incense  is  it  to  m?" 
Mincliali  (the  meat-offering)  was  the  vegetable  offering,  as  dis 
tinguished  from  zebach,  the  animal  sacrifice.  It  is  called  a 
"  lying  meat-offering,"  as  being  a  hypocritical  dead  work,  be 
hind  which  there  was  none  of  the  feeling  which  it  appeared 
to  express.  In  the  second  clause  the  Sept.,  Vulg.,  Gesenius, 
and  others  adopt  the  rendering  "  incense — an  abomination  is 
it  to  me,"  ketoreth  being  taken  as  the  name  of  the  daily  burning 
of  incense  upon  the  golden  altar  in  the  holy  place  (Ex.  xxx.  8). 
But  neither  in  Ps.  cxli.  2,  where  prayer  is  offered  by  one  who 
is  not  a  priest,  nor  in  the  passage  before  us,  where  the  refer 
ence  is  not  to  the  priesthood,  but  to  the  people  and  to  their 
deeds,  is  this  continual  incense  to  be  thought  of.  Moreover,  it 
is  much  more  natural  to  regard  the  word  ketoreth  not  as  a  bold 
absolute  case,  but,  according  to  the  conjunctive  darga  with 
which  it  is  marked,  as  constructive  rather;  and  this  is  perfectly 
allowable.  The  meat-offering  is  called  "incense"  (ketoreth)  with 
reference  to  the  so-called  azcarah,  i.e.  that  portion  which  the 
priest  burned  upon  the  altar,  to  bring  the  grateful  offerer  into 
remembrance  before  God  (called  "burning  the  memorial,"  hiktir 
azcdrdhj  in  Lev.  ii.  2).  As  a  general  rule,  this  was  accompanied 
with  incense  (ch.  Ixvi.  3),  the  whole  of  which  was  placed  upon 
the  altar,  and  not  merely  a  small  portion  of  it.  The  meat-offer 
ing,  with  its  sweet-smelling  savour,  was  merely  the  form,  which 
served  as  an  outward  expression  of  the  thanksgiving  for  God's 
blessing,  or  the  longing  for  His  blessing,  which  really  ascended 
in  prayer.  But  in  their  case  the  form  had  no  such  meaning.  It 
was  nothing  but  the  form,  with  which  they  thought  they  had 
satisfied  God ;  and  therefore  it  was  an  abomination  to  Him. 

Ver.  13&.  God  was  just  as  little  pleased  with  their  punc 
tilious  observance  of  the  feasts :  "  New-moon  and  Sabbath, 
calling  of  festal  meetings  .  .  .  /  cannot  bear  ungodliness  and 
a  festal  crowd?  The  first  objective  notions,  which  are  logi 
cally  governed  by  "I  cannot  bear"  (73WTl6:  literally,  a 
future  hoplial — I  am  unable,  incapable,  viz.  to  bear,  which 
may  be  supplied,  according  to  Ps.  ci.  5,  Jer.  xliv.  22,  Prov. 
xxx.  21),  become  absolute  cases  here,  on  account  of  another 
grammatical  object  presenting  itself  in  the  last  two  nouns : 


CHAP.  I.  14.  93 

"ungodliness    and  a  festal  crowd."      As  for  new-moon    and 

o 

Sabbath  (the  latter  always  signifies  the  weekly  Sabbath  when 
construed  with  chodesh), — and,  in  fact,  the  calling  of  meetings 
of  the  whole  congregation  on  the  weekly  Sabbath  and  high 
festivals,  which  was  a  simple  duty  according  to  Lev.  xxiii., — 
Jehovah  could  not  endure  festivals  associated  with  wickedness. 
rnvjJ  (from  "W,  to  press,  or  crowd  thickly  together)  is  synony 
mous  with  N"]i?J?,  so  far  as  its  immediate  signification  is  con 
cerned,  as  Jer.  ix.  1  clearly  shows,  just  as  iravrfjvpis  is 
synonymous  with  e/cfcX^aia.  |N£  (from  jw,  to  breathe)  is  moral 
worthlessness,  regarded  as  an  utter  absence  of  all  that  has 
true  essence  and  worth  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  prophet  in 
tentionally  joins  these  two  nouns  together.  A  densely  crowded 
festal  meeting,  combined  with  inward  emptiness  and  barrenness 
on  the  part  of  those  who  were  assembled  together,  was  a  con 
tradiction  which  God  could  not  endure. 

Yer.  14.  He  gives  a  still  stronger  expression  to  His  repug 
nance  :  "  Your  new-moons  and  your  festive  seasons  my  soul 
liateth ;  they  have  become  a  burden  to  me;  I  am  weary  of  bear 
ing  tliem?  As  the  soul  (nephesh)  of  a  man,  regarded  as  the 
band  which  unites  together  bodily  and  spiritual  life,  though  it 
is  not  the  actual  principle  of  self-consciousness,  is  yet  the  place 
in  which  he  draws,  as  it  were,  the  circle  of  self-consciousness,  so 
as  to  comprehend  the  whole  essence  of  His  being  in  the  single 
thought  of  "I;"  so,  according  to  a  description  taken  from  god 
like  man,  the  "  soul"  (nephesh)  of  God,  as  the  expression  "  my 
soul"  indicates,  is  the  centre  of  His  being,  regarded  as  encircled 
and  pervaded  (personated)  by  self-consciousness  ;  and  therefore, 
whatever  the  soul  of  God  hates  (vid.  Jer.  xv.  1)  or  loves 
(ch.  xlii.  1),  is  hated  or  loved  in  the  inmost  depths  and  to 
the  utmost  bounds  of  His  being  (Psycho!,  p.  218).  Thus  He 
hated  each  and  all  of  the  festivals  that  were  kept  in  Jerusalem, 
whether  the  beginnings  of  the  month,  or  the  high  feast-days 
(moadim,  in  which,  according  to  Lev.  xxiii.,  the  Sabbath  was 
also  included)  observed  in  the  course  of  the  month.  For  a 
/ong  time  past  they  had  become  a  burden  and  annoyance  to 
Him  :  His  long-suffering  was  weary  of  such  worship.  "  To 
bear"  (Kfett,  in  Isaiah,  even  in  ch.  xviii.  3,  for  HNb  or  riKJ?,  and 
here  for  riKB'7 :  Ewald,  §  285,  c)  has  for  its  object  the  seasons 
of  worship  already  mentioned. 


94  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Ver.  15.  Their  self-righteousness,  so  far  as  it  rested  upon 
sacrifices  and  festal  observances,  was  now  put  to  shame,  and 
the  last  inward  bulwark  of  the  sham  holy  nation  was  destroyed: 
"  And  if  ye  stretch  out  your  hands,  I  hide  my  eyes  from  you;  if 
ye  make  ever  so  much  praying,  I  do  not  hear  :  your  hands  are  full 
of  blood"  Their  praying  was  also  an  abomination  to  God. 
Prayer  is  something  common  to  man :  it  is  the  interpreter  of 
religious  feeling,  which  intervenes  and  mediates  between  God 
and  man  j1  it  is  the  true  spiritual  sacrifice.  The  law  contains 
no  command  to  pray,  and,  with  the  exception  of  Deut.  xxvi., 
no  form  of  prayer.  Praying  is  so  natural  to  man  as  man,  that 
there  was  no  necessity  for  any  precept  to  enforce  this,  the  funda 
mental  expression  of  the  true  relation  to  God.  The  prophet 
therefore  comes  to  prayer  last  of  all,  so  as  to  trace  back  their 
sham-holiness,  which  was  corrupt  even  to  this  the  last  foun 
dation,  to  its  real  nothingness.  "  Spread  out,"  parash,  or  pi. 
peresh,  to  stretch  out ;  used  with  cappaim  to  denote  swimming 
in  ch.  xxv.  11.  It  is  written  here  before  a  strong  suffix,  as  in 
many  other  passages,  e.g.  ch.  Hi.  12,  with  the  inflection  i  instead 
of  e.  This  was  the  gesture  of  a  man  in  prayer,  who  spread  out 
his  hands,  and  when  spread  out,  stretched  them  towards  heaven, 
or  to  the  most  holy  place  in  the  temple,  and  indeed  (as  if  with 
the  feeling  of  emptiness  and  need,  and  with  a  desire  to  receive 
divine  gifts)  held  up  the  hollow  or  palm  of  his  hand  (cappaim  : 
cf.  tendere  palmas,  e.g.  Virg.  A  en.  xii.  196,  tenditque  ad  sidera 
palmas).  However  much  they  might  stand  or  lie  before  Him  in 
the  attitude  of  prayer,  Jehovah  hid  His  eyes,  i.e.  His  omniscience 
knew  nothing  of  it ;  and  even  though  they  might  pray  loud  and 

1  The  primary  idea  of  hithpallel  and  tephillah  is  not  to  be  obtained  from 
Deut.  ix.  18  and  Ezra  x.  1,  as  Dietrich  and  Fiirst  suppose,  who  make 
liitlipallel  equivalent  to  hithnappel,  to  throw  one's  self  clown  ;  but  from  1  Sam. 
ii.  25,  "  If  a  man  sin  against  a  man,  the  authorities  right  him"  ( D^n'px  ^21 : 
it  is  quite  a  mistake  to  maintain  that  Elohim  cannot  have  this  meaning),  i.e. 
they  can  set  right  the  relation  which  he  has  disturbed.  "  But  if  one  sin 
against  Jehovah,  who  shall  mediate  for  him  (ip'p^BrV  "'ID,  quis  intercedat 
pro  eo)?"  We  may  see  from  this  that  prayer  is  regarded  as  mediation, 
which  sets  right  and  establishes  fellowship  ;  and  Jiitlipallel  signifies  to  make 
one's  self  a  healer  of  divisions,  or  to  settle  for  one's  self,  to  strive  after  a  settle 
ment  (si'fei,  pro  se,  intercedcre :  cf.  Job  xix.  16,  hitlichatmen,  sibi  propitium 
facere ;  xiii.  27,  hithchakkah,  sibi  insculpere^  like  the  Arabic  ichtatta,  to  bound 
off  for  one's  self). 


CHAP.  I.  16.  95 

long  (gam  chi,  etiamsi :  compare  the  simple  chi,  Jer.  xiv.  12), 
He  was,  as  it  were,  deaf  to  it  all.  We  should  expect  chi  here 
to  introduce  the  explanation  ;  but  the  more  excited  the  speaker, 
the  shorter  and  more  unconnected  his  words.  The  plural 
damim  always  denotes  human  blood  as  the  result  of  some 
unnatural  act,  and  then  the  bloody  deed  and  the  bloodguilti- 
ness  itself.  The  plural  number  neither  refers  to  the  quantity 
nor  to  the  separate  drops,  but  is  the  plural  of  production,  which 
Dietrich  has  so  elaborately  discussed  in  his  Abhandlung,  p.  40.1 
The  terrible  damim  stands  very  emphatically  before  the  govern 
ing  verb,  pointing  to  many  murderous  acts  that  had  been  com 
mitted,  and  deeds  of  violence  akin  to  murder.  Not,  indeed, 
that  we  are  to  understand  the  words  as  meaning  that  there  was 

o 

really  blood  upon  their  hands  when  they  stretched  them  out  in 
prayer ;  but  before  God,  from  whom  no  outward  show  can 
hide  the  true  nature  of  things,  however  clean  they  might  have 
washed  themselves^  they  still  dripped  with  blood.  The  expostu 
lations  of  the  people  against  the  divine  accusations  have  thus 
been  negatively  set  forth  and  met  in  vers.  11-15  :  Jehovah 
could  not  endure  their  work-righteous  worship,  which  was  thus 
defiled  with  unrighteous  works,  even  to  murder  itself.  The 
divine  accusation  is  now  positively  established  in  vers.  16, 17,  by 
the  contrast  drawn  between  the  true  righteousness  of  which  the 

o 

accused  were  destitute,  and  the  false  righteousness  of  which  they 
boasted.  The  crushing  charge  is  here  changed  into  an  admoni 
tory  appeal;  and  the  love  which  is  hidden  behind  the  wrath,  and 
would  gladly  break  through,  already  begins  to  disclose  itself. 
There  are  eight  admonitions.  The  first  three  point  to  the  re 
moval  of  evil;  the  other  five  to  the  performance  of  what  is  good. 
Ver.  16.  The  first  three  run  thus:  "  Washy  clean  your 
selves  ;  put  away  the  badness  of  your  doings  from  the  range  of 
my  eyes ;  cease  to  do  evil?  This  is  not  only  an  advance  from 
figurative  language  to  the  most  literal,  but  there  is  also  an  ad 
vance  in  what  is  said.  The  first  admonition  requires,  primarily 
and  above  all,  purification  from  the  sins  committed,  by  means 

*  As  cliittah  signified  corn  standing  in  the  field,  ?nd  cTiittim  corn  threshed 
and  brought  to  the  market,  so  damim  was  not  blood  when  flowing  through 
the  veins,  but  when  it  had  flowed  out, — in  other  words,  when  it  had  been 
violently  shed.  (For  the  Talmudic  misinterpretation  of  the  true  state  of 
the  case,  see  my  Genesis,  p.  626.) 


96  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  forgiveness  sought  for  and  obtained.  WasJi:  rachatzu,  from 
rachatz,  in  the  frequent  middle  sense  of  washing  one's  self.  Clean 
yourselves :  Mzzaccu,  with  the  tone  upon  the  last  syllable,  is  not 
the  niphal  of  zdkak,  as  the  first  plur.  imper.  niph.  of  such  verbs 
has  generally  and  naturally  the  tone  upon  the  penultimate 
(see  ch.  Hi.  11 ;  Num.  xvii.  10),  but  the  hithpael  of  zacali  for 
hizdaccu,  with  the  preformative  Tav  resolved  into  the  first  radical 
letter,  as  is  very  common  in  the  Idthpael  (Ges.  §  54,  2,  b).  Ac 
cording  to  the  difference  between  the  two  synonyms  (to  wash 
one's  self,  to  clean  one's  self),  the  former  must  be  understood  as 
referring  to  the  one  great  act  of  repentance  on  the  part  of  a 
man  who  is  turning  to  God,  the  latter  to  the  daily  repentance  of 
one  who  has  so  turned.  The  second  admonition  requires  them 
to  place  themselves  in  the  light  of  the  divine  countenance,  and 
put  away  the  evil  of  their  doings,  which  was  intolerable  to  pure 
eyes  (Hab.  i.  13).  They  \vere  to  wrestle  against  the  wickedness 
to  which  their  actual  sin  had  grown,  until  at  length  it  entirely 
disappeared.  Neged,  according  to  its  radical  meaning,  signifies 
prominence  (compare  the  Arabic  negd,  high  land  which  is  visible 
at  a  great  distance),  conspicuousness,  so  that  minneged  is  really 
equivalent  to  ex  apparentia. 

Ver.  17.  Five  admonitions  relating  to  the  practice  of  what 
is  good :  "  Learn  to  do  good,  attend  to  judgment,  set  the  oppressor 
right,  do  justice  to  the  orphan,  conduct  the  cause  of  the  widow.*' 
The  first  admonition  lays  the  foundation  for  the  rest.  They 
were  to  learn  to  do  good, — a  difficult  art,  in  which  a  man  does 
not  become  proficient  merely  by  good  intentions.  "  Learn  to 
do  good  :  "  hetib  is  the  object  to  Hindu  (learn),  regarded  as  an 
accusative;  the  inf.  abs.  jnn  in  ver.  16  takes  the  place  of  the 
object  in  just  the  same  manner.  The  division  of  this  primary 
admonition  into  four  minor  ones  relating  to  the  administration 
of  justice,  may  be  explained  from  the  circumstance  that  no 
other  prophet  directs  so  keen  an  eye  upon  the  state  and  its 
judicial  proceedings  as  Isaiah  has  done.  He  differs  in  this 
respect  from  his  younger  contemporary  Micah,  whose  prophecies 
are  generally  more  ethical  in  their  nature,  whilst  those  of  Isaiah 
have  a  political  character  throughout.  Hence  the  admonitions : 
"  Give  diligent  attention  to  judgment"  (ddrash,  to  devote  one's 
self  to  a  thing  with  zeal  and  assiduity)  ;  and  "  bring  the  op 
pressor  to  the  right  way."  This  is  the  true  rendering,  as 


CHAP.  I.  17.  97 

cMmotz  (from  chdmatz,  to  be  sharp  in  flavour,  glaring  in  appear 
ance,  violent  and  impetuous  in  character)  cannot  well  mean 
"  the  oppressed,"  or  the  man  who  is  deprived  of  his  rights,  as 
most  of  the  early  translators  have  rendered  it,  since  this  form  of 
the  noun,  especially  with  an  immutable  kametz  like  "ri32  rnfaa 
(cf.  HpJ  n>:Jp?),  is  not  used  in  a  passive,  but  in  an  active  or 
attributive  sense  (Ewald,  §  152,  b :  vid.  at  Ps.  cxxxvii.  8)  :  it  has 
therefore  the  same  meaning  as  chometz  in  Ps.  Ixxi.  4,  and  dshok 
in  Jer.  xxii.  3,  which  is  similar  in  its  form.  But  if  chdmotz 
signifies  the  oppressive,  reckless,  churlish  man,  "i$K  cannot 
mean  to  make  happy,  or  to  congratulate,  or  to  set  up,  or,  as  in 
the  talmudic  rendering,  to  strengthen  (Luzzatto  :  rianimate 
chi  e  oppressd)  ;  but,  as  it  is  also  to  be  rendered  in  ch.  iii.  12, 
ix.  15,  to  lead  to  the  straight  road,  or  to  cause  a  person  to  keep 
the  straight  course.  In  the  case  before  us,  where  the  oppressor 
is  spoken  of,  it  means  to  direct  him  to  the  way  of  justice,  to 
keep  him  in  bounds  by  severe  punishment  and  discipline.1  In 
the  same  way  we  find  in  other  passages,  such  as  ch.  xi.  4  and 
Ps.  Ixxii.  4,  severe  conduct  towards  oppressors  mentioned  in 
connection  with  just  treatment  of  the  poor.  There  follow  two 
admonitions  relating  to  widows  and  orphans.  Widows  and 
orphans,  as  well  as  foreigners,  were  the  proteges  of  God  and 
His  law,  standing  under  His  especial  guardianship  and  care 
(see,  for  example,  Ex.  xxii.  22  (21),  cf.  21  (20).  "  Do  justice 
to  the  orphan"  (shdphatt  as  in  Deut.  xxv.  1,  is  a  contracted 
expression  for  shdphat  mishpat)  :  for  if  there  is  not  even  a 
settlement  or  verdict  in  their  cause,  this  is  the  most  crying 
injustice  of  all,  as  neither  the  form  nor  the  appearance  of 
justice  is  preserved.  "  Conduct  the  cause  of  the  widows : "  2V1 
with  an  accusative,  as  in  ch.  li.  22,  the  only  other  passage  in 
which  it  occurs,  is  a  contracted  form  for  2"n  ^"i.  Thus  all  the 
grounds  of  self-defence,  which  existed  in  the  hearts  of  the 
accused,  are  both  negatively  and  positively  overthrown.  They 

1  The  Talmud  varies  in  its  explanation  of  cliamoz:  in  one  instance  it  is 
applied  to  a  judge  who  lets  his  sentence  be  thoroughly  leavened  before 
pronouncing  it ;  in  another  the  chamuz  is  said  to  signify  a  person  robbed 
and  injured,  in  opposition  to  cliomez  (b.  Sanhedrin  35a).  It  is  an  instruc 
tive  fact  in  relation  to  the  idea  suggested  by  the  word,  that,  according  to 
Joma  39&,  a  man  who  had  not  only  taken  possession  of  his  own  inheritance, 
but  had  seized  upon  another  person's  also,  bore  the  nickname  of  ben  cldmzon 
as  long  as  he  lived. 

VOL.  I.  O 


98  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

are  thundered  down  and  put  to  shame.  The  law  (thorah), 
announced  in  ver.  10,  has  been  preached  to  them.  The  prophet 
has  cast  away  the  husks  of  their  dead  works,  and  brought  out 
the  moral  kernel  of  the  law  in  its  universal  application. 

The  first  leading  division  of  the  address  is  brought  to  a  close, 
and  ver.  18  contains  the  turning-point  between  the  two  parts 
into  which  it  is  divided.  Hitherto  Jehovah  has  spoken  to  His 
people  in  wrath.  But  His  love  began  to  move  even  in  the 
admonitions  in  vers.  16,  17.  And  now  this  love,  which  desired 
not  Israel's  destruction,  but  Israel's  inward  and  outward  salva 
tion,  breaks  fully  through.  Ver.  18.  "  0  come,  and  let  us 
reason  together,  saitJi  Jehovah.  If  your  sins  come  forth  like 
scarlet  cloth,  they  shall  become  white  as  snow;  if  they  are  red 
as  crimson,  they  shall  come  forth  like  wool ! "  Jehovah  here 
challenges  Israel  to  a  formal  trial :  nocach  is  thus  used  in  a 
reciprocal  sense,  and  with  the  same  meaning  as  nishpat  in 
ch.  xliii.  26  (Ges.  §  51,  2).  In  such  a  trial  Israel  must  lose, 
for  Israel's  self-righteousness  rests  upon  sham  righteousness  ; 
and  this  sham  righteousness,  when  rightly  examined,  is  but 
unrighteousness  dripping  with  blood.  It  is  taken  for  granted 
that  this  must  be  the  result  of  the  investigation.  Israel 
is  therefore  worthy  of  death.  Yet  Jehovah  will  not  treaf 
Israel  according  to  His  retributive  justice,  but  according  to 
His  free  compassion.  He  will  remit  the  punishment,  and 
not  only  regard  the  sin  as  not  existing,  but  change  it  into  its 
very  opposite.  The  reddest  possible  sin  shall  become,  through 
His  mercy,  the  purest  white.  On  the  two  hiphils  here  applied 
to  colour,  see  Ges.  §  53,  2 ;  though  he  gives  the  meaning  in 
correctly,  viz.  "  to  take  a  colour,"  whereas  the  words  signify 
rather  to  emit  a  colour :  not  colorem  accipere,  but  colorem  dare. 
Shdni,  bright  red  (the  plural  shdnim,  as  in  Prov.  xxxi.  21, 
signifies  materials  dyed  with  shdni),  and  told,  warm  colour,  are 
simply  different  names  for  the  same  colour,  viz.  the  crimson 
obtained  from  the  cochineal  insect,  color  coccineus.  The  re 
presentation  of  the  work  of  grace  promised  by  God  as  a  change 
from  red  to  white,  is  founded  upon  the  symbolism  of  colours, 
quite  as  much  as  when  the  saints  in  the  Revelation  (ch.  xix.  8) 
are  described  as  clothed  in  white  raiment,  w7hilst  the  clothing  of 
Babylon  is  purple  and  scarlet  (ch.  xvii.  4).  Red  is  the  colour 
of  fire,  and  therefore  of  life :  the  blood  is  red  because  life  is  a 


CHAP.  I.  19,  20.  99 

fiery  process.  For  this  reason  the  heifer,  from  which  the  ashes 
of  purification  were  obtained  for  those  who  had  been  defiled 
through  contact  with  the  dead,  was  to  be  red  ;  and  the 
sprinkling-brush,  with  which  the  unclean  were  sprinkled,  was 
to  be  tied  round  with  a  band  of  scarlet  wool.  But  red  as  con 
trasted  with  white,  the  colour  of  light  (Matt.  xvii.  2),  is  the 
colour  of  selfish,  covetous,  passionate  life,  which  is  self-seeking 
in  its  nature,  which  goes  out  of  itself  only  to  destroy,  and 
drives  about  xvith  wild  tempestuous  violence :  it  is  therefore  the 
colour  of  wrath  and  sin.  It  is  generally  supposed  that  Isaiah 
speaks  of  red  as  the  colour  of  sin,  because  sin  ends  in  murder ; 
and  this  is  not  really  wrong,  though  it  is  too  restricted.  Sin  is 
called  red,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  burning  heat  which  consumes  a 
man,  and  when  it  breaks  forth  consumes  his  fellow-man  as 
well.  According  to  the  biblical  view,  throughout,  sin  stands 
in  the  same  relation  to  what  is  well-pleasing  to  God,  and  wrath 
in  the  same  relation  to  love  or  grace,  as  fire  to  light ;  and 
therefore  as  red  to  white,  or  black  to  white,  for  red  and  black 
are  colours  which  border  upon  one  another.  In  the  Song  of 
Solomon  (ch.  vii.  5).  the  black  locks  of  Shulamith  are  described 
as  being  "  like  purple,"  and  Homer  applies  the  same  epithet  to 
the  dark  waves  of  the  sea.  But  the  ground  of  this  relation  lies 
deeper  still.  Red  is  the  colour  of  fire,  which  flashes  out  of 
darkness  and  returns  to  it  again  ;  whereas  white  without  any 
admixture  of  darkness  represents  the  pure,  absolute  triumph  of 
light.  It  is  a  deeply  significant  symbol  of  the  act  of  justifica 
tion.  Jehovah  offers  to  Israel  an  actio  forensis,  out  of  which 
it  shall  come  forth  justified  by  grace,  although  it  has  merited 
death  on  account  of  its  sins.  The  righteousness,  white  as  snow 
and  wool,  with  which  Israel  comes  forth,  is  a  gift  conferred 
upon  it  out  of  pure  compassion,  without  being  conditional  upon 
any  legal  performance  whatever. 

But  after  the  restoration  of  Israel  in  integrum  by  this  act 
of  grace,  the  rest  would  unquestionably  depend  upon  the 
conduct  of  Israel  itself.  According  to  Israel's  own  decision 
would  Jehovah  determine  Israel's  future.  Yers.  19,  20.  "  If 
ye  then  shall  willingly  hear,  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the 
land;  if  ye  shall  obstinately  rebel,  ye  shall  be  eaten  by  the 
sword :  for  the  mouth  of  Jehovah  hath  spoken  it"  After  their 
justification,  both  blessing  arid  cursing  lay  once  more  before 


100  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  justified,  as  they  had  both  been  long  before  proclaimed 
by  the  law  (compare  ver.  196  with  Deut.  xxviii.  3  sqq.,  Lev 
xxvi.  3  sqq.,  and  ver.  206  with  the  threat  of  vengeance  with 
the  sword  in  Lev.  xxvi.  25).  The  promise  of  eating,  i.e.  of 
the  full  enjoyment  of  domestic  blessings,  and  therefore  of 
settled,  peaceful  rest  at  home,  is  placed  in  contrast  with  the 
curse  of  being  eaten  with  the  sword.  Chereb  (the  sword)  is 
the  accusative  of  the  instrument,  as  in  Ps.  xvii.  13,  14 ;  but 
this  adverbial  construction  without  either  genitive,  adjective,  or 
suffix,  as  in  Ex.  xxx.  20,  is  very  rarely  met  with  (Ges.  §  138, 
Anm.  3)  ;  and  in  the  passage  before  us  it  is  a  bold  construc 
tion  which  the  prophet  allows  himself,  instead  of  saying,  2nn 
DJpSKHj  for  the  sake  of  the  paronomasia  (Bottcher,  Collectanea, 
p.  161).  In  the  conditional  clauses  the  two  futures  are  fol 
lowed  by  two  preterites  (compare  Lev.  xxvi.  21,  which  is  more 
in  conformity  with  our  western  mode  of  expression),  inasmuch 
as  obeying  and  rebelling  are  both  of  them  consequences  of 
an  act  of  will :  if  ye  shall  be  willing,  and  in  consequence 
of  this  obey ;  if  ye  shall  refuse,  and  rebel  against  Jehovah. 
They  are  therefore,  strictly  speaking,  perfecta  consecutiva. 
According  to  the  ancient  mode  of  writing,  the  passage  vers. 
18-20  formed  a  separate  parasliah  by  themselves,  viz.  a 
sethumah,  or  parashah  indicated  by  spaces  left  within  the  line. 
The  piskah  after  ver.  20  corresponds  to  a  long  pause  in  the 
mind  of  the  speaker.  —  Will  Israel  tread  the  saving  path  of 
forgiveness  thus  opened  before  it,  and  go  on  to  renewed 
obedience ;  and  will  it  be  possible  for  it  to  be  brought  back  by 
this  path  ?  Individuals  possibly  may,  but  not  the  whole.  The 
divine  appeal  therefore  changes  now  into  a  mournful  com 
plaint.  So  peaceful  a  solution  as  this  of  the  discord  between 
Jehovah  and  His  children  was  not  to  be  hoped  for.  Jerusalem 
was  far  too  depraved. 

Ver.  21.  "  How  is  she  become  a  harlot,  the  faithful  citadel! 
she,  full  of  rigid,  lodged  in  righteousness,  and  now — murderers" 
It  is  the  keynote  of  an  elegy  (kinali)  which  is  sounded  here. 
n^tf,  and  but  rarely  T^,  which  is  an  abbreviated  form,  is  ex 
pressive  of  complaint  and  amazement.  This  longer  form,  like 
a  long-drawn  sigh,  is  a  characteristic  of  the  Jdnali.  The  kinoth 
(Lamentations)  of  Jeremiah  commence  with  it,  and  receive 
their  title  from  it ;  whereas  the  shorter  form  is  indicative  of 


CHAP.  I.  21.  101 

scornful  complaining,  and  is  characteristic  of  the  mdtsJwl  (e.g. 
ch.  xiv.  4,  12  ;  Mic.  ii.  4).  From  this  word,  which  gives 
the  keynote,  the  rest  all  follows,  soft,  full,  monotonous,  long 
drawn  out  and  slow,  just  in  the  style  of  an  elegy.  We  may 
see  clearly  enough  that  forms  like  ^Npo  for  fl^.-?9?  softened  by 
lengthening,  were  adapted  to  elegiac  compositions,  from  the 
first  verse  of  the  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah,  where  three  of 
these  forms  occur.  Jerusalem  had  previously  been  a  faithful 
city,  i.e.  one  stedfastly  adhering  to  the  covenant  of  Jehovah 
with  her  (vid.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  37).1  This  covenant  was  a  marriage 
covenant.  And  she  had  broken  it,  and  had  thereby  become  a 
zondh  (harlot), — a  prophetic  view,  the  germs  of  which  had  already 
been  given  in  the  Pentateuch,  where  the  worship  of  idols  on 
the  part  of  Israel  is  called  whoring  after  them  (Deut.  xxxi.  16; 
Ex.  xxxiv.  15,  16  ;  in  all,  seven  times).  It  was  not,  however, 
merely  gross  outward  idolatry  which  made  the  church  of  God 
a  "  harlot,"  but  infidelity  of  heart,  in  whatever  form  it  might 
express  itself ;  so  that  Jesus  described  the  people  of  His  own 
time  as  an  "  adulterous  generation,"  notwithstanding  the  phari- 
saical  strictness  with  which  the  worship  of  Jehovah  was  then 
observed.  For,  as  the  verse  before  us  indicates,  this  marriage 
relation  was  founded  upon  rigid  and  righteousness  in  the  broadest 
sense  :  mishpat,  "  right"  i.e.  a  realization  of  right  answering  to 
the  will  of  God  as  positively  declared  ;  and  tzedek,  "  righteous 
ness"  i.e.  a  righteous  state  moulded  by  that  will,  or  a  righteous 
course  of  conduct  regulated  according  to  it  (somewhat  different, 
therefore,  from  the  more  qualitative  tzedakali).  Jerusalem  was 
once  full  of  such  right ;  and  righteousness  was  not  merely  there 
in  the  form  of  a  hastily  passing  guest,  but  had  come  down  from 
above  to  take  up  her  permanent  abode  in  Jerusalem :  she  tarried 
there  day  and  night  as  if  it  were  her  home.  The  prophet  Ijad 
in  his  mind  the  times  of  David  and  Solomon,  and  also  more 
especially  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat  (about  one  hundred  and 
fifty  years  before  Isaiah's  appearance),  who  restored  the  ad 
ministration  of  justice,  which  had  fallen  into  neglect  since  the 

1  We  have  translated  the  word  kiryah  "  citadel "  (Burg),  instead  of 
"city;"  but  Burg  also  became  the  name  of  the  town  which  sprang  up 
around  the  citadel,  and  the  persons  living  in  and  around  the  Burg  or  citadel 
were  called  lurgenses,  "  burghers."  Jerusalem,  which  was  also  called  Zion, 
might  be  called,  with  quite  as  much  right,  a  citadel  (Bury),  as  a  city. 


102  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

closing  years  of  Solomon's  reign  and  the  time  of  Rehoboam 
and  Abijah,  to  which  Asa's  reformation  had  not  extended,  and 
re-organized  it  entirely  in  the  spirit  of  the  law.  It  is  possible 
also  that  Jehoiada,  the  high  priest  in  the  time  of  Joash,  may 
have  revived  the  institutions  of  Jehoshaphat,  so  far  as  they  had 
fallen  into  disuse  under  his  three  godless  successors  ;  but  even 
in  the  second  half  of  the  reign  of  Joash,  the  administration  of 
justice  fell  into  the  same  disgraceful  state,  at  least  as  compared 
with  the  times  of  David,  Solomon,  and  Jehoshaphat,  as  that 
in  which  Isaiah  found  it.  The  glaring  contrast  between  the 
present  and  the  past  is  indicated  by  the  expression  u  and  now? 
In  all  the  correct  MSS.  and  editions,  mislipat  is  not  accented  with 
zakeph,  but  with  rebia;  and  bdh9  which  ought  to  have  zakeph,  is 
accented  with  tiphchah,  on  account  of  the  brevity  of  the  follow 
ing  clause.  In  this  way  the  statement  as  to  the  past  condition 
is  sufficiently  distinguished  from  that  relating  to  the  present.1 
Formerly  righteousness,  now  "  murderers  "  (merazzechim),  and 
indeed,  as  distinguished  from  rozechim,  murderers  by  profes 
sion,  who  formed  a  band,  like  king  Ahab  and  his  son  (2  Kings 
vi.  32).  The  contrast  was  as  glaring  as  possible,  since  murder 
is  the  direct  opposite,  the  most  crying  violation,  of  righteousness. 
The  complaint  now  turns  from  the  city  generally  to  the 
authorities,  and  first  of  all  figuratively.  Yer.  22.  "  Thy  silver 
has  become  dross,  thy  drink  mutilated  with  ivater"  It  is 
upon  this  passage  that  the  figurative  language  of  Jer.  vi.  27 
sqq.  and  Ezek.  xxii.  18-22  is  founded.  Silver  is  here  a  figu 
rative  representation  of  the  princes  and  lords,  with  special 
reference  to  the  nobility  of  character  naturally  associated  with 
nobility  of  birth  and  rank  ;  for  silver  —  refined  silver  —  is  an 
imasje  of  all  that  is  noble  and  pure,  light  in  all  its  purity  being 
reflected  by  it  (Bahr,  /Symbolik,  i.  284).  The  princes  and  lords 
had  once  possessed  all  the  virtues  which  the  Latins  called  unitedly 
candor  ardmi,  viz,  the  virtues  of  magnanimity,  affability,  im- 


1  It  is  well  known  that  rebia  has  less  force  as  a  disjunctive  than  tiphchah, 
and  that  zakeph  is  stronger  than  either.  With  regard  to  the  law,  according 
to  which  bah  has  rebia  instead  of  zakeph^  see  Bar,  Thorath  Emeth,  p.  70. 
To  the  copies  enumerated  by  Luzzatto,  as  having  the  correct  accentuation 
(including  Brescia  1494,  and  Venice,  by  J.  B.  Chayira,  1526),  we  may  add 
Plantiu  (1582),  Buxtorf  (1618),  Nissel  (1662),  and  many  others  (cf.  Ducli- 
selt's  Billia  accentuata,  which  is  not  yet  out  of  date). 


CHAP.  I.  23,  24.  103 

partiality,  and  superiority  to  bribes.  Tins  silver  had  now  become 
Isigim,  dross,  or  base  metal  separated  (thrown  off)  from  silver 
in  the  process  of  refining  (sig,  pi.  sigim,  siggim  from  sug,  recedere, 
refuse  left  in  smelting,  or  dross  :  cf.  Prov.  xxv.  4,  xxvi.  23). 
A  second  figure  compares  the  leading  men  of  the  older  Jeru- 
selem  to  good  wine,  such  as  drinkers  like.  The  word  employed 
here  (sobe)  must  have  been  used  in  this  sense  by  the  more 
cultivated  classes  in  Isaiah's  time  (cf.  Nahum  i.  10).  This 
pure,  strong,  and  costly  wine  was  now  adulterated  with  water 
(lit.  castraturn,  according  to  Pliny's  expression  in  the  Natural 
History :  compare  the  Horatian  phrase,  jugulare  Falernum), 
and  therefore  its  strength  and  odour  were  weakened,  and  its 
worth  was  diminished.  The  present  was  nothing  but  the  dross 
and  shadow  of  the  past. 

In  ver.  23  the  prophet  says  this  without  a  figure  :  "  Tliy 
rulers  are  rebellious,  and  companions  of  thieves ;  every  one  lovetli 
presents,  and  hunteth  after  payment ;  the  orphan  they  right  not) 
and  the  cause  of  the  widow  has  no  access  to  them"  In  two 
words  the  prophet  depicts  the  contemptible  baseness  of  the 
national  rulers  (sdrim).  He  describes  first  of  all  their  baseness 
in  relation  to  God,  with  the  alliterative  sorerim :  rebellious, 
refractory  ;  and  then,  in  relation  to  men,  companions  of  thieves, 
inasmuch  as  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  bribed  by  presents 
of  stolen  goods  to  acts  of  injustice  towards  those  who  had  been 
robbed.  They  not  only  willingly  accepted  such  bribes,  and 
that  not  merely  a  few  of  them,  but  every  individual  belonging 
to  the  rank  of  princes  (cullo,  equivalent  to  haccol,  the  whole : 
every  one  lovetli  gifts)  ;  but  they  went  eagerly  in  pursuit  of 
them  (rodepli).  It  was  not  peace  (shdlom)  that  they  hunted 
after  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16),  but  shalmonim,  things  that  would  pacify 
their  avarice  ;  not  what  was  good,  but  compensation  for  their 
partiality. — This  was  the  existing  state  of  Jerusalem,  and 
therefore  it  would  hardly  be  likely  to  take  the  way  of  mercy 
opened  before  it  in  ver.  18  ;  consequently  Jehovah  would  avail 
himself  of  other  means  of  setting  it  right : — 

Yer.  24.  "  Therefore,  saying  of  the  Lord,  of  Jehovah  of 
hosts,  of  the  Strong  One  of  Israel:  Ah!  1  will  relieve  myself  on 
mine  adversaries,  and  will  avenge  myself  upon  mine  enemies" 
Salvation  through  judgment  was  the  only  means  of  improve 
ment  and  preservation  left  to  the  congregation,  which  called 


104  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

itself  by  the  name  of  Jerusalem.  Jeliovali  would  therefore 
afford  satisfaction  to  His  holiness,  and  administer  a  judicial 
sifting  to  Jerusalem.  There  is  no  other  passage  in  Isaiah  in 
which  we  meet  with  such  a  crowding  together  of  different 

O  O 

names  of  God  as  we  do  here  (compare  ch.  xix.  4,  iii.  1, 
x.  16,  33,  iii.  15).  With  three  names,  descriptive  of  the 
irresistible  omnipotence  of  God,  the  irrevocable  decree  of  a 
sifting  judgment  is  sealed.  The  word  BX3,  which  is  used  here 
instead  of  IBS  and  points  back  to  a  verb  E^J,  related  to  Dnj  and 
n^n?  corresponds  to  the  deep,  earnest  pathos  of  the  words. 
These  verbs,  which  are  imitations  of  sounds,  all  denote  a  dull 
hollow  groaning.  The  word  used  here,  therefore,  signifies  that 
which  is  spoken  with  significant  secrecy  and  solemn  softness. 
It  is  never  written  absolutely,  but  is  always  followed  by  the 
subject  who  speaks  (saying  of  Jehovah  it  is,  i.e.  Jehovah  says). 
We  meet  with  it  first  of  all  in  Gen.  xxii.  16.  In  the  prophetic 
writings  it  occurs  in  Obadiah  and  Joel,  but  most  frequently  in 
Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel.  It  is  generally  written  at  the  close  of 
the  sentence,  or  parenthetically  in  the  middle  ;  very  rarely  at  the 
commencement,  as  it  is  here  and  in  1  Sam.  ii.  30  and  Ps.  ex.  1. 
The  "  saying  "  commences  with  hoi  (ah  /),  the  painf  ulness  of 
pity  being  mingled  with  the  determined  outbreak  of  wrath. 
By  the  side  of  the  niphal  nikkam  min  (to  be  revenged  upon  a 
person)  we  find  the  niphal  nicham  (lit.  to  console  one's  self). 
The  two  words  are  derived  from  kindred  roots.  The  latter  is 
conjugated  with  #in  the  preformative  syllable,  the  former  with  i, 
according  to  the  older  system  of  vowel-pointing  adopted  in  the 
East.1  Jehovah  would  procure  Himself  relief  from  His  enemies 
by  letting  out  upon  them  the  wrath  with  which  He  had  hitherto 
been  burdened  (Ezek.  v.  13).  He  now  calls  the  masses  of 
Jerusalem  by  their  right  name. 

Ver.  25  states  clearly  in  what  the  revenge  consisted  with 
which  Jehovah  was  inwardly  burdened  (innakmah,  a  cohorta- 
tive  with  the  ah,  indicating  internal  oppression)  :  "  And  I  will 
bring  my  hand  over  thee,  and  ivill  smelt  out  thy  dross  as  ivith 

1  The  so-called  Assyrian  mode  of  pointing,  which  was  entirely  sup 
planted,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  relics,  by  the  Tiberian  mode  which 
now  lies  before  us,  has  no  seghol  (see  DMZ.  xviii.  322).  According  to 
Luzzatto  (Prnleg.  p.  200),  they  wrote  ektol  instead  of  iktol,  to  avoid  con 
founding  it  with  ^bpN  which  was  pronounced  ikiol,  and  not  yiktol 


CHAP.  I.  25.  105 

alkali,  and  will  clear  away  all  thy  lead"  As  long  as  God 
leaves  a  person's  actions  or  sufferings  alone,  His  hand,  i.e.  His 
acting,  is  at  rest.  Bringing  the  hand  over  a  person  signifies  a 
movement  of  the  hand,  which  has  been  hitherto  at  rest,  either 
for  the  purpose  of  inflicting  judicial  punishment  upon  the 
person  named  (Amos  i.  8  ;  Jer.  vi.  9 ;  Ezek.  xxxviii.  12 ; 
Ps.  Ixxxi.  15),  or  else,  though  this  is  seldom  the  case,  for  the 
purpose  of  saving  him  (Zech.  xiii.  7).  The  reference  here  is 
to  the  divine  treatment  of  Jerusalem,  in  which  punishment  and 
salvation  were  combined — punishment  as  the  means,  salvation 
as  the  end.  The  interposition  of  Jehovah  was,  as  it  were, 
a  smelting,  which  would  sw^eep  away,  not  indeed  Jerusalem 
itself,  but  the  ungodly  in  Jerusalem.  They  are  compared  to 
dross,  or  (as  the  verb  seems  to  imply)  to  ore  mixed  with  dross, 
and,  inasmuch  as  lead  is  thrown  off  in  the  smelting  of  silver, 
to  such  ingredients  of  lead  as  Jehovah  would  speedily  and 
thoroughly  remove,  "like  alkali"  i.e.  "as  if  with  alkali  "  (callor, 
comparatio  decurtata,  for  c  bailor :  for  this  mode  of  dropping 
Beth  after  Caph,  compare  ch.  ix.  3,  Lev.  xxii.  13,  and  many 
other  passages).  By  ledilim  (from  Iddal,  to  separate)  we  are 
to  understand  the  several  pieces  of  stannum  or  lead1  in  which 
the  silver  is  contained,  and  which  are  separated  by  smelting, 
all  the  baser  metals  being  distinguished  from  the  purer  kinds 
by  the  fact  that  they  are  combustible  (i.e.  can  be  oxidized). 
Both  lor,  or  potash  (an  alkali  obtained  from  land-plants),  and 
netlier,  natron  (i.e.  soda,  or  natron  obtained  from  the  ashes  of 
marine  plants,  which  is  also  met  with  in  many  mineral  waters), 
have  been  employed  from  the  very  earliest  times  to  accelerate 
the  process  of  smelting,  for  the  purpose  of  separating  a  metal 
from  its  ore. 

1  Plumbum  nigrum,  says  Pliny,  li.  n.  xxiv.  16,  is  sometimes  found  alone, 
and  sometimes  mixed  with  silver  :  ejus  qui  primus  fluit  infomacibvA  liquor, 
stannum  appellatur.  The  reference  here  is  to  the  lead  separated  from  the 
ore  in  the  process  of  obtaining  pure  silver.  In  the  form  of  powder  this 
dross  is  called  bedil,  and  the  pieces  bedilim;  whereas  opliereth  is  the  name  of 
solid  lead,  obtained  by  simply  melting  down  from  ore  which  does  not  con 
tain  silver.  The  fact  that  bedil  is  also  apparently  used  as  a  name  for  tin, 
may  be  explained  in  the  same  way  as  the  homonymy  of  iron  and  basalt 
(com.  on  Job  xxviii.  2),  and  of  the  oak  and  terebinth.  The  two  metals  are 
called  by  the  same  name  on  account  of  their  having  a  certain  outward 
resemblance,  viz.  iu  softness,  pliability,  colour,  and  specific  gravity. 


106  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Ver.  26.  As  the  threat  couched  in  the  previous  figure  does  not 
point  to  the  destruction,  but  simply  to  the  smelting  of  Jerusa 
lem,  there  is  nothing  strange  in  the  fact  that  in  ver.  26  it  should 

'  O  o 

pass  over  into  a  pure  promise;  the  meltingly  soft  and  yearningly 
mournful  termination  of  the  clauses  with  ayich,  the  keynote  of 
the  later  songs  of  Zion,  being  still  continued.  "And  I  will  bring 
back  thy  judges  as  in  the  olden  time,  and  tliy  counsellors  as  in  the 
beginning ;  afterwards  thou  wilt  be  called  city  of  righteousness, 
faithful  citadel."  The  threat  itself  was,  indeed,  relatively  a 
promise,  inasmuch  as  whatever  could  stand  the  fire  would 
survive  the  judgment ;  and  the  distinct  object  of  this  was  to 
bring  back  Jerusalem  to  the  purer  metal  of  its  own  true  nature. 
But  when  that  had  been  accomplished,  still  more  would  follow. 
The  indestructible  kernel  that  remained  would  be  crystallized, 
since  Jerusalem  would  receive  back  from  Jehovah  the  judges 
and  counsellors  which  it  had  had  in  the  olden  flourishing  times 
of  the  monarchy,  ever  since  it  had  become  the  city  of  David 
and  of  the  temple;  not,  indeed,  the  very  same  persons,  but 
persons  quite  equal  to  them  in  excellence.  Under  such  God- 
given  leaders  Jerusalem  would  become  what  it  had  once  been, 
and  what  it  ought  to  be.  The  names  applied  to  the  city  indi 
cate  the  impression  produced  by  the  manifestation  of  its  true 
nature.  The  second  name  is  written  without  the  article,  as  in 
fact  the  word  kiryah  (city),  with  its  massive,  definite  sound, 
always  is  in  Isaiah.  Thus  did  Jehovah  announce  the  way 
which  it  had  been  irrevocably  determined  that  He  would  take 
with  Israel,  as  the  only  way  to  salvation.  Moreover,  this  was 
the  fundamental  principle  of  the  government  of  God,  the  law 
of  Israel's  history. 

Ver.  27  presents  it  in  a  brief  and  concise  form  :  "  Sion  will 
be  redeemed  through  judgment,  and  her  returning  ones  through 
righteousness"  Mishpat  and  tzeddkdh  are  used  elsewhere  for 
divine  gifts  (ch.  xxxiii.  5,  xxviii.  6),  for  such  conduct  as  is 
pleasing  to  God  (ch.  i.  21,  xxxii.  16),  and  for  royal  Mes 
sianic  virtues  (ch.  ix.  6,  xi.  3-5,  xvi.  5,  xxxii.  1).  Here, 
however,  where  we  are  helped  by  the  context,  they  are  to  be 
interpreted  according  to  such  parallel  passages  as  ch.  iv.  4, 
v.  16,  xxviii.  17,  as  signifying  God's  right  and  righteousness 
in  their  primarily  judicious  self-fulfilment.  A  judgment,  on 
the  part  of  God  the  righteous  One,  would  be  the  means  by 


CHAP.  I.  28,  29.  107 

which  Zion  itself,  so  far  as  it  had  remained  faithful  to  Jehovah, 
and  those  who  were  converted  in  the  midst  of  the  judgment, 
would  be  redeemed, — a  judgment  upon  sinners  and  sin,  by 
which  the  power  that  had  held  in  bondage  the  divine  nature 
of  Zion,  so  far  as  it  still  continued  to  exist,  would  be  broken, 
and  in  consequence  of  which  those  who  turned  to  Jehovah 
would  be  incorporated  into  His  true  church.  Whilst,  there 
fore,  God  was  revealing  Himself  in  His  punitive  righteousness ; 
He  was  working  out  a  righteousness  which  would  be  bestowed 
as  a  gift  of  grace  upon  those  who  escaped  the  former.  The 
notion  of  "  righteousness"  is  now  following  a  New  Testament 
track.  In  front  it  has  the  fire  of  the  law  ;  behind,  the  love  of 
the  gospel.  Love  is  concealed  behind  the  wrath,  like  the  sun 
behind  the  thunder-clouds.  Zion,  so  far  as  it  truly  is  or  is 
becoming  Zion,  is  redeemed,  and  none  but  the  ungodly  are 
destroyed.  But,  as  is  added  in  the  next  verse,  the  latter  takes 
place  without  mercy. 

Yer.  28.  "  And  breaking  up  of  the  rebellious  and  sinners 
together;  and  those  who  forsake  Jehovah  will  perish."  The 
judicial  side  of  the  approaching  act  of  redemption  is  here 
expressed  in  a  way  that  all  can  understand.  The  exclamatory 
substantive  clause  in  the  first  half  of  the  verse  is  explained  by 
a  declaratory  verbal  clause  in  the  second.  The  "rebellious" 
were  those  who  had  both  inwardly  and  outwardly  broken  away 
from  Jehovah  ;  "  sinners"  those  who  were  living  in  open  sins  ; 
and  "  those  who  forsake  Jehovah"  such  as  had  become  estranged 
from  God  in  either  of  these  ways. 

Ver.  29  declares  how  God's  judgment  of  destruction  would 
fall  upon  all  of  these.  The  verse  is  introduced  with  an  ex 
planatory  "  for"  (chi)  :  "  For  they  become  ashamed  of  the  tere 
binths,  in  which  ye  had  your  delight;  and  ye  must  blush  for 
the  gardens,  in  which  ye  took  pleasure"  The  terebinths  and 
gardens  (the  second  word  with  the  article,  as  in  Hab.  iii,  8, 
first  binharim,  then  banneharim)  are  not  referred  to  as  objects 
of  luxury,  as  Hitzig  and  Drechsler  assume,  but  as  unlawful 
places  of  worship  and  objects  of  worship  (see  Deut.  xvi.  21). 
They  are  both  of  them  frequently  mentioned  by  the  prophets 
in  this  sense  (ch.  Ivii.  5,  Ixv.  3,  Ixvi.  17)  :  chdmar  and  bdchar 
are  also  the  words  commonly  applied  to  an  arbitrary  choice 
of  false  gods  (ch.  xliv.  9,  xli.  24,  Ixvi.  3);  and  bosh  min  is  the 


108  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

general  plirase  used  to  denote  the  shame  which  falls  upon 
idolaters,  when  the  worthlessness  of  their  idols  becomes  con 
spicuous  through  their  impotence.  On  the  difference  between 
bosh  and  chdpher,  see  the  comm.  on  Ps.  xxxv.  4.1  The  word 
elim  is  erroneously  translated  "idols"  in  the  Septuagint  and 
other  ancient  versions.  The  feeling  which  led  to  this,  however, 
was  a  correct  one,  since  the  places  of  worship  really  stand  for 
the  idols  worshipped  in  those  places.2  The  excited  state  of  the 
prophet  at  the  close  of  his  prophecy  is  evinced  by  his  abrupt 
leap  from  an  exclamation  to  a  direct  address  (Ges.  §  137, 
Anm.  3). 

Ver.  30.  He  still  continues  in  the  same  excitement,  piling 
a  second  explanatory  sentence  upon  the  first,  and  commencing 
this  also  with  "/or"  (chi)  ;  and  then,  carried  away  by  the 
association  of  ideas,  he  takes  terebinths  and  gardens  as  the 
future  figures  of  the  idolatrous  people  themselves.  "  For  ye 
shall  become  like  a  terebinth  with  withered  leaves,  and  like  a 
garden  that  hath  no  water."  Their  prosperity  is  destroyed,  so 
that  they  resemble  a  terebinth  withered  as  to  its  leaves,  which 
in  other  cases  are  always  green  (nobeleth  'aleah,  a  genitive  con 
nection  according  to  Ges.  §  112,  2).  Their  sources  of  help 

1  It  is  perfectly  certain  that  chdpher  (Arab,  chqfira,  as  distinguished 
from  chdphar,  hafara,  to  dig)  signifies  to  blush,  erubescere ;  but  the  com 
bination  of  bosh  and  y abash  (bdda),  which  would  give  albescere  or  ex- 
pallescere  (to  turn  white  or  pale)  as  the  primary  idea  of  bosh,  has  not  only 
the  Arabic  use  of  bayyada  and  ibyadda  (to  rejoice,  be  made  glad)  against 
it,  but  above  all  the  dialectic  bechath,  bahita  (bahuta),  which,  when  taken 
in  connection  with  bethath  (batta),  points  rather  to  the  primary  idea  of 
being  cut  off  (abscindi:  cf.  spes  abscissa).     See  Lane's  Arabic-English  Lexi 
con,  i.  263. 

2  "With  regard  to  the  derivation,  elim,  whether  used  in  the  sense  of 
strong  men,  or  gods,  or  rams,  or  terebinths,  is  still  but  one  word,  derived 
from  il  or  ul,  so  that  in  all  three  senses  it  may  be  written  either  with  or 
without  Yod.     Nevertheless  elim  in  the  sense  of  "  rams"  only  occurs  with 
out  Yod  in  Job  xlii.  8.     In  the  sense  of  "  gods"  it  is  always  written  with 
out  Yod;  in  that  of  "  strong  men"  with  Yod.     In  the  singular  the  name  of 
the  terebinth  is  always  written  elah  without  Yod ;  in  the  plural,  however, 
it  is  written  either  with  or  without.     But  this  no  more  presupposes  a 
singular  el  (ayil)  in  common  use,  than  betzim  presupposes  a  singular  bets 
(bay its)  ;  still  the  word  el  with  Yod  does  occur  once,  viz.  in  Gen.  xiv.  6. 
Allah  and  allon,  an  oak,  also  spring  from  the  same  root,  namely  dial  =  il. ; 
just  as  in  Arabic  both  il  and  ill  are  used  for  el  (God)  ;  and  dl  and  ill,  in 
the  sense  of  relationship,  point  to  a  similar  change  in  the  form  of  the  root. 


CHAP.  1.  31.  109 

are  dried  up,  so  that  they  are  like  a  garden  without  water,  and 
therefore,  waste.  In  this  withered  state  terebinths  and  gardens, 
to  which  the  idolatrous  are  compared,  are  easily  set  on  fire. 
All  that  is  wanted  is  a  spark  to  kindle  them,  when  they  are 
immediately  in  flames. 

Ver.  31  shows  in  a  third  figure  where  this  spark  was  to  come 
from :  "  And  the  rich  man  becomes  tow,  and  his  work  the  spark  ; 
and  they  will  both  burn  together,  and  no  one  extinguishes  them." 
The  form  poalo  suggests  at  first  a  participial  meaning  (its 
maker),  but  florin  would  be  a  very  unusual  epithet  to  apply  to 
an  idol.  Moreover,  the  figure  itself  would  be  a  distorted  one, 
since  the  natural  order  would  be,  that  the  idol  would  be  the  thing 
that  kindled  the  fire,  and  the  man  the  object  to  be  set  on  fire, 
and  not  the  reverse.  We  therefore  follow  the  LXX.,  Targ.,  and 
Vulg.,  with  Gesenius  and  other  more  recent  grammarians,  and 
adopt  the  rendering  "  his  work"  (opus  ejus).  The  forms  ftj3 
and  fo'3  (cf.  ch.  Hi.  14  and  Jer.  xxii.  13)  are  two  equally 
admissible  changes  of  the  ground- form  wB  (WB).  As  ver.  29 
refers  to  idolatrous  worship,  poalo  (his  work)  is  an  idol,  a  god 
made  by  human  hands  (of.  ch.  iL  8,  xxxvii.  19,  etc.).  The 
prosperous  idolater,  who  could  give  gold  and  silver  for  idolatrous 
images  out  of  the  abundance  of  his  possessions  (clidson  is  to  be 
interpreted  in  accordance  with  ch.  xxxiii.  6),  becomes  tow  (talm. 
"  the  refuse  of  flax  :"  the  radical  meaning  is  to  shake  out,  viz. 
in  combing),  and  the  idol  the  spark  which  sets  this  mass  of  fibre 
in  flames,  so  that  they  are  both  irretrievably  consumed.  For  the 
fire  of  judgment,  by  which  sinners  are  devoured,  need  not  come 
from  without.  Sin  carries  the  fire  of  indignation  within  itself. 

O 

And  an  idol  is,  as  it  were,  an  idolater's  sin  embodied  and  ex 
posed  to  the  light  of  day. 

The  date  of  the  composition  of  this  first  prophecy  is  a  puzzle. 
Caspar!  thoroughly  investigated  every  imaginary  possibility,  and 
at  last  adopted  the  conclusion  that  it  dates  from  the  time  of 
Uzziah,  inasmuch  as  vers.  7-9  do  not  relate  to  an  actual,  but 
merely  to  an  ideal,  present.  But  notwithstanding  all  the  acute- 
ness  with  which  Caspar!  has  worked  out  his  view,  it  still 
remains  a  very  forced  one.  The  oftener  we  return  to  the 
reading  of  this  prophetic  address,  the  stronger  is  our  impression 
that  vers.  7-9  contain  a  description  of  the  state  of  things  which 
really  existed  at  the  time  when  the  words  were  spoken.  There 


1 10  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

were  actually  two  devastations  of  the  land  of  Judah  which 
occurred  during  the  ministry  of  Isaiah,  and  in  which  Jerusalem 
was  only  spared  by  the  miraculous  interposition  of  Jehovah : 
one  under  Ahaz  in  the  year  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war ;  the 
other  under  Hezekiah,  when  the  Assyrian  forces  laid  the  land 
waste  but  were  scattered  at  last  in  their  attack  upon  Jeru 
salem.  The  year  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  is  supported 
by  Gesenius,  Eosenmiiller  (who  expresses  a  different  opinion  in 
every  one  of  the  three  editions  of  his  Scholia))  Maurer,  Movers, 
Knobel,  Havernick,  and  others;  the  time  of  the  Assyrian  op 
pression  by  Hitzig,  Umbreit,  Drechsler,  and  Luzzatto.  Now, 
whichever  of  these  views  we  may  adopt,  there  will  still  remain, 
as  a  test  of  its  admissibility,  the  difficult  question,  How  did  this 
prophecy  come  to  stand  at  the  head  of  the  book,  if  it  belonged 
to  the  time  of  Uzziah-Jotham  ?  This  question,  upon  which  the 
solution  of  the  difficulty  depends,  can  only  be  settled  when  we 
come  to  ch.  vi.  Till  then,  the  date  of  the  composition  of  ch.  i. 
must  be  left  undecided.  It  is  enough  for  the  present  to  know, 
that,  according  to  the  accounts  given  in  the  books  of  Kin^s 
and  Chronicles,  there  were  two  occasions  when  the  situation  of 
Jerusalem  resembled  the  one  described  in  the  present  chapter. 


THE  WAY  OF  GENERAL  JUDGMENT;  OR  THE  COURSE  OF  ISRAEL 
FROM  FALSE  GLORY  TO  THE  TRUE. — CHAP.  II.-IV. 

The  limits  of  this  address  are  very  obvious.  The  end  of  ch. 
iv.  connects  itself  with  the  beginning  of  ch.  ii.,  so  as  to  form  a 
circle.  After  various  alternations  of  admonition,  reproach,  and 
threatening,  the  prophet  reaches  at  last  the  object  of  the  promise 
with  which  he  started.  Chap,  v.,  on  the  other  hand,  commences 
afresh  with  a  parable.  It  forms  an  independent  address, 
although  it  is  included,  along  with  the  previous  chapters, 
under  the  heading  in  ch.  ii.  1  :  "  The  word  which  Isaiah  the 
son  of  Amoz  saw  over  Judah  and  Jerusalem"  Chap,  ii.-v. 
may  have  existed  under  this  heading  before  the  whole  collec 
tion  arose.  It  was  then  adopted  in  this  form  into  the  general 
collection,  so  as  to  mark  the  transition  from  the  prologue  to  the 
body  of  the  book.  The  prophet  describes  what  he  here  says 
concerning  Judah  and  Jerusalem  as  "  the  word  which  he  saw." 
When  men  speak  to  one  another,  the  words  are  not  seen,  but 


CHAP.  II.  1.  Ill 

heard.  But  when  God  spoke  to  the  prophet,  it  was  in  a  super- 
sensuous  way,  and  the  prophet  saw  it.  The  mind  indeed  has 
no  more  eyes  than  ears  ;  but  a  mind  qualified  to  perceive  what 
is  superserisuous  is  altogether  eye. 

The  manner  in  which  Isaiah  commences  this  second  address 
is  altogether  unparalleled.  There  is  no  other  example  of  a 
prophecy  beginning  with  HVTI.  And  it  is  very  easy  to  discover 
the  reason  why.  The  prcvt.  consecutivum  v'hdydh  derives  the 
force  of  a  future  from  the  context  alone ;  whereas  the  fut.  con 
secutivum  vaylti  (with  which  historical  books  and  sections  very 
generally  commence)  is  shown  to  be  an  aorist  by  its  simple  form. 
Moreover,  the  Vav  in  the  fut.  consecut.  has  almost  entirely  lost 
its  copulative  character  ;  in  the  prcet.  consec.,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  retains  it  with  all  the  greater  force.  The  prophet  therefore 
commences  with  "  and"  ;  and  it  is  from  what  follows,  not  from 
what  goes  before,  that  we  learn  that  liayali  is  used  in  a  future 
sense.  But  this  is  not  the  only  strange  thing.  It  is  also  an 
unparalleled  occurrence,  for  a  prophetic  address,  which  runs  as 
this  does  through  all  the  different  phases  of  the  prophetic  dis 
courses  generally  (viz.  exhortation,  reproof,  threatening,  and 
promise),  to  commence  with  a  promise.  We  are  in  a  condition, 
however,  to  explain  the  cause  of  this  remarkable  phenomenon 
with  certainty,  and  not  merely  to  resort  to  conjecture.  Vers. 
2-4  do  not  contain  Isaiah's  own  words,  but  the  words  of 
another  prophet  taken  out  of  their  connection.  We  find  them 
again  in  Mic.  iv.  1-4 ;  and  whether  Isaiah  took  them  from 
Micah,  or  whether  both  Isaiah  and  Micah  took  them  from  some 
common  source,  in  either  case  they  were  not  originally  Isaiah's.1 

1  The  historical  statement  in  Jer.  xxvi.  18,  from  which  we  learn  that  it 
was  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  that  Micah  uttered  the  threat  contained  in 
Mic.  iii.  12  (of  which  the  promises  in  Mic.  iv.  1-4  and  Isa.  ii.  2-4  are  the 
direct  antithesis),  apparently  precludes  the  idea  that  Isaiah  borrowed  from 
Micah,  whilst  the  opposite  is  altogether  inadmissible,  for  reasons  assigned 
above.  Ewald  and  Hitzig  have  therefore  come  to  the  conclusion,  quite  in 
dependently  of  each  other,  that  both  Micah  and  Isaiah  repeated  the  words 
of  a  third  and  earlier  prophet,  most  probably  of  Joel  And  the  passage 
in  question  has  really  very  much  in  common  with  the  book  of  Joel,  viz. 
the  idea  of  the  melting  down  of  ploughshares  and  pruning-hooks  (Joel  iii. 
10),  the  combination  of  rob  (many)  and  dtsum  (strong),  of  gephen  (vine) 
and  te'enah  (fig-tree),  as  compared  with  Mic.  iv.  4  ;  also  the  attesting  for 
mula,  "  For  Jehovah  hath  spoken  it"  (chi  Jehovah  dibber:  Joel  iii.  (iv.)  8), 


112  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Nor  was  it  even  intended  that  they  should  appear  to  be  his. 
Isaiah  has  not  fused  them  into  the  general  flow  of  his  own 
prophecy,  as  the  prophets  usually  do  with  the  predictions  of 
their  predecessors.  He  does  not  reproduce  them,  but,  as  we 
may  observe  from  the  abrupt  commencement,  he  quotes  them. 
It  is  true,  this  hardly  seems  to  tally  with  the  heading,  which 
describes  what  follows  as  the  word  of  Jehovah  which  Isaiah 
saw.  But  the  discrepancy  is  only  an  apparent  one.  It  was 
the  spirit  of  prophecy,  which  called  to  Isaiah's  remembrance 
a  prophetic  saying  that  had  already  been  uttered,  and  made  it 
the  starting-point  of  the  thoughts  which  followed  in  Isaiah's 
mind.  The  borrowed  promise  is  not  introduced  for  its  own 
sake,  but  is  simply  a  self-explaining  introduction  to  the  exhor 
tations  and  threatenings  which  follow,  and  through  which  the 
prophet  works  his  way  to  a  conclusion  of  his  own,  that  is  closely 
intertwined  with  the  borrowed  commencement. 

Ver.  2.  The  subject  of  the  borrowed  prophecy  is  Israel's 
future  glory  :  "  And  it  cometli  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  days,  the 
mountain  of  the  house  of  Jehovah  will  be  set  at  the  top  of  the 
mountains,  and  exalted  over  hills;  and  all  nations  pour  unto  t7." 

which  is  not  found  in  Micah,  whereas  it  is  very  common  in  Isaiah, — a  fact 
which  makes  the  sign  itself  a  very  feeble  one  (cf.  1  Kings  xiv.  11,  also  Ob. 
18).  Hitzig,  indeed,  maintains  that  it  is  only  by  restoring  this  passage 
that  the  prophetic  writings  of  Joel  receive  their  proper  rounding  off  and 
an  appropriate  termination  ;  but  although  swords  and  spears  beaten  into 
ploughshares  and  pruning-hooks  form  a  good  antithesis  to  ploughshares 
and  pruning-hooks  beaten  into  swords  and  spears  (Joel  iv.  10),  the  coming 
of  great  and  mighty  nations  to  Mount  Zion  after  the  previous  judgment  of 
extermination  would  be  too  unprepared  or  much  too  abrupt  a  phenomenon. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  admit  the  force  of  the  arguments  adduced 
either  by  E.  Meier  (Joel,  p.  195)  or  by  Knobel  and  G.  Baur  (Amos,  p.  29) 
against  the  authorship  of  Joel,  which  rest  upon  a  misapprehension  of  the 
meaning  of  Joel's  prophecies,  which  the  former  regards  as  too  full  of  storm 
and  battle,  the  latter  as  too  exclusive  and  one-sided,  for  Joel  to  be  the  author 
of  the  passage  in  question.  At  the  same  time,  we  would  call  attention  to 
the  fact,  that  the  promises  in  Micah  form  the  obverse  side  to  the  previous 
threatenings  of  judgment,  so  that  there  is  a  presumption  of  their  originality  ; 
also  that  the  passage  contains  as  many  traces  of  Micah's  style  (see  above 
at  ver.  3)  as  we  could  expect  to  find  in  these  three  verses  ;  and,  as  we  shall 
ishow  at  the  conclusion  of  this  cycle  of  predictions  (ch.  i.-vi.),  that  the  his 
torical  fact  mentioned  in  Jer.  xxvi.  1 8  may  be  reconciled  in  the  simplest 
possible  manner  with  the  assumption  that  Isaiah  borrowed  these  words  of 
promise  from  Micah.  (See  Caspari,  Aficha,  p.  444  sqq,) 


CHAP.  II.  2.  113 

The  expression  "  the  last  clays"  (acharith  Jiayyamim,  "  the  end 
of  the  days"),  which  does  not  occur  anywhere  else  in  Isaiah,  is 
always  used  in  an  eschatological  sense.  It  never  refers  to  the 
course  of  history  immediately  following  the  time  being,  but 
invariably  indicates  the  furthest  point  in  the  history  of  this 
life  —  the  point  which  lies  on  the  outermost  limits  of  the 
speaker's  horizon.  This  horizon  was  a  very  fluctuating  one. 
The  history  of  prophecy  is  just  the  history  of  its  gradual  ex 
tension,  and  of  the  filling  up  of  the  intermediate  space.  In 
Jacob's  blessing  (Gen.  xlix.)  the  conquest  of  the  land  stood  in 
the  foreground  of  the  acharith  or  last  days,  and  the  perspective 
was  regulated  accordingly.  But  here  in  Isaiah  the  acharith 
contained  no  such  mixing  together  of  events  belonging  to  the 
more  immediate  and  the  most  distant  future.  It  was  therefore 
the  last  time  in  its  most  literal  and  purest  sense,  commenc 
ing  with  the  beginning  of  the  New  Testament  aeon,  and  ter 
minating  at  its  close  (compare  Heb.  i.  1,  1  Pet.  i.  20,  with 
1  Cor.  xv.  and  the  Revelation).  The  prophet  here  predicted 
that  the  mountain  which  bore  the  temple  of  Jehovah,  and 
therefore  was  already  in  dignity  the  most  exalted  of  all  moun 
tains,  would  one  clay  tower  in  actual  height  above  all  the  high 
places  of  the  earth.  The  basaltic  mountains  of  Bashan,  which 
rose  up  in  bold  peaks  and  columns,  might  now  look  down 
with  scorn  and  contempt  upon  the  small  limestone  hill  which 
Jehovah  had  chosen  (Ps.  Ixviii.  16,  17);  but  this  was  an  in 
congruity  which  the  last  times  would  remove,  by  making  the 
outward  correspond  to  the  inward,  the  appearance  to  the  reality 
and  the  intrinsic  worth.  That  this  is  the  prophet's  meaning  is 
confirmed  by  Ezek.  xl.  2,  where  the  temple  mountain  looks 
gigantic  to  the  prophet,  and  also  by  Zech.  xiv.  10,  where  all 
Jerusalem  is  described  as  towering  above  the  country  round 
about,  which  would  one  day  become  a  plain.  The  question 
how  this  can  possibly  take  place  in  time,  since  it  presupposes  a 
complete  subversion  of  the  whole  of  the  existing  order  of  the 
earth's  surface,  is  easily  answered.  The  prophet  saw  the  new 
Jerusalem  of  the  last  days  on  this  side,  and  the  new  Jerusalem 
of  the  new  earth  on  the  other  (Rev.  xxi.  10),  blended  as  it 
were  together,  and  did  not  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other. 
But  whilst  we  thus  avoid  all  unwarrantable  spiritualizing,  it 
still  remains  a  question  what  meaning  the  prophet  attached  to 
VOL.  I.  H 


114  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  word  Vrosh  ("  at  the  top"}.  Did  lie  mean  that  Moriali 
would  one  day  stand  upon  the  top  of  the  mountains  that 
surrounded  it  (as  in  Ps.  Ixxii.  16),  or  that  it  would  stand  at 
their  head  (as  in  1  Kings  xxi.  9,  12,  Amos  vi.  7,  Jer.  xxxi.  7)  ? 
The  former  is  Hofmann's  view,  as  given  in  his  Weissagung  und 
Erfidlung,  ii.  217:  "he  did  not  indeed  mean  that  the  moun 
tains  would  be  piled  up  one  upon  the  other,  and  the  temple 
mountain  upon  the  top,  but  that  the  temple  mountain  would 
appear  to  float  upon  the  summit  of  the  others."  But  as  the 
expression  "will  be  set"  (nacoii)  does  not  favour  this  apparently 
romantic  exaltation,  and  Urosh  occurs  more  frequently  in  the 
sense  of  "  at  the  head"  than  in  that  of  "  on  the  top"  I  decide 
for  my  own  part  in  favour  of  the  second  view,  though  I  agree 
so  far  with  Hofmann,  that  it  is  not  merely  an  exaltation  of  the 
temple  mountain  in  the  estimation  of  the  nations  that  is  pre 
dicted,  but  a  physical  and  external  elevation  also.  And  when 
thus  outwardly  exalted,  the  divinely  chosen  mountain  would 
become  the  rendezvous  and  centre  of  unity  for  all  nations. 
They  would  all  "flow  unto  it"  (ndhar,  a  denom.  verb,  from 
ndhdr,  a  river,  as  in  Jer.  li.  44,  xxxi.  12).  It  is  the  temple  of 
Jehovah  which,  being  thus  rendered  visible  to  nations  afar  off, 
exerts  such  magnetic  attraction,  and  with  such  success.  Just 
as  at  a  former  period  men  had  been  separated  and  estranged 
from  one  another  in  the  plain  of  Shinar,  and  thus  different 
nations  had  first  arisen ;  so  would  the  nations  at  a  future  period 
assemble  together  on  the  mountain  of  the  house  of  Jehovah, 
and  there,  as  members  of  one  family,  live  together  in  amity 
again.  And  as  Babel  (confusion,  as  its  name  signifies)  was  the 
place  whence  the  stream  of  nations  poured  into  all  the  world ; 
so  would  Jerusalem  (the  city  of  peace)  become  the  place  into 
which  the  stream  of  nations  would  empty  itself,  and  where  all 
would  be  reunited  once  more.  At  the  present  time  there  was 
only  one  people,  viz.  Israel,  which  made  pilgrimages  to  Zion 
on  the  great  festivals,  but  it  wrould  be  very  different  then. 

Ver.  3.  "And  peoples  in  multitude  go  and  say,  Come,  let  us 
go  up  to  the  mountain  of  Jehovah,  to  the  house  of  the  God  of 
Jacob;  let  Him  instruct  us  out  of  His  ways,  and  we  will  walk  in 
His  paths."  This  is  their  signal  for  starting,  and  their  song  by 
the  way  (cf.  Zech.  viii.  21,  22).  What  urges  them  on  is  the 
desire  for  salvation.  Desire  for  salvation  expresses  itself  in  the 


CHAP.  ii.  a.  115 

name  they  give  to  the  point  towards  which  they  are  travelling  : 
they  call  Moriah  "  the  mountain  of  Jehovah,"  and  the  temple 
upon  it  "  the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob."  Through  frequent 
use,  Israel  had  become  the  popular  name  for  the  people  of  God; 
but  the  name  they  employ  is  the  choicer  name  Jacob,  which  is 
the  name  of  affection  in  the  mouth  of  Micali,  of  whose  style  we 
are  also  reminded  by  the  expression  "  many  peoples"  (ammim 
rabbim).  Desire  for  salvation  expresses  itself  in  the  object  of 
their  journey ;  they  wish  Jehovah  to  teach  them  "  out  of  His 
ways" — a  rich  source  of  instruction  with  which  they  desire  to 
be  gradually  entrusted.  The  preposition  mm  (out  of,  or  from) 
is  not  partitive  here,  but  refers,  as  in  Ps.  xciv.  12,  to  the  source 
of  instruction.  The  "  ways  of  Jehovah"  are  the  ways  which 
God  Himself  takes,  and  by  which  men  are  led  by  Him — the 
revealed  ordinances  of  His  will  and  action.  Desire  for  salva 
tion  also  expresses  itself  in  the  resolution  with  which  they  set 
out:  they  not  only  wish  to  learn,  but  are  resolved  to  act  accord 
ing  to  what  they  learn.  "  We  will  walk  in  His  paths:"  the 
hortative  is  used  here,  as  it  frequently  is  (e.g.  Gen.  xxvii.  4, 
vid.  Ges.  §  128,  1,  c),  to  express  either  the  subjective  intention 
or  subjective  conclusion.  The  words  supposed  to  be  spoken 
by  the  multitude  of  heathen  going  up  to  Zion  terminate  here. 
The  prophet  then  adds  the  reason  and  object  of  this  holy 
pilgrimage  of  the  nations  :  "  For  instruction  will  go  out  from 
Zion,  and  the  word  of  Jehovah  from  Jerusalem"  The  principal 
emphasis  is  upon  the  expressions  "  from  Zion "  and  "  from 
Jerusalem."  It  is  a  triumphant  utterance  of  the  sentiment 
that  "  salvation  is  of  the  Jews"  (John  iv.  22).  From  Zion- 
Jerusalem  there  would  go  forth  thorah,  i.e.  instruction  as  to 
the  questions  which  man  has  to  put  to  God,  and  debar  Jehovah, 
the  word  of  Jehovah,  which  created  the  world  at  first,  and  by 
which  it  is  spiritually  created  anew.  Whatever  promotes  the 
true  prosperity  of  the  nations,  comes  from  Zion- Jerusalem. 
There  the  nations  assemble  together ;  they  take  it  thence  to 
their  own  homes,  and  thus  Zion-Jerusalem  becomes  the  foun 
tain  of  universal  good.  For  from  the  time  that  Jehovah  made 
choice  of  Zion,  the  holiness  of  Sinai  was  transferred  to  Zion 
(Ps.  Ixviii.  17),  which  now  presented  the  same  aspect  as  Sinai 
had  formerly  done,  when  God  invested  it  with  holiness  by 
appearing  there  in  the  midst  of  myriads  of  angels.  What  had 


116  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

been  commenced  at  Sinai  for  Israel,  would  be  completed  at 
Zion  for  all  the  world.  This  was  fulfilled  on  that  day  of 
Pentecost,  when  the  disciples,  the  first-fruits  of  the  church  of 
Christ,  proclaimed  the  thorah  of  Zion,  i.e.  the  gospel,  in  the 
languages  of  all  the  world.  It  was  fulfilled,  as  Theodoret 
observes,  in  the  fact  that  the  word  of  the  gospel,  rising  from 
Jerusalem  "  as  from  a  fountain,"  flowed  through  the  whole  of 
the  known  world.  But  these  fulfilments  were  only  preludes  to 
a  conclusion  which  is  still  to  be  looked  for  in  the  future.  For 
what  is  promised  in  the  following  verse  is  still  altogether  un 
fulfilled. 

Ver.  4.  "  And  He  will  judge  "between  tlie  nations,  and  deliver 
justice  to  many  peoples ;  and  they  forge  their  swords  into  coulters, 
and  their  spears  into  pruning-hooks :  nation  lifts  not  up  the  sword 
against  nation,  neither  do  they  exercise  themselves  in  war  any 
more."  Since  the  nations  betake  themselves  in  this  manner  as 
pupils  to  the  God  of  revelation  and  the  word  of  His  revelation, 
He  becomes  the  supreme  judge  and  umpire  among  them.  If 
any  dispute  arise,  it  is  no  longer  settled  by  the  compulsory  force 
of  war,  but  by  the  word  of  God,  to  which  all  bow  with  willing 
submission.  With  such  power  as  this  in  the  peace-sustaining 
word  of  God  (Zech.  ix.  10),  there  is  no  more  need  for  weapons 
of  iron:  they  are  turned  into  the  instruments  of  peaceful 
employment,  into  ittim  (probably  a  synonym  for  ethim  in 
1  Sam.  xiii.  21),  plough- knives  or  coulters,  which  cut  the 
furrows  for  the  ploughshare  to  turn  up ;  and  mazmeroth, 
bills  or  pruning-hooks,  with  which  vines  are  pruned  to  increase 
their  fruit-bearing  power.  There  is  also  no  more  need  for 
military  practice,  for  there  is  no  use  in  exercising  one's  self 
in  what  cannot  be  applied.  It  is  useless,  and  men  dislike  it. 
There  is  peace,  not  an  armed  peace,  but  a  full,  true,  God-given 
and  blessed  peace.  What  even  a  Kant  regarded  as  possible  is 
now  realized,  and  that  not  by  the  so-called  Christian  powers, 
but  by  the  power  of  God,  who  favours  the  object  for  which 
an  Elihu  Burritt  enthusiastically  longs,  rather  than  the  politics 
of  the  Christian  powers.  It  is  in  war  that  the  power  of  the 
beast  culminates  in  the  history  of  the  world.  This  beast  will 
then  be  destroyed.  The  true  humanity  which  sin  has  choked 
up  will  gain  the  mastery,  and  the  world's  history  will  keep 
Sabbath.  And  may  we  not  indulge  the  hope,  on  the  ground  of 


CHAP.  II.  5.  117 

such  prophetic  words  as  these,  that  the  history  of  the  world 
will  not  terminate  without  having  kept  a  Sabbath  ?  Shall  we 
correct  Isaiah,  according  to  Quenstedt,  lest  we  should  become 
chiliasts  ?  "  The  humanitarian  ideas  of  Christendom,"  says  a 
thoughtful  Jewish  scholar,  "  have  their  roots  in  the  Pentateuch, 
and  more  especially  in  Deuteronomy.  But  in  the  prophets, 
particularly  in  Isaiah,  they  reach  a  height  which  will  pro 
bably  not  be  attained  and  fully  realized  by  the  modern  world 
for  centuries  to  come."  Yet  they  will  be  realized.  What  the 
prophetic  words  appropriated  by  Isaiah  here  affirm,  is  a  moral 
postulate,  the  goal  of  sacred  history,  the  predicted  counsel  of 
God. 

Isaiah  presents  himself  to  his  contemporaries  with  this  older 
prophecy  of  the  exalted  and  world-wide  calling  of  the  people 
of  Jehovah,  holds  it  up  before  them  as  a  mirror,  and  exclaims 
in  ver.  5,  "  0  house  of  Jacob,  come,  let  us  walk  in  the  light  of 
Jehovah."  This  exhortation  is  formed  under  the  influence  of 
the  context,  from  which  vers.  2-4  are  taken,  as  we  may  see 
from  Mic.  iv.  5,  and  also  of  the  quotation  itself.  The  use  of 
the  term  Jacob  in  stead  of  Israel  is  not  indeed  altogether  strange 
to  Isaiah  (ch.  viii.  17,  x.  20,  21,  xxix.  23),  but  he  prefers  the 
use  of  Israel  (compare  ch.  i.  24  with  Gen.  xlix.  24).  With  the 
words  "  O  house  of  Jacob  "  he  now  turns  to  his  people,  whom 
so  glorious  a  future  awaits,  because  Jehovah  has  made  it  the 
scene  of  His  manifested  presence  and  grace,  and  summons  it 
to  walk  in  the  light  of  such  a  God,  to  whom  all  nations  will 
press  at  the  end  of  the  days.  The  summons,  "  Come,  let  us 
walk,"  is  the  echo  of  ver.  3,  "  Come,  let  us  go ; "  and  as  Hitzig 
observes,  "  Isaiah  endeavours,  like  Paul  in  Rom.  xi.  14,  to  stir 
up  his  countrymen  to  a  noble  jealousy,  by  setting  before  them 
the  example  of  the  heathen."  The  "  light  of  Jehovah "  ('or 
Jehovahj  in  which  the  echo  of  vyorenu  in  ver.  3  is  hardly 
accidental ;  cf.  Prov.  vi.  23)  is  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah 
Himself,  as  furnished  by  means  of  positive  revelation,  His 
manifested  love.  It  was  now  high  time  to  walk  in  the  light  of 
Jehovah,  i.e.  to  turn  this  knowledge  into  life,  and  reciprocate 
this  love ;  and  it  was  especially  necessary  to  exhort  Israel  to 
this,  now  that  Jehovah  had  given  up  His  people,  just  because 
in  their  perverseness  they  had  done  the  very  opposite.  This 
mournful  declaration,  which  the  prophet  was  obliged  to  make 


118  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

in  order  to  explain  his  warning  cry,  he  changes  into  the  form 
of  a  prayerful  sigh.  Ver.  6.  "For  Thou  hast  rejected  Thy 
people,  the  house  of  Jacob  ;  for  they  are  filled  with  things  from 
the  east,  and  are  conjurors  like  the  Philistines;  and  with  the 
children  of  foreigners  they  go  hand  in  hand"  Here  again  we 
have  "for'1  (chi)  twice  in  succession;  the  first  giving  the 
reason  for  the  warning  cry,  the  second  vindicating  the  reason 
assigned.  The  words  are  addressed  to  Jehovah,  not  to  the 
people.  Saad.,  Gecatilia,  and  Rashi  adopt  the  rendering, 
"Thou  hast  given  up  thy  nationality ;"  and  this  rendering  is 
supported  by  J.  D.  Michaelis,  Hitzig,  and  Luzzatto.  But  the 
word  means  "  people,"  not  "nationality;"  and  the  rendering 
is  inadmissible,  and  would  never  have  been  thought  of  were  it 
not  that  there  was  apparently  something  strange  in  so  sudden 
an  introduction  of  an  address  to  God.  But  in  ch.  ii.  9,  ix.  2, 
and  other  passages,  the  prophecy  takes  the  form  of  a  prayer. 
And  ndtash  (cast  off)  with  dm  (people)  for  its  object  recals  such 
passages  as  Ps.  xciv.  14  and  1  Sam.  xii.  22.  Jehovah  had  put 
away  His  people,  i.e.  rejected  them,  and  left  them  to  them 
selves,  for  the  following  reasons :  (1.)  Because  they  were  "  full 
from  the  east"  (inikkedem :  min  denotes  the  source  from  which 
a  person  draws  and  fills  himself,  Jer.  li.  34,  Ezek.  xxxii.  6), 
i.e.  full  of  eastern  manners  and  customs,  more  especially  of 
idolatrous  practices.  By  "  the  east "  (kedem)  we  are  to  under 
stand  Arabia  as  far  as  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  and  also  the 
Aramasan  lands  of  the  Euphrates.  Under  Uzziah  and  Jotham, 
whose  sway  extended  to  Elath,  the  seaport  town  of  the  Elanitic 
Gulf,  the  influence  of  the  south-east  predominated ;  but  under 
Ahaz  and  Hezekiah,  on  account  of  their  relations  to  Asshur, 
Aram,  and  Babylon,  that  of  the  north-east.  The  conjecture  of 
Gesenius,  that  we  should  read  mikkesem,  i.e.  of  soothsaying,  is 
a  very  natural  one ;  but  it  obliterates  without  any  necessity  the 
name  of  the  region  from  which  Judah's  imitative  propensities 
received  their  impulse  and  materials.  (2.)  They  were  onenim 
(=  meonenim9M.ic.  v.  11,  from  the  poel  onen:  2  Kings  xxi.  6), 
probably  "cloud-gatherers"  or  "storm-raisers"1  like  the  Philis- 

1  There  is  no  force  in  the  explanation  "  concealing,"  i.e.  practising 
eecret  arts;  for  the  meaning  "  cover"  or  **  conceal"  is  arbitrarily  transferred 
to  the  verb  owen,  from  ganan  and  canan,  which  are  supposed  to  be  cognate 
Toots.  As  a  denominative  of  dndnt  the  cloud,  however  (on  this  name  for 


CHAP.  II.  7,  8.  119 

tines  (the  people  conquered  by  Uzziah,  and  then  again  by 
Hezekiah),  among  whom  witchcraft  was  carried  on  in  guilds, 
whilst  a  celebrated  oracle  of  Baal-Zebub  existed  at  Ekron. 
(3.)  And  they  make  common  cause  with  children  of  foreigners. 
This  is  the  explanation  adopted  by  Gesenius,  Knobel,  and 
others.  Sdphak  with  cappaim  signifies  to  clap  hands  (Job  xxvii. 
23).  The  liiphil  followed  by  Beth  is  only  used  here  in  the  sense 
of  striking  hands  with  a  person.  Luzzatto  explains  it  as  mean 
ing,  "  They  find  satisfaction  in  the  children  of  foreigners ;  it  is 
only  through  them  that  they  are  contented;'*  but  this  is  con 
trary  to  the  usage  of  the  language,  according  to  which  hispik 
in  post-biblical  Hebrew  signifies  either  suppeditare  or  (like 
saphak  in  1  Kings  xx.  10)  sufficere.  Jerome  renders  it  pueris 
alienis  adhceserunt;  but  yalde  ndcrim  does  not  mean  pueri 
alieni,  boys  hired  for  licentious  purposes,  but  the  "  sons  of 
strangers"  generally  (ch.  Ix.  10,  Ixi.  5),  with  a  strong  emphasis 
upon  their  unsanctified  birth,  the  heathenism  inherited  from 
their  mother's  womb.  With  heathen  by  birth,  the  prophet 
would  say,  the  people  of  Jehovah  made  common  cause. 

In  vers.  7,  8  he  describes  still  further  how  the  land  of  the 
people  of  Jehovah,  in  consequence  of  all  this  (on  the  future 
consec.  see  Ges.  §  129,  2,  a),  was  crammed  full  of  objects  of 
luxury,  of  self-confidence,  of  estrangement  from  God :  "And 
their  land  is  filled  with  silver  and  gold,  and  there  is  no  end 
of  their  treasures  ;  and  their  land  is  filled  with  horses,  and  there 
is  no  end  of  their  chariots.  And  their  land  is  filled  with — 
idols;  the  work  of  their  own  hands  they  worship,  that  which  their 

the  clouds,  see  at  ch.  iv.  5),  onen  might  mean  "  he  gathered  auguries  from 
the  clouds."  Or  if  we  take  onen  as  a  synonym  of  innen  in  Gen.  ix.  14,  it 
would  mean  "  to  raise  storms,"  which  would  give  the  rendering  VS^OOIUKTX^ 
tempestarii,  storm-raisers.  The  derivation  of  onen  from  pj;,  in  the  sense  of 
the  Arabic  'ana  (impf.  ya  'imi),  as  it  were  to  ogle,  oculo  maligno  petere  et 
fascinare,  founders  on  annen,  the  word  used  in  the  Targums,  which  cannot 
possibly  be  traced  to  py.  From  a  purely  philological  standpoint,  however, 
there  is  still  another  explanation  possible.  From  the  idea  of  coming  to  meet 
we  get  the  transitive  meaning  to  hold  back,  shut  in,  or  hinder,  particularly 
to  hold  back  a  horse  by  the  reins  (man),  or  when  applied  to  sexual  rela 
tions,  'unna  (unnina,  u'inna)  'an  el-mar'ati,  "he  is  prevented  (by  magic) 
from  approaching  his  wife."  Beside  the  Arabic  'innin  and  ma' nun  (to 
render  sexually  impotent  by  witchcraft),  we  find  the  Syriac  'anono  used  in 
the  same  sense. 


120  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

own  fingers  have  made."  The  glory  of  Solomon,  which  revived 
under  Uzziah's  fifty-two  years'  reign,  and  was  sustained  through 
Jotham's  reign  of  sixteen  years,  carried  with  it  the  curse  of  tlio 
law ;  for  the  law  of  the  king,  in  Deut.  xvii.  14  sqq.,  prohibited 
the  multiplying  of  horses,  and  also  the  accumulation  of  gold 
and  silver.  Standing  armies,  and  stores  of  national  treasures, 
like  everything  else  which  ministers  to  carnal  self-reliance,  were 
opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  theocracy.  Nevertheless  Judtea 
was  immeasurably  full  of  such  seductions  to  apostasy  ;  and  not 
of  those  alone,  but  also  of  things  which  plainlv  revealed  it,  viz. 
of  elilim,  idols  (the  same  word  is  used  in  Lev.  xix.  4,  xxvi.  1, 
from  elil,  vain  or  worthless ;  it  is  therefore  equivalent  to  "  not- 
gods").  They  worshipped  the  work  of  "their  own"  hands, 
what  "  their  own  "  fingers  had  made :  two  distributive  singulars, 
as  in  ch.  v.  23,  the  hands  and  fingers  of  every  individual  (vid. 
Mic.  v.  12,  13,  where  the  idols  are  classified).  The  condition 
of  the  land,  therefore,  was  not  only  opposed  to  the  law  of  the 
king,  but  at  variance  with  the  decalogue  also.  The  existing 
glory  was  the  most  offensive  caricature  of  the  glory  promised 
to  the  nation  ;  for  the  people,  whose  God  was  one  day  to  become 
the  desire  and  salvation  of  all  nations,  had  exchanged  Him  for 
the  idols  of  the  nations,  and  was  vying  with  them  in  the  appro 
priation  of  heathen  religion  and  customs. 

It  was  a  state  ripe  for  judgment,  from  which,  therefore, 
the  prophet  could  at  once  proceed,  without  any  further  prepara 
tion,  to  the  proclamation  of  judgment  itself.  Ver.  9.  "  Thus, 
then,  men  are  bowed  down,  and  lords  are  brought  low ;  and  for 
give  them — no,  that  Thou  wilt  not."  The  consecutive  futures 
depict  the  judgment,  as  one  which  would  follow  by  inward 
necessity  from  the  worldly  and  ungodly  glory  of  the  existing 
state  of  things.  The  future  is  frequently  used  in  this  way  (for 
example,  in  ch.  ix.  7  sqq.).  It  was  a  judgment  by  which  small 
and  great,  i.e.  the  people  in  all  its  classes,  were  brought  down 
from  their  false  eminence.  "  Men  "  and  "  lords  "  (dddin  and  ish, 
as  in  ch.  v.  15,  Ps.  xlix.  3,  and  Prov.  viii.  4,  and  like  auOpwiro^ 
and  avrjp  in  the  Attic  dialect),  i.e.  men  who  were  lost  in  the 
crowd,  and  men  who  rose  above  it, — all  of  them  the  judgment 
would  throw  down  to  the  ground,  and  that  without  mercy 
(Rev.  vi.  15).  The  prophet  expresses  the  conviction  (al  as  in 
2  Kings  vi.  27),  that  on  this  occasion  God  neither  could  nor 


CHAP.  II.  10-12.  121 

would  take  away  the  sin  by  forgiving  it.  There  was  nothing 
left  for  them,  therefore,  but  to  carry  out  the  command  of  the 
prophet  in  ver.  10  :  "  Creep  into  the  rock,  and  bury  thyself  in 
the  dust,  before  the  terrible  look  of  Jehovah,  and  before  the  glory 
of  His  majesty"  The  glorious  nation  would  hide  itself  most 
ignominiously,  when  the  only  true  glory  of  Jehovah,  which  had 
been  rejected  by  it,  was  manifested  in  judgment.  They  would 
conceal  themselves  in  holes  of  the  rocks,  as  if  before  a  hostile 
army  (Judg.  vi.  2  ;  1  Sam.  xiii.  6,  xiv.  11),  and  bury  them 
selves  with  their  faces  in  the  sand,  as  if  before  the  fatal  simoom 
of  the  desert,  that  they  might  not  have  to  bear  this  intolerable 
sight.  And  when  Jehovah  manifested  Himself  in  this  way  in 
the  fiery  glance  of  judgment,  the  result  summed  up  in  ver.  11 
must  follow  :  "  The  people  s  eyes  of  haughtiness  are  humbled,  and 
the  pride  of  their  lords  is  bowed  down  ;  and  Jehovah,  He  only, 
stands  exalted  in  that  day?  The  result  of  the  process  of  judg 
ment  is  expressed  in  perfects  :  nisgab  is  the  third  pers.  prcet., 
not  the  participle :  Jehovah  "  is  exalted,"  i.e.  shows  Himself  as 
exalted,  whilst  the  haughty  conduct  of  the  people  is  brought 
down  (shdphel  is  a  verb,  not  an  adjective  ;  it  is  construed  in 
the  singular  by  attraction,  and  either  refers  to  dddm,  man  or 
people :  Ges.  §  148,  1 ;  or  what  is  more  probable,  to  the  logical 
unity  of  the  compound  notion  which  is  taken  as  subject,  the 
constr.  ad  synesin  s.  sensum:  Thiersch,  §  118),  and  the  pride  of 
the  lords  is  bowed  down  (shach  =  shdchaeh,  Job  ix.  13).  The 
first  strophe  of  the  proclamation  of  judgment  appended  to  the 
prophetic  saying  in  vers.  2-4  is  here  brought  to  a  close.  The 
second  strophe  reaches  to  ver.  17,  where  ver.  11  is  repeated  as 
a  concluding  verse. 

The  expression  "  that  day  "  suggests  the  inquiry,  "What  day 
is  referred  to  ?  The  prophet  answers  this  question  in  the 
second  strophe.  Ver.  12.  "For  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  a  day  over 
everything  towering  and  lofty,  and  over  everything  exalted;  and 
it  becomes  low"  "Jehovah  hath  a  day"  (yom  layehovah),  lit. 
there  is  to  Jehovah  a  day,  which  already  exists  as  a  finished 
divine  thought  in  that  wisdom  by  which  the  course  of  history 
is  guided  (ch.  xxxvii.  26,  cf.  xxii.  11),  the  secret  of  which  He 
revealed  to  the  prophets,  who  from  the  time  of  Obadiah  and 
Joel  downwards  proclaimed  that  day  with  one  uniform  watch 
word.  But  when  the  time  appointed  for  that  day  should 


122  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

arrive,  it  would  pass  out  of  the  secret  of  eternity  into  the 
history  of  time, — a  day  of  world-wide  judgment,  which  would 
pass,  through  the  omnipotence  with  which  Jehovah  rules  over 
the  higher  as  well  as  lower  spheres  of  the  whole  creation, 
upon  all  worldly  glory,  and  it  would  be  brought  low  (shaphel). 
The  current  accentuation  of  ver.  12&  is  wrong;  correct  MSS. 
have  by  with  mercha,  Kb'rb  with  lifcha.  The  word  vshdphel 
(third  pers.  prset.  with  the  root-vowel  e)  acquires  the  force  of  a 
future,  although  no  grammatical  future  precedes  it,  from  the 
future  character  of  the  day  itself :  "  and  it  will  sink  down  " 
(Ges.  §  126,  4). 

The  prophet  then  proceeds  to  enumerate  all  the  high  things 
upon  which  that  day  would  fall,  arranging  them  two  and  two, 
and  binding  them  in  pairs  by  a  double  correlative  Vav.  The 
day  of  Jehovah  comes,  as  the  first  two  pairs  affirm,  upon  every 
thing  lofty  in  nature.  Yers.  13,  14.  "  As  upon  all  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon,  the  lofty  and  exalted,  so  upon  all  the  oaks  of  Bashan. 
As  upon  all  mountains ,  the  lofty  ones,  so  upon  all  hills  the  exalted 
ones'9  But  wherefore  upon  all  this  majestic  beauty  of  nature  I 
Is  all  this  merely  figurative  I  Kriobel  regards  it  as  merely  a 
figurative  description  of  the  grand  buildings  of  the  time  of 
Uzziah  and  Jotham,  in  the  erection  of  which  wood  had  been 
used  from  Lebanon  as  well  as  from  Bashan,  on  the  western  slopes 
of  which  the  old  shady  oaks  (sindidn  and  ballut)  are  flourishing 
still.1  But  the  idea  that  trees  can  be  used  to  signify  the  houses 
built  with  the  wood  obtained  from  them,  is  one  that  cannot  be 
sustained  from  ch.  ix.  9  (10),  where  the  reference  is  not  to 
houses  built  of  sycamore  and  cedar  wood,  but  to  trunks  of  trees 
of  the  kind  mentioned  ;  nor  even  from  Nahum  ii.  4  (3),  where 
hallerosldm  refers  to  the  fir  lances  which  are  brandished  about 
in  haughty  thirst  for  battle.  So  again  mountains  and  hills 
cannot  denote  the  castles  and  fortifications  built  upon  them, 
more  especially  as  these  are  expressly  mentioned  in  ver.  15  in 
the  most  literal  terms.  In  order  to  understand  the  prophet,  we 
must  bear  in  mind  what  the  Scriptures  invariably  assume,  from 
their  first  chapter  to  the  very  close,  namely,  that  the  totality  of 
nature  is  bound  up  with  man  in  one  common  history ;  that  man 
and  the  totality  of  nature  are  inseparably  connected  together  as 

1  On  the  meaning  of  the  name  of  this  region,  Bashan  (Z&Ucrft&u),  see 
Job,  vol.  ii.  pp,  298-400,  Eng.  Tr. 


CHAP.  II.  15,  16.  123 

centre  and  circumference ;  that  this  circumference  is  affected 
by  the  sin  which  proceeds  from  man,  as  well  as  by  the  anger  or 
the  mercy  which  proceeds  from  God  to  man  ;  that  the  judgments 
of  God,  as  the  history  of  the  nations  proves,  involve  in  fellow- 
suffering  even  that  part  of  the  creation  which  is  not  free;  and  that 
this  participation  in  the  "  corruption  "  (phthora)  and  "  glory  " 
(doxd)  of  humanity  will  come  out  with  peculiar  distinctness 
and  force  at  the  close  of  the  world's  history,  in  a  manner  corre 
sponding  to  the  commencement ;  and  lastly,  that  the  world  in 
its  present  condition  needs  a  palingenesia,  or  regeneration,  quite 
as  much  as  the  corporeal  nature  of  man,  before  it  can  become 
an  object  of  good  pleasure  on  the  part  of  God.  We  cannot  be 
surprised,  therefore,  that,  in  accordance  with  this  fundamental 
view  of  the  Scriptures,  when  the  judgment  of  God  fell  upon 
Israel,  it  should  also  be  described  as  going  down  to  the  land  of 
Israel,  and  as  overthrowing  not  only  the  false  glory  of  the  nation 
itself,  but  everything  glorious  in  the  surrounding  nature,  which 
had  been  made  to  minister  to  its  national  pride  and  love  of 
show,  and  to  which  its  sin  adhered  in  many  different  ways. 
What  the  prophet  foretold  began  to  be  fulfilled  even  in  the 
Assyrian  wars.  The  cedar  woods  of  Lebanon  were  unsparingly 
destroyed;  the  heights  and  valleys  of  the  land  were  trodden 
down  and  laid  waste ;  and,  in  the  period  of  the  great  empires 
which  commenced  with  Tiglath-pileser,  the  Holy  Land  was 
reduced  to  a  shadow  of  its  former  promised  beauty. 

The  glory  of  nature  is  followed  by  what  is  lofty  and  glori 
ous  in  the  world  of  men,  such  as  magnificent  fortifications, 
grand  commercial  buildings,  and  treasures  which  minister  to 
the  lust  of  the  eye.  Vers.  15,  16.  "As  upon  every  high  tower, 
so  upon  every  fortified  wall.  As  upon  all  ships  of  Tarshish,  so 
upon  all  works  of  curiosity"  It  was  by  erecting  fortifications 
for  offence  and  defence,  both  lofty  and  steep  (bdzur,  pneruptue, 
from  bazar,  abrumpere,  secernere),  that  Uzziah  and  Jotham 
especially  endeavoured  to  serve  Jerusalem  and  the  land  at 
large.  The  chronicler  relates,  with  reference  to  Uzziah,  in 
2  Chron.  xxvi.,  that  he  built  strong  towers  above  "  the  corner- 
gate,  the  valley-gate,  and  the  southern  point  of  the  cheese- 
makers'  hollow,"  and  fortified  these  places,  which  had  probably 
been  till  that  time  the  weakest  points  in  Jerusalem ;  also  that 
he  built  towers  in  the  desert  (probably  in  the  desert  between 


124  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Beersheba  and  Gaza,  to  increase  the  safety  of  the  land,  and 
the  numerous  flocks  which  were  pastured  in  the  ihcpfielah,  i.e 
the  western  portion  of  southern  Palestine).  With  regard  to 
Jotham,  it  is  related  in  both  the  book  of  Kings  (2  Kings 
xv.  32  sqq.)  and  the  Chronicles,  that  he  built  the  upper  gate 
of  the  temple ;  and  in  the  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxvii.)  that 
lie  fortified  the  'Ofel,  i.e.  the  southern  spur  of  the  temple  hill, 
still  more  strongly,  and  built  cities  on  the  mountains  of  Judah, 
and  erected  castles  and  towers  in  the  forests  (to  watch  for 
hostile  attacks  and  ward  them  off).  Hezekiah  also  distin 
guished  himself  by  building  enterprises  of  this  kind  (2  Chron. 
xxxii.  27-30).  But  the  allusion  to  the  ships  of  Tarshish  takes 
us  to  the  times  of  Uzziah  and  Jotham,  and  not  to  those  of 
Hezekiah  (as  Ps.  xlviii.  7  does  to  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat) ; 
for  the  seaport  town  of  Elath,  which  was  recovered  by  Uzziah, 
was  lost  again  to  the  kingdom  of  Judah  during  the  reign  of 
Ahaz.  Jewish  ships  sailed  from  this  Elath  (Ailath)  through 
the  Red  Sea  and  round  the  coast  of  Africa  to  the  harbour  of 
Tartessus,  the  ancient  Phoenician  emporium  of  the  maritime 
region  watered  by  the  Bastis  (Guadalquivir),  which  abounded 
in  silver,  and  then  returned  through  the  Pillars  of  Hercules 
(the  Straits  of  Gibraltar :  vid.  Duncker,  Gesch.  i.  312-315). 
It  was  to  these  Tartessus  vessels  that  the  expression  "  ships 
of  Tarshish"  primarily  referred,  though  it  was  afterwards 
probably  applied  to  mercantile  ships  in  general.  The  follow 
ing  expression,  "works  of  curiosity"  (sechiyyotli  hachemdah), 
is  taken  in  far  too  restricted  a  sense  by  those  who  limit  it, 
as  the  LXX.  have  done,  to  the  ships  already  spoken  of,  or 
understand  it,  as  Gesenius  does,  as  referring  to  beautiful  flags. 
Jerome's  rendering  is  correct :  "  et  super  omne  quod  visu 
pulcrum  est"  (and  upon  everything  beautiful  to  look  at) ; 
seciyydh,  from  sdcdhj  to  look  (see  Job,  p.  468),  is  sight  gene 
rally.  The  reference  therefore  is  to  all  kinds  of  works  of  art, 
whether  in  sculpture  or  paintings  (mascith  is  used  of  both), 
which  delighted  the  observer  by  their  imposing,  tasteful  appear 
ance.  Possibly,  however,  there  is  a  more  especial  reference 
to  curiosities  of  art  and  nature,  which  were  brought  by  the 
trading  vessels  from  foreign  lands. 

Ver.  17  closes  the  second  strophe  of  the  proclamation  of 
judgment  appended  to  the  earlier  prophetic  word :  "And  the 


CHAP.  II.  18,  19.  125 

haughtiness  of  the  people  is  bowed  down,  and  the  pride  of  the 
lords  brought  low ;  and  Jehovah,  He  alone,  stands  exalted  on  that 
day."  The  closing  refrain  only  varies  a  little  from  ver.  11. 
The  subjects  of  the  verbs  are  transposed.  With  a  feminine 
noun  denoting  a  thing,  it  is  almost  a  rule  that  the  predicate 
shall  be  placed  before  it  in  masculine  (Ges.  §  147,  a). 

The  closing  refrain  of  the  next  two  strophes  is  based  upon 
the  concluding  clause  of  ver.  10.  The  proclamation  of  judg 
ment  turns  now  to  the  elilim,  which,  as  being  at  the  root  of  all 
the  evil,  occupied  the  lowest  place  in  the  things  of  which  the 
land  was  full  (vers.  7,  8).  In  a  short  verse  of  one  clause  con 
sisting  of  only  three  words,  their  future  is  declared  as  it  were 
with  a  lightning-flash.  Ver.  18.  "  And  the  idols  utterly  pass 
away'1  The  translation  shows  the  shortness  of  the  verse,  but 
not  the  significant  synallage  numeri.  The  idols  are  one  and  all 
a  mass  of  nothingness,  which  will  be  reduced  to  absolute  anni 
hilation  :  they  will  vanish  cdlil,  i.e.  either  "  they  will  utterly 
perish"  (funditus  peribunt),  or,  as  cdlil  is  not  used  adverbially 
in  any  other  passage,  "they  will  all  perish"  (tota  peribunt, 
Judg.  xx.  40) — their  images,  their  worship,  even  their  names 
and  their  memory  (Zech.  xiii.  2). 

What  the  idolaters  themselves  will  do  when  Jehovah  has  so 
completely  deprived  their  idols  of  all  their  divinity,  is  then 
described  in  ver.  19 :  "And  they  will  creep  into  caves  in  the 
rocks,  and  cellars  in  the  earth,  before  the  terrible  look  of  Jehovah, 
and  before  the  glory  of  His  majesty,  when  He  ariseth  to  put  the 
earth  in  terror"  Medrdli  is  a  natural  cave,  and  mechillah  a 
subterraneous  excavation  :  this  is  apparently  the  distinction 
between  the  two  synonyms.  u  To  put  the  earth  in  terror:" 
laarotz  hd-aretz,  a  significant  paronomasia,  which  can  be  repro 
duced  in  Latin,  thus  :  ut  terreat  terram.  Thus  the  judgment 
would  fall  upon  the  earth  without  any  limitation,  upon  men 
universally  (compare  the  word  hd-dddm  in  ver.  20,  which  is 
scarcely  ever  applied  to  a  single  individual  (Josh.  xiv.  15), 
excepting,  of  course,  the  first  man,  but  generally  to  men,  or 
to  the  human  race)  and  upon  the  totality  of  nature  as  inter 
woven  in  the  history  of  man — one  complete  whole,  in  which 
sin,  and  therefore  wrath,  had  gained  the  upper  hand.  When 
Jehovah  rose  up,  i.e.  stood  up  from  His  heavenly  throne,  to 
reveal  the  glory  manifested  in  heaven,  and  turn  its  judicial 


126  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

fiery  side  towards  the  sinful  earth,  the  earth  would  receive 
such  a  shock  as  would  throw  it  into  a  state  resembling  the 
chaos  of  the  beginning.  We  may  see  very  clearly  from  Rev. 
vi.  15,  where  this  description  is  borrowed,  that  the  prophet  is 
here  describing  the  last  judgment,  although  from  a  national 
point  of  view  and  bounded  by  a  national  horizon. 

Yer.  20  forms  the  commencement  to  the  fourth  strophe : 
"  In  that  day  will  a  man  cast  away  his  idols  of  gold  and  his  idols 
of  silver,  which  they  made  for  him  to  worship,  to  the  moles  and  to 
the  bats."  The  traditional  text  separates  lachpor  peroth  into  two 
words,1  though  without  its  being  possible  to  discover  what  they 
are  supposed  to  mean.  The  reason  for  the  separation  was 
simply  the  fact  that  plurilitera  were  at  one  time  altogether 
misunderstood  and  regarded  as  composita:  for  other  plurilitera, 
written  as  two  words,  compare  ch.  Ixi.  1,  Hos.  iv.  18,  Jer. 
xlvi.  20.  The  prophet  certainly  pronounced  the  word  lachpar- 
pdroth  (Ewald,  §  157,  c)  ;  and  chapharpdrdh  is  apparently  f\ 
mole  (lit.  thrower  up  of  the  soil),  talpa,  as  it  is  rendered  by 
Jerome  and  interpreted  by  Rashi.  Gesenius  and  Knobel, 
however,  have  raised  this  objection,  that  the  mole  is  never 
found  in  houses.  But  are  we  necessarily  to  assume  that  they 
would  throw  their  idols  into  lumber-rooms,  and  not  hide  them 
in  holes  and  crevices  out  of  doors?  The  mole,  the  shrew- 
mouse,  and  the  bat,  whose  name  (atalleph)  is  regarded  by 
Schultens  as  a  compound  word  (atal-eph,  night-bird),  are  gene- 
rically  related,  according  to  both  ancient  and  modern  natu 
ralists.  Bats  are  to  birds  what  moles  are  to  the  smaller 
beasts  of  prey  (vid.  Levysohn,  Zoologie  des  Talmud,  p.  102). 
The  LXX.  combine  with  these  two  words  I hishtacliavoth  (to 
worship).  Malbim  and  Luzzatto  adopt  this  rendering,  and 
understand  the  words  to  mean  that  they  would  sink  dowrn  to 
the  most  absurd  descriptions  of  animal  worship.  But  the 

1  Abulwalid  Parchon  and  others  regard  the  double  word  as  the 
singular  of  a  substantive,  applied  to  a  particular  bird  (possibly  a  wood 
pecker),  as  a  pecker  of  fruit  (perotJi).  Kimchi  would  rather  take  lachpor 
as  an  infinitive  (as  iu  Josh.  ii.  2),  to  dig  pits ;  and  compares  with  it  the 
talmudic  word  per,  a  pit  or  grave.  No  one  adopts  the  rendering  "  into 
mouse-holes,"  simply  because  perah,  a  mouse  (from  an  Arabic  word  f tiara, 
to  dig,  or  root  up),  was  not  a  Hebrew  word  at  all,  but  was  adopted  at  a 
later  period  from  the  Arabic  (hence  the  Hebneo-Arabic  purah,  a  mouse 
trap). 


CHAP.  II.  21.  127 

accentuation,  winch  does  not  divide  the  verse  at  v~OT,  as  we 
should  expect  if  this  were  the  meaning,  is  based  upon  the 
correct  interpretation.  The  idolaters,  convinced  of  the  worth- 
lessness  of  their  idols  through  the  judicial  interposition  of  God, 
and  enraged  at  the  disastrous  manner  in  which  they  had  been 
deceived,  would  throw  away  with  curses  the  images  of  gold 
and  silver  which  artists'  hands  had  made  according  to  their 
instructions,  and  hide  them  in  the  holes  of  bats  and  in  mole 
hills,  to  conceal  them  from  the  eyes  of  the  Judge,  and  then  take 
refuge  there  themselves  after  ridding  themselves  of  this  useless 
and  damnable  burden. 

Ver.  21.  "To  creep  into  the  cavities  of  the  stone-Hocks,  and 
into  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  before  the  terrible  look  of  Jehovah,  and 
before  the  glory  of  His  majesty,  when  He  arises  to  put  the  earth  in 
terror"  Thus  ends  the  fourth  strophe  of  this  "  dies  irce,  dies 
ilia"  which  is  appended  to  the  earlier  prophetic  word.  But 
there  follows,  as  an  epiphonem,  this  nota  bene  in  ver.  22  :  Oh, 
then,  let  man  go,  in  whose  nose  is  a  breath;  for  what  is  he  esti 
mated  at?  The  Septuagint  leaves  this  verse  out  altogether. 
But  was  it  so  utterly  unintelligible  then  ?  Jerome  adopted  a 
false  pointing,  and  has  therefore  given  this  marvellous  render 
ing  :  excelsus  (bdmdh  !)  reputatus  est  ipse,  by  which  Luther  was 
apparently  misled.  But  if  we  look  backwards  and  forwards,  it 
is  impossible  to  mistake  the  meaning  of  the  verse,  which  must 
be  regarded  not  only  as  the  resultant  of  what  precedes  it,  but 
also  as  the  transition  to  what  follows.  It  is  preceded  by  the 
prediction  of  the  utter  demolition  of  everything  which  ministers 
to  the  pride  and  vain  confidence  of  men  ;  and  in  ch.  iii.  1  sqq. 
the  same  prediction  is  resumed,  with  a  more  special  reference 
to  the  Jewish  state,  from  which  Jehovah  is  about  to  take  away 
every  prop,  so  that  it  shall  utterly  collapse.  Accordingly  the 
prophet  exhorts,  in  ver.  22,  to  a  renunciation  of  trust  in  man, 
and  everything  belonging  to  him,  just  as  in  Ps.  cxviii.  8,  9, 
cxlvi.  3,  and  Jer.  xvii.  5.  The  construction  is  as  general  as 
that  of  a  gnome.  The  dat.  commodi  ^  (Ges.  §  154,  3,  e) 
renders  the  exhortation  both  friendly  and  urgent :  from  regard 
to  yourselves,  for  your  own  good,  for  your  own  salvation,  desist 
from  man,  i.e.  from  your  confidence  in  him,  in  whose  nose  (in 
cujus  naso,  the  singular,  as  in  Job  xxvii.  3 ;  whereas  the  plural 
is  used  in  Gen,  ii.  7  in  the  same  sense,  in  nares  ejus,  "  into  his 


128  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

nostrils  ")  is  a  breath,  a  breath  of  life,  which  God  gave  to  him, 
and  can  take  back  as  soon  as  He  will  (Job  xxxiv.  14;  Ps. 
civ.  29).  Upon  the  breath,  which  passes  out  and  in  through 
his  nose,  his  whole  earthly  existence  is  suspended ;  and  this, 
when  once  lost,  is  gone  for  ever  (Job  vii.  7).  It  is  upon  this 
breath,  therefore,  that  all  the  confidence  placed  in  man  must 
rest, — a  bad  soil  and  foundation  !  Under  these  conditions,  and 
with  this  liability  to  perish  in  a  moment,  the  worth  of  man" as  a 
ground  of  confidence  is  really  nothing.  This  thought  is  ex 
pressed  here  in  the  form  of  a  question  :  At  (for)  what  is  he 
estimated,  or  to  be  estimated  ?  The  passive  participle  nechshdb 
combines  with  the  idea  of  the  actual  (cestimatus)  that  of  the 
necessary  (cestimandus),  and  also  of  the  possible  or  suitable 
((vstimabilis) ;  and  that  all  the  more  because  the  Semitic  lan 
guages  have  no  special  forms  for  the  latter  notions.  The  Beth 
is  Beth  pretiij  corresponding  to  the  Latin  genitive  (guanti)  or 
ablative  (quanto), — a  modification  of  the  Betli  instrument^  the 
price  being  regarded  as  the  medium  of  exchange  or  purchase  : 
"  at  what  is  he  estimated,"  not  with  what  is  he  compared, 
which  would  be  expressed  by  9eth  (ch.  liii.  12  ;  compare  //.era, 
Luke  xxii.  37)  or  fim  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  5).  The  word  is  HEQ,  not  HD2, 
because  this  looser  form  is  only  found  in  cases  where  a  relative 
clause  follows  (eo  quod,  Eccles.  in.  22),  and  not  bammdfi,  because 
this  termination  with  a  is  used  exclusively  where  the  next  word 
begins  with  Aleph,  or  where  it  is  a  pausal  word  (as  in  1  Kings 
xxii.  21)  ;  in  every  other  case  we  have  bammeh.  The  question 
introduced  with  this  quanta  (guanti),  "  at  what,"  cannot  be 
answered  by  any  positive  definition  of  value.  The  worth  of 
man,  regarded  in  himself,  and  altogether  apart  from  God,  is 
really  nothing. 

The  proclamation  of  judgment  pauses  at  this  porisma,  but 
only  for  the  purpose  of  gathering  fresh  strength.  The  prophet 
has  foretold  in  four  strophes  the  judgment  of  God  upon  every 
exalted  thing  in  the  kosmos  that  has  fallen  away  from  com 
munion  with  God,  just  as  Amos  commences  his  book  with  a 
round  of  judgments,  which  are  uttered  in  seven  strophes  of 
uniform  scope,  bursting  like  seven  thunder-claps  upon  the 
nations  of  the  existing  stage  of  history.  The  seventh  stroke 
falls  upon  Judah,  over  which  the  thunderstorm  rests  after 
finding  such  abundant  booty.  And  in  the  same  manner  Isaiah, 


CHAP.  III.  1.  129 

in  the  instance  before  us,  reduces  the  universal  proclamation  of 
judgment  to  one  more  especially  affecting  Judah  and  Jerusalem. 
The  current  of  the  address  breaks  through  the  bounds  of  the 
strophe ;  and  the  exhortation  in  ch.  ii.  22  not  to  trust  in  man, 
the  reason  for  which  is  assigned  in  what  precedes,  also  forms  a 
transition  from  the  universal  proclamation  of  judgment  to  the 
more  special  one  in  ch.  iii.  1,  where  the  prophet  assigns  a  fresh 
ground  for  the  exhortation  : — 

Ch.  iii.  1.  "For,  behold,  the  Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts,  takes  away 
from  Jerusalem  and  from  Judah  supporter  and  means  of  support, 
every  support  of  bread  and  every  support  of  water"  The  divine 
name  given  here,  "  The  Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts,"  with  which 
Isaiah  everywhere  introduces  the  judicial  acts  of  God  (cf.  ch. 
i.  24,  x.  16,  33,  xix.  4),  is  a  proof  that  the  proclamation  of 
judgment  commences  afresh  here.  Trusting  in  man  was  the 
crying  sin,  more  especially  of  the  times  of  Uzziah-Jotham. 
The  glory  of  the  kingdom  at  that  time  carried  the  wrath  of 
Jehovah  within  it.  The  outbreak  of  that  wrath  commenced  in 
the  time  of  Ahaz  ;  and  even  under  Hezekiah  it  was  merely 
suspended,  not  changed.  Isaiah  foretells  this  outbreak  of 
vvrath.  He  describes  how  Jehovah  will  lay  the  Jewish  state  in 
ruins,  by  taking  away  the  main  supports  of  its  existence  and 
growth.  "  Supporter  and  means  of  support "  (inaslien  and 
inaslienali)  express,  first  of  all,  the  general  idea.  The  two 
nouns,  which  are  only  the  masculine  and  feminine  forms  of  one 
and  the  same  word  (compare  Mic.  ii.  4,  Nahurn  ii.  11,  and 
the  examples  from  the  Syriac  and  Arabic  in  Ewald,  §  172,  c), 
serve  to  complete  the  generalization  :  fulcra  omne  genus  (props 
of  every  kind,  omnigena).  They  are  both  technical  terms, 
denoting  the  prop  which  a  person  uses  to  support  anything, 
'vhilst  mislian  signifies  that  which  yields  support ;  so  that  the 
three  correspond  somewhat  to  the  Latin  ftdcrum,  fultura, 
falcimen.  Of  the  various  means  of  support,  bread  and  wine 
are  mentioned  first,  not  in  a  figurative  sense,  but  as  the  two 
indispensable  conditions  and  the  lowest  basis  of  human  life. 
Life  is  supported  by  bread  and  water  :  it  walks,  as  it  were, 
upon  the  crutch  of  bread,  so  that  "  breaking  the  staff  of  bread" 
(Lev.  xxvi.  26;  Ezek.  iv.  16,  v.  16,  xiv.  13;  Ps.  cv.  16)  is 
equivalent  to  physical  destruction.  The  destruction  of  the 
Jewish  state  would  accordingly  be  commenced  by  a  removal  on 
VOL.  i.  I 


130  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  part  of  Jehovah  of  all  the  support  afforded  by  bread  and 
water,  i.e.  all  the  stores  of  both.  And  this  was  literally  ful 
filled,  for  both  in  the  Chaldean  and  Roman  times  Jerusalem 
perished  in  the  midst  of  just  such  terrible  famines  as  are 
threatened  in  the  curses  in  Lev.  xxvi.,  and  more  especially  in 
Deut.  xxviii. ;  and  in  both  cases  the  inhabitants  were  reduced 
to  such  extremities,  that  women  devoured  their  own  children 
(Lam.  ii.  20 ;  Josephus,  Wars  of  Jews,  vi.  3,  3,  4).  It  is  very 
unjust,  therefore,  on  the  part  of  modern  critics,  such  as  Hitzig, 
Knobel,  and  Meier,  to  pronounce  ver.  16  a  gloss,  and,  in  fact, 
a  false  one.  Gesenius  and  Umbreit  retracted  this  suspicion. 
The  construction  of  the  verse  is  just  the  same  as  that  of  cb. 
xxv.  6 ;  and  it  is  Isaiah's  custom  to  explain  his  own  figures,  as 
we  have  already  observed  when  comparing  ch.  i.  7  sqq.  and 
i.  23  with  what  preceded  them.  "  Every  support  of  bread  and 
every  support  of  water  "  are  not  to  be  regarded  in  this  case  as 
an  explanation  of  the  general  idea  introduced  before,  "  sup 
porters  and  means  of  support,"  but  simply  as  the  commencement 
of  the  detailed  expansion  of  the  idea.  For  the  enumeration  of 
the  supports  which  Jehovah  would  take  away  is  continued  in 
the  next  two  verses. 

Vers.  2,  3.  "Hero  and  man  of  war,  judge  and  prophet, 
and  soothsayer  and  elder ;  captains  of  fifty-)  and  the  highly  dis 
tinguished,  and  counsellors,  and  masters  in  art,  and  those  skilled 
in  muttering"  As  the  state  had  grown  into  a  military  state 
under  Uzziah-Jotham,  the  prophet  commences  in  both  verses 
with  military  officers,  viz.  the  gibbor,  i.e.  commanders  whose 
bravery  had  been  already  tried ;  the  "  man  of  war"  (ish  mil- 
chdmdh),  i.e.  private  soldiers  who  had  been  equipped  and  well 
trained  (see  Ezek.  xxxix.  20) ;  and  the  "  captain  of  fifty"  (sar 
chamisshim),  leaders  of  the  smallest  divisions  of  the  army,  con 
sisting  of  only  fifty  men  (pentekontarchos,  2  Kings  i.  9,  etc.). 
The  prominent  members  of  the  state  are  all  mixed  up  together : 
"  the  judge"  (shophet),  i.e.  the  officers  appointed  by  the  govern 
ment  to  administer  justice ;  "  the  elder"  (zdkeri),  i.e.  the  heads 
of  families  and  the  senators  appointed  by  the  town  corpora 
tions  ;  the  "  counsellor"  (yoetz),  those  nearest  to  the  king ;  the 
"  highly  distinguished"  (nesu  panim),  lit.  those  whose  personal 
appearance  (panim)  was  accepted,  i.e.  welcome  and  regarded 
with  honour  (Saad. ;  wayih,  from  wa'gh,  the  face  or  appearance), 


CHAP.  III.  2,  3.  131 

that  is  to  say,  persons  of  influence,  not  only  on  account  of  their 
office,  but  also  on  account  of  wealth,  age,  goodness,  etc. ; 
"  masters  in  art"  (chacam  chardshim  :  LXX.  cro</>o?  ap%iTeKTc0v), 
or,  as  Jerome  has  very  well  rendered  it,  in  artibus  mechanicis 
exercitatus  easque  collide  tractans  (persons  well  versed  in  mecha 
nical  arts,  and  carrying  them  out  with  skill).  In  the  Chaldean 
captivities  skilled  artisans  are  particularly  mentioned  as  having 
been  carried  away  (2  Kings  xxiv.  14  sqq. ;  Jer.  xxiv.  1,  xxix. 
2)  ;  so  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that  chardshim 
(from  cheresh)  is  to  be  understood  as  signifying  mechanical  and 
not  magical  arts,  as  Gesenius,  Hitzig,  and  Meier  suppose,  and 
therefore  that  chacam  chardshim  does  not  mean  u  wizards,"  as 
Ewald  renders  it  (chardshim  is  a  different  word  from  chdrdshim, 
fabri,  from  chdrdsh,  although  in  1  Chron.  iv.  14,  cf.  Neh.  xi.  35, 
the  word  is  regularly  pointed  B^n  even  in  this  personal  sense). 
Moreover,  the  rendering  "  wizards"  produces  tautology,  inas 
much  as  masters  of  the  black  art  are  cited  as  nebon  lachashj 
u  skilled  in  muttering."  Lachash  is  the  whispering  or  mutter 
ing  of  magical  formulas ;  it  is  related  both  radically  and  in 
meaning  to  nachash,  enchantment  (Arabic  nachs,  misfortune)  ; 
it  is  derived  from  Idchash,  sibilare,  to  hiss  (a  kindred  word  to 
ndchash ;  hence  ndchdsh,  a  serpent).  Beside  this,  the  masters 
of  the  black  art  are  also  represented  as  kosem,  which,  in  ac 
cordance  with  the  radical  idea  of  making  fast,  swearing,  con 
juring,  denoted  a  soothsayer  following  heathen  superstitions,  as 
distinguished  from  the  nabi,  or  false  Jehovah  prophet  (we  find 
this  as  early  as  Deut.  xviii.  10,  14).1  These  came  next  to  bread 

1  According  to  the  primary  meaning  of  the  whole  tJiema,  which  is 
one  of  hardness,  rigidity,  firmness,  aksama  (hi.  of  kasam)  signifies,  strictly 
speaking,  to  make  sure,  i.e.  to  swear,  either  by  swearing  to  the  truth  and 
certainty  of  a  thing,  or  by  making  a  person  swear  that  he  will  do  or 
not  do  a  certain  thing,  by  laying  as  it  were  a  kasam  upon  him.  The  kal, 
on  the  other  hand  (kasamd),  gets  its  meaning  to  divide  from  the  turn 
given  to  the  radical  idea  in  the  substantive  kism,  which  signifies,  accord 
ing  to  the  original  lexicographers,  something  fixed  (==  nasib),  definite, 
i.e.  a  definite  portion.  There  is  just  the  same  association  of  ideas  in  'azama 
as  in  aksama,  namely,  literally  to  be  firm  or  make  firm,  i.e.  to  direct  one's 
will  firmly  towards  an  object  or  place ;  also  to  direct  one's  will  firmly 
towards  a  person,  to  adjure  him  to  do  a  thing  or  not  to  do  it ;  sometimes 
with  a  softer  meaning,  to  urge  or  invite  a  person  to  anything,  at  other  times 
to  recite  conjuring  formulas  Cazairn^. 


132  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

and  water,  and  were  in  a  higher  grade  the  props  of  the  state. 
They  are  mixed  together  in  this  manner  without  regular  order, 
hecause  the  powerful  and  splendid  state  was  really  a  quodlibet 
of  things  Jewish  and  heathen  ;  and  when  the  wrath  of  Jehovah 
broke  out,  the  godless  glory  would  soon  become  a  mass  of 
confusion. 

Ver.  4.  Thus  robbed  of  its  support,  and  torn  out  of  its 
proper  groove,  the  kingdom  of  Judah  would  fall  a  prey  to  the 
most  shameless  despotism  :  "  And  I  give  them  boys  for  princes, 
and  caprices  shall  rule  over  them"  The  revived  "  Solomonian" 
glory  is  followed,  as  before,  by  the  times  of  Eehoboam.  The 
king  is  not  expressly  named.  This  was  intentional.  He  had 
sunk  into  the  mere  shadow  of  a  king :  it  was  not  he  who  ruled, 
but  the  aristocratic  party  that  surrounded  him,  who  led  him 
about  in  leading  strings  as  unum  inter  pares.  Now,  if  it  is  a 
misfortune  in  most  cases  for  a  king  to  be  a  child  (naar,  Eccles. 
x.  16),  the  misfortune  is  twice  as  great  when  the  princes  or 
magnates  who  surround  and  advise  him  are  youngsters  (nedrim, 
i.e.  young  lords)  in  a  bad  sense.  It  produces  a  government  of 
taalulim.  None  of  the  nouns  in  this  form  have  a  personal 
signification.  According  to  the  primary  meaning  of  the  verbal 
stem,  the  word  might  signify  childishnesses,  equivalent  to  little 
children  (the  abstract  for  the  concrete,  like  ra  Tratiuca,  amasius), 
as  Ewald  supposes  ;  or  puppets,  fantocci,  poltroons,  or  men 
without  heart  or  brain,  as  Luzzatto  maintains.  But  the  latter 
has  no  support  in  the  general  usage  of  the  language,  and  the 
verb  yimslielu  (shall  rule)  does  not  necessarily  require  a  personal 
subject  (cf.  Ps.  xix.  14,  ciii.  19).  The  word  taalulim  is  formed 
from  the  reflective  verb  hithallel,  which  means  to  meddle,  to  gra 
tify  one's  self,  to  indulge  one's  caprice.  Accordingly  taalulim 
itself  might  be  rendered  vexationes  (ch.  Ixvi.  4).  Jerome,  who 
translates  the  word  effeminati,  appears  to  have  thought  of 
fenn  in  an  erotic  sense.  The  Sept.  rendering,  e^Trai/crai,  is 
better,  though  e^Traiyaara  would  be  more  exact.  When  used, 
as  the  word  is  here,  along  with  nearim,  it  signifies  outbursts 
of  youthful  caprice,  which  do  injury  to  others,  whether  in 
joke  or  earnest.  Neither  law  nor  justice  would  rule,  but  the 
very  opposite  of  justice  :  a  course  of  conduct  which  would 
make  subjects,  like  slaves,  the  helpless  victims  at  one  time 
of  their  lust  (Judg.  xix.  25),  and  at  another  of  their  cruelty. 


CHAP.  III.  5-7.  133 

They  would  be  governed  by  lawless  and  bloodstained  caprice,  of 
the  most  despotic  character  and  varied  forms.  And  the  people 
would  resemble  their  rulers  :  their  passions  would  be  let  loose, 
and  all  restraints  of  modesty  and  decorum  be  snapt  asunder. 

Ver.  5.  "And  the  people  oppress  one  another,  one  this  and 
a?tother  that ;  the  boy  breaks  out  violently  upon  the  old  man,  and 
the  despised  upon  the  honoured"  Niggas  is  a  reciprocal  niphal, 
as  the  clause  depicting  the  reciprocity  clearly  shows  (cf.  nilcham, 
ch.  xix.  2)  ;  nagas  followed  by  Beth  means  to  treat  as  a  tyrant 
or  taskmaster  (ch.  ix.  3).  The  commonest  selfishness  would 
then  stifle  every  nobler  motive ;  one  would  become  the  tyrant 
of  another,  and  ill-mannered  insolence  would  take  the  place  of 
that  reverence,  which  is  due  to  the  old  and  esteemed  from  boys 
and  those  who  are  below  them  in  position,  whether  we  regard 
the  law  of  nature,  the  Mosaic  law  (Lev.  xix.  32),  or  the  com 
mon  custom  of  society.  Nikleli  (from  kdldh,  the  synonym  of 
?i?fl,  ch.  viii.  23,  xxiii.  9  ;  cf.  ch.  xvi.  14,  kal,  to  be  light  or 
insignificant)  was  a  term  used  to  denote  whoever  belonged  to 
the  lowest  stratum  of  society  (1  Sam.  xviii.  23).  It  was  the 
opposite  of  nicbdd  (from  cabed,  to  be  heavy  or  of  great  import 
ance).  The  Septuagint  rendering,  o  ariuos  TT^O?  TOV  evrifjiov 
is  a  very  good  one  (as  the  Semitic  languages  have  no  such 
antithetical  formations  with  a  crTepnTiKov).  With  such  con 
tempt  of  the  distinctions  arising  from  age  and  position,  the 
state  would  very  soon  become  a  scene  of  the  wildest  confusion. 

At  length  there  would  be  no  authorities  left;  even  the 
desire  to  rule  would  die  out :  for  despotism  is  sure  to  be 
followed  by  mob-rule,  and  mob-rule  by  anarchy  in  the  most 
literal  sense.  The  distress  would  become  so  great,  that  who 
ever  had  a  coat  (cloak),  so  as  to  be  able  to  clothe  himself 
at  all  decently,  would  be  asked  to  undertake  the  government. 
Vers.  6,  7.  "  When  a  man  shall  take  hold  of  his  brother  in 
his  father  s  house,  Thou  hast  a  coat,  thou  shalt  be  our  ruler,  and 
take  this  ruin  under  thy  hand ;  he  will  cry  out  in  that  day,  I 
do  not  want  to  be  a  surgeon ;  there  is  neither  bread  nor  coat  in 
my  house :  ye  cannot  make  me  the  ruler  of  the  people."  "  His 
father  s  house" — this  is  not  an  unmeaning  trait  in  the  picture 
of  misery.  The  population  would  have  become  so  thin  and 
dispirited  through  hunger,  that  with  a  little  energy  it  would  be 
possible  to  decide  within  the  narrow  circle  of  a  family  who 


134  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

should  be  ruler,  and  to  give  effect  to  the  decision.  "  In  his 
father's  house:"  Beth  abiv  is  an  ace.  loci.  The  father's  house 
is  the  place  where  brother  meets  with  brother ;  and  one  breaks 
out  with  the  urgent  petition  contained  in  the  words,  which 
follow  without  the  introductory  "saying"  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  8,  16, 
and  xxii.  16,  xxxiii.  14).  npp  for  *I?  with  He  otians,  a  form 
rarely  met  with  (vid.  Gen.  xxvii.  37).  fi^fy  which  would  be 
written  '•nn  before  the  predicate,  is  jussive  in  meaning,  though 
not  in  form.  "  This  ruin:"  macshelah  is  used  in  Zeph.  i.  3 
for  that  which  occasions  a  person's  fall ;  here  it  signifies  what 
has  been  overthrown ;  and  as  cdshal  itself,  which  means  not 
only  to  stumble,  trip,  or  slide,  but  also  to  fall  in  consequence 
of  some  force  applied  from  without,  is  not  used  in  connection 
with  falling  buildings,  it  must  be  introduced  here  with  an 
allusion  to  the  prosopopeia  which  follows  in  ver.  8.  The  man 
who  was  distinguished  above  all  others,  or  at  any  rate  above 
many  others,  by  the  fact  that  he  could  still  dress  himself 
decently  (even  if  it  were  only  in  a  blouse),  should  be  made 
supreme  ruler  or  dictator  (cf.  kdtzin,  Judg.  xi.  6)  ;  and  the 
state  which  lay  so  miserably  in  ruins  should  be  under  his  hand, 
i.e.  his  direction,  protection,  and  care  (2  Kings  viii.  20 ;  Gen. 
xli.  35,  cf.  ch.  xvi.  9,  where  the  plural  is  used  instead  of  the 
ordinary  singular  ydd).  The  apodosis  to  the  protasis  intro 
duced  with  chi  as  a  particle  of  time  (when)  commences  in 
ver.  7.  The  answer  given  by  the  brother  to  the  earnest 
petition  is  introduced  with  "  he  will  raise  (viz.  his  voice,  ch. 
xxiv.  14)  in  that  day,  saying."  It  is  given  in  this  circumstantial 
manner  because  it  is  a  solemn  protest.  He  does  not  want  to 
be  a  cholesh,  i.e.  a  Under,  namely  of  the  broken  arms,  and 
bones,  and  ribs  of  the  ruined  state  (ch.  xxx.  26,  i.  6,  Ixi.  1). 
The  expression  ehyeh  implies  that  he  does  not  like  it,  because 
he  is  conscious  of  his  inability.  He  has  not  confidence  enough 
in  himself,  and  the  assumption  that  he  has  a  coat  is  a  false  one: 
he  not  only  has  no  coat  at  home  (we  must  remember  that  the 
conversation  is  supposed  to  take  place  in  his  father's  house), 
but  he  has  not  any  bread ;  so  that  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  a 
naked,  starving  man  like  him  to  do  what  is  suggested  ("  in  my 
house,"  ubebethi  with  a  Vav  of  causal  connection:  Ges.  155,  1,  c). 
The  prophet  then  proceeds,  in  vers.8-12,  to  describe  this  deep, 
tragical  misery  as  a  just  retribution.  Ver.  8.  "  For  Jerusalem 


CHAP.  Ill   8.  135 

is  ruined  and  JudaJi  fallen ;  because  their  tongue  and  their  doings 
(are)  against  Jehovah,  to  defy  the  eyes  of  His  glory"  Jerusalem 
as  a  city  is  feminine,  according  to  the  usual  personification ; 
Judali  as  a  people  is  regarded  .as  masculine.1  The  two  preterites 
cdslildh  and  ndphai  express  the  general  fact,  which  occasioned 
such  scenes  of  misery  as  the  one  just  described.  The  second 
clause,  beginning  with  "  because"  (chi},  is  a  substantative  clause, 
and  attributes  the  coining  judgment  not  to  future  sin,  but  to  sin 
already  existing.  "Against  Jehovah:"  ^  is  used  to  denote  a 
hostile  attitude,  as  in  ch.  ii.  4,  Gen.  iv.  8,  Num.  xxxii.  14,  Josh. 
x.  6.  The  capital  arid  the  land  are  against  Jehovah  both  in 
word  and  deed,  "  to  defy  the  eyes  of  His  glory"  (lamroth  'ene 
chebodo).  ^  is  equivalent  to  W;  and  lamroth  is  a  syncopated 
Jiiphil,  as  in  ch.  xxiii.  11,  and  like  the  niphal  in  ch.  i.  12:  we  find 
the  same  form  of  the  same  word  in  Ps.  Ixxviii.  17.  The  kal 
mdrdhy  which  is  also  frequently  construed  with  the  accusative, 
signifies  to  thrust  away  in  a  refractory  manner  ;  the  hiphii 
himrdhj  to  treat  refractorily,  literally  to  set  one's  self  rigidly  in 
opposition,  obniti;  mar,  stringer  e,  to  draw  tightly,  with  which 
unquestionably  the  meaning  bitter  as  an  astringent  is  con 
nected,  though  it  does  not  follow  that  mdrdh,  himrdhj  and 
hemar  (Ex.  xxiii.  21)  can  be  rendered  irapaTriKpaiveiv,  as  they 
have  been  in  the  Septuagint,  since  the  idea  of  opposing, 
resisting,  fighting  in  opposition,  is  implied  in  all  these  roots, 
with  distinct  reference  to  the  primary  meaning.  The  Lamed  is 
a  shorter  expression  instead  of  \ytf?,  which  is  the  term  generally 
employed  in  such  circumstances  (Amos  ii.  7  ;  Jer.  vii.  18, 
xxxii.  29).  But  what  does  the  prophet  mean  by  "  the  eyes  of 
His  glory?"  KnobeFs  assertion,  that  clidlod  is  used  here  for 
the  religious  glory,  i.e.  the  holiness  of  God,  is  a  very  strange 
one,  since  the  clidbod  of  God  is  invariably  the  fiery,  bright 
doxa  which  reveals  Him  as  the  Holy  One.  But  his  remark 
does  not  meet  the  question,  inasmuch  as  it  does  not  settle  the 
point  in  dispute,  whether  the  expression  "  the  eyes  of  His 
glory"  implies  that  the  glory  itself  has  eyes,  or  the  glory  is 
a  quality  of  the  eyes.  The  construction  is  certainly  not  a 
different  one  from  "the  arm  of  His  glory1'  in  ch.  lii.  10,  so 

1  As  a  rule,  the  name  of  a  people  (apart  from  the  personification  of  the 
people  as  leth,  a  house)  is  only  used  as  a  feminine,  when  the  name  of  the 
land  stands  for  the  nation  itself  (see  Gesenius,  LeJirlegr.  p.  469). 


136  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

that  it  is  to  be  taken  as  an  attribute.  But  this  suggests  tho 
further  question,  what  does  the  prophet  mean  by  the  glory- 
eyes  or  glorious  eyes  of  Jehovah  ?  If  we  were  to  say  the  eyes 
of  Jehovah  are  His  knowledge  of  the  world,  it  would  be  im 
possible  to  understand  how  they  could  be  called  holy,  still  less 
how  they  could  be  called  glorious.  This  abstract  explanation 
of  the  anthropomorphisms  cannot  be  sustained.  The  state  of 
the  case  is  rather  the  following.  The  glory  (chabod)  of  God 
is  that  eternal  and  glorious  morphe  which  His  holy  nature 
assumes,  and  which  men  must  picture  to  themselves  anthropo- 
morphically,  because  they  cannot  imagine  anything  superior 
to  the  human  form.  In  this  glorious  form  Jehovah  looks  upon 
His  people  with  eyes  of  glory.  His  pure  but  yet  jealous  love, 
His  holy  love  which  breaks  out  in  wrath  against  all  who  meet 
it  with  hatred  instead  of  with  love,  is  reflected  therein. 

But  Israel,  instead  of  walking  in  the  consciousness  of  being 
a  constant  and  favourite  object  of  these  majestic,  earnestly 
admonishing  eyes,  was  diligently  engaged  in  bidding  them 
defiance  both  in  word  and  deed,  not  even  hiding  its  sin  from 
fear  of  them,  but  exposing  them  to  view  in  the  most  shameless 
manner. — Ver.  9.  "  The  look  of  their  faces  testifies  against  them, 
and  their  sin  they  make  known  like  Sodortt,  without  concealing  it: 
woe  to  their  soul !  for  they  do  themselves  harm"  In  any  case, 
the  prophet  refers  to  the  impudence  with  which  their  enmity 
against  God  was  shamelessly  stamped  upon  their  faces,  without 
even  the  self-condemnation  which  leads  in  other  cases  to  a 
diligent  concealment  of  the  sin.  But  we  cannot  follow  Luz- 
zatto  and  Jos.  Kimchi,  who  take  haccdrath  as  used  directly  for 
azzutli  (impudence),  inasmuch  as  the  Arabic  hakara  (hakir'a), 
to  which  Kimchi  appeals,  signifies  to  be  astonished  and  to  stare 
(see  at  Job  xix.  3).  And  in  this  case  there  would  be  nothing 
strange  in  the  substantive  form,  which  would  be  a  piel  forma 
tion  like  nrfe  n&JBn.  But  it  may  be  a  hiphil  formation  (Ewald, 
§  156,  a) ;  and  this  is  incomparably  the  more  probable  of  the 
two,  as  hiccir  panim  is  a  very  common  phrase.  It  signifies  to 
look  earnestly,  keenly,  or  inquiringly  in  the  face  of  a  person,  to 
fix  the  eye  upon  him  ;  and,  when  used  of  a  judge,  to  take  the 
part  of  a  person,  by  favouring  him  unjustly  (Deut,  i.  17, 
xvi.  19).  But  this  latter  idea,  viz.  "their  acceptance  of  tho 
person,  or  partiality''  (according  to  Prov.  xxiv.  23,  xxviii.  21), 


CHAP.  III.  10,  11.  137 

is  inadmissible  here,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  passage 
refers  to  the  whole  nation,  and  not  particularly  to  the  judges. 
"  The  look  of  their  faces  "  (haccdrath  pmhern)  is  to  be  under 
stood  in  an  objective  sense,  viz.  the  appearance  (TO  eISo9,  Luke 
ix.  29),  like  the  agnitio  of  Jerome,  id  quo  se  agnoscendum  dot 
vultus  eorum.  This  was  probably  the  expression  commonly 
employed  in  Hebrew  for  what  we  designate  by  a  very  inappro 
priate  foreign  word,  viz.  physiognomy,  i.e.  the  expression  of 
the  face  which  reveals  the  state  of  the  mind.  This  expression 
of  their  countenance  testified  against  them  (anah  b\  as  in 
ch.  lix.  12),  for  it  was  the  disturbed  and  distorted  image  of 
their  sin,  which  not  only  could  not  be  hidden,  but  did  not  even 
wish  to  be ;  in  a  word,  of  their  azzutli  (Eccles.  viii.  1).  And  it 
did  not  even  rest  with  this  open  though  silent  display :  they 
spoke  openly  of  their  sin  (Jiiggid  in  its  simplest  meaning,  palam 
facere,  from  ndgad,  nagdda,  to  be  open,  evident)  without 
making  any  secret  of  it,  like  the  Sodomites,  who  publicly 
proclaimed  their  fleshly  lusts  (Gen.  xix.).  Jerusalem  was 
spiritually  Sodom,  as  the  prophet  called  it  in  ch.  i.  10.  By 
such  barefaced  sinning  they  did  themselves  harm  (gdmal,  lit. 
to  finish,  then  to  carry  out,  to  show  practically1). 

The  prophet's  meaning  is  evident  enough.  But  inasmuch 
as  it  is  the  curse  of  sin  to  distort  the  knowledge  of  what  is 
most  obvious  and  self-evident,  and  even  to  take  it  entirely  away, 
the  prophet  dwells  still  longer  upon  the  fact  that  all  sinning 
is  self-destruction  and  self-murder,  placing  this  general  truth 
against  its  opposite  in  a  palillogical  Johannic  way,  and  call 
ing  out  to  his  contemporaries  in  vers.  10,  11 :  "  Say  of  the 
righteous,  that  it  is  well  with  him ;  for  they  will  enjoy  the  fruit  of 
their  doings.  Woe  to  the  wicked!  it  is  ill;  for  what  his  hands  have 
wrought  will  be  done  to  him."  We  cannot  adopt  the  rendering 
"  Praise  the  righteous,"  proposed  by  Vitringa  and  other  modern 
commentators ;  for  although  dmar  is  sometimes  construed  with 
the  accusative  of  the  object  (Ps.  xl.  11,  cxlv.  6,  11),  it  never 
means  to  praise,  but  to  declare  (even  in  Ps.  xl.  11).  We  have 
here  what  was  noticed  from  Gen.  i.  4  onwards, — namely,  the 

1  It  may  now  be  accepted  as  an  established  fact,  that  the  verb  gdmal  ia 
connected  with  the  Arabic  'gamala,  to  collect  together,  'gamula,  to  be  per 
fect,  kamala,  kamula  id.,  and  gdmar,  to  finish  (see  Hupfeld  on  Ps.  vii.  5, 
aud  Fiirst,  Heb.  Lex.). 


138  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

obvious  antiptosis  or  antiphonesis  in  the  verbs  n^n  (cf.  cli.  xxii.  9, 
Ex.  ii.  2),  JT£  (1  Kings  v.  17),  and  "IBS  (like  \eyei,v,  John  ix.  9) : 
dicite  justum  quod  bonus  =  dicite  justum  esse  bonum  (Ewald, 
§  336,  b).  The  object  of  sight,  knowledge,  or  speech,  is  first 
of  all  mentioned  in  the  most  general  manner;  then  follows  the 
qualification,  or  more  precise  definition,  rritt,  and  in  ver.  11  JTJ 
(JH  without  the  pause),  might  both  of  them  be  the  third  pers. 
pret.  of  the  verbs,  employed  in  a  neuter  sense :  the  former 
signifying,  it  is  well,  viz.  with  him  (as  in  Deut.  v.  30,  Jer.  xxii. 
15,  16) ;  the  latter,  it  is  bad  (as  in  Ps.  cvi.  32).  But  it  is 
evident  from  Jer.  xliv.  17  that  &«n  2iD  and  Kin  JH  may  be  used 
in  the  sense  of  /eaXw?  (/oi/cco?)  e^et,  and  that  the  two  expressions 
are  here  thought  of  in  this  way,  so  that  there  is  no  ip  to  be 
supplied  in  either  case.  The  form  of  the  first  favours  this;  and 
in  the  second  the  accentuation  fluctuates  between  ''IK  tiplichah 
WShb  munach,  and  the  former  with  merka,  the  latter  tiphchah. 
At  the  same  time,  the  latter  mode  of  accentuation,  which  is 
favourable  to  the  personal  rendering  of  jn,  is  supported  by  edi 
tions  of  some  worth,  such  as  Brescia  1494,  Pesaro  1516,  Venice 
1515, 1521,  and  is  justly  preferred  by  Luzzatto  and  Bar.  The 
summary  assertions,  The  righteous  is  well,  the  wicked  ill,  are 
both  sustained  by  their  eventual  fate,  in  the  light  of  which  the 
previous  misfortune  of  the  righteous  appears  as  good  fortune, 
and  the  previous  good  fortune  of  the  wicked  as  misfortune. 
With  an  allusion  to  this  great  difference  in  their  eventual  fate, 
the  word  "  say,"  which  belongs  to  both  clauses,  summons  to  an 
acknowledgment  of  the  .good  fortune  of  the  one  and  the  mis 
fortune  of  the  other.  O  that  Judah  and  Jerusalem  would 
acknowledge  this  to  their  own  salvation  before  it  was  too  late ! 
For  the  state  of  the  poor  nation  was  already  miserable  enough, 
and  very  near  to  destruction. 

Ver.  12.  "  My  people,  its  oppressors  are  boys,  and  women 
rule  over  it ;  my  people,  thy  leaders  are  misleaders,  who  swallow 
up  the  way  of  thy  paths"  It  is  not  probable  that  me'olel  signifies 
maltreaters  or  triflers,  by  the  side  of  the  parallel  ndshim;  more 
over,  the  idea  of  despotic  treatment  is  already  contained  in 
nogesaiv.  We  expect  to  find  children  where  there  are  women. 
And  this  is  one  meaning  of  meolel.  It  does  not  mean  a  suckling, 
however,  as  Ewald  supposes  (§  160,  a),  more  especially  as  it 
occurs  in  connection  with  yonek  (Jer.  xliv.  7 ;  Lam.  ii.  11),  and 


CHAP.  III.  12.  139 

therefore  cannot  have  precisely  the  same  meaning ;  but,  like 
y?M  and  &ty  (the  former  of  which  may  be  contracted  from 
meolel),  it  refers  to  the  boy  as  playful  and  wanton  (lascivum, 
protervum).  Bottcher  renders  it  correctly,  pueri,  lusores,  though 
meolel  is  not  in  itself  a  collective  form,  as  he  supposes ;  but  the 
singular  is  used  collectively,  or  perhaps  better  still,  the  predi 
cate  is  intended  to  apply  to  every  individual  included  in  the 
plural  notion  of  the  subject  (compare  ch.  xvi.  8,  xx.  4,  and  Ges. 
§  146,  4)  :  the  oppressors  of  the  people,  every  one  without 
exception,  were  (even  though  advanced  in  years)  mere  boys  or 
youths  in  their  mode  of  thinking  and  acting,  and  made  all 
subject  to  them  the  football  of  their  capricious  humour.  Here 
again  the  person  of  the  king  is  allowed  to  fall  into  the  back 
ground.  But  the  female  rule,  referred  to  afterwards,  points 
us  to  the  court.  And  this  must  really  have  been  the  case  when 
Ahaz,  a  young  rake,  came  to  the  throne  at  the  age  of  twenty 
(according  to  the  LXX.  twenty-five),  possibly  towards  the  close 
of  the  reign  of  Jotham.  With  the  deepest  anguish  the  prophet 
repeats  the  expression  "  my  people,"  as  he  passes  in  his  address 
to  his  people  from  the  rulers  to  the  preachers :  for  the  meas- 
sherim  or  leaders  are  prophets  (Mic.  iii.  5)  ;  but  what  prophets  ! 
Instead  of  leading  the  people  in  a  straight  path,  they  lead  them 
astray  (ch.  ix.  15,  cf.  2  Kings  xxi.  9).  This  they  did,  as  we 
may  gather  from  the  history  of  this  crowd  of  prophets,  either 
by  acting  in  subservience  to  the  ungodly  interests  of  the  court 
with  dynastic  or  demagogical  servility,  or  by  flattering  the 
worst  desires  of  the  people.  Thus  the  way  of  the  path  of  the 
people,  i.e.  the  highway  or  road  by  whose  ramifying  paths  the 
people  were  to  reach  the  appointed  goal,  had  been  swallowed 
up  by  them,  i.e.  taken  away  from  the  sight  and  feet  of  the 
people,  so  that  they  could  not  find  it  and  walk  therein  (cf.  ch. 
xxv.  7,  8,  where  the  verb  is  used  in  another  connection).  AVhat 
is  swallowed  up  is  invisible,  has  disappeared,  without  a  trace 
being  left  behind.  The  same  idea  is  applied  in  Job  xxxix.  27 
to  a  galloping  horse,  which  is  said  to  swallow  the  road,  inasmuch 
as  it  leaves  piece  after  piece  behind  it  in  its  rapid  course.  It 
is  stated  here  with  regard  to  the  prophets,  that  they  swallow  up 
the  road  appointed  by  Jehovah,  as  the  one  in  which  His  people 
were  to  walk,  just  as  a  criminal  swallows  a  piece  of  paper  which 
bears  witness  against  him;  and  so  hides  it  in  his  own  stomach, 


140  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISATAH. 

Thus  the  way  of  salvation  pointed  out  by  the  law  was  no  longer 
to  be  either  heard  of  or  seen.  The  prophets,  who  ought  to  have 
preached  it,  said  mum,  mum,  and  kept  it  swallowed.  It  had 
completely  perished,  as  it  were,  in  the  erroneous  preaching  of 
the  false  prophets. 

This  was  how  it  stood.  There  was  but  .little  to  be  expected 
from  the  exhortations  of  the  prophet ;  so  that  he  had  to  come 
back  again  and  again  to  the  proclamation  of  judgment.  The 
judgment  of  the  world  comes  again  before  his  mind. — Ver.  13. 
"  Jehovah  has  appeared  to  plead,  and  stands  up  to  judge  the 
nations."  When  Jehovah,  weary  with  His  long-suffering,  rises 
up  from  His  heavenly  throne,  this  is  described  as  "  standing 
up"  (hum,  ch.  ii.  19,  21,  xxxiii.  10);  and  when  He  assumes 
the  judgment-seat  in  the  sight  of  all  the  world,  this  is  called 
"  sitting  down"  (yashab,  Ps.  ix.  5,  Joel  iv.  12)  ;  when,  having 
come  down  from  heaven  (Mic.  i.  2  sqq.),  He  comes  forward  as 
accuser,  this  is  called  "  standing"  (nizzab  or  amad,  Ps.  Ixxxii.  1 : 
amad  is  coming  forward  and  standing,  as  the  opposite  of  sit 
ting  ;  nizzab,  standing,  with  the  subordinate  idea  of  being  firm, 
resolute,  ready).  This  pleading  (ribh,  Jer.  xxv.  31)  is  also 
judging  (dm),  because  His  accusation,  which  is  incontrovertible, 
contains  the  sentence  in  itself;  and  His  sentence,  which  executes 
itself  irresistibly,  is  of  itself  the  infliction  of  punishment.  Thus 
does  he  stand  in  the  midst  of  the  nations  at  once  accuser,  judge, 
and  executioner  (Ps.  vii.  8).  But  among  the  nations  it  is  more 
especially  against  Israel  that  He  contends ;  and  in  Israel  it  is 
more  especially  against  the  leaders  of  the  poor  misguided  and 
neglected  people  that  He  sets  Himself. 

Vers.  14,  15.  "Jehovah  will  proceed  to  judgment  with  the 
elders  of  His  people,  and  its  princes.  And  ye,  ye  have  eaten  up 
the  vineyard ;  prey  of  the  suffering  is  in  your  houses.  What  mean 
ye  that  ye  crush  my  people,  and  grind  the  face  of  the  suffering  ? 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah  of  hosts"  The  words  of  God 
Himself  commence  with  u  and  ye"  (pattern).  The  sentence  to 
which  this  (et  vos  =  at  vos)  is  the  antithesis  is  wanting,  just 
as  in  Ps.  ii.  6,  where  the  words  of  God  commence  with  "and 
I"  (vaani,  et  ego  =  ast  ego).  The  tacit  clause  may  easily  be 
supplied;,  viz.  I  have  set  you  over  my  vineyard,  but  ye  have 
consumed  the  vineyard.  The  only  question  is,  whether  the 
sentence  is  to  be  regarded  as  suppressed  by  Jehovah  Himself, 


CHAP.  III.  14.  15.  141 

or  by  the  prophet.  Most  certainly  by  Jehovah  Himself.  The 
majesty  with  which  He  appeared  before  the  rulers  of  His 
people  was,  even  without  words,  a  practical  and  undeniable 
proof  that  their  majesty  was  only  a  shadow  of  His,  and  their 
office  His  trust.  But  their  office  consisted  in  the  fact  that 
Jehovah  had  committed  His  people  to  their  care.  The  vine 
yard  of  Jehovah  was  His  people — a  self-evident  figure,  which 
the  prophet  dresses  up  in  thp  form  of  a  parable  in  ch.  v. 
Jehovah  had  appointed  them  as  gardeners  and  keepers  of  this 
vineyard,  but  they  themselves  have  become  the  very  beasts 
that  they  ought  to  have  warded  off.  "IVSL  is  applied  to  the 
beasts  which  completely  devour  the  blades  of  a  corn-field  or 
the  grapes  of  a  vineyard  (Ex.  xxii.  4).  This  change  was  per 
fectly  obvious.  The  possessions  stolen  from  their  unhappy 
countrymen,  which  were  still  in  their  houses,  were  the  tangible 
proof  of  their  plundering  of  the  vineyard.  "The  suffering:" 
'ani  (depressus,  the  crushed)  is  introduced  as  explanatory  of 
haccerem,  the  prey,  because  depression  and  misery  were  the 
ordinary  fate  of  the  congregation  which  God  called  His  vine 
yard.  It  was  ecdesia  pressa,  but  woe  to  the  oppressors !  In 
the  question  "what  mean  ye?"  (malldcem)  the  madness  and 
wickedness  of  their  deeds  are  implied.  HD  and  D3J  are  fused 
into  one  word  here,  as  if  it  were  a  prefix  (as  in  Ex.  iv.  2, 
Ez«k.  viii.  6,  Mai.  i.  13;  vid.  Ges.  §  20,  2).  The  ken  helps  to 
make  it  clear  by  resolving  the  chethibh.  The  word  malldcem 
ought,  strictly  speaking,  to  be  followed  by  eld:  "  What  is  there 
to  you  that  ye  crush  my  people?"  as  in  ch.  xxii.  1,  16 ;  but  the 
words  rush  forwards  (as  in  Jonah  i.  6),  because  they  are  an 
explosion  of  wrath.  For  this  reason  the  expressions  relating 
to  the  behaviour  of  the  rulers  are  the  strongest  that  can  pos 
sibly  be  employed.  NS^  (crush)  is  also  to  be  met  with  in  Prov. 
xxii.  22;  but  "grind  the  face"  (tdchan  p'ne)  is  a  strong 
metaphor  without  a  parallel.  The  former  signifies  "  to  pound," 
the  latter  "  to  grind,"  as  the  millstone  grinds  the  corn.  They 
grind  the  faces  of  those  who  are  already  bowed  down,  thrusting 
them  back  with  such  unmerciful  severity,  that  they  stand  as  it 
were  annihilated,  and  their  faces  become  as  white  as  flour,  or 
as  the  Germans  would  say,  cheese- white,  chalk-white,  as  pale 
as  death,  from  oppression  and  despair.  Thus  the  language 
supplied  to  a  certain  extent  appropriate  figures,  with  which  to 


142  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

describe  the  conduct  of  the  rulers  of  Israel ;  but  it  contained 
no  words  that  could  exhaust  the  immeasurable  wickedness  of 
their  conduct :  hence  the  magnitude  of  their  sin  is  set  before 
them  in  the  form  of  a  question,  "  What  is  to  you?"  i.e.  What 
indescribable  wickedness  is  this  which  you  are  committing? 
The  prophet  hears  this  said  by  Jehovah,  the  majestic  Judge, 
whom  he  here  describes  as  Adonai  Elohim  Zebaotli  (according 
to  the  Masoretic  pointing).  This  triplex  name  of  God,  which 
we  find  in  the  prophetic  books,  viz.  frequently  in  Amos  and 
also  in  Jer.  ii.  19,  occurs  for  the  first  time  in  the  Elohistic 
Psalm,  Ps.  Ixix.  7.  This  scene  of  judgment  is  indeed  depicted 
throughout  in  the  colours  of  the  Psalms,  and  more  especially 
recals  the  (Elohistic)  Psalm  of  Asaph  (Ps.  Ixxxii.). 

But  notwithstanding  the  dramatic  vividness  with  which  the 
prophet  pictures  to  himself  this  scene  of  judgment,  he  is  obliged 
to  break  off  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  description,  because 
another  word  of  Jehovah  comes  upon  him.  This  applies  to  the 
women  of  Jerusalem,  whose  authority,  at  the  time  when  Isaiah 
prophesied,  was  no  less  influential  than  that  of  their  husbands 
who  had  forgotten  their  calling. — Yers.  16,  17.  "  Jehovah  hath 
spoken:  Because  the  daughters  of  Zion  are  haughty ',  and  walk 
about  with  extended  throat,  and  blinking  with  the  eyes,  walk  about 
with  tripping  gait,  and  tinkle  ivith  their  foot-ornaments  :  the  Lord 
of  all  makes  the  crown  of  the  daughters  of  Zion  scabbed,  and 
Jehovah  will  uncover  their  sluame."  Their  inward  pride  (gdbah, 
as  in  Ezek.  xvi.  50;  cf.  Zeph.  iii.  11)  shows  itself  outwardly. 
They  walk  with  extended  throat,  i.e.  bending  the  neck  back, 
trying  to  make  themselves  taller  than  they  are,  because  they 
think  themselves  so  great.  The  keri  substitutes  the  more  usual 
form,  rhBJ ;  but  Isaiah  in  all  probability  intentionally  made  use 
of  the  rarer  and  ruder  form  netuvoth,  since  such  a  form  really 
existed  (1  Sam.  xxv.  18),  as  well  as  the  singular  ndtu  for  ndtui 
(Job  xv.  22,  xli.  25  :  Ges.  §  75,  Anm.  5).  They  also  went 
winking  the  eyes  (mesakkeroth,  for  which  we  frequently  find 
the  erratum  meshakkerotli),  i.e.  casting  voluptuous  and  amatory 
glances  with  affected  innocence  (vev/jiara  o<f)0a\/jLwv,  LXX). 
"  Winking : "  sdkar  is  not  used  in  the  sense  of  fucare  (Targ. 
b.  Sabbath  626,  Joma  96,  Luther), — which  is  all  the  more 
inappropriate,  because  blackening  the  eyelids  with  powder  of 
antimony  was  regarded  in  the  East  of  the  Old  Testament  as 


CHAP.  III.  16.  17.  J43 

indispensable  to  female  beauty, — but  in  the  sense  of  nictare 
(LXX.,  Vulg.,  Syr.,  syn.  remaz,  cf.  sekar,  Syr.  to  squint ; 
Targ.  =  shdzaph,  Job  xx.  9).  Compare  also  the  talmudic  say 
ing:  God  did  not  create  woman  out  of  Adam's  ear,  that  she 
might  be  no  eavesdropper  (tsaithdnith),  nor  out  of  Adam's  eye, 
that  she  might  be  no  winker  (sakrdnith).1  The  third  was,  that 
they  walked  incedendo  et  trepidando.  The  second  inf.  abs.  is 
in  this  case,  as  in  most  others,  the  one  which  gives  the  distinct 
tone,  whilst  the  other  serves  to  keep  before  the  eye  the  occur 
rence  indicated  in  its  finite  verb  (Ges,  §  131,  3).  They  walk 
about  tripping  (tdphopli^  a  wide-spread  onomato-poetic  word), 
i.e.  taking  short  steps,  just  putting  the  heel  of  one  foot  against 
the  toe  of  the  other  (as  the  Talmud  explains  it).  Luther 
renders  it,  "  they  walk  along  and  waggle "  (jschwfinzen,  i.e. 
clunibus  agitatis).  The  rendering  is  suitable,  but  incorrect. 
They  could  only  take  short  steps,  because  of  the  chains  by 
which  the  costly  foot-rings  (achdsim)  worn  above  their  ankles 
were  connected  together.  These  chains,  which  were  probably 
ornamented  with  bells,  as  is  sometimes  the  case  now  in  the  East, 
they  used  to  tinkle  as  they  walked :  they  made  an  ankle-tinkling 
with  their  feet,  setting  their  feet  down  in  such  a  manner  that 
these  ankle-rings  knocked  against  each  other.  The  writing 
heraglehem  (masc.)  for  beraglehen  (fern.)  is  probably  not  an 
unintentional  synallage  gen. :  they  were  not  modest  virgines,  but 
cold,  masculine  viragines,  so  that  they  themselves  were  a  synal 
lage  generis.  Nevertheless  they  tripped  along.  Tripping  is  a 
child's  step.  Although  well  versed  in  sin  and  old  in  years,  the 
women  of  Jerusalem  tried  to  maintain  a  youthful,  childlike 
appearance.  They  therefore  tripped  along  with  short,  childish 
steps.  The  women  of  the  Mohammedan  East  still  take  pleasure 
in  such  coquettish  tinklings,  although  they  are  forbidden  by 
the  Koran,  just  as  the  women  of  Jerusalem  did  in  the  days  of 
Isaiah.  The  attractive  influence  of  natural  charms,  especially 

1  Also  5.  Sola  47b  :  "  Since  women  have  multiplied  with  extended  necks 
and  winking  eyes,  the  number  of  cases  has  also  multiplied  in  which  it  has 
been  necessary  to  resort  to  the  curse  water  (Num.  v.  18)."  In  fact,  this 
increased  to  such  an  extent,  that  Johanan  ben  Zakkai,  the  pupil  of  Hillel, 
abolished  the  ordeal  (divine-verdict)  of  the  Sota  (the  woman  suspected  of 
adultery)  altogether.  The  people  of  his  time  were  altogether  an  adulterous 
generation. 


144  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

when  heightened  by  luxurious  art,  is  very  great ;  but  the  prophet 
is  blind  to  all  this  splendour,  and  seeing  nothing  but  the  cor 
ruption  within,  foretells  to  these  rich  and  distinguished  women 
a  foul  and  by  no  means  aBsthetic  fate.  The  Sovereign  Ruler  of 
all  would  smite  the  crown  of  their  head,  from  which  long  hair 
was  now  flowing,  with  scab  (vsippach,  a  progressive  preterite  with 
Vav  apodosis,  a  denom.  verb  from  sappacliatli,  the  scurf  which 
adheres  to  the  skin :  see  at  Hab.  ii.  15)  ;  and  Jehovah  would 
uncover  their  nakedness,  by  giving  them  up  to  violation  and 
abuse  at  the  hands  of  coarse  and  barbarous  foes, — the  greatest 
possible  disgrace  in  the  eyes  of  a  woman,  who  covers  herself  as 
carefully  as  she  can  in  the  presence  of  any  stranger  (ch.  xlvii.  3 ; 
Nahum  iii.  5  ;  Jer.  xiii.  22  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  37). 

The  prophet  then  proceeds  to  describe  still  further  how  the 
Lord  would  take  away  the  whole  of  their  toilet  as  plunder. 
Vers.  18-23.  "  On  that  day  the  Lord  ivill  put  away  the  show  of 
the  ankle-clasps,  and  of  the  head-bands,  and  of  the  crescents ; 
the  ear-rings,  and  the  arm-chains,  and  the  light  veils  ;  the  diadems, 
and  the  stepping-chains,  and  the  girdles,  and  the  smelling-bottles, 
and  the  amulets  ;  the  finger-rings,  and  the  nose-rings  ;  the  gala- 
dresses,  and  the  sleeve-frocks,  and  the  wrappers,  and  the  pockets  ; 
the  hand-mirrors,  and  the  Sinda-cloths,  and  the  turbans,  and  the 
gauze  mantles"  The  fullest  explanation  of  all  these  articles  of 
female  attire  is  to  be  found  in  N.  W.  Schroder's  work,  entitled 
Commentarius  de  vestitu  mulierum  Hebrcearum  ad  Jes.  iii.  16-24, 
Lfiigd.  Batav.  1745  (a  quarto  volume),  and  in  that  of  Ant. 
Theod.  Hartmann,  consisting  of  three  octavo  volumes,  and 
entitled  Die  Hebrderin  am  Putetische  und  als  Braut  (The  Jewess 
at  the  Toilet-table,  and  as  Bride,  1800-10)  ;  to  which  we  may 
also  add,  Saalschiitz,  Archceologie,  ch.  iii.,  where  he  treats  of 
the  dresses  of  men  and  women.  It  was  not  usually  Isaiah's 
custom  to  enter  into  such  minute  particulars.  Of  all  the  pro 
phets,  Ezekiel  was  the  one  most  addicted  to  this,  as  we  may 
see,  for  example,  from  Ezek.  xvi.  And  even  in  other  pro 
phecies  against  the  women  we  find  nothing  of  the  kind  again 
(ch.  xxxii.  9  sqq. ;  Amos  iv.  1  sqq.).  But  in  this  instance,  the 
enumeration  of  the  female  ornaments  is  connected  with  that  of 
the  state  props  in  ch.  iii.  1-3,  and  that  of  the  lofty  and  exalted 
in  ch.  ii.  13-16,  so  as  to  form  a  trilogy,  and  has  its  own  special 
explanation  in  that  boundless  love  of  ornament  which  had 


CHAP.  III.  18-23.  145 

become  prevalent  in  the  time  of  Uzziah-Jotham.  It  was  the 
prophet's  intention  to  produce  a  ludicrous,  but  yet  serious  impres 
sion,  as  to  the  immeasurable  luxury  which  really  existed ;  and 
in  the  prophetic  address,  his  design  throughout  is  to  bring  out 
the  glaring  contrast  between  the  titanic,  massive,  worldly  glory, 
in  all  its  varied  forms,  and  that  true,  spiritual,  and  majestically 
simple  glory,  whose  reality  is  manifested  from  within  outwards. 
In  fact,  the  theme  of  the  whole  address  is  the  way  of  universal 
judgment  leading  on  from  the  false  glory  to  the  true.  The 
general  idea  of  tipliereth  (show:  rendered  "bravery"  in  Eng.  ver.) 
which  stands  at  the  head  and  includes  the  whole,  points  to  the 
contrast  presented  by  a  totally  different  tipliereth  which  follows 
in  ch.  iv.  2.  In  explaining  each  particular  word,  we  must  be 
content  with  what  is  most  necessary,  and  comparatively  the 
most  certain.  "  Ankle-clasps "  (acdsim)  :  these  were  rings  of 
gold,  silver,  or  ivory,  worn  round  the  ankles  ;  hence  the  denom. 
verb  (icces)  in  ver.  16,  to  make  a  tinkling  sound  with  these  rings. 
"Head-lands"  or  "frontlets"  (shebisim,  from  sJidbas  —  shdbatz: 
plectere),  were  plaited  bands  of  gold  or  silver  thread  worn  below 
the  hair-net,  and  reaching  from  one  ear  to  the  other.  There  is 
some  force,  however,  in  the  explanation  which  has  been  very 
commonly  adopted  since  the  time  of  Schroder,  namely,  that 
they  were  sun-like  balls  (=  sliemisim\  which  were  worn  as  orna 
ments  round  the  neck,  from  the  Arabic  'sumeisa  (subeisa),  a 
little  sun.  The  "  crescents"  (saharonim)  were  little  pendants  of 
this  kind,  fastened  round  the  neck  and  hanging  down  upon  the 
breast  (in  Judg.  viii.  21  we  meet  with  them  as  ornaments  hung 
round  the  camels'  necks).  Such  ornaments  are  still  worn  by 
Arabian  girls,  who  generally  have  several  different  kinds  of 
them  ;  the  hildl,  or  new  moon,  being  a  symbol  of  increasing 
good  fortune,  and  as  such  the  most  approved  charm  against  the 
evil  eye.  "Ear-rings"  (netiphoth,  ear-drops):  we  meet  with  these 
is  Judg.  viii.  26,  as  an  ornament  worn  by  Midianitish  kings. 
Hence  the  Arabic  munattafe,  a  woman  adorned  with  ear-rings. 
"Arm-chains:"  sheroth,  from  slidrar,  to  twist.  According  to  the 
Targum,  these  were  chains  worn  upon  the  arm,  or  spangles  upon 
the  wrist,  answering  to  the  spangles  upon  the  ankles.  "Flattering 
veils"  (redloth,  from  rual,  to  hang  loose) :  these  were  more  expen 
sive  than  the  ordinary  veils  worn  by  girls,  which  were  called 
tzaiph.  "Diadems"  (pe'erim)  are  only  mentioned  in  other  parts 

VOL.  I.  K 


14:6  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  the  Scriptures  as  being  worn  by  men  (e.g.  by  priests,  bride 
grooms,  or  persons  of  high  rank).  "Stepping-chains:"  tzeddoth, 
from  tze'ddah,  a  step;  hence  the  chain  worn  to  shorten  and  give 
elegance  to  the  step.  "Girdles"  kisshurim,  from  kdsliar  (cingere), 
dress  girdles,  such  as  were  worn  by  brides  upon  their  wedding-day 
(compare  Jer.  ii.  32  with  Isa.  xlix.  18)  ;  the  word  is  erroneously 
ren dered  hair-pins  (kalmasmezayyali)  in  the  Targum.  "  Smelling- 
bottles  : "  botte  hannephesh,  holders  of  scent  (nephesh,  the  breath 
of  an  aroma).  "Amulets:"  lechashim  (from  Idchash,  to  work  by 
incantations),  gems  or  metal  plates  with  an  inscription  upon 
them,  which  were  worn  as  a  protection  as  well  as  an  ornament. 
"  Finger-rings :"  tabbaoth,  from  tdba,  to  impress  or  seal,  signet- 
rings  worn  upon  the  finger,  corresponding  to  the  chothdm  worn 
by  men  upon  the  breast  suspended  by  a  cord.  "  Nose-rings  " 
(rdzme  hdapJi)  were  fastened  in  the  central  division  of  the  nose, 
and  hung  down  over  the  mouth :  they  have  been  ornaments  in 
common  use  in  the  East  from  the  time  of  the  patriarchs  (Gen. 
xxiv.  22)  down  to  the  present  day.  "  Gala-dresses  "  (machald- 
tsoth)  are  dresses  not  usually  worn,  but  taken  off  when  at  home. 
"  Sleeve-frocks"  (maatdplidh) :  the  second  tunic,  worn  above  the 
ordinary  one,  the  Roman  stola.  "  Wrappers19  (mitpdchoth,  from 
tdphachy  expandere\  broad  cloths  wrapped  round  the  body,  such 
as  Ruth  wore  when  she  crept  in  to  Boaz  in  her  best  attire 
(Ruth  iii.  15).  "  Pockets"  (charitim)  were  for  holding  money 
(2  Kings  v.  23),  which  was  generally  carried  by  men  in  the 
girdle,  or  in  a  purse  (cis).  "Hand-mirrors"  (gilyonim)  :  the 
Septuagint  renders  this  Sia^avf)  Xa/ccowKa,  sc.  i/jLarui,  Lacede 
monian  gauze  or  transparent  dresses,  which  showed  the  naked 
ness  rather  than  concealed  it  (from  gdldh,  retegere) ;  but  the 
better  rendering  is  mirrors  with  handles,  polished  metal  plates 
(from  gdldhj  polire\  as  gilldyon  is  used  elsewhere  to  signify  a 
smooth  table.  " Sindu-clotJis"  (sedinim),  veils  or  coverings  of  the 
finest  linen,  viz.  of  Sindu  or  Hindu  cloth  (crtySo^e?), — Sindu, 
the  land  of  Indus,  being  the  earlier  name  of  India.1  "  Turbans" 
(tseniphoth,  from  tsdnaph,  convolvere\  the  head-dress  composed 

1  The  Mishna  (Kelim  xxiv.  13)  mentions  three  different  sedinin :  night 
dresses,  curtains,  and  embroidery.  The  slndon  is  frequently  referred  to  as 
a  covering  wrapped  round  the  person  ;  and  in  b.  Menachoth  41a,  it  is 
stated  that  the  sindon  is  the  summer  dress,  the  sarlal  (cloak)  the  winter 
dress,  which  may  help  to  explain  Mark  xiv.  51,  52. 


CHAP.  III.  24.  147 

of  twisted  cloths  of  different  colours.  "Gauze  mantles1  (redidim, 
from  rddad,  extendere,  teniiem  facer  e),  delicate  veil-like  mantles 
thrown  over  the  rest  of  the  clothes.  Stockings  and  handker 
chiefs  are  not  mentioned  :  the  former  were  first  introduced  into 
Hither  Asia  from  Media  long  after  Isaiah's  time,  and  a  Jerur 
salem  lady  no  more  thought  of  using  the  latter  than  a  Grecian 
or  Roman  lady  did.  Even  the  veil  (burko)  now  commonly 
worn,  which  conceals  the  whole  of  the  face  with  the  exception 
of  the  eyes,  did  not  form  part  of  the  attire  of  an  Israelitish 
woman  in  the  olden  time.1  The  prophet  enumerates  twenty-one 
different  ornaments :  three  sevens  of  a  very  bad  kind,  especially 
for  the  husbands  of  these  state-dolls.  There  is  no  particular 
order  observed  in  the  enumeration,  either  from  head  to  foot,  or 
from  the  inner  to  the  outer  clothing ;  but  they  are  arranged  as 
much  ad  libitum  as  the  dress  itself. 

When  Jehovah  took  away  all  this  glory,  with  which  the 
women  of  Jerusalem  were  adorned,  they  would  be  turned  into 
wretched-looking  prisoners,  disfigured  by  ill-treatment  and 
dirt. — Ver.  24.  "  And  instead  of  balmy  scent  there  will  be 
mouldiness,  and  instead  of  the  sash  a  rope,  and  instead  of  artistic 
ringlets  a  baldness,  and  instead  of  the  dress-cloak  a  frock  of  sack 
cloth,  branding  instead  of  beauty"  Mouldiness,  or  mother  (mak, 
as  in  ch.  v.  24,  the  dust  of  things  that  have  moulded  away), 
with  which  they  would  be  covered,  and  which  they  would  be 
obliged  to  breathe,  would  take  the  place  of  the  bosem,  i.e.  the 
scent  of  the  balsam  shrub  (bdsdm),  and  of  sweet-scented  pomade 
in  general ;  and  nikpdh  that  of  the  beautifully  embroidered 
girdle  (Prov.  xxxi.  24).  The  meaning  of  this  word  is  neither 
"  a/wound,"  as  the  Targums  and  Talmud  render  it,  nor  "rags," 
as  given  by  Knobel,  ed.  1  (from  ndkaph,  percutere,  perforare), 
but  the  rope  thrown  over  them  as  prisoners  (from  kdphdh—Mvdh, 
contorquere :  LXX.,  Vulg.,  Syr.).2  Baldness  takes  the  place  of 

1  Rashi,  however,  makes  a  different  statement  (Sabbath  65a),  viz.  that 
"  Israelitish  women  in  Arabia  go  out  with  veils  which  conceal  the  face,  and 
those  in  Media  with  their  mantles  fastened  about  the  mouth." 

2  Credner  (Joel,  p.  147)  renders  the  word  "  tatters,"  from  nakaph,  to 
rub  in  pieces  ;  but  the  word  has  no  such  meaning,  whereas  the  meaning 
milnus,  lit.  percussio,  is  admissible  (see  at  Job  xix.  26),  but  does  not  suit 
the  antithesis.     Luzzatto  connects  it  with  rikaph,  to  bind  (from  which 
the  makkepJi  derives  its  name),  and  understands  it  as  referring  to  the 
dressing  applied  to  wounds,  to  lint  into  which  the  girdle  was  torn.     The 


148  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


artistic  ringlets  (fl^pp  nb»yp?  not  nfe-'jjp,  so  that  it  is  in  apposition  : 
cf.  ch.  xxx.  20  ;  Ges.  §  113  ;  Ewald,  §  287,  b).  The  reference 
is  not  to  golden  ornaments  for  the  head,  as  the  Sept.  rendering 
gives  it,  although  mikslieli  is  used  elsewhere  to  signify  embossed 
or  carved  work  in  metal  or  wood  ;  but  here  we  are  evidently  to 
understand  by  the  "  artificial  twists  "  either  curls  made  with 
the  curling-tongs,  or  the  hair  plaited  and  twisted  up  in  knots, 
which  they  would  be  obliged  to  cut  off  in  accordance  with  the 
mourning  customs  (ch.  xv.  2,  xxii.  12),  or  which  would  fall 
off  in  consequence  of  grief.  A  frock  of  sackcloth  (jnacliagoreth 
sak),  i.e.  a  smock  of  coarse  haircloth  worn  next  to  the  skin,  such 
as  Layard  found  depicted  upon  a  bas-relief  at  Kouyunjik, 
would  take  the  place  of  the  pethigil,  i.e.  the  dress-cloak  (either 
from  pdthag,  to  be  wide  or  full,  with  the  substantive  termina 
tion  ilj  or  else  composed  of  pethi,  breadth,  and  gil,  festive  re 
joicing)  ;  and  branding  the  place  of  beauty.  Branding  (ci  =  cevi, 
from  cdvdhj  Kaieiv),  the  mark  burnt  upon  the  forehead  by  their 
conquerors  :  ci  is  a  substantive,1  not  a  particle,  as  the  Targum 
and  others  render  it,  and  as  the  makkepli  might  make  it  appear. 
There  is  something  very  effective  in  the  inverted  order  of  the 
words  in  the  last  clause  of  the  five.  In  this  five-fold  reverse 
would  shame  and  mourning  take  the  place  of  proud,  voluptuous 
rejoicing. 

The  prophet  now  passes  over  to  a  direct  address  to  Jerusalem 
itself,  since  the  "  daughters  of  Zion"  are  the  daughter  of  Zion 
in  her  present  degenerate  condition.  The  daughter  of  Zion 

most  plausible  derivation  is  from  kapMh,  which  is  really  employed  in 
post-biblical  usage  to  signify  not  only  to  congeal  and  wrinkle,  but  also 
to  thicken  (Sabbath  21a,  FhaJcpoth  :  "  Make  the  wick  thicker,  that  it  may 
burn  the  brighter").  It  is  probably  radically  akin  to  the  Arabic  nukbe 
(explained  in  Lamachzari  as  equivalent  to  the  Persian  mijdn-bend,  a  girdle), 
which  is  apparently  used  to  denote  the  coarse  girdle  worn  by  peasants  or  by 
Arab  women  of  the  wandering  tribes,  resembling  a  rope  of  goat's  hair,  as 
distinguished  from  the  artistic  and  costly  girdle  worn  by  women  of  the 
upper  classes  in  the  towns. 

1  It  is  so  understood  in  b.  Sabbath  625,  with  an  allusion  to  the  proverb, 
"  The  end  of  beauty  is  burning"  (viz.  inflammation).  In  Arabia,  the  ap 
plication  of  the  cey  with  a  red-hot  iron  (mikwdh)  plays  a  very  important 
part  in  the  medical  treatment  of  both  man  and  beast.  You  meet  with 
many  men  who  have  been  burned  not  only  on  their  legs  and  arms,  but  in 
their  faces  as  well,  and,  as  a  rule,  the  finest  horses  are  disfigured  by  the 
cey.  —  WETZSTEIN. 


CHAP.  III.  26.  149 

loses  her  sons,  and  consequently  the  daughters  of  Zion  their 
husbands. — Ver.  25.  "  Thy  men  will  fall  by  the  sword,  and  thy 
might  in  war"  The  plural  methim  (the  singular  of  which  only 
occurs  in  the  form  methu,  with  the  connecting  vowel  u  as  a 
component  part  of  the  proper  names)  is  used  as  a  prose  word 
in  the  Pentateuch;  but  in  the  later  literature  it  is  a  poetic 
archaism.  "  Thy  might "  is  used  interchangeably  with  "  thy 
men,"  the  possessors  of  the  might  being  really  intended,  like 
robur  and  robora  in  Latin  (compare  Jer.  xlix.  35). 

What  the  prophet  here  foretells  to  the  daughter  of  Zion  he 
sees  in  ver.  26  fulfilled  upon  her:  "  Then  will  her  gates  lament 
and  mourn,  and  desolate  is  she,  sits  down  upon  the  ground"  The 
gates,  where  the  husbands  of  the  daughters  of  Zion,  who  have 
now  fallen  in  war,  used  at  one  time  to  gather  together  in  such 
numbers,  are  turned  into  a  state  of  desolation,  in  which  they 
may,  as  it  were,  be  heard  complaining,  and  seen  to  mourn 
(ch.  xiv.  31 ;  Jer.  xiv.  2  ;  Lam.  i.  4)  ;  and  the  daughter  of 
Zion  herself  is  utterly  vacated,  thoroughly  emptied,  completely 
deprived  of  all  her  former  population  ;  and  in  this  state  of  the 
most  mournful  widowhood  or  orphanage,  brought  down  from 
her  lofty  seat  (ch.  xlvii.  1)  and  princely  glory  (Jer.  xiii.  18), 
she  sits  down  upon  the  ground,  just  as  Judaea  is  represented 
as  doing  upon  Roman  medals  that  were  struck  after  the  de 
struction  of  Jerusalem,  where  she  is  introduced  as  a  woman 
thoroughly  broken  down,  and  sitting  under  a  palm-tree  in  an 
attitude  of  despair,  with  a  warrior  standing  in  front  of  her,  the 
inscription  upon  the  medal  being  Judcea  capta,  or  devicta.  The 
Septuagint  rendering  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  sense,  viz. 
KOI  KaTa\et,$Or)crr)  fjiovrj  Kal  et<?  Trjv  ^r\v  €§afyi(i6r)a"r)  (cf.  Luke 
xix.  44),  except  that  3B>n  is  not  the  second  person,  but  the  third, 
and  nn|33  the  third  pers.  pret.  niph.  for  nn^? — a  pausal  form 
which  is  frequently  met  with  in  connection  with  the  smaller 
distinctive  accents,  such  as  silluk  and  athnach  (here  it  occurs 
with  tiphchah,  as,  for  example,  in  Amos  iii.  8).  The  clause 
"  sits  down  upon  the  ground  "  is  appended  davv&eTcos ; — a  fre 
quent  construction  in  cases  where  one  of  two  verbs  defines  the 
other  in  a  mannei  which  is  generally  expressed  adverbially  (vid. 
1  Chron.  xiii.  2,  and  the  inverted  order  of  the  words  in  Jer. 
iv.  5 ;  cf .  xii.  6) :  Zion  sits  upon  the  earth  in  a  state  of  utter 
depopulation. 


150  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

When  war  shall  thus  unsparingly  have  swept  away  the 
men  of  Zion,  a  most  unnatural  effect  will  ensue,  namely,  that 
women  will  go  in  search  of  husbands,  and  not  men  in  search 
of  wives. — Ch.  iv.  1.  "And  seven  women  lay  hold  of  one  man 
in  that  day,  saying,  We  will  eat  our  own  bread,  and  wear  our 
oivn  clothes ;  only  let  thy  name  be  named  upon  us,  take  away 
our  reproach"  The  division  of  the  chapters  is  a  wrong  one 
here,  as  this  verse  is  the  closing  verse  of  the  prophecy  against 
the  women,  and  the  closing  portion  of  the  whole  address  does 
not  begin  till  ch.  iv.  2.  The  present  pride  of  the  daughters 
of  Zion,  every  one  of  whom  now  thought  herself  the  greatest 
as  the  wife  of  such  and  such  a  man,  and  for  whom  many  men 
were  now  the  suitors,  would  end  in  this  unnatural  self-humilia 
tion,  that  seven  of  them  would  offer  themselves  to  the  same 
man,  the  first  man  who  presented  himself,  and  even  renounce 
the  ordinary  legal  claim  upon  their  husband  for  clothing  and 
food  (Ex.  xxi.  10).  It  would  be  quite  sufficient  for  them  to  be 
allowed  to  bear  his  name  (a  let  thy  name  be  named  upon  us  : " 
the  name  is  put  upon  the  thing  named,  as  giving  it  its  distinct 
ness  and  character),  if  he  would  only  take  away  their  reproach 
(namely,  the  reproach  of  being  unmarried,  ch.  liv.  4,  as  in  Gen. 
xxx.  23,  of  being  childless)  by  letting  them  be  called  his  wives. 
The  number  seven  (seven  women  to  one  man)  may  be  explained 
on  the  ground  that  there  is  a  bad  seven  as  well  as  a  holy  one 
(e.g.  Matt.  xii.  45). 

In  ch.  iv.  1  the  threat  denounced  against  the  women  of 
Jerusalem  is  brought  to  a  close.  It  is  the  side-piece  to  the 
threat  denounced  against  the  national  rulers.  And  these  two 
scenes  of  judgment  were  only  parts  of  the  general  judgment 
about  to  fall  upon  Jerusalem  and  Judah,  as  a  state  or  national 
community.  And  this  again  was  merely  a  portion,  viz.  the 
central  group  of  the  picture  of  a  far  more  comprehensive 
judgment,  which  was  about  to  fall  upon  everything  lofty  and 
exalted  on  the  earth.  Jerusalem,  therefore,  stands  here  as  the 
centre  and  focus  of  the  great  judgment-day.  It  was  in  Jeru 
salem  that  the  ungodly  glory  which  was  ripe  for  judgment 
was  concentrated ;  and  it  was  in  Jerusalem  also  that  the  light 
of  the  true  and  final  glory  would  concentrate  itself.  To  this 
promise,  with  which  the  address  returns  to  its  starting-point, 
the  prophet  now  passes  on  without  any  further  introduction. 


CHAP.  IV.  2.  151 

In  fact  it  needed  no  introduction,  for  the  judgment  in  itself 
was  the  medium  of  salvation.  When  Jerusalem  was  judged, 
it  would  be  sifted;  and  by  being  sifted,  it  would  be  rescued, 
pardoned,  glorified.  The  prophet  proceeds  in  this  sense  to 
speak  of  what  would  happen  in  that  day,  and  describes  the 
one  great  day  of  God  at  the  end  of  time  (not  a  day  of  four- 
and-twenty  hours  any  more  than  the  seven  days  of  creation 
were),  according  to  its  general  character,  as  opening  with 
judgment,  but  issuing  in  salvation. — Ver.  2.  "  In  that  day  will 
the  sprout  of  Jehovah  become  an  ornament  and  glory,  and  the 
fruit  of  the  land  pride  and  splendour  for  the  redeemed  of  Israel " 
The  four  epithets  of  glory,  which  are  here  grouped  in  pairs, 
strengthen  our  expectation,  that  now  that  the  mass  of  Israel 
has  been  swept  away,  together  with  the  objects  of  its  worthless 
pride,  we  shall  find  a  description  of  what  will  become  an  object 
of  well-grounded  pride  to  the  "  escaped  of  Israel,"  i.e.  to  the 
remnant  that  has  survived  the  judgment,  and  been  saved  from 
destruction.  But  with  this  interpretation  of  the  promise  it  is 
impossible  that  it  can  be  the  church  of  the  future  itself,  which 
is  here  called  the  "  sprout  of  Jehovah"  and  "fruit  of  the  land" 
as  Luzzatto  and  Malbim  suppose ;  and  equally  impossible,  with 
such  an  antithesis  between  what  is  promised  and  what  is  abo 
lished,  that  the  "  sprout  of  Jehovah"  and  "fruit  of  the  earth" 
should  signify  the  harvest  blessings  bestowed  by  Jehovah,  or 
the  rich  produce  of  the  land.  For  although  the  expression 
zemach  Jehovah  (sprout  of  Jehovah)  may  unquestionably  be 
used  to  signify  this,  as  in  Gen.  ii.  9  and  Ps.  civ.  14  (cf. 
Isa.  Ixi.  11),  and  fruitfulness  of  the  land  is  a  standing  accom 
paniment  of  the  eschatological  promises  (e.g.  ch.  xxx.  23  sqq., 
compare  the  conclusion  of  Joel  and  Amos),  and  it  was  also 
foretold  that  the  fruitful  fields  of  Israel  would  become  a  glory 
in  the  sight  of  the  nations  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  29  ;  Mai.  iii.  12  ; 
cf.  Joel  ii.  17) ;  yet  this  earthly,  material  good,  of  which, 
moreover,  there  was  no  lack  in  the  time  of  Uzziah  and 
Jotham,  was  altogether  unsuitable  to  set  forth  such  a  con 
trast  as  would  surpass  and  outshine  the  worldly  glory  existing 
before.  But  even  granting  what  Hofmann  adduces  in  support 
of  this  view, — namely,  that  the  natural  God-given  blessings  of 
the  field  do  form  a  fitting  antithesis  to  the  studied  works  of  art 
of  which  men  had  hitherto  been  proud, — there  is  still  truth  in 


152  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  remark  of  Kosenmiiller,  that  "the  magnificence  of  the  whole 
passage  is  at  variance  with  such  an  interpretation."  Only 
compare  ch.  xxviii.  5,  where  Jehovah  Himself  is  described  in 
the  same  manner,  as  the  glory  and  ornament  of  the  remnant 
of  Israel.  But  if  the  "sprout  of  Jehovah"  is  neither  the 
redeemed  remnant  itself,  nor  the  fruit  of  the  field,  it  must  be 
the  name  of  the  Messiah.  And  it  is  in  this  sense  that  it  has 
been  understood  by  the  Targum,  and  by  such  modern  com 
mentators  as  Rosenmuller,  Hengstenberg,  Steudel,  Umbreit, 
Caspari,  Drechsler,  and  others.  The  great  King  of  the  future 
is  called  zemach,  avaroXtf  in  the  sense  of  Heb.  vii.  14,  viz.  as 
a  shoot  springing  out  of  the  human,  Davidic,  earthly  soil, — a 
shoot  which  Jehovah  had  planted  in  the  earth,  and  would 
cause  to  break  through  and  spring  forth  as  the  pride  of  His 
congregation,  which  was  waiting  for  this  heavenly  child.  It 
is  He  again  who  is  designated  in  the  parallel  clause  as  the 
"fruit  of  the  land"  (or  lit.  fruit  of  the  earth),  as  being  the 
fruit  which  the  land  of  Israel,  and  consequently  the  earth 
itself,  would  produce,  just  as  in  Ezek.  xvii.  5  Zedekiah  is 
called  a  "  seed  of  the  earth."  The  reasons  already  adduced 
to  show  that  "  the  sprout  of  Jehovah"  cannot  refer  to  the 
blessings  of  the  field,  apply  with  equal  force  to  "  the  fruit  of 
the  earth."  This  also  relates  to  the  Messiah  Himself,  regarded 

/       o 

as  the  fruit  in  which  all  the  growth  and  bloom  of  this  earthly 
history  would  eventually  reach  its  promised  and  divinely  ap 
pointed  conclusion.  The  use  of  this  double  epithet  to  denote 
"  the  coming  One"  can  only  be  accounted  for,  without  antici 
pating  the  New  Testament  standpoint,1  from  the  desire  to 
depict  His  double-sided  origin.  He  would  come,  on  the  one 
hand,  from  Jehovah;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  earthy 
inasmuch  as  He  would  spring  from  Israel.  We  have  here  the 
passage,  on  the  basis  of  which  zemach  (the  sprout  or  "  Branch") 

1  From  a  New  Testament  point  of  view  we  might  say  that  the  "  sprout 
of  Jehovah"  or  "  fruit  of  the  earth"  was  the  grain  of  wheat  which  redeem 
ing  love  sowed  in  the  earth  on  Good  Friday ;  the  grain  of  wheat  which 
began  to  break  through  the  ground  and  grow  towards  heaven  on  Easter 
Sunday  ;  the  grain  of  wheat  whose  golden  blade  ascended  heavenwards  on 
Ascension  Day ;  the  grain  of  wheat  whose  myriad-fold  ear  bent  down  to 
the  earth  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  poured  out  the  grains,  from  which 
the  holy  church  not  only  was  born,  but  still  continues  to  be  born.  But 
such  thoughts  as  these  lie  outside  the  historico -grammatical  meaning. 


CHAP.  IV.  3.  153 

was  adopted  by  Jeremiah  (ch.  xxiii.  5  and  xxxiii.  15)  and 
Zechariah  (ch.  iii.  8,  vi.  12)  as  a  proper  name  for  the 
Messiah,  and  upon  which  Matthew,  by  combining  this  proper 
name  zemacli  (sprout)  with  nezer  (ch.  xi.  1,  cf.  liii.  2),  rests 
his  affirmation,  that  according  to  the  Old  Testament  pro 
phecies  the  future  Messiah  was  to  be  called  a  Nazarene.  It 
is  undoubtedly  strange  that  this  epithet  should  be  introduced 
so  entirely  without  preparation  even  by  Isaiah,  who  coined 
it  first.  In  fact,  the  whole  passage  relating  to  the  Messiah 
stands  quite  alone  in  this  cycle  of  prophecies  in  ch.  i.-vi. 
But  the  book  of  Isaiah  is  a  complete  and  connected  work. 
What  the  prophet  indicates  merely  in  outline  here,  he  carries 
out  more  fully  in  the  cycle  of  prophecies  which  follows  in 
ch.  vii.-xii. ;  and  there  the  enigma,  which  he  leaves  as  an 
enigma  in  the  passage  before  us,  receives  the  fullest  solution. 
Without  dwelling  any  further  upon  the  man  of  the  future, 
described  in  this  enigmatically  symbolical  way,  the  prophet 
hurries  on  to  a  more  precise  description  of  the  church  of  the 
future. — Yer.  3.  "And  it  will  come  to  pass,  whoever  is  left  in 
Zion  and  remains  in  Jerusalem,  holy  will  he  be  called,  all  who  are 
written  down  for  life  in  Jerusalem"  The  leading  emphasis  of 
the  whole  verse  rests  upon  kadosh  (holy).  Whereas  formerly  in 
Jerusalem  persons  had  been  distinguished  according  to  their 
rank  and  condition,  without  any  regard  to  their  moral  worth 
(ch.  iii.  1-3,  10,  11 ;  cf.  ch.  xxxii.  5)  ;  so  the  name  kadosh  (holy) 
would  now  be  the  one  chief  name  of  honour,  and  would  be 
given  to  every  individual,  inasmuch  as  the  national  calling  of 
Israel  would  now  be  realized  in  the  persons  of  all  (Ex.  xix.  6, 
etc.).  Consequently  the  expression  "  he  shall  be  called"  is  not 
exactly  equivalent  to  l(  he  shall  be,"  but  rather  presupposes 
the  latter,  as  in  ch.  i.  26,  Ixi.  6,  Ixii.  4.  The  term  kadosh 
denotes  that  which  is  withdrawn  from  the  world,  or  separated 
from  it.  The  church  of  the  saints  or  holy  ones,  which  now 
inhabits  Jerusalem,  is  what  has  been  left  from  the  smeltincy 

'  O  - 

and  their  holiness  is  the  result  of  washing.  "infan  is  inter 
changed  with  1KB* ;3H.  The  latter,  as  Papenheim  has  shown  in 
his  Hebrew  synonyms,  involves  the  idea  of  intention,  viz. 
"that  which  has  been  left  behind;"  the  former  merely  ex 
presses  the  fact,  -viz.  that  which  remains.  The  character  of 
this  "  remnant  of  grace,"  and  the  number  of  members  of  which 


154  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

it  would  consist,  are  shown  in  the  apposition  contained  in 
ver.  36.  This  apposition  means  something  more  than  those 
who  are  entered  as  living  in  Jerusalem,  i.e.  the  population  of 
Jerusalem  as  entered  in  the  city  register  (Hofmann)  ;  for  the 
verb  with  Lamed  does  not  mean  merely  to  enter  as  a  certain 
thing,  but  (like  the  same  verb  with  the  accusative  in  Jer. 
xxii.  30)  to  enter  as  intended  for  a  certain  purpose.  The 
expression  D^np  may  either  be  taken  as  a  noun,  viz.  "  to  life" 
(Dan.  xii.  2),  or  as  an  adjective,  "  to  the  living"  (a  meaning 
which  is  quite  as  tenable;  cf.  Ps.  Ixix.  29,  1  Sam.  xxv.  29). 
In  either  case  the  notion  of  predestination  is  implied,  and  the 
assumption  of  the  existence  of  a  divine  "  book  of  life"  (Ex. 
xxxii.  32,  33 ;  Dan.  xii.  1 ;  cf.  Ps.  cxxxix.  16)  ;  so  that  the  idea 
is  the  same  as  that  of  Acts  xiii.  48 :  "As  many  as  were  ordained 
to  eternal  life."  The  reference  here  is  to  persons  who  were 
entered  in  the  book  of  God,  on  account  of  the  good  kernel  of 
faith  within  them,  as  those  who  should  become  partakers  of  the 
life  in  the  new  Jerusalem,  and  should  therefore  be  spared  in 
the  midst  of  the  judgment  of  sifting  in  accordance  with  this 
divine  purpose  of  grace.  For  it  wras  only  through  the  judg 
ment  setting  this  kernel  of  faith  at  liberty,  that  such  a  holy 
community  as  is  described  in  the  protasis  which  comes  after 
wards,  as  in  Ps.  Ixiii.  6,  7,  could  possibly  arise. 

Ver.  4.  "  When  the  Lord  shall  hav£  washed  away  the  filth 
of  the  daughters  of  Zion,  and  shall  have  purged  away  the  blood- 
guiltinesses  of  Jerusalem  from  the  midst  thereof,  by  the  spirit  of 
judgment  and  by  the  spirit  of  sifting."  "  When"  followed  by 
a  preterite  (equivalent  to  a  fut.  exact,  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  13 ; 
Ges.  §  126,  5),  introduces  the  circumstance,  whose  previous 
occurrence  \vould  be  the  condition  of  all  the  rest.  The  force  of 
the  future  yddiacli  ("  shall  have  purged")  is  regulated  by  that 
of  the  preterite  rdchate,  as  in  ch.  vi.  11 ;  for  although,  when 
regarded  simply  by  itself,  as  in  ch.  x.  12,  the  future  tense 
may  suggest  the  idea  of  a  future  perfect,  it  cannot  have  the 
force  of  such  a  future.  The  double  purification  answers  to  the 
two  scenes  of  judgment  described  in  ch.  iii.  The  filth  of  the 
daughters  of  Zion  is  the  moral  pollution  hidden  under  their 
vain  and  coquettish  finery ;  and  the  murderous  deeds  of  Jeru 
salem  are  the  acts  of  judicial  murder  committed  by  its  rulers 
upon  the  poor  and  innocent.  This  filth  and  these  spots  of 


CHAP.  IV.  5.  155 

blood  the  Sovereign  Ruler  washes  and  purges  away  (see  2  Cliron. 
iv.  6),  by  causing  His  spirit  or  His  breath  to  burst  in  upon  all  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  both  male  and  female.  This  breath  is 
called  "  the  spirit  of  judgment,"  because  it  punishes  evil ;  and 
"  the  spirit  of  sifting,"  inasmuch  as  it  sweeps  or  cleans  it  away. 
"TO  is  to  be  explained,  as  in  ch.  vi.  13,  in  accordance  with  Deut. 
xiii.  6  (5,  Eng.  Ver.;  "put  the  evil  away")  and  other  passages, 
such  especially  as  ch.  xix.  13,  xxi.  9.  The  rendering  given  in 
the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  viz.  "  in  the  spirit  of  burning,"  is 
founded  upon  the  radical  meaning  of  the  verb,  which  signifies 
literally  to  burn  up,  and  hence  to  clear  away  or  destroy  (see 
Job,  vol.  ii.  p.  180,  Eng.  Tr.).  Nevertheless,  "  burning"  in 
connection  with  judgment  is  not  definite  enough,  since  every 
manifestation  of  divine  judgment  is  a  manifestation  of  fire ;  but 
it  is  not  every  judgment  that  has  connected  with  it  what  is  here 
implied, — namely,  the  salutary  object  of  burning  away,  or,  in 
other  words,  of  winnowing.  The  "  spirit"  is  in  both  instances 
the  Spirit  of  God  which  pervades  the  world,  not  only  generat 
ing  and  sustaining  life,  but  also  at  times  destroying  and  sifting 
(ch.  xxx.  27,  28),  as  it  does  in  the  case  before  us,  in  which  the 
imperishable  glory  described  in  ver.  5  is  so  prepared. 

Ver.  5.  "  And  Jehovah  creates  over  every  spot  of  Mount 
Zion,  and  over  its  festal  assemblies,  a  cloud  by  day,  and  smoke, 
and  the  shining  of  flaming  fire  by  night:  for  over  all  the  glory 
comes  a  canopy?  Just  as  Jehovah  guided  and  shielded  Israel 
in  the  days  of  the  redemption  from  Egypt  in  a  smoke-cloud 
by  day  and  a  fire-cloud  by  night,  which  either  moved  in  front 
like  a  pillar,  or  floated  above  them  as  a  roof  (Num.  xiv.  14, 
etc.),  the  perpetuation  of  His  presence  at  Sinai  (Ex.  xix.  9, 
16  sqq.) ;  so  would  Jehovah  in  like  manner  shield  the  Israel  of 
the  final  redemption,  which  would  no  longer  need  the  pillar  of 
cloud  since  its  wanderings  would  be  over,  but  only  the  cloudy 
covering ;  and  such  a  covering  Jehovah  would  create,  as  the 
prcet.  consec.  NTO  ("  and  He  creates")  distinctly  affirms.  The 
verb  bdrdh  always  denotes  a  divine  and  miraculous  pro 
duction,  having  its  commencement  in  time ;  for  even  the 
natural  is  also  supernatural  in  its  first  institution  by  God. 
In  the  case  before  us,  however,  the  reference  is  to  a  fresh 
manifestation  of  His  gracious  presence,  exalted  above  the 
present  course  of  nature.  This  manifestation  would  consist 


15G  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

by  day  in  "  a  cloud,"  and  as  the  liendiadys  "  cloud  and  smoke  " 
(i.e.  cloud  in  form  and  smoke  in  substance)  distinctly  affirms,  a 
smoke-cloud,  not  a  watery  cloud,  like  those  which  ordinarily 
cover  the  sky ;  and  by  night  in  a  fiery  splendour,  not  merely 
a  lingering  fiery  splendour  like  that  of  the  evening  sky,  but, 
as  the  words  clearly  indicate,  a  flaming  brightness  (lehdbdh), 
and  therefore  real  and  living  fire.  The  purpose  of  the  cloud 
would  not  only  be  to  overshadow,  but  also  to  serve  as  a  wall  of 
defence  against  opposing  influences  j1  and  the  fire  would  not 
only  give  light,  but  by  flaming  and  flashing  would  ward  off 
hostile  powers.  But,  above  all,  the  cloud  and  fire  were  intended 
as  signs  of  the  nearness  of  God,  and  His  satisfaction.  In  the 
most  glorious  times  of  the  temple  a  smoke-cloud  of  this  kind 
filled  the  Holy  of  holies ;  and  there  was  only  one  occasion — 
namely,  at  the  dedication  of  Solomon's  temple — on  which  it 
filled  the  whole  building  (1  Kings  viii.  10)  ;  but  now  the  cloud, 
the  smoke  of  which,  moreover,  would  be  turned  at  night  into 
flaming  fire,  would  extend  over  every  spot  (mdcon,  a  more 
poetical  word  for  md/com)  of  Mount  Zion,  and  over  the  festal 
assemblies  thereon.  The  whole  mountain  would  thus  become 
a  Holy  of  holies.  It  would  be  holy  not  only  as  being  the 
dwelling-place  of  Jehovah,  but  as  the  gathering-place  of  a 
community  of  saints.  "  Her  assemblies"  (mikrdehd)  points 
back  to  Zion,  and  is  a  plural  written  defectively  (at  least  in 
our  editions2), — as,  for  example,  in  Jer.  xix.  8.  There  is  no 
necessity  to  take  this  noun  in  the  sense  of  "meeting  halls" 
(a  meaning  which  it  never  has  anywhere  else),  as  Gesenius, 
Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  others  have  done,  since  it  may  also  signify 
"  the  meetings,"  though  not  in  an  abstract,  but  in  a  concrete 
sense  (ecclesice).3  The  explanatory  clause,  "for  over  all  the 

1  The  cloud  derived  its  name,  'andn,  not  from  the  idea  of  covering,  but 
from  that  of  corning  to  meet  one.     The  clouds  come  towards  the  man  who 
gazes  at  them,  inserting  themselves  between  him  and  the  sky,  and  thus 
forcing  themselves  upon  his  notice  instead  of  the  sky ;  hence  the  visible 
outer  side  of  the  vault  of  heaven  is  also  called  'anan  (plur.  andn),  just  as 
the  same  word  is  used  to  denote  the  outermost  portion  of  the  branches  or 
foliage  of  a  tree  which  is  the  first  to  strike  the  eye  (in  contradistinction  to 
the  inner  portions,  which  are  not  so  easily  seen,  even  if  visible  at  all). 

2  Such  codices  and  ancient  editions  as  Soncino  (1488),  Brescia  (1494), 
and  many  others,  have  the  word  with  the  yod  of  the  plural. 

5  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  form  ^>y£E)    ^3O    *s  ever  strictly  a  nomen 


CHAP.  IV.  6.  157 

glory  (comes)  a  canopy"  admits  of  several  interpretations.  Dr 
Schegg  and  others  take  it  in  the  general  sense  :  "  for  defence 
and  covering  are  coming  for  all  that  is  glorious."  Now,  even  if 
this  thought  were  not  so  jejune  as  it  is,  the  word  chuppdh  would 
not  be  the  word  used  to  denote  covering  for  the  sake  of  pro 
tection  ;  it  signifies  rather  covering  for  the  sake  of  beauti 
fying  and  honouring  that  which  is  covered.  Chuppdh  is  the 
nftme  still  given  by  the  Jews  to  the  wedding  canopy,  i.e.  a 
canopy  supported  on  four  poles  and  carried  by  four  boys,  under 
which  the  bride  and  bridegroom  receive  the  nuptial  blessing, — 
a  meaning  which  is  apparently  more  appropriate,  even  in  Ps. 
xix.  6  and  Joel  ii.  16,  than  the  ordinary  explanation  thalamus 
or  torus.  Such  a  canopy  would  float  above  Mount  Zion  in  the 
form  of  a  cloud  of  smoke  and  blaze  of  fire.  (There  is  no 
necessity  to  take  chuppdh  as  a  third  pers.  pual,  since  ^nn,  which 
follows  immediately  afterwards  in  ver.  6,  may  easily  be  sup 
plied  in  thought.)  The  only  question  is  whether  ctil-cdbod 
signifies  "  every  kind  of  glory,"  or  according  to  Ps.  xxxix.  6, 
xlv.14,  "  pure  glory"  (Hofmann,  Stud.u.  Krit.  1847, pp. 936-38). 
The  thought  that  Jerusalem  would  now  be  "  all  glory,"  as  its 
inhabitants  were  all  holiness,  and  therefore  that  this  shield 
would  be  spread  out  over  pure  glory,  is  one  that  thoroughly 
commends  itself.  But  we  nevertheless  prefer  the  former,  as 
more  in  accordance  with  the  substantive  clause.  The  glory 
which  Zion  would  now  possess  would  be  exposed  to  no  further 
injury :  Jehovah  would  acknowledge  it  by  signs  of  His 
gracious  presence ;  for  henceforth  there  would  be  nothing 
glorious  in  Zion,  over  which  there  would  not  be  a  canopy 
spread  in  the  manner  described,  shading  and  yet  enlightening, 
hiding,  defending,  and  adorning  it. 

Thus  would  Zion  be  a  secure  retreat  from  all  adversities 
and  disasters.  Yer.  6.  "And  it  will  be  a  booth  for  shade  by 
day  from  the  heat  of  the  sun,  and  for  a  refuge  and  covert  from 
storm  and  from  rain"  The  subject  to  "  will  be"  is  not  the 
miraculous  roofing ;  for  dndn  (cloud)  is  masculine,  and  the  verb 
feminine,  and  there  would  be  no  sense  in  saying  that  a  chuppdh 
or  canopy  would  be  a  succdh  or  booth.  Either,  therefore,  the 

actionis  kal  (Ges.  §  84, 14).  Its  meaning  seems  rather  to  be  always  concrete, 
even  in  Arabic,  where  menam  signifies  a  sleeping-place,  sleeping-time,  or  a 
dream,  but  never  sleep,  or  sleeping  (like  sine,  Heb.  shenah,  or  naum,  Heb.  num). 


158  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

verb  contains  the  subject  in  itself,  and  the  meaning  is,  "  There 
will  be  a  booth"  (the  verb  lidydli  being  used  in  a  pregnant 
sense,  as  in  ch.  xv.  6,  xxiii.  13)  ;  or  else  Zion  (ver.  5)  is  the 
subject.  We  prefer  the  latter.  Zion  or  Jerusalem  would  be 
a  booth,  that  is  to  say,  as  the  parallel  clause  affirms,  a  place  of 
security  and  concealment  (tnistor,  which  only  occurs  here,  is 
used  on  account  of  the  alliteration  with  machseh  in  the  place 
of  sether,  which  the  prophet  more  usually  employs,  viz.  in  ch. 
xxviii.  17,  xxxii.  2).  "  By  day"  (yomdm,  which  is  construed  with 
b>y  in  the  construct  state,  cf.  Ezek.  xxx.  16)  is  left  intentionally 
without  any  "  by  night"  to  answer  to  it  in  the  parallel  clause, 
because  reference  is  made  to  a  place  of  safety  and  concealment 
for  all  times,  whether  by  day  or  night.  Heat,  storm,  and  rain 
are  mentioned  as  examples  to  denote  the  most  manifold  dangers ; 
but  it  is  a  singular  fact  that  rain,  which  is  a  blessing  so  earnestly 
desired  in  the  time  of  chdreb,  i.e.  of  drought  and  burning  heat, 
should  also  be  included.  At  the  present  day,  when  rain  falls 
in  Jerusalem,  the  whole  city  dances  with  delight.  Nevertheless 
rain,  i.e.  the  rain  which  falls  from  the  clouds,  is  not  paradisaical ; 
and  its  effects  are  by  no  means  unfrequently  destructive.  Ac 
cording  to  the  archives  of  Genesis,  rain  from  the  clouds  took 
the  place  of  dew  for  the  first  time  at  the  flood,  when  it  fell  in 
a  continuous  and  destructive  form.  The  Jerusalem  of  the  last 
time  will  be  paradise  restored ;  and  there  men  will  be  no  longer 
exposed  to  destructive  changes  of  weather.  In  this  predic 
tion  the  close  of  the  prophetic  discourse  is  linked  on  to  the 
commencement.  This  mountain  of  Zion,  roofed  over  with  a 
cloud  of  smoke  by  day  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by 
night,  is  no  other  than  the  mountain  of  the  house  of  Jehovah, 
which  was  to  be  exalted  above  all  the  mountains,  and  to  which 
the  nations  would  make  their  pilgrimage  ;  and  this  Jerusalem, 
so  holy  within,  and  all  glorious  without,  is  no  other  than  the 
place  from  which  the  word  of  Jehovah  was  one  day  to  go  forth 
into  all  the  world.  But  what  Jerusalem  is  this  ?  Is  it  the 
Jerusalem  of  the  time  of  final  glory  awaiting  the  people  of 
God  in  this  life,  as  described  in  Rev.  xi.  (for,  notwithstanding 
all  that  a  spiritualistic  and  rationalistic  anti-chiliasm  may  say, 
the  prophetic  words  of  both  Old  and  New  Testament  warrant 
us  in  expecting  such  a  time  of  glory  in  this  life)  ;  or  is  it  the 
Jerusalem  of  the  new  heaven  and  new  earth  described  in  Rev. 


CHAP.  V.  159 

xx.  21  ?  The  true  answer  is,  "  Both  in  one."  The  prophet's 
real  intention  was  to  depict  the  holy  city  in  its  final  and 
imperishable  state  after  the  last  judgment.  But  to  his  view, 
the  state  beyond  and  the  closing  state  here  were  blended  to 
gether,  so  that  the  glorified  Jerusalem  of  earth  and  the  glori 
fied  Jerusalem  of  heaven  appeared  as  if  fused  into  one.  It 
was  a  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  Old  Testament,  to 
represent  the  closing  scene  on  this  side  the  grave,  and  the  eternal 
state  beyond,  as  a  continuous  line,  having  its  commencement 
here.  The  New  Testament  first  drew  the  cross  line  which  divides 
time  from  eternity.  It  is  true,  indeed,  as  the  closing  chapters 
of  the  Apocalypse  show,  that  even  the  New  Testament  prophe 
cies  continue  to  some  extent  to  depict  the  state  beyond  in  figures 
drawn  from  the  present  world ;  with  this  difference,  however, 
that  when  the  line  had  once  been  drawn,  the  demand  was  made, 
of  which  there  was  no  consciousness  in  the  Old  Testament, 
that  the  figures  taken  from  this  life  should  be  understood  as 
relating  to  the  life  beyond,  and  that  eternal  realities  should  be 
separated  from  their  temporal  forms. 


JUDGMENT  OF  DEVASTATION  UPON  THE  VINEYAKD  OF 
JEHOVAH. — CHAP.  V. 

Closing  Words  of  (lie  First  Cycle  of  Prophecies. 

The  foregoing  prophecy  has  run  through  all  the  different 
phases  of  prophetic  exhortation  by  the  time  that  we  reach  the 
close  of  ch.  iv.;  and  its  leading  thought,  viz.  the  overthrow  of 
the  false  glory  of  Israel,  and  the  perfect  establishment  of  true 
glory  through  the  medium  of  judgment,  has  been  so  fully 
worked  out,  that  ch.  v.  cannot  possibly  be  regarded  either  as  a 
continuation  or  as  an  appendix  to  that  address.  Unquestion 
ably  there  are  many  points  in  which  ch.  v.  refers  back  to  ch. 
ii.-iv.  The  parable  of  the  vineyard  in  ch.  v.  1-7  grows,  as  it 
were,  out  of  ch.  iii.  14 ;  and  in  ch.  v.  15  we  have  a  repetition  of 
the  refrain  in  ch.  ii.  9,  varied  in  a  similar  manner  to  ch.  ii.  17. 
But  these  and  other  points  of  contact  with  ch.  ii.-iv.,  whilst 
they  indicate  a  tolerable  similarity  in  date,  by  no  means  prove 
the  absence  of  independence  in  ch.  v.  The  historical  circum 
stances  of  the  two  addresses  are  the  same ;  and  the  range  of 


ICO  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

thought  is  therefore  closely  related.  But  the  leading  idea  which 
is  carried  out  in  ch.  v.  is  a  totally  different  one.  The  basis  of 
the  address  is  a  parable  representing  Israel  as  the  vineyard  of 
Jehovah,  which,  contrary  to  all  expectation,  had  produced  bad 
fruit,  and  therefore  was  given  up  to  devastation.  What  kind 
of  bad  fruit  it  produced  is  described  in  a  six-fold  "woe;"  and 
what  kind  of  devastation  was  to  follow  is  indicated  in  the  dark 
nocturnal  conclusion  to  the  whole  address,  which  is  entirely 
without  a  promise. 

The  prophet  commenced  his  first  address  in  ch.  i.  like  another 
Moses ;  the  second,  which  covered  no  less  ground,  he  opened 
with  the  text  of  an  earlier  prophecy ;  and  now  he  commences 
the  third  like  a  musician,  addressing  both  himself  and  his 
hearers  with  enticing  words.  Ver.  la.  "  Arise,  I  will  sing  of  my 
beloved,  a  song  of  my  dearest  touching  his  vineyard"  The  fugitive 
rhythm,  the  musical  euphony,  the  charming  assonances  in  this 
appeal,  it  is  impossible  to  reproduce.  They  are  perfectly  inimi 
table.  The  Lamed  in  lidldl  is  the  Lamed  objecti.  The  person  to 
whom  the  song  referred,  to  whom  it  applied,  of  whom  it  treated, 
was  the  singer's  own  beloved.  It  was  a  song  of  his  dearest  one 
(not  his  cousin,  patruelis,  as  Luther  renders  it  in  imitation  of 
the  Vulgate,  for  the  meaning  of  dod  is  determined  by  yddid, 
beloved)  touching  his  vineyard.  The  Lamed  in  Icarmo  is  also 
Lamed  objecti.  The  song  of  the  beloved  is  really  a  song  con 
cerning  the  vineyard  of  the  beloved ;  and  this  song  is  a  song  of 
the  beloved  himself,  not  a  song  written  about  him,  or  attributed 
to  him,  but  such  a  song  as  he  himself  had  sung,  and  still  had 
to  sing.  The  prophet,  by  beginning  in  this  manner,  was  sur 
rounded  (either  in  spirit  or  in  outward  reality)  by  a  crowd  of 
people  from  Jerusalem  and  Judah.  The  song  is  a  short  one, 
and  runs  thus  in  vers.  15,  2  :  "My  beloved  had  a  vineyard  on  a 
fatly  nourished  mountain-horn,  and  dug  it  up  and  cleared  it  of 
stones,  and  planted  it  with  noble  vines,  and  built  a  tower  in  it,  and 
also  hewed  out  a  wine-press  therein ;  and  hoped  that  it  would  bring 
forth  grapes,  and  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes"  The  vineyard 
was  situated  upon  a  keren,  i.e.  upon  a  prominent  mountain  peak 
projecting  like  a  horn,  and  therefore  open  to  the  sun  on  all 
sides ;  for,  as  Virgil  says  in  the  Georgics,  "  apertos  Bacchus  amat 
colles"  This  mountain  horn  was  ben-shemen,  a  child  of  fat 
ness  :  the  fatness  was  innate,  it  belonged  to  it  by  nature  (shemen 


CHAP.  V.  1,  2.  161 

is  used,  as  in  cli.  xxviii.  1,  to  denote  the  fertility  of  a  nutritive 
loamy  soil).  And  the  owner  of  the  vineyard  spared  no  atten 
tion  or  trouble.  The  plough  could  not  be  used,  from  the  steep 
ness  of  the  mountain  slope :  he  therefore  dug  it  up,  that  is  to 
say,  he  turned  up  the  soil  which  was  to  be  made  into  a  vineyard 
with  a  hoe  (izzak,  to  hoe ;  Arab,  mizak,  mizaka) ;  and  as  he 
found  it  choked  up  with  stones  and  boulders,  he  got  rid  of  this 
rubbish  by  throwing  it  out  (sikkel,  a  privative  piel,  lapidibus 
purgare,  then  operam  consumere  in  lapides,  sc.  ejiciendos,  to 
stone,  or  clear  of  stones:  Ges.  §  52,  2).  After  the  soil  had 
been  prepared  he  planted  it  with  sore/c,  i.e.  the  finest  kind  of 
eastern  vine,  bearing  small  grapes  of  a  bluish-red,  with  pips 
hardly  perceptible  to  the  tongue.  The  name  is  derived  from  its 
colour  (compare  the  Arabic  zerha,  red  wine).  To  protect  arid 
adorn  the  vineyard  which  had  been  so  richly  planted,  he  built 
a  tower  in  the  midst  of  it.  The  expression  "  and  also"  calls 
especial  attention  to  the  fact  that  he  hewed  out  a  wine-trough 
therein  (yekeb,  the  trough  into  which  the  must  or  juice  pressed 
from  the  grapes  in  the  wine-press  flows,  lacus  as  distinguished 
from  torciilar)  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  order  that  the  trough 
might  be  all  the  more  fixed  and  durable,  he  constructed  it  in  a 
rocky  portion  of  the  ground  (chdtseb  bo  instead  of  chatsab  bo, 
with  a  and  the  accent  drawn  back,  because  a  Beth  was  thereby 
easily  rendered  inaudible,  so  that  chdtseb  is  not  a  participial 
adjective,  as  Bottcher  supposes).  This  was  a  difficult  task,  as 
the  expression  "and  also"  indicates;  and  for  that  very  reason 
it  was  an  evidence  of  the  most  confident  expectation.  But  how 
bitterly  was  this  deceived !  The  vineyard  produced  no  such 
fruit,  as  might  have  been  expected  from  a  sorek  plantation ;  it 
brought  forth  no  'andbim  whatever,  i.e.  no  such  grapes  as  a 
cultivated  vine  should  bear,  but  only  Vusldm,  or  wild  grapes. 
Luther  first  of  all  adopted  the  rendering  wild  grapes,  and  then 
altered  it  to  harsh  or  sour  grapes.  But  it  comes  to  the  same 
tiling.  The  difference  between  a  wild  vine  and  a  good  vine  is 
only  qualitative.  The  vitis  vinifera,  like  all  cultivated  plants,  is 
assigned  to  the  care  of  man,  under  which  it  improves ;  whereas 
in  its  wild  state  it  remains  behind  its  true  intention  (see  Genesis, 
§  622).  Consequently  the  word  Uusldm  (from  bd'ash,  to  be  bad, 
or  smell  bad)  denotes  not  only  the  grapes  of  the  wild  vine,  which 
are  naturally  small  and  harsh  (Rashi,  lambruches,  i.e.  grapes  of 

VOL.  I.  L 


162  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  labrusca,  which  is  used  now,  however,  as  the  botanical  name 
of  a  vine  that  is  American  in  its  origin),  but  also  grapes  of  a 
good  stock,  which  have  either  been  spoiled  or  have  failed  to 
ripen.1  These  were  the  grapes  which  the  vineyard  produced, 
such  as  you  might  indeed  have  expected  from  a  wild  vine,  but 
not  from  carefully  cultivated  vines  of  the  very  choicest  kind. 

The  song  of  the  beloved  who  was  so  sorely  deceived 
terminates  here.  The  prophet  recited  it,  not  his  beloved 
himself;  but  as  they  were  both  of  one  heart  and  one  soul, 
the  prophet  proceeds  thus  in  vers.  3  and  4 :  "  And  now,  0 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and  men  of  Judah,  judge,  I  pray  you, 
between  me  and  my  vineyard  !  What  could  have  been  done  more 
to  my  vineyard  that  I  have  not  done  in  it?  Wherefore  did  I 
hope  that  it  would  bring  forth  grapes,  and  it  brought  forth  wild 
grapes  T*  The  fact  that  the  prophet  speaks  as  if  he  were  the 
beloved  himself,  shows  at  once  who  the  beloved  must  be.  The 
beloved  of  the  prophet  and  the  lover  of  the  prophet  (yddid  and 
dod)  were  Jehovah,  with  whom  he  was  so  united  by  a  unio 
mystica  exalted  above  all  earthly  love,  that,  like  the  angel  of 
Jehovah  in  the  early  histories,  he  could  speak  as  if  he  were 
Jehovah  Himself  (see  especially  Zech.  ii.  12-15).  To  any  one 
with  spiritual  intuition,  therefore,  the  parabolical  meaning  and 
object  of  the  song  would  be  at  once  apparent ;  and  even  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and  the  men  of  Judah  (yosheb  and  Ish 
are  used  collectively,  as  in  ch.  viii.  14,  ix.  8,  xxii.  21,  cf.  xx.  6) 
were  not  so  stupefied  by  sin,  that  they  could  not  perceive  to 
what  the  prophet  was  leading.  It  was  for  them  to  decide  where 
the  guilt  of  this  unnatural  issue  lay — that  is  to  say,  of  this 
thorough  contradiction  between  the  "  doing"  of  the  vineyard 
and  the  "  doing"  of  the  Lord ;  that  instead  of  the  grapes  he 
hoped  for,  it  brought  forth  wild  grapes.  (On  the  expression 
"  what  could  have  been  done,"  quid  faciendum  est,  mah-laasoth, 

1  In  the  Jerusalem  Talmud  such  grapes  are  called  ubsliin,  the  letters 
being  transposed;  and  in  the  Mishnah  (Maaseroth  i.  2,  Zeli'ith  iv.  8) 
tJ^fcOn  is  the  standing  word  applied  to  grapes  that  are  only  halt  ripe  (see 
Lbwy's  Leshon  Chachamim,  or  Worterbuch  des  talmudischen  Hebraisch,  Prag 
1845).  With  reference  to  the  wild  grape  (TO  dypto^-^ot),  a  writer,  de 
scribing  the  useful  plants  of  Greece,  says,  "  Its  fruit  (ja,  dypiwrot^v^oi) 
consists  of  very  small  berries,  not  much  larger  than  bilberries,  with  a  harsh 
flavour." 


CHAP.  v.  5,  6.  163 


see  at  Hab.  i.  17,  Ges.  §  132,  Anm.  1.)  Instead  of  HE 
we  have  the  more  suitable  term  JJFJB,  the  latter  being  used  in 
relation  to  the  actual  cause  (causa  efficiens),  the  former  in 
relation  to  the  object  (causa  finalis).  The  parallel  to  the  second 
part,  viz.  ch.  1.  2,  resembles  the  passage  before  us,  not  only  in 
the  use  of  this  particular  word,  but  also  in  the  fact  that  there, 
as  well  as  here,  it  relates  to  both  clauses,  and  more  especially  to 
the  latter  of  the  two.  We  find  the  same  paratactic  construction 
in  connection  with  other  conjunctions  (cf.  ch.  xii.  1,  Ixv.  12). 
They  were  called  upon  to  decide  and  answer  as  to  this  what 
and  ivherefore;  but  they  were  silent,  just  because  they  could 
clearly  see  that  they  would  have  to  condemn  themselves  (as 
David  condemned  himself  in  connection  with  Nathan's  parable, 
2  Sam.  xii.  5).  The  Lord  of  the  vineyard,  therefore,  begins 
to  speak.  He,  its  accuser,  will  now  also  be  its  judge.  —  Ver.  5. 
"  Now  then,  I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  do  at  once  to  my  vineyard  : 
take  away  its  hedge,  and  it  shall  be  for  grazing  ;  pull  down  its 
wall,  and  it  shall  be  for  treading  down."  Before  "  now  then" 
(tfattdh)  we  must  imagine  a  pause,  as  in  ch.  iii.  14.  The  Lord 
of  the  vineyard  breaks  the  silence  of  the  umpires,  which  indi 
cates  their  consciousness  of  guilt.  They  shall  hear  from  Him 
what  He  will  do  at  once  to  His  vineyard  (Lamed  in  Vcarmi,  as, 
for  example,  in  Deut.  xi.  6).  "Iwill  do  :"  ani  'dseh,  fut.  instant, 
equivalent  to  facturus  sum  (Ges.  §  134,  2,  b).  In  the  inf.  abs. 
which  follow  He  opens  up  what  He  will  do.  On  this  expla 
natory  use  of  the  inf.  abs.,  see  ch.  xx.  2,  Iviii.  6,  7.  In  such 
cases  as  these  it  takes  the  place  of  the  object,  as  in  other  cases 
of  the  subject,  but  always  in  an  abrupt  manner  (Ges.  §  131,  1). 
He  would  take  away  the  mesucah,  i.e.  the  green  thorny  hedge 
(Prov.  xv.  19;  Hos.  ii.  8)  with  which  the  vineyard  was  enclosed, 
and  would  pull  down  the  gdred,  i.e.  the  low  stone  wall  (Num. 
xxii.  24  ;  Prov.  xxiv.  31),  which  had  been  surrounded  by  the 
hedge  of  thorn-bushes  to  make  a  better  defence,  as  well  as  for 
the  protection  of  the  wall  itself,  more  especially  against  being 
undermined  ;  so  that  the  vineyard  would  be  given  up  to  grazing 
and  treading  down  (LXX.  KaraTrdrrjfjLa),  i.e.  would  become  an. 
open  way  and  gathering-place  for  man  and  beast. 

This  puts  an  end  to  the  unthankful  vineyard,  and  indeed 
a  hopeless  one.  Ver.  6.  "  And  I  will  put  an  end  to  it  :  it  shall 
not  be  pruned  nor  digged,  and  it  shall  break  out  in  thorns  and 


164  THE  PKOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

thistles ;  and  I  will  command  the  clouds  to  rain  no  rain  over  it." 
"  Put  an  end:"  bdthdh  (=  battdh :  Ges.  §  67,  Anm.  11)  signifies, 
according  to  the  primary  meaning  of  bdthath  (ni3?  nri2,  see  at 
ch.  i.  29),  viz.  abscindere,  either  abscissum  =  locus  abscissus  or 
%>ro3ruptus  (ch.  vii.  19),  or  abscissio  —  deletio.  The  latter  is  the 
meaning  here,  where  shlth  bdthdh  is  a  refined  expression  for  the 
more  usual  iyD  nb'y,  both  being  construed  with  the  accusative 
of  the  thing  which  is  brought  to  an  end.  Further  pruning  and 
hoeing  would  do  it  no  good,  but  only  lead  to  further  disappointr 
ment :  it  was  the  will  of  the  Lord,  therefore,  that  the  deceitful 
vineyard  should  shoot  up  in  thorns  and  thistles  ('dldh  is  applied  to 
the  soil,  as  in  ch.  xxxiv.  13  andProv.  xxiv.  31 ;  shdmir  vdshaith, 
thorns  and  thistles,  are  in  the  accusative,  according  to  Ges.  § 
138,  1,  Anm.  2  ;  and  both  the  words  themselves,  and  also  their 
combination,  are  exclusively  and  peculiarly  Isaiah's).1  In  order 
that  it  might  remain  a  wilderness,  the  clouds  would  also  receive 
commandment  from  the  Lord  not  to  rain  upon  it.  There  can 
be  no  longer  any  doubt  who  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  is.  He  is 
Lord  of  the  clouds,  and  therefore  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth. 
It  is  He  who  is  the  prophet's  beloved  and  dearest  one.  The  song 
which  opened  in  so  minstrel-like  and  harmless  a  tone,  has  now 
become  painfully  severe  and  terribly  repulsive.  The  husk  of 
the  parable,  which  has  already  been  broken  through,  now  falls 
completely  off  (cf.  Matt.  xxii.  13,  xxv.  30).  What  it  sets 
forth  in  symbol  is  really  true.  This  truth  the  prophet  estab 
lishes  by  an  open  declaration. — Ver.  7.  "  For  the  vineyard  of 
Jehovah  of  hosts  is  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the  men  of  Judah  are 
the  plantation  of  His  delight:  He  waited  for  justice,  and  behold 
grasping  ;  for  righteousness,  and  behold  a  shriek."  The  meaning 
is  not  that  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  would  not  let  any  more  rain 
fall  upon  it,  because  this  Lord  was  Jehovah  (which  is  not 
affirmed  in  fact  in  the  words  commencing  with  "  for,"  ci)9  but 

1  Cassel  associates  shdmir  as  the  name  of  a  plant  (saxifrage?)  with  o-pvpts, 
and  sliaith  with  sentis,  eixotvOot ;  but  the  name  shdmir  is  not  at  all  applicable 
to  those  small  delicate  plants,  which  are  called  saxifraga  (stone-breakers) 
on  account  of  their  growing  out  of  clefts  in  the  rock,  and  so  appearing  to 
have  split  the  rock  itself.  Both  shdmir  vdshaith  and  kots  tfdardar,  in  Gen. 
iii.  18,  seem  rather  to  point  to  certain  kinds  of  rhamnus,  together  with 
different  kinds  of  thistles.  The  more  arid  and  waste  the  ground  is,  the 
more  does  it  abound,  where  not  altogether  without  vegetation,  in  thorny, 
prickly,  stunted  productions. 


CHAP.  V.  7.  165 

a  more  general  one.  This  was  how  the  case  stood  with  the 
vineyard ;  for  all  Israel,  and  especially  the  people  of  Judah,  were 
this  vineyard,  which  had  so  bitterly  deceived  the  expectations 
of  its  Lord,  and  indeed  "  the  vineyard  of  Jehovah  of  hosts,"  and 
therefore  of  the  omnipotent  God,  whom  even  the  clouds  would 
serve  when  He  came  forth  to  punish.  The  expression  "  for  " 
(ci)  is  not  only  intended  to  vindicate  the  truth  of  the  last  state 
ment,  but  the  truth  of  the  whole  simile,  including  this  :  it  is  an 
explanatory  "  for "  (ci  explic.\  which  opens  the  epimythion. 
"  The  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (cerem  Jehovah  Zebaotli) 
is  the  predicate.  "  The  house  of  Israel "  (beth  Yisrdel)  was  the 
whole  nation,  which  is  also  represented  in  other  passages  under 
the  same  figure  of  a  vineyard  (ch.  xxvii.  2  sqq.;  Ps.  Ixxx.,  etc.). 
But  as  Isaiah  was  prophet  in  Judah,  he  applies  the  figure  more 
particularly  to  Judah,  which  was  called  Jehovah's  favourite 
plantation,  inasmuch  as  it  was  the  seat  of  the  divine  sanctuary 
and  of  the  Davidic  kingdom.  This  makes  it  easy  enough  to 
interpret  the  different  parts  of  the  simile  employed.  The  fat 
mountain-horn  was  Canaan,  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  (Ex. 
xv.  17) ;  the  digging  of  the  vineyard,  and  clearing  it  of  stones, 
was  the  clearing  of  Canaan  from  its  former  heathen  inhabit 
ants  (Ps.  xliv.  3)  ;  the  sorek-vines  were  the  holy  priests  and 
prophets  and  kings  of  Israel  of  the  earlier  and  better  times  ( Jer. 
ii.  21)  ;  the  defensive  and  ornamental  tower  in  the  midst  of  the 
vineyard  was  Jerusalem  as  the  royal  city,  with  Zion  the  royal 
fortress  (Mic.  iv.  8)  ;  the  winepress-trough  was  the  temple, 
where,  according  to  Ps.  xxxvi.  9  (8),  the  wine  of  heavenly 
pleasures  flowed  in  streams,  and  from  which,  according  to  Ps. 
xlii.  and  many  other  passages,  the  thirst  of  the  soul  might  all 
be  quenched.  The  grazing  and  treading  down  are  explained 
in  Jer.  v.  10  and  xii.  10.  The  bitter  deception  experienced  by 
Jehovah  is  expressed  in  a  play  upon  two  words,  indicating  the 
surprising  change  of  the  desired  result  into  the  very  opposite. 
The  explanation  which  Gesenius,  Caspar!,  Knobel,  and  others 
give  of  mispdch,  viz.  bloodshed,  does  not  commend  itself ;  for 
even  if  it  must  be  admitted  that  sdphach  occurs  once  or  twice  in 
the  "  Arabizing"  book  of  Job  (ch,  xxx.  7,  xiv.  19)  in  the  sense 
of  pouring  out,  this  verbal  root  is  strange  to  the  Hebrew  (and 
the  Aramaean).  Moreover,  mispdch  in  any  case  would  only 
mean  pouring  or  shedding,  and  not  bloodshed ;  and  although 


166  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  latter  would  certainly  be  possible  by  the  side  of  the  Arabic 
saffdcli)  saffdk  (shedder  of  blood),  yet  it  would  be  such  an  ellipsis 
as  cannot  be  shown  anywhere  else  in  Hebrew  usage.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  rendering  "  leprosy  "  does  not  yield  any  appro 
priate  sense,  as  mispachath  (sappachath)  is  never  generalized 
anywhere  else  into  the  single  idea  of  "dirt"  (Luzzatto  :  sozzurd), 
nor  does  it  appear  as  an  ethical  notion.  We  therefore  prefer 
to  connect  it  with  a  meaning  unquestionably  belonging  to 
the  verb  H2D  (see  kal,  1  Sam.  iii.  36  ;  niphal,  xiv.  1  ;  hithpael, 
1  Sam.  xxvi.  19),  which  is  derived  in  *)DJ,  ?]DN,  ^D,  from  the 
primary  notion  "  to  sweep,"  spec,  to  sweep  towards,  sweep  in, 
or  sweep  away.  Hence  we  regard  mispach  as  denoting  the 
forcible  appropriation  of  another  man's  property ;  certainly  a 
suitable  antithesis  to  mishpdt.  The  prophet  describes,  in  full- 
toned  figures,  how  the  expected  noble  grapes  had  turned  into 
wild  grapes,  with  nothing  more  than  an  outward  resemblance. 
The  introduction  to  the  prophecy  closes  here. 

The  prophecy  itself  follows  next,  a  seven-fold  discourse 
composed  of  the  six-fold  woe  contained  in  vers.  8—23,  and  the 
announcement  of  punishment  in  which  it  terminates.  In  this 
six-fold  woe  the  prophet  describes  the  bad  fruits  one  by  one.  In 
confirmation  of  our  rendering  of  mispdch,  the  first  woe  relates  to 
covetousness  and  avarice  as  the  root  of  all  evil. — Yer.  8.  "  Woe 
unto  them  that  join  house  to  house,  icho  lay  field  to  field ',  till  there 
is  no  more  room,  and  ye  alone  are  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  the 
land."  The  participle  is  continued  in  the  finite  verb,  as  in  ver. 
23,  ch.  x.  1 ;  the  regular  syntactic  construction  in  cases  of  this 
kind  (Ges.  §  134,  Anm.  2).  The  preterites  after  "  till"  (there 
are  two  such  preterites,  for  'ephes  is  an  intensified  }s^  enclosing 
the  verbal  idea)  correspond  to  future  perfects  :  "  They,  the  in 
satiable,  would  not  rest  till,  after  every  smaller  piece  of  landed 
property  had  been  swallowed  by  them,  the  whole  land  had  come 
into  their  possession,  and  no  one  beside  themselves  was  settled 
in  the  land"  (Job  xxii.  8).  Such  covetousness  was  all  the 
more  reprehensible,  because  the  law  of  Israel  had  provided  so 
very  stringently  and  carefully,  that  as  far  as  possible  there  should 
be  an  equal  distribution  of  the  soil,  and  that  hereditary  family 
property  should  be  inalienable.  All  landed  property  that  had 
been  alienated  reverted  to  the  family  every  fiftieth  year,  or 
year  of  jubilee  ;  so  that  alienation  simply  had  reference  to  the 


CHAP.  V.  9,  10.  167 

usufruct  of  the  land  till  that  time.  It  was  only  in  the  case  of 
houses  in  towns  that  the  right  of  redemption  was  restricted  to 
one  year,  at  least  according  to  a  later  statute.  How  badly  the 
law  of  the  year  of  jubilee  had  been  observed,  may  be  gathered 
from  Jer.  xxxiv.,  where  we  learn  that  the  law  as  to  the  manu 
mission  of  Hebrew  slaves  in  the  sabbatical  year  had  fallen 
entirely  into  neglect.  Isaiah's  contemporary,  Micah,  makes 
just  the  same  complaint  as  Isaiah  himself  (vid.  Mic.  ii.  2). 
And  the  denunciation  of  punishment  is  made  by  him  in  very 
similar  terms  to  those  vhich  we  find  here  in  vers.  9,  10  :  "  Into 
mine  ears  Jehovah  of  hosts  :  Of  a  truth  many  houses  shall  become 
a  wilderness,  great  and  beautiful  ones  deserted.  For  ten  yokes  of 
vineyard  will  yield  one  pailful,  and  a  quarter  of  seed-corn  will 
produce  a  bushel."  We  may  see  from  ch.  xxii.  14  in  what  sense 
the  prophet  wrote  the  substantive  clause,  "  Into  mine  ears,"  or 
more  literally,  "  In  mine  ears  [is]  Jehovah  Zebaoth,"  viz.  He 
is  here  revealing  Himself  to  me.  In  the  pointing,  ^X2i  is 
written  with  tiphchah  as  a  pausal  form,  to  indicate  to  the  reader 
that  the  boldness  of  the  expression  is  to  be  softened  down  by  the 
assumption  of  an  ellipsis.  In  Hebrew,  "  to  say  into  the  ears  " 
did  not  mean  to  "speak  softly  and  secretly,"  as  Gen.  xxiii.  107  16, 
Job  xxxiii.  8,  and  other  passages,  clearly  show ;  but  to  speak  in 
a  distinct  and  intelligible  manner,  which  precludes  the  possi 
bility  of  any  misunderstanding.  The  prophet,  indeed,  had  not 
Jehovah  standing  locally  beside  him  ;  nevertheless,  he  had  Him 
objectively  over  against  his  own  personality,  and  was  well  able 
to  distinguish  very  clearly  the  thoughts  and  words  of  his  own 
personality,  from  the  words  of  Jehovah  which  arose  audibly 
within  him.  These  words  informed  him  what  would  be  the 
fate  of  the  rich  and  insatiable  landowners.  "  Of  a  truth  :" 
N^'DK  (if  not)  introduces  an  oath  of  an  affirmative  character 
(the  complete  formula  is  chai  ani  'im-lo\  "  as  I  live  if  not "), 
just  as  'i?n  (if)  alone  introduces  a  negative  oath  (e.g.  Num. 
xiv.  23).  The  force  of  the  expression  'm-/o'  extends  not  only 
to  rabbim,  as  the  false  accentuation  with  gershayim  (double- 
geresh)  would  make  it  appear,  but  to  the  whole  of  the  following 
sentence,  as  it  is  correctly  accentuated  with  rebia  in  the  Venetian 
(1521)  and  other  early  editions.  A  universal  desolation  would 
ensue:  rabbii/t  (many)  does  not  mean  less  than  all;  but  the  houses 
(bdttim,  as  the  word  should  be  pronounced,  notwithstanding 


168  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Ewald's  objection  to  Kohler's  remarks  on  Zecli.  xiv.  2;  cf. 
ii.  31)  constituted  altogether  a  very  large  number  (compare  the 
use  of  the  word  "  many"  in  ch.  ii.  3,  Matt.  xx.  28,  etc.).  f^P  is 
a  double,  and  therefore  an  absolute,  negation  (so  that  there  is 
not,  no  inhabitant,  i.e.  not  any  inhabitant  at  all).  Ver.  10,  which 
commences  with  ci9  explains  how  such  a  desolation  of  the  houses 
would  be  brought  about :  failure  of  crops  produces  famine,  and 
this  is  followed  by  depopulation.  "  Ten  zimde  (with  dagesh  lene, 
Ewald)  of  vineyard"  are  either  ten  pieces  of  the  size  that  a  man 
could  plough  in  one  day  with  a  yoke  of  oxen,  or  possibly  ten  por 
tions  of  yo&e-like  espaliers  of  vines,  i.e.  of  vines  trained  on  cross 
laths  (the  vinajugata  of  Varro),  which  is  the  explanation  adopted 
by  Biesenthal.  But  if  we  compare  1  Sam.  xiv.  14,  the  former 
is  to  be  preferred,  although  the  links  are  wanting  which  would 
enable  us  to  prove  that  the  early  Israelites  had  one  and  the 
same  system  of  land  measure  as  the  Romans ; l  nevertheless 

^IjJ  (in  Hauran)  is  precisely  similar,  and  this  word  signifies 

primarily  a  yoke  of  oxen,  and  then  a  yoke  (jugerum)  regarded 
as  a  measure  of  land.  Ten  days'  work  would  only  yield  a 
single  bath.  This  liquid  measure,  which  was  first  introduced 
in  the  time  of  the  kings,  corresponded  to  the  ephah  in  dry 
measure  (Ezek.  xiv.  11).  According  to  Josephus  (Ant.  viii. 
2,  9),  it  was  equal  to  seventy-two  Roman  sextarii,  i.e.  a  little 
more  than  thirty-three  Berlin  quarts ;  but  in  the  time  of  Isaiah 
it  was  probably  smaller.  The  homer,  a  dry  measure,  generally 

1  On  the  jugerum,  see  Hultsch,  Griechische  und  romische  Metrologie,  1862. 
The  Greek  plethron,  which  was  smaller  by  two  and  a  half,  corresponded  to 
some  extent  to  this ;  also  the  Homeric  tetraguon,  which  cannot  be  more 
precisely  defined  (according  to  Eustathius,  it  was  a  piece  of  land  which  a 
skilful  labourer  could  plough  in  one  day).  According  to  Herod,  ii.  168,  in 
the  Egyptian  square-measure  an  upovpoc  was  equal  to  150  cubits  square. 
The  Palestinian,  according  to  the  tables  of  Julian  the  Ashkalonite,  was  the 
plethron.  "  The  plethron,"  he  says,  "  was  ten  perches,  or  fifteen  fathoms, 
or  thirty  paces,  sixty  cubits,  ninety  feet"  (for  the  entire  text,  see  L.  F.  v. 
Fennersberg's  Untersuchungen  ilber  alte  Langen-,  Feld-,  und  Wecjcmaasse, 
1859).  Fennersberg's  conclusion  is,  that  the  tzemed  was  a  plethron,  equal 
in  length  to  ten  perches  of  nine  feet  each.  But  the  meaning  of  the  word 
tzemed  is  of  more  importance  in  helping  to  determine  the  measure  referred 
to,  than  the  tables  of  long  measure  of  the  architect  of  Ashkalon,  which  have 
been  preserved  in  the  imperial  collection  of  laws  of  Constantino  Harme- 
nopulos,  and  which  probably  belong  to  a  much  later  period. 


CHAP.  V.  11.  169 

called  a  cor  after  the  time  of  the  kings,  was  equal  to  ten  Attic 
medimnoi;1  a  medimnos  being  (according  to  Josephus,  Ant.  xv. 
9,  2)  about  15-16tlis  of  a  Berlin  bushel,  and  therefore  a  little 
more  than  fifteen  pecks.  Even  if  this  quantity  of  corn  should 
be  sown,  they  would  not  reap  more  than  an  ephah.  The 
harvest,  therefore,  would  only  yield  the  tenth  part  of  the 
sowing,  since  an  epha/i  was  the  tenth  part  of  a  homer,  or  three 
seahs,  the  usual  minimum  for  one  baking  (cid.  Matt.  xiii.  33). 
It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  give  the  relative  measures  exactly 
in  our  translation. 

The  second  woe,  for  which  the  curse  about  to  fall  upon 
vinedressing  (ver.  10a)  prepared  the  way  by  the  simple  asso 
ciation  of  ideas,  is  directed  against  the  debauchees,  who  in  their 
carnal  security  carried  on  their  excesses  even  in  the  daylight. 
Ver.  11.  "  Woe  unto  them  that  rise  up  early  in  the  morning 
to  run  after  strong  drink;  who  continue  till  late  at  night  with 
wine  inflaming  them  !  "  Boker  (from  bdkar,  bakara,  to  slit,  to 
tear  up,  or  split)  is  the  break  of  day;  and  nesheph  (from 
ndshaph,  to  blow)  the  cool  of  the  evening,  including  the  night 
(ch.  xxi.  4,  lix.  10)  ;  'icher,  to  continue  till  late,  as  in  Prov. 
xxiii.  30  :  the  construct  state  before  words  with  a  preposition, 
as  in  ch.  ix.  2,  xxviii.  9,  and  many  other  passages  (Ges. 
§  116,  1).  Shecdr,  in  connection  with  yayin,  is  the  general 
name  for  every  other  kind  of  strong  drink,  more  especially  for 
wines  made  artificially  from  fruit,  honey,  raisins,  dates,  etc., 
including  barley-wine  (olvos  KplBwos)  or  beer  (e'/c  tcpiOcov  /jieOv 
in  ^Eschylus,  also  called  ffpvrov  /Spvrov,  fD#o?  $0os,  and  by 
many  other  names),  a  beverage  known  in  Egypt,  which  was 
half  a  wine  country  and  half  a  beer  country,  from  as  far  back 
as  the  time  of  the  Pharaohs.  The  form  shecdr  is  composed, 
like  W  (with  the  fore-tone  tsere),  from  shdcar,  to  intoxicate ; 
according  to  the  Arabic,  literally  to  close  by  stopping  up,  i.e. 
to  stupefy.2  The  clauses  after  the  two  participles  are  circum- 

1  Or  rather  7£  Attic  medimnoi  =  10  Attic  metretoi  =  45  Roman  modia 
(see  Bockh,  Metrologische  Untersuchungen,  p.  259). 

2  It  is  a  question,  therefore,  whether  the  name  of  sugar  is  related  to  it 
or  not.     The  Arabic  sakar  corresponds  to  the  Hebrew  shecdr ;  but  sugar  is 
called  sukkar,  Pers.  'sakkar,  'sakar,  no  doubt  equivalent  to  ffa^otpt  (Arrian 
in  Periplus,  fiiht  TO  Ax'hoipivov  TO  fayopfi/ov  ff&x,xocpi),  saccharum,  an  Indian 
w^rd,  which  is  pronounced  garkara  in  Sanscrit  and  sakkar  a  in  Prakrit, 
aud  signifies  "  forming  broken  pieces,"  i.e.  sugar  in  grains  or  sirall  lumpa 


170  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  KJAIAH. 

stantial  clauses  (Ewald,  §  341,  b),  indicating  the  circumstances 
under  winch  they  ran  out  so  early,  and  sat  till  long  after  dark : 
they  hunted  after  mead,  they  heated  themselves  with  wine, 
namely,  to  drown  the  consciousness  of  their  deeds  of  darkness. 
Ver..  12  describes  how  they  go  on  in  their  blindness  with 
music  and  carousing:  "  And  guitar  and  liarp,  kettle-drum ,  and 
flute,  and  wine,  is  their  feast;  but  they  regard  not  the  work  of 
Jehovah,  and  see  not  the  purpose  of  Plis  hands.19  "  Their  feast" 
is  so  and  so  (DrPFrc>£  is  only  a  plural  in  appearance;  it  is  really  a 
singular,  as  in  Dan.  i.  10,  16,  and  many  other  passages,  with 
the  Yod  of  the  primary  form,  "WE  =  nri^fy  softened  :  see  the 
remarks  on  r6jj  at  ch.  i.  30,  and  n*W  at  ch.  xxii.  11)  ;  that  is 
to  say,  their  feast  consisted  or  was  composed  of  exciting  music 
and  wrine.  Knobel  construes  it,  "  and  there  are  guitar,  etc., 
and  wine  is  their  drink ; "  but  a  divided  sentence  of  this  kind 
is  very  tame ;  and  the  other  expression,  based  upon  the  general 
principle,  "  The  whole  is  its  parts,"  is  thoroughly  Semitic  (see 
Fleischer's  Abhandlungen  fiber  einige  Arten  der  Nominalappo- 
sition  in  den  Sitzungsberichten  der  sdchs.  Gesellschaft  der  Wis- 
senschaft,  1862).  Cinnor  (guitar)  is  a  general  name  for  such 
instruments  as  have  their  strings  drawn  (upon  a  bridge)  over  a 
sounding  board  ;  and  nebel  (the  harp  and  lyre)  a  general  name 
for  instruments  with  their  strings  hung  freely,  so  as  to  be 
played  with  both  hands  at  the  same  time.  Toph  (Arab,  duff) 
is  a  general  name  for  the  tambourin,  the  drum,  and  the  kettle 
drum  ;  chalil  (lit.  that  which  is  bored  through)  a  general  name 
for  the  flute  and  double  flute.  In  this  tumult  and  riot  they 
had  no  thought  or  eye  for  the  work  of  Jehovah  and  the  purpose 
of  His  hands.  This  is  the  phrase  used  to  express  the  idea 
of  the  eternal  counsel  of  God  (ch.  xxxvii.  26),  which  leads 
to  salvation  by  the  circuitous  paths  of  judgment  (ch.  x.  12, 
xxviii.  21,  xxix.  23),  so  far  as  that  counsel  is  embodied  in 

(brown  sugar).  The  art  of  boiling  sugar  from  the  cane  was  an  Indian 
invention  (see  Lassen,  Indische  Alter  tliumskunde,  i.  269  sqq.)-  The  early 
Egyptian  name  for  beer  is  hek  (Brugsch,  Recueil,  p.  118)  ;  the  demotic  and 
hieratic  name  henk,  the  Coptic  lienke.  The  word  ££0o?  (£^0o3')  is  also  old 
Egyptian.  In  the  Book  of  the  Dead  (79,  8)  the  deceased  says.  "  I  have 
taken  sacrificial  cakes  from  the  table,  I  have  drunk  seth-L  in  "the  evening." 
Moses  Stuart  wrote  an  Essay  upon  the  Wines  and  Strong  Drinks  of  the  Ancient 
Hebrews,  which  was  published  in  London  (1831),  with  a  preface  by  J.  Pye 
Smith. 


CHAP.  V.  13.  171 

history,  as  moulded  by  the  invisible  interposition  of  God.  In 
their  joy  and  glory  they  had  no  sense  for  what  was  the  most 
glorious  of  all,  viz.  the  moving  and  working  of  God  in  history ; 
so  that  they  could  not  even  discern  the  judgment  which  was  in 
course  of  preparation  at  that  very  time. 

Therefore  judgment  would  overtake  them  in  this  blind, 
dull,  and  stupid  animal  condition.  Ver.  13.  "  Therefore  my 
people  go  into  banishment  without  knowing;  and  their  glory  will 
become  starving  men,  and  their  tumult  men  dried  up  with  thirst" 
As  the  word  "  therefore"  (Idcen,  as  in  ch.  i.  24)  introduces  the 
threat  of  punishment,  gdldh  (go  into  captivity)  is  a  prophetic 
preterite.  Israel  would  go  into  exile,  and  that  "without 
knowing"  (mibtfli~da'ath).  The  meaning  of  this  expression 
cannot  be  "  from  want  of  knowledge,"  since  the  min  which  is 
fused  into  one  word  with  Vli  is  not  causal,  but  negative,  and 
mibUli,  as  a  preposition,  always  signifies  "without"  (absque) 
But  are  we  to  render  it  "  without  knowing  it"  (as  in  Hos.  iv.  6, 
where  haddaath  has  the  article),  or  "  unawares  1 "  There  is  no 
necessity  for  any  dispute  on  this  point,  since  the  two  renderings 
are  fundamentally  one  and  the  same.  The  knowledge,  of  which 
ver.  12  pronounces  them  destitute,  was  more  especially  a  know 
ledge  of  the  judgment  of  God  that  was  hanging  over  them  ;  so 
that,  as  the  captivity  would  come  upon  them  without  know 
ledge,  it  would  necessarily  come  upon  them  unawares.  "  Their 
glory"  (cebodo)  and  "their  tumult"  (liamono)  are  therefore  to 
be  understood,  as  the  predicates  show,  as  collective  nouns  used 
in  a  personal  sense,  the  former  signifying  the  more  select  portion 
of  the  nation  (cf.  Mic.  i.  15),  the  latter  the  mass  of  the  people, 
who  were  living  in  rioting  and  tumult.  The  former  would 
become  "  men  of  famine"  (methe  rddb  :  ""HE,  like  'E;3N  in  other 
places,  viz.  2  Sam.  xix.  29,  or  ^3,  1  Sam.  xxvi.  16)  ;  the  latter 
"  men  dried  up  with  thirst "  (tsicheh  tsdmdh :  the  same  number 
as  the  subject).  There  is  no  necessity  to  read  ^i£  (dead  men) 
instead  of  ''rip,  as  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate  do,  or  "•?»  (HTlp) 
according  to  Deut.  xxxii.  24,  as  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Bottcher,  and 
others  propose  (compare,  on  the  contrary,  Gen.  xxxiv.  30  and 
Job  xi.  11).  The  adjective  tzicheh  (hapax  leg.)  is  formed  like 
chirgeh,  ceheh,  and  other  adjectives  which  indicate  defects :  in 
such  formations  from  verbs  Lamed-He,  instead  of  e  we  have  an 
a?  that  has  grown  out  of  ay  (Olshausen,  §  182,  b).  The  rich 


172  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

gluttons  would  starve,  and  the  tippling  crowd  would  die  with 
thirst. 

The  threat  of  punishment  commences  again  with  "  there 
fore;"  it  has  not  yet  satisfied  itself,  and  therefore  grasps  deeper 
still.     Yer.  14.  "  Therefore  the  under-world  opens  its  jaws  wide, 
and  stretches  open  its  mouth  immeasurably  wide;  and  the  glory  of 
Jerusalem  descends,  and  its  tumult,  and  noise,  and  those  who  re- 
joice  ivithin  it."     The  verbs  which  follow  Idcen  (therefore)  are 
prophetic   preterites,  as   in  ver.   13.      The   feminine   suffixes 
attached  to  what  the  lower  world  swallows  up  do  not  refer  to 
sheol  (though  this  is  construed  more  frequently,  no  doubt,  as  a 
feminine  than  as  a  masculine,  as  it  is  in  Job  xxvi.  6),  but,  as 
expressed  in  the  translation,  to  Jerusalem  itself,  which  is  also 
necessarily  required  by  the  last  clause,   "  those  who  rejoice 
within  it."  The  withdrawal  of  the  tone  from  Pyi  to  the  penulti 
mate   (cf.  chdphetz  in  Ps.  xviii.  20,  xxii.  9)   is  intentionally 
omitted,  to  cause  the  rolling  and  swallowing  up  to  be  heard 
as  it  were.     A  mouth  is  ascribed  to  the  under-world,  also  a 
nephesh,   i.e.   a  greedy   soul,   in   which  sense  nephesh  is  then 
applied  metonymically  sometimes  to  a  thirst  for  blood   (Ps. 
xxvii.  12),  and  sometimes  to  simple  greediness  (ch.  Ivi.   11), 
and  even,  as  in  the  present  passage  and  Hab.  ii.  5,   to  the 
throat   or  swallow  which  the  soul  opens  "  without  measure," 
when  its  craving  knows  no  bounds  (Psychol.  p.  204).     It  has 
become  a  common  thing  now  to  drop  entirely  the  notion  which 
formerly  prevailed,  that  the  noun  sheol  was  derived  from  the 
verb  shdal  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was  generally  employed,  viz. 
to  ask  or  demand ;  but  Caspari,  who  has  revived  it  again,  is 
certainly  so  far  correct,  that  the  derivation  of  the  word  which 
the  prophet  had  in  his  mind  was  this  and  no  other.     The  word 
sheol  (an   infinitive  form,  like  pekod)   signified  primarily  the 
irresistible  and  inexorable  demand  made   upon  every  earthly 
thing ;  and  then  secondarily,  in  a  local  sense,  the  place  of  the 
abode  of  shades,  to  which   everything  on   the  surface  of  the 
earth  is  summoned ;  or  essentially  the  divinely  appointed  curse 
which  demands  and  swallows  up  everything  upon  the  earth. 
We  simply  maintain,  however,  that  the  word  sheol,  as  generally 
used,  was  associated  in  thought  with  shdal,  to  ask  or  demand. 
Originally,   no    doubt,   it    may  have    been    derived    from   the 
primary  and  more  material  idea  of  the  verb  PNC',  possibly  from 


CHAP.  V.  14.  173 

the  meaning  "  to  be  hollow,"  which  is  also  assumed  to  be  the 
primary  meaning  of  pyt?.1  At  any  rate,  this  derivation  answers 
to  the  view  that  generally  prevailed  in  ancient  times.  Accord 
ing  to  the  prevalent  idea,  Hades  was  in  the  interior  of  the 
earth.  And  there  was  nothing  really  absurd  in  this,  since  it  is 
quite  within  the  power  and  freedom  of  the  omnipresent  God 
to  manifest  Himself  wherever  and  however  He  may  please. 
As  He  reveals  Himself  above  the  earth,  i.e.  in  heaven,  among 
blessed  spirits  in  the  light  of  His  love  ;  so  did  He  reveal  Him 
self  underneath  the  earth,  viz.  in  Sheol,  in  the  darkness  and  fire 
of  His  wrath.  And  with  the  exception  of  Enoch  and  Elijah, 
with  their  marvellous  departure  from  this  life,  the  way  of  every 
mortal  ended  there,  until  the  time  when  Jesus  Christ,  having 
first  paid  the  \vrpov,  i.e.  having  shed  His  blood,  which  covers 
our  guilt  and  turns  the  wrath  of  God  into  love,  descended  into 
Hades  and  ascended  into  heaven,  and  from  that  time  forth  has 
changed  the  death  of  all  believers  from  a  descent  into  Hades 
into  an  ascension  to  heaven.  But  even  under  the  Old  Testa 
ment  the  believer  may  have  known,  that  whoever  hid  himself 
on  this  side  the  grave  in  Jehovah  the  living  One,  would  retain 
his  eternal  germ  of  life  even  in  Sheol  in  the  midst  of  the  shades, 
and  would  taste  the  love  of  God  even  in  the  midst  of  wrath. 
It  was  this  postulate  of  faith  which  lay  at  the  foundation  of 
the  fact,  that  even  under  the  Old  Testament  the  broader  and 
more  comprehensive  idea  of  Sheol  began  to  be  contracted  into 

1  The  meaning  "to  be  hollow"  is  not  very  firmly  established,  however; 
as  the  primary  meaning  of  *?y*y,  and  the  analogy  sometimes  adduced  of 
hell  =  hollow  (Holle  =  Hdhle),  is  a  deceptive  one,  as  Nolle  (hell),  to  which 
Luther  always  gives  the  more  correct  form  Ilelle,  does  not  mean  a  hollow, 
but  a  hidden  place  (or  a  place  which  renders  invisible  :  from  heln,  to  con 
ceal),  Lat.  celans  (see  Jutting,  Bibl.  Worterbuch,  1864,  pp.  85,  86).  It  is 
much  more  probable  that  the  meaning  of  slieol  is  not  the  hollow  place,  but 
the  depression  or  depth,  from  7^,  which  corresponds  precisely  to  the  Greek 
#aA«>  so  far  as  its  primary  meaning  is  concerned  (compare  the  talrnudic 
shilsliel,  to  let  down  ;  sldkliul,  sinking  or  depression,  Erubin  83b ;  sliul,  the 
foundation,  fundus) :  see  Hupfeld  on  Ps.  vi.  6.  Luzzutto  on  this  passage  also 
explains  slieol  as  signifying  depth,  and  compares  the  talmudic  hishchil=hesltil, 
to  let  down  (or,  according  to  others,  to  draw  up, — two  meanings  which  may 
easily  be  combined  in  the  same  word,  starting  from  its  radical  idea,  which 
indicates  in  general  a  loosening  of  the  previous  connection).  Fiirst  has 
also  given  up  the  meaning  cavitas,  a  hollow,  and  endeavours  to  find  a  more 
correct  explanation  of  the  primary  signification  of  slia'ul  (see  at  ch.  xl.  12). 


174  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  more  limited  notion  of  hell  (see  Psychol.  p.  415).  This  is 
the  case  in  the  passage  before  us,  where  Isaiah  predicts  of 
everything  of  which  Jerusalem  was  proud,  and  in  which  it 
revelled,  including  the  persons  who  rejoiced  in  these  things,  a 
descent  into  Hades ;  just  as  the  Korahite  author  of  Ps.  xlix. 
wrote  (ver.  14)  that  the  beauty  of  the  wicked  would  be  given 
up  to  Hades  to  be  consumed,  without  having  hereafter  any 
place  in  the  upper  world,  when  the  upright  should  have 
dominion  over  them  in  the  morning.  Hades  even  here  is 
almost  equivalent  to  the  New  Testament  gehenna. 

The  prophet  now  repeats  a  thought  which  formed  one  of 
the  refrains  of  the  second  prophetic  address  (ch.  ii.  9,  11,  cf. 
ver.  17).  It  acquires  here  a  still  deeper  sense,  from  the  con 
text  in  which  it  stands.  Vers.  15,  16.  "  Then  are  mean  men 
lowed  down,  and  lords  humbled,  and  the  eyes  of  lofty  men  are 
humbled.  And  Jehovah  of  hosts  shows  Himself  exalted  in 
judgment,  and  God  the  Holy  One  sanctifies  Himself  in  righteous 
ness"  That  which  had  exalted  itself  from  earth  to  heaven, 
would  be  cast  down  earthwards  into  hell.  The  consecutive 
futures  depict  the  coming  events,  which  are  here  represented 
as  historically  present,  as  the  direct  sequel  of  what  is  also  re 
presented  as  present  in  ver.  14  :  Hades  opens,  and  then  both 
low  and  lofty  in  Jerusalem  sink  down,  and  the  soaring  eyes 
now  wander  about  in  horrible  depths.  God,  who  is  both 
exalted  and  holy  in  Himself,  demanded  that  as  the  exalted  One 
He  should  be  exalted,  and  that  as  the  Holy  One  He  should 
be  sanctified.  But  Jerusalem  had  not  done  that ;  He  would 
therefore  prove  Himself  the  exalted  One  by  the  execution  of 
justice,  and  sanctify  Himself  (nikdash  is  to  be  rendered  as  a 
reflective  verb,  according  to  Ezek.  xxxvi.  23,  xxxviii.  23)  by 
the  manifestation  of  righteousness,  in  consequence  of  which 
the  people  of  Jerusalem  would  have  to  give  Him  glory  again st_ 
their  will,  as  forming  part  of  "the  things  under  the  earth" 
(Phil.  ii.  10).  Jerusalem  has  been  swallowed  up  twice  in  this 
manner  by  Hades ;  once  in  the  Chaldean  war,  and  again  in 
the  Roman.  But  the  invisible  background  of  these  outward 
events  was  the  fact,  that  it  had  already  fallen  under  the  power 
of  hell.  And  now,  even  in  a  more  literal  sense,  ancient  Jeru 
salem,  like  the  company  of  Korah  (Num.  xvi.  30,  33),  has 
gone  underground.  Just  as  Babylon  and  Nineveh,  the  ruins 


CHAP.  V.  17,  18.  175 

of  which  are  du^  out  of  the  inexhaustible  mine  of  their  far- 

D 

stretching  foundation  and  soil,  have  sunk  beneath  the  ground  ; 
so  do  men  walk  about  in  modern  Jerusalem  over  the  ancient 
Jerusalem,  which  lies  buried  beneath ;  and  many  an  enigma  of 
topography  will  remain  an  enigma  until  ancient  Jerusalem  has 
been  dug  out  of  the  earth  again. 

And  when  we  consider  that  the  Holy  Land  is  at  the  present 
time  an  extensive  pasture-ground  for  Arab  shepherds,  and  that 
the  modern  Jerusalem  which  has  arisen  from  the  dust  is  a 
Mohammedan  city,  we  may  see  in  this  also  a  literal  fulfilment 
of  ver.  17  :  "And  lambs  feed  as  upon  their  pasture,  and  nomad 
shepherds  eat  the  waste  places  of  the  fat  o?ies"  There  is  no 
necessity  to  supply  an  object  to  the  verb  ^jni.,  as  Knobel  and 
others  assume,  viz.  the  waste  lands  mentioned  in  the  second 
clause ;  nor  is  ceddbrdm  to  be  taken  as  the  object,  as  Caspari 
supposes ;  but  the  place  referred  to  is  determined  by  the  con 
text  :  in  the  place  where  Jerusalem  is  sunken,  there  lambs  feed 
after  the  manner  of  their  own  pasture-ground,  i.e.  just  as  if 
they  were  in  their  old  accustomed  pasture  (dober,  as  in  Mic. 
ii.  12,  from  ddbar,  to  drive).  The  lambs  intended  are  those  of 
the  gdrim  mentioned  in  the  second  clause.  The  gdrim  them 
selves  are  men  leading  an  unsettled,  nomad,  or  pilgrim  life ;  as 
distinguished  from  gerim,  strangers  visiting,  or  even  settled  at 
a  place.  The  LXX.  have  apves,  so  that  they  must  have  read 
either  cdrim  or  geddim,  which  Ewald,  Knobel,  and  others  adopt. 
But  one  feature  of  the  prophecy,  which  is  sustained  by  the 
historical  fulfilment,  is  thereby  obliterated.  Chdrboth  mScliim 
are  the  lands  of  those  that  were  formerly  marrowy,  i.e.  fat  and 
strutting  about  in  their  fulness ;  which  lands  had  now  become 
waste  places.  Knobel's  statement,  that  deal  is  out  of  place  in 
connection  with  gdrim,  is  overthrown  by  ch.  i.  7,  to  which  he 
himself  refers,  though  he  makes  he-goats  the  subject  instead  of 
men.  The  second  woe  closes  with  ver.  17.  It  is  the  longest  of 
all.  This  also  serves  to  confirm  the  fact  that  luxury  was  the 
leading  vice  of  Judah  in  the  time  of  Uzziah-Jotham,  as  it  was 
that  of  Israel  under  Jeroboam  u.  (see  Amos  vi.,  where  the 
same  threat  is  held  out). 

The  third  woe  is  directed  against  the  supposed  strong-minded 
men,  who  called  down  the  judgment  of  God  by  presumptuous 
sins  and  wicked  words  Ver.  18.  "  Woe  unto  them  that  draw 


7  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

crime  rcitli  cords  of  lying,  and  sin  as  with  the  rope  of  the  waggon? 
Knobel  and  most  other  commentators  take  mdshak  in  the  sense 
of  attrahere  (to  draw  towards  one's  self)  :  "  They  draw  towards 
them  sinful  deeds  with  cords  of  lying  palliation,  and  the  cart- 
rope  of  the  most  daring  presumption ;"  and  cite,  as  parallel 
examples,  Job  xl.  25  and  Hos.  xi.  4.  But  as  mdshak  is  also 
used  in  Deut.  xxi.  3  in  the  sense  of  drawing  in  a  yoke,  that  is 
to  say,  drawing  a  plough  or  chariot ;  and  as  the  wraggon  or  cart 
(agdldhj  the  word  commonly  used  for  a  transport-waggon,  as 
distinguished  from  mercdbdh,  the  state  carriage  or  war  chariot : 
see  Genesis,  pp.  562-3)  is  expressly  mentioned  here,  the  figure 
employed  is  certainly  the  same  as  that  which  underlies  the  New 
Testament  erepo&yeiv  ("  unequally  yoked,"  2  Cor.  vi.  14). 
Iniquity  was  the  burden  which  they  drew  after  them  with  cords 
of  lying  (shdvh:  see  at  Ps.  xxvi.  4  and  Job  xv.  31),  i.e.  "want 
of  character  or  religion  ;"  and  sin  was  the  waggon  to  which  they 
were  harnessed  as  if  with  a  thick  cart-rope  (Hofmann,  Drechsler, 
and  Caspari;  see  Ewald,  §  221,  a).  Iniquity  and  sin  are  men 
tioned  here  as  carrying  with  them  their  own  punishment.  The 
definite  fiyn  (crime  or  misdeed)  is  generic,  and  the  indefinite 
rtKBn  qualitative  and  massive.  There  is  a  bitter  sarcasm  in 
volved  in  the  bold  figure  employed.  They  were  proud  of  their 
unbelief ;  but  this  unbelief  was  like  a  halter  with  which,  like 
beasts  of  burden,  they  were  harnessed  to  sin,  and  therefore  to 
the  punishment  of  sin,  which  they  went  on  drawing  further  and 
further,  in  utter  ignorance  of  the  waggon  behind  them. 

Ver.  19  shows  very  clearly  that  the  prophet  referred  to  the 
free-thinkers  of  his  time,  the  persons  who  are  called  fools  (nabal) 
and  scorners  (letz)  in  the  Psalms  and  Proverbs.  "  Who  say, 
Let  Him  hasten,  accelerate  His  work,  that  we  may  see ;  and  let  the 
counsel  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  draw  near  and  come,  that  we 
may  experience  it."  They  doubted  whether  the  day  of  Jehovah 
would  ever  come  (Ezek.  xii.  22  ;  Jer.  v.  12,  13),  and  went  so 
far  in  their  unbelief  as  to  call  out  for  what  they  could  not 
and  would  not  believe,  and  desired  it  to  come  that  they  might 
see  it  with  their  own  eyes  and  experience  it  for  themselves 
(Jer.  xvii.  15  ;  it  is  different  in  Amos  v.  18  and  Mai.  ii.  17- 
iii.  1,  where  this  desire  does  not  arise  from  scorn  and  defiance, 
but  from  impatience  and  weakness  of  faith).  As  the  two  verbs 
denoting  haste  are  used  both  transitively  and  intransitively 


CHAP.  V.  20,  21.  177 

(vid.  Judg.  xx.  37,  to  hasten  or  make  haste),  we  might  render  the 
passage  "  let  His  work  make  haste,"  as  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Umbreit, 
and  Drechsler  do ;  but  we  prefer  the  rendering  adopted  by 
Gesenius,  Caspari,  and  Knobel,  on  the  basis  of  ch.  Ix.  22,  and 
take  the  verb  as  transitive,  and  Jehovah  as  the  subject.  The 
forms  ydchislidh  and  tabodh  are,  with  Ps.  xx.  4  and  Job  xi.  17, 
probably  the  only  examples  of  the  expression  of  a  wish  in  the 
third  person,  strengthened  by  the  ah,  which  indicates  a  summons 
or  appeal ;  for  Ezek.  xxiii.  20,  which  Gesenius  cites  (§  48,  3), 
and  Job  xxii.  21,  to  which  Knobel  refers,  have  no  connection 
with  this,  as  in  both  passages  the  ah  is  the  feminine  termination, 
and  not  hortative  (vid.  Job,  i.  p.  187  note,  and  i.  p.  441).  The 
fact  that  the  free-thinkers  called  God  "the  Holy  One  of  Israel," 
whereas  they  scoffed  at  His  intended  final  and  practical  attesta 
tion  of  Himself  as  the  Holy  One,  may  be  explained  from  ch. 
xxx.  11  :  they  took  this  name  of  God  from  the  lips  of  the  prophet 
himself,  so  that  their  scorn  affected  both  God  and  His  prophet 
at  the  same  time. 

Ver.  20.  The  fourth  woe  :  "  Woe  to  those  who  call  evil  goody 
and  good  evil ;  who  give  out  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  dark 
ness  ;  who  give  out  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for  bitter"  The 
previous  woe  had  reference  to  those  who  made  the  facts  of  sacred 
history  the  butt  of  their  naturalistic  doubt  and  ridicule,  especially 
so  far  as  they  were  the  subject  of  prophecy.  This  fourth  woe 
relates  to  those  who  adopted  a  code  of  morals  that  completely 
overturned  the  first  principles  of  ethics,  and  was  utterly  opposed 
to  the  law  of  God ;  for  evil,  darkness,  and  bitter,  with  their 
respective  antitheses,  represent  moral  principles  that  are  essen 
tially  related  (Matt.  vi.  23;  Jas.  iii.  11).  Evil,  as  hostile  to 
God,  is  dark  in  its  nature,  and  therefore  loves  darkness,  and  is 
exposed  to  the  punitive  power  of  darkness.  And  although  it 
may  be  sweet  to  the  material  taste,  it  is  nevertheless  bitter, 
inasmuch  as  it  produces  abhorrence  and  disgust  in  the  godlike 
nature  of  man,  and,  after  a  brief  period  of  self-deception,  is 
turned  into  the  bitter  woe  of  fatal  results.  Darkness  and  light, 
bitter  and  sweet,  therefore,  are  not  tautological  metaphors  for 
evil  and  good  ;  but  epithets  applied  to  evil  and  good  accord 
ing  to  their  essential  principles,  and  their  necessary  and  internal 
effects. 

Yer.  21.  The  fifth  woe :  "  Woe  unto  them  that  are  wise  in 
VOi,.  I.  Jil 


178  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

their  own  eyes,  and  prudent  in  their  own  sight'9  The  third  woe 
had  reference  to  the  unbelieving  naturalists,  the  opponents  of 
prophecy  (nebudli)  ;  the  fourth  to  the  moralists,  who  threw  all 
into  confusion  ;  and  to  this  there  is  appended,  by  a  very  natural 
association  of  ideas,  the  woe  denounced  upon  those  whom  want 
of  humility  rendered  inaccessible  to  that  wisdom  which  went 
hand  in  hand  with  prophecy,  and  the  true  foundation  of  which 
was  the  fear  of  Jehovah  (Prov.  i.  7  ;  Job  xxviii.  28  ;  Eccles. 
xii.  13).  "  Be  not  wise  in  thine  own  eyes,"  is  a  fundamental 
rule  of  this  wisdom  (Prov.  iii.  7).  It  was  upon  this  wisdom 
that  that  prophetic  policy  rested,  whose  warnings,  as  we  read  in 
ch.  xxviii.  9,  10,  they  so  scornfully  rejected.  The  next  woe, 
which  has  reference  to  the  administration  of  justice  in  the  state, 
shows  very  clearly  that  in  this  woe  the  prophet  had  more  espe 
cially  the  want  of  theocratic  wisdom  in  relation  to  the  affairs  of 
state  in  his  mind. 

Vers.  22,  23.  The  sixth  woe :  "  Woe  to  those  wlio  are  heroes 
to  drink  wine,  and  brave  men  to  mix  strong  drink ;  who  acquit 
criminals  for  a  bribe,  and  take  away  from  every  one  the  righteous 
ness  of  the  righteous."  We  see  from  ver.  23  that  the  drinkers 
in  ver.  22  are  unjust  judges.  The  threat  denounced  against 
these  is  Isaiah's  universal  ceterum  censeo  ;  and  accordingly  it 
forms,  in  this  instance  also,  the  substance  of  his  sixth  and  last 
woe.  They  are  heroes ;  not,  however,  in  avenging  wrong,  but 
in  drinking  wine ;  they  are  men  of  renown,  though  not  for 
deciding  between  guilt  and  innocence,  but  for  mixing  up  the 
ingredients  of  strong  artistic  wines.  For  the  terms  applied  to 
such  mixed  wines,  see  Ps.  Ixxv.  9,  Prov.  xxiii.  30,  Song  of  Sol. 
vii.  3.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  what  is  here 
called  shecdr  was  not,  properly  speaking,  wine,  but  an  artificial 
mixture,  like  date  wine  and  cider.  For  such  things  as  these 
they  were  noteworthy  and  strong ;  whereas  they  judged  un 
justly,  and  took  bribes  that  they  might  consume  the  reward  of 
their  injustice  in  drink  and  debauchery  (ch.  xxviii.  7,  8  ;  Prov. 
xxxi.  5).  uFor  reward:"  ektb  (Arab,  'ukb;  different  from 
dkeb,  a  heel,  =  eakib)  is  an  adverbial  accusative,  "in  recompense," 
or  "  for  pay."  "  From  him  "  (mimmennu)  is  distributive,  and 
refers  back  to  tsaddikim  (the  righteous)  ;  as,  for  example,  in 
Hos.  iv.  8. 

In  the  three  exclamations  in  vers.  18-21,  Jehovah  rested 


CHAP.  V   24.  179 

contented  with  the  simple  undeveloped  "  woe  "  (hoi).  On  the 
other  hand,  the  first  two  utterances  respecting  the  covetous  and 
the  debauchees  were  expanded  into  an  elaborate  denunciation  of 
punishment.  But  now  that  the  prophet  has  come  to  the  unjust 
judges,  the  denunciation  of  punishment  bursts  out  with  such 
violence,  that  a  return  to  the  simple  exclamation  of  "  woe  "  is 
not  to  be  thought  of.  To  the  two  "  therefores"  in  vers.  13,  14, 
a  third  is  now  added  in  ver.  24 :  "  Therefore,  as  the  tongue  of 
fire  devours  stubble,  and  hay  sinks  together  in  the  flame,  their  root 
will  become  like  mould,  and  their  blossom  fly  up  like  dust ;  for  they 
have  despised  the  law  of  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  scornfully  rejected  the 
proclamation  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  The  persons  primarily 
intended  are  those  described  in  vers.  22,  23,  but  with  a  further 
extension  of  the  range  of  vision  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  the 
vineyard  of  which  they  are  the  bad  fruit.  The  sinners  are 
compared  to  a  plant  which  moulders  into  dust  both  above  and 
below,  i.e.  altogether  (cf.  Mai.  iii.  19,  and  the  expression,  "  Let 
there  be  to  him  neither  root  below  nor  branch  above,"  in  the  in 
scription  upon  the  sarcophagus  of  the  Phoenician  king  Esmun- 
'azar).  Their  root  moulders  in  the  earth,  and  their  blossom 
(peracli,  as  in  ch.  xviii.  5)  turns  to  fine  dust,  which  the  wind 
carries  away.  And  this  change  in  root  and  blossom  takes  place 
suddenly,  as  if  through  the  force  of  fire.  In  the  expression 
ceecolkash  leshon  'esh  ("as  the  tongue  of  fire  devours  stubble"), 
which  consists  of  four  short  words  with  three  sibilant  letters,  we 
hear,  as  it  were,  the  hissing  of  the  flame.  When  the  infinitive 
construct  is  connected  with  both  subject  and  object,  the  subject 
generally  stands  first,  as  in  ch.  Ixiv.  1 ;  but  here  the  object  is 
placed  first,  as  in  ch.  xx.  1  (Ges.  §  133,  3 ;  Ewald,  §  307).  In 
the  second  c-lause,  the  infinitive  construct  passes  over  into  the 
finite  verb,  just  as  in  the  similarly  constructed  passage  in  ch. 
Ixiv.  1.  As  yirpeli  has  the  intransitive  meaning  collabi,  to  sink 
together,  or  collapse  ;  either  lehdbdh  must  be  an  ace.  loci,  or 
chashash  lehdbdh  the  construct  state,  signifying  flame-hay,  i.e. 
hay  destined  to  the  flame,  or  ascending  in  flame.1  As  the  reason 

1  In  Arabic  also,  cliashisli  signifies  hay  ;  but  in  common  usage  (at  loast  in 
Syriac)  it  is  applied  not  to  dried  grass,  but  to  green  grass  or  barley  :  hence 
the  expression  yachush  there  is  green  fodder.  Here,  however,  in  Isaiah, 
jJtashash  is  equivalent  to  chashish  yabis,  and  this  is  its  true  etymological 
meaning  (see  the  Lexicons").  But  kash  is  still  used  in  Syro-Arabic,  to 


180  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

for  the  sudden  dissolution  of  the  plantation  of  Judah,  instead  of 
certain  definite  sins  being  mentioned,  the  sin  of  all  sins  is  given 
at  once,  namely,  the  rejection  of  the  word  of  God  with  the 
heart  (rnaas),  and  in  word  and  deed  (ni'ets).  The  double  'eth 
(with  yethib  immediately  before  pashta,  as  in  eleven  passages 
in  all ;  see  Heidenheim's  Mispete  hateamim,  p.  20)  and  vet/i 
(with  tebir)  give  prominence  to  the  object ;  and  the  inter 
change  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  with  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  makes 
the  sin  appear  all  the  greater  on  account  of  the  exaltation  and 
holiness  of  God,  who  revealed  Himself  in  this  word,  and  indeed 
had  manifested  Himself  to  Israel  as  His  own  peculiar  people. 
The  prophet  no  sooner  mentions  the  great  sin  of  Judah,  than 
the  announcement  of  punishment  receives,  as  it  were,  fresh 
fuel,  and  bursts  out  again. — Ver.  25.  "  Therefore  is  the  wrath  of 
Jehovah  kindled  against  His  people,  and  lie  stretches  His  hand  over 
them,  and  smites  them ;  then  the  hills  tremble,  and  their  carcases 
become  like  sweepings  in  the  midst  of  the  streets.  For  all  this 
His  anger  is  not  appeased,  and  His  hand  is  stretched  out  still" 
We  may  see  from  these  last  words,  which  are  repeated  as  a 
refrain  in  the  cycle  of  prophecies  relating  to  the  time  of  Ahaz 
(ch.  ix.  11,  16,  x.  4),  that  the  prophet  had  before  his  mind  a 
distinct  and  complete  judgment  upon  Judah,  belonging  to  the 
immediate  future.  It  was  certainly  a  coming  judgment,  not 
one  already  past ;  for  the  verbs  after  "  therefore"  (W-mi),  like 
those  after  the  three  previous  Idcen,  are  all  prophetic  preterites. 
It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to  take  the  words  "  and  the  hills 
tremble  "  as  referring  to  the  earthquake  in  the  time  of  Uzziah 
(Amos  i.  1 ;  Zech.xiv.  5).  This  judgment,  which  was  closer  at 
hand,  would  consist  in  the  fact  that  Jehovah  would  stretch  out 
His  hand  in  His  wrath  over  His  people  (or,  as  it  is  expressed 
elsewhere,  would  swing  His  hand  :  Luther,  "  wave  His  hand," 
i.e.  move  it  to  and  fro  ;  vid.  ch,  xi.  15,  xix.  16,  xxx.  30,  32), 
and  bring  it  down  upon  Judah  with  one  stroke,  the  violence  of 
which  would  be  felt  not  only  by  men,  but  by  surrounding  nature 
as  well.  What  kind  of  stroke  this  would  be,  was  to  be  inferred 
from  the  circumstance  that  the  corpses  would  lie  unburied 

signify  pot  stubble,  but  wheat  that  has  been  cut  and  is  not  yet  threshed  ; 
whereas  the  radical  word  itself  signifies  to  be  dry,  and  chasliash  conse 
quently  is  used  for  mown  grass,  and  kash  for  the  dry  halm  of  wheat,  whether 
as  stubble  left  standing  in  the  ground,  or  as  straw  (vid.  Job,  ii.  377). 


CHAP.  V.  25.  26.  181 

in  the  streets,  like  common  street-sweepings.  The  reading 
Dten  must  be  rejected.  Early  editors  read  the  word  much 
more  correctly  nftn  ;  Buxtorf  (1618)  even  adopts  the  reading 
rrivin,  which  has  the  Masoretic  pointing  in  Num.  xxii.  39  in 
its  favour.  It  is  very  natural  to  connect  cassuchdh  with  the 
Arabic  kusdcha  (sweepings  ;  see  at  ch.  xxxiii.  12)  :  but  kusdcha 
is  the  common  form  for  waste  or  rubbish  of  this  kind  (e.g. 
kuldme,  nail-cuttings),  whereas  cassuach  is  a  form  which,  like 
the  forms  faol  (e.g.  chamois)  and  fdtil  (compare  the  Arabic 
fdsusj  a  wind-maker,  or  wind-bag,  i.e.  a  boaster),  has  always  an 
intensive,  active  (e.g.  channun),  or  circumstantial  signification 
(like  shaccul),  but  is  never  found  in  a  passive  sense.  The  Caph 
is  consequently  to  be  taken  as  a  particle  of  comparison  (followed, 
as  is  generally  the  case,  with  a  definite  article)  ;  and  suchdh  is 
to  be  derived  from  suach  (=verrere,  to  sweep).  The  reference, 
therefore,  is  not  to  a  pestilence  (which  is  designated,  as  a  stroke 
from  God,  not  by  hiccdh,  but  by  ndgaph),  but  to  the  slaughter 
of  battle  ;  and  if  we  look  at  the  other  terrible  judgment  threat 
ened  in  vers.  26  sqq.,  which  was  to  proceed  from  the  imperial 
power,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  spirit  of  prophecy  here 
points  to  the  massacre  that  took  place  in  Judah  in  connection 
with  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  (see  2  Chron.  xxviii.  5,  6). 
The  mountains  may  then  have  trembled  with  the  marching  of 
troops,  and  the  din  of  arms,  and  the  felling  of  trees,  and  the 
shout  of  war.  At  any  rate,  nature  had  to  participate  in  what 
men  had  brought  upon  themselves;  for,  according  to  the  creative 
appointment  of  God,  nature  bears  the  same  relation  to  man  as 
the  body  to  the  soul.  Every  stroke  of  divine  wrath  which 
falls  upon  a  nation  equally  affects  the  land  which  has  grown 
up,  as  it  were,  with  it ;  and  in  this  sense  the  mountains  of  Judah 
trembled  at  the  time  referred  to,  even  though  the  trembling  was 
only  discernible  by  initiated  ears.  But  "  for  all  this  "  (Beth,  = 
"notwithstanding,"  "  in  spite  of,"  as  in  Job  i.  22)  the  wrath  of 
Jehovah,  as  the  prophet  foresaw,  would  not  turn  away,  as  it  was 
accustomed  to  do  when  He  was  satisfied ;  and  His  hand  would 
still  remain  stretched  out  over  Judah,  ready  to  strike  again. 

Jehovah  finds  the  human  instruments  of  His  further  strokes, 
not  in  Israel  and  the  neighbouring  nations,  but  in  the  people 
of  distant  lands.  Ver.  26.  "  And  lifts  up  a  banner  to  the  distant 
nations,  and  hisses  to  it  from  the  end  of  the  earth ;  and,  behold, 


182  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

it  comes  with  haste  swiftly."  What  the  prophet  here  foretold 
began  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  time  of  Ahaz.  But  the  prophecy, 
which  commences  with  this  verse,  has  every  possible  mark  of 
the  very  opposite  of  a  vaticinium  post  eventum.  It  is,  strictly 
speaking,  only  what  had  already  been  threatened  in  Deut. 
xxviii.  49  sqq.  (cf.  ch.  xxxii.  21  sqq.),  though  here  it  assumes 
a  more  plastic  form,  and  is  here  presented  for  the  first  time 
to  the  view  of  the  prophet  as  though  coming  out  of  a  mist. 
Jehovah  summons  the  nations  afar  off:  haggoyim  merdchok 
signifies,  as  we  have  rendered  it,  the  "  distant  nations,"  for  merd- 
chok  is  virtually  an  adjective  both  here  and  ch.  xlix.  1,  just  as 
in  Jer.  xxiii.  23  it  is  virtually  a  substantive.  The  visible  work 
ing  of  Jehovah  presents  itself  to  the  prophet  in  two  figures. 
Jehovah  plants  a  banner  or  standard,  which,  like  an  optical 
telegraph,  announces  to  the  nations  at  a  more  remote  distance 
than  the  horn  of  battle  (shophdr)  could  possibly  reach,  that 
they  are  to  gather  together  to  war.  A  "  banner"  (nes)  :  i.e.  a 
lofty  staff  with  flying  colours  (ch.  xxxiii.  23)  planted  upon  a 
bare  mountain-top  (ch.  xiii.  2).  N;fJ  alternates  with  nnn  in  this 
favourite  figure  of  Isaiah.  The  nations  through  whom  this 
was  primarily  fulfilled  were  the  nations  of  the  Assyrian  empire. 
According  to  the  Old  Testament  view,  these  nations  were 
regarded  as  far  off,  and  dwelling  at  the  end  of  the  earth 
(ch.  xxxix.  3),  not  only  inasmuch  as  the  Euphrates  formed  the 
boundary  towards  the  north-east  between  what  was  geogra 
phically  known  and  unknown  to  the  Israelites  (Ps.  Ixxii.  8  ; 
Zech.  ix.  10),  but  also  inasmuch  as  the  prophet  had  in  his  mind 
a  complex  body  of  nations  stretching  far  away  into  further 
Asia.  The  second  figure  is  taken  from  a  bee-master,  who 
entices  the  bees,  by  hissing  or  whistling,  to  come  out  of  their 
hives  and  settle  on  the  ground.  Thus  Virgil  says  to  the  bee- 
master  who  wants  to  make  the  bees  settle,  u  Eaise  a  ringing, 
and  beat  the  cymbals  of  Cybele  all  around"  (Georgics,  iv.  54). 
Thus  does  Jehovah  entice  the  hosts  of  nations  like  swarms  of 
bees  (vii.  18),  and  they  swarm  together  with  haste  and  swift 
ness.  The  plural  changes  into  the  singular,  because  those  who 
are  approaching  have  all  the  appearance  at  first  of  a  compact 
and  indivisible  mass ;  it  is  also  possible  that  the  ruling  nation 
among  the  many  is  singled  out.  The  thought  and  expression 
are  both  misty,  and  this  is  perfectly  characteristic.  With  the 


CHAP.  V.  27,  28.  183 

word  "  behold  "  (hinneh)  the  prophet  points  to  them  ;  they  are 
approaching  meherdh  kal,  i.e.  in  the  shortest  time  with  swift 
feet,  and  the  nearer  they  come  to  his  view  the  more  clearly  he 
can  describe  them.  —  Ver.  27.  u  There  is  none  exhausted,  and 
none  stumbling  among  them  :  it  gives  itself  no  slumber,  and  no 
sleep;  and  to  none  is  the  girdle  of  his  hips  loosed;  and  to  none  is 
the  lace  of  his  shoes  broken"  Notwithstanding  the  long  march, 
there  is  no  exhausted  one.  obliged  to  separate  himself  and 
remain  behind  (Deut.  xxv.  18  ;  Isa.  xiv.  31)  ;  no  stumbling  one 
(coshel),  for  they  march  on,  pressing  incessantly  forwards,  as  if 
along  a  well-made  road  (Jer.  xxxi.  9).  They  do  not  slumber 
(iium),  to  say  nothing  of  sleeping  (y  ashen)  9  so  great  is  their 
eagerness  for  battle  :  i.e.  they  do  not  slumber  to  refresh  them 
selves,  and  do  not  even  allow  themselves  their  ordinary  night's 
rest.  No  one  has  the  girdle  of  his  armour-shirt  or  coat  of  mail, 
in  which  he  stuck  his  sword  (Neh.  iv.  18),  at  all  loosened;  nor 
has  a  single  one  even  the  shoe-string,  with  which  his  sandals 
were  fastened,  broken  (nittak,  disrumpitur).  The  statement  as 
to  their  want  of  rest  forms  a  climax  descendens  ;  the  other,  as  to 
the  tightness  and  durability  of  their  equipment,  a  climax  ascen- 
dens  :  the  two  statements  follow  one  another  after  the  nature 
of  a  chiasmus. 

The  prophet  then  proceeds  to  describe  their  weapons  and 
\var-chariots.  Ver.  28.  "  He  whose  arrows  are  sharpened,  and 
all  his  bows  strung  ;  the  hoofs  of  his  horses  are  counted  like  flint, 
and  his  wheels  like  the  whirlwind"  In  the  prophet's  view  they 
are  coming  nearer  and  nearer.  For  he  sees  that  they  have 
brought  the  sharpened  arrows  in  their  quivers  (ch.  xxii.  6)  ; 
and  the  fact  that  all  their  bows  are  already  trodden  (namely,  as 
their  length  was  equal  to  a  man's  height,  by  treading  upon  the 
string  with  the  left  foot,  as  we  may  learn  from  Arrian's  Indica), 
proves  that  they  are  near  to  the  goal.  The  correct  reading 
in  Jablonsky  (according  to  Kimchi's  Lex.  cf.  Michlal  yofi)  is 

with  dagesh  dirimens,  as  in  Ps.  xxxvii.  15  (Ges.  §  20,  2,  b). 


As  the  custom  of  shoeing  horses  was  not  practised  in.  ancient 
times,  firm  hoofs  (oir\ai,  /caprepal,  according  to  Xenophon's 
Ilippikos)  were  one  of  the  most  important  points  in  a  good 
horse.  And  the  horses  of  the  enemy  that  was  now  drawing 
near  to  Judah  had  hoofs  that  would  be  found  like  flint  (tzar, 


184  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

only  used  here,  equivalent  to  the  Arabic  zirr).  Homer  desig 
nates  such  horses  chalkopodes,  brazen-footed.  And  the  two 
wheels  of  the  war-chariots,  to  which  they  were  harnessed,  turned 
with  such  velocity,  and  overthrew  everything  before  them  with 
such  violence,  that  it  seemed  not  merely  as  if  a  whirlwind  drovo 
them  forward,  but  as  if  they  were  the  whirlwind  itself  (ch.  Ixvi. 
15  ;  Jer.  iv.  13).  Nahum  compares  them  to  lightning  (ch.  ii.  5). 
Thus  far  the  prophet's  description  has  moved  on,  as  if  by  forced 
marches,  in  clauses  of  from  two  to  four  words  each.  It  now 
changes  into  a  heavy,  stealthy  pace,  and  then  in  a  few  clauses 
springs  like  a  wild  beast  upon  its  prey. — Ver.  29.  "  Roaring 
issues  from  it  as  from  the  lioness :  it  roars  like  lions,  and  utters 
a  low  murmur ;  seizes  the  prey,  carries  it  off,  and  no  one  rescues" 
The  futures,  with  the  preceding  i?  njK^  which  is  equivalent  to 
a  future,  hold  each  feature  in  the  description  fast,  as  if  for 
prolonged  contemplation.  The  lion  roars  when  eager  for  prey ; 
and  such  is  now  the  war-cry  of  the  bloodthirsty  enemy,  which 
the  prophet  compares  to  the  roaring  of  a  lion  or  of  young 
lions  (cephirim)  in  the  fulness  of  their  strength.  (The  lion  is 
described  by  its  poetic  name,  tW? ;  this  does  not  exactly  apply 
to  the  lioness,  which  would  rather  be  designated  by  the  term 
Rw.)  The  roar  is  succeeded  by  a  low  growl  (ndham,  fremere), 
when  a  lion  is  preparing  to  fall  upon  its  prey.1  And  so  the 
prophet  hears  a  low  and  ominous  murmur  in  the  army,  which 
is  now  ready  for  battle.  But  he  also  sees  immediately  after 
wards  how  the  enemy  seizes  its  booty  and  carries  it  irrecoverably 
away:  literally,  "how  he  causes  it  to  escape,"  i.e.  not  "lets  it 
slip  in  cruel  sport,"  as  Luzzatto  interprets  it,  but  carries  it  to  a 
place  of  safety  (Mic.  vi.  14).  The  prey  referred  to  is  Judah. 
It  also  adds  to  the  gloomy  and  mysterious  character  of  the 
prophecy,  that  the  prophet  never  mentions  Judah.  In  the 
following  verse  also  (ver.  30)  the  object  is  still  suppressed,  as 
if  the  prophet  could  not  let  it  pass  his  lips.  Yer.  30.  "  And 
it  utters  a  deep  roar  over  it  in  that  day  like  the  roaring  of  the 
sea :  and  it  looks  to  the  earth,  and  behold  darkness,  tribulation, 
and  light ;  it  becomes  night  over  it  in  the  clouds  of  heaven"  The 
subject  to  "roars"  is  the  mass  of  the  enemy ;  and  in  the  expres 
sions  "  over  it"  and  "  it  looks"  (nibbat ;  the  niphal,  which  is  only 
1  In  Arabic,  en-nehem  is  used  to  signify  greediness  (see  Ali's  Proverbs, 
No.  16). 


CHAP.  V.  30.  185 

met  with  here,  in  the  place  of  the  Jiiphil)  the  prophet  has  in 
his  mind  the  nation  of  Judah,  upon  which  the  enemy  falls  with 
the  roar  of  the  ocean — that  is  to  say,  overwhelming  it  like  a 
sea.  And  when  the  people  of  Jndah  look  to  the  earth,  i.e.  to 
their  own  land,  darkness  alone  presents  itself,  and  darkness 
which  has  swallowed  up  all  the  smiling  and  joyous  aspect  which 
it  had  before.  And  what  then?  The  following  words,  tsar 
vd'or,  have  been  variously  rendered,  viz.  "  moon  (=  fahar)  and 
sun"  by  the  Jewish  expositors,  "  stone  and  flash,"  i.e.  hail  and 
thunder-storm,  by  Drechsler;  but  such  renderings  as  these, 
and  others  of  a  similar  kind,  are  too  far  removed  from  the 
ordinary  usage  of  the  language.  And  the  separation  of  the 
two  words,  so  that  the  one  closes  a  sentence  and  the  other 
commences  a  fresh  one  (e.g.  (t  darkness  of  tribulation,  and  the 
sun  becomes  dark"),  which  is  adopted  by  Hitzig,  Gesenius, 
Ewald,  and  others,  is  opposed  to  the  impression  made  by  the 
two  monosyllables,  and  sustained  by  the  pointing,  that  they  are 
connected  together.  The  simplest  explanation  is  one  which 
takes  the  word  tzar  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  tribulation  or  oppres 
sion,  arid  'or  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  light,  and  which  connects 
the  two  words  closely  together.  And  this  is  the  case  with  the 
rendering  given  above  :  tzar  vaor  are  "  tribulation  and  bright 
ening  up,"  one  following  the  other  and  passing  over  into  the 
other,  like  morning  and  night  (ch.  xxi.  12).  This  pair  of 
words  forms  an  interjectional  clause,  the  meaning  of  which  is, 
that  when  the  predicted  darkness  had  settled  upon  the  land  of 
Judah,  this  would  not  be  the  end;  but  there  would  still  follow 
an  alternation  of  anxiety  and  glimmerings  of  hope,  until  at  last 
it  had  become  altogether  dark  in  the  cloudy  sky  over  all  the 
land  of  Judah  Cariphim}  the  cloudy  sky,  is  only  met  with  here ; 
it  is  derived  from  Graph,  to  drop  or  trickle,  hence  also'ardphel: 
the  suffix  points  back  to  Id'drett,  eretz  denoting  sometimes  the 
earth  as  a  whole,  and  at  other  times  the  land  as  being  part 
of  the  earth).  The  prophet  here  predicts  that,  before  utter 
ruin  has  overtaken  Judah,  sundry  approaches  will  be  made 
towards  this,  within  which  a  divine  deliverance  will  appear  again 
and  again.  Grace  tries  and  tries  again  and  again,  until  at  last 
the  measure  of  iniquity  is  full,  and  the  time  of  repentance 
past.  The  history  of  the  nation  of  Judah  proceeded  according 
to  this  law  until  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans. 


186  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

The  Assyrian  troubles,  and  the  miraculous  light  of  divine 
help  which  arose  in  the  destruction  of  the  military  power  of 
Sennacherib,  were  only  the  foreground  of  this  mournful  but 
yet  ever  and  anon  hopeful  course  of  history,  which  terminated 
in  utter  darkness,  that  has  continued  now  for  nearly  two  thou 
sand  years. 

This  closes  the  third  prophetic  address.  It  commences 
with  a  parable  which  contains  the  history  of  Israel  in  mice, 
and  closes  with  an  emblem  which  symbolizes  the  gradual  but 
yet  certain  accomplishment  of  the  judicial,  penal  termination 
of  the  parable.  This  third  address,  therefore,  is  as  complete 
in  itself  as  the  second  was.  The  kindred  allusions  are  to  be 
accounted  for  from  the  sameness  of  the  historical  basis  and 
arena.  During  the  course  of  the  exposition,  it  has  become 
more  and  more  evident  and  certain  that  it  relates  to  the  time 
of  Uzziah  and  Jotham, — a  time  of  peace,  of  strength,  and 
wealth,  but  also  of  pride  and  luxury.  The  terrible  slaughter 
of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war,  which  broke  out  at  the  end  of 
Jotham's  reign,  and  the  varied  complications  which  king  Ahaz 
introduced  between  Judah  and  the  imperial  worldly  power, 
and  which  issued  eventually  in  the  destruction  of  the  former 
kingdom, — those  five  marked  epochs  in  the  history  of  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world,  or  great  empires,  to  which  the  Syro- 
Ephraimitish  war  was  the  prelude, — were  still  hidden  from  the 
prophet  in  the  womb  of  the  future.  The  description  of  the 
great  mass  of  people  that  was  about  to  roll  over  Judah  from 
afar  is  couched  in  such  general  terms,  so  undefined  and  misty, 
that  all  we  can  say  is,  that  everything  that  was  to  happen  to  the 
people  of  God  on  the  part  of  the  imperial  power  during  the 
five  c;reat  and  extended  periods  of  judgment  that  were  now  so 
soon  to  commence  (viz.  the  Assyrian,  the  Chaldean,  the  Persian, 
the  Grecian,  and  the  Roman),  was  here  unfolding  itself  out  of 
the  mist  of  futurity,  and  presenting  itself  to  the  prophet's  eye. 
Even  in  the  time  of  Ahaz  the  character  of  the  prophecy  changed 
in  this  respect.  It  was  then  that  the  eventful  relation,  in  which 
Israel  stood  to  the  imperial  power,  generally  assumed  its  first 
concrete  shape  in  the  form  of  a  distinct  relation  to  Asshur 
(Assyria).  And  from  that  time  forth  the  imperial  power  in 
the  mouth  of  the  prophet  is  no  longer  a  majestic  thing  without 
a  name ;  but  although  the  notion  of  the  imperial  power  was 


CHAP.  V.  30.  187 

not  yet  embodied  in  Asshur,  it  was  called  Asshur,  and  Asshur 
stood  as  its  representative.  It  also  necessarily  follows  from 
this,  that  ch.  ii.-iv.  and  v.  belong  to  the  times  anterior  to 
Ahaz,  i.e.  to  those  of  Uzziah  and  Jotham.  But  several  diffe 
rent  questions  suggest  themselves  here.  If  ch.  ii.-iv.  and  v. 
were  uttered  under  Uzziah  and  Jotham,  how  could  Isaiah  begin 
with  a  promise  (ch.  ii.  1—4)  which  is  repeated  word  for  word 
in  Mic.  iv.  1  sqq.,  where  it  is  the  direct  antithesis  to  ch.  iii. 
12,  which  was  uttered  by  Micah,  according  to  Jer.  xxvi.  18,  in 
the  time  of  Hezekiah  ?  Again,  if  we  consider  the  advance 

O  ' 

apparent  in  the  predictions  of  judgment  from  the  general  ex 
pressions  with  which  they  commence  in  ch.  i.  to  the  close  of 
ch.  v.,  in  what  relation  does  the  address  in  ch.  i.  stand  to 
ch.  ii.-iv.  and  v.,  inasmuch  as  vers.  7-9  are  not  ideal  (as 
we  felt  obliged  to  maintain,  in  opposition  to  Caspari),  but 
have  a  distinct  historical  reference,  and  therefore  at  any  rate 
presuppose  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war?  And  lastly,  if  ch. 
vi.  does  really  relate,  as  it  apparently  does,  to  the  call  of  Isaiah 
to  the  prophetic  office,  how  are  we  to  explain  the  singular  fact, 
that  three  prophetic  addresses  precede  the  history  of  his  call, 
which  ought  properly  to  stand  at  the  commencement  of  the 
hook  ?  Drechsler  and  Caspari  have  answered  this  question 
lately,  by  maintaining  that  ch.  vi.  does  not  contain  an  ac 
count  of  the  call  of  Isaiah  to  the  prophetic  office,  but  simply  of 
the  call  of  the  prophet,  who  was  already  installed  in  that  office, 
to  one  particular  mission.  The  proper  heading  to  be  adopted 
for  ch.  vi.  would  therefore  be,  "  The  ordination  of  the  prophet 
as  the  preacher  of  the  judgment  of  hardening ;"  and  ch. 
i.-v.  would  contain  warning  reproofs  addressed  by  the  prophet 
to  the  people,  who  were  fast  ripening  for  this  judgment  of 
hardening  (reprobation),  for  the  purpose  of  calling  them  to 
repentance.  The  final  decision  was  still  trembling  in  the 
balance.  But  the  call  to  repentance  was  fruitless,  and  Israel 
hardened  itself.  And  now  that  the  goodness  of  God  had  tried 
in  vain  to  lead  the  people  to  repentance,  and  the  long-suffering 
of  God  had  been  wantonly  abused  by  the  people,  Jehovah 
Himself  would  harden  them.  Looked  at  in  this  light,  ch.  vi. 
stands  in  its  true  historical  place.  It  contains  the  divine  sequel 
to  that  portion  of  Isaiah's  preaching,  and  of  the  prophetic 
preaching  generally,  by  which  it  had  been  preceded.  But 


188  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

true  as  it  is  that  the  whole  of  the  central  portion  of  Israel's 
history,  which  lay  midway  between  the  commencement  and 
the  close,  was  divided  in  half  by  the  contents  of  ch.  vi.,  and 
that  the  distinctive  importance  of  Isaiah  as  a  prophet  arose 
especially  from  the  fact  that  he  stood  upon  the  boundary 
between  these  two  historic  halves  ;  there  are  serious  objections 
which  present  themselves  to  such  an  explanation  of  ch.  vi. 
It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  this  distinctive  importance  may 
have  been  given  to  Isaiah's  official  position  at  his  very  first 
call.  And  what  Umbreit  says  —  namely,  that  ch.  vi.  must 
make  the  impression  upon  every  unprejudiced  mind,  that  it 
relates  to  the  prophet's  inaugural  vision  —  cannot  really  be 
denied.  But  the  position  in  which  ch.  vi.  stands  in  the  book 
itself  must  necessarily  produce  a  contrary  impression,  unless 
it  can  be  accounted  for  in  some  other  way.  Nevertheless  the 
impression  still  remains  (just  as  at  ch.  i.  7-9),  and  recurs 
again  and  again.  We  will  therefore  proceed  to  ch.  vi.  without 
attempting  to  efface  it.  It  is  possible  that  we  may  discover 
some  other  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  enigmatical  positioa 
of  ch.  vi.  in  relation  to  what  precedes. 

THE  PROPHET'S  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  OWN  DIVINE  MISSION. — 

CHAP.  VI. 

The  time  of  the  occurrence  here  described,  viz.  "  the  year 
that  king  Uzziah  (JJziyalni)  died"  was  of  importance  to  the 
prophet.  The  statement  itself,  in  the  naked  form  in  which  it 
is  here  introduced,  is  much  more  emphatic  than  if  it  com 
menced  with  "it  came  to  pass"  (vayJd;  cf.  Ex.  xvi.  6, 
Prov.  xxiv.  17).  It  was  the  year  of  Uzziah's  death,  not  the 
first  year  of  Jotham's  reign ;  that  is  to  say,  Uzziah  was  still 
reigning,  although  his  death  was  near  at  hand.  If  this  is  the 
sense  in  which  the  words  are  to  be  understood,  then,  even  if 
the  chapter  before  us  contains  an  account  of  Isaiah's  first  call, 
the  heading  to  ch.  i.,  which  dates  the  ministry  of  the  prophet 
from  the  time  of  Uzziah,  is  quite  correct,  inasmuch  as,  although 
his  public  ministry  under  Uzziah  was  very  short,  this  is  properly 
to  be  included,  not  only  on  account  of  its  own  importance,  but 
as  inaugurating  a  new  era  (lit.  "  an  epoch-making  beginning"). 
But  is  it  not  stated  in  2  Chron.  xxvi.  22,  that  Isaiah  wrote  a 


CHAP.  VI.  1.  189 

historical  work  embracing  the  whole  of  Uzziah' s  reign  f  Un 
questionably ;  but  it  by  no  means  follows  from  this,  that  he 
commenced  his  ministry  long  before  the  death  of  Uzziah.  If 
Isaiah  received  his  call  in  the  year  that  Uzziah  died,  this 
historical  work  contained  a  retrospective  view  of  the  life  and 
times  of  Uzziah,  the  close  of  which  coincided  with  the  call  of 
the  prophetic  author,  which  made  a  deep  incision  into  the 
history  of  Israel.  Uzziah  reigned  fifty-two  years  (809-758 
B.C.).  This  lengthened  period  was  just  the  same  to  the  king 
dom  of  Judah  as  the  shorter  age  of  Solomon  to  that  of  all 
Israel,  viz.  a  time  of  vigorous  and  prosperous  peace,  in  which 
the  nation  was  completely  overwhelmed  with  manifestations  of 
divine  love.  But  the  riches  of  divine  goodness  had  no  more 
influence  upon  it,  than  the  troubles  through  which  it  had  passed 
before.  And  now  the  eventful  change  took  place  in  the  relation 
between  Israel  and  Jehovah,  of  which  Isaiah  was  chosen  to  be 
the  instrument  before  and  above  all  other  prophets.  The  year 
in  which  all  this  occurred  was  the  year  of  Uzziah' s  death.  It 
was  in  this  year  that  Israel  as  a  people  was  given  up  to  hard 
ness  of  heart,  and  as  a  kingdom  and  country  to  devastation 
and  annihilation  by  the  imperial  power  of  the  world.  How 
significant  a  fact,  as  Jerome  observes  in  connection  with  this 
passage,  that  the  year  of  Uzziah's  death  should  be  the  year  in 
which  Romulus  was  born  ;  and  that  it  was  only  a  short  time 
after  the  death  of  Uzziah  (viz.  754  B.C.  according  to  Varro's 
chronology)  that  Rome  itself  was  founded !  The  national 
glory  of  Israel  died  out  with  king  Uzziah,  and  has  never  re 
vived  to  this  day. 

In  that  year,  says  the  prophet,  t(  I  saio  the  Lord  of  all 
sitting  upon  a  high  and  exalted  throne,  and  His  borders  filling  the 
temple"  Isaiah  saw,  and  that  not  when  asleep  and  dreaming  ; 
but  God  gave  him,  when  awake,  an  insight  into  the  invisible 
world,  by  opening  an  inner  sense  for  the  supersensuous,  whilst 
the  action  of  the  outer  senses  was  suspended,  and  by  condensing 
the  supersensuous  into  a  sensuous  form,  on  account  of  the  com 
posite  nature  of  man  and  the  limits  of  his  present  state.  This 
was  the  mode  of  revelation  peculiar  to  an  ecstatic  vision  (Iv 
eWracret,  Eng.  ver.  "  in  a  trance,"  or  lv  irvevftaTi,  "  in  the 
spirit").  Isaiah  is  here  carried  up  into  heaven  ;  for  although 
in  other  instances  it  was  undoubtedly  the  earthly  temple  which 


190  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

was  presented  to  a  prophet's  view  in  an  ecstatic  vision  (Amos 
ix.  1 ;  Ezek.  viii.  3,  x.  4,  5 ;  cf.  Acts  xxii.  17),  yet  here,  as  the 
description  which  follows  clearly  proves,  the  "  high  and  exalted 
throne"1  is  the  heavenly  antitype  of  the  earthly  throne  which 
was  formed  by  the  ark  of  the  covenant;  and  the  "temple" 
(hecdl :  lit.  a  spacious  hall,  the  name  given  to  the  temple  as  the 
palace  of  God  the  King)  is  the  temple  in  heaven,  as  in  Ps. 
xi.  4,  xviii.  7,  xxix.  9,  and  many  other  passages.  There  the 
prophet  sees  the  Sovereign  Ruler,  or,  as  we  prefer  to  render 
the  noun,  which  is  formed  from  'ddan  =  dun,  "  the  Lord  of  all" 
(All-herrn,  sovereign  or  absolute  Lord),  seated  upon  the  throne, 
and  in  human  form  (Ezek.  i.  26),  as  is  proved  by  the  robe  with 
a  train,  whose  flowing  ends  or  borders  (finibrice:  shulim,  as  in 
Ex.  xxviii.  33,  34)  filled  the  hall.  The  Sept.,  Targum,  Vulgate, 
etc.,  have  dropped  the  figure  of  the  robe  and  train,  as  too 
anthropomorphic.  But  John,  in  his  Gospel,  is  bold  enough  to 
say  that  it  was  Jesus  whose  glory  Isaiah  saw  (John  xii.  41). 
And  truly  so,  for  the  incarnation  of  God  is  the  truth  embodied 
in  all  the  scriptural  anthropomorphisms,  and  the  name  of 
Jesus  is  the  manifested  mystery  of  the  name  Jehovah.  The 
heavenly  temple  is  that  super-terrestrial  place,  which  Jehovah 
transforms  into  heaven  and  a  temple,  by  manifesting  Himself 
there  to  angels  and  saints.  But  whilst  He  manifests  His  glory 
there,  He  is  obliged  also  to  veil  it,  because  created  beings  are 
unable  to  bear  it.  But  that  which  veils  His  glory  is  no  less 
splendid,  than  that  portion  of  it  which  is  revealed.  And  this 
was  the  truth  embodied  for  Isaiah  in  the  long  robe  and  train. 
He  saw  the  Lord,  and  what  more  he  saw  was  the  all-filling 
robe  of  the  indescribable  One.  As  far  as  the  eye  of  the  seer 
could  look  at  first,  the  ground  was  covered  by  this  splendid  robe. 
There  was  consequently  no  room  for  any  one  to  stand.  And 
the  vision  of  the  seraphim  is  in  accordance  with  this.  Ver.  2. 
"Above  it  stood  seraphim :  each  one  had  six  wings  ;  with  two  he 
covered  his  face,  and  with  two  he  covered  his  feet,  and  with  two 
he  did  fly"  We  must  not  render  v  ^H3D  u  near  him  ; "  for 
although  ty  or  ^yp  is  applied  to  a  person  standing  near  or  over 
against  another  who  is  sitting  down  (Ex.  xviii.  13 ;  Jer. 
xxxvi.  21 ;  compare  2  Chron.  xxvi.  19,  where  the  latter  is  used 
1  It  is  to  this,  and  not  to  'Adonai,  as  the  Targum  and  apparently  the 
accents  imply,  that  the  words  '*  high  and  exalted"  refer. 


CHAP.  VI.  2.  191 

to  signify  "  over  against"  the  altar  of  incense),  and  is  used  in 
this  sense  to  denote  the  attitude  of  spirits  (Job  i.  6 ;  1  Kings 
xxii.  19  ;  Zech.  vi.  5),  and  even  of  men  (Zech.  iv.  14),  in 
relation  to  God  when  seated  on  His  throne,  in  which  case  it 
cannot  possibly  be  employed  in  the  sense  of  u  towering  above;" 
yet  v  oJEfy  the  strongest  expression  for  supra,  cannot  be  em 
ployed  in  any  other  than  a  literal  sense  here ;  for  which  reason 
Eashi  and  the  Targums  understand  it  as  signifying  u  above  in 
the  attitude  of  service,"  and  the  accentuation  apparently,  though 
erroneously,  implies  this  (Luzzatto).  What  Isaiah  meant  by 
this  standing  above,  may  be  inferred  from  the  use  which  the 
seraphim  are  said  to  have  made  of  their  wings.  The  imperfects 
do  not  describe  what  they  were  accustomed  to  do  (Bottcher  and 
others),  but  what  the  seer  saw  them  do :  with  two  of  their  six 
wings  he  saw  them  fly.  Thus  they  stood  flying,  i.e.  they  hovered 
or  soared  (cf.  Num.  xiv.  14),  as  both  the  earth  and  stars  are 
said  to  stand,  although  suspended  in  space  (Job  xxvi.  7).  The 
seraphim  would  not  indeed  tower  above  the  head  of  Him  that 
sat  upon  the  throne,  but  they  hovered  above  the  robe  belonging 
to  Him  with  which  the  hall  was  filled,  sustained  by  two  ex 
tended  wings,  and  covering  their  faces  with  two  other  wings  in 
their  awe  at  the  divine  glory  (Targ.  ne  videant),  and  their  feet 
with  two  others,  in  their  consciousness  of  the  depth  at  which 
the  creature  stands  below  the  Holiest  of  all  (Targ.  ne  videantur), 
just  as  the  cherubim  are  described  as  veiling  their  bodies  in 
Ezek.  i.  11.  This  is  the  only  passage  in  the  Scriptures  in  which 
the  seraphim  are  mentioned.  According  to  the  orthodox  view, 
which  originated  with  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  they  stand  at 
the  head  of  the  nine  choirs  of  angels,  the  first  rank  consisting 

O          '  & 

of  seraphim,  cherubim,  and  throni.  And  this  is  not  without 
support,  if  we  compare  the  cherubim  mentioned  in  Ezekiel, 
which  carried  the  chariot  of  the  divine  throne ;  whereas  here 
the  seraphim  are  said  to  surround  the  seat  on  which  the  Lord 
was  enthroned.  In  any  case,  the  seraphim  and  cherubim  were 
heavenly  beings  of  different  kinds ;  and  there  is  no  weight  in 
the  attempts  made  by  Hendewerk  and  Stickel  to  prove  that  they 
are  one  and  the  same.  And  certainly  the  name  seraphim  does 
not  signify  merely  spirits  as  such,  but  even,  if  not  the  highest  of 
all,  yet  a  distinct  order  from  the  rest ;  for  the  Scriptures  really 
teach  that  there  are  gradations  in  rank  in  the  hierarchy  of 


102  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

heaven.  Nor  were  they  mere  symbols  or  fanciful  images,  as 
Havemick  imagines,  but  real  spiritual  beings,  who  visibly  ap 
peared  to  the  prophet,  and  that  in  a  form  corresponding  to  their 
own  supersensuous  being,  and  to  the  design  of  the  whole  trans 
action.  Whilst  these  seraphim  hovered  above  on  both  sides  of 
Him  that  sat  upon  the  throne,  and  therefore  formed  two  opposite 
choirs,  each  ranged  in  a  semicircle,  they  presented  antiphonal 
worship  to  Him  that  sat  upon  the  throne. 

Ver.  3.  "  And  one  cried  to  the  oilier,  and  said,  Holy,  holy, 
lioly  is  Jehovah  of  hosts :  filling  the  ivhole  earth  is  His  glory" 
The  meaning  is  not  that  they  all  lifted  up  their  voice  in  con 
cert  at  one  and  the  same  time  (just  as  in  Ps.  xlii.  8  el  is  not 
used  in  this  sense,  viz.  as  equivalent  to  cneged),  but  that  there 
was  a  continuous  and  unbroken  antiphonal  song.  One  set 
commenced,  and  the  others  responded,  either  repeating  the 
"  Holy,  holy,  holy"  or  following  with  "filling  the  ivhole  earth  is 
His  glory"  Isaiah  heard  this  antiphonal  or  "  hypophonal "  song 
of  the  seraphim,  not  merely  that  he  might  know  that  the  unin 
terrupted  worship  of  God  was  their  blessed  employment,  but 
because  it  was  with  this  doxology  as  with  the  doxologies  of 
the  Apocalypse,  it  had  a  certain  historical  significance  in 
common  with  the  whole  scene.  God  is  in  Himself  the  Holy 
One  (kdddsh),  i.e.  the  separate  One,  beyond  or  above  the 
world,  true  light,  spotless  purity,  the  perfect  One.  His  glory 
(cdbod)  is  His  manifested  holiness,  as  Oetinger  and  Berigei 
express  it,  just  as,  on  the  other  hand,  His  holiness  is  His  veiled 
or  hidden  glory.  The  design  of  all  the  work  of  God  is  that 
His  holiness  should  become  universally  manifest,  or,  what  is  the 
same  thing,  that  His  glory  should  become  the  fulness  of  the 
whole  earth  (ch.  xi.  9  ;  Num.  xiv.  21 ;  Hab.  ii.  14).  This 
design  of  the  work  of  God  stands  before  God  as  eternally 
present ;  and  the  seraphim  also  have  it  ever  before  them  in  its 
ultimate  completion,  as  the  theme  of  their  song  of  praise.  But 
Isaiah  was  a  man  living  in  the  very  midst  of  the  history  that 
was  moving  on  towards  this  goal ;  and  the  cry  of  the  seraphim, 
in  the  precise  form  in  which  it  reached  him,  showed  him  to 
what  it  would  eventually  come  on  earth,  whilst  the  heavenly 
shapes  that  were  made  visible  to  him  helped  him  to  understand 
the  nature  of  that  divine  glory  with  which  the  earth  was  to  be 
filled.  The  whole  of  the  book  of  Isaiah  contains  traces  of  the 


CHAP.  VI   3.  193 

impression  made  by  this  ecstatic  vision.  The  favourite  name 
of  God  in  the  mouth  of  the  prophet,  viz.  "  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel"  (kedosh  Yisrael),  is  the  echo  of  this  seraphic  sanctus ; 
and  the  fact  that  this  name  already  occurs  with  such  marked 
preference  on  the  part  of  the  prophet  in  the  addresses  contained 
in  ch.  i.  2-iv.  5,  supports  the  view  that  Isaiah  is  here  describing 
his  own  first  call.  All  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  carry  this  name 
of  God  as  their  stamp.  It  occurs  twenty-nine  times  (including 
ch.  x.  17,  xliii.  15,  xlix.  7),  viz.  twelve  times  in  ch.  i.-xxxix.,  and 
seventeen  times  in  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  As  Luzzatto  has  well  observed, 
"  the  prophet,  as  if  with  a  presentiment  that  the  authenticity 
of  the  second  part  of  his  book  would  be  disputed,  has  stamped 
both  parts  with  this  name  of  God,  *  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,' 
as  if  with  his  own  seal."  The  only  other  passages  in  which 
the  word  occurs,  are  three  times  in  the  Psalms  (Ps.  Ixxi.  22, 
Ixxviii.  41,  Ixxxix.  19),  and  twice  in  Jeremiah  (Jer.  1.  29,  li.  5), 
and  that  not  without  an  allusion  to  Isaiah.  It  forms  an  essential 
part  of  Isaiah's  distinctive  prophetic  signature.  And  here  we 
are  standing  at  the  source  from  which  it  sprang.  But  did  this 
thrice-holy  refer  to  the  triune  God?  Knobel  contents  himself 
with  saying  that  the  threefold  repetition  of  the  word  "  holy" 
serves  to  give  it  the  greater  emphasis.  No  doubt  men  are 
accustomed  to  say  three  times  what  they  wish  to  say  in  an 
exhaustive  and  satisfying  manner ;  for  three  is  the  number  of 
expanded  unity,  of  satisfied  and  satisfying  development,  of  the 
key-note  extended  into  the  chord..  But  why  is  this  1  The 
Pythagoreans  said  that  numbers  were  the  first  principle  of  all 
things ;  but  the  Scriptures,  according  to  which  God  created  the 
world  in  twice  three  days  by  ten  mighty  words,  and  completed 
it  in  seven  days,  teach  us  that  God  is  the  first  principle  of  all 
numbers.  The  fact  that  three  is  the  number  of  developed  and 
yet  self-contained  unity,  has  its  ultimate  ground  in  the  circum 
stance  that  it  is  the  number  of  the  trinitarian  process  ;  and 
consequently  the  trilogy  (trisagion)  of  the  seraphim  (like  that 
of  the  cherubim  in  Rev.  iv.  8),  whether  Isaiah  was  aware  of  it 
or  no,  really  pointed  in  the  distinct  consciousness  of  the  spirits 
themselves  to  the  triune  God. 

When  Isaiah  heard  this,  he  stood  entranced  at  the  farthest 
possible  distance  from  Him  that  sat  upon  the  throne,  namely, 
under  the  door  of  the  heavenly  palace  or  temple.     What  he 
VOL.  I.  N 


194  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

still  further  felt  and  saw,  he  proceeds  to  relate  in  ver.  4  : 
"  And  the  foundations  of  the  thresholds  shook  with  the  voice  of 
them  that  cried;  and  the  house  became  full  of  smoke."  By 
'ammoth  Jtasripptm,  the  LXX.,  Vulgate,  Syriac,  and  others 
understand  the  posts  of  the  lintels,  the  supporting  beams  of  the 
superliminaria,  which  closed  the  doorway  at  the  top.  But  as 
sapli  is  only  used  in  other  places  to  signify  the  threshold  and 
porch  (limen  and  vestibulum),  'ammoth  hassippim  must  be  un 
derstood  here  in  the  (perfectly  appropriate)  sense  of  "  the 
foundations  of  the  thresholds"  ('ammdh,  which  bears  the  same 
relation  to  DN,  mother,  as  matrix  to  mater,  is  used  to  denote  the 
receptive  basis  into  which  the  door-steps  with  their  plugs  were 
inserted,  like  the  talmudic  ammetdh  derechayydh,  the  frame  or 
box  of  the  hand-mill  (Berachoth  18&),  and  ammath  megerah, 
the  wood-work  which  runs  along  the  back  of  the  saw  and  keeps 
it  firmly  extended  (Kdim  21,  3);  compare  the  "  Schrauben- 
mutter"  literally  screw-moMer,  or  female  screw,  which  receives 
and  holds  the  cylindrical  screw).  Every  time  that  the  choir  of 
seraphim  (N^ipn :  compare  such  collective  singulars  as  hd'oreb, 
the  ambush,  in  Josh.  viii.  19  ;  heclidlutz,  the  men  of  war,  in  Josh, 
vi.  7,  etc.)  began  their  song,  the  support  of  the  threshold  of  the 
porch  in  which  Isaiah  was  standing  trembled.  The  building  was 
seized  with  reverential  awe  throughout  its  whole  extent,  and  in 
its  deepest  foundations  :  for  in  the  blessed  state  beyond,  nothing 
stands  immoveable  or  unsusceptible  in  relation  to  the  spirits  there; 
but  all  things  form,  as  it  were,  the  accidentia  of  their  free  per 
sonality,  yielding  to  their  impressions,  and  voluntarily  following 
them  in  all  their  emotions.  The  house  was  also  "filled  with 
smoke."  Many  compare  this  with  the  similar  occurrence  in 
connection  with  the  dedication  of  Solomon's  temple  (1  Kings 
viii.  10) ;  but  Drechsler  is  correct  in  stating  that  the  two  cases 
are  not  parallel,  for  there  God  simply  attested  His  own  presence 
by  the  cloud  of  smoke  behind  which  He  concealed  Himself, 
whereas  here  there  was  no  need  of  any  such  self-attestation. 
Moreover,  in  this  instance  God  does  not  dwell  in  the  cloud  and 
thick  darkness,  whilst  the  smoke  is  represented  as  the  effect  of 
the  songs  of  praise  in  which  the  seraphim  have  joined,  and  not 
of  the  presence  of  God.  The  smoke  arose  from  the  altar  of 
incense  mentioned  in  ver.  6.  But  when  Drechsler  says  that 
it  was  the  prayers  of  saints  (as  in  Rev.  v.  8,  viii.  3,  4),  which 


CHAP.  VI   5.  195 

ascended  to  the  Lord  in  the  smoke,  this  is  a  thought  which 
is  quite  out  of  place  here.  The  smoke  was  the  immediate 
consequence  of  the  seraphs'  song  of  praise. 

This  begins  to  throw  a  light  upon  the  name  seraphim,  which 
may  help  us  to  decipher  it.  The  name  cannot  possibly  be 
connected  with  sdraph,  a  snake  (Sanscr.  sarpa,  Lat.  serpens) ; 
and  to  trace  the  word  to  a  verb  sdraph  in  the  sense  of  the 
Arabic  'sarafa  (^sarufa),  to  tower  high,  to  be  exalted,  or  highly 
honoured  (as  Gesenius,  Hengstenberg,  Hofmann,  and  others 
have  done),  yields  a  sense  which  does  not  very  strongly  com 
mend  itself.  On  the  other  hand,  to  follow  Knobel,  who  reads 
shdrdthim  (worshippers  of  God),  and  thus  presents  the  Lexicon 
with  a  new  word,  and  to  pronounce  the  word  seraphim  a  copyist's 
error,  would  be  a  rash  concession  to  the  heaven-storming  omni 
potence  which  is  supposed  to  reside  in  the  ink  of  a  German 
scholar.  It  is  hardly  admissible,  however,  to  interpret  the 
name  as  signifying  directly  spirits  of  light  or  fire,  since  the  true 
meaning  of  sdraph  is  riot  urere  (to  burn),  but  comburere  (to  set 
on  fire  or  burn  up).  Umbreit  endeavours  to  do  justice  to  this 
transitive  meaning  by  adopting  the  explanation  "  fiery  beings," 
by  which  all  earthly  corruption  is  opposed  and  destroyed.  The 
vision  itself,  however,  appears  to  point  to  a  much  more  dis 
tinctive  and  special  meaning  in  the  name,  which  only  occurs 
in  this  passage  of  Isaiah.  We  shall  have  more  to  say  upon 
this  point  presently. 

The  seer,  who  was  at  first  overwhelmed  and  intoxicated  by 
the  majestic  sight,  now  recovers  his  self-consciousness.  Ver.  5. 
"  Then  said  I,  Woe  to  me!  for  I  am  lost;  for  lam  a  man  of  unclean 
lips,  and  I  am  dwelling  among  a  people  of  unclean  lips  :  for  mine 
eyes  have  seen  the  King,  Jehovah  of  hosts"  That  a  man  cannot 
see  God  without  dying  is  true  in  itself,  and  was  an  Old  Testa 
ment  conviction  throughout  (Ex.  xxxiii.  20,  etc.).  He  must 
die,  because  the  holiness  of  God  is  to  the  sinner  a  consuming 
fire  (ch.  xxxiii.  14)  ;  and  the  infinite  distance  between  the 
creature  and  the  Creator  is  sufficient  of  itself  to  produce  a 
prostrating  effect,  which  even  the  seraphim  could  not  resist 
without  veiling  their  faces.  Isaiah  therefore  regarded  himself 
as  lost  (nidmethi,  like  6'Xo>Xa,  peril,  a  preterite  denoting  the  fact 
which,  although  not  outwardly  completed,  is  yet  effected  so  far 
as  a  man's  own  consciousness  is  concerned),  and  all  the  more 


196  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

because  he  himself  was  of  unclean  lips,  and  he  was  also  a 
member  of  a  nation  of  unclean  lips.  The  unholiness  of  his 
own  person  was  doubled,  in  consequence  of  the  closeness  of  the 
natural  connection,  by  the  unholiness  of  the  nation  to  which  he 
belonged.  He  designates  this  unholiness  as  uncleanness  of 
lips,  because  he  found  himself  transported  into  the  midst  of 
choirs  of  beings  who  were  praising  the  Lord  with  pure  lips  ; 
and  he  calls  the  King  Jehovah)  because,  although  he  had  not 
seen  Jehovah  face  to  face,  he  had  seen  the  throne,  and  the  all- 
filling  robe,  and  the  seraphim  who  surrounded  and  did  homage 
to  Him  that  sat  upon  the  throne  ;  and  therefore,  as  he  had  seen 
the  heavenly  King  in  His  revealed  majesty,  he  describes  the 
scene  according  to  the  impression  that  he  had  received.  But  to 
stand  here  in  front  of  Jehovah  of  hosts,  the  exalted  King,  to 
whom  everything  does  homage,  and  to  be  obliged  to  remain 
mute  in  the  consciousness  of  deep  uncleanness,  excited  within 
him  the  annihilating  anguish  of  self-condemnation.  And  this 
is  expressed  in  the  confession  made  by  the  contrite  seer. 

This  confession  was  followed  by  the  forgiveness  of  his  sins, 
of  which  he  received  an  attestation  through  a  heavenly  sacra 
ment,  and  which  was  conveyed  to  him  through  the  medium  of 
a  seraphic  absolution.  Vers.  6,  7.  "  And  one  of  the  seraphim  flew 
to  me  with  a  red-hot  coal  in  his  hand,  which  he  had  taken  icith 
the  tongs  from  the  altar.  And  he  touched  my  mouth  with  it,  and 
said,  Behold,  this  hath  touched  thy  lips,  and  thine  iniquity  is  taken 
away ;  and  so  tliy  sin  is  expiated."  One  of  the  beings  hovering 
round  the  Lord  (there  were,  therefore,  a  large  and  indefinite 
number)  flew  to  the  altar  of  incense, — the  heavenly  original  of 
the  altar  of  incense  in  the  earthly  temple,  which  was  reckoned 
as  belonging  to  the  Most  Holy  Place, — and  took  from  this  altar 
a  ritzpdh)  i.e.  either  a  red-hot  stone  (Vulg.  calcnlum,  Ar.  raclfe 
or  raaafe))  or,  according  to  the  prevailing  tradition,  a  red-hot 
coal  (vid.  rdtzeph  —  rdshaph,  to  scatter  sparks,  sparkle,  or  glow  : 
syn.  gacheleth))  and  that  with  a  pair  of  tongs,  because  even  a 
seraph's  hand  cannot  touch  the  vessels  consecrated  to  God,  or 
the  sacrifices  that  belong  to  Him.  With  this  red-hot  coal  he 
flew  to  Isaiah,  and  having  touched  his  mouth  with  it,  i.e.  that 
member  of  his  body  of  whose  uncleanness  he  had  more  espe 
cially  complained  (cf.  Jer.  i.  9,  where  the  prophet's  mouth  is 
touched  by  Jehovah's  hand,  and  made  eloquent  in  consequence), 


CHAP.  VI.  6,  7.  197 

he  assured  him  of  the  forgiveness  of  his  sins,  which  coincided 
with  the  application  of  this  sacramental  sign.  The  Vav  con 
nects  together  what  is  affirmed  by  ndga  (hath  touched)  and  sdr 
(a  taker  away)  as  being  simultaneous ;  the  zeli  (this)  points  as 
a  neuter  to  the  red-hot  coal.  The  future  tecuppdr  is  a  future 
consec.,  separated  by  Vav  conversive  for  the  purpose  of  bringing 
the  subject  into  greater  prominence  ;  as  it  is  practically  impos 
sible  that  the  removal  of  guilt  should  be  thought  of  as  immediate 
and  momentary,  and  the  expiation  as  occurring  gradually.  The 
fact  that  the  guilt  was  taken  away  was  the  very  proof  that  the 
expiation  was  complete.  Cipper,  with  the  "  sin  "  in  the  accusa 
tive,  or  governed  by  ?V,  signifies  to  cover  it  up,  extinguish,  or 
destroy  it  (for  the  primary  meaning,  vid.  ch.  xxviii.  18),  so  that 
it  has  no  existence  in  relation  to  the  penal  justice  of  God.  All 
sinful  uncleanness  was  burned  away  from  the  prophet's  mouth. 
The  seraph,  therefore,  did  here  what  his  name  denotes  :  he 
burned  up  or  burned  away  (comburit).  He  did  this,  however, 
not  by  virtue  of  his  own  fiery  nature,  but  by  means  of  the  divine 
fire  which  he  had  taken  from  the  heavenly  altar.  As  the  smoke 
which  filled  the  house  came  from  the  altar,  and  arose  in  conse 
quence  of  the  adoration  offered  to  the  Lord  by  the  seraphim, 
not  only  must  the  incense-offering  upon  the  altar  and  this 
adoration  be  closely  connected;  but  the  fire,  which  revealed 
itself  in  the  smoke  and  consumed  the  incense-offering,  and 
which  must  necessarily  have  been  divine  because  of  its  expia 
tory  power,  was  an  effect  of  the  love  of  God  with  which  He 
reciprocated  the  offerings  of  the  seraphim.  A  fiery  look  from 
God,  and  that  a  fiery  look  of  pure  love  as  the  seraphim  were 
sinless,  had  kindled  the  sacrifice.  Now,  if  the  fact  that  a  seraph 
absolved  the  seer  by  means  of  this  fire  of  love  is  to  be  taken  as 
an  illustrative  example  of  the  historical  calling  of  the  seraphim, 
they  were  the  vehicles  and  media  of  the  fire  of  divine  love, 
just  as  the  cherubim  in  Ezekiel  are  vehicles  and  media  of 
the  fire  of  divine  wrath.  For  just  as,  in  the  case  before  us, 
a  seraph  takes  the  fire  of  love  from  the  altar;  so  there,  in 
Ezek.  x.  6,  7,  a  cherub  takes  the  fire  of  wrath  from  the  throne- 
chariot.  Consequently  the  cherubim  appear  as  the  vehicles 
and  media  of  the  wrath  which  destroys  sinners,  or  rather  of 
the  divine  doxa,  with  its  fiery  side  turned  towards  the  world  ; 
and  the  seraphim  as  the  vehicles  and  media  of  the  love  which 


198  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

destroys  sin,  or  of  the  same   divine  doxa  with   its  light  side 
towards  the  world.1 

When  Isaiah  had  been  thus  absolved,  the  true  object  of  the 
heavenly  scene  was  made  apparent.  Ver.  8.  "  Then  I  heard  the 
voice  of  the  Lord,  saying.  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  iv/io  will  go  for 
us?  TJien  I  said,  Behold  me  here;  send  me!"  The  plural 
"for  us"  (Idnu)  is  not  to  be  accounted  for  on  the  ground  that, 
in  a  case  of  reflection  or  self-consultation,  the  subject  also  stands 
as  the  object  in  antithesis  to  itself  (as  Hitzig  supposes)  ;  nor  is 
it  a  pluralis  majestatis,  as  Knobel  maintains  ;  nor  is  the  original 
abstract  signification  of  the  plural  hinted  at,  as  Meier  thinks. 
The  plural  is  no  doubt  used  here  with  reference  to  the  seraphim, 
who  formed,  together  with  the  Lord,  one  deliberative  council 
(sod  kedoshim,  Ps.  Ixxxix.  8),  as  in  1  Kings  xxii.  19-22,  Dan. 
iv.  14,  etc. ;  just  as,  from  their  very  nature  as  "sons  of  God  " 
(b'ne  Hd-elohim),  they  made  one  family  with  God  their  Creator 
(vid.  Eph.  iii.  15),  all  linked  so  closely  together  that  they  them 
selves  could  be  called  Elohim,  like  God  their  Creator,  just  as 
in  1  Cor.  xii.  12  the  church  of  believers  is  called  Christos,  like 
Christ  its  head.  The  task  for  which  the  right  man  was  sought 
was  not  merely  divine,  but  heavenly  in  the  broadest  sense  :  for 
it  is  not  only  a  matter  in  which  God  Himself  is  interested,  that 
the  earth  should  become  full  of  the  glory  of  God,  but  this  is 
also  an  object  of  solicitude  to  the  spirits  that  minister  unto 
Him.  Isaiah,  whose  anxiety  to  serve  the  Lord  wras  no  longer 
suppressed  by  the  consciousness  of  his  own  sinfulness,  no  sooner 
heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  than  he  exclaimed,  in  holy  self- 
consciousness,  "  Behold  me  here  ;  send  me."  It  is  by  no  means 
a  probable  thing,  that  he  had  already  acted  as  a  messenger 
of  God,  or  held  the  office  of  prophet.  For  if  the  joy,  with 
which  he  offered  himself  here  as  the  messenger  of  God,  was 
the  direct  consequence  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  of  which  he 
had  received  the  seal ;  the  consciousness  of  his  own  personal 
sinfulness,  and  his  membership  in  a  sinful  nation,  would  certainly 
have  prevented  him  hitherto  from  coining  forward  to  denounce 

1  Seraphic  love  is  the  expression  used  in  the  language  of  the  church  to 
denote  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  holy  love  in  the  creature.  The  Syriac  fathers 
regarded  the  burning  coal  as  the  symbol  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God,  who 
is  often  designated  in  poetry  as  the  "live  or  burning  coal"  (kemurto  denuro) : 
DMZ.  1860,  pp.  679,  681. 


CHAP.  VI.  9,  10.  199 

judgment  upon  that  nation.  And  as  the  prophetic  office  as  such 
rested  upon  an  extraordinary  call  from  God,  it  may  fairly  be 
assumed,  that  when  Isaiah  relates  so  extraordinary  a  call  as  this, 
he  is  describing  the  sealing  of  his  prophetic  office,  and  there 
fore  his  own  first  call. 

This  is  confirmed  by  the  words  in  which  his  commission  is 
expressed,  and  the  substance  of  the  message. — Vers.  9,  10.  "He 
said,  Go,  and  tell  tins  people.  Hear  on,  and  understand  not ;  and 
look  on,  but  perceive  not.  Make  ye  the  heart  of  this  people  greasy, 
and  their  ears  heavy,  and  their  eyes  sticky  ;  that  they  may  not  see 
with  their  eyes,  and  hear  with  their  ears,  and  their  heart  under 
stand,  and  they  be  converted,  and  one  heal  them"  "  This  people" 
points  back  to  the  people  of  unclean  lips,  among  whom  Isaiah 
had  complained  of  dwelling,  and  wThom  the  Lord  would  not  call 
"  my  people."  It  was  to  go  to  this  people  and  preach  to  them, 
and  therefore  to  be  the  prophet  of  this  people,  that  he  was  called. 
But  how  mournful  does  the  divine  commission  sound  !  It  was 
the  terrible  opposite  of  that  seraphic  mission,  which  the  prophet 
had  experienced  in  himself.  The  seraph  had  absolved  Isaiah 
by  the  burning  coal,  that  he  as  prophet  might  not  absolve,  but 
harden  his  people  by  his  word.  They  were  to  hear  and  see,  and 
that  continually  as  the  gerundives  imply  (Ges.  §  131,  3,  b\  Ewald, 
§  280,  &),by  having  the  prophet's  preaching  actu  directo  constantly 
before  them ;  but  not  to  their  salvation.  The  two  prohibitory 
expressions,  "understand  not"  and  "perceive  not,"  show  what 
the  result  of  the  prophet's  preaching  was  to  be,  according  to  the 
judicial  will  of  God.  And  the  imperatives  in  ver.  10  are  not 
to  be  understood  as  simply  instructing  the  prophet  to  tell  the 
people  what  God  had  determined  to  do;  for  the  fact  that 
"  prophets  are  often  said  to  do  what  they  announce  as  about 
to  happen,"  in  proof  of  which  Jer.  i.  10  is  sometimes  quoted 
(cf.  Jer.  xxxi.  28 ;  Hos.  vi.  5 ;  Ezek.  xliii.  3),  has  its  truth  not 
in  a  rhetorical  figure,  but  in  the  very  nature  of  the  divine  word. 
The  prophet  was  the  organ  of  the  word  of  God,  and  the  word 
of  God  was  the  expression  of  the  will  of  God,  and  the  will  of 
God  is  a  divine  act  that  has  not  yet  become  historical.  For  this 
reason  a  prophet  might  very  well  be  said  to  perform  what  he 
announced  as  about  to  happen  :  God  was  the  causa  efficiens  prin- 
cipalis,  the  word  was  the  causa  media,  and  the  prophet  the  causa 
ministerialist  This  is  the  force  of  the  three  imperatives  :  they 


200  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

are  three  figurative  expressions  of  the  idea  of  hardening.  The 
first,  hishmin,  signifies  to  make  fat  (pinguem),  i.e.  without 
susceptibility  or  feeling  for  the  operations  of  divine  grace  (Ps. 
cxix.  70)  ;  the  second,  liicbid,  to  make  heavy,  more  especially 
heavy  or  dull  of  hearing  (ch.  lix.  1)  ;  the  third,  J^n  or  JK?n 
(whence  the  imperative  3^n  or  JK?*n),  to  smear  thickly,  or  paste 
over,  i.e.  to  put  upon  a  person  what  is  usually  the  result  of 
weak  eyes,  which  become  firmly  closed  by  the  hardening  of 
the  adhesive  substance  secreted  in  the  night.  The  three 
future  clauses,  with  "lest"  (pen),  point  back  to  these  three 
imperatives  in  inverse  order  :  their  spiritual  sight,  spiritual 
hearing,  and  spiritual  feeling  were  to  be  taken  away,  their  eyes 
becoming  blind,  and  their  ears  deaf,  and  their  hearts  being 
covered  over  with  the  grease  of  insensibility.  Under  the 
influence  of  these  futures  the  two  preterites  v  NS^i  3^  affirm 
what  might  have  been  the  result  if  this  hardening  had  not 
taken  place,  but  what  would  never  take  place  nowr.  The  ex 
pression  ?  NS"J  is  used  in  every  other  instance  in  a  transitive 
sense,  "  to  heal  a  person  or  a  disease,"  and  never  in  the  sense  of 
becoming  well  or  being  healed  ;  but  in  the  present  instance  it 
acquires  a  passive  sense  from  the  so-called  impersonal  construc 
tion  (Ges.  §  137,  3),  "and  one  heal  it,"  i.e.  "and  it  be  healed:" 
and  it  is  in  accordance  with  this  sense  that  it  is  paraphrased 
in  Mark  iv.  12,  whereas  in  the  three  other  passages  in  which 
the  words  are  quoted  in  the  New  Testament  (viz.  Matthew, 
John,  and  Acts)  the  Septuagint  rendering  is  adopted,  "  and  I 
should  heal  them"  (God  Himself  being  taken  as  the  subject). 
The  commission  which  the  prophet  received,  reads  as  though  it 
were  quite  irreconcilable  with  the  fact  that  God,  as  the  Good, 
can  only  will  what  is  good.  But  our  earlier  doctrinarians  have 
suggested  the  true  solution,  when  they  affirm  that  God  does  not 
harden  men  positive  aut  effective,  since  His  true  will  and  direct 
work  are  man's  salvation,  but  occasionaliter  et  eventualiter,  since 
the  offers  and  displays  of  salvation  which  man  receives  neces 
sarily  serve  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  his  sins,  and  judicialiter  so 
far  as  it  is  the  judicial  will  of  God,  that  what  was  originally 
ordained  for  man's  salvation  should  result  after  all  in  judg 
ment,  in  the  case  of  any  man  upon  whom  grace  has  ceased  to 
work,  because  all  its  ways  and  means  have  been  completely 
exhausted.  It  is  not  only  the  loving  will  of  God  which  is 


CHAP.  VI.  11-13.  201 

good,  but  also  the  wrathful  will  into  which  His  loving  will 
changes,  when  determinately  and  obstinately  resisted.  There 
is  a  self-hardening  in  evil,  which  renders  a  man  thoroughly 
incorrigible,  and  which,  regarded  as  the  fruit  of  his  moral 
behaviour,  is  no  less  a  judicial  punishment  inflicted  by  God, 
than  self-induced  guilt  on  the  part  of  man.  The  two  are 
bound  up  in  one  another,  inasmuch  as  sin  from  its  very  nature 
bears  its  own  punishment,  which  consists  in  the  wrath  of  God 
excited  by  sin.  For  just  as  in  all  the  good  that  men  do,  the 
active  principle  is  the  love  of  God  ;  so  in  all  the  harm  that 
they  do,  the  active  principle  is  the  wrath  of  God.  An  evil  act 
in  itself  is  the  result  of  self-determination  proceeding  from  a 
man's  own  will ;  but  evil,  regarded  as  the  mischief  in  which 
evil  acting  quickly  issues,  is  the  result  of  the  inherent  wrath  of 
God,  which  is  the  obverse  of  His  inherent  love  ;  and  when  a 
man  hardens  himself  in  evil,  it  is  the  inward  working  of  God's 
peremptory  wrath.  To  this  wrath  Israel  had  delivered  itself  up 
through  its  continued  obstinacy  in  sinning.  And  consequently 
the  Lord  now  proceeded  to  shut  the  door  of  repentance  against 
His  people.  Nevertheless  He  directed  the  prophet  to  preach 
repentance,  because  the  judgment  of  hardness  suspended  over 
the  people  as  a  whole  did  not  preclude  the  possibility  of  the 
salvation  of  individuals. 

Isaiah  heard  with  sighing,  and  yet  with  obedience,  in  what 
the  mission  to  which  he  had  so  cheerfully  offered  himself  was 
to  consist.  Ver.  Ha.  "  Then  said  I,  Lord,  how  long?"  He 
inquired  how  long  this  service  of  hardening  and  this  state 
of  hardness  were  to  continue, — a  question  forced  from  him  by 
his  sympathy  with  the  nation  to  which  he  himself  belonged 
(cf.  Ex.  xxxii.  9-14),  and  one  which  was  warranted  by  the 
certainty  that  God,  who  is  ever  true  to  His  promises,  could  not 
cast  off  Israel  as  a  people  for  ever.  The  answer  follows  in 
vers.  115—13  :  "  Until  towns  are  ivasted  without  inhabitant,  and 
houses  are  without  man,  and  the  ground  shall  be  laid  waste,  a  wil 
derness,  and  Jehovah  shall  put  men  far  away,  and  there  shall  be 
many  forsaken  places  within  the  land.  And  is  there  still  a  tenth 
therein,  this  also  again  is  given  up  to  destruction,  like  the  terebinth 
and  like  the  oak,  of  which,  when  they  are  felled,  only  a  root-stump 
remains  :  such  a  root-stump  is  a  holy  seed."  The  answer  is 
intentionally  commenced,  not  with  ^""W,  but  with  EX  "IE?K  "iy 


^  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

(the  expression  only  occurs  a^nin  in  Gen.  xxviii.  15  and 
Num.  xxxii.  17),  which,  even  without  dropping  the  conditional 
force  of  CN?  signified  that  the  hardening  judgment  would  only 
come  to  an  end  when  the  condition  had  heen  fulfilled,  that 
towns,  houses,  and  the  soil  of  the  land  of  Israel  and  its  environs 
had  been  made  desolate,  in  fact,  utterly  and  universally  deso 
late,  as  the  three  definitions  (without  inhabitant,  without  man, 
wilderness)  affirm.  The  expression  richak  (put  far  away)  is 
a  general  and  enigmatical  description  of  exile  'or  captivity 
(cf.  Joel  iv.  6,  Jer.  xxvii.  10)  ;  the  literal  term  gdldli  has  been 
already  used  in  ch.  v.  13.  Instead  of  a  national  term  being 
used,  we  find  here  simply  the  general  expression  umenn  (eth- 
lid-dddm  ;  the  consequence  of  depopulation,  viz.  the  entire 
absence  of  men,  being  expressed  in  connection  with  the  depo 
pulation  itself.  The  participial  noun  hd'azuldh  (the  forsaken) 
is  a  collective  term  for  places  once  full  of  life,  that  had 
afterwards  died  out  and  fallen  into  ruins  (ch.  xvii.  2,  9).  This 
judgment  would  be  followed  by  a  second,  which  would  expose 
the  still  remaining  tenth  of  the  nation  to  a  sifting,  rvrn  3t^  to 
become  again  (Ges.  §  142,  3)  ;  T#3?  rrn,  not  as  in  ch.  v.  5,  but 
as  in  ch.  iv.  4,  after  Num.  xxiv.  22  :  the  feminine  does  not 
refer  to  the  land  of  Israel  (Luzzatto),  but  to  the  tenth.  Up 
to  the  words  "  given  up  to  destruction,"  the  announcement  is 
a  threatening  one;  but  from  this  point  to  "remains"  a  con 
solatory  prospect  begins  to  dawn ;  and  in  the  last  three  words 
this  brighter  prospect,  like  a  distant  streak  of  light,  bounds  the 
horizon  of  the  gloomy  prophecy.  It  shall  happen  as  with  the 
terebinth  and  oak.  These  trees  were  selected  as  illustrations, 
not  only  because  they  were  so  near  akin  to  evergreens,  and 
produced  a  similar  impression,  or  because  there  were  so  many 
associations  connected  with  them  in  the  olden  times  of  Israel's 
history ;  but  also  because  they  formed  such  fitting  symbols  of 
Israel,  on  account  of  their  peculiar  facility  for  springing  up 
again  from  the  root  (like  the  beech  and  nut,  for  example), 
even  when  they  had  been  completely  felled.  As  the  forms 
yabbeslietli  (dryness),  dalteketh  (fever),  'avvereth  (blindness), 
shachepJieth  (consumption),  are  used  to  denote  certain  qualities 
or  states,  and  those  for  the  most  part  faulty  ones  (Concord- 
p.  1350)  ;  so  sJialleceth  here  does  not  refer  to  the  act  itself  of 
felling  or  casting  away,  but  rather  to  the  condition  of  a  tree 


CHAP.  VI.  11-13.  203 

that  has  been  hewn  or  thrown  down  ;  though  not  to  the  con 
dition  of  the  trunk  as  it  lies  prostrate  upon  the  ground,  but  to 
that  of  the  root,  which  is  still  left  in  the  earth.  Of  this  tree, 
that  had  been  deprived  of  its  trunk  and  crown,  there  was  still 
a  mazzebeth  (a  kindred  form  of  mazzeldh),  i.e.  a  root-stump 
(truncus)  fast  in  the  ground.  The  tree  was  not  yet  entirely 
destroyed  ;  the  root-stump  could  shoot  out  and  put  forth 
branches  again.  And  this  would  take  place  :  the  root-sturnp  of 
the  oak  or  terebinth,  which  was  a  symbol  of  Israel,  was  "  a  holy 
seed."  The  root-stump  was  the  remnant  that  had  survived  the 
judgment,  and  this  remnant  would  become  a  seed,  out  of  which 
a  new  Israel  would  spring  up  after  the  old  had  been  destroyed. 
Thus  in  a  few  weighty  words  is  the  way  sketched  out,  which 
God  would  henceforth  take  with  His  people.  The  passage 
contains  an  outline  of  the  history  of  Israel  to  the  end  of  time. 
Israel  as  a  nation  was  indestructible,  by  virtue  of  the  promise 
of  God ;  but  the  mass  of  the  people  were  doomed  to  destruc 
tion  through  the  judicial  sentence  of  God,  and  only  a  remnant, 
which  would  be  converted,  would  perpetuate  the  nationality  of 
Israel,  and  inherit  the  glorious  future.  This  law  of  a  bless 
ing  sunk  in  the  depths  of  the  curse  actually  inflicted,  still 
prevails  in  the  history  of  the  Jews.  The  way  of  salvation  is 
open  to  all.  Individuals  find  it,  and  give  us  a  presentiment  of 
what  might  be  and  is  to  be  ;  but  the  great  mass  are  hopelessly 
lost,  and  only  when  they  have  been  swept  away  will  a  holy 
seed,  saved  by  the  covenant-keeping  God,  grow  up  into  a  new 
and  holy  Israel,  which,  according  to  ch.  xxvii.  6,  will  fill  the 
earth  with  its  fruits,  or,  as  the  apostle  expresses  it  in  Rom. 
xi.  12,  become  "  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles." 

Now,  if  the  impression  which  we  have  received  from  ch.  vi. 
is  not  a  false  one, — namely,  that  the  prophet  is  here  relating 
his  first  call  to  the  prophetic  office,  and  not,,  as  Seb.  Schmidt 
observes,  his  call  to  one  particular  duty  (ad  unum  specialeni 
actum  officii), — this  impression  may  be  easily  verified,  inasmuch 
as  the  addresses  in  ch.  i.-v.  will  be  sure  to  contain  the  elements 
which  are  here  handed  to  the  prophet  by  revelation,  and  the 
result  of  these  addresses  will  correspond  to  the  sentence  judi 
cially  pronounced  here.  And  the  conclusion  to  which  we  have 
come  will  stand  this  test.  For  the  prophet,  in  the  very  first 
address,  after  pointing  out  to  the  nation  as  a  whole  the  gracious 


204  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

pathway  of  justification  and  sanctification,  takes  tlie  turn  indi 
cated  in  ch.  vi.  11-13,  in  full  consciousness  that  all  is  in  vain. 
And  the  theme  of  the  second  address  is,  that  it  will  be  only 
after  the  overthrow  of  the  false  glory  of  Israel  that  the  true 
glory  promised  can  possibly  be  realized,  and  that  after  the 
destruction  of  the  great  body  of  the  people  only  a  small  remnant 
will  live  to  see  this  realization.  The  parable  with  which  the 
third  begins,  rests  upon  the  supposition  that  the  measure  of  the 
nation's  iniquity  is  full ;  and  the  threatening  of  judgment 
introduced  by  this  parable  agrees  substantially,  and  in  part 
verbally,  with  the  divine  answer  received  by  the  prophet  to  his 
question  "  How  long?"  On  every  side,  therefore,  the  opinion  is 
confirmed,  that  in  ch.  vi.  Isaiah  describes  his  own  consecration 
to  the  prophetic  office.  The  addresses  in  ch.  ii.-iv.  and  v.,  which 
belong  to  the  times  of  Uzziah  and  Jotham,  do  not  fall  earlier 
than  the  year  of  Uzziah's  death,  from  which  point  the  whole 
of  Jotham' s  sixteen  years'  reign  lay  open  before  them.  Now, 
as  Micah  commenced  his  ministry  in  Jotham's  reign,  though 
his  book  was  written  in  the  form  of  a  complete  and  chronologi 
cally  indivisible  summary,  by  the  working  up  of  the  prophecies 
which  he  delivered  under  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah,  and 
was  then  read  or  published  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  as  we  may 
infer  from  Jer.  xxvi.  18,  it  is  quite  possible  that  Isaiah  may 
have  taken  from  Micah's  own  lips  (though  not  from  Micah's 
book)  the  words  of  promise  in  ch.  ii.  1-4,  which  he  certainly 
borrowed  from  some  quarter.  The  notion  that  this  word  of 
promise  originated  with  a  third  prophet  (who  must  have  been 
Joel,  if  he  were  one  of  the  prophets  known  to  us),  is  rendered 
very  improbable  by  the  many  marks  of  Micah's  prophetic 
peculiarities,  and  by  its  natural  position  in  the  context  in  which 
it  there  occurs  (vid.  Caspari,  Micha,  pp.  444-5). 

Again,  the  situation  of  ch.  vi.  is  not  inexplicable.  As 
Hiivernick  has  observed,  the  prophet  evidently  intended  to 
vindicate  in  ch.  vi.  the  style  and  method  of  his  previous  pro 
phecies,  on  the  ground  of  the  divine  commission  that  he  had 
received.  But  this  only  serves  to  explain  the  reason  why  Isaiah 
has  not  placed  ch.  vi.  at  the  commencement  of  the  collection, 
and  not  why  he  inserts  it  in  this  particular  place.  He  has 
done  this,  no  doubt,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  close  together 
the  prophecy  and  its  fulfilment ;  for  whilst  on  the  one  hand  the 


CHAP.  VI.  11-13.  205 

judgment  of  hardening  suspended  over  the  Jewish  nation  is 
brought  distinctly  out  in  the  person  of  king  Ahaz,  on  the  other 
hand  we  find  ourselves  in  the  midst  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish 
war,  which  formed  the  introduction  to  the  judgments  of  exter 
mination  predicted  in  ch.  vi.  11-13.  It  is  only  the  position  of 
ch.  i.  which  still  remains  in  obscurity.  If  ch.  i.  7-9  is  to  be 
understood  in  a  historically  literal  sense,  then  ch.  i.  must  have 
been  composed  after  the  dangers  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war 
had  been  averted  from  Jerusalem,  though  the  land  of  Judah 
was  still  bleeding  with  the  open  wounds  which  this  war,  de 
signed  as  it  was  to  destroy  it  altogether,  had  inflicted  upon  it. 
Ch.  i.  would  therefore  be  of  more  recent  origin  than  ch.  ii.— v., 
and  still  more  recent  than  the  connected  ch.  vii.-xii.  It  is  only 
the  comparatively  more  general  and  indefinite  character  of  ch.  i. 
which  seems  at  variance  with  this.  But  this  difficulty  is  re 
moved  at  once,  if  we  assume  that  ch,  i.,  though  not  indeed  the 
first  of  the  prophet's  addresses,  was  yet  in  one  sense  the  first, 
— namely,  the  first  that  was  committed  to  writing,  though  not 
the  first  that  he  delivered,  and  that  it  was  primarily  intended 
to  form  the  preface  to  the  addresses  and  historical  accounts  in 
ch.  ii.-xiL,  the  contents  of  which  were  regulated  by  it.  For 
ch.  ii.-v.  and  vii.-xii.  form  two  prophetic  cycles,  ch.  i.  being 
the  portal  which  leads  into  them,  and  ch.  vi.  the  band  which 
connects  them  together.  The  prophetic  cycle  in  ch.  ii.-v.  may 
be  called  the  Book  of  hardening,  as  it  is  by  Caspari,  and  ch. 
vii.-xii.  the  Book  of  Immanuel,  as  Chr.  Aug.  Crusius  suggests, 
because  in  all  the  stages  through  which  the  proclamation  in 
ch.  vii.-xii.  passes,  the  coming  Imrnanuel  is  the  banner  of 
consolation,  which  it  lifts  up  even  in  the  midst  of  the  judgments 
already  breaking  upon  the  people,  in  accordance  with  the  doom 
pronounced  upon  them  in  ch.  vi. 


206  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


PART    II. 

CONSOLATION  OF  IMMANUEL  IN  THE  MIDST  OF  THE 
ASSYRIAN  OPPRESSIONS.— CHAP.  VH.-XII. 

DIVIDE  SIGN  OF  THE  VIRGIN'S  WONDROUS  SON. — CHAP.  VII. 

As  the  following  prophecies  could  not  be  understood  apart  from 
the  historical  circumstances  to  which  they  refer,  the  prophet 
commences  with  a  historical  announcement.  Ver.  1.  "It  came 
to  pass,  in  the  days  of  Ahaz  the  son  of  Jotham,  the  son  of 
Uzziah  (Uziydhu),  king  of  Judah,  that  Rezin  the  king  of 
Aramcea,  and  Pekah  (Pekach)  the  son  of  Remaliah  (Remalydhu), 
king  of  Israel,  went  up  toward  Jerusalem  to  war  against  it,  and 
(he)  could  not  make  war  upon  it"  We  have  the  same  words, 
with  only  slight  variations,  in  the  history  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz 
in  2  Kings  xvi.  5.  That  the  author  of  the  hook  of  Kings 
copied  them  from  the  book  of  Isaiah,  will  be  very  apparent 
when  we  come  to  examine  the  historical  chapters  (xxxvi.-xxxix.) 
in  their  relation  to  the  parallel  sections  of  the  book  of  Kings. 
In  the  passage  before  us,  the  want  of  independence  on  the  part 
of  the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that 
he  not  only  repeats,  but  also  interprets,  the  words  of  Isaiah. 
Instead  of  saying,  "  And  (he)  could  not  make  war  upon  it,"  he 
says,  "  And  they  besieged  Ahaz,  and  could  not  make  war."  The 
singular  ydcol  (he  could)  of  Isaiah  is  changed  into  the  simpler 
plural,  whilst  the  statement  that  the  two  allies  could  not  assault 
or  storm  Jerusalem  (which  must  be  the  meaning  of  nilcham 
'al  in  the  passage  before  us),  is  more  clearly  defined  by  the 
additional  information  that  they  did  besiege  Ahaz,  but  to  no 
purpose  (tzur  W,  the  usual  expression  for  obsidione  claudere  ; 
cf.  Deut.  xx.  19).  The  statement  that  "  they  besieged  Ahaz  " 
cannot  merely  signify  that  "  they  attempted  to  besiege  him," 
although  nothing  further  is  known  about  this  siege.  But 
happily  we  have  two  accounts  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war 
(2  Kings  xvi.  and  2  Chron.  xxviii.).  The  two  historical  bonks 
complete  one  another.  The  book  of  Kings  relates  that  the 


CHAP.  VII.  2.  207 

invasion  of  Judah  by  the  two  allies  commenced  at  the  end  of 
Jotham's  reign  (2  Kings  xv.  37)  ;  and  in  addition  to  the  state 
ment  taken  from  Isa.  vii.  1,  it  also  mentions  that  Rezin  con 
quered  the  seaport  town  of  Elath,  which  then  belonged  to  the 
kingdom  of  Judah ;  whilst  the  Chronicles  notice  the  fact  that 
Rezin  brought  a  number  of  Judsean  captives  to  Damascus,  and 
that  Pekah  conquered  Ahaz  in  a  bloody  and  destructive  battle. 
Indisputable  as  the  credibility  of  these  events  may  be,  it  is 
nevertheless  very  difficult  to  connect  them  together,  either  sub 
stantially  or  chronologically,  in  a  certain  and  reliable  manner, 
as  Caspar!  has  attempted  to  do  in  his  monograph  on  the  Syro- 
Ephraimitish  war  (1849).  We  may  refer  here  to  our  own 
manner  of  dovetailing  the  historical  accounts  of  Ahaz  and  the 
Syro-Ephraimitish  war  in  the  introduction  to  the  present  work 
(p.  41  sqq.).  If  we  could  assume  that  »j  (not  fej)  was  the 
authentic  reading,  and  that  the  failure  of  the  attempt  to  take 
Jerusalem,  which  is  mentioned  here,  was  occasioned  by  the 
strength  of  the  city  itself,  and  not  by  the  intervention  of  Assyria, 
— so  that  ver.  16  did  not  contain  such  an  anticipation  as  we 
have  supposed  (p.  43),  although  summary  anticipations  of  this 
kind  were  customary  with  biblical  historians,  and  more  especially 
with  Isaiah, — the  course  of  events  might  be  arranged  in  the 
following  manner,  viz.,  that  whilst  Rezin  wras  on  his  way  to 
Elath,  Pekah  resolved  to  attack  Jerusalem,  but  failed  in  his 
attempt ;  but  that  Rezin  was  more  successful  in  his  expedition, 
which  was  a  much  easier  one,  and  after  the  conquest  of  Elath 
united  his  forces  with  those  of  his  allies. 

It  is  this  which  is  referred  to  in  ver.  2  :  "  And  it  was  told 
the  house  of  David,  Aram  has  settled  down  upon  Ephraim :  then 
his  heart  shook,  and  the  heart  of  his  people,  as  trees  of  the  wood 
shake  before  the  wind."  The  expression  nuach  *al  (settled  down 
upon)  is  explained  in  2  Sam.  xvii.  12  (cf.  Judg.  vii.  12)  by  the 
figurative  simile,  "as  the  dew  falleth  upon  the  ground:"  there 
it  denotes  a  hostile  invasion,  here  the  arrival  of  one  army  to  the 
support  of  another.  Ephraim  (feminine,  like  the  names  of 
countries,  and  of  the  people  that  are  regarded  as  included  in 
their  respective  countries  :  see,  on  the  other  hand,  ch.  iii.  8)  is 
used  as  the  name  of  the  leading  tribe  of  Israel,  to  signify  the 
whole  kingdom  ;  here  it  denotes  the  whole  military  force  of 
Israel.  Following  the  combination  mentioned  above,  we  find 


208  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

that  the  allies  now  prepared  for  a  second  united  expedition 
against  Jerusalem.  In  the  meantime,  Jerusalem  was  in  the 
condition  described  in  ch.  i.  7-9,  viz.  like  a  besieged  city,  in 
the  midst  of  enemies  plundering  and  burning  on  every  side. 
Elath  had  fallen,  as  Rezin's  timely  return  clearly  showed ;  and 
in  the  prospect  of  his  approaching  junction  with  the  allied  army, 
it  was  quite  natural,  from  a  human  point  of  view,  that  the  court 
and  people  of  Jerusalem  should  tremble  like  aspen  leaves.  $W 
is  a  contracted  fut.  kal,  ending  with  an  a  sound  on  account  of 
the  guttural,  as  in  Ruth  iv.  1  (Ges.  §  72,  Anm.  4) ;  and  Jfo, 
which  is  generally  the  form  of  the  infin.  abs.  (ch.  xxiv.  20),  is 
here,  and  only  here,  the  infin.  constr.  instead  of  %to  (cf.  noach, 
Num.  xi.  25  ;  shob,  Josh.  ii.  16  ;  mot,  Ps.  xxxviii.  17,  etc. :  vid. 
Ewald,  §  238,  I). 

In  this  season  of  terror  Isaiah  received  the  following  divine 
instructions.  Ver.  3.  "  Then  said  Jehovah  to  Isaiah,  Go  forth 
now  to  meet  AhaZj  tlwu  and  Shear-jashub  thy  son,  to  the  end  of 
the  aqueduct  of  the  upper  pool,  to  the  road  of  the  fuller  s  field ." 
The  fuller's  field  (sedeh  cobes)  was  situated,  as  we  may  assume 
with  Robinson,  Schultz,  and  Thenius,  against  Williams,  Krafft, 
etc.,  on  the  western  side  of  the  city,  where  there  is  still  an  "upper 
pool"  of  great  antiquity  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  30).  Near  to  this  pool 
the  fullers,  i.e.  the  cleaners  and  thickeners  of  woollen  fabrics, 
carried  on  their  occupation  (cobes,  from  cabas,  related  to  cdbash, 
subigere,  which  bears  the  same  relation  to  rdchatz  as  ifKvvew  to 
\oveiv).  Robinson  and  his  companions  saw  some  people  wash 
ing  clothes  at  the  upper  pool  when  they  were  there ;  and,  for  a 
considerable  distance  round,  the  surface  of  this  favourite  wash 
ing  and  bleaching  place  was  covered  with  things  spread  out  to 
bleach  or  dry.  The  road  (mesilldh),  which  ran  past  this  fuller's 
field,  was  the  one  which  leads  from  the  western  gate  to  Joppa. 
King  Ahaz  was  there,  on  the  west  of  the  city,  and  outside  the 
fortifications, — engaged,  no  doubt,  in  making  provision  for  the 
probable  event  of  Jerusalem  being  again  besieged  in  a  still  more 
threatening  manner.  Jerusalem  received  its  water  supply  from 
the  upper  Gihon  pool,  and  there,  according  to  Jehovah's  direc 
tions,  Isaiah  was  to  go  with  his  son  and  meet  him.  The  two 
together  were,  as  it  were,  a  personified  blessing  and  curse, 
presenting  themselves  to  the  king  for  him  to  make  his  own 
selection.  For  the  name  Shear- ydshub  (which  is  erroneously 


CHAP.  vir.  4.  209 

accentuated  with  tiphchah  munach  instead  of  merchah  tiphchah, 
as  in  ch.  x.  22),  i.e.  the  remnant  is  converted  (ch.  x.  21,  22), 
was  a  kind  of  abbreviation  of  the  divine  answer  given  to  the 
prophet  in  ch.  vi.  11-13,  and  was  indeed  at  once  threatening 
and  promising,  but  in  such  a  way  that  the  curse  stood  in  front 
and  the  grace  behind.  The  prophetic  name  of  Isaiah's  son  was 
intended  to  drive  the  king  to  Jehovah  by  force,  through  the 
threatening  aspect  it  presented ;  and  the  prophetic  announce 
ment  of  Isaiah  himself,  whose  name  pointed  to  salvation,  was 
to  allure  him  to  Jehovah  with  its  promising  tone. 

No  means  were  left  untried.  Ver.  4.  "  And  say  unto  him, 
Take  heed,  and  keep  quiet ;  and  let  not  thy  heart  become  soft  from 
these  two  smoking  firebrand-stumps :  at  the  fierce  anger  of  Eezin, 
and  Aram,  and  the  son  of  Remaliah"  The  imperative  ")p$n 
(not  pointed  "1P^1?,  as  is  the  case  when  it  is  to  be  connected 
more  closely  with  what  follows,  and  taken  in  the  sense  of  cave 
ne,  or  even  cave  ut)  warned  the  king  against  acting  for  himself, 
in  estrangement  from  God;  and  the  imperative  hashket  exhorted 
him  to  courageous  calmness,  secured  by  confidence  in  God ;  or, 
as  Calvin  expresses  it,  exhorted  him  "  to  restrain  himself  out 
wardly,  and  keep  his  mind  calm  within."  The  explanation 
given  by  Jewish  expositors  to  the  word  hisshamer,  viz.  conside 
super  fceces  tuas  (Ltizzatto  :  mm  riposato),  according  to  Jer. 
xlviii.  11,  Zeph.  i.  12,  yields  a  sense  which  hardly  suits  the 
exhortation.  The  object  of  terror,  at  which  and  before  which 
the  king's  heart  was  not  to  despair,  is  introduced  first  of  all  with 
Min  and  then  with  Beth,  as  in  Jer.  li.  46.  The  two  allies  are 
designated  at  once  as  what  they  were  in  the  sight  of  God,  who 
sees  through  the  true  nature  and  future  condition.  They  were 
two  tails,  i.e.  nothing  but  the  fag-ends,  of  wooden  pokers  (lit. 
stirrers,  i.e.  fire-stirrers),  which  would  not  blaze  any  more,  but 
only  continue  smoking.  They  would  burn  and  light  no  more, 
though  their  smoke  might  make  the  eyes  smart  still.  Along 
with  Rezin,  and  to  avoid  honouring  himi  with  the  title  of  king, 
Aram  (Syria)  is  especially  mentioned;  whilst  Pekah  is  called 
Ben-Remaliah,  to  recal  to  mind  his  low  birth,  and  the  absence 
of  any  promise  in  the  case  of  his  house. 

The  yd  an  'asher  ("  because")  which  follows  (as  in  Ezek. 
xii.  12)  does  not  belong  to  ver.  4  (as  might  appear  from  the 
sethume  that  comes  afterwards),  in  the  sewse  of  "  do  not  be 

VOL.    I.  O 


210  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

afraid  because,"  etc.,  but  is  to  be  understood  as  introducing 
the  reason  for  the  judicial  sentence  in  ver.  7. — Vers.  5-7. 
"  Because  Aram  hath  determined  evil  over  thee,  Ephraim 
and  the  son  of  Remaliah  (Itemalyahu)^  saying.  We  will  march 
against  Judah,  and  terrify  it,  and  conquer  it  for  ourselves,  and 
make  the  son  of  TdUel  king  in  the  midst  of  it:  thus  saith  the  .Lord 
Jehovah,  It  will  not  be  brought  about,  and  will  not  take  place." 
The  inference  drawn  by  Caspari  (Krieg,  p.  98),  that  at  the 
time  when  Isaiah  said  this,  Judaea  was  not  yet  beaten  or  con 
quered,  is  at  any  rate  not  conclusive.  The  promise  given  to 
Ahaz  was  founded  upon  the  wicked  design,  with  which  the  war 
had  been  commenced.  How  far  the  allies  had  already  gone 
towards  this  last  goal,  the  overthrow  of  the  Davidic  sovereignty, 
it  does  not  say.  But  we  know  from  2  Kings  xv.  37  that  the 
invasion  had  begun  before  Ahaz  ascended  the  throne ;  and  we 
may  see  from  ver.  16  of  Isaiah's  prophecy,  that  the  "terrify 
ing"  (nekltzennah,  from  kutz,  tcedere,  pavere)  had  actually  taken 
place ;  so  that  the  "  conquering"  (hibkia,  i.e.  splitting,  forcing 
of  the  passes  and  fortifications,  2  Kings  xxv.  4,  Ezek.  xxx. 
16,  2  Chron  xxi.  17,  xxxii.  1)  must  also  have  been  a  thing 
belonging  to  the  past.  For  history  says  nothing  about  a 
successful  resistance  on  the  part  of  Judah  in  this  war.  Only 
Jerusalem  had  not  yet  fallen,  and,  as  the  expression  "king  in 
the  midst  of  it"  shows,  it  is  to  this  that  the  term  "Judah" 
especially  refers  ;  just  as  in  ch.  xxiii.  13  Asshur  is  to  be  under 
stood  as  signifying  Nineveh.  There  they  determined  to  en 
throne  a  man  named  Tdtfel  (vid.  Ezra  iv.  7 ;  it  is  written 
Tdtial  here  in  pause,  although  this  change  does  riot  occur  in 
other  words  (e.g.  Israel)  in  pause — a  name  resembling  the 
Syrian  name  Tab-rimmon)^  a  man  who  is  otherwise  unknown ; 
but  it  never  went  beyond  the  determination,  never  was  even 
on  the  way  towards  being  realized,  to  say  nothing  of  being 
fully  accomplished.  The  allies  would  not  succeed  in  altering 
the  course  of  history  as  it  had  been  appointed  by  the  Lord. — 
Vers.  8,  9.  "For  head  of  Aram  is  Damascus,  and  head  of 

1  The  Hauran  inscriptions  contain  several  such  composite  names 
formed  like  TaVel  with  el :  see  Wetzstein,  Ausgewtihlte  griechisct>e  unA 
latcinische  Inschriften,  pp.  343-4,  361-363).  By  the  transformation  into 
Tab'al,  as  Limatto  says,  the  name  is  changed  from  Bonus  De*<  to  Bonus 


CHAP.  VII.  8,  9.  211 

Damascus  Rezin,  and  in  five-and-sixty  years  will  Ephraim  as  a 
people  be  broken  in  pieces.  And  head  of  Ephraim  is  Samaria, 
and  head  of  Samaria  the  son  of  Eemalyahu;  if  ye  believe  not, 
surely  ye  will  not  remain"  The  attempt  to  remove  ver.  86,  as 
a  gloss  at  variance  with  the  context,  which  is  supported  by 
Eichhorn,  Gesenius,  Hitzig,  Knobel,  and  others,  is  a  very 
natural  one ;  and  in  that  case  the  train  of  thought  would 
simply  be,  that  the  two  hostile  kingdoms  would  continue  in 
their  former  relation  without  the  annexation  of  Judah.  But 
when  we  look  more  closely,  it  is  evident  that  the  removal  of 
ver.  Sb  destroys  both  the  internal  connection  and  the  external 
harmony  of  the  clauses.  For  just  as  Sa  and  Sb  correspond,  so 
do  9a  and  96.  Ephraim,  i.e.  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes, 
which  has  entered  into  so  unnatural  and  ungodly  a  covenant 
with  idolatrous  Syria,  will  cease  to  exist  as  a  nation  in  the 
course  of  sixty-five  years ;  "  and  ye,  if  ye  do  not  believe,  but 
make  flesh  your  arm,  will  also  cease  to  exist."  Thus  the  two 
clauses  answer  to  one  another :  86  is  a  prophecy  announcing 
Ephraim's  destruction,  and  96  a  warning,  threatening  Judah 
with  destruction,  if  it  rejects  the  promise  with  unbelief.  More 
over,  the  style  of  86  is  quite  in  accordance  with  that  of  Isaiah 
(on  ^W2?  see  ch.  xxi.  16  and  xvi.  14 ;  and  on  Q^p,  "  away  from 
being  a  people,"  in  the  sense  of  "  so  that  it  shall  be  no  longer  a 
nation,"  ch.  xvii.  1,  xxv.  2,  and  Jer.  xlviii.  2,  42).  And  the 
doctrinal  objection,  that  the  prophecy  is  too  minute,  and  there 
fore  taken  ex  eventu,  has  no  force  whatever,  since  the  Old 
Testament  prophecy  furnishes  an  abundance  of  examples  of 
the  same  kind  (vid.  ch.  xx.  3,  4,  xxxviii.  5,  xvi.  14,  xxi.  16; 
Ezek.  iv.  5  sqq.,  xxiv.  1  sqq.,  etc.).  The  only  objection  that 
can  well  be  raised  is,  that  the  time  given  in  ver.  86  is  wrong, 
and  is  not  in  harmony  with  ver.  16.  Now,  undoubtedly  the 
sixty-five  years  do  not  come  out  if  we  suppose  the  prophecy 
to  refer  to  what  was  done  by  Tiglath-pileser  after  the  Syro- 
Ephraimitish  war,  and  to  what  was  also  done  to  Ephraim  by 
Shalmanassar  in  the  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  to  which 
ver.  16  unquestionably  refers,  and  more  especially  to  the  former. 
But  there  is  another  event  still,  through  which  the  existence 
of  Ephraim,  not  only  as  a  kingdom,  but  also  as  a  people,  was 
broken  up, — namely,  the  carrying  away  of  the  last  remnant  of 
the  Ephraimitish  population,  and  the  planting  of  colonies  from 


212  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Eastern  Asia  by  Esarhaclclon1  on  Epliraimitish  soil  (2  Kings 
xvii.  24 ;  Ezra  iv.  2).  Whereas  the  land  of  Judah  was  left 
desolate  after  the  Chaldean  deportation,  and  a  new  generation 
grew  up  there,  and  those  who  were  in  captivity  were  once 
more  enabled  to  return;  the  land  of  Ephraim  was  occupied 
by  heathen  settlers,  and  the  few  who  were  left  behind  were 
melted  up  with  these  into  the  mixed  people  of  the  Samaritans, 
and  those  in  captivity  were  lost  among  the  heathen.  We  have 
only  to  assume  that  what  was  done  to  Ephraim  by  Esarhaddon, 
as  related  in  the  historical  books,  took  place  in  the  twenty- 
second  and  twenty-third  years  of  Manasseh  (the  sixth  year  of 
Esarhaddon),  which  is  very  probable,  since  it  must  have  been 
under  Esarhaddon  that  Manasseh  was  carried  away  to  Babylon 
about  the  middle  of  his  reign  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11) ;  and  we  get 
exactly  sixty-five  years  from  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of 
Ahaz  to  the  termination  of  Ephraim's  existence  as  a  nation 
(viz.  Ahaz,  14;  Hezekiah,  29;  Manasseh,  22;  in  all,  65).  It 
was  then  that  the  unconditional  prediction,  "Ephraim  as  a 
people  will  be  broken  in  pieces,"  was  fulfilled  (yechath  me  dm; 
this  is  certainly  not  the  3d  pers.  fut.  kal,  but  the  niplial, 
Mai.  ii.  5),  just  as  the  conditional  threat  "ye  shall  not  remain" 
was  fulfilled  upon  Judah  in  the  Babylonian  captivity.  JDW 
signifies  to  have  a  fast  hold,  and  P?Njl  to  prove  fast-holding. 
If  Judah  did  not  holdfast  to  its  God,  it  would  lose  its  fast  hold 
by  losing  its  country,  the  ground  beneath  its  feet.  We  have 
the  same  play  upon  words  in  2  Chron.  xx.  20.  The  suggestion 
of  Geiger  is  a  very  improbable  one,  viz.  that  the  original  reading 
was  ^  Ij^tfn  X?  DX5  but  that  'Q  appeared  objectionable,  and  was 
altered  into  *3.  Why  should  it  be  objectionable,  when  the  words 
form  the  conclusion  to  a  direct  address  of  Jehovah  Himself, 
which  is  introduced  with  all  solemnity?  For  this  ^3,  passing 
over  from  a  confirmative  into  an  affirmative  sense,  and  em 
ployed,  as  it  is  here,  to  introduce  the  apodosis  of  the  hypothetical 
clause,  see  1  Sam.  xiv.  39,  and  (in  the  formula  nny  '•a)  Gen. 
xxxi.  42,  xliii.  10,  Num.  xxii.  29,  33,  1  Sam.  xiv.  30 :  their 
continued  existence  would  depend  upon  their  faith,  as  this  chi 
emphatically  declares. 

Thus  spake  Isaiah,  and  Jehovah  through  him,  to  the  king 

1  The  meaning  of  this  king's  name  is  Assur  fratrem  dedit  (Asur -ach* 
yidttin) :  vid.  Oppert,  Expedition,  t.  ii.  p.  354. 


CHAP.  VII.  10,  11.  213 

of  Judah.  Whether  he  replied,  or  what  reply  he  made,  we  are 
not  informed.  He  was  probably  silent,  because  he  carried  a 
secret  in  his  heart  which  afforded  him  more  consolation  than 
the  words  of  the  prophet.  The  invisible  help  of  Jehovah,  and 
the  remote  prospect  of  the  fall  of  Ephraim,  were  not  enough 
for  him.  His  trust  was  in  Asshur,  with  whose  help  he 
would  have  a  far  greater  superiority  over  the  kingdom  of 
Israel,  than  Israel  had  over  the  kingdom  of  Judah  through 
the  help  of  Damascene  Syria.  The  pious,  theocratic  policy 
of  the  prophet  did  not  come  in  time.  He  therefore  let 
the  enthusiast  talk  on,  and  had  his  own  thoughts  about  the 
matter.  Nevertheless  the  grace  of  God  did  not  give  up  the 
unhappy  son  of  David  for  lost.  Vers.  10,  11.  "  And  Jehovah 
continued  speaking  to  Ahaz  as  follows  :  Ask  thee  a  sign  of 
Jehovah  thy  God,  going  deep  down  into  Hades,  or  high  up  to 
the  height  above."  Jehovah  continued:  what  a  deep  and  firm 
consciousness  of  the  identity  of  the  word  of  Jehovah  and  the 
word  of  the  prophet  is  expressed  in  these  words  !  Accord 
ing  to  a  very  marvellous  interchange  of  idioms  (communicatio 
idiomatwn)  which  runs  through  the  prophetic  books  of  the 
Old  Testament,  at  one  time  the  prophet  speaks  as  if  he  were 
Jehovah,  and  at  another,  as  in  the  case  before  us,  Jehovah 
speaks  as  if  He  were  the  prophet.  Ahaz  was  to  ask  for  a  sign 
from  Jehovah  his  God.  Jehovah  did  not  scorn  to  call  Himself 
the  God  of  this  son  of  David,  who  had  so  hardened  his  heart. 
Possibly  the  holy  love  with  which  the  expression  "  thy  God" 
burned,  might  kindle  a  flame  in  his  dark  heart ;  or  possibly  he 
might  think  of  the  covenant  promises  and  covenant  duties 
which  the  words  "  thy  God  "  recalled  to  his  mind.  From  this, 
his  God,  he  was  to  ask  for  a  sign.  A  sign  ('oth,  from  'uth,  to 
make  an  incision  or  dent)  was  something,  some  occurrence, 
or  some  action,  which  served  as  a  pledge  of  the  divine  certainty 
of  something  else.  This  was  secured  sometimes  by  visible 
miracles  performed  at  once  (Ex.  iv.  8,  9),  or  by  appointed 
symbols  of  future  events  (ch.  viii.  18,  xx.  3)  ;  sometimes  by 
predicted  occurrences,  which,  whether  miraculous  or  natural, 
could  not  possibly  be  foreseen  by  human  capacities,  and  there 
fore,  if  they  actually  took  place,  were  a  proof  either  retrospec 
tively  of  the  divine  causality  of  other  events  (Ex.  iii.  12),  or 
prospectively  of  their  divine  certainty  (ch.  xxxvii.  30  ;  Jer. 


214  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

xliv.  29,  30).  The  thing  to  be  confirmed  on  the  present 
occasion  was  what  the  prophet  had  just  predicted  in  so  definite 
a  manner,  viz.  the  maintenance  of  Judah  with  its  monarchy, 
and  the  failure  of  the  wicked  enterprise  of  the  two  allied  king 
doms.  If  this  was  to  be  attested  to  Ahaz  in  such  a  way  as  to 
demolish  his  unbelief,  it  could  only  be  effected  by  a  miraculous 
sign.  And  just  as  Hezekiah  asked  for  a  sign  when  Isaiah 
foretold  his  recovery,  and  promised  him  the  prolongation  of  his 
life  for  fifteen  years,  and  the  prophet  gave  him  the  sign  he 
asked,  by  causing  the  shadow  upon  the  royal  sun-dial  to  go 
backwards  instead  of  forwards  (ch.  xxxviii.)  ;  so  here  Isaiah 
meets  Ahaz  with  the  offer  of  such  a  supernatural  sign,  and 
offers  him  the  choice  of  heaven,  earth,  and  Hades  as  the 
scene  of  the  miracle.  Ppj>n  and  najn  are  either  in  the  infinitive 
absolute  or  in  the  imperative;  and  TOW?  is  either  the  imperative 
7B&  with  the  lie  of  challenge,  which  is  written  in  this  form  in 
half  pause  instead  of  n/gjP  (for  the  two  similar  forms  with 
pashtah  and  zakepli,  vid.  Dan.  ix.  19),  "  Only  ask,  going  deep 
down,  or  ascending  to  the  height,"  without  there  being  any 
reason  for  reading  *\?KW  with  the  tone  upon  the  last  syllable,  as 
Hupfeld  proposes,  in  the  sense  of  profundam  fac  (or  faciendo) 
precationem  (i.e.  go  deep  down  with  thy  petition)  ;  or  else  it  is 
the  pausal  subordinate  form  for  i"1/^,  which  is  quite  allowable 
in  itself  (cf.  yechpdtej  the  constant  form  in  pause  for  yaclipotz, 
and  other  examples,  Gen.  xliii.  14,  xlix.  3,  27),  and  is  ap 
parently  preferred  here  on  account  of  its  consonance  with 
n)jn£  (Ewald,  §  93,  3).  We  follow  the  Targum,  with  the 
Sept.,  Syr.,  and  Vulgate,  in  giving  the  preference  to  the  latter 
of  the  two  possibilities.  It  answers  to  the  antithesis;  and  if  we 
had  the  words  before  us  without  points,  this  would  be  the  first 
to  suggest  itself.  Accordingly  the  words  would  read,  Go  deep 
down  (in  thy  desire)  to  Hades,  or  go  high  up  to  the  height ; 
or  more  probably,  taking  pDjjn  and  man  in  the  sense  of  gerun 
dives,  "  Going  deep  down  to  Hades,  or  (itf  from  njs,  like  vel 
from  velle  =  si  velis,  mails)  going  high  up  to  the  height."  This 
offer  of  the  prophet  to  perform  any  kind  of  miracle,  either  in 
the  world  above  or  in  the  lower  world,  has  thrown  rationalistic 
commentators  into  very  great  perplexity.  The  prophet,  says 
Hitzig,  was  playing  a  very  dangerous  game  here;  and  if  Ahaz  had 
closed  with  his  offer,  Jehovah  would  probably  have  left  him  in 


CHAP.  VII.  12,  13.  215 

the  lurch.  And  Meier  observes,  that  "  it  can  never  have  entered 
the  mind  of  an  Isaiah  to  perform  an  actual  miracle  :"  probably 
because  no  miracles  were  ever  performed  by  Gothe,  to  whose 
high  poetic  consecration  Meier  compares  the  consecration  of  the 
prophet  as  described  in  ch.  vi.  Knobel  answers  the  question, 
"  What  kind  of  sign  from  heaven  would  Isaiah  have  given  in 
case  it  had  been  asked  for?"  by  saying,  "Probably  a  very  simple 
matter."  But  even  granting  that  an  extraordinary  heavenly 
phenomenon  could  be  a  "  simple  matter,"  it  was  open  to  king 
Ahaz  not  to  be  so  moderate  in  his  demands  upon  the  venture 
some  prophet,  as  Knobel  with  his  magnanimity  might  possibly 
have  been.  Dazzled  by  the  glory  of  the  Old  Testament  pro 
phecy,  a  rationalistic  exegesis  falls  prostrate  upon  the  ground  : 
and  it  is  with  such  frivolous,  coarse,  and  common  words  as  these 
that  it  tries  to  escape  from  its  difficulties.  It  cannot  acknow 
ledge  the  miraculous  power  of  the  prophet,  because  it  believes 
in  no  miracles  at  all.  But  Ahaz  had  no  doubt  about  his  miracu 
lous  power,  though  he  would  not  be  constrained  by  any  miracle 
to  renounce  his  own  plans  and  believe  in  Jehovah.  Ver.  12. 
"  But  Ahaz  replied,  I  dare  not  ask,  and  dare  not  tempt  Jehovah." 
What  a  pious  sound  this  has !  And  yet  his  self-hardening 
reached  its  culminating  point  in  these  well-sounding  words.  He 
hid  himself  hypocritically  under  the  mask  of  Deut.  vi.  16,  to 
avoid  being  disturbed  in  his  Assyrian  policy,  and  was  infatuated 
enough  to  designate  the  acceptance  of  what  Jehovah  Himself 
had  offered  as  tempting  God.  He  studiously  brought  down 
upon  himself  the  fate  denounced  in  ch.  vi.,  and  indeed  not  upon 
himself  only,  but  upon  all  Judah  as  well.  For  after  a  few  years 
the  forces  of  Asshur  would  stand  upon  the  same  fuller's  field 
(ch.  xxxvi.  2)  and  demand  the  surrender  of  Jerusalem.  In  that 
very  hour,  in  which  Isaiah  was  standing  before  Ahaz,  the  fate 
of  Jerusalem  was  decided  for  more  than  two  thousand  years. 

The  prophet  might  have  ceased  speaking  now ;  but  in 
accordance  with  the  command  in  ch.  vi.  he  was  obliged  to  speak, 
even  though  his  word  should  be  a  savour  of  death  unto  death. 
Ver.  13.  "  And  he  spake,  Hear  ye  now,  0  house  of  David!  Is  it 
too  little  to  you  to  weary  men,  that  ye  weary  my  God  also  ? " 
«  He  spake."  Who  spake  1  According  to  ver.  10  the  speaker 
was  Jehovah  ;  yet  what  follows  is  given  as  the  word  of  the 
prophet.  Here  again  it  is  assumed  that  the  word  of  the  pro- 


216  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

pliet  was  the  word  of  God,  and  that  the  prophet  was  the  organ 
of  God  even  when  he  expressly  distinguished  between  himself 
and  God.  The  words  were  addressed  to  the  "  house  of  David," 
i.e.  to  Ahaz,  including  all  the  members  of  the  royal  family. 
Ahaz  himself  was  not  yet  thirty  years  old.  The  prophet  could 
very  well  have  borne  that  the  members  of  the  house  of  David 
should  thus  frustrate  all  his  own  faithful,  zealous  human  efforts. 
But  they  were  not  content  with  this  (on  the  expression  minus 
quam  vos  =  quam  ut  vobis  sufficiat,  see  Num.  xvi.  9,  Job  xv.  11)  : 
they  also  wearied  out  the  long-suffering  of  his  God,  by  letting 
Him  exhaust  all  His  means  of  correcting;  them  without  effect. 

O 

They  would  not  believe  without  seeing ;  and  when  signs  were 
offered  them  to  see,  in  order  that  they  might  believe,  they  would 
not  even  look.  Jehovah  would  therefore  give  them,  against  their 
will,  a  sign  of  His  own  choosing. — Vers.  14,  15.  u  Therefore 
the  Lord,  He  will  give  you  a  sign :  Behold,  the  virgin  conceives, 
and  bears  a  son,  and  calls  his  name  Immanuel.  Butter  and 
honey  will  he  eat,  at  the  time  that  he  knows  to  refuse  the  evil  and 
choose  the  good"  In  its  form  the  prophecy  reminds  one  of  Gen. 
xvi.  11,  "Behold,  thou  art  with  child,  and  wilt  bear  a  son,  and 
call  his  name  Ishmael."  Here,  however,  the  words  are  not  ad 
dressed  to  the  person  about  to  bear  the  child,  although  Matthew 
gives  this  interpretation  to  the  prophecy;1  for  n^  is  not  the 
second  person,  but  the  third,  and  is  synonymous  with  fl&pij 
(according  to  Ges.  §  74.  Anm.  1),  another  form  which  is  also 
met  with  in  Gen.  xxxiii.  11,  Lev.  xxv.  21,  Deut.  xxxi.  29,  and 
Ps.  cxviii.  23.2  Moreover,  the  condition  of  pregnancy,  which 
is  here  designated  by  the  participial  adjective  n~in  (cf.  2  Sam. 
xi.  5),  was  not  an  already  existing  one  in  this  instance,  but  (as 
in  all  probability  also  in  Judg.  xiii.  5,  cf.  4)  something  future,  as 
well  as  the  act  of  bearing,  since  hinneh  is  always  used  by  Isaiah 
to  introduce  a  future  occurrence.  This  use  of  hinneh  in  Isaiah 
is  a  sufficient  answer  to  (jesenius,  Knobel,  and  others,  who 
understand  haalmdh  as  referring  to  the  young  wife  of  the  pro 
phet  himself,  who  was  at  that  very  time  with  child.  But  it  is 

1  Jerome  discusses  this  diversity  iu  a  very  impartial   and  intelligent 
manner,  in  his  ep.  ad  Pammaclrium  de  optima  genere  interpretandi. 

2  The  pointing  makes  a  distinction  between  fl&Op  (she  calls)  and  nxi[5, 

as  Gen.  xvi.  11  should  be  pointed  (thou  callest)  ;  and  Olthausen  (§  35,  b) 
is  wrong  in  pronouncing  the  latter  a  mistake. 


CHAP.  VII.  14,  15.  217 

altogether  improbable  that  the  wife  of  the  prophet  himself 
should  be  intended.  For  if  it  were  to  her  that  he  referred,  lie 
could  hardly  have  expressed  himself  in  a  more  ambiguous  and 
unintelligible  manner ;  and  we  cannot  see  why  he  should  not 
much  rather  have  said  W'tf  or  n«s33n?  to  say  nothing  of  the  fact 
that  there  is  no  further  allusion  made  to  any  son  of  the  prophet 
of  that  name,  and  that  a  sign  of  this  kind  founded  upon  the 
prophet's  own  family  affairs  would  have  been  one  of  a  very  pre 
carious  nature.  And  the  meaning  and  use  of  the  word  'almdh 
are  also  at  variance  with  this.  For  whilst  bethuldh  (from  bdtJial, 
related  to  bddal,  to  separate,  sejimgere)  signifies  a  maiden  living 
in  seclusion  in  her  parents'  house  and  still  a  long  way  from 
matrimony,  ralmdh  (from  'dlam,  related  to  cJidlam,  and  possibly 
also  to  Dpijj  to  be  strong,  full  of  vigour,  or  arrived  at  the  age  of 
puberty)  is  applied  to  one  fully  mature,  and  approaching  the 
time  of  her  marriage.1  The  two  terms  could  both  be  applied 
to  persons  who  were  betrothed,  and  even  to  such  as  were  mar 
ried  (Joel  ii.  16  ;  Prov.  xxx.  19  :  see  Hitzig  on  these  passages). 
It  is  also  admitted  that  the  idea  of  spotless  virginity  was  not 
necessarily  connected  with  'almdh  (as  in  Gen.  xxiv.  43,  cf.  1C), 
since  there  are  passages — such,  for  example,  as  Song  of  Sol.  vi.  8 
— where  it  can  hardly  be  distinguished  from  the  Arabic  swrije  ; 
and  a  person  who  had  a  very  young-looking  wife  might  be  said 
to  have  an  *  almdh  for  his  wife.  But  it  is  inconceivable  that  in 
a  well-considered  style,  and  one  of  religious  earnestness,  a  woman 
who  had  been  long  married,  like  the  prophet's  own  wife,  could 
be  called  ha  almdh  without  any  reserve.2  On  the  other  hand, 
the  expression  itself  warrants  the  assumption  that  by  Iiaalmdh 
the  prophet  meant  one  of  the  'aldmoth  of  the  king's  harem 
(Luzzatto)  ;  and  if  we  consider  that  the  birth  of  the  child  was 
to  take  place,  as  the  prophet  foresaw,  in  the  immediate  future, 
his  thoughts  might  very  well  have  been  fixed  upon  Abijah  (All) 

1  On  the  development  of  the  meanings  of  'alam  and  clialam,  see  Ges. 
Tlies.,  and  my  Psychol.  p.  282  (see  also  the  commentary  on  Job  xxxix.  4). 
According  to  Jerome,  alma  was  Punic  also.     In  Arabic  and  Aramaean  the 
diminutive  form  guleime,  'alleimtah,  was  the  favourite  one,  but  in  Syriac 
'alimto  (the  ripened). 

2  A  young  and  newly- married  wife  might  be  called  callah  (as  in  Homer 
tdftQn  =  nubilis  and  nupta  ;  Eng.  bride)  ;  and  even  in  Homer  a  married 
woman,  if  young,  is  sometimes  called  Mvpili*  oihQ%o$,  but  neither  nwp*  nor 


218  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

lath-Zechariah  (2  Kings  xviii.  2  ;  2  Cliron.  xxix.  1),  who  be 
came  the  mother  of  king  Hezekiah,  to  whom  apparently  the 
virtues  of  the  mother  descended,  in  marked  contrast  with  the 
vices  of  his  father.  This  is  certainly  possible.  At  the  same 
time,  it  is  also  certain  that  the  child  who  was  to  be  born  was 
the  Messiah,  and  not  a  new  Israel  (Hofmann,  Schriftbeweis,  ii. 
1,  87,  88);  that  is  to  say,  that  he  was  no  other  than  that  "  won 
derful"  heir  of  the  throne  of  David,  whose  birth  is  hailed  with 
joy  in  ch.  ix.,  where  even  commentators  like  Knobel  are  obliged 
to  admit  that  the  Messiah  is  meant.  It  was  the  Messiah  whom 
the  prophet  saw  here  as  about  to  be  born,  then  again  in  ch. 
ix.  as  actually  born,  and  again  in  ch.  xi.  as  reigning, — an  indi 
visible  triad  of  consolatory  images  in  three  distinct  stages,  inter 
woven  with  the  three  stages  into  which  the  future  history  of 
the  nation  unfolded  itself  in  the  prophet's  view.  If,  therefore, 
his  eye  was  directed  towards  the  Abijah  mentioned,  he  must 
have  regarded  her  as  the  future  mother  of  the  Messiah,  and  her 

o 

son  as  the  future  Messiah.  Now  it  is  no  doubt  true,  that  in  the 
course  of  the  sacred  history  Messianic  expectations  were  often 
associated  with  individuals  who  did  not  answer  to  them,  so  that 
the  Messianic  prospect  was  moved  further  into  the  future  ;  and 
it  is  not  only  possible,  but  even  probable,  and  according  to  many 
indications  an  actual  fact,  that  the  believing  portion  of  the  nation 
did  concentrate  their  Messianic  wishes  and  hopes  for  a  long 
time  upon  Hezekiah  ;  but  even  if  Isaiah's  prophecy  may  have 
evoked  such  human  conjectures  and  expectations,  through  the 
measure  of  time  which  it  laid  down,  it  would  not  be  a  prophecy 
at  all,  if  it  rested  upon  110  better  foundation  than  this,  which 
would  be  the  case  if  Isaiah  had  a  particular  maiden  of  his  own 
day  in  his  mind  at  the  time. 

Are  we  to  conclude,  then,  that  the  prophet  did  not  refer  to 
any  one  individual,  but  that  the  "virgin"  was  a  personification 
of  the  house  of  David  I  This  view,  which  Hofmann  propounded, 
and  Stier  appropriated,  and  which  Ebrard  has  revived,  notwith 
standing  the  fact  that  Hofmann  relinquished  it,  does  not  help 
us  over  the  difficulty ;  for  we  should  expect  in  that  case  to 
find  "  daughter  of  Zion,"  or  something  of  the  kind,  since  the 
term  "  virgin"  is  altogether  unknown  in  a  personification  of 
this  kind,  and  the  house  of  David,  as  the  prophet  knew  it,  was 
by  no  means  worthy  of  such  an  epithet. 


CHAP.  VII.  14,  15.  219 

No  other  course  is  left,  therefore,  than  to  assume  that  whilst, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  prophet  meant  by  "  the  virgin  "  a  maiden 
belonging  to  the  house  of  David,  which  the  Messianic  character 
of  the  prophecy  requires ;  on  the  other  hand,  he  neither  thought 
of  any  particular  maiden,  nor  associated  the  promised  concep 
tion  with  any  human  father,  who  could  not  have  been  any  other 
than  Ahaz.  The  reference  is  the  same  as  in  Mic.  v.  3  ("  she 
which  travaileth,"  yoledali).  The  objection  that  kaalmdh  (the 
virgin)  cannot  be  a  person  belonging  to  the  future,  on  account 
of  the  article  (Hofmann,  p.  86),  does  not  affect  the  true  expla 
nation  :  it  was  the  virgin  whom  the  spirit  of  prophecy  brought 
before  the  prophet's  mind,  and  who,  although  he  could  not  give* 
her  name,  stood  before  him  as  singled  out  for  an  extraordinary 
end  (compare  the  article  in  hannaar  in  Num.  xi.  27,  etc.). 
With  what  exalted  dignity  this  mother  appeared  to  him  to  be 
invested,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  it  is  she  who  gives  the 
name  to  her  son,  and  that  the  name  Immanuel.  This  name 
sounds  full -of  promise.  But  if  we  look  at  the  expression 
"  therefore,"  and  the  circumstance  which  occasioned  it,  the 
sign  cannot  have  been  intended  as  a  pure  or  simple  promise. 
We  naturally  expect,  first,  that  it  will  be  an  extraordinary  fact 
which  the  prophet  foretells ;  and  secondly,  that  it  will  be  a  fact 
with  a  threatening  front.  Now  a  humiliation  of  the  house  of 
David  was  indeed  involved  in  the  fact  that  the  God  of  whom 
it  would  know  nothing  would  nevertheless  mould  its  future 

O 

history,  as  the  emphatic  &«n  implies,  He  (auro?,  the  Lord  Him 
self),  by  His  own  impulse  and  unfettered  choice.  Moreover, 
this  moulding  of  the  future  could  not  possibly  be  such  an  one 
as  was  desired,  but  would  of  necessity  be  as  full  of  threatening 
to  the  unbelieving  house  of  David  as  it  was  full  of  promise  to 
the  believers  in  Israel.  And  the  threatening  character  of  the 
"sign"  is  not  to  be  sought  for  exclusively  in  ver.  15,  since 
both  the  expressions  "  therefore"  (Mcen)  and  "  behold"  (liinneh) 
place  the  main  point  of  the  sign  in  ver.  14,  whilst  the  intro 
duction  of  ver.  15  without  any  external  connection  is  a  clear 
proof  that  what  is  stated  in  ver.  14  is  the  chief  thing,  and  not 
the  reverse.  But  the  only  thing  in  ver.  14  which  indicated 
any  threatening  element  in  the  sign  in  question,  must  have  been 
the  fact  that  it  would  riot  be  by  Ahaz,  or  by  a  son  of  Ahaz, 
or  by  the  house  of  David  generally,  which  at  that  time  had 


220  THE  rttOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

hardened  itself  against  God,  that  God  would  save  His  people, 
but  that  a  nameless  maiden  of  low  rank,  whom  God  had  sino-led 

'  O 

out  and  now  showed  to  the  prophet  in  the  mirror  of  His  counsel, 
would  give  birth  to  the  divine  deliverer  of  His  people  in  the 
midst  of  the  approaching  tribulations,  which  was  a  sufficient 
intimation  that  He  who  was  to  be  the  pledge  of  Judah's  con 
tinuance  would  not  arrive  without  the  present  degenerate  house 
of  David,  which  had  brought  Judah  to  the  brink  of  ruin,  being 
altogether  set  aside. 

But  the  further  question  arises  here,  What  constituted  the 
extraordinary  character  of  the  fact  here  announced  *?  It  con 
sisted  in  the  fact  that,  according  to  ch.  ix.  5,  Irnmanuel  Himself 
was  to  be  a  SOB  (wonder  or  wonderful).  He  would  be  God  in 
corporeal  self-manifestation,  and  therefore  a  "  wonder"  as  being 
a  superhuman  person.  We  should  not  venture  to  assert  this 
if  it  went  beyond  the  line  of  Old  Testament  revelation,  but  the 
prophet  asserts  it  himself  in  ch.  ix.  5  (cf.  ch.  x.  21)  :  his  words 
are  as  clear  as  possible ;  and  we  must  not  make  them  obscure, 
to  favour  any  preconceived  notions  as  to  the  development  of 
history.  The  incarnation  of  Deity  was  unquestionably  a  secret 
that  was  not  clearly  unveiled  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  the 
veil  was  not  so  thick  but  that  some  rays  could  pass  through. 
Such  a  ray,  directed  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy  into  the  mind 
of  the  prophet,  was  the  prediction  of  Immanuel.  But  if  the 
Messiah  was  to  be  Immanuel  in  this  sense,  that  He  would  Him 
self  be  El  (God),  as  the  prophet  expressly  affirms,  His  birth 
must  also  of  necessity  be  a  wonderful  or  miraculous  one.  The 
prophet  does  not  affirm,  indeed,  that  the  "  'almdh"  who  had 
as  yet  known  no  man,  would  give  birth  to  Immanuel  without 
this  taking  place,  so  that  he  could  not  be  born  of  the  house  of 
David  as  well  as  into  it,  but  be  a  gift  of  Heaven  itself ;  but  this 
" ' almdh"  or  virgin  continued  throughout  an  enigma  in  the  Old 
Testament,  stimulating  "inquiry"  (1  Pet.  i.  10-12),  and  waiting 
for  the  historical  solution.  Thus  the  sign  in  question  was,  on 
the  one  hand,  a  mystery  glaring  in  the  most  threatening  manner 
upon  the  house  of  David ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  mystery 
smiling  with  rich  consolation  upon  the  prophet  and  all  believers, 
and  couched  in  these  enigmatical  terms,  in  order  that  those 
who  hardened  themselves  might  not  understand  it,  and  that 
believers  might  increasingly  long  to  comprehend  its  meaning. 


CHAP.  VII.  16,  17.  221 

In  ver.  15  the  threatening  element  of  ver.  14  becomes  the 
predominant  one.  It  would  not  be  so,  indeed,  if  "  butter 
(thickened  milk)  and  honey"  were  mentioned  here  as  the 
ordinary  food  of  the  tenderest  age  of  childhood  (as  Gesenius, 
Hengstenberg,  and  others  suppose).  But  the  reason  afterwards 
assigned  in  vers.  16,  17,  teaches  the  very  opposite.  Thickened 
milk  and  honey,  the  food  of  the  desert,  would  be  the  only 
provisions  furnished  by  the  land  at  the  time  in  which  the 
ripening  youth  of  Immanuel  would  fall,  n^pn  (from  K^n,  to  be 
thick)  is  a  kind  of  butter  which  is  still  prepared  by  nomads  by 
shaking  milk  in  skins.  It  may  probably  include  the  cream, 
as  the  Arabic  semen  signifies  both,  but  not  the  curds  or  cheese, 
the  name  of  which  (at  least  the  more  accurate  name)  is  gelindh. 
The  object  to  JH*  is  expressed  in  vers.  15,  16  by  infinitive  abso 
lutes  (compare  the  more  usual  mode  of  expression  in  ch.  viii.  4). 
The  Lamed  prefixed  to  the  verb  does  not  mean  "  until"  (Ges. 
§  131,  1),  for  Lamed  is  never  used  as  so  definite  an  indication 
of  the  terminus  ad  quern;  the  meaning  is  either  "towards  the 
time  when  he  understands"  (Amos  iv.  7,  cf.  Lev.  xxiv.  12, 
u  to  the  end  that"),  or  about  the  time,  at  the  time  when  he 
understands  (ch.  x.  3  ;  Gen.  viii.  11 ;  Job  xxiv.  14).  This  kind 
of  food  would  coincide  in  time  with  his  understanding,  that  is  to 
say,  would  run  parallel  to  it.  Incapacity  to  distinguish  between 
good  and  bad  is  characteristic  of  early  childhood  (Deut.  i.  39, 
etc.),  and  also  of  old  age  when  it  relapses  into  childish  ways 
(2  Sam.  xix.  36).  The  commencement  of  the  capacity  to 
understand  is  equivalent  to  entering  into  the  so-called  years  of 
discretion — the  riper  age  of  free  and  conscious  self-determination. 
By  the  time  that  Immanuel  reached  this  age,  all  the  blessings 
of  the  land  would  have  been  so  far  reduced,  that  from  a  land 
full  of  luxuriant  corn-fields  and  vineyards,  it  would  have  become 
a  large  wooded  pasture-ground,  supplying  milk  and  honey,  and 
nothing  more.  A  thorough  devastation  of  the  land  is  therefore 
the  reason  for  this  limitation  to  the  simplest,  and,  when  com 
pared  with  the  fat  of  wheat  and  the  cheering  influence  of  wine, 
most  meagre  and  miserable  food.  And  this  is  the  ground 
assigned  in  vers.  16,  17.  Two  successive  and  closely  connected 
events  would  occasion  this  universal  desolation. 

Vers.  16,  17.  "  For  before  the  boy  shall  understand  to  refuse 
the  evil,  and  choose  the  good,  the  land  will  be  desolate,  of  whose 


222  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

two  kings  thou  art  afraid.  Jehovah  will  bring  upon  thee,  and 
upon  thy  people,  and  upon  thy  father  s  house,  days  such  as  have 
not  come  since  the  day  when  Ephraim  broke  away  from  Judah — 
the  king  of  A$$hur"  The  land  of  the  two  kings,  Syria  and 
Israel,  was  first  of  all  laid  waste  by  the  Assyrians,  whom  Ahaz 
called  to  his  assistance.  Tiglath-pileser  conquered  Damascus 
and  a  portion  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and  led  a  large  part 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  two  countries  into  captivity  (2  Kings 
xv.  29,  xvi.  9).  Judah  was  then  also  laid  waste  by  the 
Assyrians,  as  a  punishment  for  having  refused  the  help  of 
Jehovah,  and  preferred  the  help  of  man.  Days  of  adversity 
would  come  upon  the  royal  house  and  people  of  Judah,  such  as 
('asher,  quotes^  as  in  Ex.  x.  6)  had  not  come  upon  them  since 
the  calamitous  day  (Tmiyyom,  inde  a  die;  in  other  places  wo 
find  Tmin-hayyom,  Ex.  ix.  18,  Deut.  iv.  32,  ix.  7,  etc.)  of  the 
falling  away  of  the  ten  tribes.  The  appeal  to  Asshur  laid  the 
foundation  for  the  overthrow  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  quite 
as  much  as  for  that  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  Ahaz  became 
the  tributary  vassal  of  the  king  of  Assyria  in  consequence ; 
and  although  Hezekiah  was  set  free  from  Asshur  through  the 
miraculous  assistance  of  Jehovah,  what  Nebuchadnezzar  after 
wards  performed  was  only  the  accomplishment  of  the  frustrated 
attempt  of  Sennacherib.  It  is  with  piercing  force  that  the 
words  "  the  king  of  Assyria  "  (^eth  melek  Asshur)  are  intro 
duced  at  the  close  of  the  two  verses.  The  particle  9eth  is  used 
frequently  where  an  indefinite  object  is  followed  by  the  more 
precise  and  definite  one  (Gen.  vi.  10,  xxvi.  34).  The  point  of 
the  verse  would  be  broken  by  eliminating  the  words  as  a  gloss, 
as  Knobel  proposes.  The  very  king  to  whom  Ahaz  had 
appealed  in  his  terror,  would  bring  Judah  to  the  brink  of 
destruction.  The  absence  of  any  link  of  connection  between 
vers.  16  and  17  is  also  very  effective.  The  hopes  raised  in  the 
mind  of  Ahaz  by  ver.  16  are  suddenly  turned  into  bitter  dis 
appointment.  In  the  face  of  such  catastrophes  as  these,  Isaiah 
predicts  the  birth  of  Immanuel.  His  eating  only  thickened 
milk  and  honey,  at  a  time  when  he  knew  very  well  what  was 
good  and  what  was  not,  would  arise  from  the  desolation  of  the 
whole  of  the  ancient  territory  of  the  Davidic  kingdom  that 
had  preceded  the  riper  years  of  his  youth,  when  he  would 
certainly  have  chosen  other  kinds  of  food,  if  they  could  possibly 


CHAP.  VII.  18.  223 

Lave  been  found.  Consequently  the  birth  of  Immanuel  ap 
parently  falls  between  the  time  then  present  and  the  Assyrian 
calamities,  and  his  earliest  childhood  appears  to  run  parallel  to 
the  Assyrian  oppression.  In  any  case,  their  consequences  would 
be  still  felt  at  the  time  of  his  riper  youth.  In  what  way  the 
truth  of  the  prophecy  was  maintained  notwithstanding,  we  shall 
see  presently.  What  follows  in  vers.  18-25,  is  only  a  further  ex 
pansion  of  ver.  17.  The  promising  side  of  the  "sign"  remains 
in  the  background,  because  this  was  not  for  Ahaz.  When 
Ewald  expresses  the  opinion  that  a  promising  strophe  has  fallen 
out  after  ver.  17,  he  completely  mistakes  the  circumstances 
under  which  the  prophet  uttered  these  predictions.  In  the 
presence  of  Ahaz  he  must  keep  silence  as  to  the  promises. 
But  he  pours  out  with  all  the  greater  fluency  his  threatening 
of  judgment. 

Ver.  18.  "And  it  comes  to  pass  in  that  day,  Jelwvali  will 
hiss  for  the  fly  which  is  at  the  end  of  the  Nile-arms  of  Egypt, 
and  the  Lees  that  are  in  the  land  of  Asshur ;  and  they  come  and 
settle  all  of  them  in  the  valleys  of  the  slopes,  and  in  the  clefts  of 
the  rocks,  and  in  all  the  thorn-hedges,  and  upon  all  grass-plats." 
The  prophet  has  already  stated,  in  ch.  v.  26,  that  Jehovah 
would  hiss  for  distant  nations  ;  and  now  he  is  able  to  describe 
them  by  name.  The  Egyptian  nation,  with  its  vast  and  un 
paralleled  numbers,  is  compared  to  the  swarming  fly ;  and  the 
Assyrian  nation,  with  its  love  of  war  and  conquest,  to  the 
stinging  bee  which  is  so  hard  to  keep  off  (Deut.  i.  44  ;  Ps. 
cxviii.  12).  The  emblems  also  correspond  to  the  nature  of 
the  two  countries :  the  fly  to  slimy  Egypt  with  its  swarms  of 
insects  (see  ch.  xviii.  I),1  and  the  bee  to  the  more  mountainous 
and  woody  Assyria,  where  the  keeping  of  bees  is  still  one  of 
the  principal  branches  of  trade.  IN11,  pi.  D"n&0,  is  an  Egyptian 
name  (yaro,  with  the  article  phiaro,  pi.  yarou)  for  the  Nile  and 
its  several  arms.  The  end  of  the  Nile-arms  of  Egypt,  from  a 
Palestinian  point  of  view,  was  the  extreme  corner  of  the  land. 
The  military  force  of  Egypt  would  march  out  of  the  whole 
compass  of  the  land,  and  meet  the  Assyrian  force  in  the  Holy 

1  Egypt  abounds  in  gnats,  etc.,  more  especially  in  flies  (rnuscarise), 
including  a  species  of  small  fly  (nematli),  which  is  a  great  plague  to  men 
throughout  all  the  country  of  the  Nile  (see  Hartmann,  Natur-geschichtlich- 
medicinische  Skizze  der  Nillander,  1865,  pp.  204-5). 


224  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Land  ;  and  both  together  would  cover  the  land  in  such  a  way 
that  the  valleys  of  steep  precipitous  heights  (iiachale  habbattoth), 
and  clefts  of  the  rocks  (neldke  hasseldini),  and  all  the  thorn- 
hedges  (naazuzim)  and  pastures  (iiahalolim,  from  nihel,  to  lead 
to  pasture),  would  be  covered  with  these  swarms.  The  fact 
that  just  such  places  are  named,  as  afforded  a  suitable  shelter 
and  abundance  of  food  for  flies  and  bees,  is  a  filling  up  of  the 
figure  in  simple  truthfulness  to  nature.  And  if  we  look  at  the 
historical  fulfilment,  it  does  not  answer  even  in  this  respect 
to  the  actual  letter  of  the  prophecy  ;  for  in  the  time  of  Heze- 
kiah  no  collision  really  took  place  between  the  Assyrian  and 
Egyptian  forces ;  and  it  was  not  till  the  days  of  Josiah  that  a 
collision  took  place  between  the  Chaldean  and  Egyptian  powers 
in  the  eventful  battle  fought  between  Pharaoh-Necho  and 
Nebuchadnezzar  at  Carchemish  (Circesium),  which  decided  the 
fate  of  Judah.  That  the  spirit  of  prophecy  points  to  this 
eventful  occurrence  is  evident  from  ver.  20,  where  no  further 
allusion  is  made  to  Egypt,  because  of  its  having  succumbed  to 
the  imperial  power  of  Eastern  Asia. 

Ver.  20.  "  In  that  day  ivill  the  Lord  shave  with  a  razor,  the 
thing  for  hire  on  the  shore  of  the  river,  -with  the  king  of  Assyria, 
the  head  and  the  hair  of  the  feet ;  and  even  the  beard  it  will  take 
away?  Knobel  takes  the  hair  to  be  a  figurative  representation 
of  the  produce  of  the  land  ;  but  the  only  thing  which  at  all 
favours  the  idea  that  the  flora  is  ever  regarded  by  biblical 
writers  as  the  hairy  covering  of  the  soil,  is  the  use  of  the  term 
ndzir  as  the  name  of  an  uncultivated  vine  left  to  itself  (Lev. 
xxv.  5).  The  nation  of  Judah  is  regarded  here,  as  in  ch.  i.  6, 
as  a  man  stript  naked,  and  not  only  with  all  the  hair  of  his 
head  and  feet  shaved  off  (raglaim,  a  euphemism),  but  what  was 
regarded  as  the  most  shameful  of  all,  with  the  hair  of  his  beard 
shaved  off  as  well.  To  this  end  the  Almighty  would  make 
use  of  a  razor,  which  is  more  distinctly  defined  as  hired  on 
the  shore  of  the  Euphrates  (conductitia  in  litoribus  Euphratis : 
ndhdr  stands  here  for  hanndhdr),  and  still  more  precisely  as 
the  king  of  Asshur  (the  latter  is  again  pronounced  a  gloss  by 
Knobel  and  others).  "  The  thing  for  hire:"  hasseclrdh  might 
be  an  abstract  term  (hiring,  condactio),  but  ii  may  also  be  the 
feminine  of  sdclr,  which  indicates  an  emphatic  advance  from 
the  indefinite  to  the  more  definite  ;  in  the  sense  of  "  with  a 


CHAP.  vn.  21-25.  225 

rr.zor,  namely,  that  which  was  standing  ready  to  be  hired  in 
the  lands  on  both  sides  of  the  Euphrates,  the  king  of  Assyria." 
In  hasseclrdk  (the  thing  for  hire)  there  was  involved  the 
bitterest  sarcasm  for  Ahaz.  The  sharp  knife,  which  it  had 
hired  for  the  deliverance  of  Judah,  was  hired  by  the  LORD, 
to  shave  Judah  most  thoroughly,  and  in  the  most  disgraceful 
manner.  Tims  shaved,  Judah  would  be  a  depopulated  and 
desert  land,  in  which  men  would  no  longer  live  by  growing 
corn  and  vines,  or  by  trade  and  commerce,  but  by  grazing 
alone. — Vers.  21,  22.  "And  it  will  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that 
a  man  ivill  keep  a  small  cow  and  a  couple  of  sheep;  and  it  comes 
to  pass,  for  the  abundance  of  the  milk  they  give  lie  will  eat  cream: 
for  butter  and  honey  will  every  one  eat  that  is  left  within  the 
land."  The  former  prosperity  would  be  reduced  to  the  most 
miserable  housekeeping.  One  man  would  keep  a  milch  cow 
and  two  head  of  sheep  (or  goats)  alive  with  the  greatest  care, 
the  strongest  and  finest  full-grown  cattle  having  fallen  into 
the  hands  of  the  foe  (njn,  like  iTnn  in  other  places  :  side,  not 
shne,  because  two  female  sheep  or  goats  are  meant).  But  this 
would  be  quite  enough,  for  there  would  be  only  a  few  men  left 
in  the  land;  and  as  all  the  land  would  be  pasture,  the  small 
number  of  animals  would  yield  milk  in  abundance.  Bread 
and  wine  would  be  unattainable.  Whoever  had  escaped  the 
Assyrian  razor,  would  eat  thickened  milk  and  honey,  that  and 
nothing  but  that,  without  variation,  ad  nauseam.  The  reason 
for  this  would  be,  that  the  hills,  which  at  other  times  were  full 
of  vines  and  corn-fields,  would  be  overgrown  with  briers. 

The  prophet  repeats  this  three  times  in  vers.  23-25 :  "And 
it  will  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  every  place,  where  a  thousand 
vines  stood  at  a  thousand  silverlings,  will  have  become  thorns  and 
thistles.  With  arrows  and  with  bows  will  men  go,  for  the  whole 
land  will  have  become  thorns  and  thistles.  And  all  the  hills  that 
icere  accustomed  to  be  hoed  witli  the  hoe,  thou  wilt  not  go  to  them 
for  fear  of  thorns  and  thistles ;  and  it  has  become  a  gathering- 
place  for  oxen,  and  a  heading-place  for  sheep"  The  "thousand 
silverlings"  ('eleph  ceseph,  i.e.  a  thousand  shekels  of  silver)  recal 
to  mind  Song  of  Sol.  viii.  11,  though  there  it  is  the  value 
of  the  yearly  produce,  whereas  here  the  thousand  shekels  are 
the  value  of  a  thousand  vines,  the  sign  of  a  peculiarly  valuable 
piece  of  a  vineyard.  At  the  present  time  they  reckon  the  worth 
VOL.  I.  P 


226  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  a  vineyard  in  Lebanon  and  Syria  according  to  the  value  of 
the  separate  vines,  and  generally  take  the  vines  at  one  piastre 
(from  2d.  to  3d.)  each ;  just  as  in  Germany  a  Johannisberg 
vine  is  reckoned  at  a  ducat.  Every  piece  of  ground,  where 
such  valuable  vines  were  standing,  would  have  fallen  a  prey 
to  the  briers.  People  would  go  there  with  bow  and  arrow, 
because  the  whole  land  had  become  thorns  and  thistles  (see  at 
ch.  v.  12«),  and  therefore  wild  animals  had  made  their  homes 
there.  And  thou  (the  prophet  addresses  the  countryman  thus) 
comest  not  to  all  the  hills,  which  were  formerly  cultivated  in 
the  most  careful  manner ;  thou  comest  not  thither  to  make 
them  arable  again,  because  thorns  and  thistles  deter  thee  from 
reclaiming  such  a  fallow.  They  would  therefore  give  the  oxen 
freedom  to  rove  where  they  would,  and  let  sheep  and  goats 
tread  down  whatever  grew  there.  The  description  is  intention 
ally  thoroughly  tautological  and  pleonastic,  heavy  and  slow  in 
movement.  The  writer's  intention  is  to  produce  the  impres 
sion  of  a  waste  heath,  or  tedious  monotony.  Hence  the  repeti 
tions  of  hdi/dh  and  yiliyeli.  Observe  how  great  the  variations 
are  in  the  use  of  the  future  and  perfect,  and  how  the  meaning 
is  always  determined  by  the  context.  In  vers.  21,  22,  the 
futures  have  a  really  future  sense ;  in  ver.  23  the  first  and 
third  yiliyeli  signify  "  will  have  become"  (factus  erit  omnis 
locus),  and  the  second  "  was"  (erat)  ;  in  ver.  24  Kto  means 
"will  come"  (oeniet),  and  tihyeh  "will  have  become"  (facta 
erit  terra)  ;  in  ver.  25  we  must  render  ye  dder&n,  sarciebantur 
(they  used  to  be  hoed).  And  in  vers.  21,  22,  and  23,  lidyah  is 
equivalent  to  fiet  (it  will  become);  whilst  in  ver.  25  it  means 
factum  est  (it  has  become).  Looked  at  from  a  western  point  of 
view,  therefore,  the  future  tense  is  sometimes  a  simple  future, 
sometimes  a  future  perfect,  and  sometimes  an  imperfect  or 
synchronistic  preterite ;  and  the  perfect  sometimes  a  prophetic 
preterite,  sometimes  an  actual  preterite,  but  in  the  sphere  of 
an  ideal  past,  or  what  is  the  same  thing,  of  a  predicted  future. 

This  ends  Isaiah's  address  to  king  Ahaz.  He  does  not 
expressly  say  when  Immanuel  is  to  be  born,  but  only  what 
will  take  place  before  he  has  reached  the  riper  age  of  boyhood, 

namely,  first,  the  devastation  of  Israel  and  Syria,  and  then 

the  devastation  of  Judah  itself,  by  the  Assyrians.     Prom  the 
fact  that  the  prophet  says  no  more  than  this,  we  may  see  that 


CHAP.  VII.  23-25.  227 

his  spirit  and  his  tongue  were  under  the  direction  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  who  does  not  descend  within  the  historical  and 
temporal  range  of  vision,  without  at  the  same  time  remaining 
exalted  above  it.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  we  may  see 
from  what  he  says,  that  the  prophecy  has  its  human  side  as 
well.  When  Isaiah  speaks  of  Immanuel  as  eating  thickened 
milk  and  honey,  like  all  who  survived  the  Assyrian  troubles  in 
the  Holy  Land ;  he  evidently  looks  upon  and  thinks  of  the 
childhood  of  Immanuel  as  connected  with  the  time  of  the 
Assyrian  calamities.  And  it  was  in  such  a  perspective  com 
bination  of  events  lying  far  apart,  that  the  complex  cha 
racter  of  prophecy  consisted.  The  reason  for  this  complex 
character  was  a  double  one,  viz.  the  human  limits  associated 
with  the  prophet's  telescopic  view  of  distant  times,  and  the 
pedagogical  wisdom  of  God,  in  accordance  with  which  He 
entered  into  these  limits  instead  of  removing  them.  If,  there- 

O  ' 

fore,  we  adhere  to  the  letter  of  prophecy,  we  may  easily  throwr 
doubt  upon  its  veracity;  but  if  we  look  at  the  substance  of 
the  prophecy,  we  soon  find  that  the  complex  character  by  no 
means  invalidates  its  truth.  For  the  things  which  the  prophet 

saw  in  combination  were  essentiallv  connected,  even   though 

«-•  & 

chronologically  separated.  When,  for  example,  in  the  case 
before  us  (ch.  vii.-xii.),  Isaiah  saw  Asshur  only,  standing  out 
as  the  imperial  kingdom  ;  this  was  so  far  true,  that  the  four 
imperial  kingdoms  from  the  Babylonian  to  the  Roman  were 
really  nothing  more  than  the  full  development  of  the  com 
mencement  made  in  Assyria.  And  when  he  spoke  of  the  son  of 
the  virgin  (ch.  vii.)  as  growing  up  in  the  midst  of  the  Assyrian 
oppressions ;  this  also  was  so  far  true,  that  Jesus  was  really  born 
at  a  time  when  the  Holy  Land,  deprived  of  its  previous  abun 
dance,  was  under  the  dominion  of  the  imperial  power,  and  in  a 
condition  whose  primary  cause  was  to  be  traced  to  the  unbelief 
of  Ahaz.  Moreover,  He  who  became  flesh  in  the  fulness  of 
time,  did  really  lead  an  ideal  life  in  the  Old  Testament  history. 
He  was  in  the  midst  of  it  in  a  pre-existent  presence,  moving  on 
towards  the  covenant  goal.  The  fact  that  the  house  and  nation 
of  David  did  not  perish  in  the  Assyrian  calamities,  was  actually 
to  be  attributed,  as  ch.  viii.  presupposes,  to  His  real  though 
not  His  bodily  presence.  In  this  way  the  apparent  discrepancy 
between  the  prophecy  and  the  history  of  the  fulfilment  may  be 


228  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

solved.  We  do  not  require  the  solution  proposed  by  Vitringa, 
and  recently  appropriated  by  Haneberg, — namely,  that  the 
prophet  takes  the  stages  of  the  Messiah's  life  out  of  the  distant 
future,  to  make  them  the  measure  of  events  about  to  take 
place  in  the  immediate  future ;  nor  that  of  Berigel,  Schegg, 
Schmieder,  and  others, — namely,  that  the  sign  consisted  in  an 
event  belonging  to  the  immediate  future,  which  pointed  typi 
cally  to  the  birth  of  the  true  Immannel ;  nor  that  of  Hofmann, 
who  regards  the  words  of  the  prophet  as  an  emblematical  pre 
diction  of  the  rise  of  a  new  Israel,  which  would  come  to  the 
possession  of  spiritual  intelligence  in  the  midst  of  troublous 
times,  occasioned  by  the  want  of  intelligence  in  the  Israel  of 
his  own  time.  The  prophecy,  as  will  be  more  fully  confirmed 
as  we  proceed,  is  directly  Messianic ;  it  is  a  divine  prophecy 
within  human  limits. 


TWO  OMENS  OF  THE  IMMEDIATE  FUTURE. — 
CHAP.  VIII.  1-4. 

In  the  midst  of  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war,  which  was  not, 
yet  at  an  end,  Isaiah  received  instructions  from  God  to  perform 
a  singular  prophetic  action.  Vers.  1,  2.  "  Then  Jehovah  said  to 
me.  Take  a  large  slab,  and  ivrite  upon  it  with  common  strokes, 
'  In  Speed  Spoil,  Booty  hastens ;'  and  I  will  take  to  me  trust 
worthy  witnesses,  Uriyah  the  priest,  and  Zecharyahu  the  son  of 
Yeberechyahu"  The  slab  or  table  (cf.  ch.  iiL  23,  where  the 
same  word  is  used  to  signify  a  metal  mirror)  was  to  be  large, 
to  produce  the  impression  of  a  monument ;  and  the  writing 
upon  it  was  to  be  "  a  man's  pen  "  (cheret  'enosh),  i.e.  written 
in  the  vulgar,  arid,  so  to  speak,  popular  character,  consisting  of 
inartistic  strokes  that  could  be  easily  read  (vid.  Rev.  xiii.  18, 
xxi.  17).  Philip  d'Aquin,  in  his  Lexicon,  adopts  the  explana 
tion,  "  ^los/i-writing,  i.e.  hieroglyphic  writing,  so  called  because 
it  wTas  first  introduced  in  the  time  of  Enosh"  Luzzatto  renders 
it,  a  lettere  cubitali;  but  the  reading  for  this  would  be  V cheret 
ammath  'ish.  The  only  true  rendering  is  stylo  vulgari  (see  Ges. 
T/ies.  s.v.  Jenosh).  The  words  to  be  written  are  introduced  with 
Lamed,  to  indicate  dedication  (as  in  Ezek.  xxxvii.  16),  or  the 
object  to  which  the  inscription  was  dedicated  or  applied,  as  if  it 
ruad,  "  A  table  devoted  to  <  Spoil  very  quickly,  booty  hastens  ;"' 


CHAP.  VIII.  1,  2.  22  £ 

unless,  indeed,  Vmalieris  to  be  taken  as  afut.  instant,  as  It  is  by 
Luzzatto — after  Gen.  xv.  12,  Josh.  ii.  5,  Hab.  i.  17 — in  the 
sense  of  acceleratura  sunt  spolia,  or  (what  the  position  of  the 
words  might  more  naturally  suggest)  with  maher  in  a  transitive 
sense,  as  in  the  construction  "ijnp  ^7?  an(^  others,  accelerationi 
sj)olia,  i.e.  they  are  ready  for  hastening.  Most  of  the  commen 
tators  have  confused  the  matter  here  by  taking  the  words  as  a 
proper  name  (Ewald,  §  288,  <?),  which  they  were  not  at  first, 
though  they  became  so  afterwards.  At  first  they  were  an  oracular 
announcement  of  the  immediate  future,  aecelerant  spolia,  festinat 
prceda  (spoil  is  quick,  booty  hastens).  Spoil;  booty;  but  who 
would  the  vanquished  be?  Jehovah  knew,  and  His  prophet 
knew,  although  not  initiated  into  the  policy  of  Ahaz.  But 
their  knowledge  was  studiously  veiled  in  enigmas.  For  the 
writing  was  not  to  disclose  anything  to  the  people.  It  was 
simply  to  serve  as  a  public  record  of  the  fact,  that  the  course  of 
events  was  one  that  Jehovah  had  foreseen  and  indicated  before 
hand.  And  when  what  was  written  upon  the  table  should  after 
wards  take  place,  they  would  know  that  it  was  the  fulfilment 
of  what  had  already  been  written,  and  therefore  was  an  event 
pre-cie  tor  mined  by  God.  For  this  reason  Jehovah  took  to 
Himself  witnesses.  There  is  no  necessity  to  read  nT£«J  (and 
I  had  it  witnessed),  as  Knobel  and  others  do  ;  nor  HTyni  (and 
have  it  witnessed),  as  the  Sept.,  Targum,  Syriac,  and  Hitzig  do. 
Jehovah  said  what  He  would  do ;  and  the  prophet  knew,  without 
requiring  to  be  told,  that  it  was  to  be  accomplished  instrumen- 
tally  through  him.  Uriah  was  no  doubt  the  priest  (Urijah), 
who  afterwards  placed  himself  at  the  service  of  Ahaz  to  gratify 
his  heathenish  desires  (2  Kings  xvi.  10  sqq.).  Zechariah  ben 
Yeberechyahu  (Berechiah)  was  of  course  not  the  prophet  of  the 
times  after  the  captivity,  but  possibly  the  Asaphite  mentioned 
in  2  Chron.  xxix.  13.  He  is  not  further  known  to  us.  In 
good  editions,  ben  is  not  followed  by  makkeph,  but  marked 
with  mercJia,  according  to  the  Masora  at  Gen.  xxx.  19.  These 
two  men  were  reliable  witnesses,  being  persons  of  great  dis 
tinction,  and  their  testimony  would  weigh  with  the  people. 
When  the  time  should  arrive  that  the  history  of  their  own 
times  solved  the  riddle  of  this  inscription,  these  two  men  were 
to  tell  the  people  how  long  ago  the  prophet  had  written  that 
down  in  his  prophetic  capacity. 


230  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

But  something  occurred  in  the  meantime  whereby  the  place 
of  the  lifeless  table  was  taken  by  a  more  eloquent  and  living 
one.  Vers.  3,  4.  "  And  I  drew  near  to  the  prop] letess ;  and  she 
conceived,  and  bare  a  son:  and  Jehovah  said  to  me,  Call  his  name 
In-speed-spoil-booty-hastens  (Maher-shalal-hash-baz)  :  for  before 
the  boy  shall  know  how  to  cry.  My  father,  and  my  mother,  they  ivill 
carry  away  the  riches  of  Damascus,  and  the  spoil  of  Samaria,  be 
fore  the  king  of  Asshur"  To  his  son  Shear-yaslmb,  in  whose 
name  the  law  of  the  history  of  Israel,  as  revealed  to  the  prophet 
on  the  occasion  of  his  call  (chap,  vi.),  viz.  the  restoration  of 
only  a  remnant  of  the  whole  nation,  had  been  formulated,  there 
was  now  added  a  second  son,  to  whom  the  inscription  upon  the 
table  was  given  as  a  name  (with  a  small  abbreviation,  and  if  the 
Lamed  is  the  particle  of  dedication,  a  necessary  one).  He  was 
therefore  the  symbol  of  the  approaching  chastisement  of  Syria 
and  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes.  Before  the  boy  had  learned 
to  stammer  out  the  name  of  father  and  mother,  they  would 
carry  away  (yissa ',  not  the  third  pers.  fut.  niphal,  which  is 
yinndse\  but  kal  with  a  latent,  indefinite  subject  lianndse  : 
Ges.  §  137,  3)  the  treasures  of  Damascus  and  the  trophies  (i.e. 
the  spoil  taken  from  the  flying  or  murdered  foe)  of  Samaria 
before  the  king  of  Asshur,  who  wrould  therefore  leave  the 
territory  of  the  two  capitals  as  a  conqueror.  It  is  true  that 
Tiglath-pileser  only  conquered  Damascus,  and  not  Samaria ; 
but  he  took  from  Pekah,  the  king  of  Samaria,  the  land  beyond 
the  Jordan,  and  a  portion  of  the  land  on  this  side.  The  trophies, 
which  he  took  thence  to  Assyria,  were  no  less  the  spoil  of 
Samaria  than  if  he  had  conquered  Samaria  itself  (which  Shal- 
manassar  did  twenty  years  afterwards).  The  birth  of  Maher- 
shalal  took  place  about  three-quarters  of  a  year  later  than  the 
preparation  of  the  table  (as  the  verb  vaekrab  is  an  aorist  arid 
not  a  pluperfect) ;  and  the  time  appointed,  from  the  birth  of 
the  boy  till  the  chastisement  of  the  allied  kingdoms,  was  about 
a  year.  Now,  as  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war  did  not  commence 
later  than  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  i.e.  the  year  743, 
and  the  chastisement  by  Tiglath-pileser  occurred  in  the  life 
time  of  the  allies,  whereas  Pekah  was  assassinated  in  the  year 
739,  the  interval  between  the  commencement  of  the  war  and 
the  chastisement  of  the  allies  cannot  have  been  more  than  three 
years ;  so  that  the  preparation  of  the  table  must  not  be  assigned 


CHAP.  VIII.  5.  231 

to  a  much  later  period  than  the  interview  with  Ahaz.  The  in 
scription  upon  the  table,  which  was  adopted  as  the  name  of  the 
child,  was  not  a  purely  consolatory  prophecy,  since  the  prophet 
had  predicted,  a  short  time  before,  that  the  same  Asshur  which 
devastated  the  two  covenant  lands  would  lay  Judah  waste  as 
well.  It  was  simply  a  practical  proof  of  the  omniscience  and 
omnipotence  of  God,  by  which  the  history  of  the  future  was 
directed  and  controlled.  The  prophet  had,  in  fact,  the  mourn 
ful  vocation  to  harden.  Hence  the  enigmatical  character  of 
his  words  and  doings  in  relation  to  both  kings  and  nation. 
Jehovah  foreknew  the  consequences  which  would  follow  the 
appeal  to  Asshur  for  help,  as  regarded  both  Syria  and  Israel. 
This  knowledge  he  committed  to  writing  in  the  presence  of 
witnesses.  When  this  should  be  fulfilled,  it  would  be  all  over 
with  the  rejoicing  of  the  king  and  people  at  their  self-secured 
deliverance. 

But  Isaiah  was  not  merely  within  the  broader  circle  of  an 
incorrigible  nation  ripe  for  judgment.  He  did  not  stand  alone; 
but  was  encircled  by  a  small  band  of  believing  disciples,  who 
wanted  consolation,  and  were  worthy  of  it.  It  was  to  them  that 
the  more  promising  obverse  of  the  prophecy  of  Immanuel  be 
longed.  Mahershalal  could  not  comfort  them  ;  for  they  knew 
that  when  Asshur  had  done  with  Damascus  and  Samaria,  the 
troubles  of  Judah  would  not  be  over,  but  would  only  then  be 
really  about  to  commence.  To  be  the  shelter  of  the  faithful 
in  the  terrible  judicial  era  of  the  imperial  power,  which  was 
then  commencing,  was  the  great  purpose  of  the  prediction  of 
Immanuel ;  and  to  bring  out  and  expand  the  consolatory  cha 
racter  of  that  prophecy  for  the  benefit  of  believers,  was  the 
design  of  the  addresses  which  follow. 

ESOTERIC  ADDRESSES. — CHAP.  VIII.  5-XII. 

A.   Consolation  of  Immanuel  in  the  coming  darkness. — 
Chap.  viii.  5-ix.  6. 

The  heading  or  introduction,  "  And  Jehovah  proceeded  still 
further  to  speak  to  me,  as  follows"  extends  to  all  the  following 
addresses  as  far  as  ch.  xii.  They  all  finish  with  consolation. 
But  consolation  presupposes  the  need  of  consolation.  Conse- 


232  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

quently,  even  in  this  instance  the  prophet  is  obliged  to  com 
mence  with  a  threatening  of  judgment.  Vers.  6,  7.  "  Foras 
much  as  this  people  despiseth  the  waters  of  Siloah  that  go  softly, 
and  regardeth  as  a  delight  the  alliance  with  liezin  and  the  son  of 
Remali/ahu,  therefore,  behold!  the  Lord  of  all  bringeth  up  upon 
them  the  waters  of  the  river,  the  mighty  and  the  great,  the  king  of 
Asshur  and  all  his  military  power ;  and  he  risetJi  over  all  his 
channels,  and  goeth  over  all  his  banks"  The  Siloah  had  its 
name  (Shiloach,  or,  according  to  the  reading  of  this  passage 
contained  in  very  good  MSS.,  Shilloach),  ab  emittendo,  either  in 
an  infinitive  sense,  "shooting  forth,"  or  in  a  participial  sense, 
with  a  passive  colouring,  emissus,  sent  forth,  spirted  out  (vid. 
John  ix.  7  ;  and  on  the  variations  in  meaning  of  this  substantive 
form,  Concord,  p.  1349,  s.).  Josephus  places  the  fountain  and 
pool  of  Siloah  at  the  opening  of  the  Tyropoeon,  on  the  soitrn- 
eastern  side  of  the  ancient  city,  where  we  still  find  it  at  the 
present  day  (vid.  Jos.  Wars  of  the  Jews,  v.  4,  1  ;  also  Robinson, 
Pal.  i.  504).  The  clear  little  brook — a  pleasant  sight  to  the 
eye  as  it  issues  from  the  ravine  which  runs  between  the  south 
western  slope  of  Moriah  and  the  south-eastern  slope  of  Mount 
Zion1  (v.  Schubert,  Reise,  ii.  573) — is  used  here  as  a  symbol 
of  the  Davidic  monarchy  enthroned  upon  Zion,  which  had  the 
promise  of  God,  who  was  enthroned  upon  Moriah,  in  contrast 
with  the  imperial  or  world  kingdom,  which  is  compared  to  the 
overflowing  waters  of  the  Euphrates.  The  reproach  of  despising 
the  waters  of  Siloah  applied  to  Judah  as  well  as  Ephraim  :  to 
the  former  because  it  trusted  in  Asshur,  and  despised  the  less 
tangible  but  more  certain  help  which  the  house  of  David,  if  it 
were  but  believing,  had  to  expect  from  the  God  of  promise  ;  to 
the  latter,  because  it  had  entered  into  alliance  with  Aram  to 
overthrow  the  house  of  David ;  and  yet  the  house  of  David, 
although  degenerate  and  deformed,  was  the  divinely  appointed 
source  of  that  salvation,  which  is  ever  realized  through  quiet, 
secret  ways.  The  second  reproach  applied  more  especially  to 
Ephraim.  The  'eth  is  not  to  be  taken  as  the  sign  of  the  accusa 
tive,  for  sus  never  occurs  with  the  accusative  of  the  object  (not 
even  in  ch.  xxxv.  1),  and  could  not  well  be  so  used.  It  is  to 

1  It  is  with  perfect  propriety,  therefore,  that  Jerome  sometimes  speaks 
of  the  fons  Siloe  as  flowing  ad  radices  Montis  Zion,  and  at  other  times  as 
flowing  in  radicibus  Montis  Moria. 


CHAP.  VIII.  8.  233 

be  construed  as  a  preposition  in  the  sense  of  "  and  (or  he-cause) 
delight  (is  felt)  with  (i.e.  in)  the  alliance  with  Rezin  and  Pekah." 
(On  the  constructive  before  a  preposition,  see  Ges.  §  116,  1  : 
sits  'eth,  like  rdtzdh  'im.)  Luzzatto  compares,  for  the  construc 
tion,  Gen.  xli.  43,  vndthdn;  but  only  the  inf.  abs.  is  used  in 
this  way  as  a  continuation  of  the  finite  verb  (see  Ges.  §  131,  4,  a). 
Moreover,  £>1&/'Jp  is  not  an  Aramaic  infinitive,  but  a  substantive 
used  in  such  a  way  as  to  retain  the  power  of  the  verb  (like 
yDD  in  Num.  x.  2,  and  I3p»  in  Num.  xxiii.  10,  unless,  indeed, 
the  reading  here  should  be  "^pjp  ^p).  The  substantive  clause  is 
preferred  to  the  verbal  clause  b^|,  for  the  sake  of  the  anti 
thetical  consonance  of  bnb'D  with  DKD.  It  is  also  quite  in 
accordance  with  Hebrew  syntax,  that  an  address  which  com 
mences  with  "O  JJP  should  here  lose  itself  in  the  second  sentence 
"  in  the  twilight,"  as  Ewald  expresses  it  (§  351,  c),  of  a  sub 
stantive  clause.  Knobel  and  others  suppose  the  reproof  to 
relate  to  dissatisfied  Judseans,  who  were  secretly  favourable  to 
the  enterprise  of  the  two  allied  kings.  But  there  is  no  further 
evidence  that  there  were  such  persons  ;  and  ver.  8  is  opposed 
to  this  interpretation.  The  overflowing  of  the  Assyrian  forces 
would  fall  first  of  all  upon  Ephraim.  The  threat  of  punish 
ment  is  introduced  with  £71,  the  Vav  being  the  sign  of  sequence 
(Ewald,  §  348,  I).  The  words  "the  king  of  Asshur  "  are  the 
prophet's  own  gloss,  as  in  ch.  vii.  17,  20. 

Not  till  then  would  this  overflowing  reach  as  far  as  Judah, 
but  then  it  would  do  so  most  certainly  and  incessantly.  Ver.  8. 
"  And  presses  forward  into  Judah,  overflows  and  pours  onward, 
till  it  reaches  to  the  neck,  and  the  spreading  out  of  its  wings  fill 
the  breadth  of  thy  land,  Immanuel"  The  fate  of  Judah  would 
be  different  from  that  of  Ephraim.  Ephraim  would  be  laid 
completely  tinder  water  by  the  river,  i.e.  would  be  utterly 
destroyed.  And  in  Judah  the  stream,  as  it  rushed  forward, 
would  reach  the  most  dangerous  height ;  but  if  a  deliverer 
could  be  found,  there  was  still  a  possibility  of  its  being  saved. 
Such  a  deliverer  was  Immanuel,  whom  the  prophet  sees  in  the 
light  of  the  Spirit  living  through  all  the  Assyrian  calamities. 
The  prophet  appeals  complainingly  to  him  that  the  land,  which 
is  his  land,  is  almost  swallowed  up  by  the  world-power :  the 
spreadings  out  (muttoth,  a  hophal  noun  :  for  similar  substantive 
forms,  see  ver.  23,  ch.  xiv.  6,  xxix.  3,  and  more  especially  Pd. 


234  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Ixvi.  1-1)  of  the  wings  of  the  stream  (i.e.  of  the  large  bodies  of 
water  pouring  out  on  both  sides  from  the  main  stream,  as  from 
the  trunk,  and  covering  the  land  like  two  broad  wings)  have  filled 
the  whole  land.  According  to  Norzi,  Immanuel  is  to  be  written 
here  as  one  word,  as  it  is  in  ch.  vii.  14  ;  but  the  correct  reading 
is  'Imrndnu  El,  with  mercha  silluk  (see  note  on  ch.  vii.  14), 
though  it  does  not  therefore  cease  to  be  a  proper  name.  As 
Jerome  observes,  it  is  nomen  proprium,  non  interpretation ;  and 
so  it  is  rendered  in  the  Sept.,  Me#'  f)uwv  6  6eo9. 

The  prophet's  imploring  look  at  Immanuel  does  not  remain 
unanswered.  We  may  see  this  from  the  fact,  that  what  was  almost 
a  silent  prayer  is  changed  at  once  into  the  jubilate  of  holy  de 
fiance. — Vers.  9,  10.  "  Exasperate  yourselves,  0  nations,  and  go 
to  pieces ;  and  see  it,  all  who  are  far  off  in  the  earth  !  Gird  your 
selves,  and  go  to  pieces ;  gird  yourselves,  and  go  to  pieces!  Consult 
counsel,  and  it  comes  to  nought ;  speak  the  word,  and  it  is  not 
realized:  for  with  us  is  God"  The  second  imperatives  in  ver.  9 
are  threatening  words  of  authority,  having  a  future  significa 
tion,  which  change  into  futures  in  ver.  10  (Ges.  §  130,  2)  :  Go 
on  exasperating  yourselves  (ijn  with  the  tone  upon  the  penul 
timate,  and  therefore  not  the  pual  of  njpj  consociari,  which  is 
the  rendering  adopted  in  the  Targum,  but  the  kalvi  JJjn,  malum 
esse ;  not  vociferari,  for  which  Jtt~i,  a  different  verb  from  the 
same  root,  is  commonly  employed),  go  on  arming ;  ye  will  never 
theless  fall  to  pieces  (chottu,  from  chdthath,  related  to  cdthath, 
confringi,  consternari).  The  prophet  classes  together  all  the 
nations  that  are  warring  against  the  people  of  God,  pronounces 
upon  them  the  sentence  of  destruction,  and  calls  upon  all  distant 
lands  to  hear  this  ultimate  fate  of  the  kingdom  of  the  world,  i.e.  of 
the  imperial  power.  The  world-.kingdom  must  be  wrecked  on  the 
land  of  Immanuel;  "  for  with  us"  as  the  watchword  of  believers 
runs,  pointing  to  the  person  of  the  Saviour,  " with  us  is  God" 

There  then  follows  in  ver.  11  an  explanatory  clause,  which 
seems  at  first  sight  to  pass  on  to  a  totally  different  theme,  but 
it  really  stands  in  the  closest  connection  with  the  triumphant 
words  of  vers.  9,  10.  It  is  Immanuel  whom  believers  receive, 
constitute,  and  hold  fast  as  their  refuge  in  the  approaching 
times  of  the  Assyrian  judgment.  He  is  their  refuge  and  God 
in  Him,  and  not  any  human  support  whatever.  This  is  the 
link  of  connection  with  vers.  11,  12  :  "For  Jehovah  hath  spoken 


CHAP.  VIII.  11,  12.  235 

thus  Ic  me,  overpowering  me  with  Gotfs  hand)  and  instructing  me 
net  to  walk  in  the  way  of  this  people,  saying.  Call  ye  not  con 
spiracy  all  that  this  people  calls  conspiracy ;  and  what  is  feared 
by  ity  fear  ye  not,  neither  think  ye  dreadful"  *l*n,  "  the  hand"  is 
the  absolute  hand,  which  is  no  sooner  laid  upon  a  man  than  it 
overpowers  all  perception,  sensation,  and  thought:  chezkath 
hayydd  (viz.  'dlai,  upon  me,  Ezek.  iii.  14)  therefore  describes 
a  condition  in  which  the  hand  of  God  was  put  forth  upon  the 
prophet  with  peculiar  force,  as  distinguished  from  the  more 
usual  prophetic  state,  the  effect  of  a  peculiarly  impressive  and 
energetic  act  of  God.  Luther  is  wrong  in  following  the  Syriac, 
and  adopting  the  rendering,  "  taking  me  by  the  hand  ;"  as  chez 
kath  points  back  to  the  kal  (invalescere),  and  not  to  the  hiphil 
(apprehendere).  It  is  this  circumstantial  statement,  which  is 
continued  in  vyissereni  ("  and  instructing  me"),  and  not  the 
leading  verb  ''dinar  ("  he  said")  ;  for  the  former  is  not  the  third 
pers.  pret.  piel,  which  would  be  vyisserani,  but  the  third  pers. 
fut.  kal,  from  the  future  form  yissor  (Hos.  x.  10,  whereas 
the  fut.  piel  is  vyasser)  ;  and  it  is  closely  connected  witli 
chezkath  hayydd,  according  to  the  analogy  of  the  change  from 
the  participial  and  infinitive  construction  to  the  finite  verb 
(Ges.  §  132,  Anm.  2).  With  this  overpowering  influence,  and 
an  instructive  warning  against  going  in  the  way  of  "  this 
people,"  Jehovah  spake  to  the  prophet  as  follows.  With  regard 
to  the  substance  of  the  following  warning,  the  explanation  that 
has  been  commonly  adopted  since  the  time  of  Jerome,  viz.  noli 
duorum  regum  timere  conjurationem  (fear  not  the  conspiracy  of 
the  two  kings),  is  contrary  to  the  reading  of  the  words.  The 
warning  runs  thus :  The  prophet,  and  such  as  were  on  his  side, 
were  not  to  call  that  kesher  which  the  great  mass  of  the  people 
called  kesher  (cf.  2  Chron.  xxiii.  13,  "  She  said,  Treason,  Trea 
son  !"  kesher,  kesher)  ;  yet  the  alliance  of  Eezin  and  Pekah  was 
really  a  conspiracy — a  league  against  the  house  and  people  of 
David.  Nor  can  the  warning  mean  that  believers,  when  they 
saw  how  the  unbelieving  Ahaz  brought  the  nation  into  distress, 
were  not  to  join  in  a  conspiracy  against  the  person  of  the  king 
(Hofmann,  Drechsler) ;  they  are  not  warned  at  all  against 
making  a  conspiracy,  but  against  joining  in  the  popular  cry 
when  the  people  called  out  kesher.  The  true  explanation  has 
been  given  by  Koorda,  viz.  that  the  reference  is  to  the  conspi- 


236  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

racy,  as  it  was  called,  of  the  prophet  and  his  disciples  ("  sermo 
hie  est  de  conjuratione,  quce  dicebatur  prophetce  et  discipulorum 
ejus").  The  same  thing  happened  to  Isaiah  as  to  Amos  (Amos 
vii.  10)  and  to  Jeremiah.  Whenever  the  prophets  were  at  all 
zealous  in  their  opposition  to  the  appeal  for  foreign  aid,  they 
were  accused  and  branded  as  standing  in  the  service  of  the 
enemy,  and  conspiring  for  the  overthrow  of  the  kingdom.  In 
such  perversion  of  language  as  this,  the  honourable  among  them 
were  not  to  join.  The  way  of  God  was  now  a  very  different 
one  from  the  way  of  that  people.  If  the  prophet  and  his 
followers  opposed  the  alliance  with  Asshur,  this  was  not  a 
common  human  conspiracy  against  the  will  of  the  king  and 
nation,  but  the  inspiration  of  God,  the  true  policy  of  Jehovah. 
Whoever  trusted  in  Him  had  no  need  to  be  afraid  of  such 
attempts  as  those  of  Eezin  and  Pekah,  or  to  look  upon  them 
as  dreadful. 

The  object  of  their  fear  was  a  very  different  one.  Vers. 
13-15.  "Jehovah  of  hosts,  sanctify  Him;  and  let  Him  be 
your  fear,  and  let  Him  be  your  terror.  So  will  He  become  a 
sanctuary,  but  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence  (vexa 
tion)  to  both  the  houses  of  Israel,  a  snare  and  trap  to  the  inhabit 
ants  of  Jerusalem.  And  many  among  them  shall  stumble,  and 
shall  fall;  and  be  dashed  to  pieces,  and  be  snared  and  taken''' 
The  logical  apodosis  to  ver.  13  commences  with  V  hay  ah  (so 
shall  He  be).  If  ye  actually  acknowledge  Jehovah  the  Holy 
One  as  the  Holy  One  (hikdlsh,  as  in  ch.  xxix.  23),  and  if 
it  is  He  whom  ye  fear,  and  who  fills  you  with  dread  (ma  arltz, 
used  for  the  object  of  dread,  as  morah  is  for  the  object  of  fear ; 
hence  "  that  which  terrifies "  in  a  causative  sense),  He  will 
become  a  mikddsh.  The  word  mikddsh  may  indeed  denote  the 
object  sanctified,  and  so  Knobel  understands  it  here  according 
to  Num.  xviii.  29 ;  but  if  we  adhere  to  the  strict  notion  of  the 
word,  this  gives  an  unmeaning  apodosis.  Mikddsh  generally 
means  the  sanctified  place  or  sanctuary,  with  which  the  idea 
of  an  asylum  would  easily  associate  itself,  since  even  among 
the  Israelites  the  temple  was  regarded  and  respected  as  an 
asylum  (1  Kings  i.  50,  ii.  28).  This  is  the  explanation  which 
most  of  the  commentators  have  adopted  here ;  and  the  punc 
tuators  also  took  it  in  the  same  sense,  when  they  divided  the  two 
halves  of  ver.  11  by  athnach  as  antithetical.  And  mikddxh  is 


CHAP.  VIII   16.  237 

really  to  be  taken  in  tins  sense,  although  it  cannot  be  exactly 
rendered  "  asylum,"  since  this  would  improperly  limit  the  mean 
ing  of  the  word.  The  temple  was  not  only  a  place  of  shelter, 
but  also  of  grace,  blessing,  and  peace.  All  who  sanctified  the 
Lord  of  lords  He  surrounded  like  temple  walls ;  hid  them  in 
Himself,  whilst  death  and  tribulation  reigned  without,  and 
comforted,  fed,  and  blessed  them  in  His  own  gracious  fellowship. 
This  is  the  true  explanation  of  vhdydh  Vmikddsh,  according  to 
such  passages  as  ch.  iv.  5,  6,  Ps.  xxvii.  5,  xxxi.  21.  To  the 
two  houses  of  Israel,  on  the  contrary,  i.e.  to  the  great  mass 
of  the  people  of  both  kingdoms  who  neither  sanctified  nor  feared 
Jehovah,  He  would  be  a  rock  and  snare.  The  synonyms  are 
intentionally  heaped  together  (cf.  ctu  xxviii.  13),  to  produce 
the  fearful  impression  of  death  occurring  in  many  forms,  but 
all  inevitable.  The  first  three  verbs  of  ver.  15  refer  to  the 
"stone"  ('eben)  and  "rock"  (tzur)-,  the  last  two  to  the  "snare" 
(pack),  and  "  trap"  or  springe  (mokesli).1  All  who  did  not 
give  glory  to  Jehovah  would  be  dashed  to  pieces  upon  His  work 
as  upon  a  stone,  and  caught  therein  as  in  a  trap.  This  was  the 
burden  of  the  divine  warning,  which  the  prophet  heard  for 
himself  and  for  those  that  believed. 

The  words  that  follow  in  ver.  1 6,  "  Bind  up  the  testimony, 
seal  the  lesson  in  my  disciples"  appear  at  first  sight  to  be  a 
command  of  God  to  the  prophet,  according  to  such  parallel 
passages  as  Dan.  xii.  4,  9,  Rev.  xxii.  10,  cf.  Dan.  viii.  26 ; 
but  with  this  explanation  it  is  impossible  to  do  justice  to  the 
words  "  in  my  disciples"  (Ulimmuddi).  The  explanation  given 
by  Rosenmuller,  Knobel,  and  others,  viz.  "  by  bringing  in  men 
divinely  instructed"  (adhibitis  viris  piis  et  sapientibus\  is  gram 
matically  inadmissible.  Consequently  I  agree  with  Vitringa, 
Drechsler,  and  others,  in  regarding  ver.  16  as  the  prophet's 
own  prayer  to  Jehovah.  We  tie  together  (TO,  imperf.  ite  = 
-)V)  what  we  wish  to  keep  from  getting  separated  and  lost; 
we  seal  (chdtham)  what  is  to  be  kept  secret,  and  only  opened 
by  a  person  duly  qualified.  And  so  the  prophet  here  prays 
that  Jehovah  would  take  his  testimony  with  regard  to  the 

1  Malbim  observes  quite  correctly,  that  "  the  pack  catches,  but  does  not 
hurt ;  the  mokesh  catches  and  hurts  (e.g.  by  seizing  the  legs  or  nose,  Job 
xl.  24)  :  the  former  is  a  simple  snare  (or  net),  the  latter  a  springe,  or  snara 
\vhich  catches  by  means  of  a  spring  "  (Amos  iii.  5). 


238  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

future,  and  his  instruction,  which  was  designed  to  prepare  for 
this  future, — that  testimony  and  thorah  which  the  great  mass  in 
their  hardness  did  not  understand,  and  in  their  self-hardening 
despised, — and  lay  them  up  well  secured  and  well  preserved,  as 
if  by  band  and  seal,  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  received  the 
prophet's  words  with  believing  obedience  (limmud,  as  in  ch. 
1.  4,  liv.  13).  For  it  would  be  all  over  with  Israel,  unless  a 
community  of  believers  should  be  preserved,  and  all  over  with 
this  community,  if  the  word  of  God,  which  was  the  ground  of 
their  life,  should  be  allowed  to  slip  from  their  hearts.  We 
have  here  an  announcement  of  the  grand  idea,  which  the  second 
part  of  the  book  of  Isaiah  carries  out  in  the  grandest  style. 
It  is  very  evident  that  it  is  the  prophet  himself  who  is  speaking 
here,  as  we  may  see  from  ver.  17,  where  he  continues  to  speak 
in  the  first  person,  though  he  does  not  begin  with  ^Nl. 

Whilst  offering  this  prayer,  and  looking  for  its  fulfilment, 
he  waits  upon  Jehovah.  Ver.  17.  "And  I  wait  upon  Jehovah, 
irho  hides  His  face  before  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  hope  for  Him ." 
A  time  of  judgment  had  now  commenced,  which  would  still 
last  a  long  time ;  but  the  word  of  God  was  the  pledge  of  Israel's 
continuance  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  of  the  renewal  of  Israel's 
glory  afterwards.  The  prophet  would  therefore  hope  for  the 
grace  which  was  now  hidden  behind  the  wrath. 

His  home  was  the  future,  and  to  this  he  was  subservient, 
even  with  all  his  house.  Ver.  18.  "  Behold,  I  and  the  children 
which  Jeliovah  hath  given  me  for  signs  and  types  in  Israel,  from 
Jehovah  of  hosts,  who  dwelleth  upon  Mount  Zion"  He  pre 
sents  himself  to  the  Lord  with  his  children,  puts  himself  and 
them  into  His  hands.  They  were  Jehovah's  gift,  and  that  for 
a  higher  purpose  than  every-day  family  enjoyment.  They 
subserved  the  purpose  of  signs  and  types  in  connection  with 
the  history  of  salvation.  "  Signs  and  types  :"  'oth  (sign)  was  an 
omen  or  prognostic  (cr^/xetoy)  in  word  and  deed,  which  pointed 
to  and  was  the  pledge  of  something  future  (whether  it  were 
in  itself  miraculous  or  natural) ;  mopheth  was  either  something 
miraculous  (repas)  pointing  back  to  a  supernatural  cause,  or  a 
type  (TUTTO?,  prodigium  =  porridigium)  which  pointed  beyond 
itself  to  something  future  and  concealed,  literally  twisted  round, 
i.e.  out  of  the  ordinary  course,  paradoxical,  striking,  standing 
out  (Arab,  aft,  ift,  res  mira,  Seivov  rt),  from  HSN  (related  to  ^DH 


CHAP.  VIII.  19.  239 

like  ">Dio  =  "IDK».  His  children  were  signs  and 
enigmatical  symbols  of  the  future,  and  that  from  Jehovah  of 
hosts  who  dwelt  on  Zion.  In  accordance  with  His  counsel  (to 
which  the  DJJ  in  DVD  points),  He  had  selected  these  signs  and 
types  :  He  who  could  bring  to  pass  the  future,  which  they  set 
forth,  as  surely  as  He  was  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  who  would 
bring  it  to  pass  as  surely  as  He  had  chosen  Mount  Zion  for 
the  scene  of  His  gracious  presence  upon  earth.  Shear-yashub 
and  Mahershalal  were  indeed  no  less  symbols  of  future  wrath 
than  of  future  grace  ;  but  the  name  of  the  father  (  Yeshctydkn) 
was  an  assurance  that  all  the  future  would  issue  from  Jehovah's 
salvation,  and  end  in  the  same.  Isaiah  and  his  children  were 
figures  and  emblems  of  redemption,  opening  a  way  for  itself 
through  judgment.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (ch.  ii.  13) 
quotes  these  words  as  the  distinct  words  of  Jesus,  because  the 
spirit  of  Jesus  was  in  Isaiah, — the  spirit  of  Jesus,  which  in  the 
midst  of  this  holy  family,  bound  together  as  it  was  only  by  the 
bands  of  "  the  shadow,"  pointed  forward  to  that  church  of  the 
New  Testament  which  would  be  bound  together  by  the  bands 
of  the  true  substance.  Isaiah,  his  children,  and  his  wife,  who 
is  called  "  the  prophetess"  (nebiah)  not  only  because  she  was 
the  wife  of  the  prophet  but  because  she  herself  possessed  the 
gift  of  prophecy,  and  all  the  believing  disciples  gathered  round 
this  family, — these  together  formed  the  stock  of  the  church  of 
the  Messianic  future,  on  the  foundation  and  soil  of  the  existing 
massa  perdita  of  Israel. 

It  is  to  this  ecclesiola  in  ecclesia  that  the  prophet's  admonition 
is  addressed.  Ver.  19.  "  And  when  they  shall  say  to  you.  In 
quire  of  the  necromancers,  and  of  the  soothsayei*s  that  chirp  and 
whisper: — Should  not  a  people  inquire  of  its  Godf  for  the  living 
to  the  dead  ?"  The  appeal  is  supposed  to  be  made  by  Judaeans 
of  the  existing  stamp  ;  for  we  know  from  ch.  ii.  6,  iii.  2,  3, 
that  all  kinds  of  heathen  superstitions  had  found  their  way 
into  Jerusalem,  and  were  practised  there  as  a  trade.  The 
persons  into  whose  mouths  the  answer  is  put  by  the  prophet 
(we  may  supply  before  ver.  19&,  "  Thus  shall  ye  say  to  them;" 
cf.  Jer.  x.  11),  are  his  own  children  and  disciples.  The  cir 
cumstances  of  the  times  were  very  critical ;  and  the  people 
were  applying  to  wizards  to  throw  light  upon  the  dark  future. 
'  Ob  signified  primarily  the  spirit  of  witchcraft,  then  the  posses- 


240  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

sor  of  such  a  spirit  (equivalent  to  Baal  o&),  more  especially  the 
necromancer.  Yidd'oni,  on  the  other  hand,  signified  primarily 
the  possessor  of  a  prophesying  or  soothsaying  spirit  (irvOwv  or 
irvevfjia  rov  Trv9wvos\  Syr.  yodua  (after  the  intensive  form 
pa' ul  with  immutable  vowels),  and  then  the  soothsaying  spirit 
itself  (Lev.  xx.  27),  which  was  properly  called  yiddd on  (the 
much  knowing),  like  SaijmwV)  which,  according  to  Plato,  is 
equivalent  to  $arj/j,(t)v.  These  people,  who  are  designated  by 
the  LXX.,  both  here  and  elsewhere,  as  eyyacrrpo/jivBoi,,  i.e. 
ventriloquists,  imitated  the  chirping  of  bats,  which  was  sup 
posed  to  proceed  from  the  shades  of  Hades,  and  uttered  their 
magical  formulas  in  a  whispering  tone.1  What  an  unnatural 
thing,  for  the  people  of  Jehovah  to  go  and  inquire,  not  of 
their  own  God,  but  of  such  heathenish  and  demoniacal  deceivers 
and  victims  as  these  (ddrash  *el,  to  go  and  inquire  of  a  person, 
ch.  xi.  10,  synonymous  with  shd'al  &',  1  Sam.  xxviii.  6)  !  What 
blindness,  to  consult  the  dead  in  the  interests  of  the  living ! 
By  "  the  dead"  (hammethim)  we  are  not  to  understand  "  the 
idols"  in  this  passage,  as  in  Ps.  cvi.  28,  but  the  departed,  as 
Deut.  xviii.  11  (cf.  1  Sam  xxviii.)  clearly  proves;  and  *UB  is 
not  to  be  taken,  either  here  or  elsewhere,  as  equivalent  to 
tachath  ("  instead  of"),  as  Knobel  supposes,  but,  as  in  Jer.  xxi.  2 
and  other  passages,  as  signifying  "  for  the  benefit  of."  Necro 
mancy,  which  makes  the  dead  the  instructors  of  the  living,  is 
a  most  gloomy  deception, 

In  opposition  to  such  a  falling  away  to  wretched  supersti 
tion,  the  watchword  of  the  prophet  and  his  supporters  is  this. 
Ver.  20.  "  To  the  teaching  of  God  (thorahj  Gotteslehre),  and  to  the 

1  The  Mishnah  Sanhedrin  65a  gives  this  definition :  "  Baal  '61)  is  a  python, 
i.e.  a  soothsayer  ('  with  a  spirit  of  divination'),  who  speaks  from  his 
arm-pit ;  yidd'oni,  a  man  who  speaks  with  his  mouth."  The  baal  o&,  so  far 
as  he  had  to  do  with  the  bones  of  the  dead,  is  called  in  the  Talmud  'o6a' 
temayya\  e.g.  the  witch  of  Endor  (b.  Sabbath  1526).  On  the  history  of  the 
etj'mological  explanation  of  the  word,  see  Bottcher,  de  inferis,  §  205-217. 
If  'oft,  a  skin  or  leather  bottle,  is  a  word  from  the  same  root  (rendered 
"bellows"  by  the  LXX.  at  Job  xxxii.  19),  as  it  apparently  is,  it  may  be 
applied  to  a  bottle  as  a  thing  which  swells  or  can  be  blown  out,  and  to  a 
wizard  or  spirit  of  incantation  on  account  of  his  puffing  and  gasping.  The 
explanation  "  le  revenant,"  from  n^K  =  Arab,  aba,  to  return,  has  only  a 
very  weak  support  in  the  proper  name  3VN  =  avvab  (the  penitent,  returu- 
ing  again  and  again  to  God  :  see  again  at  ch.  xxix.  4). 


CHAP.  VIII.  20-21  241 

testimony  !  If  they  do  not  accord  with  this  ivord,  they  are  a 
people  for  wliom  no  morning  dawns"  The  summons,  "  to  the 
teaching  and  to  the  testimony"  (namely,  to  those  which  Jehovah 
gave  through  His  prophet,  ver.  17),  takes  the  form  of  a  watch 
word  in  time  of  battle  (Judg.  vii.  18).  With  this  construction 
the  following  N?"D^  (which  Knobel  understands  interroga 
tively,  "  Should  not  they  speak  so,  who,  etc.  ?  "  and  Luzzatto 
as  an  oath,  as  in  Ps.  cxxxi.  2,  "  Surely  they  say  such  words  as 
have  no  dawn  in  them")  has,  at  any  rate,  all  the  presumption 
of  a  conditional  signification.  Whoever  had  not  this  watch 
word  would  be  regarded  as  the  enemy  of  Jehovah,  and  suffer 
the  fate  of  such  a  man.  This  is,  to  all  appearance,  the  meaning 
of  the  apodosis  ">n&?  i^"pK  itPK.  Luther  has  given  the  meaning 
correctly,  "  If  they  do  not  say  this,  they  will  not  have  the 
morning  dawn  ;"  or,  according  to  his  earlier  and  equally  good 
rendering,  "  They  shall  never  overtake  the  morning  light," 
literally,  "They  are  those  to  whom  no  dawn  arises."  The  use 
of  the  plural  in  the  hypothetical  protasis,  and  the  singular  in 
the  apodosis,  is  an  intentional  and  significant  change.  All  the 
several  individuals  who  did  not  adhere  to  the  revelation  made 
by  Jehovah  through  His  prophet,  formed  one  corrupt  mass, 
which  would  remain  in  hopeless  darkness.  ">£?N  is  used  in  the 
same  sense  as  in  ch.  v.  28  and  2  Sam.  ii.  4,  and  possibly  also 
as  in  1  Sam.  xv.  20,  instead  of  the  more  usual  *3,  when  used 
in  the  affirmative  sense  which  springs  in  both  particles  out  of 
the  confirmative  (namgue  and  quoniam)  :  Truly  they  have  no 
morning  dawn  to  expect.1 

The  night  of  despair  to  which  the  unbelieving  nation  would 
be  brought,  is  described  in  vers.  21,  22:  "And  it  goes  about 
therein  hard  pressed  and  hungry  :  and  it  comes  to  pass,  when 
hunger  lefals  it,  it  frets  itself,  and  curses  by  its  king  and  by 
its  God,  and  turns  its  face  upward,  and  looks  to  the  earth, 
and  behold  distress  and  darkness,  benighting  with  anquish,  and 
thrust  out  into  darkness."  The  singulars  attach  themselves 
to  the  i^  in  ver.  19,  which  embraces  all  the  unbelievers  in  one 
mass  ;  "  therein"  (bdh)  refers  to  the  self-evident  land  (eretz). 
The  people  would  be  brought  to  such  a  plight  in  the  approach 
ing  Assyrian  oppressions,  that  they  would  wander  about  in  the 

1  Strangely  enough,  vers.  19  and  20  are  described  in  Lev.  Ralla,  ch. 
xv.,  as  words  of  the  prophet  Hos«a  incorporated  in  the  book  of  Isaiah. 
VOL.  I.  U 


242  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

land  pressed  down  by  their  hard  fate  (nikslieli)  and  hungry 
(m'e&),  because  all  provisions  would  be  gone  and  the  fields 
and  vineyards  would  be  laid  waste.  As  often  as  it  experienced 
hunger  afresh,  it  would  work  itself  into  a  rage  (vhithkazzapJi 
with  Vav  apod,  and  pathacli,  according  to  Ges.  §  54,  Anm.),  and 
curse  by  its  king  and  God,  i.e.  by  its  idol.  This  is  the  way  in 
which  we  must  explain  the  passage,  in  accordance  with  1  Sam. 
xiv.  43,  where  killel  belohim  is  equivalent  to  killel  b'shem  elo- 
him,  and  with  Zeph.  i.  5,  where  a  distinction  is  made  between 
an  oath  layeJiovdh,  and  an  oath  Vmalcdm ;  if  we  would  adhere 
to  the  usage  of  the  language,  in  which  we  never  find  a  3  ?7p 
corresponding  to  the  Latin  execrari  in  aliquem  (Ges.),  but 
on  the  contrary  the  object  cursed  is  always  expressed  in  the 
accusative.  We  must  therefore  give  up  Ps.  v.  3  and  Ixviii.  25 
as  parallels  to  Vmalco  and  belohdiv :  they  curse  by  the  idol, 
which  passes  with  them  for  both  king  and  God,  curse  their 
wretched  fate  with  this  as  they  suppose  the  most  effectual 
curse  of  all,  without  discerning  in  it  the  just  punishment  of 
their  own  apostasy,  and  humbling  themselves  penitentially 
under  the  almighty  hand  of  Jehovah.  Consequently  all  this 
reaction  of  their  wrath  would  avail  them  nothing :  whether 
they  turned  upwards,  to  see  if  the  black  sky  were  not  clearing, 
or  looked  down  to  the  earth,  everywhere  there  would  meet 
them  nothing  but  distress  and  darkness,  nothing  but  a  night 
of  anguish  all  around  (meupli  zukdh  is  a  kind  of  summary  ; 
mauph  a  complete  veiling,  or  eclipse,  written  with  u  instead 
of  the  more  usual  oof  this  substantive  form :  Ewald,  §  160,  a). 
The  judgment  of  God  does  not  convert  them,  but  only 
heightens  their  wickedness ;  just  as  in  Eev.  xvi.  11,  21,  after 
the  pouring  out  of  the  fifth  and  seventh  vials  of  wrath,  men 
only  utter  blasphemies,  and  do  not  desist  from  their  works. 
After  stating  what  the  people  see,  whether  they  turn  their  eyes 
upwards  or  downwards,  the  closing  participial  clause  of  ver.  22 
describes  how  they  see  themselves  "  thrust  out  into  darkness  " 
(in  caliginem  propulsum).  There  is  no  necessity  to  supply 
fcttn  ;  but  out  of  the  previous  hinneh  it  is  easy  to  repeat  Idnno 
or  hinnennu  (en  ipsum).  "Into  darkness  :"  'dplieldh  (ace.  loci) 
is  placed  emphatically  at  the  head,  as  in  Jer.  xxiii.  12. 

After  the  prophet  has  thus  depicted  the  people  as  without 
morning  dawn,  he  gives  the  reason  for  the  assumption  that  a 


CHAP.  ix.  i.  243 

restoration  of  light  is  to  be  expected,  although  not  for  the  exist 
ing  generation.  Ch.  ix.  1.  "  For  it  does  not  remain  dark  where 
there  is  now  distress  :  in  the  first  time  He  brought  into  disgrace 
the  land  of  Zebulun  and  the  land  of  NaphtaU,  and  in  the  last  He 
brings  to  honour  the  road  by  the  sea,  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  the 
circle  of  the  Gentiles."  *3  is  neither  to  be  taken  as  equivalent  to 
the  untranslatable  OTL  recitativum  (Knobel),  nor  is  there  any 
necessity  to  translate  it  "but"  or  "nevertheless,"  and  supply 
the  clause,  "  it  will  not  remain  so."  The  reason  assigned  for 
the  fact  that  the  unbelieving  people  of  Judah  had  fallen  into 
a  night  without  morning,  is,  that  there  was  a  morning  coming, 
whose  light,  however,  would  not  rise  upon  the  land  of  Judah 
first,  but  upon  other  parts  of  the  land.  Mudph  and  muzak  are 
hophal  nouns  :  a  state  of  darkness  and  distress.  The  meaning 
is,  There  is  not,  i.e.  there  will  not  remain,  a  state  of  darkness  over 
the  land  (Idh,  like  bah  in  viii.  21,  refers  to  'eretz\  which  is  now 
in  a  state  of  distress ;  but  those  very  districts  which  God  has 
hitherto  caused  to  suffer  deep  humiliation  He  will  bring  to 
honour  by  and  by  (hekal=  hekel,  according  to  Ges.  §  67,  Anm.  3, 
opp.  hicbld,  as  in  cb.  xxiii.  9).  The  height  of  the  glorification 
would  correspond  to  the  depth  of  the  disgrace.  We  cannot 
adopt  Knobel's  rendering,  "  as  at  a  former  time,"  etc.,  taking 
ny  as  an  accusative  of  time  and  3  as  equivalent  to  "^KS,  for 
3  is  never  used  con  junction  ally  in  this  way  (see  Psalter,  i.  301, 
and  ii.  514) ;  and  in  the  examples  adduced  by  Knobel  (viz. 
ch.  Ixi.  11  and  Job  vii.  2),  the  verbal  clauses  after  Caph  are 
elliptical  relative  clauses.  The  rendering  adopted  by  Rosen- 
mliller  and  others  (sicut  tempus  prius  vilem  reddidit,  etc.,  "  as  a 
former  time  brought  it  into  contempt")  is  equally  wrong.  And 
Ewald,  again,  is  not  correct  in  taking  the  Vav  in  v'hd-acharon 
as  the  Vav  of  sequence  used  in  the  place  of  the  cen  of  com 
parison,  p^&qn  nV3  and  pnxn  are  both  definitions  of  time. 
The  prophet  intentionally  indicates  the  time  of  disgrace  with  3, 
because  this  would  extend  over  a  lengthened  period,  in  which 
the  same  fate  would  occur  again  and  again.  The  time  of  glori 
fication,  on  the  other  hand,  is  indicated  by  the  accus.  temporis, 
because  it  would  occur  but  once,  and  then  continue  in  per 
petuity  and  without  change.  It  is  certainly  possible  that  the 
prophet  may  have  regarded  hd-acharon  as  the  subject ;  but  this 
would  destroy  the  harmony  of  the  antithesis.  By  the  land  or 


244  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

territory  of  Naphtali  (^artzdh,  poet,  for  9eretz,  as  in  Job  xxxiv. 
13,  xxxvii.  12,  with  a  toneless  ah)  we  are  to  understand  the 
upper  Galilee  of  later  times,  and  by  the  land  of  Zebulun  lower 
Galilee.  In  the  antithetical  parallel  clause,  what  is  meant  by 
the  two  lands  is  distinctly  specified  :  (1)  u  the  road  by  the  sea," 
dc.rek  hauijdm,  the  tract  of  land  on  the  western  shore  of  the  sea  of 
Chinnereth  ;  (2)  "the  other  side  of  Jordan,"  'eber  hayyarden, 
the  country  to  the  east  of  the  Jordan  ;  (3)  "  the  circle  of  the 
Gentiles,"  gelll  liaggoyim,  the  northernmost  border-land  of 
Palestine^  only  a  portion  of  the  so-called  Galilcea  of  after  times. 
Ever  since  the  times  of  the  judges,  all  these  lands  had  been 
exposed,  on  account  of  the  countries  that  joined  them,  to  corrup 
tion  from  Gentile  influence  and  subjugation  by  heathen  foes. 
The  northern  tribes  on  this  side,  as  well  as  those  on  the  other 
side,  suffered  the  most  in  the  almost  incessant  war  between 
Israel  and  the  Syrians,  and  afterwards  between  Israel  and 
the  Assyrians ;  and  the  transportation  of  their  inhabitants, 
which  continued  under  Pul,  Tiglath-pileser,  and  Shalmanassar, 
amounted  at  last  to  utter  depopulation  (Caspari,  Beitr.  110-118). 
But  these  countries  would  be  the  very  first  that  would  be 
remembered  when  that  morning  dawn  of  glory  should  break. 
Matthew  informs  us  (ch.  iv.  13  sqq.)  in  what  way  this  was  ful 
filled  at  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  times.  On  the 
ground  of  this  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  and  not  of  a  "  somewhat 
mistaken  exposition  of  it,"  as  Renan  maintains  in  his  Vie  de  Jesus 
(ch.  xiii.),  the  Messianic  hopes  of  the  Jewish  nation  were  really 
directed  towards  Galilee.1  It  is  true  that,  according  to  Jerome, 
in  loc.y  the  Nazarenes  supposed  ch.  ix.  Ib  to  refer  to  the  light  of 
the  gospel  spread  by  the  preaching  of  Paul  in  terminos  gentium 
et  mam  universi  maris.  But  "  the  sea"  (liayydm)  cannot  pos 
sibly  be  understood  as  referring  to  the  Mediterranean,  as  Meier 
and  Hofmann  suppose,  for  "  the  way  of  the  sea"  (derek  hayydm) 
would  in  that  case  have  been  inhabited  by  the  Philistines  and 
Phoenicians  ;  whereas  the  prophet's  intention  was  evidently  to 
mention  such  Israelitish  provinces  as  had  suffered  the  greatest 
affliction  and  degradation. 

1  The  Zohar  was  not  the  first  to  teach  that  the  Messiah  would  appear  in 
Galilee,  and  that  redemption  would  break  forth  from  Tiberias  ;  but  this  is 
found  in  the  Talmud  and  Midrash  (see  Litter atur-Uatt  des  Orients,  1813, 
Col.  776), 


CHAP.  IX.  2,  3.  245 

The  range  of  vision  is  first  widened  in  ver.  2  :  "  The  people 
that  ivalk  about  in  darkness  see  a  great  light;  they  who  dwell  in 
the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death,  upon  them  a  light  shines." 
The  range  of  vision  is  here  extended ;  not  to  the  Gentiles,  how 
ever,  but  to  all  Israel.  Salvation  would  not  break  forth  till  it 
had  become  utterly  dark  along  the  horizon  of  Israel,  according 
to  the  description  in  ch.  v.  30,  i.e.  till  the  land  of  Jehovah  had 
become  a  land  of  the  shadow  of  death  on  account  of  the  apos 
tasy  of  its  inhabitants  from  Jehovah  (zalmdveth  is  modified,  after 
the  manner  of  a  composite  noun,  from  zalmuth}  according  to 
the  form  kadruth,  and  is  derived  from  oh?,  ^Eth.  salema,  Arab. 
zalima,  to  be  dark).1  The  apostate  mass  of  the  nation  is  to  be 
regarded  as  already  swept  away ;  for  if  death  has  cast  its 
shadow  over  the  land,  it  must  be  utterly  desolate.  In  this 
state  of  things  the  remnant  left  in  the  land  beholds  a  great 
light,  which  breaks  through  the  sky  that  has  been  hitherto 
covered  with  blackness.  The  people,  who  turned  their  eyes 
upwards  to  no  purpose,  because  they  did  so  with  cursing  (ch. 
viii.  21),  are  now  no  more.  It  is  the  remnant  of  Israel  which 
sees  this  light  of  spiritual  and  material  redemption  arise  above 
its  head.  In  what  this  light  would  consist  the  prophet  states 
afterwards,  when  describing  first  the  blessings  and  then  the 
star  of  the  new  time. 

In  ver.  3  he  says,  in  words  of  thanksgiving  and  praise  : 
"  Thou  multipliest  the  nation,  preparest  it  great  joy ;  they  rejoice 
before  Thee  like  the  joy  in  harvest,  as  men  rejoice  ivlien  they  share 
the  spoil."  "  The  nation  "  (haggoi)  is  undoubtedly  Israel,  re 
duced  to  a  small  remnant.  That  God  would  make  this  again 
into  a  numerous  people,  was  a  leading  feature  in  the  pictures 
drawn  of  the  time  of  glory  (ch.  xxvi.  15,  Ixvi.  8  ;  Zech. 
xiv.  10,  11),  which  would  be  in  this  respect  the  counterpart  of 
that  of  Solomon  (1  Kings  iv.  20).  If  our  explanation  is  the 
correct  one  so  far,  the  only  way  to  give  an  intelligible  meaning 

1  The  shadow  or  shade,  zel,  Arab,  zill  (radically  related  to  tall  =  ta,  dew), 
derived  its  name  ab  oltegendo,  and  according  to  the  idea  attached  to  it  as 
the  opposite  of  heat  or  of  light,  was  used  as  a  figure  of  a  beneficent  shelter 
(ch.  xvi.  3),  or  of  what  was  dark  and  horrible  (cf.  Targ.  tallani,  a  night- 
demon).  The  verb  zalam,  in  the  sense  of  the  Arabic  zalima,  bears  the 
same  relation  to  zalal  as  bdham  to  bdhdh  (Gen.  p.  93),  'dram,  to  be  naked, 
to  'drdh  (Jeshurun,  p.  159).  The  noun  zelem,  however,  is  either  formed  from 
this  zctlan^  or  else  directly  from  zel,  with  the  substantive  termination  em. 


246  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

to  the  chethib  JO,  taking  it  in  a  negative  sense,  is  to  reliefer  it, 
as  Hengstenberg,  Ilitzig,  and  others  have  done,  u  Thou  multi- 
pliest  the  nation  to  which  Thou  hadst  formerly  not  given  great 
joy,"  which  must  signify,  per  litoten,  "  the  nation  which  Thou 
hadst  plunged  into  deep  sorrow."  But  it  is  unnatural  to  take 
any  one  of  the  prophetic  preterites,  commencing  with  hicbid  in 
vei.  1,  in  any  other  than  a  future  sense.  We  must  therefore 
give  the  preference  to  the  keri  p,1  and  render  it,  "  Thou  makest 
of  the  nation  a  great  multitude,  and  preparest  it  great  joy." 
The  pronoun  Id  is  written  first,  as  in  Lev.  vii.  7-9,  Job  xli.  4 
(keri),  probably  with  the  emphasis  assumed  by  Drechsler :  "  to 
it,  in  which  there  was  not  the  smallest  indication  of  such  an 
issue  as  this."  The  verbs  "  multiplied "  (higdaltd)  and  u  in 
creased"  (hirbithd)  are  intentionally  written  together,  to  put 
the  intensity  of  the  joy  on  a  level  with  the  extensiveness  of 
the  multitude.  This  joy  would  be  a  holy  joy,  as  the  ex 
pression  "  before  Thee "  implies  :  the  expression  itself  recals 
the  sacrificial  meals  in  the  courts  of  the  temple  (Deut.  xii.  7, 
xiv.  26).  It  would  be  a  joy  over  blessings  received,  as  the 
figure  of  the  harvest  indicates ;  and  joy  over  evil  averted,  as 
the  figure  of  dividing  the  spoil  presupposes:  for  the  division 
of  booty  is  the  business  of  conquerors.  This  second  figure  is 
not  merely  a  figure  :  the  people  that  are  so  joyous  are  really 
victorious  and  triumphant.  Ver.  4.  "  For  the  yoke  of  its 
burden  and  the  stick  of  its  neck,  the  stick  of  its  oppressor,  Thou 
hast  broken  to  splinters,  as  in  the  day  of  Midian."  The  suffixes 
refer  to  the  people  (ha  din).  Instead  of  soblo,  from  sobel,  we 
have  intentionally  the  more  musical  form  v3D  (with  dagesh 
dirimens  and  chateph  kametz  under  the  influence  of  the  previous 
u  instead  of  the  simple  sheva).  The  rhythm  of  the  verse  is 
anapaBstic.  "Its  burden"  (subbdlo)  and  "  its  oppressor"  (nogSs 
bo)  both  recal  to  mind  the  Egyptian  bondage  (Ex.  ii.  11,  v.  6). 
The  future  deliverance,  which  the  prophet  here  celebrates, 
would  be  the  counterpart  of  the  Egyptian.  But  as  the  whole 
of  the  great  nation  of  Israel  was  then  redeemed,  whereas  only 
a  small  remnant  would  participate  in  the  final  redemption,  he 
compares  it  to  the  day  of  Midian,  when  Gideon  broke  the  seven 
years'  dominion  of  Midian,  not  with  a  great  army,  but  with  a 

1  On  the  passages  in  which  ^  cliethib  is  ^  keri,  Bee  at  Ps.  c.  3  and 
Job  xiii.  15. 


CHAP.  IX.  5.  247 

liandful  of  resolute  warriors,  strong  in  the  Lord  (Judg.  vii.). 
The  question  suggests  itself  here,  Who  is  the  hero,  Gideon's 
antitype,  through  whom  all  this  is  to  occur  ?  The  prophet 
does  not  sav  ;  but  building  up  one  clause  upon  another  with 
'3,  he  gives  first  of  all  the  reason  for  the  cessation  of  the 
oppressive  dominion  of  the  imperial  power, — namely,  the  de 
struction  of  all  the  military  stores  of  the  enemy. — Ver.  5.  "  For 
every  boot  of  those  wlio  tramp  with  ooots  in  the  tumult  of  battle, 
and  cloak  rolled  in  blood,  shall  be  for  burning,  a  food  of  fire? 
That  which  is  the  food  of  fire  becomes  at  the  same  time  a 
s&rephdh,  inasmuch  as  the  devouring  fire  reduces  it  to  ashes, 
and  destroys  its  previous  existence.  This  closing  statement 
requires  for  jiNp  the  concrete  sense  of  a  combustible  thing;  and 
this  precludes  such  meanings  as  business  (Handel  und  Wand  el), 
noise,  or  din  (=  jiKBJ,  Jerome,  Syriac,  Rashi,  and  others).  On 
the  other  hand,  the  meaning  "  military  equipment,"  adopted 
by  Knobel  and  others, — a  meaning  derived  from  a  comparison 
of  the  derivatives  of  the  Aramaean  zun,  cizan,  and  the  Arabic 
zdna,  fut.  yezin  (to  dress  or  equip), — would  be  quite  admissible; 
at  the  same  time,  the  interchange  of  Samech  and  Zain  in  this 
word  cannot  be  dialectically  established.  Jos.  Kimchi  has  very 
properly  referred  to  the  Targum  sen,  mesdn  (Syr.  also  satin 
with  an  essentially  long  a),  which  signifies  shoe  (see  Bynseus, 
de  calceo  Hebrceoruni), — a  word  which  is  more  Aramaean  than 
Hebrew,  and  the  use  of  which  in  the  present  connection  might 
be  explained  on  the  ground  that  the  prophet  had  in  his  mind 
the  annihilation  of  the  Assyrian  forces.  We  should  no  doubt 
expect  sd'un  (sandaloumenos)  instead  of  so  en  ;  but  the  denom. 
verb  sd'an  might  be  applied  to  a  soldier's  coming  up  in  military 
boots,  and  so  signify  caligatum  venire,  although  the  primary 
meaning  is  certainly  calceare  se  (e.g.  Eph.  vi.  15,  Syr.).  Ac 
cordingly  we  should  render  it,  "  every  boot  of  him  \vho  comes 
booted  (des  Einherstiefelnden)  into  the  tumult  of  battle,"  taking 
the  word  raash,  not  as  Drechsler  does,  in  the  sense  of  the 
noise  made  by  a  warrior  coming  up  proudly  in  his  war-boots, 
•  nor  with  Luzzatto  in  the  sense  of  the  war-boot  itself,  for  which 
the  word  is  too  strong,  but  as  referring  to  the  noise  or  tumult  of 
battle  (as  in  Jer.  x.  22),  in  the  midst  of  which  the  man  comes 
up  equipped  or  shod  for  military  service.  The  prophet  names 
the  boot  and  garment  with  an  obvious  purpose.  The  destruction 


2-18  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  the  hostile  weapons  follows  as  a  matter  of  course,  if  even  tlio 
military  shoes,  worn  by  the  soldiers  in  the  enemies'  ranks,  and 
the  military  cloaks  that  were  lying  in  ddinim,  i.e.  in  blood  vio 
lently  shed  upon  the  battle-field,  were  all  given  up  to  the  fire. 

Upon  the  two  sentences  with  ci  the  prophet  now  builds  a 
third.  The  reason  for  the  triumph  is  the  deliverance  effected  ; 
and  the  reason  for  the  deliverance,  the  destruction  of  the  foe; 
and  the  reason  for  all  the  joy,  all  the  freedom,  all  the  peace,  is 
the  new  great  King. — Yer.  6.  " For  unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto 
us  a  son  is  given ;  and  the  government  rests  upon  His  shoulder  : 
and  they  call  His  name,  Wonder,  Counsellor,  mighty  God, 
Eternal- Father,  Prince  of  Peace."  The  same  person  whom  the 
prophet  foretold  in  ch.  vii.  as  the  son  of  the  virgin  who  would 
come  to  maturity  in  troublous  times,  he  here  sees  as  born,  and 
as  having  already  taken  possession  of  the  government.  There 
he  appeared  as  a  sign,  here  as  a  gift  of  grace.  The  prophet 
does  not  expressly  say  that  he  is  a  son  of  David  in  this 
instance  any  more  than  in  ch.  vii.  (for  the  remark  that  has 
been  recently  made,  that  yeled  is  used  here  for  "  infant-prince," 
is  absurd) ;  but  this  followed  as  a  matter  of  course,  from  the 
fact  that  he  was  to  bear  the  government,  with  all  its  official 
rights  (ch.  xxii.  22)  and  godlike  majesty  (Ps.  xxi.  6),  upon  his 
shoulder ;  for  the  inviolable  promise  of  eternal  sovereignty,  of 
which  the  new-born  infant  was  to  be  the  glorious  fulfilment, 
had  been  bound  up  with  the  seed  of  David  in  the  course  of 
Israel's  history  ever  since  the  declaration  in  2  Sam.  vii.  In 
ch.  vii.  it  is  the  mother  who  names  the  child ;  here  it  is  the 
people,  or  indeed  any  one  who  rejoices  in  him :  N^i??!,  "  one 
calls,  they  call,  he  is  called,"  as  Luther  has  correctly  rendered 
it,  though  under  the  mistaken  idea  that  the  Jews  had  altered 
the  original  tn^  into  N^i£l,  for  the  purpose  of  eliminating 
the  Messianic  sense  of  the  passage.  But  the  active  verb 
itself  has  really  been  twisted  by  Jewish  commentators  in  this 
way;  so  that  Rashi,  Kimchi,  Malbim,  and  others  follow  the 
Targum,  and  explain  the  passage  as  meaning,  "  the  God,  who 
is  called  and  is  Wonder,  Counsellor,  the  mighty  God,  the 
eternal  Father,  calls  his  name  the  Prince  of  Peace ; "  but 
this  rendering  evidently  tears  asunder  things  that  are  closely 
connected.  And  Luzzatto  has  justly  observed,  that  you  do  not 
expect  to  find  attributes  of  God  here,  but  such  as  would  be 


CHAP.  IX.  P.  249 

characteristic  of  the  child.  He  therefore  renders  the  passage, 
"  God  the  mighty,  the  eternal  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace, 
resolves  upon  wonderful  things,"  and  persuades  himself  that 
this  long  clause  is  meant  for  the  proper  name  of  the  child, 
just  as  in  other  cases  declaratory  clauses  are  made  into  proper 
names,  e.g.  the  names  of  the  prophet's  two  sons.  But  even 
granting  that  such  a  sesquipedalian  name  were  possible,  in  what 
an  unskilful  manner  would  the  name  be  formed,  since  the  long- 
winded  clause,  which  would  necessarily  have  to  be  uttered  in 
one  breath,  would  resolve  itself  again  into  separate  clauses, 
which  are  not  only  names  themselves,  but,  contrary  to  all  expec 
tation,  names  of  God  !  The  motive  which  prompted  Luzzatto 
to  adopt  this  original  interpretation  is  worthy  of  notice.  He 
had  formerly  endeavoured,  like  other  commentators,  to  explain 
the  passage  by  taking  the  words  from  "  Wonderful  "  to  "  Prince 
of  Peace  "  as  the  name  of  the  child ;  and  in  doing  this  he 
rendered  pjn*  tfi>D  "  one  counselling  wonderful  things,"  thus 
inverting  the  object,  and  regarded  "mighty  God"  as  well  as 
u  eternal  Father"  as  hyperbolical  expressions,  like  the  words 
applied  to  the  King  in  Ps.  xlv.  la.  But  now  he  cannot  help 
regarding  it  as  absolutely  impossible  for  a  human  child  to  be 
called  el  gibbor,  like  God  Himself  in  ch.  x.  21.  So  far  as  the 
relation  between  his  novel  attempt  at  exposition  and  the  accen 
tuation  is  concerned,  it  certainly  does  violence  to  this,  though 
not  to  such  an  extent  as  the  other  specimen  of  exegetical  leger 
demain,  which  makes  the  clause  from  &6a  to  IjrQK  the  subject 
to  «"ip1|1.  Nevertheless,  in  the  face  of  the  existing  accentuation, 
we  must  admit  that  the  latter  is,  comparatively  speaking,  the 
better  of  the  two  ;  for  if  1E&?  {Op^  were  intended  to  be  the  in 
troduction  to  the  list  of  names  which  follows,  1»$  would  not  be 
pointed  with  geresh,  but  with  zakeph.  The  accentuators  seem 
also  to  have  shrunk  from  taking  el  gibbor  as  the  name  of  a 
man.  They  insert  intermediate  points,  as  though  "eternal 
Father,  Prince  of  Peace,"  were  the  name  of  the  child,  and  all 
that  precedes,  from  "  Wonder  "  onwards,  the  name  of  God,  who 
would  call  him  by  these  two  honourable  names.  But,  at  the 
very  outset,  it  is  improbable  that  there  should  be  two  names 
instead  of  one  or  more ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  for  what 
precise  reason  such  a  periphrastic  description  of  God  should  be 
employed  in  connection  with  the  naming  of  this  child,  as  is 


250  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

not  only  altogether  different  from  Isaiah's  usual  custom,  but 
altogether  unparalleled  in  itself,  especially  without  the  definite 
article.  The  names  of  God  should  at  least  have  been  defined 
thus,  "lisan  ^KH  Npa  f*jn*n,  so  as  to  distinguish  them  from  the  two 
names  of  the  child.  Even  assuming,  therefore,  that  the  ac 
centuation  is  meant  to  convey  this  sense,  "  And  the  wonderful 
Counsellor,  the  mighty  God,  calls  his  name  Eternal-Father, 
Prince  of  Peace,"  as  appears  to  be  the  case;  we  must  necessarily 
reject  it,  as  resting  upon  a  misunderstanding  and  misinterpreta 
tion.1  We  regard  the  whole,  from  yb&  onwards,  —  as  the  con 
nection,  the  expression,  and  the  syntax  require,  —  as  a  dependent 
accusative  predicate  to  i»6?  Kip^l  (they  call  his  name),  which 
stands  at  the  head  (compare  Nip,  they  call,  it  is  called,  in  Gen. 
xi.  9,  xvi.  14,  Josh.  vii.  26,  and  above  ch.  viii.  4,  KB*,  they 
will  carry:  Ges.  §  137,  3).  If  it  be  urged,  as  an  objection  to 
the  Messianic  interpretation  of  ch.  vii.  14,  15,  that  the  Christ 
who  appeared  was  not  named  Immanuel,  but  Jesus,  this  objec- 


1  The  telisha  in  fc^Q  is  the  smallest  of  all  disjunctive  accents  ;  the 
geresh  in  105?  separates  rather  more  strongly  than  this  ;  the  pashta  in  pyv 
separates  somewhat  more  than  the  other  two,  but  less  than  the  zdkepk  in 
"1123  ;  and  this  zakeph  is  the  greatest  divider  in  the  sentence.  The  whole 
sentence,  therefore,  distributes  itself  in  the  following  manner  :  |l  lot?  top1*1! 
Dlfe"1£>  |  1JTQX  Illl  "1133  ta  III  YW  I  *&£'  A11  tne  words  from  K"lp^1  on 
wards  are  subordinate  to  the  zakeph  attached  to  1133,  which  is,  to  all  appear 
ance,  intended  to  have  the  force  of  an  introductory  colon  :  as,  for  example, 
in  2  Sam.  xviii.  5  (in  the  case  of  lEtfi*  in  the  clause  t|£^3K~r)X1  3N1S 
*UDtf!>  Vl&mXl).  In  smaller  subdivisions,  again,  ^^3  (telisha)  is  connected 
with  pyp  (pashta),  and  both  together  with  1133  ^N  (munach  zakeph).  If 
only  sar  shalom  (Prince  of  Peace)  were  intended  as  the  name  of  the  child, 
it  would  necessarily  be  accentuated  in  the  following  manner  :  \Q&  Nip"11) 
kadma  geresh,  yiN  *&a  telisha  gershayim,  1133  5>K  mercha  teUr,  *iy  ^3tf 
tifchdh,  D1^~1C>  silluk  ;  and  the  principal  disjunctive  would  stand  at  iy 
instead  of  1133.  But  if  the  name  of  the  child  were  intended  to  form  a  de 
claratory  clause,  commencing  with  pyv  ^2,  "determines  wonderful  things," 
as  Luzzatto  assumes,  we  should  expect  to  find  a  stronger  disjunctive  than 
telisha  at  &6s,  the  watchword  of  the  whole  ;  and  above  all,  we  should 
expect  a  zakeph  at  1E£J,  and  not  at  1133-  This  also  applies  to  our  (the 
ordinary)  explanation.  It  does  not  correspond  to  the  accentuation.  The 
introductory  words  IJDK?  Nlp^l  ought  to  have  a  stronger  distinctive  accent, 
in  order  that  all  which  follows  might  stand  as  the  name  which  they  intro 
duce.  Francke  (see  Psalter,  ii.  521)  perceived  this,  and  in  his  Abysms 
rnysteriorum  Esa  (ix.  6)  he  lays  great  stress  upon  the  fact,  that  God  who 
gives  the  name  has  Himself  a  threefold  name. 


CHAP.  IX.  6.  251 

tion  is  sufficiently  met  by  the  fact  that  He  did  not  receive  as  a 
proper  name  any  one  of  the  five  names  by  which,  according  to 
this  second  prophecy,  He  was  to  be  called.  Moreover,  this 
objection  would  apply  quite  as  strongly  to  the  notion,  which 
has  been  a  very  favourite  one  with  Jewish  commentators  (e.g. 
Rashi,  A.  E.  Kimchi,  Abravanel,  Malbim,  Luzzatto,  and 
others),  and  even  with  certain  Christian  commentators  (such  as 
Grotius,  Gesenius,  etc.),  that  the  prophecy  refers  to  Hezekiah, 
— a  notion  which  is  a  disgrace  to  those  who  thereby  lead  both 
themselves  and  others  astray.  For  even  if  the  hopes  held  out 
in  the  prophecy  were  attached  for  a  long  time  to  Hezekiah,  the 
mistake  was  but  too  quickly  discovered  ;  whereas  the  commen 
tators  in  question  perpetuate  the  mistake,  by  forcing  it  upon  the 
prophecy  itself,  although  the  prophet,  even  after  the  deception 
had  been  outlived,  not  only  did  not  suppress  the  prophecy,  but 
handed  it  down  to  succeeding  ages  as  awaiting  a  future  and  in 
fallible  fulfilment.  For  the  words  in  their  strict  meaning  point 
to  the  Messiah,  whom  men  may  for  a  time,  with  pardonable 
error,  have  hoped  to  find  in  Hezekiah,  but  whom,  with  un 
pardonable  error,  men  refused  to  acknowledge,  even  when  He 
actually  appeared  in  Jesus.  The  name  Jesus  is  the  combination 
of  all  the  Old  Testament  titles  used  to  designate  the  Coming 
One  according  to  His  nature  and  His  works.  The  names  con 
tained  in  ch.  vii.  14  and  ix.  6  are  not  thereby  suppressed  ;  but 
they  have  continued,  from  the  time  of  Mary  downwards,  in  the 
mouths  of  all  believers.  There  is  not  one  of  these  names  under 
which  worship  and  homage  have  not  been  paid  to  Him.  But 
we  never  find  them  crowded  together  anywhere  else,  as  we  do 
here  in  Isaiah;  and  in  this  respect  also  our  prophet  proves 
himself  the  greatest  of  the  Old  Testament  evangelists.  The 
first  name  is  N?B,  or  perhaps  more  correctly  &O3,  which  is  not 
to  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  next  word,  f$\  though  this 
construction  might  seem  to  commend  itself  in  accordance  with 
nvjJ  RvBH,  in  ch.  xxviii.  29.  This  is  the  way  in  which  it  has 
been  taken  by  the  Seventy  and  others  (thus  LXX.,  OavfJLaa-Tos 
crvfjiftov\o<; ;  Theodoret,  Oavfjiaara)^  ftov\evwv).  If  we  adopted 
this  explanation,  we  might  regard  fTP  t6a  as  an  inverted  form 
for  tikb  yyv  '•  counselling  wonderful  things.  The  possibility  of 
such  an  inversion  is  apparent  from  ch.  xxii.  2,  nsta  niNCTi,  i.e. 
full  of  tumult.  Or,  following  the  analogy  of  pere  dddm  (a  wild 


252  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

man)  in  Gen.  xvi.  12,  we  might  regard  it  as  a  genitive  con 
struction  :  a  wonder  of  a  counsellor ;  in  which  case  the  disjunc 
tive  telishdh  gedoldh  in  pele  would  have  to  be  exchanged  for 
a  connecting  mahpach.  Both  combinations  have  their  doubtful 
points,  and,  so  far  as  the  sense  is  concerned,  would  lead  us 
rather  to  expect  nxy  fcO^ao ;  whereas  there  is  nothing  at  all  to 
prevent  our  taking  fc6a  and  pjn*  as  two  separate  names  (not  even 
the  accentuation,  which  is  without  parallel  elsewhere,  so  far  as 
the  combination  of  paslita  with  telishah  is  concerned,  and  there 
fore  altogether  unique).  Just  as  the  angel  of  Jehovah,  when 
asked  by  Manoah  what  was  his  name  (Judg.  xiii.  18),  replied 
vS  (TOB),  and  indicated  thereby  his  divine  nature — a  nature 
incomprehensible  to  mortal  men  ;  so  here  the  God-given  ruler 
is  also  pele,  a  phenomenon  lying  altogether  beyond  human 
conception  or  natural  occurrence.  Not  only  is  this  or  that 
wonderful  in  Him ;  but  He  Himself  is  throughout  a  wonder — 
TrapaSogao-jjios,  as  Symmachus  renders  it.  The  second  name  is 
yoetz,  counsellor,  because,  by  virtue  of  the  spirit  of  counsel 
which  He  possesses  (ch.  xi.  2),  He  can  always  discern  and  give 
counsel  for  the  good  of  His  nation.  There  is  no  need  for  Him 
to  surround  Himself  with  counsellors ;  but  without  receiving 
counsel  at  all,  He  counsels  those  that  are  without  counsel, 
and  is  thus  the  end  of  all  want  of  counsel  to  His  nation  as  u 
whole.  The  third  name,  El  gibbor,  attributes  divinity  to  Him. 
Not,  indeed,  if  we  render  the  words  "  Strength,  Hero,"  as 
Luther  does ;  or  "  Hero  of  Strength,"  as  Meier  has  done ;  or 
"  a  God  of  a  hero,"  as  Hof mann  proposes ;  or  u  Hero-God,"  i.e. 
one  who  fights  and  conquers  like  an  invincible  god,  as  Ewald 
does.  But  all  these  renderings,  and  others  of  a  similar  kind, 
founder,  without  needing  any  further  refutation,  on  ch.  x.  21, 
where  He,  to  whom  the  remnant  of  Israel  will  turn  with 
penitence,  is  called  El  gibbor  (the  mighty  God).  There  is  no 
reason  why  we  should  take  El  in  this  name  of  the  Messiah  in 
any  other  sense  than  in  Immanu-El;  not  to  mention  the  fact 
that  El  in  Isaiah  is  always  a  name  of  God,  and  that  the 
prophet  was  ever  strongly  conscious  of  the  antithesis  between 
El  and  dddm,  as  ch.  xxxi.  3  (cf.  Hos.  xi.  9)  clearly  shows. 
And  finally,  El  gibbor  was  a  traditional  name  of  God,  which 
occurs  as  early  as  Deut.  x.  17,  cf.  Jer.  xxxii.  18,  Neh.  ix.  32, 
Ps.  xxiv.  8,  etc.  The  name  gibbor  is  used  here  as  an  adjective, 


CHAP.  IX    6.  253 

like  shaJJai  in  El  sliaddai.  The  Messiah,  then,  is  here  desig 
nated  "  mighty  God."  Undoubtedly  this  appears  to  go  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  Old  Testament  horizon  ;  but  what  if  it  should 
go  beyond  them  ?  It  stands  written  once  for  all,  just  as  in 
Jer.  xxiii.  6  Jehovah  Zidkenu  (Jehovah  our  Righteousness) 
is  also  used  as  a  name  of  the  Messiah, — a  Messianic  name, 
which  even  the  synagogue  cannot  set  aside  (vid.  Midrash 
Mishle  57a,  where  this  is  adduced  as  one  of  the  eight  names 
of  the  Messiah).  Still  we  must  not  go  too  far.  If  we  look  at 
the  spirit  of  the  prophecy,  the  mystery  of  the  incarnation  of 
God  is  unquestionably  indicated  in  such  statements  as  these. 
But  if  we  look  at  the  consciousness  of  the  prophet  himself, 
nothing  further  was  involved  than  this,  that  the  Messiah  would 
be  the  image  of  God  as  no  other  man  ever  had  been  (cf.  El, 
Ps.  Ixxxii.  1),  and  that  He  would  have  God  dwelling  within 
Him  (cf.  Jer.  xxxiii.  16).  Who  else  should  lead  Israel  to 
victory  over  the  hostile  world,  than  God  the  mighty  ?  The 
Messiah  is  the  corporeal  presence  of  this  mighty  God  ;  for 
He  is  with  Him,  He  is  in  Him,  and  in  Him  He  is  with  Israel. 
The  expression  did  not  preclude  the  /act  that  the  Messiah 
would  be  God  and  man  in  one  person  ;  but  it  did  not  pene 
trate  to  this  depth,  so  far  as  the  Old  Testament  consciousness 
was  concerned.  The  fourth  name  springs  out  of  the  third : 
"W"1?^  eternal  Father  (not  Booty  Father,  with  which  Hitzig 
and  Knobel  content  themselves)  ;  for  what  is  divine  must  be 
eternal.  The  title  Eternal  Father  designates  Him,  however, 
not  only  as  the  possessor  of  eternity  (Hengstenberg),  but  as 
the  tender,  faithful,  and  wise  trainer,  guardian,  and  provider 
for  His  people  even  in  eternity  (ch.  xxii.  21).  He  is  eternal 
Father,  as  the  eternal,  loving  King,  according  to  the  descrip 
tion  in  Ps.  Ixxii.  Now,  if  He  is  mighty  God,  and  uses  His 
divine  might  in  eternity  for  the  good  of  His  people,  He  is  also, 
as  the  fifth  name  affirms,  sar-shdlom,  a  Prince  who  removes  all 
peace-disturbing  powers,  and  secures  peace  among  the  nations 
(Zech.  ix.  10), — who  is,  as  it  were,  the  embodiment  of  peace 
come  down  into  the  world  of  nations  (Mic.  v.  4).  To  exalt  the 
government  of  David  into  an  eternal  rule  of  peace,  is  the  end 
for  which  He  is  born  ;  and  moreover  He  proves  Himself  to  be 
what  He  is  not  only  called,  but  actually  is.  Ver.  7.  "  To  the 
increase  of  government  and  to  peace  without  end,  upon  the  throne 


254  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  David,  and  over  his  kingdom,  to  strengthen  it,  and  to  support  it 
through  judgment  and  righteousness  from  henceforth  even  for 
ever.  The  jealousy  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  will  fulfil  this"  n?"!?i' 
(written  with  Mem  clausum  in  the  middle  of  the  one  word,  and, 
according  to  Elias  Levita,  properly  to  be  read  nan  D7,  Us  magni- 
ficando,  in  accordance  with  this  way  of  writing  the  word  x)  is 
not  a  participle  here,  but  a  substantive  after  the  forms  ^"IE, 
nb>5?£,  and  that  not  from  nsnn,  but  from  n?l>  an  infinitive  noun 
expressing,  according  to  its  formation,  the  practical  result  of  an 
action,  rather  than  the  abstract  idea.2  Ever  extending  dominion 
and  endless  peace  will  be  brought  in  by  the  sublime  and  lofty 
King's  Son,  when  He  sits  upon  the  throne  of  David  and  rules 
over  David's  kingdom.  He  is  a  semper  Augustus,  i.e.  a  per 
petual  increaser  of  the  kingdom;  not  by  war,  however,  but 
with  the  spiritual  weapons  of  peace.  And  within  He  gives 
to  the  kingdom  "judgment"  (mishpdt)  and  "righteousness" 
(zeddMh),  as  the  foundations  and  pillars  of  its  durability : 
mishpdt,  judgment  or  right,  which  He  pronounces  and  ordains ; 
and  righteousness,  which  He  not  only  exercises  Himself,  but 
transfers  to  the  members  of  His  kingdom.  This  new  epoch  of 
Davidic  sovereignty  was  still  only  a  matter  of  faith  and  hope. 
But  the  zeal  of  Jehovah  was  the  guarantee  of  its  realization. 
The  accentuation  is  likely  to  mislead  here,  inasmuch  as  it 
makes  it  appear  as  though  the  words  "  from  henceforth  even 
for  ever"  (me'attdh  vad  'oldm)  belonged  to  the  closing  sen 
tence,  whereas  the  eternal  perspective  which  they  open  applies 
directly  to  the  reign  of  the  great  Son  of  David,  and  only 

1  When  Bar-Kappara  says  (b.   Sanhedrin  9-ia)  that  God  designed  to 
make  Hezekiah  the  Messiah  and  Sennacherib  Gog  and  Magog,  but  that 
Hezekiah  was  not  found  worthy  of  this,  and  therefore  the  Mem  of  Vmarleh 
was  closed,  there  is  so  far  some  sense  in  this,  that  the  Messianic  hopes 
really  could  centre  for  a  certain  time  in  Hezekiah  ;  whereas  the  assertion 
of  a  certain  Hillel  (ib.  986),  that  Hezekiah  was  actually  the  Messiah  of 
Israel,  and  no  other  was  to  be  expected,  is  nothing  but  the  perverted 
fancy  of  an  empty  brain.     For  an  instance  of  the  opposite,  see  Neh.  ii.  13, 
D'Tfna  EH,  on  which  passage  the  Mirlrash  observes,  "  The  broken  walls  of 
Jerusalem  will  be  closed  in   the  day  of    salvation,  and  the  government 
which  has  been  closed  up  to  the  time  of  the  King  Messiah  will  be  opened 
then." 

2  We  have  already  observed  at  p.  156,  that  this  substantive  formation 
had  not  a  purely  abstract  meaning  even  at  the  first.     Fiirst  has  given  the 
correct  explanation  in  his  Lehrgebaude  der  Aram.  Idiome,  §  130. 


CHAP.  IX   7-X.  4.  255 

indirectly  to  the  work  of  the  divine  jealousy.  "  Zeal"  or 
jealousy,  kindly  lit.  glowing  fire,  from  MJJ,  Arab,  kanaa,  to  be 
deep  red  (Deut.  iv.  24),  is  one  of  the  deepest  of  the  Old 
Testament  ideas,  and  one  of  the  most  fruitful  in  relation  to 
the  work  of  reconciliation.  It  is  two-sided.  The  fire  of  love 
has  for  its  obverse  the  fire  of  wrath.  For  jealousy  contends  for 
the  object  of  its  love  against  everything  that  touches  either  the 
object  or  the  love  itself.1  Jehovah  loves  His  nation.  That  He 
should  leave  it  in  the  hands  of  such  bad  Davidic  kings  as  Ahaz, 
and  give  it  up  to  the  imperial  power  of  the  world,  would  be 
altogether  irreconcilable  with  this  love,  if  continued  long.  But 
His  love  flares  up,  consumes  all  that  is  adverse,  and  gives  to 
His  people  the  true  King,  in  whom  that  which  was  only  fore 
shadowed  in  David  and  Solomon  reaches  its  highest  antitypical 
fulfilment.  With  the  very  same  words,  "  the  zeal  of  Jehovah 
of  hosts,"  etc.,  Isaiah  seals  the  promise  in  ch.  xxxvii.  32. 

B.  Jehovatis  outstretched  hand. — Chap.  ix.  7-x.  4. 

The  great  light  would  not  arise  till  the  darkness  had  reached 
its  deepest  point.  The  gradual  increase  of  this  darkness  is  pre 
dicted  in  this  second  section  of  the  esoteric  addresses.  Many 
difficult  questions  suggest  themselves  in  connection  with  this 
section.  1.  Is  it  directed  against  the  northern  kingdom  only, 
or  against  all  Israel  ?  2.  What  was  the  historical  standpoint 
of  the  prophet  himself  I  The  majority  of  commentators  reply 

1  Cf.  Weber,  On  the  Wrath  of  God  (p.  xxxv.).  It  is  evident  that 
by  fa'n'oA,  £i?Aof,  we  are  to  understand  the  energy  of  love  following  up  its 
violated  claims  upon  the  creature,  from  the  comparison  so  common  in  the 
Scriptures  between  the  love  of  God  to  His  church  and  connubial  affection. 
It  is  the  jealousy  of  absolute  love,  which  seeks  to  be  loved  in  return,  and 
indeed  demands  undivided  love,  and  asserts  its  claim  to  reciprocity  of  love 
wherever  this  claim  is  refused.  In  a  word,  it  is  the  self-vindication  of 
scornful  love.  But  this  idea  includes  not  only  jealousy  seeking  the  re 
covery  of  what  it  has  lost,  but  also  jealousy  that  consumes  what  cannot 
be  saved  (Nahum  i.  2  ;  Heb.  x.  27)  ;  and  the  Scriptures  therefore  deduce 
the  wrath,  by  which  the  love  resisted  affirms  itself,  and  the  wrath  which 
meets  those  who  have  resisted  love  in  the  form  of  absolute  hostility, — in 
other  words,  the  jealousy  of  love  as  well  as  the  jealousy  of  hatred, — not 
from  love  and  holiness  as  two  entirely  distinct  sources,  but  from  the 
single  source  of  absolute  holy  love,  which,  just  because  it  is  absol-ute  and 
holy,  repels  and  excludes  whatever  will  not  suffer  itself  to  be  embraced 
(Josh.  xxiv.  19). 


256  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

that  the  prophet  is  only  prophesying  against  Ephraim  here,  and 
that  Syria  and  Ephraim  have  already  been  chastised  by  Tiglath- 
pileser.  The  former  is  incorrect.  The  prophet  does  indeed 
commence  with  Ephraim,  but  he  does  not  stop  there.  The  fates 
of  both  kingdoms  flow  into  one  another  here,  as  well  as  in  ch« 
viii.  5  sqq.,  just  as  they  were  causally  connected  in  actual  fact. 
And  it  cannot  be  maintained,  that  when  the  prophet  uttered  his 
predictions  Ephraim  had  already  felt  the  scourging  of  Tiglath- 
pileser.  The  prophet  takes  his  stand  at  a  time  when  judgment 
after  judgment  had  fallen  upon  all  Israel  without  improving  it. 
And  one  of  these  past  judgments  was  the  scourging  of  Ephraim 
by  Tiglath-pileser.  How  much  or  how  little  of  the  events 
which  the  prophet  looks  back  upon  from  this  ideal  standpoint- 
had  already  taken  place,  it  is  impossible  to  determine ;  but  this 
is  a  matter  of  indifference  so  far  as  the  prophecy  is  concerned. 
The  prophet,  from  his  ideal  standing-place,  had  not  only  this 
or  that  behind  him,  but  all  that  is  expressed  in  this  section  by 
perfects  and  aorists  (Ges.  §  129,  2,  b).  And  we  already  know 
from  ch.  ii.  9,  v.  25,  that  he  used  the  future  conversive  as  the 
preterite  of  the  ideal  past.  We  therefore  translate  the  whole 
in  the  present  tense.  In  outward  arrangement  there  is  no 
section  of  Isuiah  so  symmetrical  as  this.  In  ch.  v.  we  found 
one  partial  approach  to  the  strophe  in  similarity  of  commence 
ment,  and  another  in  ch.  ii.  in  similarity  of  conclusion.  But 
here  ch.  v.  256  is  adapted  as  the  refrain  of  four  symmetrical 
strophes.  We  will  take  each  strophe  by  itself.  Strophe  1. 
Vers.  8-12.  "  The  Lord  sends  out  a  word  against  Jacob,  and  it 
descends  into  Israel.  And  all  the  people  must  make  atonement, 
Ephraim  and  the  inhabitants  of  Samaria,  saying  in  pride  and 
haughtiness  of  heart,  i  Bricks  are  fallen  down,  and  we  build  with 
square  stones ;  sycamores  are  hewn  down,  and  we  put  cedars  in 
their  place.9  Jehovah  raises  liezins  oppressors  high  above  him, 
and  pricks  up  his  enemies:  Aram  from  the  east,  and  Philistines 
from  the  west ;  they  devour  Israel  with  full  mouth.  For  all 
this  His  anger  is  not  turned  away,  and  His  hand  is  stretched  out 
still.'11  The  word  (ddbdr)  is  both  in  nature  and  history  the 
messenger  of  the  Lord  :  it  runs  quickly  through  the  earth 
(Ps.  cxlvii.  15,  18),  and  when  sent  by  the  Lord,  comes  to  men 
to  destroy  or  to  heal  (Ps.  cvii.  20),  and  never  returns  to  its 
sender  void  (ch.  Iv,  10,  11).  Thus  does  the  Lord  now  send  a 


CHAP.  IX.  8-12  257 

word  against  Jacob  (Jacob,  as  in  ch.  ii.  5)  ;  and  this  heavenly 
messenger  descends  into  Israel  (ndphal,  as  in  Dan.  iv.  28,  and 
like  the  Arabic  nazala,  which  is  the  word  usually  employed  to 
denote  the  communication  of  divine  revelation),  taking  shelter, 
as  it  were,  in  the  soul  of  the  prophet.  Its  immediate  com 
mission  is  directed  against  Ephraim,  which  has  been  so  little 
humbled  by  the  calamities  that  have  fallen  upon  it  since  the 
time  of  Jehu,  that  the  people  are  boasting  that  they  will  re 
place  bricks  and  sycamores  (or  sycamines,  from  shikmin),  that 
wide-spread  tree  (1  Kings  x.  27),  with  works  of  art  and  cedars. 
"  We  put  in  their  place : "  nachaliph  is  not  used  here  as  in  Job 
xiv.  7,  where  it  signifies  to  sprout  again  (nova  germina  emittere\ 
but  as  in  ch.  xl.  31,  xli.  1,  where  it  is  construed  with  H3 
(strength),  and  signifies  to  renew  (novas  vires  assumere).  In 
this  instance,  when  the  object  is  one  external  to  the  subject, 
the  meaning  is  to  substitute  (substituere),  like  the  Arabic 
achlafa,  to  restore.  The  poorest  style  of  building  in  the  land 
is  contrasted  with  the  best ;  for  "  the  sycamore  is  a  tree  which 
only  flourishes  in  the  plain,  and  there  the  most  wretched  houses 
are  still  built  of  bricks  dried  in  the  sun,  and  of  knotty  beams  of 
sycamore." l  These  might  have  been  destroyed  by  the  war,  but 
more  durable  and  stately  buildings  would  rise  up  in  their  place. 
Ephraim,  however,  would  be  made  to  feel  this  defiance  of  the 
judgments  of  God  (to  "  know,"  as  in  Hos.  ix.  7,  Ezek.  xxv.  14). 
Jehovah  would  give  the  adversaries  of  Rezin  authority  over 
Ephraim,  and  instigate  his  foes :  sicsec,  as  in  ch.  xix.  2,  from 
sdcac,  in  its  primary  sense  of  "  prick,"  fyere,  which  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  meanings  to  plait  and  cover,  but  from  which  we 
have  the  words  ^,  ^p?  a  thorn,  nail,  or  plug,  and  which  is 
probably  related  to  rob^  to  view,  lit.  to  fix ;  hence  pilpel,  to 
prick  up,  incite,  which  is  the  rendering  adopted  by  the  Targum 
here  and  in  ch.  xix.  2,  and  by  the  LXX.  at  ch.  xix.  2.  There 
is  no  necessity  to  quote  the  talmudic  sicsec,  to  kindle  (by 
friction),  which  is  never  met  with  in  the  metaphorical  sense 
of  exciting.  It  would  be  even  better  to  take  our  sicsec  as  an 
intensive  form  of  sdcac,  used  in  the  same  sense  as  the  Arabic, 
viz.  to  provide  one's  self  with  weapons,  to  arm ;  but  this  is  pro 
bably  a  denominative  from  o-icca,  signifying  offensive  armour, 
with  the  idea  of  pricking  and  spearing, — a  radical  notion,  from 

1  Rosen,  Topoyrapldsclies  aus  Jerusalem. 
VOL.  I.  R 


258  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

which  it  would  be  easy  to  get  at  the  satisfactory  meaning,  to 
spur  on  or  instigate.  "  The  oppressors  of  Rezin"  (tzdre  Retzin, 
a  simple  play  upon  the  words,  like  hoi  goi  in  ch.  i.  4,  and  many 
others  in  Isaiah)  are  the  Assyrians,  whose  help  had  been  sought 
by  Ahaz  against  Rezin  ;  though  perhaps  not  these  exclusively, 
but  possibly  also  the  Trachonites,  for  example,  against  whom  the 
mountain  fortress  Rezin  appears  to  have  been  erected,  to  pro 
tect  the  rich  lands  of  eastern  Hauran.  In  ver.  12  the  range  of 
vision  stretches  over  all  Israel.  It  cannot  be  otherwise,  for  the 
northern  kingdom  never  suffered  anything  from  the  Philistines ; 
whereas  an  invasion  of  Judah  by  the  Philistines  was  really  one 
of  the  judgments  belonging  to  the  time  of  Ahaz  (2  Chron. 
xxviii.  16-19).  Consequently  by  Israel  here  we  are  to  under 
stand  all  Israel,  the  two  halves  of  which  would  become  a  rich 
prize  to  the  enemy.  Ephraim  would  be  swallowed  up  by 
Aram, — namely,  by  those  who  had  been  subjugated  by  Asshur, 
and  were  now  tributary  to  it, — and  Judah  would  be  swallowed 
up  by  the  Philistines.  But  this  strait  would  be  very  far  from 
being  the  end  of  the  punishments  of  God.  Because  Israel 
would  not  turn,  the  wrath  of  God  would  not  turn  away. 

Strophe  2.  Yers.  13-17.  "But  the  people  turneih  not  unto 
Him  that  smiteth  it,  and  they  seek  not  Jehovah  of  hosts.  There 
fore  Jehovah  rooteth  out  of  Israel  head  and  tally  palm-branch 
and  rush)  in  one  day.  Elders  and  highly  distinguished  men, 
this  is  the  head;  and  prophets,  lying  teachers,  this  is  the  tail. 
The  leaders  of  this  people  have  become  leaders  astray,  and  their 
followers  swallowed  up.  Therefore  the  Lord  will  not  rejoice  in 
their  young  men,  and  will  have  no  compassion  on  their  orphans 
and  widows :  for  all  together  are  profligate  and  evil-doers,  and 
every  mouth  speaketh  blasphemy.  With  all  this  His  anger  is 
not  turned  away,  and  His  hand  is  stretched  out  Still"  As  the 
first  stage  of  the  judgments  has  been  followed  by  no  true 
conversion  to  Jehovah  the  almighty  judge,  there  comes  a 
second.  *W  3V^  (to  turn  unto)  denotes  a  thorough  conversion, 
not  stopping  half-way.  "  The  smiter  of  it"  (hammaccehu),  or 
"  he  who  smiteth  it,"  is  Jehovah  (compare,  on  the  other  hand, 
ch.  x.  20,  where  Asshur  is  intended).  The  article  and  suffix 
are  used  together,  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  2,  Prov.  xvi.  4  (vid.  Ges. 
§  110,  2  ;  Caspari,  Arab.  Gram.  §  472).  But  there  was  coming 
now  a  great  day  of  punishment  (in  the  view  of  the  prophet,  it 


CHAP.  IX.  13-17.  259 

was  already  past),  sucli  as  Israel  experienced  more  than  once  in 
the  Assyrian  oppressions,  and  Judah  in  the  Chaldean,  when 
head  and  tail,  or,  according  to  another  proverbial  expression, 
palm-branch  and  rush,  would  be  rooted  out.  We  might  sup 
pose  that  the  persons  referred  to  wrere  the  high  and  low ;  but 
ver.  15  makes  a  different  application  of  the  first  double  figure, 
by  giving  it  a  different  turn  from  its  popular  sense  (compare 
the  Arabic  er-ru  'us  w-aledlmab  =  lofty  and  low,  in  Dietrich, 
AbJumdluttg,  p.  209).  The  opinion  which  has  very  widely 
prevailed  since  the  time  of  Koppe,  that  this  verse  is  a  gloss, 
is  no  doubt  a  very  natural  one  (see  Hitzig,  Begriff  der  Kritik; 
Ewald,  Propheten,  i.  57).  But  Isaiah's  custom  of  supplying  his 
own  gloss  is  opposed  to  such  a  view ;  also  Isaiah's  composition 
in  ch.  iii.  3  and  xxx.  20,  and  the  relation  in  which  this  verse 
stands  to  ver.  16  ;  and  lastly,  the  singular  character  of  the 
gloss  itself,  which  is  one  of  the  strongest  proofs  that  it  contains 
the  prophet's  exposition  of  his  own  words.  The  chiefs  of  the 
nation  were  the  head  of  the  national  body  ;  and  behind,  like  a 
wagging  dog's  tail,  sat  the  false  prophets  with  their  flatteries 
of  the  people,  loving,  as  Persius  says,  blando  caudam  jactare 
popello.  The  prophet  drops  the  figure  of  cippdh,  the  palm- 
branch  which  forms  the  crown  of  the  palm,  and  which  derives 
its  name  from  the  fact  that  it  resembles  the  palm  of  the  hand 
(instar  palmce  manus),  and  agmon,  the  rush  which  grows  in 
the  marsh.1  The  allusion  here  is  to  the  rulers  of  the  nation 
and  the  dregs  of  the  people.  The  basest  extremity  were  the 
demagogues  in  the  shape  of  prophets.  For  it  had  come  to 

1  The  noun  agam  is  used  in  the  Old  Testament  as  well  as  in  the  Talmud 
to  signify  both  a  marshy  place  (see  Bdba  mesi'a  36&,  and  more  especially 
Aboda  zara  38a,  where  giloi  agmah  signifies  the  laying  bare  of  the  marshy 
soil  by  the  burning  up  of  the  reeds),  and  also  the  marsh  grass  (Sabbath 
lla,  "if  all  the  agmim  were  kalams,  i.e.  writing  reeds,  or  pens;"  and 
Kiddusin  62&,  where  agam  signifies  a  stalk  of  marsh-grass  or  reed,  a  rush 
or  bulrush,  and  is  explained,  with  a  reference  to  Isa.  Iviii.  5,  as  signifying 
a  tender,  weak  stalk).  The  noun  agmon,  on  the  other  hand,  signifies  only 
the  stalk  of  the  marsh- grass,  or  the  marsh-grass  itself  ;  and  in  this  sense  it 
is  not  found  in  the  Talmud  (see  Jb&,  ii.  374).  The  verbal  meaning  upon 
which  these  names  are  founded  is  evident  from  the  Arabic  ma  agim 
(magum),  "  bad  water"  (see  at  ch.  xix.  10).  There  is  no  connection  be 
tween  this  and  maugil,  literally  a  depression  of  the  soil,  in  which  water 
lodges  for  a  long  time,  and  which  is  only  dried  up  in  summer  weather. 


260  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

this,  as  ver.  1(5  affirms,  that  those  who  promised  to  lead  by  a 
straight  road  led  astray,  and  those  who  suffered  themselves  to 
be  led  by  them  were  as  good  as  already  swallowed  up  by  hell 
(cf.  ch.  v.  14,  iii.  12).  Therefore  the  Sovereign  Ruler  would 
not  rejoice  over  the  young  men  of  this  nation ;  that  is  to  say, 
He  would  suffer  them  to  be  smitten  by  their  enemies,  without 
going  with  them  to  battle,  and  would  refuse  His  customary 
compassion  even  towards  widows  arid  orphans,  for  they  were 
all  thoroughly  corrupt  on  every  side.  The  alienation,  obliquity, 
and  dishonesty  of  their  heart,  are  indicated  by  the  word 
cltdneph  (from  chdnaph,  which  has  in  itself  the  indifferent 
radical  idea  of  inclination ;  so  that  in  Arabic,  chanif,  as  a 
synonym  of  *ddil^  has  the  very  opposite  meaning  of  decision 
in  favour  of  what  is  right)  ;  the  badness  of  their  actions  by 
jnp  (in  half  pause  for  jno2  =  jnD,  maleficus)\  the  vicious  in 
fatuation  of  their  words  by  nebdldh.  This  they  are,  and  this 
they  continue ;  and  consequently  the  wrathful  hand  of  God  is 
stretched  out  over  them  for  the  infliction  of  fresh  strokes. 

Strophe  3.  Vers.  18-21.  "For  the  wickedness  burneth  up 
like  fire :  it  devours  thorns  and  thistles,  and  burns  in  the  thickets 
of  the  wood;  and  they  smoke  upwards  in  a  lofty  volume  of  smoke. 
Through  the  wrath  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  the  land  is  turned  into 
coal,  and  the  nation  has  become  like  the  food  of  fire :  not  one  spares 
his  brother.  They  hew  on  the  right,  and  are  hungry ;  and  devour 
on  the  left,  and  are  not  satisfied :  they  devour  the  flesh  of  their 
own  arm :  Manasseh,  Ephraim ;  and  Ephraim,  Manasseh :  these 
together  over  Judah.  With  all  this  His  anger  is  not  turned  away, 
and  His  hand  is  stretched  out  still"  The  standpoint  of  the 
prophet  is  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  course  of  judgment,  and 
from  that  he  looks  back.  Consequently  this  link  of  the  chain 
is  also  past  in  his  view,  and  hence  the  future  conversives.  The 
curse,  which  the  apostasy  of  Israel  carries  within  itself,  now 
breaks  fully  out.  Wickedness,  i.e.  the  constant  thirst  of  evil, 
is  a  fire  which  a  man  kindles  in  himself.  And  when  the  grace 

1  This  is  the  way  in  which  it  should  be  written  in  «7b&,  i.  216 ;  'adala 
has  also  the  indifferent  meaning  of  return  or  decision. 

2  Nevertheless  this  reading  is  also  met  with,  and  according  to  Masorn 
finalis,  p.  52,  col.  8,  this  is  the  correct  reading  (as  in  Prov.  xvii.  4,  where  it  ia 
doubtful  whether  the  meaning  is  a  friend  or  a  malevolent  person).    The  ques 
tion  is  not  an  unimportant  one,  as  we  may  see  from  Olshausen,  §  258,  p.  581. 


CHAP.  IX.  18-21.  261 

of  God,  winch  damps  and  restrains  this  fire,  is  all  over,  it  is 
sure  to  burst  forth :  the  wickedness  bursts  forth  like  fire  (the 
verb  is  used  here,  as  in  ch.  xxx.  27,  with  reference  to  the 
wrath  of  God).  And  this  is  the  case  with  the  wickedness  of 
Israel,  which  now  consumes  first  of  all  thorns  and  thistles,  i.e. 
individual  sinners  who  are  the  most  ripe  for  judgment,  upon 
whom  the  judgment  commences,  and  then  the  thicket  of  the 
wood  (sib-che,1  as  in  ch.  x.  34,  from  sebac,  Gen.  xxii.  13  = 
sobec),  that  is  to  say,  the  great  mass  of  the  people,  which 
is  woven  together  by  bands  of  iniquity  (vattizzath  is  not  a 
reflective  niphal,  as  in  2  Kings  xxii.  13,  but  kal,  to  kindle  into 
anything,  i.e.  to  set  it  on  fire).  The  contrast  intended  in  the 
two  figures  is  consequently  not  the  high  and  low  (Ewald),  nor 
the  useless  and  useful  (Drechsler),  but  individuals  and  the  whole 
(Yitringa).  The  fire,  into  which  the  wickedness  bursts  out, 
seizes  individuals  first  of  all ;  and  then,  like  a  forest  fire,  it 
seizes  upon  the  nation  at  large  in  all  its  ranks  and  members, 
who  "  whirl  up  (roll  up)  ascending  of  smoke"  i.e.  who  roll 
up  in  the  form  of  ascending  smoke  (liitliabbek,  a  synonym  of 
hithhappek,  Judg.  vii.  13,  to  curl  or  roll).  This  fire  of  wicked 
ness  was  no  other  than  the  wrath  (rebrdh)  of  God :  it  is  God's 
own  wrath,  for  all  sin  carries  this  within  itself  as  its  own 
self-punishment.  By  this  fire  of  wrath  the  soil  of  the  land 
is  gradually  but  thoroughly  burnt  out,  and  the  people  of  the 
land  utterly  consumed:  &riy  air.  \ey.  to  be  red-hot  (LXX. 
crvy/ce/cavra^  also  the  Targum),  and  to  be  dark  or  black  (Arabic 
*atame,  late  at  night),  for  what  is  burnt  out  becomes  black. 
Fire  and  darkness  are  therefore  correlative  terms  throughout 
the  whole  of  the  Scriptures.  So  far  do  the  figures  extend,  in 
which  the  prophet  presents  the  inmost  essence  of  this  stage  of 
judgment.  In  its  historical  manifestation  it  consisted  in  the 
most  inhuman  self-destruction  during  an  anarchical  civil  war. 
Destitute  of  any  tender  emotions,  they  devoured  one  another 
without  being  satisfied  :  gdzar,  to  cut,  to  hew  (hence  the  Arabic 
for  a  butcher) :  zero'o,  his  arm,  according  to  Jer.  xix.  9, 
1  The  metheg  (gay a)  in  ^ID  (to  be  pronounced  sib-che)  has  simply  the 

euphonic  effect  of  securing  a  distinct  enunciation  to  the  sibilant  letter  (in 
other  instances  to  the  guttural,  vid.  'arboth,  Num.  xxxi.  12),  in  cases  where 
the  second  syllable  of  the  word  commences  with  a  guttural  or  kbial  letter, 
or  with  an  aspirate. 


262  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

equivalent  to  the  member  of  liis  own  family  and  tribe,  who  was 
figuratively  called  his  arm  (  Arabic  'adud:  see  Ges.  Thes.  p.  433), 
as  being  the  natural  protector  and  support.  This  interminable 
self-immolation,  and  the  regicide  associated  with  the  jealousy 
of  the  different  tribes,  shook  the  northern  kingdom  again  and 
again  to  its  utter  destruction.  And  the  readiness  with  which 
the  unbrotherly  feelings  of  the  northern  tribes  towards  one 
another  could  turn  into  combined  hostility  towards  Judah,  was 
evident  enough  from  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war,  the  conse 
quences  of  which  had  not  passed  away  at  the  time  when  these 
prophecies  were  uttered.  This  hostility  on  the  part  of  the 
brother  kingdoms  would  still  further  increase.  And  the  end 
of  the  judgments  of  wrath  had  not  come  yet. 

Strophe  4.  Ch.  x.  1-4.  "  Woe  unto  them  that  decree  un 
rig!  deous  decrees,  and  to  the  writers  who  prepare  trouble;  to  force 
away  the  needy  from  demanding  justice,  and  to  rob  the  suffering 
of  my  people  of  their  rightful  claims,  that  widows  may  become 
their  prey,  and  they  plunder  orphans!  And  what  will  ye  do  in 
the  day  of  visitation,  and  in  the  storm  that  cometh  from  afar  ? 
To  whom  will  ye  flee  for  help  ?  and  where  will  ye  deposit  your 
glory  ?  There  is  nothing  left  but  to  bow  down  under  prisoners, 
and  they  fall  wider  the  slain.  With  all  this  His  anger  is  not 
turned  away,  but  His  hand  is  stretched  out  still"  This  last 
strophe  is  directed  against  the  unjust  authorities  and  judges. 
The  woe  pronounced  upon  them  is,  as  we  have  already  frequently 
seen,  Isaiah's  ceterum  censeo.  Chdkak  is  their  decisive  decree 
(not,  however,  in  a  denominative  sense,  but  in  the  primary 
sense  of  hewing  in,  recording  in  official  documents,  ch.  xxx.  8, 
Job  xix.  23)  ;  and  citteb  (piel  only  occurring  here,  and  a 
perfect,  according  to  Gesenius,  §  126,  3)  their  official  signing 
and  writing.  Their  decrees  are  cliikeke  'aven  (an  open  plural, 
as  in  Judg.  v.  15,  for  chukke,  after  the  analogy  of  v?J,  ""^V, 
with  an  absolute  chakdklm  underlying  it  :  Ewald,  §  186-7),  inas 
much  as  their  contents  were  worthlessness,  i.e.  the  direct  oppo 
site  of  morality  ;  and  what  they  wrote  out  was  'dmdl,  trouble, 
i.e.  an  unjust  oppression  of  the  people  (compare  TTOVOS  and 
Poor  persons  who  wanted  to  commence  legal  pro- 


1  The  current  accentuation,  D'OrDDI  mercha,       y  tiplicJiah,  is  wrong. 

T  T 

The  true  accentuation  would  be  the  former  with  tiphchah  (and  metfiey),  the 


CHAP.  X.  1-4.  263 

eeeclings  were  not  even  allowed  to  do  so,  and  possessions  to  which 
widows  and  orphans  had  a  well-founded  claim  were  a  welcome 
booty  to  them  (for  the  diversion  into  the  finite  verb,  see  ch.  v. 
24,  viii.  11,  xlix.  5,  Iviii.  5).  For  all  this  they  could  not  escape 
the  judgment  of  God.  This  is  announced  to  them  in  ver.  3,  in 
the  form  of  three  distinct  questions  (commencing  witli  umdh, 
quid  igitur).  The  noun  pekuddah  in  the  first  question  always 
signifies  simply  a  visitation  of  punishment ;  sliodh  is  a  confused, 
dull,  desolate  rumbling,  hence  confusion  (turbo),  desolation : 
here  it  is  described  as  "  coming  from  afar,"  because  a  distant 
nation  (Asshur)  was  the  instrument  of  God's  wrath.  Second 
question :  "  Upon  whom  will  ye  throw  yourselves  in  your  search 
for  help  then  "  (nus  *al,  a  constr.  prcegnanSj  only  met  with  here)? 
Third  question :  "  Where,  i.e.  in  whose  hand,  will  ye  deposit 
your  wealth  in  money  and  possessions"  (cdbod,  what  is  weighty 
in  value  and  imposing  in  appearance) ;  'dzab  with  Vyad  (Gen. 
xxxix.  6),  or  with  Lamed  (Job  xxxix.  14),  to  leave  anything 
with  a  person  as  property  in  trust.  No  one  would  relieve  them 
of  their  wealth,  and  hold  it  as  a  deposit ;  it  was  irrecoverably 
lost.  To  this  negative  answer  there  is  appended  the  following 
lilti,  which,  when  used  as  a  preposition  after  a  previous  nega 
tion,  signifies  prater ;  when  used  as  a  conjunction,  nisi  (bilti 
*im9  Judg.  vii.  14) ;  and  where  it  governs  the  whole  sentence,  as 
in  this  case,  nixi  quod  (cf.  Num.  xi.  6 ;  Dan.  xi.  18).  In  the 
present  instance,  where  the  previous  negation  is  to  be  supplied 
in  thought,  it  has  the  force  of  nil  reliquum  est  nisi  quod  (there 
is  nothing  left  but).  The  singular  verb  (cdra)  is  used  con 
temptuously,  embracing  all  the  high  persons  as  one  condensed 
mass ;  and  tachath  does  not  mean  ceque  ac  or  loco  (like,  or  in 
the  place  of),  as  Ewald  (§  217,  &)  maintains,  but  is  used  in  the 
primary  and  local  sense  of  infra  (below).  Some  crouch  down 
to  find  room  at  the  feet  of  the  prisoners,  who  are  crowded 
closely  together  in  the  prison ;  or  if  we  suppose  the  prophet  to 

latter  with  mercha;  ior'dmdl  cittebu  is  an  attributive  (an  elliptical  rela 
tive)  clause.  According  to  its  etymon,  'umCil  seems  to  stand  by  the  side  of 
fttohos,  moles,  mokstus  (see  Pott  in  Kuan's  Zeitsclirift,  ix.  202)  ;  but  within 
the  Semitic  itself  it  stands  by  the  side  of  fej*  to  fade,  marcescere,  which 
coincides  with  the  Sanscrit  root  mid  and  its  cognates  (see  Leo  Meyer 
Veryleichende  Grammatik,  i.  353),  so  that  ' '  dmCd  is,  strictly  speaking,  to 
wear  out  or  tire  out  (vulg.  to  worry). 


264  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

have  a  scene  of  transportation  in  his  mind,  they  sink  down 
under  the  feet  of  the  other  prisoners,  in  their  inability  to  bear 
such  hardships,  whilst  the  rest  fall  in  war ;  and  as  the  slaughter 
is  of  long  duration,  not  only  become  corpses  themselves,  but 
are  covered  with  the  corpses  of  the  slain  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  19). 
And  even  with  this  the  wrath  of  God  is  not  satisfied.  The 
prophet,  however,  does  not  follow  out  the  terrible  gradation 
any  further.  Moreover,  the  captivity,  to  which  this  fourth 
strophe  points,  actually  formed  the  conclusion  of  a  distinct 
period. 

C.   Destruction  of  the  imperial  kingdom  of  the  world,  and  rise  of 
the  kingdom  of  Jehovah  in  His  Anointed. — Chap.  x.  5.— xii. 

The  law  of  contrast  prevails  in  prophecy,  as  it  does  also  in 
the  history  of  salvation.  When  distress  is  at  its  height,  it  is 
suddenly  brought  to  an  end,  and  changed  into  relief ;  and 
when  prophecy  has  become  as  black  with  darkness  as  in  the 
previous  section,  it  suddenly  becomes  as  bright  and  cloudless 
as  in  that  which  is  opening  now.  The  hoi  (woe)  pronounced 
upon  Israel  becomes  a  hoi  upon  Asshur.  Proud  Asshur,  with 
its  confidence  in  its  own  strength,  after  having  served  for  a 
time  as  the  goad  of  Jehovah's  wrath,  now  falls  a  victim  to  that 
wrath  itself.  Its  attack  upon  Jerusalem  leads  to  its  own  over 
throw  ;  and  on  the  ruins  of  the  kingdom  of  the  world  there 
rises  up  the  kingdom  of  the  great  and  righteous  Son  of  David, 
who  rules  in  peace  over  His  redeemed  people,  and  the  nations 
that  rejoice  in  Him  : — the  counterpart  of  the  redemption  from 
Egypt,  and  one  as  rich  in  materials  for  songs  of  praise  as  the 
passage  through  the  Red  Sea.  The  Messianic  prophecy, 
which  turns  its  darker  side  towards  unbelief  in  ch.  vii.,  and 
whose  promising  aspect  burst  like  a  great  light  through  the 
darkness  in  ch.  viii.  5— ix.  6,  is  standing  now  upon  its  third  and 
highest  stage.  In  ch.  vii.  it  is  like  a  star  in  the  night ;  in  ch. 
viii.  5-ix.  6,  like  the  morning  dawn  ;  and  now  the  sky  is  per 
fectly  cloudless,  and  it  appears  like  the  noonday  sun.  The 
prophet  has  now  penetrated  to  the  light  fringe  of  ch.  vi.  The 
name  Shear-yashub,  having  emptied  itself  of  all  the  curse  that 
it  contained,  is  now  transformed  into  a  pure  promise.  And  it 
becomes  perfectly  clear  what  the  name  Immanuel  and  the 
name  given  to  Immanuel,  El  gibbor  (mighty  God),  declared. 


CHAP.  X.  5,  6.  265 

The  remnant  of  Israel  turns  to  God  the  mighty  One ;  and  God 
the  mighty  is  henceforth  with  His  people  in  the  Sprout  of 
Jesse,  who  has  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  dwelling  within  Him 
self.  So  far  as  the  date  of  composition  is  concerned,  the 
majority  of  the  more  recent  commentators  agree  in  assign 
ing  it  to  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  because  ch.  x.  9-11  presup 
poses  the  destruction  of  Samaria  by  Shalmanassar,  which  took 
place  in  the  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah.  But  it  was  only  from 
the  prophet's  point  of  view  that  this  event  was  already  past ; 
it  had  not  actually  taken  place.  The  prophet  had  already 
predicted  that  Samaria,  and  with  Samaria  the  kingdom  of 
Israel,  would  succumb  to  the  Assyrians,  and  had  even  fixed 
the  year  (ch.  vii.  8  and  viii.  4,  7).  Why,  then,  should  he  not 
be  able  to  presuppose  it  here  as  an  event  already  past  ?  The 
stamp  on  this  section  does  not  tally  at  all  with  that  of  Isaiah's 
prophecy  in  the  times  of  Hezekiah;  whereas,  on  the  other 
hand,  it  forms  so  integral  a  link  in  the  prophetic  cycle  in 
ch.  vii.-xii.,  and  is  interwoven  in  so  many  ways  with  that 
which  precedes,  and  of  which  it  forms  both  the  continua 
tion  and  crown,  that  we  have  no  hesitation  in  assigning  it, 
with  Vitringa,  Caspari,  and  Drechsler,  to  the  first  three  years 
jf  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  though  without  deciding  whether  it 
preceded  or  followed  the  destruction  of  the  two  allies  by 
Tiglath-pileser.  It  is  by  no  means  impossible  that  it  may  have 
preceded  it. 

The  prophet  commences  with  hoi  (woe!),  which  is  always 
used  as  an  expression  of  wrathful  indignation  to  introduce  the 
proclamation  of  judgment  upon  the  person  named ;  although, 
as  in  the  present  instance,  this  may  not  always  follow  immedi 
ately  (cf.  ch.  i.  4,  5-9),  but  may  be  preceded  by  the  announce 
ment  of  the  sin  by  which  the  judgment  had  been  provoked. 
In  the  first  place,  Asshur  is  more  particularly  indicated  as  the 
chosen  instrument  of  divine  judgment  upon  all  Israel. — Vers. 
5,  6.  "Woe  to  Asshur,  the  rod  of  mine  anger,  and  it  is  a  staff  in 
their  hand,  mine  indignation.  Against  a  wicked  nation  will  1  send 
them,  and  against  the  people  of  my  wrath  give  them  a  charge, 
to  spoil  spoil,  and  to  prey  prey,  to  make  it  trodden  down  like 
street-mire"  "Mine  indignation:"  zdmi  is  either  a  permuta 
tion  of  the  predicative  Kin,  which  is  placed  emphatically  in  the 
foreground  (compare  the  KirrnriK  in  Jer.  xiv.  22,  which  is  also 


266  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

written  with  makkeph),  as  we  have  translated  it,  though  without 
taking  fcttn  as  a  copula  (=  est),  as  Ewald  does;  or  else  DTI  &on 
is  written  elliptically  for  DT3  Kin  ntsfc,  "  the  staff  which  they 
hold  is  mine  indignation"  (Ges.,  Rosenmiiller,  and  others),  in 
which  case,  however,  we  should  rather  expect  Sin  '•Byt  DT2  DtODI. 
It  is  quite  inadmissible,  however,  to  take  zami  as  a  separate 
genitive  to  matteh,  and  to  point  the  latter  with  zere,  as  Knobel 
has  done ;  a  thing  altogether  unparalleled  in  the  Hebrew  lan 
guage.1  The  futures  in  ver.  6  are  to  be  taken  literally ;  for 
what  Asshur  did  to  Israel  in  the  sixth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign, 
and  to  Judah  in  his  fourteenth  year,  was  still  in  the  future 
at  the  time  when  Isaiah  prophesied.  Instead  of  toWl  the  keri 
has  lSflfc6<,  the  form  in  which  the  infinitive  is  written  in  other 
passages  when  connected  with  suffixes  (see,  on  the  other  hand, 
2  Sam.  xiv.  7).  "  Trodden  down  :"  mirmas  with  short  a  is  the 
older  form,  which  was  retained  along  with  the  other  form  with 
the  a  lengthened  by  the  tone  (Ewald  §  160,  c). 

Asshur  was  to  be  an  instrument  of  divine  wrath  upon  all 
Israel ;  but  it  would  exalt  itself,  and  make  itself  the  end  instead 
of  the  means.  Ver.  7.  "  Nevertheless  he  meaneth  not  so,  neither 
doth  his  heart  think  so ;  for  it  is  in  his  heart  to  destroy  and  cut 
off  nations  not  a  few?  Asshur  did  not  think  so  (lo'-cen),  i.e. 
not  as  he  ought  to  think,  seeing  that  his  power  over  Israel  was 
determined  by  Jehovah  Himself.  For  what  filled  his  heart 
was  the  endeavour,  peculiar  to  the  imperial  power,  to  destroy 
not  a  few  nations,  i.e.  as  many  nations  as  possible,  for  the  pur 
pose  of  extending  his  own  dominions,  and  with  the  determi 
nation  to  tolerate  no  other  independent  nation,  and  the  desire 
to  deal  with  Judah  as  with  all  the  rest.  For  Jehovah  was 
nothing  more  in  his  esteem  than  one  of  the  idols  of  the  nations. 
Vers.  8-11.  "  For  he  saith,  Are  not  my  generals  all  kings?  Is 
not  Calno  as  Carchemish,  or  Hamath  as  Arpad,  or  Samaria  as 
Damascus  ?  As  my  hand  hath  reached  the  kingdoms  of  the  idols, 
and  their  graven  images  were  more  than  those  of  Jerusalem  and 
Samaria ;  shall  I  not,  as  I  have  done  unto  Samaria  and  her  idols,  do 
likewise  to  Jerusalem  and  her  idols  V  The  king  of  Asshur  bore 
the  title  of  the  great  king  (ch.  xxxvi.  4),  and  indeed,  as  we 
may  infer  from  Ezek.  xxvi.  7,  that  of  the  king  of  kings.  The 

1  In  the  Aiabic.  such  a  separation  does  occur  as  a  poetical  licence  (ace 
De  Sacy,  Gramm.  t.  ii.  §  270). 


CHAP.  X.  8   11.  2G7 

generals  in  his  army  he  could  call  kings,1  because  the  satraps2 
who  led  their  several  contingents  were  equal  to  kings  in  the 
extent  and  splendour  of  their  government,  and  some  of  them 
were  really  conquered  kings  (cf.  2  Kings  xxv.  28).  He  proudly 
asks  whether  every  one  of  the  cities  named  has  not  been  as 
incapable  as  the  rest,  of  offering  a  successful  resistance  to  him. 
Carchemish  is  the  later  Circesium  (Cercusium),  at  the  junc 
tion  of  the  Chaboras  with  the  Euphrates  (see  above) ;  Cahto, 
the  later  Ctesiphon,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Tigris  ;  Arpad 
(according  to  Merdshid,  i.  p.  47,  in  the  pashalic  of  Chaleb,  i.e. 
Aleppo)  and  Hamath  (i.e.  Epiphania)  were  Syrian  cities,  the 
latter  on  the  river  Orontes,  still  a  large  and  wealthy  place.  The 
king  of  Asshur  had  also  already  conquered  Samaria,  at  the 
time  when  the  prophet  introduced  him  as  uttering  these  words. 
Jerusalem,  therefore,  would  be  unable  to  resist  him.  As  he 
had  obtained  possession  of  idolatrous  kingdoms  (^  N¥£,  to  reach, 
as  in  Ps.  xxi.  9 ;  hd-elil  with  the  article  indicating  the  genus), 
which  had  more  idols  than  Jerusalem  or  than  Samaria  ;  so 
would  he  also  overcome  Jerusalem,  which  had  just  as  few  and 
just  as  powerless  idols  as  Samaria  had.  Observe  here  that  ver. 
11  is  the  apodosis  to  ver.  10,  arid  that  the  comparative  clause 
of  ver.  10  is  repeated  in  ver.  11,  for  the  purpose  of  instituting 
a  comparison,  more  especially  with  Samaria  and  Jerusalem. 
The  king  of  Asshur  calls  the  gods  of  the  nations  by  the  simple 
name  of  idols,  though  the  prophet  does  not  therefore  make  him 
speak  from  his  own  Israelitish  standpoint.  On  the  contrary, 
the  great  sin  of  the  king  of  Asshur  consisted  in  the  manner 
in  which  he  spoke.  For  since  he  recognised  no  other  gods 
than  his  own  Assyrian  national  deities,  he  placed  Jehovah 
among  the  idols  of  the  nations,  and,  what  ought  particularly 
to  be  observed,  with  the  other  idols,  whose  worship  had  been 
introduced  into  Samaria  and  Jerusalem.  But  in  this  very  fact 
there  was  so  far  consolation  for  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah, 

1  The  question  is  expressed  in  Hebrew  phraseology,  since  sar  in  Assyrian 
was  a  superior  title  to  that  of  melek,  as  we  may  see  from  inscriptions  and 
proper  names. 

2  Satrapes  is  the  old  Persian  (arrow-headed)  khsJiatra  (Sanscr.  xatra) 
pavan,  i.e.  keeper  of  goverrment.     Pdvan  (nom.  pava),  which  occurs  in  the 
Zendik  as  an  independent  word  pavan  (nom.  pavao)  in  the  sense  of  sentry 
or  watchman,  is  probably  the  original  of  the  Hebrew  pechah  (see  Spiegel, 
in  Kohler  on  Mai.  i  8). 


268  THE  FROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

that  such  blasphemy  of  the  one  living  God  could  not  remain 
unavenged ;  whilst  for  the  worshippers  of  idols  it  contained  a 
painful  lesson,  since  their  gods  really  deserved  nothing  better 
than  that  contempt  should  be  heaped  upon  them.  The  prophet 
has  now  described  the  sin  of  Asshur.  It  was  ambitious  self- 
exaltation  above  Jehovah,  amounting  even  to  blasphemy.  And 
yet  he  was  only  the  staff  of  Jehovah,  who  could  make  use  of 
him  as  He  would. 

And  when  He  had  made  use  of  him  as  He  would,  He 
would  throw  him  away.  Ver.  12.  "And  it  will  come  to  pass, 
luhen  the  Lord  shall  have  brought  to  an  end  all  His  work  upon 
Mount  Zion  and  upon  Jerusalem,  I  will  come  to  punish  over  the 
fruit  of  the  pride  of  heart  of  the  king  of  Asshur ,  and  over  the 
haughty  look  of  his  eyes."  The  "fruit"  (peri)  of  the  heart's 
pride  of  Asshur  is  his  vainglorious  blasphemy  of  Jehovah,  in 
which  his  whole  nature  is  comprehended,  as  the  inward  nature 
of  the  tree  is  in  the  fruit  which  hangs  above  in  the  midst  of 
the  branches :  tipliereth,  as  in  Zech.  xii.  7,  the  self-glorification 
which  expresses  itself  in  the  lofty  look  of  the  eyes.  Several 
constructives  are  here  intentionally  grouped  together  (Ges. 
§  114,  1),  to  express  the  great  swelling  of  Asshur  even  to  burst 
ing.  But  Jehovah,  before  whom  humility  is  the  soul  of  all 
virtue,  would  visit  this  pride  with  punishment,  when  He  should 
have  completely  cut  off  His  work,  i.e.  when  He  should  have 
thoroughly  completed  (bizza*,  absolvere}  His  punitive  work 
upon  Jerusalem  (ma'aseh,  as  in  ch.  xxviii.  21).  The  prep.  Beth 
is  used  in  the  same  sense  as  in  Jer.  xviii.  23,  agere  cum  aliquo. 
It  is  evident  that  ma'aseh  is  not  used  to  indicate  the  work  of 
punishment  and  grace  together,  so  that  yebazza  could  be 
taken  as  a  literal  future  (as  Schroring  and  Ewald  suppose), 
but  that  it  denotes  the  work  of  punishment  especially ;  and 
consequently  yebazza  is  to  be  taken  as  a  futurum  exactum 
(cf.  ch.  iv.  4),  as  we  may  clearly  see  from  the  choice  of  this 
word  in  Lam.  ii.  17  (cf.  Zech.  iv.  9). 

When  Jehovah  had  punished  to  such  an  extent  that  He 
could  not  go  any  further  without  destroying  Israel, — a  result 
which  would  be  opposed  to  His  mercy  and  truth, — His  punish 
ing  would  turn  against  the  instrument  of  punishment,  which 
would  fall  under  the  curse  of  all  ungodly  selfishness.  Vers.  13, 
14.  "For  he  hath  said,  By  the  strength  of  my  hand  I  have  done 


CHAP.  X.  13-15.  269 

it)  and  by  my  own  wisdom;  for  I  am  prudent:  and  I  removed  the 
bounds  of  the  nations,  and  I  plundered  their  stores,  and  threw 
down  rulers1  like  a  bull.  And  my  hand  extracted  the  wealth  of 
the  nations  like  a  nest :  and  as  men  sweep  up  forsaken  eggs,  have 
I  swept  the  whole  earth  ;  there  was  none  that  moved  the  wing,  and 
opened  the  mouth,  and  chirped."  The  futures  may  be  taken  most 
safely  as  regulated  by  the  preterites,  and  used,  like  German 
imperfects,  to  express  that  which  occurs  not  once  merely,  but 
several  times.  The  second  of  these  preterites,  Wjpt?,  is  the  only 
example  of  a  pod  of  verbs  rrt ;  possibly  a  mixed  form  from 
DD^  (pod  of  DDP)  and  nDP  (piel  of  notf).  The  object  to  this, 
viz.  'atkidoth  (chethib)  or  eathudoth  (keri),  is  sometimes  used 
in  the  sense  of  ra  fjLzXkovra ;  sometimes,  as  in  this  instance,  in 
the  sense  of  ra  vTrdp^ovra.  According  to  the  keri,  the  passage 
is  to  be  rendered,  "And  I,  a  mighty  one,  threw  down  kings" 
(those  sitting  on  thrones),  cabbir  being  taken  in  the  same  sense 
as  in  Job  xxxiv.  17,  24,  xxxvi.  5.  But  the  chethib  caabblr  is 
to  be  preferred  as  more  significant,  and  not  to  be  rendered  "  as 
a  hero"  (to  which  the  Caph  similitudinis  is  so  little  suitable, 
that  it  would  be  necessary  to  take  it,  as  in  ch.  xiii.  6,  as  Caph 
veritatis),  but  "  as  a  bull,"  'abblr  as  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  31,  xxii.  13, 
1.  13.  A  bull,  as  the  excavations  show,  was  an  emblem  of 
royalty  among  the  Assyrians.  In  ver.  14,  the  more  stringent 
Vav  conv.  is  introduced  before  the  third  pers.  fern.  The  king 
doms  of  the  nations  are  compared  here  to  birds'  nests,  which  the 
Assyrian  took  for  himself  (dsaph,  as  in  Hab.  ii.  5) ;  and  their 
possessions  to  single  eggs.  The  mother  bird  was  away,  so  that 
there  was  not  even  a  sign  of  resistance ;  and  in  the  nest  itself 
not  one  of  the  young  birds  moved  a  wing  to  defend  itself,  or 
opened  its  beak  to  scare  the  intruder  away.  Seb.  Schmid  has 
interpreted  it  correctly,  "  imlla  alam  movet  ad  defendendum  ant 
os  aperit  ad  terrendum"  Thus  proudly  did  Asshur  look  back 
upon  its  course  of  victory,  and  thus  contemptuously  did  it  look 
down  upon  the  conquered  kingdoms. 

This  self-exaltation  was  a  foolish  sin.  Ver.  15.  "Dare  the 
axe  boast  itself  against  him  that  heu-eth  therewith,  or  the  saw 
magnify  itself  against  him  that  useth  it?  As  if  a  staff  were  to 
swing  those  that  lift  it  up,  as  if  a  stick  should  lift  up  not- wood!" 
"Not-wood"  is  to  be  taken  as  one  word,  as  in  ch.  xxxi.  8.  A 
1  Thronende,  lit.  those  who  sat  (on  thrones). 


270  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH 

stick  is  wood,  and  nothing  more  ;  in  itself  it  is  an  absolutely 
motionless  thing.  A  man  is  "  not-wood"  an  incomparably 
higher,  living  being.  As  there  must  be  "not-wood"  to  lay 
hold  of  wood,  so,  wherever  a  man  performs  extraordinary 
deeds,  there  is  always  a  superhuman  cause  behind,  viz.  God 
Himself,  who  bears  the  same  relation  to  the  man  as  the  man  to 
the  wood.  The  boasting  of  the  Assyrian  was  like  the  bragging 
of  an  instrument,  such  as  an  axe,  a  saw,  or  a  stick,  against  the 
person  using  it.  The  verb  hemph  is  applied  both  to  saw  and 
stick,  indicating  the  oscillating  movements  of  a  measured  and 
more  or  less  obvious  character.  The  plural,  "  those  that  lift  it 
up,"  points  to  the  fact  that  by  Him  who  lifts  up  the  stick, 
Jehovah,  the  cause  of  all  causes,  and  power  of  all  powers,  is 
intended. 

There  follows  in  the  next  verse  the  punishment  provoked  by 
such  self-deification  (cf.  Hab.  i.  11).  Ver.  16.  "Therefore  will 
the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  send  consumption  against  his  fat  men; 
and  under  Asshurs  glory  there  burns  a  brand  like  a  firebrand" 
Three  epithets  are  here  employed  to  designate  God  according 
to  His  unlimited,  all-controlling  omnipotence :  viz.  haddon, 
which  is  always  used  by  Isaiah  in  connection  with  judicial  and 
penal  manifestations  of  power  ;  and  adondi  zeldoth,  a  combina 
tion  never  met  with  again,  similar  to  the  one  used  in  the 
Elohistic  Psalms,  Elchim  zebao'h  (compare,  on  the  other  hand, 
ch.  iii.  15,  x.  23,  24).  Even  here  a  large  number  of  codices 
and  editions  (Norzi's,  for  example)  have  the  reading  Jehovah 
Zebaoth,  which  is  customary  in  other  cases.1  Hdzon  (ch. 
xvii.  4)  is  one  of  the  diseases  mentioned  in  the  catalogue  of 
curses  in  Lev.  xxvi.  16  and  Deut.  xxviii.  22.  Galloping  con 
sumption  comes  like  a  destroying  angel  upon  the  great  masses 
of  flesh  seen  in  the  well-fed  Assyrian  magnates:  mishmannim  is 
used  in  a  personal  sense,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxviii.  31.  And  under  the 
glory  of  Asshur,  i.e.  its  richly  equipped  army  (cdbod  as  in  ch. 
viii.  7),  He  who  makes  His  angels  flames  of  fire  places  fire  so 
as  to  cause  it  to  pass  away  in  flames.  In  accordance  with 
Isaiah's  masterly  art  of  painting  in  tones,  the  whole  passage  is 
so  expressed,  that  we  can  hear  the  crackling,  and  spluttering, 

1  This  passage  is  not  included  in  the  134  vadda'ln  (i.e.  "  real")  adonai. 
or  passages  in  which  adonai  is  written,  and  not  merely  to  be  read,  that  are 
enumerated  by  the  Masora  (see  Bar's  Fsalterium,  p.  133). 


CHAP.  X.  17-19.  271 

and  hissing  of  the  fire,  as  it  seizes  upon  everything  within  its 
reach.  This  fire,  whatever  it  may  be  so  far  as  its  natural  and 
phenomenal  character  is  concerned,  is  in  its  true  essence  the 
wrath  of  Jehovah. — Yer.  17.  "  And  the  light  of  Israel  becomes 
a  fire,  and  His  Holy  One  a  flame;  and  it  sets  on  fire  and  devours 
its  thistles  and  thorns  on  one  day."  God  is  fire  (Dent.  ix.  3), 
and  light  (1  John  i.  5)  ;  and  in  His  owrn  self-life  the  former  is 
resolved  into  the  latter.  Kddosh  (holy)  is  here  parallel  to  'or 
(light) ;  for  the  fact  that  God  is  holy,  and  the  fact  that  He 
is  pure  light,  are  essentially  one  and  the  same  thing,  whether 
kddash  meant  originally  to  be  pure  or  to  be  separate.  The 
nature  of  all  creatures,  and  of  the  whole  cosmos,  is  a  mixture  of 
light  and  darkness.  The  nature  of  God  alone  is  absolute  light. 
But  light  is  love.  In  this  holy  light  of  love  He  has  given 
Himself  up  to  Israel,  and  taken  Israel  to  Himself.  But  He 
has  also  within  Him  a  basis  of  fire,  which  sin  excites  against 
itself,  and  which  was  about  to  burst  forth  as  a  flaming  fire  of 
wrath  against  Asshur,  on  account  of  its  sins  against  Him  and 
His  people.  Before  this  fire  of  wrath,  this  destructive  might 
of  His  penal  righteousness,  the  splendid  forces  of  Asshur  were 
nothing  but  a  mass  of  thistles  and  a  bed  of  thorns  (written 
here  in  the  reverse  order  peculiar  to  Isaiah,  slidmir  vdshaith), 
equally  inflammable,  and  equally  deserving  to  be  burned.  To 
all  appearance,  it  was  a  forest  and  a  park,  but  it  was  irrecover 
ably  lost. — Yers.  18,  19.  "  And  the  glory  of  his  forest  and  his 
garden- ground  will  He  destroy ,  even  to  soul  and  fle^h,  so  that  it  is 
as  when  a  sick  man  dieth.  And  the  remnant  of  the  trees  of  his 
forest  can  be  numbered,  and  a  boy  could  write  them"  The  army 
of  Asshur,  composed  as  it  was  of  many  and  various  nations,  was 
a  forest  (yaar) ;  and,  boasting  as  it  did  of  the  beauty  of  both 
men  and  armour,  a  garden  ground  (carrnel),  a  human  forest 
and  park.  Hence  the  idea  of  "utterly"  is  expressed  in  the 
proverbial  "  even  to  soul  and  flesh,"  which  furnishes  the  occa 
sion  for  a  leap  to  the  figure  of  the  wasting  away  of  a  Dpj  (hap. 
leg.  the  consumptive  man,  from  ndsas,  related  to  nush,  'dnash, 
Syr.  nsisOj  nshisho,  a  sick  man,  based  upon  the  radical  notion 
of  melting  away,  cf.  mdsas,  or  of  reeling  to  and  fro,  cf.  mut,  n^t, 
Arab,  ndsa,  ndta).  Only  a  single  vital  spark  would  still  glim 
mer  in  the  gigantic  and  splendid  colossus,  and  with  this  its  life 
would  threaten  to  become  entirely  extinct.  Or,  what  is  the 


272  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

same  thing,  only  a  few  trees  of  the  forest,  such  as  could  t>e 
easily  numbered  (mispdr  as  in  Deut.  xxxiii.  6,  cf.  Isa.  xxi.  17), 
would  still  remain,  yea,  so  few,  that  a  boy  would  be  able  to 
count  and  enter  them.  And  this  really  came  to  pass.  Only  a 
small  remnant  of  the  army  that  marched  against  Jerusalem 
ever  escaped.  With  this  small  remnant  of  an  all-destroying 
power  the  prophet  now  contrasts  the  remnant  of  Israel,  which 
is  the  seed  of  a  new  power  that  is  about  to  arise. — Ver.  20. 
u  And  it  ivill  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  the  remnant  of  Israel, 
and  that  luhich  has  escaped  of  the  house  of  Jacob,  will  not  continue, 
to  stay  itself  upon  its  chastiser,  and  will  stay  itself  upon  Jehovah, 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  in  truth."  Behind  the  judgment  upon 
Asshur  there  lies  the  restoration  of  Israel.  "  The  chastiser" 
was  the  Assyrian.  While  relying  upon  this,  Israel  received 
strokes,  because  Jehovah  made  Israel's  staff  into  its  rod.  But 
henceforth  it  would  sanctify  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  putting 
its  trust  in  Him  and  not  in  man,  and  that  purely  and  truly 
(beemeth,  "  in  truth"),  not  with  fickleness  and  hypocrisy. 
Then  would  be  fulfilled  the  promise  contained  in  the  name 
Shear-yashub,  after  the  fulfilment  of  the  threat  that  it  con 
tained. — Ver.  21.  "  The  remnant  will  turn,  the  remnant  of  Jacob, 
to  God  the  mighty."  El  gibbor  is  God  as  historically  manifested 
in  the  heir  of  David  (ch.  ix.  6).  Whilst  Hosea  (iii.  5)  places 
side  by  side  Jehovah  and  the  second  David,  Isaiah  sees  them 
as  one.  In  New  Testament  phraseology,  it  would  be  "  to  God 
in  Christ." 

To  Him  the  remnant  of  Israel  would  turn,  but  only  the 
remnant.  Vers.  22,  23.  "  For  if  thy  people  were  even  as  the 
sea-sand,  the  remnant  thereof  will  turn:  destruction  is  firmly 
determined,  flowing  away  righteousness.  For  the  Lord,  Jehovah 
of  hosts,  completes  the  finishing  stroke  and  that  which  is  firmly 
determined,  within  the  whole  land."  As  the  words  are  not  pre 
ceded  by  any  negative  clause,  ci  'im  are  not  combined  in  the 
sense  of  sed  or  nisi;  but  they  belong  to  two  sentences,  and 
signify  nam  si  (for  if).  If  the  number  of  the  Israelites  were 
the  highest  that  had  been  promised,  only  the  remnant  among 
them,  or  of  them  (bo  partitive,  like  the  French  en),  would  turn, 
or,  as  the  nearer  definition  ad  Deum  is  wanting  here,  come  back 
to  their  right  position.  With  regard  to  the  great  mass,  destruc 
tion  was  irrevocably  determined  (rdchatz,  Tepvew,  then  to  resolve 


CHAP.  X.  24.  273 

upon  anything,  aTroro/iw?,  1  Kings  xx.  40)  ;  and  this  destruction 
"  overflowed  with  righteousness,"  or  rather  "  flowed  on  (shoteph, 
as  in  ch.  xxviii.  18)  righteousness,"  i.e.  brought  forth  right 
eousness  as  it  flowed  onwards,  so  that  it  was  like  a  swell  of 
the  penal  righteousness  of  God  (shdtaph,  with  the  accusative, 
according  to  Ges.  §  138,  Anm.  2).  That  cilldyon  is  not  used 
here  in  the  sense  of  completion  any  more  than  in  Deut.  xxviii. 
65,  is  evident  from  ver.  23,  where  cdldh  (fern,  of  cdleh,  that 
which  vanishes,  then  the  act  of  vanishing,  the  end)  is  used  in 
terchangeably  with  it,  and  necherdtzdh  indicates  judgment  as  a 
thing  irrevocably  decided  (as  in  ch.  xxviii.  22,  and  borrowed 
from  these  passages  in  Dan.  ix.  27,  xi.  36).  Such  a  judgment 
of  extermination  the  almighty  Judge  had  determined  to  carry 
fully  out  (oseh  in  the  sense  of  a  fut.  instans)  within  all  the  land 
(b'kereb,  within,  not  Uthok,  in  the  midst  of),  that  is  to  say,  one 
that  would  embrace  the  whole  land  and  all  the  people,  and 
would  destroy,  if  not  every  individual  without  exception,  at  any 
rate  the  great  mass,  except  a  very  few. 

In  these  esoteric  addresses,  however,  it  is  not  the  prophet's 
intention  to  threaten  and  terrify,  but  to  comfort  and  encourage. 
He  therefore  turns  to  that  portion  of  the  nation  which  needs 
and  is  susceptible  of  consolation,  and  draws  this  conclusion  from 
the  element  of  consolation  contained  in  what  has  been  already 
predicted,  that  they  may  be  consoled. — Ver.  24.  "  Therefore 
thus  saith  the  Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts,  My  people  that  dwellest 
on  Zion,  be  not  afraid  of  Asskur,  if  it  shall  smite  thee  with 
the  rod,  and  lift  its  stick  against  thee,  in  the  manner  of  Egypt" 
"  Therefore :"  lacen  never  occurs  in  Hebrew  in  the  sense  of 
attamen  (Gesenius  and  Hitzig),  and  this  is  not  the  meaning 
here,  but  propterea.  The  elevating  appeal  is  founded  upon 
what  has  just  before  been  threatened  in  such  terrible  words, 
but  at  the  same  time  contains  an  element  of  promise  in  the 
midst  of  the  peremptory  judgment.  The  very  words  in  which 
the  people  are  addressed,  "  My  people  that  dwelleth  on  Zion, ' 
are  indirectly  encouraging.  Zion  was  the  site  of  the  gracious 
presence  of  God,  and  of  that  sovereignty  which  had  been 
declared  imperishable.  Those  who  dwelt  there,  and  were  the 
people  of  God  (the  servants  of  God),  not  only  according  to  their 
calling,  but  also  according  to  their  internal  character,  were  also 
heirs  of  the  promise;  and  therefore, even  if  the  Egyptian  bond- 
VOL.  i.  s 


274  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

age  should  be  renewed  in  the  Assyrian,  they  might  be  assured 
of  this  to  their  consolation,  that  the  redemption  of  Egypt  would 
also  be  renewed.  ""  In  the  manner  of  Egypt :"  Vderek  Mitzraim, 
lit.  in  the  way,  i.e.  the  Egyptians'  mode  of  acting;  derek  de 
notes  the  course  of  active  procedure,  and  also,  as  in  ver.  26  and 
Amos  iv.  10,  the  course  of  passive  endurance. 

A  still  further  reason  is  given  for  the  elevating  words,  with 
a  resumption  of  the  grounds  of  consolation  upon  which  they 
were  founded.  Vers.  25,  26.  "  For  yet  a  very  little  the  indig 
nation  is  past9  and  my  wrath  turns  to  destroy  them :  and  Jehovah 
of  hosts  moves  the  whip  over  it,  as  He  smote  Midian  at  the  rock 
of  Orel);  and  His  staff  stretches  out  over  the  sea,  and  He  lifts  it 
up  in  the  manner  of  Egypt"  The  expression  "  a  very  little " 
(as  in  ch.  xvi.  14,  xxix.  17)  does  not  date  from  the  actual 
present,  when  the  Assyrian  oppressions  had  not  yet  begun,  but 
from  the  ideal  present,  when  they  were  threatening  Israel  with 
destruction.  The  indignation  of  Jehovah  would  then  suddenly 
come  to  an  end  (cdldh  za'am,  borrowed  in  Dan.  xi.  36,  and  to 
be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  ch.  xxvi.  20) ;  and  the  wrath 
of  Jehovah  would  be,  or  go, ' al-tablithdm.  Luzzatto  recommends 
the  following  emendation  of  the  text,  Dn^  ?5£i~^y  ^1,  u  and  my 
wrath  against  the  world  will  cease,"  telel  being  used,  as  in  ch. 
xiv.  17,  with  reference  to  the  oikoumenon  as  enslaved  by  the 
imperial  power.  But  the  received  text  gives  a  better  train  of 
thought,  if  we  connect  it  with  ver.  26.  We  must  not  be  led 
astray,  however,  by  the  preposition  'al,  and  take  the  words  as 
meaning,  My  wrath  (burneth)  over  the  destruction  inflicted  by 
Asshur  upon  the  people  of  God,  or  the  destruction  endured  by 
the  latter.  It  is  to  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrians  that  the 
wrath  of  Jehovah  is  now  directed ;  *al  being  used,  as  it  fre 
quently  is,  to  indicate  the  object  upon  which  the  eye  is  fixed, 
or  to  which  the  intention  points  (Ps.  xxxii.  8,  xviii.  42).  With 
this  explanation  ver.  256  leads  on  to  ver.  26.  The  destruction 
of  Asshur  is  predicted  here  in  two  figures  drawn  from  occur 
rences  in  the  olden  time.  The  almighty  Judge  would  swing 
the  whip  over  Asshur  (rorer,  agitare,  as  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  18), 
and  smite  it,  as  Midian  was  once  smitten.  The  rock  of  Oreb 
is  the  place  where  the  Ephraimites  slew  the  Midianitish  king 
fOreb  (Judg.  vii.  25).  His  staff  would  then  be  over  the  sea, 
i.e.  would  be  stretched  out,  like  the  wonder-working  staff  of 


CHAP.  X.  27.  275 

Moses,  over  the  sea  of  affliction,  into  which  the  Assyrians  had 
driven  Israel  (yam,  the  sea,  an  emblem  borrowed  from  the  type  ; 
see  Kohler  on  Zech.  x.  11,  cf.  Ps.  Ixvi.  6) ;  and  He  would  lift 
it  up,  commanding  the  waves  of  the  sea,  so  that  they  would 
swallow  Asshur.'  "  In  the  manner  of  Egypt :"  Vderek  Mitzraim 
(according  to  Luzzatto  in  both  instances,  "  on  the  way  to 
Egypt,"  which  restricts  the  Assyrian  bondage  in  a  most  unhis- 
torical  manner  to  the  time  of  the  Egyptian  campaign)  signifies 
in  ver.  24,  as  the  Egyptians  lifted  it  up ;  but  here,  as  it  was 
lifted  up  above  the  Egyptians.  The  expression  is  intentionally 
conformed  to  that  in  ver.  24 :  because  Asshur  had  lifted  up  the 
rod  over  Israel  in  the  Egyptian  manner,  Jehovah  would  lift  it 
up  over  Asshur  in  the  Egyptian  manner  also. 

The  yoke  of  the  imperial  power  would  then  burst  asunder. 
Ver.  27.  "  And  it  will  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  its  burden  will 
remove  from  thy  shoulder,  and  its  yoke  from  thy  neck;  and  the  yoke 
will  be  destroyed  from  the  pressure  of  the  fat"  We  have  here 
two  figures :  in  the  first  (cessabit  onus  ejus  a  cervice  tua)  Israel 
is  represented  as  a  beast  of  burden ;  in  the  second  (et  jugum 
ejus  a  collo  tuo),  as  a  beast  of  draught.  And  this  second  figure 
is  divided  again  into  two  fields.  For  ydsur  merely  affirms  that 
the  yoke,  like  the  burden,  will  be  taken  away  from  Israel ;  but 
chubbal,  that  the  yoke  itself  will  snap,  from  the  pressure  of  his 
fat  strong  neck  against  it.  Knobel,  who  alters  the  text,  objects 
to  this  on  the  ground  that  the  yoke  was  a  cross  piece  of  wood, 
and  not  a  collar.  And  no  doubt  the  simple  yoke  is  a  cross 
piece  of  wood,  which  is  fastened  to  the  forehead  of  the  ox 
(generally  of  two  oxen  yoked  together:  jumenta  =  jugmenta, 
like  jugum,  from  jungere)  ;  but  the  derivation  of  the  namo 
itself,  W,  from  'dial,  points  to  the  connection  of  the  cross 
piece  of  wood  with  a  collar,  and  here  the  yoke  is  expressly 
described  as  lying  round  the  neck  (and  not  merely  fastened 
against  the  forehead).  There  is  no  necessity,  therefore,  to 
read  chebel  (chablo),  as  Knobel  proposes;  chubbal  (Arabic  chub- 
bila)  indicates  here  a  corrumpi  consequent  upon  a  disrumpi. 
(On  pne,  vid.  Job  xli.  5 ;  and  for  the  application  of  the  term 
mippene  to  energy  manifesting  itself  in  its  effects,  compare  Ps. 
Ixviii.  3  as  an  example.)  Moreover,  as  Kimchi  has  observed, 
in  most  instances  the  yoke  creates  a  wound  in  the  fat  flesh  of 
the  ox  by  pressure  and  friction;  but  here  the  very  opposite 


276  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

occurs,  and  the  fatness  of  the  ox  leads  to  the  destruction  of  the 
yoke  (compare  the  figure  of  grafting  employed  in  Rom.  xi.  17, 
to  which  Paul  gives  a  turn  altogether  contrary  to  nature). 
Salvation,  as  the  double  turn  in  the  second  figure  affirms,  comes 
no  less  from  within  (275)  than  from  without  (27a).  It  is  no 
less  a  consequence  of  the  world-conquering  grace  at  work  in 
Isaiah,  than  a  miracle  wrought  for  Israel  upon  their  foes. 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  to  describe  how  the  Assyrian 
army  advances  steadily  towards  Jerusalem,  spreading  terror  on 
every  hand,  and  how,  when  planted  there  like  a  towering  forest, 
it  falls  to  the  ground  before  the  irresistible  might  of  Jehovah. 
Eichhorn  and  Hitzig  pronounce  this  prophecy  a  vaticinium  post 
eventum,  because  of  its  far  too  special  character ;  but  Knobel 
regards  it  as  a  prophecy,  because  no  Assyrian  king  ever  did 
take  the  course  described ;  in  other  words,  as  a  mere  piece  of 
imagination,  as  Ewald  maintains.  Now,  no  doubt  the  Assyrian 
army,  when  it  marched  against  Jerusalem,  came  from  the  south 
west,  namely,  from  the  road  to  Egypt,  and  not  directly  from 
the  north.  Sennacherib  had  conquered  Lachish;  he  then 
encamped  before  Libnah,  and  it  was  thence  that  he  advanced 
towards  Jerusalem.  But  the  prophet  had  no  intention  of  giving 
a  fragment  out  of  the  history  of  the  war :  all  that  he  meant  to 
do  was  to  give  a  lively  representation  of  the  future  fact,  that 
after  devastating  the  land  of  Judah,  the  Assyrian  would  attack 
Jerusalem.  There  is  no  necessity  whatever  to  contend,  as 
Drechsler  does,  against  calling  the  description  an  ideal  one. 
There  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  between  idea  and 
imagination.  Idea  is  the  essential  root  of  the  real,  and  the 
reality  is  its  historical  form.  This  form,  its  essential  mani 
festation,  may  be  either  this  or  that,  so  far  as  individual 
features  are  concerned,  without  any  violation  of  its  essential 
character.  What  the  prophet  here  predicts  has,  when  properly 
interpreted,  been  all  literally  fulfilled.  The  Assyrian  did  come 
from  the  north  with  the  storm-steps  of  a  conqueror,  and  the 
cities  named  were  really  exposed  to  the  dangers  and  terrors  of 
M-ar.  And  this  was  what  the  prophet  depicted,  looking  as  he 
did  from  a  divine  eminence,  and  drawing  from  the  heart  of 
the  divine  counsels,  and  then  painting  the  future  with  colours 
which  were  but  the  broken  lights  of  those  counsels  as  they 
existed  in  his  own  mind. 


CHAP.  X.  28-32.  277 

JEsthetically  considered,  the  description  is  one  of  the  most 
magnificent  that  human  poetry  has  ever  produced.  Vers. 
28-32.  "  He  comes  upon  Ayyath,  passes  through  Migron ;  in 
Michmash  he  leaves  his  baggage.  They  go  through  the  pass : 
let  Geba  be  our  quarters  for  the  night !  Ramah  trembles ; 
Gibeah  of  Saul  flees.  Scream  aloud,  0  daughter  of  Gallim ! 
Only  listen,  OLaysha!  Poor  A  nathoth  !  Madmenah  hurries 
away;  the  inhabitants  of  Gebim  rescue.  He  still  halts  in  Nob  to 
day  ;  swings  his  hand  over  the  mountain  of  the  daughter  of  Zion, 
the  hill  of  Jerusalem.  Behold,  the  Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts, 
lops  down  the  branches  with  terrific  force  ;  and  those  of  towering 
growth  are  hewn  down,  and  the  lofty  are  humbled.  And  He 
fells  the  thickets  of  the  forest  with  iron  ;  and  Lebanon,  it  falls  by  a 
Majestic  One."  When  the  Assyrian  came  upon  Ayyath  (=Ayyah, 
1  Chron.  vii.  28  (?),  Neh.  xi.  31,  generally  hd-ai,  or  'Ai),  about 
thirty  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Jerusalem,  he  trod  for  the  first 
time  upon  Benjaminitish  territory,  which  was  under  the  sway 
of  Judaea.  The  name  of  this  '  AI,  which  signifies  "  stone-heap/' 
tallies,  as  Knobel  observes,  with  the  name  of  the  Tell  el-hagar, 
which  is  situated  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  to  the  south 
east  of  Beitin,  i.e.  Bethel.  But  there  are  tombs,  reservoirs,  and 
ruins  to  be  seen  about  an  hour  to  the  south-east  of  Beitin  ;  and 
these  Kobinson  associates  with  Ai.  From  Ai,  however,  the 
army  will  not  proceed  towards  Jerusalem  by  the  ordinary 
route,  viz.  the  great  north  road  (or  "  Nablus  road") ;  but,  in 
order  to  surprise  Jerusalem,  it  takes  a  different  route,  in  which 
it  will  have  to  cross  three  deep  and  difficult  valleys.  From 
Ai  they  pass  to  MIGRON,  the  name  of  which  has  apparently 
been  preserved  in  the  ruins  of  Burg  Magrun,  situated  about 
eight  minutes'  walk  from  Beitin.1  MICHMASH  is  still  to  be 
found  in  the  form  of  a  deserted  village  with  ruins,  under  the 
name  of  Muchmds,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  valley  of  Migron. 
Here  they  deposit  their  baggage  (hiphkid,  Jer.  xxxvi.  20),  so 
far  as  they  are  able  to  dispense  with  it, — either  to  leave  it  lying 
there,  or  to  have  it  conveyed  after  them  by  an  easier  route. 
For  they  proceed  thence  through  the  pass  of  Michmash,  a  deep 
and  precipitous  ravine  about  forty-eight  minutes  in  breadth, 

1  I  also  find  the  name  written  Magrum  (read  Magrun),  which  is  pro 
bably  taken  from  a  more  correct  hearsay  than  the  Maclirun  of  Kobinson 
(ii.  127). 


278  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  present  WADY  SUWEINIT.  "  The  pass"  (mabdrdh)  is  the 
defile  of  Michmash,  with  two  prominent  rocky  cliffs,  where 
Jonathan  had  his  adventure  with  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines. 
One  of  these  cliffs  was  called  Seneh  (1  Sam.  xiv.  4),  a  name 
which  suggests  es-Suweinit.  Through  this  defile  they  pass, 
encouraging  one  another,  as  they  proceed  along  the  difficult 
march,  by  the  prospect  of  passing  the  night  in  Geba,  which  is 
close  at  hand.  It  is  still  disputed  whether  this  GEBA  is  the 
same  place  as  the  following  Gibeah  of  Saul  or  not.  There 
is  at  the  present  time  a  village  called  Gebaf  below  Muchmds, 
situated  upon  an  eminence.  The  almost  universal  opinion  now 
is,  that  this  is  not  Gibeah  of  Saul,  but  that  the  latter  is  to  be 
seen  in  the  prominent  Tell  (Tuleil)  el-Ful,  which  is  situated 
farther  south.  This  is  possibly  correct.1  For  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  this  mountain,  the  name  of  which  signifies  "  Bean- 
hill,"  would  be  a  very  strong  position,  and  one  very  suitable  for 
Gibeah  of  Saul ;  and  the  supposition  that  there  were  two  places 
in  Benjamin  named  Geba,  GibeaJi,  or  Gibeath,  is  favoured  at 
any  rate  by  Josh,  xviii.  21-28,  where  Geba  and  Gibeath  are 
distinguished  from  one  another.  And  this  mountain,  which  is 
situated  to  the  south  of  er-Rdm — that  is  to  say,  between  the 
ancient  Ramah  and  Anathoth — tallies  very  well  with  the  route 
of  the  Assyrian  as  here  described  ;  whilst  it  is  very  impro 
bable  that  Isaiah  has  designated  the  very  same  place  first  of 
all  Geba,  and  then  (for  what  reason  no  one  can  tell)  Gibeah 
of  Saul.  We  therefore  adopt  the  view,  that  the  Assyrian 
army  took  up  its  quarters  for  the  night  at  Geba,  which  still 
bears  this  name,  spreading  terror  in  all  directions,  both  east 
and  west,  and  still  more  towards  the  south.  Starting  in  the 
morning  from  the  deep  valley  between  Michmash  and  Geba, 
they  pass  on  one  side  of  RAMA  (the  present  er-Rdm),  situated 
half  an  hour  to  the  west  of  Geba,  which  trembles  as  it  sees 
them  go  by ;  and  the  inhabitants  of  GIBEATH  OF  SAUL,  upon 
the  "  Bean-hill,"  a  height  that  commands  the  whole  of  the  sur 
rounding  country,  take  to  flight  when  they  pass  by.  Every 
halting-place  on  their  route  brings  them  nearer  to  Jerusalem. 

1  This  is  supported  by  Robinson  in  his  Later  Biblical  Researches  in 
Palestine  (1857),  by  Valentiner  (pastor  at  Jerusalem),  and  by  Keil  in  the 
Commentary  on  Joshua,  Judges,  etc.  (pp.  188-9),  where  all  the  more  recent 
writings  on  this  topographical  question  are  given. 


CHAP.  X.  28-32.  279 

The  prophet  goes  in  spirit  through  it  all.  It  is  so  objectively 
real  to  him,  that  it  produces  the  utmost  anxiety  and  pain.  The 
cities  and  villages  of  the  district  are  lost.  He  appeals  to  the 
daughter,  i.e.  the  population,  of  GALLIM,  to  raise  a  far-sounding 
yell  of  lamentation  with  their  voice  (Ges.  §  138,  1,  Anm.  3), 
and  calls  out  in  deep  sympathy  to  LAYSHA,  which  was  close 
by  (on  the  two  places,  both  of  which  have  vanished  now,  see 
1  Sam.  xxv.  44  and  Judg.  xviii.  29),  "  only  listen,"  the  enemy 
is  coming  nearer  and  nearer  ;  and  then  for  ANATHOTH  (^Andtd, 
still  to  be  seen  about  an  hour  and  a  quarter  to  the  north  of 
Jerusalem)  he  utters  this  lamentation  (taking  the  name  as  an 
omen  of  its  fate)  :  O  poor  Anathoth  !  There  is  no  necessity 
for  any  alteration  of  the  text ;  * aniyyali  is  an  appeal,  or  rather 
an  exclamation,  as  in  ch.  liv.  11 ;  and  'andthoth  follows,  accord 
ing  to  the  same  verbal  order  as  in  ch.  xxiii.  12,  unless  indeed 
we  take  it  at  once  as  an  adjective  written  before  the  noun, — an 
arrangement  of  the  words  which  may  possibly  have  been  admis 
sible  in  such  interjectional  sentences.  The  catastrophe  so  much 
to  be  dreaded  by  Jerusalem  draws  nearer  and  nearer.  MAD- 
MENAH  (dung-hill,  see  Job,  ii.  152)  flees  in  anxious  haste  :  the 
inhabitants  of  GEBIM  (water-pits)  carry  off  their  possessions 
(ryn,  from  ny,  to  flee,  related  to  chush,  hence  to  carry  off  in 
flight,  to  bring  in  haste  to  a  place  of  security,  Ex.  ix.  19,  cf. 
Jer.  iv.  6,  vi.  1 ;  synonymous  with  hems,  Ex.  ix.  20,  Judg.  vi. 
11 ;  different  from  'dzaz,  to  be  firm,  strong,  defiant,  from  which 
md'oz,  a  fortress,  is  derived, — in  distinction  from  the  Arabic 
maddh,  a  place  of  refuge  :  comp.  ch.  xxx.  2,  to  flee  to  Pharaoh's 
shelter).  There  are  no  traces  left  of  either  place.  The  passage 
is  generally  understood  as  implying  that  the  army  rested 
another  day  in  Nob.  But  this  would  be  altogether  at  variance 
with  the  design — to  take  Jerusalem  by  surprise  by  the  sudden 
ness  of  the  destructive  blow.  We  therefore  render  it,  "  Even 
to-day  he  will  halt  in  Nob"  (in  eo  est  ut  subsistat,  Ges.  §  132,  Anm. 
1), — namely,  to  gather  up  fresh  strength  there  in  front  of  the 
city  which  was  doomed  to  destruction,  and  to  arrange  the  plan  of 
attack.  The  supposition  that  NOB  was  the  village  of  el-Isawiye, 
which  is  still  inhabited,  and  lies  to  the  south-west  of  Anata, 
fifty-five  minutes  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem,  is  at  variance  with 
the  situation,  as  correctly  described  by  Jerome,  when  he  says  : 
"  Stems  in  oppidulo  Nob  et  procul  urbem  conspiciens  Jerusalem.11 


280  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

A  far  more  appropriate  situation  is  to  be  found  in  tlie  hill 
which  rises  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem,  and  which  is  called  Sadr, 
from  its  breast-like  projection  or  roundness, — a  name  which  is 
related  in  meaning  to  nob,  nab^  to  rise  (see  Gen.  p.  635).  From 
this  eminence  the  way  leads  down  into  the  valley  of  Kidron  ; 
and  as  you  descend,  the  city  spreads  out  before  you  at  a  very 
little  distance  off.  It  may  have  been  here,  in  the  prophet's 
view,  that  the  Assyrians  halted.1  It  was  not  long,  however 
(as  the  yenopliepli  which  follows  ao-vvSercos  implies),  before  his 
hand  was  drawn  out  to  strike  (ch.  xi.  15,  xix.  16),  and  swing 
over  the  mountain  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  (ch.  xvi.  1),  over  the 
city  of  the  holy  hill.  But  what  would  Jehovah  do,  who  was 
the  only  One  who  could  save  His  threatened  dwelling-place  in 
the  face  of  such  an  army  ?  As  far  as  ver.  32a,  the  prophet's 
address  moved  on  at  a  hurried,  stormy  pace  ;  it  then  halted,  and 
seemed,  as  it  were,  panting  with  anxiety ;  it  now  breaks  forth 
in  a  dactylic  movement,  like  a  long  rolling  thunder.  The 
hostile  army  stands  in  front  of  Jerusalem,  like  a  broad  dense 
forest.  But  it  is  soon  manifest  that  Jerusalem  has  a  God  who 
cannot  be  defied  with  impunity,  and  who  will  not  leave  His  city 
in  the  lurch  at  the  decisive  moment,  like  the  gods  of  Carchemish 
and  Calno.  Jehovah  is  the  Lord,  the  God  of  both  spiritual 
and  starry  hosts.  He  smites  down  the  branches  of  this  forest 
of  an  army:  se'eph  is  a  so-called  piel  privativum,  to  lop  (lit. 
to  take  the  branches  in  hand  ;  cf .  sikkel,  ch.  v.  2)  ;  and  pura/i 
=  pe'urah  (in  Ezekiel  porali)  is  used  like  the  Latin  frons,  to 
include  both  branches  and  foliage, — in  other  words,  the  leafy 
branches  as  the  ornament  of  the  tree,  or  the  branches  as  adorned 
with  leaves.  The  instrument  He  employs  is  maardtzdh,  his 
terrifying  and  crushing  power  (compare  the  verb  in  ch.  ii.  19, 
21).  And  even  the  lofty  trunks  of  the  forest  thus  cleared  of 
branches  and  leaves  do  not  remain  ;  they  lie  hewn  down,  and 
the  lofty  ones  must  fall.  It  is  just  the  same  with  the  trunks, 
i.e.  the  leaders,  as  with  the  branches  and  the  foliage,  i.e.  with 

1  This  is  the  opinion  of  Valentiner,  who  also  regards  the  march  of  the 
Assyrians  as  an  "  execution-march"  in  two  columns,  one  of  which  took  the 
road  through  the  difficult  ground  to  the  east,  whilst  the  other  inflicted 
punishment  upon  the  places  that  stood  near  the  road.  The  text  does  not 
require  this,  however,  but  describes  a  march,  which  spread  alarm  both 
right  and  left  as  it  went  along. 


CHAP.  XI.  1.  281 

the  ^reat  crowded  masses.  The  whole  of  the  forest  thicket  (as 
in  ch.  ix.  17)  he  hews  down  (nikkaph,  third  pers.  piel,  though  it 
may  also  be  niphal)  ;  and  Lebanon,  i.e.  the  army  of  Asshur  which 
is  now  standing  opposite  to  Mount  Zion,  like  Lebanon  with  its 
forest  of  cedars,  falls  down  through  a  Majestic  One  ('addir),  i.e. 
through  Jehovah  (ch.  xxxiii.  21,  cf.  Ps.  Ixxvi.  5,  xciii.  4).  In 
the  account  of  the  fulfilment  (ch.  xxxvii.  36)  it  is  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  (maVach  Jehovah),  who  is  represented  as  destroying  the 
hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  in  the  Assyrian  camp  in  asingle 
night.  The  angel  of  Jehovah  is  not  a  messenger  of  God  sent 
from  afar,  but  the  chosen  organ  of  the  ever-present  divine  power. 
This  is  the  fate  of  the  imperial  power  of  the  world.  When 
the  axe  is  laid  to  it,  it  falls  without  hope.  But  in  Israel 
spring  is  returning.  Ch.  xi.  1.  "And  there  cometh  forth  a 
twig  out  of  the  stump  of  Jesse,  and  a  shoot  from  its  roots  bringetli 
forth  fruit."  The  world-power  resembles  the  cedar-forest  of 
Lebanon ;  the  house  of  David,  on  the  other  hand,  because  of 
its  apostasy,  is  like  the  stump  of  a  felled  tree  (gezat  truncus, 
from  gdzd,  truncare),  like  a  root  without  stem,  branches,  or 
crown.  The  world-kingdom,  at  the  height  of  its  power,  pre 
sents  the  most  striking  contrast  to  Israel  and  the  house  of 
David  in  the  uttermost  depth  announced  in  ch.  vi.  fin.,  muti 
lated  and  reduced  to  the  lowliness  of  its  Bethlehemitish  origin. 
But  whereas  the  Lebanon  of  the  imperial  power  is  thrown 
down,  to  remain  prostrate;  the  house  of  David  renews  its 
youth.  And  whilst  the  former  has  no  sooner  readied  the 
summit  of  its  glory,  than  it  is  suddenly  cast  down  ;  the  latter, 
having  been  reduced  to  the  utmost  danger  of  destruction,  is 
suddenly  exalted.  What  Pliny  says  of  certain  trees,  "  in- 
arescunt  rursusque  adolescunt,  senescunt  quidem,  sed  e  radicibus 
repullulant"  is  fulfilled  in  the  tree  of  Davidic  royalty,  that  has 
its  roots  in  Jesse  (for  the  figure  itself,  see  F.  v.  Lasaulx,  Philo 
sophic  der  Geschichte,  pp.  117-119).  Out  of  the  stumps  of 
Jesse,  i.e.  out  of  the  remnant  of  the  chosen  royal  family  which 
has  sunk  down  to  the  insignificance  of  the  house  from  which 
it  sprang,  there  comes  forth  a  twig  (choter),  which  promises  to 
supply  the  place  of  the  trunk  and  crown  ;  and  down  below, 
in  the  roots  covered  with  earth,  and  only  rising  a  little  above 
it,  there  shows  itself  a  netzer,  i.e.  a  fresh  green  shoot  (from 
ndtzer,  to  shine  or  blossom).  In  the  historical  account  of  the 


282  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

fulfilment,  even  the  ring  of  the  words  of  the  prophecy  is 
noticed :  the  netzer,  at  first  so  humble  and  insignificant,  was  a 
poor  despised  Nazarene  (Matt.  ii.  23).  But  the  expression 
yiphreli  shows  at  once  that  it  will  not  stop  at  this  lowliness  of 
origin.  The  shoot  will  bring  forth  fruit  (par ah,  different  in 
meaning,  and  possibly1  also  in  root,  from  pdrach,  to  blossom  and 
bud).  In  the  humble  beginning  there  lies  a  power  which  will 
carry  it  up  to  a  great  height  by  a  steady  and  certain  process 
(Ezek.  xvii.  22,  23).  The  twig  which  is  shooting  up  on  the 
ground  will  become  a  tree,  and  this  tree  will  have  a  crown 
laden  with  fruit.  Consequently  the  state  of  humiliation  will 
be  followed  by  one  of  exaltation  and  perfection. 

Jehovah  acknowledges  Him,  and  consecrates  and  equips 
Him  for  His  great  work  with  the  seven  spirits.  Ver.  2.  "  And 
the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  descends  upon  Him,  spirit  of  wisdom  and 
understanding,  spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  spirit  of  knowledge 
and  fear  of  Jehovah."  "  The  Spirit  of  Jehovah"  (ruach  Ye- 
hovah)  is  the  Divine  Spirit,  as  the  communicative  vehicle  of 
the  whole  creative  fulness  of  divine  powers.  Then  follow  the 
six  spirits,  comprehended  by  the  ruach  Yehovah  in  three  pairs, 
of  which  the  first  relates  to  the  intellectual  life,  the  second 
to  the  practical  life,  and  the  third  to  the  direct  relation  to 
God.  For  chocmdh  (wisdom)  is  the  power  of  discerning  the 
nature  of  things  through  the  appearance,  and  bindh  (under 
standing)  the  power  of  discerning  the  differences  of  things  in 
their  appearance ;  the  former  is  cro0/a,  the  latter  Sicucpiais  or 
crwecrt?.  "  Counsel"  ('etzdh)  is  the  gift  of  forming  right  con 
clusions,  and  "  might"  (gelurdh)  the  ability  to  carry  them  out 
with  energy.  "  The  knowledge  of  Jehovah "  (ddaili  Yehovah) 
is  knowledge  founded  upon  the  fellowship  of  love ;  and  "  the 
fear  of  Jehovah"  (yirath  Yehovdh),  fear  absorbed  in  reverence. 
There  are  seven  spirits,  which  are  enumerated  in  order  from  the 
highest  downwards ;  since  the  spirit  of  the  fear  of  Jehovah  is 

1  We  say  possibly,  for  the  Indo-Germanic  root  bhar,  to  bear  (Sanscr. 
Wiarami  =  Qipa,  fero,  cf.  ferax,  fertilis),  which  Gesenius  takes  as  deter 
mining  the  radical  meaning  of  parach,  cannot  be  traced  with  any  certainty 
in  the  Semitic.  Nevertheless  peri  and  perach  bear  the  same  relation  to 
one  another,  in  the  ordinary  usage  of  the  language,  as  fruit  and  blossom  : 
the  former  is  so  called,  as  that  which  has  broken  through  (cf.  peter)  •  the 
latter,  as  that  which  has  broken  up,  or  budded. 


CHAP.  XI  3.  283 

the  basis  of  the  whole  (Prov.  i.  7 ;  Job  xxviii.  28  ;  Ps.  cxi.  10), 
and  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  is  the  heart  of  all.  It  corresponds 
to  the  shaft  of  the  seven-lighted  candlestick,  and  the  three 
pair  of  arms  that  proceeded  from  it.  In  these  seven  forms 
the  Holy  Spirit  descended  upon  the  second  David  for  a  per 
manent  possession,  as  is  affirmed  in  the  perf.  consec.  nrijl  (with 
the  tone  upon  the  ultimate,  on  account  of  the  following  gut 
tural,  to  prevent  its  being  pronounced  unintelligibly;1  nuach 
like  /carapaiveiv  /cat  fjueveiv,  John  i.  32,  33).  The  seven 
torches  before  the  throne  of  God  (Rev.  iv.  5,  cf.  i.  4)  burn 
and  give  light  in  His  soul.  The  seven  spirits  are  His  seven 
eyes  (Rev.  v.  6). 

And  His  regal  conduct  is  regulated  by  this  His  thoroughly 
spiritual  nature.  Ver.  3.  "  And  fear  of  Jehovah  is  fragrance 
to  Him ;  and  He  judges  not  according  to  outward  sight,  neither 
does  He  pass  sentence  according  to  outward  hearing."  We  must 
not  render  it :  His  smelling  is  the  smelling  of  the  fear  of  God, 
i.e.  the  penetration  of  it  with  a  keen  judicial  insight  (as  Heng- 
stenberg  and  Umbreit  understand  it) ;  for  herlach  with  the 
preposition  Beth  has  not  merely  the  signification  to  smell  (as 
when  followed  by  an  accusative,  Job  xxxix.  25),  but  to  smell 
with  satisfaction  (like  2  ns*i,  to  see  with  satisfaction),  Ex.  xxx. 
38,  Lev.  xxvi.  31,  Amos  v.  21.  The  fear  of  God  is  that  which 
He  smells  with  satisfaction ;  it  is  reach  nlchoach  to  Him.  Meier's 
objection,  that  fear  of  God  is  not  a  thing  that  can  be  smelt, 
and  therefore  that  herlach  must  signify  to  breathe,  is  a  trivial 
one.  Just  as  the  outward  man  has  five  senses  for  the  material 
world,  the  inner  man  has  also  a  sensorium  for  the  spiritual 
world,  which  discerns  different  things  in  different  ways.  Thus 
the  second  David  scents  the  fear  of  God,  and  only  the  fear  of 
God,  as  a  pleasant  fragrance ;  for  the  fear  of  God  is  a  sacrifice 
of  adoration  continually  ascending  to  God.  His  favour  or 
displeasure  does  not  depend  upon  brilliant  or  repulsive  external 

1  This  moving  forward  of  the  tone  to  the  last  syllable  is  also  found 
before  Ayin  in  Gen.  xxvi.  10,  and  very  commonly  with  kumah,  and  verbs 
of  a  similar  kind  ;  also  before  Elohim  and  Jehovah,  to  be  read  Adonai,  and 
before  the  half-guttural  resh,  Ps.  xliii.  1,  cxix.  154,  but  nowhere  on  any 
other  ground  than  the  orthophonic  rather  than  euphonic  one  mentioned 
above ;  compare  also  mDI  in  ver.  13,  with  V1D1  (with  n  following)  in  Ex. 
riii.  7. 


284  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

qualities ;  He  does  not  judge  according  to  outward  appearances, 
but  according  to  the  relation  of  the  heart  to  His  God. 

This  is  the  standard  according  to  which  He  will  judge  when 
saving,  and  judge  when  punishing.  Vers.  4,  5.  "  And  judges  the 
poor  with  righteousness,  and  passes  sentence  with  equity  for  the 
humble  in  the  land;  and  smites  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  His  mouthy 
and  ivith  the  breath  of  His  lips  He  slays  the  wicked.  And  righteous 
ness  is  the  girdle  of  His  loins,  and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  His 
hips."  The  main  feature  in  ver.  4  is  to  be  seen  in  the  objective 
ideas.  He  will  do  justice  to  the  dallim,  the  weak  and  helpless,  by 
adopting  an  incorruptibly  righteous  course  towards  their  oppres 
sors,  and  decide  with  straightforwardness  for  the  humble  or  meek 
of  the  land  :  'dndv,  like  'dm,  from  'dndh,  to  bend,  the  latter  de 
noting  a  person  bowed  down  by  misfortune,  the  former  a  person 
inwardly  bowed  down,  i.e.  free  from  all  self-conceit  (hoclach  f, 
as  in  Job  xvi.  21).  The  poor  and  humble,  or  meek,  are  tho 
peculiar  objects  of  His  royal  care  ;  just  as  it  was  really  to  them 
that  the  first  beatitudes  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  applied. 
But  "  the  earth"  and  "  the  wicked"  (the  latter  is  not  to  be 
understood  collectively,  but,  as  in  several  passages  in  the  Old 
Testament,  viz.  Ps.  Ixviii.  22,  ex.  6,  Hab.  Hi.  13,  14,  as  pointing 
forward  prophetically  to  an  eschatological  person,  in  whom 
hostility  towards  Jehovah  and  His  Anointed  culminates  most 
satanically)  will  experience  the  full  force  of  His  penal  right 
eousness.  The  very  word  of  His  mouth  is  a  rod  which  shatters 
in  pieces  (Ps.  ii.  9  ;  Rev.  i.  16)  ;  and  the  breath  of  His  lips  is 
sufficient  to  destroy,  without  standing  in  need  of  any  further 
means  (2  Thess.  ii.  8).  As  the  girdle  upon  the  hips  (mothnaim, 
LXX.  rrjv  ovfyvv),  and  in  front  upon  the  loins  (chtildteaim, 
LXX.  ra9  7rXeiy?a9),  fastens  the  clothes  together,  so  all  the 
qualities  and  active  powers  of  His  person  have  for  their  band 
tzeddMh,  which  follows  the  inviolable  norm  of  the  divine  will, 
and  hd'emundh,  which  holds  immovably  to  the  course  divinely 
appointed,  according  to  promise  (ch.  xxv.  1).  Special  pro 
minence  is  given  by  the  article  to  'emundh;  He  is  the  faithful 
and  true  witness  (Rev.  i.  5,  iii.  14).  Consequently  with  Him 
there  commences  a  new  epoch,  in  which  the  Son  of  David  and 
His  righteousness  acquire  a  world-subduing  force,  and  find 
their  home  in  a  humanity  that  has  sprung,  like  Himself,  out  of 
deep  humiliation. 


CHAP.  XI.  6-9.  285 

The  fruit  of  righteousness  is  peace,  which  now  reigns  in 
humanity  under  the  rule  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  and  even  in 
the  animal  world,  with  nothing  whatever  to  disturb  it.  Vers.  6-9. 
"And  the  wolf  dwells  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  lies  down 
with  the  kid;  and  calf  and  lion  and  stalled  ox  together :  a  little 
boy  drives  them.  And  cow  and  bear  go  to  the  pasture ;  their  young 
ones  lie  down  together:  and  the  lion  eats  chopped  straw  like  the  ox. 
A  nd  the  suckling  plays  by  the  hole  of  the  adder,  and  the  weaned 
child  stretches  its  hand  to  the  pupil  of  the  basilisk-viper.  Tliey 
icill  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain :  for  the  land 
is  filled  with  knowledge  of  Jehovah,  like  the  waters  covering  the 
sea.'9  The  fathers,  and  such  commentators  as  Luther,  Calvin, 
and  Vitringa,  have  taken  all  these  figures  from  the  animal  world 
as  symbolical.  Modern  rationalists,  on  the  other  hand,  under 
stand  them  literally,  but  regard  the  whole  as  a  beautiful  dream 
and  wish.  It  is  a  prophecy,  however,  the  realization  of  which 
is  to  be  expected  on  this  side  of  the  boundary  between  time  and 
eternity,  and,  as  Paul  has  shown  in  Rom.  viii.,  is  an  integral 
link  in  the  predestined  course  of  the  history  of  salvation  (Heng- 
stenberg,  Umbreit,  Hofmann,  Drechsler).  There  now  reign 
among  irrational  creatures,  from  the  greatest  to  the  least, — even 
among  such  as  are  invisible, — fierce  conflicts  and  bloodthirsti- 
ness  of  the  most  savage  kind.  But  when  the  Son  of  David 
enters  upon  the  full  possession  of  His  royal  inheritance,  the 
peace  of  paradise  will  be  renewed,  and  all  that  is  true  in  the 
popular  legends  of  a  golden  age  be  realized  and  confirmed. 
This  is  what  the  prophet  depicts  in  such  lovely  colours.  The 
wolf  and  lamb,  those  two  hereditary  foes,  will  be  perfectly 
reconciled  then.  The  leopard  will  let  the  teazing  kid  lie  down 
beside  it.  The  lion,  between  the  calf  and  stalled  ox,  neither 
seizes  upon  its  weaker  neighbour,  nor  longs  for  the  fatter  one. 
Cow  and  bear  graze  together,  whilst  their  young  ones  lie  side 
by  side  in  the  pasture.  The  lion  no  longer  thirsts  for  blood, 
but  contents  itself,  like  the  ox,  with  chopped  straw.  The  suck 
ling  pursues  its  sport  (pilpel  of  y%W,  mulcere)  by  the  adder's 
hole,  and  the  child  just  weaned  stretches  out  its  hand  boldly 
and  fearlessly  to  meurath  tziptidni.  It  is  evident  from  Jer. 
viii.  17  that  tziplioni  is  the  name  of  a  species  of  snake.  Ac 
cording  to  Aquila  and  the  Vulgate,  it  is  basiliskos,  serpens  regulus, 
possibly  from  tzaph,  to  pipe  or  hiss  (Ges.,  Fiirst)  ;  for  Isidorus, 


286  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

in  his  Origg.  xii.  4,  says,  Sibilus  idem  est  qui  et  regulus ;  sibilo 
enim  occidit,  antequam  mordeat  vel  exurat.  For  the  hapax  leg. 
hdddh,  the  meaning  dirigere,  tendere,  is  established  by  the 
Arabic ;  but  there  is  all  the  more  uncertainty  about  the  mean 
ing  of  the  hap.  leg.  PniND.  According  to  the  parallel  in,  it 
seems  to  signify  the  hollow  (Syr.,  Vulg.,  LXX.,  /com?):  whether 
from  "Vix  =  TW,  from  which  comes  rnyo ;  or  from  "riN,  the  light- 
hole  (like  "rtND,  which  occurs  in  the  Mishna,  Ohaloth  xiii.  1)  or 
opening  where  a  cavern  opens  to  the  light  of  day.  It  is 
probable,  however,  that  meurdh  refers  to  something  that  exerts 
an  attractive  influence  upon  the  child,  either  the  "  blending  of 
colours"  (Saad.  renders  tziptioni,  err  okas',  the  motley  snake),  or 
better  still,  the  "  pupil  of  the  eye  "  (Targum),  taking  the  word 
as  a  feminine  of  motor,  the  light  of  the  eye  (b.  Erubin  55&  = 
the  power  of  vision).  The  look  of  a  snake,  more  especially  of 
the  basilisk  (not  merely  the  basilisk-lizard,  but  also  the  basilisk- 
viper),  was  supposed  to  have  a  paralyzing  and  bewitching  in 
fluence  ;  but  now  the  snake  will  lose  this  pernicious  power  (ch. 
Ixv.  25),  and  the  basilisk  become  so  tame  and  harmless,  as  to  let 
children  handle  its  sparkling  eyes  as  if  they  were  jewels.  All 
this,  as  we  should  say  with  Luthardt  and  Hofmann  (Schrift* 
beweis,  ii.  2,  567),  is  only  colouring  which  the  hand  of  the  pro 
phet  employs,  for  the  purpose  of  painting  the  peace  of  that 
glorified  state  which  surpasses  all  possibility  of  description  ;  and 
it  is  unquestionably  necessary  to  take  the  thought  of  the  pro 
mise  in  a  spiritual  sense,  without  adhering  literally  to  the  medium 
employed  in  expressing  it.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  must 
guard  against  treating  the  description  itself  as  merely  a  drapery 
thrown  around  the  actual  object ;  whereas  it  is  rather  the  re 
fraction  of  the  object  in  the  mind  of  the  prophet  himself, 
and  therefore  a  manifestation  of  the  true  nature  of  that  which 
he  actually  saw.  But  are  the  animals  to  be  taken  as  the  sub 
ject  in  ver.  9  also  ?  The  subject  that  most  naturally  suggests 
itself  is  undoubtedly  the  animals,  of  which  a  few  that  are 
alarming  and  destructive  to  men  have  been  mentioned  just 
before.  And  the  fact  that  they  really  are  thought  of  as  the 
subject,  is  confirmed  by  ch.  Ixv.  25,  where  ch.  xi.  6-9a  is  re 
peated  in  a  compendious  form.  The  idea  that  ^JTV  requires 
men  as  the  subject,  is  refuted  by  the  common  njn  njn  (compare 
the  parallel  promise  in  Ezek.  xxxiv.  25,  which  rests  upon  Hos. 


CHAP.  XI    G-9.  287 

ii.  20).  That  the  term  yashchithu  can  be  applied  to  animals,  is 
evident  from  Jer.  ii.  30,  and  may  be  assumed  as  a  matter  of 
coarse.  But  if  the  animals  are  the  subject,  har  kodslii  (my  holy 
mountain)  is  not  Zion-Moriah,  upon  which  wild  beasts  never 
made  their  home  in  historical  times ;  but,  as  the  generalizing 
col  (all)  clearly  shows,  the  whole  of  the  holy  mountain-land  of 
Israel  :  har  kodshi  has  just  this  meaning  in  ch.  Ivii.  13  (cf.  Ps. 
Ixxviii.  54,  Ex.  xv.  17).  The  fact  that  peace  prevails  in  the 
animal  world,  and  also  peace  between  man  and  beast,  is  then 
attributed  to  the  universal  prevalence  of  the  knowledge  of  God, 
in  consequence  of  which  that  destructive  hostility  between  the 
animal  world  and  man,  by  which  estrangement  and  apostasy 
from  God  were  so  often  punished  (2  Kings  xvii.  25  ;  Ezek. 
xiv.  15,  etc. :  see  also  ch.  vii.  24),  have  entirely  come  to  an 
end.  The  meaning  of  "the  earth"  is  also  determined  by  that 
of  "  all  my  holy  mountain."  The  land  of  Israel,  the  dominion 
of  the  Son  of  David  in  the  more  restricted  sense,  will  be  from 
this  time  forward  the  paradisaical  centre,  as  it  were,  of  the  whole 
earth, — a  prelude  of  its  future  state  of  perfect  and  universal 
glorification  (ch.  vi.  3,  "  all  the  earth").  It  has  now  become 
full  of  "  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah,"  i.e.  of  that  experimental 
knowledge  which  consists  in  the  fellowship  of  love  (Hin,  like 
fn?,  is  a  secondary  form  of  fljn,  the  more  common  infinitive  or 
verbal  noun  from  jrr  :  Ges.  §  133,  1),  like  the  waters  which 
cover  the  sea,  i.e.  the  bottom  of  the  sea  (compare  Hab.  ii.  14, 
where  Iddaath  is  a  virtual  accusative,  full  of  that  which  is  to 
be  known).  "  Cover  "  cissdh  r  (like  sdcac  T,  Ps.  xci.  4),  signi 
fies  to  afford  a  covering  to  another ;  the  Lamed  is  frequently 
introduced  with  a  participle  (in  Arabic  regularly)  as  a  sign  of 
the  object  (Ewald,  §  292,  e),  and  the  omission  of  the  article  in 
the  case  of  mecassim  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  inverted 
order  of  the  words. 

The  prophet  has  now  described,  in  vers.  1-5,  the  righteous 
conduct  of  the  Son  of  David,  and  in  vers.  6-9  the  peace  which 
prevails  under  His  government,  and  extends  even  to  the  animal 
world,  and  which  is  consequent  upon  the  living  knowledge  of 
God  that  has  now  become  universal,  that  is  to  say,  of  the 
spiritual  transformation  of  the  people  subject  to  His  sway, — an 
allusion  full  of  enigmas,  but  one  which  is  more  clearly  expounded 
in  the  following  verse,  both  in  its  direct  contents  and  also  in  all 


288  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

that  it  presupposes.  Ver.  10.  "Audit  will  come  to  pass  in  that 
day :  the  root-sprout  of  Jesse,  which  stands  as  a  banner  of  the 
peoples,  for  it  will  nations  ask,  and  its  place  of  rest  is  glory" 
The  first  question  which  is  disposed  of  here,  has  reference  to 
the  apparent  restriction  thus  far  of  all  the  blessings  of  this 
peaceful  rule  to  Israel  and  the  land  of  Israel.  This  restriction, 
as  we  now  learn,  is  not  for  its  own  sake,  but  is  simply  the  means 
of  an  unlimited  extension  of  this  fulness  of  blessing.  The  proud 
tree  of  the  Davidic  sovereignty  is  hewn  down,  and  nothing  is 
left  except  the  root.  The  new  David  is  shoresh  Yishai  (the 
root-sprout  of  Jesse),  and  therefore  in  a  certain  sense  the  root 
itself,  because  the  latter  would  long  ago  have  perished  if  it  had 
not  borne  within  itself  from  the  very  commencement  Him  who 
was  now  about  to  issue  from  it.  But  when  He  who  had  been 
concealed  in  the  root  of  Jesse  as  its  sap  and  strength  should 
have  become  the  rejuvenated  root  of  Jesse  itself  (cf.  Rev.  xxii. 
1 6),  He  would  be  exalted  from  this  lowly  beginning  I'nes  'ammin, 
into  a  banner  summoning  the  nations  to  assemble,  and  uniting 
them  around  itself.  Thus  visible  to  all  the  world,  He  would 
attract  the  attention  of  the  heathen  to  Himself,  and  they  would 
turn  to  Him  with  zeal,  and  His  menuchdh,  i.e.  the  place  where 
He  had  settled  down  to  live  and  reign  (for  the  word  in  this  local 
sense,  compare  Num.  x.  33  and  Ps.  cxxxii.  8,  14),  would  be 
glory,  i.e.  the  dwelling-place  and  palace  of  a  king  whose  light 
shines  over  all,  who  has  all  beneath  His  rule,  and  who  gathers 
all  nations  around  Himself.  The  Vulgate  renders  it  "  et  sepul- 
crwn  ejus  gloriosum"  (a  leading  passage  for  encouraging  pil 
grimages),  but  the  passion  is  here  entirely  swallowed  up  by  the 
splendour  of  the  figure  of  royalty ;  and  menuchah  is  no  more 
the  place  of  rest  in  the  grave  than  nes  is  the  cross,  although 
undoubtedly  the  cross  has  become  the  banner  in  the  actual 
fulfilment,  which  divides  the  parousia  of  Christ  into  a  first 
and  second  coming. 

A  second  question  also  concerns  Israel.  The  nation  out  of 
which  and  for  which  this  king  will  primarily  arise,  will  before 
that  time  be  scattered  far  away  from  its  native  land,  in  accord 
ance  with  the  revelation  in  ch.  vi.  How,  then,  will  it  be  possible 
for  Him  to  reign  in  the  midst  of  it? — Vers.  11,  12.  "And  it 
will  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  the  Lord  will  stretch  out  His  hand 
again  a  second  time  to  redeem  the  remnant  of  His  people  that  shall 


CHAP.  XI.  11,  12.  289 

be  left,  out  of  A  sshur,  and  out  of  Egypt,  and  out  of  Pathros,  and 
out  of  Ethiopia,  and  out  of  *Elam,  and  out  of  Shinar,  and  out  of 
Hamath,  and  out  of  the  islands  of  the  sea.  And  he  raises  a  banner 
for  the  nations,  and  fetches  home  the  outcasts  of  Israel;  and  the 
dispersed  of  Judah  will  He  assemble  from  the  four  borders  of  the 
earth."  Asshur  and  Egypt  stand  here  in  front,  and  side  by  side, 
as  the  two  great  powers  of  the  time  of  Isaiah  (cf.  ch.  vii.  18-20). 
As  appendices  to  Egypt,  we  have  (1)  Pathros,  hierogl.  to-res, 
and  with  the  article  petores,  the  southland,  i.e.  Upper  Egypt, 
so  that  Mizraim  in  the  stricter  sense  is  Lower  Egypt  (see,  on 
the  other  hand,  Jer.  xliv.  15) ;  and  (2)  Cush,  the  land  which 
lies  still  farther  south  than  Upper  Egypt  on  both  sides  of  the 
Arabian  Gulf;  and  as  appendices  to  Asshur,  (1)  'Elam,  i.e. 
Elymais,  in  southern  Media,  to  the  east  of  the  Tigris ;  and  (2) 
Shinar,  the  plain  to  the  south  of  the  junction  of  the  Euphrates 
and  Tigris.  Then  follow  the  Syrian  Hamath  at  the  northern 
foot  of  the  Lebanon ;  and  lastly,  "  the  islands  of  the  sea"  i.e. 
the  islands  and  coast-land  of  the  Mediterranean,  together  with 
the  whole  of  the  insular  continent  of  Europe.  There  was  no 
such  diaspora  of  Israel  at  the  time  when  the  prophet  uttered 
this  prediction,  nor  indeed  even  after  the  dissolution  of  the 
northern  kingdom ;  so  that  the  specification  is  not  historical, 
but  prophetic.  The  redemption  which  the  prophet  here  foretells 
is  a  second,  to  be  followed  by  no  third  ;  consequently  the  banish 
ment  out  of  which  Israel  is  redeemed  is  the  ultimate  form  of 
that  which  is  threatened  in  ch.  vi.  12  (cf.  Deut.  xxx.  1  sqq.).  It 
is  the  second  redemption,  the  counterpart  of  the  Egyptian.  He 
will  then  stretch  out  His  hand  again  (yosiph,  supply  lishloach) : 
and  as  He  once  delivered  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  so  will  He  now 
redeem  it — purchase  it  back  (kdndh,  opp.  mdcar)  out  of  all  the 
countries  named.  The  min  attached  to  the  names  of  the  countries 
is  to  be  construed  with  liknoth.  Observe  how,  in  the  prophet's 
view,  the  conversion  of  the  heathen  becomes  the  means  of  the 
redemption  of  Israel.  The  course  which  the  history  of  salva 
tion  has  taken  since  the  first  coming  of  Christ,  and  which  it 
will  continue  to  take  to  the  end,  as  described  by  Paul  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans,  is  distinctly  indicated  by  the  prophet. 
At  the  word  of  Jehovah  the  heathen  will  set  His  people  free, 
and  even  escort  them  (ch.  xlix.  22,  Ixii.  10) ;  and  thus  He  will 
gather  again  (^dsaph,  with  reference  to  the  one  gathering  point ; 
VOL.  I.  T 


290  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


,  with  reference  to  the  dispersion  of  those  who  are  to  be 
gathered  together)  from  the  utmost  ends  of  the  four  quarters 
of  the  globe,  "  the  outcasts  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and  the 
dispersed  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah"  (nidche  Yisrdel  unephutzoth 
Yehuddh  :  nidche  =  niddeche,  with  the  dagesh  dropped  before 
the  following  guttural1),  both  men  and  women. 

But  this  calls  to  mind  the  present  rent  in  the  unity  of  the 
nation  ;  and  the  third  question  very  naturally  arises,  whether 
this  rent  will  continue.  The  answer  to  this  is  given  in  ver.  13  : 
"  And  the  jealousy  of  Ephraim  is  removed,  and  the  adversaries 
of  Judah  are  cut  off  ;  Ephraim  will  not  show  jealousy  towards 
Judah)  and  Judah  will  not  oppose  Ephraim."  As  the  suffix 
and  genitive  after  tzorer  are  objective  in  every  other  instance 
(e.g.  Amos  v.  12),  tzorere  Yehuddh  must  mean,  not  those  mem 
bers  of  Judah  who  are  hostile  to  Ephraim,  as  Ewald,  Knobel, 
and  others  suppose,  but  those  members  of  Ephraim  who  are 
hostile  to  Judah,  as  Umbreit  and  Schegg  expound  it.  In  ver. 
13a  the  prophet  has  chiefly  in  his  mind  the  old  feeling  of 
enmity  cherished  by  the  northern  tribes,  more  especially  those 
of  Joseph,  towards  the  tribe  of  Judah,  which  issued  eventually 
in  the  division  of  the  kingdom.  It  is  only  in  ver.  136  that  he 
predicts  the  termination  of  the  hostility  of  Judah  towards 
Ephraim.  The  people,  when  thus  brought  home  again,  would 
form  one  fraternally  united  nation,  whilst  all  who  broke  the 
peace  of  this  unity  would  be  exposed  to  the  immediate  judg 
ment  of  God  (yiccdrethu,  will  be  cut  off). 

A  fourth  question  has  reference  to  the  relation  between  this 
Israel  of  the  future  and  the  surrounding  nations,  such  as  the 
warlike  Philistines,  the  predatory  nomad  tribes  of  the  East, 
the  unbrotherly  Edomites,  the  boasting  Moabites,  and  the  cruel 
Ammonites.  Will  they  not  disturb  and  weaken  the  new  Israel, 
as  they  did  the  old?  Ver.  14.  "And  they  fly  upon  the  shoulder 
of  the  Philistines  seawards  ;  unitedly  they  plunder  the  sons 
of  the  East  :  they  seize  upon  Edom  and  Moab,  and  the  sons 
of  Ammon  are  subject  to  them"  Cdtheph  (shoulder)  was  the 
peculiar  name  of  the  coast-land  of  Philistia  which  sloped  off 
towards  the  sea  (Josh.  xv.  11);  but  here  it  is  used  with  an 

1  The  same  occurs  in  tyD*),  Wfe^,  1N%?i?.v!,  ^P,  ^c5^,  ^pn.  In  every 
case  the  dagesh  has  fallen  out  because  of  the  following  guttural  (Luzzatto, 
Gramm.  §  180). 


CHAP.  XL  15,  16.  291 

implied  allusion  to  this,  to  signify  the  shoulder  of  the  Philistian 
nation  (becdtheph  =  VcSthgph ;  for  the  cause  see  at  ch.  v.  2), 
upon  which  Israel  plunges  down  like  an  eagle  from  the  height 
of  its  mountain-land.  The  "  object  of  the  stretching  out  of 
their  hand "  is  equivalent  to  the  object  of  their  grasp.  And 
whenever  any  one  of  the  surrounding  nations  mentioned  should 
attack  Israel,  the  whole  people  would  make  common  cause,  and 
act  together.  How  does  this  warlike  prospect  square,  however, 
with  the  previous  promise  of  paradisaical  peace,  and  the  end  of 
all  warfare  which  this  promise  presupposes  (cf.  ch.  ii.  4)?  This 
is  a  contradiction,  the  solution  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  the 
fact  that  we  have  only  figures  here,  and  figures  drawn  from  the 
existing  relations  and  warlike  engagements  of  the  nation,  in 
which  the  prophet  pictures  that  supremacy  of  the  future  united 
Israel  over  surrounding  nations,  which  is  to  be  maintained  by 
spiritual  weapons. 

He  dwells  still  longer  upon  the  miracles  in  which  the  anti 
typical  redemption  will  resemble  the  typical  one.  Vers.  15, 16, 
"  And  Jehovah  pronounces  the  ban  upon  the  sea-tongue  of  Egypt> 
and  swings  His  hand  over  the  Euphrates  in  the  glow  of  His  breath, 
and  smites  it  into  seven  brooks,  and  makes  it  so  that  men  go 
through  in  shoes.  And  there  will  be  a  road  for  the  remnant  of 
His  people  that  shall  be  left,  out  of  Asshur,  as  it  was  for  Israel 
in  the  day  of  its  departure  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  The  two 
countries  of  the  diaspora  mentioned  first  are  Asshur  and  Egypt. 
And  Jehovah  makes  a  way  by  His  miraculous  power  for  those 
who  are  returning  out  of  both  and  across  both.  The  sea- 
tongue  of  Egypt,  which  runs  between  Egypt  and  Arabia,  i.e. 
the  Red  Sea  (sinus  Heroopolitanus,  according  to  another  figure), 
He  smites  with  the  ban  (hecherim,  corresponding  in  meaning 
to  the  pouring  out  of  the  vial  of  wrath  in  Rev.  xvi.  12, — a 
stronger  term  than  gaar,  e.g.  Ps.  cvi.  9)  ;  and  the  consequence 
of  this  is,  that  it  affords  a  dry  passage  to  those  who  are  coming 
back  (though  without  there  being  any  necessity  to  read  hecherib, 
or  to  follow  Meier  and  Knobel,  who  combine  hecherlm  with 
chdrurn,  Lev.  xxi.  18,  in  the  precarious  sense  of  splitting). 
And  in  order  that  the  dividing  of  Jordan  may  have  its  antitype 
also,  Jehovah  swings  His  hand  over  the  Euphrates,  to  smite, 
breathing  upon  it  at  the  same  time  with  burning  breath,  so 
that  it  is  split  up  into  seven  shallow  brooks,  through  which 


292  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


men  can  walk  in  sandals.  fi$3  stands,  according  to  the  law  of 
sound,  for  B$3;  and  the  air.  \€y.  DJJJ  (with  a  fixed  kametz), 
from  W  =  Bin,  E£H?  to  glow,  signifies  a  glowing  heat,  —  a  mean 
ing  which  is  also  so  thoroughly  supported  by  the  two  Arabic 

verbs  med.  Ye  *lc  and  *lc  (inf.  'aim,  gaim,  internal  heat,  burn 

ing  thirst,  also  violent  anger),  that  there  is  no  need  whatever  for 
the  conjecture  of  Luzzatto  and  Gesenius,  0¥V3.  The  early 
translators  (e.g.  LXX.  •jrvev/jban  {Biai(p,  Syr.  beuchdono,  with  a 
display  of  might)  merely  give  conjectural  renderings  of  the 
word,  which  had  become  obsolete  before  their  time  ;  Saadia, 
however,  renders  it  with  etymological  correctness  suchun,  from 
sachana,  to  be  hot,  or  set  on  fire.  Thus,  by  changing  the 
Euphrates  in  the  (parching)  heat  of  His  breath  into  seven 
shallow  wadys,  Jehovah  makes  a  free  course  for  His  people  who 
come  out  of  Asshur,  etc.  This  was  the  idea  which  presented 
itself  to  the  prophet  in  just  this  shape,  though  it  by  no  means 
followed  that  it  must  necessarily  embody  itself  in  history  in  this 
particular  form. 

As  Israel,  when  redeemed  from  Egypt  beyond  the  Red  Sea, 
sang  songs  of  praise,  so  also  will  the  Israel  of  the  second  re 
demption,  when  brought,  in  a  no  less  miraculous  manner,  across 
the  Red  Sea  and  the  Euphrates.  Ch.  xii.  1,  2.  "  And  in  that 
day  thou  wilt  say,  I  thank  Thee,  0  Jehovah,  that  Thou  wast  angry 
with  me  :  |  Thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  Thou  hast  comforted 
me.  |  Behold,  the  God  of  my  salvation  ;  |  /  trust,  and  am  not 
afraid  :  \  for  Jah  Jehovah  is  my  pride  and  song,  \  and  He  be 
came  my  salvation"  The  words  are  addressed  to  the  people  of 
the  future  in  the  people  of  the  prophet's  own  time.  They  give 
thanks  for  the  wrath  experienced,  inasmuch  as  it  was  followed 
by  all  the  richer  consolation.  The  formation  of  the  sentence 
after  *3  is  paratactic  ;  the  principal  tone  falls  upon  15,  where 
ydshob  is  written  poetically  for  vayydshob  (cf.  Deut.  xxxii.  8,  18  ; 
Ps.  xviii.  12  ;  Hos.  vi.  1).  We  hear  the  notes  of  Ps.  xc.  13, 
xxvii.  1,  resounding  here  ;  whilst  ver.  2b  is  the  echo  of  Ex. 
xv.  2  (on  which  Ps.  cxviii.  14  is  also  founded).  W  (to  be  read 
rozzi,  and  therefore  also  written  "W)  is  another  form  of  *W,  and 
is  used  here  to  signify  the  proud  self-consciousness  associated 
with  the  possession  of  power  :  pride,  and  the  expression  of  it, 
viz.  boasting.  Zimrath  is  equivalent  in  sense,  and  probably  also 


CHAP.  XII.  3-6.  29-3 

in  form,  to  zimrdthi,  just  as  in  Syriac  z'mori  (my  song)  is 
regularly  pronounced  zemor,  with  the  i  of  the  suffix  dropped 
(see  Hupfeld  on  Ps.  xvi.  6).  It  is  also  possible,  however,  that 
it  may  be  only  an  expansion  of  the  primary  form  zimrath  = 
zimrdh,  and  therefore  that  zimrath  is  only  synonymous  with 
zimrdthi)  as  chephetz  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  5  is  with  chephtzi.  One 
thing  peculiar  to  this  echo  of  Ex.  xv.  2  is  the  doubling  of 
the  Jah  in  Jdh  Jehovah)  which  answers  to  the  surpassing  of  the 
type  by  the  antitype. 

Ver.  3,  again,  contains  a  prophetic  promise,  which  points 
back  to  the  commencement  of  ver.  1 :  "  And  with  rapture  ye 
will  draw  water  out  of  the  tvells  of  salvation."  Just  as  Israel 
was  miraculously  supplied  with  water  in  the  desert,  so  will  the 
God  of  salvation,  who  has  become  your  salvation,  open  many 
and  manifold  sources  of  salvation  for  you  (W*?  as  it  is  pointed 
here,  instead  of  T.V*?1),  from  which  ye  may  draw  with  and  ac 
cording  to  your  heart's  delight.  This  water  of  salvation,  then, 
forms  both  the  material  for,  and  instigation  to,  new  songs  of 
praise;  and  vers.  4-6  therefore  continue  in  the  strain  of  a 
psalm  :  "A  nd  ye  will  say  in  that  day.  Praise  Jehovah)  proclaim 
His  name,  \  make  known  His  doings  among  the  nations,  \  boast 
that  His  name  is  exalted.  \  Harp  to  Jehovah;  for  He  has  displayed 
majesty :  \  let  this  be  known  in  all  lands.  \  Shout  and  be  jubilant) 
0  inhabitant  of  Zion :  \  for  great  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the 
midst  of  thee"  The  first  song  of  six  lines  is  here  followed  by  a 
second  of  seven  lines  :  a  prophetic  word  of  promise,  inserted 
between  them,  separates  the  one  from  the  other.  This  second 
also  commences  with  the  well-known  tones  of  a  psalm  (compare 
especially  Ps.  cv.  1,  1  Chron.  xvi.  8).  The  phrase,  "  Call  upon 
the  name  of  Jehovah,"  signifies,  Make  the  name  of  Jehovah  the 
medium  of  invocation  (Ges.  §  138,  Anm.  3*),  i.e  invoke  it,  or, 
as  here,  call  it  out.  Geuth  is  high,  towering  dignity  ;  here  it  is 
used  of  God,  as  in  ch.  xxvi.  10,  with  rdsdh :  to  prove  it  prac 
tically,  just  as  with  labesh  in  Ps.  xciii.  1,  to  show  one's  self 
openly  therein.  Instead  of  the  Chethib  meyudda'ath  in  ver.  5, 

1  The  root  is  the  same  as,  for  example,  in  refjjp  (they  rejoice)  and  ^y ; 
here,  however,  it  is  more  striking,  because  the  singular  is  written  pyB,  and 
not  pyp.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  evident  that  the  connecting  sound  ay  was 
rather  preferred  than  avoided,  as  Ewald  maintains, — as  we  may  see,  for 
example,  from  the  repeated  aychi  in  Ps.  ciii. 


294  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  kerl  substitutes  the  Jwphal  form  mudaatli,  probably  because 
meyudda,  according  to  the  standing  u-sage  of  speech,  denotes 
one  well  known,  or  intimate  ;  the  passive  of  the  hophal  is  cer 
tainly  the  more  suitable.  According  to  the  preceding  appeals, 
the  words  are  to  be  understood  as  expressing  a  desire,  that 
the  glorious  self-attestation  of  the  God  of  salvation  might  be 
brought  to  the  consciousness  of  the  whole  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  earth,  i.e.  of  all  mankind.  When  God  redeems  His  people, 
He  has  the  salvation  of  all  the  nations  in  view.  It  is  the  know 
ledge  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  made  known  through  the  word 
of  proclamation,  that  brings  salvation  to  them  all.  How  well 
may  the  church  on  Zion  rejoice,  to  have  such  a  God  dwelling 
in  the  midst  of  it !  He  is  great  as  the  giver  of  promises,  and 
great  in  fulfilling  them  ;  great  in  grace,  and  great  in  judgment ; 
great  in  all  His  saving  acts  which  spread  from  Israel  to  all  man 
kind.  Thus  does  this  second  psalm  of  the  redeemed  nation 
close,  and  with  it  the  book  of  Immanuel. 


PART  III. 

COLLECTION  OF  ORACLES  CONCERNING  THE  HEATHEN.— 
CHAP,  xni.-xxm. 

ORACLE  CONCERNING  THE  CHALDEANS,  THE  HEIRS  OP 
THE  ASSYRIANS. — CHAP.  XIII.  1-XIV.  27. 

JUST  as  in  Jeremiah  (ch.  xlvi.-li.)  and  Ezekiel  (ch.  xxv.-xxxii.), 
so  also  in  Isaiah,  the  oracles  concerning  the  heathen  are  all 
placed  together.  In  this  respect  the  arrangement  of  the  three 
great  books  of  prophecy  is  perfectly  homogeneous.  In  Jeremiah 
these  oracles,  apart  from  the  prelude  in  ch.  xxv.,  form  the  con 
cluding  portion  of  the  book.  In  Ezekiel  they  fill  up  that  space 
of  time,  when  Jerusalem  at  home  was  lying  at  her  last  gasp  and 
the  prophet  was  sitting  speechless  by  the  Chaboras.  And  here, 
in  Isaiah,  they  compensate  us  for  the  interruption  which  the 
oral  labours  of  the  prophet  appear  to  have  sustained  in  the 
closing  years  of  the  reign  of  Ahaz.  Moreover,  this  was  their 
most  suitable  position,  at  the  end  of  the  cycle  of  Messianic 


CHAP.  xiii.  i.  295 

prophecies  in  ch.  vii.-xii. ;  for  the  great  consolatory  thought  of 
the  prophecy  of  Imraanuel,  that  all  kingdoms  are  to  become 
the  kingdoms  of  God  and  His  Christ,  is  here  expanded.  And  as 
the  prophecy  of  Immanuel  was  delivered  on  the  threshold  of 
the  times  of  the  great  empires,  so  as  to  cover  the  whole  of  that 
period  with  its  consolation,  the  oracles  concerning  the  heathen 
nations  and  kingdoms  are  inseparably  connected  with  that  pro 
phecy,  which  forms  the  ground  and  end,  the  unity  and  substance, 
of  them  all. 

The  heading  in  ch.  xiii.  1,  "  Oracle  concerning  Babel,  which 
Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz  did  see"  shows  that  ch.  xiii.  forms  the 
commencement  of  another  part  of  the  whole  book.  Masedh 
(from  N£0,  efferre,  then  effari,  Ex.  xx.  7)  signifies,  as  we  may 
see  from  2  Kings  ix.  25,  effatum,  the  verdict  or  oracle,  more 
especially  the  verdict  of  God,  and  generally,  perhaps  always, 
the  judicial  sentence  of  God,1  though  without  introducing  the 
idea  of  onus  (burden),  which  is  the  rendering  adopted  by  the 
Targum,  Syriac,  Vulgate,  and  Luther,  notwithstanding  the  fact 
that,  according  to  Jer.  xxiii.  33  sqq.,  it  was  the  scoffers  who 
associated  this  idea  with  the  word.  In  a  book  which  could 
throughout  be  traced  to  Isaiah,  there  could  be  no  necessity  for 
it  to  be  particularly  stated,  that  it  was  to  Isaiah  that  the  oracle 
was  revealed,  of  which  Babel  was  the  object.  We  may  therefore 
see  from  this,  that  the  prophecy  relating  to  Babylon  was  origi 
nally  complete  in  itself,  and  was  intended  to  be  issued  in  that 
form.  But  when  the  whole  book  was  compiled,  these  headings 
were  retained  as  signal-posts  of  the  separate  portions  of  which 
it  was  composed.  Moreover,  in  the  case  before  us,  the  retention 
of  the  heading  may  be  regarded  as  a  providential  arrangement. 
For  if  this  "  oracle  of  Babel "  lay  before  us  in  a  separate  form, 
and  without  the  name  of  Isaiah,  we  should  not  dare  to  attribute 
it  to  him,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  overthrow  of  the 
Chaldean  empire  is  here  distinctly  announced,  and  that  at  a 
time  when  the  Assyrian  empire  was  still  standing.  For  this 
reason  the  majority  of  critics,  from  the  time  of  Rosenmiiller  and 
Justi  downwards,  have  regarded  the  spuriousness  of  the  pro- 

1  In  Zech.  xii.  1  sqq.  the  promise  has,  at  any  rate,  a  dark  side.  In  Lam. 
ii.  14  there  is  no  necessity  to  think  of  promises  in  connection  with  the 
mas'oth ;  and  Prov.  xxx.  1  and  xxxi.  1  cannot  help  us  to  determine  the 
prophetic  use  of  the  word. 


296  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

phecy  as  an  established  fact.  But  the  evidence  which  can  be 
adduced  in  support  of  the  testimony  contained  in  the  heading 
is  far  too  strong  for  it  to  be  set  aside  :  viz.  (1)  the  descriptive 
style  as  well  as  the  whole  stamp  of  the  prophecy,  which  re 
sembles  the  undisputed  prophecies  of  Isaiah  in  a  greater  variety 
of  points  than  any  passage  that  can  be  selected  from  any  other 
prophet.  We  will  show  this  briefly,  but  yet  amply,  and  as  far 
as  the  nature  of  an  exposition  allows,  against  Knobel  and  others 
who  maintain  the  opposite.  And  (2)  the  dependent  relation 
of  Zephaniah  and  Jeremiah, — a  relation  which  the  generally 
admitted  muse-like  character  of  the  former,  and  the  imitative 
character  of  the  latter,  render  it  impossible  to  invert.  Both 
prophets  show  that  they  are  acquainted  with  this  prophecy  of 
Isaiah,  as  indeed  they  are  with  all  those  prophecies  which  are 
set  down  as  spurious.  Stahelin,  in  his  work  on  the  Messianic 
prophecies  (Excursus  iv.),  has  endeavoured  to  make  out  that 
the  derivative  passages  in  question  are  the  original  passages  ; 
but  stat  pro  ratione  voluntas.  Now,  as  the  testimony  of  the 
heading  is  sustained  by  such  evidence  as  this,  the  one  argu 
ment  adduced  on  the  other  side,  that  the  prophecy  has  no 
historical  footing  in  the  circumstances  of  Isaiah's  times,  cannot 
prove  anything  at  all.  No  doubt  all  prophecy  rested  upon  an 
existing  historical  basis.  But  we  must  not  expect  to  be  able  to 
point  this  out  in  the  case  of  every  single  prophecy.  In  the 
time  of  Hezekiah,  as  ch.  xxxix.  clearly  shows  (compare  Mic. 
iv.  10),  Isaiah  had  become  spiritually  certain  of  this,  that  the 
power  by  which  the  final  judgment  would  be  inflicted  upon 
Judah  would  not  be  Asshur,  but  Babel,  i.e.  an  empire  which 
would  have  for  its  centre  that  Babylon,  wrhich  was  already  the 
second  capital  of  the  Assyrian  empire  and  the  seat  of  kings 
who,  though  dependent  then,  were  striving  hard  for  indepen 
dence  ;  in  other  words,  a  Chaldean  empire.  Towards  the  end 
of  his  course  Isaiah  was  full  of  this  prophetic  thought ;  and  from 
it  he  rose  higher  and  higher  to  the  consoling  discovery  that 
Jehovah  would  avenge  His  people  upon  Babel,  and  redeem 
them  from  Babel,  just  as  surely  as  from  Asshur.  The  fact 
that  so  far-reaching  an  insight  was  granted  to  him  into  the 
counsels  of  God,  was  not  merely  founded  on  his  own  personality, 
but  rested  chiefly  on  the  position  which  he  occupied  in  the  midst 
of  the  first  beginnings  of  the  age  of  great  empires.  Conse- 


CHAP.  XIII.  2,  3.  297 

quently,  according  to  the  law  of  the  creative  intensity  of  all 
divinely  effected  beginnings,  he  surveyed  the  whole  of  this  long 
period  as  a  universal  prophet,  outstripped  all  his  successors 
down  to  the  time  of  Daniel,  and  left  to  succeeding  ages  not 
only  such  prophecies  as  those  we  have  already  read,  which  had 
their  basis  in  the  history  of  his  own  times  and  the  historical 
fulfilment  of  which  was  not  sealed  up,  but  such  far  distant  and 
sealed  prophecies  as  those  which  immediately  follow.  For  since 
Isaiah  did  not  appear  in  public  again  after  the  fifteenth  year  of 
Hezekiah,  the  future,  as  his  book  clearly  shows,  was  from  that 
time  forth  his  true  home.  Just  as  the  apostle  says  of  the  New 
Testament  believer,  that  he  must  separate  himself  from  the 
world,  and  walk  in  heaven,  so  the  Old  Testament  prophet 
separated  himself  from  the  present  of  his  own  nation,  and  lived 
und  moved  in  its  future  alone. 

The  prophet  hears  a  call  to  war.  From  whom  it  issues,  and 
to  whom  or  against  whom  it  is  directed,  still  remains  a  secret ; 
but  this  only  adds  to  the  intensity.  Yer.  2.  "  On  woodless 
mountain  lift  ye  up  a  banner,  call  to  them  with  loud  sounding 
voice,  shake  the  hand,  that  they  may  enter  into  gates  of  princes  !  " 
The  summons  is  urgent :  hence  a  threefold  signal,  viz.  the 
banner-staff  planted  on  a  mountain  "  made  bald"  (nishpeh,  from 
which  comes  shephi,  which  only  occurs  in  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah), 
the  voice  raised  high,  and  the  shaking  of  the  hand,  denoting  a 
violent  beckoning, — all  three  being  favourite  signs  with  Isaiah. 
The  destination  of  this  army  is  to  enter  into  a  city  of  princes 
(ned'iblm,  freemen,  nobles,  princes,  Ps.  evii.  40,  cf.  Ps.  cxiii.  8), 
namely,  to  enter  as  conquerors  ;  for  it  is  not  the  princes  who 
invite  them,  but  Jehovah. — Ver.  3.  "/,  /  have  summoned  my 
sanctified  ones,  also  called  my  heroes  to  my  wrath,  my  proudly 
rejoicing  ones"  "  To  my  wrath  "  is  to  be  explained  in  accord 
ance  with  ch.  x.  5.  To  execute  His  wrath  He  had  summoned 
His  "sanctified  ones"  (m'kudddshim),  i.e.  according  to  Jer. 
xxii.  7  (compare  Jer.  li.  27,  28),  those  who  had  already  been 
solemnly  consecrated  by  Him  to  go  into  the  battle,  and  had 
called  the  heroes  whom  He  had  taken  into  His  service,  and  who 
were  His  instruments  in  this  respect,  that  they  rejoiced  with 
the  pride  of  men  intoxicated  with  victory  (vid.  Zeph.  i.  7,  cf. 
iii.  11).  rpJJ  is  a  word  peculiarly  Isaiah's;  and  the  combination 
is  so  unusual,  that  we  could  hardly  expect  to  find  it 


298  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

employed  by  two  authors  who  stood  in  no  relation  whatever  to 
one  another. 

The  command  of  Jehovah  is  quickly  executed.  The  great 
army  is  already  coming  down  from  the  mountains.  Vers.  4,  5. 
"  Hark,  a  rumbling  on  the  mountains  after  the  manner  of  a  great 
people ;  hark,  a  rumbling  of  kingdoms  of  nations  met  together  ! 
Jehovah  of  hosts  musters  an  army,  those  that  have  come  out  of  a 
distant  land,  from  the  end  of  the  heaven :  Jehovah  and  His  instru 
ments  of  wrath,  to  destroy  the  whole  earth"  Kol  commences  an 
interjectional  sentence,  and  thus  becomes  almost  an  interjection 
itself  (compare  ch.  lii.  8,  Ixvi.  6,  and  on  Gen.  iv.  10).  There 
is  rumbling  on  the  mountains  (ch.  xvii.  12,  13),  for  there  are 
the  peoples  of  Eran,  and  in  front  the  Medes  inhabiting  the 
mountainous  north-western  portion  of  Eran,  who  come  across 
the  lofty  Shahu  (Zagros),  and  the  ranges  that  lie  behind  it 
towards  the  Tigris,  and  descend  upon  the  lowlands  of  Babylon  ; 
and  not  only  the  peoples  of  Eran,  but  the  peoples  of  the  moun 
tainous  north  of  Asia  generally  (Jer.  li.  27), — an  army  under 
the  guidance  of  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  hosts  of  spirits  and 
stars,  whose  wrath  it  will  execute  over  the  whole  earth,  i.e. 
upon  the  world-empire ;  for  the  fall  of  Babel  is  a  judgment, 
and  accompanied  with  judgments  upon  all  the  tribes  under 
Babylonian  rule. 

Then  all  sink  into  anxious  and  fearful  trembling.  Vers. 
6-8.  "  Howl;  for  the  day  of  Jehovah  is  near ;  like  a  destructive 
force  from  the  Almighty  it  comes.  Therefore  all  arms  hang 
loosely  down,  and  every  human  heart  melts  away.  And  they  are 
troubled:  they  fall  into  cramps  and  pangs  ;  like  a  woman  in  labour 
they  twist  themselves:  one  stares  at  the  other;  their  faces  are  faces 
of  flame"  The  command  vvt|n  (not  written  defectively,  Wn) 
is  followed  by  the  reason  for  such  a  command,  viz.  "  the  day 
of  Jehovah  is  near,"  the  watchword  of  prophecy  from  the  time 
of  Joel  downwards.  The  Caph  in  ceshod  is  the  so-called  Caph 
veritatis,  or  more  correctly,  the  Caph  of  comparison  between 
the  individual  and  its  genus.  It  is  destruction  by  one  who 
possesses  unlimited  power  to  destroy  (shod,  from  shddad,  from 
which  we  have  shaddai,  after  the  form  chaggai,  the  festive  one, 
from  chdgag].  In  this  play  upon  the  words,  Isaiah  also  repeats 
certain  words  of  Joel  (ch.  i.  15).  Then  the  hands  hang  down 
from  despondency  and  helplessness,  and  the  heart,  the  seat  of 


CHAP..  XIII.  9,  10.  299 

life,  melts  (ch.  xix.  1)  in  the  heat  of  anguish.  Universal  con 
sternation  ensues.  This  is  expressed  by  the  word  venibhdlu, 
which  stands  in  half  pause ;  the  word  has  sliahheleth  followed 
by  psik  (pasek),  an  accent  which  only  occurs  in  seven  passages 
in  the  twenty-one  prose  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  and 
always  with  this  dividing  stroke  after  it.1  Observe  also  the 
following  fut.  paragogica,  which  add  considerably  to  the  energy 
of  the  description  by  their  anapaestic  rhythm.  The  men  (subj.) 
lay  hold  of  cramps  and  pangs  (as  in  Job  xviii.  20,  xxi.  6),  the 
force  of  the  events  compelling  them  to  enter  into  such  a  con 
dition.  Their  faces  are  faces  of  flames.  Knobel  understands 
this  as  referring  to  their  turning  pale,  which  is  a  piece  of 
exegetical  jugglery.  At  the  same  time,  it  does  not  suggest 
mere  redness,  nor  a  convulsive  movement ;  but  just  as  a  flame 
alternates  between  light  and  darkness,  so  their  faces  become 
alternately  flushed  and  pale,  as  the  blood  ebbs  and  flows,  as  it 
were,  being  at  one  time  driven  with  force  into  their  faces,  and 
then  again  driven  back  to  the  heart,  so  as  to  leave  deadly  pale 
ness,  in  consequence  of  their  anguish  arid  terror. 

The  day  of  Jehovah's  wrath  is  coming, — a  starless  night — a 
nightlike,  sunless  day.  Vers.  9, 10.  "  Behold,  the  day  of  Jehovah 
cometh,  a  cruel  one,  and  wrath  and  fierce  anger,  to  turn  the  earth 
into  a  wilderness  :  and  its  sinners  He  destroys  out  of  it.  For  the 
stars  of  heaven,  and  its  Orions,  will  not  let  their  light  shine :  the 
sun  darkens  itself  at  its  rising,  and  the  moon  does  not  let  its  light 
shine*  The  day  of  Jehovah  cometh  as  one  cruelly  severe 
^aczdri,  an  adj.  rel.  from  'aczdr,  chosh,  kosh,  to  be  dry,  hard, 
unfeeling),  as  purely  an  overflowing  of  inward  excitement,  and 
as  burning  anger ;  Idsum  is  carried  on  by  the  finite  verb,  ac 
cording  to  a  well-known  alteration  of  style  (=  uVhaslimld).  It  is 
not  indeed  the  general  judgment  which  the  prophet  is  depicting 
here,  but  a  certain  historical  catastrophe  falling  upon  the  na 
tions,  which  draws  the  whole  world  into  sympathetic  suffering. 
'Eretz,  therefore  (inasmuch  as  the  notions  of  land  generally, 
and  some  particular  land  or  portion  of  the  earth,  are  blended 
together,  —  a  very  elastic  term,  with  vanishing  boundaries), 
is  not  merely  the  land  of  Babylon  here,  as  Knobel  supposes, 
but  the  earth.  Ver.  10  shows  in  what  way  the  day  of  Jehovah 
is  a  day  of  wrath.  Even  nature  clothes  itself  in  the  colour  of 
1  For  the  seven  passages,  see  Ewald,  Lehrbuch  (ed.  7),  p.  224. 


300  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

wrath,  which  is  the  very  opposite  to  light.  The  heavenly  lights 
above  the  earth  go  out ;  the  moon  does  not  shine ;  and  the  sun, 
which  is  about  to  rise,  alters  its  mind.  u  The  Orions "  are 
Orion  itself  and  other  constellations  like  it,  just  as  the  morning 
stars  in  Job  xxxviii.  7  are  Hesperus  and  other  similar  stars.  It 
is  more  probable  that  the  term  cesll  is  used  for  Orion  in  the 
sense  of  u  the  fool "  (=  foolhardy),1  according  to  the  older 
translators  (LXX.  o  '/2ptW,  Targum  nepliilelwn  from  nephila , 
Syr.  gaboro,  Arab,  gebbdr,  the  giant),  than  that  it  refers  to 
Suhelj  i.e.  Canopus  (see  the  notes  on  Job  ix.  9,  xxxviii.  31), 
although  the  Arabic  suhel  does  occur  as  a  generic  name  for 
stars  of  surpassing  splendour  (see  at  Job  xxxviii.  7).  The 
comprehensive  term  employed  is  similar  to  the  figure  of  speech 
met  with  in  Arabic  (called  taglib,  i.e.  the  preponderance  of  the 
pars  potior),  in  such  expressions  as  "  the  two  late  evenings"  for 
the  evening  and  late  evening,  "  the  two  Omars  "  for  Omar  and 
Abubekr,  though  the  resemblance  is  still  greater  to  the  Latin 
Scipiones,  i.e.  men  of  Scipio's  greatness.  Even  the  Orions,  i.e. 
those  stars  which  are  at  other  times  the  most  conspicuous,  with 
hold  their  light ;  for  when  God  is  angry,  the  principle  of  anger 
is  set  in  motion  even  in  the  natural  world,  and  primarily  in  the 
stars  that  were  created  "  for  signs  "  (compare  Gen.  i.  14  with 
Jer.  x.  2). 

The  prophet  now  hears  again  the  voice  of  Jehovah  revealing 
to  him  what  His  purpose  is, — namely,  a  visitation  punishing 
the  wicked,  humbling  the  proud,  and  depopulating  the  countries. 
Vers.  11,  12.  "  And  I  visit  the  evil  upon  the  world,  and  upon 
sinners  their  guilt,  and  sink  into  silence  the  pomp  of  the  proud  ;  and 
the  boasting  of  tyrants  I  throw  to  the  ground.  I  make  men  more 
precious  than  fine  gold,  and  people  than  a  jewel  of  Opldr."  The 
verb  pdkad  is  construed,  as  in  Jer.  xxiii.  2,  with  the  accusative 
of  the  thing  punished,  and  with  ?y  of  the  person  punished. 
Instead  of  'eretz  we  have  here  tebel,  which  is  always  used  like  a 
proper  name  (never  with  the  article),  to  denote  the  earth  in  its 

1  "When  R.  Samuel  of  Nehardea,  the  astronomer,  says  in  his  &.  Berachoth 
58&,  u  If  it  were  not  for  the  heat  of  the  cesil,  the  world  would  perish  from 
the  cold  of  the  Scorpion,  and  vice  versa," — he  means  by  the  cesil  Orion  ; 
and  the  true  meaning  of  the  passage  is,  that  the  constellations  of  Orion  and 
the  Scorpion,  one  of  which  appears  in  the  hot  season,  and  the  other  in  the 
cold,  preserve  the  temperature  in  equilibrium. 


CHAP.  XIII.  13,  14.  SOI 

entire  circumference.  We  have  also  'dntzlm  in  stead  of  nedibim  : 
the  latter  signifies  merely  princes,  and  it  is  only  occasionally 
that  it  has  the  subordinate  sense  of  despots  ;  the  former  signifies 
men  naturally  cruel,  or  tyrants  (it  occurs  very  frequently  in 
Isaiah).  Everything  here  breathes  the  spirit  of  Isaiah  both  in 
thought  and  form.  "  The  lofty  is  thrown  down  :  "  this  is  one 
of  the  leading  themes  of  Isaiah's  proclamation  ;  and  the  fact 
that  the  judgment  will  only  leave  a  remnant  is  a  fundamental 
thought  of  his,  which  also  runs  through  the  oracles  concerning 
the  heathen  (ch.  xvi.  14,  xxi.  17,  xxiv.  6),  and  is  depicted  by 
the  prophet  in  various  ways  (ch.  x.  16-19,  xvii.  4-6,  xxiv.  13, 
xxx.  17).  There  it  is  expressed  under  the  figure  that  men 
become  as  scarce  as  the  finest  kinds  of  gold.  Word-painting  is 
Isaiah's  delight  and  strength.  90phir9  which  resembles  'okir  in 
sound,  was  the  gold  country  of  India,  that  lay  nearest  to  the 
Phoenicians,  the  coast-land  of  Abhira  on  the  northern  shore  of 
the  Runn  (Irina),  i.e.  the  salt  lake  to  the  east  of  the  mouths  of 
the  Indus  (see  at  Gen.  x.  29  and  Job  xxii.  24 ;  and  for  the 
Egypticized  Souphir  of  the  LXX.,  Job  xxviii.  16). 

Thus  does  the  wrath  of  God  prevail  among  men,  casting 
down  and  destroying ;  and  the  natural  world  above  and  below 
cannot  fail  to  take  part  in  it.  Yer.  13.  "  Therefore  I  shake  the 
heavens,  and  the  earth  trembles  away  from  its  place,  because  of  the 
wrath  of  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  because  of  the  day  of  His  fierce 
anger."  The  two  Beths  have  a  causative  meaning  (cf.  ch. 
ix.  18).  They  correspond  to  'al-cen  (therefore),  of  which  they 
supply  the  explanation.  Because  the  wrath  of  God  falls  upon 
men,  every  creature  which  is  not  the  direct  object  of  the  judg 
ment  must  become  a  medium  in  the  infliction  of  it.  We  have 
here  the  thought  of  ver.  9a  repeated  as  a  kind  of  refrain  (in  a 
similar  manner  to  ch.  v.  25).  Then  follow  the  several  disasters. 
The  first  is  flight. — Ver.  14.  "And  it  comes  to  pass  as  with  a 
gazelle  which  is  scared,  and  as  with  a  flock  without  gatherers :  they 
turn  every  one  to  his  people,  and  they  flee  every  one  to  his  land" 
The  neuter  v'hdydh  affirms  that  it  will  then  be  as  described  in 
the  simile  and  the  interpretation  which  follows.  Babylon  was 
the  market  for  the  world  in  central  Asia,  and  therefore  a  ren 
dezvous  for  the  most  diverse  nations  (Jer.  1.  16,  cf.  li.  9,  44) — 
for  a  Trdfji/jiiKTOf  0^X09,  as  ^Eschylus  says  in  his  Persce,  v.  52. 
This  great  and  motley  mass  of  foreigners  would  now  be  scat- 


302  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tered  in  the  wildest  flight,  on  the  fall  of  the  imperial  city.  The 
second  disaster  is  violent  death. — Ver.  15.  "Every  one  that  is 
found  is  pierced  through,  and  every  one  that  is  caught  falls  by  the 
sword"  By  "  every  one  that  is  found"  we  understand  those 
that  are  taken  in  the  city  by  the  invading  conquerors  ;  and  by 
"  every  one  that  is  caught"  those  that  are  overtaken  in  their 
flight  (sdphdh,  abripere,  ch.  vii.  20).  All  are  put  to  the  sword. 
— The  third  and  fourth  disasters  are  plunder  and  ravage.  Ver. 
16.  "  And  their  infants  are  dashed  to  pieces  before  their  eyes, 
their  houses  plundered,  and  their  wives  ravished"  Instead  of 
tisshdgalndhj  the  keri  has  the  euphemistic  term  tisshdcabndh 
(concubitum  patientur),  a  passive  which  never  occurs  in  the 
Old  Testament  text  itself.  The  keri  readings  shuccabt  in  Jer. 
iii.  2,  and  yishcdbenndh  in  Deut.  xxviii.  30,  also  do  violence  to 
the  language,  which  required  Qy  33^  and  fix  (the  latter  as  a 
preposition  in  Gen.  xix.  34)  for  the  sake  of  euphemism  ;  or 
rather  they  introduce  a  later  (talmudic)  usage  of  speech  into 
the  Scriptures  (see  Geiger,  Urschrift,  pp.  407-8).  The  pro 
phet  himself  intentionally  selects  the  base  term  shdgal,  though, 
as  the  queen's  name  Shegal  shows,  it  must  have  been  regarded 
in  northern  Palestine  and  Aramsean  as  by  no  means  a  dis 
reputable  word.  In  this  and  other  passages  of  the  prophecy 
Knobel  scents  a  fanaticism  which  is  altogether  strange  to  Isaiah* 
With  ver.  17  the  prophecy  takes  a  fresh  turn,  in  which  the 
veil  that  has  hitherto  obscured  it  is  completely  broken  through. 
We  now  learn  the  name  of  the  conquerors.  "  Behold,  I  rouse 
up  the  Medes  over  them,  who  do  not  regard  silver,  and  take  no 
pleasure  in  gold  "  It  was  the  Medes  (Darius  Medus  =  Cyaxares 
II.)  who  put  an  end  to  the  Babylonian  kingdom  in  combination 
with  the  Persians  (Cyrus).  The  Persians  are  mentioned  for 
the  first  time  in  the  Old  Testament  by  Ezekiel  and  Daniel. 
Consequently  Mddai  (by  the  side  of  which  Elam  is  mentioned 
in  ch.  xxi.  2)  appears  to  have  been  a  general  term  applied  to 
the  Arian  populations  of  Eran  from  the  most  important  ruling 
tribe.  Until  nearly  the  end  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  the  Medes 
lived  scattered  about  over  different  districts,  and  in  hamlets 
(or  villages)  united  together  by  a  constitutional  organization. 
After  they  had  broken  away  from  the  Assyrians  (714  B.C.) 
they  placed  themselves  in  709-8  B.C.  under  one  common  king, 
namely  Deyoces,  probably  for  the  purpose  of  upholding  their 


CHAP.  XIII.  18,  19.  303 

national  independence ;  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  under  a 
common  monarch,  for  even  the  chiefs  of  the  villages  were  called 
kings.1  It  is  in  this  sense  that  Jeremiah  speaks  of  "  kings  of 
Madai ;"  at  any  rate,  this  is  a  much  more  probable  supposition 
than  that  he  refers  to  monarchs  in  a  generic  sense.  But  the 
kings  of  Media,  i.e.  the  rulers  of  the  several  villages,  are 
mentioned  in  Jer.  xxv.  25  among  those  who  will  have  to  drink 
the  intoxicating  cup  which  Jehovah  is  about  to  give  to  the 
nations  through  Nebuchadnezzar.  So  that  their  expedition 
against  Babylon  is  an  act  of  revenge  for  the  disgrace  of 
bondage  that  has  been  inflicted  upon  them.  Their  disregarding 
silver  and  gold  is  not  intended  to  describe  them  as  a  rude, 
uncultivated  people :  the  prophet  simply  means  that  they  are 
impelled  by  a  spirit  of  revenge,  and  do  not  come  for  the 
purpose  of  gathering  booty.  Revenge  drives  them  on  to  for- 
getfulness  of  all  morality,  and  humanity  also. — Ver.  18.  "  And 
bows  dash  down  young  men ;  and  they  have  no  compassion  on  the 
fruit  of  the  womb :  their  eye  has  no  pity  on  children."  The  bows 
do  not  stand  for  the  bowmen  (see  ch.  xxi.  17),  but  the  bows  of 
the  latter  dash  the  young  men  to  the  ground  by  means  of  the 
arrows  shot  from  them.  They  did  not  spare  the  fruit  of  the 
womb,  since  they  ripped  up  the  bodies  of  those  that  were  with 
child  (2  Kings  viii.  12,  xv.  16,  etc.).  Even  towards  children 
they  felt  no  emotion  of  compassionate  regard,  such  as  would 
express  itself  in  the  eye :  chus,  to  feel,  more  especially  to  feel 
with  another,  i.e.  to  sympathize;  here  and  in  Ezek.  v.  11  it  is 
ascribed  to  the  eye  as  the  mirror  of  the  soul  (compare  the 
Arabic  chasyet  el-ain  ala  fuldnin,  carefulness  of  eye  for  a 
person :  Hariri,  Comment,  p.  140).  With  such  inhuman  con 
duct  on  the  part  of  the  foe,  the  capital  of  the  empire  becomes 
the  scene  of  a  terrible  conflagration. — Ver.  19.  "And  Babel, 
the  ornament  of  kingdoms,  the  proud  boast  of  the  Chaldeans, 
becomes  like  Elohims  overthrowing  judgment  upon  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah."  The  ornament  of  kingdoms  (mamldcoth),  because 
it  was  the  centre  of  many  conquered  kingdoms,  which  now 
avenged  themselves  upon  it  (ver.  4)  ;  the  pride  (cf.  eh. 
xxviii.  1),  because  it  was  the  primitive  dwelling-place  of  the 
Chaldeans  of  the  lowlands,  that  ancient  cultivated  people,  who 

1  See  Spiegel's  Eran  das  Land  zwiscJien  dem  Indus  und  Tigris  (1863), 
p.  308  sqq. 


304  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

were  related  to  the  Chaldean  tribes  of  the  Carduchisan  moun 
tains  in  the  north-east  of  Mesopotamia,  though  not  of  the  same 
origin,  and  of  totally  different  manners  (see  at  ch.  xxiii.  13). 
Their  present  catastrophe  resembled  that  of  Sodom  and  Go 
morrah  :  the  two  eths  are  accusative  :  mahpecdh  (Karao-rpofaj) 
is  used  like  dedh  in  ch.  xi.  9  with  a  verbal  force  (TO  /cara- 
crTptyai,  well  rendered  by  the  LXX.  ov  Tpoirov  /carearpe^ev  6 
<9eo?.  On  the  arrangement  of  the  words,  see  Ges.  §  133,  3). 

Babel,  like  the  cities  of  the  Pentapolis,  had  now  become  a 
perpetual  desert.  Vers.  20-22.  "  She  remains  uninhabited  for 
every  and  unoccupied  into  generation  of  generations ;  and  not  an 
Arab  pitches  his  tent  there,  and  shepherds  do  not  make  their  folds 
there.  And  there  lie  beasts  of  the  desert,  and  horn-oivls  Jill  their 
houses;  and  ostriches  dwell  there,  and  field-devils  hop  about  there. 
And  jackals  howl  in  her  castles,  and  wild  dogs  in  palaces  of 
pleasure;  and  her  time  is  near  to  come,  and  her  days  will  not  be 
prolonged."  The  conclusion  is  similar  to  that  of  the  prophecy 
against  Edom,  in  ch.  xxxiv.  16,  17.  There  the  certainty  of  the 
prediction,  even  in  its  most  minute  particulars,  is  firmly  declared ; 
here  the  nearness  of  the  time  of  fulfilment.  But  the  fulfilment 
did  not  take  place  so  soon  as  the  words  of  the  prophecy  might 
make  it  appear.  According  to  Herodotus,  Cyrus,  the  leader 
of  the  Medo-Persian  army,  left  the  city  still  standing,  with  its 
double  ring  of  walls.  Darius  Hystaspis,  who  had  to  conquer 
Babylon  a  second  time  in  518  B.C.,  had  the  walls  entirely 
destroyed,  with  the  exception  of  fifty  cubits.  Xerxes  gave  the 
last  thrust  to  the  glory  of  the  temple  of  Belus.  Having  been 
conquered  by  Seleucus  Nicator  (312),  it  declined  just  in  pro 
portion  as  Seleucia  rose.  Babylon,  says  Pliny,  ad  solitudinem 
rediit  exhausta  vicinitate  Seleucice.  At  the  time  of  Strabo  (born 
60  B.C.)  Babylon  was  a  perfect  desert;  and  he  applies  to  it 
(xvi.  15)  the  words  of  the  poet,  ep^fjiia  /meyaXrj  *GT\V  q  fjie>ya\.rj 
TToXt?.  Consequently,  in  the  passage  before  us  the  prophecy 
falls  under  the  law  of  perspective  foreshortening.  But  all  that 
it  foretells  has  been  literally  fulfilled.  The  curse  that  Babylon 
would  never  come  to  be  settled  in  and  inhabited  again  (a 
poetical  expression,  like  Jer.  xvii.  25,  xxxiii.  16),  proved  itself 
an  effectual  one,  when  Alexander  once  thought  of  making 
Babylon  the  metropolis  of  his  empire.  He  was  carried  off  by 
an  early  death.  Ten  thousand  workmen  were  at  that  time 


CHAP.  XIII.  20-22.  305 

employed  for  two  months  in  simply  clearing  away  the  rubbish 
of  the  foundations  of  the  temple  of  Belus  (the  Nimrod-tower). 
"  Not  an  Arab  pitches  his  tent  there"  (Ardbi,  from  'Ardbdh,  a 
steppe,  is  used  here  for  the  first  time  in  the  Old  Testament, 
and  then  again  in  Jer.  iii.  2 ;  yahel,  different  from  yokel  in 
ch.  xiii.  10  and  Job  xxxi.  26,  is  a  syncopated  form  of  ?nfcP, 
tentorium  figet,  according  to  Ges.  §  68,  Anm.  2,  used  instead  of 
the  customary  •JLI.^.<I.)  :  this  was  simply  the  natural  consequence 
of  the  great  field  of  ruins,  upon  which  there  was  nothing  but 
the  most  scanty  vegetation.  But  all  kinds  of  beasts  of  the 
desert  and  waste  places  make  their  homes  there  instead.  The 
list  commences  with  ziyyim  (from  zi,  dryness,  or  from  ziyi,  an 
adj.  relat.  of  the  noun  zi),  i.e.  dwellers  in  the  desert;  the 
reference  here  is  not  to  men,  but,  as  in  most  other  instances, 
to  animals,  though  it  is  impossible  to  determine  what  are  the 
animals  particularly  referred  to.  That  ochim  are  horned  owls 
( Uhus)  is  a  conjecture  of  Aurivillius,  which  decidedly  com 
mends  itself.  On  b'noth  yaandli,  see  at  Job  xxxix.  13-18. 
Wetzstein  connects  yaandh  with  an  Arabic  word  for  desert ;  it 
is  probably  more  correct,  however,  to  connect  it  with  the  Syriac 
&OJP,  greedy.  The  feminine  plural  embraces  ostriches  of  both 
sexes,  just  as  the  'iyyim  (sing.  ^  =  ^K,  from  'dvdh,  to  howl : 
see  Bernstein's  Lex.  on  Kirsch's  Chrestom.  Syr.  p.  7),  i.e.  jackals, 
are  called  bendt  awa  in  Arabic,  without  distinction  of  sex  (awa 
in  this  appellation  is  a  direct  reproduction  of  the  natural  voice 
of  the  animal,  which  is  called  wdwi  in  vulgar  Arabic).  Tan 
has  also  been  regarded  since  the  time  of  Pococke  and  Schnurrer 
as  the  name  of  the  jackal ;  and  this  is  supported  by  the  Syriac 
and  Targum  rendering  yaruro  (see  Bernstein,  p.  220),  even 
more  than  by  the  Arabic  name  of  the  wolf,  tindn,  which  only 
occurs  here  and  there.  ""N,  ibnu  awa,  is  the  common  jackal 
found  in  Hither  Asia  (Canis  aureus  vnlgaris),  the  true  type  of 
the  whole  species,  which  is  divided  into  at  least  ten  varieties, 
and  belongs  to  the  same  genus  as  dogs  and  wolves  (not  foxes). 
Tan  may  refer  to  one  of  these  varieties,  which  derived  its  name 
from  its  distinctive  peculiarity  as  a  long-stretched  animal,  whether 
the  extension  was  in  the  trunk,  the  snout,  or  the  tail.  The 
animals  mentioned,  both  quadrupeds  (rdbatz)  and  birds  (shdcan), 
are  really  found  there,  on  the  soil  of  ancient  Babylon.  When 
Kerporter  was  drawing  near  to  the  Nimrod-tower,  he  saw  lions 

VOL.  I.  U 


306  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

sunning  themselves  quietly  upon  its  walls,  which  came  down 
very  leisurely  when  alarmed  by  the  cries  of  the  Arabs.  And 
as  Rich  heard  in  Bagdad,  the  ruins  are  still  regarded  as  a 
rendezvous  for  ghosts :  sdfir,  when  contrasted  with  'attud,  sig 
nifies  the  full-grown  shaggy  buck-goat;  but  here  seirim  is 
applied  to  demons  in  the  shape  of  goats  (as  in  ch.  xxxiv.  14). 
According  to  the  Scriptures,  the  desert  is  the  abode  of  unclean 
spirits,  and  such  unclean  spirits  as  the  popular  belief  or  mytho 
logy  pictured  to  itself  were  seirim.  Virgil,  like  Isaiah,  calls 
them  saltantes  Satyros.  It  is  remarkable  also  that  Joseph 
Wolf,  the  missionary  and  traveller  to  Bochdra,  saw  pilgrims  of 
the  sect  of  Yezidis  (or  devil-worshippers)  upon  the  ruins  of 
Babylon,  who  performed  strange  and  horrid  rites  by  moonlight, 
and  danced  extraordinary  dances  with  singular  gestures  and 
sounds.  On  seeing  these  ghost-like,  howling,  moonlight  pilgrims, 
he  very  naturally  recalled  to  mind  the  dancing  seirim  of  pro 
phecy  (see  Moritz  Wagner's  Reise  nach  Persien  und  dem  Lande 
der  Kurden,  Bd.  ii.  p.  251).  And  the  nightly  howling  and 
yelling  of  jackals  (dndh  after  rikked,  as  in  1  Sam.  xviii.  6,  7) 
produces  its  natural  effect  upon  every  traveller  there,  just  as 
in  all  the  other  ruins  of  the  East.  These  are  now  the  inhabit 
ants  of  the  royal  'armenoth,  which  the  prophet  calls  'alm'noth 
with  a  sarcastic  turn,  on  account  of  their  widowhood  and 
desolation  ;  these  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  palaces  of  pleasure, 
the  luxurious  villas  and  country-seats,  with  their  hanging  gar 
dens.  The  Apocalypse,  in  ch.  xviii.  2,  takes  up  this  prophecy 
of  Isaiah,  and  applies  it  to  a  still  existing  Babylon,  which  might 
have  seen  itself  in  the  mirror  of  the  Babylon  of  old. 

But  it  is  love  to  His  own  people  which  impels  the  God  of 
Israel  to  suspend  such  a  judgment  of  eternal  destruction  over 
Babylon.  Ch.  xiv.  1,  2.  "  For  Jehovah  will  have  mercy  on  Jacob, 
and  will  once  more  choose  Israel,  and  will  settle  them  in  their  own 
land :  and  the  foreigner  will  associate  with  them,  and  they  will 
cleave  to  the  house  cf  Jacob.  And  nations  take  them,  and  ac- 
companv  them  to  their  place ;  and  the  house  of  Israel  takes  them 
to  itself  in  the  land  of  Jehovah  for  servants  and  maid-servants: 
and  they  hold  in  captivity  those  who  led  them  away  captive ;  and 
become  lords  over  their  oppressors"  We  have  here  in  nuce 
the  comforting  substance  of  ch.  _ilvi.-lxvi.  Babylon  falls  that 
Israel  may  rise.  This  is  effected  by  the  compassion  of  God. 


CHAP.  XIV.  1-4.  307 

He  chooses  Israel  once  more  (iterum,  as  in  Job.  xiv.  7  for 
example),  and  therefore  makes  a  new  covenant  with  it.  Then 
follows  their  return  to  Canaan,  their  own  land,  Jehovah's  land 
(as  in  Hos.  ix.  3).  Proselytes  from  among  the  heathen,  who 
have  acknowledged  the  God  of  the  exiles,  go  along  with  them, 
as  Ruth  did  with  Naomi.  Heathen  accompany  the  exiles  to 
their  own  place.  And  now  their  relative  positions  are  reversed. 
Those  who  accompany  Israel  are  now  taken  possession  of  by  the 
latter  (hithnachel,  Khypovo/jLeiv  eavrw,  like  hithpatteach,  ch.  Hi.  2, 
\veaOai ;  cf.  p.  94,  note,  and  Ewald,  §  124,  b),  as  servants  and 
maid-servants;  and  they  (the  Israelites)  become  leaders  into 
captivity  of  those  who  led  them  into  captivity  (Lamed  with  the 
participle,  as  in  ch.  xi.  9),  and  they  will  oppress  (rdddh  &',  as 
in  Ps.  xlix.  15)  their  oppressors.  This  retribution  of  like  for 
like  is  to  all  appearance  quite  out  of  harmony  with  the  New 
Testament  love.  But  in  reality  it  is  no  retribution  of  like  for 
like.  For,  according  to  the  prophet's  meaning,  to  be  ruled  by 
the  people  of  God  is  the  true  happiness  of  the  nations,  and  to 
allow  themselves  to  be  so  ruled  is  their  true  liberty.  At  the 
same  time,  the  form  in  which  the  promise  is  expressed  is  cer 
tainly  not  that  of  the  New  Testament ;  and  it  could  not  possibly 
have  been  so,  for  the  simple  reason  that  in  Old  Testament  times, 
and  from  an  Old  Testament  point  of  view,  there  was  no  other 
visible  manifestation  of  the  church  (ecclesia)  than  in  the  form  of 
a  nation.  This  national  form  of  the  church  has  been  broken  up 
under  the  New  Testament,  and  will  never  be  restored.  Israel, 
indeed,  will  be  restored  as  a  nation  ;  but  the  true  essence  of 
the  church,  which  is  raised  above  all  national  distinctions,  will 
never  return  to  those  worldly  limits  which  it  has  broken  through. 
And  the  fact  that  the  prophecy  moves  within  those  limits  here 
may  be  easily  explained,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  primarily  the 
deliverance  from  the  Babylonian  captivity  to  which  the  promise 
refers.  And  the  prophet  himself  was  unconscious  that  this 
captivity  would  be  followed  by  another. 

The  song  of  the  redeemed  is  a  song  concerning  the  fall  of 
the  king  of  Babel.  Vers.  3,  4a.  "  And  it  cometh  to  pass,  on  the 
day  that  Jehovah  giveth  tliee  rest  from  thy  plague,  and  from  thy 
cares,  and  from  the  heavy  bondage  ivherein  thou  wast  made  to 
verve,  that  thou  shalt  raise  such  a  song  of  triumph  concerning  the 
king  of  Babel,  and  say."  Instead  of  the  hiphil  hinniach  (to  let 


308  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

down)  of  ver.  1,  we  have  here,  as  in  the  original  passage,  Deut. 
xxv.  19,  the  form  heniach,  which  is  commonly  used  in  the  sense 
of  quieting,  or  procuring  rest.  1$J  is  trouble  which  plagues 
(as  fey  is  trouble  which  oppresses),  and  rogez  restlessness  which 
wears  out  with  anxious  care  (Job  iii.  26,  cf.  Ezek.  xii.  18). 
The  assimilated  min  before  the  two  words  is  pronounced  m¥, 
with  a  weak  reduplication,  instead  of  me,  as  elsewhere,  before 
n,  n,  and  even  before  1  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  28  ;  2  Sam.  xviii.  16). 
In  the  relative  clause  ^J3"~i?y  "i^K,  "H?K  is  not  the  Hebrew  casus 
adverb,  answering  to  the  Latin  ablative  qua  servo  te  usi  sunt ; 
nor  do  ?J3  .  .  .  "itw  belong  to  one  another  in  the  sense  of  quo,  as 
in  Deut.  xxi.  3,  qua  (vituld) ;  but  it  is  regarded  as  an  ace.  obj. 
according  to  Ex.  i.  14  and  Lev.  xxv.  39,  quon  t' a  fait  servir,  as 
in  Num.  xxxii.  5,  qu'on  donne  la  terre  (Luzzatto).  When  de 
livered  from  such  a  yoke  of  bondage,  Israel  would  raise  a  mdshdl. 
According  to  its  primary  and  general  meaning,  mdshdl  signifies 
figurative  language,  and  hence  poetry  generally,  more  especially 
that  kind  of  proverbial  poetry  which  loves  the  emblematical,  and, 
in  fact,  any  artistic  composition  that  is  piquant  in  its  character ; 
so  that  the  idea  of  what  is  satirical  or  defiant  may  easily  be 
associated  with  it,  as  in  the  passage  before  us. 

The  words  are  addressed  to  the  Israel  of  the  future  in  the 
Israel  of  the  present,  as  in  ch.  xii.  1.  The  former  would  then 
sing,  and  say  as  follows.  Vers.  4£-6.  "  How  hath  the  oppressor 
ceased  !  the  place  of  torture  ceased  !  Jehovah  hath  broken  the 
rod  of  the  wicked,  the  ruler  s  staff,  which  smote  nations  in  wrath 
with  strokes  without  ceasing,  subjugated  nations  wrathfully  with 
hunting  that  never  stays."  Not  one  of  the  early  translators  ever 
thought  of  deriving  the  hap.  leg.  madheldh  from  the  Aramsean 
dehab  (gold),  asVitringa,  Aurivillius,  and  Rosen  mill  ler  have  done. 
The  former  have  all  translated  the  word  as  if  it  were  marhebdh 
(haughty,  violent  treatment),  as  corrected  by  J.  D.  Michaelis, 
Doederlein,  Knobel,  and  others.  But  we  may  arrive  at  the 
same  result  without  altering  a  single  letter,  if  we  take  2&n  as 
equivalent  to  SIT^  2^,  to  melt  or  pine  away,  whether  we  go 
back  to  the  kal  or  to  the  hiphil  of  the  verb,  and  regard  the  Mem 
as  used  in  a  material  or  local  sense.  We  understand  it,  accord 
ing  to  madmenah  (dunghill)  in  ch.  xxv.  10,  as  denoting  the 
place  where  they  were  reduced  to  pining  away,  i.e.  as  applied 
to  Babylon  as  the  house  of  servitude  where  Israel  had  been 


CHAP.  XIV.  4-&  309 

weaned  to  death.  The  tyrant's  sceptre,  mentioned  in  ver.  5,  is 
the  Chaldean  world-power  regarded  as  concentrated  in  the  king 
of  Babel  (cf.  shelSt  in  Num.  xxiv.  17).  This  tyrant's  sceptre 
smote  nations  with  incessant  blows  and  hunting:  maccath  is  con 
strued  with  macceh,  the  derivative  of  the  same  verb ;  and  mur- 
ddphj  a  hophalnoun  (as  in  ch.  viii.  23,  xxix.  3),  with  rodeh,  which 
is  kindred  in  meaning.  Doederlein's  conjecture  (mirdath),  which 
has  been  adopted  by  most  modern  commentators,  is  quite  unneces 
sary.  Unceasing  continuance  is  expressed  first  of  all  with  bilti, 
which  is  used  as  a  preposition,  and  followed  by  sdrdh,  a  parti 
cipial  noun  like  cdldh,  and  then  with  b'li,  which  is  construed  with 
the  finite  verb  as  in  Gen.  xxxi.  20,  Job  xli.  18;  for  b'li  chdsdk 
is  an  attributive  clause  :  with  a  hunting  which  did  not  restrain 
itself,  did  not  stop,  and  therefore  did  not  spare.  Nor  is  it  only 
Israel  and  other  subjugated  nations  that  now  breathe  again. 
— Vers.  7,  8.  "  The  whole  earth  rests,  is  quiet :  they  break  forth 
into  singing.  Even  the  cypresses  rejoice  at  thee,  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon  :  l  Since  thou  hast  gone  to  sleep,  no  one  will  come  up  to 
lay  the  axe  upon  «$.'"  The  preterites  indicate  inchoatively  the 
circumstances  into  which  the  whole  earth  has  now  entered. 
The  omission  of  the  subject  in  the  case  of  pdtzehu  (they  break 
forth)  gives  the  greatest  generality  to  the  jubilant  utterances  : 
pdtzach  rinndh  (erumpere  gaudio)  is  an  expression  that  is  charac 
teristic  of  Isaiah  alone  (e.g.  ch.  xliv.  23,  xlix.  13)  ;  and  it  is  a 
distinctive  peculiarity  of  the  prophet  to  bring  in  the  trees  of 
the  forest,  as  living  and  speaking  beings,  to  share  in  the  uni 
versal  joy  (cf.  ch.  Iv.  12).  Jerome  supposes  the  trees  to  be 
figuratively  employed  here  for  the  u  chiefs  of  the  nations"  (prin- 
cipes  gentium}.  But  this  disposition  to  allegorize  not  only 
destroys  the  reality  of  the  contents,  but  the  spirit  of  the  poetry 
also.  Cypresses  and  cedars  rejoice  because  of  the  treatment 
which  they  received  from  the  Chaldean,  who  made  use  of  the 
almost  imperishable  wood  of  both  of  them  for  ornamental 
buildings,  for  his  siege  apparatus,  and  for  his  fleets,  and  even 
for  ordinary  ships, — as  Alexander,  for  example,  built  himself  a 
fleet  of  cypress-wood,  and  the  Syrian  vessels  had  masts  of  cedar. 
Of  the  old  cedars  of  Lebanon,  there  are  hardly  thirty  left  in 
the  principal  spot  where  they  formerly  grew.  Gardner  Wilkin- 
eon  (1843)  and  Hooker  the  botanist  (1860)  estimated  the  whole 
number  at  about  four  hundred ;  and  according  to  the  conclu- 


310  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

sion  which  the  latter  drew  from  the  number  of  concentric  rin^s 

o 

and  other  signs,  not  one  of  them  is  more  than  about  five  hun 
dred  years  old.1 

But  whilst  it  has  become  so  quiet  on  earth,  there  is  the 
most  violent  agitation  in  the  regions  below.  Ver.  9.  "  The  king 
dom  of  the  dead  below  is  all  in  uproar  on  account  of  thee,  to  meet 
thy  coming ;  it  stirreth  up  the  shades  for  thee,  all  the  he-goats  of 
the  earth  ;  it  raiseth  up  from  their  throne-seats  all  the  kings  of  the 
nations"  The  notion  of  Hades,  notwithstanding  the  mytho 
logical  character  which  it  had  assumed,  was  based  upon  the 
double  truth,  that  what  a  man  has  been,  and  the  manner  in 
which  he  has  lived  on  this  side  the  grave,  are  not  obliterated  on 
the  other  side,  but  are  then  really  brought  to  light,  and  that 
there  is  an  immaterial  self-formation  of  the  soul,  in  which  all 
that  a  man  has  become  under  certain  divinely  appointed  circum 
stances,  by  his  own  self-determination,  is,  as  it  were,  reflected 
in  a  mirror,  and  that  in  a  permanent  form.  This  psychical 
image,  to  which  the  dead  body  bears  the  same  relation  as  the 
shattered  mould  to  a  cast,  is  the  shade-like  corporeality  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Hades,  in  which  they  appear  essentially  though 
spiritually  just  as  they  were  on  this  side  the  grave.  This  is 
the  deep  root  of  what  the  prophet  has  here  expressed  in  a 
poetical  form ;  for  it  is  really  a  mdshdl  that  he  has  interwoven 
with  his  prophecy  here.  All  Hades  is  overwhelmed  with  excite 
ment  and  wonder,  now  that  the  king  of  Babel,  that  invincible 
ruler  of  the  world,  who,  if  not  unexpected  altogether,  was  not 
expected  so  soon,  is  actually  approaching.  From  TrfjJ  onwards, 
Sheol,  although  a  feminine,  might  be  the  subject ;  in  which  case 
the  verb  would  simply  have  reverted  from  the  feminine  to  the 
radical  masculine  form.  But  it  is  better  to  regard  the  subject 
as  neuter;  a  nescio  quid,  a  nameless  power.  The  shades  are 
suddenly  siezed  with  astonishment,  more  especially  the  former 
leaders  (leading  goats  or  bell-wethers)  of  the  herds  of  nations, 
so  that,  from  sheer  amazement,  they  spring  up  from  their  seats. 

And  how  do  they  greet  this  lofty  new-comer?  Ver.  10. 
"  They  all  rise  up  and  say  to  thee,  Art  thou  also  made  weak 
like  us  ?  art  thou  become  like  us  ?"  This  is  all  that  the  shades 
say  ;  what  follows  does  not  belong  to  them.  The  pual  chulldh 
(only  used  here),  "  to  be  made  sickly,  or  powerless,"  signifies  to 
1  See  Wilkinson's  paper  in  the  Athenxum  (London,  Nov.  1862). 


CHAP.  XIV.  10-12.  311 

be  transposed  into  the  condition  of  the  latter,  viz.  the  Rephaim 
(a  word  which  also  occurs  in  the  Phoenician  inscriptions,  from 
ND"J  =  n2"j5  to  be  relaxed  or  weary),  since  the  life  of  the  shades 
is  only  a  shadow  of  life  (cf.  et8o>Xa,  d/cucvs,  and  possibly  also 
KafJiovres  in  Homer,  when  used  in  the  sense  of  those  who  are 
dying,  exhausted  and  prostrate  with  weakness).  And  in  Hades 
we  could  not  expect  anything  more  than  this  expression  of 
extreme  amazement.  For  why  should  they  receive  their  new 
comrade  with  contempt  or  scorn  ?  From  ver.  11  onwards,  the 
singers  of  the  mashal  take  up  the  song  again. — Ver.  11.  "  Thy 
pomp  is  cast  down  to  the  region  of  the  dead,  the  noise  of  thy 
harps :  maggots  are  spread  under  thee,  and  they  that  cover  thee 
are  worms."  From  the  book  of  Daniel  we  learn  the  character 
of  the  Babylonian  music ;  it  abounded  in  instruments,  some  of 
which  were  foreign.  Maggots  and  worms  (a  bitter  sarcasm) 
now  take  the  place  of  the  costly  artistic  Babylonian  rugs,  which 
once  formed  the  pillow  and  counterpane  of  the  distinguished 
corpse.  JflP  might  be  a  third  pers.  hophal  (Ges.  §  71) ;  but  here, 
between  perfects,  it  is  a  third  pers.  pual,  like  yullad  in  ch.  ix.  5. 
Rimmdh,  which  is  preceded  by  the  verb  in  a  masculine  and  to 
a  certain  extent  an  indifferent  form  (Ges.  §  147,  a),  is  a  collec 
tive  name  for  small  worms,  in  any  mass  of  which  the  individual 
is  lost  in  the  swarm.  The  passage  is  continued  with  T£  (on 
which,  as  a  catchword  of  the  mashal,  see  at  ch.  i.  21). — Ver.  12. 
"  How  art  thou  fallen  from  the  sky,  tliou  star  of  light,  sun  of  the 
dawn,  hurled  down  to  the  earth,  thou  that  didst  throw  down 
nations  from  above?"  <!?^  is  here  the  morning  star  (from  hdlal, 
to  shine,  resolved  from  hillel,  after  the  form  |N»,  Jer.  xiii.  10, 
*$£?,  Ps.  cxix.  113,  or  rather  attaching  itself  as  a  third  class  to 
the  forms  '^r\y  ETy  :  compare  the  Arabic  sairaf,  exchanger  ; 
saikal,  sword-cleaner).  It  derives  its  name  in  other  ancient 
languages  also  from  its  striking  brilliancy,  and  is  here  called 
ben-shachar  (sun  of  the  dawn),  just  as  in  the  classical  mytho 
logy  it  is  called  son  of  Eos,  from  the  fact  that  it  rises  before 
the  sun,  and  swims  in  the  morning  light  as  if  that  were  the 
source  of  its  birth.1  Lucifer,  as  a  name  given  to  the  devil, 

1  It  is  singular,  however,  that  among  the  Semitic  nations  the  morning 
Btar  is  not  personified  as  a  male  (Hedsphoros  or  Phosphoroti),  but  as  a 
female  (Astarte,  see  at  ch.  xvii.  8),  and  that  it  is  called  NayMh,  Ashtoreth, 
Zuliara,  but  never  by  a  name  derived  from  hdlal;  whilst  the  moon  is  re- 


3 1 2  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

was  derived  from  this  passage,  which  the  fathers  (and  lately 
Stier)  interpreted,  without  any  warrant  whatever,  as  relating 
to  the  apostasy  and  punishment  of  the  angelic  leaders.  The 
appellation  is  a  perfectly  appropriate  one  for  the  king  of  Babel, 
on  account  of  the  early  date  of  the  Babylonian  culture,  which 
reached  back  as  far  as  the  grey  twilight  of  primeval  times,  and 
also  because  of  its  predominant  astrological  character.  The 
additional  epithet  cholesh  'al-goyirn  is  founded  upon  the  idea 
of  the  influxus  siderum  :l  cholesh  signifies  "overthrowing"  or 

c/  O  O 

laying  down  (Ex.  xvii.  13),  and  with  ral,  "  bringing  defeat 
upon;"  whilst  the  Talmud  (b.  Sabbath  1496)  uses  it  in  the  sense 
of  projiciens  sortem,  and  thus  throws  light  upon  the  cholesh 
(=purah,  lot)  of  the  Mishnah.  A  retrospective  glance  is  now 
cast  at  the  self-deification  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  in  which  he 
was  the  antitype  of  the  devil  and  the  type  of  antichrist  (Dan. 
xi.  36  ;  2  Thess.  ii.  4),  and  which  had  met  with  its  reward. — 
Vers.  13-15.  "  And  thou,  thou  hast  said  in  thy  heart,  I  will 
ascend  into  heaven,  I  will  exalt  my  throne  above  the  stars  of  God, 
and  sit  down  on  the  mount  of  the  assembly  of  gods  in  the  corner  of 
the  north.  I  will  ascend  to  the  heights  of  the  clouds,  I  will  make 
myself  like  the  Most  High.  Nevertheless,  thou  wilt  be  cast  down 
into  the  region  of  the  dead,  into  the  corner  of  the  pit."  An  anti 
thetical  circumstantial  clause  commences  with  veattah,  just  as  in 
ver.  19,  "  whilst  thou,"  or  "  whereas  thou."  The  liar  hammoSd 
(mount  of  assembly)  cannot  be  Zion,  as  is  assumed  by  Schegg 
and  others,  who  are  led  astray  by  the  parallel  in  Ps.  xlviii.  3, 
which  has  been  entirely  misunderstood,  and  has  no  bearing  upon 
this  passage  at  all.  Zion  was  neither  a  northern  point  of  the 
earth,  nor  was  it  situated  on  the  north  of  Jerusalem.  The 
prophet  makes  the  king  of  Babylon  speak  according  to  the 
general  notion  of  his  people,  who  had  not  the  seat  of  the  Deity 
in  the  midst  of  them,  as  the  Israelites  had,  but  who  placed  it 
on  the  summit  of  the  northern  mountains,  which  were  lost  in 

garded  as  a  male  deity  (Sin),  and  in  Arabic  Jiilal  signifies  the  new  moon 
(see  p.  145),  which  might  be  called  ben-shacar  (son  of  the  dawn),  from 
the  fact  that,  from  the  time  when  it  passes  out  of  the  invisibility  of  its 
first  phase,  it  is  seen  at  sunrise,  and  is  as  it  were  born  out  of  the  dawn. 

1  In  a  similar  manner,  the  sun-god  (Sari)  is  called  the  "  conqueror  of 
the  king's  enemies,"  "  breaker  of  opposition,"  etc.,  on  the  early  Babylonian 
monuments  Csee  G.  Rawlinson,  The  Five  Great  Monarchies,  i.  160). 


CHAP.  XIV.  16,  17.  313 

the  clouds,  just  as  the  Hindoos  place  it  on  the  fabulous  moun 
tains  of  Kaildsa,  which  lie  towards  the  north  beyond  the 
Himalayas  (Lassen,  i.  34  sqq.).  D^3"]l  (with  an  aspirated  3 
in  a  loosely  closed  syllable)  are  the  two  sides  into  which  a 
tiling  parts,  the  two  legs  of  an  angle,  and  then  the  apex  at 
which  the  legs  separate.  And  so  here,  ftev  sn3"P  (with  an 
unaspirated  Caph  in  a  triply  closed  syllable)  is  the  uttermost 
extremity  of  the  north,  from  which  the  northern  mountains 
stretch  fork-like  into  the  land,  and  yarcethe-bor  the  interior 
of  the  pit  into  which  its  two  walls  slope,  and  from  which  it 
unfolds  or  widens.  All  the  foolhardy  purposes  of  the  Chal 
dean  are  finally  comprehended  in  this,  "  /  will  make  myself 
like  the  Most  High  "  just  as  the  Assyrians,  according  to  Ctesias, 
and  the  Persians,  according  to  the  Per  see  of  JEschylus,  really 
called  their  king  God,  and  the  Sassanidae  call  themselves  bag, 
Theos,  upon  coins  and  inscriptions  (feddammeh  is  hithpael,  equi 
valent  to  'tthdarnmeh,  with  the  usual  assimilation  of  the  prefor- 
mative  Tav:  Ges.  §  34,  2,  b).  By  the  ^  in  ver.  14,  the  high 
flying  pride  of  the  Chaldean  is  contrasted  with  his  punishment, 
which  hurls  him  down  into  the  lowest  depths.  ^]N,  which  was 
originally  affirmative,  and  then  restrictive  (as  rah  was  originally 
restrictive  and  then  affirmative),  passes  over  here  into  an  adver 
sative,  just  as  in  Ps.  xlix.  16,  Job  xiii.  15  (a  change  seen  still 
more  frequently  in  i?£):  nevertheless  thou  wilt  be  hurled  down  ; 
nothing  but  that  will  occur,  and  not  what  you  propose.  This 
prophetic  turad  is  language  that  neither  befits  the  inhabitants 
of  Hades,  who  greet  his  advent,  nor  the  Israel  singing  the 
mashal ;  but  the  words  of  Israel  have  imperceptibly  passed  into 
words  of  the  prophet,  who  still  sees  in  the  distance,  and  as  some 
thing  future,  what  the  mashal  commemorates  as  already  past. 

The  prophet  then  continues  in  the  language  of  prediction. 
Vers.  16,  17.  "  They  that  see  thee  look,  considering  thee,  look  at 
thee  thoughtfully :  Is  this  the  man  that  set  the  earth  trembling, 
and  kingdoms  shaking  ?  that  made  the  world  a  ivilderness,  and 
destroyed  its  cities,  and  did  not  release  its  prisoners  (to  their) 
home?"  The  scene  is  no  longer  in  Hades  (Knobel,  TJmbreit). 
Those  who  are  speaking  thus  have  no  longer  the  Chaldean 
before  them  as  a  mere  shade,  but  as  an  unburied  corpse  that 
has  fallen  into  corruption.  As  tebel  is  feminine,  the  suffixes  in 
ver.  17  must  refer,  according  to  a  construct-to  ad  sensumt  to  the 


314  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

world  as  changed  into  a  wilderness  (midbdr).  Pdthach,  to  open, 
namely  locks  and  fetters  ;  here,  with  baithdh,  it  is  equivalent 
to  releasing  or  letting  go  (syn.  shilleach,  Jer.  1.  33).  By  the 
"  prisoners"  the  Jewish  exiles  are  principally  intended;  and  it 
was  their  release  that  had  never  entered  the  mind  of  the  king 
of  Babylon. 

The  prophet,  whose  own  words  now  follow  the  words  of 
the  spectators,  proceeds  to  describe  the  state  in  which  the  tyrant 
lies,  and  which  calls  for  such  serious  reflections.  Vers.  18,  19. 
"All  the  kings  of  the  nations,  they  are  all  interred  in  honour,  every 
one  in  his  house  :  but  thou  art  cast  away  far  from  thy  sepulchre 
like  a  shoot  hurled  away,  clothed  with  slain,  with  those  pierced 
through  with  the  sword,  those  that  go  down  to  the  stones  of  the 
pit;  like  a  carcase  trodden  under  feet"  Every  other  king  was 
laid  out  after  his  death  "  in  his  house"  (b'betho),  i.e.  within 
the  limits  of  his  own  palace ;  but  the  Chaldean  lay  far  away 
from  the  sepulchre  that  was  apparently  intended  for  him.  The 
f£  in  Tl^p  signifies  procul  ab7  as  in  Num.  xv.  24,  Prov.  xx.  3. 
He  lies  there  like  netzer  nitlidb,  i.e.  like  a  branch  torn  off  from 
the  tree,  that  has  withered  and  become  offensive,  or  rather  (as 
netzer  does  not  mean  a  branch,  but  a  shoot)  like  a  side-shoot 
that  has  been  cut  off  the  tree  and  thrown  away  with  disgust 
as  ugly,  useless,  and  only  a  hindrance  to  the  regular  growth  of 
the  tree  (possibly  also  an  excrescence)  ;  nitJidb  (cast  away)  is 
a  pregnant  expression,  signifying  "  cast  away  with  disgust." 
The  place,  where  he  lies  is  the  field  of  battle.  A  vaticinium 
post  eventum  would  be  expressed  differently  from  this,  as  Luz- 
zatto  has  correctly  observed.  For  what  Seder  '  Olam  says — 
namely,  that  Nebuchadnezzar's  corpse  was  taken  out  of  ths 
grave  by  Evilmerodach,  or  as  Abravanel  relates  it,  by  the  Medo- 
Persian  conquerors — is  merely  a  conclusion  drawn  from  the 
passage  before  us,  and  would  lead  us  to  expect  HWfin  rather 
than  rGj?B>n.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference,  so  far  as  the  truth 
of  the  prophecy  is  concerned,  whether  it  was  fulfilled  in  the 
person  of  Nebuchadnezzar  I.,  or  of  that  second  Nebuchad 
nezzar  who  gave  himself  out  as  a  son  of  Nabonet,  and  tried 
to  restore  the  freedom  of  Babylon.  The  scene  which  passes 
before  the  mind  of  the  prophet  is  the  field  of  battle.  To  clear 
this  they  make  a  hole  and  throw  stones  (abne-bor9  stones  of  the 
pit)  on  the  top,  without  taking  the  trouble  to  shovel  in  the 


CHAP.  XIV.  20,  21.  315 

earth  ;  but  the  king  of  Babylon  is  left  lying  there,  like  a 
carcase  that  is  trampled  under  foot,  and  deserves  nothing  better 
than  to  be  trampled  under  foot  (mubds,  part.  hoph.  of  bus, 
conculcare).  They  do  not  even  think  him  worth  throwing  into 
a  hole  along  with  the  rest  of  the  corpses. — Ver.  20.  "  Thou 
art  not  united  with  them  in  burial,  for  thou  hast  destroyed  thy 
land,  murdered  thy  people  :  the  seed  of  evil-doers  will  not  be 
named  for  ever"  In  this  way  is  vengeance  taken  for  the 
tyrannical  manner  in  which  he  has  oppressed  and  exhausted  his 
land,  making  his  people  the  involuntary  instruments  of  his  thirst 
for  conquest,  and  sacrificing  them  as  victims  to  that  thirst. 
For  this  reason  he  does  not  meet  with  the  same  compassion  as 
those  who  have  been  compelled  to  sacrifice  their  lives  in  his 
service.  And  it  is  not  only  all  over  for  ever  with  him,  but  it 
is  so  with  his  dynasty  also.  The  prophet,  the  messenger  of  the 
penal  justice  of  God,  and  the  mouthpiece  of  that  Omnipotence 
which  regulates  the  course  of  history,  commands  this. — Ver. 
21.  "  Prepare  a  slaughter-house  for  his  sons,  because  of  the  ini 
quity  of  their  fathers  !  They  shall  not  rise  and  conquer  lands, 
and  fill  the  face  of  the  earth  with  cities"  The  exhortation 
is  addressed  to  the  Medes,  if  the  prophet  had  any  particular 
persons  in  his  mind  at  all.  After  the  nocturnal  storming  of 
Babylon  by  the  Medes,  the  new  Babylonian  kingdom  and  royal 
house  which  had  been  established  by  Nabopolassar  vanished 
entirely  from  history.  The  last  shoot  of  the  royal  family 
of  Nabopolassar  was  slain  as  a  child  of  conspirators.  The 
second  Nebuchadnezzar  deceived  the  people  (as  Darius  says  in 
the  great  inscription  of  Behistan),  declaring,  "  I  am  Nabukud- 
rac'ara  the  son  of  Nabunita."  ?2  (used  poetically  for  />N,  like 
^3  in  ch.  xiv.  6  for  N^>)  expresses  a  negative  wish  (as  pen  does 
a  negative  intention)  :  Let  no  Babylonian  kingdom  ever  arise 
again  !  Hitzig  corrects  D-ny  into  D^JJ  (heaps  of  ruins),  Ewald 
into  &T"?¥  (tyrants),  Knobel  into  DTJ,  and  Meier  into  D^iy, 
which  are  said  to  signify  conflicts,  whilst  Maurer  will  not  take 
D'"]y  in  the  sense  of  cities,  but  of  enemies.  But  there  is  no 
necessity  for  this  at  all.  Nimrod,  the  first  founder  of  a  Baby- 
lonio-Assyrian  kingdom,  built  cities  to  strengthen  his  monarchy. 
The  king  of  Asshur  built  cities  for  the  Medes,  for  the  purpose 
of  keeping  them  better  in  check.  And  it  is  to  this  building  of 
cities,  as  a  support  to  despotism,  that  the  prophet  here  refers. 


316  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Thus  far  the  prophet  has  spoken  in  the  name  of  God. 
But  the  prophecy  closes  with  a  word  of  God  Himself,  spoken 
through  the  prophet. — Vers.  22,  23.  "And  Twill  rise  up  against 
them,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  and  root  out  in  Babel  name  and 
remnant,  sprout  and  shoot,  saith  Jehovah.  And  make  it  the  pos 
session  of  hedgehogs  and  marshes  of  water,  and  sweep  it  away 
with  the  besom  of  destruction,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts."  IXK^  DS? 
and  13JJ  r?  are  two  pairs  of  alliterative  proverbial  words,  and 
are  used  to  signify  "the  whole,  without  exception"  (compare  the 
Arabic  expression  "Kiesel  und Kies"  " flint  and  pebble,"  in  the 
sense  of  "  altogether :"  Noldecke,  Poesie  der  alien  Araber,  p. 
162).  Jehovah  rises  against  the  descendants  of  the  king  of 
Babylon,  and  exterminates  Babylon  utterly,  root  and  branch. 
The  destructive  forces,  which  Babylon  has  hitherto  been  able 
to  control  by  raising  artificial  defences,  are  now  let  loose  ;  and 
the  Euphrates,  left  without  a  dam,  lays  the  whole  region  under 
water.  Hedgehogs  now  take  the  place  of  men,  and  marshes 
the  place  of  palaces.  The  kippod  occurs  in  ch.  xxxiv.  11  and 
Zeph.  ii.  14,  in  the  company  of  birds ;  but  according  to  the 
derivation  of  the  word  and  the  dialects,  it  denotes  the  hedgehog, 
which  possesses  the  power  of  rolling  itself  up  (LXX.  eprjuov 
wore  Kcn-okKelv  e'^tWu?),  and  which,  although  it  can  neither  fly, 
nor  climb  with  any  peculiar  facility,  on  account  of  its  mode  of 
walking,  could  easily  get  upon  the  knob  of  a  pillar  that  had 
been  thrown  down  (Zeph.  ii.  14).  The  concluding  threat 
makes  the  mode  of  Babel's  origin  the  omen  of  its  end:  the 
city  of  BVB,  i.e.  Babylon,  which  had  been  built  for  the  most 
part  of  clay  or  brick-earth,  would  be  strangely  swept  away. 
The  pilpel  NC3KO  (or  #®X®,  as  Kimchi  conjugates  it  in  Michlol 
150a&,  and  in  accordance  with  which  some  codices  and  early 
editions  read  fvnKBXEft  with  double  zere)  belongs  to  the  cognate 
root  which  is  mentioned  at  Ps.  xlii.  5,  with  an  opening  i,  D,  D 
(cf.  ch.  xxvii.  8),  and  which  signifies  to  drive  or  thrust  away. 
NENtpE  is  that  with  which  anything  is  driven  out  or  swept  away, 
viz.  a  broom.  Jehovah  treats  Babylon  as  rubbish,  and  sweeps 
it  away,  destruction  (hashmed:  an  inf.  absol.  used  as  a  substan 
tive)  serving  Him  as  a  broom. 

There  now  follows,  apparently  out  of  all  connection,  another 
prophecy  against  Asshur.  It  is  introduced  here  quite  abruptly, 
like  a  fragment ;  and  it  is  an  enigma  how  it  got  here,  and  what 


CHAP.  XIV.  24-27.  317 

it  means  liere,  though  not  an  enigma  without  solution.  This 
short  Assyrian  passage  reads  as  follows.  Yers.  24-27.  "  Jehovah 
of  hosts  hath  sworn,  saying.  Surely  as  I  have  thought,  so  shall  it 
come  to  pass ;  and  as  I  have  purposed,  that  takes  place  •  to  break 
Asshur  to  pieces  in  my  land,  and  upon  my  mountain  will  I  tread 
him  under  foot :  then  his  yoke  departs  from  them,  and  his  burden 
will  depart  from  their  neck.  This  is  the  purpose  that  is  purposed 
over  the  whole  earth ;  and  this  the  hand  that  is  stretched  out  over 
all  nations.  For  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  purposed,  and  who  could 
bring  it  to  nought?  And  His  hand  that  is  stretched  out,  who 
can  turn  it  back?"  It  is  evidently  a  totally  different  judicial 
catastrophe  which  is  predicted  here,  inasmuch  as  the  world- 
power  upon  which  it  falls  is  not  called  Babel  or  Chasdim,  but 
Asshur,  which  cannot  possibly  be  taken  as  a  name  for  Babylon 
(Abravanel,  Lowth,  etc.).  Babylon  is  destroyed  by  the  Medes, 
whereas  Asshur  falls  to  ruin  in  the  mountain-land  of  Jehovah, 
which  it  is  seeking  to  subjugate, — a  prediction  which  was  lite 
rally  fulfilled.  And  only  when  this  had  taken  place  did  a 
fitting  occasion  present  itself  for  a  prophecy  against  Babel,  the 
heiress  of  the  ruined  Assyrian  power.  Consequently  the  two 
prophecies  against  Babel  and  Asshur  form  a  hysteron-proteron 
as  they  stand  here.  The  thought  which  occasioned  this  arrange 
ment,  and  which  it  is  intended  to  set  forth,  is  expressed  by 
Jeremiah  in  Jer.  1.  18,  19,  "  Behold,  I  will  punish  the  king  of 
Babylon  and  his  land,  as  I  have  punished  the  king  of  Assyria." 
The  one  event  was  a  pledge  of  the  other.  At  a  time  when  the 
prophecy  against  Assyria  had  actually  been  fulfilled,  the  prophet 
attached  it  to  the  still  unfulfilled  prophecy  against  Babylon,  to 
give  a  pledge  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  latter.  This  was  the 
pedestal  upon  which  the  Massdh  Babel  was  raised.  And  it  was 
doubly  suited  for  this,  on  account  of  its  purely  epilogical  tone 
from  ver.  26  onwards. 


THE  ORACLE  CONCERNING  PHILTSTIA. — CHAP.  XIV.  28-32. 

Among  the  punishments  enumerated  in  2  Chron.  xxviii. 
5-21  as  falling  upon  king  Ahaz,  we  find  the  following,  viz. 
that  the  Philistines  invaded  the  low  country  (shephelah)  and 
the  south  land  (negeb),  took  several  cities,  six  of  which  are 
mentioned  by  name,  and  settled  there.  This  offensive  move* 


318  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

rnent  of  the  Philistines  against  the  government  of  Judgea  \vas 
probably  occasioned  either  by  the  oppression  of  Judah  on  the 
part  of  Syria  and  Ephraim,  or  by  the  permanent  crippling  of 
Judah  through  the  Syro-Ephraimitish  war.  In  either  case,  the 
fact  itself  is  quite  sufficient  to  throw  light  upon  the  threatening 
prophecy  which  follows. 

This  is  one  of  the  prophecies  the  date  of  which  is  fixed  in 
ver.  28.  "  In  the  year  of  the  death  of  king  Aliaz  the  following 
oracle  was  uttered"  "The  year  of  the  death  of  king  Ahaz'' 
was  (as  in  ch.  vi.  1)  the  year  in  which  the  death  of  Ahaz  was 
to  take  place.  In  that  year  the  Philistines  still  remained  in 
those  possessions,  their  hold  of  which  was  so  shameful  to  Judah, 
and  had  not  yet  met  with  any  humiliating  retribution.  But 
this  year  was  the  turning-point ;  for  Hezekiah,  the  successor  of 
Ahaz,  not  only  recovered  the  cities  that  they  had  taken,  but 
thoroughly  defeated  them  in  their  own  land  (2  Kings  xviii.  8). 

It  was  therefore  in  a  most  eventful  and  decisive  year  that 
Isaiah  began  to  prophesy  as  follows.  Yer.  29.  "  Rejoice  not  so 
fully,  0  Philistia,  that  the  rodivhich  smote  thee  is  broken  to  pieces; 
for  out  of  the  serpents  root  comes  forth  a  basilisk,  and  its  fruit  is 
a  flying  dragon."  Shebet  maccek,  "  the  rod  which  smote  thee  " 
(not  "  of  him  that  smote  thee,"  which  is  not  so  appropriate),  is 
the  Davidic  sceptre,  which  had  formerly  kept  the  Philistines  in 
subjection  under  David  and  Solomon,  and  again  in  more  recent 
times  since  the  reign  of  Uzziah.  This  sceptre  was  now  broken 
to  pieces,  for  the  Davidic  kingdom  had  been  brought  down  by 
the  Syro-Epraimitish  war,  and  had  not  been  able  to  recover 
itself;  and  so  far  as  its  power  over  the  surrounding  nations  was 
concerned,  it  had  completely  fallen  to  pieces.  .  Philistia  was 
thoroughly  filled  with  joy  in  consequence,  but  this  joy  was  all 
over  now.  The  power  from  which  Philistia  had  escaped  was  a 
common  snake  (iidchdsli),  which  had  been  either  cut  to  pieces, 
or  had  died  out  down  to  the  very  roots.  But  out  of  this  root, 
i.e.  out  of  the  house  of  David,  which  had  been  reduced  to  the 
humble  condition  of  its  tribal  house,  there  was  coming  forth  a 
zepha',  a  basilisk  (regulus,  as  Jerome  and  other  early  translators 
render  it :  see  at  ch.  xi.  8) ;  and  this  basilisk,  which  is  dangerous 
and  even  fatal  in  itself,  as  soon  as  it  had  reached  maturity, 
would  bring  forth  a  winged  dragon  as  its  fruit.  The  basilisk 
is  Hezekiah,  and  the  flying  dragon  is  the  Messiah  (this  is  the 


CHAP.  XIV.  30,  31.  319 

explanation  given  by  the  Targum) ;  or,  what  is  the  same  thing, 
the  former  is  the  Davidic  government  of  the  immediate  future, 
the  latter  the  Davidic  government  of  the  ultimate  future.  The 
figure  may  appear  an  inappropriate  one,  because  the  serpent  is 
a  symbol  of  evil ;  but  it  is  not  a  symbol  of  evil  only,  but  of  a 
curse  also,  and  a  curse  is  the  energetic  expression  of  the  penal 
justice  of  God.  And  it  is  as  the  executor  of  such  a  curse  in 
the  form  of  a  judgment  of  God  upon  Philistia  that  the  Davidic 
king  is  here  described  in  a  threefold  climax  as  a  snake  or  serpent. 
The  selection  of  this  figure  may  possibly  have  also  been  sug 
gested  by  Gen.  xlix.  17 ;  for  the  saying  of  Jacob  concerning 
Dan  was  fulfilled  in  Samson,  the  sworn  foe  of  the  Philistines. 

The  coming  Davidic  king  is  peace  for  Israel,  but  for  Phi 
listia  death.  Yer.  30.  "A  nd  the  poorest  of  the  poor  will  feed, 
and  needy  ones  lie  down  in  peace;  and  I  kill  thy  root  through 
hunger,  and  he  slays  thy  remnant"  "  The  poorest  of  the  poor  :" 
b'core  dallim  is  an  intensified  expression  for  lene  dallim,  the 
latter  signifying  such  as  belong  to  the  family  of  the  poor,  the 
former  (cf.  Job  xviii.  13,  mors  dirissima)  such  as  hold  the 
foremost  rank  in  such  a  family, — a  description  of  Israel,  which, 
although  at  present  deeply,  very  deeply,  repressed  and  threat 
ened  on  every  side,  would  then  enjoy  its  land  in  quietness  and 
peace  (Zeph.  iii.  12,  13).  In  this  sense  yn}  is  used  absolutely ; 
and  there  is  no  necessity  for  Hupf eld's  conjecture  (Ps.  ii.  258), 
that  we  should  read  ^n  (in  my  pastures).  Israel  rises  again, 
but  Philistia  perishes  even  to  a  root  and  remnant ;  and  the  latter 
again  falls  a  victim  on  the  one  hand  to  the  judgment  of  God 
(famine),  and  on  the  other  to  the  punishment  inflicted  by  the 
house  of  David.  The  change  of  persons  in  ver.  306  is  no 
synallage;  but  the  subject  to  yaharog  (slays)  is  the  basilisk,  the 
father  of  the  flying  dragon.  The  first  strophe  of  the  massah 
terminates  here.  It  consists  of  eight  lines,  each  of  the  two 
Masoretic  verses  (29,  30)  containing  four  clauses. 

The  massah  consists  of  two  strophes.  The  first  threatens 
judgment  from  Judah,  and  the  second — of  seven  lines — threatens 
judgment  from  Asshur.  Yer.  31.  "  Howl,  0  gate!  cry,  Ocity! 
0  Philistia,  thou  must  melt  entirely  away ;  for  from  the  north 
cometh  smoke,  and  there  is  no  isolated  one  among  his  hosts" 
"W,  which  is  a  masculine  everywhere  else,  is  construed  here  as 
a  feminine,  possibly  in  order  that  the  two  imperfects  may  har- 


320  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

monize ;  for  there  is  nothing  to  recommend  Luzzatto's  sugges 
tion,  that  ~\yw  should  be  taken  as  an  accusative.  The  strong 
gates  of  the  Philistian  cities  (Ashdod  and  Gaza),  of  world-wide 
renown,  and  the  cities  themselves,  shall  lift  up  a  cry  of  anguish  ; 
and  Philistia,  which  has  hitherto  been  full  of  joy,  shall  melt 
away  in  the  heat  of  alarm  (ch.  xiii.  7,  ndmog,  inf.  abs.  nipli. ; 
on  the  form  itself,  compare  ch.  lix.  13)  :  for  from  the  north 
there  comes  a  singing  and  burning  fire,  which  proclaims  its 
coming  afar  off  by  the  smoke  which  it  produces;  in  other 
words,  an  all-destroying  army,  out  of  whose  ranks  not  one  falls 
away  from  weariness  or  self-will  (cf.  ch.  v.  27),  that  is  to  say, 
an  army  without  a  gap,  animated  throughout  with  one  common 
desire.  ("Wto,  after  the  form  Strto,  the  mass  of  people  assembled 
at  an  appointed  place,  or  moed,  Josh.  viii.  14,  1  Sam.  xx.  35, 
and  for  an  appointed  end.) 

To  understand  ver.  32,  which  follows  here,  nothing  more  is 
needed  than  a  few  simple  parenthetical  thoughts,  which  natu 
rally  suggest  themselves.  This  one  desire  was  the  thirst  for 
conquest,  and  such  a  desire  could  not  possibly  have  only  the 
small  strip  of  Philistian  coast  for  its  object ;  but  the  conquest  of 
this  was  intended  as  the  means  of  securing  possession  of  other 
countries  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left.  The  question 
arose,  therefore,  How  would  Judah  fare  with  the  fire  which  was 
rolling  towards  it  from  the  north  ?  For  the  very  fact  that  the 
prophet  of  Judah  was  threatening  Philistia  with  this  fire,  pre 
supposed  that  Judah  itself  would  not  be  consumed  by  it. 

And  this  is  just  what  is  expressed  in  ver.  32  :  "  And  what 
answer  do  the  messengers  of  the  nations  bring  ?  That  Jehovah 
hath  founded  Zion,  and  that  the  afflicted  of  His  people  are  hidden 
therein"  "  The  messengers  of  the  nations "  (maleace  got)  : 
goi  is  to  be  taken  in  a  distributive  sense,  and  the  messengers  to 
be  regarded  either  as  individuals  who  have  escaped  from  the 
Assyrian  army,  which  was  formed  of  contingents  from  many 
nations,  or  else  (as  we  should  expect  pelite  in  that  case,  instead 
of  maPace)  messengers  from  the  neighbouring  nations,  who 
were  sent  to  Jerusalem  after  the  Assyrian  army  had  perished 
in  front  of  the  city,  to  ascertain  how  the  latter  had  fared.  And 
they  all  reply  as  if  with  one  mouth  (yaaneh)  :  Zion  has  stood 
unshaken,  protected  by  its  God  ;  and  the  people  of  this  God,  the 
poor  and  despised  congregation  of  Jehovah  (cf.  Zech.  xi.  7), 


CHAP.  XV.  XVL  321 

ftre,  and  know  that  they  are,  concealed  in  Zion.  The  prophecy 
is  intentionally  oracular.  Prophecy  does  not  adopt  the  same 
tone  to  the  nations  as  to  Israel.  Its  language  to  the  former  is 
dictatorially  brief,  elevated  with  strong  self-consciousness,  ex 
pressed  in  lofty  poetic  strains,  and  variously  coloured,  according 
to  the  peculiarity  of  the  nation  to  which  the  oracle  refers.  The 
following  prophecy  relating  to  Moab  shows  us  very  clearly,  that 
in  the  prophet's  view  the  judgment  executed  by  Asshur  upon 
Philistia  would  prepare  the  way  for  the  subjugation  of  Philistia 
by  the  sceptre  of  David.  By  the  wreck  of  the  Assyrian  world- 
power  upon  Jerusalem,  the  house  of  David  would  recover  its  old 
supremacy  over  the  nations  round  about.  And  this  really  was 
the  case.  But  the  fulfilment  was  not  exhaustive.  Jeremiah 
therefore  took  up  the  prophecy  of  his  predecessor  again  at  the 
time  of  the  Chaldean  judgment  upon  the  nations  (Jer.  xlvii.), 
but  only  the  second  strophe.  The  Messianic  element  of  the 
first  was  continued  by  Zechariah  (Zech.  ix.). 

THE  ORACLE  CONCERNING  MOAB. — CHAP.  XV.  XVI. 

So  far  as  the  surrounding  nations  were  concerned,  the 
monarchy  of  Israel  commenced  with  victory  and  glory.  Saul 
punished  them  all  severely  for  their  previous  offences  against 
Israel  (1  Sam.  xiv.  47),  and  the  Moabites  along  with  the  rest. 
The  latter  were  completely  subdued  by  David  (2  Sam.  viii.  2). 
After  the  division  of  the  kingdom,  the  northern  kingdom  took 
possession  of  Moab.  The  Moabites  paid  tribute  from  their 
flocks  to  Samaria.  But  when  Ahab  died,  Mesha  the  king  of 
Moab  refused  this  tribute  (2  Kings  i.  1,  iii.  4  sqq.).  Ahaziah 
of  Israel  let  this  refusal  pass.  In  the  meantime,  the  Moabites 
formed  an  alliance  with  other  nations,  and  invaded  Judah.  But 
the  allies  destroyed  one  another,  and  Jehoshaphat  celebrated  in 
the  valley  of  Berachah  the  victory  wrhich  he  had  gained  without 
a  battle,  and  which  is  commemorated  in  several  psalms.  And 
when  Jehoram  the  king  of  Israel  attempted  to  subjugate  Moab 
again,  Jehoshaphat  made  common  cause  with  him.  And  the 
Moabites  were  defeated ;  but  the  fortress,  the  Moabitish  Kir, 
which  was  situated  upon  a  steep  and  lofty  chalk  rock,  remained 
standing  still.  The  interminable  contests  of  the  northern 
kingdom  with  the  Syrians  rendered  it  quite  impossible  to  main- 
VOL.  I.  x 


322  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tain  either  Moab  itself,  or  the  land  to  the  east  of  the  Jordan  in 
general.     During  the  reign  of  Jehu,  the  latter,  in  all  its  length 
and  breadth,  even  as  far  south  as  the  Arnon,  was  taken  by  the 
Syrians  (2  Kings  x.  32,  33).     The  tribes  that  were  now  no 
longer  tributary  to  the  kingdom  of  Israel  oppressed  the  Israelitish 
population,  and  avenged  upon  the  crippled  kingdom  the  loss  of 
their  independence.     Jeroboam  II.,  as  the  prophet  Jonah  had 
foretold  (2  Kings  xiv.  25),  was  the  first  to  reconquer  the  terri 
tory  of  Israel  from  Hamath  to  the  Dead  Sea.     It  is  not  indeed 
expressly  stated  that  he  subjugated  Moab  again;  but  as  Moabitish 
bands  had  disturbed  even  the  country  on  this  side  under  his 
predecessor  Joash  (2  Kings  xiii.  20),  it  may  be  supposed  that 
he   also    attempted   to   keep    Moab   within   bounds.       If   the 
Moabites,   as  is  very  probable,   had  extended  their  territory 
northwards  beyond  the  Arnon,  the  war  with  Moab  was  inevi 
table.     Moreover,  under  Jeroboam  n.  on   the  one  hand,  and 
Uzziah-Jotham    on   the    other,    we   read   nothing   about    the 
Moabites  rising ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  such  notices  as  those 
contained  in  1  Chron.  v.  17  and  2  Chron.  xxvi.  10,  show  that 
they  kept  themselves  quiet.     But  the  application  made  by  Ahaz 
to  Assyria  called  up  the  hostility  of  Moab  and  the  neighbouring 
nations  again.     Tiglath-pileser  repeated  what  the  Syrians  had 
done  before.     He  took  possession  of  the  northern  part  of  the 
land  on  this  side,  and  the  whole  of  the  land  on  the  other  side, 
and  depopulated  them.     This  furnished  an  opportunity  for  the 
Moabites  to  re-establish  themselves  in  their  original  settlements 
to  the  north  of  the  Arnon.     And  this  was  how  it  stood  at  the 
time  when  Isaiah  prophesied.      The  calamity  which  befel  them 
came  from  the  north,  and  therefore  fell  chiefly  and  primarily 
upon  the  country  to  the  north  of  the  Arnon,  which  the  Moabites 
had  taken  possession  of  but  a  short  time  before,  after  it  had 
been  peopled  for  a  long  time  by  the  tribes  of  Reuben  and  Gad. 
There  is  no  other  prophecy  in  the  book  of  Isaiah  in  which 
the  heart  of  the  prophet  is  so  painfully  affected  by  what  his 
mind  sees,  and  his  mouth  is  obliged  to  prophesy.     All  that  he 
predicts  evokes  his  deepest  sympathy,  just  as  if  he  himself 
belonged  to  the  unfortunate  nation  to  which  he  is  called  to  be 
a  messenger  of  woe.      He  commences  with  an  utterance  of 
amazement.     Ver.  1.  "  Oracle  concerning  Moab!  for  in  anight 
'Ar-Moab  is  laid  waste,  destroyed ;  for  in  a  night  Kir-Moab  if 


CHAP.  XV.  L  323 

laid  waste,  destroyed."  The  ci  (for)  is  explanatory  in  both 
instances,  and  not  simply  affirmative,  or,  as  Knobel  maintains, 
recitative,  and  therefore  unmeaning.  The  prophet  justifies 
the  peculiar  heading  to  his  prophecy  from  the  horrible  vision 
given  him  to  see,  and  takes  us  at  once  into  the  very  heart  of 
the  vision,  as  in  ch.  xviL  1,  xxiii.  1.  *  AT  Moab  (in  which  ' AT 
is  Moabitish  for  rlr ;  cf.  Jer.  xlix.  3,  where  we  find  * Ai  written 
instead  of  ' Ar,  which  we  should  naturally  expect)  is  the  name 
of  the  capital  of  Moab  (Grecized,  Areopolis),  which  was  situated 
to  the  south  of  the  Arnon,  at  present  a  large  field  of  ruins,  with 
a  village  of  the  name  of  Rabba.  Kir  Moab  (in  which  Kir 
is  the  Moabitish  for  Kiryali)  was  the  chief  fortress  of  Moab, 
which  was  situated  to  the  south-east  of  A  r,  the  present  Kerek, 
where  there  is  still  a  town  with  a  fortification  upon  a  rock, 
which  can  be  seen  from  Jerusalem  with  a  telescope  on  a  clear 
day,  and  forms  so  thoroughly  one  mass  with  the  rock,  that  in 
1834,  when  Ibrahim  Pasha  resolved  to  pull  it  down,  he  was 
obliged  to  relinquish  the  project.  The  identity  of  Kir  and 
Kerek  is  unquestionable,  but  that  of  Ar  and  Rabba  has  been 
disputed  ;  and  on  the  ground  of  Num.  xxii.  36,  where  it  seems 
to  be  placed  nearer  the  Arnon,  it  has  been  transposed  to  the 
ruins  on  the  pasture  land  at  the  confluence  of  the  Lejum  and 
Mujib  (=  "the  city  that  is  by  the  river"  in  Deut.  ii.  36  and 
Josh.  xiii.  9, 16:  see  Com.  on  Num.  xxi.  15), — a  conjecture  which 
has  this  against  it,  that  the  name  Areopolis,  which  has  been 
formed  from  Ar,  is  attached  to  the  "  metropolis  civitas  Ar? 
which  was  called  Rabba  as  the  metropolis,  and  of  which  Jerome 
relates  (on  the  passage  before  us),  as  an  event  associated  with 
his  own  childhood,  that  it  was  then  destroyed  by  an  earthquake 
(probably  in  342).  The  two  names  of  the  cities  are  used  as 
masculine  here,  like  Dammesek  in  ch.  xvii.  1,  and  TZOT  in  ch. 
xxiii.  1,  though  it  cannot  therefore  be  said,  as  at  Mic.  v.  1, 
that  the  city  stands  for  the  inhabitants  (Ges.  Lelirgebaude,  p. 
469).  "In  a  night"  (>v  absolute,  as  in  ch.  xxi.  J 1,  not  con 
struct,  which  would  give  an  illogical  assertion,  as  shuddad  and 
nidmdh  are  almost  coincident,  so  far  as  the  sense  is  concerned) 
the  two  pillars  of  the  strength  of  Moab  are  overthrown.  In 
the  space  of  a  night,  and  therefore  very  suddenly  (ch.  xvii.  14), 
Moab  is  destroyed.  The  prophet  repeats  twice  what  it  would 
have  been  quite  sufficient  to  say  once,  just  as  if  he  had  been 


324  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

condemned  to  keep  his  eye  fixed  upon  the  awful  spectacle  (on 
the  asyndeton,  see  at  ch.  xxxiii.  9  ;  and  on  the  anadiplosis, 
ver.  8,  ch.  viii.  "9,  xxi.  11-,  xvii.  12,  13).  His  first  sensation  is 
that  of  horror. 

But  just  as  horror,  when  once  it  begins  to  reflect,  is  dissolved 
in  tears,  the  thunder-claps  in  ver.  1  are  followed  by  universal 
weeping  and  lamentation.  Vers.  2-4.  "  They  go  up  to  the 
temple-house  and  Dibon,  up  to  the  heights  to  tveep :  upon  Nebo 
and  upon  Medebah  of  Moab  there  is  weeping :  on  all  heads  bald 
ness,  every  beard  is  mutilated.  In  the  markets  of  Moab  they  gird 
themselves  with  sackcloth ;  on  the  roofs  of  ilie  land,  and  in  its 
streets,  everything  wailf,  melting  into  tears.  Heshbon  cries,  and 
'Eldle ;  even  to  Jahaz  they  hear  their  howling ;  even  the  armed 
men  of  Moab  break  out  into  mourning  thereat ;  its  soul  trembles 
within  it"  The  people  (the  subject  to  H7V)  ascend  the  mountain 
with  the  temple  of  Chemosh,  the  central  sanctuary  of  the  land. 
This  temple  is  called  hab-bailh,  though  not  that  there  was  a 
Moabitish  town  or  village  with  some  such  name  as  Beth-Dib- 
lathairn  (Jer.  xlviii.  25),  as  Knobel  supposes.  Dibon,  which 
lay  above  the  Arnon  (Wady  Mitjib),  like  all  the  places  men 
tioned  in  vers.  2—4,  at  present  a  heap  of  ruins,  a  short  hour 
to  the  north  of  the  central  Arnon,  in  the  splendid  plain  of  el- 
Chura,  had  consecrated  heights  in  the  neighbourhood  (cf.  Josh. 
xiii.  17;  Num.  xxii.  41),  and  therefore  would  turn  to  them. 
Moab  mourns  upon  Nebo  and  Medebah;  5vJJ,  for  which  we 
find  *fyy  in  ch.  lii.  5,  is  written  intentionally  for  a  double  pre- 
formative,  instead  of  ?v"  (compare  the  similar  forms  in  Job 
xxiv.  21,  Ps.  cxxxviiu  6,  and  Ges.  §  70,  Anm.).  ?y  is  to  be 
taken  in  a  local  sense,  as  Hendewerk,  Drechsler,  and  Knobel 
have  rendered  it.  For  Nebo  was  probably  a  place  situated 
upon  a  height  on  the  mountain  of  that  name,  towards  the  south 
east  of  Heshbon  (the  ruins  of  Nabo,  Nabau,  mentioned  in  the 
Onom.)  ;  and  Medebah  (still  a  heap  of  ruins  bearing  the  same 
name)  stood  upon  a  round  hill  about  two  hours  to  the  south 
east  of  Heshbon.  According  to  Jerome,  there  was  an  image  of 
Chemosh  in  Nebo  ;  and  among  the  ruins  of  Madeba,  Seetzen 
discovered  the  foundations  of  a  strange  temple.  There  fol 
lows  here  a  description  of  the  expressions  of  pain.  Instead  of 
the  usual  V?^,  we  read  VK'Ni  here.  And  instead  of  gedndh 
(abscissa),  Jeremiah  (xlviii.  37)  has,  according  to  his  usual 


CHAP.  XV.  5.  325 

style,  gerudh  (decurtatce),  with  the  simple  alteration  of  a  single 
letter.1  All  runs  down  with  weeping  (culloh,  written  as  in  eh. 
xvi.  7  ;  in  ch.  ix.  8,  16,  we  have  cullo  instead).  In  other  cases 
it  is  the  eyes  that  are  said  to  run  down  in  tears,  streams,  or 
water-brooks  ;  but  here,  by  a  still  bolder  metonymy,  the  whole 
man  is  said  to  flow  down  to  the  ground,  as  if  melting  in  a  stream 
of  tears.  Heshbon  and  Elale  are  still  visible  in  their  ruins, 
which  lie  only  half  an  hour  apart  upon  their  separate  hills,  and 
are  still  called  by  the  names  Husban  and  el-AL  They  were 
both  situated  upon  hills  which  commanded  an  extensive  pro 
spect.  And  there  the  cry  of  woe  created  an  echo  which  was 
audible  as  far  as  Jahaz  (Jahza),  the  city  where  the  king  of 
Heshbon  offered  battle  to  Israel  in  the  time  of  Moses  (Deut. 
ii.  32).  The  general  mourning  was  so  great,  that  even  the 
armed  men,  i.e.  the  heroes  (Jer.  xlviii.  41)  of  Moab,  were 
seized  with  despair,  and  cried  out  in  their  anguish  (the  same 
figure  as  in  ch.  xxxiii.  7).  l?'^  thereat,  namely  on  account  of 
this  universal  lamentation.  Thus  the  lamentation  was  univer 
sal,  without  exception.  Naphsho  (his  soul)  refers  to  Moab  as  a 
whole  nation.  The  soul  of  Moab  trembles  in  all  the  limbs  of 
the  national  body ;  nyv  (forming  a  play  upon  the  sound  with 
W"]T)»  an  Arabic  word,  and  in  njrn11  a  Hebrew  word  also,  signifies 
tr  enter  e,  hue  illuc  agitari, — an  explanation  which  we  prefer,  with 
Eosenmiiller  and  Gesenius,  to  the  idea  that  J^  is  a  secondary 
verb  to  JJ$n,  fat.  Jn\  i?  is  an  ethical  dative  (as  in  Ps.  cxx.  t> 
and  cxxiii.  4),  throwing  the  action  or  the  pathos  inwardly  (see 
Psychology,  p.  152).  The  heart  of  the  prophet  participates 
in  this  pain  with  which  Moab  is  agitated  throughout ;  for,  as 
Rashi  observes,  it  is  just  in  this  that  the  prophets  of  Israel 
were  distinguished  from  heathen  prophets,  such  as  Balaam  for 
example,  viz.  that  the  calamities  which  they  announced  to  the 
nations  went  to  their  own  heart  (compare  ch.  xxi.  3,  4,  with 
ch.  xxii.  4). 

The  difficult  words  in  which  the  prophet  expresses  this 
sympathy  we  render  as  follows  :  Ver  5a.  "  M\j  heart,  towards 
Moab  it  crieth  out ;  its  bolts  reached  to  Zoar,  the  three-year-old 

1  At  the  same  time,  the  Masora  on  this  passage  before  us  is  for  geru'ah 
with  Resh,  and  we  also  find  this  reading  in  Nissel,  Clodius,  Jablonsky,  and 
in  earlier  editions;  whilst  Sonc.  1486,  Veil.  1521,  and  othors,  have  (jeda'ah, 
with  Daleih. 


326  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

heifer."  The  Lamed  in  TMoab  is  the  same  both  here  and  In 
ch.  xvi.  11  as  in  ch.  xiv.  8,  9,  viz.  "  turned  toward  Moab." 
Moab,  which  was  masculine  in  ver.  4,  is  feminine  here.  We 
may  infer  from  this  that  "iyV'"iy  nnnii  is  a  statement  which 
concerns  Moab  as  a  land.  Now,  b'richim  signifies  the  bolts  in 
every  other  passage  in  which  it  occurs ;  and  it  is  possible  to 
speak  of  the  bolts  of  a  land  with  just  as  much  propriety  as  in 
Lam,  ii.  9  and  Jer.  li.  30  (cf.  Jonah  ii.  7)  of  the  bolts  of  a 
city.  And  the  statement  that  the  bolts  of  this  land  went  to 
Zoar  is  also  a  very  appropriate  one,  for  Kir  Moab  and  Zoar 
formed  the  southern  fortified  girdle  of  the  land  ;  and  Zoar,  on 
the  south-western  tongue  of  land  which  runs  into  the  Dead  Sea, 
was  the  uttermost  fortress  of  Moab,  looking  over  towards  Judali ; 
and  in  its  depressed  situation  below  the  level  of  the  sea  it 
formed,  as  it  were,  the  opposite  polo  of  Kir  Moab,  the  highest 
point  in  the  high  land  itself.  Hence  we  agree  with  Jerome, 
who  adopts  the  rendering  vectes  ejus  usque  ad  Stgor,  whereas 
all  the  modern  translators  have  taken  the  word  in  the  sense  of 
fugitives.  'Eglath  sJflishiyydh,  which  Rosenmiiller,  Knobel, 
Dreclisler,  Meier,  and  others  have  taken  quite  unnecessarily  as 
a  proper  name,  is  either  in  apposition  to  Zoar  or  to  Moab.  In 
the  former  case  it  is  a  distinguishing  epithet.  An  ox  of  the 
three  years,  or  more  literally  of  the  third  year  (cf .  meshulleslielh, 
Gen.  xv.  9),  i.e.  a  three-year-old  ox,  is  one  that  is  still  in  all  the 
freshness  and  fulness  of  its  strength,  and  that  has  not  yet  been 
exhausted  by  the  length  of  time  that  it  has  worn  the  yoke. 
The  application  of  the  term  to  the  Moabitish  nation  is  favoured 
by  Jer.  xlvi.  20,  where  Egypt  is  called  u  a  very  fair  heifer " 
('egldh  yepltQh-phiyydh),  whilst  Babylon  is  called  the  same  in 
Jer.  1.  11  (cf.  Hos.  iv.  10,  x.  11).  And  in  the  same  way, 
according  to  the  LXX.,  Vulg.,  Targum,  and  Gesenius,  Moab 
is  called  juvenca  tertii  anni,  h.  e.  indomita  jugoque  non  assueta, 
as  a  nation  that  was  still  in  the  vigour  of  youth,  and  if  it  had 
hitherto  borne  the  yoke,  had  always  shaken  it  off  again.  But 
the  application  of  it  to  Zoar  is  favoured  (1)  by  Jer.  xlviii.  34, 
where  this  epithet  is  applied  to  another  Moabitish  city  ;  (2)  by 
the  accentuation  ;  and  (3)  by  the  fact  that  in  the  other  case  we 
should  expect  berlchd/i  (the  three-year-old  heifer,  i.e.  Moab,  is  a 
fugitive  to  Zoar:  vid.  Luzzatto).  Thus  Zoar,  the  fine,  strong, 
and  hitherto  unconquered  city,  is  now  the  destination  of  the 


CHAP.  XV.  5,  6.  327 

wildest  flight  before  the  foe  that  is  coming  from  the  north.  A 
blow  has  fallen  upon  Moab,  that  is  more  terrible  than  any  that 
has  preceded  it. 

In  a  few  co-ordinate  clauses  the  prophet  now  sets  before  us 
the  several  scenes  of  mourning  and  desolation.  Vers.  56,  6. 
"  For  the  mountain  slope  of  Luhith  they  ascend  with  weeping ; 
for  on  the  road  to  Horonayim  they  lift  up  a  cry  of  despair.  For 
the  waters  of  Nimrim  are  waste  places  from  this  time  forth :  for 
the  grass  is  dried  up,  the  vegetation  vxtsteth  away,,  the  green  is 
gone."  The  road  to  Luhith  (according  to  the  Onom.  between 
Ar-Moab  and  Zoar,  and  therefore  in  the  centre  of  Moabitis 
proper)  led  up  a  height,  and  the  road  to  Horonayim  (according 
to  Jer.  xlviii.  5)  down  a  slope.  Weeping,  they  ran  up  to  the 
mountain  city  to  hide  themselves  there  (60,  as  in  Ps.  xxiv.  3 ; 
in  Jer.  xlviii.  5  it  is  written  incorrectly  **??)•  Raising  loud 
cries  of  despair,  they  stand  in  front  of  Horonayim,  which  lay 
below,  and  was  more  exposed  to  the  enemy.  Vi$P  is  softened 
from  V^nr.  (possibly  to  increase  the  resemblance  to  an  echo),  like 
2213  from  23U3.  The  Septuagint  renders  it  very  well,  Kpair/ijv 
<7WTpifi/jLov  e^avayepovcriVj  —  an  unaccustomed  expression  of 
intense  and  ever  renewed  cries  at  the  threatening  danger  of 
utter  destruction,  and  with  the  hope  of  procuring  relief  and 
assistance  (shelter,  as  in  ch.  i.  28,  xxx.  26).  From  the  farthest 
south  the  scene  would  suddenly  be  transferred  to  the  extreme 
north  of  the  territory  of  Moab,  if  Nimrim  were  the  Nimra 
(Beth-Nimra,  Talm.  nimriii)  which  was  situated  near  to  the 
Jordan  in  Gilead,  and  therefore  farther  north  than  any  of  the 
places  previously  mentioned,  and  the  ruins  of  which  lie  a  little 
to  the  south  of  Salt,  and  are  still  called  Nimrin.  But  the 
name  itself,  which  is  derived  from  the  vicinity  of  fresh  water 
(Arab.  nemir9  nemir,  clear,  pure,  sound),  is  one  of  frequent 
occurrence ;  and  even  to  the  south  of  Moabitis  proper  there  is 
a  Wadi  Numere,  and  a  brook  called  Moyet  Numere  (two  dimi 
nutives :  "  dear  little  stream  of  Nimra"),  which  flows  through 
stony  tracks,  and  which  formerly  watered  the  country  (Burck- 
hardt,  Seetzen,  and  De  Saulcy).  In  all  probability  the  ruins 
of  Numere  by  the  side  of  this  wady  are  the  Nimrim  referred 
to  here,  and  the  waters  of  the  brook  the  "  waters  of  Nimrim" 
(ine  Nimrim}.  The  waters  that  flowed  fresh  from  the  spring 
had  been  filled  up  with  rubbish  by  the  enemy,  and  would  now 


323  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

probably  lie  waste  for  ever  (a  similar  expression  to  that  in  cli. 
xvii.  2).  He  had  gone  through  the  land  scorching  and  burning, 
so  that  all  the  vegetation  had  vanished.  On  the  miniature-like 
short  sentences,  see  ch.  xxix.  20,  xxxiii.  8,  9,  xxxii.  10;  and  on 
ITn  K?  (« it  is  riot  in  existence,"  or  "  it  has  become  not"  i.e. 
annihilated),  vid.  Ezek.  xxi.  32. 

As  Moabitis  has  thus  become  a  great  scene  of  conflagration, 
the  Moabites  cross  the  border  and  fly  to  Idumsea.  The  reason 
for  this  is  given  in  sentences  which  the  prophet  again  links  on 
to  one  another  with  the  particle  ci  (for).  Vers.  7-9.  "  There 
fore  iv hat  has  been  spared,  ivhat  has  been  gained,  and  their 
provision,  they  carry  it  over  the  willow-brook.  For  the  scream 
has  gone  the  round  in  the  territory  of  Moab ;  tJie  wailing  of  Moab 
resounds  to  Eglayim,  and  his  wailing  to  Beer-Elim.  For  the 
waters  of  Diinon  are  full  of  blood:  for  I  suspend  over  Dimon 
a  new  calamity,  over  the  escaped  of  Moab  a  lion,  and  over  the 
remnant  of  the  land."  Yithrdh  is  what  is  superfluous  or  exceeds 
the  present  need,  and  pekudddh  (lit.  a  laying  up,  depositio) 
that  which  has  been  carefully  stored ;  whilst  'dsdh,  as  the 
derivative  passage,  Jer.  xlviii.  36,  clearly  shows  (although  the 
accusative  in  the  whole  of  ver.  7  is  founded  upon  a  different 
view:  see  Rashi),  is  an  attributive  clause  (what  has  been  made, 
worked  out,  or  gained).  All  these  things  they  carry  across 
nachal  hd'ardbim,  i.e.  not  the  desert-stream,  as  Hitzig,  Maurer, 
Ewald,  and  Knobel  suppose,  since  the  plural  of  ' ardbdh  is 
'ardboth,  but  either  the  Arab  stream  (LXX.,  Saad.),  or  the 
willow-stream,  torrens  salicum  (Vulg.).  The  latter  is  more 
suitable  to  the  connection ;  and  among  the  rivers  which  flow  to 
the  south  of  the  Arnon  from  the  mountains  of  the  Moabitish 
highlands  down  to  the  Dead  Sea,  there  is  one  which  is  called 
Wadi  Sufsaf,  i.e.  willow-brook  (Tzaphtzdphdh  is  the  name  of  a 
brook  in  Hebrew  also),  viz.  the  northern  arm  of  the  Sell  el-Kerek. 
This  is  what  we  suppose  to  be  intended  here,  and  not  the  Wadi 
el-Ahsa,  although  the  latter  (probably  the  biblical  Zered1)  is 
the  boundary  river  on  the  extreme  south,  and  separates  Moab 
from  Edom  (Kerek  from  Gebal:  see  Hitter,  ErdL  xv.  1223-4). 
Wading  through  the  willow-brook,  they  carry  their  possessions 
across,  and  hurry  off  to  the  land  of  Edom,  for  their  own  land 

1  Hence  the  Targ.  n.  renders  nachal  zered  u  the  brook  of  the  willows." 
See  Buxtorf,  Lex.  cliald.  s.v.  Zerad. 


CHAP.  xvi.  i.  329 

lias  become  the  prey  of  the  foe  throughout  its  whole  extent, 
and  within  its  boundaries  the  cry  of  wailing  passes  from 
Eglayim,  on  the  south-west  of  Ar,  and  therefore  not  far  from 
the  southern  extremity  of  the  Dead  Sea  (Ezek.  xlvii.  10),  as 
far  as  Beer-Elim,  in  the  north-east  of  the  land  towards  the 
desert  (Num.  xxi.  16-18  ;  *W  must  be  supplied  :  Ewald,  §  351,  a\ 
that  is  to  say,  if  we  draw  a  diagonal  through  the  land,  from  one 
end  to  the  other.  Even  the  waters  of  Dibon,  which  are  called 
Dimon  here  to  produce  a  greater  resemblance  in  sound  to  dam, 
blood,  and  by  \vhich  we  are  probably  to  understand  the  Arnon, 
as  this  was  only  a  short  distance  off  (just  as  in  Judg.  v.  19 
the  "  waters  of  Megiddo  "  are  the  Kishon),  are  full  of  blood,1  so 
that  the  enemy  must  have  penetrated  into  the  very  heart  of 
the  land  in  his  course  of  devastation  and  slaughter.  But  what 
drives  them  across  the  willow-brook  is  not  this  alone ;  it  is  as 
if  they  forebode  that  what  has  hitherto  occurred  is  not  the 
worst  or  the  last.  Jehovah  suspends  (shith,  as  in  Hos.  vi.  11) 
over  Dibon,  whose  waters  are  already  reddened  with  blood, 
nosdphdth,  something  to  be  added,  i.e.  a  still  further  judgment, 
namely  a  lion.  The  measure  of  Moab's  misfortunes  is  not  yet 
full :  after  the  northern  enemy,  a  lion  will  come  upon  those 
that  have  escaped  by  flight  or  have  been  spared  at  home  (on 
the  expression  itself,  compare  ch.  x.  20,  xxxvii.  32,  and  other 
passages).  This  lion  is  no  other  than  the  basilisk  of  the  pro 
phecy  against  Philistia,  but  with  this  difference,  that  the  basilisk 
represents  one  particular  Davidic  king,  whilst  the  lion  is  Judith 
generally,  whose  emblem  was  the  lion  from  the  time  of  Jacob's 
blessing,  in  Gen.  xlix.  9. 

But  just  because  this  lion  is  Judah  and  its  government,  the 
summons  goes  forth  to  the  Moabites,  who  have  fled  to  Edom, 
and  even  to  Sela,  i.e.  Petra  (Wady  Musa\  near  Mount  Hor  in 
Arabia  Petrsea,  to  which  it  gave  its  name,  to  turn  for  pro 
tection  to  Jerusalem.  Ch.  xvi.  1.  "  Send  a  land-rulers  tribute 
of  lambs  from  Sela  desert-wards  to  the  mountain  of  the  daughter, 
of  Zion?  This  verse  is  like  a  long-drawn  trumpet-blast.  The 
prophecy  against  Moab  takes  the  same  turn  here  as  in  ch.  xiv. 

1  DT  INpEi  with  munach  (which  also  represents  the  metTiecj)  at  the  first 
syllable  of  the  verb  (compare  ver.  4,  ^  nj?")\  with  mercka),  according  to 
Vened.  1521,  and  other  good  editions.  This  is  also  grammatically  correct. 


330  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

82,  xviii.  7,  xix.  16  sqq.,  xxiii.  18.  The  judgment  first  of  all 
produces  slavish  fear ;  and  this  is  afterwards  refined  into  loving 
attachment.  Submission  to  the  house  of  David  is  Moab's  only 
deliverance.  This  is  what  the  prophet,  weeping  with  those  that 
weep,  calls  out  to  them  in  such  long-drawn,  vehement,  and 
urgent  tones,  even  into  the  farthest  hiding-place  in  which  they 
have  concealed  themselves,  viz.  the  rocky  city  of  the  Edomites. 
The  tribute  of  lambs  which  was  due  to  the  ruling  prince  is 
called  briefly  car  moshel- eretz.  This  tribute,  which  the  holders 
of  the  pasture-land  so  rich  in  flocks  have  hitherto  sent  to 
Samaria  (2  Kings  iii.  4),  they  are  now  to  send  to  Jerusalem, 
the  a  mountain  of  the  daughter  of  Zion"  (as  in  ch.  x.  32, 
compared  with  ch.  xviii.  7),  the  way  to  which  lay  through 
"the  desert"  i.e.  first  of  all  in  a  diagonal  direction  through 
the  Arabah,  which  stretched  downwards  to  ^Elath. 

The  advice  does  not  remain  without  effect,  but  they  em 
brace  it  eagerly.  Ver.  2.  "And  the  daughters  of  Moab  will 
be  like  birds  fluttering  about,  a  scared  nest,  at  the  fords  of  the 
Arnon"  " The  daughters  of  Moab,"  like  "  the  daughters  of 
Judah,"  for  example,  in  Ps.  xlviii.  12,  are  the  inhabitants  of  the 
cities  and  villages  of  the  land  of  Moab.  They  were  already 
like  birds  soaring  about  (Prov.  xxvii.  8),  because  of  their  flight 
from  their  own  land ;  but  here,  as  we  may  see  from  the  expres 
sion  ""U^nr) . . .  nVHj  the  simile  is  intended  to  depict  the  condition 
into  which  they  would  be  thrown  by  the  prophet's  advice.  The 
figure  (cf.  ch.  x.  14)  as  well  as  the  expression  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  2) 
is  thoroughly  Isaiah's,  It  is  a  state  of  anxious  and  timid 
indecision,  resembling  the  fluttering  to  and  fro  of  birds,  that 
have  been  driven  away  from  their  nest,  and  wheel  anxiously 
round  and  round,  without  daring  to  return  to  their  old  home. 
In  this  way  the  daughters  of  Moab,  coming  out  of  their  hiding- 
places,  whether  nearer  or  more  remote,  show  themselves  at  the 
fords  of  the  Arnon,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  very  soil  of  their 
.old  home,  which  was  situated  between  the  Arnon  and  Wady 
el-Ahsa,  and  which  was  now  devastated  by  the  hand  of  a  foe. 
|iJ"|Sp  ni"iliy?p  we  should  regard  as  in  apposition  to  benoth  Moab 
(the  daughters  of  Moab),  if  mabdroth  signified  the  coast-la  ids 
(like  'ebre  in  ch.  vii.  20),  and  not,  as  it  invariably  does,  the 
fords.  It  is  locative  in  its  meaning,  and  is  so  accentuated. 

There  they  show  themselves,  on  the  spot  to  which  their  land 


CHAP.  XVI.  3-5.  331 

once  reached  before  it  passed  into  the  possession  of  Israel, — 
there j  on  its  farthest  boundary  in  the  direction  towards  Judah, 
which  was  seated  above;  and  taking  heart,  address  the  following 
petitions  to  Zion,  or  to  the  Davidic  court,  on  the  other  side. 
Yers.  3, 4a.  "  Give  counsel,  form  a  decision,  make  thy  shadow  like 
night  in  the  midst  of  noon ;  hide  the  outcasts,  do  not  betray  the 
wanderers.  Let  mine  outcasts  tarry  in  thee,  Moab ;  be  a  covert 
to  it  from  before  the  spoiler"  In  their  extremity  they  appeal 
to  Zion  for  counsel,  and  the  once  proud  but  now  thoroughly 
humbled  Moabites  place  the  decision  of  their  fate  in  the  hands 
of  the  men  of  Judah  (so  according  to  the  keri),  and  stand 
before  Zion  praying  most  earnestly  for  shelter  and  protection. 
Their  fear  of  the  enemy  is  so  great,  that  in  the  light  of  the 
noon-day  sun  they  desire  to  be  covered  with  the  protecting 
shade  of  Zion  as  with  the  blackness  of  night,  that  they  may 
not  be  seen  by  the  foe.  The  short  sentences  correspond  to  the 
anxious  urgency  of  the  prayer  (cf.  ch.  xxxiii.  8).  Pelildh 
(cf.  peliliyydh,  ch.  xxviii.  7)  is  the  decision  of  a  judge  (pdlll) ; 
just  as  in  ch.  xv.  5  shelishiyydh  is  the  age  and  standing  of 
three  years.  The  figure  of  the  shadow  is  the  same  as  in  ch. 
xxx.  2,  3,  xxxii.  2,  etc. ;  nddvd  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  xxi.  14 ; 
nidddchai  as  in  ch.  xi.  12;  sether  as  in  ch.  xxxii.  2,  and  other 
passages ;  shoded  as  in  ch.  xxxiii.  1 ;  mippene  as  in  ch.  xxi.  15. 
The  whole  is  word  for  word  Isaiah's.  There  is  no  necessity 
to  read  nidche  instead  of  nidddchai  Moab  in  ver.  4 ;  still  less  is 
ay  a  collective  termination,  as  in  ch.  xx.  4.  Nor  are  the  words 
to  be  rendered  "  my  outcasts  ...  of  Moab,"  and  the  expres 
sion  to  be  taken  as  a  syntaxis  ornata  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  6).  On  the 
contrary,  such  an  expression  is  absolutely  impossible  here,  where 
the  speaker  is  alluding  to  himself.  It  is  better  to  abide  by  the 
punctuation  as  we  have  it,  with  nidddchai  (zakeph)  closing  the 
first  clause  of  ver.  4a,  and  Moab  (tebir,  which  is  subordinate  to 
the  following  tiphchah,  and  with  this  to  athnach)  opening  the 
second  as  an  absolute  noun.  This  is  the  way  in  which  we  have 
rendered  it  above :  "  Moab  ...  be  a  shield  to  it  .  .  ."  (though 
without  taking  Idmo  as  equivalent  to  Id). 

The  question  then  arises,  By  what  means  has  Zion  awakened 
such  reverence  and  confidence  on  the  part  of  Moab?  This 
question  is  answered  in  vers.  46,  5  :  "For  the  extortioner  is  at  an 
end,  desolation  has  disappeared,  treaders  down  are  away  from 


332  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  land.  And  a  throne  is  established  by  (/race,  and  there  sits 
thereon  in  truth  in  the  tent  of  David  one  judging,  and  zealous 
for  right,  and  practised  in  righteousness"  The  imperial  world- 
power,  which  pressed  out  both  marrow  and  blood  (melz,  a  noun 
of  the  same  form  as  letz,  like  rmtz  in  Prov.  xxx.  33,  pressure), 
and  devastated  and  trod  down  everything  (ch.  xxix.  20,  x.  6, 
xxxiii.  1,  cf.  8),  is  swept  away  from  the  land  on  this  side  of  the 
Jordan ;  Jerusalem  is  not  subject  to  it  now,  but  has  come  forth 
more  gloriously  out  of  all  her  oppressions  than  ever  she  did 
before.  And  the  throne  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  has  not 
fallen  down,  but  by  the  manifestation  of  Jehovah's  grace  has 
been  newly  established.  There  no-  longer  sits  thereon  a  king 
who  dishonours  Him,  and  endangers  His  kingdom ;  but  the 
tent-roof  of  the  fallen  and  now  re-erected  hut  of  David  (Amos 
ix.  11)  is  spread  over  a  King  in  whom  the  truth  of  the  promise 
of  Jehovah  is  verified,  inasmuch  as  justice  and  righteousness 
are  realized  through  all  that  He  does.  The  Messianic  times 
must  therefore  have  dawned  (so  the  Targum  understands  it), 
since  grace  and  truth  (chesed  veemeth)  and  "  justice  and  right 
eousness"  (mishpdt  utzeddkdh)  are  the  divino-human  signs  of 
those  times,  and  as  it  were  their  kindred  genii ;  and  who  can 
here  fail  to  recal  to  mind  the  words  of  ch.  ix.  6  (cf.  xxxiii.  5,  6)  ? 
The  king  depicted  here  is  the  same  as  "  the  lion  out  of  Judah," 
threatened  against  Moab  in  ch.  xv.  9.  Only  by  thus  submitting 
to  Him  and  imploring  His  grace  will  it  escape  the  judgment. 

But  if  Moab  does  this,  and  the  law  of  the  history  of  Israel, 
which  is  that  "  a  remnant  shall  return,"  is  thus  reflected  in  the 
history  of  Moab ;  ver.  6  cannot  possibly  contain  the  answer 
which  Moab  receives  from  Zion,  as  the  more  modern  com 
mentators  assume  according  to  an  error  that  has  almost  become 
traditional.  On  the  contrary,  the  prophecy  enters  here  upon  a 
new  stage,  commencing  with  Moab's  sin,  and  depicting  the  fate 
of  Moab  in  still  more  elegiac  strains.  Ver.  6.  "  We  have  heard 
of  the  pride  of  Moab,  the  very  haughty  (pride),  his  haughtiness, 
and  his  pride,  and  his  wrath,  the  falsehood  of  his  speech"  The 
future  self-humiliation  of  Moab,  which  would  be  the  fruit  of 
its  sufferings,  is  here  contrasted  with  the  previous  self-exalta 
tion,  of  which  these  sufferings  were  the  fruit.  "  We  have 
heard,"  says  the  prophet,  identifying  himself  with  his  people. 
Boasting  pompousness  had  hitherto  been  the  distinguishing 


CHAP.  XVI.  7,  8.  333 

characteristic  of  Moab  in  relation  to  the  latter  (see  ch.  xxv.  11). 
The  heaping  up  of  words  of  the  same  verbal  stem  (cf.  ch. 
iii.  1)  is  here  intended  to  indicate  how  thoroughly  haughty  was 
their  haughtiness  (cf.  Rom.  vii.  13,  "that  sin  might  become 
exceeding  sinful"),  and  how  completely  it  had  taken  possession 
of  Moab.  It  boasted  and  was  full  of  rage  towards  Israel,  to 
which,  so  far  as  it  retained  its  consciousness  of  the  truth  of 
Jehovah,  the  talk  of  Moab  (VB  from  Tm  =  *n3,  NB3,  to  talk 
at  random)  must  necessarily  appear  as  1?~&6,  not-right,  i.e.  at 
variance  with  fact.  These  expressions  of  opinion  had  been 
heard  by  the  people  of  God,  and,  as  Jeremiah  adds  in  ch. 
xlviii.  29,  30,  by  Israel's  God  as  well. 

Therefore  the  delightful  land  is  miserably  laid  waste. 
Vers.  7,  8.  "  Therefore  will  Moab  wail  for  Moab,  everything 
will  wail:  for  the  grape-cakes  of  Kir-Hareseth  will  ye  whine, 
utterly  crushed.  For  the  fruit-fields  of  Heshbon  have  faded 
away  :  the  vine  of  Sibmah,  lords  of  the  nations  its  branches 
smote  down ;  they  reached  to  Ja*zer,  trailed  through  the  desert : 
its  branches  spread  themselves  out  wide,  crossed  over  the  sea." 
The  Lamed  in  IMoab  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  xv.  5,  and  in 
laashislie,  which  follows  here.  Kir-PIareseth  (written  Kir- 
Heres  in  ver.  11,  and  by  Jeremiah  ;  compare  2  Kings  iii.  25, 
where  the  vowel-pointing  is  apparently  false):  Heres  or  Ha- 
reseth  may  possibly  refer  to  the  glazed  tiles  or  grooved  stones. 
As  this  was  the  principal  fortress  of  Moab,  and  according  to 
ch.  xv.  1  it  had  already  been  destroyed,  'ashishe  appears  to 
mean  the  "  strong  foundations," — namely,  as  laid  bare  ;  in  other 
words,  the  "  ruins"  (cf.  Jer.  1.  15,  and  mosede  in  ch.  Iviii.  12). 
But  in  every  other  passage  in  which  the  word  occurs  it  signifies 
a  kind  of  cake ;  and  as  the  devastation  of  the  vines  of  Moab  is 
made  the  subject  of  mourning  afterwards,  it  has  the  same  mean 
ing  here  as  in  Hos.  iii.  1,  namely  raisin-cakes,  or  raisins  pressed 
into  the  form  of  cakes.  Such  cakes  as  these  may  have  been  a 
special  article  of  the  export  trade  of  Kir.  Jeremiah  has  altered 
'dshishe  into  'anshe  (ch.  xlviii.  31),  and  thus  made  men  out  of 
the  grapes.  Hdgdh  is  to  be  understood  in  accordance  with  ch. 
xxxviii.  14,  lix.  11  (viz.  of  the  cooing  of  the  dove);  'ac  (in 
good  texts  it  is  written  with  mercha,  not  with  makkeph)  accord 
ing  to  Deut.  xvi.  15.  On  the  construction  of  the  pluralet. 
shadmoth,  compare  Hab.  iii.  17.  We  have  rendered  the  clause 


334  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

commencing  with  baale  goyim  (lords  of  the  nations)  with  the 
same  amphibolism  as  we  find  in  the  Hebrew.  It  might  mean 
either  "  lords  of  the  nations  (domini  gentium)  smote  down  its 
branches"  (viz.  those  of  the  vine  of  Sibmah;1  hdlam  being  used 
as  in  ch.  xli.  7),  or  "  its  branches  smote  down  (i.e.  intoxicated) 
lords  of  the  nations"  (dominos  gentium  ;  hdlam  having  the 
same  meaning  as  in  the  undisputed  prophecy  of  Isaiah  in  ch. 
xxviii.  1).  As  the  prophet  enlarges  here  upon  the  excellence  of 
the  Moabitish  wine,  the  latter  is  probably  intended.  The  wine 
of  Sibmah  was  so  good,  that  it  was  placed  upon  the  tables  of 
monarchs,  and  so  strong  that  it  smote  down,  i.e.  inevitably 
intoxicated,  even  those  who  were  accustomed  to  good  wines. 
This  Sibmah  wine  was  cultivated,  as  the  prophet  says,  far  and 
wide  in  Moab, — northwards  as  far  as  Jazer  (between  Ramoth, 
i.e.  Salt,  and  Heshbon,  now  a  heap  of  ruins),  eastwards  into 
the  desert,  and  southwards  across  the  Dead  Sea, — a  hyper 
bolical  expression  for  close  up  to  its  shores.  Jeremiah  defines 
yam  (the  sea)  more  closely  as  yam  Jazer  (the  sea  of  Jazer ; 
vid.  Jer.  xlviii.  32),  so  that  the  hyperbole  vanishes.  But  what 
sea  can  the  sea  of  Jazer  be  1  Probably  some  celebrated  large 
pool,  like  the  pools  of  Heshbon,  in  which  the  waters  of  the 
Wady  (Nalir)  Sir,  which  takes  its  rise  close  by,  were  collected. 
Seetzen  found  some  pools  still  there.  The  "  sea"  (yarn)  in 
Solomon's  temple  shows  clearly  enough  that  the  term  sea  was 
also  commonly  applied  to  artificial  basins  of  a  large  size ;  and 
in  Damascus  the  marble  basins  of  flowing  water  in  the  halls  of 
houses  are  still  called  lahardt ;  and  the  same  term  is  applied  to 
the  public  reservoirs  in  all  the  streets  of  the  city,  which  are 
fed  by  a  network  of  aqueducts  from  the  river  Barada.  The 
expression  "break  through  the  desert"  (td'u  midbdr)  is  also  a 
bold  one,  probably  pointing  to  the  fact  that,  like  the  red  wines 
of  Hungary  at  the  present  time,  they  were  trailing  vines,  which 
did  not  require  to  be  staked,  but  ran  along  the  ground. 

The  beauties  of  nature  and  fruitfulness  of  the  land,  which 
come  into  the  possession  of  any  nation,  are  gifts  from  the 
riches  of  divine  goodness,  remnants  of  the  paradisaical  com 
mencement  of  the  history  of  man,  and  types  of  its  paradisaical 
close  ;  and  for  this  very  reason  they  are  not  matters  of  in- 

1  In  MSS.  Shibmah  is  written  with  gaya,  in  order  that  the  two  labials 
may  be  distinctly  expressed. 


CHAP.  XVI.  9.  335 

difference  to  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  And  for  the  same  reason, 
it  is  not  unworthy  of  a  prophet,  who  predicts  the  renovation  of 
nature  and  the  perfecting  of  it  into  the  beauty  of  paradise, 
to  weep  over  such  a  devastation  as  that  of  the  Moabitish 
vineyards  which  was  now  passing  before  his  mind  (cf.  ch. 
xxxii.  12,  13).  Ver.  9.  "  Therefore  I  bemoan  the  vines  of 
Sibmah  ivith  the  weeping  of  Jazer ;  I  flood  thee  with  my  tears, 
0  Heshbon  and  Elealeli,  that  Hedad  hath  fallen  upon  thy  fruit- 
harvest  and  upon  thy  vintage"  A  tetrastich,  the  Hebrew  equiva 
lent,  in  measure  and  movement,  of  a  sapphic  strophe.  The 
circumstantiality  of  the  vision  is  here  swallowed  up  again 
by  the  sympathy  of  the  prophet ;  and  the  prophecy,  which  is 
throughout  as  truly  human  as  it  is  divine,  becomes  soft  ami 
flowing  like  an  elegy.  The  prophet  mingles  his  tears  with  the 
tears  of  Jazer.  Just  as  the  latter  weeps  for  the  devastated 
vines  of  Sibmah,  so  does  he  also  weep.  The  form  "=11*1^,  trans 
posed  from  "rJ^Xrr^YiK  (cf.  Ewald,  §  253,  a,  where  it  is  explained 
as  being  a  rare  "  voluntative"  formation),  corresponds  to  the 
elegiac  tone  of  the  whole  strophe.  Heshbon  and  Elealeh,  those 
closely  connected  cities,  with  their  luxuriant  fields  (shedemoth, 
ver.  8),  are  now  lying  in  ruins  ;  and  the  prophet  waters  them 
with  tears,  because  hedad  has  fallen  upon  the  fruit-harvest  and 
vintage  of  both  the  sister  cities.  In  other  instances  the  term 
kdtzlr  is  applied  to  the  wheat-harvest;  but  here  it  is  used  in 
the  same  sense  as  bdtzlr,  to  which  it  is  preferred  on  account 
of  Isaiah's  favourite  alliteration,  viz.  with  kaytz  (compare,  for 
example,  the  alliteration  of  mistor  with  sether  in  ch.  iv.  6). 
That  it  does  not  refer  to  the  wheat-harvest  here,  but  to  the 
vintage,  which  was  nearly  coincident  with  the  fruit-harvest 
(which  is  called  kaytz,  as  in  ch.  xxviii.  4),  is  evident  from  the 
figure  suggested  in  the  word  hedad,  which  was  the  shout  raised 
by  the  pressers  of  the  grapes,  to  give  the  time  for  moving  their 
feet  when  treading  out  the  wine  (ver.  10 ;  Jer.  xxv.  30).  A 
hedad  of  this  kind  had  fallen  upon  the  rich  floors  of  Heshbon- 
Elealeh,  inasmuch  as  they  had  been  trodden  down  by  enemies, 
— a  Hedad,  and  yet  no  Hedad,  as  Jeremiah  gives  it  in  a  beautiful 
oxymoron  (ch.  xlviii.  33),  i.e.  no  joyous  shout  of  actual  grape- 
treaders. 

The  prophet,  to  whose  favourite  words  and  favourite  figures 
Carrrel  belongs,  both  as  the  name  of  a  place  and  as  the  name 


336  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  a  thing,  now  proceeds  with  his  picture,  and  is  plunged  still 
more  deeply  into  mourning.  Vers.  10,  11.  "  And  joy  is  taken 
away,  and  the  rejoicing  of  the  garden-land;  and  there  is  no 
exulting,  no  shouting  in  the  vineyards :  the  treader  treads  out  no 
wine  in  the  presses ;  I  put  an  end  to  the  Hedad.  Therefore  my 
bowels  sound  for  Moab  like  a  harp,  and  my  inside  for  Kir-Heres" 
It  is  Jehovah  who  says  "  I  put  an  end; "  and  consequently  the 
words,  "  My  bowels  sound  like  a  harp,"  or,  as  Jeremiah  ex 
presses  it  (Jer.  xlviii.  36),  like  flutes,  might  appear  to  be  expres 
sive  of  the  feelings  of  Jehovah.  And  the  Scriptures  do  not 
hesitate  to  attribute  meayim  (viscera)  to  God  (e.g.  ch.  Ixiii.  15, 
Jer.  xxxi.  20).  But  as  the  prophet  is  the  sympathizing  subject 
throughout  the  whole  of  the  prophecy,  it  is  better,  for  the  sake 
of  unity,  to  take  the  words  in  this  instance  also  as  expressing 
the  prophet's  feelings.  Just  as  the  hand  or  plectrum  touches 
the  strings  of  the  harp,  so  that  they  vibrate  with  sound ;  so  did 
the  terrible  things  that  he  had  heard  Jehovah  say  concerning 
Moab  touch  the  strings  of  his  inward  parts,  and  cause  them  to 
resound  with  notes  of  pain.  By  the  bowels,  or  rather  entrails 
(viscera),  the  heart,  liver,  and  kidneys  are  intended, — the  highest 
organs  of  the  Psyche,  and  the  sounding-board,  as  it  were,  of 
those  u  hidden  sounds  "  which  exist  in  every  man.  God  con 
versed  with  the  prophet  "  in  the  spirit ; "  but  what  passed  there 
took  the  form  of  individual  impressions  in  the  domain  of  the 
soul,  in  which  impressions  the  bodily  organs  of  the  psychical 
life  sympathetically  shared.  Thus  the  prophet  saw  in  the  spirit 
the  purpose  of  God  concerning  Moab,  in  which  he  could  not 
and  would  not  make  any  change ;  but  it  threw  his  soul  into  all 
the  restlessness  of  pain. 

The  ultimate  reason  for  this  restlessness  is,  that  Moab  does 
not  know  the  living  God.  Ver.  12.  "  And  it  will  come  to  pass, 
when  it  is  seen  that  Moab  is  weary  with  weeping  upon  the  moun 
tain  height,  and  enters  into  its  sanctuary  to  pray,  it  will  not  gain 
anything"  HXp3  ""^T?,  a  pictorial  assonance,  such  as  Isaiah 
delights  in.  ^&P?  is  transferred  from  the  Israelitish  worship 
(appearance  before  God  in  His  temple)  to  the  heathen  ;  syn 
tactically,  si  apparuerit,  etc.,  with  Vav  before  the  apodosis.  It 
would  be  with  the  Moabites  as  with  the  priests  of  Baal  in  the 
time  of  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  26  sqq.). 

The  massa  is  now  brought  to  a  close,  and  there  follows  an 


CHAP.  XVI   13.  S37 

epilogue  which  fixes  the  term  of  the  fulfilment  of  what  is  not 
predicted  now  for  the  first  time,  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
anticipated  history.  Ver.  13.  "  This  is  the  word  which  Jehovah 
spake  long  ago  concerning  Moab.  And  now  Jehovah  speaketh 
thus  :  In  three  years,  like  years  of  a  hireling,  the  glory  of  Moab 
is  disgraced,  together  with  all  the  multitude  of  the  great ;  a  rem 
nant  is  left,  contemptibly  small,  not  great  at  all"  The  time 
fixed  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  xx.  3.  Of  working  time  the  hirer 
remits  nothing,  and  the  labourer  gives  nothing  in.  The  state 
ment  as  to  the  time,  therefore,  is  intended  to  be  taken  exactly  : 
three  years,  not  more,  rather  under  than  over.  Then  will  the 
old  saying  of  God  concerning  Moab  be  fulfilled.  Only  a  rem 
nant,  a  contemptible  remnant,  will  be  left  (">^,  cf.  B>ife>D^  ch. 
viii.  6,  in  sense  equivalent  to  1N^ :1)  ;  for  every  history  of  the 
nations  is  but  the  shadow  of  the  history  of  Israel. 

The  massa  in  ch.  xv.  1-xvi.  12  was  a  word  that  had  already 
gone  forth  from  Jehovah  "long  ago."  This  statement  may  be 
understood  in  three  different  senses.  In  the  first  place,  Isaiah 
may  mean  that  older  prophecies  had  already  foretold  essentially 
the  same  concerning  Moab.  But  what  prophecies?  We  may 
get  an  answer  to  this  question  from  the  prophecies  of  Jeremiah 
concerning  Moab  in  Jer.  xlviii.  Jeremiah  there  reproduces 
the  massa  Moab  of  the  book  of  Isaiah,  but  interweaves  with 
it  reminiscences  (1)  out  of  the  rndshal  on  Moab  in  Num. 
xxi.  27—30;  (2)  out  of  Balaam's  prophecy  concerning  Moab  in 
Num.  xxiv.  17  ;  (3)  out  of  the  prophecy  of  Amos  concerning 
Moab  (Amos  ii.  1-3).  And  it  might  be  to  these  earlier  worda 
of  prophecy  that  Isaiah  here  refers  (Iliiveniick,  Drechsler,  and 
others).  But  this  is  very  improbable,  as  there  is  no  ring  of 
these  earlier  passages  in  the  massa,  such  as  we  should  expect 
if  Isaiah  had  had  them  in  his  mind.  Secondly,  Isaiah  might 
mean  that  ch.  xv.  1  sqq.  contained  the  prophecy  of  an  older 
prophet,  which  he  merely  brought  to  remembrance  in  order  to 
connect  therewith  the  precise  tenor  of  its  fulfilment  which  had 
been  revealed  to  him.  This  is  at  present  the  prevailing  view. 
Hitzig,  in  a  special  work  on  the  subject  (1831),  as  well  as  in 
his  Commentary,  has  endeavoured  to  prove,  on  the  ground  of 
2  Kings  xiv.  25,  that  in  all  probability  Jonah  was  the  author  of 
the  oracle  which  Isaiah  here  resumes.  And  Knobel,  Maurer, 
Gustav  Baur,  and  Thenius  agree  with  him  in  this;  whilst  De 

VOL.  I.  Y 


338  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Wette,  Ewald,  and  Umbreit  regard  it  as,  at  any  rate,  decidedly 
non-Messianic.  If  the  conjecture  that  Jonah  was  the  author 
could  but  be  better  sustained,  we  should  heartily  rejoice  in  this 
addition  to  the  history  of  the  literature  of  the  Old  Testament. 
But  all  that  we  know  of  Jonah  is  at  variance  with  such  a  con 
jecture.  He  was  a  prophet  of  the  type  of  Elijah  and  Elisha, 
in  whom  the  eloquence  of  a  prophet's  words  was  thrown  alto 
gether  into  the  shade  by  the  energy  of  a  prophet's  deeds.  His 
prophecy  concerning  the  restoration  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel 
to  its  old  boundaries,  which  was  fulfilled  by  the  victories  of 
Jeroboam  n.,  we  cannot  therefore  imagine  to  have  been  so 
pictorial  or  highly  poetical  as  the  massa  Moab  (which  would 
only  be  one  part  of  that  prophecy)  really  is ;  and  the  fact  that 
he  was  angry  at  the  sparing  of  Nineveh  harmonizes  very  badly 
with  its  elegiac  softness  and  its  flood  of  tears.  Moreover,  it 
is  never  intimated  that  the  conquerors  to  whom  Moab  was 
to  succumb  would  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  Israel ;  and  the 
hypothesis  is  completely  overthrown  by  the  summons  addressed 
to  Moab  to  send  tribute  to  Jerusalem.  But  the  conclusion 
itself,  that  the  oracle  must  have  originated  with  any  older 
prophet  whatever,  is  drawn  from  very  insufficient  premises. 
No  doubt  it  is  a  thing  altogether  unparalleled  even  in  Isaiah, 
that  a  prophecy  should  assume  so  thoroughly  the  form  of  a 
kinah,  or  lamentation ;  still  there  are  tendencies  to  this  in  ch. 
xxii.  4  (cf.  ch.  xxi.  3,  4),  and  Isaiah  was  an  inexhaustible  master 
of  language  of  every  character  and  colour.  It  is  true  we  do 
light  upon  many  expressions  which  cannot  be  pointed  out  any 
where  else  in  the  book  of  Isaiah,  such  as  laale  goyim,  heddcf ', 
yeldldh,  ydra,  yitlirdli,  mdhir,  metz,  nosdphothj  pekudddh  (pro 
vision,  possession)  ;  and  there  is  something  peculiar  in  the 
circular  movement  of  the  prophecy,  which  is  carried  out  to 
such  an  extent  in  the  indication  of  reason  and  consequence,  as 
well  as  in  the  perpetually  returning,  monotonous  connection 
of  the  sentences  by  ci  (for)  and  'al-cen  (Idcen,  therefore),  the 
former  of  which  is  repeated  twice  in  ch.  xv.  1,  three  times  in 
ch.  xv.  8,  9,  and  four  times  in  succession  in  ch.  xv.  5,  6.  But 
there  is  probably  no  prophecy,  especially  in  ch.  xiii.-xxiii.,  which 
does  not  contain  expressions  that  the  prophet  uses  nowhere 
else ;  and  so  far  as  the  conjunctions  ci  and  'al-cen  (Idcea)  are 
concerned,  Isaiah  crowds  them  together  in  other  passages  as 


CHAP.  xvii.  339 

well,  and  here  almost  to  monotony,  as  a  natural  consequence  of 
the  prevailing  elegiac  tone.  Besides,  even  Ewald  can  detect 
the  characteristics  of  Isaiah  in  ch.  xvi.  1-6;  and  you  have  only 
to  dissect  the  whole  rhetorically,  syntactically,  and  philologically, 
with  the  carefulness  of  a  Caspari,  to  hear  throughout  the  ring 
of  Isaiah's  style.  And  whoever  has  retained  the  impression 
which  he  brought  with  him  from  the  oracle  against  Philistia, 
will  be  constrained  to  say,  that  not  only  the  stamp  and  outward 
form,  but  also  the  spirit  and  ideas,  are  thoroughly  Isaiah's. 
Hence  the  third  possible  conjecture  must  be  the  correct  one. 
Thirdly,  then,  Isaiah  may  mean  that  the  fate  of  Moab,  which 
he  has  just  proclaimed,  was  revealed  to  him  long  ago ;  and  the 
addition  made  now  is,  that  it  will  be  fulfilled  in  exactly  three 
years.  TNE  does  not  necessarily  point  to  a  time  antecedent  to 
that  of  Isaiah  himself  (compare  ch.  xliv.  8,  xlviii.  3,  5,  7,  with 
2  Sam.  xv.  34).  If  we  assume  that  what  Isaiah  predicts  down 
to  ch.  xvi.  12  was  revealed  to  him  in  the  year  that  Ahaz  died, 
and  that  the  epilogue  reckons  from  the  third  or  tenth  year  of 
Hezekiah,  in  either  case  the  interval  is  long  enough  for  the 
me  dz  (from  of  old).  And  we  decide  in  favour  of  this.  Un 
fortunately,  we  know  nothing  certain  as  to  the  time  at  which 
the  three  years  commence.  The  question  wrhether  it  was  Shal- 
manassar,  S argon,  or  Sennacherib  who  treated  the  Moabites  so 
harshly,  is  one  that  we  cannot  answer.  In  Herodotus  (ii.  141), 
Sennacherib  is  called  "king  of  the  Arabians  and  Assyrians;" 
and  Moab  might  be  included  in  the  Arabians.  In  any  case, 
after  the  fulfilment  of  Isaiah's  prophecy  in  the  Assyrian  times, 
there  was  still  a  portion  left,  the  fulfilment  of  which,  according 
to  Jer.  xlviii.,  was  reserved  for  the  Chaldeans. 

THE  ORACLE  CONCERNING  DAMASCUS  AND  ISRAEL. — 
CHAP.  XVII. 

From  the  Philistines  on  the  west,  and  the  Moabites  on  the 
east,  the  prophecy  relating  to  the  neighbouring  nations  now 
turns,  without  any  chronological  order,  to  the  people  of  Damas 
cene  Syria  on  the  north.  The  curse  pronounced  on  them, 
however,  falls  upon  the  kingdom  of  Israel  also,  because  it  has 
allied  itself  with  heathen  Damascus,  in  opposition  to  its  own 
brother  tribe  to  the  south,  as  well  as  to  the  Davidic  government ; 


340  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

and  by  this  unnatural  alliance  with  a  zdr,  or  stranger,  had 
become  a  zdr  itself.  From  the  period  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  to 
which  the  massa  Moab  belongs,  at  least  so  far  as  its  epilogue 
is  concerned,  we  are  here  carried  back  to  the  reign  of  Ahaz, 
and  indeed  far  beyond  "  the  year  that  Ahaz  died"  (ch.  xiv.  28), 
to  the  very  border  of  the  reigns  of  Jotham  and  Ahaz, — namely, 
to  the  time  when  the  league  for  the  destruction  of  Judah  had 
only  just  been  concluded.  At  the  time  when  Isaiah  incorpo 
rated  this  oracle  in  his  collection,  the  threats  against  the  kinir- 

'  O  £"> 

doms  of  Damascus  and  Israel  had  long  been  fulfilled.  Assyria 
had  punished  both  of  them.  And  Assyria  itself  had  also  been 
punished,  as  the  fourth  turn  in  the  oracle  indicates.  Conse 
quently  the  oracle  stands  here  as  a  memorial  of  the  truthful 
ness  of  the  prophecy ;  and  it  answers  a  further  purpose  still, 
viz.  to  furnish  a  rich  prophetic  consolation  for  the  church  of 
all  times,  when  persecuted  by  the  world,  and  sighing  under  the 
oppression  of  the  kingdom  of  the  world. 

The  first  turn  :  vers.  1-3.  "  Behold,  Damascus  must  (be 
taken)  away  out  of  the  number  of  the  cities,  and  will  be  a  heap 
of  fallen  ruins.  The  cities  of  Aroer  are  forsaken,  they  are  given 
up  to  flocks,  they  lie  there  without  any  one  scaring  them  away. 
And  the  fortress  of  Ephraim  is  abolished,  and  the  kingdom  of 
Damascus;  and  it  happens  to  those  that  are  left  of  Aram  as  to  the 
glory  of  the  sons  of  Israel,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts."  "  Behold,'1 
etc. :  hinneh  followed  by  a  participle  indicates  here,  as  it  does 
everywhere  else,  something  very  near  at  hand.  Damascus  is 
removed  "»7»  (=  "Vy  nvn»,  cf.  1  Kings  xv.  13),  i.e.  out  of  the 
sphere  of  existence  as  a  city.  It  becomes  TO,  a  heap  of  ruins. 
The  word  is  used  intentionally  instead  of  "7,  to  sound  as  much 
as  possible  like  ~>TO  :  a  mutilated  city,  so  to  speak.  It  is  just 
the  same  with  Israel,  which  has  made  itself  an  appendage  of 
Damascus.  The  "cities  of  Aroer"  (gen.  appos.  Ges.  §  114,  3) 
represent  the  land  to  the  east  of  the  Jordan  :  there  the  judg 
ment  upon  Israel  (executed  by  Tiglath-pileser)  first  began. 
There  were  two  Aroers :  an  old  Amoritish  city  allotted  to  the 
tribe  of  Reuben,  viz.  "  Aroer  on  the  Arnon"  (Deut.  ii.  36, 
iii.  12,  etc.)  ;  and  an  old  Ammonitish  one,  allotted  to  the  tribe 
of  Gad,  viz.  "Aroer  before  Kabbah"  (Rabbath  Ammon,  Josh, 
xiii.  25).  The  ruins  of  the  former  are  Arair,  on  the  lofty 
northern  bank  of  the  Mugib ;  but  the  situation  of  the  latter 


CHAP.  XVII.  4-8.  341 

has  not  yet  been  determined  with  certainty  (see  Com.  on  Josh, 
xiii.  25).  The  "cities  of  Aroer"  are  these  two  Aroers,  and  the 
rest  of  the  cities  similar  to  it  on  the  east  of  the  Jordan  ;  just 
as  "  the  Orions"  in  ch.  xiii.  10  are  Orion  and  other  similar 
stars.  We  meet  here  again  with  a  significant  play  upon  the 
sound  in  the  expression  'are  'Aroer  (cities  of  Aroer) :  the  name 
of  Aroer  was  ominous,  and  what  its  name  indicated  would 
happen  to  the  cities  in  its  circuit.  "ijny  means  "  to  lay  bare," 
to  pull  down  (Jer.  li.  58)  ;  and  ^V"]^  v"]'r$  signifies  a  stark-naked 
condition,  a  state  of  desolation  and  solitude.  After  ver.  1  has 
threatened  Damascus  in  particular,  and  ver.  2  has  done  the 
same  to  Israel,  ver.  3  comprehends  them  both.  Ephraim 
loses  the  fortified  cities  which  once  served  it  as  defences, 
and  Damascus  loses  its  rank  as  a  kingdom.  Those  that  are 
left  of  Aram,  who  do  not  fall  in  the  war,  become  like  the 
proud  citizens  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  i.e.  they  are  carried 
away  into  captivity.  All  this  was  fulfilled  under  Tiglath- 
pileser.  The  accentuation  connects  Cn~  "1KP  (the  remnant 
of  Aram)  with  the  first  half  of  the  verse ;  but  the  meaning 
remains  the  same,  as  the  subject  to  ViT  is  in  any  case  the 
Aramaeans. 

Second  turn  :  vers.  4-8.  "And  it  comes  to  pass  in  that  day, 
the  glory  of  Jacob  wastes  away,  and  the  fat  of  his  flesh  grows 
thin.  And  it  ivill  be  as  when  a  reaper  grasps  the  stalks  of 
wheat,  and  his  arm  mows  off  the  ears ;  and  it  will  be  as  with 
one  who  gathers  together  ears  in  the  valley  of  Rephaim.  Yet  a 
gleaning  remains  from  it,  as  at  the  olive-beating :  two,  three 
berries  high  up  at  the  top ;  four,  five  in  its,  the  fruit  trees, 
branches,  saith  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel.  At  that  day  will 
man  look  up  to  his  Creator,  and  his  eyes  will  look  to  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel.  And  he  will  not  look  to  the  altars,  the  work  of 
his  hands ;  and  what  his  fingers  have  made  he  will  not  regard, 
neither  the  Astartes  nor  the  sun-gods"  This  second  turn  does 
not  speak  of  Damascus,  but  simply  of  Israel,  and  in  fact  of 
all  Israel,  the  range  of  vision  widening  out  from  Israel  in  the 
more  restricted  sense,  so  as  to  embrace  the  whole.  It  will  all 
disappear,  with  the  exception  of  a  small  remnant ;  but  the  latter 
will  return.  Thus  u  a  remnant  will  return,"  the  law  of  Israel's 
history,  which  is  here  shown  first  of  all  in  its  threatening  aspect, 
and  then  in  its  more  promising  one.  The  reputation  and  pro- 


342  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

sperity  to  which  the  two  kingdoms  were  raised  by  Jeroboam  TT, 
and  Uzziah  would  pass  away.  Israel  was  ripe  for  judgment, 
like  a  field  of  corn  for  the  harvest ;  and  it  would  be  as  when  a 
reaper  grasps  the  stalks  that  have  shot  up,  and  cuts  off  the  ears. 
"^ViJ  is  not  used  elliptically  for  "VSj?  ^  (Gesenius),  nor  is  it  a 
definition  of  time  (Luzzatto),  nor  an  accusative  of  the  object 
(Knobel),  but  a  noun  formed  like  K^J,  793,  pns,  and  used  in 
the  sense  of  reaper  (kotzer  in  other  cases).1  The  figure  sug 
gested  here  is'  more  fully  expanded  in  John  iv.  and  Rev.  xiv. 
Hardly  a  single  one  will  escape  the  judgment :  just  as  in  the 
broad  plain  of  Rephaim,  which  slopes  off  to  the  south-west  of 
Jerusalem  as  far  as  Bethlehem,  where  it  is  covered  with  rich 
fields  of  wheat,  the  collectors  of  ears  leave  only  one  or  two  ears 
lying  scattered  here  and  there.  Nevertheless  a  gleaning  of 
Israel  ("in  it,"  viz.  in  Jacob,  ver.  4,  ch.  x.  22)  will  be  left, 
just  as  when  the  branches  of  the  olive  tree,  which  have  been 
already  cleared  with  the  hand,  are  still  further  shaken  with  a 
stick,  there  still  remain  a  few  olives  upon  the  highest  branch 
(two,  three ;  cf.  2  Kings  ix.  32),  or  concealed  under  the  foliage 
of  the  branches.  "  Its,  the  fruit  tree's,  branches :"  this  is  an 
elegant  expression,  as,  for  example,  in  Prov.  xiv.  13  ;  the  carry 
ing  over  of  the  n  to  the  second  word  is  very  natural  in  both 
passages  (see  Ges.  §  121,  b).  This  small  remnant  will  turn 
with  stedfast  gaze  to  the  living  God,  as  is  becoming  in  man  as 
such  (hadddm),  and  not  regard  the  idols  as  worthy  of  any  look 
at  all,  at  least  of  any  reverential  look.  As  hammdnim  are  here 
images  of  the  sun-god  pn  ^jn,  which  is  well  known  from  the 
Phoenician  monuments,2  'asherim  (for  which  we  find,  though 
more  rarely,  'asheroth)  apparently  signifies  images  of  the  moon- 
goddess.  And  the  combination  of  "  Baal,  Asherah,  and  all  the 
host  of  heaven"  in  2  Kings  xxiii.  4,  as  well  as  the  surname 
"queen  of  heaven"  in  Jer.  vii.  18,  xliv.  18,  19,  appears  to 
require  this  (Knobel).  But  the  latest  researches  have  proved 
that  f  Asherah  is  rather  the  Semitic  Aphrodite,  and  therefore 
the  planet  Venus,  which  was  called  the  "  little  luck"  (es-sad 

1  Instead  of  katzar  (to  cut  off,  or  shorten),  they  now  say  kdratz  in  the 
•whole  of  the  land  to  the  east  of  the  Jordan,  which  gives  the  idea  of  sawing 
off  ^ — a  much  more  suitable  one  where  the  Syrian  sickle  is  used. 

2  See  Levy,  Phonizisches  Worterbuch  (1864),  p.  19 ;  and  Otto  Strausa 
011  Nahum,  p.  xxii.  ss. 


CHAP.  XVII.  9-11.  343 

el-asgar}  l  by  the  Arabs,  in  distinction  from  Musteri  (Jupiter),2 
or  "the  great  luck."  And  with  this  the  name  'Asherah  the 
"lucky"  (i.e.  the  source  of  luck  or  prosperity)  and  the  similar 
surname  given  to  the  Assyrian  Istar  agree;3  for  'Asherah  is 
the  very  same  goddess  as  'Ashtoreth,  whose  name  is  thoroughly 
Arian,  and  apparently  signifies  the  star  (Ved.  stri  =  star  ;  Zend. 
stare ;  Neo-Pers.  sitdre,  used  chiefly  for  the  morning  star), 
although  Rawlinson  (without  being  able  to  suggest  any  more 
acceptable  interpretation)  speaks  of  this  view  as  "  not  worthy 
of  much  attention." 4  Thus  Asherim  is  used  to  signify  the 
bosquets  (shrubberies)  or  trees  dedicated  to  the  Semitic  Aphro 
dite  (Deut.  xvi.  21;  compare  the  verbs  used  to  signify  their 
removal,  JHJ,  rro,  B>ru)  ;  but  here  it  probably  refers  to  her 
statues  or  images5  (2  Kings  xxi.  7  ;  compare  the  miphletzeth  in 
1  Kings  xv.  13,  which  is  used  to  denote  an  obscene  exhibition). 
For  these  images  of  the  sun-god  and  of  the  goddess  of  the 
morning  star,  the  remnant  of  Israel,  that  has  been  purified  by 
the  smelting  furnace  of  judgment,  has  no  longer  any  eye.  Its 
looks  are  exclusively  directed  to  the  one  true  God  of  man.  The 
promise,  which  here  begins  to  dawn  at  the  close  of  the  second 
turn,  is  hidden  again  in  the  third,  though  only  to  break  forth 
again  in  the  fourth  with  double  or  triple  intensity. 

Third  turn  :  vers.  9-11.  "  In  that  day  will  his  fortified 
cities  le  like  the  ruins  of  the  forest  and  of  the  mountain  top,  which 
they  cleared  before  the  sons  of  Israel:  and  there  arises  a  waste 
place.  For  thou  hast  forgotten  the  God  of  thy  salvation,  and 
hast  not  thought  of  the  Rock  of  thy  stronghold,  therefore  thou 
planteclst  charming  plantations,  and  didst  set  them  with  strange 

1  See  Krehl,  Religion  der  vorislamischen  Araber  (1863),  p.  11. 

2  This  was  the  tutelar  deity  of  Damascus ;  see  Job,  ii.  446. 

3  "  Islitar"  says  Rawlinson  in  his  Five  Great  Monarchies  of  the  Ancient 
Eastern   World, — a  work  which  challenges  criticism  through  its  dazzling 
results, — "  Ishtar  is  the  goddess  who  rejoices  mankind,  and  her  most  com 
mon  epithet  is  Amra,  '  the  fortunate'  or  '  the  happy.'     But  otherwise  her 
epithets  are  vague  and  general,  insomuch  that  she  is  often  scarcely  distin 
guishable  from  Beltis  (the  wife  of  Bel-Nimrod)."    Vid.  vol.  i.  p.  175  (1862). 

4  The  planet  Venus,  according  to  a  Midrash  relating  to  Gen.  vi.  1,  2,  is 
'Jfttehar  transferred  to  the  sky  ;  and  this  is  the  same  as  Zuhare  (see  Geiger, 
Was  hat  Muhammed,  etc.,  1833,  pp.  107-109). 

6  The  plural   Ashtaroth,    Hatlwrs,   which   occurs   upon   Assyrian   and 
Egyptian  monument^,  has  -\  different  meaning. 


3  14  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

vines.  In  the  day  that  thou  planted  st,  tliou  didst  make  a  fence  ; 
and  with  the  morning  dawn  thou  madest  thy  sowing  to  blossom  : 
a  harvest  heap  in  the  day  of  deep  wounds  and  deadly  sorrow  of 
heart."  The  statement  in  ver.  3,  "  The  fortress  of  Ephraim  is 
abolished,"  is  repeated  in  ver.  9  in  a  more  descriptive  manner. 
The  fate  of  the  strongly  fortified  cities  of  Ephraim  would  be 
the  same  as  that  of  the  old  Canaanitish  castles,  which  were  still 
to  be  discerned  in  their  antiquated  remains,  either  in  the  depths 
of  forests  or  high  up  on  the  mountains.  The  \vord  'azubdh, 
which  the  early  translators  quite  misunderstood,  signifies,  both 
here  and  in  ch.  vi.  12,  desolate  places  that  have  gone  to  .ruin. 
They  also  misunderstood  "^P^rn  ^^n.  The  Septuagint  renders 
it,  by  a  bold  conjecture,  ol  'A/jioppaioi,  /cal  ol  Evaloi,;  but  this  is 
at  once  proved  to  be  false  by  the  inversion  of  the  names  of  the 
two  peoples,  which  was  very  properly  thought  to  be  necessary. 
TENH  undoubtedly  signifies  the  top  of  a  tree,  which  is  quite 
unsuitable  here.  But  as  even  this  meaning  points  back  to 
iStf,  extollere,  efferre  (see  at  Ps.  xciv.  4),  it  may  also  mean  the 
mountain-top.  The  name  haemori  (the  Amorites  :  those  who 
dwell  high  up  in  the  mountains)  proves  the  possibility  of  this  ; 
and  the  prophet  had  this  name  in  his  mind,  and  was  guided  by 
it  in  his  choice  of  a  word.  The  subject  of  ttTJJ  is  self-evident. 
And  the  reason  why  only  the  ruins  in  forests  and  on  mountains 
are  mentioned  is,  that  other  places,  which  were  situated  on  the 
different  lines  of  traffic,  merely  changed  their  inhabitants  when 
the  land  was  taken  by  Israel.  The  reason  why  the  fate  of 
Ephraim' s  fortified  castles  was  the  same  as  that  of  the  Amor- 
itish  castles,  which  were  then  lying  in  ruins,  was  that  Ephraim, 
as  stated  in  ver.  10,  had  turned  away  from  its  true  rocky 
stronghold,  namely  from  Jehovah.  It  was  a  consequence  of 
this  estrangement  from  God,  that  Ephraim  planted  B^pjtt  *%*??, 
plantations  of  the  nature  of  pleasant  things,  or  pleasant  planta 
tions  (compare  on  Ps.  Ixxviii.  49,  and  Ewald,  §  287,  al),  i.e. 
cultivated  all  kinds  of  sensual  accompaniments  to  its  worship, 
in  accordance  with  its  heathen  propensities ;  and  sowed,  or 
rather  (as  zemordh  is  the  layer  of  a  vine)  "  set,"  this  garden- 
ground,  to  which  the  suffix  ennu  refers,  with  strange  grapes, 
by  forming  an  alliance  with  a  zdr  (a  stranger),  namely  the 
king  of  Damascus.  On  the  very  day  of  the  planting,  Ephraim 
fenced  it  carefully  (this  is  the  meaning  of  the  pilpel)  aigseg 


CTfAP.  XVII.  911.  345 

from  :^»=JiD,  not  "to  raise,"  as  no  such  verb  as  3^=njb>?  NJp? 
can  be  shown  to  exist),  that  is  to  say,  he  ensured  the  perpetuity 
of  these  sensuous  modes  of  worship  as  a  state  religion,  with  all 
the  shrewdness  of  a  Jeroboam  (see  Amos  vii.  13).  And  the 
very  next  morning  he  had  brought  into  blossom  what  he  had 
sown  :  the  foreign  layer  had  shot  up  like  a  hot-house  plant,  i.e. 
the  alliance  had  speedily  grown  into  a  hearty  agreement,  and 
had  already  produced  one  blossom  at  any  rate,  viz.  the  plan  of 
a  joint  attack  upon  Judah.  But  this  plantation,  which  was  so 
flattering  and  promising  for  Israel,  and  which  had  succeeded 
so  rapidly,  and  to  all  appearance  so  happily,  was  a  harvest  heap 
for  the  day  of  the  judgment.  Nearly  all  modern  expositors 
have  taken  ned  as  the  third  person  (after  the  form  meth,  Ges. 
§  72,  Anm.  1),  and  render  it  "the  harvest  flees;"  but  the  third 
person  of  1«  would  be  "1J,  like  the  participle  in  Gen.  iv.  12  ; 
whereas  the  meaning  cumulus  (a  heap),  which  it  has  elsewhere 
as  a  substantive,  is  quite  appropriate,  and  the  statement  of  the 
prophet  resembles  that  of  the  apostle  in  Rom.  ii.  5.  The  day 
of  the  judgment  is  called  "  the  day  of  n^m"  (or,  according  to 
another  reading,  i"1?™),  not,  however,  as  equivalent  to  nachal,  a 
stream  (Luzzatto,  in  giorno  di  fiumana),  as  in  Ps.  cxxiv.  4  (the 
tone  upon  the  last  syllable  proves  this),  nor  in  the  sense  of  "  in 
the  day  of  possession,"  as  Rosenmiiller  arid  others  suppose,  since 
this  necessarily  gives  to  *U  the  former  objectionable  and  (by 
the  side  of  "V>'£)  improbable  verbal  sense  ;  but  as  the  feminine 
of  nachlek)  written  briefly  for  maccdh  nachldh  (Jer.  xiv.  17),  i.e. 
inasmuch  as  it  inflicts  grievous  and  mortal  wounds.  Ephraim's 
plantation  is  a  harvest  heap  for  that  day  (compare  Mtzir,  the 
harvest  of  punishment,  in  Hos.  vi.  11  and  Jer.  li.  33);  and 
the  hope  set  upon  this  plantation  is  changed  into  WVX  2N3,  a 
desperate  and  incurable  heartfelt  sorrow  (Jer.  xxx.  15).  The 
organic  connection  between  vers.  12-14,  which  follow,  and  the 
oracle  concerning  Damascus  and  Israel,  has  also  been  either 
entirely  misunderstood,  or  not  thoroughly  appreciated.  The 
connection  is  the  following:  As  the  prophet  sets  before  himself 
the  manner  in  which  the  sin  of  Ephraim  is  punished  by  Asshur, 
as  the  latter  sweeps  over  the  Holy  Land,  the  promise  which 
already  began  to  dawn  in  the  second  turn  bursts  completely 
through :  the  world-power  is  the  instrument  of  punishment  m 
the  hands  of  Jehovah,  but  not  for  ever. 


346  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Fourth  turn :  vers.  12-14.  "  Woe  to  the  roaring  of  many 
nations :  like  the  roaring  of  seas  they  roar ;  and  to  the  rumbling  of 
nations,  like  the  rumbling  of  mighty  waters  they  rumble!  Nations, 
like  the  rumbling  of  many  waters  they  rumble;  and  lie  threatens 
it :  then  it  flies  far  away,  and  is  chased  like  chaff  of  the  moun 
tains  before  the  wind,  and  like  a  cloud  of  dust  before  the  gale. 
At  eventide,  behold  consternation;  and  before  the  morning  dawn 
it  is  destroyed :  this  is  the  portion  of  our  plunderers,  and  the  lot 
of  our  robbers"  It  is  the  destruction  of  Asshur  that  the  pro 
phet  is  predicting  here  (as  in  ch.  xiv.  24-27,  xxix.  5-8,  etc.), 
though  not  of  Asshur  as  Asshur,  but  of  Asshur  as  the  imperial 
kingdom,  which  embraced  a  multitude  of  nations  (ch.  xxii.  6, 
viii.  9,  10,  xiv.  26,  xxix.  7,  8)  all  gathered  together  under  the 
rule  of  one  will,  to  make  a  common  attack  upon  the  church 
of  God.  The  connection  between  this  fourth  turn  and  the 
third  is  precisely  the  same  as  between  ch.  viii.  9,  10,  and  ch. 
viii.  6-8.  The  exclamation  of  woe  (hoi)  is  an  expression  of 
pain,  as  in  ch.  x.  1  ;  and  this  is  followed  by  a  proclamation  of 
the  judgment  of  wrath.  The  description  of  the  rolling  wave 
of  nations  is  as  pictorial  as  the  well-known  illi  inter  sese,  etc.,  of 
the  Cyclops  in  Virgil.  u  It  spreads  and  stretches  out,  as  if  it 
would  never  cease  to  roll,  and  roar,  and  surge,  and  sweep 
onward  in  its  course"  (Drechsler).  In  the  expression  "it"  (bo) 
in  ver.  13a,  the  many  surging  nations  are  kneaded  together,  as 
it  were,  into  one  mass.  It  costs  God  simply  a  threatening 
word;  and  this  mass  all  flies  apart  (mimmerchdk  like  merdchok, 
ch.  xxiii.  7),  and  falls  into  dust,  and  whirls  about  in  all  direc 
tions,  like  the  chaff  of  threshing-floors  in  high  situations,  or 
like  dust  whirled  up  by  the  storm.  The  judgment  commences 
in  the  evening,  and  rages  through  the  night ;  and  before  the 
morning  dawns,  the  army  of  nations  raised  by  the  imperial 
power  is  all  destroyed  (compare  ch.  xxix.  7,  8,  and  the  fulfil 
ment  in  ch.  xxxvii.  36).  The  fact  that  the  oracle  concerning 
Damascus  in  its  fourth  stage  takes  so  comprehensive  and,  so  far 
as  Israel  is  concerned,  so  promising  a  form,  may  be  explained 
on  the  ground  that  Syria  was  the  forerunner  of  Asshur  in  the 
attack  upon  Israel,  and  that  the  alliance  between  Israel  and 
Syria  became  the  occasion  of  the  complications  with  Asshur. 
If  the  substance  of  the  massd  Dammesek  (the  oracle  concern 
ing  Damascus)  had  been  restricted  to  the  prophecy  contained 


CHAP,  xviii.  347 

in  the  name  Mahershalal,  the  element  of  promise  so  charac 
teristic  of  the  prophecies  against  the  nations  of  the  world  would 
be  entirely  wanting.  But  the  shout  of  triumph,  "  This  is  the 
portion,"  etc.,  supplied  a  terminal  point,  beyond  which  the 
massa  could  not  go  without  the  sacrifice  of  its  unity.  We  are 
therefore  warranted  in  regarding  ch.  xviii.  as  an  independent 
prophecy,  notwithstanding  its  commencement,  which  apparently 
forms  a  continuation  of  the  fourth  strophe  of  ch.  xvii. 

ETHIOPIA'S  SUBMISSION  TO  JEHOVAH. — CHAP,  xviii. 

The  notion  that  ch.  xviii.  4-6  contains  an  account  of  the 
judgment  of  Jehovah  upon  Ethiopia  is  quite  an  untenable  one. 
The  prophet  is  here  predicting  the  destruction  of  the  army  of 
Sennacherib  in  his  usual  way,  and  in  accordance  with  the  actual 
fulfilment  (ch.  xxxvii.  36).  The  view  which  Hofmann  has 
adopted  from  the  Jewish  expositors — namely,  that  the  people 
so  strangely  described  at  the  commencement  and  close  of  the 
prophecy  is  the  Israelitish  nation — is  equally  untenable.  It  is 
Ethiopia.  Taking  both  these  facts  together,  then,  the  con 
clusion  to  which  we  are  brought  is,  that  the  prophet  is  here 
foretelling  the  effect  that  will  be  produced  upon  Ethiopia  by 
the  judgment  which  Jehovah  is  about  to  inflict  upon  Asshur. 
But  it  is  altogether  improbable  either  that  the  prophecy  falls 
later  than  the  Assyrian  expedition  against  Egypt  (as  Schegg 
supposes),  or  that  the  Ethiopian  ambassadors  mentioned  here 
are  despatched  to  Judah  to  seek  for  friendship  and  aid  (as 
Ewald,  Knobel,  Meier,  and  Thenius  maintain).  The  expe 
dition  was  still  impending,  and  that  against  Judah  was  the 
means  to  this  further  end.  The  ambassadors  are  not  sent  to 
Judah,  but  carry  commands  with  the  most  stirring  despatch  to 
every  province  under  Ethiopian  rule.  The  Ethiopian  kingdom 
is  thrown  into  the  greatest  excitement  in  the  face  of  the  ap 
proaching  Assyrian  invasion,  and  the  messengers  are  sent  out 
to  raise  the  militia.  At  that  time  both  Egypts  were  governed 
by  the  Ethiopian  (or  twenty-fifth)  dynasty,  SabaJco  the  Ethiopian 
having  made  himself  master  of  the  country  on  the  Lower  Nile.1 
The  king  of  Egypt  who  was  contemporaneous  with  Sennacherib 
was  the  TirJiaka  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  Tarakos  of  Manetho, 
1  See  Biugsch,  Histoire  cCEyypte,  i.  (1859)  244-246. 


348  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH". 

and  the  Tearkon  of  Strabo, — a  great  conqueror,  according  to 
Megasthenes,  like  Sesostris  and  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  had 
carried  his  conquests  as  far  as  the  Pillars  of  Hercules  (Strabo, 
xv.  1,  6).  This  explains  the  strangely  sounding  description 
given  in  vers.  2  and  7  of  the  Ethiopian  people,  which  had 
the  universal  reputation  in  antiquity  of  gigantic  strength  and 
invincibility.  It  is  impossible  to  determine  the  length  of  time 
that  intervened  between  the  composition  of  the  prophecy  and 
the  fourteenth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  in  which  the  Assyrian 
army  commenced  the  expedition  across  Judah  to  Egypt.  The 
event  which  the  prophecy  foretells — namely,  that  the  judgment 
of  Jehovah  upon  Asshur  would  be  followed  by  the  submission 
of  Ethiopia  to  Jehovah — was  only  partially  and  provisionally 
fulfilled  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  23).  And  there  is  nothing  to  surprise 
us  in  this,  inasmuch  as  in  the  prophecies  delivered  before  the 
destruction  of  Assyria  the  latter  always  presented  itself  to  the 
mind  of  the  prophet  as  the  kingdom  of  the  world ;  and  conse 
quently  the  prophecy  had  also  an  eschatological  feature,  which 
still  remained  for  a  future  and  remote  fulfilment. 

The  prophecy  commences  with  hoi}  which  never  signifies 
heuSy  but  always  vce  (woe).  Here,  however,  it  differs  from 
ch.  xvii.  12,  and  is  an  expression  of  compassion  (cf.  Isa.  Iv.  1, 
Zech.  ii.  10)  rather  than  of  anger ;  for  the  fact  that  the  mighty 
Ethiopia  is  oppressed  by  the  still  mightier  Asshur,  is  a  humilia 
tion  which  Jehovah  has  prepared  for  the  former.  Vers.  1,  2a: 
"  Woe  to  the  land  of  the  whirring  of  wings,  which  is  beyond  the 
rivers  of  Gush,  that  sends  ambassadors  into  the  sea  and  in  boats 
of  papyrus  over  the  face  of  the  waters"  The  land  of  Cush  com 
mences,  according  to  Ezek.  xxix.  10  (cf.  xxx.  6),  where  Upper 
Egypt  ends.  The  Seveneh  (Aswdn\  mentioned  by  Ezekiel,  is 
the  boundary-point  at  which  the  Nile  enters  Mizraim  proper, 
and  which  is  still  a  depot  for  goods  coming  from  the  south 
down  the  Nile.  The  nahare-Cmh  (rivers  of  Cush)  are  chiefly 
those  that  surround  the  Cushite  Sela  (Gen.  x.  7).  This  is  the 
name  given  to  the  present  Sennar,  the  Meroitic  island  which 
is  enclosed  between  the  White  and  Blue  Nile  (the  Astapos  of 
Ptolemy,  or  the  present  Balir  el-Abyad,  and  the  Astaboras  of 
Ptolemy,  or  the  present  Bahr  el-Azrak).  According  to  the 
latest  researches,  more  especially  those  of  Speke,  the  White 
Nile,  which  takes  its  rise  in  the  Lake  of  Nyanza,  is  the  chief 


CHAP.  xvui.  i,  2.  349 

source  of  the  Nile.  The  latter,  and  the  Blue  Nile,  whose  con 
fluence  (makran)  with  it  takes  place  in  lat.  1,5°  25',  are  fed  by 
many  larger  or  smaller  tributary  streams  (as  well  as  mountain 
torrents)  ;  the  Blue  Nile  even  more  than  the  Nile  proper. 
And  this  abundance  of  water  in  the  land  to  the  south  of 
Sevenehj  and  still  farther  south  beyond  Sela  (or  Meroe),  might 
very  well  have  been  known  to  the  prophet  as  a  general  fact. 
The  land  "  beyond  the  rivers  of  Gush  "  is  the  land  bounded  by 
the  sources  of  the  Nile,  i.e.  (including  Ethiopia  itself  in  the 
stricter  sense  of  the  word)  the  south  land  under  Ethiopian  rule 
that  lay  still  deeper  in  the  heart  of  the  country,  the  land  of  its 
African  auxiliary  tribes,  whose  names  (which  probably  include 
the  later  Nubians  and  Abyssinians),  as  given  in  2  Chron.  xii.  3, 
Nahum  iii.  9,  Ezek.  xxx.  5,  Jer.  xlvi.  9,  suppose  a  minuteness 
of  information  which  has  not  yet  been  attained  by  modern 
research.  To  this  Ethiopia,  which  is  designated  by  its  farthest 
limits  (compare  Zeph.  iii.  10,  where  Wolff,  in  his  book  of 
Judith,  erroneously  supposes  Media  to  be  intended  as  the 
Asiatic  Gush),  the  prophets  give  the  strange  name  of  eretz 
tziltzal  cendpliaim.  This  has  been  interpreted  as  meaning  "  the 
land  of  the  wings  of  an  army  with  clashing  arms"  by  Gesenius 
and  others ;  but  cendpliaim  does  not  occur  in  this  sense,  like 
'agappim  in  Ezek  i  el,  Others  render  it  "  the  land  of  the  noise 
of  waves"  (Umbreit)  ;  but  cendpliaim  cannot  be  used  of  waters 
except  in  such  a  connection  as  ch.  viii.  8.  Moreover,  tziltzal  is 
not  a  fitting  onomatopoetic  word  either  for  the  clashing  of  arms 
or  the  noise  of  waves.  Others,  again,  render  it  "the  land  of 
the  double  shadow"  (Grotius,  Vitringa,  Knobel,  and  others); 
but,  however  appropriate  this  epithet  might  be  to  Ethiopia  as  a 
tropical  land,  it  is  very  hazardous  to  take  the  word  in  a  sense 
which  is  not  sustained  by  the  usage  of  the  language  ;  and  the 
same  objection  may  be  brought  against  Luzzatto's  "  land  of  the 
far-shadowing  defence."  Shelling  has  also  suggested  another 
objection, — namely,  that  the  shadow  thrown  even  in  tropical 
lands  is  not  a  double  one,  falling  northwards  and  southwards 
«t  the  same  time,  and  therefore  that  it  cannot  be  figuratively 
described  as  double-winged.  Tziltzal  cendpliaim  is  the  buzzing 
of  the  wings  of  insects,  with  which  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  swarmed 
on  account  of  the  climate  and  the  abundance  of  water:  H'JVj 
constr.  /}?¥)  tinnitus,  stridor,  a  primary  meaning  from  which 


350  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  other  three  meanings  of  the  word — cymbal,  harpoon  (a 
whirring  dart),  and  grasshopper1 — are  derived.  In  ch.  vii.  18 
the  forces  of  Egypt  are  called  "  the  fly  from  the  end  of  the 
rivers  of  Egypt."  Here  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  are  called  the 
land  of  the  whirring  of  wings,  inasmuch  as  the  prophet  had  in 
his  mind,  under  the  designation  of  swarms  of  insects,  the  motley 
swarms  of  different  people  included  in  this  great  kingdom  that 
were  so  fabulously  strange  to  an  Asiatic.  Within  this  great 
kingdom  messengers  were  now  passing  to  and  fro  upon  its  great 
waters  in  boats  of  papyrus  (on  gome,  Copt,  'gome,  Talm.  gdmi, 
see  at  Job  viii.  11),  Greek  /Sa/n'Se?  irairvpivai  (ffapk,  from  the 
Egyptian  bari,  ball,  a  barque).  In  such  vessels  as  these,  and 
with  Egyptian  tackle,  they  went  as  far  as  the  remote  island  of 
Taprobane.  The  boats  were  made  to  clap  together  (plicatiles), 
so  as  to  be  carried  past  the  cataracts  (Parthey  on  Plutarch,  de 
Iside,  pp.  198-9).  And  it  is  to  these  messengers  in  their  paper 
boats  that  the  appeal  of  the  prophet  is  addressed. 

He  sends  them  home ;  and  what  they  are  to  say  to  their  own 
people  is  generalized  into  an  announcement  to  the  whole  earth. 
Vers.  2b,  3.  "  Go,  swift  messengers,  to  the  people  stretched  out 
and  polished,  to  the  terrible  people  far  away  on  the  other  side,  to 
the  nation  of  command  upon  command  and  treading  down,  whose 
land  rivers  cut  through.  All  ye  possessors  of  the  globe  and  in 
habitants  of  the  earth,  when  a  banner  rises  on  the  mountains,  look 
ye ;  and  when  they  blow  the  trumpets,  hearken!"  We  learn  from 
what  follows  to  what  it  is  that  the  attention  of  Ethiopia  and  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth  is  directed :  it  is  the  destruction  of 
Asshur  by  Jehovah.  They  are  to  attend,  when  they  observe 
the  two  signals,  the  banner  and  the  trumpet-blast ;  these  are 
decisive  moments.  Because  Jehovah  was  about  to  deliver  the 
world  from  the  conquering  might  of  Assyria,  against  which  the 
Ethiopian  kingdom  was  now  summoning  all  the  means  of  self- 
defence,  the  prophet  sends  the  messengers  home.  Their  own 

1  Schroring  supposes  tziltzal  to  be  the  scaralseus  sacer  (Linn.)  ;  but  it 
would  be  much  more  natural,  if  any  particular  animal  is  intended,  to  think 
of  the  tzaltzalya,  as  it  is  called  in  the  language  of  the  Gallas,  the  tzetze  in 
the  Betschuana  language,  the  most  dreaded  diptera  of  the  interior  of  Africa, 
a  species  of  glossina  which  attacks  all  the  larger  mammalia  (though  not 
men).  Vid.  Hartmann,  Naturgeschichtlich-medic.  Skizze  der  Nillander,  Abth. 
i.  p.  205. 


CHAP.  XVIII.  2,  3.  351 

people,  to  whicli  he  sends  them  home,  are  elaborately  described. 
They  are  memusshdk,  stretched  out,  i.e.  very  tall  (LXX.  Wvos 
/zerewpoz/),  just  as  the  Sabseans  are  said  to  have  been  in  ch.  xlv.  14. 
They  are  also  mordt  =  m'mordt  (Ges.  §  52,  Anm.  6),  smoothed, 
politusj  i.e.  either  not  disfigured  by  an  ugly  growth  of  hair,  or 
else,  without  any  reference  to  depilation,  but  rather  with  refer 
ence  to  the  bronze  colour  of  their  skin,  smooth  and  shining 
with  healthy  freshness.  The  description  which  Herodotus  gives 
of  the  Ethiopians,  fieyicrroi  KOI  tcd\\HrToi  av6pa)7ra)v  rravrwv  (iii. 
20),  quite  answers  to  these  first  two  predicates.  They  are  still 
further  described,  with  reference  to  the  wide  extent  of  their 
kingdom,  which  reached  to  the  remotest  south,  as  "  the  terrible 
nation  n?rj™  N^'iP,"  i.e.  from  this  point,  where  the  prophet 
meets  with  the  messengers,  farther  and  farther  off  (compare 
1  Sam.  xx.  21,  22,  but  not  1  Sam.  xviii.  9,  where  the  expres 
sion  has  a  chronological  meaning,  which  would  be  less  suitable 
here,  where  everything  is  so  pictorial,  and  which  is  also  to  be 
rejected,  because  fcttrrjiD  cannot  be  equivalent  to  wn  1E>X» ; 
cf.  Nahum  ii.  9).  We  may  see  from  ch.  xxviii.  10,  13,  what 
Mv  (Mv,  with  connecting  accusatives  and  before  makkeph), 
a  measuring  or  levelling  line,  signifies,  wrhen  used  by  the  pro 
phet  with  the  reduplication  which  he  employs  here  :  it  is  a 
people  of  "  command  upon  command," — that  is  to  say,  a  com 
manding  nation  ;  (according  to  Evvald,  Knobel,  and  others, 
Mv  is  equivalent  to  the  Arabic  kuwe,  strength,  a  nation  of 
double  or  gigantic  strength.)  "A  people  of  treading  down" 
(sc.  of  others  ;  mebusah  is  a  second  genitive  to  goi),  i.e.  one 
which  subdues  and  tramples  down  wherever  it  appears.  These 
are  all  distinctive  predicates — a  nation  of  imposing  grandeur, 
a  ruling  and  conquering  nation.  The  last  predicate  extols  its 
fertile  land.  Kja  we  take  not  in  the  sense  of  diripere,  or  as 
equivalent  to  Idzaz,  like  DKE>?  to  melt,  equivalent  to  mdsas, 
but  in  the  sense  of  findere,  i.e.  as  equivalent  to  y]2?  like  N£>2,  to 
sip  ==  VD3.  For  it  is  no  praise  to  say  that  a  land  is  scoured 
out,  or  washed  away,  by  rivers.  Bottcher,  who  is  wrong  in 
describing  this  chapter  as  "  perhaps  the  most  difficult  in  the 
whole  of  the  Old  Testament,"  very  aptly  compares  with  it  the 
expression  used  by  Herodotus  (ii.  108),  /carer fj,r}0rj  rj  Afyvrrros. 
But  why  this  strange  elaboration  instead  of  the  simple  name? 
There  is  a  divine  irony  in  the  fact  that  a  nation  so  great  and 


352  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

glorious,  and  (though  not  without  reason,  considering  its  natural 
gifts)  so  full  of  self-consciousness,  should  be  thrown  into  such 
violent  agitation  in  the  prospect  of  the  danger  that  threatened 
it,  and  should  be  making  such  strenuous  exertions  to  avert  that 
danger,  when  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel  was  about  to  destroy 
the  threatening  power  itself  in  a  night,  and  consequently  all 
the  care  and  trouble  of  Ethiopia  were  utterly  needless. 

The  prophet  knows  for  certain  that  the  messengers  may  go 
home  and  announce  this  act  of  Jehovah  to  their  own  people  and 
to  all  the  world.  Yers.  4-6.  "For  thus  hath  Jehovah  spoken  to 
me :  I  will  be  still,  and  will  observe  upon  my  throne  during  clear 
weather  in  sunshine,  during  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the  heat  of  harvest. 
For  before  the  harvest,  when  the  blossom  falls  off,  and  the  fruit 
becomes  the  ripening  grape:  then  will  lie  cut  off  the  branches  with 
pruning-hooks ;  and  the  tendrils  He  removes,  breaks  off.  They 
are  left  altogether  to  the  birds  of  prey  on  the  mountains,  and  to 
the  cattle  of  the  land  ;  and  the  birds  of  prey  summer  thereon,  and 
all  the  cattle  of  the  land  will  winter  thereon!9  The  prophecy 
explains  itself  here,  as  is  very  frequently  the  case,  especially 
with  Isaiah ;  for  the  literal  words  of  ver.  6  show  us  unques 
tionably  what  it  is  that  Jehovah  will  allow  to  develop  itself  so 
prosperously  under  favourable  circumstances,  and  without  any 
interposition  on  His  part,  until  He  suddenly  and  violently  puts 
an  end  to  the  whole,  just  as  it  is  approaching  perfect  maturity. 
It  is  the  might  of  Assyria.  Jehovah  quietly  looks  on  from 
the  heavenly  seat  of  His  glorious  presence,  without  disturbing 
the  course  of  the  thing  intended.  This  quietness,  however,  is 
not  negligence,  but,  as  the  hortative  expressions  show,  a  wrell- 
considered  resolution.  The  two  Caphs  in  ver.  4  are  not  com 
parative,  but  indicate  the  time.  He  remains  quiet  whilst  there 
is  clear  weather  with  sunshine  (vJJ  indicating  continuance,  as 
in  Jer.viii.  18,  1  Sam.  xiv.  32),  and  whilst  there  is  a  dew-cloud 
in  the  midst  of  that  warmth,  which  is  so  favourable  for  the 
harvest,  by  causing  the  plants  that  have  been  thoroughly  heated 
in  the  day  and  refreshed  at  night  by  the  dew,  to  shoot  up  and 
ripen  with  rapidity  and  luxuriance.  The  plant  thought  of,  as 
ver.  5  clearly  shows,  is  the  vine.  By  Upline  kdtzir  (before  the 
harvest)  we  are  either  to  understand  the  period  just  before  the 
wheat-harvest,  which  coincides  with  the  flowering  of  the  grape; 
or,  since  Isaiah  uses  kdtzir  for  bdtzir  in  ch.  xvi.  9,  the  time  at 


CHA'P.  'XVIII.  7.  353 

the  close  of  the  summer,  immediately  preceding  the  vintage. 
Here  again  the  Caph  indicates  the  time.  When  the  blossoming 
is  over,  so  that  the  flower  fades  away,  and  the  fruit  that  has  set 
becomes  a  ripening  grape  (loser,  as  in  Job  xv.  33,  not  in  the 
sense  of  labruscum,  but  of  omphax  ;  and  gdmal,  maturescere,  as 
in  Num.  xvii.  23,  maturare),  He  cuts  off  the  branches  (zalzallim, 
from  zilzel,  to  swing  to  and  fro  ;  compare  the  Arabic  ddliye,  a 
vine-branch,  from  dald,  to  hang  long  and  loose)  upon  which  the 
nearly  ripened  grapes  are  hanging,  and  removes  or  nips  off  1 
the  tendrils  (netishoth,  as  in  Jer.  v.  10,  from  ndtash,  to  stretch 
far  out  ;  niphal,  to  twist  about  a  long  way,  ch.  xvi.  8,  compare 
Jer.  xlviii.  32)  ;  an  intentional  asyndeton  with  a  pictorial  sound. 
The  words  of  Jehovah  concerning  Himself  have  here  passed 
imperceptibly  into  words  of  the  prophet  concerning  Jehovah. 
The  ripening  grapes,  as  ver.  6  now  explains,  are  the  Assyrians, 
who  were  not  far  from  the  summit  of  their  power  ;  the  fruit- 
branches  that  are  cut  off  and  nipped  in  pieces  are  their  corpses, 
which  are  now  through  both  summer  and  winter  the  food  of 
swarms  of  summer  birds,  as  well  as  of  beasts  of  prey  that 
remain  the  whole  winter  through.  This  is  the  act  of  divine 
judgment,  to  which  the  approaching  exaltation  of  the  banner, 
and  the  approaching  blast  of  trumpets,  is  to  call  the  attention 
of  the  people  of  Ethiopia. 

What  effect  this  act  of  Jehovah  would  have  upon  the 
Ethiopian  kingdom,  if  it  should  now  take  place,  is  described 
in  ver.  7  :  "At  that  time  will  there  be  offered  as  a  homage  to 
Jehovah  of  hosts  a  nation  stretched  out  and  polished,  and  from  a 
terrible  people,  far  away  on  the  other  side;  a  nation  of  command 
upon  command  and  treading  down,  whose  land  rivers  cut  through, 
at  the  place  of  the  name  of  Jehovah  of  hosts,  the  mountain  of 
Zian"  BV  (a  people),  at  the  commencement,  cannot  possibly 
be  equivalent  to  D^O  (from  a  people).  If  it  were  taken  in  this 
sense,  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  the  correction  accordingly, 


a  Pausal  sharpening  of  the  tzere,  which  is  lengthened 
by  the  tone,  from  tdzaz  or  tlz  in  post-biblical  Hebrew,  to  knock  off,  knock 
to  pieces,  or  weaken  (compare  tasliasli).  On  this  change  of  vowels  in 
pause,  see  at  Gen.  xvii.  14  ;  and  compare  Olshausen,  §  91,  d.  For  an 
example  of  the  post-biblical  use  of  the  word,  vid.  b.  Sanhedrin  102«, 
44  like  two  sticks  liammaHlzoth"  i.e.  one  of  which  "  hits  the  other  iu  two" 
(Jiittiz,  apparently  from  tuz  or  tiz^  like  Idunlach  from  nuach). 
VOL.  I.  Z 


354  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

as  Knobel  has  done ;  but  the  important  parallels  in  ch.  Ixvi.  20 
and  Zeph.  iii.  10  are  against  this.  Consequently  'am  and  goi 
(people  and  nation)  must  be  rendered  as  subjects ;  and  the  |p 
in  Dy»  must  be  taken  as  partitive.  Ethiopia  is  offered,  i.e. 
offers  itself,  as  a  free-will  offering  to  Jehovah,  impelled  irre 
sistibly  by  the  force  of  the  impression  made  by  the  mighty  act 
of  Jehovah,  or,  as  it  is  expressed  in  "  the  Titan  among  the 
Psalms"  (Ps.  Ixviii.  32,  probably  a  Davidic  psalm  of  the  time 
of  Hezekiah),  "  there  come  kingdoms  of  splendour  out  of 
Egypt;  Gush  rapidly  stretches  out  its  hands  to  Elohim."  In 
order  that  the  greatness  of  this  spiritual  conquest  might  be 
fully  appreciated,  the  description  of  this  strangely  glorious 
people  is  repeated  here ;  and  with  this  poetical  rounding,  the 
prophecy  itself,  which  was  placed  as  a  kind  of  overture  before 
the  following  massa  Mitzraim  when  the  prophet  collected  the 
whole  of  his  prophecies  together,  is  brought  to  a  close. 

THE  ORACLE  CONCERNING  EGYPT. — CHAP.  XIX. 

The  three  prophecies  in  ch.  xviii.  xix.  and  xx.  really  form  a 
trilogy.  The  first  (ch.  xviii.),  which,  like  ch.  i.,  the  introduction 
to  the  whole,  is  without  any  special  heading,  treats  in  language 
of  the  sublimest  pathos  of  Ethiopia.  The  second  (ch.  xix.) 
treats  in  a  calmer  and  more  descriptive  tone  of  Egypt.  The 
third  (ch.  xx.)  treats  of  both  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  in  the  style 
of  historic  prose.  The  kingdom  to  which  all  three  prophecies 
refer  is  one  and  the  same,  viz.  the  Egypto-Ethiopian  kingdom  ; 
but  whilst  ch.  xviii.  refers  to  the  ruling  nation,  ch.  xix.  treats 
of  the  conquered  one,  and  ch.  xx.  embraces  both  together.  The 
reason  why  such  particular  attention  is  given  to  Egypt  in  the 
prophecy,  is  that  no  nation  on  earth  was  so  mixed  up  with 
the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  from  the  patriarchal  times 
downwards,  as  Egypt  was.  And  because  Israel,  as  the  law 
plainly  enjoined  upon  it,  was  never  to  forget  that  it  had  been 
sheltered  for  a  long  time  in  Egypt,  and  there  had  grown  into 
a  great  nation,  and  had  received  many  benefits  ;  whenever 
prophecy  has  to  speak  concerning  Egypt,  it  is  quite  as  earnest 
in  its  promises  as  it  is  in  its  threats.  And  thus  the  massa  of 
Isaiah  falls  into  two  distinct  halves,  viz.  a  threatening  one 
(vers.  1-15),  and  a  promising  one  (vers.  18-25)  ;  whilst  be- 


CHAP.  XIX.  1-4.  355 

tween  the  judgment  and  the  salvation  (in  vers.  1G  and  17) 
there  stands  the  alarm,  forming  as  it  were  a  connecting  bridge 
between  the  two.  And  just  in  proportion  as  the  coil  of  punish 
ments  is  unfolded  on  the  one  hand  by  the  prophet,  the  pro 
mise  is  also  unfolded  in  just  as  many  stages  on  the  other ;  and 
moving  on  in  ever  new  grooves,  rises  at  length  to  such  a  height, 
that  it  breaks  not  only  through  the  limits  of  contemporaneous 
history,  but  even  through  those  of  the  Old  Testament  itself, 
and  speaks  in  the  spiritual  language  of  the  world-embracing 
love  of  the  New  Testament. 

The  oracle  opens  with  a  short  introduction,  condensing  the 
whole  of  the  substance  of  the  first  half  into  a  few  weighty 
words, — an  art  in  which  Isaiah  peculiarly  excelled.  In  this 
the  name  of  Egypt,  the  land  without  an  equal,  occurs  no  less 
than  three  times.  Ver.  1.  "  Behold,  Jehovah  rideth  upon  a  light 
cloudy  and  cometh  to  Egypt ;  and  the  idols  of  Egypt  shake  before 
Him,  and  the  heart  of  Egypt  melteth  within  it."  Jehovah  rides 
upon  clouds  when  He  is  about  to  reveal  Himself  in  His  judicial 
majesty  (Ps.  xviii.  11)  ;  and  in  this  instance  He  rides  upon 
a  light  cloud,  because  it  will  take  place  rapidly.  The  word 
leal  signifies  both  light  and  swift,  because  what  is  light  moves 
swiftly ;  and  even  a  light  cloud,  which  is  light  because  it  is  thin, 
is  comparatively  3V,  i.e.  literally  dense,  opaque,  or  obscure. 
The  idols  of  Egypt  shake  (3fl3,  as  in  ch.  vi.  4,  vii.  2),  because 
Jehovah  comes  over  them  to  judgment  (cf.  Ex.  xii.  12 ;  Jer. 
xlvi.  25 ;  Ezek.  xxx.  13)  :  they  must  shake,  for  they  are  to  be 
thrown  down ;  and  their  shaking  for  fear  is  a  shaking  to  their 
fall  (Vtt,  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  20,  xxix.  9).  The  Vav  apodosis  in  W 
(prcet.  cons,  with  the  tone  upon  the  last  syllable)  connects 
together  the  cause  and  effect,  as  in  ch.  vi.  7. — In  what  judg 
ments  the  judgment  will  be  fulfilled,  is  now  declared  by  the 
majestic  Judge  Himself.  Vers.  2-4.  "And  I  spur  Egypt 
against  Egypt :  and  they  go  to  war,  every  one  with  his  brother, 
and  every  one  with  his  neighbour ;  city  against  city,  kingdom 
against  kingdom.  And  the  spirit  of  Egypt  is  emptied  out  within 
it:  and  I  swallow  up  its  ready  counsel;  and  tltey  go  to  the  idols  to 
inquire,  and  to  the  mutterers,  and  to  the  oracle-spirits,  and  to  the 
soothsayers.  And  I  shut  up  Egypt  in  the  hand  of  a  hard  rule ; 
and  a  fierce  king  will  reign  over  them,  saith  the  Lord,  Jehovah  of 
hosts.9'  Civil  war  ^Till  rage  in  Egypt  (on  sicsec,  see  at  ch.  ix.  10). 


356  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

The  people  once  so  shrewd  are  now  at  their  wits'  end ;  their 
spirit  is  quite  poured  out  (niJ3J,  with  the  reduplication  removed, 
for  n^n:,  according  to  Ges.  §  68,  Anm.  11, — as,  for  example,  in 
Gen.  xi.  7,  Ezek.  xli.  7),  so  that  there  is  nothing  left  of  either 
intelligence  or  resolution.  Then  (and  this  is  also  part  of  the 
judgment)  they  turn  for  help,  in  counsel  and  action,  where  no 
help  is  to  be  found,  viz.  to  their  "  nothings  "  of  gods,  and  the 
manifold  demoniacal  arts,  of  which  Egypt  could  boast  of  being 
the  primary  seat.  On  the  names  of  the  practisers  of  the  black 
art,  see  ch.  viii.  19;  'ittim,  the  mutterers,  is  from  'dtat,  to  squeak 
(used  of  a  camel-saddle,  especially  when  new),  or  to  rumble 
(used  of  an  empty  stomach)  :  see  Lane's  Lexicon.  But  all 
this  is  of  no  avail :  Jehovah  gives  them  up  p?p,  syn.  "VSpn, 
o-vjfcXeleiv)  to  be  ruled  over  by  a  hard-hearted  and  cruel  king. 
The  prophecy  does  not  relate  to  a  foreign  conqueror,  so  as  to 
lead  us  to  think  of  Sargon  (Knobel)  or  Cambyses  (Luzzatto), 
but  to  a  native  despot.  In  comparing  the  prophecy  with  the 
fulfilment,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  ver.  2  relates  to  the 
national  revolution  which  broke  out  in  Sais,  and  resulted  in 
the  overthrow  of  the  Ethiopian  rule,  and  to  the  federal  doclek- 
archy  to  which  the  rising  of  the  nation  led.  "  Kingdom 
against  kingdom  :"  this  exactly  suits  those  twelve  small  king 
doms  into  which  Egypt  was  split  up  after  the  overthrow  of  the 
Ethiopian  dynasty  in  the  year  695,  until  Psammetichus  y  the 
dodekarch  of  Sais,  succeeded  in  the  year  670  in  comprehend 
ing  these  twelve  states  once  more  under  a  single  monarchy. 
This  very  Psammetichus  (and  the  royal  house  of  Psammetichus 
generally)  is  the  hard  ruler,  the  reckless  despot.  He  succeeded 
in  gaining  the  battle  at  Momemphis,  by  which  he  established 
himself  in  the  monarchy,  through  having  first  of  all  strength 
ened  himself  with  mercenary  troops  from  Ionia,  Caria,  and 
Greece.  From  his  time  downwards,  the  true  Egyptian  cha 
racter  was  destroyed  by  the  admixture  of  foreign  elements  ; l 
and  this  occasioned  the  emigration  of  a  large  portion  of  the 
military  caste  to  Meroe.  The  Egyptian  nation  very  soon  came 
to  feel  how  oppressive  this  new  dynasty  was,  when  Necho 
(616-597),  the  son  and  successor  of  Psammetichus,  renewed 

1  See  Leo,  Universalgescli.  i.  152,  and  what  Brugsch  says  in  his  Histoirt 
d'Egypte,  i.  250,  with  regard  to  the  brusques  changements  that  Egypt  en 
dured  under  Psammetichus. 


CHAP.  XIX.  5-10.  357 

the  project  of  Ramses-Miamun,  to  construct  a  Suez  canal,  and 
tore  away  120,000  of  the  natives  of  the  land  from  their  homes, 
sendino1  them  to  wear  out  their  lives  in  forced  labour  of  the 

tr> 

most  wearisome  kind.  A  revolt  on  the  part  of  the  native 
troops,  who  had  been  sent  against  the  rising  Gyrene,  and  driven 
back  into  the  desert,  led  to  the  overthrow  of  Hophra,  the 
grandson  of  Necho  (570),  and  put  an  end  to  the  hateful 
government  of  the  family  of  Psammetichus. 

The  prophet  then  proceeds  to  foretell  another  misfortune 
which  was  coming  upon  Egypt :  the  Nile  dries  up,  and  with 
this  the  fertility  of  the  land  disappears.  Vers.  5-10.  "  And  the 
waters  will  dry  up  from  the  sea,  and  the  river  is  parched  and 
dried.  And  the  arms  of  the  river  spread  a  stench;  the  channels 
of  Matzor  become  shalloiv  and  parched:  reed  and  rush  shrivel  up. 
The  meadows  by  the  Nile,  on  the  border  of  the  Nile,  and  every 
corn-field  of  the  Nile,  dries  up,  is  scattered,  and  disappears.  And 
the  fishermen  groan,  and  all  who  throw  draw-nets  into  the  Nile 
lament,  and  they  that  spread  out  the  net  upon  the  face  of  the 
waters  languish  away.  And  the  workers  of  fine  combed  flax  are 
confounded,  and  the  weavers  of  cotton  fabrics.  And  the  pillars 
of  the  land  are  ground  to  powder ;  all  that  ivork  for  wages  are 
ti-oubled  in  mind."  In  ver.  5  the  Nile  is  called  yam  (a  sea), 
just  as  Homer  calls  it  Oceanus,  which,  as  Diodorus  observes,  was 
the  name  given  by  the  natives  to  the  river  (Egypt,  ohani).  The 
White  Nile  is  called  bahr  el-abyad  (the  White  Sea),  the  Blue 
Nile  bahr  el-azrak,  and  the  combined  waters  bahr  en-Nil,  or, 
in  the  language  of  the  Besharin,  as  here  in  Isaiah,  yam.  And 
in  the  account  of  the  creation,  in  Gen.  i.,  yammim  is  the 
collective  name  for  great  seas  and  rivers.  But  the  Nile  itself 
is  more  like  an  inland  sea  than  a  river,  from  the  point  at  which 
the  great  bodies  of  water  brought  down  by  the  Blue  Nile  and 
the  White  Nile,  which  rises  a  few  weeks  later,  flow  together ; 
partly  on  account  of  its  great  breadth,  and  partly  also  because 
of  its  remaining  stagnant  throughout  the  dry  season.  It  is  not 
till  the  tropical  rains  commence  that  the  swelling  river  begins 
to  flow  more  rapidly,  and  the  yam  becomes  a  ndhdr.  But  when, 
as  is  here  threatened,  the  Nile  sea  and  Nile  river  in  Upper 
Egypt  sink  together  and  dry  up  (nisshethu,  niphal  either  of 
shdthath  =  ndsJiattu,  to  set,  to  grow  shallow ;  or  more  probably 
from  ndshath,  t^  dry  up,  since  ch.  xli.  17  and  Jer.  li.  30 


358  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

warrant  the  assumption  that  there  was  such  a  verb),  the  mouths 
(or  arms)  of  the  Nile  (nehdroth),  which  flow  through  the  Delta, 
and  the  many  canals  (yeorim),  by  which  the  benefits  of  the 
overflow  are  conveyed  to  the  Nile  valley,  are  turned  into 
stinking  puddles  ('irnTKn,  a  hiphil,  half  substantive  half  verbal, 
unparalleled  elsewhere,1  signifying  to  spread  a  stench  ;  possibly 
it  may  have  been  used  in  the  place  of  n^rn,  from  njTK  or  njTS, 
stmking,  to  which  a  different  application  was  given  in  ordi 
nary  use).  In  all  probability  it  is  not  without  intention  that 
Isaiah  uses  the  expression  Mdtzor,  inasmuch  as  he  distinguishes 
Mdtzor  from  Pathros  (ch.  xi.  11),  i.e.  Lower  from  Upper  Egypt 
(Egyp.  sa-het,  the  low  land,  and  sa-res,  the  higher  land),  the 
two  together  being  Mitzrayim.  And  yeorim  (by  the  side  of 
nehdroth)  we  are  warranted  in  regarding  as  the  name  given  of 
the  Nile  canals.  The  canal  system  in  Egypt  and  the  system 
of  irrigation  are  older  than  the  invasion  of  the  Hyksos  (vid. 
Lepsius,  in  Herzog's  Cyclopaedia).  On  the  other  hand,  ye*  or 
in  ver.  7  (where  it  is  written  three  times  plene,  as  it  is  also  in 
ver.  8)  is  the  Egyptian  name  of  the  Nile  generally  (yaro).2  It 
is  repeated  emphatically  three  times,  like  Mitzrayim  in  ver.  1. 
Parallel  to  mizra*,  but  yet  different  from  it,  is  nhV,  from  rrjV, 
to  be  naked  or  bare,  which  signifies,  like  many  derivatives  of 
the  synonymous  word  in  Arabic,  either  open  spaces,  or  as 
here,  grassy  tracts  by  the  water-side,  i.e.  meadows.  Even  the 
meadows,  which  lie  close  to  the  water-side  (pi  =  ora,  as  in  Ps. 
cxxxiii.  2,  not  ostitun),  and  all  the  fields,  become  so  parched, 
that  they  blow  away  like  ashes.  Then  the  three  leading 
sources  from  which  Egypt  derived  its  maintenance  all  fail  :  — 
viz.  the  fishing;  the  linen  manufacture,  which  supplied  dresses 
for  the  priests  and  bandages  for  mummies  ;  and  the  cotton 
manufacture,  by  which  all  who  were  not  priests  were  supplied 


1  It  is  not  unparalleled  as  a  Jiiph.  denom.  (compare  Tiiyn,  oil, 

to  press,  Job  xxiv.  11,  Talm.  JJvnn,  to  become  worm-eaten,  and  many 
others  of  a  similar  kind)  ;  and  as  a  mixed  form  (possibly  a  mixture  of  two 
readings,  as  Gesenius  and  Bottcher  suppose,  though  it  is  not  necessarily  so), 
the  language  admitted  of  much  that  was  strange,  more  especially  in  the 
vulgar  tongue,  which  found  its  way  here  and  there  into  written  composition. 

2  From  the  fact  that  aur  in  old  Egyptian  means  the  Nile,  we  may 
explain  the  Qpovopa  qrot  N«Ao;,  with  which  the  Laterculus  of  Eratosthenes 
closes. 


CHAP.  XIX.  11-13.  359 

with  clothes.  The  Egyptian  fishery  was  very  important.  In 
the  Berlin  Museum  there  is  an  Egyptian  micmoreth  with  lead 
attached.  The  mode  of  working  the  flax  by  means  of  serikdh, 
pectinatio  (compare  pViD,  wool-combs,  Kelim,  12,  2),  is  shown 
on  the  monuments.  In  the  Berlin  Museum  there  are  also 
Egyptian  combs  of  this  description  with  which  the  flax  was 
carded.  The  productions  of  the  Egyptian  looms  were  cele 
brated  in  antiquity:  clwrdy,  lit.  white  cloth  (singularet.  with  the 
old  termination  ay),  is  the  general  name  for  cotton  fabrics,  or 
the  different  kinds  of  byssus  that  were  woven  there  (compare 
the  jBvcraivaw  oOoviwv  of  the  Rosetta  inscription).  All  the 
castes,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  are  now  thrown  into 
agonies  of  despair.  The  shdthoth  (an  epithet  that  was  probably 
suggested  by  the  thought  of  shethi,  a  warp,  Syr.  'ashti,  to  weave, 
through  the  natural  association  of  ideas),  i.e.  the  "pillars"  of 
the  land  (with  a  suffix  relating  to  Mitzrayim,  see  at  ch.  iii.  8, 
and  construed  as  a  masculine  as  at  Ps.  xi.  3),  were  the  highest 
castes,  who  were  the  direct  supporters  of  the  state  edifice ;  and 
"DE?  *wy  cannot  mean  the  citizens  engaged  in  trade,  i.e.  the 
middle  classes,  but  such  of  the  people  as  hired  themselves  to 
the  employers  of  labour,  and  therefore  lived  upon  wages  and 
not  upon  their  own  property  ("OB>  is  used  here  as  in  Prov.  xi, 
18,  and  not  as  equivalent  to  "13D,  the  dammers-up  of  the  water 
for  the  purpose  of  catching  the  fish,  like  P??,  Kelim,  23,  5). 

The  prophet  now  dwells  upon  the  punishment  which  falls 
upon  the  pillars  of  the  land,  and  describes  it  in  vers.  11-13: 
"  The  princes  of  Zoan  become  mere  fools,  the  wise  counsellors  of 
Pharaoh;  readiness  in  counsel  is  stupified.  How  can  ye  say  to 
Pharaoh,  I  am  a  son  of  wise  men,  a  son  of  kings  of  the  olden 
time  ?  Where  are  they  then,  thy  wise  men  ?  Let  them  announce 
to  thee,  and  know  what  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  determined  con 
cerning  Egypt.  The  princes  of  Zoan  have  become  fools,  the 
princes  of  Memphis  are  deceived ;  and  they  have  led  Egypt  astray 
who  are  the  corner-stone  of  its  castes"  The  two  constructive 
^  VOZJn  do  not  stand  in  a  subordinate  relation,  but  in  a 
co-ordinate  one  (see  at  Ps.  Ixxviii.  9  and  Job  xx.  17;  compare 
also  2  Kings  xvii.  13,  keri),  viz.  "  the  wise  men,  counsellors 
of  Pharaoh,"1  so  that  the  second  noun  is  the  explanatory  per- 

1  Pharaoh  does  not  mean  "  the  king"  (equivalent  to  the  Coptic  TT-O^CO), 
but  according  to  Brunch,  "great  house"  (Upper  Egyptian  peraa,  Lower 


3GO  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

mutative  of  the  first.  Zoan  is  tlie  Tanis  of  primeval  times 
(Num.  xiii.  22),  which  was  situated  on  one  of  the  arms  through 
which  the  Nile  flows  into  the  sea  (viz.  the  ostium  Taniticum), 
and  was  the  home  from  which  two  dynasties  sprang.  Noph 
(per  aphcer.  =  Menopli,  contracted  into  Mopli  in  Hos.  ix.  6)  is 
Memphis,  probably  the  seat  of  the  Pharaohs  in  the  time  of 
Joseph,  and  raised  by  Psammetichus  into  the  metropolis  of  the 
whole  kingdom.  The  village  of  Mitrahenni  still  stands  upon 
its  ruins,  with  the  Serapeum  to  the  north-west.1  Consequently 
princes  of  Zoan  and  Memphis  are  princes  of  the  chief  cities 
of  the  land,  and  of  the  supposed  primeval  pedigree;  probably 
priest-princes,  since  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptian  priest  was  of 
world-wide  renown  (Herod,  ii.  77,  2()0),  and  the  oldest  kings 
of  Egypt  sprang  from  the  priestly  caste.  Even  in  the  time  of 
Hezekiah,  when  the  military  caste  had  long  become  the  ruling 
one,  the  priests  once  more  succeeded  in  raising  one  of  their 
own  number,  namely  Sethos,  to  the  throne  of  Sais.  These 
magnates  of  Egypt,  with  their  wisdom,  would  be  turned  into 
fools  by  the  history  of  Egypt  of  the  immediate  future;  and 
(this  is  the  meaning  of  the  sarcastic  "how  can  ye  sny")  they 
would  no  longer  trust  themselves  to  boast  of  their  hereditary 
priestly  wisdom,  or  their  royal  descent,  when  giving  counsel  to 

Egyptian  pher-ao ;  vid.  aus  dem  Orient,  i.  36).  Lauth  refers  in  confirma 
tion  of  this  to  Horapollo,  i.  62,  o$i$  xal  clao;  ptya;  sv  [/AvM  OIVTOV  avit^xivn 
fiitfrftta,  and  explains  this  Coptic  name  for  a  king  from  that  of  the  Oi/pxio? 
(fixanhfffzoi)  upon  the  head  of  the  king,  which  was  a  specifically  regal 
sign. 

1  What  the  lexicons  say  with  reference  to  Zoan  and  Noph  needs  rectify 
ing.  Zoan  (old  Egyptian  Zane,  with  the  hieroglyphic  of  striding  legs,  Copt. 
'Gam)  points  back  to  the  radical  idea  of  pelli  or  fugere;  and  according  to  the 
latest  researches,  to  which  the  Turin  papyrus  No.  112  has  led,  it  is  the  same 
as  Avotpi;  ("Afi&pts ),  which  is  said  to  mean  the  house  of  flight  (Ha-uare), 
and  was  the  seat  of  government  under  the  Hykshos.  But  Memphis  is  not 
equivalent  to  Ma-m-ptah,  as  Champollion  assumed  (although  this  city  is 
unquestionably  sometimes  called  Ha-ka-ptah,  house  of  the  essential  being 
of  Ptah)  ;  it  is  rather  equivalent  to  Men-nefer  (with  the  hieroglyphic  of 
the  pyramids),  place  of  the  good  (see  Brugsch,  Histoire  d'Eyypte,  i.  17). 
[n  the  later  language  it  is  called  pa-nuf  or  ma-nuf;  which  has  the  same 
meaning  (Copt,  niiji,  good).  Hence  Moph  is  the  contraction  of  the  name 
commencing  with  ma,  and  Noph  the  abbreviation  of  the  name  commencing 
with  ma  or  pa  by  the  rejection  of  the  local  prefix ;  for  we  cannot  for  a 
moment  think  of  Nup,  which  is  the  second  district  of  Upper  Egypt  (Brugsch, 
Geogr.  i.  66).  Noph  is  undoubtedly  Memphis. 


CHAP.  SIX.  14-17.  3G1 

Pliaraoh.  They  were  the  corner-stone  of  the  shebdfim,  i.e.  of 
the  castes  of  Egypt  (not  of  the  districts  or  provinces,  z;o/W) ; 
but  instead  of  supporting  and  defending  their  people,  it  is  now 
very  evident  that  they  only  led  them  astray.  Wn/  as  the 
Masora  on  ver.  15  observes,  has  no  Vav  cop. 

In  vers.  14  and  15  this  state  of  confusion  is  more  minutely 
described  :  "  Jehovah  hath  poured  a  spirit  of  giddiness  into  the 
heart  of  Egypt,  so  that  they  have  led  Egypt  astray  in  all  its 
doing,  as  a  drunken  man  wander eth  about  in  his  vomit.  And 
there  does  not  occur  of  Enypt  any  work,  which  worked,  of  head 
and  tail,  palm-branch  and  rush"  The  spirit  which  God  pours 
out  (as  is  also  said  elsewhere)  is  not  only  a  spirit  of  salvation, 
but  also  a  spirit  of  judgment.  The  judicial,  penal  result  which 
He  produces  is  here  called  B^W,  which  is  formed  from  WW 
(root  1J7,  to  curve),  and  is  either  contracted  from  B^Jfly,  or  points 
back  to  a  supposed  singular  njny  (vid.  Ewald,  §  158,  b).  The 
suffix  in  tfkirbdh  points  to  Egypt.  The  divine  spirit  of  judg 
ment  makes  use  of  the  imaginary  wisdom  of  the  priestly  caste, 
and  thereby  plunges  the  people,  as  it  were,  into  the  giddiness  of 
intoxication.  The  prophet  employs  the  hiphil  nynn  to  denote 
the  carefully  considered  action's  of  the  leaders  of  the  nation, 
and  the  niphal  nyro  to  denote  the  constrained  actions  of  ;i 
drunken  man,  who  has  lost  all  self-control.  The  nation  has 
been  so  perverted  by  false  counsels  and  hopes,  that  it  lies  there 
like  a  drunken  man  in  his  own  vomit,  and  gropes  and  rolls 
about,  without  being  able  to  find  any  way  of  escape.  "  No 
work  that  worked,"  i.e.  that  averted  trouble  (nfc'y  is  as  emphatic 
as  in  Dan.  viii.  24),  was  successfully  carried  out  by  any  one, 
either  by  the  leaders  of  the  nation  or  by  the  common  people 
and  their  flatterers,  either  by  the  upper  classes  or  by  the  mob. 

The  result  of  all  these  plagues,  which  were  coming  upon 
Egypt,  would  be  fear  of  Jehovah  and  of  the  people  of  Jehovah. 
Vers.  16,  17.  "  In  that  day  will  the  Egyptians  become  like 
women,  and  tremble  and  be  alarmed  at  the  swinging  of  the  hand 
of  Jehovah  of  hosts,  which  lie  sets  in  motion  against  it.  And 
the  land  of  Judah  becomes  a  shuddering  for  Egypt ;  as  often  as 
they  mention  this  against  Egypt,  it  is  alarmed,  because  of  the 
decree  of  Jehovah  of  hosts,  that  He  suspendeth  over  it."  The 
swinging  (tenitphdh)  of  the  hand  (ch.  xxx.  32)  points  back  to 
the  foregoing  judgments,  which  have  fallen  upon  Egypt  blow 


5G2  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

after  blow.  These  humiliations  make  the  Egyptians  as  soft 
and  timid  as  women  (tert.  compar.,  not  as  in  ch.  xiii.  7,  8, 
xxi.  3,  4).  And  the  sacred  soil  of  Judah  (WamaA,  as  in  ch. 
xiv.  1,  2,  xxxii.  13),  which  Egypt  has  so  often  made  the  scene 
of  war,  throws  them  into  giddiness,  into  agitation  at  the  sight 
of  terrors,  whenever  it  is  mentioned  ("IPS  ?3,  cf.  1  Sam. 
ii.  13,  lit.  "whoever,"  equivalent  to  "as  often  as  any  one," 
Ewald,  §  337,  3, /;  Njn  is  written  according  to  the  Aramaean 
form,  with  Aleph  for  He,  like  &OT  in  Num.  xi.  20,  Krnjj  in  Ezek. 
xxxvii.  31,  compare  K?3,  Ezek.  xxxvi.  5,  and  similar  in  form 
to  nan  in  ch.  iv.  5). 

The  author  of  the  plagues  is  well  known  to  them,  their 
faith  in  the  idols  is  shaken,  and  the  desire  arises  in  their  heart 
to  avert  fresh  plagues  by  presents  to  Jehovah. 

At  first  there  is  only  slavish  fear ;  but  there  is  the  begin 
ning  of  a  turn  to  something  better.  Yer.  18.  "  In  that  day 
there  ivill  be  five  cities  in  the  land  of  Egypt  speaking  the  lan 
guage  of  Canaan,  and  swearing  to  Jehovah  of  hosts:  (Ir  ha-Heres 
will  one  be  called"  Five  cities  are  very  few  for  Egypt,  which 
was  completely  covered  with  cities;  but  this  is  simply  a 
fragmentary  commencement  of  Egypt's  future  and  complete 
conversion.  The  description  given  of  them,  as  beginning  to 
speak  the  language  of  Canaan,  i.e.  the  sacred  language  of  the 
worship  of  Jehovah  (comp.  Zeph.  iii.  9),  and  to  give  themselves 
up  to  Jehovah  with  vows  made  on  oath,  is  simply  a  periphrastic 
announcement  of  the  conversion  of  the  five  cities,  p  P?^ 
(different  from  3  SJ3BO,  ch.  Ixv.  16,  as  ch.  xlv.  23  clearly  shows) 
signifies  to  swear  to  a  person,  to  promise  him  fidelity,  to  give  one's 
self  up  to  him.  One  of  these  five  will  be  called  *Ir  ha-Heres. 
As  this  is  evidently  intended  for  a  proper  name,  laechdth  does 
not  mean  unicuique,  as  in  Judg.  viii.  18  and  Ezek.  i.  6,  but  uni. 
It  is  a  customary  thing  with  Isaiah  to  express  the  nature  of 
anything  under  the  form  of  some  future  name  (vid.  ch.  iv.  3, 
xxxii.  5,  Ixi.  6,  Ixii.  4).  The  name  in  this  instance,  therefore, 
must  have  a  distinctive  and  promising  meaning.  But  what 
does  *lr  ha-Heres  mean  ?  The  Septuagint  has  changed  it  into 
TroXt?  ao-eSe'/e,  equivalent  to  *Ir  hazzedek  (city  of  righteousness), 
possibly  in  honour  of  the  temple  in  the  Heliopolitan  nomos, 
which  was  founded  under  Ptolemasus  Philometor  about  160  B.C., 
during  the  Syrian  reign  of  terror,  by  Onias  iv.,  son  of  the 


CHAP.  XIX.  13.  3G3 

high  priest  Onias  in.,  who  emigrated  to  Egypt.1  Maurer  in 
his  Lexicon  imagines  that  he  has  found  the  true  meaning,  when 
he  renders  it  "city  of  rescue;"  but  the  progressive  advance 
from  the  meaning  "to  pull  off"  to  that  of  "setting  free" 
cannot  be  established  in  the  case  of  the  verb  haras;  in  fact, 
haras  does  not  mean  to  pull  off  or  pull  out,  but  to  pull  down. 
Heres  cannot  have  any  other  meaning  in  Hebrew  than  that 
of  "  destruction."  But  as  this  appears  unsuitable,  it  is  more 
natural  to  read  'Ir  ha-cheres  (which  is  found  in  some  codices, 
though  in  opposition  to  the  Masora2).  This  is  now  generally 
rendered  "city  of  protection"  (Rosenmiiller,  Ewald,  Knobel, 
and  Meier),  as  being  equivalent  to  an  Arabic  word  signifying 
divinitus  protecta.  But  such  an  appeal  to  the  Arabic  is  con 
trary  to  all  Hebrew  usage,  and  is  always  a  very  precarious 
loophole.  'Ir  ha-cheres  would  mean  "  city  of  the  sun"  (cheres 
as  in  Job  ix.  7  and  Judg.  xiv.  18),  as  the  Talmud  in  the 
leading  passage  concerning  the  Onias  temple  (in  b.  Menalwth 
llOa)  thinks  that  even  the  received  reading  may  be  under 
stood  in  accordance  with  Job  ix.  7,  and  says  "  it  is  a  description 
of  the  sun."  "  Sun-city"  was  really  the  name  of  one  of  the 
most  celebrated  of  the  old  Egyptian  cities,  viz.  Heliopolis^  the 
city  of  the  sun-god  Ra,  which  was  situated  to  the  north-east  of 
"Memphis,  and  is  called  On  in  other  passages  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment.  Ezekiel  (xxx.  17)  alters  this  into  Avert,  for  the  purpose 
of  branding  the  idolatry  of  the  city.3  But  this  alteration  of 
the  well-attested  text  is  a  mistake  ;  and  the  true  explanation 
is,  that  Ir-haheres  is  simply  used  with  a  play  upon  the  name 
Ir-hacheres.  This  is  the  explanation  given  by  the  Targum  : 
"  Heliopolis,  whose  future  fate  will  be  destruction."  But  even 
if  the  name  is  intended  to  have  a  distinctive  and  promising 
meaning,  it  is  impossible  to  adopt  the  explanation  given  by 

1  See  Frankel  on  this  Egyptian  auxiliary  temple,  in  his  Monatschrift 
fiir  Geschichte  und  Wissenschaft  des  Judentlmms,  1852,  p.  273  sqq. ;  Herz- 
feld,   Geschichte   des   Volkes   Israel,  iii.  460   sqq.,   557  sqq.  ;    and  Gratz, 
Geschichte  der  Juden,  iii.  36  sqq. 

2  But  no  Greek  codex  has  the  reading  voht;  d%spe$  (see  Holmes-Par 
sons'  V.  T.  Grsecum  c.  var.  lect.  t.  iv.  on  this  passage),  as  the  Compluten- 
sian  has  emended  it  after  the  Vulgate  (see  the  Vocalidarium  Hebr.  37a, 
belonging  to  the  Oomplutensian). 

3  Heliopolis  answers  to  the  sacred  name  Pe-ra,  house  of  the  sun -god 
(like  Pe -Harnesses,  house  of  Ramses),  which  was  a  name  borne  by  the  city 


364  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Luzzatto,  "a  city  restored  from  the  ruins;"  for  the  name  points 
to  destruction,  not  to  restoration.  Moreover,  Heliopolis  never 
has  been  restored  since  the  time  of  its  destruction,  which 
Straho  dates  as  far  back  as  the  Persian  invasion.  There  is 
nothing  left  standing  now  out  of  all  its  monuments  but  one 
granite  obelisk :  they  are  all  either  destroyed,  or  carried  away, 
like  the  so-called  "  Cleopatra's  Needle,"  or  sunk  in  the  soil 
of  the  Nile  (Par they  on  Plutarch,  de  Iside,,  p.  162).  This 
destruction  cannot  be  the  one  intended.  But  haras  is  the 
word  commonly  used  to  signify  the  throwing  down  of  heathen 
altars  (Judg.  vi.  25 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  30,  xix.  10,  14) ;  and  the 
meaning  of  the  prophecy  may  be,  that  the  city  which  had 
hitherto  been  elr  ha-cheres,  the  chief  city  of  the  sup-worship, 
would  become  the  city  of  the  destruction  of  idolatry,  as  Jere 
miah  prophesies  in  ch.  xliii.  13,  "  Jehovah  will  break  in  pieces 
the  obelisks  of  the  sun-temple  in  the  land  of  Egypt."  Hence 
Herzfeld's  interpretation  :  "  City  of  demolished  Idols"  (p.  561). 
It  is  true  that  in  this  case  ha-heres  merely  announces  the 
breaking  up  of  the  old,  and  does  not  say  what  new  thing  will 
rise  upon  the  ruins  of  the  old  ;  but  the  context  leaves  no  doubt 
as  to  this  new  thing,  and  the  one-sided  character  of  the  de 
scription  is  to  be  accounted  for  from  the  intentional  play  upon 
the  actual  name  of  that  one  city  out  of  the  five  to  which  the 
prophet  gives  especial  prominence.  With  this  interpretation — 
for  which  indeed  we  cannot  pretend  to  find  any  special  con 
firmation  in  the  actual  fulfilment  in  the  history  of  the  church, 
and,  so  to  speak,  the  history  of  missions — the  train  of  thought 
in  the  prophet's  mind  which  led  to  the  following  groove  of 
promises  is  a  very  obvious  one. — The  allusion  to  the  sun-city, 
which  had  become  the  city  of  destruction,  led  to  the  mazzeloth 

that  was  at  other  times  called  On  (old  Egyptian  arm).  Cyrill,  however, 
explains  even  the  latter  thus,  "Civ  Bg  \<JTI  x,otr  UVTOV;  6  faux;  (u  On,  according 
to  their  interpretation,  is  the  sun"),  which  is  so  far  true  according  to 
Lauth,  that  Aint  Oin,  Oni,  signifies  the  eye  as  an  emblem  of  the  sun  ;  and 
from  this,  the  tenth  month,  which  marks  the  return  of  the  sun  to  the 
equinoctial  point,  derives  its  name  of  Pa-oni,  Pa-one,  Pa-uni.  It  may 
possibly  be  with  reference  to  this  that  Heliopolis  is  called  Ain  es-sems  in 
Arabic  (see  Arnold,  Chrestom.  Arab.  p.  56  s.).  Edrisi  (iii.  3)  speaks  of 
this  Ain  es-sems  as  u  the  country-seat  of  Pharaoh,  which  may  God  curse  ;" 
just  as  Ibn  e.l-Faraun  is  a  common  expression  of  contempt,  which  the 
Arabs  apply  to  the  Coptic  fellahs. 


CHAP.  XIX.  19,  20.  365 

or  obelisks  (see  Jer.  xliii.  13),  which  were  standing  there  on 
the  spot  where  Ra  was  worshipped.  Vers.  19,  20.  "  In  that  day 
there  stands  an  altar  consecrated  to  Jehovah  in  the  midst  of  the 
land  of  Egypt,  and  an  obelisk  near  the  border  of  the  land  con 
secrated  to  Jehovah.  And  a  sign  and  a  witness  for  Jehovah  of 
hosts  is  this  in  the  land  of  Egypt :  when  they  cry  to  Jehovah  for 
oppressors.  He  will  send  them  a  helper  and  champion,  and  deliver 
them"  This  is  the  passage  of  Isaiah  (not  ver.  18)  to  which 
Onias  iv.  appealed,  when  he  sought  permission  of  Ptolemseus 
Philometor  to  build  a  temple  of  Jehovah  in  Egypt.  He  built 
such  a  temple  in  the  nomos  of  Heliopolis,  180  stadia  (22  J  miles) 
to  the  north-east  of  Memphis  (Josephus,  Sell.  vii.  10,  3),  and 
on  the  foundation  and  soil  of  the  o^vpcofia  in  Leontopolis, 
which  was  dedicated  to  Bubastis  ( Ant.  xiii.  3,  1,  2).1  This 
temple,  which  was  altogether  unlike  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  in 
its  outward  appearance,  being  built  in  the  form  of  a  castle,  and 
which  stood  for  more  than  two  hundred  years  (from  160  B.C. 
to  A.D.  71,  when  it  was  closed  by  command  of  Vespasian),  was 
splendidly  furnished  and  much  frequented;  but  the  recognition 
of  it  was  strongly  contested  both  in  Palestine  and  Egypt.  It 
was  really  situated  "  in  the  midst  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  But 
it  is  out  of  the  question  to  seek  in  this  temple  for  the  fulfilment 
of  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  from  the  simple  fact  that  it  was  by 
Jews  and  for  Jews  that  it  was  erected.  And  where,  in  that 
case,  would  the  obelisk  be,  which,  as  Isaiah  prophesies,  was  to 
stand  on  the  border  of  Egypt,  i.e.  on  the  side  towards  the 
desert  and  Canaan  ?  The  altar  was  to  be  "  a  sign"  ('oth)  that 
there  were  worshippers  of  Jehovah  in  Egypt ;  and  the  obelisk 
a  u  witness"  (^ed)  that  Jehovah  had  proved  Himself,  to  Egypt's 

1  We  are  acquainted  with  two  cities  called  Leontopolis,  viz.  the  capital 
of  the  nomos  called  by  its  name,  which  was  situated  between  the  Busiritic 
and  the  Tanitic  nomoi;  and  a  second  between  Heroon-polis  and  Magdolon 
(see  Brugsch,  Geogr.  i.  262).  The  Leontopolis  of  Josephus,  however,  must 
have  been  another,  or  third.  It  may  possibly  have  derived  its  name,  as 
Lauth  conjectures,  from  the  fact  that  the  goddess  Bast  (from  wnich  comes 
Boubasto*,  House  of  Bast)  was  called  Paclit  when  regarded  in  her  de 
structive  character  (Todtenbuch,  164,  12).  The  meaning  of  the  name  is 
"  lioness,"  and,  as  her  many  statues  show,  she  was  represented  with  a  lion's 
head.  At  the  same  time,  the  boundaries  of  the  districts  fluctuated,  and 
the  Heliopolitan  Leontopolis  of  Josephus  may  have  originally  belonged  to 
the  Bubastic  distric- 


366  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

salvation,  to  be  the  God  of  the  gods  of  Egypt.  And  now,  if 
they  who  erected  this  place  of  worship  and  this  monument 
cried  to  Jehovah,  He  would  show  Himself  ready  to  help  them  ; 
and  they  would  no  longer  cry  in  vain,  as  they  had  formerly 
done  to  their  own  idols  (ver.  3).  Consequently  it  is  the 
approaching  conversion  of  the  native  Egyptians  that  is  here 
spoken  of.  The  fact  that  from  the  Grecian  epoch  Judaism 
became  a  power  in  Egypt,  is  certainly  not  unconnected  with 
this.  But  we  should  be  able  to  trace  this  connection  more 
closely,  if  we  had  any  information  as  to  the  extent  to  which 
Judaism  had  then  spread  among  the  natives,  which  we  do 
know  to  have  been  by  no  means  small.  The  therapeutas 
described  by  Philo,  which  were  spread  through  all  the  nomoi  of 
Egypt,  were  of  a  mixed  Egypto-Jewish  character  (vid.  Philo, 
Opp.  ii.  p.  474,  ed.  Mangey).  It  was  a  victory  on  the  part  of 
the  religion  of  Jehovah,  that  Egypt  was  covered  with  Jewish 
synagogues  and  coenobia  even  in  the  age  before  Christ.  And 
Alexandria  was  the  place  where  the  law  of  Jehovah  was 
translated  into  Greek,  and  thus  made  accessible  to  the  heathen 
world,  and  where  the  religion  of  Jehovah  created  for  itself 
those  forms  of  language  and  thought,  under  which  it  was  to 
become,  as  Christianity,  the  religion  of  the  world.  And  after 
the  introduction  of  Christianity  into  the  world,  there  were 
more  than  one  mazzebah  (obelisk)  that  were  met  with  on  the 
way  from  Palestine  to  Egypt,  even  by  the  end  of  the  first 
century,  and  more  than  one  rnizleach  (altar)  found  in  the 
heart  of  Egypt  itself.  The  importance  of  Alexandria  and  of 
the  monasticism  and  anachoretism  of  the  peninsula  of  Sinai 
and  also  of  Egypt,  in  connection  with  the  history  of  the  spread 
of  Christianity,  is  very  well  known. 

When  Egypt  became  the  prey  of  Islam  in  the  year  640, 
there  was  already  to  be  seen,  at  all  events  in  the  form  of  a 
magnificent  prelude,  the  fulfilment  of  what  the  prophet  fore 
tells  in  vers.  21,  22  :  "And  Jehovah  makes  Himself  known  to 
the  Egyptians,  and  the  Egyptians  know  Jehovah  in  that  day ;  and 
they  serve  with  slain-offerings  and  meat-offerings,  and  vow  vows 
to  Jehovah,  and  pay  them.  And  Jehovah  smites  Egypt,  smiting 
and  healing  ;  and  if  they  return  to  Jehovah,  He  suffers  Himself  to 
be  entreated,  and  heals  them.1'  From  that  small  commencement 
of  five  cities,  and  a  solitary  altar,  and  one  solitary  obelisk,  it 


CHAP.  XIX.  23-25.  3C>7 

lins  now  come  to  tins :  Jehovah  extends  the  knowledge  of 
Himself  to  the  whole  of  Egypt  (5™,  reflective  se  cognoscendum 
dare,  or  neuter  innotescere),  and  throughout  all  Egypt  there 
arises  the  knowledge  of  God.  which  soon  shows  itself  in  acts 

O  ' 

of  worship.  This  worship  is  represented  by  the  prophet,  just 
as  we  should  expect  according  to  the  Old  Testament  view,  as 
consisting  in  the  offering  of  bleeding  and  bloodless,  or  legal  and 
free-will  offerings  :  ^3Jfl,  viz.  njiTVlK,  so  that  TO  is  construed 
with  a  double  accusative,  as  in  Ex.  x.  26,  cf.  Gen.  xxx.  29 ;  or 
it  may  possibly  be  used  directly  in  the  sense  of  sacrificing,  as 
in  the  Phoenician,  and  like  nb>y  in  the  Thorah;  and  even  if  we 
took  it  in  this  sense,  it  would  yield  no  evidence  against  Isaiah's 
authorship  (compare  ch.  xxviii.  21,  xxxii.  17).  Egypt,  though 
converted,  is  still  sinful ;  but  Jehovah  smites  it,  "  smiting  and 
healing"  (ndgoph  verdpho\  compare  1  Kings  xx.  37),  so  that 
in  the  act  of  smiting  the  intention  of  healing  prevails;  and 
healing  follows  the  smiting,  since  the  chastisement  of  Jehovah 
leads  it  to  repentance.  Thus  Egypt  is  now  under  the  same 
plan  of  salvation  as  Israel  (e.g.  Lev.  xxvi.  44,  Deut.  xxxii.  36). 

Asshur,  as  we  already  know  from  ch.  xviii.,  is  equally 
humbled;  so  that  now  the  two  great  powers,  which  have 
hitherto  only  met  as  enemies,  meet  in  the  worship  of  Jehovah, 
which  unites  them  together.  Ver.  23.  "  In  that  day  a  road 
will  run  from  Egypt  to  Asshur,  and  Asshur  comes  into  Egypt, 
and  Egypt  to  Asshur;  and  Egypt  worships  (Jehovah)  with 
Asshur"  nK  is  not  a  sign  of  the  accusative,  for  there  can  be 
no  longer  any  idea  of  the  subjection  of  Egypt  to  Asshur :  on 
the  contrary,  it  is  a  preposition  indicating  fellowship ;  and  Vny 
is  used  in  the  sense  of  worship,  as  in  ver.  21.  Friendly  inter 
course  is  established  between  Egypt  and  Assyria  by  the  fact 
that  both  nations  are  now  converted  to  Jehovah.  The  road  of 
communication  runs  through  Canaan. 

Thus  is  the  way  prepared  for  the  highest  point  of  all,  which 
the  prophet  foretells  in  vers.  24,  25 :  "  In  that  day  will  Israel 
be  the  third  part  to  Egypt  and  Asshur,  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of 
the  earth,  since  Jehovah  of  hosts  blesseth  them  thus :  Blessed  be 
thou,  my  people  Egypt ;  and  thou  Asshur,  the  work  of  my  hands  ; 
and  thou  Israel,  mine  inheritance"  Israel  is  added  to  the 
covenant  between  Egypt  and  Asshur,  so  that  it  becomes  a 
tripartite  covenart  in  which  Israel  forms  the  "third  part" 


3(58  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


,  tertia  pars,  like  'asiriyydhy  decima  pars,  in  cli. 
vi.  13).  Israel  has  now  reached  the  great  end  of  its  calling  — 
to  be  a  blessing  in  "the  midst  of  the  earth"  (Ukereb  hadretz, 
in  the  whole  circuit  of  the  earth),  all  nations  being  here  repre 
sented  by  Egypt  and  Assyria.  Hitherto  it  had  been  only  to 
the  disadvantage  of  Israel  to  be  situated  between  Egypt  and 
Assyria.  The  history  of  the  Ephraimitish  kingdom,  as  well  as 
that  of  Judah,  clearly  proves  this.  If  Israel  relied  upon  Egypt, 
it  deceived  itself,  and  was  deceived  ;  and  if  it  relied  on  Assyria, 
it  only  became  the  slave  of  Assyria,  and  had  Egypt  for  a  foe. 
Thus  Israel  was  in  a  most  painful  vice  between  the  two  great 
powers  of  the  earth,  the  western  and  the  eastern  powers.  But 
how  will  all  this  be  altered  now  !  Egypt  and  Assyria  become 
one  in  Jehovah,  and  Israel  the  third  in  the  covenant.  Israel 
is  no  longer  the  only  nation  of  God,  the  creation  of  God,  the 
heir  of  God  ;  but  all  this  applies  to  Egypt  and  Assyria  now,  as 
well  as  to  Israel.  To  give  full  expression  to  this,  Israel's  three 
titles  of  honour  are  mixed  together,  and  each  of  the  three 
nations  receives  one  of  the  choice  names,  —  nachali,  "  my  inherit 
ance,"  being  reserved  for  Israel,  as  pointing  back  to  its  earliest 
history.  This  essential  equalization  of  the  heathen  nations  and 
Israel  is  no  degradation  to  the  latter.  For  although  from  this 
time  forward  there  is  to  be  no  essential  difference  between  the 
nations  in  their  relation  to  God,  it  is  still  the  God  of  Israel 
who  obtains  this  universal  recognition,  and  the  nation  of  Israel 
that  has  become,  according  to  the  promise,  the  medium  of 
blessing  to  the  world. 

Thus  has  the  second  half  of  the  prophecy  ascended  step  by 
step  from  salvation  to  salvation,  as  the  first  descended  step  by 
step  from  judgment  to  judgment.  The  culminating  point  in 
ver.  25  answers  to  the  lowest  point  in  ver.  15.  Every  step  in 
the  ascending  half  is  indicated  by  the  expression  "  in  that  day." 
Six  times  do  we  find  this  sign-post  to  the  future  within  the 
limits  of  vers.  16-25.  This  expression  is  almost  as  characteristic 
of  Isaiah  as  the  corresponding  expression,  "  Behold,  the  days 
come"  (hinneh  ydmim  bd'im),  is  of  Jeremiah  (compare,  for 
example,  Isa.  vii.  18-25).  And  it  is  more  particularly  in  the 
promising  or  Messianic  portions  of  the  prophecy  that  it  is  so 
favourite  an  introduction  (ch.  xi.  10,  11,  xii.  1  ;  compare  Zech. 
xii.  xiii.  xiv.).  Nevertheless,  the  genuineness  of  vcrs.  16-25 


CHAP.  xix.  369 

lias  recently  been  called  in  question,  more  especially  by  Hitzig. 
Sometimes  this  passage  has  not  been  found  fanatical  enough  to 
have  emanated  from  Isaiah,  i.e.  too  free  from  hatred  towards 
the  heathen  ;  whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  Knobel  adduces 
evidence  that  the  prophet  was  no  fanatic  at  all.  Sometimes  it 
is  too  fanatical ;  in  reply  to  which  we  observe,  that  there  never 
was  a  prophet  of  God  in  the  world  who  did  not  appear  to  a 
"sound  human  understanding"  to  be  beside  himself,  since,  even 
assuming  that  this  human  understanding  be  sound,  it  is  only 
within  the  four  sides  of  its  own  peculiar  province  that  it  is  so. 
Again,  in  vers.  18,  19,  a  prophecy  has  been  discovered  which  is 
too  special  to  be  Isaiah's,  in  opposition  to  which  Knobel  proves 
that  it  is  not  so  special  as  is  supposed.  But  it  is  quite  special 
enough  ;  and  this  can  never  astonish  any  one  who  can  discern  in 
the  prophecy  a  revelation  of  the  future  communicated  by  God, 
whereas  in  itself  it  neither  proves  nor  disproves  the  authorship 
of  Isaiah.  So  far  as  the  other  arguments  adduced  against 
the  genuineness  are  concerned,  they  have  been  answered  ex 
haustively  by  Caspari,  in  a  paper  which  he  contributed  on  the 
subject  to  the  Lutherische  Zeitschrift,  1841,  3.  Havernick,  in 
his  Introduction,  has  not  been  able  to  do  anything  better  than 
appropriate  the  arguments  adduced  by  Caspari.  And  we  will 
not  repeat  for  a  third  time  what  has  been  said  twice  already. 
The  two  halves  of  the  prophecy  are  like  the  two  wings  of  a 
bird.  And  it  is  only  through  its  second  half  that  the  prophecy 
becomes  the  significant  centre  of  the  Ethiopia  and  Egyptian 
trilogy.  For  ch.  xix.  predicts  the  saving  effect  that  will  be 
produced  upon  Egypt  by  the  destruction  of  Assyria.  And  ch. 
xix.  23  sqq.  announces  what  will  become  of  Assyria.  Assyria 
will  also  pass  through  judgment  to  salvation.  This  eschatologicai 
conclusion  to  ch.  xix.,  in  which  Egypt  and  Assyria  are  raised 
above  themselves  into  representatives  of  the  two  halves  of  the 
heathen  world,  is  the  golden  clasp  which  connects  ch.  xix.  and 
xx.  We  now  turn  to  this  third  portion  of  the  trilogy,  which 
bears  the  same  relation  to  ch.  xix.  as  ch.  xvi.  13?  14  to  ch. 
xv.-xvi.  12. 


VOL.  i.  9  A 


370  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


SYMBOL  OF  THE  FALL  OF  EGYPT  AND  ETHIOPIA,  AND  ITS 
INTERPRETATION. — CHAP.  XX. 

This  section,  commencing  in  the  form  of  historic  prose, 
introduces  itself  thus :  vers.  1,  2a.  "  In  the  year  that  Tartan 
came  to  Ashdod,  Sargon  the  king  of  Asshur  having  sent  him  (and 
he  made  war  against  Ashdod,  and  captured  it) :  at  that  time 
Jehovah  spake  through  Yeshayahu  the  son  of  Amoz  as  folloivs" 
i.e.  He  communicated  the  following  revelation  through  the 
medium  of  Isaiah  (Uyad,  as  in  ch.  xxxvii.  24,  Jer.  xxxvii.  2, 
and  many  other  passages).  The  revelation  itself  was  attached 
to  a  symbolical  act.  By  ad  (lit.  "  by  the  hand  of ")  refers  to 
what  was  about  to  be  made  known  through  the  prophet  by 
means  of  the  command  that  was  given  him  ;  in  other  words, 
to  ver.  3,  and  indirectly  to  ver.  2b.  Tartan  (probably  the 
same  man)  is  met  with  in  2  Kings  xviii.  17  as  the  chief 
captain  of  Sennacherib.  No  Assyrian  king  of  the  name  of 
Sargon  is  mentioned  anywhere  else  in  the  Old  Testament ;  but 
it  may  now  be  accepted  as  an  established  result  of  the  re 
searches  which  have  been  made,  that  Sargon  was  the  successor 
of  Shalmanassar,  and  that  Shalrnaneser  (Shalman,  Hos.  x.  14), 
Sargon,  Sennacherib,  and  Esarhaddon,  are  the  names  of  the 
four  Assyrian  kings  who  were  mixed  up  with  the  closing 
history  of  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judah.  It  was  Long- 
perrier  who  was  the  first  to  establish  the  identity  of  the  monarch 
who  built  the  palaces  at  Khorsabad,  which  form  the  north 
eastern  corner  of  ancient  Nineveh,  with  the  Sargon  of  the 
Bible.  We  are  now  acquainted  with  a  considerable  number 
of  brick,  harem,  votive-tablet,  and  other  inscriptions  which 
bear  the  name  of  this  king,  and  contain  all  kinds  of  testimony 
concerning  himself.1  It  was  he,  not  Shalmanassar,  who  took 
Samaria  after  a  three  years'  siege  ;  and  in  the  annalistic  in 
scription  he  boasts  of  having  conquered  the  city,  and  removed 
the  house  of  Omri  to  Assyria.  Oppert  is  right  in  calling 
attention  to  the  fact,  that  in  2  Kings  xviii.  10  the  conquest  is 

1  See  Oppert,  Expedition,  i.  328-350,  and  the  picture  of  Sargon  in  hia 
war-chariot  in  Rawlinsou's  Five  Great  Monarchies,  i.  368  ;  compare  also 
p.  304  (prisoners  taken  by  Sargon),  p.  352  (the  plan  of  his  palace),  p.  483 
(a  glass  vessel  with  his  name),  and  many  other  engravings  in  vol.  ii. 


CHAP.  XX.  1,  2.  371 

not  attributed  to  Shalmanassar  himself,  but  to  the  army.  Shal- 
manassar  died  in  front  of  Samaria ;  and  Sargon  not  only  put 
himself  at  the  head  of  the  army,  but  seized  upon  the  throne,  in 
which  he  succeeded  in  establishing  himself,  after  a  contest  of 
several  years'  duration  with  the  legitimate  heirs  and  their  party. 
He  was  therefore  a  usurper.1  Whether  his  name  as  it  appears 
on  the  inscriptions  is  Sar-kin  or  not,  and  whether  it  signifies 
the  king  de  facto  as  distinguished  from  the  king  de  jure,  we  will 
not  attempt  to  determine  now.2  This  Sargon,  the  founder  of  a 
new  Assyrian  dynasty,  who  reigned  from  721-702  (according 
to  Oppert),  and  for  whom  there  is  at  all  events  plenty  of  room 
between  721—20  and  the  commencement  of  Sennacherib's 
reign,  first  of  all  blockaded  Tyre  for  five  years  after  the  fall 
of  Samaria,  or  rather  brought  to  an  end  the  siege  of  Tyre 
which  had  been  begun  by  Shalmanassar  (Jos.  Ant.  ix.  14,  2), 
though  whether  it  was  to  a  successful  end  or  not  is  quite 
uncertain.  He  then  pursued  with  all  the  greater  energy 
his  plan  for  following  up  the  conquest  of  Samaria  with  the 
subjugation  of  Egypt,  which  was  constantly  threatening  the 
possessions  of  Assyria  in  western  Asia,  either  by  instigation 
or  support.  The  attack  upon  Ashdod  was  simply  a  means  to 
this  end.  As  the  Philistines  were  led  to  join  Egypt,  not  only 
by  their  situation,  but  probably  by  kinship  of  tribe  as  well,  the 
conquest  of  Ashdod — a  fortress  so  strong,  that,  according  to 
Herodotus  (ii.  157),  Psammetichus  besieged  it  for  twenty-nine 
years  —  was  an  indispensable  preliminary  to  the  expedition 
against  Egypt.  When  Alexander  the  Great  marched  against 
Egypt,  he  had  to  do  the  same  with  Gaza.  How  long  Tartan 

1  See  Oppert,  Les  Inscriptions  Assyriennefs  des  Sargonides  et  Us  Pastes  de 
Ninive  (Versailles,  1862),   and  Rawlinson  (vol.  ii.  406  sqq.),  who  here 
agrees  with  Oppert  in  all  essential  points.     Consequently  there  can  no 
longer  be  any  thought  of  identifying  Sargon   with   Shalmanassar   (see 
Braudis,  Ueber  den  historischen  Gewinn  aus  der  Entzifferung  der  assyr.  In- 
sckriften,  1856,  p.  48  sqq.).     Rawlinson  himself  at  first  thought  they  were 
the  same  person  (vid.  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society,  xii.  2,  419),  until 
gradually  the  evidence  increased  that  Sargou  and  Shalmanassar  were  the 
names  of  two  different  kings,  although  no  independent  inscription  of  the 
latter,  the  actual  besieger  of  Samaria,  has  yet  been  found. 

2  Hitzig  ventures  a  derivation  of  the  name  from  the  Zend  ;  and  Grote- 
fend  compares  it  with  the  Ghaldee  Sarek,  Dan.  vi.  8  (in  his  Abhandluug 
uber  Anlaye  und  Zer^orung  der  Gcbaude  von  Nimrud,  1851). 


372  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

required  is  not  to  be  gathered  from  ver.  1.  But  if  lie  con 
quered  it  as  quickly  as  Alexander  conquered  Gaza, — viz.  in 
five  months, — it  is  impossible  to  understand  why  the  follow 
ing  prophecy  should  defer  for  three  years  the  subjugation  of 
Ethiopia  and  Egypt.  The  words,  "  and  fought  against  Ash- 
dod,  and  took  it,"  must  therefore  be  taken  as  anticipatory  and 
parenthetical. 

It  was  riot  after  the  conquest  of  Ashdod,  but  in  the  year  in 
which  the  siege  commenced,  that  Isaiah  received  the  following 
admonition:  2b.  "  Go  and  loosen  the  smock-frock  from  off  thy 
loins,  and  take  off  thy  shoes  from  thy  feet.  And  he  did  so,  wen? 
stripped  and  barefooted"  We  see  from  this  that  Isaiah  was 
clothed  in  the  same  manner  as  Elijah,  who  wore  a  fur  coat 
(2  Kings  i.  8,  cf.  Zech.  xiii.  4,  Heb.  xi.  37),  and  John  the 
Baptist,  who  had  a  garment  of  camel  hair  and  a  leather  girdle 
round  it  (Matt.  iii.  4)  ;  for  sak  is  a  coarse  linen  or  hairy  over 
coat  of  a  dark  colour  (Rev.  vi.  12,  cf.  Isa.  1.  3),  such  as  was 
worn  by  mourners,  either  next  to  the  skin  (' al-habbdsdr,  1  Kings 
xxi.  27,  2  Kings  vi.  30,  Job  xvi.  15)  or  over  the  tunic,  in 
either  case  being  fastened  by  a  girdle  on  account  of  its  want  of 
shape,  for  which  reason  the  verb  chdgar  is  the  word  commonly 
used  to  signify  the  putting  on  of  such  a  garment,  instead  of 
Idbash.  The  use  of  the  word  'drom  does  not  prove  that  the 
former  was  the  case  in  this  instance  (see,  on  the  contrary, 
2  Sam.  vi.  20,  compared  with  ver.  14  and  John  xxi.  7).  With 
the  great  importance  attached  to  the  clothing  in  the  East,  where 
the  feelings  upon  this  point  are  peculiarly  sensitive  and  modest, 
a  person  was  looked  upon  as  stripped  and  naked  if  he  had  only 
taken  off  his  upper  garment.  What  Isaiah  was  directed  to  do, 
therefore,  was  simply  opposed  to  common  custom,  and  not  to 
moral  decency.  He  was  to  lay  aside  the  dress  of  a  mourner 
and  preacher  of  repentance,  and  to  have  nothing  on  but  his 
tunic  (cetoneth) ;  and  in  this,  as  well  as  barefooted,  he  was  to 
show  himself  in  public.  This  was  the  costume  of  a  man  who 
had  been  robbed  and  disgraced,  or  else  of  a  beggar  or  prisoner 
of  war.  The  word  cen  (so)  is  followed  by  the  inf.  abs.,  which 
develops  the  meaning,  as  in  ch.  v.  5,  Iviii.  6,  7. 

It  is  not  till  Isaiah  has  carried  out  the  divine  instructions, 
that  he  learns  the  reason  for  this  command  to  strip  himself,  and 
the  length  of  time  that  he  is  to  continue  so  stripped.  Vers. 


CHAP.  XX.  3-6.  373 

3,  4 :  "  And  Jehovah  said,  As  my  servant  Yeshayaliu  goeth  naked 
and  barefooted,  a  sign  and  type  for  three  years  long  over  Egypt 
and  over  Ethiopia,  so  will  the  king  of  Asshur  carry  away  the 
prisoners  of  Egypt  and  the  exiles  of  Ethiopia,  children  and  old 
men,  naked  and  barefooted,  and  with  their  seat  uncovered — a 
shame  to  Egypt."  The  expression  "  as  he  goeth "  (caasher 
hdlac)  stands  here  at  the  commencement  of  the  symbolical 
action,  but  it  is  introduced  as  if  with  a  retrospective  glance  at 
its  duration  for  three  years,  unless  indeed  the  preterite  hdlac 
stands  here,  as  it  frequently  does,  to  express  what  has  already 
commenced,  and  is  still  continuing  and  customary  (compare,  for 
example,  Job  i.  4  and  Ps.  i.  1).  The  strange  and  unseemly 
dress  of  the  prophet,  whenever  he  appeared  in  his  official  capacity 
for  three  whole  years,  was  a  prediction  of  the  fall  of  the  Egypto- 
Ethiopian  kingdom,  which  was  to  take  place  at  the  end  of  these 
three  years.  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  are  as  closely  connected  here 
as  Israel  and  Judah  in  ch.  xi.  12.  They  were  at  that  time  one 
kingdom,  so  that  the  shame  of  Egypt  was  the  shame  of  Ethiopia 
also.  'Ervdh  is  a  shameful  nakedness,  and  'ervath  Mitzrayim 
is  in  apposition  to  all  that  precedes  it  in  ver.  4.  Sheth  is  the 
seat  or  hinder  part,  as  in  2  Sam.  x.  4,  from  shdthdh,  to  set  or 
seat ;  it  is  a  substantive  form,  like  1??  YV,  V?.,  ^,  with  the  third 
radical  letter  dropt.  Chashuphay  has  the  same  ay  as  the  words 
in  ch.  xix.  9,  Judg.  v.  15,  Jer.  xxii.  14,  which  can  hardly  be 
regarded  as  constructive  forms,  as  Ewald,  Knobel,  and  Gesenius 
suppose  (although  *—  of  the  construct  has  arisen  from  *~),  but 
rather  as  a  singular  form  with  a  collective  signification.  The 
emendations  suggested,  viz.  chasuphe  by  Olshausen,  and  cha- 
Buphl  with  a  connecting  i  by  Meier,  are  quite  unnecessary. 

But  if  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  are  thus  shamefully  humbled, 
what  kind  of  impression  will  this  make  upon  those  who  rely 
upon  the  great  power  that  is  supposed  to  be  both  unapproach 
able  and  invincible  ?  Vers.  5,  6.  "  And  they  cry  together,  and 
behold  themselves  deceived  by  Ethiopia,  to  which  they  looked, 
and  by  Egypt,  in  which  they  gloried.  And  the  inhabitant  of 
this  coast-land  saith  in  that  day,  Behold,  thus  it  happens  to  those 
to  whom  we  looked,  whither  we  fled  for  help  to  deliver  us  from 
the  king  of  Asshur :  and  how  should  we,  we  escape  ?  "  ^,  which 
signiries  both  an  island  and  a  coast-land,  is  used  as  the  name  of 
Philistia  in  Zeph.  ii.  5,  and  as  the  name  of  Phoenicia  in  ch. 


374  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

xxiii.  2,  6 ;  and  for  this  reason  Knobel  and  others  understand 
it  here  as  denoting  the  former  with  the  inclusion  of  the  latter. 
But  as  the  Assyrians  had  already  attacked  both  Phoenicians 
and  Philistines  at  the  time  when  they  marched  against  Egypt, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Isaiah  had  chiefly  the  Juda3ans 
in  his  mind.  This  was  the  interpretation  given  by  Jerome 
("Judah  trusted  in  the  Egyptians,  and  Egypt  will  be  de 
stroyed"),  and  it  has  been  adopted  by  Ewald,  Drechsler,  Luz- 
zatto,  and  Meier.  The  expressions  are  the  same  as  those  in 
which  a  little  further  on  we  find  Isaiah  reproving  the  Egyptian 
tendencies  of  Judah's  policy.  At  the  same  time,  by  "the 
inhabitant  of  this  coast-land  "  we  are  not  to  understand  Judah 
exclusively,  but  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine  generally,  with 
whom  Judah  was  mixed  up  to  its  shame,  because  it  had  denied 
its  character  as  the  nation  of  Jehovah  in  a  manner  so  thoroughly 
opposed  to  its  theocratic  standing. 

Unfortunately,  we  know  very  little  concerning  the  Assyrian 
campaigns  in  Egypt.  But  we  may  infer  from  Nahum  iii.  8—10, 
according  to  which  the  Egyptian  Thebes  had  fallen  (for  it  is 
held  up  before  Nineveh  as  the  mirror  of  its  own  fate),  that 
after  the  conquest  of  Ashdod  Egypt  was  also  overcome  by 
Sargon's  army.  In  the  grand  inscription  found  in  the  halls  of 
the  palace  at  Khorsabad,  Sargon  boasts  of  a  successful  battle 
which  he  had  fought  with  Pharaoh  SebecJi  at  Kaphia,  and  in 
consequence  of  which  the  latter  became  tributary  to  him. 
Still  further  on  he  relates  that  he  had  dethroned  the  rebellious 
king  of  Ashdod,  and  appointed  another  in  his  place,  but  that 
the  people  removed  him,  and  chose  another  king ;  after  which 
he  marched  with  his  army  against  Ashdod,  and  when  the  king 
fled  from  him  into  Egypt,  he  besieged  Ashdod,  and  took  it. 
Then  follows  a  difficult  and  mutilated  passage,  in  which  Raw- 
linson  agrees  with  Oppert  in  finding  an  account  of  the  complete 
subjection  of  Sebech  (Sabako  I?).1  Nothing  can  be  built  upon 
this,  however ;  and  it  must  also  remain  uncertain  whether,  even 
if  the  rest  is  correctly  interpreted,  ch.  xx.  1  relates  to  that 
conquest  of  Ashdod  which  was  followed  by  the  dethroning  of 

1  Five  Great  Monarchies,  vol.  ii.  pp.  416-7 ;  compare  Oppert,  Sargo- 
nides,  pp.  22,  26-7.  With  regard  to  one  passage  of  the  annals,  which 
contains  an  account  of  a  successful  battle  fought  at  Ra-bek  (Heliopolis), 
;ee  Journal  Asiat.  xii.  462  sqq.  ;  Brandis,  p.  51. 


CHAP.  XX.  5,  6.  375 

the  rebellious  king  and  the  appointment  of  another,  or  to  the 
final  conquest  by  which  it  became  a  colonial  city  of  Assyria.1 
This  conquest  Sargon  ascribes  to  himself  in  person,  so  that 
apparently  we  must  think  of  that  conquest  which  was  carried 
out  by  Tartan ;  and  in  that  case  the  words,  "  he  fought  against 
it,"  etc.,  need  not  be  taken  as  anticipatory.  It  is  quite  sufficient, 
that  the  monuments  seem  to  intimate  that  the  conquest  of 
Samaria  and  Ashdod  was  followed  by  the  subjugation  of  the 
Egypto-Ethiopian  kingdom.  But  inasmuch  as  Judah,  trusting 
in  the  reed  of  Egypt,  fell  away  from  Assyria  under  Hezekiah, 
and  Sennacherib  had  to  make  war  upon  Egypt  again,  to  all 
appearance  the  Assyrians  never  had  much  cause  to  congratulate 
themselves  upon  their  possession  of  Egypt,  and  that  for  reasons 
which  are  not  difficult  to  discover.  At  the  time  appointed  by 
the  prophecy,  Egypt  came  under  the  Assyrian  yoke,  from 
which  it  was  first  delivered  by  Psammetichus ;  but,  as  the 
constant  wars  between  Assyria  and  Egypt  clearly  show,  it 
never  patiently  submitted  to  that  yoke  for  any  length  of  time. 
The  confidence  which  Judah  placed  in  Egypt  turned  out  most 
disastrously  for  Judah  itself,  just  as  Isaiah  predicted  here. 
But  the  catastrophe  that  occurred  in  front  of  Jerusalem  did 
not  put  an  end  to  Assyria,  nor  did  the  campaigns  of  Sargon 
and  Sennacherib  bring  Egypt  to  an  end.  And,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  triumphs  of  Jehovah  and  of  the  prophecy  concerning 
Assyria  were  not  the  means  of  Egypt's  conversion.  In  all 
these  respects  the  fulfilment  showed  that  there  was  an  element 
of  human  hope  in  the  prophecy,  which  made  the  distant  appear 
to  be  close  at  hand.  And  this  element  it  eliminated.  For  the 
fulfilment  of  a  prophecy  is  divine,  but  the  prophecy  itself  is 
both  divine  and  human. 

1  Among  the  pictures  from  Khorsabad  which  have  been  published  by 
Botta,  there  is  a  burning  fortress  that  has  been  taken  by  storm.  Isidor 
Lowenstern  (in  his  Essai,  Paris  1845)  pronounced  it  to  be  Ashdod ;  but 
Rodiger  regarded  the  evidence  as  inconclusive.  Nevertheless,  Lbwenstern 
was  able  to  claim  priority  over  Rawlinson  in  several  points  of  deciphering 
(Galignani's  Messenger^  Feb.  28,  1850).  He  read  in  the  inscription  the 
king's  name,  Sarak. 


376  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


THE  ORACLE  CONCERNING  THE  DESERT  OF  THE  SEA 

(BABYLON). — CHAP.  xxi.  1-10. 

Ewald  pronounces  this  and  other  headings  to  be  the  glosses 
of  ancient  readers  (Proph.  i.  56,  57).  Even  Vitringa  at  first 
attributed  it  to  the  collectors,  but  he  afterwards  saw  that  this 
was  inadmissible.  In  fact,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  understand 
how  the  expression  "  desert  of  the  sea"  (midbar-ydm)  could  have 
been  taken  from  the  prophecy  itself ;  for  yam  cannot  signify 
the  south  (as  though  synonymous  with  negeb),  but  is  invariably 
applied  to  the  west,  whilst  there  is  nothing  about  a  sea  in 
the  prophecy.  The  heading,  therefore,  is  a  peculiar  one  ;  and 
this  Knobel  admits,  though  he  nevertheless  adheres  to  the 
opinion  that  it  sprang  from  a  later  hand.  But  why?  Accord 
ing  to  modern  critics,  the  hand  by  which  the  whole  massa 
was  written  was  certainly  quite  late  enough.  From  Koppe  to 
Knobel  they  are  almost  unanimous  in  asserting  that  it  eman 
ated  from  a  prophet  who  lived  at  the  end  of  the  Babylonian 
captivity.  And  Meier  asserts  with  dictatorial  brevity,  that  no 
further  proof  is  needed  that  Isaiah  was  not  the  author.  But 
assuming,  what  indeed  seems  impossible  to  modern  critics, — 
namely,  that  a  prophet's  insight  into  futurity  might  stretch 
over  hundreds  of  years, — the  massa  contains  within  itself  and 
round  about  itself  the  strongest  proofs  of  its  genuineness. 
Within  itself:  for  both  the  thoughts  themselves,  and  the  manner 
in  which  they  are  expressed,  are  so  thoroughly  Isaiah's,  even  in 
the  most  minute  points,  that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  of  any 
prophecy  in  a  form  more  truly  his  own.  And  round  about 
itself:  inasmuch  as  the  four  massa's  (ch.  xxi.  1-10,  11-12, 
13-17,  and  xxii.)  are  so  intertwined  the  one  with  the  other  as 
to  form  a  tetralogy,  not  only  through  their  emblematical  titles 
(compare  ch.  xxx.  6)  and  their  visionary  bearing,  but  also  in 
many  ways  through  the  contexts  themselves.  Thus  the  de 
signation  of  the  prophet  as  a  <c  watchman"  is  common  to  the 
first  and  second  massa's ;  and  in  the  fourth,  Jerusalem  is  called 
the  valley  of  vision,  because  the  watch-tower  was  there,  from 
which  the  prophet  surveyed  the  future  fate  of  Babylon,  Edom, 
and  Arabia.  And  just  as  in  the  first,  Elam  and  Madai  march 
against  Babylon ;  so  in  the  fourth  (ch.  xxii.  6)  Kir  and  Elam 


CHAP.  XXI.  1,  2.  377 

march  against  Jerusalem.  The  form  of  expression  is  also 
strikingly  similar  in  both  instances  (compare  ch.  xxii.  6,  7,  with 
ch.  xxi.  7).  Is  it  then  possible  that  the  first  portion  of  the 
tetralogy  should  be  spurious,  and  the  other  three  genuine  ? 
We  come  to  the  same  conclusion  in  this  instance  as  we  did 
at  ch.  xiii.  1  sqq. ;  and  that,  most  truly,  neither  from  a  need 
less  apologetical  interest,  nor  from  forced  traditional  prejudice. 
Just  as  the  massd  Babel  rests  upon  a  prophecy  against  Asshur, 
which  forms,  as  it  were,  a  pedestal  to  it,  and  canriot  be  supposed 
to  have  been  placed  there  by  any  one  but  Isaiah  himself  ;  so 
the  massa  midbar-ydm  rests,  as  it  were,  upon  the  pillars  of  its 
genuineness,  and  announces  itself  velut  de  tripode  as  Isaiah's. 
This  also  applies  to  the  heading.  We  have  already  noticed,  in 
connection  with  ch.  xv.  1,  how  closely  the  headings  fit  in  to 
the  prophecies  themselves.  Isaiah  is  fond  of  symbolical  names 
(ch.  xxix.  1,  xxx.  7).  And  midbar-ydm  (desert  of  the  sea)  is 
a  name  of  this  kind  applied  to  Babylon  and  the  neighbourhood. 
The  continent  on  which  Babylon  stood  was  a  midbdr,  a  great 
plain  running  to  the  south  into  Arabia  deserta;  and  so  inter 
sected  by  the  Euphrates  as  well  as  by  marshes  and  lakes,  that 
it  floated,  as  it  were,  in  the  sea.  The  low-lying  land  on  the 
Lower  Euphrates  had  been  wrested,  as  it  were,  from  the  sea ; 
for  before  Semiramis  constructed  the  dams,  the  Euphrates 
used  to  overflow  the  whole  just  like  a  sea  (ireXa^L^eiv,  Herod, 
i.  184).  Abydenus  even  says,  that  at  first  the  whole  of  it 
was  covered  with  water,  and  was  called  thalassa  (Euseb.  prcep. 
ix.  41).  We  may  learn  from  ch.  xiv.  23,  why  it  was  that  the 
prophet  made  use  of  this  symbolical  name.  The  origin  and 
natural  features  of  Babylon  are  made  into  ominous  prog 
nostics  of  its  ultimate  fate.  The  true  interpretation  is  found 
in  Jeremiah  (Jer.  li.  13,  1.  38),  who  was  acquainted  with  this 
oracle. 

The  power  which  first  brings  destruction  upon  the  city  of 
the  world,  is  a  hostile  army  composed  of  several  nations.  Vers. 
1,  2.  "As  storms  in  the  south  approach,  it  comes  from,  the  desert, 
from  a  terrible  land.  Hard  vision  is  made  known  to  me :  the 
spoiler  spoils,  and  the  devastator  devastates.  Go  up,  Elam!  Sur 
round,  Maday  !  I  put  an  end  to  all  their  sighing"  "  Storms 
in  the  south"  (compare  ch.  xxviii.  21,  Amos  iii.  9)  are  storms 
which  have  their  starting-point  in  the  south,  and  therefore 


378  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

come  to  Babylon  from  Arabia  deserta ;  and  like  all  winds  tliat 
come  from  boundless  steppes,  they  are  always  violent  (Job 
i.  19,  xxxvii.  9  ;  see  Hos.  xiii.  15).  It  would  be  natural, 
therefore,  to  connect  mimmidbdr  with  lachaloph  (as  Knobel 
and  Umbreit  do),  but  the  arrangement  of  the  words  is  opposed 
to  this  ;  lachaloph  ("  pressing  forwards")  is  used  instead  of 
yachaloph  (see  Ges.  §  132,  Anm.  1,  and  still  more  fully  on 
Hab.  i.  17).  The  conjunctio  periphrastica  stands  with  great 
force  at  the  close  of  the  comparison,  in  order  that  it  may 
express  at  the  same  time  the  violent  pressure  with  which  the 
progress  of  the  storm  is  connected.  It  is  true  that,  according 
to  Herod,  i.  189,  Cyrus  came  across  the  Gyndes,  so  that  he 
descended  into  the  lowlands  to  Babylonia  through  Chalonitis 
and  Apolloniatis,  by  the  road  described  by  Isidor  v.  Charax  in 
his  Itinerarium^  over  the  Zagros  pass  through  the  Zagros-gate 
(Ptolem.  vi.  2)  to  the  upper  course  of  the  Gyndes  (the  present 
Diyala),  and  then  along  this  river,  which  he  crossed  before  its 
junction  with  the  Tigris.  But  if  the  Medo-Persian  army  came 
in  this  direction,  it  could  not  be  regarded  as  coming  "  from 
the  desert."  If,  however,  the  Median  portion  of  the  army 
followed  the  course  of  the  Choaspes  (Kerkhd)  so  as  to  descend 
into  the  lowland  of  Chuzistan  (the  route  taken  by  Major 
Rawlinson  with  a  Guran  regiment),2  and  thus  approached 
Babylon  from  the  south-east,  it  might  be  regarded  in  many 
respects  as  coming  mimmidbdr  (from  the  desert),  and  primarily 
because  the  lowland  of  Chuzistan  is  a  broad  open  plain — that 
is  to  say,  a  midbdr.  According  to  the  simile  employed  of  storms 
in  the  south,  the  assumption  of  the  prophecy  is  really  this,  that 
the  hostile  army  is  advancing  from  Chuzistan,  or  (as  geo 
graphical  exactitude  is  not  to  be  supposed)  from  the  direction 
of  the  desert  of  ed-Dahna,  that  portion  of  Arabia  deserta  which 
bounded  the  lowland  of  Chaldea  on  the  south-west.  The 
Medo-Persian  land  itself  is  called  "  a  terrible  land,"  because 
it  was  situated  outside  the  circle  of  civilised  nations  by  which 
the  land  of  Israel  was  surrounded.  After  the  thematic  com 
mencement  in  ver.  1,  which  is  quite  in  harmony  with  Isaiah's 

1  See  C.  Masson's  "  Illustration  of  the  route  from  Seleucia  to  Apoba- 
tana,  as  given  by  Isid.  of  Charax,"  in  the  Asiatic  Journal,  xii.  97  sqq. 

2  See  Rawlinson's  route  as  described  in  Ritter's  Erdkunde,  ix.  3  (West- 
asien),  p.  397  sqq. 


CHAP.  XXI.  3,  4.  379 

usual  custom,  the  prophet  begins  again  in  ver,  2.  CMzutli  (a 
vision)  has  the  same  meaning  here  as  in  ch.  xxix.  11  (though 
not  ch.  xxviii.  18) ;  and  ehdzuth  kdshdh  is  the  object  of  the 
passive  which  follows  (Ges.  §  143,  1,  b).  The  prophet  calls 
the  look  into  the  future,  which  is  given  to  him  by  divine  in 
spiration,  hard  or  heavy  (though  in  the  sense  of  difficilis,  not 
grams,  cdbed),  on  account  of  its  repulsive,  unendurable,  and, 
so  to  speak,  indigestible  nature.  The  prospect  is  wide-spread 
plunder  and  devastation  (the  expression  is  the  same  as  in 
ch.  xxxiii.  1,  compare  ch.  xvi.  4,  xxiv.  16,  bdgad  denoting 
faithjess  or  treacherous  conduct,  then  heartless  robbery),  and 
the  summoning  of  the  nations  on  the  east  and  north  of 
Babylonia  to  the  conquest  of  Babylon ;  for  Jehovah  is  about 
to  put  an  end  (hishbatti,  as  in  ch.  xvi.  10)  to  all  their  sighing 
(anchdthdh,  with  He  raf.  and  the  tone  upon  the  last  syllable), 
i.e.  to  all  the  lamentations  forced  out  of  them  far  and  wide  by 
the  oppressor. 

Here  again,  as  in  the  case  of  the  prophecy  concerning 
Moab,  what  the  prophet  has  given  to  him  to  see  does  not 
pass  without  exciting  his  feelings  of  humanity,  but  works 
upon  him  like  a  horrible  dream.  Vers.  3,  4.  "  Therefore  are 
my  loins  full  of  cramp  :  pangs  have  taken  hold  of  me,  as  the 
pangs  of  a  travailing  woman :  I  twist  myself,  so  that  I  do  not 
hear  ;  I  am  brought  down  with  fear,  so  that  I  do  not  see.  My 
heart  beats  wildly  •  horror  hath  troubled  me :  the  darkness  of  night 
that  1  love,  he  hath  turned  for  me  into  quaking"  The  prophet 
does  not  describe  in  detail  what  he  saw ;  but  the  violent  agita 
tion  produced  by  the  impression  leads  us  to  conclude  how 
horrible  it  must  have  been.  Chalchdldh  is  the  contortion  pro 
duced  by  cramp,  as  in  Nahum  ii.  11 ;  tzirim  is  the  word  properly 
applied  to  the  pains  of  childbirth ;  naavdh  means  to  bend,  or 
bow  one's  self,  and  is  also  used  to  denote  a  convulsive  utterance 
of  pain  ;  td'dh,  which  is  used  in  a  different  sense  from  Ps. 
xcv.  10  (compare,  however,  Ps.  xxxviii.  11),  denotes  a  feverish 
and  irregular  beating  of  the  pulse.  The  darkness  of  evening 
and  night,  which  the  prophet  loved  so  much  (cheshek,  a  desire 
arising  from  inclination,  1  Kings  ix.  1,  19),  and  always  longed 
for,  either  that  he  might  give  himself  up  to  contemplation,  or 
that  he  might  rest  from  outward  and  inward  labour,  had  been 
changed  into  quaking  by  the  horrible  vision.  It  is  quite  impos- 


380  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

sible  to  imagine,  as  Umbreit  suggests,  that  nesheph  chishJd  (the 
darkness  of  my  pleasure)  refers  to  the  nocturnal  feast  during 
which  Babylon  was  stormed  (Herod,  i.  191,  and  Xenophon, 
Cyrop.  vii.  23). 

On  the  other  hand,  what  Xenophon  so  elaborately  relates, 
and  what  is  also  in  all  probability  described  in  Dan.  v.  30 
(compare  Jer.  li.  39,  57),  is  referred  to  in  ver.  5 :  "  They 
cover  the  table,  match  the  watch,  eat,  drink.  Rise  up,  ye  princes  ! 
Anoint  the  shield  /"  This  is  not  a  scene  from  the  hostile  camp, 
where  they  are  strengthening  themselves  for  an  attack  upon 
Babylon :  for  the  express  allusion  to  the  covering  of  the  table 
is  intended  to  create  the  impression  of  confident  and  careless 
good  living ;  and  the  exclamation  "  anoint  the  shield"  (cf.  Jer. 
li.  11)  presupposes  that  they  have  first  of  all  to  prepare  them 
selves  for  battle,  and  therefore  that  they  have  been  taken  by 
surprise.  What  the  prophet  sees,  therefore,  is  a  banquet  in. 
Babylon.  The  only  thing  that  does  not  seem  quite  to  square 
with  this  is  one  of  the  infinitives  with  which  the  picture  is  so 
vividly  described  (Ges.  §  131,  4,  b),  namely  tzdphohhatztzaphith. 
Hitzig's  explanation,  "  they  spread  carpets "  (from  tedphdh) 
txpandere,  olducere,  compare  the  Talmudic  tziphdh,  tziphtdh, 
a  mat,  storea),  commends  itself  thoroughly  ;  but  it  is  without 
any  support  in  biblical  usage,  so  that  we  prefer  to  follow  the 
Targum,  Peshito,  and  Vulgate  (the  Sept.  does  not  give  any 
translation  of  the  words  at  all),  and  understand  the  hap.  leg. 
tzdphith  as  referring  to  the  watch:  " they  set  the  watch."  They 
content  themselves  with  this  one  precautionary  measure,  and 
give  themselves  up  with  all  the  greater  recklessness  to  their 
night's  debauch  (cf.  ch.  xxii.  13).  The  prophet  mentions  this, 
because  (as  Meier  acknowledges)  it  is  by  the  watch  that  the 
cry,  "  Rise  up,  ye  princes,"  etc.,  is  addressed  to  the  feasters. 
The  shield-leather  was  generally  oiled,  to  make  it  shine  and 
protect  it  from  wet,  and,  more  than  all,  to  cause  the  strokes  it 
might  receive  to  glide  off  (compare  the  leaves  clypeos  in  Virg. 
^En.  vii.  626).  The  infatuated  self-confidence  of  the  chief  men 
of  Babylon  was  proved  by  the  fact  that  they  had  to  be  aroused. 
They  fancied  that  they  were  hidden  behind  the  walls  and  waters 
of  the  city,  and  therefore  they  had  not  even  got  their  weapons 
ready  for  use. 

The  prophecy  is  continued  with  the  conjunction  "  for"  (ci). 


CHAP.  XXI.  6,  7.  381 

The  tacit  link  in  the  train  of  thought  is  this :  they  act  thus  in 
Babylon,  because  the  destruction  of  Babylon  is  determined. 
The  form  in  which  this  thought  is  embodied  is  the  following  : 
the  prophet  receives  instruction  in  the  vision  to  set  a  metzappeh 
upon  the  watch-tower,  who  was  to  look  out  and  see  what  more 
took  place.  Ver.  6.  "  For  thus  said  the  Lord  to  me,  Go,  set  a 
spy ;  what  he  seeth,  let  him  declare."  In  other  cases  it  is  the 
prophet  himself  who  stands  upon  the  watch-tower  (ver.  11 ; 
Hab.  ii.  1,  2)  ;  but  here  in  the  vision  a  distinction  is  made 
between  the  prophet  and  the  person  whom  he  stations  upon  the 
watch-tower  (specula).  The  prophet  divides  himself,  as  it  were, 
into  two  persons  (compare  ch.  xviii.  4  for  the  introduction ;  and 
for  the  expression  "  go,"  ch.  xx.  2).  He  now  sees  through  the 
medium  of  a  spy,  just  as  Zechariah  sees  by  means  of  the  angel 
speaking  in  him  ;  with  this  difference,  however,  that  here  the 
spy  is  the  instrument  employed  by  the  prophet,  whereas  there 
the  prophet  is  the  instrument  employed  by  the  angel. 

What  the  man  upon  the  watch-tower  sees  first  of  all,  is  a 
long,  long  procession,  viz.  the  hostile  army  advancing  quietly, 
like  a  caravan,  in  serried  ranks,  and  with  the  most  perfect  self- 
reliance.  Ver.  7.  "  And  he  saw  a  procession  of  cavalry,  pairs 
of  horsemen,  a  procession  of  asses,  a  procession  of  camels ;  and 
listened  sharply,  as  sharply  as  he  could  listen"  Receb,  both  here 
and  in  ver.  9,  signifies  neither  riding-animals  nor  war-chariots, 
but  a  troop  seated  upon  animals — a  procession  of  riders.  In 
front  there  was  a  procession  of  riders  arranged  two  and  two, 
for  Persians  and  Medes  fought  either  on  foot  or  on  horseback 
(the  latter,  at  any  rate,  from  the  time  of  Cyrus ;  vid.  Cyrop. 
iv.  3) ;  and  pdrdsh  signifies  a  rider  on  horseback  (in  Arabic  it 
is  used  in  distinction  from  rakib,  the  rider  on  camels).  Then 
came  lines  of  asses  and  camels,  a  large  number  of  which  were 
always  taken  with  the  Persian  army  for  different  purposes. 
They  not  only  carried  baggage  and  provisions,  but  were  taken 
into  battle  to  throw  the  enemy  into  confusion.  Thus  Cyrus 
gained  the  victory  over  the  Lydians  by  means  of  the  great 
number  of  his  camels  (Herod,  i.  80),  and  Darius  Hystaspis  the 
victory  over  the  Scythians  by  means  of  the  number  of  asses 
that  he  employed  (Herod,  iv.  129).  Some  of  the  subject  tribes 
rode  upon  asses  and  camels  instead  of  horses  :  the  Arabs  rode 
upon  camels  in  i^e  army  of  Xerxes,  and  the  Caramanians  rode 


382  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

upon  asses.  What  the  spy  saw  was  therefore,  no  doubt,  the 
Persian  army.  But  he  only  saw  and  listened.  It  was  indeed 
"  listening,  greatness  of  listening,"  i.e.  he  stretched  his  ear  to 
the  utmost  (rdb  is  a  substantive,  as  in  ch.  Ixiii.  7,  Ps.  cxlv.  7  ; 
and  hikshib,  according  to  its  radical  notion,  signifies  to  stiffen, 
viz.  the  ear)  j1  but  he  heard  nothing,  because  the  long  procession 
was  moving  with  the  stillness  of  death. 

At  length  the  procession  has  vanished  ;  he  sees  nothing  and 
hears  nothing,  and  is  seized  with  impatience.  Ver.  8.  "  Then 
he  cried  with  lion's  voice,  Upon  the  watch-toiuer,  0  Lord,  Island 
continually  by  day,  and  upon  my  watch  I  keep  my  stand  all  the 
nights."  He  loses  all  his  patience,  and  growls  as  if  he  were  a 
lion  (compare  Rev.  x.  3),  with  the  same  dull,  angry  sound, 
the  same  long,  deep  breath  out  of  full  lungs,  complaining  to 
God  that  he  has  to  stand  so  long  at  his  post  without  seeing 
anything,  except  that  inexplicable  procession  that  has  now 
vanished  away. 

But  when  he  is  about  to  speak,  his  complaint  is  stifled  in  his 
mouth.  Ver.  9.  u  And,  behold,  there  came  a  cavalcade  of  men, 
pairs  of  horsemen,  and  lifted  up  its  voice,  and  said,  Fallen, 
fallen  is  Babylon ;  and  all  the  images  of  its  gods  He  hath  dashed 
to  the  ground  I "  It  is  now  clear  enough  where  the  long  pro 
cession  went  to  when  it  disappeared.  It  entered  Babylon, 
made  itself  master  of  the  city,  and  established  itself  there.  And 
now,  after  a  long  interval,  there  appears  a  smaller  cavalcade, 
which  has  to  carry  the  tidings  of  victory  somewhere  ;  and  the 
spy  hears  them  cry  out  in  triumph,  "  Fallen,  fallen  is  Babylon  ! " 
In  Rev.  xviii.  1,  2,  the  same  words  form  the  shout  of  triumph 
raised  by  the  angel,  the  antitype  being  more  majestic  than  the 
type,  whilst  upon  the  higher  ground  of  the  New  Testament 
everything  moves  on  in  spiritual  relations,  all  that  is  merely 
national  having  lost  its  power.  Still  even  here  the  spiritual 
inwardness  of  the  affair  is  so  far  expressed,  that  it  is  Jehovah 
who  dashes  to  the  ground ;  and  even  the  heathen  conquerors  are 

1  Bottcher  has  very  correctly  compared  kashab  (kasuba)  with  kashdh 
(fcasa),  and  Fleischer  with  sarra  (tzarar),  which  is  applied  in  the  kal  and 
hiphil  (asarra)  to  any  animal  (horse,  ass,  etc.)  when  it  holds  its  ears  straight 
and  erect  to  listen  to  any  noise  {sarra  udhneihi,  or  iidhnahu  bi-udlmeihi,  or 
U-udhnilii  iv  ,  asarra  bi-udhnihi,  and  also  absolutely  asarra,  exactly  like 
liikshib). 


CHAP.  XXI.  11,  12.  383 

obliged  to  confess  that  the  fall  of  Babylon  and  its  pesilim 
(compare  Jer.  li.  47,  52)  is  the  work  of  Jehovah  Himself. 
What  is  here  only  hinted  at  from  afar — namely,  that  Cyrus 
would  act  as  the  anointed  of  Jehovah — is  expanded  in  the  second 
part  (ch.  xl.-lxvi.)  for  the  consolation  of  the  captives. 

The  night  vision  related  and  recorded  by  the  prophet,  a 
prelude  to  the  revelations  contained  in  ch.  xl.-lx.,  was  also 
intended  for  the  consolation  of  Israel,  which  had  already  much 
to  suffer,  when  Babylon  was  still  Assyrian,  but  would  have  to 
suffer  far  more  from  it  when  it  should  become  Chaldean. 
Yer.  10.  "Othou  my  threshing,  and  child  of  my  threshing-floor! 
What  I  have  heard  from  Jehovah  of  hosts,  the  God  of  Israel,  I 
have  declared  to  you"  Threshing  (dush)  is  a  figure  used  to 
represent  crushing  oppression  in  ch.  xli.  15  and  Mic.  iv.  12, 13; 
and  judicial  visitation  in  Jer.  li.  33  (a  parallel  by  which  we 
must  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  misled,  as  Jeremiah  has  there 
given  a  different  turn  to  Isaiah's  figure,  as  he  very  frequently 
does)  ;  and  again,  as  in  the  present  instance,  chastising  plagues, 
in  which  wrath  and  good  intention  are  mingled  together. 
Israel,  placed  as  it  was  under  the  tyrannical  supremacy  of  the 
imperial  power,  is  called  the  medusshdh  (for  medushah,  i.e.  the 
threshing)  of  Jehovah, — in  other  words,  the  corn  threshed  by 
Him ;  also  His  "  child  of  the  threshing-floor,"  inasmuch  as  it 
was  laid  in  the  floor,  in  the  bosom  as  it  were  of  the  threshing- 
place,  to  come  out  threshed  (and  then  to  become  a  thresher 
itself,  Mic.  iv.  12,  13).  This  floor,  in  which  Jehovah  makes 
a  judicial  separation  of  grains  and  husks  in  Israel,  was  their 
captivity.  Babylon  is  the  instrument  of  the  threshing  wrath  of 
God.  But  love  also  takes  part  in  the  threshing,  and  restrains 
the  wrath.  This  is  what  the  prophet  has  learned  in  the  vision 
("  I  have  heard,"  as  in  ch.  xxviii.  22), — a  consolatory  figure 
for  the  threshing-corn  in  the  floor,  i.e.  for  Israel,  which  was 
now  subject  to  the  power  of  the  world,  and  had  been  mowed  off 
its  own  field  and  carried  captive  into  Babylonia. 


THE  OKACLE  CONCERNING  THE  SILENCE  OF  DEATH  (EDOM). — 
CHAP.  XXI.  11,  12. 

This  oracle  consists  of  a  question,  addressed  to  the  prophet 
from  Seir,  and  of  the  prophet's  reply.     Seir  is  the  mountainous 


384  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

country  to  the  south  of  Palestine,  of  which  Eclom  took  posses 
sion  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Horites.  Consequently  the 
Dumah  of  the  heading  cannot  be  either  the  Duma  of  Eastern 
Hauran  (by  the  side  of  which  we  find  also  a  Tema  and  a 
Buzan)  ;  or  the  Duma  in  the  high  land  of  Arabia,  on  the  great 
Nabatsean  line  of  traffic  between  the  northern  harbours  of  the 
Red  Sea  and  Irak,  which  bore  the  cognomen  of  the  rocky 
(el-gendel)  or  Syrian  Duma  (Gen.  xxv.  14)  ;  or  the  Duma 
mentioned  in  the  Onom.,  which  was  seventeen  miles  from 
Eleutheropolis  (or  according  to  Jerome  on  this  passage,  twenty) 
"  in  Daroma  hoc  est  ad  australem  plagam"  and  was  probably 
the  same  place  as  the  Duma  in  the  mountains  of  Judah, — that 
is  to  say,  judging  from  the  ruins  of  Daume,  to  the  south-east 
of  Eleutheropolis  (see  the  Com.  on  Josh.  xv.  52),  a  place  out 
of  which  Jerome  has  made  "  a  certain  region  of  Idumsea,  near 
which  are  the  mountains  of  Seir."  The  name  as  it  stands  here 
is  symbolical,  and  without  any  demonstrable  topographical  appli 
cation.  Dumdh  is  deep,  utter  silence,  and  therefore  the  land  of 
the  dead  (Ps.  xciv.  17,  cxv.  17).  The  name  DY1N  is  turned  into 
an  emblem  of  the  future  fate  of  Eclom,  by  the  removal  of  the 
a-sound  from  the  beginning  of  the  word  to  the  end.  It  becomes 
a  land  of  deathlike  stillness,  deathlike  sleep,  deathlike  darkness. 
Ver.  11.  "  A  cry  comes  to  me  out  of  Seir :  Watchman,  how  far  is 
it  in  the  night?  Watchman,  how  far  in  the  night?"  Luther  trans 
lates  the  participle  correctly,  "  they  cry"  (man  ruft;  compare  the 
similar  use  of  the  participle  in  ch.  xxx.  24,  xxxiii.  4).  For  the 
rest,  however,  we  have  deviated  from  Luther's  excellent  transla 
tion,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  to  some  extent  the  significant 
change  from  n^tp  and  7*g&*  The  more  winged  form  of  the 
second  question  is  expressive  of  heightened,  anxious  urgency 
and  haste.  The  wish  is  to  hear  that  it  is  very  late  in  the  night, 
and  that  it  will  soon  be  past ;  min  is  partitive  (Saad.),  "  What 
part  of  the  night  are  we  at  now?"  Just  as  a  sick  man  longs 
for  a  sleepless  night  to  come  to  an  end,  and  is  constantly  asking 
what  time  it  is,  so  do  they  inquire  of  the  prophet  out  of  Edom, 
whether  the  night  of  tribulation  will  not  be  soon  over.  We 
are  not  to  understand,  however,  that  messengers  were  really  sent 
out  of  Edom  to  Isaiah  ;  the  process  was  purely  a  pneumatical 
one.  The  prophet  stands  there  in  Jerusalem,  in  the  midst  of 
the  benighted  world  of  nations,  like  a  sentry  upon  the  watch- 


CHAP.  XXI.  12.  385 

tower ;  he  understands  the  anxious  inquiries  of  the  nations  afar 
off,  and  answers  them  according  to  the  word  of  Jehovah,  which 
is  the  plan  and  chronological  measure  of  the  history  of  the 
nations,  and  the  key  to  its  interpretation.  What,  then,  is  the 
prophet's  reply  1  He  lets  the  inquirer  "  see  through  a  glass 
darkly." — Ver.  12.  "  Watchman  says,  Morning  cometh,  and  also 
night.  Will  ye  inquire,  inquire!  Tarn,  come!!"  The  answer 
is  intentionally  and  pathetically  expressed  in  an  Aramaean  form 
of  Hebrew.  NJlK  (written  even  with  X  at  the  end,  cf.  Deut. 
xxxiii.  2)  is  the  Aramaean  word  for  sin ;  and  nya  (&W?)  the 
Aramasan  word  for  /&?B>,  from  the  primary  form  of  which  (^2) 
the  future  tib'dyun  is  taken  here  (as  in  ch.  xxxiii.  7),  and  the 
imperative  betdyu  {Ges.  §  75,  Anm.  4).  Vrx,  which  is  here 
pointed  in  the  Syriac  style,  VJJN,  as  in  ch.  Ivi.  9,  12,  would  be 
similarly  traceable  to  TK*  (cf.  Ges.  §  75,  Anm.  4,  with  §  23, 
Anm.  2).  But  what  is  the  meaning  ?  Luther  seems  to  me  to 
have  hit  upon  it :  "  When  the  morning  comes,  it  will  still  be 
night."  But  vgam  (and  also)  is  not  equivalent  to  "  and  yet,"  as 
Schroring  explains  it,  with  a  reference  to  Ewald,  §  354,  a.  With 
the  simple  connection  in  the  clauses,  the  meaning  cannot  pos 
sibly  be,  that  a  morning  is  coming,  and  that  it  will  nevertheless 
continue  night,  but  that  a  morning  is  coming,  and  at  the  same 
time  a  night,  i.e.  that  even  if  the  morning  dawns,  it  will  be 
swallowed  up  again  directly  by  night.  And  the  history  was 
quite  in  accordance  with  such  an  answer.  The  Assyrian  period 
of  judgment  was  followed  by  the  Chaldean,  and  the  Chaldean 
by  the  Persian,  and  the  Persian  by  the  Grecian,  and  the  Grecian 
by  the  Roman.  Again  and  again  there  was  a  glimmer  of  morn 
ing  dawn  for  Edom  (and  what  a  glimmer  in  the  Herodian 
age  !),  but  it  was  swallowed  up  directly  by  another  night, 
until  Edom  became  an  utter  Dumdh,  and  disappeared  from  the 
history  of  the  nations.  The  prophet  does  not  see  to  the  utmost 
end  of  these  Edomitish  nights,  but  he  has  also  no  consolation 
for  Edom.  It  is  altogether  different  with  Edom  from  what  it  is 
with  Israel,  the  nocturnal  portion  of  whose  history  has  a  morn 
ing  dawn,  according  to  promise,  as  its  irrevocable  close.  The 
prophet  therefore  sends  the  inquirers  home.  Would  they  ask 
any  further  questions,  they  might  do  so,  might  turn  and  come. 
In  shubu  (turn  back)  there  lies  a  significant  though  ambimi- 

/  <"">  O  c^ 

,ous  hint.     It  is  only  in  the  case  of  their  turning,  coming,  i.e. 

VOL.  I.  23 


386  THE  PEOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

coming  back  converted,  that  the  prophet  has  any  consolatory 
answer  for  them.  So  long  as  they  are  not  so,  there  is  suspended 
over  their  future  an  interminable  night,  to  the  prophet  as  much 
as  to  themselves.  The  way  to  salvation  for  every  other  people 
is  just  the  same  as  for  Israel,  —  namely,  the  way  of  repentance. 

THE  OKACLE  IN  THE  EVENING  (AGAINST  ARABIA).  — 
CHAP.  XXI.  13-17. 


The  heading  TO2  N&»  (the  y  written  according  to  the  best 
codd.  with  a  simple  slieva),  when  pointed  as  we  have  it,  sig 
nifies,  according  to  Zech.  ix.  1  (cf.  Isa.  ix.  7),  "oracle  against 
Arabia."  But  why  not  massd  'Arab,  since  massd  is  followed 
by  a  simple  genitive  in  the  other  three  headings  ?  Or  again, 
is  this  the  only  heading  in  the  tetralogy  that  is  not  symbolical  ? 
We  must  assume  that  the  Beth  by  which  this  is  distinguished 
is  introduced  for  the  express  purpose  of  rendering  it  symbolical, 
and  that  the  prophet  pointed  it  first  of  all  ^"}VJ,  but  had  at  the 
same  time  2TJP3  in  his  mind.  The  earlier  translators  (LXX., 
Targum,  Syr.,  Vulg.,  Ar.)  read  the  second  2^2  like  the  first, 
but  without  any  reason.  The  oracle  commences  with  an  evening 
scene,  even  without  our  altering  the  second  2"^2.  And  the 
massa  has  a  symbolical  title  founded  upon  this  evening  scene. 
Just  as  'Edom  becomes  Dumah,  inasmuch  as  a  night  without  a 
morning  dawn  falls  upon  the  mountain  land  of  Seir,  so  will  3^3 
soon  be  2"TO?  inasmuch  as  the  sun  of  Arabia  is  setting.  Evening 
darkness  is  settling  upon  Arabia,  and  the  morning-land  is  be 
coming  an  evening-land.  Vers.  13-15  :  "  In  the  wilderness  in 
Arabia  ye  must  pass  the  night,  caravans  of  the  Dedanians.  Bring 
water  to  meet  thirsty  ones  !  The  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Tema 
are  coming  with  its  bread  before  the  fugitive.  For  they  are  flying 
before  swords,  before  drawn  swords,  and  before  a  bent  bow,  and 
before  oppressive  war."  There  is  all  the  less  ground  for  making 
any  alteration  in  Snya  "W_%  inasmuch  as  the  second  Beth  (wil 
derness  in  Arabia  for  of  Arabia)  is  favoured  by  Isaiah's  common 
usage  (ch.  xxviii.  21,  ix.  2  ;  compare  2  Sam.  i.  21,  Amos  iii.  9). 
'Arab,  written  with  pathach,  is  Arabia  (Ezek.  xxvii.  21  ;  rardb 
in  pause,  Jer.  xxv.  24)  ;  and  ya'ar  here  is  the  solitary  barren 
desert,  as  distinguished  from  the  cultivated  land  with  its  cities 
and  villages.  Wetzstein  rejects  the  meaning  nernus,  sylva, 


CHAP.  XXI.  13-15.  387 

which  yaar  has  been  assumed  to  have,  because  it  would  be 
rather  a  promise  than  a  threat  to  be  told  that  they  would  have 
to  flee  from  the  steppe  into  the  wood,  since  a  shady  tree  is  the 
most  delicious  dream  of  the  Beduins,  who  not  only  find  shade 
in  the  forest,  but  a  constant  supply  of  green  pasture,  and  fuel 
for  their  hospitable  hearths.  He  therefore  renders  it,  "  Ye  will 
take  refuge  in  the  V'ar  of  Arabia,"  i.e.  the  open  steppe  will  no 
longer  afford  you  any  shelter,  so  that  ye  will  be  obliged  to  hide 

c- 

yourselves  in  the  Var.   ^  for  example,  is  the  name  applied  to 


the  trachytic  rayon  of  the  Syro-Hauranitic  volcanoes  which  is 
covered  with  a  layer  of  stones.  But  as  the  Var  in  this  sense 
is  also  planted  with  trees,  and  furnishes  firewood,  this  epithet 
must  rest  upon  some  peculiar  distinction  in  the  radical  meaning 
of  the  word  yaar,  which  really  does  mean  a  forest  in  Hebrew, 
though  not  necessarily  a  forest  of  lofty  trees,  but  also  a  wilder 
ness  overgrown  with  brushwood  and  thorn-bushes.  The  mean 
ing  of  the  passage  before  us  we  therefore  take  to  be  this  :  the 
trading  caravans  (^drchoth,  like  halwotJi  in  Job  vi.  19)  of  the 
Dedanians,  that  mixed  tribe  of  Cushites  and  Abrahamides 
dwelling  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Edomites  (Gen.  x.  7, 
xxv.  3),  when  on  their  way  from  east  to  west,  possibly  to  Tyre 
(Ezek.  xxvii.  20),  would  be  obliged  to  encamp  in  the  wilderness, 
being  driven  out  of  the  caravan  road  in  consequence  of  the  war 
that  was  spreading  from  north  to  south.  The  prophet,  whose 
sympathy  mingles  with  the  revelation  in  this  instance  also,  asks 
for  water  for  the  panting  fugitives  (WJ[?»  as  in  Jer.  xii.  9,  an 
imperative  equivalent  to  VTisn  =  VTiKn  ;  compare  2  Kings  ii.  3  : 
there  is  no  necessity  to  read  ^i?,  as  the  Targum,  Doderlein, 
and  Ewald  do).  They  are  driven  back  with  fright  towards 
the  south-east  as  far  as  Tema,  on  the  border  of  Negd  and  the 
Syrian  desert.  The  Tema  referred  to  is  not  the  trans-Hauranian 
Tema,  which  is  three-quarters  of  an  hour  from  Dumah,  although 
there  is  a  good  deal  that  seems  to  favour  this,1  but  the  Tema 
on  the  pilgrim  road  from  Damascus  to  Mecca,  between  Tebuk 
and  Wadi  el-Kora,  which  is  about  the  same  distance  (four  days' 
journey)  from  both  these  places,  and  also  from  Chaibar  (it  is 
to  be  distinguished,  however,  from  Tihama,  the  coast  land  of 
Yemen,  the  antithesis  of  which  is  negd,  the  mountain  district 
1  See  Wetzstein,  ut  supra,  p.  202  ;  compare  Job,  ii.  425. 


388  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  Yemen1).  But  even  here  in  the  land  of  Tema  they  do  not 
feel  themselves  safe.  The  inhabitants  of  Tema  are  obliged  to 
bring  them  water  and  bread  ("  its  bread,"  lachmo,  referring  to 
nodid:  the  bread  necessary  in  order  to  save  them),  into  the 
hiding-places  in  which  they  have  concealed  themselves.  "  How 
humiliating,"  as  Drechsler  well  observes,  "to  be  obliged  to 
practise  their  hospitality,  the  pride  of  Arabian  customs,  in  so 
restricted  a  manner,  and  with  such  unbecoming  secrecy !"  But 
it  could  not  possibly  be  done  in  any  other  way,  since  the 
weapons  of  the  foe  were  driving  them  incessantly  before  them, 
and  the  war  itself  was  rolling  incessantly  forward  like  an  over 
whelming  colossus,  as  the  repetition  of  the  word  "before" 
(mippene)  no  less  than  four  times  clearly  implies. 

Thus  does  the  approaching  fate  of  Arabia  present  itself  in 
picture  before  the  prophet's  eye,  whilst  it  is  more  distinctly 
revealed  in  vers.  16,  17  :  "For  thus  hath  the  Lord  spoken  to  me, 
Within  a  year,  as  the  years  of  a  hired  labourer,  it  is  over  with  all 
the  glory  of  Kedar.  And  the  remnant  of  the  number  of  bows 
of  the  heroes  of  the  Kedarenes  will  be  small :  for  Jehovah,  the 
God  of  Israel,  hath  spoken"  The  name  Kedar  is  here  the 
collective  name  of  the  Arabic  tribes  generally.  In  the  stricter 
sense,  Kedar,  like  Nebaioth,  which  is  associated  with  it,  was 
a  nomadic  tribe  of  Ishmaelites,  which  wandered  as  far  as  the 
Elanitic  Gulf.  Within  the  space  of  a  year,  measured  as  exactly 
as  is  generally  the  case  where  employers  and  labourers  are  con 
cerned,  Kedar's  freedom,  military  strength,  numbers,  and  wealth 
(all  these  together  constituting  its  glory),  would  all  have  dis 
appeared.  Nothing  but  a  small  remnant  would  be  left  of  the 
heroic  sons  of  Kedar  and  their  bows.  They  are  numbered 
here  by  their  bows  (in  distinction  from  the  numbering  by 
heads),  showing  that  the  fighting  men  are  referred  to, — a  mode 
of  numbering  which  is  customary  among  the  Indian  tribes  of 
America,  for  example.2  The  noun  shear  (remnant)  is  followed 
by  five  genitives  here  (just  as  peri  is  by  four  in  ch.  x.  12) ; 
and  the  predicate  wy~>\  is  in  the  plural  because  of  the  copious 
ness  of  the  subject.  The  period  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  pro 
phecy  keeps  us  still  within  the  Assyrian  era.  In  Herodotus 

1  See  Sprenger,  Post  und  Reise-routen  des  Orients,  Heft  i.  (1864),  pp. 
118,  119. 

2  See  the  work  of  v.  Martius  on  the  Indians  of  Brazil,  i.  395,  411,  etc. 


CHAP.  XXII.  1-14.  389 

(2,  141),  Sennacherib  is  actually  called  "  king  of  Arabians  and 
Assyrians"  (compare  Josephus,  Ant.  x.  1,  4)  ;  and  both  Sargon 
and  Sennacherib,  in  their  annalistic  inscriptions,  take  credit  to 
themselves  for  the  subjugation  of  Arabian  tribes.  But  in  the 
Chaldean  era  Jeremiah  predicted  the  same  things  against  Kedar 
(ch.  xlix.)  as  against  Edom ;  and  Jer.  xlix.  30,  31  was  evidently 
written  with  a  retrospective  allusion  to  this  oracle  of  Isaiah. 
When  the  period  fixed  by  Isaiah  for  the  fulfilment  arrived,  a 
second  period  grew  out  of  it,  and  one  still  more  remote,  inas 
much  as  a  second  empire,  viz.  the  Chaldean,  grew  out  of  the 
Assyrian,  and  inaugurated  a  second  period  of  judgment  for  the 
nations.  After  a  short  glimmer  of  morning,  the  night  set  in  a 
second  time  upon  Edom,  and  a  second  time  upon  Arabia. 


THE  ORACLE  CONCERNING  THE  VALLEY  OF  VISION 

(JERUSALEM). — CHAP.  xxn.  i-u. 

The  cJidzuth  concerning  Babylon,  and  the  no  less  visionary 
prophecies  concerning  Edom  and  Arabia,  are  now  followed  by 
a  massdy  the  object  of  which  is  "  the  valley  of  vision "  (ge 
chizzdydn)  itself.  Of  course  these  four  prophecies  were  not 
composed  in  the  tetralogical  form  in  which  they  are  grouped 
together  here,  but  were  joined  together  at  a  later  period  in  a 
group  of  this  kind  on  account  of  their  close  affinity.  The 
internal  arrangement  of  the  group  was  suggested,  not  by  the 
date  of  their  composition  (they  stand  rather  in  the  opposite 
relation  to  one  another),  but  by  the  idea  of  a  storm  coming 
from  a  distance,  and  bursting  at  last  over  Jerusalem ;  for  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  "  valley  of  vision"  is  a  general  name 
for  Jerusalem  as  a  whole,  and  not  the  name  given  to  one 
particular  valley  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  true  that  the  epithet 
applied  to  the  position  of  Jerusalem  does  not  seem  to  be  in 
harmony  with  this ;  for,  according  to  Josephus,  "  the  city  was 
built  upon  two  hills,  which  are  opposite  to  one  another  and 
have  a  valley  to  divide  them  asunder,  at  which  valley  the 
corresponding  rows  of  houses  on  both  hills  end"  (  Wars  of  the 
Jews,  v.  4,  1  ;  Whiston).  But  the  epithet  is  so  far  allowable, 
that  there  are  mountains  round  Jerusalem  (Ps.  cxxv.  2)  ;  and 
the  same  city  which  is  on  an  eminence  in  relation  to  the  land 
generally,  appears  to  stand  on  low  ground  when  contrasted 


390  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

with  the  mountains  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  (Trpo?  Se 
ra  6%6[j,eva  ravrr)?  <yr]o\o§a  %0afjba\L%€Tai,  as  Phocas  says). 
According  to  this  twofold  aspect,  Jerusalem  is  called  the 
"  inhabitant  of  the  valley"  in  Jer.  xxi.  13,  and  directly  after 
wards  the  "rock  of  the  plain;"  just  as  in  Jer.  xvii.  3  it  is 
called  the  mountain  in  the  fields,  whereas  Zephaniah  (i.  11) 
applies  the  epithet  mactesh  (the  mortar  or  cauldron)  not  to  all 
Jerusalem,  but  to  one  portion  of  it  (probably  the  ravine  of  the 
Tyropseum).  And  if  we  add  to  this  the  fact  that  Isaiah's 
house  was  situated  in  the  lower  town, — and  therefore  the  stand 
point  of  the  epithet  is  really  there, — it  is  appropriate  in  other 
respects  still ;  for  the  prophet  had  there  the  temple-hill  and  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  which  is  three  hundred  feet  higher,  on  the 
east,  and  Mount  Zion  before  him  towards  the  south ;  so  that 
Jerusalem  appeared  like  a  city  in  a  valley  in  relation  to  the 
mountains  inside,  quite  as  much  as  to  those  outside.  But  the 
epithet  is  intended  to  be  something  more  than  geographical. 
A  valley  is  a  deep,  still,  solitary  place,  cut  off  and  shut  in  by 
mountains.  And  thus  Jerusalem  was  an  enclosed  place,  hid 
den  and  shut  off  from  the  world,  which  Jehovah  had  chosen  as 
the  place  in  which  to  show  to  His  prophets  the  mysteries  of 
His  government  of  the  world.  And  upon  this  sacred  prophets' 
city  the  judgment  of  Jehovah  was  about  to  fall  ;  and  the 
announcement  of  the  judgment  upon  it  is  placed  among  the 
oracles  concerning  the  nations  of  the  world !  We  may  see 
from  this,  that  at  the  time  when  this  prophecy  was  uttered, 
the  attitude  of  Jerusalem  was  so  worldly  and  heathenish,  that 
it  called  forth  this  dark,  nocturnal  threat,  which  is  penetrated 
by  not  a  single  glimmer  of  promise.  But  neither  the  pro 
phecies  of  the  time  of  Ahaz  relating  to  the  Assyrian  age  of 
judgment,  nor  those  which  were  uttered  in  the  midst  of  the 
Assyrian  calamities,  are  so  destitute  of  promise  and  so  peremp 
tory  as  this.  The  massa  therefore  falls  in  the  intermediate 
time,  probably  the  time  when  the  people  were  seized  with  the 
mania  for  liberty,  and  the  way  was  prepared  for  their  breaking 
away  from  Assyria  by  their  hope  of  an  alliance  with  Egypt 
(vid.  Delitzsch-Caspari,  Studien,  ii.  173-4).  The  prophet  ex 
poses  the  nature  and  worthlessness  of  their  confidence  in  vers. 
1-3  :  "  What  aileth  thee,  then,  that  thou  art  wholly  ascended 
upon  the  house-tops  F  0  full  of  tumult,  thou  noisy  city,  shouting 


CHAP.  XXII.  4,  5.  391 

sastle,  thy  slain  men  are  not  slain  with  the  sword,  nor  slaughtered 
in  battle.  All  thy  riders  departing  together  are  fettered  without 
low;  all  thy  captured  ones  are  fettered  together,  fleeing  far  away" 
From  the  flat  house-tops  they  all  look  out  together  at  the 
approaching  army  of  the  foe,  longing  for  battle,  and  sure  of 
victory  (culldk  is  for  cullek,  ch.  xiv.  29,  31).  They  have  no 
suspicion  of  what  is  threatening  them  ;  therefore  are  they  so 
sure,  so  contented,  and  so  defiant.  nN?O  niNBTi  is  inverted,  and 
stands  for  nlKK>n  n&6»,  like  rruo  n^'m  ch.'  viii.  22.  nP/>2 
is  used  to  denote  self-confident  rejoicing,  as  in  Zeph.  ii.  15. 
How  terribly  they  deceive  themselves  !  Not  even  the  honour 
of  falling  upon  the  battle-field  is  allowed  them.  Their  rulers 
(kdtzin,  a  judge,  and  then  any  person  of  rank)  depart  one  and 
all  out  of  the  city,  and  are  fettered  outside  "  without  bow" 
(inikkeshetJi),  i.e.  without  there  being  any  necessity  for  the  bow 
to  be  drawn  (min,  as  in  Job  xxi.  9,  2  Sam.  i.  22 ;  cf.  Ewald, 
§  217,  b).  All,  without  exception,  of  those  who  are  attacked  in 
Jerusalem  by  the  advancing  foe  (nimzaaik,  thy  captured  ones, 
as  in  ch.  xiii.  15),  fall  helplessly  into  captivity,  as  they  are 
attempting  to  flee  far  away  (see  at  ch.  xvii.  13 ;  the  perf.  de 
conatu  answers  to  the  classical  prcesens  de  conatu).  Hence 
(what  is  here  affirmed  indirectly)  the  city  is  besieged,  and  in 
consequence  of  the  long  siege  hunger  and  pestilence  destroy 
the  inhabitants,  and  every  one  who  attempts  to  get  away  falls 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  without  venturing  to  defend  him 
self,  on  account  of  his  emaciation  and  exhaustion  from  hunger. 
Whilst  the  prophet  thus  pictures  to  himself  the  fate  of  Jeru 
salem  and  Judah,  through  their  infatuation,  he  is  seized  with 
inconsolable  anguish. — Vers.  4,  5.  "  Therefore  I  say.  Look  away 
from  me,  that  I  may  weep  bitterly;  press  me  not  with  consolations 
for  the  destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  !  For  a  day  of 
noise,  and  of  treading  down,  and  of  confusion,  cometh  from  the 
Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts,  in  the  valley  of  vision,  breaking  down 
walls;  and  a  cry  of  woe  echoes  against  the  mountains"  The 
note  struck  by  Isaiah  here  is  the  note  of  the  kinah  that  is 
continued  in  the  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah.  Jeremiah  says 
sheber  for  shod  (Lam.  iii.  48),  and  bath-ammi  (daughter  of  my 
people)  is  varied  with  bath-zion  (daughter  of  Zion)  and  bath- 
yehudah  (daughter  of  Judah).  Merer  bobbed  (weep  bitterly) 
is  more  than  bdcdh  mar  (ch.  xxxiii.  7)  :  it  signifies  to  give  one's 


392  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

self  thoroughly  up  to  bitter  weeping,  to  exhaust  one's  self  with 
weeping.  The  two  similar  sounds  which  occur  in  ver.  5,  in 
imitation  of  echoes,  can  hardly  be  translated.  The  day  of 
divine  judgment  is  called  a  day  in  which  masses  of  men  crowd 
together  with  great  noise  (mehumdh),  in  which  Jerusalem  and 
its  inhabitants  are  trodden  down  by  foes  (mebusdli)  and  are 
thrown  into  wild  confusion  (mebucdli).  This  is  one  play  upon 
words.  The  other  makes  the  crashing  of  the  walls  audible, 
as  they  are  hurled  down  by  the  siege-artillery  (mekarkar  kir). 
Kirker  is  not  a  denom.  of  klr,  as  Kimchi  and  Ewald  suppose 
(unwalling  walls),  but  is  to  be  explained  in  accordance  with 
Num.  xxiv.  17,  "he  undermines,"  i.e.  throws  down  by  remov 
ing  the  supports,  in  other  words,  u  to  the  very  foundations " 
(Jcur,  to  dig,  hence  karkdrdh,  the  bottom  of  a  vessel,  Kelim 
ii.  2;  kurkoreth,  the  bottom  of  a  net,  ib.  xxviii.  10,  or  of  a  cask, 
Ahalot/i  ix.  16).  When  this  takes  place,  then  a  cry  of  woe 
echoes  against  the  mountain  (shod,  like  shua,  sheva),  i.e. 
strikes  against  the  mountains  that  surround  Jerusalem,  and  is 
echoed  back  again.  Knobel  understands  it  as  signifying  a  cry 
for  help  addressed  to  the  mountain  where  Jehovah  dwells ; 
but  this  feature  is  altogether  unsuitable  to  the  God-forgetting 
worldly  state  in  which  Jerusalem  is  found.  It  is  also  to  be 
observed,  in  opposition  to  Knobel,  that  the  description  does  not 
move  on  in  the  same  natural  and  literal  way  as  in  a  historical 
narrative.  The  prophet  is  not  relating,  but  looking ;  and  in 
ver.  5  he  depicts  the  day  of  Jehovah  according  to  both  its 
ultimate  intention  and  its  ultimate  result. 

The  advance  of  the  besiegers,  which  leads  to  the  destruc 
tion  of  the  walls,  is  first  described  in  vers.  6,  7.  "  And  Elam 
has  taken  the  quiver,  together  with  chariots  with  men,  horsemen ; 
and  Kir  has  drawn  out  the  shield.  And  then  it  comes  to  pass, 
that  tliy  choicest  valleys  are  filled  with  chariots,  and  the  horsemen 
plant  a  firm  foot  towards  the  gate"  Of  the  nations  composing 
the  Assyrian  army,  the  two  mentioned  are  Elam,  the  Semitic 
nation  of  Susiana  (Chuzistan),  whose  original  settlements  were 
the  row  of  valleys  between  the  Zagros  chain  and  the  chain  of 
advanced  mountains  bounding  the  Assyrian  plains  on  the  east; 
and  who  were  greatly  dreaded  as  bowmen  (Ezek.  xxxii.  24  ; 
Jer.  xlix.  35),  and  Kir,  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  of  the 
Cyrus  river,  which  was  an  Assyrian  province,  according  to 


CHAP.  XXII.  6,  7.  393 

2  Kings  xvi.  9  and  Amos  i.  5,  and  still  retained  its  depen 
dent  position  even  in  the  time  of  the  Achsemenides,  when 
Armenia,  at  any  rate,  is  expressly  described  in  the  arrow- 
headed  writings  as  a  Persian  province,  though  a  rebellious  one. 
The  readiness  for  battle  of  this  people  of  Kur,  who  represent, 
in  combination  with  Elam,  the  whole  extent  of  the  Assyrian 
empire  from  south  to  north,1  is  attested  by  their  "  drawing  out 
the  shield "  Derail  mdgen\  which  Caesar  calls  scutis  tegimenta 
detrahere  (bell.  gall.  ii.  21)  ;  for  the  Talmudic  meaning  appli- 
care  cannot  be  thought  of  for  a  moment  (Buxtorf,  lex.  col. 
1664).  These  nations  that  fought  on  foot  were  accompanied 
(beth,  as  in  1  Kings  x.  2)  by  chariots  filled  with  men  (receb 
9dddm)9  i.e.  war-chariots  (as  distinguished  from  'agdlotli),  and, 
as  is  added  aavvBerajs,  by  pdrdshim,  riders  (i.e.  horsemen 
trained  to  arms).  The  historical  tense  is  introduced  with  W 
in  ver.  7,  but  in  a  purely  future  sense.  It  is  only  for  the  sake 
of  the  favourite  arrangement  of  the  words  that  the  passage 
does  not  proceed  with  Vav  relat.  ftyjj^.  "  Thy  valleys  "  ^amd- 
kaik)  are  the  valleys  by  which  Jerusalem  was  encircled  on  the 
east,  the  west,  and  the  south,  viz.  the  valley  of  Kidron  on  the 
east ;  the  valley  of  Gihon  on  the  west ;  the  valley  of  Rephaim, 
stretching  away  from  the  road  to  Bethlehem,  on  the  south 
west  (ch.  xvii.  5)  ;  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  which  joins  the 
Tyropseum,  and  then  runs  on  into  a  south-eastern  angle  ;  and 
possibly  also  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  which  ran  on  the  north 
east  of  the  city  above  the  valley  of  Kidron.  These  valleys, 
more  especially  the  finest  of  them  towards  the  south,  are  now 
cut  up  by  the  wheels  and  hoofs  of  the  enemies'  chariots  and 
horses ;  and  the  enemies'  horsemen  have  already  taken  a  firm 
position  gatewards,  ready  to  ride  full  speed  against  the  gates 
at  a  given  signal,  and  force  their  way  into  the  city  (shith  with 
a  slwth  to  strengthen  it,  as  in  Ps.  iti.  7  ;  also  slm  in  1  Kings 
xx.  12,  compare  1  Sam.  xv.  2). 

When  Judah,  after  being  for  a  long  time  intoxicated  with 

1  The  name  Gurglstan  (=  Georgia)  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  river 
Kur  ;  and  it  is  a  suspicious  fact  that  Kir  has  k  at  the  commencement,  and 
i  in  the  middle,  whereas  the  name  of  the  river  which  joins  the  Araxes,  and 
flows  into  the  Caspian  sea,  is  pronounced  Kur,  and  is  written  in  Persian 

with  £=  (answering  to  the  Armenian  and  old  Persian,  in  which  Kuru  ia 
equivalent  to  Kvpo$).  Wetzstein  considers  Kir  a  portion  of  Mesopotamia. 


394  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

hope,  shall  become  aware  of  the  extreme  danger  In  which  it  is 
standing,  it  will  adopt  prudent  measures,  but  without  God.  Vers. 
8-11.  u  Then  he  takes  away  the  covering  ofJudah,  and  thou  lookest 
in  that  day  to  the  store  of  arms  of  the  forest-house ;  and  ye  see  the 
breaches  of  the  city  of  David,  that  there  are  many  of  them  ;  and 
ye  collect  together  the  waters  of  the  lower  pool.  And  ye  number 
the  houses  of  Jerusalem,  and  pull  down  the  houses,  to  fortify  the 
wall.  And  ye  make  a  basin  between  the  two  walls  for  the  waters 
of  the  old  pool ;  and  ye  do  not  look  to  Him  who  made  it,  neither 
do  ye  have  regard  to  Him  who  fashioned  it  long  ago"  Mdsdk  is 
the  curtain  or  covering  which  made  Judah  blind  to  the  threat 
ening  danger.  Their  looks  are  now  directed  first  of  all  to  the 
forest-house,  built  by  Solomon  upon  Zion  for  the  storing  and 
display  of  valuable  arms  and  utensils  (iieshsk,  or  rather,  accord 
ing  to  the  Masora  on  Job  xx.  24,  and  the  older  editions,  neshek), 
and  so  called  because  it  rested  upon  four  rows  of  cedar  columns 
that  ran  all  round  (it  was  in  the  centre  of  the  fore-court  of 
the  royal  palace ;  see  Thenius,  das  vorexil.  Jerusalem,  p.  13). 
They  also  noticed  in  the  city  of  David,  the  southern  and  highest 
portion  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  the  bad  state  of  the  walls,  and 
began  to  think  of  repairing  them.  To  this  end  they  numbered 
the  houses  of  the  city,  to  obtain  building  materials  for  strengthen 
ing  the  walls  and  repairing  the  breaches,  by  pulling  down  such 
houses  as  were  suitable  for  the  purpose,  and  could  be  dispensed 
with  (vattithtzu,  from  ndtliatz,  with  the  removal  of  the  recom- 
pensative  reduplication).  The  lower  pool  and  the  old  pool, 
probably  the  upper,  i.e.  the  lower  and  upper  Gihon,  were 
upon  the  western  side  of  the  city,  the  lower  (Birket  es-Sultan) 
to  the  west  of  Sion,  the  upper  (Birket  el-Mamilld)  farther 
up  to  the  west  of  Akra  (Robinson,  i.  483-486 ;  v.  Raumer, 
Pal.  pp.  305-6).  Kibbetz  either  means  to  collect  in  the  pool 
by  stopping  up  the  outflow,  or  to  gather  together  in  the  reser 
voirs  and  wells  of  the  city  by  means  of  artificial  canals.  The 
latter,  however,  would  most  probably  be  expressed  by  *1DX ;  so 
that  the  meaning  that  most  naturally  suggests  itself  is,  that 
they  concentrate  the  water,  so  as  to  be  able  before  the  siege 
to  provide  the  city  as  rapidly  as  possible  with  a  large  supply. 
The  word  sdtham,  which  is  used  in  the  account  of  the  actual 
measures  adopted  by  Hezekiah  when  he  was  threatened  with 
siege  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  2-5),  is  a  somewhat  different  one,  and 


CHAP.  xxii.  8-11.  395 

indicates  the  stopping  up,  not  of  the  outflow  but  of  the  springs, 
and  therefore  of  the  influx.  But  in  all  essential  points  the 
measures  adopted  agree  with  those  indicated  here  in  the  pro 
phecy.  The  chronicler  closes  the  account  of  Hezekiah's  reign 
by  still  further  observing  that  "  Hezekiah  also  stopped  the  out 
flow  of  the  upper  Gihon,  and  carried  the  water  westwards 
underground  to  the  city  of  David  "  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  30,  expla 
natory  of  2  Kings  xx.  20).  If  the  upper  Gihon  is  the  same 
as  the  upper  pool,  there  was  a  conduit  (teedldh\  connected  with 
the  upper  Gihon  as  early  as  the  time  of  Ahaz,  ch.  vii.  3. 
And  Hezekiah's  peculiar  work  consisted  in  carrying  the  water 
of  the  upper  pool  "into  the  city  of  David.'*  The  mikvdh 
between  the  two  walls,  which  is  here  prospectively  described 
by  Isaiah,  is  connected  with  this  water  supply,  which  Hezekiah 
really  carried  out.  There  is  still  a  pool  of  Hezekiah  (also 
called  Birket  el-Batrak,  pool  of  the  patriarchs,  the  Amygdalon 
of  Josephus)  on  the  western  side  of  the  city,  to  the  east  of  the 
Joppa  gate.  During  the  rainy  season  this  pool  is  supplied  by 
the  small  conduit  which  runs  from  the  upper  pool  along  the 
surface  of  the  ground,  and  then  under  the  wall  against  or 
near  the  Joppa  gate.  It  also  lies  between  two  walls,  viz.  the 
wall  to  the  north  of  Zion,  and  the  one  which  runs  to  the  north 
east  round  the  Akra  (Robinson,  i.  487-489).  How  it  came 
to  pass  that  Isaiah's  words  concerning  "  a  basin  between  the 
two  walls "  were  so  exactly  carried  out,  as  though  they  had 
furnished  a  hydraulic  plan,  we  do  not  know.  But  we  will 
offer  a  conjecture  at  the  close  of  the  exposition.  It  stands 
here  as  one  of  those  prudent  measures  which  would  be  resorted 
to  in  Jerusalem  in  the  anticipation  of  the  coming  siege ;  but 
it  would  be  thought  of  too  late,  and  in  self-reliant  alienation 
from  God,  with  no  look  directed  to  Him  who  had  wrought  and 
fashioned  that  very  calamity  which  they  were  now  seeking  to 
avert  by  all  these  precautions,  and  by  whom  it  had  been  pro 
jected  long,  long  before  the  actual  realization.  -WV  might  be 
a  plural,  according  to  ch.  liv.  5 ;  but  the  parallel  STO*  favours 
the  singular  (on  the  form  itself,  from  *'&$  =  nfefy  see  ch.  xlii.  5, 
and  at  ch.  v.  12,  i.  30).  We  have  here,  and  at  ch.  xxxvii.  26, 
i.e.  within  the  first  part  of  the  book  of  Isaiah,  the  same  doctrine 
of  "  ideas  "  that  forms  so  universal  a  key-riote  of  the  second 
part,  the  authenticity  of  which  has  been  denied.  That  which 


390  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

is  realized  in  time  lias  existed  long  before  as  a  spiritual  pattern, 
i.e.  as  an  idea  in  God.  God  shows  this  to  His  prophets ;  and 
so  far  as  prophecy  foretells  the  future,  whenever  the  event 
predicted  is  fulfilled,  the  prophecy  becomes  a  proof  that  the 
event  is  the  work  of  God,  and  was  long  ago  the  predetermined 
counsel  of  God.  The  whole  of  the  Scripture  presupposes  this 
pre-existence  of  the  divine  idea  before  the  historical  realization, 
and  Isaiah  in  Israel  (like  Plato  in  the  heathen  world)  was  the 
assiduous  interpreter  of  this  supposition.  Thus,  in  the  case 
before  us,  the  fate  of  Jerusalem  is  said  to  have  been  fashioned 
"  long  ago  "  in  God.  But  Jerusalem  might  have  averted  its 
realization,  for  it  was  no  decretum  absolutum.  If  Jerusalem 
repented,  the  realization  would  be  arrested. 

And  so  far  as  it  had  proceeded  already,  it  was  a  call  from 
Jehovah  to  repentance.  Vers.  12-14.  "  The  Lord,  Jehovah  of 
hosts ,  calls  in  that  day  to  weeping,  and  to  mourning,  and  to  the 
pulling  out  of  hair,  and  to  girding  with  sackcloth;  and  behold 
joy  and  gladness,  slaughtering  of  oxen  and  killing  of  sheep, 
eating  of  flesh  and  drinking  of  ivine,  eating  and  drinking,  for 
6 to-morrow  we  die.1  And  Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  revealed  in  mine 
ears,  Surely  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  expiated  for  you  until  ye 
die,  saith  the  Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts"  The  first  condition  of 
repentance  is  a  feeling  of  pain  produced  by  the  punishments  of 
God.  But  upon  Jerusalem  they  produce  the  opposite  effect. 
The  more  threatening  the  future,  the  more  insensibly  and  madly 
do  they  give  themselves  up  to  the  rude,  sensual  enjoyment  of 
the  present.  Shdthoth  is  interchanged  with  shdtho  (which  is 
only  another  form  of  nhE>,  as  in  ch.  vi.  9,  xxx.  19),  to  ring  with 
shdchot  (compare  Hos.  x.  4).  There  are  other  passages  in 
which  we  meet  with  unusual  forms  introduced  for  the  sake  of 
the  play  upon  the  words  (vid.  ch.  iv.  6,  viii.  6,  xvi.  9,  and  com 
pare  Ezek.  xliii.  11,  and  the  keri  of  2  Sam.  iii.  25).  The  words 
of  the  rioters  themselves,  whose  conduct  is  sketched  by  the  inf. 
abs.,  which  are  all  governed  by  hinneh,  are  simply  "  for  to 
morrow  we  shall  die."  This  does  not  imply  that  they  feel  any 
pleasure  in  the  thought  of  death,  but  indicates  a  love  of  life 
which  scoffs  at  death.  Then  the  unalterable  will  of  the  all- 
commanding  God  is  audibly  and  distinctly  revealed  to  the 
prophet.  Such  scoffing  as  this,  which  defies  the  chastisements 
of  God,  will  not  be  expiated  in  any  other  way  than  by  the 


CHAP.  XXII.  12 -14.  397 

death  of  the  scoffer  (cuppar,  from  cdpliar,  tegere,  means  to  be 
covered  over,  i.e.  expiated).  This  is  done  in  the  case  of  sin 
either  by  the  justice  of  God,  as  in  the  present  instance,  or  by 
the  mercy  of  God  (ch.  vi.  7),  or  by  both  justice  and  mercy 
combined  (as  in  ch.  xxvii.  9).  In  all  three  cases  the  expiation 
is  demanded  by  the  divine  holiness,  which  requires  a  covering 
between  itself  and  sin,  by  which  sin  becomes  as  though  it  were 
not.  In  this  instance  the  expunging  act  consists  in  punish 
ment.  The  sin  of  Jerusalem  is  expiated  by  the  giving  up  of 
the  sinners  themselves  to  death.  The  verb  temuthun  (ye  shall 
die)  is  written  absolutely,  and  therefore  is  all  the  more  dread 
ful.  The  Targum  renders  it  "  till  ye  die  the  second  (eternal) 
death"  (mothdh  tliinydndli). 

So  far  as  this  prophecy  threatened  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  by  Assyria,  it  was  never  actually  fulfilled ;  but  the 
very  opposite  occurred.  Asshur  itself  met  with  destruction  in 
front  of  Jerusalem.  But  this  was  by  no  means  opposed  to  the 
prophecy  ;  and  it  was  with  this  conviction  that  Isaiah,  never 
theless,  included  the  prophecy  in  the  collection  which  he  made 
at  a  time  when  the  non-fulfilment  was  perfectly  apparent.  It 
stands  here  in  a  double  capacity.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  a 
memorial  of  the  mercy  of  God,  which  withdraws,  or  at  all 
events  modifies,  the  threatened  judgment  as  soon  as  repentance 
intervenes.  The  falling  away  from  Assyria  did  take  place; 
but  on  the  part  of  Hezekiah  and  many  others,  who  had  taken 
to  heart  the  prophet's  announcement,  it  did  so  simply  as  an 
affair  that  was  surrendered  into  the  hands  of  the  God  of  Israel, 
through  distrust  of  either  their  own  strength  or  Egyptian 
assistance.  Hezekiah  carried  out  the  measures  of  defence 
described  by  the  prophet ;  but  he  did  this  for  the  good  of 
Jerusalem,  and  with  totally  different  feelings  from  those  which 
the  prophet  had  condemned.  These  measures  of  defence  pro 
bably  included  the  reservoir  between  the  two  walls,  which  the 
chronicler  does  not  mention  till  the  close  of  the  history  of  his 
reign,  inasmuch  as  he  follows  the  thread  of  the  book  of  Kings, 
to  which  his  book  stands,  as  it  were,  in  the  relation  of  a  com 
mentary,  like  the  midrash,  from  which  extracts  are  made.  The 
king  regulated  his  actions  carefully  by  the  prophecy,  inasmuch 
as  after  the  threats  had  produced  repentance,  vers.  8-11  still 
remained  as  good  and  wise  counsels.  In  the  second  place,  the 


398  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

oracle  stands  here  as  the  proclamation  of  a  judgment  deferred 
but  not  repealed.  Even  if  the  danger  of  destruction  which 
threatened  Jerusalem  on  the  part  of  Assyria  had  been  merci 
fully  caused  to  pass  away,  the  threatening  word  of  Jehovah 
had  not  fallen  to  the  ground.  The  counsel  of  God  contained 
in  the  word  of  prophecy  still  remained ;  and  as  it  was  the  counsel 
of  the  Omniscient,  the  time  \vould  surely  come  when  it  would 
pass  out  of  the  sphere  of  ideality  into  that  of  actual  fact.  It 
remained  hovering  over  Jerusalem  like  an  eagle,  and  Jerusalem 
would  eventually  become  its  carrion.  We  have  only  to  com 
pare  the  temuthun  of  this  passage  with  the  cnroOavelcrOe  of  John 
viii.  21,  to  see  when  the  eventual  fulfilment  took  place.  Thus 
the  "  massa  of  the  valley  of  vision "  became  a  memorial  of 
mercy  to  Israel  when  it  looked  back  to  its  past  history  ;  but 
when  it  looked  into  the  future,  it  was  still  a  mirror  of  wrath. 


AGAINST  SHEBNA  THE  STEWARD. — CHAP.  XXII.  15-25. 

(APPENDIX  TO  THE  TETRALOGY  IN  CHAP,  xxi.-xxn.  14.) 

Shebna  (N;?^';  2  Kings  xviii.  18,  26,  runt")  is  officially  de 
scribed  as  "  over  the  house"  This  was  the  name  given  to  an 
office  of  state  of  great  importance  in  both  kingdoms  (1  Kings 
iv.  6,  xviii.  3),  in  fact  the  highest  office  of  all,  and  one  so  vastly 
superior  to  all  others  (ch.  xxxvi.  3,  xxxvii.  2),  that  it  was  some 
times  filled  by  the  heir  to  the  throne  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  21).  It 
was  the  post  of  minister  of  the  household,  and  resembled  the 
Merovingian  office  of  major  domus  (rnaire  du  palais).  The 
person  "  who  was  over  the  house  "  had  the  whole  of  the  domestic 
affairs  of  the  sovereign  under  his  superintendence,  and  was 
therefore  also  called  the  socen  or  administrator  (from  sdcan, 
related  to  shdcan,  to  assist  in  a  friendly,  neighbourly  manner, 
or  to  be  generally  serviceable  :  see  on  Job  xxii.  2),  as  standing 
nearest  to  the  king.  In  this  post  of  eminence  Shebna  had 
helped  to  support  that  proud  spirit  of  self-security  and  self- 
indulgent  forgetf  ulness  of  God,  for  which  the  people  of  Jeru 
salem  had  in  the  foregoing  oracle  been  threatened  with  death. 
At  the  same  time,  he  may  also  have  been  a  leader  of  the 
Egyptian  party  of  magnates,  and  with  this  anti-theocratical 
policy  may  have  been  the  opponent  of  Isaiah  in  advising  the 


CHAP.  XXII.  15-19.  399 

king.  Hence  the  general  character  of  ch.  xxii.  1-14  now 
changes  into  a  distinct  and  special  prophecy  against  this  Shebna. 
The  time  at  which  it  was  fulfilled  was  the  same  as  that  referred 
to  in  ch.  xxii.  1-14.  There  was  still  deep  peace,  and  the  great 
minister  of  state  was  driving  about  with  splendid  equipages, 
and  engaged  in  superintending  the  erection  of  a  family  sepul 
chre.  Vers.  15-19.  li  Thus  spake  the  Lord,  Jehovah  of  hosts, 
Go,  get  thee  to  that  steward  there,  to  Shebna  the  house-mayor. 
What  hast  thou  here,  and  whom  hast  thou  here,  that  thou  hast 
hewn  thyself  out  a  sepulchre  here,  hewing  out  his  sepulchre  high 
up,  digging  himself  a  dwelling  in  rocks  ?  Behold,  Jehovah 
hurleth  thee,  hurling  with  a  maris  throw,  and  graspeth  thee  grasp 
ing.  Coiling,  He  coileth  thee  a  coil,  a  ball  into  a  land  far  and 
wide ;  there  shalt  thou  die,  and  thither  the  chariots  of  thy  glory, 
thou  shame  of  the  house  of  thy  lord!  And  I  thrust  thee  from  thy 
post,  and  from  thy  standing-place  he  pulleth  thee  down."  KITT]:^ 
go,  take  thyself  in, — not  into  the  house,  however,  but  into  the 
present  halting- pi  ace.  It  is  possible,  at  the  same  time,  that  the 
expression  may  simply  mean  "take  thyself  away,"  as  in  Gen. 
xlv.  17  and  Ezek.  iii.  4.  The  preposition  ^  is  interchanged 
with  ty,  which  more  commonly  denotes  the  coming  of  a  stronger 
man  upon  a  weaker  one  (1  Sam.  xii.  12),  and  is  here  used 
to  designate  the  overwhelming  power  of  the  prophet's  word. 
"  That  steward  there : "  this  expression  points  contemptuously 
to  the  position  of  the  minister  of  the  court  as  one  which,  how 
ever  high,  was  a  subordinate  one  after  all.  We  feel  at  once, 
as  we  read  this  introduction  to  the  divine  address,  that  insatiable 
ambition  was  one  of  the  leading  traits  in  Shebna's  character. 
What  Isaiah  is  to  say  to  Shebna  follows  somewhat  abruptly. 
The  words  "  and  say  to  him,"  which  are  added  in  the  Septuagint, 
naturally  suggest  themselves.  The  question,  What  hast  thou 
to  do  here,  and  whom  hast  thou  to  bury  here  ?  is  put  with 
a  glance  at  Shebna's  approaching  fate.  This  building  of  a 
sepulchre  was  quite  unnecessary  ;  Shebna  himself  would  never 
lie  there,  nor  would  he  be  able  to  bury  his  relations  there.  The 
threefold  repetition  of  the  word  "  here  "  (poh)  is  of  very  inci 
sive  force  :  it  is  not  here  that  he  will  stay, — here,  where  he  is 
even  now  placing  himself  on  a  bier,  as  if  it  were  his  home. 
The  participles  <l2¥h  and  ""pph  (with  chirek  compaginis :  see  on 
Ps.  cxiii.)  are  also  part  of  the  address.  The  third  person 


400  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

which  is  introduced  here  is  syntactically  regular,  although  the 
second  person  is  used  as  well  (ch.  xxiii.  2,  3 ;  Hab.  ii.  15). 
Rock-tombs,  i.e.  a  collection  of  tombs  in  the  form  of  chambers 
in  the  rocks,  were  indeed  to  be  found  to  the  east  of  Jerusalem, 
on  the  western  slope  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  in  the  wall 
of  rock  to  the  west  of  Jerusalem  ;  but  the  word  mdrom  ("  high 
up  "),  in  connection  with  the  threefold  "  here  "  (poh),  and  the 
contemptuous  "that  administrator  there,"  warrants  us  in  assum 
ing  that  mdrom  refers  to  "  the  height  of  the  sepulchres  of  the 
sons  of  David"  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  33),  i.e.  the  eastern  slope  of 
Zion,  where  the  tombs  of  the  kings  were  excavated  in  the 
rocks.  So  high  did  Shebna  stand,  and  so  great  did  he  think 
himself,  that  he  hoped  after  his  death  to  rest  among  kings,  and 
by  110  means  down  at  the  bottom.  But  how  he  deceived  him 
self!  Jehovah  would  hurl  him  far  away  (tul,  to  be  long;  pilpel, 
to  throw  or  stretch  out  to  a  distance J),  ">33  ntapD.  This  is  either 
equivalent  to  ">?2  HptipD  njpptp,  with  a  man's  throw  (Rosenmiiller), 
or  113  is  in  apposition  to  Jehovah  (Gesenius  and  Knobel).  As 
taltelah  stands  too  baldly  if  the  latter  be  adopted,  for  which 
reason  the  vocative  rendering  "  O  man,"  which  is  found  in 
the  Syriac,  does  not  commend  itself,  and  as  such  an  elliptical 
combination  of  the  absolute  with  the  genitive  is  by  no  means 
unusual  (e.g.  Prov.  xxii.  21,  Jer.  x.  10),  we  give  the  prefer 
ence  to  the  former.  Jerome's  rendering,  "  as  they  carry  off  a 
cock,"  which  he  obtained  from  the  mouth  of  his  Flelrwus,  can 
not  be  taken  into  consideration  at  all;  although  it  has  been 
retained  by  Schegg  (see  Geiger,  Lesestucke  aus  der  Mischna, 
p,  106).  The  verb  HIJV  does  not  give  a  suitable  sense  as  used 
in  Jer.  xliii.  12,  where  it  merely  signifies  to  cover  one's  self,  not 
to  wrap  up ;  nor  can  we  obtain  one  from  1  Sam.  xv.  19,  xxv.  14, 
xiv.  32,  since  the  verbal  forms  which  we  find  there,  and  which 
are  to  be  traced  to  W  (from  which  comes  W,  a  bird  of  prey), 
and  not  to  ntoy,  signify  "  to  rush  upon  anything "  (when  con 
strued  with  either  3  or  7N).  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  take  it,  as 
Michaelis,  Rosenmiiller,  Knobel,  and  others  do,  in  the  sense  of 
grasping  or  laying  hold  of.  On  the  other  hand,  tzdnaph^  which 
is  applied  in  other  instances  to  the  twisting  of.  a  turban,  also 

1  In  the  later  form  of  the  language,  this  verbal  stem  signifies  generally 
to  move  onward  ;  hence  tiyyult  motion,  or  a  walk,  and  metalteliu,  furniture, 
i.e.  moveable  goods. 


CHAP.  XXII.  20-24  401 

signifies  to  wrap  up,  make  up  into  a  bundle,  or  coil  up.  And 
caddiir,  like  tzenephdh,  signifies  that  into  which  Shebna  would 
be  coiled  up ;  for  the  Capli  is  not  to  be  taken  in  a  comparative 
sense,  since  the  use  of  caddiir  in  the  sense  of  globus  or  sphcera 
is  established  by  the  Talmud  (see  at  Job  xv.  24),  whereas  the 
Arabic  daur  only  means  gyrus,  periodus.  Shebna  is  made  into 
a  round  coil,  or  ball,  which  is  hurled  into  a  land  stretching  out 
on  both  sides,  i.e.  over  the  broad  surface  of  Mesopotamia,  where 
he  flies  on  farther  and  farther,  without  meeting  with  any  obstacle 
whatever.1  He  comes  thither  to  die — he  who,  by  his  exaggera 
tion  and  abuse  of  his  position,  has  not  only  dishonoured  his 
office,  but  the  Davidic  court  as  well ;  and  thither  do  his  state 
carriages  also  come.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  was  by 
the  positive  command  of  Jehovah  that  Isaiah  apostrophized  the 
proud  and  wealthy  Shebna  with  such  boldness  and  freedom  as 
this.  And  such  freedom  was  tolerated  too.  The  murder  or 
incarceration  of  a  prophet  was  a  thing  of  rare  occurrence  in  the 
kingdom  of  Judah  before  the  time  of  Manasseh.  In  order  to 
pave  the  way  for  the  institution  of  another  in  Shebna' s  office, 
the  punishment  of  deposition,  which  cannot  be  understood  in 
any  other  way  than  as  preceding  the  punishment  of  banish 
ment,  is  placed  at  the  close  of  the  first  half  of  the  prophecy. 
The  subject  in  ver.  196  is  not  the  king,  as  Luzzatto  supposes, 
but  Jehovah,  as  in  ver.  19a  (compare  ch.  x.  12). 

Jehovah  first  of  all  gives  him  the  blow  which  makes  him 
tremble  in  his  post,  and  then  pulls  him  completely  down  from 
this  his  lofty  station,2  in  order  that  another  worthier  man  may 
take  his  place.  Yers.  20-24.  "  And  it  will  come  to  pass  in  that 
day,  that  I  call  to  my  servant  Elialdm  the  son  of  Hilkiah,  and 
invest  him  with  thy  coat,  and  I  throw  thy  sash  firmly  round 
him,  and  place  thy  government  in  his  hand;  and  he  will  become  a 

1  Compare  the  old  saying,  "  The  heart  of  man  is  an  apple  driven  by  a 
tempest  over  an  open  plain." 

2  ^"lOyQ^  has  not  only  the  melheg  required  by  the  kametz  on  account 

of  the  long  vowel,  and  the  metheg  required  by  the  patach  on  account  of 
the  following  cliatepli  patach  (the  latter  of  which  also  takes  the  place  of  the 
metheg,  as  the  sign  of  a  subordinate  tone),  but  also  a  third  metheg  with  the 
chirek,  which  only  assists  the  emphatic  pronunciation  of  the  preposition, 
but  which  would  not  stand  there  at  all  unless  the  word  had  had  a  disjunc 
tive  accent  (compare  ch.  Iv.  9,  Fs.  xviii.  45,  Hos.  xi.  6). 

VOL.  I.  2O 


402  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

father  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and  to  the  house  of  JudaJi. 
And  I  place  the  key  of  David  upon  his  shoulder:  and  when  he 
opens,  no  man  shuts;  and  ivhen  he  shuts,  no  man  opens.  And  I 
fasten  him  as  a  plug  in  a  fast  place,  and  he  becomes  the  seat  of 
honour  to  his  father  s  house.  And  the  whole  mass  of  his  father* s 
house  hangs  upon  him,  the  offshoots  and  side-shoots,  every  small 
vessel,  from  the  vessel  of  the  basins  even  to  every  vessel  of  the 
pitchers?  Eliakim  is  called  the  u  servant  of  Jehovah,"  as  one 
who  was  already  a  servant  of  God  in  his  heart  and  conduct ; 
the  official  service  is  added  for  the  first  time  here.  This  title 
of  honour  generally  embraces  both  kinds  of  service  (ch.  xx.  3). 
It  is  quite  in  accordance  with  oriental  custom,  that  this  trans 
fer  of  the  office  is  effected  by  means  of  investiture  (compare 
1  Kings  xix.  19)  :  chizzeh,  with  a  double  accusative,  viz.  that 
of  the  person  and  that  of  the  official  girdle,  is  used  here  accord 
ing  to  its  radical  signification,  in  the  sense  of  girding  tightly  or 
girding  round,  putting  the  girdle  round  him  so  as  to  cause  the 
whole  dress  to  sit  firmly,  without  hanging  loose.  The  word 
memshalteM  (thy  government)  shows  how  very  closely  the  office 
forfeited  by  Shebna  was  connected  with  that  of  the  king. 
This  is  also  proved  by  the  word  "  father,"  which  is  applied  in 
other  cases  to  the  king  as  the  father  of  the  land  (ch.  ix.  5). 
The  "  key"  signifies  the  power  of  the  keys ;  and  for  this  reason 
it  is  not  given  into  Eliakim's  hand,  but  placed  upon  his  shoulder 
(ch.  ix.  5).  This  key  was  properly  handled  by  the  king  (Rev. 
iii.  7),  and  therefore  by  the  "  house-mayor"  only  in  his  stead. 
The  power  of  the  keys  consisted  not  only  in  the  supervision  of 
the  royal  chambers,  but  also  in  the  decision  who  was  and  who 
was  not  to  be  received  into  the  king's  service-  There  is  a 
resemblance,  therefore,  to  the  giving  of  the  keys  of  the  king 
dom  of  heaven  to  Peter  under  the  New  Testament.  But  there 
the  "  binding"  and  "  loosing"  introduce  another  figure,  though 
one  similar  in  sense;  whereas  here,  in  the  "opening"  and 
"  shutting,"  the  figure  of  the  key  is  retained.  The  comparison 
of  the  institution  of  Eliakim  in  his  office  to  the  fastening  of  a 
tent-peg  was  all  the  more  natural,  that  ydthed  was  also  used 
as  a  general  designation  for  national  rulers  (Zech.  x.  4),  who 
stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the  commonwealth  as  a  tent-peg 
to  the  tent  which  it  holds  firmly  and  keeps  upright.  As  the 
tent-peg  is  rammed  into  the  ground,  so  that  a  person  could 


CHAP.  XXII.  25.  403 

easily  sit  upon  it,  the  figure  is  changed,  and  the  tent-peg 
becomes  a  seat  of  honour.  As  a  splendid  chair  is  an  ornament 
to  a  room,  so  Eliakim  would  be  an  honour  to  his  hitherto  undis 
tinguished  family.  The  thought  that  naturally  suggests  itself 
— namely,  that  the  members  of  the  family  would  sit  upon  this 
chair,  for  the  purpose  of  raising  themselves  to  honour — is  ex 
pressed  by  a  different  figure.  Eliakim  is  once  more  depicted 
as  a  ydtlied)  but  it  is  as  a  still  higher  one  this  time, — namely,  as 
the  rod  of  a  wardrobe,  or  a  peg  driven  high  up  into  the  wall. 
Upon  this  rod  or  peg  they  hang  (tldlu,  i.e.  one  hangs,  or  there 
hangs)  all  the  cdbod  of  the  house  of  Eliakim,  i.e.  not  every  one 
who  wished  to  be  honoured  and  attained  to  honour  in  this 
way  (cf.  ch.  v.  13),  but  the  whole  weight  of  his  family  (as  hi 
ch.  viii.  7).  This  family  is  then  subdivided  into  its  separate 
parts,  and,  as  we  may  infer  from  the  juxtaposition  of  the  mas 
culine  and  feminine  nouns,  according  to  its  male  and  female 
constituents.  In  &^KS  (offshoots)  and  fitysy  ("side-shoots," 
from  JJBJ,  to  push  out;  compare  JPBS,  dung,  with  nKS,  mire)  there 
is  contained  the  idea  of  a  widely  ramifying  and  undistinguished 
family  connection.  The  numerous  rabble  consisted  of  nothing 
but  vessels  of  a  small  kind  (JiakJcdtdn),  at  the  best  of  basons 
(aggdnoth)  like  those  used  by  the  priests  for  the  blood  (Ex. 
xxiv.  6),  or  in  the  house  for  mixing  wine  (Song  of  Sol.  vii.  3 ; 
Aram,  aggono,  Ar.  iggdne,  ingdne,  a  washing  bason),  but  chiefly 
of  nebdlim,  i.e.  leather  bottles  or  earthenware  pitchers  (ch. 
xxx.  14).  The  whole  of  this  large  but  hitherto  ignoble  family 
of  relations  would  fasten  upon  Eliakim,  and  climb  through  him 
to  honour.  Thus  all  at  once  the  prophecy,  which  seemed  so 
full  of  promise  to  Eliakim,  assumes  a  satirical  tone.  We  get 
an  impression  of  the  favouring  of  nephews  and  cousins,  and 
cannot  help  asking  how  this  could  be  a  suitable  prophecy  for 
Shebna  to  hear. 

We  will  refer  to  this  again.  But  in  the  meantime  the 
impression  is  an  irresistible  one  ;  and  the  Targum,  Jerome, 
Hitzig,  and  others,  are  therefore  right  in  assuming  that  Elia 
kim  is  the  peg  which,  however  glorious  its  beginning  may 
have  been,  comes  at  last  to  the  shameful  end  described  in  ver. 
25  :  "In  that  day,  saith  Jehovah  of  hosts,  will  the  peg  that  is 
fastened  in  a  sure  place  be  removed,  and  be  cast  down,  and  fall ; 
and  the  burden  that  it  bore  falls  to  the  ground :  for  Jehovah  hath 


404  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

spoken?  The  prophet  could  not  express  in  clearer  terms  the 
identity  of  the  peg  threatened  here  with  Eliakim  himself ;  for 
how  is  it  conceivable  that  the  prophet  could  turn  all  that  he  has 
predicated  of  Eliakim  in  vers.  23,  24  into  predicates  of  Shebna? 
What  Umbreit  says — namely,  that  common  sense  must  refer 
ver.  25  to  Shebna — is  the  very  reverse  of  correct.  Eliakim 
himself  is  also  brought  down  at  last  by  the  greatness  of  his 
power,  on  account  of  the  nepotism  to  which  he  has  given  way. 
His  family  makes  a  wrong  use  of  him ;  and  he  is  more  yielding 
than  he  ought  to  be,  and  makes  a  wrong  use  of  his  office  to 
favour  them  !  He  therefore  falls,  and  brings  down  with  him 
all  that  hung  upon  the  peg,  i.e.  all  his  relations,  who  have 
brought  him  to  ruin  through  the  rapacity  with  which  they 
have  grasped  at  prosperity. 

Hitzig  maintains  that  vers.  24,  25  form  a  later  addition. 
But  it  is  much  better  to  assume  that  the  prophet  wrote  down 
ch.  xxii.  15-25  at  one  sitting,  after  the  predicted  fate  of  the 
two  great  ministers  of  state,  which  had  been  revealed  to  him 
at  two  different  times,  had  been  actually  fulfilled.  We  know 
nothing  more  about  them  than  this,  that  in  the  fourteenth 
year  of  Hezekiah  it  was  not  Shebna,  but  Eliakim,  "  who  was 
over  the  house  "  (ch.  xxxvi.  3,  22,  xxxvii.  2).  But  Shebna 
also  filled  another  office  of  importance,  namely  that  of  sopher. 
Was  he  really  taken  prisoner  and  carried  away  (a  thing  which 
is  perfectly  conceivable  even  without  an  Assyrian  captivity 
of  the  nation  generally)  ?  Or  did  he  anticipate  the  threatened 
judgment,  and  avert  it  by  a  penitential  self-abasement  ?  To 
this  and  other  questions  we  can  give  no  reply.  One  thing  alone 
is  certain, — namely,  that  the  threefold  prediction  of  Shebna's 
fall,  of  Eliakim's  elevation,  and  of  Eliakim's  fall,  would  not 
stand  where  it  does,  if  there  were  any  reason  whatever  to  be 
ashamed  of  comparing  the  prophecy  with  its  fulfilment. 


THE  ORACLE   CONCERNING  TYRE. — CHAP.  XXIII. 

(CONCLUSION  OF  THE  CYCLE  OF  PROPHECIES  RELATING  TO  THE  HEATHEN.) 

The  second  leading  type  of  the  pride  of  heathen  power 
closes  the  series  of  prophecies  against  the  nations,  as  Stier 
correctly  observes,  just  as  Babylon  opened  it.  Babylon  was 


CHAP.  XXIII.  405 

the  city  of  the  imperial  power  of  the  world ;  Tyre,  the  city  of 
the  commerce  of  the  world.  The  former  was  the  centre  of  the 
greatest  land  power ;  the  latter  of  the  greatest  maritime  power. 
The  former  subjugated  the  nations  with  an  iron  arm,  and 
ensured  its  rule  by  means  of  deportation  ;  the  latter  obtained 
possession  of  the  treasures  of  the  nations  in  as  peaceable  a 
manner  as  possible,  and  secured  its  advantages  by  colonies  and 
factories.  The  Phoenician  cities  formed  at  first  six  or  eight 
independent  states,  the  government  of  which  was  in  the  hands 
of  kings.  Of  these,  Sidon  was  much  older  than  Tyre.  The 
thorah  and  Homer  mention  only  the  former.  Tyre  did  not 
rise  into  notoriety  till  after  the  time  of  David.  But  in  the 
Assyrian  era  Tyre  had  gained  a  kind  of  supremacy  over  the 
rest  of  the  Phoenician  states.  It  stood  by  the  sea,  five  miles 
from  Sidon ;  but  when  hard  pressed  by  enemies  it  had  trans 
ferred  the  true  seat  of  its  trade  and  wealth  to  a  small  island, 
which  was  three-quarters  of  a  mile  farther  to  the  north,  and 
only  twelve  hundred  paces  from  the  mainland.  The  strait 
which  separated  this  insular  Tyre  (Tyrus)  from  ancient  Tyre 
(Palcetyrus)  was  mostly  shallow,  and  its  navigable  waters  near 
the  island  had  only  a  draught  of  about  eighteen  feet,  so  that  on 
one  or  two  occasions  a  siege  of  insular  Tyre  was  effected  by 
throwing  up  an  embankment  of  earth, — namely,  once  by  Alex 
ander  (the  embankment  still  in  existence),  and  once  possibly 
by  Nebuchadnezzar,  for  Tyre  was  engaged  in  conflict  with 
the  Chaldean  empire  as  well  as  the  Assyrian.  Now  which  of 
these  two  conflicts  was  it  that  the  prophet  had  in  his  mind  ? 
Eichhorn,  Rosenmiiller,  Hitzig,  and  Movers  say  the  Chaldean, 
and  seek  in  this  way  to  establish  the  spuriousness  of  the 
passage  ;  whereas  Gesenius,  Maurer,  Umbreit,  and  Knobel  say 
the  Assyrian,  thinking  that  this  is  the  only  way  of  sustaining  its 
genuineness.  Ewald  and  Meier  say  the  same  ;  but  they  pro 
nounce  vers.  15—18  an  interpolation  belonging  to  the  Persian  era. 
De  Wette  wavers  between  the  genuineness  and  spuriousness  of 
the  whole.  In  our  opinion,  however,  as  in  that  of  Vitringa  and 
those  who  tread  in  his  footsteps,  the  question  whether  the  im 
perial  power  by  which  Tyre  was  threatened  was  the  Assyrian  or 
the  Chaldean,  is  a  purely  exegetical  question,  not  a  critical  one. 
The  prophecy  commences  by  introducing  the  trading  vessels 
of  Phoenicia  on  their  return  home3  as  they  hear  with  alarm  the 


406  THE  PKOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tidings  of  the  fate  that  has  befallen  their  home.  Ver.  1.  "Howl, 
ye  ships -of  Tarsldsh;  for  it  is  laid  waste,  so  that  there  is  no  house, 
no  entrance  any  more  !  Out  of  the  land  of  the  Chittceans  it  is 
made  known  to  them"  Even  upon  the  open  sea  they  hear  of  it 
as  a  rumour  from  the  ships  that  they  meet.  For  their  voyage  is 
a  very  long  one :  they  come  from  the  Phoenician  colony  on  the 
Spanish  Baetis,  or  the  Guadalquivir,  as  it  was  called  from  the 
time  of  the  occupation  by  the  Moors.  "  Ships  of  Tarshish" 
are  ships  that  sail  to  Tartessus  (LXX.  inaccurately,  if\oLct, 
KapxTjSovos).  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  whole  of  the 
Mediterranean  may  have  been  called  "  the  sea  of  Tarshish  ; " 
and  hence  the  rendering  adopted  by  the  Targum,  Jerome, 
Luther,  and  others,  naves  maris  (see  Humboldt,  Kosmos,  ii. 
167,  415).  These  ships  are  to  howl  (Jielllu  instead  of  the 
feminine,  as  in  ch.  xxxii.  11)  because  of  the  devastation  that 
has  taken  place  (it  is  easy  to  surmise  that  Tyre  has  been  the 
victim)  ;  for  the  home  and  harbour,  which  the  sailors  were 
rejoicing  at  the  prospect  of  being  able  to  enter  once  more, 
have  both  been  swept  away.  Cyprus  was  the  last  station  on 
this  homeward  passage.  The  Chittim  (written  in  the  legends 
of  coins  and  other  inscriptions  with  Caph  and  Cheth)  are  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Cyprian  harbour  of  Citiitm  and  its  territory. 
But  Epiphanius,  the  bishop  of  Salamis  in  the  island  of  Cyprus, 
says  that  Citium  was  also  used  as  a  name  for  the  whole  island, 
or  even  in  a  still  broader  sense.  Cyprus,  the  principal  mart  of 
the  Phoenicians,  was  the  last  landing-place.  As  soon  as  they 
touch  the  island,  the  fact  which  they  have  only  heard  of  as 
a  rumour  upon  the  open  sea,  is  fully  disclosed  (nigldh),  i.e.  it 
now  becomes  a  clear  undoubted  certainty,  for  they  are  told  of 
it  by  eye-witnesses  who  have  made  their  escape  to  the  island. 
The  prophet  now  turns  to  the  Phoenicians  at  home,  who  have 
this  devastation  in  prospect. — Vers.  2,  3.  "  Be  alarmed,  ye  in 
habitants  of  the  coast!  Sidonian  merchants,  sailing  over  the  sea, 
filled  thee  once.  And  the  sowing  of  Sichor  came  upon  great 
waters,  the  harvest  of  the  Nile,  her  store;  and  she  became  gain  for 
nations"  The  suffixes  of  fc&p  (to  till  with  wares  and  riches) 
and  Hfrpan  (the  bringing  in,  viz.  into  barns  and  granaries) 
refer  to1  the  word  *>$,  which  is  used  here  as  a  feminine  for  the 
name  of  a  country,  and  denotes  the  Phoenician  coast,  including 
the  insular  Tyre.  "  Sidonian  merchants"  are  the  Phoenicians 


CHAP.  XXIII.  4.  407 

generally,  as  in  Homer ;  for  the  "  great  Siclon"  of  antiquity 
(Zidon  rabbdhy  Josh.  xi.  8,  xix.  28)  was  the  mother-city  of 
Phoenicia,  which  so  thoroughly  stamped  its  name  upon  the 
whole  nation,  that  Tyre  is  called  DTO  Dtf  upon  Phoenician  coins. 
The  meaning  of  ver.  3«  is  not  that  the  revenue  of  Tyre  which 
accrued  to  it  on  the  great  unfruitful  sea,  was  like  a  Nile- 
sowing,  or  an  Egyptian  harvest  (Hitzig,  Knobel).  Such  a 
simile  would  he  a  very  beautiful  one,  but  it  is  a  very  unlikely 
one,  since  the  Phoenicians  actually  did  buy  up  the  corn-stores 
of  Egypt,  that  granary  of  the  ancient  world,  and  housed  the 
cargoes  that  were  brought  to  them  "  upon  great  waters,"  i.e.  on 
the  great  Mediterranean.  Sichor  is  a  Hebraic  form  of  Siris 
(the  native  name  of  the  upper  Nile,  according  to  Dionysius 
Perieg.  and  Pliny).  It  signifies  the  black  river  (Melas,  Eust. 
on  Dion.  Per.  222),  the  black  slime  of  which  gave  such  fertility 
to  the  land.  "  The  harvest  of  the  Nile"  is  not  so  much  an  ex 
planation  as  an  amplification.  The  valley  of  the  Nile  was  the 
field  for  sowing  and  reaping,  and  the  Phoenician  coast  was  the 
barn  for  this  valuable  corn  ;  and  inasmuch  as  corn  and  other 
articles  of  trade  were  purchased  and  bartered  there,  it  thereby 
became  gain  (constr.  of  mchar,  Ewald,  213,  a,  used  in  the  same 
sense  as  in  ver.  18,  ch.  xlv.  14,  and  Prov.  iii.  14),  i.e.  the  means  of 
gain,  the  source  of  profit  or  provision,  to  whole  nations,  and  even 
to  many  such.  Others  render  the  word  "  emporium ; "  but  sdclidr 
cannot  have  this  meaning.  Moreover,  foreigners  did  not  come 
to  Phoenicia,  but  the  Phoenicians  went  to  them  (Luzzatto). 

The  address  to  the  whole  of  the  coast-land  now  passes 
into  an  address  to  the  ancestral  city.  Ver.  4.  "  Shudder,  0 
Sidon ;  for  the  sea  speaketh,  the  fortress  of  the  sea,  thus :  I 
have  not  travailed,  nor  given  birth,  nor  trained  up  young  men, 
brought  up  maidens"  The  sea,  or  more  closely  considered,  the 
fortress  of  the  sea,  i.e.  the  rock-island  on  which  Neo-tyrus 
stood  \vith  its  strong  and  lofty  houses,  lifts  up  its  voice  in 
lamentation.  Sidon,  the  ancestress  of  Canaan,  must  hear 
writh  overwhelming  shame  how  Tyre  mourns  the  loss  of  her 
daughters,  and  complains  that,  robbed  as  she  has  been  of  her 
children,  she  is  like  a  barren  woman.  For  the  war  to  have 
murdered  her  young  men  and  maidens,  was  exactly  the  same 
as  if  she  had  never  given  birth  to  them  or  brought  them  up. 
Who  is  there  that  does  not  recognise  in  this  the  language  of 


408  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Isaiah  (compare  ch.  i.  2)  ? — Even  in  Egypt  the  fate  of  Phoe 
nicia  produces  alarm.  Ver.  5.  "  When  the  report  cometh  to 
Egypt,  they  tremble  at  the  report  from  Tzor?  In  the  protasis 
(ver.  5a)  Vmitzraim  (to  Egypt)  the  verb  "  cometh"  is  implied ; 
the  Caph  in  ver.  56  signifies  simultaneousness,  as  in  ch.  xviii.  4 
and  xxx.  19  (Ges.  Thes.  p.  650).  The  news  of  the  fall  of  Tyre 
spreads  universal  terror  in  Egypt,  because  its  own  prosperity  de 
pended  upon  Tyre,  which  was  the  great  market  for  its  corn;  and 
when  such  a  bulwark  had  fallen,  a  similar  fate  awaited  itself. 

The  inhabitants  of  Tyre,  who  desired  to  escape  from  death 
or  transportation,  are  obliged  to  take  refuge  in  the  colonies, 
and  the  farther  off  the  better  :  not  in  Cyprus,  not  in  Carthage 
(as  at  the  time  when  Alexander  attacked  the  insular  Tyre),  but 
in  Tartessus  itself,  the  farthest  off  towards  the  west,  and  the 
hardest  to  reach.  Vers.  6-9.  "  Pass  ye  over  to  Tarshish;  howl, 
ye  inhabitants  of  the  coast !  Is  this  your  fate,  thou  full  of  re 
joicing,  whose  origin  is  from  the  days  of  the  olden  time,  ichom 
her  feet  carried  few  away  to  settle*?  Who  hath  determined  such 
a  thing  concerning  Tzor,  the  distributor  of  crowns,  whose  mer 
chants  are  princes,  whose  traders  are  the  chief  men  of  the  earth  ? 
Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  determined  it,  to  desecrate  the  pomp  of 
every  kind  of  ornament,  to  dishonour  the  chief  men  of  the  eartJi, 
all  of  them"  The  exclamation  "  howl  ye"  (helihi)  implies  their 
right  to  give  themselves  up  to  their  pain.  In  other  cases 
complaint  is  unmanly,  but  here  it  is  justifiable  (compare  ch. 
xv.  4).  In  ver.  la  the  question  arises,  whether  'allizdh  is  a 
nominative  predicate,  as  is  generally  assumed  ("Is  this,  this 
deserted  heap  of  ruins,  your  formerly  rejoicing  city?"),  or 
a  vocative.  We  prefer  the  latter,  because  there  is  nothing 
astonishing  in  the  omission  of  the  article  in  this  case  (ch. 
xxii.  2;  Ewald,  327,  a);  whereas  in  the  former  case,  although  it 
is  certainly  admissible  (see  ch.  xxxii.  13),  it  is  very  harsh  (com 
pare  ch.  xiv.  16),  and  the  whole  expression  a  very  doubtful  one 
to  convey  the  sense  of  Dai>  n^N  nriy  mp  nNM.  To  'allizdh 
there  is  attached  the  descriptive,  attributive  clause  :  whose 
origin  (kadmdh,  Ezek.  xvi.  55)  dates  from  the  days  of  the 
olden  time ;  and  then  a  second  "  whose  feet  brought  her  far 
away  (raglaim  construed  as  a  masculine,  as  in  Jer.  xiii.  16,  for 
example)  to  dwell  m  a  foreign  land.  This  is  generally  under 
stood  as  signifying  transportation  by  force  into  an  enemy's 


CHAP.  XXIII.  6-9.  409 

country.  But  Luzzatto  very  properly  objects  to  this,  partly  ou 
the  ground  that  n^H  HOT  (her  feet  carried  her)  is  the  strongest 
expression  that  can  be  used  for  voluntary  emigration,  to  which 
Idgur  (to  settle)  also  corresponds ;  and  partly  because  we  miss 
the  antithetical  nnjfi,  which  we  should  expect  with  this  inter 
pretation.  The  reference  is  to  the  trading  journeys  which 
extended  "  far  away"  (whether  by  land  or  sea),  and  to  the 
colonies,  i.e.  the  settlements  founded  in  those  distant  places, 
that  leading  characteristic  of  the  Tyro-Phoenician  people  (this 
is  expressed  in  the  imperfect  by  yobiludhj  qnam  portabant ;  gur 
is  the  most  appropriate  word  to  apply  to  such  settlements  :  for 
mgrdchdk,  see  at  ch.  xvii.  13).  Sidon  was  no  doubt  older  than 
Tyre,  but  Tyre  was  also  of  primeval  antiquity.  Strabo  speaks 
of  it  as  the  oldest  Phoenician  city  "  after  Sidon ;"  Curtius  calls 
it  vetustate  originis  insignia  ;  and  Joseph  us  reckons  the  time 
from  the  founding  of  Tyre  to  the  building  of  Solomon's  temple 
as  240  years  (Ant.  viii.  3,  1 ;  compare  Herod,  ii.  44).  Tyre  is 
called  hamma  atirdh,  not  as  wearing  a  crown  (Vulg.  quondam 
coronata),  but  as  a  distributor  of  crowns  (Targum).  Either 
would  be  suitable  as  a  matter  of  fact ;  but  the  latter  answers 
better  to  the  hiphil  (as  hikrin,  hiphtfs,  which  are  expressive  of 
results  produced  from  within  outwards,  can  hardly  be  brought 
into  comparison).  Such  colonies  as  Citium,  Tartessus,  and 
at  first  Carthage,  were  governed  by  kings  appointed  by  the 
mother  city,  and  dependent  upon  her.  Her  merchants  were 
princes  (compare  ch.  x.  8),  the  most  honoured  of  the  earth  ; 
^333  acquires  a  superlative  meaning  from  the  genitive  connec 
tion  (Ges.  §  119,  2).  From  the  fact  that  the  Phoenicians  had 
the  commerce  of  the  world  in  their  hands,  a  merchant  was 
called  cenaani  or  cenaan  (Hos.  xii.  8  ;  from  the  latter,  not 
from  cm  did)  the  plural  ciridnim  which  we  find  here  is  formed), 
and  the  merchandise  ciridh.  The  verb  c7iillel9  to  desecrate  or 
profane,  in  connection  with  the  "  pomp  of  every  kind  of  orna 
ment,"  leads  us  to  think  more  especially  of  the  holy  places  of 
both  insular  and  continental  Tyre,  among  which  the  temple  of 
Melkarth  in  the  new  city  of  the  former  was  the  most  prominent 
(according  to  Arrian,  Anab.  ii.  16,  irdkaLOTarov  &v  fivijfirj 
avBpcDTTivrj  Siao-cti^erai).  These  glories,  which  were  thought  so 
inviolable,  Jehovah  will  profane.  "  To  dishonour  the  chief 
lehdkel  (ad  ignominiam  deducere,  Vulg.)  as  in  ch.  viii.  23. 


410  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

The  consequence  of  the  fall  of  Tyre  is,  that  the  colonies 
achieve  their  independence,  Tartessus  being  mentioned  by  way 
of  example.  Ver.  10.  "  Overflow  thy  land  like  the  Nile,  0 
daughter  of  Tarshish!  No  girdle  restrains  thee  any  longer" 
The  girdle  (mezacli)  is  the  supremacy  of  Tyre,  which  has 
hitherto  restrained  all  independent  action  on  the  part  of  the 
colony.  Now  they  no  longer  need  to  wait  in  the  harbour  for 
the  ships  of  the  mother  city,  no  longer  to  dig  in  the  mines  as  her 
tributaries  for  silver  and  other  metals.  The  colonial  territory  is 
their  own  freehold  now,  and  they  can  spread  themselves  over  it 
like  the  Nile  when  it  passes  beyond  its  banks  and  overflows  the 
land.  Koppe  has  already  given  this  as  the  meaning  of  ver.  10. 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  to  relate,  as  it  were,  to  the 
Phoenicio-Spanish  colony,  the  daughter,  i.e.  the  population  of 
Tartessus,  what  has  happened  to  the  mother  country.  Vers. 
11,  12.  "  His  hand  hath  He  stretched  over  the  sea,  throivn  king 
doms  into  trembling ;  Jehovah  hath  given  commandment  concerning 
Kenaan,  to  destroy  her  fortresses.  And  He  said,  Tliou  shalt  not 
rejoice  any  further,  thou  disgraced  one,  virgin  daughter  of  Sidon! 
Get  up  to  Kittim,  go  over ;  there  also  shalt  thou  not  find  rest" 
There  is  no  ground  whatever  for  restricting  the  "kingdoms" 
(inamldcoth)  to  the  several  small  Phoenician  states  (compare 
ch.  xix.  2).  Jehovah,  reaching  over  the  sea,  has  thrown  the 
lands  of  Hither  Asia  and  Egypto-Ethiopia  into  a  state  of  the 
most  anxious  excitement,  and  has  summoned  them  as  instru 
ments  of  destruction  with  regard  to  Kena'an  (^,  like  ?V  in 
Esther  iv.  5).  Phoenicia  called  itself  Kenaan  (Canaan)  ;  but 
this  is  the  only  passage  in  the  Old  Testament  in  which  the 
name  occurs  in  this  most  restricted  sense.  "l^ppy,  ^or  "Pl?^??  as 
in  Num.  v.  22,  Amos  viii.  4.  The  form  J^WD  is  more  rare, 
but  it  is  not  a  deformity,  as  Knobel  and  others  maintain.  There 
are  other  examples  of  the  same  resolution  of  the  reduplication 
and  transposition  of  the  letters  (it  stands  for  $TJ??5>  PossiDty 
a  Phoenician  word ;  see  Hitzig,  Grabschrift,  p.  16,  and  Levi, 
Phosnizische  Studien,  p.  17),  viz.  ttzpn  in  Lam.  iii.  22  (vid.  at 
Ps.  Ixiv.  7),  and  tozijj  in  Num.  xxiii.  13,  at  least  according  to 
the  Jewish  grammar  (see,  however,  Ewald,  §  250,  b).1  " 


1  Bottcher  derives  the  form  from  njjo,  a  supposed  diminutive ;  see, 

V      T 

however,  Jesurun,  pp.  212-216. 


CHAP.  XXIII.  13,  14.  411 

of  the  daughter  of  Sidon"  (equivalent  to  "  virgin  daughter  of 
Sidon,"  two  epexegetical  genitives ;  Ewald,  §  289,  c)  is  synony 
mous  with  Kenaan.  The  name  of  the  ancestral  city  (compare 
ch.  xxxvii.  22)  has  here  become  the  name  of  the  whole  nation  that 
has  sprung  from  it.  Hitherto  this  nation  has  been  untouched, 
like  a  virgin,  but  now  it  resembles  one  ravished  and  defiled. 
If  now  they  flee  across  to  Cyprus  (cittiyim  -or  cittim\  there  will 
be  no  rest  for  them  even  there,  because  the  colony,  emancipated 
from  the  Phoenician  yoke,  will  only  be  too  glad  to  rid  herself  of 
the  unwelcome  guests  from  the  despotic  mother  -country. 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  to  describe  the  fate  of  Phoenicia. 
Vers.  13,  14.  u  Behold  the  Chaldean  land:  this  people  that  has 
not  been  (Asshur — it  hath  prepared  the  same  for  desert  beasts)  — 
they  set  up  their  siege-towers,  destroy  the  palaces  of  Ktnaan, 
make  it  a  heap  of  ruins.  Mourn,  ye  ships  of  Tarshish :  for  your 
fortress  is  laid  waste."  The  general  meaning  of  ver.  13,  as  the 
text  now  runs,  is  that  the  Chaldeans  have  destroyed  Kena'an, 
and  in  fact  Tyre.  lE^n  (they  set  up)  points  to  the  plural  idea 
of  "  this  people,"  and  V^na  (chethib  V^na)  to  the  singular  idea 
of  the  same  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  feminine  suffixes  relate 
to  Tyre,  u  They  (the  Chaldeans)  have  laid  bare  the  palaces 
^arinenoth,  from  \irmonetli)  of  Tyre,"  i.e.  have  thrown  them 
down,  or  burned  them  down  to  their  very  foundations  p?W, 
from  TO  =  TO,  Ps.  cxxxvii.  7,  like  liny  in  Jer.  li.  58)  ;  it  (the 
Chaldean  people)  has  made  her  (Tyre)  a  heap  of  rubbish.  So 
far  the  text  is  clear,  and  there  is  no  ground  for  hesitation.  But 
the  question  arises,  whether  in  the  words  D^Sp  iTJD^  "fl$K  Asshur 
is  the  subject  or  the  object.  In  the  former  case  the  prophet 
points  to  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans,  for  the  purpose  of  describ 
ing  the  instruments  of  divine  wrath ;  and  having  called  them 
"  a  nation  which  has  not  been"  (»Tn  KP),  explains  this  by  saying 
that  Asshur  first  founded  the  land  which  the  Chaldeans  now 
inhabit  for  them,  i.e.  wild  hordes  (Ps.  Ixxii.  9) ;  or  better  still 
(as  tziyyim  can  hardly  signify  mountain  hordes),  that  Asshur 
has  made  it  (this  nation,  DV  fern,,  as  in  Jer.  viii.  5,  Ex.  v.  16) 
into  dwellers  in  steppes  (Knobel),  which  could  not  be  crvnceived 
of  in  any  other  way  than  that  Asshur  settled  the  Chaldeans, 
who  inhabited  the  northern  mountains,  in  the  present  so-called 
land  of  Chaldea,  and  thus  made  the  Chaldeans  into  a  people, 
i.e.  a  settled,  cultivated  people,  and  a  people  bent  on  conquest 


412  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

and  taking  part  in  the  history  of  the  world  (according  to 
Knobel,  primarily  as  a  component  part  of  the  Assyrian  army). 
But  this  view,  which  we  meet  with  even  in  Calvin,  is  exposed 
to  a  grave  difficulty.  It  is  by  no  means  improbable,  indeed, 
that  the  Chaldeans,  who  were  descendants  of  Nahor,  according 
to  Gen.  xxii.  22,  and  therefore  of  Semitic  descent,1  came  down 
from  the  mountains  which  bound  Armenia,  Media,  and  Assyria, 
having  been  forced  out  by  the  primitive  migration  of  the  Arians 
from  west  to  east ;  although  the  more  modern  hypothesis,  which 
represents  them  as  a  people  of  Tatar  descent,  and  as  mixing 
among  the  Shemites  of  the  countries  of  the  Euphrates  and 
Tigris,  has  no  historical  support  whatever,  the  very  reverse 
being  the  case,  according  to  Gen.  x.,  since  Babylon  was  of  non- 
Semitic  or  Cushite  origin,  and  therefore  the  land  of  Chaldea,  as 
only  a  portion  of  Babylonia  (Strabo,  xvi.  1,  6),  was  the  land 
of  the  Shemites.  But  the  idea  that  the  Assyrians  brought 
them  down  from  the  mountains  into  the  lowlands,  though  not 
under  Ninus  and  Semiramis,2  as  Yitringa  supposes,  but  about 
the  time  of  Shalmanassar  (Ges.,  Hitzig,.  Knobel,  and  others),3 
is  pure  imagination,  and  merely  an  inference  drawn  from  this 
passage.  For  this  reason  I  have  tried  to  give  a  different 
interpretation  to  the  clause  D^w  '^"J?!  "H$K  in  my  Com.  on 
Habakkuk  (p.  22),  viz.  "  Asshur — it  has  assigned  the  same  to 
the  beasts  of  the  desert."  That  Asshur  may  be  used  not  only 
pre-eminently,  but  directly,  for  Nineveh  (like  Kenaan  for  Tzor\ 
admits  of  no  dispute,  since  even  at  the  present  day  the  ruins 

are  called  j$\,  and  this  is  probably  a  name  applied  to  Nineveh 

in   the  arrow-headed  writings  also   (Layard,  Nineveh  and  its 

1  Arpaclisliad  (Gen.  x.  22),  probably  the  ancestor  of  the  oldest  Chal 
deans,  was  also  Semitic,  whether  his  name  is  equivalent  to  Armaclislmd 
(the  Chaldean  high-land)  or  not.     Arrapachitis  rings  like  Albagh,  the  name 
of  the  table-land  between  the  lake  of  Urmia  and  that  of  Van,  according  to 
which  shad  was  the  common  Armenian  termination  for  names  of  places. 

2  The  same  view  is  held  by  Oppert,  though  he  regards  the  Casdim  as 
the  primitive  Turanian  (Tatar)  inhabitants  of  Shinar,  and  supposes  this 
passage  to  relate  to  their  subjugation  by  the  Semitic  Assyrians. 

3  For  an  impartial  examination  of  this  migration  or  transplantation 
hypothesis,  which  is  intimately  connected  with  the  Scythian  hypothesis,  see 
M.  v.  Niebuhr's  Geschichte  Assurs  und  Babels  seitPhul  (1857,  pp.  152-154). 
Rawlinson  (Monarchies,  i.  71-74)  decidedly  rejects  the  latter  as  at  variance 
with  the  testimonies  of  Scripture,  of  Berosus,  and  of  the  monuments. 


CHAP.  XXIII.  13,  14.  413 

Remains).  The  word  tziyyim  is  commonly  applied  to  beasts 
of  the  wilderness  (e.g.  ch.  xiii.  21),  and  wf>  np;  for  n*v  UW 
(used  of  Nineveh  in  Zeph.  ii.  13,  14)  may  be  explained  in  ac 
cordance  with  Ps.  civ.  8.  The  form  of  the  parenthetical  clause, 
however,  would  be  like  that  of  the  concluding  clause  of 
Amos  i.  11.  But  what  makes  me  distrustful  even  of  this  view 
is  not  a  doctrinal  ground  (Winer,  Real  Worterbuch,  i.  218), 
but  one  taken  from  Isaiah's  own  prophecy.  Isaiah  undoubtedly 
sees  a  Chaldean  empire  behind  the  Assyrian ;  but  this  would 
be  the  only  passage  in  which  he  prophesied  {and  that  quite  by 
the  way)  how  the  imperial  power  would  pass  from  the  latter  to 
the  former.  It  was  the  task  of  Nahum  and  Zephaniah  to  draw 
this  connecting  line.  It  is  true  that  this  argument  is  not 
sufficient  to  outweigh  the  objections  that  can  be  brought  against 
the  other  view,  which  makes  the  text  declare  a  fact  that  is 
never  mentioned  anywhere  else ;  but  it  is  important  never 
theless.  For  this  reason  it  is  possible,  indeed,  that  Ewald's 
conjecture  is  a  right  one,  and  that  the  original  reading  of  the 
text  was  B^y.33  r?.*?  ![?•  Read  in  this  manner,  the  first  clause 
runs  thus  :  u  Behold  the  land  of  the  Canaaneans :  this  people 
has  come  to  nothing ;  Asshur  has  prepared  it  (their  land)  for 
the  beasts  of  the  desert."  It  is  true  that  njn  tib  generally  means 
not  to  exist,  or  not  to  have  been  (Ob.  16) ;  but  there  are  also 
cases  in  which  6&  is  used  as  a  kind  of  substantive  (cf.  Jer. 
xxxiii.  25),  and  the  words  mean  to  become  or  to  have  become 
nothing  (Job  vi.  21,  Ezek.  xxi.  32,  and  possibly  also  Isa.  xv.  6). 
Such  an  alteration  of  the  text  is  not  favoured,  indeed,  by  any 
of  the  ancient  versions.  For  our  own  part,  we  still  abide  by 
the  explanation  we  have  given  in  the  Commentary  on  Habakkuk, 
not  so  much  for  this  reason,  as  because  the  seventy  years 
mentioned  afterwards  are  a  decisive  proof  that  the  prophet  had 
the  Chaldeans  and  not  Asshur  in  view,  as  the  instruments  em 
ployed  in  executing  the  judgment  upon  Tyre.  The  prophet 
points  out  the  Chaldeans, — that  nation  which  (although  of 
primeval  antiquity,  Jer.  v.  15)  had  not  yet  shown  itself  as  a  con 
queror  of  the  world  (cf .  Hab.  i.  6),  having  been  hitherto  subject 
to  the  Assyrians ;  but  which  had  now  gained  the  mastery  after 
having  first  of  all  destroyed  Asshur,  i.e.  Nineveh1  (namely,  with 

1  This  destruction  of  Nineveh  was  really  such  an  one  as  could  be  called 
yesor  Vzujyim  (a  preparation  for  beasts  of  the  desert),  for  it  has  been  ever 


414  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tlie  Meclo-Babylonian  army  under  Nabopolassar,  the  founder  of 
the  Neo-Babylonian  empire,  in  606  B.C.), — as  the  destroyers  of 
the  palaces  of  Tyre.  With  the  appeal  to  the  ships  of  Tarshish 
to  pour  out  their  lamentation,  the  prophecy  returns  in  ver.  14 
to  the  opening  words  in  ver.  1.  According  ta  ver.  4,  the 
fortress  here  is  insular  Tyre.  As  the  prophecy  thus  closes 
itself  by  completing  the  circle,  vers.  15-18  might  appear  to  be 
a  later  addition.  This  is  no  more  the  case,  however,  here,  than 
in  the  last  part  of  ch.  xix.  Those  critics,  indeed,  who  do  not 
acknowledge  any  special  prophecies  that  are  not  vaticinia  post 
eventum,  are  obliged  to  assign  vers.  15-18  to  the  Persian  era. 

The  prophet  here  foretells  the  rise  of  Tyre  again  at  the 
close  of  the  Chaldean  world-wide  monarchy.  Vers.  15,  16. 
"  And  it  will  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  Tzor  will  be  for 
gotten  seventy  years,  equal  to  the  days  of  one  king ;  after  the  end 
of  the  seventy  years,  Tzor  will  go,  according  to  the  song  of  the 
harlot.  Take  the  guitar,  sweep  through  the  city,  0  forgotten 
harlot !  Play  bravely,  sing  zealously,  that  thou  mayest  be  re 
membered!"  The  "days  of  a  king'''  are  a  fixed  and  unchange 
able  period,  for  which  everything  is  determined  by  the  one 
sovereign  will  (as  is  the  case  more  especially  in  the  East),  and 
is  therefore  stereotyped.  The  seventy  years  are  compared  to 
the  days  of  such  a  king.  Seventy  is  well  fitted  to  be  the 
number  used  to  denote  a  uniform  period  of  this  kind,  being 
equal  to  10  X  7,  i.e.  a  compact  series  of  heptads  of  years 
(shabbathotli).  But  the  number  is  also  historical,  prophecy 
being  the  power  by  which  the  history  of  the  future  was 
"  periodized "  beforehand  in  this  significant  manner.  They 
coincide  with  the  seventy  years  of  Jeremiah  (compare  2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  21),  that  is  to  say,  with  the  duration  of  the  Chaldean 
rule.  During  this  period  Tyre  continued  with  its  world-wide 
commerce  in  a  state  of  involuntary  repose.  "  Tyre  will  be 
forgotten :"  vnishcachath  is  not  a  participle  (Bottcher),  but  the 
perf.  eons,  which  is  required  here,  and  stands  for  nrG"^1}  with 
an  original  n  fern.  (cf.  ch.  vii.  14,  Ps.  cxviii.  23).  After  the 
seventy  years  (that  is  to  say,  along  with  the  commencement 

since  a  heap  of  ruins,  which  the  earth  gradually  swallowed  up;  so  that  when 
Xenophon  went  past  it,  he  was  not  even  told  that  these  were  the  ruins  of 
the  ancient  Ninus.  On  the  later  buildings  erected  upon  the  ruins,  see 
Marcus  v.  Niebuhr,  p.  203. 


CHAP.  XXIII.  17,  18.  415 

of  the  Persian  rule)  the  harlot  is  welcomed  again.  She  is  like 
a  bayadere  or  troubadour  going  through  the  streets  with  song 
and  guitar,  and  bringing  her  charms  into  notice  again.  The 
prophecy  here  falls  into  the  tone  of  a  popular  song,  as  in  ch. 
v.  1  and  xxvii.  2.  It  will  be  with  Tyre  as  with  such  a  musician 
and  dancer  as  the  one  described  in  the  popular  song. 

When  it  begins  again  to  make  love  to  all  the  world,  it  will 
get  rich  again  from  the  gain  acquired  by  this  worldly  inter 
course.  Ver.  17.  "  And  it  will  come  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the 
seventy  years:  Jehovah  will  visit  Tzor,  and  she  comes  again  to  her 
hire,  and  commits  prostitution  with  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  on 
ihe  broad  surface  of  the  globe"  Such  mercantile  trading  as  hers, 
which  is  only  bent  upon  earthly  advantages,  is  called  zdndh,  on 
account  of  its  recognising  none  of  the  limits  opposed  by  God, 
and  making  itself  common  to  all  the  world,  partly  because  it  is 
a  prostitution  of  the  soul,  and  partly  because  from  the  very 
earliest  times  the  prostitution  of  the  body  was  also  a  common 
thing  in  markets  and  fairs,  more  especially  in  those  of  Phoenicia 
(as  the  Phoenicians  were  worshippers  of  Astarte).  Hence  the 
gain  acquired  by  commerce,  which  Tyre  had  now  secured 
again,  is  called  'etlmdn  (Deut.  xxiii.  19)r  with  a  feminine  suffix, 
according  to  the  Masora  without  mappik  (Ewald,  §  247,  a). 

This  restoration  of  the  trade  of  Tyre  is  called  a  visitation 
on  the  part  of  Jehovah,  because,  however  profane  the  conduct 
of  Tyre  might  be,  it  was  nevertheless  a  holy  purpose  to  which 
Jehovah  rendered  it  subservient,  Ver.  18.  "And  her  gam 
and  her  reward  of  prostitution  will  be  holy  to  Jehovah :  it  is  not 
stored  up  nor  gathered  together ;  but  her  gain  from  commerce 
will  be  theirs  who  dwell  before  Jehovah,  to  eat  to  satiety  and  for 
stately  clothing."  It  is  not  the  conversion  of  Tyre  which  is 
held  up  to  view,  but  something  approaching  it.  Sac/tar  (which 
does  not  render  it  at  all  necessary  to  assume  a  form  sachar  for 
ver.  3)  is  used  here  in  connection  with  'ethndn,  to  denote  the 
occupation  itself  which  yielded  the  profit.  This,  and  also  the 
profit  acquired,  would  become  holy  to  Jehovah  ;  the  latter 
would  not  be  treasured  up  and  capitalized  as  it  formerly  was, 
but  they  would  give  tribute  and  presents  from  it  to  Israel,  and 
thus  help  to  sustain  in  abundance  and  clothe  in  stately  dress 
the  nation  which  dwelt  before  Jehovah,  i.e.  whose  true  dwell 
ing-place  was  in  the  temple  before  the  presence  of  God  (Ps. 


416  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

xxvii.  4,  Ixxxiv.  5 ;  mecasseh  =  that  winch  covers,  i.e.  tlie  cover 
ing  ;  'dthik,  like  the  Arabic  * atik,  old,  noble,  honourable).  A 
strange  prospect !  As  Jerome  'says,  "  Hac  secundum  historiam 
necdum  facia  comperimus." 

The  Assyrians,  therefore,  were  not  the  predicted  instru 
ments  of  the  punishment  to  be  inflicted  upon  Phoenicia.  Nor 
was  Shalmanassar  successful  in  his  Phoenician  war,  as  the 
extract  from  the  chronicle  of  Menander  in  the  Antiquities  of 
Josephus  (Ant.  ix.  14,  2)  clearly  shows.  Elulaaus,  the  king  of 
Tyre,  had  succeeded  in  once  more  subduing  the  rebellious 
Cyprians  (Kittaioi).  But  with  their  assistance  (if  indeed  eV* 
TouTou?  Tre/^a?  is  to  be  so  interpreted1)  Shalmanassar  made 
war  upon  Phoenicia,  though  a  general  peace  soon  put  an  end  to 
this  campaign.  Thereupon  Sidon,  Ace,  Palsetyrus,  and  many 
other  cities,  fell  away  from  Tyrus  (insular  Tyre),  and  placed 
themselves  under  Assyrian  supremacy.  But  as  the  Tyrians 
would  not  do  this,  Shalmanassar  renewed  the  war ;  and  the 
Phoenicians  that  wrere  under  his  sway  supplied  him  with  six 
hundred  ships  and  eight  hundred  rowers  for  this  purpose.  The 
Tyrians,  however,  fell  upon  them  with  twelve  vessels  of  war, 
and  having  scattered  the  hostile  fleet,  took  about  five  hundred 
prisoners.  This  considerably  heightened  the  distinction  of 
Tyre.  And  the  king  of  Assyria  was  obliged  to  content  him 
self  with  stationing  guards  on  the  river  (Leontes),  and  at  the 
conduits,  to  cut  off  the  supply  of  fresh  water  from  the  Tyrians. 
This  lasted  for  five  years,  during  the  whole  of  which  time 
the  Tyrians  drank  from  wells  that  they  had  sunk  themselves. 
Now,  unless  we  want  to  lower  the  prophecy  into  a  mere  picture 
of  the  imagination,  we  cannot  understand  it  as  pointing  to 
Asshur  as  the  instrument  of  punishment,  for  the  simple  reason 
that  Shalmanassar  was  obliged  to  withdraw  from  the  "  fortress 
of  the  sea  "  without  accomplishing  his  purpose,  and  only  suc 
ceeded  in  raising  it  to  all  the  greater  honour.  But  it  is  a 

1  The  view  held  by  Johann  Brandis  is  probably  the  more  correct  one, 
— namely,  that  Shalmanassar  commenced  the  contest  by  sending  an  army 
over  to  the  island  against  the  Chittseans  (svt  not  in  the  sense  of  ad,  to, 
but  of  contra,  against,  just  as  in  the  expression  further  on,  ITT'  ecvrovg 
vTTtarprJ/s,  contra  eos  rediit),  probably  to  compel  them  to  revolt  again 
from  the  Tyrians.  Rawlinson  (Monarchies,  ii.  405)  proposes,  as  an  emen 
dation  of  the  text,  ml  TOVTOV,  by  which  the  Cyprian  expedition  is  got  rid 
of  altogether. 


CHAP.  XXIII.  18.  417 

question  whether  even  Nebuchadnezzar  was  more  successful 
with  insular  Tyre.  All  that  Josephus  is  able  to  tell  us  from 
the  Indian  and  Phoenician  stones  of  Philostratus,  is  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  besieged  Tyre  for  thirteen  years  in  the  reign 
of  Ithobal  (Ant.  x.  11,  1).  And  from  Phoenician  sources  them 
selves,  he  merely  relates  (c.  Ap.  i.  21)  that  Nebuchadnezzar 
besieged  Tyre  for  thirteen  years  under  Ithobal  (viz.  from  the 
seventh  year  of  his  reign  onwards).  But  so  much,  at  any  rate, 
may  apparently  be  gathered  from  the  account  of  the  Tynan 
government  which  follows,  viz.  that  the  Persian  era  was  pre 
ceded  by  the  subjection  of  the  Tyrians  to  the  Chaldeans,  inas 
much  as  they  sent  twice  to  fetch  their  king  from  Babylon. 
When  the  Chaldeans  made  themselves  masters  of  the  Assyrian 
empire,  Phoenicia  (whether  with  or  without  insular  Tyre,  we 
do  not  know)  was  a  satrapy  of  that  empire  (Josephus,  Ant.  x. 
11,  1 ;  c.  Ap.  i.  19,  from  Berosus),  and  this  relation  still  con 
tinued  at  the  close  of  the  Chaldean  rule.  So  much  is  certain, 
however, — and  Berosus,  in  fact,  says  it  expressly, — viz.  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  once  more  subdued  Phoenicia  when  it  rose  in 
rebellion ;  and  that  when  he  was  called  home  to  Babylon  in 
consequence  of  the  death  of  his  father,  he  returned  with  Phoe 
nician  prisoners.  What  we  want,  however,  is  a  direct  account 
of  the  conquest  of  Tyre  by  the  Chaldeans.  Neither  Josephus 
nor  Jerome  could  give  any  such  account.  And  the  Old  Tes 
tament  Scriptures  appear  to  state  the  very  opposite, — namely, 
the  failure  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  enterprise.  For  in  the  twenty- 
seventh  year  after  Jehoiachim's  captivity  (the  sixteenth  from 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem)  the  following  word  of  the  Lord 
came  to  Ezekiel  (Ezek.  xxix.  17,  18)  :  "  Son  of  man,  Nebuchad 
nezzar  the  king  of  Babylon  has  caused  his  army  to  perform  a 
long  and  hard  service  against  Tyre :  every  head  is  made  bald, 
and  every  shoulder  peeled ;  yet  neither  he  nor  his  army  has 
any  wages  at  Tyre  for  the  hard  service  which  they  have  per 
formed  around  the  same."  It  then  goes  on  to  announce  that 
Jehovah  would  give  Egypt  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  that  this 
would  be  the  wages  of  his  army.  Gesenius,  Winer,  Hitzig, 
and  others,  infer  from  this  passage,  when  taken  in  connection 
with  other  non-Israel itish  testimonies  given  by  Josephus,  which 
merely  speak  of  a  siege,  that  Nebuchadnezzar  did  not  conquer 
Tyre ;  but  Hengstenberg  (de  rebus  Tyriorum,  1832),  Hliver- 

VOL.  I.  2  D 


418  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

nick  (EzeL  pp.  427-442),  and  Drechsler  (Isa.  ii.  166-169) 
maintain  by  arguments,  which  have  been  passed  again  and 
again  through  the  sieve,  that  this  passage  presupposes  the  con 
quest  of  Tyre,  and  merely  announces  the  disproportion  between 
the  profit  which  Nebuchadnezzar  derived  from  it  and  the 
effort  that  it  cost  him.  Jerome  (on  Ezekiel)  gives  the  same 
explanation.  When  the  army  of  Nebuchadnezzar  had  made 
insular  Tyre  accessible  by  heaping  up  an  embankment  with 
enormous  exertions,  and  they  were  in  a  position  to  make  use  of 
their  siege  artillery,  they  found  that  the  Tyrians  had  carried 
away  all  their  wealth  in  vessels  to  the  neighbouring  islands ; 
"  so  that  when  the  city  was  taken,  Nebuchadnezzar  found 
nothing  to  repay  him  for  his  labour  ;  and  because  he  had 
obeyed  the  will  of  God  in  this  undertaking,  after  the  Tyrian 
captivity  had  lasted  a  few  years,  Egypt  was  given  to  him" 
(Jerome).  I  also  regard  this  as  the  correct  view  to  take  ; 
though  without  wishing  to  maintain  that  the  words  might  not 
be  understood  as  implying  the  failure  of  the  siege,  quite  as 
readily  as  the  uselessness  of  the  conquest.  But  on  the  two 
following  grounds,  I  am  persuaded  that  they  are  used  here  in 
the  latter  sense.  (1.)  In  the  great  trilogy  which  contains  Eze- 
kiel's  prophecy  against  Tyre  (Ezek.  xxvi.-xxviii.),  and  in  which 
he  more  than  once  introduces  thoughts  and  figures  from  Isa. 
xxiii.,  which  he  still  further  amplifies  and  elaborates  (according 
to  the  general  relation  in  which  he  stands  to  his  predecessors, 
of  whom  he  does  not  make  a  species  of  mosaic,  as  Jeremiah 
does,  but  whom  he  rather  expands,  fills  up,  and  paraphrases,  as 
seen  more  especially  in  his  relation  to  Zephaniah),  he  predicts 
the  conquest  of  insular  Tyre  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  He  foretells 
indeed  even  more  than  this ;  but  if  Tyre  had  not  been  at  least 
conquered  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  prophecy  would  have  fallen 
completely  to  the  ground,  like  any  merely  human  hope.  Now 
we  candidly  confess  that,  on  doctrinal  grounds,  it  is  impossible 
for  us  to  make  such  an  assumption  as  this.  There  is  indeed 
an  element  of  human  hope  in  all  prophecy,  but  it  does  not 
reach  such  a  point  as  to  be  put  to  shame  by  the  test  supplied 
in  Deut.  xviii.  21,  22.  (2.)  If  I  take  a  comprehensive  survey 
of  the  following  ancient  testimonies:  (a)  that  Nebuchadnezzar, 
when  called  home  in  consequence  of  his  father's  death,  took 
some  Phoenician  prisoners  with  him  (Berosus,  ut  sup.);  (b)  that 


CHAP.  XXIII.  18.  419 

with  this  fact  before  us,  the  statement  found  in  the  Phoenician 
sources,  to  the  effect  that  the  Tyrians  fetched  two  of  their 
rulers  from  Babylon,  viz.  Merbal  and  Eirom,  presents  a  much 
greater  resemblance  to  2  Kings  xxiv.  12,  14,  and  Dan.  i.  3, 
than  to  1  Kings  xii.  2,  3,  with  which  Hitzig  compares  it  ; 
(c)  that,  according  to  Josephus  (c.  Ap.  i.  20),  it  was  stated  "  in 
the  archives  of  the  Phoenicians  concerning  this  king  Nebuchad 
nezzar,  that  he  conquered  all  Syria  and  Phoenicia;"  and  (d) 
that  the  voluntary  submission  to  the  Persians  (Herod,  iii.  19 ; 
Xen.  Cyrop.  i.  1,  4)  was  not  the  commencement  of  servitude, 
but  merely  a  change  of  masters ; — if,  I  say,  I  put  all  these 
things  together,  the  conclusion  to  which  I  am  brought  is,  that 
the  thirteen  years'  siege  of  Tyre  by  Nebuchadnezzar  ended  in 
its  capture,  possibly  through  capitulation  (as  Winer,  Movers, 
and  others  assume). 

The  difficulties  which  present  themselves  to  us  when  we 
compare  together  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel,  are  still 
no  doubt  very  far  from  being  removed ;  but  it  is  in  this  way 
alone  that  any  solution  of  the  difficulty  is  to  be  found.  For 
even  assuming  that  Nebuchadnezzar  conquered  Tyre,  he  did 
not  destroy  it,  as  the  words  of  the  two  prophecies  would  lead 
us  to  expect.  The  real  solution  of  the  difficulty  has  been 
already  given  by  Havernick  and  Drechsler  :  "  The  prophet 
sees  the  whole  enormous  mass  of  destruction  which  eventually 
came  upon  the  city,  concentrated,  as  it  were,  in  Nebuchad 
nezzar's  conquest,  inasmuch  as  in  the  actual  historical  develop 
ment  it  was  linked  on  to  that  fact  like  a  closely  connected 
chain.  The  power  of  Tyre  as  broken  by  Nebuchadnezzar  is 
associated  in  his  view  with  its  utter  destruction."  Even  Alex 
ander  did  not  destroy  Tyre,  when  he  had  conquered  it  after 
seven  months'  enormous  exertions.  Tyre  was  still  a  flourishing 
commercial  city  of  considerable  importance  under  both  the 
Syrian  and  the  Roman  sway.  In  the  time  of  the  Crusades  it 
was  still  the  same ;  and  even  the  Crusaders,  who  conquered  it 
in  1125,  did  not  destroy  it.  It  was  not  till  about  a  century 
and  a  half  later  that  the  destruction  was  commenced  by  the 
removal  of  the  fortifications  on  the  part  of  the  Saracens.  At 
the  present  time,  all  the  glory  of  Tyre  is  either  sunk  in  the 
sea  or  buried  beneath  the  sand,  —  an  inexhaustible  mine  of 
building  materials  for  Beirut  and  other  towns  upon  the  coast. 


420  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Amidst  these  vast  ruins  of  the  island  city,  there  is  nothing 
standing  now  but  a  village  of  wretched  wooden  huts.  And  the 
island  is  an  island  no  longer.  The  embankment  which  Alex 
ander  threw  up  has  grown  into  a  still  broader  and  stronger 
tongue  of  earth  through  the  washing  up  of  sand,  and  now 
connects  the  island  with  the  shore, — a  standing  memorial  of 
divine  justice  (Strauss,  Sinai  und  Golgotha,  p.  357).  This 
picture  of  destruction  stands  before  the  prophet's  mental  eye, 
and  indeed  immediately  behind  the  attack  of  the  Chaldeans 
upon  Tyre, — the  two  thousand  years  between  being  so  com 
pressed,  that  the  whole  appears  as  a  continuous  event.  This 
is  the  well-known  law  of  perspective,  by  which  prophecy  is 
governed  throughout.  This  law  cannot  have  been  unknown  to 
the  prophets  themselves,  inasmuch  as  they  needed  it  to  accredit 
their  prophecies  even  to  themselves.  Still  more  was  it  neces 
sary  for  future  ages,  in  order  that  they  might  not  be  deceived 
with  regard  to  the  prophecy,  that  this  universally  determin 
ing  law,  in  which  human  limitations  are  left  unresolved,  and 
are  miraculously  intermingled  with  the  eternal  view  of  God, 
should  be  clearly  known. 

But  another  enigma  presents  itself.  The  prophet  foretells 
a  revival  of  Tyre  at  the  end  of  seventy  years,  and  the  passing 
over  of  its  world-wide  commerce  into  the  service  of  the  con 
gregation  of  Jehovah.  We  cannot  agree  with  E.  O.  Gilbert 
(T/ieodulia,  1855,  pp.  273-4)  in  regarding  the  seventy  years  as 
a  sacred  number,  which  precludes  all  clever  human  calculation, 
because  the  Lord  thereby  conceals  His  holy  and  irresistible 
decrees.  The  meaning  of  the  seventy  is  clear  enough :  they 
are,  as  we  saw,  the  seventy  years  of  the  Chaldean  rule.  And 
this  is  also  quite  enough,  if  only  a  prelude  to  what  is  predicted 
here  took  place  in  connection  with  the  establishment  of  the 
Persian  sway.  Such  a  prelude  there  really  was  in  the  fact, 
that,  according  to  the  edict  of  Cyrus,  both  Sidonians  and 
Tyrians  assisted  in  the  building  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem 
(Ezra  iii.  7,  cf.  i.  4).  A  second  prelude  is  to  be  seen  in  the 
fact,  that  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  labours  of  the 
apostles  there  was  a  Christian  church  in  Tyre,  which  was 
visited  by  the  Apostle  Paul  (Acts  xxi.  3,  4),  and  that  this 
church  steadily  grew  from  that  time  forward.  In  this  way  again 
the  trade  of  Tyre  entered  the  service  of  the  God  of  revelation. 


CHAP.  XXIV.-XXVII.  421 

But  it  is  Christian  Tyre  which  now  lies  in.  ruins.  One  of  the 
most  remarkable  ruins  is  the  splendid  cathedral  of  Tyre,  for 
which  Eusebius  of  Csesarea  wrote  a  dedicatory  address,  and  in 
which  Friedrich  Barbarossa,  who  was  drowned  in  the  Kaly- 
kadnos  in  the  year  1190,  is  supposed  to  have  been  buried. 
Hitherto,  therefore,  these  have  been  only  preludes  to  the  fulfil 
ment  of  the  prophecy.  Its  ultimate  fulfilment  has  still  to  be 
waited  for.  But  whether  the  fulfilment  will  be  an  ideal  one, 
when  not  only  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  but  also  the  trade  of 
the  wrorld,  shall  belong  to  God  and  His  Christ;  or  spiritually,  in 
the  sense  in  which  this  word  is  employed  in  the  Apocalypse, 
i.e.  by  the  true  essence  of  the  ancient  Tyre  reappearing  in 
another  city,  like  that  of  Babylon  in  Rome  ;  or  literally,  by 
the  fishing  village  of  Tzur  actually  disappearing  again  as  Tyre 
rises  from  its  ruins, — it  would  be  impossible  for  any  commen 
tator  to  say,  unless  he  were  himself  a  prophet. 


PART    IV. 

FINALE   OF   THE    GREAT   CATASTROPHE. 
CHAP,  xxiv.-xxvn. 

The  cycle  of  prophecies  which  commences  here  has  no 
other  parallel  in  the  Old  Testament  than  perhaps  Zech.  ix.-xiv. 
Both  sections  are  thoroughly  eschatological  and  apocryphal  in 
their  character,  and  start  from  apparently  sharply  defined 
historical  circumstances,  which  vanish,  however,  like  will-o'-the 
wisps,  as  soon  as  you  attempt  to  follow  and  seize  them ;  for 
the  simple  reason,  that  the  prophet  lays  hold  of  their  radical 
idea,  carries  them  out  beyond  their  outward  historical  form, 
and  uses  them  as  emblems  of  far-off  events  of  the  last  days. 
It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  majority  of  modern 
critics,  from  the  time  of  Eichhorn  and  Koppe,  have  denied  the 
genuineness  of  these  four  chapters  (xxiv.-xxvii.),  notwithstand 
ing  the  fact  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  words  themselves  that 
passes  beyond  the  Assyrian  times.  Rosen miiller  did  this  in  the 
first  edition  of  his  Scholia;  but  in  the  second  and  third  editions 


422  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

he  has  fallen  into  another  error,  chiefly  because  the  prophecy 
contains  nothing  which  passes  beyond  the  political  horizon  of 
Isaiah's  own  times.  Now  we  cannot  accept  this  test  of  genuine 
ness  ;  it  is  just  one  of  the  will-o'-the-wisps  already  referred  to. 
Another  consequence  of  this  phenomenon  is,  that  our  critical 
opponents  inevitably  get  entangled  in  contradictions  as  soon 
as  they  seek  for  a  different  historical  basis  for  this  cycle  of 
prophecies  from  that  of  Isaiah's  own  times.  According  to 
Gesenius,  De  Wette,  Maurer,  and  Umbreit,  the  author  wrote 
in  Babylonia ;  according  to  Eichhorn,  Ewald,  and  Knobel,  in 
Judah.  In  the  opinion  of  some,  he  wrote  at  the  close  of  the 
captivity ;  in  that  of  others,  immediately  after  the  overthrow  of 
the  kingdom  of  Judah.  Hitzig  supposes  the  imperial  city, 
whose  destruction  is  predicted,  to  be  Nineveh ;  others,  for  the 
most  part,  suppose  it  to  be  Babylon.  But  the  prophet  only 
mentions  Egypt  and  Asshur  as  powers  by  which  Israel  is 
enslaved ;  and  Knobel  consequently  imagines  that  he  wrote  in 
this  figurative  manner  from  fear  of  the  enemies  that  were  still 
dwelling  in  Judah.  This  wavering  arises  from  the  fact,  that 
what  is  apparently  historical  is  simply  an  eschatological  emblem. 
It  is  quite  impossible  to  determine  whether  that  which  sounds 
historical  belonged  to  the  present  or  past  in  relation  to  the 
prophet  himself.  His  standing-place  was  beyond  all  the  his 
tory  that  has  passed  by,  even  down  to  the  present  day ;  and 
everything  belonging  to  this  history  was  merely  a  figure  in  the 
mirror  of  the  last  lines.  Let  it  be  once  established  that  no 
human  critics  can  determine  a  priori  the  measure  of  divine 
revelation  granted  to  any  prophet,  and  all  possible  grounds 
combine  to  vindicate  Isaiah's  authorship  of  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.,  as 
demanded  by  its  place  in  the  book  of  Isaiah.1  Appended  as 
they  are  to  ch.  xiii.-xxiii.  without  a  distinct  heading,  they  are 
intended  to  stand  in  a  relation  of  steady  progress  to  the  oracles 
concerning  the  nations ;  and  this  relation  is  sustained  by  the 

1  The  genuineness  is  supported  by  Kosenmiiller,  Hensler  (Jesaia  neu 
tibersetzt,  mit  Anm.},  Paulus  (Clavis  tiber  Jesaia),  August!  (Exeg.  Hand- 
bucli),  Beckhaus  (tiber  Integritat  der  proph.  ScTiriften  des  A.  T.  1796), 
Kleinert  (tiber  die  Eclifheit  sammtlicher  in  d.  Buche  Jesaia  enth.  Weissa- 
gungen,  1829),  Kiiper  (Jeremias  librorum  sacr.  interpres  atque  vindex,  1837), 
and  Jahn,  Havernick,  Keil  (in  their  Introductions).  In  monographs,  C.  F. 
L.  Arndt  (De  loco,  c.  xxiv.-xxvii.,  Jesaiss  vindicando  et  explicando,  1826), 
and  Ed.  Bohl  (Vaticinium  Jes.  cap.  xxiv.-xxvii.  commentario  illtistr.  1861). 


CHAP.  XXIV.-XXVII.  423 

fact  that  Jeremiah  read  them  in  connection  with  these  oracles 
(compare  ch.  xxiv.  17,  18,  with  Jer.  xlviii.  43,  44),  and  that 
they  are  full  of  retrospective  allusions,  which  run  out  like  a 
hundred  threads,  though  grasped,  as  it  were,  in  a  single  hand. 
Ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  ch.  xiii.-xxiii.,  as 
ch.  xi.  xii.  to  ch.  vii.-x.  The  particular  judgments  predicted 
in  the  oracle  against  the  nations,  all  flow  into  the  last  judgment 
as  into  a  sea ;  and  all  the  salvation  which  formed  the  shining 
edge  of  the  oracles  against  the  nations,  is  here  concentrated  in 
the  glory  of  a  mid-day  sun.  Ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.  form  the  finale 
to  ch.  xiii.-xxiii.,  and  that  in  a  strictly  musical  sense.  What 
the  finale  should  do  in  a  piece  of  music — namely,  gather  up  the 
scattered  changes  into  a  grand  impressive  whole — is  done  here 
by  this  closing  cycle.  But  even  apart  from  this,  it  is  full  of 
music  and  song.  The  description  of  the  catastrophe  in  ch. 
xxiv.  is  followed  by  a  simple  hymnal  echo.  As  the  book  of 
Immanuel  closes  in  ch.  xii.  with  a  psalm  of  the  redeemed,  so 
have  ;we  here  a  fourfold  song  of  praise.  The  overthrow  of 
the  imperial  city  is  celebrated  in  a  song  in  ch.  xxv.  1-5 ; 
another  song  in  ch.  xxv.  9  describes  how  Jehovah  reveals 
himself  with  His  saving  presence;  another  in  ch.  xxvi.  1-19 
celebrates  the  restoration  and  resurrection  of  Israel ;  and  a 
fourth  in  ch.  xxvii.  2-5  describes  the  vineyard  of  the  church 
bringing  forth  fruit  under  the  protection  of  Jehovah.  And 
these  songs  contain  every  variety,  from  the  most  elevated 
heavenly  hymn  to  the  tenderest  popular  song.  It  is  a  grand 
manifold  concert,  which  is  merely  introduced,  as  it  were,  by 
the  epic  opening  in  ch.  xxiv.  and  the  epic  close  in  ch.  xxvii.  6 
sqq.,  and  in  the  midst  of  which  the  prophecy  unfolds  itself 
in  a  kind  of  recitative.  Moreover,  we  do  not  find  so  much  real 
music  anywhere  else  in  the  ring  of  the  words.  The  heaping  up 
of  paronomasia  has  been  placed  among  the  arguments  against 
the  genuineness  of  these  chapters.  But  we  have  already  shown 
by  many  examples,  drawn  from  undisputed  prophecies  (such  as 
ch.  xxii.  5,  xvii.  12,  13),  that  Isaiah  is  fond  of  painting  for  the 
ear ;  and  the  reason  why  he  does  it  here  more  than  anywhere 
else,  is  that  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.  formed  a  finale  that  was  intended 
to  surpass  all  that  had  gone  before.  The  whole  of  this  finale 
is  a  grand  hallelujah  to  ch.  xiii.-xxiii.,  hymnic  in  its  character, 
and  musical  in  form,  and  that  to  such  a  degree,  that,  like  ch. 


424  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

xxv.  6,  the  prophecy  is,  as  it  were,  both  text  and  divisions  at 
the  same  time.  There  was  no  other  than  Isaiah  who  was  so 
incomparable  a  master  of  language.  Again,  the  incomparable 
depth  in  the  contents  of  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.  does  not  shake  our 
confidence  in  his  authorship,  since  the  whole  book  of  this 
Solomon  among  the  prophets  is  full  of  what  is  incomparable. 
And  in  addition  to  much  that  is  peculiar  in  this  cycle  of 
prophecies,  which  does  not  astonish  us  in  a  prophet  so  richly 
endowed,  and  so  characterized  by  a  continual  change  "  from 
glory  to  glory,"  the  whole  cycle  is  so  thoroughly  Isaiah's  in  its 
deepest  foundation,  and  in  a  hundred  points  of  detail,  that  it  is 
most  uncritical  to  pronounce  the  whole  to  be  certainly  not  Isaiah's 
simply  because  of  these  peculiarities.  So  far  as  the  eschato- 
logical  and  apocalyptical  contents,  which  seem  to  point  to  a 
very  late  period,  are  concerned,  we  would  simply  call  to  mind 
the  wealth  of  eschatological  ideas  to  be  found  even  in  Joel, 
who  prophesies  of  the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit,  the  march  of 
the  nations  of  the  world  against  the  church,  the  si<ms  that 

O  '  O 

precede  the  last  day,  the  miraculous  water  of  the  New  Jeru 
salem.  The  revelation  of  all  the  last  things,  which  the  Apo 
calypse  of  the  New  Testament  embraces  in  one  grand  picture, 
commenced  with  Obadiah  and  Joel;  and  there  is  nothing 
strange  in  the  fact  that  Isaiah  also,  in  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.,  should 
turn  away  from  the  immediate  external  facts  of  the  history  of 
his  own  time,  and  pass  on  to  these  depths  beyond. 

THE  JUDGMENT  UPON  THE  EARTH. — CHAP.  XXIY. 

It  is  thoroughly  characteristic  of  Isaiah,  that  the  commence 
ment  of  this  prophecy,  like  ch.  xix.  1,  places  us  at  once  in  the 
very  midst  of  the  catastrophe,  and  condenses  the  contents  of 
the  subsequent  picture  of  judgment  into  a  few  rapid,  vigorous, 
vivid,  and  comprehensive  clauses  (like  ch.  xv.  1,  xvii.  1,  xxin.  1, 
cf.  xxxiii.  1).  Vers.  1-3.  "  Behold,  Jehovah  emptieth  the  earth, 
and  layeth  it  waste,  and  marreth  its  form,  and  scattereth  its 
inhabitants.  And  it  happeneth,  as  to  the  people,  so  to  the  priest ; 
as  to  the  servant,  so  to  his  master;  as  to  the  'maid,  so  to  her 
mistress;  as  to  the  buyer,  so  to  the  seller ;  as  to  the  lender,  so  to 
the  borrower ;  as  to  the  creditor,  so  to  the  debtor.  Emptying  the 
earth  is  emptied,  and  plundering  is  plundered :  for  Jehovah  hath 


CHAP.  XXIV.  1-3.  425 

spoken  this  word."  The  question,  whether  the  prophet  is  speak 
ing  of  a  past  or  future  judgment,  which  is  one  of  importance 
to  the  interpretation  of  the  whole,  is  answered  by  the  fact  that 
with  Isaiah  "  hinneh"  (behold)  always  refers  to  something 
future  (ch.  iii.  1,  xvii.  1,  xix.  1,  xxx.  27,  etc.).  And  it  is  only 
in  his  case,  that  we  do  meet  with  prophecies  commencing  so 
immediately  with  hinne/i.  Those  in  Jeremiah  which  approach 
this  the  most  nearly  (viz.  Jer.  xlvii.  2,  xlix.  35,  cf.  li.  1,  and 
Ezek.  xxix.  3)  do  indeed  commence  with  hinneh,  but  not  without 
being  preceded  by  an  introductory  formula.  The  opening 
"  behold"  corresponds  to  the  confirmatory  "  for  Jehovah  hath 
spoken,"  which  is  always  employed  by  Isaiah  at  the  close  of 
statements  with  regard  to  the  future  and  occurs  chiefly,1 
though  not  exclusively,2  in  the  book  of  Isaiah,  whom  we  may 
recognise  in  the  detailed  description  in  ver.  2  (vid.  ch.  ii.  12-16, 
iii.  2,  3,  18-23,  as  compared  with  ch.  ix.  13 ;  also  with  the 
description  of  judgment  in  ch.  xix.  2—4,  which  closes  in  a 
similar  manner).  Thus  at  the  very  outset  we  meet  with  Isaiah's 
peculiarities  ;  and  Caspari  is  right  in  saying  that  no  prophecy 
could  possibly  commence  with  more  of  the  characteristics  of 
Isaiah  than  the  prophecy  before  us.  The  play  upon  words 
commences  at  the  very  outset.  Bdkak  and  bdlak  (compare  the 
Arabic  battulca,  a  blank,  naked  desert)  have  the  same  ring, 
just  as  in  Nahum  ii.  11,  cf.  3,  and  Jer.  li.  2.  The  niphal 
futures  are  intentionally  written  like  verbs  Pe-Vdv  (tibbok  and 
tibboz,  instead  of  tibbak  and  tibbaz),  for  the  purpose  of  making 
them  rhyme  with  the  infinitive  absolute*  (cf.  ch.  xxii.  13).  So, 
again,  caggebirtdh  is  so  written  instead  of  cigbtrtdh,  to  produce 
a  greater  resemblance  to  the  opening  syllable  of  the  other 
words.  The  form  ntw  is  interchanged  with  XW3  (as  in  1  Sam. 
xxii.  2),  or,  according  to  Kimchi's  way  of  writing  it,  with  NB'J 
(written  with  tzere),  just  as  in  other  passages  we  meet  with 

N^'3   along  with  n^J,  and,  judging  from   uJ,  to  postpone  or 

credit,  the  former  is  the  primary  form.  Noslieh  is  the  creditor, 
and  fa  NCO  "iBte  is  not  the  person  who  has  borrowed  of  him,  but, 
as  n^j  invariably  signifies  to  credit  (hiphil,  to  give  credit),  the 

1  Vid.  ch.  i.  20,  xxi.  17,  xxii.  25,  xxv.  8,  xl.  5,  Iviii.  14 ;  also  compare 
cb.  xix.  4,  xvi.  13,  and  xxxvii.  22. 

8  Vid.  Ob.  18,  Joel  iv.  8,  Mic.  iy.  4,  1  Kings  xiv.  11. 


42(5  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

person  whom  he  credits  (with  3  obj.,  like  3  to  in  ch.  ix.  3),  not 
u  the  person  through  whom  he  is  NBO"  (Hitzig  on  Jer.  xv.  10), 
Hence,  "  lender  and  borrower,  creditor  and  debtor "  (or  taker 
of  credit).  It  is  a  judgment  which  embraces  all,  without  dis 
tinction  of  rank  and  condition  ;  and  it  is  a  universal  one,  not 
merely  throughout  the  whole  of  the  land  of  Israel  (as  even 
Drechsler  renders  H&jn),  but  in  all  the  earth ;  for  as  Arndt 
correctly  observes,  ptf  n  signifies  "  the  earth "  in  this  passage, 
including,  as  in  ch.  xi.  4,  the  ethical  New  Testament  idea  of 
"the  world"  (kosmos). 

That  this  is  the  case  is  evident  from  vers.  4-9,  where  the 
accursed  state  into  which  the  earth  is  brought  is  more  fully 
described,  and  the  cause  thereof  is  given.     Vers.  4-9.  "  Smitten 
down,  withered  up  is  the  earth ;  pined  away,  wasted  away  is  the 
world;  pined  away  have  they,  the  foremost  of  the  people  of  the 
earth.     A  nd  the  earth  has  become  wicked  among  its  inhabitants  ; 
for  they  transgressed  revelations,   set  at  nought  the  ordinance, 
broke  the  everlasting  covenant.     Therefore  hath  the  curse  devoured 
the  earth,  and  they  who  dwelt  in  it  make  expiation :  therefore  are 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  withered  up,  and  there  are  very  few 
mortals  left.    New  wine  mourneth,  vine  is  parched,  all  the  merry- 
hearted  groan.     The  joyous  playing  of  tabrets  is  silent ;  the  noise 
of  them  that  rejoice  hath  ceased ;  the  joyous  playing  of  the  guitai 
is  silent.     They  drink  no  wine  with  a  song  ;  meth  tastes  bitter  to 
them  that  drink  it."     "  The  ivorld"  (tebel)  is  used  here  in  ver. 
4,  as  in  ch.  xxvi.  9  (always  in  the  form  of  a  proper  name,  and 
without  the  article),  as  a  parallel  to  "the  earth"  (Jiadretz),  with 
which  it  alternates  throughout  this  cycle  of  prophecies.     It  is 
used  poetically  to  signify  the  globe,  and  that  without  limitation 
(even  in  ch.  xiii.  11  and  xviii.  3);  and  therefore  "the  earth" 
is  also  to  be  understood  here  in  its  most  comprehensive  sense 
(in  a  different  sense,  therefore,  from  ch.  xxxiii.  9,  which  con 
tains  the  same  play  upon   sounds).      The  earth  is   sunk  in 
mourning,  and  has  become  like  a  faded  plant,  withered  up  with 
heat;  the  high  ones  of  the  people  of  the  earth  (rnerom;  abstr. 
pro  concr.,  like  cdbod  in  ch.  v.  13,  xxii.  24)  are  included  (2V 
is  used,  as  in  ch.  xlii.  5,  xl.  7,  to  signify  humanity,  i.e.  man 
generally).     ^1?£  (for  the  form,  see  Job,  i.  328)  stands  in  half 
pause,  which  throws  the  subjective  notion  that  follows  into 
greater  prominence.     It  is  the  punishment  of  the  inhabitants  of 


CHAP  XXIV.  4-9.  427 

the  earth,  which  the  earth  has  to  share,  because  it  has  shared 
in  the  wickedness  of  those  who  live  upon  it:  chdnaph  (not 
related  to  tdnaph)  signifies  to  be  degenerate,  to  have  decided 
for  what  is  evil  (ch.  ix.  16),  to  be  wicked ;  and  in  this  intransi 
tive  sense  it  is  applied  to  the  land,  which  is  said  to  be  affected 
with  the  guilt  of  wicked,  reckless  conduct,  more  especially  of 
blood-guiltiness  (Ps.  cvi.  38,  Num.  xxxv.  33  ;  compare  the 
transitive  use  in  Jer.  iii.  9).  The  wicked  conduct  of  men, 
which  has  caused  the  earth  also  to  become  chanephdh,  is  de 
scribed  in  three  short,  rapid,  involuntarily  excited  sentences 
(compare  ch.  xv.  6,  xvi.  4,  xxix.  20,  xxxiii.  8 ;  also  ch.  xxiv.  5, 
i.  4,  6,  8 ;  out  of  the  book  of  Isaiah,  however,  we  only  meet 
with  this  in  Joel  i.  10,  and  possibly  Josh.  vii.  11).  Under 
standing  "  the  earth  "  as  we  do  in  a  general  sense,  "  the  law  " 
cannot  signify  merely  the  positive  law  of  Israel.  The  Gentile 
world  had  also  a  tordh  or  divine  teaching  within,  which  con 
tained  an  abundance  of  divine  directions  (toroth).  They  also 
had  a  law  written  in  their  hearts ;  and  it  was  with  the  whole 
human  race  that  God  concluded  a  covenant  in  the  person  of 
Noah,  at  a  time  when  the  nations  had  none  of  them  come  into 
existence  at  all.  This  is  the  explanation  given  by  even  Jewish 
commentators ;  nevertheless,  we  must  not  forget  that  Israel 
was  included  among  the  transgressors,  and  the  choice  of  ex 
pression  was  determined  by  this.  With  the  expression  "  there 
fore"  the  prophecy  moves  on  from  sin  to  punishment,  just  as 
in  ch.  v.  25  (cf.  ver.  24).  nbx  is  the  curse  of  God  denounced 
against  the  transgressors  of  His  law  (Dan.  ix.  11  ;  compare 
Jer.  xxiii.  10,  which  is  founded  upon  this,  and  from  which  n£a« 
has  been  introduced  into  this  passage  in  some  codices  and 
editions).  The  curse  of  God  devours,  for  it  is  fire,  and  that 
from  within  outwards  (see  ch.  i.  31,  v.  24,  ix.  18,  x.  16,  17, 
xxix.  6,  xxx.  27  sqq.,  xxxiii.  11-14):  chdru  (milel,  since  pashta  is 
an  ace.  postpos.},1  from  clidrar,  they  are  burnt  up,  exusti.  With 
regard  to  *&tpw,  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe  that  it  cannot 
be  traced  back  to  DPK  =  DB»,  Dot?;  and  that  of  the  two  meanings, 
culpam  contrahere  and  culpam  sustinere,  it  has  the  latter  mean 
ing  here.  We  must  not  overlook  the  genuine  mark  of  Isaiah 
here  in  the  description  of  the  vanishing  away  of  men  down  to 

1  In  correct  texts  cMru  has  twopashtas,  the  former  indicating  the  place 
of  the  tone. 


428  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


a  small  remnant  :  "iKKtt  ("i^)  is  the  standing  word  used  to 
denote  this  ;  "WTB  (used  with  regard  to  number  both  here  and  in 
ch.  xvi.  14;  and  with  regard  to  time  in  ch.  x.  25  and  xxix.  17) 
is  exclusively  Isaiah's  ;  and  K^&$  is  used  in  the  same  sense  as  in 
ch.  xxxiii.  8  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  12).  In  ver.  7  we  are  reminded  of 
Joel  i.  (on  the  short  sentences,  see  ch.  xxix.  20,  xvi.  8-10)  ;  in 
vers.  8,  9  any  one  acquainted  with  Isaiah's  style  will  recal  to 
mind  not  only  ch.  v.  12,  14,  but  a  multitude  of  other  parallels. 
We  content  ourselves  with  pointing  to  Ppy  (which  belongs  ex 
clusively  to  Isaiah,  and  is  taken  from  Isa.  xxii.  2  and  xxxii.  13 
in  Zeph.  ii.  15,  and  from  Isa.  xiii.  3  in  Zeph.  iii.  11)  ;  and  for 
basshir  (with  joyous  song)  to  ch.  xxx.  32  (with  the  beating  of 
drums  and  playing  of  guitars),  together  with  ch.  xxviii.  7.  The 
picture  is  elegiac,  and  dwells  so  long  upon  the  wine  (cf.  ch. 
xvi.),  just  because  wine,  both  as  a  natural  production  and  in 
the  form  of  drink,  is  the  most  exhilarating  to  the  heart  of  all 
the  natural  gifts  of  God  (Ps.  civ.  15  ;  Judg.  ix.  13).  All  the 
sources  of  joy  and  gladness  are  destroyed  ;  and  even  if  there  is 
much  still  left  of  that  which  ought  to  give  enjoyment,  the  taste 
of  the  men  themselves  turns  it  into  bitterness. 

The  world  with  its  pleasure  is  judged  ;  the  world's  city  is 
also  judged,  in  which  both  the  world's  power  and  the  world's 
pleasure  were  concentrated.  Vers.  10-13.  "  The  city  of  tohu  is 
broken  to  pieces  ;  every  house  is  shut  up,  so  that  no  man  can  come 
in.  There  is  lamentation  for  wine  in  the  fields  ;  all  rejoicing  has 
set  ;  the  delight  of  the  earth  is  banished.  What  is  left  of  the  city 
is  wilderness,  and  the  gate  was  shattered  to  ruins.  For  so  will  it 
be  within  the  earthy  in  the  midst  of  the  nations  ;  as  at  the  olive- 
beating,  as  at  the  gleaning,  when  the  vintage  is  over"  The  city 
of  tohu  (kiryath  tohu)  :  this  cannot  be  taken  collectively,  as 
Rosenmiiller,  Arndt,  and  Drechsler  suppose,  on  account  of  the 
annexation  of  Jdryath  to  tohu,  which  is  turned  into  a  kind  of 
proper  name  ;  nor  can  we  understand  it  as  referring  to  Jeru 
salem,  as  the  majority  of  commentators  have  done,  including 
even  Schegg  and  Stier  (according  to  ch.  xxxii.  13,  14),  after 
we  have  taken  "  the  earth"  (hadretz)  in  the  sense  of  kosmos 
(the  world).  It  is  rather  the  central  city  of  the  world  as 
estranged  from  God  ;  and  it  is  here  designated  according  to 
its  end,  which  end  will  be  tohu,  as  its  nature  was  tohu.  Its  true 
nature  was  the  breaking  up  of  the  harmony  of  all  divine  order  ; 


CHAP.  XXIV.  10-13  429 

and  so  its  end  will  be  the  breaking  up  of  its  own  standing,  and 
a  hurling  back,  as  it  were,  into  the  chaos  of  its  primeval  begin 
ning.  With  a  very  similar  significance  Rome  is  called  turbida 
Roma  in  Persius  (i.  5).  The  whole  is  thoroughly  Isaiah's,  even 
to  the  finest  points :  tohu  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  xxix.  21 ;  and 
for  the  expression  Ktelp  (so  that  you  cannot  enter ;  namely,  on 
account  of  the  ruins  which  block  up  the  doorway)  compare  ch. 
xxiii.  1,  vii.  8,  xvii.  1,  also  v.  9,  vi.  11,  xxxii.  13.  The  cry  or 
lamentation  for  the  wine  out  in  the  fields  (ver.  11;  cf.  Job 
v.  10)  is  the  mourning  on  account  of  the  destruction  of  the 
vineyards ;  the  vine,  which  is  one  of  Isaiah's  most  favourite 
symbols,  represents  in  this  instance  also  all  the  natural  sources 
of  joy.  In  the  term  'drbdh  (rejoicing)  the  relation  between 
joy  and  light  is  presupposed ;  the  sun  of  joy  is  set  (compare 
Mic.  iii.  6).  What  remains  of  the  city  ("^V?  is  partitive,  just  as 
n  in  ch.  x.  22)  is  shammdh  (desolation),  to  which  the  whole 
city  has  been  brought  (compare  ch.  v.  9,  xxxii.  14).  The 
strong  gates,  which  once  swarmed  with  men,  are  shattered  to 
ruins  (yuccath,  like  Mic.  i.  7,  for  yucath,  Ges.  §  67,  Anm.  8 ; 
nJNB>,  ajr.  \€j.,  a  predicating  noun  of  sequence,  as  in  ch.  xxxvii. 
26,  "into  desolated  heaps;"  compare  ch.  vi.  11,  etc.,  and  other 
passages).  In  the  whole  circuit  of  the  earth  (ch.  vi.  12,  vii.  22  ; 
htfdretz  is  "the  earth"  here  as  in  ch.  x.  23,  xix.  24),  and  in 
the  midst  of  what  was  once  a  crowd  of  nations  (compare  Mic. 
v.  6,  7),  there  is  only  a  small  remnant  of  men  left.  This  is 
the  leading  thought,  which  runs  through  the  book  of  Isaiah 
from  beginning  to  end,  and  is  figuratively  depicted  here  in 
a  miniature  of  ch.  xvii.  4-6.  The  state  of  things  produced 
by  the  catastrophe  is  compared  to  the  olive-beating,  which 
fetches  down  what  fruit  was  left  at  the  general  picking,  and 
to  the  gleaning  of  the  grapes  after  the  vintage  has  been  fully 
gathered  in  (cdldh  is  used  here  as  in  ch.  x.  25,  xvi.  4,  xxi.  16, 
etc.,  viz.  "  to  be  over,"  whereas  in  ch.  xxxii.  10  it  means 
to  be  hopelessly  lost,  as  in  ch.  xv.  6).  There  are  no  more 
men  in  the  whole  of  the  wide  world  than  there  are  of  olives 
and  grapes  after  the  principal  gathering  has  taken  place. 
The  persons  saved  belong  chiefly,  though  not  exclusively,  to 
Israel  (John  iii.  5).  The  place  where  they  assemble  is  the 
land  of  promise. 

There  is  now  a  church  there  refined  by  the  judgment,  and 


430  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

rejoicing  in  its  apostolic  calling  to  the  whole  world.  Vers.  14, 
15.  "  They  will  lift  up  their  voice,  and  exult;  for  the  majesty 
of  Jehovah  they  shout  from  the  sea :  therefore  praise  ye  Jehovah 
in  the  lands  of  the  sun,  in  the  islands  of  the  sea  the  name  of 
Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel."  The  ground  and  subject  of  the 
rejoicing  is  "  the  majesty  of  Jehovah,"  i.e.  the  fact  that  Je 
hovah  had  shown  Himself  so  majestic  in  judgment  and  mercy 
(ch.  xii.  5,  6),  and  was  now  so  manifest  in  His  glory  (ch.  ii. 
11,  17).  Therefore  rejoicing  was  heard  "from  the  sea"  (the 
Mediterranean),  by  which  the  abode  of  the  congregation  of 
Jehovah  was  washed.  Turning  in  that  direction,  it  had  the 
islands  and  coast  lands  of  the  European  West  in  front  (iyyi 
Jiayydm ;  the  only  other  passage  in  which  this  occurs  is  ch.  xi. 
11,  cf.  Ezek.  xxvi.  18),  and  at  its  back  the  lands  of  the 
Asiatic  East,  which  are  called  'tm'w,  the  lands  of  light,  i.e. 
of  the  sun-rising.  This  is  the  true  meaning  of  'wn'm,  as  J. 
Schelling  and  Drechsler  agree ;  for  Doderlein's  comparison  of 

t'jt 
the  rare  Arabic  word  .  \  septentrio  is  as  far  removed  from  the 

Hebrew  usage  as  that  of  the  Talmud  "tftf  Nrrritf,  vespera. 
Hitzig's  proposed  reading  D^Nl  (according  to  the  LXX.) 
diminishes  the  substance  and  destroys  the  beauty  of  the  ap 
peal,  which  goes  forth  both  to  the  east  and  west,  and  summons 
to  the  praise  of  the  name  of  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel,  |3~^, 
i.e.  because  of  His  manifested  glory.  His  "name"  (cf.  ch. 
xxx.  27)  is  His  nature  as  revealed  and  made  "nameable"  in 
judgment  and  mercy. 

This  appeal  is  not  made  in  vain.  Ver.  16a.  "  From  the 
border  of  the  earth  we  hear  songs :  Praise  to  the  Righteous 
One!"  It  no  doubt  seems  natural  enough  to  understand  the 
term  tzaddlk  (righteous)  as  referring  to  Jehovah ;  but,  as 
Hitzig  observes,  Jehovah  is  never  called  "the  Righteous  One" 
in  so  absolute  a  manner  as  this  (compare,  however,  Ps.  cxii.  4, 
where  it  occurs  in  connection  with  other  attributes,  and  Ex.  ix. 
27,  where  it  stands  in  an  antithetical  relation)  ;  and  in  addition 
to  this,  Jehovah  gives  ^  (ch.  iv.  2,  xxviii.  5),  whilst  1i33,  and 
not  *3¥>  is  ascribed  to  Him.  Hence  we  must  take  the  word  in 
the  same  sense  as  in  ch.  iii.  10  (cf.  Hab.  ii.  4).  The  reference 
is  to  the  church  of  righteous  men,  whose  faith  has  endured  the 
fire  of  the  judgment  of  wrath.  In  response  to  its  summons  to 


CHAP.  XXIV.  16-20.  431 

the  praise  of  Jehovah,  they  answer  it  in  songs  from  the  border 
of  the  earth.  The  earth  is  here  thought  of  as  a  garment  spread 
out ;  cenaph  is  the  point  or  edge  of  the  garment,  the  extreme 
eastern  and  western  ends  (compare  ch.  xi.  12).  Thence  the 
church  of  the  future  catches  the  sound  of  this  grateful  song  as 
it  is  echoed  from  one  to  the  other. 

The  prophet  feels  himself,  "  in  spirit,"  to  be  a  member  of 
this  church;  but  all  at  once  he  becomes  aware  of  the  sufferings 
which  will  have  first  of  all  to   be   overcome,  and  which   he 
cannot  look  upon  without  sharing  the  suffering  himself.     Vers. 
16-20.  "  Then  I  said,  Ruin  to  me!  ruin  to  me!     Woe  to  me! 
Robbers  rob,  and  robbing,  they  rob  as  robbers.      Horror,  and 
pit,  and  snare,  are  over  thee,  0  inhabitant  of  the  earth!     And  it 
cometh  to  pass,  whoever  fleeth  from  the  tidings  of  horror  falleth 
into  tlie  pit ;  and  whoever  escapeth  out  of  the  pit  is  caught  in 
the  snare :  for  the  trap-doors  on  high  are  opened,  and  the  firm 
foundations   of  the   earth   shake.      The  earth   rending,  is  rent 
asunder;  the  earth  bursting,  is  burst  in  pieces;  the  earth  shaking, 
tottereth.     The  earth  reeling,  reeleth  like  a  drunken  man,  and 
swingeth  like  a  hammock ;  and  its  burden  of  sin  presseth  upon  it ; 
and  it  falleth,  and  riseth  not  again."     The  expression  "  Then  I 
said"  (cf.  ch.  vi.  5)  stands  here  in  the  same  apocalyptic  con 
nection  as  in  Rev.  vii.  14,  for  example.    He  said  it  at  that  time 
in  a  state  of  ecstasy ;  so  that  when  he  committed  to  writing 
what  he  had  seen,  the  saying  was  a  thing  of  the  past.     The 
final  salvation  follows  a  final  judgment;  and  looking  back  upon 
the  latter,  he  bursts  out  into  the  exclamation  of  pain :  rdzl-ll, 
consumption,  passing  away,  to  me  (see  ch.  x.  16,  xvii.  4),  i.e.  I 
must  perish  (rdzi  is  a  word  of  the  same  form  as  kali,  shdni, 
'dni;  literally,  it  is  a  neuter  adjective  signifying  emaciatum  = 
macies ;  Ewald,  §  749,  g).      He  sees  a  dreadful,  bloodthirsty 
people  preying  among  both  men  and  stores  (compare  ch.  xxi.  2, 
xxxiii.  1,  for  the  play  upon  the  word  with  TQ,  root  13,   cf. 
xeuOeiv  Tivd  TL,  tecte  agere,  i.e.  from  behind,  treacherously,  like 
assassins).     The  exclamation,  "  Horror,  and  pit,"  etc.  (which 
Jeremiah  applies  in  Jer.  xlviii.  43,  44,  to  the  destruction  of 
Moab  by  the  Chaldeans),  is  not  an  invocation,  but  simply  a 
deeply  agitated  utterance  of  what  is  inevitable.    In  the  pit  and 
snare  there  is  a  comparison  implied  of  men  to  game,  and  of  the 
enemy  to  sportsmen  (cf.  Jer.  xvi.  16,  Lam.  iv.  19  ;  yilldcer,  as 


432  THE  PEOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


in  ch.  viii.  15,  xxviii.  13).  The  £>y  in  v?  is  exactly  the  same 
as  in  Judg.  xvi.  9  (cf.  Isa.  xvi.  9).  They  who  should  flee  as 
soon  as  the  horrible  news  arrived  (min,  as  in  ch.  xxxiii.  3)  would 
not  escape  destruction,  but  would  become  victims  to  one  form 
if  not  to  another  (the  same  thought  which  we  find  expressed 
twice  in  Amos  v.  19,  and  still  more  fully  in  ch.  ix.  1-4,  as  well 
as  in  a  more  dreadfully  exalted  tone).  Observe,  however,  in 
how  mysterious  a  background  those  human  instruments  of 
punishment  remain,  who  are  suggested  by  the  word  bog  dim 
(robbers).  The  idea  that  the  judgment  is  a  direct  act  of 
Jehovah,  stands  in  the  foreground  and  governs  the  whole. 
For  this  reason  it  is  described  as  a  repetition  of  the  flood  (for 
the  opened  windows  or  trap-doors  of  the  firmament,  which  let 
the  great  bodies  of  wrater  above  them  come  down  from  on  high 
upon  the  earth,  point  back  to  Gen.  vii.  11  and  viii.  2,  cf.  Ps. 
Ixxviii.  23)  ;  and  this  indirectly  implies  its  universality.  It  is 
also  described  as  an  earthquake.  "  The  foundations  of  the 
earth"  are  the  internal  supports  upon  which  the  visible  crust 
of  the  earth  rests.  The  way  in  which  the  earth  in  its  quaking 
first  breaks,  then  bursts,  and  then  falls,  is  painted  for  the  ear 
by  the  three  reflective  forms  in  ver.  19,  together  with  their 
gerundives,  which  keep  each  stage  in  the  process  of  the  cata 
strophe  vividly  before  the  mind,  Hjn  is  apparently  an  error  of 
the  pen  for  JT),  if  it  is  not  indeed  a  n.  actionis  instead  of  the 
inf.  absol.  as  in  Hab.  iii.  9.  The  accentuation,  however,  re 
gards  the  ah  as  a  toneless  addition,  and  the  form  therefore  as 
a  gerundive  (like  Jcob  in  Num.  xxiii.  25).  The  reflective  form 
yjnnn  is  not  the  liitlipalel  of  JTi,  vociferari,  but  the  hithpoel  of 
VJH  (HTJ),  frangere.  The  threefold  play  upon  the  words  would 
be  tame,  if  the  words  themselves  formed  an  anti-climax  ;  but  it 
is  really  a  climax  ascendens.  The  earth  first  of  all  receives 
rents;  then  gaping  wide,  it  bursts  asunder;  and  finally  sways 
to  and  fro  once  more,  and  falls.  It  is  no  longer  possible  for  it 
to  keep  upright.  Its  wickedness  presses  it  down  like  a  burden 
(ch.  i.  4  ;  Ps.  xxxviii.  5),  so  that  it  now  reels  for  the  last  time 
like  a  drunken  man  (ch.  xxviii.  7,  xxix.  9),  or  a  hammock  (ch. 
i.  8),  until  it  falls  never  to  rise  again. 

But  if  the  old  earth  passes  away  in  this  manner  out  of  the 
system  of  the  universe,  the  punishment  of  God  must  fall  at  the 
same  time  both  upon  the  princes  of  heaven  and  upon  the  princes 


CHAP.  XXIV.  21-23.  433 

of  earth  (the  prophet  does  not  arrange  what  belongs  to  the  end 
of  all  things  in  a  "  chronotactic"  manner).  They  are  the  secrets 
of  two  worlds,  that  are  here  unveiled  to  the  apocalyptic  seer  of 
the  Old  Testament.  Vers.  21-23.  "And  it  cometh  to  pass  in 
that  day,  Jehovah  will  visit  the  army  of  the  high  place  in  the 
high  place,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth  on  the  earth.  And  tliey  are 
imprisoned,  as  one  imprisons  captives  in  the  pit,  and  shut  up  in 
prison;  and  in  the  course  of  many  days  they  are  visited.  And 
the  moon  blushes,  and  the  sun  turns  pale :  for  Jehovah  of  hosts 
reigns  royally  upon  Mount  Zion  and  in,  Jerusalem,  and  before 
His  elders  is  glory."  With  this  doubly  expressed  antithesis  of 
mdrom  and  'addmdh  (cf.  xxiii.  lib)  before  us,  brought  out  as  it 
is  as  sharply  as  possible,  we  cannot  understand  "  the  army  of 
the  high  place"  as  referring  to  certain  earthly  powers  (as  the 
Targum,  Luther,  Calvin,  and  Havernick  do).  Moreover,  the 
expression  itself  is  also  opposed  to  such  an  interpretation  ;  for, 
as  ver.  18  clearly  shows,  in  which  mimmdrom  is  equivalent  to 
misshdmaim  (cf.  ch.  xxxiii.  5,  xxxvii.  23,  xl.  26),  ^">p  K??  'ls 
synonymous  with  E^i^C1  N^;  and  this  invariably  signifies  either 
the  starry  host  (ch.  xl.  26)  or  the  angelic  host  (1  Kings 
xxii.  19  ;  Ps.  cxlviii.  2),  and  occasionally  the  two  combined, 
without  any  distinction  (Neh.  ix.  6).  As  the  moon  and  sun 
are  mentioned,  it  might  be  supposed  that  by  the  "  host  on 
high"  we  are  to  understand  the  angelic  host,  as  Abravanel, 
Umbreit,  and  others  really  do:  "the  stars,  that  have  been  made 
into  idols,  the  shining  kings  of  the  sky,  fall  from  their  altars, 
and  the  kings  of  the  earth  from  their  thrones."  But  the  very 
antithesis  in  the  word  "  kings"  (inalche)  leads  us  to  conjecture 
that  "the  host  on  high"  refers  to  personal  powers;  and  the 
view  referred  to  founders  on  the  more  minute  description  of 
the  visitation  (pdkad  *al,  as  in  ch.  xxvii.  1,  3,  cf.  xxvi.  21), 
"  they  are  imprisoned,"  etc. ;  for  this  must  also  be  referred 
to  the  heavenly  host.  The  objection  might  indeed  be  urged, 
that  the  imprisonment  only  relates  to  the  kings,  and  that  the 
visitation  of  the  heavenly  host  finds  its  full  expression  in  the 
shaming  of  the  moon  and  sun  (ver.  23)  ;  but  the  fact  that  the 
moon  and  sun  are  thrown  into  the  shade  by  the  revelation  of 
the  glory  of  Jehovah,  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  judgment  in 
flicted  upon  them.  Hence  the  commentators  are  now  pretty 
well  agreed,  that  "  the  host  on  high"  signifies  here  the  angelic 

VOL.  I.  ?  E 


434  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

army.  But  it  is  self-evident,  that  a  visitation  of  the  angelic 
army  cannot  be  merely  a  relative  and  partial  one.  And  it  is 
not  sufficient  to  understand  the  passage  as  meaning  the  wicked 
angels,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  good.  Both  the  context  and 
the  parallelism  show  that  the  reference  must  be  to  a  penal 
visitation  in  the  spiritual  world,  which  stands  in  the  closest 
connection  with  the  history  of  man,  and  in  fact  with  the  his 
tory  of  the  nations.  Consequently  the  host  on  high  will  refer 
to  the  angels  of  the  nations  and  kingdoms ;  and  the  prophecy 
here  presupposes  what  is  affirmed  in  Deut.  xxxii.  8  (LXX.), 
and  sustained  in  the  book  of  Daniel,  when  it  speaks  of  a  sar  of 
Persia,  Javan,  and  even  the  people  of  Israel.  In  accordance 
with  this  exposition,  there  is  a  rabbinical  saying,  to  the  effect 
that  "  God  never  destroys  a  nation  without  having  first  of  all 
destroyed  its  prince,"  i.e.  the  angel  who,  by  whatever  means  he 
first  obtained  possession  of  the  nation,  whether  by  the  will  of 
God  or  against  His  will,  has  exerted  an  ungodly  influence  upon 
it.  Just  as,  according  to  the  scriptural  view,  both  good  and  evil 
angels  attach  themselves  to  particular  men,  and  an  elevated 
state  of  mind  may  sometimes  afford  a  glimpse  of  this  encircling 
company  and  this  conflict  of  spirits  ;  so  do  angels  contend  for 
the  rule  over  nations  and  kingdoms,  either  to  guide  them  in 
the  way  of  God  or  to  lead  them  astray  from  God  ;  and  there 
fore  the  judgment  upon  the  nations  which  the  prophet  here 
foretells  will  be  a  judgment  upon  angels  also.  The  kingdom 
of  spirits  has  its  own  history  running  parallel  to  the  destinies 
of  men.  What  is  recorded  in  Gen.  vi.  was  a  seduction  of  men 
by  angels,  and  one  of  later  occurrence  than  the  temptation  by 
Satan  in  paradise ;  and  the  seduction  of  nations  and  kingdoms 
by  the  host  of  heaven,  which  is  here  presupposed  by  the  pro 
phecy  of  Isaiah,  is  later  than  either.  Ver.  22a  announces  the 
preliminary  punishment  of  both  angelic  and  human  princes: 
'aseplidh  stands  in  the  place  of  a  gerundive,  like  talteldh  in 
ch.  xxii.  17.  The  connection  of  the  words  'asephdh  'assir  is 
exactly  the  same  as  that  of  talteldh  gdber  in  ch.  xxii.  17  :  in 
carceration  after  the  manner  of  incarcerating  prisoners ;  'dsaph, 
to  gather  together  (ch.  x.  14,  xxxiii.  4),  signifies  here  to  incar 
cerate,  just  as  in  Gen.  xlii.  17.  Both  verbs  are  construed  with 
W,  because  the  thrusting  is  from  above  downwards  into  the 
pit  and  prison  (ral  embraces  both  upon  or  over  anything,  and 


CHAP.  XXIV.  21-23.  435 

into  it,  e.g.  I  Sam.  xxxi.  4,  Job  vi.  16  j  see  Hitzig  on  Nab. 
iii.  12).  We  may  see  from  2  Pet.  ii.  4  and  Jude  6  bow  this 
is  to  be  understood.  The  reference  is  to  the  abyss  of  Hades, 
where  they  are  reserved  in  chains  of  darkness  unto  the  judg 
ment  of  the  great  day.  According  to  this  parallel,  yippdkedu 
(shall  be  visited)  ought  apparently  to  be  understood  as  denot 
ing  a  visitation  in  wrath  (like  ch.  xxix.  6,  Ezek.  xxxviii.  8  ; 
compare  pdkad  followed  by  an  accusative  in  ch.  xxvi.  21,  also 
xx vi.  14,  and  Ps.  lix.  6 ;  niphkad,  in  fact,  is  never  used  to 
signify  visitation  in  mercy),  and  therefore  as  referring  to  the 
infliction  of  the  final  punishment.  Hitzig,  however,  under 
stands  it  as  relating  to  a  visitation  of  mercy ;  and  in  this  he 
is  supported  by  Ewald,  Knobel,  and  Luzzatto.  Gesenius, 
Umbreit,  and  others,  take  it  to  indicate  a  citation  or  summons, 
though  without  any  ground  either  in  usage  of  speech  or  actual 
custom.  A  comparison  of  ch.  xxiii.  17  in  its  relation  to  ch. 
xxiii.  151  favours  the  second  explanation,  as  being  relatively  the 
most  correct;  but  the  expression  is  intentionally  left  ambiguous. 
So  far  as  the  thing  itself  is  concerned,  we  have  a  parallel  in 
Rev.  xx.  1-3  and  7-9 :  they  are  visited  by  being  set  free  again, 
and  commencing  their  old  practice  once  more :  but  only  (as 
ver.  23  affirms)  to  lose  again  directly,  before  the  glorious  and 
triumphant  might  of  Jehovah,  the  power  they  have  temporarily 
reacquired.  What  the  apocalyptist  of  the  New  Testament 
describes  in  detail  in  Rev.  xx.  4,  xx.  11  sqq.,  and  xxi.,  the 
apocalyptist  of  the  Old  Testament  sees  here  condensed  into 
one  fact,  viz.  the  enthroning  of  Jehovah  and  His  people  in 
a  new  Jerusalem,  at  which  the  silvery  white  moon  (lebdndh) 
turns  red,  and  the  glowing  sun  (chammdh)  turns  pale  ;  the  two 
great  lights  of  heaven  becoming  (according  to  a  Jewish  ex 
pression)  "like  a  lamp  at  noonday"  in  the  presence  of  such 
glory.  Of  the  many  parallels  to  ver.  23  which  we  meet  with 
in  Isaiah,  the  most  worthy  of  note  are  ch.  xi.  10  to  the  con 
cluding  clause,  "  and  before  His  elders  is  glory"  (also  ch, 
iv.  5),  and  ch.  i.  26  (cf.  iii.  14),  with  reference  to  the  use  of 
the  word  zekenlm  (elders).  Other  parallels  are  ch.  xxx.  26,  for 
chammdh  and  leldndh ;  ch.  i.  29,  for  chdpli&r  and  bosh ;  ch. 
xxxiii.  22,  for  mdlak;  ch.  x.  12,  for  "Mount  Zion  and  Jeru 
salem."  We  have  already  spoken  at  ch.  i.  16  of  the  word  iwged 
1  Cf.  Targ.,  Saad.,  "  they  will  come  into  remembrance  again." 


436  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

(Arab,  negd,  from  ndgad,  j^J,  to  be  exalted;  vid.  opp.A^,  to 

be  pressed  down,  to  sink),  as  applied  to  that  which  stands  out 
prominently  and  clearly  before  one's  eyes.  According  to 
Hofmann  (Sehriftbeweis,  i.  320-1),  the  elders  here,  like  the 
twenty-four  presbuteroi  of  the  Apocalypse,  are  the  sacred 
spirits,  forming  the  council  of  God,  to  which  He  makes  known 
His  will  concerning  the  world,  before  it  is  executed  by  His 
attendant  spirits  the  angels.  But  as  we  find  counsellors 
promised  to  the  Israel  of  the  new  Jerusalem  in  ch.  i.  26,  in 
contrast  with  the  bad  zekenim  (elders)  which  it  then  possessed 
(ch.  iii.  14),  such  as  it  had  at  the  glorious  commencement  of 
its  history ;  and  as  the  passage  before  us  says  essentially  the 
same  with  regard  to  the  zekenim  as  we  find  in  ch.  iv.  5  with 
regard  to  the  festal  meetings  of  Israel  (vid.  ch.  xxx.  20  and 
xxxii.  1)  ;  and  still  further,  as  Rev.  xx.  4  (cf.  Matt.  xix.  28)  is 
a  more  appropriate  parallel  to  the  passage  before  us  than  Rev. 
iv.  4,  we  may  assume  with  certainty,  at  least  with  regard  to 
this  passage,  and  without  needing  to  come  to  any  decision  con 
cerning  Rev.  iv.  4,  that  the  zekenim  here  are  not  angels,  but 
human  elders  after  God's  own  heart.  These  elders,  being 
admitted  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  and  reigning 
together  with  Him,  have  nothing  but  glory  in  front  of  them, 
and  they  themselves  reflect  that  glory. 

THE  FOURFOLD  MELODIOUS  ECHO. — CHAP.  XXV.  XXVI. 

A .  First  echo :  Salvation  of  the  nations  after  the  fall  of  the 
imperial  city. — Chap.  xxv.  1-8. 

There  is  not  merely  reflected  glory,  but  reflected  sound  as 
well.  The  melodious  echoes  commence  with  ch.  xxv.  1  sqq. 
The  prophet,  transported  to  the  end  of  the  days,  commemorates 
what  he  has  seen  in  psalms  and  songs.  These  psalms  and 
songs  not  only  repeat  what  has  already  been  predicted ;  but, 
sinking  into  it,  and  drawing  out  of  it,  they  partly  expand  it 
themselves,  and  partly  prepare  the  way  for  its  further  extension. 

The  first  echo  is  ch.  xxv.  1-8,  or  more  precisely  ch.  xxv.  1-5. 
The  prophet,  whom  we  already  know  as  a  psalmist  from  ch.  xii., 
now  acts  as  choral  leader  of  the  church  of  the  future,  and 


CHAP.  XXV.  1-5.  437 

praises  Jehovah  for  having  destroyed  the  mighty  imperial  citv, 
and  proved  Himself  a  defence  and  shield  against  its  tyranny 
towards  His  oppressed  church.  Vers.  1-5.  "  Jehovah,  Thou  art 
my  God;  I  will  exalt  Thee,  I  will  praise  Thy  name,  that  Thou  hast 
wrought  wonders,  counsels  from  afar,  sincerity,  truth.  For  Thou 
hast  turned  it  from  a  city  into  a  heap  of  stones,  the  steep  castle  into  a 
ruin;  the  palace  of  the  barbarians  from  being  a  city,  to  be  rebuilt  no 
more  for  ever.  Therefore  a  wild  people  will  honour  Thee,  cities  of 
violent  nations  fear  Thee.  For  Thouprovedst  Thyself  a  stronghold 
to  the  lowly,  a  stronghold  to  the  poor  in  his  distress,  as  a  shelter 
from  the  storm  of  rain,  as  a  shadow  from  the  burning  of  the  sun ; 
for  the  blast  of  violent  ones  was  like  a  storm  of  rain  against  a  wall. 
Like  the  burning  of  the  sun  in  a  parched  land,  Thou  subduest  the 
noise  of  the  barbarians;  (like)  the  burning  of  the  sun  through  the 
shadow  of  a  cloud,  the  triumphal  song  of  violent  ones  was  brought 
low"  The  introductory  clause  is  to  be  understood  as  in  Ps. 
cxviii.  28  :  Jehovah  (voc.),  my  God  art  Thou.  "  Thou  hast 
wrought  wonders :"  this  is  taken  from  Ex.  xv.  11  (as  in  Ps. 
Ixxvii.  15,  Ixxviii.  12 ;  like  ch.  xii.  2,  from  Ex.  xv.  2).  The 
wonders  which  are  now  actually  wrought  are  "  counsels  from 
afar"  (merdchok),  counsels  already  adopted  afar  off,  i.e.  long 
before,  thoughts  of  God  belonging  to  the  olden  time ;  the  same 
ideal  view  as  in  ch.  xxii.  11,  xxxvii.  26  (a  parallel  which  coincides 
with  our  passage  on  every  side),  and,  in  fact,  throughout  the 
whole  of  the  second  part.  It  is  the  manifold  "  counsel'*  of  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel  (ch.  v.  19,  xiv.  24-27,  xix.  12,  17,  xxiii.  8, 
xxviii.  29)  which  displays  its  wonders  in  the  events  of  time. 
To  the  verb  JVBW  we  have  also  a  second  and  third  object,  viz. 
JDX  nj^DS.  It  is  a  common  custom  with  Isaiah  to  place  deriva 
tives  of  the  same  word  side  by  side,  for  the  purpose  of  giving 
the  greatest  possible  emphasis  to  the  idea  (ch.  iii.  1,  xvi.  6). 
njlEK  indicates  a  quality,  f»fc  an  actual  fact.  What  He  has 
executed  is  the  realization  of  His  faithfulness,  and  the  reality 
of  His  promises.  The  imperial  city  is  destroyed.  Jehovah, 
as  the  first  clause  which  is  defined  by  tzakeph  affirms,  has 
removed  it  away  from  the  nature  of  a  city  into  the  condition 
of  a  heap  of  stones.  The  sentence  has  its  object  within  itself, 
and  merely  gives  prominence  to  the  change  that  has  been 
effected;  the  Lamed  is  used  in  the  same  sense  as  in  ch.  xxiii.  13 
(cf.  xxxvii.  26)  •  the  min,  as  in  ch.  vii.  8,  xvii.  i,  xxiii.  1,  xxiv.  10. 


438  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Mappeldli,  with  kametz  or  tzere  before  the  tone,  is  a  word  that 
can  only  be  accredited  from  the  book  of  Isaiah  (ch.  xvii.  1, 
xxiii.  13).  "Vy,  nnp,  and  P"iEK  are  common  parallel  words  in 
Isaiah  (ch.  i.  26,  xxii.  2,  xxxii.  13,  14)  ;  and  zdrim,  as  in  ch. 
i.  7  and  xxix.  5,  is  the  most  general  epithet  for  the  enemies 
of  the  people  of  God.  The  fall  of  the  imperial  kingdom  is 
followed  by  the  conversion  of  the  heathen ;  the  songs  proceed 
from  the  mouths  of  the  remotest  nations.  Ver.  3  runs  parallel 
with  Rev.  xv.  3,  4.  Nations  hitherto  rude  and  passionate  now 
submit  to  Jehovah  with  decorous  reverence,  and  those  that 
were  previously  oppressive  (arltzim,  as  in  ch.  xiii.  11,  in  form 
like  pdrltzim,  shdllshim)  with  humble  fear.  The  cause  of  this 
conversion  of  the  heathen  is  the  one  thus  briefly  indicated  in  the 
Apocalypse,  "  for  thy  judgments  are  made  manifest"  (Rev.  xv. 
4).  75  and  jtatf  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  30,  xxix.  19)  are  names  well  known 
from  the  Psalms,  as  applying  to  the  church  when  oppressed. 
To  this  church,  in  the  distress  which  she  had  endured  (ft  l£3, 
as  in  ch.  xxvi.  16,  Ixiii.  9,  cf.  xxxiii.  2),  Jehovah  had  proved 
Himself  a  strong  castle  (maoz;  on  the  expression,  compare  ch. 
xxx.  3),  a  shelter  from  storm  and  a  shade  from  heat  (for  the 
figures,  compare  ch.  iv.  6,  xxxii.  2,  xvi.  3),  so  that  the  blast  of 
the  tyrants  (compare  ruach  in  ch.  xxx.  28,  xxxiii.  11,  Ps.  Ixxvi. 
13)  was  like  a  wall-storm,  i.e.  a  storm  striking  against  a  wall 
(compare  ch.  ix.  3,  a  shoulder-stick,  i.e.  a  stick  which  strikes 
the  shoulder),  sounding  against  it  and  bursting  upon  it  without 
being  able  to  wash  it  away  (ch.  xxviii.  17 ;  Ps.  Ixii.  4),  because 
it  was  the  wall  of  a  strong  castle,  and  this  strong  castle  was 
Jehovah  Himself.  As  Jehovah  can  suddenly  subdue  the  heat 
of  the  sun  in  dryness  (tzdy0n,  abstract  for  concrete,  as  in  ch. 
xxxii.  2,  equivalent  to  dry  land,  ch.  xli.  18),  and  it  must  give 
way  when  He  brings  up  a  shady  thicket  (Jer.  iv.  29),  namely 
of  clouds  (Ex.  xix.  9 ;  Ps.  xviii.  12),  so  did  He  suddenly  sub 
due  the  thundering  (shd'on,  as  in  ch.  xvii.  12)  of  the  hordes 
that  stormed  against  His  people;  and  the  song  of  triumph 
(zdmlr,  only  met  with  again  in  Song  of  Sol.  ii.  12)  of  the 
tyrants,  which  passed  over  the  world  like  a  scorching  heat,  was 
soon  "brought  low"  (dndh,  in  its  neuter  radical  signification 
"  to  bend,"  related  to  JH3,  as  in  ch.  xxxi.  4). 

Thus  the  first  hymnic  echo  dies  away;  and  the  eschatological 
prophecy,  coming  back  to  ch.  xxiv.  23,  but  with  deeper  prayer- 


CHAP.  XXV.  6-8.  439 

like  penetration,  proceeds  thus  in  ver.  6:  "And  Jehovah  of 
hosts  prepares  for  all  nations  upon  this  mountain  a  feast  of  fat 
things,  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of  fat  things  rich  in  marrow, 
of  wines  on  the  lees  thoroughly  strained"  u  This  mountain "  is 
Zion,  the  seat  of  God's  presence,  and  the  place  of  His  church's 
worship.  The  feast  is  therefore  a  spiritual  one.  The  figure 
is  taken,  as  in  Ps.  xxii.  27  sqq.,  from  the  sacrificial  meals  con 
nected  with  the  sheldmim  (the  peace-offerings).  Shemdrim 
nfzukMkim  are  wines  which  have  been  left  to  stand  upon 
their  lees  after  the  first  fermentation  is  over,  which  have  thus 
thoroughly  fermented,  and  have  been  kept  a  long  time  (from 
shdmar,  to  keep,  spec,  to  allow  to  ferment),  and  which  are  then 
filtered  before  drinking  (Gr.  olvos  aa/atlas,  i.e.  Siv\io-fjLevo$  or 
SirjOifcbs,  from  SirjOeiv,  percolare),  hence  wine  both  strong  and 
clear.  Memuchdyim  might  mean  emedullatce  ("  with  the  mar 
row  taken  out ;"  compare,  perhaps,  Prov.  xxxi.  3),  but  this 
could  only  apply  to  the  bones,  not  to  the  fat  meat  itself ;  the 
meaning  is  therefore  "  mixed  with  marrow,"  made  marrowy, 
medullosce.  The  thing  symbolized  in  this  way  is  the  full  en 
joyment  of  blessedness  in  the  perfected  kingdom  of  God.  The 
heathen  are  not  only  humbled  so  that  they  submit  to  Jehovah, 
but  they  also  take  part  in  the  blessedness  of  His  church,  and 
are  abundantly  satisfied  with  the  good  things  of  His  house,  and 
made  to  drink  of  pleasure  as  from  a  river  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9).  The 
ring  of  the  verse  is  inimitably  pictorial.  It  is  like  joyful  music 
to  the  heavenly  feast.  The  more  flexible  form  B^rop  (from 
the  original,  ''npp  =:  nnp?p)  is  intentionally  chosen  in  the  place 
of  B^npo.  It  is  as  if  we  heard  stringed  instruments  played 
with  the  most  rapid  movement  of  the  bow. 

Although  the  feast  is  on  earth,  it  is  on  an  earth  which  has 
been  transformed  into  heaven;  for  the  party-wall  between  God 
and  the  world  has  fallen  down  :  death  is  no  more,  and  all  tears 
are  for  ever  wiped  away.  Vers.  7, 8.  "And  He  casts  away  upon 
this  mountain  the  veil  that  veiled  over  all  peoples,  and  the  covering 
that  covered  over  all  nations.  He  puts  away  death  for  ever;  and 
the  Lord  Jehovah  wipes  the  tear  from  every  face ;  and  He  removes 
the  shame  of  His  people  from  the  whole  earth :  for  Jehovah  hath 
spoken  it."  What  Jehovah  bestows  is  followed  by  what  He 
puts  away.  The  "  veil "  and  "  covering "  (massecdh,  from 
udsac  =  mdsdcy  ch.  xxii.  8,  from  sdcac,  to  weave,  twist,  aud 


440  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

twist  over  =  to  cover)  are  not  symbols  of  mourning  and  afflic 
tion,  but  of  spiritual  blindness,  like  the  "  veil "  upon  the  heart 
of  Israel  mentioned  in  2  Cor.  iii.  15.  The  pene  hallot  (cf.  Job 
xli.  5)  is  the  upper  side  of  the  veil,  the  side  turned  towards 
you,  by  which  Jehovah  takes  hold  of  the  veil  to  lift  it  up. 
The  second  hallot  stands  for  t^n  (Ges.  §  71,  Anm.  1),  and  is 
written  in  this  form,  according  to  Isaiah's  peculiar  style  (vid. 
ch.  iv.  6,  vii.  11,  viii.  6,  xxii.  13),  merely  for  the  sake  of  the 
sound,  like  the  obscurer  niplial  forms  in  ch.  xxiv.  3.  The  only 
difference  between  the  two  nouns  is  this  :  in  lot  the  leading  idea 

o 
is  that  of  the  completeness  of  the  covering,  and  in  rnassecdh 

that  of  its  thickness.     The  removing  of  the  veil,  as  well  as  of 

L 

death,  is  called  223,  which  we  find  applied  to  God  in  other 
passages,  viz.  ch.  xix.  3,  Ps.  xxi.  10,  Iv.  10.  Swallowing  up 
is  used  elsewhere  as  equivalent  to  making  a  thing  disappear,  by 
taking  it  into  one's  self ;  but  here,  as  in  many  other  instances, 
the  notion  of  receiving  into  one's  self  is  dropped,  and  nothing 
remains  but  the  idea  of  taking  away,  unless,  indeed,  abolish 
ing  of  death  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  taking  it  back  into 
what  hell  shows  to  be  the  eternal  principle  of  wrath  out  of 
which  God  called  it  forth.  God  will  abolish  death,  so  that 
there  shall  be  no  trace  left  of  its  former  sway.  Paul  gives 
a  free  rendering  of  this  passage  in  1  Cor.  xv.  54,  /careTroOrj  6 
OdvaTos  ei?  vlicos  (after  the  Aramaean  netzach,  vincere).  The 
Syriac  combines  both  ideas,  that  of  the  Targurn  and  that  of 
Paul :  absorpta  est  mors  per  victoriam  in  sempiternwn.  But  the 
abolition  of  death  is  not  in  itself  the  perfection  of  blessedness. 
There  are  sufferings  which  force  out  a  sigh,  even  after  death 
has  come  as  a  deliverance.  But  all  these  sufferings,  whose 
ultimate  ground  is  sin,  Jehovah  sweeps  away.  There  is  some 
thing  very  significant  in  the  use  of  the  expression  rTO'n  (a 
tear),  which  the  Apocalypse  renders  irav  SaKpvov  (Rev.  xxi.  4). 
Wherever  there  is  a  tear  on  any  face  whatever,  Jehovah  wipes 
it  away ;  and  if  Jehovah  wipes  away,  this  must  be  done  most 
thoroughly :  He  removes  the  cause  with  the  outward  symptom, 
the  sin  as  well  as  the  tear.  It  is  self-evident  that  this  applies 
to  the  church  triumphant.  The  world  has  been  judged,  and 
what  was  salvable  has  been  saved.  There  is  therefore  no  more 
shame  for  the  people  of  God.  Over  the  whole  earth  there  is 
no  further  place  to  be  found  for  this ;  Jehovah  has  taken  it 


CHAP.  XXV.  9-12.  441 

away.  The  earth  is  therefore  a  holy  dwelling-place  for  blessed 
men.  The  new  Jerusalem  is  Jehovah's  throne,  but  the  whole 
earth  is  Jehovah's  glorious  kingdom.  The  prophet  is  here 
looking  from  just  the  same  point  of  view  as  Paul  in  1  Cor. 
xv.  28,  and  John  in  the  last  page  of  the  Apocalypse. 

B.  Second  echo:  The  humiliation  of  Moab. — Chap.  xxv.  9-12. 

After  this  prophetic  section,  which  follows  the  first  melo 
dious  echo  like  an  interpolated  recitative,  the  song  of  praise 
begins  again  ;  but  it  is  soon  deflected  into  the  tone  of  pro 
phecy.  The  shame  of  the  people  of  God,  mentioned  in  ver.  8, 
recals  to  mind  the  special  enemies  of  the  church  in  its  imme 
diate  neighbourhood,  who  could  not  tyrannize  over  it  indeed, 
like  the  empire  of  the  world,  but  who  nevertheless  scoffed  at 
it  and  persecuted  it.  The  representative  and  emblem  of  these 
foes  are  the  proud  and  boasting  Moab  (ch.  xvi.  6 ;  Jer. 
xlviii.  29).  All  such  attempts  as  that  of  Knobel  to  turn  this 
into  history  are  but  so  much  lost  trouble.  Moab  is  a  mystic 
name.  It  is  the  prediction  of  the  humiliation  of  Moab  in  this 
spiritual  sense,  for  which  the  second  echo  opens  the  way  by 
celebrating  Jehovah's  appearing.  Jehovah  is  now  in  His 
manifested  presence  the  conqueror  of  death,  the  drier  of  tears, 
the  saviour  of  the  honour  of  His  oppressed  church.  Ver.  9. 
"  And  then  say  in  that  day,  Behold  our  God,  for  whom  we 
icaited  to  help  us:  this  is  Jehovah,  for  whom  we  waited;  let  us  be 
glad  and  rejoice  in  His  salvation."  The  undefined  but  self- 
evident  subject  to  vdmar  (u they  say")  is  the  church  of  the 
last  days.  "Behold:"  hinneh  and  zeh  belong  to  one  another, 
as  in  ch.  xxi.  9.  The  waiting  may  be  understood  as  implying 
a  retrospective  glance  at  all  the  remote  past,  even  as  far  back 
as  Jacob's  saying,  "  I  wait  for  Thy  salvation,  O  Jehovah " 
(Gen.  xlix.  18).  The  appeal,  "Let  us  be  glad,"  etc.,  has 
passed  over  into  the  grand  hodu  of  Ps.  cxviii.  24. 

In  the  land  of  promise  there  is  rejoicing,  but  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Jordan  there  is  fear  of  ruin.  Two  contrasted  pic 
tures  are  placed  here  side  by  side.  The  Jordan  is  the  same  as 
the  "great  gulf"  in  the  parable  of  the  rich  man.  Upon  Zion 
Jehovah  descends  in  mercy,  but  upon  the  highlands  of  Moab 
in  His  wrath.  Vers.  10-12.  "For  the  hand  of  Jehovah  wilt 
sink  down  upon  this  mountain}  and  Moab  is  trodden  down  there 


442  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

where  it  is,  as  straw  is  trodden  down  in  the  water  of  the  dung-pit. 
And  he  spreadeth  out  his  hands  in  the  pool  therein,  as  the  swimmer 
spreadeth  them  out  to  swim ;  but  Jehovah  forceth  down  the  pride 
of  Moab  in  spite  of  the  artifices  of  his  hands.  Yea,  thy  steep, 
towering  walls  He  bows  down,  forces  under,  and  casts  earthwards 
into  dust."  Jehovah  brings  down  His  hand  upon  Zion  (nuach, 
as  in  ch.  vii.  2,  xi.  1),  not  only  to  shelter,  but  also  to  avenge. 
Israel,  that  has  been  despised,  He  now  makes  glorious,  and  for 
contemptuous  Moab  He  prepares  a  shameful  end.  In  the  place 
where  it  now  is  (WrCT,  as  in  2  Sam.  vii.  10,  Hab.  iii.  16,  "  in 
its  own  place,"  its  own  land)  it  is  threshed  down,  stamped  or 
trodden  down,  as  straw  is  trodden  down  into  a  dung-pit  to  turn 
it  into  manure :  hiddush,  the  inf.  constr.,  with  the  vowel  sound 
u,  possibly  to  distinguish  it  from  the  inf.  absol.  hiddosh  (Ewald, 
§  240,  b).  Instead  of  tea  (as  in  ch.  xliii.  2),  the  chethib  has 
^3  (cf.  Job  ix.  30) ;  and  this  is  probably  the  more  correct 
reading,  since  madmendh,  by  itself,  means  the  dunghill,  and 
not  the  tank  of  dung  water.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  quite  pos 
sible  that  Vmo  is  intended  as  a  play  upon  the  name  Moab,  just 
as  the  word  madmendh  may  possibly  have  been  chosen  with  a 
play  upon  the  Moabitish  Madmen  (Jer.  xlviii.  2).  In  ver.  11 
Jehovah  would  be  the  subject,  if  Ukirbo  (in  the  midst  of  it) 
referred  back  to  Moab ;  but  although  the  figure  of  Jehovah 
pressing  down  the  pride  of  Moab,  by  spreading  out  His  hands 
within  it  like  a  swimmer,  might  produce  the  impression  of 
boldness  and  dignity  in  a  different  connection,  yet  here,  where 
Moab  has  just  been  described  as  forced  down  into  the  manure- 
pit,  the  comparison  of  Jehovah  to  a  swimmer  would  be  a  very 
offensive  one.  The  swimmer  is  Moab  itself,  as  Gesenius,  Hitzig, 
Knobel,  and  in  fact  the  majority  of  commentators  suppose. 
"  In  the  midst  of  it :"  b'kirbo  points  back  in  a  neuter  sense  to 
the  place  into  which  Moab  had  been  violently  plunged,  and 
which  was  so  little  adapted  for  swimming.  A  man  cannot 
swim  in  a  manure  pond  ;  but  Moab  attempts  it,  though  without 
success,  for  Jehovah  presses  down  the  pride  of  Moab  in  spite 
of  its  artifices  (EV,  as  in  Neh.  v.  18  ;  ^^"1?,  written  with  dagesh 
according  to  the  majority  of  MSS.,  from  H31N,  like  the  Arabic 
urbe,  irbe,  cleverness,  wit,  sharpness),  i.e.  the  skilful  and  cunning 
movement  of  its  hands.  Saad.  gives  it  correctly,  as  muchdtale, 
wiles  and  stratagems ;  Hitzig  also  renders  it  "  machinations," 


CHAP.  XXVI.  1,  2.  443 

i.e.  twistings  and  turnings,  which  Moab  makes  with  its  arms, 
for  the  purpose  of  keeping  itself  up  in  the  water.  What  ver. 
11  affirms  in  figure,  ver.  12  illustrates  without  any  figure.  If 
the  reading  were  1T£Mp  nioin  22'^p,  the  reference  would  be  to 
Kir-Moab  (ch.  xv.  1,  xvi.  7).  But  as  the  text  stands,  we  are 
evidently  to  understand  by  it  the  strong  and  lofty  walls  of  the 
cities  of  Moab  in  general. 

C.  Third  echo  :  Israel  brought  back,  or  raised  from  the  dead. — 

Chap.  xxvi. 

Thus  the  second  hymnic  echo  has  its  confirmation  in  a 
prophecy  against  Moab,  on  the  basis  of  which  a  third  hymnic 
echo  now  arises.  Whilst  on  the  other  side,  in  the  land  of  Moab, 
the  people  are  trodden  down,  and  its  lofty  castles  demolished, 
the  people  in  the  land  of  Judah  can  boast  of  an  impregnable 
city.  Yer.  1.  "  In  that  day  will  this  song  be  sung  in  the  land  of 
Judah :  A  city  of  defence  is  ours  ;  salvation  He  sets  for  walls 
and  bulwark"  According  to  the  punctuation,  this  ought  to  be 
rendered,  "  A  city  is  a  shelter  for  us  ;"  but  T'P  TJJ  seem  rather 
to  be  connected,  according  to  Prov.  xvii.  19,  "a  city  of  strong, 
i.e.  of  impregnable  offence  and  defence."  The  subject  of  JVPJ 
is  Jehovah.  The  future  indicates  what  He  is  constantly  doing, 
and  ever  doing  afresh ;  for  the  walls  and  bulwarks  of  Jeru 
salem  (chelj  as  in  Lam.  iL  8,  the  small  outside  wall  whicli 
encloses  all  the  fortifications)  are  not  dead  stone,  but  yeshudh, 
ever  living  and  never  exhausted  salvation  (ch.  Ix.  18).  In  just 
the  same  sense  Jehovah  is  called  elsewhere  the  wall  of  Jeru 
salem,  and  even  a  wall  of  fire  in  Zech.  ii.  9, — parallels  which 
show  that  yeshudh  is  intended  to  be  taken  as  the  accusative  of 
the  object,  and  not  as  the  accusative  of  the  predicate,  according 
to  ch.  v.  6,  Ps.  xxi.  7,  Ixxxiv.  7,  Jer.  xxii.  6  (Luzzatto). 

In  ver.  1  this  city  is  thought  of  as  still  empty :  for,  like 
paradise,  in  which  man  was  placed,  it  is  first  of  all  a  creation 
of  God  ;  and  hence  the  exclamation  in  ver.  2 :  "  Open  ye  the 
gates,  that  a  righteous  people  may  enter,  one  keeping  truthfulness" 
The  cry  is  a  heavenly  one ;  and  those  who  open,  if  indeed  we 
are  at  liberty  to  inquire  who  they  are,  must  be  angels.  We 
recal  to  mind  Ps.  xxiv.,  but  the  scene  is  a  different  one.  The 
author  of  Ps.  cxviii.  has  given  individuality  to  this  passage  in 
vers.  19,  20.  Goi  tzaddik  (a  righteous  nation)  is  the  church 


444  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  the  righteous,  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  16.  Goi  (nation)  is  used  heie, 
as  in  ver.  15  and  ch.  ix.  2  (cf.  p.  80),  with  reference  to  Israel, 
which  has  now  by  grace  become  a  righteous  nation,  and  has 
been  established  in  covenant  truth  towards  God,  who  keepeth 
truth  ('emimim,  from  'emim,  Ps.  xxxi.  24). 

The  relation  of  Israel  and  Jehovah  to  one  another  is  now 
a  permanent  one.  Ver.  3.  "  Thou  keepest  the  firmly-established 
mind  in  peace,  peace ;  for  his  confidence  rests  on  Tliee"  A  gnome 
(borrowed  in  Ps.  cxii.  7,  8),  but  in  a  lyrical  connection,  and  with 
a  distinct  reference  to  the  church  of  the  last  days.  There  is  no 
necessity  to  take  ^BD  "^  as  standing  for  ")?£  "H^D,  as  Knobel 
does.  The  state  of  mind  is  mentioned  here  as  designating  the 

O  O 

person  possessing  it,  according  to  his  inmost  nature.  "!•£  (the 
mind)  is  the  whole  attitude  and  habit  of  a  man  as  inwardly 
constituted,  i.e.  as  a  being  capable  of  thought  and  will,  spop 
is  the  same,  regarded  as  having  a  firm  hold  in  itself,  and  this 
it  has  whenever  it  has  a  firm  hold  on  God  (ch.  x.  20).  This 
is  the  mind  of  the  new  Israel,  and  Jehovah  keeps  it,  shdlom, 
shdlom  (peace,  peace ;  accusative  predicates,  used  in  the  place 
of  a  consequential  clause),  i.e.  so  that  deep  and  constant  peace 
abides  therein  (Phil.  iv.  7).  Such  a  mind  is  thus  kept  by 
Jehovah,  because  its  trust  is  placed  in  Jehovah,  rnttj  refers 
to  "W,  according  to  Ewald,  §  149,  d,  and  is  therefore  equivalent 
to  fcttH  rrm  (cf.  Ps.  vii.  10,  Iv.  20),  the  passive  participle,  like 
the  Latin  confisus,  fretus.  To  hang  on  God,  or  to  be  thoroughly 
devoted  to  Him,  secures  both  stability  and  peace. 

A  cry  goes  forth  again,  as  if  from  heaven,  exhorting  Israel 
to  continue  in  this  mind.  Ver.  4.  "  Hang  confidently  on  Je 
hovah  for  ever :  for  in  Jah,  Jehovah,  is  an  everlasting  rock" 
The  combination  Jah  Jehovah  is  only  met  with  here  and  in 
ch.  xii.  2.  It  is  the  proper  name  of  God  the  Redeemer  in 
the  most  emphatic  form.  The  Beth  essential  frequently  stands 
before  the  predicate  (Ges.  §  151,  3) ;  here,  however,  it  stands 
before  the  subject,  as  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  5,  Iv.  19.  In  Jah  Jehovah 
(munach,  tzakepli)  there  is  an  everlasting  rock,  i.e.  He  is  essen 
tially  such  a  rock  (compare  Deut.  xxxii.  4,  like  Ex.  xv.  2  for 
ch.  xii.  2). 

He  has  already  proved  Himself  to  be  such  a  rock,  on  which 
everything  breaks  that  would  attack  the  faithful  whom  He  sur 
rounds.  Vers.  53  6.  "  For  He  hath  bent  down  them  that  dwell 


CHAP.  XXVI.  5-9.  445 

on  high;  the  towering  castle,  He  tore  it  down,  tore  it  down  to 
the  earth,  cast  it  into  dust.  The  foot  treads  it  to  pieces,  feet 
of  the  poor,  steps  of  the  lowly"  Passing  beyond  the  fall  of 
Moab,  the  fall  of  the  imperial  city  is  celebrated,  to  which 
Moab  was  only  ah  annex  (ch.  xxv.  1,  2,  xxiv.  10-12).  The 
futures  are  determined  by  the  preterite ;  and  the  anadiplosis, 
which  in  other  instances  (e.g.  ch.  xxv.  1,  cf.  Ps.  cxviii.  11) 
links  together  derivatives  or  variations  of  form,  is  satisfied 
in  this  instance  with  changing  the  forms  of  the  suffix.  The 
second  thought  of  ver.  6  is  a  more  emphatic  repetition  of  the 
first :  it  is  trodden  down  ;  the  oppression  of  those  who  have 
been  hitherto  oppressed  is  trodden  down. 

The  righteous,  who  go  astray  according  to  the  judgment  of 
the  world,  thus  arrive  at  a  goal  from  which  their  way  appears 
in  a  very  different  light.  Ver.  7.  "  The  path  that  the  righteous 
man  takes  is  smoothness ;  Thou  makest  the  course  of  the  righteous 
smooth."  "ij?J  is  an  accusative  predicate :  Thou  rollest  it,  i.e. 
Thou  smoothest  it,  so  that  it  is  just  as  if  it  had  been  bevelled 
with  a  rule,  and  leads  quite  straight  (on  the  derivative  peles,  a 
level,  see  at  Job  xxxvii.  16)  and  without  interruption  to  the 
desired  end.  The  song  has  here  fallen  into  the  language  of  a 
mashal  of  Solomon  (vid.  Prov.  iv.  26,  v.  6,  21).  It  pauses  here 
to  reflect,  as  if  at  the  close  of  a  strophe. 

It  then  commences  again  in  a  lyrical  tone  in  vers.  8  and  9  : 
"  We  have  also  waited  for  Thee,  that  Thou  shouldest  come  in  the 
path  of  Thy  judgments ;  the  desire  of  the  soul  went  after  Thy 
name,  and  after  Thy  remembrance.  With  my  soul  I  desired 
Thee  in  the  night ;  yea,  with  my  spirit  deep  within  me,  I  longed 
to  have  Thee  here :  for  when  Thy  judgments  strike  the  earth,  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  learn  righteousness"  In  the  opinion  of 
Hitzig,  Knobel,  Drechsler,  and  others,  the  prophet  here  comes 
back  from  the  ideal  to  the  actual  present.  But  this  is  not  the 
case.  The  church  of  the  last  days,  looking  back  to  the  past, 
declares  with  what  longing  it  has  waited  for  that  manifesta 
tion  of  the  righteousness  of  God  which  has  now  taken  place. 
"  The  path  of  Thy  judgments  : "  'orach  mishpdtekd  belongs 
to  the  te ;  venientem  (or  venturwn)  being  understood.  The 
clause  follows  the  poetical  construction  nitf  Nin,  after  the  ana 
logy  of  "sp;?.  "n??-  They  longed  for  God  to  come  as  a  Redeemer 
in  the  way  of  His  judgments.  The  "  name"  and  "  remem- 


446  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

brance"  are  the  nature  of  God,  that  has  become  nameable 
and  memorable  through  self-assertion  and  self-manifestation 
(Ex.  iii.  15).  They  desired  that  God  should  present  Himself 
again  to  the  consciousness  and  memory  of  man,  by  such  an  act 
as  should  break  through  His  concealment  and  silence.  The 
prophet  says  this  more  especially  of  himself ;  for  he  feels  him 
self  "  in  spirit"  to  be  a  member  of  the  perfected  church.  "  My 
soul"  and  "  my  spirit"  are  accusatives  giving  a  more  precise 
definition  (Ewald,  §  281,  e).  "  The  night"  is  the  night  of 
affliction,  as  in  ch.  xxi.  11.  In  connection  with  this,  the  word 
shicher  (lit.  to  dig  for  a  thing,  to  seek  it  eagerly)  is  employed 
here,  with  a  play  upon  shachar.  The  dawning  of  the  morning 
after  a  night  of  suffering  was  the  object  for  which  he  longed, 
naphshi  (my  soul),  i.e.  with  his  entire  personality  (Psychol.  p. 
202),  and  ruchi  tfkirbi  (my  spirit  within  me),  i.e.  with  the  spirit 
of  his  mind,  irvevjjia  TOV  1/009  (Psychol.  p.  183).  And  why  ? 
Because,  as  often  as  God  manifested  Himself  in  judgment, 
this  brought  men  to  the  knowledge,  and  possibly  also  to  the 
recognition,  of  what  was  right  (cf.  Ps.  ix.  17).  "  Will  learn:" 
Idmdu  is  a  prcet.  gnomicum,  giving  the  result  of  much  practical 
experience. 

Here  again  the  shir  has  struck  the  note  of  a  mdshdl.  And 
proceeding  in  this  tone,  it  pauses  here  once  more  to  reflect  as 
at  the  close  of  a  strophe.  Ver.  10.  "  If  favour  is  shown  to  the 
wicked  man,  he  does  not  learn  righteousness ;  in  the  most  upright 
land  he  acts  wickedly,  and  has  no  eye  for  the  majesty  of  Jehovah." 
WF\  I^  is  a  hypothetical  clause,  which  is  left  to  be  indicated  by 
the  emphasis,  like  Neh.  i.  8  (Ewald,  §  357,  b) :  granting  that 
favour  (chen  =  "  goodness,"  Rom.  ii.  4)  is  constantly  shown  to 
the  wicked  man.  "  The  most  upright  land:"  'eretz  necochoth 
is  a  land  in  which  everything  is  right,  and  all  goes  honourably. 
A  worthless  man,  supposing  he  were  in  such  a  land,  would  still 
act  knavishly ;  and  of  the  majesty  of  Jehovah,  showing  itself 
in  passing  punishments  of  sin,  though  still  sparing  him,  he 
would  have  no  perception  whatever.  The  prophet  utters  this 
with  a  painful  feeling  of  indignation  ;  the  word  bal  indicating 
denial  with  emotion. 

The  situation  still  remains  essentially  the  same  in  vers. 
11-13:  "Jehovah,  Thy  hand  has  been  exalted,  but  they  did  not 
see :  they  will  see  the  zeal  for  a  people,  being  put  to  shame ;  yea, 


CHAP.  XXVI.  11-13.  447 

fire  will  devour  Thine  adversaries.  JehovaJi,  Thou  wilt  establish 
peace  for  us :  for  Thou  hast  accomplished  all  our  work  for  us. 
Jehovah  our  God,  lords  besides  Thee  had  enslaved  us ;  but 
through  Thee  we  praise  Thy  name"  Here  are  three  forms  of 
address  beginning  with  Jehovah,  and  rising  in  the  third  to 
"  Jehovah  our  God."  The  standpoint  of  the  first  is  the  time 
before  the  judgment ;  the  standpoint  of  the  other  two  is  in  the 
midst  of  the  redemption  that  has  been  effected  through  judg 
ment.  Hence  what  the  prophet  states  in  ver.  11  will  be  a 
general  truth,  which  has  now  received  its  most  splendid  con 
firmation  through  the  overthrow  of  the  empire.  The  complaint 
of  the  prophet  here  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  liii.  1.  We  may  also 
compare  Ex.  xiv.  8,  not  Ps.  x.  5;  (rum  does  not  mean  to 
remain  beyond  and  unrecognised,  but  to  prove  one's  self  to  be 
high.)  The  hand  of  Jehovah  had  already  shown  itself  to  be 
highly  exalted  (rdmdh,  3  pr.),  by  manifesting  itself  in  the 
history  of  the  nations,  by  sheltering  His  congregation,  and 
preparing  the  way  for  its  exaltation  in  the  midst  of  its  humi 
liation  ;  but  as  they  had  no  eye  for  this  hand,  they  would  be 
made  to  feel  it  upon  themselves  as  the  avenger  of  His  nation. 
The  "  zeal  for  a  people,"  when  reduced  from  this  ideal  expres 
sion  into  a  concrete  one,  is  the  zeal  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  (ch.  ix. 
6,  xxxvii.  32)  for  His  own  nation  (as  in  ch.  xlix.  8).  Kinath 
'dm  (zeal  for  a  people)  is  the  object  to  yecliezu  (they  shall 
see)  ;  vyeboshu  (and  be  put  to  shame)  being  a  parenthetical 
interpolation,  which  does  not  interfere  with  this  connection. 
"  Thou  wilt  establish  peace"  (tishpot  shdlom,  ver.  12)  expresses 
the  certain  hope  of  a  future  and  imperturbable  state  of  peace 
(pones,  stabilies) ;  and  this  hope  is  founded  upon  the  fact,  that 
all  which  the  church  has  hitherto  accomplished  (ma'aseh,  the 
acting  out  of  its  calling,  as  in  Ps.  xc.  17,  see  at  ch.  v.  12)  has 
not  been  its  own  work,  but  the  work  of  Jehovah  for  it.  And 
the  deliverance  just  obtained  from  the  yoke  of  the  imperial 
power  is  the  work  of  Jehovah  also.  The  meaning  of  the 
complaint,  "  other  lords  beside  Thee  had  enslaved  us,"  is  just 
the  same  as  that  in  ch.  Ixiii.  18  ;  but  there  the  standpoint  is  in 
the  midst  of  the  thing  complained  of,  whereas  here  it  is  beyond 
it.  Jehovah  is  Israel's  King.  He  seemed  indeed  to  have  lost 
His  rule,  since  the  masters  of  the  world  had  done  as  they  liked 
with  Israel.  But  it  was  very  different  now,  and  it  was  onty 


448  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

through  Jehovah  ("  through  Thee")  that  Israel  could  now  once 
more  gratefully  celebrate  Jehovah's  name. 

The  tyrants  who  usurped  the  rule  over  Israel  have  now 
utterly  disappeared.  Ver.  14.  "  Dead  men  live  not  again,  shades 
do  not  rise  again :  so  hast  Thou  visited  and  destroyed  them,  and 
caused  all  their  memory  to  perish"  The  meaning  is  not  that 
Jehovah  had  put  them  to  death  because  there  was  no  resur 
rection  at  all  after  death ;  for,  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  the 
prophet  was  acquainted  with  such  a  resurrection.  In  methim 
(dead  men)  and  rephaim  (shades)  he  had  directly  in  mind  the 
oppressors  of  Israel,  who  had  been  thrust  down  into  the  region 
of  the  shades  (like  the  king  of  Babylon  in  ch.  xiv.),  so  that 
there  was  no  possibility  of  their  being  raised  up  or  setting 
themselves  up  again.  The  15?  is  not  argumentative  (which 
would  be  very  freezing  in  this  highly  lyrical  connection),  but 
introduces  what  must  have  occurred  eo  ipso  when  the  other 
had  taken  place  (it  corresponds  to  the  Greek  apa,  and  is  used 
here  in  the  same  way  as  in  ch.  Ixi.  7,  Jer.  v.  2,  ii.  33,  Zech. 
xi.  7,  Job  xxxiv.  25,  xlii.  3).  They  had  fallen  irrevocably 
into  Sheol  (Ps.  xlix.  15),  and  consequently  God  had  swept 
them  away,  so  that  not  even  their  name  was  perpetuated. 

Israel,  when  it  has  such  cause  as  this  for  praising  Jehovah, 
will  have  become  a  numerous  people  once  more.  Ver.  15. 
"  Thou  hast  added  to  the  nation,  0  Jehovah,  hast  added  to  the 
nation;  glorified  Thyself;  moved  out  all  the  borders  of  the  land." 
The  verb  ^DJ,  which  is  construed  in  other  cases  with  ?V,  ?$, 
here  with  <>,  carries  its  object  within  itself :  to  add,  i.e.  to  give 
an  increase.  The  allusion  is  to  the  same  thing  as  that  which 
caused  the  prophet  to  rejoice  in  ch.  ix.  2  (compare  ch.  xlix. 
19,  20,  liv.  1  sqq.,  Mic.  ii.  12,  iv.  7,  Obad.  19,  20,  and 
many  other  passages;  and  for  rich^ktd,  more  especially  Mic. 
vii.  11).  Just  as  ver.  13  recals  the  bondage  in  Egypt,  and 
ver.  14  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh  in  the  Ked  Sea,  so  ver.  16 
recals  the  numerical  strength  of  the  nation,  and  the  extent 
of  the  country  in  the  time  of  David  and  Solomon.  At  the 
same  time,  we  cannot  say  that  the  prophet  intended  to  recai 
these  to  mind.  The  antitypical  relation,  in  which  the  last 
times  stand  to  these  events  and  circumstances  of  the  past,  is 
a  fact  in  sacred  history,  though  not  particularly  referred  to 
here. 


CHAP.  XXVI.  16-18.  449 

The  Uphilldh  now  returns  to  the  retrospective  glance  already 
cast  in  vers.  8,  9  into  that  night  of  affliction,  which  preceded  the 
redemption  that  had  come.  Vers.  16-18.  "Jehovah,  in  trouble 
they  missed  Thee,  poured  out  light  supplication  luhen  Thy  chas 
tisement  came  upon  them.  As  a  woman  ivith  child,  ivho  draws 
near  to  her  delivery,  ivrithes  and  cries  out  in  her  pangs,  so  were 
we  in  Thy  sight,  0  Jehovah.  We  went  with  child,  we  writhed; 
it  was  as  if  we  brought  forth  wind.  We  brought  no  deliverance 
to  the  land,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  ivorld  did  not  come  to  the 
light"  The  substantive  circumstantial  clause  in  the  parallel 
line,  to?  T'iDlft,  castigatione  tua  eos  affligente  (?  as  in  ver.  9), 
corresponds  to  "to?3;  and  IPTO  pipv,  a  preterite  (ptt?=p^,  Job 
xxviii.  2,  xxix.  6,  to  be  poured  out  and  melt  away)  with  Nun 
paragogic  (which  is  only  met  with  again  in  Deut.  viii.  3,  16, 
the  yekoshun  in  Isa.  xxix.  21  being,  according  to  the  syntax, 
the  future  of  kosh),  answers  to  pd/cad,  which  is  used  here  as  in 
ch.  xxxiv.  16,  1  Sam.  xx.  6,  xxv.  15,  in  the  sense  of  lustrando 
desiderare.  Lachash  is  a  quiet,  whispering  prayer  (like  the 
whispering  of  forms  of  incantation  in  ch.  iii.  3)  ;  sorrow  ren 
ders  speechless  in  the  long  run ;  and  a  consciousness  of  sin 
crushes  so  completely,  that  a  man  does  not  dare  to  address  God 
aloud  (ch.  xxix.  4).  Pregnancy  and  pangs  are  symbols  of  a 
state  of  expectation  strained  to  the  utmost,  the  object  of  which 
appears  all  the  closer  the  more  the  pains  increase.  Often,  says 
the  perfected  church,  as  it  looks  back  upon  its  past  history, 
often  did  we  regard  the  coming  of  salvation  as  certain ;  but 
again  and  again  were  our  hopes  deceived.  The  first  103  is 
equivalent  to  3,  "  as  a  woman  with  child,"  etc.  (see  at  ch. 
viii.  23)  ;  the  second  is  equivalent  to  "NW3,  "  as  it  were,  we 
brought  forth  wind."  This  is  not  an  inverted  expression,  sig 
nifying  we  brought  forth  as  it  were  wind;  but  iD3  governs 
the  whole  sentence  in  the  sense  of  "  (it  was)  as  if"  The  issue 
of  all  their  painful  toil  was  like  the  result  of  a  false  pregnancy 
(empneumatosis),  a  delivery  of  wind.  This  state  of  things  also 
proceeded  from  Jehovah,  as  the  expression  "  before  Thee " 
implies.  It  was  a  consequence  of  the  sins  of  Israel,  and  of  a 
continued  want  of  true  susceptibility  to  the  blessings  of  salva 
tion.  Side  by  side  with  their  disappointed  hope,  ver.  18  places 
the  ineffectual  character  of  their  own  efforts.  Israel's  own 
doings, — no,  tLy  could  never  make  the  land  into 

VOL.  I.  2  F 


450  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

bring  it  into  a  state  of  complete  salvation)  ;  and  (so  might  tli€ 
final  clause  be  understood)  they  waited  in  vain  for  the  judg 
ment  of  Jehovah  upon  the  sinful  world  that  was  at  enmity 
against  them,  or  they  made  ineffectual  efforts  to  overcome  it. 
This  explanation  is  favoured  by  the  fact,  that  throughout  the 
whole  of  this  cycle  of  prophecies  yoshbe  tebel  does  not  mean 
the  inhabitants  of  the  holy  land,  but  of  the  globe  at  large  in 
the  sense  of  "the  world"  (ver.  21,  ch.  xxiv.  5.  6).  A«;ain, 

.  .      \  /         /  &  7 

the  relation  of  v3*  to  the  ^BR  in  ver.  19,  and  the  figure  pre 
viously  employed  of  the  pains  of  child-birth,  speak  most 
strongly  in  favour  of  the  conclusion,  that  ndphal  is  here  used 
for  the  falling  of  the  fruit  of  the  womb  (cf.  Wisd.  vii.  3,  //. 
xix.  110,  xaraTreaelv  and  ireaelv).  And  yoshbe  tebel  (the  in 
habitants  of  the  world)  fits  in  with  this  sense  (viz.  that  the 
expected  increase  of  the  population  never  came),  from  the 
fact  that  in  this  instance  the  reference  is  not  to  the  inhabitants 
of  the  earth ;  but  the  words  signify  inhabitants  generally,  or, 
as  we  should  say,  young,  new-born  "  mortals."  The  punish 
ment  of  the  land  under  the  weight  of  the  empire  still  con 
tinued,  and  a  new  generation  did  not  come  to  the  light  of  day 
to  populate  the  desolate  land  (cf.  Psychol.  p.  414). 

But  now  all  this  had  taken  place.  Instead  of  singing  what 
has  occurred,  the  tephillah  places  itself  in  the  midst  of  the 
occurrence  itself.  Ver.  19.  "  Thy  dead  will  live,  my  corpses 
rise  again.  Awake  and  rejoice,  ye  that  lie  in  the  dust!  For  thy 
dew  is  dew  of  the  lights,  and  the  earth  will  bring  shades  to  the 
day"  The  prophet  speaks  thus  out  of  the  heart  of  the  church 
of  the  last  times.  In  consequence  of  the  long-continued  suffer 
ings  and  chastisements,  it  has  been  melted  down  to  a  very  small 
remnant;  and  many  of  those  whom  it  could  once  truly  reckon 
as  its  own,  are  now  lying  as  corpses  in  the  dust  of  the  grave. 
The  church,  filled  with  hope  which  will  not  be  put  to  shame, 
now  calls  to  itself,  "  Thy  dead  will  live"  (TOP  ^C1!?  reviviscent, 
as  in  D^ritsn  Jvnr^  the  resurrection  of  the  dead),  and  consoles 
itself  with  the  working  of  divine  grace  and  power,  which  is 
even  now  setting  itself  in  motion  :  "  my  corpses  will  rise  again  " 
(pop?  ™$>  nebelah :  a  word  without  a  plural,  but  frequently 
used  in  a  plural  sense,  as  in  ch.  v.  2.5,  and  therefore  connected 
with  pop*,  equivalent  to  fijppn :  here  before  a  light  suffix,  with 
the  £  retained,  which  is  lost  in  other  cases).  It  also  cries  out, 


CHAP.  XXVI.  19.  451 

in  full  assurance  of  the  purpose  of  God,  the  believing  word 
of  command  over  the  burial-ground  of  the  dead,  "  Wake  up 
and  rejoice,  ye  that  sleep  in  the  dust,"  and  then  justifies  to 
itself  this  believing  word  of  command  by  looking  up  to  Jehovah, 
and  confessing,  "  Thy  dew  is  dew  born  out  of  (supernatural) 
lights,"  as  the  dew  of  nature  is  born  out  of  the  womb  of  the 
morning  dawn  (Ps.  ex.  3).  Others  render  it  "  dew  upon 
herbs,"  taking  nrriK  as  equivalent  to  ^P*^,  as  in  2  Kings  iv.  39. 
We  take  it  as  from  rnitf  (Ps.  cxxxix.  12),  in  the  sense  of 
D^nn  nis.  The  plural  implies  that  there  is  a  perfect  fulness 
of  the  lights  of  life  in  God  ("  the  Father  of  lights,"  Jas.  i.  17). 
Out  of  these  there  is  born  the  gentle  dew,  which  gives  new  life 
to  the  bones  that  have  been  sown  in  the  ground  (Ps.  cxli.  7), — 
a  figure  full  of  mystery,  which  is  quite  needlessly  wiped  away 
by  Hofmann's  explanation,  viz.  that  it  is  equivalent  to  tal 
horothj  "  dew  of  thorough  saturating."  Luther,  who  renders 
it,  "  Thy  dew  is  a  dew  of  the  green  field,"  stands  alone  among 
the  earlier  translators.  The  Targum,  Syriac,  Vulgate,  and 
Saad.  all  render  it,  "Thy  dew  is  light  dew;"  and  with  the 
uniform  connection  in  which  the  Scriptures  place  'or  (light) 
and  cliayylm  (life),  this  rendering  is  natural  enough.  We  now 
translate  still  further,  "  and  the  earth  (yadretz,  as  in  ch.  Ixv.  17, 
Prov.  xxv.  3,  whereas  pKI  is  almost  always  in  the  construct 
state)  will  bring  shades  to  the  day"  (hippil,  as  a  causative  of 
ndphal,  ver.  18),  i.e.  bring  forth  again  the  dead  that  have 
sunken  into  it  (like  Luther's  rendering,  "  and  the  land  will 
cast  out  the  dead" — the  rendering  of  our  English  version  also : 
TR.).  The  dew  from  the  glory  of  God  falls  like  a  heavenly 
seed  into  the  bosom  of  the  earth;  and  in  consequence  of  this,  the 
earth  gives  out  from  itself  the  shades  which  have  hitherto  been 
held  fast  beneath  the  ground,  so  that  they  appear  alive  again 
on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Those  who  understand  ver.  18  as 
relating  to  the  earnestly  descried  overthrow  of  the  lords  of  the 
world,  interpret  this  passage  accordingly,  as  meaning  either, 
"  and  thou  castest  down  shades  to  the  earth"  (pK,  ace.  loci, 
=  pK"iy,  ver.  5,  pfc6,  ch.  xxv.  12),  or,  "and  the  earth  causeth 
shades  to  fall,"  i.e.  to  fall  into  itself.  This  is  Kosenmiiller  s 
explanation  (terra  per  prosopoposiam,  ut  supra  xxiv.  20,  inducta, 
deturbare  in  or  cum  sistitur  impios,  eo  ipso  manes  eos  reddens). 
But  although  *-ephaim,  when  so  interpreted,  agrees  with  ver. 


452  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

14,  where  this  name  is  given  to  the  oppressors  of  the  people  of 
God,  it  would  be  out  of  place  here,  where  it  would  necessarily 
mean,  "  those  who  are  just  becoming  shades."  But,  what  is  of 
greater  importance  still,  if  this  concluding  clause  is  understood 
as  applying  to  the  overthrow  of  the  oppressors,  it  does  not  give 
any  natural  sequence  to  the  words,  "  dew  of  the  lights  is  thy 
dew ;"  whereas,  according  to  our  interpretation,  it  seals  the 
•faith,  hope,  and  prayer  of  the  church  for  what  is  to  follow. 
When  compared  with  the  New  Testament  Apocalypse,  it  is 
66 the  first  resurrection"  which  is  here  predicted  by  Isaiah. 
The  confessors  of  Jehovah  are  awakened  in  their  graves  to 
form  one  glorious  church  with  those  who  are  still  in  the  body. 
In  the  case  of  Ezekiel  also  (Ez.  xxxvii.  1-14),  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead  which  he  beholds  is  something  more  than  a  figurative 
representation  of  the  people  that  were  buried  in  captivity.  The 
church  of  the  period  of  glory  on  this  side  is  a  church  of  those 
who  have  been  miraculously  saved  and  wakened  up  from  the 
dead.  Their  persecutors  lie  at  their  feet  beneath  the  ground. 

The  judgment  upon  them  is  not  mentioned,  indeed,  till 
after  the  completion  of  the  church  through  those  of  its  mem 
bers  that  have  died,  although  it  must  have  actually  preceded 
the  latter.  Thus  the  standpoint  of  the  prophecy  is  incessantly 
oscillating  backwards  and  forwards  in  these  four  chapters 
(xxiv.-xxvii.).  This  explains  the  exhortation  in  the  next  verses, 
and  the  reason  assigned.  Vers.  20,  21.  "  Go  in,  my  people, 
into  thy  chambers,  and  shut  the  door  behind  thee ;  hide  thyself  a, 
little  moment,  till  the  judgment  of  wrath  passes  by.  For,  behold, 
Jehovah  goeth  out  from  His  place  to  visit  the  iniquity  of  the  in 
habitants  of  the  earth  upon  them ;  and  the  earth  discloses  the  blood 
that  it  has  sucked  up,  and  no  more  covers  her  slain"  The  shir 
is  now  at  an  end.  The  prophet  speaks  once  more  as  a  prophet. 
Whilst  the  judgment  of  wrath  (zdam)  is  going  forth,  and  until 
it  shall  have  passed  by  (on  the  fut.  exact.,  see  ch.  x.  12,  iv.  4  ; 
and  on  the  fact  itself,  acharith  hazzaam,  Dan.  viii.  19),  the 
people  of  God  are  to  continue  in  the  solitude  of  prayer  (Matt, 
vi.  6,  cf.  Ps.  xxvii.  5,  xxxi.  21).  They  can  do  so,  for  the 
judgment  by  which  they  get  rid  of  their  foes  is  the  act  of 
Jehovah  alone  ;  and  they  are  to  do  so  because  only  he  who  is 
hidden  in  God  by  prayer  can  escape  the  wrath.  The  judgment 
only  lasts  a  little  while  (ch.  x.  24,  25,  liv.  7,  8,  cf.  Ps.  xxx.  6), 


CHAP.  XXVII.  1.  453 

a  short  time  which  is  shortened  for  the  elect's  sake.  Instead 
of  the  dual  V$H  (as  the  house-door  is  called,  though  not  the 
chamber-door),  the  word  is  pointed  ^riTn  (from  n^j  =  rta),  just 
as  the  prophet  intentionally  chooses  the  feminine  "on  instead 
of  nnn.  The  nation  is  thought  of  as  feminine  in  this  particular 
instance  (cf.  ch.  liv.  7,  8) ;  because  Jehovah,  its  avenger  and 
protector,  is  acting  on  its  behalf,  whilst  in  a  purely  passive 
attitude  it  hides  itself  in  Him.  Just  as  Noah,  behind  whom 
Jehovah  shut  the  door  of  the  ark,  was  hidden  in  the  ark  whilst 
the  water-floods  of  the  judgment  poured  down  without,  so 
should  the  church  be  shut  off  from  the  world  without  in  its  life 
of  prayer,  because  a  judgment  of  Jehovah  was  at  hand.  "  He 
goeth  out  of  His  place "  (verbatim  the  same  as  in  Mic.  i.  3), 
i.e.  not  out  of  His  own  divine  life,  as  it  rests  within  Himself, 
but  out  of  the  sphere  of  the  manifested  glory  in  which  He 
presents  Himself  to  the  spirits.  He  goeth  forth  thence  equipped 
for  judgment,  to  visit  the  iniquity  of  the  inhabitant  of  the  earth 
upon  him  (the  singular  used  collectively),  and  more  especially 
their  blood-guiltiness.  The  prohibition  of  murder  was  given  to 
the  sons  of  Noah,  and  therefore  was  one  of  the  stipulations  of 
"the  covenant  of  old"  (ch.  xxiv.  5).  The  earth  supplies  two 
witnesses  :  (1)  the  innocent  blood  which  has  been  violently  shed 
(on  ddmim,  see  ch.  i.  15),  which  she  has  had  to  suck  up,  and 
which  is  now  exposed,  and  cries  for  vengeance ;  and  (2)  the 
persons  themselves  who  have  been  murdered  in  their  innocence, 
and  who  are  slumbering  within  her.  Streams  of  blood  come 
to  light  and  bear  testimony,  and  martyrs  arise  to  bear  witness 
against  their  murderers. 

o 

Upon  whom  the  judgment  of  Jehovah  particularly  falls, 
is  described  in  figurative  and  enigmatical  words  in  ch.  xxvii. 
1 :  "  In  that  day  will  Jehovah  visit  with  His  sword,  with  the 
hard,  and  the  great,  and  the  strong,  leviathan  the  fleet  serpent, 
and  leviathan  the  twisted  serpent,  and  slay  the  dragon  in  the 
sear  No  doubt  the  three  animals  are  emblems  of  three  im 
perial  powers.  The  assertion  that  there  are  no  more  three 
animals  than  there  are  three  swords,  is  a  mistake.  If  the 
preposition  were  repeated  in  the  case  of  the  swords,  as  it  is 
in  the  case  of  the  animals,  we  should  have  to  understand  the 
passage  as  referring  to  three  swords  as  well  as  three  animals. 
But  this  is  no*  the  case.  We  have  therefore  to  inquire  what 


454  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  three  world-powers  are ;  and  this  question  is  quite  a  justi 
fiable  one :  for  we  have  no  reason  to  rest  satisfied  with  the 
opinion  held  by  Drechsler,  that  the  three  emblems  are  symbols 
of  ungodly  powers  in  general,  of  every  kind  and  every  sphere, 
unless  the  question  itself  is  absolutely  unanswerable.  Now 
the  tannin  (the  stretched-out  aquatic  animal)  is  the  stand 
ing  emblem  of  Egypt  (ch.  li.  9 ;  Ps.  Ixxiv.  13 ;  Ezek.  xxix. 
3,  xxxii.  2).  And  as  the  Euphrates-land  and  Asshur  are 
mentioned  in  vers.  12,  13  in  connection  with  Egypt,  it  is 
immediately  probable  that  the  other  two  animals  signify  the 
kingdom  of  the  Tigris,  i.e.  Assyria,  with  its  capital  Nineveh 
which  stood  on  the  Tigris,  and  the  kingdom  of  the  Euphrates, 
i.e.  Chaldea,  with  its  capital  Babylon  which  stood  upon  the 
Euphrates.  Moreover,  the  application  of  the  same  epithet 
Leviathan  to  both  the  kingdoms,  with  simply  a  difference  in 
the  attributes,  is  suggestive  of  two  kingdoms  that  were  related 
to  each  other.  We  must  not  be  misled  by  the  fact  that  ndchdsh 
bdriach  is  a  constellation  in  Job  xxvi.  13 ;  we  have  no  bam- 
marom  (on  high)  here,  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  21,  and  therefore  are 
evidently  still  upon  the  surface  of  the  globe.  The  epithet 
employed  was  primarily  suggested  by  the  situation  of  the  two 
cities.  Nineveh  was  on  the  Tigris,  which  was  called  Chiddekel,1 
on  account  of  the  swiftness  of  its  course  and  its  terrible  rapids ; 
hence  Asshur  is  compared  to  a  serpent  moving  along  in  a  rapid, 
impetuous,  long,  extended  course  (bdriach,  as  in  ch.  xliii.  14, 
is  equivalent  to  barriacJi,  a  noun  of  the  same  form  as  Tpy,  and 
a  different  word  from  beriach,  a  bolt,  ch.  xv.  5).  Babylon,  on 
the  other  hand,  is  compared  to  a  twisted  serpent,  i.e.  to  one 
twisting  about  in  serpentine  curves,  because  it  was  situated  on 
the  very  winding  Euphrates,  the  windings  of  which  are  espe 
cially  labyrinthine  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Babylon.  The 
river  did  indeed  flow  straight  away  at  one  time,  but  by  artificial 
cuttings  it  was  made  so  serpentine  that  it  passed  the  same  place, 
viz.  Arderikka,  no  less  than  three  times  ;  and  according  to  the 

1  In  point  of  fact,  not  only  does  yj  signify  both  an  arrow  and  the 
Tigris,  according  to  the  Neo-Persian  lexicons,  but  the  old  explanation 
44  Tigris,  swift  as  a  dart,  since  the  Medes  call  the  Tigris  toxeuma "  (the 
shot  or  shot  arrow  ;  Eustath.  on  Dion  Perieg.  v.  984),  is  confirmed  by  the 
Zendic  tighri,  which  has  been  proved  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of  arrow  of 
shot  (Yesht  8,  6,  yatha  tighris  mainyava$ao'),  i.e.  like  a  heavenly  arrow. 


CHAP.  XXVII.  2-5.  455 

declaration  of  Herodotus  in  his  own  time,  when  any  one  sailed 
down  the  river,  he  had  to  pass  it  three  times  in  three  days 
(Ritter,  x.  p.  8).  The  real  meaning  of  the  emblem,  however,  is 
no  more  exhausted  by  this  allusion  to  the  geographical  situation, 
than  it  was  in  the  case  of  "the  desert  of  the  sea"  (ch.  xxi.  1). 
The  attribute  of  winding  is  also  a  symbol  of  the  longer  duration 
of  one  empire  than  of  the  other,  and  of  the  more  numerous 
complications  into  which  Israel  would  be  drawn  by  it.  The 
world-powrer  on  the  Tigris  fires  with  rapidity  upon  Israel,  so 
that  the  fate  of  Israel  is  very  quickly  decided.  But  the  world- 
power  on  the  Euphrates  advances  by  many  windings,  and  en 
circles  its  prey  in  many  folds.  And  these  windings  are  all  the 
more  numerous,  because  in  the  prophet's  view  Babylon  is  the 
iinal  form  assumed  by  the  empire  of  the  world,  and  therefore 
Israel  remains  encircled  by  this  serpent  until  the  last  days. 
The  judgment  upon  Asshur,  Babylon,  and  Egypt,  is  the  judg 
ment  upon  the  world-powers  universally. 

I).   The  fourth  echo  :   The  fruit-bearing  vineyard  under  the 
protection  of  Jehovah. — Chap,  xxvii.  2-6. 

The  prophecy  here  passes  for  the  fourth  time  into  the  tone 
of  a  song.  The  church  recognises  itself  in  the  judgments  upon 
the  world,  as  Jehovah's  well-protected  and  beloved  vineyard. 
Vers.  2-5.  "  In  that  day 

A  merry  vineyard — sing  it  ! 

J,  Jehovah,  its  keeper, 

Every  moment  1  water  it. 

That  nothing  may  come  near  it, 

I  watch  it  night  and  day. 

Wrath  have  I  none  ; 

0,  had  I  thorns,  thistles  before  me  I 

I  would  make  up  to  them  in  battle, 

JBurn  them  all  together. 

Men  would  then  have  to  grasp  at  my  protection. 

Make  peace  with  me, 

Make  peace  witli  me" 

Instead  of  introducing  the  song  with,  "  In  that  day  shall  this 
song  be  sung,"  or  some  such  introduction,  the  prophecy  passes 
at  once  into  t^e  song.  It  consists  in  a  descending  scale  of 


(56  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

strophes,  consisting  of  one  of  five  lines  (vers.  2,  3),  one  of  four 
lines  (ver.  4),  and  one  of  three  lines  (ver.  5).  The  thema  is 
placed  at  the  beginning,  in  the  absolute  case:  cerem  chemer. 
This  may  signify  a  vineyard  of  fiery  or  good  wine  (compare 
cerem  zaith  in  Judg.  xv.  5) ;  but  it  is  possible  that  the  reading 
should  be  cerem  cliemed,  as  in  ch.  xxxii.  12,  as  the  LXX., 
Targum,  and  most  modern  commentators  assume.  ^  W  sig 
nifies,  according  to  Num.  xxi.  17,  Ps.  cxlvii.  7  (cf.  Ex.  xxxii.  18, 
Ps.  Ixxxviii.  1),  to  strike  up  a  song  with  reference  to  anything, 
— an  onomatopoetic  word  (different  from  TO?  to  begin,  literally 
to  meet,  see  p.  156).  Cerem  (the  vineyard)  is  a  feminine  here, 
like  1^3,  the  well,  in  the  song  of  the  well  in  Num.  xxi.  17,  18, 
and  just  as  Israel,  of  which  the  vineyard  here  is  a  symbol 
(ch.  iii.  14,  v.  1  sqq.),  is  sometimes  regarded  as  masculine,  and 
at  other  times  as  feminine  (ch.  xxvi.  20).  Jehovah  Himself 
is  introduced  as  speaking.  He  is  the  keeper  of  the  vineyard, 
who  waters  it  every  moment  when  there  is  any  necessity 
(lirgaim,  like  Idbb'kdrim  in  ch.  xxxiii.  2,  every  morning),  and 
watches  it  by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  that  nothing  may  visit  it. 
'^  ^i??  (to  visit  upon)  is  used  in  other  cases  to  signify  the 
infliction  of  punishment;  here  it  denotes  visitation  by  some 
kind  of  misfortune.  Because  it  was  the  church  purified  through 
afflictions,  the  feelings  of  Jehovah  towards  it  were  pure  love, 
without  any  admixture  of  the  burning  of  anger  (cliemdh). 
This  is  reserved  for  all  who  dare  to  do  injury  to  this  vineyard. 
Jehovah  challenges  these,  and  says,  Who  is  there,  then,  that 
gives  me  thorns,  thistles  !  (^p.JT  =  7  jrp,  as  in  Jer.  ix.  1,  cf.  Josh. 
xv.  19.)  The  asyndeton,  instead  of  TPW\  ">^^,  which  is  cus 
tomary  elsewhere,  corresponds  to  the  excitement  of  the  exalted 
defender.  If  He  had  thorns,  thistles  before  Him,  He  would 
break  forth  upon  them  in  war,  i.e.  make  war  upon  them  (bah, 
neuter,  upon  such  a  mass  of  bush),  and  set  it  all  on  fire 
(rpyn  =  rpsrn).  The  arrangement  of  the  strophes  requires  that 
we  should  connect  niprfezi  with  nygas  (var.  WSX),  though 
this  is  at  variance  with  the  accents.  We  may  see  very  clearly, 
even  by  the  choice  of  the  expression  lammilchdmdk,  that  thorns 
and  thistles  are  a  figurative  representation  of  the  enemies  of 
the  church  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  6,  7).  And  in  this  sense  the  song 
concludes  in  ver.  5 :  only  by  yielding  themselves  to  mercy  will 
Jiey  find  mercy.  iK  with  a  voluntative  following,  "unless/'  aa 


CHAP.  XXVII.  6-8.  457 

in  Lev.  xxvl.  41.  «  Take  hold  of:'1  hechgzik  V,  as  in  1  Kings 
i.  50,  of  Adonijah,  who  lays  hold  of  the  horns  of  the  altar. 
"  Make  peace  with :"  'dsdh  shdlom  F,  as  in  Josh.  ix.  15.  The 
song  closes  here.  What  the  church  here  utters,  is  the  con 
sciousness  of  the  gracious  protection  of  its  God,  as  confirmed 
in  her  by  the  most  recent  events. 

The  prophet  now  adds  to  the  song  of  the  vineyard,  by  way 
of  explanation, — Yer.  6.  "  In  future  will  Jacob  strike  roots, 
Israel  blossom  and  bud,  and  fill  the  surface  of  the  globe  with 
fruits."  We  may  see  from  Q^n  (ace.  temp,  as  in  Eccles.  ii.  16, 
equivalent  in  meaning  to  "  Behold,  the  days  come,"  Jer.  vii.  32, 
etc.),  that  the  true  language  of  prophecy  commences  again 
here.  For  the  active  wjJS  compare  Jer.  xix.  4,  Ezek.  viii.  17, 
etc.  The  prophet  here  says,  in  a  figure,  just  the  same  as  the 
apostle  in  Rom.  xi.  12,  viz.  that  Israel,  when  restored  once 
more  to  favour  as  a  nation,  will  become  "  the  riches  of  the 
Gentiles." 


JEHOVAH  S  CHASTISING  AND  SAVING  COURSE  TOWARDS 
ISRAEL. — CHAP.  XXVII.  7~13. 

The  prophet  does  not  return  even  now  to  his  own  actual 
times ;  but,  with  the  certainty  that  Israel  will  not  be  exalted 
until  it  has  been  deeply  humbled  on  account  of  its  sins,  he 
places  himself  in  the  midst  of  this  state  of  punishment.  And 
there,  in  the  face  of  the  glorious  future  which  awaited  Israel, 
the  fact  shines  out  brightly  before  his  eyes,  that  the  punishment 
which  God  inflicts  upon  Israel  is  a  very  different  thing  from 
that  inflicted  upon  the  world.  Yers.  7,  8.  "  Hath  He  smitten 
it  like  the  smiting  of  its  smiter,  or  is  it  slain  like  the  slaying  of 
those  slain  by  Him  ?  Thou  punishedst  it  with  measures,  when 
thou  didst  thrust  it  away,  sifting  with  violent  breath  in  the  day  of 
the  east  wind."  "Its  smiter"  (maccehu)  is  the  imperial  power 
by  which  Israel  had  been  attacked  (ch.  x.  20)  ;  and  "  those 
slain  by  Him"  (Wn)  are  the  slain  of  the  empire  who  had 
fallen  under  the  strokes  of  Jehovah.  The  former  smote  un 
mercifully,  and  its  slain  ones  now  lay  without  hope  (ch.  xxvi.  14). 
Jehovah  smites  differently,  and  it  is  very  different  with  the 
church,  which  has  succumbed  in  the  persons  of  its  righteous 
members.  For  the  double  play  upon  words,  see  ch.  xxiv.  16, 


458  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

xxii.  18,  x.  16.  When  Jehovah  put  Israel  away  (as  if  by 
means  of  a  "bill  of  divorcement,"  ch.  1.  1),  He  strove  against  it 
(ch.  xlix.  25),  i.e.  punished  it,  "  in  measure"  i.e.  determining 
the  measure  very  exactly,  that  it  might  not  exceed  the  enduring 
power  of  Israel,  nor  endanger  the  existence  of  Israel  as  a 
nation  (cf.  bemishpdt  in  Jer.  x.  24,  xxx.  11,  xlvi.  28).  On  the 
other  hand,  Hitzig,  Ewald,  and  Knobel  read  nspKDa,  from  a 
word  NpNp,1  related  to  &$?,  or  even  Kpsp,  "  when  thou  didst 
disturb  (or  drive  forth)  ;"  but  the  traditional  text  does  not 
indicate  any  various  reading  writh  n  mappic.,  and  the  ancient 
versions  and  expositors  all  take  the  word  as  a  reduplication  of 
HKp,  which  stands  here  as  the  third  of  an  ephah  to  denote  a 
moderately  large  measure.  The  clause  hdgdh  berucho  is  probably 
regarded  as  an  elliptical  relative  clause,  in  which  case  the  tran 
sition  to  the  third  person  can  be  best  explained :  "  thou,  who 
siftedst  with  violent  breath."  Hdgdh,  which  only  occurs  again 
in  Prov.  xxv.  4,  signifies  to  separate,  e.g.  the  dross  from  silver 
(ch.  i.  25).  Jehovah  sifted  Israel  (compare  the  figure  of  the 
threshing-floor  in  ch.  xxi.  10),  at  the  time  when,  by  suspending 
captivity  over  it,  He  blew  as  violently  upon  it  as  if  the  east 
wind  had  raged  (vid.  Job,  ii.  77).  But  He  only  sifted,  He 
did  not  destroy. 

He  was  angry,  but  not  without  love ;  He  punished,  but 
only  to  be  able  to  pardon  again.  Ver.  9.  "  Therefore  will  the 
guilt  of  Jacob  be  purged  thus ;  and  this  is  all  the  fruit  of  the 
removal  of  his  sin  :  when  He  maketli  all  altar-stones  like  chalk- 
stones  that  are  broken  in  pieces,  Astarte  images  and  sun-pillars 
do  not  rise  up  again."  With  the  word  "therefore"  (Idceri)  a 
conclusion  is  drawn  from  the  expression  "  by  measure."  God 
punished  Israel  "  by  measure ; "  His  punishment  is  a  way  to 
salvation  :  therefore  it  ceases  as  soon  as  its  purpose  is  secured ; 
and  so  would  it  cease  now,  if  Israel  would  thoroughly  renounce 
its  sin,  and,  above  all,  the  sin  of  all  sins,  namely  idolatry. 
«  Thus"  (by  this)  refers  to  the  tofe'a  which  follows ;  "  by  this," 
namely  the  breaking  to  pieces  of  the  altars  and  images  of  the 
moon  goddess  ;  or  possibly,  to  speak  more  correctly,  the  goddess 
of  the  morning-star,  and  those  of  the  sun-god  as  well  (see  ch. 

1  Bb'ttcher  refers  to  a  Talnradic  word,  &ODH  (to  remove),  but  this  is  to 
be  pronounced  fcODH  (  —  JTDH),  and  is,  moreover,  very  uncertain. 


CHAP,  xxvii.  10,  11.  459 

xvii.  8).  By  the  fact  that  Israel  put  away  the  fundamental 
cause  of  all  mischief,  viz.  idolatry,  the  guilt  for  which  it  had 
yet  to  make  atonement  would  be  covered,  made  good,  or  wiped 
away  (on  cuppar,  see  at  ch.  xxii.  14).  The  parenthesis  (cf.  ch. 
xxvi.  lib)  affirms  that  this  very  consequence  would  be  all  the 
fruit  (cdl-peri)  desired  by  Jehovah  of  the  removal  of  the  sin  of 
Israel,  which  the  chastisement  was  intended  to  effect. 

The  prophet  said  this  from  out  of  the  midst  of  the  state 
of  punishment,  and  was  therefore  able  still  further  to  confirm 
the  fact,  that  the  punishment  would  cease  with  the  sin,  by  the 
punishment  which  followed  the  sin.  Vers.  10,  11.  "  For  the 
strong  city  is  solitary,  a  dwelling  given  up  and  forsaken  like  the 
steppe  :  there  calces  feed,  and  there  they  lie  down,  and  eat  off  its 
branches.  When  its  branches  become  withered,  they  are  broken : 
women  come,  make  fires  with  them. ;  for  it  is  not  a  people  of  intel 
ligence  :  therefore  its  Creator  has  no  pity  upon  it,  and  its  Former 
does  not  pardon  it."  The  nation  without  any  intelligence  (ch. 
i.  3),  of  which  Jehovah  was  the  Creator  and  Former  (ch. 
xxii.  11),  is  Israel ;  and  therefore  the  fortress  that  has  been 
destroyed  is  the  city  of  Jerusalem.  The  standpoint  of  the 
prophet  must  therefore  be  beyond  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
and  in  the  midst  of  the  captivity.  If  this  appears  strange  for 
Isaiah,  nearly  every  separate  word  in  these  two  verses  rises  up 
as  a  witness  that  it  is  Isaiah,  and  no  other,  who  is  speaking 
here  (compare,  as  more  general  proofs,  ch.  xxxii.  13,  14,  and 
v.  17  ;  and  as  more  specific  exemplifications,  ch.  xvi.  2,  9,  xi.  7, 
etc.).  The  suffix  in  "  her  branches  "  refers  to  the  city,  whose 
ruins  were  overgrown  with  bushes.  Synonymous  with  E^yp^ 
branches  (always  written  with  dagesh  in  distinction  from  E^yp, 
clefts,  ch.  ii.  21),  is  kdtzir,  cuttings,  equivalent  to  shoots  that 
can  be  easily  cut  off.  It  was  a  mistake  on  the  part  of  the  early 
translators  to  take  kdtzir  in  the  sense  of  "harvest"  (Vulg., 
Symm.,  Saad.,  though  not  the  LXX.  or  Luther).  As  kdtzir 
is  a  collective  term  here,  signifying  the  whole  mass  of  branches, 
the  predicate  can  be  written  in  the  plural,  tisshdbarndh,  which 
is  not  to  be  explained  as  a  singular  form,  as  in  ch.  xxviii.  3. 
nnifc*,  in  the  neuter  sense,  points  back  to  this :  women  light  it 
p^n,  as  in  Mai.  i.  10),  i.e.  make  with  it  a  lighting  flame  (lis) 
and  a  warming  fire  ("fix,  ch.  xliv.  16).  So  desolate  does  Jeru 
salem  lie,  thaf  in  the  very  spot  which  once  swarmed  with  men 


460  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

a  calf  now  quietly  eats  the  green  foliage  of  the  bushes  that 
grow  between  the  ruins;  and  in  the  place  whence  hostile  armies 
had  formerly  been  compelled  to  withdraw  without  accomplish 
ing  their  purpose,  women  now  come  and  supply  themselves  with 
wood  without  the  slightest  opposition. 

But  when  Israel  repents,  the  mercy  of  Jehovah  will  change 
all  this.  Vers.  12,  13.  "And  it  will  come  to  pass  on  that  day, 
Jehovah  will  appoint  a  beating  of  corn  from  the  water-flood  of 
the  Euphrates  to  the  brook  of  Egypt,  and  ye  will  be  gathered  to- 
ff  ether  one  by  one,  0  sons  of  Israel.  And  it  will  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  a  great  trumpet  will  be  blown,  and  the  lost  ones  in  the 
land  of  Asshur  come,  and  the  outcasts  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and 
cast  themselves  down  before  Jehovah  on  the  holy  mountain  in 
Jerusalem"  I  regard  every  exposition  of  ver.  12  which  sup 
poses  it  to  refer  to  the  return  of  the  captives  as  altogether  false. 
The  Euphrates  and  the  brook  of  Egypt,  i.e.  the  Wady  el-Arish, 
were  the  north-eastern  and  south-western  boundaries  of  the 
land  of  Israel,  according  to  the  original  promise  (Gen.  xv.  18  : 
1  Kings  viii.  65),  and  it  is  not  stated  that  Jehovah  will  beat 
on  the  outside  of  these  boundaries,  but  within  them.  Hence 
Gesenius  is  upon  a  more  correct  track,  when  he  explains  it  as 
meaning  that  "  the  kingdom  will  be  peopled  again  in  its  greatest 
promised  extent,  and  that  as  rapidly  and  numerously  as  if  men 
had  fallen  like  olives  from  the  trees."  No  doubt  the  word 
chdlat  is  applied  to  the  beating  down  of  olives  in  Deut.  xxiv.  20 ; 
but  this  figure  is  inapplicable  here,  as  olives  must  already  exist 
before  they  can  be  knocked  down,  whereas  the  land  of  Israel 
is  to  be  thought  of  as  desolate.  What  one  expects  is,  that 
Jehovah  will  cause  the  dead  to  live  within  the  whole  of  the 
broad  expanse  of  the  promised  land  (according  to  the  promise 
in  ch.  xxvi.  19,  21).  And  the  figure  answers  this  expectation 
most  clearly  and  most  gloriously.  Chdbat  was  the  word  com 
monly  applied  to  the  knocking  out  of  fruits  with  husks,  which 
were  too  tender  and  valuable  to  be  threshed.  Such  fruits,  as 
the  prophet  himself  affirms  in  ch.  xxviii.  27,  were  knocked  out 
carefully  with  a  stick,  and  would  have  been  injured  by  the 
violence  of  ordinary  threshing.  And  the  great  field  of  dead 
that  stretched  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Rhinokoloura,1  re- 

1  TihmoJcoloura  (or  Rhinokoroura) .  for  the  origin  of  this  name  of  the 
Wady  el-Arish,  see  Strabo,  xvi.  2,  31. 


CHAP.  XXVII.  12,  13.  461 

sembled  a  floor  covered  over  with  such  tender,  costly  fruit. 
There  true  Israelites  and  apostate  Israelites  lay  mixed  together. 
But  Jehovah  would  separate  them.  He  would  institute  a 
beating,  so  that  the  true  members  of  the  church  would  come  to 
the  light  of  day,  being  separated  from  the  false  like  grains 
sifted  from  their  husks.  "  Thy  dead  will  live  ;"  it  is  to  this 
that  the  prophet  returns.  And  this  view  is  supported  by  the 
choice  of  the  word  shibboleth,  which  combines  in  itself  the 
meanings  of  "flood"  (Ps.  Ixix.  3,  16)  and  "ear"  (sc.  of 
corn).  This  word  gives  a  fine  dilogy  (compare  the  dilogy  in 
ch.  xix.  18  and  Hab.  ii.  7).  From  the  "  ear"  of  the  Euphrates 
down  to  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai,  Jehovah  would  knock — a  great 
heap  of  ears,  the  grains  of  which  were  to  be  gathered  together 
"  one  by  one,"  i.e.  singly  (in  the  most  careful  manner  possible  ; 
Greek,  /ea#eZ?,  KO,&  eva).  To  this  risen  church  there  would  be 
added  the  still  living  diaspora,  gathered  together  by  the  signal 
of  God  (compare  ch.  xviii.  3,  xi.  12).  Asshur  and  Egypt  are 
named  as  lands  of  banishment.  They  represent  all  the  lands 
of  exile,  as  in  ch.  xix.  23-25  (compare  ch.  xi.  11).  The  two 
names  are  emblematical,  and  therefore  not  to  be  used  as  proofs 
that  the  prophecy  is  within  the  range  of  Isaiah's  horizon.  Nor 
is  there  any  necessity  for  this.  It  is  just  as  certain  that  the 
cycle  of  prophecy  in  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.  belongs  to  Isaiah,  and  not 
to  any  other  prophet,  as  it  is  that  there  are  not  two  men  to  be 
found  in  the  world  with  faces  exactly  alike. 


END  OF  VOL.  I. 


T.  and  T.  Claris  Publications. 


Just  published,  in  crown  8vo,  price  6s., 

STUDIES  IN  THE   CHRISTIAN   EVIDENCES. 

BY  ALEXANDER  MAIR,  D.D. 

CONTENTS.— Chap.  I.  Christianity  and  Physical  Science.  II.  Of  Intellectual  Difficulties 
in  Religion.  III.  Revelation  and  Inspiration.  IV.  Authenticity  of  the  New 
Testament.  V.  Testimony  of  the  Unquestioned  Epistles  of  Paul.  VI.  The 
Christian  Miracles.  VII.  Direct  Personal  Testimony  to  Miracles  in  the  New- 
Testament.  VIII.  The  Resurrection  of  Christ.  IX.  Argument  from  the  Unique 
Personality  of  Christ.  X.  Important  Converging  Lines,  and  the  Theory  of  Proba 
bilities.  XI.  Christianity  proving  itself  by  the  '  Survival  of  the  Fittest '  Appendix. 

Just  published,  in  crown  Svo,  price  6.?., 

CHRISTIAN   CHARITY  IN   THE  ANCIENT 
CHURCH. 

Bv  G.   UHLHOEN,  D.D. 

^  "The  historical  knowledge  this  work  displays  is  immense,  and  the  whole  subject  is 
wrought  out  with  great  care  ai  d  skill.  It  is  a  most  readable,  delightful,  and  instructive 
volume.' — Evangelical  Christendom. 

'The  facts  are  surprising,  many  of  them  fresh,  and  the  truths  to  be  deduced  are  far 
more  powerful  as  weapons  for  warring  against  infidelity  than  scores  of  lectures  or 
bushels  of  tracts.' — Ecclesiastical  Gazette. 

Just  published,  in  demy  8vo, 

LECTURES  ON  PAUL'S  EPISTLES  TO  THE 
THESSALONIANS. 

BY   REV.   DR.   HUTCHISON. 

Just  puhlitJied,  in  demy  8uo,  price  10.«.  6d, 

THE     LORD'S     PRAYER: 

AN    EXPOSITION. 
BY    REV.     NEWMAN    HALL. 


In  demy  8co,  price  Vs., 

OUTLINES  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIAN 

DOCTRINE. 

—          Bv    EEV.  T.   G.   CRIPPEN. 
In  Two  Volumes,  8vo,  price  21s., 

THEOLOGY   OF   THE   OLD  TESTAMENT. 

BY    DR.    GUST.    FR.    OEHLER, 

PROFESSOR  OF  THEOLOGY  IN  TUBINGEN. 

Z;j  Two  Volumes,  8yo,  price  21s., 

HISTORY    OF    THE    REFORMATION, 

IN    GERMANY   AND    SWITZERLAND    CHIEFLY. 
BY  THE  LATE  DR.  K.  R.  HAGENBACH. 

TRANSLATED    FROM    THE    FOURTH    REVISED    EDITION    OF    THE 

GERMAN. 


T.  and  T.  Claris  Publications. 


In  Three  Volumes,  8vo,  price  31s.  6d., 

CHRISTIAN     ETHICS. 

BY  DR.  H.  MARTENSEN, 

BISHOP   OF   SEELAND. 

Eranslateti  from  tfje  ^utfjor's  German  lEtutton. 

VOLUME  I.— GENERAL  ETHICS. 
„       IL— INDIVIDUAL  ETHICS. 
„     III.-SOCIAL  ETHICS. 

4  As  man  is  a  member  of  two  societies,  a  temporal  and  a  spiritual,  it  is  clear  that  his 
ethical  development  only  can  go  on  when  these  two  are  treated  side  by  side.  This 
Bishop  Martensen  has  done  with  rare  skill.  We  do  not  know  where  the  conflicting 
claims  of  Church  and  State  are  more  equitably  adjusted.  .  .  .  We  can  read  these 
volumes  through  with  unflagging  interest.'— Literary  World. 

'  It  is  no  ordinary  book,  and  we  commend  it  to  the  study  of  all  who  are  interested 
in  Christian  Ethics,  as  one  of  the  most  able  treatises  on  the  subject  which  has  ever 
yet  appeared.' —  Watchman. 

4  Dr.  Martensen  has  allowed  himself  the  liberty  of  speaking  from  the  heart  to  the 
heart.  His  work  will  be  found  as  useful  to  non-theological  as  to  professionally 
theological  readers.  They  will  find  very  much  in  it  to  instruct  and  to  stimulate.' — 
Nonconform  ist. 

By  the  same  Author. 

In  One  Volume,  8vo,  price  10s.  6d. ,  j 

CHRISTIAN    DOGMATICS. 

COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  DOCTRINES   OF   CHRISTIANITY. 

'To  students  this  volume  will  be  helpful  and  welcome.' — Freeman. 

'  We  feel  much  indebted  to  Messrs.  Clark  for  their  introduction  of  this  important 
compendium  of  orthodox  theology  from  the  pen  of  the  learned  Danish  Bishop.  .  .  . 
Every  reader  must  rise  from  its  perusal  stronger,  calmer,  and  more  hopeful,  not  only 
for  the  fortunes  of  Christianity,  but  of  dogmatic  theology.' — Quarterly  Review. 

4  Such  a  book  is  a  library  in  itself,  and  a  monument  of  pious  labour  in  the  cause  of 
true  religion.'— Irish  Ecclesiastical  Gazette. 


In  Three  Volumes,  8vo,  price  31s.  6d., 

A    HISTORY    OF    CHRISTIAN    DOCTRINES. 

BY  THE  LATE  DR.  K.  E.  HAGENBACH. 
2EranslatetJ  from  tfje  Jiftfj  anto  ilagt  German  (55oition, 


from  other  Sources. 
WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  BY  THE  VERY  REV.  DEAN  PLUMPTRE. 

1  This  scholarly  and  elaborate  history.'—  Dickinson's  Theological  Quarterly. 

'A  comprehensive  survey.'  —  John  Bull. 

'  There  is  no  work  which  deals  with  this  subject  in  a  manner  so  scientific  and  so 
thorough  as  Hagenbach's.  Moreover,  there  is  no  edition  of  this  work,  either  in  German 
or  in  English,  which  approaches  the  present  as  to  completeness  and  accuracy.'  —  Church 
Bells. 

'No  work  will  be  more  welcome  or  useful  than  the  present  one.  We  have  a  whole 
system  of  theology  from  the  hand  of  the  greatest  Jiving  theologian  of  Germany.'  — 
Methodist  Recorder. 


PUBLICATIONS    OF 

T.     AND     T.     C  L  A  R  K, 

38   GEORGE   STREET,    EDINBURGH. 

LONDON:  HAMILTON,  ADAMS,  &  CO. 

Adam  (J.,  D.D.) — AN  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.    8vo,  9s. 
Alexander  (Dr.  J.  A.) — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

New  and  Revised  Edition.     Two  vols.  8vo,  17s. 

Ante-Nicene  Christian  Library — A  COLLECTION  OF  ALL  THE  WORKS 
OF  THE  FATHERS  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH  PRIOR  TO  THE  COUNCIL  OF 
NIOEA.  Twenty-four  vols.  8vo,  Subscription  price,  £6,  6s. 

Auberlen  (C.  A.) — THE  DIVINE  REVELATION.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 
Augustine's  Works — Edited  by  MARCUS  DODS,  D.D.      Fifteen  vols. 

8vo,  Subscription  price,  £3,  19s. 

Bannerman  (Professor) — THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST  :  A  Treatise  on  the 

Nature,  Powers,  etc.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Baumgarten  (Professor) — APOSTOLIC  HISTORY  ;  Being  an  Account  of 

the  Development  of  the  Early  Church.     Three  vols.  Svo,  27s. 

Beck  (Dr.) — OUTLINES  OF  BIBLICAL  PSYCHOLOGY.     Crown  Svo,  4s. 

PASTORAL  THEOLOGY.     Crown  8vo,  6s. 

Bengel — GNOMON  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     With  Original  Notes, 

Explanatory  and  Illustrative.     Five  vols.  8vo,  Subscription  price,  31s.  6d. 
Cheaper  Edition,  the  five  volumes  bound  in  three,  24s. 

Besser's  CHRIST  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  WORLD.     Price  6s. 
Bible-Class  Handbooks.     Crown  Svo. 

BINNIE  (Prof.)— The  Church,  Is.  6d. 

BROWN  (Principal)— The  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  2s. 

CAXDLISH  (Prof.) — The  Christian  Sacraments,  Is.  6d. 

DAVIDSON  (Prof.)— The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  2s.  6d. 

DODS  (MARCUS,  D.D.)— The  Post- Exilian  Prophets,  2s. 

The  Book  of  Genesis,  2s. 

DOUGLAS  (Principal)— The  Book  of  Joshua,  Is.  Cd. 

The  Book  of  Judges,  Is.  3d. 

HENDERSON  (ARCHIBALD,  M.A.) — Palestine,  with  Maps.     The  maps  are  by 
Captain  Conder,  R.E.,  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.    Price  2s.  6d. 

LINDSAY  (Prof.)— The  Gospel  of  St.  Mark,  2s.  6d. 

The  Reformation,  2s. 

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  Part  I.,  Ch.  I.-XII.,  Is.  Gd. 

MACGREGOR  (Prof.)— The  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  Is.  Gel. 

MACPHERSON  (JOHN,  M.A.) — Presbyteriam'sm,  Is.  Gd. 
The  Westminster  Confession  of  Faith,  2s. 

MURPHY  (Prof.) — The  Books  of  Chronicles,  Is.  6d. 

SCRYMGEOUR  (Wit.) — Lessons  on  the  Life  of  Christ,  2s.  6d. 

STALKER  (JAMES,  M.A.)— The  Life  of  Christ,  Is.  Gd. 

The  Life  of  St.  Paul,  Is.  6d. 

SMITH  (GEORGE,  LL.D.) — A  Short  History  of  Missions,  2s.  Gd. 

WALKER  (NORMAN  L.,  M.A.)— Scottish  Church  History,  Is.  6d. 

WHYTE  (ALEXANDER,  D.D.) — The  Shorter  Catechism,  2s.  Gd. 
Bible-Class  Primers.     Paper  covers,  6d.  each;  free  by  post,  7d.     In 
cloth,  8d.  each ;  free  by  post,  9d. 

CROSKERY  (Prof.) — Joshua  and  the  Conquest. 

GIVEN  (Prof.)— The  Kings  of  Judah. 

GLOAG,  (PATON  J.,  D.D.)— Life  of  Paul. 

IVRRACH  (JAMES,  .u.A.)— Life  of  Moses. 

SALMOND  (Prof.)— Life  of  Peter. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Bible-Class  Primers — continued. 

SMITH  (H.  W.,  D.D.)— Outlines  of  Early  Church  History. 

THOMSON  (PETER,  M.A.) — Life  of  David. 

WALKER  (W.,  M.A.) — The  Kings  of  Israel. 

TViNTERBOTHAM  (R.\YNER,  M.A.) — Life  and  Reign  of  Solomon. 

WITHEROW  (Prof.) — The  History  of  the  Reformation. 
Bleek's  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.    Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 
Bowman  (T.,  M.A.) — EASY  AND  COMPLETE  HEBREW  COURSE.     8vo. 

Part  I.,  7s.  6d.  ;  Part  II.,  10s.  6d. 
Briggs    (Prof.) — BIBLICAL    STUDY:     Its    Principles,    Methods,    and 

History.     Post  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

AMERICAN  PRESBYTERIANISM  :  Its  Origin  and  Early  History, 

together  with  an  Appendix  of  Letters  and  Documents,  many  of  which  have 
recently  been  discovered. 

Brown  (David,  D.D.) — CHRIST'S  SECOND   COMING:   Will  it  be  Pre- 

Millennial  ?     Seventh  Edition,  crown  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

Bruce  (A.  B.,  D.D.) — THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE  ;  or,  Exposition 

of  Passages  in  the  Gospels  exhibiting  the  Twelve  Disciples  of  Jesus  under 
Discipline  for  the  Apostleship.     Third  Edition,  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

THE  HUMILIATION  OF  CHRIST,  in  its  Physical,  Ethical,  and 

Official  Aspects.     Second  Edition,  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Buchanan  (Professor) — THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION.  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

ON  COMFORT  IN  AFFLICTION.     Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

—  ON  IMPROVEMENT  OF  AFFLICTION.     Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d. 
Bungener  (Felix) — EOME  AND  THE  COUNCIL  IN  THE  NINETEENTH 

CENTURY.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Calvin's  INSTITUTES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  KELIGION.     Translated  by 

HENRY  BEVERIDGE.     Two  vols.  Svo,  14s. 
Calvini    Institutio    Christianas    Religionis.      Curavit    A.    THOLUCK. 

Two  vols.  Svo,  Subscription  price,  14s. 

Candlish  (Prof.  J.  S.,  D.D.) — THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  BIBLICALLY  AND 

HISTORICALLY  CONSIDERED.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Caspari  (C.  E.) — A  CHRONOLOGICAL  AND  GEOGRAPHICAL  INTRODUC 
TION  TO  THE  LIFE  OF  CHRIST.     Svo,  9s. 

Gaspers  (A.) — THE  FOOTSTEPS  OF  CHRIST.     Crown  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

Cave  (Prof.) — THE  SCRIPTURAL  DOCTRINE  OF  SACRIFICE.     8vo,  12s. 

Christlieb  (Dr.) — MODERN  DOUBT  AND  CHRISTIAN  BELIEF.    Apologetic 

Lectures  addressed  to  Earnest  Seekers  after  Truth.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Cotterill  —  PEREGRINUS    PROTEUS  :    Investigation    into    De    Morte 

Peregrini,  the  Two  Epistles  of  Clement  to  the  Corinthians,  etc.     Svo,  12s. 

MODERN  CRITICISM:  Clement's  Epistles  to  Virgins, etc.    Svo,  5s. 

Cremer  (Professor) — BIBLICO-THEOLOGICAL  LEXICON  OF  NEW  TESTA 
MENT  GREEK.     Third  Edition,  demy  4to,  25s. 

Crippen  (Rev.  T.   G-.) — A  POPULAR  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  HISTORY 

OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE.     Svo,  9s. 
Cunningham  (Principal) — HISTORICAL  THEOLOGY.    A  Eeview  of  the 

Principal  Doctrinal  Discussions  in  the  Christian  Church  since  the  Apostolic 
Age.     Second  Edition,  Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

DISCUSSIONS  ON  CHURCH  PRINCIPLES.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Curtiss  (Dr.  S.  I.) — THE  LEVITICAL  PRIESTS.     A  Contribution  to  the 

Criticism  of  the  Pentateuch.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Dabney  (E.   L.,    D.D.) — THE    SENSUALISTIC    PHILOSOPHY    OF    THE 

NINETEENTH  CENTURY  CONSIDERED.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 
Davidson  (Professor) — AN  INTRODUCTORY  HEBREW  GRAMMAR.     With 

Progressive  Exercises  in  Reading  and  Writing.     Seventh  Edition,  Svo,  7s.  6d. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Delitzsch  (Prof.)— A  SYSTEM  OF  BIBLICAL  PSYCHOLOGY.     Svo,  12s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  JOB.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  PSALMS.    Three  vols.  Svo,  31s.  6d. 

ON  THE  PROVERBS  OF  SOLOMON.    Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

ON  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON  AND  ECCLESIASTES.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  HISTORY  OF  REDEMPTION.    Cr.  Svo,  4s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Doedes  (Dr.  J.) — MANUAL  OF  HERMENEUTICS  FOR  THE  NEW  TESTA 
MENT.     Crown  Svo,  3s. 

Dollinger  (Dr.)— HIPPOLYTUS  AND  CALLISTUS  ;  or,  The  Koman  Church 
in  the  First  Half  of  the  Third  Century.     Svo,  9s. 

Dorner  (Professor) — HISTORY  OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  DOCTRINE 

OF  THE  PERSON  OF  CHRIST.     Five  vols.  Svo,  £2,  12s.  6d. 

SYSTEM  OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE.     Four  vols.  Svo,  £2,  2s. 

Eadie  (Professor) — COMMENTARIES  ON  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLES  TO  THE 

GALATIANS,  EPHESIANS,  PHILIPPIANS,  COLOSSIANS.     New  and  Revised  Edi 
tions,  Edited  by  Rev.  WILLIAM  YOUNG,  M.A.     Four  vols.  Svo,  10s.  6d.  each. 
Ebrard  (Dr.  J.  H.  A.)— THE  GOSPEL  HISTORY:    A  Compendium  of 

Critical  Investigations  in  support  of  the  Four  Gospels.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Elliott — ON  THE  INSPIRATION  OF  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES.    Svo,  6s. 
Ernesti — BIBLICAL  INTERPRETATION  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.    Two 

vols.     8s. 

Ewald  (Heinrich) — SYNTAX  OF  THE  HEBREW  LANGUAGE  OF  THE  OLD 

TESTAMENT.     Svo,  8s.  6d. 

EEVELATION  :   ITS   NATURE  AND  EECORD.       Translated   by 

Prof.  T.  GOADBY.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Fairbairn  (Principal) — TYPOLOGY  OF  SCRIPTURE,  viewed  in  connection 
with  the  series  of  Divine  Dispensations.     Sixth  Edition,  Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

THE  REVELATION  OF  LAW  IN  SCRIPTURE,  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

EZEKIEL  AND  THE  BOOK  OF  HIS  PROPHECY.  4thEd.,8vo,  10s.  6d. 

PROPHECY  VIEWED  IN  ITS  DISTINCTIVE  NATURE,  ITS  SPECIAL 

FUNCTIONS,  AND  PROPER  INTERPRETATIONS.     Second  Edition,  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  HERMENEUTICAL  MANUAL.     Svo,  10s.  Cd. 

THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.     The  Greek  Text  and  Translation. 

With  Introduction,  Expository  Notes,  and  Dissertations.     Svo,  7s.  6d. 

PASTORAL  THEOLOGY  :  A  Treatise  on  the  Office  and  Duties  of 


the  Christian  Pastor.     With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 

Forbes  (Prof.) — SYMMETRICAL  STRUCTURE  OF  SCRIPTURE.   Svo,  8s.  6d. 

.  ANALYTICAL  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  ROMANS.     Svo,  10s.  6<1 

Gebhardt  (H. ) — THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  APOCALYPSE,  AND  ITS  RELATION 

TO  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  GOSPEL  AND  EPISTLES  OF  JOHN.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Gerlach — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 
G-ieseler  (Dr.  J.  C.  L.) — A  COMPENDIUM  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY. 

Four  vols.  Svo,  £2,  2s. 

Clifford  (Canon) — VOICES  OF  THE  PROPHETS.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Given  (Rev.  Prof.  J.  J.) — THE  TRUTHS  OF  SCRIPTURE  IN  CONNECTION 

WITH  REVELATION,  INSPIRATION,  AND  THE  CANONT.     Svo,  9s. 

Glasgow  (Prof.)— APOCALYPSE  TRANSLATED  AND  EXPOUNDED.  Svo,  14s. 
Gloag  (Pa ton  J.,  D.D.) — A  CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  COMMENTARY 

ON  THE  ACT0   OF  THE  APOSTLES.      Two  vols.   SvO,  21s. 

THE  MESSIANIC  PROPHECIES.     Crown  Svo,  price  7s.  6d. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Gloag  (P.  J.,  D.D.) — INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PAULINE  EPISTLES.  8vo,  12s. 

EXEGETICAL  STUDIES.     Crown  8vo,  5s. 

Godet  (Prof.) — COMMENTARY  ON  ST.  LUKE'S  GOSPEL.  Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL.    Three  vols.  Svo,  31s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EOMANS.    Two 

vols.  Svo,  21s. 

LECTURES  IN  DEFENCE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  FAITH.    Cr.  Svo,  6s. 

Goebel  (Siegfried) — THE  PARABLES  OF  JESUS.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 
Gotthold's  Emblems ;  or,  INVISIBLE  THINGS  UNDERSTOOD  BY  THINGS 

THAT  ARE  MADE.       CrOWll  8vO,  5s. 

Guyot  (Arnold,  LL.D.) — CREATION;  or,  The  Biblical  Cosmogony  in  the 
Light  of  Modern  Science.     With  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo,  5s.  6d. 

Hagenbach  (Dr.  K.  E.) — HISTORY  OF  DOCTRINES.     Edited,  with  large 

additions  from  various  sources.     Three  vols.  Svo,  31s.  6d. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  EEFORMATION  IN  GERMANY  AND  SWITZER 
LAND  CHIEFLY.      TWO  VOls.  8vO,  21 S. 

Hall   (Rev.   Newman,    LL.B.) — THE  LORD'S   PRAYER:    A  Practical 

Meditation.     Svo,  10s.  6<1. 

Harless  (Dr.  C.  A.) — SYSTEM  OF  CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 
Harris  (Rev.  S.,  D.D.)— THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  BASIS  OF  THEISM.   Svo,  12s. 
Haupt  (Erich) — THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JOHN.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 
Havernick  (H.  A.  Ch.) — INTRODUCTION  TO  OLD  TESTAMENT.     10s.  6d. 
Heard  (Rev.  J.  B.,  M.A.) — THE  TRIPARTITE  NATURE  OF  MAN — SPIRIT, 

SOUL,  AND  BODY — applied  to  Illustrate  and  Explain  the  Doctrine  of  Original 
Sin,  the  New  Birth,  the  Disembodied  State,  and  the  Spiritual  Body.  With 
an  Appendix  on  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  Fifth  Edition ,  crown  Svo,  6s. 

THE  OLD  AND  NEW  THEOLOGY.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 

Hefele  (Bishop) — A  HISTORY  OF  THE  COUNCILS  OF  THE  CHURCH. 

Vol.  I.,  to  A.D.  325  ;  Vol.  II.,  A.D.  326  to  429.  Vol.  TIL,  A.D.  431  to  the 
close  of  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  451.  Svo,  12s.  each. 

Hengstenberg  (Professor) — COMMENTARY  ON  PSALMS.    3  vols.  Svo,  33s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES.     Treatises  on 

the  Song  of  Solomon,  Job,  and  on  Isaiah,  etc.     Svo,  9s. 

THE  PROPHECIES  OF  EZEKIEL  ELUCIDATED.    Svo,  10s.  6d. 

DISSERTATIONS  ON  THE  GENUINENESS  OF  DANIEL,  AND  THE 

INTEGRITY  OF  ZECHARIAH.     Svo,  12s. 

— : HISTORY  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  UNDER  THE  OLD  TESTA 
MENT.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

CHRISTOLOGY  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.    Four  vols.  Svo,  £2, 2s. 

ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Hermes   Trismegistus — THEOLOGICAL  AND  PHILOSOPHICAL  WORKS. 

Translated  from  the  original  Greek  by  J.  D.  CHAMBERS,  M.A.     Svo,  6s. 

Herzog — ENCYCLOPEDIA  OR  DICTIONARY  OF  BIBLICAL,  HISTORICAL, 

DOCTRINAL,  AND  PRACTICAL  THEOLOGY.  Based  on  the  Real- EncyUopcidie 
of  H&rzog,  Plitt,  and  Hawk.  Edited  by  Professor  SCHAFF,  D.D.  In  Three 
vols.,  price  24s.  each. 

Hutchison  (John,  D.D.)— COMMENTARY  ON  THESSALONIANS.     Svo,  9s. 
Janet  (Paul) — FINAL  CAUSES.    By  PAUL  JANET,  Member  of  the  In 
stitute.     Translated  from  the  French.     Second  Edition,  demy  Svo,  12s. 

THE  THEORY  OF  MORALS.     Translated  from  the  latest  French 

Edition.     Demy  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Jouffroy — PHILOSOPHICAL  ESSAYS.     Fcap.  Svo,  5s. 

Junii  (Francisci) — Opuscula  Theologica  Selecta.     4to,  vellum,  16s. 

Kant — THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  ETHICS.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Keil  (Prof.) — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH.     3  vols.  8vo,  31s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  JOSHUA,  JUDGES,  AND  KUTH. 

Svo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  KINGS.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  CHRONICLES.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  EZRA,  NEHEMIAH,  ESTHER.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  JEREMIAH.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  EZEKIEL.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

•   ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  MlNOR  PROPHETS.      Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

• MANUAL  OF   HISTORICO  -  CRITICAL    INTRODUCTION    TO    THE 

CANONICAL  SCRIPTURES  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Keymer  (Rev.  N.,  M.A.) — NOTES  ON  GENESIS.     Crown  Svo,  Is.  6d. 

Killen  (Prof.) — THE  OLD  CATHOLIC  CHURCH  ;  or,  The  History,  Doc 
trine,  Worship,  and  Polity  of  the  Christians,  traced  to  A.D.  755.     Svo,  9s. 

Konig  (Dr.  F.  E.) — THE  RELIGIOUS  HISTORY  OF  ISRAEL.    A  Discussion 

of  the   Chief    Problems    in    Old    Testament   History   as    opposed   to    the 
Development  Theorists.     Crown  Svo,  3s.  6d. 

Krummacher  (Dr.  F.  W.) — THE  SUFFERING  SAVIOUR  ;  or,  Meditations 

on  the  Last  Days  of  the  Sufferings  of  Christ.     Eighth  Edit.,  crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

DAVID,  THE  KING  OF  ISRAEL  :  A  Portrait  drawn  from  Bible 

History  and  the  Book  of  Psalms.     Second  Edition,  crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 

Kurtz  (Prof.) — HANDBOOK  OF  CHURCH  HISTORY.     Two  vols.  Svo,  15s. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  OLD  COVENANT.    Three  vols.  Svo,  31s.  6d. 

Ladd  (Prof.    G-.    T.) — THE  DOCTRINE  OF  SACRED    SCRIPTURE  :   A 

Critical,  Historical,  and  Dogmatic  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  and  Nature  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments.    "Two  vols.  Svo,  1600  pp.,  28s. 

Laidlaw  (Prof.) — THE  BIBLE  DOCTRINE  OF  MAN.     Svo,  10s.  Gd. 
Lange  (J.  P.,  D.D.) — THE  LIFE  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST.     Edited, 

with  additional  Notes,  by  MAHCTJS  DODS,  D.D.     Second  Edition,  in  Four 
vols.  Svo,  Subscription  price  28s. 

COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS.    Edited 

by  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D.     OLD  TESTAMENT,  14  vols.  ;  NEW  TESTAMENT,  10 
vols.  ;  APOCRYPHA,  1  vol.     Subscription  price,  nett,  15s.  each. 

ON  ST.  MATTHEW  AND  ST.  MARK.     Three  vols.  Svo,  31s.  Gd. 

ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  LUKE.     Two  vols.  Svo,  18s. 

ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Lehmann  (Pastor) — SCENES  FROM  THE  LIFE  OF  JESUS.    Cr.  Svo,  3s.  6d. 
Lewis  (Tayler,  LL.D.)— THE  Six  DAYS  OF  CREATION.    Cr.  Svo,  7s.  6d. 
Lisco  (F.  Cr.) — PARABLES  OF  JESUS  EXPLAINED.    Fcap.  Svo,  5s. 
Lotze  (Professor) — MICROCOSMOS.     In  preparation. 

Luthardt,  Kahnis,  and  Bruckner — THE  CHURCH.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 
Luthardt  (Prof.) — ST.  JOHN  THE  AUTHOR  OF  THE  FOURTH  GOSPEL.    9s. 

ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL  DESCRIBED  AND  EXPLAINED  ACCORDING 

TO  ITS  PECULIAR  CHARACTER.     Three  vols.  Svo,  31s.  6d. 

APOLOGETIC     LECTURES     ON     THE     FUNDAMENTAL     (Sixth 

Edition),  SAVING  (Fourth  Edition),  MORAL  TRUTHS  OF  CHRISTIANITY  (Third 
Edition).     Three  vols.  crown  Svo,  6s.  each. 

M'Cosh  (Dr.  Jas.)— PHILOSOPHIC  SERIES.     Part  I.  (Didactic).    Nos. 

I. -IV.  now  re    ly.     Part  II.  (Historical).     Issued  in  Bi-Monthly  Numbers. 
Price  2s.  each. 


T.  and  T.  Clark '  s  Publications. 


Macdonald  (Rev.  D.) — INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.    Two  vols. 

8vo,  21s. 

THE  CREATION  AND  FALL.     8vo,  12s. 

M'Lauchlan  (T.,  D.D.,  LL.D.) — THE  EARLY  SCOTTISH  CHURCH.     To 

the  Middle  of  the  Twelfth  Century.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Mair  (A.,  D.D.) — STUDIES  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  EVIDENCES.     Cr.  Svo,  6s. 
Martensen  (Bishop) — CHRISTIAN  DOGMATICS  :  A  Compendium  of  the 

Doctrines  of  Christianity.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.     (GENERAL  ETHICS.)     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.    (INDIVIDUAL  ETHICS.)     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.     (SOCIAL  ETHICS.)     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Matheson  (Geo.,  D.D.) — GROWTH  OF  THE  SPIRIT  or  CHRISTIANITY,  from 

the  First  Century  to  the  Dawn  of  the  Lutheran  Era.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

AIDS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  GERMAN  THEOLOGY.    3rd  Edition,  4s.  6d. 

Meyer  (Dr.)  —  CRITICAL  AND    EXEGETICAL    COMMENTARY    ON    ST. 

MATTHEW'S  GOSPEL.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  MARK  AND  LUKE.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  CORINTHIANS.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  GALATIANS.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

ON  EPHESIANS  AND  PHILEMON.    One  vol.  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

ON  PHILIPPIANS  AND  COLOSSIANS.     One  vol.  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

ON  THESSALONIANS.     (Dr.  Liinemann.)     One  vol.  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.     (Dr.  Hutlier.)    Svo,  10s.  6d. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.    (Dr.  Liinemann.)   Svo,  10s.  6d. 

ST.  JAMES'  AND  ST.  JOHN'S  EPISTLES.    (Hutlier.)    Svo,  10s.  6d. 

PETER  AND  JUDE.     (Dr.  Hutlier.)     One  vol.  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Michie   (Charles,  M.A.)— BIBLE  AVORDS  AND  PHRASES,  EXPLAINED 

AND  ILLUSTRATED.     18mo,  Is. 
Monrad  (Dr.  D.  G.) — THE  WORLD  OF  PRAYER;  or,  Prayer  in  relation 

to  Personal  Religion.     Crown  Svo,  4s.  6d. 

Morgan  (J.,  D.D.) — SCRIPTURE  TESTIMONY  TO  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.    9s. 

EXPOSITION  OF  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.     Svo,  9s. 

Mtiller  (Dr.  Julius) — THE  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  OF  SIN.     An  entirely 

New  Translation  from  the  Fifth  German  Edition.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Murphy  (Professor) — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PSALMS.     Svo,  12s. 

A  CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  COMMENTARY  ON  EXODUS.    9s. 

Naville  (Ernest) — THE  PROBLEM  OF  EVIL.     Crown  Svo,  4s.  6d. 

THE  CHRIST.   Translated  by  Eev.  T.  J.  DESPRES.   Cr.  Svo,  4s.  6d. 

MODERN    PHYSICS:    Studies    Historical    and    Philosophical. 

Translated  by  Rev.  HENRY  DOWNTON,  M.A.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Nicoll  (W.  E.,  M.A.)— THE  INCARNATE  SAVIOUR:    A  Life  of  Jesus 

Christ.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 

Neander  (Dr.) — GENERAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  RELIGION  AND 

CHURCH.     Nine  vols.  Svo,  £3,  7s.  6d. 

Oehler  (Prof.) — THEOLOGY  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.     2  vols.  Svo,  21s. 
Oosterzee  (Dr.  Van) — THE  YEAR  OF  SALVATION.      Words  of  Life  for 

Every  Day.     A  Book  of  Household  Devotion.     Two  vols.  Svo,  7s.  6d.  each. 

MOSES  :  A  Biblical  Study.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Olshausen  (Dr.  H.) — BIBLICAL  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  GOSPELS  AND 

ACTS.     Four  vols.  Svo,  £2,  2s.     Cheaper  Edition,  four  vols.  crown  8vo,  24s. 

ROMANS.     One  vol.  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

CORINTHIANS.     One  vol.  8vo,  9s. 

PHILIPPIANS,  TITUS,  AND  FIRST  TIMOTHY.  One  vol.  8 vo,  10s.6d. 

Orelli — OLD  TESTAMENT  PROPHECY  REGARDING  THE  CONSUMMATION 

OF  THE  KINGDOM  or  GOD.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Owen  (Dr.  John) — WORKS.     Best  and  only  Complete  Edition.     Edited 
by  Rev.  Dr.  GOOLD.     Twenty-four  vols.  8vo,  Subscription  price,  £4,  4s. 
The  '  Hebreivs'  may  be  had  separately,  in  Seven  vols.,  £2,  2s.  nett. 

Philippi  (F.  A. ) — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.    From 

the  Third  Improved  Edition,  by  Rev.  Professor  BANKS.     Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

Piper  (Dr.  Ferdinand) — LIVES  OF  THE  LEADERS  OF  THE  CHURCH 

UNIVERSAL.     Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

Popular  Commentary  on  the  New  Testament.  Edited  by  PHILIP 
SCHAFF,  D.D.  With  Illustrations  and  Maps.  Vol.  I. — THE  SYNOPTICAL 
GOSPELS.  Vol.  II. — ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL,  AND  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 
Vol.  III. — ROMANS  TO  PHILEMON.  Vol.  IV. — HEBREWS  TO  REVELATION. 
In  Four  vols.  imperial  8vo,  18s.  each. 

Pressense*  (Edward  de) — THE  REDEEMER  :  Discourses.   Crown  8vo,  6s. 
Rabiger  (Prof.)— ENCYCLOPEDIA  OF  THEOLOGY.    Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 
Rainy    (Principal)  —  DELIVERY  AND    DEVELOPMENT   OF   CHRISTIAN 

DOCTRINE.     (The  Fifth  Series  of  the  Cunningham  Lectures.}     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Reusch  (Professor) — BIBLE  AND  NATURE.     In  preparation. 

Reuss  (Professor)— HISTORY  OF  THE  SACRED  SCRIPTURES  OF  THE  NEW 

TESTAMENT.     640  pp.  8vo,  15s. 

Riehm  (Dr.  E.) — MESSIANIC  PROPHECY  :  Its  Origin,  Historical  Charac 
ter,  and  Relation  to  New  Testament  Fulfilment.  Crown  8vo,  5s. 

Ritter  (Carl) — THE  COMPARATIVE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  PALESTINE  AND  THE 

SINAITIC  PENINSULA.     Four  vols.  8vo,  32s. 

Robinson  (Rev.  S.,  D.D.) — DISCOURSES  ON  EEDEMPTION.  8vo,  7s.  6d. 
Robinson  (Edward,  D.D.)— GREEK  AND  ENGLISH  LEXICON  OF  THE 

NEW  TESTAMENT.     8vo,  9s. 

Rothe  (Professor) — SERMONS  FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.     Cr.  Svo,  Gs. 
Saisset — MANUAL  OF  MODERN  PANTHEISM.     Two  vols.  Svo,  10s.  6d. 
Sartorius  (Dr.  E.) — DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  LOVE.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 
Schaff  (Professor)— HISTORY  OF   THE   CHRISTIAN  CHURCH.     (New 

Edition,  thoroughly  Revised  and  Enlarged. ) 

APOSTOLIC   CHRISTIANITY,   A.D.    1-100.    In  Two  Divisions. 

Ex.  8vo,  21s. 

ANTE-NICENE  CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.  100-325.    In  Two  Divisions. 

Ex.  8vo,  21s. 

POST-NICENE  CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.  325-600.     In  Two  Divisions. 

Ex.  Svo,  21s. 

THE  MIDDLE  AGES  (to  Gregory  VII.)     In  Two  Divisions. 

Ex.  Svo,  21s. 

Schmid's  BIBLICAL  THEOLOGY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  Svo,  10s.  Gd. 
Schiirer(Prof .)— HISTORY  OF  THE  NEWTESTAMENT  TIMES.  In  preparation. 
Scott  (Jas.,  M.A.,  D.D.)— PRINCIPLES  OF  NEW  TESTAMENT  QUOTATION 

ESTABLISHED  AND  APPLIED  TO  BIBLICAL  CRITICISM.    Cr.  Svo,  2nd  Edit.,  4s. 

Shedd  (W.,  D.D.)— HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE.     Two  vols. 

8vo,  21s. 

SERMOVS  TO  THE  NATURAL  MAN.  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

SERMONS  TO  THE  SPIRITUAL  MAN.  Svo,  7s.  6d. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Smeaton  (Professor) — THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  ATONEMENT  AS  TAUGHT 

BY  CHRIST  HIMSELF.     Second  Edition,  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.     (Ninth  Series  of 

Cunningham  Lectures.}     8vo,  9s. 

Smith  (Professor  Thos.,  D.D.) — MEDIEVAL  MISSIONS.    Or.  8vo,  4s.  6d. 
Stalker  (Rev.  Jas.,  M.A.) — THE  LIFE  OF  JESUS  CHRIST.    New  Edition, 

in  larger  Type.     Crown  8vo,  3s.  6d. 

= —  THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  PAUL.     New  Edition,  in  larger  Type.     Crown 

8vo,  3s.  6d. 

Steinmeyer  (Dr.  F.  L.) — THE  MIRACLES  OF  OUR  LORD  :  Examined  in 

their  relation  to  Modern  Criticism.     8vo,  7s.  6d. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  PASSION  AND  RESURRECTION  OF  OUR 

LORD,  considered  in  the  Light  of  Modern  Criticism.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Stevenson  (Mrs.) — THE  SYMBOLIC  PARABLES  :  The  Predictions  of  the 

Apocalypse  viewed  in  relation  to  the  General  Truths  of  Scripture.   Crown  8vo,  5s. 

Steward  (Eev.  G-.) — MEDIATORIAL  SOVEREIGNTY  :  The  Mystery  of  Christ 

and  the  Revelation  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.     Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

THE  ARGUMENT  OF   THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE    HEBREWS.     A 

Posthumous  "Work.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Stier  (Dr.  Eudolph) — ON  THE  WORDS  OF  THE  LORD  JESUS.    Eight 

vols.  8vo,  £4,  4s.     Separate  volumes  may  be  had,  price  10s.  6d. 
In  order  to  bring  this  valuable  Work  more  within  the  reach  of  all  Glasses,  both 
Clergy  and  Laity,  Messrs.  Clark  continue  to  supply  the  Eight-volume  Edition 
bound  in  FOUR  at  the  Original  Subscription  price  of  £2,  2s. 

THE  WORDS  OF  THE  EISEN  SAVIOUR,  AND  COMMENTARY  ON 

THE  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JAMES.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

THE  WORDS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  EXPOUNDED.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Tholuck  (Professor) — COMMENTARY  ON  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.    8vo,  9s. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EOMANS.    Two  vols.  fcap.  8vo,  8s. 

LIGHT  FROM  THE  CROSS.     Third  Edition,  crown  8vo,  5s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT.    8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Tophel  (Pastor  G-.) — THE  WORK  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.     Cr.  Svo,  2s.  6d. 
Uhlhorn(Gr.)— CHRISTIAN  CHARITY  IN  THE  ANCIENT  CHURCH.  Cr.  Svo,  Cs. 

Ullmann  (Dr.  Carl) — REFORMERS  BEFORE  THE  REFORMATION,  princi 
pally  in  Germany  and  the  Netherlands.  Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

THE  SINLESSNESS  OF  JESUS  :    An  Evidence  for  Christianity. 

Fourth  Edition,  crown  Svo,  6s. 

TIrwick  (W.,   M.A.) — THE  SERVANT  OF  JEHOVAH  :   A  Commentary 

upon  Isaiah  lii.  13-liii.  12;  with  Dissertations  upon  Isaiah  xl.-lxvi.     Svo,  6s. 

Vinet  (Professor) — STUDIES  ON  BLAISE  PASCAL.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

PASTORAL  THEOLOGY.     Second  Edition,  post  Svo,  3s.  6d. 

Watts  (Professor) — THE  NEWER  CRITICISM  AND  THE  ANALOGY  OF 

THE  FAITH.     Third  Edition,  crown  8vo,  5s. 

Weiss  (Prof.) — BIBLICAL  THEOLOGY  OF  NEW  TESTAMENT.  2  vols.  8vo,21s. 

LIFE  OF  CHRIST.     Three  vols.  Svo,  31s.  6d. 

White  (Eev.  M.) — SYMBOLICAL  NUMBERS  OF  SCRIPTURE.    Cr.  Svo,  4s. 
Williams  (W.  H.,  M.A.) — A  SELECT  VOCABULARY  OF  LATIN  ETYMOLOGY. 

For  the  use  of  Schools.     Fcap.  Svo,  Is.  6d. 

Winer  (Dr.  G-.  B.)— A  TREATISE  ON  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  NEW  TESTA 
MENT  GREEK,  regarded  as  the  Basis  of  New  Testament  Exegesis.  Third 
Edition,  edited  by  W.  F.  MOULTON,  D.D.  Ninth  English  Edition,  8vo,  15s. 

A  COMPARATIVE  VIEW  OF  THE  DOCTRINES  AND  CONFESSIONS 

OF  THE  VARIOUS  COMMUNITIES  OF  CHRISTENDOM.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 
Wuttke  (Professor) — CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.    Two  vols.  8vo,  12s.  6d. 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED 


