Google 



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



BIBLE INSPIRATION. 



■ 1: 



» t 



BIBLE INSPIRATION: 



ITS BEAUTY AKD NATURE. 



BY TUB 

KEV. J. C. RYLE, M.A., 

Vicar of Stradbroke, 
Honorary Canon of Norwich, and Bural Dean of Hoxne, Suffolk. 

AUTHOR OF "KXPOSITOKY THOUGHTS," ETC. 




'*U\>$r 



WILLIAM HUNT AND COMPANY, 

12, PATERNOSTER ROW. 

IPSWICH : WILLIAM HUNT, TAVKBK 8TUEKT. 

1877. 



101 . I 



k\\ ■ 



k 



BIBLE INSPIRATION. 



tt 



2 TIMOTHY HI. 16. 

All Scripture is given by inspiration of God" 



How was the Bible written? — "Whence is it? 
From heaven, or of men ? " — Had the writers of 
the Bible any special or peculiar help in doing 
their work ? — Is there anything in the Bible which 
makes it unlike all other books, and therefore 
demands our respectful attention ?— These are 
questions of vast importance. They are questions 
to which I wish to offer an answer in this volume. 
To speak plainly, the subject I propose to examine 
is that deep one, the inspiration of Scxvtfwri* \ 



BIBLE INSPIRATION: 



believe the Bible to have been written by inspira- 
tion of God, and I want others to be of the same 
belief. 

The subject is always important. It is the very 
keel and foundation of Christianity. If Christians 
have no Divine book to turn to as the warrant of 
their doctrine and practice, they have no solid 
ground for present peace or hope, and no right to 
claim the attention of mankind. They are building 
on a quicksand, and their faith is vain. We ought 
to be able to say boldly, "We are what we are, 
and we do what we do, because we have here a 
book which we believe to be the Word of God." 

The subject is one of peculiar importance in the 
present day. Infidelity and scepticism abound 
everywhere. In one form or another they are to 
be found in every rank and class of society. 
Thousands of Englishmen are not ashamed to say 
that they regard the Bible as an old obsolete 
Jewish book, which has no special claim on our 
faith and odedience, and that it contains many 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 



inaccuracies and defects. Myriads who will not 
go so far as this are wavering and shaken in their 
belief, and show plainly by their lives that they 
are not quite sure the Bible is true. In a day 
like this the true Christian should be able to set 
his foot down firmly, and to render a reason of his 
confidence in God's Word. He should be able by 
sound arguments to meet and silence the gainsayer, 
if he cannot convince him. He should be able to 
show good cause why he thinks the Bible is " from 
heaven, and not of men." 

The subject without doubt is a very difficult one* 
It cannot be followed up without entering on 
ground which is dark and mysterious to mortal 
man. It involves the discussion of things which 
are miraculous, and supernatural, and above reason, 
and cannot be fully explained. But difficulties 
must not turn us away from any subject in religion. 
There is not a science in the world about which? 
questions may not be asked which no one cait 
answer. It is poor philosophy to say we will 



8 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 



believe nothing unless we can understand every- 
thing! We must not give up the subject of 
inspiration in despair because it contains things 
"hard to be understood." There still remains a 
vast amount of ground for study which is plain to 
every common understanding. Reader, I invite 
you to occupy this ground with me to-day, and 
to hear what I have got to say on the Divine 
authority of God's Word. 

In considering the subject before us, there are 
two things which I propose to do : — 

I. In the first place, I shall try to show the 
general truth, that the Bible is given by inspiration 
of God. 

II. In the second place, I shall try to show 
the extent to which. the Bible is inspired. 

. I trust that all who read this volume will take up 
the subject in a serious and reverent spirit. This 
question of inspiration is no light one. It involves 
tremendously grave consequences. If the Bible is 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 9 

not the Word of God and inspired, the whole of 
Christendom for 1800 years has been under an 
immense delusion ; — half the human race has been 
cheated and deceived, and churches are monuments 
of folly. — If the Bible is the Word of God and 
inspired, all who refuse to believe it are in fearful 
danger ;— they are living on the brink of eternal 
misery. No man, in his sober senses, can fail to 
see that the whole subject demands most serious 
attention. 

I. In the first place, I propose to show the 
general truth, — that the Bible is given by inspiration 
of God. 

In saying this, I mean to assert that the Bible 
is utterly unlike all other books that were ever 
written, because its writers were specially inspired, 
or enabled by God, for the work which they did. 
I say that the Book comes to us with a claim 
which no other book possesses. It is stamped 
with Divine authority. In this respect it stands 



10 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

entirely alone. Sermons, and tracts, and theological 
writings of all kinds, may be sound and edifying, 
but they are, only the handiwork of uninspired 
man. The Bible alone is the Book of God. 

Now I shall not waste time in proving that 
the Scriptures are genuine and authentic, that they 
were really written by the very men who profess 
to have written them, and that they contain the 
very things which they wrote. I shall not touch 
what are commonly called external evidences. I 
shall bring forward the book itself, and put it in 
the witness-box. I shall try to show that nothing 
can possibly account for the Bible being what it 
is, and doing what it has done, except the theory 
that it is the Word of God. I lay it down 
broadly, as a position which cannot be turned, 
that the Bible itself, fairly examined, is the best 
witness of its own inspiration. I shall content 
myself with stating some plain facts about the 
Bible, which can neither be denied nor explained 
away. And the ground I shall take up is this, — 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 11 

that these facts ought to satisfy every reasonable 
inquirer that the Bible is of God, and not of man. 
They are simple facts, which require no knowledge 
of Hebrew, or Greek, or Latin, in order to be 
understood ; yet they are facts which prove to ray 
own mind conclusively that the Bible is super- 
human, or not of man. 

(a) It is a fact, that there is an extraordinary 
depth, fulness, and richness in the contents of the 
Bible. It throws more light on a vast number of 
most important subjects than all the other books 
in the world put together. It boldly handles 
matters which are beyond the reach of man, when 
left to himself. It treats of things which are 
mysterious and invisible, — the soul, the world to 
come, and eternity, — depths which man has no 
line to fathom. All who have tried to write of 
these things, without Bible light, have done little 
but show their own ignorance. They grope like 
the blind ; they speculate ; they guess ; they 
generally make the darkness more visible, and 



12 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

land us in a region of uncertainty and doubt. 
How dim were the views of Socrates, Plato, 
Cicero, and Seneca ! A well-taught Sunday scholar, 
in this day, knows more spiritual truth than all 
these sages put together. 

The Bible alone gives a reasonable account of 
the beginning and end of the globe on which we 
live. It starts from the birthday of sun, moon, 
stars, and earth in their present order, and shows 
us creation in its cradle. It foretells the dissolu- 
tion of all things, when the earth and all its 
works shall be burned up, and shows us creation 
in its grave. It tells us the story of the world's 
youth, as the habitation of man ; and it tells us 
the story of its old age. It gives us a picture of 
its first days ; and it gives us a picture of its last. 
How vast and important is this knowledge ! Can 
this be the handiwork of uninspired minds? 
Eeader, try to answer that question. 

The Bible alone gives a true and faithful account 
of man. It does not flatter him as novels and 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 13 

romances do; it does not conceal his faults and 
exaggerate bis goodness ; it paints him just as he 
is. It describes him as a fallen creature, of his 
own nature inclined to evil, — a creature needing 
not only a pardon, but a new heart, to make him 
fit for heaven. It shows him to be a corrupt being 
under every circumstance, when left to himself, — 
corrupt after the loss of paradise, — corrupt after 
the flood, — corrupt when fenced in by divine laws 
and commandments, — corrupt when the Son of 
God came down and visited him in the flesh, — 
corrupt in the face of warnings, promises, miracles, 
judgments, mercies. In one word, it shows man 
to be by nature always a sinner. How important 
is this knowledge! Can this be the work of 
uninspired minds? Eeader, try to answer that 
question. 

The Bible alone gives us true views of God. By 
nature man knows nothing clearly or fully about 
Him. All his conceptions of Him are low, 
grovelling, and debased. What could be more 



14* BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

degraded than the gods of the Canaanites and 
Egyptians,— of Babylon, of Greece, and of Rome ? 
What can be more vile than the gods of the 
Hindoos and other heathen in our own time ? — 
By the Bible we know that God hates sin. The 
destruction of the old world by the flood ; the 
burning of Sodom and Gomorrah ; the drowning 
of Pharoah and the Egyptians in the Bed Sea ; 
the cutting off the nations of Canaan ; the over- 
throw of Jerusalem and the Temple; the scattering 
of the Jews ; — all these are unmistakable witnesses. 
— By the Bible we know that God loves sinners. 
His gracious promise in the day of Adam's fall ; 
His longsuffering in the time of Noah ; His 
deliverance of Israel out of the land of Egypt; 
His gift of the law at Mount Sinai ; His bringing 
the tribes into the promised land ; His forbearance 
in the days of the Judges and Kings; His repeated 
warnings by the mouth of His prophets; His 
restoration of Israel after the Babylonian captivity ; 
His sending His Son into the world, in due time, 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 15 



to be crucified; His commanding the Gospel to 
be preached to the Gentiles ; — all these are speaking 
facts. — By the Bible we learn that God knows all 
things. We see Him foretelling tilings hundreds 
and thousands of years before they take place, and 
as He foretells so it comes to pass. He foretold 
that the family of Ham should be a servant of 
servants; that Tyre should become a rock for drying 
nets; that Nineveh should become a desolation; 
that Babylon should be made a desert ; that Egypt 
should be the basest of kingdoms ; that Edom 
should be forsaken and uninhabited ; and that 
tiie Jews should not be reckoned among the 
nations. All these things were utterly unlikely 
and improbable. Yet all have been fulfilled. Once 
more I say, how vast and important is all this 
knowledge ! Can this Book be the work of un- 
inspired man ? Keader, try to answer that question. 
The Bible alone teaches us that God has made 
a full, perfect, and complete provision for the salva- 
tion of fallen man. It tells of an atonement made 



16 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

for the sin of the world, by the sacrifice and death 
of God's own Son upon the cross. It tells us that 
by His death for sinners, as their Substitute, He 
has obtained eternal redemption for all that believe 
on Him. The claims of God's broken law have 
now been satisfied. " Christ has suffered for sin, 
the just for the unjust." God can now be just, 
and yet the justifier of the ungodly. It tells us 
that there is now a complete remedy for the guilt 
of sin,— even the precious blood of Christ; and 
peace, and rest of conscience for all who believe 
on Christ. "Whosoever believeth on Him shall 
not perish, but have eternal life." It tells us that 
there is a complete remedy for the power of sin, 
— even the almighty grace of the Spirit of Christ. 
It shows us the Holy Ghost quickening believers, 
and making them new creatures. It promises a 
new heart and a new nature to all who will hear 
Christ's voice, and follow Him. Once more I say, 
how important is this knowledge ! What should 
we know of all these comfortable truths without 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 17 

the Bible ? Can this Book be the composition of 

uninspired men? Header, try to answer that 

question. 

The Bible alone explains (lie state of things that 

we see in the world around vs. There are many 

things on earth which a natural man cannot 

explain. The amazing inequality of conditions, 

— the poverty and distress, — the oppression and 

persecution, — the shakings and tumults,— the 

failures of statesmen and legislators, — the constant 

existence of uncured evils and abuses, — all these 

things are often puzzling to him. He sees, but 

does not understand. But the Bible makes it all 

clear. The Bible can tell him that the whole 

world lieth in wickedness, — that the prince of the 

world, the devil, is everywhere, — and that it is 

vain to look for perfection in the present order of 

things. The Bible will tell him that neither laws 

nor education can ever change men's hearts, — and 

that, just as no man will ever make a machine 

work well unless he allows for friction, — so also 

b2 



18 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 



no man will do much good in the world unless he 
always remembers that human nature is fallen, 
and that the world he works in is full of sin. 
The Bible will tell him that there is "a good 
time" certainly coming, — and coming perhaps 
sooner than people expect it, — a time of perfect 
knowledge, perfect justice, perfect happiness, and 
perfect peace. But the Bible will tell him this 
time shall not be brought in by any power but 
that of Christ coming to earth again. And for 
that second coming of Christ, the Bible will tell 
him to prepare. Once more, I say, how important 
is all this knowledge ! 

Reader, all these are things which men could 
find nowhere except in the Scriptures. We have 
probably not the least idea how little we should 
know about these things if we had not the Bible. 
We hardly know the value of the air we breathe, 
and the sun which shines on us, because we have 
never known what it is to be without them. We 
do not value the truths on which I have been 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 19 

just now dwelling, because we do not realize the 
darkness of men to whom these truths have not 
been revealed. Surely no tongue can fully tell 
the value of the treasures this one volume contains. 
Set down this fact in your mind, and do not forget 
it. The extraordinary contents of the Bible are 
a great fact which can only be explained by 
admitting its inspiration. Mark well what I say. 
It is a simple broad fact, that in the matter of 
contents, the Bible stands entirely alone, and no 
other book is fit to be named in the same day 
with it. He that dares to say the Bible is not 
inspired, let him give a reasonable account of this 
fact, if he can ! 

(6) It is another fact that there is an extraordi- 
nary unity and harmony in the contents of the Bible, 
which is entirely above man. We all know how 
difficult it is to get a story told by any three 
persons, not living together, in which there are 
not some contradictions and discrepancies. If the 
story is a long one, and involves a large quantity 



20 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

of particulars, unity seems almost impossible 
among the common run of men. But it is not so 
with the Bible. Here is a long book written by 
not less than thirty different persons. The writers 
were men of every rank and class in society. 
One was a lawgiver. One was a warlike king. 
One was a peaceful king. One was a herdsman. 
One had been brought up as a publican, — another 
as a physician, — another as a learned Pharisee, — 
two as fishermen,— several as priests. They lived 
at different intervals over a space of 1500 years ; 
and the greater part of them never saw each other 
face to face. And yet there is a perfect harmony 
among all these writers ! They all write as if 
they were under one dictation. The style and 
hand-writing may vary, but the mind that runs 
through their work is always one and the same. 
They all tell the same story. They all give one 
account of man, — one account of God, — one account 
of the way of salvation, — one account of the 
human heart. You see truth unfolding under 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 21 

their hands, as you go through the volume of 
their writings, — but you never detect any real 
contradiction, or contrariety of view. 

Reader, set down this fact in your mind, and 
ponder it well. Tell me not that this unity might 
be the result of chanca No one can ever believe 
that but a very credulous person. There is only 
one satisfactory account to be given of the fact 
before us. — The Bible is not of man, but of God. 

(c) It is another fact that there is an extraordi- 
nary vrisdom, sublimity and majesty in the style of 
the Bible which is above man. Strange and unlikely 
as it was, the writers of Scripture have produced a 
book which even at this day is utterly unrivalled. 
With all our boasted attainments in science and art 
and learning, we can produce nothing in literature 
that can be compared with the Bible. Even at 
this very hour, in the nineteenth century, the book 
stands entirely alone. There is a strain and a 
style and a tone of thought about it, which separate 
it from all other writings. There are no weak 



22 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

points, and motes, and flaws, and blemishes. There 
is no mixture of infirmity and feebleness, such as 
you will find in the works of even the best 
Christians. " Holy, holy, holy," seems written on 
every page. To talk of comparing the Bible with 
other " sacred books " so-called, such as the Koran, 
the Shasters, or the book of Mormon, is positively 
absurd. You might as well compare the sun with 
a rushlight, — or Skiddaw with a mole hill,— or 
St. Paul's with an Irish hovel, — or the Portland 
vase with a garden pot, — or the Koh-i-noor diamond 
with a bit of glass.* God seems to have allowed 
the existence of these pretended revelations, in 
order to prove the immeasurable superiority of 
His own Word. To talk of the inspiration of the 
Bible, as only differing in degree from that of such 



* Carlyle's estimate of the Koran is given, in "Hero- 
worship," in the following words. "It is a wearisome, 
confused jumble, crude, recondite, abounding in endless itera- 
tions, long-windedness, entanglement, insupportable stupidity. 
In short nothing but a sense of duty could carry any European 
through the Koran, with its unreadable masses of lumber." 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 23 

writings as the works of Homer, Plato, Shakspeare 
Dante, and Milton, is simply a piece of blasphe- 
mous folly. Every honest and unprejudiced reader 
must see that there is a gulf between the Bible 
and any other book, which no man can fathom 
You feel, at turning from the Scriptures to other 
works, that you have got into a new atmosphere. 
You feel like one who has exchanged gold for base 
metal, and heaven for earth. And how can this 
mighty difference be accounted for? The men 
who wrote the Bible had no special advantages. 
They lived in a remote corner of the civilized 
earth. They had, most of them, little leisure, few 
books, and no learning, — such as learning is 
reckoned in this world. Yet the book they com- 



Owen says, "There are no other writings in the world, 
beside the Bible, that ever pretended unto a divine original, 
but they are not only from their matter, but from the manner 
of their writing, and the plain footsteps of human artifice and 
weakness therein, sufficient for their own conviction, and do 
openly discover their own vain pretensions." (The Reason of 
Faith. Works, voL iv., p. 34.) 



24 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

pose is one which is unrivalled ! There is but 
one way of accounting for this fact. — They wrote 
under the direct inspiration of Ood. 

(d) It is another fact that there is an extraordinary 
accuracy in the facts and statements of the Bible, 
which is above man. Here is a book which has 
been finished and before the world for nearly 1800 
years. Those 1800 years have been the busiest 
and most changeful period the world has ever 
seen. During this period the greatest discoveries 
have been made in science, the greatest alterations 
in the ways and customs of society, the greatest 
improvements in the habits and usages of life. 
Hundreds of things might be named which satisfied 
and pleased our forefathers, which we have laid 
aside long ago as obsolete, useless, and old- 
fashioned. The laws, the books, the houses, the 
furniture, the clothes, the carriages of each suc- 
ceeding century, have been a continual improve- 
ment on those of the century that went before. 
There is hardly a thing in which faults and weak 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 25 

points have not been discovered. There is scarcely 
an institution which has not gone through a 
process of sifting, purifying, refining, simplifying, 
reforming, amending, and changing. But all this 
time men have never discovered a weak point or 
a defect in the Bible. .Infidels have assailed it 
in vain. There it stands, — perfect, and fresh, and 
complete, as it did eighteen centuries ago. The 
march of intellect never overtakes it. The wisdom 
of wise men never gets beyond it. The science 
of philosophers never proves it wrong. The dis- 
coveries of travellers never convict it of mistakes. 
— Are the distant islands of the Pacific laid open ? 
Nothing is found that in the slightest degree 
contradicts the Bible account of man's heart. — 
Are the ruins of Nineveh and Egypt ransacked 
and explored? Nothing is found that overturns 
one jot or tittle of the Bible's historical statements. 
— How shall we account for this fact? Who 
could have thought it possible that so large a 
book, handling such a vast variety of subjects, 

G 



26 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

should, at the end of 1800 years, be found so free 

from erroneous statements? There is only one 

account to be given of the fact. — The Bible was 

written by inspiration of God. 

(e) It is another fact that there is in the Bible 

an extraordinary suitableness to the spiritual wants 

of all mankind. It exactly meets the heart of 

man in every rank or class, in every country and 

climate, in every age and period of life. It is the 

only book in existence which is never out of place 

and out of date. Other books after a time become 

obsolete and old-fashioned. The Bible never does. 

Other books suit one country or people, and not 

another. The Bible suits all. It is the book of 

the poor and unlearned no less than of the rich 

and the philosopher. It feeds the mind of the 

labourer in his cottage, and it satisfies the gigantic 

intellects of Newton, Chalmer3, Brewster, and 
Faraday. Lord Macaulay, and John Bright, and 

the writers of brilliant articles in the Times, and 

the humblest City Missionaries, are all under 



ITS REALITY AND NATUR& . 27 

obligations to the same volume. It is equally 
valued by the converted New Zealander in the 
southern hemisphere, and the Bed Eiver Indian in 
the cold north of America, and the Hindoo under 
the tropical sun. 

It is the only book, moreover, which seems 
always fresh and evergreen and new. For eighteen 
centuries it has been studied and prayed over by 
millions of private Christians, and expounded and 
explained and preached to us by thousands of 
ministers. Fathers, and schoolmen, and reformers, 
and puritans, and modern divines, have incessantly 
dug down into the mine of Scripture, and yet 
never exhausted it It is a well never dry, and a 
field which is never barren. It meets the hearts 
and minds and consciences of Christians in the 
nineteenth century as fully as it did those of 
Greeks and Bomans when it was first completed. 
It suits the Dairyman's daughter as well as Persis, 
or Tryphena, or Tryphosa, — and the English Peer 
as well as the converted African at Sierra Leone. 



28 BIBLE INSPIBATION: 

It is still the first book which fits the child's mind 
when he begins to learn religion, and the last to 
which the old man clings as he leaves the world.* 



* " I have always been strongly in favour of secular educa- 
tion in the sense of education without theology. But I must 
confess I have been no less seriously perplexed to know by 
what practical measures the religious feeling, which is the 
essential basis of conduct, could be kept up, in the present 
chaotic state of opinion on these matters, without the use of the 
Bible. 

"Consider the great historical fact that for three centuries 
this Book has been woven into the life of ail that is best and 
noblest in English history ; — that it has become the national 
epic of Britain, and is as familiar to noble and simple from 
John o'Groat's Home to the Land's End, as Dant6 and Tasso 
once were to the Italians ; — that it is written in the best and 
purest English, and abounds in exquisite beauties of mere 
literary form ;— and finally, that it forbids the veriest hind 
who never left his village to be ignorant of other countries and 
other civilizations, and of a great past, stretching back to the 
furthest limits of the oldest nations in the world. By the 
study of what other book could children be so much humanized 
and made to feel that each figure in that vast historical 
procession fills, like themselves, but a momentary space in 
the interval between two eternities, and earns the blessings 
or the curses of ail time, according to its effort to do good 
and hate evil, even as they also are earning their payment 
for their work ? " — Professor Huxley on School Boards (Huxley's 
Critiques and Essays, p. 51.) 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 29 

In short, it suits all ages, ranks, climates, minds, 
conditions. It is the one book which suits the 
world. 

Now how shall we account for this singular 
fact ? What satisfactory explanation can we give ? 
There is only one account and explanation. — The 
Bible was written by Divine inspiration. It is the 
book of the world, because He inspired it who 
formed the world, —who made all nations of one 
blood, — and knows man's common nature. It is 
the book for every heart, because He dictated it 
who alone knows all hearts, and what all hearts 
require. It is the book of God. 

(/) Last, but not least, it is a great fact that 
the Bible has had a most extraordinary effect on 
the condition of those nations in which it has been 
known, taught, and read. 

I invite any honest-minded reader to look at a 
map of the world, and see what a story that map 
tells. Which are the countries on the face of the 
globe at this moment where there is the greatest 



30 BIBLE INSPIBATION: 

amount of idolatry, or cruelty, or tyranny, or 
impurity, or mis-government, or disregard of life 
and liberty and truth ? Precisely those countries 
where the Bible is not known. — Which are the 
Christian countries, so-called, where the greatest 
quantity of ignorance, superstition, and corruption, 
is to be found at this very moment? The 
countries in which the Bible is a forbidden or 
neglected book, — such countries as Spain and the 
South American States. — Which are the countries 
where liberty, and public and private morality 
have attained the highest pitch? The countries 
where the Bible is free to all, like England, 
Scotland, Germany, and the United States. Yes ! 
when you know how a nation deals with the 
Bible, you may generally know what a nation is. 

But this is not all. Let us look nearer home. 
Which are the cities on earth where the fewest 
soldiers and police are required to keep order? 
London, Manchester, Liverpool, New York, Phila- 
delphia, — cities where Bibles abound. — Which are 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 31 

the countries in Europe where there are the fewest 
murders and illegitimate births ? The Protestant 
countries, where the Bible is freely read. — Which 
are the Churches and religious bodies on earth 
which are producing the greatest results by 
spreading light and dispelling darkness? Those 
which make much of the Bible, and teach and 
preach it as God's Word. The Eomanist, the 
Neologian, the Socinian, the Deist, the sceptic, or 
the friends of mere secular teaching, have never 
yet shown us one Sierra Leone, one New Zealand, 
one Tinnevelly, as the fruit of their principles. 
We only can do that who honour the Bible 
and reverence it as God's Word. Let that fact 
also be remembered. He that denies the Divine 
inspiration of the Bible, let him explain that fact 
if he can.* 



* " The Bible is the fountain of all true patriotism and loyalty 
in States ; — it is the source of all true wisdom, sound policy, 
and equity in Senates, Council-chambers, and Courts of Justice ; 
— it is the spring of all true discipline and obedience, and of 



1 



32 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

Eeader, I place these six facts about the Bible 
before you, and I ask you to consider them well 
Take them all six together, treat them fairly, and 
look at them honestly. Upon any other principle 
than that of divine inspiration, those six facts 
appear to me inexplicable and unaccountable. 
Here is a book written by a succession of Jews 
in a little corner of the world, which positively 
stands alone. Not only were its writers isolated 
and cut off in a peculiar manner from other 
nations, but they belonged to a people who have 
never produced any other book of note except the 
Bible ! There is not the slightest proof that, 
unassisted and left to themselves, they were 



ail valour and chivalry, in armies and fleets, in the battlefield 
and on the wide sea; — it is the origin of all probity and 
integrity in commerce and in trade, in marts and in shops, in 
banks and exchanges, in the public resorts of men and the 
secret silence of the heart ; — it is the pure, unsullied fountain 
of all love and peace, happiness, quietness and joy, in families 
and households. — Wherever it is duly obeyed it makes the 
desert of the world to rejoice and blossom as the rose." — 
Wordstvorth on Inspiration, p. 113. 



ITS BEAL1TY AND NATURE. 33 

capable of writing anything remarkable, like the 
Greeks and Eomans. Yet these men have given 
the world a volume which for depth, unity, 
sublimity, accuracy, suitableness to the wants of 
man, aud power of influencing its readers, is 
perfectly unrivalled ! How can this be explained ? 
How can it be accounted for ? To my mind there 
is only one answer. The writers of the Bible 
were divinely helped and qualified for the work 
which they did. Th6 book which they have given 
to us was written by inspiration of God.* 

For my own part, I believe that in dealing with 
sceptics, and unbelievers, and enemies of the Bible, 
Christians are too apt to stand only on the defen- 
sive. They are too often content with answering 
this or that little objection, or discussing this or 



* "The little ark of Jewish literature still floats above the 
surges of time, while mere fragments of the wrecked archives 
of the huge oriental empires, as well as of the lesser kingdoms 
that surrounded Judaea, are now and then cast on our distant 
shores. " — Rogers on the Superhuman Origin of the Bible, p. 311. 



1 



34 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

that little difficulty, which is picked out of Scrip- 
ture and thrown in their teeth. I believe we 
ought to act on the aggressive far more than we 
do, and to press home on the adversaries of in- 
spiration the enormous difficulties of their own 
position. We have a right to ask them how they 
can possibly explain the origin and nature of the 
Bible, if they will not allow that it is of Divine 
authority ? We have a right to say, — " Here is a 
book which not only courts inquiry but demands 
investigation. We challenge you to tell us how 
that Book was written, if you deny its inspiration/' 
— How can they account for this Book standing so 
entirely alone, and for nothing having ever been 
written equal to it, like it, near it, or fit to be 
compared with it for a minute ? — I defy them to 
give any rational reply on their own principles. 
On our principles we can. To tell us that man's 
unassisted mind could have written the Bible is 
simply ridiculous. It is worse than ridiculous : it 
13 the height of credulity. In short, the difficulties 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 35 

of unbelief are far greater than the difficulties of 
faith. No doubt there are things "hard to be 
understood," if we accept the Scriptures as God's 
Word. But, after all, they are nothing compared 
to the hard things which rise up in our way, and 
demand solution if * we once deny inspiration. 
There is no alternative. Men must either believe 
things which are grossly improbable, or else they 
must accept the great general truth that the Bible 
is the inspired Word of God. 

II. The second thing which I propose to con- 
sider is the extent to which the Bible is inspired. 
Assuming, as a general truth, that the Bible is 
given by Divine inspiration, I wish to examine 
how far and to what degree its writers received 
Divine help. In short, what is it exactly that we 
mean when we talk of the Scriptures as the Word 
of God i 

This is, no doubt, a difficult question, and one 
about which the best Christians are not entirely 



36 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

of one mind. The plain truth is that inspiration 
is a miracle ; and, like all miracles, there is much 
about it which we cannot fully understand. — We 
must not confound it with intellectual power, such 
as great poets and authors possess. To talk of 
Shakespeare and Milton and Byron being inspired, 
like Moses and St. Paul, is to my mind almost 
profane. — Nor must we confound it with the gifts 
and graces bestowed on the early Christians in the 
primitive Church. All the Apostles were enabled 
to preach and work miracles, but not all were 
inspired to write. — We must rather regard it as a 
special supernatural gift, bestowed on about thirty 
people out of mankind, in order to qualify them 
for the special business of writing the Scriptures ; 
and we must be content to allow that, like every- 
thing miraculous, we cannot entirely explain it, 
though we can believe it A miracle would not be 
a miracle, if it could be explained ! That miracles 
are possible, I do not stop to prove here. I never 
trouble myself on that subject until those who 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 37 

deny miracles have fairly grappled with the great 
fact that Christ rose again from the dead. I 
firmly believe that miracles are possible, and have 
been wrought ; and among great miracles I place 
the fact that men were inspired by God to write 
the Bible. Inspiration, therefore, being a miracle, 
I frankly allow that there are difficulties about it 
which at present I cannot fully solve. 

The exact manner in which the minds of the 
inspired writers of Scripture worked when they 
wrote, I do not pretend to explain. Very likely 
they could not have explained it themselves. I 
do not admit for a moment that they were mere 
machines holding pens, and, like type-setters in a 
printing-office, did not understand what they were 
doing. I abhor the "mechanical" theory of 
inspiration. I dislike the idea that men like Moses 
and St. Paul were no better than organ-pipes, 
employed by the Holy Ghost, or ignorant secretaries 
or amanuenses who wrote by dictation what they 
did not understand. I admit nothing of the kind. 

B 



38 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

I believe that in some marvellous manner the 
Holy Ghost made use of the reason, the memory, 
the intellect, the style of thought, and the peculiar 
mental temperament of each writer of the Scrip- 
tures. But how and in what manner this was 
done I can no more explain than I can the union 
of two natures, God and man, in the person of 
our blessed Lord Jesus Christ. — I only know that 
there is both a Divine, and a human element in 
the Bible, and that while the men who wrote it 
were really and truly men, the book that they 
wrote and handed down to us is really and truly 
the Word of God. I know the result, but I do 
not understand the process. The result is, that 
the Bible is the written Word of God ; but I can 
no more explain the process than I can explain 
how the water became wine at Cana, or how five 
loaves fed five thousand men, or how a word 
raised Lazarus from the dead. — I do not pretend 
to explain miracles, and I do not pretend to 
explain fully the miraculous gift of inspiration. 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 39 

The position I take up is that while the Bible- 
writers were not " machines," as some sneeringly 
say, they only wrote what God taught them to 
write. The Holy Ghost put into their minds 
thoughts and ideas, and then guided their pens 
in writing and expressing them. When you read 
the Bible you are not reading the unaided, self- 
taught composition of erriug men like yourselves* 
but thoughts and words which were suggested by 
the eternal God. The men who were employed 
to indite the Scripture "spake not of themselves." 
They "spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost." (2 Peter i. 21.) He that holds a Bible 
in his hand should know that he holds not the 
word of man but of God. 

Concerning the precise extent to which the Bible 
is inspired, 1 freely admit that Christians differ 
widely. Some of the views put forth on the 
subject appear to me erroneous in the extreme. I 
shall not shrink from giving my own opinion, and 
stating my reasons for maintaining it. In matters 



40 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

like these I dare not call any man master. Painful 
as it is to disagree with able and gifted men on 
religious questions, I dare not take up views of 
inspiration which my head and heart tell me are 
unsound, however high and honoured the names 
of those who maintain them. I believe in my 
conscience that low and defective views of this 
subject are doing immense damage to the cause 
of Christ in these last days. 

Some hold that some of the books of Scripture 
are not inspired at all, and have no more authority 
or claim to our reverence than the writings of any 
ordinary man. — Others who do not go so far as 
this, and allow that all the books in the Bible are 
inspired, maintain that inspiration was only 
partial, and that there are portions in almost 
every book which are uninspired. — Others hold 
that inspiration means nothing more than general 
superintendence and direction, and that, while the 
Bible writers were miraculously preserved from 
making mistakes in great things and matters 



ITS BEALITY AND NATURE. 41 

necessary to salvation, in things indifferent they 

were left to their own unassisted faculties, like 

any other writers. — Some hold that all the ideas in 

the Bible were given by inspiration, but not the 

words and language in which they are clothed, — 

though how to separate ideas from words it is 

rather hard to understand! — Some, finally, allow 

the thorough inspiration of all the Bible, and yet 

maintain that it was possible for the writers to 

make occasional mistakes in their statements, and 

that such mistakes do exist at this day. 

From all these views I totally and entirely 

dissent. They all appear to me more or less 

defective, below the truth, dangerous in their 

tendency, and open to grave and insuperable 

objections. The view which I maintain is that 

every book, and chapter, and verse, and syllable 

of the Bible was given by inspiration of God. I 

hold that not only the substance of the Bible, but 

its language, — not only the ideas of the Bible, but 

its words, — not only certain parts of the Bible, but 

D2, 



42 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

every chapter of the book, — that all and each are 
of Divine authority. I hold that the Scripture 
not only contains the Word of God, but is the 
Word of God. I believe the narratives and 
statements of Genesis, and the catalogues in 
Chronicles, were just as truly written by inspira- 
tion as the Acts of the Apostles. I believe Ezra*s 
account of the nine-and-twenty knives, and St. 
Paul's message about the cloak and parchments, 
were as much written under Divine direction as 
the 20th of Exodus, the 17th of John, or the 8th 
of Eomans. I do not say, be it remembered, that 
all these parts of the Bible are of equal import- 
ance to our souls. Nothing of the kind ! But I 
do say they were all equally given by inspiration * 



* "We affirm that the Bible is the Word of God, and that 
it is not marred with human infirmities. We do not imagine, 
with some, that the Bible is like a threshing-floor, on which 
wheat and chaff lie mingled together, and that it is left for 
the reader to winnow and sift the wheat from the chaff by the 
fan and sieve of his own mind." — Wordsworth on "Inspiration." 
(P. 11.) 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 43 

In making this statement I ask the reader not 
to misunderstand my meaning. I do not forget 
that the Old Testament was written in Hebrew 
and the New Testament in , Greek. The inspiration 
of every word, for which I contend, is the in- 
spiration of every original Hebrew and Greek word, 
as the Bible writers first wrote it down. I stand 
up for nothing more and nothing less than this. 
I lay no claim to the inspiration of every word 
in the various versions and translations of God's 
Word. So far as those translations and versions 
are faithfully and correctly done, so far they are, 
practically, of equal authority with the original 
Hebrew and Greek. We have reason to thank 
God that many of the translations are, in the 
main, faithful and accurate. At any rate our own 
English Bible, if not perfect, is so far correct, that 
in reading it we have a right to believe that we 
are reading in our own tongue not the word of 
man, but of God. 

Now the view for which I contend, — that every 



44 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

-- - --• 

word of the Bible is inspired, — is not accepted by 
many good Christians, and is bitterly opposed in 
many quarters. I shall therefore mention a few 
reasons why it appears to me the only safe and 
tenable view which can be adopted, and the only 
one which is free from innumerable objections. 
If I err in maintaining it I have the comfort, at 
any rate, of erring in good company. I only 
take up the same ground which almost all the 
Fathers occupied ; which Bishop Jewell, and 
Hooker, and Owen, took up long ago ; and which 
Chalmers, Bobert Haldane, Gaussen, Bishop 
Wordsworth, M'Caul, Burgon, and Archdeacon 
Lee of the Irish Church, have ably defended in 
modern days. I know, however, that men's minds 
are variously constituted. Arguments and reasons 
which appear weighty to some are of no weight 
with others. I shall content myself with setting 
down in order the reasons which satisfy me. 

(a) For one thing, I cannot see how the Bible 
can be a perfect rule of faith and practice if it is 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 45 

not fully inspired, and if it contains any flaws and 
imperfections. If the Bible is anything at all it 
is the statute-book of God's kingdom, — the code 
of laws and regulations by which the subjects of 
that kingdom are to live, — the register-deed of 
the terms on which they have peace now and shall 
have glory hereafter. Now, why are we to suppose 
that such a book will be loosely and imperfectly 
drawn up, any more than legal deeds are drawn 
up on earth? Every lawyer can tell us that in 
legal deeds and statutes every word is of import- 
ance, and that property, life, or death may often 
turn on a single word. Think of the confusion 
that would ensue if wills, and settlements, and 
conveyances, and partnership-deeds, and leases, 
and agreements, and acts of parliament were not 
carefully drawn up and carefully interpreted, and 
every word allowed its due weight. Where would 
be the use of such documents if particular words 
went for nothing, and everyone had a right to 
add, or take away, or alter, or deny the validity 



46 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

of words, or erase words at his own discretion? 
At this rate we might as well lay aside our legal 
documents altogether ! Surely we have a right to 
expect that in the book which contains our title- 
deeds for eternity every word should be inspired, 
and nothing imperfect admitted. If God's statute- 
book is not inspired, and every word is not of 
Divine authority, God's subjects are left in a 
pitiable state. I see much in this. 

(6) For another thing, if the Bible is not fully 
inspired, and contains imperfections, I cannot 
understand the language which is frequently used 
about it in its own pages. Such expressions as 
"The oracles of God;"— " He saith;"— "God 
saith" — "the Holy Ghost spake by Esaias the 
prophet ; " — " the Holy Ghost saith, To-day if ye 
will hear His voice," — would appear to me in- 
explicable and extravagant if applied to a book 
containing occasional blemishes, defects, and 
mistakes. (Acts vii. 38.; Rom. iii. 2; Heb. v. 
12; 1 Peter iv. 11; Ephes. iv. 8; Heb. i. 8; 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 47 

Acts xxviil 25 ; Heb. iii. 7 ; x. 15 ; Kom. ix. 25.) 
Once grant that every word of Scripture is in- 
spired, and I see an admirable propriety in the 
languaga I cannot understand " the Holy Ghost," 
making a mistake, or an "oracle" containing 
anything defective ! If any man replies that the 
Holy Ghost did not always speak by Isaiah, I will 
ask him who is to decide when He did and when 
He did not ? I see much in this. 

(c) For another thing, the theory that the Bible 
was not given by inspiration of God, appears to 
me utterly at variance with several quotations from 
the Old Testament which I find in the New. I 
allude to those quotations in which the whole 
force of the passage turns on one single word, 
and once even on the use of the singular instead 
of the plural number. Take, for instance, such 
quotations as "The Lord said unto my Lord." 
(Matt. xxii. 44.) "I said, ye are gods." (John 
x. 34) "To Abraham and his seed were the 
promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of 



48 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

many ; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is 
Christ." (Gal. iii. 16.) "He is not ashamed to 
call them brethren, saying, I will declare Thy 
name unto my brethren." (Heb. ii. 11, 12.) In 
every one of these cases the whole point of the 
quotation lies in a single word.* But if this is 
so, it is hard to see on what principle we can deny 
the inspiration of all the words of Scripture. At 
any rate, those who deny verbal inspiration will 
find it difficult to show us exactly which words 
are inspired and which are not. Who is to draw 
the line, and where is it to be drawn? I see 
much in this. 

(d) For another thing, if the words of Scripture 
are not all inspired, the value of the Bible as a 
weapon in controversy is greatly damaged, if not 
entirely taken away. Who does not know that 
in arguing with Jews, Arians, or Socinians, the 



* It would be easy to multiply texts in proof of this point. 
I will only name the following : Heb. ii. 8; iii. 7—19; iv. 2 — 
J J ; xii. 27. 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 49 

whole point of the texts we quote against them 
often lies in a single word ? What are we to 
reply if an adversary asserts that the special word 
of some text, on which we ground an argument, 
is a mistake of the writer, and therefore of no 
authority ? To my mind it appears that the 
objection would be fatal. It is useless to quote 
texts if we once admit that not all the words of 
which they are composed were given by inspiration. 
Unless there is some certain standard to appeal to 
we may as well hold our tongues. Argument is 
labour in vain if our mouths are to be stopped by 
the retort, "That text is not inspired." I see 
much in this, 

(e) For another thing, to give up verbal inspira- 
tion appears to me to destroy the usefulness of the 
Bible as an instrument for public preaching and 
instruction. Where is the use of choosing a text 
and making it the subject of a pulpit address, if 
we do not believe that every word of the text is 
inspired i Once let our hearers get hold of the 



50 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

* 

idea that the writers of the Bible could make 
mistakes in the particular words they used, and 
they will care little for any reproofs, or exhorta- 
tions, or remarks which are based on words. " How 
do you know," they might ask us, " that this word, 
about which you made such ado yesterday, was 
given by the Holy Ghost? How do you know 
that St. Paul, or St. Peter, or St. John did not 
make a mistake, and use the wrong word ? That 
they could make mistakes about words you yourself 
allow." I know not what others may think. For 
myself, I could give no answer. I see much in this. 
(/) Last, but not least, the denial of verbal 
inspiration appears to me to destroy a great part of 
the usefulness of the Bible as a source of comfort 
and instruction in private reading. Where is the 
truly Christian student of the Bible who does not 
know that words, particular words, afford a large 
portion of the benefit which he derives from his 
daily reading ? How much the value of many a 
cherished text depends on some single phrase, or 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 51 

the number of a substantive, or the tense of a 
verb ? Alas ! there would be an end of all this if 
we once concede that each word is not inspired ; 
and that, for anything we know, some much-loved 
favourite substantive, or verb, or pronoun, or 
adverb, or adjective, was an Apostle's mistake, 
and the word of man, not of God ! What others 
might think I know not For myself, I should 
be tempted to lay aside my Bible in despair, and 
become of -all men most miserable. I see much 
in this. 

Now, I freely grant that many excellent Chris- 
tians think that the view I maintain is open to 
serious objections. That the Bible, generally 
speaking, is given by inspiration, they firmly 
maintain. But they shrink from maintaining that 
inspiration extends to every word of Scripture. 
I am sorry to differ from these worthy people. 
But I cannot see the weight and force of their 
objections. Fairly and honestly examined, they 
fail to carry conviction to my mind. 



52 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

(a) Some object that there are occasional state- 
ments in the Bible which contradict the facts of 
history. Are these all verbally inspired? — My 
answer is that it is far more easy to assert this 
than to prove it. There is nothing of which we 
have so few trustworthy remains as very ancient 
history, and if ancient uninspired history and 
Bible history seem to disagree, it is generally safer 
and wiser to believe that Bible history is right 
and other history wrong. At any rate, it is a 
singular fact that all recent researches in Assyria, 
Babylon, Palestine, and Egypt, show an extraordi- 
nary and increasing tendency to confirm the perfect 
accuracy of the Word of God. The lamented Mr. 
Smith's discoveries at Babylon are a remarkable 
example of what I mean. There are buried 
evidences which God seems to keep in reserve 
for these last days. If Bible history and other 
histories cannot be made to agree at present, it is 
safest to wait. 

(b) Some object that there are occasional state- 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 53 

ments in the Bible which contradict the facts of 
natural science. Are these all inspired ? — My 
answer is again, that it is far more easy to assert 
this than to prove it. The Bible was not written 
to teach a system of geology or astronomy, and 
on matters touching these two sciences it wisely 
uses popular language, such as common people 
can understand. No one thinks of saying the 
Astronomer Boyal contradicts science because he 
speaks of the sun's " rising and setting." If the 
Bible said anywhere that the earth was a flat 
surface, — or that it was a fixed globe round which 
the sun revolved, — or that it never existed in any 
state before Adam and Eve, — there might be some- 
thing in the objection. But it never does so. It 
speaks of scientific subjects as they appear. But 
it never flatly contradicts science.* 

* " The language of Scripture is necessarily adapted to the 
common state of man's intellectual development, in which he 
is not supposed to be possessed of science. Hence the phrases 
used by Scripture are precisely those which science soon teaches 
man to consider inaccurate. Yet they are not on that account 

E2 



54 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

(c) Some object that there are occasional state- 
ments in the Bible which are monstrous, absurd, 
and incredible. Are they really obliged to believe 
that Eve was tempted by the devil in the form of 
a serpent, — that Noah was saved in an ark, — that 
Balaam's ass spoke, — and that Jonah actually went 
into the whale's belly ? Are all these statements 
inspired? — My answer is that Christ's apostles 
speak of these things as historical facts, and were 
more likely to know the truth about them than 
we are. After all, do we believe in miracles or 
not? Do we believe that Christ Himself rose 
from the dead? Let us stick to that one grand 
miracle first, and disprove it if we can. If we 
do believe it, it is foolish to object to things 
because they are miraculous. 

(d) Some object that there are things mentioned 

the less fitted for their purpose, for if any terms had been used 
adapted to a more advanced state of knowledge, they must 
have been unintelligible to those to whom the Scripture was 
first addressed."— WheweWs Philosophy of Inductive Science*. 
Vol. i, p. 686. 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 55 

occasionally in the Bible which are so trifling that 
they are unworthy to be called inspired. They 
point to St. Paul's writing about his cloak, and 
books, and parchments, and ask if we think such 
little matters were really written by inspiration of 
God ? — I answer that the least things affecting any 
of God's children are not too small for the notice 
of Him who numbers "the hairs of our heads." 
There are excellent and edifying lessons to be 
learned from the cloak and parchments, as Robert 
Haldane has shown most convincingly, in his 
work on the " Evidences of Divine Kevelation." 
After all, man knows very little indeed what is 
great and what is small in God's sight The 
history of Nimrod "the mighty hunter" is dis- 
patched in three verses of Genesis, while the 
history of a Syrian dwelling in tents, called 
Abraham, fills up no less than fourteen chapters. 
The microscope applied to the book of nature, can 
show us God's hand in the least lichen that grows 
on the top of Scawfell as well as in the cedar of 



56 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

Lebanon. The veriest trifles, as they seem to us 
in the Book of Scripture, may turn out to be most 
striking confirmations of its truth. Paley has 
shown this admirably in his " Horae Paulinse," and 
Professor Blunt in his " Undesigned Coincidences." 
(e) Some object that there are grave discre- 
pancies in some of the Bible histories, especially 
in the four Gospels, which cannot be made to 
harmonize and agree. Are the words, they ask, 
all inspired in these cases? Have the writers 
made no mistakes ? — I answer that the number 
of these discrepancies is grossly exaggerated, and 
that in many cases they are only apparent, and 
disappear under the touch of common sense. Even 
in the hardest of them, we should remember in 
common fairness, that there are very likely circum- 
stances kept back from us which entirely reconcile 
everything, if we only knew them. Very often 
in these days when two honest, veracious men 
give a separate account of some long story, their 
accounts do not quite tally, because one dwells 



ITS EEALITY AND NATUBE. 57 

on one part and the other on another. All 
well-informed students of history know that the 
precise day when Charles I. erected his standard 
at Nottingham, in the Parliamentary war, has not 
been settled to this hour ! 

(/) Some object that Job's friends, in their 
long speeches, said many weak and foolish things. 
Were all their words inspired ? — An objection like 
this arises from an illogical and confused idea 
of what inspiration means. The book of Job 
contains an historical account of a wonderful part 
of the old patriarch's history, and a report both of 
his speeches and those of his friends. But we 
are nowhere told that either Job, or Eliphaz and 
his companions, spoke all that they spoke by the 
Holy Ghost. The writer of the book of Job was 
thoroughly inspired to record all they said. But 
whether they spoke rightly or wrongly is to be 
decided by the general teaching of Scripture. — No 
one would say that St Peter was inspired when 
he said, "I know not the Man," in the High 



58 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

Priest's palace. But the writer of the Gospel was 
inspired when he wrote it down for our learning. 
— In the Acts of the Apostles the letter of 
Claudius Lysias was certainly not written by 
inspiration, and Gamaliel, and the town clerk of 
Ephesus and Tertullus were not inspired when 
they made their speeches. But I am equally 
certain that St. Luke was inspired to write them 
down and record them in his book. 

(g) Some object that St. Paul, in the 7th 
chapter of the 1st Corinthians, when giving 
certain advice to the Corinthian Church, says at 
one time, " Not I, but the Lord," and at another, 
" I, not the Lord." And they ask, Does not this 
show that in part of his advice he was not 
inspired ? — I answer, Not at all. A careful study 
of the chapter will show that when the Apostle 
says "Not I, but the Lord," he lays down some 
principles on which the Lord had spoken already ; 
and when he says "I, not the Lord," he gives 
advice on some point about which there had been 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 59 

no revelation hitherto. But there is not the 
slightest proof that he is not writing all the 
way through under direct inspiration of God. 

(h) Some object that there are many various 
readings of the words of Scripture, and that we 
cannot, therefore, feel sure that we have the 
original inspired Word of God. I answer that 
the various readings, when fairly examined, will 
prove to be absurdly exaggerated in number and 
importance. Dr. Kennicott, Bengel, and others 
have proved this long ago. No doubt we may 
have lost a few of the original words. We have 
no right to expect infallibility in transcribers and 
copyists, before the invention of printing. But 
there is not a single doctrine in Scripture which 
would be affected or altered, if all the various 
readings were allowed, and the disputed or 
doubtful words were omitted. Considering how 
many hands the Bible passed through before 
printing was invented, and who the transcribers 
were, it is marvellous that the various readings 



i 



60 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

are so few ! The fact that about the immense 
majority of all the words in the old Hebrew and 
Greek Scriptures there is no doubt at all, is little 
short of a miracle, and demands thanksgiving to 
God. One thing is very certain. There is no 
ancient book which has been handed down to us 
with so good a text and so few various readings 
as the Bible. 

(i) Finally, some object that occasional parts of 
the Bible are taken from the writings of uninspired 
men, such as historical chronicles, and pedigrees, 
and lists of names. -Are all these to be regarded 
as inspired ? — I reply that there seems no reason 
why the Holy Ghost should not direct the Bible 
writers to use materials made ready to their hands, 
as well as facts which they had seen themselves, 
and by so directing them, invested such words 
as they used with Divine authority. When St. 
Paul quoted lines from heathen poets he did not 
mean us to regard them as inspired. But he was 
taught by God to clothe his ideas in the words 



ITS BEALtTt AND NATUEE. 61 

which they had used, and by so doing he very 
likely obtained a favourable reading from many. 
And when we read such quotations, or read lists of 
names taken from Jewish chronicles and registers, 
we need not doubt that the Bible writers were 
taught to use such materials by inspiration of God. 
Header, I leave the objections to verbal inspira- 
tion at this point, and will detain you no longer 
with them. It is vain to deny that the subject 
has its difficulties, which will probably never be 
completely solved. I cannot perhaps explain such 
difficulties as the mention of "Jeremy the prophet" 
in Matthew xxvii., or reconcile the third and sixth 
hour in St. John's and St. Mark's account of the 
crucifixion, or Stephen's account of Jacob's burial 
in the seventh chapter of Acts, to my own entire 
satisfaction. But I have no doubt they can be 
explained, and perhaps will be some day. These 
things do not move me. I expect difficulties in 
such a deep and miraculous matter as inspiration, 
which I have not eyes to see through. I am 

r 



62 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

content to wait. It was a wise saying of Faraday, 
that "there are many questions about which it is 
the highest philosophy to keep our minds in a 
state of judicious suspense." It should be a 
settled rule with us never to give up a great 
principle, when we have got hold of it, on account 
of difficulties. Time often make things clear 
which at first look dark. The view of inspiration 
which presents to my own mind the fewest diffi- 
culties, is that in which all the words of Scripture, 
as well as the thoughts, are regarded as inspired* 
Here I take my stand. 

Header, remember what I have just said. Never 
give up a great principle in theology on account 
of difficulties. Wait patiently, and the difficulties 
may all melt away. Let that be an axiom iij. 
your mind. Suffer me to mention an illustration 
of what I mean. Those conversant with astronomy 
know that before the discovery of the planet 
Neptune there were difficulties which greatly 
troubled the most scientific astronomers, respecting 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 63 

i 

certain aberrations of the planet Uranus. These 
aberrations puzzled the minds of astronomers; 
and some of them suggested that they might pos- 
sibly prove the whole Newtonian system to be 
untrue! But at that time a well-known French 
astronomer, named Leverrier, read before the 
Academy of Science a paper, in which he laid 
down this great axiom, — that it did not become a 
scientific man to give up a principle because of 
difficulties which could not be explained. He 
said in effect, " We cannot explain the aberrations 
of Uranus now; but we may be sure that the 
Newtonian system will be proved to be right, 
sooner or later. Something may be discovered 
one day which will prove that these aberrations 
may be accounted for, and yet the Newtonian 
system remain true and unshaken." A few years 
after, the anxious eyes of astronomers discovered 
the last great planet, Neptune. This planet was 
shown to be the true cause of all the aberrations 
of Uranus ; and what the French astronomer had 



i 



64 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

laid down as a principle in science was proved to 
be wise and true. The application of the anecdote 
is obvious. Let us beware of giving up any first 
principle in theology. Let us not give up the 
great principle of plenary verbal inspiration because 
of apparent difficulties. The day may come when 
they will all be solved. In the meantime we may 
rest assured that the difficulties which beset any 
other theory of inspiration are tenfold greater than 
any which beset our own. 

Let me now conclude this tract with a few 
words of plain application. Let us lay aside all 
deep discussion of hard things about the manner 
of inspiration. Let us take it for granted, that, in 
some way or other, whether we can explain it or 
not, we hold the Bible to be the Word of God. 
Header, let us start from this point Give me a 
hearing, while I say a few things which appear to 
me to deserve your attention. 

1. Eeader, is the Bible the Word of God? 
Then mind that you do not. neglect it. Bead it: 



ITS BEALITY AND NATUEE. 65 

Tead it! Begin to read it this very day. What 
greater insult to God can a man be guilty of than 
to refuse to read the letter Qod sends him from 
heaven ? Qh, be sure, if you will not read your 
Bible, you are in fearful danger of losing your 
soul! 

You are in danger, because God will reckon 
with you for yowr neglect of the Bible in the day 
qf judgment. You will have to give account of 
your use of time, strength, and money ; and you 
will also have to give account of your use of the 
Word. You will not stand at that bar on the 
same level, in point of responsibility, with the 
dweller in central Africa, who never heard of the 
Bible. Oh, no! To whom much is given, of 
them much will be required. Of all men's buried 
talents, none will weigh them down so heavily as 
a neglected Bible. As you deal with the Bible, 
so God will deal with your souL Eeader, will you 
not repent, and turn over a new leaf in life, and 
read your Bible? 



65 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

You are in danger, because there is no degree 
of error in religion into which you may not fall. 
Tou are at the mercy of the first clever Jesuit, 
Mormonite, Socinian, Turk, or Jew, who may 
happen to meet you. A land of unwalled villages 
is not more defenceless against an enemy than a 
man who neglects his Bible, You may go on 
tumbling from one step of delusion to another, 
till at length you are landed in the pit of hell. 
Eeader, I say once more, Will you not repent and 
read your Bible ? 

You are in danger, because there is not a single 
reasonable excuse you can allege for neglecting the 
Bible. You have no time to read it forsooth ! But 
you can make time for eating, drinking, sleeping, 
getting money and spending money, and perhaps 
for news-paper reading and smoking. You might 
easily make time to read the Word. Alas ! it is 
not want of time, but waste of time that ruins 
souls ! — You find it too troublesome to read for- 
aooth ! You had better say at once it is too much 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 67 

trouble to go to heaven, and you are content to 
go to hell. Truly these excuses are like the rub- 
bish round the walls of Jerusalem in Nehemiah's 
days. They would all soon disappear if, like the 
Jews, you had "a mind to work." Eeader, I 
say for the last time, Will you not repent and 
read your Bible ? 

Believe me, believe me, the Bible itself is the 
best witness of its own inspiration. The men who 
quibble and make difficulties about inspiration 
are too often the very men who never read the 
Scriptures at all. The darkness and hardness they 
profess to complain of is far more often in their 
own hearts than in the book. Oh, be persuaded 1 
Take it up and begin to read. 

2. Is the Bible the Word of God ? Then be 
sure you always read it with deep reverence. Say 
to your soul whenever you open the Bible, " my 
soul, thou art going to read a message from God." 
The sentences of judges, and the speeches of kings, 
are received with awe and respect How much 



68 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

more reverence is due to the words of the Judge 
of judges and "King of kings! Avoid, as you 
would cursing and swearing, that irreverent habit 
of mind into which some modern divines have 
unhappily fallen, in speaking about the Bible. 
They handle the contents of the holy book as 
carelessly and disrespectfully as if the writers were 
such men as themselves. They make one think 
of a child composing a book to expose the fancied 
ignorance of his own father,— or of a pardoned 
murderer criticising the handwriting and style of 
his own reprieve. Enter rather into the spirit of 
Moses on Mount Horeb: — "Put thy shoes from 
off thy feet ; the place whereon thou standest is 
holy ground." 

3. Is the Bible the Word of God ? Then be 
sure you never read it without fervent prayer for 
the help and teaching of the Holy Spirit. Here is 
the rock on which many make shipwreck. They 
do not ask for wisdom and instruction, and so 
they find the Bible dark, and carry nothing away 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 69 

from it. You should pray for the Spirit to guide 
you into all truth* You should beg the . Lord 
Jesus Christ to "open your understanding," as 
He did that of His disciples. The Lord God, by 
whose inspiration the book was written, keeps the 
keys of the book, and alone can enable you to 
understand it profitably. Nine times over in one 
Psalm does David cry, " Teach me." Five times 
over, in the same Psalm, does he say, " Give me 
understanding." Well says John Owen, Dean of 
Christ Church, Oxford, " There is a sacred light in 
the Word: but there is a covering and veil on 
the eyes of men, so that they cannot behold it 
aright. Now, the removal of this veil is the 
peculiar work of the Holy Spirit." Humble prayer 
will throw more light on your Bible than Poole, 
or Henry, or Scott, or Burkitt, or Bengel, or 
Alford, or Wordsworth, or Barnes, or Ellicott, or 
Lightfoot, or any commentary that ever waa 
written. 

Tbe Bible is a large, book or a small one, a dark 



70 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

or a bright one, according to the spirit in which 
men read it. Intellect alone will do nothing with 
it Wranglers and first class men will not under- 
stand it unless their hearts are right as well as 
their heads. The highest critical and grammatical 
knowledge will find it a sealed book without the 
teaching of the Holy Ghost Its contents are 
often " hid to the wise and prudent and revealed 
to babes." Header, remember this, and say 
always, when you open your Bible, " O God, 
for Christ's sake, give me the teaching of the 
Spirit" 

4. Finally, is the Bible the Word of God ? 
Then let us all resolve from this day forward 
to prize the Bible 'more. Let us not fear being 
idolaters of this blessed book. Men may easily 
make an idol of the Church, of ministers, of 
sacraments, or of intellect Men cannot make an 
idol of the Word. Let us regard all who would 
damage the authority of the Bible, or impugn its 
credit, as spiritual robbers. We are travelling 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 71 

through a wilderness : they rob us of our only 
guide* We are voyaging over a stormy sea : they 
rob us of our only compass. We are toiling over 
a weary road : they pluck our staff out of our 
hands. And what do these spiritual robbers give 
us in place of the Bible ? What do they offer as 
a guide and provision for our souls? Nothing! 
absolutely nothing ! Big swelling words ! Empty 
promises of new light t High sounding jargon ; 
but nothing substantial and real! They would 
fain take from us the bread of life, and they do 
not give us in its place so much as a stone. Let 
us turn a deaf ear to them. Let us firmly grasp 
and prize the Bible more and more, the more it 
is assaulted. 

Beader, God has given you the Bible to make 
you wise unto salvation, and guide you to ever- 
lasting life. Do not neglect this precious gift. 
Bead it diligently. Walk in its light, and you 
shall be saved. 



72 BIBLE INSPIRATION 



P.S. 



The following quotations about inspiration, from 
the works of four eminent British theologians, I 
venture to think, deserve attentive perusal. They 
are valuable in themselves on account of the 
arguments which they contain. They also supply 
abundant proof that the high view of verbal 
inspiration which I advocate in this tract is no 
jnoderp invention, but an "old path," in which 
many of God's ablest children have walked, and 
found it a good way. 

1. Bishop Jewell, author of the " Apology," 
was unquestionably one of the most learned of the 
English Eeformers. Let us hear what he says : — 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 7& 

" St Paul, speaking of the Word of God, saith, 
'the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of 
God, and is profitable/ Many think the Apostle's 
speech is hardly true of the whole Scripture, — that 
all and every part of the Scripture is profitable. 
Much is spoken of genealogies and pedigrees, of 
lepers, of sacrificing goats and oxen, etc. These 
seem to have little profit in them : to be idle and 
vain. If they show vain in thine eyes, yet hath 
not the Lord set them down in vain. The words 
of the Lord are pure words, as the silver tried in a 
furnace of earth refined seven times. There is no 
sentence, no clause, no word, no syllable, no letter, 
but it is written for thy instruction: there is not 
one jot but it is sealed and signed with the blood 
of the Lamb. Our imaginations are idle, our 
thoughts are vain : there is no idleness, no vanity, 
in the Word of God. Those oxen and goats which 
were sacrificed teach thee to kill the uncleanness 
and filthiness of thine heart : they teach thee that 

thou art guilty of death, when thy life must be 

G 



7± BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

redeemed by the death of some beast : they lead 
thee to believe the forgiveness of sins by a more- 
perfect sacrifice, since it was not possible that the 
blood of bulls or of goats should take away sins. 
That leprosy teacheth thee the uncleanness and 
leprosy of thy soul. These genealogies and pedi- 
grees lead us to the birth of our Saviour Christ, 
so that the whole Word of God is pure and holy* 
No word, no letter, no syllable, nor point or prick 
thereof, but is written and preserved for thy sake/' 
—Jewell on the Holy Scriptures. Works, voL iv., p. 
1175, Parker Society. 

2. Eichard Hooker, author of the "Ecclesi- 
astical Polity," is justly respected by all schools of 
thought in the Church of England as " the judicious 
Hooker." Let us hear what he says : — 

" Touching the manner how men, by the Spirit 
of Prophecy in Holy Scripture, have spoken and 
written of things to come, we must understand, 
that as the knowledge of that they spake, so like- 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 



wise the utterance of that they knew, came not by 
those usual and ordinary means whereby we are 
brought to understand the mysteries of our salva- 
tion, and are wont to instruct others in the same. 
For whatsoever we know, we have it by the hands 
and ministry of men, which lead us along lik6 
children from a letter to a syllable, from a syllable 
to a word, from a word to a line, from a line to a 
sentence, from a sentence to a side, and so turn 
over. But God Himself was their instructor. He 
Himself taught them, partly by dreams and visions 
in the night, partly by revelations in the day, 
taking them aside from amongst their brethren, 
and talking with them as a man would talk with 
his neighbours in the way. Thus they became 
acquainted even with the secret and hidden counsels 
of God ; they saw things which themselves were 
not able to utter, they beheld that whereat men 
and angels are astonished, they understood in the 
beginning what should come to pass in the last 
day3. God, which lightened thus the eyes of their 



76 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

understanding, giving them knowledge by unusual 
and extraordinary means, did also miraculously 
Himself frame and fashion their words and writings, 
insomuch that a greater difference there seemeth 
not to be between the manner of their knowledge, 
than there is between the manner of their speech 
and ours. ' We have received/ saith the Apostle, 
• not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which 
is of God, that we might know the things that are 
given, to us of God : which things also we speak, 
not in words which man's wisdom teacheth, but 
which the Holy Ghost doth teach.' This is that 
which the Prophets mean by those books written 
full within and without; which books were so 
often delivered them to eat, not because God fed 
them with ink and paper, but to teach us, that so 
often as He employed them in this heavenly work, 
they neither spake nor wrote any word of their own, 
hut uttered syllable by syllable as the Spirit put it in 
their mouths, no otherwise than the harp or the 
Jute doth give a sound according to the direction 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 77 

of his hands that holdeth it and striketh it with 
skill"— Hooker's Works. Vol iii., 537, 540. 

3. John Owen, Dean of Christ Church, Oxford, 
was the most learned and argumentative of the 
Puritans. Let us hear what he says : — 

" Holy men of God spake as they were moved 
by the Holy Ghost When the word was thus 
brought to them it was not left to their own 
understandings, wisdom, minds, memories, to order, 
dispose, and give it out; but they were bornef, 
actuated, carried out by the Holy Ghost, to speak, 
deliver, and write all that, and nothing but that, 
— to very tittles, — that was so brought unto them. 
They invented not words themselves, suited to the 
things they had learned, but only expressed the 
word that they received. Though their mind and 
understanding were used in the choice of words 
(whence arise all the differences in their manner 
of expression), yet they were so guided that their 

words were not their own, but immediately supplied 

a2> 



78 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 



unto them. Not only the doctrine they taught 
was the word of truth, — truth itself, — but the words 
whereby they taught it were words of truth from 
God Himselt Thus, allowing the contribution of 
proper instruments for the reception and represen- 
tation of words which answer to the mind and 
tongue of the Prophets in the coining of the voice 
of God to them, — every apex of the written Word 
is equally divine, and as immediately from God 
as the voice wherewith, or whereby, He spake to 
us in the Prophets ; and is therefore accompanied 
with the same authority in itself and to us." — 
Owen on the Divine Original of the Scripture. VoL 
xvi, p. 305. 

4. Dr. Chalmers was probably the most 
intellectual and deep-thinking theologian that 
intellectual Scotland has ever produced. Let us 
hear what he says : — 

(a) "The subject-matter of the Bible has to 
jpass through the minds of the selected Prophets 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 79 

and Apostles, and to issue thence in language ere 
it comes forth in the shape of Scripture upon the 

world. Now it is here that we meet the advocates 
of a partial or mitigated inspiration, and would, 
make common cause against one and all of them. 
There is not one theory short, by however so little, 
of a thorough and perfect inspiration, — there is 
not one of them but is chargeable with the con- 
sequence, that the subject-matter of revelation 
suffers and is deteriorated in the closing footsteps 
of its progress; and just before it settles into 
that ultimate position, where it stands forth to 
guide and illuminate the world. It existed purely 
in heaven. It descended purely from heaven to 
earth. It was deposited purely by the great 
Agent of revelation in the minds of the Apostles. 
But then we are told that when but a little way 
from the final landing place, then, instead of being 
carried forward purely to the situation where 
alone the great purpose of the whole movement, 
was to be fulfilled, then was it abandoned to itself, 



80 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

and then were human infirmities permitted to 
mingle with it> and to mar its lustre. Strange, 
that just when entering on the functions of an 
authoritative guide and leader to mankind, that 
then, and not till then, the soil and the feebleness 
of humanity should be suffered to gather around 
it Strange, that, with the inspiration of thoughts, 
it should make pure ingress into the minds of the 
Apostles; but wanting the inspiration of words 
should not make pure egress to that world in 
whose behalf alone, and for whose admonition 
alone, this great movement originated in heaven/ 
and terminated in earth. Strange, more especially 
strange, in the face of the declaration that not 
unto themselves but unto us they ministered these 
things, — ^strange, nevertheless, that this revelation 
should come in purely to themselves, but to us 
should come forth impurely, with somewhat, it 

# 

would appear, with somewhat the taint and the 

obscuration of human frailty attached to it. — It 

matters not at what point in the progress of this 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 81 

celestial truth to our world, the obscuration has 
been cast upon it It comes to us a dim and 
desecrated thing at last; and man instead of 
holding converse with God's unspotted testimony, 
has an imperfect, a mutilated Bible put into his 
hands." 

(6) " Such being our views, it is the unavoidable 
consequence of them that we should hold the 
Bible, for all the purposes of a revelation, to be 
perfect in its language, as well as perfect in its 
doctrine. And for this conclusion it is not 
necessary that we should arbitrate between the 
theories of superintendence and suggestion. The 
superintendence that would barely intercept the 
progress of error, we altogether discard, — con- 
ceiving, that, if this term be applicable to the 
process of inspiration at all, it must be that 
efficient superintendence which not only secures 
that, negatively, there shall be nothing wrong, — 
but which also secures that, affirmatively, there 



82 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 

should at all times have emanated from the sacred 
penmen, the fittest topics, and these couched in 
the fittest and most appropriate expressions. 
Whether this has been effected partly by super- 
intendence and partly by suggestion, or wholly by 
suggestion, we care not. We have no inclination 
and no taste for these distinctions. Our cause is 
independent of them ; nor can we fully participate 
in the fears of those alarmists who think that out 
cause is materially injured by them. The im- 
portant question with us is not the process of the 
manufacture, but the qualities of the resulting 
commodity. The former we hold not to be a 
relevant, and we are not sure that it is a legitimate 
inquiry. It is on the latter we take our stand ; 
and the superabundant testimonies of Scripture 
on the worth and the perfection and the absolute 
authority of the Word — these form the strong- 
holds of an argument that goes to establish all 
which the most rigid advocates for a total and 
infallible inspiration ought to desire. Our concern 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 83. 

is with the work, and not with the workmanship ; 
nor need we intrude into the mysteries of the 
hidden operation, if only assured by the explicit 
testimonies of Scripture that the product of that 
operation, is, both in substance and expression a 
perfect directory of faith and practice. We believe 
that, in the composition of that record, men not 
only thought as they were inspired, but spake as 
they were moved by the Holy Ghost. But our 
argument for the absolute perfection of Holy Writ 
is invulnerably beyond the reach even of those 
who have attempted to trace with geographical 
precision the line which separates the miraculous 
from the natural; and tell us when it was that 
Apostles wrote the word which the Spirit prompted 
them, and when it was that they wrote the words 
which the Spirit permitted them. To the result, 
in our humble apprehension, it positively matters 
not. Did they speak the words that the Spirit 
prompted, — these words were therefore the best? 
Did they speak the words which the Spirit 



84 BIBLE INSPIRATION: 



permitted, — it was because these words were the 
best ? The optimism of the Bible is alike secured 
in loth these ways; and the sanction of the Spirit 
extended, both in respect of sentiments and of 
sayings, to every clause of it. In either way, they 
effectively are the words of the Spirit ; and God 
through the Bible is not presenting truths through 
the medium of others' language. He in effect has 
made it His own language ; and God, through tlie 
Bible, is speaking to us? 

(c) " It is the part of Christians to rise like a 
wall of fire around the integrity and inspiration 
of Scripture; and to hold them as intact and 
inviolable, as if a rampart were thrown around 
them, whose foundations are on earth and whose 
battlements are in heaven. It is this tampering 
with limits that destroys and defaces everything ; 
and therefore it is precisely when the limit is 
broken that the alarm should be sounded. If the 
battle-cry ia to be lifted at all, it should be lifted 



ITS REALITY AND NATURE. 85 

at the outset; and so on the first mingling, by 
however so slight an infusion, of things human 
with things divine, all the friends of the Bible 
should join heart and hand against so foul and 
fearful a desecration." — Clialmers 9 Christian Evi- 
dences, Vol. ii p. 371, 372, 375, 376, 396. 



H 



\ 



losdoh: 



SRorfce bs the same JUrthor, 



Knots Untied. 

Being Plain Statements on Disputed Points in Religion from the 
Stand-point of an Evangelical Churcl 
Third Edition. Extra doth, 7s. 6d. 



Expository Thoughts on the Gospels. 

Designed for Family and Private Beading, -with the Text com- 
plete, and copious Notes. 

St. Matthew. Extra cloth. 6s. 

St. Mabk. Uniform with the above. 6s. 

St. Lukk. Vol. I. 6s. 6d. 

St. Luke. Vol n. 7s. 

St. John. Vol. I. 6s. 6d. 

St. John. Vol. II. 6s. fld. 

St. John. Vol. HI. 8s. 

This work is also kept in half Morocco, at an excess of S». per volume. In 
extra half Morocco binding, at 5t». 6d ; or whole Turkey Morocco, 6s. 64. 
per volume. Also in extra bindings, for presentation. 

Assurance. 

(2 Tim. iv. 6, 7, 8. ) With Notes and Extracts from Writers of the 
17th century. Seventh Edition, revised and enlarged. Limp 
cloth, Is. 

Bishops and Clergy of Other Days. 

With an Introduction oh the Real Merits of the Reformers and 
Puritans. Grown 8vo'. f extra cloth, 4s. 

Church Reform. 

Being Papers on the Subject, with full Notes and Introduction. 
Grown 8vo. Extra cloth, limp, 2s. 6d. 

Coming Events and Present Duties. 

Being Miscellaneous Sermons and Addresses on Prophetical 
Subjects ; arranged, revised, and corrected. Grown 8vo. 8a. 6d. 

Holiness, 

and other Kindred Subjects. With a Preface for the limes. 
Small 8vo., extra cloth, 8s. 6d. 



/ 



Home Truths. 

Being the Miscellaneous Addresses and Tracts, revised and cor- 
rected especially for this work. Sixth edition. Fcap 8vo., extra 
cloth, lettered. Eight Series. Each illustrated with a Frontispiece 
and Vignette Title. Each volume, Ss. 6d. 
This work is also kept in Morocco* JRussia, and other elegant bindings, for 
presents; prices and specimens of which wUl be forwarded on appli- 
cation to the Publishers. 

Re-issue of Home Truths. 

Containing the Miscellaneous Writings of the Rev. Canon Byle, 
M. A. In eight volumes. Extra cloth, gilt edges, 26s. 

Hymns for the Church oh Earth. 

Being 800 Hymns, for the most part of Modern date. Selected 
and arranged by the Bev. J. C. Byle, M.A. Tenth Edition. 

In small 8vo., black cloth, red edges, 4s.; limp cloth, for invalids, 4b.; 
black antique, 4s. 6d. ; violet and extra cloth antique, gilt edges, 6s. ; 
Turkey Morocco, 10s. 6d. Russia and other bindings, for presentation, 

A Portable Edition. Printed on toned paper. Extra cloth, gilt edges, 
Ss. 6d. ; red edges, 3s. 

Hymns for the Church on Earth. 

An entirely New and Enlarged Edition of 400 Hymns. In various 
cloth bindings, 4s. 6cL, 6s., and in Morocco, 10s. 

Spiritual Songs. 

Coloss. iii. 6. Being One Hundred Hymns, not to be found in 
the hymn books most commonly used. Selected by the Bev. 
J. C. Byle, M.A. Fifteenth enlarged edition. Series I., glazed 
wrapper, 9d. ; fancy cloth, gilt edges, Is. Series II., uniform 
with the first series : in glased wrapper, gilt edges, Is. ; limp 
cloth, Is. 4d. 

The Additional Hymn-Book. 

Being Three Hundred Hymns for Public Worship, most of them 
not to be found in the Collections commonly used. Limp cloth, 
6d. ; extra cloth, thin boards, 9d. ; cloth boards, Is. 

The Two Bears, 

And other Sermons for Children. With Illustrations by Dalziel. 
Extra cloth. Is. (3d. 

Young Men Exhorted. 

An Address to Young Men. Tenth Edition. Fcap 8vo., 68pp., 
cloth extra, Is. ; tinted wrapper, 6d 

A detailed List of all the Works of the Rev. J. O. Byle may be obtained on 

application to the Publishers. 



\ 



or, Common Mistakes in Religion. A Series of Short Readings, 

,clo 



or. Counsels to Christians on the Details of Everyday life. With 

~ " " ~ " - ■ { r — - 



BY THE REV, GEORGE EVERARD, M.A., 

Vicar of St. Mark's, Wolverhampton. 

Beneath the Cross. 

Counsels, Meditations, and Prayers for Communicants. Third Ed. 
18mo., limp cloth, Is. ; extra cloth, Is. 6d. ; Morocco, 2s. 6d. 

The Wrong Train ; 

or, Common Mistakes 

in very large type. Feap 8vo, cloth boards, Is 6d ; printed cover, Is! 

Day by Day ; 

or, Counsels to 

Introduction by the Rev. T. Vores, Incumbent of St. Mary's, 
Hastings. Eighth Edition. Fcap 8vo., cloth, red edges, Ss. ; an- 
tique, gilt edges, 3s. 6d. 
Cheap Edition, uniform -with " Not Tour Own." Is. 6d. 

Steps Across ; 

or, Guidance and Help to the Anxious and Doubtful. A Com- 
panion Volume to "Day by Day." Fcap 8vo. Goth boards, 
2s. 6d. Extra, gilt edges, Ss. 

Before His Footstool. 

Family Prayers for One Month, with Prayers for Special Occasions, 
and Introduction. Second Edition. FcapSvo. Extra cloth, 2s. 6d. 

" Not Your Own : " 

or, Counsels to Young Christians. Twelfth Edition. 18mo., cloth 
limp, Is. ; extra binding, Is. 6d. 

The Home of Bethany. 

or, Christ Revealed as the Teacher and Comforter of His people. 
Limp cloth, Is. Extra cloth, gilt edges, Is. 6d. 

Safe and Happy. 

Words of Help and Encouragement to Young Women, with 
Prayers for Daily use. Uniform with "Not Tour Own," etc. 
Seventh edition. limp cloth, Is. Extra cloth, gilt edges, Is. 6d. 

Zionward. 

Help on t 

Own." Extra cloth, Is. 6d. 

Home Sundays ; 

or, Help and Consolation from the Sanctuary. Second Edition. 
Cloth extra, 8s. ; bevelled, gilt edges, 8s. 6d. 

Welcome Homel 

or, Plain Teachings from the Story of the Prodigal. Second 
Edition. 8d. 



Help on the Way to the Better Land. Uniform with " Not Your 
do" 



\ 



BY THE LATE LORD BISHOP OF CARLISLE, 

Words of Eternal Life ; 

or, the First Principles of the Doctrine of Christ: set forth in 
Eighteen Sermons. Grown 8vo., cloth. 7s. 

New Testament Millennarianism ; 

or. the Kingdom and Coming- of Christ, as taught by Himself and 
His Apostles. 640 pp. Crown 8vo., extra cloth. 10s. 

The Way of Peace ; 

or, the Teaching of Scripture concerning Justification, Sanntifica- 
tion, and Assurance. In Sermons, preached before the University 
of Oxford. Fouith edition. Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. 

BY THE LATE BR0WNL0W NORTH, B.A. 

Think on these Things ; 

Wisdom : her cry.— Wisdom : who has it ?— The Grace of God- 
Christ the Saviour : Christ the Judge. Uniform with " Our- 
selves." 3s. 

You ! what You are, and what You may be. 

Sketched from the history of the Gadarene. Uniform with * * Our- 
selves." Square. Is. 

Ourselves : 

A Picture sketched from the History of the Children of Israel. 
Fourth Edition. Cloth boards, 2s. 6d. ; antique binding, 8s. 
Fifth and Cheaper Edition. 18mo., cloth limp. Is. 9d. 

The Prodigal Son ; 

or, the Way Home.' Cloth boards, extra, antique binding. 2s. 

Yes ! or No ! 

or, God's Offer of Salvation. Gen. xxiv. 68. Uniform with 
" Ourselves." Third Edition. Extra binding. 8s. 18mo., cloth 
limp, cheap edition. Is. 9d. 

The Rich Man and Lazarus. 

A Practical Exposition. Uniform with " Ourselves. ** Second 
Edition. Square 18mo., cloth boards, Is. 6d. ; extra binding. 2s. 

Leaves. A Packet containing Fifty Large Type Tracts of four pages 
each, for general distribution, 6d. 

Uniform Series of Large Type Books. Limp cloth. Each Sixpence. 

Christ the Saviour,— Christ the The Good Physician. 

Judge. Think I 

Earnest Words, New and Old. Wisdom : Her Cry. 

Gathered Leaves. Wisdom: Who has it T 

God's Way of Salvation. Words for the Anxious. 



L 



London: William Hunt and Company, 12, Paternoster Roto. 



