"Presented  to 

4°\l/ycliffe     (Allege, 

v  v  >*^ 

-|  eronto, 
<j 

Frederick  ' 

,  1SS5. 


of  the 


of 


ta 


Vycliffe  College  Library 


CLARK'S 


FOREIGN 


THEOLOGICAL   LIBRARY. 


FOUETH  SEK1ES. 
VOL.  XV. 


Dtlttjscl)  on  tljj  i3voj)I)tcu«   of 


'  l    '/  '  V 

VOL.  II. 


EDINBURGH: 
T.  AND  T.  CLARK,  38,  GEORGE  STREET. 

MDCCCLXXXIV. 


PfclNTED    BY    MORIUSON    AND   GIBB 
FOR 

T.    &   T.    CLARK,    EDINBURGH. 


HAMILTON,    ADAMS,   AND   CO. 
DUBLIN,  ....  GEORGH    HERBKRT. 

NEW   YORK  .....  SCRIBNEK    AND    WKLFORD. 


BIBLICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON 


THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH, 


BY 

FRANZ   DELITZSCH.   D.D., 


PROFESSOR    OF  THKOLOOT. 


from  i\t  German, 

BY 

THE    EEV.     JAMES     MARTIN,     B.  A. 


VOL.  IL 


EDINBURGH: 
T.  &  T.  CLARK,  38,  GEORGE  STREET. 

MDCCCLXXXIV. 


CONTENTS 


PART  V. 

PACK 

BOOK  OF  WOES  ;  OR,  HISTORICAL  DISCOURSES  DELATING  TO  ASSHUR 

AND  THE  EGYPTIAN  ALLIANCE  (CHAP,  xxvm.-xxxm.),  .  1 

THE  FIRST  WOE. — Judgment  upon  Samaria  and  Jerusalem, 

and  Consolation  for  both  (Chap,  xxviii.),  .  .  2 

THE  SECOND  WOE. — The  Oppression  and  Deliverance  of  Ariel 

(Chap,  xxix.),       .  .  .  .  .  .17 

THE  THIRD  WOE. — The  Momentous  Result  of  the  Alliance 

with  Egypt  (Chap,  xxx.),  ....  26 

THE  FOURTH  WOE.— The  False  Help  ;  the  Despised  One  pitied ; 

and  the  New  Era  (Chap,  xxxi.-xxxii.  1-8),          .  .          43 

Against  the  Women  of  Jerusalem  (Chap,  xxxii.  9-20),  .  50 

THE  FIFTH  WOE. — Woe  concerning  Asshur  ;  Deliverance  and 

Glory  of  Jerusalem  (Chap,  xxxiii.),          ...  57 

PART    VI. 

FINALE  OF  THE  JUDGMENT  UPON  ALL  THE  WORLD  (MORE  ESPE 
CIALLY  UPON  EDOM),  AND  REDEMPTION  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF 
JEHOVAH  (CHAP,  xxxiv.  xxxv.),  ...  66 


PART  VII. 

FULFILMENTS  OF  PROPHECY;  AND  PROPHECIES  BELONGING  TO 
THE  FOURTEENTH  YEAR  OF  HEZEKIAH'S  REIGN,  AND  THE 
TIMES  IMMEDIATELY  FOLLOWING  (CHAP.  XXXVI.-XXXIX.),  .  80 

A.  First  Assyrian  Attempt  to  compel  the  Surrender  of  Jeru 

salem  (Chap,  xxxvi.-xxxvii.  7),  ...  84 

B.  Second  Attempt  of  the  Assyrians  to  force  the  Surrender 

of     Jerusalem.       Its     Miraculous     Deliverance     (Chap, 
xxxvii.  8  sqq.),      ......  94 


vi  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

C.  Hezekiah's  Illness.      Isaiah  assures  him  of  his  Recovery 

(Chap,  xxxviii.),  .....         Ill 

D.  Threatening  of  the  Babylonian  Captivity  occasioned  by 

Hezekiah  (Chap,  xxxix.),  .  .  .  .122 


SECOND  HALF  OF  THE  COLLECTION  (CHAP.  XL.-LXVL). 

PART  L 

FIRST  PROPHECY. — Words  of  Comfort,  and  the  God  of  Comfort 

(Chap,  xl.),  ...  .  139 

SECOND  PROPHECY. — The  God  of  the  World's  History,  and  of 

Prophecy  (Chap,  xli.),  .  .  .  .  .157 

THIRD  PROPHECY. — The  Mediator  of  Israel  and  Saviour  of  the 

Gentiles  (Chap,  xlil  1-xliii.  13),  .  .  .174 

FOURTH  PROPHECY. — Avenging  and  Deliverance ;  and  Outpouring 

of  the  Spirit  (Chap,  xliii.  14-xliv.  5),  .  .  .  195 

FIFTH  PROPHECY. — The  Ridiculous  Gods  of  the  Nations ;  and  the 

God  of  Israel,  who  makes  His  People  to  rejoice  (Chap. 

xliv.  6-23), .205 

SIXTH  PROPHECY. — Cyrus,  the  Anointed  of  Jehovah,  and  Deliverer 

of  Israel  (Chap.  xliv.  24-xlv.),  .  .  .  .214 

SEVENTH  PROPHECY.— Fall  of  the  Gods  of  Babel  (Chap,  xlvi.),  .  231 
EIGHTH  PROPHECY. — Fall  of  Babel,  the  Capital  of  the  Empire  of 

the  World  (Chap,  xlvii.),  ....  237 

NINTH  PROPHECY. — Deliverance  from  Babylon  (Chap,  xlviii.),  .  245 

PART  II. 

FIRST  PROPHECY. — Self-attestation  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah. 

The  Despondency  of  Zion  reproved  (Chap,  xlix.),  .  2.06 

SECOND  PROPHECY. — Israel's  Self -rejection ;  and  the  Stedfastness 

of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  (Chap.  L),  .  .  .  274 

THIRD  PROPHECY. — The  bursting  forth  of  Salvation,  and  turning 

away  of  the  Cup  of  Wrath  (Chap,  li.),  .  .  .  281 

FOURTH  PROPHECY. — Jerusalem  exchanges  Servitude  for  Domi 
nion,  and  Imprisonment  for  Liberty  (Chap.  lii.  1-12),  .  295 

FIFTH  PROPHECY. — Golgotha  and  Sheblimini,  or  the  Exaltation 
of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  out  of  deep  Degradation  (Chap, 
lii.  13-liii.), 301 


CONTENTS.  vii 

PAGK 

SIXTH  PROPHECY. — The  Glory  of  Jerusalem,  the  Church  of  the 

Servants  of  Jehovah  (Chap,  liv.),  .  .  342 

SEVENTH  PROPHECY. — Come  and  take  the  sure  Salvation  of 

Jehovah  (Chap.  lv.),  .....  353 
EIGHTH  PROPHECY. — Sabbatical  Admonitions,  and  Consolation  for 

Proselytes  and  Eunuchs  (Chap.  Ivi.  1-8),  .  .  360 

NINTH  PROPHECY. — Neglect  of  Duty  by  the  readers  of  Israel ; 

and  Errors  of  the  People  (Chap.  hi.  9->ii.),       .  .        364 

PART  III. 

FIRST  PROPHECY.— The  False  Worship  and  the  True,  with  the  Pro 
mises  belonging  to  the  latter  (Chap.  Iviii.),  .  .  384 

SECOND  PROPHECY. — The  existing  "Wall  of  Partition  broken  down 

at  last  (Chap,  lix.),  .  .  .  .  .  395 

THIRD  PROPHECY. — The  Glory  of  the  Jerusalem  of  the  Last  Days 

(Chap.  lx.),  ......  409 

FOURTH  PROPHECY. — The  Glory  of  the  Office  committed  to  the 

Servant  of  Jehovah  (Chap.  Ixi.),  .  .  .  .  424 

FIFTH  PROPHECY— The  gradual  Extension  of  the  Glory  of  Jeru 
salem  (Chap.  Ixii.),  .....  434 

SIXTH  PROPHECY.— Judgment  upon  Edom,  and  upon  the  whole 

World  that  is  hostile  to  the  Church  (Chap.  Ixiii.  1-6),  .  442 

THE  THREE  CLOSING  PROPHECIES. 

FIRST  CLOSING  PROPHECY. — Thanksgiving,  Confession,  and  Sup 
plication  of  the  Church  of  the  Captivity  (Chap.  Ixiii.  7- 
Ixiv.), 451 

SECOND  CLOSING  PROPHECY. — Jehovah's  Answer  to  the  Church's 

Prayer  (Chap.  Ixv.),  .....  474 

THIRD  CLOSING  PROPHECY. — Exclusion  of  Scorners  from  the  coming 

Salvation  (Chap.  Ixvi.),  .....  493 


APPENDIX, 519 

OBSERVATIONS  ON  ISAIAH  xxi.    By  J.  G.  WETZSTEIN,          .  .        625 


THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

PART   Y. 

BOOK    OF    WOES; 

OR  HISTORICAL  DISCOURSES  RELATING  TO  ASSHUR  AND 
THE  EGYPTIAN  ALLIANCE. 

CHAP,  xxvm.-xxxm. 

ESE  chapters  carry  us  to  the  earliest  years  of 
Hezekiah's  reign,  probably  to  the  second  and  third ; 
as  Samaria  has  not  yet  been  destroyed.  They  run 
parallel  to  the  book  of  Micah,  which  also  takes  its 
start  from  the  destruction  of  Samaria,  and  are  as  faithful  a 
mirror  of  the  condition  of  the  people  under  Hezekiah,  as  ch. 
vii.-xii.  were  of  their  condition  under  Ahaz.  The  time  of  Ahaz 
was  characterized  by  a  spiritless  submission  to  the  Assyrian  yoke  ; 
that  of  Hezekiah  by  a  casual  striving  after  liberty.  The  people 
tried  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  Assyria ;  not  with  confidence  in 
Jehovah,  however,  but  in  reliance  upon  the  help  of  Egypt. 
This  Egypticizing  policy  is  traced  step  by  step  by  Isaiah,  in 
ch.  xxviii.-xxxii.  The  gradual  rise  of  these  addresses  may  be 
seen  from  the  fact,  that  they  follow  the  gradual  growth  of  the 
alliance  with  Egypt  through  all  its  stages,  until  it  is  fully  con 
cluded.  By  the  side  of  this  casual  ground  of  trust,  which 
Jehovah  will  sweep  away,  the  prophet  exhibits  the  precious 
corner-stone  in  Zion  as  the  true,  firm  ground  of  confidence. 
We  might  therefore  call  these  chapters  (xxviii.-xxxiii.)  "  the 
book  of  the  precious  corner-stone,"  just  as  we  called  ch.  vii.  - xii. 
"  the  book  of  Immanuel."  But  the  prophecy  in  ch.  xxviii.  16 
VOL.  II.  A 


2  THE  PKOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

does  not  determine  and  mould  the  whole  of  this  section,  in 
the  same  manner  in  which  the  other  section  is  moulded  and 
governed  by  the  prophecy  of  the  Son  of  the  Virgin.  We 
therefore  prefer  to  call  this  cycle  of  prophecy  "  the  book  of 
woes ;"  for  censure  and  threatening  are  uttered  here  in  repeated 
utterances  of  "  woe"  not  against  Israel  only,  but  more  especially 
against  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  until  at  last,  in  ch.  xxxiii.,  the 
"  hoi  concerning  Jerusalem"  is  changed  into  a  "  hoi  concerning 
Asshur."  All  the  independent  and  self-contained  addresses  in 
this  cycle  of  prophecy  commence  with  hoi  ("  woe:"  ch.  xxviii., 
xxix.,  xxx.,  xxxi.-xxxii.,  xxxiii.).  The  section  which  does  not 
begin  with  hoi  (viz.  ch.  xxxii.  9-20)  is  the  last  and  dependent  part 
of  the  long  address  commencing  with  ch.  xxxi.  1.  On  the  other 
hand,  ch.  xxix.  15-24  also  commences  with  hoi,  though  it  does 
not  form  a  distinct  address  in  itself,  since  ch.  xxix.  forms  a  com 
plete  whole.  The  subdivisions  of  the  sections,  therefore,  have 
not  a  uniform  commencement  throughout ;  but  the  separate 
and  independent  addresses  all  commence  with  hoi.  The  climax 
of  these  prophecies  of  woe  is  ch.  xxx.  Up  to  this  point  the 
exclamation  of  woe  gradually  ascends,  but  in  ch.  xxxi.-xxxii. 
it  begins  to  fall ;  and  in  ch.  xxxiii.  (which  contains  an  epilogue 
that  was  only  added  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign) 
it  has  changed  into  the  very  opposite.  The  prophet  begins  with 
hoi,  but  it  is  a  woe  concerning  the  devastator.  This  utmost 
woe,  however,  was  not  fulfilled  at  the  point  of  time  when  the 
fulfilment  of  "  the  utmost"  predicted  in  ch.  xxviii.— xxxii.  was 
apparently  close  at  hand ;  but  Jerusalem,  though  threatened 
with  destruction,  was  miraculously  saved.  Yet  the  prophet 
had  not  merely  to  look  on,  as  Jonah  had.  He  himself  pre 
dicted  this  change  in  the  purpose  of  God,  inasmuch  as  the 
direction  of  the  "  woe"  in  his  mouth  is  altered,  like  that  of  the 
wrath  of  God,  which  turns  from  Jerusalem  to  Asshur,  and 
destroys  it. 


THE  FIRST  WOE. — JUDGMENT  UPON  SAMARIA  AND  JERUSALEM, 
AND  CONSOLATION  FOR  BOTH. — CHAP.  XXVIII. 

Isaiah,  like  Micah,  commences  with  the  fall  of  the  proud 
and  intoxicated  Samaria.  Ver.  1.  "  Woe  to  the  proud  crown  of 
the  drunken  of  Epliraim,  and  to  the  fading  flower  of  its  splendid 


CHAP.  XXVIII.  1-4.  6 

ornament,  which  is  upon  the  head  of  the  luxuriant  valley  of  those 
slain  with  wine."  The  allusion  is  to  Samaria,  which  is  called  (1) 
"  the  pride-crown  of  the  drunken  of  Ephraim,"  i.e.  the  crown 
of  which  the  intoxicated  and  blinded  Ephraimites  were  proud 
(ch.  xxix.  9,  xix.  14),  and  (2)  "  the  fading  flower "  (on  the 
expression  itself,  compare  ch.  i.  30,  xl.  7, 8)  "  of  the  ornament  of 
his  splendour,"  i.e.  the  flower  now  fading,  which  had  once  been 
the  ornament  with  which  they  made  a  show.  This  flower  stood 
"  upon  the  head  of  the  valley  of  fatnesses  of  those  slain  with 
wine"  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  8),  i.e.  of  the  valley  so  exuberant  with  fruit- 
fulness,  belonging  to  the  Ephraimites,  who  were  thoroughly 
enslaved  by  wine.  Samaria  stood  upon  a  beautiful  swelling 
hill,  which  commanded  the  whole  country  round  in  a  most 
regal  way  (Amos  iv.  1,  vi.  1),  in  the  centre  of  a  large  basin,  of 
about  two  hours'  journey  in  diameter,  shut  in  by  a  gigantic 
circle  of  still  loftier  mountains  (Amos  iii.  9).  The  situation 
was  commanding ;  the  hill  terraced  up  to  the  very  top ;  and  the 
surrounding  country  splendid  and  fruitful  (Eitter,  Erdkunde, 
xvi.  660,  661).  The  expression  used  by  the  prophet  is  inten 
tionally  bombastic.  Pie  heaps  genitives  upon  genitives,  as  in 
ch.  x.  12,  xxi.  17.  The  words  are  linked  together  in  pairs. 
Shemdnl)n  (fatnesses)  has  the  absolute  form,  although  it  is 
annexed  to  the  following  word,  the  logical  relation  overruling 
the  syntactical  usage  (compare  ch.  xxxii.  13,  1  Chron.  ix.  13). 
The  sesquipedalia  verba  are  intended  to  produce  the  impression 
of  excessive  worldly  luxuriance  and  pleasure,  upon  which  the 
woe  is  pronounced.  The  epithet  nobhel  (fading  :  possibly  a 
genitive,  as  in  ver.  4),  which  is  introduced  here  into  the  midst 
of  this  picture  of  splendour,  indicates  that  all  this  splendour  is 
not  only  destined  to  fade,  but  is  beginning  to  fade  already. 

In  the  next  three  verses  the  hoi  is  expanded.  Vers.  2-4. 
a  Behold,  the  Lord  holds  a  strong  and  mighty  thing  like  a  hail 
storm,  a  pestilent  tempest ;  like  a  storm  of  mighty  overflowing 
ivaters,  He  casts  down  to  the  earth  with  almighty  hand.  With 
feet  they  tread  down  the  proud  crown  of  the  drunken  of  Ephraim. 
And  it  happens  to  the  fading  flower  of  its  splendid  ornament, 
which  is  upon  the  head  of  the  luxuriant  valley,  as  to  an  early  fig 
before  it  is  harvest,  which  whoever  sees  it  looks  at,  and  it  is  no 
sooner  in  his  hand  than  he  swallows  it."  "  A  strong  and  mighty 
thing :"  p?*?)  PJ9  we  nave  rendered  in  the  neuter  (with  the 


4  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH 

LXX.  and  Targum)  rather  than  in  the  masculine,  as  Luther 
dues,  although  the  strong  and  mighty  thing  which  the  Lord 
holds  in  readiness  is  no  doubt  the  Assyrian.  Pie  is  simply  the 
medium  of  punishment  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  which  is  called 
ydd  absolutely,  because  it  is  absolute  in  power,  —  as  it  were, 
the  hand  of  all  hands.  This  hand  hurls  Samaria  to  the  ground 
(on  the  expression  itself,  compare  ch.  xxv.  12,  xxvi.  5),  so  that 
they  tread  the  proud  crown  to  pieces  with  their  feet  (terd- 
masndhj  the  more  pathetic  plural  form,  instead  of  the  singular 
terdmes ;  Ges.  §  47,  Anm.  3,  and  Caspari  on  Obad.  13). 
The  noun  saar,  which  is  used  elsewhere  in  the  sense  of  shud 
dering,  signifies  here,  like  '"^P,  an  awful  tempest ;  and  when 
connected  with  2Ep,  a  tempest  accompanied  with  a  pestilential 
blast,  spreading  miasma.  Such  destructive  power  is  held 
by  the  absolute  hand.  It  is  soon  all  over  then  with  the 
splendid  flower  that  has  already  begun  to  fade  (?22  1")^  like 
iBijn  \i?3  in  ch.  xxii.  24).  It  happens  to  it  as  to  a  bikkurdh 
(according  to  the  Masora,  written  with  mappik  here,  as  dis 
tinguished  from  Hos.  ix.  10,  equivalent  to  kebhikkurdthdh ;  see 
Job  xi.  9,  "  like  an  early  fig  of  this  valley ;"  according  to 
others,  it  is  simply  euphonic).  The  gathering  of  figs  takes 
place  about  August.  Now,  if  any  one  sees  a  fig  as  early  as 
June,  he  fixes  his  eyes  upon  it,  and  hardly  touches  it  with 
his  hand  before  he  swallows  it,  and  that  without  waiting  to 
masticate  it  long.  Like  such  a  dainty  bit  will  the  luxuriant 
Samaria  vanish.  The  fact  that  Shalmanassar,  or  his  successor 
Sargon,  did  not  conquer  Samaria  till  after  the  lapse  of  three 
years  (2  Kings  xviii.  10),  does  not  detract  from  the  truth  of  the 
prophecy ;  it  is  enough  that  both  the  thirst  of  the  conqueror 
and  the  utter  destruction  of  Samaria  answered  to  it. 

The  threat  is  now  followed  by  a  promise.  This  is  essen 
tially  the  same  in  character  as  ch.  iv.  2-6.  The  place  of  the 
false  glory  thus  overthrown  is  now  filled  by  a  glory  that  is 
divine  and  true.  Vers.  5,  6.  "  In  that  day  will  Jehovah  of 
hosts  le  the  adorning  crown  and  the  splendid  diadem  to  the 
remnant  of  His  people  ;  and  the  spirit  of  justice  to  them  that  sit  on 
the  judgment-seat,  and  heroic  strength  to  them  that  drive  back  war 
at  the  gate."  "  The  remnant  of  His  people"  ("W5?  with  a  fixed 
kametz,  as  in  ch.  xxi.  17)  is  not  Judah,  as  distinguished  from 
Ephraim  that  had  utterly  perished ;  but  Judah  and  the  remain- 


CHAP.  XXVIII.  5,  6.  5 

Ing  portion  of  Ephraim,  as  distinguished  from  the  portion 
which  had  perished.  After  the  perishable  thing  in  which  they 
gloried  had  been  swept  away,  the  eternal  person  of  Jehovah 
Himself  would  be  the  ornament  and  pride  of  His  people.  He, 
the  Lord  of  the  seven  spirits  (ch.  xi.  2),  would  be  to  this  rem 
nant  of  His  people  the  spirit  of  right  and  heroic  strength. 
There  would  be  an  end  to  unjust  judging  and  powerless  sub 
mission.  The  judges  are  called  "  those  who  sit e al-hammishpdt" 
in  the  sense  of  "  on  the  seat  of  judgment"  (Ps.  ix.  5,  cxxii.  5)  ; 
the  warriors  are  called  "  those  who  press  back  milchdmdh 
slid*  rdh"  (war  at  the  gate),  i.e.  either  war  that  has  reached  their 
own  gate  (ch.  xxii.  7),  or  war  which  they  drive  back  as  far  as 
the  gate  of  the  enemy  (2  Sam.  xi.  23;  1  Mace.  v.  22).  The 
promise  in  this  last  passage  corresponds  to  Mic.  v.  4,  5.  The 
athnach  in  ver.  6  ought  to  stand  at  hammisJipdt ;  the  second 
clause  of  the  verse  may  be  completed  from  the  first,  n"i^3?l 
being  equivalent  to  mn:i  nrfo,  and  T^B  to  WVtb.  We  might 
regard  2  Chron.  xxx.  as  a  fulfilment  of  what  is  predicted  in 
ver.  6,  if  the  feast  of  passover  there  described  really  fell  in  the 
age  succeeding  the  fall  of  Samaria ;  for  this  feast  of  passover 
did  furnish  a  representation  and  awaken  a  consciousness  of 
that  national  unity  which  had  been  interrupted  from  the  time 
of  Eehoboam.  But  if  we  read  the  account  in  the  Chronicles 
with  unprejudiced  minds,  it  is  impossible  to  shut  our  eyes  to 
the  fact  that  this  feast  of  passover  took  place  in  the  second 
month  of  the  first  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  and  therefore  not 
after  the  depopulation  of  the  northern  kingdom  by  Shalmanassar, 
but  after  the  previous  and  partial  depopulation  by  Tiglath- 
pileser  (see  vol.  i.  p.  52).  In  fact,  the  fulfilment  cannot  be 
looked  for  at  all  in  the  space  between  the  sixth  and  fourteenth 
years  of  Hezekiah,  since  the  condition  of  Judah  during  that 
time  does  not  answer  at  all  to  the  promises  given  above.  The 
prophet  here  foretells  what  might  be  hoped  for,  when  Asshur 
had  not  only  humbled  Ephraim,  but  Judah  also.  The  address 
consists  of  two  connected  halves,  the  promising  beginnings  of 
which  point  to  one  and  the  same  future,  and  lay  hold  of  one 
another. 

With  the  words,  "  and  they  also,"  the  prophet  commences 
the  second  half  of  the  address,  and  passes  from  Ephraim  to 
.     Vers.  7,  8.  "  And  they  also  reel  with  wine,  and  are 


6  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

giddy  with  meth ;  priest  and  prophet  reel  with  meth,  are  swal 
lowed  up  by  wine :  they  are  giddy  with  meth,  reel  when  seeing 
visions,  stagger  when  pronouncing  judgment.  For  all  tables  are 
full  of  filthy  vomit,  without  any  more  place"  The  Judseans  are 
not  less  overcome  with  wine  than  the  Ephraimites,  and  espe 
cially  the  rulers  of  Judah.  In  wicked  violation  of  the  law  of 
God,  which  prohibited  the  priests  from  drinking  strong  drink 
when  performing  priestly  service,  and  that  on  pain  of  death 
(Lev.  x.  9,  cf.  Ezek.  xliv.  21),  they  were  intoxicated  even  in 
the  midst  of  their  prophetic  visions  (n*pn,  literally  "  the  thing 
seeing,"  then  the  act  of  seeing ;  equivalent  to  W,  like  nth  in 
ver.  15  =  IW!;  Olshausen,  §  176,  c),  and  when  passing  judicial 
sentences.  In  the  same  way  Micah  also  charges  the  prophets 
and  priests  with  being  drunkards  (Mic.  iii.  1  sqq.,  cf.  ii.  11). 
Isaiah's  indignation  is  manifested  in  the  fact,  that  in  the  words 
which  he  uses  he  imitates  the  staggering  and  stumbling  of  the 
topers  ;  like  the  well-known  passage,  Sta  pes  sta  mi  pes  stas  pes 
lie  labere  mi  pes.  Observe,  for  example,  the  threefold  repetition 
of  shdgu — tdghu,  shdgu — tdghu,  shdgu — pdqu.  The  hereditary 
priests  and  the  four  prophets  represent  the  whole  of  the  official 
personages.  The  preterites  imply  that  drunkenness  had  become 
the  fixed  habit  of  the  holders  of  these  offices.  The  preposition 
3  indicates  the  cause  ("  through,"  as  in  2  Sam.  xiii.  28  and 
Esther  i.  10),  and  min  the  effect  proceeding  from  the  cause  (in 
consequence  of  wine).  In  ver.  8  we  can  hear  them  vomit. 
We  have  the  same  combination  of  the  p  and  ¥  in  the  verb 
kotzen,  Gothic  kozan.  All  the  tables  of  the  carousal  are  full, 
without  there  being  any  further  room  (cf.  ch.  v.  8)  ;  everything 
swims  with  vomit.  The  prophet  paints  from  nature,  here  with 
out  idealizing.  He  receives  their  conduct  as  it  were  in  a  mirror, 
and  then  in  the  severest  tones  holds  up  this  mirror  before  them, 
adults  though  they  were. 

Vers.  9, 10.  "  Whom  then  would  he  teach  knowledge  f  And  to 
whom  make  preaching  intelligible?  To  those  weaned  from  the  milk'? 
To  those  removed  from  the  breast?  For  precept  upon  precept,  pre 
cept  upon  precept,  line  upon  line,  line  upon  line,  a  little  here,  a  little 
there!"  They  sneer  at  the  prophet,  that  intolerable  moralist. 
They  are  of  age,  and  free;  and  he  does  not  need  to  bring  know 
ledge  to  them  (daath  as  in  ch.  xi.  9),  or  make  them  understand 
the  proclamation.  They  know  of  old  to  what  he  would  lead. 


CHAP.  XXVIII.  11-13.  7 

Are  they  little  children  that  have  just  been  weaned  (on  the 
construed ves,  see  ch.  ix.  2,  v.  11,  xxx.  18  ;  Ges.  §  114,  1),  and 
who  must  let  themselves  be  tutored  ?  For  the  things  he 
preaches  are  nothing  but  endless  petty  teazings.  The  short 
words  (tsdv,  as  in  Hos.  v.  11),  together  with  the  diminutive 
"Vyt  (equivalent  to  the  Arabic  sugayyir,  mean,  from  sagir, 
small),  are  intended  to  throw  ridicule  upon  the  smallness  and 
vexatious  character  of  the  prophet's  interminable  and  uninter 
rupted  chidings,  as  h  (==  *?y,  ^  ;  comp.  <>  *)DJ,  ch.  xxvi.  15)  im 
plies  that  they  are ;  just  as  the  philosophers  in  Acts  xvii.  18 
call  Paul  a  0-776^0X0709,  a  collector  of  seeds,  i.e.  a  dealer  in 
trifles.  And  in  the  repetition  of  the  short  words  we  may  hear 
the  heavy  babbling  language  of  the  drunken  scoffers. 

The  prophet  takes  the  ki  ("  for  ")  out  of  their  mouths,  and 
carries  it  on  in  his  own  way.  It  was  quite  right  that  their 
ungodliness  should  show  itself  in  such  a  way  as  this,  for  it 
would  meet  with  an  appropriate  punishment.  Vers.  11-L3. 
"  For  through  men  stammering  in  speech,  and  through  a  strange 
tongue,  will  He  speak  to  this  people.  He  who  said  to  them,  There 
is  rest,  give  rest  to  weary  ones,  and  there  is  refreshing  !  But 
they  would  not  hear.  Therefore  the  word  of  Jehovah  becomes  to 
them  precept  upon  precept,  precept  upon  precept,  line  upon  line, 
line  upon  line,  a  little  here,  a  little  there,  that  they  may  go  and 
stumble  backwards,  and  be  wrecked  to  pieces,  and  be  snared  and 
taken.79  Jehovah  would  speak  to  the  scoffing  people  of  stam 
mering  tongue  a  language  of  the  same  kind,  since  He  would 
speak  to  them  by  a  people  that  stammered  in  their  estimation, 
i.e.  who  talked  as  barbarians  (cf.  /3apj3apL%et,v  and  balbutire ; 
see  ch.  xxxiii.  19,  compared  with  Deut.  xxviii.  49).  The 
Assyrian  Semitic  had  the  same  sound  in  the  ear  of  an  Israelite, 
as  Low  Saxon  (a  provincial  dialect)  in  the  ear  of  an  educated 
German  ;  in  addition  to  which,  it  was  plentifully  mixed  up  with 
Iranian,  and  possibly  also  with  Tatar  elements.  This  people 
would  practically  interpret  the  will  of  Jehovah  in  its  own  patois 
to  the  despisers  of  the  prophet.  Jehovah  had  directed  them, 
through  His  prophets,  after  the  judgments  which  they  had 
experienced  with  sufficient  severity  (ch.  i.  5  sqq.),  into  the  true 
way  to  rest  and  refreshing  (Jer.  vi.  16),  and  had  exhorted  them 
to  give  rest  to  the  nation,  which  had  suffered  so  much  under 
Ahaz  through  the  calamities  of  war  (2  Chron.  xxviii.),  and  not 


8  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

to  drag  it  into  another  war  by  goading  it  on  to  rise  against 
Assyria,  or  impose  a  new  burden  in  addition  to  the  tribute  to 
Assyria  by  purchasing  the  help  of  Egypt.  But  they  would  not 
hearken  («««-=  tt«,  ch.  xxx.  15,  16;*  Ges.  §  23,  3,  Anm.  3). 
Their  policy  was  a  very  different  one  from  being  still,  or  be 
lieving  and  waiting.  And  therefore  the  word  of  Jehovah, 
which  they  regarded  as  an  endless  series  of  trivial  commands, 
would  be  turned  in  their  case  into  an  endless  series  of  painful 
sufferings.  To  those  who  thought  themselves  so  free,  and  lived 
so  free,  it  would  become  a  stone  on  which  they  would  go  to 
pieces,  a  net  in  which  they  would  be  snared,  a  trap  in  which 
they  would  be  caught  (compare  ch.  viii.  14,  15). 

The  prophet  now  directly  attacks  the  great  men  of  Jeru 
salem,  and  holds  up  a  Messianic  prophecy  before  their  eyes, 
which  turns  its  dark  side  to  them,  as  ch.  vii.  did  to  Ahaz. 
Vers.  14-17.  "  Therefore  hear  the  ivord  of  Jehovah,  ye  scornful 
lords,  rulers  of  this  people  wldcli  is  in  Jerusalem  !     For  ye  say, 
We  have  made  a  covenant  with  death,  and  with  Hades  have  we 
come  to  an  agreement.    Tke  swelling  scourge,  when  it  cometh  hither, 
will  do  us  no  harm ;  for  we  have  made  a  lie  our  shelter,  and  in 
deceit  have  we  hidden  ourselves.     Therefore  thus  saith  the  L/ord 
Jehovah,  Behold,  I  am  He  who  hath  laid  in  Zion  a  stone,  a 
stone  of  trial,  a  precious  corner-stone  of  well-founded  founding ; 
whoever  believes  will  not  have  to  move.     And  I  make  justice  the 
line,  and  righteousness  the  level ;  and  hail  sweeps  away  the  refuge 
of  lies,  and  the  hiding-place  is  washed  away  by  waters"     With 
Idkhen   (therefore)  the  announcement  of  punishment  is  once 
more  suspended ;  and  in  ver.  16  it  is  resumed  again,  the  expo 
sition  of  the  sin  being  inserted  between,  before  the  punish 
ment  is  declared.     Their  sin  is  Idtson,  and  this  free-thinking 
scorn  rests  upon  a  proud  and  insolent  self-confidence,  which 
imagines  that  there  is  no  necessity  to  fear  death  and  hell ;  and 
this  self-confidence  has  for  its  secret  reserve  the  alliance  to  be 
secretly  entered  into  with  Egypt  against  Assyria.     What  the 
prophet  makes  them  say  here,  they  do  not  indeed  say  exactly  in 
this  form  ;  but  this  is  the  essential  substance  of  the  carnally 
devised  thoughts   and  words  of  the  rulers  of  the   people  of 
Jerusalem,  as  manifest  to  the  Searcher  of  hearts.     Jerusalem, 
the  city  of  Jehovah,  and  such  princes  as  these,  who  eithe»' 
proudly  ignore  Jehovah,  or  throw  Him  off  as  useless,  what  a 


CHAP.  XXVIIt.  14-17.  9 

contrast!  Chozeh,  and  chdzuth  in  ver.  18,  signify  an  agree 
ment,  either  as  a  decision  or  completion  (from  the  radical 
meaning  of  the  verb  chdzdh;  see  vol.  i.  p.  71),  or  as  a  choice, 
beneplacitum  (like  the  Arabic  ray),  or  as  a  record,  i.e.  the  means 
of  selecting  (like  the  talmudic  chdzlth,  a  countersign,  a  ra'fiydh,  a 
proof  or  argument :  Luzzatto).  In  shot  shoteph  ("  the  swelling 
scourge,"  chethib  ^^),  the  comparison  of  Asshur  to  a  flood 
(vers.  2,  8,  7),  and  the  comparison  of  it  to  a  whip  or  scourge,  are 
mixed  together ;  and  this  is  all  the  more  allowable,  because  a 
whip,  when  smacked,.really  does  move  in  waving  lines  (com 
pare  Jer.  viii.  6,  where  shdtaph  is  applied  to  the  galoping  of  a 
war-horse).  The  chethib  "OJJ  in  ver.  15  (for  which  the  keri 
reads  "O3£,  according  to  ver.  19)  is  to  be  read  *ny  (granting 
that  it  shall  have  passed,  or  that  it  passes)  ;  and  there  is  no 
necessity  for  any  emendation.  The  Egyptian  alliance  for 
which  they  are  suing,  when  designated  according  to  its  true 
ethical  nature,  is  slieqer  (lie)  and  Mzdbh  (falsehood)  ;  compare 
2  Kings  xvii.  4  (where  we  ought  perhaps  to  read  sheqer  for 
qesher,  according  to  the  LXX.),  and  more  especially  Ezek. 
xvii.  15  sqq.,  from  which  it  is  obvious  that  the  true  prophets 
regarded  self-willed  rebellion  even  against  heathen  rule  as  a 
reprehensible  breach  of  faith.  The  Idklien  (therefore),  which 
is  resumed  in  ver.  16,  is  apparently  followed  as  strangely  as 
in  ch.  vii.  14,  by  a  promise  instead  of  a  threat.  But  this 
is  only  apparently  the  case.  It  is  unquestionably  a  promise ; 
but  as  the  last  clause,  "  he  that  believeth  will  not  flee,"  i.e.  will 
stand  firm,  clearly  indicates,  it  is  a  promise  for  believers  alone. 
For  those  to  whom  the  prophet  is  speaking  here  the  promise  is 
a  threat,  a  savour  of  death  unto  death.  Just  as  on  a  former 
occasion,  when  Ahaz  refused  to  ask  for  a  sign,  the  prophet 
announced  to  him  a  sign  of  Jehovah's  own  selection ;  so  here 
Jehovah  opposes  to  the  false  ground  of  confidence  on  which  the 
leaders  relied,  the  foundation  stone  laid  in  Zion,  which  would 
bear  the  believing  in  immoveable  safety,  but  on  which  the 
unbelieving  would  be  broken  to  pieces  (Matt.  xxi.  44).  This 
stone  is  called  'ebhen  bdchan,  a  stone  of  proving,  i.e.  a  proved 
and  self-proving  stone.  Then  follow  other  epithets  in  a  series 
commencing  anew  with  pinnath  =  'ebhen  pinnath  (compare  Pe. 
cxviii.  22)  :  angulus  h.  e.  lapis  angularis  pretiositatis  fandationis 
funclatce.  It  is  a  corner-stone,  valuable  in  itself  (on 


10  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

compare  1  Kings  v.  31),  and  affording  the  strongest  foundation 
and  inviolable  security  to  all  that  is  built  upon  it  (musdd  a 
substantive  in  form  like  musdr,  and  mussdd  a  hophal  participle 
in  the  form  of  those  of  the  verba  contracta  pe  yod).  This  stone 
was  not  the  Davidic  sovereignty,  but  the  true  seed  of  David 
which  appeared  in  Jesus  (Rom.  ix.  33  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  6,  7).  The 
figure  of  a  stone  is  not  opposed  to  the  personal  reference,  since 
the  prophet  in  ch.  yjii.  14  speaks  even  of  Jehovah  Himself 
under  the  figure  of  a 'stone.  The  majestically  unique  descrip 
tion  renders  it  quite  impossible  that  Hezekiah  can  be  intended. 
Micah,  whose  book  forms  the  side  piece  of  this  cycle  of  pro 
phecy,  also  predicted,  under  similar  historical  circumstances, 
the  birth  of  the  Messiah  in  Bethlehem  Ephratah  (Mic.  v.  1). 
What  Micah  expresses  in  the  words,  "  His  goings  forth  are  from 
of  old,"  is  indicated  here  in  the  preterite  yissad  connected  with 
hi?ieni  (the  construction  is  similar  to  that  in  Obad.  2,  Ezek. 
xxv.  7 ;  compare  ver.  2  above,  and  Jer.  xlix.  15,  xxiii.  19).  It 
denotes  that  which  has  been  determined  by  Jehovah,  and  there 
fore  is  as  good  as  accomplished.  What  is  historically  realized 
lias  had  an  eternal  existence,  and  indeed  an  ideal  pre-existence 
even  in  the  heart  of  history  itself  (ch.  xxii.  11,  xxv.  1,  xxxvii. 
26).  Ever  since  there  had  been  a  Davidic  government  at  all, 
this  stone  had  lain  in  Zion.  The  Davidic  monarchy  not  only 
had  in  this  its  culminating  point,  but  the  ground  of  its  con 
tinuance  also.  It  was  not  only  the  Omega,  but  also  the  Alpha. 
Whatever  escaped  from  wrath,  even  under  the  Old  Testament, 
stood  upon  this  stone.  This  (as  the  prophet  predicts  in 
B*rp  &  plpxran  :  B*IT  the  fut.  kal)  would  be  the  stronghold  of 
faith  in  the  midst  of  the  approaching  Assyrian  calamities  (cf. 
ch.  vii.  9)  ;  and  faith  would  be  the  condition  of  life  (Hab. 
ii.  4).  But  against  unbelievers  Jehovah  would  proceed  accord 
ing  to  His  punitive  justice.  He  would  make  this  (justice  and 
righteousness,  mishpdt  and  tefddqdJi)  a  norm,  i.e.  a  line  and 
level.  A  different  turn,  however,  is  given  to  qdv,  with  a  play 
upon  vers.  10,  11.  What  Jehovah  is  about  to  do  is  depicted 
as  a  building  which  He  is  carrying  out,  and  which  He  will  carry 
out,  so  far  as  the  despisers  are  concerned,  on  no  other  plan  than 
that  of  strict  retribution.  His  punitive  justice  comes  like  a 
hailstorm  and  like  a  flood  (cf.  ver.  2,  ch.  x.  22).  The  hail 
smites  the  refuge  of  lies  of  the  great  men  of  Jerusalem,  and 


CHAP.  XXVIII.  18,  19.  11 

clears  it  away  (^^,  hence  JP,  a  shovel)  ;  and  the  flood  buries 
their  hiding-place  in  the  waters,  and  carries  it  away  (the  accen 
tuation  should  be  "IHD  tifchali,  D)O  mercha). 

And  the  whip  which  Jehovah  swings  will  not  be  satisfied 
with  one  stroke,  but  will  rain  strokes.  Vers.  18,  19.  "And 
your  covenant  witli  death  is  struck  out,  and  your  agreement  with 
Hades  will  not  stand ;  the  swelling  scourge,  when  it  comes,  ye  will 
become  a  thing  trodden  down  to  it.  A  s  often  as  it  passes  it  takes 
you:  for  every  morning  it  passes,  by  day  and  by  night;  and  it  is 
nothing  but  shuddering  to  hear  such  preaching.  For  the  bed  is 
too  short  to  stretch  in,  and  the  covering  too  tight  when  a  man 
wraps  himself  in  it."  Although  Ifrlth  is  feminine,  the  predi 
cate  to  it  is  placed  before  it  in  the  masculine  form  (Ges.  §  144). 
The  covenant  is  thought  of  as  a  document ;  for  kliuppar  (for 
which  Hupfeld  would  read  thuphar ;  Ps.  ii.  197)  signifies  here 
Miterari  (just  as  the  kal  is  used  in  Gen.  vi.  14  in  the  sense 
of  oblinere ;  or  in  Prov.  xxx.  20,  the  Targum,  and  the  Syriac, 
in  the  sense  of  abstergere ;  and  in  the  Talmud  frequently  in 
the  sense  of  wiping  off  =  qinnedch,  or  wiping  out  =  mdchaq, — 
which  meanings  all  go  back,  along  with  the  meaning  negare,  to 
the  primary  meaning,  tegere,  obducere).  The  covenant  will  be 
"  struck  out,"  as  you  strike  out  a  wrong  word,  by  crossing  it 
over  with  ink  and  rendering  it  illegible.  They  fancy  that  they 
have  fortified  themselves  against  death  and  Hades;  but  Jehovah 
gives  to  both  of  these  unlimited  power  over  them.  When  the 
swelling  scourge  shall  come,  they  will  become  to  it  as  mirmds, 
i.e.  they  will  be  overwhelmed  by  it,  and  their  corpses  become 
like  dirt  of  the  streets  (ch.  x.  6,  v.  5)  ;  En^rn  has  the  mercha 
upon  the  penult.,  according  to  the  older  editions  and  the  smaller 
Masora  on  Lev.  viii.  26,  the  tone  being  drawn  back  on  account 
of  the  following  &.  The  strokes  of  the  scourge  come  inces- 

o  o 

santly,  and  every  stroke  sweeps  them,  i.e.  many  of  them,  away. 
^.p  (from  V!I,  construct  ^,  sufficiency,  abundance)  followed  by 
the  infinitive,  quotiescunque  irruet ;  Idqach,  auferre,  as  in  Jer. 
xv.  15,  and  in  the  idiom  Idqach  nephesh.  These  scourgings 
without  end — what  a  painful  lecture  Jehovah  is  reading  them  ! 
This  is  the  thought  expressed  in  the  concluding  words  :  for 
the  meaning  cannot  be,  that  "even  (raq  as  in  Ps.  xxxii.  6) 
the  report  (of  such  a  fate)  is  alarming,"  as  Grotius  and  others 
explain  it ;  or  the  report  is  nothing  but  alarming,  as  Gussetius 


12  THE  PROPHECIES  OP  ISAIAH. 


and  others  interpret  it,  since  in  that  case  H^iD^  >?bK  ^cr.  ch. 
xxiii.  5)  would  have  been  quite  sufficient,  instead  of  njttBB*  pan. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  expression  points  back  to  the  scorn 
ful  question  addressed  by  the  debauchees  to  the  prophet  in 
ver.  9,  "To  whom  will  he  make  preaching  intelligible?"  i.e. 
to  whom  will  he  preach  the  word  of  God  in  an  intelligible 
manner  1  (as  if  they  did  not  possess  Imdh  without  this  ;  njflBB^ 
UKOJJJ  as  in  ch.  liii.  1.)  As  ver.  11  affirmed  that  Jehovah  would 
take  up  the  word  against  them,  the  drunken  stammerers,  through 
a  stammering  people  ;  so  here  the  scourging  without  end  is  called 
the  shemudh,  or  sermon,  which  Jehovah  preaches  to  them.  At 
the  same  time,  the  word  hdbhln  is  not  causative  here,  as  in  ver. 
9,  viz.  "  to  give  to  understand,"  but  signifies  simply  "  to  under 
stand,"  or  have  an  inward  perception.  To  receive  into  one's 
comprehension  such  a  sermon  as  that  which  was  now  being 
delivered  to  them,  was  raq-zevdrdh,  nothing  but  shaking  or 
shuddering  (rag  as  in  Gen.  vi.  5)  ;  JW  (from  which  comes  njnt? 
or  by  transposition  nJ^J_)  is  applied  to  inward  shaking  as  well 
as  to  outward  tossing  to  and  fro.  Jerome  renders  it  "  tan- 
tummodo  sola  vexatio  intellectum  dabit  auditui"  and  Luther 
follows  him  thus  :  "  but  the  vexation  teaches  to  take  heed 
to  the  word,"  as  if  the  reading  were  pan.  The  alarming 
character  of  the  lecture  is  depicted  in  ver.  20,  in  a  figure 
which  was  probably  proverbial.  The  situation  into  which 
they  are  brought  is  like  a  bed  too  short  for  a  man  to  stretch 
himself  in  (mm  as  in  2  Kings  vi.  1),  and  like  a  covering 
which,  according  to  the  measure  of  the  man  who  covers 
himself  up  in  it  (or  perhaps  still  better  in  a  temporal  sense, 
"  when  a  man  covers  or  wraps  himself  up  in  it,"  cf.  ch. 
xviii.  4),  is  too  narrow  or  too  tight.  So  would  it  be  in  their 
case  with  the  Egyptian  treaty,  in  which  they  fancied  that 
there  were  rest  and  safety  for  them.  They  would  have  to 
acknowledge  its  insufficiency.  They  had  made  themselves  a 
bed,  and  procured  bed-clothes;  but  how  mistaken  they  had 
been  in  the  measure,  how  miserably  and  ridiculously  they  had 
miscalculated  ! 

It  would  be  with  them  as  it  was  with  the  Philistines  when 
David  turned  their  army  into  water  at  Baal-Perazim  (2  Sam. 
v.  20  ;  1  Chron.  xiv.  11),  or  when  on  another  occasion  he  drove 
them  before  him  from  Gibeon  to  Gezer  (1  Chron.  xiv.  13 


CHAP.  XXVIII.  21,  22,  13 

sqq.).  Ver.  21.  "  For  Jehovah  will  rise  up  as  in  the  mountain 
of  Perazim,  and  be  wroth  as  in  the  valley  at  Gibeon  to  work  His 
work :  astonishing  is  His  work ;  and  to  act  His  act :  strange  is 
His  act."  The  Targum  wrongly  supposes  the  first  historical 
reminiscence  to  refer  to  the  earthquake  in  the  time  of  Uzziah, 
and  the  second  to  Joshua's  victory  over  the  Amorites.  The 
allusion  really  is  to  the  two  shameful  defeats  which  David 
inflicted  upon  the  Philistines.  There  was  a  very  good  reason 
why  victories  over  the  Philistines  especially  should  serve  as 
similes.  The  same  fate  awaited  the  Philistines  at  the  hands 
of  the  Assyrians,  as  predicted  by  the  prophet  in  ch.  xiv.  28  sqq. 
(cf.  ch.  xx.).  And  the  strangeness  and  verity  of  Jehovah's 
work  were  just  this,  that  it  would  fare  no  better  with  the 
magnates  of  Judah  at  the  hand  of  Asshur,  than  it  had  with  the 
Philistines  at  the  hand  of  David  on  both  those  occasions.  The 
very  same  thing  would  now  happen  to  the  people  of  the  house 
of  David  as  formerly  to  its  foes.  Jehovah  would  have  to  act 
in  opposition  to  His  gracious  purpose.  He  would  have  to  act 
towards  His  own  people  as  He  once  acted  towards  their  foes. 
This  was  the  most  paradoxical  thing  of  all  that  they  would 
have  to  experience. 

But  the  possibility  of  repentance  was  still  open  to  them, 
and  at  least  a  modification  of  what  had  been  threatened  was 
attainable.  Ver.  22.  "And  now  drive  ye  not  mockeries,  lest  your 
fetters  be  strengthened ;  for  I  have  heard  from  the  Lord,  Jehovah 
of  hosts,  a  judgment  of  destruction,  and  an  irrevocable  one,  upon 
the  whole  earth."  It  is  assumed  that  they  are  already  in  fetters, 
namely,  the  fetters  of  Asshur  (Nah.  i.  13).  Out  of  these  fetters 
they  wanted  to  escape  by  a  breach  of  faith,  and  with  the  help 
of  Egypt  without  Jehovah,  and  consequently  they  mocked  at  the 
warnings  of  the  prophet.  He  therefore  appeals  to  them  at  any 
rate  to  stop  their  mocking,  lest  they  should  fall  out  of  the 
bondage  in  which  they  now  were,  into  one  that  would  bind 
them  still  more  closely,  and  lest  the  judgment  should  become 
even  more  severe  than  it  would  otherwise  be.  For  it  was 
coming  without  fail.  It  might  be  modified,  and  with  thorough 
repentance  they  might  even  escape ;  but  that  it  would  come, 
and  that  upon  the  whole  earth,  had  been  revealed  to  the  pro 
phet  by  Jehovah  of  hosts.  This  was  the  shemudh  which  the 
prophet  had  heard  from  Jehovah,  and  which  he  gave  them  to 


14  THE  PEOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

hear  and  understand,  though  hitherto  he  had  only  been  scoffed 
at  by  their  wine-bibbing  tongues. 

The  address  of  the  prophet  is  here  apparently  closed.  But 
an  essential  ingredient  is  still  wanting  to  the  second  half,  to 
make  it  correspond  to  the  first.  There  is  still  wanting  the 
fringe  of  promise  coinciding  with  vers.  5,  6.  The  prophet  has 
not  only  to  alarm  the  scoffers,  that  if  possible  he  may  pluck 
some  of  them  out  of  the  fire  through  fear  (Jtidg.  v.  23) ;  he 
has  also  to  comfort  believers,  who  yield  themselves  as  disciples 
to  him  and  to  the  word  of  God  (ch.  viii.  16).  He  does  this 
here  in  a  very  peculiar  manner.  He  has  several  times  assumed 
the  tone  of  the  mashal,  more  especially  in  ch.  xxvi. ;  but  here 
the  consolation  is  dressed  up  in  a  longer  parabolical  address, 
which  sets  forth  in  figures  drawn  from  husbandry  the  discipli 
nary  and  saving  wisdom  of  God.  Isaiah  here  proves  himself 
a  master  of  the  mashal.  In  the  usual  tone  of  a  mashal  song, 
he  first  of  all  claims  the  attention  of  his  audience  as  a  teacher 
of  wisdom.  Ver.  23.  "Lend  me  your  ear,  and  hear  my  voice; 
attend,  and  hear  my  address  /"  Attention  is  all  the  more  need 
ful,  that  the  prophet  leaves  his  hearers  to  interpret  and  apply 
the  parable  themselves.  The  work  of  a  husbandman  is  very 
manifold,  as  he  tills,  sows,  and  plants  his  field.  Vers.  24-26. 
"  Does  the  ploughman  plough  continually  to  sow  ?  to  furrow  and 
to  harrow  his  land?  Is  it  not  so:  when  he  levels  the  surface 
thereof,  he  scatters  Hack  poppy  seed,  and  strews  cummin,  and  puts 
m  wheat  in  rows,  and  barley  in  the  appointed  piece,  and  spelt  on 
its  border  ?  And  He  has  instructed  him  how  to  act  rightly : 
his  God  teaches  it  him"  The  ploughing  (chdrash)  which 
opens  the  soil,  i.e.  turns  it  up  in  furrows,  and  the  harrowing 
(sidded)  which  breaks  the  clods,  take  place  to  prepare  for  the 
sowing,  and  therefore  not  interminably,  but  only  so  long  as  is 
necessary  to  prepare  the  soil  to  receive  the  seed.  When  the 
seed-furrows  have  been  drawn  in  the  levelled  surface  of  the 
ground  (shivvdh),  then  the  sowing  and  planting  begin  ;  and 
this  also  takes  place  in  various  ways,  according  to  the  different 
kinds  of  fruit.  Qetsach  is  the  black  poppy  (nigella  sativa, 
Arab,  habbe  soda,  so  called  from  its  black  seeds),  belonging 
to  the  ranunculaceas.  Kammon  was  the  cummin  (cuminum 
cyminum)  with  larger  aromatic  seeds,  Ar.  kammun,  neither  of 
them  our  common  carraway  (Kiimmel,  carum).  The  wheat  he 


CHAP.  XXVIII.  27-29.  15 

sows  carefully  in  rows  (sorahy  ordo ;  ad  ordinem,  as  it  155  trans 
lated  by  Jerome),  i.e.  he  does  not  scatter  it  about  carelessly,  like 
the  other  two,  but  lays  the  grains  carefully  in  the  furrows, 
because  otherwise  when  they  sprang  up  they  would  get  massed 
together,  and  choke  one  another.  Nismdn,  like  sdrdh,  is  an  ace. 
loci :  the  barley  is  sown  in  a  piece  of  the  field  specially  marked 
off  for  it,  or  specially  furnished  with  signs  (slmdnwi) ;  and 
kussemeth,  the  spelt  (£eta,  also  mentioned  by  Homer,  Od.  iv. 
604,  between  wheat  and  barley),  along  the  edge  of  it,  so  that 
spelt  forms  the  rim  of  the  barley  field.  It  is  by  a  divine 
instinct  that  the  husbandman  acts  in  this  manner;  for  God, 
who  established  agriculture  at  the  creation  (i.e.  Jehovah,  not 
Osiris),  has  also  given  men  understanding.  This  is  the  mean 
ing  of  vi/issero  lammislipdt :  and  (as  we  may  see  from  all  this) 
He  (his  God  :  the  subject  is  given  afterwards  in  the  second 
clause)  has  led  him  (Prov.  xxxi.  1)  to  the  right  (this  is  the 
rendering  adopted  by  Kimchi,  whilst  other  commentators  have 
been  misled  by  Jer.  xxx.  11,  and  last  of  all  Malbim  Luzzatto, 
"  Cosi  Dio  con  giustizia  corregge ;"  he  would  have  done  better, 
however,  to  say,  con  moderazione). 

Again,  the  labour  of  the  husbandman  is  just  as  manifold 
after  the  reaping  has  been  done.  Vers.  27-29.  "  For  the  black 
poppy  is  not  threshed  with  a  threshing  sledge,  nor  is  a  cart  wheel 
rolled  over  cummin ;  but  black  poppy  is  knocked  out  with  a  sticky 
and  cummin  with  a  staff.  Is  bread  corn  crushed  ?  No ;  he  does  not 
go  on  threshing  it  for  ever,  and  drive  the  wheel  of  his  cart  and  his 
horses  over  it:  he  does  not  crush  it.  This  also,  it  goeth  forth  from 
Jehovah  of  hosts :  He  gives  wonderful  intelligence,  high  under 
standing"  Ki  (for)  introduces  another  proof  that  the  husband 
man  is  instructed  by  God,  from  what  he  still  further  does. 
He  does  not  use  the  threshing  machine  (chdruts,  syn.  morag, 
Ar.  naureg,  nor  eg),  or  the  threshing  cart  (agdldh  :  see  Winer's 
Iteal-Worterbuch,  art.  Dreschen),  which  would  entirely  destroy 
the  more  tender  kinds  of  fruit,  but  knocks  them  out  with  a 
staff  (baculo  excutit:  see  at  ch.  xxvii.  12).  The  sentence  lechem 
yuddq  is  to  be  accentuated  as  an  interrogative :  Is  bread  corn 
crushed  ?  Oh  no,  he  does  not  crush  it.  This  would  be  the  case 
if  he  were  to  cause  the  wheel  (i.e.  the  wheels,  gilgal,  constr.  to 
galgal)  of  the  threshing  cart  W7ith  the  horses  harnessed  in  front 
to  rattle  over  it  with  all  their  might  (hdmam,  to  set  in  noisy 


16  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

violent  motion).  Lecliem,  like  the  Greek  sitos,  is  corn  from 
which  bread  is  made  (ch.  xxx.  23  ;  Ps.  civ.  14).  WK  is  meta- 
plastic  (as  if  from  EHN)  for  unn  (see  Ewald,  §  312,  b).  Instead 
of  Vcna^  the  pointing  ought  to  be  van  Eft  (from  Bna  with  kametz 
before  the  tone  =  Arab,  fdras,  as  distinguished  from  fcna  with 
a  fixed  kametz,  equivalent  to  /arras,  a  rider)  :  "  his  horses,"  here 
the  threshing  horses,  which  were  preferred  to  asses  and  oxen. 
Even  in  this  treatment  of  the  fruit  when  reaped,  there  is  an 

I  • 

evidence  of  the  wonderful  intelligence  (Hf5??,  as  written  KJBH) 
and  exalted  understanding  (on  iWW,  from  ^'J,  see  at  Job  xxvi. 
3)  imparted  by  God.  The  expression  is  one  of  such  grandeur, 
that  we  perceive  at  once  that  the  prophet  has  in  his  mind  the 
wisdom  of  God  in  a  higher  sphere.  The  wise,  divinely  inspired 
course  adopted  by  the  husbandman  in  the  treatment  of  the  field 
and  fruit,  is  a  type  of  the  wise  course  adopted  by  the  divine 
Teacher  Himself  in  the  treatment  of  His  nation.  Israel  is 
Jehovah's  field.  The  punishments  and  chastisements  of  Je 
hovah  are  the  ploughshare  and  harrow,  with  which  He  forcibly 
breaks  up,  turns  over,  and  furrows  this  field.  But  this  does 
not  last  for  ever.  When  the  field  has  been  thus  loosened, 
smoothed,  and  rendered  fertile  once  more,  the  painful  process 
of  ploughing  is  followed  by  a  beneficent  sowing  and  planting 
in  a  multiform  and  wisely  ordered  fulness  of  grace.  Again, 
Israel  is  Jehovah's  child  of  the  threshing-floor  (seech,  xxi.  10). 
He  threshes  it ;  but  He  does  not  thresh  it  only :  He  also  knocks ; 
and  when  He  threshes,  He  does  not  continue  threshing  for  ever, 
i.e.  as  Caspari  has  well  explained  it,  "  He  does  not  punish  all 
the  members  of  the  nation  with  the  same  severity ;  and  those 
whom  He  punishes  with  greater  severity  than  others  He  does 
not  punish  incessantly,  but  as  soon  as  His  end  is  attained, 
and  the  husks  of  sin  are  separated  from  those  that  have  been 
punished,  the  punishment  ceases,  and  only  the  worst  in  the 
nation,  who  are  nothing  but  husks,  and  the  husks  on  the 
nation  itself,  are  swept  away  by  the  punishments"  (compare 
ch.  i.  25,  xxix.  20,  21).  This  is  the  solemn  lesson  and 
affectionate  consolation  hidden  behind  the  veil  of  the  parable. 
Jehovah  punishes,  but  it  is  in  order  that  He  may  be  able  to 
bless.  He  sifts,  but  He  does  not  destroy.  He  does  not  thresh 
His  own  people,  but  He  knocks  them ;  and  even  when  He 
threshes,  they  may  console  themselves  in  the  face  of  the 


CHAP.  XXIX.  1.  17 

approaching  period  of  judgment,  that  they  are  never  crushed 
or  injured. 

THE  SECOND  WOE  :    THE  OPPRESSION  AND  DELIVERANCE 
OF  ARIEL. — CHAP.  XXIX. 

The  prophecy  here  passes  from  the  fall  of  Samaria,  the 
crown  of  flowers  (ch.  xxviii.  1-4),  to  its  formal  parallel.  Jeru 
salem  takes  its  place  by  the  side  of  Samaria,  the  crown  of 
flowers,  under  the  emblem  of  a  hearth  of  God.  'Ariel  might, 
indeed,  mean  a  lion  of  God.  It  occurs  in  this  sense  as  the 
name  of  certain  Moabitish  heroes  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  20 ;  1  Citron. 
xi.  22),  and  Isaiah  himself  used  the  shorter  form  PfcOK  for  the 

/  7  .  v    :  v 

heroes  of  Judah  (ch.  xxxiii.  7).  But  as  ^~)^  (God's  hearth,  in 
terchanged  with  &TJD,  God's  height)  is  the  name  given  in  Ezek. 
xliii.  15,  16,  to  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  in  the  new  temple, 
and  as  Isaiah  could  not  say  anything  more  characteristic  of 
Jerusalem,  than  that  Jehovah  had  a  fire  and  hearth  there  (ch. 
xxxi.  9)  ;  and,  moreover,  as  Jerusalem  the  city  and  community 
within  the  city  would  have  been  compared  to  a  lioness  rather 
than  a  lion,  we  take  ?NS")N  in  the  sense  of  ara  Dei  (from  rnj^ 
to  burn).  The  prophet  commences  in  his  own  peculiar  way 
with  a  grand  summary  introduction,  which  passes  in  a  few 
gigantic  strides  over  the  whole  course  from  threatening  to 
promise.  Ver.  1.  "  Woe  to  Ariel,  to  Ariel,  the  castle  where 
David  pitched  his  tent!  Add  year  to  year,  let  the  feasts  revolve  : 
then  I  distress  Ariel,  and  there  is  groaning  and  moaning;  and  so 
she  proves  herself  to  me  as  Ariel."  By  the  fact  that  David 
fixed  his  headquarters  in  Jerusalem,  and  then  brought  the 
sacred  ark  thither,  Jerusalem  became  a  hearth  of  God.  Within 
a  single  year,  after  only  one  more  round  of  feasts  (to  be  inter 
preted  according  to  ch.  xxxii.  10,  and  probably  spoken  at  the 
passover),  Jehovah  would  make  Jerusalem  a  besieged  city,  full 
of  sighs  (vahdtslqOthij  perf.  cons.,  with  the  tone  upon  the  ulti 
mate)  ;  but  "  she  becomes  to  me  like  an  Ariel,"  i.e.,  being 
qualified  through  rne,  she  will  prove  herself  a  hearth  of  God, 
by  consuming  the  foes  like  a  furnace,  or  by  their  meeting  with 
their  destruction  at  Jerusalem,  like  wood  piled  up  on  the  altar 
and  then  consumed  in  flame.  The  prophecy  has  thus  passed 
over  the  whole  ground  in  a  few  majestic  words.  It  now  starts 

VOL.  II.  B 


18  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

from  the  very  beginning  again,  and  first  of  all  expands  tlie 
hoi.  Vers.  3  and  4.  "And  I  encamp  in  a  circle  round  about  thee, 
and  surround  thee  with  watch-posts,  and  erect  tortoises  against 
thee.  And  when  brought  down  thou  wilt  speak  from  out  of  the 
ground,  and  thy  speaking  ivill  sound  low  out  of  the  dust;  and  thy 
voice  cometh  up  like  that  of  a  demon  from  the  ground,  and  thy 
speaking  will  whisper  out  of  the  dust"  It  would  have  to  go  so 
far  with  Ariel  first  of  all,  that  it  would  be  besieged  by  a  hostile 
force,  and  would  lie  upon  the  ground  in  the  greatest  extremity, 
and  then  would  whisper  with  a  ghostlike  softness,  like  a  dying 
man,  or  like  a  spirit  without  flesh  and  bones.  Kaddur  signifies 
sphcera,  orbis,  as  in  ch.  xxii.  18  and  in  the  Talmud  (from 
Mdar  =  Mthar ;  cf.  kudur  in  the  name  Nabu-kudur-ussur, 
Nebo  protect  the  crown,  /ctSapw),  and  is  used  here  poetically 
for  Mp.  Jerome  renders  it  quasi  sphceram  (from  dur,  orbis). 
ntfD  (from  syj?  2^)  might  signify  "  firmly  planted  "  (Luzzatto, 
immobilmente ;  compare  shuth,  ch.  xxii.  7)  ;  but  according  to 
the  parallel  it  signifies  a  military  post,  like  2Sftp?  1^3.  Metsu- 
roth  (from  mdtsor,  Deut.  xx.  20)  are  instruments  of  siege,  the 
nature  of  which  can  only  be  determined  conjecturally.  On 
'obh,  see  ch.  viii.  19  j1  there  is  no  necessity  to  take  it  as  standing 
for  baal  'obh. 

Thus  far  does  the  unfolding  of  the  hoi  reach.  Now  follows 
an  unfolding  of  the  words  of  promise,  which  stand  at  the  end 
of  ver.  1 :  u  And  it  proves  itself  to  me  as  Ariel."  Vers.  5-8. 
"  And  the  multitude  of  thy  foes  will  become  like  finely  powdered 
dust,  and  the  multitude  of  the  tyrants  like  chaff  flying  away ;  and 
it  will  take  place  suddenly,  very  suddenly.  From  Jehovah  of 
hosts  there  comes  a  visitation  with  crash  of  thunder  and  earth 
quake  and  great  noise,  whirlwind  and  tempest,  and  the  blazing  up 
of  devouring  fire.  And  the  multitude  of  all  the  nations  that 
gather  together  against  Ariel,  and  all  those  who  storm  and  distress 
Ariel  and  her  stronghold,  will  be  like  a  vision  of  the  night  in  a 

1  The  'aTclctibli  mentioned  there  is  equivalent  to  aribub,  Arab,  a  knot  on  a 
reed  stalk,  then  that  part  of  such  a  reed  which  comes  between  two  knots, 
then  the  reed  stalk  itself  ;  root  33,  to  rise  up,  swell,  or  become  convex 
without  and  concave  within  (FL).  It  is  possible  that  it  would  be  better  to 
trace  'obh  back  to  this  radical  and  primary  meaning  of  what  is  hollow  (and 
therefore  has  a  dull  sound),  whether  used  in  the  sense  of  a  leather-bag,  or 
Applied  to  a  spirit  of  incantation,  and  the  possessor  of  such  a  spirit. 


CHAP.  XXIX.  5-8.  19 

dream.  And  it  is  just  as  a  hungry  man  dreams,  and  behold  he 
eats;  and  when  he  wakes  up  his  soulis  empty:  and  just  as  a  thirsty 
man  dreams,  and  behold  he  drinks ;  and  when  he  wakes  up,  behold, 
he  is  faint,  and  his  soul  is  parched  with  thirst :  so  will  it  be  to  the 
multitude  of  the  nations  which  gather  together  against  the  moun 
tain  of  Zion?  The  hostile  army,  described  four  times  as 
hdmon,  a  groaning  multitude,  is  utterly  annihilated  through  the 
terrible  co-operation  of  the  forces  of  nature  which  are  let  loose 
upon  them  (ch.  xxx.  30,  cf.  ch.  xvii.  13).  "  There  comes  a  visi 
tation:"  tippdqed  might  refer  to  Jerusalem  in  the  sense  of  "it 
will  be  visited"  in  mercy,  viz.  by  Jehovah  acting  thus  upon  its 
enemies.  But  it  is  better  to  take  it  in  a  neuter  sense :  "  punish 
ment  is  inflicted."  The  simile  of  the  dream  is  applied  in  two 
different  ways  :  (1.)  Ver.  7.  They  will  dissolve  into  nothing,  as 
if  they  had  only  the  same  apparent  existence  as  a  vision  in  a 
dream.  (2.)  Yer.  8.  Their  plan  for  taking  Jerusalem  will  be 
put  to  shame,  and  as  utterly  brought  to  nought  as  the  eating 
or  drinking  of  a  dreamer,  which  turns  out  to  be  a  delusion 
as  soon  as  he  awakes.  Just  as  the  prophet  emphatically  com 
bines  two  substantives  from  the  same  verbal  root  in  ver.  1,  and 
two  adverbs  from  the  same  verb  in  ver.  5 ;  so  does  he  place  N3¥ 
and  nns  together  in  ver.  7,  the  former  with  5>JJ  relating  to  the 
crowding  of  an  army  for  the  purpose  of  a  siege,  the  latter  with 
an  objective  suffix  (compare  Ps.  liii.  6)  to  the  attack  made  by 
a  crowded  army.  The  metsoddh  of  Ariel  (i.e.  the  watch-tower, 
specula,  from  tsud,  to  spy J)  is  the  mountain  of  Zion  mentioned 
afterwards  in  ver.  8.  "iKto,  as  if ;  comp.  Zech.  x.  6,  Job  x.  19. 
73is  nam  without  wn;  the  personal  pronoun  is  frequently  omitted, 
not  only  in  the  leading  participial  clause,  as  in  this  instance 
(compare  ch.  xxvi.  3,  xl.  19  ;  Ps.  xxii.  29  ;  Job  xxv.  2 ;  and 
Kohler  on  Zech.  ix.  12),  but  also  with  a  minor  participial  clause, 
as  in  Ps.  vii.  10,  Iv.  20,  and  Hab.  ii.  10.  The  hungering  and 
thirsting  of  the  waking  man  are  attributed  to  his  nephesh  (soul : 
cf.  ch.  xxxii.  6,  v.  14 ;  Prov.  vi.  30),  just  because  the  soul  is 
the  cause  of  the  physical  life,  and  without  it  the  action  of  the 
senses  would  be  followed  by  no  sensation  or  experience  what 
ever.  The  hungry  stomach  is  simply  the  object  of  feeling, 

1  In  Arabic,  also,  masad  signifies  a  lofty  hill  or  mountain-top,  from 
a  secondary  form  of  tsud;  and  massara,  to  lay  the  foundations  of  a  fortified 
city  C»r  mdtsor,  Ps.  xxxi.  22),  from  tsur. 


20  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

and  everything  sensitive  in  the  bodily  organism  is  merely  tlie 
medium  of  sensation  or  feeling ;  that  which  really  feels  is  the 
soul.  The  soul  no  sooner  passes  out  of  the  dreaming  state  into 
a  waking  condition,  than  it  feels  that  its  desires  are  as  unsatis 
fied  as  ever.  Just  like  such  a  dream  will  the  army  of  the 
enemy,  and  that  victory  of  which  it  is  so  certain  before  the 
battle  is  fought,  fade  away  into  nothing. 

This  enigma  of  the  future  the  prophet  holds  out  before  the 
eyes  of  his  contemporaries.  The  prophet  received  it  by  reve 
lation  of  Jehovah  ;  and  without  the  illumination  of  Jehovah 
it  could  not  possibly  be  understood.  The  deep  degradation  of 
Ariel,  the  wonderful  deliverance,  the  sudden  elevation  from  the 
abyss  to  this  lofty  height, — all  this  was  a  matter  of  faith.  But 
this  faith  was  just  what  the  nation  wanted,  and  therefore  the 
understanding  depending  upon  it  was  wanting  also.  The 
sh'mudh  was  there,  but  the  blndh  was  absent ;  and  all  njfl!D$  pn 
was  wrecked  on  the  obtuseness  of  the  mass.  The  prophet, 
therefore,  who  had  received  the  unhappy  calling  to  harden  his 
people,  could  not  help  exclaiming  (ver.  9a),  "  Stop,  and  stare ; 
blind  yourselves,  and  grow  Mind!"  ntpnnnn,  to  show  one's  self 
delaying  (from  nn»,  according  to  Luzzatto  the  reflective  of 
nonoty  an  emphatic  form  which  is  never  met  with),  is  con 
nected  with  the  synonymous  verb  HDn,  to  be  stiff  with  astonish 
ment  ;  but  to  yyv,  to  be  plastered  up,  i.e.  incapable  of  seeing 
(cf.  ch.  vi.  10),  there  is  attached  the  hitlipalpel  of  the  same 
verb,  signifying  "to  place  one's  self  in  such  circumstances," 
se  oblinere  (differently,  however,  in  Ps.  cxix.  16,  47,  compare 
ch.  xi.  8,  se  permulcere).  They  could  not  understand  the  word 
of  God,  but  they  were  confused,  and  their  eyes  were,  so  to 
speak,  festered  up  :  therefore  this  self-induced  condition  would 
become  to  them  a  God-appointed  punishment.  The  impera 
tives  are  judicial  words  of  command. 

This  growth  of  the  self-hardening  into  a  judicial  sentence 
of  obduracy,  is  proclaimed  still  more  fully  by  the  prophet. 
Yers.  96-12.  "  They  are  drunken,  and  not  with  wine;  they  reel, 
and  not  with  meth.  For  Jehovah  hath  poured  upon  you  a  spirit 
of  deep  sleep,  and  bound  up  your  eyes ;  the  prophets  and  your 
heads,  the  seers,  He  has  veiled.  And  the  revelation  of  all  this 
will  be  to  you  like  words  of  a  sealed  writing,  which  they  give  to 
him  who  understands  writing,  saying,  Pray,  read  this ;  but  lie 


CHAP.  XXIX.  9-12.  21 

says,  I  cannot,  it  is  sealed.  And  they  give  tlie  writing  to  one 
who  does  not  understand  writing,  saying,  Pray,  read  this ;  but 
he  says,  I  do  not  understand  writing."  They  were  drunken 
and  stupid ;  not,  however,  merely  because  they  gave  themselves 
up  to  sensual  intoxication  (1.^,  dependent  upon  ^?£?,  ebrii  vino), 
but  because  Jehovah  had  given  them  up  to  spiritual  confusion 
and  self-destruction.  All  the  punishments  of  God  are  inflicted 
through  the  medium  of  His  no  less  world-destroying  than 
world-sustaining  Spirit,  which,  although  not  willing  what  is 
evil,  does  make  the  evil  called  into  existence  by  the  creature 
the  means  of  punishing  evil.  Tardemdh  is  used  here  to  signify 
the  powerless,  passive  state  of  utter  spiritual  insensibility.  This 
judgment  had  fallen  upon  the  nation  in  all  its  members,  even 
upon  the  eyes  and  heads  of  the  nation,  i.e.  the  prophets.  Even 
they  whose  duty  it  was  to  see  to  the  good  of  the  nation,  and 
lead  it,  were  blind  leaders  of  the  blind  ;  their  eyes  were  fast 
shut  (Q^Vj  the  intensive  form  of  the  kal,  ch.  xxxiii.  15 ;  Aram. 
E2W ;  Talmud  also  pay  :  to  shut  the  eyes,  or  press  them  close), 
and  over  their  heads  a  cover  was  drawn,  as  over  sleepers  in  the 
night.  Since  the  time  of  Koppe  and  Eichhorn  it  has  become 
a  usual  thing  to  regard  D'WlijifTTlK  and  D*fhn  as  a  gloss,  and 
indeed  as  a  false  one  (compare  ch.  ix.  13,  14)  ;  but  the  reason 
assigned — namely,  that  Isaiah's  polemics  are  directed  not  against 
the  prophets,  but  against  the  stupid  staring  people — is  utterly 
groundless  (compare  ch.  xxviii.  7,  and  the  polemics  of  his  con 
temporary  Micah,  e.g.  ch.  iii.  5-8).  Moreover,  the  author  of  a 
gloss  would  have  been  more  likely  to  interpret  DS^fcO  by  D'nfcPn 
or  B^nan  (compare  Job  ix.  24).  And  vers.  11  and  12  are  also 
opposed  to  this  assumption  of  a  gloss.  For  by  those  who  under 
stood  what  was  written  (sepher),  it  is  evident  that  the  prophets 
arid  rulers  of  the  nation  are  intended  ;  and  by  those  who  did 
not  understand  it,  the  great  mass  of  the  people.  To  both  of 
them,  "  the  vision  of  all,"  i.e.  of  all  and  everything  that  God 
had  shown  to  His  true  prophets,  was  by  the  judgment  of  God 
completely  sealed.  Some  of  them  might  have  an  outward 
knowledge  ;  but  the  inward  understanding  of  the  revelation 
was  sealed  to  them.  Some  had  not  even  this,  but  stared  at  the 
word  of  the  prophet,  just  as  a  man  who  cannot  read  stares  at 
what  is  written.  The  chethib  has  "iSBH  ;  the  Jceri  "IDD,  though 
without  any  ground,  since  the  article  is  merely  generic.  In- 


22  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


stead  of  nrw  Nip.  we  should  write  nt  &O"fcOp  in  both  cases,  as 
certain  codices  and  old  editions  do. 

This  stupefaction  was  the  self-inflicted  punishment  of  the 
dead  works  with  which  the  people  mocked  God  and  deceived 
themselves.  Vers.  13,  14.  "  The  Lord  hath  spoken  :  Because 
this  people  approaches  me  with  its  mouthy  and  honours  me  with 
its  lips,  and  keeps  its  heart  far  from  me)  and  its  reverence  of 
me  has  become  a  commandment  learned  from  men:  therefore, 
behold^  I  will  proceed  wondrously  with  this  people,  wondrously 
and  marvellously  strange  ;  and  the  ivisdom  of  its  wise  men  is  lost, 
and  the  understanding  of  its  intelligent  men  becomes  invisible." 
Ever  since  the  time  of  Asaph  (Ps.  1.,  cf.  Ixxviii.  36,  37), 
the  lamentation  and  condemnation  of  hypocritical  ceremonial 
worship,  without  living  faith  or  any  striving  after  holiness,  had 
been  a  leading  theme  of  prophecy.  Even  in  Isaiah's  intro 
ductory  address  (ch.  i.)  this  complaint  was  uttered  quite  in 
the  tone  of  that  of  Asaph.  In  the  time  of  Hezekiah  it  was 
peculiarly  called  for,  just  as  it  was  afterwards  in  that  of  Josiah 
(as  the  book  of  Jeremiah  shows).  The  people  had  been  obliged 
to  consent  to  the  abolition  of  the  public  worship  of  idols,  but 
their  worship  of  Jehovah  was  hypocrisy.  Sometimes  it  was 
conscious  hypocrisy,  arising  from  the  fear  of  man  and  favour  of 
man  ;  sometimes  unconscious,  inasmuch  as  without  any  inward 
conversion,  but  simply  with  work-righteousness,  the  people  con 
tented  themselves  with,  and  even  prided  themselves  upon,  an 
outward  fulfilment  of  the  law  (Mic.  vi.  6-8,  iii.  11).  Instead  of 
VH  (LXX.,  Vulg.,  Syr.,  Matt.  xv.  8,  Mark  vii.  6),  we  also  meet 
with  the  reading  baJ,  "  because  this  people  harasses  itself  as  with 
tributary  service  ;"  but  the  antithesis  to  richaq  (LXX.  iroppco 
aTre^eu}  favours  the  former  reading  niggash,  accedit  ;  and  Tfpliw 
(with  its  mouth)  must  be  connected  with  this,  though  in  oppo 
sition  to  the  accents.  This  self-alienation  and  self-blinding, 
Jehovah  would  punish  with  a  wondrously  paradoxical  judgment, 
namely,  the  judgment  of  a  hardening,  which  would  so  completely 
empty  and  confuse,  that  even  the  appearance  of  wisdom  and 
unity,  which  the  leaders  of  Israel  still  had,  would  completely 
disappear,  *Tp^  (as  in  ch.  xxxviii.  5)  is  not  the  third  person 
fut.  hiphil  here  (so  that  it  could  be  rendered,  according  to  ch. 
xxviii.  16,  "Behold,  I  am  he  who;"  or  more  strictly  still, 
"  Behold  me,  who;"  which,  however,  would  give  a  prominence 


CHAP.  XXIX.  15,  16.  2o 

to  the  subject  that  would  be  out  of  place  here),  but  the  part,  kal 
for  *lDi\  That  the  language  really  allowed  of  such  a  lengthen 
ing  of  the  primary  form  qatil  into  qatil,  and  especially  in  the 
case  of  ^Ppi11,  is  evident  from  Eccles.  i.  18  (see  at  Ps.  xvi.  5). 
In  K.i?SJ  N^L1,  K^B  (cf.  Lam.  i.  9)  alternates  with  the  gerundive 
(see  at  ch.  xxii.  17)  :  the  fifth  example  in  this  one  address  of 
the  emphatic  juxtaposition  of  words  having  a  similar  -sound  and 
the  same  derivation  (vid.  vers.  1,  5,  7,  9). 

Their  hypocrisy,  which  was  about  to  be  so  wonderfully 
punished  according  to  the  universal  law  (Ps.  xviii.  26,  27), 
manifested  itself  in  their  self-willed  and  secret  behaviour,  which 
would  not  inquire  for  Jehovah,  nor  suffer  itself  to  be  chastened 
by  His  word.  Vers.  15,  16.  "  Woe  unto  them  that  hide  plans 
deep  from  Jehovah,  and  their  doing  occurs  in  a  dark  place,  and 
they  say,  Who  saw  us  then,  and  who  knew  about  us  ?  Oh  for  your 
perversity !  It  is  to  be  regarded  as  potters'  clay ;  that  a  work 
could  say  to  its  maker,  He  has  not  made  me ;  and  an  image  to  its 
sculptor,  He  does  not  understand  it  /"  Just  as  Ahaz  had  carefully 
kept  his  appeal  to  Asshur  for  help  secret  from  the  prophet ;  so 
did  they  try,  as  far  as  possible,  to  hide  from  the  prophet  the 
plan  for  an  alliance  with  Egypt.  ^p?  is  a  syncopated  hiphil 
for  •V^pnij,  as  in  ch.  i.  12,  iii.  8,  xxiii.  11.  PWn  adds  the 
adverbial  notion,  according  to  our  mode  of  expression  (cornp. 
Joel  ii.  20,  and  the  opposite  thought  in  Joel  ii.  26;  Ges.  § 
142).  To  hide  from  Jehovah  is  equivalent  to  hiding  from 
the  prophet  of  Jehovah,  that  they  might  not  have  to  listen  to 
reproof  from  the  word  of  Jehovah.  We  may  see  from  ch. 
viii.  12  how  suspiciously  they  watched  the  prophet  in  such  cir 
cumstances  as  these.  But  Jehovah  saw  them  in  their  secrecy, 
and  the  prophet  saw  through  the  whole  in  the  light  of  Jehovah. 
Drissn  is  an  exclamation,  like  in^Bfl  in  Jer.  xlix.  16.  They 
are  perverse,  or  ('z'm)  "is  it  not  so?"  They  think  they  can 
dispense  with  Jehovah,  and  yet  they  are  His  creatures ;  they 
attribute  cleverness  to  themselves,  and  practically  disown  Jeho 
vah,  as  if  the  pot  should  say  to  the  potter  who  has  turned  it, 
He  does  not  understand  it. 

But  the  prophet's  God,  whose  omniscience,  creative  glory, 
and  perfect  wisdom  they  so  basely  mistook  and  ignored,  would 
very  shortly  turn  the  present  state  of  the  world  upside  down,  and 
make  Himself  a  congregation  out  of  the  poor  and  wretched, 


24  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

whilst  He  would  entirely  destroy  this  proud  ungodly  nation. 
Vers.  17-21.  "  Is  it  not  yet  a  very  little,  and  Lebanon  is  turned 
into  a  fruitful  field,  and  the  fruitful  field  esteemed  as  a  forest? 
And  in  that  day  the  deaf  hear  scripture  words,  and  the  eyes  of  the 
blind  will  see  out  of  obscurity  and  out  of  darkness.  And  the  joy 
of  the  humble  increases  in  Jehovah,  and  the  poor  among  men  will 
rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  For  tyrants  are  gone,  and  it  is 
over  with  scoffers ;  and  all  who  think  evil  are  rooted  out,  ivho  con 
demn  a  man  for  a  word,  and  lay  snares  for  him  that  is  free-spoken 
in  the  gate,  and  overthrow  the  righteous  through  shameful  lies" 
The  circumstances  themselves,  as  well  as  the  sentence  passed, 
will  experience  a  change,  in  complete  contrast  with  the  present 
state  of  things.  This  is  what  is  affirmed  in  ver.  17  ;  probably 
a  proverb  transposed  into  a  more  literary  style.  What  is  now 
forest  becomes  ennobled  into  garden  ground ;  and  what  is 
garden  ground  becomes  in  general  estimation  a  forest  (?EfOlP? 
"\Vv,  although  we  should  rather  expect  ?,  just  as  in  eh.  xxxii. 
15).  These  emblems  are  explained  in  vers.  18  sqq.  The 
people  that  are  now  blind  and  deaf,  so  far  as  the  word  of 
Jehovah  is  concerned,  are  changed  into  a  people  with  open 
ears  and  seeing  eyes.  Scripture  words,  like  those  which  the 
prophet  now  holds  before  the  people  so  unsuccessfully,  are 
heard  by  those  who  have  been  deaf.  The  unfettered  sight  of 
those  who  have  been  blind  pierces  through  the  hitherto  sur 
rounding  darkness.  The  heirs  of  the  new  future  thus  trans 
formed  are  the  'andvlm  ("  meek")  and  the  'ebhyonim  ("  poor"). 
B^N  (the  antithesis  of  O^'J*?,  e.g.  ver.  13)  heightens  the  repre 
sentation  of  lowliness ;  the  combination  is  a  superlative  one, 
as  in  fsvn  n^,  Jer.  xlix.  20,  and  js^n  "ty  in  Zech.  xi.  7  (cf. 
nvn  pia  in  ch.  xxxv.  9)  :  needy  men  who  present  a  glaring 
contrast  to,  and  stand  out  from,  the  general  body  of  men. 
Such  men  will  obtain  ever  increasing  joy  in  Jehovah  (ydsaph 
as  in  ch.  xxxvii.  31).  Such  a  people  of  God  would  take  the 
place  of  the  oppressors  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  12)  and  scoffers  (cf, 
ch.  xxviii.  14,  22),  and  those  who  thought  evil  (shdqad,  invigi- 
lare,  sedulo  agere),  i.e.  the  wretched  planners,  who  made  a  N^n 
of  every  one  who  did  not  enter  into  their  plans  (i.e.  who  called 
him  a  chote  ;  cf.  Deut.  xxiv.  4,  Eccles.  v.  5),  and  went  to 
law  with  the  man  who  openly  opposed  them  in  the  gate 
(  \inos  v.  10 ;  y'qvshun,  possibly  the  perf.  kal,  cf.  Jer.  1.  24 ; 


CHAP.  XXIX.  22-24.  25 

according  to  the  syntax,  however,  it  is  the  fut.  kal  of  qftsh  = 
ydqosh:  see  at  ch.  xxvi.  16;  Ges.  §  44,  Anm.  4),  and  thrust 
away  the  righteous,  i.e.  forced  him  away  from  his  just  rights 
(ch.  x.  2),  by  tohu,  i.e.  accusations  and  pretences  of  the 
utmost  worthlessness ;  for  these  would  all  have  been  swept 
away.  This  is  the  true  explanation  of  the  last  clause,  as  given 
in  the  Targum,  and  not  "into  the  desert  and  desolation,"  as 
Knobel  and  Luzzatto  suppose  ;  for  with  Isaiah  tohu  is  the 
synonym  for  all  such  words  as  signify  nothingness,  ground 
lessness,  and  fraud.  The  prophet  no  doubt  had  in  his  mind, 
at  the  time  that  he  uttered  these  words,  the  conduct  of  the 
people  towards  himself  and  his  fellow-prophets,  and  such  as 
were  like-minded  with  them.  The  charge  brought  against  him 
of  being  a  conspirator,  or  a  traitor  to  his  country,  was  a  tohil 
of  this  kind.  All  these  conspirators  and  persecutors  Jehovah 
would  clear  entirely  away. 

Everything  that  was  incorrigible  would  be  given  up  to 
destruction ;  and  therefore  the  people  of  God,  when  it  came 
out  of  the  judgment,  would  have  nothing  of  the  same  kind  to 
look  for  again.  Vers.  22-24.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  Jehovah 
of  the  house  of  Jacob,  He  ivho  redeemed  Abraham:  Jacob  shall 
not  henceforth  be  ashamed,  nor  shall  his  face  turn  pale  any  more. 
For  when  he,  when  his  children  see  the  work  of  my  hands  in  tit  P. 
midst  of  him,  they  will  sanctify  my  name,  and  sanctify  the  Holy 
One  of  Jacob,  and  shudder  before  the  God  of  Israel.  And 
those  who  were  of  an  erring  spirit  discern  understanding,  and 
murmurers  accept  instruction.''9  With  ^N  (for  which  Luzzatto, 
following  Lowth,  reads  7N,  "  the  God  of  the  house  of  Jacob") 
the  theme  is  introduced  to  which  the  following  utterance  refers. 
The  end  of  Israel  will  correspond  to  the  holy  root  of  its  origin. 
Just  as  Abraham  was  separated  from  the  human  race  that  was 
sunk  in  heathenism,  to  become  the  ancestor  of  a  nation  of 
Jehovah,  so  would  a  remnant  be  separated  from  the  great  mass 
of  Israel  that  was  sunk  in  apostasy  from  Jehovah ;  and  this 
remnant  would  be  the  foundation  of  a  holy  community  well 
pleasing  to  God.  And  this  would  never  be  confounded  or 
become  pale  with  shame  again  (on  bosh,  see  at  ch.  i.  29; 
chdvar  is  a  poetical  Ararnaism)  ;  for  both  sins  and  sinners  that 
calied  forth  the  punishments  of  God,  which  had  put  them  to 
shame,  would  have  been  swept  away  (cf.  Zeph.  iii.  11).  In 


26  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  presence  of  this  decisive  work  of  punishment  (matiseh  as 
in  ch.  xxviii.  21,  x.  12,  v.  12,  19),  which  Jehovah  would 
perform  in  the  heart  of  Israel,  Israel  itself  would  undergo  a 
thorough  change.  I^T*  is  in  apposition  to  the  subject  in  tofc'"j3> 
"  when  he,  namely  his  children"  (comp.  Job  xxix.  3)  ;  and  the 
expression  "his  children"  is  intentionally  chosen  instead  of 
"his  sons"  (bdmm),  to  indicate  that  there  would  be  a  new 
generation,  which  would  become,  in  the  face  of  the  judicial 
self-manifestation  of  Jehovah,  a  holy  church,  sanctifying  Him, 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  Yaqdlshu  is  continued  in  vehiqdlshu : 
the  prophet  intentionally  repeats  this  most  significant  word, 
and  heerlts  is  the  parallel  word  to  it,  as  in  ch.  viii.  12,  13. 
The  new  church  would  indeed  not  be  a  sinless  one,  or  thoroughly 
perfect;  but,  according  to  ver.  24,  the  previous  self-hardening  in 
error  would  have  been  exchanged  for  a  willing  and  living  appro 
priation  of  right  understanding,  and  the  former  murmuring 
resistance  to  the  admonitions  of  Jehovah  would  have  given 
place  to  a  joyful  and  receptive  thirst  for  instruction.  There  is 
the  same  interchange  of  Jacob  and  Israel  here  which  we  so 
frequently  meet  with  in  ch.  xl.  sqq.  And,  in  fact,  throughout 
this  undisputedly  genuine  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  we  can  detect  the 
language  of  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  Through  the  whole  of  the  first  part, 
indeed,  we  may  trace  the  gradual  development  of  the  thoughts 
and  forms  which  predominate  there. 

THE  THIRD  WOE:  THE  MOMENTOUS  RESULT  OF  THE  ALLIANCE 
WITH  EGYPT. — CHAP.  XXX. 

The  plan  which,  according  to  ch.  xxix.  15,  was  already 
projected  and  prepared  in  the  deepest  secrecy,  is  now  much 
further  advanced.  The  negotiations  by  means  of  ambassadors 
have  already  been  commenced ;  but  the  prophet  condemns  what 
he  can  no  longer  prevent.  Vers.  1-5.  "  Woe  to  the  stubborn 
children,  saith  Jehovah,  to  drive  plans,  and  not  by  my  impulse, 
and  to  plait  alliance,  and  not  according  to  my  Spirit,  to  heap 
sin  upon  sin :  that  go  away  to  travel  down  to  Egypt,  without 
having  asked  my  mouth,  to  fly  to  Pharaoh's  shelter,  and  to  con 
ceal  themselves  under  the  shadow  of  Egypt.  And  Pharaoh's 
shelter  becomes  a  shame  to  them,  and  the  concealment  under  the 
shadow  of  Egypt  a  disgrace.  For  Juda/ts  princes  have  appeared 


CHAP.  XXX.  1-5.  27 

in  Zoan,  and  his  ambassadors  arrive  in  Hanes.  They  will  all 
have  to  be  ashamed  of  a  people  useless  to  them,  that  brings  no 
help  and  no  use,  but  shame,  and  also  reproach"  Sorerlm  is  fol 
lowed  by  infinitives  with  Lamed  (cf.  ch.  v.  22,  iii.  8)  :  who  are 
bent  upon  it  in  their  obstinacy.  MasseJchdh  designates  the 
alliance  as  a  plait  (massgkheth).  According  to  Cappellus  and 
others,  it  designates  it  as  formed  with  a  libation  (cnrovG*ij,  from 
cnriv§ecr6ai)  ;  but  the  former  is  certainly  the  more  correct  view, 
inasmuch  as  massekhdh  (from  ndsakh,  fundere)  signifies  a  cast, 
and  hence  it  is  more  natural  here  to  take  ndsakh  as  equivalent  to 
sdkhakh, plectere  (Jerome :  ordiremini  telam).  The  context  leaves 
no  doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  adverbial  expressions  *|&~*6l 
and  t|JTfr&6l,  viz.  without  its  having  proceeded  from  me,  and 
without  my  Spirit  being  there.  "Sin  upon  sin  :"  inasmuch  as 
they  carry  out  further  and  further  to  perfect  realization  the 
thought  which  was  already  a  sinful  one  in  itself.  The  prophet 
now  follows  for  himself  the  ambassadors,  who  are  already  on 
the  road  to  the  country  of  the  Nile  valley.  He  sees  them 
arrive  in  Zoan,  and  watches  them  as  they  proceed  thence  into 
Hanes.  He  foresees  and  foretells  what  a  disgraceful  opening 
of  their  eyes  will  attend  the  reward  of  this  untheocratical  be 
ginning.  On  laoz  b\  see  at  ch.  x.  31 :  eoz  is  the  infinitive 
;  ma  oz^  on  the  contrary,  is  a  derivative  of 
to  be  strong.  The  suffixes  of  1*nJP  (his  princes)  and 
3K7O  (his  ambassadors)  are  supposed  by  Hitzig,  Ewald,  and 
Knobel,  who  take  a  different  view  of  what  is  said,  to  refer  to 
the  princes  and  ambassadors  of  Pharaoh.  But  this  is  by  no 
means  warranted  on  the  ground  that  the  prophet  cannot  so 
immediately  transfer  to  Zoan  and  Hanes  the  ambassadors  of 
Judah,  who  were  still  on  their  journey  according  to  ver.  2. 
The  prophet's  vision  overleaps  the  existing  stage  of  the  desire 
for  this  alliance ;  he  sees  the  great  men  of  his  nation  already 
suing  for  the  favour  of  Egypt,  first  of  all  in  Zoan,  and  then 
still  further  in  Hanes,  and  at  once  foretells  the  shameful  ter 
mination  of  this  self-desecration  of  the  people  of  Jehovah. 
The  LXX.  give  for  W3*  Dpn?  fjidrvv  KOTriaa-ovcnv,  i.e.  WJ'1]  &|n? 
and  Knobel  approves  this  reading;  but  it  is  a  misunderstand 
ing,  which  only  happens  to  have  fallen  out  a  little  better  this 
time  than  the  rendering  £9  AavtS  given  for  "WO  in  ch.  xxix.  3. 
If  chinndm  had  been  the  original  reading,  it  would  hardly  have 


28  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

entered  any  one's  mind  to  change  it  into  chdnes.  The  latter 
was  the  name  of  a  city  on  an  island  of  the  Nile  in  Central 
Egypt,  the  later  Heracleopolis  (Eg.  Hues ;  EJmes),  the  Anysis 
of  Herodotus  (ii.  137).  On  Zoan,  see  at  ch.  xix.  11.  At  that 
time  the  Tanitic  dynasty  was  reigning,  the  dynasty  preceding 
the  Ethiopian.  Tanis  and  Anysis  were  the  two  capitals.  B^Nin 
(=  B^3'n?  a  metaplastic  hiphil  of  £;3J  =  C$3?  a  different  word 
from  B'3J)  is  incorrectly  pointed  for  E^Dn,  like  n:b*aq  (keri) 
for  njbMN~|  in  Josh.  xxi.  10.  E"lsiin  signifies  elsewhere,  "  to 
make  stinking"  (to  calumniate,  Prov.  xiii.  5),  or  "  to  come  into 
ill  odour"  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  12)  ;  here,  however,  it  means  to  be 
put  to  shame  (E\X3  =  Bfa). 

The  prophet's  address  is  hardly  commenced,  however,  when 
a  heading  is  introduced  of  the  very  same  kind  as  we  have 
already  met  with  several  times  in  the  cycle  of  prophecies 
against  the  heathen  nations.  Gesenius,  Hitzig,  Umbreit,  and 
Knobel,  rid  themselves  of  it  by  pronouncing  it  a  gloss  founded 
upon  a  misunderstanding.  But  nothing  is  more  genuine  in  the 
whole  book  of  Isaiah  than  the  words  massa  bahdmoth  negebh. 
The  heading  is  emblematical,  like  the  four  headings  in  ch.  xxi., 

O  7  O 

xxii.  And  the  masscL  embraces  vers.  6,  7.  Then  follows  the 
command  to  write  it  on  a  table  by  itself.  The  heading  is  an 
integral  part  of  the  smaller  whole.  Isaiah  breaks  off  his 
address  to  communicate  an  oracle  relating  to  the  Egyptian 
treaty,  which  Jehovah  has  specially  commanded  him  to  hand 
down  to  posterity.  The  same  interruption  would  take  place  if 
we  expunged  the  heading ;  for  in  any  case  it  was  vers.  6,  7 
that  he  was  to  write  upon  a  table.  This  is  not  an  address  to 
the  people,  but  the  preliminary  text,  the  application  of  which 
is  determined  afterwards.  The  prophet  communicates  in  the 
form  of  a  citation  what  has  been  revealed  to  him  by  God,  and 
then  states  what  God  has  commanded  him  to  do  with  it.  We 
therefore  enclose  vers.  6,  7  in  inverted  commas  as  a  quotation, 
and  render  the  short  passage,  which  is  written  in  the  tone  of 
ch.  xxi.,  as  follows :  Vers.  6,  7.  a  Oracle  concerning  this  water- 
oxen  of  the  south :  Through  a  land  of  distress  and  confinement, 
whence  the  lioness  and  lion,  adders  and  flying  dragons;  they  carry 
their  possessions  on  the  shoulders  of  asses'  foals,  and  their  trea 
sures  on  the  humps  of  camels,  to  a  nation  that  profits  nothing. 
A 'id  Egypt,  wortldessly  and  hollowly  will  they  help;  therefore 


CHAP.  XXX   6,  7.  29 

I  call  this  Egypt,  Great-moutli  that  sits  still"  The  "  water- 
ox  of  the  south"  is  the  Nile-horse;  and  this  is  the  emblem  of 
Egypt,  the  land  of  the  south  (in  Daniel  and  Zechariah  Baby 
lonia  is  "  the  land  of  the  north").  Bahamoth  is  the  construct 
of  b'hemoth  (Job  xl.),  which  is  a  Hebraized  form  of  an  Egyptian 
word,  p-ehe-mau  (though  the  word  itself  has  not  yet  been  met 
with),  i.e.  the  ox  of  the  water,  or  possibly  p-elie-mau-t  (with  the 
feminine  article  at  the  close,  though  in  hesmut,  another  name 
for  a  female  animal,  mut  =  t.  man  signifies  u  the  mother:"  see 
at  Job  xl.  15).  The  animal  referred  to  is  the  hippopotamus, 
which  is  called  bomarino  in  Italian,  Arab,  the  Nile-horse  or 
water-pig.  The  emblem  of  Egypt  in  other  passages  of  the  Old 
Testament  is  tannin,  the  water-snake,  or  leviathan,  the  croco 
dile.  In  Ps.  Ixviii.  31  this  is  called  chayyath  qdneh,  "  the 
beast  of  the  reed,"  though  Hengstenberg  supposes  that  the 
Nile-horse  is  intended  there.  This  cannot  be  maintained,  how 
ever  ;  but  in  the  passage  before  us  this  emblem  is  chosen,  just 
because  the  fat,  swine-like,  fleshy  colossus,  whose  belly  nearly 
touches  the  ground  as  it  walks,  is  a  fitting  image  of  Egypt,  a 
land  so  boastful  and  so  eager  to  make  itself  thick  and  broad,  and 
yet  so  slow  to  exert  itself  in  the  interest  of  others,  and  so  un 
willing  to  move  from  the  spot.  This  is  also  implied  in  the  name 
rahabh-hem-shdbheth.  Rahab  is  a  name  applied  to  Egypt  in  other 
passages  also  (ch.  li.  9  ;  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4,  Ixxxix.  11),  and  that  in 
the  senses  attested  by  the  LXX.  at  Job  xxvi.  12  (cf.  ix.  13), 
viz.  KTJTOS,  a  sea-monster,  monstrum  marinum.  Here  the  name 
has  the  meaning  common  in  other  passages,  viz.  violence,  domi 
neering  pride,  boasting  (aXafyveia,  as  one  translator  renders 
it).  Dn  is  a  term  of  comparison,  as  in  Gen.  xiv.  2,  3,  etc. ;  the 
plural  refers  to  the  people  called  rahabh.  Hence  the  meaning 
is  either,  "  The  bragging  people,  they  are  sit-still ;"  or,  "  Boast- 
house,  they  are  idlers."  To  this  deceitful  land  the  ambassadors 
of  Judah  were  going  writh  rich  resources  (chaydllm,  opes)  on 
the  shoulder  of  asses'  foals,  and  on  the  hump  (dabbesheth,  from 
ddbhash,  according  to  Luzzatto  related  to  gdbhash,  to  be  hilly) 
of  camels,  without  shrinking  from  the  difficultios  and  dangers  of 
the  road  through  the  desert,  where  lions  and  snakes  spring  out 
now  here  and  now  there  (&p^j  neuter,  as  in  Zeph.  ii.  7,  comp. 
ch.  xxxviii.  16  ;  see  also  Deut.  viii.  15,  Num.  xxi.  6).  Through 
this  very  desert,  through  which  God  had  led  their  fathers  when 


30  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

He  redeemed  them  out  of  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  they  were 
now  marching  to  purchase  the  friendship  of  Egypt,  though 
really,  whatever  might  be  the  pretext  which  they  offered,  it 
was  only  to  deceive  themselves ;  for  the  vainglorious  land  would 
never  keep  the  promises  that  it  made. 

So  runs  the  divine  oracle  to  which  the  following  command 
refers.  Ver.  8.  "Now  go,  write  it  on  a  table  with  them,  and 
note  it  in  a  book,  and  let  it  stand  there  for  future  days,  for  ever, 
to  eternity"  The  suffixes  of  kothbdh  (write  it)  and  chuqqdh 
(note  it)  refer  in  a  neuter  sense  to  vers.  6,  7  ;  and  the  expres 
sion  "  go  "  is  simply  a  general  summons  to  proceed  to  the  matter 
(cf.  ch.  xxii.  15).  Sepher  could  be  used  interchangeably  with 
ludch,  because  a  single  leaf,  the  contents  of  which  were  con 
cluded,  was  called  seplier  (Ex.  xvii.  14).  Isaiah  was  to  write 
the  oracle  upon  a  table,  a  separate  leaf  of  durable  material ;  and 
that  "  with  them,"  i.e.  so  that  his  countrymen  might  have  it 
before  their  eyes  (compare  ch.  viii.  1,  Hab.  ii.  2).  It  was  to  be 
a  memorial  for  posterity.  The  reading  "w  (Sept.,  Targ.,  Syr.) 
for  "lyj  is  appropriate,  though  quite  unnecessary.  The  three 
indications  of  time  form  a  climax :  for  futurity,  for  the  most 
remote  future,  for  the  future  without  end. 

It  was  necessary  that  the  worthlessness  of  the  help  of  Egypt 
should  be  placed  in  this  way  before  the  eyes  of  the  people. 
Vers.  9-11.  "For  it  is  a  refractory  people,  lying  children, 
children  who  do  not  like  to  hear  the  instruction  of  Jehovah,  who 
say  to  the  seers,  See  not ;  and  to  the  prophets,  Prophesy  not  unto 
us  right  things  I  Speak  flatteries  to  us  !  Get  out  of  the  way, 
turn  aside  from  the  path,  remove  from  our  face  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel"  On  the  expression  'am  merl  (a  people  of  stubbornness), 
see  at  ch.  iii.  8.  The  vowel-pointing  of  E^n?  follows  the  same 
rule  as  that  of  &?rin.  The  prophet  traces  back  their  words  to 
an  unvarnished  expression  of  their  true  meaning,  just  as  he 
does  in  ch.  xxviii.  15.  They  forbid  the  prophets  of  Jehovah  to 
prophesy,  more  especially  nekhochoth,  straight  or  true  things 
(things  not  agreeable  to  their  own  wishes),  but  would  rather 
hear  chdldqoth,  i.e.  smooth,  insinuating,  and  flattering  things, 
and  even  mahdthalloth  (from  hdthal,  Talm.  tal,  ludere),  i.e. 
illusions  or  deceits.  Their  desire  was  to  be  entertained  and 
lauded,  not  repelled  and  instructed.  The  prophets  are  to  adopt 
another  course  (*3jp  only  occurs  here,  and  that  twice,  instead  of 


CHAP.  XXX.  12-14.  31 

the  more  usual  t|3?p  =  fp,  after  the  form  vS,  v$),  and  not  trouble 
them  any  more  with  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  whom  they  (at 
least  Isaiah,  who  is  most  fond  of  calling  Jehovah  by  this 
name)  have  always  in  their  mouths. 

Thus  do  they  fall  out  with  Jehovah  and  the  bearers  of  His 
word.  Vers.  12-14.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel,  Because  ye  dislike  this  icord,  and  put  your  trust  in  force 
and  shufflings,  and  rely  upon  this ;  therefore  will  this  iniquity  be 
to  you  like  a  falling  breach,  bent  forwards  in  a  high-towering 
wall,  which  falls  to  ruin  suddenly,  very  suddenly.  And  He 
smites  it  to  pieces,  as  a  potters  vessel  falls  to  pieces,  when  they 
smash  it  without  sparing,  and  of  which,  when  it  lies  smashed  to 
pieces  there,  you  cannot  find  a  sherd  to  fetch  fire  with  from  the 
hearth,  or  to  take  water  with  out  of  a  cistern"  The  "  word " 
towards  which  they  cherished  mfos  (read  mo'oskhem),  was  the 
word  of  Jehovah  through  His  prophet,  which  was  directed 
against  their  untheocratic  policy  of  reckoning  upon  Egypt. 
Ndloz,  bent  out  or  twisted,  is  the  term  used  to  denote  this  very 
policy,  which  was  ever  resorting  to  bypaths  and  secret  ways ; 
whilst  'osheq  denotes  the  squeezing  out  of  the  money  required 
to  carry  on  the  war  of  freedom,  and  to  purchase  the  help  of 
Egypt  (compare  2  Kings  xv.  20).  The  guilt  of  Judah  is 
compared  to  the  broken  and  overhanging  part  of  a  high  wall 
(nibli  eh, bent  forwards;  compare  JJajJ3,a  term  applied  to  a  diseased 
swelling).  Just  as  such  a  broken  piece  brings  down  the  whole 
of  the  injured  wall  along  with  it,  so  would  the  sinful  conduct 
of  Judah  immediately  ruin  the  whole  of  its  existing  constitution. 
Israel,  which  would  not  recognise  itself  as  the  image  of  Jehovah, 
even  when  there  was  yet  time  (ch.  xxix.  16),  would  be  like  a 
vessel  smashed  into  the  smallest  fragments.  It  is  the  captivity 
which  is  here  figuratively  threatened  by  the  prophet ;  for  the 
smashing  had  regard  to  Israel  as  a  state.  The  subject  to  fravh 
in  ver.  14  is  Jehovah,  who  would  make  use  of  the  hostile  power 
of  man  to  destroy  the  wall,  and  break  up  the  kingdom  of  Judah 
into  such  a  diaspora  of  broken  sherds.  The  reading  is  not  n-av\ 
(LXX.,  Targum),  but  nnnttt,  et  franget  earn.  Kdthoth  is  an 
infinitive  statement  of  the  mode  ;  the  participle  Mthuth,  which 
is  adopted  by  the  Targum,  Kimchi,  Norzi,  and  others,  is  less 
suitable.  It  was  necessary  to  proceed  with  felT  &6  (without  his 
sparing),  simply  because  the  infinitive  absolute  cannot  be  con- 


32  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

nected  with  j&  (Ewald,  §  350,  a).  *$&$  (to  be  written  tlms 
\vith  daqesh  both  here  and  Hag.  ii.  16)  passes  from  the  primary 
meaning  nudare  to  that  of  scooping  up,  as  rny  does  to  that  of 
pouring  out. 

Into  such  small  sherds,  a  heap  thus  scattered  hither  and 
thither,  would  the  kingdom  of  Judah  be  broken  up,  in  conse 
quence  of  its  ungodly  thirst  for  self-liberation.  Vers.  15-17. 
"  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel, 
Through  turning  and  rest  ye  would  be  helped;  your  strength  vjould 
show  itself  in  quietness  and  confidence',  but  ye  would  not.  And 
ye  said,  No,  but  ive  will  fly  upon  horses  ;  therefore  ye  shall  flee: 
and,  We  will  ride  upon  racehorses  ;  therefore  your  pursuers  will 
race.  A  thousand,  ye  will  flee  from  the  threatening  of  one,  from 
the  threatening  of  five,  until  ye  are  reduced  to  a  remnant,  like 
a  pine  upon  the  top  of  the  mountain,  and  like  a  banner  upon  the 
hill."  The  conditions  upon  which  their  salvation  depended, 
and  by  complying  with  which  they  would  attain  to  it,  were 
shubhdh,  turning  from  their  self-chosen  way,  and  nachath,  rest 
from  self-confident  work  of  their  own  (from  nuach,  like  rachath, 
ventilabrum,  from  rudch,  and  shachath,  fovea,  from  shuach). 
Their  strength  (i.e.  what  they  would  be  able  to  do  in  opposition 
to  the  imperial  power)  would  show  itself  (Jidydh,  arise,  come  to 
the  light,  as  in  ch.  xxix.  2)  in  hashqet,  laying  aside  their  busy 
care  and  stormy  eagerness,  and  bitchdh,  trust,  which  cleaves  to 
Jehovah  and,  renouncing  all  self-help,  leaves  Him  to  act  alone. 
This  was  the  leading  and  fundamental  principle  of  the  prophet's 
politics  even  in  the  time  of  Ahaz  (ch.  vii.  4).  But  from  the 
very  first  they  would  not  act  upon  it  ;  nor  would  they  now  that 
the  alliance  with  Egypt  had  become  an  irreversible  fact.  To 
fly  upon  horses,  and  ride  away  upon  racehorses  (kal,  like  ice\r)s, 
celer1),  had  been  and  still  was  their  proud  and  carnal  ambition, 
which  Jehovah  would  answer  by  fulfilling  upon  them  the 
curses  of  the  thorah  (Lev.  xxvi.  8,  36  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  25,  xxxii. 
30).  One,  or  at  the  most  five,  of  the  enemy  would  be  able 
with  their  snorting  to  put  to  flight  a  whole  thousand  of  the 
men  of  Judah.  The  verb  nus  (ver.  16),  which  rhymes  with  sus, 
is  used  first  of  all  in  its  primary  sense  of  "  flying  "  (related  to 


1  We  regard  the  Sanscrit  kal,  to  drive  or  hunt,  the  Greek 
and  the  Semitic  qal,  as  all  having  the  same  root  :  cf  .  Curtius,  Grundziige  der 
yriech.  E'ymol.  i.  116. 


CHAP.  XXX.  18.  33 

nuts,  cf.  Ex.  xiv.  27),  and  then  in  its  more  usual  sense  of 
"  fleeing."  (Luzzatto,  after  Abulwalid  :  vogliamo  far  sui  cavalli 
gloriosa  comparsa,  from  nils,  or  rather  ndsas,  hence  ndnos,  from 
which  comes  nes,  excellere.)  w%\,  the  fut.  niphal,  signifies  to  be 
light,  i.e.  swift ;  whereas  ?£?.,  the  fat.  kal,  had  become  a  common 
expression  for  light  in  the  sense  of  despised  or  lightly  esteemed. 
The  horses  and  chariots  are  Judah's  own  (ch.  ii.  7  ;  Mic.  v.  9), 
though  possibly  with  the  additional  allusion  to  the  Egyptian 
cavalry,  of  world-wide  renown,  which  they  had  called  to  their 
help.  In  ver.  17a  the  subject  of  the  first  clause  is  also  that 
of  the  second,  and  consequently  we  have  not  ^SEl  (compare 
the  asyndeta  in  ch.  xvii.  6).  The  insertion  of  rebhdbhdh  (ten 
thousand)  after  chdmisshdh  (five),  which  Lowth,  Gesenius,  and 
others  propose,  is  quite  unnecessary.  The  play  upon  the  words 
symbolizes  the  divine  law  of  retribution  (talio),  which  would 
be  carried  out  with  regard  to  them.  The  nation,  which  had 
hitherto  resembled  a  thick  forest,  would  become  like  a  lofty  pine 
(toren,  according  to  the  talmudic  turnltha,  Pinus  pined),  stand 
ing  solitary  upon  the  top  of  a  mountain,  and  like  a  flagstaff 
planted  upon  a  hill — a  miserable  remnant  in  the  broad  land  so 
fearfully  devastated  by  war.  For  EK  "W  followed  by  a  preterite 
(equivalent  to  the  fut.  exactum),  compare  ch.  vi.  11  and  Gen. 
xxiv.  19. 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  with  |?J1,  to  which  we  cannot 
give  any  other  meaning  than  et  propterea,  which  it  has  every 
where  else.  The  thought  of  the  prophet  is  the  perpetually 
recurring  one,  that  Israel  would  have  to  be  reduced  to  a  small 
remnant  before  Jehovah  would  cease  from  His  wrath.  Ver. 
18.  "  And  therefore  will  Jehovah  wait  till  He  inclines  towards 
you,  and  therefore  will  He  withdraw  Himself  on  high  till  He  has 
mercy  upon  you;  for  Jehovah  is  a  God  of  right,  salvation  to  those 
who  wait  for  Him."  In  other  places  Idkhen  (therefore)  deduces 
the  punishment  from  the  sin  ;  here  it  infers,  from  the  nature 
of  the  punishment,  the  long  continuance  of  the  divine  wrath. 
ChikMh,  to  wait,  connected  as  it  is  here  with  Lamed,  has  at  least 
the  idea,  if  not  the  actual  signification,  of  delay  (as  in  2  Kings 
ix.  3 ;  compare  Job  xxxii.  4).  This  hjelps  to  determine  the 
sense  of  ydrum,  which  does  not  mean,  He  will  show  Himself 
exalted  as  a  judge,  that  through  judgment  He  may  render  it 
possible  to  have  mercy  upon  you  (which  is  too  far-fetched  a 

VOL.  II.  C 


3<1  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

meaning)  ;  but,  He  will  raise  Himself  up,  so  as  to  be  far  away 
(cf.  Num.  xvi.  45,  "  Get  you  up  from  among  this  congrega 
tion  ;"  and  Ps.  x.  5,  mdrom  =  "  far  above,"  as  far  as  heaven, 
out  of  his  sight),  that  thus  (after  having  for  a  long  time  with 
drawn  His  gracious  presence ;  cf.  Hos.  v.  6)  He  may  bestow 
His  mercy  upon  you.  A  dark  prospect,  but  only  alarming  to 
unbelievers.  The  salvation  at  the  remotest  end  of  the  future 
belongs  to  believers  even  now.  This  is  affirmed  in  the  word 
'ashre  (blessed),  which  recals  Ps.  ii.  12.  The  prophet  uses 
chdkhdh  in  a  very  significant  double  sense  here,  just  as  he  did 
nus  a  short  time  before.  Jehovah  is  waiting  for  the  time  when 
He  can  show  His  favour  once  more,  and  blessed  are  they  who 
meet  His  waiting  with  their  own  waiting. 

None  but  such  are  heirs  of  the  grace  that  follows  the 
judgment — a  people,  newly  pardoned  in  response  to  its  cry  for 
help,  conducted  by  faithful  teachers  in  the  right  way,  and  re 
nouncing  idolatry  with  disgust.  Vers.  19-22.  "  For  a  people 
continues  dwelling  in  Zion,  in  Jerusalem ;  tliou  slialt  not  weep 
for  ever :  He  will  prove  Himself  gracious  to  thee  at  the  sound  of 
thy  cry  for  help;  as  soon  as  He  hears,  He  answers  thee.  And 
the  Lord  giveth  you  bread  in  penury,  and  water  for  your  need; 
and  thy  teachers  will  not  hide  themselves  any  more,  and  thine  eyes 
come  to  see  thy  teachers.  And  thine  ears  will  hear  words  behind 
thee,  saying,  '  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it!1  whether  ye  turn  to 
the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  And  ye  defile  the  covering  of  thy 
graven  images  of  silver,  and  the  clothing  of  thy  molten  images  of 
gold;  thou  wilt  scatter  them  like  a  filthy  thing :  *  Get  out!9  thou 
eayest  to  it"  We  do  not  render  ver.  19a,  " For  O  people  that 
dwelleth  in  Zion,  in  Jerusalem!"  For  although  the  personal 
pronoun  may  be  omitted  after  Vav  in  an  apostrophizing  con 
nection  (Prov.  viii.  5 ;  Joel  ii.  23),  we  should  certainly  expect 
to  find  HflN  here.  The  accent  very  properly  marks  these  words 
as  forming  an  independent  clause.  The  apparent  tautology  in 
the  expression,  "  in  Zion,  in  Jerusalem,"  is  emphatic  and  ex 
planatory.  The  fate  of  Zion-Jerusalem  will  not  be  the  same 
as  that  of  the  imperial  city  (ch.  xiii.  20,  xxv.  2) ;  for  it  is  the 
city  of  Jehovah,  which,  according  to  His  promise,  cannot  be 
come  an  eternally  deserted  ruin.  After  this  promising  decla 
ration,  the  prophet  turns  and  addresses  the  people  of  the  future 
in  the  people  of  his  own  time  :  laklio  strengthens  the  verbal 


CHAP.  XXX.  19-22.  35 

notion  with  the  mark  of  duration ;  cJidnon  with  the  mark  of 
certainty  and  fulness.  13PP,  with  an  advanced  #,  as  in  Gen. 
xliii.  29,  for  13n?.  3  is  the  shortest  expression  used  to  denote 
simultaneous  occurrence ;  answering  and  hearing  would  coin 
cide  (shorn  ah,  nomen  actionis,  as  in  ch.  xlvii.  9,  lv.  2;  Ges.  §  45, 
\o ;  'dndkh,  the  pausal  form  here,  as  in  Jer.  xxiii.  37).  From 
this  lowest  stage  of  response  to  the  penitential  cry  for  help,,  the 
promise  rises  higher  and  higher.  The  next  stage  is  that  in 
which  Jerusalem  is  brought  into  all  the  distress  consequent 
upon  a  siege,  as  threatened  by  the  prophet  in  ch.  xxix.  3,  4  ; 
the  besieged  would  not  be  allowed  by  God  to  die  of  starvation, 
but  He  would  send  them  the  necessary  support.  The  same  ex 
pression,  but  very  little  altered,  viz.  "to  give  to  eat  lecJiem  la-chatz 
umayim  lachatz?  signifies  to  put  any  one  upon  the  low  rations 
of  a  siege  or  of  imprisonment,  in  1  Kings  xxii.  27  and  2  Chron. 
xviii.  26 ;  but  here  it  is  a  promise,  with  the  threat  kept  in  the 
background.  "W  and  fr£  are  connected  with  the  absolute  nouns 
Dn?  and  D^D,  not  as  adverbial,  but  as  appositional  definitions  (like 
^}9  H!,  "wine  which  is  giddiness,"  in  Ps.  Ix.  5;  and  Dt?"!?  D!9, 
"  water  which  is  knees,"  i.e.  which  has  the  measure  of  the  knees, 
where  birkayim  is  also  in  apposition,  and  not  the  accusative  of 
measurement) :  literally,  bread  which  is  necessity,  and  water 
which  is  affliction;  that  is  to  say,  nourishment  of  which  there  is 
extreme  need,  the  very  opposite  of  bread  and  water  in  abundance. 
TJmbreit  and  Drechsler  understand  this  spiritually.  But  the 
promise  rises  as  it  goes  on.  There  is  already  an  advance,  in 
the  fact  that  the  faithful  and  well-meaning  teachers  (morlm) 
no  longer  keep  themselves  hidden  because  of  the  hard-hearted- 
ness  and  hatred  of  the  people,  as  they  have  done  ever  since 
the  time  of  Ahaz  (^33,  a  denom. :  to  withdraw  into  ^33, 
irTepv^j  the  utmost  end,  the  most  secret  corner ;  though  Mnaph 
in  itself  signifies  to  cover  or  conceal).  Israel,  when  penitent, 
would  once  more  be  able  to  rejoice  in  the  sight  of  those  whom 
it  longed  to  have  back  again.  T^to  is  a  plural,  according  to 
the  context  (on  the  singular  of  the  previous  predicate,  see  Ges. 
§  147).  As  the  shepherds  of  the  flock,  they  would  follow  the 
people  with  friendly  words  of  admonition,  whilst  the  people 
would  have  their  ears  open  to  receive  their  instruction.  ^EKn 
is  here  equivalent  to  WWi,  W&ft.  The  abominations  of  ido 
latry  (which  continued  even  in  the  first  years  of  Hezekiah's 


3G  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

reign  :  ch.  xxxi.  7  ;  Mic.  i.  5,  v.  11-13,  vi.  16)  would  now  be 
regaided  as  abominations,  and  put  away.  Even  gold  and 
silver,  with  which  the  images  that  were  either  carved  or  cast 
in  inferior  metal  were  overlaid,  would  be  made  unclean  (see 
2  Kings  xxiii.  8  sqq.) ;  that  is  to  say,  no  use  would  be  made  of 
them.  Ddvdh  is  a  shorter  expression  for  kell  ddmh,  the  cloth 
worn  by  a  woman  at  the  monthly  period.  On  zdrdh,  to  dis 
pense — to  which  ddi-dh  would  be  inappropriate  if  understood 
of  the  woman  herself,  as  it  is  by  Luzzatto — compare  2  Kings 
xxiii.  6.  With  Ian?,  the  plural  used  in  the  general  address 
passes  over  into  the  individualizing  singular ;  ii>  is  to  be  taken 
as  a  neuter  pointing  back  to  the  plunder  of  idols. 

The  promise,  after  setting  forth  this  act  of  penitence,  rises 
higher  and  higher ;  it  would  not  stop  at  bread  in  time  of  need. 
Vers.  23-25.  "  And  He  gives  rain  to  thy  seed,  ivith  which  thou 
sowest  the  land ;  and  bread  of  the  produce  of  the  land,  and  it  is 
full  of  sap  and  fat:  in  that  day  your  flocks  will  feed  in  roomy 
pastures.  And  the  oxen  and  the  young  asses,  which  work  the 
land,  salted  mash  will  they  eat,  which  is  winnowed  with  the 
winnowing  shovel  and  winnowing  fork  I  And  upon  every  high 
mountain,  and  every  hill  that  rises  high,  there  are  springs,  brooks 
in  the  day  of  the  great  massacre,  when  the  towers  fall?  The 
blessing  which  the  prophet  depicts  is  the  reverse  of  the  day  of 
judgment,  and  stands  in  the  foreground  when  the  judgment  is 
past.  The  expression  "  in  that  day  "  fixes,  as  it  were,  the  even 
ing  of  the  day  of  judgment,  which  is  followed  by  the  depicted 
morning  of  blessing.  But  the  great  mass  of  the  Jewish  nation 
would  be  first  of  all  murdered  in  war ;  the  towers  must  fall, 
i.e.  (though  without  any  figure,  and  merely  as  an  exemplifying 
expression)  all  the  bulwarks  of  self-confidence,  self-help,  and 
pride  (ch.  ii.  15 ;  Mic.  v.  9,  10).  In  the  place  of  the  self- 
induced  calamities  of  war,  there  would  now  come  the  God- 
given  rich  blessings  of  peace ;  and  in  the  place  of  the  proud 
towers,  there  would  come  fruitful  heights  abounding  with 
water.  The  field  would  be  cultivated  again,  and  produce 
luxuriant  crops  of  nutritious  corn  ;  so  that  not  only  the  labour 
of  man,  but  that  of  the  animals  also,  would  receive  a  rich  re 
ward.  "  Rain  to  thy  seed :"  this  is  the  early  rain  commencing 
about  the  middle  of  October.  "tfi?K  is  an  accusative,  XHT  being 
construed  with  a  double  accusative,  as  in  Deut.  xxii.  9.  TjiJP 


CHAP.  XXX.  23-25.  37 

might  be  the  singular,  so  far  as  the  form  is  concerned  (see 
i.  30,  v.  12,  xxii.  11)  ;  but,  according  to  Ex.  xvii.  3,  it  must 
be  taken  as  a  plural,  like  T"?j£.  The  'tildphlm  are  the  oxen 
used  in  ploughing  and  threshing ;  the  'aydrlm,  the  asses  used 
for  carrying  manure,  soil,  the  sheaves,  or  the  grain.  Belll 
chdmlts  is  a  mash  (composed  of  oats,  barley,  and  vetches,  or 
things  of  that  kind)  made  more  savoury  with  salt  and  sour 
vegetables  ;*  that  is  to  say,  a  farrago  (from  bdlal,  to  mix ;  Job, 
vol.  ii.  p.  362).  According  to  Wetzstein,  it  is  ripe  barley  (un- 
threshed  during  the  harvest  and  threshing  time,  and  the  grain 
itself  for  the  rest  of  the  year)  mixed  with  salt  or  salt  vege 
tables.  In  any  case,  belll  is  to  be  understood  as  referring  to 
the  grain ;  this  is  evident  from  the  relative  clause,  "  which  has 
been  winnowed"  (=  mezdreh,  Ewald,  §  169,  d),  or  perhaps  more 
correctly,  "  which  he  (one)  winnows"  (part,  kal),  the  parti 
ciple  standing  for  the  third  person,  with  the  subject  contained 
within  itself  (Ewald,  §  200),  i.e.  not  what  was  generally  given 
from  economy,  viz.  barley,  etc.,  mixed  with  chopped  straw  (tibn), 
but  pure  grain  (habb  mahd,  as  they  say  at  the  present  day). 
Racliath  is  a  winnowing  shovel,  which  is  still  used,  according  to 
Wetzstein,  in  Merj,  Gedur,  and  Hauran  ;  mizreli,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  the  winnowing  fork  with  six  prongs.  Dainty  food, 
such  as  was  only  given  occasionally  to  the  cattle,  as  something 
especially  strengthening,  would  then  be  their  regular  food,  and 
would  be  prepared  in  the  most  careful  manner.  "  Who  cannot 
see,"  exclaims  Vitringa,  "that  this  is  to  be  taken  spiritually?" 
He  appeals  to  what  Paul  says  in  1  Cor.  ix.  9,  viz.  that  God 
does  not  trouble  Himself  about  oxen.  But  Paul  did  not  mean 
this  in  the  same  sense  as  Aristotle,  who  maintained  that  the 
minima  were  entirely  excluded  from  the  providence  of  God. 
What  the  Scriptures  say  concerning  cattle,  they  do  not  say  for 
the  sake  of  the  cattle,  but  for  the  sake  of  men  ;  though  it  does 
not  follow  that  the  cattle  are  to  be  understood  figuratively,  as 
representing  men.  And  this  is  the  case  here.  What  the  pro 
phet  paints  in  this  idyllic  style,  in  colours  furnished  by  the 
existing  customs,2  is  not  indeed  intended  to  be  understood  in 
the  letter ;  and  yet  it  is  to  be  taken  literally.  In  the  age  of 

1  Such  as  Salsola  kali,  Salsola  tragus,  Salsolu  soda,  and  other  plants  of 
the  family  of  the  chenopodiaceae. 

2  Asses  particularly,  even  those  of  a  guest,  are  generally  very  much 


38  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

glory,  even  on  this  side  of  eternity,  a  gigantic  stride  will  be 
taken  forward  towards  the  glorification  of  universal  nature, 
and  towards  the  end  of  all  those  sighs  which  are  so  discernible 
now,  more  especially  among  domestic  animals.  The  prophecy 
is  therefore  to  be  interpreted  according  to  Rom.  viii.  19  sqq. ; 
from  which  we  may  clearly  see  that  God  does  trouble  Himself 
about  the  sighing  of  an  ox  or  ass  that  is  overburdened  with 
severe  toil,  and  sometimes  left  to  starve. 

The  promise  now  rises  higher  and  higher,  and  passes  from 
earth  to  heaven.  Ver.  26.  "And  the  light  of  the  moon  will  be 
as  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  the  light  of  the  sun  will  be  multiplied 
sevenfold,  like  the  light  of  seven  days^  in  the  day  that  Jehovah 
bindeth  the  hurt  of  His  people,  and  healeth  the  crushing  of  His 
stroke"  Modern  commentators  from  Lowth  downwards  for  the 
most  part  pronounce  D^*n  nj?2$  "^3  a  gloss ;  and  there  is  one 
external  evidence  in  favour  of  this,  which  is  wanting  in  the  case 
of  the  other  supposed  glosses  in  Isaiah,  namely,  that  the  words 
are  omitted  by  the  LXX.  (though  not  by  the  Targum,  the 
Syriac,  or  Jerome).  Even  Luther  (although  he  notices  these 
words  in  his  exposition  and  sermons)  merely  renders  them,  der 
Sonnen  schein  wird  siebenmal  heller  sein  denn  jtzt  (the  sunlight 
will  be  seven  times  as  bright  as  it  is  now).  But  the  internal 
evidence  does  not  favour  their  spuriousness  even  in  the  case 
before  us ;  for  the  fact  that  the  regularity  of  the  verse,  as  con 
sisting  of  four  members,  is  thereby  disturbed,  is  no  evidence  at 
all,  since  the  verse  could  be  arranged  in  a  pentastic  quite  as  well 
as  in  a  tetrastic  form.  We  therefore  decide  in  this  instance 
also  in  favour  of  the  conclusion  that  the  prophet  composed  the 
gloss  himself.  Bat  we  cannot  maintain,  with  Umbreit,  that  the 
addition  was  necessary,  in  order  to  guard  against  the  idea  that 
there  would  be  seven  suns  shining  in  the  sky ;  for  the  prophet 
does  not  predict  a  multiplication  of  the  sun  by  seven,  but 
simply  the  multiplication  of  its  light.  The  seven  days  are  the 
length  of  an  ordinary  week.  Drechsler  gives  it  correctly : 
"  The  radiated  light,  which  is  sufficient  to  produce  the  daylight 
for  a  whole  week  according  to  the  existing  order  of  things,  will 
then  be  concentrated  into  a  single  day."  Luther  renders  it  in 

neglected.  The  host  throws  them  a  little  grass,  and  then  hangs  up  the 
fodder-sack  full  of  chopped  straw  ;  and  it  is  a  sign  of  extraordinary  hospi 
tality  if  corn  is  given  to  the  asses  as  well  as  to  the  horses. — WETZSTEIN. 


CHAP.  XXX.  27,  28.  39 

this  way,  als  wenn  sielen  tag  ynn  eynander  geschlossen  weren 
(as  if  seven  days  were  enclosed  in  one  another).  This  also  is 
not  meant  figuratively,  any  more  than  Paul  means  it  figu- 
rativelv,  when  he  says,  that  with  the  manifestation  of  the 
"  glory"  of  the  children  of  God,  the  "  corruption"  of  universal 
nature  will  come  to  an  end.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  of  the  new 
heaven  that  the  prophet  is  speaking,  but  of  the  glorification  of 
nature,  which  is  promised  by  both  the  Old  Testament  prophecy 
and  by  that  of  the  New  at  the  closing  period  of  the  world's 
history,  and  which  will  be  the  closing  typical  self-annunciation 
of  that  eternal  glory  in  wrhich  everything  will  be  swallowed  up. 
The  brightest,  sunniest  days  then  alternate,  as  the  prophet 
foretells,  with  the  most  brilliant  moonlight  nights.  No  other 
miracles  will  be  needed  for  this  than  that  wonder-working 
power  of  God,  which  even  now  produces  those  changes  of 
weather,  the  laws  of  which  no  researches  of  natural  science 
have  enabled  us  to  calculate,  and  which  will  then  give  the 
greatest  brilliancy  and  most  unchangeable  duration  to  what  is 
now  comparatively  rare, — namely,  a  perfectly  unclouded  sky, 
with  sun  or  moon  shining  in  all  its  brilliancy,  yet  without  any 
scorching  from  the  one,  or  injurious  effects  from  the  other. 
Heaven  and  earth  will  then  put  on  their  sabbath  dress ;  for  it 
will  be  the  Sabbath  of  the  world's  history,  the  seventh  day  in 
the  world's  week.  The  light  of  the  seven  days  of  the  world's 
week  will  be  all  concentrated  in  the  seventh.  For  the  beginning 
of  creation  was  light,  and  its  close  will  be  light  as  well.  The 
darkness  all  comes  between,  simply  that  it  may  be  overcome. 
At  last  will  come  a  boqer  (morning),  after  which  it  will  no 
more  be  said,  "  And  evening  was,  and  morning  was."  The 
prophet  is  speaking  of  the  last  type  of  this  morning.  What  he 
predicts  here  precedes  what  he  predicted  in  ch.  xxiv.  23,  just  as 
the  date  of  its  composition  precedes  that  of  ch.  xxiv.— xxvii. ; 
for  there  the  imperial  city  was  Babylon,  whereas  here  the 
glory  of  the  latter  day  is  still  placed  immediately  after  the  fall 
of  Assyria. 

Vers.  27,  28.  "  Behold,  the  name  of  Jehovah  cometh  from 
far,  burning  His  wrath,  and  quantity  of  smoke :  His  lips  are  full 
of  wrathful  fcam,  and  His  tongue  like  devouring  fire.  And  His 
breath  is  like  an  overflowing  brook,  which  reaches  half-way  to  the 
neck,  to  sift  nations  in  the  sieve  of  nothingness  ;  and  a  misleading 


40  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

bridle  comes  to  the  cheeks  of  the  nations.91  Two  figures  are  here 
melted  together, — namely,  that  of  a  storm  coming  up  from  the 
farthest  horizon,  which  turns  the  sky  into  a  sea  of  fire,  and 
kindles  whatever  it  strikes,  so  that  there  rises  up  a  heavy 
burden,  or  thick  mass  of  smoke  (kobhed  massd'dh,  like  mas'eth  in 
Judg.  xx.  40,  cf.  38 ;  on  this  attributive  combination,  burning 
His  wrath  (Evvald,  §  288,  c)  and  a  quantity,  etc.,  see  ch.  xiii. 
9) ;  and  that  of  a  man  burning  with  wrath,  whose  lips  foam, 
whose  tongue  moves  to  and  fro  like  a  flame,  and  whose  breath 
is  a  snorting  that  threatens  destruction,  which  when  it  issues 
from  Jehovah  swells  into  a  stream,  which  so  far  covers  a 
man  that  only  his  neck  appears  as  the  visible  half.  We  had 
the  same  figure  in  ch.  viii.  8,  where  Asshur,  as  it  came  upon 
Judah,  was  compared  to  such  an  almost  overwhelming  and 
drowning  flood.  Here,  again,  it  refers  to  Judah,  which  the 
wrath  of  Jehovah  had  almost  though  not  entirely  destroyed. 
For  the  ultimate  object  of  the  advancing  name  of  Jehovah 
(shem,  name,  relating  to  His  judicial  coming)  is  to  sift  nations, 
etc. :  lahdndphdh  for  Fhdmph  (like  lahazdddh  in  Dan.  v.  20), 
to  make  it  more  like  ndphdh  in  sound.  The  sieve  of  nothingness 
is  a  sieve  in  which  everything,  that  does  not  remain  in  it  as 
good  corn,  is  given  up  to  annihilation ;  fcflP  is  want  of  being, 
i.e.  of  life  from  God,  and  denotes  the  fate  that  properly  belongs 
to  such  worthlessness.  In  the  case  of  v'resen  (and  a  bridle, 
etc.)  we  must  either  supply  in  thought  Dlfcv  (D^),  or,  what  is 
better,  take  it  as  a  substantive  clause:  "  a  misleading  bridle"  (or 
a  bridle  of  misleading,  as  Bottcher  renders  it,  mattieh  being 
the  form  mashqeli)  holds  the  cheeks  of  the  nations.  The  nations 
are  regarded  as  wild  horses,  which  could  not  be  tamed,  but 
'vhich  were  now  so  firmly  bound  and  controlled  by  the  wrath 
of  God,  that  they  were  driven  down  into  the  abyss. 

This  is  the  issue  of  the  judgment  which  begins  at  the  house 
of  God,  then  turns  against  the  instrument  employed,  namely 
the  heathen,  and  becomes  to  the  Israel  that  survives  a  counter 
part  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt.  Ver.  29.  "  Your  song 
will  then  sound  as  in  the  night,  when  the  feast  is  celebrated;  and 
ye  will  have  joy  of  heart  like  those  who  march  ivith  the  playing 
of  flutes,  to  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  Jehovah,  to  the  Rock  of 
Israel"  In  the  word  chdg  (feast),  which  is  generally  used  with 
special  reference  to  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  there  is  here  an 


CHAP.  XXX.  30-33.  41 

unmistakeable  allusion  to  the  passover,  as  we  may  see  from  the 
introduction  of  "  the  night,"  which  evidently  means  the  night 
before  the  passover  (lei  shimmurim,  Ex.  xii.  42),  which  was  so 
far  a  festal  night,  that  it  preceded  and  introduced  the  feast  of 
unleavened  bread.  The  prophet  has  taken  his  figure  from  the 
first  passover-night  in  Egypt,  when  Israel  was  rejoicing  in  the 
deliverance  which  it  was  just  about  to  receive,  whilst  the  de 
stroying  angel  was  passing  through  the  land.  Such  would  be 
the  song  which  they  would  be  able  to  sing,  when  Jehovah 
poured  out  His  judgment  upon  His  people's  enemies  outside. 
The  church  is  shut  up  in  its  chamber  (ch.  xxvi.  20),  and  its 
joy  resembles  the  heartfelt  joy  of  those  who  go  on  pilgrimage 
on  one  of  the  three  great  feasts,  or  in  the  procession  that 
carries  up  the  first-fruits  to  Jerusalem  (Biccurim,  iii.  3),  going 
up  with  the  sound  of  flutes  to  the  mountain  of  Jehovah,  to 
appear  before  Him,  the  Rock  of  Israel. 

Israel  is  marching  in  such  a  joyful  way  to  a  sacred  and 
glorious  height,  whilst  outside  Jehovah  is  sweeping  the  world- 
power  entirely  away,  and  that  without  any  help  from  Israel. 
Vers.  30-33.  "  And  Jehovah  causes  His  majestic  voice  to  be 
heard,  and  causes  the  lowering  of  His  arm  to  be  seen,  with  the 
snorting  of  wrath  and  the  blazing  of  devouring  fire,  the  bursting 
of  a  cloud,  and  pouring  of  rain  and  hailstones.  For  Asshur  will 
be  terrified  at  the  voice  of  Jehovah,  when  He  smites  ivith  the  staff. 
And  it  will  come  to  pass,  every  stroke  of  the  rod  of  destiny,  which 
Jehovah  causes  to  fall  upon  Asshur,  is  dealt  amidst  the  noise  of 
drums  and  the  playing  of  guitars;  and  in  battles  of  swinging 
arm  He  fights  it.  For  a  place  for  the  sacrifice  of  abominations 
has  long  been  made  ready,  even  for  the  king  is  it  prepared ;  deep, 
broad  has  He  made  it :  its  funeral-pile  has  fire  and  wood  in 
abundance;  the  breath  of  Jehovah  like  a  stream  of  brimstone  sets 
it  on  fire."  The  imposing  crash  (on  hod,  see  Job  xxxix.  20) 
of  the  cry  which  Jehovah  causes  to  be  heard  is  thunder  (see 
Ps.  xxix.) ;  for  the  catastrophe  occurs  with  a  discharge  of  all 
the  destructive  forces  of  a  storm  (see  ch.  xxix.  6).  Nephets 
is  the  "  breaking  up'*  or  "  bursting,"  viz.  of  a  cloud.  It  is 
through  such  wrath-announcing  phenomena  of  nature  that 
Jehovah  manifests  the  otherwise  invisible  letting  down  of  His 
arm  to  smite  (nachath  may  possibly  not  be  the  derivative  of 
nudch,  "  a  settling  down,"  but  of  nachath,  "  the  coming  down/' 


42  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

as  in  Ps.  xxxviii.  3  ;  just  as  shebheth  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  7  is  not 
derived  from  sh&bk,  but  from  shdbhath,  to  go  to  ruin).  Ver.  31, 
commencing  with  ki  (for),  explains  the  terrible  nature  of  what 
occurs,  from  the  object  at  which  it  is  directed  :  Asshur  is 
alarmed  at  the  voice  of  Jehovah,  and  thoroughly  goes  to  pieces, 
We  must  not  render  this,  as  the  Targum  does,  "  which  smites 
with  the  rod,"  i.e.  which  bears  itself  so  haughtily,  so  tyranni 
cally  (after  ch.  x.  24).  The  smiter  here  is  Jehovah  (LXX., 
Vulg.,  Luther)  ;  and  basshebhet  yakkeh  is  either  an  attributive 
clause,  or,  better  still,  a  circumstantial  determining  clause,  eo 
virga  percutiente.  According  to  the  accents,  tfhdydh  in  ver.  32 
is  introductory :  "  And  it  will  come  to  pass,  every  stroke  of  the 
punishing  rod  falls  (supply  rvjiT)  with  an  accompaniment  of 
drums  and  guitars"  (the  Beth  is  used  to  denote  instrumental 
accompaniment,  as  in  ver.  29,  ch.  xxiv.  9,  Ps.  xlix.  5,  etc.), — 
namely,  on  the  part  of  the  people  of  Jerusalem,  who  have 
only  to  look  on  and  rejoice  in  the  approaching  deliverance. 
Musdddh  with  matteh  is  a  verbal  substantive  used  as  a  genitive, 
"  an  appointment  according  to  decree"  (comp.  ydsad  in  Hab. 
i.  12,  and  yd' ad  in  Mic.  vi.  9).  The  fact  that  drums  and 
guitars  are  heard  along  with  every  stroke,  is  explained  in 
ver.  326 :  "  Jehovah  fights  against  Asshur  with  battles  of 
swinging,"  i.e.  not  with  darts  or  any  other  kind  of  weapon,  but 
by  swinging  His  arm  incessantly,  to  smite  Asshur  without  its 
being  able  to  defend  itself  (cf.  ch.  xix.  16).  Instead  of  H3, 
which  points  back  to  Asshur,  not  to  matteh,  the  keri  has  D3, 
which  is  not  so  harsh,  since  it  is  immediately  preceded  by  W. 
This  cutting  down  of  the  Assyrians  is  accounted  for  in 
ver.  33,  (ki,  for),  from  the  fact  that  it  had  long  ago  been 
decreed  that  they  should  be  burned  as  dead  bodies.  'Ethmul  in 
contrast  with  mdchdr  is  the  past :  it  has  not  happened  to-day, 
but  yesterday,  i.e.,  as  the  predestination  of  God  is  referred  to, 
"  long  ago."  Tophteh  is  the  primary  form  of  topheth  (from 
tfiph,  not  in  the  sense  of  the  Neo-Persian  tdften,  Zend,  tap,  to 
kindle  or  burn,  from  which  comes  tafedra,  melting ;  but  in  the 
Semitic  sense  of  vomiting  or  abhorring :  see  at  Job  xvii.  6), 
the  name  of  the  abominable  place  where  the  sacrifices  were 
offered  to  Moloch  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom:  a  Tophet-like  place. 
The  word  is  variously  treated  as  both  a  masculine  and  feminine, 
possibly  because  the  place  of  abominable  sacrifices  is  described 


CHAP.  XXXI.  1-3.  43 


first  as  Mmdh  in  Jer.  vii.  31.  In  the  clause  \SM  '•s  KVTta,  the 
gam,  which  stands  at  the  head,  may  be  connected  with  lam- 
melekh,  "  also  for  the  king  is  it  prepared"  (see  at  Job  ii.  10)  ; 
but  in  all  probability  lammelekh  is  a  play  upon  lammolekh  {e.g. 
Lev.  xviii.  2),  "  even  this  has  been  prepared  for  the  Melekh," 
viz.  the  king  of  Asshur.  Because  he  was  to  be  burned  there, 
together  with  his  army,  Jehovah  had  made  this  Tophet-like 
place  very  deep,  so  that  it  might  have  a  far-reaching  back 
ground,  and  very  broad,  so  that  in  this  respect  also  there  might 
be  room  for  many  sacrifices.  And  their  mfdurdh,  i.e.  their 
pile  of  wood  (as  in  Ezek.  xxiv.  9,  cf.  5,  from  diir,  Talm.  dayyer, 
to  lay  round,  to  arrange,  pile),  has  abundance  of  fire  and  wood 
(a  hendiadys,  like  "  cloud  and  smoke"  in  ch.  iv.  5).  Abundance 
of  fire  :  for  the  breath  of  Jehovah,  pouring  upon  the  funeral 
pile  like  a  stream  of  brimstone,  sets  it  on  fire.  3  "IJJ3,  not  to 
burn  up,  but  to  set  on  fire.  H3  points  back  to  tophtek,  like  the 
suffix  of  rrfdurdthdh.1 


THE  FOURTH  WOE. — THE   FALSE   HELP  ;    THE   DESPISED  ONE 
PITIED  ;    AND  THE  NEW  EKA. — CHAP.  XXXI.-XXXII.  1-8. 

There  is  nothing  to  surprise  us  in  the  fact,  that  the  prophet 
returns  again  and  again  to  the  alliance  with  Egypt.  After  his 
warning  had  failed  to  prevent  it,  he  wrestled  with  it  in  spirit, 
set  before  himself  afresh  the  curse  which  would  be  its  certain 
fruit,  brought  out  and  unfolded  the  consolation  of  believers 
that  lay  hidden  in  the  curse,  and  did  not  rest  till  the  cursed 
fruit,  that  had  become  a  real  thing,  had  been  swallowed  up  by 
the  promise,  which  was  equally  real.  The  situation  of  this 
fourth  woe  is  just  the  same  as  that  of  the  previous  one.  The 
alliance  with  Egypt  is  still  in  progress.  Vers.  1-3.  "  Woe  to 

1  So  far  as  the  form  of  the  text  is  concerned,  kol  has  the  disjunctive 
yethib  before  paslita,  which  occurs  eleven  times  according  to  the  Masora. 
Nevertheless  the  word  is  logically  connected  in  the  closest  manner  with 
what  follows  (comp.  ''eih  torath  in  ch.  v.  24).  The  ah  of  musadu.li  is  rafa- 
tum  pro  mappicato,  according  to  the  Masora ;  in  which  case  the  suffix  would 
refer  to  Asshur.  In  the  place  of  N1H  DJ  we  also  meet  with  x»n  DJ,  with 
this  clietliib  and  keri  reversed ;  but  the  former,  according  to  which  pin  is 
equivalent  to  n33in,  has  many  examples  to  support  it  in  the  Masora.  pin 
has  kametz  in  correct  MSS.  in  half  pause ;  whereas  Kimchi  (Michlol,  117i) 
regards  it  as  a  participle. 


44  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

them  tliat  go  down  to  Egypt  for  help,  and  rely  upon  Jwrses,  and 
put  their  trust  in  chariots,  that  there  are  many  of  them ;  and  in 
horsemen,  that  there  is  a  powerful  multitude  of  them  ;  and  do  not 
look  up  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  do  not  inquire  for  Jehovah  ! 
And  yet  He  also  is  wise ;  thus  then  He  brings  evil,  and  sets  not 
His  words  aside ;  and  rises  up  against  the  house  of  miscreants, 
and  against  the  help  of  evil-doers.  And  Egypt  is  man,  and  not 
God;  and  its  horses  flesh,  and  not  spirit.  And  when  Jehovah 
stretches  out  His  hand,  the  helper  stumbles,  and  he  that  is  helped 
falls,  and  they  all  perish  together"  The  expression  "  them 
that  go  down"  (hayywedlm)  does  not  imply  that  the  going  down 
was  taking  place  just  then  for  the  first  time.  It  is  the  participle 
of  qualification,  just  as  God  is  called  N?.2n.  rntyp  with  Lamed 
of  the  object,  as  in  ch.  xx.  6.  The  horses,  chariots,  and  horse 
men  here,  are  those  of  Egypt,  which  Diodorus  calls  tTnrdo-ifAos, 
on  account  of  its  soil  being  so  suitable  for  cavalry  (see  Lepsius 
in  Herzog's  Cyclopaedia).  The  participle  is  combined  in  the 
finite  verb.  Instead  of  D^p^D'by^  we  also  find  the  reading  pre 
ferred  by  Norzi,  of  ty  without  Vav,  as  in  ch.  v.  11  (cf.  2o). 
The  perfects,  WW  K?  and  ^Kn'j  fcO,  are  used  without  any  definite 
time,  to  denote  that  which  was  always  wanting  in  them.  The 
circumstantial  clause,  "  whilst  He  is  assuredly  also  wise,'*  i.e. 
will  bear  comparison  with  their  wisdom  and  that  of  Egypt,  is  a 
touching  yLte/cocrt9.  It  was  not  necessary  to  think  very  highly 
of  Jehovah,  in  order  to  perceive  the  reprehensible  and  destruc 
tive  character  of  their  apostasy  from  Him.  The  fut.  consec. 
N5J1  is  used  to  indicate  the  inevitable  consequence  of  their 
despising  Him  who  is  also  wise.  He  will  not  set  aside  His 
threatening  words,  but  carry  them  out.  The  house  of  mis 
creants  is  Judah  (ch.  i.  4)  ;  and  the  help  (abstr.  pro  concr.,  just 
as  Jehovah  is  frequently  called  "  my  help,"  'ezrdthi,  by  the 
Psalmist)  of  evil-doers  is  Egypt,  whose  help  has  been  sought 
by  Judah.  The  latter  is  l(  man"  (^dddm),  and  its  horses  "  flesh" 
(bdsdr)  ;  whereas  Jehovah  is  God  (El)  and  spirit  (ruacli ;  see 
Psychol.  p.  85).  Hofmann  expounds  it  correctly  :  "  As  ruacli 
has  life  in  itself,  it  is  opposed  to  the  bdsdr,  which  is  only 
rendered  living  through  the  rudch ;  and  so  El  is  opposed  to  the 
corporeal  'dddm,  who  needs  the  spirit  in  order  to  live  at  all." 
Thus  have  they  preferred  the  help  of  the  impotent  and  condi 
tioned,  to  the  help  of  the  almighty  and  all-conditioning  One. 


CHAP.  XXXI.  4.  4.5 

Jehovah,  who  is  God  and  spirit,  only  requires  to  stretch  out 
His  hand  (an  anthropomorphism,  by  the  side  of  which  we  find 
the  rule  for  interpreting  it)  ;  and  the  helpers,  and  those  who  are 
helped  (i.e.  according  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  though  not 
in  reality),  that  is  to  say,  both  the  source  of  the  help  and  the 
object  of  help,  are  all  cast  into  one  heap  together. 

And  things  of  this  kind  would  occur.  Ver.  4.  "  For  thus 
hath  Jehovah  spoken  to  me,  As  the  lion  growls,  and  the  young 
lion  over  its  prey,  against  which  a  whole  crowd  of  shepherds  is 
called  together ;  he  is  not  alarmed  at  their  cry,  and  does  not 
surrender  at  their  noise ;  so  icill  Jehovah  of  hosts  descend  to  the 
campaign  against  the  mountain  of  Zion,  and  against  their  hill." 
There  is  no  other  passage  in  the  book  of  Isaiah  which  sounds 
so  Homeric  as  this  (vid.  II.  xviii.  161,  162,  xii.  299  sqq.).  It 
has  been  misunderstood  by  Knobel,  Umbreit,  Drechsler,  and 
others,  who  suppose  ^  K^  to  refer  to  Jehovah's  purpose  to 
fjght  for  Jerusalem  :  Jehovah,  who  would  no  more  allow  His 
city  to  be  taken  from  Him,  than  a  lion  would  give  up  a  lamb 
that  it  had  taken  as  its  prey.  But  how  could  Jerusalem  be 
compared  to  a  lamb  which  a  lion  holds  in  its  claws  as  tereph  ? 
(ch.  v.  29.)  We  may  see,  even  from  ch.  xxix.  7,  what  con 
struction  is  meant  to  be  put  upon  «>#  NiV.  Those  sinners  and 
their  protectors  would  first  of  all  perish ;  for  like  a  fierce  in 
domitable  lion  would  Jehovah  advance  against  Jerusalem,  and 
take  it  as  His  prey,  without  suffering  Himself  to  be  thwarted 
by  the  Judseans  and  Egyptians,  who  set  themselves  in  opposition 
to  His  army  (the  Assyrians).  The  mountain  of  Zion  was  the 
citadel  and  temple ;  the  hill  of  Zion  the  city  of  Jerusalem 
(ch.  x.  32).  They  would  both  be  given  up  to  the  judgment  of 
Jehovah,  without  any  possibility  of  escape.  The  commenta 
tors  have  been  misled  by  the  fact,  that  a  simile  of  a  promising 
character  follows  immediately  afterwards,  without  anything  to 
connect  the  one  with  the  other.  But  this  abrupt  fjierdfiao-is 
was  intended  as  a  surprise,  and  was  a  true  picture  of  the  actual 
fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  ;  for  in  the  moment  of  the  greatest 
distress,  when  the  actual  existence  of  Jerusalem  was  in  question 
(cf.  ch.  x.  33,  34),  the  fate  of  Ariel  took  suddenly  and  miracu 
lously  a  totally  different  turn  (ch.  xxix.  2).  In  this  sense,  a 
pleasant  picture  is  placed  side  by  side  with  the  terrible  one 
(compare  Mic.  v.  6,  7). 


46  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Jehovah  suddenly  arrests  the  work  of  punishment,  and  the  love 
which  the  wrath  enfolds  within  itself  begins  to  appear.  Ver.  5. 
"  Like  fluttering  birds,  so  will  Jehovah  of  Hosts  screen  Jerusalem ; 
screening  and  delivering,  sparing  and  setting  free"  The  prophet 
uses  the  plural,  "  like  fluttering  birds,"  with  an  object — namely, 
not  so  much  to  represent  Jehovah  Himself,  as  the  tender  care 
and,  as  it  were,  maternal  love,  into  which  His  leonine  fierceness 
would  be  changed.  This  is  indicated  by  the  fact,  that  he 
attaches  the  feminine  'dphoth  to  the  common  gender  tsipporlm. 
The  word  pdsoach  recals  to  mind  the  deliverance  from  Egypt 
(as  in  ch.  xxx.  29)  in  a  very  significant  manner.  The  sparing 
of  the  Israelites  by  the  destroyer  passing  over  their  doors,  from 
which  the  passover  derived  its  name,  would  be  repeated  once 
more.  We  may  see  from  this,  that  in  and  along  with  Assyria, 
Jehovah  Himself,  whose  instrument  of  punishment  Assyria  was, 
would  take  the  field  against  Jerusalem  (ch.  xxix.  2,  3)  ;  but 
His  attitude  towards  Jerusalem  is  suddenly  changed  into  one 
resembling  the  action  of  birds,  as  they  soar  round  and  above 
their  threatened  nests.  On  the  inf.  abs.  kal  (gdnon)  after  the 
hiphil,  see  Ewald,  §  312,  b ;  and  on  the  continuance  of  the  inf. 
abs.  in  the  finite  verb,  §  350,  a.  This  generally  takes  place 
through  the  future,  but  here  through  the  preterite,  as  in  Jer. 
xxiii.  14,  Gen.  xxvi.  13,  and  1  Sam.  ii.  26  (if  indeed  vegddel  13 
the  third  pers.  preterite  there). 

On  the  ground  of  this  half  terrible,  half  comforting  picture 
of  the  future,  the  call  to  repentance  is  now  addressed  to  the 
people  of  the  prophet's  own  time.  Ver.  6.  "  Then  turn,  0  sons 
of  Israel,  to  Him  from  whom  men  have  so  deei^ly  departed." 
Strictly  speaking,  "  to  Him  with  regard  to  whom  pKte)  ye  are 
deeply  fallen  away"  (heemlq,  as  in  Hos.  ix.  9,  and  sdrdh,  that 
which  is  alienated,  alienation,  as  in  ch.  i.  5) ;  the  transition  to 
the  third  person  is  like  the  reverse  in  ch.  i.  29.  This  call  to 
repentance  the  prophet  strengthens  by  two  powerful  motives 
drawn  from  the  future. 

The  first  is,  that  idolatry  would  one  day  be  recognised  in  all 
its  abomination,  and  put  away.  Ver.  7.  "  For  in  that  day  they 
will  abhor  every  one  their  silver  idols  and  their  gold  idols,  which 
your  hands  have  made  you  for  a  sin"  i.e.  to  commit  sin  and 
repent,  with  the  preponderance  of  the  latter  idea,  as  in  Hos. 
viii.  Ill  (compare  1  Kings  xiii.  34).  KE?n,  a  second  accusative 


CHAP.  XXXI.  8,  9.  47 

to  *!&$,  indicating  the  result.     The  prospect  is  the  same  as  that 
held  out  in  ch.  xxx.  22,  xxvii.  9,  xvii.  8,  ii.  20. 

The  second  motive  is,  that  Israel  will  not  be  rescued  by 
men,  but  by  Jehovah  alone ;  so  that  even  He  from  whom  they 
have  now  so  deeply  fallen  will  prove  Himself  the  only  true 
ground  of  confidence.  Yers.  8,  9.  (t  And  Asshur  falls  by  a 
sword  not  of  a  man,  and  a  sword  not  of  a  man  will  devour  him ; 
and  he  flees  before  a  sword,  and  his  young  men  become  tributary. 
And  his  rock,  for  fear  will  it  pass  away,  and  his  princes  be 
frightened  away  by  the  flags  :  the  saying  of  Jehovah,  who  has  His 
fire  in  Zion,  and  His  furnace  in  Jerusalem"  The  LXX.  and 
Jerome  render  this  falsely  favgerat,  OVK  (j-6)  cnro  vrpoo-toTrov 
fjLa%alpa<s.  &  is  an  ethical  dative,  and  the  prophet  intentionally 
writes  "  before  a  sword"  without  any  article,  to  suggest  the 
idea  of  the  unbounded,  infinite,  awful  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  2,  beydd ; 
Psalter,  vol.  i.  p.  15).  A  sword  is  drawn  without  any  human 
intervention,  and  before  this  Asshur  falls,  or  at  lea^t  so  many  of 
the  Assyrians  as  are  unable  to  save  themselves  by  flight.  The 
powrer  of  Asshur  is  for  ever  broken  ;  even  its  young  men  will 
henceforth  become  tributary,  or  perform  feudal  service.  By 
"his  rock"  most  commentators  understand  the  rock  upon  which 
the  fugitive  would  gladly  have  taken  refuge,  but  did  not  dare 
(Rosemn tiller,  Gesenius,  Knobel,  etc.) ;  others,  again,  the  mili 
tary  force  of  Asshur,  as  its  supposed  invincible  refuge  (Saad.; 
etc.)  ;  others,  the  apparently  indestructible  might  of  Asshur 
generally  (Vulgate,  Rashi,  Ilitzig).  But  the  presence  of  "  bis 
princes"  in  the  parallel  clause  makes  it  most  natural  to  refer 
u  his  rock"  to  the  king ;  and  this  reference  is  established  with 
certainty  by  what  ch.  xxxii.  2  affirms  of  the  king  and  princes  of 
Judah.  Luther  also  renders  it  thus  :  undjr  Fels  wird fur  furcht 
wegzihen  (and  their  rock  will  withdraw  for  fear).  Sennacherib 
really  did  hurry  back  to  Assyria  after  the  catastrophe  in  a 
most  rapid  flight.  Minnes  are  the  standards  of  Asshur,  which 
the  commanders  of  the  army  fly  away  from  in  terror,  without 
attempting  to  rally  those  that  were  scattered.  Thus  speaks 
Jehovah,  and  this  is  what  He  decrees  who  has  His  ^ur  and 
tannur  in  Jerusalem.  We  cannot  suppose  that  the  allusion 
here  is  to  the  fire  and  hearth  of  the  sacrifices ;  for  tannur  does 
not  mean  a  hearth,  but  a  furnace  (from  niir,  to  burn).  The 
reference  is  to  the  light  of  the  divine  presence,  wl  ich  was  out- 


4:8  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

wardly  a  devouring  fire  for  the  enemies  of  Jerusalem,  an  unap 
proachable  red-hot  furnace  (ignis  et  caminus  qui  devorat  pecca- 
tores  et  ligna,  foenum  stipulamque  consumit :  Jerome). 

For  Judah,  sifted,  delivered,  and  purified,  there  now  begins 
a  new  era.  Righteous  government,  as  a  blessing  for  the  people, 
is  the  first  beneficent  fruit.  Ch.  xxxii.  1,  2.  u  Behold,  the  king 
will  reign  according  to  righteousness ;  and  the  princes,  according 
to  right  will  they  command.  And  every  one  will  be  like  a  shelter 
from  the  wind,  and  a  covert  from  the  storm ;  like  water-brooks  in 
a  dry  place,  like  the  shadow  of  a  gigantic  rock  in  a  languishing 
land"  The  kingdom  of  Asshur  is  for  ever  destroyed  ;  but  the 
kingdom  of  Judah  rises  out  of  the  state  of  confusion  into 

O 

which  it  has  fallen  through  its  God-forgetting  policy  and  dis 
regard  of  justice.  King  and  princes  now  rule  according  to  the 
standards  that  have  been  divinely  appointed  and  revealed.  The 
Lamed  in  uFsdrlm  (and  the  princes)  is  that  of  reference  (quod 
attinet  ad,  as  in  Ps.  xvi.  3  and  Eccles.  ix.  4),  the  exponent 
of  the  usual  casus  abs.  (Ges.  §  146,  2)  ;  and  the  two  other 
Lameds  are  equivalent  to  /card,  secundum  (as  in  Jer.  xxx.  11). 
The  figures  in  ver.  2  are  the  same  as  in  ch.  xxv.  4.  The  rock 
of  Asshur  (i.e.  Sennacherib)  has  departed,  and  the  princes  of 
Asshur  have  deserted  their  standards,  merely  to  save  them 
selves.  The  king  and  princes  of  Judah  are  now  the  defence 
of  their  nation,  and  overshadow  it  like  colossal  walls  of  rock. 
This  is  the  first  fruit  of  the  blessing. 

The  second  is  an  opened  understanding,  following  upon 
the  ban  of  hardening.  Vers.  3,  4.  "  And  the  eyes  of  the 
seeing  no  more  are  closed,  and  the  ears  of  the  hearing  attend. 
And  the  heart  of  the  hurried  understands  to  know,  and  the 
tongue  of  stammerers  speaks  clear  things  with  readiness"  It 
is  not  physical  miracles  that  are  predicted  here,  but  a  spiri 
tual  change.  The  present  judgment  of  hardening  will  be 
repealed  :  this  is  what  ver.  3  affirms.  The  spiritual  defects, 
from  which  many  suffer  who  do  not  belong  to  the  worst,  will 
be  healed  :  this  is  the  statement  in  ver.  4.  The  form  njWn 
is  not  the  future  of  fW  here,  as  in  ch.  xxxi.  1,  xxii.  4, 
xvii.  7,  8  (in  the  sense  of,  they  will  no  longer  stare  about 
restlessly  and  without  aim),  but  of  ny^  =  yywy  a  metaplastic 
future  of  the  latter,  in  the  sense  of,  to  be  smeared  over  or 
closed  (see  ch.  xxix.  9,  vi.  10 ;  cf.  tach  in  ch.  xliv.  18). 


CHAP.  XXXII.  5-8.  49 

On  qdslidbh  (the  kal  of  winch  is  only  met  with  here),  see  at 
ch.  xxi.  7.  The  times  succeeding  the  hardening,  of  which 
Isaiah  is  speaking  here,  are  "  the  last  times,"  as  ch.  vi.  clearly 
shows  ;  though  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  the  king  men 
tioned  in  ver.  1  (as  in  ch.  xi.  1  sqq.)  is  the  Messiah  Himself. 
In  ver.  1  the  prophet  merely  affirms,  that  Israel  as  a  national 
commonwealth  will  then  be  governed  in  a  manner  well  pleasing 
to  God  ;  here  he  predicts  that  Israel  as  a  national  congregation 
will  be  delivered  from  the  judgment  of  not  seeing  with  seeing 
eyes,  and  not  hearing  with  hearing  ears,  and  that  it  will  be 
delivered  from  defects  of  weakness  also.  The  nimhdrim  are 
those  that  fall  headlong,  the  precipitate,  hurrying,  or  rash  ; 
and  the  GMfP,  stammerers,  are  not  scoffers  (ch.  xxviii.  7  sqq., 
xxix.  20),  as  Knobel  and  Drechsler  maintain,  but  such  as 
are  unable  to  think  and  speak  with  distinctness  and  certainty, 
more  especially  concerning  the  exalted  things  of  God.  The 
former  would  now  have  the  gifts  of  discernment  (ydbhlu),  to 
perceive  things  in  their  true  nature,  and  to  distinguish  under 
all  circumstances  that  which  is  truly  profitable  (Iddaatli)  ;  the 
latter  would  be  able  to  express  themselves  suitably,  with  refine 
ment,  clearness,  and  worthiness.  Tsachoth  (old  ed.  tsdchoth) 
signifies  that  which  is  light,  transparent;  not  merely  intelli 
gible,  but  refined  and  elegant.  "in^n  gives  the  adverbial  idea 
to  ledabber  (Evrald,  §  285,  a). 

A  third  fruit  of  the  blessing  is  the  naming  and  treating  of 
every  one  according  to  his  true  character.  Vers.  5-8.  "  The 
fool  will  no  more  be  called  a  nobleman,  nor  the  crafty  a  gentleman. 
For  a  fool  speaks  follies,  and  his  heart  does  godless  things,  to  prac 
tise  tricks  and  to  speak  error  against  Jehovah,  to  leave  the  soul  of 
hungry  men  empty,  and  to  withhold  the  drink  of  thirsty  ones.  A  nd 
the  craft  of  a  crafty  man  is  evil,  who  devises  stratagems  to  destroy 
suffering  ones  by  lying  words,  even  when  the  needy  exhibits  his  right 
But  a  noble  man  devises  noble  tilings,  and  to  noble  things  he  ad- 
heres"  Nobility  of  birth  and  wealth  will  give  place  to  nobility 
of  character,  so  that  the  former  will  not  exist  or  not  be  recog 
nised  without  the  latter.  Nddlbh  is  properly  one  who  is  noble  in 
character,  and  then,  dropping  the  ethical  meaning,  one  who  is 
noble  by  rank.  The  meaning  of  the  word  generosus  follows  the 
same  course  in  the  opposite  direction.  Shoa  is  the  man  who  is 
raised  to  eminence  by  the  possession  of  property;  the  gentle- 

VOL    II.  D 


50  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

man,  as  in  Job  xxxiv.  19.  The  prophet  explains  for  himself  in 
what  sense  he  uses  the  words  nablidl  and  kilai.  We  see  from  his 
explanation  that  kilai  neither  signifies  the  covetous,  from  kill 
(Saad.),  nor  the  spendthrift,  from  killdh  (Hitzig).  Jerome 
gives  the  correct  rendering,  viz.  fraudulentus ;  and  Rashi  and 
Kimchi  very  properly  regard  it  as  a  contraction  of  nekhllai.  It 
is  an  adjective  form  derived  from  /^3  =  ^".33,  like  WW  =  NS5W  (Job 
xx.  6).  The  form  v3  in  ver.  1  is  used  interchangeably  with 
this,  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  resemblance  in  sound  to  1v3 
(inachinatoris  machince  pravce).  In  ver.  6,  commencing  with  ki 
(for),  the  fact  that  the  ndblidl  (fool)  and  kilai  (crafty  man)  will 
lose  their  titles  of  honour,  is  explained  on  the  simple  ground 
that  such  men  are  utterly  unworthy  of  them.  NdLlidl  is  a  scoffer 
at  religion,  who  thinks  himself  an  enlightened  man,  and  yet  at 
the  same  time  has  the  basest  heart,  and  is  a  worthless  egotist. 
The  infinitives  with  Lamed  show  in  what  the  immorality  ('dven) 
consists,  with  which  his  heart  is  so  actively  employed.  In  ver. 
6,  ubhedabber  ("  and  if  he  speak")  is  equivalent  to,  "  even  in  the 
event  of  a  needy  man  saying  what  is  right  and  well  founded  :" 
Vdv  =  et  in  the  sense  of  etiam  (cf.  2  Sam.  i.  23  ;  Ps.  xxxi.  12 ; 
Hos.  viii.  6 ;  Eccles.  v.  6)  ;  according  to  Knohel,  it  is  equivalent 
to  et  quidem,  as  in  Eccles.  viii.  2,  Amos  iii.  11,  iv.  10;  whereas 
Ewald  regards  it  as  Vav  cortj.  (§  283,  d),  "  and  by  going  to  law 
with  the  needy,"  but  |is3X"n«  would  be  the  construction  in  this 
case  (vid.  2  Kings  xxv.  6).  According  to  ver.  8,  not  only  does 
the  noble  man  devise  what  is  noble,  but  as  such  (tfin)  he  adheres 
to  it.  "We  might  also  adopt  this  explanation,  "  It  is  not  upon 
gold  or  upon  chance  that  he  rises ;"  but  according  to  the  Arabic 
equivalents,  qum  signifies  persistere  here. 

AGAINST  THE  WOMEN  OF  JERUSALEM. — CHAP.  XXXII.  9-20. 

APPENDIX  TO  THE  FOURTH  WOE. 

This  short  address,  although  rounded  off  well,  is  something 
more  than  a  fragment  complete  in  itself,  like  the  short  para 
bolic  piece  in  ch.  xxviii.  23-29,  which  commences  in  a  similar 
manner.  It  is  the  last  part  of  the  fourth  woe,  just  as  that  was 
the  last  part  of  the  first.  It  is  a  side  piece  to  the  threatening 
prophecy  of  the  time  of  Uzziah-Jotham  (ch.  iii.  16  sqq.),  and 
chastises  the  frivolous  self-security  of  the  women  of  Jerusalem, 


CHAP.  XXXII.  9-14.  51 

just  as  the  former  chastises  their  vain  and  luxurious  love  of 
finery.  The  prophet  has  now  uttered  many  a  woe  upon  Jeru 
salem,  which  is  bringing  itself  to  the  verge  of  destruction  ;  but 
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  women  are  by  nature  more  delicate, 
and  more  easily  affected  and  alarmed,  than  men,  he  has  made 
no  impression  upon  the  women  of  Jerusalem,  to  whom  he  now 
foretells  a  terrible  undeceiving  of  their  carnal  ease,  whilst  he 
holds  out  before  them  the  ease  secured  by  God,  which  can 
only  be  realized  on  the  ruins  of  the  former.  The  first  part 
of  the  address  proclaims  the  annihilation  of  their  false  ease. 
Vers.  9-14.  "  Ye  contented  women,  rise  up,  hear  my  voice ;  ye 
confident  daughters,  hearken  to  my  speech  I  Days  to  the  year  : 
then  will  ye  tremble,  confident  ones  I  for  it  is  all  over  with  the 
vintage,  the  fruit  harvest  comes  to  nought.  Tremble,  contented 
ones  !  Quake,  ye  confident  ones  !  Strip,  make  yourselves  bare, 
and  gird  your  loins  ivith  sackcloth  I  They  smite  upon  their  breasts 
for  the  pleasant  fields,  for  the  fruitful  vine.  On  the  land  of  my 
people  there  come  up  weeds,  briers ;  yea,  upon  all  joyous  houses 
of  the  rejoicing  city.  For  the  palace  is  made  solitary;  the  crowd  of 
the  city  is  left  desolate;  the  of  el  and  watch-tower  serve  as  caves 
for  ever,  for  the  delight  of  wild  asses,  for  the  tending  of  flocks." 
The  summons  is  the  same  as  in  Gen.  iv.  23  and  Jer.  ix.  19  (comp. 
ch.  xxviii.  23)  ;  the  attributes  the  same  as  in  Amos  vi.  1  (cf.  ch. 
iv.  1,  where  Isaiah  apostrophizes  the  women  of  Samaria).  IJ^t?, 
lively,  of  good  cheer;  and  HB2,  trusting,  namely  to  nothing. 
They  are  to  rise  up  (qomndh),  because  the  word  of  God  must 
be  heard  standing  (Judg.  iii.  20).  The  definition  of  the  time 
"  days  for  a  year"  (ydmlm  ral-shdndh)  appears  to  indicate  the 
length  of  time  that  the  desolation  would  last,  as  the  word 
tirgazndh  is  without  any  Vav  apod.  (cf.  ch.  Ixv.  24,  Job  i. 
16-18);  but  ch.  xxix.  1  shows  us  differently,  and  the  Vav  is 
omitted,  just  as  it  is,  for  example,  in  Dan.  iv.  28.  Shdndh  is 
the  current  year.  In  an  undefined  number  of  days,  at  the 
most  a  year  from  the  present  time  (which  is  sometimes  the 
meaning  of  ydmlm),  the  trembling  would  begin,  and  there 
would  be  neither  grapes  nor  fruit  to  gather.  Hence  the  spring 
harvest  of  corn  is  supposed  to  be  over  when  the  devastation 
begins.  D"1^  is  an  ace.  temporis  ;  it  stands  here  (as  in  ch.  xxvii.  6, 
for  example  ;  vid.  Ewald,  §  293,  1)  to  indicate  the  starting  point, 
not  the  period  of  duration.  The  milel-forms  nob's,  rnjp, 


32  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

are  explained  by  Evvald,  Drechsler,  and  Luzzatto,  as  plur.  fern, 
imper.  with  the  Nun  of  the  termination  noli  dropped, — an  elision 
that  is  certainly  never  heard  of.  Others  regard  it  as  inf.  with 
He  femin.  (Credner,  Joel,  p.  141)  ;  but  '"Y^i?  for  the,  infinitive 
Fvtpjj  is  unexampled ;  and  equally  unexampled  would  be  the 
inf.  with  He  indicating  the  summons,  as  suggested  by  Bottcher, 
"to  the  shaking!"  "to  the  stripping!"  They  are  sing.  masc. 
imper. ,  such  as  occur  elsewhere  apart  from  the  pause,  e.g.  H3i ?D 
(for  which  the  keri  has  n?^?)  in  Judg.  ix.  8  ;  and  the  singular 
in  the  place  of  the  plural  is  the  strongest  form  of  command. 
The  masculine  instead  of  the  feminine  appears  already  in  '"H?, 
which  is  used  in  the  place  of  nj"nn.  The  prophet  then  pro 
ceeds  in  the  singular  number,  comprehending  the  women  as  a 
mass,  and  using  the  most  massive  expression.  The  He  intro 
duced  into  the  summons  required  that  the  feminine  forms,  W, 
etc.,  should  be  given  up.  rnV,  from  "ny,  to  be  naked,  to  strip 
one's  self,  rnin  absolute,  as  in  Joel  i.  13  (cf.  ch.  iii.  24),  signi 
fies  to  gird  one's  self  with  sackcloth  (saq).  We  meet  with  the 
same  remarkable  enall.  generis  in  ver.  12.  Men  have  no  breasts 
(shddaim),  and  yet  the  masculine  soph9 dim  is  employed,  inas 
much  as  the  prophet  had  the  whole  nation  in  his  mind,  through 
out  which  there  would  be  such  a  plangere  ubera  on  account  of 
the  utter  destruction  of  the  hopeful  harvest  of  corn  and  wine. 
Shddaim  (breasts)  and  sTf  (construct  to  sddoth)  have  the  same 
common  ring  as  ubera  and  ubertas  frugum.  In  ver.  13  tdaleli 
points  back  to  qots  shdmlr,  which  is  condensed  into  one  neuter 
idea.  The  ki  in  ver.  13&  has  the  sense  of  the  Latin  imo 
(Ewald,  §  330,  b).  The  genitive  connection  of  nr^  nnj?  with 
Wbfii  V?2  (joy-houses  of  the  jubilant  city)  is  the  same  as  in  ch. 
xxviii.  1.  The  whole  is  grammatically  strange,  just  as  in  the 
Psalms  the  language  becomes  all  the  more  complicated,  dis 
jointed,  and  difficult,  the  greater  the  wrath  and  indignation  of 
the  poet.  Hence  the  short  shrill  sentences  in  ver.  14 :  palace 
given  up  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  22) ;  city  bustle  forsaken  (i.e.  the  city 
generally  so  full  of  bustle,  ch.  xxii.  2).  The  use  of  1^3  is  the 
same  as  in  Prov.  vi.  2(>,  Job  ii.  4.  'Of el,  i.e.  the  south-eastern 
fortified  slope  of  the  temple  mountain,  and  the  bachan  (i.e.  the 
watch-tower,  possibly  the  flock-tower  which  is  mentioned  in 
Mic.  iv.  8  along  with  rofel),  would  be  pro  speluncis,  i.e.  would 
be  considered  and  serve  as  such.  And  in  the  very  place  where 


CHAP.  XXXIL  15-19.  53 

the  women  of  Jerusalem  had  once  led  their  life  of  gaiety,  wild 
asses  would  now  have  their  delight,  and  flocks  their  pasture  (on 
the  wild  asses,  perd'lm,  that  fine  animal  of  the  woodless  steppe, 
see  at  Job  xxiv.  5,  xxxix.  5-8).  Thus  would  Jerusalem,  with  its 
strongest,  proudest  places,  be  laid  in  ruins,  and  that  in  a  single 
year,  or  even  less  than  a  year. 

The  state  would  then  continue  long,  very  long,  until  at  last 
the  destruction  of  the  false  rest  would  be  followed  by  the  reali 
zation  of  the  true.  Vers.  15—19.  "  Until  the  Spirit  is  poured 
out  over  us  from  on  high,  and  the  wilderness  becomes  a  fruitful 
field)  and  the  fruitful  field  is  counted  as  the  forest.  And  justice 
makes  its  abode  in  the  desert,  and  righteousness  settles  down  upon 
the  fruit-field.  And  the  effect  of  righteousness  will  le  peace,  and 
the  reward  of  righteousness  rest  and  security  for  ever.  And  my 
people  dwells  in  a  place  of  peace,  and  in  trustworthy,  safe  dwell 
ings,  and  in  cheerful  resting-places.  And  it  hails  with  the  over 
throw  of  the  forest,  and  into  lowliness  must  the  city  be  brought 
low."  There  is  a  limit,  therefore,  to  the  "  for  ever  "of  ver.  14. 
The  punishment  would  last  till  the  Spirit,  which  Israel  had  not 
then  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  it  (see  Hag.  ii.  5),  and  whose 
fulness  was  like  a  closed  vessel  to  Israel,  should  be  emptied  out 
over  Israel  from  the  height  of  heaven  (compare  the  piel  rvjSJ, 
Gen.  xxiv.  20),  i.e.  should  be  poured  out  in  all  its  fulness. 
When  that  was  done,  a  great  change  would  take  place,  the 
spiritual  nature  of  which  is  figuratively  represented  in  the  same 
proverbial  manner  as  in  ch.  xxix.  17.  At  the  same  time,  a 
different  turn  is  given  to  the  second  half  in  the  passage  before 
us.  The  meaning  is,  not  that  what  was  now  valued  as  a  fruit- 
bearing  garden  would  be  brought  down  from  its  false  eminence, 
and  be  only  regarded  as  forest ;  but  that  the  whole  would  be  so 
glorious,  that  what  was  now  valued  as  a  fruit-garden,  would  be 
thrown  into  the  shade  by  something  far  more  glorious  still,  in 
comparison  with  which  it  would  have  the  appearance  of  a  forest, 
in  which  everything  grew  wild.  The  whole  land,  the  unculti 
vated  pasture-land  as  well  as  the  planted  fruitful  fields  of  corn 
and  fruit,  would  then  become  the  tent  and  seat  of  justice  and 
righteousness.  "  Justice  and  righteousness"  (mishpdt  and 
tseddqdh)  are  throughout  Isaiah  the  stamp  of  the  last  and 
perfect  time.  As  these  advance  towards  self-completion,  the 
•produce  and  result  of  these  will  be  peace  (maaseh  and  'abhoddh 


54  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

are  used  to  denote  the  fruit  or  self-reward  of  work  and  pains 
taking  toil ;  compare  «"wQ).  But  two  things  must  take  place 
before  this  calm,  trustworthy,  happy  peace,  of  which  the  existing 
carnal  security  is  only  a'  caricature,  can  possibly  be  realized. 
In  the  first  place,  it  must  hail,  and  the  wood  must  fall,  being 
beaten  down  with  hail.  We  already  know,  from  ch.  x.  34, 
that  "  the  wood"  was  an  emblem  of  Assyria ;  and  in  ch.  xxx. 
30,  31,  we  find  "  the  hail"  mentioned  as  one  of  the  forces  of 
nature  that  would  prove  destructive  to  Assyria.  And  secondly, 
"  the  city"  p7'7j  a  play  upon  the  word,  and  a  counterpart  to 
">y*n)  must  first  of  all  be  brought  low  into  lowliness  (i.e.  be  deeply 
humiliated).  Rosenmiiller  and  others  suppose  the  imperial 
city  to  be  intended,  according  to  parallels  taken  from  ch. 
xxiv.-xxvii. ;  but  in  this  cycle  of  prophecies,  in  which  the 
imperial  city  is  never  mentioned  at  all,  "  the  city"  must  be 
Jerusalem,  whose  course  from  the  false  peace  to  the  true  lay 
through  a  humiliating  punishment  (ch.  xxix.  2-4,  xxx.  19  sqq., 
xxxi.  4  sqq.). 

In  the  face  of  this  double  judgment,  the  prophet  congratu 
lates  those  who  will  live  to  see  the  times  after  the  judgment. 
Ver.  20.  "  Blessed  are  ye  that  sow  by  all  waters,  and  let  the 
foot  of  the  oxen  and  asses  rove  in  freedom"  Those  who  lived 
to  see  these  times  would  be  far  and  wide  the  lords  of  a  quiet 
and  fruitful  land,  cleared  of  its  foes,  and  of  all  disturbers  of 
peace.  They  would  sow  wherever  they  pleased,  by  all  the 
waters  that  fertilized  the  soil,  and  therefore  in  a  soil  of  the 
most  productive  kind,  and  one  that  required  little  if  any  trouble 
to  cultivate.  And  inasmuch  as  everything  would  be  in  the 
most  copious  abundance,  they  would  no  longer  need  to  watch 
with  anxiety  lest  their  oxen  and  asses  should  stray  into  the 
corn-fields,  but  would  be  able  to  let  them  wander  wherever  they 
pleased.  There  cannot  be  the  slightest  doubt  that  this  is  the 
correct  explanation  of  the  verse,  according  to  ch.  xxx.  23-25 
(compare  also  ch.  vii.  21  sqq.). 

This  concludes  the  four  woes,  from  which  the  fifth,  that 
immediately  follows,  is  distinguished  by  the  fact,  that  in  the 
former  the  Assyrian  troubles  are  still  in  the  future,  whereas 
the  fifth  places  us  in  the  very  midst  of  them.  The  prophet 
commenced  (ch.  xxviii.  1-4)  with  the  destruction  of  Samaria ; 
he  then  threatened  Judah  and  Jerusalem  also.  But  it  is  un- 


CHAP.  XXXII.  20.  55 

commonly  difficult  to  combine  the  different  features  of  the 
threat  into  a  complete  picture.  Sifting  even  to  a  small  rem 
nant  is  a  leading  thought,  which  runs  through  the  threat.  And 
we  also  read  throughout  the  whole,  that  Asshur  will  meet  with 
its  own  destruction  in  front  of  that  very  Jerusalem  which  it  is 
seeking  to  destroy.  But  the  prophet  also  knows,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  Jerusalem  is  besieged  by  the  Assyrians,  and  will  not 
be  rescued  till  the  besieged  city  has  been  brought  to  the  last 
extremity  (ch.  xxix.  1  sqq.,  xxxi.  4  sqq.)  ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  this  will  reach  even  to  the  falling  of  the  towers  (ch. 
xxx.  25),  the  overthrow  of  the  wall  of  the  state  (ch.  xxx.  13, 
14),  the  devastation  of  the  land,  and  the  destruction  of  Jeru 
salem  itself  (ch.  xxxii.  12  sqq.)  ;  and  for  both  of  these  he  fixes 
the  limit  of  a  year  (ch.  xxix.  1,  xxxii.  10).  This  double  threat 
may  be  explained  in  the  following  manner.  The  judgments 
which  Israel  has  still  to  endure,  and  the  period  of  glory  that 
will  follow  them,  lie  before  the  mental  eye  of  the  prophet  like 
a  long  deep  diorama.  While  threatening  the  existing  generation, 
he  penetrates  more  or  less  deeply  into  the  judgments  which  lie  in 
perspective  before  him.  He  threatens  at  one  time  merely  a  siege 
that  will  continue  till  it  is  brought  to  the  utmost  extremity ;  at 
another  time  utter  destruction.  But  the  imperial  power  intended, 
by  which  this  double  calamity  is  to  be  brought  upon  Judah, 
must  be  Assyria ;  since  the  prophet  knew  of  no  other  in  the 
earliest  years  of  Hezekiah,  when  these  threatening  addresses  were 
uttered.  And  this  gives  rise  to  another  difficulty.  Not  only  was 
the  worst  prediction — namely,  that  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusa 
lem — not  fulfilled ;  but  even  the  milder  prophecy — namely,  that 
of  a  siege,  which  would  bring  them  to  the  deepest  distress — was 
not  accomplished.  There  never  was  any  actual  siege  of  Jerusa 
lem  by  the  Assyrians.  The  explanation  of  this  is,  that,  according 
to  Jer.  xviii.  7,  8,  and  9, 10,  neither  the  threatenings  of  punish 
ment  nor  the  promises  of  blessing  uttered  by  the  prophets  were 
so  unconditional,  that  they  were  certain  to  be  fulfilled  and  that 
with  absolute  necessity,  at  such  and  such  a  time,  or  upon  such 
and  such  a  generation.  The  threatened  punishment  might  be 
repealed  or  modified,  if  repentance  ensued  on  the  part  of  the 
persons  threatened  (Jonah  iii.  4  ;  1  Kings  xxi.  29 ;  2  Kings 
xxii.  15-20 ;  2  Chron.  xii.  5-8).  The  words  of  the  prophecy 
did  not  on  that  account  fall  to  the  ground.  If  they  produced  re- 


56  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

pentance,  they  answered  the  veiy  purpose  for  which  they  were 
intended  ;  but  if  the  circumstances  which  called  for  punishment 
should  return,  their  force  returned  as  well  in  all  its  fulness.  If 
the  judgment  was  one  irrevocably  determined,  it  was  merely 
delayed  by  this,  to  be  discharged  upon  the  generation  which 
should  be  ripest  for  it.  And  we  have  also  an  express  historical 
testimony,  which  shows  that  this  is  the  wray  in  which  the  non- 
fulfilment  of  what  Isaiah  threatened  as  about  to  take  place  within 
a  year  is  to  be  accounted  for.  Not  only  Isaiah,  but  also  his 
contemporary  Micah,  threatened,  that  along  with  the  judgment 
upon  Samaria,  the  same  judgment  would  also  burst  upon 
Jerusalem.  Zion  would  be  ploughed  as  a  field,  Jerusalem 
would  be  laid  in  ruins,  and  the  temple  mountain  would  be  turned 
into  a  wooded  height  (Mic.  iii.  12).  This  prophecy  belongs 
to  the  first  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  for  it  was  then  that  the 
book  of  Micah  was  composed.  But  we  read  in  Jer.  xxvi. 
18,  19,  that,  in  their  alarm  at  this  prophecy,  Hezekiah  and  all 
Judah  repented,  and  that  Jehovah  withdrew  His  threat  in  con 
sequence.  Thus,  in  the  very  first  year  of  Hezekiah,  a  change 
for  the  better  took  place  in  Judah;  and  this  was  necessarily 
followed  by  the  withdrawal  of  Isaiah's  threatenings,  just  as 
those  threatenings  had  co-operated  in  the  production  of  this 
conversion  (see  Caspari,  Micha,  p.  160  sqq.).  Not  one  of  the 
three  threats  (Isa.  xxix.  1-4,  xxxii.  9—14  ;  Mic.  iii.  12),  which 
form  an  ascending  climax,  was  fulfilled.  Previous  threatenings 
so  far  recovered  their  original  force,  when  the  insincerity  of  the 
conversion  became  apparent,  that  the  Assyrians  did  unques 
tionably  march  through  Judah,  devastating  everything  as  they 
went  along.  But  because  of  Hezekiah's  self-humiliation  and 
faith,  the  threat  was  turned  from  that  time  forward  into  a 
promise.  In  direct  opposition  to  his  former  threatening,  Isaiah 
now  promised  that  Jerusalem  would  not  be  besieged  by  the 
Assyrians  (ch.  xxxvii.  33-35),  but  that,  before  the  siege  was 
actually  established,  Assyria  would  fall  under  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem. 


CHAP.  XXXIII.  1.  57 


THE  FIFTH  WOE. — WOE  CONCERNING   ASSHUR  ;    DELIVERANCE 
AND  GLORY  OF  JERUSALEM. — CHAP.  XXXIII. 

We  are  now  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign. 
The  threatenings  of  the  first  years,  which  the  repentance  of 
the  people  had  delayed,  are  now  so  far  in  force  again,  and  so 
far  actually  realized,  that  the  Assyrians  are  already  in  Judah, 
and  have  not  only  devastated  the  land,  but  are  threatening 
Jerusalem.  The  element  of  promise  now  gains  the  upper 
hand,  the  prophet  places  himself  between  Asshur  and  his  own 
nation  with  the  weapons  of  prophecy  and  prayer,  and  the  woe 
turns  from  the  latter  to  the  former.  Ver.  1.  "  Woe,  devastator, 
and  thyself  not  devastated;  and  tlwu  spoiler,  and  still  not  spoiled! 
Hast  tliou  done  with  devastating  ?  thou  shalt  be  devastated.  Hast 
t/wu  attained  to  rob  ?  men  rob  thee"  Asshur  is  described  as  not 
devastated  and  not  spoiled  (which  could  not  be  expressed  by  a 
participle  as  with  us,  since  bdgad  is  construed  with  Beth,  and 
not  with  the  accusative  of  the  person),  because  it  had  not  yet 
been  visited  by  any  such  misfortune  as  that  which  had  fallen 
upon  other  lands  and  nations.  But  it  would  be  repaid  with 
like  for  like  as  soon  as  (3  indicating  simultaneousness,  as  in  ch. 
xxx.  19  and  xviii.  5,  for  example)  its  devastating  and  spoiling 
had  reached  the  point  determined  by  Jehovah.  Instead  of  ^, 
we  find  in  some  codd.  and  editions  the  reading  to,  which  is 
equally  admissible.  In  ^nn3  (horn  D»n)  the  radical  syllable 
is  lengthened,  instead  of  having  dagesh.  ^jrtas  is  equivalent  to 
*jnfen3?  a  hiphil  syncopated  for  the  sake  of  rhythm  (as  in  ch. 
iii.  8,  Deut.  i.  33,  and  many  other  passages),  written  here  with 
dagesh  dirimens,  from  the  verb  ndldh,  which  is  attested  also 
by  Job  xv.  29.  The  coincidence  in  meaning  with  the  verb 

J|j   (fut.  i  and  u),  to  acquire  or  attain  (see  Job,  vol.  i.  296,  ii. 

165),  has  been  admitted  by  the  earliest  of  the  national  gram 
marians,  Ben-Koreish,  Chayug,  etc.  The  conjecture  ^w33 
(in  addition  to  which  Cappellus  proposed  ^niN^3)  is  quite 
unnecessary.  The  play  upon  the  sound  sets  forth  the  punish 
ment  of  the  hitherto  unpunished  one  as  the  infallible  echo  of 
its  sin. 

In  ver.  2  the  prophet's  word  of  command  is  changed  into  a 


58  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

believing  prayer :  "  Jehovah,  be  gracious  to  us ;  ice  wait  for 
Thee:  be  their  arm  with  every  morning,  yea,  our  salvation  in 
time  of  need!''9  "Their  arm"  i.e.  the  power  which  shelters  and 
defends  them,  viz.  Thy  people  and  my  own.  "  Yea"  'aph,  is 
emphatic.  Israel's  arm  every  morning,  because  the  danger  is 
renewed  every  day;  Israel's  salvation,  i.e.  complete  deliver 
ance  (ch.  xxv.  9),  because  the  culminating  point  of  the  trouble 
is  still  in  prospect. 

While  the  prophet  is  praying  thus,  he  already  sees  the 
answer.  Vers.  3,  4.  u  At  the  sound  of  a  noise  peoples  pass  away ; 
at  Thy  rising  nations  are  scattered.  And  your  booty  is  swept 
away  as  a  swarm  of  locusts  sweeps  away ;  as  beetles  run,  they  run 
upon  it"  The  indeterminate  hdmon,  which  produces  for  that 
very  reason  the  impression  of  something  mysterious  and  terrible, 
is  at  once  explained.  The  noise  comes  from  Jehovah,  who  is 
raising  Himself  judicially  above  Assyria,  and  thunders  as  a  judge. 
Then  the  hostile  army  runs  away  (N?Q3 =  ti?B3,  from  the  niphal 
r?3,  1  Sam.  xiii.  11,  from  p?3  =  piBJ,  from  pis);  and  your  booty 
(the  address  returns  to  Assyria)  is  swept  away,  just  as  when  a 
swarm  of  locusts  settles  on  a  field,  it  soon  eats  it  utterly  away. 
Jerome,  Cappellus,  and  others  follow  the  Septuagint  rendering, 
OP  TpoTrov  edv  Tt9  (Tvvaydyrj  aKp&as.  The  figure  is  quite  as 
appropriate,  but  the  article  in  hechdsll  makes  the  other  view  the 
more  natural  one ;  and  ver.  45  places  this  beyond  all  doubt. 
Shdqaq,  from  which  the  participle  shogeq  and  the  substantive 
masshdq  are  derived,  is  used  here,  as  in  Joel  ii.  9,  to  signify  a 
busy  running  hither  and  thither  (discursitare).  The  syntactic 
use  of  shoqeq  is  the  same  as  that  of  fcO.P  (they  call)  in  ch.  xxi. 
11,  and  sophedlm  (they  smite)  in  ch.  xxxii.  12.  The  inhabit 
ants  of  Jerusalem  swarm  in  the  enemy's  camp  like  beetles ; 
they  are  all  in  motion,  and  carry  off  what  they  can. 

The  prophet  sees  this  as  he  prays,  and  now  feasts  himself 
on  the  consequences  of  this  victory  of  Jehovah,  prophesying  in 
vers.  5,  6  :  "  Jehovah  is  exalted ;  for,  dwelling  on  high,  He  has 
filled  Zion  with  justice  and  righteousness.  And  there  will  be 
security  of  thy  times,  riches  of  salvation,  of  wisdom,  and  know 
ledge.  Fear  of  Jehovah  is  then  the  treasure  of  Judah"  Exalted : 
for  though  highly  exalted  in  Himself,  He  has  performed  an  act 
of  justice  and  righteousness,  with  the  sight  and  remembrance 
of  which  Ziou  is  filled  as  with  an  overflowing  rich  supply  of 


CHAP.  XXXIII.  7-9.  59 

instruction  and  praise.  A  new  time  has  dawned  for  the  people 
of  Judah.  The  prophet  addresses  them  in  ver.  6  ;  for  there  is 
nothing  to  warrant  us  in  regarding  the  words  as  addressed  to 
Hezekiah.  To  the  times  succeeding  this  great  achievement 
there  would  belong  'emundh,  i.e.  durability  (Ex.  xvii.  12), — a 
uniform  and  therefore  trustworthy  state  of  things  (compare 
ch.  xxxix.  8,  "  peace  and  truth").  Secondly,  there  would  also 
belong  to  them  Jpn,  a  rich  store  of  salvation,  wisdom,  and 
knowledge  (compare  the  verb  in  ch.  xxiii.  18).  We  regard 
these  three  ideas  as  all  connected  with  chosen.  The  prophet 
makes  a  certain  advance  towards  the  unfolding  of  the  seven 
gifts  in  ch.  xi.  2,  which  are  implied  in  "  salvation ;"  but  he 
hurries  at  once  to  the  lowest  of  them,  which  forms  the  ground 
work  of  all  the  rest,  when  he  says,  thirdly,  that  the  fear  of 
Jehovah  will  be  the  people's  treasure.  The  construct  form, 
chokhmath,  instead  of  chokJimdh,  is  a  favourite  one,  which  Isaiah 
employs,  even  apart  from  the  genitive  relation  of  the  words, 
for  the  purpose  of  securing  a  closer  connection,  as  ch.  xxxv.  2, 
li.  21  (compare  pdrash  in  Ezek.  xxvi.  10),  clearly  show.  In 
the  case  before  us,  it  has  the  further  advantage  of  consonance 
in  the  closing  sound. 

The  prophet  has  thus  run  through  the  whole  train  of  thought 
with  a  few  rapid  strides,  in  accordance  with  the  custom  which 
we  have  already  frequently  noticed ;  and  now  he  commences 
afresh,  mourning  over  the  present  miserable  condition  of  things, 
in  psalm-like  elegiac  tones,  and  weeping  with  his  weeping 
people.  Vers.  7-9.  "  Behold,  their  heroes  weep  without ;  the 
messengers  of  peace  weep  bitterly.  Desolate  are  roads,  disap 
peared  are  travellers;  he  has  broken  covenant,  insulted  cities, 
despised  men.  The  land  mourns,  languishes ;  Lebanon  stands 
ashamed,  parched;  the  meadow  of  Sharon  has  become  like  a 
steppe,  and  Bashan  and  Carmel  shake  their  leaves."  E^"}^  is 
probably  chosen  with  some  allusion  to  'Ariel,  the  name  of  Jeru 
salem  in  ch.  xxix. ;  but  it  has  a  totally  different  meaning.  We 
have  rendered  it  "  heroes,"  because  tans  is  here  synonymous 
with  ?N1K  in  the  Nibelung-like  piece  contained  in  2  Sam.  xxiii. 
20  and  1  Chron.  xi.  22.  This  'tin* el,  which  is  here  contracted 
into  'er'el  (compare  the  biblical  name  'Ar'ell  and  the  post- 
biblical  name  of  the  angels,  'Erelllm),  is  compounded  of  'an 
(a.  lion)  and  'El  (God),  and  therefore  signifies  "  the  lion  of 


CO  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

God,"  but  in  this  sense,  that  El  (God)  gives  to  the  idea  of 
leonine  courage  merely  the  additional  force  of  extraordinary  or 
wonderful  ;  and  as  a  composite  word,  it  contents  itself  with  a 
singular,  with  a  collective  sense  according  to  circumstances, 
without  forming  any  plural  at  all.  The  dagesh  is  to  be  ex 
plained  from  the  fact  that  the  word  (which  tradition  has  erro 
neously  regarded  as  a  compound  of  Dr6  n&ON)  is  pointed  in 
accordance  with  the  form  >$"]3  0^1?)  •  The  heroes  intended 
by  the  prophet  were  the  messengers  sent  to  Sennacherib  to  treat 
with  him  for  peace.  They  carried  to  him  the  amount  of  silver 
and  gold  which  he  had  demanded  as  the  condition  of  peace 
(2  Kings  xviii.  14).  But  Sennacherib  broke  the  treaty,  by 
demanding  nothing  less  than  the  surrender  of  Jerusalem  itself. 
Then  the  heroes  of  Jerusalem  cried  aloud,  when  they  arrived 
at  Jerusalem,  and  had  to  convey  this  message  of  disgrace  and 
alarm  to  the  king  and  nation  ;  and  bitterly  weeping  over  such 
a  breach  of  faith,  such  deception  and  disgrace,  the  embassy, 
which  had  been  sent  off,  to  the  deep  self-humiliation  of  Judah 
and  themselves,  returned  to  Jerusalem.  Moreover,  Sennacherib 
continued  to  storm  the  fortified  places,  in  violation  of  his  agree 
ment  (on  ma  as  'anm,  see  2  Kings  xviii.  13).  The  land  was 
more  and  more  laid  waste,  the  fields  were  trodden  down  ;  and 
the  autumnal  aspect  of  Lebanon,  with  its  faded  foliage,  and  of 
Bashan  and  Carmel,  with  their  falling  leaves,  looked  like  shame 
and  grief  at  the  calamities  of  the  land.  It  was  in  the  autumn, 
therefore,  that  the  prophet  uttered  these  complaints  ;  and  the 
definition  of  the  time  given  in  his  prophecy  (ch.  xxxii.  10) 
coincides  with  this.  teij  is  the  pausal  form  for  teij,  just  as  in 
other  places  an  e  with  the  tone^  which  has  sprung  from  i9  easily 
passes  into  a  in  pause  ;  the  sharpening  of  the  syllable  being 
pref  erred  to  the  lengthening  of  it,  not  only  when  the  syllable 
which  precedes  the  tone  syllable  is  an  open  one,  but  sometimes 
even  when  it  is  closed  (e.g.  Judg.  vi.  19,  ^13  )•  Instead  of 
n:ny3  we  should  read  rQ"iy3  (without  the  article),  as  certain 
codd.  and  early  editions  do.1  Isaiah  having  mourned  in  the 
tone  of  the  Psalms,  now  comforts  himself  with  the  words  of  a 


1  "We  find  the  same  in  Zech.  xiv.  10,  and  D'Qiya  in  ch.  xliv.  4,  whereas 
we  invariably  have  nyiJB  (see  Michlol,  45ft),   just  as  we  always  find 
3j  and  on  the  other  hand 


CHAI\  XXXIII.  10-14.  61 

psalm.  Like  David  in  Ps.  xii.  6,  lie  hears  Jehovah  speak. 
The  measure  of  Asshur' s  iniquity  is  full ;  the  hour  of  Judah's 
redemption  is  come  ;  Jehovah  has  looked  on  long  enough,  as 
though  sitting  still  (ch.  xviii.  4).  Ver.  10.  "  Now  will  I  arise, 
saith  Jehovah,  now  exalt  myself,  now  lift  up  myself'9  Three 
times  does  the  prophet  repeat  the  word  'attdh  (now),  which  is 
so  significant  a  word  with  all  the  prophets,  but  more  especially 
with  Hosea  and  Isaiah,  and  which  always  fixes  the  boundary- 
line  and  turning-point  between  love  and  wrath,  wrath  and  love. 
DSViX  (in  half  pause  for  DOHK)  is  contracted  from  DpiiJiX  (Ges. 
§  54,  2,  b).  Jehovah  would  rise  up  from  His  throne,  and  show 
Himself  in  all  His  greatness  to  the  enemies  of  Israel. 

After  the  prophet  has  heard  this  from  Jehovah,  he  knows 
how  it  will  fare  with  them.  He  therefore  cries  out  to  them 
in  triumph  (ver.  11),  "  Ye  are  pregnant  with  hay,  ye  bring 
forth  stubble  I  Your  snorting  is  the  fire  that  will  devour  you" 
Their  vain  purpose  to  destroy  Jerusalem  comes  to  nothing; 
their  burning  wrath  against  Jerusalem  becomes  the  fire  of 
wrath,  which  consumes  them  (for  chashash  and  gash,  see  at 
ch.  v.  24). 

The  prophet  announces  this  to  them,  and  now  tells  openly 
what  has  been  exhibited  to  him  in  his  mental  mirror  as  the  pur 
pose  of  God.  Yer.  12.  "And  nations  become  as  lime  burnings, 
thorns  cut  off,  which  are  kindled  with  fire"  The  first  simile  sets 
forth  the  totality  of  the  destruction  :  they  will  be  so  com 
pletely  burned  up,  that  nothing  but  ashes  will  be  left,  like  the 
lump  of  lime  left  at  the  burning  of  lime.  The  second  contains 
a  figurative  description  of  its  suddenness :  they  have  vanished 
suddenly,  like  dead  brushwood,  which  is  cut  down  in  con 
sequence,  and  quickly  crackles  up  and  is  consumed  (ch.  v. 
24,  cf.  ix.  17)  :  Jcdsach  is  the  Targum  word  for  zdmar,  ampu- 
tare,  whereas  in  Arabic  it  has  the  same  meaning  as  sdchdh, 
verrere. 

But  the  prophet,  while  addressing  Asshur,  does  not  overlook 
those  sinners  of  his  own  nation  who  are  deserving  of  punish 
ment.  The  judgment  upon  Asshur  is  an  alarming  lesson,  not 
only  for  the  heathen,  but  for  Israel  also  ;  for  there  is  no  respect 
of  persons  with  Jehovah.  Vers.  13,  14.  "  Hear,  ye  distant 
ones,  what  I  have  accomplished;  and  perceive,  ye  near  ones,  my 
omnipotence!  The  sinners  in  Zion  are  afraid ;  trembling  seizes 


62  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  hypocrites  :  who  of  us  can  abide  ivith  devouring  fire  f  who  of 
us  abide  with  everlasting  burnings?"  Even  for  the  sinners  in 
Jerusalem  also  there  is  no  abiding  in  the  presence  of  the 
Almighty  and  Just  One,  who  has  judged  Asshur  (the  act  of 
judgment  is  regarded  by  the  prophet  as  having  just  occurred) ; 
they  must  either  repent,  or  they  cannot  remain  in  His  presence. 
Jehovah,  so  far  as  His  wrath  is  concerned,  is  "  a  consuming 
fire"  (Deut.  iv.  24,  ix.  3) ;  and  the  fiery  force  of  His  anger  is 
"  everlasting  burnings"  (mokede  roldm),  inasmuch  as  it  consists 
of  flames  that  are  never  extinguished,  never  burn  themselves 
out.  And  this  God  had  His  fire  and  His  furnace  in  Jeru 
salem  (ch.  xxxi.  9),  and  had  just  shown  what  His  fire  could 
do,  when  once  it  burst  forth.  Therefore  do  the  sinners  inquire 
in  their  alarm,  whilst  confessing  to  one  another  (Idnu ;  cf. 
Amos  ix.  1)  that  none  of  them  can  endure  it,  "  Who  can  dwell 
with  devouring  fire?"  etc.  (gur  with  the  ace.  loci,  as  in  Ps. 
v.  5). 

The  prophet  answers  their  question.  Yers.  15,  16.  "  He 
that  walketh  in  righteousness,  and  speaketh  uprightness ;  he  that 
de*piseth  gain  of  oppressions,  whose  hand  keepeth  from  grasping 
bribes;  he  that  stoppeth  his  ear  from  hearing  murderous  counsel, 
and  shutteth  his  eyes  from  looking  at  evil;  he  will  dwell  upon 
high  places ;  rocky  fastnesses  are  his  castle;  his  bread  is  abundant, 
his  waters  inexhaustible."  Isaiah's  variation  of  Ps.  xv.  and 
xxiv.  3-6  (as  Jer.  xvii.  5-8  contains  Jeremiah's  variation  of 
Ps.  i.).  Tseddqoth  is  the  accusative  of  the  object,  so  also  is 
meshdnm :  he  who  walks  in  all  the  relations  of  life  in  the  full 
measure  of  righteousness,  i.e.  who  practises  it  continually,  and 
whose  words  are  in  perfect  agreement  with  his  inward  feelings 
and  outward  condition.  The  third  quality  is,  that  he  not  only 
does  not  seek  without  for  any  gain  which  injures  the  interests 
of  his  neighbour,  but  that  he  inwardly  abhors  it.  The  fourth 
is,  that  he  diligently  closes  his  hands,  his  ears,  and  his  eyes, 
against  all  danger  of  moral  pollution.  Bribery,  which  others 
force  into  his  hand,  he  throws  away  (cf.  Neh.  v.  13);  against 
murderous  suggestions,  or  such  as  stimulate  revenge,  hatred, 
and  violence,  he  stops  his  ear ;  and  from  sinful  sights  he  closes 
his  eyes  firmly,  and  that  without  even  winking.  Such  a  man 
has  no  need  to  fear  the  wrath  of  God.  Living  according  to 
the  will  of  God,  he  lives  in  the  love  of  God ;  and  in  that  he  is 


CHAP.  XXXIII.  17-19.  63 

shut  in  as  it  were  upon  the  inaccessible  heights  and  in  the  im 
pregnable  walls  of  a  castle  upon  a  rock.  He  suffers  neither 
hunger  nor  thirst ;  but  his  bread  is  constantly  handed  to  him 
(nittdn,  partie.),  namely,  by  the  love  of  God ;  and  his  waters 
never  fail,  for  God,  the  living  One,  makes  them  flow.  This  is 
the  picture  of  a  man  who  has  no  need  to  be  alarmed  at  the 
judgment  of  God  upon  Asshur. 

Over  this  picture  the  prophet  forgets  the  sinners  in  Zion, 
and  greets  with  words  of  promise  the  thriving  church  of  the 
future.  Ver.  17.  "  Thine  eyes  will  see  the  king  in  his  beauty, 
will  see  a  land  that  is  very  far  off?  The  king  of  Judah, 
hitherto  so  deeply  humbled,  and,  as  Micah  instances  by  way  of 
example,  "  smitten  upon  the  cheeks,"  is  then  glorified  by  the 
victory  of  his  God ;  and  the  nation,  constituted  as  described  in 
vers.  15,  16,  will  see  him  in  his  God-given  beauty,  and  see  the 
land  of  promise,  cleared  of  enemies  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach 
and  the  foot  carry,  restored  to  Israel  without  reserve,  and 
under  the  dominion  of  this  sovereign  enjoying  all  the  blessed 
ness  of  peace. 

The  tribulation  has  passed  away  like  a  dream.  Yers.  18, 19. 
"  Thy  heart  meditates  upon  the  shuddering.  Where  is  the  valuer  ? 
where  the  weigher  ?  where  he  who  counted  the  towers  ?  The  rough 
2^eople  thou  seest  no  more,  the  people  of  deep  inaudible  lip,  of 
stammering  unintelligible  tongue"  The  dreadful  past  is  so 
thoroughly  forced  out  of  mind  by  the  glorious  present,  that 
they  are  obliged  to  turn  back  their  thoughts  (hdgdh,  meditari, 
as  Jerome  renders  it)  to  remember  it  at  all.  The  sopher  who 
had  the  management  of  the  raising  of  the  tribute,  the  shoqel 
who  tested  the  weight  of  the  gold  and  silver,  the  sophSr  'eth 
hammigddllm  who  drew  up  the  plan  of  the  city  to  be  besieged 
or  stormed,  are  all  vanished.  The  rough  people  (TJ/'iJ  &y,  the 
niphal  of  TW,  from  TJP),  that  had  shown  itself  so  insolent,  so 
shameless,  and  so  insatiable  in  its  demands,  has  become  invisible. 
This  attribute  is  a  perfectly  appropriate  one  ;  and  the  explana 
tion  given  by  Kashi,  Yitringa,  Ewald,  and  Fiirst,  who  take  it 
in  the  sense  of  loez  in  Ps.  cxiv.  1,  is  both  forced  and  ground 
less.  The  expressions  'imke  and  niVag  refer  to  the  obscure  and 
barbarous  sound  of  their  language ;  misshemoa  to  the  unintelli- 
gibility  of  their  speech ;  and  n^3  ptf  to  the  obscurity  of  their 
meaning.  Even  if  the  Assyrians  spoke  a  Semitic  language, 


64  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

they  were  of  so  totally  different  a  nationality,  and  their  manners 
were  so  entirely  different,  that  their  language  must  have  sounded 
even  more  foreign  to  an  Israelite  than  Dutch  to  a  German. 

And  how  will  Jerusalem  look  when  Asshur  has  been  dashed 
to  pieces  on  the  strong  fortress  ?  The  prophet  passes  over  here 
into  the  tone  of  Ps.  xlviii.  (vers.  13,  14.)  Ps.  xlvi.  and  xlviii. 
probably  belong  to  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat ;  but  they  are 
equally  applicable  to  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem  in  the  time 
of  Hezekiah.  Ver.  20.  "  Look  upon  Zion,  the  castle  of  our 
festal  meeting.  Thine  eyes  will  see  Jerusalem,  a  pleasant  place, 
a  tent  that  does  not  wander  about,  whose  pegs  are  never  drawn, 
and  none  of  whose  cords  are  ever  broken."  Jerusalem  stands 
there  unconquered  and  inviolable,  the  fortress  where  the  con 
gregation  of  the  whole  land  celebrates  its  feasts,  a  place  full  of 
good  cheer  (ch.  xxxii.  18),  in  which  everything  is  now  arranged 
for  a  continuance.  Jerusalem  has  come  out  of  tribulation 
stronger  than  ever, — not  a  nomadic  wandering  tent  (tsd'an, 
a  nomad  word,  to  wander,  lit.  to  pack  up  =  taan  in  Gen.  xlv. 
17),  but  one  set  up  for  a  permanent  dwelling. 

It  is  also  a  great  Lord  who  dwells  therein,  a  faithful  and 
almighty  defender.  Vers.  21,  22.  "  No,  there  dwells  for  us  a 
glorious  One,  Jehovah ;  a  place  of  streams,  canals  of  wide 
extent,  into  which  no  fleet  of  rowing  vessels  ventures,  and  which 
no  strong  man  of  war  shall  cross.  For  Jehovah  is  our  Judge ; 
Jehovah  is  our  war-Prince ;  Jehovah  is  our  King;  He  ivill  bring 
us  salvation."  Following  upon  the  negative  clauses  in  ver.  20&, 
the  next  verse  commences  with  kl  'im  (imo).  Glorious  (Jaddlr) 
is  Jehovah,  who  has  overthrown  Lebanon,  i.e.  Assyria  (ch.  x. 
34).  He  dwells  in  Jerusalem  for  the  good  of  His  people, — 
a  place  of  streams,  i.e.  one  resembling  a  place  of  streams,  from 
the  fact  that  He  dwells  therein.  Luzzatto  is  right  in  maintain 
ing,  that  13  and  *sn.3JP  point  back  to  Cipp,  and  therefore  that 
mekom  is  neither  equivalent  to  loco  (tachath,  instead  of),  which 
would  be  quite  possible  indeed,  as  1  Kings  xxi.  19,  if  not  Hos. 
ii.  1,  clearly  proves  (cf.  ch.  xxii.  38),  nor  used  in  the  sense  of 
substitution  or  compensation.  The  meaning  is,  that,  by  virtue 
of  Jehovah's  dwelling  there,  Jerusalem  had  become  a  place,  or 
equivalent  to  a  place,  of  broad  streams,  like  those  which  in 
other  instances  defended  the  cities  they  surrounded  (e.g.  Baby 
lon,  the  "  twisted  snake,"  ch.  xxvii.  1),  and  of  broad  canals, 


CHAP.  XXXIII.  23,  24,  65 

which  kept  off  the  enemy,  like  moats  around  a  fortification. 
The  word  &*}&  was  an  Egyptian  word,  that  had  become  natu 
ralized  in  Hebrew ;  nevertheless  it  is  a  very  natural  supposi 
tion,  that  the  prophet  was  thinking  of  the  No  of  Egypt,  which 
was  surrounded  by  waters,  probably  Nile-canals  (see  Winer, 
.7?.  W.  Nah.  iii.  8).  The  adjective  in  which  yddaim  brings 
out  with  greater  force  the  idea  of  breadth,  as  in  ch.  xxii.  18 
("  on  both  sides"),  belongs  to  both  the  nouns,  which  are  placed 
side  by  side,  aawSera)^  (because  permutative).  The  presence 
of  Jehovah  was  to  Jerusalem  what  the  broadest  streams  and 
canals  were  to  other  cities ;  and  into  these  streams  and  canals, 
which  Jerusalem  had  around  it  spiritually  in  Jehovah  Himself, 
no  rowing  vessels  ventured  (2  ?pn,  ingredi).  Luzzatto  renders 
the  word  "  ships  of  roving,"  i.e.  pirate  ships ;  but  this  is  im 
probable,  as  shut,  when  used  as  a  nautical  word,  signifies  to 
row.  Even  a  majestic  tsl,  i.e.  trieris  magna,  could  not  cross  it : 
a  colossal  vessel  of  this  size  would  be  wrecked  in  these  mighty 
and  dangerous  waters.  The  figure  is  the  same  as  that  in  ch. 
xxvi.  1.  In  the  consciousness  of  this  inaccessible  and  impene 
trable  defence,  the  people  of  Jerusalem  gloried  in  their  God, 
who  watched  as  a  shophet  over  Israel's  rights  and  honour,  who 
held  as  mechoqeq  the  commander's  rod,  and  ruled  as  melekh  in 
the  midst  of  Israel ;  so  that  for  every  future  danger  it  was 
already  provided  with  the  most  certain  help. 

Now  indeed  it  was  apparently  very  different  from  this.  It 
was  not  Assyria,  but  Jerusalem,  that  was  like  a  ship  about  to 
be  wrecked ;  but  when  that  which  had  just  been  predicted 
should  be  fulfilled,  Jerusalem,  at  present  so  powerless  and 
sinful,  would  be  entirely  changed.  Vers.  23,  24.  "  Thy  ropes 
hang  loose;  they  do  not  hold  fast  the  support  of  thy  mast;  they 
do  not  hold  the  flag  extended :  then  is  booty  of  plunder  divided  in 
abundance ;  even  lame  men  share  the  prey.  And  not  an  inhabi 
tant  will  say,  I  am  weak :  the  people  settled  there  have  their  sins 
forgiven."  Nearly  every  commentator  (even  Luzzatto)  has 
taken  ver.  23  as  addressed  to  Assyria,  which,  like  a  proud 
vessel  of  war,  would  cross  the  encircling  river  by  which  Jeru 
salem  was  surrounded.  But  Drechsler  has  very  properly 
given  up  this  view.  The  address  itself,  with  the  suffix  ayikh 
(see  at  ch.  i.  26),  points  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  the  reference  to 
this  gives  the  most  appropriate  sense,  whilst  the  contrast 
VOL.  II.  K 


66  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

between  the  now  and  then  closes  the  prophecy  in  the  most 
glorious  manner.  Jerusalem  is  now  a  badly  appointed  ship, 
dashed  about  by  the  storm,  the  sport  of  the  waves.  Its  rigging 
hangs  loose  (Jerome,  laxati  sunf)  ;  it  does  not  hold  the  ken 
torndm  fast,  i.e.  the  support  of  their  mast,  or  cross  beam  with  a 
hole  in  it,  into  which  the  mast  is  slipped  (the  mesodme  of 
Homer,  Od.  xv.  289),  which  is  sure  to  go  to  ruin  along  with 
the  falling  mast,  if  the  ropes  do  not  assist  its  bearing  power 
(malum  sustinentes  thecce  succurrant,  as  Vitruvius  says).  And 
so  the  ropes  of  the  ship  Jerusalem  do  not  keep  the  nes  spread 
out,  i.e.  the  eirio-^fiov  of  the  ship,  whether  we  understand  by  it 
a  flag  or  a  sail,  writh  a  device  worked  upon  it  (see  Winer,  .7?.  W. 
s.  v.  Schiffe).  And  this  is  the  case  with  Jerusalem  now  ;  but 
then  ('dz)  it  will  be  entirely  different.  Asshur  is  wrecked,  and 
Jerusalem  enriches  itself,  without  employing  any  \veapons,  from 
the  wealth  of  the  Assyrian  camp.  It  was  with  a  prediction  of 
this  spoiling  of  Asshur  that  the  prophet  commenced  in  ver.  1 ; 
so  that  the  address  finishes  as  it  began.  But  the  closing  words 
of  the  prophet  are,  that  the  people  of  Jerusalem  are  now  strong 
in  God,  and  are  fiy  $&)  (as  in  Ps.  xxxii.  1),  lifted  up,  taken 
away  from  their  guilt.  A  people  humbled  by  punishment, 
penitent,  and  therefore  pardoned,  would  then  dwell  in  Jeru 
salem.  The  strength  of  Israel,  and  all  its  salvation,  rest  upon 
the  forgiveness  of  its  sins. 


PART   VI. 

FINALE  OF  THE  JUDGMENT  UPON  ALL  THE  WORLD  (MORE 
ESPECIALLY  UPON  EDOM),  AND  REDEMPTION  OF  THE 
PEOPLE  OF  JEHOVAH. 

CHAP,  xxxiv.  xxxv. 

THESE  two  chapters  stand  in  precisely  the  same  relation  to 
ch.  xxviii.-xxxiii.  as  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.  to  ch.  xiii.-xxiii.  In  both 
instances  the  special  prophecies  connected  with  the  history  of 
the  prophet's  own  times  are  followed  by  a  comprehensive  finale 
of  an  apocalyptic  character.  We  feel  that  we  are  carried  en- 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  67 

tirely  away  from  the  stage  of  history.  There  is  no  longer  that 
foreshortening,  by  which  the  prophet's  perspective  was  charac 
terized  before  the  fall  of  Assyria.  The  tangible  shapes  of  the 
historical  present,  by  which  we  have  been  hitherto  surrounded, 
are  now  spiritualized  into  something  perfectly  ideal.  We  are 
transported  directly  into  the  midst  of  the  last  things  ;  and  the 
eschatological  vision  is  less  restricted,  has  greater  mystical 
depth,  belongs  more  to  another  sphere,  and  has  altogether  more 
of  a  New  Testament  character.  The  totally  different  impres 
sion  which  is  thus  made  by  ch.  xxxiv.  xxxv.,  as  compared  with 
ch.  xxviii.-xxxiii.,  must  not  cause  any  misgivings  as  to  the 
authenticity  of  this  closing  prophecy.  The  relation  in  which 
Jeremiah  and  Zephaniah  stand  to  ch.  xxxiv.  and  xxxv.,  is  quite 
sufficient  to  drive  all  doubts  away.  (Read  Caspari's  article, 
"  Jeremiah  a  Witness  to  the  Genuineness  of  Isa.  xxxiv.,  and 
therefore  also  to  the  Genuineness  of  Isa.  xl.-lxvi.,  xiii.-xiv.  23, 
and  xxi.  1-10,"  in  the  Lutherische  Zeitschrift,  1843,  2  ;  and 
Nagelsbach's  Jeremia  und  Babylon,  pp.  107-113,  on  the  rela 
tion  of  Jer.  1.  li.  more  especially  to  Isa.  xxxiv.  xxxv.)  There 
are  many  passages  in  Jeremiah  (viz.  ch.  xxv.  31,  33,  34,  xlvi. 
10,  1.  27,  39,  li.  40)  which  cannot  be  explained  in  any  other 
way  than  on  the  supposition  that  Jeremiah  had  the  prophecy  of 
Isaiah  in  ch.  xxxiv.  before  him.  We  cannot  escape  from  the 
conclusion,  that  just  as  we  find  Jeremiah  introducing  earlier 
prophecies  generally  into  his  cycle  of  prophecies  against  the 
nations,  and,  in  the  addresses  already  mentioned,  borrowing 
from  Amos  and  Nahum,  and  placing  side  by  side  with  a 
passage  from  Amos  (compare  Jer.  xxv.  30  with  Amos  i.  2) 
one  of  a  similar  character,  and  agreeing  with  Isa.  xxxiv..  so  he 
also  had  Isa.  xxxiv.  and  xxxv.  before  him,  and  reproduced  it 
in  the  same  sense  as  he  did  other  and  earlier  models.  It  is 
equally  certain  that  Zeph.  i.  7,  8,  and  ii.  14,  stand  in  a  depen 
dent  relation  to  Isa.  xxxiv.  6, 11 ;  just  as  Zeph.  ii.  15  was  taken 
from  Isa.  xlvii.  8,  and  Zeph.i.  1  fin.  and  iii.  11  from  Isa.  xiii.  3; 
whilst  Zeph.  ii.  14  also  points  back  to  Isa.  xiii.  21,  22.  We 
might,  indeed,  reverse  the  relation,  and  make  Jeremiah  and 
Zephaniah  into  the  originals  in  the  case  of  the  passages  men 
tioned  ;  but  this  is  opposed  to  the  generally  reproductive  and 
secondary  character  of  both  these  prophets,  and  also  to  the 
evident  features  of  the  passages  in  question.  We  might  also 


68  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

follow  Movers,  De  Wette,  and  Hitzig,  who  get  rid  of  the  testi 
mony  of  Isaiah  by  assuming  that  the  passages  resting  upon 
Isa.  xxxiv.,  and  other  disputed  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  are  inter 
polated  ;  but  this  is  opposed  to  the  moral  character  of  all 
biblical  prophecy,  and,  moreover,  it  could  only  apply  to  Jere 
miah,  not  to  Zephaniah.  We  must  in  this  case  "  bring  reason 
into  captivity  to  obedience "  to  the  external  evidence ;  though 
internal  evidence  also  is  not  wanting  to  set  a  seal  upon  these 
external  proofs.  Just  as  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.  are  full  of  the  clearest 
marks  of  Isaiah's  authorship,  so  is  it  also  with  ch.  xxxiv.  xxxv. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  the  marked  contrast  which  we 
find  between  these  two  closing  prophecies  and  the  historical 
prophecies  of  the  Assyrian  age.  These  two  closing  prophecies 
were  appended  to  ch.  xiii.-xxiii.  and  xxviii.-xxxiii.  at  the  time 
when  Isaiah  revised  the  complete  collection.  They  belong  to 
the  latest  revelations  received  by  the  prophet,  to  the  last  steps 
by  which  he  reached  that  ideal  height  at  which  he  soars  in 
ch.  xl.-lxvi.,  and  from  which  he  never  descends  again  to  the 
stage  of  passing  history,  which  lay  so  far  beneath.  After 
the  fall  of  Assyria,  and  when  darkness  began  to  gather  on  the 
horizon  again,  Isaiah  broke  completely  away  from  his  own 
times.  "  The  end  of  all  things "  became  more  and  more  his 
own  true  home.  The  obscure  foreground  of  his  prophecies  is  no 
longer  Asshur,  which  he  has  done  with  now  so  far  as  prophecy 
is  concerned,  but  Babel  (Babylon).  And  the  bright  centre  of 
his  prophecies  is  not  the  fall  of  Asshur  (for  this  was  already 
prophetically  a  thing  of  the  past,  which  had  not  been  followed 
by  complete  salvation),  but  deliverance  from  Babylon.  And 
the  bright  noon-day  background  of  his  prophecies  is  no  longer 
the  realized  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  prophecy, — realized,  that 
is  to  say,  in  the  one  person  of  the  Messiah,  whose  form  had 
lost  the  sharp  outlines  of  ch.  vii.-xii.  even  in  the  prophecies 
of  Hezekiah's  time, — but  the  parousia  of  Jehovah,  which  all 
flesh  would  see.  It  was  the  revelation  of  the  mystery  of  the 
incarnation  of  God,  for  which  all  this  was  intended  to  prepare 
the  way.  And  there  was  no  other  way  in  which  that  could  be 
done,  than  by  completing  the  perfect  portrait  of  the  Messiah 
in  the  light  of  the  ultimate  future,  so  that  both  the  factors  in 
the  prophecy  might  be  assimilated.  The  spirit  of  Isaiah,  more 
than  that  of  any  other  prophet,  was  the  laboratory  of  this  great 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  1-3.  69 

process  in  the  history  of  revelation.  The  prophetic  cycles  in 
ch.  xxiv.— xxvii.  and  xxxiv.  xxxv.  stand  in  the  relation  of  pre 
ludes  to  it.  In  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  the  process  of  assimilation  is  fully 
at  work,  and  there  is  consequently  no  book  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment  which  has  gone  so  thoroughly  into  New  Testament 
depths,  as  this  second  part  of  the  collection  of  Isaiah's  pro 
phecies,  which  commences  with  a  prediction  of  the  parousia  of 
Jehovah,  and  ends  with  the  creation  of  the  new  heaven  and 
new  earth.  Ch.  xxxiv.  and  xxxv.  are,  as  it  were,  the  first  pre 
paratory  chords.  Edom  here  is  what  Moab  was  in  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii. 
By  the  side  of  Babylon,  the  empire  of  the  world,  whose  policy 
of  conquest  led  to  its  enslaving  Israel,  it  represents  the  world 
in  its  hostility  to  Israel  as  the  people  of  Jehovah.  For  Edom 
was  Israel's  brother-nation,  and  hated  Israel  as  the  chosen 
people.  In  this  its  unbrotherly,  hereditary  hatred,  it  repre 
sented  the  sum-total  of  all  the  enemies  and  persecutors  of  the 
church  of  Jehovah.  The  special  side-piece  to  ch.  xxxiv.  is 
ch.  Ixiii.  1-6. 

What  the  prophet  here  foretells  relates  to  all  nations,  and 
to  every  individual  within  them,  in  their  relation  to  the  con 
gregation  of  Jehovah.  He  therefore  commences  with  the 
appeal  in  vers.  1-3  :  "  Come  near,,  ye  peoples,  to  hear ;  and  ye 
nations,  attend.  Let  the  earth  hear,  and  that  which  fills  it,  the 
world,  and  everything  that  springs  from  it.  For  the  indignation 
of  Jehovah  will  fall  upon  all  nations,  and  burning  wrath  upon 
all  their  host ;  He  has  laid  the  ban  upon  them,  delivered  them  to 
the  slaughter.  And  their  slain  are  cast  away,  and  their  corpses — 
their  stench  will  arise,  and  mountains  melt  witli  their  blood." 
The  summons  does  not  invite  them  to  look  upon  the  completion 
of  the  judgment,  but  to  hear  the  prophecy  of  the  future  judg 
ment  ;  and  it  is  issued  to  everything  on  the  earth,  because  it 
would  all  have  to  endure  the  judgment  upon  the  nations  (see 
at  ch.  v.  25,  xiii.  10).  The  expression  qetseph  layehdvdh  im 
plies  that  Jehovah  was  ready  to  execute  His  wrath  (compare 
yom  layehovdh  in  ver.  8  and  ch.  ii.  12).  The  nations  that  are 
hostile  to  Jehovah  are  slaughtered,  the  bodies  remain  unburied, 
and  the  streams  of  blood  loosen  the  firm  masses  of  the  moun 
tains,  so  that  they  melt  away.  On  the  stench  of  the  corpses, 
compare  Ezek.  xxxix.  11.  Even  if  chdsam,  in  this  instance, 
does  not  mean  "  to  take  away  the  breath  with  the  stench,"  there 


70  THE  PKOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

is  no  doubt  that  Ezekiel  had  this  prophecy  of  Isaiah  in  his 
mind,  when  prophesying  of  the  destruction  of  Gog  and  Magog 
(Ezek.  xxxix.). 

The  judgment  foretold  by  Isaiah  also  belongs  to  the  last 
things ;  for  it  takes  place  in  connection  with  the  simultaneous 
destruction  of  the  present  heaven  and  the  present  earth.  Ver.  4. 
u  And  all  the  host  of  the  heavens  moulder  away,  and  the  heavens 
are  rolled  up  like  a  scroll,  and  all  their  host  withers  as  a  leaf 
withers  away  from  the  vine,  and  like  withered  leaves  from  the 
fig-tree"  Ndmaq,  to  be  dissolved  into  powdered  mother  (ch. 
iii.  24,  v.  24)  ;  ndgol  (for  ndgal,  like  ndzdl  in  ch.  Ixiii.  19,  Ixiv.  2, 
and  ndrots  in  Eccles.  xii.  6),  to  be  rolled  up, — a  term  applied 
to  the  cylindrical  book-scroll.  The  heaven,  that  is  to  say,  the 
present  system  of  the  universe,  breaks  up  into  atoms,  and  is 
rolled  up  like  a  book  that  has  been  read  through ;  and  the  stars 
fall  down  as  a  withered  leaf  falls  from  a  vine,  when  it  is  moved 
by  even  the  lightest  breeze,  or  like  the  withered  leaves  shaken 
from  the  fig-tree.  The  expressions  are  so  strong,  that  they 
cannot  be  understood  in  any  other  sense  than  as  relating  to  the 
end  of  the  world  (ch.  Ixv.  17,  Ixvi.  22  ;  compare  Matt.  xxiv. 
29).  It  is  not  sufficient  to  say  that  "  the  stars  appear  to  fall 
to  the  earth,"  though  even  Yitringa  gives  this  explanation. 

When  we  look,  however,  at  the  following  ki  (for),  it  un 
doubtedly  appears  strange  that  the  prophet  should  foretell  the 
passing  away  of  the  heavens,  simply  because  Jehovah  judges 
Edom.  But  Edom  stands  here  as  the  representative  of  all 
powers  that  are  hostile  to  the  church  of  God  as  such,  and 
therefore  expresses  an  idea  of  the  deepest  and  widest  cosmical 
signification  (as  ch.  xxiv.  21  clearly  shows).  And  it  is  not 
only  a  doctrine  of  Isaiah  himself,  but  a  biblical  doctrine  uni 
versally,  that  God  will  destroy  the  present  world  as  soon  as  the 
measure  of  the  sin  which  culminates  in  unbelief,  and  in  the 
persecution  of  the  congregation  of  the  faithful,  shall  be  really 
full. 

If  we  bear  this  in  mind,  we  shall  not  be  surprised  that  the 
prophet  gives  the  following  reason  for  the  passing  away  of  the 
present  heavens.  Vers.  5-7.  u  For  my  sword  has  become 
intoxicated  in  the  heaven;  behold,  it  comes  down  upon  Edom, 
and  upon  the  people  of  my  ban  to  judgment.  The  sword  of 
Jehovah  Jills  itself  with  blood,  is  fattened  with  fat,  with  blood 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  5-7.  71 

of  lambs  and  he-goats,  with  kidney-fat  of  rams  /  for  Jehovah  has 
a  sacrifice  in  Bozrah,  and  a  great  slaughter  in  the  land  of  Edom. 
And  buf aloes  fall  with  them,  and  bullocks  together  with  bulls; 
and  their  land  becomes  intoxicated  with  blood,  and  their  dust 
fattened  with  fat."  Just  as  in  ch.  Ixiii.  Jehovah  is  represented 
as  a  treader  of  the  wine-press,  and  the  nations  as  the  grapes  ; 
so  here  He  is  represented  as  offering  sacrifice,  and  the  nations 
as  the  animals  offered  (zebhach:  cf.  Zeph.  i.  7  ;  Jer.  xlvi.  10; 
Ezek.  xxxix.  17  sqq. :  all  three  passages  founded  upon  this). 
Jehovah  does  not  appear  here  in  person  as  judge,  as  He  does 
there,  but  His  sword  appears ;  just  as  in  Gen.  iii.  24,  the 
"  sword  which  turned  every  way"  is  mentioned  as  an  inde 
pendent  power  standing  by  the  side  of  the  cherub.  The  sword 
is  His  executioner,  which  has  no  sooner  drunk  deeply  of  wrath 
in  heaven,  i.e.  in  the  immediate  sphere  of  the  Deity  (rivvethdh9 
an  intensive  form  of  the  kal,  like  pitteach,  ch.  xlviii.  8 ;  Ewald, 
§  120,  d),  than  it  comes  down  in  wild  intoxication  upon 
Edom,  the  people  of  the  ban  of  Jehovah,  i.e.  the  people  upon 
whom  He  has  laid  the  ban,  and  there,  as  His  instrument  of 
punishment,  fills  itself  with  blood,  and  fattens  itself  with  fat. 
njB^in  is  the  hothpaal  =  FBtpNjn,  with  the  n  of  the  preformative 
syllable  assimilated  (compare  *3tfl  in  ch.  i.  16,  and  HEHK  in  chu 
xiv.  14).  The  penultimate  has  the  tone,  the  ndh  being  treated 
as  in  the  plural  forms  of  the  future.  The  dropping  of  the 
dagesh  in  the  V  is  connected  with  this.  The  reading  ^ipriDj  jn 
ver.  6,  is  an  error  that  has  been  handed  down  in  modern  copies 
(in  opposition  to  both  codices  and  ancient  editions)  ;  for  2^n 
(primary  form,  chilb)  is  the  only  form  met  with  in  the  Old 
Testament.  The  lambs,  he-goats,  and  rams,  represent  the 
Edomitish  nation,  which  is  compared  to  these  smaller  sacrificial 
animals.  Edom  and  Bozrah  are  also  placed  side  by  side  in  ch. 
Ixiii.  1.  The  latter  was  one  of  the  chief  cities  of  the  Edomites 
(Gen.  xxxvi.  33  ;  Amos  i.  12  ;  Jer.  xlix.  13,  22), — not  the 
Bozrah  in  Auranitis  (Haurdn),  however,  which  is  well  known 
in  church  history,  but  Bozrah  in  the  mountains  of  Edom, 
upon  the  same  site  as  the  village  of  Buzaire  (i.e.  Minor 
Bozrah),  which  is  still  surrounded  by  its  ruins.  In  con 
trast  with  the  three  names  of  the  smaller  animals  in  ver.  6, 
the  three  names  of  oxen  in  ver.  7  represent  the  lords  of  Edom. 
They  also  will  fall,  smitten  by  the  sword  (i/dredu :  cf .  Jer.  1.  27, 


72  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

II.  40;  also  Jer.  xlviii.  15).  The  feast  of  the  sword  is  so  abun 
dant,  that  even  the  earth  and  the  dust  of  the  land  of  Edom  are 
satiated  with  blood  and  fat. 

Thus  does  Jehovah  avenge  His  church  upon  Edom.  Yers. 
8-  10.  "  For  Jehovah  hath  a  day  of  vengeance,  a  year  of  recom 
pense,  to  contend  for  Zion.  And  the  brooks  of  Edom  are  turned 
into  pitch,  and  its  dust  into  brimstone,  and  its  land  becomes 
burning  pitch.  Day  and  night  it  is  not  quenched ;  the  smoke  of 
Edcm  goes  up  for  ever :  it  lies  waste  from  generation  to  genera 
tion  ;  no  one  passes  through  it  for  ever  and  ever"  The  one 
expression,  "  to  contend  for  Zion,"  is  like  a  flash  of  lightning, 
throwing  light  upon  the  obscurity  of  prophecy,  both  backwards 
and  forwards.  A  day  and  a  year  of  judgment  upon  Edom 
(compare  ch.  Ixi.  2,  Ixiii.  4)  would  do  justice  to  Zion  against  its 
accusers  and  persecutors  (rlbh,  vindicare,  as  in  ch.  li.  22).  The 
everlasting  punishment  which  would  fall  upon  it  is  depicted  in 
figures  and  colours,  suggested  by  the  proximity  of  Edom  to  the 
Dead  Sea,  and  the  volcanic  character  of  this  mountainous 
country.  The  unquenchable  fire  (for  which  compare  ch.  Ixvi. 
24),  and  the  eternally  ascending  smoke  (cf.  Rev.  xix.  3),  prove 
that  the  end  of  all  things  is  referred  to.  The  prophet  meant 
primarily,  no  doubt,  that  the  punishment  announced  would 
fall  upon  the  land  of  Edom,  and  within  its  geographical  boun 
daries  ;  but  this  particular  punishment  represented  the  punish 
ment  of  all  nations,  and  all  men  who  were  Edomitish  in  their 
feelings  and  conduct  towards  the  congregation  of  Jehovah. 

The  land  of  Edom,  in  this  geographical  and  also  emble 
matical  sense,  would  become  a  wilderness  ;  the  kingdom  of 
Edom  would  be  for  ever  destroyed.  Vers.  11,  12.  "And 
pelican  and  hedgehog  take  possession  of  it,  and  eared-owl  and 
raven  dwell  there ;  and  he  stretches  over  it  the  measure  of  Tohu 
and  the  level  of  Bohu.  Its  nobles — there  is  no  longer  a 
monarchy  which  they  elected ;  and  all  its  princes  come  to 
nought"  The  description  of  the  ruin,  which  commences  in 
ver.  Ha  with  a  list  of  animals  that  frequent  marshy  and  soli- 
tiry  regions,  is  similar  to  the  one  in  ch.  xiii.  20-22,  xiv.  23 
(compare  Zeph.  ii.  14,  which  is  founded  upon  this).  Isaiah's 
was  the  original  of  all  such  pictures  of  ruin  which  we  meet 
with  in  the  later  prophets.  The  qippod  is  the  hedgehog, 
although  we  find  it  here  in  the  company  of  birds  (from  qdphad, 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  11,  12.  73 

to  draw  one's  self  together,  to  roll  up;  see  ch.  xiv.  23).  J"ixp  is 
written  here  with  a  double  kametz,  as  well  as  in  Zepli.  ii.  14, 
according  to  codd.  and  Kimchi,  IV. B.  (Targ.  qdth,  elsewhere 
qdq;  Saad.  and  Abulwalid,  qiiq:  see  at  Ps.  cii.  7).  Accord 
ing  to  well-established  tradition,  it  is  the  long-necked  pelican, 
which  lives  upon  fish  (the  name  is  derived  either  from  Nip,  to 
vomit,  or,  as  the  construct  is  n^ip,  from  a  word  riNjj,  formed  in 
imitation  of  the  animal's  cry).  Yanshuph  is  rendered  by  the 
Targum  qippopliln  (Syr.  kafufo),  i.e.  eared-owls,  which  are  fre 
quently  mentioned  in  the  Talmud  as  birds  of  ill  omen  (Rashi,  or 
Berachoth  51b,  chouette).  As  the  parallel  to  qdv,  we  have  ^?tf 
(stones)  here  instead  of  fvptpo,  the  level,  in  ch.  xxviii.  17.  It  is 
used  in  the  same  sense,  however, — namely,  to  signify  the  weight 
used  in  the  plumb  or  level,  which  is  suspended  by  a  line.  The 
level  and  the  measure  are  commonly  employed  for  the  purpose 
of  building  up  ;  but  here  Jehovah  is  represented  as  using  these 
for  the  purpose  of  pulling  down  (a  figure  met  with  even  before 
the  time  of  Isaiah  :  vid.  Amos  vii.  7-9,  cf.  2  Kings  xxi.  13, 
Lam.  ii.  8),  inasmuch  as  He  carries  out  this  negative  reverse  of 
building  with  the  same  rigorous  exactness  as  that  with  which 
a  builder  carries  out  his  well-considered  plan,  and  throws 
Edom  back  into  a  state  of  desolation  and  desert,  resembling 
the  disordered  and  shapeless  chaos  of  creation  (compare  Jer. 
iv.  23,  where  tdlm  vdbhohu  represents,  as  it  does  here,  the  state 
into  which  a  land  is  reduced  by  fire),  inn  has  no  dagesh  lene ; 
and  this  is  one  of  the  three  passages  in  which  the  opening 
mute  is  without  a  dagesh,  although  the  word  not  only  follows, 
but  is  closely  connected  with,  one  which  has  a  soft  consonant  as 
its  final  letter  (the  others  are  Ps.  Ixviii.  18  and  Ezek.  xxiii.  42). 
Thus  the  primeval  kingdom  with  its  early  monarchy,  which  so 
long  preceded  that  of  Israel,  is  brought  to  an  end  (Gen.  xxxvi. 
31).  5*jh  stands  at  the  head  as  a  kind  of  protasis.  Edom  was 
an  elective  monarchy  ;  the  hereditary  nobility  electing  the  new 
king.  But  this  would  be  done  no  more.  The  electoral  princes 
of  Edom  would  come  to  nothing.  Not  a  trace  would  be  left 
of  all  that  had  built  up  the  glory  of  Edom. 

The  allusion  to  the  monarchy  and  the  lofty  electoral  dignity 
leads  the  prophet  on  to  the  palaces  and  castles  of  the  land. 
Starting  with  these,  he  carries  out  the  picture  of  the  ruins  in 
vers.  13  -15.  "  And  the  palaces  of  Edom  break  out  into  thorns, 


74  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

nettles  and  thistles  in  its  castles ;  and  it  becomes  the  abode  of 
wild  dogs,  pasture  for  ostriches.  And  martens  meet  with  jackals, 
and  a  wood-devil  runs  upon  its  fellow ;  yea,  Lilith  dwells  there, 
and  finds  rest  for  itself.  There  the  arrow-snake  makes  its  nest, 
and  breeds  and  lays  eggs,  and  broods  in  the  shadow  there ;  yea, 
there  vultures  gather  together  one  to  another."  The  feminine 
suffixes  refer  to  Edom,  as  they  did  in  the  previous  instance,  as 
Dft&rna  or  Di^tf  pK.  On  the  tannlm,  tsiyylm,  and  'iyylm,  see  at 
ch.  xiii.  21,  22.  It  is  doubtful  whether  chdtslr  here  corre 
sponds  to  the  Arabic  word  for  an  enclosure  (=  "^n),  as  Gesenius, 
Hitzig,  and  others  suppose,  as  elsewhere  to  the  Arabic  for 
green,  a  green  field,  or  garden  vegetable.  We  take  it  in 
the  latter  sense,  viz.  a  grassy  place,  such  as  was  frequented 
by  ostriches,  which  live  upon  plants  and  fruits.  The  word 
tsiyyim  (steppe  animals)  we  have  rendered  "  martens,"  as  the 
context  requires  a  particular  species  of  animals  to  be  named. 
This  is  the  interpretation  given  by  Rashi  (in  loc.)  and  Kimchi 
in  Jer.  1.  39  to  the  Targum  word  tamvdn.  We  do  not  render 
'iyylm  "wild  cats"  (chattullri),  but  "jackals,"  after  the  Arabic. 
fcOf  with  ^  we  take  in  the  sense  of  rnjj  (as  in  Ex.  v.  3).  Llllth 
(Syr.  and  Zab.  lelitho),  lit.  the  creature  of  the  night,  was  a 
female  demon  (sheddh)  of  the  popular  mythology ;  according  to 
the  legends,  it  was  a  malicious  fairy  that  was  especially  hurtful 
to  children,  like  some  of  the  fairies  of  our  own  fairy  tales. 
There  is  life  in  Edom  still ;  but  what  a  caricature  of  that 
which  once  was  there !  In  the  very  spot  where  the  princes  of 
Edom  used  to  proclaim  the  new  king,  satyrs  now  invite  one 
another  to  dance  (ch.  xiii.  21) ;  and  where  kings  and  princes 
once  slept  in  their  palaces  and  country  houses,  the  llllth,  which 
is  most  at  home  in  horrible  places,  finds,  as  though  after  a 
prolonged  search,  the  most  convenient  and  most  comfortable  rest 
ing-place.  Demons  and  serpents  are  not  very  far  distant  from 
one  another.  The  prophet  therefore  proceeds  in  ver.  15  to  the 
arrow-snake,  or  springing-snake  (Arabic  qiffdze,  from  qdphaz, 
related  to  qdphats,  Song  of  Sol.  ii.  8,  to  prepare  for  springing, 
or  to  spring  ;  a  different  word  from  qippod,  which  has  the  same 
root).  This  builds  its  nest  in  the  ruins  ;  there  it  breeds  (millet, 
to  let  its  eggs  slide  out)  and  lays  eggs  (bdqa,  to  split,  i.e.  to 
bring  forth) ;  and  then  it  broods  in  the  shade  (ddgar  is  the 
Targum  word  in  Job  xxxix.  14  for  chimmem  (ithpael  in  Lam. 


CHAP.  XXXIV.  16,  17.  75 

i.  20  for  "iG"jon),  and  is  also  used  in  the  rabbinical  writings  for 
fovere,  as  Jerome  renders  it  here).  The  literal  sense  of  the 
word  is  probably  to  keep  the  eggs  together  (Targum,  Jer.  xvii. 
11,  pJD  t?33»,  LXX.  o-vvrjycvyev),  since  W  (syn.  1BH)  signifies 
"  to  collect."  Rashi  has  therefore  explained  it  in  both  passages 
as  meaning  glousser,  to  cluck,  the  noise  by  which  a  fowl  calls 
its  brood  together.  The  dayydJi  is  the  vulture.  These  fowls 
and  most  gregarious  birds  of  prey  also  collect  together  there. 

Whenever  any  one  compared  the  prophecy  with  the  fulfil 
ment,  they  would  be  found  to  coincide.  Yers.  16,  17.  "Search 
in  the  book  of  Jehovah,  and  read!  Not  one  of  the  creatures 
fails,  not  one  misses  the  other :  for  my  mouth — it  has  commanded 
it;  and  His  breath — it  has  brought  them  together.  And  He 
has  cast  the  lot  for  them,  and  His  hand  has  assigned  it  (this  land) 
to  them  by  measure :  they  will  possess  it  for  ever ;  to  generation 
and  generation  they  will  dwell  therein"  The  phrase  7J?  27)3  is 
used  for  entering  in  a  book,  inasmuch  as  what  is  written  there 
is  placed  upon  the  page  ;  and  ?V£  Kn<!J  for  searching  in  a  book, 
inasmuch  as  a  person  leans  over  the  book  when  searching  in  it, 
and  gets  the  object  of  his  search  cut  of  it.  The  prophet  applied 
the  title  "  The  Book  of  Jehovah  "  to  his  collection  of  the  pro 
phecies  with  which  Jehovah  had  inspired  him,  and  which  He 
had  commanded  him  to  write  down.  Whoever  lived  to  see  the 
time  when  the  judgment  should  come  upon  Edom,  would  have 
only  to  look  inquiringly  into  this  holy  scripture ;  and  if  he  com 
pared  what  was  predicted  there  with  what  had  been  actually 
realized,  he  would  find  the  most  exact  agreement  between  them. 
The  creatures  named,  which  loved  to  frequent  the  marshes  and 
solitary  places,  and  ruins,  would  all  really  make  their  homes  in 
what  had  once  been  Edom.  But  the  satyrs  and  the  llllth, 
which  were  only  the  offspring  of  the  popular  belief — what  of 
them  1  They,  too,  would  be  there  ;  for  in  the  sense  intended 
by  the  prophet  they  were  actual  devils,  which  he  merely  calls 
by  well-known  popular  names  to  produce  a  spectral  impression. 
Edom  would  really  become  a  rendezvous  for  all  the  animals 
mentioned,  as  well  as  for  such  unearthly  spirits  as  those  which 
he  refers  to  here.  The  prophet,  or  rather  Jehovah,  whose 
temporary  organ  he  was,  still  further  confirms  this  by  saying, 
"  My  mouth  hath  commanded  it,  and  His  breath  has  brought 
them  (all  these  creatures)  together."  As  the  first  creating 


76  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

word  proceeded  from  the  mouth  of  Jehovah,  so  also  does  the 
word  of  prophecy,  which  resembles  such  a  word ;  and  the 
breath  of  the  mouth  of  Jehovah,  i.e.  His  Spirit,  is  the  power 
which  accomplishes  the  fiat  of  prophecy,  as  it  did  that  of  crea 
tion,  and  moulds  all  creatures  and  their  history  according  to 
the  will  and  counsel  of  God  (Ps.  xxxiii.  6).  In  the  second 
part  of  ver.  166  the  prophet  is  speaking  of  Jehovah ;  whereas 
in  the  first  Jehovah  speaks  through  him, — a  variation  which 
vanishes  indeed  if  we  read  VS  (Olshausen  on  Job  ix.  20),  or, 
what  would  be  better,  ^rva,  but  which  may  be  sustained  by  a 
hundred  cases  of  a  similar  kind.  There  is  a  shadow,  as  it 
were,  of  this  change  in  the  Q|v,  which  alternates  with  jnj  in 
connection  with  the  animals  named.  The  suffix  of  chilFqattdh 
(without  mappikj  as  in  1  Sam.  i.  6)  refers  to  the  land  of  Edom. 
Edom  is,  as  it  were,  given  up  by  a  divine  lot,  and  measured  off 
with  a  divine  measure,  to  be  for  ever  the  horrible  abode  of 
beasts  and  demons  such  as  those  described.  A  prelude  of  the 
fulfilment  of  this  swept  over  the  mountainous  land  of  Edom 
immediately  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (see  Kohler  on 
Mai.  i.  2-5)  ;  and  it  has  never  risen  to  its  previous  state  of  cul 
tivation  again.  It  swarms  with  snakes,  and  the  desolate  moun 
tain  heights  and  barren  table-lands  are  only  inhabited  by  wild 
crows  and  eagles,  and  great  flocks  of  birds.  But  the  ultimate 
fulfilment,  to  which  the  appeal  in  ver.  16  refers,  is  still  in  the 
future,  and  will  eventually  fall  upon  the  abodes  of  those  who 
spiritually  belong  to  that  circle  of  hostility  to  Jehovah  (Jesus) 
and  His  church,  of  which  ancient  Edom  was  merely  the  centre 
fixed  by  the  prophet. 

Edom  falls,  never  to  rise  again.  Its  land  is  turned  into  a 
horrible  wilderness.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  wilderness 
through  which  the  redeemed  Israel  returns,  is  changed  into  a 
flowery  field.  Ch.  xxxv.  1,  2.  "  Gladness  Jills  the  desert  and 
the  heath ;  and  the  steppe  rejoices,  and  flowers  like  the  crocus.  It 
flowers  abundantly,  and  rejoices ;  yea,  rejoicing  and  singing :  the 
glory  of  Lebanon  is  given  to  it,  the  splendour  of  Carmel  and 
the  plain  of  Sharon ;  they  ivill  see  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  the 
splendour  of  our  God."  "B"TO  DV^b"  (to  be  accentuated  with 
tiphchah  munach,  not  with  mercha  tiphchah)  has  been  correctly 
explained  by  Aben-Ezra.  The  orignal  Nun  has  been  assimilated 
to  the  following  Mem,  just  as  pidyOn  in  Num.  iii.  49  is  after- 


CHAP.  XXXV.  1,  2.  77 

wards  written  pidyom  (Evvald,  §  91,  b).  The  explanation  given 
by  Rashi,  Gesenius,  and  others  (Icetabuntur  liis),  is  unten 
able,  if  only  because  sits  (sis)  cannot  be  construed  with  the 
accusative  of  the  object  (see  at  ch.  viii.  6)  ;  and  to  get  rid  of 
the  form  by  correction,  as  Olshausen  proposes,  is  all  the  more 
objectionable,  because  "  the  old  full  plural  in  un  is  very 
frequently  met  with  before  Mem"  (Bottcher),  in  which  case  it 
may  have  been  pronounced  as  it  is  written  here.1  According 
to  the  Targum  on  Song  of  Sol.  ii.  1  (also  Saad.,  Abulw.), 
the  chabliatstseleth  is  the  narcissus ;  whilst  the  Targum  on  the 
passage  before  us  leaves  it  indefinite — sicut  lilia.  The  name  (a 
derivative  of  bdtsal)  points  to  a  bulbous  plant,  probably  the 
crocus  and  primrose,  which  were  classed  together.2  The  sandy 
steppe  would  become  like  a  lovely  variegated  plain  covered  with 
meadow  flowers.3  On  gllath,  see  at  ch.  xxxiii.  6  (cf.  ch.  Ixv.  18)  : 
the  infiu.  noun  takes  the  place  of  an  inf.  abs.,  which  expresses 
the  abstract  verbal  idea,  though  in  a  more  rigid  manner ;  'aph 
(like  gam  in  Gen.  xxxi.  15,  xlvi.  4)  is  an  exponent  of  the 
increased  emphasis  already  implied  in  the  gerunds  that  come 
after.  So  joyful  and  so  gloriously  adorned  will  the  barren 
desert,  which  has  been  hitherto  so  mournful,  become,  on  ac 
count  of  the  great  things  that  are  in  store  for  it.  Lebanon, 
Carmel,  and  Sharon  have,  as  it  were,  shared  their  splendour 
with  the  desert,  that  all  might  be  clothed  alike  in  festal  dress, 
when  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  which  surpasses  everything  else  in 

1  Bbttcher  calls  urn  the  oldest  primitive  form  of  the  plural ;  but  it  is 
only  a  strengthening  of  un  ;  cf .  tannlm  =  tannin,  Hanameel  =  Hananeel, 
and  such  Sept.  forms  as  Gesem,  Madiam,  etc.  (see  Hitzig  on  Jer.  xxxii.  7). 
Wetzstein  told  me  of  a  Bedouin  tribe,  in  whose  dialect  the  third  pers. 
prset.  regularly  ended  in  m,  e.g.  akalum  (they  have  eaten). 

2  The  crocus  and  the  primrose  (Nn^VlpPI  in  Syriac)  may  really  be  easily 
confounded,  but  not  the  narcissus  and  primrose,  which  have  nothing  in 
common  except  that  they  are  bulbous  plants,  like  most  of  the  flowers  of 
the  East,  which  shoot  up  rapidly  in  the  spring,  as  soon  as  the  winter  rains 
are  over.     But  there  are  other  colchicacese  beside  our  colchicum  autumnale, 
which  flowers  before  the  leaves  appear  and  is  therefore  called  Jilius  ante 
patrem  (e.g.  the  eastern  colchicum  variegatum). 

8  Layard,  in  his  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  describes  in  several  places  the 
enchantingly  beautiful  and  spring-like  variation  of  colours  which  occurs 
in  the  Mesopotamian  "  desert ; "  though  what  the  prophet  had  in  his  mind 
was  not  the  real  midbar,  or  desert  of  pasture  land,  but,  as  the  words  isiydh 
and  'arc.bhdh  show,  the  utterly  barren  sandy  desert. 


78  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

its  splendour,  should  appear  ;  that  glory  which  they  would  not 
only  be  privileged  to  behold,  but  of  which  they  would  be 
honoured  to  be  the  actual  scene. 

The  prophet  now  exclaims  to  the  afflicted  church,  in  lan 
guage  of  unmixed  consolation,  that  Jehovah  is  coming.  Vers. 
3,  4.  "  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and  make  the  trembling 
knees  strong !  Say  to  those  of  a  terrified  heart.  Be  strong ! 
Pear  ye  not !  Behold,  your  God  will  come  for  vengeance,  for  a 
divine  retribution :  He  will  come,  and  bring  you  salvation" 
Those  who  have  become  weak  in  faith,  hopeless  and  despairing, 
are  to  cheer  up;  and  the  stronger  are  to  tell  such  of  their 
brethren  as  are  perplexed  and  timid,  to  be  comforted  now  :  for 
Jehovah  is  coming  ndqdm  (i.e.  as  vengeance),  and  gemul  'Elohlm 
(i.e.  as  retribution,  such  as  God  the  highly  exalted  and  Almighty 
Judge  inflicts;  the  expression  is  similar  to  that  in  ch.  xxx.  27, 
xiii.  9,  cf.  xl.  10,  but  a  bolder  one ;  the  words  in  apposition 
stand  as  abbreviations  of  final  clauses).  The  infliction  of 
punishment  is  the  immediate  object  of  His  coming,  but  the 
ultimate  object  is  the  salvation  of  His  people  (B^r^  a  con" 
tracted  future  form,  which  is  generally  confined  to  the  aorist). 
Vers.  5-7.  "  Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  will  be  opened,  and  the 
ears  of  the  deaf  unstopped.  Then  will  the  lame  man  leap  as  the 
stag,  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  man  shout ;  for  waters  break 
out  in  the  desert,  and  brooks  in  the  steppe.  And  the  mirage 
becomes  a  fish-pond,  and  the  thirsty  ground  gushing  water-springs  ; 
in  the  place  of  jackals,  where  it  lies,  there  springs  up  grass  with 
reeds  and  rushes."  The  bodily  defects  mentioned  here  there  is 
no  reason  for  regarding  as  figurative  representations  of  spiritual 
defects.  The  healing  of  bodily  defects,  however,  is  merely 
the  outer  side  of  what  is  actually  effected  by  the  coming  of 
Jehovah  (for  the  other  side,  comp.  ch.  xxxii.  3,  4).  And  so, 
also,  the  change  of  the  desert  into  a  field  abounding  with  water 
is  not  a  mere  poetical  ornament ;  for  in  the  last  times,  the  era 
of  redemption,  nature  itself  will  really  share  in  the  doxa  which 
proceeds  from  the  manifested  God  to  His  redeemed.  Shdrdbh 
(Arab,  sardb)  is  essentially  the  same  thing  as  that  which  we 
call  in  the  western  languages  the  mirage,  or  Fata  morgana ;  not 
indeed  every  variety  of  this  phenomenon  of  the  refraction  of 
light,  through  strata  of  air  of  varying  density  lying  one  above 
another,  but  more  especially  that  appearance  of  water,  which  is 


CHAP.  XXXV.  8-10.  7? 

produced  as  if  by  magic  in  the  dry,  sandy  desert1  (literally 
perhaps  the  "desert  shine,"  just  as  we  speak  of  the  "Alpine 
glow;"  seech,  xlix.  10).  The  antithesis  to  this  is  \fyam  (Chald. 
'agma,  Syr.  egmo,  Ar.  ag'am),  a  fish-pond  (as  in  ch.  xli.  18, 
different  from  'dgdm  in  ch.  xix.  10).  In  the  arid  sandy  desert, 
where  the  jackal  once  had  her  lair  and  suckled  her  young  (this 
is,  according  to  Lam.  iv.  3,  the  true  explanation  of  the  permu- 
tative  ribhtsdh,  for  which  ribhtsdm  would  be  in  some  respects 
more  suitable),  grass  springs  up  even  into  reeds  and  rushes ;  so 
that,  as  ch.  xliii.  20  affirms,  the  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  praise 
Jehovah. 

In  the  midst  of  such  miracles,  by  which  all  nature  is 
glorified,  the  people  of  Jehovah  are  redeemed,  and  led  home  to 
Zion.  Yers.  8-10.  "A nd  a  highway  rises  there,  and  a  road, 
and  it  ivill  be  called  the  Holy  Road;  no  unclean  man  will  pass 
along  it,  as  it  is  appointed  for  them  :  whoever  walks  the  road, 
even  simple  ones  do  not  go  astray.  There  will  be  no  lion  there, 
and  the  most  ravenous  beast  of  prey  will  not  approach  it,  will  not 
be  met  with  there ;  and  redeemed  ones  walk.  And  the  ransomed 
of  Jehovah  will  return,  and  come  to  Zion  with  shouting,  and  ever 
lasting  joy  upon  their  head :  they  lay  hold  of  gladness  and  joy, 
and  sorrow  and  sighing  flee  away."  Not  only  unclean  persons 
from  among  the  heathen,  but  even  unclean  persons  belonging 
to  Israel  itself,  will  never  pass  along  that  holy  road  ;  none  but 
the  church  purified  and  sanctified  through  sufferings,  and  those 
connected  with  it.  to?  fcttn,  to  them,  and  to  them  alone,  does 
this  road  belong,  which  Jehovah  has  made  and  secured,  and 
which  so  readily  strikes  the  eye,  that  even  an  idiot  could  not 
miss  it ;  whilst  it  lies  so  high,  that  no  beast  of  prey,  however 
powerful  (jperlts  chayyoth,  a  superlative  verbal  noun :  Ewald, 
§  313,  c),  could  possibly  leap  up  to  it :  not  one  is  ever  encoun 
tered  by  the  pilgrim  there.  The  pilgrims  are  those  whom 
Jehovah  has  redeemed  and  delivered,  or  set  free  from  captivity 
and  affliction  (?M,  fei,  related  to  $>n,  solvere ;  rttB,  "t&,  scindere, 
abscindere).  Everlasting  joy  soars  above  their  head ;  they  lay 
fast  hold  of  delight  and  joy  (compare  on  ch.  xiii.  8),  so  that  it 
never  departs  from  them.  On  the  other  hand,  sorrow  and 
sighing  flee  away.  The  whole  of  ver.  10  is  like  a  mosaic  from 
ch.  li.  11,  Ixi.  7,  li.  3 ;  and  what  is  affirmed  of  the  holy  road, 
1  See  G  Rawlinson,  Monarchies,  i.  p  38. 


80 


THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


is  also  affirmed  in  cli.  lii.  1  of  the  holy  city  (compare  ch.  Ixii. 
12,  Ixiii.  4).  A  prelude  of  the  fulfilment  is  seen  in  what 
Ezra  speaks  of  with  gratitude  to  God  in  Ezra  viii.  31.  We 
have  intentionally  avoided  crowding  together  the  parallel 
passages  from  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  The  whole  chapter  is,  in  every 
part,  both  in  thought  and  language,  a  prelude  of  that  book  of 
consolation  for  the  exiles  in  their  captivity.  Not  only  in  its 
spiritual  New  Testament  thoughts,  but  also  in  its  ethereal  lan 
guage,  soaring  high  as  it  does  in  majestic  softness  and  light, 
the  prophecy  has  now  reached  the  highest  point  of  its  develop 
ment. 


PART   VII. 

FULFILMENTS  OF  PROPHECY ;  AND  PROPHECIES  BELONGING 
TO  THE  FOURTEENTH  YEAR  OF  HEZEKIAH'S  REIGN,  AND 
THE  TIMES  IMMEDIATELY  FOLLOWING. 

CHAP,  xxxvi.-xxxix. 

To  the  first  six  books  of  Isaiah's  prophecies  there  is  now 
appended  a  seventh.  The  six  form  three  syzygies.  In  the 
"Book  of  Hardening,"  ch.  i.-vi.  (apart  from  ch.  i.,  which 
belonged  to  the  times  of  Uzziah  and  Jotham),  we  saw  Israel's 
day  of  grace  brought  to  an  end.  In  the  "  Book  of  Immanuel," 
ch.  vii.-xii.  (from  the  time  of  Ahaz),  we  saw  the  judgment  of 
hardening  and  destruction  in  its  first  stage  of  accomplishment  > 
but  Immanuel  was  a  pledge  that,  even  if  the  great  mass  should 
perish,  neither  the  whole  of  Israel  nor  the  house  of  David 
would  be  destroyed.  The  separate  judgments  through  which 
the  way  was  to  be  prepared  for  the  kingdom  of  Immanuel,  are 
announced  in  the  "  Book  concerning  the  Nations,"  ch.  xiii.-xxiii. 
(from  the  times  of  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah)  ;  and  the  general 
judgment  in  which  they  would  issue,  and  after  which  a  new 
Israel  would  triumph,  is  foretold  in  the  "  Book  of  the  great 
Catastrophe,"  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.  (after  the  fifteenth  year  of  Heze 
kiah).  These  two  syzygies  form  the  first  great  orbit  of  the 
collection.  A  second  opens  with  the  "  Book  of  Woes,  or  of 
the  Precious  Corner-stone,"  ch.  xxviii.-xxxiii.  (xxviii.-xxxii., 


CHAP.  XXXVI.- XXX IX.  81 

from  the  first  years  of  Hezekiah,  andxxxiii.  from  the  fourteenth 
year),  by  the  side  of  which  is  placed  the  "  Book  of  the  Judgment 
upon  Edom,  and  of  the  Restoration  of  Israel,"  ch.  xxxiv.  xxxv. 
(after  Hezekiah's  fifteenth  year).  The  former  shows  how 
Ephraim  succumbs  to  the  power  of  Asshur,  and  Judah's  trust 
in  Egypt  is  put  to  shame ;  the  latter,  how  the  world,  with  its 
hostility  to  the  church,  eventually  succumbs  to  the  vengeance 
of  Jehovah,  whereas  the  church  itself  is  redeemed  and  glorified. 
Then  follows,  in  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.,  a  "  Book  of  Histories,"  which 
returns  from  the  ideal  distances  of  ch.  xxxiv.  xxxv.  to  the 
historical  realities  of  ch.  xxxiii.,  and  begins  by  stating  that  "  at 
the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool  in  the  highway  of  the  fuller's 
field,"  where  Ahaz  had  formerly  preferred  the  help  of  Asshur 
to  that  of  Jehovah,  there  stood  an  embassy  from  the  king  of 
Asshur  with  a  detachment  of  his  army  (ch.  xxxvi.  2),  scorn 
fully  demanding  the  surrender  of  Jerusalem. 

Just  as  we  have  found  throughout  a  well-considered  suc 
cession  and  dovetailing  of  the  several  parts,  so  here  we  can  see 
reciprocal  bearings,  which  are  both  designed  and  expressive ; 
and  it  is  a  priori  a  probable  thing  that  Isaiah,  who  wrote  the 
historical  introduction  to  the  Judseo- Assyrian  drama  in  the 
second  book,  is  the  author  of  the  concluding  act  of  the  same 
drama,  which  is  here  the  subject  of  Book  vii.  The  fact  that 
the  murder  of  Sennacherib  is  related  in  ch.  xxxvii.  37,  38,  in 
accordance  with  the  prophecy  in  ch.  xxxvii.  7,  does  not  render 
this  impossible,  since,  according  to  credible  tradition,  Isaiah  out 
lived  Hezekiah  (see  vol.  i.  34).  The  assertion  made  by  Hitzig  and 
others — that  the  speciality  of  the  prophecy,  and  the  miraculous 
character  of  the  events  recorded  in  ch.  xxxvi.— xxxix.,  preclude 
the  possibility  of  Isaiah's  authorship,  inasmuch  as,  "  according  to 
a  well-known  critical  rule,"  such  special  prophecies  as  these  are 
always  vaticinia  ex  eventu,  and  accounts  of  miracles  are  always 
more  recent  than  their  historical  germ — rests  upon  a  foregone 
conclusion  which  was  completed  before  any  investigation  took 
place,  and  which  we  have  good  ground  for  rejecting,  although 
we  are  well  acquainted  with  the  valuable  service  that  has  been 
rendered  by  this  philosopher's  stone.  The  statement  that 
accounts  of  miracles  as  such  are  never  contemporaneous  with 
the  events  themselves,  is  altogether  at  variance  with  experience; 
and  if  the  advance  from  the  general  to  the  particular  were  to 

VOL.  II.  F 


82  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

be  blotted  out  of  Isaiah's  prophecy  in  relation  to  Asshur,  this 
would  be  not  only  unhistorical,  but  un psychological  also. 

The  question  whether  Isaiah  is  the  author  of  ch.  xxxvi.- 
xxxix.  or  not,  is  bound  up  with  the  question  whether  the  original 
place  of  these  histories  is  in  the  book  of  Isaiah  or  the  book  of 
Kings,  where  the  whole  passage  is  repeated  with  the  exception 
of  Hezekiali's  psalm  of  thanksgiving  (2  Kings  xviii.  13-xx.  19). 
We  shall  find  that  the  text  of  the  book  of  Kings  is  in  several 
places  the  purer  and  more  authentic  of  the  two  (though  not  so 
much  so  as  a  biassed  prejudice  would  assume),  from  which  it 
apparently  follows  that  this  section  is  not  in  its  original  position 
in  the  book  of  Isaiah,  but  has  been  taken  from  some  other 
place  and  inserted  there.  But  this  conclusion  is  a  deceptive 
one.  In  the  relation  in  which  Jer.  lii.  and  2  Kings  xxiv.  18- 
xxv.  stand  to  one  another,  we  have  a  proof  that  the  text  of  a 
passage  may  be  more  faithfully  preserved  in  a  secondary  place 
than  in  its  original  one.  For  in  this  particular  instance  it  is 
equally  certain  that  the  section  relating  to  king  Zedekiah  and 
the  Chaldean  catastrophe  was  written  by  the  author  of  the 
book  of  Kings,  whose  style  was  formed  on  that  of  Deuteronomy, 
and  also,  that  in  the  book  of  Jeremiah  it  is  an  appendix  taken 
by  an  unknown  hand  from  the  book  of  the  Kings.  But  it  is 
also  an  acknowledged  fact,  that  the  text  of  Jer.  lii.  is  incom 
parably  the  purer  of  the  two,  and  also  that  there  are  many 
other  instances  in  which  the  passage  in  the  book  of  Kings  is 
corrupt — that  is  to  say,  in  the  form  in  which  it  lies  before  us 
now — whereas  the  Alexandrian  translator  had  it  in  his  possession 
in  a  partially  better  form.  Consequently,  the  fact  that  Isa. 
xxxvi.-xxxix.  is  in  some  respects  less  pure  than  2  Kings  xviii.  13- 
xx.  19,  cannot  be  any  argument  in  itself  against  the  originality 
of  this  section  in  the  book  of  Isaiah. 

It  is  indeed  altogether  inconceivable,  that  the  author  of 
the  book  of  Kings  should  have  written  it ;  for,  on  the  one 
hand,  the  liberality  of  the  prophetic  addresses  communicated 
point  to  a  written  source  (see  vol.  i.  16)  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  is  wanting  in  that  Deuteronomic  stamp,  by  which  the  hand 
of  this  author  is  so  easily  recognised.  Nor  can  it  have  been 
copied  by  him  out  of  the  annals  of  Hezekiah  (dillire  hayydmlm), 
as  is  commonly  supposed,  since  it  is  written  in  prophetic  and 
not  in  annalistic  style.  Whoever  has  once  made  himself 


CHAP.  XXXVI.-XXXIX.  83 

acquainted  with  these  two  different  kinds  of  historical  compo 
sition,  the  fundamentally  different  characteristics  of  which  we 
have  pointed  out  in  the  Introduction  (vol.  i.  p.  2  sqq.),  can 
never  by  any  possibility  confound  them  again.  And  this 
passage  is  written  in  a  style  so  peculiarly  prophetical,  that,  like 
the  magnificent  historical  accounts  of  Elijah,  for  example, 
which  commence  so  abruptly  in  2  Kings  xvii.  1,  it  must  have 
been  taken  from  some  special  and  prophetical  source,  which 
had  nothing  to  do  with  other  prophetico-historical  portions  of 
the  book  of  Kings.  And  the  following  facts  are  sufficient  to 
raise  the  probability,  that  this  source  was  no  other  than  the 
book  of  Isaiah  itself,  into  an  absolute  certainty.  In  the  first 
place,  the  author  of  the  book  of  Kings  had  the  book  of  Isaiah 
amongst  the  different  sources,  of  which  his  apparatus  was  com 
posed  ;  this  is  evident  from  2  Kings  xvi.  5,  a  passage  which 
was  written  with  Isa.  vii.  1  in  view.  And  secondly,  we  have 
express,  though  indirect,  testimony  to  the  effect  that  this  sec 
tion,  which  treats  of  the  most  important  epoch  in  Hezekiah's 
reign,  is  in  its  original  place  in  the  book  of  Isaiah.  The 
author  of  the  book  of  Chronicles  says,  in  2  Chron.  xxxii.  32  : 
"  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Hezekiah,  and  the  gracious 
occurrences  of  his  life,  behold,  they  are  written  in  the  vision 
(clidzon)  of  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz,  and  in  the  book  of  the 
kings  of  Judah  and  Israel."  This  notice  clearly  proves  that  a 
certain  historical  account  of  Hezekiah  had  either  been  taken 
out  of  the  collection  of  Isaiah's  prophecies,  which  is  headed 
clidzon  (vision),  and  inserted  in  the  "  book  of  the  kings  of 
Judah  and  Israel,"  or  else  had  been  so  inserted  along  with  the 
whole  collection.  The  book  of  the  Kings  was  the  principal 
source  employed  by  the  chronicler,  which  he  calls  "  the  midrash 
of  the  book  of  the  Kings"  in  2  Chron.  xxiv.  27.  Into  this 
Midrash,  or  else  into  the  still  earlier  work  upon  which  it  was  a 
commentary,  the  section  in  question  was  copied  from  the  book 
of  Isaiah ;  and  it  follows  from  this,  that  the  writer  of  the  his 
tory  of  the  kings  made  use  of  our  book  of  Isaiah  for  one  portion 
of  the  history  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  and  made  extracts  from  it. 
The  chronicler  himself  did  not  care  to  repeat  the  whole  section, 
which  he  knew  to  be  already  contained  in  the  canonical  book 
of  Kings  (to  say  nothing  of  the  book  of  Isaiah).  At  the  same 
time,  his  own  historical  account  of  Hezekiah  in  2  Chron.  xxvii 


84  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

clearly  shows  that  he  was  acquainted  with  it,  and  also  that  the 
historical  materials,  which  the  annals  supplied  to  him  through 
the  medium  of  the  Midrash,  were  totally  different  both  in  sub 
stance  and  form  from  those  contained  in  the  section  in  question. 
These  two  testimonies  are  further  strengthened  by  the  fact, 
that  Isaiah  is  well  known  to  us  as  a  historian  through  another 
passage  in  the  Chronicles,  namely,  as  the  author  of  a  complete 
history  of  Uzziah's  reign  (see  vol.  i.  38) ;  also  by  the  fact,  that 
the  prophetico-historical  style  of  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.,  with  their 
fine,  noble,  pictorial  prose,  which  is  comparable  to  the  grandest 
historical  composition  to  be  met  with  in  Hebrew,  is  worthy  of 
Isaiah,  and  bears  every  mark  of  Isaiah's  pen  ;  thirdly,  by  the 
fact,  that  there  are  other  instances  in  which  Isaiah  has  inter 
woven  historical  accounts  with  his  prophecies  (ch.  vii.  viii.  and 
xx.),  and  that  in  so  doing  he  sometimes  speaks  of  himself  in 
the  first  person  (ch.  vi.  1,  viii.  1-4),  and  sometimes  in  the  third 
(ch.  vii.  3  sqq.,  and  xx.),  just  as  in  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix. ;  and 
fourthly,  by  the  fact  that,  as  we  have  already  observed,  ch.  vii.  3 
and  xxxvi.  2  bear  the  clearest  marks  of  having  had  one  and 
the  same  author ;  and,  as  we  shall  also  show,  the  order  in  which 
the  four  accounts  in  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.  are  arranged,  corresponds 
to  the  general  plan  of  the  whole  collection  of  prophecies, — 
ch.  xxxvi.  and  xxxvii.  looking  back  to  the  prophecies  of  the 
Assyrian  era,  and  ch.  xxxviii.  and  xxxix.  looking  forwards  to 
those  of  the  Babylonian  era,  which  is  the  prophet's  ideal  pre 
sent  from  ch.  xl.  onwards. 


A.    FIRST  ASSYRIAN  ATTEMPT  TO  COMPEL  THE  SURRENDER 
OF  JERUSALEM. — CHAP.  XXXVI.-XXXVII.  7. 

Marcus  v.  Niebuhr,  in  his  History  of  AssJiur  and  Babel 
(p.  164),  says,  "  Why  should  not  Hezekiah  have  revolted  from 
Asshur  as  soon  as  he  ascended  the  throne?  He  had  a  motive 
for  doing  this,  which  other  kings  had  not, — namely,  that  as 
he  held  his  kingdom  in  fief  from  his  God,  obedience  to  a  tem 
poral  monarch  was  in  his  case  sin."  But  this  assumption, 
which  is  founded  upon  the  same  idea  as  that  in  which  the 
question  was  put  to  Jesus  concerning  the  tribute  money,  is  not 
at  all  in  accordance  with  Isaiah's  view,  as  we  may  see  from 
ch.  xxviii.-xxxii. ;  and  Hezekiah's  revolt  cannot  have  occurred 


CHAP.  XXXVI.  1.  85 

even  in  the  sixth  year  of  his  reign  (see  vol.  i.  51).  For  Shal- 
manassar,  or  rather  Sargon,  made  war  upon  Egypt  and  Ethiopia 
after  the  destruction  of  Samaria  (ch.  xx. ;  cf .  Oppert,  Les 
Inscriptions  des  Sargonides,  pp.  22,  27),  without  attempting 
anything  against  Hezekiah.  It  was  not  till  the  time  of  Sargon, 
who  overthrew  the  reigning  house  of  Assyria,  that  the  actual 
preparations  for  the  revolt  were  commenced,  by  the  formation 
of  an  alliance  between  the  kingdom  of  Judah  on  the  one  hand, 
and  Egypt,  and  probably  Philistia,  on  the  other,  the  object  of 
which  was  the  rupture  of  the  Assyrian  yoke.1  The  campaign 
of  Sennacherib  the  son  of  Sargon,  into  which  we  are  trans 
ported  in  the  following  history,  was  the  third  of  his  expeditions, 
the  one  to  which  Sennacherib  himself  refers  in  the  inscription 
upon  the  prism  :  u  dans  ma  3*  campagne  je  marchai  vers  la 
Syrie."  The  position  which  we  find  Sennacherib  taking  up 
between  Philistia  and  Jerusalem,  to  the  south-west  of  the  latter, 
is  a  very  characteristic  one  in  relation  to  both  the  occasion  and 
the  ultimate  object  of  the  campaign.  Ch.  xxxvi.  I.2  "  And  it 
came  to  pass  in  the  (K.  and  in  the)  fourteenth  year  of  king  Hiz- 
kiyahu,  Sancherib  king  of  Asshur  came  up  against  all  the  forti 
fied  cities  of  Judah,  and  took  them.  (K.  adds  :  Then  Hizkiyali 
king  of  Judah  sent  to  the  king  of  Asshur  to  Lachish,  saying,  I 
have  sinned,  withdraw  from  me  again  ;  what  thou  imposest  upon 
me  I  will  raise.  And  the  king  of  A  sshur  imposed  upon  Hizkiyah 
king  of  Judah  three  hundred  talents  of  silver,  and  thirty  talents 
of  gold.  And  Hizkiyah  gave  up  all  the  silver  that  was  in  the 
house  of  Jehovah,  and  in  the  treasures  of  the  king's  house.  At 
the  same  time  Hizkiyah  mutilated  the  doors  of  the  temple  of 
Jehovah,  and  the  pillars  which  Hizkiyah  king  of  Judah  had 
plated  with  gold,  and  gave  it  to  the  king  of  Asshur)."  This  long 
addition,  which  is  distinguished  at  once  by  the  introduction  of 
ITpTn  in  the  place  of  liTpfn,  is  probably  only  an  annalistic 
interpolation,  though  one  of  great  importance  in  relation 
to  Isa.  xxxiii.  7.  What  follows  in  Isaiah  does  not  dovetail 

1  The  name  Amgarron  upon  the  earthenware  prism  of  Sennacherib 
does  not  mean  Migron  (Oppert),  but  Ekron  (Rawlinson). 

2  We  shall  show  the  variations  in  the  text  of  2  Kings  xviii.  13  sqq.,  as 
far  as  we  possibly  can,  in  our  translation.     K.  signifies  the  book  of  Kings. 
But  the  task  ot  pronouncing  an  infallible  sentence  upon  them  all  we  shall 
leave  to  those  who  know  everything. 


86  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

well  into  this  addition,  and  therefore  does  not  presuppose  its 
existence.  Ver.  2.  "  Then  the  king  of  Asshur  sent  Rabshakeh 
(K. :  Tartan,  and  Rabsaris,  and  Rabshakeh)  from  Lachish  towards 
Jerusalem  to  king  Hizkiyahu  with  a  great  army,  and  he  advanced 
(K. :  to  king  H.  ivith  a  great  army  to  Jerusalem ;  and  they  went 
up  and  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  went  up,  and  came  and  advanced) 
to  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool  by  the  road  of  the  fuller  s  field" 
Whereas  in  K.  the  repeated  1ST1  l^jn  (and  went  up  and  came) 
forms  a  "  dittography,"  the  names  Tartan  and  Rab-saris  have 
apparently  dropped  out  of  the  text  of  Isaiah,  as  ch.  xxxvii.  6  and 
24  presuppose  a  plurality  of  messengers.  The  three  names  are 
not  names  of  persons,  but  official  titles,  viz.  the  commander-in- 
chief  (Tartan,  which  really  occurs  in  an  Assyrian  list  of  offices ; 
see  Rawlinson,  Monarchies,  ii.  412),  the  chief  eunuch  (see  the 
plate  in  Rawlinson,  ii.  118),  and  the  chief  cup-bearer  (^E^n 
with  tzere  =  ^i?^?"!).  The  situation  of  Lachish  is  marked  by 
the  present  ruins  of  Umm  Lakis,  to  the  south-west  of  Bet- 
Gibrin  (Eleutheropolis)  in  the  Shephelah.  The  messengers 
come  from  the  south-west  with  the  ultima  ratio  of  a  strong 
detachment  (7*0  a  connecting  form,  from  ?s.n,  like  rt?fi}  N^, 
Zech.  xiv.  4 ;  Ewald,  §  287,  a)  ;  they  therefore  halt  on  the 
western  side  of  Jerusalem  (on  the  locality,  see  at  ch.  vii.  3, 
xxii.  8-11 ;  compare  Keil  on  Kings). 

Hezekiah's  confidential  ministers  go  there  also.  Ver.  3  (K. 
"  And  they  called  to  the  king),  and  there  went  out  to  him  (K.  to 
them)  Eliakim  son  of  Hilkiyahu,  the  house-minister,  and  Shebna 
the  chancellor,  and  Joah  son  of  Asaph,  the  recorder"  On  the 
office  of  the  house-minister,  or  major-domo,  which  was  now 
filled  by  Eliakim  instead  of  Shebna  (W2V,  K.  twice  n:n^),  see  ch. 
xxii.  15  sqq. ;  and  on  that  of  sopher  and  mazklr,  see  vol.  i.  pp. 
7,  8.  Rabshakeh's  message  follows  in  vers.  4-10  :  "And  Rab 
shakeh  said  to  them,  Say  now  to  Hizkiyahu,  Thus  saith  the  great 
king,  the  king  of  Asshur,  What  sort  of  confidence  is  this  that 
thou  hast  got?  I  say  (K.  thou  sayest,  i.e.  thou  talkest),  vain  talk 
is  counsel  and  strength  for  war :  now,  then,  in  whom  dost  thou 
trust,  that  thou  hast  rebelled  against  me  ?  (K.  Now)  Behold, 
thou  trustest  (K.  ^If)  in  this  broken  reed-staff  there,  in  Egypt,  on 
which  one  leans,  and  it  runs  into  his  hand  and  pierces  it ;  so 
does  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  to  all  who  trust  in  him.  But  if 
thou  sayest  to  me  (K.  ye  say).  We  trust  in  JeJiovah  our  God ; 


CHAP.  XXXVI.  4-10.  87 

is  it  not  He  whose  high  places  and  altars  HizUyahu  lias  removed, 
and  has  said  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  Ye  shall  worship  before 
the  altar  (K.  adds,  in  Jerusalem)  ?  And  now  take  a  wager  with 
my  lord  (K.  with)  the  king  of  Asshur ;  I  will  deliver  thee  two 
thousand  horses,  if  thou  art  able  for  thy  part  to  give  horsemen 
upon  them.  And  how  couldst  thou  repel  the  advance  of  a  single 
satrap  among  the  least  of  the  servants  of  my  lord  ?  !  Thou 
puttest  thy  trust  then  in  Egypt  for  chariots  and  riders  !  And 
(omitted  in  K.)  now  have  I  come  up  without  Jehovah  against 
this  land  to  destroy  it  (K.  against  this  place,  to  destroy  it)  ? 
Jehovah  said  to  me,  Go  up  to  (K.  against)  this  land,  and  destroy 
it"  The  chronicler  has  a  portion  of  this  address  of  Rabshakeh 
in  2  Chron.  xxxii.  10-12.  And  just  as  the  prophetic  words  in 
the  book  of  Kings  have  a  Deuteronomic  sound,  and  those  in 
the  Chronicles  the  ring  of  a  chronicle,  so  do  Rabshakeh's  words, 
and  those  which  follow,  sound  like  the  words  of  Isaiah  himself. 
"  The  great  king "  is  the  standing  royal  title  appended  to  the 
names  of  Sargon  and  Sennacherib  upon  the  Assyrian  monu 
ments  (compare  ch.  x.  8).  Hezekiah  is  not  thought  worthy  of 
the  title  of  king,  either  here  or  afterwards.  The  reading 
JJ")ON  in  ver.  5  (thou  speakest  vain  talk)  is  not  the  preferable 
one,  because  in  that  case  we  should  expect  Jjna"!,  or  rather 
(according  to  the  usual  style)  JJ"?sn  ^JK.  The  meaning  is,  that 
he  must  look  upon  Hezekiah's  resolution,  and  his  strength 
(rnirm  nvy  connected  as  in  ch.  xi.  2)  for  going  to  war,  as  mere 
boasting  ("  lip-words,"  as  in  Prov.  xiv.  23),  and  must  therefore 
assume  that  there  was  something  in  the  background  of  which 
he  was  well  aware.  And  this  must  be  Egypt,  which  would 
not  only  be  of  no  real  help  to  its  ally,  but  would  rather  do  him 
harm  by  leaving  him  in  the  lurch.  The  figure  of  a  reed-staff 
has  been  borrowed  by  Ezekiel  in  ch.  xxix.  6,  7.  It  was  a 
very  appropriate  one  for  Egypt,  with  its  abundance  of  reeds 
and  rushes  (ch.  xix.  6),  and  it  has  Isaiah's  peculiar  ring  (for 
the  expression  itself,  compare  ch.  xlii.  3  ;  and  for  the  fact 
itself,  ch.  xxx.  5,  and  other  passages).  Y^\  does  not  mean 
fragile  (Luzz.  quella  fragil  canna),  but  broken,  namely,  in 
consequence  of  the  loss  of  the  throne  by  the  native  royal 
family,  from  whom  it  had  been  wrested  by  the  Ethiopians 
(ch.  xviii.),  and  the  defeats  sustained  at  the  hands  of  Sargon 
(ch.  xx.).  The  construction  cui  quis  innititur  et  intrat  is  para- 


88  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tactic  for  cui  si  quis.  In  ver.  7  the  reading  jVDON'n  commends 
itself,  from  the  fact  that  the  sentence  is  not  continued  with 
fTPon  ;  but  as  Hezekiah  is  addressed  throughout,  and  it  is  to 
him  that  the  reply  is  to  be  made,  the  original  reading  was  pro 
bably  "iBKn.  The  fact  that  Hezekiah  had  restricted  the  wor 
ship  of  Jehovah  to  Jerusalem,  by  removing  the  other  places 
of  worship  (2  Kings  xviii.  4),  is  brought  against  him  in  a 
thoroughly  heathen,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  (considering 
the  inclination  to  worship  other  gods  which  still  existed  in  the 
nation)  a  very  crafty  manner.  In  vers.  8,  9,  he  throws  in  his 
teeth,  with  most  imposing  scorn,  his  own  weakness  as  com 
pared  with  Asshur,  which  was  chiefly  dreaded  on  account  of 
its  strength  in  cavalry  and  war-chariots.  NJ  Siynn  does  not 

O  */  T  v  T  ;    • 

refer  to  the  performance  and  counter- performance  which 
follow,  in  the  sense  of  u connect  thyself"  (Luzz.  associati),  but 
is  used  in  a  similar  sense  to  the  Homeric  jj,vyf]vai,  though  with 
the  idea  of  vying  with  one  another,  not  of  engaging  in  war 
(the  synonym  in  the  Talmud  is  himrdh,  to  bet,  e.g.  b.  Sabbath 
3  la) :  a  bet  and  a  pledge  are  kindred  notions  (Heb.  I^"JV,  cf. 
Lat.  vadari).  On  peclidh  (f or  pachdk),  which  also  occurs  as  an 
Assyrian  title  in  Ezek.  xxiii.  6,  23,  see  vol.  i.  p.  267,  note  3. 
inx  nnSj  two  constructives,  the  first  of  which  is  to  be  explained 
according  to  Ewald,  §  286,  a  (compare  above,  ver.  2,  *HD  rh), 
form  the  logical  regens  of  the  following  servorum  domini  mei 
minimorum  ;  and  heshlbh  pene  does  not  mean  here  to  refuse  a 
petitioner,  but  to  repel  an  antagonist  (ch.  xxviii.  6).  The 
fut.  consec.  ntanrn  deduces  a  consequence  :  Hezekiah  could  not 
do  anything  by  himself,  and  therefore  he  trusted  in  Egypt, 
from  which  he  expected  chariots  and  horsemen.  In  ver.  10, 
the  prophetic  idea,  that  Asshur  was  the  instrument  employed 
by  Jehovah  (ch.  x.  5,  etc.),  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  the 
Assyrian  himself.  This  is  very  conceivable,  but  the  colouring 
of  Isaiah  is  undeniable.  The  concluding  words,  in  which  the 
Assyrian  boasts  of  having  Jehovah  on  his  side,  affect  the 
messengers  of  Hezekiah  in  the  keenest  manner,  especially 
because  of  the  people  present.  Ver.  11.  "  Then  said  Eliakim 
(K.  the  son  of  Hilkiyaliu),  and  Shebna,  and  Joah,  to  Rabsliakeh, 
Pray,  speak  to  thy  servants  in  Aramcean,  for  we  understand  it ; 
and  do  not  speak  to  (K.  with)  us  in  Jewish,  in  the  ears  of  the 
people  that  are  on  the  wall"  They  spoke  Y'hudlth,  i.e.  the 


CHAP.  XXXVI.  12-20.  89 

colloquial  language  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  The  kingdom 
of  Israel  was  no  longer  in  existence,  and  the  language  of  the 
Israelitish  nation,  as  a  whole,  might  therefore  already  be  called 
Judsean  (Jewish),  as  in  Neh.  xiii.  24,  more  especially  as  there 
may  have  been  a  far  greater  dialectical  difference  between  the 
popular  speech  of  the  northern  and  southern  kingdoms,  than  we 
can  {rather  from  the  biblical  books  that  were  written  in  the  one 

o 

or  the  other.  Aramsean  (^ardmltJi),  however,  appears  to  have 
been  even  then,  as  it  was  at  a  later  period  (Ezra  iv.  7),  the 
language  of  intercourse  between  the  empire  of  Eastern  Asia  and 
the  people  to  the  west  of  the  Tigris  (compare  Alex.  Polyhistor 
in  Euseb.  cliron.  arm.  i.  43,  where  Sennacherib  is  said  to  have 
erected  a  monument  with  a  Chaldean  inscription)  ;  and  conse 
quently  educated  Judseans  not  only  understood  it,  but  were  able 
to  speak  it,  more  especially  those  who  were  in  the  service  of  the 
state.  Assyrian,  on  the  contrary,  was  unintelligible  to  Judseans 
(ch.  xxviii.  11,  xxxiii.  19),  although  this  applied  comparatively 
less  to  the  true  Assyrian  dialect,  which  was  Semitic,  and  can 
be  interpreted  for  the  most  part  from  the  Hebrew  (see  Oppert's 
"  Outlines  of  an  Assyrian  Grammar"  in  the  Journal  Asiatique, 
1859),  than  to  the  motley  language  of  the  Assyrian  army, 
which  was  a  compound  of  Arian  and  Turanian  elements.  The 
name  Sennacherib  (Sancherlbh  =  2T"iniTjp,  LXX.  Sennache- 
reim,  i.e.  "  Sin,  the  moon-god,  had  multiplied  the  brethren ") 
is  Semitic ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  name  Tartan,  which  cannot 
be  interpreted  either  from  the  Semitic  or  the  Arian,  is  an. 
example  of  the  element  referred  to,  which  was  so  utterly 
strange  to  a  Judsean  ear. 

The  harsh  reply  is  given  in  ver.  12.  "  Then  Rabshakeh 
said  (K.  to  them),  Has  my  lord  sent  me  to  (K.  ?yn)  thy  lord  and 
to  thee,  not  rather  to  (both  texts,  ty  the  men  who  sit  upon  the 
wall,  to  eat  their  dung,  and  to  drink  their  urine  together  ivith 
you?" — namely,  because  their  rulers  were  exposing  them  to  a 
siege  which  would  involve  the  most  dreadful  state  of  famine. 

After  Kabshakeh  had  refused  the  request  of  Hezekiah's 
representatives  in  this  contemptuous  manner,  he  turned  in 
defiance  of  them  to  the  people  themselves.  Yers.  13-20. 
"  Then  Rabshakeh  went  near,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice  in 
the  Jewish  language  (K.  and  spake),  and  said,  Hear  the  words 
(K.  the  word)  of  the  (treat  king,  the  king  of  Asshur.  Thus  saitk 


00  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISATAII. 

the  king,  Let  not  Hizkiyahu  practise  deception  upon  you  ( 
K.  W&)  ;  for  he  cannot  deliver  you  (K.  out  of  his  hand).  And 
let  not  Hizkiyahu  feed  you  tenth  hope  in  Jehovah,  saying,  Jehovah 
will  deliver,  yea,  deliver  us:  (K.  and)  this  city  will  not  be  delivered 
into  the  hand  of  the  king  of  Asshur.  Hearken  not  to  Hizkiyahu; 
for  thus  saith  the  king  (hammelekh,  K.  melekh)  of  Asshur,  Enter 
into  a  connection  of  mutual  good  wishes  ivith  me,  and  come  out  to 
me :  and  enjoy  every  one  his  vine,  and  every  one  his  Jig-tree,  and 
drink  every  one  the  water  of  his  cistern ;  till  I  come  and  take  you 
away  into  a  land  like  your  land,  a  land  of  corn  and  wine,  a  land 
of  bread-corn  and  vineyards  (K.  a  land  full  of  fine  olive-trees  and 
honey,  and  live  and  do  not  die,  and  hearken  not  to  Hizkiyahu)  ; 
that  Hizkiyahu  do  not  befool  you  (K.  for  he  befools  you),  saying, 
Jehovah  will  deliver  us  !  Have  the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered 
(K.  really  delivered)  every  one  his  land  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
king  of  Asshur?  Where  are  the  gods  of  Hamath  and  Arpad? 
wliere  the  gods  of  Sepharvayim  (K.  adds,  Hena  and  f/iia/i)?  and 
how  much  less  (^l,  K.  *3)  have  they  delivered  that  Samaria  out 
of  my  hand  ?  Wlio  were  they  among  all  the  gods  of  these  (K.  of 
the)  lands,  who  delivered  their  land  out  of  my  hand  ?  how  much 
less  will  Jehovah  deliver  Jerusalem  out  of  my  hand!?"  The 
chronicler  also  has  this  continuation  of  Rabshakeh's  address 
in  part  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  13-15),  but  he  has  fused  into  one  the 
Assyrian  self-praise  uttered  by  Rabshakeh  on  his  first  and 
second  mission.  The  encouragement  of  the  people,  by  referring 
to  the  help  of  Jehovah  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  6-8),  is  placed  by  him 
before  this  first  account  is  given  by  Isaiah,  and  forms  a  conclu 
sion  to  the  preparations  for  the  contest  with  Asshur  as  there 
described.  Rabshakeh  now  draws  nearer  to  the  wall,  and 
harangues  the  people.  &0$n  is  construed  here  with  a  dative  (to 
excite  treacherous  hopes);  whereas  in  2  Chron.  xxxii.  15  it  is 
written  with  an  accusative.  The  reading  ^5TP  is  altered  from 
^JO  in  ver.  20,  which  is  inserted  still  more  frequently  by  the 
chronicler.  The  reading  "VJjrrnK  with  jnan  is  incorrect ;  it 
would  require  jri3*  (Ges.  §  143,  \a).  To  make  a  berdkhdh  with 
a  person  was  equivalent  to  entering  into  a  relation  of  blessing, 
i.e.  into  a  state  of  mind  in  which  each  wished  all  prosperity  to 
the  other.  This  was  probably  a  common  phrase,  though  we 
only  meet  with  it  here.  K£,  when  applied  to  the  besieged,  is 
equivalent  to  surrendering  (e.g.  1  Sam.  xi.  3;.  If  they  did 


CHAP.  XXXVI.  21,  22.  91 

that,  they  should  remain  in  quiet  possession  and  enjoyment, 
until  the  Assyrian  fetched  them  away  (after  the  Egyptian  cam 
paign  was  over),  and  transported  them  to  a  land  which  he 
describes  to  them  in  the  most  enticing  terms,  in  order  to  soften 
down  the  inevitable  transportation.  It  is  a  question  whether 
the  expansion  of  this  picture  in  the  book  of  Kings  is  original 
or  not ;  since  njjfi  y:n  in  ver.  19  appears  to  be  also  tacked  on 
here  from  Isa.  xxxvii.  13  (see  at  this  passage).  On  HamatJi 
and  Arpad  (to  the  north  of  Haleb  in  northern  Syria,  and  a 
different  place  from  Arvad  =  Arad),  see  ch.  x.  9.  S'pharvayim 
(a  dual  form,  the  house  of  the  Sepharvlm,  2  Kings  xvii.  31) 
is  the  Sipphara  of  Ptol.  v.  18,  7,  the  southernmost  city  of 
Mesopotamia,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Euphrates ;  Pliny's  Hip- 
parenum  on  the  Narraga,  i.e.  the  canal,  nehar  malka,  the  key 
to  the  irrigating  or  inundating  works  of  Babylon,  which  were 
completed  afterwards  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (Plin.  h.  n.  vi.  30); 
probably  the  same  place  as  the  sun-city,  Sippara,  in  which 
Xisuthros  concealed  the  sacred  books  before  the  great  flood 
(see  K.  Miiller's  Fragmenta  Historicorum  Gr.  ii.  501-2).  |3 
in  ver.  18  has  a  warning  meaning  (as  if  it  followed  D3^  VW'n); 
and  both  "91  and  *3  in  vers.  19,  20,  introduce  an  exclamatory 
clause  when  following  a  negative  interrogatory  sentence:  "and 
that  they  should  have  saved,"  or  "  that  Jehovah  should  save," 
equivalent  to  "  how  much  less  have  they  saved,  or  will  He 
save"  (Ewald,  §  354,  c;  comp.  T^,  2  Chron.  xxxii.  15).  Rab- 
shakeh's  words  in  vers.  18-20  are  the  same  as  those  in  Isa.  x. 
8-11.  The  manner  in  which  he  defies  the  gods  of  the  heathen, 
of  Samaria,  an.d  last  of  all  of  Jerusalem,  corresponds  to  the  pro 
phecy  there.  It  is  the  prophet  himself  who  acts  as  historian 
here,  and  describes  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy,  though 
without  therefore  doing  violence  to  his  character  as  a  prophet. 

The  effect  of  Rabsliakeh's  words.  Vers.  21,  22.  "But  they 
held  their  peace  (K.  and  they,  the  people,  held  their  peace),  and 
answered  him  not  a  word ;  for  it  was  the  king  8  commandment, 
saying,  Ye  shall  not  answer  him.  Then  came  EliaTcim  son  of 
Hilkiyahu  (K.  Hilkiyali),  the  house-minister,  and  Shebna  the 
chancellor,  and  Joah  son  of  Asaph,  the  recorder,  to  HizkiyaJiu, 
with  torn  clothes,  and  told  him  the  words  of  Rabshakeh."  It  is 
only  a  superficial  observation  that  could  commend  the  reading 
in  Kings,  "  They,  the  people,  held  their  peace,"  which  Hitzig 


92  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

and  Knobel  prefer,  but  which  Luzzatto  very  properly  rejects. 
As  the  Assyrians  wished  to  speak  to  the  king  himself  (2  Kings 
xviii.  18),  who  sent  the  three  to  them  as  his  representatives, 
the  command  to  hear,  and  to  make  no  reply,  can  only  have 
applied  to  them  (and  they  had  already  made  the  matter  worse  by 
the  one  remark  which  they  had  made  concerning  the  language); 
and  the  reading  W^W)  in  the  text  of  Isaiah  is  the  correct  one. 
The  three  were  silent,  because  the  king  had  imposed  the  duty 
of  silence  upon  them ;  and  regarding  themselves  as  dismissed, 
inasmuch  as  Rabshakeh  had  turned  away  from  them  to  the 
people,  they  hastened  to  the  king,  rending  their  clothes,  in 
despair  and  grief  at  the  disgrace  they  had  experienced. 

The  king  and  the  deputation  apply  to  Isaiah.  Ch.  xxxvii. 
1-4.  "  And  it  came  to  pass,  when  king  Hizkiyahu  had  heard, 
he  rent  his  clothes,  and  wrapped  himself  in  mourning  linen,  and 
went  into  the  house  of  Jehovah.  And  sent  E 'Hakim  the  house- 
minister,  and  Shebna  (K.  omits  J"IK)  the  chancellor,  and  the  eldest 
of  the  priests,  wrapped  in  mourning  linen,  to  Isaiah  son  of  Amoz, 
the  prophet  (K.  has  what  is  inadmissible  :  the  prophet  son  of 
Amoz}.  And  they  said  to  him,  Thus  saith  Hizkiyahu,  A  day 
of  affliction,  and  punishment,  and  blasphemy  is  this  day;  for 
children  are  come  to  the  matrix,  and  there  is  no  strength  to  bring 
them  forth.  Perhaps  Jehovah  thy  God  will  hear  the  words 
(K.  all  the  words)  of  Rabshakeh,  with  which  the  king  of  Asshur 
his  lord  has  sent  him  to  revile  the  living  God ;  and  Jehovah  thy 
God  will  punish  for  the  words  which  He  hath  heard,  and  thou 
wilt  make  intercession  for  the  remnant  that  still  exists"  The 
distinguished  embassy  is  a  proof  of  the  distinction  of  the 
prophet  himself  (Knobel).  The  character  of  the  deputation 
accorded  with  its  object,  which  was  to  obtain  a  consolatory 
word  for  the  king  and  people.  In  the  form  of  the  instructions 
we  recognise  again  the  flowing  style  of  Isaiah,  '"T^fl,  as  a 
synonym  of  "ip^,  &P3>  is  used  as  in  Hos.  v.  9  ;  HVJO  (from  the 
leal  K^J)  according  to  ch.  i.  4,  v.  24,  lii.  5,  like  nvsp  (from  the 
piel  f^)>  Neh.  ix.  18,  26  (reviling,  i.e.  reviling  of  God,  or 
blasphemy).  The  figure  of  there  not  being  sufficient  strength 
to  bring  forth  the  child,  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  Ixvi.  9.  ">?^? 
(from  ")^,  syn.  H?>  Gen.  xxxviii.  29)  does  not  signify  the 
actual  birth  (Luzzatto,  punto  di  dover  nascere),  nor  the  deliver- 
ing-stool  (Targum),  like  mashber  shel-chayydh,  the  delivering- 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  5-7  93 

stool  of  the  midwife  (Kelim  xxiii.  4) ;  but  as  the  subject  is  the 
children,  and  not  the  mother,  the  matrix  or  mouth  of  the 
womb,  as  in  Hos.  xiii.  13,  "  He  (Ephraim)  is  an  unwise  child ; 
when  it  is  time  does  he  not  stop  in  the  children's  passage" 
(mashber  bdmm),  i.e.  the  point  which  a  child  must  pass,  not 
only  with  its  head,  but  also  with  its  shoulders  and  its  whole 
body,  for  which  the  force  of  the  pains  is  often  not  sufficient? 
The  existing  condition  of  the  state  resembled  such  unpromising 
birth-pains,  which  threatened  both  the  mother  and  the  fruit  of 
the  womb  with  death,  because  the  matrix  would  not  open  to 
give  birth  to  the  child,  HT>  like  njn  in  ch.  xi.  9.  The  timid 
inquiry?  which  hardly  dared  to  hope,  commences  with  'ulai. 
The  following  future  is  continued  in  perfects,  the  force  of 
which  is  determined  by  it :  "  and  He  (namely  Jehovah,  the 
Targum  and  Syriac)  will  punish  for  the  words,"  or,  as  we  point 
it,  "  there  will  punish  for  the  words  which  He  hath  heard, 
Jehovah  thy  God  (hokhlach,  referring  to  a  judicial  decision,  as 
in  a  general  sense  in  ch.  ii.  4  and  xi.  4)  ;  and  thou  wilt  lift  up 
prayer"  (i.e.  begin  to  offer  it,  ch.  xiv.  4).  "  He  will  hear," 
namely  as  judge  and  deliverer ;  "  He  hath  heard,"  namely  as 
the  omnipresent  One.  The  expression,  "  to  revile  the  living 
God"  (lechdreph  'Eldhlm  died),  sounds  like  a  comparison  of 
Kabshakeh  to  Goliath  (1  Sam.  xvii.  26,  36).  The  "  existing 
remnant"  was  Jerusalem,  which  was  not  yet  in  the  enemy's 
hand  (compare  ch.  i.  8,  9).  The  deliverance  of  the  remnant  is 
a  key-note  of  Isaiah's  prophecies.  But  the  prophecy  would  not 
be  fulfilled,  until  the  grace  which  fulfilled  it  had  been  met  by 
repentance  and  faith.  Hence  Hezekiah's  weak  faith  sues  for 
the  intercession  of  the  prophet,  whose  personal  relation  to  God 
is  here  set  forth  as  a  closer  one  than  that  of  the  king  and 
priests. 

Isaiah's  reply.  Vers.  5-7.  "  And  the  servants  of  king 
Hizkiyahu  came  to  Isaiah.  And  Isaiah  said  to  them  (Ej^!?N, 
K.  &!?;11),  Speak  thus  to  your  lord.  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Be  not 
afraid  of  the  words  which  thou  hast  heard,  with  which  the 
servants  of  the  king  of  Asshur  have  blasphemed  me!  Behold,  I 
will  bring  a  spirit  upon  him,  and  he  will  hear  a  hearsay,  and 
return  to  his  land ;  and  I  cut  him  doivn  with  the  sword  in  his  own 
land?  Luzzatto,  without  any  necessity,  takes  V1!DKS1  in  ver.  3 
in  the  modal  sense  of  what  they  were  to  do  (e  dovevano  dirgli)  : 


94  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

they  were  to  say  this  to  him,  but  he  anticipated  them  at  once 
with  the  instructions  given  here.  The  fact,  so  far  as  the  style 
is  concerned,  is  rather  this,  that  ver.  5,  while  pointing  back, 
gives  the  ground  for  ver.  6  :  "  and  when  they  had  come  to 
him  (saying  this),  he  said  to  them."  ^Jtt  we  render  "servants" 
(Knappen1)  after  Esth.  ii.  2,  vi.  3,  5  ;  it  is  a  more  contemptuous 
expression  than  ^y.  The  rufich  mentioned  here  as  sent  by 
God  is  a  superior  force  of  a  spiritual  kind,  which  influences 
both  thought  and  conduct,  as  in  such  other  connections  as  ch. 
xix.  14,  xxviii.  6,  xxix.  10  (Psychol.  p.  295,  Anm.). 

The  external  occasion  which  determined  the  return  of  Sen 
nacherib,  as  described  in  ch.  xxxvii.  36,  37,  was  the  fearful 
mortality  that  had  taken  place  in  his  army.  The  sJfmudh 
(rumour,  hearsay),  however,  was  not  the  tidings  of  this  cata 
strophe,  but,  as  the  continuation  of  the  account  in  vers.  8,  9, 
clearly  shows,  the  report  of  the  advance  of  Tirhakah,  which 
compelled  Sennacherib  to  leave  Palestine  in  consequence  of 
this  catastrophe.  The  prediction  of  his  death  is  sufficiently 
special  to  be  regarded  by  modern  commentators,  who  will 
admit  nothing  but  the  most  misty  figures  as  prophecies,  as  a 
vaticinium  post  eventuin.  At  the  same  time,  the  prediction  of 
the  event  which  would  drive  the  Assyrian  out  of  the  land  is 
intentionally  couched  in  these  general  terms.  The  faith  of  the 
king,  and  of  the  inquirers  generally,  still  needed  to  be  tested 
and  exercised.  The  time  had  not  yet  come  for  him  to  be 
rewarded  by  a  clearer  and  fuller  announcement  of  the  judg 
ment. 


B.  SECOND  ATTEMPT  OF  THE  ASSYRIANS  TO  FORCE  THE 
SURRENDER  OF  JERUSALEM.  ITS  MIRACULOUS  DELI 
VERANCE. — CHAP.  XXXVII.  8  SQQ. 

Rabshakeh,  who  is  mentioned  alone  in  both  texts  as  the 
leading  person  engaged,  returns  to  Sennacherib,  who  is  induced 
to  make  a  second  attempt  to  obtain  possession  of  Jerusalem,  as 
a  position  of  great  strength  and  decisive  importance.  Vers. 
8,  9.  "  Rabshakeh  thereupon  returned,  and  found  the  king  of 

1  Knappe  is  the  same  word  as  "  Knave  ;"  but  we  have  no  word  in  use 
now  which  is  an  exact  equivalent,  and  knave  has  entirely  lost  its  original 
sense  of  servant.— TK. 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  10-13.  95 

AssJiur  warring  against  Libnah  :  for  he  had  heard  that  he  had 
withdrawn  from  Lacldsh.  And  he  heard  say  concerning  Tirhakah 
king  of  Ethiopia,  (K.  Behold),  he  has  come  out  to  make  war  with 
thee ;  and  heard,  and  sent  (K.  and  repeated,  and  sent)  messen 
gers  to  Hizkiyahu,  saying"  Tirhakah  was  cursorily  referred  to 
in  ch.  xviii.  The  twenty-fifth  dynasty  of  Manetho  contained 
three  Ethiopian  rulers  :  Sabakon,  Sebichos  (KiD  =  K)D,  although, 
so  far  as  we  know,  the  Egyptian  names  begin  with  Sh),  and 
Tarakos  (Tarkos),  Egypt.  Taharka,  or  Heb.  with  the  tone  upon 
the  penultimate,  Tirhdqdh.  The  only  one  mentioned  by  Hero 
dotus  is  Sabakon,  to  whom  he  attributes  a  reign  of  fifty  years 
(ii.  139),  i.e.  as  much  as  the  whole  three  amount  to,  when 
taken  in  a  round  sum.  If  Sebichos  is  the  biblical  So,  to  whom 
the  lists  attribute  from  twelve  to  fourteen  years,  it  is  perfectly 
conceivable  that  Tirhakah  may  have  been  reigning  in  the 
fourteenth  year  of  Hezekiah.  But  if  this  took  place,  as 
Manetho  affirms,  366  years  before  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by 
Alexander,  i.e.  from  696  onwards  (and  the  Apis-stele,  No.  2037, 
as  deciphered  by  Vic.  de  Rouge,  Revue  archeol.  1863,  confirms 
it),  it  would  be  more  easily  reconcilable  with  the  Assyrian 
chronology,  which  represents  Sennacherib  as  reigning  from 
702-680  (Oppert  and  Rawlinson),  than  with  the  current  biblical 
chronology,  according  to  which  Hezekiah's  fourteenth  year  is 
certainly  not  much  later  than  the  year  714.1  It  is  worthy  of 
remark  also,  that  Tirhakah  is  not  described  as  Pharaoh  here, 
but  as  the  king  of  Ethiopia  (melekh  Kush;  see  at  ver.  36). 
Libnah,  according  to  the  Onom.  a  place  in  regione  Eleuthero- 
politana,  is  probably  the  same  as  Tell  es-SaJieh  ("  hill  of  the 
pure  "  =  of  the  white),  to  the  north-west  of  Bet  Gilrin,  called 
Alba  Specula  (Blanche  Garde)  in  the  middle  ages.  The  ex 
pression  y»B>5  ("and  he  heard"),  which  occurs  twice  in  the 
text,  points  back  to  what  is  past,  and  also  prepares  the  way  for 
what  follows :  "  having  heard  this,  he  sent,"  etc.  At  the  same 
time  it  appears  to  have  been  altered  from  3t?J. 

The  message.  Yers.  10-13.  "  Thus  shall  ye  say  to  Hizkiyahu 
king  of  Judah,  saying,  Let  not  thy  God  in  whom  thou  trustest 
deceive  thee,  saying,  Jerusalem  will  not  be  given  into  the  hand  of 
the  king  of  Asshur.  Behold,  thou  hast  surely  heard  what  (K. 

1  On  the  still  prevailing  uncertainty  with  regard  to  the  synchronism, 
see  Keil  on  Kings  ;  and  Duncker,  Geschichte  des  Alterthums.  pp.  713-4. 


96  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

that  which)  the  kings  of  Asshur  have  done  to  all  lands,  to  lay  the 
ban  upon  them;  and  thou,  thou  shouldst  be  delivered?  !  Have  the 
gods  of  the  nations,  which  my  fathers  destroyed,  delivered  them : 
Gozan,  and  Haran,  and  Rezeph,  and  the  Bene-Eden,  which 
are  in  Telassar  ?  Where  is  (K.  ivhere  is  he)  the  king  of 
Hamath,  and  the  king  of  Arpad,  and  the  king  of*Ir-Sepharvaim, 
Hena,  and  ' ' Ivah?"  Although  fJK  is  feminine,  Dnte  (K.  DHK), 
like  DE'nnnpj  points  back  to  the  lands  (in  accordance  with  the 
want  of  any  thoroughly  developed  distinction  of  the  genders  in 
Hebrew) ;  likewise  "i^'N  quas  pessumdedemnt.  There  is  his 
torical  importance  in  the  fact,  that  here  Sennacherib  attributes 
to  his  fathers  (Sargon  arid  the  previous  kings  of  the  Derketade 
dynasty  which  he  had  overthrown)  what  Rabshakeh  on  the 
occasion  of  the  first  mission  had  imputed  to  Sennacherib  him 
self.  On  Gozan,  see  vol.  i.  p.  51.  It  is  no  doubt  identical  with 
the  Zuzan  of  the  Arabian  geographers,  which  is  described  as  a 
district  of  outer  Armenia,  situated  on  the  Chabur,  e.g.  in  the 
Merasid.  "  The  Chabur  is  the  Chabur  of  el-Hasaniye,  a  district 
of  Mosul,  to  the  east  of  the  Tigris ;  it  comes  down  from  the 
mountains  of  the  land  of  Zuzan,  flows  through  a  broad  and 
thickly  populated  country  in  the  north  of  Mosul,  which  is 
called  outer  Armenia,  and  empties  itself  into  the  Tigris." 
Ptolemy,  on  the  other  hand  (v.  18,  14),  is  acquainted  with  a 
Mesopotamian  Gauzanitis ;  and,  looking  upon  northern  Meso 
potamia  as  the  border  land  of  Armenia,  he  says,  /carpet  Be 
TT}?  X^Pa^  ra  /juev  TT/JO?  rfj  'Apaevla  rj  'AvOe/novaia  (not  far 
from  Edessa)  vfi  fjv  r)  XaX/aTt?,  VTTO  8e  Tavrijv  r)  Tav^avlns, 
possibly  the  district  of  Gulzan,  in  which  Nisibin,  the  ancient 
Nisibis,  still  stands.1  For  Ildrdn  (Syr.  Horon ;  Joseph. 
Charran  of  Mesopotamia),  the  present  Harran,  not  far  from 
Charmelik,  see  Genesis,  p.  327.  The  Harran  in  the  Guta  of 
Damascus  (on  the  southern  arm  of  the  Harus),  which  Beke 
has  recently  identified  with  it,  is  not  connected  with  it  in  any 
way.  Retseph  is  the  Rhesapha  of  Ptol.  v.  18,  6,  below  Thap- 
sacus,  the  present  Rusafa  in  the  Euphrates- valley  of  ez-Zor, 
between  the  Euphrates  and  Tadmur  (Palmyra ;  see  Robinson, 
Pal.).  Telassar \  with  which  the  Targum  (ii.  iii.)  and  Syr. 
confound  the  Ellasar  of  Gen.  xiv.  1,  i.e.  Artemita  (Artamita), 
is  not  the  Thelseo3  of  the  Itin.  Antonini  and  of  the  Notitia 
1  See  Oppert,  Expedition,  i.  60. 


CHAP.  XXXVII   14-20.  97 

dignitatum, — in  which  case  the  Bene-Eden  might  be  the  tribe  of 
Bet  Genn  (Bettegene)  on  the  southern  slope  of  Lebanon  (i.e. 
the  'Eden  of  Coelesyria,  Amos  i.  5 ;  the  Paradeisos  of  Ptol.  v. 
15,  20;  Paradisus,  Plin.  v.  19),— but  the  Thelser  of  the  Tab. 
Peuting.9  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Tigris  ;  and  Bene  'Eden  is 
the  tribe  of  the  'Eden  mentioned  by  Ezekiel  (xxvii.  23)  after 
Ilaran  and  Ctesiphon.  Consequently  the  enumeration  of  the 
warlike  deeds  describes  a  curve,  which  passes  in  a  north 
westerly  direction  through  Hamath  and  Arpad,  and  then 
returns  in  Sepharvaim  to  the  border  of  southern  Mesopotamia 
and  Babylonia.  tIr-Sepliarvaim  is  like  fIr-Nachash,  'Ir-Shemesh, 
etc.  The  legends  connect  the  name  with  the  sacred  books. 
The  form  of  the  name  is  inexplicable ;  but  the  name  itself 
probably  signifies  the  double  shore  (after  the  Aramaean),  as 
the  city,  which  was  the  southernmost  of  the  leading  places  of 
Mesopotamia,  was  situated  on  the  Euphrates.  The  wrords 
n^  y^9  if  not  taken  as  proper  names,  would  signify,  "  he  has 
taken  away,  and  overthrown ;"  but  in  that  case  we  should 
expect  ViJtt  «ttn  or  Wjn  Vftran.  They  are  really  the  names  of 
cities  which  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  trace.  Hena  is  hardly 
the  well-known  Avatho  on  the  Euphrates,  as  Gesemus,  v. 
Niebuhr,  and  others  suppose ;  and  'Ivah,  the  seat  of  the  '  AvvZm 
(2  Kings  xvii.  31),  agrees  still  less,  so  far  as  the  sound  of  the 
word  is  concerned,  with  "  the  province  of  Hebeh  (1  Hebeb  : 
Kitter,  Erdk.  xi  707),  situated  between  Anah  and  the  Chabur 
on  the  Euphrates,"  with  which  v.  Niebuhr  combines  it.1 

This  intimidating  message,  which  declared  the  God  of  Israel 
to  be  utterly  powerless,  was  conveyed  by  the  messengers  of 
Sennacherib  in  the  form  of  a  letter.  Vers.  14, 15.  "  And  Iliz- 
kiyahu  took  the  fetter  out  of  the  hand  of  the  messengers,  and  read  it 
(K.  read  tliem),  and  went  up  to  the  house  of  Jehovah;  and  Ilizki- 
yaliu  spread  it  before  Jehovah"  Sephdrlm  (the  sheets)  is  equiva 
lent  to  the  letter  (not  a  letter  in  duplo),  like  literce  (cf.grammata). 
in^npsi  (changed  by  K.  into  D— )  is  construed  according  to  the 
singular  idea.  Thenius  regards  this  spreading  out  of  the  letter  as 
a  naivetd;  and  Gesenius  even  goes  so  far  as  to  speak  of  the  praying 
machines  of  the  Buddhists.  But  it  was  simply  prayer  without 
words — an  act  of  prayer,  which  afterwards  passed  into  vocal 
prayer.  Vers.  16-20.  "  And  Hizkiyahu  prayed  to  (K.  before) 
1  For  other  combinations  of  equal  value,  see  Oppert,  Expedition,  i.  220. 
VOL.  II,  O 


i)3  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Jehovah,  saying  (K.  and  said),  Jehovah  of  hosts  (K.  omits  tselM- 
98tk)9  God  of  Israel)  enthroned  upon  the  cherubim,  Thou,  yea  Thou 
alone,  art  God  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth;  Thou,  Thou  hast 
made  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Incline  Thine  ear,  Jehovah,  and 
hear  (y^>  various  reading  in  both  texts  VB^)  !  Open  Tldne 
eyes  (K.  with  Yod  of  the  plural),  Jehovah,  and  see;  and  hear  the 
(K.  all  the)  words  of  Sennacherib,  which  he  hath  sent  (K.  with 
which  he  hath  sent  him,  i.e.  Rabshakeh)  to  despise  the  living 
God  I  Truly,  0  Jehovah,  the  kings  of  Asshur  have  laid  waste 
all  lands,  and  their  land  (K.  the  nations  and  their  land),  and  have 
put  (v'ndthon,  K.  vendthenu)  their  gods  into  the  fire :  for  they  were 
not  gods,  only  the  work  of  men1  s  hands,  wood  and  stone ;  therefore 
they  have  destroyed  them.  And  now,  Jehovah  our  God,  help  us 
(K.  adds  pray)  out  of  his  hand,  and  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
may  know  that  Tlwu  Jehovah  (K.  Jehovah  Elohim)  art  it  alone" 
On  Cr^)2  (no  doubt  the  same  word  as  ypvTres,  though  not 
fabulous  beings  like  these,  but  a  symbolical  representation  of 
heavenly  beings),  see  my  Genesis,  p.  626 ;  and  on  yoshebh  hak- 
kerubhlm  (enthroned  on  the  cherubim),  see  at  Ps.  xviii.  11  and 
Ixxx.  2.  Kin  in  Kirrnrix  is  an  emphatic  repetition,  that  is  to  say 
a  strengthening,  of  the  subject,  like  ch.  xliii.  25,  li.  12,  2  Sam. 
vii.  28,  Jer.  xlix.  12,  Ps.  xliv.  5,  Neh.  ix.  6,  7,  Ezra  v.  11  : 
tu  ille  (not  tu  es  ille,  Ges.  §  121,  2)  =  tu,  nullus  alms.  Such 
passages  as  ch.  xli.  4,  where  mn  is  the  predicate,  do  not 
belong  here.  I^V  is  not  a  singular  (like  wy  in  Ps.  xxxii.  8, 

o  •.•  *•  o  *  *  *•  y 

where  the  LXX.  have  ^y),  but  a  defective  plural,  as  we  should 
expect  after  pdqach.  On  the  other  hand,  the  reading  sheldcho 
(u  hath  sent  him  "),  which  cannot  refer  to  debhdrlm  (the  words), 
but  only  to  the  person  bringing  the  written  message,  is  to  be 
rejected.  Moreover,  Knobel  cannot  help  giving  up  his  pre 
ference  for  the  reading  vendthon  (compare  Gen.  xli.  43  ;  Ges. 
§  131,  4a);  just  as,  on  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  help  regarding 
the  reading  D¥"iNT)N}  nfaHKjTOnw  as  a  mistake,  when  compared 
with  the  reading  of  the  book  of  Kings.  Abravanel  explains 
the  passage  thus :  "  The  Assyrians  have  devastated  the  lands, 
and  their  own  land"  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  20),  of  which  we  may  find 
examples  in  the  list  of  victories  given  above;  compare  also 
Beth-Arbel  in  Hos.  x.  14,  if  this  is  Irbil  on  the  Tigris,  from 
which  Alexander's  second  battle  in  Persia,  which  was  really 
fought  at  Gaugamela,  derived  its  name.  But  how  does  this 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  21-23.  99 

tally  with  the  fact  that  they  threw  the  gods  of  these  lands — that 
is  to  say,  of  their  own  land  also  (for  D^n?K  could  not  possibly 
refer  to  niyixn,  to  the  exclusion  of  Dnx) — into  the  fire  f  If  we 
read  haggoylm  (the  nations),  we  get  rid  both  of  the  reference 
to  their  own  land,  which  is  certainly  purposeless  here,  and  also 
of  the  otherwise  inevitable  conclusion  that  they  burned  the 
gods  of  their  own  country.  The  reading  ni¥"iKn  appears  to 
have  arisen  from  the  fact,  that  after  the  verb  mnn  the  lands 
appeared  to  follow  more  naturally  as  the  object,  than  the  tribes 
themselves  (compare,  however,  ch.  Ix.  12).  The  train  of 
thought  is  the  following :  The  Assyrians  have  certainly  de 
stroyed  nations  and  their  gods,  because  these  gods  were  nothing 
but  the  works  of  men :  do  Thou  then  help  us,  O  Jehovah, 
that  the  world  may  see  that  Thou  alone  art  it,  viz.  God 
^Elohlm,  as  K.  adds,  although,  according  to  the  accents, 
Jehovah  Elohim  are  connected  together,  as  in  the  books  of 
Samuel  and  Chronicles,  and  very  frequently  in  the  mouth  of 
David  :  see  Symbols  in  Psalmos,  pp.  15,  16). 

The  prophet's  reply.  Yers.  21,  22a.  "And  Isaiah  the  son  of 
Amoz  sent  to  Hizkiyahu,  saying,  Thus  saith  Jehovah  the  God 
of  Israel,  That  which  tliou  hast  prayed  to  me  concerning  Sen 
nacherib  the  king  of  Asshur  (K.  adds,  /  have  heard)  :  this  is  the 
utterance  which  Jehovah  utters  concerning  him."  He  sent,  i.e. 
sent  a  message,  viz.  by  one  of  his  disciples  (limrnudlm,  ch.  viii. 
16).  According  to  the  text  of  Isaiah,  "JB'K  would  commence  the 
protasis  to  "linn  nr  (as  for  that  which — this  is  the  utterance)  ; 
or,  as  the  Vav  of  the  apodosis  is  wanting,  it  might  introduce 
relative  clauses  to  what  precedes  ("  I,  to  whom  :"  Ges.  §  123,  1, 
Anm.  1).  But  both  of  these  are  very  doubtful.  "VVe  cannot 
dispense  with  *J?|OP  (I  have  heard),  which  is  given  by  both 
the  LXX.  and  Syr.  in  the  text  of  Isaiah,  as  well  as  that  of 
Kings. 

The  prophecy  of  Isaiah  which  follows  here,  is  in  all  respects 
one  of  the  most  magnificent  that  we  meet  with.  It  proceeds 
with  strophe-like  strides  on  the  cothurnus  of  the  Deborah  style  : 
Yers.  22&,  23.  "  The  virgin  daughter  of  Zion  despiseth  thee, 
laugheth  thee  to  scorn ;  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem  shaketh  her  head 
after  thee.  Whom  hast  thou  reviled  and  blasphemed,  and  over 
whom  hast  thou  spoken  loftily,  that  thou  hast  lifted  up  thine  eyes 
on  high  f  Against  the  Holy  One  of  Israel?'  The  predicate  is 


100  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

written  at  the  head,  in  ver.  22£,  in  the  masculine,  i.e.  without 
any  precise  definition ;  since  nta  is  a  verb  rrt,  and  neither  the 
participle  nor  the  third  pers.  fern,  of  FQ.  Zion  is  called  a  virgin, 
with  reference  to  the  shame  with  which  it  was  threatened 
though  without  success  (ch.  xxiii.  12)  ;  bethulath  bath  are 
subordinate  appositions,  instead  of  co-ordinate.  With  a  con 
tented  and  heightened  self-consciousness,  she  shakes  her  head 
behind  him  as  he  retreats  with  shame,  saying  by  her  attitude, 
as  she  moves  her  head  backwards  and  forwards,  that  it  must 
come  to  this,  and  could  not  be  otherwise  (Jer.  xviii.  16 ;  Lam. 
ii.  15,  16).  The  question  in  ver.  23  reaches  as  far  as  T-TJJj 
although,  according  to  the  accents,  ver.  23  is  an  affirmative 
clause  :  "  and  thou  turnest  thine  eyes  on  high  against  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel "  (Hitzig,  Ewald,  Drechsler,  and  Keil).  The 
question  is  put  for  the  purpose  of  saying  to  Asshur,  that  He 
at  whom  they  scoff  is  the  God  of  Israel,  whose  pure  holiness 
breaks  out  into  a  consuming  fire  against  all  by  whom  it  is  dis 
honoured.  The  fut.  cons.  Kfrni  is  essentially  the  same  as  in 
ch.  li.  12,  13,  and  Bi"iD  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  xl.  26. 

Second  turn,  ver.  24.  "  By  thy  servants  (K.  thy  messengers) 
hast  thou  reviled  the  Lord,  in  that  thou  sayest,  With  the  multitude 
(K.  chethib  nrra)  of  my  chariots  have  I  climbed  the  height  of  the 
mountains,  the  inner  side  of  Lebanon ;  and  I  shall  fell  the  lofty 
growth  of  its  cedars,  the  choice  (mibhchar,  K.  mibhchor)  of  its 
cypresses :  and  I  shall  penetrate  (K.  and  will  penetrate)  to  the 
height  (K.  the  halting-place)  of  its  uttermost  border,  the  grove  of 
its  orchard"  The  other  text  appears,  for  the  most  part,  the 
preferable  one  here.  Whether  maV  tikliekhd  (thy  messengers, 
according  to  ch.  ix.  14)  or  'abhddekhd  (thy  servants,  viz.  Rab- 
shakeh,  Tartan,  and  Rabsaris)  is  to  be  preferred,  may  be  left 
undecided  ;  also  whether  <Q3"i  33"O  is  an  error  or  a  superlative 
expression,  "with  chariots  of  my  chariots,"  i.e.  my  countless 
chariots  ;  also,  thirdly,  whether  Isaiah  wrote  mibhchor.  He 
uses  mistor  in  ch.  iv.  6  for  a  special  reason ;  but  such  obscure 
forms  befit  in  other  instances  the  book  of  Kings,  with  its  colour 
ing  of  northern  Palestine ;  and  we  also  meet  with  mibhchor  in 
2  Kings  iii.  19,  in  the  strongly  Aramaic  first  series  of  histories 
of  Elisha,  On  the  other  hand,  ns  jp  jiP£  is  certainly  the  original 
reading,  in  contrast  with  tep  DftD.  It  is  important,  as  bearing 
upon  the  interpretation  of  the  passage,  that  both  texts  have 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  25-27.  lOl 

,  not  rpOKJ,  and  that  the  other  text  confirms  this  pointing, 
inasmuch  as  it  has  n^i3W  instead  of  NUS1.  The  Lebanon  here, 
if  not  purely  emblematical  (as  in  Jer.  xxii.  6  =  the  royal  city 
Jerusalem  ;  Ezek.  xvii.  3  =  Judah-Jerusalem),  has  at  any  rate 
a  synecdochical  meaning  (cf.  xiv.  8),  signifying  the  land  of 
Lebanon,  i.e.  the  land  of  Israel,  into  which  he  had  forced  a 
way,  and  all  the  fortresses  and  great  men  of  which  he  would 
destroy.  He  would  not  rest  till  Jerusalem,  the  most  renowned 
height  of  the  land  of  Lebanon,  was  lying  at  his  feet.  Thenius 
is  quite  right  in  regarding  the  "resting-place  of  the  utmost 
border"  and  "  the  pleasure-garden  wood"  as  containing  allu 
sions  to  the  holy  city  and  its  royal  citadel  (compare  the  allegory 
in  ch.  v.  vol.  i.  pp.  164-5). 

Third  turn,  ver.  25.  "  /,  1  have  digged  and  drunk  (K.  foreign) 
waters,  and  will  make  dry  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  all  the  Nile-arms 
CH^:,  K.  n.ltf.)  of  Matsor."  If  we  take  W.ty  in  ver.  24  as  a  per 
fect  of  certainty,  ver.  25a  would  refer  to  the  overcoming  of  the 
difficulties  connected  with  the  barren  sandy  steppe  on  the  way 
to  Egypt  (viz.  et-Tili) ;  but  the  perfects  stand  out  against  the 
following  futures,  as  statements  of  what  was  actually  past. 
Thus,  in  places  where  there  were  no  waters  at  all,  and  it  might 
have  been  supposed  that  his  army  would  inevitably  perish,  there 
he  had  dug  them  (qiir,  from  which  mdqor  is  derived,  fodere ; 
not  scaturire,  as  Luzzatto  supposes),  and  had  drunk  up  these 
waters,  which  had  been  called  up,  as  if  by  magic,  upon  foreign 
soil ;  and  in  places  where  there  were  waters,  as  in  Egypt  (mdtsor 
is  used  in  Isaiah  and  Micah  for  mitsrayim,  with  a  play  upon  the 
appellative  meaning  of  the  word  :  an  enclosing  fence,  a  forti 
fying  girdle :  see  Ps.  xxxi.  22),  the  Nile-arms  and  \?anals  of 
which  appeared  to  bar  all  farther  progress,  it  was  an  easy  thing 
for  him  to  set  at  nought  all  these  opposing  hindrances.  The 
Nile,  with  its  many  arms,  was  nothing  but  a  puddle  to  him, 
which  he  trampled  out  with  his  feet. 

And  yet  what  he  was  able  to  do  was  not  the  result  of  his 
own  power,  but  of  the  counsel  of  God,  which  he  subserved. 
Fourth  turn,  vers.  26,  27.  "Hast  thou  not  heard?  1  have 
done  it  long  ago,  from  (K.  lemin,  since)  the  days  of  ancient  time 
have  I  formed  it,  and  now  brought  it  to  pass  (rpriNrin,  K.  rpriK'qn) : 
that  thou  shouldst  lay  waste  fortified  cities  into  desolate  stone 
heaps ;  and  t/teir  inhabitants,  powerless,  were  terrified,  and  were 


102  THE  PROPHECIEb  OF  ISAIAH. 


put  to  shame  (^31,  K.  1£'3*V)  :  became  herb  of  the  field  and  green 
of  the  turfy  herb  of  the  house-tops,  and  a  corn-field  (HD^E*!.  K. 
and  blighted  corn)  before  the  blades"  Umerdchoq  (from  afar)  is 
not  to  be  connected  with  the  preceding  words,  but  according  to 
the  parallel  with  those  which  follow.  The  historical  reality,  in 
this  instance  the  Assyrian  judgment  upon  the  nations,  had  had 
from  all  eternity  an  ideal  reality  in  God  (see  at  ch.  xxii.  11). 
The  words  are  addressed  to  the  Assyrian  ;  and  as  his  instru 
mentality  formed  the  essential  part  of  the  divine  purpose,  ""nrw 
does  not  mean  "  there  should,"  but  "  thou  shouldest,"  e/^eXXe? 
(cf.  ch.  xliv.  14,  15,  and  Hab.  i.  17).  K.  has 
instead  of  rritf^r6  (though  not  as  chethib,  in  which  case 
it  would  have  to  be  pointed  rri^np),  a  singularly  syncopated 
hiphil  (for  nte'p).  The  point  of  comparison  in  the  four  figures 
is  the  facility  with  which  they  can  be  crushed.  The  nations  in 
the  presence  of  the  Assyrian  became,  as  it  were,  weak,  delicate 
grasses,  with  roots  only  rooted  in  the  surface,  or  like  a  corn 
field  with  the  stalk  not  yet  formed  (shedemdh,  ch.  xvi.  8), 
which  could  easily  be  rooted  up,  and  did  not  need  to  be  cut 
down  with  the  sickle.  This  idea  is  expressed  still  more 
strikingly  in  Kings,  "like  corn  blighted  (sh'dephdh,  compare 
shidddphon,  corn-blight)  before  the  shooting  up  of  the  stalk  ;  " 
the  Assyrian  being  regarded  as  a  parching  east  wind,  which 
destroys  the  seed  before  the  stalk  is  formed. 

Asshur  is  Jehovah's  chosen  instrument  while  thus  casting 
down  the  nations,  which  are  "  short-handed  against  him,"  i.e. 
incapable  of  resisting  him.  But  Jehovah  afterwards  places  this 
lion  under  firm  restraint  ;  and  before  it  has  reached  the  goal  set 
before  if;  He  leads  it  back  into  its  own  land,  as  if  with  a  ring 
through  its  nostril.  Fifth  turn,  vers.  28,  29.  "  And  thy  silting 
down,  and  thy  going  out,  and  thy  entering  in,  I  know  ;  and  thy 
heating  thyself  against  me.  On  account  of  thy  heating  thyself 
against  me,  and  because  thy  self-confidence  has  risen  up  into  mine 
ears,  I  put  my  ring  into  thy  nose,  and  my  muzzle  into  thy  lips, 
and  lead  thee  back  by  the  way  by  which  thou  hast  come"  Sitting 
down  and  rising  up  (Ps.  cxxxix.  2),  going  out  and  coming  in 
(Ps.  cxxi.  8),  denote  every  kind  of  human  activity.  All 
the  thoughts  and  actions,  the  purposes  and  undertakings  of 
Sennacherib,  more  especially  with  regard  to  the  people  of 
Jehovah,  were  under  divine  control.  $1  is  followed  by  the 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  30.  103 

infinitive,  which  is  then  continued  in  the  finite  verb,  just  as 
in  ch.  xxx.  12.  ^MW  (another  reading,  *P^^)  is  used  as  a 
substantive,  and  denotes  the  Assyrians'  complacent  and  scornful 
self-confidence  (Ps.  cxxiii.  4),  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  tftf$ 
(Targum,  Abulw.,  Kashi,  Kimchi,  Rosenmiiller,  Luzzatto). 
The  figure  of  the  leading  away  with  a  nose-ring  (chachl  with  a 
latent  dagesh,  Nn  to  prick,  hence  choach,  Arab,  chock,  chocha, 
a  narrow  slit,  literally  means  a  cut  or  aperture)  is  repeated  in 
Ezek.  xxxviii.  4.  Like  a  wild  beast  that  had  been  subdued 
by  force,  the  Assyrian  would  have  to  return  home,  without 
having  achieved  his  purpose  with  Judah  (or  with  Egypt). 

The  prophet  now  turns  to  Hezekiah.  Ver.  30.  "  And  let 
tliis  be  a  sign  to  thee.  Men  eat  this  year  what  is  self-sown ;  and  in 
the  second  year  ivliat  springs  from  the  roots  (shac-hls,  K.  sdchlsh)  ; 
and  in  the  third  year  they  sow  and  reap  and  plant  vineyards,  and 
eat  (chethib  7I2N)  their  fruit."  According  to  Thenius,  hasshdndh 
(this  year)  signifies  the  first  year  after  Sennacherib's  in 
vasion,  hasshdndh  hasshemth  (the  second  year)  the  current 
year  in  which  the  words  were  uttered  by  Hezekiah,  hasshdndh 
hasshellshlth  (the  third  year)  the  year  that  was  coming  in  which 
the  land  would  be  cleared  of  the  enemy.  But  understood  in  this 
way,  the  whole  would  have  been  no  sign,  but  simply  a  prophecy 
that  the  condition  of  things  during  the  two  years  was  to  come 
to  an  end  in  the  third.  It  would  only  be  a  "  sign "  if  the 
second  year  was  also  still  in  the  future.  By  hasshdndh,  there 
fore,  we  are  to  understand  what  the  expression  itself  requires 
(cf.  ch.  xxix.  1,  xxxii.  10),  namely  the  current  year,  in  which 
the  people  had  been  hindered  from  cultivating  their  fields  by 
the  Assyrian  who  was  then  in  the  land,  and  therefore  had  been 
thrown  back  upon  the  sdphlach,  i.e.  the  after  growth  (avro^ara, 
LXX.,  the  self-sown),  or  crop  which  had  sprung  up  from  the 
fallen  grains  of  the  previous  harvest  (from  sdphach,  adjicere,  see 
at  Hab.  ii.  15  ;  or,  according  to  others,  effundere,  see  vol.  i.  165). 
It  was  autumn  at  the  time  when  Isaiah  gave  this  sign  (ch. 
xxxiii.  9),  and  the  current  civil  year  was  reckoned  from  one 
autumnal  equinox  to  the  other,  as,  for  example,  in  Ex.  xxiii.  16, 
where  the  feast  of  tabernacles  or  harvest  festival  is  said  to  fall 
at  the  close  of  the  year ;  so  that  if  the  fourteenth  year  of 
Hezekiah  was  the  year  714,  the  current  year  would  extend 
from  Tishri  714  to  Tishri  713.  But  if  in  the  nexl  year  also, 


104  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

713-712,  there  was  no  sowing  and  reaping,  but  the  people  were 
to  eat  shdchis,  i.e.  that  which  grew  of  itself  (ai/roc^ue?,  Aq., 
Theod.),  and  that  very  sparingly,  not  from  the  grains  shed  at 
the  previous  harvest,  but  from  the  roots  of  the  wheat,  we  need 
not  assume  that  this  year,  713-712,  happened  to  be  a  sabbatical 
year,  in  which  the  law  required  all  agricultural  pursuits  to  be 
suspended.1  It  is  very  improbable  in  itself  that  the  prophet 
should  have  included  a  circumstance  connected  with  the 
calendar  in  his  "  sign  ;"  and,  moreover,  according  to  the  existing 
chronological  data,  the  year  715  had  been  a  sabbatical  year 
(see  Hitzig).  It  is  rather  presupposed,  either  that  the  land 
would  be  too  thoroughly  devastated  and  desolate  for  the  fields 
to  be  cultivated  and  sown  (Keil)  ;  or,  as  we  can  hardly  imagine 
such  an  impossibility  as  this,  if  we  picture  to  ourselves  the 
existing  situation  and  the  kind  of  agriculture  common  in 
Palestine,  that  the  Assyrian  would  carry  out  his  expedition  to 
Egypt  in  this  particular  year  (713-12),  and  returning  through 
Judah,  would  again  prevent  the  sowing  of  the  corn  (Ilitzig, 
Knobel).  But  in  the  third  year,  that  is  to  say  the  year 
712-11,  freedom  and  peace  would  prevail  again,  and  there 
would  be  nothing  more  to  hinder  the  cultivation  of  the  fields  or 
vineyards.  If  this  should  be  the  course  of  events  during  the 
three  years,  it  would  be  a  sign  to  king  Hezekiah  that  the  fate 
of  the  Assyrian  would  be  no  other  than  that  predicted.  The 
year  712-11  would  be  the  peremptory  limit  appointed  him,  and 
the  year  of  deliverance. 

Seventh  turn,  vers.  31,  32.  "And  that  which  is  escaped 
of  the  house  of  Judah,  that  which  remains  will  again  take 
root  downward,  and  bear  fruit  upward.  For  from  Jerusalem 
will  a  remnant  go  forth,  and  a  fugitive  from  Mount  Zion ; 
the  zeal  of  Jehovah  of  hosts  (K.  chethib  omits  tscbliadth) 
will  carry  this  out"  The  agricultural  prospect  of  the  third 
year  shapes  itself  here  into  a  figurative  representation  of  the 
fate  of  Judah.  Isaiah's  watchword,  "a  remnant  shall  return," 
is  now  fulfilled  ;  Jerusalem  has  been  spared,  and  becomes  the 
source  of  national  rejuvenation.  You  hear  the  echo  of  ch. 
v.  24,  ix.  6,  and  also  of  ch.  xxvii.  6.  The  word  tsebhd'oth  is 
wanting  in  Kings,  here  as  well  as  in  ver.  17  ;  in  fact,  this 

1  There  certainly  is  no  necessity  for  a  sabbatical  year  followed  by  « 
year  of  jubilee,  to  enable  us  to  explain  the  "  sign,"  as  Hofmann  supposes. 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  33-33.  105 

divine  name  is,  as  a  rule,  very  rare  in  the  book  of  Kings,  where 
it  only  occurs  in  the  first  series  of  accounts  of  Elijah  (1  Kings 
xviii.  15,  xix.  10,  14 ;  cf.  2  Kings  iii.  14). 

The  prophecy  concerning  the  protection  of  Jerusalem  be 
comes  more  definite  in  the  last  turn  than  it  ever  has  been 
before.  Vers.  33-35.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  Jehovah  concerning 
the  king  of  Asshur,  He  will  not  enter  into  this  city,  nor  shoot  off 
an  arrow  there ;  nor  do  they  assault  it  with  a  shield,  nor  cast  up 
earthworks  against  it.  By  the  way  by  which  he  came  (K.  will 
come)  will  he  return ;  and  he  will  not  enter  into  this  city,  saith 
Jehovah.  And  I  shield  this  city  (?V,  K.  ?$),  to  help  it,  for  mine 
own  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of  David  my  servant"  According  to 
Hitzig,  this  conclusion  belongs  to  the  later  reporter,  on  account 
of  its  "  suspiciously  definite  character."  Knobel,  on  the  other 
hand,  sees  no  reason  for  disputing  the  authorship  of  Isaiah, 
inasmuch  as  in  all  probability  the  pestilence  had  already  set  in 
(ch.  xxxiii.  24),  and  threatened  to  cripple  the  Assyrian  army 
very  considerably,  so  that  the  prophet  began  to  hope  that 
Sennacherib  might  now  be  unable  to  stand  against  the  power 
ful  Ethiopian  king.  To  us,  however,  the  words  "  Thus  saith 
Jehovah  "  are  something  more  than  a  flower  of  speech ;  and  we 
hear  the  language  of  a  man  exalted  above  the  standard  of  the 
natural  man,  and  one  who  has  been  taken,  as  Amos  says  (iii.  7), 
by  God,  the  moulder  of  history,  into  "  His  secret."  Here  also 
we  see  the  prophecy  at  its  height,  towards  which  it  has  been 
ascending  from  ch.  vi.  13  and  x.  33,  34  onwards,  through 
the  midst  of  obstacles  accumulated  by  the  moral  condition  of 
the  nation,  but  with  the  same  goal  invariably  in  view.  The 
Assyrian  will  not  storm  Jerusalem  ;  there  will  not  even  be 
preparations  for  a  siege.  The  verb  qiddem  is  construed  with  a 
double  accusative,  as  in  Ps.  xxi.  4  ;  sOleldh  refers  to  the  earth 
works  thrown  up  for  besieging  purposes,  as  in  Jer.  xxxii.  24. 
The  reading  Nhj  instead  of  N2  has  arisen  in  consequence  of  the 
eye  having  wandered  to  the  following  &O11.  The  promise  in 
ver  35a  sounds  like  ch.  xxxi.  5.  The  reading  ^  for  ^  is  in 
correct.  One  motive  assigned  ("  for  my  servant  David's  sake  ") 
is  the  same  as  in  1  Kings  xv.  4,  etc. ;  and  the  other  ("  for  mine 
own  sake")  the  same  as  in  ch.  xliii.  25,  xlviii.  11  (compare, 
however,  ch.  Iv.  3  also).  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  in  accordance 
with  the  honour  and  faithfulness  of  Jehovah,  that  Jerusalem  is 


106  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

delivered  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  worth  of  David,  or, 
what  is  the  same  thing,  the  love  of  Jehovah  turned  towards 
him,  of  which  Jerusalem  reaps  the  advantage. 

To  this  culminating  prophecy  there  is  now  appended  an 
account  of  the  catastrophe  itself.  Vers.  36-38.  "  TJien  (K. 
And  it  came  to  pass  that  night,  that)  the  angel  of  Jehovah  went 
forth  and  smote  (vayyakkeh,  K.  vayyakli}  in  the  camp  of  Asshur 
a  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand;  and  when  men  rose  up  in  the 
morning,  behold,  they  were  all  lifeless  corpses.  Then  Sennacherib 
king  of  Asshur  decamped,  and  went  forth  and  returned,  and 
settled  down  in  Nineveh.  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  was  wor 
shipping  in  the  temple  of  Nisroch,  his  god,  Adrammelech  and 
Sharezer  his  sons  (K.  chethib  omits  '  his  sons')  smote  him  with 
the  sword;  and  wlien  they  escaped  to  the  land  of  Ararat,  Esar- 
haddon  ascended  the  throne  in  his  stead."  The  first  pair  of 
histories  closes  here  with  a  short  account  of  the  result  of  the 
Assyrian  drama, in  which  Isaiah's  prophecies  were  most  gloriously 
fulfilled:  not  only  the  prophecies  immediately  preceding,  but 
all  the  prophecies  of  the  Assyrian  era  since  the  time  of  Ahaz, 
which  pointed  to  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  forces  (e.g. 
x.  33-4),  and  to  the  flight  and  death  of  the  king  of  Assyria 
(ch.  xxxi.  9,  xxx.  33).  If  we  look  still  further  forward  to  the 
second  pair  of  histories  (ch.  xxxviii.  xxxix.),  we  see  from  ch. 
xxxviii.  6  that  it  is  only  by  anticipation  that  the  account  of 
these  closing  events  is  finished  here  ;  for  the  third  history  carries 
us  back  to  the  period  before  the  final  catastrophe.  We  may 
account  in  some  measure  for  the  haste  and  brevity  of  this 
closing  historical  fragment,  from  the  prophet's  evident  wish  to 
finish  up  the  history  of  the  Assyrian  complications,  and  the 
prophecy  bearing  upon  it.  But  if  we  look  back,  there  is  a  gap 
between  ch.  xxxvii.  36  and  the  event  narrated  here.  For, 
according  to  ver.  30,  there  was  to  be  an  entire  year  of  trouble 
between  the  prophecy  and  the  fulfilment,  during  which  the 
cultivation  of  the  land  would  be  suspended.  What  took  place 
during  that  year  ?  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Sennacherib 
was  engaged  with  Egypt ;  for  (1)  when  he  made  his  second 
attempt  to  get  Jerusalem  into  his  power,  he  had  received  in 
telligence  of  the  advance  of  Tirhakah,  and  therefore  had  with 
drawn  the  centre  of  his  army  from  Lachish,  and  encamped 
before  Libnah  (ch.  xxxvii.  8,  9)  ;  (2)  according  to  Joseph  us 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  36-38.  107 

(Ant.  x.  1,  4),  there  was  a  passage  of  Berosus,  which  has  been 
lost,  in  which  he  stated  that  Sennacherib  "  made  an  expedition 
against  all  Asia  and  Egypt;"  (3)  Herodotus  relates  (ii.  141) 
that,  after  Anysis  the  blind,  who  lost  his  throne  for  fifty  years 
in  consequence  of  an  invasion  of  Egypt  by  the  Ethiopians 
under  Sabakoa,  but  wrho  recovered  it  again,  Sethon  the  priest 
of  Hephaestus  ascended  the  throne.  The  priestly  caste  was  so 
oppressed  by  him,  that  when  Sanacharibos,  the  king  of  the 
Arabians  and  Assyrians,  led  a  great  army  against  Egypt,  they 
refused  to  perform  their  priestly  functions.  But  the  priest- 
king  went  into  the  temple  to  pray,  and  his  God  promised  to 
help  him.  He  experienced  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy 
before  Pelusium,  where  the  invasion  was  to  take  place,  and 
where  he  awaited  the  foe  with  such  as  continued  true  to  him. 
"  Immediately  after  the  arrival  of  Sanacharibos,  an  army  of 
field-mice  swarmed  throughout  the  camp  of  the  foe,  and  devoured 
their  quivers,  bows,  and  shield-straps,  so  that  when  morning 
came  on  they  had  to  flee  without  arms,  and  lost  many  men  in 
consequence.  This  is  the  origin  of  the  stone  of  Sethon  in  the 
temple  of  Plephsestus  (at  Memphis),  which  is  standing  there 
still,  with  a  mouse  in  one  hand,  and  with  this  inscription  : 
Whosoever  looks  at  me,  let  him  fear  the  gods  !"  This  2e6a)s 
(possibly  the  Zet  whose  name  occurs  in  the  lists  at  the  close  of 
the  twenty-third  dynasty,  and  therefore  in  the  wrong  place) 
is  to  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  Saitic  princes  of  the  twenty- 
sixth  dynasty,  who  seem  to  have  ruled  in  Lower  Egypt  con 
temporaneously  with  the  Ethiopians1  (as,  in  fact,  is  stated 
in  a  passage  of  the  Armenian  Eusebius,  ^Ethiopas  et  Saitas 
regnasse  aiunt  eodem  tempore),  until  they  succeeded  at  length 
in  ridding  themselves  of  the  hateful  supremacy.  Herodotus 
evidently  depended  in  this  instance  upon  the  hearsay  of  Lower 
Egypt,  which  transferred  the  central  point  of  the  Assyrian 
history  to  their  own  native  princely  house.  The  question, 

1  A  seal  of  Pharaoh  Sabakon  has  been  found  among  the  ruins  of  the 
palace  of  Kuyunjik.  The  colossal  image  of  Tarakos  is  found  among  the 
bas-reliefs  of  Medinet-Habu.  He  is  holding  firmly  a  number  of  Asiatic 
prisoners  by  the  hair  of  their  head,  and  threatening  them  with  a  club. 
There  are  several  other  stately  monuments  in  imitation  of  the  Egyptian 
style  in  the  ruins  of  Nepata,  the  northern  capital  of  the  Meroitic  state, 
which  belong  to  him  (Lepsius,  Denkmaler,  p.  10  of  the  programme). 


108  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

whether  the  disarming  of  the  Assyrian  army  in  front  of  Pelusium 
merely  rested  upon  a  legendary  interpretation  of  the  mouse  in 
Sethon's  hand,1  which  may  possibly  have  been  originally  in 
tended  as  a  symbol  of  destruction ;  or  whether  it  was  really 
founded  upon  an  actual  occurrence  which  was  exaggerated  in 
the  legend,2  may  be  left  undecided.  But  it  is  a  real  insult  to 
Isaiah,  when  Thenius  and  G.  Rawlinson  place  the  scene  of  ver. 
36  at  Pelusium,  and  thus  give  the  preference  to  Herodotus. 
Has  not  Isaiah  up  to  this  point  constantly  prophesied  that  the 
power  of  Asshur  was  to  be  broken  in  the  holy  mountain  land  of 
Jehovah  (ch.  xiv.  25),  that  the  Lebanon  forest  of  the  Assyrian 
army  would  break  to  pieces  before  Jerusalem  (ch.  x.  32-34), 
and  that  there  the  Assyrian  camp  would  become  the  booty  of 
the  inhabitants  of  the  city,  and  that  without  a  conflict  1  And 
is  not  the  catastrophe  that  would  befal  Assyria  described  in 
ch.  xviii.  as  an  act  of  Jehovah,  which  would  determine  the 
Ethiopians  to  do  homage  to  God  who  was  enthroned  upon 
Zion  1  We  need  neither  cite  2  Chron.  xxxii.  21  nor  Ps.  Ixxvi. 
(LXX.  a)$r)  Trpos  TOV  *A<r<rvpiov)9  according  to  which  the  wea 
pons  of  Asshur  break  to  pieces  upon  Jerusalem  ;  Isaiah's  pro 
phecies  are  quite  sufficient  to  prove,  that  to  force  this  Pelusiac 
disaster3  into  ver.  36  is  a  most  thoughtless  concession  to 
Herodotus.  The  final  catastrophe  occurred  before  Jerusalem, 
and  the  account  in  Herodotus  gives  us  no  certain  information 
even  as  to  the  issue  of  the  Egyptian  campaign,  which  took 
place  in  the  intervening  year.  Such  a  gap  as  the  one  which 
occurs  before  ver.  36  is  not  without  analogy  in  the  historical 
writings  of  the  Bible ;  see,  for  example,  Num.  xx.  1,  where 
an  abrupt  leap  is  made  over  the  thirty-seven  years  of  the 
wanderings  in  the  desert.  The  abruptness  is  not  affected 
by  the  addition  of  the  clause  in  the  book  of  Kings,  "It  came 
to  pass  that  night."  For,  in  the  face  of  the  "sign"  men 
tioned  in  ver.  30,  this  cannot  mean  "in  that  very  night"  (viz. 
the  night  following  the  answer  given  by  Isaiah)  ;  but  (un- 

1  This  Sethos  monument  has  not  yet  been  discovered  (Brugsch,  Reise- 
berichte,  p.  79).     The  temple  of  Phta  was  on  the  south  side  of  Memphis  ; 
the  site  is  marked  by  the  ruins  at  Mitrahenni. 

2  The  inhabitants  of  Troas  worshipped  mice,  "  because  they  gnawed  the 
Barings  of  the  enemies'  bows"  (see  Wesseling  on  //.  i.  39). 

3  G.  Rawiiusoii,  Monarchies,  ii.  -145. 


CHAP.  XXXVII.  36-38.  109 

less  it  is  a  careless  interpolation)  it  must  refer  to  vers.  33,  34, 
and  mean  ilia  nocte,  viz.  the  night  in  which  the  Assyrian 
had  encamped  before  Jerusalem.  The  account  before  us 
reads  just  like  that  of  the  slaying  of  the  first-born  in  Egypt 
(Ex.  xii.  12,  xi.  4).  The  plague  of  Egypt  is  marked  as  a 
pestilence  by  the  use  of  the  word  ndgaph  in  connection  with 
hikkdh  in  Ex.  xii.  23,  13  (compare  Amos  iv.  10,  where  it 
seems  to  be  alluded  to  under  the  name  "il^)  ;  and  in  the  case 
before  us  also  we  cannot  think  of  anything  else  than  a  divine 
judgment  of  this  kind,  which  even  to  the  present  day  defies 
all  attempts  at  an  setiological  solution,  and  which  is  described 
in  2  Sam.  xxiv.  as  effected  through  the  medium  of  angels,  just 
as  it  is  here.  Moreover,  the  concise  brevity  of  the  narrative 
leaves  it  quite  open  to  assume,  as  Hensler  and  others  do,  that 
the  ravages  of  the  pestilence  in  the  Assyrian  army,  which 
carried  off  thousands  in  the  night  (Ps.  xci.  6),  even  to  the 
number  of  185,000,  may  have  continued  for  a  considerable 
time.1  The  main  thing  is  the  fact  that  the  prophecy  in  ch. 
xxxi.  8  was  actually  fulfilled.  According  to  Josephus  (Ant. 
x.  1,  5),  when  Sennacherib  returned  from  his  unsuccessful 
Egyptian  expedition,  he  found  the  detachment  of  his  army, 
which  he  had  left  behind  in  Palestine,  in  front  of  Jerusalem, 
where  a  pestilential  disease  sent  by  God  was  making  great 
havoc  among  the  soldiers,  and  that  on  the  very  first  night  of 
the  siege.  The  three  verses,  "  he  broke  up,  and  went  away,  and 
returned  home,"  depict  the  hurried  character  of  the  retreat, 
like  uabiit  excessit  evasit  erupit"  (Cic.  ii.  CatiL  init.).  The 
form  of  the  sentence  in  ver.  38  places  Sennacherib's  act  of 
worship  and  the  murderous  act  of  his  sons  side  by  side,  as 
though  they  had  occurred  simultaneously.  The  connection 
would  be  somewhat  different  if  the  reading  had  been  ^"13*1  (cf. 
Ewald,  §  341,  a).  Nisroch  apparently  signifies  the  eagle-like,  or 
hawk-like  (from  nisr,  nesher),  possibly  like  'Arioch  from  'an. 
The  LXX.  transcribe  it  vacrapa%,  A  acrapa%,  S  acrapaic  (K 
laOpafo  where  B  has  /-tecrepa^),  and  explorers  of  the  monuments 
imagined  at  one  time  that  they  had  discovered  this  god  as 

1  The  pestilence  in  Mailand  in  1629  carried  off,  according  to  Tadino, 
160,000  men  ;  that  in  Vienna,  in  1679, 122,849  ;  that  in  Moscow,  at  the  end 
of  the  last  century,  according  to  Martens,  670,000  ;  but  this  was  during 
the  whole  time  that  the  ravages  of  the  pestilence  lasted. 


110  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Asarak;1  but  they  have  more  recently  retracted  this,  although 
there  really  is  a  hawk-headed  figure  among  the  images  of  the 
Assyrian  deities  or  genii.2  The  name  has  nothing  to  do  with 
that  of  the  supreme  Assyrian  deity,  Asur,  Asshur.  A  better 
derivation  of  Nisroch  would  be  from  ?PJ?>  T^y  -H^;  and  this  is 
confirmed  by  Oppert,  who  has  discovered  among  the  inscrip 
tions  in  the  harem  of  Khorsabad  a  prayer  of  Sargon  to  Nisroch, 
who  appears  there,  like  the  Hymen  of  Greece,  as  the  patron 
of  marriage,  and  therefore  as  a  "  uniter."3  The  name  'Adram- 
melekh  (a  god  in  2  Kings  xvii.  31)  signifies,  as  we  now  know, 
"gloriosus  ('addir)  est  rex;"  and  Sharetser  (for  which  we  should 
expect  to  find  Saretser),  dominator  tuelitur.  The  Armenian 
form  of  the  latter  name  (in  Moses  Choren.  i.  23),  San-asar 
(by  the  side  of  Adramel,  who  is  also  called  Arcamozari),  pro 
bably  yields  the  original  sense  of  "  Lunus  (the  moon-god  Sin) 
tuebitur"  Polyhistorus  (in  Euseb.  citron,  arm.  p.  19),  on  the 
authority  of  Berosus,  mentions  only  the  former,  Ardumuzan,  as 
the  murderer,  and  gives  eighteen  years  as  the  length  of  Sen 
nacherib's  reign.  The  murder  did  not  take  place  immediately 
after  his  return,  as  Josephus  says  (Ant.  x.  1,  5 ;  cf.  Tobit  i. 
21-25,  Vulg.) ;  and  the  expression  used  by  Isaiah,  he  "  dwelt 
(settled  down)  in  Nineveh,"  suggests  the  idea  of  a  considerable 
interval.  This  interval  embraced  the  suppression  of  the  rebel 
lion  in  Babylon,  where  Sennacherib  made  his  son  Asordan 
king,  and  the  campaign  in  Cilicia  (both  from  Polyhistorus),4 
and  also,  according  to  the  monuments,  wars  both  by  sea  and 
land  with  Susiana,  which  supported  the  Babylonian  thirst  for 
independence.  The  Asordan  of  Polyhistorus  is  Esar-haddon 
(also  written  without  the  maJcktph,  Esarhaddon),  which  is  gene 
rally  supposed  to  be  the  Assyrian  form  of  p^TlfcTTi^N,  Assur 
fratrem  dedit.  It  is  so  difficult  to  make  the  chronology  tally 
here,  that  Oppert,  on  Isa.  xxxvi.  1,  proposes  to  alter  the  four 
teenth  year  into  the  twenty-ninth,  and  Eawlinson  would  alter 
it  into  the  twenty-seventh.5  They  both  of  them  assign  to  king 

1  Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  xii.  2,  pp.  426-7. 

2  Rawlinson,  Monarchies,  ii.  265. 

8  Expedition  Scientifique  en  Mesopotamie,  t.  ii.  p.  339. 
4  Vid.  Rickter,  Berosi  quse  supersunt  (1825),  p.  62  ;  Miiller,  Fraymenta 
Hist.  Gr.  ii.  504. 

6  Saryojiides,  p.  10,  and  Monarchies,  ii.  434. 


CHAP.  XXXVIII.  Ill 

Sargon  a  reign  of  seventeen  (eighteen)  years,  and  to  Senna 
cherib  (in  opposition  to  Polyhistorus)  a  reign  of  twenty-three 
(twenty-four)  years ;  and  they  both  agree  in  giving  680  as  the 
year  of  Sennacherib's  death.  This  brings  us  down  below  the 
first  decade  of  Manasseh's  reign,  and  would  require  a  different 
author  from  Isaiah  for  vers.  37,  38.  But  the  accounts  given  by 
Polyhistorus,  Abydenus,  and  the  astronomical  canon,  however 
we  may  reconcile  them  among  themselves,  do  not  extend  the 
reign  of  Sennacherib  beyond  693.1  It  is  true  that  even  then 
Isaiah  would  have  been  at  least  about  ninety  years  old.  But 
the  tradition  which  represents  him  as  dying  a  martyr's  death 
in  the  reign  of  Manasseh,  does  really  assign  him  a  most  unusual 
old  age.  Nevertheless,  vers.  37,  38  may  possibly  have  been 
added  by  a  later  hand.  The  two  parricides  fled  to  the  "  land 
of  Ararat,"  i.e.  to  Central  Armenia.  The  Armenian  history 
describes  them  as  the  founders  of  the  tribes  of  the  Sassunians 
and  Arzerunians.  From  the  princely  house  of  the  latter, 
among  whom  the  name  of  Sennacherib  was  a  very  common 
one,  sprang  Leo  the  Armenian,  whom  Genesios  describes  as  of 
Assyrio- Armenian  blood.  If  this  were  the  case,  there  would  be 
no  less  than  ten  Byzantine  emperors  who  were  descendants  of 
Sennacherib,  and  consequently  it  would  not  be  till  a  very  late 
period  that  the  prophecy  of  Nahum  was  fulfilled,2 

c.  HEZEKIAH'S  ILLNESS.    ISAIAH  ASSURES  HIM  OF  HIS 

RECOVERY. — CHAP.  XXXVIII. 

There  is  nothing  to  surprise  us  in  the  fact  that  we  are 
carried  back  to  the  time  when  Jerusalem  was  still  threatened 
by  the  Assyrian,  since  the  closing  verses  of  ch.  xxxvii.  merely 

1  See  Duncker,  Gesch.  des  Alterthums.  i.  pp.  708-9. 

2  Duncker,  on  the  contrary  (p.  709),  speaks  of  the  parricides  as  falling 
very  shortly  afterwards  by  their  brother's  hand,  and  overlooks  the  Armenian 
tradition  (cf.  Eawlinson,  Monarchies,  ii.  465),  which  transfers  the  flight 
of  the  two,  who  were  to  have  been  sacrificed,  as  is  reported  by  their  own 
father,  to  the  year  of  the  world  4494,  i.e.  B.C.  705  (see  the  historical  survey 
of  Prince  Hubbof  in  the  Miscellaneous  Translations,  vol.  ii.  1834).     The 
Armenian  historian  Thomas  (at  the  end  of  the  ninth  century)  expressly 
states  that  he  himself  had  sprung  from  the  Arzerunians,  and  therefore  from 
Sennacherib  ;  and  for  this  reason  his  historical  work  is  chiefly  devoted  to 
Assyrian  affairs  (see  Aucher  on  Euseb.  chron.  i.  p.  xv). 


112  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

contain  an  anticipatory  announcement,  introduced  for  the  pur 
pose  of  completing  the  picture  of  the  last  Assyrian  troubles, 
by  adding  the  fulfilment  of  Isaiah's  prediction  of  their  ter 
mination.  It  is  within  this  period,  and  indeed  in  the  year  of 
the  Assyrian  invasion  (ch.  xxxvi.  1),  since  Hezekiah  reigned 
twenty-nine  years,  and  fifteen  of  these  are  promised  here,  that 
the  event  described  by  Isaiah  falls, — an  event  not  merely  of 
private  interest,  but  one  of  importance  in  connection  with  the 
history  of  the  nation  also. — Yers.  1-3.  "  In  those  days  Hizkiyalut, 
became  dangerously  ill.  And  Isaiah  son  of  Amoz,  the  prophet, 
came  to  him,  and  said  to  him,  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Set  thine 
house  in  order :  for  thou  wilt  die,  and  not  recover.  Then  Hizld- 
yahu  turned  (K.  om.)  Ids  face  to  the  wall,  and  prayed  to  Jehovah, 
and  said  (K.  saying),  0  Jehovah,  remember  this,  I  pray,  that  I 
have  walked  before  thee  in  truth,  and  with  the  whole  heart,  and 
have  done  what  was  good  in  Thine  eyes  I  And  Hi~kiyahu  ivept 
with  loud  weeping"  "  Give  command  to  thy  house  "  (?,  cf.  /N, 
2  Sam.  xvii.  23)  is  equivalent  to,  "  Make  known  thy  last  will  to 
thy  family "  (compare  the  rabbinical  tsavvd'dh,  the  last  will 
and  testament)  ;  for  though  tsivvdh  is  generally  construed  with 
the  accusative  of  the  person,  it  is  also  construed  with  Lamed 
(e.g.  Ex.  i.  22  ;  cf.  7£,  Ex.  xvi.  34).  iTn  in  such  a  connection 
as  this  signifies  to  revive  or  recover.  The  announcement  of 
his  death  is  unconditional  and  absolute.  As  Vitringa  observes, 
"  the  condition  was  not  expressed,  because  God  would  draw 
it  from  him  as  a  voluntary  act."  The  sick  man  turned  his 
face  towards  the  wall  (VJ2  2pn?  hence  the  usual  fut.  cons.  3D*}, 
as  in  1  Kings  xxi.  4,  8,  14),  to  retire  into  himself  and  to  God. 
The  supplicatory  njfcj  (here,  as  in  Ps.  cxvi.  4,  16,  and  in  all  six 
times,  writh  n)  always  has  the  principal  tone  upon  the  last 
syllable  before  mrT»  =  ^IN  (Neh.  i.  11).  The  metheg  has  some 
times  passed  into  a  conjunctive  accent  (e.g.  Gen.  1.  17,  Ex. 
xxxii.  31).  "iPK  riN  does  not  signify  that  which,  but  this,  that, 
as  in  Deut.  ix.  7,  2  Kings  viii.  12,  etc.  "  In  truth,"  i.e.  without 
wavering  or  hypocrisy.  p£t?  3p2,  with  a  complete  or  whole 
heart,  as  in  1  Kings  viii.  61,  etc.  He  wept  aloud,  because  it  was 
a  dreadful  thing  to  him  to  have  to  die  without  an  heir  to  the 
throne,  in  the  full  strength  of  his  manhood  (in  the  thirty-ninth 
year  of  his  age),  and  with  the  nation  in  so  unsettled  a  state. 
The  prospect  is  now  mercifully  changed.  Vers.  4-6.  u  And 


CHAP.  XXXVIII.  4-6,  21,  22.  113 

it  came  to  pass  (K.  Isaiah  was  not  yet  out  of  the  inner  city  ;  kert 
"Wn,  the  forecourt,  and)  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  to  Isaiah  (K. 
to  him)  as  follows :  Go  (K.  turn  again)  and  say  to  Hizkiyalm 
(K.  adds,  to  the  prince  of  my  people).  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  the 
God  of  David  thine  ancestor,  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  seen  thy 
tears;  behold,  I  (K.  will  cure  thee,  on  the  third  day  thou 
shalt  go  up  to  the  house  of  Jehovah)  add  (K.  and  I  add)  to  thy 
days  fifteen  years.  And  I  will  deliver  thee  and  this  city  out 
of  the  hand  of  the  Icing  of  Asshur,  and  will  defend  this  city 
(K.  for  mine  own  sake  and  for  David  my  servant's  sake)"  In 
the  place  of  "W  (the  city)  the  keri  and  the  earlier  translators 
have  "J-fn.  The  city  of  David  is  not  called  the  "inner  city" 
anywhere  else ;  in  fact,  Zion,  with  the  temple  hill,  formed  the 
upper  city,  so  that  apparently  it  is  the  inner  space  of  the  city 
of  David  that  is  here  referred  to,  and  Isaiah  had  not  yet  passed 
through  the  middle  gate  to  return  to  the  lower  city,  where  he 
dwelt  (vol.  i.  pp.  70,  390).  The  text  of  Kings  is  the  more 
authentic  throughout ;  except  that  *&$  TJJ,  "  the  prince  of  my 
people,"  is  an  annalistic  adorning  which  is  hardly  original. 
$>*}  in  Isaiah  is  an  inf.  abs.  used  in  an  imperative  sense ;  3^, 
on  the  other  hand,  which  we  find  in  the  other  text,  is  im 
perative.  On  yosiph,  see  at  ch.  xxix.  14. 

The  text  of  Isaiah  is  not  only  curtailed  here  in  a  very 
forced  manner,  but  it  has  got  into  confusion  ;  for  vers.  21  and 
22  are  removed  entirely  from  their  proper  place,  although  even 
the  Septuagint  has  them  at  the  close  of  Hezekiah's  psalm. 
They  have  been  omitted  from  their  place  at  the  close  of  ver.  6 
through  an  oversight,  and  then  added  in  the  margin,  where 
they  now  stand  (probably  with  a  sign,  to  indicate  that  they  were 
supplied).  We  therefore  insert  them  here,  where  they  properly 
belong.  Vers.  21,  22.  "  Then  Isaiah  said  they  were  to  bring 
(K.  take)  a  fig-cake ;  and  they  plaistered  (It.  brought  and  covered) 
the  boil,  and  he  recovered.  And  Hizkiyahu  said  (K.  to  Isaiah), 
What  sign  is  there  that  (K.  Jehovah  will  heal  me,  so  that  I  go 
up)  I  shall  go  up  into  the  house  of  Jehovah?"  As  shechln  never 
signifies  a  plague-spot,  but  an  abscess  (indicated  by  heightened 
temperature),  more  especially  that  of  leprosy  (cf.  Ex.  ix.  9, 
Lev.  xiii.  18),  there  is  no  satisfactory  ground,  as  some  suppose, 
for  connecting  Hezekiah's  illness  (taken  along  with  ch.  xxxiii. 
24)  with  the  pestilence  which  broke  out  in  the  Assyrian  army. 

VOL.  II.  H 


114  THE  PEOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

The  use  of  the  figs  does  not  help  us  to  decide  whether  we  are 
to  assume  that  it  was  a  boil  (bubon)  or  a  carbuncle  (charbon). 
Figs  were  a  well-known  emolliens  or  maturans,  and  were  used 
to  accelerate  the  rising  of  the  swelling  and  the  subsequent  dis 
charge.  Isaiah  did  not  show  any  special  medical  skill  by  order 
ing  a  softened  cake  of  pressed  figs  to  be  laid  upon  the  boil,  nor 
did  he  expect  it  to  act  as  a  specific,  and  effect  a  cure  :  it  was 
merely  intended  to  promote  what  had  already  been  declared  to 
be  the  will  of  God.  ^  ^1P?!  is  probably  more  original  than 
the  simpler  but  less  definite  *?$  1DW.  Hitzig  is  wrong  in  ren 
dering  W,  "that  it  (the  boil)  may  get  well;"  and  Knobel  in 
rendering  it,  "  that  he  may  recover."  It  is  merely  the  antici 
pation  of  the  result  so  common  in  the  historical  writings  of 
Scripture  (see  at  ch.  vii.  1  and  xx.  1),  after  which  the  historian 
goes  back  a  step  or  two. 

The  pledge  desired.  Vers.  7,  8.  "(K.  Tlien  Isaiah  said)  and 
(K.  om.)  let  this  be  the  sign  to  thee  on  the  part  of  Jehovah,  that 
P$?j  K.  *3)  Jehovah  will  perform  this  (K.  the)  word  which  He  has 
spoken ;  Behold,  I  make  the  shadow  retrace  the  steps,  which  it  has 
gone  down  upon  the  sun-dial  of  Ahaz  through  the  sun,  ten  steps 
backward.  And  the  sun  went  back  ten  steps  upon  the  dial,  which 
it  had  gone  down  "  (K.  "  Shall  the  shadow  go  forward  p^  read 
spn  according  to  Job  xl.  2,  or  ?fen]  ten  steps,  or  shall  it  go  back 
ten  steps  ?  Then  Yechizkiyahu  said,  It  is  easy  for  the  shadoio 
to  go  down  ten  steps ;  no,  but  the  shadow  shall  go  back  ten  steps. 
Then  Isaiah  the  prophet  cried  to  Jehovah,  and  turned  back  the 
shadow  by  the  steps  that  it  had  gone  down  upon  the  sun-dial  of 
Ahazi  ten  steps  backward").  "Steps  of  Ahaz"  was  the  name 
given  to  a  sun-dial  erected  by  him.  As  maaldli  may  signify 
eitner  one  of  a  flight  of  steps  or  a  degree  (syn.  madrigdli),  we 
might  suppose  the  reference  to  be  to  a  dial-plate  with  a 
gnomon ;  but,  in  the  first  place,  the  expression  points  to  an 
actual  succession  of  steps,  that  is  to  say,  to  an  obelisk  upon  a 
square  or  circular  elevation  ascended  by  steps,  which  threw  the 
shadow  of  its  highest  point  at  noon  upon  the  highest  steps,  and 
in  the  morning  and  evening  upon  the  lowest,  either  on  the 
one  side  or  the  other,  so  that  the  obelisk  itself  served  as  a 
gnomon.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  Targum  on  2  Kings  ix.  13 
renders  gerem  hammaaloth  by  derag  shaayydt,  step  (flight  of 
steps)  of  the  sun-dial ;  and  the  obelisk  of  Augustus,  on  the 


CHAP.  XXXVIII.  7,  8.  115 

Field  of  Mars  at  Home,  was  one  of  this  kind,  which  served  as 
a  sun-dial.  The  going  forward,  going  down,  or  declining  of 
the  shadow,  and  its  going  back,  were  regulated  by  the  meridian 
line,  and  under  certain  circumstances  the  same  might  be  said 
of  a  vertical  dial,  i.e.  of  a  sun-dial  with  a  vertical  dial-plate  ; 
but  it  applies  more  strictly  to  a  step-dial,  i.e.  to  a  sun-dial  in 
which  the  degrees  that  measure  definite  periods  of  time  are 
really  gradus.  The  step-dial  of  Ahaz  may  have  consisted  of 
twenty  steps  or  more,  which  measured  the  time  of  day  by  half- 
hours,  or  even  quarters.  If  the  sign  was  given  an  hour  before 
sunset,  the  shadow,  by  going  back  ten  steps  of  half-an-hour 
each,  would  return  to  the  point  at  which  it  stood  at  twelve 
o'clock.  But  how  was  this  effected  ?  Certainly  not  by  giving 
an  opposite  direction  to  the  revolution  of  the  earth  upon  its  axis, 
which  would  have  been  followed  by  the  most  terrible  convul 
sions  over  the  entire  globe  ;  and  in  all  probability  not  even  by 
an  apparently  retrograde  motion  of  the  sun  (in  which  case  the 
miracle  would  be  optical  rather  than  cosmical)  ;  but  as  the 
intention  was  to  give  a  sign  that  should  serve  as  a  pledge,  and 
therefore  had  no  need  whatever  to  be  supernatural  (vol.  i.  214), 
it  may  have  been  simply  through  a  phenomenon  of  refraction, 
since  all  that  was  required  was  that  the  shadow  which  was 
down  at  the  bottom  in  the  afternoon  should  be  carried  upwards 
by  a  sudden  and  unexpected  refraction.  Hammaaldth  (the 
steps)  in  ver.  8  does  not  stand  in  a  genitive  relation  to  ts$ 
(the  shadow),  as  the  accents  would  make  it  appear,  but  is  an 
accusative  of  measure,  equivalent  to  fivjfl32i  in  the  sum  of  the 
steps  (2  Kings  xx.  11).  To  this  accusative  of  measure  there 
is  appended  the  relative  clause  :  quos  (gradus)  descendit  (""^Tr  5 
?¥  being  used  as  a  feminine)  in  scala  Ahasi  per  solem,  i.e. 
through  the  onward  motion  of  the  sun.  When  it  is  stated  that 
"  the  sun  returned,"  this  does  not  mean  the  sun  in  the  heaven, 
but  the  sun  upon  the  sun-dial,  upon  which  the  illumined  sur 
face  moved  upwards  as  the  shadow  retreated ;  for  when  the 
shadow  moved  back,  the  sun  moved  back  as  well.  The  event 
is  intended  to  be  represented  as  a  miracle  ;  and  a  miracle  it 
really  was.  The  force  of  will  proved  itself  to  be  a  poweir 
superior  to  all  natural  law  ;  the  phenomenon  followed  upon  the 
prophet's  prayer  as  an  extraordinary  result  of  divine  power,  not 
through  his  astronomical  learning,  but  simply  through 


116  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

that  faith  which  can  move  mountains,  because  it  can  set  in 
motion  the  omnipotence  of  God. 

As  a  documentary  proof  of  this  third  account,  a  psalm  of 
Hezekiah  is  added  in  the  text  of  Isaiah,  in  which  he  celebrates 
his  miraculous  rescue  from  the  brink  of  death.  The  author 
of  the  book  of  Kings  has  omitted  it ;  but  the  genuineness  is 
undoubted.  The  heading  runs  thus  in  ver.  9  :  "  Writing  of 
Hizkiyahu  king  of  Judah,  when  he  was  sick,  and  recovered  from 
his  sickness"  The  song  which  follows  might  be  headed 
Mikhtam,  since  it  has  the  characteristics  of  this  description  of 
psalm  (see  at  Ps.  xvi.  1).  We  cannot  infer  from  bachdlotho 
(when  he  was  sick)  that  it  was  composed  by  Hezekiah  during 
his  illness  (see  at  Ps.  li.  1)  ;  vayyechi  (and  he  recovered)  stamps 
it  as  a  song  of  thanksgiving,  composed  by  him  after  his  recovery. 
In  common  with  the  two  Ezrahitish  psalms,  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  and 
Ixxxix.,  it  has  not  only  a  considerable  number  of  echoes  of  the 
book  of  Job,  but  also  a  lofty  sweep,  which  is  rather  forced 
than  lyrically  direct,  and  appears  to  aim  at  copying  the  best 
models. 

Strophe  1  consists  indisputably  of  seven  lines  : 

Vers.  10-12.  "  I  said,  In  quiet  of  my  days  shall  I  depart 

into  the  gates  of  Hades  : 
I  am  mulcted  of  the  rest  of  my  years. 
I  said,  I  shall  not  see  Jali,  Jah,  in  the  land  of  the  living  : 
I  shall  behold  man  no  more,  with  Hie  inhabitants  of  the  regions 

of  the  dead. 
My  home  is  broken  up,  and  is  carried  off  from  me  like  a 

shepherds  tent: 
I  rolled  up  my  life  like  a  weaver ;  He  would  have  cut  me  loose 

from  the  roll: 
From  day  to  night  Thou  makest  an  end  of  me" 

u  In  quiet  of  my  days"  is  equivalent  to,  in  the  midst  of  the 
quiet  course  of  a  healthy  life,  and  is  spoken  without  reference 
to  the  Assyrian  troubles,  which  still  continued.  W,  from  HOT, 
to  be  quiet,  lit.  to  be  even,  for  the  radical  form  D*T  has  the 
primary  idea  of  a  flat  covering,  of  something  stroked  smooth, 
of  that  which  .is  level  and  equal,  so  that  it  could  easily  branch 
out  into  the  different  ideas  of  cequabilitas,  equality  of  measure, 
cequitas,  equanimity,  aquitas,  equality,  and  also  of  destruction 


CHAP.  XXXVIII.  10-12:  117 

=  complanatioj  levelling.  On  the  cohortative,  in  the  sense  of 
that  which  is  to  be,  see  Ewald,  §  228,  a ;  n9/?N,  according  to  its 
verbal  idea,  has  the  same  meaning  as  in  Ps.  xxxix.  14  and 
2  Chron.  xxi.  20  ;  and  the  construction  with  3  (=  HKUK]  rota) 
is  construct™  prcegnans  (Luzzatto).  The  pual  Wj3J3  does  not 
mean,  "  I  am  made  to  want"  (Rashi,  Knobel,  and  others), 
which,  as  the  passive  of  the  causative,  would  rather  be  WpBH, 
like  WTOJf,  I  am  made  to  inherit  (Job  vii.  3) ;  but,  I  am  visited 
with  punishment  as  to  the  remnant,  mulcted  of  the  remainder, 
deprived,  as  a  punishment,  of  the  rest  of  my  years.  The  clause, 
"  Jah  in  the  land  of  the  living,"  i.e.  the  God  of  salvation,  who 
reveals  Himself  in  the  land  of  the  living,  is  followed  by  the 
corresponding  clause,  Hn  t|2Bnl|"Dy>  "  I  dwelling  with  the  in 
habitants  of  the  region  of  the  dead ;"  for  whilst  "vH  signifies 
temporal  life  (from  clidlad,  to  glide  imperceptibly  away,  Job 
xi.  17),  7JH  signifies  the  end  of  this  life,  the  negation  of  all 
conscious  activity  of  being,  the  region  of  the  dead.  The  body 
is  called  a  dwelling  (dor,  Arab,  ddr)9  as  the  home  of  a  man  who 
possesses  the  capacity  to  distinguish  himself  from  everything 
belonging  to  him  (Psyclwl.  p.  227).  It  is  compared  to  a 
nomadic  tent.  \p  (a  different  word  from  that  in  Zech.  xi.  17, 
where  it  is  the  chirek  compaginis)  is  not  a  genitive  (=  njfy 
Ewald,  §  151,  6),  but  an  adjective  in  t,  like  W8  njh  in  Zech. 
xi.  15.  With  nigldli  (in  connection  with  JH33,  as  in  Job  iv. 
21),  which  does  not  mean  to  be  laid  bare  (Luzz.),  nor  to  be 
wrapt  up  (Ewald),  but  to  be  obliged  to  depart,  compare  the 
New  Testament  e/c&rjpetv  etc  rov  crayAaros  (2  Cor.  v.  8).  The 
air.  >yeyp.  *lfijj  might  mean  to  cut  off,  or  shorten  (related  to 
qdphach)  ;  it  is  safer,  however,  and  more  appropriate,  to  take  it 
in  the  sense  of  rolling  up,  as  in  the  name  of  the  badger  (ch. 
xiv.  23,  xxxiv.  11),  since  otherwise  what  Hezekiah  says  of  him 
self  and  of  God  would  be  tautological.  I  rolled  or  wound  up 
my  life,  as  the  weaver  rolls  up  the  finished  piece  of  cloth  :  i.e. 
I  was  sure  of  my  death,  namely,  because  God  was  about  to 
give  me  up  to  death ;  He  was  about  to  cut  me  off  from  the 
thrum  (the  future  is  here  significantly  interchanged  with  the 
perfect).  Dalldh  is  the  thrum,  licium,  the  threads  of  the  warp 
upon  a  loom,  which  becomes  shorter  and  shorter  the  further 
the  weft  proceeds,  until  at  length  the  piece  is  finished,  and  the 
weaver  cuts  through  the  short  threads,  and  so  sets  it  free 


118  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

cf.  Job  vi.  9,  xxvii.  8).  The  strophe  closes  with  the  deep 
lamentation  which  the  sufferer  poured  out  at  that  time  :  ne 
could  not  help  feeling  that  God  would  put  an  end  to  him 
(shdlam,  syn.  kdldh,  tdmam,  gdmar)  from  day  to  night,  i.e.  in 
the  shortest  time  possible  (compare  Job  iv.  20). 

In  strophe  2  the  retrospective  glance  is  continued.  His 
sufferings  increased  to  such  an  extent,  that  there  was  nothing 
left  in  his  power  but  a  whining  moan — a  languid  look  for 
help. 

Vers.  13,  14.  "  I 'waited  patiently  till  the  morning ;  like  the 

lion, 

So  He  broke  in  pieces  all  my  bones : 
From  day  to  night  Thou  makest  it  all  over  with  me. 
Like  a  swalloiv,  a  crane,  so  I  chirped; 
I  cooed  like  the  dove : 
Mine  eyes  pined  for  the  height. 
0  Lord,  men  assault  me  !    Be  bail  for  me" 

The  meaning  of  shivvithi  may  be  seen  from  Ps.  cxxxi.  2,  in 
accordance  with  which  an  Arabic  translator  has  rendered  the 
passage,  u  I  smoothed,  i.e.  quieted  (sdweitu)  my  soul,  notwith 
standing  the  sickness,  all  night,  until  the  morning."  But  the 
morning  brought  no  improvement ;  the  violence  of  the  pain, 
crushing  him  like  a  lion,  forced  from  him  again  and  again  the 
mournful  cry,  that  he  must  die  before  the  day  had  passed,  and 
should  not  live  to  see  another.  The  Masora  here  has  a  remark, 
which  is  of  importance,  as  bearing  upon  Ps.  xxii.  17,  viz.  that 
*nj$3  occurs  twice,  and  *wyb  '•"inn  with  two  different  meanings. 
The  meaning  of  "ViJV  D}D3  is  determined  by  Jer.  viii.  7,  from 
which  it  is  evident  that  "W  is  not  an  attribute  of  DID  here,  in 
the  sense  of  "  chirping  mournfully,"  or  "  making  a  circle  in 
its  flight,"  but  is  the  name  of  a  particular  bird,  namely  the 
crane.  For  although  the  Targum  and  Syriac  both  seem  to 
render  DID  in  that  passage  (keri  D^p,  which  is  the  chethib  here, 
according  to  the  reading  of  Orientals)  by  K^snra  (a  crane,  Arab. 
Kurki),  and  "W  by  WVJUp  (the  ordinary  name  of  the  swallow, 
which  Haji  Gaon  explains  by  the  Arabic  chuttaf),  yet  the 
relation  is  really  the  reverse :  sus  (sis)  is  the  swallow,  and  'dgur 
the  crane.  Hence  Kashi,  on  b.  Kiddusm  44a  ("  then  cried 
Res  Lakis  like  a  crane"),  gives  'dgiir,  Fr.  grue,  as  the  rendering 


CHAP.  XXXVIII.  15-17.  119 

of  fcOaro  ;  whereas  Parchon  (s.v.  'dgur)  confounds  the  crane 
with  the  hoarsely  croaking  stork  (ciconia  alba).  The  verb 
' dtsaphtseph  answers  very  well  not  only  to  the  flebile  murmur 
of  the  swallow  (into  wLich  the  penitential  Progne  was  changed, 
according  to  the  Grecian  myth),  but  also  to  the  shrill  shriek  of 
the  crane,  which  is  caused  by  the  extraordinary  elongation  of 
the  windpipe,  and  is  onomatopoetically  expressed  in  its  name 
'dgur.1  Tsiphtseph,  like  Tp%eiv,  is  applied  to  every  kind  of 
shrill,  penetrating,  inarticulate  sound.  The  ordinary  meaning 
of  dallu,  to  hang  long  and  loose,  has  here  passed  over  into 
that  of  pining  (syn.  kdldh).  The  name  of  God  in  ver.  14& 
is  Adonai,  not  Jehovah,  being  one  of  the  134  r^},  &'•£•  words 
which  are  really  written  Adonai,  and  not  merely  to  be  read 
so.2  It  is  impossible  to  take  ^""i^y  as  an  imperative.  The 
pointing,  according  to  which  we  are  to  read  'a&hqa,  admits 
this  (compare  shdmrdh  in  Ps.  Ixxxvi.  2,  cxix.  167  ;  and  on  the 
other  hand,  zockrdlli,  in  Neh.  v.  19,  etc.)  ;3  but  the  usage  of 
the  language  does  not  yield  any  appropriate  meaning  for  such 
an  imperative.  It  is  either  the  third  person,  used  in  a  neuter 
sense,  "  it  is  sorrowful  with  me ;"  or,  what  Luzzatto  very 
properly  considers  still  more  probable,  on  account  of  the  anti 
thesis  of  'ashqdh  and  'drbeni,  a  substantive  (^asliqah  for  'osJieq), 
"  there  is  pressure  upon  me"  (compare  vT^,  ch.  xxiv.  16),  i.e. 
it  presses  me  like  an  unmerciful  creditor ;  and  to  this  there  is 
appended  the  petition,  Guarantee  me,  i.e.  be  bail  for  me, 
answer  for  me  (see  at  Job  xvii.  3). 

In  strophe  3  he  now  describes  how  Jehovah  promised  him 
help,  how  this  promise  put  new  life  into  him,  and  how  it  was 
fulfilled,  and  turned  his  sufferings  into  salvation. 

Vei's.  15-17.  "  What  shall  I  say,  that  He  promised  me,  and 

He  hath  carried  it  out : 
I  should  walk  quietly  all  my  years,  on  the  trouble  of  my  soul?  ! 

1  The  call  of  the  parent  cranes,  according  to  Naumann  (  Vogel  Dentsch- 
lands,  ix.  364),  is  a  rattling  kruh  (gruh),  which  is  uncommonly  violent 
when  close,  and  has  a  trumpet-like  sound,  which  makes  it  audible  at  a  very 
great  distance.     With  the  younger  cranes  it  has  a  somewhat  higher  tone, 
which  often  passes,  so  to  speak,  into  a  falsetto. 

2  Vid.  Bar,  Psalterium,  p.  133. 

*  Vid.  Bar,  Thorath  Emeih,  pp.  22,  23. 


120  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

6  0  Lord,  by  such  tilings  men  revive,  and  the  life  of  my  spirit 

is  always  therein : 

And  so  wilt  Thou  restore  me,  and  make  me  to  live!9 
Behold,  bitterness  became  salvation  to  me.,  bitterness  ; 
And  Thou,  Thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  in  love  out  of  the  pit 

of  destruction 
For  Thou  hast  cast  ah  my  sins  behind  Thy  back? 

The  question,  "What  shall  I  say?'*  is  to  be  understood  as  in 
2  Sam.  vii.  20,  viz.  What  shall  I  say,  to  thank  Him  for  having 
promised  me,  and  carried  out  His  promise  ?  The  Vav  in  i^NI 
introduces  the  statement  of  his  reason  (Ges.  §  155,  1,  c).  On 
rrnn  (=  rmnn),  from  rm  (=  *n*n),  see  at  Ps.  xlii.  5.  The 
future  here,  in  ver.  156,  gives  the  purpose  of  God  concerning 
him.  He  was  to  walk  (referring  to  the  walk  of  life,  not  the 
walk  to  the  temple)  gently  (without  any  disturbance)  all  his 
years  upon  the  trouble  of  his  soul,  i.e.  all  the  years  that  fol 
lowed  upon  it,  the  years  that  were  added  to  his  life.  This  is 
the  true  explanation  of  ?y,  as  in  ch.  xxxviii.  5,  xxxii.  10,  Lev. 
xv.  25  ;  not  "  in  spite  of"  (Ewald),  or  "  with,"  as  in  Ps.  xxxi. 
24,  Jer.  vi.  14,  where  it  forms  an  adverb.  A  better  rendering 
than  this  would  be  "  for,"  or  "  on  account  of,"  i.e.  in  humble 
salutary  remembrance  of  the  way  in  which  God  by  His  free 
grace  averted  the  danger  of  death.  What  follows  in  ver.  16 
can  only  be  regarded  in  connection  with  the  petition  in  ver.  16&, 
as  Hezekiah's  reply  to  the  promise  of  God,  which  had  been 
communicated  to  him  by  the  prophet.  Consequently  the 
neuters  OfivIJ  and  1^3  (cf.  ch.  Ixiv.  4,  Job  xxii.  21,  Ezek.  xxxiii. 
18,  19)  refer  to  the  gracious  words  and  gracious  acts  of  God. 
These  are  the  true  support  of  life  (?y  as  in  Deut.  viii.  3)  for 
every  man,  and  in  these  does  the  life  of  his  spirit  consist,  i.e. 
his  inmost  and  highest  source  of  life,  and  that  "  on  all  sides" 
(^5r>  which  it  would  be  more  correct  to  point  /S^,  as  in  1  Chron. 
vii.  5  ;  cf.  bakkdl,  in  every  respect,  2  Sam.  xxiii.  5).  With  this 
explanation,  the  conjecture  of  Ewald  and  Knobel,  that  the 
reading  should  be  inn,  falls  to  the  ground.  From  the  general 
truth  of  which  he  had  made  a  personal  application,  that  the 
word  of  God  is  the  source  of  all  life,  he  drew  this  conclusion, 
which  he  here  repeats  with  a  retrospective  glance,  "  So  wilt 
Thou  then  make  me  whole  (see  the  kal  in  Job  xxxix.  4),  and 


CHAP.  XXXVIII.  18-20.  121 

keep  me  alive"  (for  *£n$;  with  the  hope  passing  over  into  a 
prayer).  The  praise  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  com 
mences  with  the  word  liinneli  (behold).  His  severe  illness  had 
been  sent  in  anticipation  of  a  happy  deliverance  (on  the  radical 
signification  of  mar,  which  is  here  doubled,  to  give  it  a  super 
lative  force,  see  Job,  vol.  i.  279).  The  Lord  meant  it  for  good; 
the  suffering  was  indeed  a  chastisement,  but  it  was  a  chastise 
ment  of  love.  Casting  all  his  sins  behind  Him,  as  men  do 
with  things  which  they  do  not  wish  to  know,  or  have  no  desire  to 
be  reminded  of  (compare  e.g.  Neh.  ix.  26),  He  "loved  him  out," 
i.e.  drew  him  lovingly  out,  of  the  pit  of  destruction  (chdshag, 
love  as  a  firm  inward  bond ;  bell,  which  is  generally  used  as  a 
particle,  stands  here  in  its  primary  substantive  signification, 
from  bdldh,  to  consume). 

In  strophe  4  he  rejoices  in  the  preservation  of  his  life  as 
the  highest  good,  and  promises  to  praise  God  for  it  as  long  as 
he  lives. 

Vers.  18-20.  "  For  Hades  does  not  praise  Thee;  death  does 

not  sing  praises  to  Tliee: 

They  that  sink  into  the  grave  do  not  hope  for  Thy  truth. 
The  living,  the  living,  he  praises  Thee,  as  I  do  to-day ; 
The  father  to  the  children  makes  known  Thy  truth. 
Jehovah  is  ready  to  give  me  salvation ; 
Therefore  will  we  play  my  stringed  instruments  all  the  days 

of  my  life 
In  the  house  of  Jehovah." 

We  have  here  that  comfortless  idea  of  the  future  state, 
which  is  so  common  in  the  Psalms  (vid.  Ps.  vi.  6,  xxx.  10, 
Ixxxviii.  12,  13,  cf.  cxv.  17),  and  also  in  the  book  of  Ecclesi- 
astes  (Eccles.  ix.  4,  5,  10).  The  foundation  of  this  idea,  not 
withstanding  the  mythological  dress,  is  an  actual  truth  (vid. 
Psychol.  p.  409),  which  the  personal  faith  of  the  hero  of  Job 
endeavours  to  surmount  (Comment,  pp.  150-153,  and  elsewhere), 
but  the  decisive  removal  of  which  was  only  to  be  effected  by 
the  progressive  history  of  salvation.  The  verse  is  introduced 
with  "for"  (kl),  inasmuch  as  the  gracious  act  of  God  is  accounted 
for  on  the  ground  that  He  wished  to  be  still  further  glorified 
by  His  servant  whom  He  delivered.  &6,  in  ver.  18a,  is  written 
only  once  instead  of  twice,  as  ill  ch.  xxiii.  4.  They  "  sink 


122  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH 

into  the  grave,"  i.e.  are  not  thought  of  as  dying,  but  as  already 
dead.  "Truth"  (Smetli)  is  the  sincerity  of  God,  with  which 
Pie  keeps  His  promises.  Ver.  195  reminds  us  that  Manasseh, 
who  was  twelve  years  old  when  he  succeeded  his  father,  was 
not  yet  born  (cf.  ch.  xxxix.  7).  The  W^  njn':,  fteXXet  <ra>?ew 
/AC,  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  xxxvii.  26.  The  change  in  the  number 
in  ver.  205  may  be  explained  from  the  fact  that  the  writer 
thought  of  himself  as  the  choral  leader  of  his  family  ;  ay  is  a 
suffix,  not  a  substantive  termination  (Evvald,  §  164,  p.  427). 
The  impression  follows  us  to  the  end,  that  we  have  cultivated 
rather  than  original  poetry  here.  Hezekiah's  love  to  the  older 
sacred  literature  is  well  known.  He  restored  the  liturgical 
psalmody  (2  Chron.  xxix.  30).  He  caused  a  further  collection 
of  proverbs  to  be  made,  as  a  supplement  to  the  older  book  of 
Proverbs  (Prov.  xxv.  1).  The  "  men  of  Hezekiah  "  resembled 
the  Pisistratian  Society,  of  which  Onomacritos  was  the  head. 

On  vers.  21,  22,  see  the  notes  at  the  close  of  vers.  4-6, 
where  these  two  verses  belong. 

D.   THREATENING  OF  THE  BABYLONIAN  CAPTIVITY  OCCA 
SIONED  BY  HEZEKIAH. — CHAP.  XXXIX. 

From  this  point  onwards  the  text  of  the  book  of  Kings  (2 
Kings  xx.  12-19,  cf.  2  Chron.  xxxii.  24-31)  runs  parallel  to 
the  text  before  us.  Babylonian  ambassadors  have  an  interview 
with  the  convalescent  king  of  Judah.  Ver.  1.  "  At  that  time 
Merodach  BaPadan  (K.  Berodach  BaVadari),  son  of  BaVadan 
king  of  Babel,  sent  writings  and  a  present  to  Hizh'yahu,  and 
heard  (K.  for  he  had  heard)  that  he  (K.  Hizkiyahu)  had  been  sick, 
and  was  restored  again?  The  two  texts  here  share  the  original 
text  between  them.  Instead  of  the  unnatural  S&?B^  (which 
would  link  the  cause  on  to  the  effect,  as  in  2  Sam.  xiv.  5),  we 
should  read  V^^  ^,  whereas  p?n*1  in  our  text  appears  to  be  the 
genuine  word  out  of  which  UT'pTn  in  the  other  text  has  sprung, 
although  it  is  not  indispensable,  as  r6n  has  a  pluperfect  sense. 
In  a  similar  manner  the  name  of  the  king  of  Babylon  is  given 
here  correctly  as  ^n^-iD  (Nissel,  ^TP  without  K,  as  in  Jer.  1.  2), 
whilst  the  book  of  Kings  has  T!K"ia  (according  to  the  Masora 
with  K),  probably  occasioned  by  the  other  name  Bal'adan,  which 
begins  with  Beth.  It  cannot  be  maintained  that  the  words 


CHAP.  XXXIX.  1.  123 

ben  BaVaddn  are  a  mistake ;  at  the  same  time,  Bal'adan  (Jos. 
Baladas)  evidently  cannot  be  a  name  by  itself  if  M'rtfdakh 
BaVdddn  signifies  "  Merodach  (the  Babylonian  Bel  or  Jupiter l} 
filium  dedit"2  In  the  Canon  Ptol.  Mardokempados  is  preceded 
by  a  Jugceus ;  and  the  inscriptions,  according  to  G.  Rawlinson, 
Hon.  ii.  395,  indicate  Merodach-Baladan  as  the  "  son  of  Yakin" 
They  relate  that  the  latter  acknowledged  Tiglath-pileser  as  his 
feudal  lord ;  that,  after  reigning  twelve  years  as  a  vassal,  he 
rose  in  rebellion  against  Sargon  in  league  with  the  Susanians 
and  the  Aramasan  tribes  above  Babylonia,  and  lost  everything 
except  his  life  ;  that  he  afterwards  rebelled  against  Sennacherib 
in  conjunction  with  a  Chaldean  prince  named  Susub,  just  after 
Sennacherib  had  returned  from  his  first3  JudaBan  campaign 
to  Nineveh ;  and  that  having  been  utterly  defeated,  he  took 
refuge  in  an  island  of  the  Persian  Gulf.  He  does  not  make 
his  appearance  any  more ;  but  Susub  escaped  from  his  place  of 
concealment,  and  being  supported  by  the  Susanians  and  cer 
tain  Aramaean  tribes,  fought  a  long  and  bloody  battle  with 
Sennacherib  on  the  Lower  Tigris.  This  battle  he  lost,  and 
Nebo-som-iskun,  a  son  of  Merodach  Baladan,  fell  into  the  hands 
of  the  conqueror.  In  the  midst  of  these  details,  as  given  by  the 
inscriptions,  the  statement  of  the  Can.  Ptol.  may  still  be  main 
tained,  according  to  which  the  twelve  years  of  Mardokempados 
(a  contraction,  as  Ewald  supposes,  of  Mardokempalados)  com 
mence  with  the  year  721.  From  this  point  onwards  the  biblical 
and  extra-biblical  accounts  dovetail  together  ;  whereas  in  Poly- 
histor  (Eus.  chron.  arm.)  the  following  Babylonian  rulers  are 
mentioned  :  "  a  brother  of  Sennacherib,  Acises,  who  reigned 
hardly  a  month ;  Marodach  Baladan,  six  months ;  Elibus  into 
the  third  year;  Asordan,  Sennacherib's  son,  who  was  made 
king  after  the  defeat  of  Elibus."  Now,  as  the  Can.  Ptolem. 
also  gives  a  Belibos  with  a  three  years'  reign,  the  identity  of 
Mardokempados  and  Marodach  Baladan  is  indisputable.  The 
Can.  Ptol.  seems  only  to  take  into  account  his  legitimate  reign 
as  a  vassal,  and  Polyhistor  (from  Berosus)  only  his  last  act 
of  rebellion.  At  the  same  time,  this  is  very  far  from  removing 
all  the  difficulties  that  lie  in  the  way  of  a  reconciliation,  more 

1  Eawlinson,  Monarchies,  i.  169. 

3  Oppert,  Expedition,  ii.  355. 

8  The  inscriptions  mention  two  campaigns. 


124  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

especially  the  chronological  difficulties.  Rawlinson,  who  places 
the  commencement  of  the  (second)  Judsean  campaign  in  the 
year  698,  and  therefore  transfers  it  to  the  end  of  the  twenty- 
ninth  year  of  Hezekiah's  reign  instead  of  the  middle,  sets 
himself  in  opposition  not  only  to  ch.  xxxvi.  1,  but  also  to 
ch.  xxxviii.  5  and  2  Kings  xviii.  2.  According  to  the  biblical 
accounts,  as  compared  with  the  Can.  PtoL,  the  embassy  must 
have  been  sent  by  Merodach  Baladan  during  the  period  of  his 
reign  as  vassal,  which  commenced  in  the  year  721.  Apparently 
it  had  only  the  harmless  object  of  congratulating  the  king  upon 
his  recovery  (and  also,  according  to  2  Chron.  xxxii.  31,  of 
making  some  inquiry,,  in  the  interests  of  Chaldean  astrology, 
into  the  mopheth  connected  with  the  sun-dial)  ;  but  it  cer 
tainly  had  also  the  secret  political  object  of  making  common 
cause  with  Hezekiah  to  throw  off  the  Assyrian  yoke.  All  that 
can  be  maintained  with  certainty  beside  this  is,  that  the  embassy 
cannot  have  been  sent  before  the  fourteenth  year  of  Hezekiah's 
reign  ;  for  as  he  reigned  twenty-nine  years,  his  illness  must 
have  occurred,  according  to  ch.  xxxviii.  5,  in  the  fourteenth 
year  itself,  i.e.  the  seventh  year  of  Mardokempados.  Such 
questions  as  whether  the  embassy  came  before  or  after  the 
Assyrian  catastrophe,  which  was  still  in  the  future  at  the  time 
referred  to  in  ch.  xxxviii.  4-6y  or  whether  it  came  before  or 
after  the  payment  of  the  compensation  money  to  Sennacherib 
(2  Kings  xviii.  14-16),  are  open  to  dispute.  In  all  probability 
it  took  place  immediately  before  the  Assyrian  campaign,1  as 
Hezekiah  was  still  able  to  show  off  the  abundance  of  his  riches 
to  the  Babylonian  ambassadors. 

Ver.  2.  "  And  Hezekiah  rejoiced  (K.  heard,  which  is  quite 
inappropriate)  concerning  them,  and  showed  them  (K.  all)  his 
storehouse  :  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  spices,  and  the  fine  oil 
(hasshdmen,  K.  shemen),  and  all  his  arsenal,  and  all  that  was  in 
his  treasures  :  there  was  nothing  that  Hezekiah  had  not  shown 
them9  in  his  house  or  in  all  his  kingdom"  Although  there  were 

1  A  reviewer  in  the  Theol  L.  El.  1857,  p.  12,  inquires :  "  How  could 
the  prophet  have  known  that  all  that  Hezekiah  showed  to  the  Babylonian 
ambassador  would  one  day  be  brought  to  Babylon,  when  in  a  very  short 
time  these  treasures  would  all  have  been  given  by  Hezekiah  to  the  king  of 
Assyria  ?  "  Answer  :  The  prophecy  is  so  expressed  in  ch.  xxxix.  6,  7,  that 
this  intervening  occurrence  does  not  prejudice  its  truth  at  all. 


CHAf.  XXXIX.  3-8.  125 

spices  kept  in  J"OJ  JV3,  J"D3  is  not  equivalent  to  J1N33  (from  NJJ, 
to  break  to  pieces,  to  pulverize),  which  is  applied  to  gum-dragon 
and  other  drugs,  but  is  the  nipltal  nbj  from  JTi3  (piel,  Arab. 
kayyata,  to  cram  full,  related  to  013  (D^?)>  D?J  (D?.?)?  and  P°S- 
sibly  also  to  DH3,  katama  (Hitzig,  Knobel,  Furst),  and  conse 
quently  it  does  not  mean  "  the  house  of  his  spices,"  as  Aquila, 
Symmachus,  and  the  Vulgate  render  it,  but  his  "  treasure- 
house  or  storehouse"  (Targ.,  Syr.,  Saad.).  It  differs,  however, 
from  beth  kellm,  the  wood  house  of  Lebanon  (ch.  xxii.  8).  He 
was  able  to  show  them  all  that  was  worth  seeing  "  in  his  whole 
kingdom,"  inasmuch  as  it  was  all  concentrated  in  Jerusalem, 
the  capital. 

The  consequences  of  this  coqueting  with  the  children  of 
the  stranger,  and  this  vain  display,  are  pointed  out  in  vers.  3-8 : 
"  Tlien  came  IsaiaJi  the  prophet  to  king  Hizkiyahu,  and  said  to 
him,  What  have  these  men  said,  and  whence  come  they  to  thee  ? 
Hizkiyahu  said,  Tliey  came  to  me  from  afar  country  (K.  omits 
to  me),  out  of  BabeL  He  said  further,  What  have  they  seen 
in  thy  house'?  Hizkiyahu  said,  All  that  is  in  my  house  have 
they  seen:  there  ivas  nothing  in  my  treasures  that  I  had  not 
shown  them.  Then  Isaiah  said  to  Hizkiyahu,  Hear  the  word  of 
Jehovah  of  hosts  (K.  omits  tsebhaoth) ;  Behold,  days  come,  that  all 
that  is  in  thy  house,  and  all  that  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  unto 
this  day,  will  be  carried  away  to  Babel  («3?  K.  n£?3):  nothing  will 
be  left  behind,  saith  Jehovah.  And  of  thy  children  that  proceed 
from  thee,  whom  thou  shalt  beget,  will  they  take  (K.  chethib,  '  will 
he  take')  ;  and  they  will  be  courtiers  in  the  palace  of  the  king  of 
Babel.  Then  said  Hizkiyahu  to  Isaiah,  Good  is  the  word  of 
Jehovah  ivhich  thou  hast  spoken.  And  he  said  further,  Yea  (H3, 
K.  DK  ^L!)?  there  shall  be  peace  and  stedfastness  in  my  days" 
Hezekiah's  two  candid  answers  in  vers.  3  and  4  are  an  invo 
luntary  condemnation  of  his  own  conduct,  which  was  sinful  in 
two  respects.  This  self-satisfied  display  of  worthless  earthly 
possessions  would  brino;  its  own  punishment  in  their  loss ;  and 
this  obsequious  suing  for  admiration  and  favour  on  the  part 
of  strangers,  would  be  followed  by  plundering  and  enslaving 
on  the  part  of  those  very  same  strangers  whose  envy  he  had 
excited.  The  prophet  here  foretells  the  Babylonian  captivity  ; 
but,  in  accordance  with  the  occasion  here  given,  not  as  the 
destiny  of  the  whole  nation,  but  as  that  of  the  house  of  David, 


126  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Even  political  sharp-sightedness  might  have  foreseen,  that  some 
such  disastrous  consequences  would  follow  Hezekiah's  impru 
dent  course  ;  but  this  absolute  certainty,  that  Babylon,  which 
was  then  struggling  hard  for  independence,  would  really  be 
the  heiress  to  the  Assyrian  government  of  the  world,  and  that 
it  was  not  from  Assyria,  which  was  actually  threatening  Judah 
with  destruction  for  its  rebellion,  but  from  Babylon,  that  this 
destruction  would  really  come,  was  impossible  without  the  spirit 
of  prophecy.  We  may  infer  from  ver.  7  (cf.  ch.  xxxviii.  19, 
and  for  the  fulfilment,  Dan.  i.  3)  that  Hezekiah  had  no  son  as 
yet,  at  least  none  with  a  claim  to  the  throne ;  and  this  is  con 
firmed  by  2  Kings  xxi.  1.  So  far  as  the  concluding  words  are 
concerned,  we  should  quite  misunderstand  them,  if  we  saw 
nothing  in  them  but  common  egotism.  ^  (for)  is  explanatory 
here,  and  therefore  confirmatory.  DX  KvH,  however,  does  not 
mean  "  yea,  if  only,"  as  Ewald  supposes  (§  324,  5),  but  is  also 
explanatory,  though  in  an  interrogative  form,  "  Is  it  not  good 
(i.e.  still  gracious  and  kind),  if,"  etc.  1  He  submits  with 
humility  to  the  word  of  Jehovah,  in  penitential  acknowledgment 
of  his  vain,  shortsighted,  untheocratic  conduct,  and  feels  that 
lie  is  mercifully  spared  by  God,  inasmuch  as  the  divine  bless 
ings  of  peace  and  stability  (HEX  a  self-attesting  state  of  things, 
without  any  of  those  changes  which  disappoint  our  confident 
expectations)  would  continue.  "Although  he  desired  the  pros 
perity  of  future  ages,  it  would  not  have  been  right  for  him 
to  think  it  nothing  that  God  had  given  him  a  token  of  His 
clemency,  by  delaying  His  judgment "  (Calvin). 

Over  the  kingdom  of  Judah  there  was  now  hanging  the 
very  same  fate  of  captivity  and  exile,  which  had  put  an  end  to 
the  kingdom  of  Israel  eight  years  before.  When  the  author  of 
the  book  of  Kings  prefaces  the  four  accounts  of  Isaiah  in  2 
Kings  xviii.  13-20,  with  the  recapitulation  in  2  Kings  xviii. 
9-12  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  5,  6),  his  evident  meaning  is,  that  the  end 
of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  and  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  the 
kingdom  of  Judah,  had  their  meeting-point  in  Hezekiah's  time. 
As  Israel  fell  under  the  power  of  the  Assyrian  empire,  which 
foundered  upon  Judah,  though  only  through  a  miraculous 
manifestation  of  the  grace  of  God  (see  Hos.  i.  7) ;  so  did 
Judah  fall  a  victim  to  the  Babylonian  empire.  The  four 
accounts  are  so  arranged,  that  the  first  two,  together  with  the 


CHAP.  XXXIX.  3-8.  127 

epilogue  in  Isa.  xxxvii.  36  sqq.,  which  contains  the  account  of 
the  fulfilment,  bring  the  Assyrian  period  of  judgment  to  a 
close ;  and  the  last  two,  with  the  eventful  sketch  in  ch.  xxxix. 
6,  7,  open  the  way  for  the  great  bulk  of  the  prophecies  which 
now  follow  in  ch.  xl.-lxvi.,  relating  to  the  Babylonian  period 
of  judgment.  This  Janus-headed  arrangement  of  the  contents 
of  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.  is  a  proof  that  this  historical  section  formed 
an  original  part  of  the  "  vision  of  Isaiah."  At  any  rate,  it  leads 
to  the  conclusion  that,  whoever  arranged  the  four  accounts  in 
their  present  order,  had  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  before  him  at  the  time. 
We  believe,  however,  that  we  may,  or  rather,  considering  the 
prophetico-historical  style  of  ch.  xxxvi.-xxxix.,  that  we  must, 
draw  the  still  further  conclusion,  that  Isaiah  himself,  when  he 
revised  the  collection  of  his  prophecies  at  the  end  of  Hezekiah's 
reign,  or  possibly  not  till  the  beginning  of  Manasseh's,  bridged 
over  the  division  between  the  two  halves  of  the  collection  by  the 
historical  trilogy  in  the  seventh  book. 


SECOND  HALF  OF  THE  COLLECTION. 

CHAP.  XL.-LXVI. 

THE  first  half  consisted  of  seven  parts ;  the  second  consists  of 
three.  The  trilogical  arrangement  of  this  cycle  of  prophecies 
has  hardly  been  disputed  by  any  one,  since  Riickert  pointed  it 
out  in  his  Translation  of  the  Hebrew  Prophets  (1831).  And  it 
is  equally  certain  that  each  part  consists  of  3  X  3  addresses. 
The  division  of  the  chapters  furnishes  an  unintentional  proof 
of  this,  though  the  true  commencement  is  not  always  indi 
cated.  The  first  part  embraces  the  following  nine  addresses: 
ch.  xl. ;  xli. ;  xlii.  1-xliii.  13  ;  xliii.  14-xliv.  5 ;  xliv.  6-23  ; 
xliv.  24-xlv. ;  xlvi. ;  xlvii. ;  xlviii.  The  second  part  includes 
the  following  nine:  ch.  xlix. ;  1.;  li. ;  Hi.  1-12;  lii.  13-liii. ; 
liv. ;  Iv. ;  Ivi.  1-8  ;  Ivi.  9-1  vii.  The  third  part  the  following 
nine :  ch.  Iviii. ;  lix. ;  Ix. ;  Ixi. ;  Ixii. ;  Ixiii.  1-6  ;  Ixiii.  7-lxiv. ; 
Ixv. ;  Ixvi.  It  is  only  in  the  middle  of  the  first  part  that  the 
division  is  at  all  questionable.  In  the  other  two  it  is  hardly 
possible  to  err.  The  theme  of  the  whole  is  the  comforting 
announcement  of  the  approaching  deliverance,  and  its  attendant 
summons  to  repentance.  For  the  deliverance  itself  was  for  the 
Israel,  which  remained  true  to  the  confession  of  Jehovah  in 
the  midst  of  affliction  and  while  redemption  was  delayed,  and 
not  for  the  rebellious,  who  denied  Jehovah  in  word  and  deed, 
and  thus  placed  themselves  on  the  level  of  the  heathen. 
"  There  is  no  peace,  saith  Jehovah,  for  the  wicked:"  with  these 
words  does  the  first  part  of  the  twenty-seven  addresses  close  in 
ch.  xlviii.  22.  The  second  closes  in  ch.  Ivii.  21  in  a  more 
excited  and  fuller  tone  :  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  for 
the  wicked."  And  at  the  close  of  the  third  part  (ch.  Ixvi.  24) 
the  prophet  drops  this  form  of  refrain,  and  declares  the  miser~ 
able  end  of  the  wicked  in  deeply  pathetic  though  horrifying 
terms :  "  Their  worm  shall  not  die,  and  their  fire  shall  not  le 

128 


CHAP.  XL.-LXVI.  129 

quenched,  and  they  shall  be  an  abhorrence  to  all  flesh;"  just  as,  at 
the  close  of  the  fifth  book  of  the  Psalms,  the  shorter  form  of 
berdkhdh  (blessing)  is  dropt,  and  an  entire  psalm,  the  Hallelujah 
(Ps.  cl.),  takes  its  place. 

The  three  parts,  which  are  thus  marked  off  by  the  prophet 
himself,  are  only  variations  of  the  one  theme  common  to  them 
all.  At  the  same  time,  each  has  its  own  leading  thought,  and 
its  own  special  key-note,  which  is  struck  in  the  very  first  words. 
In  each  of  the  three  parts,  also,  a  different  antithesis  stands 
in  the  foreground:  viz.  in  the  first  part,  ch.  xl.-xlviii.,  the  con 
trast  between  Jehovah  and  the  idols,  and  between  Israel  and 
the  heathen  ;  in  the  second  part,  ch.  xlix.-lvii.,  the  contrast 
between  the  present  suffering  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  and 
His  future  glory ;  in  the  third  part,  ch.  Iviii.-lxvi.,  the  con 
trast  observable  in  the  heart  of  Israel  itself,  between  the  hypo 
crites,  the  depraved,  the  rebellious,  on  the  one  side,  and  the 
faithful,  the  mourning,  the  persecuted,  on  the  other.  The  first 
part  sets  forth  the  deliverance  from  Babylon,  in  which  the 
prophecy  of  Jehovah  is  fulfilled,  to  the  shame  and  overthrow  of 
the  idols  and  their  worshippers ;  the  second  part,  the  way  of 
the  Servant  of  Jehovah  through  deep  humiliation  to  exaltation 
and  glory,  which  is  at  the  same  time  the  exaltation  of  Israel  to 
the  height  of  its  world-wide  calling ;  the  third  part,  the  indis 
pensable  conditions  of  participation  in  the  future  redemption 
and  glory.  There  is  some  truth  in  Hahn's  opinion,  that  the 
distinctive  characteristics  of  the  three  separate  parts  are  ex 
hibited  in  the  three  clauses  of  ch.  xl.  2  :  "  that  her  distress  is 
ended,  that  her  debt  is  paid,  that  she  has  received  (according  to 
his  explanation,  6  will  receive')  double  for  all  her  sins"  For 
the  central  point  of  the  first  part  is  really  the  termination  of 
the  Babylonian  distress ;  that  of  the  second,  the  expiation  of 
guilt  by  the  self-sacrifice  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  ;  and  that 
of  the  third,  the  assurance  that  the  sufferings  will  be  followed 
by  "a  far  more  exceeding  weight  of  glory."  The  promise 
rises  higher  and  higher  in  the  circular  movements  of  the  3x9 
addresses,  until  at  length  it  reaches  its  zenith  in  ch.  Ixv.  and 
Ixvi.,  and  links  time  and  eternity  together. 

So  far  as  the  language  is  concerned,  there  is  nothing  more 
finished  or  more  elevated  in  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament 
than  this  trilogy  of  addresses  by  Isaiah.  In  ch.  i.-xxxix.  of 

VOL.  II.  1 


130  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  collection,  the  prophet's  language  is  generally  more  com 
pressed,  chiselled  (lapidarisch\  plastic,  although  even  there  his 
style  passes  through  all  varieties  of  colour.  But  here  in  ch. 
xl.-lxvi.,  where  he  no  longer  has  his  foot  upon  the  soil  of  his 
own  time,  but  is  transported  into  the  far  distant  future,  as  into 
his  own  home,  even  the  language  retains  an  ideal  and,  so  to 
speak,  ethereal  character.  It  has  grown  into  a  broad,  pellucid, 
shining  stream,  which  floats  us  over  as  it  were  into  the  world 
beyond,  upon  majestic  yet  gentle  and  translucent  waves. 
There  are  only  two  passages  in  which  it  becomes  more  harsh, 
turbid,  and  ponderous,  viz.  ch.  liii.  ancl  Ivi.  9-lvii.  Ha.  In  the 
former  it  is  the  emotion  of  sorrow  which  throws  its  shadow 
upon  it ;  in  the  latter,  the  emotion  of  wrath.  And  in  every 
other  instance  in  which  it  changes,  we  may  detect  at  once  the 
influence  of  the  object  and  of  the  emotion.  In  ch.  Ixiii.  7  the 
prophet  strikes  the  note  of  the  liturgical  tephilldh ;  in  ch.  Ixiii. 
195— Ixiv.  4  it  is  sadness  which  chokes  the  stream  of  words;  in 

7  / 

ch.  Ixiv.  5  you  hear,  as  in  Jer.  iii.  25,  the  key-note  of  the 
liturgical  vidduy,  or  confessional  prayer. 

And  when  we  turn  to  the  contents  of  his  trilogy,  it  is 
more  incomparable  still.  It  commences  with  a  prophecy,  which 
gave  to  John  the  Baptist  the  great  theme  of  his  preaching. 
It  closes  with  the  prediction  of  the  creation  of  a  new  heaven 
and  new  earth,  beyond  which  even  the  last  page  of  the  New 
Testament  Apocalypse  cannot  go.  And  in  the  centre  (ch.  Iii. 
13— liii.)  the  sufferings  and  exaltation  of  Christ  are  proclaimed 
as  clearly,  as  if  the  prophet  had  stood  beneath  the  cross  itself, 
and  had  seen  the  Risen  Saviour.  Pie  is  transported  to  the  very 
commencement  of  the  New  Testament  times,  and  begins  just 
like  the  New  Testament  evangelists.  He  afterwards  describes 
the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  as  completed  events,  with 
all  the  clearness  of  a  Pauline  discourse.  And  lastly,  he  clings 
to  the  heavenly  world  beyond,  like  John  in  the  Apocalypse. 
Yet  the  Old  Testament  limits  are  not  disturbed;  but  within 
those  limits,  evangelist,  apostle,  and  apocalyptist  are  all  con 
densed  into  one.  Throughout  the  whole  of  these  addresses  we 
never  meet  with  a  strictly  Messianic  prophecy ;  and  yet  they 
have  more  christological  depth  than  all  the  Messianic  prophecies 
taken  together.  The  bright  picture  of  the  coming  King,  which 
is  met  with  in  the  earlier  Messianic  prophecies,  undergoes  a 


CHAP.  XL.-LXVI.  131 

metamorphosis  here,  out  of  which  it  issues  enriched  by  many 
essential  elements,  viz.  those  of  the  two  status,  the  mors  vicaria, 
and  the  munus  triplex.  The  dark  typical  background  of 
suffering,  which  the  mournful  Davidic  psalms  give  to  the  figure 
of  the  Messiah,  becomes  here  for  the  first  time  an  object  of 
direct  prediction.  The  place  of  the  Son  of  David,  who  is  only 
a  King,  is  now  taken  by  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  who  is  Prophet 
and  Priest  by  virtue  of  His  self-sacrifice,  and  King  as  well ;  the 
Saviour  of  Israel  and  of  the  Gentiles,  persecuted  even  to  death 
by  His  own  nation,  but  exalted  by  God  to  be  both  Priest  and 
King.  So  rich  and  profound  a  legacy  did  Isaiah  leave  to  the 
church  of  the  captivity,  and  to  the  church  of  the  future  also, 
yea,  even  to  the  New  Jerusalem  upon  the  new  earth.  Heng- 
stenberg  has  very  properly  compared  these  prophecies  of  Isaiah 
to  the  Deuteronomic  "  last  words "  of  Moses  in  the  steppes 
of  Moab,  and  to  the  last  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  within  the 
circle  of  His  own  disciples,  as  reported  by  John.  It  is  a 
thoroughly  esoteric  book,  left  to  the  church  for  future  inter 
pretation.  To  none  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets  who 
followed  him  was  the  ability  given  perfectly  to  open  the  book. 
Nothing  but  the  coming  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  Christ  could  break  all  the  seven  seals.  But 
was  Isaiah  really  the  author  of  this  book  of  consolation  ? 
Modern  criticism  visits  all  who  dare  to  assert  this  with  the 
double  ban  of  want  of  science  and  want  of  conscience.  It 
regards  Isaiah's  authorship  as  being  quite  as  impossible  as  any 
miracle  in  the  sphere  of  nature,  of  history,  or  of  the  spirit. 
No  prophecies  find  any  favour  in  its  eyes,  but  such  as  can  be 
naturally  explained.  It  knows  exactly  how  far  a  prophet  can 
see,  and  where  he  must  stand,  in  order  to  see  so  far.  But 
we  are  not  tempted  at  all  to  purchase  such  omniscience  at  the 
price  of  the  supernatural.  We  believe  in  the  supernatural 
reality  of  prophecy,  simply  because  history  furnishes  indis 
putable  proofs  of  it,  and  because  a  supernatural  interposition 
on  the  part  of  God  in  both  the  inner  and  outer  life  of  man 
takes  place  even  at  the  present  day,  and  can  be  readily  put  to 
the  test.  But  this  interposition  varies  greatly  both  in  degree 
and  kind  ;  and  even  in  the  far-sight  of  the  prophets  there  were 
the  greatest  diversities,  according  to  the  measure  of  their 
charisma.  It  is  quite  possible,  therefore,  that  Isaiah  may 


132  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

have  foreseen  the  calamities  of  the  Babylonian  age  and  the 
deliverance  that  followed  "  by  an  excellent  spirit,"  as  the  son  of 
Sirach  says  (Ecclus.  xlviii.  24),  and  may  have  lived  and  moved 
in  these  "  last  things,"  even  at  a  time  when  the  Assyrian 
empire  was  still  standing.  But  we  do  not  regard  all  that  is 
possible  as  being  therefore  real.  We  can  examine  quite  im 
partially  whether  this  really  was  the  case,  and  without  our 
ultimate  decision  being  under  the  constraint  of  any  unalterable 
foregone  conclusion,  like  that  of  the  critics  referred  to.  All 
that  we  have  said  in  praise  of  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  would  retain  its 
fullest  force,  even  if  the  author  of  the  whole  should  prove  to  be 
a  prophet  of  the  captivity,  and  not  Isaiah. 

We  have  already  given  a  cursory  glance  at  the  general  and 
particular  grounds  upon  which  we  maintain  the  probability,  or 
rather  the  certainty,  that  Isaiah  was  the  author  of  ch.  xl.-lxvi. 
(vid.  vol.  i.  pp.  57-62)  ;  and  we  have  explained  them  more  fully 
in  the  concluding  remarks  to  Drechsler's  Commentary  (vol.  iii. 
pp.  361-416),  to  which  we  would  refer  any  readers  who  wish 
to  obtain  a  complete  insight  into  the  pro  and  con  of  this  critical 
question.  All  false  supports  of  Isaiah's  authorship  have  there 
been  willingly  given  up  ;  for  the  words  of  Job  to  his  friends 
(xiii.  7,  8)  are  quite  as  applicable  to  a  biblical  theologian  of 
the  present  day. 

We  have  admitted,  that  throughout  the  whole  of  the 
twenty-seven  prophecies,  the  author  of  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  has  the 
captivity  as  his  fixed  standpoint,  or  at  any  rate  as  a  standpoint 
that  is  only  so  far  a  fluctuating  one,  as  the  eventual  deliverance 
approaches  nearer  and  nearer,  and  that  without  ever  betraying 
the  difference  between  the  real  present  and  this  ideal  one ;  so 
that  as  the  prophetic  vision  of  the  future  has  its  roots  in  every 
other  instance  in  the  soil  of  the  prophet's  own  time,  and  springs 
out  of  that  soil,  to  all  appearance  he  is  an  exile  himself.  But 
notwithstanding  this,  the  following  arguments  may  be  adduced 
in  support  of  Isaiah's  authorship.  In  the  first  place,  the  de 
liverance  foretold  in  these  prophecies,  with  all  its  attendant 
circumstances,  is  referred  to  as  something  beyond  the  reach  of 
human  foresight,  and  known  to  Jehovah  alone,  and  as  some 
thing  the  occurrence  of  which  would  prove  Him  to  be  the  God 
of  Gods.  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  prophecy,  knew  the  name 
of  Cyrus  even  before  he  knew  it  himself ;  and  He  demon- 


CHAP.  XL.-LXVI.  133 

strated  His  Godhead  to  all  the  world,  inasmuch  as  He  caused 
the  name  and  work  of  the  deliverer  of  Israel  to  be  foretold  (ch. 
xlv.  4-7).  Secondly,  although  these  prophecies  rest  through 
out  upon  the  soil  of  the  captivity,  and  do  not  start  with  the 
historical  basis  of  Hezekiah's  time,  as  we  should  expect  them 
to  do,  with  Isaiah  as  their  author ;  yet  the  discrepancy  between 
this  phenomenon  and  the  general  character  of  prophecy  else 
where,  loses  its  full  force  as  an  argument  against  Isaiah's 
authorship,  if  we  do  not  separate  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  from  ch.  i.-xxxix. 
and  take  it  as  an  independent  work,  as  is  generally  done.  The 
whole  of  the  first  half  of  the  collection  is  a  staircase,  leading 
up  to  these  addresses  to  the  exiles,  and  bears  the  same  relation 
to  them,  as  a  whole,  as  the  Assyrian  pedestal  in  ch.  xiv.  24—27  to 
the  Babylonian  massd'  in  ch.  xiii.-xiv.  26  (see  vol.  i.  317).  This 
relation  between  the  two — namely,  that  Assyrian  prophecies 
lay  the  foundation  for  Babylonian — runs  through  the  whole  of 
the  first  half.  It  is  so  arranged,  that  the  prophecies  of  the 
Assyrian  times  throughout  have  intermediate  layers,  which 
reach  beyond  those  times ;  and  whilst  the  former  constitute  the 
groundwork,  the  latter  form  the  gable.  This  is  the  relation  in 
which  ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.  stand  to  ch.  xiii.— xxiii.,  and  ch.  xxxiv. 
xxxv.  to  ch.  xxviii.-xxxiii.  And  within  the  cycle  of  prophecies 
against  the  nations,  three  Babylonian  prophecies  —  viz.  ch. 
xiii.-xiv.  23,  xxi.  1-10,  and  xxiii. — form  the  commencement, 
middle,  and  end.  The  Assyrian  prophecies  lie  within  a  circle, 
the  circumference  and  diameter  of  which  consist  of  prophecies 
that  have  a  longer  span.  And  are  all  these  prophecies,  that 
are  inserted  with  such  evident  skill  and  design,  to  be  taken 
away  from  our  prophet  ?  The  oracle  concerning  Babel,  in 
ch.  xiii.-xiv.  23,  has  all  the  ring  of  a  prophecy  of  Isaiah's,  as 
we  have  already  seen  ;  and  in  the  epilogue,  in  ch.  xiv.  24-27, 
it  has  Isaiah's  signature.  The  second  oracle  concerning  Babel, 
in  ch.  xxi.  1-10,  is  not  only  connected  with  three  passages  of 
Isaiah's  that  are  acknowledged  as  genuine,  so  as  to  form  a 
tetralogy  ;  but  in  style  and  spirit  it  is  most  intimately  bound 
up  with  them.  The  cycle  of  prophecies  of  the  final  cata 
strophe  (ch.  xxiv.-xxvii.)  commences  so  thoroughly  in  Isaiah's 
style,  that  nearly  every  word  and  every  turn  in  the  first  three 
verses  bears  Isaiah's  stamp  ;  and  in  ch.  xxvii.  12,  13,  it  dies 
away,  just  like  the  book  of  Immaiiuel,  ch.  xi.  11  sqq.  And 


134  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  genuineness  of  ch.  xxxiv.  and  xxxv.  has  never  yet  been 
disputed  on  any  valid  grounds.  Knobel,  indeed,  maintains 
that  the  historical  background  of  this  passage  establishes  its 
spuriousness  ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  detect  any  background  of 
contemporaneous  history.  Edom  in  this  instance  represents 
the  world,  as  opposed  to  the  people  of  God,  just  as  Moab  does 
in  ch.  xxv.  Consider,  moreover,  that  these  disputed  prophecies 
form  a  series  which  constitutes  in  every  respect  a  prelude  to 
ch.  xl.-lxvi.  Have  we  not  in  ch.  xiv.  1,  2,  the  substance  of 
ch.  xl.-lxvi.,  as  it  were,  in  nuce  ?  Is  not  the  trilogy  "  Babel,"  in 
ch.  xlvi.-xlviii.,  like  an  expansion  of  the  vision  in  ch.  xxi.  1-10? 
Is  not  the  prophecy  concerning  Edom  in  ch.  xxxiv.  the  side- 
piece  to  ch.  Ixiii.  1-6  ?  And  do  we  not  hear  in  ch.  xxxv.  the 
direct  prelude  to  the  melody,  which  is  continued  in  ch.  xl.— Ixvi.  ? 
And  to  this  we  may  add  still  further  the  fact,  that  prominent 
marks  of  Isaiah  are  common  alike  to  the  disputed  prophecies, 
and  to  those  whose  genuineness  is  acknowledged.  The  name 
of  God,  which  is  so  characteristic  of  Isaiah,  and  which  we  meet 
with  on  every  hand  in  acknowledged  prophecies  in  ch.  i.-xxxix., 
viz.  "  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,"  runs  also  through  ch.  xl.-lxvi. 
(vol.  i.  193).  And  so  again  do  the  confirmatory  words,  "  Thus 
saith  Jehovah,"  and  the  interchange  of  the  national  names 
Jacob  and  Israel  (compare,  for  example,  ch.  xl.  27  with  ch. 
xxix.  23).1  The  rhetorical  figure  called  epanaphora,  which 
may  be  illustrated  by  an  Arabic  proverb,2 — 

44  Enjoy  the  scent  of  the  yellow  roses  of  Negd; 
For  when  the  evening  is  gone,  it  is  over  with  the  yellow  roses," — 

is  very  rare  apart  from  the  book  of  Isaiah  (Gen.  vi.  9,  xxxv. 
12  ;  Lev.  xxv.  41 ;  Job  xi.  7) ;  whereas  in  the  book  of  Isaiah 
itself  it  runs  like  a  favourite  oratorical  turn  from  beo-innino;  to 

O  O 

end  (vid.  ch.  i.  7,  iv.  3,  vi.  11,  xiii.  10,  xiv.  25,  xv.  8,  xxx.  20, 
xxxiv.  9,  xl.  19,  xlii.  15,  19,  xlviii.  21,  li.  13,  liii.  6,  7,  liv.  4, 
13,  1.  4,  Iviii.  2,  lix.  8, — a  collection  of  examples  which  could 
probably  be  still  further  increased).  But  there  are  still  deeper 
lines  of  connection  than  these.  How  strikingly,  for  example, 

1  The  remark  which  we  made  at  vol.  i.  p.  117,  to  the  effect  that  Isaiah 
prefers  Israel,  is  therefore  to  be  qualified,  inasmuch  as  in  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  Jacob 
takes  precedence  of  Israel. 

2  See  Mehren,  PJietorik  der  Araler,  p.  161  sqq. 


CHAP.  XL.-LXVL  135 

does  eh.  xxviii.  5  ring  in  harmony  with  ch.  Ixii.  3,  and  ch. 
xxix.  23  (cf.  v.  7)  with  ch.  Ix.  21  !  And  does  not  the  leading 
thought  which  is  expressed  in  ch.  xxii.  11,  xxxvii.  26  (cf.  ch. 
xxv.  1),  viz.  that  whatever  is  realized  in  history  has  had  its 
pre-existence  as  an  idea  in  God,  run  with  a  multiplied  echo 
through  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  1  And  does  not  the  second  half  repeat, 
in  ch.  Ixv.  25,  in  splendidly  elaborate  paintings,  and  to  some 
extent  in  the  very  same  words  (which  is  not  unlike  Isaiah), 
what  we  have  already  found  in  ch.  xi.  6  sqq.,  xxx.  26,  and 
other  passages,  concerning  the  future  glorification  of  the  earthly 
and  heavenly  creation?  Yea,  we  may  venture  to  maintain 
(and  no  one  has  ever  attempted  to  refute  it),  that  the  second 
half  of  the  book  of  Isaiah  (ch.  xl.-lxvi),  so  far  as  its  theme,  its 
standpoint,  its  style,  and  its  ideas  are  concerned,  is  in  a  state 
of  continuous  formation  throughout  the  whole  of  the  first  (ch. 
i.-xxxix.).  On  the  frontier  of  the  two  halves,  the  prediction  in 
ch.  xxxix.  5,  7  stands  like  a  sign-post,  with  the  inscription,  "  To 
Babylon."  There,  viz.  in  Babylon,  is  henceforth  Isaiah's  spi 
ritual  home ;  there  he  preaches  to  the  church  of  the  captivity 
the  way  of  salvation,  and  the  consolation  of  redemption,  but  to 
the  rebellious  the  terrors  of  judgment. 

That  this  is  the  case,  is  confirmed  by  the  reciprocal  relation 
in  which  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  stand  to  all  the  other  literature  of  the 
Old  Testament  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  In  ch.  xl.-lxvi. 
we  find  reminiscences  from  the  book  of  Job  (compare  ch.  xl. 
23  with  Job  xii.  24  ;  xliv.  25  with  Job  xii.  17,  20 ;  xliv.  24  with 
Job  ix.  8  ;  xl.  14  with  Job  xxi.  22  ;  lix.  4  with  Job  xv.  35  and 
Ps.  vii,  15).  And  the  first  half  points  back  to  Job  in  just  the 
same  manner.  The  poetical  words  JJJ3,  "^nn,  D^VNV,  are  only 
met  with  in  the  book  of  Isaiah  and  the  book  of  Job.  Once  at 
least,  namely  ch.  lix.  7,  we  are  reminded  of  mishle  (Prov.  i.  16)  ; 
whilst  in  the  first  half  we  frequently  met  with  imitations  of 
the  mdslidl  of  Solomon.  The  two  halves  stand  in  exactly  the 
same  relation  to  the  book  of  Micah  ;  compare  ch.  Iviii.  1  with 
Mic.  iii.  8,  like  ii.  2-4  with  Mic.  iv.  1-4,  and  xxvi.  21  with 
Mic.  i.  3.  And  the  same  relation  to  Nahuin  runs  through  the 
two  ;  compare  Nah.  iii.  4,  5  with  ch.  xlvii.,  ii.  1  with  Hi.  7a,  1Z>, 
and  ii.  11  with  xxiv.  1,  iii.  13  with  xix.  16.  We  leave  the 
question  open,  on  which  side  the  priority  lies.  But  when  we 
find  in  Zephaniah  and  Jeremiah  points  of  contact  not  only  with 


136  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

ch.  xl.-lxvi.,  but  also  with  ch.  xiii.-xiv.  23,  xxi.  1-10,  xxxiv.- 
xxxv.,  which  preclude  the  possibility  of  accident,  it  is  more  than 
improbable  that  these  two  prophets  should  have  been  imitated 
by  the  author  of  ch.  xl.-lxvi.,  since  it  is  in  them  above  all 
others  that  we  meet  with  the  peculiar  disposition  to  blend  the 
words  and  thoughts  of  their  predecessors  with  their  own.  Not 
only  does  Zephaniah  establish  points  of  contact  with  Isa.  xiii. 
and  xxxiv.  in  by  no  means  an  accidental  manner,  but  compare 
ch.  ii.  15  with  Isa.  xlvii.  8,  10,  and  ch.  iii.  10  with  Isa.  Ixvi. 
20.  The  former  passage  betrays  its  derivative  character  by 
the  fact  that  t^y  is  a  word  that  belongs  exclusively  to  Isaiah  ; 
whilst  the  latter  is  not  only  a  compendium  of  Isa.  Ixvi.  20, 
but  also  points  back  to  Isa.  xviii.  1,  7,  in  the  expression 
t^O"nn:^  "UJJO.  In  Jeremiah,  the  indication  of  dependence  upon 
Isaiah  comes  out  most  strongly  in  the  prophecy  against  Babylon 
in  Jer.  1.  li. ;  in  fact,  it  is  so  strong,  that  Movers,  Hitzig, 
and  De  Wette  regard  the  anonymous  author  of  ch.  xl.-lxvi. 
as  the  interpolator  of  this  prophecy.  But  it  also  contains  echoes 
of  Isa.  xiii.,  xiv.,  xxi.,  and  xxxiv.,  and  is  throughout  a  Mosaic 
of  earlier  prophecies.  The  passage  in  Jer.  x.  1-16  concern 
ing  the  nothingness  of  the  gods  of  the  nations,  sounds  also 
most  strikingly  like  Isaiah's  ;  compare  more  especially  Isa.  xliv. 
12-15,  xli.  7,  xlvi.  7,  though  the  attempt  has  also  been  made 
to  render  this  intelligible  by  the  interpolation  hypothesis.  It 
is  not  only  in  vers.  6-8  and  10,  which  are  admitted  to  be 
Jeremiah's,  that  we  meet  with  the  peculiar  characteristics  of 
Jeremiah  ;  but  even  in  passages  that  are  rejected  we  find  such 
expressions  of  his  as  nai,  DniS  for  DJJS,  1JD3,  D'JWn,  rn|?3,  a 
penal  visitation,  such  as  we  never  meet  with  in  Isaiah  n.  And 
the  whole  of  the  consolatory  words  in  Jer.  xxx.  10,  11,  and 
ao-ain  in  xlvi.  27.  28,  which  sound  so  much  like  the  deutero- 

O  7  / 

Isaiah,  are  set  down  as  having  been  inserted  in  the  book  of 
Jeremiah  by  Isaiah  II.  But  Caspari  has  shown  that  this  is  im 
possible,  because  the  concluding  words  of  the  promise,  "I  will 
correct  thee  in  measure,  and  will  not  leave  thee  altogether 
unpunished,"  would  have  no  meaning  at  all  if  uttered  at  the 
close  of  the  captivity ;  and  also,  because  such  elements  as  are 
evidently  Jeremiah's,  and  in  which  it  coincides  with  prophecies 
of  Jeremiah  that  are  acknowledged  to  be  genuine,  far  outweigh 
those  of  the  deutero-Isaiah.  And  yet  in  this  passage,  when 


CHAP.  XL-LXVI.  137 

Israel  is  addressed  .is  "my  servant,"  we  hear  the  tone  of  the 
deutero-Isaiah.  Jeremiah  fuses  in  this  instance,  as  in  many 
other  passages,  the  tones  of  Isaiah  with  his  own.  There  are 
also  many  other  passages  which  coincide  with  passages  of  the 
second  part  of  Isaiah,  both  in  substance  and  expression,  though 
not  so  conclusively  as  those  already  quoted,  and  in  which  we 
have  to  decide  between  regarding  Jeremiah  as  an  imitator,  or 
Isaiah  II.  as  an  interpolator.  But  if  we  compare  Jer.  vi.  15 
with  Isa.  Ivi.  11,  and  Isa.  xlvili.  6  with  Jer.  xxxiii.  3,  where 
Jeremiah,  according  to  his  usual  custom,  gives  a  different  turn 
to  the  original  passages  by  a  slight  change  in  the  letters,  we 
shall  find  involuntary  reminiscences  of  Isaiah  in  Jeremiah,  in 
such  parallels  as  Jer.  iii.  16,  Isa.  Ixv.  17  ;  Jer.  iv.  13,  Isa.  IxvL 
15;  Jer.  xi.  19,  Isa.  liii. ;  and  shall  hear  the  ring  of  Isa.  li. 
17-23  in  Jeremiah's  qlnoth,  and  that  of  Isa.  Ivi.  9-lvii.  lla  in 
the  earlier  reproachful  addresses  of  Jeremiah,  and  not  vice  versa. 
In  conclusion,  let  us  picture  to  ourselves  the  gradual  de 
velopment  of  Isaiah's  view  of  the  captivity,  that  penal  judgment 
already  threatened  in  the  law.  (1.)  In  the  Uzziah-Jotham  age 
the  prophet  refers  to  the  captivity,  in  the  most  general  terms  that 
can  be  conceived,  in  ch.  vi.  12,  though  he  mentions  it  casually 
by  its  own  name  even  in  ch.  v.  13.  (2.)  In  the  time  of  Aliaz 
we  already  see  him  far  advanced  beyond  this  first  sketchy 
reference  to  the  captivity.  In  ch.  xi.  11  sqq.  he  predicts  a 
second  deliverance,  resembling  the  Egvptian  exodus.  Asshur 
stands  at  the  head  of  the  countries  of  the  diaspora,  as  the 
imperial  power  by  which  the  judgment  of  captivity  is  carried 
out.  (3.)  In  the  early  years  of  Hezekiali,  ch.  xxii.  18  appears  to 
indicate  the  carrying  away  of  Judah  by  Asshur.  But  when 
the  northern  kingdom  had  succumbed  to  the  judgment  of  the 
Assyrian  banishment,  and  Judah  had  been  mercifully  spared 
this  judgment,  the  eyes  of  Isaiah  were  directed  to  Babylon  as 
the  imperial  power  destined  to  execute  the  same  judgment  upon 
Judah.  We  may  see  this  from  ch.  xxxix.  5-7.  Micah  also 
speaks  of  Babylon  as  the  future  place  of  punishment  and 
deliverance  (Mic.  iv.  10).  The  prophecies  of  the  overthrow 
of  Babylon  in  ch.  xiii.  14,  21,  are  therefore  quite  in  the  spirit 
of  the  prophecies  of  Hezekiah's  time.  And  ch.  xl.— Ixvi. 
merely  develop  on  all  sides  what  was  already  contained  in  germ 
in  ch.  xiv  1.  2,  xxi.  10.  It  is  well  known  that  in  the  time  of 


138  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Hezekiali  Babylon  attempted  to  break  loose  from  Assyria;  and 
so  also  the  revolt  of  the  Medes  from  Asshur,  and  the  union  of 
their  villages  and  districts  under  one  monarch  named  Deyoces, 
occurred  in  the  time  of  Hezekiah.1  It  is  quite  characteristic  of 
Isaiah  that  he  never  names  the  Persians,  who  were  at  that  time 
still  subject  to  the  Medes.  He  mentions  Madai  in  ch.  xiii.  17 
and  xxi.  2,  and  Koresh  (Kurus),  the  founder  of  the  Persian 
monarchy ;  but  not  that  one  of  the  two  leading  Iranian  tribes, 
which  gained  its  liberty  through  him  in  the  time  of  Astyages, 
and  afterwards  rose  to  the  possession  of  the  imperial  sway. 

Bat  how  is  it  possible  that  Isaiah  should  have  mentioned 
Cyrus  byname  centuries  before  this  time  (210  years,  according 
to  Josephus,  Ant.  xi.  1,  2)  ?  Windischmann  answers  this 
question  in  his  Zoroastrische  Studien,  p.  137.  "  No  one,"  he 
says,  "  who  believes  in  a  living,  personal,  omniscient  God,  and 
in  the  possibility  of  His  revealing  future  events,  will  ever  deny 
that  He  possesses  the  power  to  foretell  the  name  of  a  future 
monarch."  And  Albrecht  Weber,  the  Indologian,  finds  in  this 
answer  "  an  evidence  of  self-hardening  against  the  scientific 
conscience,"  and  pronounces  such  hardening  nothing  less  than 
"  devilish." 

It  is  not  possible  to  come  to  any  understanding  concerning 
this  point,  which  is  the  real  nerve  of  the  prevailing  settled  con 
clusion  as  to  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  We  therefore  hasten  on  to  our  ex 
position.  And  in  relation  to  this,  if  we  only  allow  that  the  prophet 
really  was  a  prophet,  it  is  of  no  essential  consequence  to  what 
age  he  belonged.  For  in  this  one  point  we  quite  agree  with 
the  opponents  of  its  genuineness,  namely,  that  the  standpoint 
of  the  prophet  is  the  second  half  of  the  captivity.  If  the  author 
is  Isaiah,  as  we  feel  constrained  to  assume  for  reasons  that  we 
have  already  stated  here  and  elsewhere,  he  is  entirely  carried 
away  from  his  own  times,  and  leads  a  pneumatic  life  among  the 
exiles.  There  is,  in  fact,  no  more  "  Johannic "  book  in  the 
whole  of  the  Old  Testament  than  this  book  of  consolation.  It 
is  like  the  product  of  an  Old  Testament  gift  of  tongues.  The 
fleshly  body  of  speech  has  been  changed  into  a  glorified  body ; 
and  we  hear,  as  it  were,  spiritual  voices  from  the  world  beyond, 
or  world  of  glory. 

1  Spiegel  (Eran,  p.  313  sqq.)  places  the  revolt  of  the  Medes  in  the  year 
714,  and  Deyoces  in  the  year  708. 


CHAP.  XL.  1.  2.  139 

PART   I. 

FIRST  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  XL. 
WORDS  OF  COMFORT,  AND  THE  GOD  OF  COMFORT. 

IN  this  first  address  the  prophet  vindicates  his  call  to  be  the 
preacher  of  the  comfort  of  the  approaching  deliverance,  and 
explains  this  comfort  on  the  ground  that  Jehovah,  who  called 
him  to  this  comforting  proclamation,  was  the  incomparably 
exalted  Creator  and  Euler  of  the  world.  The  first  part  of  this 
address  (vers.  1-11)  may  be  regarded  as  the  prologue  to  the 
whole  twenty-seven.  The  theme  of  the  prophetic  promise,  and 
the  irresistible  certainty  of  its  fulfilment,  are  here  declared. 
Turning  to  the  people  of  the  captivity,  whom  Jehovah  has 
neither  forgotten  nor  rejected,  the  prophet  commences  thus  in 
ver.  1 :  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God" 
This  is  the  divine  command  to  the  prophets.  Nachdmu  (piel, 
literally,  to  cause  to  breathe  again)  is  repeated,  because  of  its 
urgency  (anadiplosis,  as  in  ch.  xli.  27,  xliii.  11,  xxv.,  etc.).  The 
word  "ittK1',  which  does  not  mean  "  will  say  "  here  (Hofmann, 
Stier),  but  "  saith  "  (LXX.,  Jerome), — as,  for  example,  in  1 
Sam.  xxiv.  14, — affirms  that  the  command  is  a  continuous  one. 
The  expression  "  saith  your  God"  is  peculiar  to  Isaiah,  and 
common  to  both  parts  of  the  collection  (ch.  i.  11, 18,  xxxiii.  10, 
xl.  1,  25,  xli.  21,  Ixvi.  9).  The  future  in  all  these  passages  is 
expressive  of  that  which  is  taking  place  or  still  continuing. 
And  it  is  the  same  here.  The  divine  command  has  not  been 
issued  once  only,  or  merely  to  one  prophet,  but  is  being  con 
tinually  addressed  to  many  prophets.  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort 
ye  my  people,"  is  the  continual  charge  of  the  God  of  the  exiles, 
who  has  not  ceased  to  be  their  God  even  in  the  midst  of  wrath, 
to  His  messengers  and  heralds  the  prophets. 

The  summons  is  now  repeated  with  still  greater  emphasis, 
the  substance  of  the  consoling  proclamation  being  also  given 
Ver.  2.  "  Speak  ye  to  the  heart  of  Jerusalem,  and  cry  unto  her, 
that  her  affliction  is  ended,  that  her  debt  is  paid,  that  she  has  re 
ceived  from  the  hand  of  Jehovah  double  for  all  her  sins"     The 


140  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

holy  city  is  thought  of  here  in  connection  with  the  population 
belonging  to  it.  3JTW  ^-T!  (to  speak  to  the  heart)  is  an  expres 
sion  applied  in  Gen.  xxxiv.  3  and  Judg.  xix.  3  to  words 
adapted  to  win  the  heart ;  in  Gen.  1.  21,  to  the  words  used  by 
Joseph  to  inspire  his  brethren  with  confidence ;  whilst  here  it 
is  used  in  precisely  the  same  sense  as  in  Hos.  ii.  16,  and  possibly 
not  without  a  reminiscence  of  this  earlier  prophecy.  ?K  K")iJ 
(to  call  to  a  person)  is  applied  to  a  prophetic  announcement 
made  to  a  person,  as  in  Jer.  vii.  27,  Zech.  i.  4.  The  announce 
ment  to  be  made  to  Jerusalem  is  then  introduced  with  ""S,  OTI, 
which  serves  as  the  introduction  to  either  an  indirect  or  a  direct 
address  (Ges.  §  155,  1,  e).  (1.)  Her  affliction  has  become  full, 
and  therefore  has  come  to  an  end.  K3V,  military  service,  then 
feudal  service,  and  hardship  generally  (Job  vii.  1) ;  here  it 
applies  to  the  captivity  or  exile — that  unsheltered  bivouac,  as 
it  were,  of  the  people  who  had  been  transported  into  a  foreign 
land,  and  were  living  there  in  bondage,  restlessness,  and  in 
security.  (2.)  Her  iniquity  is  atoned  for,  and  the  justice  of 
God  is  satisfied :  nirtsdh,  which  generally  denotes  a  satisfactory 
reception,  is  used  here  in  the  sense  of  meeting  with  a  satis 
factory  payment,  like  |ty  n^n  in  Lev.  xxvi.  41,  43,  to  pay  off 
the  debt  of  sin  by  enduring  the  punishment  of  sin.  (3.)  The 
third  clause  repeats  the  substance  of  the  previous  ones  with 
greater  emphasis  and  in  a  fuller  tone  :  Jerusalem  has  already 
suffered  fully  for  her  sins.  In  direct  opposition  to  ftftfy  which 
cannot,  when  connected  with  two  actual  perfects  as  it  is  here, 
be  taken  as  a  perfect  used  to  indicate  the  certainty  of  some 
future  occurrence,  Gesenius,  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Umbreit,  Stier, 
and  Hahn  suppose  kiphlayim  to  refer  to  the  double  favour  that 
Jerusalem  was  about  to  receive  (like  mishneh  in  ch.  Ixi.  7,  and 
possibly  borrowed  from  Isaiah  in  Zech.  ix.  12),  instead  of  to 
the  double  punishment  which  Jerusalem  had  endured  (like 
mishneh  in  Jer.  xvi.  18).  It  is  not  to  be  taken,  however,  in  a 
judicial  sense ;  in  which  case  God  would  appear  over-rigid, 
and  therefore  unjust.  Jerusalem  had  not  suffered  more  than 
its  sins  had  deserved  ;  but  the  compassion  of  God  regarded 
what  His  justice  had  been  obliged  to  inflict  upon  Jerusalem  as 
superabundant.  This  compassion  also  expresses  itself  in  the 
words  "  for  all"  (tfkhol,  c.  Beth  pretii) :  there  is  nothing  left  for 
further  punishment.  The  turning-point  from  wrath  to  love 


CHAP.  XL.  3.  141 

lias  arrived.  The  wrath  has  gone  forth  in  double  measure. 
With  what  intensity,  therefore,  will  the  love  break  forth,  which 
has  been  so  long  restrained  ! 

There  is  a  sethume  in  the  text  at  this  point.  The  first  two 
verses  form  a  small  parashah  by  themselves,  the  prologue  of  the 
prologue.  After  the  substance  of  the  consolation  has  been  given 
on  its  negative  side,  the  question  arises,  What  positive  salvation 
is  to  be  expected  I  This  question  is  answered  for  the  prophet, 
inasmuch  as,  in  the  ecstatic  stillness  of  his  mind  as  turned 
to  God,  he  hears  a  marvellous  voice.  Ver.  3.  "  Hark,  a  crier  ! 
In  the  wilderness  prepare  ye  a  way  for  Jehovah,  make  smooth  in 
the  desert  a  road  for  our  God."  This  is  not  to  be  rendered  "  a 
voice  cries"  (Ges.,  Umbreit,  etc.)  ;  but  the  two  words  are  in 
the  construct  state,  and  form  an  interjectional  clause,  as  in  ch. 
xiii.  4,  lii.  8,  Ixvi.  (5 :  Voice  of  one  crying  !  Who  the  crier  is 
remains  concealed  ;  his  person  vanishes  in  the  splendour  of  his 
calling,  and  falls  into  the  background  behind  the  substance  of 
his  cry.  The  cry  sounds  like  the  long-drawn  trumpet-blast  of 
a  herald  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  1).  The  crier  is  like  the  outrider  of  a 
king,  who  takes  care  that  the  way  by  which  the  king  is  to  go 
shall  be  put  into  good  condition.  The  king  is  Jehovah ;  and 
it  is  all  the  more  necessary  to  prepare  the  way  for  Him  in  a 
becoming  manner,  that  this  way  leads  through  the  pathless 
desert.  Bammidldr  is  to  be  connected  with  pannu,  according 
to  the  accents  on  account  of  the  parallel  (zakepli  katan  has  a 
stronger  disjunctive  force  here  than  zakepli  gadol,  as  in  Deut. 
xxvi.  14,  xxviii.  8,  2  Kings  i.  6),  though  without  any  conse 
quent  collision  with  the  New  Testament  description  of  the  ful 
filment  itself.  And  so  also  the  Targum  and  Jewish  expositors 
take  im»3  Klip  ^1p  together,  like  the  LXX.,  and  after  this  the 
Gospels.  We  may,  or  rather  apparently  we  must,  imagine  the 
crier  as  advancing  into  the  desert,  and  summoning  the  people 
to  come  and  make  a  road  through  it.  But  why  does  the  way 
of  Jehovah  lie  through  the  desert,  and  whither  does  it  lead  ? 

O  7 

It  was  through  the  desert  that  He  went  to  redeem  Israel  out 
of  Egyptian  bondage,  and  to  reveal  Himself  to  Israel  from 
Sinai  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2 ;  Judg.  v.  4 ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  8)  ;  and  in  Ps. 
Ixviii.  4  (5)  God  the  Redeemer  of  His  people  is  called  hdrokhebh 
baardbhoth.  Just  as  His  people  looked  for  Him  then,  when 
they  were  between  Egypt  and  Canaan ;  so  was  He  to  be  looked 


142  THE  PKOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

for  by  His  people  again,  now  that  they  were  in  the  "  desert  of 
the  sea"  (ch.  xxi.  1),  and  separated  by  Arabia  deserta  from 
their  fatherland.  If  He  were  coming  at  the  head  of  His 
people,  He  Himself  would  clear  the  hindrances  out  of  Plis  way; 
but  He  was  coming  through  the  desert  to  Israel,  and  therefore 
Israel  itself  was  to  take  care  that  nothing  should  impede  the 
rapidity  or  detract  from  the  favour  of  the  Coming  One.  The 
description  answers  to  the  reality ;  but,  as  we  shall  frequently 
find  as  we  go  further  on,  the  literal  meaning  spiritualizes  itself 
in  an  allegorical  way. 

The  summons  proceeds  in  a  commanding  tone.  Yer.  4. 
a  Let  every  valley  be  exalted,  and  every  mountain  and  hill  made 
low ;  and  let  the  rugged  be  made  a  plain,  and  the  ledges  of  rocks 
a  valley."  rprn,  which  takes  its  tone  from  the  two  jussive  verbs, 
is  also  itself  equivalent  to  W.  Instead  of  fcOS  (from  K?3),  the 
pointing  in  Zech.  xiv.  4,  we  have  here  (according  to  Kimchi) 
the  vowel-pointing  fcOa ;  at  the  same  time,  the  editions  of  Brescia, 
Pesaro,  Venice  1678,  have  N^  (with  tzere),  and  this  is  also  the 
reading  of  a  codex  of  Luzzatto  without  Masoretic  notes.  The 
command,  according  to  its  spiritual  interpretation,  points  to  the 
encouragement  of  those  that  are  cast  down,  the  humiliation  of 
the  self-righteous  and  self-secure,  the  changing  of  dishonesty 
into  simplicity,  and  of  unapproachable  haughtiness  into  sub 
mission  (for  'dqdbh,  hilly,  rugged,1  compare  Jer.  xvii.  9  together 
with  Hab.  ii.  4).  In  general,  the  meaning  is  that  Israel  is  to 
take  care,  that  the  God  who  is  coming  to  deliver  it  shall  find  it 
in  such  an  inward  and  outward  state  as  befits  His  exaltation 
and  His  purpose. 

The  cry  of  the  crier  proceeds  thus  in  ver.  5 :  "  And  the 
glory  of  Jehovah  will  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  seeth  together:  for 
the  mouth  of  Jehovah  hath  spoken  it"  The pret.  cons,  rbto]  is 
here  apodosis  imper.  When  the  way  is  prepared  for  Jehovah 
the  Coming  One,  the  glory  of  the  God  of  salvation  will  unveil 
itself  (on  the  name  Jehovah,  which  is  applied  to  God,  the  abso 
lute  I,  as  living  and  revealing  Himself  in  history,  more  espe 
cially  in  the  history  of  salvation,  see  vol.  i.  p.  67).  His  parousia 
is  the  revelation  of  His  glory  (1  Pet.  iv.  13).  This  revelation 
is  made  for  the  good  of  Israel,  but  not  secretly  or  exclusively  ; 

1  In  this  ethical  sense  Essex  applied  the  word  to  Queen  Elizabeth.     See 
Hefele,  Ximenes,  p.  90  (ed.  2). 


CHAP.  XL.  6-8.  143 

for  all  the  human  race,  called  here  designedly  "all  flesh"  (kol 
bdsdr),  will  come  to  see  it  (compare  Luke  iii.  6,  "  the  salvation 
of  God").  Man,  because  he  is  flesh,  cannot  see  God  without 
dying  (Ex.  xxxiii.  20)  ;  but  the  future  will  fill  up  this  gulf  of 
separation.  The  object  to  the  verb  "see"  is  not  what  follows, 
as  Kosenmuller  supposes,  viz.  "  that  the  mouth  of  Jehovah  hath 
spoken,"  for  the  word  of  promise  which  is  here  fulfilled  is  not 
one  addressed  to  all  flesh ;  nor  does  it  mean,  "  see  that  Jehovah 
hath  spoken  with  His  own  mouth,"  i.e.  after  having  become 
man,  as  Stier  maintains,  for  the  verb  required  in  this  case  would 
be  "ifHPj  not  "^l*  The  clause,  "for  the  mouth  of  Jehovah  hath 
spoken  it,"  is  rather  Isaiah's  usual  confirmation  of  the  fore 
going  prophecy  (see  vol.  i.  p.  425).  Here  the  crier  uses  it  to 
establish  the  certainty  of  what  he  foretells,  provided  that  Israel 
will  do  what  he  summons  it  to  perform. 

The  prophet  now  hears  a  second  voice,  and  then  a  third, 
entering  into  conversation  with  it.  Vers.  6—8.  "  Hark,  one 
speaking.  Cry  !  And  lie  answers.  What  shall  I  cry  ?  All  flesh 
is  grass,  and  all  its  beauty  as  the  flower  of  the  field.  Grass 
is  withered,  flower  faded :  for  the  breath  of  Jehovah  has  bloivn 
upon  it.  Surely  grass  is  the  people ;  grass  withereth,  flower 
fadeth:  yet  the  word  of  our  God  will  stand  for  ever."  A  second 
voice  celebrates  the  divine  word  of  promise  in  the  face  of  the 
approaching  fulfilment,  and  appoints  a  preacher  of  its  eternal 
duration.  The  verb  is  not  "iB&tt  (et  dixi,  LXX.,  Vulg.),  but 
"ID5J1 ;  so  that  the  person  asking  the  question  is  not  the  prophet 
himself,  but  an  ideal  person,  whom  he  has  before  him  in  vision 
ary  objectiveness.  The  appointed  theme  of  his  proclamation 
is  the  perishable  nature  of  all  flesh  (ver.  5  Traaa  (?dp%,  here 
Tracra  77  adpj;),  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  imperishable  nature 
of  the  word  of  God.  Men  living  in  the  flesh  are  universally 
impotent,  perishing,  limited  ;  God,  on  the  contrary  (ch.  xxxi.  3), 
is  the  omnipotent,  eternal,  all-determining ;  and  like  Himself,  so 
is  His  word,  which,  regarded  as  the  vehicle  and  utterance  of  His 
willing  and  thinking,  is  not  something  separate  from  Himself, 
and  therefore  is  the  same  as  He.  Chasdo  is  the  charm  or  grace 
fulness  of  the  outward  appearance  (LXX. ;  1  Pet.  i.  24,  Bo^a : 
see  Schott  on  the  passage,  Jas.  i.  11,  evTrpeTreta).  The  com 
parison  instituted  with  grass  and  flower  recals  ch.  xxxvii.  27 
and  Job  viii.  12,  and  still  more  Ps.  xc.  5,  6,  and  Job  xiv.  2. 


144  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Ver.  la  describes  what  happens  to  the  grass  and  flower.  The 
preterites,  like  the  Greek  aoristus  gnomicus  (cf.  ch.  xxvi.  10), 
express  a  fact  of  experience  sustained  by  innumerable  examples: 
exaruit  gramen,  emarcuitflos  ;l  consequently  the  *3  which  follows 
is  not  hypothetical  (granting  that),  but  explanatory  of  the 
reason,  viz.  "  because  ruach  Jehovah  hath  blown  upon  it,"  i.e. 
the  "  breath "  of  God  the  Creator,  which  pervades  the  crea 
tion,  generating  life,  sustaining  life,  and  destroying  life,  and 
whose  most  characteristic  elementary  manifestation  is  the  wind. 
Every  breath  of  wind  is  a  drawing  of  the  breath  of  the  whole 
life  of  nature,  the  active  indwelling  principle  of  whose  existence 
is  the  ruach  of  God.  A  fresh  verse  ought  to  commence  now 
with  J3N.  The  clause  DJjn  TOn  J2N  is  genuine,  and  thoroughly 
in  Isaiah's  style,  notwithstanding  the  LXX.,  which  Gesenius 
nnd  Hitzig  follow.  pK  is  not  equivalent  to  a  comparative  f3 
(Ewald,  §  105,  a),  but  is  assuring,  as  in  ch.  xlv.  15,  xlix.  4, 
liii.  4 ;  and  ha  dm  (the  people)  refers  to  men  generally,  as  in 
ch.  xlii.  5.  The  order  of  thought  is  in  the  form  of  a  triolet. 
The  explanation  of  the  striking  simile  commences  with  'dkhen 
(surely)  ;  and  then  in  the  repetition  of  the  words,  "  grass 
withereth,  flower  fadeth,"  the  men  are  intended,  who  resemble 
the  grass  and  the  flower.  Surely  grass  is  the  human  race  ; 
such  grass  withereth  and  such  flower  fadeth,  but  the  word  of 
our  God  (Jehovah,  the  God  of  His  people  and  of  sacred  history) 
ydqiim  Fuldm,  i.e.  it  rises  up  without  withering  or  fading,  and 
endures  for  ever,  fulfilling  and  verifying  itself  through  all 
times.  This  general  truth  refers,  in  the  present  instance,  to 
the  word  of  promise  uttered  by  the  voice  in  the  desert.  If  the 
word  of  God  generally  has  an  eternal  duration,  more  especially 
is  this  the  case  with  the  word  of  the  parousia  of  God  the 
Redeemer,  the  word  in  which  all  the  words  of  God  are  yea 
and  amen.  The  imperishable  nature  of  this  word,  however, 
has  for  its  dark  foil  the  perishable  nature  of  all  flesh,  and  all 
the  beauty  thereof.  The  oppressors  of  Israel  are  mortal,  and 
their  chesed  with  which  they  impose  and  bribe  is  perishable ; 
but  the  word  of  God,  with  which  Israel  can  console  itself,  pre- 

1  ^Q3  has  munach  here  and  in  ver.  8  attached  to  the  penultimate  in 

"  T 

all  correct  texts  (hence  milel,  on  account  of  the  monosyllable  which  fol 
lows),  and  metheg  on  the  tzere  to  sustain  the  lengthening. 


CHAP.  XL.  9.  145 

serves  the  field,  and  ensures  it  a  glorious  end  to  its  history. 
Tims  the  seal,  which  the  first  crier  set  upon  the  promise  of 
Jehovah's  speedy  coming,  is  inviolable  ;  and  the  comfort  which 
the  prophets  of  God  are  to  bring  to  His  people,  who  have  now 
been  suffering  so  long,  is  infallibly  sure. 

The  prophet  accordingly  now  takes,  as  his  standpoint,  the 
time  when  Jehovah  will  already  have  come.  Ver.  9.  "  Upon 
a  Idgh  mountain  get  thee  up,  0  evangelistess  Zion ;  lift  up  thy 
voice  with  strength,  evangelistess  Jerusalem  :  lift  up,  le  not 
afraid ;  say  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  Behold  your  God."  Knobel 
and  others  follow  the  LXX.  and  Targum,  and  regard  Zion 
and  Jerusalem  as  accusatives  of  the  object,  viz.  "  preacher  of  sal 
vation  (i.e.  a  chorus  of  preachers)  to  Zion-Jerusalem  ;"  but 
such  parallels  as  ch.  lii.  7  and  Ixii.  11  are  misleading  here. 
The  words  are  in  apposition  (A.  S.  Th.  evayyeXi^o/juevrj  Suw). 
Zion-Jerusalem  herself  is  called  an  evangelistess  :  the  personi 
fication  as  a  female  renders  this  probable  at  the  outset,  and  it 
is  placed  beyond  all  doubt  by  the  fact,  that  it  is  the  cities  of 
Judah  (the  daughters  of  Zion-Jerusalem)  that  are  to  be  evan 
gelized.  The  prophet's  standpoint  here  is  in  the  very  midst 
of  the  parousia.  When  Jerusalem  shall  have  her  God  in  the 
midst  of  her  once  more,  after  He  has  broken  up  His  home 
there  for  so  long  a  time ;  she  is  then,  as  the  restored  mother- 
community,  to  ascend  a  high  mountain,  and  raising  her  voice 
with  fearless  strength,  to  bring  to  her  daughters  the  joyful 
news  of  the  appearance  of  their  God.  The  verb  bisser  signifies 
literally  to  smooth,  to  unfold,  then  to  make  glad,  more  espe 
cially  with  joyful  news.1  It  lies  at  the  root  of  the  New  Testa 
ment  eua<yrye\££eiv  (evangelize),  and  is  a  favourite  word  of  the 

1  The  verb  bisser  signifies  primarily  to  stroke,  rub,  shave,  or  scratch 
the  surface  of  anything  ;  then  to  stroke  off  or  rub  off  the  surface,  or  any 
thing  which  covers  it ;  then,  suggested  by  the  idea  of  "  rubbing  smooth" 
(glati),  "to  smooth  a  person"  (jemanden  gldtten ;  compare  the  English,  to 
gladden  a  person),  i.e.  vultum  ejus  diducere,  to  make  him  friendly  and 
cheerful,  or  "  to  look  smoothly  upon  a  person,"  i.e.  to  show  him  a  friendly 
face ;  and  also  as  an  intransitive,  "  to  le  glad,"  to  be  friendly  and  cheerful  ; 
and  lastly,  in  a  general  sense,  aliquid  attingere,  tractare,  attrectare,  to 
grasp  or  handle  a  thing  (from  which  comes  lasar,  the  flesh,  as  something 
tangible  or  material).  In  harmony  with  the  Hebrew  Usser  (Jer.  xx.  15), 
they  say  in  Arabic  basarahu  (or  intensive,  lassarahu')  bi-mauludin,  he  has 
gladdened  him  with  the  news  of  the  birth  of  a  son. 

VOL.  II.  K 


146  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

author  of  ch.  xl.— Ixvi.,  that  Old  Testament  evangelist,  though 
it  is  no  disproof  of  Isaiah's  authorship  (cf.  Nahum  ii.  1). 
Hitherto  Jerusalem  has  been  in  despair,  bowed  down  under 
the  weight  of  the  punishment  of  her  sins,  and  standing  in  need 
of  consolation.  But  now  that  she  has  Jehovah  with  her  again, 
she  is  to  lift  up  her  voice  with  the  most  joyful  confidence, 
without  further  anxiety,  and  to  become,  according  to  her  true 
vocation,  the  messenger  of  good  tidings  to  all  Judaea. 

In  ver.  10  the  prophet  goes  back  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  fulfilment  to  that  of  the  prophecy.  "  Behold  the  Lord, 
Jehovah,  as  a  mighty  one  will  He  come,  His  arm  ruling  for  Him; 
behold,  His  reward  is  with  Him,  and  His  retribution  before  Him." 
We  must  not  render  the  first  clause  lt  with  strong,"  i.e.  with 
strength,  as  the  LXX.  and  Targum  do.  The  Beth  is  Beth 
essential  (cf.  ch.  xxvi.  4;  Ges.  §  154,  3,  a).  He  will  come  in  the 
essence,  strength,  and  energy  of  a  strong  one  ;  and  this  is  still 
further  defined  by  the  participial,  circumstantial  clause,  u  His 
arm  ruling  for  Him"  (brachio  suo  ipsi  dominante).  It  is  His 
arm  that  rules  for  Him,  i.e.  that  either  brings  into  subjection 
to  Him,  or  else  overthrows  whatever  opposes  Him.  Never 
theless,  ver.  106  does  not  present  Him  merely  in  one  aspect, 
namely  as  coming  to  judge  and  punish,  but  in  both  aspects, 
viz.  that  of  the  law  and  that  of  the  gospel,  as  a  righteous 
re  warder ;  hence  the  double  name  of  God,  Adonai  Jehovah 
(compare  ch.  iii.  15,  xxviii.  16,  xxx.  15,  all  in  the  first  part), 
which  is  used  even  in  the  Pentateuch,  and  most  frequently  by 
Amos  and  Ezekiel,  and  which  forms,  as  it  were,  an  anagram. 
npysa  is  already  met  with  in  Lev.  xix.  13  as  a  synonym  of 
~O&?,  passing  from  the  general  idea  of  work  to  that  of  some 
thing  earned  and  forfeited.  Jehovah  brings  with  Him  the 
penal  reward  of  the  enemies  of  His  people,  and  also  the  gracious 
reward  of  the  faithful  of  His  people,  whom  He  will  compensate 
for  their  previous  sufferings  with  far  exceeding  joys  (see  ch. 
Ixii.  11). 

The  prophet  dwells  upon  this,  the  redeeming  side  not  the 
judicial,  as  he  proceeds  to  place  the  image  of  the  good  shepherd 
by  the  side  of  that  of  the  Lord  Jehovah.  Ver.  11.  "He  will 
feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd,  take  the  lambs  in  His  arm,  and 
carry  them  in  His  bosom,  and  gently  lead  those  that  are  giving 
suck"  The  flock  is  His  people,  now  dispersed  in  a  foreign 


CHAP.  XL.  12.  147 

land.  The  love  with  which  He  tends  this  flock  is  shown,  by 
way  of  example,  in  His  conduct  towards  the  E^D  (=r  D^TO  from 
^tp  =  vfa),  the  young  lambs  that  have  not  long  been  born, 
and  the  nvV,  those  giving  suck,  lactantes  (Vulg.  fetci),  not 
those  that  are  sucking,  sugentes  (from  ^y  med.  Vav,  to  nourish, 
cf.  vol.  i.  p.  138).  Such  as  cannot  keep  pace  with  the  flock  he 
takes  in  his  arms,  and  carries  in  the  bosom  of  his  dress ;  and 
the  mothers  he  does  not  overdrive,  but  PJSJ  (see  at  Ps.  xxiii.  2), 
lets  them  go  gently  along,  because  they  require  care  (Gen. 
xxxiii.  13).  With  this  loving  picture  the  prologue  in  vers.  1-11 
is  brought  to  a  close.  It  stands  at  the  head  of  the  whole,  like 
a  divine  inauguration  of  the  prophet,  and  like  the  quintessence 
of  what  he  is  commanded  to  proclaim.  Nevertheless  it  is  also 
an  integral  part  of  the  first  address.  For  the  questions  which 
follow  cannot  possibly  be  the  commencement  of  the  prophecy, 
though  it  is  not  very  clear  how  far  they  form  a  continuation. 

The  connection  is  the  following :  The  prophet  shows  both 
didactically  and  paraenetically  what  kind  of  God  it  is  whose 
appearance  to  redeem  His  people  has  been  prophetically  an 
nounced  in  vers.  1-11.  He  is  the  incomparably  exalted  One. 
This  incomparable  exaltation  makes  the  ignorance  of  the  wor 
shippers  of  idols  the  more  apparent,  but  it  serves  to  comfort 
Israel.  And  Israel  needs  such  consolation  in  its  present  banish 
ment,  in  which  it  is  so  hard  for  it  to  comprehend  the  ways  of 
God. 

In  order  to  bring  His  people  to  the  full  consciousness  of  the 
exaltation  of  Jehovah,  the  prophet  asks  in  ver.  12, ,"  Who  hath 
measured  the  waters  with  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and  regulated 
the  heavens  with  a  span,  and  taken  up  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a 
third  measure,  and  weighed  the  mountains  with  a  steelyard,  and 
hills  with  balances  ?  "  Jehovah,  and  He  alone,  has  given  to  all 
these  their  proper  quantities,  their  determinate  form,  and  their 
proportionate  place  in  the  universe.  How  very  little  can  a  man 
hold  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand  (sho'al)  I1  how  very  small  is  the 
space  which  a  man's  span  will  cover !  how  little  is  contained  in 

1  The  root  p£J  ^Lj  has  the  primary  meaning  of  easily  moving  or  being 
easily  moved  ;  then  of  being  loose  or  slack,  of  hanging  down,  or  sinking, 
— a  meaning  which  we  meet  with  in  *?y&  and  ^$&.  Accordingly,  shoal 
signifies  the  palm  (i.e.  the  depression  made  by  the  hand),  and  she'6l  not 
literally  a  hollowing  or  cavity,  but  a  depression  or  low  ground. 


148  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  third  of  an  ephah  (slidlisli;  see  at  Ps.  Ixxx.  6)  !  and  how 
trifling  in  either  bulk  or  measure  is  the  quantity  you  can  weigh 
in  scales,  whether  it  be  a  peles,  i.e.  a  steelyard  (statera),  or 
mdVnaytm,  a  tradesman's  balance  (bilances),  consisting  of  two 
scales.1  But  what  Jehovah  measures  with  the  hollow  of  His 
hand,  and  with  His  span,  is  nothing  less  than  the  waters  beneath 
and  the  heavens  above.  He  carries  a  scoop,  in  which  there  is 
room  for  all  the  dust  of  which  the  earth  consists,  and  a  scale 
on  which  He  has  weighed  the  great  colossal  mountains. 

A  second  question  follows  in  vers.  13,  14.  u  Who  regulated 
the  Spirit  of  Jehovah,  and  (who)  instructed  Him  as  His  counsel 
lor  ?  With  whom  took  He  counsel,  and  who  would  have  explained 
to  Him  and  instructed  Him  concerning  the  path  of  right,  and 
taught  Him  knowledge,  and  made  known  to  Him  a  prudent  course?" 
The  first  question  called  to  mind  the  omnipotence  of  Jehovah ; 
this  recalls  His  omniscience,  which  has  all  fulness  in  itself,  and 
therefore  precludes  all  instruction  from  without.  "  The  Spirit 
of  Jehovah  "  is  the  Spirit  which  moved  upon  the  waters  at  the 
creation,  and  by  which  chaos  was  reduced  to  order.  "Who," 
inquires  this  prophet, — "  who  furnished  this  Spirit  with  the 
standard,  according  to  which  all  this  was  to  be  done  ?"  |2n  as 
in  ver.  12,  to  bring  into  conformity  with  rule,  and  so  to  fit  for 
regulated  working.  Instead  of  mercha  tifchah  athnach,  which 
suggests  the  Targum  rendering,  "  guis  direxit  spiritum  ?  Jehova" 
(yid.  Prov.  xvi.  2),  it  would  be  more  correct  to  adopt  the 
accentuation  tifchah  munach  athnach  (cf.  Ex.  xxi.  24,  xxiii.  9), 
and  there  are  certain  codices  in  which  we  find  this  (see  Dach- 
selt).  In  ver.  13&  we  might  follow  the  Septuagint  translation, 
Kal  r/9  avrov  <7i;/z/3o7Ao?  eyevero,  05  av/jLfii/Bd  (Rom.  xi.  34 ; 
1  Cor.  ii.  16,  <TV fjL/3  i/3d(7ei,)  avrov,  but  in  this  case  we  miss  the 
verb  nvi.  The  rendering  we  have  given  above  is  not  so  harsh, 
and  the  accentuation  is  indifferent  here,  since  silluk  is  never 
written  without  tifchah  if  only  a  single  word  precedes  it.  In 
ver.  14  the  reciprocal  fJJfa  is  connected  with  J"IN  =  DK.  The 
futt.  cons,  retain  their  literal  meaning :  with  whom  did  He 

1  According  to  the  meaning,  to  level  or  equalize,  which  is  one  meaning 
of  pilles,  the  noun  peles  is  applied  not  only  to  a  level  used  to  secure  equili 
brium,  which  is  called  mishqeleth  in  ch.  xxviii.  17,  but  also  to  a  steelyard 
used  for  weighing,  the  beam  of  which  consists  of  a  lever  with  unequal 
arms,  which  flies  up  directly  the  weight  is  removed. 


CHAP.  XL.  15,  16.  149 

consult,  so  that  he  supplied  Him  with  understanding  in  con 
sequence  (hebhln,  generally  to  understand,  here  in  a  causative 
sense).  The  verbs  of  instruction  are  sometimes  construed  with 
3  of  the  lesson  taught,  sometimes  with  a  double  accusative. 
In  reply  to  the  questions  in  vers.  13,  14,  which  are  essentially 
one,  Israel  must  acknowledge  that  its  God  is  the  possessor  of 
absolute  might,  and  also  of  absolute  wisdom. 

From  His  exaltation  as  Creator,  the  prophet  now  proceeds 
to  His  exaltation  as  Governor  of  the  world.  Ver.  15.  "  Behold, 
nations  like  a  little  drop  on  a  bucket,  and  like  a  grain  of  sand  in 
a  balance,  are  they  esteemed ;  behold,  islands  like  an  atom  of  dust 
that  rises  in  the  air."  Upon  Jehovah,  the  King  of  the  world, 
does  the  burden  rest  of  ruling  over  the  whole  human  race, 
which  is  split  up  into  different  nations ;  but  the  great  masses  of 
people  over  whom  Jehovah  rules  are  no  more  burden  to  Him 
than  a  drop  hanging  upon  a  bucket  is  a  burden  to  the  man  who 
carries  it  (min  is  used  in  the  same  sense  as  in  Song  of  Sol. 
iv.  1,  vi.  5),  no  more  than  the  weight  in  a  balance  is  perceptibly 
increased  or  diminished  by  a  grain  of  sand  that  happens  to  lie 
upon  it  (shachaq,  from  shachaq,  to  grind  to  powder).  The 
islands,  those  fragments  of  firm  ground  in  the  midst  of  the 
ocean  (^$  =  ivy,  from  HJN,  to  betake  one's  self  to  a  place,  and 
remain  there),  upon  which  the  heathen  world  was  dispersed 
(Gen.  x.),  are  to  Him  who  carries  the  universe  like  the  small 
particle  of  dust  (p^  from  P£H,  to  crush  or  pulverize),  which  is 
lifted  up,  viz.  by  the  slightest  breath  of  wind  (si®\  metaplastic 
fut.  niph.  of  tul  =  natal,  ch.  Ixiii.  9).  The  rendering  of 
Knobel,  "  dust  which  is  thrown,"  would  require  IBV  (ch.  xli.  2)  ; 
and  neither  that  of  Gesenius,  viz.  "  He  takes  up  islands  like  a 
particle  of  dust,"  nor  that  of  Hitzig,  "  He  carries  islands,"  etc., 
is  admissible,  for  /VLD  =  pjpj  signifies  tollere,  not  portare ;  and  the 
former,  viz.  insulas  tollit,  furnishes  no  answer  to  the  question, 
"  How  so,  and  to  what  end?" 

By  the  side  of  this  vanishing  diminutiveness  on  the  part  of 
man  as  contrasted  with  Jehovah,  everything  by  which  man 
could  express  his  adoration  of  the  exalted  One  comes  incom 
parably  short  of  His  exaltation.  Ver.  16.  "  And  Lebanon  is 
not  a  sufficiency  of  burning,  nor  its  game  a  sufficiency  of  burnt- 
o/erings"  i.e.  there  is  not  enough  wood  to  sustain  the  fire,  nor  a 
sufficient  supply  of  sacrificial  animals  to  be  slaughtered,  and  to 


150  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

ascend  in  fire.  *!  (constr.  ^.)  signifies  that  which  suffices  (and 
then  that  which  is  plentiful)  ;  it  differs  therefore  from  TO  Seov, 
what  is  requisite.1 

From  the  obverse  of  the  thought  in  ver.  15  the  prophet 
returns  to  the  thought  itself,  and  dwells  upon  it  still  further. 
Ver.  17.  "All  the  nations  are  as  nothing  before  Him;  they  are 
regarded  by  Him  as  belonging  to  nullity  and  emptiness."  'Ephes 
is  the  end  at  which  a  thing  ceases,  and  in  an  absolute  sense 
that  at  which  all  being  ceases,  hence  non-existence  or  nullity. 
Tohu  (from  tdhdh,  related  to  shadh;  vid.  Job,  vol.  ii.  p.  296),  a 
horrible  desolation,  like  the  chaos  of  creation,  where  there  is 
nothing  definite,  and  therefore  as  good  as  nothing  at  all  (see 
p.  25) ;  min  is  hardly  comparative  in  the  sense  of  "  more 
nothing  than  nothing  itself  "  (like  Job.  xi.  17,  where  "  brighter" 
is  to  be  supplied,  or  Mic.  vii.  4,  where  "sharper"  is  similarly 
required),  but  is  used  in  the  same  partitive  sense  as  in  ch.  xli.  24 
(cf.  xliv.  11  and  Ps.  Ixii.  10). 

The  conclusion  drawn  from  ver.  17,  that  Jehovah  is  there 
fore  the  matchless  Being,  shapes  itself  into  a  question,  which  is 
addressed  not  to  idolaters,  but  to  such  of  the  Israelites  as  needed 
to  be  armed  against  the  seductive  power  of  idolatry,  to  which 
the  majority  of  mankind  had  yielded.  Ver.  19.  "  And  to 
lohom  can  ye  liken  God,  and  what  kind  of  image  can  ye  place 
beside  Him  ! "  The  \  before  ;$}  is  conclusive,  as  in  ch. 
xxviii.  26,  and  the  futures  are  modi  potent. :  with  what  can  ye 
bring  into  comparison  (?N  as  in  ch.  xiv.  10)  El,  i.e.  God,  the 
one  Being  who  is  absolutely  the  Mighty?  and  what  kind  of 
demuth  (i.e.  divine,  like  Himself)  can  ye  place  by  His  side  I 

Least  of  all  can  an  idol  bear  comparison  with  Him.  Ver. 
19.  "The  idol,  when  the  smith  has  cast  it,  the  melter  plates  it 
ivith  gold,  and  melteth  silver  chains  for  it."  The  object  (happesel, 
the  idol),  which  is  here  placed  first  as  the  theme  in  the  accusa 
tive  (lit.  the  image  hewn  out),  denotes  in  this  instance  an  idol 
generally.  £hn  is  as  comprehensive  as  faber.  nnj3  y[p"i  signifies 
here  to  cover  over  with  a  2HT  yp"i  (lamina  auri),  the  verb  being 
used  in  a  denominative  sense,  and  not  in  its  primary  meaning. 

1  The  derivation  of  «j  is  still  more  obscure  than  that  of  Be?,  which  sig 
nifies,  according  to  Benfey  (Wurzelworterlmch,  ii.  205),  "  there  needs ;" 
according  to  Sonne,  "  it  binds,  sell,  q 


CHAP.  XL.  20,  21.  151 

As  we  must  assume,  according  to  ver.  20,  that  the  prophet 
intends  to  cany  us  into  the  midst  of  the  process  of  manufac 
turing  the  idol,  the  paratactic  expression  is  to  be  pointed  as 
above,  viz.  "after  the  (a)  smith  has  cast  it  (compare  Arab. 
nasik,  a  piece  of  cast  metal),  the  (a)  melter  (goldsmith)  covers 
it  with  gold  plate  ; "  and  tsdreph,  which  is  palindromically  re 
peated,  according  to  Isaiah's  custom  (p.  134),  is  not  the  third  pers. 
poel  (on  the  poel  of  strong  stems,  see  at  Job  ix.  15  and  Ps.  cix. 
10),  but  a  participle,  equivalent  to  wn  *pi¥  (as  in  ch.  xxix.  8, 
which  see ;  and  also,  according  to  the  accents,  ch.  xxxiii.  5), 
"  and  he  melteth  chains  of  silver,"  viz.  to  fasten  the  image. 

This  is  the  origin  of  a  metal  idol.  The  wooden  idol  is 
described  in.  ver.  20:  "  The  man  ivlio  is  impoverished  in  obla 
tions,  he  chooseth  a  block  of  wood  that  will  not  rot ;  he  seeketh 
for  himself  a  skilful  smithy  to  prepare  an  idol  that  will  not 
shake."  He  who  has  fallen  into  such  poverty  that  he  can  only 
offer  to  his  God  a  poor  oblation  (terumdh,  accusative,  accord 
ing  to  Ewald,  §  284,  c),  has  an  idol  cut  for  himself  out  of  a 
block  of  wood.  That  sdkhan  (Arab,  sakana  or  sakuna)  1  is  an 
ancient  word,  is  evident  from  Dent.  viii.  9.  The  verb  yimmot, 
like  yittol  in  ver.  15,  is  a  fut.  niphal,  to  be  made  to  shake. 
A  wooden  image,  which  is  planed  at  the  bottom,  and  made 
heavier  below  than  above,  to  prevent  its  falling  over  with  every 
shock,  is  to  be  a  god  !  The  thing  carries  its  own  satire,  even 
when  described  with  the  greatest  seriousness. 

Having  thus  depicted  in  a  few  strokes  the  infatuation  of 
idolatry,  the  prophet  addresses  the  following  question  to  such 
of  the  Israelites  as  are  looking  at  it  with  longing  eyes,  even  if 
they  have  not  already  been  deluded  by  it.  Ver.  21.  "Do  ye 
not  know  ?  Do  ye  not  hear  ?  Is  it  not  proclaimed  to  you  from 
the  beginning  ?  Have  ye  not  obtained  an  insight  into  the  founda 
tions  of  the  earth?"  We  have  here  four  questions  chiastically 

1  Both  forms  occur  in  this  sense,  according  to  the  evidence  of  original 
sources,  with  the  common  imperative  yaskunu,  the  infinitive  sukune  passed 
over  by  Freytag,  the  verbal  substantive  maskane,  and  the  adjective  miskin 
or  meskin,  primarily  to  be  forced  to  inactivity  through  weakness,  destitution, 
or  outward  influences,  not  to  be  able  to  move  and  exert  one's  self  ;  or,  more 
particularly,  not  to  be  able  to  defend  one's  self  (as  it  were  to  be  obliged  to 
4it  still  or  keep  still).  Hence  more  especially  opibus  et  facultatibus  careus^ 
being  in  distress,  destitute,  poor. 


152  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

arranged.  The  absolute  being  of  God,  which  is  above  all 
created  things,  is  something  which  may  be  either  inferred 
per  ratiocinationem,  or  learned  per  traditionem.  When  Israel 
failed  to  acknowledge  the  absolute  distinctness  and  unequalled 
supremacy  of  Jehovah  its  God,  it  hardened  itself  against  the 
knowledge  which  it  might  acquire  even  in  a  natural  way  (cf. 
Ps.  xix.  and  Rom.  i.  20),  and  shut  its  ears  against  the  teaching 
of  revelation  and  tradition,  which  had  come  down  from  the 
very  beginning  of  its  history.  The  first  two  questions  are 
construed  with  futures,  the  other  two  with  perfects;  the  former 
refer  to  what  is  possible,  the  latter  to  what  is  an  actual  fact. 
Have  you — this  is  the  meaning  of  the  four  questions — have 
you  obtained  no  knowledge  of  the  foundations  of  the  earth, 
namely,  as  to  the  way  in  which  they  were  laid  ? 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  to  describe  the  God  whom  both 
His  works  and  word  proclaim.  The  participles  which  follow 
are  predicates  of  the  subject,  which  filled  the  consciousness  of 
the  prophet  as  well  as  that  of  every  believer.  Ver.  22.  "  lie 
who  is  enthroned  above  the  vault  of  the  earth,  and  its  inhabitants 
resemble  grasshoppers  ;  who  has  spread  out  the  heavens  like  gauze, 
and  stretched  them  out  like  a  tent -roof  to  dwell  in"  He,  the 
manifested  and  yet  unknown,  is  He  who  has  for  His  throne 
the  circle  of  the  heavens  (chug  shdmayim,  Job  xxii.  14),  which 
arches  over  the  earth,  and  to  whom  from  His  inaccessible 
height  men  appear  as  diminutive  as  grasshoppers  (Num. 
xiii.  33)  ;  He  who  has  spread  out  the  blue  sky  like  a  thin 
transparent  garment  (dog,  a  thin  fabric,  like  daq,  fine  dust,  in 
ver.  15),  and  stretched  it  out  above  the  earth  like  a  tent  for 
dwelling  in  (^ohel1  Idshebheth).  The  participle  brings  to  view 
the  actions  and  circumstances  of  all  times.  In  the  present 
instance,  where  it  is  continued  in  the  historical  sense,  it  is  to 
be  resolved  into  the  perfect ;  in  other  cases,  the  preservation  of 
the  world  is  evidently  thought  of  as  a  creatio  continua  (see 
Psychol.  p.  111). 

1  The  noun  'oliel  is  derived  from  the  root  ^,  from  which  come  JJ, 
coaluit,  colieesit,  to  thicken  within  or  gain  consistency  (hence,  regarded  on 
another  side,  to  lose  in  outward  extent  or  outward  bulk,  to  shrink ;  to  go 
back  to  its  original  or  essential  condition  ;  to  issue  in  something  as  the 
final  result ;  or  generally,  to  draw  back  or  return  from  a  distance),  and 
l^,  to  attach  one's  self  or  accustom  one's  self  to  a  person  or  thing,  equiva- 


CHAP.  XL.  23,  24.  153 

This  is  followed  by  a  series  of  predicates  of  God  the  Ruler 
of  the  universe.  Yers.  23,  24.  "  lie  who  giceth  up  rulers  to 
annihilation  ;  maketh  judges  of  the  earth  like  a  desolation.  They 
are  hardly  planted,  hardly  sown,  their  stem  has  hardly  taken 
root  in  the  earth,  and  He  only  blows  upon  them,  and  they  dry  up, 
and  the  storm  carries  them  away  like  stubble"  There  is  nothing 
so  high  and  inaccessible  in  the  world,  that  He  cannot  bring  it 
to  nothing,  even  in  the  midst  of  its  most  self-confident  and 
threatening  exaltation.  Rozemm  are  solemn  persons,  crepvoi, 
possessors  of  the  greatest  distinction  and  influence  (vol.  i.  p.  207) ; 
shdpJftlm,  those  who  combine  in  themselves  the  highest  judicial 
and  administrative  power.  The  former  He  gives  up  to  annihila 
tion  ;  the  latter  He  brings  into  a  condition  resembling  the 
negative  state  of  the  tohu  out  of  which  the  world  was  produced, 
and  to  which  it  can  be  reduced  again.  We  are  reminded  here 
of  such  descriptions  as  Job  xii.  17,  24  (p.  135).  The  sudden 
ness  of  the  catastrophe  is  depicted  in  ver.  24.  ?3  *1K  (which 
only  occurs  here),  when  followed  by  D31!  in  the  apodosis  (cf. 
2  Kings  xx.  4),  signifies  that  even  this  has  not  yet  taken  place 
when  the  other  also  occurs  :  hence  vixdum.  plantati  sunt,  etc. 
The  niphal  JJBJ  and  the  pual  V}f  denote  the  hopeful  com 
mencement ;  the  poel  En}?  the  hopeful  continuation.  A  layer 
or  seed  excites  the  hope  of  blossom  and  fruit,  more  especially 
when  it  has  taken  root ;  but  nothing  more  is  needed  than  a 
breath  of  Jehovah,  and  it  is  all  over  with  it  (the  verb  ndahaph 
is  used  in  this  verse,  where  plants  with  stems  are  referred  to  ; 
a  verb  with  a  softer  labial,  ndshabh,  was  employed  above  in 
connection  with  grass  and  flowers).  A  single  withering  breath 
lays  them  at  rest ;  and  by  the  power  of  Jehovah  there  rises  a 
stormy  wind,  which  carries  them  away  like  light  dry  stubble 
(Nbo ;  compare,  on  the  other  hand,  the  verb  used  m  ver.  15,  viz. 
tul  =  natal,  to  lift  up,  to  keep  in  the  air). 

lent  to  alifa  and  anisa ;  to  take  up  one's  abode  in  a  place,  or  absolutely,  to 
commence  housekeeping  by  marrying,  like  the  Italian  accasarsi,  Turkish 
ewlenmek  (from  eiy,  a  house)  ;  or,  when  applied  to  a  place  itself,  to  be 
habitable,  inhabited,  and  cultivated  (=pass.  uhila,  more  especially  in  the 
participle  dhil,='dmir  =  ma'mur).  Hence  ahl,  one  who  belongs  to  a  person 
or  place,  with  its  numerous  applications,  and  also  ^ns,  a  tent  (primarily  a 
dwelling  generally,  Engl.  abode),  which  stands  at  the  end  of  this  etymo 
logical  series. 


154  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

The  thought  of  ver.  18  now  recurs  like  a  refrain,  a  con 
clusion  being  appended  to  the  premises  by  means  of  i,  as  was 
the  case  there.  Ver.  25.  "And  to  whom  will  ye  compare  me, 
to  whom  I  can  be  equal ?  saith  the  Holy  One"  Not  hagqddosh, 
because  a  poetical  or  oratorical  style  omits  the  article  wherever 
it  can  be  dispensed  with.  The  Holy  One  asks  this,  and  can 
ask  it,  because  as  such  He  is  also  exalted  above  the  whole 
world  (Job  xv.  15,  xxv.  5). 

After  the  questions  in  vers.  18  and  25,  which  close  syllo- 
gistically,  a  third  start  is  made,  to  demonstrate  the  incomparable 
nature  of  Jehovah.  Ver.  26.  "  Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,  and 
see :  who  hath  created  these  things  ?  It  is  He  who  bringeth  out 
their  host  by  number,  calleth  them  all  by  names,  because  of  the 
greatness  of  (His)  might,  and  as  being  strong  in  power :  there  is 
not  one  that  is  missing"  Jehovah  spoke  in  ver.  25  ;  now  the 
prophet  speaks  again.  We  have  here  the  same  interchange 
which  occurs  in  every  prophetic  book  from  Deuteronomy  down 
wards,  and  in  which  the  divine  fulness  of  the  prophets  is  dis 
played.  The  answer  does  not  begin  with  N^'ift^  in  the  sense 
of  "  He  who  brings  them  out  has  created  them ;"  but  the 
participle  is  the  predicate  to  the  subject  of  which  the  prophet's 
soul  is  full :  Jehovah,  it  is  He  who  brings  out  the  army  of 
stars  upon  the  plane  of  heaven,  as  a  general  leads  out  his  army 
upon  the  field  of  battle,  and  that  bemispdr,  by  number,  counting 
the  innumerable  stars,  those  children  of  light  in  armour  of 
light,  which  meet  the  eye  as  it  looks  up  by  night.  The  finite 
verb  tfjjp*  denotes  that  which  takes  place  every  night.  He  calls 
them  all  by  name  (comp.  the  derivative  passage,  Ps.  cxlvii.  4) : 
this  He  does  on  account  of  the  greatness  and  fulness  of  His 
might  (^onim,  vires,  virtus),  and  as  strong  in  power,  i.e.  because 
He  is  so.  This  explanation  is  simpler  than  Ewald's  (§  293,  c), 
viz.  "  because  of  the  power  (TO  uparepov)  of  the  Strong  One." 
The  call  addressed  to  the  stars  that  are  to  rise  is  the  call  of  the 
Almighty,  and  therefore  not  one  of  all  the  innumerable  host 
remains  behind.  B^K  individualizes ;  "ny}  (participle),  as  in 
ch.  xxxiv.  16,  suggests  the  idea  of  a  sheep  that  is  missed  from 
the  flock  through  staying  behind.  The  second  part  of  the 
address  closes  here,  having  demonstrated  the  folly  of  idolatry 
from  the  infinite  superiority  of  God  ;  and  from  this  the  third 
part  deduces  consolation  for  Israel  in  the  midst  of  its  despair. 


CHAP.  XL.  27,  28.  155 

Such  of  the  Israelites  as  require  first  of  all  to  be  brought  to 
a  consciousness  of  the  folly  of  idolatry  are  not  called  Israel  at 
all,  because  they  place  themselves  on  a  par  with  the  goylm. 
But  now  the  prophet  addresses  those  of  little  faith,  who  never 
theless  desire  salvation ;  those  who  are  cast  down,  but  not  in 
utter  despair.  Yer.  27.  "  Why  sayest  thou,  0  Jacob,  and 
speakest,  0  Israel,  My  way  is  hidden  from  Jehovah,  and  my  right 
is  overlooked  by  my  God?"  The  name  Jacob  stands  here  at 
the  head,  as  in  ch.  xxix.  22,  as  being  the  more  exquisite  name, 
and  the  one  which  more  immediately  recalled  their  patriarchal 
ancestor.  They  fancied  that  Jehovah  had  completely  turned 
away  from  them  in  wrath  and  weariness.  "  My  way"  refers 
to  their  thorny  way  of  life ;  "  my  right"  (mishpdti)  to  their 
good  right,  in  opposition  to  their  oppressors.  Of  all  this  He 
appeared  to  take  no  notice  at  all.  He  seemed  to  have  no 
thought  of  vindicating  it  judicially  (on  the  double  min,  away 
from  him,  see  Ges.  §  154,  3,  c). 

The  groundlessness  of  such  despondency  is  set  before  them 
in  a  double  question.  Yer.  28.  "  I*  it  not  known  to  tJiee,  or  hast 
thou  not  heard,  an  eternal  God  is  Jehovah,  Creator  of  the  ends 
of  the  earth  :  He  fainteth  not,  neither  becomes  weary ;  His  under 
standing  is  unsearchable"  Those  who  are  so  desponding  ought 
to  know,  if  not  from  their  own  experience,  at  least  from  infor 
mation  that  had  been  handed  down,  that  Jehovah,  who  created 
the  earth  from  one  end  to  the  other,  so  that  even  Babylonia 
was  not  beyond  the  range  of  His  vision  or  the  domain  of  His 
power,  was  an  eternal  God,  i.e.  a  God  eternally  the  same  and 
never  varying,  who  still  possessed  and  manifested  the  power 
which  He  had  displayed  in  the  creation.  Israel  had  already 
passed  through  a  long  history,  and  Jehovah  had  presided  over 
this,  and  ruled  within  it ;  and  He  had  not  so  lost  His  power  in 
consequence,  as  to  have  now  left  His  people  to  themselves.  He 
does  not  grow  faint,  as  a  man  wrould  do,  who  neglected  to  take 
the  repeated  nourishment  requisite  to  sustain  the  energy  of  his 
vital  power ;  nor  does  He  become  weary,  like  a  man  who  has 
exhausted  his  capacity  for  work  by  over-exertion.  And  if  He 
had  not  redeemed  His  people  till  then,  His  people  were  to  know 
that  His  course  was  pure  tebhiindh  or  understanding,  which  was 
in  the  possession  of  infallible  criteria  for  determining  the  right 
point  of  time  at  which  to  interpose  with  His  aid. 


156  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH 

Jehovah  is  so  far  from  becoming  faint,  that  it  is  Ho  who 
gives  strength  to  the  fainting.  Ver.  29.  "  Giving  power  to  the 
faint,  and  to  the  incapable  He  giveth  strength  in  abundance" 
D^K  psA  is  equivalent  to  D'rtK  r«  "^;  P«  is  used  exactly  like 
a  privative  to  form  a  negative  adjective  (e.g.  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  5  ; 
Prov.  xxv.  3). 

Faith  is  all  that  is  needed  to  ensure  a  participation  in  the 
strength  (n^>7  after  the  form  i"1???),  which  He  so  richly  bestows 
and  so  powerfully  enhances.  Vers.  30,  31.  "And  youths  grow 
faint  and  weary,  and  young  men  suffer  a  fall.  But  they  who 
Wait  for  Jehovah  gain  fresh  strength ;  lift  up  their  wings  like  eagles  ; 
run,  and  are  not  weary  ;  go  forward,  and  do  not  faint"  Even 
youths,  even  young  men  in  the  early  bloom  of  their  morning  of 
life  (lachurim,  youths,  from  "ire,  related  to  l?3,  133),  succumb 
to  the  effects  of  the  loss  of  sustenance  or  over-exertion  (both 
futures  are  defective,  the  first  letter  being  dropped),  and  any 
outward  obstacle  is  sufficient  to  cause  them  to  fall  faty  "Nth 
inf.  abs.  kal,  which  retains  what  has  been  stated  for  contempla 
tion,  according  to  Ges.  §  131,  3,  Anm.  2).  In  ver.  SOathe  verb 
stands  first,  ver.  30  being  like  a  concessive  clause  in  relation  to 
ver.  31.  "  Even  though  this  may  happen,  it  is  different  with 
those  who  wait  for  Jehovah,"  i.e.  those  who  believe  in  Him  ; 
for  the  Old  Testament  applies  to  faith  a  number  of  synonyms 
denoting  trust,  hope,  and  longing,  and  thus  describes  it  according 
to  its  inmost  nature,  asfidu&'a  and  as  hope,  directed  to  the  mani 
festation  and  completion  of  that  which  is  hoped  for.  The  Vav 
cop.  introduces  the  antithesis,  as  in  ver.  8.  Vrpjjj  to  cause  one 
to  pursue,  or  new  to  take  the  place  of  the  old  (Lat.  recentare). 
The  expression  'U1  *5>3£  is  supposed  by  early  translators,  after  the 
Sept.,  Targ.  Jer.,  and  Saad.,  to  refer  to  the  moulting  of  the 
eagle  and  the  growth  of  the  new  feathers,  which  we  meet  with 
in  Ps.  ciii.  5  (cf.  Mic.  i.  16)  as  a  figurative  representation  of 
the  renewal  of  youth  through  grace.  But  Hitzig  correctly 
observes  that  !"6jn  is  never  met  with  as  the  causative  of  the 
I'al  used  in  ch.  v.  6,  and  moreover  that  it  would  require  ntfj 
instead  of  "ON.  The  proper  rendering  therefore  is,  "  they  cause 
their  wings  to  rise,  or  lift  their  wings  high,  like  the  eagles"  ('ebher 
as  in  Ps.  Iv.  7).  Their  course  of  life,  which  has  Jehovah  for 
its  object,  is  as  it  were  possessed  of  wings.  They  draw  from 
Him  strength  upon  strength  (see  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  8) ;  running  does 


CHAP.  XLI.  1.  157 

not  tire  them,  nor  do  they  become  faint  from  going  ever  further 
and  further. 

The  first  address,  consisting  of  three  parts  (vers.  1-11, 
12-26,  27-31),  is  here  brought  to  a  close. 

SECOND  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  XLI. 
THE  GOD  OF  THE  WORLD'S  HISTORY,  AND  OF  PROPHECY. 

Jehovah  comes  forward  here,  and  speaking  in  the  tone  in 
which  He  already  began  to  speak  in  ch.  xl.  25,  invites  the 
idolatrous  nations  to  contend  with  Him,  declares  the  raising  up 
of  the  conqueror  from  the  east  to  be  His  work,  and  adduces  this 
as  the  sign  that  He  has  been  the  Author  and  Guider  of  the 
world's  history  from  the  beginning.  But  what  if  the  question 
should  be  asked  on  the  part  of  the  nations,  With  what  right 
does  He  do  this  ?  The  acts  of  the  conqueror  prove  themselves 
to  be  a  work  of  the  God  who  is  exalted  above  the  idols,  from 
the  fact  that  they  bring  destruction  to  the  idolatrous  nations, 
and  to  the  people  of  Jehovah  the  long-desired  redemption.  It 
is  in  this  that  the  conclusiveness  of  the  illustration  lies.  The 
argument,  however,  presupposes  that  Cyrus  has  already  en 
tered  upon  his  victorious  course.  It  is  evident  at  the  outset 
that  future  events,  or  events  still  unfulfilled,  would  have  no 
force  as  present  proofs.  And  the  words  also  clearly  imply,  that 
the  work  which  Jehovah  attributes  to  Himself,  in  opposition  to 
the  gods  of  the  nations,  is  already  in  progress. 

Ver.  1.  Summons  to  the  contest :  "  Be  silent  to  me,  ye 
islands ;  and  let  the  nations  procure  fresh  strength :  let  them  come 
near,  then  speak;  we  will  enter  into  contest  together"  The  words 
are  addressed  to  the  whole  of  the  heathen  world,  and  first  of 
all  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  western  islands  and  coasts.  This 
was  the  expression  commonly  employed  in  the  Old  Testament 
to  designate  the  continent  of  Europe,  the  solid  ground  of  which 
is  so  deeply  cut,  and  so  broken  up,  by  seas  and  lakes,  that 
it  looks  as  if  it  were  about  to  resolve  itself  into  nothing  but 
islands  and  peninsulas.  7N  P'nnn  is  a  pregnant  expression  for 
turning  in  silence  towards  a  person  ;  just  as  in  Job  xiii.  13  it 
is  used  with  min,  in  the  sense  of  forsaking  a  person  in  silence. 
That  they  may  have  no  excuse  if  they  are  defeated,  they  are 


158  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

to  put  on  fresh  strength ;  just  as  in  ch.  xl.  31  believers  are 
spoken  of  as  drawing  fresh  strength  out  of  Jehovah's  fulness. 
They  are  to  draw  near,  then  speak,  i.e.  to  reply  after  hearing 
the  evidence,  for  Jehovah  desires  to  go  through  all  the  forms 
of  a  legal  process  with  them  in  pro  et  contra.  The  mishpdt  is 
thought  of  here  in  a  local  sense,  as  a  forum  or  tribunal.  But 
if  Jehovah  is  one  party  to  the  cause,  who  is  the  judge  to  pro 
nounce  the  decision  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  is  the  same 
as  at  ch.  v.  3.  "  The  nations,"  says  Rosentnuller,  "  are  called 
to  judgment,  not  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  but  to  that  of 
reason."  The  deciding  authority  is  reason,  which  cannot  fail 
to  recognise  the  facts,  and  the  consequences  to  be  deduced 
from  them. 

The  parties  invited  are  now  to  be  thought  of  as  present, 
and  Jehovah  commences  in  ver.  2  :  "  Who  hath  raised  up  the 
man  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  whom  justice  meets  at  his  foot, 
He  giveth  up  nations  before  him,  and  kings  He  subdues,  giveth 
men  like  the  dust  to  his  sword,  and  like  driven  stubble  to 
his  bow?"  The  sentence  governed  by  "who"  (ml)  ends  at 
leraglo  (at  his  foot) ;  at  the  same  time,  all  that  follows  is  spoken 
with  the  echo  of  the  interrogative  accent.  The  person  raised 
up  is  Cyrus,  who  is  afterwards  mentioned  by  name.  The 
coining  one  (if,  that  is  to  say,  we  adhere  to  the  belief  in  Isaiah's 
authorship  of  these  addresses)  first  approaches  gradually  within 
the  horizon  of  the  prophet's  ideal  present;  and  it  is  only  little 
by  little  that  the  prophet  becomes  more  intimately  acquainted 
with  a  phenomenon  which  belongs  to  so  distant  a  future,  and 
has  been  brought  so  close  to  his  own  eyes.  Jehovah  has  raised 
up  the  new  great  hero  "  from  the  east"  (mimmizrdch),  and, 
according  to  ver.  25,  "  from  the  north"  also.  Both  of  these 
were  fulfilled  ;  for  Cyrus  was  a  Persian  belonging  to  the  clan 
of  Achaarnenes  (Hakhdmanis),  which  stood  at  the  head  of  the 
tribe,  or  of  the  Pasargadae.  He  was  the  son  of  Cambyses;  and 
even  if  the  Median  princess  Mandane  were  not  his  mother,  yet, 
according  to  nearly  all  the  ancient  accounts,  he  was  connected 
with  the  royal  house  of  Media ;  at  any  rate,  after  Astyages  was 
dethroned,  he  became  head  and  chief  of  the  Medes  as  well  as 
of  the  Persians  (hence  the  name  of  "  Mule"  which  was  given 
to  him  by  the  oracle,  and  that  given  by  Jerome,  "  agitator 
").  Now  Media  was  to  the  north  of  Babylonia,  and  Persia 


CHAP.  XLI.  2.  159 

to  the  east ;  so  that  his  victorious  march,  in  which,  even  before 
the  conquest  of  Babylon,  he  subjugated  all  the  lands  from 
the  heights  of  Hinduku  to  the  shores  of  the  ^Egean  Sea,  had 
for  its  starting-point  both  the  east  and  north.1  The  clause 
v3"]p  *naoj^  pl^  is  an  attributive  clause,  and  as  such  a  virtual 
object :  "  him  whom  (supply  "HPfcTnK)  justice  comes  to  meet  (N~}P 
=  lTS  Ges.  §  75,  vi.)  on  his  track"  (cf.  Gen.  xxx.  30;  Job 
xviii.  11;  Hab.  iii.  5).  The  idea  of  tsedeq  is  determined  by  what 
follows  :  Jehovah  gives  up  nations  before  him,  and  causes 
kings  to  be  trodden  down  (causative  of  rdddh).  Accordingly, 
tsedeq  is  either  to  be  understood  here  in  an  attributive  sense,  as 
denoting  the  justice  exercised  by  a  person  (viz.  the  justice  exe 
cuted  successfully  by  Cyrus,  as  the  instrument  of  Jehovah,  by 
the  force  of  arms)  ;  or  objectively  of  the  justice  awarded  to  a 
person  (to  which  the  idea  of  "meeting"  is  more  appropriate), 
viz.  the  favourable  result,  the  victory  which  procures  justice 
for  the  just  cause  of  the  combatant.  Rosenmiiller,  Knobel, 
and  others,  are  wrong  in  maintaining  that  tsedeq  (tseddqdh)  in 
ch.  xl.-lxvi.  signifies  primarily  justice,  and  then  prosperity  and 
salvation  as  its  reward.  The  word  means  straightness,  justice, 
righteousness,  and  nothing  more  (from  tsddaq,  to  be  hard,  firm, 
extended,  straight,  e.g.  rumh-un-tsadq,  a  hard,  firm,  and  straight 
lance)  ;  but  it  has  a  double  aspect,  because  justice  consists, 
according  to  circumstances,  of  either  wrath  or  favour,  and 

O  '  / 

therefore  has  sometimes  the  idea  of  the  strict  execution  of 
justice,  as  in  this  instance,  sometimes  of  a  manifestation  of 
justice  in  fidelity  to  promises,  as  in  ver.  10.  ]W  is  repeated 
here  in  ver.  2  (just  like  UflDTI  in  ch.  xl.  14)  with  the  same 
subject,  but  in  a  different  sense.  To  make  sword  and  bow  the 
subject,  in  the  sense  of  "  his  sword  gives  (sc.  (  the  foe ')," 
is  a  doubtful  thing  in  itself ;  and  as  cherebh  and  qesheth  are 
feminines,  it  is  by  no  means  advisable.  Moreover,  in  other 
instances,  the  comparative  3  leaves  it  to  the  reader  to  carry 
out  the  figure  indicated  according  to  his  own  fancy.  And 
this  is  the  case  here:  He  (Jehovah)  makes  his  sword  as  if 
there  were  dust,  his  bow  as  if  there  were  hunted  stubble 
(Bottcher),  i.e.  pounding  the  enemy  like  dust,  and  hunting 
it  like  flying  stubble.  Our  text  has  "^VS,  but  in  certain 
codices  we  find  "ISJQ  with  tzere ;  and  this  reading,  which  is 
1  See  Fable's  G'eschichte  des  Oriental.  Altertluuns.  (18G4),  p.  170  sqq. 


1GO  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

contrary  to  rule,  has  in  its  favour  the  express  testimony  of 
Moses  the  punctuator.1 

The  conqueror  is  now  still  further  described  in  futures, 
which  might  be  defined  by  1^,  and  so  express  a  simultaneous 
past  (synchronistic  imperfects),  but  which  it  is  safer  to  take  as 
standing  traits  in  the  picture  drawn  of  the  conqueror  referred 
to.  Yer.  3.  "  He  pursueth  them,  and  marclieth  in  peace  Ly  a 
course  which  he  never  trod  with  his  feet"  He  marches  victori 
ously  further  and  further,  "  slidldm"  i.e.  "  in  safety"  (or,  as  an 
adjective,  safely ;  Job  xxi.  9),  without  any  one  being  able  to 
do  him  harm,  by  a  course  (accus.  Ges.  §  138,  1)  which  he  has 
not  been  accustomed  to  tread  with  his  feet  (ingredi). 

The  great  fact  of  the  present  time,  which  not  one  of  the 
gods  of  the  heathen  can  boast  of  having  brought  to  pass,  is  now 
explained.  Jehovah  is  its  author.  Ver.  4.  u  Who  hath  wrought 
and  executed  it  ?  He  who  calleth  the  generations  of  men  from 
the  beginning,  I  Jehovah  am  first,  and  ivith  the  last  am  I  HE." 
The  synonyms  7V3  and  nb>y  are  distinguished  from  each  other  in 
the  same  way  as  "  to  work"  (or  bring  about)  and  "  to  realize" 
(or  carry  out).  Hence  the  meaning  is,  Who  is  the  author  to 
whom  both  the  origin  and  progress  of  such  an  occurrence  are 
to  be  referred  ?  It  is  He  who  "  from  the  beginning,"  i.e.  ever 
since  there  has  been  a  human  history,  has  called  into  existence 
the  generations  of  men  through  His  authoritative  command. 
And  this  is  no  other  than  Jehovah,  who  can  declare  of  Him 
self,  in  contrast  with  the  heathen  and  their  gods,  who  are  of 
yesterday,  and  to-morrow  will  not  be :  I  am  Jehovah,  the  very 
first,  whose  being  precedes  all  history ;  and  with  the  men  of  the 
latest  generations  yet  to  come  "  I  am  it."  Kin  is  not  introduced 
here  to  strengthen  the  subject,  ego  ille  ("  I  and  no  other,"  as  in 
ch.  xxxvii.  16,  which  see) ;  but,  as  in  ch.  xliii.  10,  13,  xlvi.  4, 
xlviii.  12,  it  is  a  predicate  of  the  substantive  clause,  ego  sum  is 
(ille),  viz.  'Elohlrn ;  or  even  as  in  Ps.  cii.  28  (cf.  Job  iii.  19  and 
Heb.  xiii.  8),  ego  sum  idem  (Hitzig).  They  are  both  included, 
without  any  distinction  in  the  assertion.  He  is  this,  viz.  God 
throughout  all  ages,  and  is  through  all  ages  HE,  i.e.  the  Being 
who  is  ever  the  same  in  this  His  deity.  It  is  the  full  meaning 
of  the  name  Jehovah  which  is  unfolded  here  ;  for  God  is  called 

1  In  his  Tipan  ^DYl  (rules  of  pointing),  with  which  the  Masora  Jinalis 
is  surrounded. 


CHAP.  XLI.  5-7.  161 

Jehovali  as  the  absolute  I,  the  absolutely  free  Being,  pervading 
all  history,  and  yet  above  all  history,  as  He  who  is  Lord  of  His 
own  absolute  being,  in  revealing  which  He  is  purely  self-deter 
mined  ;  in  a  word,  as  the  unconditionally  free  and  unchangeably 
eternal  personality. 

In  the  following  verse  we  have  not  a  description  of  the 
impression  made  upon  the  heathen  by  the  argument  of  Jehovah, 
but  the  argument  itself  is  continued.  Ver.  5.  "  Islands  have 
seen  it,  and  shuddered;  the  ends  of  the  earth  trembled;  they  have 
approached,  and  drawn  near."  We  have  here  a  description  of 
the  effects  which  the  victorious  course  of  Cyrus  had  begun  to 
produce  in  the  heathen  world.  The  perfects  denote  the  past, 
and  the  futures  a  simultaneous  past ;  so  that  we  have  not  to 
compare  ver.  5a  with  Hab.  iii.  10  so  much  as  with  Ps.  Ixxvii.  17. 
The  play  upon  the  words  WT^I  . . .  NO  pairs  together  both  seeing 
and  fearing.  The  Cumseans,  when  consulting  the  oracle,  com 
menced  thus  :  ?5yu,et9  Se  Sf^wuVoire?  rrjv  TIeporewv  Bvvajjuv.  The 
perfect  with  the  aorist  following  in  ver.  5b  places  the  follow 
ing  picture  upon  the  stage  :  They  have  approached  and  drawn 
near  (from  all  directions)  to  meet  the  threatening  danger  ;  and 
how  ?  Vers.  6,  7.  "  One  helped  his  companion,  and  he  said  to 
his  brother,  Only  firm!  TJie  caster  put  firmness  into  the  metier, 
the  hammer-smoother  into  the  anvil-smiter,  saying  of  the  solder 
ing r,  It  is  good ;  and  made  liim  firm  with  nails,  that  lie  should  not 
shake."  Him,  viz.  the  idol.  Everything  is  in  confusion,  from 
the  terror  that  prevails ;  and  the  gods  from  which  they  expect 
deliverance  are  not  made  till  now,  the  workmen  stimulating 
one  another  to  work.  The  chdrdsh,  who  casts  the  image,  en 
courages  the  tsoreph,  whose  task  it  is  to  provide  it  with  the 
plating  of  gold  and  silver  chains  (ch.  xl.  19),  to  work  more 
bravely;  and  the  man  who  smooths  with  the  hammer  (pattish, 
instrumental)  does  the  same  to  the  man  who  smites  the  anvil 
(Djin  with  seghol,  whereas  in  other  cases,  e.g.  Ezek.  xxii.  25, 
the  tone  generally  gives  way  without  any  change  in  the  vowel- 
pointing).  The  latter  finds  the  soldering  all  right,  by  which 
the  gold  plates  of  the  covering  are  fastened  together,  so  as  to 
give  to  the  golden  idol  a  massive  appearance.  He  is  the  last 
into  whose  hands  it  comes ;  and  nothing  more  is  wanting,  than 
that  he  should  forge  upon  the  anvil  the  nails  with  which  it  is 
fastened,  to  prevent  it  from  falling.  To  such  foolish,  fruitless 

VOL.  II.  L 


162  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

proceedings  have  the  nations  resorted  when  threatened   with 
su'bjugation  by  Cyrus. 

The  proof  adduced  by  Jehovah  of  His  own  deity  closes 
here.  But  instead  of  our  hearing  whether  the  nations,  with 
which  He  has  entered  upon  the  contest,  have  any  reply  to  make, 
the  address  turns  to  Israel,  upon  which  deliverance  dawns  from 
that  very  quarter,  from  which  the  others  are  threatened  with 
destruction.  Yers.  8-10.  "  And  thou,  Israel  my  servant,  Jacob 
ivhom  1  have  chosen,  seed  of  Abraham  my  friend,  thou  whom  I 
have  laid  hold  of  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  called  from  the  cor 
ners  thereof,  and  said  to  thee,  Thou  art  my  servant,  I  have  chosen 
and  not  despised  thee ;  fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee ;  be  not 
afraid,  for  I  am  thy  God  :  I  have  chosen  thee,  I  also  help  thee,  1 
also  hold  thee  ivith  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness"  The  \ 
before  ^^}  connects  together  antitheses,  which  show  themselves 
at  once  to  be  antitheses.  Whereas  the  nations,  which  put  their 
trust  in  idols  that  they  themselves  had  made,  were  thrown  into 
alarm,  and  yielded  before  the  world-wide  commotions  that  had 
originated  with  the  eastern  conqueror,  Israel,  the  nation  of 
Jehovah,  might  take  comfort  to  itself.  Every  word  here 
breathes  the  deepest  affection.  The  address  moves  on  in  soft 
undulating  lines.  The  repetition  of  the  suffix  1,  with  which 
"ic?x  forms  a  relative  of  the  second  person,  for  which  we  have  no 
equivalent  in  our  language  (Ges.  §  123,  Anm.  1),  gives  to  the 
address  a  pressing,  clinging,  and,  as  it  were,  loving  key-note. 
The  reason,  which  precedes  the  comforting  assurance  in  ver.  10, 
recals  the  intimate  relation  in  which  Jehovah  had  placed  Him 
self  towards  Israel,  and  Israel  towards  Himself.  The  leading 
thought,  "  servant  of  Jehovah,"  which  is  characteristic  of  ch. 
xl.-xlvi.,  and  lies  at  the  root  of  the  whole  spirit  of  these  addresses, 
more  especially  of  their  Christology,  we  first  meet  with  here, 
and  that  in  a  popular  sense.  It  has  both  an  objective  and  a 
subjective  side.  On  the  one  hand,  Israel  is  the  servant  of 
Jehovah  by  virtue  of  a  divine  act ;  and  this  act,  viz.  its  election 
and  call,  was  an  act  of  pure  grace,  and  was  not  to  be  traced,  as 
the  expression  "  I  have  chosen  and  not  despised  thee"  indicates, 
to  any  superior  excellence  or  merit  on  the  part  of  Israel.  On 
the  contrary,  Israel  was  so  obscure  that  Jehovah  might  have 
despised  it ;  nevertheless  He  had  anticipated  it  in  free  un 
merited  love  with  this  stamp  of  the  character  indelibilis  of  a 


CHAP.  XLI.  8-10.  163 

servant  of  Jehovah.  On  the  other  hand,  Israel  was  the  servant 
of  Jehovah,  inasmuch  as  it  acted  out  what  Jehovah  had  made 
it,  partly  in  reverential  worship  of  this  God,  and  partly  in  active 
obedience.  /n~n??  ^?V,  i.e.  "serving  Jehovah,"  includes  both 
liturgical  service  (also  T?y  absolutely,  ch.  xix.  23)  and  the  ser 
vice  of  works.  The  divine  act  of  choosing  and  calling  is  dated 
from  Abraham.  From  a  Palestinian  point  of  view,  Ur  of 
Chaldgea,  within  the  old  kingdom  of  Nimrod,  and  Haran  in 
northern  Mesopotamia,  seemed  like  the  ends  and  corners  of  the 
earth  (^atslllm,  remote  places,  from  'dtsal,  to  put  aside  or  apart). 
Israel  and  the  land  of  Israel  were  so  inseparably  connected,  that 
whenever  the  origin  of  Israel  was  spoken  of,  the  point  of  view 
could  only  be  taken  in  Palestine.  To  the  far  distant  land  of 
the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  had  Jehovah  gone  to  fetch  Abraham, 
u  the  friend  of  God"  (Jas.  ii.  23),  who  is  called  in  the  East 
even  to  the  present  day,  clialil  ollali,  the  friend  of  God.  This 
calling  of  Abraham  was  the  furthest  terminus  a  quo  of  the 
existence  of  Israel  as  the  covenant  nation ;  for  the  leading  of 
Abraham  was  providentially  appointed  with  reference  to  the 
rise  of  Israel  as  a  nation.  The  latter  was  pre-existent  in  him 
by  virtue  of  the  counsel  of  God.  And  when  Jehovah  adopted 
Abraham  as  His  servant,  and  called  him  "  rny  servant"  (Gen. 
xxvi.  24),  Israel,  the  nation  that  was  coming  into  existence  in 
Abraham,  received  both  the  essence  and  name  of  a  "  servant 
of  Jehovah."  Inasmuch  then  as,  on  looking  back  to  its  past 
history,  it  could  not  fail  to  perceive  that  it  was  so  thoroughly 
a  creation  of  divine  power  and  grace,  it  ought  not  to  be  fearful, 
and  look  about  with  timidity  and  anxiety ;  for  He  who  had 
presented  Himself  at  the  very  beginning  as  its  God,  was  still 
always  near.  The  question  arises,  in  connection  with  the  word 
Tfi-flSK,  whether  it  means  to  strengthen  (ch.  xxxv.  3;  Ps.  Ixxxix. 
22),  or  to  lay  firm  hold  of,  to  attach  firmly  to  one's  self,  to  choose. 
We  decide  in  favour  of  the  latter  meaning,  which  is  established 
by  ch.  xliv.  14,  cf.  Ps.  Ixxx.  16,  18.  The  other  perfects  affirm 
what  Jehovah  has  ever  done,  and  still  continues  to  do.  In  the 
expression  "  by  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness,"  the  justice 
or  righteousness  is  regarded  pre-eminently  on  its  brighter  side, 
the  side  turned  towards  Israel ;  but  it  is  also  regarded  on  its 
fiery  side,  or  the  side  turned  towards  the  enemies  of  Israel.  It 
is  the  righteousness  which  aids  the  oppressed  congregation 


164  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

against  its  oppressors.  The  repeated  *|K  heaps  one  synonym 
upon  another,  expressive  of  the  divine  love ;  for  \  simply  con 
nects,  D3  appends,  *]tf  heaps  up  (cumulat).  Language  is  too 
contracted  to  hold  all  the  fulness  of  the  divine  love ;  and  for 
this  reason  the  latter  could  not  find  words  enough  to  express 
all  that  it  desired. 

With  the  exclamation  hen  (behold)  the  eyes  of  Israel  are 
now  directed  to  the  saving  interposition  of  Jehovah  in  the 
immediate  future.  Vers.  11-13.  "Behold,  all  tliey  that  were 
incensed  against  thee  must  be  ashamed  and  confounded ;  the  men 
of  thy  conflict  become  as  nothing,  and  perish.  Tliou  wilt  seek 
them,  and  not  find  them,  the  men  of  thy  feuds ;  the  men  of  thy 
warfare  become  as  nothing,  and  nonentity.  For  I,  Jehovah  thy 
God,  lay  hold  of  thy  right  hand,  He  icho  saith  to  thee,  Fear  not ; 
I  will  help  thee."  The  comprehensive  expression  omnes  wflam- 
mati  in  te  (iiiphal,  as  in  ch.  xlv.  24)  stands  at  the  head ;  and 
then,  in  order  that  every  kind  may  be  included,  the  enemies  are 
called  by  a  different  name  every  time.  The  three  substantives 
bear  much  the  same  relation  to  one  another  as  Us,  rixa,  bellum 
(milchdmdh,  lit.  throng  =  war-tumult,  like  the  epic  /cXo^o?), 
hence  adversarii,  inimici,  hostes.  The  suffixes  have  the  force 
of  objective  genitives.  We  have  founded  our  translation 
upon  the  reading  TH^T?.  The  three  names  of  the  enemies  are 
placed  emphatically  at  the  close  of  the  sentences,  and  these  are 
long  drawn  out,  whilst  the  indignation  gives  vent  to  itself; 
whereas  in  ver.  13  there  follows  nothing  but  short  sentences, 
in  which  the  persecuted  church  is  encouraged  and  affectionately 
embraced.  Two  clauses,  which  are  made  to  rhyme  with  em, 
announce  the  utter  destruction  of  their  foes;  then  the  inflective 
rhyme  ekha  is  repeated  five  times ;  and  the  sixth  time  it  passes 
over  into  ikha. 

The  consolatory  words,  "  Fear  not,"  are  now  repeated,  for 
the  purpose  of  once  more  adding  the  promise  that  Israel  will 
not  succumb  to  its  foes,  but  will  acquire  power  over  its  ene 
mies.  Yers.  14-16.  "  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  and  handful 
Israel :  I  will  Jielp  tliee,  saith  Jehovah ;  and  thy  Redeemer  is  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel.  Behold,  I  have  made  thee  a  threshing  roller, 
a  sharp  new  one,  with  double  edges :  thou  wilt  thresh  mountains, 
and  pound  them ;  and  hills  thou  wilt  make  like  chaff.  Thou  wilt 
wiunow  them,  and  wind  carries  them  away,  and  tempest  scatters 


CHAP.  XLI.  14-20.  165 

them :  and  tJwu  wilt  rejoice  in  Jehovah,  and  glory  in  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel."  Israel,  which  is  now  helplessly  oppressed,  is 
called  "  worm  of  Jacob "  (gen.  appos.)  in  compassion,  i.e. 
Jacob  that  is  like  a  worm,  probably  with  some  allusion  to 
Ps.  xxii.  7;  for  the  image  of  the  Messiah  enriches  itself  in 
these  discourses,  inasmuch  as  Israel  itself  is  looked  upon  in  a 
Messianic  light,  so  that  the  second  David  does  not  stand  by 
the  side  of  Israel,  but  appears  as  Israel's  heart,  or  true  and 
inmost  essence.  The  people  are  then  addressed  as  the  "  people 
of  Israel,"  with  some  allusion  to  the  phrase  "iSDi?  ""HO  (i.e.  few 
men,  easily  numbered)  in  Gen.  xxxiv.  30,  Deut.  iv.  27  (LXX. 
6\iyocrTbs  'Io-par]\ ;  Luther,  Ir  armer  hanffe  Israel,  ye  poor 
crowd  of  Israel).  They  no  longer  formed  the  compact  mass  of 
a  nation ;  the  band  of  the  commonwealth  was  broken  :  they 
were  melted  down  into  a  few  individuals,  scattered  about  hither 
and  thither.  But  it  would  not  continue  so.  "  I  help  thee  " 
(perfect  of  certainty)  is  Jehovah's  solemn  declaration ;  and  the 
Redeemer  (reclemtor,  Lev.  xxv.  48,  49)  of  His  now  enslaved 
people  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  with  His  love,  which  per 
petually  triumphs  over  wrath.  Not  only  will  He  set  it  free, 
but  He  will  also  endow  it  with  might  over  its  oppressors;  samtikh 
is  a  perfect  of  assurance  (Ges.  §  126,  4)  ;  morag  (roller)  signi 
fies  a  threshing-sledge  (Arab,  naureg,  noreg),  which  has  here 
the  term  p"in  (ch.  xxviii.  27)  as  a  secondary  name  along  with 
B^fJ,  and  is  described  as  furnished  on  the  under  part  of  the 
two  arms  of  the  sledge  not  only  with  sharp  knives,  but  with 
two-edged  knives  (rri*2''D  a  reduplication,  like  nxDND  in  ch. 
xxvii.  8,  whereas  ^D  is  a  double  plural).  Just  like  such  n 
threshing  machine  would  Israel  thresh  and  grind  to  powder 
from  that  time  forth  both  mountains  and  hills.  This  is  evi 
dently  a  figurative  expression  for  proud  and  mighty  foes,  just 
as  wind  and  tempest  denote  the  irresistible  force  of  Jehovah's 
aid.  The  might  of  the  enemy  would  be  broken  down  to  the 
very  last  remnant,  whereas  Israel  would  be  able  to  rejoice  and 
glory  in  its  God. 

At  the  present  time,  indeed,  the  state  of  His  people  was  a 
helpless  one,  but  its  cry  for  help  was  not  in  vain.  Vers.  17-20. 
"  The  poor  and  needy,  who  seek  for  water  and  there  is  none,  their 
tongue  faints  for  thirst.  I  Jehovah  ivill  hear  them,  I  the  God  of 
Israel  will  not  forsake  them.  I  open  streams  upon  /tills  of  the 


1G6  THE  PKOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

field,  and  springs  in  the  midst  of  valleys  ;  1  make  the  desert 
into  a  pond,  and  dry  land  into  fountains  of  water.  I  give  in 
the  desert  cedars,  acacias,  and  myrtles,  and  oleasters;  I  set  in  the 
steppe  cypresses,  plane-trees,  and  sherbin-trees  together,  that  they 
may  see,  and  know,  and  lay  to  heart  and  understand  all  together, 
that  the  hand  of  Jehovah  hath  accomplished  this,  and  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel  hath  created  it?  Kimchi,  Hitzig,  and  others 
refer  these  promises  to  the  returning  exiles  ;  but  there  is  also  a 
description,  without  any  restriction  to  the  return  home,  of  the 
miraculous  change  which  would  take  place  in  the  now  comfort 
less  and  helpless  condition  of  the  exiles.  The  shephdyim,  i.e. 
bare,  woodless  hills  rising  up  from  the  plain,  Jer.  xii.  12,  the 
beqaoth,  or  deep  valleys,  by  the  sides  of  which  there  rise  preci 
pitous  mountains,  and  the  'erets  tsiyydh,  the  land  of  burning 
heat  or  drought  (cf.  Ps.  Ixiii.  2),  depict  the  homeless  condition 
of  Israel,  as  it  wandered  over  bald  heights  and  through  water 
less  plains  about  a  land  with  parched  and  gaping  soil.  For 
the  characteristics  of  the  object,  which  is  placed  before  E.^N, 
we  may  therefore  compare  such  passages  as  ch.  xliv.  3,  Iv.  1. 
nng'j  is  either  a  pausal  form  for  ""^J,  and  therefore  the  niphal 
of  nritt>  (to  set,  become  shallow,  dry  up),  or  a  pausal  form  for 
nri^b,  and  therefore  the  kal  of  n^  with  dagesh  affectuosum,  like 
13rJ'in  Ezek.  xxvii.  19  (Olshausen,  §  83, 1).  The  form  nriBtf  in 
Jer.  li.  30  may  just  as  well  be  derived  from  rin^  (Ges.  §  67, 
Anm.  11)  as  from  n^j,  whereas  tfiBtt  may  certainly  be  taken  as 
the  niphal  of  nn^  after  the  form  fea,  "im  (Ges.  §  67,  Anm.  5), 
though  it  would  be  safer  to  refer  it  to  a  kal  n^J,  which  seems 
to  be  also  favoured  by  ^7^1  in  Jer.  xviii.  14  as  a  transposition 
of  iri^X  The  root  B>j,  of  which  J")£;J  would  be  a  further  ex 
pansion,  really  exhibits  the  meaning  to  dry  up  or  thirst,  in  the 
Arabic  nassa ;  whereas  the  verbs  W&9  tWN,  DDJ  (ch.  x.  18),  njw, 
Syr.  nas,  nos ,  Arab,  ndsa,  nasnasa,  with  the  primary  meaning 
to  slacken,  lose  their  hold,  and  Nt'O,  ntw,  ypj,  to  deceive,  de 
range,  and  advance,  form  separate  families.  Just  when  they 
are  thus  on  the  point  of  pining  away,  they  receive  an  answer 
to  their  prayer :  their  God  opens  streams,  i.e.  causes  streams  to 
break  forth  on  the  hills  of  the  field,  and  springs  in  the  midst 
of  the  valleys.  The  desert  is  transformed  into  a  lake,  and  the 
steppe  of  burning  sand  into  fountains  of  water.  What  was 
predicted  in  ch.  xxxv.  6,  7  is  echoed  again  here, — a  figurative 


CHAP.  XLI.  21-23.  1  f>7 

representation  of  the  manifold  fulness  of  refreshing,  consola 
tion,  and  marvellous  help  which  was  to  burst  all  at  once  upon 
those  who  were  apparently  forsaken  of  God  What  is  de 
picted  in  vers.  19,  20,  is  the  effect  of  these.  It  is  not  merely  a 
scanty  vegetation  that  springs  up,  but  a  corresponding  mani 
fold  fulness  of  stately,  fragrant,  and  shady  trees  ;  so  that  the 
steppe,  where  neither  foot  nor  eye  could  find  a  resting-place, 
is  changed,  as  by  a  stroke  of  magic,  into  a  large,  dense,  well- 
watered  forest,  and  shines  with  sevenfold  glory, — an  image  of 
the  many-sided  manifestations  of  divine  grace  which  are  ex 
perienced  by  those  who  are  comforted  now.  Isaiah  is  espe 
cially  fond  of  such  figures  as  these  (vid.  ch.  v.  7,  vi.  13, 
xxvii.  6,  xxxvii.  31).  There  are  seven  (4  -f-  3)  trees  named; 
seven  indicating  the  divine  character  of  this  manifold  develop 
ment  (Psi/chol.  p.  188).  ' Erez  is  the  generic  name  for  the 
cedar ;  shittdh,  the  acacia,  the  Egyptian  npina  (atcavOa),  Copt. 
shont ;  hadas,  the  myrtle  ;  *ets  shemen,  the  wild  olive,  as  dis 
tinguished  from  zayith  (77  aypLeXaios,  opposed  to  r)  e\ala  in 
Horn.  xi.  17)  ;  berosh,  the  cypress,  at  any  rate  more  especially' 
this ;  tidhdr  we  have  rendered  the  "  plane-tree,"  after  Saad.  ; 
and  t*asshur  the  "  sherbin  "  (a  kind  of  cedar),  after  Saad.  and 
Syr.  The  crowded  synonyms  indicating  sensual  and  spiritual 
perception  in  ver.  20a  (^&,  sc.  03?,  ver.  22)  are  meant  to 
express  as  strongly  as  possible  the  irresistible  character  of  the 
impression.  They  will  be  quite  unable  to  regard  all  this  as 
accidental  or  self-produced,  or  as  anything  but  the  production 
of  the  power  and  grace  of  their  God. 

There  follows  now  the  second  stage  in  the  suit.  Yers.  21-23. 
61  Bring  hither  your  cause,  saith  Jehovah ;  bring  forward  your 
proofs,  saith  the  king  of  Jacob.  Let  them  bring  forward,  and 
make  known  to  us  what  will  happen :  make  known  the  beginning, 
what  it  is,  and  we  will  fix  our  heart  upon  it,  and  take  knowledge 
of  its  issue;  or  let  us  hear  ivhat  is  to  come.  Make  known  what  is 
coming  later,  and  we  ivill  acknowledge  that  ye  are  gods  :  yea,  do 
good,  and  do  evil,  and  we  will  measure  ourselves,  and  see  together" 
In  the  first  stage  Jehovah  appealed,  in  support  of  His  deity,  to 
the  fact  that  it  was  He  who  had  called  the  oppressor  of  the 
nations  upon  the  arena  of  history.  In  this  second  stage  HP 
appeals  to  the  fact  that  He  only  knows  or  can  predict  the 
future.  There  the  challenge  was  addressed  to  the  worshippers 


168  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  idols,  here  to  the  idols  themselves  ;  but  in  both  cases  both 
of  these  are  ranged  on  the  one  side,  and  Jehovah  with  His 
people  upon  the  other.  It  is  with  purpose  that  Jehovah  is 
called  the  "King of  Jacob,"  as  being  the  tutelar  God  of  Israel, 
in  contrast  to  the  tutelar  deities  of  the  heathen.  The  challenge 
to  the  latter  to  establish  their  deity  is  first  of  all  addressed  to 
them  directly  in  ver.  21,  and  then  indirectly  in  ver.  22a,  where 
Jehovah  connects  Himself  with  His  people  as  the  opposing 
party;  but  in  ver.  2*2b  He  returns  again  to  a  direct  address. 
rriZOT  are  evidences  (lit.  robora,  cf.  o^upco/zara,  2  Cor.  x.  4, 
from  DStf,  to  be  strong  or  stringent ;  mishn.  ESfyrn,  to  contend 
with  one  another  pro  et  contra)  ;  here  it  signifies  proofs  that 
they  can  foresee  the  future.  Jehovah  for  His  part  has  dis 
played  this  knowledge,  inasmuch  as,  at  the  very  time  when  He 
threatened  destruction  to  the  heathen  at  the  hands  of  Cyrus, 
He  consoled  His  people  with  the  announcement  of  their  de 
liverance  (vers.  8-20).  It  is  therefore  the  turn  of  the  idol 
deities  now :  "  Let  them  bring  forward  and  announce  to  us  the 
things  that  will  come  to  pass."  The  general  idea  of  what  is  in 
the  future  stands  at  the  head.  Then  within  this  the  choice 
is  given  them  of  proving  their  foreknowledge  of  what  is  after 
wards  to  happen,  by  announcing  either  nirC'S"},  or  even  niN3. 
These  two  ideas,  therefore,  are  generic  terms  within  the  range 
of  the  things  that  are  to  happen.  Consequently  ni3E'Vnn  cannot 
mean  "  earlier  predictions,"  pmus  prcedicta,  as  Hitzig,  Knobel, 
and  others  suppose.  This  explanation  is  precluded  in  the 
present  instance  by  the  logic  of  the  context.  Both  ideas  lie 
upon  the  one  line  of  the  future;  the  one  being  more  imme 
diate,  the  other  more  remote,  or  as  the  expression  alternating 
with  rnxnn  implies  "rinsp  nisnxn,  Centura  in  posterum  ("  in  later 
times,"  compare  ch.  xlii.  23,  "  at  a  later  period  ; "  from  the 
participle  W&,  radical  form  **}&,  vid.  Ges.  §  75,  Anm.  5,  pro 
bably  to  distinguish  it  from  ninfc).  This  is  the  explanation 
adopted  by  Stier  and  Halm,  the  latter  of  whom  has  correctly 
expounded  the  word,  as  denoting  "  the  events  about  to  happen 
first  in  the  immediate  future,  which  it  is  not  so  difficult  to 
prognosticate  from  signs  that  are  discernible  in  the  present." 
The  choice  is  given  them,  either  to  foretell  "  things  at  the 
beginning  "  (haggldu  in  our  editions  is  erroneously  pointed  with 
kadma  instead  of  geresh),  i.e.  that  which  will  take  place  first  or 


CHAP.  XLI.  24.  169 

next,  " what  they  Le"  (guce  et  qualia  sint),  so  that  now,  when 
the  acharlth,  "  the  latter  end  "  (i.e.  the  issue  of  that  which  is 
held  out  to  view),  as  prognosticated  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
present,  really  occurs,  the  prophetic  utterance  concerning  it 
maybe  verified;  or  "things  to  come,"  i.e.  tilings  further  off, 
in  later  times  (in  the  remote  future),  the  prediction  of  which 
is  incomparably  more  difficult,  because  without  any  point  of 
contact  in  the  present.  They  are  to  choose  which  they  like  (itf 
from  njx,  like  velhom  velle):  "  ye  do  good,  and  do  evil,"  i.e.  (ac 
cording  to  the  proverbial  use  of  the  phrase  ;  cf.  Zeph.  i.  12  and 
Jer.  x.  5)  only  express  yourselves  in  some  way  ;  come  forward, 
and  do  either  the  one  or  the  other.  The  meaning  is,  not  that 
they  are  to  stir  themselves  and  predict  either  good  or  evil,  but  they 
are  to  show  some  sign  of  life,  no  matter  what.  "  And  we  will 
measure  ourselves  (i.e.  look  one  another  in  the  face,  testing  and 
measuring),  and  see  together"  viz.  what  the  result  of  the  contest 
will  be.  njfiBfcl  like  njnnn  in  2  Kings  xiv.  8,  11,  with  a  co- 
hortative  ah,  which  is  rarely  met  with  in  connection  with  verbs 
n"b,  and  the  tone  upon  the  penultimate,  the  ah  being  attached 
without  tone  to  the  voluntative  yfltW  in  ver.  5  (Ewald,  §  228,  c). 
For  the  chethib  ^"]^,  the  keri  has  the  voluntative  N~U!.. 

Jehovah  has  thus  placed  Himself  in  opposition  to  the 
heathen  and  their  gods,  as  the  God  of  history  and  prophecy. 
It  now  remains  to  be  seen  whether  the  idols  will  speak,  to  prove 
their  deity.  By  no  means ;  not  only  are  they  silent,  but  they 
cannot  speak.  Therefore  Jehovah  breaks  out  into  words  of 
wrath  and  contempt.  Ver.  24.  a  Behold,  ye  are  of  nothing,  and 
your  doing  of  nought :  an  abomination  whoever  chooseth  you" 
The  two  JD  are  partitive,  as  in  ch.  xl.  17  ;  and  yswp  is  not  an 
error  of  the  pen  for  DQXE,  as  Gesenius  and  others  suppose,  but 
JJSK  from  ysij  =  na  (from  which  comes  na)?  nys?  ch.  xlii.  14 
(from  which  comes  n^SN,  ch.  lix.  5),  to  breathe,  stands  as  a 
synonym  to  j)K,  OT,  nn.  The  attributive  clause  DJ2  "ira*. 
(supply  "iKte  Kin)  is  a  virtual  subject  (Ewald,  §  333,  b)  :  ye  and 
your  doings  are  equally  nil ;  and  whoever  chooses  you  for  pro 
tectors,  and  makes  you  the  objects  of  his  worship,  is  morally 
the  most  degraded  of  beings. 

The  more  conclusively  and  incontrovertibly,  therefore,  does 
Jehovah  keep  the  field  as  the  moulder  of  history  and  foreteller 
of  the  future,  and  therefore  as  God  above  all  gods.  Ver,  25. 


170  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

"  I  have  raised  up  from  the  north,  and  he  came  :  from  the  rising 
of  the  sun  one  who  invokes  my  name ;  and  he  treads  upon  satraps 
as  mud,  and  like  a  potter  kneadeth  clay.9'  The  object  of  the 
verb  halrothi  (I  have  wakened  up)  is  he  who  came  when 
wakened  up  by  Jehovah  from  the  north  and  east,  i.e.  from 
Media  and  Persia  (r>Ns<i  —  n&w  for  nN*1.  with  evasion  of  the  auxi- 

•     2  ~"" 

liary  pathach,  Ges.  §  76,  2,  c),  and,  as  the  second  clause  affirms, 
who  invokes  or  will  invoke  the  name  of  Jehovah  (at  any  rate, 
qui  invocabit  is  the  real  meaning  of  qui  invocaf).  For  although 
the  Zarathustrian  religion,  which  Cyrus  followed,  was  nearest 
to  the  Jehovah  religion  of  all  the  systems  of  heathenism,  it 
was  a  heathen  religion  after  all.  The  doctrine  of  a  great  God 
(baga  vazarka),  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  at  the  same 
time  of  a  great  number  of  Bagas  and  Yazatas,  behind  whose 
working  and  worship  the  great  God  was  thrown  into  the  shade, 
is  (apart  from  the  dualism  condemned  in  ch.  xlv.  7)  the  sub 
stance  of  the  sacred  writings  of  the  Magi  in  our  possession,  as 
conGrmed  by  the  inscriptions  of  the  Achemenides.1  But  the 
awakened  of  Jehovah  would,  as  is  here  predicted,  "  call  with 
the  name,  or  by  means  of  the  name,  of  Jehovah,"  which  may 
mean  either  call  upon  this  name  (Zeph.  iii.  9 ;  Jer.  x.  25),  or 
call  out  the  name  (compare  Ex.  xxxiii.  19,  xxxiv.  5,  with  Ex. 
xxxv.  30)  in  the  manner  in  which  he  does  make  use  of  it  in  the 
edict  setting  the  exiles  free  (Ezra  i.  2).  The  verb  K2^  which 
follows  (cf.  ver.  2)  designates  him  still  further  as  a  conqueror 
of  nations;  the  verb  construed  with  an  accusative  is  used 
here,  as  is  very  frequently  the  case,  in  the  sense  of  hostile 
attack.  The  word  Sdgdn,  which  is  met  with  first  in  Ezekiel — • 
apart,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  passage  before  us — may  have 
owed  its  meaning  in  the  Hebrew  vocabulary  to  its  similarity 
in  sound  to  sokhen  (ch.  xxii.  15)  ;  at  any  rate,  it  is  no  doubt  a 
Persian  word,  which  became  naturalized  in  the  Hebrew  (£or/a- 
1/779  in  Athengeus,  and  Neo-Pers.  sichne,  a  governor :  see  Ges. 
Thes.),  though  this  comparison  is  by  no  means  so  certain2  as 

1  "VTindischmann,  Zoroastrisclie  Sludien,  pp.  134,  135. 

2  Spiegel  has  the  following  remarks  upon  the  subject :  There  is  but  very 
little  probability  in  the  etymologies  which  can  be  suggested  for  the  word 
sdgan  through  the  help  of  the  old  Persian.     The  new  Persian  shihne  cannot 
be  traced  beyond  Neo-Persian,  and  even  there  it  is  somewhat  suspicious  on 
account  of  the  _  which  it  contains,  and  which  is  not  Persian.     The  only 


CHAP.  XLI.  26-28.  171 

that  a-arpaTT^  is  the  same  as  the  Ksatrapdvan  of  the  inscrip 
tions,  i.e.  protector  of  the  kingdom.1  Without  at  all  overlook 
ing  the  fact  that  this  word  segdnlm,  so  far  as  it  can  really  be 
supposed  to  be  a  Persian  word,  favours  the  later  composition 
of  this  portion  of  the  book  of  Isaiah,  \ve  cannot  admit  that  it 
has  any  decisive  weight,  inasmuch  as  the  Persian  word  pardcs 
occurs  even  in  the  Song  of  Solomon.  And  the  indications 
which  might  be  found  in  the  word  segdmm  unfavourable  to 
Isaiah's  authorship  are  abundantly  counterbalanced  by  what 
immediately  follows. 

As  ver.  25  points  back  to  the  first  charge  against  the  heathen 
and  their  gods  (vers.  2-7),  so  vers.  26-28  point  back  to  the 
second.  Not  only  did  Jehovah  manifest  Himself  as  the  Uni 
versal  Kuler  in  the  waking  up  of  Cyrus,  but  as  the  Omniscient 
Ruler  also.  Vers.  26-28.  "  Who  hath  made  it  known  from  the 
beginning,  we  will  acknowledge  it,  and  from  former  time,  we  will 
say  He  is  in  the  right  f  !  Yea,  there  ivas  none  that  made  known ; 
yea,  none  that  caused  to  hear ;  yea,  none  that  heard  your  words. 
As  the  first  I  said  to  Zion,  Behold,  behold,  there  it  is :  and  I 
lestow  evangelists  upon  Jerusalem.  And  I  looked,  and  there  was 
no  man ;  and  of  these  there  was  no  one  answering  whom  I  could 
ask,  and  ivho  would  give  me  an  answer"  If  any  one  of  the 
heathen  deities  had  foretold  this  appearance  of  Cyrus  so  long 
before  as  at  the  very  commencement  of  that  course  of  history 

real  Persian  word  to  which  I  could  think  of  tracing  it  is  slmlir,  a  city  (old 
Bactrian  kJishatJira,  or  shoithra,  a  place  of  abode) ;  or  it  might  possibly  have 
sprung  from  shoithraka,  a  supposititious  word,  in  the  sense  of  governor  of 
a  district,  but  with  the  r  changed  into  n  (a  change  which  only  occurs  in 

Huzvaresh)  and  the  £>  into  _..  There  are  also  difficulties  in  the  compari 
son  of  the  old  Bactrian  ganh,  to  say  or  express  solemnly.  An  adjective 
qanhana  (expressing,  commanding),  formed  from  this  verb,  would  be  pro 
nounced  gahdna  or  even  gana  in  old  Persian ;  and  from  this  Sdgdn  would 
have  to  be  obtained,  so  that  we  should  still  want  the  n  to  take  the  place  of 
the  Gimel.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  still  harsher  form  of  the  root  ganh 
in  the  Gatha  dialect,  namely  qak  (not  the  same  as  the  Sanskrit  gak,  to  be 
strong,  as  Haug  supposes),  from  which  the  Neo-Persian  saclian,  sachun,  a 
word,  is  derived ;  so  that  it  appears  to  have  been  also  current  in  old 
Persian.  Accordingly,  the  form  qakana  may  also  have  been  used  in  the 
place  of  ganlianci)  and  this  might  suit  in  some  degree  for  sarjan. 

1  See  H.  Rawlinson,  Asiatic  Journal,  xi.  1,  p.  116  ss. ;  and  Spiegel,  Keil- 
inschriften,  p.  104. 


172  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

which  had  thus  reached  its  goal,  Jehovah  with  His  people, 
being  thus  taught  by  experience,  would  admit  and  acknow 
ledge  their  divinity.  K>fcOD  is  used  in  the  same  sense  as  in 
ch.  xlviii.  16  :  and  also  in  ch.  xli.  4  and  xl.  21,  where  it  refers, 
according  to  the  context  in  each  case,  to  the  beginning  of  the 
particular  line  of  history.  P^V  signifies  either  "  he  is  right,"  i.e. 
in  the  right  (compare  the  Arabic  siddik,  genuine),  or  in  a  neuter 
sense,  "  it  is  right"  (==  true),  i.e.  the  claim  to  divine  honours  is 
really  founded  upon  divine  performances.  But  there  was  not 
one  who  had  proclaimed  it,  or  who  gave  a  single  sound  of  him 
self;  no  one  had  heard  anything  of  the  kind  from  them.  pX 
receives  a  retrospective  character  from  the  connection ;  and 
bearing  this  in  mind,  the  participles  may  be  also  resolved  into 
imperfects.  The  repeated  ^N,  passing  beyond  what  is  set  down 
as  possible,  declares  the  reality  of  the  very  opposite.  What 
Jehovah  thus  proves  the  idols  to  want,  He  can  lay  claim  to  for 
Himself.  In  ver.  27  we  need  not  assume  that  there  is  any 
hyperbaton,  as  Louis  de  Dieu,  Eosenmtiller,  and  others  have 
done  :  "  I  first  will  give  to  Zion  and  Jerusalem  one  bringing 
glad  tidings :  behold,  behold  them."  After  what  has  gone 
before  in  ver.  26  we  may  easily  supply  WP^,  "  I  said,"  in  ver. 
27a  (compare  ch.  viii.  19,  xiv.  16,  xxvii.  2),  not  ION,  for  the 
whole  comparison  drawn  by  Jehovah  between  Himself  and  the 
idols  is  retrospective,  and  looks  back  from  the  fulfilment  in 
progress  to  the  prophecies  relating  to  it.  The  only  reply  that 
we  can  look  for  to  the  question  in  ver.  26  is  not,  "  I  on  the 
contrary  do  it,"  but  "  I  did  it."  At  the  same  time,  the  render 
ing  is  a  correct  one  :  "  Behold,  behold  them"  (ilia ;  for  the 
neuter  use  of  the  masculine,  compare  ch.  xlviii.  3,  xxxviii.  16, 
xlv.  8).  "  As  the  first/'  Jehovah  replies  (i.e.  without  any  one 
anticipating  me),  "  have  I  spoken  to  Zion  :  behold,  behold,  there 
it  is,"  pointing  with  the  finger  of  prophecy  to  the  corning  sal 
vation,  which  is  here  regarded  as  present ;  "  and  I  gave  to 
Jerusalem  messengers  of  joy;"  i.e.  long  ago,  before  what  is 
now  approaching  could  be  known  by  any  one,  I  foretold  to  my 
church,  through  the  medium  of  prophets,  the  glad  tidings  of 
the  deliverance  from  Babylon.  If  the  author  of  ch.  xl.-lxvi. 
were  a  prophet  of  the  captivity,  his  reference  here  would  be 
to  such  prophecies  as  Isa.  xi.  11  (where  Shinar  is  mentioned 
as  a  land  of  dispersion),  and  more  especially  still  Mic.  iv.  10, 


CHAP.  XLI.  29.  173 

"  There  in  Babylon  wilt  thou  be  delivered,  there  will  Jehovah 
redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  thine  enemies  ;"  but  if  Isaiah 
were  the  author,  he  is  looking  back  from  the  ideal  standpoint 
of  the  time  of  the  captivity,  and  of  Cyrus  more  especially,  to 
his  own  prophecies  before  the  captivity  (such  as  ch.  xiii.  1-xiv. 
23,  and  xxi.  1-10),  just  as  Ezekiel,  when  prophesying  of  Gog 
and  Mao;og,  looks  back  in  ch.  xxxviii.  17  from  the  ideal  stand 
point  of  this  remote  future,  more  especially  to  his  own  prophe 
cies  in  relation  to  it.  In  that  case  the  mebhasser,  or  evangelist, 
more  especially  referred  to  is  the  prophet  himself  (Grotius 
and  Stier),  namely,  as  being  the  foreteller  of  those  prophets  to 
whom  the  commission  in  ch.  xl.  1,  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye," 
is  addressed,  and  who  are  greeted  in  ch.  lii.  7,  8  as  the  bearers 
of  the  joyful  news  of  the  existing  fulfilment  of  the  deliverance 
that  has  appeared,  and  therefore  as  the  mebhosser  or  evangelist 
of  the  future  DnfettD.  In  any  case,  it  follows  from  vers. 
26,  27  that  the  overthrow  of  Babylon  and  the  redemption  of 
Israel  had  long  before  been  proclaimed  by  Jehovah  through 
His  prophets  ;  and  if  our  exposition  is  correct  so  far,  tho 
futures  in  ver.  28  are  to  be  taken  as  imperfects :  And  I  looked 
round  (^Nl,  a  voluntative  in  the  hypothetical  protasis,  Ges. 
§  128,  2),  and  there  was  no  one  (who  announced  anything  of 
the  kind)  ;  and  of  these  (the  idols)  there  was  no  adviser  (with 
regard  to  the  future,  Num.  xxiv.  14),  and  none  whom  I  could 
ask,  and  who  answered  me  (the  questioner).  Consequently, 
just  as  the  raising  up  of  Cyrus  proclaimed  the  sole  omnipotence 
of  Jehovah,  so  did  the  fact  that  the  deliverance  of  Zion- 
Jerusalem,  for  which  the  raising  up  of  Cyrus  prepared  the 
way,  had  been  predicted  by  Him  long  before,  proclaim  His 
sole  omniscience. 

This  closing  declaration  of  Jehovah  terminates  with  similar 
words  of  wrath  and  contempt  to  those  with  which  the  judicial 
process  ended  in  ver.  24.  Ver.  29.  "  See  them  ally  vanity ; 
nothingness  are  their  productions,  wind  and  desolation  their 
molten  images"  DiTSPJJB  are  not  the  works  of  the  idols,  but,  as 
the  parallel  shows,  the  productions  (plural,  as  in  Ezek.  vi.  6,  Jer. 
i.  16)  of  the  idolaters, — in  other  words,  the  idols  themselves, — 
a  parallel  expression  to  &n*3pJ  (from  ^03,  as  in  ch.  xlviii.  5  = 
massekhdh,  ch.  xlii.  17).  DDK  j)K  is  an  emotional  asyndeton 
(Ges.  §  155,  1,  a).  The  address  is  thus  rounded  off  by  return- 


174  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

ing  to  the  idolaters,  with  whom  it  first  started.  The  first  part, 
vers.  1-24,  contains  the  judicial  pleadings ;  the  second  part, 
vers.  25  sqq.,  recapitulates  the  evidence  and  the  verdict. 

THIRD  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  XLII.  I-XLIII.  13. 
THE  MEDIATOR  OF  ISRAEL  AND  SAVIOUR  OF  THE  GENTILES. 

The  lien  (behold)  in  ch.  xli.  29  is  now  followed  by  a  second 
lien.  With  the  former,  Jehovah  pronounced  sentence  upon  the 
idolaters  and  their  idols ;  with  the  latter,  He  introduces  His 
"  servant."  In  ch.  xli.  8  this  epithet  was  applied  to  the  nation, 
which  had  been  chosen  as  the  servant  and  for  the  service  of 
Jehovah.  But  the  servant  of  Jehovah  who  is  presented  to  us 
here  is  distinct  from  Israel,  and  has  so  strong  an  individuality 
and  such  marked  personal  features,  that  the  expression  cannot 
possibly  be  merely  a  personified  collective.  Nor  can  the  prophet 
himself  be  intended ;  for  what  is  here  affirmed  of  this  servant 
of  Jehovah  goes  infinitely  beyond  anything  to  which  a  prophet 
was  ever  called,  or  of  which  a  man  was  ever  capable.  It  must 
therefore  be  the  future  Christ ;  and  this  is  the  view  taken  in 
the  Targum,  where  the  translation  of  our  prophecy  commences 
thus  :  "  ffd9  'abhdl  MeslilcliaT  Still  there  must  be  a  connection 
between  the  national  sense,  in  which  the  expression  "servant 
of  Jehovah  "  was  used  in  ch.  xli.  8,  and  the  personal  sense  in 
which  it  is  used  here.  The  coming  Saviour  is  not  depicted  as 
the  Son  of  David,  as  in  ch.  vii.-xii.,  and  elsewhere,  but  appears 
as  the  embodied  idea  of  Israel,  i.e.  as  its  truth  and  reality 
embodied  in  one  person.  The  idea  of  "  the  servant  of  Jehovah  " 
assumed,  to  speak  figuratively,  the  form  of  a  pyramid.  The 
base  was  Israel  as  a  whole ;  the  central  section  was  that  Israel, 
which  was  not  merely  Israel  according  to  the  flesh,  but  accord 
ing  to  the  spirit  also  ;  the  apex  is  the  person  of  the  Mediator  of 
salvation  springing  out  of  Israel.  And  the  last  of  the  three  is 
regarded  (1)  as  the  centre  of  the  circle  of  the  promised  king 
dom — the  second  David;  (2)  the  centre  of  the  circle  of  the 
people  of  salvation — the  second  Israel;  (3)  the  centre  of  the 
circle  of  the  human  race — the  second  Adam.  Throughout  the 
whole  of  these  prophecies  in  ch.  xl.— Ixvi.  the  knowledge  of 
salvation  is  still  in  its  second  stage,  and  about  to  pass  into  the 


CHAP.  XLII.  1-3.  175 

tliird.  Israel's  true  nature  as  a  servant  of  God,  which  had  its 
roots  in  the  election  and  calling  of  Jehovah,  and  manifested 
itself  in  conduct  and  action  in  harmony  with  this  calling,  is 
all  concentrated  in  Him,  the  One,  as  its  ripest  fruit.  The 
gracious  purposes  of  God  towards  the  whole  human  race,  which 
were  manifested  even  in  the  election  of  Israel,  are  brought  by 
Him  to  their  full  completion.  Whilst  judgments  are  inflicted 
upon  the  heathen  by  the  oppressor  of  the  nations,  and  display 
the  nothingness  of  idolatry,  the  servant  of  Jehovah  brings  to 
them  in  a  peaceful  way  the  greatest  of  all  blessings.  Ver.  1. 
"  Behold  my  servant,  ivhom  I  uphold;  mine  elect,  whom  my  soul 
loveth :  I  have  laid  my  Spirit  upon  Him ;  He  will  bring  out  right 
to  the  Gentiles."  We  must  not  render  the  first  clause  "  by 
whom  I  hold."  Tdmakli  V  means  to  lay  firm  hold  of  and  keep 
upright  (sustinere).  ^M  nnyi  (supply  u  or  iriN*,  Job  xxxiii.  26) 
is  an  attributive  clause.  The  amplified  subject  extends  as  far 
as  naphshi ;  then  follows  the  predicate:  I  have  endowed  Him 
with  my  Spirit,  and  by  virtue  of  this  Spirit  He  will  carry  out 
mishpdt,  i.e.  absolute  and  therefore  divine  right,  beyond  the 
circle  in  which  He  Himself  is  to  be  found,  even  far  away  to  the 
Gentiles.  Mislipdt  is  the  term  employed  here  to  denote  true 
religion  regarded  on  its  practical  side,  as  the  rule  and  authority 
for  life  in  all  its  relations,  i.e.  religion  as  the  law  of  life,  z/o/xo?. 

The  prophet  then  proceeds  to  describe  how  the  servant  of 
Jehovah  will  manifest  Himself  in  the  world  outside  Israel  by 
the  promulgation  of  this  right.  Ver.  2.  "  He  will  not  cry,  nor 
lift  up,  nor  cause  to  be  heard  in  the  street,  His  voice."  u  His 
voice"  is  the  object  of  "lift  up,"  as  well  as  "cause  to  be  heard." 
With  our  existing  division  of  the  verse,  it  must  at  least  be  sup 
plied  in  thought.  Although  he  is  certain  of  His  divine  call, 
and  brings  to  the  nations  the  highest  and  best,  His  manner  of 
appearing  is  nevertheless  quiet,  gentle,  and  humble ;  the  very 
opposite  of  those  lying  teachers,  who  endeavoured  to  exalt 
themselves  by  noisy  demonstrations.  He  does  not  seek  His 
own,  and  therefore  denies  Himself  ;  He  brings  what  commends 
itself,  and  therefore  requires  no  forced  trumpeting. 

With  this  unassuming  appearance  there  is  associated  a 
tender  pastoral  care.  Ver.  3.  "A  bruised  reed  He  does  not 
brea.k,  and  a  glimmering  wick  He  does  not  put  out :  according  to 
truth  Pie  brings  out  riglit"  "  Bruised :  "  rdtsuts  signifies  here, 


176  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

as  in  ch.  xxxvi.  6,  what  is  cracked,  and  therefore  half-broken 
already.  Glimmering :  keheh  (a  form  indicative  of  defects, 
like  "tt.V),  that  which  is  burning  feebly,  and  very  nearly  ex 
tinguished.  Tertullian  understands  by  the  "  bruised  reed " 
(arundinem  contusam)  the  faith  of  Israel,  and  by  the  "  glim 
mering  wick"  (liniim  ardens)  the  momentary  zeal  of  the 
Gentiles.  But  the  words  hardly  admit  of  this  distinction  ;  the 
reference  is  rather  a  general  one,  to  those  whose  inner  and  outer 
life  is  only  hanging  by  a  slender  thread.  In  the  statement 
that  in  such  a  case  as  this  He  does  not  completely  break  or  ex 
tinguish,  there  is  more  implied  than  is  really  expressed.  Not 
only  will  He  not  destroy  the  life  that  is  dying  out,  but  He  will 
actually  save  it ;  His  course  is  not  to  destroy,  but  to  save.  If 
we  explain  the  words  that  follow  as  meaning,  "He  will  carry 
out  right  to  truth,"  i.e.  to  its  fullest  efficacy  and  permanence 
(LXX.  e^9  aXtfOeiav,  instead  of  which  we  find  et?  vl/cos,  "unto 
victory,"  in  Matt.  xii.  20,1  as  if  the  reading  were  nvA,  as  in 
Hab.  i.  4),  the  connection  between  the  first  and  last  clauses  of 
ver.  3  is  a  very  loose  one.  It  becomes  much  closer  if  we  take 
the  7  as  indicating  the  standard,  as  in  ch.  xi.  3  and  xxxii.  1, 
and  adopt  the  rendering  "according  to  truth"  (Hitzig  and 
Knobel).  It  is  on  its  subjective  and  practical  side  that  truth 
is  referred  to  here,  viz.  as  denoting  such  a  knowledge,  and 
acknowledgment  of  the  true  facts  in  the  complicated  affairs  of 
men,  as  will  promote  both  equity  and  kindness. 

The  figures  in  ver.  3a  now  lead  to  the  thought  that  the 
servant  of  God  will  never  be  extinguished  or  become  broken 
Himself.  Ver.  4.  "  He  will  not  become  faint  or  broken,  till  He 
establish  right  upon  earth,  and  the  islands  wait  for  His  instruc 
tion"  As  nrDI  (become  faint)  points  back  to  nnD  ring's  (the 
faint  or  glimmering  wick),  so  fnj  must  point  back  to  p^n  njp 
(the  bruised  or  broken  reed) ;  it  cannot  therefore  be  derived 
from  pn  (to  run)  in  the  sense  of  "  He  will  not  be  rash  or  impe 
tuous,  but  execute  His  calling  with  wise  moderation,"  as  Heng- 
stenberg  supposes,  but  as  in  Eccles.  xii.  6,  from  TTJ^P^  (Ges. 
§  67,  Anm.  9),  in  the  neuter  sense  of  infringetur  (will  break). 
His  zeal  will  not  be  extinguished,  nor  will  anything  break  His 
strength,  till  He  shall  have  secured  for  right  a  firm  standing  on 
the  earth  (D'B*  is  a  fut.  ex.  so  far  as  the  meaning  is  concerned, 
1  "Ad  victor  lam  enim  xpio-iy  per  ducit  qui  ad  veritatem  perducit." — ANGER. 


CHAP.  XLII.  5-7.  177 

like  W?y  in  cli.  x.  12).  The  question  arises  now,  whether  what 
follows  is  also  governed  by  "W,  in  the  sense  of  "  and  until  the 
islands  shall  have  believed  his  instruction,"  as  Hitzig  supposes ; 
or  whether  it  is  an  independent  sentence,  as  rendered  by  the 
LXX.  and  in  Matt.  xii.  21.  We  prefer  the  latter,  both 
because  of  ch.  li.  5,  and  also  because,  although  'n  "131?  7W  may 
certainly  mean  to  exercise  a  believing  confidence  in  the  word 
of  God  (Ps.  cxix.  74,  81),  1rn1r6  iw  can  only  mean  "to  wait 
with  longing  for  a  person's  instruction"  (Job  xxix.  23),  and 
especially  in  this  case,  where  no  thought  is  more  naturally  sug 
gested,  than  that  the  messenger  to  the  Gentile  world  will  be 
welcomed  by  a  consciousness  of  need  already  existing  in  the 
heathen  world  itself.  There  is  a  gratia  prceparans  at  work  in 
the  Gentile  world,  as  these  prophecies  all  presuppose,  in  perfect 
harmony  with  the  Gospel  of  John,  with  which  they  have  so 
much  affinity;  and  it  is  an  actual  fact,  that  the  cry  for  redemp 
tion  runs  through  the  whole  human  race,  i.e.  an  earnest  longing, 
the  ultimate  object  of  which,  however  unconsciously,  is  the  ser 
vant  of  Jehovah  and  his  instruction  from  Zion  (ch.  ii.  3), — in 
other  words,  the  gospel. 

The  words  of  Jehovah  are  now  addressed  to  His  servant 
himself.  He  has  not  only  an  exalted  vocation,  answering  to 
the  infinite  exaltation  of  Him  from  whom  he  has  received  his 
call ;  but  by  virtue  of  the  infinite  might  of  the  caller,  he  may 
be  well  assured  that  he  will  never  be  wanting  in  power  to 
execute  his  calling.  Yers.  5-7.  "  Thus  saith  God,  Jehovah, 
who  created  the  heavens,  and  stretched  them  out ;  who  spread  the 
earth,  and  its  productions ;  who  gave  the  spirit  of  life  to  the  people 
upon  it,  and  the  breath  of  life  to  them  that  walk  upon  it :  I, 
Jehovah,  I  have  called  thee  in  righteousness,  and  grasped  thy 
hand;  and  I  keep  thee,  and  make  thee  the  covenant  of  the  people, 
the  light  of  the  Gentiles,  to  open  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  prisoners 
out  of  the  -prison,  them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison- 
house."  The  perfect  'dinar  is  to  be  explained  on  the  ground 
that  the  words  of  God,  as  compared  with  the  prophecy  which 
announces  them,  are  always  the  earlier  of  the  two.  !wn  (the 
absolutely  Mighty)  is  an  anticipatory  apposition  to  Jehovah 
(Ges.  §  113**).  The  attributive  participles  we  have  resolved 
into  perfects,  because  the  three  first  at  least  declare  facts  of 
creation,  which  have  occurred  once  for  all.  D^Bto  is  not  to  be 

VOL.  II.  M 


178  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

regarded  as  a  plural,  after  ch.  liv.  5  and  Job  xxxv.  10 ;  but  as 
Km  precedes  it,  we  may  take  it  as  a  singular  with  an  original 
quiescent  Yod,  after  ch.  v.  12,  xxii.  11,  xxvi.  12  (cf.  vol.  i.  p.  108). 
On  V\T\  (construct  of  Vfi),  see  ch.  xl.  19.  The  1  of  n^'Stt  (a 
word  found  both  in  Job  and  Isaiah,  used  here  in  its  most  direct 
sense,  to  signify  the  vegetable  world)  must  be  taken  in  accord 
ance  with  the  sense,  as  the  Vav  of  appurtenance ;  since  JJpi 
may  be  affirmed  of  the  globe  itself,  but  not  of  the  vegetable 
productions  upon  it  (cf.  Gen.  iv.  20 ;  Judg.  vi.  5  ;  2  Chron. 
ii.  3).  Nes7idmdh  and  ruach  are  epithets  applied  to  the  divine 
principle  of  life  in  all  created  corporeal  beings,  or,  what  is  the 
same  thing,  in  all  beings  with  living  souls.  At  the  same  time, 
nesMmdh  is  an  epithet  restricted  to  the  self-conscious  spirit  of 
man,  which  gives  him  his  personality  (Psychol.  p.  76,  etc.)  ; 
whereas  ruach  is  applied  not  only  to  the  human  spirit,  but  to 
the  spirit  of  the  beast  as  well.  Accordingly,  Dy  signifies  the 
human  race,  as  in  ch.  xl.  7.  What  is  it,  then,  that  Jehovah, 
the  Author  of  all  being  and  all  life,  the  Creator  of  the  heaven 
and  the  earth,  says  to  His  servant  here?  u  I  Jehovah  have 
called  thee  '  in  righteousness' "  (betsedeq  :  cf.  ch.  xlv.  13,  where 
Jehovah  also  says  of  Cyrus,  "  I  have  raised  him  up  in  right 
eousness").  p"iv,  derived  from  Ply,  to  be  rigid,  straight,  denotes 
the  observance  of  a  fixed  rule.  The  righteousness  of  God  is 
the  stringency  with  which  He  acts,  in  accordance  with  the  will 
of  His  holiness.  This  will  of  holiness  is,  so  far  as  the  human 
race  is  concerned,  and  apart  from  the  counsels  of  salvation,  a 
will  of  wrath  ;  but  from  the  standpoint  of  these  counsels  it  is 
a  will  of  love,  which  is  only  changed  into  a  will  of  wrath 
towards  those  who  despise  the  grace  thus  offered  to  them. 
Accordingly,  tsedeq  denotes  the  action  of  God  in  accordance 
with  His  purposes  of  love  and  the  plan  of  salvation.  It  sig 
nifies  just  the  same  as  what  we  should  call  in  New  Testament 
phraseology  the  holy  love  of  God,  which,  because  it  is  a  holy 
love,  has  wrath  against  its  despisers  as  its  obverse  side,  but 
which  acts  towards  men  not  according  to  the  law  of  works, 
but  according  to  the  law  of  grace.  The  word  has  this  evan 
gelical  sense  here,  where  Jehovah  says  of  the  Mediator  of  His 
counsels  of  love,  that  He  has  called  Him  in  strict  adherence  to 
the  will  of  His  love,  which  will  show  mercy  as  right,  but  at 
the  same  time  will  manifest  a  right  of  double  severity  towards 


CHAP.  XLII.  5-7.  179 

tliose  who  scornfully  repel  the  offered  mercy.  That  He  had 
been  called  in  righteousness,  is  attested  to  the  servant  of  Je 
hovah  by  the  fact  that  Jehovah  has  taken  Him  by  the  hand 
(Pins'!  contracted  after  the  manner  of  a  future  of  sequence), 
and  guards  Him,  and  appoints  Him  D^3  "&6  DJ>  nnrA.  These 
words  are  a  decisive  proof  that  the  idea  of  the  expression 
"  servant  of  Jehovah"  has  been  elevated  in  ch.  xlii.  1  sqq.,  as 
compared  with  ch.  xli.  8,  from  the  national  base  to  the  personal 
apex.  Adherence  to  the  national  sense  necessarily  compels  a 
resort  to  artifices  which  carry  their  own  condemnation,  such  as 
that  Dy  ms  signifies  the  "  covenant  nation,"  as  Hitzig  sup 
poses,  or  "  the  mediating  nation,"  as  Ewald  maintains,  whereas 
either  of  these  would  require  ma  Dj; ;  or  "  national  covenant" 
(Knobel),  in  support  of  which  we  are  referred,  though  quite 
inconclusively,  to  Dan.  xi.  28,  where  BHp  nna  does  not  mean 
the  covenant  of  the  patriots  among  themselves,  but  the  cove 
nant  religion,  with  its  distinctive  sign,  circumcision  ;  or  even 
that  DJJ  is  collective,  and  equivalent  to  D'Dy  (Rosenmiiller), 
whereas  Dy  and  DSU,  when  standing  side  by  side,  as  they  do 
here,  can  only  mean  Israel  and  the  Gentiles ;  and  so  far  as  the 
passage  before  us  is  concerned,  this  is  put  beyond  all  doubt  by 
ch.  xlix.  8  (cf.  ver.  6).  An  unprejudiced  commentator  must 
admit  that  the  "  servant  of  Jehovah"  is  pointed  out  here,  as 
He  in  whom  and  through  whom  Jehovah  concludes  a  new 
covenant  with  His  people,  in  the  place  of  the  old  covenant 
that  was  broken, — namely,  the  covenant  promised  in  ch.  liv.  10, 
Ixi.  8,  Jer.  xxxi.  31-34,  Ezek.  xvi.  60  sqq.  The  mediator  of 
this  covenant  with  Israel  cannot  be  Israel  itself,  not  even  the 
true  Israel,  as  distinguished  from  the  mass  (where  do  we  read 
anything  of  this  kind  ?)  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  remnant  left 
after  the  sweeping  away  of  the  mass  is  the  object  of  this  cove 
nant.1  Nor  can  the  expression  refer  to  the  prophets  as  a  body, 
or,  in  fact,  have  any  collective  meaning  at  all :  the  form  of  the 

1  This  is  equally  applicable  to  V.  F.  Oehler  (Der  Kneclit  JeTiova's  ini 
De  uter  ojesaia,  2  Theile,  1865),  who  takes  the  "  servant  of  Jehovah"  as 
far  as  ch.  lii.  14  in  a  national  sense,  and  supposes  "  the  transition  from 
the  'servant'  as  a  collective  noun,  to  the  ' servant'  as  an  individual,"  to  be 
effected  there  ;  whereas  two  younger  theologians,  E.  Schmutz  (Le  Serviteur 
de  Jehova,  1858)  and  Ferd.  Philippi  (Die  bibl  Lelire  mm  Knechte  Gottes, 
18G4),  admit  that  the  individualizing  commences  as  early  as  ch.  xlii.  1. 


180  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

word,  which  is  so  strongly  personal,  is  in  itself  opposed  to  this. 
It  cannot,  in  fact,  denote  any  other  than  that  Prophet  who  is 
more  than  a  prophet,  namely,  Malachi's  "  Messenger  of  the 
covenant"  (ch.  ill.  1).  Amongst  those  who  suppose  that  the 
"  servant  of  Jehovah"  is  either  Israel,  regarded  in  the  light  of 
its  prophetic  calling,  or  the  prophets  as  a  body,  Umbreit  at  any 
rate  is  obliged  to  admit  that  this  collective  body  is  looked  at 
here  in  the  ideal  unity  of  one  single  Messianic  personality ;  and 
he  adds,  that  "  in  the  holy  countenance  of  this  prophet,  which 
shines  forth  as  the  ideal  of  future  realization,  we  discern 
exactly  the  loved  features  of  Him  to  whom  all  prophecy  points, 
and  who  saw  Himself  therein."  This  is  very  beautiful ;  but 
why  this  roundabout  course  f  Let  us  bear  in  mind,  that  the 
servant  of  Jehovah  appears  here  not  only  as  one  who  is  the 
medium  of  a  covenant  to  the  nation,  arid  of  light  to  the  Gen 
tiles,  but  as  being  himself  the  people's  covenant  and  heathen's 
light,  inasmuch  as  in  his  own  person  he  is  the  band  of  a  new 
fellowship  between  Israel  and  Jehovah,  and  becomes  in  his  own 
person  the  light  which  illumines  the  dark  heathen  world.  This 
is  surely  more  than  could  be  affirmed  of  any  prophet,  even  of 
Isaiah  or  Jeremiah.  Hence  the  "  servant  of  Jehovah"  must 
be  that  one  Person  who  was  the  goal  and  culminating  point 
to  which,  from  the  very  first,  the  history  of  Israel  was  ever 
pressing  on  ;  that  One  who  throws  into  the  shade  not  only  all 
that  prophets  did  before,  but  all  that  had  been  ever  done  by 
Israel's  priests  or  kings  ;  that  One  who  arose  out  of  Israel,  for 
Israel  and  the  whole  human  race,  and  who  stood  in  the  same 
relation  not  only  to  the  wider  circle  of  the  whole  nation,  but 
also  to  the  inner  circle  of  the  best  and  noblest  within  it,  as  the 
heart  to  the  body  which  it  animates,  or  the  head  to  the  body 
over  which  it  rules.  All  that  Cyrus  did,  was  simply  to  throw 
the  idolatrous  nations  into  a  state  of  alarm,  and  set  the  exiles 
free.  But  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  opens  blind  eyes ;  and 
therefore  the  deliverance  which  He  brings  is  not  only  redemp 
tion  from  bodily  captivity,  but  from  spiritual  bondage  also. 
He  leads  His  people  (cf.  ch.  xlix.  3,  9),  and  the  Gentiles  also, 
out  of  night  into  light ;  He  is  the  Redeemer  of  all  that  need 
redemption  and  desire  salvation. 

Jehovah  pledges  His  name  and  honour  that  this  work  of 
the  Servant  of  Jehovah  will  be  carried  into  effect.     Ver.  8.  "  1 


CHAP.  XLII.  8-13.  181 

am  Jehovah;  that  is  my  name,  and  my  glory  I  give  not  to  another, 
nor  mil  renown  to  idols"  That  is  His  name,  which  affirms  how 
truly  He  stands  alone  in  His  nature,  and  recals  to  mind  the 
manifestations  of  His  life,  His  power,  and  His  grace  from  the 
very  earliest  times  (cf.  Ex.  iii.  15).  He  to  whom  this  name 
belongs  cannot  permit  the  honour  due  to  Him  to  be  perma 
nently  transferred  to  sham  gods.  He  has  therefore  made  pre 
parations  for  putting  an  end  to  idolatry.  Cyrus  does  this 
provisionally  by  the  tempestuous  force  of  arms ;  and  the  Ser 
vant  of  Jehovah  completes  it  by  the  spiritual  force  of  His 
simple  word,  and  of  His  gentle,  unselfish  love. 

First  the  overthrow  of  idolatry,  then  the  restoration  of 
Israel  and  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  :  this  is  the  double  work 
of  Jehovah's  zeal  which  is  already  in  progress.  Ver.  9.  "  The 
first,  behold,  is  come  to  pass,  and  new  things  am  I  proclaiming ; 
before  it  springs  up,  I  let  you  hear  it"  The  "  first  "  is  the  rise 
of  Cyrus,  and  the  agitation  of  the  nations  which  it  occasioned, 
— events  which  not  only  formed  the  starting-point  of  the  pro 
phecy  in  these  addresses,  whether  the  captivity  was  the  pro 
phet's  historical  or  ideal  standpoint,  but  which  had  no  less 
force  in  themselves,  as  the  connection  between  the  first  and 
second  halves  of  the  verse  before  us  imply,  as  events  both 
foreknown  and  distinctly  foretold  by  Jehovah.  The  "  new 
things  "  which  Jehovah  now  foretells  before  their  visible  deve 
lopment  (ch.  xliii.  19),  are  the  restoration  of  Israel,  for  which 
the  defeat  of  their  oppressors  prepares  the  way,  and  the  con 
version  of  the  heathen,  to  which  an  impulse  is  given  by  the 
fact  that  God  thus  glorifies  Himself  in  His  people. 

The  prediction  of  these  "  new  things,"  which  now  follows, 
looks  away  from  all  human  mediation.  They  are  manifestly 
the  work  of  Jehovah  Himself,  and  consist  primarily  in  the 
subjugation  of  His  enemies,  who  are  holding  His  people  in 
captivity.  Vers.  10-13.  "  Sing  ye  to  Jehovah  a  new  song, 
His  praise  from  the  end  of  the  earth,  ye  navigators  of  the  sea, 
and  its  fulness ;  ye  islands,  and  their  inhabitants.  Let  the 
desert  and  the  cities  thereof  strike  up,  the  villages  that  Kedar 
doth  inhabit ;  the  inhabitants  of  the  rock-city  may  rejoice,  shout 
from  the  summits  of  the  mountains.  Let  them  give  glory  to 
Jehovah,  and  proclaim  His  praise  in  the  islands.  Jehovah,  like 
a  hero  will  He  go  forth,  kindle  jealousy  like  a  man  of  war ;  He 


182  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

will  break  fortli  into  a  war-cry,  a  yelling  war-cry,  prove  Himself 
a  hero  upon  His  enemies"  The  "new  things"  furnish  the 
impulse  and  materials  of  "  a  new  song,"  such  as  had  never 
been  heard  in  the  heathen  world  before.  This  whole  group  of 
verses  is  like  a  variation  of  ch.  xxiv.  14,  15.  The  standing- 

7  C5 

place,  whence  the  summons  is  uttered,  is  apparently  Ezion- 
geler,  at  the  head  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf,  that  seaport  town 
from  which  in  the  time  of  the  kings  the  news  of  the  nations 
reached  the  Holy  Land  through  the  extensive  commerce  of 
Israel.  From  this  point  the  eye  stretches  to  the  utmost  circle 
of  the  earth,  and  then  returns  from  the  point  where  it  meets 
with  those  who  "  go  down  to  the  sea,"  i.e.  who  navigate  the 
ocean  which  lies  lower  than  the  solid  ground.  These  are  to 
sing,  and  everything  that  lives  and  moves  in  the  sea  is  to  join 
in  the  sailors'  song.  The  islands  and  coast  lands,  that  are 
washed  by  the  sea,  are  likewise  to  sing  together  with  their 
inhabitants.  After  the  summons  has  drawn  these  into  the  net 
of  the  song  of  praise,  it  moves  into  the  heart  of  the  land.  The 
desert  and  its  cities  are  to  lift  up  (viz.  "  their  voice "),  the 
villages  which  Kedar  inhabits.  The  reference  to  Sela,  the 
rock-city  of  Edomitish  Xabatsea,  which  is  also  mentioned  in 
ch.  xvi.  1  (the  Wadi  Musa,  which  is  still  celebrated  for  its 
splendid  ruins),  shows  by  way  of  example  what  cities  are  in 
tended.  Their  inhabitants  are  to  ascend  the  steep  mountains 
by  which  the  city  is  surrounded,  and  to  raise  a  joyful  cry 
(yitsvdchic,  to  cry  out  with  a  loud  noise  ;  cf.  ch.  xxiv.  11). 
Along  with  the  inhabitants  of  cities,  the  stationary  Arabs,  who 
are  still  called  Hadariye  in  distinction  from  Wabariye,  the 
Arabs  of  the  tents,  are  also  summoned ;  hadar  (chdtser)  is  a 
fixed  abode,  in  contrast  to  bedu,  the  steppe,  where  the  tents  are 
pitched  for  a  short  time,  now  in  one  place  and  now  in  another. 
In  ver.  12  the  summons  becomes  more  general.  The  subject 
is  the  heathen  universally  and  in  every  place ;  they  are  to  give 
Jehovah  the  glory  (Ps.  Ixvi.  2),  and  declare  His  praise  upon 
the  islands,  i.e.  to  the  remotest  ends  of  the  whole  world  of 
nations.  In  ver.  13  there  follows  the  reason  for  this  summons, 
and  the  theme  of  the  new  song  in  honour  of  the  God  of  Israel, 
viz.  His  victory  over  His  enemies,  the  enemies  of  His  people. 
The  description  is  anthropomorphically  dazzling  and  bold,  such 
as  the  self-assurance  and  vividness  of  the  Israelitish  idea  of 


CHAP.  XLII.  14.  183 

God  permitted,  without  any  danger  of  misunderstanding. 
Jehovah  goes  out  into  the  conflict  like  a  hero;  and  like  a  "man 
of  war,"  i.e.  like  one  who  has  already  fought  many  battles,  and 
is  therefore  ready  for  war,  and  well  versed  in  warfare,  He  stirs 
up  jealousy  (see  at  ch.  ix.  6).  His  jealousy  has  slumbered  as 
it  were  for  a  long  time,  as  if  smouldering  under  the  ashes ;  but 
now  He  stirs  it  up,  i.e.  makes  it  burn  up  into  a  bright  flame. 
Going  forward  to  the  attack,  JTTT?  "  He  breaks  out  into  a  cry," 
C^IV-"5)^  "yea>  a  ye^n'ng  cry  "  (kal  Zeph.  i.  14,  to  cry  with  a 
yell ;  hiphil,  to  utter  a  yelling  cry).  In  the  words,  "  He  will 
show  Himself  as  a  hero  upon  His  enemies,"  we  see  Him  already 
engaged  in  the  battle  itself,  in  which  He  proves  Himself  to 
possess  the  strength  and  boldness  of  a  hero  (Jiithgabbar  only 
occurs  again  in  the  book  of  Job).  The  overthrow  which 

heathenism  here  suffers  at  the  hand  of  Jehovah  is,  according 

7  o 

to  our  prophet's  view,  the  final  and  decisive  one.  The  re 
demption  of  Israel,  which  is  thus  about  to  appear,  is  redemption 
from  the  punishment  of  captivity,  and  at  the  same  time  from 
all  the  troubles  that  arise  from  sin.  The  period  following  the 
captivity  and  the  New  Testament  times  here  flow  into  one. 

The  period  of  punishment  has  now  lasted  sufficiently  long  ; 
it  is  time  for  Jehovah  to  bring  forth  the  salvation  of  His 
people.  Ver.  14.  "  /  have  been  silent  eternally  long,  was  still, 
restrained  myself ;  like  a  travailing  woman,  I  now  breathe  again, 
snort  and  snuff  together."  The  standpoint  of  these  prophecies 
has  the  larger  half  of  the  captivity  behind  it.  It  has  already 
lasted  a  long  time,  though  only  for  several  decades  ;  but  in  the 
estimation  of  Jehovah,  with  His  love  to  His  people,  this  time  of 
long-suffering  towards  their  oppressors  is  already  an  "  eternity" 
(see  ch.  Ivii.  11,  Iviii.  12,  Ixi.  4,  Ixiii.  18,  19,  Ixiv.  4,  cf.  vers. 
10,  11).  He  has  kept  silence,  has  still  forcibly  restrained 
Himself,  just  as  Joseph  is  said  to  have  done  to  prevent  himself 
from  breaking  out  into  tears  (Gen.  xliii.  31).  Love  impelled 
Him  to  redeem  His  people ;  but  justice  was  still  obliged  to  pro 
ceed  with  punishment. 

Three  real  futures  now  take  the  place  of  imperfects  regu 
lated  by  W^JJJJi  They  are  not  to  be  understood  as  denoting 
the  violent  breathing  and  snorting  of  a  hero,  burning  with 
rage  and  thirsting  for  battle  (Knobel)  ;  nor  is  Dtf  N  to  be  derived 
from  D£^,  as  Hitzig  supposes,  through  a  mistaken  comparison 


184  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  Ezjk.  xxxvi.  3,  though  the  latter  does  not  mean  to  lay 
waste,  but  to  be  waste  (see  Hitzig  on  Ezek.  xxxvi.  3).  The 
true  derivation  is  from  DKO,  related  to  *]B>J,  K;3J,  3JW.  To  the 
figure  of  a  hero  there  is  now  added  that  of  a  travailing  woman; 
!"U?3  is  short  breathing  (with  the  glottis  closed) ;  D^J  the  snort 
ing  of  violent  inspiration  and  expiration  ;  t\#W  the  earnest 
longing  for  deliverance  pressing  upon  the  burden  in  the  womb ; 
and  irp  expresses  the  combination  of  all  these  several  strainings 
of  the  breath,  which  are  associated  with  the  so-called  labour- 
pains.  Some  great  thing,  with  which  Jehovah  has,  as  it  were, 
long  been  pregnant,  is  now  about  to  be  born. 

The  delivery  takes  place,  and  the  whole  world  of  nature 
undergoes  a  metamorphosis,  which  is  subservient  to  the  great 
work  of  the  future.  Ver.  15.  "  I  make  waste  mountains  and 
hills,  and  all  their  herbage  I  dry  up,  and  change  streams  into 
islands,  and  lakes  I  dry  up."  Here  is  another  example  of 
Isaiah's  favourite  palindromy,  as  Nitzsch  calls  this  return  to  a 
word  that  has  been  used  before,  or  linking  on  the  close  of  a 
period  to  its  commencement  (see  p.  134).  Jehovah's  panting  in 
labour  is  His  almighty  fiery  breath,  which  turns  mountains  and 
hills  into  heaps  of  ruins,  scorches  up  the  vegetation,  condenses 
streams  into  islands,  and  dries  up  the  lakes ;  that  is  to  say, 
turns  the  strange  land,  in  which  Israel  has  been  held  captive, 
into  a  desert,  and  at  the  same  time  removes  all  the  hindrances 
to  His  people's  return,  thus  changing  the  present  condition  of 
the  world  into  one  of  the  very  opposite  kind,  which  displays 
His  righteousness  in  wrath  and  love. 

The  great  thing  which  is  brought  to  pass  by  means  of  this 
catastrophe  is  the  redemption  of  His  people.  Ver.  16.  "And 
I  lead  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they  knoiv  not ;  ly  steps  that  they 
know  not,  I  make  them  ivalk  :  I  turn  dark  space  before  them  into 
light,  and  rugged  places  into  a  plain.  Tliese  are  the  things  that 
I  carry  out,  and  do  not  leave"  The  "  blind  "  are  those  who 
have  been  deprived  of  sight  by  their  sin,  and  the  consequent 
punishment.  The  unknown  ways  in  which  Jehovah  leads 
them,  are  the  ways  of  deliverance,  which  are  known  to  Him 
alone,  but  which  have  now  been  made  manifest  in  the  fulness 
of  time.  The  "  dark  space  "  (machshdk)  is  their  existing  state 
of  hopeless  misery;  the  "  rugged  places"  (ma  aqasshim)  the 
hindrances  that  met  them,  and  dangers  that  threatened  them 


CHAP.  XLII.  17-19.  185 

on  all  sides  in  the  foreign  land.  The  mercy  of  Jehovah  adopts 
the  blind,  lights  up  the  darkness,  and  clears  every  obstacle 
away.  "  These  are  the  things  "  (liaddebhdnni}  :  this  refers  to 
the  particulars  already  sketched  out  of  the  double  manifestation 
of  Jehovah  in  judgment  and  in  mercy.  The  perfects  of  the 
attributive  clause  are  perfects  of  certainty. 

In  connection  with  this,  the  following  verse  declares  what 

*  O 

effect  this  double  manifestation  will  produce  among  the  heathen. 
Ver.  17.  "  They  fall  back,  are  put  deeply  to  shame,  that  trust  in 
molten  images,  that  say  to  the  molten  image,  Thou  art  our  God" 
Bosheth  takes  the  place  of  an  inf.  intens.  ;  cf.  Hab.  iii.  9. 
Jehovah's  glorious  acts  of  judgment  and  salvation  unmask  the 
false  gods,  to  the  utter  confusion  of  their  worshippers.  And 
whilst  in  this  way  the  false  religions  fall,  the  redemption  of  Israel 
becomes  at  the  same  time  the  redemption  of  the  heathen.  The 
first  half  of  this  third  prophecy  is  here  brought  to  a  close. 

The  thought  which  connects  the  second  half  with  the  first 
is  to  be  found  in  the  expression  in  ver,  16,  "I  will  bring  the 
blind  by  a  way."  It  is  the  blind  whom  Jehovah  will  lead  into 
the  light  of  liberty,  the  blind  who  bring  upon  themselves  not 
only  His  compassion,  but  also  His  displeasure  ;  for  it  is  their 
own  fault  that  they  do  not  see.  And  to  them  is  addressed  the 
summons,  to  free  themselves  from  the  ban  which  is  resting 
upon  them.  Yer.  18.  "  Ye  deaf,  hear;  and  ye  blind,  look  up, 
that  ye,  may  see"  B'cnnn  and  E'HWn  (this  is  the  proper  pointing, 
according  to  the  codd.  and  the  Masora1)  are  vocatives.  The 
relation  in  which  t^lin  and  n&o  stand  to  one  another  is  that  of 
design  and  accomplishment  (ch.  Ixiii.  15,  Job  xxxv.  5,  2  Kings 
iii.  14,  etc.)  ;  and  they  are  used  interchangeably  with  V0"y  H£3 
and  nx~j  (e.g.  2  Kings  xix.  16),  which  also  stand  in  the  same 
relation  of  design  and  result. 

The  next  verse  states  who  these  self-willed  deaf  and  blind 
are,  and  how  necessary  this  arousing  was.  Yer.  19.  "  Who  is 
Hind,  but  my  servant  ?  and  deaf,  as  my  messenger  whom  I  send  ? 
who  blind  as  the  confidant  of  God,  and  blind  as  the  servant  of 
Jehovah  ?"  The  first-  double  question  implies  that  Jehovah's 
servant  and  messenger  is  blind  and  deaf  in  a  singular  and  un- 


1  The  Masora    observes   expressly  jTJDDI    pai    j^JDD          omnes   cxci 
raphati  et  pathachati  ;  but  our  editions  have  both  here  and  in  2  Sam.  v.  6,  8, 


186  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

paralleled  way.  The  words  are  repeated,  the  questioner  dwell 
ing  upon  the  one  predicate  rwvSr9  "  blind,"  in  which  every 
thing  is  affirmed,  and,  according  to  Isaiah's  favourite  custom, 
returning  palindromically  to  the  opening  expression  "  servant 
of  Jehovah"  (cf.  ch.  xl.  19,  xlii.  15,  and  many  other  passages). 
D?B>»  does  not  mean  "  the  perfect  one,"  as  Vitringa  renders  it, 
nor  "  the  paid,  i.e.  purchased  one,"  as  Rosenmiiller  supposes, 
but  one  allied  in  peace  and  friendship,  the  confidant  of  God. 
It  is  the  passive  of  the  Arabic  muslim,  one  who  trusts  in  God 
(compare  the  Jwphal  in  Job  v.  23).  It  is  impossible  to  read 
the  expression,  "  My  messenger  whom  I  send,"  without  thinking 
of  ch.  xlii.  1  sqq.,  where  the  "servant  of  Jehovah"  is  repre 
sented  as  a  messenger  to  the  heathen.  (Jerome  is  wrong  in 
following  the  Jewish  commentators,  and  adopting  the  render 
ing,  ad  quern  nuntios  meos  misi.)  With  this  similarity  both  of 
name  and  calling,  there  must  be  a  connection  between  the 
"  servant"  mentioned  here,  and  the  a  servant"  referred  to  there. 
Now  the  "  servant  of  Jehovah"  is  always  Israel.  But  since 
Israel  might  be  regarded  either  according  to  the  character  of 
the  overwhelming  majority  of  its  members  (the  mass),  who 
had  forgotten  their  calling,  or  according  to  the  character  of 
those  living  members  who  had  remained  true  to  their  calling, 
and  constituted  the  kernel,  or  as  concentrated  in  that  one 
Person  who  is  the  essence  of  Israel  in  the  fullest  truth  and 
highest  potency,  statements  of  the  most  opposite  kind  could 
be  made  with  respect  to  this  one  homonymous  subject.  In  ch. 
xli.  8  sqq.  the  "servant  of  Jehovah"  is  caressed  and  com 
forted,  inasmuch  as  there  the  true  Israel,  which  deserved  and 
needed  consolation,  is  addressed,  without  regard  to  the  mass 
who  had  forgotten  their  calling.  In  ch.  xlii.  1  sqq.  that  One 
person  is  referred  to,  who  is,  as  it  were,  the  centre  of  this  inner 
circle  of  Israel,  and  the  head  upon  the  body  of  Israel.  And  in 
the  passage  before  us,  the  idea  is  carried  from  this  its  highest 
point  back  again  to  its  lowest  basis;  and  the  servant  of  Jehovah 
is  blamed  and  reproved  for  the  harsh  contrast  between  its 
actual  conduct  and  its  divine  calling,  between  the  reality  and 
the  idea.  As  we  proceed,  we  shall  meet  again  with  the  "  ser 
vant  of  Jehovah"  in  the  same  systole  and  diastole.  The  ex 
pression  covers  two  concentric  circles,  and  their  one  centre. 
The  inner  circle  of  the  "  Israel  according  to  the  Spirit"  forms 


CHAP.  XLIL  20-22.  187 

the  connecting  link  between  Israel  in  its  widest  sense,  and 
Israel  in  a  personal  sense.  Here  indeed  Israel  is  severely 
blamed  as  incapable,  and  unworthy  of  fulfilling  its  sacred 
calling  ;  but  the  expression  "  whom  I  send  "  nevertheless 
affirms  that  it  will  fulfil  it, — namely,  in  the  person  of  the  ser 
vant  of  Jehovah,  and  in  all  those  members  of  the  "  servant  of 
Jehovah"  in  a  national  sense,  who  long  for  deliverance  from 
the  ban  and  bonds  of  the  present  state  of  punishment  (see  ch. 
xxix.  18).  For  it  is  really  the  mission  of  Israel  to  be  the 
medium  of  salvation  and  blessing  to  the  nations ;  and  this  is 
fulfilled  by  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  who  proceeds  from  Israel, 
and  takes  his  place  at  the  head  of  Israel.  And  as  the  history 
of  the  fulfilment  shows,  when  the  foundation  for  the  accom 
plishment  of  this  mission  had  been  laid  by  the  servant  of 
Jehovah  in  person,  it  was  carried  on  by  the  servant  of  Jehovah 
in  a  national  sense ;  for  the  Lord  became  "  a  covenant  of  the 
people"  through  His  own  preaching  and  that  of  His  apostles. 
But  "alight  of  the  Gentiles"  He  became  purely  and  simply 
through  the  apostles,  who  represented  the  true  and  believing 
Israel. 

The  reproof,  which  affects  Israel  a  potiori,  now  proceeds 
still  further,  as  follows.  Vers.  20-22.  "  Thou  hast  seen  much, 
and  yet  keepest  not;  opening  the  ears,  he  yet  doth  not  hear. 
Jehovah  was  pleased  for  His  righteousness*  sake:  He  gave  a 
thorah  great  and  glorious.  And  yet  it  is  a  people  robbed  and 
plundered;  fastened  in  holes  all  of  them,  and  they  are  hidden  in 
prison-houses :  they  have  become  booty,  without  deliverers ;  a 
spoil,  without  any  one  saying,  Give  it  up  again  !"  In  ver.  20 
"thou"  and  "he"  alternate,  like  "they"  and  "ye"  in  ch.  i. 
29,  and  "  I"  and  "  he"  in  ch.  xiv.  30.  rpfcO,  which  points  back 
to  the  past,  is  to  be  preserved.  The  reading  of  the  keri  is  rnaa 
(inf.  abs.  like  niDK>,  ch.  xxii.  13,  and  nnjj,  Hab.  iii.  13),  which 
makes  the  two  half-verses  uniform.  Israel  has  had  many  and 
great  things  to  see,  but  without  keeping  the  admonitions  they 
contained ;  opening  its  ears,  namely  to  the  earnestness  of  the 
preaching,  it  hears,  and  yet  does  not  hear,  i.e.  it  only  hears 
outwardly,  but  without  taking  it  into  itself.  Ver.  21  shows  us 
to  what  ver.  20  chiefly  refers,  fsn  is  followed  here  by  the 
future  instead  of  by  Lamed  with  an  infinitive,  just  as  in  ch.  liii. 
10  it  is  followed  by  the  perfect  (Ges.  §  142,  3,  V).  Jehovah 


188  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

was  pleased  for  His  righteousness'  sake  (which  is  mentioned 
here,  not  as  that  which  recompenses  for  works  of  the  law,  but 
as  that  which  bestows  mercy  according  to  His  purpose,  His 
promise,  and  the  plan  of  salvation)  to  make  thordh,  i.e.  the 
direction,  instruction,  revelation  which  He  gave  to  His  people, 
great  and  glorious.  The  reference  is  primarily  and  chiefly  to 
the  Sinaitic  law,  and  the  verbs  relate  not  to  the  solemnitv  of 
the  promulgation,  but  to  the  riches  and  exalted  character  of  the 
contents.  But  what  a  glaring  contrast  did  the  existing  condi 
tion  of  Israel  present  to  these  manifestations  and  purposes  of 
mercy  on  the  part  of  its  God!  The  intervening  thought  ex 
pressed  by  Hosea  (Hos.  viii.  126),  viz.  that  this  condition  was 
the  punishment  of  unfaithfulness,  may  easily  be  supplied.  The 
inf.  abs.  nan  is  introduced  to  give  life  to  the  picture,  as  in  ch. 
xxii.  13.  Hahn  renders  it,  "They  pant  (Jiipldl  of  pMcJi)  in 
the  holes  all  of  them,"  but  kulldm  (all  of  them)  must  be  the 
accusative  of  the  object ;  so  that  the  true  meaning  is,  "  They 
have  fastened  (hiphil  of  pdchach)  all  of  them,"  etc.  (Ges.  §  131, 
4,  b).  Schegg  adopts  the  rendering,  "  All  his  youths  fall  into 
traps,"  which  is  wrong  in  two  respects  ;  for  bachurlm  is  the 
plural  of  chur  (ch.  xi.  8),  and  it  is  parallel  to  the  double  plural 
0"W3  VQ,  houses  of  custodies.  The  whole  nation  in  all  its 
members  is,  as  it  were,  put  into  bonds,  and  confined  in  prisons 
of  all  kinds  (an  allegorizing  picture  of  the  homelessness  and 
servitude  of  exile),  without  any  one  thinking  of  demanding  it 
back  (2£;n  =  3K>'n,  as  in  Ezek.  xxi.  35 ;  a  pausal  form  here : 
vid.  Ges.  §  29,  4  Anm.). 

When  they  ceased  to  be  deaf  to  this  crying  contradiction, 
they  would  recognise  with  penitence  that  it  was  but  the  merited 
punishment  of  God.  Yers.  23-25.  "  Who  among  you  will  give 
ear  to  this,  attend,  and  hear  afar  off?  Who  has  given  up  Jacob 
to  plundering,  and  Israel  to  the  spoilers  ?  Is  it  not  Jehovah, 
against  ivhom  we  have  sinned  ?  and  they  would  not  walk  in  His 
ways,  and  hearkened  not  to  His  law.  Then  He  poured  upon  it 
in  burning  heat  His  wrath,  and  the  strength  of  the  fury  of  war : 
and  this  set  it  in  flames  round  about,  and  it  did  not  come  to  be 
recognised ;  it  set  it  on  fire,  and  it  did  not  lay  it  to  heart"  The 
question  in  ver.  23  has  not  the  force  of  a  negative  sentence, 
"  No  one  does  this,"  but  of  a  wish,  "  O  that  one  would"  (as  in 
2  Sam  xxiii.  15,  xv.  4;  Ges.  §  136,  1).  If  they  had  but  an 


CHAP.  XLIII.  1,  2.  189 

inward  ear  for  the  contradiction  which  the  state  of  Israel  pre 
sented  to  its  true  calling,  and  the  earlier  manifestations  of 
divine  mercy,  and  would  but  give  up  their  previous  deafness 
for  the  time  to  come :  this  must  lead  to  the  knowledge  and 
confession  expressed  in  ver.  24.  The  names  Jacob  and  Israel 
here  follow  one  another  in  the  same  order  as  in  ch.  xxix.  23, 
xl.  27  (compare  ch.  xli.  8,  where  this  would  have  been  imprac 
ticable).  IT  belongs  to  &  in  the  sense  of  GUI.  The  punctua 
tion  does  not  acknowledge  this  relative  use  of  IT  (on  which,  see 
at  ch.  xliii.  21),  and  therefore  puts  the  athnach  in  the  wrong 
place  (see  Eashi).  In  the  words  "  we  have  sinned"  the  pro 
phet  identifies  himself  with  the  exiles,  in  whose  sin  he  knew  and 
felt  that  he  was  really  involved  (cf.  ch.  vi.  5).  The  objective 
affirmation  which  follows  applies  to  the  former  generations,  who 
had  sinned  on  till  the  measure  became  full,  spta  takes  the 
place  of  the  object  to  toN  (see  ch.  i.  17)  ;  the  more  usual  ex 
pression  would  be  T\37? ;  the  inverted  order  of  the  words  makes 
the  assertion  all  the  more  energetic.  In  ver.  25  the  genitive 
relation  tetf  n&n  is  avoided,  probably  in  favour  of  the  similar 
ring  of  HJpn  and  HDnpp.  ncn  is  either  the  accusative  of  the 
object,  and  iBK  a  subordinate  statement  of  what  constituted  the 
burning  heat  (cf.  Ewald,  §  287,  k),  or  else  an  accusative,  of  more 
precise  definition  =  nona  in  ch.  Ixvi.  15  (Ges.  §  118,  3).  The 
outpouring  is  also  connected  by  zeugma  with  the  "  violence  of 
war."  The  milchdmdh  then  becomes  the  subject.  The  war- 
fury  raged  without  result.  Israel  was  not  brought  to  reflection. 
The  tone  of  the  address  is  now  suddenly  changed.  The 
sudden  leap  from  reproach  to  consolation  was  very  significant. 
It  gave  them  to  understand,  that  no  meritorious  work  of  their 
own  would  come  in  between  what  Israel  was  and  what  it  was 
to  be,  but  that  it  was  God's  free  grace  which  came  to  meet  it. 
Ch.  xliii.  1,  2.  "  But  now  thus  saith  Jehovah  thy  Creator,  0 
Jacob,  and  thy  Former,  0  Israel !  Fear  not,  for  I  have  redeemed 
tliee;  I  have  called  thee  by  name,  thou  art  mine.  When  thou  goest 
through  the  water,  I  am  with  thee;  and  through  rivers,  they  shall 
not  drown  thee:  when  thou  goest  into  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be 
burned;  and  the  flame  shall  not  set  thee  on  fire"  The  punish 
ment  has  now  lasted  quite  long  enough  ;  and,  as  nnjn  affirms, 
the  love  which  has  hitherto  retreated  behind  the  wrath  returns 
to  its  own  prerogatives  again.  He  who  created  and  formed 


190  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Israel,  by  giving  Abraham  the  son  of  the  promise,  and  caused 
the  seventy  of  Jacob's  family  to  grow  up  into  a  nation  in 
Egypt,  He  also  will  shelter  and  preserve  it.  He  bids  it  be  of 
good  cheer  ;  for  their  early  history  is  a  pledge  of  this.  The 
perfects  after  ^  in  ver.  Ib  stand  out  against  the  promising 
futures  in  ver.  2,  as  retrospective  glances  :  the  expression  "  I 
have  redeemed  thee"  pointing  back  to  Israel's  redemption  out 
of  Egypt ;  "  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name"  (lit.  I  have  called 
with  thy  name,  i.e.  called  it  out),  to  its  call  to  be  the  peculiar 
people  of  Jehovah,  who  therefore  speaks  of  it  in  ch.  xlviii.  12 
as  "  My  called."  This  help  of  the  God  of  Israel  will  also 
continue  to  arm  it  against  the  destructive  power  of  the  most 
hostile  elements,  and  rescue  it  from  the  midst  of  the  greatest 
dangers,  from  which  there  is  apparently  no  escape  (cf.  Ps.  Ixvi. 
12  ;  Dan.  iii.  17,  27  ;  and  Ges.  §  103,  2). 

Just  as  in  ver.  \b,  la  (for),  with  all  that  follows,  assigns  the 
reason  for  the  encouraging  "  Fear  not ;"  so  here  a  second  kl 
introduces  the  reason  for  the  promise  which  ensures  them 
against  the  dangers  arising  from  either  water  or  fire.  Vers.  3,  4. 
"  For  I  Jehovah  am  thy  God ;  (I)  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  thy 
Saviour :  I  give  up  Egypt  as  a  ransom  for  thee,  Ethiopia  and 
Sela  in  thy  stead.  Because  thou  art  dear  in  my  eyes,  highly 
esteemed,  and  I  loved  thee ;  I  give  up  men  in  thy  steady  and 
peoples  for  thy  life"  Both  "  Jehovah"  and  "  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel"  are  in  apposition  to  "  /"  ('ani),  the  force  of  which  is 
continued  in  the  second  clause.  The  preterite  ndthatti  (I  have 
given),  as  the  words  "I  will  give"  in  ver.  4&  clearly  show, 
states  a  fact  which  as  yet  is  only  completed  so  far  as  the  pur 
pose  is  concerned.  "  A  ransom :"  kdpher  (\vrpov)  is  literally 
the  covering  (see  vol.  i.  397  and  ii.  11), — the  person  making  the 
payment,  or  the  person  for  whom  he  makes  it,  being  covered 
by  the  payment.  fcOp  is  the  land  of  Meroe,  which  is  enclosed 
between  the  White  and  Blue  Nile,  the  present  Ddr  Senndr, 
district  of  Sennar  (Sen-drti,  i.e.  island  of  Send),  or  the  ancient 
Meroitic  priestly  state  settled  about  this  enclosed  land,  probably 
included  in  the  Mudrdya  (Egypt)  of  the  Achasmenidian  arrow- 
headed  inscriptions ;  though  it  is  uncertain  whether  the  Kusiya 
(Heb.  Kuslurn)  mentioned  there  are  the  predatory  tribe  of 
archers  called  Koaaaloi  (Strabo,  xi.  13,  6),  whose  name  has 
been  preserved  in  the  present  Chuzistan,  the  eastern  Ethiopians 


CHAP.  XLIII.  5-7.  191 

of  the  Greeks  (as  Lassen  and  Rawlinson  suppose),  or  the 
African  Ethiopians  of  the  Bible,  as  Oppert  imagines.  The 
fact  that  Egypt  was  only  conquered  by  Cambyses,  and  not  by 
Cyrus,  who  merely  planned  it  (Herod,  i.  153),  and  to  whom  it 
is  only  attributed  by  a  legend  (Xen.  Cyr.  viii.  6,  20,  \eyerat 
KaTCKJTpe-^raaOai,  A'lyvTrrov),  does  no  violence  to  the  truth  of 
the  promise.  It  is  quite  enough  that  Egypt  and  the  neigh 
bouring  kingdoms  were  subjugated  by  the  new  imperial  power 
of  Persia,  and  that  through  that  empire  the  Jewish  people 
recovered  their  long-lost  liberty.  The  free  love  of  God  was 
the  reason  for  His  treating  Israel  according  to  the  principle 
laid  down  in  Prov.  xi.  8,  xxi.  18.  "^&?9  does  not  signify  ex  quo 
tempore  here,  but  is  equivalent  to  ")CW  "OBJp  in  Ex.  xix.  18,  Jer. 
xliv.  23  ;  for  if  it  indicated  the  terminus  a  quo,  it  would  be 
followed  by  a  more  distinct  statement  of  the  fact  of  their 
election.  The  personal  pronoun  "  and  I"  (vaani)  is  intro 
duced  in  consequence  of  the  change  of  persons.  In  the  place 
of  ^rijl  (perf.  cons.),  jnso  commended  itself,  as  the  former  had 
already  been  used  in  a  somewhat  different  function.  All  that 
composed  the  chosen  nation  are  here  designated  as  "  man" 
(dddm),  because  there  was  nothing  in  them  but  what  was 
derived  from  Adam,  rinn  has  here  a  strictly  substitutionary 
meaning  throughout. 

The  encouraging  "  Fear  not "  is  here  resumed,  for  the  pur 
pose  of  assigning  a  still  further  reason.  Yers.  5-7.  "Fear  not; 
JOT  I  am  with  thee :  I  bring  thy  seed  from  the  east,  and  from  the 
west  will  I  gather  them  ;  I  will  say  to  the  north,  Give  up  ;  and 
to  the  south,  Keep  not  lack :  bring  my  sons  from  far,  and  my 
daughters  from  the  end  of  the  earth;  everything  that  is  called 
by  my  name,  and  I  have  created  for  my  glory,  that  I  have 
formed,  yea  finished !"  The  fact  that  Jehovah  is  with  Israel 
will  show  itself  in  this,  that  He  effects  its  complete  restoration 
from  all  quarters  of  the  heaven  (compare  the  lands  of  the 
diaspora  in  all  directions  already  mentioned  by  Isaiah  in 
ch.  xi.  11,  12).  Jehovah's  command  is  issued  to  north  and 
south  to  give  up  their  unrighteous  possession,  not  to  keep 
it  back,  and  to  restore  His  sons  and  daughters  (compare  the 
similar  change  in  the  gender  in  ch.  xi.  12),  which  evidently 
implies  the  help  and  escort  of  the  exiles  on  the  part  of 
the  heathen  (ch.  xiv.  2).  The  four  quarters  and  four  winds 


192  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

are  of  the  feminine  gender.  In  ver.  7  the  object  is  more  pre 
cisely  defined  from  the  standpoint  of  sacred  history.  The 
three  synonyms  bring  out  the  might,  the  freeness,  and  the 
riches  of  grace,  with  which  Jehovah  called  Israel  into  existence, 
to  glorify  Himself  in  it,  and  that  He  might  be  glorified  by  it. 
They  form  a  climax,  for  N"J?  signifies  to  produce  as  a  new 
thing ;  "W,  to  shape  what  has  been  produced ;  and  nb>i??  to 
make  it  perfect  or  complete,  hence  creavi,  formavi,  perfeci. 

We  come  now  to  the  third  turn  in  the  second  half  of  this 
prophecy.  It  is  linked  on  to  the  commencement  of  the  first 
turn  ("  Hear,  ye  deaf,  and  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  see  "), 
the  summons  being  now  addressed  to  some  one  to  bring  forth 
the  Israel,  which  has  eyes  and  ears  without  seeing  or  hearing ; 
whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the  nations  are  all  to  come  together, 
and  this  time  not  for  the  purpose  of  convincing  them,  but  of 
convincing  Israel.  Vers.  8-10.  "  Bring  out,  a  blind  people,  and 
it  has  eyes  ;  and  deaf  people,  and  yet  furnished  with  ears  I  All 
ye  heathen,  gather  yourselves  together,  and  let  peoples  assemble  ! 
Who  among  you  can  proclaim  such  a  thing?  And  let  them  cause 
former  things  to  be  heard,  appoint  their  witnesses,  and  be  justi 
fied.  Let  these  hear,  and  say,  True  !  Ye  are  my  witnesses,  saith 
Jehovah,  and  my  servant  whom  I  have  chosen ;  that  ye  may  know 
and  believe  me,  and  see  that  it  is  I:  before  me  was  no  God 
formed,  and  there  will  be  none  after  me"  "  Bring  out "  does 
not  refer  here  to  bringing  out  of  captivity,  as  in  Ezek.  xx.  34, 
41,  xxxiv.  13,  since  the  names  by  which  Israel  is  called  arc 
hardly  applicable  to  this,  but  rather  to  bringing  to  the  place 
appointed  for  judicial  proceedings.  The  verb  is  in  the  impera 
tive.  The  heathen  are  also  to  gather  together  en  masse;  TO^i?? 
is  also  an  imperative  here,  as  in  Joel  iv.  11  =  TO3jj>n  (cf.  VPJ, 
Jer.  1.  5 ;  Ewald,  §  226,  c).  In  ver.  9&  we  have  the  commence 
ment  of  the  evidence  adduced  by  Jehovah  in  support  of  His 
own  divine  right:  Who  among  the  gods  of  the  nations  can  pro 
claim  this  I  i.e.  anything  like  my  present  announcement  of  the 
restoration  of  Israel  1  To  prove  that  they  can,  let  them  cause 
"  former  things"  to  be  heard,  i.e.  any  former  events  which  they 
had  foretold,  and  which  had  really  taken  place  ;  and  let  them 
appoint  witnesses  of  such  earlier  prophecies,  and  so  prove  them 
selves  to  be  gods,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  fact  that  these  witnesses 
have  publicly  heard  their  declaration  and  confirm  the  truth 


CHAP.  XLIII.  11-13.  193 


thereof.  The  subject  to  'til  W?f]}  (they  may  hear,  etc.)  is  the 
witnesses,  not  as  now  informing  themselves  for  the  first  time, 
but  as  making  a  public  declaration.  The  explanation,  "  that 
men  may  hear,"  changes  the  subject  without  any  necessity. 
But  whereas  the  gods  are  dumb  and  lifeless,  and  therefore 
cannot  call  any  witnesses  for  themselves,  and  not  one  of  all  the 
assembled  multitude  can  come  forward  as  their  legitimate  wit 
ness,  or  as  one  able  to  vindicate  them,  Jehovah  can  call  His 
people  as  witnesses,  since  they  have  had  proofs  in  abundance 
that  He  possesses  infallible  knowledge  of  the  future.  It  is 
generally  assumed  that  "and  my  servant"  introduces  a  second 
subject  :  "  Ye,  and  (especially)  my  servant  whom  I  have 
chosen."  In  this  case,  "my  servant"  would  denote  that  por 
tion  of  the  nation  which  was  so,  not  merely  like  the  mass  of 
the  people  according  to  its  divine  calling,  but  also  by  its  own 
fidelity  to  that  calling  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  kernel  of  the  nation, 
which  was  in  the  midst  of  the  mass,  but  had  not  the  manners 
of  the  mass.  At  the  same  time,  the  sentence  which  follows  is 
much  more  favourable  to  the  unity  of  the  subject  ;  and  why 
should  not  "my  servant"  be  a  second  predicate?  The  ex 
pression  "  ye  "  points  to  the  people,  who  were  capable  of  seeing 
and  hearing,  and  yet  both  blind  and  deaf,  and  who  had  been 
brought  out  to  the  forum,  according  to  ver.  8.  Ye,  says 
Jehovah,  are  my  witnesses,  and  ye  are  my  servant  whom  I  have 
chosen  ;  I  can  appeal  to  what  I  have  enabled  you  to  experi 
ence  and  to  perceive,  and  to  the  relation  in  which  I  have  in 
mercy  caused  you  to  stand  to  myself,  that  ye  may  thereby  be 
brought  to  consider  the  great  difference  that  there  is  between 
what  ye  have  in  your  God  and  that  which  the  heathen  (here 
present  with  you)  have  in  their  idols.  "  I  am  He,"  i.e.  God 
exclusively,  and  God  for  ever.  His  being  has  no  beginning  and 
no  end  ;  so  that  any  being  apart  from  His,  which  could  have 
gone  before  or  could  follow  after,  so  as  to  be  regarded  as  divine 
(in  other  words,  the  deity  of  the  artificial  and  temporal  images 
which  are  called  gods  by  the  heathen),  is  a  contradiction  in  itself. 
The  address  now  closes  by  holding  up  once  more  the  object 
and  warrant  of  faith.  Vers.  11-13.  "/,  I  am  Jehovah;  and 
beside  me  there  is  no  Saviour.  /,  /  have  proclaimed  and 
brought  salvation,  and  given  to  perceive,  and  there  was  no  oilier 
god  among  you  :  and  ye  are  my  witnesses,  saith  Jehovah,  and  I 
VOL  II.  N 


194  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

am  God.  Even  from  the  day  onwards  I  am  so ;  and  there  is 
no  deliverer  out  of  my  hand :  I  act,  and  ivho  can  turn  it  back  ?" 
The  proper  name  "Jehovah"  is  used  here  (ver.  13)  as  a  name 
indicating  essence  :  "  I  and  no  other  am  the  absolutely  existing 
and  living  One,"  i.e.  He  who  proves  His  existence  by  His 
acts,  and  indeed  by  His  saving  acts.  jn?to  and  Jehovah  are 
kindred  epithets  here ;  just  as  in  the  New  Testament  the 
name  Jehovah  sets,  as  it  were,  bat  only  to  rise  again  in  the 
name  Jesus,  in  which  it  is  historically  fulfilled.  Jehovah's 
previous  self-manifestation  in  history  furnished  a  pledge  of 
the  coming  redemption.  The  two  synonyms  Wsn  and  Vi^DBTi 
have  Viyt?in  in  the  midst.  He  proclaimed  salvation,  brought 
salvation,  and  in  the  new  afflictions  was  still  ever  preaching 
salvation,  without  there  having  been  any  zdr,  i.e.  any  strange 
or  other  god  in  Israel  (Deut.  xxxii.  16;  see  above,  ch.  xvii. 
10),  who  proved  his  existence  in  any  such  way,  or,  in  fact, 
gave  any  sign  of  existence  at  all.  This  they  must  them 
selves  confess  ;  and  therefore  (Vav  in  sense  equivalent  to 
ergo,  as  in  ch.  xl.  18,  25)  He,  and  He  alone,  is  El,  the  abso 
lutely  mighty  One,  i.e.  God.  And  from  this  time  forth  He 
is  so,  i.e.  He,  and  He  only,  displays  divine  nature  and  divine 
life.  There  is  no  reason  for  taking  Disp  in  the  sense  of 
Di"1  nvnp,  "  from  the  period  when  the  day,  i.e.  time,  existed  " 
(as  the  LXX.,  Jerome,  Stier,  etc.,  render  it).  Both  the  gam 
(also)  and  the  future  'eptial  (I  will  work)  require  the  meaning 
supported  by  Ezek.  xlviii.  35,  "  from  the  day  onwards,"  i.e. 
from  this  time  forth  (syn.  DV'\JD^,  ch.  xlviii.  7).  The  con 
cluding  words  give  them  to  understand,  that  the  predicted  sal 
vation  is  coming  in  the  way  of  judgment.  Jehovah  will  go 
forward  with  His  work ;  and  if  He  who  is  the  same  yesterday 
and  to-day  sets  this  before  Him,  who  can  turn  it  back,  so  that 
it  shall  remain  unaccomplished  ?  The  prophecy  dies  away, 
like  the  massa!  Bdlhel  with  its  epilogue  in  ch.  xiv.  27.  In  the 
first  half  (ch.  xlii.  1-17)  Jehovah  introduced  His  servant,  the 
medium  of  salvation,  and  proclaimed  the  approaching  work  of 
salvation,  at  which  all  the  world  had  reason  to  rejoice.  The 
second  half  (ch.  xlii.  18— xliii.  13)  began  with  reproaching,  and 
sought  to  bring  Israel  through  this  predicted  salvation  to  re 
flect  upon  itself,  and  also  upon  its  God,  the  One  God,  to  whom 
there  was  no  equal. 


CHAP.  XLIII.  14   IS.  195 


FOURTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  XLIII.  M-XLIV.  5. 

AVENGING  AND  DELIVERANCE  ;    AND  OUTPOURING  OF  THE 

SPIRIT. 

In  close  connection  with  the  foregoing  prophecy,  the  present 
one  commences  with  the  dissolution  of  the  Chaldean  empire. 
Vers.  14,  1 5.  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  your  Redeemer,  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel,  For  your  sake  I  have  sent  to  Babel,  and  will  hurl 
them  all  down  as  fugitives,  and  the  Chaldeans  into  the  ships  of 
their  rejoicing.  I,  Jehovah,  am  your  Holy  One ;  (/)  Israel's 
Creator,  your  King."  Hitzig  reads  fll^N^  and  adopts  the  ren 
dering,  "  and  drowned  the  shouting  of  the  Chaldeans  in  groan 
ing."  Ewald  also  corrects  ver.  14«  thus  :  "  And  plunge  their 
guitars  into  groanings,  and  the  rejoicing  of  the  Chaldeans  into 
sighs."  We  cannot  see  any  good  taste  in  this  un-Hebraic  bom 
bast.  Nor  is  there  any  more  reason  for  altering  DWQ  (LXX. 
favyovras)  into  DTP"Q  (Jerome,  vectes),  as  Umbreit  proposes : 
"  and  make  all  their  bolts1  fall  down,  and  the  Chaldeans,  who 
rejoice  in  ships"  (badniyoth).  None  of  these  alterations  effect 
any  improvement.  For  your  sakes,  says  Jehovah,  i.e.  for  the 
purpose  of  releasing  you,  I  have  sent  to  Babylon  (sc.  the  agents 
of  my  judgments,  ch.  xiii.  3),  and  will  throw  them  all  down 
(viz.  the  Trd/jifjiL/CTO^  0^X09  of  this  market  of  the  world ;  see  ch. 
xiii.  14,  xlvii.  15)  as  fugitives  (bdrichlm  with  a  fixed  kametz, 
equivalent  to  barrlchlm),  i.e.  into  a  hurried  flight;  and  the 
Chaldeans,  who  have  been  settled  there  from  a  hoary  antiquity, 
even  they  shall  be  driven  into  the  ships  of  their  rejoicing 
(u&tiniyoth.  as  in  Prov.  xxxi.  14),  i.e.  the  ships  which  were 
previously  the  object  of  their  jubilant  pride  and  their  jubilant 
rejoicing.  *J£Tn1fl1  stands  in  the  perf.  co-nsec.,  as  indicating  the 
object  of  all  the  means  already  set  in  motion.  The  ships  of 
pleasure  are  not  air-balloons,  as  Hitzig  affirms.  Herodotus 
(i.  194)  describes  the  freight  ships  discharging  in  Babylon  ; 
and  we  know  from  other  sources  that  the  Chaldeans  not  only 
navigated  the  Euphrates,  but  the  Persian  Gulf  as  well,  and 
employed  vessels  built  by  Phrenicians  for  warlike  purposes 

1  This  would  require 


196  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

also.1  THjUl  itself  might  indeed  signify  "to  hurl  to  the  ground" 
(Ps.  Ivi.  8,  lix.  12) ;  but  the  allusion  to  ships  shows  that  3  Tnin 
are  to  be  connected  (cf.  ch.  Ixiii.  14),  and  that  a  general  driving 
down  both  by  land  and  water  to  the  southern  coast  is  intended. 
By  thus  sweeping  away  both  foreigners  and  natives  out  of 
Babylon  into  the  sea,  Jehovah  proves  what  He  is  in  Himself, 
according  to  ver.  15,  and  also  in  His  relation  to  Israel ;  we 
must  supply  a  repetition  of  ^  here  (ver.  15&),  as  in  ver.  3a. 
The  congregation  which  addresses  Him  as  the  Holy  One,  the 
people  who  suffer  Him  to  reign  over  them  as  their  King, 
cannot  remain  permanently  despised  and  enslaved. 

There  now  follows  a  second  field  of  the  picture  of  redemp 
tion  ;  and  the  expression  "  for  your  sake"  is  expounded  in  vers. 
16-21 :  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  who  giveth  a  road  through  the 
sea,  and  a  path  through  tumultuous  waters ;  who  bringeth  out 
chariot  and  horse,  army  and  hero ;  they  lie  down  together,  they 
never  rise :  they  have  flickered  away,  extinguished  like  a  wick. 
Remember  not  things  of  olden  time,  nor  meditate  upon  those  of 
earlier  times  !  Beliold,  I  work  out  a  new  thing:  will  ye  not  live 
to  see  it  f  Yea,  1  make  a  road  through  the  desert,  and  streams 
through  solitudes.  The  beast  of  the  field  will  praise  me,  wild 
dogs  and  ostriches :  for  I  give  water  in  the  desert,  streams  in  soli 
tude,  to  give  drink  to  my  people,  my  chosen.  The  people  that  1 
formed  for  myself,  they  shall  shoiu  forth  my  praise"  What 
Jehovah  really  says  commences  in  ver.  18.  Then  in  between 
He  is  described  as  Redeemer  out  of  Egypt;  for  the  redemption 
out  of  Egypt  was  a  type  and  pledge  of  the  deliverance  to  be 
looked  for  out  of  Babylon.  The  participles  must  not  be  ren 
dered  qui  dedit,  eduxit ;  but  from  the  mighty  act  of  Jehovah 
in  olden  time  general  attributes  are  deduced  :  He  w-ho  makes  a 
road  in  the  sea,  as  He  once  showed.  The  sea  with  the  tumul 
tuous  waters  is  the  Red  Sea  (Neh.  ix.  11)  ;  'izzuz,  which 
rhymes  with  vdsus,  is  a  concrete,  as  in  Ps.  xxiv.  8,  the  army 
with  the  heroes  at  its  head.  The  expression  "  bringeth  out," 
etc.,  is  not  followed  by  "  and  suddenly  destroys  them,"  but  we 
are  transported  at  once  into  the  very  midst  of  the  scenes  of 
destruction.  123K^  shows  them  to  us  entering  upon  the  sleep 
of  death,  in  which  they  lie  without  hope  (ch.  xxvi.  14).  The 
close  (kappishtdh  Ichdbhu)  is  iambic,  as  in  Judg.  v.  27.  The 
1  Sse  G.  Rawlinson,  Monarchies,  i.  128,  ii.  -148. 


CHAP.  XL1II.  16-21.  ID 7 

admonition  in  ver.  18  does  not  commend  utter  forgetfulness 
and  disregard  (see  ch.  xlvi.  9) ;  but  that  henceforth  they  are  to 
look  forwards  rather  than  backward.  The  new  thing  which 
Jehovah  is  in  the  process  of  working  out  eclipses  the  old,  and 
deserves  a  more  undivided  and  prolonged  attention.  Of  this 
new  thing  it  is  affirmed,  "  even  now  it  sprouts  up ;"  whereas  in 
ch.  xlii.  9,  even  in  the  domain  of  the  future,  a  distinction  was 
drawn  between  "the  former  things"  and  "  new  things,"  and  it 
could  be  affirmed  of  the  latter  that  they  were  not  yet  sprouting 
up.  In  the  passage  before  us  the  entire  work  of  God  in  the 
new  time  is  called  clidddsMh  (new),  and  is  placed  in  contrast 
with  the  rislwnoth)  or  occurrences  of  the  olden  time;  so  that  as 
the  first  part  of  this  new  thing  had  already  taken  place  (ch. 
xlii.  9),  and  there  was  only  the  last  part  still  to  come,  it  might 
very  well  be  affirmed  of  the  latter,  that  it  was  even  now  sprouting 
up  (not  already,  which  nny  may  indeed  also  mean,  but  as  in 
ch.  xlviii.  7).  In  connection  with  this,  iyijnn  &o^n  (a  verbal 
form  with  the  suffix,  as  in  Jer.  xiii.  17,  with  kametz  in  the 
syllable  before  the  tone,  as  in  ch.  vi.  9,  xlvii.  11,  in  pause)  does 
not  mean,  "  Will  ye  then  not  regard  it,"  as  Ewald,  Umbreit, 
and  others  render  it;  but,  "shall  ye  not,  i.e.  assuredly  ye  will, 
experience  it."  The  substance  of  the  chadds/idh  (the  new 
thing)  is  unfolded  in  ver.  196.  It  enfolds  a  rich  fulness  of 
wonders  :  *]K  affirming  that,  among  other  things,  Jehovah  will 
do  this  one  very  especially.  He  transforms  the  pathless,  water 
less  desert,  that  His  chosen  one,  the  people  of  God,  may  be 
able  to  go  through  in  safety,  and  without  fainting.  And  the 
benefits  of  this  miracle  of  divine  grace  reach  the  animal  world 
as  well,  so  that  their  joyful  cries  are  an  unconscious  praise  of 
Jehovah.  (On  the  names  of  the  animals,  see  vol.  i.  305  ;  and 
Ivohler  on  Mai.  i.  3.)  In  this  we  can  recognise  the  prophet, 
who,  as  we  have  several  times  observed  since  ch.  xi.  (compare 
especially  ch.  xxx.  23,  24,  xxxv.  7),  has  not  only  a  sympathizing 
heart  for  the  woes  of  the  human  race,  but  also  an  open  ear  for 
the  sighs  of  all  creation.  He  knows  that  when  the  sufferings 
of  the  people  of  God  shall  be  brought  to  an  end,  the  sufferings 
of  creation  will  also  terminate ;  for  humanity  is  the  heart  of 
the  universe,  and  the  people  of  God  (understanding  by  this 
the  people  of  God  according  to  the  Spirit)  are  the  heart  of 
humanity .  In  ver.  21  the  promise  is  brought  to  a  general 


193  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

close :  the  people  that  (zu  personal  and  relative,  as  in  ch.  xlii. 
24 l)  I  have  formed  for  myself  will  have  richly  to  relate  how  I 
glorified  myself  in  them. 

It  would  be  the  praise  of  God,  however,  and  not  the  merits 
of  their  own  works,  that  they  would  have  to  relate  ;  for  there 
was  nothing  at  all  that  could  give  them  any  claim  to  reward. 
There  were  not  even  acts  of  'ceremonial  worship,  but  only  the 
guilt  of  grievous  sins.  Vers.  22-24.  "  And  thou  hast  not  called 
upon  me,  0  Jacob,  that  thou  shouldst  have  wearied  thyself  for 
me,  0  Israel !  Thou  hast  not  brought  me  sheep  of  thy  burnt- 
offerings,  and  thou  hast  not  honoured  me  with  thy  s  Iain-offer  ings. 
I  have  not  burdened  thce  with  meat-offer  ing  s,  and  have  not 
troubled  thee  about  incense*  Thou  hast  bought  me  no  spice-cane 
for  silver,  nor  hast  thou  refreshed  me  with  fat  of  thy  slain- 
offerings.  No  ;  thou  hast  wearied  me  with  thy  sins,  troubled  me 
with  tliim  iniquities"  We  cannot  agree  with  Stier,  that  these 
words  refer  to  the  whole  of  the  previous  worship  of  Israel, 
which  is  treated  here  as  having  no  existence,  because  of  its 
heartlessness  and  false-holiness.  And  we  must  also  not  forget, 
that  all  these  prophecies  rested  on  either  the  historical  or  the 
ideal  soil  of  the  captivity.  The  charge  commences  with  the 
worship  of  prayer  (with  calling  upon  Jehovah,  as  in  Ps.  xiv.  4, 
xviii.  7),  to  which  the  people  were  restricted  when  in  exile,  since 
the  law  did  not  allow  them  to  offer  sacrifice  outside  the  holy 
land.  The  personal  pronoun  ^,  in  the  place  of  the  suffix,  is 
written  first  of  all  for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  as  if  the  meaning 
were,  "  Israel  could  exert  itself  to  call  upon  other  gods,  but 
not  upon  Jehovah."  The  following  kl  is  equivalent  to  ut  (Hos. 
i.  6),  or  'ad-ki  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  10,  adeo  ut  laborasses  me  colendo 
(so  as  to  have  wearied  thyself  in  worshipping  me).  They  are 
also  charged  with  having  offered  no  sacrifices,  inasmuch  as  in  a 
foreign  land  this  duty  necessarily  lapsed  of  itself,  together  with 

1  The  pointing  connects  tf'Dy  with  makkeph,  so  that  the  rendering 
would  be,  "The  people  there  I  have  formed  for  myself;"  but  according 
to  our  view,  DJ?  should  be  accented  with  yethib,  and  zu  with  munach.  In 
just  the  same  way,  zu  is  connected  with  the  previous  noun  as  a  demonstra 
tive,  by  means  of  makkeph,  in  Ex.  xv.  13,  16,  Ps.  ix.  16,  Ixii.  12,  cxlii.  4, 
cxliii.  8,  and  by  means  of  a  subsidiary  accent  in  Ps.  x.  2,  xii.  8.  The  idea 
which  underlies  ch.  xlii.  24  appears  to  be,  "  This  is  the  retribution  that 
we  have  met  with  from  him."  But  in  none  of  these  can  we  be  bound  by 
the  punctuation. 


CHAP.  XLIII.  22-24.  199 

the  self-denial  that  it  involved.  The  spelling  riN'?n  (as  jn. 
Num.  xiv.  31)  appears  to  have  been  intended  for  the  pronun 
ciation  fife^n  (compare  the  pronunciation  in  2  Kings  xix.  25, 
which  comes  between  the  two).  The  'oloth  (burnt-offerings) 
stand  first,  as  the  expression  of  adoration,  and  are  connected 
with  seh,  which  points  to  the  daily  morning  and  evening  sacri 
fice  (the  tdmid).  Then  follow  the  tfbhdcMm  (slain-offerings), 
the  expression  of  the  establishment  of  fellowship  with  Jehovah 
(Tnjp  is  equivalent  to  T^p,  like  nrpn  =  n»H3,  ch.  xliii.  25). 
The  "  fat"  (chelebh)  in  ver.  24  refers  to  the  portions  of  fat 
that  were  placed  upon  the  altar  in  connection  with  this  kind 
of  sacrifice.  After  the  z*bMchlm  comes  the  minchdh,  the  ex 
pression  of  desire  for  the  blessing  of  Jehovah,  a  portion  of 
which,  the  so-called  remembrance  portion  ^azkdrdh),  was  placed 
upon  the  altar  along  with  the  whole  of  the  incense.  And 
lastly,  the  qdneh  (spice-cane),  i.e.  some  one  of  the  Amoma^ 
points  to  the  holy  anointing  oil  (Ex.  xxx.  23),  or  if  it  refer  to 
spices  generally,  to  the  sacred  incense,  though  qdneh  is  not 
mentioned  as  one  of  the  ingredients  in  Ex.  xxx.  34.  The 
nation,  which  Jehovah  was  now  redeeming  out  of  pure  un- 
mingled  grace,  had  not  been  burdened  with  costly  tasks  of  this 
description  (see  Jer.  vi.  20) ;  on  the  contrary,  it  was  Jehovah 
only  who  was  burdened  and  troubled.  He  denies  that  there 
was  any  "  causing  to  serve"  (T^ip,  lit.  to  make  a  person  a 
servant,  to  impose  servile  labour  upon  him)  endured  by  Israel, 
but  affirms  this  rather  of  Himself.  The  sins  of  Israel  pressed 
upon  Him,  as  a  burden  does  upon  a  servant.  His  love  took 
upon  itself  the  burden  of  Israel's  guilt,  which  derived  its  gravi 
tating  force  from  His  own  holy  righteous  wrath  ;  but  it  was 
a  severe  task  to  bear  this  heavy  burden,  and  expunge  it, — a 
thoroughly  divine  task,  the  significance  of  which  was  first 
brought  out  in  its  own  true  light  by  the  cross  on  Golgotha. 
When  God  creates,  He  expresses  His  fiat,  and  what  He  wills 
comes  to  pass.  But  He  does  not  blot  out  sin  without  balancing 

1  The  qdneh  is  generally  supposed  to  be  the  Calamus;  but  the  calamus 
forms  no  stalk,  to  say  nothing  of  a  cane  or  hollow  stalk.  It  must  be  some 
kind  of  aromatic  plant,  with  a  stalk  like  a  cane,  either  the  Cardamum, 
Inyber,  or  Curcuma;  at  any  rate,  it  belonged  to  the  species  Amomum. 
The  aroma  of  this  was  communicated  to  the  anointing  oil,  the  latter  being 
infused,  and  the  resinous  parts  of  the  former  being  thereby  dissolved. 


200  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

.His  love  with  His  justice  ;  and  this  equalization  is  not  effected 
without  conflict  and  victory. 

Nevertheless,  the  sustaining  power  of  divine  love  is  greater 
than  the  gravitating  force  of  divine  wrath.  Ver.  25.  "  /,  / 
alone,  blot  out  thy  transgressions  for  my  own  sake,  and  do  not 
remember  iliy  sins."  Jehovah  Himself  here  announces  the  sola 
gratia  and  sola  fides.  We  have  adopted  the  rendering  "  I 
alone,"  because  the  threefold  repetition  of  the  subject,  "  I,  I, 
He  is  blotting  out  thy  transgressions,"  is  intended  to  affirm 
that  this  blotting  out  of  sin  is  so  far  from  being  in  any  way 
merited  by  Israel,  that  it  is  a  sovereign  act  of  Plis  absolute 
freedom  ;  and  the  expression  "  for  my  own  sake,"  that  it  has 
its  foundation  only  in  God,  namely,  in  His  absolute  free  grace, 
that  movement  of  His  love  by  which  wrath  is  subdued.  For 
the  debt  stands  written  in  God's  own  book.  Justice  has 
entered  it,  and  love  alone  blots  it  out  (mdehdk,  e'faXe/(£et,  as  in 
ch.  xliv.  22,  Ps.  li.  3,  11,  cix.  14)  ;  but,  as  we  know  from  the 
actual  fulfilment,  not  without  paying  with  blood,  and  giving 
the  quittance  with  blood. 

Jehovah  now  calls  upon  Israel,  if  this  be  not  the  case,  to 
remind  Him  of  any  merit  upon  which  it  can  rely.  Yer.  20. 
"  Call  to  my  remembrance ;  we  will  strive  with  one  another:  tell 
now,  that  thou  mayst  appear  just."  Justification  is  an  actus 
forensis  (see  ch.  i.  18).  Justice  accuses,  and  grace  acquits.  Or 
has  Israel  any  actual  merits,  so  that  Justice  would  be  obliged 
to  pronounce  it  just  f  The  object  to  liazklrenl  and  sapper, 
which  never  have  the  closed  sense  of  pleading,  as  Bottcher 
supposes,  is  the  supposed  meritorious  works  of  Israel. 

But  Israel  has  no  such  works ;  on  the  contrary,  its  history 
has  been  a  string  of  sins  from  the  very  first.  Ver.  27.  a  Thij 
first  forefather  sinned,  and  thy  mediators  have  fallen  away  from 
me"  By  the  first  forefather,  Hitzig,  Umbreit,  and  Knobel 
understand  Adam;  but  Adam  was  the  forefather  of  the  human 
race,  not  of  Israel ;  and  the  debt  of  Adam  was  the  debt  of  man 
kind,  and  not  of  Israel.  The  reference  is  to  Abraham,  as  the 
first  of  the  three  from  whom  the  origin  and  election  of  Israel 
were  dated;  Abraham,  whom  Israel  from  the  very  first  had 
called  with  pride  "  our  father"  (Matt.  iii.  9).  Even  the  history 
of  Abraham  was  stained  with  sin,  and  did  not  shine  in  the  light 
of  meritorious  works,  but  in  that  of  grace,  and  of  faith  laying 


CHAP.  XLIII.  28-XLIV.  4.  201 

hold  of  grace.  The  melltsim,  interpreters,  and  mediators 
generally  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  31;  Job  xxxiii.  23),  are  the  prophets 
and  priests,  who  stood  between  Jehovah  and  Israel,  and  were 
the  medium  of  intercourse  between  the  two,  both  in  word  and 
deed.  They  also  had  for  the  most  part  become  unfaithful  to 
God,  by  resorting  to  ungodly  soothsaying  and  false  worship. 
Hence  the  sin  of  Israel  was  as  old  as  its  very  earliest  origin ; 
and  apostasy  had  spread  even  among  those  who  ought  to  have 
been  the  best  and  most  godly,  because  of  the  office  they  sus 
tained. 

Consequently  the  all-holy  One  was  obliged  to  do  what  had 
taken  place.  Ver.  28.  "  Then  I  profaned  holy  princes,  and 
gave  up  Jacob  to  the  curse,  and  Israel  to  blasphemies"  TvnfcO 
might  be  an  imperfect,  like  ?•?&!,  "  I  ate,"  in  ch.  xliv.  19,  and 
B'3«l,  « I  looked,"  in  ch.  Ixiii.  5 ;  but  run^i  by  the  side  of  it 
shows  that  the  pointing  sprang  out  of  the  future  interpretation 
contained  in  the  Targum;  so  that  as  the  latter  is  to  be  rejected, 
we  must  substitute  $9TBfJ,  njnxj  (Ges.  §  49,  2).  The  «  holy 
princes"  (sdre  qodesh)  are  the  hierarchs,  as  in  1  Chron.  xxiv. 
5,  the  supreme  spiritual  rulers  as  distinguished  from  the  tem 
poral  rulers.  The  profanation  referred  to  was  the  fact  that 
they  were  ruthlessly  hurried  off  into  a  strange  land,  where 
their  official  labours  were  necessarily  suspended.  This  was  the 
fate  of  the  leaders  of  the  worship;  and  the  whole  nation,  which 
bore  the  honourable  names  of  Jacob  and  Israel,  was  given  up 
to  the  ban  (cherem)  and  the  blasphemies  (giddupJilm)  of  the 
nations  of  the  world. 

The  prophet  cannot  bear  to  dwell  any  longer  upon  this  dark 
picture  of  their  state  of  punishment ;  the  light  of  the  promise 
breaks  through  again,  and  in  this  third  field  of  the  fourth  pro 
phecy  in  all  the  more  intensive  form.  Ch.  xliv.  1-4.  "And 
now  hear,  0  Jacob  my  servant,  and  Israel  whom  I  have  chosen 
Thus  saith  Jehovah,  thy  Creator,  and  thy  Former  from  the 
womb,  wlio  cometh  to  thy  help ;  Fear  not,  my  servant  Jacob ;  and 
Jeshurun,  whom  I  have  chosen  !  For  I  will  pour  out  water  upon 
thirsty  ones,  and  brooks  upon  the  dry  ground ;  will  pour  out  my 
Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and  my  blessing  upon  thine  after-grovith ; 
and  they  shoot  up  among  the  grass,  as  willows  by  flowing  waters" 
In  contrast  with  the  cherem,  i.e.  the  setting  apart  for  destruc 
tion,  there  is  here  presented  the  promise  of  the  pouring  out  of 


202  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  Spirit  and  of  blessing;  and  in  contrast  with  the 
the  promise  of  general  eagerness  to  come  and  honour  Israel 
and  its  God  (ver.  5).  The  epithets  by  which  Jehovah  desig 
nates  Himself,  and  those  applied  to  Israel  in  vers.  1,  2,  make 
the  claim  to  love  all  the  more  urgent  and  emphatic.  The 
accent  which  connects  |B2£  *p¥sv  so  as  to  make  ^pTSP  by  itself 

"•  v  •  ;  v    ; '  T   v :  :  ~       */ 

an  attributive  clause  like  to  Wn3?  is  confirmed  by  ver.  24 
and  ch.  xlix.  5  :  Israel  as  a  nation  and  all  the  individuals 
within  it  are,  as  the  chosen  servant  of  Jehovah  (ch.  xlix.  1), 
the  direct  formation  of  Jehovah  Himself  from  the  remotest 
point  of  their  history.  In  ver.  26,  Jeshurun  is  used  inter 
changeably  with  Jacob.  This  wo'-d  occurs  in  three  other 
passages  (viz.  Deut.  xxxii.  15,  xxxiii.  5,  26),  and  is  always 
written  with  kibbutz,  just  as  it  is  here.  The  rendering  'lo-paeX- 
tWo?  in  Gr.  Ven.  is  founded  upon  the  supposition  that  the 
word  is  equivalent  to  WOfc^i — a  strange  contraction,  which  is 
inadmissible,  if  only  on  account  of  the  substitution  of  p  for  b\ 
The  W  points  back  to  155^,  to  be  straight  or  even  ;  hence  A.  S. 
Th.  evOvs  (elsewhere  GuOvraTos),  Jerome  rectissimus  (though  in 
Deut.  xxxii.  15  he  renders  it,  after  the  LXX.,  dilectus).  It  is 
an  offshoot  of  ^  =  -15*  (Ps.  xxv.  21),  like  pifar,  |«YV  from  far, 
riT  ;  and  un  (=6n)  does  not  stamp  it  as  a  diminutive  (for 
jit^K  which  Kamphausen  adduces  in  opposition  to  Hengsten- 

"  /  1  XI  O 

berg  and  Yolck,  does  not  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  K^K  as 
mannikin  to  man,  but  rather  as  the  image  of  a  man  to  a  man 
himself ;  compare  the  Arabic  insdn).  We  must  not  render  it 
therefore  as  an  affectionate  diminutive,  as  Gesenius  does,  the 
more  especially  as  Jehovah,  though  speaking  in  loving  terms, 
does  not  adopt  the  language  of  a  lover.  The  relation  of 
Jeshurun  to  1^1  is  rather  the  same  as  that  of  nfcW  to  Difa;,  so 
that  the  real  meaning  is  "  gentleman,"  or  one  of  gentlemanly 
or  honourable  mind,  though  this  need  not  appear  in  the  trans 
lation,  since  the  very  nature  of  a  proper  name  would  obliterate 
it.  In  ver.  3,  the  blessings  to  be  expected  are  assigned  as  the 
reason  for  the  exhortation  to  be  of  good  cheer.  In  ver.  3a 
water  is  promised  in  the  midst  of  drought,  and  in  ver.  3b  the 
Spirit  and  blessing  of  God,  just  as  in  Joel  the  promise  of  rain 
is  first  of  all  placed  in  contrast  with  drought ;  and  this  is  fol 
lowed  by  the  premise  of  the  far  surpassing  antitype,  namely, 
the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  There  is  nothing  at  variance  with 


CHAP.  XLIV.  1-4.  203 


tliis  in  the  fact  that  we  have  not  the  form  HNDV  in  the  place  of 
NEV  (according  to  the  analogy  of  n£P3>  px,  njY^mjfe,  Ps.  Ixviii. 
10).  By  Np¥  we  understand  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  who 
are  thirsting  for  rain,  and  by  yabbdshdh  the  parched  land  itself. 
Further  on,  however,  an  express  distinction  is  made  between  the 
abundance  of  water  in  the  land  and  the  prosperous  growth  of 
the  nation  planted  by  the  side  of  water-brooks  (Ps.  i.  3).  We 
must  not  regard  3a.  therefore,  as  a  figure,  and  3&  as  the  ex 
planation,  or  turn  3a  into  a  simile  introduced  in  the  form  of  a 
protasis,  although  unquestionably  water  and  mountain  streams 
are  made  the  symbol,  or  rather  the  anagogical  type,  of  spiritual 
blessings  coming  down  from  above  in  the  form  of  heavenly 
gifts,  by  a  gradual  ascent  from  Q;E  and  Evfa  (from  ?t  J,  to  trickle 
downwards,  Song  of  Sol.  iv.  15,  Jer.  xviii.  14)  to  'n  nn  and 
'n  nann  (fisna).  When  these  natural  and  spiritual  waters  flow 
down  upon  the  people,  once  more  restored  to  their  home,  they 
spring  up  among  (p?2  only  met  with  here,  LXX.  and  Targuin 
the  grass,  like  willows  by  water-brooks.  The  willows  L 


1  "  The  garab,"  says  TVetzstem,  "  was  only  met  with  by  me  in  one  locality, 
or,  at  any  rate,  I  only  noticed  it  once,  namely  in  the  Wady  So'eb,  near  to 
a  ford  of  the  river  which  is  called  the  Hod  ford,  from  the  chirbet  el-Hod,  a 
miserable  ruin  not  far  off.  It  is  half  an  hour  to  the  west  of  Nimrin  (Nim- 
rim,  ch.  xv.  6),  or,  speaking  more  exactly,  half  an  hour  above  (i.e.  to  the 
east  of)  Zafdt  Nimrin,  an  antique  road  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  river, 
hewn  in  a  precipitous  wall  of  rock,  like  the  ladder  of  Tyre.  I  travelled 
through  the  valley  in  June  1860,  and  find  the  following  entry  in  my  diary  : 
4  At  length  the  ravine  opened  up  into  a  broader  valley,  so  that  we  could 
get  down  to  the  clear,  copious,  and  rapid  stream,  and  were  able  to  cross 
it.  Being  exhausted  by  the  heat,  we  lay  down  near  the  ford  among  the 
oleanders,  which  the  mass  of  flowers  covered  with  a  rosy  glow.  The  reed 
grows  here  to  an  unusual  height,  as  in  the  Wady  Yarmuk,  and  willows 
(zafzaf}  and  garab  are  mingled  together,  and  form  many-branched  trees 
of  three  or  four  fathoms  in  height.  The  vegetation,  which  is  fresh  and 
luxuriant  by  the  water-side,  is  scorched  up  with  the  heat  in  the  valley 
within  as  little  as  ten  paces  from  the  banks  of  the  stream.  The  farthest 
off  is  the  'osar  plant,  with  its  thick,  juicy,  dark  green  stalks  and  leaves,  and 
its  apple  -like  fruit,  which  is  of  the  same  colour,  and  therefore  not  yet  ripe. 
The  garab  tree  has  already  done  flowering.  The  leaves  of  this  tree  stand 
quite  close  around  the  stem,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Sindiana  (the  Syrian  oak), 
and,  like  the  leaves  of  the  latter,  are  fringed  with  little  thorns  ;  but,  like 
the  willow,  it  is  a  water  plant,  and  our  companions  Abdallah  and  Nasrallali 
assured  us  that  it  was  only  met  with  near  flowing  water  and  in  hot  low 
lands.  Its  bunches  of  flowers  are  at  the  points  of  the  slender  branches,  and 


204  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

are  the  nation,  which  has  hitherto  resembled  withered  plants  in 
a  barren  soil,  but  is  now  restored  to  all  the  bloom  of  youth 
through  the  Spirit  and  blessing  of  God.  The  grass  stands  for 
the  land,  which  resembles  a  green  luxuriant  plain  ;  and  the 
water-brooks  represent  the  abundant  supply  of  living  waters, 
which  promote  the  prosperity  of  the  land  and  its  inhabitants. 

When  Jehovah  has  thus  acknowledged  His  people  once 
more,  the  heathen,  to  whose  gidduphlm  (blasphemies)  Israel  has 
hitherto  been  given  up,  will  count  it  the  greatest  honour  to 
belong  to  Jehovah  and  His  people.  Ver.  5.  "  One  will  say,  I 
belong  to  Jehovah ;  and  a  second  will  solemnly  name  the  name  of 
Jacob  ;  and  a  third  will  inscribe  himself  to  Jehovah,  and  name 
the  name  of  Israel  with  honour"  The  threefold  zeh  refers  to 
the  heathen,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4,  5.  One  will  declare  himself 

assume  an  umbelliferous  form.  This  is  the  liy  of  the  Bible.'  Conse 
quently  the  garab  or  (as  nom.  unitatis)  the  garaba  cannot  be  regarded  as  a 
species  of  willow  ;  and  Winer's  assumption  {Real-  Worterbuch,  s.v.  Weiden), 
that  the  weeping  willow  is  intended  at  any  rate  in  Ps.  cxxxvii.  2,  is  an 
error.  In  Arabic  the  weeping  willow  is  always  called  slmfshaf  mustacld 
(the  drooping  tree).  At  the  same  time,  we  may  render  D'Oiy  *  willows,' 
since  the  garab  loves  running  water  as  well  as  the  willow,  and  apparently 
they  seek  one  another's  society  ;  it  is  quite  enough  that  the  difference  should 
be  clearly  pointed  out  in  the  commentary.  The  reason  why  the  garab  did 
not  find  its  way  into  my  herbarium  was  the  following.  On  my  arrival  in 
Salt,  I  received  the  first  intelligence  of  the  commencement  of  the  slaughter 
of  the  Christians  on  Antilibanus,  and  heard  the  report,  which  was  then 
commonly  believed,  that  a  command  had  been  sent  from  Constantinople  to 
exterminate  Christianity  from  Syria.  This  alarming  report  compelled  me 
to  inquire  into  the  actual  state  of  affairs  ;  therefore,  leaving  my  luggage  and 
some  of  my  companions  behind,  I  set  off  with  all  speed  to  Jerusalem,  where 
I  hoped  to  obtain  reliable  information,  accompanied  by  Herr  Dorgen,  my 
kavas,  and  two  natives,  viz.  Alidallah  the  smith,  from  Salt,  and  Nasrallah 
the  smith,  from  Ain  Genna.  For  a  ride  like  this,  which  did  not  form  part 
of  the  original  plan  of  my  journey,  everything  but  weapons,  even  a  her 
barium,  would  have  been  in  the  way.  Still  there  are  small  caravans  going 
every  week  between  Salt  and  Jerusalem,  and  they  must  always  cross  the 
Hud  ford,  so  that  it  would  be  easy  to  get  a  twig  of  the  garab.  So  far  as 
I  remember,  the  remains  of  the  blossom  were  of  a  dirty  white  colour." 
(Compare  vol.  i.  328,  where  we  have  taken  naclial  hd'arabhlm,  according  to 
the  meaning  of  the  words,  as  a  synonym  of  Wady  Sufsaf,  or,  more  correctly, 
Safsaf.  From  the  description  given  above,  the  garab  is  a  kind  of  viburnum 
with  indented  leaves.  This  tree,  which  is  of  moderate  height,  is  found  by 
the  side  of  streams  along  with  the  willow.  According  to  Sprengel  (Gesch. 
rfe.r  Botanik.  i.  25),  the  safsafis  the  sallx  sulserrata  of  Wildenow). 


CHAP.  XL1V.  6.  205 

to  belong  to  Jehovah  ;  another  will  call  with  the  name  of  Jacob, 
i.e.  (according  to  the  analogy  of  the  phrase  'n  DKO  fcOjj)  make 
it  the  medium  and  object  of  solemn  exclamation  ;  a  third  will 
write  with  his  hand  (VlJ,  an  ace.  of  more  precise  definition, 
like  non  in  ch.  xlii.  25,  and  I'mr  in  ch.  xliii.  23),  "  To  Jehovah," 
thereby  attesting  that  he  desires  to  belong  to  Jehovah,  and 
Jehovah  alone.  This  is  the  explanation  given  by  Gesenius, 
Hahn,  and  others;  whereas  Hitzig  and  Knobel  follow  the  LXX. 
in  the  rendering,  u  he  will  write  upon  his  hand  t  layehovdh,'  i.e. 
mark  the  name  of  Jehovah  upon  it."  But  apart  from  the  fact 
that  kdthabh,  with  an  accusative  of  the  writing  materials,  would 
be  unprecedented  (the  construction  required  would  be  ftj"^), 
this  view  is  overthrown  by  the  fact  that  tattooing  was  prohibited 
by  the  Israelitish  law  (Lev.  xix.  28  ;  compare  the  mark  of  the 
beast  in  Eev.  xiii.  16).  DCO  Nip  is  interchanged  with  DBa  H33? 
to  surname,  or  entitle  (the  Syriac  and  Arabic  are  the  same ; 
compare  the  Arabic  kunye,  the  name  given  to  a  man  as  the 
father  of  such  and  such  a  person,  e.g.  Abu-Muhammed,  rhetori 
cally  called  metonymy).  The  name  Israel  becomes  a  name  or 
title  of  honour  among  the  heathen.  This  concludes  the  fourth 
prophecy,  which  opens  out  into  three  distinct  fields.  With 
nnjn  in  ch.  xliv.  1  it  began  to  approach  the  close,  just  as  the 
third  did  in  ch.  xliii.  1, — a  well-rounded  whole,  which  leaves 
nothing  wanting. 

FIFTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  XLIV.  6-23. 

THE  RIDICULOUS  GODS  OF  THE  NATIONS  ;    AND  THE  GOD  OF 
ISRAEL,  WHO  MAKES  HIS  PEOPLE  TO  REJOICE. 

A  new  pledge  of  redemption  is  given,  and  a  fresh  exhorta 
tion  to  trust  in  Jehovah  ;  the  wretchedness  of  the  idols  and 
their  worshippers  being  pointed  out,  in  contrast  with  Jehovah, 
the  only  speaking  and  acting  God.  Ver.  6.  "  Thus  saith 
Jehovah  the  King  of  Israel,  and  its  Redeemer,  Jehovah  of  hosts ; 
I  am  first,  and  I  last ;  and  beside  me  there  is  no  God'9  The 
fact  that  His  deity,  which  rules  over  not  only  the  natural 
world,  but  history  as  well,  is  thus  without  equal  and  above 
all  time,  is  now  proved  by  Him  from  the  fact  that  He  alone 
manifests  Himself  as  God,  and  that  by  the  utterance  of  pro- 


206  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

jhecy.  Ver.  7.  "And  who  preaches  as  I  do?  Let  him  make  it 
known,  and  show  it  to  me ;  since  I  founded  the  people  of  ancient 
time !  A  nd  future  things,  and  what  is  approaching,  let  them 
only  make  known."  Jehovah  shows  Himself  as  the  God  of 
prophecy  since  the  time  that  He  founded  D^ijroy  (K"i^  refers 
to  the  continued  preaching  of  prophecy).  'Am  roldm  is  the 
epithet  applied  in  Ezek.  xxvi.  20  to  the  people  of  the  dead, 
who  are  sleeping  the  long  sleep  of  the  grave ;  and  here  it  does 
not  refer  to  Israel,  which  could  neither  be  called  an  "  eternal " 
nation,  nor  a  people  of  the  olden  time,  and  which  would  have 
been  more  directly  named;  but  according  to  ch.  xl.  7  and  xlii.  5, 
where  'am  signifies  the  human  race,  and  Job  xxii.  15  sqq.,  where 
roldm  is  the  time  of  the  old  world  before  the  flood,  it  signifies 
humanity  as  existing  from  the  very  earliest  times.  The  pro 
phecies  of  Jehovah  reach  back  even  to  the  history  of  paradise. 
The  parenthetical  clause,  "Let  him  speak  it  out,  and  tell  it  me," 
is  like  the  apodosis  of  a  hypothetical  protasis  :  "  if  any  one 
thinks  that  he  can  stand  by  my  side."  The  challenge  points  to 
earlier  prophecies ;  with  nvn'ti,}  it  takes  a  turn  to  what  is  future, 
JYPriK  itself  denoting  what  is  absolutely  future,  according  to 
ch.  xli.  23,  and  nJN3H  "i£'N  what  is  about  to  be  realized  imme 
diately  ;  Idmo  is  an  ethical  dative. 

Of  course,  none  of  the  heathen  gods  could  in  any  way  answer 
to  the  challenge.  So  much  the  more  confident  might  Israel  be, 
seeing  that  it  had  quite  another  God.  Yer.  8.  "Despair  ye  not, 
neither  tremble  :  have  not  I  told  thee  long  ago,  and  made  known, 
and  ye  are  my  witnesses :  is  there  a  God  beside  me?  And  nowhere 
a  rock;  I  know  of  none"  The  Jewish  lexicographers  derive  innn 
(with  the  first  syllable  closed)  from  nrn  (m) ;  whereas  modern 
lexicographers  prefer  some  of  them  to  read  ^"ifi,  tlrehu,  from 
nij  (Ges.,  Knobel),  and  others  *K"Vn  (Ewald).  'But  the  possi 
bility  of  there  being  a  verb  nrn,  to  tremble  or  fear,  cannot  for 
a  moment  be  doubted  when  we  think  of  such  words  as  &O'T,  JHJ, 

compare  also  8\.  (applied  to  water  moving  to  and  fro).     It  was 

not  of  the  heathen  deities  that  they  were  directed  not  to  be 
afraid,  as  in  Jer.  x.  5,  but  rather  the  great  catastrophe  coming 
upon  the  nations,  of  which  Cyrus  was  the  instrument.  In  the 
midst  of  this,  when  one  nation  after  another  would  be  over 
thrown,  and  its  tutelar  gods  would  prove  to  be  worthless,  Israel 


CHAP.  XLIV.  9-11.  207 

would  have  nothing  to  fear,  since  its  God,  who  was  no  dumb 
idol,  had  foretold  all  this,  and  that  indeed  long  ago  (THE,  cf. 
tTfrOD,  ch.  xli.  26),  as  they  themselves  must  bear  witness.  Pro 
phecies  before  the  captivity  had  foretold  the  conquest  of  Baby 
lon  by  Medes  and  Elamites,  and  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from 
the  Babylonian  bondage;  and  even  these  prophecies  themselves 
were  like  a  spirit's  voice  from  the  far  distant  past,  consoling 
the  people  of  the  captivity  beforehand,  and  serving  to  support 
their  faith.  On  the  ground  of  such  well-known  self-manifes 
tations,  Jehovah  could  well  ask,  "Is  there  a  God  beside  me?" 
— a  virtual  denial  in  the  form  of  an  interrogation,  to  which  the 
categorical  denial,  "  There  is  no  rock  (i.e.  no  ground  of  trust, 
ch.  xxvi.  4,  xvii.  10),  I  know  of  none  (beside  me),"  is  attached. 
The  heathen  gods  are  so  far  from  being  a  ground  of  trust, 
that  all  who  trust  in  them  must  discover  with  alarm  how  they 
have  deceived  themselves.  Vers.  9-11.  "  The  makers  of  idols, 
they  are  all  desolation,  and  their  bosom-children  worthless ;  and 
those  who  bear  witness  for  them  see  nothing  and  know  nothing, 
that  they  may  be  put  to  shame.  Who  hath  formed  the  god,  and 
cast  the  idol  to  no  profit^  Behold.,  all  its  followers  will  be  put  to 
shame ;  and  the  workmen  are  men:  let  them  all  assemble  together, 
draw  near,  be  alarmed,  be  all  put  to  shame  together."  The 
chamudlm  (favourites)  of  the  makers  of  idols  are  the  false  gods, 
for  whose  favour  they  sue  with  such  earnestness.  If  we  retain 
the  word  HEn,  which  is  pointed  as  critically  suspicious,  and 
therefore  is  not  accentuated,  the  explanation  might  possibly  be, 
"  Their  witnesses  (i.e.  witnesses  against  themselves)  are  they 
(the  idols)  :  they  see  not,  and  are  without  consciousness,  that 
they  (those  who  trust  in  them)  may  be  put  to  shame."  In  any 
case,  the  subject  to  yeblwsliu  (shall  be  put  to  shame)  is  the 
worshippers  of  idols.  If  we  erase  nsn,  Drny  will  be  those  who 
come  forward  as  witnesses  for  the  idols.  This  makes  the  words 
easier  and  less  ambiguous.  At  the  same  time,  the  Septuagint 
retains  the  word  (fcal  pdprvpes  avrwv  elaiv).  As  "  not  seeing" 
here  signifies  to  be  blind,  so  "  not  knowing  "  is  also  to  be  under 
stood  as  a  self-contained  expression,  meaning  to  be  irrational, 
just  as  in  ch.  xlv.  20,  Ivi.  10  (in  ch.  i.  3,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
have  taken  it  in  a  different  sense).  &»6  implies  that  the  will  of 
the  sinner  in  his  sin  has  also  destruction  for  its  object;  and  this 
is  not  something  added  to  the  sin,  but  growing  out  of  it.  The 


208  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

question  in  ver.  10  summons  the  maker  of  idols  for  the  pur 
pose  of  announcing  his  fate,  and  in  ^Jfto  W!P  (to  no  profit)  this 
announcement  is  already  contained.  Ver.  11  is  simply  a  de 
velopment  of  this  expression,  "  to  no  profit."  "W ,  like  JJBJ  in 
ver.  14,  is  contrary  to  the  rhythmical  law  milra  which  prevails 
elsewhere.  V"nn  (its  followers)  are  not  the  fellow-workmen  of 
the  maker  of  idols  (inasmuch  as  in  that  case  the  maker  himself 
would  be  left  without  any  share  in  the  threat),  but  the  associates 
(I.e.  followers)  of  the  idols  (Hos.  iv.  17 ;  1  Cor.  x.  20).  It  is  a 
pernicious  work  that  they  have  thus  had  done  for  them.  And 
what  of  the  makers  themselves  ?  They  are  numbered  among 
the  men.  So  that  they  who  ought  to  know  that  they  are 
made  by  God,  become  makers  of  gods  themselves.  What  an 
absurdity  !  Let  them  crowd  together,  the  whole  guild  of  god- 
makers,  and  draw  near  to  speak  to  the  works  they  have  made. 
All  their  eyes  will  soon  be  opened  with  amazement  and  alarm. 
The  prophet  now  conducts  us  into  the  workshops.  Vers. 
12,  13.  u  The  iron-smith  has  a  chisel,  and  works  with  red-hot 
coals,  and  shapes  it  ivith  hammers,  and  works  it  with  his  powerful 
arm.  He  gets  hungry  thereby,  and  his  strengtli  fails ;  if  he 
drink  no  water,  he  becomes  exhausted.  The  carpenter  draws  the 
line,  marks  it  with  the  pencil,  carries  it  out  with  planes,  and 
makes  a  drawing  of  it  with  the  compass,  and  carries  it  out  like 
the  figure  of  a  man,  like  the  beauty  of  a  man,  which  may  diuell 
in  the  house."  The  two  words  char  ash  barzel  are  connected 
together  in  the  sense  of  faber  ferrarius,  as  we  may  see  from 
the  expression  chdrash  'etslm  (the  carpenter,  faber  liynarius), 
which  follows  in  ver.  13.  Chdrash  is  the  construct  of  chdrash 
(=charrdsh),  as  in  Ex.  xxviii.  11.  The  second  kametz  of  this 
form  of  noun  does  indeed  admit  of  contraction,  but  only  to  the 
extent  of  a  full  short  vowel  ;  consequently  the  construct  of  the 
plural  is  not  ^n,  but  "Bhn  (cn.  xlv.  16,  etc.).  Hence  ver.  12 
describes  how  the  smith  constructs  an  idol  of  iron,  ver.  13  how 
the  carpenter  makes  one  of  wood.  But  the  first  clause,  <na  Bnn 
^V^j  is  enigmatical.  In  any  case,  ^JTO  is  a  smith's  tool  of  some 
kind  (from  TO,  related  to  Wi).  And  consequently  Gesenius, 
Umbreit,  and  others,  adopt  the  rendering,  "  the  smith  an  axe, 
that  does  he  work,  .  .  . ;"  but  the  further  account  of  the  origin 
of  an  idol  says  nothing  at  all  about  this  axe,  which  the  smith 
supplies  to  the  carpenter,  that  he  may  hew  out  an  idol  with  it. 


CHAP.  XLIV.  14-17.  209 

Hitzig  renders  it,  "  The  smith,  a  hatchet  does  he  work,  and 
forms  it  (viz.  into  an  idol) ;"  but  what  a  roundabout  way ! 
first  to  make  a  hatchet  and  then  make  it  into  an  idol,  which 
would  look  very  slim  when  made.  Knobel  translates  it,  u  As 
for  the  cutting-smith,  he  works  it ;"  but  this  guild  of  cutting- 
smiths  certainly  belongs  to  Utopia.  The  best  way  to  render 
the  sentence  intelligible,  would  be  to  supply  $>  :  "  The  smith 
has  (uses)  the  mdatsdd"  But  in  all  probability  a  word  has 
dropped  out ;  and  the  Septuagint  rendering,  on  &%vvev  re/crav 
(Ti^pov  <TK67rdpvq>  elpydo-aroj  K.T.\.,  shows  that  the  original 
reading  of  the  text  was  nvyft  ^Pl  Knn  Tin,  and  that  Tin  got 
lost  on  account  of  its  proximity  to  niT.  The  meaning  therefore 
is,  "  The  smith  has  sharpened,  or  sharpens  (chidded,  syn.  sliinnen) 
the  maatsdd"  possibly  the  chisel,  to  cut  the  iron  upon  the 
anvil ;  and  works  with  red-hot  coals,  making  the  iron  red-hot 
by  blowing  the  fire.  The  piece  of  iron  which  he  cuts  off  is  the 
future  idol,  and  this  he  shapes  with  hammers  (^^^  the  future 
of  "W).  And  what  of  the  carpenter  ?  He  stretches  the  line 
upon  the  block  of  wood,  to  measure  the  length  and  breadth  of 
the  idol ;  he  marks  it  upon  the  wood  with  red-stone  (sered, 
rubrica,  used  by  carpenters),  and  works  it  with  planes  (maqtsuoth, 
a  feminine  form  of  V^i?P,  from  JttiJ,  to  cut  off,  pare  off,  plane  ; 
compare  the  Arabic  mikta),  and  with  the  compasses  (mechugdh, 
the  tool  used,  lading,  Le.  for  making  a  circle)  he  draws  the 
outline  of  it,  that  \i  to  say,  in  order  that  the  different  parts  of 
the  body  may  be  in  right  proportion ;  and  he  constructs  it  in 
such  a  manner  that  it  acquires  the  shape  of  a  man,  the  beautiful 
appearance  of  a  man,  to  be  set  up  like  a  human  inmate  in 
either  a  temple  or  private  house.  The  piel  "wri  ("^tt),  from 
which  comes  yetdarehu)  is  varied  here  (according  to  Isaiah's 
custom ;  cf.  ch.  xxix.  7,  xxvi.  5)  with  the  poel  "i$i%  which  is  to 
be  understood  as  denoting  the  more  exact  configuration.  The 
preterites  indicate  the  work  for  which  both  smith  and  carpenter 
have  made  their  preparations ;  the  futures,  the  work  in  which 
they  are  engaged. 

The  prophet  nowr  traces  the  origin  of  the  idols  still  further 
back.  Their  existence  or  non-existence  ultimately  depends 
upon  whether  it  rains  or  not.  Vers.  14-17.  "  One  prepares  to 
cut  down  cedars,  and  takes  holm  and  oak-tree,  and  chooses  for 
himself  among  the  trees  of  the  foreat.  He  has  planted  a  fig,  and 
VOL.  II.  O 


210  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  rain  draws  it  up.  And  it  serves  the  man  for  firing :  lie  take* 
thereof,  and  ivarms  himself ;  he  also  heats,  and  bakes  bread ;  he 
also  works  it  into  a  god,  and  prostrates  himself;  makes  an  idol  of 
it,  and  falls  down  before  it.  The  half  of  it  he  has  burned  in  the 
fire:  over  the  half  of  it  he  eats  flesh,  roasts  a  roast,  and  is  satis- 
fled;  he  also  warms  himself,  and  says,  Hurrah,  1  am  getting 
warm,  I  feel  the  heat.  And  the  rest  of  it  he  makes  into  a  god, 
into  his  idol,  and  says,  Save  me,  for  thou  art  my  god"  The 
subject  of  the  sentence  is  not  the  carpenter  of  the  previous 
verse,  but  "  any  one."  tn"JK  apparently  stands  first,  as  indi 
cating  the  species ;  and  in  the  Talmud  and  Midrash  the  trees 
named  are  really  described  as  DNnN  W.  But  tirzdh  (from 
tdraz,  to  be  hard  or  firm)  does  not  appear  to  be  a  coniferous 
tree  ;  and  the  connection  with  'allon,  the  oak,  is  favourable  to 
the  rendering  a<ypiof3d\avos  (LXX.,  A.  Th.),  ilex  (Vulg.). 
On  'immets,  to  choose,  see  ch.  xli.  10.  p.**  (with  Nun  minuscu- 
lum),  plur.  D^lK  (b.  Pos-ha  Sana  23a)'  or  ttnx  (Para  iii.  8), 
is  explained  by  the  Talmud  as  "^y,  sing.  toy,  i.e.  according  to 
Aruch  and  Rashi,  laurier,  the  berries  of  which  are  called  baies. 
We  have  rendered  it  "fig"  according  to  the  LXX.  and  Jerome, 
since  it  will  not  do  to  follow  the  seductive  guidance  of  the 
similarity  in  sound  to  ornus  (which  is  hardly  equivalent  to 
opewos).1  The  description  is  genealogical,  and  therefore  moves 
retrogressively,  from  the  felling  to  the  planting,  rrrn  in  ver. 
15a  refers  to  the  felled  and  planted  tree,  and  primarily  to  the 
ash.  DHtt  (of  such  as  these)  is  neuter,  as  in  ch.  xxx.  6  ;  at  the 
same  time,  the  prophet  had  the  D^vy  (the  wood,  both  as  produce 
and  material)  in  his  mind.  The  repeated  *1K  lays  emphasis 
upon  the  fact,  that  such  different  tilings  are  done  with  the  very 
same  wood.  It  is  used  for  warming,  and  for  the  preparation 
of  food,  as  well  as  for  making  a  god.  On  the  verbs  of  adora 
tion,  hishtachavdh  (root  shach,  to  sink,  to  settle  down)  and 
sdgad,  which  is  only  applied  to  idolatrous  worship,  and  from 
which  mesgid,  a  mosque,  is  derived,  see  Holemann's  Bibel- 
studien,  i.  3.  ^  may  no  doubt  be  taken  as  a  plural  (=  Dr6? 
as  in  ch.  xxx.  5),  "  such  things  (talia)  does  he  worship,"  as 
Stier  supposes  ;  but  it  is  probably  pathetic,  and  equivalent  to 

1  The  apt*  of  Theophrastus  is  probably  quercus  ilex,  which  is  still  called 
dpiti-  the  laurus  nobilis  is  now  called  /SaiVja,  from  the  branches  which  serve 
instead  of  palm-branches. 


CHAP.  XLIV.  18,  19.  211 

tf?,  as  in  ch.'liii.  8  (compare  Ps.  xi.  7  ;  E\vald,  §  247,  a).  Ac 
cording  to  the  double  application  of  the  wood  mentioned  in  ver. 
15,  a  distinction  is  drawn  in  vers.  16,  17  between  the  one  half 
of  the  wood  and  the  other.  The  repeated  chetsyo  (the  half  of 
it)  in  ver.  16  refers  to  the  first  half,  which  furnishes  not  only 
fuel  for  burning,  but  shavings  and  coals  for  roasting  and  baking 
as  well.  And  as  a  fire  made  for  cooking  warms  quite  as  much 
as  one  made  expressly  for  the  purpose,  the  prophet  dwells  upon 
this  benefit  which  the  wood  of  the  idol  does  confer.  On  the 
tone  upon  the  last  syllable  of  chammothl,  see  at  Job  xix.  17  ; 
and  on  the  use  of  the  word  nx^  as  a  comprehensive  term, 
embracing  every  kind  of  sensation  and  perception,  see  my 
Psychologic,  p.  234.  Diagoras  of  Melos,  a  pupil  of  Democritus, 
once  threw  a  wooden  standing  figure  of  Hercules  into  the  fire, 
and  said  jocularly,  "  Come  now,  Hercules,  perform  thy  thir 
teenth  labour,  and  help  me  to  cook  the  turnips." 

So  irrational  is  idolatry ;  but  yet,  through  self-hardening, 
they  have  fallen  under  the  judgment  of  hardness  of  heart  (ch. 
vi.  9,  10,  xix.  3,  xxix.  10),  and  have  been  given  up  to  a  repro 
bate  mind  (Rom.  i.  28).  Vers.  18,  19.  "  They  perceive  not, 
and  do  not  understand :  for  their  eyes  are  smeared  over,  so  that 
they  do  not  see ;  their  hearts,  so  that  they  do  not  understand. 
And  men  take  it  not  to  heart,  no  perception  and  no  understanding, 
that  men  should  say,  The  half  of  it  I  have  burned  in  the  fire, 
and  also  baked  bread  upon  the  coals  thereof;  roasted  flesh,  and 
eaten  :  and  ought  I  to  make  the  rest  of  it  an  abomination,  to  fall 
down  before  the  produce  of  a  tree  ?"  Instead  of  ntp,  Lev.  xiv. 
42,  the  third  person  is  written  ntp  (from  tdchach,  Ges.  §  72, 
Anm.  8)  in  a  circumstantial  sense  :  their  eyes  are,  as  it  were, 
smeared  over  with  plaster.  The  expression  2p"7K  1^'n  or  &*ty 
(ch.  xlvi.  8),  literally  to  carry  back  into  the  heart,  which  wre 
find  as  well  as  sW#  D^>,  to  take  to  heart  (ch.  xlii.  25),  answers 
exactly  to  the  idea  of  reflection,  here  with  reference  to  the 
immense  contrast  between  a  piece  of  wood  and  the  Divine 
Being.  The  second  and  third  $h  in  ver.  19  introduce  substan 
tive  clauses,  just  as  verbal  clauses  are  introduced  by  f60.  Ibi6 
is  used  in  the  same  manner  as  in  ch.  ix.  8 :  "perception  and  insight 
showing  themselves  in  their  saying."  On  bul,  see  Job  xl.  20 ; 
the  meaning  "block"  cannot  be  established:  the  talmudic  bul, 
a  lump  or  piece,  which  Evvald  adduces,  is  the  Greek 


212  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

This  exposure  of  the  infatuation  of  idolatry  closes  with  an 
epiphonem  in  the  form  of  a  gnome  (cf.  ch.  xxvi.  7,  10).  Ver. 
20.  "  He  who  striveth  after  ashes,  a  befooled  heart  has  led  him 
astray,  and  he  does  not  deliver  his  soid,  and  does  not  think.  Is 
there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand?"  We  have  here  a  complete 
and  self-contained  sentence,  which  must  not  be  broken  up  in 
the  manner  proposed  by  Knobel,  "  He  hunts  after  ashes ;  his 
heart  is  deceived,"  etc.  He  who  makes  ashes,  i.e.  things  easily 
scattered,  perishable,  and  worthless,  the  object  of  his  effort  and 
striving  (compare  ruach  in  Hos.  xii.  2),  has  been  led  astray 
from  the  path  of  truth  and  salvation  by  a  heart  overpowered 
by  delusion  ;  he  is  so  certain,  that  he  does  not  think  of  saving 
his  soul,  and  it  never  occurs  to  him  to  say,  "  Is  there  not  a  lie 
in  my  right  hand  ?  "  All  that  belongs  to  idolatry  is  sheqer — a 
fabrication  and  a  lie.  nyi  means  primarily  to  pasture  or  tend, 
hence  to  be  concerned  about,  to  strive  after.  ?rfln  is  an  attribu 
tive,  from  tdlal  =  hdthal,  ludere,  ludijicare  (see  at  ch.  xxx.  10). 

The  second  half  of  the  prophecy  commences  with  ver.  21. 
It  opens  with  an  admonition.  Ver.  21.  "  Remember  this, 
Jacob  and  Israel;  for  tlwu  art  my  servant :  I  have  formed  thee; 
thou  art  servant  to  me,  0  Israel :  thou  art  not  forgotten  by  me" 
The  thing  to  which  the  former  were  blind,  —  namely,  that 
idolatry  is  a  lie, — Jacob  was  to  have  firmly  impressed  upon  its 
mind.  The  words  "  and  Israel,"  which  are  attached,  are  a 
contraction  for  "  and  remember  this,  O  Israel "  (compare  the 
vocatives  after  Vdu  in  Prov.  viii.  5  and  Joel  ii.  23).  In  the 
reason  assigned,  the  tone  rests  upon  my  in  the  expression  a  my 
servant,"  and  for  this  reason  "  servant  to  me "  is  used  inter 
changeably  with  it.  Israel  is  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  and  as 
such  it  was  formed  by  Jehovah  ;  and  therefore  reverence  was 
due  to  Him,  and  Him  alone.  The  words  which  follow  are 
rendered  by  the  LXX.,  Targum,  Jerome,  and  Luther  as 
though  they  read  W3H  K?9  though  Hitzig  regards  the  same 
rendering  as  admissible  even  with  the  reading  W3n?  inasmuch 
as  the  niphal  n$J  has  the  middle  sense  of  €7ri,\av0dvecr6ai,  obli- 
visci.  But  it  cannot  be  shown  that  nizkar  is  ever  used  in  the 
analogous  sense  of  fiifLvq<rK€<rOai,  recordari.  The  niphal,  which 
was  no  doubt  originally  reflective,  is  always  used  in  Hebrew 
to  indicate  simply  the  passive  endurance  of  something  which 
originated  with  the  subject  of  the  action  referred  to,  so  that 


CHAP.  XLIV.  22.  213 

nisshdh  could  only  signify  "  to  forget  one's  self."  We  must 
indeed  admit  the  possibility  of  the  meaning  "  to  forget  one's 
self "  having  passed  into  the  meaning  "  to  be  forgetful,"  and 
this  into  the  meaning  "  to  forget."  The  Aramaean  ^ntf  also 
signifies  to  be  forgotten  and  (with  an  accent  following)  to  for 
get,  and  the  connection  with  an  objective  suffix  has  a  support 
in  ^lon^  in  Ps.  cix.  3.  But  the  latter  is  really  equivalent 
to  *flN  1En7l1?  so  that  it  may  be  adduced  with  equal  propriety 
in  support  of  the  other  rendering,  according  to  which  ^Jfl  is 
equivalent  to  ^  HEOn  (Ges.,  Umbr.,  Ewald,  Stier).  There  are 
many  examples  of  this  brachyological  use  of  the  suffix  (Ges. 
§  121,  4),  so  that  this  rendering  is  certainly  the  safer  of  the 
two.  It  also  suits  the  context  quite  as  well  as  the  former, 
" Oh,  forget  me  not;"  the  assurance  "thou  wilt  not  be  for 
gotten  by  me"  (compare  ch.  xlix.  15  and  the  lamentation  of 
Israel  in  ch.  xl.  27)  being  immediately  followed  by  an 
announcement  of  the  act  of  love,  by  which  the  declaration  is 
most  gloriously  confirmed. — Ver.  22.  "  /  have  blotted  out  thy 
transgressions  as  a  misty  and  thy  sins  as  clouds :  return  to  me ; 
for  I  have  redeemed  thee"  We  have  adopted  the  rendering 
"mist"  merely  because  we  have  no  synonym  to  "cloud;"  we 
have  not  translated  it  "  thick  cloud,"  because  the  idea  of  dark 
ness,  thickness,  or  opacity,  which  is  the  one  immediately  sug 
gested  by  the  wTord,  had  become  almost  entirely  lost  (see  ch. 
xxv.  5).  Moreover,  *>£  2V  is  evidently  intended  here  (see  ch. 
xix.  1),  inasmuch  as  the  point  of  comparison  is  not  the  dark, 
heavy  multitude  of  sins,  but  the  facility  and  rapidity  with 
which  they  are  expunged.  Whether  we  connect  with  Wno 
the  idea  of  a  stain,  as  in  Ps.  li.  3,  11,  or  that  of  a  debt  entered 
in  a  ledger,  as  in  Col.  ii.  14,  and  as  we  explained  it  in  ch.  xliii. 
25  (cf.  mdchdhj  Ex.  xxxii.  32,  33),  in  any  case  sin  is  regarded 
as  something  standing  between  God  and  man,  and  impeding 
or  disturbing  the  intercourse  between  them.  This  Jehovah 
clears  away,  just  as  when  His  wind  sweeps  away  the  clouds, 
and  restores  the  blue  sky  again  (Job  xxvi.  13).  Thus  does 
God's  free  grace  now  interpose  at  the  very  time  when  Israel 
thinks  He  has  forgotten  it,  blotting  out  Israel's  sin,  and 
proving  this  by  redeeming  it  from  a  state  of  punishment. 
What  an  evangelical  sound  the  preaching  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment  evangelist  has  in  this  passage  also !  Forgiveness  and 


214  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

redemption  are  not  offered  on  condition  of  conversion,  but 
the  mercy  of  God  conies  to  Israel  in  direct  contrast  to  what 
its  works  deserve,  and  Israel  is  merely  called  upon  to  recipro 
cate  this  by  conversion  and  renewed  obedience.  The  perfects 
denote  that  which  has  essentially  taken  place.  Jehovah  has 
blotted  out  Israel's  sin,  inasmuch  as  He  does  not  impute  it  any 
more,  and  thus  has  redeemed  Israel.  All  that  yet  remains  is 
the  outward  manifestation  of  this  redemption,  which  is  already 
accomplished  in  the  counsel  of  God. 

There  is  already  good  ground,  therefore,  for  exuberant  re 
joicing  ;  and  the  reply  of  the  church  to  these  words  of  divine 
consolation  is  as  follows:  Ver.  23.  "Exult,  0  heavens;  for 
Jehovah  hath  accomplished  it :  shout,  ye  depths  of  the  earth ; 
break  out,  ye  mountains,  into  exulting ;  thou  forest,  and  all  the 
wood  therein  :  for  Jehovah  hath  redeemed  Jacob,  and  He  showeth 
Himself  glorious  upon  Israel"  All  creation  is  to  rejoice  in  the 
fact  that  Jehovah  has  completed  what  He  purposed,  that  He 
has  redeemed  His  people,  and  henceforth  will  show  Himself 
glorious  in  them.  The  heavens  on  high  are  to  exult ;  also  the 
depths  of  the  earth,  i.e.  not  Hades,  which  would  be  opposed 
to  the  prevailing  view  of  the  Old  Testament  (Ps.  Ixvi.,  cf. 
Ixxxviii.  13),  but  the  interior  of  the  earth,  with  its  caves,  its 
pits,  and  its  deep  abysses  (see  Ps.  cxxxix.  15)  ;  and  the  moun 
tains  and  woods  which  rise  up  from  the  earth  towards  heaven — 
all  are  to  unite  in  the  exultation  of  the  redeemed  :  for  the 
redemption  that  is  being  accomplished  in  man  will  extend  its 
effects  in  all  directions,  even  to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  natural 
world. 

This  exulting  finale  is  a  safe  boundary-stone  of  this  fifth 
prophecy.  It  opened  with  ^  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  and  the 
sixth  opens  with  the  same. 

SIXTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  XLIV.  24-XLV. 

CYRUS,  THE  ANOINTED  OF  JEHOVAH,  AND  DELIVERER  OF 

ISRAEL. 

The  promise  takes  a  new  turn  here,  acquiring  greater  and 
greater  speciality.  It  is  introduced  as  the  word  of  Jehovah, 
who  first  gave  existence  to  Israel,  and  has  not  let  it  go  to  ruin. 


CHAP.  XLIV.  21-28.  215 

Vers.  24-28.  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  thy  Redeemer,  and  He  that 
formed  thee  from  the  ivomb,  I  Jehovah  am  He  that  accom- 
plisheth  all ;  wlw  stretched  out  the  heavens  alone,  spread  out  the 
earth  by  Himself;  who  bringeth  to  nought  the  signs  of  the  pro- 
pliets  of  lies,  and  exposeth  the  soothsayers  as  raging  mad ;  who 
turneth  back  the  wise  men,  and  maketh  their  science  folly ;  who 
Tealizeth  the  word  of  His  servant,  and  accomplishetli  the  predic 
tion  of  His  messengers ;  who  saith  to  Jerusalem,  She  shall  be 
inhabited!  and  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  They  shall  be  built,  and 
their  ruins  I  raise  up  again  !  who  saith  to  the  whirlpool,  Dry 
up  ;  and  1  dry  its  streams  !  who  saith  to  Koresh,  My  shepherd 
and  he  will  perform  all  my  will ;  and  will  say  to  Jerusalem,  She 
shall  be  built,  and  the  temple  founded  /"  The  prophecy  which 
commences  with  ver.  24a  is  carried  on  through  this  group  of 
verses  in  a  series  of  participial  predicates  to  *3JK  (I).  Jehovah 
is  roseh  kol,  accomplishing  all  (perjiciens  omnia),  so  that  there 
is  nothing  that  is  not  traceable  to  His  might  and  wisdom  as 
the  first  cause.  It  was  He  who  alone,  without  the  co-operation 
of  any  other  being,  stretched  out  the  heavens,  who  made  the 
earth  into  a  wide  plain  by  Himself,  i.e.  so  that  it  proceeded  from 
Himself  alone  :  *nx®,  as  in  Josh.  xi.  20  (compare  "SO,  ch.  xxx. 
1  ;  and  mimmenni  in  Hos.  viii.  4),  chethib  ""flN  *£>,  "  who  was 
with  me,"  or  "who  is  it  beside  me?"  The  Targum  follows 
the  keri;  the  Septnagint  the  chethib,  attaching  it  to  the  fol 
lowing  words,  Tt?  erepo?  SiaoveeSacret.  Ver.  25  passes  on  from 
Him  whom  creation  proves  to  be  God,  to  Him  who  is  proving 
Himself  to  be  so  in  history  also,  and  that  with  obvious  refer 
ence  to  the  Chaldean  soothsayers  and  wise  men  (ch.  xlvii.  D, 
10),  who  held  out  to  proud  Babylon  the  most  splendid  and 
hopeful  prognostics.  "  Who  brings  to  nought  (mepher,  opp. 
meqliri)  the  signs,"  i.e.  the  marvellous  proofs  of  their  divine 
mission  which  the  false  prophets  adduced  by  means  of  fraud 
and  witchcraft.  The  LXX.  render  baddlm,  eyycurrpifjLvGcov, 
Targ.  bidm  (in  other  passages  =  9ob,  Lev.  xx.  27  ;  'obdth,  Lev. 
xix.  31  ;  hence  =  irvOcov,  TrvOwves).  At  ch.  xvi.  6  and  Job 
xi.  3  we  have  derived  it  as  a  common  noun  from  rm  =  XD3, 
to  speak  at  random  ;  but  it  is  possible  that  rna  may  originally 
have  signified  to  produce  or  bring  forth,  without  any  reference 
to  /3a,TTO\oyelv,  then  to  invent,  to  fabricate,  so  that  badd'tm  as 
a  personal  name  (as  in  Jer.  1.  30)  would  be  synonymous  with 


216  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

baddaim,  mendaces.  On  qdseimm,  see  ch.  iii.  2  (vol.  i. 131)  ;  on 
yfholel,  Job  xii.  17,  where  it  occurs  in  connection  with  a  similar 
predicative  description  of  God  according  to  His  works.  In 
ver.  26  a  contrast  is  drawn  between  the  heathen  soothsayers 
and  wise  men,  and  the  servant  and  messengers  of  Jehovah, 
whose  word,  whose  'etsdh,  i.e.  determination  or  disclosure  con 
cerning  the  future  (cf.  yaats,  ch.  xli.  28),  he  realizes  and  per 
fectly  fulfils.  By  "  his  servant"  we  are  to  understand  Israel 
itself,  according  to  ch.  xlii.  19,  but  only  relatively,  namely,  as 
the  bearer  of  the  prophetic  word,  and  therefore  as  the  kernel 
of  Israel  regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  the  prophetic  mission 
which  it  performed;  and  consequently  "his  messengers"  are 
the  prophets  of  Jehovah  who  were  called  out  of  Israel.  The 
singular  "  his  servant"  is  expanded  in  "  his  messenger"  into 
the  plurality  embraced  in  the  one  idea.  This  is  far  more 
probable  than  that  the  author  of  these  prophetic  words,  who 
only  speaks  of  himself  in  a  roundabout  manner  even  in  ch.  xl. 
6,  should  here  refer  directly  to  himself  (according  to  ch.  xx.  3). 
In  ver.  266  the  predicates  become  special  prophecies,  and  hence 
their  outward  limits  are  also  defined.  As  we  have  S^n  and 
not  ^K^Rj  we  must  adopt  the  rendering  habitetur  and  cedificentur, 
with  which  the  continuation  of  the  latter  et  vastata  ejus  erigam 
agrees.  In  ver.  27  the  prophecy  moves  back  from  the  restora 
tion  of  Jerusalem  and  the  cities  of  Judah  to  the  conquest  of 
Babylon.  The  expression  calls  to  mind  the  drying  up  of  the 
Red  Sea  (ch.  li.  10,  xliii.  16) ;  but  here  it  relates  to  something 
future,  according  to  ch.  xlii.  15,  1.  2, — namely,  to  the  drying  up 
of  the  Euphrates,  which  Cyrus  turned  into  the  enlarged  basin 
of  Sepharvaim,  so  that  the  water  sank  to  the  depth  of  a  single 
foot,  and  men  could  "  go  through  on  foot"  (Herod,  i.  191). 
But  in  the  complex  view  of  the  prophet,  the  possibility  of  the 
conqueror's  crossing  involved  the  possibility  of  the  exiles'  depart 
ing  from  the  prison  of  the  imperial  city,  which  was  surrounded 
by  a  natural  and  artificial  line  of  waters  (ch.  xi.  15).  ITOtf 
(from  ^  =  fe,  to  whiz  or  whirl)  refers  to  the  Euphrates, 
just  as  nftsuldh  in  Job  xli.  23,  Zech.  x.  11,  does  to  the  Nile  ; 
'T^y1^  is  used  *n  tne  same  sense  as  the  Homeric  '/2/ceai/oto 
peeOpa.  In  ver.  28  the  special  character  of  the  promise  reaches 
its  highest  shoot.  The  deliverer  of  Israel  is  mentioned  by 
name  :  "  That  saith  to  Koresh,  My  shepherd  (i.e.  a 


CHAP.  XLIV.  24-28  217 

\acov  appointed  by  me),  and  he  who  performs  all  my  will" 
(chephets,  OeXfj^a^  not  in  the  generalized  sense  of  TrpayfAa),  and 
that  inasmuch  as  he  (Cyrus)  saith  to  (or  of)  Jerusalem,  It  shall 
be  built  (tibbdneh,  not  the  second  pers.  tibbdm),  and  the  foun 
dation  of  the  temple  laid  (lieklidl  a  masculine  elsewhere,  here  a 
feminine).  This  is  the  passage  which  is  said  by  Josephus  to 
have  induced  Cyrus  to  send  back  the  Jews  to  their  nathre  land : 
"  Accordingly,  when  Cyrus  read  this,  and  admired  the  divine 
power,  an  earnest  desire  and  ambition  seized  upon  him  to  fulfil 
what  was  so  written"  (Jos.  Ant.  xi.  2).  According  to  Ctesias 
and  others,  the  name  of  Cyrus  signifies  the  sun.  But  all  that 
can  really  be  affirmed  is,  that  it  sounds  like  the  name  of  the 
sun.  For  in  Neo-Pers.  the  sun  is  called  char,  in  Zendic  hvare 
(kartf),  and  from  this  proper  names  are  formed,  such  as  chars' id 
(Sunshine,  also  the  Sun)  ;  but  Cyrus  is  called  Kuru  or  Khuru 
upon  the  monuments,  and  this  cannot  possibly  be  connected 
with  our  chur,  which  would  be  uicara  in  Old  Persian  (Rawlin- 
son,  Lassen,  Spiegel),  and  Koresli  is  simply  the  name  of  Kuru 
(Kvp-os)  Hebraized  after  the  manner  of  a  segholate.  There  is 
a  marble-block,  for  example,  in  the  Murghab  valley,  not  far 
from  the  mausoleum  of  Cyrus,  which  contained  the  golden 
coffin  with  the  body  of  the  king  (see  Strabo,  xv.  3,  7) ;  and  on 
this  we  find  an  inscription  that  we  also  meet  with  elsewhere, 
viz.  adam.  Fur  us.  khsdya  \  tidy  a.  hakhdmanisiya,  i.e.  lam  Kuru 
the  king  of  the  Achseinenides.1  This  name  is  identical  with 
the  name  of  the  river  Kur  (Kvpos;  see  i.  393,  note)  ;  and  what 
Strabo  says  is  worthy  of  notice, — namely,  that  "  there  is  also  a 
river  called  Cyrus,  which  flows  through  the  so-called  cave  of 
Persis  near  Pasargadas,  and  whence  the  king  took  his  name, 
changing  it  from  Agradates  into  Cyrus"  (Strab.  xv.  3,  6).  It 
is  possible  also  that  there  may  be  some  connection  between  the 
name  and  the  Indian  princely  title  of  Kuru. 

The  first  strophe  of  the  first  half  of  this  sixth  prophecy 

1  See  the  engraving  of  this  tomb  of  Cyrus,  which  is  now  called  the 
"  Tomb  of  Solomon's  mother,"  in  Vaux's  Nineveh  and  Persepolis  (p.  345). 
On  the  identity  of  Murghab  and  Pasargadse,  see  Spiegel,  Keil-inschnften, 
pp.  71,  72  ;  and  with  regard  to  the  discovery  of  inscriptions  that  may  still 
be  expected  around  the  tomb  of  Cyrus,  the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society, 
x.  46,  note  4  (also  compare  Spiegel's  Geschichte  der  Entzifferung  der  Keil- 
schrift,  im  "  Ausland,"  1865,  p.  413). 


218  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

(ch.  xliv.  24  sqq.),  the  subject  of  winch  is  Cyrus,  the  predicted 
restorer  of  Jerusalem,  of  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  of  the 
temple,  is  now  followed  by  a  second  strophe  (ch.  xlv.  1-8), 
having  for  its  subject  Cyrus,  the  man  through  whose  irre 
sistible  career  of  conquest  the  heathen  would  be  brought  to 
recognise  the  power  of  Jehovah,  so  that  heavenly  blessings 
would  come  down  upon  the  earth.  The  naming  of  the  great 
shepherd  of  the  nations,  and  the  address  to  hirn,  are  continued 
in  ch.  xlv.  1-3  :  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah  to  His  anointed)  to  Koresh, 
ivhom  I  have  taken  by  his  right  hand  to  subdue  nations  before 
him  ;  and  the  loins  of  kings  I  ungird,  to  open  before  him  doors 
and  gates ,  that  they  may  not  continue  shut.  I  shall  go  before 
thee,  and  level  what  is  heaped  up :  gates  of  brass  shall  I  break 
in  pieces,  and  bolts  of  iron  shall  I  smite  to  the  ground.  And  I 
shall  give  thee  treasures  of  darkness,  and  jewels  of  hidden  places, 
that  thou  mayest  know  that  I  Jehovah  am  He  who  called  out 
thy  name,  (even)  the  God  of  Israel."  The  words  addressed  to 
Cyrus  by  Jehovah  commence  in  ver.  2,  but  promises  applying 
to  him  force  themselves  into  the  introduction,  being  evoked  by 
the  mention  of  his  name.  He  is  the  only  king  of  the  Gentiles 
whom  Jehovah  ever  calls  meshlchl  (my  anointed  ;  LXX.  TCO 
XpiaTO)  fjiov).  The  fundamental  principle  of  the  politics  of 
the  empire  of  the  world  was  all-absorbing  selfishness.  But  the 
politics  of  Cyrus  were  pervaded  by  purer  motives,  and  this 
brought  him  eternal  honour.  The  very  same  thing  which  the 
spirit  of  Darius,  the  father  of  Xerxes,  is  represented  as  saying 
of  him  in  the  Perso3  of  ^Eschylus  (v.  735),  @eo?  <yap  ov/c 
ri^Orjaev,  &><?  ev(j)pa)v  ecf)v  (for  he  was  not  hateful  to  God,  be 
cause  he  was  wrell-disposed),  is  here  said  by  the  Spirit  of  reve 
lation,  which  by  no  means  regards  the  virtues  of  the  heathen 
as  splendida  vitia.  Jehovah  has  taken  him  by  his  right  hand, 
to  accomplish  great  things  through  him  while  supporting  him 
thus.  (On  the  inf.  rad  for  rod,  from  rddad,  to  tread  down, 
see  Ges.  §  67,  Anm.  3.)  The  dual  deldthaim  has  also  a  plural 
force:  "double  doors"  (fores)  in  great  number,  viz.  those  of 
palaces.  After  the  two  infinitives,  the  verb  passes  into  the 
finite  tense  :  "  loins  of  kings  I  ungird "  (discingo ;  pitteach, 
which  refers  primarily  to  the  loosening  of  a  fastened  garment, 
is  equivalent  to  depriving  of  strength).  The  gates — namely, 
those  of  the  cities  which  he  storms — will  not  be  shut,  sc.  in 


CHAP.  XLV.  4-7.  219 

perpetuity,  that  is  to  say,  they  will  have  to  open  to  him. 
Jerome  refers  here  to  the  account  given  of  the  elder  Cyrus 
in  Xenophon's  Cyropcedia.  A  general  picture  may  no  doubt 
be  obtained  from  this  of  his  success  in  war ;  but  particular 
statements  need  support  from  other  quarters,  since  it  is  only  a 
historical  romance.  Instead  of  igntf  ("t^'itf?)  iri  ver.  2,  the  keri 
has  "i$$  ;  just  as  in  Ps.  v.  9  it  has  ">^n  instead  of  iBnn.  A 
hipldl  "VSPin  cannot  really  be  shown  to  have  existed,  and  the 
abbreviated  future  form  "ignN  would  be  altogether  without 
ground  or  object  here.  Bnnn  (tumid a ;  like  Osp7?>  amosna, 
and  others)  is  meant  to  refer  to  the  difficulties  piled  up  in  the 
conqueror's  way.  The  "gates  of  brass"  (nedhushdh,  brazen, 
poetical  for  nechosheth,  brass,  as  in  the  derivative  passage,  Ps. 
cvii.  16)  and  "bolts  of  iron"  remind  one  more  especially  of 
Babylon  with  its  hundred  "  brazen  gates,"  the  very  posts  and 
lintels  of  which  were  also  of  brass  (Herod,  i.  179)  ;  and  the 
treasures  laid  up  in  deep  darkness  and  jewels  preserved  in 
hiding-places,  of  the  riches  of  Babylon  (Jer.  1.  37,  li.  13),  and 
especially  of  those  of  the  Lydian  Sardes,  "  the  richest  city  of 
Asia  after  Babylon"  (Cyrop.  vii.  2,  11),  which  Cyrus  con 
quered  first.  On  the  treasures  which  Cyrus  acquired  through 
his  conquests,  and  to  which  allusion  is  made  in  the  Persce  of 
JEschylus,  v.  327  ("  O  Persian,  land  and  harbour  of  many 
riches  thou"),  see  Plin.  h.  n.  xxxiii.  2.  Brerewood  estimates 
the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  mentioned  there  as  captured  by 
him  at  no  less  than  £126,224,000  sterling.  And  all  this  suc 
cess  is  given  to  him  by  Jehovah,  that  he  may  know  that  it  is 
Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel  who  has  called  out  with  his  name, 
i.e.  called  out  his  name,  or  called  him  to  be  what  he  is,  and  as 
what  he  shows  himself  to  be. 

A  second  and  third  object  are  introduced  by  a  second  and 
third  ])!&?.  Vers.  4-7.  "  For  the  sake  of  my  servant  Jacob,  and 
Israel  my  chosen,  I  called  thee  hither  by  name,  surnamed  thee 
when  thou  knewest  me  not.  I  Jehovah,  and  there  is  none  else, 
beside  me  no  God :  I  equipped  thee  when  thou  knewest  me  not ; 
that  they  may  know  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  its  going 
down,  that  there  is  none  without  me :  I  Jehovah,  and  there  is 
none  else,  former  of  the  light,  and  creator  of  the  darkness; 
founder  of  peace,  and  creator  of  evil :  1  Jehovah  am  He  who 
worketh  all  this."  The  NnpKj  which  follows  the  second  reason 


220  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

assigned  like  an  apodosis,  is  construed  doubly  :  "  I  called  to 
thee,  calling  thee  by  name."  The  parallel  ^DK  refers  to  such 
titles  of  honour  as  "  my  shepherd  "  and  "  my  anointed,"  which 
had  been  given  to  him  by  Jehovah.  This  calling,  distinguish 
ing,  and  girding,  i.e.  this  equipment  of  Cyrus,  took  place  at  a 
time  when  Cyrus  knew  nothing  as  yet  of  Jehovah,  and  by  this 
very  fact  Jehovah  made  known  His  sole  Deity.  The  meaning 
is,  not  that  it  occurred  while  he  was  still  worshipping  false  gods, 
but,  as  the  refrain-like  repetition  of  the  words  "  though  thou 
hast  not  known  me  "  affirms  with  strong  emphasis,  before  he 
had  been  brought  into  existence,  or  could  know  anything  of 
Jehovah.  The  passage  is  to  be  explained  in  the  same  way  as 
Jer.  i.  5,  u  Before  I  formed  thee  in  the  womb,  I  knew  thee  " 
(see  Psychol.  pp.  36,  37,  39)  ;  and  what  the  God  of  prophecy 
here  claims  for  Himself,  must  not  be  questioned  by  false  criti 
cism,  or  weakened  down  by  false  apologetics  (i.e.  by  giving  up 
the  proper  name  Cyrus  as  a  gloss  in  ch.  xliv.  28  and  xlv.  1 ;  or 
generalizing  it  into  a  king's  name,  such  as  Pharaoh,  Abime- 
lech,  or  Agag).  The  third  and  last  object  of  this  predicted 
and  realized  success  of  the  oppressor  of  nations  and  deliverer 
of  Israel  is  the  acknowledgment  of  Jehovah,  spreading  over 
the  heathen  world  from  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  sun,  i.e. 
in  every  direction.  The  ah  of  nrnjflSD*  is  not  a  feminine  termi 
nation  (LXX.,  Targ.,  Jer.),  but  a  feminine  suffix  with  He 
raphato  pro  mappic  (Kimchi) ;  compare  ch.  xxiii.  17,  18,  xxxiv. 

17   (but   not  nitt   in   ch.  xviii.   5,   or  rnoiD  in   ch.  xxx.   32). 

Shemesh  (the  sun)  is  a  feminine  here,  as  in  Gen.  xv.  17,  Nah. 
iii.  17,  Mai.  iii.  20,  and  always  in  Arabic ;  for  the  west  is 
invariably  called  1*2 JN?  (Arab,  magrib).  In  ver.  7  we  are  led 
by  the  context  to  understand  by  darkness  and  evil  the  penal 
judgments,  through  which  light  and  peace,  or  salvation,  break 
forth  for  the  people  of  God  and  the  nations  generally.  But  as 
the  prophecy  concerning  Cyrus  closes  with  this  self-assertion 
of  Jehovah,  it  is  unquestionably  a  natural  supposition  that 
there  is  also  a  contrast  implied  to  the  dualistic  system  of 
Zarathustra,  which  divided  the  one  nature  of  the  Deity  into 
two  opposing  powers  (see  Windischmann,  Zoroastrische  Studien, 
p.  135).  The  declaration  is  so  bold,  that  Marcion  appealed  to 
this  passage  as  a  proof  that  the  God  of  the  Old  Testament  was 


CHAP.  XLV.  8.  221 

a  different  being  from  the  God  of  the  New,  and  not  the  God 
of  goodness  only.  The  Yalentinians  and  other  gnostics  also 
regarded  the  words  "  There  is  no  God  beside  me "  in  Isaiah, 
as  deceptive  words  of  the  Demiurgus.  The  early  church  met 
them  with  Tertullian's  reply,  "  de  his  creator  profitetur  malis 
quce  congruunt  judici"  and  also  made  use  of  this  self-attestation 
of  the  God  of  revelation  as  a  weapon  with  which  to  attack 
Manicheeism.  The  meaning  of  the  words  is  not  exhausted  by 
those  who  content  themselves  with  the  assertion,  that  by  the 
evil  (or  darkness)  we  are  not  to  understand  the  evil  of  guilt 
(malum  culpce),  but  the  evil  of  punishment  (malum  pcence). 
Undoubtedly,  evil  as  an  act  is  not  the  direct  working  of  God, 
but  the  spontaneous  work  of  a  creature  endowed  with  freedom. 
At  the  same  time,  evil,  as  well  as  good,  has  in  this  sense  its 
origin  in  God, — that  He  combines  within  Himself  the  first 
principles  of  love  and  wrath,  the  possibility  of  evil,  the  self- 
punishment  of  evil,  and  therefore  the  consciousness  of  guilt  as 
well  as  the  evil  of  punishment  in  the  broadest  sense.  When 
the  apostle  celebrates  the  glory  of  free  grace  in  Rom.  ix.  11 
sqq.,  he  stands  on  that  giddy  height,  to  which  few  are  able 
to  follow  him  without  falling  headlong  into  the  false  conclu 
sions  of  a  decretum  absolutum,  and  the  denial  of  all  creaturely 
freedom. 

In  the  prospect  of  this  ultimate  and  saving  purpose  of  the 
mission  of  Cyrus,  viz.  the  redemption  of  Israel  and  the  con 
version  of  the  heathen,  heaven  and  earth  are  now  summoned  to 
bring  forth  and  pour  down  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  gifts, 
according  to  the  will  and  in  the  power  of  Jehovah,  who  has  in 
view  a  new  spiritual  creation.  Ver.  8.  "  Cause  to  trickle  down, 
ye  heavens  above,  and  let  the  blue  sky  rain  down  righteousness  ; 
let  the  earth  open,  and  let  salvation  blossom,  and  righteousness ; 
let  them  sprout  together :  I  Jehovah  have  created  it."  What  thp 
heavens  are  to  cause  to  trickle  down,  follows  as  the  object  to 
^•r.  And  what  is  to  flower  when  the  earth  opens  (pdthach  as 
in  Ps.  cvi.  17 ;  compare  aprilis  and  the  Neo-Greek  anoixis, 
spring),  is  salvation  and  righteousness.  But  tzedek  (righteous 
ness)  is  immediately  afterwards  the  object  of  a  new  verb  ;  so 
that  njJ*TC}  V?*>  which  are  thought  of  as  combined,  as  the  word 
"JIT  (together)  shows,  are  uncoupled  in  the  actual  expression. 
Knobel  expresses  a  different  opinion,  and  assumes  that  JJB*|  is 


222  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

regarded  as  a  collective  noun,  and  therefore  construed  with  a 
plural,  like  rn»«  in  Ps.  cxix.  103,  and  fropn  in  Hag.  ii.  7.  But 
the  use  of  yachad  (together)  favours  the  other  interpretation. 
The  suffix  of  Vnaon  points  to  this  fulness  of  righteousness  and 
salvation.  It  is  a  creation  of  Jehovah  Himself.  Heaven  and 
earth,  when  co-operating  to  effect  this,  are  endowed  with  their 
capacity  through  Him  from  whom  cometh  every  good  and 
perfect  gift,  and  obey  now,  as  at  the  first,  His  creative  fiat. 
This  a rorate  cceli  desuper  et  nubes  pluant  justum"  as  the 
Vulgate  renders  it,  is  justly  regarded  as  an  old  advent  cry. 

The  promise  is  now  continued  in  a  third  strophe  (ch. 
xlv.  9-13),  and  increases  more  and  more  in  the  distinctness  of 
its  terms;  but  just  as  in  ch.  xxix.  15-21,  it  opens  with  a  re 
proof  of  that  pusillanimity  (ch.  xl.  27;  cf.  ch.  11.  13,  xlix.  24, 
Iviii.  3),  which  goes  so  far  to  complain  of  the  ways  of  Jehovah. 
Vers.  9,  10.  "  Woe  to  him  that  quarrelleth  with  his  Maker — a 
pot  among  the  pots  of  earthenware  ?  Can  the  clay  indeed  say  to 
him  that  shapeth  it,  What  makest  thou  ?  and  thy  work.  He  hath 
no  hands  ?  Woe  to  him  that  saith  to  his  father.  What  begettest 
thou  ?  and  to  the  woman,  What  bringest  thou  forth  f "  The 
comparison  drawn  between  a  man  as  the  work  of  God  and  the 
clay-work  of  a  potter  suggested  itself  all  the  more  naturally, 
inasmuch  as  the  same  word  yotser  was  applied  to  God  as 
Creator,  and  also  to  a  potter  (figulus).  The  word  cheres  sig 
nifies  either  a  sherd,  or  fragment  of  earthenware  (ch.  xxx.  14), 
or  an  earthenware  vessel  (Jer.  xix.  1 ;  Prov.  xxvi.  23).  In  the 
passage  before  us,  where  the  point  of  comparison  is  not  the 
fragmentary  condition,  but  the  earthen  character  of  the  material 
('addmdh),  the  latter  is  intended :  the  man,  who  complains  of 
God,  is  nothing  but  a  vessel  of  clay,  and,  more  than  that,  a 
perishable  vessel  among  many  others  of  the  very  same  kind.1 
The  questions  which  follow  are  meant  to  show  the  folly  of  this 
complaining.  Can  it  possibly  occur  to  the  clay  to  raise  a  com 
plaint  against  him  who  has  it  in  hand,  that  he  has  formed  it 
in  such  and  such  a  manner,  or  for  such  and  such  a  purpose 
(compare  Rom.  ix.  20,  "  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus  ")  ?  To 
the  words  "or  thy  work"  we  must  supply  nuin  dicet  (shall  it 

1  The  Septuagint  reads  shin  for  sin  in  both  instances,  and  introduces 
here  the  very  unsuitable  thought  already  contained  in  ch.  xxviii.  24,  "  Shall 
the  ploughman  plough  the  land  the  whole  day  ?  " 


CHAP.  XLV.  11,  12.  223 

say)  ;  po'al  is  a  manufacture,  as  in  ch.  i.  31.  The  question  is 
addressed  to  the  maker,  as  those  in  ch.  vii.  25  are  to  the 
husbandman :  Can  the  thing  made  by  thee,  O  man,  possibly 
say  in  a  contemptuous  tone,  "  He  has  no  hands?" — a  supposi 
tion  the  ridiculous  absurdity  of  which  condemns  it  at  once ;  and 
yet  it  is  a  very  suitable  analogy  to  the  conduct  of  the  man  who 
complains  of  God.  In  ver.  10  a  woe  is  denounced  upon  those 
who  resemble  a  man  who  should  say  to  his  own  father,  What 
children  dost  thou  beget  ?  or  to  a  wife,  What  dost  thou  bring 
forth  ?  (fchllln  an  emphatic,  and  for  the  most  part  pausal,  fut. 
parag.,  as  in  Ruth  ii.  8,  iii.  18.)  This  would  be  the  rudest  and 
most  revolting  attack  upon  an  inviolably  tender  and  private 
relation  ;  and  yet  Israel  does  this  when  it  makes  the  hidden 
providential  government  of  its  God  the  object  of  expostulation. 
After  this  double  woe,  which  is  expressed  in  general  terms, 
but  the  application  of  which  is  easily  made,  the  words  of 
Jehovah  are  directly  addressed  to  the  presumptuous  criticizers. 
Ver.  11.  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  its 
Maker,  Ask  me  what  is  to  come ;  let  my  sons  and  the  work  of 
my  hands  be  committed  to  me!"  The  names  by  which  He 
calls  Himself  express  His  absolute  blamelessness,  and  His 
absolute  right  of  supremacy  over  Israel.  "WNKJ  is  an  im 
perative,  like  W»K>  in  Gen.  xxiii.  8  ;  the  third  person  would 
be  written  W|fl£  The  meaning  is  :  If  ye  would  have  any 
information  or  satisfaction  concerning  the  future  ("  things  to 

O  \  £D 

come,"  ch.  xli.  23,  xliv.  7),  about  which  ye  can  neither  know 
nor  determine  anything  of  yourselves,  inquire  of  me.  TO  with 
an  accusative  of  the  person,  and  ^  of  the  thbg,  signifies  to 
commit  anything  to  th«  care  of  another  (1  Chron.  xxii.  12). 
The  fault-finders  in  Israel  were  to  leave  the  people  of  whom 
Jehovah  was  the  Maker  (a  retrospective  allusion  to  vers.  10  and 
9),  in  the  hands  of  Him  who  has  created  everything,  and  on  whom 
everything  depends.  Ver.  12.  "/,  /  have  made  the  earth,  and 
created  men  upon  it ;  I,  my  hands  have  stretched  out  the  heavens, 
and  all  their  host  have  I  called  forth"  ^T/?^,  according  to 
Ges.  §  121,  3,  is  equivalent  to  my  hands,  and  mine  alone,— 
a  similar  arrangement  of  words  to  those  in  Gen.  xxiv.  27,  2 
Chron.  xxviii.  10,  Eccles.  ii.  15.  Hitzig  is  wrong  in  his  render 
ing,  "all  their  host  do  I  command."  That  of  Ewald  is  the 
•correct  one,  "  did  I  appoint ;"  for  tsivmh,  followed  by  an 


224  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

accusative  of  the  person,  means  to  give  a  definite  order  or  com 
mand  to  any  one,  the  command  in  this  case  being  the  order  to 
come  into  actual  existence  (=  esse  jussi,  cf .  Ps.  xxxiii.  9). 

He  who  created  all  things,  and  called  all  things  into  exist 
ence,  had  also  raised  up  this  Cyrus,  whose  victorious  career  had 
increased  the  anxieties  and  fears  of  the  exiles,  instead  of  leading 
them  to  lift  up  their  heads,  because  their  redemption  was  draw 
ing  nigh.  Ver.  13.  " /,  I  have  raised  him  up  in  righteousness, 
and  all  his  ways  shall  I  make  smooth :  He  will  build  my  city, 
and  release  my  banished  ones,  not  for  price  nor  for  reward,  saith 
Jehovah  of  hosts"  All  the  anxieties  of  the  exiles  are  calmed  by 
the  words  "  in  righteousness,"  which  trace  back  the  revolutions 
that  Cyrus  was  causing  to  the  righteousness  of  Jehovah,  i.e.  to 
His  interposition,  which  was  determined  by  love  alone,  and 
tended  directly  to  the  salvation  of  His  people,  and  in  reality  to 
that  of  all  nations.  And  they  are  fully  quieted  by  the  promise, 
which  is  now  expressed  in  the  clearest  and  most  unequivocal 
words,  that  Cyrus  would  build  up  Jerusalem  again,  and  set  the 
captivity  free  (gdluth,  as  in  ch.  xx.  4),  and  that  without  re 
demption  with  money  (ch.  lii.  3), — a  clear  proof  that  Jehovah 
had  not  only  raised  up  Cyrus  himself,  but  had  put  his  spirit 
within  him,  i.e.  had  stirred  up  within  him  the  resolution  to  do 
this  (see  the  conclusion  to  the  books  of  Chronicles,  and  the 
introduction  to  that  of  Ezra).  This  closes  the  first  half  of  our 
sixth  prophecy. 

The  second  half  is  uttered  in  the  prospect,  that  the  judg 
ment  which  Cyrus  brings  upon  the  nations  will  prepare  the  way 
for  the  overthrow  of  heathenism,  and  the  universal  acknow 
ledgment  of  the  God  of  Israel.  The  heathen  submit,  as  the 
first  strophe  or  group  of  verses  (ch.  xlv.  14-17)  affirms,  to  the 
congregation  and  its  God  ;  the  idolatrous  are  converted,  whilst 
Israel  is  for  ever  redeemed.  With  the  prospect  of  the  release 
of  the  exiles,  there  is  associated  in  the  prophet's  perspective  the 
prospect  of  an  expansion  of  the  restored  church,  through  the 
entrance  of  "  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles."  Ver.  14.  "  Thus 
saith  Jehovah,  The  productions  of  Egypt,  and  gain  of  Ethiopia,  and 
the  Sabceans,  men  of  tall  stature,  will  come  over  to  thee,  and  belong 
to  thee :  they  will  come  after  thee ;  in  chains  they  will  come  over, 
and  cast  themselves  down  to  thee ;  they  pray  to  thee,  Surely  God 
is  in  thee,  and  there  is  none  else ;  no  Deity  at  a//."  Assuming 


CHAP.  XLV.  14.  225 

that  VihjJ  has  the  same  meaning  in  both  cases,  the  prophet's 
meaning  appears  to  be,  that  the  Egyptians,  Ethiopians,  and 
Meroites  (see  ch.  xliii.  3),  who  had  been  enslaved  by  the  im 
perial  power  of  Persia,  would  enter  the  miraculously  emanci 
pated  congregation  of  Israel  (Ewald).  But  if  they  were 
thought  of  as  in  a  state  of  subjugation  to  the  imperial  power 
of  Asia,  how  could  the  promise  be  at  the  same  time  held  out 
that  their  riches  would  pass  over  into  the  possession  of  the 
church?  And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  the  chains  in  which 
they  come  over  cannot  be  regarded,  at  least  in  this  connection, 
where  such  emphasis  is  laid  upon  the  voluntary  character  of  the 
surrender,  as  placed  upon  them  by  Israel  itself  (as  in  ch.  Ix.  11 
and  Ps.  cxlix.  8).  We  must  therefore  suppose  that  they  put 
chains  upon  themselves  voluntarily,  and  of  their  own  accord, 
and  thus  offer  themselves  spontaneously  to  the  church,  to  be 
henceforth  its  subjects  and  slaves.  Egypt,  Ethiopia,  and  Saba 
are  the  nations  that  we  meet  with  in  other  passages,  where  the 
licereditas  gentium  is  promised  to  the  church,  and  generally  in 
connection  with  Tyre  (vid.  Ps.  Ixviii.  32,  Ixxii.  10 ;  compare 
ch.  xviii.  7,  xix.  16  sqq.,  xxiii.  18).  Whilst  the  labour  of 
Egypt  (i.e.  the  productions  of  its  labour)  and  the  trade  of 
Ethiopia  (i.e.  the  riches  acquired  by  trade)  are  mentioned ;  in 
the  case  of  Saba  the  prophecy  looks  at  the  tall  and  handsome 
tribe  itself,  a  tribe  which  Agatharchides  describes  as  having 
actijAara  a^ioXoycorepa.  These  would  place  themselves  at  the 
service  of  the  church  with  their  invincible  strength.  The 
voluntary  character  of  the  surrender  is  pointed  out,  not  only 
in  the  expression  "  they  will  come  over,"  but  also  in  the  con 
fession  with  which  this  is  accompanied.  In  other  cases  the 
words  hitlipallel  'el  are  only  used  of  prayer  to  God  and  idols  ; 
but  here  it  is  to  the  church  that  prayer  is  offered.  In  the 
prophet's  view,  Jehovah  and  His  church  are  inseparably  one 
(compare  1  Cor.  xii.  12,  where  "  Christ"  stands  for  the  church 
as  one  body,  consisting  of  both  head  and  members ;  also  the 
use  of  the  word  "  worship"  in  Rev.  iii.  9,  which  has  all  the 
ring  of  a  passage  taken  from  Isaiah).  ^jtf  is  used  here  in  its 
primary  affirmative  sense,  as  in  Ps.  Iviii.  12.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  Paul  had  this  passage  of  Isaiah  in  his  mind  when 
writing  1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25,  a7rayje\\a)v  ori,  6  @eo?  6Wo>?  eV  VJMV 
t,  or,  according  to  a  better  arrangement  of  the  words,  ort 
VOL.  ii.  p 


226  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


(=  "5J&S)  6  060?  eV  vfuv  eariv.  'Ephes  does  not  signify 
prater  (as  a  synonym  of  ^ita,  **??*)  either  here  or  anywhere 
else,  but  is  a  substantive  used  with  a  verbal  force,  which  stands 
in  the  same  relation  to  ftf  as  "  there  is  not  at  all  (absolutely 
not)"  to  "  there  is  not  ;"  compare  ch.  v.  8,  xlv.  6,  xlvi.  9,  also 
Deut.  xxxii.  36  (derivative  passage,  2  Kings  xiv.  26),  and 
Amos  vi.  10,  2  Sam.  ix.  3  ;  vid.  ch.  xlvii.  8. 

What  follows  in  ver.  15  is  not  a  continuation  of  the  words 
of  the  Gentiles,  but  a  response  of  the  church  to  their  con 
fession.  The  nations  that  have  been  idolatrous  till  now,  bend 
in  humble  spontaneous  worship  before  the  church  and  its  God  ; 
and  at  the  sight  of  this,  the  church,  from  whose  soul  the  prophet 
is  speaking,  bursts  out  into  an  exclamation  of  reverential  amaze 
ment.  Ver.  1  5.  "  Verily  Thou  art  a  mysterious  God,  Thou  God 
of  Israel,  Thou  Saviour"  Literally,  a  God  who  hides  Himself 
(mistatter  :  the  resemblance  to  /zuoT^p-twS???  is  quite  an  acci 
dental  one  ;  the  e  is  retained  in  the  participle  even  in  pause). 
The  meaning  is,  a  God  who  guides  with  marvellous  strange 
ness  the  history  of  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  by  secret  ways, 
which  human  eyes  can  never  discern,  conducts  all  to  a  glorious 
issue.  The  exclamation  in  Rom.  xi.  33,  "  O  the  depth  of  the 
riches,"  etc.,  is  a  similar  one. 

The  way  in  which  this  God  who  hides  Himself  is  ultimately 
revealed  as  the  God  of  salvation,  is  then  pointed  out  in  vers. 
16,  17  :  "  They  are  put  to  shame,  and  also  confounded,  all  of 
them  ;  they  go  away  into  confusion  together,  the  forgers  of  idols. 
Israel  is  redeemed  by  Jehovah  with  everlasting  redemption  :  ye 
are  not  put  to  shame  nor  confounded  to  everlasting  eternities" 
The  perfects  are  expressive  of  the  ideal  past.  Jehovah  shows 
Himself  as  a  Saviour  by  the  fact,  that  whereas  the  makers 
of  idols  perish,  Israel  is  redeemed  an  everlasting  redemption 
(ace.  obj.  as  in  ch.  xiv.  6,  xxii.  17;  Ges.  §  138,  1,  Anm.  1), 
i.e.  so  that  its  redemption  is  one  that  lasts  for  aeons  (tutafta 
\vTpw(Ti$,  Heb.  ix.  12)  :  —  observe  that  teshudh  does  not  literally 
signify  redemption  or  rescue,  but  transfer  into  a  state  of  wide 
expanse,  i.e.  of  freedom  and  happiness.  The  plural  'oldmim 
(eternities  =  al  Fcove?,  ceva)  belongs,  according  to  Knobel,  to  the 
later  period  of  the  language  ;  but  it  is  met  with  as  early  as  in 
old  Asaphite  psalms  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  6).  When  the  further  promise 
is  added,  Ye  shall  not  be  put  to  shame,  etc.,  this  clearly  shows, 


CHAP.  XLV.  18,  19.  227 

what  is  also  certain  on  other  grounds, — namely,  that  the  re 
demption  is  not  thought  of  merely  as  an  outward  and  bodily 
one,  but  also  as  inward  and  spiritual,  and  indeed  (in  accordance 
with  the  prophetic  blending  of  the  end  of  the  captivity  with 
the  end  of  all  things)  as  a  final  one.  Israel  will  never  bring 
upon  itself  again  such  a  penal  judgment  as  that  of  the  capti 
vity  by  falling  away  from  God ;  that  is  to  say,  its  state  of  sin 
will  end  with  its  state  of  punishment,  even  1£  ''PPW""1^  i>e.9 
since  "W  has  no  plural,  et?  alwvas  rwv  alwvcov. 

The  second  and  last  strophe  of  this  prophecy  commences 
with  ver.  18.  By  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  thus  openly 
proclaimed,  those  of  the  heathen  who  have  been  saved  from 
the  judgment  will  recognise  Jehovah  as  the  only  God ;  and  the 
irresistible  will  of  Jehovah,  that  all  mankind  should  worship 
Him,  be  carried  out.  The  promise  cannot  remain  unfulfilled. 
Vers.  18,  19.  "  For  thus  saith  Jehovah,  the  creator  of  the 
heavens  (He  is  the  Deity),  the  former  of  the  earth,  and  its  finisher ; 
He  has  established  it  (He  has  not  created  it  a  desert,  He  has 
formed  it  to  be  inhabited)  :  I  am  Jehovah,  and  there  is  none 
else.  I  have  not  spoken  in  secret,  in  a  place  of  the  land  of 
darkness;  I  did  not  say  to  the  seed  of  Jacob,  Into  the  desert 
seek  ye  me!  I  Jehovah  am  speaking  righteousness,  proclaiming 
upright  things"  The  athnach  properly  divides  ver.  18  in  half. 
Ver.  18a  describes  the  speaker,  and  what  He  says  commences 
in  ver.  186.  The  first  parenthesis  affirms  that  Jehovah  is  God 
in  the  fullest  and  most  exclusive  sense ;  the  second  that  He  has 
created  the  earth  for  man's  sake,  not  "  as  a  desert "  (tohu :  the 
LXX.,  Targum,  and  Jerome  render  this  with  less  accuracy, 
non  in  vanum),  i.e.  not  to  be  and  continue  to  be  a  desert,  but  to 
be  inhabited.  Even  in  Gen.  i.  2,  chaos  is  not  described  as  of 
God's  creation,  because  (whatever  may  be  men's  opinions  con 
cerning  it  in  other  respects)  the  creative  activity  of  God  merely 
made  use  of  this  as  a  starting-point,  and  because,  although  it 
did  not  come  into  existence  without  God,  it  was  at  any  rate  not 
desired  by  God  for  its  own  sake.  The  words  of  Jehovah  com 
mence,  then,  with  the  assertion  that  Jehovah  is  the  absolute 
One;  and  from  this  two  thoughts  branch  off  :  (1.)  The  first  is, 
that  the  prophecy  which  emanates  from  Him  is  an  affair  of 
light,  no  black  art,  but  essentially  different  from  heathen  sooth- 
Baying.  By  "  a  dark  place  of  the  earth"  we  are  to  understand, 


228  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

according  to  Ps.  cxxxix.  15,  the  interior  of  the  earth,  and 
according  to  Job  x.  21,  Hades ;  the  intention  being  to  point 
out  the  contrast  between  the  prophecies  of  Jehovah  and  the 
heathen  cave-oracles  and  spirit- voices  of  the  necromancists, 
which  seemed  to  rise  up  from  the  interior  of  the  earth  (see  ch. 
Ixv.  4,  viii.  19,  xxix.  4).  (2.)  The  second  thought  is,  that  the 
very  same  love  of  Jehovah,  which  has  already  been  displayed 
in  the  creation,  attests  itself  in  His  relation  to  Israel,  which  He 
has  not  directed  to  Himself  "  into  the  desert"  (tohu),  just  as 
He  did  not  create  the  earth  a  tohu.  Meier  and  Knobel  suppose 
that  baqshum,  which  is  written  here,  according  to  a  well-supported 
reading,  with  Koph  raphatum  (whereas  in  other  cases  the  dagesh 
is  generally  retained,  particularly  in  the  imperative  of  biqqesh), 
refers  to  seeking  for  disclosures  as  to  the  future ;  but  the  word 
•OVkTn  would  be  used  for  this,  as  in  ch.  viii.  19.  He  has  not  said, 
"  Seek  ye  me  (as  in  Zeph.  ii.  3)  into  the  desert,"  i.e.  without 
the  prospect  of  meeting  with  any  return  for  your  pains.  On 
the  contrary,  He  has  attached  promises  to  the  seeking  of  Him 
self,  which  cannot  remain  unfulfilled,  for  He  is  "  one  speaking 
righteousness,  declaring  things  that  are  right;"  i.e.  when  He 
promises,  He  follows  out  the  rule  of  His  purpose  and  of  His 
plan  of  salvation,  and  the  impulse  of  sincere  desire  for  their 
good,  and  love  which  is  ever  true  to  itself.  The  present  word 
of  prophecy  points  to  the  fulfilment  of  these  promises. 

The  salvation  of  Israel,  foretold  and  realized  by  Jehovah, 
becomes  at  the  same  time  the  salvation  of  the  heathen  world. 
Vers.  20,  21.  "  Assemble  yourselves  and  come;  draw  near  together, 
ye  escaped  of  the  heathen !  Irrational  are  they  who  burden 
themselves  with  the  wood  of  their  idol,  and  pray  to  a  god  that 
bringeth  no  salvation.  Make  known,  and  cause  to  draw  near ; 
yea,  let  them  take  counsel  together :  Who  has  made  such  things 
knoivn  from  the  olden  time,  proclaimed  it  long  ago  f  have  not  1, 
Jehovah?  and  there  is  no  Deity  beside  me;  a  God  just,  and  bring 
ing  salvation  :  there  is  not  without  me !  "  The  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles,  which  enters  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  a  remnant  of 
the  whole  mass  of  the  heathen:  for  salvation  comes  through  judg 
ment  ;  and  it  is  in  the  midst  of  great  calamities  that  the  work 
of  that  heathen  mission  is  accomplished,  which  is  represented  in 
these  prophecies  on  the  one  hand  as  the  mission  of  Cyrus,  and 
on  the  other  hand  as  the  mission  of  Jehovah  and  His  servant, 


CHAP.  XLV.  20,  21.  229 

Hence  this  summons  to  listen  to  the  self-assertion  of  the  God 
of  revelation,  is  addressed  to  the  escaped  of  the  heathen,  who 
are  not  therefore  the  converted,  but  those  who  are  susceptible 
of  salvation,  and  therefore  spared.  By  "  the  heathen " 
(haggoylm)  Knobel  understands  the  allies  and  auxiliaries  of 
the  Babylonians,  whom  Cyrus  put  to  flight  (according  to  the 
Cyropddid)  before  his  Lydian  campaign.  But  this  is  only  an 
example  of  that  exaggerated  desire  to  turn  everything  into 
history,  which  not  only  prevented  his  seeing  the  poetry  of  the 
form,  but  obscured  the  fact  that  prophecy  is  both  human  and 
divine.  For  the  future  was  foreshortened  to  the  telescopic 
glance  of  the  prophet,  so  that  he  could  not  see  it  in  all  its 
length  and  breadth.  He  saw  in  one  mass  what  history  after 
wards  unrolled ;  and  then  behind  the  present  he  could  just  see 
as  it  were  the  summit  of  the  end,  although  a  long  eventful 
way  still  lay  between  the  two.  Accordingly,  our  prophet  here 
takes  his  stand  not  at  the  close  of  any  particular  victory  of 
Cyrus,  but  at  the  close  of  all  his  victories ;  and,  in  his  view, 
these  terminate  the  whole  series  of  catastrophes,  which  are 
outlived  by  a  remnant  of  the  heathen,  who  are  converted  to 
Jehovah,  and  thus  complete  the  final  glory  of  the  restored 
people  of  God.  Throughout  the  whole  of  these  prophecies  we 
see  immediately  behind  the  historical  foreground  this  eschato- 
logical  background  lifting  up  its  head.  The  heathen  who  have 
been  preserved  will  assemble  together ;  and  from  the  fact  that 
Jehovah  proves  Himself  the  sole  foreteller  of  the  events  that 
are  now  unfolding  themselves,  they  will  be  brought  to  the 
conviction  that  He  is  the  only  God.  The  hithpael  Mthnaggesh 
does  not  occur  anywhere  else.  On  the  absolute  SH*1  &6,  see  at 
ch.  xliv.  9  (cf.  i.  3).  To  the  verb  haggishu  we  must  supply, 
as  in  ch.  xli.  22,  according  to  the  same  expression  in  ver.  21, 
D^nbyy  (your  proofs).  "  This"  refers  to  the  fall  of  Babylon 
and  redemption  of  Israel — salvation  breaking  through  judg 
ment.  On  me'dz,  from  the  olden  time,  compare  ch.  xliv.  8. 
God  is  "  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour,"  as  a  being  who  acts  most 
stringently  according  to  the  demands  of  His  holiness,  and 
wherever  His  wrath  is  not  wickedly  provoked,  sets  in  motion 
His  loving  will,  which  is  ever  concerned  to  secure  the  salvation 
of  men. 

It  is  in  accordance  with  this  holy  loving  will  that  the  cry  is 


THE  PEOPHECIES  0*'  IbAIAH. 

published  in  ver.  22  :  "  Turn  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye 
ends  of  the  earth;  for  I  am  God,  and  none  else"  The  first 
imperative  is  hortatory,  the  second  promising  (cf.  ch.  xxxvi.  16 
and  viii.  9)  :  Jehovah  desires  both,  viz.  the  conversion  of  all 
men  to  Himself;  and  through  this  their  salvation,  and  this 
His  gracious  will,  which  extends  to  all  mankind,  will  not  rest 
till  its  object  has  been  fully  accomplished.  Yer.  23.  "  B\j 
myself  have  I  sworn,  a  word  has  gone  out  of  a  mouth  of  right 
eousness,  and  will  not  return,  That  to  me  every  knee  shall  bend, 
every  tongue  swear"  Swearing  by  Himself  (see  Gen.  xxii.  16), 
God  pledges  what  He  swears  with  His  own  life  (compare 
Kom.  xiv.  11,  "as  I  live").  Parallel  to  Viya^  '?  is  the 
clause  3H5*  fc&  nyn  njjns  'BO  K£.  Here  Rosenmuller  connects 
"1TJ  npn¥  together  as  if  with  a  hyphen,  in  the  sense  of  a  truth- 
word  (Jerome,  justitice  verbum).  But  this  is  grammatically 
impossible,  since  it  would  require  npix  "^"i  ;  moreover,  it  is 
opposed  both  to  the  accents,  and  to  the  dagesh  in  the  Daleth. 
Hitzig's  rendering  is  a  better  one :  "  Truth  (LXX.  St/cato- 
crvvrj),  a  word  that  does  not  return," — the  latter  being  taken 
as  an  explanatory  permutative ;  but  in  that  case  we  should 
require  &6  for  &6l,  and  tseddqdh  is  not  used  in  the  sense  of 
truth  anywhere  else  (compare  tsaddiq,  however,  in  ch.  xli.  26). 
On  the  other  hand,  np1¥  might  be  equivalent  to  npisn  ("  in 
righteousness;"  cf.  ch.  xlii.  25,  npn  =  nona),  if  it  were  not 
incomparably  more  natural  to  connect  together  np*i¥  SDD  as  a 
genitive  construction  ;  though  not  in  the  sense  in  which  '•SD 
muan  is  used  in  post-biblical  writings, — namely,  as  equivalent  to 
"  out  of  the  mouth  of  God"  (see  Buxtorf,  Lex.  Chald.  Col.  385), 
— but  rather  in  this  way,  that  the  mouth  of  God  is  described 
attributively  as  regulated  in  its  words  by  His  holy  will  (as 
"speaking  righteousness,"  ver.  19&).  A  word  has  gone  forth 
from  this  mouth  of  righteousness ;  and  after  it  has  once  gone 
forth,  it  does  not  return  without  accomplishing  its  object  (ch. 
Iv.  11).  What  follows  is  not  so  much  a  promising  prediction 
(that  every  knee  will  bend  to  me),  as  a  definitive  declaration  of 
will  (that  it  shall  or  must  bend  to  me).  According  to  ch.  xix. 
18,  xliv.  5,  "to  me"  is  to  be  regarded  as  carried  forward,  and 
so  to  be  supplied  after  "  shall  swear"  (the  Septuagint  rendering, 
TOV  0eoi>,  is  false  ;  that  of  Paul  in  Rom.  xiv.  11, 
TO>  0ew,  is  correct ;  and  in  this  case,  as  in 


CHAP.  XLVI.  231 

others  also,  the  Cod.  Al.  of  the  Sept.  has  been  corrected  from 
the  New  Testament  quotations). 

This  bending  of  the  knee,  this  confession  as  an  oath  of 
homage,  will  be  no  forced  one.  Ver.  24.  "  Only  in  Jehovah, 
do  men  say  of  me,  is  fulness  of  righteousness  and  strength;  they 
come  to  Him,  and  all  that  were  incensed  against  Him  are  put  to 
shame."  The  parenthetical  insertion  of  "1DK  *h  (i>,  with  refer 
ence  to,  as  in  ch.  xli.  7,  xliv.  26,  28)  is  the  same  as  in  Ps. 
cxix.  57.  SJK  has  a  restrictive  sense  here,  which  springs  out  of 
the  affirmative  (cf.  Ps.  xxxix.  7,  Ixxiii.  1),  just  as,  in  the  case 
of  rag,  the  affirmative  grows  out  of  the  primary  restrictive 
sense.  The  "  righteousness "  is  abounding  (superabundant) 
righteousness  (Kom.  v.  15  sqq.).  T'V  is  the  strength  of  sancti- 
fication,  and  of  the  conquest  of  the  world.  The  subject  to 
Kb*  (which  is  not  to  be  changed,  according  to  the  Masora,  into 
the  more  natural  W2J,  as  it  is  by  the  LXX.,  Syr.,  and  Vulg.) 
is,  whoever  has  seen  what  man  has  in  Jehovah,  and  made  con 
fession  of  this ;  such  a  man  does  not  rest  till  he  has  altogether 
come  over  to  Jehovah,  whereas  all  His  enemies  are  put  to 
shame.  They  separate  themselves  irretrievably  from  the  men 
who  serve  Him,  the  restoration  of  whom  is  His  direct  will,  and 
the  goal  of  the  history  of  salvation.  Ver.  25.  "  In  Jehovah 
all  the  seed  of  Israel  shall  become  righteous,  and  shall  glory? 
Kuetschi  has  very  properly  observed  on  this  verse,  that  the 
reference  is  to  the  Israel  of  God  out  of  all  the  human  race,  i.e. 
the  church  of  the  believers  in  Israel  expanded  by  the  addition 
of  the  heathen  ;  which  church  is  now  righteous,  i.e.  reconciled 
and  renewed  by  Jehovah,  and  glories  in  Him,  because  by 
grace  it  is  what  it  is. 

This  brings  the  sixth  prophecy  to  a  close.  Its  five  strophes 
commence  with  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord ;"  at  the  same  time,  the 
fifth  strophe  has  two  "  woes"  (hoi)  before  this,  as  the  ground 
upon  which  it  rests. 

SEVENTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  XLVI. 
FALL  OF  THE  GODS  OF  BABEL. 

There  follows  now  a  trilogy  of  prophecies  referring  to 
Babylon.  After  the  prophet  has  shown  what  Israel  has  to 


232  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

expect  of  Cyrus,  he  turns  to  what  awaits  Babylon  at  the 
hands  of  Cyrus.  Vers.  1,  2.  "  Bel  sinketh  down,  Nebo  stoopeth; 
its  images  come  to  the  beast  of  burden  and  draught  cattle  :  your 
litters  are  laden,  a  burden  for  the  panting.  They  stooped,  sank 
down  all  at  once,  and  could  not  get  rid  of  the  burden ;  and  their 
own  self  went  into  captivity"  The  reference  to  Babylon  comes 
out  at  once  in  the  names  of  the  gods.  Bel  was  the  Jupiter  of 
the  Babylonians  and,  as  Bel-Merodach,  the  tutelar  deity  of 
Babylon;  Nebo  was  Mercury,  the  tutelar  deity  of  the  later 
Chaldean  royal  family,  as  the  many  kings'  names  in  which  it 
appears  clearly  show  (e.g.  Nabonassar,  Nabo-polassar,  etc.). 
The  pyramidal  heap  of  ruins  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
Euphrates,  which  is  now  called  Birs  Nimrud,  is  the  ruin  of 
the  temple  of  Bel,  of  which  Herodotus  gives  a  description  in 
i.  181-183,  and  probably  also  of  the  tower  mentioned  in  Gen.  xi., 
which  was  dedicated  to  Bel,  if  not  to  El  =  Saturn.  Herodotus 
describes  two  golden  statues  of  Bel  which  were  found  there 
(cf.  Diodorus,  ii.  9,  5),  but  the  way  in  which  Nebo  was  repre 
sented  is  still  unknown.  The  judgment  of  Jehovah  falls  upon 
these  gods  through  Cyrus.  Bel  suddenly  falls  headlong,  and 
Nebo  stoops  till  he  also  falls.  Their  images  come  to  (fall  to 
the  lot  of)  the  chayydh,  i.e.  the  camels,  dromedaries,  and  ele 
phants  ;  and  beJiemdh,  i.e.  horses,  oxen,  and  asses.  Your  fiKfejj 
gestamina,  the  prophet  exclaims  to  the  Babylonians,  i.e.  the 
images  hitherto  carried  by  you  in  solemn  procession  (ch.  xlv. 
20 ;  Amos  v.  26  ;  Jer.  x.  5),  are  now  packed  up,  a  burden  for 
that  which  is  wearied  out,  i.e.  for  cattle  that  has  become  weary 
with  carrying  them.  In  ver.  1,  as  the  two  participial  clauses 
show,  the  prophet  still  takes  his  stand  in  the  midst  of  the 
catastrophe ;  but  in  ver.  2  it  undoubtedly  lies  behind  him  as  a 
completed  act.  In  ver.  2a  he  continues,  as  in  ver.  1,  to  enter 
into  the  delusion  of  the  heathen,  and  distinguish  between  the 
numina  and  simulacra.  The  gods  of  Babylon  have  all  stooped 
at  once,  have  sunken  down,  and  have  been  unable  to  save  their 
images  which  were  packed  upon  the  cattle,  out  of  the  hands  of 
the  conquerors.  In  ver.  2b  he  destroys  this  delusion  :  they  are 
going  into  captivity  (Hos.  x.  5  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  7,  xlix.  3),  even 
u  their  ownself "  (naphshdm),  since  the  self  or  personality  of  the 
beingless  beings  consists  of  nothing  more  than  the  wood  and 

ft  o  o 

metal  of  which  their  images  are  composed. 


CHAP.  XL VI.  3-5.  233 

From  this  approaching  reduction  of  the  gods  of  Babylon 
to  their  original  nothingness,  several  admonitions  are  now  de 
rived.  The  first  admonition  is  addressed  to  all  Israel.  Vers. 
3-5.  "Hearken  unto  me,  0  house  of  Jacob,  and  all  the  remnant 
of  the  house  of  Israel :  ye,  lifted  up  from  the  womb  ;  ye,  carried 
from  the  mother  s  lap!  And  till  old  age  it  is  I,  and  to  grey  hair 
I  shall  bear  you  on  my  shoulder :  I  have  done  it,  and  I  shall 
carry ;  and  I  put  upon  my  shoulder,  and  deliver.  To  whom  can 
ye  compare  me,  and  liken,  and  place  side  by  side,  that  we  should 
be  equalT'1  The  house  of  Jacob  is  Judah  here,  as  in  Obad. 
18  (see  Caspari  on  the  passage),  Nah.  ii.  3,  and  the  house  of 
Israel  the  same  as  the  house  of  Joseph  in  Obadiah;  whereas  in 
Amos  iii.  13,  vi.  8,  vii.  2,  Jacob  stands  for  Israel,  in  distinction 
from  Judah.  The  Assyrian  exile  was  earlier  than  the  Baby 
lonian,  and  had  already  naturalized  the  greater  part  of  the 
exiles  in  a  heathen  land,  and  robbed  them  of  their  natural 
character,  so  that  there  was  only  a  remnant  left  by  whom  there 
was  any  hope  that  the  prophet's  message  would  be  received. 
What  the  exiles  of  both  houses  were  to  hear  was  the  question 
in  ver.  5,  which  called  upon  them  to  consider  the  incomparable 
nature  of  their  God,  as  deduced  from  what  Jehovah  could  say 
of  Himself  in  relation  to  all  Israel,  and  what  He  does  say  from 
D^DOjn  onwards.  Babylon  carried  its  idols,  but  all  in  vain : 
they  were  carried  forth,  without  being  able  to  save  themselves; 
but  Jehovah  carried  His  people,  and  saved  them.  The  expres 
sions,  u  from  the  womb,  and  from  the  mother's  lap,"  point  back 
to  the  time  when  the  nation  which  had  been  in  process  of  for 
mation  from  the  time  of  Abraham  onwards  came  out  of  Egypt, 
and  was  born,  as  it  were,  into  the  light  of  the  world.  From 
this  time  forward  it  had  lain  upon  Jehovah  like  a  willingly 
adopted  burden,  and  He  had  carried  it  as  a  nurse  carries  a 
suckling  (Num.  xi.  12),  and  an  eagle  its  young  (Deut.  xxxii. 
11).  In  ver.  4  the  attributes  of  the  people  are  carried  on  in 
direct  (not  relative)  self-assertions  on  the  part  of  Jehovah. 
The  senectus  and  canities  tire  obviously  those  of  the  people, — 
not,  however,  as  though  it  was  already  in  a  state  of  dotage  (as 
Hitzig  maintains,  appealing  erroneously  to  ch.  xlvii.  6),  but  as 
denoting  the  future  and  latest  periods  of  its  history.  Even 
till  then  Jehovah  is  He,  i.e.  the  Absolute,  and  always  the  same 
(see  ch.  xli.  4).  As  He  has  acted  in  the  past,  so  will  He  act 


234  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

at  all  times — supporting  and  saving  His  people.  Hence  He 
could  properly  ask,  Whom  could  you  place  by  the  side  of  me, 
so  that  we  should  be  equal?  (Vav  consec.  as  in  ch.  xl.  25.) 

The  negative  answer  to  this  question  is  the  direct  result  of 
what  precedes,  but  a  still  further  proof  is  given  in  vers.  6,  7. 
"  They  who  pour  gold  out  of  the  bag,  and  weigh  silver  with  the 
balance,  hire  a  goldsmith  to  make  it  into  a  god,  that  they  may  fall 
down,  yea,  throw  themselves  down.  They  lift  it  up,  carry  it 
away  upon  their  shoulder,  and  set  it  down  in  its  place :  there  it 
stands  •  from  its  place  it  does  not  move :  men  also  cry  to  it,  but  it 
does  not  answer ;  it  saves  no  one  out  of  distress."  There  is  no 
necessity  for  assuming  that  Dyjn  is  used  in  the  place  of  the 
finite  verb,  as  Hitzig  imagines,  or  as  equivalent  to  D^J  EH,  as 
Rosenmuller  and  Gesenius  suppose ;  but  up  to  V13&)  the  whole 
is  subject,  and  therefore  vp^l  is  the  point  at  which  the  change 
into  the  finite  verb  occurs  (Ges.  §  131,  2).  The  point  in  liaz- 
zdlim  is  not  the  extravagant  expenditure,  as  Ewald  thinks,  but 
the  mean  origin  of  the  god,  which  commences  with  the  pouring 
out  of  gold  from  a  purse  (zul  =  zdlal,  to  shake,  to  pour  out). 
Qdneh  is  the  lever  of  the  scales  (icavtov).  The  metal  weighed 
out  is  given  to  a  goldsmith,  who  plates  the  idol  with  the  gold, 
and  makes  the  ornaments  for  it  of  silver.  When  it  is  finished, 
they  lift  it  up,  or  shoulder  it  (^sfe^  with  a  distinctive  Great 
Telisha),  carry  it  home,  and  set  it  down  in  the  place  which  it 
is  to  have  under  it  f^J^)«  There  it  stands  firm,  immoveable, 
and  also  deaf  and  dumb,  hearing  no  one,  answering  no  one, 
and  helping  no  one.  The  subject  to  pWPm  is  any  p#¥.  The  first 
admonition  closes  here.  The  gods  who  are  carried  fall  without 
being  able  to  save  themselves,  whereas  Israel's  God  carries  and 
saves  His  people ;  He,  the  Incomparable,  more  especially  in 
contrast  with  the  lifeless  puppets  of  idols. 

The  second  admonition  is  addressed  to  those  wrho  would 
imitate  the  heathen.  Vers.  8-11.  "  Remember  this,  and  become 
firm ;  take  it  to  heart,  ye  rebellious  ones  !  Remember  the  be 
ginning  from  the  olden  time,  that  I  am  God,  and  none  else  : 
Deity,  and  absolutely  none  like  me ;  proclaiming  the  issue  from 
the  beginning,  and  from  ancient  times  what  has  not  yet  taken 
place,  saying,  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  all  my  good  pleasure 
I  carry  out :  calling  a  bird  of  prey  from  the  east,  the  man  of 
my  counsel  from  a  distant  land:  not  only  have  I  spoken,  I  also 


CHAP.  XLVI.  8~11.  235 

bring  it ;  I  have  purposed  it,  I  also  execute  it."  The  object  to 
which  "this"  points  back  is  the  nothingness  of  idols  and 
idolatry.  The  persons  addressed  are  the  DW'ia  (those  aposta 
tizing),  but,  as  ^'f'fcrin  shows,  whether  it  mean  avSpiQaOe  or 
tcparcuovo-Oe  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13),  such  as  have  not  yet  actually 
carried  out  their  rebellion  or  apostasy,  but  waver  between 
Jehovahism  and  heathenism,  and  are  inclined  to  the  latter. 
IPBWin  is  hardly  a  denorn.  hithpalel  of  B^K  in  the  sense  of  "man 
yourselves,"  since  B^N,  whether  it  signifies  a  husband  or  a  social 
being,  or  like  KfaN,  a  frail  or  mortal  being,  is  at  any  rate  equi 
valent  to  BOX,  and  therefore  never  shows  the  modification  u. 
WN  (ngfc)  signifies  to  be  firm,  strong,  compact ;  in  the  piel 
(rabb.),  to  be  well-grounded ;  nithpael,  to  be  fortified,  estab 
lished  ;  here  hithpoel,  "  show  yourselves  firm  "  (Targ.,  Jer.  : 
fundamini  ne  rursum  subitus  idololatrice  vos  turbo  subverted). 
That  they  may  strengthen  themselves  in  faith  and  fidelity, 
they  are  referred  to  the  history  of  their  nation ;  nfa'B>&O  are 
not  prophecies  given  at  an  earlier  time, — a  meaning  which 
the  priora  only  acquire  in  such  a  connection  as  ch.  xliii.  9, 
— but  former  occurrences.  They  are  to  pass  before  their 
minds  the  earlier  history,  and  indeed  "  from  the  olden  time." 
"  Remember :"  zikhru  is  connected  with  the  accusative  of  the 
object  of  remembrance,  and  ^  points  to  its  result.  An 
earnest  and  thoughtful  study  of  history  would  show  them 
that  Jehovah  alone  was  El,  the  absolutely  Mighty  One,  and 
'Eldhim,  the  Being  who  united  in  Himself  all  divine  majesty  by 
which  reverence  was  evoked.  The  participles  in  vers.  10,  11 
are  attached  to  the  "  I "  of  *jito3.  It  is  Jehovah,  the  Incom 
parable,  who  has  now,  as  at  other  times  from  the  very  com 
mencement  of  the  new  turn  in  history,  predicted  the  issue  to 
which  it  would  lead,  and  miqqedem,  i.e.  long  before,  predicted 
things  that  have  not  yet  occurred,  and  which  therefore  lie 
outside  the  sphere  of  human  combination, — another  passage 
like  ch.  xli.  26,  xlv.  21,  etc.,  in  which  what  is  predicted  in  these 
prophecies  lays  claim  to  the  character  of  a  prediction  of  long 
standing,  and  not  of  one  merely  uttered  a  few  years  before. 
The  rPB>&O,  in  which  the  nutfto  are  already  in  progress  (ch. 
xlii.  9),  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  prophet's  ideal  present ;  for 
Jehovah  not  only  foretells  before  the  appearance  of  Cyrus 
what  is  to  be  expected  of  him,  but  declares  that  His  determi- 


236  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

nation  must  be  realized,  that  He  will  bring  to  pass  everything 
upon  which  His  will  is  set,  and  summons  the  man  upon  the 
stage  of  history  as  the  instrument  of  its  accomplishment,  so 
that  He  knew  Cyrus  before  he  himself  had  either  conscious 
ness  or  being  (ch.  xlv.  4,  5).  The  east  is  Persis  (ch.  xli.  2) ; 
and  the  distant  land,  the  northern  part  of  Media  (as  in  ch. 
xiii.  5).  Cyrus  is  called  an  eagle,  or,  strictly  speaking,  a  bird 
of  prey  (^ayit1),  just  as  in  Jer.  xlix.  22  and  Ezek.  xvii.  3 
Nebuchadnezzar  is  called  a  nesher.  According  to  Cyrop.  vii. 
1,  4,  the  campaign  of  Cyrus  was  aero?  ^pvaovs  eVt  So^aro? 
fiaKpov  avaTera/jievos.  Instead  of  iJW  £*K,  the  keri  reads 
more  clearly,  though  quite  unnecessarily,  ^VJJ  B^K  (see  e.g.  ch. 
xliv.  26).  The  correlate  *1^  (ver.  116),  which  is  only  attached 
to  the  second  verb  the  second  time,  affirms  that  Jehovah  does 
not  only  the  one,  but  the  other  also.  His  word  is  made  by 
Him  into  a  deed,  His  idea  into  a  reality.  "fl£  is  a  word  used 
particularly  by  Isaiah,  to  denote  the  ideal  preformation  of  the 
future  in  the  mind  of  God  (cf.  ch.  xxii.  11,  xxxvii.  26).  The 
feminine  suffixes  refer  in  a  neuter  sense  to  the  theme  of  the 
prophecy — the  overthrow  of  idolatrous  Babel,  upon  which 
Cyrus  comes  down  like  an  eagle,  in  the  strength  of  Jehovah. 
So  far  we  have  the  nota  bene  for  those  who  are  inclined  to 
apostasy.  They  are  to  lay  to  heart  the  nothingness  of  the 
heathen  gods,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  self-manifestation  of 
Jehovah  from  the  olden  time,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  One  God 
who  is  now  foretelling  and  carrying  out  the  destruction  of  the 
imperial  city  through  the  eagle  from  the  east. 

A  third  admonition  is  addressed  to  the  forts  esprits  in  vers. 
12,  13.  "Hearken  to  me,  ye  strong-hearted,  that  are  far  from 
righteousness  !  I  have  brought  my  righteousness  near ;  it  is  not 
far  off,  and  my  salvation  tarrieth  not :  and  I  give  salvation  in 
Zion,  my  glory  to  Israel"  All  that  is  called  in  Hellenic  and 
Hellenistic  poO?,  \6yos  avvelfycris,  #1/^09,  is  comprehended  in 
tcapbla;  and  everything  by  which  bdsdr  and  nephesh  are  affected 
comes  into  the  light  of  consciousness  in  the  heart  (Psychol.ip.  251). 

1  The  resemblance  to  usrog  (etteros)  is  merely  accidental.  This  name 
for  the  eagle  is  traceable,  like  avis,  to  a  root  t?d,  to  move  with  the  swift 
ness  of  the  wind.  This  was  shown  by  Passow,  compare  Kuhn's  Zeitsclirift, 
i.  29,  where  we  also  find  at  10,  126  another  but  less  probable  derivation 
from  a  root  z,  to  go  (compare  eva,  a  course,;. 


CHAP.  XLVII.  237 

According  to  this  biblico-psychological  idea,  J?  ^^  may  signify 
either  the  courageous  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  6),  or,  as  in  this  instance,  the 
strong-minded  ;  but  as  a  synonym  of  37  '•jpjn  (Ezek.  ii.  4)  and 
2?  ^i?  (Ezek.  iii.  7),  viz.  in  the  sense  of  those  who  resist  the  im 
pressions  of  the  work  and  grace  of  God  in  their  consciousness  of 
mental  superiority  to  anything  of  the  kind,  and  not  in  the  sense 
of  those  who  have  great  mental  endowments.  These  are  "  far 
from  righteousness"  (tseddqdh),  that  is  to  say,  they  have  despaired 
of  the  true,  loving  fidelity  of  Jehovah,  and  have  no  wish  for 
any  further  knowledge  of  it.  Therefore  they  shall  hear,  and 
possibly  not  without  impression,  that  this  loving  fidelity  is  about 
to  manifest  itself,  and  salvation  is  about  to  be  realized.  Jehovah 
has  given  salvation  in  Zion,  that  is  to  say,  is  giving  it  even  now, 
so  that  it  will  become  once  more  the  centre  of  the  renovated 
nation,  and  impart  its  glory  to  this,  so  that  it  may  shine  in  the 
splendour  bestowed  upon  it  by  its  God.  We  have  here  the  side 
of  light  and  love,  turned  towards  us  by  the  two-faced  tseddqdh, 
as  a  parallel  word  to  th'thitdh,  or  salvation.  With  this  admo 
nition  to  the  indifferent  and  careless,  to  whom  the  salvation  of 
which  they  have  given  up  all  hope  is  proclaimed  as  at  the  door, 
this  prophecy  is  brought  to  a  close.  In  three  distinct  stages, 
commencing  with  "hearken,"  "remember,"  "  hearken,"  it  has 
unfolded  the  spiritual  influences  which  the  fact  declared  in 
vers.  1,  2  ought  to  have  upon  Israel,  and  resembles  a  pastoral 
sermon  in  its  tone. 


EIGHTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  XLVII. 
FALL  OF  BABEL,  THE  CAPITAL  OF  THE  EMPIRE  OF  THE  WORLD. 

From  the  gods  of  Babylon  the  proclamation  of  judgment 
passes  on  to  Babylon  itself.  Vers.  1-4.  "  Come  down,  and  sit 
in  the  dusty  0  virgin  daughter  Babel ;  sit  on  the  ground  without 
a  throne,  0  Chaldceans-daughter  !  For  men  no  longer  call  thee 
delicate  and  voluptuous.  Take  the  mill,  and  grind  meal :  throw 
back  thy  veil,  lift  up  the  train,  uncover  the  thigh,  wade  through 
streams.  Let  thy  nakedness  be  uncovered,  even  let  thy  shame  be 
seen ;  I  shall  take  vengeance,  and  not  spare  men.  Our  Redeemer, 
Jehovah  of  hosts  is  His  name,  Holy  One  of  Israel"  This  is  the 
first  strophe  in  the  prophecy.  As  ver.  36  clearly  shows,  what 


238  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

precedes  is  a  penal  sentence  from  Jehovah.  Both  fla  in  rela 
tion  to  rfana  (ch.  xxiii.  12,  xxxvii.  22),  and  bl2  and  D^fcs  in 
relation  to  ri3?  are  appositional  genitives ;  Babel  and  Chaldeans 
(Dnbo  as  in  ch.  xlviii.  20)  are  regarded  as  a  woman,  and  that 
as  one  not  yet  dishonoured.  The  unconquered  oppressor  is 
threatened  with  degradation  from  her  proud  eminence  into 
shameful  humiliation  ;  sitting  on  the  ground  is  used  in  the  same 
sense  as  in  ch.  iii.  26.  Hitherto  men  have  called  her,  with 
envious  admiration,  rakkdh  vadnuggdh  (from  Deut.  xxviii.  56), 
mollis  et  delicata,  as  having  carefully  kept  everything  disagree 
able  at  a  distance,  and  revelled  in  nothing  but  luxury  (compare 
*oneg,  ch.  xiii.  22).  Debauchery  with  its  attendant  rioting 
(ch.  xiv.  11,  xxv.  5),  and  the  Mylitta  worship  with  its  licensed 
prostitution  (Herod,  i.  199),  were  current  there;  but  now  all 
this  was  at  an  end.  ^P^,  according  to  the  Masora,  has  only 
one  pashta  both  here  and  in  ver.  5,  and  so  has  the  tone  upon 
the  last  syllable,  and  accordingly  metlieg  in  the  antepenult. 
Isaiah's  artistic  style  may  be  readily  perceived  both  in  the  three 
clauses  of  ver.  1  that  are  comparable  to  a  long  trumpet-blast 
(compare  ch.  xl.  9  and  xvi.  1),  and  also  in  the  short,  rugged,  in* 
voluntarily  excited  clauses  that  follow  (compare  vol.  i.  427).  The 
mistress  becomes  the  maid,  and  has  to  perform  the  low,  menial 
service  of  those  who,  as  Homer  says  in  Od.  vii.  104,  a\erp6vovai 
/zvA,77?  em  fi^XoTra  /capTrov  (grind  at  the  mill  the  quince-coloured 
fruit ;  compare  at  Job  xxxi.  10).  She  has  to  leave  her  palace 
as  a  prisoner  of  war,  and,  laying  aside  all  feminine  modesty, 
to  wade  through  the  rivers  upon  which  she  borders.  Chespl  has 
8  instead  of  £,  and,  as  in  other  cases  where  a  sibilant  precedes, 
the  mute  p  instead  of /(compare  'ispl,  Jer.  x.  17).  Both  the 
prosopopeia  and  the  parallel,  "  thy  shame  shall  be  seen,"  require 
that  the  expression  "  thy  nakedness  shall  be  uncovered"  should 
not  be  understood  literally.  The  shame  of  Babel  is  her  shame 
ful  conduct,  which  is  not  to  be  exhibited  in  its  true  colours, 
inasmuch  as  a  stronger  one  is  coming  upon  it  to  rob  it  of  its 
might  and  honour.  This  stronger  one,  apart  from  the  instru 
ment  employed,  is  Jehovah :  vindictam  sumam,  non  parcam 
homini.  Stier  gives  a  different  rendering  here,  namely,  "  I  will 
run  upon  no  man,  i.e.  so  as  to  make  him  give  way;"  Hahn, 
"  I  will  not  meet  with  a  man,"  so  destitute  of  population  will 
Babylon  be ;  and  Ruetschi,  "  I  will  not  step  in  as  a  man." 


CHAP.  XLVII.  5-7.  239 

Gesenius  and  Rosenmiiller  are  nearer  to  the  mark  'when  they 
suggest  non  pangarn  (paciscar)  cum  homine;  but  this  would 
require  at  any  rate  DHKTIK,  even  if  the  verb  JM3  really  had  the 
meaning  to  strike  a  treaty.  It  means  rather  to  strike  against  a 
person,  to  assault  any  one,  then  to  meet  or  come  in  an  opposite 
direction,  and  that  not  only  in  a  hostile  sense,  but,  as  in  this 
instance,  and  also  in  ch.  Ixiv.  4,  in  a  friendly  sense  as  well. 
Hence,  "  I  shall  not  receive  any  man,  or  pardon  any  man  " 
(Hitzig,  Ewald,  etc.).  According  to  an  old  method  of  writing 
the  passage,  there  is  a  pause  here.  But  ver.  4  is  still  connected 
with  what  goes  before.  As  Jehovah  is  speaking  in  ver.  5,  but 
Israel  in  ver.  4,  and  as  ver.  4  is  unsuitable  to  form  the  basis  of 
the  words  of  Jehovah,  it  must  be  regarded  as  the  antiphone 
to  vers.  1-3  (cf.  ch.  xlv.  15).  Our  Redeemer,  exclaims  the 
church  in  joyfully  exalted  self-consciousness,  He  is  Jehovah  of 
hosts,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel !  The  one  name  affirms  that  He 
possesses  the  all-conquering  might ;  the  other  that  He  possesses 
the  will  to  carry  on  the  work  of  redemption, — a  will  influenced 
and  constrained  by  both  love  and  wrath. 

In  the  second  strophe  the  penal  sentence  of  Jehovah  is 
continued.  Vers.  5-7.  u  Sit  silent,  and  creep  into  the  dark 
ness^  0  Chaldeans-daughter!  for  men  no  longer  call  thee  lady 
of  kingdoms.  I  was  ivroth  iviili  my  people ;  I  polluted  mine 
inheritance,  and  gave  them  into  thy  hand :  thou  hast  shown  them 
no  mercy ;  upon  old  men  thou  laidst  thy  yoke  very  heavily.  And 
thou  saidst,  I  shall  be  lady  for  ever ;  so  that  thou  didst  not 
take  these  things  to  heart :  thou  didst  not  consider  the  latter  end 
thereof."  Babylon  shall  sit  down  in  silent,  brooding  sorrow, 
and  take  herself  away  into  darkness,  just  as  those  who  have 
fallen  into  disgrace  shrink  from  the  eyes  of  men.  She  is 
looked  upon  as  an  empress  (ch.  xiii.  9  ;  the  king  of  Babylon 
called  himself  the  king  of  kings,  Ezek.  xxvi.  7),  who  has  been 
reduced  to  the  condition  of  a  slave,  and  durst  not  show  herself 
for  shame.  This  would  happen  to  her,  because  at  the  time 
when  Jehovah  made  use  of  her  as  His  instrument  for  punish 
ing  His  people,  she  went  beyond  the  bounds  of  her  authority, 
showing  no  pity,  and  ill-treating  even  defenceless  old  men. 
According  to  Koppe,  Gesenius,  and  Hitzig,  Israel  is  here  called 
zdqiin,  as  a  decayed  nation  awakening  sympathy  ;  but  according 
to  the  Scripture,  the  people  of  God  is  always  young,  and  never 


240  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

decays  ;  on  the  contrary,  its  ziqndh,  i.e.  the  latest  period  of  its 
history  (ch.  xlvi.  4),  is  to  be  like  its  youth.  The  words  are  to 
be  understood  literally,  like  Lam.  iv.  16,  v.  12  :  even  upon  old 
men,  Babylon  had  placed  the  heavy  yoke  of  prisoners  and 
slaves.  But  in  spite  of  this  inhumanity,  it  flattered  itself  that 
it  would  last  for  ever.  Hitzig  adopts  the  reading  "W  rnsa,  and 
renders  it,  "  To  all  future  times  shall  I  continue,  mistress  to  all 
eternity."  This  may  possibly  be  correct,  but  it  is  by  no  means 
necessary,  inasmuch  as  it  can  be  shown  from  1  Sam.  xx.  41, 
and  Job  xiv.  6,  that  "W  is  used  as  equivalent  to  "»5?K  1J>,  in  the 
sense  of  "  till  the  time  that ;"  and  gebhereth,  as  the  feminine 
of  gdbher  =  gebher,  may  be  the  absolute  quite  as  well  as  the 
construct.  The  meaning  therefore  is,  that  the  confidence  of 
Babylon  in  the  eternal  continuance  of  its  power  was  such,  that 
"  these  things,"  i.e.  such  punishments  as  those  which  were 
now  about  to  fall  upon  it  according  to  the  prophecy,  had  never 
come  into  its  mind ;  such,  indeed,  that  it  had  not  called  to 
remembrance  as  even  possible  "  the  latter  end  of  it,"  i.e.  the 
inevitably  evil  termination  of  its  tyranny  and  presumption. 

A  third  strophe  of  this  proclamation  of  punishment  is 
opened  here  with  nnjn?  on  the  ground  of  the  conduct  censured. 
Vers.  8-11.  "  And  now  hear  this,  iliou  voluptuous  one,  she  ivho 
sitteth  so  securely,  who  sayeth  in  her  heart,  I  am  it,  and  none 
else:  I  shall  not  sit  a  widow,  nor  experience  bereavement  of 
children.  And  these  two  will  come  upon  thee  suddenly  in  one 
day  :  bereavement  of  children  and  widowhood ;  they  come  upon 
thee  in  fullest  measure,  in  spite  of  the  multitude  of  thy  sorceries, 
in  spite  of  the  great  abundance  of  thy  witchcrafts.  Thou  trustedst 
in  thy  wickedness,  saidst,  No  one  seeth  me.  Thy  wisdom  and  thy 
knowledge,  they  led  thee  astray ;  so  that  thou  saidst  in  thy  heart, 
I  am  it,  and  none  else.  And  misfortune  cometh  upon  thee,  which 
thou  dost  not  understand  how  to  charm  away :  and  destruction 
will  fall  upon  thee,  which  thou  canst  not  atone  for ;  there  ivill  come 
suddenly  upon  thee  ruin  wliicli  thou  suspectest  not."  In  the  sur 
names  given  to  Babylon  here,  a  new  reason  is  assigned  for  the 
judgment, — namely,  extravagance,  security,  and  self-exaltation. 
r*]y  is  an  intensive  form  of  H?  (LXX.  rpvfapd).  The  i  of 
''pax  is  regarded  by  Hahn  as  the  same  as  we  meet  with  in 
••riK  =  riK  ;  but  this  is  impossible  here  with  the  first  person. 
Rosenmtiller,  Ewald,  Gesenius,  and  others,  take  it  as  chirek 


CHAP.  XLVII.  8-11.  241 

compaginiS)  and  equivalent  to  TiJJ  pS,  which  would  only  occur 
in  this  particular  formula.  Hitzig  supposes  it  to  be  the  suffix 
of  the  word,  which  is  meant  as  a  preposition  in  the  sense  of  et 
prceter  me  ultra  (nemo)  ;  but  this  nemo  would  be  omitted,  which 
is  improbable.  The  more  probable  explanation  is,  that  Das 
signifies  absolute  non-existence,  and  when  used  as  an  adverb, 
"  exclusively,  nothing  but,"  e.g.  ^i?  D3X?  nothing,  the  utmost 
extremity  thereof,  i.e.  only  the  utmost  extremity  of  it  (Num. 
xxiii.  13 ;  cf.  xxii.  35).  But  it  is  mostly  used  with  a  verbal 
force,  like  pS  (pK),  (utique)  non  est  (see  ch.  xlv.  14) ;  hence 
"D2S,  like  ^S,  (utique)  non  sum.  The  form  in  which  the  pre 
sumption  of  Babylon  expresses  itself,  viz.  "  I  (am  it),  and  I  am 
absolutely  nothing  further,"  sounds  like  self-deification,  by  the 
side  of  similar  self-assertion  on  the  part  of  Jehovah  (ch.  xlv.  5, 
6,  xviii.  22  ;  cf.  vers.  xxi.  14  and  ch.  xlvi.  9).  Nineveh  speaks 
in  just  the  same  way  in  Zeph.  ii.  15  (on  the  secondary  character 
of  this  passage,  see  p.  67)  ;  compare  Martial :  "  Terrarum  Dea 
gentiumque  Roma  cui  par  est  nihil  et  nihil  secundum"  Babylon 
also  says  still  further  (like  the  Babylon  of  the  last  days  in  Rev. 
xviii.  7)  :  "I  shall  not  sit  as  a  widow  (viz.  mourning  thus  in 
solitude,  Lam.  i.  1,  iii.  28  ;  and  secluded  from  the  world,  Gen. 
xxxviii.  11),  nor  experience  the  loss  of  children"  (orbilatem). 
She  would  become  a  widow,  if  she  should  lose  the  different 
nations,  and  "  the  kings  of  the  earth  who  committed  fornication 
with  her "  (Rev.  xviii.  9)  ;  for  her  relation  to  her  own  king 
cannot  possibly  be  thought  of,  inasmuch  as  the  relation  in 
which  a  nation  stands  to  its  temporal  king  is  never  thought  of 
as  marriage,  like  that  of  Jehovah  to  Israel.  She  would  also  be 
a  mother  bereaved  of  her  children,  if  war  and  captivity  robbed 
her  of  her  population.  But  both  of  these  would  happen  to  her 
suddenly  in  one  day,  so  that  she  would  succumb  to  the  weight 
of  the  double  sorrow.  Both  of  them  would  come  upon  her 
ffthummdm  (secundum  integritatem  eoruni),  i.e.  so  that  she  would 
come  to  learn  what  the  loss  of  men  and  the  loss  of  children 
signified  in  all  its  extent  and  in  all  its  depth,  and  that  in  spite 
of  (2,  with,  equivalent  to  "notwithstanding,"  as  in  ch.  v.  25; 
not  "  through  =  on  account  of,"  since  this  tone  is  adopted  for 
the  first  time  in  ver.  10)  the  multitude  of  its  incantations,  and 
the  very  great  mass  ('dtsmdh,  an  inf.  noun,  as  in  ch.  xxx.  19, 
Iv.  2,  used  here,  not  as  in  ch.  xl.  29,  in  an  intensive  sense,  but, 

VOL.  II.  0 


242  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

like  'cttstim,  as  a  parallel  word  to  rabli  in  a  numerical  sense) 
of  its  witchcrafts  (chebher,  binding  by  means  of  incantations, 
/earaSeoy^o?).  Babylonia  was  the  birth-place  of  astrology,  from 
which  sprang  the  twelve-fold  division  of  the  day,  the  horoscope 
and  sun-dial  (Herod,  ii.  109);  but  it  was  also  the  home  of  magic, 
which  pretended  to  bind  the  course  of  events,  and  even  the 
power  of  the  gods,  and  to  direct  them  in  whatever  way  it  pleased 
(Diodorus,  ii.  29).  Thus  had  Babylon  trusted  in  her  wicked 
ness  (ch.  xiii.  11),  viz.  in  the  tyranny  and  cunning  by  which 
she  hoped  to  ensure  perpetual  duration,  with  the  notion  that 
she  was  exalted  above  the  reach  of  any  earthly  calamity.  She 
thought,  "  None  seeth  me"  (non  est  videns  me),  thus  suppressing 
the  voice  of  conscience,  and  practically  denying  the  omnipo 
tence  and  omnipresence  of  God.  ^$jh  (with  a  verbal  suffix, 
videns  me,  whereas  ""JO  in  Gen.  xvi.  3  signifies  videns  mei  = 
meus),  also  written  ^JO,  is  a  pausal  form  in  half  pause  for  *OKl 
(ch.  xxix.  15).  Tzere  passes  in  pause  both  into  patJiach  (e.g. 
ch.  xlii.  22),  and  also,  apart  from  such  hithpael  forms  as  ch. 
xli.  16,  into  kametz,  as  in  w»sj?  (Job  xxii.  20,  which  see).  By 
the  "  wisdom  and  knowledge"  of  Babylon,  which  had  turned 
her  aside  from  the  right  way,  we  are  to  understand  her  policy, 
strategy,  and  more  especially  her  magical  arts,  i.e.  the  mysteries 
of  the  Chaldeans,  their  eV^topiot  <£t\ocro(j5>ofc  (Strabo,  xxi.  1,  6). 
On  hovdh  (used  here  and  in  Ezek.  vii.  26,  written  havvdh  else 
where),  according  to  its  primary  meaning,  "  yawning,"  yaivov, 
then  a  yawning  depth,  ^acr^a,  utter  destruction,  see  at  Job 
xxxvii.  6.  nxb>  signifies  primarily  a  desert,  or  desolate  place, 
here  destruction ;  and  hence  the  derivative  meaning,  waste 
noise,  a  dull  groan.  The  perfect  consec.  of  the  first  clause 
precedes  its  predicate  n>n  in  the  radical  form  N2  (Ges,  §  147,  a). 
With  the  parallelism  of  ni23?  it  is  not  probable  that  ^n^, 
which  rhymes  with  it,  is  a  substantive,  in  the  sense  of  "  from 
which  thou  wilt  experience  no  morning  dawn"  (i.e.  after  the 
ni^ht  of  calamity),  as  Umbreit  supposes.  The  suffix  also  causes 
some  difficulty  (hence  the  Vulgate  rendering,  ortum  ejus,  sc. 
mali)  ;  and  instead  of  T|n,  we  should  expect  Wfl.  In  any 
case,  shachrdh  is  a  verb,  and  Hitzig  renders  it,  "  which  thou 
wilt  not  know  how  to  unblacken  ;"  but  this  privative  use  of 
shicher  as  a  word  of  colour  would  be  without  example.  It 
would  be  better  to  translate  it,  "  which  thou  wilt  not  know  how 


CHAP.  XLVII.  12-15.  243 

to  spy  out"  (as  in  ch.  xxvi.  9),  but  better  still,  "  which  thou  wilt 
not  know  how  to  conjure  away"  (shicher  =  *^,  as  it  were 

incantitare,  and  here  incantando  averruncare).  The  last  relative 
clause  affirms  what  shachrdh  would  state,  if  understood  accord 
ing  to  ch.  xxvi.  9  :  destruction  which  thou  wilt  not  know,  i.e. 
which  will  come  suddenly  and  unexpectedly. 

Then  follows  the  concluding  strophe,  which,  like  the  first, 
announces  to  the  imperial  city  in  a  triumphantly  sarcastic  tone 
its  inevitable  fate  ;  whereas  the  intermediate  strophes  refer 
rather  to  the  sins  by  which  this  fate  has  been  brought  upon  it. 
Vers.  12-15.  u  Come  near,  then,  with  thine  enchantments,  and 
with  the  multitude  of  thy  witchcrafts^  wherein  thou  hast  laboured 
from  thy  youth :  perhaps  thou  canst  profit,  perhaps  thou  wilt 
inspire  terror.  Thou  art  wearied  through  the  multitude  of  thy 
consultations  ;  let  the  dissectors  of  the  heavens  come  near,  then,  and 
save  thee,  the  star-gazers,  they  who  with  every  new  moon  bring 
things  to  light  that  will  come  upon  thee.  Behold,  they  have  become 
like  stubble :  fire  has  consumed  them :  there  is  not  a  red-hot  coal 
to  warm  themselves,  a  hearth-fire  to  sit  before.  So  is  it  with  thy 
people,  for  whom  thou  hast  laboured :  thy  partners  in  trade  from 
thy  youth,  they  wander  away  every  one  in  his  own  direction ;  no 
one  who  brings  salvation  to  thee."  Hitzig  and  others  adopt  the 
simple  rendering,  "  Persevere,  then,  with  thine  enchantments." 
It  is  indeed  true,  that  in  Lev.  xiii.  5  3  Toy  signifies  "  to  remain 
standing  by  anything,"  i.e.  to  persevere  with  it,  just  as  in 
Ezek.  xiii.  5  it  signifies  to  keep  one's  standing  in  anything  ;  in 
2  Kings  xxiii.  3,  to  enter  upon  anything ;  and  in  Eccles.  viii.  3, 
to  engage  in  anything ;  but  there  is  no  reason  for  taking  it  here 
in  any  other  sense  than  in  ver.  13.  Babylon  is  to  draw  near 
with  all  the  processes  of  the  black  art,  wherein  p^N2?  according 
to  our  western  mode  of  expression,  equivalent  to  DH3  ^V$, 
Ges.  123,  2*)  it  had  been  addicted  to  abundance  of  routine 
from  its  youth  upwards  (fiyjj  with  an  auxiliary  pathach  for 
JW) ;  possibly  it  may  be  of  some  use,  possibly  it  will  terrify, 
i.e.  make  itself  so  terrible  to  the  approaching  calamity,  as  to 
cause  it  to  keep  off.  The  prophet  now  sees  in  spirit  how 
Babylon  draws  near,  and  how  it  also  harasses  itself  to  no  pur 
pose  ;  he  therefore  follows  up  the  K3"Hpy,  addressed  in  pleno  to 
Babylon,  with  a  second  challenge  commencing  with 


244  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Their  astrologers  are  to  draw  near,  and  try  that  power  over  the 
future  to  which  they  lay  claim,  by  bringing  it  to  bear  at  once  upon 
the  approaching  destruction  for  the  benefit  of  Babylon.  Tj^nvjj 
is  a  singular  form  connected  with  a  feminine  plural  suffix,  such 
as  we  find  in  Ps.  ix.  15,  Ezek.  xxxv.  11,  Ezra  ix.  15,  connected 
with  a  masculine  plural  suffix.  Assuming  the  correctness  ot 
the  vowel-pointing,  the  singular  appears  in  such  cases  as  these 
to  have  a  collective  meaning,  like  the  Arabic  pi.  fractus ;  for 
there  is  no  ground  to  suppose  that  the  Aramgean  plural  form 
'etsdth  is  used  here  in  the  place  of  the  Hebrew.  Instead  of 
D'E^ran  (which  would  be  equivalent  to  ran  lBfc),  the  keri 
reads  D?E^  t|"}^n>  cutters  up  of  the  heavens,  i.e.  planners  or 
dissectors  of  them,  from  hdbhar,  dissecare,  resecare  (compare 
the  rabbinical  habhdrdh,  a  syllable,  i.e.  segmentum  vocabuli,  and 
possibly  also  the  talmudic  'fb/tdrtm,  limbs  of  a  body).  The 
correction  proposed  by  Knobel,  viz.  chdbliere,  from  chdbhar,  to 
know,  or  be  versed  in,  is  unnecessary.  Chdzdh  ft  signifies  here, 
as  it  generally  does,  to  look  with  pleasure  or  with  interest  at  any 
thing  ;  hence  Luther  has  rendered  it  correctly,  die  Sternkucker 
(Eng.  ver.  star-gazers).  They  are  described  still  further  as  those 
who  make  known  with  every  new  moon  (lechoddshlm,  like 
labbeqdrlm,  every  morning,  ch.  xxxiii.  2,  etc.),  things  which, 
etc.  "^;N£  is  used  in  a  partitive  sense :  out  of  the  great  mass 
of  events  they  select  the  most  important,  and  prepare  a  calendar 
or  almanack  (aX^evi^aKa  in  Plutarch)  for  the  state  every 
month.  But  these  very  wise  men  cannot  save  themselves,  to 
say  nothing  of  others,  out  of  the  power  of  that  flame,  which  is 
no  comforting  coal-fire  to  warm  one's  self  by,  no  hearth-fire 
(ch.  xliv.  16)  to  sit  in  front  of,  but  a  devouring,  eternal,  i.e. 
peremptory  flame  (ch.  xxxiii.  14).  The  rendering  adopted  by 
Grotius,  Yitringa,  Lowth,  Gesenius,  and  others,  "  non  supererit 
pruna  ad  calendum"  is  a  false  one,  if  only  because  it  is  not 
in  harmony  with  the  figure.  "  Thus  shall  they  be  unto  thee," 
he  continues  in  ver.  15,  i.e.  such  things  shall  be  endured  to 
thy  disgrace  by  those  about  whom  thou  hast  wearied  thyself 
(-IB>K  =  bna  "iPK).  The  learned  orders  of  the  Chaldeans  had 
their  own  quarter,  and  enjoyed  all  the  distinction  and  privileges 
of  a  priestly  caste.  What  follows  cannot  possibly  be  under 
stood  as  relating  to  these  masters  of  astrology  and  witchcraft, 
as  Ewald  supposes ;  for,  according  to  the  expression  *™$  in 


CHAP.  XL  VIII.  1,  2.  245 


ver.  11,  they  would  be  called  IH^y.  Moreover,  if  they  became 
a  prey  of  the  flames,  and  therefore  were  unable  to  flee,  we 
should  have  to  assume  that  they  were  burned  while  taking 
flight  (Umbreit).  ^1D'D  are  those  who  carried  on  commercial 
intercourse  with  the  great  "trading  city"  (Ezek.  xvii.  4),  as 
Berossos  says,  "  In  Babylon  there  was  a  great  multitude  of  men 
of  other  nations  who  had  settled  in  Chaldea,  and  they  lived  in 
disorder,  like  the  wild  beasts;"  compare  ./Eschylus,  Pers.  52-3, 
Ba(3v\a>v  8  T]  TroXv'XpVG'OS  ira^itcrov  oy\ov  Tre/^Tret.  All  of 
these  are  scattered  in  the  wildest  flight,  fa-OT^J  ^K,  every  one 
on  his  own  side,  viz.  in  the  direction  of  his  own  home,  and  do 
not  trouble  themselves  about  Babylon. 

NINTH   PROPHECY.—  CHAP.  XLVIII. 
DELIVERANCE  FROM  BABYLON. 

This  third  portion  of  the  trilogy  (ch.  xlvi.  xlvii.  xlviii.) 
stands  in  the  same  relation  to  ch.  xlvii.,  as  ch.  xlvi.  3  sqq.  to 
ch.  xlvi.  1,  2.  The  prophecy  is  addressed  to  the  great  body  of 
the  captives.  Vers.  1,  2.  "  Hear  ye  this,  0  house  of  Jacob,  ivho 
are  called  by  the  name  of  Israel,  and  have  flowed  out  of  the 
waters  of  Judah,  who  swear  by  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  extol 
the  God  of  Israel,  not  in  truth,  and  not  in  righteousness  I  For 
they  call  themselves  of  the  holy  city,  and  stay  themselves  upon  the 
God  of  Israel,  Jehovah  of  hosts  His  name"  The  summons 
to  hear  is  based  upon  the  Israelitish  nationality  of  those  who 
are  summoned,  to  which  they  still  cling,  and  upon  the  relation 
in  which  they  place  themselves  to  the  God  of  Israel.  This 
gives  to  Jehovah  the  right  to  turn  to  them,  and  imposes  upon 
them  the  duty  to  hearken  to  Him.  The  blame,  inserted  by  the 
way,  points  at  the  same  time  to  the  reason  for  the  address  which 
follows,  and  to  the  form  which  it  necessarily  assumes.  "  The 
house  of  Jacob"  is  not  all  Israel,  as  the  following  words  clearly 
show,  but,  as  in  ch.  xlvi.  3,  the  house  of  Judah,  which  shared 
in  the  honourable  name  of  Israel,  but  have  flowed  out  of  the 
waters,  i.e.  the  source  of  Judah.  The  summons,  therefore,  is 
addressed  to  the  JudaBan  exiles  in  Babylon,  arid  that  inasmuch 
as  they  swear  by  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and  remember  the 
God  of  Israel  with  praise  (Itiz'ki.r  U  as  in  Ps.  xx.  8),  though  not 


246  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

in  truth  and  not  in  righteousness  (1  Kings  iii.  G ;  Zech.  viii.  8), 
i.e.  without  their  state  of  mind  (cf.  ch.  xxxviii.  3,  Jer.  xxxii.  41) 
or  mode  of  action  corresponding  to  their  confession,  so  as  to 
prove  that  it  was  sincerely  and  seriously  meant.  The  praise 
bestowed  upon  the  persons  summoned,  which  is  somewhat 
spoiled  by  this,  is  explained  in  ver.  2  ;  they  call  themselves 
after  the  holy  city  (this  title  is  applied  to  Jerusalem  both 
here  and  in  ch.  Iii.  1,  as  well  as  in  the  books  of  Daniel  and 
Nehemiah).  We  may  easily  supply  here,  that  the  holiness 
of  the  city  laid  an  obligation  upon  its  citizens  to  be  holy  in 
their  character  and  conduct.  They  also  relied  upon  the  God 
of  Israel,  whose  name  is  Jehovah  Zebaoth ;  and  therefore 
lie  could  require  of  them  the  fullest  confidence  and  deepest 
reverence. 

After  this  summons,  and  description  of  those  who  are  sum 
moned,  the  address  of  Jehovah  begins.  Vers.  3-5.  "  The  first 
I  have  long  ago  proclaimed,  and  it  has  gone  forth  out  of  my 
mouthy  and  I  caused  it  to  be  heard.  I  carried  it  out  suddenly, 
and  it  came  to  pass.  Because  I  knew  that  thou  art  hard,  and  thy 
neck  an  iron  clasp,  and  thy  brow  of  brass;  I  proclaimed  it  to  thee 
long  ago ;  before  it  came  to  pass,  I  caused  thee  to  hear  it,  that 
thou  mightest  not  say,  My  idol  has  done  it,  and  my  graven  image 
and  molten  image  commanded  it"  The  word  nw&on  in  itself 
signifies  simply  priora ;  and  then,  according  to  the  context,  it 
signifies  prius  facia  (ch.  xlvi.  9),  or  prius  prcedicta  (ch.  xliii.  9), 
or  prius  eventura  (ch.  xli.  22,  xlii.  9).  In  the  present  passage 
it  refers  to  earlier  occurrences,  which  Jehovah  had  foretold, 
and,  when  the  time  fixed  for  their  accomplishment  arrived, 
which  He  had  immediately  brought  to  pass.  With  a  retro 
spective  glance  at  this,  we  find  plural  masc.  suffixes  (cf.  ch.  xli. 
27)  used  interchangeably  with  plural  fern.  (cf.  ver.  7  and  ch. 
xxxviii.  16)  ;  the  prophet  more  frequently  uses  the  sing.  fern, 
in  this  neuter  sense  (ch.  xli.  20,  xlii.  23,  etc.),  and  also,  though 
very  rarely,  the  sing.  masc.  (ch.  xlv.  8).  On  gld,  a  band,  a 
sinew,  but  here  a  clasp  (cf.  Arab,  kaid,  a  fetter),  see  Psychology, 
p.  233.  Nechushdh  is  a  poetical  equivalent  for  nechosheth,  as  in 
ch.  xlv.  2.  The  heathen  cravings  of  Israel,  which  reached  into 
the  captivity,  are  here  presupposed.  Hengstenberg  is  mistaken 
in  his  supposition,  that  the  prophet's  standpoint  is  always 
anterior  to  the  captivity  when  he  speaks  in  condemnation  of 


CHAP.  XLVIII.  6-8.  247 

idolatry.  We  cannot  draw  any  conclusion  from  the  character 
of  the  community  that  returned,  with  regard  to  that  of  the 
people  of  the  captivity  generally.  The  great  mass  even  of 
Judah,  and  still  more  of  Israel,  remained  behind,  and  became 
absorbed  into  the  heathen,  to  whom  they  became  more  and 
more  assimilated.  And  does  not  Ezekiel  expressly  state  in  ch. 
xx.  30  sqq.,  that  the  golah  by  the  Chaboras  defiled  themselves 
with  the  same  abominations  of  idolatry  as  their  fathers,  and 
that  the  prevailing  disposition  was  to  combine  the  worship  of 
Jehovah  with  heathenism,  or  else  to  exchange  the  former 
altogether  for  the  latter  ?  And  we  know  that  it  was  just  the 
same  with  the  exiles  in  Egypt,  among  whom  the  life  and 
labours  of  Jeremiah  terminated.  Wherever  the  prophet  speaks 
of  D^t^a  and  D'W"),  these  names  invariably  include  a  tendency 
or  falling  away  to  Babylonian  idolatry,  to  which  he  describes 
the  exiles  as  having  been  addicted,  both  in  ch.  Ixvi.  17  and 
elsewhere. 

But  in  order  to  determine  exactly  what  "the  former  things" 
were,  which  Jehovah  had  foretold  in  order  that  Israel  might 
not  ascribe  them  to  this  idol  or  the  other,  we  must  add  vers. 
(5-8:  "Thou  hast  heard  it,  look  then  at  it  all;  and  ye,  must  ye  not 
confess  it  ?  I  give  tliee  new  things  to  hear  from  this  time  forth, 
and  hidden  things,  and  what  thou  didst  not  know.  It  is  created 
now,  and  not  long  ago ;  and  thou  hast  not  heard  it  before,  that 
thou  mightest  not  say,  Behold,  I  knew  it.  Thou  hast  neither  heard 
it,  nor  known  it,  nor  did  thine  ear  open  itself  to  it  long  ago :  for 
I  knew  thou  art  altogether  faithless,  and  thou  art  called  rebellious 
from  the  womb"  The  meaning  of  the  question  in  ver.  ()a  is 
very  obvious  :  they  must  acknowledge  and  attest,  even  though 
against  their  will  (ch.  xliii.  10,  xliv.  8),  that  Jehovah  has 
foretold  all  that  is  now  confirmed  by  the  evident  fulfilment. 
Consequently  the  "  former  things  "  are  the  events  experienced 
by  the  people  from  the  very  earliest  times  (ch.  xlvi.  9)  down  to 
the  present  times  of  Cyrus,  and  more  especially  the  first  half 
or  epoch  of  this  period  itself,  which  expired  at  the  time  that 
formed  the  prophet's  standpoint.  And  as  the  object  of  the 
prediction  was  to  guard  Israel  against  ascribing  to  its  idols  that 
which  had  taken  place  (which  can  only  be  understood  of  events 
that  had  occurred  in  favour  of  Israel),  the  "  former  things " 
must  include  the  preparation  for  the  redemption  of  Israel  from 


248  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  Babylonian  captivity  through  the  revolution  brought  to 
pass  by  Cyrus.  Hence  the  "new  things"  will  embrace  the 
redemption  of  Israel  with  its  attendant  circumstances,  and  that 
not  merely  on  its  outward  side,  but  on  its  spiritual  side  as  well; 
also  the  glorification  of  the  redeemed  people  in  the  midst  of 
a  world  of  nations  converted  to  the  God  of  Israel,  and  the 
creation  of  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  ;  in  short,  the  New 
Testament  aeon  (compare  DV  ft^TJri  LXX.  et<?  Sia0r)fC7]v  761/0^9, 
ch.  xlii.  6),  with  the  facts  which  contribute  to  its  ultimate  com 
pletion  (cf.  ch.  xlii.  9).  The  announcement  and  realization  of 
these  absolutely  new  and  hitherto  secret  things  (cf.  Rom.  xvi.  25) 
take  place  from  this  time  forward ;  Israel  has  not  heard  of 
them  "  before  to-day"  (compare  DisO,  "  from  this  day  forward," 
ch.  xliii.  13),  that  it  may  not  lay  claim  to  the  knowledge 
conveyed  to  it  by  prophecy,  as  something  drawn  from  itself. 
This  thought  is  carried  to  a  climax  in  ver.  8  in  three  cor 
related  sentences  commencing  with  "yea"  (gam).  HfiS  signifies 
patescere  here,  as  in  ch.  Ix.  11  (Ewald,  §  120,  a).  Jehovah  had 
said  nothing  to  them  of  this  before,  because  it  was  to  be  feared 
that,  with  their  faithlessness  and  tendency  to  idolatry,  which 
had  run  through  their  entire  history,  they  would  only  abuse 
it.  This  is  strange  !  On  the  one  hand,  the  rise  of  Cyrus  is 
spoken  of  here  as  predicted  from  of  old,  because  it  belonged  to 
the  "  former  things,"  and  as  knowable  through  prophecy, — a 
statement  which  favours  the  opinion  that  these  addresses  were 
written  before  the  captivity;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  dis 
tinction  is  drawn  between  these  "  former  things "  and  certain 
"  new  things  "  that  were  intentionally  not  predicted  before  the 
expiration  of  these  "  former  things/'  which  certainly  seems  to 
preclude  the  possibility  of  their  having  been  composed  before 
the  captivity ;  since,  as  Ruetschi  observes,  if  "  the  older  Isaiah 
had  predicted  this,  he  would  have  acted  in  direct  opposition  to 
Jehovah's  design."  But  in  actual  fact,  the  dilemma  in  which 
the  opponents  of  the  authenticity  of  these  prophecies  find  them 
selves,  is  comparatively  worse  than  this.  For  the  principal 
objection — namely,  that  a  prophet  before  the  captivity  could  not 
possibly  have  known  or  predicted  anything  concerning  Cyrus — 
cannot  be  satisfactorily  removed  by  attributing  these  prophecies 
to  a  prophet  of  the  time  of  the  captivity,  since  they  expressly 
and  repeatedly  affirm  that  the  rise  of  Cyrus  was  an  event  fore- 


CHAP.  XLVIII.  9-11.  249 

known  and  predicted  by  the  God  of  prophecy.  Now,  if  it  is 
Isaiah  who  thus  takes  his  stand  directly  in  the  midst  of  the 
captivity,  we  can  understand  both  of  these :  viz.  the  retro 
spective  glance  at  previous  prophecies,  which  issued  in  the 
rise  of  Cyrus  that  prepared  the  way  for  the  redemption  from 
Babylon,  since,  so  far  as  the  prophet  was  concerned,  such  pro 
phecies  as  ch.  xiii.-xiv.  23,  xxi.  1-10,  and  also  ch.  xi.  10-12 
(Mic.  iv.  10),  are  fused  into  one  with  his  present  predictions  ; 
and  also  the  prospective  glance  at  prophecies  which  are  now 
first  to  be  uttered,  and  events  which  are  now  for  the  first 
time  about  to  be  accomplished  ;  inasmuch  as  the  revelations 
contained  in  these  prophecies  concerning  Israel's  pathway 
through  suffering  to  glory,  more  especially  so  far  as  they 
grew  out  of  the  idea  of  the  "  servant  of  Jehovah,"  might 
really  be  set  down  as  absolutely  new  to  the  prophet  himself, 
and  never  heard  of  before.  Meanwhile  our  exposition  is  not 
affected  by  the  critical  question ;  for  even  we  most  firmly 
maintain,  that  the  prophet  who  is  speaking  here  has  his 
standpoint  in  the  midst  of  the  captivity,  on  the  boundary 
line  of  the  condition  of  suffering  and  punishment  and  its 
approaching  termination. 

The  people  now  expiating  its  offences  in  exile  has  been 
from  time  immemorial  faithless  and  inclined  to  apostasy  ; 
nevertheless  Jehovah  will  save  it,  and  its  salvation  is  therefore 
an  unmerited  work  of  His  compassion.  Yers.  9-11.  "  For  my 
names  sake  I  lengthen  out  my  wrath,  and  for  my  praise  I  hold 
back  toivards  thee,  that  I  may  not  cut  thee  off.  Behold,  I  have 
refined  thee,  and  not  in  the  manner  of  silver :  I  have  proved  thee 
in  the  furnace  of  affliction.  For  mine  own  sake,  for  mine  own 
sake  1  accomplish  it  (for  liow  is  it  profaned  /),  and  my  glory 
I  give  not  to  another"  The  futures  in  ver.  9  affirm  what 
Jehovah  continually  does.  He  lengthens  out  His  wrath,  i.e. 
He  retards  its  outbreak,  and  thus  shows  Himself  long-suffering. 

He  tames  or  chains  it  (&??n,  like  ^k^,  root  DL3,  compare  domare, 

root  Sanscr.  dam,  possibly  also  to  dam  or  damp)  for  the  sake 
of  Israel,  that  He  may  not  exterminate  it  utterly  by  letting 
it  loose,  and  that  for  the  sake  of  His  name  and  His  praise, 
which  require  the  carrying  out  of  His  plan  of  salvation, 
on  which  the  existence  of  Israel  depends.  What  Israel  has 


250  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

hitherto  experienced  has  been  a  melting,  the  object  of  which 
was  not  destruction,  but  testing  and  refinement.  The  Beth  of 
*|prn  N?1  Is  not  Belli  pretii  in  the  sense  of  "  not  to  gain  silver/' 
or  "  not  so  that  I  should  have  gained  silver  as  operas  pretium" 
as  Umbreit  and  Evvald  maintain  (and  even  Knobel,  who 
explains  it  however  as  meaning  "  in  the  accompaniment  of 
silver,"  though  in  the  same  sense).  Such  a  thought  would  be 
out  of  place  and  purposeless  here.  Nor  is  RosenmiiUer's  ex 
planation  admissible,  viz.  "  not  with  silver,  i.e.  with  that  force 
of  fire  which  is  necessary  for  the  smelting  out  of  silver."  This 
is  altogether  unsuitable,  because  the  sufferings  inflicted  upon 
Israel  did  resemble  the  smelting  out  of  the  precious  metal  (see 
ch.  i.  25).  The  Beth  is  rather  the  Beth  essentios^  which  may  be 
rendered  by  tanquam,  and  introduces  the  accusative  predicate 
in  this  instance,  just  as  it  introduces  the  nominative  predicate 
in  the  substantive  clause  of  Job  xxiii.  13,  and  the  verbal  clause 
of  Ps.  xxxix.  7.  Jehovah  melted  Israel,  but  not  like  silver 
(not  as  men  melt  silver)  ;  the  meaning  of  which  is,  not  that 
He  melted  it  more  severely,  i.e.  even  more  thoroughly,  than 
silver,  as  Stier  explains  it,  but,  as  the  thought  is  positively 
expressed  in  ver.  106,  that  the  afflictions  which  fell  upon 
Israel  served  as  a  smelting  furnace  (kur  as  in  Deut.  iv.  20). 
It  was,  however,  a  smelting  of  a  superior  kind,  a  spiritual 
refining  and  testing  (Idchar  is  Aramaic  in  form,  and  equiva 
lent  to  Idchan).  The  manifestation  of  wrath,  therefore,  as 
these  expressions  affirm,  had  a  salutary  object ;  and  in  this  very 
object  the  intention  was  involved  from  the  very  first,  that  it 
should  only  last  for  a  -time.  He  therefore  puts  an  end  to  it 
now  for  His  own  sake,  i.e.  not  because  Pie  is  induced  to  do  so 
by  the  merits  of  Israel,  but  purely  as  an  act  of  grace,  to  satisfy 
a  demand  made  upon  Him  by  His  own  holiness,  inasmuch  as, 
if  it  continued  any  longer,  it  would  encourage  the  heathen  to 
blaspheme  His  name,  and  would  make  it  appear  as  though  He 
cared  nothing  for  His  own  honour,  which  was  inseparably 
bound  up  with  the  existence  of  Israel.  The  expression  here 
is  curt  and  harsh  throughout.  In  ver.  96,  ]Wb  and  "25*  are  to 
be  supplied  in  thought  from  ver.  9a ;  and  in  the  parenthetical 
exclamation,  SlT  T^N  (niphal  of  W>n,  as  in  Ezek.  xxii.  26),  the 
distant  word  *ftW  (my  name),  also  from  ver.  9a.  "  I  will  do  it" 
refers  to  the  carrying  out  of  their  redemption  (cf.  ch.  xliv.  23). 


CHAP.  XLVIII.  12-16.  251 

In  Ezek.  xxxvi.  1.9-23  we  have,  as  it  were,  a  commentary  upon 
ver.  11. 

The  prophecy  opened  with  "  Hear  ye ;"  and  now  the  second 
half  commences  with  "  Hear."  Three  times  is  the  appeal  made 
to  Israel :  Hear  ye ;  Jehovah  alone  is  God,  Creator,  shaper  of 
history,  God  of  prophecy  and  of  fulfilment.  Vers.  12-16. 
"  Hearken  to  me,  0  Jacob,  and  Israel  my  called !  I  am  it,  1 
first,  also  I  last.  My  hand  also  hath  laid  the  foundation  of  the 
earth,  and  my  right  hand  hath  spanned  the  heavens :  I  call  to 
them,  and  they  stand  there  together.  All  ye,  assemble  yourselves, 
and  hear :  Who  among  them  hath  proclaimed  this  f  He  whom 
Jehovah  loveth  unll  accomplish  his  will  upon  Babel,  and  his 
arm  upon  the  Chaldeans.  I,  I  have  spoken,  have  also  called 
him,  have  brought  him  here,  and  his  way  prospers.  Come  ye 
near  to  me  !  Hear  ye  this  I  I  have  not  spoken  in  secret,  from  the 
beginning:  from  the  time,  that  it  takes  place,  there  am  I :  and 
now  the  Lord  Jehovah  hath  sent  me  and  His  Spirit."  Israel  is 
to  hearken  to  the  call  of  Jehovah.  The  obligation  to  this 
exists,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  fact  that  it  is  the  nation  called 
to  be  the  servant  of  Jehovah  (ch.  xli.  9),  the  people  of  sacred 
history  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  fact  that  Jehovah  is 
Nin  (ever  since  Deut.  xxxii.  39,  the  fundamental  clause  of  the 
Old  Testament  credo),  i.e.  the  absolute  and  eternally  unchange 
able  One,  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  all  history,  more  especially 
of  that  of  Israel,  the  Creator  of  the  earth  and  heavens  (tippach, 
like  ndtdh  elsewhere,  equivalent  to  the  Syriac  tfphach,  to  spread 
out),  at  whose  almighty  call  they  stand  ready  to  obey,  with  all 
the  beings  they  contain.  ViN  &Op  is  virtually  a  conditional 
sentence  (Ewald,  §  357,  b).  So  far  everything  has  explained 
the  reason  for  the  exhortation  to  listen  to  Jehovah.  A  further 
reason  is  now  given,  by  His  summoning  the  members  of  His 
nation  to  assemble  together,  to  hear  liis  own  self-attestation, 
and  to  confirm  it :  Who  among  them  (the  gods  of  the  heathen) 
has  proclaimed  this,  or  anything  of  the  kind  ?  That  which  no 
one  but  Jehovah  has  ever  predicted  follows  immediately,  in 
the  form  of  an  independent  sentence,  the  subject  of  which  is 
tans  nirp  (cf.  ch.  xli.  24)  :  He  whom  Jehovah  loveth  will 
accomplish  his  will  upon  Babylon,  and  his  arm  (accomplish  it) 
upon  the  Chaldeans,  Ijfifi  is  not  an  accusative  (as  Hitzig, 
Ewald,  Stier,  and  others  maintain) ;  for  the  expression  "  accom- 


252  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

plish  his  arm"  (?  Jehovah's  or  his  own)  is  a  phrase  that  is 
quite  unintelligible,  even  if  taken  as  zeugmatic ;  it  is  rather 
the  nominative  of  the  subject,  whilst  D^b?  —  D^KGS,  like 
V^nn  =  'r&nn  \yiJ?  in  ver.  9.  Jehovah,  He  alone,  is  He  who 
has  proclaimed  such  things  ;  He  also  has  raised  up  in  Cyrus 
the  predicted  conqueror  of  Babylon.  The  prosperity  of  his 
career  is  Jehovah's  work.  As  certainly  now  as  ttOpn  in  Ver. 

•f  .        :    ,T  • 

14  is  the  word  of  Jehovah,  so  certain  is  it  that  vS  tonjp  is  the 
same.  He  summons  to  Himself  the  members  of  His  nation, 
that  they  may  hear  still  further  His  own  testimony  concerning 
Himself.  From  the  beginning  He  has  not  spoken  in  secret 
(see  ch.  xlv.  19)  ;  but  from  the  time  that  all  which  now  lies 
before  their  eyes — namely,  the  victorious  career  of  Cyrus — has 
unfolded  itself,  He  has  been  there,  or  has  been  by  (sham,  there, 
as  in  Prov.  viii.  27),  to  regulate  what  was  coming  to  pass,  and 
to  cause  it  to  result  in  the  redemption  of  Israel.  Hofmanri 
gives  a  different  explanation,  viz. :  "  I  have  not  spoken  in  secret 
from  the  beginning ;  not  from  the  time  when  it  came  to  pass 
(not  then  for  the  first  time,  but  long  before)  ;  I  was  then 
(when  it  occurred)."  But  the  arrangement  of  the  words  is 
opposed  to  this  continued  force  of  the  &6,  and  the  accents  are 
opposed  to  this  breaking  off  of  the  ^N  Q£;,  which  affirms  that, 
at  the  time  when  the  revolution  caused  by  Cyrus  was  preparing 
in  the  distance,  He  caused  it  to  be  publicly  foretold,  and 
thereby  proclaimed  Himself  the  present  Author  and  Lord  of 
what  was  then  occurring.  Up  to  this  point  Jehovah  is  speaking ; 
but  who  is  it  that  now  proceeds  to  say,  "And  now — namely, 
now  that  the  redemption  of  Israel  is  about  to  appear  (nnjn 
being  here,  as  in  many  other  instances,  e.g.  ch.  xxxiii.  10,  the 
turning-point  of  salvation) — now  hath  the  Lord  Jehovah  sent 
me  and  His  Spirit?"  The  majority  of  the  commentators  as 
sume  that  the  prophet  comes  forward  here  in  his  own  person, 
behind  Him  whom  he  has  introduced,  and  interrupts  Him. 
But  although  it  is  perfectly  true,  that  in  all  prophecy,  from 
Deuteronomy  onwards,  words  of  Jehovah  through  the  prophet 
and  words  of  the  prophet  of  Jehovah  alternate  in  constant, 
and  often  harsh  transitions,  and  that  our  prophet  has  this  mark 
of  divine  inspiration  in  common  with  all  the  other  prophets 
(cf.  ch.  Ixii.  5,  6),  it  must  also  be  borne  in  mind,  that  hitherto 
he  has  not  spoken  once  objectively  of  himself,  except  quite 


CHAP.  XLVIII.  12-16.  253 

indirectly  (vid.  ch.  xl.  6,  xliv.  26),  to  say  nothing  of  actually 
coming  forward  in  his  own  person.  Whether  this  takes  place 
further  on,  more  especially  in  ch.  Ixi.,  we  will  leave  for  the 
present ;  but  here,  since  the  prophet  has  not  spoken  in  his  own 
person  before,  whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  these  words  are 
followed  in  ch.  xlix.  1  sqq.  by  an  address  concerning  himself 
from  that  servant  of  Jehovah  who  announces  himself  as  the 
restorer  of  Israel  and  light  of  the  Gentiles,  and  who  cannot 
therefore  be  either  Israel  as  a  nation  or  the  author  of  these 
prophecies,  nothing  is  more  natural  than  to  suppose  that  the 
words,  "  And  now  hath  the  Lord,"  etc.,  form  a  prelude  to  the 
words  of  the  One  unequalled  servant  of  Jehovah  concerning 
Himself  which  occur  in  ch.  xlix.  The  surprisingly  mysterious 
way  in  which  the  words  of  Jehovah  suddenly  pass  into  those 
of  His  messenger,  which  is  only  comparable  to  Zech.  ii.  12 
sqq.,  iv.  9  (where  the  speaker  is  also  not  the  prophet,  but  a 
divine  messenger  exalted  above  him),  can  only  be  explained  in 
this  manner.  And  in  no  other  way  can  we  explain  the  HW., 
which  means  that,  after  Jehovah  has  prepared  the  way  for  the 
redemption  of  Israel  by  the  raising  up  of  Cyrus,  in  accordance 
with  prophecy,  and  by  his  success  in  arms,  He  has  sent  him, 
the  speaker  in  this  case,  to  carry  out,  in  a  mediatorial  capacity, 
the  redemption  thus  prepared,  and  that  not  by  force  of  arms, 
but  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  (ch.  xlii.  1  ;  cf.  Zech. 
iv.  6).  Consequently  the  Spirit  is  not  spoken  of  here  as  join 
ing  in  the  sending  (as  Umbreit  and  Stier  suppose,  after  Jerome 
and  the  Targum  :  the  Septuagint  is  indefinite,  /cal  TO  irvevjjLa 
avrov)  ;  nor  do  we  ever  find  the  Spirit  mentioned  in  such 
co-ordination  as  this  (see,  on  the  other  hand,  Zech.  vii.  12,  per 
spiritum  swim).  The  meaning  is,  that  it  is  also  sent,  i.e.  sent 
in  and  with  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  who  is  speaking  here.  To 
convey  this  meaning,  there  was  no  necessity  to  write  either 
inrrt  'nfc  nfe  or  invrriK]  Or6e>,  since  the  expression  is  just  the 
same  as  that  in  ch.  xxix.  7,  Firnto  nsnv ;  and  the  Vav  may  be 
regarded  as  the  Vav  of  companionship  (Mitschaft,  lit.  with-ship, 
as  the  Arabs  call  it ;  see  at  ch.  xlii.  5). 

The  exhortation  is  now  continued.  Israel  is  to  learn  the 
incomparable  nature  of  Jehovah  from  the  work  of  redemption 
thus  prepared  in  word  and  deed.  The  whole  future  depends 
upon  the  attitude  which  it  henceforth  assumes  to  His  command- 


254  THE  PEOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

ments.  Yers.  17-19.  "  Thus  scrith  Jehovah,  thy  Redeemer,  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel;  I,  Jehovah  thy  God,  am  He  that  teacheth 
thee  to  do  that  which  profiteth,  and  leadeth  thee  by  the  way  that 
thou  shouldst  go.  0  that  thou  hearkenedst  to  my  commandments  ! 
then  thy  peace  becomes  like  the  river,  and  thy  righteousness  like 
waves  of  the  sea;  and  thy  seed  becomes  like  the  sand,  and  the 
children  of  thy  body  like  the  grains  thereof:  its  name  will  not  be 
cut  off  nor  destroyed  away  from  my  countenance"  Jehovah  is 
Israel's  rightful  and  right  teacher  and  leader.  T^inp  is  used  in 
the  same  sense  as  in  ch.  xxx.  5  and  xliv.  10,  to  furnish  what 
is  useful,  to  produce  what  is  beneficial  or  profitable.  The 
optative  \xh  is  followed,  as  in  ch.  Ixiii.  19,  by  the  preterite 
ntinam  attenderis,  the  idea  of  reality  being  mixed  up  with  the 
wish.  Instead  of  *rw  in  the  apodosis,  we  should  expect  *rP1 
(so  would),  as  in  Deut.  xxxii.  29.  The  former  points  out  the 
consequence  of  the  wish  regarded  as  already  realized.  Shalom, 
prosperity  or  health,  will  thereby  come  upon  Israel  in  such 
abundance,  that  it  will,  as  it  were,  bathe  therein  ;  and  tseddqdh, 
rectitude  acceptable  to  God,  so  abundantly,  that  it,  the  sinful 
one,  will  be  covered  by  it  over  and  over  again.  Both  of  these, 
shdlom  and  tseddqdh,  are  introduced  here  as  a  divine  gift,  not 
merited  by  Israel,  but  only  conditional  upon  that  faith  which 
gives  heed  to  the  word  of  God,  especially  to  the  word  which 
promises  redemption,  and  appropriates  it  to  itself.  Another 
consequence  of  the  obedience  of  faith  is,  that  Israel  thereby 
becomes  a  numerous  and  eternally  enduring  nation.  The  play 
upon  the  words  in  VTOE3  ^pjo  is  very  conspicuous.  Many 
expositors  (e.g.  Rashi,  Gesenius,  Hitzig,  and  Knobel)  regard 
TOP  as  synonymous  with  D'JflO,  and  therefore  as  signifying  the 
viscera,  i.e.  the  beings  that  fill  the  heart  of  the  sea ;  but  it  is 
much  more  natural  to  suppose  that  the  suffix  points  back  to  chol. 
Moreover,  no  such  metaphorical  use  of  viscera  can  be  pointed 
out ;  and  since  in  other  instances  the  feminine  plural  (such 
as  kendphoth,  tfrdndtli)  denotes  that  which  is  artificial  as  dis 
tinguished  from  what  is  natural,  it  is  impossible  to  see  why  the 
interior  of  the  sea,  which  is  elsewhere  called  lebh  (lebhabh,  the 
heart),  and  indirectly  also  beten,  should  be  called  TOD  instead 
of  DTO.  To  all  appearance  vntyp  signifies  the  grains  of  sand 
(LXX.,  Jerome,  Targ.)  ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that 
(Neo-Heb.  ny»  niimulus)  is  the  Targum  word  for  rn  a,  and 


CHAP.  XLVIII.  20-22.  255 

the  Semitic  root  Sflp,  related  to  ^  ;  p»,  melted,  dissolved,  signifies 
to  be  soft  or  tender.  The  conditional  character  of  the  con 
cluding  promise  has  its  truth  in  the  word  ^s? p.  Israel  remains 
a  nation  even  in  its  apostasy,  but  fallen  under  the  punishment 
of  kareth  (of  cutting  off),  under  which  individuals  perish  when 
they  wickedly  transgress  the  commandment  of  circumcision, 
and  others  of  a  similar  kind.  It  is  still  a  people,  but  rooted 
out  and  swept  away  from  the  gracious  countenance  of  God, 
who  no  more  acknowledges  it  as  His  own  people. 

So  far  the  address  is  hortatory.  In  the  face  of  the  ap 
proaching  redemption,  it  demands  fidelity  and  faith.  But  in 
the  certainty  that  such  a  faithful  and  believing  people  will  not 
be  wanting  within  the  outer  Israel,  the  prophecy  of  redemption 
clothes  itself  in  the  form  of  a  summons.  Yers.  20-22.  "  Go 
out  of  Babel,  flee  from  Chaldcea  with  voice  of  shouting:  declare 
ye,  preach  ye  this,  carry  it  out  to  the  end  of  the  earth  I  Say  ye, 
Jehovah  hath  redeemed  Jacob  His  servant.  And  they  thirsted 
not :  He  led  them  through  dry  places ;  He  caused  water  to  trickle 
out  of  rocks  for  them ;  He  split  rocks,  and  waters  gushed  out. 
There  is  no  peace,  saith  Jehovah,  for  the  ivicked"  They  are  to 
go  out  of  Babylon,  and  with  speed  and  joy  to  leave  the  land  of 
slavery  and  idolatry  far  behind.  Bdrach  does  not  mean  literally 
to  flee  in  this  instance,  but  to  depart  with  all  the  rapidity  of 
flight  (compare  Ex.  xiv.  5).  And  what  Jehovah  has  clone  to 
them,  is  to  be  published  by  them  over  the  whole  earth;  the 
redemption  experienced  by  Israel  is  to  become  a  gospel  to  all 
mankind.  The  tidings  which  are  to  be  sent  forth  (fcOtfn  as  in 
ch.  xlii.  1),  extend  from  7JO  to  the  second  D?g,  which  is  repeated 
palindromically.  Jehovah  has  redeemed  the  nation  that  He 
chose  to  be  the  bearer  of  His  salvation,  amidst  displays  of  love, 
in  which  the  miracles  of  the  Egyptian  redemption  have  been 
renewed.  This  is  what  Israel  has  to  experience,  and  to  preach, 
so  far  as  it  has  remained  true  to  its  God.  But  there  is  no 
peace,  saith  Jehovah,  to  the  reshalm :  this  is  the  name  given 
to  loose  men  (for  the  primary  meaning  of  the  verbal  root  is 
laxity  and  looseness),  i.e.  to  those  whose  inward  moral  nature  is 
loosened,  without  firm  hold,  and  therefore  in  a  state  of  chaotic 
confusion,  because  they  are  without  God.  The  reference  is  to 
the  godless  in  Israel.  The  words  express  the  same  thought 
negatively  which  is  expressed  positively  in  Gal.  vi.  16,  "Peace 


256  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

upon  the  Israel  of  God."  Shalom  is  the  significant  and  com 
prehensive  name  given  to  the  coming  salvation.  From  this  the 
godless  exclude  themselves  ;  they  have  no  part  in  the  future 
inheritance;  the  sabbatical  rest  reserved  for  the  people  of  God 
does  not  belong  to  them.  With  this  divine  utterance,  which 
pierces  the  conscience  like  the  point  of  an  arrow,  this  ninth 
prophecy  is  brought  to  a  close ;  and  not  that  only,  but  also  the 
trilogy  concerning  "  Babel "  in  ch.  xlvi.-xlix.,  and  the  whole  of 
the  first  third  of  these  3x9  addresses  to  the  exiles.  From 
this  time  forth  the  name  Koresh  (Cyrus),  and  also  the  name 
Babel,  never  occur  again  ;  the  relation  of  the  people  of 
Jehovah  to  heathenism,  and  the  redemption  from  Babylon,  so 
far  as  it  was  foretold  and  accomplished  by  Jehovah,  not  only 
proving  His  sole  deity,  but  leading  to  the  overthrow  of  the 
idols  and  the  destruction  of  their  worshippers.  This  theme  is 
now  exhausted,  and  comes  into  the  foreground  no  more.  The 
expression  D^K  W*?^,  in  its  connection  with  "'BJJ  }£n3_,  points  at 
once  to  the  diversity  in  character  of  the  second  section,  which 
commences  here. 


PART   II. 

FIRST  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  XLIX. 

SELF-ATTESTATION  OF  THE  SERVANT  OF  JEHOVAH.   THE 
DESPONDENCY  OF  ZION  REPROVED. 

THE  very  same  person  who  was  introduced  by  Jehovah  in  ch, 
xlii.  1  sqq.  here  speaks  for  himself,  commencing  thus  in  vers. 
1-3:  "Listen,  0  isles,  unto  me;  and  hearken,  ye  nations  afar  off : 
Jehovali  hath  called  me  from  the  womb ;  from  my  mother  s  lap 
hath  He  remembered  my  name.  A  nd  He  made  my  mouth  like 
a  sharp  sword;  in  the  shadow  of  His  hand  hath  He  hid  me, 
and  made  me  into  a  polished  shaft ;  in  His  quiver  hath  He  con 
cealed  me.  And  He  said  to  me,  Thou  art  my  servant,  0  Israel, 
thou  in  ivhom  I  glorify  myself"  Although  the  speaker  is  called 
Israel  in  ver.  3b,  he  must  not  be  regarded  as  either  a  collective 
person  representing  all  Israel,  or  as  the  collective  personality 


CHAP.  XLIX.  1-3.  257 

of  the  kernel  of  Israel,  which  answered  to  its  true  idea.  It  is 
not  the  former,  because  in  ver.  5  he  is  expressly  distinguished 
from  the  nation  itself,  which  is  the  immediate  object  of  his 
special  work  as  restorer  and  (according  to  ver.  8  and  ch.  xlii.  6) 
covenant-mediator  also ;  not  the  latter,  because  the  nation, 
whose  restoration  he  effects,  according  to  ver.  5,  was  not  some 
thing  distinct  from  the  collective  personality  of  the  "  servant 
of  Jehovah "  in  a  national  sense,  but  rather  the  entire  body 
of  the  "  servants  of  Jehovah  "  or  remnant  of  Israel  (see,  for 
example,  ch.  Ixv.  8-16).  Moreover,  it  cannot  be  either  of 
these,  because  what  he  affirms  of  himself  is  expressed  in  such 
terms  of  individuality,  that  they  cannot  be  understood  as  em 
ployed  in  a  collective  sense  at  all,  more  especially  where  he 
speaks  of  his  mother's  womb.  In  every  other  case  in  which 
Israel  is  spoken  of  in  this  way,  we  find  only  "  from  the  womb" 
(mibbeten,  ch.  xliv.  2,  24 ;  xlvi.  3,  along  with  minm-racham ; 
also  ch.  xlviii.  8),  without  the  addition  of  DK  (mother),  which 
is  quite  unsuitable  to  the  collective  body  of  the  nation  (except 
in  such  allegorical  connections  as  ch.  li.  1,  2,  and  Ezek.  xvi.  3). 
Is  it  then  possibly  the  prophet,  who  is  here  speaking  of  himself 
and  refers  in  ver.  Ib  to  his  own  mother  (compare  "^K  in  Jer. 
xv.  10,  xx.  14,  17)  1  This  is  very  improbable,  if  only  because 
the  prophet,  who  is  the  medium  of  the  word  of  God  in  these 
prophecies,  has  never  placed  himself  in  the  foreground  before. 
In  ch.  xl.  6  he  merely  speaks  of  himself  indirectly  ;  in  ch.  xliv. 
26,  even  if  he  refer  to  himself  at  all  (which  we  greatly  doubt), 
it  is  only  objectively;  and  in  ch.  xlviii.  16,  the  other  person, 
into  whose  words  the  words  of  Jehovah  pass,  cannot  be  the 
prophet,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  transition  of  the  words 
of  Jehovah  into  those  of  His  messenger  is  essentially  different 
in  this  instance  from  the  otherwise  frequent  interchange  of  the 
words  of  Jehovah  and  those  of  His  prophet,  and  also  because 
the  messenger  of  Jehovah  speaks  of  himself  there,  after  the 
"  former  things"  have  come  to  pass,  as  the  mediator  (either  in 
word  or  deed)  of  the  "  new  things  "  which  were  never  heard  of 
before,  but  are  to  be  expected  now;  whereas  the  author  of  these 
addresses  was  also  the  prophet  of  the  "  former  things,"  and 
therefore  the  messenger  referred  to  rises  up  within  the  course 
of  sacred  history  predicted  by  the  author  of  these  prophecies. 
Moreover,  what  the  speaker  in  this  case  (ch.  xlix.  1,  2)  says  of 

VOL.  II.  K 


258  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAFf. 

himself  is  so  unique,  so  glorious,  that  it  reaches  far  beyond  the 
vocation  and  performance  of  any  single  prophet,  or,  in  fact,  of 
any  individual  man  subject  to  the  limitations  of  human  life  and 
human  strength.  There  is  nothing  else  left,  therefore,  than 
to  suppose  that  the  idea  implied  in  the  expression  "  servant  of 
Jehovah  "  is  condensed  in  this  instance,  as  in  ch.  xlii.  1  sqq., 
into  that  of  a  single  person.  When  it  is  expanded  to  its 
widest  circumference,  the  "  servant  of  Jehovah  "  is  all  Israel ; 
when  it  only  covers  its  smaller  and  inner  circle,  it  is  the  true 
people  of  Jehovah  contained  within  the  entire  nation,  like  the 
kernel  in  the  shell  (see  the  definition  of  this  at  ch.  li.  7,  Ixv.  10; 
Ps.  xxiv.  6,  Ixxiii.  15)  ;  but  here  it  goes  back  to  its  very  centre. 
The  "  servant  of  Jehovah,"  in  this  central  sense,  is  the  heart 
of  Israel.  From  this  heart  of  Israel  the  stream  of  salvation 
flows  out,  first  of  all  through  the  veins  of  the  people  of  God, 
and  thence  through  the  veins  of  the  nations  generally.  Just 
as  Cyrus  is  the  world-power  in  person,  as  made  subservient  to 
the  people  of  God,  so  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  who  is  speak 
ing  here,  is  Israel  in  person,  as  promoting  the  glorification  of 
Jehovah  in  all  Israel,  and  in  all  the  world  of  nations  :  in  other 
words,  it  is  He  in  whom  the  true  nature  of  Israel  is  concentrated 
like  a  sun,  in  whom  the  history  of  Israel  is  coiled  up  as  into 
a  knot  for  a  further  and  final  development,  in  whom  Israel's 
world-wide  calling  to  be  the  Saviour  of  mankind,  including 
Israel  itself,  is  fully  carried  out ;  the  very  same  who  took  up  the 
word  of  Jehovah  in  ch.  xlviii.  16&,  in  the  full  consciousness  of 
His  fellowship  with  Him,  declaring  Plimself  to  be  His  messen 
ger  who  had  now  appeared.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  more 
over,  that  throughout  these  prophecies  the  breaking  forth  of 
salvation,  not  for  Israel  only,  but  for  all  mankind,  is  regarded 
as  bound  up  with  the  termination  of  the  captivity ;  and  from 
this  its  basis,  the  restoration  of  the  people  who  were  then  in 
exile,  it  is  never  separated.  This  fact  is  of  great  importance  in 
relation  to  the  question  of  authorship,  and  favours  the  conclu 
sion  that  they  emanated  from  a  prophet  who  lived  before  the 
captivity,  and  not  in  the  midst  of  it.  Just  as  in  ch.  vii.  Isaiah 
sees  the  son  of  the  virgin  grow  up  in  the  time  of  the  Assyrian 
oppressions,  and  then  sees  his  kingdom  rising  up  on  the  ruins 
of  the  Assyrian  (cf.  vol.  i.  p.  227)  ;  so  does  he  here  behold  the 
servant  of  Jehovah  rising  up  in  the  second  half  of  the  captivity, 


CHAP.  XLIX.  1-3.  259 

as  if  born  in  exile,  in  the  midst  of  the  punishment  borne  bv 
his  people,  to  effect  the  restoration  of  Israel.  At  the  present 
time,  when  he  begins  to  speak,  coming  forward  without  any 
further  introduction,  and  speaking  in  his  own  name  (a  unique 
instance  of  dramatic  style,  which  goes  beyond  even  Ps.  ii.),  he 
has  already  left  behind  him  the  commencement  of  his  work, 
which  was  directed  towards  the  salvation  of  mankind.  His 
appeal  is  addressed  to  the  "  isles,"  which  had  been  frequently 
mentioned  already  when  the  evangelization  of  the  heathen 
was  spoken  of  (ch.  xlii.  4,  10,  12 ;  cf.  ch.  xxiv.  15),  and 
to  the  "  nations  from  afar,"  i.e.  the  distant  nations  (as  in  ch. 
v.  26;  compare,  on  the  other  hand,  Jer.  xxiii.  23).  They  are 
to  hear  what  he  says,  not  merely  what  he  says  in  the  words 
that  follow,  but  what  he  says  generally.  What  follows  is 
rather  a  vindication  of  his  right  to  demand  a  hearing  and 
obedience,  than  the  discourse  itself,  which  is  to  be  received  with 
the  obedience  of  faith ;  at  the  same  time,  the  two  are  most 
intimately  connected.  Jehovah  has  called  him  ab  utero,  has 
thought  of  his  name  from  the  bowels  of  his  mother  (W  as  in 
Ps.  Ixxi.  6),  i.e.  even  before  he  was  born ;  ever  since  his  con 
ception  has  Jehovah  assigned  to  him  his  calling,  viz.  his  saving 
calling,  and  solemnly  announced  his  name  in  relation  to  this 
calling.  We  call  to  mind  here  Jer.  i.  5,  Luke  i.  41,  Gal.  i.  15, 
but  above  all  the  name  Immanuel,  which  is  given  by  anticipa 
tion  to  the  Coming  One  in  ch.  vii.  14,  and  the  name  Jesus, 
which  God  appointed  through  the  mouth  of  angels,  when  the 
human  life  of  Him  who  was  to  bear  that  name  was  still  ripening 
in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  (Matt.  i.  20-23).  It  is  worthy  of 
notice,  however,  that  the  great  Coming  One,  though  he  is 
described  in  the  Old  Testament  as  one  who  is  to  be  looked  for 
"  from  the  seed  of  David,"  is  also  spoken  of  as  "  born  of  a 
woman,"  whenever  his  entrance  into  the  world  is  directly 
referred  to.  In  the  Protevangelium  he  is  called,  though  not  in 
an  individual  sense,  "the  seed  of  the  woman;"  Isaiah,  in  the 
time  of  Ahaz,  mentions  "the  virgin"  as  his  mother;  Micah 
(v.  2)  speaks  of  his  rr6v ;  even  the  typical  psalms,  as  in  Ps. 
xxii.  10,  11,  give  prominence  to  the  mother.  And  is  not  this  a 
sign  that  prophecy  is  a  work  of  the  Spirit,  who  searches  out 
the  deep  things  of  the  counsel  of  God  1  In  ver.  2  the  speaker 
says  still  further,  that  Jehovah  has  made  his  mouth 


260  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

chadddh  (like  a  sharp  sword),  namely,  that  he  may  overcome 
everything  that  resists  him  as  if  with  a  sharp  sword,  and  sever 
asunder  things  that  are  bound  up  together  in  a  pernicious 
bond  (ch.  xi.  4  ;  Rev.  i.  16  ;  Heb.  iv.  12)  ;  also  that  He  has 
made  him  into  diets  bdrur  (not  /3eXo?  e'/cXe/eroz',  LXX.,  but,  as 
in  Jer.  li.  11,  cleaned,1  polished,  sharpened,  pointed),  namely,  to 
pierce  the  hearts  (Ps.  xlv.  6),  and  inflict  upon  them  the  most 
wholesome  wounds  ;  and  again,  that  Jehovah  has  hidden  him 
under  the  shadow  of  His  almighty  hand,  and  kept  him  con 
cealed  in  the  quiver  of  His  loving  counsel,  just  girt  as  men  keep 
their  swords  and  arrows  in  sheaths  and  quivers  ready  for  the 
time  when  they  want  to  use  them,  in  order  that  in  the  fulness  of 
time  He  might  draw  out  this  His  sword,  and  put  this  His  arrow 
to  the  bow.  The  question  whether  the  allusion  here  is  to  the 
time  preceding  the  foreknown  period  of  his  coming,  or  whether 
it  is  to  eternity  that  the  words  refer,  does  not  present  any 
great  dilemma ;  at  the  same  time,  the  prophecy  in  this  instance 
only  traces  back  the  being  of  the  person,  who  now  appears,  to 
the  remotest  point  of  his  historical  coming.  Ver.  3  describes, 
without  any  figure,  what  Jehovah  has  made  him.  He  has  said 
to  him  (cf .  Ps.  ii.  Ib)  :  Thou  art  my  servant ;  thou  art  Israel, 
in  whom  (in  quo,  as  in  ch.  xliv.  23)  I  glorify  myself.  Schenkel's 
exposition  is  grammatically  impossible  :  "  (It  is)  in  Israel  that 
I  will  glorify  myself  through  thee."  The  servant  himself  is 
called  Israel.  We  call  to  mind  here  the  expression  in  Matt, 
xvi.  18,  "Thou  art  Peter;"  and  the  use  of  the  name  "Israel,"  as 
the  individuation  of  a  generic  name,  reminds  us  of  the  fact  that 
the  kings  of  a  nation  are  sometimes  called  by  the  name  of  the 
nation  itself  (e.g.  Asshur,  ch.  x.  5  sqq.).  But  Israel  was  from 
the  very  first  the  God-given  name  of  an  individual.  Just  as 
the  name  Israel  was  first  of  all  given  to  a  man,  and  then  after 
that  to  a  nation,  so  the  name  which  sprang  from  a  personal 
root  has  also  a  personal  crown.  The  servant  of  Jehovah  is 
Israel  in  person,  inasmuch  as  the  purpose  of  mercy,  upon  the 
basis  of  which  and  for  the  accomplishment  of  which  Jehovah 
made  Jacob  the  father  of  the  twelve-tribed  nation,  is  brought 
by  him  into  full  and  final  realization.  We  have  already  seen 
that  Israel,  as  an  entire  nation,  formed  the  basis  of  the  idea 
1  The  comparison  to  purus  is  one  that  naturally  suggests  itself ;  but 
this,  like  putus,  is  derived  from  a  root  pu. 


CHAP.  XLIX.  4.  261 

contained  in  the  term  "  servant  of  Jehovah ;"  Israel,  regarded 
as  a  people  faithful  to  its  calling,  the  centre ;  and  the  personal 
servant  of  Jehovah  its  apex.  In  the  present  instance,  where 
he  is  called  distinctly  "  Israel,"  the  fact  is  clearly  expressed, 
that  the  servant  of  Jehovah  in  these  prophecies  is  regarded  as 
the  kernel  of  the  kernel  of  Israel,  as  Israel's  inmost  centre,  as 
Israel's  highest  head.  He  it  is  in  whom  (i.e.  on  whom  and 
through  whom)  Jehovah  glorifies  Himself,  inasmuch  as  He 
carries  out  through  him  the  counsels  of  His  love,  which  are  the 
self-glorification  of  His  holy  love,  its  glory  and  its  triumph. 

In  the  next  verse  the  speaker  meets  the  words  of  divine 
calling  and  promise  with  a  complaint,  which  immediately 
silences  itself,  however.  Ver.  4.  "And  /,  /  said,  I  have 
wearied  myself  in  vain,  and  thrown  away  my  strength  for 
nothing  and  to  no  purpose;  yet  my  right  is  with  Jehovah,  and  my 
reward  with  my  God"  The  Vav  with  which  the  verse  opens 
introduces  the  apparent  discrepancy  between  the  calling  he  had 
received,  and  the  apparent  failure  of  his  work.  |3K,  however, 
denies  the  conclusion  which  might  be  drawn  from  this,  that 
there  was  neither  reality  nor  truth  in  his  call.  The  relation 
between  the  clauses  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  in  Ps.  xxxi.  23 
and  Jonah  ii.  5  (where  we  find  ^X,  which  is  more  rarely  used 
in  this  adversative  sense);  compare  also  Ps>  xxx.  7  (but  I  said), 
and  the  psalm  of  Hezekiah  in  ch.  xxxviii.  10  with  the  antithesis 
in  Ps.  xxxviii.  15.  In  the  midst  of  his  activity  no  fruit  was  to 
be  seen,  and  the  thought  came  upon  him,  that  it  was  a  failure  ; 
but  this  disturbance  of  his  rejoicing  in  his  calling  was  soon 
quieted  in  the  confident  assurance  that  his  mishpdt  (i.e.  his 
good  right  in  opposition  to  all  contradiction  and  resistance) 
and  his  "  work"  (i.e.  the  result  and  fruit  of  the  work,  which  is 
apparently  in  vain)  are  with  Jehovah,  and  laid  up  with  Him 
until  the  time  when  He  will  vindicate  His  servant's  right,  and 
crown  his  labour  with  success.  We  must  not  allow  ourselves 
to  be  led  astray  by  such  parallels  as  ch.  xl.  10,  Ixii.  11.  The 
words  are  not  spoken  in  a  collective  capacity  any  more  than 
in  the  former  part  of  the  verse  ;  the  lamentation  of  Israel  as  a 
people,  in  ch.  xl.  27,  is  expressed  very  differently. 

The  expression  "  and  now  "  (nw),  which  follows,  evidently 
indicates  a  fresh  turn  in  the  official  life  of  the  person  speaking 
here.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  the  failure  of 


2C2  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

his  labours  within  his  own  people,  which  has  forced  out  the 
lamentation  in  ver.  4a.  For  his  reason  for  addressing  his 
summons  in  ch.  xlix.  1  to  the  world  of  nations,  is  that  Jehovah 
has  not  guaranteed  to  him,  the  undaunted  one,  success  to  his 
labours  among  his  own  people,  but  has  assigned  him  a  mission 
extending  far  beyond  and  reaching  to  all  mankind.  Vers.  5,  6. 
"And  now,  saith  Jehovah,  that  formed  me  from  the  womb  to  be 
His  servant,  to  bring  back  Jacob  to  Him,  and  that  Israel  may 
be  gathered  together  to  Him;  and  I  am  honoured  in  the  eyes  of 
Jehovah,  and  my  God  has  become  my  strength.  He  saith,  It  is 
only  a  small  thing  that  thou  becomest  my  servant,  to  set  up  the 
tribes  of  Jacob,  and  to  bring  back  the  preserved  of  Israel.  I 
have  set  thee  for  the  light  of  the  Gentiles,  to  become  my  salvation 
to  the  end  of  the  earth."  Both  shobhebh  and  hdshlbh  unite 
within  themselves  the  meanings  reducere  (Jer.  1.  19)  and  resti- 
tuere.  On  &6=-^>  generally,  see  at  ch.  ix.  2,  Ixiii.  9.  Jerome 
is  wrong  in  his  rendering,  et  Israel  qui  non  congregabitur  (what 
could  a  prophecy  of  the  rejection  of  the  Jews  do  here?);  so 
also  is  Hitzig's  rendering,  "  since  Israel  is  not  swept  away ;" 
and  Hofmann's,  "  Israel,  which  is  not  swept  away."  In  the 
present  instance,  where  the  restoration  of  Israel  is  the  event 
referred  to,  &)DK  must  signify  "  the  gathering  together  of  Israel," 
as  in  ch.  xi.  12.  fa  (parallel  1vX)  points  to  Jehovah  as  the 
author  of  the  gathering,  and  as  the  object  of  it  also.  The 
transition  from  the  infinitive  of  design  to  the  finite  verb  of 
desire,  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  xiii.  9,  xiv.  25.  The  attributive 
clause,  added  to  the  name  Jehovah,  expresses  the  lofty  mission 
of  the  servant  of  God  with  regard  to  Israel.  The  parenthesis, 
u  I  have  honour  in  the  eyes  of  Jehovah,  and  my  God  has  be 
come  my  strength,  i.e.  has  become  mighty  in  me,  the  apparently 
weak  one,"  looks  beyond  to  the  still  loftier  mission,  by  which 
the  former  lofty  one  is  far  surpassed.  On  account  of  this 
parenthetically  inserted  praise  of  Jehovah,  the  "i&N  is  resumed 
in  "ittN*}.  Instead  of  ini^n  bj^  (compare  1  Kings  xvi.  31),  i.e. 
it  is  a  small  thing  that  thou  shouldst  be,  we  have  it  here,  as 
in  Ezek.  viii.  17,  with  a  comparative  min,  which  must  not, 
however,  be  logically  pressed :  "  It  is  smaller  than  that,"  i.e. 
it  is  too  small  a  thing  that  thou  shouldst  be.  The  netslre 
(Keri,  netsure)  of  Israel  are  those  who  have  been  preserved 
in  exile  (Ezek.  vi.  12) ;  in  other  cases,  we  find  "iff ,  nnxp,  or 


CHAP.  XLIX.  7.  263 

Not  only  is  the  restoration  of  the  remnant  of  Israel 

J 

the  work  of  the  servant  of  Jehovah  ;  but  Jehovah  has  ap 
pointed  him  for  something  higher  than  this.  He  has  given 
or  set  him  for  the  light  of  the  heathen  ("  a  light  to  lighten 
the  Gentiles,"  Luke  ii.  32),  to  become  His  salvation  to  the 
end  of  the  earth  (LXX. :  rov  elvai  ere  els  crcorTjplav  elw? 
eavarov  TJ}?  7%)»  Those  who  regard  Israel  as  a  nation  as 
speaking  here  (e.g.  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Umbreit,  etc.)  go  right 
away  from  this,  which  is  the  most  natural  sense  of  the  words, 
and  explain  them  as  meaning,  "  that  my  salvation  may  be, 
reach,  or  penetrate  to  the  end  of  the  earth."  But  inasmuch  as 
the  servant  of  Jehovah  is  the  light  of  the  world,  he  is  through 
that  very  fact  the  salvation  of  the  world ;  and  he  is  both  of 
these  through  Jehovah,  whose  counsels  of  fltyXh.  are  brought  by 
him  into  historical  realization  and  visible  manifestation. 

The  words  of  the  servant  of  God,  in  which  he  enforces 
his  claim  upon  the  nations,  are  now  lost  in  words  of  Jehovah 
to  him,  which  are  no  longer  reported  by  him,  but  are  appended 
as  an  independent  address.  His  present  condition  is  one  of  the 
deepest  humiliation.  Ver.  7.  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  the  Re 
deemer  of  Israel,  His  Holy  One,  to  him  of  contemptible  soul,  to 
the  abhorrence  of  the  people,  to  the  servant  of  tyrants  :  kings  shall 
see  and  arise ;  princes,  and  prostrate  themselves  for  the  sake  of 
Jehovah,  who  is  faithful,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  that  He  hath 
chosen  thee"  As  Idzoh  with  a  changeable  kametz  (cf.  chamois,  ch. 
i.  17)  has,  if  not  exactly  a  passive  force,  yet  something  very  like 
a  passive  circumstantial  meaning,  $ajrnfa  must  mean  the  man 
who  is  contemptible  as  regards  his  soul,  i.e.  held  in  contempt, 
or,  as  Hofmann  explains  it,  \vhorn  men  do  not  think  worthy  to 
live  (though  he  follows  Ewald,  and  takes  Ifzdli  as  an  infinitive 
treated  as  a  substantive).  Accordingly  2ynp  is  also  to  be  taken 
personally.  The  meaning  abhorring  is  unsuitable ;  but  2i/;n  is 
also  used  in  a  causative  sense,  to  cause  to  abhor,  i.e.  to  make  a 
thing  an  abomination  (Ezek.  xvi.  25),  or  to  excite  abhorrence  : 
hence,  "  to  him  who  excites  the  people's  abhorrence,"  which  is 
the  same,  so  far  as  the  sense  is  concerned,  as  "  to  the  object  of 
their  abhorrence."  But  even  as  a  participial  substantive  synp 
would  literally  mean  the  thing  exciting  abhorrence,  i.e.  the 
abhorrence,  just  as  mekhasseh  in  ch.  xxiii.  18  signifies  the  thing 
covering,  i.e.  the  covering.  All  these  participial  substantives 


264  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  the  piel  indicate  the  thing,  place,  or  instrument  accomplish 
ing  that  which  the  piel  affirms.  We  need  not  raise  the  question 
whether  goi  refers  to  Israel  or  to  the  heathen.  It  signifies  the 
mass  of  men,  the  people,  like  'am  in  Ps.  Ixii.  9,  and  in  those 
passages  in  which  it  is  used  by  our  prophet  for  the  human  race 
generally.  The  mosJfllm,  of  whom  the  person  here  addressed  is 
the  servant  or  enslaved  one,  are  obviously  heathen  tyrants.  What 
is  here  affirmed  of  the  "  one  servant  of  Jehovah  "  was  no  doubt 
also  applicable  to  the  nation  generally,  and  more  especially  to 
that  portion  of  the  nation  which  was  true  to  its  calling  and 
confession.  He  in  whom  Israel's  relation  of  servant  to 
Jehovah  was  fully  realized,  did  indeed  spring  out  of  His  own 
nation,  when  it  was  under  the  oppression  of  the  powers  of  this 
world;  and  all  the  shame  and  persecution  which  those  who 
remained  faithful  among  His  people  had  to  endure  from  the 
heathen  oppressors,  and  also  from  the  ungodly  among  their 
own  countrymen  (see,  for  example,  ch.  Ixvi.  5),  discharge  their 
force  like  a  violent  storm  upon  Him  as  an  individual.  When, 
therefore,  we  find  the  sufferings  of  the  people  and  the  glory  of 
which  they  became  partakers  described  in  other  passages  in 
just  the  same  terms,  we  must  not  infer  from  this  that  "  servant 
of  Jehovah  "  is  a  collective  epithet  in  the  passage  before  us. 
The  person  addressed  here  is  the  Restorer  of  Israel,  the  Light 
of  the  Gentiles,  the  Salvation  of  Jehovah  for  all  mankind. 
When  kings  and  princes  shall  behold  Him  who  was  once 
brought  so  low,  delivered  from  His  humiliation,  and  exalted 
to  the  glorious  height  of  the  work  to  which  He  has  been  called, 
they  will  rise  up  with  reverence  from  their  thrones,  and  pros 
trate  themselves  upon  the  ground  in  worship  for  the  sake  of 
Jehovah,  as  before  Him  who  ("IBW  emphatic,  utpote  qui)  is 
faithful,  showing  Himself  sincere  in  His  promises,  and  for  the 
sake  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  in  that,  as  is  now  made  mani 
fest,  "  He  hath  chosen  thee."  The  fut.  consec.  particularizes 
the  general  motive  assigned,  and  carries  it  still  further. 

The  next  two  verses  describe  (though  only  with  reference 
to  Israel,  the  immediate  circle)  what  is  the  glory  of  the  voca 
tion  to  which  Jehovah,  in  accordance  with  His  promise,  exalts 
His  chosen  One.  Vers.  8,  9a.  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  In  a  time 
of  favour  have  I  heard  thee,  and  in  the  day  of  salvation  have  I 
helped  thee  :  and  I  form  thee}  and  set  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the 


CHAP.  XLIX.  9-12.  265 

people,  to  raise  up  the  land,  to  apportion  again  desolate  inherit 
ances,  saying  to  prisoners,  Go  ye  out :  to  those  wlio  are  in  dark 
ness,  Come  ye  to  the  light."  Jehovah  heard  His  servant,  and 
came  to  his  help  when  he  prayed  to  Him  out  of  the  condition 
of  bondage  to  the  world,  which  he  shared  with  his  people.  He 
did  it  at  the  time  for  the  active  display  of  His  good  pleasure, 
and  for  the  realizing  of  salvation,  which  had  been  foreseen  by 
Him,  and  had  now  arrived.  The  futures  which  follow  are  to 
be  taken  as  such.  The  fact  that  Jehovah  makes  His  servant 
u  a  covenant  of  the  people,"  i.e.  the  personal  bond  which  unites 
Israel  and  its  God  in  a  new  fellowship  (see  ch.  xlii.  6),  is  the 
fruit  of  his  being  heard  and  helped.  The  infinitives  with 
Lamed  affirm  in  what  way  the  new  covenant  relation  will  be 
made  manifest.  The  land  that  has  fallen  into  decay  rises  into 
prosperity  again,  and  the  desolate  possessions  return  to  their 
former  owners.  This  manifestation  of  the  covenant  grace,  that 
has  been  restored  to  the  nation  again,  is  effected  through  the 
medium  of  the  servant  of  Jehovah.  The  rendering  of  the  LXX. 
is  quite  correct :  rov  KaTaa-rrjaaL  rrjv  <yr\v  /cal  K\7]povo/jif)o-ai, 
Kk^povofjiia^  eprjfjLovs  X^yoi/ra.  ^EN?  is  a  dicendo  governed  by 
both  infinitives.  The  prisoners  in  the  darkness  of  the  prison 
and  of  affliction  are  the  exiles  (ch.  xlii.  22).  The  mighty  word 
of  the  servant  of  Jehovah  brings  to  them  the  light  of  liberty, 
in  connection  with  which  (as  has  been  already  more  than  once 
observed)  the  fact  should  be  noticed,  that  the  redemption  is 
viewed  in  connection  with  the  termination  of  the  captivity,  and, 
in  accordance  with  the  peculiar  character  of  the  Old  Testament, 
is  regarded  as  possessing  a  national  character,  and  therefore  is 
purely  external. 

The  person  of  the  servant  of  Jehovah  now  falls  into  the 
background  again,  and  the  prophecy  proceeds  with  a  descrip 
tion  of  the  return  of  the  redeemed.  Vers.  95-12.  "  They  shall 
feed  by  the  ways,  and  there  is  pasture  for  them  upon  all  field- 
hills.  They  shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst,  and  the  mirage  and  sun 
shall  not  blind  them :  for  He  that  hath  mercy  on  them  shall  lead 
them,  and  guide  them  by  bubbling  water-springs.  And  I  make 
all  my  mountains  ways,  and  my  roads  are  exalted.  Behold 
these,  they  come  from  afar;  and,  behold,  these  from  the  north  and 
from  the  sea;  and  these  from  the  land  of  the  Sinese"  The  people 
returning  home  are  represented  as  a  flock.  By  the  roads  that 


266  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

they  take  to  their  homes,  they  are  able  to  obtain  sufficient  pas 
ture,  without  being  obliged  to  go  a  long  way  round  in  order  to 
find  a  sufficient  supply ;  and  even  upon  bare  sandy  hills  (ch. 
xli.  18)  there  is  pasture  found  for  them.  Nothing  is  wasting  ; 
even  the  shdrdbh  (see  ch.  xxxv.  7,  p.  79)  and  the  sun  do  not 
hurt  them,  the  former  by  deceiving  and  leading  astray,  the 
latter  by  wearying  them  with  its  oppressive  heat :  for  He 
whose  compassion  has  been  excited  by  their  long  pining  misery 
(ch.  xli.  17-20)  is  leading  them,  and  bringing  them  along  in 
comfort  by  bubbling  springs  of  real  and  refreshing  water  ('£9!j 
as  Petrarch  once  says  of  shepherds,  Move  la  schiera  sua  soave- 
mente).  Jehovah  also  makes  all  the  mountains  into  roads  for 
those  who  are  returning  home,  and  the  paths  of  the  desert  are 
lifted  up,  as  it  were,  into  well-made  roads  (yerumun,  Ges.  §  47, 
Anm.  4).  They  are  called  my  mountains  and  my  highways 
(differently  from  ch.  xiv.  25),  because  they  are  His  creation  ; 
and  therefore  He  is  also  able  to  change  them,  and  now  really 
does  change  them  for  the  good  of  His  people,  who  are  returning 
to  the  land  of  their  forefathers  out  of  every  quarter  of  the  globe. 
Although  in  Ps.  cvii.  3  yam  (the  sea)  appears  to  stand  for  the 
south,  as  referring  to  the  southern  part  of  the  Mediterranean, 
which  washes  the  coast  of  Egypt,  there  is  no  ground  at  all  in 
the  present  instance  for  regarding  it  as  employed  in  any  other 
than  its  usual  sense,  namely  the  west ;  merdchoq  (from  far)  is 
therefore  either  the  south  (cf.  ch.  xliii.  6)  or  the  east,  according 
to  the  interpretation  that  we  give  to  Berets  Slnlm,  as  signifying  a 
land  to  the  east  or  to  the  south.  The  Phoenician  Sinim  (Gen. 
x.  17),  the  inhabitants  of  a  fortified  town  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Area,  which  has  now  disappeared,  but  which  was  seen  not 
only  by  Jerome,  but  also  by  Marino  Sanuto  (de  castro  Arachas 
ad  dimidiam  leucam  est  oppidum  Sin),  cannot  be  thought  of,  for 
the  simple  reason  that  this  Sin  was  too  near,  and  was  situated 
to  the  west  of  Babylon  and  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem  ;  whilst 
Sin  (=Pelusium)  in  Egypt,  to  which  Ewald  refers,  did  not 
give  its  name  to  either  a  tribe  or  a  land.  Arias  Montanus  was 
among  the  first  to  suggest  that  the  Sinim  are  the  Sinese 
(Chinese)  ;  and  since  the  question  has  been  so  thoroughly  dis 
cussed  by  Gesenius  (in  his  Commentary  and  Thesaurus),  most 
of  the  commentators,  and  also  such  Orientalists  as  Langles  (in 
his  Recherches  asiatiques),  Movers  (in  his  Phoenicians),  Lassen 


CHAP.  XLIX.  9-12.  267 

(in  liis  IndiscJie  Alterthums'kunde,  i.  856-7),  have  decided  in 
favour  of  this  opinion.  The  objection  brought  against  the 
supposition,  that  the  name  of  the  Chinese  was  known  to  the 
nations  of  the  west  at  so  early  a  period  as  this,  viz.  that  this 
could  not  have  been  the  case  till  after  the  reign  of  the  emperor 
Shi-hoang-ti)  of  the  dynasty  of  Thsin,  who  restored  the  empire 
that  had  been  broken  up  into  seven  smaller  kingdoms  (in  the 
year  247  B.C.),  and  through  whose  celebrated  reign  the  name 
of  his  dynasty  came  to  be  employed  in  the  western  nations  as 
the  name  of  China  generally,  is  met  by  Lassen  with  the  simple 
fact  that  the  name  occurs  at  a  much  earlier  period  than  this, 
and  in  many  different  forms,  as  the  name  of  smaller  states  into 
which  the  empire  was  broken  up  after  the  reign  of  Wu-wang 
(1122-1115  B.C.).  "  The  name  Qlvai  (Strabo),  Swat  (Ptol.), 
TftWrfa  (Kosmas),  says  the  Sinologist  Neumann,  did  not  obtain 
currency  for  the  first  time  from  the  founder  of  the  great  dynasty 
of  Tsin ;  but  long  before  this,  Tsin  was  the  name  of  a  feudal 
kingdom  of  some  importance  in  Shen-si,  one  of  the  western 
provinces  of  the  Sinese  land,  arid  Fei-tse,  the  first  feudal  king 
of  Tsin,  began  to  reign  as  early  as  897  B.C."  It  is  quite  pos 
sible,  therefore,  that  the  prophet,  whether  he  were  Isaiah  or  any 
other,  may  have  heard  of  the  land  of  the  Sinese  in  the  far  east, 
and  this  is  all  that  we  need  assume;  not  that  Sinese  merchants 
visited  the  market  of  the  world  on  the  Euphrates  (Movers  and 
Lassen),  but  only  that  information  concerning  the  strange 
people  who  were  so  wealthy  in  rare  productions,  had  reached 
the  remote  parts  of  the  East  through  the  medium  of  com 
merce,  possibly  from  Ophir,  and  through  the  Phoenicians. 
But  Egli  replies  :  "  The  seer  on  the  streams  of  Babel  certainly 
could  not  have  described  any  exiles  as  returning  home  from 
China,  if  he  had  not  known  that  some  of  his  countrymen 
were  pining  there  in  misery,  and  I  most  positively  affirm  that 
this  was  not  the  case."  What  is  here  assumed — namely,  that 
there  must  have  been  a  Chinese  diaspora  in  the  prophet's  own 
time — is  overthrown  by  what  has  been  already  observed  in  ch. 
xi.  11 ;  and  we  may  also  see  that  it  is  not  purely  by  accident 
that  the  land  of  the  Sinese  is  given  as  the  farthest  point  to  the 
east,  from  my  communications  concerning  the  Jews  of  China 
in  the  History  of  the  Post-biblical  Poetry  of  the  Jews  (1836,  pp. 
58-62,  cf.  p.  21).  I  have  not  yet  seen  Sionnet's  work,  which 


268  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

lias  appeared  since,  viz.  Essai  sur  les  Juifs  de  la  Chine  et  sur 
£  influence,  quits  out  eue  sur  la  literature  de  ce  vaste  empire, 
avant  Vere  clireiienne,  ;  but  I  have  read  the  Mission  of  Enquiry 
to  the  Jews  in  China  in  the  Jewish  Intelligence,  May  1851, 
where  a  fac-simile  of  their  thorah  is  given.  The  immigration 
took  place  from  Persia  (cf.  'Eldm,  ch.  xi.  11),  at  the  latest, 
under  the  Han  dynasty  (205  B.C.-220  A.D.),  and  certainly 
before  the  Christian  era. 

In  this  return  of  the  exiles  from  every  quarter  of  the  globe 
to  their  fatherland,  and  for  this  mighty  work  of  God  on  behalf 
of  His  church,  which  has  been  scattered  in  all  directions,  the 
whole  creation  is  to  praise  Him.  Ver.  13.  "  Sing,  0  heavens; 
and  shout,  0  earth;  and  break  out  into  singing,  0  mountains  !  for 
Jehovah  hath  comforted  His  people,  and  He  hath  compassion 
upon  His  afflicted  ones."  The  phrase  nr»  m?B,  like  f^  nva 
(which  occurs  in  Ps.  xcviii.  4  as  well  as  in  Isaiah),  is  peculiarly 
Isaiah's  (ch.  xiv,  7,  and  several  times  in  ch.  xl.-lxvi.).  "  The 
afflicted  ones"  ^aniyylni)  is  the  usual  Old  Testament  name  for 
the  ecclesia  militans.  The  future  alternates  with  the  perfect : 
the  act  of  consolation  takes  place  o-nce  for  all,  but  the  com 
passion  lasts  for  ever.  Here  again  the  glorious  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God  appears  as  the  focus  from  which  the  whole 
world  is  glorified.  The  joy  of  the  Is-rael  of  God  becomes  the 
joy  of  heaven  and  earth.  With  the  summons  to  this  joy  the 
first  half  of  the  prophecy  closes ;  for  the  word  "iD^n,  which 
follows,  shows  clearly  enough  that  the  prophecy  has  merely 
reached  a  resting-point  here,  since  this  word  is  unsuitable  for 
commencing  a  fresh  prophecy. 

The  prophet,  looking  back  at  the  period  of  suffering  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  deliverance,  exclaims  from  the  midst  of 
this  train  of  thought :  Ver.  14.  "  Zion  said,  Jehovah  hath 
forsaken  me,  and  the  Lord  hath  forgotten  me"  The  period 
of  suffering  which  forces  out  this  lamentation  still  continues. 
What  follows,  therefore,  applies  to  the  church  of  the  present, 
i.e.  of  the  captivity.  Vers.  15,  16.  "  Does  a  woman  forget  her 
sucking  child,  so  as  not  to  have  compassion  upon  the  child  of  her 
womb  f  Even  though  mothers  should  forget,  I  will  not  forget 
thee.  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  my  hands  ; 
thy  walls  stand  continually  before  me"  In  reply  to  the  com 
plaining  church,  which  knows  that  her  home  'is  in  Zion- 


CHAP.  XLIX.  17,  18.  2 69 

Jerusalem,  and  which  has  been  kept  so  long  away  from  her 
home,  Jehovah  sets  forth  His  love,  which  is  as  inalienable  as  a 
mother's  love,  yea,  far  greater  than  even  maternal  love.  On 
hy,  see  vol.  i.  p.  139  ;  the  min  in  meraclem  is  equivalent  to 
ware  pr],  as  in  ch.  xxiii.  1,  xxiv.  10,  xxxiii.  15,  etc.  E3?  so  far 
as  the  actual  sense  is  concerned,  is  equivalent  to  *?'£$  (Ewald, 
§  362,  b) :  "  granted  that  such  (mothers)  should  forget,  i.e.  dis 
own,  their  love."  The  picture  of  Zion  (not  merely  the  name, 
as  ver.  165  clearly  shows)  is  drawn  in  the  inside  of  Jehovah's 
hands,  just  as  men  are  accustomed  to  burn  or  puncture  orna 
mental  figures  and  mementoes  upon  the  hand,  the  arm,  and  the 
forehead,  and  to  colour  the  punctures  with  alhenna  or  indigo 
(see  Tafel,  xii.,  in  vol.  ii.  pp.  33-35  of  Lane's  Manners  and 
Customs  of  the  Modern  Egyptians).  There  is  the  figure  of 
Zion,  unapproachable  to  every  creature,  as  close  to  Him  as  He 
is  to  Himself,  and  facing  Him  amidst  all  the  emotions  of  His 
divine  life.  There  has  He  the  walls  of  Zion  constantly  before 
Him  (on  neged,  see  at  ch.  i.  16,  xxiv.  23)  ;  and  even  if  for  a 
time  they  are  broken  down  here  below,  with  Him  they  have  an 
eternal  ideal  existence,  which  must  be  realized  again  arid  again 
in  an  increasingly  glorious  form. 

It  is  this  fact  of  a  renewed  glorification  which  presents  itself 
afresh  to  the  prophet's  mind.  Vers.  17,  18.  "  Thy  children  make 
haste,  thy  destroyers  and  masters  draw  out  from  thee.  Lift  up 
thine  eyes  round  about,  and  see :  all  these  assemble  themselves 
together,  and  come  to  thee.  As  truly  as  I  live,  saith  Jehovah,  thou 
wilt  put  them  all  on  like  jewellery,  and  gird  them  round  thee  like 
a  bride."  The  pointing  adopted  by  the  LXX.,  Targ.,  Jer., 
and  Saad.,  is  SJ^a.  The  antithesis  favours  this  reading ;  but 
^??  suits  vers.  18,  19  better ;  and  the  thought  that  Zion's 
children  come  and  restore  her  fallen  walls,  follows  of  itself 
from  the  very  antithesis  :  her  children  come  ;  and  those  who 
destroyed  their  maternal  home,  and  made  it  a  desolate  ruin, 
have  to  depart  from  both  city  and  land.  Zion  is  to  lift  up  her 
eyes,  that  have  been  cast  down  till  now,  yea,  to  lift  them  up 
round  about ;  for  on  all  sides  those  whom  she  thought  she  had 
lost  are  coming  in  dense  crowds  f\?  (cf.  tib  =  v  with  V^X,  ch. 
xlix.  5),  to  her,  i.e.  henceforth  to  belong  to  her  again.  Jehovah 
pledges  His  life  (chai  9dnl,  %wv  eya),  Ewald,  §  329,  a)  that  a 
time  of  glory  is  coming  for  Zion  and  her  children.  '3  in  the 


270  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

affirmative  sense,  springing  out  of  the  confirmative  after  an 
affirming  oath,  equivalent  to  N/>~DK  elsewhere  (e.g.  ch.  v.  9). 
The  population  which  Zion  recovers  once  more,  will  be  to  her 
like  the  ornaments  which  a  woman  puts  on,  like  the  orna 
mental  girdle  (ch.  iii.  20)  which  a  bride  fastens  round  her 
wedding  dress. 

Thus  will  Zion  shine  forth  once  more  with  the  multitude  of 
her  children  as  with  a  festal  adorning.  Vers.  19,  20.  "For  thy 
ruins  and  thy  waste  places  and  thy  land  full  of  ruin, — yea,  now 
thou  wilt  be  too  narrow  for  the  inhabitants,  and  thy  devourers  are 
far  away.  Thy  children,  that  were  formerly  taken  from  thee, 
shall  say  in  thine  ears,  The  space  is  too  narrow  for  me ;  give  way 
for  me,  that  I  may  have  room"  The  word  "  for"  (kl)  intro 
duces  the  explanatory  reason  for  the  figures  just  employed  of 
jewellery  and  a  bridal  girdle.  Instead  of  the  three  subjects, 
"  thy  ruins,"  etc.,  the  comprehensive  "  thou"  is  employed  per- 
mutatively,  and  the  sentence  commenced  afresh.  *3  is  repeated 
emphatically  in  nny  '•a  (for  now,  or  yea  now)  ;  this  has  essen 
tially  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  apodosis  of  hypothetical 
protasis  (e.g.  Gen.  xxxi.  42,  xliii.  10),  except  that  the  sense  is 
more  decidedly  affirmative  than  in  the  present  instance,  where 
one  sees  it  spring  out  of  the  confirmative.  Zion,  that  has  been 
hitherto  desolate,  now  becomes  too  small  to  hold  her  inhabitants ; 
and  her  devourers  are  far  away,  i.e.  those  who  took  forcible  pos 
session  of  the  land  and  cities,  and  made  them  untenable,  niy  is 
to  be  understood  in  accordance  with  Ps.  xlii.  6,  and  ^[K3  in 
accordance  with  Ps.  xliv.  2  (see  at  ch.  v.  9).  It  will  even  come 
to  this,  that  the  children  of  which  Zion  was  formerly  robbed 
will  call  to  one  another,  so  that  she  becomes  a  witness  with  her 
ears  to  that  which  they  have  so  clearly  seen  :  the  space  is  too 
narrow,  give  way  (geshdh,  from  ndgash,  to  advance,  then  to  move 
generally,  also  to  move  in  an  opposite  direction,  i.e.  to  fall  back, 
as  in  Gen.  xix.  9)  for  me,  that  I  may  be  able  to  settle  down. 

The  words  that  sound  in  the  ears  of  Zion  are  now  followed 
by  the  thought  of  astonishment  and  surprise,  that  rises  up  in  her 
heart.  Ver.  21.  "  And  thou  wilt  say  in  thy  heart,  Who  hath 
borne  me  these,  seeing  I  was  rolled  of  children,  and  barren, 
banished,  and  thrust  away ;  and  these,  who  hath  brought  them 
up?  Behold,  I  was  left  alone;  these,  where  were  ilieyT"1  She 
sees  herself  suddenly  surrounded  by  a  great  multitude  of 


CHAP.  XLIX.  22.  271 

children,  and  yet  she  was  robbed  of  children,  and  galmuddh  (lit. 
hard,  stony,  Arab,  'galmad,  'gulmud,  e.g.  es-sachr  el  'gulmud, 
the  hardest  stone,  mostly  as  a  substantive,  stone  or  rock,  from 
gdlam,  from  which  comes  the  Syriac  gelomo,  stony  ground, 
related  to  chdlam,  whence  challdmlsh,  gravel,  root  gal,  gam,  to 
press  together,  or  heap  up  in  a  lump  or  mass),  i.e.  one  who 
seemed  utterly  incapacitated  for  bearing  children  any  more. 
She  therefore  asks,  Who  hath  borne  me  these  (not,  who  hath 
begotten,  which  is  an  absurd  question)  I  She  cannot  believe 
that  they  are  the  children  of  her  body,  and  her  children's 
children.  As  a  tree,  whose  foliage  is  all  faded  away,  is  called 
nobheleth  itself  in  ch.  i.  30,  so  she  calls  herself  goldh  vesurdh, 
extorris  et  remota  (stir  —  musdr,  like  sug  in  Prov.  xiv.  14  = 
ndsog  or  mussdg),  because  her  children  have  been  carried  away 
into  exile.  In  the  second  question,  the  thought  has  dawned 
upon  her  mind,  that  those  by  whom  she  finds  herself  sur 
rounded  are  her  own  children  ;  but  as  she  was  left  alone, 
whilst  they  went  forth,  as  she  thought  to  die  in  a  foreign  land, 
she  cannot  comprehend  where  they  have  been  hitherto  concealed, 
or  where  they  have  grown  up  into  so  numerous  a  people. 

The  prophecy  now  takes  a  step  backward  in  the  domain  of 
the  future,  and  describes  the  manner  in  which  the  children  of 
Zion  get  back  to  their  home.  Ver.  22.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
Jehovah,  Behold,  I  lift  up  my  hand  to  nations,  and  set  up  my 
standard  to  peoples:  and  they  bring  thy  sons  in  their  bosom;  and 
thy  daughters,  upon  shoulders  are  they  carried"  The  setting  up 
of  a  standard  (ch.  v.  26,  xi.  12,  xviii.  3,  cf.  Ixii.  10)  is  a  favourite 
figure  with  Isaiah,  as  well  as  swaying  the  hand.  Jehovah  gives 
a  sign  to  the  heathen  nations  with  His  hand,  and  points  out  to 
them  the  mark  that  they  are  to  keep  in  view,  with  a  signal  pole 
which  is  set  up.  They  understand  it,  and  carry  out  His  instruc 
tions,  and  bring  Zion's  sons  and  daughters  thither,  and  that  as 
a  foster-father  ('omen)  carries  an  infant  in  the  bosom  of  his 
dress  (chotsen,  as  in  Neh.  v.  13  ;  Arabic  as  in  Ps.  cxxix.  7, 
hidn,  from  hadana,  to  embrace,  to  press  tenderly  to  one's  self ; 
vid.  Num.  xi.  12),  or  upon  his  arms,  so  that  it  reclines  upon 
his  shoulder  ('al-kdthcph  ;  cf.  fal-tsad,  ch.  lx.  4,  Ixvi.  12). 

Such  affectionate  treatment  does  the  church  receive,  which 
is  assembling  once  more  upon  its  native  soil,  whilst  kings  and 
their  consorts  hasten  to  serve  the  re-assembled  community. 


272  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Ver.  23.  "  And  kings  become  tliy  foster- fathers,  and  their  prin 
cesses  thy  nurses :  they  bow  down  their  face  to  thee  to  the  earthy 
and  they  lick  the  dust  of  thy  feet ;  and  thou  learnest  that  I  am 
Jehovah,  He  whose  hoping  ones  are  not  put  to  shame"  As 
foster-fathers  devote  all  their  strength  and  care  to  those  en 
trusted  to  them,  and  nurses  nourish  children  from  the  very 
marrow  of  their  own  life,  so  will  kings  become  the  shelterers 
of  Zion,  and  princesses  the  sustainers  of  her  growth.  All  that  is 
true  in  the  regal  headship  of  the  church  will  be  realized,  and  all 
that  is  false  in  regal  territorialism  will  condemn  itself:  "vultu 
in  terram  demisso  adorabunt  te  et pulverem pedum  tuorum  lingent" 
(Jerome).  They  do  homage  to  the  church,  and  kiss  the  ground 
upon  which  she  stands  and  walks.  According  to  ch.  xlv.  14, 
this  adoration  belongs  to  the  God  who  is  present  in  the  church, 
and  points  the  church  itself  away  from  all  thought  of  her  own 
merits  to  Jehovah,  the  God  of  salvation,  cui  qui  confident  non 
puJefient  (ninj  with  an  auxiliary  pathach,  like  W£  in  ch.  xlvii. 
15 ;  Ges.  §  65,  2  :  "i^'K  with  the  first  person  made  into  a  relative 
as  in  ch.  xli.  8  ;  Ges.  §  123,  1,  Anm.  1).  Observe,  however, 
that  the  state  will  not  be  swallowed  up  by  the  church, — a  thing 
which  never  will  occur,  and  is  never  meant  to  occur ;  but  by 
the  state  becoming  serviceable  to  the  church,  there  is  realized  a 
prelude  of  the  perfected  kingdom  of  God,  in  which  the  dualism 
of  the  state  and  the  church  is  entirely  abolished. 

There  follows  now  a  sceptical  question  prompted  by  weak 
ness  of  faith  ;  and  the  divine  reply.  The  question,  ver.  24  : 
"  Can  the  booty  indeed  be  wrested  from  a  giant,  or  ivill  the  cap- 
tive  host  of  the  righteous  escape?"  The  question  is  logically 
one,  and  only  divided  rhetorically  into  two  (Ges.  §  153,  2). 
The  giant,  or  gigantically  strong  one,  is  the  Chaldean.  Knobel, 
in  opposition  to  Hitzig,  who  supposes  the  Persian  to  be  referred 
to,  points  very  properly  to  ch.  li.  12,  13,  and  lii.  5.  He  is 
mistaken,  however,  in  thinking  that  we  must  read  P"]JJ  *2W  in 
ver.  24&,  as  Ewald  does  after  the  Syriac  and  Jerome,  on  account 
of  the  parallelism.  The  exiles  are  called  shebhl  tsaddlq,  not, 
however,  as  captives  wrested  from  the  righteous  (the  congre 
gation  of  the  righteous),  as  Meier  thinks,  taking  tsaddlq  as  the 
gen.  obj. ;  still  less  as  captives  carried  off  by  the  righteous  one, 
i.e.  the  Chaldean,  for  the  Chaldean,  even  regarded  as  the 
accomplisher  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  is  not  tsaddlq, 


CHAP.  XLIX.  25,  26.  273 

but  "  wicked  "  (Hab.  i.  13) ;  but  merely  as  a  host  of  captives 
consisting  of  righteous  men  (Hitzig).  The  divine  answer, 
vers.  25,  26 :  "  Yea,  thus  saith  Jehovah,  Even  the  captive  hosts 
of  a  giant  are  wrested  from  him^  and  the  booty  of  a  tyrant  escapes  • 
and  I  will  make  war  upon  him  that  icarreth  ivith  thee,  and  I  will 
bring  salvation  to  thy  children.  A  nd  I  feed  them  that  pain  thee 
ivith  their  own  flesh  ;  and  they  shall  be  drunken  with  their  own 
blood,  as  if  with  new  ivine  ;  and  all  flesh  sees  that  I  Jehovah  am 
thy  Saviour ',  and  that  thy  Redeemer  is  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob" 
We  might  take  the  kl  in  ver.  25a  as  a  simple  affirmative,  but 
it  is  really  to  be  taken  as  preceded  by  a  tacit  intermediate 
thought.  Kosenmuller's  explanation  is  the  correct  one  :  "  that 
which  is  hardly  credible  shall  take  place,  for  thus  hath  Jehovah 
said."  He  has  also  given  the  true  interpretation  of  gam  : 
"  although  this  really  seems  incredible,  yet  I  will  give  it  effect." 
Ewald,  on  the  contrary,  has  quite  missed  the  sense  of  vers.  24, 
25,  which  he  gives  as  follows :  "  The  booty  in  men  which  a 
hero  has  taken  in  war,  may  indeed  be  taken  from  him  again  ; 
but  Jehovah  will  never  let  the  booty  that  He  takes  from 
the  Chaldean  (viz.  Israel)  be  wrested  from  Him  again."  This 
is  inadmissible,  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  presupposes  the 
emendation  p"iy  "as? ;  and  this  'drlts  is  quite  unsuitable,  partly 
because  it  would  be  Jehovah  to  whom  the  case  supposed  re 
ferred,  and  still  more,  because  the  correspondence  in  character 
between  ver.  24  and  ver.  14  is  thereby  destroyed.  The  gibbdr 
and  'ants  is  called  ^"\\  in  ver.  256,  with  direct  reference  to 
Zion.  This  is  a  noun  formed  from  the  future,  like  Jareb  in 
Hos.  v.  13  and  x.  6, — a  name  chosen  as  the  distinctive  epithet 
of  the  Asiatic  emperor  (probably  a  name  signifying  "  king 
Fighting-cock").  The  self-laceration  threatened  against  the 
Chaldean  empire  recals  to  mind  ch.  ix.  19,  20,  and  Zech.  xi.  9, 
and  has  as  revolting  a  sound  as  Num.  xxiii.  24  and  Zech. 
ix.  15, — passages  which  Daumer  and  Ghillany  understand  in 
the  cannibal  sense  which  they  appear  to  have,  whereas  what 
they  understand  literally  is  merely  a  hyperbolical  figure. 
Moreover,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  Old  Testament 
church  was  a  nation,  and  that  the  spirit  of  revelation  in  the 
Old  Testament  assumed  the  national  form,  which  it  afterwards 
shattered  to  pieces.  Knobel  points  to  the  revolt  of  the  Hyr- 
canians  and  several  satraps,  who  fought  on  the  side  of  Cyrus 

VOL.  II.  S 


274  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

against  their  former  rulers  (Cyrop.  iv.  2,  6,  v.  1-3)  All  this 
will  be  subservient  to  that  salvation  and  redemption,  which 
form  the  historical  aim  of  Jehovah  and  the  irresistible  work  of 
the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob.  The  name  of  God  which  we  meet 
with  here,  viz.  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob,  only  occurs  again  in 
ch.  i.  24,  and  shows  who  is  the  author  of  the  prophecy  which 
is  concluded  here.  The  first  half  set  forth,  in  the  servant  of 
Jehovah,  the  mediator  of  Israel's  restoration  and  of  the  con 
version  of  the  heathen,  and  closed  with  an  appeal  to  the  heaven 
and  the  earth  to  rejoice  with  the  ransomed  church.  The 
second  half  (vers.  14—26)  rebukes  the  despondency  of  Zion, 
which  fancies  itself  forgotten  of  Jehovah,  by  pointing  to 
Jehovah's  more  than  maternal  love,  and  the  superabundant 
blessing  to  be  expected  from  Him.  It  also  rebukes  the  doubts 
of  Zion  as  to  the  possibility  of  such  a  redemption,  by  pointing 
to  the  faithfulness  and  omnipotence  of  the  God  of  Israel,  who 
will  cause  the  exiles  to  be  wrested  from  the  Chaldean,  and  their 
tormentors  to  devour  one  another.  The  following  chapter 
commences  a  fresh  train  of  ideas. 

» 
SECOND  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  L. 

ISRAEL'S  SELF-REJECTION  ;  AND  THE  STEDFASTNESS  OF  THE 
SERVANT  OF  JEHOVAH. 

The  words  are  no  longer  addressed  to  Zion,  but  to  her 
children.  Ver.  1.  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Where  is  your  mother's 
bill  of  divorce,  with  which  I  put  her  away  ?  Or  where  is  one  of 
my  creditors,  to  whom  I  sold  you  ?  Behold,  for  your  iniquities 
are  ye  sold,  and  for  your  transgressions  is  your  mother  put  away? 
It  was  not  He  who  had  broken  off  the  relation  in  which  He 
stood  to  Zion ;  for  the  mother  of  Israel,  whom  Jehovah  had 
betrothed  to  Himself,  had  no  bill  of  divorce  to  show,  with 
which  Jehovah  had  put  her  away  and  thus  renounced  for 
ever  the  possibility  of  receiving  her  again  (according  to  Deut. 
xxiv.  1-4),  provided  she  should  in  the  meantime  have  married 
another.  Moreover,  He  had  not  yielded  to  outward  constraint, 
and  therefore  given  her  up  to  a  foreign  power ;  for  where 
was  there  one  of  His  creditors  (there  is  not  any  one)  to  whom 
He  would  have  been  obliged  to  relinquish  His  sons,  because 


CHAP.  L.  2,  8.  275 

unable  to  pay  His  debts,  and  in  this  way  to  discharge  them  ? 
— a  harsh  demand,  which  was  frequently  made  by  unfeeling 
creditors  of  insolvent  debtors  (Ex.  xxi.  7  ;  2  Kings  iv.  1 ;  Matt, 
xviii.  25).  On  nosheh,  a  creditor,  see  at  ch.  xxiv.  2.  Their 
present  condition  was  indeed  that  of  being  sold  and  put  away  ; 
but  this  was  not  the  effect  of  despotic  caprice,  or  the  result  of 
compulsion  on  the  part  of  Jehovah.  It  was  Israel  itself  that 
had  broken  off  the  relation  in  which  it  stood  to  Jehovah ;  they 
had  been  sold  through  their  own  faults,  and  "  for  your  trans 
gressions  is  your  mother  put  away."  Instead  of  "J^KW  we 
have  D^y^'ssi.  This  may  be  because  the  church,  although  on 
the  one  hand  standing  higher  and  being  older  than  her  children 
(i.e.  her  members  at  any  particular  time),  is  yet,  on  the  other 
hand,  morally  affected  by  those  to  whom  she  has  given  birth, 
who  have  been  trained  by  her,  and  recognised  by  her  as  her  own. 
The  radical  sin,  however,  which  has  lasted  from  the  time 
of  the  captivity  down  to  the  present  time,  is  disobedience  to  the 
word  of  God.  This  sin  brought  upon  Zion  and  her  children 
the  judgment  of  banishment,  and  it  was  this  which  made  it 
last  so  long.  Vers.  2,  3.  "  Why  did  I  come,  and  there  was  no 
one  there?  Why  did  I  call,  and  there  was  no  one  who  answered? 
Is  my  hand  too  short  to  redeem  ?  or  is  there  no  strength  in  me  to 
deliver?  Behold,  through  my  threatening  I  dry  up  the  sea;  turn 
streams  into  a  plain:  their  fish  rot,  because  there  is  no  water,  and 
die  for  thirst.  I  clothe  the  heavens  in  mourning,  and  make  sack 
cloth  their  covering"  Jehovah  has  come,  and  with  what  ?  It 
follows,  from  the  fact  of  His  bidding  them  consider,  that  His 
hand  is  not  too  short  to  set  Israel  loose  and  at  liberty,  that  He 
is  not  so  powerless  as  to  be  unable  to  draw  it  out ;  that  He  is 
the  Almighty,  who  by  His  mere  threatening  word  (Ps.  cvi.  9, 
civ.  7)  can  dry  up  the  sea,  and  turn  streams  into  a  hard  and 
barren  soil,  so  that  the  fishes  putrefy  for  want  of  water  (Ex. 
vii.  18,  etc.),  and  die  from  thirst  (thdmoth  a  voluntative  used  as 
an  indicative,  as  in  ch.  xii.  1,  and  very  frequently  in  poetical 
composition) ;  who  can  clothe  the  heavens  in  mourning,  and 
make  sackcloth  their  (dull,  dark)  covering  (for  the  expression 
itself,  compare  ch.  xxxvii.  1,  2) ;  who  therefore,  fiat  applicatio, 
can  annihilate  the  girdle  of  waters  behind  which  Babylon 
fancies  herself  concealed  (see  ch.  xlii.  15,  xliv.  27),  and  cover 
the  empire,  which  is  now  enslaving  and  torturing  Israel,  with 


276  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

a  sunless  and  starless  night  of  destruction  (ch.  xiii.  10).  It 
follows  from  all  this,  that  He  has  come  with  a  gospel  of  deliver 
ance  from  sin  and  punishment;  but  Israel  has  given  no  answer, 
has  not  received  this  message  of  salvation  with  faith,  since  faith 
is  assent  to  the  word  of  God.  And  in  whom  did  Jehovah 
come  ?  Knobel  and  most  of  the  commentators  reply,  "  in  His 
prophets."  This  answer  is  not  wrong,  but  it  does  not  suffice 
to  show  the  connection  between  what  follows  and  what  goes 
before.  For  there  it  is  one  person  who  speaks ;  and  who  is 
that,  but  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  who  is  introduced  in  these 
prophecies  with  dramatic  directness,  as  speaking  in  his  own 
name  ?  Jehovah  has  come  to  His  people  in  His  servant.  We 
know  who  was  the  servant  of  Jehovah  in  the  historical  fulfil 
ment.  It  was  He  whom  even  the  New  Testament  Scriptures 
describe  as  TOV  Traiba  TOV  Kvpiov,  especially  in  the  Acts  (iii. 
13,  26,  iv.  27,  30).  It  was  not  indeed  during  the  Babylonian 
captivity  that  the  servant  of  Jehovah  appeared  in  Israel  with 
the  gospel  of  redemption ;  but,  as  we  shall  never  be  tired  of 
repeating,  this  is  the  human  element  in  these  prophecies,  that 
they  regard  the  appearance  of  the  "servant  of  Jehovah,"  the 
Saviour  of  Israel  and  the  heathen,  as  connected  with  the  cap 
tivity  :  the  punishment  of  Israel  terminating,  according  to  the 
law  of  the  perspective  foreshortening  of  prophetic  vision,  with 
the  termination  of  the  captivity ;  and  the  final  glory  of  Israel 
and  the  final  salvation  of  all  mankind  beginning  to  dawn  on 
the  border  of  the  captivity, — a  connection  which  we  regard  as 
one  of  the  strongest  confirmations  of  the  composition  of  these 
addresses  before  the  captivity,  as  well  as  of  Isaiah's  authorship. 
But  this  dvOpwTTivov  does  not  destroy  the  6dov  in  them,  inas 
much  as  the  time  at  which  Jesus  appeared  was  not  only  similar 
to  that  of  the  Babylonian  captivity,  but  stood  in  a  causal  con 
nection  with  it,  since  the  Roman  empire  was  the  continuation 
of  the  Babylonian,  and  the  moral  state  of  the  people  under  the 
iron  arm  of  the  Roman  rule  resembled  that  of  the  Babylonian 
exiles  (Ezek.  ii.  6,  7).  At  the  same  time,  whatever  our  opinion 
on  this  point  may  be,  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  it  is  to  the  ser 
vant  of  Jehovah,  who  was  seen  by  the  prophet  in  connection 
with  the  Babylonian  captivity,  that  the  words  "  wherefore  did  I 
come"  refer. 

He  in  whom  Jehovah  came  to  His  nation,  and  proclaimed 


CHAP.  L.  4.  277 

to  it,  in  the  midst  of  its  self-induced  misery,  the  way  and  work 
of  salvation,  is  He  who  speaks  in  ver.  4 :  "  The  Lord  Jehovah 
hath  given  me  a  disciple's  tongue,  that  I  may  Jcnoiv  how  to  set  up 
the  wearied  with  words  :  He  wakeneth  every  morning ;  ivakeneth 
mine  ear  to  attend  in  disciple's  manner"  The  word  limmudim, 
which  is  used  in  the  middle  of  the  verse,  and  which  is  the  older 
word  for  the  later  talmidlm,  paOTjrai,  as  in  ch.  viii.  16,  liv.  13, 
is  repeated  at  the  close  of  the  verse,  according  to  the  figure  of 
palindromy,  which  is  such  a  favourite  figure  in  both  parts  of 
the  book  of  Isaiah  ;  and  the  train  of  thought,  "  He  wakeneth 
morning  by  morning,  wakeneth  mine  ear,"  recals  to  mind  the 
parallelism  with  reservation  which  is  very  common  in  the 
Psalms,  and  more  especially  the  custom  of  a  "  triolet-like " 
spinning  out  of  the  thoughts,  from  which  the  songs  of  u  de 
grees"  (or  ascending  steps,  shir  liamma  alotli)  have  obtained 
their  name.  The  servant  of  Jehovah  affords  us  a  deep  insight 
here  into  His  hidden  life.  The  prophets  received  special 
revelations  from  God,  for  the  most  part  in  the  night,  either  in 
dreams  or  else  in  visions,  which  were  shown  them  in  a  waking; 

'  lr> 

condition,  but  yet  in  the  more  susceptible  state  of  nocturnal 
quiet  and  rest.  Here,  however,  the  servant  of  Jehovah  re 
ceives  the  divine  revelations  neither  in  dreams  nor  visions  of 
the  night ;  but  every  morning  (babloqer  babboqer  as  in  ch. 
xxviii.  19),  i.e.  when  his  sleep  is  over,  Jehovah  comes  to  him, 
awakens  his  ear,  by  making  a  sign  to  him  to  listen,  and  then 
takes  him  as  it  were  into  the  school  after  the  manner  of  a 
pupil,  and  teaches  him  what  and  how  he  is  to  preach.  Nothing 
indicates  a  tongue  befitting  the  disciples  of  God,  so  much  as 
the  gift  of  administering  consolation ;  and  such  a  gift  is  pos 
sessed  by  the  speaker  here.  "  To  help  with  words  him  that  is 

exhausted"  (with  suffering  and  self-torture)  :    TO,  Arab.  ^,1 ;. 

med.  Vav,  related  to  *^y,  c*in,  signifies  to  spring  to  a  person 
with  words  to  help,  Aq.  uTrocrr^/o/crat,  Jer.  sustentare.  The 

Arabic  <^A£  ™>ed.  Je,  to  rain  upon  or  water  (Ewald,  Umbreit, 

etc.),  cannot  possibly  be  thought  of,  since  this  has  no  support 
in  the  Hebrew  ;  still  less,  however,  can  we  take  TO  as  a  denom. 
from  ny,  upon  which  Luther  has  founded  his  rendering,  "  to 
speak  to  the  weary  in  due  season  "  (also  Eng.  ver.).  "Oi  is  an 


278  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


accusative  of  more  precise  definition,  like  ">^'N  in  ver.  1  (cf.  cli. 
xlii.  25,  xliii.  23).  Jerome  has  given  the  correct  rendering  : 
"that  I  may  know  how  to  sustain  him  that  is  weary  with  a  word." 

His  calling  is  to  save,  not  to  destroy  ;  and  for  this  calling 
he  has  Jehovah  as  a  teacher,  and  to  Him  he  has  submitted 
himself  in  docile  susceptibility  and  immoveable  obedience. 
Ver.  5.  "  The  Lord  Jehovah  hath  opened  mine  ear  ;  and  7,  / 
was  not  rebellious,  and  did  not  turn  back"  He  put  him  into  a 
position  inwardly  to  discern  His  will,  that  he  might  become 
the  mediator  of  divine  revelation  ;  and  he  did  not  set  himself 
against  this  calling  (mdrdh,  according  to  its  radical  meaning 
stringere^  to  make  one's  self  rigid  against  any  one,  avmeivew], 
and  did  not  draw  back  from  obeying  the  call,  which,  as  he  well 
knew,  would  not  bring  him  earthly  honour  and  gain,  but 
rather  shame  and  ill-treatment.  Ever  since  he  had  taken  the 
path  of  his  calling,  he  had  not  drawn  timidly  back  from  the 
sufferings  with  which  it  was  connected,  but  had  rather  cheer 
fully  taken  them  upon  him.  Ver.  6.  "  /  offered  my  back  to 
smitersy  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  pluck  off  the  hair  ;  I  hid 
not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting"  He  offered  his  back  to 
such  as  smote  it,  his  cheeks  to  such  as  plucked  out  the  hair 
of  his  beard  (mdrat  as  in  Neh.  xiii.  25).  He  did  not  hide  his 
face,  to  cover  it  up  from  actual  insults,  or  from  being  spit 
upon  (on  kelimmoth  with  roq,  smiting  on  the  cheek,  KoAa0/£eo>, 
strokes  with  rods,  pairi^eW)  blows  upon  the  head,  TVTrrew  e/9 
rr]v  K€(f)aX,tfv  with  ejATTTvew,  compare  Matt.  xxvi.  67,  xxvii.  30, 
John  xviii.  22).  The  way  of  his  calling  leads  through  a 
shameful  condition  of  humiliation.  What  was  typified  in  Job 
(see  ch.  xxx.  10,  xvii.  6),  and  prefigured  typically  and  pro 
phetically  in  the  Psalms  of  David  (see  Ps.  xxii.  7,  Ixix.  8), 
finds  in  him  its  perfect  antitypical  fulfilment. 

But  no  shame  makes  him  faint-hearted  ;  he  trusts  in  Him 
who  hath  called  him,  and  looks  to  the  end.  Ver.  7.  "  Bat  the 
Lord  Jehovah  ivill  help  me  ;  therefore  have  I  not  suffered  myself 
to  be  overcome  by  mockery:  therefore  did  1  make  my  face  like  the 
flint,  and  knew  that  I  should  not  be  put  to  shame"  The  \  intro 
duces  the  thought  with  which  his  soul  was  filled  amidst  all 
his  sufferings.  In  ^D^D3  &  he  affirms,  that  he  did  not  suffer 
himself  to  be  inwardly  overcome  and  overpowered  by  kelimmdh. 
The  consciousness  of  his  high  calling  remained  undisturbed; 


CHAP.  L.  8,  9.  279 

lie  was  never  ashamed  of  that,  nor  did  he  turn  away  from  it. 
The  two  j?~i>y  stand  side  by  side  upon  the  same  line.  He  made 
his  face  kachalldmlsh  (from  chdlam,  related  to  gdlam  in  ch. 
xlix.  21,  with  the  substantative  termination  Ish:  see  Jeshurun, 
p.  229),  i.e.  he  made  it  as  unfeeling  as  a  flint-stone  to  the 
attacks  of  his  foes  (cf.  Ezek.  iii.  8,  9).  The  LXX.  renders 
this  e07jKa  TO  irpoawTTOv  pov  a>?  arepeav  Trerpav  ;  but  ecmjpi^a 
TO  Trpoa-.y  which  is  the  rendering  given  to  '•JB  D^  in  Jer.  xxi.  10, 
would  have  been  just  the  proper  rendering  here  (see  Luke 
ix.  51).  In  "  holy  hardness  of  endurance,"  as  Stier  says,  he 
turned  his  face  to  his  antagonists,  without  being  subdued  or 
frightened  away,  and  was  well  assured  that  He  whose  cause 
he  represented  would  never  leave  him  in  the  lurch. 

In  the  midst  of  his  continued  sufferings  he  was  still 
certain  of  victory,  feeling  himself  exalted  above  every  human 
accusation,  and  knowing  that  Jehovah  would  acknowledge 
him ;  whereas  his  opponents  were  on  the  way  to  that  destruc 
tion,  the  germ  of  which  they  already  carried  within  them. 
Vers.  8,  9.  "He  is  near  that  justifieth  me;  who  ivill  contend  with 
me?!  We  will  draw  near  together!  Who  is  my  adversary  in 
judgment?!  Let  him  draw  near  to  me!  Behold,  the  Lord  Jehovah 
will  help  me;  who  is  he  that  could  condemn  me?!  Behold,  they 
all  shall  fall  to  pieces  like  a  garment;  the  moth  shall  eat  them  up" 
p^yn  and  W"]1?  are  forensic  antitheses:  the  former  signifies 
to  set  one  forth,  both  practically  and  judicially,  as  righteous 
(2  Sam.  xv.  4 ;  Ps.  Ixxxii.  3) ;  the  latter  as  guilty,  JJgn  (Deut. 
xxv.  1 ;  Ps.  cix.  7).  'TiDy^  which  has  lost  the  principal  tone 
on  account  of  the  following  W  (inj),  has  munach  instead  of 
metheg  in  the  antepenultimate.  Baal  mishpdtl  means,  " he  who 
has  a  judicial  cause  or  lawsuit  against  me,"  just  as  in  Roman 
law  the  dominus  Litis  is  distinguished  from  the  procurator,  i.e. 
from  the  person  who  represents  him  in  court  (syn.  Idol 
debhdrlm,  Ex.  xxiv.  14,  and  'ish  rlbhl  in  Job  xxxi.  35 ;  compare 
ch.  xli.  11).  fcttm»  are  connected,  and  form  an  emphatic  T/?, 
Rom.  viii.  34  (Ewald  §  325,  a).  "All  of  them"  (kulldm):  this 
refers  to  all  who  are  hostile  to  him.  They  fall  to  pieces  like  a 
worn-out  garment,  and  fall  a  prey  to  the  moth  which  they 
already  carry  within  them  :  —  a  figure  which  we  meet  with 
again  in  ch.  li.  8  (cf.  Job  xiii.  28,  Hos.  v.  12),  and  one  which, 
although  apparently  insignificant,  is  yet  really  a  terrible  one, 


2SO  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

inasmuch  as  it  points  to  a  power  of  destruction  working  im 
perceptibly  and  slowly,  but  yet  effecting  the  destruction  of  the 
object  selected  with  all  the  greater  certainty. 

Thus  far  we  have  the  words  of  the  servant.  The  prophecy 
opened  with  words  of  Jehovah  (vers.  1-3),  and  with  such  words 
it  closes,  as  we  may  see  from  the  expression,  "  this  shall  ye 
have  at  my  hand,"  in  ver.  lib.  The  first  word  of  Jehovah  is 
addressed  to  those  who  fear  Him,  and  hearken  to  the  voice 
of  His  servant.  Ver.  10.  "  Who  among  you  is  fearing  Jehovah, 
hearkening  to  the  voice  of  His  servant  ?  He  that  walketh  in  dark 
ness,  and  without  a  ray  of  light,  let  him  trust  in  the  name  of 
Jehovah,  and  stay  himself  upon  his  God"  The  question  is 
asked  for  the  purpose  of  showing  to  any  one  who  could  reply, 
"  I  am  one,  or  wish  to  be  such  an  one,"  what  his  duty  and  his 
privileges  are.  In  the  midst  of  the  apparent  hopelessness  of  his 
situation  (chashekhlm  the  accusative  of  the  object,  and  plural 
to  chashekhdh,  ch.  viii.  22),  and  of  his  consequent  despondency 
of  mind,  he  is  to  trust  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  that  firmest 
and  surest  of  all  grounds  of  trust,  and  to  stay  himself  upon  his 
God,  who  cannot  forsake  or  deceive  him.  He  is  to  believe  (ch. 
vii.  9,  xxviii.  16  ;  Hab.  ii.  4)  in  God  and  the  word  of  salva 
tion,  for  nan  and  \$W)  are  terms  applied  to  that  fiducia  fidei 
which  is  the  essence  of  faith.  The  second  word  of  Jehovah  is 
addressed  to  the  despisers  of  His  word,  of  which  His  servant  is 
the  bearer.  Ver.  11.  "Behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  fire,  that  equip 
yourselves  with  burning  darts,  away  into  the  glow  of  your  fire, 
and  into  the  burning  darts  that  ye  have  kindled  !  This  comes  to 
you  from  my  hand ;  ye  shall  lie  doivn  in  sorrow"  The  fire  is 
not  the  fire  of  divine  wrath  (Jer.  xvii.  4),  but  the  fire  of 
wickedness  (rish'dh,  ch.  ix.  17),  more  especially  that  hellish 
fire  with  which  an  evil  tongue  is  set  on  fire  (Jas.  iii.  6)  ;  for 
the  zlqoth  (equivalent  to  ziqqoth,  from  zeq  =  zing,  from  zdnaq, 
to  spring,  to  let  fly,  Syr.  to  shoot  or  hurl),  i.e.  shots,  and 
indeed  burning  arrows  (Ps.  vii.  14),  are  figurative,  and  stand 
for  the  blasphemies  and  anathemas  which  they  cast  at  the  ser 
vant  of  Jehovah.  It  is  quite  unnecessary  to  read  ""TKlp  instead 
of  ^-TNtt,  as  Hitzig,  Ewald,  and  Knobel  propose,  or  even,  con 
trary  to  all  usage  of  speech,  ^.l.KO.  The  former  is  the  more 
pictorial :  they  gird  burning  darts,  accingunt  malleolos,  i.e. 
they  equip  or  arm  themselves  with  them  for  the  purpose  of 


CHAP.  LL  1-3.  281 

attack  Cch.  xlv.  5).  But  the  destruction  which  they  prepare 
for  the  servant  of  Jehovah  becomes  their  own.  They  them 
selves  have  to  go  into  the  midst  of  the  hurning  fire  and  the 
burning  darts,  that  they  have  set  on  fire.  The  hand  of  Jehovah 
suddenly  inverts  the  position ;  the  fire  of  wrath  becomes  the 
fire  of  divine  judgment,  and  this  fire  becomes  their  bed  of 
torment.  The  LXX.  has  it  correctly,  ev  \v7rr)  KOi^ 
The  Lamed  indicates  the  situation  (Ewald,  §  217,  d). 
with  the  tone  upon  the  last  syllable  gives  a  dictatorial  con 
clusion.  It  has  a  terrible  sound,  but  still  more  terrible  (apart 
from  the  future  state)  is  the  historical  fulfilment  that  presents 
itself  to  the  eye. 


THIRD  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LI. 

THE  BURSTING  FORTH  OP  SALVATION,  AND  TURNING  AWAY 
OF  THE  CUP  OF  WRATH. 

The  prophetic  address  now  turns  again  from  the  despisers 
of  the  word,  whom  it  has  threatened  \vith  the  torment  of  fire, 
to  those  who  long  for  salvation.  Yers.  1-3.  "  Hearken  to  me, 
ye  that  are  in  pursuit  of  righteousness,  ye  that  seek  Jehovah. 
Look  up  to  the  rock  whence  ye  are  hewn,  and  to  the  hollow  of  the 
pit  whence  ye  are  dug.  Look  up  to  Abraham  your  forefather, 
and  to  Sara  who  bare  you,  that  he  was  one  when  I  called  him, 
and  blessed  him,  and  multiplied  him.  For  Jehovah  hath  com 
forted  Zion,  comforted  all  her  ruins,  and  turned  her  desert  like 
Eden,  and  her  steppe  as  into  the  garden  of  God ;  joy  and  gladness 
are  found  in  her,  thanksgiving  and  sounding  music.''9  The 
prophecy  is  addressed  to  those  who  are  striving  after  the  right 
kind  of  life  and  seeking  Jehovah,  and  not  turning  from  Him 
to  make  earthly  things  and  themselves  the  object  of  their  pur 
suit  ;  for  such  only  are  in  a  condition  by  faith  to  regard  that  as 
possible,  and  in  spirit  to  behold  that  as  real,  which  seems  im 
possible  to  human  understanding,  because  the  very  opposite  is 
lying  before  the  eye  of  the  senses.  Abraham  and  Sarah  they 
are  mentally  to  set  before  them,  for  they  are  types  of  the  sal 
vation  to  be  anticipated  now.  Abraham  is  the  rock  whence 
the  stones  were  hewn,  of  which  the  house  of  Jacob  is  composed; 


282  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

and  Sarah  with  her  maternal  womb  the  hollow  of  the  pit  out 
of  which  Israel  was  brought  to  the  light,  just  as  peat  is  dug 
out  of  a  pit,  or  copper  out  of  a  mine.  The  marriage  of  Abra 
ham  and  Sarah  was  for  a  long  time  unfruitful ;  it  was,  as  it 
were,  out  of  hard  stone  that  God  raised  up  children  to  Himself 
in  Abraham  and  Sarah.  The  rise  of  Israel  was  a  miracle  of 
divine  power  and  grace.  In  antithesis  to  the  masculine  tsiir, 
bor  is  made  into  a  feminine  through  maqqebJicth,  which  is 
chosen  with  reference  to  neqebJidh.  To  D^?^n  we  must  supply 
13BD  • . .  1K-;K,  and  to  WjnjM,  USED  . . .  iBte.' '  Ver.  2a  informs 
them  who  the  rock  and  the  hollow  of  the  pit  are,  viz.  Abraham 
your  forefather,  and  Sarah  t'chdlelkhem,  who  bare  you  with  all 
the  pains  of  childbirth :  " you"  for  the  birth  of  Isaac,  the 
son  of  promise,  was  the  birth  of  the  nation.  The  point  to  be 
specially  looked  at  in  relation  to  Abraham  (in  comparison  with 
whom  Sarah  falls  into  the  background)  is  given  in  the  words 
quod  unum  vocavi  eum  (that  he  was  one  when  I  called  him). 
The  perfect  l^^i?  relates  the  single  call  of  divine  grace,  which 
removed  Abraham  from  the  midst  of  idolaters  into  the  fellow 
ship  of  Jehovah.  The  futures  that  follow  (with  Vav  cop.) 
point  out  the  blessing  and  multiplication  that  were  connected 
with  it  (Gen.  xii.  1,  2).  He  is  called  one  (^echdd  as  in  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  24,  Mai.  ii.  15),  because  he  was  one  at  the  time  of  his 
call,  and  vet  through  the  mi<rht  of  the  divine  blessing  became 

«/  o 

the  root  of  the  whole  genealogical  tree  of  Israel,  and  of  a  great 
multitude  of  people  that  branched  off  from  it.  This  is  what 
those  who  are  now  longing  for  salvation  are  to  remember, 
strengthening  themselves  by  means  of  the  olden  time  in  their 
faith  in  the  future  which  so  greatly  resembles  it.  The  corre 
sponding  blessing  is  expressed  in  preterites  (ntc/iam,  vayydsern)^ 
inasmuch  as  to  the  eye  of  faith  and  in  prophetic  vision  the  future 
has  the  reality  of  a  present  and  the  certainty  of  a  completed  fact. 
Zion,  the  mother  of  Israel  (ch.  1.  1),  the  counterpart  of  Sarah, 
the  ancestress  of  the  nation, — Zion,  which  is  now  mourning  so 
bitterly,  because  she  is  lying  waste  and  in  ruins, — is  comforted 
by  Jehovah.  The  comforting  word  of  promise  (ch.  xl.  1) 
becomes,  in  her  case,  the  comforting  fact  of  fulfilment  (ch. 
xlix.  13).  Jehovah  makes  her  waste  like  Eden  (LXX.  a>? 
TrapdSeicrov),  like  a  garden,  as  glorious  as  if  it  had  been  directly 
planted  by  Himself  (Gen.  xiii.  10 ;  Num.  xxiv.  6).  And  this 


CHAP.  LL  4,  5.  283 

paradise  is  not  without  human  occupants  ;  but  when  you  enter 
it  you  find  joy  and  gladness  therein,  and  hear  thanksgiving 
at  the  wondrous  change  that  has  taken  place,  as  well  as  the 
voice  of  melody  (zimrdh  as  in  Amos  v.  23).  The  pleasant 
land  is  therefore  full  of  men  in  the  midst  of  festal  enjoyment 
and  activity.  As  Sarah  gave  birth  to  Isaac  after  a  long 
period  of  barrenness,  so  Zion,  a  second  Sarah,  will  be  sur 
rounded  by  a  joyous  multitude  of  children  after  a  long  period 
of  desolation. 

But  the  great  work  of  the  future  extends  far  beyond  the 
restoration  of  Israel,  which  becomes  the  source  of  salvation  to 
all  the  world.  Vers.  4,  5.  "  Hearken  unto  me,  my  people,  and 
(jive  ear  unto  me,  0  my  congregation  !  for  instruction  will  go 
forth  from  me,  and  I  make  a  place  for  my  right,  to  be  a  light  of 
the  nations.  My  righteousness  is  near,  my  salvation  is  drawn 
out,  and  my  arms  ivill  judge  nations :  the  hoping  of  the  islands 
looks  to  me,  and  for  mine  arm  is  their  ivaiting."  It  is  Israel 
which  is  here  summoned  to  hearken  to  the  promise  introduced 
with  ki.  *ENNp  is  only  used  here  of  Israel,  like  ^ia  in  Zeph.  ii.  9  ; 
and  the  LXX.  (/col  ol  /SacriXeis)  have  quite  misunderstood 
it.  An  address  to  the  heathen  would  be  quite  out  of  harmony 
with  the  character  of  the  whole  prophecy,  which  is  carried  out 
quite  consistently  throughout.  'DJJ  and  'D1&A,  therefore,  are 
not  plurals,  as  the  Syriac  supposes,  although  it  cannot  be  dis 
puted  that  it  is  a  rare  thing  to  meet  with  the  plural  form 
apocopated  thus,  after  the  form  of  the  talmudic  Aramaean 
(see,  for  example,  p.  89  ;  and  see  also  at  Ps.  xlv.  9). 
What  ch.  xlii.  1  sqq.  describes  as  the  calling  of  the  servant  of 
Jehovah,  viz.  to  carry  out  justice  among  the  nations,  and  to 
plant  it  on  the  earth,  appears  here  as  the  act  of  Jehovah  ;  but, 
as  a  comparison  of  '•riKO  with  psSft?  (ch.  ii.  3)  clearly  shows,  as 
the  act  of  the  God  who  is  present  in  Israel,  and  works  from 
Israel  outwards.  Out  of  Israel  sprang  the  Saviour ;  out  of 
Israel  the  apostleship ;  and  when  God  shall  have  mercy  upon 
Israel  again,  it  will  become  to  the  whole  world  of  nations  "  life 
from  the  dead."  The  thordh  referred  to  here  is  that  of  Sion, 
as  distinguished  from  that  of  Sinai,  the  gospel  of  redemption, 
and  mishpdt  the  new  order  of  life  in  which  Israel  and  the 
nations  are  united.  Jehovah  makes  for  this  a  place  of  rest,  a 
firm  standing-place,  from  which  its  light  to  lighten  the  nations 


284  THE  PKOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


streams  forth  in  all  directions.  Sf^"in  as  in  Jer.  xxxi.  2,  1.  34, 
from  W"J,  in  the  sense  of  the  Arabic  £-£fj,  to  return,  to  procure 

return,  entrance,  and  rest  ;  a  different  word  from  W"J  in  ch.  li. 
15,  which  signifies  the  very  opposite,  viz.  to  disturb,  literally  to 
throw  into  trembling.  P"]¥  and  J^,  which  occur  in  ver.  5a, 
are  synonyms  throughout  these  prophecies.  The  meaning  of 
the  former  is  determined  by  the  character  of  the  thorah,  which 
gives  "  the  knowledge  of  salvation"  (Luke  i.  77),  and  with  that 
"the  righteousness  of  God"  (Rom.  i.  17;  cf.  Isa.  liii.  11). 
This  righteousness  is  now  upon  the  point  of  being  revealed  ; 
this  salvation  has  started  on  the  way  towards  the  fullest  realiza 
tion.  The  great  mass  of  the  nations  fall  under  the  judgment 
which  the  arms  of  Jehovah  inflict,  as  they  cast  down  to  the 
ground  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left.  When  it  is  stated 
of  the  islands,  therefore,  that  they  hope  for  Jehovah,  and 
wait  for  His  arm,  the  reference  is  evidently  to  the  remnant  of 
the  heathen  nations  which  outlives  the  judgment,  and  not  only 
desires  salvation,  and  is  susceptible  of  it,  but  which  actually 
receives  salvation  (compare  the  view  given  in  John  xi.  52, 
which  agrees  with  that  of  Isaiah,  and  which,  in  fact,  is  the 
biblical  view  generally,  e.g.  Joel  iii.  5).  To  these  the  saving 
arm  (the  singular  only  was  suitable  here  ;  cf.  Ps.  xvi.  11)  now 
brings  that  salvation,  towards  which  their  longing  was  more  or 
less  consciously  directed,  and  which  satisfied  their  inmost  need. 
Observe  in  ver.  5  the  majestic  and  self-conscious  movement  of 
the  rhythm,  with  the  effective  tone  of  yeyaclielun. 

The  people  of  God  are  now  summoned  to  turn  their  eyes 
upwards  and  downwards  :  the  old  world  above  their  heads  and 
under  their  feet  is  destined  to  destruction.  Ver.  6.  "  Lift  up 
your  eyes  to  the  heavens,  and  look  upon  the  earth  beneath  :  for  the 
heavens  will  pass  away  like  smoke,  and  the  earth  fall  to  pieces 
like  a  garment,  and  its  inhabitants  die  out  like  a  nonentity  ;  and 
my  salvation  will  last  for  ever,  and  my  righteousness  does  not  go 
to  ruin?  The  reason  for  the  summons  follows  with  ki.  The 
heavens  will  be  resolved  into  atoms,  like  smoke  :  nimldchu  from 
mdlach,  related  to  mdrach,  root  mal,  from  which  comes  nidlal 
(see  at  Job  xiv.  2),  to  rub  to  pieces,  to  crumble  to  pieces,  or 
mangle  ;  Aquila,  rp^orjOiricrav,  from  d\oav,  to  thresh.  As 
meldchlm  signifies  rags,  the  figure  of  a  garment  that  has  fallen 


CHAP.  LI.  6.  285 

to  pieces,  winch  was  then  quite  ready  to  hand  (ch.  1.  9),  pre 
sented  itself  from  the  natural  association  of  ideas.  !5"to3,  how 
ever,  cannot  mean  "  in  like  manner"  (LXX.,  Targ.,  Jerome)  ; 
for  if  we  keep  to  the  figure  of  a  garment  falling  to  pieces,  the 
figure  is  a  very  insipid  one ;  and  if  we  refer  it  to  the  fate  of 
the  earth  generally,  the  thought  which  it  offers  is  a  very  tame 
one.  The  older  expositors  were  not  even  acquainted  with  what 
is  now  the  favourite  explanation,  viz.  "  as  gnats  perish"  (Hitzig, 
Ewald,  Umbreit,  Knobel,  Stier,  etc.)  ;  since  the  singular  of 
kinnlm  is  no  more  ken  than  the  singular  of  W?2  is  P]3.  The 
gnat  (viz.  a  species  of  stinging  gnat,  probably  the  diminutive 
but  yet  very  troublesome  species  which  is  called  akol  uskut, 
"  eat  and  be  silent,"  in  Egyptian)  is  called  kinndh,  as  the 
talmudic  usage  shows,  where  the  singular,  which  does  not 
happen  to  be  met  with  in  the  Old  Testament,  is  found  in  the 
case  of  kinnlm  as  well  as  in  that  of  betsim.1  We  must  explain 
the  word  in  the  same  mariner  as  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  5,  Num.  xiii. 
33,  Job  ix.  35.  In  all  these  passages  ken  merely  signifies 
"  so"  (ita,  sic)  ;  but  just  as  in  the  classical  languages,  these 
words  often  derive  their  meaning  from  the  gesture  with  which 
they  are  accompanied  (e.g.  in  Terence's  Eunuch :  Cape  hoc 
flabellum  et  ventulum  sic  facito).  This  is  probably  Riickert's 
opinion,  when  he  adopts  the  rendering :  and  its  inhabitants 
"  like  so"  (so  wie  so)  do  they  die.  But  "  like  so"  is  here  equi 
valent  to  "  like  nothing."  That  the  heavens  and  the  earth  do 
not  perish  without  rising  again  in  a  renewed  form,  is  a  thought 
which  may  naturally  be  supplied,  and  which  is  distinctly  ex 
pressed  in  ver.  16,  ch.  Ixv.  17,  Ixvi.  22.  Righteousness 
(ts'ddqdh)  and  salvation  (yeshudli)  are  the  heavenly  powers, 
which  acquire  dominion  through  the  overthrow  of  the  ancient 
world,  and  become  the  foundations  of  the  new  (2  Pet.  iii.  13). 
That  the  tseddqdh  will  endure  for  ever,  and  the  y'shudh  will 
not  be  broken  (yechath,  as  in  ch.  vii.  8,  confringetur,  whereas 
in  ver.  7  the  meaning  is  constememini),  is  a  prospect  that  opens 
after  the  restoration  of  the  new  world,  and  which  indirectly 

1  Kinnam,  in  Ex.  viii.  13,  14,  whether  it  be  a  collective  plural  or  a  sin 
gular,  also  proves  nothing  in  support  of  ken,  any  more  than  midddh  in 
Job  xi.  9  (which  see)  in  favour  of  mad,  in  the  sense  of  measure.  It  does 
not  follow,  that  because  a  certain  form  lies  at  the  foundation  of  a  deri 
vative,  it  must  have  been  current  in  ordinary  usage. 


286  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

applies  to  men  who  survive  the  catastrophe,  having  become 
partakers  of  righteousness  and  salvation.  For  righteousness 
and  salvation  require  beings  in  whom  to  exert  their  power. 

Upon  this  magnificent  promise  of  the  final  triumph  of  the 
counsel  of  God,  an  exhortation  is  founded  to  the  persecuted 
church,  not  to  be  afraid  of  men.  Vers.  7,  8.  "  Hearken  unto 
me,  ye  that  know  about  righteousness,  thou  people  with  my  law  in 
the  heart ;  fear  ye  not  the  reproach  of  mortals,  and  be  ye  not 
alarmed  at  their  revilings.  For  the  moth  will  devour  them  like  a 
garment,  and  the  worm  devour  them  like  woollen  cloth ;  and  my 
righteousness  will  stand  for  ever,  and  my  salvation  to  distant 
generations"  The  idea  of  the  "servant  of  Jehovah,"  in  its 
middle  sense,  viz.  as  denoting  the  true  Israel,  is  most  clearly 
set  forth  in  the  address  here.  They  that  pursue  after  righteous 
ness,  and  seek  Jehovah  (ch.  li.  1),  that  is  to  say,  the  servants 
of  Jehovah  (ch.  Ixv.  8,  9),  are  embraced  in  the  unity  of  a 
"  people,"  as  in  ch.  Ixv.  10  (cf.  ch.  x.  24),  i.e.  of  the  true 
people  of  God  in  the  people  of  His  choice,  and  therefore  of  the 
kernel  in  the  heart  of  the  whole  mass, — an  integral  intermediate 
link  in  the  organism  of  the  general  idea,  which  Havernick  and, 
to  a  certain  extent,  Hofmann  eliminate  from  it,1  but  not  with 
out  thereby  destroying  the  typical  mirror  in  which  the  prophet 
beholds  the  passion  of  the  One.  The  words  are  addressed  to 
those  who  know  from  their  own  experience  what  righteousness 

1  Havernick,  in  his  Lectures  on  the  Theology  of  the  Old  Testament, 
published  by  H.  A.  Hahn,  1848,  and  in  a  second  edition  by  H.  Schultz, 
1863  ;  Drechsler,  in  his  article  on  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  in  the  Luth. 
Zeitschrift,  1852 ;  v.  Hofmann,  in  his  Schriftbeweis,  ii.  1,  147.  The  first 
two  understand  by  the  servant  of  Jehovah  as  an  individual,  the  true  Israel 
personified :  the  idea  has  simply  Israel  as  a  whole  at  its  base,  i.e.  Israel 
which  did  not  answer  to  its  ideal,  and  the  Messiah  as  the  summit,  in  whom 
the  ideal  of  Israel  was  fully  realized.  Drechsler  goes  so  far  as  to  call  the 
central  link,  viz.  an  Israel  true  to  its  vocation,  a  modern  abstraction  that  has 
no  support  in  the  Scriptures.  Hofmann,  however,  says  that  he  has  no  wish 
to  exclude  this  central  idea,  and  merely  wishes  to  guard  against  the  notion 
that  a  number  of  individuals,  whether  Israelites  generally  or  pious  Israelites, 
are  ever  intended  by  the  epithet  "  servant  of  Jehovah."  "  The  nation," 
he  says  himself  at  p.  145,  "was  called  as  a  nation  to  be  the  servant  of 
God,  but  it  fulfilled  its  calling  as  a  church  of  believers."  And  so  say  we ; 
but  we  also  add  that  this  church  is  a  kernel  always  existing  within  the 
outer  ecclesia  mizta,  and  therefore  always  a  number  of  individuals,  though 
they  are  only  known  to  God. 


CHAP.  LI.  9-11.  287 

is  as  a  gift  of  grace,  and  as  conduct  in  harmony  with  the  plan 
of  salvation,  i.e.  to  the  nation,  which  bears  in  its  heart  the 
law  of  God  as  the  standard  and  impulse  of  its  life,  the  church 
which  not  only  has  it  as  a  letter  outside  itself,  but  as  a  vital 
power  within  (cf.  Ps.  xl.  9).  None  of  these  need  to  be  afraid 
of  men.  Their  despisers  and  blasphemers  are  men  (Vwos/t;  cf. 
ver.  12,  Ps.  ix.  20,  x.  18),  whose  pretended  omnipotence,  exalta 
tion,  and  indestructibility,  are  an  unnatural  self-convicted  lie. 
The  double  figure  in  ver.  8,  which  forms  a  play  upon  words 
that  cannot  well  be  reproduced,  affirms  that  the  smallest  exer 
tion  of  strength  is  quite  sufficient  to  annihilate  their  sham 
greatness  and  sham  power ;  and  that  long  before  they  are 
actually  destroyed,  they  carry  the  constantly  increasing  germ 
of  it  within  themselves.  The  sds,  says  a  Jewish  proverb,  is 
brother  to  the  'ash.  The  latter  (from  'dshesh,  collabi,  Arab. 
'aththa,  trans,  corrodere)  signifies  a  moth ;  the  former  (like  the 
Arabic  sus,  suse,  Gr.  0^9)  a  moth,  and  also  a  weevil,  curculio. 
The  relative  terms  in  Greek  are  0-779  (Armen.  tzetz)  and  tck. 
But  whilst  the  persecutors  of  the  church  succumb  to  these 
powers  of  destruction,  the  righteousness  and  salvation  of  God, 
which  are  even  now  the  confidence  and  hope  of  His  church, 
and  the  full  and  manifest  realization  of  which  it  will  hereafter 
enjoy,  stand  for  ever,  and  from  "  generation  to  generation,"  ledor 
ddrlm,  i.e.  to  an  age  which  embraces  endless  ages  within  itself. 
But  just  as  such  an  exhortation  as  this  followed  very  naturally 
from  the  grand  promises  with  which  the  prophecy  commenced, 
so  does  a  longing  for  the  promised  salvation  spring  out  of  this 
exhortation,  together  with  the  assurance  of  its  eventual  realiza 
tion.  Vers.  9-11.  "  Awake,  awake,  clothe  thyself  in  might,  0 
arm  of  Jehovah ;  awake,  as  in  the  days  of  ancient  time,  the  ages 
of  the  olden  world  I  Was  it  not  thou  that  didst  split  Rahal  in 
pieces,  and  pierced  the  dragon  ?  Was  it  not  thou  that  didst  dry 
up  the  sea,  the  waters  of  the  great  billow ;  that  didst  turn  the 
depths  of  the  sea  into  a  way  for  redeemed  to  pass  through  ?  And 
the  emancipated  of  Jehovah  will  return,  and  come  to  Zion  with 
shouting,  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  head:  they  grasp  at  glad 
ness  and  joy,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  flee  away."  The  para 
disaical  restoration  of  Zion,  the  new  world  of  righteousness 
and  salvation,  is  a  work  of  the  arm  of  Jehovah,  i.e.  of  the 
manifestation  of  His  might.  His  arm  is  now  in  a  sleeping 


288  THE  PEOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

state.  It  is  not  lifeless,  indeed,  but  motionless.  Therefore 
the  church  calls  out  to  it  three  times,  "  Awake  "  (url :  to  avoid 
monotony,  the  milra  and  milel  tones  are  interchanged,  as  in 
Judg.  v.  12).1  It  is  to  arise  and  put  on  strength  out  of  the 
fulness  of  omnipotence  (Idbliesh  as  in  Ps.  xciii.  1;  cf.  \a/jL/3dveiv 
SvvaiMV)  Rev.  xi.  17,  and  Bvaeo  aXfcrfv,  arm  thyself  with  strength, 
in  77.  xix.  36,  ix.  231).  The  arm  of  Jehovah  is  able  to  accom 
plish  what  the  prophecy  affirms  and  the  church  hopes  for;  since 
it  has  already  miraculously  redeemed  Israel  once.  Raliabh  is 
Egypt  represented  as  a  monster  of  the  waters  (see  ch.  xxx.  7), 
and  tannin  is  the  same  (cf.  xxvii.  1),  but  with  particular  refer 
ence  to  Pharaoh  (Ezek.  xxix.  3).  fc^rrn^  tu  illud,  is  equivalent 
to  "thou,  yea  thou"  (see  at  ch.  xxxvii.  16).  The  Red  Sea  is 
described  as  the  "  waters  of  the  great  deep "  (lehom  rabbdh), 
because  the  great  storehouse  of  waters  that  lie  below  the  solid 
ground  were  partially  manifested  there  (see  Genesis,  p.  259). 
iiD&n  has  double  paslita;  it  is  therefore  milel,  and  therefore 
the"  third  pr.  =  HDb>  nete  (Ges.  §  109,  Anf.).  Ch.  xxxv.  10  is 
repeated  in  ver.  11,  being  attached  to  D^W  of  the  previous 
verse,  just  as  it  is  there.  Instead  of  ID:  W&9  which  we  find 
here,  we  have  there  *Dtt  H1^ ;  in  everything  else  the  two 
passages  are  word  for  word  the  same.  Hitzig,  Ewald,  and 
Knobel  suppose  that  ver.  11  was  not  written  by  the  author  of 
these  addresses,  but  was  interpolated  by  some  one  else.  But 
in  ch.  Ixv.  25  we  meet  with  just  the  same  kind  of  repetition 
from  ch.  i.-xxxix. ;  and  in  the  first  part  we  find,  at  any  rate, 
repetitions  in  the  form  of  refrains  and  others  of  a  smaller  kind 
(like  ch.  xix.  15,  cf.  ch.  ix.  13).  And  ver.  11  forms  a  con 
clusion  here,  just  as  it  does  in  ch.  xxxv.  10.  An  argument  is 
founded  upon  the  olden  time  with  reference  to  the  things  to 
be  expected  now  ;  the  look  into  the  future  is  cleared  and 
strengthened  by  the  look  into  the  past.  And  thus  will  the 
emancipated  of  Jehovah  return,  being  liberated  from  the 
present  calamity  as  they  were  delivered  from  the  Egyptian 
then.  The  first  half  of  this  prophecy  is  here  brought  to  a 
close.  It  concludes  with  expressions  of  longing  and  of  hope, 
the  echo  of  promises  that  had  gone  before. 

In  the  second  half  the  promise  commences  again,  but  with 
more  distinct  reference  to  the  oppression  of  the  exiles  and  the 
1  See  Norzi  and  Luzzatto's  Grammatica  della  Lingua  Ebr.  §  513. 


CHAP.  LI.  12-15.  289 

sufferings  of  Jerusalem.  Jehovah  Himself  begins  to  speak 
now,  setting  His  seal  upon  what  is  longed  and  hoped  for. 
Vers.  12-15.  "  /,  I  am  your  comforter :  who  art  thou,  that  thou 
shouldst  be  afraid  of  a  mortal  who  will  die,  and  of  a  son  of  man 
ivho  is  made  a  blade  of  grass ;  that  thou  shouldst  forget  Jehovah 
thy  Creator,  who  stretched  out  the  heavens  and  founded  the  earth ; 
that  thou  shouldst  be  afraid  continually  all  the  day  of  the  fury 
of  the  tormentor,  as  he  aims  to  destroy  ?  and  where  is  the  fury  of 
t/ie  tormentor  left  ?  He  that  is  bowed  doivn  is  quickly  set  loose, 
and  does  not  die  to  the  grave,  and  his  bread  does  not  fail  him ; 
as  truly  as  I  Jehovah  am.  thy  God,  who  frighteneth  up  the  sea,  so 
that  its  waves  roar :  Jehovah  of  hosts  is  His  name"  tttn  after 
•aJX  'OiK  is  an  emphatic  repetition,  and  therefore  a  strengthen 
ing  of  the  subject  (avros  eyco),  as  above,  in  ver.  10,  in  fcOrrflK. 
From  this  major,  that  Jehovah  is  the  comforter  of  His  church, 
and  by  means  of  a  minor,  that  whoever  has  Him  for  a  com 
forter  has  no  need  to  fear,  the  conclusion  is  drawn  that  the 
church  has  no  cause  to  fear.  Consequently  we  cannot  adopt 
Knobel's  explanation,  "  How  small  thou  art,  that  thou  art 
afraid."  The  meaning  is  rather,  "  Is  it  really  the  case  with 
thee  (i.e.  art  thou  then  so  small,  so  forsaken),  that  thou  hast 
any  need  to  fear''  (fut.  consec.,  according  to  Ges.  §  129,  1 ;  cf. 
ki,  Ex.  iii.  11,  Judg.  ix.  28)?  The  attributive  sentence  tdmuth 
(who  will  die)  brings  out  the  meaning  involved  in  the  epithet 
applied  to  man,  viz.  9#nosh  (compare  in  the  Persian  myth 
Gayomard,  from  the  old  Persian  gaya  meretan,  mortal  life)  ; 
Txn  =  "^yns  (Ps.  xxxvii.  2,  xc.  5,  ciii.  1,5 ;  compare  above,  ch. 
xl.  6-8)  is  an  equation  instead  of  a  comparison.  In  ver.  126 
the  address  is  thrown  into  a  feminine  form,  in  ver.  13a  into  a 
masculine  one ;  Zion  being  the  object  in  the  former,  and  (what 
is  the  same  thing)  Israel  in  the  latter  :  that  thou  forgettest  thy 
Creator,  who  is  also  the  almighty  Maker  of  the  universe,  and 
soarest  about  in  constant  endless  alarm  at  the  wrath  of  the 
tormentor,  whilst  he  is  aiming  to  destroy  (pichad,  contremiscere, 
as  in  Prov.  xxviii.  14  ;  ka'dsher  as  in  Ps.  Ivi.  7,  Num.  xxvii. 
14,  lit.  according  as  ;  Jconen,  viz.  his  arrows,  or  even  his  bow,  as 
in  Ps.  xi.  2,  vii.  J  3,  cf.  xxi.  13).  We  must  not  translate  this 
quasi  disposuisset,  which  is  opposed  to  the  actual  fact,  although 
syntactically  possible  (Job  x.  19  ;  Zech.  x.  6).  The  question 
with  which  the  fear  is  met,  "  And  where  is  the  fury  of  the 

VOL.  II.  T 


290  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tormentor?"  looks  into  the  future:  "  There  is  not  a  trace  of 
him  to  be  seen,  he  is  utterly  swept  away."  If  hammefslq  sig 
nifies  the  Chaldean,  ver.  14,  in  which  the  warning  passes  into 
a  promise,  just  as  in  the  first  half  the  promise  passed  into  a 
warning,  is  not  to  be  understood  as  referring  to  oppression  by 
their  own  countrymen,  who  were  more  heathenish  than  Israel- 
itish  in  their  disposition,  as  Knobel  supposes ;  but  tsoeh  (from 
tsadli,  to  stoop  or  bend)  is  an  individualizing  description  of  the 
exiles,  who  were  in  captivity  in  Babylon,  and  some  of  them 
actually  in  prison  (see  ch.  xlii.  7,  22).  Those  who  were  lying 
there  in  fetters,  and  were  therefore  obliged  to  bend,  hastened 
to  be  loosed,  i.e.  would  speedily  be  set  at  liberty  (the  conquest 
of  Babylon  by  Cyrus  may  be  referred  to  here)  ;  they  would 
not  die  and  fall  into  the  pit  (constr.  prcegnans),  nor  would  their 
bread  fail ;  that  is  to  say,  if  we  regard  the  two  clauses  as  the 
dissection  of  one  thought  (which  is  not  necessary,  however, 
though  Hitzig  supports  it),  "  he  will  not  die  of  starvation." 
The  pledge  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  all-sufficiency  of 
Jehovah,  who  throws  the  sea  into  a  state  of  trembling  (even  by 
a  threatening  word,  g*drdh ;  Vfi  is  the  construct  of  the  parti 
ciple,  with  the  tone  upon  the  last  syllable,  as  in  Lev.  xi.  7,  Ps. 
xciv.  9  :  see  Bar's  Psalter,  p.  132,  from  rdya,  tremefacere),  so 
that  its  waves  roar  (cf.  Jer.  xxxi.  35,  and  the  original  passage 
in  Job  xxvi.  12). 

The  promise,  as  the  pledge  of  which  Jehovah  has  staked 
His  absolute  power,  to  which  everything  must  yield,  now  rises 
up  to  an  eschatological  height,  from  the  historical  point  at 
which  it  began.  Ver.  16.  "And  I  put  my  ivords  into  thy  moufh, 
and  in  the  shadow  of  my  hand  have  I  covered  thee,  to  plant 
heavens,  and  to  found  an  earth,  and  to  say  to  Zion,  Thou  art  my 
people"  It  is  a  lofty  calling,  a  glorious  future,  for  the  prepa 
ration  and  introduction  of  which  Israel,  although  fallen  as  low- 
as  ver.  7  describes,  has  been  equipped  and  kept  in  the  shadow 
of  unapproachable  omnipotence.  Jehovah  has  put  His  words 
into  the  mouth  of  this  Israel — His  words,  the  force  and  cer 
tainty  of  which  are  measured  by  His  all-determining  absolute 
ness.  And  what  is  the  exalted  calling  which  it  is  to  subserve 
through  the  medium  of  these  words,  and  for  which  it  is  pre 
served,  without  previously,  or  indeed  at  any  time,  passing 
away  1  We  must  not  render  it,  "  that  thou  mayest  plant,'* 


CHAP.  LI.  16.  291 

etc.,  with  which  the  conclusion  does  not  harmonize,  viz.  "  that 
thou  mayest  say,"  etc. ;  for  it  is  not  Israel  who  says  this  to 
Israel,  but  Jehovah  says  it  to  Israel.  The  planter,  founder, 
speaker,  is  therefore  Jehovah.  It  is  God's  own  work,  to  which 
Israel  is  merely  instrumentally  subservient,  by  means  of  the 
words  of  God  placed  in  its  mouth,  viz.  the  new  creation  of  the 
world,  and  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  favour ;  both  of  them, 
the  former  as  well  as  the  latter,  regalia  of  God.  The  reference 
is  to  the  last  times.  The  Targum  explains  it  thus  :  "  to  restore 
the  people  of  whom  it  is  said,  They  will  be  as  numerous  as  the 
stars  of  heaven ;  and  to  perfect  the  church,  of  which  it  is 
said,  They  will  be  as  numerous  as  the  dust  of  the  earth," 
Knobel  understands  by  this  a  completion  of  the  theocracy,  ana 
a  new  arrangement  of  the  condition  of  the  wrorld ;  Ewald,  a 
new  spiritual  creation,  of  which  the  liberation  of  Israel  is  the 
first  corner-stone.  But  the  prophecy  speaks  of  a  new  heaven 
and  a  new  earth,  in  something  more  than  a  figurative  sense,  as 
a  new  creation  of  God  (ch.  Ixv.  17).  Jehovah  intends  to 
create  a  new  world  of  righteousness  and  salvation,  and  practi 
cally  to  acknowledge  Zion  as  His  people.  The  preparation  for 
this  great  and  all-renewing  work  of  the  future  is  aided  by  the 
true  Israel,  which  is  now  enslaved  by  the  heathen,  and  dis 
owned  and  persecuted  by  its  own  countrymen.  A  future  of 
salvation,  embracing  Israel  and  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  is 
implied  in  the  words  placed  by  Jehovah  in  the  mouth  of  His 
church,  which  was  faithful  to  its  calling.  These  words  in 
their  mouth  are  the  seed-corns  of  a  new  world  in  the  midst  of 
the  old.  The  fact  that  the  very  same  thing  is  said  here  of  the 
true  spiritual  Israel,  as  in  ch.  xlix.  2  of  the  one  servant  of 
Jehovah,  may  be  explained  in  the  same  manner  as  when  the 
apostles  apply  to  themselves,  in  Acts  xiii.  47,  a  word  of  God 
relating  to  the  one  Servant  of  Jehovah,  by  saying,  "  So  hath 
the  Lord  commanded  us."  The  One  is,  in  fact,  one  with 
this  Israel ;  He  is  this  Israel  in  its  highest  potency ;  He  towers 
above  it,  but  only  as  the  head  rises  above  the  members  of  the 
body,  with  which  it  forms  a  living  whole.  There  is  no  necessity, 
therefore,  to  assume,  as  Hengstenberg  and  Philippi  do,  that 
ver.  13  contains  an  address  from  the  One  who  then  stood  before 
the  mind  of  the  prophet.  "  There  is  no  proof,"  as  Vitring^ 
affirms,  "  of  any  change  in  the  object  in  this  passage,  nor  any 


292  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

solid  reason  for  assuming  it."  The  circumference  of  the  idea  is 
always  the  same.  Here,  however,  it  merely  takes  the  direction 
towards  the  centre,  and  penetrates  its  smaller  inner  circle,  but 
does  not  go  back  to  the  centre  itself. 

Just  as  we  found  above,  that  the  exclamation  "awake"  (uri), 
which  the  church  addresses  to  the  arm  of  Jehovah,  grew  out  of 
the  preceding  great  promises ;  so  here  there  grows  out  of  the 
same  another  "awake"  (kith* 6reri),  which  the  prophet  addresses 
to  Jerusalem  in  the  name  of  his  God,  and  the  reason  for  which  is 
given  in  the  form  of  new  promises.  Vers.  17-23.  "  Wake  thyself 
up,  wake  thyself  up,  stand  up,  0  Jerusalem,  thou  that  hast  drunk 
out  of  the  hand  of  Jehovah  the  goblet  of  His  fury :  the  goblet  cup 
of  reeling  hast  thou  drunk,  sipped  out.  There  was  none  who 
guided  her  of  all  the  children  that  she  had  brought  forth;  and  none 
who  took  her  by  the  hand  of  all  the  children  that  she  had  brought 
up.  There  were  two  things  that  happened  to  thee ;  who  should 
console  thee?  Devastation,  and  ruin,  and  famine,  and  the  sword: 
how  should  I  comfort  thee  ?  Thy  children  were  benighted,  lay  at 
the  corners  of  all  the  streets  like  a  snared  antelope :  as  those  who 
were  full  of  the  fury  of  Jehovah,  the  rebuke  of  thy  God.  There 
fore  hearken  to  this,  0  wretched  and  drunken,  but  not  with  wine  : 
Thus  saith  thy  Lord,  Jehovah,  and  thy  God  that  defendeth  His 
jieople,  Behold,  I  take  out  of  thine  hand  the  goblet  of  reeling,  the 
goblet  cup  of  my  fury :  thou  shalt  not  continue  to  drink  it  any 
more.  And  I  put  it  into  the  hand  of  thy  tormentors ;  who  said  to 
thy  soul,  Bow  down,  that  we  may  go  over ;  and  thou  madest  thy 
back  like  the  ground,  and  like  a  public  way  for  those  who  go  over 
it."  In  ver.  17,  Jerusalem  is  regarded  as  a  woman  lying  on 
the  ground  in  the  sleep  of  faintness  and  stupefaction.  She  has 
been  obliged  to  drink,  for  her  punishment,  the  goblet  filled 
with  the  fury  of  the  wrath  of  God,  the  goblet  which  throws  those 
who  drink  it  into  unconscious  reeling ;  and  this  goblet,  which 
is  called  qubbaath  kos  (KinreX\.ov  Trornpiov,  a  genitive  construc 
tion,  though  appositional  in  sense),  for  the  purpose  of  giving 
greater  prominence  to  its  swelling  sides,  she  has  not  only  had 
to  drink,  but  to  drain  quite  clean  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxv.  9,  and  more 
especially  Ezek.  xxiii.  32-34).  Observe  the  plaintive  falling 
of  the  tone  in  shdthlth  mdtslth.  In  this  state  of  unconscious 
stupefaction  was  Jerusalem  lying,  without  any  help  on  the 
part  of  her  children  ;  there  was  not  one  who  came  to  guide  the 


CHAP.  LI.  17-23.  293 

stupefied  one,  or  took  her  by  the  hand  to  lift  her  up.  The 
consciousness  of  the  punishment  that  their  sins  had  deserved, 
and  the  greatness  of  the  sufferings  that  the  punishment  had 
brought,  pressed  so  heavily  upon  all  the  members  of  the  con 
gregation,  that  not  one  of  them  showed  the  requisite  cheerful 
ness  and  strength  to  rise  up  on  her  behalf,  so  as  to  make  her 
fate  at  any  rate  tolerable  to  her,  and  ward  off  the  worst 
calamities.  What  elegiac  music  we  have  here  in  the  deep 
cadences  :  mikkol-bdmm  ydldddh,  mikkol-bdnlm  giddeldh  !  So 
terrible  was  her  calamity,  that  no  one  ventured  to  break  the 
silence  of  the  terror,  or  give  expression  to  their  sympathy. 
Even  the  prophet,  humanly  speaking,  is  obliged  to  exclaim, 
"  How  (mi,  literally  as  who,  as  in  Amos  vii.  2,  5)  should  I  com 
fort  thee!"  He  knew  of  no  equal  or  greater  calamity,  to  which 
he  could  point  Jerusalem,  according  to  the  principle  which 
experience  confirms,  solamen  miseris  socios  habuisse  malorum. 
This  is  the  real  explanation,  according  to  Lam.  ii.  13,  though 
we  must  not  therefore  take  ml  as  an  accusative  =  beim,  as 
Hitzig  does.  The  whole  of  the  group  is  in  the  tone  of  the 
Lamentations  of  Jeremiah.  There  were  two  kinds  of  things 
(i.e.  two  kinds  of  evils  :  misJipdchoth,  as  in  Jer,  xv.  3)  that  had 
happened  to  her  (K"J[J  =  rnj?,  with  which  it  is  used  interchange 
ably  even  in  the  Pentateuch), — namely,  the  devastation  and  ruin 
of  their  city  and  their  land,  famine  and  the  sword  to  her  chil 
dren,  tfieir  inhabitants.  In  ver.  20  this  is  depicted  with  special 
reference  to  the  famine.  Her  children  were  veiled  (ullaph, 
deliquium  patij  lit.  obvelari),  and  lay  in  a  state  of  unconscious 
ness  like  corpses  at  the  corner  of  every  street,  where  this 
horrible  spectacle  presented  itself  on  every  hand.  They  lay 
ketli()  mikhmdr  (rendered  strangely  and  with  very  bad  taste  in 
the  LXX.,  viz.  like  a  half-cooked  turnip  ;  but  given  correctly 
by  Jerome,  sicut  oryx,  as  in  the  LXX.  at  Deut.  xiv.  5,  illaque- 
atus),  i.e.  like  a  netted  antelope  (see  at  Job  xxxix.  9),  i.e.  one 
that  has  been  taken  in  a  hunter's  net  and  lies  there  exhausted, 
after  having  almost  strangled  itself  by  ineffectual  attempts  to 
release  itself.  The  appositional  'W  E>*!?pp,  which  refers  to 
^?>  gives  as  a  quippe  qui  the  reason  for  all  this  suffering.  It 
is  the  punishment  decreed  by  God,  which  has  pierced  their  very 
heart,  and  got  them  completely  in  its  power.  This  clause 
assigning  the  reason,  shows  that  the  expression  "  thy  children  " 


294  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

(Idnayikli)  is  not  to  be  taken  here  in  the  same  manner  as  in 
Lam.  ii.  11,  12,  iv.  3,  4,  viz.  as  referring  to  children  in  distinc 
tion  from  adults  ;  the  subject  is  a  general  one,  as  in  ch.  v.  25. 
With  Idkhen  (therefore,  ver.  21)  the  address  turns  from  the 
picture  of  sufferings  to  the  promise,  in  the  view  of  which  the 
cry  was  uttered,  in  ver.  17,  to  awake  and  arise.  Therefore, 
viz.  because  she  had  endured  the  full  measure  of  God's  wrath, 
she  is  to  hear  what  His  mercy,  that  has  now  begun  to  move, 
purposes  to  do.  The  connecting  form  s7iekhurath  stands  here, 
according  to  Ges.  §  116,  1,  notwithstanding  the  (epexegetical) 
Vav  which  comes  between.  We  may  see  from  ch.  xxix.  9 
how  thoroughly  this  "  drunk,  but  not  with  wine,"  is  in  Isaiah's 
own  style  (from  this  distinction  between  a  higher  and  lower 
sphere  of  related  facts,  compare  ch.  xlvii.  14,  xlviii.  10).  The 
intensive  plural  'adomm  is  only  applied  to  human  lords  in 
other  places  in  the  book  of  Isaiah;  but  in  this  passage,  in  which 
Jerusalem  is  described  as  a  woman,  it  is  used  once  of  Jehovah. 
Ydrlbh  'ammo  is  an  attributive  clause,  signifying  u  who  con 
ducts  the  cause  of  His  people,"  i.e.  their  advocate  or  defender. 
He  takes  the  goblet  of  reeling  and  wrath,  which  Jerusalem  has 
emptied,  for  ever  out  of  her  hand,  and  forces  it  newly  filled 
upon  her  tormentors.  There  is  no  ground  whatever  for  read 
ing  "H^JQ  (from  n^?  to  throw  down,  related  to  HJ,  whence  comes 
jV,  a  precipitate  or  sediment)  in  the  place  of  SJ^to  (pret.  Id.  of 
nj,  (laborare,  dolere),  that  favourite  word  of  the  Lamentations 
of  Jeremiah  (ch.  i.  5,  12,  iii.  32,  cf.  i.  4),  the  tone  of  which  we 
recognise  here  throughout,  as  Lowth,  Ewald,  and  Umbreit 
propose  after  the  Targurn  ?Jv  |jio  farn.  The  words  attributed 
to  the  enemies,  shechl  vena  dbhordh  (from  shdcMh,  the  Jcal  of 
which  only  occurs  here),  are  to  be  understood  figuratively,  as 
in  Ps.  cxxix.  3.  Jerusalem  has  been  obliged  to  let  her  children 
be  degraded  into  the  defenceless  objects  of  despotic  tyranny 
and  caprice,  both  at  home  in  their  own  conquered  country,  and 
abroad  in  exile.  But  the  relation  is  reversed  now.  Jerusalem 
is  delivered,  after  having  been  punished,  and  the  instruments 
of  her  punishment  are  given  up  to  the  punishment  which  their 
pride  deserved. 


CHAP.  LII.  1,  2  295 


FOURTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LII.  1-12. 

JERUSALEM  EXCHANGES  SERVITUDE  FOR  DOMINION,  AND 
IMPRISONMENT  FOR  LIBERTY. 

The  same  call,  which  was  addressed  in  ch.  li.  9  to  the  arm 
of  Jehovah  that  was  then  represented  as  sleeping,  is  here  ad 
dressed  to  Jerusalem,  which  is  represented  as  a  sleeping  woman. 
Yers.  1,  2.  "  Awake,  awake;  clothe  thyself  in  thy  might,  0  Zion ; 
clothe  thyself  in  thy  state  dresses,  0  Jerusalem,  thou  holy  city  : 
for  henceforth  there  will  no  more  enter  into  thee  one  uncircumcised 
and  unclean  I  Shake  thyself  from  the  dust ;  arise,  sit  down,  0 
Jerusalem :  loose  thyself  from  the  chains  of  thy  neck,  0  captive 
daughter  of  Zion!"  Jerusalem  is  lying  upon  the  ground 
stupefied  with  the  wrath  of  God,  and  exhausted  with  grief ; 
but  this  shameful  prostration  and  degradation  will  now  come 
to  an  end.  She  is  to  rise  up  and  put  on  her  might,  which 
has  long  been  broken  down,  and  apparently  has  altogether 
disappeared,  but  which  can  and  must  be  constantly  renewed, 
because  it  rests  upon  the  foundation  of  an  inviolable  promise. 
She  is  to  wake  up  and  recover  her  ancient  power,  and  put  on 
her  state  robes,  i.e.  her  priestly  and  royal  ornaments,  which 
belong  to  her  as  a  "royal  city,"  i.e.  as  the  city  of  Jehovah  and 
His  anointed  one.  For  henceforth  she  will  be  what  she  was 
always  intended  to  be,  and  that  without  any  further  desecra 
tion.  Heathen,  uncircumcised,  and  those  who  were  unclean  in 
heart  and  flesh  (Ezek.  xliv.  9),  had  entered  her  by  force,  and 
desecrated  her  :  heathen,  who  had  no  right  to  enter  the  con 
gregation  of  Jehovah  as  they  were  (Lam.  i.  10).  But  she 
should  no  longer  be  defiled,  not  to  say  conquered,  by  such 
invaders  as  these  (Joel  iv.  17  ;  Nahum  ii.  Ib ;  compare  ver.  7 
with  Nahum  ii.  la).  On  the  construction  non  perget  intralit 
=  intrare,  see  Ges.  §  142,  3,  c.  In  ver.  2  the  idea  of  the  city 
falls  into  the  background,  and  that  of  the  nation  takes  its 
place.  D^n11  "O^  does  not  mean  "captive  people  of  Jerusa 
lem,"  however,  as  Hitzig  supposes,  for  this  would  require  n»3t? 
in  accordance  with  the  personification,  as  in  ver.  26.  The  ren 
dering  supported  by  the  LXX.  is  the  true  one,  "  Sit  down,  O 
Jerusalem ;"  and  this  is  also  the  way  in  which  it  is  accentuated. 


296  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

The  exhortation  is  the  counterpart  of  ch.  xlvii.  1.  Jerusalem 
is  sitting  upon  the  ground  as  a  prisoner,  having  no  seat  to  sit 
upon;  but  this  is  only  that  she  may  be  the  more  highly  exalted; 
— whereas  the  daughter  of  Babylon  is  seated  as  a  queen  upon  a 
throne,  but  only  to  be  the  more  deeply  degraded.  The  former 
is  now  to  shake  herself  free  from  the  dust,  and  to  rise  up  and 
sit  down  (viz.  upon  a  throne,  Targum).  The  captive  daughter 
of  Zion  '(slfbhiyydh,  al^JLokwro^,  Ex.  xii.  29,  an  adjective 
written  first  for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  as  in  ch.  x.  30,  liii.  11) 
is  to  undo  for  herself  (sibi  laxare  according  to  vol.  i.  p.  94 
note,  like  hithnachel,  ch.  xiv.  2,  sibi  possidendo  capere)  the 
chains  of  her  neck  (the  chethib  innsnn,  they  loosen  themselves, 
is  opposed  to  the  beautiful  parallelism)  ;  for  she  who  was  mourn 
ing  in  her  humiliation  is  to  be  restored  to  honour  once  more, 
and  she  who  was  so  shamefully  laden  with  fetters  to  liberty. 

The  reason  for  the  address  is  now  given  in  a  well-sustained 
promise.  Vers.  3-6.  "For  thus  saith  Jehovah,  Ye  have  been 
sold  for  nothing,  and  ye  shall  not  be  redeemed  with  silver.  For 
thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  My  people  went  down  to  Egypt  in 
the  beginning  to  dwell  there  as  guests  ;  and  Asshur  has  oppressed 
it  for  nothing.  And  now,  what  have  I  to  do  here  ?  saith 
Jehovah:  for  my  people  are  taken  away  for  nothing;  their  oppres 
sors  shriek,  saith  Jehovah,  and  my  name  is  continually  blasphemed 
all  the  day.  Therefore  my  people  shall  learn  my  name  ;  there- 
fore,  in  that  day,  that  I  am  He  who  saith,  TJiere  am  I."  Ye 
have  been  sold  (this  is  the  meaning  of  ver.  3) ;  but  this  selling 
is  merely  a  giving  over  to  a  foreign  power,  without  the  slightest 
advantage  accruing  to  Him  who  had  no  other  object  in  view 
than  to  cause  them  to  atone  for  their  sins  (ch.  1.  1),  and  with 
out  any  other  people  taking  their  place,  and  serving  Him  in 
their  stead  as  an  equivalent  for  the  loss  He  sustained.  And 
there  would  be  no  need  of  silver  to  purchase  the  favour  of 
Him  who  had  given  them  up,  since  a  manifestation  of  divine 
power  would  be  all  that  would  be  required  (ch.  xlv.  13).  For 
whether  Jehovah  show  Himself  to  Israel  as  the  Eighteous  One 
or  as  the  Gracious  One,  as  a  Judge  or  as  a  Redeemer,  He  always 
acts  as  the  Absolute  One,  exalted  above  all  earthly  affairs, 
having  no  need  to  receive  anything,  but  able  to  give  every 
thing.  He  receives  no  recompense,  and  gives  none.  Whether 
punishing  or  redeeming,  He  always  guards  His  people's  honour, 


CHAP.  LII.  3-6.  297 

proving  Himself  in  the  one  case  to  be  all-sufficient,  and  in  the 
other  almighty,  but  acting  in  both  cases  freely  from  Himself. 
In  the  train  of  thought  in  vers.  4-6  the  reason  is  given  for 
the  general  statement  in  ver.  3.  Israel  went  down  to  Egypt, 
the  country  of  the  Nile  valley,  with  the  innocent  intention  of 
sojourning,  i.e.  living  as  a  guest  (gur)  there  in  a  foreign  land  ; 
and  yet  (as  we  may  supply  from  the  next  clause,  according 
to  the  law  of  a  self-completing  parallelism)  there  it  fell  into 
the  bondage  of  the  Pharaohs,  who,  whilst  they  did  not  fear 
Jehovah,  but  rather  despised  Him,  were  merely  the  blind 
instruments  of  His  will.  Asshur  then  oppressed  it  b'ephes,  i.e. 
not  "  at  last "  {ultimo  tempore,  as  Havernick  renders  it),  but 
(as  DDK  is  the  synonym  of  r.K  in  ch.  xl.  17,  xli.  12)  "  for 
nothing,"  i.e.  without  having  acquired  any  right  to  it,  but 
rather  serving  in  its  unrighteousness  simplv  as  the  blind  in 
strument  of  the  righteousness  of  Jehovah,  who  through  the 
instrumentality  of  Asshur  put  an  end  first  of  all  to  the  king 
dom  of  Israel,  and  then  to  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  The  two 
references  to  the  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  oppressions  are  ex 
pressed  in  as  brief  terms  as  possible.  But  with  the  words 
"  now  therefore "  the  prophecy  passes  on  in  a  much  more 
copious  strain  to  the  present  oppression  in  Babylon.  Jehovah 
inquires,  Quid  mihi  hie  (What  have  I  to  do  here)  ?  Hitzig 
supposes  poh  (here)  to  refer  to  heaven,  in  the  sense  of,  "  What 
pressing  occupation  have  I  here,  that  all  this  can  take  place 
without  my  interfering?"  But  such  a  question  as  this  would 
be  far  more  appropriate  to  the  Zeus  of  the  Greek  comedy  than 
to  the  Jehovah  of  prophecy.  Knobel,  who  takes  poh  as  refer 
ring  to  the  captivity,  in  accordance  with  the  context,  gives  a 
ridiculous  turn  to  the  question,  viz.,  "  What  do  I  get  here  in 
Babylonia,  from  the  fact  that  my  people  are  carried  off  for 
nothing?  Only  loss."  He  observes  himself  that  there  is  a 
certain  wit  in  the  question.  But  it  would  be  silly  rather  than 
witty,  if,  after  Jehovah  had  just  stated  that  He  had  given  up 
His  people  for  nothing,  the  prophet  represented  Him  as  pre 
paring  to  redeem  it  by  asking,  "  What  have  I  gained  by  it  ?  " 
The  question  can  have  no  other  meaning,  according  to  ch.  xxii. 
16,  than  "  What  have  I  to  do  here  ?"  Jehovah  is  thought  of  as 
present  with  His  people  (cf.  Gen.  xlvi.  4),  and  means  to  inquire 
whether  He  shall  continue  this  penal  condition  of  exile  any 


293  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

longer  (Targum,  Rashi,  Rosen  miiller,  Ewald,  Stier,  etc.).  The 
question  implies  an  intention  to  redeem  Israel,  and  the  reason 
for  this  intention  is  introduced  with  ki.  Israel  is  taken  away 
(ablatus),  viz.  from  its  own  native  home,  chinndm,  i.e.  without 
the  Chaldeans  having  any  human  claim  upon  them  whatever. 
The  words  iW'rp  V^b  (hvti)  are  not  to  be  rendered,  "its 
singers  lament,"  as  Ruetschi  and  Rosenmiiller  maintain,  since 
the  singers  of  Israel  are  called  meshorerim ;  nor  "  its  (Israel's) 
princes  lament,"  as  Vitringa  and  Hitzig  supposed,  since  the 
people  of  the  captivity,  although  they  had  still  their  national 
sdrlm,  had  no  other  mdshelim  than  the  Chaldean  oppressors 
(ch.  xlix.  7,  xiv.  5).  It  is  the  intolerable  tyranny  of  the  oppres 
sors  of  His  people,  that  Jehovah  assigns  in  this  sentence  as 
the  reason  for  His  interposition,  which  cannot  any  longer  be 
deferred.  It  is  true  that  we  do  meet  with  helll  (of  which  we 
have  the  future  here  without  any  syncope  of  the  first  syllable) 
in  other  passages  in  the  sense  of  ululare^  as  a  cry  of  pain ;  but 
just  as  V^n,  i^"J,  HP  signify  &  yelling  utterance  of  either  joy  or 
pain,  so  Jielll  may  also  be  applied  to  the  harsh,  shrieking  of  the 
capricious  tyrants,  like  Lucan's  Icetis  ululare  triwnphis,  and  the 
Syriac  ailel,  which  is  used  to  denote  a  war-cry  and  other  noises 
as  well.  In  connection  with  this  proud  and  haughty  bluster, 
there  is  also  the  practice  of  making  Jehovah's  name  the  butt  of 
their  incessant  blasphemy  :  fKlip  is  a  part,  hithpoel  with  an 
assimilated  n  and  a  pausal  a  for  £,  although  it  might  also  be  a 
passive  hithpoal  (for  the  o*in  the  middle  syllable,  compare  ^9, 
Mai.  i.  7  ;  S>rop,  Esth.  viii.  14).  In  ver.  6  there  follows  the 
closin^  sentence  of  the  whole  train  of  thought:  therefore  His 

t5  O 

people  are  to  get  to  learn  His  name,  i.e.  the  self-manifestation 
of  its  God,  who  is  so  despised  by  the  heathen  ;  therefore  (Idklien 
repeated  with  emphasis,  like  ?J?3  in  ch.  lix.  18,  and  possibly 
mm  in  Ps.  xlv.  9)  in  that  day,  the  day  of  redemption,  (supply 
"it  shall  get  to  learn")  that  "I  am  he  who  saith,  Here  am  I," 
i.e.  that  He  who  has  promised  redemption  is  now  present  as  the 
True  and  Omnipotent  One  to  carry  it  into  effect. 

The  first  two  turns  in  the  prophecy  (vers.  1-2,  3-6)  close 
here.  The  third  turn  (vers.  7-10)  exults  at  the  salvation  which 
is  being  carried  into  effect.  The  prophet  sees  in  spirit,  how 
the  tidings  of  the  redemption,  to  which  the  fall  of  Babylon, 
which  is  equivalent  to  the  dismission  of  the  prisoners,  gives  the 


CHAP.  L1I.  7,  8.  299 

finishing  stroke,  are  carried  over  the  mountains  of  Judah  to 
Jerusalem.  Yer.  7.  "  How  lovely  upon  the  mountains  are  the 
feet  of  them  that  bring  good  tiding*)  that  publish  peace,  that 
bring  tidings  of  good,  that  publish  salvation,  that  say  unto 
Zion,  Thy  God  reignetJi  royally  !  "  The  words  are  addressed  to 
Jerusalem,  consequently  the  mountains  are  those  of  the  Holy 
Land,  and  especially  those  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem  :  mebhasser 
is  collective  (as  in  the  primary  passage,  Nahum  ii.  1 ;  cf.  xli.  27, 
Ps.  Ixviii.  12),  u  whoever  brings  the  glad  tidings  to  Jerusalem." 
The  exclamation  "  how  lovely "  does  not  refer  to  the  lovely 
sound  of  their  footsteps,  but  to  the  lovely  appearance  presented 
by  their  feet,  which  spring  over  the  mountains  with  all  the 
swiftness  of  gazelles  (Song  of  Sol.  ii.  17,  viii.  14).  Their  feet 
look  as  if  they  had  wings,  because  they  are  the  messengers  of 
good  tidings  of  joy.  The  joyful  tidings  that  are  left  indefinite 
in  m'bhasser,  are  afterwards  more  particularly  described  as  a 
proclamation  of  peace,  good,  salvation,  and  also  as  containing 
the  announcement  "  thy  God  reigneth,"  i.e.  has  risen  to  a  right 
royal  sway,  or  seized  upon  the  government  (1J?B  in  an  in 
choative  historical  sense,  as  in  the  theocratic  psalms  which 
commence  with  the  same  watchword,  or  like  e/3ao-i\ev<Te  in 
Rev.  xix.  6,  cf.  xi.  17).  Up  to  this  time,  when  His  people 
were  in  bondage,  He  appeared  to  have  lost  His  dominion  (ch. 
Ixiii.  19);  but  now  He  has  ascended  the  throne  as  a  Redeemer 
with  greater  glory  than  ever  before  (ch.  xxiv.  23).  The 
gospel  of  the  swift-footed  messengers,  therefore,  is  the  gospel  of 
the  kingdom  of  God  that  is  at  hand;  and  the  application  which 
the  apostle  makes  of  this  passage  of  Isaiah  in  Rom.  x.  15,  is 
justified  by  the  fact  that  the  prophet  saw  the  final  and  uni 
versal  redemption  as  though  in  combination  with  the  close  of 
the  captivity. 

How  will  the  prophets  rejoice,  when  they  see  bodily  before 
them  what  they  have  already  seen  from  afar !  Ver.  8. 
"Hark,  thy  watchers!  They  lift  up  the  voice  together;  they 
rejoice :  for  they  see  eye  to  eye,  how  Jehovah  bringeth  Zion  home" 
i>ip  followed  by  a  genitive  formed  an  interjectional  clause,  and 
had  almost  become  an  interjection  itself  (see  Gen.  iv.  10). 
The  prophets  are  here  called  tsophlm,  spies,  as  persons  who 
looked  into  the  distance  as  if  from  a  watch-tower  (specula,  ch. 
xxi.  6,  Hab.  ii.  1),  just  as  in  ch.  Ivi.  10.  It  is  assumed  that 


300  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  people  of  the  captivity  would  still  have  prophets  among 
them  :  in  fact,  the  very  first  word  in  these  prophecies  (ch.  xl. 
])  is  addressed  to  them.  They  who  saw  the  redemption  from 
afar,  and  comforted  the  church  therewith  (different  from 
mebhasser,  the  evangelist  of  the  fulfilment),  lift  up  their  voice 
together  with  rejoicing ;  for  they  see  Jehovah  bringing  back 
Zion,  as  closely  as  one  man  is  to  another  when  he  looks  directly 
into  his  eyes  (Num.  xiv.  14).  3  is  the  same  as  in  the  construc 
tion  3  niO  ;  and  3V.?"  has  the  transitive  meaning  reducere,  resti- 
tuere  (as  in  Ps.  xiv.  7,  cxxvi.  1,  etc.),  which  is  placed  beyond  all 
doubt  by  W3W  in  Ps.  Lxxxv.  5. 

Zion  is  restored,  inasmuch  as  Jehovah  turns  away  her 
misery,  brings  back  her  exiles,  and  causes  the  holy  city  to  rise 
again  from  her  ruins.  Ver.  9.  "Break  out  into  exultation,  sing 
together,  ye  ruins  of  Jerusalem :  for  Jehovah  hath  comforted  His 
people.  He  hath  redeemed  Jerusalem."  Because  the  word  of 
consolation  has  become  an  act  of  consolation,  i.e.  of  redemption, 
the  ruins  of  Jerusalem  are  to  break  out  into  jubilant  shouting 
as  they  rise  again  from  the  ground. 

Jehovah  has  wrought  out  salvation  through  judgment  in  the 
sight  of  all  the  world.  Ver.  10.  "Jehovah  hath  made  bare  His 
holy  arm  before  the  eyes  of  all  nations,  and  all  the  ends  of  the 
earth  see  the  salvation  of  our  God."  As  a  warrior  is  accustomed 
to  make  bare  his  right  arm  up  to  the  shoulder,  that  he  may 
fight  without  encumbrance  (exsertare,  humeros  nudamque  laces- 
sere  pugnan,  as  Statins  says  in  Theb.  i.  413),  so  has  Jehovah 
made  bare  His  holy  arm,  that  arm  in  which  holiness  dwells, 
which  shines  with  holiness,  and  which  acts  in  holiness,  that 
arm  which  has  been  hitherto  concealed  and  therefore  has 
appeared  to  be  powerless,  and  that  in  the  sight  of  the  whole 
world  of  nations ;  so  that  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  come  to  see 
the  reality  of  the  work,  which  this  arm  has  already  accom 
plished  by  showing  itself  in  its  unveiled  glory — in  other  words, 
"  the  salvation  of  our  God." 

This  salvation  in  its  immediate  manifestation  is  the  libera 
tion  of  the  exiles ;  and  on  the  ground  of  what  the  prophet  sees 
in  spirit,  he  exclaims  to  them  (as  in  ch.  xlviii.  20),  in  vers.  11, 
12  :  "  Go  ye  forth,  go  ye  forth,  go  out  from  thence,  lay  hold  of 
no  unclean  thing ;  go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her,  cleanse  your- 
selves,  ye  that  bear  the  vessels  of  Jehovah.  For  ye  shall  not  go 


CHAP.  L1I.  13-LIII.  301 

out  in  confusion,  and  ye  shall  not  go  forth  in  flight :  for  Jehovah 
goeth  before  you,  and  the  God  of  Israel  is  your  rear-guard" 
When  they  go  out  from  thence,  i.e.  from  Babylon,  they  are  not 
to  touch  anything  unclean,  i.e.  they  are  not  to  enrich  them 
selves  with  the  property  of  their  now  subjugated  oppressors,  as 
was  the  case  at  the  exodus  from  Egypt  (Ex.  xii.  36).  It  is  to 
be  a  holy  procession,  at  which  they  are  to  appear  morally  as 
well  as  corporeally  unstained.  But  those  who  bear  the  vessels 
of  Jehovah,  i.e.  the  vessels  of  the  temple,  are  not  only  not  to 
defile  themselves,  but  are  to  purify  themselves  (hibbdru  with 
the  tone  upon  the  last  syllable,  a  regular  imperative  niphal  of 
bdrar).  This  is  an  indirect  prophecy,  and  was  fulfilled  in  the 
fact  that  Cyrus  directed  the  golden  and  silver  vessels,  which 
Nebuchadnezzar  had  brought  to  Babylon,  to  be  restored  to  the 
returning  exiles  as  their  rightful  property  (Ezra  i.  7-11). 
It  would  thus  be  possible  for  them  to  put  themselves  into  the 
right  attitude  for  their  departure,  since  it  would  not  take  place 
in  precipitous  haste  (b'chippdzori),  as  the  departure  from  Egypt 
did  (Deut.  xvi.  3,  cf.  Ex.  xii.  39),  nor  like  a  flight,  but  they 
would  go  forth  under  the  guidance  of  Jehovah.  DDSDKD  (with 
the  e  changed  into  the  original  £)  does  not  mean,  "  He  bringeth 
you,  the  scattered  ones,  together,"  but  according  to  Num.x.  25, 
Josh.  vi.  9,  13,  "He  closes  your  procession," — He  not  only  goes 
before  you  to  lead  you,  but  also  behind  you,  to  protect  you  (as 
in  Ex.  xiv.  19).  For  the  me'asseph,  or  the  rear-guard  of  an  army, 
is  its  keystone,  and  has  to  preserve  the  compactness  of  the  whole. 
The  division  of  the  chapters  generally  coincides  with  the 
several  prophetic  addresses.  But  here  it  needs  emendation. 
Most  of  the  commentators  are  agreed  that  the  words  "  Behold 
my  servant,"  etc.  (Jdnneh  yaskil  'abhdl)  commence  a  new  sec 
tion,  like  hen  'abhdi  (behold  my  servant)  in  ch.  xlii.  1. 

FIFTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LII.  13-Lin. 

GOLGOTHA  AND  SHEBLIMINI,1  OR  THE  EXALTATION  OF  THE 
SERVANT  OF  JEHOVAH  OUT  OF  DEEP  DEGRADATION. 

Victor  F.  Oehler  has  recently  attempted  to  establish  an 
opinion,  to  which  no  one  had  given  expression  before,  viz.  that 
jy :  "  sit  tkou  at  my  right  hand." — TB. 


302  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  transition  from  the  collective  idea  of  the  servant  of  God  to 
the  "  Servant  of  God"  as  an  individual  takes  place  in  ver.  14, 
where  Israel  is  addressed  in  the  first  clause,  and  the  Messiah 
referred  to  in  the  second.  But  our  view  is  a  totally  different 
one.  In  every  case,  thus  far,  in  which  another  than  Jehovah 
has  spoken,  it  has  been  the  one  "  Servant  of  Jehovah "  who 
was  the  centre  of  the  circle,  the  heart  and  head  of  the  body  of 
Israel.  And  after  having  heard  him  speaking  himself  in  ch. 
1.  4-9,  xlix.  1-6,  xlviii.  16&,  and  Jehovah  speaking  concerning 
him  in  ch.  1.  10,  11,  xlix.  7-9,  xlii.  1-7,  it  does  not  come  upon 
us  at  all  unexpectedly,  that  Jehovah  begins  to  speak  of  him 
again  here.  Nor  does  it  surprise  us,  that  the  prophet  should 
pass  in  so  abrupt  a  manner,  from  the  exaltation  of  the  church 
to  the  exaltation  of  the  servant  of  Jehovah.  If  we  look  back, 
we  find  that  he  has  not  omitted  anything,  that  could  preclude 
the  possibility  of  our  confounding  this  servant  of  Jehovah  with 
Israel  itself.  For  although  Israel  itself,  in  its  relation  to 
Jehovah,  is  spoken  of  frequently  enough  as  "  my  servant" 
and  "his  servant;"  yet  the  passage  before  us  is  preceded  by 
the  same  representation  of  Israel  the  community  as  a  female, 
which  has  been  sustained  from  ch.  li.  17  onwards;  and  although 
in  ch.  li.  1-16  the  national  idea  of  the  "servant  of  Jehovah" 
is  expressed  in  the  most  definite  manner  possible  (more  espe 
cially  in  ch.  li.  7),  the  name  employed  is  not  that  which  the 
personal  "  Servant,"  whom  no  one  can  possibly  mistake  in  ch. 
1.  4—9,  already  bears  in  ch.  1.  10.  It  is  this  personal  Servant 
who  is  spoken  of  here.  It  is  his  portrait  that  is  here  filled  out 
and  completed,  and  that  as  a  side-piece  to  the  liberation  and 
restoration  of  Zion- Jerusalem  as  depicted  just  before.  It  is  the 
servant  of  Jehovah  who  conducts  His  people  through  suffer 
ing  to  glory.  It  is  in  his  heart,  as  we  now  most  clearly  discern, 
that  the  changing  of  Jehovah's  wrath  into  love  takes  place. 
He  suffers  with  his  people,  suffers  for  them,  suffers  in  their 
stead ;  because  he  has  not  brought  the  suffering  upon  himself, 
like  the  great  mass  of  the  people,  through  sin,  but  has  volun 
tarily  submitted  to  it  as  the  guiltless  and  righteous  one,  in 
order  that  he  might  entirely  remove  it,  even  to  its  roots,  i.e.  the 
guilt  and  the  sin  which  occasioned  it,  by  his  own  sacrifice  of 
himself.  Thus  is  Israel's  glory  concentrated  in  him  like  a 
sun.  The  glory  of  Israel  has  his  glory  for  a  focus.  He  is  the 


CHAP.  LI1.  13-LIII.  303 

seed-corn,  which  is  buried  in  the  earth,  to  bring  forth  much 
fruit ;  and  this  "  much  fruit"  is  the  glory  of  Israel  and  the  sal 
vation  of  the  nations. 

"  Christian  scholars,"  says  Abravanel,  "  interpret  this  pro 
phecy  as  referring  to  that  man  who  was  crucified  in  Jerusalem 
about  the  end  of  the  second  temple,  and  who,  according  to 
their  view,  was  the  Son  of  God,  who  became  man  in  the  womb 
of  the  Virgin.  But  Jonathan  ben  Uziel  explains  it  as  relating 
to  the  Messiah  who  has  yet  to  come ;  and  this  is  the  opinion  of 
the  ancients  in  many  of  their  Midrashim."  So  that  even  the 
synagogue  could  not  help  acknowledging  that  the  passage  of 
the  Messiah  through  death  to  glory  is  predicted  here.1  And 
what  interest  could  we  have  in  understanding  by  the  "  servant 
of  Jehovah,"  in  this  section,  the  nation  of  Israel  generally,  as 
many  Rabbis,  both  circumcised  and  uncircumcised,  have  done  ; 
whereas  he  is  that  One  Israelite  in  whom  Jehovah  has  effected 
the  redemption  of  both  Israel  and  the  heathen,  even  through 
the  medium  of  Israel  itself  1  Or  what  interest  could  we  have 
in  persuading  ourselves  that  Jeremiah,  or  some  unknown 
martyr-prophet,  is  intended,  as  Grotius,  Bunsen,  and  Ewald 
suppose ;  whereas  it  is  rather  the  great  unknown  and  misinter 
preted  One,  whom  Jewish  arid  Judaizing  exegesis  still  con 
tinues  to  misinterpret  in  its  exposition  of  the  figure  before  us, 
just  as  His  contemporaries  misinterpreted  Him  when  He  actu 
ally  appeared  among  them.  How  many  are  there  whose  eyes 
have  been  opened  when  reading  this  "  golden  passional  of  the 
Old  Testament  evangelist,"  as  Polycarp  the  Lysian  calls  it ! 
In  how  many  an  Israelite  has  it  melted  the  crust  of  his  heart ! 
It  looks  as  if  it  had  been  written  beneath  the  cross  upon  Gol 
gotha,  and  was  illuminated  by  the  heavenly  brightness  of  the 
full  *yOv  IV.  It  is  the  unravelling  of  Ps.  xxii.  and  Ps.  ex. 
It  forms  the  outer  centre  of  this  wonderful  book  of  consolation 
(ch.  xl.-lxvi.),  and  is  the  most  central,  the  deepest,  and  the 
loftiest  thing  that  the  Old  Testament  prophecy,  outstripping 
itself,  has  ever  achieved. 

And  yet  it  does  not  belie  its  Old  Testament  origin.  For 
the  prophet  sees  the  advent  of  "  the  servant  of  Jehovah,"  and 

1  See  A.  M.  M 'Caul's  tract  on  Isa.  liii.,  and  the  "  Old  Jewish  Midrasli 
of  the  Suffering  Redeemer "  in  our  Mag.  Saat  auf  Hoffnung,  i.  3,  pp. 
87-39. 


304  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

His  rejection  by  His  own  people,  bound  up  as  it  were  with  the 
duration  of  the  captivity.  It  is  at  the  close  of  the  captivity 
that  he  beholds  the  exaltation  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  who 
has  died  and  been  buried,  and  yet  lives  for  ever  ;  and  writh  His 
exaltation  the  inward  and  outward  return  of  Israel,  and  the 
restoration  of  Jerusalem  in  its  renewed  and  final  glory  ;  and 
with  this  restoration  of  the  people  of  God,  the  conversion  of  the 
nations  and  the  salvation  of  mankind.1 

In  this  sense  there  follows  here,  immediately  after  the  cry, 
"  Go  ye  out  from  Babylon,"  an  index  pointing  from  the  suffer 
ing  of  the  Servant  to  His  reward  in  glory.  Ch.  Hi.  13.  "  Behold, 
my  servant  will  act  wisely  ;  he  will  come  forth,  and  arise,  and  be 
very  liigli^  Even  apart  from  ch.  xlii.  1,  Idnneh  (Jien)  is  a 
favourite  commencement  with  Isaiah  ;  and  this  very  first  verse 
contains,  according  to  Isaiah's  custom,  a  brief,  condensed  ex 
planation  of  the  theme.  The  exaltation  of  the  Servant  of 
Jehovah  is  the  theme  of  the  prophecy  which  follows.  In  ver. 
13a  the  way  is  shown,  by  which  He  reaches  His  greatness  ;  in 
ver.  136  the  increasing  greatness  itself.  '"SKVi  by  itself  means 
simply  to  gain,  prove,  or  act  with  intelligence  (LXX. 


1  I  cannot  refrain  from  repeating  here  a  passage  taken  from  my  closing 
remarks  on  Drechsler  (iii.  376),  simply  because  I  cannot  find  any  better 
way  of  expressing  what  I  have  to  say  upon  this  point  :  "  When  Isaiah 
sang  his  dying  song  on  the  border  line  of  the  reigns  of  Hezekiah  and 
Manasseh,  all  the  coming  sufferings  of  his  people  appeared  to  be  concen 
trated  in  the  one  view  of  the  captivity  in  Babylon.  And  it  was  in  the 
midst  of  this  period  of  suffering,  which  formed  the  extreme  limit  of  his 
range  of  vision,  that  he  saw  the  redemption  of  Israel  beginning  to  appear. 
He  saw  the  servant  of  Jehovah  working  among  the  captives,  just  as  at  His 
coming  He  actually  did  appear  in  the  midst  of  His  people,  when  they  were  in 
bondage  to  the  imperial  power  of  the  world  ;  he  also  saw  the  Servant  of 
Jehovah  passing  through  death  to  glory,  and  Israel  ascending  with  Him, 
as  in  fact  the  ascension  of  Jesus  was  the  completion  of  the  redemption  of 
Israel  ;  and  it  was  only  the  unbelief  of  the  great  mass  of  Israel  which  occa 
sioned  the  fact,  that  this  redemption  was  at  first  merely  the  spiritual 
redemption  of  believers  out  of  the  nation,  and  not  the  spiritual  and 
physical  redemption  of  the  nation  as  a  whole.  So  far,  therefore,  a  broad 
gap  \vas  made  in  point  of  time  between  the  exaltation  of  the  servant  of 
Jehovah  and  the  glorious  restoration  of  Israel  which  is  still  in  the  future  ; 
and  this  gap  was  hidden  from  the  prophet's  view.  It  is  only  the  coming 
of  Christ  in  glory  which  will  fully  realize  what  was  not  yet  realized  when 
He  entered  into  glory  after  the  sufferings  of  death,  on  account  of  Israel's 
unbelief." 


CHAP.  LII.  13.  305 

and  then,  since  intelligent  action,  as  a  rule,  is  also  effective,  it 
is  used  as  synonymous  with  Tr3??,  "*Tp"?,  to  act  with  result,  i.e. 
so  as  to  be  successful.  Hence  it  is  only  by  way  of  sequence 
that  the  idea  of  "  prosperously"  is  connected  with  that  of 
"  prudently"  (e.g.  Josh.  i.  8  ;  Jer.  x.  21).  The  word  is  never 
applied  to  such  prosperity  as  a  man  enjoys  without  any  effort  of 
his  own,  but  only  to  such  as  he  attains  by  successful  action, 
i.e.  by  such  action  as  is  appropriate  to  the  desired  and  desirable 
result.  In  Jer.  xxiii.  2,  where  hisfal  is  one  feature  in  the 
picture  of  the  dominion  exercised  by  the  Messiah,  the  idea  of 
intelligent  action  is  quite  sufficient,  without  any  further  sub 
ordinate  meaning.  But  here,  where  the  exaltation  is  derived 
from  S*3fe*  as  the  immediate  consequence,  without  any  inter 
vening  p'^JJ,  there  is  naturally  associated  with  the  idea  of  wise 
action,  i.e.  of  action  suited  to  the  great  object  of  his  call,  that 
of  effective  execution  or  abundant  success,  which  has  as  its 
natural  sequel  an  ever-increasing  exaltation.  Kosenmliller 
observes,  in  ver.  13&,  "  There  is  no  need  to  discuss,  or  even  to 
inquire,  what  precise  difference  there  is  in  the  meaning  of  the 
separate  words;"  but  this  is  a  very  superficial  remark.  If  we 
consider  that  rum  signifies  not  only  to  be  high,  but  to  rise  up 
(Prov.  xi.  11)  and  become  exalted,  and  also  to  become  manifest 
as  exalted  (Ps.  xxi.  14),  and  that  KtW,  according  to  the  imme 
diate  and  original  reflective  meaning  of  the  niphal,  signifies  to 
raise  one's  self,  whereas  gdbhah  expresses  merely  the  condition, 
without  the  subordinate  idea  of  activity,  we  obtain  this  chain 
of  thought :  he  will  rise  up,  he  will  raise  himself  still  higher, 
he  will  stand  on  high.  The  three  verbs  (of  which  the  two 
perfects  are  defined  by  the  previous  future)  consequently  de 
note  the  commencement,  the  continuation,  and  the  result  or 
climax  of  the  exaltation  ;  and  Stier  is  not  wrong  in  recalling 
to  mind  the  three  principal  steps  of  the  exaltatio  in  the  his 
torical  fulfilment,  viz.  the  resurrection,  the  ascension,  and  the 
sitting  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  The  addition  of  the 
word  1NO  shows  very  clearly  that  FOJl  is  intended  to  be  taken 
as  the  final  result :  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  rising  from  stage 
to  stage,  reaches  at  last  an  immeasurable  height,  that  towers 
above  everything  besides  (comp.  vjrepvtywcre  in  Phil.  ii.  9,  with 
vtycoOek  in  Acts  ii.  33,  and  for  the  nature  of  the  virep 
Eph.  i.  20-23). 

VOL.  ii.  u 


306  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

The  prophecy  concerning  him  passes  now  Into  an  address 
to  him,  as  in  ch.  xlix.  8  (cf.  ver.  7),  which  sinks  again  imme 
diately  into  an  objective  tone.  Vers.  14,  15.  "  Just  as  many 
were  astonished  at  thee :  so  disfigured,  Jiis  appearance  was  not 
human,  and  his  form  not  like  that  of  the  children  of  men  :  so 
will  he  make  many  nations  to  tremble;  kings  will  shut  their  mouth 
at  him :  for  they  see  what  has  not  been  told  them,  and  discover 
ivhat  they  have  not  heard."  Both  Oehler  and  Hahn  suppose 
that  the  first  clause  is  addressed  to  Israel,  and  that  it  is  here 
pointed  away  from  its  own  degradation,  which  excited  such 
astonishment,  to  the  depth  of  suffering  endured  by  the  One 
man.  Halm's  principal  reason,  which  Oehler  adopts,  is  the 
sudden  leap  that  we  should  otherwise  have  to  assume  from  the 
second  person  to  the  third,  —  an  example  of  "  negligence " 
which  we  can  hardly  impute  to  the  prophet.  But  a  single 
glance  at  ch.  xlii.  20  and  i.  29  is  sufficient  to  show  how  little 
force  there  is  in  this  principal  argument.  We  should  no  doubt 
expect  B^vV  or  ^vV  after  what  has  gone  before,  if  the  nation 
were  addressed ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  end  a  comparison 
between  the  sufferings  of  the  nation  and  those  of  the  One  man, 
which  merely  places  the  sufferings  of  the  twro  in  an  external 
relation  to  one  another,  could  be  intended  to  answer ;  whilst 
the  second  ken  (so),  which  evidently  introduces  an  antithesis, 
is  altogether  unexplained.  The  words  are  certainly  addressed 
to  the  servant  of  Jehovah  ;  and  the  meaning  of  the  sicut  (just 
as)  in  ver.  14,  and  of  the  sic  (so)  which  introduces  the  prin 
cipal  sentence  in  ver.  15,  is,  that  just  as  His  degradation  was 
the  deepest  degradation  possible,  so  His  glorification  would  be 
of  the  loftiest  kind.  The  height  of  the  exaltation  is  held  up 
as  presenting  a  perfect  contrast  to  the  depth  of  the  degrada 
tion.  The  words,  "  so  distorted  was  his  face,  more  than  that 
of  a  man,"  form,  as  has  been  almost  unanimously  admitted 
since  the  time  of  Vitringa,  a  parenthesis,  containing  the  reason 
for  the  astonishment  excited  by  the  servant  of  Jehovah.  Stier 
is  wrong  in  supposing  that  this  first  "  so"  (ken)  refers  to  ka^asher 
(just  as),  in  the  sense  of  "  If  men  were  astonished  at  thee, 
there  was  ground  for  the  astonishment."  Ver.  15  would  not 
stand  out  as  an  antithesis,  if  we  adopted  this  explanation  ; 
moreover,  the  thought  that  the  fact  corresponded  to  the  im 
pression  which  men  received,  is  a  very  tame  a] id  unnecessary 


CHAP.  LII.  14,  15.  307 

one ;  and  the  change  of  persons  in  sentences  related  to  one 
another  in  this  manner  is  intolerably  harsh ;  whereas,  with 
our  view  of  the  relation  in  which  the  sentences  stand  to  one 
another,  the  parenthesis  prepares  the  way  for  the  sudden  change 
from  a  direct  address  to  a  declaration.  Hitherto  many  had 
been  astonished  at  the  servant  of  Jehovah  :  shame  m,  to  be 
desolate  or  waste,  to  be  thrown  by  anything  into  a  desolate  or 
benumbed  condition,  to  be  startled,  confused,  as  it  were  petri 
fied,  by  paralyzing  astonishment  (Lev.  xxvi.  32  ;  Ezek.  xxvi. 
16).  To  such  a  degree  (ken,  adeo)  was  his  appearance  mish- 
cliath  me'ishj  and  his  form  mibbene  'dddm  (sc.  mishchath).  We 
might  take  mishchath  as  the  construct  of  mishchath,  as  Hitzig 
does,  since  this  connecting  form  is  sometimes  used  (e.g.  xxxiii.  6) 
even  without  any  genitive  relation  ;  but  it  may  also  be  the 
absolute,  syncopated  from  rinn^b  =  nrwp  (Havernick  and 
Stier),  like  moshchath  in  Mai.  i.  14?  or,  what  we  prefer,  after 
the  form  mirmas  (ch.  x.  6),  with  the  original  a,  without  the 
usual  lengthening  (Ewald,  §  160,  c,  Anm.  4).  His  appearance 
and  his  form  were  altogether  distortion  (stronger  than  moshchdth, 
distorted),  away  from  men,  out  beyond  men,  i.e.  a  distortion  that 
destroys  all  likeness  to  a  man  j1  'ish  does  not  signify  man  as 
distinguished  from  woman  here,  but  a  human  being  generally. 
The  antithesis  follows  in  ver.  15 :  viz.  the  state  of  glory  in  which 
this  form  of  wretchedness  has  passed  away.  As  a  parallel 
to  the  "  many"  in  ver.  14,  we  have  here  "  many  nations,"  indi 
cating  the  excess  of  the  glory  by  the  greater  fulness  of  the 
expression  ;  and  as  a  parallel  to  "  were  astonished  at  thee," 
"  he  shall  make  to  tremble"  (yazzeli),  in  other  words,  the  effect 
which  He  produces  by  what  He  does  to  the  effect  produced  by 
what  He  suffers.  The  hiphil  hizzdh  generally  means  to  spirt 
or  sprinkle  (adspergere),  and  is  applied  to  the  sprinkling  of  the 

1  The  church  before  the  time  of  Constantine  pictured  to  itself  the 
Lord,  as  He  walked  on  earth,  as  repulsive  in  His  appearance ;  whereas  the 
church  after  Constantine  pictured  Him  as  having  quite  an  ideal  beauty 
(see  my  tract,  Jesus  and  Hillel,  1865,  p.  4).  They  were  both  right :  un 
attractive  in  appearance,  though  not  deformed,  He  no  doubt  was  in  the 
days  of  His  flesh ;  but  He  is  ideally  beautiful  in  His  glorification.  The 
body  in  which  He  was  born  of  Mary  was  no  royal  form,  though  faith  could 
see  the  doxa  shining  through.  It  was  no  royal  form,  for  the  suffering  of 
death  was  the  portion  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  even  from  His  mother's  worn)) ; 
but  the  glorified  One  is  infinitely  exalted  above  all  the  ideal  of  art. 


308  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

blood  with  the  finger,  more  especially  upon  the  capporeth  and 
altar  of  incense  on  the  day  of  atonement  (differing  in  this  re 
spect  from  zdraq,  the  swinging  of  the  blood  out  of  a  bowl), 
also  to  the  sprinkling  of  the  water  of  purification  upon  a  leper 
with  the  bunch  of  hyssop  (Lev.  xiv.  7),  and  of  the  ashes  of  the 
red  heifer  upon  those  defiled  through  touching  a  corpse  (Num. 
xix.  18)  ;  in  fact,  generally,  to  sprinkling  for  the  purpose  of 
expiation  and  sanctification.  And  Vitringa,  Hengstenberg, 
and  others,  accordingly  follow  the  Syriac  and  Vulgate  in  adopt 
ing  the  rendering  adsperget  (he  will  sprinkle).  They  have 
the  usage  of  the  language  in  their  favour ;  and  this  explana 
tion  also  commends  itself  from  a  reference  to  W  in  ch.  liii.  4, 
and  JH3  in  ch.  liii.  8  (words  which  are  generally  used  of  leprosy, 
and  on  account  of  which  the  suffering  Messiah  is  called  in 
b.  Sanhedrin  986  by  an  emblematical  name  adopted  from  the 
old  synagogue,  "the  leper  of  Rabbi's  school"),  since  it  yields 
the  significant  antithesis,  that  he  who  was  himself  regarded  as 
unclean,  even  as  a  second  Job,  would  sprinkle  and  sanctify  whole 
nations,  and  thus  abolish  the  wall  of  partition  between  Israel 
and  the  heathen,  and  gather  together  into  one  holy  church 
with  Israel  those  who  had  hitherto  been  pronounced  "unclean" 
(ch.  Hi.  1).  But,  on  the  other  hand,  this  explanation  has  so  far 
the  usage  of  the  language  against  it,  that  liizzdli  is  never  con 
strued  with  the  accusative  of  the  person  or  thing  sprinkled  (like 
adspergere  aliqua  re  aliquem ;  since  'eth  in  Lev.  iv.  6,  17  is  a 
preposition  like  ral9  9el  elsewhere)  ;  moreover,  there  would  be 
something  very  abrupt  in  this  sudden  representation  of  the 
servant  as  a  priest.  Such  explanations  as  "  he  will  scatter 
asunder"  (disperget,  Targum,  etc.),  or  "he  will  spill"  (sc.  their 
blood),  are  altogether  out  of  the  question  ;  such  thoughts  as 
these  would  be  quite  out  of  place  in  a  spiritual  picture  of  sal 
vation  and  glory,  painted  upon  the  dark  ground  we  have  here. 
The  verb  ndzdh  signified  primarily  to  leap  or  spring ;  hence 
hizzdhj  with  the  causative  meaning  to  sprinkle.  The  kal  com 
bines  the  intransitive  and  transitive  meanings  of  the  word 
"spirt,"  and  is  used  in  the  former  sense  in  ch.  Ixiii.  3,  to 
signify  the  springing  up  or  sprouting  up  of  any  liquid  scattered 
about  in  drops.  The  Arabic  nazd  (see  Ges.  Thes.)  shows  that 
this  verb  may  also  be  applied  to  the  springing  or  leaping  of 
living  beings,  caused  by  excess  of  emotion.  And  accordingly 


CHAP.  LIII.  1.  309 

we  follow  the  majority  of  the  commentators  in  adopting  the 
rendering  e.vsilire  faciet.  The  fact  that  whole  nations  are  the 
object,  and  not  merely  individuals,  proves  nothing  to  the  con 
trary,  as  Hab.  iii.  6  clearly  shows.  The  reference  is  to  their 
leaping  up  in  amazement  (LXX.  Oav/jLaaovrai)  ;  and  the  verb 
denotes  less  an  external  than  an  internal  movement.  They 
will  tremble  with  astonishment  within  themselves  (cf.  pdchadu 
verdgezu  in  Jer.  xxxiii.  9),  being  electrified,  as  it  were,  by  the 
surprising  change  that  has  taken  place  in  the  servant  of  Je 
hovah.  The  reason  why  kings  "  shut  their  mouths  at  him"  is 
expressly  stated,  viz.  what  was  never  related  they  see,  and  what 
was  never  heard  of  they  perceive  ;  i.e.  it  was  something  going 
far  beyond  all  that  had  ever  been  reported  to  them  outside  the 
world  of  nations,  or  come  to  their  knowledge  within  it.  Hitzig's 
explanation,  that  they  do  not  trust  themselves  to  begin  to  speak 
before  him  or  along  with  him,  gives  too  feeble  a  sense,  and 
would  lead  us  rather  to  expect  VjBp  than  VyV.  The  shutting  of 
the  mouth  is  the  involuntary  effect  of  the  overpowering  impres 
sion,  or  the  manifestation  of  their  extreme  amazement  at  one 
so  suddenly  brought  out  of  the  depths,  and  lifted  up  to  so  great 
a  height.  The  strongest  emotion  is  that  which  remains  shut 
up  within  ourselves,  because,  from  its  very  intensity,  it  throws 
the  whole  nature  into  a  suffering  state,  and  drowns  all  reflec 
tion  in  emotion  (cf.  yaclidrlsh  in  Zeph.  iii.  17).  The  parallel 
in  ch.  xlix.  7  is  not  opposed  to  this  ;  the  speechless  astonish 
ment,  at  what  is  unheard  and  inconceivable,  changes  into  ador 
ing  homage,  as  soon  as  they  have  become  to  some  extent 
familiar  with  it.  The  first  turn  in  the  prophecy  closes  here  : 
The  servant  of  Jehovah,  whose  inhuman  sufferings  excite  such 
astonishment,  is  exalted  on  high  ;  so  that  from  utter  amazement 
the  nations  tremble,  and  their  kings  are  struck  dumb. 

But,  says  the  second  turn  in  ch.  liii.  1-3,  the  man  of  sor 
rows  was  despised  among  us,  and  the  prophecy  as  to  his  future 
was  not  believed.  We  hear  the  first  lamentation  (the  question 
is,  From  whose  mouth  does  it  come  ?)  in  ver.  1  :  "  Who  hath 
believed  our  preaching ;  and  the  arm  of  Jehovah,  over  whom  has 
it  been  revealed?"  "I  was  formerly  mistaken,"  says  Hofmann 
(Schriftbeweis,  ii.  1,  159,  160),  "as  to  the  connection  between 
ch.  liii.  1  and  ch.  Hi.  13-15,  and  thought  that  the  Gentiles 
were  the  speakers  in  the  former,  simply  because  it  was  to  them 


310  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tli at  the  latter  referred.  But  I  see  now  that  I  was  in  error. 
It  is  affirmed  of  the  heathen,  that  they  have  never  heard  before 
the  things  which  they  now  see  with  their  eyes.  Consequently 
it  cannot  be  they  who  exclaim,  or  in  whose  name  the  inquiry  is 
made,  Who  hath  believed  our  preaching?"  Moreover,  it  can 
not  be  they,  both  because  the  redemption  itself  and  the  exalta 
tion  of  the  Mediator  of  the  redemption  are  made  known  to 
them  from  the  midst  of  Israel  as  already  accomplished  facts, 
and  also  because  according  to  ch.  lii.  15  (cf.  ch.  xlix.  7,  xlii.  4, 
li.  5)  they  hear  the  things  unheard  of  before,  with  amazement 
which  passes  into  reverent  awe,  as  the  satisfaction  of  their  own 
desires,  in  other  words,  with  the  glad  obedience  of  faith.  And 
we  may  also  add,  that  the  expression  in  ch.  liii.  8,  "  for  the 
transgression  of  my  people,"  would  be  quite  out  of  place  in  the 
mouths  of  Gentiles,  and  that,  as  a  general  rule,  words  attri 
buted  to  Gentiles  ought  to  be  expressly  introduced  as  theirs. 
Whenever  we  find  a  "  we  "  introduced  abruptly  in  the  midst  of 
a  prophecy,  it  is  always  Israel  that  speaks,  including  the  pro 
phet  himself  (ch.  xlii.  24,  Ixiv.  5,  xvi.  6,  xxiv.  16,  etc.).  Hof- 
mann  therefore  very  properly  rejects  the  view  advocated  by 
many,  from  Calvin  down  to  Stier  and  Oehler,  who  suppose 
that  it  is  the  prophet  himself  who  is  speaking  here  in  connec 
tion  with  the  other  heralds  of  salvation  ;  "  for,"  as  he  says, 
"  how  does  all  the  rest  which  is  expressed  in  the  1st  pers. 
plural  tally  with  such  a  supposition  ?  "  It  it  is  really  Israel, 
which  confesses  in  vers.  2  sqq.  how  blind  it  has  been  to  the 
calling  of  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  which  was  formerly  hidden 
in  humiliation  but  is  now  manifested  in  glory ;  the  mournful 
inquiry  in  ver.  1  must  also  proceed  from  the  mouth  of  Israel. 
The  references  to  this  passage  in  John  xii.  37,  38,  and  Rom. 
x.  1 6,  do  not  compel  us  to  assign  ver.  1  to  the  prophet  and  his 
comrades  in  office.  It  is  Israel  that  speaks  even  in  ver.  1.  The 
nation,  which  acknowledges  with  penitence  how  shamefully  it 
has  mistaken  its  own  Saviour,  laments  that  it  has  put  no  faith 
in  the  tidings  of  the  lofty  and  glorious  calling  of  the  servant  of 
God.  We  need  not  assume,  therefore,  that  there  is  any  change 
of  subject  in  ver.  2  ;  and  (what  is  still  more  decisive)  it  is 
necessary  that  we  should  not,  if  we  would  keep  up  any  close 
connection  between  ch.  liii.  1  and  ch.  lii.  15.  The  heathen 
receive  with  faith  tidings  of  things  which  had  never  been  heard 


CHAP.  LIII.  L  311 

of  before ;  whereas  Israel  has  to  lament  that  It  put  no  faith  in 
the  tidings  which  it  had  heard  long,  long  before,  not  only  with 
reference  to  the  person  and  work  of  the  servant  of  God,  but 
with  regard  to  his  lowly  origin  and  glorious  end.  njftOJ?  (a 
noun  after  the  form  HW],  njjttS?,  a  different  form  from  that  of 
H;H3,  which  is  derived  from  the  adjective  /i|)  signifies  the  hear 
say  (a/cotf),  i.e.  the  tidings,  more  especially  the  prophetic  an 
nouncement  in  ch.  xxviii.  9 ;  and  wriyp^  according  to  the  primary 
subjective  force  of  the  suffix,  is  equivalent  to  «y»K>  1K'«  nyiDW 
(cf.  Jer.  xlix.  14),  i.e.  the  hearsay  which  we  have  heard. 
There  were  some,  indeed,  who  did  not  refuse  to  believe  the 
tidings  which  Israel  heard  :  a\V  ov  Trdvres  vTrrf/covcrav  TCO 
€vayye\iq>  (Rom.  x.  16) ;  the  number  of  the  believers  was 
vanishingly  small,  when  compared  with  the  unbelieving  mass  of 
the  nation.  And  it  is  the  latter,  or  rather  its  remnant  which 
had  eventually  come  to  its  senses,  that  here  inquires,  Who  hath 
believed  our  preaching,  i.e.  the  preaching  that  was  common 
among  us  ?  The  substance  of  the  preaching,  which  had  not 
been  believed,  was  the  exaltation  of  the  servant  of  God  from  a 
state  of  deep  degradation.  This  is  a  work  performed  by  the 
"  arm  of  Jehovah,"  namely,  His  holy  arm  that  has  been  made 
bare,  and  that  now  effects  the  salvation  of  His  people,  and  of 
the  nations  generally,  according  to  His  own  counsel  (ch.  lii.  10, 
li.  5).  This  arm  works  down  from  on  high,  exalted  far  above 
all  created  things ;  men  have  it  above  them,  and  it  is  made 
manifest  to  those  who  recognise  it  in  what  is  passing  around 
them.  Who,  asks  Israel,  has  had  any  faith  in  the  coming 
exaltation  of  the  servant  of  God?  who  has  recognised  the  omni 
potence  of  Jehovah,  which  has  set  itself  to  effect  his  exaltation? 
All  that  follows  is  the  confession  of  the  Israel  of  the  last  tin* as, 
to  which  this  question  is  the  introduction.  We  must  not  over 
look  the  fact  that  this  golden  "passional"  is  also  one  of  the 
greatest  prophecies  of  the  future  conversion  of  the  nation, 
which  has  rejected  the  servant  of  God,  and  allowed  the  Gentiles 
to  be  the  first  to  recognise  him.  At  last,  though  very  late,  it 
will  feel  remorse.  And  when  this  shall  once  take  place,  then 
and  not  till  then  will  this  chapter — which,  to  use  an  old  epithet, 
will  ever  be  carnijicina  Rabbinorum — receive  its  complete  his 
torical  fulfilment. 

The  confession,  which   follows,  grows   out   of   the  great 


312  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

lamentation  depicted  by  Zechariah  in  Zech.  xii.  11  sqq.  Yer. 
2.  "  And  he  sprang  up  like  a  layer-shoot  before  Him,  and  like  a 
root-sprout  out  of  dry  ground:  he  had  no  form,  and  no  beauty;  and 
we  looked,  and  there  was  no  look,  such  that  we  could  have  found 
pleasure  in  him"  Yer.  2,  as  a  sequel  to  ver.  16,  looks  back  to  the 
past,  and  describes  how  the  arm  of  Jehovah  manifested  itself  in 
the  servant's  course  of  life  from  the  very  beginning,  though  im 
perceptibly  at  first,  and  unobserved  by  those  who  merely  noticed 
the  outside.  The  suffix  of  Vjap  cannot  refer  to  the  subject  of 
the  interrogative  sentence,  as  Hahn  and  Hofmann  suppose,  for 
the  answer  to  the  quis  there  is  nemo ;  it  relates  to  Jehovah,  by 
which  it  is  immediately  preceded.  Before  Jehovah,  namely, 
so  that  He,  whose  counsel  thus  began  to  be  fulfilled,  fixed  His 
eye  upon  him  with  watchfulness  and  protecting  care,  he  grew 
up  Pp.i*?,  like  the  suckling,  i.e.  (in  a  horticultural  sense)  the 
tender  twig  which  sucks  up  its  nourishment  from  the  root  and 
stem  (not  as  Hitzig  supposes,  according  to  Ezek.  xxxi.  16,  from 
the  moisture  in  the  soil) ;  for  the  tender  twig  upon  a  tree,  or 
trunk,  or  stalk,  is  called  n$  (for  which  we  have  pfr  here)  : 
vid.  Ezek.  xvii.  22,  the  twig  of  a  cedar ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  12  (11),  of  a 
vine  ;  Job  viii.  16,  of  a  liana.  It  is  thought  of  here  as  a  layer, 
as  in  Ezek.  xvii.  22  ;  and,  indeed,  as  the  second  figure  shows 
when  taken  in  connection  with  ch.  xi.  1,  as  having  been  laid 
down  after  the  proud  cedar  of  the  Davidic  monarchy  from 
which  it  sprang  had  been  felled ;  for  elsewhere  it  is  compared 
to  a  shoot  which  springs  from  the  root  left  in  the  ground  after 
the  tree  has  been  felled.  Both  figures  depict  the  lowly  and 
unattractive  character  of  the  small  though  vigorous  begin 
ning.  The  expression  "  out  of  dry  ground,"  which  belongs  to 
both  figures,  brings  out,  in  addition,  the  miserable  character  of 
the  external  circumstances  in  the  midst  of  which  the  birth  and 
growth  of  the  servant  had  taken  place.  The  "  dry  ground " 
is  the  existing  state  of  the  enslaved  and  degraded  nation ;  i.e. 
he  was  subject  to  all  the  conditions  inseparable  from  a  nation 
that  had  been  given  up  to  the  power  of  the  world,  and 
was  not  only  enduring  all  the  consequent  misery,  but  was 
in  utter  ignorance  as  to  its  cause  ;  in  a  word,  the  dry  ground 
is  the  corrupt  character  of  the  age.  In  what  follows,  the 
majority  of  the  commentators  have  departed  from  the  accents, 
and  adopted  the  rendering,  "  he  had  no  form  and  no  beauty, 


CHAP.  LIU.  5.  313 

tliat  we  should  look  at  Him"  (should  have  looked  at  Him),  viz. 
with  fixed  looks  that  loved  to  dwell  upon  Him.  This  rendering 
was  adopted  by  Symmachus  and  Vitringa  (wa  elSco^v  avrov ; 
vt  ipsum  respiceremus).  But  Luther,  Stier,  and  others,  very 
properly  adhere  to  the  existing  punctuation  ;  since  the  other 
would  lead  us  to  expect  to  nx"^1  instead  of  ^N"}}1),  and  the  close 
reciprocal  relation  of  hlttBTl/1  *n&n?l,  which  resembles  a  play 
upon  the  words,  is  entirely  expunged.  The  meaning  therefore 
is,  "  We  saw  Him,  and  there  was  nothing  in  His  appearance 
to  make  us  desire  Him,  or  feel  attracted  by  Him."  The  literal 
rendering  of  the  Hebrew,  with  its  lively  method  of  transferring 
you  into  the  precise  situation,  is  ut  concupisceremus  eum  (delec- 
taremur  eo) ;  whereas,  in  our  oriental  style,  we  should  rather 
have  written  ut  concupivissemus,  using  the  pluperfect  instead  of 
the  imperfect,  or  the  tense  of  the  associated  past.  Even  in  this 
sense  ^^1^1  is  very  far  from  being  unmeaning :  Pie  dwelt  in 
Israel,  so  that  they  had  Him  bodily  before  their  eyes,  but  in 
His  outward  appearance  there  was  nothing  to  attract  or  delight 
the  senses. 

On  the  contrary,  the  impression  produced  by  His  appear 
ance  was  rather  repulsive,  and,  to  those  who  measured  the  great 
and  noble  by  a  merely  worldly  standard,  contemptible.  Ver.  3. 
"  He  was  despised  and  forsaken  by  men ;  a  man  of  griefs,  and 
well  acquainted  with  disease ;  and  like  one  from  whom  men  hide 
their  face :  despised,  and  we  esteemed  Him  not."  All  these  dif 
ferent  features  are  predicates  of  the  erat  that  is  latent  in  non 
species  ei  neque  decor  and  non  adspectus.  Nibhzeh  is  introduced 
again  palindromically  at  the  close  in  Isaiah's  peculiar  style ; 
consequently  Martini's  conjecture  '131  Nv  innp  is  to  be  rejected. 
This  nibhzeh  (cf.  bdzoh,  ch.  xlix.  7)  is  the  keynote  of  the 
description  which  looks  back  in  this  plaintive  tone.  The  pre 
dicate  chddal  'ishlm  is  misunderstood  by  nearly  all  the  com 
mentators,  inasmuch  as  they  take  D^S  as  synonymous  with 
Diar^a,  whereas  it  is  rather  used  in  the  sense  of  t^K^jn  (lords), 
as  distinguished  from  bene  'dddm,  or  people  generally  (see  ch. 
ii.  9,  11,  17).  The  only  other  passages  in  which  it  occurs  are 
Prov.  viii.  4  and  Ps.  cxli.  4 ;  and  in  both  instances  it  signifies 
persons  of  rank.  Hence  Cocceius  explains  it  thus  :  "  wanting 
in  men,  i.e.  having  no  respectable  men  with  Him,  to  support 
Him  with  their  authority."  It  might  also  be  understood  us 


314  ittE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


meaning  the  ending  one  among  men,  i.e.  the  one  who  takes  the 
last  place  (S.  eXa^tcrro?,  Jer.  novissimus)  ;  but  in  this  case 
He  Himself  would  be  described  as  B*K,  whereas  it  is  absolutely 
affirmed  that  He  had  not  the  appearance  or  distinction  of  such 
an  one.  But  the  rendering  deficiens  (wanting)  is  quite  correct; 
compare  Job  xix.  14,  "  my  kinsfolk  have  failed  "  (defecerunt, 
chad*  lit,  cognati  mei).  The  Arabic  chadhalahu  or  chad/tala 
'anhu  (he  left  him  in  the  lurch,  kept  back  from  him,  forsook 
him)  also  points  to  the  true  meaning  ;  and  from  this  we  have 
the  derivatives  chddhil,  refusing  assistance,  leaving  without 
help  ;  and  machdhul,  helpless,  forsaken  (see  Lane's  Arabic 
Lexicon).  In  Hebrew,  chddal  has  not  only  the  transitive  mean 
ing  to  discontinue  or  leave  off  a  thing,  but  the  intransitive,  to 
cease  or  be  in  want,  so  that  chadal  'ishlm  may  mean  one  in 
want  of  men  of  rank,  i.e.  finding  no  sympathy  from  such  men. 
The  chief  men  of  His  nation  who  towered  above  the  multitude, 
the  great  men  of  this  world,  withdrew  their  hands  from  Him, 
drew  back  from  Him  :  He  had  none  of  the  men  of  any  distinc 
tion  at  His  side.  Moreover,  He  was  rrinKSE  E^N,  a  man  of  sorrow 
of  heart  in  all  its  forms,  i.e.  a  man  whose  chief  distinction  was, 
that  His  life  was  one  of  constant  painful  endurance.  And  He 
was  also  vH  JfiT,  that  is  to  say,  not  one  known  through  His 
sickness  (according  to  Deut.  i.  13,  15),  which  is  hardly  suffi 
cient  to  express  the  genitive  construction  ;  nor  an  acquaintance 
of  disease  (S.  yvaycrTos  v6o-q>,  familiarls  morLo),  which  would 
be  expressed  by  J^p  or  JHto  ;  but  scitus  morbi,  i.e.  one  who 
was  placed  in  a  state  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  disease. 
The  deponent  passive  JJV1J,  acquainted  (like  IdtuacJi,  confisus  ; 
zdkhur,  mindful  ;  peritus,  pervaded,  experienced),  is  supported 
by  JfHJp  =  JflTTiD  ;  Gr.  TL  p,a6(£V.  The  meaning  is  not,  that 
He  had  by  nature  a  sickly  body,  falling  out  of  one  disease  into 
another  ;  but  that  the  wrath  instigated  by  sin,  and  the  zeal  of 
self-sacrifice  (Ps.  Ixix.  10),  burnt  like  the  fire  of  a  fever  in  His 
soul  and  body,  so  that  even  if  He  had  not  died  a  violent  death, 
He  would  have  succumbed  to  the  force  of  the  powers  of  destruc 
tion  that  were  innate  in  humanity  in  consequence  of  sin,  and  of 
His  own  self-consuming  conflict  with  them.  Moreover,  He  was 
tfmaster  pdnlm  mimmennu.  This  cannot  mean,  'Mike  one 
hiding  his  face  from  us,"  as  Hengstenberg  supposes  (with  an 
allusion  to  Lev.  xiii.  45)  ;  or,  what  is  comparatively  better, 


CHAP.  LIII.  4,  315 

"like  one  causing  the  hiding  of  the  face  from  him :"  for  although 
the  feminine  of  the  participle  is  written  rnfiDD,  and  in  the  plural 
D'nripO  for  D'H'TipE)  is  quite  possible,  we  never  meet  with  master 
for  mastlr,  like  liaster  for  hastlr  in  the  infinitive  (ch.  xxix.  15, 
cf.  Deut.  xxvi.  12).  Hence  master  must  be  a  noun  (of  the  form 
marbets,  marbeq,  mashcheth)  ;  and  the  words  mean  either  "  like 
the  hiding  of  the  face  on  our  part,"  or  like  one  who  met  with 
this  from  us,  or  (what  is  more  natural)  like  the  hiding  of  the 
face  before  his  presence  (according  to  ch.  viii.  17,  1.  6,  liv.  8, 
lix.  2,  and  many  other  passages),  i.e.  like  one  whose  repulsive 
face  it  is  impossible  to  endure,  so  that  men  turn  away  their 
face  or  cover  it  with  their  dress  (compare  ch.  1.  6  with  Job 
xxx.  10).  And  lastly,  all  the  predicates  are  summed  up  in  the 
expressive  word  nibhzeh  :  He  was  despised,  and  we  did  not  think 
Him  dear  and  worthy,  but  rather  "esteemed  Him  not,"  or  rather 
did  not  estimate  Him  at  all,  or  as  Luther  expresses  it,  "  esti 
mated  Him  at  nothing"  (cJidshabh,  to  reckon,  value,  esteem,  as 
in  ch.  xiii.  17,  xxxiii.  8,  Mai.  iii.  16). 

The  second  turn  closes  here.  The  preaching  concerning 
His  calling  and  His  future  was  not  believed ;  but  the  Man  of 
sorrows  was  greatly  despised  among  us. 

Those  who  formerly  mistook  and  despised  the  Servant  of 
Jehovah  on  account  of  His  miserable  condition,  now  confess 
that  His  sufferings  were  altogether  of  a  different  character 
from  what  they  had  supposed.  Ver.  4.  "  Verily  He  hath 
borne  our  diseases  and  our  pains :  He  hath  laden  them  upon 
Himself ;  but  we  regarded  Him  as  one  stricken,  smitten  of  God, 
and  afflicted?  It  might  appear  doubtful  whether  |3K  (the 
fuller  form  of  ^]N)  is  affirmative  here,  as  in  ch.  xl.  7,  xlv.  15, 
or  adversative,  as  in  ch.  xlix.  4.  The  latter  meaning  grows 
out  of  the  former,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  opposite  which  is 
strongly  affirmed.  We  have  rendered  it  affirmatively  (Jer. 
vere\  not  adversatively  (verum,  ut  vero\  because  ver.  4  itself 
consists  of  two  antithetical  halves, — a  relation  which  is  ex 
pressed  in  the  independent  pronouns  N^n  and  WH3K?  that  answer 
to  one  another.  The  penitents  contrast  themselves  and  their 
false  notion  with  Him  and  His  real  achievement.  In  Matthew 
(viii.  17)  the  words  are  rendered  freely  and  faithfully  thus : 
auro?  ra?  aaOeveias  f]fj,wv  eXa/3e,  KOI  ra9  vocovs  e/Bdcrracrev. 
Even  the  fact  that  the  relief  which  Jesus  afforded  to  all  kinds 


316  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  bodily  diseases  is  regarded  as  a  fulfilment  of  what  is  here 
affirmed  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  is  an  exegetical  index 
worth  noticing.  In  4a  it  is  not  really  sin  that  is  spoken  of, 
but  the  evil  which  is  consequent  upon  human  sin,  although  not 
always  the  direct  consequence  of  the  sins  of  individuals  (John 
ix.  3).  But  in  the  fact  that  He  was  concerned  to  relieve  this 
evil  in  all  its  forms,  whenever  it  came  in  His  way  in  the  exer 
cise  of  His  calling,  the  relief  implied  as  a  consequence  in  ver. 
4a  was  brought  distinctly  into  view,  though  not  the  bearing 
and  lading  that  are  primarily  noticed  here.  Matthew  has 
very  aptly  rendered  N^J  by  eXa/3e,  and  ??D  by  e^darao-e.  For 
whilst  73D  denotes  the  toilsome  bearing  of  a  burden  that  has 
been  taken  up,  KJ;J  combines  in  itself  the  ideas  of  tollere  and 
ferre.  When  construed  with  the  accusative  of  the  sin,  it  signi 
fies  to  take  the  debt  of  sin  upon  one's  self,  and  carry  it  as  one's 
own,  i.e.  to  look  at  it  and  feel  it  as  one's  own  (e.g.  Lev.  v.  1,  17), 
or  more  frequently  to  bear  the  punishment  occasioned  by  sin, 
i.e.  to  make  expiation  for  it  (Lev.  xvii.  16,  xx.  19,  20,  xxiv.  15), 
and  in  any  case  in  which  the  person  bearing  it  is  not  himself 
the  guilty  person,  to  bear  sin  in  a  mediatorial  capacity,  for  the 
purpose  of  making  expiation  for  it  (Lev.  x.  17).  The  LXX. 
render  this  N^J  both  in  the  Pentateuch  and  Ezekiel  \ajBelv 
apapTiav,  once  avcKfrepeiv ;  and  it  is  evident  that  both  of  these 
are  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  an  expiatory  bearing,  and 
not  merely  of  taking  away,  as  has  been  recently  maintained 
in  opposition  to  the  satisfactio  vicaria,  as  we  may  see  clearly 
enough  from  Ezek.  iv.  4-8,  where  the  I*W  riNb>  is  represented 
by  the  prophet  in  a  symbolical  action.  But  in  the  case  before 
us,  where  it  is  not  the  sins,  but  "  our  diseases  "  (V^Jj  is  a  de 
fective  plural,  as  the  singular  would  be  written  ^£j*J)  and  "  our 
pains"  that  are  the  object,  this  mediatorial  sense  remains 
essentially  the  same.  The  meaning  is  not  merely  that  the  Ser 
vant  of  God  entered  into  the  fellowship  of  our  sufferings,  but 
that  He  took  upon  Himself  the  sufferings  which  we  had  to 
bear  and  deserved  to  bear,  and  therefore  not  only  took  them 
away  (as  Matt.  viii.  17  might  make  it  appear),  but  bore  them 
in  His  own  person,  that  He  might  deliver  us  from  them.  But 
when  one  person  takes  upon  himself  suffering  which  another 
would  have  had  to  bear,  and  therefore  not  only  endures  it  with 
him,  but  in  his  stead,  this  is  called  substitution  or  representation, 


CHAP.  LIII.  6.  317 

— an  idea  which,  however  unintelligible  to  the  understanding, 

belongs  to  the  actual  substance  of  the  common  consciousness 
o 

of  man,  and  the  realities  of  the  divine  government  of  the  world 
as  brought  within  the  range  of  our  experience,  and  one  which 
has  continued  even  down  to  the  present  time  to  have  much 
greater  vigour  in  the  Jewish  nation,  where  it  has  found  its 
true  expression  in  sacrifice  and  the  kindred  institutions,  than 
in  any  other,  at  least  so  far  as  its  nationality  has  not  been 
entirely  annulled.1  Here  again  it  is  Israel,  which,  having  been 
at  length  better  instructed,  and  now  bearing  witness  against 
itself,  laments  its  former  blindness  to  the  mediatorially  vica 
rious  character  of  the  deep  agonies,  both  of  soul  and  body,  that 
were  endured  by  the  great  Sufferer.  They  looked  upon  them 
as  the  punishment  of  His  own  sins,  and  indeed — inasmuch  as, 
like  the  friends  of  Job,  they  measured  the  sin  of  the  Sufferer 
by  the  sufferings  that  He  endured — of  peculiarly  great  sins. 
They  saw  in  Him  V133,  "  one  stricken"  i.e.  afflicted  with  a 
hateful,  shocking  disease  (Gen.  xii.  17  ;  1  Sam.  vi.  9), — such, 
for  example,  as  leprosy,  which  was  called  J733  icar  ef.  (2  Kings 
xv.  5,  A.  a<fnjfjwov,  S.  ev  a(j)fj  ovra  =  leprosum,  Th.  fjLefjLaa-Tvyw- 
/jievov,  cf.  yu-ao-rtye?,  Mark  iii.  10,  scourges,  i.e.  bad  attacks) ; 
also  D^PK  H3D?  "  one  smitten  of  God "  (from  ndkhdJi,  root 
•J3,  33 ;  see  Job9  vol.  ii.  p.  146),  and  TOJfO,  bowed  down  (by 
God),  i.e.  afflicted  with  sufferings.  The  name  Jehovah  would 
have  been  out  of  place  here,  where  the  evident  intention  is  to 
point  to  the  all-determining  divine  power  generally,  whose 
vengeance  appeared  to  have  fallen  upon  this  particular  suf 
ferer.  The  construction  mukkeh  'Eldhlm  signifies,  like  the 
Arabic  muqdtal  rabbuh,  one  who  has  been  defeated  in  conflict 
with  God  his  Lord  (see  Job,  vol.  i.  p.  267)  ;  and  'Elohlm  has 
the  syntactic  position  between  the  two  adjectives,  which  it 
necessarily  must  have  in  order  to  be  logically  connected  with 
them  both. 

In  ver.  5,  $^\  as  contrasted  with  ^rtfXI,  continues  the  true 
state  of  the  case  as  contrasted  with  their  false  judgment. 
Ver.  5.  "  Whereas  He  was  pierced  for  our  sins,  bruised  for  our 
iniquities:  the  punishment  was  laid  upon  Him  for  our  peace;  and 
through  His  stripes  we  were  healed."  The  question  is,  whether 
ver.  5a  describes  what  He  was  during  His  life,  or  what  He  was 
1  See  my  Jesus  und  Hillel,  pp.  26,  27. 


318  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

in  His  death.  The  words  decide  in  favour  of  the  latter.  For 
although  chdldl  is  applied  to  a  person  mortally  wounded  but 
not  yet  dead  (Jer.  li.  52  ;  Ps.  Ixix.  27),  and  dialed  to  a  heart 
wounded  to  death  (Ps.  cix.  22)  ;  the  pure  passives  used  here, 
which  denote  a  calamity  inflicted  by  violence  from  without, 
more  especially  mechdldl,  which  is  not  the  participle  polal  of 
chll  (made  to  twist  one's  self  with  pain),  but  the  participle  pool 
of  clidlal  (pierced,  transfossus,  the  passive  of  mechdlel,  ch.  li.  9), 
and  the  substantive  clauses,  which  express  a  fact  that  has 
become  complete  in  all  its  circumstances,  can  hardly  be  under 
stood  in  any  other  way  than  as  denoting,  that  "  the  servant  of 
God "  floated  before  the  mind  of  the  speaker  in  all  the  suffer 
ings  of  death,  just  as  was  the  case  with  Zechariah  in  Zech. 
xii.  10.  There  were  no  stronger  expressions  to  be  found  in 
the  language,  to  denote  a  violent  and  painful  death.  As  min, 
with  the  passive,  does  not  answer  to  the  Greek  UTTO,  but  to 
aTTo,  the  meaning  is  not  that  it  was  our  sins  and  iniquities  tha<~ 
had  pierced  Him  through  like  swords,  and  crushed  Him  like 
heavy  burdens,  but  that  He  was  pierced  and  crushed  on  account 
of  our  sins  and  iniquities.  It  was  not  His  own  sins  and  ini 
quities,  but  ours,  which  He  had  taken  upon  Himself,  that  He 
might  make  atonement  for  them  in  our  stead,  that  were  the 
cause  of  His  having  to  suffer  so  cruel  and  painful  a  death. 
The  ultimate  cause  is  not  mentioned;  but  Ivy  UDTOP  ")D«D  which 
follows  points  to  it.  His  suffering  was  a  musdr,  which  is  an 
indirect  affirmation  that  it  was  God  who  had  inflicted  it  upon 
Him,  for  who  else  could  the  yoser  (rrfyasser)  be  ?  We  have 
rendered  musdr  "punishment;"  and  there  was  no  other  word  in 
the  language  for  this  idea ;  for  though  DjM  and  n^jja  (to  which 
Hofmann  refers)  have  indeed  the  idea  of  punishment  associated 
with  them,  the  former  signifies  e/cSi/wfo-i?,  the  latter  eVtWei/r^ 
whereas  musdr  not  only  denotes  iraiSeta,  as  the  chastisement 
of  love  (Prov.  iii.  11),  but  also  as  the  infliction  of  punishment 
( —  Ti/jLcopla,  KoXacri?,  Prov.  vii.  22,  Jer.  xxx.  14),  just  as 
David,  when  he  prayed  that  God  might  not  punish  him  in  His 
anger  and  hot  displeasure  (Ps.  vi.  2),  could  not  find  a  more 
suitable  expression  for  punishment,  regarded  as  the  execution 
of  judgment,  than  IB*1,  (rvrrin).  The  word  itself,  which  follows 
the  form  of  musdd  (ch.  xxviii.  16),  signified  primarily  being 
chastised  (from  ydsar  =  vdsar,  constringere,  coercere),  and 


CHAP.  LIII.  6.  319 

included  from  the  very  outset  the  idea  of  practical  chastise 
ment,  which  then  passed  over  into  that  of  admonition  in  words, 
of  warning  by  example,  and  of  chastity  as  a  moral  quality 
In  the  case  before  us,  in  which  the  reference  is  to  a  sufferer, 
and  to  a  musdr  resting  upon  him,  this  can  only  mean  actual 
chastisement.  If  the  expression  had  been  vSy  ^IDID,  it  would 
merely  mean  that  God  had  caused  Him,  who  had  taken  upon 
Himself  our  sins  and  iniquities  and  thus  made  Himself  repre 
sentatively  or  vicariously  guilty,  to  endure  the  chastisement 
which  those  sins  deserved.  But  it  is  ^pi?B>  "iD^iD.  The  con 
nection  of  the  words  is  the  same  as  that  of  D^n  nriDin  in  Prov. 
xv.  31.  As  the  latter  signifies  "reproof  leading  to  life,"  so 
the  former  signifies  "  the  chastisement  which  leads  to  our 
peace."  It  is  true  that  the  suffix  belongs  to  the  one  idea,  that 
that  has  grown  up  through  this  combination  of  the  words,  like 
l)erUli  shelomij  "  my  peace-covenant"  (ch.  liv.  10)  ;  but  what  else 
could  our  "peace-chastisement"  be,  than  the  chastisement  that 
brings  us  peace,  or  puts  us  into  a  state  of  salvation  ?  This  is 
the  idea  involved  in  Stier's  rendering,  "restoring  chastisement," 
and  Hofmann's,  "  the  chastisement  wholesome  for  us."  The 
difference  in  the  exposition  simply  lies  in  the  view  entertained 
of  the  musdr,  in  which  neither  of  these  commentators  will 
allow  that  there  is  any  idea  of  a  visitation  of  justice  here. 
But  according  to  our  interpretation,  the  genitive  liDife,  which 
defines  the  musdr  so  far  as  its  object  and  results  are  concerned, 
clearly  shows  that  this  manifestation  of  the  justice  of  God,  this 
satisfaction  procured  by  His  holiness,  had  His  love  for  its 
foundation  and  end.  It  was  our  peace,  or,  what  is  more  in 
accordance  W7ith  the  full  idea  of  the  word,  our  general  well- 
being,  our  blessedness,  which  these  sufferings  arrived  at  and 
secured  (the  synonyms  of  shdlom  are  tobh  and  y€shudh,  ch. 
lii.  7).  In  what  follows,  "  and  by  His  stripes  (chabhurdh  = 
chabbiirdh,  ch.  i.  6)  we  have  been  healed,"  shdlom  is  defined  as 
a  condition  of  salvation  brought  about  by  healing.  "  Vennstis- 
simum  'oZv/awpov"  exclaims  Vitringa  here.  He  means  the 
same  as  Jerome  when  he  says,  suo  vulnere  vulnera  nostra 
curavit.  The  stripes  and  weals  that  were  inflicted  upon  Him 
have  made  us  sound  and  well  (the  LXX.  keeps  the  collective 
singular,  and  renders  it  very  aptly  r&>  /jbcoXwTri  avTov\  cf.  1  Pet. 
ii.  24).  We  were  sick  unto  death  because  of  our  sins;  but  He, 


320  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  sinless  one,  took  upon  Himself  a  suffering  unto  death, 
which  was,  as  it  were,  the  concentration  and  essence  of  the  woes 
that  we  had  deserved ;  and  this  voluntary  endurance,  this  sub 
mission  to  the  justice  of  the  Holy  One,  in  accordance  with  the 
counsels  of  divine  love,  became  the  source  of  our  healing. 

Thus  does  the  whole  body  of  the  restored  Israel  confess  with 
penitence,  that  it  has  so  long  mistaken  Him  whom  Jehovah, 
as  is  now  distinctly  affirmed,  had  made  a  curse  for  their  good, 
when  they  had  gone  astray  to  their  own  ruin.  Ver.  6.  "  All 
we  like  sheep  went  astray ;  we  had  turned  every  one  to  his  own 
way ;  and  Jehovah  caused  the  iniquity  of  us  all  to  fall  on  Him" 
It  is  the  state  of  exile,  upon  which  the  penitent  Israel  is  here 
looking  back  ;  but  exile  as  being,  in  the  prophet's  view,  the 
final  state  of  punishment  before  the  final  deliverance.  Israel 
in  its  exile  resembled  a  scattered  flock  without  a  shepherd ;  it 
had  lost  the  way  of  Jehovah  (ch.  Ixiii.  17),  and  every  one  had 
turned  to  his  own  way,  in  utter  selfishness  and  estrangement 
from  God  (ch.  Ivi.  11).  But  whereas  Israel  thus  heaped  up 
guilt  upon  guilt,  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  was  He  upon  whom 
Jehovah  Himself  caused  the  punishment  of  their  guilt  to  fall, 
that  He  might  make  atonement  for  it  through  His  own  suffer 
ing.  Many  of  the  more  modern  expositors  endeavour  to  set 
aside  the  pcena  vicaria  here,  by  giving  to  JTjiBn  a  meaning 
which  it  never  has.  Thus  Stier  renders  it,  "  Jehovah  caused 
the  iniquity  of  all  to  strike  or  break  upon  Him."  Others,  again, 
give  a  meaning  to  the  statement  which  is  directly  at  variance 
with  the  words  themselves.  Thus  Hahn  renders  it :  Jehovah 
took  the  guilt  of  the  whole  into  His  service,  causing  Him  to  die 
a  violent  death  through  their  crime.  Hofmann  very  properly  re 
jects  both  explanations,  and  holds  fast  to  the  fact  that  3  i^Dn, 
regarded  as  a  causative  of  3  WS,  signifies  "  to  cause  anything 
to  strike  or  fall  upon  a  person,"  which  is  the  rendering  adopted 
by  Symmachus :  icvpios  /caravTfjaat,  &rrotr}<rev  et?  avrbv  rrjv  avo- 
/jLiav  irdvTtov  fjfjiwv.  "  Just  as  the  blood  of  a  murdered  man 
comes  upon  the  murderer,  when  the  bloody  deed  committed 
comes  back  upon  him  in  the  form  of  blood-guiltiness  inflicting 
vengeance ;  so  does  sin  come  upon,  overtake  (Ps.  xl.  13),  or 
meet  with  the  sinner.  It  went  forth  from  him  as  his  own  act ; 
it  returns  with  destructive  effect,  as  a  fact  by  which  he  is  con 
demned.  But  in  this  case  God  does  not  suffer  those  who  have 


CHAP.  L1II   6.  821 

sinned  to  be  overtaken  by  the  sin  they  have  committed  ;  but  It 
falls  upon  His  servant,  the  righteous  One."  These  are  Hof- 
mann's  words.  But  if  the  sin  turns  back  upon  the  sinner  in 
the  shape  of  punishment,  why  should  the  sin  of  all  men,  which 
the  Servant  of  God  has  taken  upon  Himself  as  His  own,  over 
take  Him  in  the  form  of  an  evil,  which,  even  if  it  be  a  punish 
ment,  is  not  punishment  inflicted  upon  Him  ?  For  this  is  just 
the  characteristic  of  Hofmann's  doctrine  of  the  atonement, 
that  it  altogether  eliminates  from  the  atoning  work  the  recon 
ciliation  of  the  purposes  of  love  with  the  demands  of  righteous 
ness.  Now  it  is  indeed  perfectly  true,  that  the  Servant  of 
God  cannot  become  the  object  of  punishment,  either  as  a  ser 
vant  of  God  or  as  an  atoning  Saviour ;  for  as  servant  of  God 
He  is  the  beloved  of  God,  and  as  atoning  Saviour  He  undertakes 
a  work  which  is  well  pleasing  to  God,  and  ordained  in  God's 
eternal  counsel.  So  that  the  wrath  which  pours  out  upon 
Him  is  not  meant  for  Him  as  the  righteous  One  who  voluntarily 
offers  up  Himself;  but  indirectly  it  relates  to  Him,  so  far  as  He 
has  vicariously  identified  Himself  with  sinners,  who  are  deserv 
ing  of  wrath.  How  could  He  have  made  expiation  for  sin,  if 
lie  had  simply  subjected  Himself  to  its  cosmical  effects,  and  not 
directly  subjected  Himself  to  that  wrath  which  is  the  invariable 
divine  correlative  of  human  sin?  And  what  other  reason  could 
there  be  for  God's  not  rescuing  Him  from  this  the  bitterest  cup 
of  death,  than  the  ethical  impossibility  of  acknowledging  the 
atonement  as  really  made,  without  having  left  the  representa 
tive  of  the  guilty,  who  had  presented  Himself  to  Him  as  though 
guilty  Himself,  to  taste  of  the  punishment  which  they  had 
deserved  1  It  is  true  that  vicarious  expiation  and  pcena  vicaria 
are  not  coincident  ideas.  The  punishment  is  but  one  element 
in  the  expiation,  and  it  derives  a  peculiar  character  from  the 
fact  that  one  innocent  person  voluntarily  submits  to  it  in  His 
own  person.  It  does  not  stand  in  a  thoroughly  external  rela 
tion  of  identity  to  that  deserved  by  the  many  who  are  guilty  ; 
but  the  latter  cannot  be  set  aside  without  the  atoning  indivi 
dual  enduring  an  intensive  equivalent  to  it,  and  that  in  such 
a  manner,  that  this  endurance  is  no  less  a  self-cancelling  of 
wrath  on  the  part  of  God,  than  an  absorption  of  wrath  on  the 
part  of  the  Mediator ;  and  in  this  central  point  of  the  atoning 
work,  the  voluntarily  forgiving  love  of  God  and  the  voluntarily 
VOL.  II.  X 


322  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

self-sacrificing  love  of  the  Mediator  meet  together,  like  hands 
stretched  out  to  grasp  one  another  from  the  midst  of  a  dark 
cloud.  Hermann  Schultz  also  maintains  that  the  suffering, 
\vliich  was  the  consequence  of  sin  and  therefore  punishment  to 
the  guilty,  is  borne  by  the  Redeemer  as  suffering,  without  being 
punishment.  But  in  this  way  the  true  mystery  is  wiped  out  of 
the  heart  of  the  atoning  work;  and  this  explanation  is  also  at 
variance  with  the  expression  "  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  " 
in  ver.  5&,  and  the  equally  distinct  statement  in  ver.  66,  "  He 
hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  It  was  the  sin  of  all 
Israel,  as  the  palindromically  repeated  kulldnu  emphatically 
declares,  which  pressed  upon  Him  with  such  force  when  His 
atoning  work  was  about  to  be  decided.  But  fiy  is  used  to 
denote  not  only  the  transgression  itself,  but  also  the  guilt 
incurred  thereby,  and  the  punishment  to  which  it  gives  rise. 
All  this  great  multitude  of  sins,  and  mass  of  guilt,  and  weight 
of  punishment,  came  upon  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  according  to 
the  appointment  of  the  God  of  salvation,  who  is  gracious  in 
holiness.  The  third  turn  ends  here.  It  was  our  sins  that  He 
bore,  and  for  our  salvation  that  God  caused  Him  to  suffer  on 
our  account. 

The  fourth  turn  describes  how  He  suffered  and  died  and 
was  buried.  Ver.  7.  "  He  was  ill  treated ;  whilst  He  suffered 
ivillingly,  and  opened  not  His  mouth,  like  the  sheep  that  is  led  to 
the  slaughter-bend i,  and  like  a  lamb  that  is  dumb  before  its 
shearers,  and  opened  not  His  mouth."  The  third  pers.  niphal 
stands  first  in  a  passive  sense  :  He  has  been  hard  pressed  (1 
Sam.  xiii.  6)  :  He  is  driven,  or  hunted  (1  Sam.  xiv.  24), 
treated  tyrannically  and  unsparingly  ;  in  a  word,  plagued 
(vexatus  ;  compare  the  niphal  in  a  reciprocal  sense  in  ch. 
iii.  5,  and  according  to  the  reading  Wtt  in  ch.  xxix.  13  in  a 
reflective  sense,  to  torment  one's  self).  Hitzig  renders  the 
next  clause,  "  and  although  tormented,  He  opened  not  His 
mouth."  But  although  an  explanatory  subordinate  clause  may 
precede  the  principal  clause  which  it  more  fully  explains,  no 
example  can  be  found  of  such  a  clause  with  (a  retrospective) 
Nini  explaining  what  follows;  for  in  Job  ii.  8  the  circumstantial 
clause,  "  sitting  down  among  the  ashes,"  belongs  to  the  princi 
pal  fact  which  stands  before.  And  so  here,  where  HJJM  (from 
which  comes  the  participle  nj^  usually  met  with  in  circum- 


CHAP.  LI  1 1.  8.  323 

stantial  clauses)  has  not  a  passive,  but  a  reflective  meaning,  as 
in  Ex.  x.  3 :  "  He  was  ill  treated,  whilst  He  bowed  Himself 
(=  suffered  voluntarily),  and  opened  not  His  mouth "  (the 
regular  leap  from  the  participle  to  the  finite).  The  voluntary 
endurance  is  then  explained  by  the  simile  "  like  a  sheep  that  is 
led  to  the  slaughter"  (an  attributive  clause,  like  Jer.  xi.  19) ; 
and  the  submissive  quiet  bearing,  by  the  simile  "  like  a  lamb 
that  is  dumb  before  its  shearers."  The  commentators  regard 
n»^S3  as  a  participle ;  but  this  would  have  the  tone  upon  the 
last  syllable  (see  ch.  i.  21,  26,  Nah.  in.  11 ;  cf.  Job,  vol.  i. 
p.  393,  note).  The  tone  shows  it  to  be  the  pausal  form  for 
nppw,  and  so  we  have  rendered  it ;  and,  indeed,  as  the  inter 
change  of  the  perfect  with  the  future  in  the  attributive  clause 
must  be  intentional,  not  quce  olmutescit,  but  obmutuit.  The 
following  words,  Va  nria*  NT),  do  not  form  part  of  the  simile, 
which  would  require  tiphtach,  for  nothing  but  absolute  necessity 
would  warrant  us  in  assuming  that  it  points  back  beyond  ?n^ 
to  nt??  as  Rashi  and  others  suppose.  The  palindromical  repe 
tition  also  favours  the  unity  of  the  subject  with  that  of  the 
previous  nna11  and  the  correctness  of  the  delicate  accentua 
tion,  with  which  the  rendering  in  the  LXX.  and  Acts  viii.  32 
coincides.  All  the  references  in  the  New  Testament  to  the 
Lamb  of  God  (with  which  the  corresponding  allusions  to  the 
passover  are  interwoven)  spring  from  this  passage  in  the  book 
of  Isaiah. 

The  description  of  the  closing  portion  of  the  life  of  the 
Servant  of  Jehovah  is  continued  in  ver.  8.  "  He  has  been  taken 
away  from  prison  and  from  judgment ;  and  of  His  generation 
who  considered :  '  He  was  snatched  away  out  of  the  land  of  the 
living ;  for  the  wickedness  of  my  people  punishment  fell  upon 
Him9?"  The  principal  emphasis  is  not  laid  upon  the  fact  that 
He  was  taken  away  from  suffering,  but  that  it  was  out  of  the 
midst  of  suffering  that  He  was  carried  off.  The  idea  that  is 
most  prominent  in  luqqdch  (with  a  in  half  pause)  is  not  that  of 
being  translated  (as  in  the  accounts  of  Enoch  and  Elijah),  but 
of  being  snatched  or  hurried  away  (abreptus  est,  ch,  lii.  5, 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  4,  etc.).  The  parallel  is  abscissus  (cf.  nikhrath^ 
Jer.  xi.  19)  a  terra  viventium,  for  which  "iWJ  by  itself  is  supposed 
to  be  used  in  the  sense  of  carried  away  (i.e.  out  of  the  sphere 
of  the  living  into  that  of  the  dead,  Lam.  iii.  54;  cf.  Ezek. 


324  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

xxxvii.  11,  "It  is  all  over  with  us").  ~Wfy  (from  "TO,  com.pescere) 
is  a  violent  constraint ;  here,  as  in  Ps.  cvii.  39,  it  signifies  a 
persecuting  treatment  which  restrains  by  outward  force,  such 
as  that  of  prison  or  bonds ;  and  mishpdt  refers  to  the  judicial 
proceedings,  in  which  He  was  put  upon  His  trial,  accused  and 
convicted  as  worthy  of  death, — in  other  words,  to  His  unjust 
judgment.  The  min  might  indeed  be  understood,  as  in  ver.  5a, 
not  as  referring  to  the  persons  who  swept  Him  away  (=  UTTO), 
but,  as  in  Ps.  cvii.  39,  as  relating  to  the  ground  and  cause  of 
the  sweeping  away.  But  the  local  sense,  which  is  the  one 
most  naturally  suggested  by  luqqach  (e.g.  ch.  xlix.  24),  is  to  be 
preferred :  hostile  oppression  and  judicial  persecution  were  the 
circumstances  out  of  which  He  was  carried  away  by  death. 
With  regard  to  what  follows,  we  must  in  any  case  adhere  to  the 
ordinary  usage,  according  to  which  dor  (=  Arab,  daur,  dahr, 
a  revolution  or  period  of  time)  signifies  an  age,  or  the  men 
living  in  a  particular  age ;  also,  in  an  ethical  sense,  the  entire 
body  of  those  who  are  connected  together  by  similarity  of  dis 
position  (see,  for  example,  Ps.  xiv.  5)  ;  or  again  (=  Arab,  ddr) 
a  dwelling,  as  in  ch.  xxxviii.  12,  and  possibly  also  (of  the 
grave)  in  Ps.  xlix.  20.  Such  meanings  as  length  of  life 
(Luther  and  Grotius),  course  of  life  (Vitringa),  or  fate 
(Hitzig),  it  is  impossible  to  sustain.  Hence  the  Sept.  render 
ing,  rrjv  yeveav  avrov  1/9  8^777 >/<jeTat,  which  Jerome  also  adopts, 
can  only  mean,  so  far  as  the  usage  of  the  language  is  con 
cerned,  "  who  can  declare  the  number  of  His  generation"  (i.e. 
of  those  inspired  by  His  spirit,  or  filled  with  His  life)  ;  but  in 
this  connection  such  a  thought  would  be  premature.  More 
over,  the  generation  intended  would  be  called  ijnt  rather  than 
Vin,  as  springing  from  Him.  Still  less  can  we  adopt  the  mean 
ing  "  dwelling,"  as  Knobel  does,  who  explains  the  passage  thus : 
"  who  considers  how  little  the  grave  becomes  Him,  which  He  has 
received  as  His  dwelling-place."  The  words  do  not  admit  of 
this  explanation.  Hofmann  formerly  explained  the  passage  as 
meaning,  "  No  one  takes  His  dwelling-place  into  his  mind  or 
mouth,  so  as  even  to  think  of  it,  or  inquire  what  had  become 
of  Him  ; "  but  in  His  Schriftbeweis  he  has  decided  in  favour  of 
the  meaning,  His  contemporaries,  or  the  men  of  His  generation. 
It  is  only  with  this  rendering  that  we  obtain  a  thought  at  all 
suitable  to  the  picture  of  suffering  given  here,  or  to  the  words 


CHAP.  LIU.  8.  325 

which  follow  (compare  Jer.  ii.  31,  O  ye  men  of  this  generation). 
hiTDNI  in  that  case  is  not  the  object  to  nrrii^  the  real  object  to 
which  is  rather  the  clause  introduced  by  ''S,  but  an  adverbial 
accusative,  which  may  serve  to  give  emphatic  prominence  to 
the  subject,  as  we  may  see  from  ch.  Ivii.  12,  Ezek.  xvii.  21, 
Neh.  ix.  34  (Ges.  §  117,  Anm.)  ;  for  MK  cannot  be  a  preposi 
tion,  since  inter  cequales  ejus  wrould  not  be  expressed  in  Hebrew 
by  nvrriK,  but  by  mm.  The  pilel  soclieach  with  be  signifies 
in  Ps.  cxliii.  5  a  thoughtful  consideration  or  deliberation,  in 
a  word,  meditationem  alicujus  rei  (compare  the  Teal  with  the 
accusative,  Ps.  cxlv.  5).  The  following  kl  is  an  explanatory 
quod :  with  regard  to  His  contemporaries,  who  considered  that, 
etc.  The  words  introduced  with  kl  are  spoken,  as  it  were,  out 
of  the  heart  of  His  contemporaries,  who  ought  to  have  con 
sidered,  but  did  not.  We  may  see  from  *®y  that  it  is  intended 
to  introduce  a  direct  address  ;  and  again,  if  we  leave  kl  untrans 
lated,  like  OTL  recitativum  (see,  for  example,  Josh.  ii.  24 ;  com 
pare  dij  Dan.  ii.  25),  we  can  understand  why  the  address,  which 
has  been  carried  on  thus  far  in  such  general  terms,  assumes  all 
at  once  an  individual  form.  It  cannot  be  denied,  indeed,  that 
we  obtain  a  suitable  object  for  the  missing  consideration,  if  we 
adopt  this  rendering:  "  Pie  was  torn  away  (3d prcet.)  out  of  the 
land  of  the  living,  through  (inin  denoting  the  mediating  cause) 
the  wicked  conduct  of  my  people  (in  bringing  Him  to  death), 
to  their  own  punishment ;  i.e.  none  of  the  men  of  His  age 
(like  ml  in  ver.  1,  no  one  =  only  a  very  few)  discerned  what 
had  befallen  them  on  account  of  their  sin,  in  riddino-  them- 

7  o 

selves  of  Him  by  a  violent  death."  Hofmann  and  V.  F. 
Oeliler  both  adopt  this  explanation,  saying,  u  Can  the  prophet 
have  had  the  person  of  the  Ecce  Homo  before  his  eye,  without 
intimating  that  his  people  called  down  judgment  upon  them 
selves,  by  laying  violent  hands  upon  the  Servant  of  God?" 
We  cannot,  however,  decide  in  favour  of  this  explanation  ;  since 
the  impression  produced  by  this  \ch  yn  *&y  #£'£)£  is,  that  it  is 
intended  to  be  taken  as  a  rectification  of  TO  iruSET!  tirw&fl  in  ver. 
4&,  to  which  it  stands  in  a  reciprocal  relation.  This  reciprocal 
relation  is  brought  out  more  fully,  if  we  regard  the  force  of 
the  min  as  still  continued  (ob  plagarn  qua  illis  debebatur,  Seb. 
Schmid,  Kleinert,  etc.)  ;  though  not  in  the  sense  of  "  through 
the  stroke  proceeding  from  then>  my  people  "  (Halm),  which 


326  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

would  be  opposed  to  the  general  usage  of  JttJ  ;  or  taking  tt»  Jtt3 
as  a  relative  clause,  populi  mei  quibus  plaga  debebatur  (Heng- 
stenberg,  Havernick).  But  the  most  natural  course  is  to  take 
Idmo  as  referring  to  the  Servant  of  God,  more  especially  as  our 
prophet  uses  Idmo  pathetically  for  Id,  as  ch.  xliv.  15  unques 
tionably  shows  (notwithstanding  the  remonstrance  of  Stier, 
who  renders  the  passage,  "  He  was  all  plague,  or  smiting,  for 
them").  WJ  always  signifies  suffering  as  a  calamity  proceeding 
from  God  (e.g.  Ex.  xi.  1,  Ps.  xxxix.  11,  and  in  every  other 
passage  in  which  it  does  not  occur  in  the  special  sense  of 
leprosy,  which  also  points  back,  however,  to  the  generic  idea  of 
a  plague  divinely  sent)  ;  hence  Jerome  renders  it,  "  for  the  sin 
of  my  people  have  I  smitten  Him."  The  text  does  not  read  so ; 
but  the  smiter  is  really  Jehovah.  Men  looked  upon  His  Ser 
vant  as  a  yiM ;  and  so  He  really  was,  but  not  in  the  sense  ia. 
which  men  regarded  Him  as  such.  Yet,  even  if  they  had  been 
mistaken  concerning  Him  during  His  lifetime ;  now  that  He 
no  longer  dwelt  among  the  living,  they  ought  to  see,  as  they 
looked  back  upon  His  actions  and  His  sufferings,  that  it  was 
not  for  His  own  wickedness,  but  for  that  of  Israel,  viz.  to  make 
atonement  for  it,  that  such  a  visitation  from  God  had  fallen 
upon  Him  (j>  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  16  and  ch.  xxvi.  16,  where  the 
sentence  is  in  the  same  logical  subordination  to  the  previous  one 
as  it  is  here,  where  Dachselt  gives  this  interpretation,  which  is 
logically  quite  correct:  propter  prcevaricationem  populi  mei 
2^laga  ei  contingent). 

After  this  description  in  ver.  7  of  the  patience  with  which 
He  suffered,  and  in  ver.  8  of  the  manner  in  which  He  died, 
there  follows  a  retrospective  glance  at  His  burial.  Ver.  9. 
"  And  they  assigned  Him  His  grave  with  sinners,  and  with  a  rich 
man  in  His  martyrdom,  because  He  had  done  no  wrong,  and  there 
was  no  deceit  in  His  mouth."  The  subject  to  jn*l  (assigned)  is 
not  Jehovah,  although  this  would  not  be  impossible,  since  JHJ  has 
Jehovah  as  the  latent  subject ;  but  it  would  be  irreconcilable 
with  ver.  10,  where  Jehovah  is  introduced  as  the  subject  with 
antithetical  prominence.  It  would  be  better  to  assume  that  "  my 
people"  is  the  subject;  but  as  this  would  make  it  appear  as  if  the 
statement  introduced  in  ver.  Sb  with  Ta  (for)  were  continued  here, 
we  seem  compelled  to  refer  it  to  doro  (His  generation),  which 
occurs  in  the  principal  clause.  No  objection  could  be  offered 


CHAP.  LIII.  9.  327 

to  our  regarding  "  His  own  generation"  as  the  subject ;  but 
doro  is  somewhat  too  far  removed  for  this  ;  and  if  the  prophet 
had  had  the  contemporaries  of  the  sufferer  in  his  mind,  he 
would  most  likely  have  used  a  plural  verb  (vayyitlenu).  Some, 
therefore,  supply  a  personal  subject  of  the  most  general  kind 
to  yitten  (which  occurs  even  with  a  neuter  subject,  like  the 
German  es  gibt,  Fr.  il  y  a,  Eng.  "there  is;"  cf.  Prov.  xiii. 
10)  :  "  they  (on)  gave  ;"  and  looking  at  the  history  of  the 
fulfilment,  we  confess  that  this  is  the  rendering  we  prefer.  In 
fact,  without  the  commentary  supplied  by  the  fulfilment,  it 
would  be  impossible  to  understand  ver.  9a  at  all.  The  earlier 
translators  did  great  violence  to  the  text,  and  yet  failed  to  bring 
out  any  admissible  thought.  And  the  explanation  which  is  most 
generally  adopted  now,  viz.  that  ">W  is  the  synonymous  parallel 
to  OW~!  (as  even  Luther  rendered  it,  "  and  died  like  a  rich 
man,"  with  the  marginal  gloss,  "  a  rich  man  who  sets  all  his 
heart  upon  riches,  i.e.  a  wicked  man"),  is  also  untenable ;  for 
even  granting  that  'dshlr  could  be  proved  by  examples  to  be 
sometimes  used  as  synonymous  with  yen,  as  "oy  and  jtoK  are 
as  synonyms  of  p^V,  this  would  be  just  the  passage  in  which 
it  would  be  least  possible  to  sustain  any  such  use  of  the  word  ; 
since  he  who  finds  his  grave  with  rich  men,  whether  with  the 
godly  or  the  ungodly,  would  thereby  have  received  a  decent, 
and  even  honourable  burial.  This  is  so  thoroughly  sustained 
by  experience,  as  to  need  no  confirmation  from  such  passages 
as  Job  xxi.  32.  Hitzig  has  very  good  ground,  therefore,  for 
opposing  this  "  synonymous"  explanation ;  but  when  he  adopts 

the  rendering  lapsator,  after  the  Arabic  jjic>  this  is  quite  as 

much  in  opposition  to  Arabic  usage  (according  to  which 
this  word  merely  signifies  a  person  who  falls  into  error,  and 
makes  a  mistake  in  speaking),  as  it  is  to  the  Hebrew.  Ewald 
changes  TBty  into  PW  (a  word  which  has  no  existence)  ;  and 
Bottcher  alters  it  into  JH  '•bfy  which  is  comparatively  the  best 
suggestion  of  all.  Hofmann  connects  the  two  words  vritoa  "VK'y, 
u  men  who  have  become  rich  through  the  murders  that  they 
have  treacherously  caused"  (though  without  being  able  to  ad 
duce  any  proof  that  moth  is  ever  applied  to  the  death  which  one 
person  inflicts  upon  another).  At  any  rate,  all  these  attempts 
spring  from  the  indisputable  assumption,  that  to  be  rich  is  not 


328  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

in  itself  a  sin  which  deserves  a  dishonourable  burial,  to  say 
nothing  of  its  receiving  one.  If,  therefore,  DW")  and  Try  are 
not  kindred  ideas,  they  must  be  antithetical ;  but  it  is  no  easier 
to  establish  a  purely  ethical  antithesis  than  an  ethical  coinci 
dence.  If,  however,  we  take  the  word  DTch  as  suggesting  the 
idea  of  persons  found  guilty,  or  criminals  (an  explanation  which 
the  juridical  context  of  the  passage  well  sustains ;  see  at  ch. 
1.  9),  we  get  a  contrast  which  our  own  usage  of  speech  also 
draws  between  a  rich  man  who  is  living  in  the  enjoyment  of 
his  own  possessions,  and  a  delinquent  who  has  become  im 
poverished  to  the  utmost,  through  hatred,  condemnation,  ruin. 
And  if  we  reflect  that  the  Jewish  rulers  would  have  given  to 
Jesus  the  same  dishonourable  burial  as  to  the  two  thieves,  but 
that  the  Roman  authorities  handed  over  the  body  to  Joseph  the 
Arimathsean,  a  u  rich  man"  (Matt,  xxvii.  57),  who  placed  it 
in  the  sepulchre  in  his  own  garden,  we  see  an  agreement  at 
once  between  the  gospel  history  and  the  prophetic  words,  which 
could  only  be  the  work  of  the  God  of  both  the  prophecy  and 
its  fulfilment,  inasmuch  as  no  suspicion  could  possibly  arise  of 
there  having  been  any  human  design  of  bringing  the  former 
into  conformity  with  the  latter.  But  if  it  be  objected,  that 
according  to  the  parallel  the  'dshir  must  be  regarded  as  dead, 
quite  as  much  as  the  veslialm,  we  admit  the  force  of  this 
objection,  and  should  explain  it  in  this  way :  "  They  assigned 
Him  His  grave  with  criminals,  and  after  He  had  actually  died 
a  martyr's  death,  with  a  rich  man ;"  i.e.  He  was  to  have  lain 
where  the  bodies  of  criminals  lie,  but  He  was  really  laid  in  a 
grave  that  was  intended  for  the  corpse  of  a  rich  man.1  The 
rendering  adopted  by  Vitringa  and  others,  "  and  He  was  with 
a  rich  man  in  his  death,"  is  open  to  this  objection,  that  such  a 
clause,  to  be  quite  free  from  ambiguity,  would  require  TK>jrnNl 
vmm  wn.  Hengstenberg  and  Stier  very  properly  refer  both 
jrn  and  Y"Op,  which  must  be  repeated  in  thought,  to  the  second 
clause  as  well  as  the  first.  The  rendering  tumulum  ejns  must 
be  rejected,  since  Idmdh  never  has  this  meaning;  and  Wfe3, 
which  is  the  pointing  sustained  by  three  Codd.,  would  not  be 
mausolea,  but  a  lofty  burial-hill,  after  the  fashion  of  the 
lianengrdber  (certain  "  giants'  graves,"  or  barrows,  in  Holstein 
1  A  clairvoyant  once  said  of  the  Lord  :  "  Died  like  a  criminal ;  buried 
like  a  prince  of  the  earth"  (yid.  PsijcUol.  pp.  202,  364). 


CHAP.  LIII.  10.  329 

and  Saxony).1  V}te  is  a  plur.  exaggerative  here,  as  in  Ezek. 
xxviii.  10  (compare  m'mothe  in  Ezek.  xxviii.  8  and  Jer.  xvi.  4)  ; 
it  is  applied  to  a  violent  death,  the  very  pain  of  which  makes  it 
like  dying  again  and  again.  The  first  clause  states  with  whom 
they  at  first  assigned  Him  His  grave  ;  the  second  with  whom  it 
was  assigned  Him,  after  He  had  really  died  a  painful  death. 
u  Of  course/'  as  F.  Philippi  observes,  "  this  was  not  a  thorough 
compensation  for  the  ignominy  of  having  died  the  death  of  a 
criminal ;  but  the  honourable  burial,  granted  to  one  who  had 
been  ignominiously  put  to  death,  showed  that  there  must  be 
something  very  remarkable  about  Him.  It  was  the  beginning 
of  the  glorification  which  commenced  with  His  death."  If  we 
have  correctly  interpreted  the  second  clause,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  in  our  minds,  since  we  cannot  shake  the  word  of  God 
like  a  kaleidoscope,  and  multiply  the  sensus  complex,  as  Stier 
does,  that  &  by  (=  &  "i^f^y)  does  not  mean  "  notwithstanding 
that  not,"  as  in  Job  xvi.  17,  but  "  because  not,"  like  ^"^V  in 
Gen.  xxxi.  20.  The  reason  why  the  Servant  of  God  received 
such  honourable  treatment  immediately  after  His  ignominious 
martyrdom,  was  to  be  found  in  His  freedom  from  sin,  in  the 
fact  that  He  had  done  no  wrong,  and  there  was  no  deceit  in 
His  mouth  (LXX.  and  1  Pet.  ii.  22,  where  the  clause  is 
correctly  rendered  ouSe  evpeOrj  80X05  ev  ra>  crro/Acm  avrov). 
His  actions  were  invariably  prompted  by  pure  love,  and  His 
speech  consisted  of  unclouded  sincerity  and  truth. 

The  last  turn  in  the  prophecy,  which  commences  here,  carries 
out  ver.  Qb  still  further,  and  opens  up  the  background  of  His 
fate.  The  gracious  counsel  of  God  for  our  salvation  was 
accomplished  thus.  Yer.  10.  "And  it  pleased  JeJwvah  to  bruise 
Him,  to  afflict  Him  with  disease ;  if  Plis  soul  would  pay  a  tres 
pass-offering.  He  should  see  posterity,  should  live  long  days,  and 

1  The  usage  of  the  language  shows  clearly  that  Mmdh  had  originally 
the  meaning  of  "height"  (e.g.  2  Sam.  i.  19).  The  primary  meaning  sug 
gested  by  Bottcher,  of  locm  clausus,  septus  (from  D"Q  =  Dil3,  f$),  cannot 
be  sustained.  We  still  hold  that  03  is  the  expanded  jo,  and  riEO  an 
ascent,  steep  place,  or  stair.  In  the  Talmud,  bdmah  is  equivalent  to  fiufto;, 
an  altar,  and  r\W2  (Syr.  lim)  equivalent  to  the  ftr^ot  of  the  orator  and 
judge ;  flapios,  root  /Sot,  like  the  Hebrew  bdmdh,  signifies  literally  an  eleva 
tion,  and  actually  occurs  in  the  sense  of  a  sepulchral  hill,  which  this  never 
has.  not  even  in  Ezek.  xliii.  7. 


330  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  purpose  of  Jehovah  should  prosper  through  His  hand. 
cannot  possibly  be  equivalent  to  WJ,  as  Hitzig  supposes.  An 
article  appended  to  a  noun  never  obliterates  the  fundamental 
character  of  its  form  (not  even  in  pNH).  Nor  does  Bottcher's 

\  «  V  T    T  / 

suggestion,  that  we  should  read  vJJH  as  an  accusative  of  more 
precise  definition,  commend  itself ;  for  what  would  the  article 
do  in  that  case  I  It  is  the  hiphil  of  rpTI,  like  the  Syriac  agli 
from  gelo ;  or  rather,  as  even  in  Syriac  this  vJK  is  equivalent  to 
*tyx,  of  NT!>n,  2  Chron.  xvi.  12  (cf.  Q^nn),  like  <Bnn  in  2  Kings 
xiii.  6  and  Jer.  xxxii.  35,  from  Ntpn.  ^31  is  placed  under  &OT 
(=iK31  with  Dag.  dirimens)  in  Gesenius'  Lexicon;  but  this 
substantive  is  a  needless  fiction.  1&O1  is  an  inf.  piel :  conterere 
*um  (Jerome),  not  KaOapiaai  avrdv  (LXX.  from  fcOT^riDT). 
According  to  Mic.  vi.  13  (^nten  W?nn,  I  hurt  to  smite  thee,  i.e. 
I  smite  thee  with  a  painful  blow),  ynn  itfSI  are  apparently  con 
nected,  in  the  sense  of  "And  it  pleased  Jehovah  to  bruise  Him 
painfully."  But  both  logically  and  syntactically  this  would 
require  the  opposite  construction,  viz.  1«31  W1.  ^3*1  must 
therefore  be  an  infinitive,  depending  upon  FBH,  according  to 
Job  xxxiii.  32  (=euSo/o7cre;  the  LXX.  thoughtlessly  renders  it 
jBovXe-rai).  The  infinitive  construction  is  then  changed  into  the 
finite;  for  even  '•i'nn  is  subordinate  to  fan,  as  in  Hos.  v.  11  (cf.  ch. 
xlii.  21  ;  Ges.  §  142,  3) ;  "  he  would,  made  ill,"  being  equiva 
lent  to  "  he  would  make  ill,"  i.e.  he  would  plunge  into  distress. 
There  is  no  necessity  to  repeat  1X31  after  ^nn,  in  the  sense  of 
"  he  caused  sore  evil  therewith,"  viz.  with  the  1WT.  It  was 
men  who  inflicted  upon  the  Servant  of  God  such  crushing 
suffering,  such  deep  sorrow ;  but  the  supreme  causa  efficiens  in 
the  whole  was  God,  who  made  the  sin  of  men  subservient  to 
His  pleasure,  His  will,  and  predetermined  counsel.  The  suffer 
ing  of  His  Servant  was  to  be  to  Him  the  way  to  glory,  and  this 
way  of  His  through  suffering  to  glory  was  to  lead  to  the  estab 
lishment  of  a  church  of  the  redeemed,  which  would  spring 
from  Him;  in  other  words,  it  would  become  the  commencement 
of  that  fulfilment  of  the  divine  plan  of  salvation  which  He,  the 
ever-living,  ever-working  One,  would  carry  out  to  completion. 
We  give  up  the  idea  that  Esb>jR  is  to  be  taken  as  addressed  by 
Jehovah  to  "  His  Servant."  The  person  acting  is  the  Servant, 
and  it  is  to  Jehovah  that  the  action  refers.  But  Hofmann's 
present  view,  viz.  that  tdslm  is  addressed  to  the  people,  is  still 


CHAP.  LIU    10.  331 

less  admissible.  It  is  the  people  who  are  speaking  here  ;  and 
although  the  confession  of  the  penitent  Israel  runs  on  from 
ver.  11  (where  the  confessing  retrospective  view  of  the  past 
becomes  a  prospective  and  prophetic  glance  at  the  future)  in  a 
direct  prophetic  tone,  and  ver.  10  might  form  the  transition  to 
this;  yet,  if  the  people  were  addressed  in  this  word  tdsim,  it 
would  be  absolutely  necessary  that  it  should  be  distinctly  men 
tioned  in  this  connection.  And  is  it  really  Israel  which  makes 
the  soul  of  the  Servant  an  'dshdm,  and  not  rather  the  Servant 
Himself?  No  doubt  it  is  true,  that  if  nothing  further  were 
stated  here  than  that  "  the  people  made  the  life  of  the  Servant 
of  God  an  'dshdm,  inasmuch  as  it  treated  Him  just  as  if  it 
had  a  pricking  in  its  conscience  so  long  as  it  suffered  Him  to 
live," — which  is  a  natural  sequel  in  Hofmann's  case  to  his  false 
assumption,  that  the  passion  described  in  ch.  liii.  was  merely 
the  culminating  point  in  the  sufferings  which  the  Servant  was 
called  to  endure  as  a  prophet,  whereas  the  prophet  falls  into  the 
background  here  behind  the  sacrifice  and  the  priest, — we  should 
no  doubt  have  one  scriptural  testimony  less  to  support  the 
satisfactio  vicaria.1  But  if  we  adopt  the  following  rendering, 
which  is  the  simplest,  and  the  one  least  open  to  exception  :  if 
His  soul  offered  (placed,  i.e.  should  have  placed;  cf.  Job  xiv.  14, 
si  mortuus  fuerit)  an  'dshdm, — it  is  evident  that  'dshdm  has 
here  a  sacrificial  meaning,  and  indeed  a  very  definite  one,  inas 
much  as  the  'dshdm  (the  trespass-offering)  was  a  sacrifice,  the 
character  of  which  was  very  sharply  defined.  It  is  self-evident, 
however,  that  the  'dshdm  paid  by  the  soul  of  the  Servant  must 
consist  in  the  sacrifice  of  itself,  since  He  pays  it  by  submitting 
to  a  violent  death ;  and  a  sacrifice  presented  by  the  nephesh  (the 
soul,  the  life,  the  very  self)  must  be  not  only  one  which  pro- 

1  In  the  first  edition  of  Hofmann's  ScTiriftleweis  (i.  2,  137),  in  which 
he  regarded  tasim  as  addressed  to  God,  he  set  aside  the  orthodox  view  with 
the  remark,  that  God  Himself  makes  good  the  injury  that  men  have  done 
to  Him  by  giving  up  the  life  of  His  Servant.  In  the  second  edition  (i.  2, 
208)  he  supposes  the  people  to  be  addressed,  and  it  is  therefore  the  people 
who  make  the  Servant's  life  an  'asliam.  The  first  edition  contained  the 
following  correct  definition  ot'ashdm:  "In  general,  it  denotes  what  one 
person  pays  to  make  good  an  injury  done  by  him  to  another."  The  ex 
position  which  follows  above  will  show  how  we  are  forced  to  adopt  the 
orthodox  view,  if  we  adhere  to  this  definition  and  regard  the  Servant  Him 
self  as  presenting  the  'ashum. 


332  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

ceeds  from  itself,  but  one  which  consists  in  itself.  If,  then,  we 
would  understand  the  point  of  view  in  which  the  self-sacrifice 
of  the  Servant  of  God  is  placed  when  it  is  called  an  'dshdm,  we 
must  notice  very  clearly  the  characteristic  distinction  between 
this  kind  of  sacrifice  and  every  other.  Many  of  the  ritual 
distinctions,  however,  may  be  indicated  superficially,  inasmuch 
as  they  have  no  bearing  upon  the  present  subject,  where  we 
have  to  do  with  an  antitypical  and  personal  sacrifice,  and  not 
with  a  typical  and  animal  one.  The  'ds/tdm  was  a  sanctissimum, 
like  that  of  the  sin-offering  (Lev.  vi.  10,  17,  and  xiv.  13),  and 
according  to  Lev.  vii.  7  there  was  "  one  law"  for  them  both. 
This  similarity  in  the  treatment  was  restricted  simply  to  the 
fact,  that  the  fat  portions  of  the  trespass-offering,  as  well  as 
of  the  sin-offering,  were  placed  upon  the  altar,  and  that  the 
remainder,  as  in  the  case  of  those  sin-offerings  the  blood  of 
which  was  not  taken  into  the  interior  of  the  holy  place,  was 
assigned  to  the  priests  and  to  the  male  members  of  the  priestly 
families  (see  Lev.  vi.  22,  vii.  6).  There  were  the  following 
points  of  contrast,  however,  between  these  two  kinds  of  sacrifice: 
(1.)  The  material  of  the  sin-offerings  varied  considerably,  consist 
ing  sometimes  of  a  bullock,  sometimes  of  a  pair  of  doves,  and 
even  of  meal  without  oil  or  incense;  whereas  the  trespass-offering 
always  consisted  of  a  ram,  or  at  any  rate  of  a  male  sheep.  (2.)  The 
choice  of  the  victim,  and  the  course  adopted  with  its  blood,  was 
regulated  in  the  case  of  the  sin-offering  according  to  the  condi 
tion  of  the  offerer ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  trespass-offering  they 
were  neither  of  them  affected  by  this  in  the  slightest  degree. 
(3.)  Sin-offerings  were  presented  by  the  congregation,  and  upon 
holy  days,  whereas  trespass-offerings  were  only  presented  by 
individuals,  and  never  upon  holy  days.  (4.)  In  connection  with 
the  trespass-offering  there  was  none  of  the  smearing  of  the 
blood  (n'thlndh)  or  of  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  (liazzd *dh) 
connected  with  the  ton-offering,  and  the  pouring  out  of  the 
blood  at  the  foot  of  the  altar  (ilfpJiikhdK)  is  never  mentioned. 
The  ritual  for  the  blood  consisted  purely  in  the  swinging  out 
of  the  blood  (zfrlqdli),  as  in  the  case  of  the  whole  offering  and 
of  the  peace-offerings.  There  is  only  one  instance  in  which 
the  blood  of  the  trespass-offering  is  ordered  to  be  smeared,  viz. 
upon  certain  portions  of  the  body  of  the  leper  (Lev.  xiv.  14), 
for  which  the  blood  of  the  sin-offering  that  was  to  be  applied 


CHAP.  LIII.  10.  333 

exclusively  to  the  altar  could  not  be  used.  And  in  general  we 
find  that,  in  the  case  of  the  trespass-offering,  instead  of  the 
altar-ritual,  concerning  which  the  law  is  very  brief  (Lev.  vii. 
1-7),  other  acts  that  are  altogether  peculiar  to  it  are  brought 
prominently  into  the  foreground  (Lev.  v.  14  sqq. ;  Num.  v. 
5-8).  These  are  all  to  be  accounted  for  from  the  fact  that  a 
trespass-offering  was  to  be  presented  by  the  man  who  had  un 
intentionally  laid  hands  upon  anything  holy,  e.g.  the  tithes  or 
first-fruits,  or  who  had  broken  any  commandment  of  God  "  in 
ignorance"  (if  indeed  this  is  to  be  taken  as  the  meaning  of  the 
expression  "  and  wist  it  not"  in  Lev.  v.  17-19)  ;  also  by  the  man 
who  had  in  any  way  defrauded  his  neighbour  (which  was  re 
garded  as  unfaithfulness  towards  Jehovah),  provided  he  antici 
pated  it  by  a  voluntary  confession, — this  included  the  violation 
of  another's  conjugal  rights  in  the  case  of  a  bondmaid  (Lev. 
xix.  20-22) ;  also  by  a  leper  or  a  Nazarite  defiled  by  contact 
with  a  corpse,  at  the  time  of  their  purification,  because  their 
uncleanness  involved  the  neglect  and  interruption  of  the  duties 
of  worship  which  they  were  bound  to  observe.  Wherever  a 
material  restitution  was  possible,  it  was  to  be  made  with  the 
addition  of  a  fifth  ;  and  in  the  one  case  mentioned  in  Lev.  xix. 
20-22,  the  trespass-offering  was  admissible  even  after  a  judicial 
punishment  had  been  inflicted.  But  in  every  case  the  guilty 
person  had  to  present  the  animal  of  the  trespass-offering  "  ac 
cording  to  thy  valuation,  O  priest,  in  silver  shekels,"  i.e.  accord 
ing  to  the  priest's  taxation,  and  in  holy  coin.  Such  was  the 
prominence  given  to  the  person  of  the  priest  in  the  ritual  of 
the  trespass-offering.  In  the  sin-offering  the  priest  is  always 
the  representative  of  the  offerer  ;  but  in  the  trespass-offering 
he  is  generally  the  representative  of  God.  The  trespass-offer 
ing  was  a  restitution  or  compensation  made  to  God  in  the 
person  of  the  priest,  a  payment  or  penance  which  made  amends 
for  the  wrong  done,  a  satisfactio  in  a  disciplinary  sense.  And 
this  is  implied  in  the  name ;  for  just  as  ristpn  denotes  first  the 
sin,  then  the  punishment  of  the  sin  and  the  expiation  of  the 
sin,  and  hence  the  sacrifice  which  cancels  the  sin ;  so  'dslidin 
signifies  first  the  guilt  or  debt,  then  the  compensation  or 
penance,  and  hence  (cf.  Lev.  v.  15)  the  sacrifice  which  dis 
charges  the  debt  or  guilt,  and  sets  the  man  free.  Every  species 
of  sacrifice  had  its  own  primary  idea.  The  fundamental  idea 


334  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH 

of  the  'oldh  (burnt-offering)  was  oblatio,  or  the  offering  of 
worship ;  that  of  the  sheldmlm  (peace-offerings),  conciliatio,  or 
the  knitting  of  fellowship ;  that  of  the  minchdh  (meat-offering), 
donatioj  or  sanctifying  consecration  ;  that  of  the  cliattatli  (sin- 
offering),  expiatio,  or  atonement;  that  of  the  'dshdm  (trespass- 
offering),  mulcta  (satisfactio))  or  a  compensatory  payment.  The 
self-sacrifice  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  may  be  presented  under 
all  these  points  of  view.  It  is  the  complete  antitype,  the  truth, 
the  object,  and  the  end  of  all  the  sacrifices.  So  far  as  it  is  the 
antitype  of  the  "  whole  offering,"  the  central  point  in  its  anti- 
typical  character  is  to  be  found  in  the  offering  of  His  entire 
personality  (Trpocrfopa  rov  o-fw/xaro?,  Heb.  x.  10)  to  God  for  a 
sweet  smelling  savour  (Eph.  v.  2)  ;  so  far  as  it  is  the  antitype 
of  the  sin-offering,  in  the  shedding  of  His  blood  (Heb.  ix.  13, 
14),  the  "  blood  of  sprinkling*'  (Heb.  xii.  24 ;  1  Pet.  i.  2)  ;  so 
far  as  it  is  the  antitype  of  the  sJteldmlm9  and  especially  of  the 
passover,  in  the  sacramental  participation  in  His  one  self-sacri 
fice,  which  He  grants  to  us  in  His  courts,  thus  applying  to  us 
His  own  redeeming  work,  and  confirming  our  fellowship  of 
peace  with  God  (Heb.  xiii.  10  ;  1  Cor.  v.  7),  since  the  sheldr/nm 
derive  their  name  from  shdlom,  pax^  communio ;  so  far  as  it  is 
the  antitype  of  the  trespass-offering,  in  the  equivalent  rendered 
to  the  justice  of  God  for  the  sacrileges  of  our  sins.  The  idea 
of  compensatory  payment,  which  Hofmann  extends  to  the 
whole  sacrifice,  understanding  by  kipper  the  covering  of  the 
guilt  in  the  sense  of  a  debt  (debitum),  is  peculiar  to  the  'dshdm ; 
and  at  the  same  time  an  idea,  which  Hofmann  cannot  find  in 
the  sacrifices,  is  expressed  here  in  the  most  specific  manner, 
viz.  that  of  satisfaction  demanded  by  the  justice  of  God,  and 
of  pcena  outweighing  the  guilt  contracted  (cf.  nirtsdh,  ch.  xl. 
2)  ;  in  other  words,  the  idea  of  satisfactio  vicaria  in  the  sense 
of  Anselm  is  brought  out  most  distinctly  here,  where  the  soul 
of  the  Servant  of  God  is  said  to  present  such  an  atoning  sacri 
fice  for  the  whole,  that  is  to  say,  where  He  offers  Himself  as 
such  a  sacrifice  by  laying  down  the  life  so  higl/ly  valued  by 
God  (ch.  xlii.  1,  xlix.  5).  As  the  verb  most  suitable  to  the 
idea  of  the  'dshdm  the  writer  selects  the  verb  siw,  which  is 
generally  used  to  denote  the  giving  of  a  pledge  (Job  xvii.  3), 
and  is  therefore  the  most  suitable  word  for  every  kind  of  satis 
factio  that  represents  a  direct  solutio.  The  apodoses  to  "  if  His 


CHAP.  LIII.  11.  335 

soul  shall  have  paid  the  penalty  (pcenam  or  mulctam)"  are  ex 
pressed  in  the  future,  and  therefore  state  what  would  take 
place  when  the  former  should  have  been  done.  He  should  see 
posterity  (vid.  Gen.  1.  23 ;  Job  xlii.  16),  i.e.  should  become 
possessed  of  a  large  family  of  descendants  stretching  far  and 
wide.  The  reference  here  is  to  the  new  "  seed  of  Israel,"  the 
people  redeemed  by  Him,  the  church  of  the  redeemed  out  of 
Israel  and  all  nations,  of  which  He  would  lay  the  foundation. 
Again,  He  should  live  long  days,  as  He  says  in  Rev.  i.  18,  "  I 
was  dead ;  and,  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore."1  Thirdly, 
the  pleasure  of  Jehovah  should  prosper  "  in  His  hand,"  i.e. 
through  the  service  of  His  mediation,  or  (according  to  the 
primary  meaning  of  tsdlach)  should  go  on  advancing  inces 
santly,  and  pressing  on  to  the  final  goal.  His  self-sacrifice, 
therefore,  merely  lays  the  foundation  for  a  progressively  self- 
realizing  "  pleasure  of  the  Lord,"  i.e.  (cf.  ch.  xliv.  28)  for  the 
realization  of  the  purpose  of  God  according  to  His  determinate 
counsel,  the  fuller  description  of  which  we  had  in  ch.  xlii.  and 
xlix.,  where  it  was  stated  that  He  should  be  the  mediator  of  a 
new  covenant,  and  the  restorer  of  Israel,  the  light  of  the  Gen 
tiles  and  salvation  of  Jehovah  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

This  great  work  of  salvation  lies  as  the  great  object  of  His 
calling  in  the  hand  of  the  deceased  and  yet  eternally  living  One, 
and  goes  on  victoriously  through  His  mediation.  He  now  reaps 
the  fruit  of  His  self-sacrifice  in  a  continuous  priestly  course. 
Ver.  11.  "Because  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  He  will  see,  and 
be  refreshed ;  through  His  knowledge  will  He  procure  justice, 
my  righteous  servant,  for  the  many,  and  will  take  their  iniquities 
upon  Himself"  The  prophecy  now  leaves  the  standpoint  of 
Israel's  retrospective  acknowledgment  of  the  long  rejected  Ser 
vant  of  God,  and  becomes  once  more  the  prophetic  organ  of 
God  Himself,  who  acknowledges  the  servant  as  His  own.  The 
min  of  ?W3  might  be  used  here  in  its  primary  local  significa 
tion,  "  far  away  from  the  trouble "  (as  in  Job  xxi.  9,  for 
example)  ;  or  the  temporal  meaning  which  is  derived  from  the 

1  Knobel  observes  here :  "  The  statement  that  a  person  first  offers 
himself  as  a  trespass-offering,  and  then  still  lives  for  a  long  time,  and  still 
continues  working,  is  a  very  striking  one  ;  but  it  may  be  explained  on  the 
ground  that  the  offerer  is  a  plurality."  But  how  are  we  to  explain  the 
striking  expression  in  our  creed,  "  rose  again  from  the  dead?" 


obb  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

local  would  be  also  admissible,  viz.  "  from  the  time  of  the 
trouble,"  i.e.  immediately  after  it  (as  in  Ps.  Ixxiii.  20)  ;  but 
the  causal  sense  is  the  most  natural,  viz.  on  account  of,  in 
consequence  of  (as  in  Ex.  ii.  23),  which  not  only  separates 
locally  and  links  together  temporarily,  but  brings  into  intimate 
connection.  The  meaning  therefore  is,  "  In  consequence  of  the 
trouble  of  His  soul  (i.e.  trouble  experienced  not  only  in  His 
body,  but  into  the  inmost  recesses  of  His  soul),  He  will  see, 
satisfy  Himself."  Hitzig  supplies  3it33  (Jer.  xxix.  32)  ;  Knobel 
connects  tojns,  in  opposition  to  the  accents  (like  A.  S.  Th. 
€fjL7r\7jo-0rjo-erat  ev  rf)  yvuxrei  avrov),  thus  :  "  He  looks  at  His 
prudent  work,  and  has  full  satisfaction  therewith."  But  there 
is  nothing  to  supply,  and  no  necessity  to  alter  the  existing 
punctuation.  The  second  verb  receives  its  colouring  from  the 
first ;  the  expression  "  He  will  see,  will  satisfy  Himself,"  being 
equivalent  to  "  He  will  enjoy  a  satisfying  or  pleasing  sight " 
(cf.  Ps.  xvii.  15),  whicK  will  consist,  as  ver.  106  clearly  shows, 
in  the  successful  progress  of  the  divine  work  of  salvation,  of 
which  He  is  the  Mediator.  1Djm  belongs  to  P^  as  the  medium 
of  setting  right  (cf.  Prov.  xi.  9).  This  is  connected  with  ^  in 
the  sense  of  "procure  justice,"  like  ?  ^^  (ch.  vi.  10)  ;  ?  rnn  in 
ch.  xiv.  3,  xxviii.  12  (cf.  Dan.  xi.  33,  ^  P^n,  to  procure  intelli 
gence;  Gen.  xlv.  7,  ^  rrnn,  to  prolong  life, — a  usage  which  leads 
on  to  the  Aramaean  combination  of  the  dative  with  the  accusa 
tive,  e.g.  Job  xxxvii.  18,  compare  v.  2).  Tsaddlq  'abhdl  do  not 
stand  to  one  another  in  the  relation  of  a  proper  name  and  a 
noun  in  apposition,  as  Hofmann  thinks,  nor  is  this  expression 
to  be  interpreted  according  to  "in  T|7»n  (Ges.  §  113)  ;  but  "a 
righteous  man,  my  servant,"  with  the  emphatic  prominence 
given  to  the  attribute  (cf.  ch.  x.  30,  xxiii.  12,  Ps.  Ixxxix.  51),  is 
equivalent  to  "  my  righteous  servant."  But  does  injTQ  mean 
per  cognilionem  sui,  or  per  cognitionem  suam  ?  The  former 
gives  a  sense  which  is  both  doctrinally  satisfying  and  prac 
tically  correct :  the  Righteous  One  makes  others  partakers  of 
righteousness,  through  their  knowledge  of  Him,  His  person, 
and  His  work,  and  (as  the  biblical  jnj,  which  has  reference  not 
only  to  the  understanding,  but  to  personal  experience  also, 
clearly  signifies)  through  their  entrance  into  living  fellowship 
with  Him.  Nearly  all  the  commentators,  who  understand  by 
the  servant  of  God  the  Divine  Redeemer,  give  the  preference 


CHAP.  LIII.  11.  337 

to  this  explanation  (e.g.  Vitringa,  Hengstenberg,  and  Stier). 
But  the  meaning  preferred  is  not  always  the  correct  one.  The 
subjective  rendering  of  the  suffix  (cf.  Prov.  xxii.  17)  is  favoured 
by  Mai.  ii.  7,  where  it  is  said  that  "  the  priest's  lips  should  keep 
daath  (knowledge)  ;"  by  Dan.  xii.  3,  where  faithful  teachers  are 
called  matsdlqe  hdrabblm  (they  that  turn  many  to  righteous 
ness)  ;  and  by  ch.  xi.  2,  according  to  which  "  the  spirit  of 
knowledge"  (ruacli  daath)  is  one  of  the  seven  spirits  that  de 
scend  upon  the  sprout  of  Jesse  ;  so  that  "  knowledge "  (daath) 
is  represented  as  equally  the  qualification  for  the  priestly,  the 
prophetic,  and  the  regal  calling.  It  is  a  very  unseemly  remark, 
therefore,  on  the  part  of  a  modern  commentator,  when  he 
speaks  of  the  subjective  knowledge  of  the  Servant  as  "  halting 
weakly  behind  in  the  picture,  after  His  sacrificial  death  has 
already  been  described."  We  need  only  recal  to  mind  the 
words  of  the  Lord  in  Matt.  xi.  27,  wrhich  are  not  only  recorded 
both  by  the  synoptists  and  by  John,  but  supported  by  testi 
mony  outside  the  Gospels  also :  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but 
the  Father;  neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save  the  Son, 
and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal  Him."  Let  us 
remember  also,  that  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  whose  priestly 
mediatorial  work  is  unfolded  before  us  here  in  ch.  liii.,  upon 
the  ground  of  which  He  rises  to  more  than  regal  glory  (ch.  Hi. 
15,  compare  liii.  12),  is  no  other  than  He  to  whom  His  God  has 
given  the  tongue  of  the  learned,  "to  know  how  to  speak  a  word 
in  season  to  him  that  is  weary,  i.e.  to  raise  up  the  weary  and 
heavy  laden"  (ch.  1.  4).  He  knows  God,  with  whom  He 
stands  in  loving  fellowship ;  He  knows  the  counsels  of  His 
love  and  the  will  of  His  grace,  in  the  fulfilment  of  which  His 
own  life  ascends,  after  having  gone  down  into  death  and  come 
forth  from  death  ;  and  by  virtue  of  this  knowledge,  which  rests 
upon  His  own  truest  and  most  direct  experience,  He,  the 
righteous  Ore,  will  help  "the  many,"  i.e.  the  great  mass 
(hdrabbim  as  in  Dan.  ix.  27,  xi.  33,  39,  xii.  3  ;  cf.  Ex.  xxiii.  2, 
where  rabbim  is  used  in  the  same  sense  without  the  article), 
hence  all  His  own  nation,  and  beyond  that,  all  mankind  (so  far 
as  they  were  susceptible  of  salvation ;  =  rot?  TroXAofc,  Rom. 
v.  19,  cf.  TroXXwz/,  Matt.  xxvi.  28),  to  a  right  state  of  life  and 
conduct,  and  one  that  should  be  well-pleasing  to  God.  The 
primary  reference  is  to  the  righteousness  of  faith,  which  is  the 

VOL.  II.  Y 


338  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

consequence  of  justification  on  the  ground  of  His  atoning  work, 
when  this  is  believingly  appropriated  ;  but  the  expression  also 
includes  that  righteousness  of  life,  which  springs  by  an  inward 
necessity  out  of  those  sanctifying  powers,  that  are  bound  up 
with  the  atoning  work  which  we  have  made  our  own  (see  Dan. 
ix.  24).  The  ancients  recognised  this  connection  between  the 
justitia  fidei  et  vita?  better  than  many  of  the  moderns,  who  look 
askance  at  the  Romish  justitia  infusa,  and  therewith  boast  of 
advancing  knowledge.  Because  our  righteousness  has  its  roots 
in  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  as  an  absolutely  unmerited  gift  of 
grace  without  works,  the  prophecy  returns  once  more  from  the 
justifying  work  of  the  Servant  of  God  to  His  sin-expunging 
work  as  the  basis  of  all  righteousness  :  "  He  shall  bear  their 
iniquities."  This  yisbol  (He  shall  bear),  which  stands  along 
with  futures,  and  therefore,  being  also  future  itself,  refers  to 
something  to  be  done  after  the  completion  of  the  work  to  which 
He  is  called  in  this  life  (with  which  Hofmann  connects  it), 
denotes  the  continued  operation  of  His  s'bhdldm  (ver.  4), 
through  His  own  active  mediation.  His  continued  lading  of 
our  trespasses  upon  Himself  is  merely  the  constant  presence 
and  presentation  of  His  atonement,  which  has  been  offered  once 
for  all.  The  dead  yet  living  One,  because  of  His  one  self- 
sacrifice,  is  an  eternal  Priest,  who  now  lives  to  distribute  the 
blessings  that  He  has  acquired. 

The  last  reward  of  His  thus  working  after  this  life  for  the 
salvation  of  sinners,  and  also  of  His  work  in  this  life  upon 
which  the  former  is  founded,  is  victorious  dominion.  Ver.  12. 
"  Therefore  I  give  Him  a  portion  among  the  great,  and  ivit/t  strong 
ones  will  He  divide  spoil;  because  He  has  poured  out  His  soul 
into  death:  and  He  let  Himself  be  reckoned  among  transgressors; 
whilst  He  bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made  intercession  for  the 
transgressors"  The  promise  takes  its  stand  between  humiliation 
and  exaltation,  and  rests  partly  upon  the  working  of  the  exalted 
One,  and  partly  upon  the  doing  and  suffering  of  One  who  was 
so  ready  to  sacrifice  Himself.  Luther  follows  the  LXX.  and 
Vulgate,  and  adopts  the  rendering,  "  Therefore  will  I  give 
Him  a  great  multitude  for  booty;"  and  Havernick,  Stier,  and 
others  adopt  essentially  the  same  rendering,  "  Therefore  will  I 
apportion  to  Him  the  many."  But,  as  Job  xxxix.  17  clearly 
shows,  this  clause  can  only  mean,  "  Therefore  will  I  give  Him 


CHAP.  LIII.  12.  339 

a  portion  in  the  many."  If,  however,  cliilleq  V  means  to  have 
a  portion  in  anything,  and  not  to  give  the  thing  itself  as  a  por 
tion,  it  is  evident  that  hdrabblm  here  are  not  the  many,  but  the 
great ;  and  this  is  favoured  by  the  parallel  clause.  The  ideas 
of  greatness  and  force,  both  in  multitude  and  might,  are  bound 
up  together  in  rabh  and  'dfe&tii  (see  ch.  viii.  7),  and  the  context 
only  can  decide  which  rendering  is  to  be  adopted  when  these 
ideas  are  separated  from  one  another.  What  is  meant  by 
"giving  a  portion  bdrabbim"  is  clearly  seen  from  such  passages 
as  ch.  lii.  15,  xlix.  7,  according  to  which  the  great  ones  of  the 
earth  will  be  brought  to  do  homage  to  Him,  or  at  all  events  to 
submit  to  Him.  The  second  clause  is  rendered  by  Luther, 
"  and  He  shall  have  the  strong  for  a  prey."  This  is  at  any 
rate  better  than  the  rendering  of  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate,  lt  et 

O  O  * 

fort-turn  dividet  spolia"  But  Prov.  xvi.  19  shows  that  UK  is  a 
preposition.  Strong  ones  surround  Him,  and  fight  along  with 
Him.  The  reference  here  is  to  the  people  of  which  it  is  said 
in  Ps.  ex.  3,  "  Thy  people  are  thorough  devotion  in  the  day  of 
Thy  power ;"  and  this  people,  which  goes  with  Him  to  battle, 
and  joins  with  Him  in  the  conquest  of  the  hostile  powers  of 
the  world  (Rev.  xix.  14),  also  participates  in  the  enjoyment  of 
the  spoils  of  His  victory.  "With  this  victorious  sway  is  He 
rewarded,  because  He  has  poured  out  His  soul  unto  death, 
having  not  only  exposed  His  life  to  death,  but  "poured  out" 
(heerdh.  to  strip  or  empty,  or  pour  clean  out,  even  to  the  very 
last  remnant)  His  life-blood  into  death  (lammdveth  like  the 
Lamed  in  Ps.  xxii.  16),  and  also  because  He  has  suffered  Him 
self  to  be  reckoned  with  transgressors,  i.e.  numbered  among 
them  (niph.  tolerativum),  namely,  in  the  judgment  of  His 
countrymen,  and  in  the  unjust  judgment  (mishpdt)  by  which 
He  was  delivered  up  to  death  as  a  wicked  apostate  and  trans 
gressor  of  the  law.  AVith  Kini  there  is  attached  to  DW3TIN1 
H3D3  (He  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors),  if  not  in  a 
subordinate  connection  (like  Kim  in  ver.  5  :  compare  ch.  x.  7), 
the  following  antithesis :  He  submitted  cheerfully  to  the  death 
of  a  sinner,  and  yet  He  was  no  sinner,  but  "bare  the  sin  of 
many  (cf.  Heb.  ix.  28),  and  made  intercession  for  the  trans 
gressors."  Many  adopt  the  rendering,  "  and  He  takes  away 
the  sin  of  many,  and  intervenes  on  behalf  of  the  transgressors." 
But  in  this  connection  the  preterite  NJPJ  can  only  relate  to  some- 


340  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tiling  antecedent  to  the  foregoing  future,  so  that  $?W  denotes  a 
connected  past ;  and  thus  have  the  LXX.  and  Vulg.  correctly 
rendered  it.  Just  as  a  JPaan  in  ver.  66  signifies  to  cause  to  fall 
upon  a  person,  so  in  Jer.  xv.  11  it  signifies  to  make  one  ap 
proach  another  (in  supplication).  Here,  however,  as  in  ch.  lix. 
16,  the  hip/til  is  not  a  causative,  but  has  the  intensive  force  of 
the  kaly  viz.  to  press  forward  with  entreaty,  hence  to  intercede 
(with  a  Lamed  of  the  person  on  whose  behalf  it  occurs).  Ac 
cording  to  the  cons,  temporum,  the  reference  is  not  to  the  inter 
cession  (eWeuft?)  of  the  glorified  One,  but  to  that  of  the  suffering 
One,  on  behalf  of  His  foes.  Every  word  stands  here  as  if 
written  beneath  the  cross  on  Golgotha.  And  this  is  the  case 
with  the  clause  before  us,  which  was  fulfilled  (though  not  exclu 
sively)  in  the  prayer  of  the  crucified  Saviour:  "Father,  forgive 
them  ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do  "  (Luke  xxiii.  34). 

"  The  prophetic  view,"  says  Oehler,  who  agrees  with  us  in 
the  general  opinion  that  the  idea  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  has 
three  distinct  stages,  "  ascends  in  these  discourses  step  by  step, 
as  it  were,  from  the  one  broad  space  covered  by  the  foundation- 
walls  of  a  cathedral  up  to  the  very  summit  with  its  giddy  height, 
on  which  the  cross  is  planted ;  and  the  nearer  it  reaches  the 
summit,  the  more  conspicuous  do  the  outlines  of  the  cross 
itself  become,  until  at  last,  when  the  summit  is  reached,  it  rests 
in  peace,  having  attained  what  it  desired  when  it  set  its  foot 
upon  the  first  steps  of  the  temple  tower."  There  is  something 
very  striking  in  this  figure.  Here,  in  the  very  centre  of  this 
book  of  consolation,  we  find  the  idea  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah 
at  the  very  summit  of  its  ascent.  It  has  reached  the  goal.  The 
Messianic  idea,  which  was  hidden  in  the  general  idea  of  the 
nation  regarded  as  u  the  servant  of  Jehovah,"  has  gradually 
risen  up  in  the  most  magnificent  metamorphosis  from  the 
depths  in  which  it  was  thus  concealed.  And  this  fusion  has 
generated  what  was  hitherto  altogether  strange  to  the  figure  of 
the  Messiah,  viz.  the  unio  mystica  capitis  et  corporis.  Hitherto 
Israel  has  appeared  simply  as  the  nation  governed  by  the 
Messiah,  the  army  which  He  conducted  into  battle,  the  com 
monwealth  ordered  by  Him.  But  now,  in  the  person  of  the 
Servant  of  Jehovah,  we  see  Israel  itself  in  personal  self-mani 
festation  :  the  idea  of  Israel  is  fully  realized,  and  the  true 
nature  of  Israel  shines  forth  in  all  its  brilliancy.  Israel  is 


CHAP.  LIU.  12.  341 

the  body,  and  He  the  head,  towering  above  it.  Another 
element,  with  which  we  found  the  Messianic  idea  enriched 
even  before  ch.  liii.,  was  the  munus  triplex.  As  early  as 
ch.  vii.-xii.  the  figure  of  the  Messiah  stood  forth  as  the 

o 

figure  of  a  King ;  but  the  Prophet  like  unto  Moses,  promised 
in  Deut.  xviii.  15,  was  still  wanting.  But,  according  to  ch. 
xlii.,  xlix.,  1.,  the  servant  of  Jehovah  is  first  a  prophet,  and  as 
the  proclaimer  of  a  new  law,  and  the  mediator  of  a  new  cove 
nant,  really  a  second  Moses;  at  the  close  of  the  work  appointed 
Him,  however,  He  receives  the  homage  of  kings,  whilst,  as 
ch.  liii.  clearly  shows,  that  self-sacrifice  lies  between,  on  the 
ground  of  which  He  rules  above  as  a  Priest  after  the  order  of 
Melchizedek, — in  other  words,  a  Priest  and  also  a  King.  From 
this  point  onward  there  are  added  to  the  Messianic  idea  the 
further  elements  of  the  status  duplex  and  the  satisfactio  vicaria. 
David  was  indeed  thej;yp_a.of  the  twofold  state  of  his  antitype, 
inasmuch  as  it  was  through  suffering  that  he  reached  the 
throne ;  but  where  have  we  found,  in  all  the  direct  Messianic 
prophecies  anterior  to  this,  the  suffering  path  of  the  Ecce  Homo 
even  to  the  grave  1  But  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  goes  through 
shame  to  glory,  and  through  death  to  life.  He  conquers  when 
He  falls  ;  He  rules  after  being  enslaved  ;  He  lives  after  He 
has  died ;  He  completes  His  work  after  He  Himself  has  been 
apparently  cut  off.  His  glory  streams  upon  the  dark  ground  of 
the  deepest  humiliation,  to  set  forth  which  the  dark  colours  were 
supplied  by  the  pictures  of  suffering  contained  in  the  Psalms 
and  in  the  book  of  Job.  And  these  sufferings  of  His  are 
not  merely  the  sufferings  of  a  confessor  or  a  martyr,  like  those 
of  the  ecclesia  pressa,  but  a  vicarious  atoning  suffering,  a  sacri 
fice  for  sin.  To  this  the  chapter  before  us  returns  again  and 
again,  being  never  tired  of  repeating  it.  "  Spiritus  Sanctus" 
says  Brentius,  "  non  delectatur  inani  /BaTroXoyiq,  et  tamen  quum 
in  hoc  cap.  videatur  /3aTTo\6<yos  teal  ravroXoyos  esse,  dubium  non 
est,  quin  tractet  rem  cognitu  maxime  necexsariam."  The  banner 
of  the  cross  is  here  set  up.  The  curtain  of  the  most  holy  is 
lifted  higher  and  higher.  The  blood  of  the  typical  sacrifice, 
which  has  been  hitherto  dumb,  begins  to  speak.  Faith,  which 
penetrates  to  the  true  meaning  of  the  prophecy,  hopes  on  not 
on'y  for  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  but  also  for  the  Lamb 
of  God,  which  beareth  the  sin  of  the  world.  And  in  pro- 


312  THE  PEOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

phecy  itself  we  see  the  after-effect  of  this  gigantic  advance. 
Zechariah  no  longer  prophesies  of  the  Messiah  merely  as  a 
king  (ch.  vi.  13)  ;  He  not  only  rules  upon  His  throne,  but  is 
also  a  priest  upon  His  throne  :  sovereignty  and  priesthood  go 
hand  in  hand,  being  peacefully  united  in  Him.  And  in  Zech. 
xii.  13  the  same  prophet  predicts  in  Him  the  good  Divine 
Shepherd,  whom  His  people  pierce,  though  not  without  thereby 
fulfilling  the  counsel  of  God,  and  whom  they  afterwards  long 
for  with  bitter  lamentation  and  weeping.  The  penitential  and 
believing  confession  which  would  then  be  made  by  Israel  is 
prophetically  depicted  by  Isaiah's  pen — "mourning  in  bitter 
sorrow  the  lateness  of  its  love.'* 


SIXTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LIV. 

THE  GLORY  OF  JERUSALEM,  THE  CHURCH  OF  THE  SERVANTS 
OF  JEHOVAH. 

After  the  u  Servant  of  God"  has  expiated  the  sin  of  His 
people  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  and  Israel  has  acknowledged 
its  fault  in  connection  with  the  rejected  One,  and  entered  into 
the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the  salvation  procured  by  Him, 
the  glory  of  the  church,  which  has  thus  become  a  partaker  of 
salvation  through  repentance  and  faith,  is  quite  ready  to  burst 
forth.  Hence  the  prophet  can  now  exclaim,  ver.  1 :  "  Exult,  0 
barren  one.,  tliou  that  didst  not  Lear ;  break  forth  into  exulting,  and 
cry  aloud,  thou  that  didst  not  travail  with  child :  for  there  are  more 
children  of  the  solitary  one  than  children  of  the  married  wife,  saith 
Jehovah"  The  words  are  addressed  to  Jerusalem,  which  was  a 
counterpart  of  Sarah  in  her  barrenness  at  first,  and  her  fruit- 
fulness  afterwards  (ch.  li.  1-3).  She  is  not  ibn  t6  rnjjg  (Job 
xxiv.  21),  but  rr6;  &  rnjjjj  (Judg.  xiii.  2)  ;  not  indeed  that  she 
had  never  had  any  children,  but  during  her  captivity  and  exile 
she  had  been  robbed  of  her  children,  and  as  a  holy  city  had 
given  birth  to  no  more  (ch.  xlix.  21).  She  was  sJiomemdh, 
rendered  solitary  (2  Sam.  xiii.  20 ;  the  allusion  is  to  her  de 
population  as  a  city),  whereas  formerly  she  was  njW3,  i.e. 
enjoyed  the  fellowship  of  Jehovah  her  husband  (ba'al).  But 
this  condition  would  not  last  (for  Jehovah  had  not  given  her 
a  divorce)  :  she  was  therefore  to  exult  and  shout,  since  the 


CHAP.  LIV.  2,  3.  343 

number  of  children  which  she  would  now  have,  as  one  desolate 
and  solitary,  would  be  greater  than  the  number  of  those  which 
she  had  as  a  married  wife. 

With  this  prospect  before  her,  even  her  dwelling-place 
would  need  enlarging.  Ver.  2.  "  Enlarge  the  space  of  thy  tent, 
and  let  them  stretch  out  the  curtains  of  thy  habitations ;  forbid 
not!  lengthen  thy  cords,  and  fasten  thy  plugs"  She  is  to  widen 
out  the  space  inside  her  tent,  and  they  (^  has  no  definite  sub 
ject,  which  is  often  the  case  where  some  subordinate  servant  is 
to  be  thought  of)  are  to  spread  out  far  and  wide  the  coverings 
of  the  framework  of  her  dwelling,  which  is  called  mishkenoth 
(in  the  plural)  on  account  of  its  roominess  and  magnificence : 
she  is  not  to  forbid  it,  thinking  in  her  weakness  of  faith,  "  It  is 
good  enough  as  it  is ;  it  would  be  too  large."  The  cords  which 
hold  up  the  walls,  she  is  to  lengthen  ;  and  the  plugs,  to  which 
the  cords  are  fastened,  she  is  to  ram  fast  into  the  earth  :  the 
former  because  the  tent  (i.e.  the  holy  city,  Jer.  xxxi.  38-40, 
and  the  dwelling-place  of  the  church  generally,  ch.  xxvi.  15) 
has  to  receive  a  large  number  of  inhabitants ;  the  latter  be 
cause  it  will  not  be  broken  up  so  soon  again  (ch.  xxxiii.  20). 

The  reason  why  the  tent  is  to  be  so  large  and  strong  is 
given  in  ver.  3  :  "  For  thou  wilt  break  forth  on  the  right  and  on 
the  left ;  and  thy  seed  icill  take  possession  of  nations,  and  they 
will  people  desolate  cities"  "  On  the  right  and  on  the  left"  is 
equivalent  to  "on  the  south  and  north"  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  13,  the 
speaker  being  supposed  to  have  his  face  turned  towards  the 
east :  compare  the  Sanscrit  apdn,  situated  at  the  back,  i.e. 
towards  the  west).  We  must  supply  both  west  and  east,  since 
the  promises  contained  in  such  passages  as  Gen.  xv.  18-21 
remained  unfulfilled  even  in  the  age  of  David  and  Solomon. 
Jerusalem  will  now  spread  out,  and  break  through  all  her 
former  bounds  (pdrats  is  used  in  the  same  sense  in  Gen. 
xxviii.  14) ;  and  her  seed  (i.e.  the  seed  acquired  by  the  Servant 
of  Jehovah,  the  dead  yet  eternally  living  One,  the  aTrepua, 
\vhose  airep^a  Pie  Himself  is)  will  take  possession  of  nations 
(ydrash,  ydresh,  capessere,  occupare ;  more  especially  K\7]povo- 
pew,  syn.  ndchal) ;  and  they  (i.e.  the  children  born  to  her)  will 
people  desolate  cities  (hdshibh,  the  causative  of  ydshabh,  to  be 
inhabited,  ch.  xiii.  20).  Thus  will  the  promise  be  fulfilled,  that 
"  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth," — a  promise  not  confined  to 


344  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  Preacher  on  the  mount,  but  found  also  in  Ps.  xxxvii.  9-11, 
and  uttered  by  our  own  prophet  in  ch.  Ix.  21,  Ixv.  9. 

The  encouraging  promise  is  continued  in  ver.  4  :  "  Fear 
not,  for  thou  wilt  not  be  put  to  shame;  and  bid  defiance  to 
reproach,  for  thou  wilt  not  blush :  no,  thou  unit  forget  the  shame 
of  thy  youth,  and  wilt  no  more  remember  the  reproach  of  thy 
widowhood."  Now  that  redemption  was  before  the  door,  Israel 
was  not  to  fear  any  more,  or  to  be  overcome  (as  the  niphal 
nikhlam  implies)  by  a  feeling  of  the  shame  consequent  upon 
her  state  of  punishment,  or  so  to  behave  herself  as  to  leave  no 
room  for  hope.  For  a  state  of  things  was  about  to  commence, 
in  which  she  would  have  no  need  to  be  ashamed  (on  bosh  and 
chdpher  or  hechpir,  see  vol.  i.  p.  108,  note),  but  which,  on  the 
contrary  (*3,  imo,  as  in  ch.  x.  7,  Iv.  9),  would  be  so  glorious 
that  she  would  forget  the  shame  of  her  youth,  i.e.  of  the  Egyp 
tian  bondage,  in  which  the  national  community  of  Israel  was 
still  but  like  a  virgin  (^almdh),  who  entered  into  a  betrothal 
when  redeemed  by  Jehovah,  and  became  His  youthful  wife 
through  a  covenant  of  love  (ehe  =  berlth)  when  the  law  was 
given  at  Sinai  (Jer.  ii.  2  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  60)  ;  so  glorious  indeed, 
that  she  would  never  again  remember  the  shame  of  her  widow 
hood,  i.e.  of  the  Babylonian  captivity,  in  which  she,  the  wife 
whom  Jehovah  had  taken  to  Himself,  was  like  a  widow  whose 
husband  had  died. 

It  was  no  real  widowhood,  however,  but  only  an  apparent 
one  (Jer.  li.  5),  for  the  husband  of  Jerusalem  was  living  still. 
Ver.  5.  "  For  thy  husband  is  thy  Creator ;  Jehovah  of  hosts  is 
His  name;  and  thy  Redeemer  the  Holy  One  of  Israel;  God  of 
the  ivhole  earth  is  He  called"  The  plurals  T.-?S£  and  ?jW  (see 
at  ch.  xxii.  11)  are  to  be  explained  from  the  plural  'Elohlm, 
which  is  connected  with  plural  attributes  in  Josh.  xxiv.  19, 
1  Sam.  xvii.  26,  Ps.  Iviii.  12  (compare  VD'np  in  ch.  x.  15j, 
and  with  plural  predicates  in  Gen.  xx.  13,  xxxv.  7,  and  2  Sam. 
vii.  23.  By  such  expressions  as  these,  which  represent  all 
the  plurality  of  the  divine  nature  as  inherent  in  the  One,  the 
religion  of  revelation,  both  Israelitish  and  Christian,  exhibits 
itself  as  embodying  all  that  is  true  in  polytheism.  He  who 
has  entered  into  the  relation  of  husband  to  Jerusalem  (^JvJ£, 
not  "Hv^Il,  ch.  i.  3)  is  the  very  same  through  \vhom  she  first 
came  into  existence,  the  God  whose  bidding  the  heavenly 


CHAP.  LIV.  6-8.  345 

hosts  obey ;  and  the  Redeemer  of  Jerusalem,  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel,  is  called  the  God  of  the  whole  earth,  and  therefore  has 
both  the  power  and  the  means  to  help  her,  as  prompted  by  the 
relation  of  love  which  exists  between  them. 

And  this  relation  He  now  renews.  Ver.  6.  u  For  Jehovah 
calleth  thee  as  a  wife  forsaken  and  burdened  with  sorrow,  and  as 
a  wife  of  youth,  when  once  she  is  despised,  saith  thy  God"  The 
verb  N"JP,  which  is  the  one  commonly  used  in  these  prophecies 
to  denote  the  call  of  grace,  on  the  ground  of  the  election  of 
grace,  is  used  here  to  signify  the  call  into  that  relation,  which 
did  indeed  exist  before,  but  had  apparently  been  dissolved. 
^J^nip  is  used  here  out  of  pause  (cf.  ch.  Ix.  9)  ;  it  stands,  how 
ever,  quite  irregularly  for  the  form  in  ekh,  which  is  the  one 
commonly  employed  (Judg.  iv.  20  ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  26).  "  And 
as  a  wife  :"  riKW  is  equivalent  to  nK;N3l.  The  hypothetical 
DS^n  '3  belongs  to  the  figure.  Jehovah  calls  His  church  back 
to  Himself,  as  a  husband  takes  back  the  wife  he  loved  in  his 
youth,  even  though  he  may  once  have  been  angry  with  her. 
It  is  with  intention  that  the  word  i"1?-^  ^s  no^  used.  The 
future  (imperfect)  indicates  what  partially  happens,  but  does 
not  become  an  accomplished  or  completed  fact :  He  is  dis 
pleased  with  her,  but  He  has  not  cherished  aversion  or  hatred 
towards  her. 

Thus  does  Jehovah's  displeasure  towards  Jerusalem  pass 
quickly  away ;  and  all  the  more  intense  is  the  manifestation  of 
love  which  follows  His  merely  momentary  anger.  Vers.  7,  8. 
"  For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee,  and  ivith  great  mercy 
u-ill  I  gather  thee.  In  an  effusion  of  anger  I  hid  my  face  froir. 
thee  for  a  moment,  and  with  everlasting  grace  I  have  compassion 
upon  thee,  saith  Jehovah  thy  Redeemer?  uFor  a  small  moment" 
carries  us  to  the  time  of  the  captivity,  which  was  a  small  moment 
in  comparison  with  the  duration  of  the  tender  and  merciful  love, 
with  which  Jehovah  once  more  received  the  church  into  His 
fellowship  in  the  person  of  its  members,  yri  in  ver.  Sa  is  not 
an  adverb,  meaning  momentarily,  as  in  ch.  xlvii.  9,  but  an  accu 
sative  of  duration,  signifying  a  single  moment  long.  Ketseph 
signifies  wrath  regarded  as  an  outburst  (fragor),  like  the 
violence  of  a  storm  or  a  clap  of  thunder ;  shetseph,  which 
rhymes  with  it,  is  explained  by  A.  Schultens,  after  the  Arabic, 
as  signifying  durum  et  asperum  esse :  and  hence  the  rendering 


346  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

adopted  by  Hitzig,  "  in  hard  harshness."  But  this  yields  no 
antithesis  to  "  everlasting  kindness,"  which  requires  that  shetseph 
should  be  rendered  in  some  way  that  expresses  the  idea  of  some 
thing  transitory  or  of  short  duration.  The  earlier  translators 
felt  this,  when,  like  the  LXX.  for  example,  they  adopted  the 
rendering  eV  Qv^w  pucpu),  and  others  of  a  similar  kind ;  and 
Ibn  Labrat,  in  his  writing  against  Menahem  b.  Zeruk,  who 
gives  chorl,  burning  heat,  as  a  gloss  to  shetseph,  explains  it  by 
Wp  (as  Kimchi  and  others  did  afterwards).  But,  as  Jakob  Tarn 
correctly  observes,  "  this  makes  the  sense  purely  tautological." 
In  all  probability,  shdtsaph  is  a  form  allied  to  shdtaph,  as 
ndshabh  (ch.  xl.  7)  is  to  ndshaph  (ch.  xl.  24),  and  qdmat  (Job 
xvi.  8)  to  qdmats,  which  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  one 
another,  so  far  as  the  sense  is  concerned,  as  bubbling  over  to 
flowing  over :  so  that  the  proper  rendering  would  not  be  "  in 
the  overflowing  of  glowing  heat,"  as  Umbreit  thinks,  which 
would  require  *|Sp  *\VW3,  (Prov.  xxvii.  4),  but  in  the  gushing  up 
of  displeasure,  the  overflowing  of  indignation  (Meier).  The 
ketseph  is  only  a  shetsephj  a  vanishing  moment  (Jer.  in  momenta 
indignationis),  when  compared  with  the  true  feeling  of  Jehovah 
towards  Jerusalem,  which  is  chesed  'oldm,  everlasting  kindness. 
The  ground  of  this  "  everlasting  kindness "  is  given  in 
ver.  9 :  "  For  it  is  now  as  at  the  waters  of  Noah,  when  I  swore 
that  the  waters  of  Noah  should  not  overflow  the  earth  any  more ; 
so  have  I  sworn  not  to  be  wroth  with  thee,  and  not  to  threaten 
thee"  The  commencement  of  this  verse  has  been  a  fluctuating 

c> 

one  from  the  earliest  times.  The  Sept.  reading  is  SBD ;  that  of 
the  Targ.,  S.,  Jerome,  Syriac,  and  Saad.,  ^3  ;  and  even  the 
Codd.  read  sometimes  *??"S3,  sometimes  ^3  (compare  Matt. 
xxiv.  37,  wcrirep  al  rjjLLepai,  TOV  IVcoe,  OVTCOS,  /c.r.X., — a  passage 
which  appears  to  derive  its  shape  from  the  one  before  us,  with 
the  reading  I|D\D,  and  which  is  expounded  in  Luke  xvii.  26). 
If  we  read  ^D^D,  the  word  nNT  must  refer  to  the  present,  as  the 
turning-point  between  wrath  and  mercy ;  but  if  W7e  read  *D"*D, 
DKf  denotes  the  pouring  out  of  wrath  in  connection  with  the 
captivity.  Both  readings  are  admissible ;  and  as  even  the 
Septuagint,  with  its  QUITO  TOV  i/Saro?  (from  the  water),  gives  an 
indirect  support  to  the  reading  W3  as  one  word,  this  may 
probably  merit  the  preference,  as  the  one  best  sustained.  TJ'K 
is  ubi,  quum,  as  in  Num.  xx.  13,  Ps.  xcv.  9,  etc.,  although  it 


CHAP.  LIV.  9.  347 

might  also  be  taken  as  the  correlate  of  the  ken  which  follows, 
as  in  Jer.  xxxiii.  22  (cf.  xlviii.  8)  ;  and  in  accordance  with  the 
accents,  we  prefer  the  former.  The  present  turning-point 
resembles,  in  Jehovah's  esteem,  the  days  of  Noah, — those  days 
in  which  He  swore  that  a  flood  should  not  any  more  come  upon 
the  earth  (min  as  in  ch.  v.  6  and  many  other  passages)  :  for 
so  does  He  now  confirm  with  an  oath  His  fixed  purpose  that 
no  such  judgment  of  wrath  as  that  which  has  just  been 
endured  shall  ever  fall  upon  Jerusalem  again  ("IJJ3  denotes 
threatening  with  a  judicial  word,  which  passes  at  once  into 
effect,  as  in  ch.  li.  20).  Hendewerk  has  the  following  quibbling 
remark  here  :  "  What  the  comparison  with  the  flood  is  worth, 
we  may  gather  from  the  later  history,  which  shows  how  soon  the 
new  Jerusalem  and  the  renovated  state  succumbed  to  the  judicial 
wrath  of  God  again."  To  this  we  reply :  (1.)  That  the  prophecy 
refers  to  the  converted  Israel  of  the  last  days,  whose  Jerusalem 
will  never  be  destroyed  again.  These  last  days  appear  to  the 
prophet,  according  to  the  general  character  of  all  prophecy,  as 
though  linked  on  to  the  close  of  the  captivity.  For  throughout 
all  prophecy,  along  with  the  far-sightedness  imparted  by  the 
Spirit,  there  was  also  a  short-sightedness  whicli  the  Spirit  did 
not  remove;  that  is  to  say,  the  directly  divine  element  of  insight 
into  the  future  was  associated  with  a  human  element  of  Iwpe, 
which  was  nevertheless  also  indirectly  divine,  inasmuch  as  it 
subserved  the  divine  plan  of  salvation  ;  and  this  hope  brought, 
as  it  were,  the  far  distant  future  into  the  closest  proximity  with 
the  troubled  present.  If,  then,  we  keep  this  in  mind,  we  shall 
see  that  it  was  quite  in  order  for  the  prophet  to  behold  the  final 
future  on  the  very  edge  of  the  present,  and  not  to  see  the  long 
and  undulating  way  between.  (2.)  The  Israel  which  has  been 
plunged  by  the  Romans  into  the  present  exile  of  a  thousand 
years  is  that  part  of  the  nation  (Rom.  xi.  25),  which  has  thrust 
away  the  eternal  mercy  and  the  unchangeable  covenant  of 
peace ;  but  this  rejection  has  simply  postponed,  and  not  pre 
vented,  the  full  realization  of  the  salvation  promised  to  Israel 
as  a  people.  The  covenant  still  exists,  primarily  indeed  as  an 
offer  on  the  part  of  Jehovah,  so  that  it  rests  with  Israel  whether 
it  shall  continue  one-sided  or  not ;  but  all  that  is  wanted  on  the 
part  of  Israel  is  faith,  to  enable  it  to  exchange  the  shifting  soil 
of  its  present  exile  for  the  rocky  foundation  of  that  covenant 


348  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

of  peace  which  has  encircled  the  ages  since  the  captivity  (see 
Hag.  ii.  9),  as  the  covenant  with  Noah  encircled  those  after 
the  flood  with  the  covenant  sign  of  the  rainbow  in  the  cloud. 

Yer.  1 0.  "  For  the  mo  mtains  may  depart,  and  the  hills  may 
shake;  my  grace  will  not  depart  from  thee,  and  my  covenant  of 
peace  will  not  shake,  saith  Jehovah  who  hath  compassion  on 
thee"  Jehovah's  grace  and  covenant  of  peace  (cf.  Num. 
xxv.  12)  stand  as  firm  as  the  mountains  of  God  (Ps.  xxxvi.  7), 
without  departing  from  Jerusalem  (^^P  instead  of  the  usual 
TjnsD)  and  without  shaking ;  and  they  will  be  fulfilled.  This 
fulfilment  will  not  take  place  either  by  force  or  by  enchant 
ment;  but  the  church  which  is  to  be  glorified  must  pass  through 
sufferings,  until  it  has  attained  the  form  which  answers  to  the 
glory  promised  to  it  on  oath.  And  this  will  also  take  place;  for 
the  old  Jerusalem  will  come  forth  as  a  new  one  out  of  the 
furnace  of  affliction.  Vers.  11,  12.  "  0  thou  afflicted,  tossed 
with  tempest,  not  comforted,  behold,  I  lay  thy  stones  in  stibium, 
and  lay  thy  foundations  with  sapphires  ;  and  make  thy  minarets 
of  ruby,  and  thy  gates  into  carbuncles,  and  all  thy  boundary  into 
jewels"  At  the  present  time  the  church,  of  which  Jerusalem 
is  the  metropolis,  is  sunk  in  misery,  driven  with  tempest  like 
chaff  of  the  threshing-floor  (Hos.  xiii.  3),  without  comfort  ; 
because  till  now  it  has  waited  in  vain  for  any  act  of  consolation 
on  the  part  of  God,  and  has  been  scorned  rather  than  com 
forted  by  man  (rnyb  is  a  part,  kal,  not  pual ;  and  HDrn  3d  pers. 
prcet.  like  nrmn/ch.  Ixii.  12,  and  norn,  Hos.  i.  6,  ii'.  3).  But 
this  will  be  altered ;  Jerusalem  will  rise  again  from  the  dust, 
like  a  glorious  building  of  God.  Jerome  makes  the  following 
apt  remark  on  ver.  116:  "in  stibio,  i.e.  in  the  likeness  of  an 
elegant  woman,  who  paints  her  eyes  with  stibium;  referring 
to  the  beauty  of  the  city."  Pukh  is  eye-black  (kohl,  cf.  kdchal, 
Ezek.  xxiii.  40),  i.e.  a  sooty  compound,  the  chief  component  of 
which  was  powdered  antimony,  or  else  manganese  or  lead,  and 
with  which  oriental  women  coloured  their  eyebrows,  and  more 
particularly  the  eyelids  both  above  and  below  the  eyes,  that  the 
beauty  of  the  latter  might  be  all  the  more  conspicuous  (2  Kings 
ix.  30).  The  classic  <J>VKOS,  fucus,  has  a  meaning  foreign  to  the 
Hebrew  word,  viz.  that  of  rouge  for  the  cheeks.  If,  then, 
stibium  (antimony),  or  any  blackening  collyrium  generally, 
served  the  purpose  of  mortar  in  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem, 


CHAP.  LIV.  11,  12.  349 

the  stones  of  its  walls  (not  its  foundation-stones,  T^JN,  which  is 
the  reading  adopted  by  Ewald,  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  visible 
stones  of  its  towering  walls)  would  look  like  the  eyes  of  a 
woman  shining  forth  from  the  black  framework  of  their 
painted  lids,  i.e.  they  would  stand  out  in  splendour  from  their 
dark  ground.  The  Beth  in  bassapplrlm  indicates  the  means 
employed.  Sapphires  serve  as  foundation-stones,  for  the 
foundation  of  Jerusalem  stands  as  immoveably  firm  as  the 
covenant  of  God.  The  sapphire  blue  is  the  colour  of  the 
heaven,  of  revelation,  and  of  the  covenant.  The  slfmdslwth, 
however,  i.e.  the  minarets  which  stand  out  like  rays  of  the  sun, 
and  also  the  gates,  have  a  red  appearance.  Ked  is  the  colour 
of  blood,  and  hence  of  life  and  of  imperishableness ;  also  the 
colour  of  fire  and  of  lightning,  and  hence  of  wrath  and  victory. 
Jehovah  makes  the  minarets  of  a  ruby."  The  Sept.  and 
Jerome  adopt  the  rendering  iaspidem  (a  jasper) ;  at  any  rate, 
1313  (which  is  the  proper  way  of  writing  the  word  :  Ewald, 
§  48,  c1)  is  a  red  sparkling  jewel  (from  kidked;  cf.  kidod,  scin 
tilla).  The  arches  of  the  gates  He  forms  of  rrjjptf  ^3K?  stones 
of  fiery  splendour  (from  qddach,  to  burn  :  hence  qaddachath, 
TTuptro?),  that  is  to  say,  of  carbuncle  stones  (from  carbunculus, 
a  small  red-hot  coal),  like  ruby,  garnet,  etc.  Jerome  has 
adopted  the  false  rendering  lapides  sculptos,  after  Symm.  \lBoi 
ry\v(£>fjs  (from  nip  =  Tip,  finderety.  The  accusative  of  the 
predicate  1313  is  interchanged  with  niptf  "03X7,  and  then  with 
parppnKpj  to  denote  the  materia  ex  qua.  The  whole  territory 
(precinct)  of  Jerusalem  is  turned  by  Jehovah  into  precious 
stones,  that  is  to  say,  it  appears  to  be  paved  with  such  stones, 
just  as  in  Tobit  xiii.  17  the  streets  are  said  to  be  "  paved  with 
beryl,  and  carbuncle,  and  stones  of  Ophir,"  i.e.  to  be  covered 
with  a  mosaic  formed  of  precious  stones.  It  is  upon  the 
passage  before  us  that  Tobit  xiii.  16,  17,  and  Kev.  xxi.  18-21, 
are  founded.  The  motley  colours  of  the  precious  stones,  with 
which  the  new  Jerusalem  is  adorned,  are  something  more  than 

1  The  first  3  is  dagessatum,  the  second  rapliatum :  see  Norzi.  The  word 
forms  one  of  the  eighteen  which  have  a  dayesh  after  a  word  ending  with 
a  vowel  sound  (i?D3D  X^3  NVrP  1D3  fEttl) :  see  Masora  Magna  on  Dan. 
v.  11,  and  Heidenheim's  D^yDH  l|13atyD»  41a.  The  object  is  to  secure 
greater  euphony,  as  in  £"D3~G3  (&6n),  ch.  x.  9,  which  is  one  of  the 
eighteen  words. 


350  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

a  mere  childish  fancy.  Whence,  then,  do  the  precious  stones 
derive  their  charm  ?  The  ultimate  ground  of  this  charm  is 
the  fact,  that  in  universal  nature  everything  presses  to  the 
light,  and  that  in  the  mineral  world  the  jewels  represent  the 
highest  stage  of  this  ascending  process.  It  is  the  self-unfold 
ing  process  of  the  divine  glory  itself,  which  is  reflected  type- 
logically  in  the  several  gradations  of  the  manifold  play  of 
colours  and  the  transparency  of  the  precious  stones.  For  this 
reason,  the  high  priest  wore  a  breastplate  with  twelve  precious 
stones,  upon  which  were  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel ;  and  for  this  same  reason,  the  author  of  the  Apocalypse 
carries  out  into  detail  in  ch.  xxi.  the  picture  of  the  new 
Jerusalem,  which  is  here  sketched  by  the  prophet  of  the  Old 
Testament  (without  distinguishing  time  from  eternity),  adding 
crystals  and  pearls  to  the  precious  stones  which  he  there  men 
tions  one  by  one.  How  can  all  this  be  explained,  except  on 
the  ground  that  even  the  mineral  world  reflects  the  glory  of 
those  eternal  lights  from  which  God  is  called  the  "  Father  of 
lights,"  or  except  on  the  assumption  that  the  saints  in  light  will 
one  day  be  able  to  translate  these  stony  types  into  the  words 
of  God,  out  of  which  they  have  their  being? 

The  outward  glory  of  the  city  is  only  the  manifestation, 
which  strikes  the  senses,  of  the  spiritual  glory  of  the  church 
dwelling  therein.  Ver.  13.  "  And  all  thy  children  icill  be  the 
learned  of  Jehovah  ;  and  great  the  peace  of  thy  children"  We 
translate  both  halves  of  the  verse  as  substantive  clauses,  al 
though  they  might  be  accusatives  of  both  the  object  and  pre 
dicate,  dependent  upon  VU??>.  'n  H^ip  are  disciples  of  Jehovah, 
but,  as  in  ch.  1.  4,  with  the  subordinate  idea  of  both  docility  and 
learning.  The  children  of  Jerusalem  will  need  no  instruction 
from  man,  but  carry  within  them  the  teaching  of  heaven,  as 
those  who  are  "  taught  of  God  "  (SiSa/crol  @eov,  John  vi.  45  ; 
0€o£>L&aKToi,,  1  Thess.  iv.  9).  Essentially  the  same  promise  is 
given  in  Joel  iii.  1,  2,  and  Jer.  xxxi.  34  ;  and  represented  in 
1  John  ii.  20  ("  Ye  have  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  One,  and 
know  all  things")  as  already  fulfilled.  In  the  place  of  the 
former  inward  and  outward  distress,  there  has  now  entered 
didldrriy  perfect  inward  and  outward  peace,  complete  salva 
tion,  and  blessedness  as  its  result.  2"]  is  an  adjective,  for 
this  form  cannot  be  shown  to  have  existed  as  a  syncopated 


CHAP.  L1V.  14-17.  35! 

third  pers.  prcet.,  like  n^  '•n  (=  ^n).  The  verse  closes  palin- 
dromically. 

In  perfect  keeping  with  this  grace  through  righteousness, 
Jerusalem  will  then  stand  firm  and  impregnable.  Vers.  14,  15. 
u  Through  righteousness  wilt  thou  be  fortified :  be  far  from 
anxiety ',  for  thou  hast  nothing  to  fear;  and  from  terror,  for  it  will 
not  come  near  thee.  Behold,  men  crowd  together  in  crowds ;  my 
will  is  not  there.  Who  crowd  together  against  thee  ? — he  shall  fall 
by  thee"  Both  the  thought  and  action  of  Jerusalem  will  be 
righteousness  then,  and  it  will  thereby  acquire  strength  ;  ^jian 
is  a  pausal  future  hithpalel,  with  the  n  of  the  reflective  opening 
syllable  assimilated  (Ges.  §  53,  2,  b).  With  this  reciprocal  in 
fluence  of  its  moral  character  and  imparted  glory,  it  can,  and 
is  to  keep  far  away  from  all  thought  of  oppression  and  terror ; 
for,  through  divine  grace  and  a  corresponding  divine  nature,  it 
has  nothing  to  fear.  |n  (ver.  15a),  when  pointing  to  any  trans 
action  as  possible  (as,  for  example,  in  Job  xii.  14,  xxiii.  8), 
acquires  almost  the  significance  of  a  conditional  particle  (Evvald, 
§  103,  g).  The  equally  hypothetical  parallel  clause  is  clothed  in 
the  form  of  an  interrogative.  For  the  verb  gur,  the  meaning 
"  to  gather  together "  (related  to  "i-lf  ),  more  especially  to  join 
together  with  hostile  intention  (cf.  (rvvd<yecr0ai,  Rev.  xix.  19, 
xx.  8),  is  sustained  by  Ps.  Ivi.  7,  lix.  4 ;  and  with  rna,  lacessere, 
it  has  nothing  to  do  (Hitzig  and  Ewald).  ^fiN  has  the  force  of 
contra  te,  as  in  the  case  of  verbs  of  combat.  The  first  apodosis 
is  this :  "  but  it  takes  place  entirely  away  from  me,"  i.e.  with 
out  and  against  my  will ;  ^N1r?  =  ^P  (as  in  ch.  lix.  21),  and 
DniK  =  DflS,  are  no  sure  signs  of  a  later  usage;  for  this  alter 
nation  of  the  two  forms  of  HN  is  met  with  as  early  as  Josh.  xiv.  12. 
The  second  apodosis  is,  "  he  will  fall  upon  (or  against)  thee," 
or,  as  we  should  say,  "  founder,"  or  "  be  wrecked."  It  is  far 
more  likely  that  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  than  that 
they  mean  "  he  will  fall  to  thy  lot  "  (^y  taj,  like  ^  i>£J  elsewhere, 
to  fall  to  a  person)  ;  for  the  context  here  is  a  totally  different 
one  from  ch.  xlv.  14,  and  we  look  for  nothing  more  than  a 
declaration  of  the  utter  failure  and  ruin  of  the  undertaking. 

Jerusalem  will  be  thus  invincible,  because  Jehovah,  the 
Almighty  One,  is  its  protector.  Vers.  16,  17.  "Behold,  I  have 
created  the  smith  who  bloweth  the  coal-fire,  and  brings  to  the  light 
u  weapon  according  to  his  trade ;  and  I  have  created  the  destroyer 


352  THE  PEOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

to  destroy.  Every  lueapon  formed  against  iliee  has  no  success, 
and  every  tongue  that  cometh  before  the  judgment  with  thee  thou 
wilt  condemn.  TIds  the  inheritance  of  the  servants  of  Jehovah;  and 
their  righteousness  from  me,  saith  Jehovah."  If  Jehovah  has 
created  the  armourer,  who  forges  a  weapon  ^OT^3  (i.e.  accord 
ing  to  his  trade,  or  according  to  the  thing  he  has  to  finish, 
whether  an  arrow,  or  a  sword,  or  a  spear ;  not  "  for  his  own 
use,"  as  Kimchi  supposes),  to  be  used  in  the  hostile  army 
against  Jerusalem,  He  has  also  created  a  destroyer  farf?)  to 
destroy.  The  very  same  creative  might,  to  which  the  origin  of 
the  weapon  is  to  be  traced  as  its  primary  cause,  has  opposed 
to  it  beforehand  a  defender  of  Jerusalem.  And  as  every 
hostile  weapon  fails,  Jerusalem,  in  the  consciousness  of  its 
divine  right,  will  convict  every  accusing  tongue  as  guilty  and 
deserving  of  utter  condemnation  (W~!?  as  in  ch.  1.  9,  cf.  1 
Sam.  xiv.  47,  where  it  denotes  the  punishment  of  the  guilty). 
The  epiphonern  in  ver.  176,  with  the  retrospective  HNT  and  the 
words  "  saith  the  Lord,"  which  confirm  the  certainty  of  the 
fulfilment,  forms  an  unmistakeable  close  to  the  prophecy. 
This  is  the  position  in  which  Jehovah  has  placed  His  servants 
as  heirs  of  the  future  salvation ;  and  this  the  righteousness 
which  they  have  received  as  His  gift,  and  which  makes  them 
strong  within  and  victorious  without.  The  individual  idea  of 
the  church,  which  we  find  elsewhere  personified  as  "  the  servant 
of  Jehovah,"  equivalent  to  "the  people  in  whose  heart  is  my 
law  "  (ch.  li.  7),  or  "  my  people  that  have  sought  me  "  (ch.  Ixv. 
10),  is  here  expanded  into  "the  servants  of  Jehovah"  (as  in 
ch.  Ixv.  8,  9 ;  compare  ch.  lix.  21  with  ch.  li.  16).  But  totally 
different  colours  are  employed  in  ch.  lii.  13-ch.  liii.  to  depict 
the  exaltation  of  the  one  "  Servant  of  Jehovah,"  from  those 
used  here  to  paint  the  glory  of  the  church  of  the  "  servants  of 
Jehovah," — a  proof  that  the  ideas  do  not  cover  one  another. 
That  wThich  is  the  reward  of  suffering  in  the  case  of  the  former, 
is  the  experience  of  divine  mercy  in  that  of  the  latter:  it  becomes 
a  partaker  of  the  salvation  purchased  by  the  other.  The  one 
"  Servant  of  Jehovah"  is  the  heart  of  the  church,  in  which  the 
crisis  which  bursts  forth  into  life  is  passing ;  the  righteousness 
of  the  "  servants  of  Jehovah  "  is  the  fruit  of  the  sufferings 
of  this  one  "  Servant  of  Jehovah,"  who  is  Himself  pH¥  and 
He  is  the  Mediator  of  all  the  salvation  of  the 


CHAP.  LV.  1,  2.  353 

church.      He    is    not   only   its   "  head,"    but   its    "  fulness " 
(7r\rjpa)ua)  also. 

SEVENTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LV. 
COME  AND  TAKE  THE  SURE  SALVATION  OF  JEHOVAH. 

All  things  are  ready ;  the  guests  are  invited  ;  and  nothing 
is  required  of  them  except  to  come.  Vers.  1,  2.  "Alas,  all  ye 
thirsty  ones,  come  ye  to  the  water;  and  ye  that  have  no  silver,  come 
ye,  buy,  and  eat  I  Yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  without  money 
and  without  payment !  Wherefore  do  ye  iveigh  silver  for  that 
which  is  not  bread,  and  the  result  of  your  labour  for  that  which 
satisjleth  not  ?  0  hearken  ye  to  me,  and  eat  the  good,  and  let 
your  soul  delight  itself  in  fat."  Hitzig  and  Knobel  understand 
by  water,  wine,  and  milk,  the  rich  material  blessings  which 
awaited  the  exiles  on  their  return  to  their  fatherland,  whereas 
they  were  now  paying  tribute  and  performing  service  in  Babylon 
without  receiving  anything  in  return.  But  the  prophet  was 
acquainted  with  something  higher  than  either  natural  water 
(ch.  xliv.  3,  cf.  xli.  17)  or  natural  wine  (ch.  xxv.  6).  Pie 
knew  of  an  eating  and  drinking  which  reached  beyond  the 
mere  material  enjoyment  (ch.  Ixv.  13) ;  and  the  expression 
'n  21B,  whilst  it  includes  material  blessings  (Jer.  xxxi.  12),  is 
not  exhausted  by  them  (ch.  Ixiii.  7,  cf.  Ps.  xxvii.  13),  just  as 
Jjjynn  in  ch.  Iviii.  14  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvii.  4,  11)  does  not  denote  a 
feeling  of  worldly,  but  of  spiritual  joy.  Water,  wine,  and 
milk,  as  the  fact  that  water  is  placed  first  clearly  shows,  are 
not  the  produce  of  the  Holy  Land,  but  figurative  representations 
of  spiritual  revival,  recreation,  and  nourishment  (cf .  1  Pet.  ii.  2, 
"  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word").  The  whole  appeal  is  framed 
accordingly.  When  Jehovah  summons  the  thirsty  ones  of  His 
people  to  come  to  the  water,  the  summons  must  have  reference 
to  something  more  than  the  water  to  which  a  shepherd  leads 
his  flock.  And  as  buying  without  money  or  any  other  medium 
of  exchange  is  an  idea  which  neutralizes  itself  in  the  sphere  of 
natural  objects,  wine  and  milk  are  here  blessings  and  gifts  of 
divine  grace,  which  are  obtained  by  grace  (%a/3trt,  gratis), 
their  reception  being  dependent  upon  nothing  but  a  sense  of 
need,  and  a  readiness  to  accept  the  blessings  offered.  Again, 
VOL.  II.  Z 


354  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


the  use  of  the  verb  Vt!2$,  which  is  confined  in  other  passages  to 
the  purchase  of  cereals,  is  a  sufficient  proof  that  the  reference  is 
not  to  natural  objects,  but  to  such  objects  as  could  properly  be 
compared  to  cereals.  The  bread  and  other  provisions,  which  Israel 
obtained  in  its  present  state  of  punishment,  are  called  "  not 
bread,"  and  "  not  serving  to  satisfy,"  because  that  which  truly 
satisfies  the  soul  comes  from  above,  and  being  of  no  earthly 
nature,  is  to  be  obtained  by  those  who  are  the  most  destitute  of 
earthly  supplies.  Can  any  Christian  reader  fail  to  recal,  when 
reading  the  invitation  in  ver.  1,  the  words  of  the  parable  in 
Matt.  xxii.  4,  "All  things  are  now  ready?"  And  does  not 
ver.  2  equally  suggest  the  words  of  Paul  in  Rom.  xi.  6,  "  If 
by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more  of  works  ?  "  Even  the  exclama 
tion  hoi  (alas  !  see  ch.  xviii.  1),  with  which  the  passage  com 
mences,  expresses  deep  sorrow  on  account  of  the  unsatisfied 
thirst,  and  the  toilsome  labour  which  affords  nothing  but 
seeming  satisfaction.  The  way  to  true  satisfaction  is  indicated 
in  the  words,  "  Hearken  unto  me  :  "  it  is  the  way  of  the  obe 
dience  of  faith.  In  this  way  alone  can  the  satisfaction  of  the 
soul  be  obtained. 

And  in  this  way  it  is  possible  to  obtain  not  only  the  satis 
faction  of  absolute  need,  but  a  superabundant  enjoyment,  and 
an  overflowing  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  Vers.  3-5.  "  Incline 
your  ear,  and  come  to  me  :  hear,  and  let  your  soul  revive  ;  and  I 
ivill  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  the  true  mercies  of 
David.  Behold,  I  have  set  him  as  a  witness  for  nations,  a  prince 
and  commander  of  nations.  Behold,  thou  wilt  call  a  mass  of 
people  that  thou  knoiuest  not;  and  a  mass  of  people  that  knoweth 
thee  not  will  hasten  to  thee,  for  the  sake  of  Jehovah  thy  God,  and 
for  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  that  He  hath  made  thee  glorious." 
The  expression  "  make  a  covenant  "  (kdrath  berlth)  is  not 
always  applied  to  a  superior  in  relation  to  an  inferior  (compare, 
on  the  contrary,  Ezra  x.  3)  ;  but  here  the  double-sided  idea 
implied  in  pactio  is  confined  to  one  side  alone,  in  the  sense  of  a 
spontaneous  sponsio  having  all  the  force  of  a  covenant  (ch. 
Ixi.  8;  compare  2  Chron.  vii.  18,  where  kdrath  by  itself  signifies 
"  to  promise  with  the  force  of  a  covenant  "),  and  also  of  the 
offer  of  a  covenant  or  anticipated  conclusion  of  a  covenant,  as 
in  Ezek.  xxxiv.  25,  and  in  the  case  before  us,  where  "  the  true 
mercies  of  David"  are  attached  to  the  idea  of  offering  or  grant- 


CHAP.  LV-  3-5.  355 

inn  involved  in  the  expression,  "I  will  make  an  everlasting 
covenant  with  you,"  as  a  more  precise  definition  of  the  object. 
All  that  is  required  on  the  part  of  Israel  is  hearing,  and  coming, 
and  taking :  let  it  do  this,  and  it  will  be  pervaded  by  new 
life ;  and  Jehovah  will  meet  it  with  an  everlasting  covenant, 
viz.  the  unchangeable  mercies  of  David.  Our  interpretation 
of  this  must  be  dependent  chiefly  upon  whether  ver.  4  is  re 
garded  as  looking  back  to  the  history  of  David,  or  looking  for 
ward  to  something  future.  In  the  latter  case  we  are  either  to 

O 

understand  by  "  David"  the  second  David  (according  to  Hos. 
iii.  5,  Jer.  xxx.  9,  Ezek.  xxxiv.  24),  so  that  the  allusion  is  to 
the  mercies  granted  in  the  Messiah,  and  according  to  ch.  ix.  7, 
enduring  "from  henceforth  even  for  ever;"  or  else  David  is 
the  son  of  Jesse,  and  "  the  mercies  of  David  "  are  the  mercies 
bestowed  upon  him,  which  are  called  "  the  true  mercies "  as 
mercies  promised  and  running  into  the  future  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  50 ; 
2  Chron.  vi.  42),  in  which  case  ver.  4  explains  what  David 
will  become  in  the  person  of  his  antitype  the  second  David. 
The  directly  Messianic  application  of  the  name  "  David  "  is  to 
be  objected  to,  on  the  ground  that  the  Messiah  is  never  so 
called  without  further  remark ;  whilst  the  following  objections 
may  be  adduced  to  the  indirectly  Messianic  interpretation  of 
ver.  4  (David  in  the  Messiah) :  (1.)  The  change  of  the  tense  in 
vers.  4,  5,  which  requires  that  we  should  assume  that  ver.  4 
points  backwards  into  the  past,  and  ver.  5  forwards  into  the 
future  : *  (2.)  That  the  choice  of  the  expression  in  vers.  4,  5 
is  designed  to  represent  what  Israel  has  to  look  for  in  the  future 
as  going  beyond  what  was  historically  realized  in  David ;  for  in 
ver.  5  the  mass  of  the  heathen  world,  which  has  hitherto  stood 

1  F.  Philippi  observes  that  jn,  which  refers  to  the  future  in  ver.  5  at 
any  rate,  must  be  taken  as  referring  to  the  same  sphere  of  time  as  that 
which  immediately  precedes.  But  hen  in  Isaiah  points  sometimes  back 
wards  (ch.  1.  1,  Ixiv.  4),  sometimes  forwards ;  and  where  two  follow 
one  another,  of  which  the  one  points  backwards  and  the  other  forwards, 
the  former  is  followed  by  the  perfect,  the  latter  by  the  future  (ch.  L  1,  2). 
But  if  they  both  point  to  the  future,  the  future  tense  is  used  in  both 
instances  (ch.  1.  9).  A  better  argument  in  favour  of  the  prophetic  inter 
pretation  of  ver.  4  might  be  drawn  from  the  fact  that  iflro  JH  may  mean 
"  I  give  (set,  lay,  or  make)  even  now  "  (e.g.  Jer.  i.  9).  But  what  we  have 
said  above  is  sufficient  proof  that  this  is  not  the  meaning  here  (if  this  were 
the  meaning,  we  should  rather  expect  vriru  jn). 


356  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

out  of  all  relation  to  Israel,  answers  to  the  O^N? :  (3.)  That 
the  juxtaposition  of  the  Messiah  and  Israel  would  be  altogether 
without  parallel  in  these  prophecies  (ch.  xl.-lxvi.),  and  contrary 
to  their  peculiar  character ;  for  the  earlier  stereotype  idea  of 
the  Messiah  is  here  resolved  into  the  idea  of  the  u  servant  of 
Jehovah,"  from  which  it  returns  again  to  its  primary  use,  i.e. 
from  the  national  basis  to  the  individual,  by  means  of  the 
ascending  variations  through  which  this  expression  passes,  and 
thus  reaches  a  more  comprehensive,  spiritual,  arid  glorified 
form.  The  personal  "  servant  of  Jehovah "  is  undoubtedly 
no  other  than  the  "  Son  of  David "  of  the  earlier  prophecy ; 
but  the  premises,  from  which  we  arrive  at  this  conclusion  in 
connection  with  our  prophet,  are  not  that  the  "  servant  of 
Jehovah"  is  of  the  seed  of  David  and  the  final  personal  reali 
zation  of  the  promise  of  a  future  king,  but  that  he  is  of  the 
nation  of  Israel,  and  the  final  personal  realization  of  the  idea 
of  Israel,  both  in  its  inward  nature,  and  in  its  calling  in  relation 
to  the  whole  world  of  nations.  Consequently  vers.  4  and  5  stand 
to  one  another  in  the  relation  of  type  and  antitype,  and  the 
"  mercies  of  David  "  are  called  "  the  true  mercies "  (probably 
with  an  allusion  to  2  Sam.  vii.  16;  cf.  Ps.  Ixxxix.  29,  30),  as 
being  inviolable, — mercies  which  had  both  been  realized  in 
the  case  of  David  himself,  and  would  be  realized  still  further, 
inasmuch  as  they  must  endure  for  an  everlasting  future,  and 
therefore  be  further  and  further  fulfilled,  until  they  have 
reached  that  lofty  height,  on  the  summit  of  which  they  will 
remain  unchangeable  for  ever.  It  is  of  David  the  son  of 
Jesse  that  Jehovah  says  in  ver.  4,  "  I  have  given  him  for  a 
witness  to  peoples,  a  leader  and  commander  to  the  peoples." 
So  far  as  the  sense  is  concerned,  TJJ  is  as  much  a  construct  as 
nft'O.  In  the  application  to  David  of  the  term  1J>,  which  never 
means  anything  but  testis,  witness,  in  these  prophecies,  we  may 
clearly  see  the  bent  of  the  prophet's  mind  towards  what  is 
spiritual.  David  had  subdued  nations  by  the  force  of  arms, 
but  his  true  and  loftiest  greatness  consisted  in  the  fact  that  he 
was  a  witness  of  the  nations, — a  witness  by  the  victorious  power 
of  his  word,  the  conquering  might  of  his  Psalms,  the  attractive 
force  of  his  typical  life.  What  he  expresses  so  frequently  in 
the  Psalms  as  a  resolution  and  a  vow,  viz.  that  he  will  proclaim 
the  name  of  Jehovah  among  the  nations  (Ps.  xviii.  50,  Ivii.  10), 


CHAP.  LV.  6,  7.  357 

he  has  really  fulfilled  :  he  has  not  only  overcome  them  by 
bloody  warfare,  but  by  the  might  of  his  testimony,  more 
especially  as  "  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  1). 
What  David  himself  was  able  to  say  in  Ps.  xviii.  43,  "  People 
that  I  did  not  know  served  me,"  will  be  fulfilled  to  a  still  wider 
extent  in  the  experience  of  Israel.  Having  been  presented 
with  the  promised  "  inviolable  mercies  of  David,"  it  will  effect 
a  spiritual  conquest  over  the  heathen  world,  even  over  that  por 
tion  which  has  hitherto  stood  in  no  reciprocal  relation  to  it, 
and  gain  possession  of  it  for  itself  for  the  sake  of  Jehovah, 
whom  it  has  for  its  God,  and  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  (^  of 
the  object,  in  relation  to  which,  or  at  the  instigation  of  which, 
anything  is  done),  because  He  hath  glorified  it  (His  people  : 
is  not  a  pausal  form  for  "H"!^?,  cf.  ch.  liv.  6,  but  for 
TINS,  hence  =^»B,  cf.  t\W,  ch'.  xxx.  19)  ;  so  that  joining 
themselves  to  Israel  is  the  same  as  joining  themselves  to  God 
and  to  the  church  of  the  God  of  revelation  (cf.  ch.  Ix.  9,  where 
ver.  5b  is  repeated  almost  word  for  word). 

So  gracious  is  the  offer  which  Jehovah  now  makes  to  His 
people,  so  great  are  the  promises  that  He  makes  to  it,  viz.  the 
regal  glory  of  David,  and  the  government  of  the  world  by 
virtue  of  the  religion  of  Jehovah.  Hence  the  exhortation  is 
addressed  to  it  in  vers.  6  and  7  :  "  Seek  ye  Jehovah  while  He 
may  be  found,  call  ye  upon  Him  while  He  is  near.  Let  the 
wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts : 
and  let  him  return  to  Jehovah,  and  He  will  have  compassion  upon 
him  ;  and  to  our  God,  for  He  will  abundantly  pardon"  They 
are  to  seek  to  press  into  the  fellowship  of  Jehovah  (ddrash 
with  the  radical  meaning  terere,  to  acquire  experimental  know 
ledge  or  confidential  acquaintance  with  anything)  now  that  He 
is  to  be  found  (ch.  Ixv.  1,  compare  the  parallelism  of  words 
and  things  in  Jer.  xxix.  14),  and  to  call  upon  Him,  viz.  for  a 
share  in  that  superabundant  grace,  now  that  He  is  near,  i.e. 
now  that  He  approaches  Israel,  and  offers  it.  In  the  admoni 
tion  to  repentance  introduced  in  ver.  7,  both  sides  of  the  yLtera- 
VQICL  find  expression,  viz.  turning  away  from  sinful  self-will,  and 
turning  to  the  God  of  salvation.  The  apodosis  with  its  pro 
mises  commences  with  ^ipnTi — then  will  He  have  compassion 
upon  such  a  man  ;  and  consequentlv  D^Pr5  n?T."^  (with  ^  be 
cause  the  fragmentary  sentence  UVp&T/fctt  did  not  admit  of  tht> 


358  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

continuation  with  V)  has  not  a  general,  but  an  individual  mean 
ing  (vid.  Ps.  cxxx.  4,  7),  and  is  to  be  translated  as  a  future  (for 
the  expression,  compare  ch.  xxvi.  17). 

The  appeal,  to  leave  their  own  way  and  their  own  thoughts, 
and  yield  themselves  to  God  the  Redeemer,  and  to  His  word, 
is  now  urged  on  the  ground  of  the  heaven-wide  difference  be 
tween  the  ways  and  thoughts  of  this  God  and  the  despairing 
thoughts  of  men  (ch.  xl.  27,  xlix.  24),  and  their  aimless  laby 
rinthine  ways.  Vers.  8,  9.  "For  my  thoughts  are  not  your 
thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  my  ivays,  saith  Jehovah  :  no> 
heaven  is  high  above  the  earth ;  so  high  are  my  ways  above  your 
ways,  and  my  thoughts  above  your  thoughts"  The  kl  (imo) 
introduces  the  undeniable  statement  of  a  fact  patent  to  the 
senses,  for  the  purpose  of  clearly  setting  forth,  by  way  of  com 
parison,  the  relation  in  which  the  ways  and  thoughts  of  God 
stand  to  those  of  man.  There  is  no  necessity  to  supply  "i^K3  after 
^,  as  Hitzig  and  Knobel  do.  It  is  simply  omitted,  as  in  ch.  Ixii.  5 
and  Jer.  iii.  20,  or  like  }3  in  Prov.  xxvi.  11,  etc.  On  what  side 
the  heaven-wide  elevation  is  to  be  seen,  is  shown  in  what  follows. 
They  are  not  so  fickle,  so  unreliable,  or  so  powerless. 

This  is  set  forth  under  a  figure  drawn  from  the  rain  and  the 
snow.  Vers.  10, 11.  "For  as  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow 
from  heaven,  and  returneth  not  thither,  till  it  has  moistened  the 
earth,  and  fertilized  it,  and  made  it  green,  and  offered  seed  to  the 
sower  and  bread  to  the  eater;  so  will  my  word  be  which  goeth  forth 
out  of  my  mouth:  it  will  not  return  to  me  fruitless,  till  it  has 
accomplished  that  which  I  willed,  and  prosperously  carried  out  that 
for  which  I  sent  it"  The  rain  and  snow  come  down  from  the 
sky,  and  return  not  thither  till  they  have  .  .  .  The  perfects 
after  EK  *3  are  all  to  be  understood  as  such  (Evvald,  §  356,  a). 
Rain  and  snow  return  as  vapour  to  the  sky,  but  not  without 
having  first  of  all  accomplished  the  purpose  of  their  descent. 
And  so  with  the  word  of  Jehovah,  which  goeth  forth  out  of  His 
mouth  (&*•£,  not  NJP,  ch.  xlv.  23,  because  it  is  thought  of  as  still 
going  on  in  the  preaching  of  the  prophet) :  it  will  not  return  with 
out  having  effected  its  object,  i.e.  without  having  accomplished 
what  was  Jehovah's  counsel,  or  "good  pleasure" — without  having 
attained  the  end  for  which  it  was  sent  by  Jehovah  (constr.  as 
in  2  Sam.  xi.  22,  1  Kings  xiv.  6).  The  word  is  represented  in 
other  places  as  the  messenger  of  God  (ch.  ix.  8;  Ps.  cvii.  20. 


CHAP.  LV.  12,  13.  359 

cxlvii.  15  sqq.).  The  personification  presupposes  that  it  is  not 
a  mere  sound  or  letter.  As  it  goeth  forth  out  of  the  mouth  of 
God  it  acquires  shape,  and  in  this  shape  is  hidden  a  divine 
life,  because  of  its  divine  origin  ;  and  so  it  runs,  with  life  from 
God,  endowed  with  divine  power,  supplied  with  divine  commis 
sions,  like  a  swift  messenger  through  nature  and  the  world  of 
man,  there  to  melt  the  ice,  as  it  were,  and  here  to  heal  and  to 
save ;  and  does  not  return  from  its  course  till  it  has  given 
effect  to  the  will  of  the  sender.  This  return  of  the  word  to 
God  also  presupposes  its  divine  nature.  The  will  of  God, 
which  becomes  concrete  and  audible  in  the  word,  is  the  utter 
ance  of  His  nature,  and  is  resolved  into  that  nature  again  as 
soon  as  it  is  fulfilled.  The  figures  chosen  are  rich  in  analogies. 
As  snow  and  rain  are  the  mediating  causes  of  growth,  and 
therefore  the  enjoyment  of  what  is  reaped ;  so  is  the  soil  of  the 
human  heart  softened,  refreshed,  and  rendered  productive  or 
prolific  by  the  word  out  of  the  mouth  of  Jehovah ;  and  this 
word  furnishes  the  prophet,  who  resembles  the  sower,  with  the 
seed  which  he  scatters,  and  brings  with  it  bread  which  feeds 
the  souls :  for  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of 
God  is  bread  (Deut.  viii.  3). 

The  true  point  of  comparison,  however,  is  the  energy  with 
which  the  word  is  realized.  Assuredly  and  irresistibly  will  the 
word  of  redemption  be  fulfilled.  Vers.  12,  13.  "  For  ye  will 
go  out  with  joy,  and  be  led  forth  in  peace :  the  mountains  and 
the  hills  will  break  out  before  you  into  shouting,  and  all  the  trees 
of  the  field  will  clap  their  hands.  Instead  of  the  thorn  will 
cypresses  shoot  up,  and  instead  of  the  fleabane  will  myrtles  shoot 
up :  and  it  will  be  to  Jehovah  for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting 
memorial  that  will  not  be  swept  away."  "  With  joy,"  i.e.  with 
out  the  hurry  of  fear  (ch.  Hi.  12) ;  "  in  peace,"  i.e.  without 
having  to  fight  their  way  through  or  flee.  The  idea  of  the 
sufferer  falls  back  in  ioin  behind  that  of  a  festal  procession 
(Ps.  xlv.  15,  16).  In  applying  the  term  kaph  (hand)  to  the 
trees,  the  prophet  had  in  his  mind  their  kippoth,  or  branches. 
The  psalmist  in  Ps.  xcviii.  8  transfers  the  figure  created  by 
our  prophet  to  the  waves  of  the  streams.  Na  atsiits  (from 
naats,  to  sting)  is  probably  no  particular  kind  of  thorn,  such, 
for  example,  as  the  fuller's  thistle,  but,  as  in  ch.  vii.  19,  briers 
and  thorns  generally.  On  sirpad,  see  Ges.  Thes.;  we  have 


3(>0  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

followed  the  rendering,  KOVV&,  of  the  LXX.  That  this  trans 
formation  of  the  vegetation  of  the  desert  is  not  to  be  taken 
literally,  any  more  than  in  ch.  xli.  17—20,  is  evident  from  the 
shouting  of  the  mountains,  and  the  clapping  of  hands  on  the  part 
of  the  trees.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  the  prophet  says  some 
thing  more  than  that  Israel  will  return  home  with  such  feelings 
of  joy  as  will  cause  everything  to  appear  transformed.  Such  pro 
mises  as  those  which  we  find  here  and  in  ch.  xli.  1.9  and  xxxv. 
1,  2,  and  such  exhortations  as  those  which  we  find  in  ch.  xliv. 
23,  xlix.  13,  and  lii.  9,  arise  from  the  consciousness,  which  was 
common  to  both  prophets  and  apostles,  that  the  whole  creation 
will  one  day  share  in  the  liberty  and  glory  of  the  children  of 
God  (Rom.  viii.  21).  This  thought  is  dressed  up  sometimes  in 
one  form,  and  sometimes  in  another.  The  psalmists  after  the 
captivity  borrowed  the  colours  in  which  they  painted  it  from 
our  prophet  (see  at  Ps.  xcvi.  and  xcviii.).  rvrn  is  construed  as 
a  neuter  (cf.  I"1?**"]?,  ch.  xlv.  8),  referring  to  this  festal  transfor 
mation  of  the  outer  world  on  the  festive  return  of  the  redeemed. 
niK  is  treated  in  the  attributive  clause  as  a  masculine,  as  if  it 
came  from  nw,  to  make  an  incision,  to  crimp,  as  we  have 

already  indicated  in  vol.  i.  p.  213  ;   but  the  Arabic  £J,  ay  at, 

shows  that  it  comes  from  njs,  to  point  out,  and  is  contracted 
from  awayat,  and  therefore  was  originally  a  feminine. 

EIGHTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LVI.  1-8. 

*   SABBATICAL  ADMONITIONS,  AND  CONSOLATION  FOB 
PROSELYTES  AND  EUNUCHS. 

The  note  of  admonition  struck  in  the  foregoing  prophecy 
is  continued  here,  the  sabbatical  duties  being  enforced  with 
especial  emphasis  as  part  of  the  general  righteousness  of  life. 
Vers.  1,  2.  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Keep  ye  right,  and  do  rigid- 
eousness :  for  my  salvation  is  near  to  come,  and  my  righteousness 
to  reveal  itself.  Blessed  is  the  mortal  that  doeth  this,  and  the  son 
of  man  that  layeth  fast  hold  thereon  ;  ivho  keepeth  the  Sabbath, 
that  he  doth  not  desecrate  it,  and  keepeth  his  hand  from  doing  any 
kind  of  emir  Jehovah  and  Israel  have  both  an  objective  standard 
in  the  covenant  relation  into  which  they  have  entered  :  DBE'C 


CHAP.  LVI.  3.  3fil 


(right)  is  practice  answering  to  this  ;  njttt^  (salvation)  the 
performance  promised  by  God  ;  n|51V  (righteousness)  on  both 
sides  such  personal  activity  as  is  in  accordance  with  the  cove 
nant  relation,  or  what  is  the  same  thing,  with  the  purpose  and 
plan  of  salvation.  The  nearer  the  full  realization  on  the  part 
of  Jehovah  of  what  He  has  promised,  the  more  faithful  ought 
Israel  to  be  in  everything  to  which  it  is  bound  by  its  relation  to 
Jehovah.  DKT  (this)  points,  as  in  Ps.  vii.  4,  to  what  follows  ; 
and  so  also  does  H3,  which  points  back  to  nxT.  Instead  of  "riBB? 
or  "lb9$  we  have  here  1p$,  the  HNT  being  described  personally 
instead  of  objectively,  ri3B>  is  used  as  a  masculine  in  vers.  2  and  6 
(cf.  ch.  Iviii.  13),  although  the  word  is  not  formed  after  the  same 
manner  as  fc9£,  but  is  rather  contracted  from  ttR3&  (a  festive 
time,  possibly  with  l"W-rnj;  understood),  and  therefore  was 
originally  a  feminine  ;  and  it  is  so  personified  in  the  language 
employed  in  the  worship  of  the  synagogue.1  The  prophet  here 
thinks  of  ri3B/  as  rfltfn  D^,  and  gives  it  the  gender  of  Di\ 

The  ^tPK  (blessed)  of  ver.  2  is  now  extended  to  those  who 
might  imagine  that  they  had  no  right  to  console  themselves 
with  the  promises  which  it  contained.  Ver.  3.  "  And  let  not 
the  foreigner,  who  hath  not  joined  himself  to  Jehovah,  speak  thus: 
Assuredly  Jehovah  will  cut  me  off  from  His  people  ;  and  let  not 
the  eunuch  say,  I  am  only  a  dry  tree."  As  rr6:  is  not  pointed 
as  a  participle  (HJp?)j  but  as  a  3d  pers.  pres.,  the  n  of  nj73n  is 
equivalent  to  "IB%  as  in  Josh.  x.  24,  Gen.  xviii.  21,  xxi.  3, 
xlvi.  27,  1  Kings  xi.  9  (Ges.  §  109).  By  the  eunuchs  we  are 
to  understand  those  of  Israelitish  descent,  as  the  attributive 
clause  is  not  repeated  in  their  case.  Heathen,  who  professed 
the  religion  of  Jehovah,  and  had  attached  themselves  to  Israel, 
might  be  afraid  lest,  when  Israel  should  be  restored  to  its 
native  land,  according  to  the  promise,  as  a  holy  and  glorious 
community  with  a  thoroughly  priestly  character,  Jehovah  would 
no  longer  tolerate  them,  i.e.  would  forbid  their  receiving  full 
citizenship.  7?*1?!  has  the  connecting  vowel  a,  as  in  Gen. 
xix.  19,  xxix.  32,  instead  of  the  usual  e.  And  the  Israelitish 

1  According  to  b.  Sabbath  119a,  R.  Chanina  dressed  himself  on  Friday 
evening  in  his  sabbath-clothes,  and  said,  "  Come,  and  let  us  go  to  meet 
Queen  Sabbath."  And  so  did  also  Jannai,  saying,  "  Come,  0  bride  ;  come, 
O  bride."  Hence  the  customary  song  with  which  the  Sabbath  was  greeted 
had  rAaM  H2^  M3  !"fe  nfcOP^  HIT  roi?  as  its  commencement  and  refrain. 


3G2  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIATT. 

eunuchs,  who  had  been  mutilated  against  their  will,  that  they 
might  serve  at  heathen  courts  or  in  the  houses  of  foreign  lords, 
and  therefore  had  not  been  unfaithful  to  Jehovah,  might  be 
afraid  lest,  as  unfruitful  trees,  they  should  be  pronounced  un 
worthy  of  standing  in  the  congregation  of  Jehovah.  There 
was  more  ground  for  the  anxiety  of  the  latter  than  for  that  of 
the  former.  For  the  law  in  Deut.  xxiii.  4-7  merely  prohibits 
Ammonites  and  Moabites  for  all  time  to  come  from  reception 
into  the  congregation,  on  account  of  their  unbrotherly  conduct 
towards  the  Israelites  as  they  came  out  of  Egypt,  whilst  that 
in  Deut.  xxiii.  8,  9  prohibits  the  reception  of  Edomites  and 
Egyptians  to  the  third  generation  ;  so  that  there  was  no  prohi 
bition  as  to  other  allies — such,  for  example,  as  the  Babylonians. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  law  in  Deut.  xxiii.  2  expressly  declares, 
as  an  expression  of  the  horror  of  God  at  any  such  mutilation 
of  nature,  and  for  the  purpose  of  precluding  it,  that  no  kind  of 
emasculated  person  is  to  enter  the  congregation  of  Jehovah. 
But  prophecy  breaks  through  these  limits  of  the  law.  Yers. 
4,  5.  "  For  thus  sait/i  Jehovah  to  the  circumcised.  Those  who 
hep  my  Sabbaths,  and  decide  for  that  in  which  I  take  pleasure, 
and  take  fast  hold  of  my  covenant;  I  give  to  them  in  my  house 
and  within  my  ivalls  a  memorial  and  a  name  better  than  sons  and 
daughters :  I  give  such  a  man  an  everlasting  name,  that  shall  not 
be  cut  off"  The  second  condition  after  the  sanctification  of 
the  Sabbath  has  reference  to  the  regulation  of  life  according 
to  the  revealed  will  of  God ;  the  third  to  fidelity  with  regard 
to  the  covenant  of  circumcision.  ^  also  means  a  side,  and 
hence  a  place  (Deut.  xxiii.  13)  ;  but  in  the  passage  before  us, 
where  VW\  *JJ  form  a  closely  connected  pair  of  words,  to  which 
rtotpl  D"93D  is  appended,  it  signifies  the  memorial,  equivalent 
to  rojfB  (2  Sam.  xviii.  18 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  12),  as  an  index  lifted 
up  on  high  (Ezek.  xxi.  24),  which  strikes  the  eye  and  arrests 
attention,  pointing  like  a  signpost  to  the  person  upon  whom  it 
is  placed,  like  monumentum  a  monendo.  They  are  assured  that 
they  will  not  be  excluded  from  close  fellowship  with  the  church 
("  in  my  house  and  within  my  walls"),  and  also  promised,  as 
a  superabundant  compensation  for  the  want  of  posterity,  long 
life  in  the  memory  of  future  ages,  by  whom  their  long  tried 
attachment  to  Jehovah  and  His  people  in  circumstances  of 
great  temptation  will  not  be  forgotten. 


CHAP.  LVI.  6,  7.  363 

The  fears  of  proselytes  from  among  the  heathen  are  also 
removed.  Vers.  6,  7.  "  And  the  foreigners,  who  have  joined 
themselves  to  Jehovah,  to  serve  Him,  and  to  love  the  name  of 
Jehovah,  to  be  His  servants,  whoever  keepeth  the  Sabbath  from 
desecrating  it,  and  those  who  hold  fast  to  my  covenant,  1  bring 
them  to  my  holy  mountain,  and  make  them  joyful  in  my  house  of 
prayer ;  their  whole-offerings  and  their  slain-offerings  are  well- 
pleasing  upon  mine  altar  :  for  my  house,  a  house  of  prayer  shall 
it  be  called  for  all  nations."  The  proselytes,  who  have  attached 
themselves  to  Jehovah  ('rriy),1  the  God  of  Israel,  with  the  pure 
intention  of  serving  Him  with  love,  are  not  to  be  left  behind 
in  the  strange  land.  Jehovah  will  bring  them  along  with  His 
people  to  the  holy  mountain,  upon  which  His  temple  rises  once 
more ;  there  will  He  cause  them  to  rejoice,  and  all  that  they 
place  upon  His  altar  will  find  a  most  gracious  acceptance.  It 
is  impossible  that  the  prophet  should  be  thinking  here  of  the 
worship  of  the  future  without  sacrifice,  although  in  ch.  liii.  he 
predicts  the  self-sacrifice  of  the  "  Servant  of  Jehovah,"  which 
puts  an  end  to  all  animal  sacrifices.  But  here  the  temple  is 
called  "  the  house  of  prayer,"  from  the  prayer  which  is  the 
soul  of  all  worship.  It  will  be  called  a  house  of  prayer  for  all 
nations ;  and  therefore  its  nature  will  correspond  to  its  name. 
This  ultimate  intention  is  already  indicated  in  Solomon's  dedi 
catory  prayer  (1  Kings  viii.  41-43)  ;  but  our  prophet  was  the 
first  to  give  it  this  definite  universal  expression.  Throughout 
this  passage  the  spirit  of  the  law  is  striving  to  liberate  itself 
from  its  bondage.  Nor  is  there  anything  to  surprise  us  in  the 
breaking  down  of  the  party  wall,  built  up  so  absolutely  between 
the  eunuchs  on  the  one  hand  and  the  congregation  on  the 
other,  or  the  one  partially  erected  between  the  heathen  and  the 
congregation  of  Israel ;  as  we  may  see  from  ch.  Ixvi.  21,  where 
it  is  affirmed  that  Jehovah  will  even  take  priests  and  Levites 
out  of  the  midst  of  the  heathen  whom  Israel  will  bring  back 
with  it  into  its  own  land. 

The  expression  "saying  of  tJie  Lord"  (Ne'um  Jehovah), 
which  is  so  solemn  an  expression  in  itself,  and  which  stands 
1  The  oriental  reading,  not  in  ver.  3,  but  here  in  ver.  6,  is  'iT^y  ;  the 
western,  'n~^tf.  The  Masora  follows  the  western  OtfZnyD),  i.e.  the  Pales 
tinian,  and  reckons  this  passage  as  one  of  the  31  Tr^y  in  the  Old  Testa- 
uuent  Scriptures. 


364  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

here  at  the  head  of  the  following  declaration,  is  a  proof  that  it 
contains  not  only  something  great,  but  something  which  needs 
a  solemn  confirmation  because  of  its  strangeness.  Not  only  is 
there  no  ground  for  supposing  that  Gentiles  who  love  Jehovah 
will  be  excluded  from  the  congregation ;  but  it  is  really 
Jehovah's  intention  to  gather  some  out  of  the  heathen,  and  add 
them*  to  the  assembled  diaspora  of  Israel.  Ver.  8.  "  Word  of 
the  Lord,  Jehovah  :  gathering  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  I  will 
also  gather  beyond  itself  to  its  gathered  ones."  We  only  find 
'n  DW  at  the  commencement  of  a  sentence,  in  this  passage  and 
Zech.  xii.  1.  The  double  name  of  God,  Adonai  Jehovah,  also 
indicates  something  great.  1yJJ  (to  it)  refers  to  Israel,  and 
VS3ipA  is  an  explanatory  permutative,  equivalent  to  VVHp3';>j; ;  or 
else  fe  denotes  the  fact  that  the  gathering  will  exceed  the  limits 
of  Israel  (cf.  Gen.  xlviii.  22),  and  ?  the  addition  that  will  be 
made  to  the  gathered  ones  of  Israel.  The  meaning  in  either 
case  remains  the  same.  Jehovah  here  declares  what  Jesus  says 
in  John  x.  16  :  "Other  sheep  I  have  which  are  not  of  this  fold: 
them  also  I  must  bring,  and  they  shall  hear  my  voice;  and  there 
shall  be  one  fold  and  one  Shepherd  ;"  "  Jehovah  one,  and  His 
name  one,"  as  it  is  expressed  in  Zech.  xiv.  9.  Such  are  the 
views  and  hopes  that  have  grown  up  out  of  the  chastisement 
inflicted  by  their  captivity.  God  has  made  it  a  preparatory 
school  for  New  Testament  times.  It  has  been  made  subser 
vient  to  the  bursting  of  the  fetters  of  the  law,  the  liberation 
of  the  spirit  of  the  law,  and  the  establishment  of  friendship 
between  Israel  and  the  Gentile  world  as  called  to  one  common 
salvation. 


NINTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LVI.  9-LVii.  21. 

NEGLECT  OF  DUTY  BY  THE  LEADERS  OF  ISRAEL ;  AND  ERRORS 
OF  THE  PEOPLE. 

It  is  a  question  whether  ch.  Ivi.  9  forms  the  commencement 
of  a  fresh  prophecy,  or  merely  the  second  half  of  the  prophecy 
contained  in  ch.  Ivi.  1-8.  We  decide,  for  our  part,  in  favour 
of  the  former.  If  ch.  Ivi.  9  sqq.  formed  an  antithetical  second 
half  to  the  promising  first  half  in  ch.  Ivi.  1-8,  we  should  expect 
to  find  the  prophets  and  leaders  of  Israel,  whose  licentiousness 


CHAP.  LVI.  9.  365 

and  want  of  principle  are  here  so  severely  condemned, 
threatened  with  destruction  in  the  heathen  land,  whilst  true 
proselytes  and  even  eunuchs  were  brought  to  the  holy  moun 
tain.  But  we  meet  with  this  antithesis  for  the  first  time  in 
ch.  Ivii.  13,  where  we  evidently  find  ourselves  in  the  midst  of 
another  prophetic  address.  And  where  can  that  address  com 
mence,  if  not  at  ch.  Ivi.  9,  from  which  point  onwards  we  have 
that  hard,  dull,  sharp,  and  concise  language  of  strong  indigna 
tion  (see  p.  130),  which  recals  to  mind  psalms  written  "  in  a 
thundering  style"  (Psalter,  i.  80)  and  the  reproachful  addresses 
of  Jeremiah,  and  which  passes  again  in  ch.  Ivii.  11  sqq.  into 
the  lofty  crystalline  language  peculiar  to  our  prophet's  "  book 
of  consolation?"  The  new  prophetic  address  commences,  like 
ch.  Iv.  1,  with  a  summons.  Ver.  9.  "  All  ye  beasts  of  the  field, 
come  near  !  To  devour,  all  ye  beasts  in  the  forest  !"  According 
to  the  accentuation  before  us  (tafe6  mercha,  irprr^D  tiphchah), 
the  beasts  of  the  field  are  summoned  to  devour  the  beasts  in  the 
forest.  This  accentuation,  however,  is  false,  and  must  be 
exchanged  for  another  which  is  supported  by  some  MSS.,  viz. 
htib  tiphchah,  irprr^O  mercha,  and  1JP3  Beth  raphatum.  It  is 
true  that  even  with  these  accents  we  might  still  adhere  to 
the  view  favoured  by  Jewish  commentators,  viz.  that  the 
beasts  of  the  field  are  to  be  devoured  by  the  beasts  of  the 
forest,  if  this  view  yielded  any  admissible  sense  (compare,  for 
example,  that  supported  by  Meyer,  "  Ye  enemies,  devour  the 
scattered  ones  of  my  congregation  "),  and  had  not  against  it  the 
synonymous  parallelism  of  HS?  IJVn  and  1JP3  irpn  (ch.  xliii.  20 ; 
Ps.  civ.  11,  20  ;  cf.  Gen.  iii.  14).  But  there  remains  another 
view,  according  to  which  "lya  IJVrrpD  is  a  second  vocative  answer 
ing  to  nfc>  inrn'^a.  According  to  the  Targum,  what  is  to  be 
devoured  is  the  great  body  of  heathen  kings  attacking  Jerusa 
lem  ;  according  to  Jerome,  Cyril,  Stier,  etc.,  the  pasture  and 
food  provided  by  the  grace  of  God.  But  what  follows  teaches 
us  something  different  from  this.  Israel  has  prophets  and 
shepherds,  who  are  blind  to  every  coming  danger,  and  therefore 
fail  to  give  warning  of  its  approach,  because  they  are  sunken 
in  selfishness  and  debauchery.  It  resembles  a  flock  without  a 
keeper,  and  therefore  an  easy  prey  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  5)  ;  and  the 
meaning  of  the  appeal,  which  is  certainly  addressed  to  the 
nations  of  the  world,  the  enemies  of  the  people  of  God,  is  this ; 


366  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

"Ye  have  only  to  draw  near;  ye  can  feed  undisturbed,  and 
devour  as  much  as  ye  please."  This  is  the  explanation  adopted 
by  most  of  the  more  modern  commentators.  In  Jer.  xii.  9, 
which  is  founded  upon  this  ("  Assemble  all  ye  beasts  of  the 
field,  bring  them  hither  to  devour"),  it  is  also  Jerusalem  which 
is  assigned  as  food  to  the  heathen.  The  parallel  in  ver.  9  is 
both  synonymous  and  progressive.  The  writer  seeks  for  rare 
forms,  because  he  is  about  to  depict  a  rare  inversion  of  the 
proper  state  of  things.  tivn  (with  the  first  syllable  loosely 
closed)  is  the  antiquated  form  of  connection,  which  was 
admissible  even  with  "1JJO  following  (cf.  ch.  v.  11,  ix.  1,  2; 
2  Sam.  i.  21).  On  VJJK  (=«1K),  see  at  ch.  xxi.  ]2  (cf. 
ver.  14). 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  with  IBV  0^)  •  the  suffix  refers 
to  Israel,  which  was  also  the  object  to  fe$A.  Vers.  10,  11. 
u  his  watchmen  are  blind:  they  (are)  all  ignorant,  they  (are)  all 
dumb  dogs  that  cannot  bark ;  raving,  lying  down,  loving  to  slum 
ber.  And  the  dogs  are  mightily  greedy,  they  know  no  satiety ; 
and  such  are  shepherds  !  They  know  no  understanding ;  they 
have  all  turned  to  their  own  ways,  every  one  for  his  own  gain 
throughout  his  border"  The  "  watchmen  "  are  the  prophets 
here,  as  everywhere  else  (ch.  lii.  8,  cf.  ch.  xxi.  6,  Hab.  ii.  1  ; 
Jer.  vi.  17  ;  Ezek.  iii.  17).  The  prophet  is  like  a  watchman 
(tsopheh)  stationed  upon  his  watch-tower  (specula),  whose  duty 
it  is,  when  he  sees  the  sword  come  upon  the  land,  to  blow  the 
slwphdr,  and  warn  the  people  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  1-9).  But  just  as 
Jeremiah  speaks  of  bad  prophets  among  the  captives  (Jer. 
xxix.  1-32),  and  the  book  of  Ezekiel  is  full  of  reproaches  at 
the  existing  neglect  of  the  office  of  watchman  and  shepherd  ; 
so  does  the  prophet  here  complain  that  the  watchmen  of  the 
nation  are  blind,  in  direct  opposition  to  both  their  title  and 
their  calling ;  they  are  all  without  either  knowledge  or  the 
capacity  for  knowledge  (vid.  ch.  xliv.  9,  xlv.  20).  They  ought 
to  resemble  watchful  sheep-dogs  (Job  xxx.  1),  which  bark 
when  the  flock  is  threatened ;  but  they  are  dumb,  and  cannot 
bark  (ndbhach,  root  nab),  and  leave  the  flock  to  all  its  danger. 
Instead  of  being  "  seers  "  (chozlm),  they  are  ravers  (hozlm ;  cf . 
ch.  xix.  18,  where  we  have  a  play  upon  Dnnn  in  cnnn).  D^rn, 
from  njn,  to  rave  in  sickness,  n.  act.  hadhajan  (which  Kimchi 
compares  to  parlare  in  sonno)  ;  hence  the  Targum  PP^T,  LXX. 


CHAP.  LVL  10,  11.  367 


iy  A  <f)avTa%6fjL€voi,  S  6pa/jLaTMnaL,  Jer.  videntes 
vana.  The  predicates  which  follow  are  attached  to  the  leading 
word  hozlm  (raving),  if  not  precisely  as  adjectives,  yet  as  more 
minutely  descriptive.  Instead  of  watching,  praying,  wrestling, 
to  render  themselves  susceptible  of  visions  of  divine  revelations 
for  the  good  of  their  people,  and  to  keep  themselves  in  readi 
ness  to  receive  them,  they  are  idle,  loving  comfortable  ease, 
talkers  in  their  sleep.  And  the  dogs,  viz.  those  prophets  who 
resemble  the  worst  of  them  (see  at  ch.  xl.  8,  p.  144),  are  PBJ}  •»$, 
of  violent,  unrestrained  soul,  insatiable.  Their  soul  lives  and 
moves  in  the  lowest  parts  of  their  nature  ;  it  is  nothing  but 
selfish  avarice,  self-indulgent  greediness,  violent  restlessness  of 
passion,  that  revolves  perpetually  around  itself.  With  the 
words  "  and  these  are  shepherds,"  the  range  of  the  prophet's 
vision  is  extended  to  the  leaders  of  the  nation  generally  ;  for 
when  the  prophet  adds  as  an  exclamation,  "And  such  (hi  =  tales) 
are  shepherds!"  he  applies  the  glaring  contrast  between  calling 
and  conduct  to  the  holders  of  both  offices,  that  of  teacher  and 
that  of  ruler  alike.  For,  apart  from  the  accents,  it  would  be 
quite  at  variance  with  the  general  use  of  the  personal  pronoun 
n»n,  to  apply  it  to  any  other  persons  than  those  just  described 
(viz.  in  any  such  sense  as  this  :  "  And  those,  who  ought  to  be 
shepherds,  do  not  know").  Nor  is  it  admissible  to  commence 
an  adversative  minor  clause  with  norn,  as  Knobel  does, 
"  whereas  they  are  shepherds  ;"  for,  since  the  principal  clause 
has  D^sn  (dogs)  as  the  subject,  this  would  introduce  a  hetero 
geneous  mixture  of  the  two  figures,  shepherds'  dogs  and  shep 
herds.  We  therefore  take  D'jn  nom  as  an  independent  clause  : 
"  And  it  is  upon  men  of  such  a  kind,  that  the  duty  of  watching 
and  tending  the  nation  devolves  !"  These  D^jn  (for  which  the 
Targum  reads  D'JH)  are  then  still  further  described  :  they 
know  not  to  understand,  i.e.  they  are  without  spiritual  capacity 
to  pass  an  intelligible  judgment  (compare  the  opposite  com 
bination  of  the  two  verbs  in  ch.  xxxii.  4)  ;  instead  of  caring 
for  the  general  good,  they  have  all  turned  to  their  own  way 
(I'darkdm),  i.e.  to  their  own  selfish  interests,  every  one  bent 
upon  his  own  advantage  (JTCB  from  VV?,  abscindere,  as  we  say, 
seinen  Schnitt  zu  maclien,  to  reap  an  advantage,  lit.  to  make  an 
incision).  *nvj5D,  from  his  utmost  extremity  (i.e.  from  that  of 
his  own  station,  including  all  its  members),  in  other  words, 


368  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

"throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  his  own  circle;"  qdtseh, 
the  end,  being  regarded  not  as  the  terminal  point,  but  as  the 
circumference  (as  in  Gen.  xix.  4,  xlvii.  21,  and  Jer.  li.  31). 

An  office-bearer  of  the  kind  described  is  now  introduced 
per  mimesin  as  speaking.  Ver.  12.  "  Come  here,  I  will  fetch 
wine,  and  let  us  drink  meth ;  and  to-morrow  shall  be  like  to-day, 
great,  excessively  abundant"  He  gives  a  banquet,  and  pro 
mises  the  guests  that  the  revelry  shall  be  as  great  to-morrow 
as  to-day,  or  rather  much  more  glorious,  "inp  SV  is  the  day  of 
to-morrow,  TO  eiravpiov,  for  mdchdr  is  always  without  an  article; 
hence  et  jiet  uti  hie  (dies)  dies  crastinus,  viz.  magnus  supra 
moduin  valde.  "1JV,  or  "^  (as  it  is  to  be  pointed  here  according 
to  Kimchi,  Miclilol  1676,  and  Worterbuch),  signifies  super 
abundance  ;  it  is  used  here  adverbially  in  the  sense  of  extra 
ordinarily,  beyond  all  bounds  (differing  therefore  from  ^rn"1, 
"  more,"  or  "  singularly,"  in  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes). 

Whilst  watchmen  and  shepherds,  prophets  and  rulers, 
without  troubling  themselves  about  the  flock  which  they  have 
to  watch  and  feed,  are  thus  indulging  their  own  selfish  desires, 
and  living  in  debauchery,  the  righteous  man  is  saved  by  early 
death  from  the  judgment,  which  cannot  fail  to  come  with  such 
corruption  as  this.  Ch.  Ivii.  1,  2.  "  The  righteous  perisheth, 
and  no  man  taketh  it  to  heart ;  and  pious  men  are  swept  away, 
ivithout  any  one  considering  that  the  righteous  is  swept  away  from 
misfortune.  He  entereth  into  peace :  they  rest  upon  their  beds, 
whoever  has  walked  straight  before  him"  With  "  the  righteous" 
the  prophet  introduces,  in  glaring  contrast  to  this  luxurious 
living  on  the  part  of  the  leading  men  of  the  nation,  the  standing 
figure  used  to  denote  the  fate  of  its  best  men.  With  this  pre 
vailing  demoralization  and  worldliness,  the  righteous  succumbs 
to  the  violence  of  both  external  and  internal  sufferings.  1?N, 
he  dies  before  his  time  (Eccles.  vii.  15)  ;  from  the  midst  of 
the  men  of  his  generation  he  is  carried  away  from  this  world 
(Ps.  xii.  2  ;  Mic.  vii.  2),  and  no  one  lays  it  to  heart,  viz.  the 
divine  accusation  and  threat  involved  in  this  early  death.  Men 
of  piety  (chesed,  the  love  of  God  and  man)  are  swept  away, 
without  there  being  any  one  to  understand  or  consider  that 
(kl  unfolds  the  object  to  be  considered  and  laid  to  heart,  viz. 
what  is  involved  in  this  carrying  away  when  regarded  as  a 
providential  event)  the  righteous  is  swept  away  k<  from  the 


CHAP.  LVII    3,  4.  369 

evil,"  i.e.  that  lie  may  be  saved  from  the  approaching  punish 
ment  (compare  2  Kings  xxii.  20).  For  the  prevailing  corrup 
tion  calls  for  punishment  from  God  ;  and  what  is  first  of  all  to 
be  expected  is  severe  judgment,  through  which  the  coming  sal 
vation  will  force  its  way.  In  ver.  2  it  is  intimated  that  the 
righteous  man  and  the  pious  do  not  lose  the  blessings  of  this 
salvation  because  they  lose  this  life  :  for  whereas,  according 
to  the  prophet's  watchword,  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked, 
it  is  true,  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  departing  righteous  man, 
that  "  he  enters  into  peace  "  (slidlom,  ace.  loci  s.  status ;  Ges. 
118,  1);  "they  rest  upon  their  beds,"  viz.  the  bottom  of  the 
grave,  which  has  become  their  mishkdbh  (Job  xvii.  13,  xxi.  26), 
"  whoever  has  walked  in  that  which  lay  straight  before  him," 
i.e.  the  one  straight  plain  path  which  he  had  set  before  him 
Ora  ace.  obj.  as  in  ch.  xxxiii.  15,  1.  10,  Ewald,  §  172,  b, 
from  nbJ,  that  which  lies  straight  before  a  person ;  whereas  nro 
with  rD3  irD3,  signifying  probably  fixedness,  steadiness  of  look, 

related  to  ,^J9  to  pierce,  HJ^  percutere,  is  used  as  a  preposi 
tion  :  compare  Prov.  iv.  25,  rob?,  straight  or  exactly  before 
him).  The  grave,  when  compared  with  the  restlessness  of  this 
life,  is  therefore  "  peace."  He  who  has  died  in  faith  rests  in 
God,  to  whom  he  has  committed  himself  and  entrusted  his 
future.  We  have  here  the  glimmering  light  of  the  New  Testa 
ment  consolation,  that  the  death  of  the  righteous  is  better  than 
life  in  this  world,  because  it  is  the  entrance  into  peace. 

The  reproachful  language  of  the  prophet  is  now  directed 
against  the  mass  of  the  nation,  who  have  occasioned  the  "  evil" 
from  which  the  righteous  is  swept  away,  i.e.  the  generation  that 
is  hostile  to  the  servants  of  Jehovah,  and  by  whom  those  sins 
of  idolatry  are  still  so  shamelessly  carried  on,  which  first  led  to 
the  captivity.  Vers.  3,  4.  "  And  ye,  draiv  nearer  hither,  children 
of  the  sorceress,  seed  of  the  adulterer,  and  of  her  that  committed 
whoredom!  Over  whom  do  ye  make  yourselves  merry1?  Over 
whom  do  ye  open  the  mouth  wide,  and  put  the  tongue  out  long  f 
Are  ye  not  the  brood  of  apostasy,  seed  of  lying  T*  They  are  to 
draw  nearer  hither  (henndh  as  in  Gen.  xv.  16),  to  the  place 
where  God  is  speaking  through  His  prophet,  to  have  themselves 
painted,  and  to  hear  their  sentence.  Just  as  elsewhere  the 
moral  character  of  a  man  is  frequently  indicated  by  the  men- 

VOL.  II.  2  A 


370  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tion  of  his  father  (2  Kings  vi.  32),  or  his  mother  (1  Sam.  xx. 
30),  or  both  parents  (Job  xxx.  8),  so  here  the  generation  of 
the  captivity,  so  far  as  it  continued  to  practise  the  idolatry  by 
which  its  ancestors  had  brought  upon  themselves  the  Chaldean 
catastrophe,  is  called  first  njj'y  ^3  (or  more  correctly  njjjf),  sons 
of  the  sorceress  (possibly  the  maker  of  clouds  or  storm,  ch.  ii. 
6,  vol.  i.  118  :  Jer.  augur  atricis)^  one  who  made  heathen  and 
superstitious  customs  her  means  of  livelihood,  viz.  the  commu 
nity  as  it  existed  before  the  captivity,  wrhich  really  deserved  no 
better  name,  on  account  of  the  crying  contradiction  between 
its  calling  and  its  conduct ;  and  secondly,  with  regard  to  both 
the  male  and  female  members  of  the  community,  nJTJjfl  tl$?J'?  Jnj, 
semen  adulteri  et  fornicarice  (Jer.),  though  Stier,  Hahn,  and 
others  adopt  the  rendering  semen  adulterum  et  quod  (qui)  scor- 
taris.  A.  better  rendering  than  this  would  be,  "  Seed  of  an 
adulterer,  and  one  who  committest  adultery  thyself,"  viz.  (what 
would  be  indicated  with  this  explanation  by  the  fut.  consec.)  in 
consequence  of  this  descent  from  an  adulterer.  But  as  JHT 
(seed,  posterity),  wherever  it  is  more  minutely  defined,  is  con 
nected  with  a  genitive,  and  not  with  an  adjective,  the  presump 
tion  is  that  mtni  *)NJB  denotes  the  father  and  mother.  njTrrt  is 
an  attributive  clause  regarded  as  a  genitive  (Ges.  §  123,  3, 
Anm.  1),  and  more  closely  connected  with  *1&U»  than  if  it  was 
written  njtni  (=  rmn,  ch.  i.  21) :  Seed  of  an  adulterer,  and 
consequently  (Ewald,  §  351,  6),  or  similarly,  of  one  who  gave 
herself  up  to  whoredom.  Idolatry,  prostitution,  and  magic  are 
most  closely  allied.  The  prophet  now  asks,  "  Over  whom  do 
ye  find  your  pleasure  ?  For  whom  are  your  common  contemp 
tuous  actions  intended?"  33ynn  is  only  used  here,  and  denotes 
the  feeling  which  finds  pleasure  in  the  sufferings  of  another. 
The  objects  of  this  malicious  contemptuous  pleasure  (Ps.  xxii. 
8  sqq.,  xxxv.  21)  are  the  servants  of  Jehovah;  and  the  ques 
tion,  as  in  ch.  xxxvii.  23,  is  one  of  amazement  at  their  impu 
dence,  since  the  men  over  whom  they  make  merry  are  really 
deserving  of  esteem,  whereas  they  themselves  are  the  refuse  of 
Israel :  Are  ye  not  a  brood  of  apostasy,  seed  of  lying  ?  As 
apostasy  and  lying,  when  regarded  as  parents,  can  only  produce 
something  resembling  themselves ;  the  character  of  those  from 
whom  they  are  descended  is  here  imputed  to  the  men  them 
selves,  even  more  clearly  than  before.  The  genitives  of  origin 


CHAP.  LVII.  5,  6.  371 

are  also  genitives  of  attribute.  Instead  of  ^  (e.g.  ch.  ii.  6) 
we  have  here  ^?1  before  makkeph,  with  the  shortening  of  a 
into  i. 

The  participles  which  follow  in  the  next  verse  are  in  appo 
sition  to  DfiN,  and  confirm  the  predicates  already  applied  to 
them.  They  soon  give  place,  however,  to  independent  sen 
tences.  Vers.  5,  6.  "  Ye  that  inflame  yourselves  by  the  tere 
binths,  under  every  green  tree,  ye  slayers  of  children  in  the  valleys 
under  the  clefts  of  the  rocks.  By  the  smooth  ones  of  the  brook 
was  thy  portion ;  they,  they  were  thy  lot :  thou  also  pouredst  out 
libations  to  them,  tliou  laidst  meat-offerings  upon  them.  Shall  I 
be  contented  with  this  ?"  The  people  of  the  captivity  are  ad 
dressed,  and  the  idolatry  handed  down  to  them  from  their 
ancestors  depicted.  The  prophet  looks  back  from  the  stand 
point  of  the  captivity,  and  takes  his  colours  from  the  time  in 
which  he  himself  lived,  possibly  from  the  commenceme'nt  of 
Manasseh's  reign,  w7hen  the  heathenism  that  had  for  a  long 
time  been  suppressed  burst  forth  again  in  all  its  force,  and  the 
measure  of  iniquity  became  full.  The  part,  niphal  Dorian  is 
formed  like  jn3  in  Jer.  xxii.  23,  if  the  latter  signifies  miserandum 
esse.  The  primary  form  is  DHJ^  which  is  doubled  like  ")M  from 
"na  in  Job  xx.  28,  and  from  which  Dm  is  formed  by  the  reso 
lution  of  the  latent  reduplication.  Stier  derives  it  from  Drr ; 
but  even  if  formed  from  this,  DH3  would  still  have  to  be  ex 
plained  from  Dm,  after  the  form  riw.  'Ellm  signifies  either 
gods  or  terebinths  (see  vol.  i.  108,  note  1).  But  although 
it  might  certainly  mean  idols,  according  to  Ex.  xv.  11,  Dan. 
xi.  36  (LXX.,  Targ.,  and  Jerome),  it  is  never  used  directly 
in  this  sense,  and  Isaiah  always  uses  the  word  as  the  name  of 
a  tree  (ch.  i.  29,  Ixi.  3).  The  terebinths  are  introduced  here, 
exactly  as  in  ch.  i.  29,  as  an  object  of  idolatrous  lust :  "  who 
inflame  themselves  with  the  terebinths;"  3  denotes  the  object 
with  which  the  lust  is  excited  and  inflamed.  The  terebinth 
(eldh)  held  the  chief  place  in  tree- worship  (hence  DJ^X,  lit. 
oak-trees,  together  with  ota,  is  the  name  of  one  of  the  Phoeni 
cian  gods1),  possibly  as  being  the  tree  sacred  to  Astarte ;  just 
as  the  Samura  Acacia  among  the  heathen  Arabs  was  the  tree 
sacred  to  the  goddess  *  Uzza?  The  following  expression,  "under 

1  See  Levy,  PhoniziscJte  Stndien,  i.  19. 

*  Krehl,  Religion  der  vorisl.  Araber,  p.  74  sqq. 


372  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

every  green  tree,"  is  simply  a  permutative  of  the  words  "  with 
the  terebinths"  in  the  sense  of  "  with  the  terebinths,  yea,  under 
every  green  tree"  (a  standing  expression  from  Deut.  xii.  2  down 
wards), — one  tree  being  regarded  as  the  abode  and  favourite  of 
this  deity,  and  another  of  that,  and  all  alluring  you  to  your 
carnal  worship.  From  the  tree-worship  with  its  orgies,  which 
was  so  widely  spread  in  antiquity  generally,  the  prophet  passes 
to  the  leading  Canaanitish  abomination,  viz.  human  sacrifices, 
which  had  been  adopted  by  the  Israelites  (along  with  '•DH^  we 
find  the  false  reading  ""Dn^,  which  is  interpreted  as  signifying 
self-abuse).  Judging  from  the  locality  named,  "under  the 
clefts  of  the  rocks,"  the  reference  is  not  to  the  slaying  of  chil 
dren  sacrificed  to  Moloch  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  but  to  these 
offered  to  Baal  upon  his  bdmoth  or  high  places  (Jer.  xix.  5  ; 
Ezek.  xvi.  20,  21 ;  Hos.  xiii.  2  ;  Ps.  cvi.  37,  38).  As  we 
learn  from  the  chronique  scandaleuse  many  things  connected 
with  the  religious  history  of  Israel,  which  cannot  be  found 
in  its  historical  books,  there  is  nothing  to  surprise  us  in  the 
stone-worship  condemned  in  ver.  6.  The  dagesli  of  si??n  is  in 
any  case  dagesli  dirimens.  The  singular  is  either  P?n  after  the 
form  '03H  (cf.  "OT,  ch.  Iviii.  3),  or  P^n  after  the  form  n^. 
But  p|?n?  smoothness,  never  occurs ;  and  the  explanation,  "  in 
the  smoothnesses,  i.e.  the  smooth  places  of  the  valley,  is  thy 
portion,"  has  this  also  against  it,  that  it  does  not  do  justice  to 
the  connection  3  pi>n,  in  which  the  preposition  is  not  used  in  a 
local  sense,  and  that  it  leaves  the  emphatic  BH  DH  quite  unex 
plained.  The  latter  does  not  point  to  places,  but  to  objects  of 
worship  for  which  they  had  exchanged  Jehovah,  of  whom  the 
true  Israelite  could  say  'n  'j?pn,  Ps.  cxix.  57,  etc.,  or  'ro  v  Ppn, 
Josh.  xxii.  25,  and  ^jfo  T»ta  ™JK  (Thou  art  He  that  maintaineth 
my  lot),  Ps.  xvi.  5.  The  prophet  had  such  expressions  as  these 
in  his  mind,  and  possibly  also  the  primary  meaning  of  TIN  = 
K\fjpo<;,  which  may  be  gathered  from  the  rare  Arabic  word 
'garal,  gravel,  stones  worn  smooth  by  rolling,  when  he  said,  "  In 
the  smooth  ones  of  the  valley  is  thy  portion  ;  they,  they  are  thy 
lot."  In  the  Arabic  also,  achlaq  (equivalent  to  clidldq,  smooth, 
which  forms  here  a  play  upon  the  word  with  P?n,  chdldq) 
is  a  favourite  word  for  stones  and  rocks.  ^Or<lP?D,  however, 
according  to  1  Sam.  xvii.  40  (where  the  intensive  form  p^n, 
like  ^3P,  is  used),  are  stones  which  the  stream  in  the  vallev 


CHAP.  LVII.  7,  8.  373 

lias  washed  smooth  with  time,  and  rounded  into  a  pleasing  shape. 
The  mode  of  the  worship,  the  pouring  out  of  libations,1  and 
the  laying  of  meat-offerings  upon  them,  confirm  this  view.  In 
Carthage  such  stones  were  called  abbadires  (=  TIN,  ptf)  ;  and 
among  the  ancient  Arabs,  the  asndm  or  idols  consisted  for  the 
most  part  of  rude  blocks  of  stone  of  this  description.  Herodotus 
(iii.  8)  speaks  of  seven  stones  which  the  Arabs  anointed,  calling 
upon  the  god  Orotal.  Suidas  (s.v.  0e£i<?  aprjs)  states  that  the 
idol  of  Ares  in  Petra  was  a  black  square  stone ;  and  the  black 
stone  of  the  Ka'aba  was,  according  to  a  very  inconvenient  tra 
dition  for  the  Mohammedans,  an  idol  of  Saturn  (zuhal).2  Stone- 
worship  of  this  kind  had  been  practised  by  the  Israelites  before 
the  captivity,  and  their  heathenish  practices  had  been  trans 
mitted  to  the  exiles  in  Babylon.  The  meaning  of  the  question, 
Shall  I  comfort  myself  concerning  such  things? — i.e.  Shall  I 
be  contented  with  them  (EHjiK  nipJial,  not  hithpael)  f — is,  that  it 
was  impossible  that  descendants  who  so  resembled  their  fathers 
should  remain  unpunished. 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  with  perfects,  like  ^3?^'  and  J"l v^n 
(addressed  to  the  national  community  generally,  the  congrega 
tion  regarded  as  a  woman).  The  description  is  mostly  retro 
spective.  Vers.  7,  8.  "  Upon  a  lofty  and  high  mountain  hast  thou 
set  up  thy  bed  ;  thou  also  ascendedst  thither  to  offer  slain  offerings. 

1  Compare  the  remarks  made  in  the  Comm.  on  the  Pentateuch,  vol.  i.  p. 
283,  on  the  heathen  worship  of  anointed  stones,  and  the  Baetulian  worship. 

2  See  Krehl,  p.  72.     In  the  East  Indies  also  we  find  stone-worship  not 
only  among  the  Vindya  tribes  (Lassen,  A.K.  i.  376),  but  also  among  the 
Vaishnavas,  who  worship  Vishnu  in  the  form  of  a  stone,  viz.  the  salagrdma, 
a  kind  of  stone  from  the  river  Gandak  (see  Wilson's  Sanscrit  Lexicon  s.h.v. 
and  Vishnu- Purana,  p.  163).     The  fact  of  the  great  antiquity  of  stone  and 
tree  worship  has  been  used  in  the  most  ridiculous  manner  by  Dozy  in  his 
work  on  the  Israelites  at  Mecca  (1864).     He  draws  the  following  conclu 
sion  from  Deut.  xxxii.  18:    "  Thus  the  Israelites  sprang  from  a  divine 
block  of  stone ;  and  this  is,  in  reality,  the  true  old  version  of  the  origin  of 
the  nation."     From  Isa.  li.  1,  2,  he  infers  that  Abraham  and  Sara  were 
not  historical  persons  at  all,  but  that  the  former  was  a  block  of  stone,  and 
the  latter  a  hollow  ;  and  that  the  two  together  were  a  block  of  stone  in  a 
hoilow,  to  which  divine  worship  was  paid.     "This  fact,"  he  says,  "  viz. 
that  Abraham  and  Sarah  in  the  second  Isaiah  are  not  historical  persons, 
but  a  block  of  stone  and  a  hollow,  is  one  of  great  worth,  as  enabling  us  to 
determine  the  time  at  which  the  stories  of  Abraham  in   Genesis  were 
written,  and  to  form  a  correct  idea  of  the  spirit  of  those  stories." 


374  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

And  behind  the  door  and  the  post  tJwu  didst  place  thy  reminder; 
for  thou  uncoveredst  away  from  me,  and  ascendedst ;  thou  madest 
thy  bed  broad,  and  didst  stipulate  for  thyself  what  they  had  to 
do:  thou  lovedst  their  lying  with  thee;  thou  sawest  their  manhood" 
The  lovers  that  she  sought  for  herself  are  the  gods  of  the 
heathen.  Upon  lofty  mountains,  where  they  are  generally 
worshipped,  did  she  set  up  her  bed,  and  did  all  that  was  needed 
to  win  their  favour.  The  zikkaron,  i.e.  the  declaration  that 
Jehovah  is  the  only  God,  which  the  Israelites  were  to  write 
upon  the  posts  of  their  houses,  and  upon  the  entrances  (Deut. 
vi.  9,  xi.  20),  for  a  constant  reminder,  she  had  put  behind  the 
door  and  post,  that  she  might  not  be  reminded,  to  her  shame, 
of  her  unfaithfulness.  That  this  explanation,  which  most  of 
the  commentators  adopt,  is  the  true  one,  is  proved  by  the 
expression  ^KB  ^  which  follows,  and  according  to  which  ^i^T 
is  something  inconvenient,  which  might  and  was  intended  to 
remind  them  of  Jehovah.  'fiK»,  away,  far  from  me,  as  in  Jer. 
iii.  1,  and  like  Vinrrc?,  which  is  still  more  frequently  used.  It 
is  unnecessary  to  take  gilllth  with  *invj?  understood  (Ezek. 
xxiii.  18)  as  equivalent  to  "  thou  makest  thyself  naked,"  or 
with  reference  to  the  clothes  =  avaavpeis.  "H??^?  is  the  common 
object  of  all  three  verbs,  even  of  vJJffl  (with  double  metheg\ 
after  Gen.  xlix.  4.  On  rron}  for  *n»W  (cf.  Jer.  iii.  5),  see 
Ewald,  §  191,  b.  The  explanation  "  thou  didst  bind,"  or  "  thou 
didst  choose  (some)  of  them  to  thyself,"  is  contrary  to  the 
general  usage,  according  to  which  ?  rp3  signifies  spondere 
(2  Chron.  vii.  18),  and  DJ>  rna  pacisci  (1  Sam.  xxii.  8),  in  both 
cases  with  nna  to  be  supplied,  so  that  }D  (fl^a)  rna  would 
mean  stipnlari  ab  aliquo,  i.e.  to  obtain  from  a  person  a  solemn 
promise,  with  all  the  force  of  a  covenant.  What  she  stipulated 
from  them  was,  either  the  wages  of  adultery,  or  the  satisfaction 
of  her  wanton  lust.  What  follows  agrees  with  this ;  for  it  is 
there  distinctly  stated,  that  the  lovers  to  whom  she  offered 
herself  gratified  her  lust  abundantly :  adamasti  concubitum 
eorum  (mishkdbh,  cubile,  e.g.  Prov.  vii.  17,  and  concubitus,  e.g. 
Ezra  xxiii.  17),  manum  conspexisti.  The  Targum  and  Jewish 
commentators  adopt  this  explanation,  loco  quern  delegisti,  or 
(postquam)  locum  delegisti.  This  also  is  apparently  the  meaning 
of  the  accents,  and  most  of  the  more  modern  commentators 
have  adopted  it,  taking  T  in  the  sense  of  place  or  side.  But 


CHAP.  LVII.  9,  10.  375 

this  yields  only  a  very  lame  and  unmeaning  thought.  Doe<ler- 
lein  conjectured  that  1J  was  employed  here  in  the  sense  of 
Wvcj>a\\o<; ;  and  this  is  the  explanation  adopted  by  Hitzig, 
Ewald,  and  others.  The  Arabic  furnishes  several  analogies  to 
this  obscene  use  of  the  word  ;  and  by  the  side  of  Ezek.  xvi.  26 
and  xxiii.  20,  where  the  same  thing  is  affirmed  in  even  plainer 
language,  there  is  nothing  to  astonish  in  the  passage  before  us. 
The  meaning  is,  that  after  the  church  of  Jehovah  had  turned 
away  from  its  God  to  the  world  and  its  pleasures,  it  took  more 
and  more  delight  in  the  pleasures  afforded  it  by  idolatry,  and 
indulged  its  tastes  to  the  full. 

o 

In  the  closest  reciprocal  connection  with  this  God-forgetting, 
adulterous  craving  for  the  favour  of  heathen  gods,  stood  their 
coquetting  with  the  heathen  power  of  the  world.  Vers.  9,  10. 
"  And  thou  wentest  to  the  king  with  oil,  and  didst  measure 
copiously  thy  spices,  and  didst  send  thy  messengers  to  a  great 
distance,  and  didst  deeply  abase  thyself,  even  to  Hades.  Thou 
didst  become  weary  of  the  greatness  of  thy  way ;  yet  thou  saidst 
not,  It  is  unattainable :  thou  obtainedst  the  revival  of  thy  strength  : 
therefore  thou  wast  not  pained."  The  first  thing  to  be  noticed 
here,  is  one  that  has  been  overlooked  by  nearly  all  the  modem 
commentators,  viz.  that  we  have  here  a  historical  retrospect 
before  us.  And  secondly,  a  single  glance  at  ver.  11  is  suffi 
cient  to  show  that  the  words  refer  to  a  servile  coquetry  from 
the  fear  of  man,  and  therefore  to  a  wicked  craving  for  the 
favour  of  man  ;  so  that  "  the  king"  is  not  Baal,  or  any  heathen 
god  whatever  (according  to  ch.  viii.  21  and  Zeph.  i.  5),  but  the 
Asiatic  ruler  of  the  world.  Ahaz  sent  messengers,  as  we  read 
in  2  Kings  xvi.  7  sqq.,  to  Tiglath-pileser,  the  king  of  Assyria, 
to  say  to  him,  "  I  am  thy  servant  and  thy  son."  And  Ahaz 
took  the  silver  and  gold  that  were  in  the  house  of  Jehovah,  and 
in  the  treasures  of  the  palace,  and  sent  a  bribe  to  the  king  of 
Assyria.  And  again,  at  vers.  10  sqq.,  Ahaz  went  to  Damascus 
to  meet  the  king  of  Assyria,  and  there  he  saw  an  altar,  and 
sent  a  model  of  it  to  Jerusalem,  and  had  one  like  it  put  in  the 
place  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering.  Such  acts  as  these  are 
here  described  in  the  figure  of  Israel  travelling  with  oil  to  the 
king,  and  taking  a  quantity  of  choice  spices  with  it  to  gain  his 
favour,  and  also  sending  messengers,  and  not  only  bowing 
itself  to  the  earth,  but  even  stooping  to  Hades,  that  is  to  say, 


376  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

standing  as  it  were  on  its  bead  in  its  excessive  servility,  for 
the  purpose  of  obtaining  allies.  It  seems  most  natural  to  take 
f£$3  as  equivalent  to  pBQ  nm^'n :  tbou  wentest  in  oil  (dripping 
with  pomade),  and  didst  apply  to  thyself  many  spices;  but 
Beth  after  verbs  of  going  signifies  to  go  with  anything,  to  take 
it  with  one  and  bring  it,  so  that  the  oil  and  spices  are  thought 
of  here  as  presents,  which  she  took  with  her  as  sensual  stimu 
lants,  with  a  view  to  the  amorous  pleasures  she  was  seeking 
(Ezek.  xxiii.  41,  cf.  Hos.  xii.  2).  T'S^n  signifies  to  go  deep 
down  in  Jer.  xiii.  18  ;  the  meaning  here  is,  to  bow  very  low, 
or  to  degrade  one's  self.  By  "  the  greatness  or  breadth  of  the 
way"  (a  similar  expression  to  that  in  Josh.  ix.  13),  all  the  great 
sacrifices  are  intended  which  it  cost  her  to  purchase  the  favour 
of  the  heathen  ruler.  Although  they  were  a  great  trouble  to 
her,  yet  she  did  not  say  BWJ,  "  it  is  hopeless  ;"  the  niphal  of 
K'&O  signifies  in  1  Sam.  xxvii.  1,  to  betake  one's  self  to  a  thing  with 
despair  of  its  success.  The  participle  in  Job  vi.  26  means  a 
despairing  person ;  it  also  occurs  in  a  neuter  sense  in  Jer. 
ii.  25,  xviii.  12,  viz.  given  up,  i.e.  absolutely  in  vain.  She  did 
not  give  up  hope,  although  the  offerings  nearly  exhausted  her 
strength ;  on  the  contrary,  she  gained  "P  n?n,  "  life  of  her  arm," 
i.e.  (according  to  the  use  of  n^n  in  the  sense  of  reviving,  and 
n^nn,  to  bring  to  life  again)  new  life  in  her  arm,  in  other  words, 
"  the  renewing  of  her  strength"  (reoentern  vigorem  virium 
suarum).  Thus,  without  noticing  the  sighs  and  groans  forced 
from  her  by  the  excessive  toil  and  fatigue,  but  stirring  herself 
up  again  and  again,  she  pursued  the  plan  of  strengthening  her 
alliances  with  the  heathen.  Ezekiel's  picture  of  Aholah  and 
Aholibah  is  like  a  commentary  on  vers.  3-10  (see  Ezek.  xxiii.). 
From  fear  of  man,  Israel,  and  still  more  Judah,  had  given 
up  the  fear  of  Jehovah.  Ver.  Ha.  "And  of  whom  hast  thou 
been  afraid,  and  (whom)  didst  thou  fear,  that  thou  becarnest  a  liar, 
and  didst  not  continue  mindful  of  me,  and  didst  not  take  it  to 
heart  ?  "  It  was  of  men — only  mortal  men,  with  no  real  power 
(ch.  li.  12) — that  Israel  was  so  needlessly  afraid,  that  it  resorted 
to  lies  and  treachery  to  Jehovah  (kl,  ut,  an  interrogative  sen 
tence,  as  in  2  Sam.  vii.  18,  Ps.  viii.  5)  :  purchasing  the  favour 
of  man  out  of  the  fear  of  man,  and  throwing  itself  into  the 
arms  of  false  tutelar  deities,  it  banished  Jehovah  its  true 
shelter  out  of  its  memory,  and  did  not  take  it  to  heart,  viz.  the 


CHAP.  LVII.  11-13.  377 

sinfulness  of  such  infidelity,  and  the  eventful  consequences  by 
which  it  was  punished  (compare  ch.  xlvii.  7  and  xlii.  25). 

With  ver.  lib  the  reproaches  are  addressed  to  the  present. 
The  treachery  of  Israel  had  been  severely  punished  in  the 
catastrophe  of  which  the  captivity  was  the  result,  but  without 
effecting  any  improvement.  The  great  mass  of  the  people 
were  as  forgetful  of  God  as  ever,  and  would  not  be  led  to 
repentance  by  the  long-suffering  of  God,  which  had  hitherto 
spared  them  from  other  well-merited  punishments.  Ver.  lib. 
"Am  I  not  silent,  and  that  for  a  long  time,  whereas  thou  wast 
not  afraid  of  me?"  A  comparison  with  ch.  xlii.  14  will  show 
that  the  prophecy  returns  here  to  its  ordinary  style.  The 
LXX.  and  Jerome  render  the  passage  as  if  the  reading  were 
DpVD  (viz.  Wy  =  Trapopwv,  quasi  non  videns),  and  this  is  the 
reading  which  Lowth  adopts.  We  may  see  from  this,  that 
the  original  text  had  a  defective  D$Wi,  which  was  intended, 
however,  to  be  read  &<$&.  The  prophet  applies  the  term  'oldm 
(see  ch.  xlii.  14)  to  the  captivity,  which  had  already  lasted  a 
long  time — a  time  of  divine  silence  :  the  silence  of  His  help  so 
far  as  the  servants  of  Jehovah  were  concerned,  but  the  silence 
of  His  wrath  as  to  the  great  mass  of  the  people. 

But  this  silence  would  not  last  for  ever.  Vers.  12,  13. 
U7, 1  will  proclaim  thy  righteousness ;  and  tliy  works,  they  will  not 
profit  thee.  When  thou  criest,  let  thy  heaps  of  idols  save  thee  : 
but  a  wind  carries  them  all  away ;  a  breath  takes  them  off ;  and 
whoever  putteth  trust  in  me  will  inherit  the  land,  and  take  posses 
sion  of  my  holy  mountain"  According  to  the  context,  ^riiJIV 
cannot  be  a  synonym  of  nyv^  here.  It  is  neither  salvation  nor 
the  way  of  salvation  that  is  intended;  nor  is  this  even  included, 
as  Stier  supposes.  But  the  simple  reference  is  to  what  Israel 
in  its  blindness  regarded  as  righteousness ;  whereas,  if  it  had 
known  itself,  it  would  have  seen  that  it  was  the  most  glaring 
opposite.  This  lying-righteousness  of  Israel  would  be  brought 
to  a  judicial  exposure  by  Jehovah.  ^W^'fiN1)  is  not  a  second 
accusative  to  *ns,for  in  that  case  we  should  have  TOTD1  -jnp^-nN; 
but  it  commences  a  second  sentence,  as  the  accents  really  indi 
cate.  When  Jehovah  begins  thus  to  speak  and  act,  the  im 
potence  of  the  false  gods  which  His  people  have  made  for 
themselves  will  soon  be  exposed  ;  and  "  as  for  thy  works  (i.e. 
thine  idols,  ch.  xli.  29,  cf.  ch.  i.  31),  they  will  do  thee  no  good" 


378  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

(ch.  xliv.  9,  10,  compare  Jer.  xxiii.  33 ;  for  the  question 
Nb>O~nD,  here  an  emphatic  elevation  of  the  subject,  compare  ch. 
liii.  8,  Vin-nw,  Ewald,  §  277,  p.  683).  This  determines  the 
meaning  of  "H^3!?,  which  Knobel  supposes  to  refer  to  the  large 
army  of  the  Babylonians,  with  which  the  apostates  among  the 
exiles  had  formed  an  offensive  and  defensive  alliance.  But  the 
term  is  really  applied  to  the  heaps  (qibbuts,  collectio,  not  an  adjec 
tive  of  the  form  limmud)  of  different  idols,  with  which  Israel 
had  furnished  itself  even  in  its  captivity  (compare  qibbdtsdh  in 
Mic.  i.  17).  It  was  in  vain  for  them  to  turn  to  these  pan 
theons  of  theirs ;  a  single  ruach  would  carry  them  all  away,  a 
hebhel  would  swreep  them  off,  for  they  themselves  were  nothing 
but  hebhel  and  ruach  (ch.  xli.  29).  The  proper  punctuation 
here  is  ?2rrnj^  •  the  first  syllable  of  rip"1,  which  is  attached  to  a 
word  with  a  disjunctive  accent,  has  a  so-called  heavy  Gaya,  the 
second  a  euphonic  Gaya,  according  to  rules  which  are  too  little 
discussed  in  our  grammars.  When  Knobel  supports  his  ex 
planation  of  T^)3p  on  the  ground  that  the  idols  in  ver.  13a  and 
the  worshippers  of  Jehovah  in  ver.  13&  do  not  form  a  fitting 
antithesis,  the  simple  reply  is,  that  the  contrast  lies  between 
the  idols,  which  cannot  save,  and  Jehovah,  who  not  only  saves 
those  who  trust  in  Him,  but  sends  them  prosperity  according 
to  His  promises.  With  the  promise,  "Whoso  trusts  in  me  will 
inherit  the  land/'  this  prophecy  reaches  the  thought  with 
which  the  previous  prophecy  (ch.  Ivi.  7,  8)  closed;  and  possibly 
what  is  here  affirmed  of  TV^i?  forms  an  intentional  antithesis 
to  the  promise  there,  1^??^  ty  Y3\>X  "W :  when  Jehovah  gathers 
His  faithful  ones  from  the  dispersion,  and  gathers  others  to 
them  (from  among  the  heathen),  then  will  the  plunder  which 
the  faithless  have  gathered  together  be  all  scattered  to  the 
winds.  And  whilst  the  latter  stand  forsaken  by  their  power 
less  works,  the  former  will  be  established  in  the  peaceful  in 
heritance  of  the  promised  land. 

The  first  half  of  the  prophecy  closes  here.  It  is  full  of 
reproach,  and  closes  with  a  brief  word  of  promise,  which  is 
merely  the  obverse  of  the  threat.  The  second  half  follows  an 
opposite  course.  Jehovah  will  redeem  His  people,  provided  it 
has  been  truly  humbled  by  the  sufferings  appointed,  for  He 
has  seen  into  what  errors  it  has  fallen  since  He  has  withdrawn 
His  mercy  from  it.  "But  the  wicked,"  etc.  The  whole  closes 


CHAP.  LVII.  14,  15.  379 

here  with  words  of  threatening,  which  are  the  obverse  of  the 
promise.  Yer.  136  forms  the  transition  from  the  first  half  to 
the  second. 

The  promise  is  now  followed  by  an  appeal  to  make  ready 
the  way  which  the  redeemed  people  have  to  take.  Ver.  14. 
"  And  He  saith,  Heap  up,  heap  up,  prepare  a  way,  take  away 
every  obstruction  from  the  way  of  my  people."  This  is  the  very 
same  appeal  which  occurs  once  in  all  three  books  of  these  pro 
phecies  (ch.  xl.  3,  4,  Ivii.  14,  Ixii.  10).  The  subject  of  the 
verb  ('dmar)  is  not  Jehovah ;  but  the  prophet  intentionally 
leaves  it  obscure,  as  in  ch.  xl.  3,  6  (cf.  xxvi.  2).  It  is  a  heavenly 
cry  ;  and  the  crier  is  not  to  be  more  precisely  named. 

The  primary  ground  for  this  voice  being  heard  at  all  is,  that 
the  Holy  One  is  also  the  Merciful  One,  and  not  only  has  a  mani 
festation  of  glory  on  high,  but  also  a  manifestation  of  grace  below. 
Ver.  15.  "For  thus  saith  the  high  and  lofty  One,  the  eternally  dwell 
ing  One,  He  whose  name  is  Holy  One;  I  dwell  on  high  and  in  the 
holy  place,  and  with  the  contrite  one  and  him  that  is  of  a  humbled 
spirit,  to  revive  the  spirit  of  humbled  ones,  and  to  revive  the  heart  of 
contrite  ones"  He  inflicts  punishment  in  His  wrath;  but  to  those 
who  suffer  themselves  to  be  urged  thereby  to  repentance  and  the 
desire  for  salvation,  He  is  most  inwardly  and  most  effectually  near 
with  His  grace.  For  the  heaven  of  heavens  is  not  too  great  for 
Him,  and  a  human  heart  is  not  too  small  for  Him  to  dwell  in. 
And  He  who  dwells  upon  cherubim,  and  among  the  praises  of 
seraphim,  does  not  scorn  to  dwell  among  the  sighs  of  a  poor 
human  soul.  He  is  called  ram  (high),  as  being  high  and 
exalted  in  Himself ;  Kfett  (the  lofty  One),  as  towering  above  all 
besides ;  and  *W  |3fc>.  This  does  not  mean  the  dweller  in  eternity, 
which  is  a  thought  quite  outside  the  biblical  range  of  ideas;  but, 
since  *W  stands  to  pt?  not  in  an  objective,  but  in  an  attributive 
or  adverbial  relation  (Ps.  xlv.  7,  cf.  Prov.  i.  33),  and  |?B>,  as 
opposed  to  being  violently  wrested  from  the  ordinary  sphere  of 
life  and  work  (cf.  Ps.  xvi.  9,  cii.  29),  denotes  a  continuing  life, 
a  life  having  its  root  in  itself,  *W  £#  must  mean  the  eternally 
(=  ^)  dwelling  One,  i.e.  He  whose  life  lasts  for  ever  and  is 
always  the  same.  He  is  also  called  qddosh,  as  One  who  is 
absolutely  pure  and  good,  separated  from  all  the  uncleanness 
and  imperfection  by  which  creatures  are  characterized.  This 
is  not  to  be  rendered  sanctum  nomen  ejw,  but  sanctus ;  this 


380  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

name  is  the  facit  of  His  revelation  of  Himself  in  the  history  of 
salvation,  which  is  accomplished  in  love  and  wrath,  grace  and 
judgment.  This  God  inhabits  mdrom  veqddosh,  the  height  and 
the  Holy  Place  (accusatives  of  the  object,  like  mdrom  in  ch. 
xxxiii.  5,  and  meromlm  in  ch.  xxxiii.  16),  both  together  being 
equivalent  to  <£w5  airpocriTov  (1  Tim.  vi.  16),  since  qddosh 
(neuter,  as  in  Ps.  xlvi.  5,  Ixv.  5)  answers  to  <£<w?,  and  mdrom  to 
aTTpoairov.  But  He  also  dwells  with  (J")K  as  in  Lev.  xvi.  16) 
the  crushed  and  lowly  of  spirit.  To  these  He  is  most  inti 
mately  near,  and  that  for  a  salutary  and  gracious  purpose, 
namely  "  to  revive  .  .  ."  rrnn  and  n*n  always  signify  either  to 
keep  that  which  is  living  alive,  or  to  restore  to  life  that  which 
is  dead.  The  spirit  is  the  seat  of  pride  and  humility,  the  heart 
the  seat  of  all  feeling  of  joy  and  sorrow  ;  we  have  therefore 
spiritum  humilium  and  cor  contritorum.  The  selfish  egotism 
which  repentance  breaks  has  its  root  in  the  heart;  and  the  self- 
consciousness,  from  whose  false  elevation  repentance  brings 
down,  has  its  seat  in  the  spirit  (Psychol.  p.  199). 

The  compassion,  by  virtue  of  which  God  has  His  abode 
and  His  work  of  grace  in  the  spirit  and  heart  of  the  penitent, 
is  founded  in  that  free  anticipating  love  which  called  man  and 
his  self-conscious  spirit-soul  into  being  at  the  first.  Ver.  16. 
"  For  I  do  not  contend  for  ever,  and  I  am  not  angry  for  ever  : 
for  the  spirit  would  pine  away  before  me,  and  the  souls  of  men 
which  I  have  created."  The  early  translators  (LXX.,  Syr.,  Jer., 
possibly  also  the  Targum)  give  to  *|toJP_  the  meaning  egredietur, 
which  certainly  cannot  be  established.  And  so  also  does  Stier, 
so  far  as  the  thought  is  concerned,  when  he  adopts  the  render 
ing,  "  A  spirit  from  me  will  cover  over,  and  breath  of  life  will 
I  make ;"  and  so  Hahn,  "  When  the  spirit  pines  away  before 
me,  I  create  breath  in  abundance."  But  in  both  cases  the 
writer  would  at  any  rate  have  used  the  perf.  consec.  W&lft,  and 
the  last  clause  of  the  verse  has  not  the  syntactic  form  of  an 
apodosis.  The  rendering  given  above  is  the  only  one  that  is 
unassailable  both  grammatically  and  in  fact.  ^  introduces  the 
reason  for  the  self-limitation  of  the  divine  wrath,  just  as  in 
Ps.  Ixxviii.  38,  39  (cf.  Ps.  ciii.  14):  if  God  should  put  no 
restraint  upon  His  wrath,  the  consequence  would  be  the  entire 
destruction  of  human  life,  which  was  His  creative  work  at  first. 
The  verb  *loy,  from  its  primary  meaning  to  bend  round  (Job, 


CHAP.  LVII.  17,  18.  381 

ii.  p.  8),  has  sometin.es  the  transitive  meaning  to  cover,  and 
sometimes  the  meaning  to  wrap  one's  self  round,  i.e.  to  become 
faint  or  weak  (compare  *|W,  fainted  away,  Lam.  ii.  19  ;  and 
f]Bynn  in  Ps.  cxlii.  4,  which  is  applied  to  the  spirit,  like  the  kal 
here),  ^sta  is  equivalent  to  "  in  consequence  of  the  wrath 
proceeding  from  me."  nitt^J  (a  plural  only  met  with  here) 
signifies,  according  to  the  fixed  usage  of  the  Old  Testament 
(ii.  22,  xlii.  5),  the  souls  of  men,  the  origin  of  which  is  de 
scribed  as  a  creation  in  the  attributive  clause  (with  an  emphatic 
"ON.),  just  as  in  Jer.  xxxviii.  16  (cf.  Zech.  xii.  1).  Whether  the 
accents  are  intended  to  take  W^y  ^N  in  this  attributive  sense 
or  not,  cannot  be  decided  from  the  tiphcliah  attached  to  filDKbl. 
The  prophet,  who  refers  to  the  flood  in  other  passages  also  (e.g. 
ch.  liv.  9),  had  probably  in  his  mind  the  promise  given  after 
the  flood,  according  to  which  God  would  not  make  the  existing 
and  inherited  moral  depravity  an  occasion  for  utterly  destroy 
ing  the  human  race. 

This  general  law  of  His  action  is  most  especially  the  law  of 
His  conduct  towards  Israel,  in  which  such  grievous  effects  of 
its  well-deserved  punishment  are  apparent,  and  effects  so  diffe 
rent  from  those  intended,  that  the  compassion  of  God  feels 
impelled  to  put  an  end  to  the  punishment  for  the  good  of  all 
that  are  susceptible  of  salvation.  Vers.  17,  18.  "And  because 
of  the  iniquity  of  its  selfishness,  I  was  wroth,  and  smote  it;  hiding 
myself,  and  being  angry :  then  it  went  on,  turning  away  in  the 
way  of  its  own  heart.  I  have  seen  its  ivays,  and  will  heal  it ; 
and  will  lead  it,  and  afford  consolations  to  it,  and  to  its  mourning 
ones"  The  fundamental  and  chief  sin  of  Israel  is  here  called 
JJXa,  lit.  a  cut  or  slice  (=  gain,  ch.  Ivi.  11);  then,  like  ir\eove%ia, 
which  is  "idolatry"  according  to  Col.  iii.  5,  or  like  $C\ap<yvpia, 
which  is  "  the  root  of  all  evil"  according  to  1  Tim.  vi.  10,  greedy 
desire  for  worldly  possession,  self-seeking,  or  worldliness  gene 
rally.  The  future  ^2N1,  standing  as  it  does  by  the  side  of  the 
perfect  here,  indicates  that  which  is  also  past ;  and  *|VpKl  stands 
in  the  place  of  a  second  gerund  :  abscondendo  (viz.  pdnai,  my 
face,  ch.  liv.  8)  et  stomachando.  When  Jehovah  had  thus 
wrathfully  hidden  His  gracious  countenance  from  Israel,  and 
withdrawn  His  gracious  presence  out  of  the  midst  of  Israel 
(Hos.  v.  6,  DTO  rf>n),  it  went  away  from  Him  (33itJ>  with  331^, 
like  tyty  with  5£fr),  going  its  own  ways  like  the  world  of  nations 


382  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

that  had  been  left  to  themselves.  But  Jehovah  had  not  seen 
these  wanderings  without  pity.  The  futures  which  follow  are 
promising,  not  by  virtue  of  any  syntactic  necessity,  but  by 
virtue  of  an  inward  necessity.  He  will  heal  His  wounded  (ch. 
i.  4-6)  and  languishing  people,  and  lead  in  the  right  way  those 
that  are  going  astray,  and  afford  them  consolation  as  a  recom 
pense  for  their  long  sufferings  (D^Dim  is  derived  from  the  piel 
Dn3?  and  not,  as  in  Hos.  xi.  8,  from  the  niphal  hinndchem,  in  the 
sense  of  "feelings  of  sympathy"),  especially  (Vav  epexeget. ; 
Ges.  §  155,  1)  its  mourning  ones  (ch.  Ixi.  2,  3,  Ixvi.  10),  i.e. 
those  whom  punishment  has  brought  to  repentance,  and  ren 
dered  desirous  of  salvation. 

But  when  the  redemption  comes,  it  will  divide  Israel  into 
two  halves,  with  very  different  prospects.  Yers.  19-21. 
"  Creating  fruit  of  the  lips ;  JeJiovah  saith,  '  Peace,  peace  to 
those  that  are  far  off,  and  to  those  that  are  near ;  and  I  heal  it.' 
But  the  wicked  are  like  the  sea  that  is  cast  up ;  for  it  cannot  rest, 
and  its  waters  cast  out  slime  and  mud.  There  is  no  peace,  saith 
my  God,  for  the  wicked.'9  The  words  of  God  in  ver.  19  are 
introduced  with  an  interpolated  "  inquit  Jehova"  (cf.  ch.  xlv. 
24,  and  the  ellipsis  in  ch.  xli.  27);  and  what  Jehovah  effects  by 
speaking  thus  is  placed  first  in  a  determining  participial  clause: 
"  Creating  fruit  (3U  =  3«,  3fo,  keri  3<3)  of  the  lips,"  KapTrov 
XelXetov  (LXX.,  Heb.  xiii.  15),  i.e.  not  of  His  own  lips,  to 
which  ariia  would  be  inapplicable,  but  the  offering  of  praise 
and  thanksgiving  springing  from  human  lips  (for  the  figure, 
see  Psychol.  p.  214,  transl. ;  and  on  the  root  33,  to  press  upon 
forward,  Gen.  p.  635):  "Jehovah  saith  shdlom,  shdldm,"  i.e. 
lasting  and  perfect  peace  (as  in  ch.  xxvi.  3),  "  be  the  portion 
of  those  of  my  people  who  are  scattered  far  and  near"  (ch.  xliii. 
5-7,  xlix.  12;  compare  the  application  to  heathen  and  Jews  in 
Eph.  ii.  17)  ;  "and  I  heal  it"  (viz.  the  nation,  which,  although 
scattered,  is  like  one  person  in  the  sight  of  God).  But  the 
wicked,  who  persist  in  the  alienation  from  God  inherited  from 
the  fathers,  are  incapable  of  the  peace  which  God  brings  to 
His  people :  they  are  like  the  sea  in  its  tossed  and  stormy  state 
(CHiJ  pausal  third  pers.  as  an  attributive  clause).  As  this  cannot 
rest,  and  as  its  waters  cast  out  slime  and  mud,  so  has  their 
natural  state  become  one  of  perpetual  disturbance,  leading  to 
the  uninterrupted  production  of  unclean  and  ungodly  thoughts, 


CHAP.  LVII.  19-21. 

words,  and  works.  Thus,  then,  there  is  no  peace  for  them, 
saith  my  God.  With  these  words,  which  have  even  a  more 
pathetic  sound  here  than  in  ch.  xlviii.  22,  the  prophet  seals  the 
second  book  of  his  prophecies.  The  "  wicked"  referred  to  are 
not  the  heathen  outside  Israel,  but  the  heathen,  i.e.  those 
estranged  from  God,  within  Israel  itself. 

The  transition  from  the  first  to  the  second  half  of  this 
closing  prophecy  is  formed  by  "^ttl  in  ch.  Ivii.  14.  In  the 
second  half,  from  ch.  Ivii.  lift,  we  find  the  accustomed  style  of 
our  prophet ;  but  in  ch.  Ivi.  9-lvii.  Ha  the  style  is  so  thoroughly 
different,  that  Ewald  maintains  that  the  prophet  has  here 
inserted  in  his  book  a  fragment  from  some  earlier  writer  of 
the  time  of  Manasseh.  But  we  regard  this  as  very  improbable. 
It  is  not  required  by  what  is  stated  concerning  the  prophets 
and  shepherds,  for  the  book  of  Ezekiel  clearly  shows  that  the 
prophets  and  shepherds  of  the  captivity  were  thus  debased. 
Still  less  does  what  is  stated  concerning  the  early  death  of  the 
righteous  require  it ;  for  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  suffering 
servant  of  Jehovah,  which  is  peculiar  to  the  second  book,  is 
shadowed  forth  therein.  Nor  by  what  is  affirmed  as  to  the 
idolatrous  conduct  of  the  people;  for  in  the  very  centre  (ver.  4) 
the  great  mass  of  the  people  are  reproached  for  their  contemp 
tuous  treatment  of  the  servants  of  Jehovah.  Nor  does  the 
language  itself  force  us  to  any  such  conjecture,  for  ch.  liii.  also 
differs  from  the  style  met  with  elsewhere  ;  and  yet  (although 
Ewald  regards  it  as  an  earlier,  borrowed  fragment)  it  must  be 
written  by  the  author  of  the  whole,  since  its  grandest  idea 
finds  its  fullest  expression  there.  At  the  same  time,  we  may 
assume  that  the  prophet  described  the  idolatry  of  the  people 
under  the  influence  of  earlier  models.  If  he  had  been  a  pro 
phet  of  the  captives  after  the  time  of  Isaiah,  he  would  have 
rested  his  prophecies  on  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel.  For  just  as 
ch.  li.  18  sqq.  has  the  ring  of  the  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah, 
so  does  ch.  Ivii.  3  sqq.  resemble  in  many  respects  the  earlier 
reproaches  of  Jeremiah  (compare  Jer.  v.  7-9,  29,  ix.  8,  with 
the  expression,  "  Should  I  rest  satisfied  with  this  1 ")  ;  also  ch. 
ii,  25  (BW:),  H.  20,  iii.  6,  13  ("  upon  lofty  mountains  and  under 
green  trees") ;  also  the  night  scene  in  Ezek.  xxiii. 


384  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISALAK 

PART   III. 

FIRST  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LVIII. 

THE  FALSE  WORSHIP  AND  THE  TRUE,  WITH  THE  PROMISES 
BELONGING  TO  THE  LATTER. 

As  the  last  prophecy  of  the  second  book  contained  all  the  three 
elements  of  prophetic  addresses — reproach,  threat,  and  promise, 
— so  this,  the  first  prophecy  of  the  third  book,  cannot  open  in 
any  other  way  than  with  a  rehearsal  of  one  of  these.  The 
prophet  receives  the  commission  to  appear  as  the  preacher  of 
condemnation  ;  and  whilst  Jehovah  is  giving  the  reason  for 
this  commission,  the  preaching  itself  commences.  Vers.  1,  2. 
"  Cry  with  full  throat,  hold  not  back ;  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a 
bugle,  and  proclaim  to  my  people  their  apostasy,  and  to  the  house 
of  Jacob  their  sins.  And  they  seek  me  day  by  day,  and  desire  to 
learn  my  ways,  like  a  nation  which  has  done  righteousness,  and 
has  not  forsaken  the  right  of  their  God:  they  ask  of  me  judgments 
of  righteousness  ;  they  desire  the  drawing  near  of  Elohim"  As 
the  second  prophecy  of  the  first  part  takes  as  its  basis  a  text 
from  Micah  (ch.  ii.  1-4),  so  have  we  here  in  ver.  \b  the  echo 
of  Mic.  iii.  8.  Not  only  with  lisping  lips  (1  Sam.  i.  13),  but 
with  the  throat  (Ps.  cxv.  7,  cxlix.  6)  ;  that  is  to  say,  with  all 
the  strength  of  the  voice,  lifting  up  the  voice  like  the  shophdr 
(not  a  trumpet,  which  is  called  n")V^n?  nor  in  fact  any  metallic 
instrument,  but  a  bugle  or  signal  horn,  like  that  blown  on  new 
year's  day :  see  at  Ps.  Ixxxi.  4),  i.e.  in  a  shrill  shouting  tone. 
With  a  loud  voice  that  must  be  heard,  with  the  most  unsparing 
publicity,  the  prophet  is  to  point  out  to  the  people  their  deep 
moral  wounds,  which  they  may  indeed  hide  from  themselves 
with  hypocritical  opus  operatum,  but  cannot  conceal  from  the 
all-seeing  God.  The  1  of  '•rri&O  does  not  stand  for  an  explana 
tory  particle,  but  for  an  adversative  one  :  "  their  apostasy  .  .  . 
their  sins ;  and  yet  (although  they  are  to  be  punished  for  these) 
they  approach  Jehovah  every  day"  (Di11  Di*  with  mahpach 
under  the  first  DV,  and  pasek  after  it,  as  is  the  general  rule 
between  two  like -sounding  words),  "that  He  would  now 


CHAP.  LVIII.  3,  4.  385 

speedily  interpose."  They  also  desire  to  know  the  ways  which 
He  intends  to  take  for  their  deliverance,  and  by  which  He 
desires  to  lead  them.  This  reminds  us  of  the  occurrence 
between  Ezekiel  and  the  elders  of  Gola  (Ezek.  xx.  1  sqq. ; 
compare  also  Ezek.  xxxiii.  30  sqq.).  As  if  they  had  been  a 
people  whose  rectitude  of  action  and  fidelity  to  the  commands 
of  God  warranted  them  in  expecting  nothing  but  what  was 
good  in  the  future,  they  ask  God  (viz.  in  prayer  and  by  in 
quiring  of  the  prophet)  for  mishpete  tsedeq,  "  righteous  mani 
festations  of  judgment,"  i.e.  such  as  will  save  them  and  destroy 
their  foes,  and  desire  qirbath  'Elohlm,  the  coming  of  God,  i.e. 
His  saving  parousia.  The  energetic  futures,  with  the  tone 
upon  the  last  syllable,  answer  to  their  self-righteous  pre 
sumption  ;  and  P^sn*  is  repeated,  according  to  Isaiah's  most 
favourite  oratorical  figure  (see  p.  134),  at  the  close  of  the 
verse. 

There  follow  now  the  words  of  the  work-righteous  them 
selves,  who  hold  up  their  fasting  before  the  eyes  of  God,  and 
complain  that  He  takes  no  notice  of  it.  And  how  could  He  ? ! 
Vers.  3,  4.  "  (  Wherefore  do  we  fast  and  Thou  seest  not,  afflict 
our  soul  and  Thou  regardest  not?'  Behold,  on  the  day  of  your 
fasting  ye  carry  on  your  business,  and  ye  o^iress  all  your 
labourers.  Behold,  ye  fast  ivitli  strife  and  quarrelling,  and  ivith 
smiting  ivith  the  fist  maliciously  closed :  ye  do  not  fast  now  to 
make  your  voice  audible  on  high."  By  the  side  of  DIX  (root  DV, 
to  press,  tie  up,  constrain)  we  have  here  the  older  expres 
sion  found  in  the  Pentateuch,  $33  H3y?  to  do  violence  to  the 
natural  life.  In  addition  to  the  fasting  on  the  day  of  atone 
ment  (the  tenth  of  the  seventh  month  Tizri),  the  only  fast 
prescribed  by  the  law,  other  fasts  were  observed  according  to 
Zech.  vii.  3,  viii.  19,  viz.  fasts  to  commemorate  the  commence 
ment  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  (10th  Tebeth),  its  capture  (17th 
Tammuz),  its  destruction  (9th  Abib),  and  the  murder  of  Geda- 
liah  (3d  Tizri).  The  exiles  boast  of  this  fasting  here;  but  it  is 
a  heartless,  dead  work,  and  therefore  worthless  in  the  sight  ot 
God.  There  is  the  most  glaring  contrast  between  the  object  of 
the  fast  and  their  conduct  on  the  fast-day :  for  they  carry  on 
their  work-day  occupation  ;  they  are  then,  more  than  at  any 
other  time,  true  taskmasters  to  their  work-people  (lest  the  ser 
vice  of  the  master  should  suffer  from  the  service  of  God)  ;  and 

VOL    II  2  B 


386  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

because  when  fasting  they  are  doubly  irritable  and  ill-tempered, 
this  leads  to  quarrelling  and  strife,  and  even  to  striking  with 
angry  fist  (^j^a,  from  *H3,  to  collect  together,  make  into  a 
ball,  clench).  Hence  in  their  present  state  the  true  purpose 
of  fasting  is  quite  unknown  to  them,  viz.  to  enable  them  to 
draw  near  with  importunate  prayer  to  God,  who  is  enthroned 
on  high  (ch.  Ivii.  15).1  The  only  difficulty  here  is  the  phrase 
}*2n  KS».  In  the  face  of  ver.  13,  this  cannot  have  any  other 
meaning  than  to  stretch  one's  hand  after  occupation,  to  carry 
on  business,  to  occupy  one's  self  with  it, — fan  combining  the 
three  meanings,  application  or  affairs,  striving,  and  trade  or 
occupation.  NVD?  however,  maintains  its  primary  meaning,  to 
lay  hold  of  or  grasp  (cf.  ch.  x.  14 ;  Targ.  P^?"!?  rV?5  r11™? 
ye  seek  your  livelihood).  This  is  sustained  by  what  follows, 
whether  we  derive  B^Sty  (cf.  ^H,  ch.  Ivii.  6)  from  3W  (et 
omnes  labores  vestros  graves  rigide  exigitis\  to  (from  which 
we  have  here  Vtofl  for  *b>3n,  Deut.  xv.  3)  being  construed  as 
in  2  Kings  xxiii.  35  with  the  accusative  of  what  is  peremptorily 
demanded  ;  or  (what  we  certainly  prefer)  from  2VJJ ;  or  better 
still  from  3$y  (like  ^y)  :  omnes  operarios  vestros  adigitis  (urgetis\ 
to  being  construed  with  the  accusative  of  the  person  oppressed, 
as  in  Deut.  xv.  2,  where  it  is  applied  to  the  oppression  of  a 
debtor.  Here,  however,  the  reference  is  not  to  those  who  owe 
money,  but  to  those  who  owe  labour,  or  to  obligations  to  labour ; 
and  TO  does  not  signify  a  debtor  (an  idea  quite  foreign  to 
this  verbal  root),  but  a  labourer,  one  who  eats  the  bread  of 
sorrows,  or  of  hard  toil  (Ps.  cxxvii.  2).  The  prophet  paints 
throughout  from  the  life;  and  we  cannot  be  persuaded  by 
Stier's  false  zeal  for  Isaiah's  authorship  to  give  up  the  opinion, 
that  we  have  here  a  figure  drawn  from  the  life  of  the  exiles  in 
Babylon. 

"Whilst  the  people  on  the  fast-day  are  carrying  on  their 
worldly,  selfish,  everyday  business,  the  fasting  is  perverted  from 
a  means  of  divine  worship  and  absorption  in  the  spiritual 
character  of  the  day  to  the  most  thoroughly  selfish  purposes :  it 
is  supposed  to  be  of  some  worth  and  to  merit  some  reward. 

1  The  ancient  church  called  a  fast  statio,  because  he  who  fasted  had  to 
wait  in  prayer  day  and  night  like  a  soldier  at  his  post.  See  on  this  and 
what  follows,  the  Shepherd  of  Hermas,  iii.  Sim.  5,  and  the  Epistle  of  Bar 
nabas,  c.  iii. 


CHAP.  LVIII.  5-7.  887 

This  work-holy  delusion,  behind  which  self-righteousness  and 
unrighteousness  were  concealed,  is  met  thus  by  Jehovah 
through  His  prophet :  Vers.  5-7.  "  Can  such  things  as  these 
pass  for  a  fast  that  I  have  pleasure  in,  as  a  day  for  a  man  to 
afflict  his  soul?  To  bow  down  his  head  like  a  bulrush,  and 
spread  sackcloth  and  ashes  under  him — dost  thou  call  this  a 
fast  and  an  acceptable  day  for  Jehovah  ?  Is  not  this  a  fast  that 
I  have  pleasure  in :  To  loose  coils  of  wickedness,  to  untie  the 
bands  of  the  yoke,  and  for  sending  away  the  oppressed  as  free, 
and  that  ye  break  every  kind  of  yoke  ?  Is  it  not  this,  to  break 
thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  to  take  the  poor  and  houseless  to  thy 
home ;  when  thou  seest  a  naked  man  that  thou  clothest  him,  and 
dost  not  deny  thyself  before  thine  own  flesh  ?"  The  second  part 
of  the  address  commences  with  ver.  5.  The  true  worship, 
which  consists  in  works  of  merciful  love  to  one's  brethren,  and 
its  great  promises  are  here  placed  in  contrast  with  the  false 
worship  just  described.  HDn  points  backwards  :  is  such  a  fast 
as  this  a  fast  after  Jehovah's  mind,  a  day  on  which  it  can  be 
said  in  truth  that  a  man  afflicts  his  soul  (Lev.  xvi.  29)  I  The 
n  of  *p?n  is  resumed  in  npn ;  the  second  7  is  the  object  to  fcOjpn 
expressed  as  a  dative.  The  first  J  answers  to  our  preposition 
"  to"  with  the  infinitive,  which  stands  here  at  the  beginning 
like  a  casus  absol.  (to  hang  down  ;  for  which  the  inf.  abs. 
p]iD3n  might  also  be  used),  and  as  in  most  other  cases  passes 
over  into  the  finite  (et  quod  saccum  et  cinerem  substernitt  viz. 
sibi:  Ges.  §  132,  Anm.  2).  To  hang  down  the  head  and  sit  in 
sackcloth  and  ashes — this  does  not  in  itself  deserve  the  name  of 
fasting  and  of  a  day  of  gracious  reception  (ch.  Ivi.  7,  Ixi.  2)  on 
the  part  of  Jehovah  (rnn^  for  a  subjective  genitive).  Vers. 
6  and  7  affirm  that  the  fasting  which  is  pleasant  to  Jehovah 
consists  in  something  very  different  from  this,  namely,  in  re 
leasing  the  oppressed,  and  in  kindness  to  the  helpless ;  not  in 
abstinence  from  eating  as  such,  but  in  sympathetic  acts  of  that 
self-denying  love,  which  gives  up  bread  or  any  other  possession 
for  the  sake  of  doing  good  to  the  needy.1  There  is  a  bitter 
irony  in  these  words,  just  as  when  the  ancients  said,  "  not  eating 
is  a  natural  fast,  but  abstaining  from  sin  is  a  spiritual  fast." 
Daring  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans  a  general 

1  The  ancient  church  connected  fasting  with  almsgiving  by  law.   Dressel, 
Patr.  Ap.  p.  493. 


388  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

emancipation  of  the  slaves  of  Israelitish  descent  (who  were  to 
be  set  free,  according  to  the  law,  every  three  years)  was  resolved 
upon  and  carried  out ;  but  as  soon  as  the  Chaldeans  were  gone, 
the  masters  fetched  their  liberated  slaves  back  into  servitude 
again  (Jer.  xxxiv.  8-22).  And  as  ver.  6  shows,  they  carried 
the  same  selfish  and  despotic  disposition  with  them  into 
captivity.  The  nt  which  points  forwards  is  expanded  into  infin. 
absolutes,  which  are  carried  on  quite  regularly  in  the  finite 
tense.  Motdh,  which  is  repeated  palindromically,  signifies  in 
both  cases  a  yoke,  lit.  vectis,  the  cross  wood  which  formed  the 
most  important  part  of  the  yoke,  and  which  was  fastened  to  the 
animal's  head,  and  so  connected  with  the  plough  by  means  of 
a  cord  or  strap  (Sir.  xxx.  35,  xxxiii.  27).1  It  is  to  this  that 
nnjtf,  knots,  refers.  We  cannot  connect  it  with  mutteh,  a  state 
of  perverted  right  (Ezek.  ix.  9),  as  Hitzig  does.  D^V"i  are 
persons  unjustly  and  forcibly  oppressed  even  with  cruelty;  pyj 
is  a  stronger  synonym  to  p^V  (e.g.  Amos  iv.  1).  In  ver.  7  we 
have  the  same  spirit  of  general  humanity  as  in  Job  xxxi.  13-23, 
Ezek.  xviii.  7,  8  (compare  what  James  describes  in  ch.  i.  27  as 
"pure  religion  and  undefiled").  Dn?  (BH3)  D'lS  is  the  usual 
phrase  for  K\av  (/cXafeo/)  aprov.  D'HVip  is  the  adjective  to 
D\>:^,  and  apparently  therefore  must  be  derived  from  "TO : 
miserable  men  who  have  shown  themselves  refractory  towards 
despotic  rulers.  But  the  participle  mdrud  cannot  be  found 
elsewhere;  and  the  recommendation  to  receive  political  fugitives 
has  a  modern  look.  The  parallels  in  Lam.  i.  7  and  iii.  19  are 
conclusive  evidence,  that  the  word  is  intended  as  a  derivative 
of  in,  to  wander  about,  and  it  is  so  rendered  in  the  LXX., 
Targ.,  and  Jerome  (vagos).  But  ^O,  pi.  E'HVipj  is  no  adjective; 
and  there  is  nothing  to  recommend  the  opinion,  that  by  "  wan 
derers"  we  are  to  understand  Israelitish  men.  Ewald  supposes 
that  D^"ilp  may  be  taken  as  a  part,  liopli.  for  D'HTitt,  hunted 
away,  like  DTHBBn  in  2  Kings  xi.  2  (keri  D'Tittttn) ;  but  it  cannot 

1  I  have  already  observed  at  ch.  xlvii.  6,  in  vindication  of  what  was 
stated  at  ch.  x.  27,  that  the  yoke  was  not  in  the  form  of  a  collar.  I 
brought  the  subject  under  the  notice  of  Prof.  Schegg,  who  wrote  to  me 
immediately  after  his  return  from  his  journey  to  Palestine  to  the  following 
effect :  "  I  saw  many  oxen  ploughing  in  Egypt.  Palestine,  Syria,  and  the 
neighbourhood  of  Ephesus ;  and  in  every  case  the  yoke  was  a  cross  piece 
of  wood  laid  upon  the  neck  of  the  animal,  and  fastened  to  the  pole  of  the 
plough  by  a  cord  which  passed  under  the  neck  of  the  animal." 


CHAP.  LVIII.  8,  9.  389 

be  shown  that  the  language  allowed  of  this  shifting  of  a  vowel- 
sound.  We  prefer  to  assume  that  D^VIB  (persecuted)  is  re 
garded  as  part,  pass.,  even  if  only  per  metaplasmum,  from  Tip, 
a  secondary  form  of  nn  (cf.  D3»,  fte,  HTO,  makund).  Yer.  76 
is  still  the  virtual  subject  to  ^nnnriK  Ditf.  The  apodosis  to  the 
hypothetical  ^3  commences  with  a  perf.  consec.,  which  then 
passes  into  the  pausal  future  Epynn.  In  ^top  (from  thine  own 
flesh)  it  is  presupposed  that  all  men  form  one  united  whole  as 
being  of  the  same  flesh  and  blood,  and  that  they  form  one 
family,  owing  to  one  another  mutual  love. 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  to  point  out  the  reward  of  divine 
grace,  which  would  follow  such  a  fast  as  this,  consisting  of 
self-renouncing,  self-sacrificing  love ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the 
promise  he  once  more  reminds  of  the  fact,  that  this  love  is 
the  condition  of  the  promise.  This  divides  the  promises  into 
two.  The  middle  promise  is  linked  on  to  the  first;  the  morning 
dawn  giving  promise  of  the  "perfect  day"  (Prov.  iv.  18).  The 
first  series  of  promises  we  have  in  vers.  8,  9a.  "  Then  will  iliy 
light  break  forth  as  the  morning  dawn,  and  thy  healing  will 
sprout  up  speedily,  and  thy  righteousness  will  go  before  thee,  the 
glory  of  Jehovah  will  follow  thee.  Then  wilt  thou  call  and 
Jehovah  will  answer ;  thou  wilt  beseech,  and  He  will  say,  Here 
am  I!"  The  love  of  God  is  called  "light"  in  contrast  with  His 
wrath  ;  and  a  quiet  cheerful  life  in  God's  love  is  so  called,  in 
contrast  with  a  wild  troubled  life  spent  in  God's  wrath.  This 
life  in  God's  love  has  its  dawn  and  its  noon-day.  When  it  is 
night  both  within  and  around  a  man,  and  he  suffers  himself  to 
be  awakened  by  the  love  of  God  to  a  reciprocity  of  love ;  then 
does  the  love  of  God,  like  the  rising  sun,  open  for  itself  a  way 
through  the  man's  dark  night  and  overcome  the  darkness  of 
wrath,  but  so  gradually  that  the  sky  within  is  at  first  only 
streaked  as  it  were  with  the  red  of  the  morning  dawn,  the 
herald  of  the  sun.  A  second  figure  of  a  promising  character 
follows.  The  man  is  sick  unto  death ;  but  when  the  love  of 
God  stimulates  him  to  reciprocal  love,  he  is  filled  with  new 
vigour,  and  his  recovery  springs  up  suddenly ;  he  feels  within 
him  a  new  life  working  through  with  energetic  force  like  a 
miraculous  springing  up  of  verdure  from  the  earth,  or  of 
growing  and  flowering  plants.  The  only  other  passages  in 
which  njnK  occurs  are  in  the  books  of  Jeremiah,  Chronicles, 


390  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

and  Nehemiah.  It  signifies  recovery  (LXX.  here,  TO,  Iduard 
<TOV  ra%v  dvareXeij  an  old  mistake  for  t/M&rtO)  vestimenta),  and 
hence  general  prosperity  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  13).  It  always 
occurs  with  the  predicate  nnity  (causative  '"y#j!!,  cf.  Targ.  Ps. 
cxlvii.  3,  NJ"!^  pDtf,  another  reading  ^"iN),  oritur  (for  which 
we  have  here  poetically  germinat)  alicui  sanitas;  hence  Gesenius 
and  others  have  inferred,  that  the  word  originally  meant  the 
binding  up  of  a  wound,  bandage  (imponitur  alicui  fascia). 
But  the  primary  word  is  ^K  =  T]"iX7  to  set  to  rights,  to  restore 
or  put  into  the  right  condition  (e.g.  b.  Sabbath  336,  "he  cured 
his  wounded  flesh  "),  connected  with  ^P")*?,  Arab,  drak,  accommo- 
datus;  so  that  n^lX?  after  the  form  njvfy  Arab,  (though  rarely) 
arika,  signifies  properly,  setting  to  rights,  i.e.  restoration. 

The  third  promise  is :  "  thy  righteousness  will  go  before 
thee,  the  glory  of  Jehovah  will  gather  thee,  or  keep  thee  to 
gether,"  i.e.  be  thy  rear-guard  (LXX.  Trepto-reXe?  ere,  enclose 
thee  with  its  protection ;  ^DN  as  in  *15&?D,  ch.  lii.  12).  The 
figure  is  a  significant  one  :  the  first  of  the  mercies  of  God  is 
Sifcaiovv,  and  the  last  So^d^eiv.  When  Israel  is  diligent  in  the 
performance  of  works  of  compassionate  love,  it  is  like  an  army 
on  the  march  or  a  travelling  caravan,  for  which  righteousness 
clears  and  shows  the  way  as  being  the  most  appropriate  gift  of 
God,  and  whose  rear  is  closed  by  the  glory  of  God,  which  so 
conducts  it  to  its  goal  that  not  one  is  left  behind.  The  fourth 
promise  assures  them  of  the  immediate  hearing  of  prayer,  of 
every  appeal  to  God,  every  cry  for  help. 

But  before  the  prophet  brings  his  promises  up  to  their  cul 
minating  point,  he  once  more  lays  down  the  condition  upon 
which  they  rest.  Vers.  96-12.  "If  thou  put  away  from  the 
midst  of  thee  the  yoke,  the  pointing  of  the  finger,  and  speaking  of 
evil)  and  offerest  up  thy  gluttony  to  the  hungry,  and  satisfiest  the 
soul  that  is  bowed  down :  thy  light  will  stream  out  in  the  dark 
ness,  and  thy  darkness  become  like  the  brightness  of  noon-day. 
And  Jehovah  will  guide  thee  continually,  and  satisfy  thy  soul  in 
droughts,  and  refresh  thy  bones;  and  thou  wilt  become  like  a  well- 
watered  garden,  and  like  a  fountain,  whose  waters  never  deceive. 
And  thy  people  will  build  ruins  of  the  olden  time,  foundations  of 
earlier  generations  wilt  thou  erect;  and  men  will  call  thee  repairers 
of  breaches,  restorers  of  habitable  streets.'1  noio,  a  yoke,  is  here 
equivalent  to  yoking  or  oppression,  as  in  ver.  6a,  where  it 


CHAP.  LVIII.  9-12.  391 


stands  bv  the  side  of  JJKn.     SKBtTTPV  (only  met  with  here,  for 

.  J  -    v  •  l"t        ~  t      \  •> 

n?^  Ges.  §  65,  1,  a),  the  stretching  out  of  the  finger,  signifies 
a  scornful  pointing  with  the  fingers  (Prov.  vi.  13,  Sa/criAo- 
SeiKreiv)  at  humbler  men,  and  especially  at  such  as  are 
godly  (ch.  Ivii.  4).  j)K~"iJjn,  the  utterance  of  things  which  are 
wicked  in  themselves  and  injurious  to  one's  neighbour,  hence 
sinful  conversation  in  general.  The  early  commentators  looked 
for  more  under  ^33,  than  is  really  meant  (and  so  does  even 
Stier  :  "  thy  soul,  thy  heart,  all  thy  sympathetic  feelings,"  etc.). 
The  name  of  the  soul,  which  is  regarded  here  as  greedily  long 
ing  (ch.  Ivi.  11),  is  used  in  Deut.  xxiv.  6  for  that  which  nourishes 
it,  and  here  for  that  which  it  longs  for  ;  the  longing  itself 
(appetitus)  for  the  object  of  the  longing  (Psychol.  p.  204). 
We  may  see  this  very  clearly  from  the  choice  of  the  verb  P2fi 
(a  voluntative  in  a  conditional  clause,  Ges.  §  128,  2),  which, 
starting  from  the  primary  meaning  educere  (related  to  P?3,  Arabic 
anfaqOy  to  give  out,  distribute,  nafaqa,  distribution,  especially 
of  alms),  signifies  both  to  work  out,  acquire,  carry  off  (Prov. 
iii.  13,  viii.  35,  etc.),  and  also  to  take  out,  deliver,  offer,  ex- 
promere  (as  in  this  instance  and  Ps.  cxl.  9,  cxliv.  13).  The 
soul  "  bowed  down  "  is  bowed  down  in  this  instance  through 
abstinence.  The  apodoses  commence  with  the  per/,  cons.  rnn. 
r6as  is  the  darkness  caused  by  the  utter  absence  of  light  (Arab. 
afalat  esh-sliemsu,  "  the  sun  has  become  invisible  ")  ;  see  at 
Job  x.  22.  This,  as  the  substantive  clause  affirms,  is  like  the 
noon-day,  which  is  called  ^11^,  because  at  that  point  the  day 
light  of  both  the  forenoon  and  afternoon,  the  rising  and  setting 
light,  is  divided  as  it  were  into  two  by  the  climax  which  it  has 
attained.  A  new  promise  points  to  the  fact,  that  such  a  man 
may  enjoy  without  intermission  the  mild  and  safe  guidance  of 
divine  grace,  for  which  nnj  (nrun,  syn.  7JJJ)  is  the  word  com 
monly  employed  ;  and  another  to  the  communication  of  the 
most  copious  supply  of  strength.  The  a?ra|  <yeyp.  ninynva 
does  not  state  with  what  God  will  satisfy  the  soul,  as  Halm 
supposes  (after  Jerome,  "splendoribus"),  but  according  to  HiTHS 
(Ps.  Ixviii.  7)  and  such  promises  as  ch.  xliii.  20,  xlviii.  21, 
xlix.  10,  the  kind  of  satisfaction  and  the  circumstances  under 
which  it  occurs,  viz.  in  extreme  droughts  (Targ.  "  years  of 
drought").  In  the  place  of  the  perf.  cons,  we  have  then  the 
future,  which  facilitates  the  elevation  of  the  object  :  "and  thy 


392  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


bones  will  He  make  strong,"  r?££.j  for  which  Hupfeld  would 
read  ^Ef,  "  will  He  rejuvenate."  r*?™}  is  a  denom.  of  f^n, 
expeditus;  it  may,  however,  be  directly  derived  from  a  verb  Y^n, 
presupposed  by  E^n,  not,  however,  in  the  meaning  "  to  be  fat" 
(LXX.  TriavOrja-erai,  and  so  also  Kimchi),  but  "  to  be  strong," 
lit.  to  be  loose  or  ready  for  action  ;  and  b.  Jebamoth  1026 
has  the  very  suitable  gloss  '•urui  Tnr  (making  the  bones  strong). 
This  idea  of  invigorating  is  then  unfolded  in  two  different 
figures,  of  which  that  of  a  well-watered  garden  sets  forth  the 
abundance  received,  that  of  a  spring  the  abundance  possessed. 
Natural  objects  are  promised,  but  as  a  gift  of  grace  ;  for  this 
is  the  difference  between  the  two  testaments,  that  in  the  Old 
Testament  the  natural  is  ever  striving  to  reach  the  spiritual, 
whereas  in  the  New  Testament  the  spiritual  lifts  up  the  natural 
to  its  own  level.  The  Old  Testament  is  ever  striving  to  ^ive 
inwardness  to  what  was  outward  ;  in  the  New  Testament  this 
object  is  attained,  and  the  further  object  now  is  to  make  the 
outward  conformed  to  the  inward,  the  natural  life  to  the 
spiritual.  The  last  promise  (whether  the  seventh  or  eighth, 
depends  upon  whether  we  include  the  growing  of  the  morning 
light  into  the  light  of  noon,  or  not)  takes  its  form  from  the 
pining  of  the  exiles  for  their  home  :  "  and  thy  people  (^22) 
build"  (Ewald,  §  295,  c)  ;  and  Bottcher  would  read  "pa  «ni  ;  but 
IP  with  a  passive,  although  more  admissible  in  Hebrew  than  in 
Arabic,  is  very  rarely  met  with,  and  then  more  frequently  in  the 
sense  of  cvno  than  in  that  of  t»?ro,  and  «3  followed  by  a  plural 
of  the  thing  would  be  more  exact  than  customary.  Moreover, 
there  is  no  force  in  the  objection  that  *JtpO  with  the  active  can 
only  signify  "  some  of  thee,"  since  it  is  equivalent  to  1OD  "it?X, 
those  who  sprang  from  thee  and  belong  to  thee  by  kindred 
descent.  The  members  born  to  the  congregation  in  exile  will 
begin,  as  soon  as  they  return  to  their  home,  to  build  up  again 
the  ruins  of  olden  time,  the  foundations  of  earlier  generations, 
i.e.  houses  and  cities  of  which  only  the  foundations  are  left 
(ch.  Ixi.  4)  ;  therefore  Israel  restored  to  its  fatherland  receives 
the  honourable  title  of  "builder  of  breaches,"  "restorer  of  streets 
(i.e.  of  places  much  frequented  once)  J"D^  "  (for  inhabiting), 
i.e.  so  that,  although  so  desolate  now  (ch.  xxxiii.  8),  they  become 
habitable  and  populous  once  more. 

The  third  part  of  the  prophecy  now  adds  to  the  duties  of 


CHAP   LVIII.  13,  14.  393 

human  love  the  duty  of  keeping  the  Sabbath,  together  with 
equally  great  promises;  i.e.  it  adds  the  duties  of  the  first  table  to 
those  of  the  second,  for  the  service  of  works  is  sanctified  by  the 
service  of  worship.  Vers.  13,  14.  "  If  thou  hold  back  tliy  foot 
from  the  Sabbath,  from  doing  thy  business  on  my  holy  day,  and 
callest  the  Sabbath  a  delight,  the  holy  of  Jehovah,  reverer,  and 
lionourest  it,  not  doing  thine  own  ways,  not  pursuing  thy  business 
and  speaking  words  :  then  wilt  thou  have  delight  in  Jehovah,  and 
I  will  cause  thee  to  ride  upon  the  high  places  of  the  land,  and 
make  thee  enjoy  the  inheritance  of  Jacob  thy  forefather,  for 
the  mouth  of  Jehovah  hath  spoJcen  it"  The  duty  of  keeping  the 
Sabbath  is  also  enforced  by  Jeremiah  (ch.  xvii.  19  sqq.)  and 
Ezekiel  (ch.  xx.  12  sqq.,  xxii.  8,  26),  and  the  neglect  of  this 
duty  severely  condemned.  Ch.  Ivi.  has  already  shown  the  im 
portance  attached  to  it  by  our  prophet.  The  Sabbath,  above 
all  other  institutions  appointed  by  the  law,  was  the  true  means 
of  uniting  and  sustaining  Israel  as  a  religious  community,  more 
especially  in  exile,  where  a  great  part  of  the  worship  necessarily 
fell  into  abeyance  on  account  of  its  intimate  connection  with 
Jerusalem  and  the  holy  land  ;  but  whilst  it  was  a  Mosaic  insti 
tution  so  far  as  its  legal  appointments  were  concerned,  it  rested, 
in  a  way  which  reached  even  beyond  the  rite  of  circumcision, 
upon  a  basis  much  older  than  that  of  the  law,  being  a  cere 
monial  copy  of  the  Sabbath  of  creation,  which  was  the  divine 
rest  established  by  God  as  the  true  object  of  all  motion;  for 
God  entered  into  Himself  again  after  He  had  created  the  world 
out  of  Himself,  that  all  created  things  might  enter  into  Him. 
In  order  that  this,  the  great  end  set  before  all  creation,  and 
especially  before  mankind,  viz.  entrance  into  the  rest  of  God, 
might  be  secured,  the  keeping  of  the  Sabbath  prescribed  by  the 
law  was  a  divine  method  of  education,  which  put  an  end  every 
week  to  the  ordinary  avocations  of  the  people,  with  their  secular 
influence  and  their  tendency  to  fix  the  mind  on  outward  things, 
and  was  designed  by  the  strict  prohibition  of  all  work  to  force 
them  to  enter  into  themselves  and  occupy  their  minds  with 
God  and  His  word.  The  prophet  does  not  hedge  round  this 
commandment  to  keep  the  Sabbath  with  any  new  precepts,  but 
merely  demands  for  its  observance  full  truth  answering  to  the 
spirit  of  the  letter.  "  If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from  the 
Sabbath  "  is  equivalent  to,  if  thou  do  not  tread  upon  its  holy 


394  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

ground  with  a  foot  occupied  with  its  everyday  work, 
which  follows  is  not  elliptical  (=  Tfl&yto  answering  to 

j.  \  ~;  i"  o 

an  unnecessary  and  mistaken  assumption),  but  an  explanatory 
permutative  of  the  object  "thy  foot:"  "turn  away  thy  foot," 
viz.  from  attending  to  thy  business  (a  defective  plural)  on  my 
holy  day.  Again,  if  thou  call  (i.e.  from  inward  contemplation 
and  esteem)  the  Sabbath  a  pleasure  ^dneg,  because  it  leads  thee 
to  God,  and  not  a  burden  because  it  leads  thee  away  from 
thine  everyday  life;  ef.  Amos  viii.  5)  and  the  holy  one  of 
Jehovah  (on  this  masculine  personification  of  the  Sabbath,  see 
ch.  Ivi.  2),  "  trfkhubbdd,"  honoured  =  honourable,  honorandus 
(see  vol.  i.  p.  128),  and  if  thou  truly  honourest  him,  whom 
Jehovah  has  invested  with  the  splendour  of  His  own  glory 
(Gen.  ii.  3  :  "  and  sanctified  it  "),  "  not "  (|O  =  wore  prj)  "  to 
perform  thy  ways "  (the  ordinary  ways  which  relate  to  self- 
preservation,  not  to  God),  "  not  to  attend  to  thine  own  business" 
(see  at  ver.  3)  tc  and  make  words,"  viz.  words  of  vain  useless 
character  and  needless  multitude  ("QT-O'n  as  in  Hos.  x.  4, 
denoting  unspiritual  gossip  and  boasting)  ; l  then,  just  as  the 
Sabbath  is  thy  pleasure,  so  wilt  thou  have  thy  pleasure  in 
Jehovah,  i.e.  enjoy  His  delightful  fellowship  ('n/JJ  23yriFi,  a 
promise  as  in  Job  xxii.  26),  and  He  will  reward  thee  for  thy 


1  Hitzig  observes,  that  "  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  has  already  received 
the  Jewish  addition,  '  speaking  is  work.'  "  But  from  the  premiss  that  the 
sabbatical  rest  of  God  was  rest  from  speaking  His  creating  word  (Ps. 
xxxiii.  6),  all  the  conclusion  that  tradition  has  ever  drawn  is,  that  on  the 
Sabbath  men  must  to  a  certain  extent  rest  TainD  as  well  as  POTDD  ;  and 
when  R.  Simon  b.  Jochai  exclaimed  to  his  loquacious  old  mother  on  the 
Sabbath,  "Keeping  the  Sabbath  means  keeping  silence,"  his  meaning  was 
not  that  talking  hi  itself  was  working  and  therefore  all  conversation  was 
forbidden  on  the  Sabbath.  Tradition  never  wmt  as  far  as  this.  The 
rabbinical  exposition  of  the  passage  before  us  is  the  following  :  "  Let  not 
thy  talking  on  the  Sabbath  be  the  same  as  that  on  working  days ;"  and 
when  it  is  stated  once  in  the  Jerusalem  Talmud  that  the  Rabbins  could 
hardly  bring  themselves  to  allow  of  friendly  greetings  on  the  Sabbath,  it 
certainly  follows  from  this,  that  they  did  not  forbid  them.  Even  the 
author  of  the  rh"W  (JVGn  nirr6  ^K-5)  with  its  excessive  ceremonial  strin 
gency  goes  no  further  than  this,  that  on  the  Sabbath  men  must  abstain 
from  (>in  "HIT  And  is  it  possible  that  our  prophet  can  have  been  more 
stringent  than  the  strictest  traditionalists,  and  wished  to  make  the  keeper 
of  the  Sabbath  a  Carthusian  monk  ?  There  could  not  be  a  more  thorough 
perversion  of  the  spirit  of  prophecy  than  this. 


CHAP.  LIX.  1,  2.  395 

renunciation  of  earthly  advantages  with  a  victorious  reign,  with 
an  unapproachable  possession  of  the  high  places  of  the  land — 
i.e.  chiefly,  though  not  exclusively,  of  the  promised  land,  which 
shall  then  be  restored  to  thee, — and  with  the  free  and  undisputed 
usufruct  of  the  inheritance  promised  to  thy  forefather  Jacob 
(Ps.  cv.  10,  11 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  13  and  xxxiii.  29)  ; — this  will  be 
thy  glorious  reward,  for  the  mouth  of  Jehovah  hath  spoken  it. 
Thus  does  Isaiah  confirm  the  predictions  of  ch.  i.  20  and  xl.  25 
(compare  ch.  xxiv.  3  and  the  passages  quoted  at  vol.  i.  p.  425). 

SECOND  PKOPHECY.-CHAP.  LIX. 

THE  EXISTING  WALL  OF  PARTITION  BROKEN  DOWN  AT  LAST. 

This  second  prophetic  address  continues  the  reproachful 
theme  of  the  first.  In  the  previous  prophecy  we  found  the 
virtues  which  are  well-pleasing  to  God,  and  to  which  He  pro 
mises  redemption  as  a  reward  of  grace,  set  in  contrast  with 
those  false  means,  upon  which  the  people  rested  their  claim  to 
redemption.  In  the  prophecy  before  us  the  sins  which  retard 
redemption  are  still  more  directly  exposed.  Vers.  1,  2.  "  Be 
hold,  Jehovalis  hand  is  not  too  short  to  help,  nor  His  ear  too  heavy 
to  hear ;  but  your  iniquities  have  become  a  party-wall  between 
you  and  your  God,  and  your  sins  have  hidden  His  face  from 
you,  so  that  He  does  not  hear"  The  reason  why  redemption  is 
delayed,  is  not  that  the  power  of  Jehovah  has  not  been  suffi 
cient  for  it  (cf.  ch.  1.  2),  or  that  He  has  not  been  aware  of 
their  desire  for  it,  but  that  their  iniquities  (DJ'TiyiJJ  with  the 
second  syllable  defective)  have  become  dividers  (Dv^o,  defec 
tive),  have  grown  into  a  party- wall  between  them  and  their 
God,  and  their  sins  (cf.  Jer.  v.  25)  have  hidden  pdiiim  from 
them.  As  the  "  hand"  (ydd)  in  ch.  xxviii.  2  is  the  absolute 
hand ;  so  here  the  "  face"  (pdmm)  is  that  face  which  sees 
everything,  which  is  everywhere  present,  whether  uncovered  or 
concealed ;  which  diffuses  light  when  it  unveils  itself,  and 
leaves  darkness  when  it  is  veiled ;  the  sight  of  which  is  blessed 
ness,  and  not  to  see  which  is  damnation.  This  absolute  coun 
tenance  is  never  to  be  seen  in  this  life  without  a  veil ;  but  the 
rejection  and  abuse  of  grace  make  this  veil  a  perfectly  im 
penetrable  covering.  And  Israel  had  forfeited  in  this  way  the 


396  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

light  and  sight  of  this  countenance  of  God,  and  had  raised  a 
party-wall  between  itself  and  Him,  and  that  TO$£,  so  that  He 
did  not  hear,  i.e.  so  that  their  prayer  did  not  reach  Him  (Lam. 
iii.  44)  or  bring  down  an  answer  from  Him. 

The  sins  of  Israel  are  sins  in  words  and  deeds.  Ver.  3. 
"  For  your  hands  are  defiled  with  bloody  and  your  fingers  with 
iniquity ;  your  lips  speak  lies,  your  tongue  murmurs  wickedness" 
The  verb  ^NJ,  to  spot  (see  ch.  Ixiii.  3),  is  a  later  softening  down 
of  t>JJ3  (e.g.  2  Sam.  i.  21) ;  and  in  the  place  of  the  niphal  i>W3 
(Zeph.  iii.  1),  we  have  here,  as  in  Lam.  iv.  14,  the  double  passive 
form  7KM,  compounded  of  niphal  and  pual.  The  post-biblical 
nithpaelj  compounded  of  the  niphal  and  the  hithpael,  is  a  mixed 
form  of  the  same  kind,  though  we  also  meet  with  it  in  a  few 
biblical  passages  (Deut.  xxi.  8  ;  Prov.  xxvii.  15  ;  Ezek.  xxiii. 
48).  The  verb  hdgdh  (LXX.  yu-eXera)  combines  the  two 
meanings  of  "  thought"  (meditation  or  reflection),  and  of  a 
light  low  "  expression,"  half  inward  half  outward. 

The  description  now  passes  over  to  the  social  and  judicial 
life.  Lying  and  oppression  universally  prevail.  Yers.  4-6. 
"  No  one  speaks  with  justice,  and  no  one  pleads  with  faithfulness ; 
men  trust  in  vanity,  and  speak  with  deception ;  they  conceive 
trouble,  and  bring  forth  ruin.  They  hatch  basilisks'  eggs,  and 
weave  spiders'  webs.  He  that  eateth  of  their  eggs  must  die  ;  and 
if  one  is  trodden  upon,  it  splits  into  an  adder.  Their  webs  do 
not  suffice  for  clothing,  and  men  cannot  cover  themselves  with 
their  works :  their  works  are  works  of  ruin,  and  the  practice  of 
injustice  is  in  their  hands."  As  fcOjJ  is  generally  used  in  these 
prophetic  addresses  in  the  sense  of  Krjpvo-creiv,  and  the  judicial 
meaning,  citare,  in  jus  vocare,  litem  intendere,  cannot  be  sus 
tained,  we  must  adopt  this  explanation,  "  no  one  gives  public 
evidence  with  justice"  (LXX.  ouSet?  \a\el  SUaia).  P'JV  is  firm 
adherence  to  the  rule  of  right  and  truth ;  nj^DK  a  conscientious 
reliance  which  awakens  trust ;  DQ^p  (in  a  reciprocal  sense,  as 
in  ch.  xliii.  26,  Ixvi.  16)  signifies  the  commencement  and  pur 
suit  of  a  law-suit  with  any  one.  The  abstract  infinitives  which 
follow  in  ver.  46  express  the  general  characteristics  of  the 
social  life  of  that  time,  after  the  mariner  of  the  historical  in 
finitive  in  Latin  (cf.  ch.  xxi.  5  ;  Ges.  §  131,  4,  b).  Men  trust 
in  tdhuj  that  which  is  perfectly  destitute  of  truth,  and  speak 
NV^  what  i"  morally  corrupt  and  worthless.  The  double  figure 


CHAP.  LIX.  4-7.  397 

fix  TJrtrn  fey  inn  is  taken  from  Job  xv.  35  (of.  Ps.  vii.  15). 
Vin  (compare  the  poel  in  ver.  13)  is  only  another  form  for  rhn 
(Ges.  §  131,  4,  b)  ;  and  *l?jjft!  (the  western  or  Palestinian  reading 
here),  or  TOTI  (the  oriental  or  Babylonian  reading),  is  the  usual 
form  of  the  inf.  abs.  hiph.  (Ges,  §  53,  Anm.  2).  What  they 
carry  about  with  them  and  set  in  operation  is  compared  in 
ver.  5a  to  basilisks'  eggs  ("OiyS¥?  serpens  regulus,  as  in  ch.  xi.  8) 
and  spiders'  webs  (B*?3y,  as  in  Job  viii.  14,  from  23J>,  possibly 
in  the  sense  of  squatter,  sitter  still,  with  the  substantive  ending 
fah  ;  see  Jeshurun,  p.  228).  They  hatch  basilisks'  eggs  (JJjpa 
like  J?P2?  ch.  xxxiv.  15,  a  perfect,  denoting  that  which  has 
hitherto  always  taken  place  and  therefore  is  a  customary 
thing)  ;  and  they  spin  spiders'  webs  (JHK  possibly  related  to 
apd^-vrj  ;l  the  future  denoting  that  which  goes  on  occurring). 
The  point  of  comparison  in  the  first  figure  is  the  injurious 
nature  of  all  they  do,  whether  men  rely  upon  it,  in  which  case 
"  he  that  eateth  of  their  eggs  dieth,"  or  whether  they  are  bold 
or  imprudent  enougli  to  try  and  frustrate  their  plans  and  per 
formances,  when  that  (the  egg)  which  is  crushed  or  trodden 
upon  splits  into  an  adder,  i.e.  sends  out  an  adder,  which  snaps 
at  the  heel  of  the  disturber  of  its  rest.  "M  as  in  Job  xxxix.  15, 
here  the  part.  pass.  fern,  like  rniD  (ch.  xlix.  21),  with  —  instead 
of  —  ,  like  TO,  the  original  a  of  the  feminine  (zurath)  having 
returned  from  its  lengthening  into  a  to  the  weaker  lengthening 
into  &  The  point  of  comparison  in  the  second  figure  is  the 
worthlessness  and  deceptive  character  of  their  works.  What 
they  spin  and  make  does  not  serve  for  a  covering  to  any  man 
(1D3JV  with  the  most  general  subject  :  Ges.  §  137,  3),  but  has 
simply  the  appearance  of  usefulness  ;  their  works  are  |?X"^yo 
(with  metheg,  not  munach,  under  the  Mem),  evil  works,  and  their 
acts  are  all  directed  to  the  injury  of  their  neighbour,  in  his 
right  and  his  possession. 

This  evil  doing  of  theirs  rises  even  to  hatred,  the  very 
opposite  of  that  love  which  is  well-pleasing  to  God.  Ver.  7. 
"  Their  feet  run  to  evil,  and  make  haste  to  shed  innocent  blood  : 


1  Neither  na,ipos  nor  dpxxw  has  hitherto  been  traced  to  an  Indian  root 
in  any  admissible  way.  Benfey  deduces  the  former  from  the  root  dhvri 
(to  twist)  ;  but  this  root  has  to  perform  an  immense  number  of  services 
M.  Miiller  deduces  the  latter  from  rak;  but  this  means  to  make,  not 
to  spin. 


398  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

their  thoughts  are  thought*  of  wickedness ;  wasting  and  destruction 
are  in  their  paths"  Paul  has  interwoven  this  passage  into  his 
description  of  the  universal  corruption  of  morals,  in  Rom.  iii. 
15-17.  The  comparison  of  life  to  a  road,  and  of  a  man's  con 
duct  to  walking,  is  very  common  in  proverbial  sayings.  The 
prophet  has  here  taken  from  them  both  his  simile  and  his 
expressions.  We  may  see  from  ver.  7  a,  that  during  the  cap 
tivity  the  true  believers  were  persecuted  even  to  death  by  their 
countrymen,  who  had  forgotten  God.  The  verbs  WiJ  and  ViSTO'l 
(the  proper  reading,  with  metheg,  not  munach,  under  the  D) 
depict  the  pleasure  taken  in  wickedness,  when  the  conscience  is 
thoroughly  lulled  to  sleep. 

Their  whole  nature  is  broken  up  into  discord.  Ver.  8. 
"  The  way  of  peace  they  know  not,  and  there  is  no  right  in  their 
roads :  they  make  their  paths  crooked :  every  one  who  treads  upon 
them  knows  no  peace"  With  sp^,  the  way  upon  which  a  man 
goes,  the  prophet  uses  interchangeably  (here  and  in  ver.  7) 
npDD?  a  high-road  thrown  up  with  an  embankment ;  'J^tt  (with 
the  plural  in  im  and  6th),  a  carriage-road ;  and  nyn^  a  footpath 
formed  by  the  constant  passing  to  and  fro  of  travellers. 
Peaceable  conduct,  springing  from  a  love  of  peace,  and  aiming 
at  producing  peace,  is  altogether  strange  to  them ;  no  such 
thing  is  to  be  met  with  in  their  path  as  the  recognition  or 
practice  of  right :  they  make  their  paths  for  themselves  (D($, 
dat.  ethicus),  i.e.  most  diligently,  twisting  about ;  and  whoever 
treads  upon  them  (bah,  neuter,  as  in  ch.  xxvii.  4),  forfeits  all 
enjoyment  of  either  inward  or  outward  peace.  Shalom  is 
repeated  significantly,  in  Isaiah's  peculiar  style,  at  the  end  of 
the  verse.  The  first  strophe  of  the  prophecy  closes  here :  it 
was  from  no  want  of  power  or  willingness  on  the  part  of  God, 
that  He  had  not  come  to  the  help  of  His  people ;  the  fault 
lay  in  their  own  sins. 

In  the  second  strophe  the  prophet  includes  himself  when 
speaking  of  the  people.  They  now  mourn  over  that  state  of 
exhaustion  into  which  they  have  been  brought  through  the 
perpetual  straining  and  disappointment  of  expectation,  and 
confess  those  sins  on  account  of  which  the  righteousness  and 
salvation  of  Jehovah  have  been  withheld.  The  prophet  is 
speaking  communicatively  here ;  for  even  the  better  portion  of 
the  nation  was  involved  in  the  guilt  and  consequences  of  the 


CHAP.  LIX.  9-11.  399 

corruption  which  prevailed  among  the  exiles,  inasmuch  as  a 
nation  forms  an  organized  whole,  and  the  delay  of  redemption 
really  affected  them.  Vers.  9-11.  "  Therefore  right  remains 
far  from  us,  and  righteousness  does  not  overtake  us  ;  we  hope  for 
light,  and  behold  darkness;  for  brightness — we  walk  in  thick  dark 
ness.  We  grope  along  the  wall  like  the  blind,  and  like  eyeless 
men  we  grope :  we  stumble  in  the  light  of  noon-day  as  in  the  dark 
ness,  and  among  the  living  like  the  dead.  We  roar  all  like  bears, 
and  moan  deeply  like  doves :  we  hope  for  right,  and  it  cometh  not; 
for  salvation — it  remaineth  far  off  from  us"  At  the  end  of  this 
group  of  verses,  again,  the  thought  with  which  it  sets  out  is 
palindromically  repeated.  The  perfect  njjrn  denotes  a  state  of 
things  reaching  from  the  past  into  the  present ;  the  future 
^p/^n  a  state  of  things  continuing  unchangeable  in  the  present. 
By  mishpdt  we  understand  a  solution  of  existing  inequalities  or 
incongruities  through  the  judicial  interposition  of  God ;  by 
tseddqdh  the  manifestation  of  justice,  which  bestows  upon  Israel 
grace  as  its  right  in  accordance  with  the  plan  of  salvation 
after  the  long  continuance  of  punishment,  and  pours  out 
merited  punishment  upon  the  instruments  employed  in  punish 
ing  Israel.  The  prophet's  standpoint,  whether  a  real  or  an 
ideal  one,  is  the  last  decade  of  the  captivity.  At  that  time, 
about  the  period  of  the  Lydian  war,  when  Cyrus  was  making 
one  prosperous  stroke  after  another,  and  yet  waited  so  long 
before  he  turned  his  arms  against  Babylon,  it  may  easily  be 
supposed  that  hope  and  despondency  alternated  incessantly  in 
the  minds  of  the  exiles.  The  dark  future,  which  the  prophet 
penetrated  in  the  light  of  the  Spirit,  was  indeed  broken  up  by 
rays  of  hope,  but  it  did  not  amount  to  light,  i.e.  to  a  perfect 
lighting  up  (negohoth,  an  intensified  plural  of  negohdh,  like 
nekhochoth  in  ch.  xxvi.  10,  pi.  of  nekhochdh  in  ver.  14)  ;  on  the 
contrary,  darkness  was  still  the  prevailing  state,  and  in  the  deep 
thick  darkness  (^dpheloth)  the  exiles  pined  away,  without  the 
promised  release  being  effected  for  them  by  the  oppressor  of 
the  nations.  "We  grope,"  they  here  complain,  "like  blind 
men  by  a  wall,  in  which  there  is  no  opening,  and  like  eyeless 
men  we  grope."  Bfefo  (only  used  here)  is  a  synonym  of  the 
older  «?'$?  (Deut.  xxviii.  29)  ;  rwy  (with  the  elision  of  the 
reduplication,  which  it  is  hardly  possible  to  render  audible,  and 
which  comes  up  again  in  the  pausal  ncft&?)  has  the  ah  of  force, 


400  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

here  of  the  impulse  to  self-preservation,  which  leads  them  to 
grope  for  an  outlet  in  this  aTropla  ;  and  Q^V  PN  is  not  quite 
synonymous  with  E^W,  for  there  is  such  a  thing  as  blindness 
with  apparently  sound  eyes  (cf.  ch.  xliii.  8)  ;  and  there  is  also  a 
real  absence  of  eyes,  on  account  of  either  a  natural  malforma 
tion,  or  the  actual  loss  of  the  eyes  through  either  external 
injury  or  disease.  In  the  lamentation  which  follows,  "  we 
stumble  in  the  light  of  noon-day  (&!"];}]{,  meridies  =  mesidies, 
the  culminating  point  at  which  the  eastern  light  is  separated 
from  the  western)  as  if  it  were  darkness,  and  D'3»B;&$2,  as  if 
we  were  dead  men,"  we  may  infer  from  the  parallelism  that 
since  D'3DB>Ka  must  express  some  antithesis  to  &^?3,  it  cannot 
mean  either  in  caliginosis  (Jer.,  Luther,  etc.),  or  "in  the  graves" 
(Targ.,  D.  Kimchi,  etc.),  or  "  in  desolate  places"  (J.  Kimchi). 
Moreover,  there  is  no  such  word  in  Hebrew  as  DB'K,  to  be  dark, 
although  the  lexicographers  give  a  Syriac  word  WDniXj  thick 


darkness  (possibly  related  to  <L*J^9  which  does  not  mean  the 

dark  night,  but  late  in  the  night)  ;  and  the  verb  sJidmen,  to  be 
fat,  is  never  applied  to  "  fat,  i.e.  thick  darkness,"  as  Knobel 
assumes,  whilst  the  form  of  the  word  with  3  c.  dagesh  precludes 
the  meaning  a  solitary  place  or  desert  (from  DBte  =  DDB>).  The 
form  in  question  points  rather  to  the  verbal  stem  JOB',  which 
yields  a  fitting  antithesis  to  DW3,  whether  we  explain  it  as 
meaning  "in  luxuriant  fields,"  or  "among  the  fat  ones,  i.e.  those 
who  glory  in  their  abundant  health."  We  prefer  the  latter, 
since  the  word  mishmanmm  (Dan.  xi.  24  ;  cf.  Gen.  xxvii.  28) 
had  already  been  coined  to  express  the  other  idea  ;  and  as  a  rule, 
words  formed  with  X  prosth.  point  rather  to  an  attributive  than 
to  a  substantive  idea.  1»B>K  is  a  more  emphatic  form  of  |£B> 
(Judg.  iii.  29)  ;  1  and  D^DB'K  indicates  indirectly  the  very  same 
thing  which  is  directly  expressed  by  D*|Olpb  in  ch.  x.  16.  Such 
explanations  as  "  in  opimis  rebus  "  (Stier,  etc.),  or  "  in  fat- 

1  The  name  of  the  Phoenician  god  of  health  and  prosperity,  viz.  Esmoun, 
which  Alois  Miiller  (Esmun,  ein  Beitrag  zur  Mythologie  des  orient.  Alter- 
tliums.  1864)  traces  to  \iyyn  (Ps.  Ixviii.  32)  from  DB>K  =  DBtfl,  "the 
splendid  one  (illustris)"  probably  means  "  the  healthy  one,  or  one  of  full 
health"  (after  the  form  Tin^S,  iTYIBB'N),  which  agrees  somewhat  better 
with  the  account  of  Photios  :  *E<rftovvois  VKQ  Qoii/Uav  uvopcwpkvw  \TS\  T$ 


CHAP.  LIX.  12,  13.  401 

ness  of  body,  i.e.  fulness  of  life"  (Bottcher),  are  neither  so 
suitable  to  the  form  of  the  word,  nor  do  they  answer  to  the 
circumstances  referred  to  here,  where  all  the  people  in  exile 
are  speaking.  The  true  meaning  therefore  is,  "we  stumble 
(reel  about)  among  fat  ones,  or  those  who  lead  a  merry  life,"  as 
if  we  were  dead.  "  And  what,"  as  Dcederlein  observes,  "  can 
be  imagined  more  gloomy  and  sad,  than  to  be  wandering  about 
like  shades,  while  others  are  fat  and  flourishing?"  The  growl 
ing  and  moaning  in  ver.  11  are  expressions  of  impatience  and 
pain  produced  by  longing.  The  people  now  fall  into  a  state  of 
impatience,  and  roar  like  bears  (hdmdh  like  fremere),  as  when, 
for  example,  a  bear  scents  a  flock,  and  prowls  about  it  (vesper- 
tinus  circumgemit  ursus  ovile :  Hor.  Ep.  xvi.  51) ;  and  now 
again  they  give  themselves  up  to  melancholy,  and  moan  in  a 
low  and  mournful  tone  like  the  doves,  quarum  blanclitias  ver- 
baque  murmur  habet  (Ovid).  njn?  like  murmurare,  expresses 
less  depth  of  tone  or  raucitas  than  npn.  All  their  looking 
for  righteousness  and  salvation  turns  out  again  and  again  to 
be  nothing  but  self-deception,,  when  the  time  for  their  coming 
seems  close  at  hand. 

The  people  have  already  indicated  by  |3"2g  in  ver.  9  that 
this  benighted,  hopeless  state  is  the  consequence  of  their  pre 
vailing  sins  'y  they  now  come  back  to  this,  and  strike  the  note 
of  penitence  (viddui),  which  is  easily  recognised  by  the  recur 
ring  rhymes  anu  and  enu.  The  prophet  makes  the  confession 
(as  in  Jer.  xiv.  19,  20,  cf.  iii.  21  sqq.),  standing  at  the  head  of 
the  people  as  the  leader  of  their  prayer  (baal  tepliilldli)  :  Yers. 
12,  13.  "For  our  transgressions  are  many  before  Thee,  and  our 
sins  testify  against  us  ;  for  our  transgressions  are  known  to  us,  and 
our  evil  deeds  well  known  :  apostasy  and  denial  of  Jehovah,  and 
turning  back  from  following  our  God,  oppressive  and  false  speak 
ing,  receiving  and  giving  out  from  the  heart  words  of  falsehood" 
The  people  acknowledge  the  multitude  and  magnitude  of  their 
apostate  deeds,  which  are  the  object  of  the  omniscience  of 
God,  and  their  sins  which  bear  witness  against  them  (n™5J  the 
predicate  of  a  neuter  plural ;  Ges.  §  146,  3).  The  second  ^ 
resumes  the  first :  "  our  apostate  deeds  are  with  us  (J")K  as  in 
Job  xii.  3  ;  cf.  EV,  Job  xv.  9),  i.e.  we  are  conscious  of  them ; 
and  our  misdeeds,  we  know  them  "  (DWJTP  for  p3JTP,  as  in  Gen. 
xli.  23,  cf.  6,  and  with  JJ,  as  is  always  the  case  with  verbs  jT^ 
VOL.  II.  2  C 


402  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

before  3,  and  with  a  suffix ;  Ewald,  §  60).  The  sins  are  now 
enumerated  in  ver.  13  in  abstract  infinitive  forms.  At  the 
head  stands  apostasy  in  thought  and  deed,  which  is  expressed 
as  a  threefold  sin.  'na  (of  Jehovah)  belongs  to  both  the 
"apostasy"  (treachery;  e.g.  ch.  i.  2)  and  the  "  denial"  (Jer.  v. 
12).  tfw  is  an  inf.  abs.  (different  from  Ps.  Ixxx.  19).  Then 
follow  sins  against  the  neighbour :  viz.  such  speaking  as  leads 
to  oppression,  and  consists  of  sdrdh,  that  which  deviates  from  or 
is  opposed  to  the  law  and  truth  (Deut.  xix.  16)  ;  also  the  con 
ception  (concipere)  of  lying  words,  and  the  utterance  of  them 
from  the  heart  in  which  they  are  conceived  (Matt.  xv.  18,  xii. 
35).  Yin  and  fan  are  the  only  poel  infinitives  which  occur  in 
the  Old  Testament,  just  as  ^rfefw  (ch.  x.  13)  is  the  only  example 
of  a  poel  perfect  of  a  verb  n"?.  The  poel  is  suitable  through 
out  this  passage,  because  the  action  expressed  affects  others, 
and  is  intended  to  do  them  harm.  According  to  Ewald,  the 
poel  indicates  the  object  or  tendency :  it  is  the  conjugation 
employed  to  denote  seeking,  attacking,  or  laying  hold  of;  e.g. 
|B*v,  lingua  petere,  i.e.  to  calumniate ;  $V9  ocnlo  petere,  i.e.  to 
envy. 

The  confession  of  personal  sins  is  followed  by  that  of  the 
sinful  state  of  society.  Vers.  14,  15a.  "And  right  is  forced 
lack,  and  righteousness  stands  afar  off ;  for  truth  has  fallen  in 
the  market-place,  and  honesty  finds  no  admission.  And  truth 
became  missing,  and  he  who  avoids  evil  is  outlawed."  In  con 
nection  with  mislipdt  and  tseddqdh  here,  we  have  not  to  think 
of  the  manifestation  of  divine  judgment  and  justice  which  is 
prevented  from  being  realized ;  but  the  people  are  here  con 
tinuing  the  confession  of  their  own  moral  depravity.  Right 
has  been  forced  back  from  the  place  which  it  ought  to  occupy 
(hisslg  is  the  word  applied  in  the  law  to  the  removal  of  boun 
daries),  and  righteousness  has  to  look  from  afar  off  at  the 
unjust  habits  of  the  people,  without  being  able  to  interpose. 
And  why  are  right  and  righteousness — that  united  pair  so 
pleasing  to  God  and  beneficial  to  man — thrust  out  of  the 
nation,  and  why  do  they  stand  without?  Because  there  is  no 
truth  or  uprightness  in  the  nation.  Truth  wanders  about,  and 
stands  no  longer  in  the  midst  of  the  nation  ;  but  upon  the  open 
street,  the  broad  market-place,  where  justice  is  administered, 
and  where  she  ought  above  all  to  stand  upright  and  be  pre- 


CHAP.  LIX.  15-18.  403 

served  upright,  she  has  stumbled  and  fallen  down  (cf.  ch. 
iii.  8)  ;  and  honesty  (n'khQcJidh),  which  goes  straight  forward, 
would  gladly  enter  the  limits  of  the  forum,  but  she  cannot : 
people  and  judges  alike  form  a  barrier  which  keeps  her  back. 
The  consequence  of  this  is  indicated  in  ver.  15a :  truth  in  its 
manifold  practical  forms  has  become  a  missing  thing;  and  who 
ever  avoids  the  existing  voice  is  mishtolel  (part,  hithpoel,  not 
hithpoal),  one  who  is  obliged  to  let  himself  be  plundered  and 
stripped  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  6),  to  be  made  a  sJioldl  (Mic.  i.  8),  Arab. 
maslub,  with  a  passive  turn  given  to  the  reflective  meaning, 
as  in  ^snnn,  to  cause  one's  self  to  be  spied  out  =  to  disguise 
one's  self,  and  as  in  the  so-called  niplial  toleratlvum  (Ewald, 
133,  b,  2). 

The  third  strophe  of  the  prophecy  commences  at  ver.  15£ 
or  ver.  16.  It  begins  with  threatening,  and  closes  with  pro 
mises  ;  for  the  true  nature  of  God  is  love,  and  every  manifes 
tation  of  wrath  is  merely  one  phase  in  its  development.  In 
consideration  of  the  fact  that  this  corrupt  state  of  things  fur 
nishes  no  prospect  of  self-improvement,  Jehovah  has  already 
equipped  Himself  for  judicial  interposition.  Vers.  155-18. 
"  And  Jehovah  saw  it,  and  it  was  displeasing  in  His  eyes,  that 
there  was  no  right.  And  He  saw  that  there  was  not  a  man  any 
where,  and  was  astonished  that  there  was  nowhere  an  intercessor : 
tit  en  His  arm  brought  Him  help,  and  His  righteousness  became 
His  stay.  And  He  put  on  righteousness  as  a  coat  of  mail,  and 
the  helmet  of  salvation  upon  His  head;  and  put  on  garments  oj 
vengeance  as  armour,  and  clothed  Himself  in  zeal  as  in  a  cloak. 
According  to  the  deeds,  accordingly  He  will  repay:  burning 
wrath  to  His  adversaries,  punishment  to  His  foes ;  the  islands 
He  will  repay  with  chastisement."  The  prophet's  language  has 
now  toilsomely  worked  its  way  through  the  underwood  of  keen 
reproach,  of  dark  descriptions  of  character,  and  of  mournful 
confession  which  has  brought  up  the  apostasy  of  the  great 
mass  in  all  the  blacker  colours  before  his  mind,  from  the  fact 
that  the  confession  proceeds  from  those  who  are  ready  for 
salvation.  And  now,  having  come  to  the  description  of  the 
approaching  judgment,  out  of  whose  furnace  the  church  of 
the  future  is  to  spring,  it  rises  again  like  a  palm-tree  that  has 
been  violently  hurled  to  the  ground,  and  shakes  its  head  as 
if  restored  to  itself  in  the  transforming  ether  of  the  future. 


404  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Jehovah  saw,  and  it  excited  His  displeasure  ("  it  was  evil  in 
His  eyes,"  an  antiquated  phrase  from  the  Pentateuch,  e.g. 
Gen.  xxxviii.  10)  to  see  that  right  (which  He  loves,  ch.  Ixi.  8; 
Ps.  xxxvii.  28)  had  vanished  from  the  life  of  His  nation.  He 
saw  that  there  was  no  man  there,  no  man  possessing  either  the 
disposition  or  the  power  to  stem  this  corruption  (K^K  as  in  Jer. 
v.  1,  cf.  1  Sam.  iv.  9,  1  Kings  ii.  2,  and  the  old  Jewish  say 
ing,  "  Where  there  is  no  man,  I  strive  to  be  a  man  ").  He  was 
astonished  (the  sight  of  such  total  depravity  exciting  in  Him 
the  highest  degree  of  compassion  and  displeasure)  that  there 
was  no  yaSD,  i.e.  no  one  to  step  in  between  God  and  the  people, 
and  by  his  intercession  to  press  this  disastrous  condition  of  the 
people  upon  the  attention  of  God  (see  ch.  liii.  12)  ;  no  one  to 
form  a  wall  against  the  coming  ruin,  and  cover  the  rent  with 
his  body ;  no  one  to  appease  the  wrath,  like  Aaron  (Num.  xvii. 
12,  13)  or  Phinehas  (Num.  xxv.  7).  What  the  fut.  consec. 
affirms  from  VBtol  onwards,  is  not  something  to  come,  bitf 
something  past,  as  distinguished  from  the  coming  events  an* 
nounced  from  ver.  18  onwards.  Because  the  nation  was  sa 
utterly  and  deeply  corrupt,  Jehovah  had  equipped  Himself 
for  judicial  interposition.  The  equipment  was  already  com 
pleted  ;  only  the  taking  of  vengeance  remained  to  be  effected. 
Jehovah  saw  no  man  at  His  side  who  was  either  able  or  willin^ 

o 

to  help  Him  to  His  right  in  opposition  to  the  prevailing  abomi 
nations,  or  to  support  His  cause.  Then  His  own  arm  became 
His  help,  and  His  righteousness  His  support  (cf.  ch.  Ixiii.  5)  ; 
so  that  He  did  not  desist  from  the  judgment  to  which  He  felt 
Himself  impelled,  until  He  had  procured  the  fullest  satisfac 
tion  for  the  honour  of  His  holiness  (ch.  v.  16).  The  armour 
which  Jehovah  puts  on  is  now  described.  According  to  the 
scriptural  view,  Jehovah  is  never  unclothed ;  but  the  free 
radiation  of  His  own  nature  shapes  itself  into  a  garment  of 
light.  Light  is  the  robe  He  wears  (Ps.  civ.  2).  When  the 
prophet  describes  this  garment  of  light  as  changed  into  a  suit 
of  armour,  this  must  be  understood  in  the  same  sense  as  when 
the  apostle  in  Eph.  vi.  speaks  of  a  Christian's  panoply.  Just 
as  there  the  separate  pieces  of  armour  represent  the  manifold 
self-manifestations  of  the  inward  spiritual  life,  so  here  the 
pieces  of  Jehovah's  armour  stand  for  the  manifold  self-mani 
festations  of  His  holy  nature,  which  consist  of  a  mixture  of 


CHAP.  LIX.  15-18.  405 

wrath  and  love.  He  does  not  arm  Himself  from  any  outward 
armoury ;  but  the  armoury  is  His  infinite  wrath  and  His 
infinite  love,  and  the  might  in  which  He  manifests  Himself 
in  such  and  such  a  way  to  His  creatures  is  His  infinite  will. 
He  puts  on  righteousness  as  a  coat  of  mail  (Tr~\W  in  half  pause, 
as  in  1  Kings  xxii.  34  in  full  pause,  for  $*}&,  6  passing  into 
the  broader  d,  as  is  generally  the  case  in  r?P.'!>  ®^..  5  also  in 
Gen.  xliii.  14,  vfotf;  xlix.  3,  TV;  xlix.  27,  Pf^fc  so 'that  His 
appearance  on  every  side  is  righteousness ;  and  on  His  head 
He  sets  the  helmet  of  salvation:  for  tne  ultimate  object  for 
which  He  goes  into  the  conflict  is  the  redemption  of  the 
oppressed,  salvation  as  the  fruit  of  the  victory  gained  by 
righteousness.  And  over  the  coat  of  mail  He  draws  on  clothes 
of  vengeance  as  a  tabard  (LXX.  TrepijSoXaiov),  and  wraps 
Himself  in  zeal  as  in  a  war-cloak.  The  inexorable  justice  of 
God  is  compared  to  an  impenetrable  brazen  coat  of  mail ;  His 
joyful  salvation,  to  a  helmet  which  glitters  from  afar ;  His 
vengeance,  with  its  manifold  inflictions  of  punishment,  to  the 
clothes  worn  above  the  coat  of  mail ;  and  His  wrathful  zeal 
(nw[p  from  WjJ,  to  be  deep  red)  with  the  fiery-looking  chlamys. 
No  weapon  is  mentioned,  neither  swrord  nor  bow ;  for  His 
own  arm  procures  Him  help,  and  this  alone.  But  what  will 
Jehovah  do,  when  He  has  armed  Himself  thus  with  justice 
and  salvation,  vengeance  and  zeal  ?  As  ver.  18  affirms,  He 
will  carry  out  a  severe  and  general  retributive  judgment.  ^£3 
and  H7D3  signify  accomplishment  of  (on  gdmal,  see  at  ch.  iii.  9) 
a  prjfjia  fjueaov ;  fivpa,  which  may  signify,  according  to  the  con 
text,  either  manifestations  of  love  or  manifestations  of  wrath, 
and  either  retribution  as  looked  at  from  the  side  of  God,  or 
forfeiture  as  regarded  from  the  side  of  man,  has  the  latter 
meaning  here,  viz.  the  works  of  men  and  the  double-sided 
gemul,  i.e.  repayment,  and  that  in  the  infliction  of  punish 
ment.  7V3,  as  if,  as  on  account  of,  signifies,  according  to  its 
Semitic  use,  in  the  measure  (2)  of  that  which  is  fitting  (V) ; 
cf.  ch.  Ixiii.  7,  uti  par  est  propter.  It  is  repeated  with  em 
phasis  (like  \A  in  ch.  Iii.  6)  ;  the  second  stands  without  rectum, 
as  the  correlate  of  the  first.  By  the  adversaries  and  enemies, 
we  naturally  understand,  after  what  goes  before,  the  rebellious 
Israelites.  The  prophet  does  not  mention  these,  however,  but 
"  the  islands,"  that  is  to  say,  the  heathen  world.  He  hides  the 


406  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

special  judgment  upon  Israel  in  the  general  judgment  upon 
the  nations.  The  very  same  fate  falls  upon  Israel,  the  salt  of 
the  world  which  has  lost  its  savour,  as  upon  the  whole  of  the 
ungodly  world.  The  purified  church  will  have  its  place  in  the 
midst  of  a  world  out  of  which  the  crying  injustice  has  been 
swept  away. 

The  prophet  now  proceeds  to  depict  the  Wt^,  the  symbol 
of  which  is  the  helmet  upon  Jehovah's  head.  Vers.  19,  20. 
"  And  they  will  fear  the  name  of  Jehovah  from  the  west,  and 
His  glory  from  the  rising  of  the  sun :  for  He  will  come  like  a 
stream  dammed  up,  which  a  tempest  of  Jehovah  drives  away. 
And  a  Redeemer  comes  for  Zion,  and  for  those  who  turn  from 
apostasy  in  Jacob,  saith  Jehovah"  Instead  of  ^T.!?  Knobel 
would  strike  out  the  metheg,  and  read  l^T."!,  "and  they  will  see;" 
but  "  seeing  the  name  of  Jehovah "  (the  usual  expression  is 
"seeing  His  glory")  is  a  phrase  that  cannot  be  met  with, 
though  it  is  certainly  a  passable  one ;  and  the  relation  in 
which  ver.  196  stands  to  19a  does  not  recommend  the  altera 
tion,  since  ver.  196  attributes  that  general  fear  of  the  name  of 
Jehovah  (cf.  Deut.  xxviii.  58)  and  of  His  glory  (see  the  parallel 
overlooked  by  Knobel,  Ps.  cii.  16),  which  follows  the  manifes 
tation  of  judgment  on  the  part  of  Jehovah,  to  the  manner  in 
which  this  manifestation  occurs.  Moreover,  the  true  Masoretic 
reading  in  this  passage  is  not  lOTI  (as  in  Mic.  vii.  17),  but 
1KW  (see  Norzi).  The  two  JO  in  3$|BD  (with  the  indispens 
able  metheg  before  the  chateph,  and  a  second  to  ensure  clear 
ness  of  pronunciation)  1  and  $D5?"rnTt3Kfl  (also  with  the  so-called 
strong  metheg)2  indicate  the  terminus  a  quo.  From  all  quarters 
of  the  globe  will  fear  of  the  name  and  of  the  glory  of  Jehovah 
become  naturalized  among  the  nations  of  the  world.  For 
when  God  has  withdrawn  His  name  and  His  glory  from  the 
world's  history,  as  during  the  Babylonian  captivity  (and  also  at 
the  present  time),  the  return  of  both  is  all  the  more  intense  and 
extraordinary ;  and  this  is  represented  here  in  a  figure  which 
recals  ch.  xxx.  27,  28,  x.  22,  23  (cf.  Ezek.  xliii.  2).  The 
accentuation,  which  gives  pashta  to  ^2?,  does  indeed  appear  to 
make  "JJ  the  subject,  either  in  the  sense  of  oppressor  or  adver 
sary,  as  in  Lam.  iv.  12,  or  in  that  of  oppression,  as  in  ch.  xxv.  4, 

1  See  the  law  in  Bar's  Metheg- Setzung,  §  29. 

2  See  idem,  §  28. 


CHAP.  LIX.  19,  20.  407 

xxvi.  16,  xxx.  20.  The  former  is  quite  out  of  the  question, 
since  no  such  transition  to  a  human  instrument  of  the  retri 
butive  judgment  could  well  take  place  after  the  VJV?  n^n  in 
ver.  18.  In  support  of  the  latter,  it  would  be  possible  to  quote 
ch.  xlviii.  18  and  Ixvi.  12,  since  "IV  is  the  antithesis  to  sJidlom. 
But  according  to  such  parallels  as  ch.  xxx.  27,  28,  it  is  incom 
parably  more  natural  to  take  Jehovah  (His  name,  His  glory) 
as  the  subject.  Moreover,  te,  which  must  in  any  case  refer  to 
"iroa,  is  opposed  to  the  idea  that  "IV  is  the  subject,  to  which  12 
would  have  the  most  natural  claim  to  be  referred, — an  explana 
tion  indeed  w7hich  Stier  and  Hahn  have  really  tried,  taking 
nDDU  as  in  Ps.  lx.  4,  and  rendering  it  "  The  Spirit  of  Jehovah 
holds  up  a  banner  against  him,  viz.  the  enemy."  If,  however, 
Jehovah  is  the  subject  to  ^,  "iy  inp  must  be  taken  together 
(like  D'D3D  . . .  D^3,  ch.  xi.  9;  rate  sjrrn,  Ps.  cxliii.  10;  Ges.  §  111, 
2,  5),  either  in  the  sense  of  u  a  hemming  stream,"  one  causing 
as  it  were  a  state  of  siege  (from  tsur^  ch.  xxi.  2,  xxix.  3),  or, 
better  still,  according  to  the  adjective  use  of  the  noun  "IV  (here 
with  tzakeph,  IV  from  "HV)  in  ch.  xxviii.  20,  Job  xli.  7,  2  Kings 
vi.  1,  a  closely  confined  stream,  to  whose  waters  the  banks  form 
a  compressing  darn,  which  it  bursts  through  when  agitated  by  a 
tempest,  carrying  everything  away  with  it.  Accordingly,  the 
explanation  we  adopt  is  this:  Jehovah  will  come  like  thfe  stream, 
a  stream  hemmed  in,  which  a  wind  of  Jehovah,  i.e.  (like  "  the 
mountains  of  God,"  "  cedars  of  God,"  "  garden  of  Jehovah," 
ch.  li.  3,  cf.  Num.  xxiv.  6)  a  strong  tempestuous  \vind,  sweeps 
away  (is  nDp3,  nosesa-b-b6j  with  the  tone  drawn  back  and  dagesh 
forte  conj.  in  the  monosyllable,  the  pilel  of  nus  with  Beth :  to 
hunt  into,  to  press  upon  and  put  to  flight), — a  figure  which 
also  indicates  that  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  is  the  driving  force  in 
this  His  judicially  gracious  revelation  of  Himself.  Then,  when 
the  name  of  Jehovah  makes  itself  legible  once  more  as  with 
letters  of  fire,  when  His  glory  comes  like  a  sea  of  fire  within 
the  horizon  of  the  world's  history,  all  the  world  from  west  to 
east,  from  east  to  west,  will  begin  to  fear  Him.  But  the  true 
object  of  the  love,  which  bursts  forth  through  this  revelation  of 
wrath,  is  His  church,  which  includes  not  only  those  who  have 
retained  their  faith,  but  all  who  have  been  truly  converted  tollim. 
And  He  comes  (Nil  a  continuation  of  ^)  for  Zion  a  Redeemer, 
i.e.  as  a  Redeemer  (a  closer  definition  of  the  predicate),  and  for 


408  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH 


those  who  turn  away  from  apostasy  (VVZ  W',  compare  ch.  i.  27, 
and  for  the  genitive  connection  Mic.  ii.  8,  '""p1™  ^&9  those  who 
have  turned  away  from  the  war).  The  Vav  here  does  not  signify 
"and  indeed,"  as  in  ch.  Ivii.  18,  but  "more  especially."  He  comes 
as  a  Redeemer  for  Zion,  i.e.  His  church  which  has  remained  true, 
including  those  who  turn  again  to  Jehovah  from  their  previous 
apostasy.  In  Rom.  xi.  26  the  apostle  quotes  this  word  of  God, 
which  is  sealed  with  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,"  as  a  proof  of  the 
final  restoration  of  all  Israel  ;  for  mrT1  (according  to  the  Apo 
calypse,  6  wv  KOI  6  TIV  fcal  o  ep^oyu-ei/o?)  is  to  him  the  God  who 
moves  on  through  the  Old  Testament  towards  the  goal  of  His 
incarnation,  and  through  the  New  Testament  towards  that  of 
His  parousia  in  Christ,  which  will  bring  the  world's  history  to 
a  close.  But  this  final  close  does  not  take  place  without  its 
having  become  apparent  at  the  same  time  that  God  "  has  con 
cluded  all  in  unbelief,  that  He  may  have  compassion  upon  all" 
(Rom.  xi.  32). 

Jehovah,  having  thus  come  as  a  Redeemer  to  His  people, 
who  have  hitherto  been  lying  under  the  curse,  makes  an  ever 
lasting  covenant  with  them.  Ver.  21.  "  And  /,  this  is  my 
covenant  with  them,  saith  Jehovah  :  My  Spirit  which  is  upon  thee, 
and  my  word  ivhich  I  have  put  in  thy  mouthy  shall  not  depart  out  of 
thy  mouth,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed,  and  out  of  the  mouth 
of  thy  seed's  seed,  saith  Jehovah,  from  henceforth  and  for  ever" 
In  the  words,  "And  I,  this  is  my  covenant  with  them,"  we  have 
a  renewal  of  the  words  of  God  to  Abram  in  Gen.  xvii.  4,  "  As 
for  me,  behold,  my  covenant  is  with  thee."  Instead  of  DfiK  we 
have  in  the  same  sense  Dnx  (not  Drritf,  as  in  ch.  liv.  15)  ;  we 
find  this  very  frequently  in  Jeremiah.  The  following  prophecy 
is  addressed  to  Israel,  the  "  servant  of  Jehovah,"  which  has 
been  hitherto  partially  faithful  and  partially  unfaithful,  but 
which  has  now  returned  to  fidelity,  viz.  the  "  remnant  of 
Israel,"  which  has  been  rescued  through  the  medium  of  a 
general  judgment  upon  the  nations,  and  to  which,  the  great 
body  of  all  who  fear  God  from  east  to  west  attach  themselves. 
This  church  of  the  new  covenant  has  the  Spirit  of  God  over  it, 
for  it  comes  down  upon  it  from  above  ;  and  the  comforting 
saving  words  of  God  are  not  only  the  blessed  treasure  of  its 
heart,  but  the  confession  of  its  mouth  which  spreads  salvation 
all  around.  The  words  intended  are  those  which  prove,  accord- 


CHAP.  LX.  1.  409 

intf  to  ch.  li.  16,  the  seeds  of  the  new  heaven  and  the  new 

^  / 

earth.  The  church  of  the  last  days,  endowed  with  the  Spirit 
of  God,  and  never  again  forsaking  its  calling,  carries  them  as 
the  evangelist  of  God  in  her  apostolic  mouth.  The  subject 
of  the  following  prophecy  is  the  new  Jerusalem,  the  glorious 
centre  of  this  holy  church. 

THIRD  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LX. 
THE  GLOKY  OF  THE  JERUSALEM  OF  THE  LAST  DAYS. 

It  is  still  night.  The  inward  and  outward  condition  of  the 
church  is  night ;  and  if  it  is  night  followed  by  a  morning,  it  is 
so  only  for  those  who  "  against  hope  believe  in  hope."  The 
reality  which  strikes  the  senses  is  the  night  of  sin,  of  punish 
ment,  of  suffering,  and  of  mourning, — a  long  night  of  nearly 
seventy  years.  In  this  night,  the  prophet,  according  to  the 
command  of  God,  has  been  prophesying  of  the  coming  light. 
In  his  inward  penetration  of  the  substance  of  his  own  preach 
ing,  he  has  come  close  to  the  time  when  faith  is  to  be  turned 
to  sin-ht.  And  now  in  the  strength  of  God.  who  has  made 

O  O  ' 

him  the  mouthpiece  of  His  own  creative  fiat,  he  exclaims  to 
the  church,  ver.  1:  "^4Hs^,  grow  light;  for  thy  light  cometh, 
and  the  glory  of  Jehovah  riseth  upon  thee"  The  appeal  is 
addressed  to  Zion-Jerusalem,  which  is  regarded  (as  in  ch. 
xlix.  18,  1.  1,  Hi.  1,  2,  liv.  1)  as  a  woman,  and  indeed  as  the 
mother  of  Israel.  Here,  however,  it  is  regarded  as  the  church 
redeemed  from  banishment,  and  settled  once  more  in  the  holy 
city  and  the  holy  land,  the  church  of  salvation,  which  is  now 
about  to  become  the  church  of  glory.  Zion  lies  prostrate  on 
the  ground,  smitten  down  by  the  judgment  of  God,  brought 
down  to  the  ground  by  inward  prostration,  and  partly  over 
come  by  the  sleep  of  self-security.  She  now  hears  the  cry, 
"Arise"  (quml).  This  is  not  a  mere  admonition,  but  a  word  of 
power  which  puts  new  life  into  her  limbs,  so  that  she  is  able  to 
rise  from  the  ground,  on  which  she  has  lain,  as  it  were,  under 
the  ban.  The  night,  which  has  brought  her  to  the  ground 
mourning,  and  faint,  and  intoxicated  with  sleep,  is  now  at  an 
end.  The  mighty  word  quml,  "  arise,"  is  supplemented  by  a 
second  word :  Jorl.  What  creative  force  there  is  in  these  two 


410  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

trochees,  qiiml  'drl,  which  hold  on,  as  it  were,  till  what  they 
express  is  accomplished ;  and  what  force  of  consolation  in  the 
two  iambi,  ki-bhd  'orekh,  which  affix,  as  it  were,  to  the  acts  of 
Zion  the  seal  of  the  divine  act,  and  add  to  the  aporis  (or  eleva 
tion)  its  #e'o"£9  (or  foundation)  !  Zion  is  to  become  light ;  it  is 
to,  because  it  can.  But  it  cannot  of  itself,  for  in  itself  it  has 
no  light,  because  it  has  so  absolutely  given  itself  up  to  sin ;  but 
there  is  a  light  which  will  communicate  itself  to  her,  viz.  the 
light  which  radiates  from  the  holy  nature  of  God  Himself. 
And  this  light  is  salvation,  because  the  Holy  One  loves  Zion:  it 
is  also  glory,  because  it  not  only  dispels  the  darkness,  but  sets 
itself,  all  glorious  as  it  is,  in  the  place  of  the  darkness.  Zdrach 
is  the  word  commonly  applied  to  the  rising  of  the  sun  (Mai. 
iii.  20).  The  sun  of  suns  is  Jehovah  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  12),  the  God 
who  is  coming  (ch.  lix.  20). 

It  is  now  all  darkness  over  mankind ;  but  Zion  is  the  east, 
in  which  this  sun  of  suns  will  rise.  Ver.  2.  "  For,  behold,  the 
darkness  covereth  the  earth,  and  deep  darkness  the  nations ;  and 
Jehovah  riseth  over  thee,  and  His  glory  becomes  visible  over  thee" 
The  night  which  settles  upon  the  world  of  nations  is  not  to  be 
understood  as  meaning  a  night  of  ignorance  and  enmity  against 
God.  This  prophecy  no  doubt  stands  in  progressive  connection 
with  the  previous  one ;  but,  according  to  ch.  lix.  19,  the  mani 
festation  of  judgment,  through  \vhich  Zion  is  redeemed,  brings 
even  the  heathen  from  west  to  east,  i.e.  those  who  survive  the 
judgment,  to  the  fear  of  Jehovah.  The  idea  is  rather  the 
following :  After  the  judgments  of  God  have  passed,  darkness 
in  its  greatest  depth  still  covers  the  earth,  and  a  night  of  clouds 
the  nations.  It  is  still  night  as  on  the  first  day,  but  a  night 
which  is  to  give  place  to  light.  Where,  then,  will  the  sun  rise, 
by  which  this  darkness  is  to  be  lighted  up  ?  The  answer  is, 
"  Over  Zion,  the  redeemed  church  of  Israel."  But  whilst  dark 
ness  still  covers  the  nations,  it  is  getting  light  in  the  Holy 
Land,  for  a  sun  is  rising  over  Zion,  viz.  Jehovah  in  His 
unveiled  glory.  The  consequence  of  this  is,  that  Zion  itself 
becomes  thoroughly  light,  and  that  not  for  itself  only,  but  for 
all  mankind.  When  Jehovah  has  transformed  Zion  into  the 
likeness  of  His  own  glory,  Zion  transforms  all  nations  into  the 
likeness  of  her  own.  Ver.  3.  "And  nations  walk  to  thy  light, 
and  kings  to  the  shining  of  thy  rays."  Zion  exerts  such  an 


CHAP.  LX.  4,  5.  411 

attractive  force,  that  nations  move  towards  her  light  (p  ?J?n  as 
in  faVoV  tfe*}  and  other  similar  expressions),  and  kings  to  the 
splendour  of  her  rays,  to  share  in  them  for  themselves,  and 
enjoy  them  with  her.  All  earthly  might  and  majesty  station 
themselves  in  the  light  of  the  divine  glory,  which  is  reflected 
by  the  church. 

Zion  is  now  exhorted,  as  in  ch.  xlix.  18,  to  lift  up  her  eyes, 
and  turn  them  in  all  directions ;  for  she  is  the  object  sought  by 
an  approaching  multitude.  Ver.  4.  u  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round 
about,  and  see :  they  all  crowd  together,  they  come  to  thee :  thy 
sons  come  from  afar,  and  thy  daughters  are  carried  hither  upon 
arms."  The  multitude  that  are  crowding  together  and  coming 
near  are  the  diaspora  of  her  sons  and  daughters  that  have  been 
scattered  far  away  (ch.  xi.  12),  and  whom  the  heathen  that  are 
now  drawing  near  to  her  bring  with  them,  conducting  them 
and  carrying  them,  so  that  they  cling  "  to  the  side  "  (ch.  Lxvi. 
12)  of  those  who  are  carrying  them  upon  their  arms  and 
shoulders  (ch.  xlix.  22).  njJ?Nn  is  softened  from  n3DNn?  the 
pausal  form  for  niipsn  (compare  the  softening  in  Ruth  i.  13), 
from  P?K,  to  keep,  fasten,  support ;  whence  }£X,  n3ON?  a  foster- 
father,  a  nurse  who  has  a  child  in  safe  keeping. 

When  this  takes  place,  Zion  will  be  seized  with  the  greatest 
delight,  mingled  with  some  trembling.  Ver.  5.  "  Then  wilt 
thou  see  and  shine,  and  thine  heart  will  tremble  and  expand ;  for 
the  abundance  of  the  sea  will  be  turned  to  thee,  the  wealth  of  the 
nations  cometh  to  thee"  It  is  a  disputed  question  whether  the 
proper  reading  is  ^"ify  ^nn,  or  *KTri — all  three  point  to  to* — 
or  Wn,  from  nfcO.  The  last  is  favoured  by  the  LXX.,  Targ., 
Syr.,  Jerome,  Saad.,  and  all  the  earlier  Jewish  commentators 
except  AE,  and  is  also  the  Masoretic  reading ;  for  the  Masora 
finalis  (f.  1,  col.  6)  observes  that  this  '•Kin  is  the  only  instance 
of  such  a  form  from  nxn  (differing  therefore  from  Wn  in  Zeph. 
iii.  15,  where  we  also  find  the  readings  "^TH  and  ^nn)  ;  and 
there  is  a  note  in  the  margin  of  the  Masora,  Pjton  ivf>,  to  the 
effect  that  this  ^"in  is  the  only  one  with  chateph,  i.e.  Sheva. 
Moreover,  Wfl  (thou  shalt  see)  is  the  more  natural  reading, 
according  to  ch.  Ixvi.  14  and  Zech.  x.  7 ;  more  especially  as  &OJ 
is  not  a  suitable  word  to  use  (like  pdchad  and  rdgaz  in  Jer. 
xxxiii.  9)  in  the  sense  of  trembling  for  joy  (compare,  on  the 
contrary,  JHJ,  ch.  xv.  4,  and  nrn  in  ch.  xliv.  8).  The  true  ren- 


412  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

dering  therefore  is,  "  Then  wilt  thou  see  and  shine,"  i.e.  when 
thou  seest  this  thou  wilt  shine,  thy  face  will  light  up  with  joy  ; 
ndliar  as  in  Ps.  xxxiv.  6.  Luther  renders  it,  "  Then  wilt  thou 
see  thy  desire,  and  break  out,"  viz.  into  shouting ;  Jerome,  on 
the  contrary,  has,  "  Thou  wilt  overflow,  i.e.  thou  wilt  be  inun 
dated  with  waters  coming  suddenly  like  rivers." 

The  impression  produced  by  this  revolution  is  so  over 
powering,  that  Zion's  heart  trembles  ;  yet  at  the  same  time  it 
is  so  elevating,  that  the  straitened  heart  expands  (^rni,  a  figure 
quite  unknown  to  the  classical  languages,  although  they  have 
angor  and  angustia ;  the  LXX.  renders  it  KOL  eKo-Trjcrr),  after 
the  reading  3rni  in  Cliayug,  and  Isaac  Nathan  in  his  Con 
cordance^  entitled  2TD  YKft)  :  for  hamon  yam,  i.e.  everything 
of  value  that  is  possessed  by  islands  and  coast  lands  (hdmon, 
groaning,  a  groaning  multitude,  more  especially  of  possessions, 
Ps.  xxxvii.  16,  etc.),  is  brought  to  her;  and  chel  goyim,  the 
property,  i.e.  (looking  at  the  plural  of  the  predicate  which 
follows ;  cf.  Hag.  ii.  7)  the  riches  (gold,  silver,  etc.,  Zech.  xiv. 
14)  of  the  heathen,  are  brought  into  her,  that  she  may  dispose 
of  them  to  the  glory  of  her  God. 

The  nations  engaged  in  commerce,  and  those  possessing 
cattle,  vie  with  one  another  in  enriching  the  church.  Vers.  6,  7. 
"  A  swarm  of  camels  ivill  cover  thee,  the  foals  of  Midian  and 
Epliah  :  they  come  all  together  from  Saba  ;  they  bring  gold  and 
incense,  and  they  joyfully  make  known  the  praises  of  Jehovah.  All 
the  flocks  of  Kedar  gather  together  unto  thee,  the  rams  of  Nebaioth 
will  serve  thee:  they  will  come  up  unth  acceptance  upon  mine 
altar  j  and  I  will  adorn  the  house  of  my  adorning"  The  trading 
nations  bring  their  wares  to  the  church.  The  tribe  of  Midian, 
which  sprang  from  Abraham  and  Keturah  (Gen.  xxv.  2),  and 
of  which  Ephah  (Targ.  Holdd,  the  Hutheilites  ?)  formed  one 
of  the  several  branches  (Gen.  xxv.  4),  had  its  seat  on  the 
eastern  coast  of  the  Elanitic  Gulf,  which  is  still  indicated  by 
the  town  of  Madyan,  situated,  according  to  the  geographers  of 
Arabia,  five  days'  journey  to  the  south  of  Aila.  These  come 
in  such  long  and  numerous  caravans,  that  all  the  country  round 
Jerusalem  swarms  with  camels.  riya^  as  in  Job  xxii.  11 ;  and 
•nan  (parallel  to  D^D3)  from  133  =  Arabic  bakr  or  likr,  a  young 
male  camel,  c?  generally  a  camel's  foal  (up  to  the  age  of  not 
more  than  nine  years ;  see  Lane's  Lexicon,  i.  240).  All  of  these, 


CHAP.  LX   6,  7.  413 

both  Midianites  and  Ephasans,  come  out  of  Sheba,  which  Strabo 
(xvi.  4,  19)  describes  as  "  the  highly  blessed  land  of  the 
Sabaeans,  in  which  myrrh,  frankincense,  and  cinnamon  grow." 
There,  viz.  in  Yemen,1  where  spices,  jewels,  and  gold  abound, 
they  have  purchased  gold  and  frankincense,  and  these  valuable 
gifts  they  now  bring  to  Jerusalem,  not  as  unwilling  tribute, 
but  with  the  joyful  proclamation  of  the  glorious  deeds  and 
attributes  of  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel.  And  not  only  do  the 
trading  nations  come,  but  the  nomad  tribes  also  :  viz.  Kedar, 
the  Kedarenes,  with  their  bows  (ch.  xxi.  17),  who  lived  in  the 
desert,  between  Babylonia  and  Syria,  in  &'!>£  (ch.  xlii.  11), 
i.e.  fixed  settlements  ;  and  Nebaioth,  also  an  Ishmaelitish  tribe 
(according  to  the  incontrovertible  account  of  Gen.  xxv.  13),  a 
nomad  tribe,  which  was  still  of  no  note  even  in  the  time  of 
the  kings  of  Israel,  but  which  rose  into  a  highly  cultivated 
nation  in  the  centuries  just  before  Christ,  and  had  a  kingdom 
extending  from  the  Elanitic  Gulf  to  the  land  on  the  east  of  the 
Jordan,  and  across  Belka  as  far  as  Hauran  ;  for  the  monu 
ments  reach  from  Egypt  to  Babylonia,  though  Arabia  Petrasa 
is  the  place  where  they  chiefly  abound.2  The  Kedarenes 
drive  their  collected  flocks  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  rams  (^K, 
arietes,  not  principes)  of  the  Nabatseans,  being  brought  by  them, 
M'Q  at  the  service  of  the  church  ^JWi*  a  verbal  form  with  a 


1  Seba  (K2pi  ch.  xliii.  3,  xlv.  14)  is  Meroe  generally,  or  (according  to 
Strabo  and  Steph.  Byz.)  more  especially  a  port   in  northern  Ethiopia  ; 
Sheba  (JO^),  the  principal  tribe  of  southern  Arabia,  more  especially  its 
capital  Marib  (Morio&a),  which,  according  to  an  Arabian  legend,  contained 
the  palace  of  Bilkis,  the  JO$  H3^lp  (see  Exc.  iv.  in  Kruger's  Feldzug  von 
jElius  Gallus,  1862).     It  is  true  that  the  following  passage  of  Strabo  (xvi. 
14,  21)  is  apparently  at  variance  with  the  opinion  that  the  seat  of  the 
Sabseans  was  in  southern  Arabia.     "  First  of  all,"  he  says,  "above  Syria, 
Arabia  Felix  is  inhabited  by  the  Nabatseans  and  Sabseans,  who  frequently 
marched  through  the  former  before  it  belonged  to  the  Romans."    But  as, 
according  to  every  other  account  given  by  Strabo,  the  Sabseans  had  their 
home  in  Arabia  Felix,  and  the  Nabatseans  at  the  northern  extremity  of  the 
Red  Sea,  in  Arabia  Petrsea,  all  that  this  passage  can  imply  is,  that  at  that 
part  of  Arabia  which  stretches  towards  the  Syrian  boundary,  the  expedi 
tions  of  the  Sabseans  came  upon  the  Nabatseans. 

2  Quatremere  rejects  the  identity  of  the  Nabatseans  and  the  Ishmaelitish 
Nebaioth  ;  but  it  has  been  justly  defended  by  Winer,  Kless,  Knobel,  and 
Krehl  (Religion  der  vorisl.  Araler,  p.  51). 


414  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

toneless  contracted  suffix,  as  in  ch.  xlvii.  10),  and  ascend  lfen4$, 
according  to  good  pleasure  =  acceptably  (with  the  W  used  to 
form  adverbs,  Ewald,  §  217,  i;  cf.  Frdtson  in  ch.  Ivi.  7),  the 
altar  of  Jehovah  ('dldk  with  the  local  object  in  the  accusative, 
as  in  Gen.  xlix.  4,  Num.  xiii.  17).  The  meaning  is,  that 
Jehovah  will  graciously  accept  the  sacrifices  which  the  church 
offers  from  the  gifts  of  the  Nabatasans  (and  Kedarenes)  upon 
His  altar.  It  would  be  quite  wrong  to  follow  Antistes  Hess 
and  Baumgarten,  and  draw  the  conclusion  from  such  prophe 
cies  as  these,  that  animal  sacrifices  will  be  revived  again.  The 
sacrifice  of  animals  has  been  abolished  once  for  all  by  the  self- 
sacrifice  of  the  "Servant  of  Jehovah;"  and  by  the  spiritual 
revolution  which  Christianity,  i.e.  the  Messianic  religion,  has 
produced,  so  far  as  the  consciousness  of  modern  times  is  con 
cerned,  even  in  Israel  itself,  it  is  once  for  all  condemned  (see 
Holdheim's  Schrift  uber  das  Ceremonial-gesetz  im  Messiasreichy 
1845).  The  prophet,  indeed,  cannot  describe  even  what  belongs 
to  the  New  Testament  in  any  other  than  Old  Testament 
colours,  because  he  is  still  within  the  Old  Testament  limits. 
But  from  the  standpoint  of  the  New  Testament  fulfilment,  that 
which  was  merely  educational  and  preparatory,  and  of  which 
there  will  be  no  revival,  is  naturally  transformed  into  the  truly 
essential  purpose  at  which  the  former  aimed ;  so  that  all  that 
was  real  in  the  prophecy  remains  unaffected  and  pure,  after 
the  deduction  of  what  was  merely  the  unessential  medium  em 
ployed  to  depict  it.  The  very  same  Paul  who  preaches  Christ 
as  the  end  of  the  law,  predicts  the  conversion  of  Israel  as  the 
topstone  of  the  gracious  counsels  of  God  as  they  unfold  them 
selves  in  the  history  of  salvation,  and  describes  the  restoration 
of  Israel  as  "the  riches  of  the  Gentiles;"  and  the  very  same 
John  who  wrote  the  Gospel  was  also  the  apocalyptist,  by  whom 
the  distinction  between  Israel  and  the  Gentiles  was  seen  in 
vision  as  still  maintained  even  in  the  New  Jerusalem.  It 
must  therefore  be  possible  (though  we  cannot  form  any  clear 
idea  of  the  manner  in  which  it  will  be  carried  out),  that  the 
Israel  of  the  future  may  have  a  very  prominent  position  in  the 
perfect  church,  and  be,  as  it  were,  the  central  leader  of  its 
worship,  though  without  the  restoration  of  the  party-wall  of 
particularism  and  ceremonial  shadows,  which  the  blood  of  the 
crucified  One  has  entirely  washed  away.  The  house  of  God 


CHAP.  LX.  8,  9.  415 

in  Jerusalem,  as  the  prophet  has  already  stated  in  ch.  Ivi.  7, 
\vill  be  a  house  of  prayer  (beth  tep7iilldh)  for  all  nations.  Here 
Jehovah  calls  the  house  built  in  His  honour,  and  filled  with 
His  gracious  presence,  "the  house  of  my  glory."  He  will 
make  its  inward  glory  like  the  outward,  by  adorning  it  with 
the  gifts  presented  by  the  converted  Gentile  world. 

From  the  mainland,  over  which  caravans  and  flocks  are 
coming,  the  prophet  now  turns  his  eyes  to  the  sea.  Vers.  8,  9. 
"  Who  are  these  who  fly  hither  as  a  cloudj  and  like  the  doves  to 
their  windows  ?  Yea,  the  islands  wait  for  me  ;  and  the  ships  of 
Tarshish  come  first,  to  bring  thy  children  from  far,  their  silver 
and  gold  with  them,  to  the  name  of  tlty  God,  and  to  the  holy 
One  of  Israel,  because  He  hath  ornamented  thee"  Upon  the 
sea  there  appear  first  of  all  enigmatical  shapes,  driving  along 
as  swiftly  as  if  they  were  light  clouds  flying  before  the  wind 
(ch.  xix.  1,  xliv.  22),  or  like  doves  flying  to  their  dovecots 
(celeres  cavis  se  turribus  abdunt,  as  Ovid  says),  i.e.  to  the  round 
towers  with  their  numerous  pigeon-holes,  which  are  provided 
for  their  shelter.  The  question  is  addressed  to  Zion,  and  the 
answer  may  easily  be  anticipated, — namely,  that  this  swarm  of 
swiftly  flying  figures  are  hurrying  to  a  house  which  they  long 
to  reach,  as  much  as  pigeons  do  to  reach  their  pigeon-house. 
The  h  which  follows  is  explanatory  :  this  hurrying  presents 
itself  to  thine  eyes,  because  the  isles  wait  for  me.  The  reason 
for  all  this  haste  is  to  be  found  in  the  faith  of  those  who  are 
hurrying  on.  The  Old  Testament  generally  speaks  of  faith  as 
hope  (P  njjp  as  in  ch.  li.  5,  xlii.  4)  ;  not  that  faith  is  the  same 
as  hope,  but  it  is  the  support  of  hope,  just  as  hope  is  the  com 
fort  of  faith.  In  the  Old  Testament,  when  the  true  salvation 
existed  only  in  promise,  this  epithet,  for  which  there  wrere  many 
synonyms  in  the  language,  was  the  most  appropriate  one.  The 
faith  of  the  distant  lands  of  the  west  is  now  beginning  to  work. 
The  object  of  all  this  activity  is  expressed  in  the  \vord  N'Orp. 
The  things  thus  flying  along  like  clouds  and  doves  are  ships ; 
with  the  Tartessus  ships,  which  come  from  the  farthest  ex 
tremity  of  the  European  insular  quarter  of  the  globe,  at  their 
head  (njb^Tia  with  munach  instead  of  metheg,  in  the  same  sense 
as  in  Num.  x.  14  ;  LXX.  ev  7rpa)Tot,$ ;  Jerome,  in  principio, 
in  the  foremost  rank),  i.e.  acting  as  the  leaders  of  the  fleet 
which  is  sailing  to  Zion  and  bringing  Zion's  children  from 


410  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

afar,  and  along  with  them  the  gold  and  silver  of  the  owners  of 
the  vessels  themselves,  to  the  name  (B^V,  to  the  name,  dative, 
not  equivalent  to  JJtt??  ;  LXX.  Sta,  as  in  ch.  Iv.  5)  of  thy  God, 
whom  they  adore,  and  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  because  He 
hath  ornamented  thee,  and  thereby  inspired  them  with  reve 
rence  and  love  to  thee  (TJ^?.  for  T?.N?.,  as  in  ch.  liv.  6,  where  it 
even  stands  out  of  pause). 

The  first  turn  (vers.  1-3)  described  the  glorification  of  Zion 
through  the  rising  of  the  glory  of  Jehovah ;  the  second  (vers. 
4-9)  her  glorification  through  the  recovery  of  her  scattered 
children,  and  the  gifts  of  the  Gentiles  who  bring  them  home ; 
and  now  the  third  depicts  her  glorification  through  the  service 
of  the  nations,  especially  of  her  former  persecutors,  and  gene 
rally  through  the  service  of  all  that  is  great  and  glorious  in 
the  world  of  nature  and  the  world  of  men.  Not  only  do  the 
converted  heathen  offer  their  possessions  to  the  church  on 
Zion,  but  they  offer  up  themselves  and  their  kings  to  pay  her 
homage  and  render  service  to  her.  Vers.  10-12.  "  And  sons  of 
strangers  build  thy  walls,  and  tJieir  kings  serve  thee :  for  in  my 
wrath  I  have  smitten  thee,  and  in  my  favour  I  have  had  mercy 
upon  thee.  And  thy  gates  remain  open  continually  day  and 
nighty  they  shall  not  be  shut,  to  bring  in  to  thee  the  possessions  of 
the  nations  and  their  kings  in  triumph.  For  the  nation  and  the 
kingdom  which  will  not  serve  thee  ivill  perish,  and  the  nations  be 
certainly  laid  waste."  The  walls  of  Zion  (T£kn  doubly  defec 
tive)  rise  up  from  their  ruins  through  the  willing  co-operation 
of  converted  foreigners  (ch.  Ivi.  6,  7),  and  foreign  kings  place 
themselves  at  the  service  of  Zion  (ch.  xlix.  23) ;  the  help  ren 
dered  by  the  edicts  of  Cyrus,  Darius,  and  Artaxerxes  Longi- 
manus  being  only  a  prelude  to  events  stretching  on  to  the  end 
of  time,  though  indeed,  in  the  view  of  the  prophet  himself,  the 
period  immediately  succeeding  the  captivity  really  would  be  the 
end  of  time.  Of  the  two  perfects  in  ver.  10&,  TT??  points  to 
the  more  remote  past;  T^PD?.  to  the  nearer  past,  stretching 
forward  into  the  present  (cf.  ch.  liv.  8).  On  pitteach,  patescere, 
hiscere,  see  ch.  xlviii.  8,  where  it  is  applied  to  the  ear,  as  in 
Song  of  Sol.  vii.  13  to  a  bud.  The  first  clause  of  ver.  Ha 
closes  with  njvj ;  tiphchah  divides  more  strongly  than  tebir, 
which  is  subordinate  to  it.  At  the  same  time,  "  day  and  night" 
may  be  connected  with  "  shall  not  be  shut,"  as  in  Rev.  xxi. 


CHAP.  LX.  13.  417 

25,  26.  The  gates  of  Zion  may  always  be  left  open,  for  there 
is  no  more  fear  of  a  hostile  attack ;  and  they  must  be  left  open 
ad  importandum,  that  men  may  bring  in  the  possession  of  the 
heathen  through  them  (a  thing  which  goes  on  uninterruptedly), 
D'ttru  DroiDI,  The  last  words  are  rendered  by  Knobel,  "  and 
their  kings  are  leaders  (of  the  procession)  ; "  but  ndhug  would 
be  a  strange  substantive,  having  nothing  to  support  it  but  the 
obscure  B^PJ  from  B^PJ,  for  W"is  in  Cant.  iii.  8  does  not  mean  a 
support,  but  amplexus  (Ewald,  §  149,  d).  The  rendering  "  and 
their  kings  escorted,"  i.e.  attended  by  an  escort,  commends 
itself  more  than  this ;  but  in  the  passage  quoted  in  support  of 
this  use  of  ndhag,  viz.  Nah.  ii.  8,  it  is  used  as  a  synonym  of 
hdgdh,  signifying  gemere.  It  is  better  to  follow  the  LXX.  and 
Jerome,  and  render  it,  "  and  their  kings  brought,"  viz.,  accord 
ing  to  ch.  xx.  4,  1  Sam.  xxx.  2,  as  prisoners  (Targ.  zec]lqm,  i.e. 
beziqqlm,  in  fetters), — brought,  however,  not  by  their  several 
nations  who  are  tired  of  their  government  and  deliver  them 
up  (as  Hitzig  supposes),  but  by  the  church,  by  which  they 
have  been  irresistibly  bound  in  fetters,  i.e.  inwardly  conquered 
(compare  ch.  xlv.  14  with  Ps.  cxlix.  8),  and  thus  suffer  them 
selves  to  be  brought  in  a  triumphal  procession  to  the  holy  city 
as  the  captives  of  the  church  and  her  God.  Ver.  12  is  con 
nected  with  this  nehuglm;  for  the  state  of  every  nation  and 
kingdom  is  henceforth  to  be  determined  by  its  subjection  to  the 
church  of  the  God  of  sacred  history  (*ny,  SovXeveiv,  in  distinc 
tion  from  sherethj  Siatcovelv,  QepaTrevetv),  and  by  its  entrance 
into  this  church — the  very  same  thought  which  Zechariah 
carries  out  in  ch.  xiv.  16  sqq.  Instead  of  *1!irP3,  "3  is  more 
properly  pointed  according  to  certain  MSS.  with  munach  (with 
out  makkeph)  ;  the  article  before  haggoyim  is  remonstrative, 
and  the  inf.  intens.  chdrObh  makes  the  thing  threatened  un 
questionable. 

From  the  thought  that  everything  great  in  the  world  of 
man  is  to  be  made  to  serve  the  Holy  One  and  His  church, 
the  prophet  passes  to  what  is  great  in  the  world  of  nature. 
Ver.  13.  "  The  glory  of  Lebanon  will  comie  to  thee,  cypresses, 
plane-trees  and  Sherbin-trees  all  together,  to  beautify  the  place  of 
my  sanctuary,  and  to  make  the  place  of  my  feet  glorious."  The 
splendid  cedars,  which  are  the  glory  of  Lebanon,  and  in  fact 
the  finest  trees  of  all  kinds,  will  be  brought  to  Zion,  not  as 

VOL.  II.  2  D 


418  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH, 

trunks  felled  to  be  used  as  building  materials,  but  dug  up  with 
their  roots,  to  ornament  the  holy  place  of  the  temple  (Jer.  xvii. 
12),  and  also  to  this  end,  that  Jehovah  may  glorify  the  "holy 
place  of  His  feet,"  i.e.  the  place  where  He,  who  towers  above 
the  heaven  of  all  heavens,  has  as  it  were  to  place  His  feet. 
The  temple  is  frequently  called  His  footstool  (hddom  ragldiv\ 
with  especial  reference  to  the  ark  of  the  covenant  (Ps.  xcix.  5, 
cxxxii.  7  ;  Lam.  ii.  1  ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.  2)  as  being  the  central 
point  of  the  earthly  presence  of  God  (cf.  ch.  Ixvi.  1).  The 
trees,  that  is  to  say,  which  tower  in  regal  glory  above  all  the  rest 
of  the  vegetable  world,  are  to  adorn  the  environs  of  the  temple, 
so  that  avenues  of  cedars  and  plane-trees  lead  into  it ;  a  proof 
that  there  is  no  more  fear  of  any  further  falling  away  to 
idolatry.  On  the  names  of  the  trees,  see  ch.  xli.  19.  Three 
kinds  are  mentioned  here  ;  we  found  seven  there.  The  words 
nrv  nv^ni  imn  KTil  are  repeated  verbatim  from  ch.  xli.  19  (on 
these  repetitions  of  himself,  see  p.  288). 

The  prophecy  now  returns  to  the  world  of  man.  Ver.  14. 
"  The  children  also  of  thy  tormentors  come  lending  unto  thee,  and 
all  thy  despisers  stretch  themselves  at  the  soles  of  thy  feet,  and  call 
thee  i  City  of  Jehovah,  Zion  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel?  "  The 
persecutors  of  the  church  both  in  work  and  word  are  now  no 
more  (ch.  xxvi.  14),  and  their  children  feel  themselves  dis 
armed.  They  are  seized  with  shame  and  repentance,  when 
they  see  the  church  which  was  formerly  tormented  and  despised 
so  highly  exalted.  They  come  shechoach  (an  inf.  noun  of  the 
form  jinip,  Lam.  v.  13 ;  used  here  as  an  accusative  of  more  pre 
cise  definition,  just  as  nouns  of  this  kind  are  frequently  con 
nected  directly  with  the  verb  1J?H,  Ewald,  §  279,  c),  literally  a 
bow  or  stoop,  equivalent  to  bowing  or  stooping  (the  opposite  to 
romdh  in  Micah  ii.  3),  and  stretch  themselves  "  at  the  soles  of 
thy  feet,"  i.e.  clinging  to  thee  as  imploringly  and  obsequiously 
as  if  they  would  lay  themselves  down  under  thy  very  feet,  and 
were  not  worthy  to  lie  anywhere  but  there  (as  in  ch.  xlix.  23)  ; 
and  whereas  formerly  they  called  thee  by  nicknames,  they  now 
give  thee  the  honourable  name  of  "  City  of  Jehovah,  Zion  of 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,"  not  "  Sanctuary  of  Israel,"  as  Meier 
supposes,  since  qedosh  Israel  is  always  a  name  of  Jehovah  in 
the  book  of  Isaiah.  It  is  a  genitive  construction  like  Bethle 
hem  of  Judah,  Gibeah  of  Saul,  and  others. 


CHAP.  LX.  15-18.  419 

The  fourth  turn  (vers.  15-18)  describes  the  glorification  of 
Zion  through  the  growth  and  stability  of  its  community  both 
without  and  within.  A  glorious  change  takes  place  in  the 
church,  not  only  in  itself,  but  also  in  the  judgment  of  the 
nations.  Vers.  15,  16.  "  Whereas  thou  ivast  forsaken,  and 
hated,  and  no  one  walked  through  thee,  I  make  thee  now  into 
eternal  splendour,  a  rapture  from  generation  to  generation.  And 
thou  suckest  the  milk  of  nations,  and  the  breast  of  kings  thou 
wilt  suck,  and  learn  that  I  Jehovah  am  thy  Saviour  and  thy  Re 
deemer,  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob"  Of  the  two  ideas  of  a 
church  (the  mother  of  Israel)  and  a  city  (metropolis)  involved 
in  the  term  Zion,  the  former  prevails  in  ver.  15,  the  latter  in 
ver.  16.  For  although  ruttJJ  and  nxut?  are  equally  applicable 
to  a  city  and  a  church  (ch.  liv.  6,  11),  the  expression  "no  one 
walked  through  thee "  applies  only  to  the  desolate  city  as  she 
lay  in  ruins  (see  ch.  xxxiv.  10).  The  fusion  of  the  two  ideas 
in  ver.  15  is  similar  to  ch.  xlix.  21.  Jerusalem  will  now  become 
thoroughly  a  splendour,  and  in  fact  an  eternal  splendour,  a 
rapture  of  successive  generations  so  long  as  the  history  of  this 
world  continues.  The  nations  and  their  kings  give  up  their 
own  vital  energy  to  the  church,  just  as  a  mother  or  nurse  gives 
the  milk  of  her  breasts  to  a  child  ;  and  the  church  has  thereby 
rich  food  for  a  prosperous  growth,  and  a  constant  supply  of 
fresh  material  for  grateful  joy.  We  cannot  for  a  moment 
think  of  enriching  by  means  of  conquest,  as  Hitzig  does ;  the 
sucking  is  that  of  a  child,  not  of  a  vampyre.  We  should  expect 
meldkhoth  (ch.  xlix.  23)  instead  of  nfldkhim  (kings)  ;  but  by  "jb> 
(as  in  ch.  Ixvi.  11  for  *y&)  the  natural  character  of  what  is 
promised  is  intentionally  spiritualized.  The  figure  proves  itself 
to  be  only  a  figure,  and  requires  an  ideal  interpretation.  The 
church  sees  in  all  this  the  gracious  superintendence  of  her  God; 
she  learns  from  experience  that  Jehovah  is  her  Saviour,  that 
He  is  her  Redeemer,  He  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob,  who  has 
conquered  for  her,  and  now  causes  her  to  triumph  (^K  S3  with 
munach  yethib,  as  in  ch.  xlix.  266,  which  passage  is  repeated 
almost  verbatim  here,  and  ch.  Ixi.  8). 

The  outward  and  inward  beauty  of  the  new  Jerusalem  is 
now  depicted  by  the  materials  of  her  structure,  and  the  powers 
which  prevail  within  her.  Yers.  17,  18.  "  For  copper  I  bring 
gold,  and  for  iron  I  bring  silver,  and  for  wood  copper,  and  for 


420  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

stones  iron,  and  make  peace  tliy  magistracy,  and  righteousness 
thy  bailiffs.  Injustice  is  no  more  seen  in  thy  land,  wasting  and 
destruction  in  thy  borders ;  and  thou  callest  salvation  thy  ivalls, 
and  renown  thy  gates.91  Wood  and  stone  are  not  used  at  all  in 
the  building  of  the  new  Jerusalem.  Just  as  in  the  time  of 
Solomon  silver  was  counted  as  nothing  (1  Kings  x.  21)  and 
had  only  the  value  of  stones  (1  Kings  x.  27),  so  here  Jehovah 
gives  her  gold  instead  of  copper,  silver  instead  of  iron ;  whilst 
copper  and  iron  are  so  despised  with  this  superabundance  of 
the  precious  metals,  that  they  take  the  place  of  such  building 
materials  as  wood  and  stones.  Thus  the  city  will  be  a  massive 
one,  and  not  even  all  of  stone,  but  entirely  built  of  metal,  and 
indestructible  not  only  by  the  elements,  but  by  all  kinds  of  foes. 
The  allegorical  continuation  of  the  prophecy  shows  very  clearly 
that  the  prophet  does  not  mean  his  words  to  be  taken  literally. 
The  LXX.,  Saad.,  and  others,  are  wrong  in  adopting  the  ren 
dering,  "  I  make  thy  magistracy  peace,"  etc. ;  since  shdlom  and 
tseddqdh  are  not  accusatives  of  either  the  predicate  or  the  object, 
but  such  personifications  as  we  are  accustomed  to  in  Isaiah  (vid. 
ch.  xxxii.  16,  17,  lix.  14;  cf.  ch.  xlv.  8).  Jehovah  makes 
peace  its  pequdddh,  i.e.  its  "  overseership  "  (like  gebhurdh,  hero- 
ship,  in  ch.  iii.  25,  and  'ezrdh,  helpership,  in  ch.  xxxi.  2),  or 
magistracy;  and  righteousness  its  bailiffs.  The  plural  ^^3 
is  no  disproof  of  the  personification  ;  the  meaning  is,  that 
tseddgdh  (righteousness)  is  to  Jerusalem  what  the  whole  body 
of  civil  officers  together  are :  that  is  to  say,  righteousness  is  a 
substitute  for  the  police  force  in  every  form.  Under  such 
magistracy  and  such  police,  nothing  is  ever  heard  within  the 
land,  of  which  Jerusalem  is  the  capital,  of  either  chdmds,  i.e.  a 
rude  and  unjust  attack  of  the  stronger  upon  the  weaker,  or  of 
shod,  i.e.  conquest  and  devastation,  and  shebher,  i.e.  dashing  to 
pieces,  or  breaking  in  two.  It  has  walls  (ver.  10)  ;  but  in  truth 
"salvation,"  the  salvation  of  its  God,  is  regarded  as  its  im 
pregnable  fortifications.  It  has  gates  (ver.  11);  but  teldlldh,  the 
renown  that  commands  respect,  with  which  Jehovah  has  in 
vested  it,  is  really  better  than  any  gate,  whether  for  ornament 
or  protection. 

The  fifth  turn  celebrates  the  glorifying  of  Jerusalem, 
through  the  shining  of  Jehovah  as  its  everlasting  light  and 
through  the  form  of  its  ever-growing  membership,  which  is  so 


CHAP.  LX.  19,  20.  421 

well-pleasing  to  Gotl.  The  prophecy  returns  to  the  thought 
with  which  it  set  out,  and  by  which  the  whole  is  regulated,  viz. 
that  Jerusalem  will  be  light.  This  leading  thought  is  now  un 
folded  in  the  most  majestic  manner,  and  opened  up  in  all  its 
eschatological  depth.  Vers.  19,  20.  "  The  sun  will  be  no  more 
thy  light  by  day,  neither  for  brightness  will  the  moon  shine  upon 
thee :  Jehovah  will  be  to  thee  an  everlasting  light,  and  thy  God 
thy  glory.  Thy  sun  will  no  more  go  down,  and  thy  moon  will 
not  be  withdrawn;  for  Jehovah  will  be  to  thee  an  everlasting 
l/ght,  and  the  days  of  thy  mourning  ivill  be  fulfilled."  Although, 
in  the  prophet's  view,  the  Jerusalem  of  the  period  of  glory  in 
this  world  and  the  Jerusalem  of  the  eternal  glory  beyond 
flow  into  one  another ;  the  meaning  of  this  prophecy  is  not 
that  the  sun  and  moon  will  no  longer  exist.  Even  of  the 
Jerusalem  which  is  not  to  be  built  by  Israel  with  the  help  of 
converted  heathen,  but  which  comes  down  from  heaven  to 
earth,  the  seer  in  Rev.  xxi.  23  merely  says,  that  the  city  needs 
neither  the  shining  of  the  sun  nor  of  the  moon  (as  the  Targum 
renders  the  passage  before  us,  "thou  wilt  not  need  the  shining 
of  the  sun  by  day"),  for  the  glory  of  God  lightens  it,  and  the 
Lamb  is  the  light  thereof,  i.e.  God  Himself  is  instead  of  a  sun 
to  her,  and  the  Lamb  instead  of  a  moon.  Consequently  we 
do  not  agree  with  Stier,  who  infers  from  this  passage  that 
"  there  is  a  final  new  creation  approaching,  when  there  will  be 
no  more  turning  round  into  the  shadow  (Jas.  i.  17),  when  the 
whole  planetary  system,  including  the  earth,  will  be  changed, 
and  when  the  earth  itself  will  become  a  sun,  yea,  will  become 
even  more  than  that,  in  the  direct  and  primary  light  which 
streams  down  upon  it  from  God  Himself."  We  rather  agree 
with  Hofmann,  that  "there  will  still  be  both  sun  and  moon,  but 
the  Holy  Place  will  be  illumined  without  interruption  by  the 
manifestation  of  the  presence  of  God,  which  outshines  all 
besides."  The  prophet  has  here  found  the  most  complete 
expression,  for  that  which  has  already  been  hinted  at  in  such 
prophecies  in  ch.  iv.  5,  xxx.  26,  xxiv.  23.  As  the  city  receives 
its  light  neither  from  the  sun  nor  from  the  moon,  this  implies, 
what  Rev.  xxi.  25  distinctly  affirms,  that  there  will  be  no 
more  night  there.  The  prophet  intentionally  avoids  a  >"M>  tlt^ 
parallel  to  DW  "lisp.  We  must  not  render  the  second  clause  in 
ver.  19,  "  and  it  will  not  become  light  to  thee  with  the  shining 


422  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


of  the  moon,"  for  "VKn  never  means  to  get  light  ;  nor  "  and  as 
for  the  shining  of  the  moon,  it  does  not  give  the  light,"  as 
Hitzig  and  Knobel  propose,  for  rttifa  is  used  alone,  and  not 
rrvn  ruita  as  the  antithesis  to  DDV  Tn£,  in  the  sense  of  "  to  light 
up  the  night"  (compare  flJJ  as  applied  to  the  shining  of  the 
moon  in  ch.  xiii.  10,  and  np  to  the  glittering  of  the  stars  in 
Joel  ii.  10),  and  even  the  use  of  rWn  is  avoided.  The  true 
rendering  is  either,  "  and  for  lighting,  the  moon  will  not  shine 
upon  thee"  (Stier,  Hahn,  etc.)  ;  or,  what  is  more  in  accordance 
with  the  accentuation,  which  would  have  given  PQ^l  tifchah  and 
not  tsakeph  gadol,  if  it  had  been  intended  to  indicate  the  object, 
"  and  as  for  the  lighting"  (?  as  in  ch.  xxxii.  1&).  The  glory 
of  Jehovah,  which  soars  above  Jerusalem,  and  has  come  down 
into  her,  is  henceforth  her  sun  and  her  moon,  —  a  sun  that  never 
sets,  a  moon  *1?^  &6  which  is  not  taken  in  towards  morning, 
like  a  lamp  that  has  been  hung  out  at  night  (compare  ^DfcO,  ch. 
xvi.  10,  withdrawn,  disappeared).  The  triumph  of  light  over 
darkness,  which  is  the  object  of  the  world's  history,  is  con 
centrated  in  the  new  Jerusalem.  How  this  is  to  be  under 
stood,  is  explained  in  the  closing  clause  of  ver.  20.  The  sum  of 
the  days  of  mourning  allotted  to  the  church  is  complete.  The 
darkness  of  the  corruption  of  sin  and  state  of  punishment  is 
overcome,  and  the  church  is  nothing  but  holy  blessed  joy  with 
out  change  or  disturbance  ;  for  it  walks  no  longer  in  sidereal 
light,  but  in  the  eternally  unchangeable  light  of  Jehovah, 
which  with  its  peaceful  gentleness  and  perfect  purity  illumines 
within  as  well  as  without.  The  seer  of  the  Apocalypse  also 
mentions  the  Lamb.  The  Lamb  is  also  known  to  our  prophet  ; 
for  the  "  Servant  of  Jehovah"  is  the  Lamb.  But  the  light  of 
transfiguration,  in  which  he  sees  this  exalted  Lamb,  is  not 
great  enough  to  admit  of  its  being  combined  with  the  light  of 
the  Divine  Nature  itself. 

The  next  verse  shows  how  deep  was  his  consciousness  of 
the  close  connection  between  darkness,  wrath,  and  sin.  Ver. 
21.  u  And  thy  people,  they  are  all  righteous;  they  possess  the 
land  for  ever,  a  sprout  of  my  plantations,  a  work  of  my  hands 
for  glorification"  The  church  of  the  new  Jerusalem  consists 
of  none  but  righteous  ones,  who  have  been  cleansed  from  guilt, 
and  keep  themselves  henceforth  pure  from  sinning,  and  there 
fore  possess  the  land  of  promise  for  ever,  without  having  to 


CHAP.  LX.  22.  ±26 

fear  repeated  destruction  and  banishment:  a  "sprout"  (netser 
as  in  ch.  xi.  1,  xiv.  19 ;  Arab,  nadr,  the  green  branch)  "  of  my 
plantations"  (tyB»  chethib,  erroneously  to»  or  W?»),  i.e.  of  my 
creative  acts  of  grace  (cf.  ch.  v.  7),  a  "  work  of  my  hands" 
(cf.  ch.  xix.  25),  "  to  glorify  me,"  i.e.  in  which  I  possess  that  in 
which  I  glory  (TKBTinS  as  in  ch.  Ixi.  3). 

The  life  of  this  church,  which  is  newly  created,  new-born, 
through  judgment  and  grace,  gradually  expands  from  the  most 
unassuming  centre  in  ever  widening  circles  until  it  has  attained 
the  broadest  dimensions.  Ver.  2  2  a.  "  The  smallest  one  will 
become  thousands,  and  the  meanest  one  a  powerful  nation"  "  The 
small  and  mean  one,"  or,  as  the  idea  is  a  relative  one,  "  the 
smallest  and  meanest  one"  (Ges.  §  119,  2),  is  either  a  childless 
one,  or  one  blessed  with  very  few  children.  At  the  same  time, 
the  reference  is  not  exclusively  to  growth  through  the  blessing 
of  children,  but  also  to  growth  through  the  extension  of  fel 
lowship.  We  have  a  similar  expression  in  Mic.  iv.  7  (cf.  v. 
1),  where  'eleph  is  employed,  just  as  it  is  here,  in  the  sense  of 
^X  "  to  thousands  (or  chiliads)." 

The  whole  of  the  prophetic  address  is  now  sealed  with  this 
declaration  :  Yer.  226.  "  I,  Jehovah,  will  hasten  it  in  His  time" 
The  neuter  H3-  (as  in  ch.  xliii.  13,  xlvi.  11)  refers  to  every 
thing  that  has  been  predicted  from  ver.  1  downwards.  Jehovah 
will  fulfil  it  rapidly,  when  the  point  of  time  (icaipos)  which  He 
has  fixed  for  it  shall  have  arrived.  As  this  point  of  time  is 
known  to  Him  only,  the  predicted  glory  will  burst  all  at  once 
with  startling  suddenness  upon  the  eyes  of  those  who  have 
•waited  believingly  for  Him. 

This  chapter  forms  a  connected  and  self-contained  whole, 
as  we  may  see  very  clearly  from  the  address  to  Zion-Jerusalem, 
which  is  sustained  throughout.  If  we  compare  together  such 
passages  as  ch.  li.  17-23  ("Awake,  awake,  stand  up,  O  Jeru 
salem"),  ch.  lii.  1,  2  ("Awake,  awake,  put  on  thy  strength,  O 
Zion"),  and  ch.  liv.  ("  Sing,  O  barren"),  which  are  all  closely 
related  so  far  as  their  contents  are  concerned,  we  shall  find  that 
these  addresses  to  Zion  form  an  ascending  series,  ch.  Ix.  being 
the  summit  to  which  they  rise,  and  that  the  whole  is  a  com 
plete  counterpart  to  the  address  to  the  daughter  of  Babylon  in 
ch.  xlvii. 


424  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


FOURTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LXL 

THE  GLORY  OF  THE  OFFICE  COMMITTED  TO  THE  SERVANT  OP 

JEHOVAH. 

The  words  of  Jehovah  Himself  pass  over  here  into  the 
words  of  another,  whom  He  has  appointed  as  the  Mediator  of 
His  gracious  counsel.  Vers.  1-3.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
Jehovah  is  over  me,  because  Jehovah  hath  anointed  me,  to  bring 
glad  tidings  to  sufferers,  hath  sent  me  to  bind  up  broken-hearted 
ones,  to  proclaim  liberty  to  those  led  captive,  and  emancipation  to 
the  fettered ;  to  proclaim  a  year  of  grace  from  Jehovah,  and  a 
day  of  vengeance  from  our  God;  to  comfort  all  that  mourn;  to 
put  upon  the  mourners  of  Zion,  to  give  them  a  head-dress  for 
ashes,  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  a  wrapper  of  renown  for  an 
expiring  spirit,  that  they  'may  be  called  terebinths  of  righteousness, 
a  planting  of  Jehovah  for  glorification"  Who  is  the  person 
speaking  here  ?  The  Targum  introduces  the  passage  with 
KjDji  "IDS.  Nearly  all  the  modern  commentators  support  this 
view.  Even  the  closing  remarks  to  Drechsler  (iii.  381)  express 
the  opinion,  that  the  prophet  who  exhibited  to  the  church  the 
summit  of  its  glory  in  ch.  lx.,  an  evangelist  of  the  rising  from 
on  high,  an  apocalyptist  who  sketches  the  painting  which  the 
New  Testament  apocalyptist  is  to  carry  out  in  detail,  is  here 
looking  up  to  Jehovah  with  a  grateful  eye,  and  praising  Him 
with  joyful  heart  for  his  exalted  commission.  But  this  view, 
when  looked  at  more  closely,  cannot  possibly  be  sustained.  It 
is  open  to  the  following  objections :  (1.)  The  prophet  never 
speaks  of  himself  as  a  prophet  at  any  such  length  as  this ;  on 
the  contrary,  with  the  exception  of  the  closing  words  of  ch. 
Ivii.  21,  "  saith  my  God,"  he  has  always  most  studiously  let 
his  own  person  fall  back  into  the  shade.  (2.)  Wherever  any 
other  than  Jehovah  is  represented  as  speaking,  and  as  referring 
to  his  own  calling,  or  his  experience  in  connection  with  that 
calling,  as  in  ch.  xlix.  1  sqq.,  1.  4  sqq.,  it  is  the  very  same 
"  servant  of  Jehovah"  of  whom  and  to  whom  Jehovah  speaks 
in  ch.  xlii.  1  sqq.,  Iii.  13-liii.,  and  therefore  not  the  prophet 
himself,  but  He  who  had  been  appointed  to  be  the  Mediator 
of  a  new  covenant,  the  light  of  the  Gentiles,  the  salvation  of 


CHAP.  LXI.  1-3.  425 

Jehovah  for  the  whole  world,  and  who  would  reach  this  glorious 
height,  to  which  He  had  been  called,  through  self-abasement 
even  to  death.  (3.)  All  that  the  person  speaking  here  says  of 
himself  is  to  be  found  in  the  picture  of  the  unequalled  "  Servant 
of  Jehovah,"  who  is  highly  exalted  above  the  prophet.  He  is 
endowed  with  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  (ch.  xlii.  1)  ;  Jehovah  has 
sent  Him,  and  with  Him  His  Spirit  (ch.  xlviii.  166) ;  He  has  a 
tongue  taught  of  God,  to  help  the  exhausted  with  words  (ch. 
1.  4)  ;  He  spares  and  rescues  those  who  are  almost  despairing 
and  destroyed,  the  bruised  reed  and  expiring  wick  (ch.  xlii.  7). 
"  To  open  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  prisoners  from  the  prison, 
and  them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison-house  :"  this  is 
what  He  has  chiefly  to  do  for  His  people,  both  in  word  and 
deed  (ch.  xlii.  7,  xlix.  9).  (4.)  We  can  hardly  expect  that, 
after  the  prophet  has  described  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  of 
whom  he  prophesied,  as  coming  forward  to  speak  with  such 
dramatic  directness  as  in  ch.  xlix.  1  sqq.,  1.  4  sqq.  (and  even 
ch.  xlviii.  166),  he  will  now  proceed  to  put  himself  in  the  fore 
ground,  and  ascribe  to  himself  those  very  same  official  attributes 
which  he  has  already  set  forth  as  characteristic  features  in  his 
portrait  of  the  predicted  One.  For  these  reasons  we  have  no 
doubt  that  we  have  here  the  words  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah. 
The  glory  of  Jerusalem  is  depicted  in  ch.  Ix.  in  the  direct 
words  of  Jehovah  Himself,  which  are  well  sustained  throu^h- 

7  O 

out.  And  now,  just  as  in  ch.  xlviii.  166,  though  still  more 
elaborately,  we  have  by  their  side  the  words  of  His  servant, 
who  is  the  mediator  of  this  glory,  and  who  above  all  others 
is  the  pioneer  thereof  in  his  evangelical  predictions.  Just  as 
Jehovah  says  of  him  in  ch.  xlii.  1,  "  I  have  put  my  Spirit 
upon  him ;"  so  here  he  says  of  himself,  "  The  Spirit  of 
Jehovah  is  upon  me."  And  when  he  continues  to  explain  this 
still  further  by  saying,  "  because"  (f£  from  njy?  intention,  pur 
pose  ;  here  equivalent  to  ~\yx  ]Vl)  "Jehovah  hath  anointed  me" 
(tudshach  'othl,  more  emphatic  than  meshdchanl),  notwithstand 
ing  the  fact  that  indshach  is  used  here  in  the  sense  of  prophetic 
and  not  regal  anointing  (1  Kings  xix.  16),  we  may  find  in  the 
choice  of  this  particular  word  a  hint  at  the  fact,  that  the  Servant 
of  Jehovah  and  the  Messiah  are  one  and  the  same  person.  So 
also  the  account  given  in  Luke  iv.  16-22 — viz.  that  when  Jesus 
was  in  the  synagogue  at  Nazareth,  after  reading  the  opening 


426  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

words  of  this  address,  He  closed  the  book  with  these  words, 
"  This  day  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears  " — cannot  be 
interpreted  more  simply  in  any  other  way,  than  on  the  supposi 
tion  that  Jesus  here  declares  Himself  to  be  the  predicted  and 
divinely  anointed  Servant  of  Jehovah,  who  brings  the  gospel 
of  redemption  to  His  people.  Moreover,  though  it  is  not 
decisive  in  favour  of  our  explanation,  yet  this  explanation  is 
favoured  by  the  fact  that  the  speaker  not  only  appears  as  the 
herald  of  the  new  and  great  gifts  of  God,  but  also  as  the 
dispenser  of  them  ("  non  prceco  tantum,  sed  et  dispensator" 
Vitringa).  The  combination  of  the  names  of  God  ('Adonai 
Yehovah)  is  the  same  as  in  ch.  1.  4-9.  On  bisser,  evayyeXt&v 
(-ecr6ai,)7  see  p.  145.  He  comes  to  put  a  bandage  on  the 
hearts'  wounds  of  those  who  are  broken-hearted  :  !>  BOH  (B>2n) 
as  in  Ezek.  xxxiv.  4,  Ps.  cxlvii.  3 ;  cf.  ^  Nan  (NB"l),  vol.  i.  p.  200; 
*?  P*]??,  p.  336.  li-H  fcOjj  is  the  phrase  used  in  the  law  for 
the  proclamation  of  the  freedom  brought  by  the  year  of  jubilee, 
which  occurred  every  fiftieth  year  after  seven  sabbatical  periods, 
and  was  called  shenatJi  hadderor  (Ezek.  xlvi.  17)  ;  deror  from 
ddrar,  a  verbal  stem,  denoting  the  straight,  swift  flight  of  a 
swallow  (see  at  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  4),  and  free  motion  in  general,  such 
as  that  of  a  flash  of  lightning,  a  liberal  self-diffusion,  like  that 
of  a  superabundant  fulness.  Pegac7i-qoach  is  written  like  two 
words  (see  at  ch.  ii.  20).  The  Targum  translates  it  as  if  peqach 
were  an  imperative :  "  Come  to  the  light,"  probably  meaning 
undo  the  bands.  But  qodch  is  not  a  Hebrew  word ;  for  the 
qlchoth  of  the  Mishna  (the  loops  through  which  the  strings  of 
a  purse  are  drawn,  for  the  purpose  of  lacing  it  up)  cannot  be 
adduced  as  a  comparison.  Parchon,  AE,  and  A,  take  peqach- 
qoach  as  one  word  (of  the  form  7^0 a,  "irnnBJ),  in  the  sense  of 
throwing  open,  viz.  the  prison.  But  as  ;9a^ac/i  is  never  used 
like  pdthach  (ch.  xiv.  17,  li.  14),  to  signify  the  opening  of  a 
room,  but  is  always  applied  to  the  opening  of  the  eyes  (ch. 
xxxv.  5,  xlii.  7,  etc.),  except  in  ch.  xlii.  20,  where  it  is  used  for 
the  opening  of  the  ears,  we  adhere  to  the  strict  usage  of  the 
language,  if  we  understand  by  peqachqoach  the  opening  up  of 
the  eyes  (as  contrasted  with  the  dense  darkness  of  the  prison)  ; 
and  this  is  how  it  has  been  taken  even  by  the  LXX.,  who 
have  rendered  it  KOI  TV<£Xot9  avafSKefyw,  as  if  the  reading  had 
been  B^yh  (Ps.  cxlvi.  8).  Again,  he  is  sent  to  promise  with 


CHAP.  LXI.  1-3.  427 

a  loud  proclamation  a  year  of  good  pleasure  (rdtson:  syn. 
yeshudh)  and  a  day  of  vengeance,  which  Jehovah  has  ap 
pointed  ;  a  promise  which  assigns  the  length  of  a  year  for  the 
thorough  accomplishment  of  the  work  of  grace,  and  only  the 
length  of  a  day  for  the  work  of  vengeance.  The  vengeance 
applies  to  those  who  hold  the  people  of  God  in  fetters,  and 
oppress  them  ;  the  grace  to  all  those  whom  the  infliction  of 
punishment  has  inwardly  humbled,  though  they  have  been 
strongly  agitated  by  its  long  continuance  (ch.  Ivii.  15).  The 
'cibhelim,  whom  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  has  to  comfort,  are  the 
"  mourners  of  Zion,"  those  who  take  to  heart  the  fall  of  Zion. 
In  ver.  3,  E^Bv  •  •  •  ^T?  ne  corrects  himself,  because  what  he 
brings  is  not  merely  a  diadem,  to  which  the  word  sum  (to  set) 
would  apply,  but  an  abundant  supply  of  manifold  gifts,  to 
which  only  a  general  word  like  ndthan  (to  give)  is  appropriate. 
Instead  of  "1SK,  the  ashes  of  mourning  or  repentance  laid  upon 
the  head,  he  brings  1NQ,  a  diadem  to  adorn  the  head  (a  trans 
position  even  so  far  as  the  letters  are  concerned,  and  therefore 
the  counterpart  of  1EN)  ;  the  "  oil  of  joy"  (from  Ps.  xlv.  8  ; 
compare  also  ^n^'o  there  with  W  n^rp  here)  instead  of  mourn 
ing;  "  a  wrapper  (cloak)  of  renown"  instead  of  a  faint  and 
almost  extinguished  spirit.  The  oil  with  which  they  henceforth 
anoint  themselves  is  to  be  joy  or  gladness,  and  renown  the 
cloak  in  which  they  wrap  themselves  (a  genitive  connection,  as 
in  ch.  lix.  17).  And  whence  is  all  this?  The  gifts  of  God, 
though  represented  in  outward  figures,  are  really  spiritual,-  and 
take  effect  within,  rejuvenating  and  sanctifying  the  inward 
man  ;  they  are  the  sap  and  strength,  the  marrow  and  impulse 
of  a  new  life.  The  church  thereby  becomes  "  terebinths  of 
righteousness"  ( y'N :  Targ.,  Symm.,  Jer.,  render  this,  strong 
ones,  mighty  ones ;  Syr.  decJire,  rams ;  but  though  both  of  these 
are  possible,  so  far  as  the  letters  are  concerned,  they  are  un 
suitable  here),  i.e.  possessors  of  righteousness,  produced  by  God 
and  acceptable  with  God,  having  all  the  firmness  and  fulness 
of  terebinths,  with  their  strong  trunks,  their  luxuriant  verdure, 
and  their  perennial  foliage, — a  planting  of  Jehovah,  to  the 
end  that  He  may  get  glory  out  of  it  (a  repetition  of  ch.  Ix.  21). 
Even  in  ver.  36  with  Dr6  fcopl  a  perfect  was  introduced  in 
the  place  of  the  infinitives  of  the  object,  and  affirmed  what  was 
to  be  accomplished  through  the  mediation  of  the  Servant  of 


428  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Jehovah.  The  second  turn  in  the  address,  which  follows  in 
vers.  4-9,  continues  the  use  of  such  perfects,  which  afterwards 
pass  into  futures.  But  the  whole  is  still  governed  by  the  com 
mencement  in  ver.  1.  The  Servant  of  Jehovah  celebrates  the 
glorious  office  committed  to  him,  and  expounds  the  substance 
of  the  gospel  given  him  to  proclaim.  It  points  to  the  restora 
tion  of  the  promised  land,  and  to  the  elevation  of  Israel,  after 
its  purification  in  the  furnace  of  judgment,  to  great  honour 
and  dignity  in  the  midst  of  the  world  of  nations.  Vers.  4-6. 
u  And  they  will  build  up  wastes  of  the  olden  time,  raise  up  deso 
lations  of  the  forefathers,  and  renew  desolate  cities,  desolations  of 
former  generations.  And  strangers  stand  and  feed  your  flocks, 
and  foreigners  become  your  ploughmen  and  vinedressers.  But 
ye  will  be  called  priests  of  Jehovah ;  Servants  of  our  God,  will 
men  say  to  you :  ye  will  eat  the  riches  of  the  nations,  and  pride 
yourselves  in  their  glory"  The  desolations  and  wastes  of  'oldm 
and  dor  vddor,  i.e.  of  ages  remote  and  near  (ch.  Iviii.  12),  are 
not  confined  to  what  had  lain  in  ruins  during  the  seventy  years 
of  the  captivity.  The  land  will  be  so  thickly  populated,  that 
the  former  places  of  abode  will  not  suffice  (ch.  xlix.  19,  20)  ;  so 
that  places  must  be  referred  to  which  are  lying  waste  beyond 
the  present  bounds  of  the  promised  land  (ch.  liv.  3),  and  which 
will  be  rebuilt,  raised  up,  and  renewed  by  those  who  return 
from  exile,  and  indeed  by  the  latest  generations  (ch.  Iviii.  12, 
IBO  ;  cf.  ch.  Ix.  14).  Chorelh,  in  the  sense  of  desolation,  is  a 
word  belonging  to  the  later  period  of  the  language  (Zeph.,  Jer., 
and  Ezek.).  The  rebuilding  naturally  suggests  the  thought  of 
assistance  on  the  part  of  the  heathen  (ch.  Ix.  10).  But  the 
prophet  expresses  the  fact  that  they  will  enter  into  the  service 
of  Israel  (ver.  5),  in  a  new  and  different  form.  They  "  stand 
there"  (viz.  at  their  posts  ready  for  service,  ' ' al-mishmartdm, 
2  Chron.  vii.  6),  "  and  feed  your  flocks"  (jN;¥  singularetantum,  cf. 
Gen.  xxx.  43),  and  foreigners  are  your  ploughmen  and  vine 
dressers.  Israel  is  now,  in  the  midst  of  the  heathen  who  have 
entered  into  the  congregation  of  Jehovah  and  become  the 
people  of  God  (ch.  xix.  25),  what  the  Aaronites  formerly  were 
in  the  midst  of  Israel  itself.  It  stands  upon  the  height  of  its 
primary  destination  to  be  a  kingdom  of  priests  (Ex.  xix.  6). 
They  are  called  "  priests  of  Jehovah,"  and  the  heathen  call 
them  "  servants  of  our  God ;"  for  even  the  heathen  speak  with 


CHAP.  LXI.  4-6.  429 

believing  reverence  of  the  God,  to  whom  Israel  renders  priestly 
service,  as  "  our  God."  This  reads  as  if  the  restored  Israelites 
•were  to  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  the  converted  heathen  as 
the  clergy  to  the  laity;  but  it  is  evident,  from  ch.  Ixvi.  21,  that 
the  prophet  has  no  such  hierarchical  separation  as  this  in  his 
mind.  All  that  we  can  safely  infer  from  his  prophecy  is,  that 
the  nationality  of  Israel  will  not  be  swallowed  up  by  the 
entrance  of  the  heathen  into  the  community  of  the  God  of 
revelation.  The  people  created  by  Jehovah,  to  serve  as  the 
vehicle  of  the  promise  of  salvation  and  the  instrument  in  pre 
paring  the  way  for  salvation,  will  also  render  Him  special  service, 
even  after  that  salvation  has  been  really  effected.  At  the  same 
time,  we  cannot  take  the  attitude,  which  is  here  assigned  to  the 
people  of  sacred  history  after  it  has  become  the  teacher  of  the 
nations,  viz.  as  the  leader  of  its  worship  also,  and  shape  it  into 
any  clear  and  definite  form  that  shall  be  reconcilable  with  the 
New  Testament  spirit  of  liberty  and  the  abolition  of  all  national 
party-walls.  The  Old  Testament  prophet  utters  New  Testa 
ment  prophecies  in  an  Old  Testament  form.  Even  when  he 
continues  to  say,  "  Ye  will  eat  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
pride  yourselves  in  their  glory/'  i.e.  be  proud  of  the  glorious 
things  which  have  passed  from  their  possession  into  yours,  this 
is  merely  colouring  intended  to  strike  the  eye,  which  admits  of 
explanation  on  the  ground  that  he  saw  the  future  in  the  mirror 
of  the  present,  as  a  complete  inversion  of  the  relation  in  which 
the  two  had  stood  before.  The  figures  present  themselves  to 
him  in  the  form  of  contrasts.  The  New  Testament  apostle,  on 
the  other  hand,  says  in  Rom.  xi.  12  that  the  conversion  of  all 
Israel  to  Christ  will  be  "  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles."  But  if 
even  then  the  Gentile  church  should  act  according  to  the  words 
of  the  same  apostle  in  Rom.  xv.  27,  and  show  her  gratitude  to 
the  people  whose  spiritual  debtor  she  is,  by  ministering  to  them 
in  carnal  things,  all  that  the  prophet  has  promised  here  will  be 
amply  fulfilled.  We  cannot  adopt  the  explanation  proposed  by 
Hitzig,  Stier,  etc.,  "  and  changing  with  them,  ye  enter  into 
their  glory"  (hitliyammer  from  ydmar  =  mur,  Hiph. :  hemlr,  Jer. 
ii.  11 ;  lit.  to  exchange  with  one  another,  to  enter  into  one 
another's  places);  for  ydmar  =  'dmar  (cf.  ydchad  =  'dchad; 
ydsham  —  'dsharn  ;  ydlaph  =  'dlaph),  to  press  upwards,  to  rise 
up  (related  to  tdmar,  see  at  ch.  xvii.  9 ;  sdmar,  Symm. 


430  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


tv,  possibly  also  'dmar  with  the  hithpael  hitliamme'r,  LXX. 
aa-Teveiv),  yields  a  much  simpler  and  more  appropriate 
meaning.  From  this  verb  we  have  hitJiammer  in  Ps.  xciv.  4, 
"to  lift  one's  self  up  (proudly)/'  and  here  hithyammer;  and  it 
is  in  this  way  that  the  word  has  been  explained  by  Jerome 
(superbietis),  and  possibly  by  the  LXX.  (Oavpao-Oijaeo-Oe,  in 
the  sense  of  spectabiles  eritis),  by  the  Targum,  and  the  Syriac, 
as  well  as  by  most  of  the  ancient  and  modern  expositors. 

The  shame  of  banishment  will  then  be  changed  into  an 
excess  of  joy,  and  honourable  distinction.  Vers.  7-9.  "  In 
stead  of  shame  ye  will  have  double,  and  (instead)  of  insult  they 
rejoice  at  their  portion  :  thus  in  their  land  they  will  possess 
double;  everlasting  joy  will  they  have.  For  IJehovah  love  right, 
hate  robbery  in  wickedness  ;  and  give  them  their  reward  in  faith 
fulness,  and  conclude  an  everlasting  covenant  with  them.  And 
their  family  will  be  known  among  the  nations,  and  their  offspring 
in  the  midst  of  the  nations  :  all  who  see  them  will  recognise  them, 
for  they  are  a  family  that  Jehovah  hath  blessed"  The  enigma 
tical  first  half  of  ver.  7  is  explained  in  ver.  2,  where  mishneh 
is  shown  to  consist  of  double  possession  in  the  land  of  their 
inheritance,  which  has  not  only  been  restored  to  them,  but 
extended  far  beyond  the  borders  of  their  former  possession  ; 
and  ydronnu  chelqdm  (cf.  ch.  Ixiv.  14)  denotes  excessive  re 
joicing  in  the  ground  and  soil  belonging  to  them  (according  to 
the  appointment  of  Jehovah)  :  chelqdm  as  in  Mic.  ii.  4  ;  and 
mishneh  as  equivalent  not  to  "Itt3  "WP,  but  to  HEn*  ?WD. 
Taking  this  to  be  the  relation  between  ver.  Ib  and  7  a,  the 
meaning  of  lakhen  is  not,  "  therefore,  because  they  have  hitherto 
suffered  shame  and  reproach  ;"  but  what  is  promised  in  ver.  la 
is  unfolded  according  to  its  practical  results,  the  effects  con 
sequent  upon  its  fulfilment  being  placed  in  the  foreground  (cf. 
vol.  i.  p.  448)  ;  so  that  there  is  less  to  astonish  us  in  the  ellipti- 
cally  brief  form  of  ver.  la  which  needed  explanation.  The 
transition  from  the  form  of  address  to  that  of  declaration  is  the 
same  as  in  ch.  i.  29,  xxxi.  6,  lii.  14,  15.  Httfe^  is  a  concise 
expression  for  HEPD  nnrn,  just  as  W^*  in  ch.  xlviii.  9  is  for 
Vlbnn  |J»fa;  Chelqdm  is  either  the  accusative  of  the  object, 
according  to  the  construction  of  |3"i,  which  occurs  in  Ps.  li.  16  ; 
or  what  I  prefer,  looking  at  npn  in  ch.  xlii.  25,  and  T£3n  in 
ch.  xliii.  23,  an  adverbial  accusative  =  Dp/TQ.  The  LXX., 


CHAP.  LXI.  7-9.  431 

Jerome,  and  Saad.  render  the  clause,  in  opposition  to  the 
accents,  "  instead  of  your  double  shame  and  reproach ;"  but 
in  that  case  the  principal  words  of  the  clause  would  read 
D3jAn  13in.  The  explanation  adopted  by  the  Targum,  Saad., 
and  Jerome,  "  shame  on  the  part  of  those  who  rejoice  in  their 
portion,"  is  absolutely  impossible.  The  great  majority  of  the 
modern  commentators  adopt  essentially  the  same  explanation 
of  ver.  la  as  we  have  done,  and  even  A.  E.  Kimchi  does  the 
same.  Hahn's  modification,  "instead  of  your  shame  is  the 
double  their  portion,  and  (instead)  of  the  insult  this,  that  they 
will  rejoice,"  forces  a  meaning  upon  the  syntax  which  is  abso 
lutely  impossible.  The  reason  for  the  gracious  recompense  for 
the  wrong  endured  is  given  in  ver.  8,  "  Jehovah  loves  the 
right,"  which  the  enemies  of  Israel  have  so  shamefully  abused. 
"  He  hates  n?ij?3  7T3,  i.e.  not  rapinam  in  holocausto  (as  Jerome, 
Talmud  b.  Succa  30a,  Luther,  and  others  render  it ;  Eng.  ver. 
u robbery  for  burnt-offering"), — for  what  object  could  there 
be  in  mentioning  sacrifices  here,  seeing  that  only  heathen 
sacrifices  could  be  intended,  and  there  would  be  something 
worse  than  gdzel  to  condemn  in  them? — but  robbery,  or,  strictly 
speaking,  "  something  robbed  in  or  with  knavery "  (LXX., 
Targ.,  Syr.,  Saad.),  which  calls  to  mind  at  once  the  cruel 
robbery  or  spoiling  that  Israel  had  sustained  from  the  Chal 
deans,  its  bozezlm  (ch.  xlii.  24), — a  robbery  which  passed  all 
bounds,  rfoj;  is  softened  from  nb]J?  (from  iw,  V$),  like  nnity  in 
Job  v.  16,  and  fb\y  in  Ps.  Iviii.  3  and  Ixiv.  7  ;  though  it  is 
doubtful  whether  the  punctuation  assumes  the  latter,  as  the 
Targum  does,  and  not  rather  the  meaning  holocaustum  sup 
ported  by  the  Talmud.  For  the  very  reason,  therefore,  that 
Israel  had  been  so  grievously  ill-treated  by  the  instruments  of 
punishment  employed  by  Jehovah,  He  would  give  those  who 
had  been  ill-treated  their  due  reward,  after  He  had  made  the 
evil,  which  He  had  not  approved,  subservient  to  His  own  salu 
tary  purposes.  n?ya  is  the  reward  of  work  in  Lev.  xix.  13,  of 
hardship  in  Ezek.  xxix.  20 ;  here  it  is  the  reward  of  suffering. 
This  reward  He  would  give  flOtfa,  exactly  as  He  had  promised, 
without  the  slightest  deduction.  The  posterity  of  those  who 
have  been  ill-treated  and  insulted  will  be  honourably  known 
(JHiJ  as  in  Prov.  xxxi.  23)  in  the  world  of  nations,  and  men 
will  need  only  to  catch  sight  of  them  to  recognise  them  (by 


432  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

prominent  marks  of  blessing),  for  they  are  a  family  blessed  of 
God.  '3,  not  quod  (because),  although  it  might  have  this 
meaning,  but  nam  (for),  as  in  Gen.  xxvii.  23,  since  hikklr  in 
cludes  the  meaning  agnoscere  (to  recognise). 

This  is  the  joyful  calling  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  to  be 
the  messenger  of  such  promises  of  God  to  His  people.  Vers. 
10,  11.  "Joyfully  I  rejoice  in  Jehovah;  my  soul  shall  be  joyful 
in  my  God,  that  He  hath  given  me  garments  of  salvation  to  put 
on,  hath  wrapped  me  in  the  robe  of  righteousness,  as  a  bride 
groom  who  ivears  the  turban  like  a  priest,  and  as  a  bride  wlio 
puts  on  her  jewellery.  For  like  the  land  which  brings  forth  its 
sprouts,  and  as  a  garden  which  causes  the  things  sown  in  it 
to  sprout  up ;  so  the  Lord  Jehovah  bringeth  righteousness  to 
sprouting,  and  renown  before  all  nations"  The  Targum  pre 
cedes  this  last  turn  with  "Thus  saith  Jerusalem."  But  as 
vers.  4-9  are  a  development  of  the  glorious  prospects,  the  reali 
zation  of  which  has  to  be  effected  through  the  instrumentality 
of  the  person  speaking  in  vers.  1-3  both  in  word  and  deed, 
the  speaker  here  is  certainly  the  same  as  there.  Nor  is  it  even 
the  fact  that  he  is  here  supposed  to  commence  speaking  again ; 
but  he  is  simply  continuing  his  address  by  expressing  at  the 
close,  as  he  did  at  the  beginning,  the  relation  in  which  he 
stands  in  his  own  person  to  the  approaching  elevation  of  His 
people.  Exalted  joy,  which  impels  him  to  exult,  is  what  he 
experiences  in  Jehovah  his  God  (^  denoting  the  ground  and 
orbit  of  his  experience)  :  for  the  future,  which  so  abounds  in 
grace,  and  which  he  has  to  proclaim  as  a  prophet  and  as  the 
evangelist  of  Israel,  and  of  which  he  has  to  lay  the  foundation 
as  the  mediator  of  Israel,  and  in  which  he  is  destined  to  parti 
cipate  as  being  himself  an  Israelite,  consists  entirely  of  salva 
tion  and  righteousness ;  so  that  he,  the  bearer  and  messenger 
of  the  divine  counsels  of  grace,  appears  to  himself  as  one  to 
whom  Jehovah  has  given  clothes  of  salvation  to  put  on,  and 
whom  He  has  wrapped  in  the  robe  of  righteousness.  Ts'ddqdh 
(righteousness),  looked  at  from  the  evangelical  side  of  the  idea 
which  it  expresses,  is  here  the  parallel  word  to  yeshudh  (sal 
vation).  The  figurative  representation  of  both  by  different 
articles  of  dress  is  similar  to  ch.  lix.  17 ;  yd' at,  which  only  occurs 
here,  is  synonymous  with  'dtdh,  from  which  comes  ma'titeh, 
a  wrapper  or  cloak  (ver.  3).  He  appears  to  himself,  as  he 


CHAP.  LXI.  10,  11.  433 

stands  there  hoping  such  things  for  his  people,  and  preaching 
such  things  to  his  people,  to  resemble  a  bridegroom,  who  makes 
his  turban  in  priestly  style,  i.e.  who  winds  it  round  his  head 
after  the  fashion  of  the  priestly  migbaOth  (Ex.  xxix.  9),  which 
are  called  D^NS  in  Ex.  xxxix.  28  (cf.  Ezek.  xliv.  18).  Rashi 
ind  others  think  of  the  mitsnepheth  of  the  high  priest,  which 
was  of  purple-blue ;  but  jro*  does  not  imply  anything  beyond 
the  migbadh,  a  tall  mitra,  which  was  formed  by  twisting  a 
long  linen  band  round  the  head  so  as  to  make  it  stand  up  in 
a  point.  jn3  is  by  no  means  equivalent  to  kunen,  or  hekhln, 
as  Hitzig  and  Halm  suppose,  since  the  verb  Mlian  =  kun 
only  survives  in  kolien.  Kilien  is  a  denom.,  and  signifies 
to  act  or  play  the  priest  ;  it  is  construed  here  W7ith  the 
accusative  "^3,  which  is  either  the  accusative  of  more  precise 
definition  ("who  play  the  priest  in  a  turban;"  A.  &>?  VVJJL^LOV 
ieparev6p,evov  <7re(/>azW),  or  what  would  answer  better  to  the 
parallel  member,  "  who  makes  the  turban  like  a  priest."  As 
often  as  he  receives  the  word  of  promise  into  his  heart  and 
takes  it  into  his  mouth,  it  is  to  him  like  the  turban  of  a  bride 
groom,  or  like  the  jewellery  which  a  bride  puts  on  (tadeh,  Teal, 
as  in  Hos.  ii.  15).  For  the  substance  of  the  promise  is  nothing 
but  salvation  and  renown,  which  Jehovah  causes  to  sprout  up 
before  all  nations,  just  as  the  earth  causes  its  vegetation  to 
sprout,  or  a  garden  its  seed  (3  as  a  preposition  in  both  in 
stances,  instar  followed  by  attributive  clauses ;  see  ch.  viii.  23). 
The  word  in  the  mouth  of  the  servant  of  Jehovah  is  the  seed, 
out  of  which  great  things  are  developed  before  all  the  world. 
The  ground  and  soil  Berets)  of  this  development  is  mankind  ; 
the  enclosed  garden  therein  (ganndli)  is  the  church ;  and  the 
great  things  themselves  are  ts*ddqdh,  as  the  true  inward  nature 
of  His  church,  and  tfldlldh  as  its  outward  manifestation.  The 
force  which  causes  the  seed  to  germinate  is  Jehovah ;  but  the 
bearer  of  the  seed  is  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  and  the  ground 
of  his  festive  rejoicing  is  the  fact  that  he  is  able  to  scatter  the 
seed  of  so  gracious  and  glorious  a  future. 


VOL.  II.  2  E 


434  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH 

FIFTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LXII. 
THE  GRADUAL  EXTENSION  OF  THE  GLORY  OF  JERUSALEM. 

Nearly  all  the  more  recent  commentators  regard  the  pro 
phet  himself  as  speaking  here.  Having  given  himself  up  to 
praying  to  Jehovah  and  preaching  to  the  people,  he  will  not 
rest  or  hold  his  peace  till  the  salvation,  which  has  begun  to  be 
realized,  has  been  brought  fully  out  to  the  light  of  day.  It  is, 
however,  really  Jehovah  who  commences  thus  :  Vers.  1-3. 
"  For  Zioris  sake  I  shall  not  be  silent,  and  for  Jerusalem9 s  sake 
I  shall  not  rest,  till  her  righteousness  breaks  forth  like  morning 
brightness,  and  her  salvation  like  a  blazing  torch.  And  nations 
will  see  thy  righteousness,  and  all  kings  thy  glory ;  and  men 
will  call  thee  by  a  new  name,  which  the  mouth  of  Jehovah  will 
determine.  And  thou  wilt  be  an  adorning  coronet  in  the  hand 
of  Jehovah,  and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  lap  of  thy  God."  It  is 
evident  that  Jehovah  is  the  speaker  here,  both  from  ver.  6  and 
also  from  the  expression  used ;  for  chdshdh  is  the  word  com 
monly  employed  in  such  utterances  of  Jehovah  concerning 
Himself,  to  denote  His  leaving  things  in  their  existing  state 
without  interposing  (ch.  Ixv.  6,  Ivii.  11,  Ixiv.  11).  Moreover, 
the  arguments  which  may  be  adduced  to  prove  that  the  author 
of  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  is  not  the  speaker  in  ch.  Ixi.,  also  prove  that  it 
is  not  he  who  is  continuing  to  speak  of  himself  in  ch.  Ixii. 
Jehovah,  having  now  begun  to  speak  and  move  on  behalf  of 
Zion,  will  "  for  Zion's  sake,"  i.e.  just  because  it  is  Zion,  His 
own  church,  neither  be  silent  nor  give  Himself  rest,  till  He 
has  gloriously  executed  His  work  of  grace.  Zion  is  now  in 
the  shade,  but  the  time  will  come  when  her  righteousness  will 
go  forth  as  nogah,  the  light  which  bursts  through  the  night 
(ch.  Ix.  19,  lix.  9  ;  here  the  morning  sunlight,  Prov.  iv.  18  ; 
compare  shachar,  the  morning  red,  ch.  Iviii.  8)  ;  or  till  her 
salvation  is  like  a  torch  which  blazes.  "IJO*  belongs  to  *^B?3 
(mercha)  in  the  form  of  an  attributive  clause  =  "W3,  although 
it  might  also  be  assumed  that  "un11  stands  by  attraction  for 
lyan  (cf.  ch.  ii.  11;  Ewald,  §  317,  c).  The  verb  1^3,  which 
is  generally  applied  to  wrath  (e.g.  ch.  xxx.  27),  is  here  used  in 
connection  with  salvation,  which  has  wrath  towards  the  enemies 


CHAP.  LXII.  4,  5.  435 

of  Zion  as  its  obverse  side :  Zion's  tsedeq  (righteousness)  shall 
become  like  the  morning  sunlight,  before  which  even  the  last 
twilight  has  vanished;  and  Zion's  yeshudh  is  like  a  nightly 
torch,  which  sets  fire  to  its  own  material,  and  everything  that 
comes  near  it.  The  force  of  the  conjunction  *W  (until)  does 
not  extend  beyond  ver.  1.  From  ver.  2  onwards,  the  condition 
of  things  in  the  object  indicated  by  *ry  is  more  fully  described. 
The  eyes  of  the  nations  will  be  directed  to  the  righteousness  of 
Zion,  the  impress  of  which  is  now  their  common  property ;  the 
eyes  of  all  kings  to  her  glory,  with  which  the  glory  of  none 
of  them,  nor  even  of  all  together,  can  possibly  compare.  And 
because  this  state  of  Zion  is  a  new  one,  which  has  never  existed 
before,  her  old  name  is  not  sufficient  to  indicate  her  nature. 
She  is  called  by  a  new  name ;  and  who  could  determine  this 
new  name  ?  He  who  makes  the  church  righteous  and  glorious, 
He,  and  He  alone,  is  able  to  utter  a  name  answering  to  her 
new  nature,  just  as  it  was  He  who  called  Abram  Abraham,  and 
Jacob  Israel.  The  mouth  of  Jehovah  will  determine  it  (^i?J, 
to  pierce,  to  mark,  to  designate  in  a  signal  and  distinguishing 
manner,  nnncupare ;  cf.  Amos  vi.  1,  Nam.  i.  17).  It  is  only 
in  imagery  that  prophecy  here  sees  what  Zion  will  be  in  the 
future :  she  will  be  "  a  crown  of  glory,"  "  a  diadem,"  or  rather 
a  tiara  (t,semph;  Chethib  tsenuph  ==  mitsnepheth,  the  head-dress 
of  the  high  priest,  Ex.  xxviii.  4,  Zech.  iii.  5  ;  and  that  of  the 
king,  Ezek.  xxi.  31)  "  of  regal  dignity,"  in  the  hand  of  her 
God  (for  want  of  a  synonym  of  "hand,"  we  have  adopted  the 
rendering  "in  the  lap  "  the  second  time  that  it  occurs).  Meier 
renders  ni.T  Tn  (^22)  Jovce  sub  prcesidio,  as  though  it  did  not 
form  part  of  the  figure.  But  it  is  a  main  feature  in  the  figure, 
that  Jehovah  holds  the  crown  in  His  hand.  Zion  is  not  the 
ancient  crown  which  the  Eternal  wears  upon  His  head,  but 
the  crown  wrought  out  in  time,  which  He  holds  in  His  hand, 
because  He  is  seen  in  Zion  by  all  creation.  The  whole  history 
of  salvation  is  the  history  of  the  taking  of  the  kingdom,  and 
the  perfecting  of  the  kingdom  by  Jehovah ;  in  other  words,  the 
history  of  the  working  out  of  this  crown. 

Zion  will  be  once  more  the  beloved  of  God,  and  her  home 
the  bride  of  her  children.  Vers.  4,  5.  "  Men  will  no  more  call 
thee  'Forsaken  one;'  and  thy  land  they  will  no  more  call 
*  Desert:'  but  men  will  name  thee  '  My  delight  in  her]  and  thy 


436  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

home  'Married  one:9  for  Jehovah  hath  delight  in  thee,  and  thy 
land  is  married.  For  the  young  man  marrieth  the  maiden,  thy 
children  will  marry  thee ;  and  as  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  in  the 
bride,  thy  God  will  rejoice  in  thee"  The  prophecy  mentions 
nexv  names,  which  will  now  take  the  place  of  the  old  ones ; 
but  these  names  indicate  what  Zion  appears  to  he,  not  her  true 
nature  which  is  brought  to  the  light.  In  the  explanatory 
clause  f(?  stands  at  the  head,  because  the  name  of  Zion  is  given 
first  in  distinction  from  the  name  of  her  land.  Zion  has 
hitherto  been  called  'azubhdh,  forsaken  by  Jehovah,  who  for 
merly  loved  her ;  but  she  now  receives  instead  the  name  of 
chephtsl-bhdh  (really  the  name  of  a  woman,  viz.  the  wife  of 
Hezekiah,  and  mother  of  Manasseh,  2  Kings  xxi.  1),  for  she 
is  now  the  object  of  true  affection  on  the  part  of  Jehovah. 
With  the  rejoicing  of  a  bridegroom  in  his  bride  (the  accusa 
tive  is  used  here  in  the  same  sense  as  in  I"!?"!}  n£^  Hftb;  Ges. 
§  138,  1)  will  her  God  rejoice  in  her,  turning  to  her  again 
with  a  love  as  strong  and  deep  as  the  first  love  of  a  bridal  pair. 
And  the  land  of  Zion's  abode,  the  fatherland  of  her  children, 
was  hitherto  called  shemdmdh ;  it  was  turned  into  a  desert  by 
the  heathen,  and  the  connection  that  existed  between  it  and 
the  children  of  the  land  was  severed ;  but  now  it  shall  be 
called  be'uldh,  for  it  will  be  newly  married.  A  young  man 
marries  a  virgin,  thy  children  will  marry  thee :  the  figure  and 
the  fact  are  placed  side  by  side  in  the  form  of  an  emble 
matical  proverb,  the  particle  of  comparison  being  omitted  (see 
Herzog's  Cyclopaedia,  xiv.  696,  and  Ges.  §  155,  2,  A).  The 
church  in  its  relation  to  Jehovah  is  a  weak  but  beloved  woman, 
which  has  Him  for  its  Lord  and  Husband  (ch.  liv.  5)  ;  but  in 
relation  to  her  home  she  is  the  totality  of  those  who  are  lords 
or  possessors  (badle,  2  Sam.  vi.  2)  of  the  land,  and  who  call 
the  land  their  own  as  it  were  by  right  of  marriage.  Out  of 
the  loving  relation  in  which  the  church  stands  to  its  God, 
there  flows  its  relation  of  authority  over  every  earthly  thing  of 
which  it  stands  in  need.  In  some  MSS.  there  is  a  break  here. 

Watchmen  stationed  upon  the  walls  of  Zion  (says  the  third 
strophe)  do  not  forsake  Jehovah  till  He  has  fulfilled  all  His 
promise.  Vers.  6,  7.  "  Upon  thy  walls,  0  Jerusalem,  have  I 
stationed  watchmen;  all  the  day  and  all  the  night  continually  they 
are  not  silent.  0  ye  who  remember  Jehovah,  leave  yourselves  no 


CHAP.  LXII.  6,  7.  437 

rest !  And  give  Him  no  rest,  till  He  raise  up,  and  till  He  set 
Jerusalem  for  a  praise  in  the  earth"  As  the  phrase  hiphqid  \d 
signifies  to  make  a  person  an  overseer  (president)  over  any 
thing,  it  seems  as  though  we  ought  to  render  the  sentence 
before  us,  "  I  have  set  watchmen  over  thy  walls."  But  hiphqid 
by  itself  may  also  mean  "to  appoint"  (2  Kings  xxv.  23),  and 
therefore  ^nbirr^JJ  may  indicate  the  place  of  appointment 
(LXX.  eVt  TWV  Tei^ewv  crou,  upon  thy  walls ;  ' JepoucraX??^, 
Kareo-rrja-a  (j>v\a/ca<;).  Those  who  are  stationed  upon  the  walls 
are  no  doubt  keepers  of  the  walls;  not,  however,  as  persons 
whose  exclusive  dutv  it  is  to  keep  the  walls,  but  as  those  who 
have  committed  to  them  the  guarding  of  the  city  both  within 
and  without  (Song  of  Sol.  v.  7).  The  appointment  of  such 
watchmen  presupposes  the  existence  of  the  city,  which  is  thus 
to  be  watched  from  the  walls.  It  is  therefore  inadmissible  to 
think  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  as  still  lying  in.  ruins,  as  the 
majority  of  commentators  have  done,  and  to  understand  by  the 
watchmen  pious  Israelites,  who  pray  for  their  restoration,  or 
(according  to  b.  Menachotli  87a;  cf.  Zech.  i.  12)  angelic  inter 
cessors.  The  walls  intended  are  those  of  the  city,  which, 
though  once  destroyed,  is  actually  imperishable  (ch.  xlix.  If)) 
and  has  now  been  raised  up  again.  And  who  else  could  the 
watchmen  stationed  upon  the  walls  really  be,  but  prophets  who 
are  called  tsophim  (e.g.  ch.  Hi.  8),  and  whose  calling,  according  to 
Ezek.  xxxiii.,  is  that  of  watchmen?  And  if  prophets  are  meant, 
who  else  can  the  person  appointing  them  be  but  Jehovah  Him 
self  ?  The  idea  that  the  author  of  these  prophecies  is  speaking 
of  himself,  as  having  appointed  the  shdmerlm,  must  therefore 
be  rejected.  Jehovah  gives  to  the  restored  Jerusalem  faithful 
prophets,  whom  He  stations  upon  the  walls  of  the  city,  that 
they  may  see  far  and  wide,  and  be  heard  afar  off.  And  from 
those  walls  does  their  warning  cry  on  behalf  of  the  holy  city 
committed  to  their  care  ascend  day  and  night  to  Jehovah, 
and  their  testimony  go  round  about  to  the  world.  For  after 
Jerusalem  has  been  restored  and  re-peopled,  the  further  end  to 
be  attained  is  this,  that  Jehovah  should  build  up  the  newly 
founded  city  within  (conen  the  consequence  of  bdndh,  Num. 
xxi.  27,  and  'dsdh,  ch.  xlv.  18,  Deut.  xxxii.  6 ;  cf.  ch.  liv.  14, 
and  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  5),  and  help  it  to  attain  the  central  post  of 
honour  in  relation  to  those  without,  which  He  has  destined 


438  THE  PEOPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

for  it.  Such  prophets  of  the  times  succeeding  the  captivity 
(n'bhilm  'acharonim ;  cf.  Zech.  i.  4)  were  Haggai,  Zechariah, 
and  Malachi.  Haggai  stands  upon  the  walls  of  Jerusalem, 
and  proclaims  the  glory  of  the  second  temple  as  surpassing  that 
of  the  first.  Zechariah  points  from  Joshua  and  Zerubbabel 
onwards  to  the  sprout  of  Jehovah,  who  is  priest  and  prince  in 
one  person,  and  builds  the  true  temple  of  God.  Malachi  pre 
dicts  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  His  temple,  and  the  rising  of 
the  Sun  of  righteousness.  Under  the  eyes  of  these  prophets 
the  city  of  God  rose  up  again,  and  they  stand  upon  its  pin 
nacles,  and  look  thence  into  the  glorious  future  that  awaits  it, 
and  hasten  its  approach  through  the  word  of  their  testimony. 
Such  prophets,  who  carry  the  good  of  their  people  day  and 
night  upon  their  anxious  praying  hearts,  does  Jehovah  give  to 
the  Jerusalem  after  the  captivity,  which  is  one  in  the  prophet's 
view  with  the  Jerusalem  of  the  last  days ;  and  in  so  lively  a 
manner  does  the  prophet  here  call  them  up  before  his  own 
mind,  that  he  exclaims  to  them,  "Ye  who  remind  Jehovah,  to 
finish  gloriously  the  gracious  work  which  He  has  begun,"  give 
yourselves  no  rest  (dtirni  from  ddmdh  =  ddmam,  to  grow  dumb, 
i.e.  to  cease  speaking  or  working,  in  distinction  from  chdshdh, 
to  be  silent,  i.e.  not  to  speak  or  work),  and  allow  Him  no  rest 
till  He  puts  Jerusalem  in  the  right  state,  and  so  glorifies  it,  that 
it  shall  be  recognised  and  extolled  as  glorious  over  all  the  earth. 
Prophecy  here  sees  the  final  glory  of  the  church  as  one  that 
gradually  unfolds  itself,  and  that  not  without  human  instru 
mentality.  The  prophets  of  the  last  times,  with  their  zeal  in 
prayer,  and  in  the  exercise  of  their  calling  as  witnesses,  form  a 
striking  contrast  to  the  blind,  dumb,  indolent,  sleepy  hirelings 
of  the  prophet's  own  time  (ch.  Ivi.  10). 

The  following  strophe  expresses  one  side  of  the  divine 
promise,  on  which  the  hope  of  that  lofty  and  universally 
acknowledged  glory  of  Jerusalem,  for  whose  completion  the 
watchers  upon  its  walls  so  ceaselessly  exert  themselves,  is 
founded.  Vers.  8,  9.  "  Jehovah  hath  sworn  by  His  right  hand, 
and  by  His  powerful  arm,  Surely  I  no  more  give  thy  corn  for 
food  to  thine  enemies;  and  foreigners  will  not  drink  thy  must,  for 
which  thou  hast  laboured  hard.  No,  they  that  gather  it  in  shall 
eat  it,  and  praise  Jehovah  ;  and  they  that  store  it,  shall  drink  it 
in  the  courts  of  my  sanctuary"  The  church  will  no  more  sue- 


CHAP.  LXII.  10-12.  439 

cumb  to  the  tyranny  of  a  worldly  power.  Peace  undisturbed, 
and  unrestricted  freedom,  reign  there.  With  praise  to  Jehovah 
are  the  fruits  of  the  land  enjoyed  by  those  who  raised  and 
reaped  them.  fiJW  (with  an  auxiliary  pathach,  as  in  ch.  xlvii. 
12,  15)  is  applied  to  the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  and  includes 
the  service  of  the  heathen  who  are  incorporated  in  Israel  (ch. 
Ixi.  5)  ;  whilst  ^^  (whence  VBDND  with  D  rapha(um)  or  ^Ck 
(poel,  whence  the  reading  VSpSO,  cf.  Ps.  ci.  5,  meloshnl;  cix.  10, 
ve-dorshu,  for  which  in  some  codd.  and  editions  we  find  l^pjJP, 
an  intermediate  form  between  piel  and  poel;  see  at  Ps.  Ixii.  4) 
and  r?i?  stand  in  the  same  relation  to  one  another  as  condere 
(horreo)  and  colligere  (cf.  ch.  xi.  12).  The  expression  bechats- 
roth  qodshl,  in  the  courts  of  my  sanctuary,  cannot  imply  that 
the  produce  of  the  harvest  will  never  be  consumed  anywhere 
else  than  there  (which  is  inconceivable),  but  only  that  their 
enjoyment  of  the  harvest-produce  will  be  consecrated  by  festal 
meals  of  worship,  with  an  allusion  to  the  legal  regulation  that 
two-tenths  (maaser  shenl)  should  be  eaten  in  a  holy  place 
(Upline  Jehovah)  by  the  original  possessor  and  his  family,  with 
the  addition  of  the  Levites  and  the  poor  (Deut.  xiv.  22-27  : 
see  Saalschiitz,  Mosaisches  Recht,  cap.  42).  Such  thoughts,  as 
that  all  Israel  will  then  be  a  priestly  nation,  or  that  all  Jeru 
salem  will  be  holy,  are  not  implied  in  this  promise.  All  that 
it  affirms  is,  that  the  enjoyment  of  the  harvest-blessing  will 
continue  henceforth  undisturbed,  and  be  accompanied  with  the 
grateful  worship  of  the  giver,  and  therefore,  because  sanctified 
by  thanksgiving,  will  become  an  act  of  worship  in  itself.  This 
is  what  Jehovah  has  sworn  "  by  His  right  hand,"  which  He 
only  lifts  up  with  truth,  and  "  by  His  powerful  arm/'  which 
carries  out  what  it  promises  without  the  possibility  of  resist 
ance.  The  Talmud  (b.  Nazir  3b)  understands  by  My  ynt  the 
left  arm,  after  Dan.  xii.  7  ;  but  the  1  of  jmDl  is  epexegetical. 

The  concluding  strophe  goes  back  to  the  standpoint  of  the 
captivity.  Yers.  10-12.  "  Go  forth,  go  forth  through  the  gates, 
clear  the  way  of  the  people.  Cast  up,  cast  up  the  road,  clean  it 
of  stones  ;  lift  up  a  banner  above  the  nations  !  Behold,  JehovaJi 
hath  caused  tidings  to  sound  to  the  end  of  the  earth.  Say  to  the 
daughter  of  Zion,  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh  ;  behold,  His 
reward  is  with  Him,  and  His  recompense  before  Him.  And  men 
will  call  them  the  holy  people,  the  redeemed  of  Jehovah  ;  and  men 


440  TriE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

will  call  tliee.  Striven  after,  A  city  tJiat  will  not  be  forsaken"  We 
cannot  adopt  the  rendering  proposed  by  Gesenius,  "  Go  ye  into 
the  gates,"  whether  of  Jerusalem  or  of  the  temple,  since  the 
reading  would  then  be  ^"W  *N3  (Gen.  xxiii.  10)  or  D^Il 
(Jer.  vii.  2).  For  although  3  "ay  may  under  certain  circum 
stances  be  applied  to  entrance  into  a  city  (Judg.  ix.  26),  yet  it 
generally  denotes  either  passing  through  a  land  (ch.  viii.  21, 
xxxiv.  10;  Gen.  xli.  46;  Lev.  xxvi.  6,  etc.),  or  through  a 
nation  (2  Sam.  xx.  14),  or  through  a  certain  place  (ch.  x.  28)  ; 
so  that  the  phrase  iy$3  "iiy,  which  does  not  occur  anywhere 
else  (for  in  Mic.  ii.  13,  which  refers,  however,  to  the  exodus 
of  the  people  out  of  the  gates  of  the  cities  of  the  captivity, 
"ijflj?  voy^  do  not  belong  together),  must  refer  to  passing 
through  the  gate ;  and  the  cry  D'ny^O  ray  means  just  the  same 
as  ba»  m*  («  Go  ye  forth  from  Babylon")  in  ch.  xlviii.  20,  lii. 
11.  The  call  to  go  out  of  Babylon  forms  the  conclusion  of  the 
prophecy  here,  just  as  it  does  in  ch.  xlviii.  20,  21,  lii.  11,  12. 
It  is  addressed  to  the  exiles ;  but  who  are  they  to  whom  the 
command  is  given,  "  Throw  up  a  way," — a  summons  repeat 
edly  found  in  all  the  three  books  of  these  prophecies  (ch.  xl.  3, 
Ivii.  14)  I  They  cannot  be  the  heathen,  for  this  is  contra 
dicted  by  the  conclusion  of  the  charge,  "Lift  ye  up  a  banner 
above  the  nations;"  nor  can  we  adopt  what  seems  to  us  a  use 
less  fancy  on  the  part  of  Stier,  viz.  that  ver.  10  is  addressed  to 
the  watchmen  on  the  walls  of  Zion.  We  have  no  hesitation, 
therefore,  in  concluding  that  they  are  the  very  same  persons 
who  are  to  march  through  the  gates  of  Babylon.  The  van 
guard  (or  pioneers)  of  those  who  are  coming  out  are  here 
summoned  to  open  the  way  by  which  the  people  are  to  march, 
to  throw  up  the  road  (viz.  by  casting  up  an  embankment, 
hamsilldh,  as  in  ch.  xi.  16,  xlix.  11  ;  mas  ltd,  ch.  xxxv.  8),  to 
clear  it  of  stones  (siqqel,  as  in  ch.  v.  2  ;  cf.  Hos.  ix.  12,  shikkvl 
me'dddm),  and  lift  up  a  banner  above  the  nations  (one  rising 
so  high  as  to  be  visible  far  and  wide),  that  the  diaspora  of  all 
places  may  join  those  who  are  returning  home  with  the 
friendly  help  of  the  nations  (ch.  xi.  12,  xlix.  22).  For  Jehovah 
hath  caused  tidings  to  be  heard  to  the  end  of  the  earth,  i.e.  as 
we  may  see  from  what  follows,  the  tidings  of  their  liberation  ; 
in  other  words,  looking  at  the  historical  fulfilment,  the  procla 
mation  of  Cyrus,  which  he  caused  to  be  issued  throughout  hia 


CHAP.  LXII.  10-12,  441 

empire  at  the  instigation  of  Jehovah  (Ezra  i.  1).  Hitzig 
regards  Jr^'?  as  expressing  what  had  actually  occurred  at  the 
time  when  the  prophet  uttered  his  predictions  ;  and  in  reality 
the  standpoint  of  the  prophets  was  so  far  a  variable  one,  that 
the  fulfilment  of  what  was  predicted  did  draw  nearer  and 
nearer  to  it  ev  irvevfjLari  (p.  123).  But  as  liinneh  throughout 
the  book  of  Isaiah  (vol.  i.  425),  even  when  followed  by  a  perfect 
(p.  10),  invariably  points  to  something  future,  all  that  can  be 
said  is,  that  the  divine  announcement  of  the  time  of  redemp 
tion,  as  having  now  arrived,  stands  out  before  the  soul  of  the 
prophet  with  all  the  certainty  of  a  historical  fact.  The  conclu 
sion  which  Knobel  draws  from  the  expression  "  to  the  end  of 
the  earth,"  as  to  the  Babylonian  standpoint  of  the  prophet,  is  a 
false  one.  In  his  opinion,  "the  end  of  the  earth"  in  such  pas 
sages  as  Ps.  Ixxii.  8,  Zech.  ix.  10  (! 'aplise- 'drets),  and  ch.  xxiv. 
16  (tfnaph  hd'drets),  signifies  the  western  extremity  of  the  orbis 
onentaliSy  that  is  to  say,  the  region  of  the  Mediterranean,  more 
especially  Palestine ;  whereas  it  was  rather  a  term  applied  to 
the  remotest  lands  which  bounded  the  geographical  horizon 
(compare  ch.  xlii.  10,  xlviii.  20,  with  Ps.  ii.  8,  xxii.  28,  and 
other  passages).  The  words  that  follow  ("  Say  ye,"  etc.)  might 
be  taken  as  a  command  issued  on  the  ground  of  the  divine 
hislnriia  ("the  Lord  hath  proclaimed");  but  hishmia  itself  is 
a  word  that  needs  to  be  supplemented,  so  that  what  follows  is 
the  divine  proclamation  :  Men  everywhere,  i.e.  as  far  as  the 
earth  or  the  dispersion  of  Israel  extends,  are  to  say  to  the 
daughter  of  Zion — that  is  to  say,  to  the  church  which  has  its 
home  in  Zion,  but  is  now  in  foreign  lands — that  "its  salvation 
cometh,"  i.e.  that  Jehovah,  its  Saviour,  is  coming  to  bestow  a 
rich  reward  upon  His  church,  which  has  passed  through  severe 
punishment,  but  has  been  so  salutarily  refined.  Those  to  whom 
the  words  "  Say  ye,"  etc.,  are  addressed,  are  not  only  the  pro 
phets  of  Israel,  but  all  the  mourners  of  Zion,  who  become 
rrfbhass'rim,  just  because  they  respond  to  this  appeal  (compare 
the  meaning  of  this  "  Say  ye  to  the  daughter  of  Zion"  with 
Zech.  ix.  9  in  Matt.  xxi.  5).  The  whole  of  the  next  clause, 
"  Behold,  His  reward,"  etc.,  is  a  repetition  of  the  prophet's  own 
words  in  ch.  xl.  10.  It  is  a  question  whether  the  words  "  and 
they  shall  call  thee,"  etc.,  contain  the  gospel  which  is  to  be 
proclaimed  according  to  the  will  of  Jehovah  to  the  end  of  the 


442  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

earth  (see  ch.  xlviii.  20),  or  whether  they  are  a  continuation  of 
the  prophecy  which  commences  with  "  Behold,  Jehovah  hath 
pro  claimed."  The  latter  is  the  more  probable,  as  the  address 
here  passes  again  into  an  objective  promise.  The  realization  of 
the  gospel,  which  Jehovah  causes  to  be  preached,  leads  men  to 
call  those  who  are  now  still  in  exile  "  the  holy  people,"  "  the 
redeemed"  (lit.  ransomed,  ch.  li.  10  ;  like  peduye  in  ch.  xxxv. 
10).  "  And  thee" — thus  does  the  prophecy  close  by  returning 
to  a  direct  address  to  Zion- Jerusalem — "thee  will  men  call 
cPr&shdh"  sought  assiduously,  i.e.  one  whose  welfare  men,  and 
still  more  Jehovah,  are  zealously  concerned  to  promote  (com 
pare  the  opposite  in  Jer.  xxx.  17), — "a  city  that  will  not  be 
forsaken,"  i.e.  in  which  men  gladly  settle,  and  which  will  nevei 
be  without  inhabitants  again  (the  antithesis  to  'fyubltdh  in  ch. 
Ix.  15),  possibly  also  in  the  sense  that  the  gracious  presence  of 
God  will  never  be  withdrawn  from  it  again  (the  antithesis  to 
' ttzublidh  in  ver.  4).  i"QTW  is  the  third  pers.  pr.,  like  nuchdmdh 
in  ch.  liv.  11  :  the  perfect  as  expressing  the  abstract  present 
(Ges.  §  126,  3). 

The  following  prophecy  anticipates  the  question,  how  Israel 
can  possibly  rejoice  in  the  recovered  possession  of  its  inherit 
ance,  if  it  is  still  to  be  surrounded  by  such  malicious  neigh 
bours  as  the  Edomites. 

SIXTH  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LXIII.  1-6. 

JUDGMENT  UPON  EDOM,  AND  UPON  THE  WHOLE  WORLD  THAT 
IS  HOSTILE  TO  THE  CHURCH. 

Just  as  the  Ammonites  had  been  characterized  by  a  thirst 
for  extending  their  territory  as  well  as  by  cruelty,  and  the 
Moabites  by  boasting  and  a  slanderous  disposition,  so  were  the 
Edomites,  although  the  brother-nation  to  Israel,  characterized 
from  time  immemorial  by  fierce,  implacable,  bloodthirsty  hatred 
towards  Israel,  upon  which  they  fell  in  the  most  ruthless  and 
malicious  manner,  whenever  it  was  surrounded  by  danger  or 
had  suffered  defeat.  The  knavish  way  in  which  they  acted 
in  the  time  of  Joram,  when  Jerusalem  was  surprised  and 
plundered  by  Philistines  and  Arabians  (2  Chron.  xxi.  16,  17), 
has  been  depicted  by  Obadiah.  A  large  part  of  the  inhabitants 


CHAP.  LXIII.  1-6.  443 

of  Jerusalem  were  then  taken  prisoners,  and  sold  by  tlie 
conquerors,  some  to  the  Phoenicians  and  some  to  the  Greeks 
(Obad.  20;  Joel  iv.  1-8);  to  the  latter  through  the  medium  of 
the  Edomites,  who  were  in  possession  of  the  port  and  com 
mercial  city  of  Elath  on  the  Elanitic  Gulf  (Amos  i.  6).  Under 
the  rule  of  the  very  same  Joram  the  Edomites  had  made  them 
selves  independent  of  the  house  of  David  (2  Kings  viii.  20 ; 
2  Chron.  xxi.  10),  and  a  great  massacre  took  place  among  the 
Judseans  settled  in  Idumsea ;  an  act  of  wickedness  for  which 
Joel  threatens  them  with  the  judgment  of  God  (ch.  iv.  19), 
and  which  was  regarded  as  not  yet  expiated  even  in  the  time  of 
Uzziah,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  Amaziah  had  chastised 
them  (2  Kings  xiv.  7),  and  Uzziah  had  wrested  Elath  from 
them  (2  Kings  xiv.  22).  "  Tims  saith  Jelwvah"  was  the  pro 
phecy  of  Amos  (i.  11,  12)  in  the  first  half  of  Uzziah's  reign, 
"for  three  transgressions  of  Edom,  and  for  four ',  I  will  not  take 
it  back,  because  he  pursued  his  brother  with  the  sword,  and  stifled 
his  compassion,  so  that  his  anger  tears  in  pieces  for  ever,  and  he 
keeps  his  fierce  wrath  eternally:  And  I  let  fire  loose  upon  Teman, 
and  it  devours  the  palaces  of  Bozrali"  So  also  at  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans,  and  the  carrying  away  of  the 
people,  Edom  took  the  side  of  the  Chaldeans,  rejoiced  over 
Israel's  defeat,  and  flattered  itself  that  it  should  eventually 
rule  over  the  territory  that  had  hitherto  belonged  to  Israel. 
They  availed  themselves  of  this  opportunity  to  slake  their 
thirst  for  revenge  upon  Israel,  placing  themselves  at  the  service 
of  its  enemies,  delivering  up  fugitive  Judseans  or  else  mas 
sacring  them,  and  really  obtaining  possession  of  the  southern 
portion  of  Judaea,  viz.  Hebron  (1  Mace.  v.  65 ;  cf.  Josephus, 
Wars  of  the  Jews,  iv.  9,  7).  With  a  retrospective  glance  at 
these,  the  latest  manifestations  of  eternal  enmity,  Edom  is 
threatened  with  divine  vengeance  by  Jeremiah  in  the  prophecy 
contained  in  Jer.  xlix.  7-22,  which  is  taken  for  the  most  part 
from  Obadiah;  also  in  the  Lamentations  (iv.  21,  22),  as  well  as 
by  Ezekiel  (xxv.  12—14,  and  especially  xxxv.),  and  by  the  author 
of  Ps.  cxxxvii.,  which  looks  back  upon  the  time  of  the  captivity. 
Edom  is  not  always  an  emblematical  name  for  the  imperial 
power  of  the  world  :  this  is  evident  enough  from  Ps.  cxxxvii., 
from  Isa.  xxi.,  and  also  from  Isa.  xxxiv.  in  connection  witli 
ch.  xiii.,  where  the  judgment  upon  Edom  is  represented  as  a 


444  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

different  one  from  the  judgment  upon  Babylon.  Babylon  and 
Edom  are  always  to  be  taken  literally,  so  far  as  the  primary 
meaning  of  the  prophecy  is  concerned ;  but  they  are  also  le- 
presentative,  Babylon  standing  for  the  violent  and  tyrannical 
world-power,  and  Edom  for  the  world  as  cherishing  hostility 
and  manifesting  hostility  to  Israel  as  Israel,  i.e.  as  the  people 
of  God.  Babylon  had  no  other  interest,  so  far  as  Israel  was 
concerned,  than  to  subjugate  it  like  other  kingdoms,  and 
destroy  every  possibility  of  its  ever  rising  again.  But  Edom, 
which  dwelt  in  Israel's  immediate  neighbourhood,  and  sprang 
from  the  same  ancestral  house,  hated  Israel  with  hereditary 
mortal  hatred,  although  it  knew  the  God  of  Israel  better  than 
Babylon  ever  did,  because  it  knew  that  Israel  had  deprived  it 
of  its  birthright,  viz.  the  chieftainship.  If  Israel  should  have 
such  a  people  as  this,  and  such  neighbouring  nations  generally 
round  about  it,  after  it  had  been  delivered  from  the  tyranny  of 
the  mistress  of  the  world,  its  peace  would  still  be  incessantly 
threatened.  Not  only  must  Babylon  fall,  but  Edom  also  must 
be  trodden  down,  before  Israel  could  be  redeemed,  or  be 
regarded  as  perfectly  redeemed.  The  prophecy  against  Edom 
which  follows  here  is  therefore  a  well-chosen  side-piece  to  the 
prophecy  against  Babel  in  ch.  xlvii.,  at  the  point  of  time  to 
which  the  prophet  has  been  transported. 

This  is  the  smallest  of  all  the  twenty-seven  prophecies. 
In  its  dramatic  style  it  resembles  Ps.  xxiv. ;  in  its  visionary 
and  emblematical  character  it  resembles  the  tetralogy  in  ch. 
xxi.-xxii.  14.  The  attention  of  the  seer  is  attracted  by  a 
strange  and  lofty  form  coming  from  Edom,  or  more  strictly 
from  Bozrah  ;  not  the  place  in  Auranitis  or  Hauran  (Jer. 
xlviii.  24)  which  is  memorable  in  church  history,  but  the  place 
in  Edomitis  or  Gebal,  between  Petra  and  the  Dead  Sea,  which 
still  exists  as  a  village  in  ruins  under  the  diminutive  name  of 
el-Busaire.  Ver.  1.  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  in 
deep  red  clothes  from  Bozrah  ?  This,  glorious  in  his  apparel, 
lending  to  and  fro  in  the  fulness  of  his  strength?"  The  verb 
chdmats  means  to  be  sharp  or  bitter ;  but  here,  where  it  can 
only  refer  to  colour,  it  means  to  be  glaring,  and  as  the  Syriac 
shows,  in  which  it  is  generally  applied  to  blushing  from  shame 
or  reverential  awe,  to  be  a  staring  red  (ofew?).  The  question, 
what  is  it  that  makes  the  clothes  of  this  new-comer  so  strik- 


CHAP.  LXIII.  1.  445 

ingly  red?  is  answered  afterwards.     But  apart  from  the  colour, 
they  are  splendid  in  their  general  arrangement  and  character. 


The  person  seen  approaching  is  iKWa  Tfin  (cf.  jJo-  and 
jtXfc,  to  rush  up,  to  shoot  up  luxuriantly,  alidar  used  for  a 

swollen  body),  and  possibly  through  the  medium  of  Mddr 
(which  may  signify  primarily  a  swelling,  or  pad,  07^09,  and 
secondarily  pomp  or  splendour),  "  to  honour  or  adorn  ;"  so  that 
hddur  signifies  adorned,  grand  (as  in  Gen.  xxiv.  65  ;  Targ. 
II.  LXX.  &>/?ato?),  splendid.  The  verb  tsd'dh,  to  bend  or 
stoop,  we  have  already  met  with  in  ch.  li.  14.  Here  it  is  used 
to  denote  a  gesture  of  proud  self-consciousness,  partly  with  or 
without  the  idea  of  the  proud  bending  back  of  the  head  (or 
bending  forward  to  listen),  and  partly  with  that  of  swaying  to 
and  fro,  i.e.  the  walk  of  a  proud  man  swinging  to  and  fro  upon 
the  hips.  The  latter  is  the  sense  in  which  we  understand  tsoeh 
here,  viz.  as  a  syn.  of  the  Arabic  mutamdil,  to  bend  proudly 
from  one  side  to  the  other  (Vitringa  :  se  hue  illuc  motitans). 
The  person  seen  here  produces  the  impression  of  great  and 
abundant  strength  ;  and  his  walk  indicates  the  corresponding 
pride  of  self-consciousness. 

"Who  is  this?"  asks  the  seer  of  a  third  person.  But  the 
answer  comes  from  the  person  himself,  though  only  seen  in  the 
distance,  and  therefore  with  a  voice  that  could  be  heard  afar  off. 
Ver.  Ib.  "  I  am  lie  that  speaketh  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  aid." 
Hitzig,  Knobel,  and  others,  take  righteousness  as  the  object  of 
the  speaking  ;  and  this  is  grammatically  possible  (3  =  Tre/ot, 
e.g.  Deut.  vi.  7).  But  our  prophet  uses  pTO  in  ch.  xlii.  6,  xlv. 
13,  and  np*TC2  in  an  adverbial  sense  :  "  strictly  according  to 
the  rule  of  truth  (more  especially  that  of  the  counsel  of  mercy 
or  plan  of  salvation)  and  right."  The  person  approaching  says 
that  he  is  great  in  word  and  deed  (Jer.  xxxii.  19).  He  speaks 
in  righteousness  ;  in  the  zeal  of  his  holiness  threatening  judg 
ment  to  the  oppressors,  and  promising  salvation  to  the  oppressed; 
and  what  he  threatens  and  promises,  he  carries  out  with  mighty 
power.  He  is  great  (sn,  not  3"J  ;  S.  vTrep^a^v^  Jer.  pro- 
pugnator)  to  aid  the  oppressed  against  their  oppressors.  This 
alone  might  lead  us  to  surmise,  that  it  is  God  from  whose 
mouth  of  righteousness  (ch.  xlv.  23)  the  consolation  of  redemp- 


446  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

tion  proceeds,  and  whose  holy  omnipotent  arm  (ch.  Hi.  10,  lix. 
16)  carries  out  the  act  of  redemption. 

The  seer  surmises  this  also,  and  now  inquires  still  further, 
whence  the  strange  red  colour  of  his  apparel,  which  does  not 
look  like  the  purple  of  a  king's  talaror  the  scarlet  of  a  chlamys. 
Ver.  2.  "  Whence  the  red  on  thine  apparel,  and  thy  clothes  like 
those  of  a  wine-presser  T*  V^P  inquires  the  reason  and  cause ; 
HEP,  in  its  primary  sense,  the  object  or  purpose.  The  seer  asks, 
"  Why  is  there  red  ('dddm,  neuter,  like  rabh  in  ver.  7)  to  thine 
apparel?"  The  Lamed,  which  might  be  omitted  (wherefore  is  thy 
garment  red?),  implies  that  the  red  was  not  its  original  colour, 
but  something  added  (cf.  Jer.  xxx.  12,  and  Idmo  in  ch.  xxvi. 
16,  liii.  8).  This  comes  out  still  more  distinctly  in  the  second 
half  of  the  question  :  "  and  (why  are)  thy  clothes  like  those  of 
one  who  treads  (wine)  in  the  wine-press  "  (b'gath  with  a  pausal 
a  not  lengthened,  like  baz  in  ch.  viii.  1),  i.e.  saturated  and 
stained  as  if  with  the  juice  of  purple  grapes  I 

The  person  replies:  Vers.  3-6.  " /  have  trodden  the  wine- 
trough  alone,  and  of  the  nations  no  one  was  with  me :  and  I  trode 
them  in  my  wrath,  and  trampled  them  down  in  my  fury;  and  their 
life-sap  spirted  upon  my  clothes,  and  all  my  raiment  was  stained. 
For  a  day  of  vengeance  was  in  my  heart,  and  the  year  of  my 
redemption  was  come.  And  1  looked  round,  and  there  was  no 
helper;  and  I  wondered  there  was  no  supporter:  then  mine  own 
arm  helped  me ;  and  my  fury,  it  became  my  support.  And  I  trode 
down  nations  in  my  wrath,  and  made  them  drunk  in  my  fury, 
and  made  their  life-blood  run  down  to  the  earth."  He  had  indeed 
trodden  the  wine-press  (purdh—gath,  or,  if  distinct  from  this, 
the  pressing-trough  as  distinguished  from  the  pressing-house  or 
pressing-place ;  according  to  Fiirst,  something  hollowed  out ; 
but  according  to  the  traditional  interpretation  frompur  =  pdrar, 
to  crush,  press,  both  different  from  yeqebh :  see  at  ch.  v.  2),  and 
he  alone ;  so  that  the  juice  of  the  grapes  had  saturated  and 
coloured  his  clothes,  and  his  only.  When  he  adds,  that  of  the 
nations  no  one  was  with  him,  it  follows  that  the  press  which  ne 
trode  was  so  great,  that  he  might  have  needed  the  assistance  of 
whole  nations.  And  when  he  continues  thus  :  And  I  trod  them 
in  my  wrath,  etc.,  the  enigma  is  at  once  explained.  It  was  to 
the  nations  themselves  that  the  knife  was  applied.  They  were 
cut  off  like  grapes  and  put  into  the  wine-press  (Joel  iv.  13);  and 


CHAP.  LXIII.  3-6.  447 

tliis  heroic  figure,  of  which  there  was  no  longer  any  doubt  that 
it  was  Jehovah  Himself,  had  trodden  them  down  in  the  impulse 
and  strength  of  His  wrath.  The  red  upon  the  clothes  was  the 
life-blood  of  the  nations,  which  had  spirted  upon  them,  and  with 
which,  as  He  trode  this  wine-press,  He  had  soiled  all  His  gar 
ments.  Netsach,  according  to  the  more  recently  accepted  de 
rivation  from  ndlsach,  signifies,  according  to  the  traditional  idea, 
which  is  favoured  by  Lam.  iii.  18,  vigor,  the  vital  strength  and 
life-blood,  regarded  as  the  sap  of  life.  H  (compare  the  his 
torical  tense  H  in  2  Kings  ix.  33)  is  the  future  used  as  an  im 
perfect,  and  it  spirted,  from  ndzdli  (see  at  cli.  Hi.  15).  ^PfJ-^ 
(from  !>NJ  =  ^3,  ch.  lix.  3)  is  the  perfect  hiphil  with  an  Ara 
maean  inflexion  (compare  the  same  Aramaism  in  Ps.  Ixxvi.  6, 
2  Chron.  xx.  35  ;  and  *9f$}9  which  is  half  like  it,  in  Job  xvi.  7); 
the  Hebrew  form  would  be  V??$»!'.1  AE  and  A  regard  the  form 
as  a  mixture  of  the  perfect  and  future,  but  this  is  a  mistake. 
This  work  of  wrath  had  been  executed  by  Jehovah,  because 
He  had  in  His  heart  a  day  of  vengeance,  which  could  not 
be  delayed,  and  because  the  year  (see  at  ch.  Ixi.  2)  of  His 
promised  redemption  had  arrived,  vNj)  (this  is  the  proper  read 
ing,  not  Y^f,  as  some  codd.  have  it;  and  this  was  the  reading 
which  Rashi  had  before  him  in  his  comm.  on  Lam.  i.  6)  is 
the  plural  of  the  passive  participle  used  as  an  abstract  noun 
(compare  Ds*n  vivi,  vitales,  or  rather  viva,  vitalia  =  vita).  And 
He  only  had  accomplished  this  work  of  wrath.  Ver.  5  is  the 
expansion  of  *W,  and  almost  a  verbal  repetition  of  ch.  lix.  16. 
The  meaning  is,  that  no  one  joined  Him  with  conscious  free 
will,  to  render  help  to  the  God  of  judgment  and  salvation  in 
His  purposes.  The  church  that  was  devoted  to  Him  was  itself 
the  object  of  the  redemption,  and  the  great  mass  of  those  who 
were  estranged  from  Him  the  object  of  the  judgment.  Thus 
He  found  Himself  alone,  neither  human  co-operation  nor  the 
natural  course  of  events  helping  the  accomplishment  of  His 
purposes.  And  consequently  He  renounced  all  human  help, 
and  broke  through  the  steady  course  of  development  by  a 
marvellous  act  of  His  own.  He  trode  down  nations  in  His 
wrath,  and  intoxicated  them  in  His  fury,  and  caused  their  life- 


1  The  Babylonian  MSS.  have  TJOX  with  chirek,  since  the  Babylonian 
(Assyrian)  system  of  punctuation  has  no  serjliol. 


448  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

blood  to  flow  down  to  the  ground.  The  Targum  adopts  the 
rendering  "  et  triturabo  eos"  as  if  the  reading  were  D^a^N], 
which  we  find  in  Sonc.  1488,  and  certain  other  editions,  as  well 
as  in  some  codd.  Many  agree  with  Cappellus  in  preferring 
this  reading;  and  in  itself  it  is  not  inadmissible  (see  Lam.  i. 
15).  But  the  LXX.  and  all  the  other  ancient  versions,  the 
Masora  (which  distinguishes  D*OBW  with  a,  as  only  met  with 
once,  from  D"iaBW  with  a  in  Deut.  ix.  17),  and  the  great  ma 
jority  of  the  MSS.,  support  the  traditional  reading.  There  is 
nothing  surprising  in  the  transition  to  the  figure  of  the  cup  of 
wrath,  which  is  a  very  common  one  with  Isaiah.  Moreover,  all 
that  is  intended  is,  that  Jehovah  caused  the  nations  to  feel  the 
full  force  of  this  His  fury,  by  trampling  them  down  in  His 
fury. 

Even  in  this  short  and  highly  poetical  passage  we  see  a 
desire  to  emblematize,  just  as  in  the  emblematic  cycle  of  pro 
phetical  night-visions  in  ch.  xxi.-xxii.  14.  For  not  only  is  the 
name  of  Edom  made  covertly  into  an  emblem  of  its  future  fate, 
CHK  becoming  D'lN  upon  the  apparel  of  Jehovah  the  avenger, 
when  the  blood  of  the  people,  stained  with  blood-guiltiness 
towards  the  people  of  God,  is  spirted  out,  but  the  name  of 
Bozrah  also ;  for  Idtsar  means  to  cut  off  bunches  of  grapes 
(vindemiare),  and  botsrdh  becomes  bdtsir,  i.e.  a  vintage,  vfhich 
Jehovah  treads  in  His  wrath,  when  He  punishes  the  Edomitish 
nation  as  well  as  all  the  rest  of  the  nations,  which  in  their 
hostility  towards  Him  and  His  people  have  taken  pleasure  in 
the  carrying  away  of  Israel  and  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
and  have  lent  their  assistance  in  accomplishing  them.  Knobel 
supposes  that  the  judgment  referred  to  is  the  defeat  which 
Cyrus  inflicted  upon  the  nations  under  Croesus  and  their  allies  ; 
but  it  can  neither  be  shown  that  this  defeat  affected  the 
Edomites,  nor  can  we  understand  why  Jehovah  should  appear 
as  if  coming  from  Edom-Bozrah,  after  inflicting  this  judgment, 
to  which  ch.  xli.  2  sqq.  refers.  Knobel  himself  also  observes, 
that  Edorn  was  still  an  independent  kingdom,  and  hostile  to 
the  Persians  (Diod.  xv.  2)  not  only  under  the  reign  of  Cam- 
byses  (Herod,  iii.  5  sqq.),  but  even  later  than  that  (Diod.  xiii. 
4B).  But  at  the  time  of  Malachi,  who  lived  under  Artaxerxes 
JLongimanus,  if  not  under  his  successor  Darius  Nothus,  a  judg 
ment  of  devastation  was  inflicted  upon  Edom  (Mai.  i.  3-5), 


CHAP.  LXIII.  3-6.  449 

from  which  it  never  recovered.  The  Chaldeans,  as  Caspar! 
has  shown  (Obad.  p.  142),  cannot  have  executed  it,  since  the 
Edomites  appear  throughout  as  their  accomplices,  and  as  still 
maintaining  their  independence  even  under  the  first  Persian 
kings  ;  nor  can  any  historical  support  be  found  to  the  conjec 
ture,  that  it  occurred  in  the  wars  between  the  Persians  and 
the  Egyptians  (Hitzig  and  Kohler,  Mai.  p.  35).  What  the 
prophet's  eye  really  saw  was  fulfilled  in  the  time  of  the 
Maccaba3ans,  when  Judas  inflicted  a  total  defeat  upon  them, 
John  Hyrcanus  compelled  them  to  become  Jews,  and  Alex 
ander  Jannai  completed  their  subjection  ;  and  in  the  time  of 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Komans,  when  Simon  of 
Gerasa  avenged  their  cruel  conduct  in  Jerusalem  in  combina 
tion  with  the  Zelots,  by  ruthlessly  turning  their  well-cultivated 
land  into  a  horrible  desert,  just  as  it  would  have  been  left  by  a 
swarm  of  locusts  (Jos.  Wars  of  the  Jews,  iv.  9,  7). 

The  New  Testament  counterpart  of  this  passage  in  Isaiah 
is  the  destruction  of  Antichrist  and  his  army  (Rev.  xix.  11 
sqq.).  He  who  effects  this  destruction  is  called  the  Faithful 
and  True,  the  Logos  of  God;  and  the  seer  beholds  Him  sitting 
upon  a  white  horse,  with  eyes  of  flaming  fire,  and  many  diadems 
upon  His  head,  wearing  a  blood-stained  garment,  like  the  person 
seen  by  the  prophet  here.  The  vision  of  John  is  evidently 
formed  upon  the  basis  of  that  of  Isaiah  ;  for  when  it  is  said  of 
the  Logos  that  He  rules  the  nations  with  a  staff  of  iron,  this 
points  to  Ps.  ii. ;  and  when  it  is  still  further  said  that  He  treads 
the  wine-press  of  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God,  this  points  back 
to  Isa.  Ixiii.  The  reference  throughout  is  not  to  the  first 
coming  of  the  Lord,  when  He  laid  the  foundation  of  His  king 
dom  by  suffering  and  dying,  but  to  His  final  coming,  when  He 
will  bring  His  regal  sway  to  a  victorious  issue.  Nevertheless 
ch.  Ixiii.  1-6  has  always  been  a  favourite  passage  for  reading 
in  Passion  week.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that  the  Christian  cannot 
read  this  prophecy  without  thinking  of  the  Saviour  streaming 
with  blood,  who  trode  the  wine-press  of  wrath  for  us  without 
the  help  of  angels  and  men,  i.e.  who  conquered  wrath  for  us. 
But  the  prophecy  does  not  relate  to  this.  The  blood  upon  the 
garment  of  the  divine  Hero  is  not  His  own,  but  that  of  His 
enemies ;  and  His  treading  of  the  wine-press  is  not  the  conquest 
of  wrath,  but  the  manifestation  of  wrath.  This  section  can 

VOL.  ii.  2  F 


450  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

only  h*1  properly  used  as  a  lesson  for  Passion  week  so  far  ^s 
this,  that  Jehovah,  who  here  appears  to  the  Old  Testament 
seer,  was  certainly  He  who  became  man  in  His  Christ,  in  the 
historical  fulfilment  of  His  purposes;  and  behind  the  first  advent 
to  bring;  salvation  there  stood  with  warning  form  the  final  cominc1 

O  DO 

to  judgment,  which  will  take  vengeance  upon  that  Edom,  to 
whom  the  red  lentil-judgment  of  worldly  lust  and  power  was 
dearer  than  the  red  life-blood  of  that  loving  Servant  of  Jehovah 
who  offered  Himself  for  the  sin  of  the  whole  world. 

There  follows  now  in  ch.  Ixiii.  7-lxiv.  11  a  prayer  com 
mencing  with  thanksgiving  as  it  looks  back  to  the  past,  and 
closing  with  a  prayer  for  help  as  it  turns  to  the  present.  Hitzig 
and  Knobel  connect  this  closely  with  ch.  Ixiii.  1-6,  assuming 
that  through  the  great  event  which  had  occurred,  viz.  the  over 
throw  of  Edom,  and  of  the  nations  hostile  to  the  people  of  God 
as  such,  by  which  the  exiles  were  brought  one  step  nearer  to 
freedom,  the  prophet  was  led  to  praise  Jehovah  for  all  His 
previous  goodness  to  Israel.  There  is  nothing,  however,  to 
indicate  this  connection,  which  is  in  itself  a  very  loose  one. 
The  prayer  which  follows  is  chiefly  an  entreaty,  and  an  entreaty 
appended  to  ch.  Ixiii.  1-6,  but  without  any  retrospective  allu 
sion  to  it :  it  is  rather  a  prayer  in  general  for  the  realization  of 
the  redemption  already  promised.  Ewald  is  right  in  regarding 
ch.  Ixiii.  7-lxvi.  as  an  appendix  to  this  whole  book  of  consola 
tion,  since  the  traces  of  the  same  prophet  are  unmistakeable  ; 
but  the  whole  style  of  the  description  is  obviously  different, 
and  the  historical  circumstances  must  have  been  still  further 
developed  in  the  meantime. 

The  three  prophecies  which  follow  are  the  finale  of  the 
whole.  The  announcement  of  the  prophet,  which  has  reached 
its  highest  point  in  the  majestic  vision  in  ch.  Ixiii.  1—6,  is  now 
drawing  to  an  end.  It  is  standing  close  upon  the  threshold  of  all 
that  has  been  promised,  and  nothing  remains  but  the  fulfilment 
of  the  promise,  which  he  has  held  up  like  a  jewel  on  every  side. 
And  now,  just  as  in  the  finale  of  a  poetical  composition,  all  the 
melodies  and  movements  that  have  been  struck  before  are 
gathered  up  into  one  effective  close  ;  and  first  of  all,  as  in  Hab. 
iii.,  into  a  prayer,  which  forms,  as  it  were,  the  lyrical  echo  of 
the  preaching  that  has  gone  before. 


CHAP.  LXIII.  7,  451 

THE   THREE   CLOSING   PROPHECIES. 

FIRST  CLOSING  PROPHECY.—  CHAP.  LXIII.  T-LXIV. 

THANKSGIVING,  CONFESSION,  AND  SUPPLICATION  OF  THE 
CHUKCH  OF  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

THE  prophet,  as  the  leader  of  the  prayers  of  the  church,  here 
passes  into  the  expanded  style  of  the  tephillah.  Ver.  7.  "  / 
will  celebrate  the  mercies  of  Jehovah,  the  praises  of  Jehovah,  as 
is  seemly  for  all  that  Jehovah  hath  shown  ws,  and  the  great 
goodness  towards  the  house  of  Israel,  which  He  hath  shown  them 
according  to  His  pity,  and  the  riches  of  His  mercies."  The 
speaker  is  the  prophet,  in  the  name  of  the  church,  or,  what  is 
the  same  thing,  the  church  in  which  the  prophet  includes 
himself.  The  prayer  commences  with  thanksgiving,  according 
to  the  fundamental  rule  in  Ps.  1.  23.  The  church  brings  to 
its  own  remembrance,  as  the  subject  of  praise  in  the  presence 
of  God,  all  the  words  and  deeds  by  which  Jehovah  has  dis 


played  His  mercy  and  secured  glory  to  Himself.     Hpn  (this  is 

the  correct  pointing,  with  1  protected  by  gaya  ;  cf.  *lb!3  in  ch. 
liv.  12)  are  the  many  thoughts  of  mercy  and  acts  of  rnercy  into 
which  the  grace  of  God,  i.e.  His  one  purpose  of  grace  and  His 
one  work  of  grace,  had  been  divided.  They  are  just  so  many 
tehilldthj  self-glorifications  of  God,  and  impulses  to  His  glori 
fication.  On  ?y3,  as  is  seemly,  see  at  ch.  lix.  18.  There  is  no 
reason  for  assuming  that  2ltrTY)  is  equivalent  to  31B~2~i  7JEW,  as 
Hitzig  and  Knobel  do.  niD'in  commences  the  second  object 
to  ^3\$,  in  which  what  follows  is  unfolded  as  a  parallel  to  the 
first.  Rabh,  the  much,  is  a  neuter  formed  into  a  substantive, 
as  in  Ps.  cxlv.  7  ;  robh,  plurality  or  multiplicity,  is  an  infinitive 
used  as  a  substantive.  Tubh  is  God's  benignant  goodness  ; 
rachamlm,  His  deepest  sympathizing  tenderness  ;  chesed  (root 
Dn,  used  of  violent  emotion;  cf.  Syr.  chasad,  chasam,  cemulari; 

^.rab.  ^/*2>-,  to  be  tender,  full  of  compassion),  grace  which 
condescends  to  and  comes  to  meet  a  sinful  creature.  After 


452  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

this  introit,  the  prayer  itself  commences  with  a  retrospects  e 
glance  at  the  time  of  the  giving  of  the  law,  when  the  relation 
of  a  child,  in  which  Israel  stood  to  Jehovah,  was  solemnly  pro 
claimed  and  legally  regulated.  Ver.  8.  "  He  said,  They  are 
my  people,  children  who  will  not  lie;  and  He  became  their 
Saviour"  ^  is  used  here  in  its  primary  affirmative  sense. 
^jpB*  is  the  future  of  hope.  When  He  made  them  His  people, 
His  children,  He  expected  from  them  a  grateful  return  of  His 
covenant  grace  in  covenant  fidelity;  and  whenever  they  needed 
help  from  above,  He  became  their  Saviour  (moslila).  We 
can  recognise  the  ring  of  Ex.  xv.  2  here,  just  as  in  ch.  xii.  2. 
Moshla*  is  a  favourite  word  in  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  (compare,  however, 
ch.  xix.  20  also) 

The  next  verse  commemorates  the  way  in  which  He 
proved  Himself  a  Saviour  in  heart  and  action.  Ver.  9.  "  In 
all  their  affliction  He  was  afflicted,  and  the  Angel  of  His  face 
brought  them  salvation.  In  His  love  and  in  His  pity  He  re 
deemed  them,  and  lifted  them  up,  and  bare  them  all  the  days  of 
the  olden  time."  This  is  one  of  the  fifteen  passages  in  which 
the  chethib  has  tit?,  the  keri  ii>.  It  is  only  with  difficulty  that 
we  can  obtain  any  meaning  from  the  chethib :  "  in  all  the 
affliction  which  He  brought  upon  them  He  did  not  afflict,  viz. 
according  to  their  desert "  (Targ.,  Jer.,  Rashi)  ;  or  better  still, 
as  tsar  must  in  this  case  be  derived  from  tsur,  and  tsar  is  only 
met  with  in  an  intransitive  sense,  "  In  all  their  distress  there 
was  no  distress"  (Saad.),  with  which  J.  D.  Michaelis  compares 
2  Cor.  iv.  8,  "  troubled  on  every  side,  yet  not  distressed." 
The  oxymoron  is  perceptible  enough,  but  the  Dr6  (nv  fc6), 
which  is  indispensable  to  this  expression,  is  wanting.  Even 
with  the  explanation,  "In  all  their  affliction  He  was  not  an 
enemy,  viz.  Jehovah,  to  them"  (Doderleiri),  or  "  No  man  perse 
cuted  them  without  the  angel  immediately,"  etc.  (Cocceius  and 
Rosenmiiller),  we  miss  &r6  or  DriK.  There  are  other  still  more 
twisted  and  jejune  attempts  to  explain  the  passage  with  vh, 
which  are  not  worth  the  space  they  occupy.  Even  the  older 
translators  did  not  know  how  to  deal  with  the  vb  in  the  text. 
The  Sept.  takes  tsar  as  equivalent  to  tsir,  a  messenger,  and 
renders  the  passage  according  to  its  own  peculiar  interpnnc- 
tuation :  ov  7rpecr/3vs  ovSe  ^776X09,  aXX'  avros  eaaxrev  avrov? 
(neither  a  messenger  nor  an  angel,  but  His  face,  i.e.  He 


CHAP.  LXIII.  9.  453 

Himself  helped  them:  Ex.  xxxiii.  14,  15;  2  Sam.  xvii.  11). 
Everything  forces  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Jceri  b  is  to  be 
preferred.  The  Masora  actually  does  reckon  this  as  one  of  the 
fifteen  passages  in  which  b  is  to  be  read  for  &6.1  Jerome  was 
also  acquainted  with  this  explanation.  He  says  :  "  Where  we 
have  rendered  it,  '  In  all  their  affliction  He  was  not  afflicted/ 
which  is  expressed  in  Hebrew  by  LO,  the  adverb  of  negation, 
we  might  read  IPSE  ;  so  that  the  sense  would  be,  <  In  all  their 
affliction  He,  i.e.  God,  was  afflicted.'"  If  we  take  the  sentence 
in  this  way,  u  In  all  oppression  there  was  oppression  to  Him," 
it  yields  a  forcible  thought  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  Scrip 
ture  (compare  e.g.  Judg.  x.  16),  an  expression  in  harmony  with 
the  usage  of  the  language  (compare  tsar-ll,  2  Sam.  i.  26),  and 
a  construction  suited  to  the  contents  (b  =  ipsi).  There  is 
nothing  to  surprise  us  in  the  fact  that  God  should  be  said  to 
feel  the  sufferings  of  His  people  as  His  own  sufferings  ;  for 
the  question  whether  God  can  feel  pain  is  answered  by  the 
Scriptures  in  the  affirmative.  He  can  as  surely  as  everything 
originates  in  Him,  with  the  exception  of  sin,  which  is  a  free 
act  and  only  originates  in  Him  so  far  as  the  possibility  is  con 
cerned,  but  not  in  its  actuality.  Just  as  a  man  can  feel  pain, 
and  yet  in  his  personality  keep  himself  superior  to  it,  so  God 
feels  pain  without  His  own  happiness  being  thereby  destroyed. 
And  so  did  He  suffer  writh  His  people ;  their  affliction  was 
reflected  in  His  own  life  in  Himself,  and  shared  Him  in 
wardly.  But  because  He,  the  all-knowing,  all-feeling  One, 
is  also  the  almighty  will,  He  sent  the  angel  of  His  face,  and 
brought  them  salvation.  "  The  angel  of  His  face,"  says 
Knobel,  "  is  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire,  in  which  Jehovah  was 
present  with  His  people  in  the  march  through  the  desert,  with 
His  protection,  instruction,  and  guidance,  the  helpful  presence 
of  God  in  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire."  But  where  do  we  ever 
read  of  this,  that  it  brought  Israel  salvation  in  the  pressure  of 

1  There  are  fifteen  passages  in  which  the  Jceri  substitutes  *h  for  &^. 
See  Masora  magna  on  Lev.  xi.  21  (Psalter,  ii.  60).  If  we  add  Isa.  xlix.  5, 
1  Chron.  xi.  20, 1  Sam.  ii.  16,  there  are  eighteen  (Jo&,  vol.  i.  p.  213).  But 
the  first  two  of  these  are  not  reckoned,  because  they  are  doubtful ;  and  in 
the  third,  instead  of  *h  being  substituted  for  fr^,  &<i?  is  substituted  for  £ 
(Ges.  Thes.  735,  &).  2  Sam.  xix.  7  also  is  not  a  case  in  point,  for  there 
the  keri  is  ^  for  $b. 


454  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

great  dangers?  Only  on  one  occasion  (Ex.  xiv.  19,  20)  does 
it  .cover  the  Israelites  from  their  pursuers;  but  in  that  very 
instance  a  distinction  is  expressly  made  between  the  angel  of 
God  and  the  pillar  of  cloud.  Consequently  the  cloud  and 
the  angel  were  two  distinct  media  of  the  manifestation  of 
the  presence  of  God.  They  differed  in  two  respects.  The 
cloud  was  a  material  medium — the  veil,  the  sign,  and  the  site 
of  the  revealed  presence  of  God.  The  angel,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  a  personal  medium,  a  ministering  spirit  (\ei,Tov pyt/cov 
rjTV€viJLa\  in  which  the  name  of  Jehovah  was  indwelling  for  the 
purpose  of  His  own  self-attestation  in  connection  with  the  his 
torical  preparation  for  the  coming  of  salvation  (Ex.  xxiii.  21). 
He  was  the  mediator  of  the  preparatory  work  of  God  in  both 
word  and  deed  under  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  manifesta 
tion  of  that  redeeming  might  and  grace  which  realized  in. 
Israel  the  covenant  promises  given  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.). 
A  second  distinction  consisted  in  the  fact  that  the  cloud  was  a 
mode  of  divine  manifestation  which  was  always  visible;  wrhereas, 
although  the  angel  of  God  did  sometimes  appear  in  human 
shape  both  in  the  time  of  the  patriarchs  and  also  in  that  of 
Joshua  (Josh.  v.  13  sqq.),  it  never  appeared  in  such  a  form 
during  the  history  of  the  exodus,  and  therefore  is  only  to  be 
regarded  as  a  mode  of  divine  revelation  which  was  chiefly  dis 
cernible  in  its  effects,  and  belonged  to  the  sphere  of  invisi 
bility  :  so  that  in  any  case,  if  we  search  in  the  history  of  the 
people  that  was  brought  out  of  Egypt  for  the  fulfilment  of 
such  promises  as  Ex.  xxiii.  20-23,  we  are  forced  to  the  conclu 
sion  that  the  cloud  was  the  medium  of  the  settled  presence  of 
God  in  His  angel  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  although  it  is  never  so 
expressed  in  the  thorah.  This  mediatorial  angel  is  called  "  the 
angel  of  His  face,"  as  being  the  representative  of  God,  for 
"  the  face  of  God"  is  His  self-revealing  presence  (even  though 
only  revealed  to  the  mental  eye)  ;  and  consequently  the  pre 
sence  of  God,  which  led  Israel  to  Canaan,  is  called  directly 
"  His  face"  in  Deut.  iv.  37,  apart  from  the  angelic  mediation 
to  be  understood;  and  "my  face"  in  Ex.  xxxiii.  14,  15,  by  the 
side  of  "  my  angel "  in  Ex.  xxxii.  34,  and  the  angel  in  Ex. 
xxxiii.  2,  appears  as  something  incomparably  higher  than  the 
presence  of  God  through  the  mediation  of  that  one  angel,  whose 
personality  is  completely  hidden  by  his  mediatorial  instrumen- 


CHAP.  LXIII.  10.  455 

tality.  The  genitive  V33,  therefore,  is  not  to  be  taken  objec 
tively  in  the  sense  of  "  the  angel  who  sees  His  face,"  but  as 
explanatory,  "  the  angel  who  is  His  face,  or  in  whom  His  face 
is  manifested."  The  Nin  which  follows  does  not  point  back  to 
the  angel,  but  to  Jehovah,  who  reveals  Himself  thus.  But 
although  the  angel  is  regarded  as  a  distinct  being  from 
Jehovah,  it  is  also  regarded  as  one  that  is  completely  hidden 
before  Him,  whose  name  is  in  him.  He  redeemed  them  by 
virtue  of  His  love  and  of  His  chemldh,  i.e.  of  His  forgiving 
gentleness  (Arabic,  with  the  letters  transposed,  cliilm;  compare, 
however,  chamul,  gentle-hearted),  and  lifted  them  up,  and 
carried  them  (N&3  the  consequence  of  7tM,  which  is  similar  in 
sense,  and  more  Aramaean ;  cf.  tollere  root  tal,  and  ferre  root 
lhar,  perf.  tuli)  all  the  days  of  the  olden  time. 

The  prayer  passes  now  quite  into  the  tone  of  Ps.  Ixxviii. 
and  cvi.,  and  begins  to  describe  how,  in  spite  of  Jehovah's 
grace,  Israel  fell  again  and  again  away  from  Jehovah,  and  yet 
was  always  rescued  again  by  virtue  of  His  grace.  For  it  is 
impossible  that  it  should  leap  at  once  in  rrani  to  the  people  who 
caused  the  captivity,  and  "Aj5  have  for  its  subject  the  peniten 
tial  church  of  the  exiles  which  was  longing  for  redemption 
(Ewald).  The  train  of  thought  is  rather  this:  From  the  proofs 
of  grace  which  the  Israel  of  the  olden  time  had  experienced, 
the  prophet  passes  to  that  disobedience  to  Jehovah  into  which 
it  fell,  to  that  punishment  of  Jehovah  which  it  thereby  brought 
upon  itself,  and  to  that  longing  for  the  renewal  of  the  old 
Mosaic  period  of  redemption,  which  seized  it  in  the  midst  of  its 
state  of  punishment.  But  instead  of  saying  that  Jehovah  did 
not  leave  this  longing  unsatisfied,  and  responded  to  the  peni 
tence  of  Israel  with  ever  fresh  help,  the  prophet  passes  at  once 
from  the  desire  of  the  old  Israel  for  redemption,  to  the  prayer 
of  the  existing  Israel  for  redemption,  suppressing  the  inter 
mediate  thought,  that  Israel  was  even  now  in  such  a  state  of 
punishment  and  longing. 

Israel's  ingratitude.  Yer.  10.  "  But  they  resisted  and  vexed 
His  Holy  Spirit :  then  He  turned  to  be  their  enemy ;  He  made 
war  upon  them"  Not  only  has  toSfjn  (to  cause  cutting  pain) 
tenj5  nvrnK  as  its  object,  but  no  has  the  same  (on  the  primary 
meaning,  see  at  ch.  iii.  8).  In  other  cases,  the  object  of  rrfrdth 
(hamroth)  is  Jehovah,  or  His  word,  His  promise,  His  providence, 


456  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

hence  Jehovah  himself  in  the  revelations  of  His  nature  in  word 
and  deed  ;  here  it  is  the  spirit  of  holiness,  which  is  distinguished 
from  Him  as  a  personal  existence.  For  just  as  the  angel  who 
is  His  face,  i.e.  the  representation  of  His  nature,  is  designated 
as  a  person  both  by  His  name  and  also  by  the  redeeming 
activity  ascribed  to  Him ;  so  also  is  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by 
the  fact  that  He  can  be  grieved,  and  therefore  can  feel  grief 
(compare  Eph.  iv.  30,  "  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God"). 
Hence  Jehovah,  and  the  angel  of  His  face,  and  the  Spirit  of 
His  holiness,  are  distinguished  as  three  persons,  but  so  that  the 
two  latter  derive  their  existence  from  the  first,  which  is  the 
absolute  ground  of  the  Deity,  and  of  everything  that  is  divine. 
Now,  if  we  consider  that  the  angel  of  Jehovah  was  indeed  an 
angel,  but  that  he  was  the  angelic  anticipation  of  the  appear 
ance  of  God  the  Mediator  "  in  the  flesh,"  and  served  to  fore 
shadow  Him  "who,  as  the  image  of  the  invisible  God"  (Col.  i.  15), 
as  "  the  reflection  of  His  glory  and  the  stamp  of  His  nature  " 
(Heb.  i.  3),  is  not  merely  a  temporary  medium  of  self-manifesta 
tion,  but  the  perfect  personal  self-manifestation  of  the  divine 
panlm,  we  have  here  an  unmistakeable  indication  of  the  mystery 
of  the  triune  nature  of  God  the  One,  which  was  revealed  in 
history  in  the  New  Testament  work  of  redemption.  The  subject 
to  "sJBrn  is  Jehovah,  whose  Holy  Spirit  they  troubled.  He  who 
proved  Himself  to  be  their  Father  (cf.  Deut.  xxxii.  6),  became, 
through  the  reaction  of  His  holiness,  the  very  reverse  of  what 
He  wished  to  be.  He  turned  to  be  their  enemy;  fcfln,  He,  the  most 
fearful  of  all  foes,  made  war  against  them.  This  is  the  way  in 
which  we  explain  ver.  10&,  although  with  this  explanation  it 
would  have  to  be  accentuated  differently,  viz.  'jSiTI  mahpach, 
Dr6  pashta,  1^*6  zakeph,  Nin  tiplicliah,  DITDrta  silluk.  The 
accentuation  as  we  find  it  takes  DITDr6j  Kin  as  an  attributive 
clause :  "  to  an  enemy,  wrho  made  war  against  them." 

Israel  being  brought  to  a  right  mind  in  the  midst  of  this 
state  of  punishment,  longed  for  the  better  past  to  return. 
Vers.  11-14.  "  Tlien  His  people  remembered  the  days  of  the  olden 
time,  of  Moses :  Where  is  He  who  brought  them  up  out  of  the  sea 
with  the  shepherd  of  his  flock  f  where  is  He  who  put  the  spirit  of 
His  holiness  in  the  midst  of  them ;  who  caused  the  arm  of  His 
majesty  to  go  at  the  right  of  Moses ;  who  split  the  ivaters  before 
them,  to  make  Himself  an  everlasting  name ;  who  caused  them 


CHAP.  LXIII.  11-14.  457 

to  pass  through  abysses  of  the  deep,  like  the  horse  upon  the  plain, 
without  their  stumbling  ?  Like  the  cattle  which  goeth  down 
into  the  valley,  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  brought  them  to  rest :  thus 
hast  Thou  led  Thy  people,  to  make  Thyself  a  majestic  name." 
According  to  the  accentuation  before  us,  ver.  lla  should  be 
rendered  thus :  "  Then  He  (viz.  Jehovah)  remembered  the 
days  of  the  olden  time,  the  Moses  of  His  people"  (LXX., 
Targ.,  Syr.,  Jerome).  But  apart  from  the  strange  expression 
66  the  Moses  of  His  people,"  which  might  perhaps  be  regarded 
as  possible,  because  the  proper  name  mosheh  might  suggest  the 
thought  of  its  real  meaning  in  Hebrew,  viz.  extrahens= liberator, 
but  which  the  Syriac  rejects  by  introducing  the  reading  rabhdo 
(Moses,  His  servant),  we  have  only  to  look  at  the  questions  of 
evidently  human  longing  which  follow,  to  see  that  Jehovah 
cannot  be  the  subject  to  "13TJ1  (remembered),  by  which  these 
reminiscences  are  introduced.  It  is  the  people  which  begins  its 
inquiries  with  njjtfj  just  as  in  Jer.  ii.  6  (cf.  ch.  li.  9,  10),  and 
recals  "  the  days  of  olden  time,"  according  to  the  admonition  in 
Deut.  xxxii.  7.  Consequently,  in  spite  of  the  accents,  such 
Jewish  commentators  as  Saad.  and  Rashi  regard  "his  people" 
(rammo)  as  the  subject ;  whereas  others,  such  as  AE,  Kimchi, 
and  Abravanel,  take  account  of  the  accents,  and  make  the 
people  the  suppressed  subject  of  the  verb  "  remembered,"  by 
rendering  it  thus,  "  Then  it  remembered  the  days  of  olden  time, 
(the  days)  of  Moses  (and)  His  people,"  or  in  some  similar  way. 
But  with  all  modifications  the  rendering  is  forced  and  lame. 
The  best  way  of  keeping  to  the  accents  is  that  suggested  by 
Stier,  "  Then  men  (indef .  man,  the  French  on)  remembered  the 
days  of  old,  the  Moses  of  His  people."  But  why  did  the 
prophet  not  say  V12T*1?  as  the  proper  sequel  to  ver.  10  1  We 
prefer  to  adopt  the  following  rendering  and  accentuation  :  Then 
remembered  (zdkeph  gadol)  the  days-of-old  (mercha)  of  Moses 
(tiphchah)  His  people.  The  object  stands  before  the  subject, 
as  for  example  in  2  Kings  v.  13  (compare  the  inversions  in 
ch.  viii.  22  extr.,  xxii.  2  init.);  and  mosheh  is  a  genitive  govern 
ing  the  composite  "  days  of  old"  (for  this  form  of  the  construct 
state,  compare  ch.  xxviii.  1  and  Ruth  ii.  1).  The  retrospect 
commences  with  "  Where  is  He  who  led  them  up  I"  etc.  The 
suffix  of  D.!$Bn  (for  D^VDH,  like  zrn  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  2S,  and  there 
fore  with  the  verbal  force  predominant)  refers  to  the  ancestors ; 


458  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

and  although  the  word  is  determined  by  the  suffix,  it  has  the 
article  as  equivalent  to  a  demonstrative  pronoun  (ille  qui  sur- 
sum  duxitj  eduxit  eos).  "  The  shepherd  of  his  flock  "  is  added 
as  a  more  precise  definition,  not  dependent  upon  vayyizkor,  as 
even  the  accents  prove.  DN  is  rendered  emphatic  by  yethib, 
since  here  it  signifies  und  cum.  The  Targum  takes  it  in  the 
sense  of  instar  pasloris  gregis  sui ;  but  though  DV  is  sometimes 
used  in  this  way,  HN  never  is.  Both  the  LXX.  and  Targum 
read  njn ;  Jerome,  on  the  other  hand,  adopts  the  reading 
"•ip,  and  this  is  the  Masoretic  reading,  for  the  Masora  in  Gen. 
xlvii.  3  reckons  four  njJ*i,  without  including  the  present  passage. 
Kimchi  and  Abravanel  also  support  this  reading,  and  Norzi 
very  properly  gives  it  the  preference.  The  shepherds  of  the 
flock  of  Jehovah  are  Moses  and  Aaron,  together  with  Miriam 
(Ps.  Ixxvii.  21 ;  Mic.  vi.  4).  With  these  (i.e.  in  their  company 
or  under  their  guidance)  Jehovah  led  His  people  up  out  of 
Egypt  through  the  Red  Sea.  With  the  reading  \jn,  the  question 
whether  begirbo  refers  to  Moses  or  Israel  falls  to  the  ground.  Into 
the  heart  of  His  people  (Neh.  ix.  20)  Jehovah  put  the  spirit 
of  His  holiness :  it  was  present  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  inasmuch 
as  Moses,  Aaron,  Miriam,  the  Seventy,  and  the  prophets  in  the 
camp  possessed  it,  and  inasmuch  as  Joshua  inherited  it  as  the 
successor  of  Moses,  and  all  the  people  might  become  possessed 
of  it.  The  majestic  might  of  Jehovah,  which  manifested  itself 
majestically,  is  called  the  "  arm  of  His  majesty  ;"  an  anthropo 
morphism  to  which  the  expression  "  who  caused  it  to  march  at 
the  right  hand  of  Moses"  compels  us  to  give  an  interpretation 
worthy  of  God.  Stier  will  not  allow  that  to"]Nan  5pT  is  to  be 
taken  as  the  object,  and  exclaims,  "  What  a  marvellous  figure 
of  speech,  an  arm  walking  at  a  person's  right  hand  !"  But  the 
arm  which  is  visible  in  its  deeds  belongs  to  the  God  who  is 
invisible  in  His  own  nature;  and  the  meaning  is,  that  the  active 
power  of  Moses  was  not  left  to  itself,  but  the  overwhelming 
omnipotence  of  God  went  by  its  side,  and  endowed  it  with 
superhuman  strength.  It  was  by  virtue  of  this  that  the 
elevated  staff  and  extended  hand  of  Moses  divided  the  Red 
Sea  (Ex.  xiv.  1G).  5>i?to  has  mahpach  attached  to  the  3,  and 
therefore  the  tone  drawn  back  upon  the  penultimate,  and 
metheg  with  the  tsere,  that  it  may  not  be  slipped  over  in  the 
pronunciation.  The  clause  'W  rttyh  affirms  that  the  absolute 


CHAP.  LXIII.  15.  459 

purpose  of  God  is  in  Himself.  But  He  is  holy  love,  and  whilst 
willing  for  Himself,  He  wills  at  the  same  time  the  salvation  of 
His  creatures.  He  makes  to  Himself  an  "  everlasting  name," 
bv  glorifying  Himself  in  such  memorable  miracles  of  redemp 
tion,  as  that  performed  in  the  deliverance  of  His  people  out  of 
Egypt.  According  to  the  general  order  of  the  passage,  ver.  13 
apparently  refers  to  the  passage  through  the  Jordan  ;  but  the 
psalmist,  in  Ps.  cvi.  9  (cf.  Ixxvii.  17),  understood  it  as  referring 
to  the  passage  through  the  Red  Sea.  The  prayer  dwells  upon 
this  chief  miracle,  of  which  the  other  was  only  an  after-play. 
"  As  the  horse  gallops  over  the  plain,"  so  did  they  pass  through 
the  depths  of  the  sea  w3*  K?  (a  circumstantial  minor  clause), 
i.e.  without  stumbling.  Then  follows  another  beautiful  figure  : 
"  like  the  beast  that  goeth  down  into  the  valley,"  not  "  as  the 
beast  goeth  down  into  the  valley,"  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah 
brought  it  (Israel)  to  rest,  viz.  to  the  nfnuchdh  of  the  Canaan 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey  (Deut.  xii.  9 ;  Ps.  xcv.  11),  where 
it  rested  and  was  refreshed  after  the  long  and  wearisome  march 
through  the  sandy  desert,  like  a  flock  that  had  descended  from 
the  bare  mountains  to  the  brooks  and  meadows  of  the  valley. 
The  Spirit  of  God  is  represented  as  the  leader  here  (as  in  Ps. 
cxliii.  10),  viz.  through  the  medium  of  those  who  stood,  en 
lightened  and  instigated  by  Him,  at  the  head  of  the  wandering 
people.  The  following  |3  is  no  more  a  correlate  of  the  fore 
going  particle  of  comparison  than  in  ch.  lii.  14.  It  is  a  recapi 
tulation,  and  refers  to  the  whole  description  as  far  back  as 
ver.  9,  passing  with  fijnj  into  the  direct  tone  of  prayer. 

The  way  is  prepared  for  the  petitions  for  redemption  which 
follow,  outwardly  by  the  change  in  ver.  146,  from  a  mere 
description  to  a  direct  address,  and  inwardly  by  the  thought, 
that  Israel  is  at  the  present  time  in  such  a  condition,  as  to  cause 
it  to  look  back  with  longing  eyes  to  the  time  of  the  Mosaic 
redemption.  Ver.  15.  "  Look  from  heaven  and  see,  from  the 
habitation  of  Thy  holiness  and  majesty  !  Where  is  Thy  zeal  and 
Thy  display  of  might  ?  The  pressure  of  Thy  bowels  and  Thy 
compassions  are  restrained  towards  me"  On  the  relation  between 
t^an,  to  look  up,  to  open  the  eyes,  and  HJO,  to  fix  the  eye  upon 
a  thing,  see  p.  185.  It  is  very  rarely  that  we  meet  with  the 
words  in  the  reverse  order,  DUm  n&o  (vid.  Hab.  i.  5  ;  Lam.  i. 
11).  In  the  second  clause  of  ver.  15a3  instead  of  m  'ts 


4GO  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

(from  heaven),  we  have  "  from  the  dwelling-place  (mizz*Wiul) 
of  Thy  holiness  and  majesty."  The  all-holy  and  all-glorious 
One,  who  once  revealed  Himself  so  gloriously  in  the  history  of 
Israel,  has  now  withdrawn  into  His  own  heaven,  where  He  is 
only  revealed  to  the  spirits.  The  object  of  the  looking  and 
seeing,  as  apparent  from  what  follows,  is  the  present  helpless 
condition  of  the  people  in  their  sufferings,  to  which  there  does 
not  seem  likely  to  be  any  end.  There  are  no  traces  now  of  the 
kin  ah  (zeal)  with  which  Jehovah  used  to  strive  on  behalf  of 
His  people,  and  against  their  oppressors  (ch.  xxvi.  11),  or  of  the 
former  displays  of  His  gel>hurdh  ^JflfaMft,  as  it  is  correctly  written 
in  Yen.  1521,  is  a  defective  plural).  In  ver.  15&  we  have  not 
a  continued  question  ("  the  sounding  of  Thy  bowels  and  Thy 
mercies,  which  are  restrained  towards  me?"),  as  Hitzig  and 
Knobel  suppose.  The  words  'elai  hitliappdgu  have  not  the 
appearance  of  an  attributive  clause,  either  according  to  the  new 
strong  thought  expressed,  or  according  to  the  order  of  the  words 
(with  vtf  written  first).  On  strepitus  viscerum,  as  the  effect 
and  sign  of  deep  sympathy,  see  at  ch.  xvi.  11.  E^nn  and 
DTO,  or  rather  D^O  (from  nyp?  of  the  form  njn),  both  signify 
primarily  o-TrXcry^m,  strictly  speaking  the  soft  inward  parts 
of  the  body ;  the  latter  from  the  root  VE,  to  be  pulpy  or  soft, 
the  former  from  the  root  m,  to  be  slack,  loose,  or  soft.  Jton,  as 
the  plural  of  the  predicate  shows,  does  not  govern  T£D!  also. 
It  is  presupposed  that  the  love  of  Jehovah  urges  Him  towards 
His  people,  to  relieve  their  misery ;  but  His  compassion  and 
sympathy  apparently  put  constraint  upon  themselves  (hittiappeq 
as  in  ch.  xlii.  14,  lit.  se  superare,  from  'dphaq,  root  pQ),  to  abstain 
from  working  on  behalf  of  Israel. 

The  prayer  for  help,  and  the  lamentation  over  its  absence, 
are  now  justified  in  ver.  16:  "  For  Thou  art  our  Father ;  for 
Abraham  is  ignorant  of  us,  and  Israel  knoweth  us  not.  Thou, 
0  Jehovah,  art  our  Father  ;  our  Redeemer  is  from  olden  time 
Thy  name."  Jehovah  is  Israel's  Father  (Deut.  xxxii.  6).  His 
creative  might,  and  the  gracious  counsels  of  His  love,  have 
called  it  into  being :  tt'OK  has  not  yet  the  deep  and  unrestricted 
sense  of  the  New  Testament  "  Our  Father."  The  second  kl 
introduces  the  reason  for  this  confession  that  Jehovah  was 
Israel's  Father,  and  could  therefore  look  for  paternal  care  and 
help  from  Him  alone.  Even  the  dearest  and  most  honourable 


CHAP.  LXIII.  17-19.  4G1 

men,  the  forefathers  of  the  nation,  could  not  help  it.  Abraham 
and  Jacob-Israel  had  been  taken  away  from  this  world,  and 
were  unable  to  interfere  on  their  own  account  in  the  history 
of  their  people.  JHJ  and  "V3H  suggest  the  idea  of  participating 
notice  and  regard,  as  in  Deut.  xxxiii.  9  and  Ruth  ii.  10,  19. 
^"J11?!  has  the  vowel  a  (pausal  for  a,  ch.  Ivi.  3)  in  the  place  of  S, 
to  rhyme  with  ttiJJT  (see  Ges.  §  60,  Anm.  2).  In  the  conclud 
ing  clause,  according  to  the  accents,  Bjiyp  ^.?N3  are  connected 
together ;  but  the  more  correct  accentuation  is  ww  tiphchah, 
D^yo  mercha,  and  we  have  rendered  it  so.  From  the  very 
earliest  time  the  acts  of  Jehovah  towards  Israel  had  been  such 
that  Israel  could  call  Him  l^M. 

But  in  the  existing  state  of  things  there  was  a  contrast 
which  put  their  faith  to  a  severe  test.  Ver.  17.  u  0  Jehovah, 
why  leadest  Thou  us  astray  from  Thy  ways,  hardenest  our  heart, 
so  as  not  to  fear  Thee  ?  Return  for  Thy  servants'  sake,  the  tribes 
of  Thine  inheritance"  When  men  have  scornfully  and  obsti 
nately  rejected  the  grace  of  God,  God  withdraws  it  from  them 
judicially,  gives  them  up  to  their  wanderings,  and  makes  their 
heart  incapable  of  faith  (hiqshiach,  which  only  occurs  again  in 
Job  xxxix.  16,  is  here  equivalent  to  hiqshdh  in  Ps.  xcv.  8, 
Deut.  ii.  30).  The  history  of  Israel  from  ch.  vi.  onwards  has 
been  the  history  of  such  a  gradual  judgment  of  hardening,  and 
such  a  curse,  eating  deeper  and  deeper,  and  spreading  its  in 
fluence  wider  and  wider  round.  The  great  mass  are  lost,  but 
not  without  the  possibility  of  deliverance  for  the  better  part  of 
the  nation,  which  now  appeals  to  the  mercy  of  God,  and  sighs 
for  deliverance  from  this  ban.  Two  reasons  are  assigned  for 
this  petition  for  the  return  of  the  gracious  presence  of  God  : 
first,  that  there  are  still  "  servants  of  Jehovah"  to  be  found, 
as  this  prayer  itself  actually  proves ;  and  secondly,  that  the 
divine  election  of  grace  cannot  perish. 

But  the  existing  condition  of  Israel  looks  like  a  withdrawal 
of  this  grace ;  and  it  is  impossible  that  these  contrasts  should 
cease,  unless  Jehovah  comes  down  from  heaven  as  the  deliverer 
of  His  people.  Vers.  18,  19  (Ixiv.  1).  "For  a  little  time  Thy 
holy  people  was  in  possession.  Our  adversaries  have  trodden 
down  Thy  sanctuary.  We  have  become  such  as  He  who  is  from 
everlasting  has  not  ruled  over,  upon  whom  Thy  name  was  not 
called.  0  that  Thou  wouldst  rend  the  heaven,  come  down,  the 


462  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

mountains  would  shake  before  thy  countenance"  It  is  very  natural 
to  try  whether  ydreshu  may  not  have  tsdrenu  for  its  subject  (cf. 
Jer.  xlix.  2)  ;  but  all  the  attempts  made  to  explain  the  words 
on  this  supposition,  show  that  lammitsdr  is  at  variance  with  the 
idea  that  ydreshu  refers  to  the  foes.  Compare,  for  example, 
Jerome's  rendering  "  quasi  nihilum  (i.e.  ad  nihil  et  absque  allo 
labore)  possederunt  populiim  sanctum  tuum  ;  "  that  of  Cocceius, 
"propemodum  adluzreditatem;"  and  that  of  Stier,  "  for  a  little 
they  possess  entirely  Thy  holy  nation."  Hits' dr  is  the  harsher 
form  for  mizdr,  which  the  prophet  uses  in  ch.  x.  25?  xvi.  14, 
xxix.  17  for  a  contemptibly  small  space  of  time;  and  as  ^  is  com 
monly  used  to  denote  the  time  to  which,  towards  which,  within 
which,  and  through  which,  anything  occurs  (cf.  2  Chron.  xi. 
17,  xxix.  17  ;  Ewald,  §  217,  d),  lammitsdr  may  signify  for  a 
(lit.  the  well-known)  short  time  (per  breve  tempus ;  like  efc,  eV, 
/car  eviavrov,  a  year  long).  If  miqddsh  could  mean  the  holy 
land,  as  Hitzig  and  others  suppose,  miqddshekhd  might  be  the 
common  object  of  both  sentences  (Ewald,  §  351,  p.  838).  But 
miqdash  Jehovah  (the  sanctuary  of  Jehovah)  is  the  place  of 
His  abode  and  worship  ;  and  "  taking  possession  of  the  temple  " 
is  hardly  an  admissible  expression.  On  the  other  hand,  ydrash 
Jmdrets,  to  take  possession  of  the  (holy)  land,  is  so  common  a 
phrase  (e.g.  ch.  Ix.  21,  Ixv.  9 ;  Ps.  xliv.  4),  that  with  the  words 
"Thy  holy  people  possessed  fora  little  (time)"  we  naturally 
supply  the  holy  land  as  the  object.  The  order  of  the  words  in 
the  two  clauses  is  chiastic.  The  two  strikingly  different  sub 
jects  touch  one  another  as  the  two  inner  members.  Of  the 
perfects,  the  first  expresses  the  more  remote  past,  the  second 
the  nearer  past,  as  in  ch.  Ix.  10&.  The  two  clauses  of  the  versa 
rhyme, — the  holiest  thing  in  the  possession  of  the  people,  which 
was  holy  according  to  the  choice  and  calling  of  Jehovah,  being 
brought  into  the  greatest  prominence  ;  boses  —  irarelv,  Luke 
xxi.  24,  Rev.  xi.  2.  Hahn's  objection,  that  the  time  between 
the  conquest  of  the  land  and  the  Chaldean  catastrophe  could 
not  be  called  mitsdr  (a  little  while),  may  be  answered,  from  the 
fact  that  a  time  which  is  long  in  itself  shrinks  up  when  looked 
back  upon  or  recalled,  and  that  as  an  actual  fact  from  the  time 
of  David  and  Solomon,  when  Israel  really  rejoiced  in  the  pos 
session  of  the  land,  the  coming  catastrophe  began  to  be  fore 
boded  by  many  significant  preludes.  The  lamentation  in  ver. 


CHAP.  LXI1I.  18,  19.  463 

19  proceeds  from  the  same  feeling  which  caused  the  better 
portion  of  the  past  to  vanish  before  the  long  continuance  of 
the  mournful  present  (compare  the  reverse  at  p.  346).  Hitzig 
renders  W*n  "  we  were  ;  "  Hahn,  "  we  shall  be  ; "  but  here, 
where  the  speaker  is  not  looking  back,  as  in  ch.  xxvi.  17,  at  a 
state  of  things  which  has  come  to  an  end,  but  rather  at  one 
which  is  still  going  on,  it  signifies  "we  have  become."  The 
passage  is  rendered  correctly  in  S.  :  eyevrjOrjfjLev  (or  better,  yejo- 
vafjiev)  cb?  air  alwvos  &v  OVK  e'f  oucr/acra?  ouSe  brttc\ij0i]  TO  OVO/AO, 
crov  avTois.  The  virtual  predicate  to  lidylnu  commences  with 
me'oldm:  "we  have  become  such  (or  like  such  persons)  as," 
etc. ;  which  would  be  fully  expressed  by  "it?K  By3?  or  merely 
"i£'N3,  or  without  "^K,  and  simply  by  transposing  the  words, 
'Ul  ri$TO  Kb  (cf.  Obad.  16) :  compare  the  virtual  subject 
bmTrW  in  ch.  xlviii.  14,  and  the  virtual  object  'BP3  *Oj3»  in 
ch.  xli.  25  (Ewald,  §  333,  b)..  Every  form  of  "  as  if'"  is  inten 
tionally  omitted.  The  relation  in  which  Jehovah  placed  Him 
self  to  Israel,  viz.  as  its  King,  and  as  to  His  own  people  called 
by  His  name,  appears  not  only  as  though  it  had  been  dissolved, 
but  as  though  it  had  never  existed  at  all.  The  existing  state 
of  Israel  is  a  complete  practical  denial  of  any  such  relation. 
Deeper  tones  than  these  no  lamentation  could  possibly  utter, 
and  hence  the  immediate  utterance  of  the  sigh  which  goes  up 
to  heaven  :  "  O  that  Thou  wouldst  rend  heaven ! "  It  is  ex 
tremely  awkward  to  begin  a  fresh  chapter  with  H^i?-?  ("  as  when 
the  melting  fire  burneth  ")  ;  at  the  same  time,  the  Masoretic 
division  of  the  verses  is  unassailable.1  For  ver.  19£  (ch.  Ixiv.  1) 
could  not  be  attached  to  ch.  Ixiv.  1,  2,  since  this  verse  would 
be  immensely  overladen ;  moreover,  this  sigh  really  belongs  to 
ver.  19a  (ch.  Ixiii.  19),  and  ascends  out  of  the  depth  of  the 
lamentation  uttered  there.  On  utinam  discideris  ==  discinderes, 
see  at  ch.  xlviii.  18.  The  wish  presupposes  that  the  gracious 
presence  of  God  had  been  withdrawn  from  Israel,  and  that 
Israel  felt  itself  to  be  separated  from  the  world  beyond  by  a 
thick  party-wall,  resembling  an  impenetrable  black  cloud.  The 
closing  member  of  the  optative  clause  is  generally  rendered 
(utinam)  a  facie  tua  monies  diffluerent  (e.g.  Rosenm  tiller  after 

1  In  the  Hebrew  Bibles,  chap.  Ixiv.  commences  at  the  second  verse  of 
our  version  ;  and  the  first  verse  is  attached  to  ver.  19  of  the  previous 
chapter. — TR. 


4G4  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  LXX.  TaKY)crovTai),  or  more  correctly,  defluerent  (Jerome), 
as  ndzal  means  to  flow  down,  not  to  melt.  The  meaning  there 
fore  would  be,  "  O  that  they  might  flow  down,  as  it  were  to 
the  ground  melting  in  the  fire  "  (Hitzig).  The  form  ndzollu 
cannot  be  directly  derived  from  ndzal,  if  taken  in  this  sense  ; 
for  it  is  a  pure  fancy  that  ndzollu  may  be  a  modification  of  the 
pausal  vJJ  with  o  for  a,  and  the  so-called  dagesli  affectuosum). 
Stier  invents  a  verb  med.  o.  ?fJ.  The  more  probable  supposi 
tion  is,  that  it  is  a  niphal  formed  from  zdlal  =  ndzal  (Ewald, 
§  193,  c).  But  zdlal  signifies  to  hang  down  slack,  to  sway  to 
and  fro  (hence  zolel,  lightly  esteemed,  and  zalzalllm,  ch.  xviii.  5, 
pliable  branches),  like  zul  in  ch.  xlvi.  6,  to  shake,  to  pour  down  ;  l 
and  ndzollu,  if  derived  from  this,  yields  the  appropriate  sense 
concuterentur  (compare  the  Arabic  zalzala,  which  is  commonly 
applied  to  an  earthquake).  The  nearest  niphal  form  would  be 
^W  (or  resolved,  TO£,  Judg.  v.  5)  ;  but  instead  of  the  a  of  the 
second  syllable,  the  niphal  of  the  verbs  y"y  has  sometimes  o, 
like  the  verb  l"y  (e.g.  to,  ch.  xxxiv.  4  ;  Ges.  §  67,  Anm.  5). 

The  similes  which  follow  cannot  be  attached  to  this  ndzollu, 
however  we  may  explain  it.  Yet  ch.  Ixiv.  1  (2)  does  not  form 
a  new  and  independent  sentence  ;  but  we  must  in  thought 
repeat  the  word  upon  which  the  principal  emphasis  rests  in  ch. 
Ixiii.  196  (ch.  Ixiv.  1).  Ch.  Ixiv.  1,  2  (2,  3).  "  (  Wouldst  come 
down)  as  fire  kindles  brushwood,  fire  causes  water  to  boil;  to  make 
known  Tliy  name  to  Tldne  adversaries,  that  the  heathen  may  tremble 
before  Tliy  face!  When  Thou  doest  terrible  things  which  we  hoped 
not  for  ;  wouldst  come  down,  (and)  mountains  shake  before  Thy 
countenance!"  The  older  expositors  gave  themselves  a  great 
deal  of  trouble  in  the  attempt  to  trace  hdmdslm  to  mdsas,  to 
melt.  But  since  Louis  de  Dieu  and  Albert  Schultens  have 

followed  Saadia  and  Abulwalid  in  citing  the  Arabic  ^*JX>,  to 
crack,  to  mutter,  to  mumble,  etc.,  and  JL&,  to  break  in  pieces, 

confringere,  from  which  comes  hashim,  broken,  dry  wood,  it  is 
generally  admitted  that  hdmdsim  is  from  hemes  (lit.  crackling, 
rattling,  Arab,  hams),  and  signifies  "  dry  twigs,"  arida  sarmenta, 
The  second  simile  might  be  rendered,  "as  water  bubbles  up 


1  Just  as  the  Greek  has  in  addition  to  ox^-evsiv  the  much  simpler  and 
more  root-like  aii-ttv  ;  so  the  Semitic  has,  besides  i>t>  the  roots  XT,  J?T  :  com 
pare  the  Arabic  ^f,  j?tKT?  ytyf,  all  three  denoting  restless  motion. 


OHAP.  LXIV.  1,  2.  465 

in  the  fire;"  and  in  that  case  mayim  would  be  treated  as  a 
feminine  (according  to  the  rule  in  Ges.  §  146,  3),  in  support 
of  which  Job  xiv.  19  may  be  adduced  as  an  unquestionable 
example  (although  in  other  cases  it  is  masculine),  and  Bfc  =  PK3 
would  be  used  in  a  local  sense,  like  lehdbJidh,  into  flames,  in  ch. 
v.  24.  But  it  is  much  more  natural  to  take  t?X,  which  is  just  as 
often  a  feminine  as  DSD  is  a  masculine,  as  the  subject  of  njDJji,  and 
to  give  to  the  verb  TO,  which  is  originally  intransitive,  judging 

from  the  Arabic  ^u,  to  swell,  the  Chald.  Jfl3,  to  spring  up 


(compare  ntya^DN,  blisters,  pustules),  the  Syr.  M3,  to  bubble  up, 
etc.,  the  transitive  meaning  to  cause  to  boil  or  bubble  up,  rather 
than  the  intransitive  to  boil  (comp.  ch.  xxx.  13,  ""W^J,  swollen  = 
bent  forwards,  as  it  were  protumidus).  Jehovah  is  to  come  down 
with  the  same  irresistible  force  which  fire  exerts  upon  brushwood 
or  water,  when  it  sets  the  former  in  flames  and  makes  the  latter 
boil  ;  in  order  that  by  such  a  display  of  might  He  may  make 
His  name  known  (viz.  the  name  thus  judicially  revealing 
itself,  hence  "  in  fire,"  ch.  xxx.  27,  Ixvi.  15)  to  His  adver 
saries,  and  that  nations  (viz.  those  that  are  idolaters)  may 
tremble  before  Him  (TJSO  :  cf.  Ps.  Ixviii.  2,  3).  The  infinitive 
clause  denoting  the  purpose,  like  that  indicating  the  com 
parison,  passes  into  the  finite  (cf.  ch.  x.  2,  xiii.  9,  xiv.  25). 
Modern  commentators  for  the  most  part  now  regard  the 
optative  lu  (O  that)  as  extending  to  ver.  2  also  ;  and,  in  fact, 
although  this  continued  influence  of  lu  appears  to  overstep  the 
bounds  of  the  possible,  we  are  forced  to  resort  to  this  ex 
tremity.  Ver.  2  cannot  contain  a  historical  retrospect  :  the 
word  "  formerly"  would  be  introduced  if  it  did,  and  the  order  of 

the  words  would  be  a  different  one.     Airain,  we  cannot  assume 
» 

that  TOM  Dnn  *pjsp  rn*V  contains  an  expression  of  confidence, 
or  that  the  perfects  indicate  certainty.  Neither  the  context, 
the  foregoing  ni&Ofa  1HW3  (why  not  nbfy?),  nor  the  paren 
thetical  assertion  nipo  l6,  permits  of  this.  On  the  other  hand, 
'\S\  "JDlbjn  connects  itself  very  appropriately  with  the  purposes 
indicated  in  ver.  1  (2):  "may  tremble  when  Thou  doest  terrible 
things,  which  we,  i.e.  such  as  we,  do  not  look  for,"  i.e.  which 
surpass  our  expectations.  And  now  nothing  remains  but  to 
recognise  the  resumption  of  ch.  Ixiii.  19  (Ixiv.  1)  in  the  clause 
"  The  mountains  shake  at  Thy  presence,"  in  which  case  ch. 

VOL.  II.  2  G 


46G  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Ixiii.  19Z»-lxiv.  2  (Ixiv.  1-3)  forms  a  grand  period  rounded  off 
palindromically  after  Isaiah's  peculiar  style. 

The  following  clause  gives  the  reason  for  this ;  1  being  very 
frequently  the  logical  equivalent  for  kl  (e.g.  ch.  iii.  7  and 
xxxviii.  15).  The  justification  of  this  wish,  which  is  forced 
from  them  by  the  existing  misery,  is  found  in  the  incomparable 
acts  of  Jehovah  for  the  good  of  His  own  people,  which  are  to 
be  seen  in  a  long  series  of  historical  events.  Ver.  3  (4).  u  For 
from  olden  time  men  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived,  nor  hath  an 
eye  seen,  a  God  beside  Thee,  who  acted  on  behalf  of  him  that 
waiteth  for  Him"  No  ear,  no  eye  has  ever  been  able  to  perceive 
the  existence  of  a  God  \vho  acted  like  Jehovah,  i.e.  really 
interposed  on  behalf  of  those  who  set  their  hopes  upon  Him. 
This  is  the  explanation  adopted  by  Knobel ;  but  he  wrongly 
supplies  rn&OIJ  to  nt?JP,  whereas  ntvy  is  used  here  in  the  same 
pregnant  sense  as  in  Ps.  xxii.  32,  xxxvii.  5,  Iii.  11  (cf.  gdmar 
in  Ps.  Ivii.  3,  cxxxviii.  8).  It  has  been  objected  to  this  explana 
tion,  that  r?!*j?.  is  never  connected  with  the  accusative  of  the 
person,  and  that  God  can  neither  be  heard  nor  seen.  But  what 
is  terrible  in  relation  to  JJ£B>  in  Job  xlii.  5  cannot  be  untenable 
in  relation  to  psn.  Hearing  and  seeing  God  are  here  equiva 
lent  to  recognising  His  existence  through  the  perception  of  His 
works.  The  explanation  favoured  by  Rosenmuller  and  Stier, 
viz.,  "  And  from  olden  time  men  have  not  heard  it,  nor  per 
ceived  with  ears,  no  eye  has  seen  it,  O  God,  beside  Thee,  what 
(this  God)  doth  to  him  that  waiteth  for  Him,"  is  open  to  still 
graver  objections.  The  thought  is  the  same  as  in  Ps.  xxxi.  20, 
and  when  so  explained  it  corresponds  more  exactly  to  the  free 
quotation  in  1  Cor.  ii.  9,  which  with  our  explanation  there  is 
no  necessity  to  trace  back  to  either  ch.  Iii.  15,  16,  or  a  lost 
book,  as  Origen  imagined  (see  Tischendorfs  ed.  vii.  of  the 
N.  T.  on  this  passage).  This  which  no  ear  has  heard,  no  eye 
seen,  is  not  God  Himself,  but  He  who  acts  for  His  people,  and 
justifies  their  waiting  for  Him  (cf.  Hofmann,  Die  h.  Schrifi 
Neum  Testaments,  ii.  2,  51).  Another  proof  that  Paul  had  no 
other  passage  than  this  in  his  mind,  is  the  fact  that  the  same 
quotation  is  met  with  in  Clement's  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians 
(ch.  xxxiv.),  where,  instead  of  "  those  that  love  Him,"  we  have 
"  those  that  wait  for  Him,"  a  literal  rendering  of  fr7«nt&,  The 
quotation  by  Paul  therefore  by  no  means  leads  us  to  take 


CHAP.  LXIV.  4.  467 

Elohim  as  a  vocative  or  IJI  njvy  as  the  object,  although  it  must 
not  be  concealed  that  this  view  of  the  passage  and  its  reference 
to  the  fulness  of  glory  in  the  eternal  life  is  an  old  rabbinical 
one,  as  Rashi  expressly  affirms,  when  he  appeals  to  R.  Jose 
(Joseph  Kara)  as  bondsman  for  the  other  (see  b.  Sanhedrin 
99a).  Hahn  has  justly  objected  to  this  traditional  explanation, 
which  regards  Elohim  as  a  vocative,  that  the  thought,  that 
God  alone  has  heard  and  perceived  and  seen  with  His  eye 
what  He  intends  to  do  to  His  people,  is  unsuitable  in  itself, 
and  at  variance  with  the  context,  and  that  if  'ui  nb>jp  was 
intended  as  the  object,  -IE>K  (DK)  would  certainly  be  inserted. 
And  to  this  we  may  add,  that  we  cannot  find  the  words  Elohim 
zuldthekltd  (God  beside  Thee)  preceded  by  a  negation  anywhere 
in  ch.  xl.— Ixvi.  without  receiving  at  once  the  impression,  that 
they  affirm  the  sole  deity  of  Jehovah  (comp.  ch.  xlv.  5,  21). 
The  meaning  therefore  is,  "  No  other  God  beside  Jehovah  has 
ever  been  heard  or  seen,  who  acted  for  (ageret  pro)  those  who 
waited  for  Him."  Mechakkeh  is  the  construct,  according  to  Ges. 
§  116,  1  ;  and  ydaseh  has  tsere  here,  according  to  Kiinchi 
(Micldol  1256)  and  other  testimonies,  just  as  we  meet  with 
fife^n  four  times  (in  Gen.  xxvi.  29;  Josh.  vii.  9;  2  Sam.  xiii.  12; 
Jer.  xl.  16)  and  HBW  once  (Josh.  ix.  24),  mostly  with  a  dis 
junctive  accent,  and  not  without  the  influence  of  a  whole  or 
half  pause,  the  form  with  tsere  being  regarded  as  more  emphatic 
than  that  with  seghol.1 

After  the  long  period  governed  by  &b  has  thus  been  fol 
lowed  by  the  retrospect  in  ver.  3  (4),  it  is  absolutely  impossible 
that  ver.  4a  (5a)  should  be  intended  as  an  optative,  in  the 
sense  of  "  O  that  thou  wouldst  receive  him  that/'  etc.,  as  Stier 
and  others  propose.  The  retrospect  is  still  continued  thus,  ver. 
4a  (5a)  :  "  Thou  didst  meet  him  that  rejoiceth  to  work  righteous 
ness,  when  they  remembered  Thee  in  Thy  ways."  P7>*  nb'yi  vw  is 
one  in  whom  joy  and  right  action  are  paired,  and  is  therefore 

1  In  addition  to  the  examples  given  above,  we  have  the  following  forms 
of  the  same  kind  in  kal:  n^ts1  (with  tiphchah)  in  Jer.  xvii.  17  ;  ilfcpfl  (with 
tsakeph)  in  Dan.  i.  13,  compare  n^n  (with  atlinach}  in  Lev.  xviii.  7,  b, 
and  n^jn  (with  the  smaller  disjunctive  tiphchah)  in  vers.  9-11 ;  nip:*1  (with 
athnacK)  in  Nah.  i.  3 ;  rnTK  (with  tsakeph)  in  Ezek.  v.  12.  This  influence 
of  the  accentuation  has  escaped  the  notice  of  the  more  modern  grammarians 
(e.g.  Ges.  §  75,  Anm.  17). 


468  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


equivalent  to  rrt5?g?  S?5?.  At  the  same  time,  it  may  possibly  be 
more  correct  to  take  P^  as  the  object  of  both  verses,  as  Hof- 
mann  does  in  the  sense  of  "those  who  let  what  is  right  be 
their  joy,  and  their  action  also;"  for  though  vwy  (£"£>)  cannot 
be  directly  construed  with  the  accusative  of  the  object,  as  we 
have  already  observed  at  ch.  viii.  6  and  xxxv.  1,  it  may  be 
indirectly,  as  in  this  passage  and  ch.  Ixv.  18.  On  pdgar,  "  to 
come  to  meet,"  in  the  sense  of  "  coming  to  the  help  of,"  see  at 
ch.  xlvii.  3  ;  it  is  here  significantly  interchanged  with  T5T!?  of 
the  minor  clause  bidrdkhekhd  yiz¥rukhd,  "  those  who  remember 
Thee  in  Thy  ways"  (for  the  syntax,  compare  ch.  i.  5  and  xxvi. 
16)  :  "When  such  as  love  and  do  right,  walking  in  Thy  ways, 
remembered  Thee  (i.e.  thanked  Thee  for  grace  received,  and 
longed  for  fresh  grace),  Thou  earnest  again  and  again  to  meet 
them  as  a  friend." 

But  Israel  appeared  to  have  been  given  up  without  hope  to 
the  wrath  of  this  very  God.  Ver.  4&  (56).  "  Behold,  Thou,  7  hou 
art  enraged,  and  we  stood  as  sinners  there  ;  already  have  we  been 
long  in  this  state,  and  shall  we  be  saved  T*  Instead  of  hen  'attdh 
(the  antithesis  of  now  and  formerly),  the  passage  proceeds  with 
hen  'attdh.  There  was  no  necessity  for  'attdh  with  qdtsaphtd;  so 
that  it  is  used  with  special  emphasis:  "Behold,  Thou,  a  God  who 
so  faithfully  accepts  His  own  people,  hast  broken  out  in  wrrath" 
(see  p.  345).  The  following  word  Kt-)n31_  cannot  mean  "and 
we  have  sinned,"  but  is  &fut.  consec.,  and  therefore  must  mean 
at  least,  "then  we  have  sinned"  (the  sin  inferred  from  the 
punishment).  It  is  more  correct,  however,  to  take  it,  as  in 
Gen.  xliii.  9,  in  the  sense  of,  "  Then  we  stand  as  sinners,  as 
guilty  persons  :"  the  punishment  has  exhibited  Israel  before 
the  world,  and  before  itself,  as  what  it  really  is  (consequently 
the  fut.  consec.  does  not  express  the  logical  inference,  but  the 
practical  consequence).  As  KBrui  has  tsakeph,  and  therefore  the 
accents  at  any  rate  preclude  Schelling's  rendering,  "  and  we 
have  wandered  in  those  ways  from  the  very  earliest  times,"  we 
must  take  the  next  two  clauses  as  independent,  if  indeed  Dm 
is  to  be  understood  as  referring  to  "pD-fD.  Stier  only  goes  half 
way  towards  this  when  he  renders  it,  "  And  indeed  in  them  (the 
ways  of  God,  we  sinned)  from  of  old,  and  should  we  be  helped?" 
This  is  forced,  and  yet  not  in  accordance  with  the  accents. 
Kosenmuller  and  Hahn  quite  satisfy  this  demand  when  they 


CHAP.  LXIV.  4.  469 

render  it,  "Tamen  in  viis  tuis  ceternitas  ut  salvemur ;"  but  'oldm, 
ala)v,  in  this  sense  of  alcoviorr)?,  is  not  scriptural.  The  render 
ing  adopted  by  Besser,  Grotius,  and  Starck  is  a  better  one  : 
"  (Si  vero)  in  illis  (viis  tuis)  perpetuo  (mansissemus),  tune  servati 
fuerimus"  (if  we  had  continued  in  Thy  ways,  then  we  should 
have  been  preserved).  But  there  is  no  succession  of  tenses 
here,  which  could  warrant  us  in  taking  V^l  as  a  paulo-post 
future;  and  Hofmann's  view  is  syntactically  more  correct,  "In 
them  (i.e.  the  ways  of  Jehovah)  eternally,  we  shall  find  salva 
tion,  after  the  time  is  passed  in  which  He  has  been  angry  and 
we  have  sinned"  (or  rather,  been  shown  to  be  guilty).  But  we 
question  the  connection  between  DPQ  and  T3VT  in  any  form.  In 
our  view  the  prayer  suddenly  takes  a  new  turn  from  hen  (be 
hold)  onwards,  just  as  it  did  with  lu*  (O  that)  in  ch.  Ixiv.  1 ; 
and  "pSVJ  in  ver.  5a  stands  at  the  head  of  a  subordinate  clause. 
Hence  Dra  must  refer  back  to  XDn:i  HSttp  ("  in  Thine  anger 
and  in  our  sins,"  Schegg).  There  is  no  necessity,  however, 
to  search  for  nouns  to  which  to  refer  BH3.  It  is  rather  to  be 
taken  as  neuter,  signifying  "  therein"  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  18,  cf.  Ps. 
xc.  10),  like  B^v^  thereupon  =  thereby  (ch.  xxxviii.  16),  fnzi 
therein  (xxxviii.  16),  Dnp  thereout  (ch.  xxx.  6),  therefrom  (ch. 
xliv.  15).  The  idea  suggested  by  such  expressions  as  these  is 
no  doubt  that  of  plurality  (here  a  plurality  of  manifestations 
of  wrath  and  of  sins),  but  one  which  vanishes  into  the  neuter 
idea  of  totality.  Now  we  do  justice  both  to  the  clause  without 
a  verb,  which,  being  a  logical  copula,  admits  simply  of  a  pre 
sent  sumus  ;  and  also  to  Warn,  which  is  the  accusative  of 
duration,  when  we  explain  the  sentence  as  meaning,  "  In  this 
state  we  are  and  have  been  for  a  long  time/'  'Oldm  is  used  in 
other  instances  in  these  prophecies  to  denote  the  long  continu 
ance  of  the  state  of  punishment  (see  ch.  xlii.  14,  Ivii.  11),  since 
it  appeared  to  the  exiles  as  an  eternity  (a  whole  aeon),  and 
what  lay  beyond  it  as  but  a  little  while  (mits'dr,  ch.  Ixiii.  18). 
The  following  word  XK&H  needs  no  correction.  There  is  no 
necessity  to  change  it  into  J^,  ag  Ewald  proposes,  after  the 
LXX.  Kal  eTrXavrjOriiiev  ("and  we  fell  into  wandering"),  or 
what  would  correspond  still  more  closely  to  the  LXX.  (cf.  ch. 
xlvi.  8,  DT^'B,  LXX.  7re7r\avr)iJL€voi),  but  is  less  appropriate 
here,  into  V^'S31  ("and  we  fell  into  apostasy"),  the  reading 
supported  by  Lowth  and  others.  If  it  were  necessary  to  alter 


470  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

the  text  at  all,  we  might  simply  transpose  the  letters,  and  read 
W'^,  "  and  cried  for  help."  But  if  we  take  it  as  a  question, 
"  And  shall  we  experience  salvation — find  help  ?  "  there  is 
nothing  grammatically  inadmissible  in  this  (compare  ch.  xxviii. 
28),  and  psychologically  it  is  commended  by  the  state  of  mind 
depicted  in  ch.  xl.  27,  lix.  10-12.  Moreover,  what  follows 
attaches  itself  quite  naturally  to  this. 

The  people  who  ask  the  question  in  ver.  5  do  not  regard 
themselves  as  worthy  of  redemption,  as  their  self-righteousness 
has  been  so  thoroughly  put  to  shame.  Ver.  5  (6).  "  We  all 
became  like  the  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  virtues  like  a  garment 
soiled  with  blood;  and  we  all  faded  away  together  like  the  leaves; 
and  our  iniquities,  like  the  storm  they  carried  us  away.'9  The 
whole  nation  is  like  one  whom  the  law  pronounces  unclean, 
like  a  leper,  who  has  to  cry  "tame,  tame"  as  he  goes  along, 
that  men  may  get  out  of  his  way  (Lev.  xiii.  45).  Doing  right 
in  all  its  manifold  forms  (tseddqoth,  like  ch.  xxxiii.  15,  used 
elsewhere  of  the  manifestations  of  divine  righteousness),  which 
once  made  Israel  well-pleasing  to  God  (ch.  i.  21),  has  disap 
peared  and  become  like  a  garment  stained  with  menstruous 
discharge  (cf.  Ezek.  xxxvi.  17);  (LXX.  &)?  pd/cos  aTrofcaOn/JLevrjs 
=  ddvdh,  ch.  xxx.  22  ;  nidddh,  Lam.  i.  17  ;  teme'dh,  Lev.  xv. 
33).  'Iddlm  (used  thus  in  the  plural  in  the  Talmud  also)  signi 
fies  the  monthly  period  (menstrua).  In  the  third  figure,  that 
of  fading  falling  foliage,  the  form  vanndbhel  is  not  Teal  (==  van- 
nibbdl  orvanibbal;  Ewald,  §  232,  b),  which  would  be  an  impossi 
bility  according  to  the  laws  of  inflexion  ;  still  less  is  it  niphal 
=  vanninndbhel  (which  Kimchi  suggests  as  an  alternative)  ;  but 
certainly  a  hiphil.  It  is  not,  however,  from  ndbliel  =  vannablel, 
"  with  the  reduplication  dropped  to  express  the  idea  of  some 
thing  gradual,"  as  Bottcher  proposes  (a  new  and  arbitrary 
explanation  in  the  place  of  one  founded  upon  the  simple  laws 
of  inflexion),  but  either  from  bdlal  (compare  the  remarks  on 
belll  in  ch.  xxx.  24,  which  hardly  signifies  "ripe  barley"  how 
ever),  after  the  form  fyw  (from  &l),  ^]pj}  (from  "H?!?),  or  from  bill, 
after  the  form  Ep*\,  etc.  In  any  case,  therefore,  it  is  a  meta- 
plastic  formation,  whether  from  bdlal  or  bul  =  ndbhel,  like  "i?'Ts- 
in  1  Chron.  xx.  3,  after  the  form  "ip>l,  from  "nb>  =  "ito,  or  after 
the  form  JTM,  from  "HP  =  "ifco  (compare  the  rabbinical  expla 
nation  of  the  name  of  the  month  Bul  from  the  falling  of  the 


CHAP.  LXIV.  6.  471 

leaves,  in  Buxtorf,  Lex.  talm.  col.  271).  The  hiphil  fen  or 
b'3n  is  to  be  compared  to  B^Nj],  to  stream  out  red  (=  to  be 
red) ;  Tl^n,  to  make  an  extension  (=  to  be  long) ;  0*1^7,  to 
strike  root  (=  to  root),  etc.,  and  signifies  literally  to  produce  a 
fading  (=  to  fade  away).  In  the  fourth  figure,  Urtg  (as  it  is 
also  written  in  ver.  6  according  to  correct  codices)  is  a  defec 
tive  plural  (as  in  Jer.  xiv.  7,  Ezek.  xxviii.  18,  Dan.  ix.  13) 
for  the  more  usual  Wnftg  (ch.  lix.  12).  fiV  is  the  usual  term 
applied  to  sin  regarded  as  guilt,  which  produces  punishment  of 
itself.  The  people  were  robbed  by  their  sins  of  all  vital  strength 
and  energy,  like  dry  leaves,  which  the  guilt  and  punishment 
springing  from  sin  carried  off  as  a  very  easy  prey. 

Universal  forgetful  ness  of  God  was  the  consequence  of  this 
self-instigated  departure  from  God.  Ver.  6  (7).  "  And  there 
was  no  one  who  called  upon  Thy  name,  who  aroused  himself  to  lay 
firm  hold  of  Thee  :  for  Thou  hadst  hidden  Thy  face  from  MS,  and 
didst  melt  us  into  the  hand  of  our  transgressions."  There  was 
no  one  (see  ch.  lix.  16)  who  had  risen  up  in  prayer  and  inter 
cession  out  of  this  deep  fall,  or  had  shaken  himself  out  of  the 
sleep  of  security  and  lethargy  of  insensibility,  to  lay  firm  hold 
of  Jehovah,  i.e.  not  to  let  Him  go  till  He  blessed  him  and  his 
people  again.  The  curse  of  God  pressed  every  one  down  ;  God 
had  withdrawn  His  grace  from  them,  and  given  them  up  to  the 
consequences  of  their  sins.  The  form  I^Ern  is  not  softened 
from  the  pilel  «Mbni,  but  is  a  kal  like  133WJ  in  Job  xxxi.  15 
(which  see),  :iD  being  used  in  a  transitive  sense,  as  Jcun  is  there 
(cf.  shubh,  ch.  lii.  8  ;  mush,  Zech.  iii.  9).  The  LXX.,  Targ., 
and  Syr.  render  it  et  tradidisti  nos ;  but  we  cannot  conclude 
from  this  with  any  certainty  that  they  read  ^p.3»Jjn,  which 
Knobel  follows  Ewald  in  correcting  into  the  incorrect  form 

o 

133pri1.  The  prophet  himself  had  the  expression  miggen  b'yad 
(Gen.  xiv.  20,  cf.  Job  viii.  4)  in  his  mind,  in  the  sense  of 
liquefecisti  nos  in  manum,  equivalent  to  liquefecisti  et  tradidisti 
(TrapeStoftas,  Rom.  i.  28),  from  which  it  is  evident  that  *^3  is 
not  a  mere  Sid  (LXX.),  but  the  "hand"  of  the  transgressions 
is  their  destructive  and  damning  power. 

This  was  the  case  when  the  measure  of  Israel's  sins  had 
become  full.  They  were  carried  into  exile,  where  they  sank 
deeper  and  deeper.  The  great  mass  of  the  people  proved  them 
selves  to  be  really  massa  perdita,  and  perished  among  the 


472  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

heathen.  But  there  were  some,  though  a  vanishingly  small 
number,  who  humbled  themselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of 
God,  and,  when  redemption  could  not  be  far  off,  wrestled  in 
such  prayers  as  these,  that  the  nation  might  share  it  in  its 
entirety,  and  if  possible  not  one  be  left  behind.  With  nnjn  the 
existing  state  of  sin  and  punishment  is  placed  among  the 
things  of  the  past,  and  the  petition  presented  that  the  present 
moment  of  prayer  may  have  all  the  significance  of  a  turning- 
point  in  their  history.  Vers.  7,  8  (8,  9).  "And  now,  0  Jehovah, 
Thou  art  our  Father :  we  are  the  clay,  and  Thou  our  Maker ; 
and  we  are  all  the  work  of  Thy  hand.  Be  not  extremely  angry, 
0  Jehovah,  and  remember  not  the  transgression  for  ever!  Behold, 
consider,  we  beseech  Thee,  we  are  all  Thy  people"  The  state  of 
tilings  must  change  at  last ;  for  Israel  is  an  image  made  by 
Jehovah  ;  yea,  more  than  this,  Jehovah  is  the  begetter  of  Israel, 
and  loves  Israel  not  merely  as  a  sculptor,  but  as  a  father 
(compare  ch.  xlv.  9,  10,  and  the  unquestionable  passage  of 
Isaiah  in  ch.  xxix.  16).  Let  Him  then  not  be  angry  iNE'iy, 
"  to  the  utmost  measure"  (cf.  Ps.  cxix.  8),  or  if  we  paraphrase 
it  according  to  the  radical  meaning  of  1KD,  "  till  the  weight 
becomes  intolerable."  Let  Him  not  keep  in  mind  the  guilt  for 
ever,  to  punish  it ;  but,  in  consideration  of  the  fact  that  Israel 
is  the  nation  of  His  choice,  let  mercy  take  the  place  of  justice, 
•n  strengthens  the  petition  in  its  own  way  (see  Gen.  xxx.  34), 
just  as  N3  does ;  and  t^sn  signifies  here,  as  elsewhere,  to  fix  the 
eye  upon  anything.  The  object,  in  this  instance,  is  the  existing 
fact  expressed  in  "  we  are  all  Thy  people."  Hitzig  is  correct 
in  regarding  the  repetition  of  "  all  of  us "  in  this  prayer  as 
significant.  The  object  throughout  is  to  entreat  that  the  whole 
nation  may  participate  in  the  inheritance  of  the  coming  salva 
tion,  in  order  that  the  exodus  from  Babylonia  may  resemble 
the  exodus  from  Egypt. 

The  re-erection  of  the  ruins  of  the  promised  land  requires 
the  zeal  of  every  one,  and  this  state  of  ruin  must  not  continue. 
It  calls  out  the  love  and  faithfulness  of  Jehovah.  Vers.  9-11. 
"  The  cities  of  Thy  holiness  have  become  a  pasture-ground ;  Zion 
has  become  a  pasture-ground,  Jerusalem  a  desert.  The  house  of 
our  holiness  and  of  our  adorning,  where  our  fathers  praised  Thee, 
is  given  up  to  the  Jire,  and  everything  that  was  our  delight  given 
up  to  devastation.  Wilt  Thou  restrain  Thyself  in  spite  of  this, 


CHAP.  LX1V.  9-11.  473 

0  Jehovah,  be  silent,  and  leave  us  to  suffer  the  utmost  ?"  Jeru 
salem  by  itself  could  not  possibly  be  called  "  cities"  (are),  say 
with  reference  to  the  upper  and  lower  cities  (Vitringa).  It  is 
merely  mentioned  by  name  as  the  most  prominent  of  the  many 
cities  which  were  all  "  holy  cities,"  inasmuch  as  the  whole  of 
Canaan  was  the  land  of  Jehovah  (ch.  xiv.  25),  and  His  holy 
territory  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  54).  The  word  midbdr  (pasture-land, 
heath,  different  from  tsiyyah,  the  pastureless  desert,  ch.  xxxv. 
1)  is  repeated,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  the  same 
fate  had  fallen  upon  Zion-Jerusalem  as  upon  the  rest  of  the 
cities  of  the  land.  The  climax  of  the  terrible  calamity  was 
the  fact,  that  the  temple  had  also  fallen  a  prey  to  the  burn 
ing  of  the  fire  (compare  for  the  fact,  Jer.  lii.  13).  The  people 
call  it  "  house  of  our  holiness  and  of  our  glory."  Jehovah's 
qodesh  and  tipliereth  have,  as  it  were,  transplanted  heaven 
to  earth  in  the  temple  (compare  ch.  Ixiii.  15  with  ch.  Ix.  7)  ; 
and  this  earthly  dwelling-place  of  God  is  Israel's  possession, 
and  therefore  Israel's  qodesh  and  tipliereth.  The  relative 
clause  describes  what  sublime  historical  reminiscences  are 
attached  to  the  temple :  "1PK  is  equivalent  to  DP  15W,  as  in 
Gen.  xxxix.  20,  Num.  xx.  13  (compare  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  4),  Deut. 
viii.  15,  etc.  w?n  has  chateph-pathach,  into  which,  as  a 
rule,  the  vocal  sheva  under  the  first  of  two  similar  letters  is 
changed.  Machamaddenu  (our  delights)  may  possibly  include 
favourite  places,  ornamental  buildings,  and  pleasure  grounds  ; 
but  the  parallel  leads  us  rather  to  think  primarily  of  things 
associated  with  the  worship  of  God,  in  which  the  people  found 
a  holy  delight.  i>3,  contrary  to  the  usual  custom,  is  here  fol 
lowed  by  the  singular  of  the  predicate,  as  in  Prov.  xvi.  2,  Ezek. 
xxxi.  15  (cf.  Gen.  ix.  29).  Will  Jehovah  still  put  restraint 
upon  Himself,  and  cause  His  merciful  love  to  keep  silence, 
JHfTvJI,  with  such  a  state  of  things  as  this,  or  notwithstanding 
this  state  of  things  (Job  x.  7)  ?  On  p3*?nn,  see  ch.  Ixiii.  15, 
xlii.  14.  The  suffering  would  indeed  increase  iNEny  (to  the 
utmost),  if  it  caused  the  destruction  of  Israel,  or  should  not  be 
followed  at  last  by  Israel's  restoration.  Jehovah's  compassion 
cannot  any  longer  thus  forcibly  restrain  itself ;  it  must  break 
forth,  like  Joseph's  tears  in  the  recognition  scene  (Gen.  xlv.  1). 


474  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

SECOND  CLOSING  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LXV. 
JEHOVAH'S  ANSWER  TO  THE  CHURCH'S  PRAYER. 

After  the  people  have  poured  out  their  heart  before  Je 
hovah,  He  announces  what  they  may  expect  from  Him.  Bat 
instead  of  commencing  with  a  promise,  as  we  might  anticipate 
after  the  foregoing  prayer,  He  begins  with  reproach  and  threat 
ening  ;  for  although  the  penitential  portion  of  the  community 
had  included  the  whole  nation  in  their  prayer,  it  was  destruc 
tion,  and  not  deliverance,  which  awaited  one  portion  of  the 
nation,  and  that  portion  was  the  greater  one.  The  great  mass 
were  in  that  state  of  "  sin  unto  death"  which  defies  all  inter 
cession  (1  John  v.  16),  because  they  had  so  scornfully  and 
obstinately  resisted  the  grace  which  had  been  so  long  and  so 
incessantly  offered  to  them.  Vers.  1,  2.  "  I  was  discernible  to 
those  who  did  not  inquire,  discoverable  by  those  who  did  not  seek 
me.  I  said,  '  Here  am  /,  here  am  /,'  to  a  nation  where  my  name 
was  not  called.  I  spread  out  my  hands  all  the  day  to  a  refractory 
people,  who  walked  in  the  way  that  was  not  good,  after  their  own 
thoughts"  The  LXX.  (A)  render  ver.  \a,  "  I  was  found  by 
those  who  did  not  seek  me,  I  became  manifest  to  those  who  did 
not  ask  for  me"  (B  reverses  the  order) ;  and  in  Rom.  x.  20,  21, 
Paul  refers  ver.  1  to  the  Gentiles,  and  ver.  2  to  Israel.  The 
former,  to  whom  He  has  hitherto  been  strange,  enter  into 
fellowship  with  Him ;  whilst  the  latter,  to  whom  He  has  con 
stantly  offered  Himself,  thrust  Him  away,  and  lose  His  fellow 
ship.  Luther  accordingly  adopts  this  rendering :  "  I  shall  be 
sought  by  those  who  did  not  ask  for  me,  I  shall  be  found  by 
those  who  did  not  seek  me.  And  to  the  heathen  who  did  not 
call  upon  my  name,  I  say,  Here  am  I,  here  am  I."  Zwingli, 
again,  observes  on  ver.  1,  "  This  is  an  irresistible  testimony  to 
the  adoption  of  the  Gentiles."  Calvin  also  follows  the  apostle's 
exposition,  and  observes,  that  "  Paul  argues  boldly  for  the 
calling  of  the  Gentiles  on  the  ground  of  this  passage,  and  says 
that  Isaiah  dared  to  proclaim  and  assert  that  the  Gentiles  had 
been  called  by  God,  because  he  announced  a  greater  thing, 
and  announced  it  more  clearly  than  the  reason  of  those  times 
would  bear."  Of  all  the  Jewish  expositors,  there  is  only  one, 


CHAP.  LXV.  1,  2.  475 

viz.  Gecatilia,  who  refers  ver.  1  to  the  Gentiles;  and  of  all  the 
Christian  expositors  of  modern  times,  there  is  only  one,  viz. 
Hendewerk,  who  interprets  it  in  this  way,  without  having  been 
influenced  by  the  quotation  made  by  Paul.  Hofmann,  how 
ever,  and  Stier,  feel  obliged  to  follow  the  apostle's  exposition, 
and  endeavour  to  vindicate  it.  But  we  have  no  sympathy  with 
any  such  untenable  efforts  to  save  the  apostle's  honour.  In 
Kom.  ix.  25,  26,  he  also  quotes  Hos.  ii.  25  and  ii.  1  in  support 
of  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles ;  whereas  he  could  not  have 
failed  to  know,  that  it  is  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  favour 
which  is  alluded  to  there.  He  merely  appeals  to  Hos.  ii.  in 
support  of  the  New  Testament  fact  of  the  calling  of  the  Gen 
tiles,  so  far  as  it  is  in  these  words  of  the  Old  Testament  prophet 
that  the  fact  is  most  adequately  expressed.  And  according  to 
1  Pet.  ii.  10,  Peter  received  the  same  impression  from  Hosea's 
words.  But  with  the  passage  before  us  it  is  very  different. 
The  apostle  shows,  by  the  way  in  which  he  applies  the  Scrip 
ture,  how  he  depended  in  this  instance  upon  the  Septuagint 
translation,  which  was  in  his  own  hands  and  those  of  his  readers 
also,  and  by  which  the  allusion  to  the  Gentiles  is  naturally 
suggested,  even  if  not  actually  demanded.  And  we  may  also 
assume  that  the  apostle  himself  understood  the  Hebrew  text, 
with  which  he,  the  pupil  of  Rabban  Gamaliel,  was  of  course 
well  acquainted,  in  the  same  sense,  viz.  as  relating  to  the  calling 
of  the  Gentiles,  without  being  therefore  legally  bound  to  adopt 
the  same  interpretation.  The  interchange  of  ^3  (cf.  ch.  Iv.  5) 
and  Dy ;  the  attribute  W;l  fcnp  SO,  which  applies  to  heathen, 
and  heathen  only  ;  the  possibility  of  interpreting  ch.  Ixv.  1,  2,  in 
harmony  with  the  context  both  before  and  after,  if  ver.  1  be 
taken  as  referring  to  the  Gentiles,  on  the  supposition  that 
Jehovah  is  here  contrasting  His  success  with  the  Gentiles  and 
His  failure  with  Israel :  all  these  certainly  throw  weight  into 
the  scale.  Nevertheless  they  are  not  decisive,  if  we  look  at  the 
Hebrew  alone,  apart  altogether  from  the  LXX.  For  nidraslitl 
does  not  mean  "  I  have  become  manifest ;"  but,  regarded  as 
the  so-called  niphal  tolerativum  (according  to  Ezek.  xiv.  3,  xx. 
3,  31,  xxxvi.  37),  "  I  permitted  myself  to  be  explored  or  found 
out  ;"  and  consequently  ^NVpa,  according  to  ch.  Iv.  6,  "  I  let 
myself  be  found."  And  so  explained,  ver.  1  stands  in  a  parallel 
relation  to  ch.  Iv.  6  :  Jehovah  was  searchable,  was  discoverable 


476  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

(cf.  Zeph.  i.  6)  to  those  who  asked  no  questions,  and  did  not 
seek  Him  (KiM>  =  *6  15*6,  Ges.  §  123,  3),  i.e.  He  displayed  to 
Israel  the  fulness  of  His  nature  and  the  possibility  of  His 
fellowship,  although  they  did  not  bestir  themselves  or  trouble 
themselves  in  the  least  about  Him, — a  view  which  is  confirmed 
by  the  fact  that  ver.  16  merely  refers  to  offers  made  to  them, 
and  not  to  results  of  any  kind.  Israel,  however,  is  called 
*Btsa  fcOp"&o  ^  not  as  a  nation  that  was  not  called  by  Jehovah's 
name  (which  would  be  expressed  by  frTip?,  ch.  xliii.  7 ;  cf.  ^po, 
K\,7]Tos  /jLOVj  ch.  xlviii.  12),  but  as  a  nation  where  (supply  Dasher) 
Jehovah's  name  was  not  invoked  (LXX.  "  who  called  not 
upon  my  name"),  and  therefore  as  a  thoroughly  heathenish 
nation ;  for  which  reason  we  have  goi  (LXX.  €#1/05)  here,  and 
not  'am  (LXX.  Xao?).  Israel  was  estranged  from  Him,  just 
like  the  heathen ;  but  He  still  turned  towards  them  with 
infinite  patience,  and  (as  is  added  in  ver.  2)  with  ever  open 
arms  of  love.  He  spread  out  His  hands  (as  a  man  does  to  draw 
another  towards  him  to  embrace  him)  all  the  day  (i.e.  conti 
nually,  cf.  ch.  xxviii.  24)  towards  an  obstinate  people,  who 
walked  in  the  way  that  was  not  good  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvi.  5,  Prov. 
xvi.  29;  here  with  the  article,  which  could  not  be  repeated 
with  the  adjective,  because  of  the  16),  behind  their  own 
thoughts.  That  which  led  them,  and  which  they  followed,  was 
not  the  will  of  God,  but  selfish  views  and  purposes,  according 
to  their  own  hearts'  lusts ;  and  yet  Jehovah  did  not  let  them 
alone,  but  they  were  the  constant  thought  and  object  of  His  love, 
which  was  ever  seeking,  alluring,  and  longing  for  their  salvation. 
But  through  this  obstinate  and  unyielding  rejection  of  His 
love  they  have  excited  wrath,  which,  though  long  and  patiently 
suppressed,  now  bursts  forth  with  irresistible  violence.  Vers. 
3-5.  "  The  people  that  continually  provoketh  me  by  defying  me 
to  my  face,  sacrificing  in  the  gardens,  and  burning  incense  upon 
the  tiles  ;  who  sit  in  the  graves,  and  spend  the  night  in  closed 
places  ;  to  eat  the  flesh  of  swine,  and  broken  pieces  of  abomina 
tions  is  in  their  dishes ;  who  say,  Stop  !  come  not  too  near  me  ; 
for  I  am  holy  to  thee :  they  are  a  smoke  in  my  nose,  a  fire 
blazing  continually"  HpS  (these)  in  ver.  5b  is  retrospective, 
summing  up  the  subject  as  described  in  vers.  3-5a,  and  what 
follows  in  ver.  5b  contains  the  predicate.  The  heathenish 
practices  of  the  exiles  are  here  depicted,  and  in  ver.  7  they  are 


CHAP.  LXV.  3-5.  477 

expressly  distinguished  from  those  of  their  fathers.  Hence 
there  is  something  so  peculiar  in  the  description,  that  we  look 
in  vain  for  parallels  among  those  connected  with  the  idolatry 
of  the  Israelites  before  the  time  of  the  captivity.  There  is 
only  one  point  of  resemblance,  viz.  the  allusion  to  gardens  as 
places  of  worship,  which  only  occurs  in  the  book  of  Isaiah,  and 
in  which  our  passage,  together  with  ch.  Ivii.  5  and  Ixvi.  17, 
strikingly  coincides  with  ch.  i.  29.  "Upon  my  face"  (fal- 
pdnai)  is  equivalent  to  "  freely  and  openly,  without  being 
ashamed  of  me,  or  fearing  me;"  cf.  Job  i.  11,  vi.  28, 
xxi.  31.  "Burning  incense  upon  the  bricks"  carries  us  to 
Babylonia,  the  true  home  of  the  cocti  lateres  (laterculi).  The 
tlwrah  only  mentions  Vblienlm  in  connection  with  Babylonian 
and  Egyptian  buildings.  The  only  altars  that  it  allows  are 
altars  of  earth  thrown  up,  or  of  unhewn  stones  and  wooden 
beams  with  a  brazen  covering.  "  They  who  sit  in  the  graves," 
according  to  Vitringa,  are  they  who  sacrifice  to  the  dead.  He 
refers  to  the  Greek  and  Horn  an  inferior  and  februationes,  or 
expiations  for  the  dead,  as  probably  originating  in  the  East. 
Sacrifices  for  the  dead  were  offered,  in  fact,  not  only  in  India 
and  Persia,  but  also  in  Hither  Asia  among  the  Ssabians,  and 
therefore  probably  in  ancient  Mesopotamia  and  Babylonia. 
But  were  they  offered  in  the  graves  themselves,  as  we  must 
assume  from  D11"]?!??  (not  Dn^pr^y)  <2  Nothing  at  all  is  known 
of  this,  and  Bottcher  (de  inferis,  §  234)  is  correct  in  rendering 
it  "  among  (inter)  the  graves,"  and  supposing  the  object  to  be 
to  hold  intercourse  there  with  the  dead  and  with  demons.  The 
next  point,  viz.  passing  the  night  in  closed  places  (i.e.  places 
not  accessible  to  every  one  :  netsurlm,  custodita  —  clausa,  like 
netlmim,  amoena),  may  refer  to  the  mysteries  celebrated  in 
natural  caves  and  artificial  crypts  (on  the  mysteries  of  the 
Ssabians,  see  Chwolsohn,  Die  Ssabier  u.  der  Ssabismus,  ii.  332 
sqq.).  But  the  LXX.  and  Syriac  render  it  eV  rot?  o-TrrjXaLois 
Koi/jiwvTai  8t'  evvTrvia,  evidently  understanding  it  to  refer  to 
the  so-called  incubare,  l^KOifiaaOai ;  and  so  Jerome  explains  it. 
"  In  the  temples  of  idols,"  he  says,  "  where  they  were  accus 
tomed  to  lie  upon  the  skins  of  the  victims  stretched  upon  the 
ground,  to  gather  future  events  from  their  dreams."  The 
expression  ubhannetsurlm  points  not  so  much  to  open  temples, 
as  to  inaccessible  caves  or  subterraneous  places.  G.  Rawlinsoii 


478  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

(Monarchies,  ii.  269)  mentions  the  discovery  of  "clay  idols  in 
holes  below  the  pavement  of  palaces."  From  the  next  charge, 
"  who  eat  there  the  flesh  of  the  swine,"  we  may  infer  that  the 
Babylonians  offered  swine  in  sacrifice,  if  not  as  a  common 
tiling,  yet  like  the  Egyptians  and  other  heathen,  and  ate  their 
flesh  ("the  flesh  taken  from  the  sacrifice,"  2  Mace.  vi.  21)  ; 
whereas  among  the  later  Ssabians  (Harranians)  the  swine  was 
not  regarded  as  either  edible  or  fit  for  sacrifice.  On  the 
synecdochical  character  of  the  sentence  OH^3  Dr.??  P"1?S  see 
at  ch.  v.  12a,  cf.  Jer.  xxiv.  2.  Knobel's  explanation,  "pieces" 
(but  it  is  not  ""I?."!?5!)  "of  abominations  are  their  vessels,  i.e.  those 
of  their  lepoo-Koirla"  is  a  needless  innovation.  5^3B  signifies  a 
stench,  putrefaction  (Ezek.  iv.  14,  besar  piggul),  then  in  a  con 
crete  sense  anything  corrupt  or  inedible,  a  thing  to  be  abhorred 
according  to  the  laws  of  food  or  the  law  generally  (syn.  7iDS? 
P'iDB)  ;  and  when  connected  with  P*]S  (chethib)j  which  bears 
the  same  relation  to  P"}E  as  crumbs  or  pieces  (from  p"]Q,  to 
crumble)  to  broth  (from  P")£,  to  rub  off  or  scald  off),  it  means 
a  decoction,  or  broth  made  either  of  such  kinds  of  flesh  or  such 
parts  of  the  body  as  were  forbidden  by  the  law.  The  context 
also  points  to  such  heathen  sacrifices  and  sacrificial  meals  as 
were  altogether  at  variance  with  the  Mosaic  law.  For  the  five 
following  words  proceed  from  the  mouths  of  persons  who  fancy 
that  they  have  derived  a  high  degree  of  sanctity  either  from 
the  mysteries,  or  from  their  participation  in  rites  of  peculiar 
sacredness,  so  that  to  every  one  who  abstains  from  such  rites, 
or  does  not  enter  so  deeply  into  them  as  they  do  themselves, 
they  call  out  their  "  odi  profanum  vulgus  et  arceo"  T.?N  2"!P, 
keep  near  to  thyself,  i.e.  stay  where  you  are,  like  the  Arabic 
idhab  ileika,  go  away  to  thyself,  for  take  thyself  off.  'inparrta 
(according  to  some  MSS.  with  mercha  tifchali),  do  not  push 
against  me  (equivalent  to  n^rr^a  or  v~"i^3,  get  away,  make 
room ;  Gen.  xix.  9,  Isa.  xlix.  20),  for  q^ashtikhd,  I  am  holy  to 
thee,  i.e.  unapproachable.  The  verbal  suffix  is  used  for  the 
dative,  as  in  ch.  xliv.  21  (Ges.  §  121,  4),  for  it  never  occurred 
to  any  of  the  Jewish  expositors  (all  of  whom  give  sanctus  prce 
te  as  a  gloss)  that  the  Kal  qddash  was  used  in  a  transitive  sense, 
like  chdzaq  in  Jer.  xx.  7,  as  Luther,  Calvin,  and  even  Hitzig 
suppose.  Nor  is  the  exclamation  the  well-meant  warning 
against  the  communication  of  a  burdensome  q'dusshdh,  which 


CHAP.  LXV.  6,  7  470 

had  to  be  removed  by  washing  before  a  man  could  proceed  to 
the  duties  of  every-day  life  (suteh,  for  example,  as  the  qedussMh 
of  the  man  who  had  touched  the  flesh  of  a  sin-offering,  or  been 
sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  a  sin-offering;  Lev.  vi.  20,  cf.  Ezek. 
xliv.  19,  xlvi.  20).  It  is  rather  a  proud  demand  to  respect  the 
sacro-sanctus,  and  not  to  draw  down  the  chastisement  of  the 
gods  by  the  want  of  reverential  awe.  After  this  elaborate 
picture,  the  men  who  are  so  degenerate  receive  their  fitting 
predicate.  They  are  fuel  for  the  wrath  of  God,  which  mani 
fests  itself,  as  it  were,  in  smoking  breath.  This  does  not  now 
need  for  the  first  time  to  seize  upon  them ;  but  they  are  already 
in  the  midst  of  the  fire  of  wrath,  and  are  burning  there  in 
inextinguishable  flame. 

The  justice  of  God  will  not  rest  till  it  has  procured  for 
itself  the  fullest  satisfaction.  Vers.  6,  7.  "Behold,  it  is 
written  before  me :  I  will  not  keep  silence  without  having  recom 
pensed,  and  I  will  recompense  into  their  bosom.  Your  offences, 
and  the  offences  of  your  fathers  together,  saith  Jehovah,  that  they 
have  burned  incense  upon  the  mountains,  and  insulted  me  upon 
the  hills,  and  I  measure  their  reward  first  of  all  into  their  bosom.1' 
Vitringa  has  been  misled  by  such  passages  as  ch.  x.  1,  Job 
xiii.  26,  Jer.  xxii.  30,  in  which  Mthabh  (Jcittebh)  is  used  to 
signify  a  written  decree,  and  understands  by  kh'thubhdh  the  sen 
tence  pronounced  by  God  ;  but  the  reference  really  is  to  their 
idolatrous  conduct  and  contemptuous  defiance  of  the  laws  of 
God.  This  is  ever  before  Him,  written  in  indelible  characters, 
waiting  for  the  day  of  vengeance ;  for,  according  to  the  figura 
tive  language  of  Scripture,  there  are  heavenly  books,  in  which 
the  good  and  evil  works  of  men  are  entered.  And  this  agrees 
with  what  follows  :  "  I  will  not  be  silent,  without  having  first 
repaid,"  etc.  The  accentuation  very  properly  places  the  tone 
upon  the  penultimate  of  the  first  shillamtl  as  being  a  pure 
perfect,  and  upon  the  last  syllable  of  the  second  as  a  perf. 
consec.  EX  *3  preceded  by  a  future  and  followed  by  a  perfect 
signifies,  "but  if  (without  having)  first,"  etc.  (ch.  Iv.  10;  Gen. 
xxxii.  27  ;  Lev.  xxii.  6  ;  Euth  iii.  18  ;  cf.  Judg.  xv.  7).  The 
original  train  of  thought  was,  "  I  will  not  keep  silence,  for  I 
shall  first  of  all  keep  silence  when,"  etc.  Instead  of  *al  cheqdm, 
"  upon  their  bosom,"  we  might  have  'el  cheqdm,  into  their 
bosom,  as  in  Jer.  xxxii.  18,  Ps.  Ixxix.  12.  In  ver.  7  the  keri 


480  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

really  has  W  instead  of  'al,  whilst  in  ver.  6  the  chetJiib  is  *al 
without  any  keri  (for  the  figure  itself,  compare  Luke  vi.  38, 
"  into  your  bosom").  The  thing  to  be  repaid  follows  in  ver. 
la ;  it  is  not  governed,  however,  by  shillamtl,  as  the  form  of 
the  address  clearly  shows,  bat  by  'ashallem  understood,  which 
may  easily  be  supplied.  Whether  Dasher  is  to  be  taken  in  the 
sense  of  qui  or  quod  (that),  it  is  hardly  possible  to  decide ;  but 
the  construction  of  the  sentence  favours  the  latter.  Sacrificing 
"upon  mountains  and  hills"  (and,  what  is  omitted  here,  "under 
every  green  tree  ")  is  the  well-known  standing  phrase  used  to 
describe  the  idolatry  of  the  times  preceding  the  captivity  (cf. 
ch.  Ivii.  7 ;  Hos.  iv.  13 ;  Ezek.  vi.  13).  'rto  points  back  to 
v'shillamft  in  ver.  Qb,  after  the  object  has  been  more  precisely 
defined.  Most  of  the  modern  expositors  take  njbJ&o  Drfe'S 
together,  in  the  sense  of  "  their  former  wages,"  i.e.  the  recom 
pense  previously  deserved  by  their  fathers.  But  in  this  case 
the  concluding  clause  would  only  affirm,  by  the  side  of  ver.  la, 
that  the  sins  of  the  fathers  would  be  visited  upon  them.  More 
over,  this  explanation  has  not  only  the  accents  against  it,  but 
also  the  parallel  in  Jer.  xvi.  18  (see  Hitzig),  which  evidently 
stands  in  a  reciprocal  relation  to  the  passage  before  us.  Con 
sequently  ri  slionali  must  be  an  adverb,  and  the  meaning  evi 
dently  is,  that  the  first  thing  which  Jehovah  had  to  do  by  virtue 
of  His  holiness  was  to  punish  the  sins  of  the  apostate  Israelites; 
and  He  would  so  punish  them,  that  inasmuch  as  the  sins  of  the 
children  were  merely  the  continuation  of  the  fathers'  sins,  the 
punishment  would  be  measured  out  according  to  the  desert  of 
both  together. 

As  the  word  ri'shondh  (first  of  all)  has  clearly  intimated 
that  the  work  of  the  future  will  not  all  consist  in  the  execution 
of  penal  justice,  there  is  no  abruptness  in  the  transition  from 
threatening  to  promises.  Vers.  8,  9.  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  As 
when  the  must  is  found  in  the  cluster,  men  say,  Do  not  destroy  it9 
for  there  is  a  blessing  within  it,  so  ivill  I  do  for  the  sake  of  my 
servants,  that  I  may  not  destroy  the  whole.  And  I  will  bring 
forth  a  seed  out  of  Jacob,  and  an  heir  of  my  mountains  out  of 
Judah,  and  my  chosen  ones  shall  inherit  it,  and  my  servants  shall 
dwell  there"  Of  the  two  co-ordinate  clauses  of  the  protasis 
(ver.  8a),  the  first  contains  the  necessary  condition  of  the 
second.  Hattlrosh  (must,  or  the  juice  of  the  grapes,  from 


CHAP.  LXV.  10.  481 

ydrasli,  possibly  primarily  nothing  more  than  receipt,  or  the 
produce  of  labour)  and  baeshkol  have  both  of  them  the  article 
generally  found  in  comparisons  (Ges.  §  109,  Anm.  1);  ">PN] 
signifies,  as  in  ch.  xlv.  24,  "  men  say,"  with  the  most  general 
and  indefinite  subject.  As  men  do  not  destroy  a  juicy  cluster 
of  grapes,  because  they  would  thereby  destroy  the  blessing 
of  God  which  it  contains  ;  so  will  Jehovah  for  His  servants' 
sake  not  utterly  destroy  Israel,  but  preserve  those  who  are  the 
clusters  in  the  vineyard  (ch.  iii.  14,  v.  1-7)  or  upon  the  vine 
(Ps.  Ixxx.  9  sqq.)  of  Israel.  He  will  not  destroy  hakkol,  the 
whole  without  exception;  that  is  to  say,  keeping  to  the  figure, 
not  "  the  juice  with  the  skin  and  stalk,"  as  Knobel  and  Halm 
explain  it,  but  "  the  particular  clusters  in  which  juice  is  con 
tained,  along  with  the  degenerate  neglected  vineyard  or  vine, 
which  bears  for  the  most  part  only  sour  grapes  (ch.  v.  4) 
or  tendrils  without  fruit  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  5).  The  servants  of 
Jehovah,  who  resemble  these  clusters,  remain  preserved. 
Jehovah  brings  out,  causes  to  go  forth,  calls  to  the  light  of 
day  (fc^Xin  as  in  ch.  liv.  16;  here,  however,  it  is  by  means  of 
sifting :  Ezek.  xx.  34  sqq.),  out  of  Jacob  and  Judah,  i.e.  the 
people  of  the  two  captivities  (see  ch.  xlvi.  3),  a  seed,  a  family, 
that  takes  possession  of  His  mountains,  i.e.  His  holy  mountain- 
land  (ch.  xiv.  25,  cf.  Ps.  cxxi.  1,  and  har  qodshi,  which  is  used 
in  the  same  sense  in  ch.  xi.  9,  Ixv.  25).  As  "  my  mountain  " 
is  equivalent  in  sense  to  the  "  land  of  Israel,"  for  which  Ezekiel 
is  fond  of  saying  u  the  mountains  of  Israel"  (e.g.  ch.  vi.  2,  3),  the 
promise  proceeds  still  further  to  say,  "  and  my  chosen  ones  will 
take  possession  thereof"  (viz.  of  the  land,  ch.  Ix.  21,  cf.  viii.  21). 
From  west  to  east,  i.e.  in  its  whole  extent,  the  land  then 
presents  the  aspect  of  prosperous  peace.  Ver.  10.  "  And  the 
plain  of  Sharon  becomes  a  meadow  for  flocks,  and  the  valley  of 
Achor  a  resting-place  for  oxen,  for  my  people  that  asketh  for  me." 
Hasshdron  (Sharon)  is  the  plain  of  rich  pasture-land  which 
stretches  along  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean  from  Yafo  to 
the  neighbourhood  of  Carmel.  'Emeq  'Akhor  is  a  valley  which 
became  renowned  through  the  stoning  of  Achan,  in  a  range  of 
hills  running  through  the  plain  of  Jericho  (see  Keil  on  Josh. 
vii.  24  sqq.).  From  the  one  to  the  other  will  the  wealth  in 
flocks  extend,  and  in  the  one  as  well  as  in  the  other  will  that 
peace  prevail  which  is  row  enjoyed  by  the  people  of  Jehovah, 
VOL.  II.  2  H 


482  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

who  inquired  for  Him  in  the  time  of  suffering,  and  therefore 
bear  this  name  in  truth.  The  idyllic  picture  of  peace  is 
thoroughly  characteristic  of  Isaiah  :  see,  for  example,  ch.  xxxii. 
20  ;  and  for  rebhets  with  ndveh,  compare  ch.  xxxv.  7. 

The  prophecy  now  turns  again  to  those  already  indicated 
and  threatened  in  vers.  1-7.  Vers.  11,  12.  "  And  ye,  ivho  are 
enemies  to  Jehovah,  0  ye  that  are  unmindful  of  my  holy  moun 
tain,  who  prepare  a  table  for  Gad,  and  fill  up  mixed  drink  for 
the  goddess  of  destiny,  —  /  have  destined  you  to  the  sword,  and  ye 
ivill  all  bow  down  to  the  slaughter,  because  I  have  called  and  ye 
have  not  replied,  I  have  spoken  and  ye  have  not  heard;  and  ye  did 
evil  in  mine  eyes,  and  ye  chose  that  which  I  did  not  like?  It 
may  be  taken  for  granted  as  a  thing  generally  admitted,  that 
ver.  lib  refers  to  two  deities,  and  to  the  lectisternia  (meals  of 
the  gods,  cf.  Jer.  vii.  18,  li.  44)  held  in  their  honour.  spy 
jnb^'  is  the  other  side  of  the  lectum  sternere,  i.e.  the  spread 
ing  of  the  cushions  upon  which  the  images  of  the  gods  were 
placed  during  such  meals  of  the  gods  as  these.  In  the  passage 
before  us,  at  any  rate,  the  lectus  answering  to  the  shulchdn  (like 
the  sella  used  in  the  case  of  the  goddesses)  is  to  be  taken  as  a 
couch  for  eating,  not  for  sleeping  on.  In  the  second  clause, 
therefore,  "=19^*?  *W?  B^Dlpni  (which  is  falsely  accentuated  in 
our  editions  with  tifchah  mercha  silluk,  instead  of  mercha  tifchah 
silluk),  "]DE>D  N?D  signifies  to  fill  with  mixed  drink,  i.e.  with 
wine  mixed  with  spices,  probably  oil  of  spikenard.  KpO  may  be 
connected  not  only  with  the  accusative  of  the  vessel  filled,  but 
also  with  that  of  the  thing  with  which  it  is  filled  (e.g.  Ex. 
xxviii.  17).  Both  names  have  the  article,  like  fepan.  nan  is 
perfectly  clear  ;  if  used  as  an  appellative,  it  would  mean 
"  good  fortune."  The  word  has  this  meaning  in  all  the  three 
leading  Semitic  dialects,  and  it  also  occurs  in  this  sense  in 
Gen.  xxx.  11,  where  the  chethib  is  to  be  read  "tJ3  (LXX.  eV 
rv^rj).  The  Aramaean  definitive  is  &H3  (not  N*ja),  as  the  Arabic 
'gadd  evidently  shows.  The  primary  word  is  Ti|  (Arab,  'gadda), 


to  cut    off,  to  apportion  ;  so   that  j^,  like  the   synonymous 

s  ^ 

^?    signifies   that  which   is   appointed,    more   especially  the 

good  fortune  appointed.     There  can   be  no  doubt,  therefore, 
that  Gad,  the  god  of  good  fortune,  more  especially  if  the  name 


CHAP.  LXV.  11,  12  483 

of  the  place  Baal-Gad  is  to  be  explained  in  the  same  way  as 
Baal-hammdn,  is  Baal  (Bel)  as  the  god  of  good  fortune. 
Gecatilia  (Mose  ha-Cohen)  observes,  that  this  is  the  deified 
planet  Jupiter.  This  star  is  called  by  the  Arabs  "  the  greater 
luck "  as  being  the  star  of  good  fortune ;  and  in  all  proba 
bility  it  is  also  the  rabb-el-bacht  (lord  of  good  fortune)  wor 
shipped  by  the  Ssabians  (Chwolsohn,  ii.  30,  32).  It  is  true 
that  it  is  only  from  the  passage  before  us  that  we  learn  that 
it  was  worshipped  by  the  Babylonians ;  for  although  H. 
Rawlinson  once  thought  that  he  had  found  the  names  Gad 
and  Menni  in  certain  Babylonian  inscriptions  (Journal  of  the 
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  xii.  p.  478),  the  Babylonian  Pantheon  in 
G.  Rawlinson's  Monarchies  contains  neither  of  these  names. 
With  this  want  of  corroborative  testimony,  the  fact  is  worthy 
of  notice,  that  a  Rabbi  named  '  Ulla,  who  sprang  from  Babylon, 
explains  the  E^Yi  of  the  Mishna  by  Kin  KD"W  (a  sofa  dedicated 
to  the  god  of  prosperity,  and  often  left  unused)  (b.  Nedarim 
56a ;  cf.  Sanhedrin  20a).1  But  if  Gad  is  Jupiter,  nothing  is 
more  probable  than  that  Meni  is  Venus  ;  for  the  planet  Venus  is 
also  regarded  as  a  star  of  prosperity,  and  is  called  by  the  Arabs 
"  the  lesser  luck."  The  name  Meni  in  itself,  indeed,  does  not 
necessarily  point  to  a  female  deity;  for  meni  from  mdndh,  if  taken 
as  a  passive  participial  noun  (like  ^  nn3?  a  creature),  signifies 
"  that  which  is  apportioned  ;"  or  if  taken  as  a  modification 
of  the  primary  form  many,  like  ^3,  vtp,  ^V,  and  many  others, 
allotment,  destination,  fate.  We  have  synonyms  in  the  Arabic 
mana-n  and  meniye,  and  the  Per>ian  bacht  (adopted  into  the 
Arabic),  which  signify  the  general  fate,  and  from  which  bago- 
bacht  is  distinguished  as  signifying  that  which  is  exceptionally 
allotted  by  the  gods.  The  existence  of  a  deity  of  this  name 
wfni  is  also  probably  confirmed  by  the  occurrence  of  the  per- 

1  The  foreign  formula  of  incantation  given  in  b.  Salbath  67«,  "H}  13 
I|DK'"Q1  "OtyiN  &h  pWDI  (according  to  the  glosses,  "  0  Fortune,  give  good 
fortune,  and  be  not  tardy  day  and  night"),  also  belongs  here  ;  whereas  the 
name  of  a  place  not  far  from  Siloah,  called  Gad-yavan  (Gad  of  Greece),  con 
tains  some  allusion  to  the  mythology  of  Greece,  which  we  are  unable  to 
trace.  In  the  later  usage  of  the  language  Gad  appears  to  have  acquired 
the  general  meaning  of  numen  (e.g.  ~b.  Clmllin  40a :  im  &OJ?  the  mountain- 
spirit)  ;  and  this  helps  to  explain  the  fact  that  in  Pehlewi  \CT\^  signifies 
majesty  in  a  royal,  titular  sense  (see  Vuller's  Lex. ;  and  Spiegel  in  the 
Indisclie  Studien,  3,  412). 


484  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 


soual  name  ^"Dy  on  certain  Aramseo-Persian  coins  of  the 
Achsemenides,1  with  which  Fiirst  associates  the  personal  name 
Achiman  (see  his  Lex.),  combining  p  with  Mtfv,  and  *OB.  with 
Mrjvij,  as  Movers  (Plwnizier,  i.  650)  and  Knobel  have  also 
done.  }D  and  ^D  would  then  be  Semitic  forms  of  these  Indo- 
Germanic  names  of  deities  ;  for  Mtfv  is  Deus  Lunus,  the 
worship  of  which  in  Carrae  (Charran)  is  mentioned  by  Spartian 
in  ch.  vi.  of  the  Life  of  Caracalla,  whilst  Strabo  (xii.  3,  31,  32) 
speaks  of  it  as  being  worshipped  in  Pontus,  Phrygia,  and  other 
places  ;  and  Mrjvr)  is  Dea  Luna  (cf.  Teveirr)  Mdvrj  in  Plut. 
qucest.  rom.  52,  Genita  Mana  in  Plin.  h.  n.  29,  4,  and  Dea 
Mena  in  Augustine,  Civ.  4,  11),  which  was  worshipped,  accord 
ing  to  Diodorus  (iii.  56)  and  Nonnus  (Dionys.  v.  70  ss.),  in 
Phoenicia  and  Africa.  The  rendering  of  the  LXX.  may  be 
quoted  in  favour  of  the  identity  of  the  latter  with  ^o  (eroifid- 
%ovre<$  TOJ  Scuftovlip  (another  reading  Sai/Jiovi)  Tpdire^av  /cal 
7r\rjpovvTe<;  rfj  TV^TJ  Kepcurfjui),  especially  if  we  compare  with  this 
what  Macrobius  says  in  Saturn,  i.  19,  viz.  that  "  according  to 
the  Egyptians  there  are  four  of  the  gods  which  preside  over  the 
birth  of  men,  Aai^tov,  Tv^y,  "Epo>5,  'Avdrftcq.  Of  these  Daimon 
is  the  sun,  the  author  of  spirit,  of  warmth,  and  of  light.  Tyclie 
is  the  moon,  as  the  goddess  through  whom  all  bodies  below  the 
moon  grow  and  disappear,  and  whose  ever  changing  course 
accompanies  the  multiform  changes  of  this  mortal  life."2  In 
perfect  harmony  with  this  is  the  following  passage  of  Vettius 
Valens,  the  astrologer  of  Antioch,  which  has  been  brought  to 
light  by  Selden  in  his  Syntagma  de  Diis  Syris  ;  K\rfpot  rfj? 
TV^S  KOI  TOV  ^ai/Jiovo^  crrj/malvovcriv  (viz.  by  the  signs  of 
nativity)  rj\iov  re  /cal  ae^rjvrjv.  Rosenmiiller  very  properly 
traces  back  the  Sept.  rendering  to  this  Egyptian  view,  accord 
ing  to  which  Gad  is  the  sun-god,  and  Meni  the  lunar  goddess 
as  the  power  of  fate.  Now  it  is  quite  true  that  the  passage 
before  us  refers  to  Babylonian  deities,  and  not  to  Egyptian  ; 
at  the  same  time  there  might  be  some  relation  between  the  two 
views,  just  as  in  other  instances  ancient  Babylonia  and  Egypt 
coincide.  But  there  are  many  objections  that  may  be  offered 
to  the  combination  of  ^O  (Meni)  and  Mrjvrj  :  (1)  The  Baby 
lonian  moon-deity  was  either  called  Slny  as  among  the  ancient 

1  See  Rodiger  in  the  concluding  part  of  the  thes.  p.  97. 

8  See  Ge.  Zoega's  Abhandlungen,  edited  by  Welcker  (1817),  pp.  39,  40. 


CHAP.  LXV.  11,  12.  485 

Shemites  generally,  or  else  by  other  names  connected  with  ^ 
(HT)  and  chdmar.  (2)  The  moon  is  called  mas  in  Sanscrit, 
Zendic  mdo,  Neo-Pers.  mdh  (maJi) ;  but  in  the  Arian  languages 
we  meet  with  no  such  names  as  could  be  traced  to  a  root  man 
as  the  expansion  of  md  (to  measure),  like  /Jbrjv  (privr/),  Goth. 
mena ;  for  the  ancient  proper  names  which  Movers  cites,  viz. 
'Apia/jLevr)S)  'ApTa^evys,  etc.,  are  traceable  rather  to  the  Arian 
manas  =  jj,evo$,  mens,  with  which  Minerva  (Menerva,  endowed 
with  mind)  is  connected.  (3)  If  meni  were  the  Semitic  form 
of  the  name  for  the  moon,  we  should  expect  a  closer  reciprocal 
relation  in  the  meanings  of  the  words.  We  therefore  subscribe 
to  the  view  propounded  by  Gesenius,  who  adopts  the  pairing 
of  Jupiter  and  Venus  common  among  the  Arabs,  as  the  two 
heavenly  bodies  that  preside  over  the  fortunes  of  men ;  and  un 
derstands  by  Meni  Venus,  and  by  Gad  Jupiter.  There  is  nothing 
at  variance  with  this  in  the  fact  that  'Ashtoreth  (Ishtar,  with 
'Asherdh)  is  the  name  of  Venus  (the  morning  star),  as  we  have 
shown  at  ch.  xiv.  12.  Meni  is  her  special  name  as  the  bestower 
of  good  fortune  and  the  distributor  of  fate  generally;  probably 
identical  with  Mandt,  one  of  the  three  leading  deities  of  the 
prse-Islamitish  Arabs.1  The  address  proceeds  with  umdmthl 
(and  I  have  measured),  which  forms  an  apodosis  and  contains 
a  play  upon  the  name  of  Meni}  ver.  11  being  as  it  were  a  protasis 
indicating  the  principal  reason  of  their  approaching  fate.  Be 
cause  they  sued  for  the  favour  of  the  two  gods  of  fortune 
(the  Arabs  call  them  es-saddni,  "the  two  fortunes")  and  put 
Jehovah  into  the  shade,  Jehovah  would  assign  them  to  the 
sword,  and  they  would  all  have  to  bow  down  (JH3  as  in  ch.  x. 
4).  Another  reason  is  now  assigned  for  this,  the  address  thus 
completing  the  circle,  viz.,  because  when  I  called  ye  did  not 
reply,  when  I  spake  ye  did  not  hear  (this  is  expressed  in  the 
same  paratactic  manner  as  in  ch.  v.  4,  xii.  1,  1.  2),  and  ye  have 
done,  etc. :  an  explanatory  clause,  consisting  of  four  members, 
which  is  repeated  almost  word  for  word  in  ch.  Ixvi.  4  (cf.  Ivi.  4). 
On  the  ground  of  the  sin  thus  referred  to  again,  the 
proclamation  of  punishment  is  renewed,  and  the  different  fates 
awaiting  the  servants  of  Jehovah  and  those  by  whom  He  is 
despised  are  here  announced  in  five  distinct  theses  and  anti- 

1  See  Krehl,  Religion  der  vorislamischen  Araber,  p.  78.    Sprenger  in  hia 
Life  of  Mohammad,  1862,  compares  the  Arabic  Mandt  with  *}&. 


486  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

theses.  Vers.  13-16.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Jehovah: 
Behold  my  servants  will  eat,  but  ye  will  hunger ;  behold  my  ser 
vants  will  drink,  but  ye  ivill  thirst ;  behold  my  servants  will  rejoice, 
but  ye  will  be  put  to  shame ;  behold  my  servants  will  exult  for 
delight  of  heart,  but  ye  will  cry  for  anguish  of  heart,  and  ye  will 
lament  for  brokenness  of  spirit.  And  ye  will  leave  your  name 
for  a  curse  to  my  chosen  ones,  and  the  Lord,  Jehovah,  will  slay 
thee ;  but  His  servants  He  will  call  by  another  name,  so  that  who 
ever  blesseth  himself  in  the  land  will  bless  himself  by  the  God  of 
truthfulness,  and  whoever  sweareth  in  the  land  ivill  swear  by  the 
God  of  truthfulness,  because  the  former  troubles  are  forgotten, 
and  because  they  have  vanished  from  mine  eyes"  The  name 
Adonai  is  connected  with  the  name  Jehovah  for  the  purpose  of 
affirming  that  the  God  of  salvation  and  judgment  has  the 
power  to  carry  His  promises  and  threats  into  execution. 
Starving,  confounded  by  the  salvation  they  had  rejected  (^BOn 
as  in.  ch.  Ixvi.  5),  crying  and  wailing  (yvJJJ,  fut.  hiph.  as  in  ch. 
xv.  2,  with  a  double  preformative ;  Ges.  §  70,  2  Anm.)  for 
sorrow  of  heart  and  crushing  of  spirit  (shebher,  rendered  very 
well  by  the  LXX.  o-vvrpiftr),  as  in  ch.  Ixi.  1,  avvTeTpi[JiiJievov<s\ 
the  rebellious  ones  are  left  behind  in  the  land  of  captivity, 
whilst  the  servants  of  Jehovah  enjoy  the  richest  blessings  from 
God  in  the  land  of  promise  (ch.  Ixii.  8,  9).  The  former,  perish 
ing  in  the  land  of  captivity,  leave  their  name  to  the  latter  as 
shebhudh,  i.e.  to  serve  as  a  formula  by  which  to  swear,  or  rather 
to  execrate  or  curse  (Num  v.  21),  so  that  men  will  say,  "  Jehovah 
slay  thee,  as  He  slew  them."  This,  at  any  rate,  is  the  meaning 
of  the  threat ;  but  the  words  'Ml  ^JfPlprfl  cannot  contain  the 
actual  formula,  not  even  if  we  drop  the  Vav,  as  Knobel  pro 
poses,  and  change  ^VTa?  into  FWEP ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  al 
though  in  the  doxologies  a  Hebrew  was  in  the  habit  of  saying 
"  berukh  shemo  "  (bless  his  name)  instead  of  yehl  shemo  bdrukh 
(his  name  be  blessed),  he  never  went  so  far  as  the  Arab  with 

his  (jj.ljj  <djl,  but  said  rather  "pnrp.     Still  less  could  he  make 

use  of  the  perfect  (indicative)  in  such  sentences  as  "  may  he 
slay  thee,"  instead  of  the  future  (voluntative)  ^^W,  unless  the 
perfect  shared  the  optative  force  of  the  previous  future  by 
virtue  of  the  consecutio  temporum.  And  secondly,  the  indispens 
able  DH3  or  i"1?^?  would  be  wanting  (see  Jer.  xxix.  22,  cf.  Gen. 


CHAP.  LXV.  13-19.  487 

xlviii.  20).  We  may  therefore  assume,  that  the  prophet  has 
before  his  rnind  the  words  of  this  imprecatory  formula,  though 
he  does  not  really  express  them,  and  that  he  deduces  from  it 
the  continuation  of  the  threat.  And  this  explains  his  passing 
from  the  plural  to  the  singular.  Their  name  will  become  an 
execration ;  but  Jehovah  will  call  His  servants  by  another 
name  (cf.  ch.  Ixii.  2),  so  that  henceforth  it  will  be  the  God  of 
the  faithfully  fulfilled  promise  whose  name  men  take  into  their 
mouth  when  they  either  desire  a  blessing  or  wish  to  give  as 
surance  of  the  truth  (hithldrekh  be,  to  bless  one's  self  with  any 
one,  or  with  the  name  of  any  one;  Ewald,  §  133,  Anm.  1). 
No  other  name  of  any  god  is  now  heard  in  the  land,  except 
this  gloriously  attested  name ;  for  the  former  troubles,  which 
included  the  mixed  condition  of  Israel  in  exile  and  the  perse 
cution  of  the  worshippers  of  Jehovah  by  the  despisers  of 
Jehovah,  are  now  forgotten,  so  that  they  no  longer  disturb  the 
enjoyment  of  the  present,  and  are  even  hidden  from  the  eyes 
of  God,  so  that  all  thought  of  ever  renewing  them  is  utterly 
remote  from  His  mind.  This  is  the  connection  between  ver. 
16  and  vers.  13-15.  "IE?K  does  not  mean  eo  quod  here,  as  in 
Gen.  xxxi.  49  for  example,  but  ita  ut,  as  in  Gen.  xiii.  16. 
What  follows  is  the  result  of  the  separation  accomplished  and 
the  promise  fulfilled.  For  the  same  reason  God  is  called 
Elolie  'amen,  "the  God  of  Amen,"  i.e.  the  God  who  turns  what 
Pie  promises  into  Yea  and  Amen  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  The  epithet 
derived  from  the  confirmatory  Amen,  which  is  thus  applied  to 
Jehovah,  is  similar  to  the  expression  in  Eev.  iii.  14,  where 
Jesus  is  called  "  the  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true  witness." 
The  explanatory  kl  (for)  is  emphatically  repeated  in  '31,  as  in 
Gen.  xxxiii.  11  and  1  Sam.  xix.  4  (compare  Job  xxxviii.  20). 
The  inhabitants  of  the  land  stand  in  a  close  and  undisturbed 
relation  to  the  God  who  has  proved  Himself  to  be  true  to  His 
promises ;  for  all  the  former  evils  that  followed  from  the  sin 
have  entirely  passed  away. 

The  fact  that  they  have  thus  passed  away  is  now  still 
further  explained ;  the  prophet  heaping  up  one  kl  (for)  upon 
another,  as  in  ch.  ix.  3-5.  Vers.  17-19.  "  For  behold  I  create 
a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth ;  and  men  will  not  remember  the 
first,  nor  do  they  come  to  any  ones  mind.  No,  be  ye  joyful 
and  exult  for  ever  at  that  which  I  create :  for  behold  I  turn 


488  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Jerusalem  into  exulting,  and  her  people  into  joy.  And  T  shall 
exult  over  Jerusalem,  and  be  joyous  over  my  people,  and  the  voice 
of  weeping  and  screaming  will  be  heard  in  her  no  more"  The 
promise  here  reaches  its  culminating  point,  which  had  already 
been  seen  from  afar  in  ch.  li.  16.  Jehovah  creates  a  new 
heaven  and  a  new  earth,  which  bind  so  fast  with  their  glory, 
and  which  so  thoroughly  satisfy  all  desires,  that  there  is  no 
thought  of  the  former  ones,  and  no  one  wishes  them  back 
again.  Most  of  the  commentators,  from  Jerome  to  Hahn, 
suppose  the  rishonoth  in  ver.  16  to  refer  to  the  former  sorrow 
ful  times.  Calvin  says,  "  The  statement  of  the  prophet,  that 
there  will  be  no  remembrance  of  former  things,  is  supposed 
by  some  to  refer  to  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  as  if  he  meant, 
that  henceforth  neither  the  fame  nor  even  the  name  of  either 
would  any  more  be  heard ;  but  I  prefer  to  refer  them  to  the 
former  times."  But  the  correctness  of  the  former  explanation 
is  shown  by  the  parallel  in  Jer.  iii.  16,  which  stands  in  by  no 
means  an  accidental  relation  to  this  passage,  and  where  it  is 
stated  that  in  the  future  there  will  be  no  ark  of  the  covenant, 
"  neither  shall  it  come  to  mind,  neither  shall  they  remember  it," 
inasmuch  as  all  Jerusalem  will  be  the  throne  of  Jehovah,  and 
not  merely  the  capporeth  with  its  symbolical  cherubim.  This 
promise  is  also  a  glorious  one  ;  but  Jeremiah  and  all  the  other 
prophets  fall  short  of  the  eagle-flight  of  Isaiah,  of  whom  the 
same  may  be  said  as  of  John,  "volat  avis  sine  meta."  Luther 
(like  Zwingli  and  Stier)  adopts  the  correct  rendering,  "  that 
men  shall  no  more  remember  the  former  ones  (i.e.  the  old 
heaven  and  old  earth),  nor  take  it  to  heart."  But  'dldh  'al-lebh 
signifies  to  come  into  the  mind,  not  "  to  take  to  heart,"  and  is 
applied  to  a  thing,  the  thought  of  which  "  ascends"  within  us, 
and  with  which  we  are  inwardly  occupied.  There  is  no  neces 
sity  to  take  the  futures  in  ver.  176  as  commands  (Ilitzig)  ;  for 
jfti^'DK  13  (^  with  munach,  as  in  Ven.  1521,  after  the  Masora 
to  Num.  xxxv.  33)  fits  on  quite  naturally,  even  if  we  take  them 
as  simple  predictions.  Instead  of  such  a  possible,  though  not 
actual,  calling  back  and  wishing  back,  those  who  survive  the 
new  times  are  called  upon  rather  to  rejoice  for  ever  in  that 
which  Jehovah  is  actually  creating,  and  will  have  created  then. 
"V^X,  if  not  regarded  as  the  accusative-object,  is  certainly  re 
garded  as  the  object  of  causality,  "in  consideration  of  that 


CHAP.  LXV.  20.  480 

which"  (cf.  ch.  xxxi.  6,  Gen.  iii.  17,  Judg.  A  in.  15),  equiva 
lent  to,  "  on  account  of  that  which"  (seeatch.  Ixiv.  4,  xxxv.  1), 
The  imperatives  sisu  vegllil  are  not  words  of  admonition  so 
much  as  words  of  command,  and  kl  gives  the  reason  in  this 
sense  :  Jehovah  makes  Jerusalem  gildh  and  her  people  mdso? 
(accusative  of  the  predicate,  or  according  to  the  terminology 
adopted  in  Becker's  syntax,  the  "  factitive  object,"  Ges.  §  139, 
2),  by  making  joy  its  perpetual  state,  its  appointed  condition  of 
life  both  inwardly  and  outwardly.  Nor  is  it  joy  on  the  part 
of  the  church  only,  but  on  the  part  of  its  God  as  well  (see  the 
primary  passage  in  Deut.  xxx.  9).  When  the  church  thus 
rejoices  in  God,  and  God  in  the  church,  so  that  the  light  of 
the  two  commingle,  and  each  is  reflected  in  the  other ;  then 
will  no  sobbing  of  weeping  ones,  no  sound  of  lamentation,  be 
heard  any  more  in  Jerusalem  (see  the  opposite  side  as  expressed 
in  ch.  11/36). 

There  will  be  a  different  measure  then,  and  a  much  greater 
one,  for  measuring  the  period  of  life  and  grace.  Yer.  20. 
"  And  there  shall  no  more  come  thence  a  suckling  of  a  few  days, 
and  an  old  man  ivho  has  not  lived  out  all  his  days ;  for  the  youth 
in  it  will  die  as  one  a  hundred  years  old,  and  the  sinner  be 
smitten  with  the  curse  as  one  a  hundred  years  old"  Our 
editions  of  the  text  commence  ver.  20  with  PWl*"l6,  but  ac 
cording  to  the  Masora  (see  Mas.  finalis,  p.  23,  col.  7),  which 
reckons  five  ntttf"H7l  at  the  commencement  of  verses,  and 
includes  our  verse  among  them,  it  must  read  (WPT^  as  it  is 
also  rendered  by  the  LXX.  and  Targum.  The  meaning  and 
connection  are  not  affected  by  this  various  reading.  Hence 
forth  there  will  not  spring  from  Jerusalem  (or,  what  hay  ah 
really  means,  "  come  into  existence ;"  "  thence"  misshdm,  not 
"from  that  time,"  but  locally,  as  in  Hos.  ii.  17  and  elsewhere, 
cf.  ch.  Iviii.  12)  a  suckling  (see  vol.  i.  p.  138)  of  days,  i.e.  one 
who  has  only  reached  the  age  of  a  few  days  (ydmlm  as  in  Gen. 
xxiv.  55,  etc.),  nor  an  old  man  who  has  not  filled  his  days,  i.e. 
lias  not  attained  to  what  is  regarded  as  a  rule  as  the  full 
measure  of  human  life.  He  who  dies  as  a  youth,  or  is  re 
garded  as  having  died  young,  will  not  die  before  the  hundredth 
year  of  his  life  ;  and  the  sinner  (Kttfnrn  with  segholj  as  in  Eccl. 
viii.  12,  ix.  18;  Ges.  §  75,  Anm.  21)  upon  whom  the  curse  of 
God  falls,  and  who  is  overwhelmed  by  the  punishment,  will  nut 


490  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

be  swept  away  before  the  hundredth  year  of  his  life.  We  can 
not  maintain  with  Hofmann  (Schriftbeweis,  ii.  2,  567),  that  it 
is  only  in  appearance  that  less  is  here  affirmed  than  in  ch. 
xxv.  8.  The  reference  there  is  to  the  ultimate  destruction  of 
the  power  of  death ;  here  it  is  merely  to  the  limitation  of  its 
power. 

In  the  place  of  the  threatened  curses  of  the  law  in  Lev. 
xxvi.  16  (cf.  Deut.  xxviii.  30),  the  very  opposite  will  now 
receive  their  fullest  realization.  Vers.  21-23.  "And  they  will 
build  houses  and  inhabit  them,  and  plant  vineyards  and  enjoy 
the  fruit  thereof.  They  will  not  build  and  another  inhabit,  nor 
plant  and  another  enjoy ;  for  like  the  days  of  trees  are  the  days 
of  my  people,  and  my  chosen  ones  will  consume  the  work  of  their 
hands.  They  ivill  not  weary  themselves  in  vain,  nor  bring  forth 
for  sudden  disaster;  for  they  are  a  family  of  the  blessed  of 
Jehovah,  and  their  offspring  are  left  to  them.19  They  themselves 
will  enjoy  what  they  have  worked  for,  without  some  one  else 
stepping  in,  whether  a  countryman  by  violence  or  inheritance, 
or  a  foreigner  by  plunder  or  conquest  (ch.  Ixii.  8),  to  take  pos 
session  of  that  which  they  have  built  and  planted  (read  W®\ 

without  dagesli) ;  for  the  duration  of  their  life  will  be  as  great 
as  that  of  trees  (i.e.  of  oaks,  terebinths,  and  cedars,  which  live 
for  centuries),  and  thus  they  will  be  able  thoroughly  to  enjoy 
in  their  own  person  what  their  hands  have  made.  Billdh  does 
net  mean  merely  to  use  and  enjoy,  but  to  use  up  and  consume. 
Work  and  generation  will  be  blessed  then,  and  there  will  be 
no  more  disappointed  hopes.  They  will  not  weary  themselves 
(iyy»  with  a  preformative  *  without  that  of  the  root)  for  failure, 
nor  get  children  labbehdldh,  i.e.  for  some  calamity  to  fall  sud 
denly  upon  them  and  carry  them  away  (Lev.  xxvi.  16,  cf.  Ps. 
Ixxviii.  33).  The  primary  idea  of  bdhal  is  either  acting,  per 
mitting,  or  bearing,  with  the  characteristic  of  being  let  loose, 
of  suddenness,  of  overthrow,  or  of  throwing  into  confusion. 
The  LXX.  renders  it  et?  Kardpav,  probably  according  to  the 
Egypto-Jewish  usage,  in  which  behdldh  may  have  signified 
cursing,  like  bahle,  buhle  in  the  Arabic  (see  the  Appendices). 
The  two  clauses  of  the  explanation  which  follows  stand  in  a 
reciprocal  relation  to  the  two  clauses  of  the  previous  promise. 
They  are  a  family  of  the  blessed  of  God,  upon  whose  labour 


CHAP.  LXV.  24,  26.  491 

the  blessing  of  God  rests,  and  their  offspring  are  with  them, 
without  being  lost  to  them  by  premature  death.  This  is  the 
true  meaning,  as  in  Job  xxi.  8,  and  not  "  their  offspring  with 
them,"  i.e.  in  like  manner,  as  Hitzig  supposes. 

All  prayer  will  be  heard  then.  Ver.  24.  "And  it  will  come 
to  pass :  before  they  call,  I  will  answer  ;  they  are  still  speaking, 
and  I  already  hear"  The  will  of  the  church  of  the  new  Jeru 
salem  will  be  so  perfectly  the  will  of  Jehovah  also,  that  He 
will  hear  the  slightest  emotion  of  prayer  in  the  heart,  the  half- 
uttered  prayer,  and  will  at  once  fulfil  it  (cf.  ch.  xxx.  19). 

And  all  around  will  peace  and  harmony  prevail,  even  in 
the  animal  world  itself.  Ver.  25.  "  Wolf  and  lamb  then  feed 
together,  and  the  lion  eats  chopped  straw  like  the  ox,  and  the 
serpent  —  dust  is  its  bread.  They  will  neither  do  harm  nor 
destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain,  saith  Jehovah"  We  have  fre 
quently  observed  within  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  (last  of  all  at  ch.  Ixv.  12, 
cf.  Ixvi.  4),  how  the  prophet  repeats  entire  passages  from  the 
earlier  portion  of  his  prophecies  almost  word  for  word.  Here 
he  repeats  ch.  xi.  6-9  with  a  compendious  abridgment.  Ver. 
256  refers  to  the  animals  just  as  it  does  there.  But  whilst  this 
custom  of  self-repetition  favours  the  unity  of  authorship,  ^£?O 
for  TnfV  =  und,  which  only  occurs  elsewhere  in  Ezra  and  Eccle- 
siastes  (answering  to  the  Chaldee  n7D?.),  might  be  adduced  as 
evidence  of  the  opposite.  The  only  thing  that  is  new  in  the 
picture  as  here  reproduced,  is  what  is  said  of  the  serpent.  This 
will  no  longer  watch  for  human  life,  but  will  content  itself 
with  the  food  assigned  it  in  Gen.  iii.  14.  It  still  continues  to 
wriggle  in  the  dust,  but  without  doing  injury  to  man.  The 
words  affirm  nothing  more  than  this,  although  Stier's  method 
of  exposition  gets  more  out,  or  rather  puts  more  in.  The 
assertion  of  those  who  regard  the  prophet  speaking  here  as  one 
later  than  Isaiah,  viz.  that  ver.  25  is  only  attached  quite  loosely 
to  what  precedes,  is  unjust  and  untrue.  The  description  of  the 
new  age  closes  here,  as  in  ch.  xi.,  with  the  peace  of  the  world  of 
nature,  which  stands  throughout  ch.  xl.-lxvi.  in  the  closest  reci 
procal  relation  to  man,  just  as  it  did  in  ch.  i.— xxxix.  If  we  follow 
Halm,  and  change  the  animals  into  men  by  simply  allegorizing, 
we  just  throw  our  exposition  back  to  a  standpoint  that  has  been 
long  passed  by.  But  to  what  part  of  the  history  of  salvation 
are  we  to  kok  for  a  place  for  the  fulfilment  of  such  prophecies 


492  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

as  these  of  the  state  of  peace  prevailing  in  nature  around  the 
church,  except  in  the  millennium  I  A  prophet  was  certainly 
no  fanatic,  so  that  we  could  say,  these  are  beautiful  dreams. 
And  if,  what  is  certainly  true,  his  prophecies  are  not  intended 
to  be  interpreted  according  to  the  letter,  but  according  to  the 
spirit  of  the  letter ;  the  letter  is  the  sheath  of  the  spirit,  as 
Luther  calls  it,  and  we  must  not  give  out  as  the  spirit  of  the 
letter  what  is  nothing  more  than  a  quid-pro-quo  of  the  letter. 
The  prophet  here  promises  a  new  age,  in  which  the  patriarchal 
measure  of  human  life  will  return,  in  which  death  will  no  more 
break  off  the  life  that  is  just  beginning  to  bloom,  and  in  which 
the  war  of  man  with  the  animal  world  will  be  exchanged  for 
peace  without  danger.  And  when  is  all  this  to  occur  ?  Cer 
tainly  not  in  the  blessed  life  beyond  the  grave,  to  which  it 
would  be  both  absurd  and  impossible  to  refer  these  promises, 
since  they  presuppose  a  continued  mixture  of  sinners  with  the 
righteous,  and  merely  a  limitation  of  the  power  of  death,  not 
its  utter  destruction.  But  when  then  1  This  question  ought 
to  be  answered  by  the  anti-millenarians.  They  throw  back 
the  interpretation  of  prophecy  to  a  stage,  in  which  commenta 
tors  were  in  the  habit  of  lowering  the  concrete  substance  of 
the  prophecies  into  mere  doctrinal  loci  communes.  They  take 
refuge  behind  the  enigmatical  character  of  the  Apocalypse, 
without  acknowledging  that  what  the  Apocalypse  predicts 
under  the  definite  form  of  the  millennium  is  the  substance  of 
all  prophecy,  and  that  no  interpretation  of  prophecy  on  sound 
principles  is  any  longer  possible  from  the  standpoint  of  an 
orthodox  antichiliasm,  inasmuch  as  the  antichiliasts  twist  the 
word  in  the  mouths  of  the  prophets,  and  through  their  perver 
sion  of  Scripture  shake  the  foundation  of  all  doctrines,  every 
one  of  which  rests  upon  the  simple  interpretation  of  the  words 
of  revelation.  But  one  objection  may  be  made  to  the  supposi 
tion,  that  the  prophet  is  here  depicting  the  state  of  things  in 
the  millennium  ;  viz.  that  this  description  is  preceded  by  an 
account  of  the  creation  of  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth. 
The  prophet  appears,  therefore,  to  refer  to  that  Jerusalem, 
which  is  represented  in  the  Apocalypse  as  coming  down  from 
heaven  to  earth  after  the  transformation  of  the  globe.  But  to 
this  it  may  be  replied,  that  the  Old  Testament  prophet  was  not 
yet  able  to  distinguish  from  one  another  the  things  which  the 


CHAP.  LXVI.  1-4.  493 

author  of  the  Apocalypse  separates  into  distinct  periods.  From 
the  Old  Testament  point  of  view  generally,  nothing  was  known 
of  a  state  of  blessedness  beyond  the  grave.  Hades  lay  beyond 
this  present  life;  and  nothing  was  known  of  a  heaven  in  which 
men  were  blessed.  Around  the  throne  of  God  in  heaven 
there  were  angels  and  not  men.  And,  indeed,  until  the  risen 
Saviour  ascended  to  heaven,  heaven  itself  was  not  open  to  men, 
and  therefore  there  was  no  heavenly  Jerusalem  whose  descent 
to  earth  could  be  anticipated  then.  Consequently  in  the  pro 
phecies  of  the  Old  Testament  the  eschatological  idea  of  the 
new  Cosmos  does  unquestionably  coincide  with  the  millennium. 
It  is  only  in  the  New  Testament  that  the  new  creation  inter 
venes  as  a  party-wall  between  this  life  and  the  life  beyond ; 
whereas  the  Old  Testament  prophecy  brings  down  the  new 
creation  itself  into  the  present  life,  and  knows  nothing  of  any 
Jerusalem  of  the  blessed  life  to  come,  as  distinct  from  the  new 
Jerusalem  of  the  millennium.  We  shall  meet  with  a  still 
further  illustration  in  ch.  Ixvi.  of  this  Old  Testament  custom 
of  reducing  the  things  of  the  life  to  come  within  the  limits  of 
this  present  world. 

THIRD  CLOSING  PROPHECY.— CHAP.  LXVI. 
EXCLUSION  OF  SCORNERS  FROM  THE  COMING  SALVATION. 

Although  the  note  on  which  this  prophecy  opens  is  a 
different  one  from  any  that  has  yet  been  struck,  there  are  many 
points  in  which  it  coincides  with  the  preceding  prophecy.  For 
not  only  is  ch.  Ixv.  12  repeated  here  in  ver.  4,  but  the  sharp 
line  of  demarcation  drawn  in  ch.  Ixv.,  between  the  servants  of 
Jehovah  and  the  worldly  majority  of  the  nation  with  reference 
to  the  approaching  return  to  the  Holy  Land,  is  continued  here. 
As  the  idea  of  their  return  is  associated  immediately  with  that  of 
the  erection  of  a  new  temple,  there  is  nothing  at  all  to  surprise 
us,  after  what  we  have  read  in  ch.  Ixv.  8  sqq.,  in  the  fact  that 
Jehovah  expresses  His  abhorrence  at  the  thought  of  having  a 
temple  built  by  the  Israel  of  the  captivity,  as  the  majority  then 
were,  and  does  so  in  such  words  as  those  which  follow  in  vers. 
1  -4 :  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah :  The  heaven  is  my  throne,  and  the 
earth  my  footstool.  What  kind  of  house  is  it  that  ye  would  build 


494  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

me,  and  what  kind  of  place  for  my  rest  ?  My  hand  hath  made 
all  these  things ;  then  all  these  things  arose,  saith  Jehovah ;  and 
at  such  persons  do  I  look,  at  the  miserable  and  broken-hearted, 
and  him  that  trembleth  at  my  word.  He  that  slaughtereth  the 
ox  is  the  slayer  of  a  man;  he  that  sacrificeth  the  sheep  is  a 
strangler  of  dogs ;  he  that  offereth  a  meat-offering,  it  is  swine's 
blood ;  he  that  causeth  incense  to  rise  up  in  smoke,  blesseth  idols. 
A  s  they  have  chosen  their  ways,  and  their  soul  cherisheth  pleasure 
in  their  abominations ;  so  will  I  choose  their  ill-treatments,  and 
bring  their  terrors  upon  them,  because  I  called  and  no  one  replied, 
I  spake  and  they  did  not  hear,  and  they  did  evil  in  mine  eyes,  and 
chose  that  in  which  I  took  no  pleasure."  Hitzig  is  of  opinion 
that  the  author  has  broken  off  here,  and  proceeds  quite  unex 
pectedly  to  denounce  the  intention  to  build  a  temple  for  Jehovah. 
Those  who  wish  to  build  he  imagines  to  be  those  who  have  made 
up  their  minds  to  stay  behind  in  Chaldea,  and  who,  whilst  their 
brethren  who  have  returned  to  their  native  land  are  preparing 
to  build  a  temple  there,  want  to  have  one  of  their  own,  just  as 
the  Jews  in  Egypt  built  one  for  themselves  in  Leontopolis  (see 
vol.  i.  pp.  362-366).  Without  some  such  supposition  as  this, 
Hitzig  thinks  it  altogether  impossible  to  discover  the  thread  which 
connects  the  different  verses  together.  This  view  is  at  any  rate 
better  than  that  of  Umbreit,  who  imagines  that  the  prophet 
places  us  here  "  on  the  loftiest  spiritual  height  of  the  Christian 
development."  "  In  the  new  Jerusalem,"  he  says,  "  there  will 
be  no  temple  seen,  nor  any  sacrifice  ;  Jehovah  forbids  these 
in  the  strongest  terms,  regarding  them  as  equivalent  to  mortal 
sins."  But  the  prophet,  if  this  were  his  meaning,  would  involve 
himself  in  self-contradiction,  inasmuch  as,  according  to  ch.  Ivi. 
and  lx.,  there  will  be  a  temple  in  the  new  Jerusalem  with 
perpetual  sacrifice,  which  this  prophecy  also  presupposes  in 
vers.  20  sqq.  (cf.  ver.  6)  ;  and  secondly,  he  would  contradict 
other  prophets,  such  as  Ezekiel  and  Zechariah,  and  the  spirit 
of  the  Old  Testament  generally,  in  which  the  statement,  that 
whoever  slaughters  a  sacrificial  animal  in  the  new  Jerusalem 

O 

will  be  as  bad  as  a  murderer,  has  no  parallel,  and  is  in  fact 
absolutely  impossible.  According  to  Hitzig's  view,  on  the 
other  hand,  ver.  3a  affirms,  that  the  worship  which  they  would 
be  bound  to  perform  in  their  projected  temple  would  be  an 
abomination  to  Jehovah,  however  thoroughly  it  might  be  made 


CHAP.  LXVI.  1-4.  495 

to  conform  to  the  Mosaic  ritual.  But  there  is  nothing  in  the 
text  to  sustain  the  idea,  that  there  is  any  intention  here  to 
condemn  the  building  of  a  temple  to  Jehovah  in  Chaldsea, 
nor  is  such  an  explanation  by  any  means  necessary  to  make  the 
text  clear.  The  condemnation  on  the  part  of  Jehovah  has 
reference  to  the  temple,  which  the  returning  exiles  intend  to 
build  in  Jerusalem.  The  prophecy  is  addressed  to  the  entire 
body  now  ready  to  return,  and  says  to  the  whole  without 
exception,  that  Jehovah,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  does 
not  stand  in  need  of  any  house  erected  by  human  hands,  and 
then  proceeds  to  separate  the  penitent  from  those  that  are  at 
enmity  against  God,  rejects  in  the  most  scornful  manner  all 
offerings  in  the  form  of  worship  on  the  part  of  the  latter,  and 
threatens  them  with  divine  retribution,  having  dropped  in 
vers.  36-4  the  form  of  address  to  the  entire  body.  Just  as  in 
the  Psalm  of  Asaph  (Ps.  1.)  Jehovah  refuses  animal  and  other 
material  offerings  as  such,  because  the  whole  of  the  animal 
world,  the  earth  and  the  fulness  thereof,  are  His  possession, 
so  here  He  addresses  this  question  to  the  entire  body  of  the 
exiles :  What  kind  of  house  is  there  that  ye  could  build,  that 
would  be  worthy  of  me,  and  what  kind  of  place  that  would 
be  worthy  of  being  assigned  to  me  as  a  resting-place  ?  On 
mdgom  menuchdthl9  locus  qui  sit  requies  mea  (apposition  instead 
of  genitive  connection),  see  p.  35.  He  needs  no  temple ;  for 
heaven  is  His  throne,  and  the  earth  His  footstool.  He  is  the 
Being  who  filleth  all,  the  Creator,  and  therefore  the  possessor, 
of  the  universe;  and  if  men  think  to  do  Him  a  service  by  build 
ing  Him  a  temple,  and  forget  His  infinite  majesty  in  their 
concern  for  their  own  contemptible  fabric,  He  wants  no  temple 
at  all.  "All  these"  refer,  as  if  pointing  with  the  finger,  to 
the  world  of  visible  objects  that  surround  us.  vn»1  (from  njn, 
existere,  fieri)  is  used  in  the  same  sense  as  the  ^HJI  which 
followed  the  creative  W.  In  this  His  exaltation  He  is  not  con 
cerned  about  a  temple  ;  but  His  gracious  look  is  fixed  upon 
the  man  who  is  as  follows  (zeh  pointing  forwards  as  in  ch. 
Iviii.  6),  viz.  upon  the  mourner,  the  man  of  broken  heart,  who 
is  filled  with  reverential  awe  at  the  word  of  His  revelation. 
We  may  see  from  Ps.  li.  9  what  the  link  of  connection  is 
between  vers.  2  and  3.  So  far  as  the  mass  of  the  exiles  were 
concerned,  who  had  not  been  humbled  by  their  sufferings,  and 


496  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

whom  the  preaching  of  the  prophet  could  not  bring  to  reflec 
tion,  He  did  not  want  any  temple  or  sacrifice  from  them.  The 
sacrificial  acts,  to  which  such  detestable  predicates  are  here 
applied,  are  such  as  end  with  the  merely  external  act,  whilst 
the  inward  feelings  of  the  person  presenting  the  sacrifice  are 
altogether  opposed  to  the  idea  of  both  the  animal  sacrifice  and 
the  meat-offering,  more  especially  to  that  desire  for  salvation 
which  was  symbolized  in  all  the  sacrifices;  in  other  words,  they 
are  sacrificial  acts  regarded  as  veKpa  epya,  the  lifeless  works  of 
men  spiritually  dead.  The  articles  of  hasshor  and  hasseh  are 
used  as  generic  with  reference  to  sacrificial  animals.  The 
slaughter  of  an  ox  was  like  the  slaying  (makkeh  construct 
with  tzere)  of  a  man  (for  the  association  of  ideas,  see  Gen. 
xlix.  6);  the  sacrifice  (zoblieacli  like  slidchat  is  sometimes  applied 
to  slaughtering  for  the  purpose  of  eating;  here,  however,  it 
refers  to  an  animal  prepared  for  Jehovah)  of  a  sheep  like  the 
strangling  of  a  dog,  that  unclean  animal  (for  the  association  of 
ideas,  see  Job  xxx.  1)  ;  the  offerer  up  (nf'oleh)  of  a  meat 
offering  (like  one  who  offered  up)  swine's  blood,  i.e.  as  if  he 
was  offering  up  the  blood  of  this  most  unclean  animal  upon  the 
altar ;  he  who  offered  incense  as  an  'azkdrdh  (see  at  ch.  i.  13a) 
like  one  who  blessed  'dven,  i.e.  godlessness,  used  here  as  in 
1  Sam.  xv.  23,  and  also  in  Hosea  in  the  change  of  the  name  of 
Bethel  into  Beth  'Aven,  for  idolatry,  or  rather  in  a  concrete 
sense  for  the  worthless  idols  themselves,  all  of  which,  according 
to  ch.  xli.  29,  are  nothing  but  'dven.  Rosenmiiller,  Gesenius, 
Hitzig,  Stier,  and  even  Jerome,  have  all  correctly  rendered  it 
in  this  way,  "  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol"  (quasi  qui  benedicat 
idolo)  ;  and  Vitringa,  "  cultum  exhibens  vano  numini"  (offering 
worship  to  a  vain  god).  Such  explanations  as  that  of  Luther, 
on  the  other  hand,  viz.  "  as  if  he  praised  that  which  was  wrong," 
are  opposed  to  the  antithesis,  and  also  to  the  presumption  of 
a  concrete  object  to  TOD  (blessing)  ;  whilst  that  of  Knobel, 
"  praising  vainly"  (^dven  being  taken  as  an  ace.  adv.\  yields  too 
tame  an  antithesis,  and  is  at  variance  with  the  usage  of  the 
language.  In  this  condemnation  of  the  ritual  acts  of  worship, 
the  closing  prophecy  of  the  book  of  Isaiah  coincides  with  the 
first  (ch.  i.  11-15).  But  that  it  is  not  sacrifices  in  themselves 
that  are  rejected,  but  the  sacrifices  of  those  whose  hearts  are 
divided  between  Jehovah  and  idols,  and  who  refuse  to  offer 


CHAP.  LXVI.  5.  497 

to  Him  the  sacrifice  that  is  dearest  to  Him  (Ps.  li.  19,  cf. 
1.  23),  is  evident  from  the  correlative  double-sentence  that 
follows  in  vers.  3b  and  4,  which  is  divided  into  two  masoretic 
verses,  as  the  only  means  of  securing  symmetry.  Gam  .  .  . 
gam,  which  means  in  other  cases,  "  both  .  .  .  and  also,"  or  in 
negative  sentences  "  neither . . .  nor,"  means  here,  as  in  Jer.  li.  12, 
u  as  assuredly  the  one  as  the  other,"  in  other  words,  u  as  ...  so." 
They  have  chosen  their  own  ways,  which  are  far  away  from 
those  of  Jehovah,  and  their  soul  has  taken  pleasure,  not  in  the 
worship  of  Jehovah,  but  in  all  kinds  of  heathen  abominations 
(shiqqutsehem,  as  in  many  other  places,  after  Deut.  xxix.  1 6)  ; 
therefore  Jehovah  wants  no  temple  built  by  them  or  with  their 
co-operation,  nor  any  restoration  of  sacrificial  worship  at  their 
hands.  But  according  to  the  law  of  retribution,  He  chooses 
thadlulehem,  vexation es  eorum  (LXX.  ra  e/ATraiyuara  avrwv : 
see  at  ch.  iii.  4),  with  the  suffix  of  the  object :  fates  that 
will  use  them  ill,  and  brings  their  terrors  upon  them,  i.e.  such 
a  condition  of  life  as  will  inspire  them  with  terror  (meguroth,  as 
in  Ps.  xxxiv.  5). 

From  the  heathenish  majority,  with  their  ungodly  hearts, 
the  prophet  now  turns  to  the  minority,  consisting  of  those  who 
tremble  with  reverential  awe  when  they  hear  the  word  of  God. 
They  are  called  to  hear  how  Jehovah  will  accept  them  in 
defiance  of  their  persecutors.  Ver.  5.  "  Hear  ye  the  wwd  of 
Jehovah,  ye  that  tremble  at  His  word :  your  brethren  that  hate 
you,  that  thrust  you  from  them  for  my  name's  sake,  say,  '  Let 
Jehovah  get  honour,  that  we  may  see  your  joy  :'  they  will  be  put 
to  shame"  They  that  hate  them  are  their  own  brethren,  and 
(what  makes  the  sin  still  greater)  the  name  of  Jehovah  is  the 
reason  why  they  are  hated  by  them.  According  to  the  accents, 
indeed  (DD^JD  rebia,  1|£E>  pashta),  the  meaning  would  be . 
"  your  brethren  say  .  .  .  *  for  my  name's  sake  (i.e.  for  me  =  out 
of  goodness  and  love  to  us)  will  Jehovah  glorify  Himself,' — then 
we  shall  see  your  joy,  but — they  will  be  put  to  shame."  Rashi 
and  other  Jewish  expositors  interpret  it  in  this  or  some  similar 
way ;  but  Rosen miiller,  Stier,  and  Hahn  are  the  only  modern 
Christian  expositors  who  have  done  so,  following  the  precedent 
of  earlier  commentators,  who  regarded  the  accents  as  binding. 
Luther,  however,  very  properly  disregarded  them.  If  W  fyoi 
be  taken  in  connection  with  la^,  it  gives  only  a  forced  sense, 

VOL.  II.  2  I 


498  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

which  disturbs  the  relation  of  all  the  clauses  ;  whereas  this  is 
preserved  in  all  respects  in  the  most  natural  and  connected 
manner  if  we  combine  *w  \yzb  with  0?*:!^  QrT*??^,  as  we  must 
do,  according  to  such  parallels  as  Matt.  xxiv.  9.  rna  V*13,  to 
scare  away  or  thrust  away  (Amos  vi.  3,  with  the  object  in  the 
dative),  corresponds  to  a<f>op%ei,v  in  Luke  vi.  22  (compare  John 
xvi.  22,  "  to  put  out  of  the  synagogue").  The  practice  of 
excommunication,  or  putting  under  the  ban  (niddui),  reaches 
beyond  the  period  of  the  Herodians  (see  Eduyoth  v.  6),1  at  any 
rate  as  far  back  as  the  times  succeeding  the  captivity ;  but  in 
the  passage  before  us  it  is  quite  sufficient  to  understand  nidddh 
in  the  sense  of  a  defamatory  renunciation  of  fellowship.  To 
the  accentuators  this  *w  \ycb  D3H3O  appeared  quite  unintelli 
gible.  They  never  considered  that  it  had  a  confessional  sense 
here,  which  certainly  does  not  occur  anywhere  else  :  viz.  "  for 
my  name's  sake,  which  ye  confess  in  word  and  deed."  With 
unbelieving  scorn  they  say  to  those  who  confess  Jehovah,  and 
believe  in  the  word  of  the  true  redemption :  Let  Jehovah  glorify 
Himself  (lit.  let  Him  be,  i.e.  show  Himself,  glorious  =  yikkdbhed, 
cf.  Job.  xiv.  21),  that  we  may  thoroughly  satisfy  ourselves  with 
looking  at  your  joy.  They  regard  their  hope  as  deceptive,  and 
the  word  of  the  prophet  as  fanaticism.  These  are  they,  who, 
when  permission  to  return  is  suddenly  given,  will  desire  to 
accompany  them,  but  will  be  disappointed,  because  they  did 
not  rejoice  in  faith  before,  and  because,  although  they  do  now 
rejoice  in  that  which  is  self-evident,  they  do  this  in  a  wrong 
way. 

The  city  and  temple,  to  which  they  desire  to  go,  are  nothing 
more,  so  far  as  they  are  concerned,  than  the  places  from  which 
just  judgment  will  issue.  Yer.  6.  "  Sound  of  tumult  from  the 
city  !  Sound  from  the  temple  !  Sound  of  Jehovah)  who  repays 
His  enemies  with  punishment"  All  three  ^ip,  to  the  second  of 
which  pN^  must  be  supplied  in  thought,  are  in  the  form  of 
interjectional  exclamations  (as  in  ch.  lii.  8).  In  the  third,  how 
ever,  we  have  omitted  the  note  of  admiration,  because  here  the 
interjectional  clause  approximates  very  nearly  to  a  substantive 
clause  ("  it  is  the  sound  of  Jehovah"),  as  the  person  shouting 
announces  here  who  is  the  originator  and  cause  of  the  noise 

1  Compare  Wiesner :  Der  Bann  in  seiner  gesch.  Entwickelung  auf  dem 
Boden  des  Judenthums,  1864. 


CHAP.  LXVI.  7-9.  499 

\vhich  was  so  enigmatical  at  first.  The  city  and  temple  are  in 
deed  still  lying  in  ruins  as  the  prophet  is  speaking ;  but  even  in 
this  state  they  both  preserve  the  holiness  conferred  upon  them. 
They  are  the  places  where  Jehovah  will  take  up  His  aboda 
once  more ;  and  even  now,  at  the  point  at  which  promise  and 
fulfilment  coincide,  they  are  in  the  very  process  of  rising  again. 
A  loud  noise  (like  the  tumult  of  war)  proceeds  from  it.  It  is 
Jehovah,  He  who  is  enthroned  in  Zion  and  rules  from  thence 
(ch.  xxxi.  9),  who  makes  Himself  heard  in  this  loud  noise 
(compare  Joel  iv.  16  with  the  derivative  passage  in  Amos  i.  2)  ; 
it  is  He  who  awards  punishment  or  reckons  retribution  to  His 
foes.  In  other  cases  ^D3  (2^'n)  fiW  generally  means  to  repay 
that  which  has  been  worked  out  (what  has  been  deserved ; 
e.g.  Ps.  cxxxvii.  8,  compare  ch.  iii.  11) ;  but  in  ch.  lix.  18 
gemul  was  the  parallel  word  to  chemdh,  and  therefore,  as  in  ch. 
xxxv.  4,  it  did  not  apply  to  the  works  of  men,  but  to  the  retri 
bution  of  the  judge,  just  as  in  Jer.  li.  6,  where  it  is  used  quite 
as  absolutely.  We  have  therefore  rendered  it  "  punishment ;" 
"  merited  punishment"  would  express  both  sides  of  this  double- 
sided  word.  By  "  His  enemies,"  according  to  the  context,  we 
are  to  understand  primarily  the  mass  of  the  exiles,  who  were 
so  estranged  from  God,  and  yet  withal  so  full  of  demands  and 
expectations. 

All  of  these  fall  victims  to  the  judgment ;  and  yet  Zion  is 
not  left  either  childless  or  without  population.  Vers.  7-9. 
"  Before  she  travailed  she  brought  forth ;  before  pains  came  upon 
her,  she  was  delivered  of  a  boy.  Who  hath  heard  such  a  thing  ? 
Who  hath  seen  anything  like  it?  Are  men  delivered  of  a  land  in 
one  day  ?  or  is  a  nation  begotten  at  once  ?  For  Zion  hath  travailed, 
yea,  hath  brought  forth  her  children.  Should  I  bring  to  the  birth, 
and  not  cause  to  bring  forth  ?  saith  Jehovah :  or  should  I,  who 
cause  to  bring  forth,  shut  up  ?  saith  thy  God."  Before  Zion 
travaileth,  before  any  labour  pains  come  upon  her  (chebhel  with 
tzere),  she  has  already  given  birth,  or  brought  with  ease  into 
the  world  a  male  child  (himllt  like  millet,  in  ch.  xxxiv.  15,  to 
cause  to  glide  out).  This  boy,  of  whom  she  is  delivered  with 
such  marvellous  rapidity,  is  a  whole  land  full  of  men,  an  entire 
nation.  The  seer  exclaims  with  amazement,  like  Zion  herself 
in  ch.  xlix.  21,  "  who  hath  heard  such  a  thing,  or  seen  anything 
like  it  ?  is  a  land  brought  to  the  birth  (havuchal  followed  by 


500  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

'erets  for  hathucJial,  as  in  Gen.  siii.  6,  Isa.  ix.  18 ;  Ges.  §  147), 
i.e.  the  population  of  a  whole  land  (as  in  Judg.  xviii.  30),  and 
that  in  one  day,  or  a  nation  born  all  at  once  (yivvdled,  with 
munach  attached  to  the  kametz,  and  metlieg  to  the  tzere)  ? 
This  unheard-of  event  has  taken  place  now,  for  Zion  has 
travailed,  yea,  has  also  brought  forth  her  children," — not  one 
child,  but  her  children,  a  whole  people  that  calls  her  mother.1 
"  For"  (ki)  presupposes  the  suppressed  thought,  that  this  un 
exampled  event  has  now  occurred  :  ydleddh  follows  chdldh  with 
gam,  because  dill  signifies  strictly  parturire ;  ydlad,  parere. 
Zion,  the  mother,  is  no  other  than  the  woman  of  the  sun  in 
Rev.  xii. ;  but  the  child  born  of  her  there  is  the  shepherd  of  the 
nations,  who  proceeds  from  her  at  the  end  of  the  days,  whereas 
here  it  is  the  new  Israel  of  the  last  days ;  for  the  church, 
which  is  saved  through  all  her  tribulations,  is  both  the  mother 
of  the  Lord,  by  whom  Babel  is  overthrown,  and  the  mother  of 
that  Israel  which  inherits  the  promises,  that  the  unbelieving 
mass  have  failed  to  obtain.  Ver.  9  follows  with  an  emphatic 
confirmation  of  the  things  promised.  Jehovah  inquires:  "Should 
I  create  the  delivery  (cause  the  child  to  break  through  the 
matrix)  and  not  the  birth  (both  hiphil,  causative),  so  that 
although  the  child  makes  an  effort  to  pass  the  opening  of  the 
womb,  it  never  comes  to  the  light  of  day  ?  Or  should  I  be  one 
to  bring  it  to  the  birth,  and  then  to  have  closed,  viz.  the  womb, 
so  that  the  work  of  bringing  forth  should  remain  ineffectual, 
when  all  that  is  required  is  the  last  effort  to  bring  to  the  light 
the  fruit  of  the  womb?"  From  the  expression  "thy  God,"  we 
see  that  the  questions  are  addressed  to  Zion,  whose  faith  they 
are  intended  to  strengthen.  According  to  Hofmann  (Schrift- 
beweisj  ii.  1,  149,  150),  the  future  "i*?&0  affirms  what  Jehovah 
will  say,  when  the  time  for  bringing  forth  arrives,  and  the 
perfect  *i£K  what  He  is  saying  now  :  "  Should  I  who  create 
the  bringing  forth  have  shut  up?"  And  He  comforts  the  now 
barren  daughter  Zion  (ch.  liv.  1)  with  the  assurance,  that  her 
barrenness  is  not  meant  to  continue  for  ever.  "  The  prediction," 

1  There  is  a  certain  similarity  in  the  saying,  with  which  a  talmudic 
teacher  roused  up  the  sleepy  scholars  of  the  Beth  ha-Midrash :  "  There 
was  once  a  woman,  who  was  delivered  of  600,000  children  in  one  day," 
viz.  Jochebed,  who,  when  she  gave  birth  to  Moses,  brought  600,000  to  the 
light  of  freedom  (Ex.  xii.  37). 


CHAP.  LXVI.  10,  11.  501 


says  Hofmann,  "  which  is  contained  in  'n  ")»&0,  of  the  ultimate 
issue  of  the  fate  of  Zion,  is  so  far  connected  with  the  consola 
tion  administered  for  the  time  present,  that  she  who  is  barren 
now  is  exhorted  to  anticipate  the  time  when  the  former  promise 
shall  be  fulfilled."  But  this  change  in  the  standpoint  is  arti 
ficial,  and  contrary  to  the  general  use  of  the  expression  'n  IZD&P 
elsewhere  (see  at  ch.  xl.  1).  Moreover,  the  meaning  of  the 
two  clauses,  which  constitute  here  as  elsewhere  a  disjunctive 
double  question  in  form  more  than  in  sense,  really  runs  into 
one.  The  first  member  affirms  that  Jehovah  will  complete  the 
bringing  to  the  birth  ;  the  second,  that  He  will  not  ultimately 
frustrate  what  He  has  almost  brought  to  completion  :  an  ego 
sum  is  qui  parere  faciat  et  (uterum)  occluserim  (occludam)  ? 
There  is  no  other  difference  between  liofcO  and  "i»K,  than  that 
the  former  signifies  the  word  of  God  which  is  sounding  at  the 
present  moment,  the  latter  the  word  that  has  been  uttered  and 
is  resounding  still.  The  prophetic  announcement  of  our  prophet 
has  advanced  so  far,  that  the  promised  future  is  before  the  door. 
The  church  of  the  future  is  already  like  the  fruit  of  the  body 
ripe  for  the  birth,  and  about  to  separate  itself  from  the  womb 
of  Zion,  which  has  been  barren  until  now.  The  God  by  whom 
everything  has  been  already  so  far  prepared,  will  suddenly 
cause  Zion  to  become  a  mother;  —  a  boy,  viz.  a  whole  people 
after  Jehovah's  own  heart,  will  suddenly  lie  in  her  lap,  and 
this  new-born  Israel,  not  the  corrupt  mass,  will  build  a  temple 
for  Jehovah. 

In  the  anticipation  of  such  a  future,  those  who  inwardly 
participate  in  the  present  sufferings  of  Zion  are  to  rejoice 
beforehand  in  the  change  of  all  their  suffering  into  glory. 
Vers.  10,  11.  "  Rejoice  ye  with  Jerusalem,  and  exult  over  her,  all 
ye  that  love  her  ;  be  ye  delightfully  glad  with  her,  all  ye  that 
mourn  over  her,  that  ye  may  suck  and  be  satisfied  with  the  breast 
of  her  consolations,  that  ye  may  sip  and  delight  yourselves  in 
the  abundance  of  her  glory"  Those  who  love  Jerusalem  (the 
abode  of  the  church,  and  the  church  itself),  who  mourn  over 
her  (hitJiabb&l,  inwardly  mourn,  1  Sam.  xv.  35,  prove  and  show 
themselves  to  be  mourners  and  go  into  mourning,  b.  Moed 
katan  206,  the  word  generally  used  in  prose,  whereas  i?K,  to  be 
thrown  into  mourning,  to  mourn,  only  occurs  in  the  higher 
style  ;  compare  ps?  ^?N,  ch.  Ivii.  18,  Ixi.  2,  3,  Ix.  20),  these  are 


502  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

even  now  to  rejoice  in  spirit  with  Jerusalem  and  exult  on  her 
account  (bah),  and  share  her  ecstatic  delight  with  her  (ittdh), 
in  order  that  when  that  in  which  they  now  rejoice  in  spirit 
shall  be  fulfilled,  they  may  suck  and  be  satisfied,  etc.  Jeru 
salem  is  regarded  as  a  mother,  and  the  rich  actual  consolation, 
which  she  receives  (ch.  li.  3),  as  the  milk  that  enters  her  breasts 
(shod  as  in  ch.  Ix.  16),  and  from  which  she  now  supplies  her 
children  with  plentiful  nourishment.  PT,  which  is  parallel  to 
1b>  (not  VT,  a  reading  which  none  of  the  ancients  adopted),  sig 
nifies  a  moving,  shaking  abundance,  which  oscillates  to  and  fro 
like  a  great  mass  of  water,  from  KT8T,  to  move  by  fits  and  starts, 
for  pellere  movere  is  the  radical  meaning  common  in  such  com 
binations  of  letters  as  KT,  Jft,  *O,  Ps.  xlii.  5,  to  which  Bernstein 
and  Knobel  have  correctly  traced  the  word;  whereas  the 
meaning  emicans  fluxus  (Schroder),  or  radians  copia  (Koeher), 
to  pour  out  in  the  form  of  rays,  has  nothing  to  sustain  it  in  the 
usage  of  the  language. 

The  reason  is  now  given,  why  the  church  of  the  future 
promises  such  abundant  enjoyment  to  those  who  have  suffered 
with  her.  Ver.  12.  "  For  thus  saith  Jehovah,  Behold,  I  guide 
peace  to  her  like  a  river,  and  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  an 
overflowing  stream,  that  ye  may  suck;  ye  shall  be  borne  upon 
arms,  and  fondled  upon  knees"  Jehovah  guides  or  turns  (Gen. 
xxxix.  21)  peace  to  Jerusalem,  the  greatest  of  all  inward  bless 
ings,  and  at  the  same  time  the  most  glorious  of  all  the  outward 
blessings,  that  are  in  the  possession  of  the  Gentile  world  (kdbhod 
as  in  ch.  Ixi.  6),  both  of  them  in  the  richest  superabundance 
("  like  a  river,"  as  in  ch.  xlviii.  18),  so  that  (perf.  cons.)  "  ye 
may  be  able  to  suck  yourselves  full  according  to  your  heart's 
desire"  (ch.  Ix.  16).  The  figure  of  the  new  maternity  of 
Zion,  and  of  her  children  as  quasimodogeniti,  is  still  preserved. 
The  members  of  the  church  can  then  revel  in  peace  and 
wrealth,  like  a  child  at  its  mother's  breasts.  The  world  is  now 
altogether  in  the  possession  of  the  church,  because  the  church 
is  altogether  God's.  The  allusion  to  the  heathen  leads  on  to  the 
thought,  which  was  already  expressed  in  a  similar  manner  in 
ch.  xlix.  22  and  Ix.  4:  "on  the  side  (arm  or  shoulder)  will  ye  be 
carried,  and  fondled  (V^W,  pulpal  of  the  pilpel  $&¥&,  ch.  xi.  8) 
upon  the  knees,"  viz.  by  the  heathen,  who  will  vie  with  one  another 
in  the  effort  to  show  you  tenderness  and  care  (ch.  xlix.  23). 


CHAP.  LXVL  13,  14.  503 

The  prophet  now  looks  upon  the  members  of  the  church  as 
having  grown  up,  as  it  were,  from  childhood  to  maturity :  they 
suck  like  a  child,  and  are  comforted  like  a  grown-up  son.  Ver. 
13.  "  Like  a  man  whom  his  mother  comforteth,  so  will  I  comfort 
you,  and  ye  shall  be  comforted  in  Jerusalem"  Hitzig  says  that 
*lsh  is  not  well  chosen  ;  but  how  easily  could  the  prophet  have 
written  ben  (son),  as  in  ch.  xlix.  15 !  He  writes  'ish,  however, 
not  indeed  in  the  unmeaning  sense  in  which  the  LXX.  has 
taken  it,  viz.  w?  el'  Tiva  ^rrjp  TrapafcaXeaei,,  but  looking  upon 
the  people,  whom  he  had  previously  thought  of  as  children,  as 
standing  before  him  as  one  man.  Israel  is  now  like  a  man 
who  has  escaped  from  bondage  and  returned  home  from  a 
foreign  land,  full  of  mournful  recollections,  the  echoing  sounds 
of  which  entirely  disappear  in  the  maternal  arms  of  divine  love 
there  in  Jerusalem,  the  beloved  home,  which  was  the  home  of 
its  thoughts  even  in  the  strange  land. 

Wherever  they  look,  joy  now  meets  their  eye.  Ver.  14. 
"  And  ye  will  see,  and  your  heart  will  be  joyful,  and  your  bones 
will  flourish  like  young  herbage ;  and  thus  does  the  hand  of 
Jehovah  make  itself  known  in  His  servants,  and  fiercely  does 
He  treat  His  enemies."  They  will  see,  and  their  heart  will 
rejoice,  i.e.  (cf.  ch.  liii.  11,  Ix.  5)  they  will  enjoy  a  heart- 
cheering  prospect,  and  revive  again' with  such  smiling  scenery 
all  around.  The  body  is  like  a  tree.  The  bones  are  its 
branches.  These  will  move  and  extend  themselves  in  the 
fulness  of  rejuvenated  strength  (compare  ch.  Iviii.  11,  ft 
ossa  tua  expedita  faciet) ;  and  thus  will  the  hand  of  Jehovah 
practically  become  known  (venode<dh,  perf.  cons.)  in  His  ser 
vants, — that  hand  under  whose  gracious  touch  all  vernal  life 
awakens,  whether  in  body  or  in  mind.  And  thus  is  it  with 
the  surviving  remnant  of  Israel,  whereas  Jehovah  is  fiercely 
angry  with  His  foes.  The  first  riK  is  used  in  a  prepositional 
sense,  as  in  Ps.  Ixvii.  2,  viz.  "in  His  servants,  so  that  they 
come  to  be  acquainted  with  it;"  the  second  in  an  accusative 
sense,  for  zaam  is  either  connected  with  7V,  or  as  in  Zech. 
i.  12,  Mai.  i.  4,  with  the  accusative  of  the  object.  It  is  quite 
contrary  to  the  usage  of  the  language  to  take  both  DK  accord 
ing  to  the  phrase  (DV)  flK  (ny"0  mio  rwy* 

The  prophecy  now  takes  a  new  turn  with  the  thought 
expressed  in  the  words,  "and  fiercely  does  He  treat  His 


504  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

enemies."  The  judgment  of  wrath,  which  prepares  the  way 
for  the  redemption  and  ensures  its  continuance,  is  described 
more  minutely  in  ver.  15  :  "  For  behold  Jehovah,  in  the  fire  will 
He  come,  and  His  chariots  are  like  the  whirlwind,  to  pay  out  His 
wrath  in  burning  heat,  and  His  threatening  passeth  into  flames  of 
fire"  Jehovah  comes  baesh,  in  igne  (Jerome  ;  the  LXX.,  on 
the  contrary,  render  it  arbitrarily  w?  irvp,  kd'esh),  since  it 
is  the  fiery  side  of  His  glory,  in  which  He  appears,  and  fire 
pours  from  Him,  which  is  primarily  the  intense  excitement  of 
the  powers  of  destruction  within  God  Himself  (ch.  x.  17,  xxx. 
27  ;  Ps.  xviii.  9),  and  in  these  is  transformed  into  cosmical 
powers  of  destruction  (ch.  xxix.  6,  xxx.  30;  Ps.  xviii.  13). 
He  is  compared  to  a  warrior,  driving  along  upon  war-chariots 
resembling  stormy  wind,  which  force  everything  out  of  their 
way,  and  crush  to  pieces  whatever  comes  under  their  wheels. 
The  plural  WTlhsnQ  (His  chariots)  is  probably  not  merely 
amplifying,  but  a  strict  plural ;  for  Jehovah,  the  One,  can 
manifest  Himself  in  love  or  wrath  in  different  places  at  the 
same  time.  The  very  same  substantive  clause  vnnnD  fiBIDDl 
occurs  in  Jer.  iv.  13,  where  it  is  not  used  of  Jehovah,  how 
ever,  but  of  the  Chaldeans.  Observe  also  that  Jeremiah  there 
proceeds  immediately  with  a  derivative  passage  from  Hab.  i.  8. 
In  the  following  clause  denoting  the  object,  iSN  n»H2  2*B*r6,  we 
must  not  adopt  the  rendering,  "  to  breathe  out  His  wrath  in 
burning  heat"  (Hitzig),  for  heshlbh  may  mean  respirare,  but  not 
exspirare  (if  this  were  the  meaning,  it  would  be  better  to  read 
3'$r6  from  2K>J,  as  Lowth  does);  nor  "ut  iram  suam  furore  sedet" 
(Meier),  for  even  in  Job  ix.  13,  Ps.  Ixxviii.  38,  IBK  a^n  does  not 
mean  to  still  or  cool  His  wrath,  but  to  turn  it  away  or  take  it 
back ;  not  even  "to  direct  His  wrath  in  burning  heat"  (Ges., 
Kn.),  for  in  this  sense  h&shlbh  would  be  connected  with  an  object 
with  5>,  %  (Job  xv.  13),  ^  (i.  25).  It  has  rather  the  meaning 
reddere  in  the  sense  of  retribuere  (Arab,  athdba,  syn.  shillem), 
and  "  to  pay  back,  or  pay  out,  His  wrath "  is  equivalent,  to 
heshlbh  ndgdm  (Deut.  xxxii.  41,  43).  Hence  1DX  niona  does  not 
stand  in  a  permutative  relation  instead  of  a  genitive  one  (viz. 
in  fervore,  ird  sud  =  irce  suce),  but  is  an  adverbial  definition, 
just  as  in  ch.  xlii.  25.  That  the  payment  of  the  wrath  deserved 
takes  place  in  burning  heat,  and  His  rebuke  (ge'drdh)  in  flames 
of  fire,  are  thoughts  that  answer  to  one  another. 


CHAP.  LXVI.  16.  17.  505 

Jehovah  appears  with  these  warlike  terrors  because  He  is 
coming  for  a  great  judgment.  Ver.  16.  "For  in  t/ie  midst  of 
fire  Jehovah  holds  judgment,  and  in  the  midst  of  His  sword  with 
all  flesh ;  and  great  will  be  the  multitude  of  those  pierced  through 
by  Jehovah"  The  fire,  which  is  here  introduced  as  the  medium 
of  judgment,  points  to  destructive  occurrences  of  nature,  and 
the  sword  to  destructive  occurrences  of  history.  At  the  same 
time  all  the  emphasis  is  laid  here,  as  in  ch.  xxxiv.  5,  6  (cf. 
ch.  xxvii.  1),  upon  the  direct  action  of  Jehovah  Himself.  The 
parallelism  in  ver.  16a  is  progressive.  Nishpat  'eth,  "to  go 
into  judgment  with  a  person,"  as  in  Ezek.  xxxviii.  22  (cf .  DJ?  in 
ch.  iii.  14,  Joel  iv.  2,  2  Chron.  xxii.  8 ;  yitera,  Luke  xi.  31,  32). 
We  find  a  resemblance  to  ver.  166  in  Zeph.  ii.  12,  and  this  is 
not  the  only  resemblance  to  our  prophecy  in  that  strongly 
reproductive  prophet. 

The  judgment  predicted  here  is  a  judgment  upon  nations, 
and  falls  not  only  upon  the  heathen,  but  upon  the  great  mass 
of  Israel,  who  have  fallen  away  from  their  election  of  grace 
and  become  like  the  heathen.  Yer.  17.  "  They  that  consecrate 
themselves  and  purify  themselves  for  the  gardens  behind  one  in 
the  midst,  who  eat  swine  s  flesh  and  abomination  and  the  field- 
mouse — they  all  come  to  an  end  together,  saith  Jehovah"  The 
persons  are  first  of  all  described ;  and  then  follows  the  judg 
ment  pronounced,  as  the  predicate  of  the  sentence.  They  sub 
ject  themselves  to  the  heathen  rites  of  lustration,  and  that  with 
truly  bigoted  thoroughness,  as  is  clearly  implied  by  the  com 
bination  of  the  two  synonyms  hammithqaddeshlm  and  ham- 
mittahdrlm  (hithpael  with  an  assimilated  tav),  which,  like  the 
Arabic  qadusa  and  tahura,  are  both  traceable  to  the  radical  idea 
afopifeiv.  The  ?N  of  nfaarrbtf  is  to  be  understood  as  relating 
to  the  object  or  behoof :  their  intention  being  directed  to  the 
gardens  as  places  of  worship  (ch.  i.  29,  Ixv.  3),  ad  sacra  in 
lucis  obeunda,  as  Schelling  correctly  explains.  In  the  chethib 
Sjina  iriK  inK,  the  intf  (for  which  we  may  also  read  ^iriN,  the  form 
of  connection,  although  the  twopathachs  of  the  text  belong  to  the 
keri)  is  in  all  probability  the  hierophant,  who  leads  the  people  in 
the  performance  of  the  rites  of  religious  worship  ;  and  as  he  is 
represented  as  standing  in  the  midst  ("H^)  °f  tne  worshipping 
crowd  that  surrounds  him,  'achar  (behind,  after)  cannot  be  un 
derstood  locally,  as  if  they  formed  his  train  or  tail,  but  tempo- 


506  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

rally  or  in  the  way  of  imitation.  He  who  stands  in  their  rnidst 
performs  the  ceremonies  before  them,  and  they  follow  him, 
i.e.  perform,  them  after  him.  This  explanation  leaves  nothing 
to  be  desired.  The  keri,  'achath,  is  based  upon  the  assumption 
that  'achad  must  refer  to  the  idol,  and  substitutes  therefore  the 
feminine,  no  doubt  with  an  allusion  to  'asJierdh,  so  that  battdvekh 
(in  the  midst)  is  to  be  taken  as  referring  not  to  the  midst  of 
the  worshipping  congregation,  but  to  the  midst  of  the  gardens. 
This  would  be  quite  as  suitable ;  for  even  if  it  were  not  ex 
pressly  stated,  we  should  have  to  assume  that  the  sacred  tree 
of  Astarte,  or  her  statue,  occupied  the  post  of  honour  in  the 
midst  of  the  garden,  and  'achar  would  correspond  to  the  phrase 
in  the  Pentateuch,  DnriK  DTi^N  nnx  rut.  But  the  foregoing 

/  •      v:       "~j  i~        TT  o          O 

expression,  sanctificantes  et  mundantes  se  (consecrating  and  puri 
fying),  does  not  favour  this  sense  of  the  word  'achar  (why  not 
?  =  ™*f?  ?),  nor  do  we  see  why  the  name  of  the  goddess  should 
be  suppressed,  or  why  she  should  be  simply  hinted  at  in  the 
word  nnK  (one),  ^n^  ("TnK)  has  its  sufficient  explanation  in 
the  antithesis  between  the  one  choir-leader  and  the  many 
followers ;  but  if  we  take  'achath  as  referring  to  the  goddess, 
we  can  find  no  intelligible  reason  or  object.  Some  again  have 
taken  both  ''achad  and  'achath  to  be  the  proper  name  of  the  idol. 
Ever  since  the  time  of  Scaliger  and  Grotius,  'achad  has  been 
associated  with  the  Phoenician  "ASco&os  fiaa-iXevs  6ewv  men 
tioned  by  Sanchuniathon  in  Euseb.  prcep.  ev.  1,  10,  21,  or  with 
the  Assyrian  sun-god  Adad,  of  whom  Macrobius  says  (Saturn. 
1,  23),  Ejus  nominis  interpretatio  significat  unus;  but  we  should 
expect  the  name  of  a  Babylonian  god  here,  and  not  of  a 
Phoenician  or  Assyrian  (Syrian)  deity.  Moreover,  Macrobius' 
combination  of  the  Syrian  Hadad  with  'achad  was  a  mere 
fancy,  arising  from  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  language. 
Clericus'  combination  of  'achath  with  Hecate,  who  certainly 
appears  to  have  been  worshipped  by  the  Harranians  as  a 
monster,  though  not  under  this  name,  and  not  in  gardens 
(which  would  not  have  suited  her  character),  is  also  untenable. 
Now  as  'achath  cannot  be  explained  as  a  proper  name,  and  the 
form  of  the  statement  does  not  favour  the  idea  that  'achar 
'achath  or  'achar  'achad  refers  to  an  idol,  we  adopt  the  reading 
'achad,  and  understand  it  to  refer  to  the  hierophant  or  mysta- 
gogue.  Jerome  follows  the  keri*  and  renders  it  post  unam 


CHAP.  LXVI.  18.  507 

intrinsecus.  The  reading  post  januam  is  an  ancient  correction, 
which  is  not  worth  tracing  to  the  Aramaean  interpretation  of 
'achar  'achad,  "  behind  a  closed  door,"  and  merely  rests  upon 
some  rectification  of  the  unintelligible  post  unam.  The  Targum 
renders  it,  "  one  division  after  another,"  and  omits  battdvekh. 
The  LXX.,  on  the  other  hand,  omits  'acJiar  'achad,  reads 
ubhattdvekh,  and  renders  it  KOI  ev  TOI$  TrpoOvpois  (in  the  inner 
court).  Symmachus  and  Theodoret  follow  the  Targum  and 
Syriac,  and  render  it  OTT/CTO)  a\\rj\o)v,  and  then  pointing  the  next 
word  Sjiria  (which  Schelling  and  Bottcher  approve),  render  the 
rest  eV  /^ecrw  ea-OiovTav  TO  /cpeas  TO  %oi,peiov  (in  the  midst  of 
those  who  eat,  etc.).  But  v2K  commences  the  further  descrip 
tion  of  those  who  were  indicated  first  of  all  by  their  zealous 
adoption  of  heathen  customs.  Whilst,  on  the  one  hand,  they 
readily  adopt  the  heathen  ritual ;  they  set  themselves  on  the 
other  hand,  in  the  most  daring  way,  altogether  above  the  law 
of  Jehovah,  by  eating  swine's  flesh  (ch.  Ixv.  4)  and  reptiles 
(sheqets,  abomination,  used  for  disgusting  animals,  such  as 
lizards,  snails,  etc.,  Lev.  vii.  21,  xi.  II1),  and  more  especially 
the  mouse  (Lev.  xi.  29),  or  according  to  Jerome  and  Zwingli 
the  dormouse  (glis  esculentus),  which  the  Talmud  also  mentions 
under  the  name  &TQ1  fcTQrjy  (wild  mouse)  as  a  dainty  bit  with 
epicures,  and  which  was  fattened,  as  is  well  known,  by  the 
Romans  in  their  gliraria.2  However  inward  and  spiritual  may 
be  the  interpretation  given  to  the  law  in  these  prophecies,  yet, 
as  we  see  here,  the  whole  of  it,  even  the  laws  of  food,  were 
regarded  as  inviolable.  So  long  as  God  Himself  had  not  taken 
away  the  hedges  set  about  His  church,  every  wilful  attempt  to 
break  through  them  was  a  sin,  which  brought  down  His  wrath 
and  indignation. 

The  prophecy  now  marks  out  clearly  the  way  which  the 
history  of  Israel  will  take.  It  is  the  same  as  that  set  forth  by 
Paul,  the  prophetic  apostle,  in  Rom.  ix.-xi.  as  the  winding  but 
memorable  path  by  which  the  compassion  of  God  will  reach  its 
all-embracing  end.  A  universal  judgment  is  the  turning-point. 
Ver.  18.  "And  /,  their  works  and  their  thoughts it  comes  to 

1  See  Levysohn,  Zoologie  des  Talmuds,  pp.  218-9. 

2  See  Levysohn,  id.  pp.  108-9.     A  special  delicacy  was  glires  isicio 
porcino,  dormice  with  pork  stuffing ;  see  Brillat-Sararin's  Physiologie  dei 
Geschmacks,  by  C.  Vogt,  p.  253. 


508  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

pass  that  all  nations  and  tongues  are  gathered  together,  that  they 
come  and  see  my  glory"  This  verse  commences  in  any  case 
with  a  harsh  ellipsis.  Hofmann,  who  regards  ver.  17  as  refer 
ring  not  to  idolatrous  Israelites,  but  to  the  idolatrous  world 
outside  Israel,  tries  to  meet  the  difficulty  by  adopting  this  ren 
dering  :  "  And  I,  saith  Jehovah,  when  their  thoughts  and 
actions  succeed  in  bringing  together  all  nations  and  tongues 
(to  march  against  Jerusalem),  they  come  and  see  my  glory 
(i.e.  the  alarming  manifestation  of  my  power)."  But  what  is 
the  meaning  of  the  opening  "OiKI  (and  I),  which  cannot  possibly 
strengthen  the  distant  "ntos,  as  we  should  be  obliged  to  assume? 
Or  what  rule  of  syntax  would  warrant  our  taking  DTOjfliD 
nij?  ^$&™&  as  a  participial  clause  in  opposition  to  the 
accents  I  Again,  it  is  impossible  that  'OJjo  should  mean  "  et 
contra  me;"  or  DiTra£T!E1  DPPOTD,  "in  spite  of  their  works  and 
thoughts,"  as  Hahn  supposes,  which  leaves  "Oasi  quite  unex 
plained;  not  to  mention  other  impossibilities  which  Ewald, 
Knobel,  and  others  have  persuaded  themselves  to  adopt.  If 
we  wanted  to  get  rid  of  the  ellipsis,  the  explanation  adopted  by 
Hitzig  would  recommend  itself  the  most  strongly,  viz.  "  and  as 
for  me,  their  works  and  thoughts  have  come,  i.e.  have  become 
manifest  (jj/cacrw,  Susanna,  ver.  52),  so  that  I  shall  gather  to 
gether."  But  this  separation  of  ¥2$  HK3  (it  is  going  to  gather 
together)  is  improbable  :  moreover,  according  to  the  accents,  the 
first  clause  reaches  as  far  as  DiTroBTiDI  (with  the  twin-accent 
zakeph-munach  instead  of  zakepli  and  metheg) ;  whereupon  the 
second  clause  commences  with  HS3,  which  could  not  have  any 
other  disjunctive  accent  than  zakepli  gadol  according  to  well- 
defined  rules  (see,  for  example,  Num.  xiii.  27).  But  if  we 
admit  the  elliptical  character  of  the  expression,  we  have  not  to 
supply  WTT  (I  know),  as  the  Targ.,  Syr.,  Saad.,  Ges.,  and  others 
do,  but,  what  answers  much  better  to  the  strength  of  the  emotion 
which  explains  the  ellipsis,  IpSK  (I  will  punish).  The  ellipsis 
is  similar  in  character  to  that  of  the  "  Quos  ego  "  of  Virgil  (Aen. 
i.  139),  and  comes  under  the  rhetorical  figure  aposiopesis  :  "  and 
I,  their  works  and  thoughts  (I  shall  know  how  to  punish)." 
The  thoughts  are  placed  after  the  works,  because  the  reference 
is  more  especially  to  their  plans  against  Jerusalem,  that  work 
of  theirs,  which  has  still  to  be  carried  out,  and  which  Jehovah 
turns  into  a  judgment  upon  them.  The  passage  might  have 


CHAP.  LXVI.  19,  20.  509 

been  continued  with  Jci  mishpdtl  (for  my  judgment),  like  the 
derivative  passage  in  Zeph.  iii.  8  ;  but  the  emotional  hurry  of 
the  address  is  still  preserved :  n«|  (properly  accented  as  a  par 
ticiple)  is  equivalent  to  nyn  (K3)  n«3  in  Jer.  li.  33,  Ezek.  vii. 
7,  12  (cf.  B^jn,  ch.  xxvii.  6).  At  the  same  time  there  is  no 
necessity  to  supply  anything,  since  run  by  itself  may  also  be 
taken  in  a  neuter  sense,  and  signify  venturum  (futurum)  est 
(Ezek.  xxxix.  8).  The  expression  "  peoples  and  tongues  "  (as  in 
the  genealogy  of  the  nations  in  Gen.  ch.  x.)  is  not  tautological, 
since,  although  the  distinctions  of  tongues  and  nationalities 
coincided  at  first,  yet  in  the  course  of  history  they  diverged 
from  one  another  in  many  ways.  All  nations  and  all  com 
munities  of  men  speaking  the  same  language  does  Jehovah 
bring  together  (including  the  apostates  of  Israel,  cf.  Zech.  xiv. 
14)  :  these  will  come,  viz.  as  Joel  describes  it  in  ch.  iv.  9  sqq., 
impelled  by  enmity  towards  Jerusalem,  but  not  without  the 
direction  of  Jehovah,  who  makes  even  what  is  evil  subservient 
to  His  plans,  and  will  see  His  glory, — not  the  glory  manifest  in 
grace  (Ewald,  Umbreit,  Stier,  Hahn),  but  His  majestic  mani 
festation  of  judgment,  by  which  they,  viz.  those  who  have  been 
encoiled  by  sinful  conduct,  are  completely  overthrown. 

But  a  remnant  escapes ;  and  this  remnant  is  employed  by 
Jehovah  to  promote  the  conversion  of  the  Gentile  world  and 
the  restoration  of  Israel.  Vers.  19,  20.  "  And  I  set  a  sign  upon 
them,  and  send  away  those  that  have  escaped  from  them  to  the 
Gentiles  to  Tarshlsh,  Phul,  and  Lud,  to  the  stretchers  of  the  low, 
Tubal  and  Javan — the  distant  islands  that  have  not  heard  my 
fame  and  have  not  seen  my  glory,  and  they  will  proclaim  my 
glory  among  the  Gentiles.  And  they  will  bring  your  brethren 
out  of  all  heathen  nations,  a  sacrifice  for  Jehovah,  upon  horses  and 
upon  chariots,  and  upon  litters  and  upon  mules  and  upon  drome 
daries,  to  my  holy  mountain,  to  Jerusalem,  saith  Jehovah,  as  the 
children  of  Israel  bring  the  meat-offering  in  a  clear  vessel  to  the 
house  of  Jehovah"  The  majority  of  commentators  understand 
v'samtl  bdhem  'oth  (and  I  set  a  sign  upon  them)  as  signify 
ing,  according  to  Ex.  x.  2,  that  Jehovah  will  perform  such  a 
miraculous  sign  upon  the  assembled  nations  as  He  formerly 
performed  upon  Egypt  (Hofmann),  and  one  which  will  out 
weigh  the  ten  Egyptian  'othoth  and  complete  the  destruction 
commenced  by  them.  Hitzig  supposes  the  'oth  to  refer  directly 


510  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

to  the  horrible  wonder  connected  with  the  battle,  in  which 
Jehovah  fights  against  them  with  fire  and  sword  (compare  the 
parallels  so  far  as  the  substance  is  concerned  in  Joel  iv.  14-16, 
Zeph.  iii.  8,  Ezek.  xxxviii.  18  sqq.,  Zech.  xiv.  12  sqq.).  But 
since,  according  to  the  foregoing  threat,  the  expression  "  they 
shall  see  my  glory "  signifies  that  they  will  be  brought  to  ex 
perience  the  judicial  revelation  of  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  if 
vesamtl  bdhern  *6th  (and  I  set  a  sign  upon  them)  were  to  be  un 
derstood  in  this  judicial  sense,  it  would  be  more  appropriate  for 
it  to  precede  than  to  follow.  Moreover,  this  vesamtl  bdhem  *6th 
would  be  a  very  colourless  description  of  what  takes  place  in 
connection  with  the  assembled  army  of  nations.  It  is  like  a 
frame  without  a  picture ;  and  consequently  Ewald  and  Um- 
breit  are  right  in  maintaining  that  what  follows  directly  after 
is  to  be  taken  as  the  picture  for  this  framework.  The  'ofh 
(or  sign)  consists  in  the  unexpected  and,  with  this  universal 
slaughter,  the  surprising  fact,  that  a  remnant  is  still  spared, 
and  survives  this  judicial  revelation  of  glory.  This  marvellous 
rescue  of  individuals  out  of  the  mass  is  made  subservient  in 
the  midst  of  judgment  to  the  divine  plan  of  salvation.  Those 
who  have  escaped  are  to  bring  to  the  far  distant  heathen  world 
the  tidings  of  Jehovah,  the  God  who  has  been  manifested  in 
judgment  and  grace,  tidings  founded  upon  their  own  experience. 
It  is  evident  from  this,  that  notwithstanding  the  expression 
"  all  nations  and  tongues,"  the  nations  that  crowd  together 
against  Jerusalem  and  are  overthrown  in  the  attempt,  are  not 
to  be  understood  as  embracing  all  nations  without  exception, 
since  the  prophet  is  able  to  mention  the  names  of  many  nations 
which  were  beyond  the  circle  of  these  great  events,  and  had 
been  hitherto  quite  unaffected  by  the  positive  historical  reve 
lation,  which  was  concentrated  in  Israel.  By  Tarshish  Knobel 
understands  the  nation  of  the  Tyrsenes,  Tuscans,  or  Etruscans; 
but  there  is  far  greater  propriety  in  looking  for  Tarshish,  as 
the  opposite  point  to  'Ophir,  in  the  extreme  west,  where  the 
name  of  the  Spanish  colony  Tartessus  resembles  it  in  sound. 
In  the  middle  ages  Tunis  was  combined  with  this.  Instead 
of  Tfo  ^3  we  should  probably  read  with  the  LXX.  TO  Ens, 
as  in  Ezek.  xxvii.  10,  xxx.  5.  Stier  decides  in  favour  of 
this,  whilst  Hitzig  and  Ewald  regard  ^IQ  as  another  form  of 
DlS.  The  epithet  JW  '?'f£  (drawers  of  the  bow)  is  ad- 


CHAP.  LXVI.  19,  20.  511 

mirably  adapted  to  the  inhabitants  of  Pat,  since  this  people 
of  the  early  Egyptian  Phet  (Phaiat)  is  represented  ideogra- 
phically  upon  the  monuments  by  nine  bows.  According  to 
Josephus,  Ant.  i.  6,  2,  a  river  of  Mauritania  was  called  Phout, 
and  the  adjoining  country  PJwute ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by 
other  testimonies.  As  Lud  is  by  no  means  to  be  understood  as 
referring  to  the  Lydians  of  Asia  Minor  here,  if  only  because 
they  could  not  well  be  included  among  the  nations  of  the 
farthest  historico-geographical  horizon  in  a  book  which  traces 
prophetically  the  victorious  career  of  Cyrus,  but  signifies  rather 
the  undoubtedly  African  tribe,  the  Ti?  which  Ezekiel  mentions 
in  ch.  xxx.  5  among  the  nations  under  Egyptian  rule,  and  in 
ch.  xxvii.  10  among  the  auxiliaries  of  the  Tyrians,  and  which 
Jeremiah  notices  in  ch.  xlvi.  9  along  with  Put  as  armed  with 
bows ;  Pat  and  Lud  form  a  fitting  pair  in  this  relation  also, 
whereas  Pul  is  never  met  with  again.  The  Targum  renders  it 
by  ^Q,  i.e.  (according  to  Bochart)  inhabitants  of  $i\at,  a 
Nile  island  of  Upper  Egypt,  which  Strabo  (xvii.  1,  49)  calls 
"  a  common  abode  of  Ethiopians  and  Egyptians"  (see  Parthey's 
work,  De  Philis  insula) ;  and  this  is  at  any  rate  better  than 
Knobel's  supposition,  that  either  Apulia  (which  was  certainly 
called  Pul  by  the  Jews  of  the  middle  ages)  or  Lower  Italy  is 
intended  here.  Tubal  stands  for  the  Tibarenes  on  the  south 
east  coast  of  the  Black  Sea,  the  neighbours  of  the  Moschi 
(TI^D)^  with  whom  they  are  frequently  associated  by  Ezekiel 
(ch.  xxvii.  13,  xxxviii.  2,  3,  xxxix.  1)  ;  according  to  Josephus 
(Ant.  i.  6,  1),  the  (Caucasian)  Iberians.  Javan  is  a  name 
given  to  the  Greeks,  from  the  aboriginal  tribe  of  the  'laFoves. 
The  eye  is  now  directed  towards  the  west :  the  "  isles  afar  off" 
are  the  islands  standing  out  of  the  great  western  sea  (the 
Mediterranean),  and  the  coastlands  that  project  into  it.  To 
all  these  nations,  which  have  hitherto  known  nothing  of  the 
God  of  revelation,  either  through  the  hearing  of  the  word  or 
through  their  own  experience,  Jehovah  sends  those  who  have 
escaped ;  and  they  make  known  His  glory  there,  that  glory  the 
judicial  manifestation  of  which  they  have  just  seen  for  them 
selves.  The  prophet  is  speaking  here  of  the  ultimate  completion 
of  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles ;  for  elsewhere  this  appeared 
to  him  as  the  work  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  for  which 
Cyrus  the  oppressor  of  the  nations  prepared  the  soil.  His 


512  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

standpoint  here  resembles  that  of  the  apostle  in  Rom.  xi.  25, 
who  describes  the  conversion  of  the  heathen  world  and  the 
rescue  of  all  Israel  as  facts  belonging  to  the  future ;  although 
at  the  time  when  he  wrote  this,  the  evangelization  of  the 
heathen  foretold  by  our  prophet  in  ch.  xlii.  1  sqq.  was  already 
progressing  most  rapidly.  A  direct  judicial  act  of  God  Him 
self  will  ultimately  determine  the  entrance  of  the  Pleroma  of 
the  Gentiles  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  this  entrance  of  the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  will  then  lead  to  the  recovery  of  the 
diaspora  of  Israel,  since  the  heathen,  when  won  by  the  testi 
mony  borne  to  Jehovah  by  those  who  have  been  saved,  "  bring 
your  brethren  out  of  all  nations."  On  the  means  employed  to 
carry  this  into  effect,  including  kirkdroth,  a  species  of  camels 
(female  camels),  which  derives  its  name  from  its  rapid  swaying 
motion,  see  the  Lexicons.1  The  words  are  addressed,  as  in  ver. 
5,  to  the  exiles  of  Babylonia.  The  prophet  presupposes  that 
his  countrymen  are  dispersed  among  all  nations  to  the  farthest 
extremity  of  the  geographical  horizon.  In  fact,  the  commerce 
of  the  Israelites,  which  had  extended  as  far  as  India  and  Spain 
ever  since  the  time  of  Solomon,  the  sale  of  Jewish  prisoners  as 
slaves  to  Phoenicians,  Edomites,  and  Greeks  in  the  time  of 
king  Joram  (Obad.  20 ;  Joel  iv.  6 ;  Amos  i.  6),  the  Assyrian 
captivities,  the  free  emigrations, — for  example,  of  those  who 
stayed  behind  in  the  land  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
and  then  went  down  to  Egypt, — had  already  scattered  the  Is 
raelites  over  the  whole  of  the  known  world  (see  at  ch.  xlix.  12). 
Umbreit  is  of  opinion  that  the  prophet  calls  all  the  nations 
who  had  turned  to  Jehovah  "  brethren  of  Israel,"  and  repre 
sents  them  as  marching  in  the  most  motley  grouping  to  the 
holy  city.  In  that  case  those  who  were  brought  upon  horses, 
chariots,  etc.,  would  be  proselytes  ;  but  who  would  bring  them  ? 
This  explanation  is  opposed  not  only  to  numerous  parallels  in 
Isaiah,  such  as  ch.  Ix.  4,  but  also  to  the  abridgment  of  the 
passage  in  Zeph.  iii.  10 :  "  From  the  other  side  of  the  rivers  of 
Ethiopia  (taken  from  Isa.  xviii.)  will  they  offer  my  worshippers, 

1  The  LXX.  render  it  <r«/«d<W,  i.e.  probably  palanquins.  Jerome 
observes  on  this,  qux  nos  dormitoria  interpretari  possumus  vel  basternas. 
(On  this  word,  with  which  the  name  of  the  Bastarnians  as  'A^alo/3/o/  ia 
connected,  see  Hahnel's  Bedeutung  der  Bastarner  fur  das  german.  Alter' 
thum,  1865,  p.  34.) 


CHAP.  LXVI.  21.  513 

the  daughters  of  my  dispersed  ones,  to  me  for  a  holy  offering." 
It  is  the  diaspora  of  Israel  to  which  the  significant  name  "  my 
worshippers,  the  daughters  of  my  dispersed  ones,"  is  there  ap 
plied.  The  figure  hinted  at  in  minchdthl  (my  holy  offering)  is 
given  more  elaborately  here  in  the  book  of  Isaiah,  viz.  "  as  the 
children  of  Israel  are  accustomed  (fut.  as  in  ch.  vi.  2)  to  offer 
the  meat-offering"  (i.e.  that  which  was  to  be  placed  upon  the 
altar  as  such,  viz.  wheaten  flour,  incense,  oil,  the  grains  of  the 
first-fruits  of  wheat,  etc.)  "  in  a  pure  vessel  to  the  house  of 
Jehovah,"  not  in  the  house  of  Jehovah,  for  the  point  of  com 
parison  is  not  the  presentation  in  the  temple,  but  the  bringing 
to  the  temple.  The  minchali  is  the  diaspora  of  Israel,  and  the 
heathen  who  have  become  vessels  of  honour  correspond  to  the 
clean  vessels. 

The  latter,  having  been  incorporated  into  the  priestly  con 
gregation  of  Jehovah  (ch.  Ixi.  6),  are  not  even  excluded  from 
the  priestly  and  Levitical  service  of  the  sanctuary.  Ver.  21. 
"And  I  will  also  add  some  of  them  to  the  priests,  to  the  Levites, 
saith  Jehovah"  Hitzig  and  Knobel  suppose  mehem  to  refer  to 
the  Israelites  thus  brought  home.  But  in  this  case  something 
would  be  promised,  which  needed  no  promise  at  all,  since  the 
right  of  the  native  cohen  and  Levites  to  take  part  in  the  priest 
hood  and  temple  service  wras  by  no  means  neutralized  by  their 
sojourn  in  a  foreign  land.  And  even  if  the  meaning  were  that 
Jehovah  would  take  those  who  were  brought  home  for  priests 
and  Levites,  without  regard  to  their  Aaronic  or  priestly  descent, 
or  (as  Jewish  commentators  explain  it)  without  regard  to  the 
apostasy,  of  which  through  weakness  they  had  made  themselves 
guilty  among  the  heathen ;  this  ought  to  be  expressly  stated. 
But  as  there  is  nothing  said  about  any  such  disregard  of  priestly 
descent  or  apostasy,  and  what  is  here  promised  must  be  some 
thing  extraordinary,  and  not  self-evident,  mehem  must  refer  to 
the  converted  heathen,  by  whom  the  Israelites  had  been  brought 
home.  Many  Jewish  commentators  even  are  unable  to  throw  off 
the  impression  thus  made  by  the  expression  mehem  (of  them)  ; 
but  they  attempt  to  get  rid  of  the  apparent  discrepancy  be 
tween  this  statement  and  the  Mosaic  law,  by  understanding 
by  the  Gentiles  those  who  had  been  originally  Israelites  of 
Levitical  and  Aaronic  descent,  and  whom  Jehovah  would 
single  out  again.  David  Friedlander  and  David  Ottensosser 

VOL.  II.  2  K 


514  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

interpret  it  quite  correctly  thus  :  "  Meliem,  i.e.  of  those  heather, 
who  bring  them  home,  will  He  take  for  priests  and  Levites, 
for  all  will  be  saints  of  Jehovah  ;  and  therefore  He  has  just 
compared  them  to  a  clean  vessel,  and  the  Israelites  offered  by 
their  hand  to  a  minchdh."  The  majority  of  commentators  do 
not  even  ask  the  question,  in  what  sense  the  prophet  uses 
lakkoliamm  laleviyyim  (to  the  priests,  to  the  Levites)  with  the 
article.  Joseph  Kimchi,  however,  explains  it  thus :  "  "pl^ 
D^mn,  to  the  service  of  the  priests,  the  Levites,  so  that  they 
(the  converted  heathen)  take  the  place  of  the  Gibeonites  (cf. 
Zech.  xiv.  216),  and  therefore  of  the  former  CananaBan  rfthmlm" 
(see  Kohler,  Nacli-exil.  Proph.  iii.  p.  39).  But  so  interpreted, 
the  substance  of  the  promise  falls  behind  the  expectation 
aroused  by  DHB  DJ1.  Hofmann  has  adopted  a  more  correct 
explanation,  viz. :  "  God  rewards  them  for  this  offering,  by 
taking  priests  to  Himself  out  of  the  number  of  the  offering 
priests,  who  are  added  as  such  to  the  Levitical  priests."  Apart, 
however,  from  the  fact  that  D^  D":rD^  cannot  well  signify  "  for 
Levitical  priests "  according  to  the  Deuteronomic  D^n  D'Oron, 
since  this  would  require  D^n  D^nDP  (inasmuch  as  such  permu- 
tative  and  more  precisely  defining  expressions  as  Gen.  xix.  9, 
Josh.  viii.  24  cannot  be  brought  into  comparison) ;  the  idea 
"  in  addition  to  the  priests,  to  the  Levites,"  is  really  implied  in 
the  expression  (cf.  ch.  Ivi.  8),  as  they  would  say  n${^  np^  and 
not  i"!EW?  and  would  only  use  D^P  np?  in  the  sense  of  adding 
to  those  already  there.  The  article  presupposes  the  existence  of 
priests,  Levites  (asyndeton,  as  in  ch.  xxxviii.  14,  xli.  29,  Ixvi.  5), 
to  whom  Jehovah  adds  some  taken  from  the  heathen.  When 
the  heathen  shall  be  converted,  and  Israel  brought  back,  the 
temple  service  will  demand  a  more  numerous  priesthood  and 
Levitehood  than  ever  before ;  and  Jehovah  will  then  increase 
the  number  of  those  already  existing,  not  only  from  the  D'&CKD, 
but  from  the  D^3B  also.  The  very  same  spirit,  which  broke 
through  all  the  restraints  of  the  law  in  ch.  Ivi.,  is  to  be  seen  at 
work  here  as  well.  Those  who  suppose  mehem  to  refer  to  the 
Israelites  are  wrong  in  saying  that  there  is  no  other  way,  in 
which  the  connection  with  ver.  22  can  be  made  intelligible. 
Friedlander  had  a  certain  feeling  of  what  was  right,  when  he 
took  ver.  21  to  be  a  parenthesis  and  connected  ver.  22  with 
ver.  20.  There  is  no  necessity  for  any  parenthesis,  however, 


CHAP.  LXVI.  22,  23.  515 

The  reason  winch  follows,  relates  to  the  whole  of  the  previous 
promise,  including  ver.  21 ;  the  election  of  Israel,  as  Hofmann 
observes,  being  equally  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  heathen 
exert  themselves  to  bring  back  the  diaspora  of  Israel  to  their 
sacred  home,  and  also  by  the  fact  that  the  highest  reward 
granted  to  them  is,  that  some  of  them  are  permitted  to  take 
part  in  the  priestly  and  Levitical  service  of  the  sanctuary. 
Ver.  22.  "  For  as  the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth,  which  I  am 
about  to  make,  continue  before  me,  saith  Jehovah,  so  ivill  your 
family  and  your  name  continue"  The  great  mass  of  the  world 
of  nations  and  of  Israel  also  perish;  but  the  seed  and  name 
of  Israel,  i.e.  Israel  as  a  people  with  the  same  ancestors 
and  an  independent  name,  continues  for  ever,  like  the  new 
heaven  and  the  new  earth ;  and  because  the  calling  of  Israel 
towards  the  world  of  nations  is  now  fulfilled  and  everything 
has  become  new,  the  former  fencing  off  of  Israel  from  other 
nations  comes  to  an  end,  and  the  qualification  for  priest 
hood  and  Levitical  office  in  the  temple  of  God  is  no  longer 
merely  natural  descent,  but  inward  nobility.  The  new  heaven 
and  the  new  earth,  God's  approaching  creation  (quce  facturus 
sum),  continue  eternally  before  Him  (Vphdnai  as  in  ch.  xlix. 
16),  for  the  old  ones  pass  away  because  they  do  not  please  God  ; 
but  these  are  pleasing  to  Him,  and  are  eternally  like  His  love, 
whose  work  and  image  they  are.  The  prophet  here  thinks  of 
the  church  of  the  future  as  being  upon  a  new  earth  and  und  vr 
a  new  heaven.  But  he  cannot  conceive  of  the  eternal  in  the 
form  of  eternity ;  all  that  he  can  do  is  to  conceive  of  it  as  the 
endless  continuance  of  the  history  of  time.  Ver.  23.  "And 
it  will  come  to  pass  :  from  new  moon  to  new  moon,  and  from 
Sabbath  to  Sabbath,  all  flesh  will  come,  to  worship  before  me, 
saith  Jehovah'9  New  moons  and  Sabbaths  will  still  be  cele 
brated  therefore  ;  and  the  difference  is  simply  this,  that  just  as 
all  Israel  once  assembled  in  Jerusalem  at  the  three  great  feasts, 
all  flesh  now  journey  to  Jerusalem  every  new  moon  and  every 
Sabbath.  *n  (construct  ^)  signifies  that  which  suffices,  then 
that  which  is  plentiful  (see  ch.  xl.  16),  that  which  is  due  or 
fitting,  so  that  (ttW)  Bhh  ^D  (with  a  temporal,  not  an  explana 
tory  min,  as  Gesenius  supposes)  signifies  "  from  the  time  when, 
or  as  often  as  what  is  befitting  to  the  new  moon  (or  Sabbath) 
occurs"  (cf.  xxviii.  19).  If  (raea)  cnra  be  added,  3  is  that  of 


516  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

exchange :  as  often  as  new  moon  (Sabbath)  for  new  moon 
(Sabbath)  is  befitting,  i.e.  ought  to  occur :  1  Sam.  vii.  16 ; 
Zech.  xiv.  16  (cf.  1  Sam.  i.  7,  1  Kings  v.  25,  1  Chron.  xxvii. 
1:  "year  by  year,"  "month  by  month").  When  we  find 
(irOKb)  ifc/nns  as  we  do  here,  the  meaning  is,  "  as  often  as  it 
has  to  occur  on  one  new  moon  (or  Sabbath)  after  the  other," 
i.e.  in  the  periodical  succession  of  one  after  another.  At  the 
same  time  it  might  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  1  Kings 
viii.  59,  to^B  DV  "iji'Tj  which  does  not  mean  the  obligation  of 
one  day  after  the  other,  but  rather  "  of  a  day  on  the  fitting 
day  "  (cf .  Num.  xxviii.  10, 14),  although  the  meaning  of  change 
and  not  of  a  series  might  be  sustained  in  the  passage  before 
us  by  the  suffixless  mode  of  expression  which  occurs  in  con 
nection  with  it. 

They  who  go  on  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  every  new  moon 
and  Sabbath,  see  there  with  their  own  eyes  the  terrible  punish 
ment  of  the  rebellious.  Ver.  24.  "  And  they  go  out  and  look  at 
the  corpses  of  the  men  that  have  rebelled  against  me,  for  their 
worm  will  not  die  and  their  fire  will  not  be  quenched,  and  they 
become  an  abomination  to  all  flesh"  The  perfects  are  per/,  cons. 
regulated  by  the  foregoing  fctil\  ^fcttPI  (accented  with  pashta 
in  our  editions,  but  more  correctly  with  munach)  refers  to  their 
going  out  of  the  holy  city.  The  prophet  had  predicted  in  ver. 
18,  that  in  the  last  times  the  whole  multitude  of  the  enemies  of 
Jerusalem  would  be  crowded  together  against  it,  in  the  hope 
of  getting  possession  of  it.  This  accounts  for  the  fact  that  the 
neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  becomes  such  a  scene  of  divine 
judgment.  %  HfcO  always  denotes  a  fixed,  lingering  look  directed 
to  any  object ;  here  it  is  connected  with  the  grateful  feeling  of 
satisfaction  at  the  righteous  acts  of  God  and  their  own  gracious 
deliverance.  1^71?  which  only  occurs  again  in  Dan.  xii.  2,  is 
the  strongest  word  for  "  abomination."  It  is  very  difficult  to 
imagine  the  picture  which  floated  before  the  prophet's  mind. 
How  is  it  possible  that  all  flesh,  i.e.  all  men  of  all  nations, 
should  find  room  in  Jerusalem  and  the  temple  ?  Even  if  the 
city  and  temple  should  be  enlarged,  as  Ezekiel  and  Zechariah 
predict,  the  tiling  itself  still  remains  inconceivable.  And  again, 
how  can  corpses  be  eaten  by  worms  at  the  same  time  as  they 
are  being  burned,  or  how  can  they  be  the  endless  prey  of  worms 
and  fire  without  disappearing  altogether  from  the  sight  of  man  1 


CHAP.  LXVI.  24.  517 

It  is  perfectly  obvious,  that  the  thing  itself,  as  here  described, 
must  appear  monstrous  and  inconceivable,  however  we  may 
suppose  it  to  be  realized.  The  prophet,  by  the  very  mode  of 
description  adopted  by  him,  precludes  the  possibility  of  our 
conceiving  of  the  thing  here  set  forth  as  realized  in  any  material 
form  in  this  present  state.  He  is  speaking  of  the  future  state, 
but  in  figures  drawn  from  the  present  world.  The  object  of 
his  prediction  is  no  other  than  the  new  Jerusalem  of  the  world 
to  come,  and  the  eternal  torment  of  the  damned  ;  but  the  way 
in  which  he  pictures  it,  forces  us  to  translate  it  out  of  the 
figures  drawn  from  this  life  into  the  realities  of  the  life  to 
come ;  as  has  already  been  done  in  the  apocryphal  books  of 
Judith  (xvi.  17)  and  Wisdom  (vii.  17),  as  well  as  in  the  New 
Testament,  e.g.  Mark  ix.  43  sqq.,  with  evident  reference  to  this 
passage.  This  is  just  the  distinction  between  the  Old  Testa 
ment  and  the  New,  that  the  Old  Testament  brings  down  the 
life  to  come  to  the  level  of  this  life,  whilst  the  New  Testament 
lifts  up  this  life  to  the  level  of  the  life  to  come ;  that  the  Old 
Testament  depicts  both  this  life  and  the  life  to  come  as  an  end 
less  extension  of  this  life,  whilst  the  New  Testament  depicts  it 
as  a  continuous  line  in  two  halves,  the  last  point  in  this  finite 
state  being  the  first  point  of  the  infinite  state  beyond ;  that  the 
Old  Testament  preserves  the  continuity  of  this  life  and  the  life 
to  come  by  transferring  the  outer  side,  the  form,  the  appear 
ance  of  this  life  to  the  life  to  come,  the  new  Testament  by 
making  the  inner  side,  the  nature,  the  reality  of  the  life  to  come, 
the  $vvdfj,€i<$  fj,e\\ovTo?  alwvos,  immanent  in  this  life.  The 
new  Jerusalem  of  our  prophet  has  indeed  a  new  heaven  above 
it  and  a  new  earth  under  it,  but  it  is  only  the  old  Jerusalem 
of  earth  lifted  up  to  its  highest  glory  and  happiness ;  whereas  the 
new  Jerusalem  of  the  Apocalypse  comes  down  from  heaven, 
and  is  therefore  of  heavenly  nature.  In  the  former  dwells  the 
Israel  that  has  been  brought  back  from  captivity  ;  in  the  latter, 
the  risen  church  of  those  who  are  written  in  the  book  of  life. 
And  whilst  our  prophet  transfers  the  place  in  which  the  rebel 
lious  are'  judged  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  itself ;  in 
the  Apocalypse,  the  lake  of  fire  in  which  the  life  of  the  ungodly 
is  consumed,  and  the  abode  of  God  with  men,  are  for  ever 
separated.  The  Hinnom-valley  outside  Jerusalem  has  become 
Gehenna,  and  this  is  no  longer  within  the  precincts  of  the  new 


518  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

Jerusalem,  because  there  is  no  need  of  any  such  example  to  the 
righteous  who  are  for  ever  perfect. 

In  the  lessons  prepared  for  the  synagogue  ver.  23  is  re 
peated  after  ver.  24,  on  account  of  the  terrible  character  of  the 
latter,  "  so  as  to  close  with  words  of  consolation." 1  But  the 
prophet,  who  has  sealed  the  first  two  sections  of  these  prophetic 
orations  with  the  words,  "  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked," 
intentionally  closes  the  third  section  with  this  terrible  picture 
of  their  want  of  peace.  The  promises  have  gradually  soared 
into  the  clear  light  of  the  eternal  glory,  to  the  new  creation  in 
eternity ;  and  the  threatenings  have  sunk  down  to  the  depth 
of  eternal  torment,  which  is  the  eternal  foil  of  the  eternal 
light.  More  than  this  we  could  not  expect  from  our  prophet. 
His  threefold  book  is  now  concluded.  It  consists  of  twenty- 
seven  orations.  The  central  one  of  the  whole,  i.e.  the  four 
teenth,  is  ch.  lii.  13-liii. ;  so  that  the  cross  forms  the  centre 
of  this  prophetic  trilogy.  Per  crucem  ad  lacem  is  its  watch 
word.  The  self-sacrifice  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  lays  the 
foundation  for  a  new  Israel,  a  new  human  race,  a  new  heaven 
and  a  new  earth. 

1  Isaiah  is  therefore  regarded  as  an  exception  to  the  rule,  that  the 
prophets  close  their  orations  D^Dimni  rQB>  "HITa  (b.  Berachoth  31a), 
although,  on  the  other  hand,  this  exception  is  denied  by  some,  on  the 
ground  that  the  words  "  they  shall  be  an  abhorring  "  apply  to  the  Gentilea 
(j.  Berachoth  c.  V.  Anf.  Midras  Tillim  on  Ps.  iv.  8). 


APPENDIX. 


VOL.  I.  PAGE  66. — In  the  commentary  on  the  second  half  of 
chap,  xl.-lxvi.,  I  have  referred  here  and  there  to  the  exposi 
tions  of  J.  Heinemann  (Berlin  1842)  and  Isaiah  Hochstadter 
(Carlsruhe  1827),  both  written  in  Hebrew, — the  former  well 
worthy  of  notice  for  criticism  of  the  text,  the  latter  provided 
with  a  German  translation.  For  the  psalm  of  Hezekiah  (ch. 
xxxviii.)  Professor  Sam.  David  Luzzatto  of  Padua  lent  me  his 
exposition  in  manuscript.  Since  then  this  great  and  noble- 
minded  man  has  departed  this  life  (on  the  29th  Sept.  1865).  His 
commentary  on  Isaiah,  so  far  as  it  has  been  printed,  is  full  of 
information  and  of  new  and  stirring  explanations,  written  in 
plain,  lucid,  rabbinical  language.  It  would  be  a  great  mis 
fortune  for  the  second  half  of  this  valuable  work  to  remain  un- 
printed.  I  well  remember  the  assistance  which  the  deceased 
afforded  me  in  my  earlier  studies  of  the  history  of  the  post- 
biblical  Jewish  poetry  (1836),  and  the  affection  which  he  dis 
played  when  I  renewed  my  former  acquaintance  with  him  on 
the  occasion  of  his  publishing  his  Isaiah  ;  so  that  I  lament  his 
loss  on  my  own  account  as  well  as  in  the  interests  of  science. 
"  Why  have  you  allowed  twenty-five  years  to  pass,"  he  wrote  to 
me  on  the  22d  Feb.  1863,  "without  telling  me  that  you  re 
membered  me?  Is  it  because  we  form  different  opinions  of  the 
r\ti>y  and  the  lA  1^  *6'  of  Isaiah  ?  Are  you  a  sincere  Chris 
tian  ?  Then  you  are  a  hundred  times  dearer  to  me  than  so 
many  Israelitish  scholars,  the  partizans  of  Spinoza,  with  whom 
our  age  swarms."  These  words  indicate  very  clearly  the  stand 
point  taken  in  his  writings. 

Of  the  commentaries  written  in  English,  I  am  acquainted 
not  only  with  Lowth,  but  with  the  thoroughly  practical  commen- 

519 


520  APPENDIX. 

tary  of  Henderson  (1857),  and  that  of  Joseph  Addison  Alexander, 
Prof,  in  Princeton  (1847,  etc.),  which  is  very  much  read  as  an 
exegetical  repertorium  in  England  also.  But  I  had  neither  of 
them  in  my  possession. 

VOL.  I.  PAGE  70. — What  I  have  said  here  on  ch.  i.  1  as  the 
heading  to  the  whole  book,  or  at  any  rate  to  ch.  i.-xxxix.,  has 
been  said  in  part  by  Photios  also  in  his  Amphilochia,  which 
Sophocles  the  M.D.  has  published  complete  from  a  MS.  of 
Mount  Athos  (Athens  1858,  4). 

VOL.  I.  PAGE  203,  ON  CH.  vi.  13.— Hofmann  in  his 
Scliriftbeweis  (ii.  2,  541)  maintains  with  Knobel,  that  rDSS 
cannot  be  shown  to  have  any  other  meaning  than  "  plant." 
It  is  never  met  with  in  this  sense,  which  it  might  have  (after 
^==V^),  though  it  is  in  the  sense  of  statua  and  cippus,  which, 
when  applied  to  a  tree  deprived  of  its  crown,  can  only  mean 
stipes  or  truncus. — We  take  this  opportunity  of  referring  to  a 
few  other  passages  of  his  work : — Ch.  viii.  22.  "  And  the  deep 
darkness  is  scared  away :  mfnudddch  with  the  accusative  of  the 
object  used  with  the  passive."  But  this  is  only  possible  with  the 
finite  verb,  not  with  the  passive  participle.  Ch.  ix.  2.  "By  the  fact 
that  Thou  hast  made  the  people  many,  Thou  hast  not  made  the 
joy  great;  but  now  they  rejoice  before  Thee  (who  hast  appeared)." 
It  is  impossible  that  rpn-in  and  rfrun,  when  thus  surrounded 
with  perfects  relating  to  the  history  of  the  future,  should  itself 
relate  to  the  historical  past. — Ch.  xviii.  "It  is  Israel  in  its  dis 
persion  which  is  referred  to  here  as  a  people  carried  away  and 
spoiled,  but  which  from  that  time  forward  is  an  object  of 
reverential  awe, — a  people  that  men  have  cut  in  pieces  and 
trampled  under  foot,  whose  land  streams  have  rent  in  pieces." 
But  does  not  this  explanation  founder  on  n&6m  Nirr{B  aauf  In 
the  midst  of  attributes  which  point  to  ill-treatment,  can  this 
passage  be  meant  to  describe  the  position  which  Israel  is  hence 
forth  to  hold  as  one  commanding  respect  (see  our  exposition)  ? 
—  Ch.  xix.  28.  "  Egypt  the  land  of  cities  will  be  reduced  to  five 
cities  by  the  judgment  that  falls  upon  it."  But  how  can  the 
words  affirm  that  there  will  be  only  five  cities  in  all,  when  there  is 
nothing  said  about  desolation  in  the  judgment  predicted  before? 
— Ch.  xxi.  1-10.  "  What  the  watchman  on  the  watch-tower  sees 


APPENDIX.  52  1 

is  not  the  hostile  army  marching  against  Babel,  but  the  march 
of  the  people  of  God  returning  home  from  Babel."  Conse 
quently  tsemed  pdrdshlm  does  not  mean  pairs  of  horsemen,  but 
carriages  full  of  men  and  drawn  by  horses.  But  we  can  see  what 
tsemed  pdrdshlm  is  from  2  Kings  ix.  25  (roWbliim  tsemddlm), 
and  from  the  combination  of  rekhebh  and  pdrdshlm  (chariots  and 
horsemen)  in  ch.  xxii.  7,  xxxi.  1.  And  the  rendering  "  car 
riages  "  will  never  do  for  ch.  xxi.  7,  9.  Carriages  with  camels 
harnessed  to  them  would  be  something  unparalleled  ;  and 
rekhebh  gdmdl  (cf.  1  Sam.  xxx.  17)  by  the  side  of  tsemed 
pdrdshlm  has  a  warlike  sound. 

VOL.  I.  PAGE  279,  ON  CH.  x.  28-32.—  Professor  Schegg 
travelled  by  this  very  route  to  Jerusalem  (cf.  p.  560,  Anrn.  2)  : 
From  Gifneh  he  went  direct  to  Tayibeh  (which  he  imagined 
to  be  the  ancient  Ai\  and  then  southwards  through  Muchmas, 
Gebcij  Hizmeh)  'Anata,  and  el-hawiye  to  Jerusalem. 

VOL.  IT.  PAGE  65.  —  No  (No  9Amon  in  Nahum  iii.  8)  is 
the  Egyptian  nu-Amun=AiQ<Jrn6Ki^  (nu  the  spelling  of  the 
hieroglyphic  of  the  plan  of  the  city,  with  which  the  name  of 
the  goddess  Nu.  t  =  Rhea  is  also  written).  The  ordinary 
spelling  of  the  name  of  this  city  corresponds  to  the  Greek 


VOL.  ii.  PAGE  66,  ON  CH.  xxxm.  23.  —  (Compare  Grashof, 
Ueber  das  Schiff  bei  Homer  und  Hesiod,  Gymnasial-programm 
1834,  p.  23  sqq.).  The  pea-oS^r]  (=  peao  SO/XT;)  is  the  cross 
plank  which  connects  the  two  sides  of  the  ship.  A  piece  is  cut 
out  of  this  on  the  side  towards  the  rudder,  in  which  the  mast 
is  supported,  being  also  let  into  a  hole  in  the  boards  of  the  keel 
(i<rT07re&r))  and  there  held  fast.  The  mast  is  also  prevented 
from  falling  backwards  by  ropes  or  stays  carried  forward  to 
the  bows  (irpoTovot).  On  landing,  the  mast  is  laid  back  into  a 
hollow  place  in  the  bottom  of  the  ship  (IcrroSoKTj).  If  the  stays 
are  not  drawn  tight,  the  mast  may  easily  fall  backwards,  and 
so  slip  not  only  out  of  the  /-teo-oS/z?/  but  out  of  the  LcrroTreBrj 
also.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  words  DJ1JJ"!?  *PfDJ"*?«  It 
would  be  better  to  understand  ken  as  referring  to  the  laroTre^rj 
than  to  the  /zecroSyLtT;.  The  latter  has  no  "  hole,"  but  only  a 


522  APPENDIX. 

notch,  i.e.  a  semicircular  piece  cut  out,  and  serves  as  a  support 
to  the  mast ;  the  former,  on  the  contrary,  has  the  mast  inserted 
into  it,  and  serves  as  a  ken,  i.e.  a  basis,  theca,  loculamentum. 
Vitringa  observes  (though  without  knowing  the  difference 
between  fjieo-oSfjuj  and  urrvire&r}) :  "  Oportet  accedere  funes,  qui 
thecam  ferment,  h.  e.  qui  malum  sustinentes  tliecoe  succurrant,  qui 
quod  theca  sola  per  se  prcestare  nequit  absque  funibus  cum  ea 
veluti  concurrentes  efficiant" 

VOL.  ii.  PAGE  75,  ON  CH.  xxxiv.  16. — This  transition 
from  words  of  Jehovah  concerning  Himself  to  words  relating 
to  Him,  may  also  be  removed  by  adopting  the  following  ren 
dering  :  "  For  my  mouth,  it  has  commanded  it,  and  its  (my 
mouth's)  breath,  it  has  brought  it  together"  (rucho  =  ruach  pi, 
Ps.  xxx.  6,  Job  xv.  30). 

VOL.  II.  PAGE  104. — I  am  wrong  in  describing  it  here  as 
improbable  that  the  land  would  have  to  be  left  uncultivated 
during  the  year  713—12  in  consequence  of  the  invasion  that 
had  taken  place,  even  after  the  departure  of  the  Assyrians. 
Wetzstein  has  referred  me  to  his  Appendix  on  the  Monastery 
of  Job  (see  Comm.  on  Job,  vol.  ii.  416),  where  he  has  shown 
that  the  fallow-land  (wdgiha)  of  a  community,  which  is  sown 
in  the  autumn  of  1865  and  reaped  in  the  summer  of  186(5, 
must  have  been  broken  up,  i.e.  ploughed  for  the  first  time,  in 
the  winter  of  1864-65.  "  If  this  breaking  up  of  the  fallow 
(el-Bur)  were  obliged  to  be  omitted  in  the  winter  of  1864-65, 
because  of  the  enemy  being  in  the  land,  whether  from  the 
necessity  for  hiding  the  oxen  in  some  place  of  security,  or  from 
the  fact  that  they  had  been  taken  from  the  peasants  and  con 
sumed  by  the  foe,  it  would  be  impossible  to  sow  in  the  autumn 
of  1865  and  reap  a  harvest  in  the  summer  of  1866.  And  if 
the  enemy  did  not  withdraw  till  the  harvest  of  1865,  only  the 
few  who  had  had  their  ploughing  oxen  left  by  the  war  would  find 
it  possible  to  break  up  the  fallow.  But  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other  could  sow,  if  the  enemy's  occupation  of  the  land  had  pre 
vented  them  from  ploughing  in  the  winter  of  1864-65.  If 
men  were  to  sow  in  the  newly  broken  fallow,  they  would  reap 
no  harvest,  and  the  seed  would  only  be  lost.  It  is  only  in  the 
volcanic  and  therefore  fertile  region  of  Haurdn  (Bashan)  that 


APPENDIX.  523 

tne  sowing  of  the  newly  broken  fallow  (es-sikak)  yields  a 
harvest,  and  there  it  is  only  when  the  winter  brings  a  large 
amount  of  rain  ;  so  that  even  in  Hauran  nothing  but  necessity 
leads  any  one  to  sow  upon  the  sikak.  In  western  Palestine,  even  in 
the  most  fruitful  portions  of  it  (round  jSamaria  and  Nazareth), 
the  farmer  is  oblige'd  to  plough  three  times  before  he  can  sow  ; 
and  a  really  good  farmer  follows  up  the  breaking  up  of  the 
fallow  (sikak)  in  the  winter,  the  second  ploughing  (thdnid)  in 
the  spring,  and  the  third  ploughing  (tethliih)  in  the  summer, 
with  a  fourth  (terlia)  in  the  latter  part  of  the  summer.  Con 
sequently  no  sowing  could  take  place  in  the  autumn  of  713,  if 
the  enemy  had  been  in  the  land  in  the  autumn  of  714,  in  con 
sequence  of  his  having  hindered  the  farmer  from  the  sikak  in 
the  winter  of  714-3,  and  from  the  thdnia  and  tethlith  in  the 
spring  and  summer  of  713.  There  is  no  necessity,  therefore, 
to  assume  that  a  second  invasion  took  place,  which  prevented 
the  sowing  in  the  autumn  of  713." 

VOL.  n.  PAGE  114,  ON  2  KINGS  xx.  9.  —  Even  ^n  is 
syntactically  admissible  in  the  sense  of  iveritne;  see  Gen.  xxi.  7, 
Ps.  xi.  3,  Job  xii.  9. 


VOL.  II.  PAGE  244.—  aXfievi'xiaKa,  in  Pint.,  read  Porph., 
viz.  in  the  letter  of  Porphyries  to  the  Egyptian  Anebo  in 
Euseb.  prcep.  iii.  4,  init.:  TCLS  re  efc  TOV?  S&CQVOIQ  rofj,a$  /cal  TOU? 
a>po<TK07rov5  KOI  TOW  XlPyo/i^POfS  Kparaiovs  fyepovas,  wz>  /cal 
ovo/jLara  ev  rot?  a\iA6vi%iaKols  fyeperai',  compare  Jamblichos, 
de  Mysteriis,  viii.  4:  rare  ev  rot?  cra\fjbea^iviaKol^  /u-e/jo?  TL 
IBpa^yrarov  Trepii-^ei,  rwv  'Epfjualtccav  Siard^ewv.  This  reading 
c-aAyLtecr^ma/cot?  has  been  adopted  by  Parthey  after  two 
codices  and  the  text  in  Salmasius,  de  annis  dim.  605.  But 
akfjievi'^iaKols  is  favoured  by  the  form  Almanack  (Hebr.  p3£ta, 
see  Steinschneider,  Catal.  Codd.  Lugduno-Batav.  p.  370),  in 
which  the  word  was  afterwards  adopted  as  the  name  of  an 
astrological  handbook  or  year-book.  In  Arabic  the  word  ap 

pears  to  me  to  be  equivalent  to   -\^\,  the  encampment  (of  the 

stars)  ;  but  to  all  appearance  it  was  originally  an  Egyptian 
word,  and  possibly  the  Coptic  monk  (old  Egyptian  mencli),  a 
form  or  thing  formed,  is  hidden  beneath  it. 


524  APPENDIX. 

VOL.  n.  PAGE  376,  ON  CH.  LVII.  10,  P'Nfo.  —  Fleischer  says: 

"  Just  as  in  J^  and  \~>.  .  the  meaning  of  hope  springs  out  of 

/  *  /  */ 

the  idea  of  stretching  and  drawing  out,  so  do  (JMJ\    and  ^ju 

(spem  deposuit,  desperavit)  signify  literally  to  draw  in,  to  com- 

st'        2 
press  ;  hence  the  old  Arabic       ^  __  7      consumption,  phthisis. 

And  the  other  old  Arabic  word       .  ?  lit.  squeezing,  res  angustce 

=fakr  wa-faka,  want,  need,  and  penury,  or  in  a  concrete  sense 
the  need,  or  thing  needed,  is  also  related  to  this." 

VOL.  n.  PAGE  483-4,  ON  CH.  LXV.  11.  —  Mrjvij  appears  in 
fjLrjvaryvpTrjs  =  /jL^rpajvprr}^  as  the  name  of  Cybele,  the  mother 
of  the  gods.  In  Egyptian,  Menld  is  a  form  of  Isis  in  the  city 
of  Hat-uer.  The  Ithyphallic  Min,  the  cognomen  of  Amon, 
which  is  often  written  in  an  abbreviated  form  with  the  spelling 
men  (Copt.  MHIN,  signum),  is  further  removed. 


VOL.  ii.  PAGE  490,  ON  CH.  LXV.  23.  —  n>.   Fleischer  says: 
.  /// 

"  7H3  and  J^j  are  so  far  connected,  that  the  stem  7m,  like 

rta,  signifies  primarily  to  let  loose,  or  let  go.  This  passes  over 
partly  into  outward  overtaking  or  overturning,  and  partly  into 
internal  surprise  and  bewildering,  and  partly  also  (in  Arabic) 
into  setting  free  on  the  one  hand,  and  outlawing  on  the  other 
(compare  the  Azazel-goat  of  the  day  of  atonement,  which  was 

sent  away  into  the  wilderness)  ;  hence  it  is  used  as  an  eauiva- 

/  /  / 
lent  for          (execrare)" 


OBSEBVATIONS  ON  ISAIAH  XXI. 

BY  J.  G.  WETZSTEIN. 

|F  we  look  upon  the  last  two  oracles  of  ch.  xxi.  as 
neither  connected  together,  nor  associated  with  the 
first,  we  remain  in  utter  ignorance  as  to  their  pur 
port  ;  whereas  they  admit  of  the  most  satisfactory 
explanation  if  we  take  ch.  xxi.  as  a  whole,  and  regard  it  as  con 
taining  a  description  of  the  storming  of  Babylon,  and  its  con 
sequences,  so  far  as  the  tribes  of  the  desert  and  the  Edomites  are 
concerned.  Let  the  following  serve  as  an  introduction.  With 
the  complete  conquest  of  Syria  and  what  appeared  to  be  the 
voluntary  subjection  of  Edom,  the  Chaldean  empire  found  itself 
in  possession  of  all  the  cultivated  lands,  which  surround  the 
desert  both  to  the  east  and  to  the  west ;  and  as  it  was  strong 
enough,  at  all  events  from  the  time  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  to  defend 
the  harvests  of  the  villages  against  the  nomads,  whilst  the 
latter  could  not  exist  without  the  former,  there  must  have  been 
forcible  contributions  levied  by  the  tribes,  and  bloody  reprisals 
on  the  part  of  the  Chaldeans.  At  the  same  time,  one  single 
appeal,  like  that  contained  in  Jer.  xlix.  28-33,  may  well  have 
sufficed  to  compel  the  Arabs  to  seek  their  safety  in  alliance 
with  Babylon.  This  ultimate  alliance,  of  the  actual  completion 
of  which  we  have  no  doubt,  from  the  situation  of  Babylon  itself 
(Jer.  xxvii.  6),  was  very  advantageous  to  both  parties ;  for 
whilst  it  furnished  the  Kedarenes  under  the  flag  of  the  Chal 
deans  with  the  best  opportunity  of  satisfying  their  thirst  for 
rapine  and  plunder  in  distant  lands  (for  the  most  part,  probably 
in  wealthy  Egypt),  it  supplied  the  Chaldeans  with  new  forces, 
always  ready  for  battle  and  therefore  inexpensive,  and  opened 
and  secured  to  the  caravan  trade  of  the  gigantic  capital,  which 
was  already  certainly  very  extensive,  all  the  roads  of  the  desert. 

625 


526  APPENDIX. 

It  may  safely  be  maintained  that  the  splendour  of  the  city 
dates  first  from  the  time  when  she  became  the  queen  of  the 
desert,  and  as  such  the  capital  of  the  Semitic  nations.  As  for 
the  Edomites,  their  policy  was  determined  by  that  of  their 
hereditary  foes,  the  Judseans.  The  latter  allied  themselves  to 
Egypt  both  in  the  Chaldean  and  the  Assyrian  wars  ;  and  con 
sequently  the  former  attached  themselves  to  Babel  (Obad. 
11  sqq.), — and  they  had  thereby  chosen  the  better  part,  for 
during  the  continuance  of  the  Chaldean  empire  Edom  appears 
to  have  reached  its  greatest  extent  and  most  flourishing  condition, 
even  though  its  princes  may  have  been  nominally  subject  to  the 
king  of  Babel  (Jer.  xxvii.  3).  Not  only  have  we  to  include 
among  the  mountains  of  Seir,  according  to  the  usage  of  speech 
of  the  later  times,  their  southern  extension,  viz.  the  Hizmah 
mountains ;  but  the  Edomites  also  obtained  possession  of  por 
tions  of  the  land  of  Judaea  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  5,  cf.  xxxv.  10)  ;  yea, 
and  certain  of  their  tribes  emigrated  even  into  Trachonitis  (in 
the  wider  sense  of  the  word,  i.e.  into  Hauran  or  northern  Gilead), 
if,  according  to  Josephus  and  Eusebius,  it  was  here  that  the 
Aramaean  Uzzite  tribes  had  their  home  (Lam.  iv.  21).  In  like 
manner,  all  the  Iladir,  as  far  east  as  the  mountains  of  Aga9 
may  have  been  ceded  to  them  by  the  Chaldeans,  namely,  the 
cities  of  Dedan,  Temah,  Duma  in  the  Goph,  and  others  which 
are  not  mentioned  in  the  Bible.  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his 
successors  may  have  been  especially  compelled  by  the  wars  with 
Egypt  to  secure  the  attachment  of  the  Edomites,  who  lived  so 
near  to  the  borders  of  this  land,  by  great  concessions ;  and 
the  latter  will,  no  doubt,  have  remained  true  to  their  avengers 
upon  Judah,  even  till  the  conquest  of  Babylon.  In  the  war 
with  Cyrus,  the  city  not  only  obtained  help  from  Syria,  but 
from  the  desert  and  the  mountains  of  Seir  also.1 

We  now  return  to  ch.  xxi.  When  the  barbarians  threaten 
Babel,  the  eyes  of  all  are  directed  in  anxious  expectation 
towards  the  east,  from  the  mountains  of  Judaea  as  well  as  from 
Seir ;  inasmuch  as,  for  the  one,  there  is  being  accomplished 
there  a  divine  judgment  upon  the  foes  of  its  oppressed  people, 

1  Isa.  Ixiii.  1-6  shows  retrospectively  how  correct  this  is, — a  proof  of  the 
instructive  character  of  this  and  the  following  observations,  although  the 
point  of  ultimate  fulfilment  fixed  in  ch.  xxi.  16  is  at  variance  with  the 
direct  and  close  connection  of  the  three  massa's  (Del} 


OBSERVATIONS  OX  ISAIAH  XXL  527 

whilst  the  other  sees  the  approach  of  a  national  calamity.  At 
length  Babylon  falls.  Horsemen  bring  the  tidings  to  the  west. 
They  are  either  Arabs  flying  from  the  scene,  or  the  victors 
themselves,  who  are  coming  to  chastise  such  tribes  as  were 
hostile  in  their  disposition,  after  Babylon  itself  had  fallen.  In 
that  flat  arid  desert,  without  any  fortified  places,  there  lies  the 
great  enchanting  oasis  of  el-Goph  with  the  city  of  Duma/i, 
four  Delul-m. arches  to  the  south-west  of  Babylon.  On  a 
general  flight  from  the  localities  of  the  Sawad  and  the  tents  on 

O  O 

the  Euphrates,  this  would  be  the  first  place  in  which  men  and 
flocks  could  find  a  permanent  rest.  Now,  since  it  is  extremely 
probable  that  Cyrus  would  send  his  troop  of  camel-riders 
against  the  Arabs  immediately  after  the  conquest  of  Babylon, 
to  secure  the  respect  of  these  troublesome  neighbours  at  the 
very  outset ;  Dumah,  the  most  important  Hadirah  of  the  Ish- 
maelites,  is  hardly  likely  to  have  been  spared.  One  proof  of 
its  importance  at  that  time  is  the  fact,  that  it  was  thought 
worthy  of  a  separate  massa.  The  cry  from  Seir  (ver.  11) 
may  be  accounted  for  from  the  fact,  that  Edom  and  Dumah 
were  then  standing  in  the  very  close  relation  to  one  another 
which  we  have  already  spoken  of  as  probable.  The  answer 
given  to  those  who  inquire  whether  the  evil  has  not  come  to 
an  end  with  the  fall  of  Babel  and  Dumah,  is  that  it  has  only 
just  begun.  "The  morning  came,  but  also  the  night;"  i.e. 
your  morning  of  prosperity  was  the  existence  of  the  Chaldean 
empire,  your  night  of  calamity  has  begun  with  its  overthrow. 
"  Would  ye  know  more,  only  inquire  !  Come  back  once 
more!"  These  words  are  words  of  sarcasm.  The  persons  in 
quiring  knew  quite  enough  when  they  heard  the  answer,  "  The 
morning  came,  and  also  the  night;"  but  the  prophet  calls  after 
them  :  "  Is  my  reply  not  clear  enough  ?  Do  ye  want  to  know 
something  more  definite  about  this  night  and  what  else  it  will 
bring  you?"  Assuming  the  connection  between  Massa  1  and 
2,  this  is  the  explanation. 

In  the  third  massa  the  war  spreads  over  the  rest  of  the 
desert,  as  far  west  as  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mountains 
of  Seir.  It  begins  by  scaring  away  the  caravans  from  the 
roads  of  commerce.  As  their  flight  went  past  Temah,  we  are 
tempted  to  regard  their  owners  the  Dedanim  as  inhabitants  of 
the  before-mentioned  city  of  Dedan  (Jer.  xlix.  8),  which  is 


523  APPENDIX. 

associated  with  Temah  in  Jer.  xxv.  23,  and  must  be  regarded 
as  the  principal  seat  of  the  Keturaean  tribe  of  the  same  name 
(Gen.  xxv.  3).  The  sixteen  Keturgean  tribes  formed  a  com 
plex  of  small  kindred  peoples,  who,  to  use  an  antiquated  term, 
inhabited  Arabia  PetraBa  (Stony  Arabia),  i.e.  the  land  of  the 
Harra  from  the  borders  of  Edom  to  Medina,  and  from  the 
Elanitic  Gulf  to  the  mountains  of  Aga,  having  villages  and 
small  towns  in  spots  capable  of  cultivation,  and  carrying  on  the 
rearing  of  camels  in  the  valleys  of  the  mountains  and  in  Waar 
and  commerce  on  the  Eed  Sea,  and  who,  with  the  great 
poverty  of  their  land,  will  most  likely  have  engaged  in  the 
transport  of  such  articles  of  commerce  as  they  found  in  the 
neighbouring  harbours  and  the  different  stations  on  the  inland 
roads.  The  latter  is  affirmed  in  Isa.  Ix.  6  of  Midian  and 
Ephah,  and  in  Gen.  xxxvii.  36  of  Medan ;  and  caravans  of 
Dedan  might  therefore  be  intended  here.  But  these  are  not 
mentioned  anywhere  else ;  and  as  the  city  itself  was  certainly 
not  one  of  sufficient  importance  for  the  driving  away  of  its 
caravans  to  be  regarded  as  the  event  of  great  moment,  with 
which  the  massa  would  evidently  introduce  the  great  desert 
war,  we  have  rather  to  think  simply  of  the  Dedan  who  are 
mentioned  in  Gen.  x.  7  in  the  table  of  nations,  and  therefore 
belonged  to  the  great  nations  of  the  ancient  world  within  the 
circle  of  the  biblical  history.  These  J)edan9  also  called  Beni 
Dedan  in  Ezek.  xxvii.  15,  were  not  Shemites,  but  a  branch  of 
the  Cushite  stem  of  Rama.  Another  branch  was  called  S/ieba. 
The  name  Cush  is  generally  regarded  as  a  very  wide  geogra 
phical  term.  It  was  once  thought  that  the  Israelites  in 
cluded  under  this  one  name  all  the  southern  lands  of  the  then 
known  world — that  is  to  say,  not  only  Ethiopia,  but  also 
southern  Arabia  and  the  eastern  lands  as  far  as  India, — so  that 
Cushites  were  found  on  the  coasts  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  and 
even  in  the  Higaz.  But  there  is  really  nothing  at  all  in  those 
passages  of  the  Bible  which  bear  upon  this  question,  to  compel 
us  to  go  beyond  the  limits  of  north-eastern  Africa.  According 
to  Gen.  ii.  13  (if  we  take  the  Gihon  to  be  the  southern  Nile, 
the  Bachar  el-abyad,  and  understand  MID  in  its  true  signifi 
cation,  "  to  flow  round"),  the  complex  of  tribes  called  Cush 
inhabited  the  eastern  country  washed  by  the  upper  Nile  as  far 
as  the  southern  frontier  of  Egypt,  i.e.  to  the  city  of  Swen  (Ezek. 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  ISAIAH  XXL  529 

xxix.  10),  the  present  Aswan,1  including  the  adjoining  stretch 
of  coast  (Ezek.  xxx.  9),  i.e.  the  interior  and  coast-lands  of 
Nuba,  Bigga,  'Aiwa,  Habesh,  Berbera,  and  Zeng.  As  the  three 
different  tribes  of  Rama,  Dedan,  and  Seba  carried  on  trading 
operations  with  Syria,  their  settlements  must  certainly  have 
reached  to  the  sea-coast,  and  therefore  embraced  the  Troglo- 
dytice  of  the  ancients  almost  from  Berenice  to  the  promontory 
of  Deire.  If  they  stretched  still  farther  over  a  portion  of  the 
Berbera  coast  beyond  the  straits,  it  was  very  likely  the  Rama 
who  dwelt  there  ;  for  the  Bible  only  mentions  them  once,  and 
that  apparently  with  the  intention  of -naming  a  people  very  far 
of,  who  carried  on  trade  with  Tyre.2 

We  should  be  brought  to  the  same  conclusion,  if  among  the 
different  productions  mentioned  in  Ezek.  xxvii.  22  we  had  to 
refer  "  the  best  of  all  spices"  to  Ra'ma,  for  the  whole  of  the 
coast-land  on  both  sides  of  the  promontory  of  ' ' Apto/tara  (Ptol. 
Wilb.  p.  300)  was  celebrated  in  antiquity  for  its  costly  spices.3 
The  S/ieba,  on  the  other  hand,  must  have  dwelt  upon  the 
Abyssinian  Gulf,  for  Strabo  (xvii.  4)  mentions  as  in  close 
proximity  to  the  present  seaport  town  of  Massaua,  not  only  a 
harbour  called  Saba,  which  he  describes  after  Artemidorus  as 
the  very  great  city  of  Saba,  but  also  a  Sabsean  mouth ;  and 

1  According  to  Yakut,  this  town  is  more  properly  called  Swan  in 
Arabic,  which  approaches  more  nearly  to  the  Hebrew  {ip  and  the  Latin 
Syene.     Hence  arose  the  name  Aswan  in  the  mouths  of  the  people. 

2  There  are  some  who  seek  the  Ra'ma -people  in  the  'PtyaifAa,  vo'ht; 
(Ptol.  Wilb.  p.  405)  on  the  north-east  coast  of  'Oman,  and  place  the 
Dedan  to  the  north  of  this  towards  Bahrein.   But  the  city  of  Ptol.  answers 

rather  to  the  f^TJ  of  the  Arabian  geographers,  whereas  niDJTI  written  in 
Greek  would  read  'P«/««4«,  'Pdprct,  or  'Potypotra.  Moreover,  if  we  put 
the  Ra'ma  and  Dedan  on  the  Persian  Gulf,  would  it  not  be  necessary  to  put 
the  closely  related  Sheba  there  as  well  ?  Do  we  not  find  them  associated 
with  Ra'ma  in  Ezek.  xxvii.  22,  and  with  Dedan  in  Ezek.  xxxviii.  13  ? 
But  the  fcO$  (Sheba)  again  are  closely  bound  up  with  their  cousins  the 
N2D  (Seba)  ;  and,  according  to  Ps.  Ixxii.  10,  must  not  be  separated  from 
them.  Now,  happily,  in  Isa.  xlv.  14  we  have  a  statement  concerning  the 
Litter  which  proves  them  to  be  Nubians.  How  can  there  be  any  doubt, 
therefore,  as  to  the  land  to  which  the  whole  fraternity  must  be  assigned  ? 

3  In  Yakut  under  Bahar  Zeng  we  read :  The  coast  of  the  Zeng  Sea, 
as  far  as  the  land  of  Berbera  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aden,  and  the 
adjacent  islands  have  a  luxuriant  growth  of  sandal-wood,  of  black  and 

VOL.  II.  2  L 


530  APPENDIX. 

although  it  may  possibly  be  a  rare  thing  for  the  name  of  a 
great  people  to  be  given  to  a  city  or  a  river,  this  is  easily 
conceivable  in  the  case  of  a  harbour  or  the  mouth  of  a  river, 
inasmuch  as  the  harbour  and  river  of  the  Sheba  may  have  been 
the  river  and  harbour  KCLT  efcr^V  to  foreign  sailors,  as  being 
either  the  only  ones  there,  or  at  any  rate  those  of  greatest  im 
portance.  This  port  with  its  surrounding  country  must  have 
constituted  an  integral,  because  an  indispensable,  part  of  the 
primeval  state  of  Meroe,  so  memorable  in  the  history  of  civilisa 
tion  ;  and  the  S/iebd  (K?^)  will  have  been  not  only  the  in 
habitants  of  the  line  of  coast,  but  also  those  of  the  insular 
kingdom,  for  the  queen  of  this  people  (1  Kings  x.  1  sqq.)  is 
called  in  Jos.  Ant  viii.  6,  5  the  ruler  of  Ethiopia.  There  is  no 
ground  whatever  for  the  favourite  combination  of  Meroe  with 
fcOp  (Seba),1  or  for  assigning  the  queen  of  Sheba  (itOXhtsbo, 
1  Kings  x.)  to  the  Sabaeans  of  Yemen  (Gen.  x.  28).  The 
latter  were  probably  at  all  times  cultivators  of  the  soil  in  the 
mountains,  and  poor  breeders  of  camels  (nomads)  in  the  desert. 
The  export  of  incense  alone  could  never  bring  them  wealth,  with 
the  strong  competition  of  other  lands ;  and  with  the  few  wants 
of  the  southern  Arabian  they  never  attained  a  high  degree  of 
cultivation,  even  in  the  most  flourishing  period  of  the  Arabian 
tribes.  The  ruins  of  ancient  buildings,  which  are  met  with  in 
western  Yemen,  recal  with  their  colossal  forms  the  temples  and 
pyramids  of  Nubia,  and  can  only  be  regarded  as  witnesses  of 
Ethiopian  culture,  since  this  part  of  the  Arabian  peninsula 
was  frequently  subject  to  the  neighbouring  country,  and  even 

•white  ebony,  and  of  kana ;  on  the  coast  they  also  gather  amber,  which  is 
found  here  and  nowhere  else.  The  Berbera-l&nd  lies  between  the  Habenk 
and  Zeng,  and  the  people  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  Berberians  of 
the  west.  The  neighbouring  island  of  Sokotra  exports  myrrh  and  the 
Dem-el-achdwen,  a  gum,  which  is  only  found  npon  this  island,  and  is  there 
called  katir.  It  is  sold  in  two  different  qualities,  viz.  as  a  natural  un 
adulterated  resinous  dropping  of  a  red  colour,  and  also  as  an  artificial 
production  with  spurious  additions. 

1  This  combination  is  made  on  the  strength  of  the  passage  in  Jos.  Ant. 
ii.  10,  2  ;  but  then  Josephus  is  not  speaking  of  Seba,  but  of  Sheba.  The 
LXX.  place  Sela  in  northern  Nubia.  The  name  seems  also  to  have  been 
pointed  Soba;  and  this  calls  to  mind  Strabo's  'A<rra<7o'/3*s'  ("  Soba-river"), 
which  appears  to  have  fallen  into  the  Nile  to  the  west  of  the  Abyssinian 
mountains. 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  ISAIAH  XXI,  531 

received  colonies  from  thence.  The  romantic  statements  of 
the  ancients  concerning  the  treasures  of  the  Sabaeans  of  Arabia 
may  be  accounted  for,  partly  from  the  utter  ignorance  of  a 
land,  which  passed  under  the  name  of  Arabia  Eudcemon  (pro 
bably  the  Greek  form  of  |»'n=  Yemen)  as  the  embodiment  of 
all  that  was  valuable,  partly  from  the  fact  that  the  Cushite 
Sabaeans  were  confounded  with  the  Joktanite  tribe  of  the  same 
name,  and  partly  from  the  simple  fact  that  statements  relating 
to  the  former  were  transferred  to  the  latter.  And  even  where 
the  distinction  was  preserved  by  the  ancients,  modern  writers 
have  confounded  them,  as  the  articles  Sheba  and  Seba  in 
Winer's  Real-Worterbuch  will  show.  As  the  Jewish  nation 
apparently  came  into  close  contact  with  none  of  the  Joktanitish 
tribes  (except  perhaps  on  the  voyages  to  Opliir\  the  Arabian 
Seba  are  mentioned  much  less  frequently  in  the  Bible  than  is 
commonly  supposed.  It  is  different  with  the  Cushites,  who 
must  have  been  brought  down  to  the  sea  very  early  by  their 
river-navigation  (compare  Isa.  xviii.  1,  2),  and  who  would 
command  the  Red  Sea  down  to  the  time  of  the  Nabata3ans. 
The  queen  of  Sheba  certainly  came  to  Solomon  partly  with  the 
intention  of  connecting  herself  with  a  monarch,  through  whose 
harbours  on  the  Elanitic  Gulf  the  trade  of  her  own  people  with 
Palestine,  Syria,  Gaza,  Tyre,  and  the  Mediterranean  was  to  a 
great  extent,  and  during  war  with  Egypt  exclusively,  carried 
on.  The  principal  exports  of  the  Ethiopian  harbours  were 
negro  slaves  of  both  sexes,  ivory,  ebony,  cinnamon,  amber, 
myrrh,  sandal-wood  (aloe),  incense,  topaz,  emeralds,  and,  above 
all,  refined  gold  (compare  Strabo's  Besclireibung  von  Trog- 
lodytice  und  Meroe ;  also  Yakubi  liber  regionum,  ed.  A.  W.  T. 
Yuynbott,  1861,  p.  121  sqq.).  According  to  the  latter  authority, 
the  gold  mines  of  Ethiopia  excited  the  same  attractive  power  in 
the  earliest  times  of  Islam  as  those  of  California  in  our  own 
day.  Nearly  all  these  articles  of  commerce  are  associated  in 
the  Bible  with  the  Cushite  tribes  already  named,  and  most 
frequently  with  the  Sheba  (the  chief  of  these  tribes,  the 
Cushites  par  excellence)  and  the  DeJan. 

The  latter  are  placed,  along  with  Sheba,  among  the  rich 
and  powerful  nations  carrying  on  a  maritime  trade  in  Ezek. 
xxxviii.  13  ;  and  in  ch.  xxvii.  15,  20,  they  are  described  as 
trading  with  Tyre  in  ivory,  ebony,  and  tapestry.  The  first 


532  APPENDIX. 

two  articles  are  still  specifically  articles  of  Ethiopian  export, 
and  not  Indian  at  all,  as  those  who  look  for  the  Dedan  on  the 
Persian  Gulf  suppose.  Strabo  (xvii.  2)  calls  ebony  a  common 
production  of  Meroe.  In  the  earliest  period  of  Islam,  'Aidttb, 
to  the  south  of  Berenice,  was  an  important  harbour  for  the 
export  of  Nubian  ivory  and  gold  (vid.  Yakubi  ut  sup.).  A  nd 
the  tapestries  were  either  of  Ethiopian  or  Egyptian  manufac 
ture.  The  Nubian  wool  was  peculiarly  suitable  for  tapestries, 
because  it  was  not  loose,  but  more  of  the  nature  of  hair,  like 
that  of  the  Angola  sheep.  The  Egyptian  tapestries,  which 
were  probably  made  of  this  wool,  were  highly  valued  in  ancient 
times ;  and  we  even  find  them  mentioned  in  the  tariff  of 
Diocletian  (compare  W.  H.  Waddington,  Edit  de  Diocletien, 
Paris  1864,  p.  20,  with  note  6,  where  testimonies  of  ancient 
writers  to  the  value  of  these  tapestries  are  given). 

If  we  take  the  Declan  to  be  the  most  northerly  of  these 
Cushites,  it  is  because  we  find  their  caravans  in  Syria.  It  is 
true  that  articles  of  commerce  belonging  to  the  Declanians 
might  be  taken  by  ship  to  Suez  or  ^Ela,  and  when  transported 
thence  by  camels  to  Tyre  or  Babylon  be  called  caravans  of  the 
Dedaniansj  just  as  at  the  present  day  the  caravan  which  travels 
periodically  from  Bagdad  to  Damascus  is  called  the  Persian 
caravan,  because  it  carries  Persian  goods.  But  we  assume  that 
the  Dedanian  caravans  came  from  Africa  itself,  which  was  by 
no  means  impossible,  if  the  people  on  the  northern  frontier  of 
Nubia  dwelt  upon  the  Gulf  of  Berenice,  under  the  Allaki 
mountains.  Their  settlements  may  even  have  extended,  either 
originally  or  at  the  time  to  which  the  massa  of  Isaiah  refers, 
still  farther  north  over  a  portion  of  the  Mokattam  (i.e.  the 
mountain  range  running  from  Aswan  to  Suez).  As  all  the 
world  of  all  ages  desired  to  possess  "  the  golden  calf"  (Jer. 
xlvi.  20)  of  Egypt,  so  did  also,  and  even  pre-eminently,  its 
southern  neighbour.  Egypt  had  often  Ethiopian  rulers,  and 
several  times  during  the  existence  of  the  Israelitish  kingdoms. 
A  dynasty  of  this  kind  would  be  sustained  by  such  of  their 
tribe  as  had  established  themselves  with  armed  force  in  the 
land,  and  would  rule  there  till  they  were  forced  out  by  another 
invasion,  or  decimated  and  lost  amongst  a  new  people.  We 
might  assume,  even  if  the  Bible  said  nothing  about  it,  that  in 
this  way  an  Ethiopian  population  gradually  covered  the  whole 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  ISAIAH  XXL  533 

of  the  Mokattam,  and  possibly  the  peninsula  of  Sinai  also,  just 
as  even  at  the  present  day  the  more  important  tribes  of  the 
latter  are  regarded  as  immigrants  and  Egyptians.  But  the 
Bible  also  mentions  these  Cushites.  The  places  and  encamp 
ments  plundered  by  Asa,  according  to  2  Chron.  xiv.  14,  15,  on 
the  south-western  frontier  of  Judaea,  must  from  the  context 
have  been  Cushite ;  for  it  is  not  stated  there,  that  even  Philis 
tines  or  Arabians  had  made  common  cause  with  the  Zerali  who 
invaded  Judah  out  of  Egypt  (or,  as  others  suppose,  across  the 
Mokattam  out  of  Nubia),  and  had  been  chastised  by  Asa  on 
that  account.  Later  still,  under  Jorams  reign,  the  Philistines 
and  Arabs  there  did  indeed  plunder  Jerusalem  (2  Chron.  xxi. 
1 6),  but  they  did  so  'al-yad  Kushlm,  "  in  alliance  with  the 
Cushites,"  who  had  found  their  permanent  settlements  on  the 
N.E.  frontier  of  Egypt,  and  probably  passed  as  subjects  of  that 
land.  If  we  confine  the  true  land  of  the  Egyptians  to  the 
banks  of  the  Nile  and  the  Delta,  as  we  ought,  the  eastern 
mountains  of  Cushite  CabilaB  (called  Arabes,  u  nomads,"  even 
by  the  ancients;  cf.  "the  tents  of  Cushan"  in  Hab.  iii.  7) 
and  the  harbours  of  the  Red  Sea  from  Suez  downwards  be 
longed  to  trading  tribes  of  Cushites. 

The  massa  bardbh  in  ch.  xxi.  13-15  agrees  with  this  view 
of  the  land  and  population  of  the  Dedanians.  The  caravans  are 
on  the  road  to  Babylon,  bringing  the  productions  of  Ethiopia  as 
contributions  towards  the  demand  made  for  articles  of  luxury 
in  the  enormous  capital.  The  road  leads  by  Petra,  Ma'an, 
and  Korakir,  and  one  somewhat  farther  south  by  Duma  and 
SuMka.  There,  probably  not  far  from  Puma,  they  learn  how 
near  the  enemy  are,  and  flee,  leaving  the  open  road  and  taking 
the  direction  towards  Tema  through  the  protecting  labyrinth 
of  the  Downs.  Between  this  city  and  Duma,  as  many  from 
both  places  have  assured  me  in  the  most  trustworthy  manner, 
there  is  no  direct  road,  nor  has  there  ever  been  one.1  And 
over  all  this  ground  you  do  not  find  a  single  drop  of  water 
either  in  winter  or  summer,  since  the  flying  sand  itself  renders 
it  impossible  to  provide  cisterns  for  collecting  the  rain-water. 
Yet  the  distance  between  the  two  is  not  more  than  forty  hours, 

1  The  road  led  from  Tema,  by  Korakir,  Ezrak,  and  Kasam,  to  the 
north  ;  at  Ezrak  one  branched  off  to  the  west  (Bozrah  and  Amman),  at 
Kasam  another  branched  off  to  Damascus. 


534  APPENDIX. 

since  Tema  lies  to  the  N.E.  of  Teluk,  and  not  to  the  S.E.,  as 
marked  upon  our  maps ;  and  for  this  reason  the  Arabian 
geographers  do  not  even  reckon  it  as  belonging  to  the  Penin 
sula,  but  place  it  in  the  Syrian  desert,  and  some  even  in  Syria 
itself.1  Now  if  the  yaar  (ver.  13),  into  which  the  Dedanians 

c/ 

fled,  was  the  Arabian^zj,  their  flight  ended  at  Tema  ;  for  the 

great  Wa&r  of  Arabia,  i.e.  the  land  of  the  Harra,  commences 
there.  And  if  it  is  "  forest,"  the  prophet  had  no  doubt  the 
western  coast  mountains  in  his  mind  ;  for  since  the  mountains 
of  Seir  certainly  derived  their  name  from  their  original  forests 
(even  now,  according  to  Burckhardt  and  others,  there  are  still 
many  holm-oaks  there),  the  Hisma  wrere  very  likely  wooded  as 
well.  According  to  a  statement  in  Yakut's  Geograph.  Lexicon 
(«.  v.  Tram),  the  higher  portions  of  them,  the  Gebel  Iram,  were 
covered  with  firs  (Snobar)  even  in  later  times.  Their  seeking 
for  a  hiding-place  in  the  Wa*r  or  forest  is  contrasted  with 
their  spending  the  night  by  the  wells  of  the  free  open  steppe, 
where  the  caravans  encamp  when  there  is  no  danger  appre 
hended. 

A  few  words  in  conclusion  as  to  ver.  13  according  to  the 
LXX.  The  rendering  of  the  words  D^Tl  mmK  by  ev  rfj 
oSo)  Aa&dv  seems  to  have  been  influenced  by  a  circumstance, 
to  which  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  call  attention.  There 
lies  to  the  west  of  Tema  a  city  in  ruins  called  Dedan,  which 
was  probably  inhabited  at  the  time  of  the  Seventy  and  well 
known  to  them,  so  that  the  'dr'choth  lyddmm  suggested  to 
their  minds  the  road  which  runs  from  Tema  to  this  city.  It 
is  the  same  road  of  which  the  Onomasticon  says,  Aai^av^  Iv  rf) 
'ISou/ia/a,  a>9  'lepefjiias.  Trapatceercu  rfj  $ava  a>?  airo  er^eiW 
B'  Tr/309  floppav.  Only  if  Eusebius  understood  by  $avd  the 
place  called  Punon  in  Num.  xxxiii.  42,  in  the  northern  half  of 
the  valley  of  the  Araba,  he  had  not  formed  a  correct  idea  of 
the  actual  situation  of  this  city  ;  for  in  Yakut's  Geographical 
Lexicon  it  is  said  that  "  Dedan  was  formerly  a  fine  city  on  the 
border  of  the  Belka  towards  the  Higaz,  which  is  now  desolate." 
The  Kitab  el-merdsid,  in  which,  as  is  well  known,  there  are 
innumerable  typographical  errors,  substitutes  for  the  name  of 

1  See  my  paper  on  "  Northern  Arabia  and  the  Syrian  Desert,"  in  tha 
ZeitscJirift  fur  d.  allg.  Erdktmde,  1865. 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  ISAIAH  XXL  535 

the   city   the   Persian   word   Dedeban,   and   reads   incorrectly 
"  road "  instead  of  "  frontier."     The  true  reading  must  have 
been  either  "  in  the  Belka,  on  the  high  road,  near  to  Higaz? 
or  "  belonging  to  Higaz,  on  the  road  to  the  Belka ;  "  but  in 
either  case  Yakut  would  have  expressed  himself  differently. 
Now,  as  neither  the  Araba-  valley,  nor  Gibal  and  the  Serali 
mountains  (of  Seir)  were  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  Belka, 
whereas  the  more  easterly  places,  such  as  Ma  an,  Edruh,  G-erba, 
Muta,  and  others,  were,  the  statement  made  by  Yakut  leads  us 
to  assume  that  a  traveller  from  Muta  to  Tebuk  would  have  the. 
city  of  JDedan  on  one  side,  and  that  the  right  side,  since  all 
cultivation  ceases  to  the  left  of  the  road.     It  is  very  natural  to 
connect  it  with  Dedan,  the  Ketursean  city  mentioned  above ; 
and  the  fact  that  the  latter  is  mentioned  twice  in  connection 
with  Edom  (viz.  in  Jer.  xlix.  8  and  Ezek.  xxv.  13,  probably 
because  it  was  associated  with  Edom  during  the  continuance 
of  the  Chaldean  empire)  may  have  led  Eusebius  to  place  it  in 
the  Arabah.     The  idea  of  its  having  belonged  originally  to 
Edom  may  be  dismissed  without  hesitation ;  for  all  the  settle 
ments  of  the  Keturseans   are  certainly  to  be  thought  of  as 
beyond  the  ancient  limits  of  Edom,  and  even  Dedan  is  not 
mentioned  in  Gen.  xxxvi.  among  the  kindred  and  districts  of 
Edom,  whereas  in  Jer.  xxv.  21,  23,  it  is  expressly  separated 
from  Edom  and  connected  with  two  other  cities  of  the  desert, 
viz.  Tema  and  Buz,  because,  even  if  temporarily  belonging  to 
Edom,  it  may  have  had  much  in  common  with  the  latter  in 
position,  mode   of  life,   municipal   constitution,   and   history. 
The  farther  it  was  removed  from  Edom  proper,  i.e.  the  more 
it  lay  to  the  south  of  Aila,  the  more  does  its  situation  agree 
with  Ezek.  xxv.  1 3,  where  it  is  placed  in  contrast  with  Teman, 
which  was    situated,  according  to   Eusebius,  to  the   north  of 
Petra.     Although  it  cannot  be  affirmed  of  any  place  lying 
farther  south  than  Aila  that  it  was  situated  in  the  Belka,  the 
Arabian  geographers,  on  the  other  hand,  by  no  means  unfre- 
quently  represented  the  Higaz  as  beginning  at  a  line  drawn 
in  the  latitude  of  Median ;  and  I  am  therefore  inclined  to  look 
for  the  ruins  of  Dedan  at  the  eastern  foot  of  the  mountains  of 
Hismah,  especially  as  there  is  a  valley  of  Meddn  there,  which 
slopes  off  towards  the  east.     This  name  is  not  met  with  any 
where  else  in  the  geography  of  Arabia,  and  is  too  striking  in 


536  APPENDIX. 

this  particular  country  for  it  to  be  possible  to  avoid  conjecturing 
that  it  originally  belonged  to  a  ruined  city  situated  there,  which 
is  called  MaSidva  (read  MaSdpa)  in  Ptol.  (Will.  p.  408),  and 
was  most  probably  the  principal  place  belonging  to  the  Ketu- 
tribe  of  Meddn  (Gen.  xxv.  2). 


Assuming  the  identity  of  frn  and  ^Jo  jJI,  the  only  question 

that  remains  is,  how  the  second  could  arise  from  the  first,  and 
how  it  could  get  the  article  ?  Both  these  questions  are 
answered  by  the  assumption  that  the  word  dedd?i,  which  was 
almost  intolerable  (at  any  rate  to  an  Arabic  ear),  was  traced 
back  to  a  root  TT  by  the  extension  of  the  first  syllable,  and 
thus  the  termination  became  the  forming  syllable.  In  this 

/  c/ 

way  they  got  the  form  (JUJ,  which  is  very  frequent  in  Arabic 

names  of  places,  with  a  really  appellative  signification,  and 
such  a  word  would  very  properly  receive  the  article.1  Euse- 
bius  adopts  a  shorter  course.  He  imagines  that  there  were 
originally  two  different  names,  viz.  FTH  (a  defective  rj1?.)  the 

name  of  the  Keturrean  city,  and  rn  (probably  according  to  the 

/  / 

form  TO,  equivalent  to  ^4J)  that  of  the  Cushite  tribe,  which  he 

supposes  to  have  lived  in  the  Syrian  desert  ;  for  in  a  different 
article  of  the  Onomasticon  from  the  one  mentioned  before  he 
says,  Aa&ap,  ev  7$  Ky&ap  w,  'lepe^ta?.  Whatever  we  may 
think  of  his  double  orthography,  the  distinction  which  he 
draws  between  the  two  tribes  is  at  any  rate  supported  by  the 
biblical  account,  and  is  by  no  means  rendered  obsolete  by  the 
more  modern  assumption  of  mixed  races  or  the  variations  of 
genealogies.  The  Bible  calls  the  Cushites,  Dedan  and  Sheba, 
very  ancient  tribes,  and  the  two  Keturseans  of  the  same  name 
very  youthful  tribes.  Now  if  we  are  to  take  this  as  undeniable 
testimony,  why  may  we  not  assume,  as  the  real  explanation  of 

1  Words  formed  from  the  root  TT  are  rare  even  in  Arabic  ;  but  among 
the  wandering  tribes  of  the  Syrian  desert  dtd  is  the  usual  name  given  to 
the  breast  of  a  woman.  As  the  Arab  used  the  names  of  all  the  outward 
parts  of  the  body  at  any  rate  as  designations  to  be  applied  to  the  soil, 
there  might  be  some  hilly  formation  near  Dedan  which  led  to  the  adoption 
of  this  etymon  here,  although  the  people  needed  no  such  motive  as  this  for 
giving  a  native  sound  to  a  foreign  word. 


OBSERVATION?  ON  ISAIAH  XXI.  537 

the  sameness  of  the  names,  that  the  father  of  the  latter  called 
the  two  brothers  by  the  names  of  two  flourishing  tribes,  since 
the  name  of  the  genealogical  founder  of  any  people  was  re 
garded  by  the  Shemites  as  a  name  of  good  omen  ?  Or  why 
may  not  the  mother  have  been  a  Cushite,  who  called  her  two 
sons  by  the  names  of  the  most  powerful  tribes  of  her  own 
people  ?  The  Keturseans  with  their  uninterrupted  intercourse 
with  the  African  coast,  like  the  modern  dwellers  upon  the  Red 
Sea,  are  sure  to  have  had  a  large  number  of  Cushite  wives, 
who  would  often  give  exotic  names  to  their  children.  More 
over,  there  is  an  Arabic  proverb  which  warns  us  against 
inquiring  too  minutely  into  the  why  and  wherefore  of  Semitic 
proper  names.  Such  inquiries  are  of  very  doubtful  worth 
from  a  scientific  point  of  view,  and  only  lead  to  frivolities. 
Any  one,  however,  who  thinks  similarity  of  names  quite  a 
sufficient  reason  for  trying  to  combine  the  most  heterogeneous 
elements,  can  show  his  skill  in  this  art  of  cookery  in  the  most 
splendid  manner  upon  the  genealogies  of  the  Arabs.  Even  at 
the  present  day  there  are  probably  thirty  tribes  or  branches  of 
tribes  called  Sad  in  the  Peninsula,  in  Syria,  in  Mesopotamia, 
and  in  Egypt,  who  have  nothing  whatever  in  common  except 
the  name;  and  quite  as  many  with  the  names  Hamddn,  Chdlid, 
Ali,  Gdnim,  IJasan}  Muhammed,  and  so  forth. 


END  OF  VOL.  II. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN    CHURCH 

BY  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D.,  LL.D. 
Just  published,  in  Two  Volumes,  ex.  demy  8vo,  price  21s., 
SECTION  FIRST— APOSTOLIC  CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.  1-100. 
tuition,  tfj0r0w($l2  Hefciseli  atv&  <55nlat(jetr. 


CONTENTS. — General  Introduction. — T.  Preparation  for  Christianity.  II.  Jesus  Christ. 
III.  The  Apostolic  Age.  IV.  St.  Peter  and  the  Conversion  of  the  Jews.  V.  St.  Paul 
and  the  Conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  VI.  The  Great  Tribulation.  VII.  St.  John  ami 
the  Last  Stadium  of  the  Apostolic  Period — The  Consolidation  of  Jewish  and  Gentile 
Christianity.  VIII.  Christian  Life  in  the  Apostolic  Church.  IX.  Worship  in  the 
Apostolic  Age.  X.  Organization  of  the  Apostolic  Church.  XI.  Theology  of  the 
Apostolic  Age.  XII.  The  New  Testament.  Alphabetical  Index. 


'No  student  and,  indeed,  no  critic  can  with  fairness  overlook  a  work  like  the  present, 
written  with  such  evident  candour,  and,  at  the  same  time,  with  so  thorough  a  knowledge 
of  the  sources  of  early  Christian  history.' — Scotsman. 

'  I  trust  that  this  very  instructive  volume  will  find  its  way  to  the  library  table  of  every 
minister  who  cares  to  investigate  thoroughly  the  foundations  of  Christianity.  I  cannot 
refrain  from  congratulating  you  on  having  carried  through  the  press  this  noble  contri 
bution  to  historical  literature.  I  think  that  there  is  no  other  work  which  equals  it  in 
many  important  excellences.' — Rev.  Prof.  FISHER,  D.D. 

'In  no  other  work  of  its  kind  with  which  I  am  acquainted  will  students  and  general 
readers  find  so  much  to  instruct  and  interest  them.'— Rev.  Prof.  HITCHCOCK,  D.D. 

In  demy  4to,  Third  Edition,  price  25s., 

BIBLICO-THEOLOGICAL  LEXICON  OF  NEW 
TESTAMENT  GREEK. 

BY  HERMANN  CREMER,  D.D., 

PROFESSOR   OP  THEOLOGY   IN  THE   UNIVERSITY   OF  GKKIFSW'ALD. 

TRANSLATED   FROM    THE    GERMAN    OF    THE    SECOND    EDITION 
(WITH  ADDITIONAL  MATTER  AND  CORRECTIONS  BY  THE  AUTHOR ) 

BY  WILLIAM  URWICK,  M.A. 


'Dr.  Cremer's  work  is  highly  and  deservedly  esteemed  in  Germany.  It  gives  with 
care  and  thoroughness  a  complete  history,  as  far  as  it  goes,  of  each  word  and  phrase 
that  it  deals  with.  .  .  .  Dr.  Cremer's  explanations  are  most  lucidly  set  out.' — Guardian. 

'  It  is  hardly  possible  to  exaggerate  the  value  of  this  work  to  the  student  of  the  Greek 
Testament.  .  .  .  The  translation  is  accurate  and  idiomatic,  and  the  additions  to  the 
later  edition  are  considerable  and  important.' — Church  Bells. 

'  We  cannot  find  an  important  word  in  our  Greek  New  Testament  which  is  not 
discussed  with  a  fulness  and  discrimination  which  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired.' — 
Nonconformist. 

'  This  noble  edition  in  quarto  of  Cremer's  Biblico-Theological  Lexicon  quite  super 
sedes  the  translation  of  the  first  edition  of  the  work.  Many  of  the  most  important 
articles  have  been  re- written  and  re-arranged.' — British  Quarterly  Review. 

'  A  majestic  volume,  admirably  printed  and  faultlessly  edited,  and  will  win  gratitude 
as  well  as  renown  for  its  learned  and  Christian  Author,  and  prove  a  precious  boon  to 
students  and  preachers  who  covet  exact  and  exhaustive  acquaintance  with  the  literal 
and  theological  teaching  of  the  New  Testament.' — Dickinson's  Theological  Quarterly. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


In  One  Volume,  8yo,  Second  Edition,  price  12s., 

FINAL    CAUSES. 

BY  PAUL  JANET,  Member  of  the  Institute,  Paris. 

TRANSLATED    FROM    THE    LATEST    FRENCH    EDITION 
BY  WILLIAM  AFFLECK,  B.D. 

CONTENTS.— PRELIMINARY  CHAPTER— The  Problem.  BOOK  I.— The  Law  of 
Finality.  BOOK  II.— The  First  Cause  of  Finality.  APPENDIX. 

'This  very  learned,  accurate,  and,  within  its  prescribed  limits,  exhaustive  work.  .  .  . 
The  book  as  a  whole  abounds  in  matter  of  the  highest  interest,  and  is  a  model  of  learn 
ing  and  judicious  treatment.' — Guardian. 

'Illustrated  and  defended  with  an  ability  and  learning  which  must  command  the 
reader's  admiration.' — Dublin  Review. 

'  A  great  contribution  to  the  literature  of  this  subject.  M.  Janet  has  mastered  the 
conditions  of  the  problem,  is  at  home  in  the  literature  of  science  and  philosophy,  and  has 
that  faculty  of  felicitous  expression  which  makes  French  books  of  the  highest  class  such 
delightful  reading ;  ...  in  clearness,  vigour,  and  depth  it  has  been  seldom  equalled,  and 
more  seldom  excelled,  in  philosophical  literature.' — Spectator. 

'  A  wealth  of  scientific  knowledge  and  a  logical  acumen  which  will  win  the  admiration 
of  every  reader.' — Church  Quarterly  Review. 

In  demy  8vo,  price  10s.  6c?., 

THE    BIBLE    DOCTRINE    OF    MAN. 

(SEVENTH  SERIES  OF  CUNNINGHAM  LECTURES.) 

BY  JOHN  LAIDLAW,  D.D., 

Professor  of  Systematic  Theology,  New  College,  Edinburgh. 


'An  important  and  valuable  contribution  to  the  discussion  of  the  anthropology  of  the 
sacred  writings,  perhaps  the  most  considerable  that  has  appeared  in  our  own  language.' 
— Literary  Churchman. 

'The  work  is  a  thoughtful  contribution  to  a  subject  which  must  always  have  deep 
interest  for  the  devout  student  of  the  Bible.' — British  Quarterly  Review. 

'Dr.  Laidlaw's  work  is  scholarly,  able,  interesting,  and  valuable.  .  .  .  Thoughtful 
and  devout  minds  will  find  much  to  stimulate,  and  not  a  little  to  assist,  their  meditations 
in  this  learned  and,  let  us  add,  charmingly  printed  volume.' — Record. 

'  On  the  whole,  we  take  this  to  be  the  most  sensible  and  reasonable  statement  of  the 
Biblical  psychology  of  man  we  have  met.' — Expositor. 

'The  book  will  give  ample  material  for  thought  to  the  reflective  reader;  and  it  holds 
a  position,  as  far  as  we  know,  which  is  unique.' — Church  Bells. 

'The  Notes  to  the  Lectures,  which  occupy  not  less  than  180  pages,  are  exceedingly 
valuable.  The  style  of  the  lecturer  is  clear  and  animated ;  the  critical  and  analytical 
judgment  predominates.' — English  Independent. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


In  demy  8vo,  Second  Edition,  price  10s.  6d., 

THE     HUMILIATION     OF     CHRIST, 

IN  ITS  PHYSICAL,  ETHICAL,  AND  OFFICIAL  ASPECTS. 
BY    A.    B.    BRUCE,    D.D., 

PROFESSOR  OF  DIVINITY,  FREE  CHUKCH  COLLEGE,  GLASGOW. 

'Dr.  Bruce's  style  is  uniformly  clear  and  vigorous,  and  this  book  of  his,  »s  a  whole, 
has  the  rare  advantage  of  being  at  once  stimulating  and  satisfying  to  the  mind  in  a  high 
degree.' — British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

'  This  work  stands  forth  at  once  as  an  original,  thoughtful,  thorough  piece  of  work  in 
the  branch  of  scientific  theology,  such  as  we  do  not  often  meet  in  our  language.  .  .  .  Jt 
is  really  a  work  of  exceptional  value;  and  no  one  can  read  it  without  perceptible  gain  in 
theological  knowledge.' — English  Churchman. 

4  We  have  not  for  a  long  time  met  with  a  work  so  fresh  and  suggestive  as  this  of  Pro 
fessor  Bruce.  .  .  .  We  do  not  know  where  to  look  at  our  English  Universities  for  a 
treatise  so  calm,  logical,  and  scholarly.' — English  Independent. 


By  the  same  Author. 

In  demy  8vo,  Third  Edition,  price  10s.  6d., 

THE    TRAINING    OF    THE    TWELVE; 

OR, 

EXPOSITION  OF  PASSAGES  IN  THE  GOSPELS 
r  EXHIBITING  THE  TWELVE  DISCIPLES  OF  JESUS  UNDER 
DISCIPLINE  FOR  THE  APOSTLESHIP. 

'Fere  we  have  a  really  great  book  on  an  important,  large,  and  attractive  subject — a 
book  full  of  loving,  wholesome,  profound  thoughts  about  the  fundamentals  of  Christian 
faith  and  practice.' — British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

'  It  is  some  five  or  six  years  since  this  work  first  made  its  appearance,  and  now  that  a 
second  edition  has  been  called  for.  the  Author  has  taken  the  opportunity  to  make  some 
alterations  which  are  likely  to  render  it  still  more  acceptable.  Substantially,  however, 
the  book  remains  the  same,  and  the  hearty  commendation  with  which  we  noted  its  first 
issue  applies  to  it  at  least  as  much  now." — Rock. 

'The  value,  the  beauty  of  this  volume  is  that  it  is  a  unique  contribution  to,  because  a 
loving  and  cultured  study  of,  the  life  of  Christ,  in  the  relation  of  the  Master  of  the 
Twelve.' — Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 

In  duny  8vo,  price  10s.  6d., 

DELIVERY  AND   DEVELOPMENT   OF 
CHRISTIAN   DOCTRINE. 

BY    ROBERT    RAINY,    D.D., 

PRINCIPAL,  AND  PROFESSOR  OF  DIVINITY  AND  CHURCH  HISTORY,  NEW  COLLEGE,  EDIX. 

'We  gladly  acknowledge  the  high  excellence  and  the  extensive  learning  which  these 
lectures  display.  They  are  able  to  the  last  degree;  and  the  author  has,  in  an  unusual 
measure,  the  power  of  acute  and  brilliant  generalization.' — Literary  Churchman. 

'  It  is  a  rich  and  nutritious  book  throughout,  and  in  temper  and  spirit  beyond  all 
praise.' — British  and  Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 

'  The  subject  is  treated  with  a  comprehensive  grasp,  keen  logical  power,  clear  analysis 
niid  learning,  and  in  devout  spirit.' — Evangelical  Magazine. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


PROFESSOR    GODET'S    WORKS. 

In  Three  Volumes,  Svo,  price  31s.  Qd., 
A      COMMENTARY      ON 

THE    GOSPEL    OF    ST.    JOHN. 

BY  F.  GODET,  D.D., 

PROFESSOR   OF  THEOLOGY,   NEUCHATEL. 

|  This  work  forms  one  of  the  battle-fields  of  modern  inquiry,  and  is  itself  so  rich  in 
spiritual  truth  that  it  is  impossible  to  examine  it  too  closely  ;  and  we  welcome  this  treatise 
from  the  pen  of  Dr.  Godet.  We  have  no  more  competent  exegete,  and  this  new  volume 
shows  all  the  learning  and  vivacity  for  which  the  Author  is  distinguished.' — Freeman. 

In  Two  Volumes,  Svo,  price  21*., 

THE    GOSPEL    OF    ST.    LUKE. 

CranslatetJ  from  tfje  £ec0trti  jfrendj  (JHlittton, 

*  Marked  by  clearness  and  good  sense,  it  will  be  found  to  possess  value  and  interest  as 
one  of  the  most  recent  and  copious  works  specially  designed  to  illustrate  this  Gospel.' — 
Guardian. 

In  Two  Volumes,  Svo,  price  21s., 

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE   ROMANS. 

'  We  have  looked  through  it  with  great  care,  and  have  been  charmed  not  less  by  the 
clearness  and  fervour  of  its  evangelical  principles  than  by  the  carefulness  of  its  exegesis, 
its  fine  touches  of  spiritual  intuition,  and  its  appositeness  of  historical  illustration.' — 
Baptist  Magazine. 

In  crown  Svo,  Second  Edition,  price  6s., 

DEFENCE    OF   THE    CHRISTIAN    FAITH. 

TRANSLATED   BY  THE 

HON,  AND  REV.  CANON  LYTTELTW,  M.A., 

RECTOR  OF  HAGLEY. 

'This  volume  is  not  unworthy  of  the  great  reputation  which  Professor  G<~>det  enjoys. 
It  shows  the  same  breadth  of  reading  and  extent  of  learning  as  his  previous  work*,  and 
the  same  power  of  eloquent  utterance.' — Church  Bells. 

'  Professor  Godet  is  at  once  so  devoutly  evangelical  in  his  spirit  and  so  profoundly 
intelligent  in  his  apprehension  of  truth,  that  we  shall  all  welcome  these  contributions  to 
the  study  of  much  debated  subjects  with  the  utmost  satisfaction.' — Christian  World. 

In  demy  Svo,  Fourth  Edition,  price  10«<?.  Qd., 

MODERN  DOUBT  AND  CHRISTIAN  BELIEF. 

A  Series  of  Apologetic  Lectures  addressed  to  Earnest 
Seekers  after  Truth. 

BY  THEODORE  CHRISTLTEB,  D.D., 

UNIVERSITY    PREACHER    AND    PROFESSOR    OF   THEOLOGY    AT    BONN. 

Translated,  with  the  Author's  sanction,  chiefly  by  the  Rev.  H.  U.  WEITBRECHT, 
Ph.D.,  and  Edited  by  the  Rev.  T.  L.  KINGSBURY,  M.A. 

'  We  recommend  the  volume  as  one  of  the  most  valuable  and  important  among  recent 
contributions  to  our  apologetic  literature.  .  .  .  We  are  heartily  thankful  both  to  the 
learned  Author  and  to  his  translators.' — Guardian. 

'We  express  our  unfeigned  admiration  of  the  ability  displayed  in  this  work,  and  of 
the  spirit  of  deep  piety  which  pervades  it ;  and  whilst  we  commend  it  to  the  careful 
parusal  of  our  readers,  we  heartily  rejoice  that  in  those  days  of  reproach  and  blasphemy 
so  able  a  champion  has  come  forward  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  which  was  once 
delivered  to  the  saints.' — Christian  Observer. 


HANDBOOKS    FOR    BIBLE   CLASSES. 

'  These  volumes  are  models  of  the  multum  in  parvo  style.  We  have 
long  desired  to  meet  with  a  Series  of  this  kind— Little  Books  on  Great 
Subjects.' — Literary  World. 

THE    EPISTLE   OF    ST.  PAUL   TO  THE   GALATIANS. 

ffiSitfj  Erttrotiucttott  atrtj  $>otes  [Price  Is.  Gd. 

BY  THE  EKV.  PROFESSOR  JAMES  MACGREGOR,  D.D. 

THE     POST-EXILIAN     PROPHETS— 

HAGGAI,  ZECHARIAH,  MALACHI. 

fflSEtti)  Introduction  anto  $0tes  [Price  2*. 

BY  MARCUS  DODS,  D.D. 

THE     LIFE     OF     CHRIST. 

BY  REV.  JAMES  STALKER,  M.A.  [Price  Is.'Gd. 

THE     CHRISTIAN     SACRAMENTS. 

BY  PROFESSOR  JAMES  S.  CANDLISH,  D.D.  [Price  Is.  Gd. 

THE     BOOKS     OF     CHRONICLES. 

BY  REV.  PROFESSOR  MURPHY,  BELFAST.  [Price  Is.  Gd. 

THE    WESTMINSTER    CONFESSION    OF    FAITH. 

ffiSaitfj  Etttrotmcttott  ano  $otw  [Price  "2s. 

BY  REV.  JOHN  MACPHERSON,  M.A. 

THE     BOOK     OF     JUDGES. 

BY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  DOUGLAS,  D.D.  [Price  Is.  3d. 

THE     BOOK     OF     JOSHUA. 

BY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  DOUGLAS,  D.D.  [Price  Is.  Gd. 

THE     EPISTLE     TO     THE     HEBREWS. 

BY  REV.  PROFESSOR  A.  B.  DAVIDSON.  [Price  2s.  Gd. 

SCOTTISH     CHURCH     HISTORY. 

BY  RKV.  NORMAN  L.  WALKER,  M.A.  [Price  Is.  Gd. 

THE     CHURCH. 

BY  REV.  PROFESSOR  WM.  BINNIE,  D.D.  [Price  Is.  Gd. 

THE     EPISTLE     TO     THE     ROMANS. 

BY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  BROWN,  D.D.  [Price  2s. 

THE     BOOK     OF     GENESIS. 

BY  MARCUS  DODS,  D.D.  [Price  2s. 

THE     REFORMATION. 

BY  REV.  PROFESSOR  LINDSAY,  D.D.  [Price  2s. 

PRESBYTERIANISM. 

_______  BY  REV.  JOHN  MACPHERSON,  M.A.  [Price  Is.  Gd. 

LESSONS     ON     THE     LIFE     OF     CHRIST. 

BY  REV.  WM.  SCRYMGEOUR.  [Price  2s.  Gd. 

THE     SHORTER     CATECHISM. 

BY  ALEXANDER  WHYTE,  D.D.  [Price  2s.  Gd. 

ST.     MARK'S     GOSPEL. 

BY  RKV.  PROFESSOR  LINDSAY,  D.D.  [Price  2s.  Gd. 


T.  and  7".  Clark '  s  Publications. 


In  Three  Volumes,  Imperial  8vo,  Price  24s.  each, 

ENCYCLOPEDIA 


OR 


DICTIONARY 

OF 

BIBLICAL,  HISTORICAL,  DOCTRINAL,  AND 
PRACTICAL  THEOLOGY. 

BASED  ON  THE  REAL-ENCYKLOPADIE  OF  HERZOG,  PUTT,  AND  HAUCK, 

EDITED  BY 

PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D.,  LL.D., 

PROFESSOR  IN  THE  UNION  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY,  NEW  YORK. 


'As  a  comprehensive  work  of  reference,  within  a  moderate  compass,  we  know- 
nothing  at  all  equal  to  it  in  the  large  department  which  it  deals  with.' — Church  Bells. 

'  The  work  will  remain  as  a  wonderful  monument  of  industry,  learning,  and  skill.  It 
will  be  indispensable  to  the  student  of  specifically  Protestant  theology;  nor,  indeed,  do 
we  think  that  any  scholar,  whatever  be  his  especial  line  of  thought  or  study,  would 
find  it  superfluous  on  his  shelves.' — Literary  Churchman. 

'  We  commend  this  work  with  a  touch  of  enthusiasm,  for  we  have  often  wanted  such 
ourselves.  It  embraces  in  its  range  of  writers  all  the  leading  authors  of  Europe  on 
ecclesiastical  questions.  A  student  may  deny  himself  many  other  volumes  to  secure 
this,  for  it  is  certain  to  take  a  prominent  and  permanent  place  in  our  literature.' — 
Evangelical  Magazine. 

'  Dr.  Schaff  s  name  is  a  guarantee  for  valuable  and  thorough  work.  His  new  Encyclo 
paedia  (based  on  Herzog)  will  be  one  of  the  most  useful  works  of  the  day.  It  will  provo 
a  standard  authority  on  all  religious  knowledge.  No  man  in  the  country  is  so  well  fitted 
to  perfect  such  a  work  as  this  distinguished  and  exact  scholar.' — HOWARD  CROSBY,  D.D., 
LL.D.,  ex-Chancellor  of  the  University,  New  York. 

'This  work  will  prove  of  great  service  to  many;  it  supplies  a  distinct  want  in  our 
theological  literature,  and  it  is  sure  to  meet  with  welcome  from  readers  who  wish  a 
popular  book  of  reference  on  points  of  historical,  biographical,  and  theological  interest. 
Many  of  the  articles  give  facts  which  may  be  sought  far  and  wide,  and  in  vain  in  our 
encyclopaedias.' — Scotsman. 

1  Those  who  possess  the  latest  edition  of  Herzog  will  still  find  this  work  by  no  means 
superfluous.  .  .  .  Strange  to  say,  the  condensing  process  seems  to  have  improved  the 
original  articles.  .  .  .  We  hope  that  no  minister's  library  will  long  remain  without  a 
copy  of  this  work.' — Daily  Review. 

'For  fulness,  comprehensiveness,  and  accuracy,  it  will  take  the  first  place  among 
Biblical  Encyclopaedias.'— WM.  M.  TAYLOR,  D.D. 


PUBLICATIONS     OF 

T.     AND     T.     CLARK, 

38   GEORGE   STREET,    EDINBURGH. 

LONDON:  HAMILTON,  ADAMS,  &  CO. 


Adam  ( J.,  D.D.)— AN  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.    8vo,  9s. 
Alexander  (Dr.  J.  A.) — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PROPHECIES  OF  ISAIAH. 

New  and  Revised  Edition.     Two  vols.  Svo,  17s. 

Ante-Nicene  Christian  Library — A  COLLECTION  OF  ALL  THE  WORKS 

OF  THE  FATHERS  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CIIUHCH  PRIOR  TO  THE  COUNCIL  OF 
NIC.<EA.     Twenty-four  vols.  Svo,  Subscription  price,  £6,  6s. 

Auberlen  (C.  A.) — THE  DIVINE  REVELATION.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 
Augustine's  Works — Edited  by  MARCUS  DODS,  D.D.      Fifteen  vols. 

8vo,  Subscription  price,  £3,  19s. 

Bannerman  (Professor)— THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST  :  A  Treatise  on  the 

Nature,  Powers,  etc.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Batimgarten  (Professor) — APOSTOLIC  HISTORY  ;  Being  an  Account  of 

the  Development  of  the  Early  Church.     Three  vols.  Svo,  27s. 

Beck  (Dr.) — OUTLINES  OF  BIBLICAL  PSYCHOLOGY.     Crown  Svo,  4s. 

—  PASTORAL  THEOLOGY.     Shortly. 
Bengel — GNOMON  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.     With  Original  Notes, 

Explanatory  and  Illustrative.     Five  vols.  Svo,  Subscription  price,  31s.   6d. 
Cheaper  Edition,  the  five  volumes  bound  in  three,  24s. 

Besser's  CHRIST  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  WORLD.     Price  6s. 
Bible-Class  Handbooks.     Crown  Svo. 

BINNIE  (Prof.)— The  Church,  Is.  Cd. 

BROWN  (Principal)— The  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  2s. 

CANDLISH  (Prof.) — The  Christian  Sacraments,  Is.  6d. 

DAVIDSON  (Prof.)— The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  2s.  6d. 

DODS  (MARCUS,  D.D.) — The  Post-Exilian  Prophets,  "2s. 

The  Book  of  Genesis.  2s. 

DOUGLAS  (Principal)— The  Book  of  Joshua,  Is.  6d. 

The  Book  of  Judges,  Is.  ;M. 

HENDERSON  (ARCHIBALD,  M.A.) — Palestine,  with  Maps.     The  maps  are  by 
Captain  Conder,  R.E.,  of  the  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.    Price  2s.  6d. 

LINDSAY  (Prof.)— The  Gospel  of  St.  Mark,  2s.  6d. 

The  Reformation,  2s. 

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  Part  I.,  Cb.  I.-XII.,  Is.  Gd. 

MACGREGOR  (Prof.)— The  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  Is.  6d. 

MACPHEKSON  (JOHN,  M.A.)— Presbyter! anism,  Is.  (3d. 

The  Westminster  Confession  of  Faith,  2s. 

MURPHY  (Prof.) — The  Books  of  Chronicles,  Is.  6d. 

SCRYMGEOUR  (Wii.)— Lessons  on  the  Life  of  Christ,  2s.  6d. 

STALKER  (JAMES,  M.A.)— The  Life  of  Christ,  Is.  6d. 

The  Life  of  St.  Paul,  Is.  6d. 

SMITH  (GEORGE,  LL.D.) — A  Short  History  of  Missions,  2s.  6d. 

WALKER  (NORMAN  L.,  M.A.)— Scottish  Church  History,  Is.  6d. 

WHYTE  (ALEXANDER,  D.D.)— The  Shorter  Catechism,  2s.  6d. 
Bible-Class  Primers.     Paper  covers,  6d.  each ;  free  by  post,  7d.     In 
cloth.  8d.  each ;  free  by  post,  9d. 

CROSKERY  (Prof.) — Joshua  and  the  Conquest. 

GIVEN  (Prof.)— The  Kings  of  Judah. 

GLOAG,  (PATON  J..  D.D.)— Life  of  Paul. 

IVEKACH  (JAMES,  M.A.)— Life  of  Moses. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Bible-Class  Primers — continued. 
SALMOND  (Prof.)— Life  of  Peter. 

SMITH  (H.  W.,  D.D.)— Outlines  Of  Early  Church  History. 
THOMSON  (PKTEK,  M. A.)— Life  of  David. 
WALKER  (W.,  M.A.)— The  Kings  of  Israel. 
WINTERBOTHAM  (liAYNER,  M.A.)—  Life  and  Reign  of  Solomon. 
WiTHEROW  (Prof.)— The  History  of  the  Reformation. 

Bleek's  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 
Bowman  (T.,  M.A.) — EASY  AND  COMPLETE  HEBREW  COURSE.     Svo. 

Part  I.,  7s.  6d.  ;  Part  II.,  10s.  (jil. 

Briggs    (Prof.) — BIBLICAL    STUDY  :     Its    Principles,     Methods,    and 

History.     Preface  by  Rev.  Prof.  BRUCE,  D.D.,  Glasgow.      Post  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

Brown  (David,  D.D.)— CHRIST'S   SECOND   COMING:    Will  it  be  Pre- 

Alillennial '(     Seventh  Edition,  crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

Bruce  (A.  B.,  D.D.) — THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  TWELVE  ;  or,  Exposition 

of  Passages  in  the  Gospels  exhibiting  the  Twelve  Disciples  of  Jesus  under 
"Discipline  for  the  Apostleship.     Third  Edition,  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

THE  HUMILIATION  OF  CHRIST,  in  its  Physical,  Ethical,  and 

Official  Aspects.     Second  Edition,  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Buchanan  (Professor) — THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION.  Svo,  10s.  Gel. 

ON  COMFORT  IN  AFFLICTION.     Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d. 

-  ON  IMPROVEMENT  OF  AFFLICTION.     Crown  Svo,  2s.  6d. 
Bungener  (Felix) — HOME  AND  THE  COUNCIL  IN  THE  NINETEENTH 

CENTURY.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Calvin's  INSTITUTES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN   RELIGION.     Translated  by 

HENRY  BEVERIDGE.     Two  vols.  Svo,  14s. 
Calvini    Institutio    Christianas    Beligionis.      Curavit    A    THOLUCK. 

Two  vols.  Svo,  Subscription  price,  14s. 

Candlish  (Prof.  J.  S.,  D.D.) — THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  BIBLICALLY  AND 
HISTORICALLY  CONSIDERED.  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Caspari  (C.  E.) — A  CHRONOLOGICAL  AND  GEOGRAPHICAL  INTRODUC 
TION  TO  THE  LIFE  OF  CHRIST.  Svo,  9s. 

Gaspers  (A,)— THE  FOOTSTEPS  OF  CHRIST.     Crown  Svo,  7s.  6d. 

Cave  (Prof.) — THE  SCRIPTURAL  DOCTRINE  OF  SACRIFICE.     Svo,  12s. 

Christlieb  (Dr.) — MODERN  DOUBT  AND  CHRISTIAN  BELIEF.    Apologetic 

Lectures  addressed  to  Earnest  Seekers  after  Truth.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Cotterill  —  PEREGRINUS    PROTEUS  :    Investigation    into    De    Morte 

Peregrini,  the  Two  Epistles  of  Clement  to  the  Corinthians,  etc.     Svo,  12s. 

MODERN  CRITICISM  :  Clement's  Epistles  to  Virgins,  etc.    Svo,  os. 

Creiner  (Professor) — BIBLICO-THEOLOGICAL  LEXICON  OF  NEW  TESTA 
MENT  GREEK.     Third  Edition,  demy  4to,  25s. 

Crippen  (Rev.  T.   G.) — A  POPULAR  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  HISTORY 

OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE.     Svo,  9s. 
Cunningham  (Principal) — HISTORICAL  THEOLOGY.    A  Review  of  the 

Principal  Doctrinal  Discussions  in  the  Christian  Church  since  the  Apostolic 
Age.     Second  Edition,  Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

DISCUSSIONS  ON  CHURCH  PRINCIPLES.     8vo,  10s.  Gd. 

Curtiss  (Dr.  S.  I.) — THE  LEVITICAL  PRIESTS.     A  Contribution  to  the 

Criticism  of  the  Pentateuch.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Dabney  (E.  L.,  D.D.) — THE  SENSUALISTIC  PHILOSOPHY  OF  THE 
NINETEENTH  CENTURY  CONSIDERED.  Crown  Svo,  Os. 

LECTURES  ON  SYSTEMATIC  AND  POLEMIC  THEOLOGY.    Svo,  16s. 

Davidson  (Professor)— AN  INTRODUCTORY  HEBREW  GRAMMAR.     With 

Progressive  Exercises  in  Reading  and  Writing.     Seventh  Edition,  Svo,  7s.  tid. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Delitzsch  (Prof.)— A  SYSTEM  OF  BIBLICAL  PSYCHOLOGY.     8vo.  12s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  JOB.     Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  PSALMS.     Three  vols.  8vo,  31s.  6d. 

ON  THE  PROVERBS  OF  SOLOMON.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  THE  SONG  OF  SOLOMON  AND  ECCLESIASTES.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  HISTORY  OF  REDEMPTION.     Cr.  8vo,  4s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  ISAIAH.    Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Doedes  (Dr.  J.)— MANUAL  OF  HERMENEUTICS  FOR  THE  NEW  TESTA 
MENT.     Crown  Svo,  3s. 

Dollinger  (Dr.) — HIPPOLYTUS  AND  CALLISTUS  ;  or,  The  Eoman  Church 

in  the  First  Half  of  the  Third  Century.     Svo,  9s. 

Dorner  (Professor) — HISTORY  OF  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  DOCTRINE 

OF  THE  PER90X  OF  CHRIST.     Five  vols.  Svo,  £2,  12s.  6d. 

SYSTEM  OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE.     Four  vols.  Svo,  £2,  2s. 

Eadie  (Professor) — COMMENTARIES  ON  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLES  TO  THE 

GALATI ANS,  EPHESIAN.S,  I'MILII-PIANS,  COLOSSI  ANS.     Tsew  and  Revised  Edi 
tions,  Edited  by  Kev.  WILLIAM  YOUNG,  M.A.     Four  vols.  Svo,  10s.  6d.  each. 

Ebrard  (Dr.  J.  H.  A.) — THE  GOSPEL  HISTORY  :    A  Compendium  of 

Critical  Investigations  in  support  of  the  Four  Gospels.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Elliott — ON  THE  INSPIRATION  OF  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES.    Svo,  6s. 
Ernesti — BIBLICAL  INTERPRETATION  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.    Two 

vols.     8s. 

Ewald  (Heinrich) — SYNTAX  OF  THE  HEBREW  LANGUAGE  OF  THE  OLD 

TESTAMENT.     Svo,  8s.  6d. 

REVELATION  :   ITS   NATURE  AND  RECORD.       Translated   by 

Prof.  T.  GOADBY.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Fairbairn  (Principal) — TYPOLOGY  OF  SCRIPTURE,  viewed  in  connection 

Avith  the  series  of  Divine  Dispensations.     Sixth  Edition,  Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

THE  REVELATION  OF  LAW  IN  SCRIPTURE,  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

.  EZEKIEL  AND  THE  BOOK  OF  HIS  PROPHECY.    4  til  Ed.,  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

PROPHECY  VIEWED  IN  ITS  DISTINCTIVE  NATURE,  ITS  SPECIAL 

FUNCTIONS,  AND  PJROPEF.  INTERPRETATIONS.     Second  Edition,  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  HERMENEUTICAL  MANUAL.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.     The  Greek  Text  and  Translation. 

With  Introduction,  Expository  Notes,  and  Dissertations.     Svo,  7s.  6d. 
— •  PASTORAL  THEOLOGY  :  A  Treatise  on  the  Office  and  Duties  of 
the  Christian  Pastor.     With  a  Memoir  of  the  Author.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 

Forbes  (Prof.)— SYMMETRICAL  STRUCTURE  OF  SCRIPTURE.   8vo,  8s.  Gd. 

.  ANALYTICAL  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  ROMANS.     Svo,  10s.  Gd. 

Gebhardt  (H.) — THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  APOCALYPSE,  AND  ITS  RELATION 

TO  THE  DOCTKINE  OF  THE  GOSPEL  AND  EPISTLES  OF  JOHN.       Svo,  10s.   6d. 

Gerlach — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH.     Svo,  10s.  Gd. 
Gieseler  (Dr.  J.  C.  L.)— A  COMPENDIUM  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY. 

Four  vols.  Svo,  £2,  2s. 

Gilford  (Canon) — VOICES  OF  THE  PROPHETS.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Given  (Rev.  Prof.  J.  J.) — THE  TRUTHS  OF  SCRIPTURE  IN  CONNECTION 

WITH  REVELATION,  INSPIRATION,  AND  THE  CANON.     Svo,  9s. 

Glasgow  (Prof. ) — APOCALYPSE  TRANSLATED  AND  EXPOUNDED.  Svo,  1 4s. 
Gloag  (Paton  J.,  D.D.) — A  CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  COMMENTARY 

ON  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.      Two  Vols.   SvO,  21 S. 

THE  MESSIANIC  PROPHECIES.     Crown  Svo,  price  7s.  Gd. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Gloag  (P.  J.,  D.D. ) — INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PAULINE  EPISTLES.  8vo,  12s. 

-  EXEGETICAL  STUDIES.     Crown  8vo,  5s. 
Godet  (Prof.) — COMMENTARY  ON  ST.  LUKE'S  GOSPEL.  Twovols.  Svo,  21s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL.    Three  vols.  8vo,  31s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.    Two 

vols.  8vo,  21s. 

LECTURES  IN  DEFENCE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  FAITH.    Cr.  Svo,  6s. 

Goebel  (Siegfried) — THE  PARABLES  OF  JESUS.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 
Gotthold's  Emblems ;  or,  INVISIBLE  THINGS  UNDERSTOOD  BY  THINGS 

THAT  ARE  MADE.     Crown  8vo,  5s. 

Guyot  (Arnold,  LL.D.) — CREATION;  or,  The  Biblical  Cosmogony  in  the 
Light  of  Modern  Science.     With  Illustrations.     Crown  Svo,  5s.  6cl. 

Hagenbach  (Dr.  K.  E.) — HISTORY  OF  DOCTRINES.     Edited,  with  large 

additions  from  various  sources.     Three  vols.  Svo,  31s.  6d. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  REFORMATION  IN  GERMANY  AND  SWITZER 
LAND  CHIEFLY.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Hall  (Rev.   Newman,   LL.B.)— THE  LORD'S  PRAYER:    A  Practical 

Meditation.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Harless  (Dr.  C.  A.) — SYSTEM  OF  CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.    Svo,  10s.  6d. 
Harris  (Eev.  S.,  D.D.)— THE  PHILOSOPHICAL  BASIS  OF  THEISM.   8vo,  1 2s. 
Haupt  (Erich) — THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JOHN.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 
Havernick  (H.  A.  Ch.) — INTRODUCTION  TO  OLD  TESTAMENT.     10s.  6d. 
Heard  (Rev.  J.  B.,  M.A.) — THE  TRIPARTITE  NATURE  OF  MAN — SPIRIT, 

SOUL,  AND  BODY — applied  to  Illustrate  and  Explain  the  Doctrine  of  Original 
Sin,  the  New  Birth,  the  Disembodied  State,  and  the  Spiritual  Body.  With 
an  Appendix  on  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  Fifth  Edition,  crown  Svo,  6s. 

THE  OLD  AND  NEW  THEOLOGY.     Crown  8vo,  6s. 

Hefele  (Bishop) — A  HISTORY  OF  THE  COUNCILS  OF  THE  CHURCH. 

Vol.  I.,  to  A.D.  325  ;  Vol.  II.,  A.D.  326  to  429.  Vol.  III.,  A.D.  431  to  the 
close  of  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  451.  Svo,  12s.  each. 

Hengstenberg  (Professor) — COMMENTARY  ON  PSALMS.    3  vols.  8vo,  33s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES.     Treatises  on 

the  Song  of  Solomon,  Job,  and  on  Isaiah,  etc.     Svo,  9s. 

THE  PROPHECIES  OF  EZEKIEL  ELUCIDATED.    Svo,  10s.  6d. 

DISSERTATIONS  ON  THE  GENUINENESS  OF  DANIEL,  AND  THE 

INTEGRITY  OF  ZECHARIAH.     Svo,  12s. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  UNDER  THE  OLD  TESTA 
MENT.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

CHRISTOLOGY  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.    Four  vols.  8vo,  £2, 2s. 

ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.     Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

Hermes   Trismegistus — THEOLOGICAL  AND  PHILOSOPHICAL  WORKS. 

Translated  from  the  original  Greek  by  J.  D.  CHAMBERS,  M.A.     Svo,  6s. 

Herzog — ENCYCLOPAEDIA  OR  DICTIONARY  OF  BIBLICAL,  HISTORICAL, 

DOCTRINAL,  AND  PRACTICAL  THEOLOGY.  Bawd  on  the  lie.al- f/ncyklopcidie 
of  Herzog,  Plitt,  and  Hauck.  Edited  by  Professor  SCHAFF,  D.D.  In  Three 
vols.,  price  24s.  each. 

Hutchison  (John,  D.D.) — COMMENTARY  ON  THESSALONIANS.     Svo,  9s. 
Janet  (Paul) — FINAL  CAUSES.     By  PAUL  JANET,  Member  of  the  In 
stitute.     Translated  from  the  French.     Second  Edition,  demy  Svo,  12s. 
THE  THEORY  OF  MORALS.     Translated  from  the  latest  French 

Edition.     Demy  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Jouffroy — PHILOSOPHICAL  ESSAYS.     Fcap.  Svo,  5s. 

Junii  (Francisci) — Opuscula  Theologica  Selecta.     4to,  vellum,  16s. 

Kant — THE  METAPHYSIC  OF  ETHICS.     Crown  8vo,  6s. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Keil  (Prof.) — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PENTATEUCH.     3  vols.  8vo,  8 1  s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  JOSHUA,  JUDGES,  AND  RUTH. 

8vo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL.    8vo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  KINGS.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  CHRONICLES.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  EZRA,  NEHEMIAH,  ESTHER.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

COMMENTARY  ON  JEREMIAH.     Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  EZEKIEL.    Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  DANIEL.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  MlNOR  PROPHETS.      Two  Vols.  8\'0,  21  S. 

MANUAL  OF   HISTORICO  -  CRITICAL    INTRODUCTION    TO    THE 

CANONICAL  SCRIPTURES  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.     Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

Keymer  (Eev.  N.,  M.A.) — NOTES  ON  GENESIS.     Crown  8vo,  Is.  6d. 

Killen  (Prof.) — THE  OLD  CATHOLIC  CHURCH  ;  or,  The  History,  Doc 
trine,  Worship,  and  Polity  of  the  Christians,  traced  to  A.D.  755.     8vo,  9s. 

Konig  (Dr.   F.   E.) — THE' CHIEF  PRINCIPLES  OF  ANCIENT   ISRAEL'S 

RELIGION  (against  the  Kuenen  School).  /n  the  Press. 

Krummacher  (Dr.  F.  W.) — THE  SUFFERING  SAVIOUR  ;  or,  Meditations 

on  the  Last  Days  of  the  Sufferings  of  Christ.     Eighth  Edit. ,  crown  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

DAVID,  THE  KING  OF  ISRAEL  :  A  Portrait  drawn  from  Bible 

History  and  the  Book  of  Psalms.     Second  Edition,  crown  8vo,  7s.  6d. 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY.     Crown  8vo,  6s. 

Kurtz  (Prof.) — HANDBOOK  OF  CHURCH  HISTORY.    Two  vols.  8vo,  15s. 

HISTORY  OF  THE  OLD  COVENANT.     Three  vols.  8vo,  31s.  6d. 

Ladd    (Prof.    G-.    T.) — THE  DOCTRINE  OF  SACRED    SCRIPTURE  :    A 

Critical,  Historical,  and  Dogmatic  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  and  Nature  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testaments.     Two  vols.  8vo,  1600  pp.,  28s. 

Laidlaw  (Prof.) — THE  BIBLE  DOCTRINE  OF  MAN.     8vo,  10s.  Gd. 
Lange  (J.  P.,  D.D.) — THE  LIFE  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST.     Edited, 

with  additional  Notes,  by  MARCUS  DODS,  D.D.     Second  Edition,  in  Four 
vols.  Svo,  Subscription  price  28s. 

COMMENTARIES  ON  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENTS.    Edited 

by  PHILIP  SCHAFF,  D.D.     OLD  TESTAMENT,  14  vols.  ;  NEW  TESTAMENT,  10 
vols.  ;  APOCRYPHA,  1  vol.     Subscription  price,  nett,  15s.  each. 

-  ON  THE  GOSPELS  OF  ST.  MATTHEW  AND  ST.  MARK.     Three 

vols.  8vo,  31s.  6d. 

ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  LUKE.     Two  vols.  8vo,  18s. 

ON  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.     Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

Lehmann  (Pastor) — SCENES  FROM  THE  LIFE  OF  JESUS.    Cr.  8vo,  3s.  Gd. 
Lewis  (Tayler,  LL.D.)— THE  Six  DAYS  OF  CREATION.    Cr.  8vo,  7s.  Gd. 
Lisco  (F.  G.) — PARABLES  OF  JESUS  EXPLAINED.    Fcap.  8vo,  5s. 
Lotze  (Professor) — MICROCOSMOS.     In  preparation. 

Luthardt,  Kahnis,  and  Bruckner — THE  CHURCH.     Crown  8vo,  5s. 
Luthardt  (Prof.) — ST.  JOHN  THE  AUTHOR  OF  THE  FOURTH  GOSPEL.    9s. 

ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL  DESCRIBED  AND  EXPLAINED  ACCORDING 

TO  ITS  PECULIAR  CHARACTER.     Three  vols.  8vo,  31s.  6d. 

APOLOGETIC     LECTURES     ON     THE     FUNDAMENTAL     (Sixth 

Edition),  SAVING  (Fourth  Edition),  MORAL  TRUTHS  OF  CHRISTIANITY  (Third 
Edition).     Three  vols.  crown  8vo,  6s.  each. 
M'Cosh  (Dr.  Jas.) — PHILOSOPHIC  SERIES.     Part  I.  (Didactic).     Part  II. 

(Historical).     Iswed  in  Bi-Monthly  Number*.     Price  2s. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Macdonald  (Rev.  D.) — INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  PENTATEUCH.    Two  vols. 

8vo,  21s. 

THE  CREATION  AND  FALL.     Svo,  12s. 

M'Lauchlan  (T.,  B.D.,  LL.D.)— THE  EARLY  SCOTTISH  CHURCH.     To 

the  Middle  of  the  Twelfth  Century.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Mair  (A.,  D.D.) — STUDIES  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  EVIDENCES.     Or.  8vo,  6s. 
Martensen  (Bishop) — CHRISTIAN  DOGMATICS  :  A  Compendium  of  the 

Doctrines  of  Christianity.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

•  CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.     (GENERAL  ETHICS.)     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.    (INDIVIDUAL  ETHICS.)    Svo,  10s.  6cl. 

CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.     (SOCIAL  ETHICS.)     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Matheson  (Geo.,  D.D.) — GROWTH  or  THE  SPIRIT  OF  CHRISTIANITY,  from 

the  First  Century  to  the  Dawn  of  the  Lutheran  Era.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

AIDS  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  GERMAN  THEOLOGY.    3rd  Edition,  4s.  6d. 

Meyer  (Dr.)  —  CRITICAL  AND    EXEGETICAL    COMMENTARY    ON    ST. 

MATTHEW'S  GOSPEL.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  MARK  AND  LUKE.    Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

ON  ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  CORINTHIANS.    Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

ON  GALATIANS.    Svo,  10s.  6d. 

ON  EPHESIANS  AND  PHILEMON.    One  vol.  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

ON  PHILIPPIANS  AND  COLOSSIANS.     One  vol.  Svo,  10s.  6cf. 

ON  THESSALONIANS.     (Dr.  Lilnemann.)     One  vol.  Svo,  10s.  Gd. 

THE  PASTORAL  EPISTLES.     (Dr.  Hutlicr.)    Svo,  10s.  6d. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.    (Dr.  Liinemann.)   Svo,  10s.  6d. 

—  ST.  JAMES'  AND  ST.  JOHN'S  EPISTLES.    (Huthcr.)    Svo,  10s.  6d. 

PETER  AND  JUDE.     (Dr.  Hutlier.)     One  vol.  Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Michie   (Charles,  M. A.)— BIBLE  WORDS  AND  PHRASES,  EXPLAINED 

AND  ILLUSTRATED.     ISmo,  Is. 

Monrad  (Dr.  D.  G-.) — THE  WORLD  OF  PRAYER;  or,  Prayer  in  relation 
to  Personal  Eeligion.     Crown  Svo,  4s.  6d. 

Morgan  (J.,  D.D.)— SCRIPTURE  TESTIMONY  TO  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.    9s. 

EXPOSITION  OF  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.     Svo,  9s. 

Muller  (Dr.  Julius) — THE  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE  OF  SIN.    An  entirely 

New  Translation  from  the  Fifth  German  Edition.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Murphy  (Professor) — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  PSALMS.    Svo,  12s. 

A  CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  COMMENTARY  ON  EXODUS.    9s. 

Naville  (Ernest)— THE  PROBLEM  OF  EVIL.     Crown  Svo,  4s.  6d. 

THE  CHRIST.   Translated  by  Rev.  T.  J.  DESPRES.   Cr.8vo,4s.6d. 

-  MODERN    PHYSICS:    Studies    Historical    and    Philosophical. 

Translated  by  Rev.  HENRY  DOWNTOX,  M.A.     Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Nicoll  (W.  E.,  M.A.) — THE  INCARNATE  SAVIOUR  :    A  Life  of  Jesus 

Christ.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 

Neander  (Dr.)— GENERAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  EELIGION  AND 

CHUECII.     Nine  vols.  Svo,  £3,  7s.  6d. 

Oehler  (Prof.) — THEOLOGY  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.     2  vols.  Svo,  21s. 
Oosterzee  (Dr.  Van) — THE  YEAR  OF  SALVATION.      Words  of  Life  for 

Every  Day.     A  Book  of  Household  Devotion.     Two  vols.  Svo,  7s.  6d.  each. 

MOSES  :  A  Biblical  Study.     Crown  Svo,  6s. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Oishausen  (Dr.  H.) — BIBLICAL  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  GOSPELS  AND 

ACTS.     Four  vols.  8vo,  £2,  2s.     Cheaper  Edition,  four  vols.  crown  Svo,  24s. 

EOMANS.     One  vol.  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

CORINTHIANS.     One  vol.  Svo,  9s. 

PHILIPPIANS,  TITUS,  AND  FIRST  TIMOTHY.  One  vol.  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Orelli — OLD  TESTAMENT  PROPHECY  REGARDING  THE  CONSUMMATION 

OF  THE  KINGDOM  OK  GOD.  In  the  Press. 

Owen  (Dr.  John) — WORKS.     Best  and  only  Complete  Edition.     Edited 
by  Rev.  Dr.  GOOLD.     Twenty-four  vols.  Svo,  Subscription  price,  £4,  4s. 
The  'Hebrews'  may  be  had  separately,  in  Seven  vols.,  £2,  2s.  nett. 

Philippi  (F.  A. ) — COMMENTARY  ON  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  KOMANS.    From 

the  Third  Improved  Edition,  by  Rev.  Professor  BANKS.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Piper  (Dr.  Ferdinand) — LIVES  OF  THE  LEADERS  OF  THE  CHURCH 

UNIVERSAL.     Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

Popular  Commentary  on  the  New  Testament.  Edited  by  PHILIP 
SCHAFF,  D.D.  "With  Illustrations  and  Maps.  Vol.  I. — THE  SYNOPTICAL 
GOSPELS.  Vol.  II. — ST.  JOHN'S  GOSPEL,  AND  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES. 
Vol.  III. — ROMANS  TO  PHILEMON.  Vol.  IV. — HEBREWS  TO  REVELATION. 
In  Four  vols.  imperial  Svo,  18s.  each. 

Pressense"  (Edward  de) — THE  EEDEEMER  :  Discourses.  Crown  Svo,  Gs. 
Eabiger  (Prof.) — ENCYCLOPAEDIA  OF  THEOLOGY.  Vol.  I,  Svo,  10s.  6d. 
Rainy  (Principal)  —  DELIVERY  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF  CHRISTIAN 

DOCTRINE.     (The  Fifth  Series  of  the  Citnninyham  Lectures.}     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Reusch  (Professor) — BIBLE  AND  NATURE.     In  preparation. 

Reuss  (Professor) — HISTORY  OF  THE  SACRED  SCRIPTURES  OF  THE  NEW 

TESTAMENT.     640  pp.  Svo,  15s. 

Riehm  (Dr.  E.) — MESSIANIC  PROPHECY  :  Its  Origin,  Historical  Charac 
ter,  and  Relation  to  New  Testament  Fulfilment.  Crown  Svo,  5s. 

Ritter  (Carl) — THE  COMPARATIVE  GEOGRAPHY  OF  PALESTINE  AND  THE 

SINAITIC  PENINSULA.     Four  vols.  Svo,  32s. 

Robinson  (Rev.  S.,  D.D.) — DISCOURSES  ON  REDEMPTION.  8vo,  7s.  6d. 
Robinson  (Edward,  D.D.) — GREEK  AND  ENGLISH  LEXICON  OF  THE 

NEW  TESTAMENT.     Svo,  9s. 

Rothe  (Professor) — SERMONS  FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.     Cr.  Svo,  Gs. 
Saisset — MANUAL  OF  MODERN  PANTHEISM.     Two  vols.  Svo,  10s.  Gd. 
Sartorius  (Dr.  E.)— DOCTRINE  OF  DIVINE  LOVE.     Svo,  10s.  Gd. 
Schaff  (Professor) — HISTORY  OF   THE    CHRISTIAN   CHURCH.      (New 

Edition,  thoroughly  Revised  and  Enlarged.) 

APOSTOLIC   CHRISTIANITY,   A.D.    1-100.     In   Two   Divisions. 

Ex.  Svo,  21s. 

ANTE-NICENE  CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.  100-325.    In  Two  Divisions. 

Ex.  Svo,  21s. 

POST-NICENE  CHRISTIANITY,  A.D.  325-600.     In  Two  Division*. 

Ex.  Svo,  21s. 

THE  MIDDLE  AGES  (to  Gregory  VII.)      In  Two  Divisions. 

Ex.   Svo,  21s. 

Schmid's  BIBLICAL  THEOLOGY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  Svo,  10>.  0<t 
Schiirer(Prof.) — HISTORY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  TIMES,  jnprcpn^itfim. 
Scott  (Jas.,  M.A.,  D.D.) — PRINCIPLES  OF  NEW  TESTAMENT  QUOTATION 

ESTABLISHED  AND  APPLIED  TO  BIBLICAL  CRITICISM.     Cr.  Svo,  2nd  Edit..  4s. 

Shedd  (W.,  D.D.)— HISTORY  OF  CHRISTIAN  DOCTRINE.     Two  vols. 

Svo,  21s. 

SERMONS  TO  THE  NATURAL  MAN.  Svo,  7s.  Gd. 

SERMONS  TO  THE  SPIRITUAL  MAN.  8vo,  7s.  <;<!. 


T.  and  T.  Clark's  Publications. 


Smeaton  (Professor) — THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  ATONEMENT  AS  TAUGHT 

BY  CHRIST  HIMSELF.     Second  Edition,  8vo,  10s.  6d. 

ON  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.     (Ninth  Series  of 

Cunningham  Lectures.)    8vo,  9s. 

Smith  (Professor  Thos.,  D.D.) — MEDIEVAL  MISSIONS.    Or.  8vo,  4s.  6d. 
Stalker  (Rev.  Jas.,  M.A.) — THE  LIFE  OF  JESUS  CHRIST.    New  Edition, 

in  larger  Type.     Crown  8vo,  3s.  6d. 

THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  PAUL.     New  Edition,  in  larger  Type.     Crown 

8vo,  3s.  6d. 

Steinmeyer  (Dr.  F.  L.) — THE  MIRACLES  OF  OUR  LORD  :  Examined  in 

their  relation  to  Modern  Criticism.     8vo,  7s.  6d. 

THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  PASSION  AND  EESURRECTION  OF  OUR 

LOUD,  considered  in  the  Light  of  Modern  Criticism.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Stevenson  (Mrs.) — THE  SYMBOLIC  PARABLES  :  The  Predictions  of  the 

Apocalypse  viewed  in  relation  to  the  General  Truths  of  Scripture.   CroAvn  8vo,  5s. 

Steward  (Eev.  G.) — MEDIATORIAL  SOVEREIGNTY  :  The  Mystery  of  Christ 

and  the  Kevelation  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.     Two  vols.  8vo,  21s. 

THE  ARGUMENT  OF   THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE    HEBREWS.    A 

Posthumous  Work.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Stier  (Dr.  Rudolph) — ON  THE  WORDS  OF  THE  LORD  JESUS.    Eight 

vols.  8vo,  £4,  4s.     Separate  volumes  may  be  had,  price  10s.  6d. 
In  order  to  bring  this  valuable  Work  more  within  the  reach  of  all  Classes,  both 
Clergy  and  Laity,  Messrs.  Clark  continue  to  supply  the  Eight-volume  Edition 
bound  in  FOUR  at  the  Original  Subscription  price  of  £2,  2s. 

THE  WORDS  OF  THE  EISEN  SAVIOUR,  AND  COMMENTARY  ON 

THE  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JAMES.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

THE  WORDS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  EXPOUNDED.     8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Tholuck  (Professor) — COMMENTARY  ON  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.    Svo,  9s. 

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EOMANS.    Two  vols.  fcap.  8vo,  8s. 

LIGHT  FROM  THE  CROSS.     Third  Edition,  crown  8vo,  5s. 

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT.    8vo,  10s.  6d. 

Tophel  (Pastor  G.) — THE  WORK  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.     Cr.  8vo,  2s.  6d. 
Uhlhorn(Gr.) — CHRISTIAN  CHARITY  IN  THE  ANCIENT  CHURCH.  Cr.  Svo,  6s. 

UUniann  (Dr.  Carl) — REFORMERS  BEFORE  THE  REFORMATION,  princi 
pally  in  Germany  and  the  Netherlands.  Two  vols.  Svo,  21s. 

THE  SINLESSNESS  OF  JESUS  :    An  Evidence  for  Christianity. 

Fourth  Edition,  crown  Svo,  6s. 

Urwick   (W.,   M.A.) — THE  SERVANT  OF  JEHOVAH  :   A  Commentary 

upon  Isaiah  Hi.  13-liii.  12;  with  Dissertations  upon  Isaiah  xl.-lxvi.     8vo,  6s. 

Vinet  (Professor) — STUDIES  ON  BLAISE  PASCAL.     Crown  8vo,  5s. 

PASTORAL  THEOLOGY.     Second  Edition,  post  Svo,  3s.  6d. 

Watts  (Professor) — THE  NEWER  CRITICISM  AND  THE  ANALOGY  OF 

THE  FAITH.     Third  Edition,  crown  Svo,  5s. 

Weiss  (Prof.)— BIBLICAL  THEOLOGY  OF  NEW  TESTAMENT.  2vols.8vo,21s. 

—  LIFE  OF  CHRIST.     Three  vols.  Svo,  31s.  6d. 
White  (Rev.  M.) — SYMBOLICAL  NUMBERS  OF  SCRIPTURE.    Cr.  8vo,  4s. 
Williams  (W.  H.,  M.A.) — A  SELECT  VOCABULARY  OF  LATIN  ETYMOLOGY. 

For  the  use  of  Schools.     Fcap.  Svo,  Is.  6d. 

Winer  (Dr.  G.  B.)—  A  TREATISE  ON  THE  GRAMMAR  OF  NEW  TESTA 
MENT  GREEK,  regarded  as  the  Basis  of  New  Testament  Exegesis.  Third 
Edition,  edited  by  W.  F.  MOULTON,  D.D.  Ninth  English  Edition,  Svo,  15s. 

A  COMPARATIVE  VIEW  OF  THE  DOCTRINES  AND  CONFESSIONS 

OF  THE  VARIOUS  COMMUNITIES  OF  CHRISTENDOM.     Svo,  10s.  6d. 

Wuttke  (Professor) — CHRISTIAN  ETHICS.    Two  vols.  Svo,  12s.  6d. 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 

DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED 


1 


B 


