


Z fil 


ili LOZ) ¢ 


4O Mh cts 








j ‘ 
s 
, P ‘ ; 
fi ets © ty) Wh 
Tr, } j | 
iti 
\ ' 
Wis 
Vn? 
Es? 
' 
rr 
i 
: 
: 
Ya 
' , 





















4 As rei 
MA ; Vv 
¥ i # , h i” Nal > ; hs. 
AR fi Pad 3 nih ene D: 
"it YP ya Heh 
, : nt oF av ei hn : 
th ae Viv iD ip tee 
ys coer ih BS Ava 
Ms: CWrs. Cogs ¥ Rd T+ 
1 yal yh %y ; +44 Nie r iS}> ip > Le 7 
arises Co) Mag 60076 Wa ahie RM yt tat 
iy “ a hi : wd be Aa | ih é My 
3s. he Digitized by the Internet Archive — 
+! Tee hoe \\ ae zi " 
Fh aaa in 2007 with funding from 
a r : A gy) Oe : A + eaa oat bi a j ; 
| bie Microsoft Corporati Misi 
bh Ky NS Ay thts A ae nt 
Vee ih oti Huy é Hf : if 
a ' ‘ 1 
; y a. 





es 1? Hh} A 


i) 1 aN mo 
we ey a ba i ahh a 












c rere) 
a 


yews 


Jor- 


BIBLICAL COMMENTARY 


ON 


THE BOOK OF JOB. 


BY 


FE. DELITZSCH, DD.. 


PROFESSOR OF THEOLOGY. 


TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN 
BY THE 


REV. FRANCIS BOLTON, B.A, 


ELLAND. 


) 
VOL. I. oe ae , 
eg gee, 


a> 
G 
— 
stlinsiaad 


EDINBURGH: 


T. AND T. CLARK, 38, GEORGE STREET. 
LONDON: HAMILTON, ADAMS, & CO. DUBLIN: JOHN ROBERTSON & 00. 
~MDCCCLXVI. 


gy 
- 
a 
fe 7 


7 . _ | ' + 
LEE AE 
cw 7 q ; ’ : 


Mes on a 


ws 





TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


—+— 
INTRODUCTION. 
PAGE 
aC § 1. The Problem of the Book of Job, . - ‘ . 1 
2. The Chokma-character of the Book, . : : ; 5 
3. Position in the Canon, ? : 9 
_ 4, The System of Accentuation, Manner wu Wig in 1 Verses, 
and Structure of the Strophe, ; : amoeiien H 
5. The Dramatic Art of the Plot and Execution, ; ; 14 
6. Time of Composition, ‘ : , ‘ é 18 
7. Signs from the Doctrinal Contents, . : : : 22 
8. Echoes in the later Sacred Writings, ‘ : : 24 
— 9. The chief Critical Questions, . : ? , 26 
— 10. The Satan of the Prologue, . : d ‘ : 27 
—11. The Final Solution of the Problem, . . ‘ 2 29 
12. The History of the Exposition, , ; ; é 33 


TRANSLATION AND EXPOSITION OF THE BOOK OF JOB. 
FIRST PART.—THE OPENING.—Cuap. 1.—111. 


The Prologue—Chap. i. ii., : ; ; : 45 
Job’s disconsolate Outburst of Grief Chap. i: ; ‘ee 


vi TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


SECOND PART.—THE ENTANGLEMENT.—Czar. tv.-xxvI. 


THE FIRST COURSE OF THE CONTROVERSY.—CHAP. IV.-XIV. 


PAGE 
Eliphaz’ First Speech—Chap. iv. v., ; ; : oe 
Job’s First Answer—Chap. vi. vii., : ‘ ; “5 See 
Bildad’s First Speech—Chap. viii., / : ; » E82 
Job’s Second Answer—Chap. ix. x., 4 5 ; > | ae 
Zophar’s First Speech—Chap. xi., f ; ; “a 
Job’s Third Answer—Chap. xii.-xiv., . ; : . 193 

THE SECOND COURSE OF THE CONTROVERSY.—CHAP. XV.—XXI. 

Eliphaz’ Second Speech—Chap. xv., : ; : . 249 
Job’s First Answer—Chap. xvi. xvii, . . . . 278 
Bildad’s Second Speech—Chap. xviii, . ; ; . 815 
Job’s Second Answer—Chap. xix., : : ; . 834 
Zophar’s Second Speech—Chap. xx., } ; : . 373 
Job’s Third Answer—Chap. xxi., . ‘ a hile el . 3896 


THE THIRD COURSE OF THE CONTROVERSY.—CHAP. XXII,—XXVI. 
Eliphaz’ Third Speech—Chap. xxii., . { ‘ . 427 


INTRODUCTION TO THE BOOK OF JOB. 





JOB, maintaining his virtue, and justifying the utterance of the 
Creator respecting him, sits upon his heap of ashes as the glory and 
pride of God. God, and with Him the whole celestial host, witnesses 
the manner in which he bears his misfortune. He conquers, and his 
conquest is a triumph beyond the stars. Be it history, be it poetry: 


he who thus wrote was a divine seer. 


FRIEDR. HEINR. JACOBI 
(Werke, iii. 427). 


In this Introduction but little has been transferred from the Art. Hiob, — 
which the Author has contributed to Herzog’s Real-Encyklopadie. Tt 
presents a new, independent working up of the introductory matter, and — 
contains only so much of it as is required at the commencement of a 
Commentary. The Author’s treatise on the idea of the book of Job 
in the Zeitschrift fiir Protestantismus u. Kirche, 1851, 8. 65-85, is 
recapitulatory rather than isagogic, and consequently of a totally distinct 
character. 


add 
NOTE. : ove nega 


[This work is enriched by critical notes contributed by Prof. Dr 
Fleischer, and illustrative notes contributed by Dr Wetzstein, fifteen 
years Prussian Consul at Damascus. 

The second volume will contain an Appendix contributed by Dr 
Wetzstein on the ‘‘ Monastery of Job” in Hauran, the tradition con- 
cerning Job, and a map of the district.—TR. ] 


* 


THE BOOK OF JOB. 
INTRODUCTION. 


§ 1. THE PROBLEM OF THE BOOK OF JOB. 


a AVA HY do afflictions upon afflictions befall the righteous 
4ei, man? This is the question, the answering of 





that afflictions are for the righteous man the way to a twofold 
blessedness. But in itself, this answer cannot satisfy; so 
much the less, as the twofold blessedness to which Job finally 
attains is just as earthly and of this world as that which he 
has lost by affliction. This answer is inadequate, since on 
the one hand such losses as those of beloved children cannot, 
as the loss of sheep and camels, really be made good by double 
the number of other children; on the other hand, it may be 
objected that many a righteous man deprived of his former 
prosperity dies in outward poverty. There are numerous 
deathbeds which protest against this answer. There are many 
pious sufferers to whom this present material issue of the book 
of Job could not yield any solace ; whom, when in conflict at 
least, it might the rather bring into danger of despair. With 
reference to this conclusion, the book of Job is an insufficient 


theodicy, as in general the truth taught in the Old Testament, 
VOL. I. rae 


L 


/ 
| 


2 INTRODUCTION. 


that the end, n-nx, of the righteous, as of the unrighteous, 
would reveal the hidden divine recompense, could afford no 
true consolation so long as this n-ns flowed on with death 
into the night of Hades, Sv’, and had no prospect of eternal 
life. 

But the issue of the history, regarded. externally, is by no 
means the proper answer to the great question of the book. 
The principal thing is not that Job is doubly blessed, but that 
God acknowledges him as His servant, which He is able to 
do, after Job in all his afflictions has remained true to God. 
Therein lies the important truth, that there is a suffering of 
the righteous which is not a decree of wrath, into which the 
love of God has been changed, but a dispensation of that love 
itself. In fact, this truth is the heart of the book of Job. It 
has therefore been said—particularly by Hirzel, and recently 
by Renan—that it aims at destroying the old Mosaic doctrine 
of retribution. But this old Mosaic doctrine of retribution is 
a modern phantom. That all suffering is a divine retribution, 
the Mosaic Thora does not teach. Renan calls this doctrine 
la vieille conception patriarcale. But the patriarchal history, 
and especially the history of Joseph, gives decided proof 


(against it. The distinction between the suffering of the 
x 


righteous and the retributive justice of God, brought out in 
the book of Job, is nothing new. The history before the time 
of Israel, and the history of Israel even, exhibit it in facts; 
and the words of the law, as Deut. viii. 16, expressly show 
that there are sufferings which are the result of God’s love ; 
though the book of Job certainly presents this truth, which 

otherwise had but a scattered and presageful utterance, in a | 
unique manner, and causes it to come forth before us from a 
calamitous and terrible conflict, as pure gold from a fierce 


‘furnace. It comes forth as the result of the controversy with 


the false doctrine of retribution advanced by the friends; a 
doctrine which is indeed not Mosaic, for the Mosaic Thora 


§ 1. THE PROBLEM OF THE BOOK OF JOB. 3 


in the whole course of the history of revelation is nowhere 
impugned and corrected, but ever only augmented, and, con- 
sistently with its inherent character, rendered more complete. / 

But if we now combine both the truths illustrated in the * 

book of Job,—(1) The affliction of the righteous man leads 
to a so much greater blessedness; (2) The affliction of the 
righteous is a dispensation of the divine love, which is ex- 
. pressed and verified in the issue of the affliction,—this double | 
answer is still not an adequate solution of the great question™ 
of the book. For there ever arises the opposing consideration, 
wherefore are such afflictions necessary to raise the righteous 
to blessedness—afflictions which seem so entirely to bear the 
character of wrath, and are in no way distinguished from 
judgments of retributive justice ? 

To this question the book furnishes, as it appears to us, \ 
two answers: (1.) The afflictions of the righteous are a means 
of discipline and purification; they certainly arise from the 
sins of the righteous man, but still are not the workings of 
God’s wrath, but of His love, which is directed to his purify- 
ing and advancement. Such is the view Elihuin the book = « 
of Job represents. The writer of the introductory portion of eo 
Proverbs has expressed this briefly but beautifully (Prov. iii. 

11; cf. Heb. xii.) Ochler, in order that one may perceive 

its distinction from the view of the three friends, rightly 
refers to the various theories of punishment. Discipline 
designed for improvement is properly no punishment, since 
punishment, according to its true idea, is only satisfaction 
rendered for the violation of moral order. In how far the 
speeches of Elihu succeed in conveying this view clear and 
distinct from the original standpoint of the friends, especially | < 
of Eliphaz, matters not to us here; at all events, it is in the | 
mind of the poet as the characteristic of these speeches. (2.) — 
The afflictions of the righteous man are means of proving 

and testing, which, like chastisements, come from the love of x 


4 INTRODUCTION. 


\. God. Their object is not, however, the purging away of sin 
Pcaash may still cling to the righteous man, but, on the con- 
\ trary, the manifestation and testing of his righteousness. 
This is the point of view from which, apart from Elihu’s 
speeches, the book of Job presents Job’s afflictions. Only 
by this relation of things is the chagrin with which Job takes . 
up the words of Eliphaz, and so begins the controversy, ex- 
plained and justified or excused. And, indeed, if it should 
be even impossible for the Christian, especially with regard 
to his own sufferings, to draw the line between disciplinary 
and testing sufferings so clearly as it is drawn in the book of 
Job, there is also for the deeper and more acute New Testa- 
ment perception of sin, a suffering of the righteous which 
exists without any causal connection with his sin, viz. confes- 
sion by suffering, or martyrdom, which the righteous man 
undergoes, not for his own sake, but for the sake of God. 

If we, then, keep in mind these two further answers which 
the book of Job gives us to the question, “ Why through 
suffering to blessedness?” it is not to be denied that practi- 

/ cally they are perfectly sufficient. If I know that God sends 
afflictions to me because, since sin and evil are come into the 
world, they are the indispensable means of purifying and 
testing me, and by both purifying and testing of perfecting 
me,—these are explanations with which I can and must con- 
sole myself. But this is still not the final answer of the book 
of Job to its great question. And its unparalleled magnitude, 
its high significance in the historical development of reve- 
lation, its typical character already recognised in the Old 
Testament, consists just in its going beyond this answer, and 
giving us an answer which, going back to the extreme roots 
of evil, and being deduced from the most intimate connec- 
tions of the individual life of man with the history and plan 
of the world in the most comprehensive sense, not only prac- 
tically, but speculatively, satisfies. 


\ 


§ 2. THE CHOKMA-CHARACTER OF THE BOOK. 5 


§ 2. THE CHOKMA-CHARACTER OF THE BOOK. | 


But before we go so far into this final and highest answer as 
the province of the Introduction permits and requires, in order 
to assign to the reader the position necessary to be taken for 
understanding the book, we ask, How comes it that the book of 
Job presents such a universal and absolute solution of the pro- 
blem, otherwise unheard of in the Old Testament Scriptures ? 
The reason of it is in the peculiar mental tendency (Geistes- 
richtung) of the Israelitish race from which it proceeded. 
There was in Israel a bias of a universalistic, humanic, philo- 
sophical kind, which, starting from the fear or worship (reli- 
gion) of Jehovah, was turned to the final causes of things,— 
the cosmical connections of the earthly, the common human 
foundations of the Israelitish, the invisible roots of the visible, 
the universal actual truth of the individual and national his- 
torical, The common character of the few works of this 
Chokma which have been preserved to us is the humanic 
standpoint, stripped of everything peculiarly Israelitish. In 
the whole book of Proverbs, which treats of the relations of 
human life in its most general aspects, the name of the cove- 
nant people, Syn, does not once occur. In Ecclesiastes, 
which treats of the nothingness of all earthly things, and 
with greater right than the book of Job may be called the 
canticle of Inquiry,’ even the covenant name of God, min, 
does not occur. In the Song of Songs, the groundwork 
of the picture certainly, but not the picture itself, is Israel- 
itish: it represents a common human primary relation, the 
love of man and woman; and that if not with allegorical, 
yet mystical meaning, similar to the Indian Gitagovinda, 


1 The book of Job, says H. Heine, in his Vermischte Schriften, 1854, 1., 
is the canticle of Inquiry (das Hohelied der Skepsis), and horrid serpents 
hiss therein their eternal Wherefore? As man when he suffers must 
weep his fill, so must he cease to doubt. This poison of doubt must 
not be wanting in the Bible, that great storehouse of mankind. 


6 INTRODUCTION. 


‘ and also the third part of the Tamul Kural, translated by 
a Graul. 
S / So the book of Job treats a fundamental question of our 
$ common humanity; and the poet has studiously taken his 
7 ‘| hero not from Israelitish history, but from extra-Israelitish 
$ 29 tradition. rom beginning to end he is conscious of relating 
4 an extra-Israelitish history,—a history handed down among 
the Arab tribes to the east of Palestine, which has come to 
his ears; for none of the proper names contain even a trace of 
symbolically intended meaning, and romantic historical poems 
were moreover not common among the ancients. This extra- 
Israelitish history from the patriarchal period excited the pur- 
pose of his poem, because the thought therein presented lay 
lso in hisown mind. The Thora from Sinai and prophecy, 
the history and worship of Israel, are nowhere introduced ; 
‘ even indirect references to them nowhere escape him. He 

’ throws himself with wonderful truthfulness, effect, and vivid- 

- ness, into the extra-Israelitish position. His own Israelitish 
~  , standpoint he certainly does not disavow, as we see from his — 
(| calling God mmm everywhere in the prologue and epilogue; but 
\i non-Israelitish character of his hero and of his locality he 
maintains with strict consistency.. Only twice is myn’ found 
in the mouth of Job (i. 21, xii. 9), which is not to be wondered 
at, since this name of God, as the names Morija and Jochebed 
show, is not absolutely post-Mosaic, and therefore may have 
been known among the Hebrew people beyond Israel. But 
with this exception, Job and his friends everywhere call God 
AION, which is more poetic, and for non-Israelitish speakers 
(vid. Prov. xxx. 5) more appropriate than pnDN, which occurs 
only three times (xx. 29, xxxii. 2, xxxvili. 7); or they call 
Him "%, which is the proper, name of God in the patriarchal 
time, as it appears everywhere in Genesis, where in the 
Elohistic portions the high and turning-points of the self- 
manifestation of God occur (xvii. 1, xxxv. 11; cf. Ex. 


§ 2. THE CHOKMA-CHARACTER OF THE BOOK, 7 


vi. 3), and when the patriarchs, at special seasons, pronounce 
the promise which they have received upon their children 
_(axviii. 3, xlviii. 3, xlix..25; cf. xliii, 14). Even many of 
. the designations of the divine attributes which have become 
fixed in the Thora, as D'S JIN, fH, 0:77, which one might 
well expect in the book of Job, are not found in it; nor ay, 
often used of Jehovah in Psalms; nor generally the too (so 
to speak) dogmatic terminology of the Israelitish religion ;! 
besides which also this characteristic, that only the oldest 
mode of heathen worship, star-worship (xxxi. 26-28), is men- 
tioned, without even the name of God (myay mm or niway o7dy) 
occurring, which designates God as Lord of the heavens, 
which the heathen deified. The writer has also intentionally 
avoided this name, which is the star of the time of the Israel- 
itish kings ; for he is never unmindful that his subject is an 
ante- and extra-Israelitish one. 

Hengstenberg, in his Lecture on the Book of Job, 1856, \ 
goes so far as to maintain, that a character like Job cannot 
possibly have existed in the heathen world, and that revelation 
would have been unnecessary if heathendom could produce 
such characters for itself. The poet, however, without doubt, 
presupposes the opposite; and if he did not presuppose it, he 
should have refrained from using all his skill to produce the 
appearance of the opposite. That he has nevertheless done it, 
cannot mislead us: for, on the one hand, Job belongs to the 
patriarchal period, therefore the period before the giving of 
the law,—a period in which the early revelation was still at 
work, and the revelation of God, which had not remained 


1 wip, of God, only occurs once (vi. 10); tpn but twice (x. 12, and 
with Elihu, xxxvii. 13) ; amx with its derivatives not at all (gen. only 


xix. 19). In the speeches of the three, pty (only with Elihu, xxxiv. 17), 
pawD, and pw, as expressions of the divine justitia recompensativa, are 


not to be found ; nbs and na become nowhere synonymous to designate 
Job’s sufferings by the right name; DI) appears (ix. 23) only in the 
general signification of misfortune. 


: 
~ } 
" 


ee 


; 


8 ; INTRODUCTION. 


unknown in the side branches of the patriarchal family. On 
the other hand, it is quite consistent with the standpoint of 
the Chokma, that it presupposes a preparatory self-manifes- 


‘tation of God even in the extra-Israelitish world; just as 
John’s Gospel, which aims at proving in Christianity the 
_ absolute religion which shall satisfy every longing of all man- 
' kind, acknowledges réxva Tod Ocod Svecxopmicpéva also beyond 
the people of God, xi. 52, without on this account finding the 


incarnation of the Logos, and the possibility of regeneration 


| ___ by it, to be superfluous. 


This parallel between the book of Job and the Gospel by 


[ John is fully authorized ; for the important disclosure which 


the prologue of John gives to us of the Logos, is already in 
being in the book of Job and the introduction to the book of — 
Proverbs, especially ch. viii., without requiring the intervening 
element of the Alexandrine religious philosophy, which, how- 
ever, after it is once there, may not be put aside or disayowed. 
The Alexandrine doctrine of the Logos is really the genuine 
more developed form, though with many imperfections, of that 
which is taught of the Chokma in the book of Job and in Pro- 


verbs. Both notions have a universalistic comprehensiveness, 


/ referring not only to Israel, but to mankind.. The nnn cer- 


tainly took up its abode in Israel, as it itself proves in the book 
Yodia Ferpax, ch. xxiv.; but there is also a share of it attainable 
by and allotted to all mankind. This is the view of the writer 
of the book of Job. He is imbued with the conviction, that 
even beyond Israel fellowship is possible with the one living 
God, who has revealed himself in Israel; that He also there 
continually reveals himself, ordinarily in the conscience, and 
extraordinarily in dreams and visions; that there is also found 
there a longing and struggling after that redemption of which 
Israel has the clear words of promise. His wondrous book 
soars high above the Old Testament limit; it is the Melchi- 
zedek among the Old Testament books. The ‘final and highest 


SY f SVAN 8. Position IN THE CANON. - 9 
solution of the problem with which it grapples, has a quarry 
extending out even beyond the patriarchal history. The 
Wisdom of the book of Job originates, as we shall see, from 
paradise. For this turning also to the primeval histories of 
Genesis, which are earlier than the rise of the nations, and the 
investigation of the hieroglyphs in the prelude to the Thora, 
which are otherwise almost passed over in the Old Testament, 

belong to the peculiarities of the Chokma. Bred 


§ 3. POSITION IN THE CANON. 


As a work of the Chokma, the book of Job stands, with the 
three other works belonging to this class of the Israelitish 
literature, among the Hagiographa, which are called in He- 
brew simply p’an2. Thus, by the side of mn and px'23, the 
third division of the canon is styled, in which are included all 
those writings belonging neither to the province of prophetic 
history nor prophetic declaration. Among the Hagiographa 
are writings even of a prophetic character, as Psalms and 
Daniel ; but their writers were not properly oa. At 
present Lamentations stands among them; but this is not its 
original place, as also Ruth appears to have stood originally 
between Judges and Samuel. Both Lamentations and Ruth 
are placed among the Hagiographa, that there the five so-called 
mdi or scrolls may stand together: Schir ha-Schirim the 
feast-book of the eighth passover-day, Ruth that of the second 
Schabuoth-day, Kinoth that of the ninth of Ab, Koheleth 
that of the eighth Succoth-day, Esther that of Purim. The 
book of Job, which is written neither in prophetico-historical 
style, nor in the style of prophetic preaching, but is a didactic 
poem, could stand nowhere else but in the third division of the 
canon. ‘The position which it occupies is moreover a very 
shifting one. In the Alexandrine canon, Chronicles, Ezra, 
Nehemiah, Tobit, Judith, Esther, follow the four books of 


10 - . INTRODUCTION. 


the Kings. ‘The historical books therefore stand, from the 
earliest to the latest, side by side; then begins with Job, Psalms, 
Proverbs, a new row, opened with these three in stricter sense 
poetical books. Then Melito of Sardis, in the second century, 
places Chronicles with the books of the Kings, but arranges 
immediately after them the non-historical Hagiographa in the 
following order: Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, 
Job; here the Salomonic writings are joined to the Davidic 
Psalter, and the anonymous book of Job stands last. In our 
editions of the Bible, the Hagiographa division begins with 
Psalms, Proverbs, Job (the succession peculiar to mss. of 
the German class); in the Talmud (Bathra, 146), with Ruth, 
Psalms, Job, Proverbs; in the Masora, and in mss. of the 
Spanish class, with Chronicles, Psalms, Job, Proverbs. All 
these modes of arrangement are well considered. The 
Masora connects with the oxnns Na) the homogeneous 
book, the Chronicles; the Talmud places the book of Ruth 
before the Psalter as an historical prologue, or as a connec- 
tion between the prophetico-historical books and the Hagio- 
grapha.’ The practice in our editions is to put the Psalms as 
the first book of the division, which agrees with Luke xxiv. 44, 
and with Philo, who places duvovs next to. the prophetical 
books. Job stands only in the LXX. at the head of the three 
so-called poetic books, perhaps as a work by its patriarchal 
contents referring back to the earliest times. Everywhere 
else the Psalter stands first among the three books. These 
three are commonly denoted by the vox memoralis no's “DD ; 
but this succession, Job, Proverbs, Psalms, is nowhere found. 
The Masora styles them after its own, and the Talmudic order 
DN’n “DD. 


! That Job stands after the Psalms is explained by his being contem- 
porary with the Queen of Sheba, or, accepting Moses as the writer of the 
book (in which case it should stand at the head of the Chethubim), by 
its not being placed foremost, on account of its terrible contents (accord- 


ing to the maxim SM2y7b3 nny x5). 


§ 4. THE SYSTEM OF ACCENTUATION, ETC. a 


§ 4, THE SYSTEM OF ACCENTUATION, MANNER OF WRITING 
IN VERSES, AND STRUCTURE OF THE STROPHE. 


The so-ciphered three books have, as is known, this in 
common, that they are (with the exception of the prologue 
and epilogue in the book of Job) punctuated according to 
a special system, which has been fully discussed in my Com- 
mentary on the Psalms, and in Baer’s edition of the Psalter. 
This accent system, like the prosaic, is constructed on the 
fundamental law of dichotomy; but it is determined by 
better organization, more expressive and melodious utterance, 
Only the so-called prose accents, however, not the metrical 
or poetic (with the exception of a few detached fragments), 
have been preserved in transmission. Nevertheless, we are 
always still able to discern from these accents how the 
reading in the synagogue divided the thoughts collected into 
the form of Masoretic verses, into two chief divisions, and 
within these again into lesser divisions, and connected or 
separated the single words; while the musical rhythm accom- 
modated itself as much as possible to the logical, so that 
the accentuation is on this account an important source for 
ascertaining the traditional exegesis, and contains an abun- 
dance of most valuable hints for the interpreter. Tradition, 
moreover, requires for the three books a verse-like short line 
stich-manner of writing; and pid, versus, meant originally, 
not the Masoretic verse, but the separate sentence, otiyos, 


denoted in the accent system by a great distinctive; as e.g. 
Job i. 3: 


Let the day perish wherein I was born, 
And the night, which said, There ts a man-child con- 
ceived, 


is a Masoretic verse divided into two parts by Athnach, and 
therefore, according to the old order, is to be written as two 


~ 


12 INTRODUCTION. 


otixyo.' This also is important. In,order to recognise the 


strophe-structure of Hebrew poems, one must attend to the 
atixot, in which the poetic thoughts follow one another in 
well-measured flow. Parallelism, which we must likewise 
acknowledge as the fundamental law of the rhythm of Hebrew 
poetry, forms the evolutions of thought not always of two 
members, but often—as e.g. iii. 4, 5, 6, 9—also of three. The 
poetic formation is not, however, confined to this, but even 
further combines (as is most unmistakeably manifest in the 
alphabetical psalms,’ and as recently also Ewald inclines to 
acknowledge*) such distichs and tristichs into a greater whole, 
forming a complete circle of thought; in other words, into 
strophes of four, eight, or some higher number of lines, in 
themselves paragraphs, which, however, show themselves as 
strophes, inasmuch as they recur and change symmetrically. 


1 The meaning of this old order, and the aptness of its execution, has 
been lost in later copyists, because they break off not according to the 
sense, but only according to the space, as the or/xos in numbering the 
lines, e.g. of the Greek orators, are mere lines according to the space 
(Raumzeile), at least according to Ritschl’s view (Die alex. Bibliotheken, 
1838, S. 92-136), which, however, has been disputed by V6mel. The 
old soferish order intends lines according to the sense, and so also the 
Greek distinction by révre oriynpal (oringnpsis) BiBrot, i.e. Job, Psalms, 
Proverbs, Canticles, Ecclesiastes. 

2 That from these we may proceed, the ancients here and there conjec- 
tured; as e.g. Serpilius says, ‘‘ It may perhaps occur to some, whether 
now and then a slight judgment of the Davidic species of verse and 
poesy may not be in some way formed from his, so to speak, alphabetical 


psalms.” 


8 On strophes in the book of Job, Jahrb. iii. 118 : “* That the Masoretic ~ 


division of the verses is not always correct, follows also from a more 
exact consideration of the strophes. Here comes a further question, 
whether one must determine the limit of such a strophe only according 
to the verses, which are often in themselves very irregular, or rather, 
strictly according to the members of the verse? ‘The latter seems to me, 
at least in some parts, certainly to be the case, as I have already had 
opportunity to remark.” Nevertheless, he reckons the strophes in Neue 
Bemerkungen zum B. Ijob, ix. 85-87, according to lines = Masoretic 
verses. 


§ 4. THE SYSTEM OF ACCENTUATION, ETC. 13 


Hupfeld has objected that these strophes, as an aggregate 
formed of a symmetrical number of stichs, are opposed to the 
nature of the rhythm = parallelism, which cannot stand on one 
leg, but needs two; but this objection is as invalid as if one 
should say, Because every soldier has two legs, therefore soldiers 
ean only march singly, and not in a row and company. It 
. may be seen, e.g., from xxxvi. 22-25, 26-29, 30-33, where the 
poet begins three times with 77, and three times the sentences 
so beginning” are formed of eight lines. Shall we not say 
there are three eight-line strophes beginning with jn? Never 
theless, we are far from maintaining that the book of Job 
consists absolutely of speeches in the strophe and poetic form. 
It breaks up, however, into paragraphs, which not unfre- 
quently become symmetrical strophes. That neither the 
symmetrical nor mixed strophe-schema is throughout with 
strict unexceptional regularity carried out, arises from the 
artistic freedom which the poet was obliged to maintain in 
order not to sacrifice the truth as well as the beauty of the 
dialogue. Our translation, arranged in paragraphs, and the 
schemata of the number of stichs in the paragraph placed 
above each speech, will show that the arrangement of the 
whole is, after all, far more strophic than its dramatic cha- 
racter allows, according to classic and modern poetic art. It 
is similar in Canticles, with the melodramatic character of 
which it better agrees. In both cases it is explamed from the 


1 What Gottfr. Hermann, in his diss. de arte poesis Grecorum buco- 
lice, says respecting the strophe-division in Theocritus, is nevertheless 
to be attentively considered: Verendum est ne ipsi nobis somnia fin- 
gamus perdamusque operam, si artificiosas stropharum comparationes 
comminiscamur, de quibus ipsi poete ne cogitaverint quidem. Videri- 
que potest id eo probabilius esse, quod seepenumero dubitari potest, sic 
an aliter constituende sint strophe. Nam poesis, qualis heec bucoli- 
corum est, que maximam partem ex brevibus dictis est composita, ipsa 
natura sua talis est ut in partes fere vel pares vel similes dividi possit. 
Nihilo tamen minus illam strophicam rationem non negligendam arbi- 
tror, ut que apud poetas bucolicos in consuetudinem vertisse videatur, etc. 


14 INTRODUCTION. 


v Hebrew poesy being in its fundamental peculiarity lyric, and 
‘from the drama not having freed itself from the lyric element, 
and attained to complete independence. The book of Job is, 
moreover, not a drama grown to complete development. Pro- 
logue and epilogue are treated as history, and the separate 
\. speeches are introduced in the narrative style. In the latter 
respect (with the exception of ch. ii. 10a), Canticles is more. 
directly dramatic than the book of Job.'| The drama is here 
in reference to the strophic form in the garb of Canticles, 
and in respect of the narrative form in the garb of history or 
(epopee. Also the book of Job cannot be regarded as drama, 
if we consider, with G. Baur,’ dramatic and scenic to be in- 
separable ideas; for the Jews first became acquainted with 
\ the theatre from the Greeks and Romans.’ Nevertheless, it is 
questionable whether the drama everywhere presupposes the 
existence of the stage, as e.g. A. W. v. Schlegel, in his Lee- 
tures on Dramatic Art and Literature, maintains. Gdthe, at 
least, more than once asserts, that “ drama and a composition 
for the stage may be separate,” and admits a “ dramatic plot 
and execution” in Canticles.* | 


§ 5. THE DRAMATIC ART OF THE PLOT AND EXECUTION. 


On the whole, we have as little hesitation as Hupfeld in 
calling the book of Job a drama; and it is characteristic of 


1 Hence there are Greek Mss., in which the names of the speakers 
(e.g. 4 viuQn, ai veavides, 6 vvy@Pios) are prefixed to the separate parts of 
Canticles (vid. Repertorium fiir bibl. u, morgenl. Lit. viii. 1781, 8. 180). 
The Archimandrite Porphyrios, who in his Travels, 1856, described the 
Codex Sinaiticus before Tischendorf, though unsatisfactorily, describes 
there also such d:aAoysxae written MSs. of Canticles. 

2 Das B. Hiob und Dante’s Géttliche Comidie, Studien u. Krit. 1856, iii. 

8 See my Geschichte der jiidischen Dramatik in my edition of the 
Migdal Oz (hebr. handling of the Pastor jido of Guarini) by Mose 
Chajim Luzzatto, Leipz. 1837. 

* Werke (neue Ausg. in 30 Bden.), xiii. 596; xxvi: 518 f. 


§ 5. THE DRAMATIC ART OF THE PLOT AND EXECUTION. 15 


the Israelitish Chokma, that by Canticles and the book of Job, 
its two generic manifestations, it has enriched the national _ 
poesy with this new form of poetic composition. The book of \ 
Job is, though not altogether, yet substantially, a drama, and 
one consisting of seven divisions: (1) ch. i—iii., the opening ; | 
(2) ch. iv.—xiv., the first course of the controversy, or the \ 
beginning entanglement; (3) ch. xv.—xxi., the second course 
of the controversy, or the increasing entanglement; (4) ch. 


— ——— 


xxii._xxvi., the third course of the controversy, or the in- 
creasing entanglement at its highest ; (5) ch. xxvii.-xxxi., the 
transition from the entanglement (Séc1s) to the unravelling 
(Avows) : Job’s monologues ; (6) ch. xxxviii.—xlii. 6, the con- 
sciousness of the unravelling ; (7) xlii. 7 sqq., the unravel- 
ling in outward reality. In this we have left Elihu’s speeches 
(ch. xxxii.—xxxvii.) out of consideration, because it is very| 
questionable whether they are a part of the original form of | 
the book, and not, on the contrary, the introduction of another | 
poet. If we include them, the drama has eight divisions. 
The speeches of Elihu form an interlude in the transition 
from the dSéoxs to the Avaws. The book of Job is an audience- / 
chamber, and one can readily suppose that a cotemporary or 
Jater poet may have mixed himself up with the speakers. 
Whether, however, this is really the case, may remain here 
undecided. The prologue is narrative, but still partly in \ 
dialogue style, and so far not altogether undramatical. In / 
form it corresponds most to the Euripidean, which also are a 

_ kind of epic introduction to the pieces, and it accomplishes 
what Sophocles in his prologues so thoroughly understands. 
At the very beginning he excites interest in the occurrences ge 
to be brought forward, and makes us acquainted with that 
which remains concealed from the actors. After the knot of 
the puzzle is tied in the prologue, it becomes more and more 
deeply entangled in the three courses of the controversy. ee | 
In the monologues of Job it begins to be disentangled, and 


16 INTRODUCTION. 


in the sixth part the unravelling follows, well prepared for, 
_and therefore not dd pnyavis, and is perfected in the 
epilogue or exodus: the servant of God, being so far as neces- 
sary cleared by penitence, is justified in opposition to his 
friends; and the victor, tried in accordance with the divine 
utterance, is crowned. It is therefore a continually progress- 
\. ing history. The remark of Herder," “ Here all is stationary 
in long conversations,” is superficial. It is from beginning to 
end a stream of the most active life, with external incident only 
in the opening and in the unravelling; what Schlegel says of 
Gothe’s Iphigenie holds good of the middle of the book, that 
the ideas are worked into incidents, and brought, as it were, 
before the eye. Moreover, as in Giéthe’s Tasso, the deficiency 
of external action is compensated by the richness and preci- 
{sion with which the characters are drawn. Satan, Job’s wife, 
f the hero himself, the three friends,—everywhere diversified 
\_ and minute description. The poet manifests, also, dramatic 
skill in other directions. “He -has laid out the controversy 
with a masterly hand, making the heart of the reader gradu- 
ally averse to the friends, and in the same degree winning it 
towards Job. He makes the friends all through give utter- 
ance to the most glorious truths, which, however, in the appli- 
| cation to the case before them, turn out to be untrue. And 
although the whole of the representation serves one great idea, 
it is still not represented by any of the persons brought for- 
ward, and is by no one expressly uttered. Every person is, 
as it were, the consonant letter to the word of this idea; it is 
throughout the whole book. taken up with the realization of — 
itself ; at the end it first comes forth as the resulting product 
of the whole. Job himself is not less a tragic hero than the 


CEdipus of both Sophocles’ tragedies.” What is there an 


1 Geist der Ebriischen Poesie, 1805, i. 8. 187. 
? Schultens says: Quidquid tragoedia vetus unquam Sophocleo vel 
Aaschyleo molita est cothurno, infra magnitudinem, gravitatem, ardorem, 


§ 5. THE DRAMATIC ART OF THE PLOT AND EXECUTION. 17 


inevitable fate, expressed by the oracle, is in the book of Job 
the decree of Jehovah, over whom is no controlling power, 
decreed in the assembly of angels. As a painful puzzle the 
lot of affliction comes down on Job. At the beginning he is 
the victor of an easy battle, until the friends’ exhortations to 
repentance are added to suffering, which in itself is incom- 
prehensible, and make it still harder to be understood. He is 
thereby involved in a hard conflict, in which at one time, full 
of arrogant self-confidence, he exalts himself heavenward ; at 
another time, sinks to the ground in desponding sadness. 
The God, however, against which he fights is but a phan- 
tom, which the temptation has presented to his saddened eye 
instead of the true God; and this phantom is in no way 
different from the inexorable fate of the Greek tragedy. As 
in that the hero seeks to maintain his inward freedom against 


Ros 


the secret power which crushes him with an iron arm ; so Job” \ 


maintains his innocence against this God, which has devoted 
him to destruction as an offender. But in the midst of this 
terrific conflict with the God of the present, this creation of 
the temptation, Job’s faith gropes after the God of the future, 
to whom he is ever driven nearer the more mercilessly the 
enemies pursue him. At length Jehovah really appears, but 
not at Job’simpetuous summons. He appears first after Job 
has made a beginning of humble self-concession, in order to 
complete the work begun, by condescendingly going forth to 
meet him. Jehovah appears, and the fury vanishes. The 
dualism, which the Greek tragedy leaves unabolished, is here 
reconciled. Human freedom. does not succumb; but it be- 


animositatem horum affectuum infinitum quantum subsidet. Similarly 
Ewald (Jahrb. ix. 27): Neither the Hindoos, nor the Greeks and Romans, 
have such a lofty and purely perfected poem to produce. One would 
perhaps compare it with one of Aischylus or Sophocles’ tragedies as the 
nearest ; but we cannot easily find a single one among these approach- 
ing its unblemished height and perfection in the midst of the greatest 
simplicity. 
VOL. I. B 


/ 
i 
f 


“ 


18 INTRODUCTION. 


comes evident that not an absolute arbitrary power, but divine 
| een whose inmost impulse is love, moulds human destiny. 


§ 6. TIME OF COMPOSITION. 


That this masterpiece of religious reflection and systematic 
creative art—this, to use Luther’s expression, lofty and grand 
book, in which, as the mountains round an Alpine valley, all 
the terribly sublime that nature and human history present 
is ranged one above another—belongs to no other than the 
Salomonic period, we might almost assume, even if it were 
not confirmed on all sides. The opinion that Moses wrote 
the book of Job before the giving of the law, is found in the 
Talmuds (jer. Sota V. 8; b. Bathra, 15a), This view has — 
been recently revived by Ebrard (1858). But how improb- 
able, all but impossible, that the poetical literature of Israel 
should have taken its rise with such a non plus ultra of 
reflective poetry, and that this poem should have had Moses 
the lawgiver for its author! “Moses certainly is not the 
composer of the book of Job,” says Herder rightly,’ “ or 
Solon might have written the Iliad and the Eumenides of 
ZKschylus.” This opinion, which is also found in Origen, 
Jerome, Polychronius, and Julian of Halicarnassus, would 
surely never have suggested itself to any one, had not the 
studious avoidance in the book of all reference to the law, 
prophecy, history, religious worship, and even of the religious 
terminology of Israel, consequent on its design, produced the 
appearance of a pre-Sinaitic origin. But, first, this absence 
of such reference is, as we have already seen, the result of 
the genius and aim which belong to the book; secondly, the 
writer distinctly enough betrays his acquaintance with the 
Thora: for as the Chokma for the most part necessarily 
presupposes the revelation of God deposited in the Thora, 

1 Geist der Ebr. Poesie, 1805, i. S. 180. ' 


§ 6. TIME OF COMPOSITION. 19 


and is even at pains to show its universal and eternal ideas, 
and its imperishable nature full of meaning for all men, so a 
book like the book of Job could only have been written by an 
Israelitish author, only have sprung from the spiritual know- 
ledge and experience rendered possible by the Thora.’ For 
as insight into the groping of the heathen world after divine 
truth is only possible in the light of Christianity, so also such 
a spiritually bold and accurate reproduction of an old patri- 
archal tradition was only possible in the light of the revelation 
of Jehovah: not to mention that the middle part of the book 
is written in the style of the book of Proverbs, the surround- 
ing parts in evident imitation of the style of the primitive ioe 
histories of the Pentateuch. | 

But as the supposition of a pre-Salomonic composition is 
proved invalid, so also are all the grounds on which it has 
been sought to prove a post-Salomonic. Ewald, whom Hei- 
ligstedt and Renan follow, is of opinion that it shows very 
unsettled and unfortunate times in the background, and from 
this and other indications was written under Manasseh; 
Hirzel, that the writer who is so well acquainted with Egypt, 
seems to have been carried into Egypt with King Jehoahaz ; 
Stickel, that the book presupposes the invasion of the Asiatic 
conqueror as begun, but not yet so far advanced as the 
destruction of Jerusalem; Bleek, that it must belong to the 
post-Salomonic period, because it seems to refer to a previous 


1 Reggio indeed maintains (Kerem Chemed, vi. 53-60) in favour of the 
Mosaic pre-Sinaitic composition: ‘‘God is only represented as the Al- 
mighty, the Ruler of the universe: His love, mercy, forbearance—attri- 
butes which the Thora first revealed—are nowhere mentioned ;” and 
8. D. Luzzatto concludes from this even the non-Israelitish origin of the 
book: ‘* The God of Job is not the God of Israel, the gracious One: He is 
the almighty and just, but not the kind and true One;” but although 
the book does not once’use the words goodness, love, forbearance, com- 
passion of God, it is nevertheless a bright example of them all; and it is 

the love of God which it manifests as a bright ray in the dark mystery 
of the affliction of the righteous. 


20 INTRODUCTION. 


comprehensive diversified literature. But all this rests on 
invalid grounds, false observation, and deceptive conclusions. 
Indeed, the assumption that a book which sets forth such a 
fearful conflict in the depths of affliction must have sprung — 
from a time of gloomy national distress, is untenable: it is 
sufficient to suppose that the writer himself has experienced 
the like, and experienced it at a time when all around him 
were living in great luxury, which must have greatly aggra- 
‘vated his trial. It would be preferable to suppose that the 
book of Job belongs to the time of the exile (Umbreit and 
others), and that Job, though not exactly a personification of 
Israel, is still Synimd Svin,) a pattern for the people of the 
exile (Bernstein); for this view, interesting indeed in itself, 
has the similarity of several passages of the second part of 
\the book of Isaiah in its favour: comp. ch, xl. 14 with Job 
xxi. 22, xl. 23 with Job xii. 24, xliv. 25 with Job xii. 17, 20, 
xliv. 24 with Job ix. 8, lix. 4 with Job xv. 35, Ps. vii. 15. 

( These, however, only prove that the severely tried ecclesia 
pressa of the exiles might certainly recognise itself again in 
the example of Job, and make it seem far more probable that 

\ the book of Job is older than that period of Israel’s suffering. 
The literature of the Chokma began with Solomon. First 

in the time of Solomon, whose peculiar gift was worldly 
wisdom, a time which bears the character of peaceful con- 
templation resulting from the conflicts of belief of David’s 
time,” the external and internal preliminary conditions for 


1 Vid. c. 90 of Ez chajim, by Ahron b. Elias of Nicomedia, edited by 
Delitzsch, 1841, which corresponds to More Nebuchim, iii. 22-24. The 
view that the poet himself, by Job intended the Israel of the exile 
(according to Warburton, the Israel of the restoration after the exile; ac- 
cording to Grotius, the Edomites carried into exile by the Babylonians), 
is about the same as the view that the guilty Pericles may be intended 
by King Gidipus, or the Sophists by the Odysseus of the Philoctetes. 

* Thus far Gaupp, Praktische Theol. ii. 1, 488, is in some degree 
right, when he considers the book of Job a living testimony of the new 
spirit of belief which was bursting forth in David’s time. 


§ 6. TIME OF COMPOSITION. 21 


it existed. The chief part of Proverbs and Canticles is by 
Solomon himself; the introductory passages (Prov. i—ix.) 
represent a later period of the Chokma, probably the time of 
Jehoshaphat; the book of Ecclesiastes, which is rightly assigned 
by H. G. Bernstein ‘in his Questiones Kohelethane to the time 
between Artaxerxes 1. Longimanus, and Darius Codomannus, 
‘and perhaps belongs to the time of Artaxerxes 11. Mnemon, 
represents the latest period. The book of Job is indicated as » 
_a work of the first of these three periods, by its classic, grand, 
and noble form. It bears throughout the stamp of. that 
creative, beginning-period of the Chokma,—of that Salomonic 
age of knowledge and art, of deeper thought respecting re- 
vealed religion, and of intelligent, progressive culture of the 
traditional forms of art,—that unprecedented age, in which 
the literature corresponded to the summit of glorious .mag- 
nificence to which the kingdom of the promise had then at- 
tained. ‘The heart of Solomon (according to 1 Kings v. 9 
sq., Heb.; iv. 29, English version) enclosed within itself a 
fulness of knowledge, “even as the sand that is on the sea- 
shore :” his wisdom was greater than the op °22, from whom 
the traditional matter of the book of Job is borrowed ; greater 
than the wisdom of the oy, with whose country and 
natural marvels the author of the book of Job is intimately | 
acquainted. The extensive knowledge of natural history and_/ 
general science displayed in the book of Job, is the result of 
the wide circle of observation which Israel had reached. It 
was a time when the chasm between Israel and the nations 
was more than ever bridged over. The entire education of » 
Israel at that time took a so to speak cosmopolitan direction. 
It was a time introductory to the extension of redemption, 
and the triumph of the religion of Israel, and the union of es 
all nations in belief on the God of love. 


22 INTRODUCTION. 


§ 7. SIGNS FROM THE DOCTRINAL CONTENTS. 


That the book of Job belongs to this period and-no other, 
is confirmed also by the relation of its doctrinal contents 
to the other canonical writings. If we compare the doc- 
trine respecting Wisdom—her super-eminence, applicability 
to worldly matters, and co-operation in the creation of the 
world—in Prov. i.-ix., especially ch. viii., with Job xxviii., it 

is there manifestly more advanced, and further developed. 
If we compare the pointing to the judgment of God, Job 
xix. 29, with the hint of a future general judgment, which 
shall decide and adjust all things, in Eccl. xii. 14, we see at 
once that what comes forward in the former passage only 
at first as an expression of personal belief, is in the latter 
already become a settled element of general religious con- 
sciousness. 

, And however we may interpret that brilliant passage of the 
book of Job, ch. xix. 25-27,—whether it be the beholding of 
God in the present bodily, future spiritual, or future glorified 
state,—it is by no means an echo of an already existing reve- 
lation of the resurrection of the dead, that acknowledgment 
of revelation which we see breaking forth and expanding 
throughout Isa. xxvi. 19, comp. xxv. 8, and Ezek. xxxvii. 
comp. Hos, vi. 2, until Dan. xii. 2. The prevailing representa- 
tions of the future in the book of Job are exactly the same as 

_ those in the Psalms of the time of David and Solomon, and in 

‘the Proverbs of Solomon. The writer speaks as one of the 
same age in which Heman sighed, Ps. Ixxxviii. 11 sq., “ Wile 
Thou show wonders to the dead? or shall the shades arise and 
praise Thee? Shall Thy loving-kindness be declared in the grave, 
Thy faithfulness in the abyss?” Besides, the greatest conceiv- 

re able fulness of allusion to the book of Job, including Elihu’s 
speeches, is found in Ps. Ixxxviii. and Ixxxix., whose authors, 
Heman and Ethan, the Ezrahites, are not the same as the 


§ 7. SIGNS FROM THE DOCTRINAL CONTENTS. 23 


chief singers of David of the same name, but the contem- 
poraries of Solomon mentioned in 1 Kings v. 11. These 
two psalms coincide with the book of Job, both in expressions 
with which remarkable representations are united, as DTP 
of the celestial spirits, ox59 of the shades in Hades, p78 of 
Hades itself, and also in expressions which do not occur 
elsewhere in the Old Testament, as D%.8 and O’y3; and the 
agreement is manifest, moreover, in the agreement of whole 
_ verses either in thought or in expression: comp. Ps. Ixxxix. 
38 with Job xvi. 19, Ixxxix. 48 with Job vii. 7, Ixxxix. 49 
with Job xiv. 14, Ixxxviiil. 5 with Job xiv. 10, Ixxxviii. 9 
with Job xxx. 10, lxxxix. 8 with Job xxxi. 34. In all 
these passages, however, there is no such similarity as sug- 
gests a borrowing, but an agreement which, since it cannot 
possibly be accidental, may be most easily explained by sup- > 
posing that the book of Job proceeds from just the same 
Chokma-fellowship to which, according to 1 Kings v. 11, 
the two Ezrahites, the writers of Ps. Ixxxvili. and Ixxxix., / 
belong. \\ 
* One might go further, and conjecture that. the veri 
Heman who composed Ps. Ixxxviil., the gloomiest of all the A 
Psalms, and written under circumstances of suffering similar ‘ -\\ 
to Job’s, may-be the author of the book of Job—for which PS 
many probable reasons might be advanced; by which also. 
what G. Baur rightly assumes would be confirmed, that the 
Ay writer of the book of Job has himself passed through the 
NG inward spiritual conflict which he: describes, and accordingly 
gives a page from his own religious history. But we are 
satisfied with the admission, that the book of Job is the 
work of one of the wise men whose rendezvous was the 
Ne court of Solomon. Gregory of Nazianzen and Luther have 
already admitted the origin of the book in Solomon’s time; 
and among later critics, Rosenmiiller, Havernick, Vai- 


hinger, Hahn, Schlottmann, Keil, and Hofmann (though in 





24 INTRODUCTION. 


his Weissagung und Erfillwng he expressed the opinion that 
it belongs to the Mosaic period), are agreed in this.’ 


§ 8. ECHOES IN THE LATER SACRED WRITINGS. 


It may be readily supposed, that a book like this, which is 
occupied with a question of such vital import to every think- 
ing and pious man,—which treats it in such a lively manner, 
riveting the attention, and bespeaking sympathy,—which, 
apart from its central subject, is so many-sided, so majesti- 
cally beautiful in language, and so inexhaustible in imagery,— 
will have been one of the most generally read of the national 
books of Israel. Such is found to be the case; and also 
hereby its origin in the time of Solomon is confirmed: for 
at this very period it is to Ps. Ixxxvili. Ixxxix. only that it 
stands in the mutual relation already mentioned. But the 
echoes appear as early as in the n2n%21, which are ap- 
pended to the Salomonic ‘Svip in the book of Proverbs: comp. 
the teaching from an example in the writer’s own experi- 
ence, Prov. xxiv. 30 sqq. with Job v. 3 sqq. The book of 
Job, however, next to the Proverbs of Solomon, was the 
favourite source of information for the author of the intro 
ductory proverbs (ch. iix.). Here (apart from the doctrine 
of wisdom) we find whole passages similar to the book of 
Job: comp. Prov. iii. 11 with Job v. 17, viii. 25 with Job — 
xv. 7, iii. 15 with Job xxviii. 18. 

Then, in the prophets of the flourishing period of pro- 
phetic literature, which begins with Obadiah and Joel, we 
find distinct traces of familiarity with the book of Job. 
Amos describes the glory of God the Creator in words . 
taken from it (ch. iv. 13, v. 8, after Job ix. 8; ef. x. 22, 


‘ Also Professor Barnwell, in the Carolina Times, 1857, No. 785, calls 
the book of Job “the most brilliant flower of this brighter than Eliza- 
bethan and nobler than Augustan era.” 


- 


_ § 8. ECHOES IN THE LATER SACRED WRITINGS. 25 


xxxvill. 31). Isaiah has introduced a whole verse of the 
book of Job, almost verbatim, into his prophecy against 
Egypt (ch. xix. 5 = Job xiv. 11): in the same prophecy, ch. 
xix. 13 sq. refer to Job xii. 24 sq., so also ch. xxxv. 3 to Job 
iv. 4. These reminiscences of the book of Job are frequent 
in Isaiah (ch. xl.-lxvi.). This book of solace for the exiles 
corresponds to the book of Job not only in words, which 
exclusively belong in common to the two (as Y! and o’NyNy), 
and in surprising similarity of expression (as ch liii. 9, comp. 
Job xvi. 17; lx. 6, comp. Job xxii. 11), but also in numerous 
passages of similar thought and form (comp. ch. xl. 23 with 
Job xii. 24) ; and in the description of the Servant of Jeho- 
vah, one is here and there involuntarily reminded of the book 
of Job (as ch. 1. 6, comp. with Job xvi. 10). In Jereniiah, \ 
the short lyric passage, ch. xx. 14-18, in which he curses the 
day of his birth, falls back on Job iii.: the form in which 
the despondency of the prophet breaks forth is determined by 
- the book of Job, with which he was familiar. It requires no fer 
proof that the same prophet follows the book of Job in many~ 
passages of Lamentations, and especially the first part of ch. 
iii.: he makes use of confessions, complaints, and imagery from _, 
the affliction of Job, to represent the affliction of Israel. 

By the end of the time of the kings, Job was a person 
generally known in Israel, a recognised saint; for ee 
in the year 593-2 B.c. (ch. xiv. 14 sqq.), complains that the 
measure of Israel’s sin is so great, that if Noah, Daniel, and ' 
Job were in the midst of Israel, though they might save them- 
selves, they would not be able to hold back the arm of divine 
justice. The prophet mentions first Noah, a righteous man a | 
of the old world; then Daniel, a righteous man of contem- 
porary Israel ; and last of all Job, a righteous man beyond the 
line of the promise." He would not, however, have been able / 


1 Hengstenberg (Beitrdge, i. 72) thinks Job is mentioned last because 
less suited to Ezekiel’s purpose than Noah and Daniel. Carpzov (Introd. 


26 INTRODUCTION. 


to mention him, if he had not, by means of the written narra- 
tive, been a person well known among the people to whom the 
prophetical discourse was addressed The literature of the Old 
Testament has no further reference to the question of the time 
of the composition of the book of Job; for, on a comparison 
of Eccl. v. 14 with Job i. 21, it scarcely remains a question 
to which the priority belongs. 


5 


§ 9. THE CHIEF CRITICAL QUESTIONS. 


Whether, however, the whole book, as we now have it, ; 
comes from the time of Solomon, as the work of one poet, or 
of one chief poet,’ is a question which can be better deter- 
mined in the course of the exposition. More or less important 
doubts have been entertained whether some constituent parts 


pot the whole belong to the original setting. By far the most 


ig: 
yi 


important question of criticism respects the six chapters of 
Elihu’s speeches (ch. xxxii.-xxxvii.), respecting which the sus- . 
picion entertained by the fathers, and first decidedly expressed 
by Stuhlmann (1804), that not only in form are they inferior 
to the artistic execution of the rest of the work, but also in 
contents are opposed to its original plan, is not yet set aside, 
and perhaps never will be altogether satisfactorily settled. 
Besides this, Kennicot also has suspected the speech of Job, 
ch. xxvii. 11-xxviii. 28, because there Job seems to yield to 
the friends’ controverted doctrine of retribution. De Wette 


Vis more inclined here to suppose a want of connection on the 


in ll. poet. p. 35) is more ingenious, but too artificial, when he finds an 
anti-climax in the order: Noachus in clade primi mundi ccumenica, 
Daniel in clade patriz ac gentis sux, Iobus in clade familie servatus est.. - 

1 Compare Bottcher, Ahrenlese, 8.68: ‘* Respecting the mode of com- 
position, we think there was one chief poet, with several contemporary 
associates, incited by a conversation on the then (ie., according to 
Bottcher’s view, in the reign of Manasseh) frequent afflictions of the 
innocent.” 


' $10. THE SATAN OF THE PROLOGUE. 27 


part of the writer than an interpolation. ‘We shall have to 
prove whether this speech of Job really encroaches upon the 
province of the unravelling, or renders the transition more 
complete. 

The whole description of Behemoth and Leviathan, ch. xl. 
15-xli. 26, is regarded by Ewald as a later addition: De Wette 
extends this judgment only to ch. xli. 4-26: Eichhorn was 
_Aatisfied at first with changing the order of Jehovah’s speeches; 
but in the last edition of his Hinleitung ascribed the passage 
about the two monsters to a later poet. The exposition will 
~ have to bring the form of expression of the supposed interpo- 

lation, and its relation to the purpose of the second speech of 
Jehovah, in comparison with the first, under consideration. 
But we need not defer our judgment of the prologue and S 
epilogue. All the doubts raised by Stuhlmann, Bernstein, | 
Knobel (diss. de carminis Iobi argumento, fine ac dispositione, | 
and Studien u. Kritiken, 1842, ii.), and others, respecting both 
these essential parts, are put an end to by the consideration, 
that the middle part of the book, without them, is a torso 
without head and feet. aa 


| 
; 





§ 10. THE SATAN OF THE PROLOGUE. 


But the Satan in the prologue is a stumbling-block to many, 
which, if it does not lead them to doubt the authenticity. of 
the prologue, still causes them to question whether the com- 
position of the book belongs to the time of Solomon. For 
Satan is first definitely named, Zech. iii., and 1 Chron. xxi. 1; 
consequently in writings of the period after the exile. On the 
other hand, j0¥, Num. xxii. 22, appellatively describes one who 
comes forward hostilely, or as a hindrance; and Ps. cix. 6 is 
at least open to question whether the prince of evil spirits 
may not be meant, which, according to Zech. iii. 1, seems to be 
intended. However, in Micaiah’s vision, 1 Kings xxii. 19-23, 


c). 
\ 
~~ 
. 


On 


28 INTRODUCTION. 


where one might expect jown, mn is used. It is even main- 
tained in the present day, that the idea of Satan was first 
obtained by the Israelitish race from contact with the East- 
Asiatic nations, which began with Israel in the time of 
Menahem, with Judah in the time of Ahaz; the view of 
Diestel, that it is the copy of the Egyptian Set-7yphon, stands 
at present alone. When we consider that the redemptive 
work of Jesus Christ is regarded by Him and His apostles 


‘from one side as the overthrow of Satan, it were a miserable 


thing for the divine truth of Christianity that this Satan 
should be nothing more than a copy of the Persian Ahriman, 


\" and consequently a mere phantom. However, supposing 


/ there were some such connection, we should then have only 


two periods at which the book of Job could possibly have 


_ been composed,—the time after the exile, and the time of 


Solomon ; for these are the only periods at which not only 
collision, hut also an interchange of ideas, between Israel and 


\ the profane nations could have taken-place. It is ‘also just as 


possible for the conception of Satan to have taken possession 
of the Israelitish mind under Solomon as during the exile, 
especially as it is very questionable whether the religion of 
Cyrus, as found in the Zend books, may not have been far 
more influenced by Israel, than, contrariwise, have influenced 
Israel. 


-~ But the conception of Satan is indeed much older in its 


existence than the time of Solomon: the serpent of paradise 
must surely have appeared to the inquiring mind of Israel as 
the disguise of an evil spirit; and nothing further can be 
maintained, than that this evil spirit, which in the Mosaic 
worship of the great day of atonement is called Sty (called 
later 21 5y2, a name borrowed from the god of Ekron), 
appears first in the later literature of Israel under the name 
jown. If now, moreover, the Chokma of the Salomonic 
period was specially conversant with the pre-Israelitish his- 


§ 11. THE FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM. . 29 


tories of Genesis, whence indeed even the chief thought of 
Canticles and the figure of on yy eg. frequently occurring 
in Proverbs are drawn, it is difficult to conceive why the evil 
spirit, that in its guise of a serpent aimed its malice against 
man, could not have been called ju’n so early as the Salo- 
monic period. 

The wisdom of the author of the book of Job, we have said 
above, springs from paradise. Thence he obtains the highest 
and final solution of his problem. It is now time to give 
expression to this. At present we need only do so in outline, 
since it is simply of use to place us from the commencement 
at the right standpoint for understanding the book of Job. 


§ 11. THE FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM. 


The nature of sin is two-sided. It consists in the creature’s 
setting up himself in opposition to God, who is the essence of 
the personality of the creature. It consists also, on the other 
side, in the stirring up of the depth of the nature of the 
creature, whose essential consistence has its harmony in God; 
and by this stirring up, falls into a wild confusion. In other 
words, evil has a personal side and a natural side. And just 
so, also, is God’s wrath which it excites, and which operates 
against it. For God’s wrath is, on the one hand, the personal > 
displeasure or aversion into which His love is. changed, since 
the will of the creature and the will of God are in opposition ; 
on the other hand, an excited condition of the contrary forces 
of the divine nature, or, as Scripture expresses it, the kindling 
of the fire of the divine glory, in which sense it is often said 
of wrath, that God sends it forth, that He pours it forth, or 
that man has to drink of it (Job xxi. 20, comp. vi. 4). 

In reference to the creature, we call evil according to its 
personal side éy@pa, and according to its natural side aragia, 

1 Vid. my Proleg. to Weber’s book on the Wrath of God. 


30 INTRODUCTION. 


‘ turba.' Both personal evil and natural evil have originated in 
the spirit world: first of all, in a spirit nearest to God, which 
as fallen is called jovn. It has sought its own selfish ends, 
and thereby deranged its nature, so that it has become in 
every respect the object of the divine wrath, and the mate- 
rial for the burning of the divine wrath: for the echthra 
and turba: have the intention and the burning of the wrath 
of God in themselves as divine correlata; but Satan, after 
that he has become entirely possessed of these divine powers 
(Energien), is also their instrument. The spirit of light and 
love is altogether become the spirit of fire and wrath; the 
whole sphere of wrath is centred in him. After having given 
up his high position in the realm of light, he is become lord 
of the realm of wrath. } 
He has, from the commencement of his fall, the hell within 
himself, but is first cast into the lake of fire at the end of the 
present dispensation (Matt. xxv. 41; Apoc. xx. 10: comp. 
Dan. vii. 11). In the meantime, he is being deprived of his 
power by the Son of man, who, in the midst of His own and. 
His disciples’ victories over the demons, beholds him fall as 
lightning from heaven (Luke x. 18), and by His death gives 
him his deathblow,—a final judgment, which, later on, be- 
comes fully manifest in the continuous degradation of the 
vanquished (comp. Apoc. xii. 9, xx. 3, xx. 10). Accordingly, 
when Satan, in the book of Job, still appears among the angels 
of God in heaven, and indeed as xariywp, it is quite in 
accordance with the disclosures which the New ‘Testament 
Scriptures give us respecting the invisible angelic side of the 
present dispensation. 
We will now cast a glance at the relation to the wrath of 
(a, and to Satan, into which man has fallen through the 
temptation of the old serpent. 'Tempted by Satan, he is him- 
self fallen into the realm of wrath, and become a servant of 
1 Vid. Biblische Psychologie, 8. 128, 160. 


§ 11. THE FINAL SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM. ie 


Satan. He is in his grasp. All calamity that befalls him is 
divine punishment, either proceeding directly from the wrath 
of God, or worked by the wrath-spirit, Satan. But in pro- 
spect of the future atonement, which was to free man from the 
wrath of God, and from the power of wrath in which Satan 
holds him, it was possible for man, even under the Old Testa- 
ment, to realize this deliverance, by virtue of an apprehension 
of the grace flowing from God’s purpose of redemption. Who- 
ever has been made free by this grace is changed: from an 
object of the divine wrath to an object of the divine love, and 
nothing that befalls him in this condition proceeds from the 
wrath of God—all from His love. This love cannot, how- 
ever, manifest itself so brightly as it would, so long as sin 
remains in the man and in the world ; it is only able to mani- 
fest itself as loving wrath, 7:e. as love controlling, and making / 
wrath serviceable to. itself. 

Thus Job’s suffering is a dispensation of love, but brought 
about by the wrath-spirit, and with every appearance of 
wrath. It is so with every trial and chastisement of the 
righteous. And it cannot be otherwise; for trial is designed 
to be for man a means of overcoming the evil that is external 
to him, and chastisement of overcoming the evil that is within 
him. There is a conflict between evil and good in the world, 
which can issue in victory to the good only so, that the good 
proves itself in distinction from the evil, withstands the 
assault of evil, and destroys the evil that exists bound up” 
with itself: only so, that the good as far as it is still mixed 
with the evil is refined as by fire, and more and more freed 
from it. 

This is the twofold point of view from which the suffering 
of Job is to be regarded. It was designed, first of all, that . 
Job should prove himself in opposition to Satan, in order to 
overcome him ; and since Job does not pass through the trial 
entirely without sinning, it has the effect at the same time of 


32 ‘INTRODUCTION. 


purifying and perfecting him. In both respects, the history 
of Job is a passage from the history of God’s own conflict 
with the evil one, which is the substance of the history of re- 
\_demption, and ends in the triumph of the divine love. And_ 
Gaupp’ well says: In the book of Job, Satan loses a cause 
which is intended only as prelude to the greatest of all causes, 
since judgment is gone forth over the world, and the prince 
of darkness has been cast forth. Accordingly the church 
has always recognised in the passion of Job a type of the 
\_passion of Jesus Christ. James (v.11) even compares the 
‘patience of Job and the issue of the Lord’s sufferings. And 
according to this indication, it was the custom after the second 
century to read the book of Job in the churches during pas- 
sion-week.? The final solution of the problem which this - 
marvellous book sets forth, is then this: the suffering of the 
~ righteous, in its deepest cause, is the conflict of the seed of 
the woman with the seed of the serpent, which ends in the 
head of the serpent being trampled under foot ; it is the type 
- or copy of the suffering of Christ, the Holy God, who has 
himself borne our sins, and in the constancy of His reconcil- 
ing love has withstood, even to the final overthrow, the assault 
of wrath and of the angel of wrath. 

The real contents of the book of Job is the mystery of the 
Cross: the Cross on Golgotha is the solution of the enigma 
of every cross; and the book of Job is a _ prophecy of this 

\ final solution. 

1 Praktische Theologie, ii. 1, 8. 488 sqq. 

2 Vid. Origen’s Opp. t. ii. p. 851: In conventu ecclesize in diébus 
sanctis legitur passio Iob, in diebus jejuntt, in diebus abstinentix, in diebus, 
in quibus tanquam compatiuntur vi qui jejunant et abstinent admirabili illo 
Iob, in diebus, in quibus in jejunio et abstinentia sanctam Domini nostri 
Jesu Christi passionem sectamur. Known thus from the public reading 
in the churches, Job was called among the Syrians, "Machbono, the 


Beloved, the Friend (Ewald, Jahrb. x. 207); and among the Arabs, 
Es-ssabiir, the patient one. 


~ 


§ 12. THE HISTORY OF THE EXPOSITION. 33 


§ 12, THE HISTORY OF THE EXPOSITION. 


Before proceeding to the exposition, we will take a brief 
review of the history of the exposition of the book. The 
promise of the Spirit to lead into all truth is continually 
receiving its fulfilment in the history of the church, and 
especially in the interpretation of Scripture. But nowhere 
is the progress of the church in accordance with this promise 
so manifest as in the exposition of the word, and particularly 
of the Old Testament. In the patristic and middle ages, 
light was thrown only on detached portions of the Old Tes- 
tament ; they lacked altogether, or had but an inadequate 
knowledge of, the Hebrew language. They regarded the Old 
Testament not as the forerunner, but allegory, of the New, 
and paid less attention to it in proportion as the spiritual per- 
ception of the church lost its apostolic purity and freshness. 
However, so far as inward spiritual feeling and experience 
could compensate for the almost entire absence of outward 
conditions, this period has produced and handed'down many 
valuable explanations. 

But at the time of the Reformation, the light of the day 
which had already dawned first spread in all its brightness 
over the Old Testament. The knowledge of Hebrew, until 
then the private possession of a few, became the public 
property of the church: all erroneous interventions which 
had hitherto separated the church both from Christ and 
from the living source of the word were put aside; and 
starting from the central truth of justification by faith and 
its results, a free but still not unrestricted investigation 
commenced. Still there was wanting to this period all 
perception of historical development, and consequently the 
ability to comprehend the Old Testament as preparing the 
way for the New by its gradual historical development of 
the plan of redemption. The exposition of Scripture, more- 

VOL. I. C 


34 INTRODUCTION. 


over, soon fell again under the yoke of an enslaving tradition, 
of a scholastic systematizing, and of an unhistorical dog- 
matizing which mistook its peculiar aim ; and this period 
of bondage, devoid of spirituality, was followed by a period 
of false freedom, that of rationalism, which cut asunder the 
mutual relation between the exposition of Scripture and the 
confession of the church, since it reduced the covenant con- 
tents of the church’s confession to the most shallow notion 
of God and the most trivial moral rules, and regarded the 
Old Testament as historical indeed, but with carnal eyes, 
which were blind to the work of God that was preparing 
the way in the history of Israel for the New Testament 
redemption. The progress of exegesis seemed at that time 
to have been stayed; but the Head of the church, who 
reigns in the midst of His enemies, caused the exposition of 
His word to come forth again from the dead in a more 
glorious form. The bias towards the human side of Serip- 
ture has taught exegesis that Scripture is neither altogether 
a divine, nor altogether a human, but a divine-human book. 
The historical method of regarding it, and the advanced 
knowledge of language, have taught that the Old Testament 
presents a divine-human growth tending towards the God- 
man, a gradual development and declaration of the divine 
purpose of salvation,—a miraculous history moving onward 
towards that miracle of all miracles, Jesus Christ. Believing 
on Him, bearing the seal of His Spirit in himself, and par- 
taking of the true liberty His Spirit imparts, the expositor of 
Scripture beholds in the Old Testament, with open face, now 
as never before, the glory of the Lord. 

The truth of this sketch is confirmed by the history of the 
exposition of the book of Job. The Greek fathers, of whom 
twenty-two (including Ephrem) are quoted in the Catena,’ 


1 Tt contains as basis the Greek text of the book of Job from the Cod. 
Alexandrinus, arranged in stichs. 


§ 12. THE HISTORY OF THE EXPOSITION. 35 


published by Patricius Junius, 1637, furnish little more than 
could be expected. If there be any Old Testament book 
whose comprehensive meaning is now first understood according 

to the external and internal conditions of its-gradual advance 

to maturity, it is the book of Job. The Greek fathers were 
confined to the L.XX., without being in a position to test 
that translation by the original text; and it is just the Greek Bis 
translation of the book of Job which suffers most seriously 
from the flaws which in general affect the LXX. Whole 
verses are omitted, others are removed from their original 
places, and the omissions are filled up by apocryphal addi- 
tions! Origen was well aware of this (Zp. ad Afric. § 3 
sq.), but he was not sufficiently acquainted with Hebrew to 
give a reliable collation of the LXX. with the original text 

in his Tetrapla and Hexapla; and his additions (denoted 
by daggers), and the passages restored by him from other 
translators, especially Theodotion (by asterisks), deprive the 
Septuagint text of its original form, without, however, giving 

a correct impression of the original text. And since in the 
book of Job the meaning of the whole is dependent upon the oO 
meaning of the most isolated passage, the full meaning of the 
book was a perfect impossibility to the Greek fathers. They _/ 
occupied themselves much with this mysterious book, but 
typical and ‘allegorical could not make up what was wanting 

to the fathers, of grammatical and historical interpretation. 
The Italic, the next version to the LX X., was still more 
defective than this: Jerome calls the book of Job in this 
translation, Decurtatus et laceratus corrosusque. He revised 

it by the text of the Hexapla, and according to his own plan 
had to supply not less than about 700-800 versus (otixot). 
His own independent translation is far before its age; but he 
himself acknowledges its defectiveness, inasmuch as he relates, 


1 On this subject vid. Gust. Bickel’s De indole ae ratione versionis 
Alexandrinz in interpretando 1. Iobi, just published (1863). 


OG INTRODUCTION. 


in his prefatio in l. Job, how it was accomplished. He en- 
gaged, non parvis numis, a Jewish teacher from Lydda, where 
there was at that time an university, but confesses that, after 
he had gone through the book of Job with him, he was no 
wiser than before : Cujus doctrina an aliquid profecerim nescio; 
hoc unum scio, non potuisse me interpretari nist quod antea 
intellexeram. On this account he calls it, as though he would 
complain of the book itself, obliquus, figuratus, lubricus, and 
says it is like an eel—the more tightly one holds it, the faster 
it glides away. There were then three Latin versions of the 
book of Job,—the Italic, the Italic improved by Jerome, and 
the independent translation of Jerome, whose deviations, as 
Augustine complains, produced no little embarrassment. The 
Syrians were better off with their Peschito, which was made 
direct from the orignal text; but the Scholia of Ephrem (pp. 
1-19, t. ii. of the three Syriac tomi of his works) contain less 
that is useful than might be expected.? The succeeding 
age produced nothing better. ie 
Among the expositors of the book of Job we find some 
illustrious names: Gregory the Great, Beda Venerabilis 
(whose Commentary has been erroneously circulated as the 
still undiscovered Commentary of Jerome), Thomas Aquinas, 
Albertus Magnus,’ and others; but no progress was made 
in the interpretation of the book, as the means were wanting. 
The principal work of the middle ages was Gregory the 
Great’s Expositio in beatum Iob seu Moralium, ll. xxxv., a 
1 Perhaps with the use of the Jewish Targum, though not the one 
extant, for Talmudic literature recognises the existence of a Targum of 
the book of Job before the destruction of the temple, b. Sabbath, 115a, 
etc. Besides, the LX X. was considered of such authority in the East, 
that the monophysite Bishop Paulus of Tela, 617, formed a new Syriac 
translation from the LXX. and the text of the Herapla (published by 

Middeldorff, 1834-35 ; cf. his Cura hexaplares in Iobum, 1817). 
* Froriep, Ephremiana in 1. Tobi, 1769, iv., says much about these 


Scholia to little purpose. 
® His Postill# super {ob are still unprinted. 


§ 12. THE HISTORY OF THE EXPOSITION. Bi 


gigantic work, which leaves scarcely a dogmatic-ethical theme 
untouched, though in its own proper sphere it furnishes 
nothing of importance, for Gregory explained so, wt super 
historie fundamentum moralitatis construeret edificium et ana- 
goges imposuerit culmen prestantissimum,' but the linguistic- 
historical foundation is insufficient, and the exposition, which 
gives evidence of significant character and talent, accordingly 
goes off almost constantly into digressions opposed to its object. 

It was only towards the end of the middle ages, as the 
knowledge of the Hebrew language began, through Jewish 
converts, to come into the church, that a new era commenced. 
For what advance the Jewish exposition of the book of Job 
had hitherto made, beyond that of the church, it owed to the 
knowledge of Hebrew ; although, in the absence of any con- 
ception of the task of the expositor, and especially the exposi- 
tor of Scripture, it knew not how fittingly to turn it to account. 
Saadia’s (born 890) Arabic translation of the book of Job, 
with explanations,” does not accomplish much more than that 
of Jerome, if we may in general say that it surpasses it. 
Salomo Isaaki of Troyes (Raschi, erroneously called Jarchi), 
whose Commentary on the Book of Job (rendered incomplete 
by his death, 1105) was completed by his grandson, Samuel b. 
Meir (Raschbam, died about 1160),’ contains a few attempts 
at grammatical historical exposition, but is in other respects 
entirely dependent on Midrash Haggada (which may be com- 
pared with the church system of allegorical interpretation), 
whose barren material is treasured up in the catena-like com- 
pilations, one of which to the collected books of the Old Testa- 


1 Notker quoted by Diimmler, Formelbuch des Bischof’s Salomo von 
Constanz, 1857, 8. 67 f. 

2 Vid. Ewald-Duke’s Beitriige zur G'esch. der dltesten Auslegung und 
Spracherklérung des A. T. 2 Bdd. 1844. 

* Respecting this accounts are uncertain: vid. Geiger, Die franzdsische 
Exegetenschule (1855), 8. 22; and comp. de Rossi, Catalogus Cod. 181. 
Zunz, Zur Geschichte und Literatur. 


38 INTRODUCTION 


ment bears the name of Simeon ha-Darschan (nynw pip) ; 
the other to the three poetical books, the name of Machir b. 
Todros ("20 wrp>). Abenezra the Spaniard, who wrote his 
Commentary on the Book of Jobin Rome, 1175, delights in new 
bold ideas, and to enshroud himself in a mystifying nimbus. 
David Kimchi, who keeps best to the grammatical-historical 
course, has not expounded the book of Job; and a commentary 
on this book by his brother, Mose Kimchi, is not yet brought to 
| -~ light. The most important Jewish works on the book of Job 
are without doubt the Commentaries of Mose b. Nachman 
or Nachmanides (Ramban), born at Gerona 1194, and Levi 
b. Gerson, or Gersonides (Ralbag), born at Bagnols 1288. 
_ Both were talented thinkers; the former more of the Pla- 
tonic, the latter of the Aristotelic type. Their Commentaries 
' (taken up‘in the collective Rabbinical Commentaries), espe- 
cially that of the latter, were widely circulated in the middle 
\ ages. They have both a philosophical bias." What is to be 
found in them that is serviceable on any point, may be pretty 
well determined from the compilation of Lyra. Nikolaus de 
Lyra, author of Postille perpetue in universa Biblia (com- 
pleted 1330), possessed, for that age, an excellent knowledge 
of the original text, the necessity of which he acknowledged, 
and regarded the sensus literalis as basis of all other sensus. 
But, on the one hand, he was not independent of his Jewish 
predecessors; on the other, he was fettered by the servile 
unevangelical spirit of his age. 

—— The bursting of this fetter was the dawn of a new day for 
exegesis. Luther, Brentius, and other reformers, by the 
depth of their religious experience, their aversion to the 
capriciousness of the system of allegorical interpretation and 


1 Other older commentaries bearing on the history of exposition, 
as Menahem b. Chelbo, Joseph Kara, Parchon, and others, are not yet 
known ; also that of the Italian poet Immanuel, a friend of Dante, is 
still unprinted. The rabbinical commentaries contain only, in addition, 
the Commentary of Abraham Farisol of Avigrron (about 1460). 


§ 12. THE HISTORY OF THE EXPOSITION. 39 


freedom from tradition, were fitted to look into the very 
heart of the book of Job; and they also possessed sufficient | 
acquaintance with the Hebrew to get an inkling of the carry- } } 
ing out of its chief idea, but no more than an inkling of it. 

“ The book of Job,” says Luther in his preface, “ treats of | 
the question whether misfortune from God befalls even the \ 
godly. Here Job is firm, and maintains that God afflicts | \ 
even the godly without cause, for His praise alone, as Christ 
(John ix.) also shows from the man who was born blind.” 

In these words the idea of the book is correctly indicated. 
But that he had only an approximate conception of the sepa- 
rate parts, he openly confesses. By the help of Melancthon 
and the Hebraist Aurogallus, he translated the book of Job, \, 
and says in his epistle on the translation, that they could 7 
sometimes scarcely finish three lines in four days. And 
while engaged upon the translation, he wrote to Spalatin, in y, 
his naive strong way, that Job seemed to bear his translation — ? 
less patiently than the consolation of his friends, and would | 
rather remain seated on his dunghill. Jerome Weller, a man_, 
who, from inward experience similar to that described in this 
book, was qualified above many to be its expositor, felt the 
same unsatisfactoriness. An expositor of Job, says he, must 
have lain on the same bed of sickness as Job, and have tasted 

in some measure the bitter experience of Job. Such an 
expositor was Weller, sorely tried in the school of affliction. 
But his exposition does not extend beyond the twelfth chapter; 
and he is glad when at last, by God’s grace, he has got through 
the twelve chapters, as through firm and hard rock; the 

_ remaining chapters he commends to another. The most 
comprehensive work of the Reformation period on the book 
of Job, is the Sermons (conciones) of Calvin The exegesis 
of the pre-rationalistic period advanced beyond these per- — 
formances of the reformers only in proportion as philological 
learning extended, particularly Mercier and Cocceius in the 


ann 
el 


40 _ INTRODUCTION. 


Reformed, Seb. Schmid in the Lutheran, Joannes de Pineda 
in the Romish Church. The Commentary of the last named 
(Madrid, 1597), a surprisingly learned compilation, was also 
used and admired by Protestants, but zealously guards the 
immaculateness of the Vulgate. The commentaries of the 
German reformers are to the present day unsurpassed for the 
comprehension of the fundamental truth of the book. 

With the Commentary of Albert Schultens, a Dutchman 
(2 vols. 1737), a new epoch in the exposition begins. He was 
the first to bring the Semitic languages, and chiefly the 
Arabic, to bear on the translation of the book. And rightly 
so, for the Arabic has retained more that is ancient than any 
other Semitic dialect; and Jerome, in his preface to Daniel, 
had before correctly remarked, lob cum arabica lingua pluri- 
mam habet societatem. Reiske (Conjecture in Iobum, 1779) 
and Schnurrer (Animadv. ad quedam loca Iobi, 1781) fol- 
lowed later in the footsteps of Schultens; but in proportion 
as the Israelitish element was considered in its connection 
with the Oriental, the divine distinctiveness of the former was 

‘forgotten. Nevertheless, the book of Job had far less to suffer 
than the other biblical books from rationalism, with its frivo- 
lous moral judgments and distorted interpretations of Scrip- 
ture: it reduced the idea of the book to tameness, and Satan, 
here with more apparent reason than elsewhere, was regarded 
as a mythical invention ; but there were, however, no miracles 

and prophecies to be got rid of. 

And as, for the first time since the apostolic period, atten- 
tion was now given to the book as a poetical masterpiece, 
substantial advantage arose to the exposition itself from the 
translations and explanations of an Eckermann, Moldenhauer, 
Stuhlmann, and others. What a High-German rhymster of 

* Though not in due proportion, especially in Animadversiones philo- 


logicz in Iobum (Opp. minora, 1769), where he seeks to explain the errors 
of translation in the LX.X. from the Arabic. 


§ 12. THE HISTORY OF THE EXPOSITION. 4] 


the fourteenth century, made known by Hennig, and the 
Florentine national poet Juliano Dati at the beginning of 
the sixteenth century, accomplished in their poetical repro- 
ductions of the book of Job, is here incomparably surpassed. 
What might not the fathers have accomplished if they had 
- only had at their disposal such a translation of the book of 
Job as e.g. that of Boéckel, or of the pious Miss Elizabeth 
Smith, skilled in the Oriental languages (died, in her twenty- 
eighth year, 1805),’ or of a studious Swiss layman (Notes to 
the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, together with a Trans- 
lation of the Book of Job, Basel 1841)? 

The way to the true and full perception of the divine 
in Scripture is through the human : hence rationalism— 
especially after Herder, whose human mode of perception 
improved and deepened—prepared the way for a new era 
in the church’s exposition of the book of Job. The Com- / 
mentaries of Samuel Lee (1837), Vaihinger (1842), Welte 
(1849), Hahn (1850), and Schlottmann (1851),? are the 
first-fruits of this new period, rendered possible by the earlier 
Commentaries of Umbreit (1824-32), Ewald (1836-51), and 
Hirzel (1839, second edition, edited by Olshausen, 1852), 
of whom the first® is characterized by enthusiasm for the 
poetical grandeur of the book, the second by vivid perception 
of the tragical, and the third by sound tact and good arrange- 
ment,—three qualifications which a young Scotch investigator, 
A. B. Davidson, strives, not unsuccessfully, to unite in his 
Commentary (vol. i. 1862).* Besides these substantially 


1 Vid. Volksblatt fiir Stadt und Land, 1859, No. 20. 

2 Vid. the review of the last two by Oehler in Reuter’s Repertorium, 
Feb. 1852; and Kosegarten’s Aufsatz iiber das B. Hiob in der Kieler 
Allgem. Monatsschrift, 1853, S. 761-774. 

8 Vid. Ullmann-Riehm’s Blitter der Erinnerung an F. W. C. Umbreit 
(1862), S. 54-58. 

+ The author, already known by a Treatise on the Hebrew Accentuology, 
is not to be mistaken for Sam. Davidson. In addition, we would call 


42 INTRODUCTION. 


progressive works, there is the Commentary of Heiligstedt 
(1847), which is only a recapitulatory clavis after the style 
of Rosenmiiller, but more condensed; and for what modern 
Jewish commentaries, as those of Blumenfeld, Arnheim 
(1836), and Lowenthal (1846), contain beyond the stand- 
point of the earlier Dvn. and DO 1N3, they are almost entirely 
indebted to their Christian predecessors. Also in the more 
condensed form of translations, with accompanying explana- 
tions, the understanding of the book of Job has been in many 
ways advanced. We may mention here the translations of — 
Koster (1831), who first directed attention to the strophe- 
structure of Hebrew poetry, but who also, since he regarded 
the Masoretic verse as the constructive element of the strophe, 
has introduced an error which has not been removed even to 
the present day; Stickel (1842), who has, not untastefully, 
sought to imitate the form of this masterpiece, although his 
division of the Masoretic verse into strophe lines, according 
to the accents, like Hirzel’s and Meier’s in Canticles, is the 
opposite extreme to the mistake of Kdéster ; Ebrard (1858), 
who translates in iambic pentameters, as Hosse had previously 
done ;+ and Renan, who solely determines his arrangement 
of the stichs by the Masoretic division of verses, and more- 
over haughtily displays his scornful opposition to Christianity 
in the prefatory Etude.’ Besides, apart from the general 
commentaries (Bibelwerke), among which that of Von Gerlach 
(Bd. iii. des A. T. 1849) may be mentioned as the most noted, 
and such popular practical expositions as Diedrich’s (1858), - 
many—some in the interest of poetry generally (as Spiess, 


attention to the Commentary of Carey (1858), in which the archzeology 
and geography of the book of Job is illustrated by eighty woodcuts and 
a map. 

1 Vid. Schneider, Die neuesten Studien iiber das B. Hiob, Deutsche 
Zeitschr. fiir christl. Wissensch., 1859, No. 27. 

* Against which Abbé Crelier has come forward : Le livre de Job venge 
des interprétations fausses et impies de M. Ernest Renan, 1860. 


§ 12. THE HISTORY OF THE EXPOSITION. 43 


1852), others in the interest of biblical theology (as Haupt, 
1847 ; Hosse, 1849; Hayd, 1859; Birkholz, 1859; and in 
Sweden, Lindgren, Upsala 1831)—have sought to render the 
reading of the book of Job easier and more profitable by 
means of a translation, with a short introduction and occa- 
sional explanations. 

Even with all these works before us, though they are in 
part excellent and truly serviceable, it cannot be affirmed 
that the task of the exposition has been exhaustively per- 
formed, so that absolutely no plus ultra remains. To adjust 
the ideal meaning of the book according to its language, its 
bearing on the history of redemption, and its spiritual charac- 
ter,—and throughout to indicate the relation of the single parts 
to the idea which animates the whole, is, and remains, a great 
task worthy of ever-new exertion. We will try to perform it, 
without presuming that we are able to answer all the claims 
on the expositor. The right expositor of the book of Job 
must before everything else bring to it a believing appre- 
hension of the work of Christ, in order that. he may be able 
to comprehend this book from its connection with the histori- 
cal development of the plan of redemption, whose unity is 
the work of Christ. Further, he must be able to give himself 
up freely and cheerfully to the peculiar vein of this (together 
with Ecclesiastes) most bold of all Old Testament books, in 
order that he may gather from the very heart its deeply 
hidden idea. Not less must he possess historical perception, 
in order that he may be able to appreciate the relativeness 


with which, since the plan of salvation is actually and con-) 
fessedly progressive, the development of the idea of the book 


is burdened, notwithstanding its absolute truth in itself 
Then he must not only have a clear perception of the 
divinely true, but also of the beautiful in human art, in 
order to be able to appreciate the wonderful blending of the 
divine and human in the form as in the contents. Finally, 


> 


, 


44 INTRODUCTION. 


he must stand on the pinnacle of linguistic and antiquarian 
Knowledge, in order to be able to follow the lofty flight of its 
language, and become familiar with the incomparably rich 
wariety of its matter. This ideal of an expositor of the book 
“of Job we will keep in view, and seek, as near as possible, to 


attain within the limit assigned to this condensed exegetical 
handbook. | 


TRANSLATION AND EXPOSITION 
Ol THE BOOK OF JOB. 


"Ex abray raov rtEewv [rod BiBaiov] yevdpevor caQnvicwpev tiv evvosey, 
avTOU wodnyovvTos Huds woods Tiy Eorenvelev, Tov xal tov aytov 1d 
pos TOS dyavas évioxyvovtos.—OLYMPIODOROS. 





THE OPENING. 


CHAP. I.—III. 


JOB’S PIETY IN THE MIDST OF THE GREATEST 
PROSPERITY.—CHAP. I. 1—5. 


Tse book begins in prose style: as Jerome says, Prosa 
ineipit, versu labitur, pedestri sermone finitur. Prologue and 
epilogue are accordingly excepted from the poetical accen- 
tuation, and are accented according to the usual system, as 
the first word shows; for &S has, in correct editions, Tebir, 
a smaller distinctive, which does not belong to the poetical ac- 
centuation. The writer does not begin with 1, as the writers 
of the historico-prophetical books, who are conscious that 
they are relating a portion of the connection of the collective 
Israelitish history, e.g. 1 Sam. i. 1, &8°O%, but, as the writer 
of the book of Esther (ii. 5) for similar reasons, with 75 vs, 
because he is beginning a detached extra-Israelitish history. 


Ver. 1. There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name 
was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, and one 
that feared God, and eschewed evil. 


The LXX. translates, év yopa TH Adoitids; and adds at 


46 HE BOOK OF JOB. 


the close of the book, éml tots opiouw ris ’Idovpaias Kat 
"ApaBilas, therefore north-east from Idumea, towards the 
Arabian desert. There, in the Arabian desert west from 
Babylon, under the Caucabenes, according to Ptolemy (v. 
19, 2), the Aictrai (Aicetrat), i.e. the Uzzites, dwelt. This 
determination of the position of Uz is the most to be relied on. 
It tends indirectly to confirm this, that Odcos, in Jos. Ant. i. 
6, 4, is described as founder of Trachonitis and Damascus ; 
that the Jakut Hamawi and Moslem tradition generally (as 
recently Fries, Stud. u. Krit. 1854, ii.) mention the Kast 
Haran fertile tract of country north-west of Téma and Bazan, 
el-Bethenije, the district of Damascus in which Job dwelt ;* 
that the Syrian tradition also transfers the dwelling-place of 
Job to Hauran, where, in the district of Damascus, a monas- 
tery to his honour is called Dair Ejjub (vid. Volek, Calenda- 
rium Syriacum, p. 29). All these accounts agree that Uz is 
not to be sought in Idumza proper (Gebal). And the early 
historical genealogies (Gen. x. 23, xxii. 21, xxxvi. 28) are not 
unfavourable to this, since they place Uz in relation to Seir- 
Edom on the one hand, and on the other to Aram: the 
perplexing double occurrence of such names as Téma and 
Dama, both in Idumzea and East Hauran, perhaps just results 
from the mixing of the different tribes through migration. 
But at all events, though Uz did not lie in Gebél, yet both 
from Lam. iv. 21, and on account of the reference in the 
book of Job itself to the Horites (ch. xxiv. 30), a geogra- 
phical connection between Idumea and Ausitis is to be held; 
and from Jer. xxv. 20 one is warranted in supposing, that 
yy, with which the Arabic name of Esau, (jac (Vess!l), 
perhaps not accidentally accords, was the collective name of 
the northern part of the Arabian desert, extending north-east 

1 Vid. Abulfeda, Historia anteislam. p. 26 (cf. 207 f.), where it says, 


‘The whole of Bethenije, a part of the province of Damascus, belonged 
to Job as his possession.” 


CHAP. I. 1. 47 


from Idumeea towards Syria. Here, where the aborigines 
of Seir were driven back by the Aramaic immigrants, and 
to where in later times the territory of Edom extended, 
dwelt Job. His name is not symbolic with reference to the 
following history. It has been said, 31*§ signifies one hos- 
tilely treated, by Satan namely.’ But the following reasons 
are against it: (1) that none of the other names which occur 
in the book are symbolically connected with the history; (2) 
that the form Sip has never a properly passive signification, but 
either active, as 115‘, reprover (as parallel form with Sp), or 
neuter, as 7i5', born, 113%, drunken, also occasionally infinitive 
(vid. Fiirst, Concord. p. 1349 s.), so that it may be more 
correct, with Ewald, after the Arabic (38, cognate with a’, 
perhaps also sia), to explain the “one going of himself.” 
Similar in sound are, 3), the name of one of the sons of Issachar 
(Gen. xlvi. 13); the name of the Idumean king, 231, Gen. 
xxxvi. 83 (which the LXX., Aristeas, Jul. Africanus,’ 
combine with Job); and the name of the king of Mauritania, 
Juba, which in Greek is written ’To8as (Didymus Chalcenter. 
ed. Schmidt, p. 305): perhaps all these names belong to the 
root 3’, to shout with joy. The LXX. writes "Ié8 with 
lenis ; elsewhere the x at the beginning is rendered by asper, 
e.g. “ABpadp, ‘Hdias. Luther writes Hiob; he has pre- 
ferred the latter mode, that it may not be read Job with 
consonantal Jod, when it should be Iob, as e.g. it is read by 
the English. It had been more correctly Ijob, but Luther 
wished to keep to the customary form of the name so far as 
he could ; so we, by writing Iob with vowel I, do not wish to 


1 Geiger (DMZ, 1858, S. 542 sq.) conjectures that, Sir. xlix.9 (xal yap 
suvijodn trav éxOpav ev duBpw), trav éxdoay is a false translation of 3))N. 
Renan assents ; but ray éyépay suits there excellently, and Job would be 
unnaturally dragged in. 

2 Vid. Routh, Reliquie ii. 154.sq.: "Ex rod "Hoad drroe re rorrol xeel 
Payoujr yevudiret, AD ob Zaped, && ov dG, os xard ovyxopnow beod dad 
Ose Bérou éxeipaadn xal évinnos tov weipalovra. 


48 . THE BOOK OF JOB. 


deviate too much from the mode of writing and pronuncia- 
tion customary since Luther." 

The writer intentionally uses four synonyms together, in 
order to describe as strongly as possible Job’s piety, the 
reality and purity of which is the fundamental assumption of 
the history. Of, with the whole heart disposed towards God 
and what is good, and also well-disposed toward mankind ; 
Ww, in thought and action without deviation conformed to 
that which is right; D7 8, fearing God, and consequently 
being actuated by the fear of God, which is the beginning 
(i.e. principle) of wisdom; 979d, keeping aloof from evil, 
which is opposed to God. The first predicate recalls Gen. 
xxv. 27, the fourth the proverbial Psalms (xxxiy. 15, xxxvii. 
27) and Prov. xiv. 16. This mingling of expressions from 
Genesis and Proverbs is characteristic. First now, after the 
history has been begun in preett., aorr. follow. 


Vers. 2 sq. And there were born unto him seven sons and three 
daughters. His substance also was seven thousand sheep, 
and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, 
and five hundred she-asses, and servants in great num- 
ber; so that this man was the greatest.of all the men of 
the east. 


It is a large, princely household. The numbers are large, 
but must not on that account be considered an invention. 
The four animals named include both kinds. With the 
doubled DON corresponds the also constructive ni’, the Tere 
of which is never shortened, though in the singular one says 
ns, from 89, The aorists, especially of the verb 14 (77), 


1 On the authorizing of the writing Iob, more exactly Iob, also Ijob 
(not, however, Ijjob, which does not correspond to the real pronuncia- 
tion, which softens ij into i, and uw into 0), vid. Fleischer’s Bettrdge 
zur arab. Sprachkunde (Abh. der stichs. Gesellschaft d. Wissenschaften, 
1863), 8. 187 f. [The usual English form Job is adopted here, thongh 
Dr Delitzsch writes Iob in the original work.—TR.] 


CHAP. I. 4, 5. | 49 


which, according to its root, signifies not so much esse as fieri, 
ewistere, are intended to place us at once in the midst of his 
prosperity. Ex tis, says Leo Africanus in reference to flocks, 
Arabes suas divitias ac possessiones estimant. ‘In fine, Job was 
without his equal among the D7p ‘22. So the tribes are called 
which extend from Arabia Deserta, lying to the east of 
Palestine, northwards to the countries on the Euphrates, and 
south over Arabia Petra and Felix. The wisdom of these 
tribes, treasured up in proverbs, songs, and traditions, is men- 
tioned in 1 Kings v. 10, side by side with the wisdom of the 
Egyptians. The writer now takes a very characteristic feature 
from the life of Job, to show that, even in the height of pro- 
sperity, he preserved and manifested the piety affirmed of him. 


Vers. 4 sq. And his sons went and feasted in the house 
of him whose day it was, and sent and.called for their 
sisters to eat and drink with them. And tt happened, when 
the days of their feasting were gone about, that Job sent 
and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and 
offered burnt-offerings according to the number of them 
all: for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, 
and dismissed God from their hearts. Thus did Job 
continually. 


The subordinate facts precede, ver. 4, in perf’. ; the chief 
fact follows, ver. 5, in fut. consec. The perf’. describe, 
according to Ges. § 126, 3, that which has happened re- 
peatedly in the past, as eg. Ruth iv. 7; the fut. consec. the 
customary act of Job, in conjunction with this occurrence. 
The consecutio temporum is exactly like 1 Sam. i. 3 sq. 

It is questionable whether &*8 M2 is a distinct adverbial ex- 
pression, in domu uniuscujusque, and yor also distinct, die ejus 
(Hirz. and others) ; or whether the three words are only one 
adverbial expression, in domo ejus cujus dies erat, which latter 
we prefer. At all events, ini’ here, in this connection; is not, 

WORT) D 


50 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


with Hahn, Schlottm., and others, to be understood of the 
birthday, as ch. iii. 1. The text, understood simply as it 
stands, speaks of a weekly round (Oehler and others). The 
seven sons took it in turn to dine with one another the week 
round, and did not forget their sisters in the loneliness of 
the parental home, but added them to their number. There 
existed among them a family peace and union which had 
been uninterruptedly cherished; but early on the morning 
of every eighth day, Job instituted a solemn service for his 
family, and offered sacrifices for his ten children, that they 
might obtain forgiveness for any sins of frivolity into which 
they might have fallen in the midst of the mirth of their ' 
family gatherings. 

The writer might have represented this celebration on the 
evening of every seventh day, but he avoids even the slightest 
reference to anything Israelitish: for there is no mention 
in Scripture of any celebration of the Sabbath before the 
time of Israel. The sacred observance of the Sabbath, 
which was consecrated by God the Creator, was first ex- 
_ pressly enjoined by the Sinaitic Thora. Here the family 
celebration falls on the morning of the Sunday,—a remark- 
able prelude to the New Testament celebration of Sunday in 
the age before the giving of the law, which is a type of the 
New Testament time after the law. The fact that Job, as 
father of the family, is the Cohen of his house,—a right of 
priesthood which the fathers of Israel exercised at the first 
passover (o¥0 MDD), and from which a relic is still retained 
in the annual celebration of the passover (ny1" MD5),—is 
also characteristic of the age prior to the law. The stand- 
point of this age is also further faithfully preserved in this 
particular, that nd here, as also ch. xlii. 8, appears distinctly 
as an expiatory offering; whilst in the Mosaic ritual, although 
it still indeed serves 1925 (Lev. i. 4), as does every blood- 
offering, the idea of expiation as its peculiar intention is 


CHAP. I. 4, 5. 51 


transferred to nxon and ovis. Neither of these forms of 
expiatory offering is here mentioned. The blood-offering 
still bears its most general generic name, noiy, which it re- 
ceived after the flood. This name indicates that the offering 
is one which, being consumed by fire, is designed to ascend 
in flames and smoke. noyn refers not so much to bringing 
it up to the raised altar, as to causing it to rise in flame 
and smoke, causing it to ascend to God, who is above. 
wap is the outward cleansing and the spiritual preparation 
for the celebration of the sacred festival, as Ex. xix. 14. It 
is scarcely necessary to remark, that the masculine suffixes 
refer also to the daughters. There were ten whole sacrifices 
offered by Job on each opening day of the weekly round, at 
the dawn of the Sunday ; and one has therefore to imagine 
this round of entertainment as beginning with the first-born 
on the first day of the week. “Perhaps,” says Job, “my 
children have sinned, and bidden farewell to God in their 
hearts.” Undoubtedly, 372 signifies elsewhere (1 Kings 
xxi. 10; Ps. x. 3), according to a so-called dvtiuppactiny 
evgnuia, maledicere. This signification also suits ch. ii. 5, 
but does not at all suit ch. ii. 9. This latter passage sup- 
ports the signification valedicere, which arises from the cus- 
tom of pronouncing a benediction or benedictory salutation 
at parting (e.g. Gen. xlvii. 10). Job is afraid lest his chil- 
dren may have become somewhat unmindful of God during 
their mirthful gatherings. In Job’s family, therefore, there 
was an earnest desire for sanctification, which was far from 
being satisfied with mere outward propriety of conduct. 
Sacrifice (which is as old as the sin of mankind) was to Job 
a means of grace, by which he cleansed himself and his 
family every week from inward blemish. The /futt. consec. 
are followed by perff., which are governed by them. 33, 
however, is followed by the fut., because in historical con- 
nection (cf. on the other hand, Num. viii. 26), in the signifi- 


52 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


cation, faciebat h.e. facere solebat (Ges. § 127, 4, d). Thus 
Job did every day, i.e. continually. As head of the family, 
he faithfully discharged his priestly vocation, which per- 
mitted him to offer sacrifice as an early Gentile servant of 
- God. The writer has now made us acquainted with the 
chief person of the history which he is about to record, and 
in ver. 6 begins the history itself. 


JEHOVAH'S DETERMINATION TO TRY JOB.—CHAP. i. 6-12. 


He transfers us from earth to heaven, where everything 
that is done on earth has its unseen roots, its final cause. 


Ver.:6. Now there was a day when the sons of God came 
to present themselves before Jehovah; and Satan came 
also in the midst of them. 


The translation “it happened on a day”? is rejected in Ges. 
§ 109, rem. 1, c.4 The article, it is there said, refers to what 
precedes—the day, at the time; but this favourite mode of 
expression is found at the beginning of a narrative, even 
when it cannot be considered to have any reference to what 
has preceded, e.g. 2 Kings iv. 18. The article is used in the 
opposite manner here, because the narrator in thought con- 
nects the day with the following occurrence; and this frees 
it from absolute indefiniteness: the western mode of expres- 
sion is different. From the writer assigning the earthly 
measure of time to the place of God and spirits, we see that 
celestial things are represented by him parabolically. But the 
assumptions on which he proceeds are everywhere recognised 
in Scripture ; for (1.) DONT ‘22, as the name of the celestial — 
spirits, is also found out of the book of Job (Gen. vi. 2; cf. 

1 The vaferences to Gesenius’ Hebrew Grammar have been carefully 


verified according to the English edition published by Bagster and Sons, 
London.—Tr. ' / 


CHAP. I. 6. ——«#BS 


Ps. xxix. 1, Ixxxix. 7, Dan. iii. 25). They are so called, as 
beings in the likeness of God, which came forth from God in 
the earliest beginning of creation, before this material world 
and man came into existence (ch. xxxviii. 4-7): the desig- 
nation ‘22 points to the particular manner of their creation. 
_(2.) Further, it is the teaching of Scripture, that these are the 
nearest attendants upon God, the nearest created glory, with 
which He has surrounded himself in His eternal glory, and 
that He uses them as the immediate instruments of His cos- 
mical rule. This representation underlies Gen. i. 26, which/ 
Philo correctly explains, Svadéyeras 6 TOV Od@v TaTHp Tais 
éavtov Suvdpecwv; and in Ps. Ixxxix. 6-8, a psalm which is — 
closely allied to the book of Job, onP and iD, of the holy 
ones, is just the assembly of the heavenly spirits, from which, 
as dryryenoe of God, they go forth into the universe and among 
men. (3.) It is also further the teaching of Scripture, that 
one of these spirits has withdrawn himself from the love of 
God, has reversed the truth of his bright existence, and in 
sullen ardent self-love is become the enemy of God, and 
everything godlike in the creature. This spirit is called, in 
reference to God and the creature, }0W1, from the verb jbY, 
to come in the way, oppose, treat with enmity,—a name which 
occurs first here, and except here occurs only in Zech. iii. and 
1 Chron. xxi.1. Since the Chokma turned, with a decided pre-_/ 
ference, to the earliest records of the world and mankind before 

_ the rise of nationalities, it- must have known the existence 
of this God-opposing spirit from Gen. ii. sq. The frequent 
occurrence of the tree of life and the way of life in the Salo- 
monic Proverbs, shows how earnestly the research of that time 
was engaged with the history of Paradise: so that it cannot 
be surprising that it coined the name own for that evil spirit. 
(4.) Finally, it agrees with 1 Kings xxii. 19-22, Zech. iii., on > 
the one hand, and Apoc. xii. on the other, that Satan here 
appears still among the good spirits, resembling Judas Iscariot 


54 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


among the disciples until his treachery was revealed. The 
work of redemption, about which his enmity to God overdid 

itself, and by which his damnation is perfected, is during the 
whole course of the Old Testament history incomplete. 

- Herder, Eichhorn, Lutz, Ewald, and Umbreit, see in this 
distinct placing of Satan in relation to the Deity and good 
spirits nothing but a change of representations arising from 
foreign influences; but if Jesus Christ is really the vanquisher 
of Satan, as He himself says, the realm of spirits must have 
a history, which is divided into two eras by this triumph. 
Moreover, both the Old and New Testaments agree herein, 
that Satan is God’s adversary, and consequently altogether — 
evil, and must notwithstanding serve God, since He makes even 
evil minister to His purpose of salvation, and the working out 
of His plan in the government of the world. This is the chief 

) thought which underlies the further progress of the scene. 
The earthly elements of time, space, and dialogue, belong to 
the poetic drapery. 

Instead of dy ayn, "2B? is used elsewhere (Prov. xxii. 29) : 
by isa usage of language derived from the optical illusion of 
the one who is in the foreground seeming to surpass the one 
in the background. It is an assembly day in heaven. All 
the spirits present themselves to-render their account, and 
expecting to receive commands; and the following dialogue 
ensues between Jehovah and Satan :— 


Ver. 7. Then Jehovah said to Satan, Whence comest thou? 
Satan answered Jehovah, and said, From going to and fro 
in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. 


The fut. follows P82 in the signification of the pres., 
Whence comest thou? the perf. would signify, Whence hast 
thou come? (Ges. § 127, 2.) Cocceius subtly observes: WVota- 
tur Satanas velut Deo nescio h.e. non adprobante res suas agere. 

‘ It is implied in the question that his business is selfish, arbi- 


nN | \p > : hye _* 
La, \ a —oern agit 
; 4 x ’ 
yas al 2? — 6 ners sid “ 
Pa wo r- 
CHAP. I. 8-11. 55 


trary, and has no connection with God. In his answer, 


a Dw, as 2 Sam. xxiv. 2, signifies rapid passing from one end 


to the other ; "PAN, an observant roaming forth. Peter also 5 
says of Satan, wepurate? (1 Pet. v. 8 sq.).' . He answers at _, 


first generally, as expecting a-more particular question, which 
Jehovah now puts to him. 


Ver. 8: Then said Jehovah to Satan, Hast thou considered 


_my servant Job? for there ts none like him in the earth, 
a perfect and an upright man, one that pee eth God and 
escheweth evil. 


By *2 Jehovah gives the reason of His inquiry. Had 
Satan been observant of Job, even he must have confessed 
that there was on the earth real genuine piety. 2 DY, ani- 
mum advertere (for 2 is animus, VD) anima), is construed 
with by, of the object on which the attention falls, and on 
which it fixes itself, or ON, of the object towards which it is 


directed (ch. ii.3). The repetition of the four predicates used Ss 


of Job (ver. 1) in the mouth of Jehovah (though without 


the waw combining both pairs there) is a skilful touch of a 


the poet. Further on, the narrative is also interwoven with 
poetic repetitions (as eg. ch. xxxiv. and Gen. i.), to give it 
architectural symmetry, and to strengthen the meaning and 
impression of what is said. Jehovah triumphantly displays 
His servant, the incomparable one, in opposition to Satan ; 
but this does not disconcert him: he knows how, as on all 
occasions, so here also, to deny what Jehovah affirms. 


Vers. 9-11. Then Satan answered Jehovah, and said, Doth 
Job fear God for nought? Hast Thou not made a hedge 
about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath 
on every side? Hast Thou not blessed the work of his 


1 Among the Arabs the devil is called 2 shed | el-hharith—the active, 
busy, industrious one. 


56 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


hands, and his substance is inereased in the land? But 
put forth Thine hand now, and touch all that he hath: 
truly he will renounce Thee to Thy face. = 


-~ Satan is, according to the Apoc. xii. 10, the xatzjyap who 
accuses the servants of God day and night before God. It 
is a fact respecting the invisible world, though expressed in 
the language and imagery of this world. So long as he is 
not finally vanquished and condemned, he has access to God, 
and thinks to justify himself by denying the truth of the exist- 
ence and the possibility of the continuance of all piety. God 
permits it; for since everything happening to the creature is 
placed under the law of free development, evil in the world 
of spirits is also free to maintain and expand itself, until a 
spiritual power comes forward against it, by which the 
hitherto wavering conflict between the principles of good and_ 

\ evil is decided. This is the truth contained in the poetic 

\ description of the heavenly scene, sadly mistaken by Umbreit 
in his Essay on Sin, 1853, in which he explains Satan, ac- 
cording to Ps. cix. 6, as a creation of our author’s fancy. The 
paucity of the declarations respecting Satan in the Old Tes- 
tament has misled him. And indeed the historical advance 
from the Old Testament to the New, though in-itself well 
authorized, has in many ways of late induced to the levelling 
of the heights and depths of the New Testament. Formerly 
Umbreit was of the opinion, as many are still, that the idea 
of Satan is derived from Persia ; but between Ahriman (An- 
gramainyus) and Satan there is no striking resemblance ;' 
whereas Diestel, in his Abh. tiber Set-Typhon, Asasel und 
Satan, Stud. u. Krit., 1860, 2, cannot indeed recognise any 


1 Moreover, it is still questionable whether the form of the ancient 
doctrine of fire-worship among the Persians did not result from Jewish 
influences. Vid. Stuhr, Religionssysteme der heidn. Volker des Orients, 8. 
373-75. 


CHAP. I. 9-11. 57 


connection between Sty and the Satan of the book of Job, 
but maintains a more complete harmony in all substantial 
marks between the latter and the Egyptian Typhon, and 
infers that “to Satan is therefore to be denied a purely 
Israelitish originality, the natural outgrowth of the Hebrew 
mind. It is indeed no special honour for Israel to be able to 
call him their own. He never has taken firm hold on the 


Hebrew consciousness.” But how should it be no honour for | 


Israel, the people to whom the revelation of redemption was 
made, and in whose history the plan of redemption was deve- 
loped, to have traced the poisonous stream of evil up to the 
- fountain of its first free beginning in the spiritual world, and 
to have more than superficially understood the history of the 
fall of mankind by sin, which points to a disguised super- 
human power, opposed to the divine will? This perception 
undoubtedly only begins gradually to dawn in the Old Testa- 
ment; but in the New Testament, the abyss of evil is fully 
disclosed, and Satan has so far a hold on the consciousness 
of Jesus, that He regards His life’s vocation as a conflict 
with Satan. And the Protevangelium is deciphered in facts, 
when the promised seed of the woman crushed the serpent’s 


head, but at the same time suffered the bruising of its own 


heel. 

The view (e.g. Lutz in his Biblische Dogmatik) that Satan 
as he is represented in the book of Job is not the later evil 
spirit, is to be rejected : he appears here only first, say Herder 
and Hichhorn, as impartial executor of judgment, and overseer 
of morality, commissioned by God. But he denies'what God 
affirms, acknowledges no love towards God in the world 
which is not rooted in self-love, and is determined to destroy 
this love as a mere semblance. Where piety is dulled, he 
rejoices in its obscurity; where it is not, he dims its lustre 
by reflecting his own egotistical nature therein. Thus it is 
in Zech. iii., and so here. Genuine love loves God O3n 


i 


i 
f _— 
. 


\ 


* 


{ 


banc 


58 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


(adverb from jf, like gratis from gratia): it loves Him for 
His own sake; it is a relation of person to person, without 
any actual stipulations and claim. But Job doés not thus 
fear God; 87 is here pret., whereas in vers. 1 and 8 it is the 
adjective. God has indeed hitherto screened him from all 
evil; m2” from sw, sepire, and 7Y2 (7¥2) composed of 3 and 
TY, in the primary signification circum, since TY expresses that 
the one joins itself to the other, and 2 that it covers it, or 
covers itself with it. By the addition of 220%, the idea of the 
triple WY3 is still strengthened. “¥yo, LXX., Vulg., have 
translated by the plural, which is not false according to the 
thought; for O° nvyr is, especially in Deuteronomy, a favourite 
collective expression for human enterprise.. /18, a word, with 
the Sanskrito-Sem. frangere, related to P18, signifying to 
break through the, bounds, multiply and increase one’s self 
unboundedly (Gen. xxx. 30, and freq.). The particle Doi, 
proper only to the oldest and classic period, and very com- 
monly used in the first four books of the Pentateuch, — 
in our book, generally DON}, is an emphatic “ nevertheless ;” 
Lat. (suited to this passage at least) verwm enim vero. NO-DN 
is either, as frequently, a shortened formula of asseveration : 
May such and such happen to me if he do not, etc., = for- 
sooth he will (LX X. 4 pv); or it is half a question: At- 
tempt only this and this, whether he will not deny thee, = 

~ annon, as ch. xvii. 2, xxii. 20. The first perhaps suits the 
charactér of Satan better: he affirms that God is mistaken. 
312 signifies here also, valedicere: he will say farewell to thee, 
and indeed PIB Y (as Isa. lxv. 3), meeting thee arrogantly 
and shamelessly: it signifies, properly, upon thy counte- 
nance, i.e. say it to thee, to the very face, that he will have 
nothing more to do with thee (comp. on ch. ii.5). In order _ 
now that the truth of His testimony to Job’s piety, an and this 
piety itself, may be tried, Jehovah surrenders all Job’s pos- 
sessions, all that is his, except himself, to Satan. 


Roe. 


CHAP. I. 12. 59 


Ver. 12. Then Jehovah said to Satan, Behold, all that he 
hath is in thy hand; only upon himself put not forth 
thy hand. And Satan went forth ee the presence of 
Jehovah. 


Notice well: The divine permission appears at the same \ 
time as a divine command, for in general there is not a per- 
mission by which God remains purely passive; wherefore 
God is even called in Scripture creator mali (the evil act as 
such only excepted), Isa. xlv. 7. Further, the divine arrange- 
ment has pot its foundation in the sin which still clings yo 


ee en vee 


assumed ‘not. only of, ‘all the the pletion meee but even n of all 
the righteousness, of Adam’ s race. . Thirdly, the permission 
proceeds, « on the contrary, from God’s purpose to maintain, 
in opposition to ‘Satan, the righteousness which, in spite of 
the universal liability to sin, is peculiar to Job; and if we 
place this single instance in historical connection with the 
development of the plan of redemption, it is a part of the 
conflict of the woman’s seed with the serpent, and of the 
gradual degradation of Satan to the lake of fire. After 
Jehovah’s permission, Satan retires forthwith. The licence 
is welcome to him, for he delights in the work of destruction. 
And he hopes to conquer. For after he has experienced the 
unlimited power of evil over himself, he has lost all faith 
in the power of good, and is indeed become himself the self- vA 
deceived father of lies. 


THE FOUR MESSENGERS OF MISFORTUNE.—CHAP. I. 13 SQQ. 


Satan now accomplishes to the utmost of his power, by re- 
peated blows, that which Jehovah had granted to him: first 
on Job’s oxen, and asses, and herdsmen. | 


60 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Vers. 13-15. And it came to pass one day, when his sons and 
his daughters were eating and drinking wine in the house 
of their eldest brother, that a messenger came to Job, and — 
said, The oxen were ploughing, and the asses feeding be- 
side them, when the Sabeans fell upon them, and carried 
them away, and smote the servants with the edge of the 
sword ; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 


The principal clause, 017 ‘3, in which the art. of 017 has 
no more reference to anything preceding than in ver. 6, is 
immediately followed by an adverbial clause, which may be ex- _ 
pressed by participles, Lat. filits ejus filiabusque convivantibus. 
The details which follow are important. Job had celebrated 

( the usual weekly worship early in the morning with his chil- 
dren, and knew that they were met together in the house of | 
his eldest son, with whom the order of mutual entertainment 
came round again, when the messengers of misfortune began 
to break in upon him: it is therefore on the very day when, by 
reason of the sacrifice offered, he was quite sure of Jehovah’s 

\ favour. The participial construction, the oxen were plough- 
ing (vid. Ges. § 134, 2, c), describes the condition which was 
disturbed by the calamity that befell them. The verb 
stands here because the clause is a principal one, not as ver. - 
13, adverbial. oy-OY, properly “at hand,” losing its radical 
meaning, signifies (as Judg. xi. 26) “close by.” The inter- 
pretation “in their places,” after Num. ii. 17, is untenable, 
as this signification of 7? is only supported in the sing. Nav 
is construed as fem., since the name of the country is used 
as the name of the people. In Genesis three races of this — 
name are mentioned: Cushite (x. 7), Joktanish (x. 28), and 
Abrahamic (xxv. 3). Here the nomadic portion of this mixed 
race in North Arabia from the Persian Gulf to Idumza is 
intended. Luther, for the sake of clearness, translates here, 
and 1 Kings x. 1, Arabia. In noon), the waw, as is seen 


- CHAP. I. 16, 17. 61 
from the Kametz, is waw convertens, and the paragogic ah,~ 
which otherwise indicates the cohortative, is either without 
significance, or simply adds intensity to the verbal idea: I 
have saved myself with great difficulty. For this common 
form of the 1 fut. consec., occurring four times in the Penta- 

- teuch, vid. Ges. § 49, 2. The clause 7? wane is objective: in >) 
order that—so it was intended: by the calamity—I might tell 
thee. ne 


Tur SECOND MessencER: Ver. 16. While he was. yet 
speaking, another came, and said, The fire of God fell 
from heaven, and set fire to the sheep and servants, and 
consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 


The fire of God, which descends, is not a suitable expression 
for Samim (Schlottm.), that wind of the desert which often so 
suddenly destroys man and beast, although indeed it: is indi- 
cated by certain atmospheric phenomena, appearing first of a 
yellow colour, which changes to a leaden hue and spreads 
through the atmosphere, so that the sun when at the brightest 
becomes a dark red. The writer, also, can scarcely have in- ™ 
tended lightning (Rosenm., Hirz., Hahn), but rain of fire or 
brimstone, as with Sodom and Gomorrha, and as 1 Kings 
xvill. 38, 2 Kings i. 12. 


Tue Turrp Messencer: Ver.17. While he was yet speak- 
ing, there came also another, and said, The Chaldeans 
ranged themselves in three bands, and rushed upon the 
camels, and carried them away, and slew the servants with 
the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to 
tell thee. 


Without any authority, Ewald sees in this mention of the 
Chaldeans an indication of the composition of the book in the 
seventh century B.c., when the Chaldeans under Nabopolassar 
began to inherit the Assyrian power. Following Ewald, Renan 


62 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


observes that the Chaldeans first appear as such marauders 
about the time of Uzziah. But in Genesis we find mention 
of early Semitic Chaldeans among the mountain ranges lying 
to the north of Assyria and Mesopotamia; and later, Nahor 
Chaldeans of Mesopotamia, whose existence is tra¢ed back to 
the patriarchal times (vid. Genesis, p. 422'), and who were 
powerful enough at any time to make a raid into Idumza. 
To make an attack divided into several DW), heads, multi- 
tudes, bands (two—Gen. xiv. 15 ;. three—Judg. vii. 16, 1 
Sam. xi. 11; or four—Judg. ix. 34), is an ancient military” 
stratagem; and WB, e.g. Judg. ix. 33, is the proper word 
for attacks of such bands, either for plunder or revenge. In 
a5, at the edge of the sword, a [epée, 4 is like the usual 
acc. of manner. | 


Toe FourtH MeEssENGER: Ver. 18. While he was yet 
speaking, another also came, and said, Thy sons and thy 
daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest 
brother's house: and, behold, a great wind came across 
from the desert, and smote the four corners of the house, 
and it fell upon the young people, and they are dead ; and 
I only am escaped alone to tell thee. | 


Instead of siy, we have 72 here: the former denotes con- 
tinuity in time, the latter continuity in space, and they may 
be interchanged. ‘Y in the signif. “‘while” is here construed 
with the participle, as Neh. vii. 3; comp. other construc- 
tions, ch. viii. 21, 1 Sam. xiv. 19, Jonah iv. 2. “From the 
other side of the desert” is equivalent to, from its farthest 
end. O30 are the youthful sons and daughters of Job, 
according to the epicene use of %Y) in the Pentateuch (youths 
and maidens). In one day Job is now bereft of everything 
which he accounted the gift of Jehovah,—his herds, and with 


This reference is to Delitzsch’s Commentar iiber die Genesis, 1860, 
a separate work from the Keil and Delitzsch series. —Tr. 


CHAP. I. 18, 19. 63 


these his servants, which he not only prizes as property, but 
for whom he has also a tender heart (ch. xxxi.) ; last of all, 
even his dearest ones, his children. Satan has summoned the 
elements and men for the destruction of Job’s possessions by 
repeated strokes. That men and nations can be excited by 
- Satan to hostile enterprises, is nothing surprising (cf. Apoc. 
xx. 8); but here, even the fire of God and the hurricane are 
attributed to him. Is this poetry or truth? Luther, in the 
Larger Catechism, question iv., says the same: “The devil 


causes strife, murder, rebellion, and war, also thunder and , 


lightning, and hail, to destroy corn and cattle, to poison the 


atmosphere,” etc.,—a passage of our creed often ridiculed by * 
rationalism ; but it is correct if understood in accordance 


with Scripture, and not superstitiously. As among men, so 
in nature, since the Fall two different powers of divine anger 
and divine love are in operation : the mingling of these is the 
essence of the present Kosmos. Everything destructive to 
nature, and everything arising therefrom which is dangerous 
and fatal to the life of man, is the outward manifestation of 
the power of anger. In this power Satan has fortified him- 
self ; and this, which underlies the whole course of nature, he 
is able to make use of, so far as God may permit it as being 
subservient to His chief design (comp. Apoc. xiii. 13 with 2 
Thess. ii. 9). He has no creative power. Fire and storm, 
by means of which he works, are of God; but he is allowed to 


excite these forces to hostility against man, just as he himself — 


. is become an instrument of evil. It is similar with human 


demonocracy, whose very being consists in placing itself 
en rapport with the hidden powers of nature. Satan is the | 
great juggler, and has already manifested himself as such, | 


even in paradise and in the temptation of Jesus Christ. There 
is in nature, as among men, an entanglement of contrary 
forces which he knows how to unloose, because it is the sphere 
of his special dominion ; for the whole course of nature, in the 


64 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


change of its phenomena, is subject not only to abstract laws, 
| but also to concrete supernatural powers, both bad and good. 


Tae Conpuct oF Jos: Vers. 20 sq. Then Job arose, and 
rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon 
the ground, and worshipped, and said, Naked came I out 
of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither : 
Jehovah gave, and Jehovah hath taken away ; blessed be 
the name of Jehovah. 


(Ve The first three messengers Job has heard, sitting, and in 
silence ; but at the news of the death of his children, brought 
by the fourth, he can no longer overcome his grief. The 
intensity of his feeling is indicated by rising up (cf. Jonah iii. 
6); his torn heart, by the rending of his mantle ; the conscious 
loss of his dearest ones, by cutting off the hair of his head. He 
does not, however, act like one in despair, but, humbling him- 
self under the mighty hand of God, falls to the ground and 
prostrates himself, ¢.e. worshipping God, so that his face touches 

\the earth. MGAWN, se prosternere, this is the gesture of adora- 
tion, wpookivynors.' “NS is defectively written, as Num. xi. 11; 
cf. infra, ch. xxxii. 18. The occurrence of 1¥ here is remark- 
able, and may have given rise to the question of Nicodemus, 
John iii. 4: pt Sdvatas dvOpwros eis THY Koay THs wnTpos 
avtov Sevtepov eiceNOciv. The writer of Ecclesiastes (ch. v. 

/ 14) has left out this difficult now. It means either being put 
back into a state of unconsciousness and seclusion from the 
light and turmoil of this world, similar to his former state 
in his mother’s womb, which Hupfeld, in his Commentatio 
in quosdam Iobeidos locos, 1858, favours; or, since the idea 
of "OX {2 may be extended, return to the bosom of mother 
earth (Ew., Hirz., Schlottm., et al.), so that Mow is not so 
much retrospective as rather prospective with reference. to 


1 Vid. Holemann’s Abh. iiber die biblische Gestaltung der Anbetung, in 
his Bibelstudien, Abth. 1 (1859). 


CHAP. I. 20, 21. 65 


the grave (Bottch.), which we prefer; for as the mother’s 
bosom can be compared to the bosom of the earth (Ps. I 
exxxix. 15), because it is of the earth, and recalls the original | 
forming of man from the earth, so the bosom of the earth 

is compared to the mother’s, Sir. xl. 1: ag’ jyépas é€d8ou ex AVE 
yaoTpos wyTpos ws tjuépas éritadijs cis untépa rdvrov. The 
writer here intentionally makes Job call God mm. In the 
dialogue portion, the name Mn occurs only once in the mouth 

of Job (ch. xii. 9); most frequently the speakers use mbx 
and Ww. This use of the names of God corresponds to the 
early use of the same in the Pentateuch, according to which 
‘Ww is the proper name of God in the patriarchal days, and 
mn in the later days, to which they were preparatory. The 
traditional view, that Elohim describes God according to the 
attribute of justice, Jehovah according to the attribute of 
mercy, is only in part correct; for even when the advent of 
God to judgment is announced, He is in general named 
Jehovah. Rather, DYN (plur. of mide, fear), the Revered 
One, describes God as object ; mM or i mn, on the other hand, 

as subject. DION describes His | in the falions of His glori- ~ 
- ous majesty, including also the spirits, which are round about 
Him; mm as the Absolute One. Accordingly, Job, when he ee 
says Mm, thinks of God not only as the absolute cause of 
his fate, but as the Being ordering his life according to His- 
own counsel, who is ever worthy of praise, whether in His 
infinite wisdom He gives or takes away. Job was not driven | 
from God, but praised Him in the midst of suffering, even \ 
when, to human understanding and feeling, there was only 
occasion for anguish: he destroyed the suspicion of Satan, | 
that he only feared God for the sake of His gifts, not for His } 
own sake; and remained, in the midst of a fourfold tempta- 
tion, the conqueror! Throughout the whole book he does not7 ~ 


1 In Oliver Goldsmith’s Vicar of Wakefield (vid. Jul. Hamberger, Gott 
und seine Rijhartigs S. 71), there is much that reminds one of the 


VOL. I. E 


66 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


84, : go so far as to deny God (DYN 772), and thus far he does not 
~ Whigs into any unworthy utterances concerning His rule. © 


Ver. 22. Jn all this Job sinned not, nor attributed folly to 
God. . 


In all this, 7.2. as the LXX. correctly renders it: which — 
~ thus far had befallen him; Ewald e¢ al. translate incorrectly : 
he gave God no provocation. nan signifies, according to ch. 
xxiv. 12, comp. ch. vi. 6, saltlessness and tastelessness, dealing 
devoid of meaning and purpose, and is to be translated either, 
he uttered not, non edidit, anything absurd against God, as 
Jerome translates, neque stultum quid contra Deum locutus 
\. est; or, he did not attribute folly to God: so that 5 jna are 
connected, as Ps. Ixviii. 35, Jer. xiii. 16. Since M2 by itself. 
nowhere signifies to express, we side with Hirzel and Schlottm. 
against Rodiger (in his Thes.) and Oehler, in favour of the 
ry latter. The writer hints that, later on, Job committed him- 


self by some unwise thoughts of the government of God. 
\ 


THE FIFTH AND SIXTH TEMPTATION.—CHAP. II. 1-10. 


Satan. has now exhausted his utmost power, but without — 
success. 


Ver. 1. Again there was a day when the sons of God came 
to present themselves before Jehovah, and Satan came also 
among them, to present himself before Jehovah. 


The clause expressive of the purpose of their appearing is 
here repeated in connection with Satan (comp. on the con- 
trary, ch. i. 6), for this time he appears with a most definite 


book of Job, especially the repeated misfortunes which befall the worthy 
clergyman, his submission under all, and the issue which counterbalances 
his misfortune. But what is copied from the book of Job appears to be 
only superficial, not to come from the depth of the spiritual life. 


- CHAP. IL. 2, 3. 67 


~ 


object. Jehovah addresses Satan as He had done on the 
former occasion. 


Ver. 2. And Jehovah said to Satan, Whence comest thou? 
And Satan answered Jehovah, and said, From going to 
and fro in the earth, and wandering up and down in it. 


Instead of [N, ch. i. 7, we have here the similar expres- 
sion MDS (Ges. § 150, extra). Such slight variations are 
also frequent in the repetitions in the Psalms, and we have 
had an example in ch. i. in the interchange of sip and “Y, 
After the general answer which Satan gives, Jehovah in- 
quires more particularly. 


Ver. 3. Then Jehovah said to Satan, Hast thou considered 
my servant Job? for there is none like him in the earth, 
a perfect and an upright man, fearing God and eschew- 
ng evil; and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although - 
thow hast moved.me-against him, to injure himwithout 
cause. 


m™ 


~e 


From the foregoing fact, that amidst all his sufferings >) 
hitherto Job has preserved and proved his 79" (except in the 
book of Job, only Prov. xi. 3), the fut>consec. draws the con- 

~elusion: there was no previous reason for the injury which 
Satan had urged God to decree for Job. DN does not sig- ~ 
nify, as Umbreit thinks, to lead astray, in which case it were 
an almost blasphemous anthropomorphism : it signifies inst¢- 
gare, and indeed generally, to evil, as eg. 1 Chron. xxi. 1; 
but not always, e.g. Josh. xv. 18: here it is certainly in a 
strongly anthropopathical sense of the impulse given by 
Satan to Jehovah to prove Job in so hurtful a manner. 
The writer purposely chooses these strong expressions, MDT 
and yba, Satan’s aim, since he suspected Job still, went 
beyond the limited power which was given him over Job: | 
Satan even now again denies what Jehovah affirms. cig 


68 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Vers. 4. sq. And Satan answered Jehovah, and said, Skin 
for skin, and all that man hath will he give for his life: 
stretch forth yet once Thy hand, and touch his bone, and 
his flesh, truly he will renounce Thee to Thy face. 


/ Olshausen refers NY 32 iy to Job in relation to Jeho- 
vah: So long as Thou leavest his skin untouched, he will 
also leave Thee untouched; which, though it is the devil who 

\ speaks, were nevertheless too unbecomingly expressed. Hup- 
feld understands by the skin, that skin which is here given 
for the other,—the skin of his cattle, of his servants and 
children, which Job ‘had gladly given up, that for such a 
price he might get off with his own skin sound; but Wa 
cannot be used as Beth pretii: even in Prov. vi. 26 this is 
not the case. For the same reason, we must not, with Hirz., 
Ew., and most, translate, Skin for skin = like for like, which 
Ewald bases on the strange assertion, that one skin is like 

~ another, as one dead piece is like another. The meaning of 
the words of Satan (rightly understood by Schlottm. and 
/ the Jewish expositors) is this: One gives up one’s skin to 
preserve one’s skin; one endures pain on a sickly part of the 
skin, for the sake of saving the whole skin; one holds up 
the arm, as Raschi suggests, to avert the fatal blow from the 
head. The second clause is climacteric: a man gives skin 
for skin; but for his life, his highest good, he willingly gives 
up everything, without exception, that can be given up, and 
life itself still retained. This principle derived from experi- 
ence, applied to Job, may be expressed thus: Just so, Job 
has gladly given up everything, and is content to have 
escaped with his life. pbdii, verwm enim vero, is connected 
with this suppressed because self-evident application. The 
verb 33, above, ch. i. 11, with 3, is construed here with oN, 
and expresses increased malignity: Stretch forth Thy hand 
but once to his very bones, etc. Instead of TB, ch. i. 11, 


CHAP. II. 6-8 69 


‘BON is used here with the same force: forthwith, fearlessly 
and regardlessly (comp. ch. xiii. 15; Deut. vii. 10), he will 
bid Thee farewell. 


THE GRANT OF NEW Power: Ver. 6. And Jehovah said 
to Satan, Behold, he is in thy hand; only take care of his 
life. 

Job has not forfeited his life; permission is given to place 

it in extreme peril, and nothing more, in order to see whether 
or not, in the face of death, he will deny the God who has 
decreed such heavy affliction for him. W532 does not signify 
the same as 0°47; it is the soul producing the spirit-life of 
man. We must, however, translate “life,” because we do 
not use “soul” in the sense of arvy7, anima. : 


THE WORKING OUT OF THE COMMISSION: Vers. 7 et seq. 
Then Satan went, forth from the presence of Jehovah, 
and smote Job with sore boils, from the sole of his foot to 
his croun. And he took him a potsherd to scrape him- 
self with, and sat in the midst of ashes. 


The description of this disease calls to mind Deut. xxviii. 
35 with 27, and is, according to the symptoms mentioned 
further on in the book, elephantiasis (so called because the 
limbs become jointless lumps like elephants’ legs), Arab. ~ 
eloes ‘gudhdm, Lat. lepra nodosa, the most fearful form 
of lepra, which sometimes seizes persons even of the higher 
ranks. Artapan (C. Miiller, Fragm. iii. 222) says, that an 
Egyptian king was the first man who died of elephantiasis. 
Baldwin, king of Jerusalem, was afflicted with it in a very 
dangerous form.’ The disease begins with the rising of 


1 Vid. the history in Heer, De elephantiasi Grecorum et Arabum, 
Breslau, 1842, and coloured plates in Traité de la Spédalskhed ou Ele- 
phantiasis des Grecs par Danielssen et Boeck, Paris, 1848, translated 
from the Norwegian ; and in Hecker, Elevhantiasis oder Lepra Arabica, 


70 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


tubercular boils, and at length resembles a cancer spreading 
itself over the whole body, by which the body is so affected, 
that some of the limbs fall completely away. Scraping with 
a potsherd will not only relieve the intolerable itching of the 
skin, but also remove the matter. Sitting among ashes is on 
account of the deep sorrow (comp. Jonah iii. 6) into which 
Job is brought by his heavy losses, especially the loss of his 
children. The LXX. adds that he sat on a dunghill out- 
side the city: the dunghill is taken from the passage Ps. 
exiii. 7, and the “ outside. the city” from the law of the Y7¥9, 


7 In addition to the four losses, a fifth temptation, in the form 


of a disease incurable in the eye of man, is now come upon 
Job: a natural disease, but brought on by Satan, permitted, 


> es and therefore decreed, by God. Satan does not appear again 


. " 
Ye 
a / 


throughout the whole book. Evil has not only a personal 
existence in the invisible world, but also its agentsand instru- 
ments in’ ‘this ; 5 and by these it is henceforth nist: 





- 


wy “F Inst JOB’S WIFE (who is only mentioned in one other 
f 


passage (ch. xix. 17), where Job complains that his 


4 Ww breath is offensive to her) comEs TO Him: Ver. 9. 
pp} Then his wife said to him, Dost thou still hold fast thine 


integrity ? renounce God, and die. 
/ In the LXX. the words of his wife are unskilfully ex- 


(tended. The few words as they stand are sufficiently charac- 


Lahr, 1858 (with lithographs). ‘‘ The means of cure,” says Aretiius the 
Cappadocian (vid. his writings translated by Mann, 1858, S. 221), ‘‘ must 
be more powerful than the disease, if it is to be removed. But what 
cure can be successfully applied to the fearful evil of elephantiasis? It 
is not confined to one part, either internally or externally, but takes 
possession of the entire system. It is terrible and hideous to behold, for 
it gives a man the appearance of an animal. Every one dreads to live, 


rae * and have any intercourse, with such invalids; they flee from them as 


Pat 
ys 
+ OP 
Kaw '¢ 
} 


4 4 
¥ Jf) 


w 


; “from the plague, for infection is easily communicated by the breath. 


Where, in the whole range of pharmacy, can such a powerful remedy be 
found ?” 





§ CHAP. II. 9. 71 


teristic. They are not to be explained, Call on God for the 


last time, and then die (von Gerl.) ; or, Call on Him that thou 
die (according to Ges. § 130, 2); but 712 signifies, as Job’s 
answer shows, to take leave of. She therefore counsels 
Job to do that which Satan has boasted to accomplish. And 
notwithstandin, ing, “Hengstenberg, i in his Lecture on the Book of 
Job (1860),* defends her against the too severe judgment 
of expositors. Her desperation, says he, proceeds from her 
strong love for her husband; and if she had to suffer the same 
herself, she would probably have struggled against despair. 
But love hopeth all things ; love keeps its despondency hidden 
even when it desponds; love has no such godless utterance, 
as to say, Renounce God; and none so unloving, as to say, 
Die. No, indeed! this woman is truly diaboli_a h adjutrie 
(August.); a tool of the tempter (Ebrard); impie carnis 
preco (Brentius). And though Calvin goes too far when he 
calls her not only organum Satane, but even Proserpinam et 
Furiam infernalem, the title of another Xantippe, against 
which Hengstenberg defends her, is indeed rather flattery 
than slander. Tobias’ Anna is her copy.?- What experience 
of life and insight the writer manifests in introducing Job’s 
wife as the mocking opposer of his constant piety! Job has 
lost his children, but this wife he has retained, for he needed 
not to be tried by losing her : he was proved sufficiently by 
having her. She is further on once referred to, but even 


1 Clark’s Foreign Theological Library. 

2 She says to the blind Tobias, when she is obliged to work for the 
support of the family, and does not act straightforwardly towards him : 
mov sicily ai grenmocvves cov xal oi dixccsoodvas cov, idod yrword ravte 
Meret ood, t.e. (as Sengelmann, Book of Tobit, 1857, and O. F. Fritzsche, 
Handbuch zu d. Apokr. Lief. ii. 8. 36, correctly explain) one sees from 
thy misfortunes that thy virtue is not of much avail to thee. She ap- 
pears still more like Job in the revised text: manifeste vana facta est 
spes tua et eleemosyne tue modo apparuerunt, i.e. thy benevolence has 
obviously brought us to poverty. In the text of Jerome a parallel 
between Tobias and Job precedes this utterance of Tobias’ wife. 


— 
a a cidalles 


een 


a eel 


72 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


then not to her advantage. Why, asks Chrysostom, did the 
devil leave him this wife? Because he thought her a good 
scourge, by which to plague him more acutely than by any 
_ other means. Moreover, the thought is not far distant, that 
_ God left her to him in order that when, in the glorious issue 
of his sufferings, he receives everything doubled, he might 
not have this thorn in the flesh also doubled.’ What enmity 
towards God, what uncharitableness towards her husband, is 
there in her sarcastic words, which, if they are more than 
mockery, counsel him to suicide! (EKbrard). But he repels 
\\_them in a manner becoming himself. 


Ver, 10. But he said to her, As one of the ungodly would 
speak, thou speakest. Shall we receive good from God, 


and shall we not also receive evil ? 


/ The answer of Job is strong but not harsh, for the nnsx 
(comp. 2 Sam. xiii. 18) is somewhat soothing. The translation 
“as one of the foolish women” does not correspond to the 

. Hebrew; bas is one who thinks madly and acts impiously. 
~ What follows is a double question, 03 for 037. The D3 stands 
at the beginning of the sentence, but logically belongs to the 
second part, towards which pronunciation and reading must 
hurry over the first,—a frequent occurrence after interrogative 
particles, e.g. Num. xvi. 22, Isa. v. 4b; after causal particles, 
e.g. Isa. xii. 1, Prov. i. 24; after the negative }2, Deut. viii. 
12 sqq., and often. Hupfeld renders the thought expressed in 
the double question very correctly: bonum quidem hucusque a 
Deo accepimus, malum vero jam non item accipiemus? 03 is 
found also elsewhere at the beginning of a sentence, although 
' The delicate design of the writer here must not be overlooked : it 
has something of the tragi-comic about it, and has. furnished acceptable 
material for epigrammatic writers not first from Kiistner, but from Alters 
onwards (vid. das Epigramm vom J. 1696, in Serpilius’ Personalia Tobi). _ 


Vid. a Jewish proverb relating thereto in Tendlau, Spriichw. u. Redens- 
arten deutsch-jiid. Vorzeit (1860), 8. 11. 


CHAP. IL. 10, 11. q3 


belonging to a later clause, and that indeed not always the 
one immediately following, e.g. Hos. vi. 11, Zech. ix. 11; the 
same syntax is to be found with 48, 38, and P1. bap, like MDA, 

is a word common tothe book of Job and Proverbs (xix. 20) ; 
besides these, it is found only in books written after the exile, 
and is more Aramaic than Hebraic. By this answer which | 
Job gives to his wife, he has repelled the sixth temptation. | 


For Kix: 
Ver. 100. In all this Job sinned not with his lips. a" 
The Targum adds : but in his thoughts he already cherished 


sinful words. 15a is certainly not undesignedly introduced — 
here and omitted in ch. i. 22. The temptation to murmur \ ct 
was now already at work within him, but he was its master, so | 

that no murmur escaped him. 


THE SILENT VISIT.—CHAP. II. 11 SQQ. 


After the sixth temptation there comes a seventh ; and now 
. . . y i 
the real conflict begins, through which the hero of the book | 
passes, not indeed without sinning, but still triumphantly. —/ 


a 





See ee eT 


Ver. 11. When Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that 

was come upon him, they came every one from his own 
place; Eliphaz from Teman, and Bildad from Shuach, 
and Zophar from Naama: .for they had made an ap- 
potntment to come together to go and sympathize with him, 
and comfort him. 


IEYON is, according to Gen. xxxvi., an old Idumean name 
(transposed = Phasaél in the history of the Herodeans ; ac- 
cording to Michaelis, Suppl. p. 87: cut Deus aurum est, comp. 
ch. xxii. 25), and j2° a district of Idumeza, celebrated for 
its native wisdom (Jer. xlix. 7; Bar. iii. 22 sq.). But also in 
Kast-Hauran a Témd is still found (described by Wetzstein 


Vaan 


a 


74 | THE BOOK OF JOB. 


in his Bericht aber seine Reise in den beiden Trachonen und um 
das Hauran-Gebirge, Zeitschr. fir allg. Erdkunde, 1859), and 


about fifteen miles south of Témd, a Bizdn suggestive of 


_Elihw’s surname (comp. Jer. xxv. 23). Tl’ we know only 


from Gen. xxv. as the son of Abraham and Keturah, who 
settled in the east country. Accordingly it must be a dis- 
trict of Arabia lying not very far from Idumea: it might 
be compared with trans-Hauran Schakka, though the sound, 
however, of the word makes it scarcely admissible, which is 
undoubtedly one and the same with Saxcala, east from 
Batanza, mentioned in Ptolem. v.15. 092 is a name fre- 
quent in Syria and Palestine: there is a town of the Jewish 
Shephéla (the low ground by the Mediterranean) of this name, 
Josh. xv. 41, which, however, can hardly be intended here. 
M83 is Milel, consequently third pers. with the art. instead 
of the relative pron. (as, besides here, Gen. xviii. 21, xlvi. 27), 
vid. Ges. § 109 ad init. The Niph. 1yi3 is wrongly taken by 
some expositors as the same meaning with 793, to confer with, — 
appoint a meeting: it signifies, to assemble themselves, to 
meet in an appointed place at an appointed time (Neh. vi. 2). 
oa spread among the mounted tribes of the Arabian 
desert with the rapidity of telegraphic despatches. 


Terr ARRIVAL: Ver. 12. And when they lifted up their 
eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted up their voice, 
and wept ; and they rent every one his mantle, and threw 
dust upon their heads toward heaven. 


They saw a form which seemed to be Job, but in which 
they were not able to recognise him. Then they weep and 
rend their outer garments, and catch up dust to throw up 
towards heaven (1 Sam. iv. 12), that it may fall again upon 
Their heads. The casting up of dust on high is the outward 


sign of intense suffering, and, as von Gerlach rightly remarks, 


of that which causes him to ery to heaven. 


| 


a ee 


CHAP. II. 13-III. 2. 75 


THEIR SILENCE: Ver. 13. And they sat with him upon 
the ground seven days and seven nights ;:and none spake 
a word unto him: for they saw that his pain was very 
great. | 


Ewald erroneously thinks that custom and propriety pre- 


force of the impression produced on them, and the fear of 


le 


/ scribed this seven days’ silence; it was (as Ezek. iii. 15) the eae fl* 


(P< fod 


f. Le Ee 


| annoying the sufferer. But their long silence ‘shows that fi- 8 % ta 


they had not fully realized the purpose of their visit. Their 
| | feeling i is overpowered by reflection, their sympathy by dismay. 
It is a pity that they let Job utter the first word, which they 
) might have prevented by some word of kindly solace; for, 
_ becoming first fully conscious of the difference between his 





present and former position from their conduct, he breaks 
forth with curses. 


JOB’S DISCONSOLATE UTTERANCE OF GRIEF.—CHAP. III. 


Job’s first longer utterance now commences, by which he 
involves himself in the conflict, which is his seventh tempta- 
tion or trial. 


Vers. 1 sq. After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed his 


day. And Job spake, and said. | 


Ver. 2 consists only of three words, which are separated by 
Rebia; and os, although Milel, is vocalized W28", because 
the usual form 728", which always immediately precedes 
direct narration, is not well suited to close the verse. 2) 
signifies to begin to speak from some previous incitement, 
as the New Testament dzroxpivecOas (not always == 2'WN) is 


also sometimes used.’ The following utterance of Job, with 


1 Vid. on this use of cxroxpiveodas, Questio xxi. of the Amphilochia 
of Photius in Ang. Maji Collectio, i. 229 sq. 


je 


a ba 


f 
Py: £ santtfe 


i 
Agtl 
ah 


& 
ee 

ay 

' . & wk 


7, # 
Pil al 


po i> 
Al yy Vy, 


a 


i 


ant 


Can ese 
ants 


76 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


which the poetic accentuation begins, is analysed by modern 
critics as follows: vers. 3-10, 11-19, 20-26. Schlottmann 
calls it three strophes, Hahn three parts, in the first of which 
delirious cursing of life is expressed; in the second, eager 
longing for death; in the third, reproachful inquiry after 
the end of such a life of suffering. In reality they are not 
strophes. Nevertheless Ebrard is wrong when he maintains 
that, in general, strophe-structure is as little to be found in the 
book of Job as in Wallenstein’s Monologue. The poetical 
part of the book of Job is throughout strophic, so far as the 
nature of the drama admits it. So also even this first speech. 
Stickel has correctly traced out its divisions; but accidentally, 
for he has reckoned according to the Masoretic verses. That 
this is false, he is now fully aware; also Ewald, in his Hssay 
on Strophes in the Book of Job, is almost misled into this 
groundless reckoning of the strophes according to the Maso- 
retic verses (Jahrb. iii. S. 118, Anm. 3). The strophe-schema 
of the following speech is as follows: 8. 10. 6. 8. 6. 8. 6. 
The translation will show how unmistakeably it may be 
known. In the translation we have followed the complete 
lines of the original, and their rhythm: the iambic pentameter 
into which Ebrard, and still earlier Hosse (1849), have trans- 
lated, disguises the oriental Hebrew poetry of the book with 
its variegated richness of form in a western uniform, the ~ 
monotonous impression of which is not, as elsewhere, counter- 
balanced in the book of Job by the change of external action. 
/ After the translation we give the grammatical explanation 
. of each strophe; and at the conclusion of the speech thus 
translated and explained, its higher exposition, i.e. its artistic 
importance in the connection of the drama, and its theological 
_\ importance in relation to the Old and New Testament religion 
_ and religious life. 


CHAP. III. 3-5. 77 


3 Perish the day wherein I was born. 
And the night which said, A man-child is conceived ! 
4 Let that day become darkness ; 
Let not Eloah ask after it from above, 
And let not the light shine on tt. 
5 May darkness and the shadow of death purchase it back ; 
Let a cloud lie upon tt ; 
May that which obscures the day terrify it. a 
The curse is against the day of his birth and the night of 2 
his conception as recurring yearly, not against the actual first 4 
day (Schlottm.), to which the imprecations which follow are | 
not pertinent. Job wishes his birth-day may become dies ater, | 
swallowed up by darkness as into nothing. The elliptical ae 
relative clauses, ver. 3 (Ges. § 123, 3; cf. 127, 4, c), become 
clear from the translation. Transl. the night (no? with parag. 
He is masc.) which said, not: in which they said; the night 
alone was witness of this beginning of the development of a 
man-child, and made report of it to the High One, to whom 
it is subordinate. Day emerges from the darkness as Eloah  \ 
from above (as ch. xxxi. 2, 28), 2.e. He who reigns over the 
changes here below, asks after it; interests Himself in His own 
(v1). Job wishes his birth-day may not rejoice in this. The 
relations of this his birth-day are darkness and the shadow of 
death. These are to redeem it, as, according to the right of 
kinsmen, family property is redeemed when it has got into a 
stranger's hands. This is the meaning of Osa (LXX. éxrAdBor), 
not = °¥3, inquinent (Targ.). 122¥ is collective, as 7173, mass of 
cloud. Instead of ‘123 (the Caph of which seems pointed 
as prepos.), we must read with Ewald (§ 157, a), Olshansen, 
(§ 187, 0), and others, *1'22, after the form 20on, darkness, 
dark flashing (vid. on Ps. x. 8), 15’, tapestry, unless we are 
willing to accept a form of noun without example elsewhere. 
The word signifies an obscuring, from 13, to glow with heat, 
because the greater the glow the deeper the blackness it leaves 


\ 


78 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


behind. All that ever obscures a day is to overtake and 
render terrible that day." | 


6 That night ! let darkness seize upon it; 
Let it not rejoice among the days of the year ; 
Let it not come into the number of the month. 
7 Lo! let that night becomé barren ; 
Let no sound of gladness come to tt. 
8 Let those who curse the day curse it, 
Who are skilled in stirring up leviathan. 
9 Let the stars of its early twilight be darkened ; 
Let it long for light and there be none ; 
And let it not refresh itself with the eyelids of the dawn. 


Darkness is so to seize it, and so completely swallow it up, 
that it shall not be possible for it to pass into the light of day. 
It is not to become a day, to be reckoned as belonging to the 
days of the year and rejoice in the light thereof. 4M, for 1M, 
fut. Kal from 1n (Ex. xviii. 9), with Dagesh lene retained, 
and a helping Pathach (vid. Ges. § 75, rem. 3, d); the reverse 
of the passage Gen. xlix. 6, where 1M’, from 1M, uniat se, is 
found. It is to become barren, 3003, so that no hans being 
shall ever be conceived and born, ait greeted joyfully in it.? 
“Those who curse days” are magicians who know how to 
change days into dies infausti by their incantations. Accord- 
ing to vulgar superstition, from which the imagery of ver. 8 
is borrowed, there was a special art of exciting the dragon, 
which is the enemy of sun and moon, against them both, so 
that, by its devouring them, total darkness prevails. The 
dragon is called in Hindu rdéhw; the Chinese, and also the 

* We may compare here, and further on, Constance’s outburst of de- 
spair in King John (iii. 1 and iii. 4). Shakespeare, like Goethe, enriches 


himself from the book of Job. 
* Fries understands M237, song of the spheres (concentum coeli, ch. 


xxxviii. 37, Vulg.); but ‘this Hellenic conception is without support in 
holy Scripture. 


CHAP. IIL 10-12. 79 


natives of Algeria, even at the present day make a wild 
tumult with drums and copper vessels when an eclipse of the 
sun or moon occurs, until the dragon will release his prey.’ 
Job wishes that this monster may swallow up the sun of his 
birth-day. If the night in which he was conceived or born 
is to become day, then let the stars of its twilight (é.e. the 
stars which, as messengers of the morning, twinkle through 
the twilight of dawn) become dark. It is to remain for 
ever dark, never behold with delight the eyelids of the dawn. 
2 m9, to regale one’s self with the sight of anything, refresh 
one’s self. When the first rays of morning shoot up in the 
eastern sky, then the dawn raises its eyelids; they are in 
Sophocles’ Antigone, 103, ypucéns jpuépas Brépapor, the eye- 
lid of the golden day, and therefore of the sun, the great eye. 


10 Because it did not close the doors of my mother’s womb, _ 
Nor hid sorrow from my eyes. 
11 Why did I not die from the womb, 
Come forth from the womb and expire ? 
12 Why have the knees welcomed me? 
And why the breasts, that I should suck ? 


The whole strophe contains strong reason for his cursing 
the night of his conception or birth. It should rather have 
closed (i.e. make the womb barren, to be explained according 
to 1 Sam. i. 5, Gen. xvi. 2) the doors of his womb (i.e. the 
womb that conceived (concepit) him), and so have withdrawn 
_ the sorrow he now experiences from his unborn eyes (on the 


1 On the dragon rahu, that swallows up sun and moon, vid. Pott, in 
the Hallische Lit. Zeitschr. 1849, No. 199 ; on the custom of the Chinese, 
Kéuffer, Das chinesische Volk, 8. 123. A similar custom among the 
natives of Algeria I have read of in a newspaper (1856). Moreover, the 
clouds which conceal the sky the Indians represent asa serpent. It is 
ahi, the cloud-serpent, which Indra chases away when he divides the 
clouds with his lightning. Vid. Westergaard in Weber’s Indischer Zeitschr. 
1855, 8. 417. 


80 THE BOOK OF Jos. 


extended force of the negative, vid. Ges. § 152, 3). Then 
why, i.e. to what purpose worth the labour, is he then con- 
/ ceived and born? The four questions, vers. 11 sqq., form a _ 

climax: he follows the course of his life from its commence- 
ment in embryo (O17, to be explained according to Jer. xx. 
17, and ch. x. 18, where, however, it is } local, not as here, 
temporal) to the birth, and from the joy of his father who 
took the new-born child upon his knees (comp. Gen. 1. 23) to 
the first development of the infant, and he curses this growing 
life in its four phases (Arnh., Schlottm.). Observe the con- 
secutio temp. The fut. MDS has the signification moriebar, 
because taken from the thought of the first period of his con- 
ception and birth; so also 3§8}, governed by the preceding 
perf., the signification et exspirabam (Ges. § 127, 4, c). “Just 
so P28, but modal, ut sugerem ea. 


13 So should I now have lain and had quiet, 
I should have slept, then it would have been well with me, 
14 With kings and couneillors of the earth, 
Who built ruins for themselves, 
15 Or with princes possessing gold, 
Who filled their houses with silver : 
16 Or like a hidden untimely birth I had not been, 
And as children that have never seen the light. 


The perf. and interchanging fut. have the signification of 
oriental imperfecta conjunctivi, according to Ges. § 126, 5; 
nmy *D is the usual expression after hypothetical clauses, and _ 
takes the perf. if the preceding clause specifies a condition 
which has not occurred in the past (Gen. xxxi. 42, xliii. 10; 
Num. xxii. 29, 83; 1 Sam. xiv. 30), the fut. if a condition 
is not existing in the present (ch. vi. 3, viii. 6, xiii. 19). It 
is not to be translated: for then; ‘> rather commences the 
clause following: so I should now, indeed then I should. 
Ruins, ni31n, are uninhabited desolate buildings, elsewhere 


{ 


CHAP. III. 17-19. 81 


such as have become, here such as are from the first intended 
to remain, uninhabited and desolate, consequently sepulchres, 
mausoleums ; probably, since the book has Egyptian allusions, 
in other passages also, a play upon the pyramids, in whose 
name (III-XPAM, according to Coptic glossaries) ITI is the~ 
Egyptian article (vid. Bunsen, Aeg. ii. 361); Arab. without 
the art. hirdm or ahrdm (vid. Abdollatif, ed. de Sacy, p. 298, 
s.).' Also Renan: Qui se bdtissent des mausolées. Béottch, 
de inferis, § 298 (who, however, prefers to read mam, wide 
streets), rightly directs attention to the difference between 
mann 32 (to rebuild the ruins) and 15 'n 722 (to build ruins 
for one’s self). With is like things are then ranged after one 
another. Builders of the pyramids, millionaires, abortions \ ° 
(vid. Eccl. vi. 3), and the still-born: all these are removed | 
from the sufferings of this life in their quiet of the grave, be | 
their grave a “ruin” gazed upon by their descendants, or a 
hole dug out in the earth, and again filled in as it was before. / 
17 There the wicked cease from troubling, ‘ 
And the weary are at rest. 
18 The captives dwell together in tranquillity ; 
They hear not the voice of the taskmaster. 
19 The small and great,—they are alike there ; 
And the servant is free from his lord. 


There, z.e. in the grave, all enjoy the rest they could not | 
find here: the troublers and the troubled ones alike. 
corresponds to the radical idea of looseness, broken in pieces, 
want of restraint, therefore of Turba (comp. Isa. lvii.. 20, 
Jer. vi. 7), contained etymologically in #¥7. The Pilel pxw 


(vid. Ges. § 55, 2) signifies perfect freedom from care. In 


1 We think that mya4n sounds rather like npn, the name of the 
pyramids, as the Arabic haram (instead of hharam), derived from XPAM, 
recalls harman (e.g. beith harman, a house in ruins), the synonym of 
_ hharban (js). ' 
VOL. I. ' F 


82 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Ni7 DY, N17 is more than the sign of the copula (Hirz., Hahn, 
Schlottm.); the rendering of the LXX., Vulg.; and Luth., 
ibi sunt, is too feeble. As it is said of God, Isa. xli. 4, xliii. 
13, Ps. cii. 28, that He is sin, tc. He who is always the same, 
6 avtds; so here, sim, used purposely instead of 7157, signifies 
that great and small are like one another in the grave: all 
distinction has ceased, it has sunk to the equality of their pre- 
‘ sent lot. Correctly Ewald: Great and small are there the same. 
\_ ™, ver. 18, refers to this destiny which brings them together. 


20 Why is light given to the wretched, 
And life to the sorrowful in soul ? 
21 Who wait for death, and he comes not, 
Who dig after him more than for treasure, 
22 Who rejoice with exceeding joy, 
Who are enraptured, when they can find the grave? . 
23 To the man whose way is hidden, . 
And whom Eloah hath hedged round ? 


The descriptive partt. vers. 21a, 22a, are continued in pre- — 
dicative clauses, which are virtually relative clauses; ver. 
216 has the fut. consec., since’ the sufferers are regarded as 
now at least dead; ver. 22b the simple fut., since their long- 
ing for the grave is placed before the eye (on this transition 
from the part. to the verb. jin., vid. Ges. § 134, rem. 2). 


rejoicing, i.e. the cry and gesture of joy. The translation 

usque ad exultationem, is, however, more appropriate here as 
/-well as in Hos. ix. 1, With ver. 23 Job refers to himself: he 

is the man whose way of suffering is mysterious and prospect- 

less, and whom God has penned in on all sides (a fig. like 

ch. xix. 8; comp. Lam. iii. 5), 422, sepire, above, ch, i. 10, 
\ to hedge round for protection, here: forcibly straiten. 


CHAP. III. 24-26. 83 


24 For instead of my food my sighing cometh, 
And my roarings pour themselves forth as water. 

25 For I fear something terrible, and it cometh upon me, 
And that before which I shudder cometh to me. 

26 I dwelt not in security, nor rested, nor ‘ eshed myself : 
Then trouble cometh. 


That "BD may pass over from the local signification to the 
substitutionary, like the Lat. pro (¢.g. pro premio est), is seen 
from ch. iv. 19 (comp. 1 Sam. i. 16): the parallelism, which 
is less favourable to the interpretation, before my bread (Hahn, 
Schlottm., and others), favours the signification pro here. The 
fut. consec. 135" (Kal of 73) is to be translated, according to 
> Ges. § 129, 3, a, se effundunt (not effuderunt) : it denotes, by 
close connection with the preceding, that which has hitherto 
happened. Just so ver. 25a:.I fear something terrible; 
forthwith it comes over me (this terrible, most dreadful 
thing). OMS is conjugated by the 5 passing into the original 
of the root (vid. Ges. § 74, rem. 4). And just so the con- 
clusion: then also forthwith 125 (¢.e. suffering which disorders, 
rages and ransacks furiously) comes again. Schlottm. trans- 
lates tamely and wrongly: then comes—oppression. Hahn, 
better: Nevertheless fresh trouble always comes; but the 
“nevertheless” is incorrect, for the fut. consec. indicates a 
close connection, not contrast. The prett., ver. 26, give the ay 
details of the principal fact, which follows in the fut. conse. 
only a short cessation, which is no real cessation ; then the 
suffering rages afresh. t 

Why—one is inclined to ask respecting this first speech of 
Job, which gives rise to the following controversy—why does 
the writer allow Job, who but a short time before, in opposi- 
tion to his wife, has manifested such wise submission to God’s 
dealings, all at once to break forth in such despair? Does it 
not seem as though the assertion of Satan were about to be 


1. 
4 


84 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


confirmed? Much depends upon one’s forming a correct and 
just judgment respecting the state of mind from which this 
first speech proceeds. ‘To this purpose, consider (1) That the 
speech contains no trace of what the writer means by 772 
pnoxmnsy: Job nowhere says that he will have nothing more 
to do with God; he does not renounce his former faithful- 
ness: (2) That, however, in the mind of the writer, as may 
be gathered from ch. ii. 10, this speech is to be regarded as 
the beginning of Job’s sinning. If a man, on account of his 
sufferings, wishes to die early, or not to have been born at 
all, he has lost his confidence that God, even in the severest 
suffering, designs his highest good; and this want of confi- 
dence is sin. 

There is, however, a great. difference between a man who 
has in general no trust in God, and in whom suffering only 
makes this manifest in a terrible manner, and the man with 
whom trust in God is a habit of his soul, and is only momen- 
tarily repressed, and, as it were, paralysed. Such interrup- 
tion of the habitual state may result from the first pressure of 
unaccustomed suffering ; it may then seem as though trust 
in God were overwhelmed, whereas it has only given way to 
rally itself again. It is, however, not the greatness of the 
affliction in itself which shakes his sincere trust in God, but a 
change of disposition on the part of God which seems to be 
at work in the affliction, The sufferer considers himself as 
forgotten, forsaken, and rejected of God, as mariy passages 
in the Psalms and Lamentations show: therefore he sinks 
into despair; and in this despair expression is given to the 
profound truth (although with regard to the individual it is a 


~ sinful weakness), that it is better never to have been born, or 


to be annihilated, than to be rejected of God (comp. Matt. 
xxvl. 24, xadov jv avdre@ ei ov« éyevvyOn 0 dvOpwros éxeivos). 


f In such a condition of spiritual, and, as.we know from the 


prologue, of Satanic temptation (Luke xxii. 81, Eph. vi. 16), 


CHAP. III, 24-26. 85 


is Job. He does not despair when he. contemplates his afflic--~ 
tion, but when he looks at God through it, who, as though 
He were become his enemy, has surrounded him with this 
affliction as with a rampart. He calls himself a man whose 
way is hidden, as Zion laments, Isa. xl. 27, “My way is 
hidden from Jehovah;” a man whom Eloah has hedged 
round, as Jeremiah laments over the ruins of Jerusalem, y, 
Lam. iii. 1-13 (in some measure a comment on Job iii. 23)y 
“Tam the man who has-seen affliction by the rod of His 
wrath. . . . He has hedged me round that I cannot get out, 
and made my chain heavy.” In this condition of entire de- 
privation of every taste of divine goodness, Job breaks forth 
in curses.. He has lost wealth and children, and has praised 
God; he has even begun to bear an incurable disease with 
submission to the providence of God. Now, however, when’; ) 
not only the affliction, but God himself, seems to him to be | 
hostile (nunc autem occultato patre, as Brentius expresses it),' | 
we hear from his mouth neither words of praise (the highest / 
excellence in affliction) nor words of resignation (duty in afflic-| _ 
tion), but words of despair : his trust in God is not destroyed, | } 
but overcast by thick clouds of melancholy and doubt. 
“It is indeed inconceivable that a New Testament believer, 











° 
1 Fries, in his discussion of this portion of the book of Job, Jahrbb. \ j 
Siir Deutsche Theologie, 1859, 8. 790 ff., is quite right that the real afflic- - 
tion of Job oe in this, that the inward feeling of being forsaken of ile 
God; which 1 was hitherto strange to him, is come upon him. But the 
remark directed an me, that the feeling of being forsaken of God 
does not always stand in connection with other affliction, but may come” é 
on the favoured of God even'in the midst of uninterrupted outward pro- as 


sperity, does not concern me, since it is manifestly by the dispensations 
which deprive him of all his possessions, and at last affect him corpore- 9 








ally and individually, that Job is led to regard himself as one forsaken of 

God, and still more than that, one hated by God; and since, on the others ad 
~ hand also, this view of the tempted does not appear to be absolutely sub- - aa »* 
jective, God_has really withdrawn from J ob the ee proof and at \* Pe | 






th time the feelitigyof-His-a! Ove, 1. the fid elity ? 
of His sorvant'-lovoy And- prove TS ADEGTatencss, sive ee 
ir peteeminenniiiiandialaitia es Te ee 


a wk late” * ee ho ae f 


86 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


even under the strongest temptation, should utter such im- 
ee or especially such a question of doubt as in ver. 
20: Wherefore is light given to the miserable? But that an 
[Old Testament believer might very easily become involved 
e in such conflicts of belief, may be accounted for by the 
absence of any express divine revelation to carry his mind . 

*) \ beyond the bounds of the present. Concerning the future 
y- at the period when the book of Job was composed, and the 


» _|Rhero of the book lived, there were longings, inferences, and 
rs 





yj forebodings of the soul; but there was no clear, consoling 
© © word of God on which to rely,—no @eios Adyos which, to 
ge  speak as Plato (Phaedo, p. 85, D), could serve as a rescuing 
" fi- plank in the shipwreck of this life. Therefore the ravrayod 
"\ OpvrAXrovpevov extends through all the glory and joy of the 
Greek life from the very beginning throughout, The best 
thing is never to have been born; the second best, as soon 
as possible thereafter, to die. The truth, that the suffering 
( of this present time is not worthy of the glory which shall 
__ be revealed in us, was still silent. The proper disposition of 
mind, under such veiling of the future, was then indeed more . 
absolute, as faith committed itself blindfold to the guidance 
of God. But how near at hand was the temptation to regard 
a troublous life as an indication of the divine anger, and 
doubtingly to ask, Why God should send the light of life to 
such! They knew not that the present lot of man forms but 
the one half of his history: they saw only in the one scale 
misery and wrath, and not in the other the heaven of love 
and blessedness to be revealed hereafter, by which these are 
outweighed ; they longed for a present solution of the mys- 
tery of life, because they knew nothing of the possibility of 
he a future solution. Thus it is to be explained, that not only 
Job in this poem, but also Jeremiah in the book of his pro- 
phecy, ch. xx. 14-18, curses the day of his birth. He curses 
the man who brought his father the joyous tidings of the 


a 


CHAP. III. 24-26, ; 87 


birth of a son, and wishes him the fate of ‘Sodom and 
Gomorrha. He wishes for himself that his mother might 
have been his grave, and asks, like Job, “ Wherefore came I 
forth out of the womb to see labour and sortow, and that my 
days should be consumed in shame?” Hitzig remarks on 


this, that it may be inferred from the contents and form of | ~ 


this passage, there was a certain brief disturbance of spirit, a / 
result of the general indescribable distress of the troublous 
last days of Zedekiah, to which the spirit of the prophet also 
succumbed. And it is certainly a kind of delirium in which 
Jeremiah so speaks, but there is no physical disorder of mind 


_ with it: the understanding of the prophet is so slightly and 


only momentarily disturbed, that he has the rather gained 
power’ over his faith, and is himself become one of its dis- , 
turbing forces. ats 

Without applying to this lyric piece either the standard 
of pedantic moralizing, or of minute criticism as poetry, 
the intense melancholy of this extremely plaintive prophet 
may have proceeded from the following reasoning: After I 
have lived ten long years of fidelity and sacrifice to my pro- 
phetic calling, I see that it has totally failed in its aim: all 
my hopes are blighted; all my exhortations to repentance, 
and my prayers, have not availed to draw Judah back from 
the abyss into which he is now cast, nor to avert the wrath 
of Jehovah which is now poured forth: therefore it had 
been better for me never to have been born. This thought 
affects the prophet so much the more, since in every fibre of 
his being he is an Israelite, and identifies the weal and woe of 
his people with his own; just as Moses would rather himself ° 
be blotted out from the book of life than that Israel should 
perish, and Paul was willing to be separated from Christ as 
anathema if he could thereby save Israel. What wonder 
that this thought should disburden itself in such impreca- 
tions! Had Jeremiah not been born, he would not have had 


88 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


occasion to sit on the ruins of Jerusalem, But his outburst 

of feeling is notwithstanding a paroxysm of excitement, for, 
_though reason might drive him to despair, faith would teach 
him to hope even in the midst of downfall; and in reality, 
this small lyric piece in the collective prophecy of Jeremiah 

is only as a detached rock, over which, as a stream of clear 
living water, the prophecy flows on more joyous in faith, 

\. more certain of the future. In the book of Job it is other- 
A wise; for what in Jeremiah and several of the psalms is 
compressed into a small compass,—the darkness of tempta= 

tion and its clearing up,—is here the substance of a long 

NY entanglement dramatically presented, which first of all ‘be- 
comes progressively more and more involved, and to which 

\ this outburst of feeling gives the impulse. As Jeremiah, 
| had he not been born, would not have sat on the ruins of 
y Jerusalem; so Job, had he not been born, would not have 
4 _ found himself in this abyss of wrath. Neither of them 
y? , ’ , knows anything of the future solution of every present mys- 
tery of life; they know nothing of the future life and the 
” oy heavenly crown. This it is which, while it justifies their 


\ | q despair, casts greater glory round their struggling faith. 


4g The first speaker among the friends, who now comes for- 
ap ward, is Eliphaz, probably the eldest of them, In the main, 
/ they all represent one view, but each with his individual | 


[ peculiarity: Eliphaz with the self-confident pathos of age, 
, and the mien of a prophet;! Bildad with the moderation and 
caution befitting one poorer in thought; Zophar with an 
excitable vehemence, neither skilled nor disposed for a lasting 
contest. The skill of the writer, as we may here at the outset 
w remark, is manifested in this, that what the friends say, con- 
sidered in itself, is true: the error lies only in the inadequacy 
oa and inapplicability of | what is said to the case before them, 

( 1 A. B. Davidson thinks Eliphaz is characterized as “the oldest, the 

.most dignified, the calmest, and most considerate of Job’s friends.” 


- 








CHAP. IY. 2-5. 89 


SECOND PART.—THE ENTANGLEMENT. 


CHAP. IV.—-XXVI. 
THE FIRST COURSE OF THE CONTROVERSY.—CHAP. IV.—-XIV. 


Eliphaz’ First Speech.—Chap. iv. v. 
Schema : 8. 12. 11. 11. | 11. 12, 10. 10. 10. 2. 


In reply to Sommer, who in his excellent biblische Ab- 
handlungen, 1846, considers the. octastich as the extreme 
limit of the compass of the strophe, it is sufficient to refer 
to the Syriac strophe-system. It is, however, certainly an 
impossibility that, as Ewald (Jahrb. ix. 87) remarks with 
reference to the first speech of Jehovah, ch. xxxviii. xxxix., 
the strophes can sometimes extend to a length of 12 lines 
= Masoretic verses, consequently consist of 24 oriyou and 
more. [Then Eliphaz the Temanite began, and said :] 


2 If one attempts a word with thee, will it grieve thee? 
And still to restrain himself from words, who is able? 
3 Behold, thou hast instructed many, , 
And the weak hands thou hast strengthened. 
4 The stumbling turned to thy words, 
And the sinking knees thou hast strengthened. 
5 But now it cometh to thee, thou art grieved; 
Now it toucheth thee, thou despondest. . 


The question with which Eliphaz begins, is certainly one 
of those in which the tone of interrogation falls on the second 
of the paratactically connected sentences: Wilt thou, if we 
speak to thee, feel it unbearable? Similar examples are ch. 
iv. 21, Num. xvi. 22, Jer. vill. 4; and with interrogative 
Wherefore? Isa. v. 4, 1. 2: comp. the similar paratactic 
union of sentences, ch. ii. 10, ili. 116. The question arises 


/ 


90 TRE BOOK OF JOB. 


here, whether 75) is an Aramaic form of writing for 8¥2 (as 
the Masora in distinction from Deut. iv. 34 takes it), and 
also either future, Wilt thou, if we raise, i.e. utter, etc.; or 
passive, as Ewald formerly,’ If a word is raised, i.e. uttered, 
727 Nb, like bya xiva, ch. xxvii. 1; or whether it is third pers. 
Piel, with the signification; attempt, tentare, Eccles. vii. 23. 
The last is to be preferred, because more admissible and also 
more expressive. D2 followed by the fut. is a hypothetic 
pret., Supposing that, etc., wilt thou, etc., as e.g. ch. xxiii. 10. 
PD is the Aramaic plur. of 759, which is more frequent in 
the book of Job than the Hebrew plur. 09. The futt., 
vers. 3 sq., because following the perf., are like imperfects in 
the western languages: the expression is like Isa. xxxv. 3. 
In AMY °3, ver. 5,°2 has a temporal signification, Now when, 
Ges. § 155, I, e, (6). 


‘i 6 Is not thy prety thy confidence, 
Thy hope? And the uprightness of thy ways ? 
7 Think now : who ever perished, being innocent? ! 
And where have the righteous been cut off ? ! 
8 As often as I saw, those who ploughed evil 
And sowed sorrow,—they reaped the same. 
9 By the breath of Eloah they perished, 
By the breath of His anger they vanished away. 
10 The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the shachal, 
And the teeth of the young lions, are. rooted out. 
11 The lion wanders about for want of prey, 
And the lioness’ whelps are scattered. 


In ver. 6 all recent expositors take the last waw as waw 


1 In the second edition, comp. Jahrb. ix. 37, he explains it otherwise: ‘If 
we attempt a word with thee, will it be grievous to thee quod xgre feras ?” 
But that, however, must be MD; the form Mp) can only be third pers. Piel: 
If any one attempts, etc., which, according to Ewald's risa ome gives 
no suitable rendering. 


CHAP. IV. 611. 91 


apodosis: And thy hope, is not even this the integrity of thy 
way? According to our punctuation, there is no occasion for 
supposing such an application of the waw apodosis, which is 
an error in a clause consisting only of substantives, and is 
not supported by the examples, ch. xv. 17, xxiii. 12, 2 Sam. 
xxii. 41. ympnis the permutative of the ambiguous snbp, 
which, from Spa, to be fat, signifies both the awkwardness of 
stupidity and the boldness of confidence. The addition of 
Nin to", ver. 7, like ch. xiii. 19, xvii. 3, makes the question 
more earnest : guis tandem, like Mt “2, quisnam (Ges. § 122, 2). 
In ver. 8, WD is not comparative, but temporal, and yet so 
that it unites, as usual, what stands in close connection with, 
and follows directly upon, the preceding: When, so as, as 
often as I had seen those who planned and worked out evil 
(comp. Prov. xxii. 8), I also saw that they reaped it. That the 
ungodly, and they alone, perish, is shown in vers. 10 sq. under 
the simile of the lions. The Hebrew, like the oriental lan- 
guages in general, is rich in names for lions; the reason of 
which is, that the lion-tribe, although now become rarer in 
Asia, and of which only a solitary one is found here and 
there in the valley of the Nile, was more numerous in the 
early times, and spread over a wider area.2 5n¥, which the 
old expositors often understood as the panther, is perhaps the 
maneless lion, which is still found on the lower Euphrates 
and Tigris. Yn) = yn}, Ps. lviii. ‘7, evellere, elidere, by 
zeugma, applies to the voice also., All recent expositors 


1 We will not, however, dispute the possibility, for at least in Arabic - 
one can say, a) j Zeid, he is wise. Grammarians remark that .) j 


in this instance is like a hypothetical sentence: If any one asks, etc. 
2 Sam. xv. 34 is similar. 

2 Vid. Schmarda, Geographische Verbreitung der Thiere, i. 210, where, 
among other things, we read: The lion in Asia is driven back at almost 
all points, and also in Africa has been greatly diminished ; for hundreds 
of lions and panthers were used in the Roman amphitheatres, whilst at 
the present time it would be impossible to procure so large a number. 


92 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


translate ver. 11 init. wrongly: the lion perishes. The par- 
ticiple 728 is a stereotype expression for wandering about 
viewless and helpless (Deut. xxvi. 5, Isa. xxvii. 18, Ps. cxix. 
176, and freq.). The part., otherwise remarkable here, has 
its origin in this usage of the language. The parallelism is 
like’ Ps. xcii. 10. 


12 And a word reached me stealthily, 
And my ear heard a whisper thereof. 


13 In the play of thought, in visions of the night, 


aL Ly 


When deep sleep falleth on men, 
14 Fear came upon me, and trembling ; 

And it caused the multitude of my bones to quake with fear. 
15 And a breathing passed over my face ; 

The hair of my flesh stood up: 
16 Lt stood there, and I discerned not its appearance : 

An image was before my eyes ; 

A gentle murmur, and I heard a voice. 


The fut. 22, like Judg. ii. 1, Ps. Ixxx. 9, is ruled by the 
following fut. consec.: ad me furtim delatum est (not defere- 
batur). Eliphaz does not say *28 333) (although he means a 
single occurrence), because he desires, with pathos, to put 
himself prominent. That the word came to him so secretly, 


_ and that he heard only as it were a whisper (yO, according 
to Arnheim, in distinction from YD, denotes a faint, indistinct 
impression on the ear), is designed to show the value of such 


a solemn communication, and to arouse curiosity. Instead of 
the prosaic 131, we find here the poetic pausal-form 3732 ex- 
panded from 439, after the form *39, ch. xxi. 16, Ps. xviii. 23. 
1 is partitive: I heard only a whisper, murmur ; the word was 
too sacred and holy to come loudly and directly to his ear. 
It happened, as he lay in the deep sleep of night, in the midst 
of the confusion of thought resulting from nightly dreams. 
D’eyy (from *'y¥, branched) are thoughts proceeding like 





CHAP, IV. 17-21. . 93 


branches from the heart as their root, and intertwining them- 
selves ; the }® which follows refers to the cause: there were 
all manner of dreams which occasioned the thoughts, and to 
which they referred (comp. ch. xxxiii. 15); 2708, in dis- 
tinction from 73%, sleep, and 721", slumber, is the deep sleep 
related to death and ecstasy, in which man sinks back from 
outward life into the remotest ground of his inner life. In ver. 
14, "287P, from 81P= MP, to meet (Ges. § 75, 22), is equiva- 
lent to ‘27? (not ‘27P, as Hirz., first edition, wrongly points it ; 
comp. Gen. xliv. 29). The subject of 175i) is the undiscerned 
ghostlike something. Eliphaz was stretched upon his bed \ 
when 4%, a breath of wind, passed (Aen, similar to Isa. xxi. 1) 
over his face. The wind is the element by means of which 
the spirit-existence is made manifest; comp. 1 Kings xix. 12, 
where Jehovah appears in a gentle whispering of the wind, 
and Acts ii. 2, where the descent of the Holy Spirit is made 
known by a mighty rushing. ™, vedwa, Sanscrit dtma, 
signifies both the immaterial spirit and the air, which is pro- 
portionately the most immaterial of material things.’ His / 
hair bristled up, even every hair of his body ; 75D, not causa- 
tive, but intensive of Kal. Hy" has also the ghostlike appear- 

- ance as subject. Eliphaz could not discern its outline, only 

a MDA, imago gquedam (the most ethereal word for form, 
Num. xii. 8, Ps. xvii. 15, of wopdy or Sofa of God), was before 4 4 
his eyes, and he heard, as it were proceeding from it, oP nD, 
i.e. per hendiadyn: a voice, which spoke to him in a gentle J 
whispering tone, as follows : 


17 Js a mortal just before Eloah, 
Or a man pure before his Maker ? 
18 Behold, He trusteth not His servants ! 
And His angels He chargeth with imperfection. 


1 On wind and spirit, vid. Windischmann, Die Philosophie im Fort- 
gang der Weltgesch. 8. 1331 ff. 


94 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


19 How much more those who dwell in houses of clay, 
| Whose origin is in the dust ! 
They are crushed as though they were moths. = 
20 From morning until evening,—so are they broken in pieces: 
Unobserved they perish for ever. 
21 Is it not so: the cord of their tent in them is torn away, 
So they die, and not in wisdom ? ! 


The question arises whether {2 is comparative: pre Deo, 
on which Mercier with penetration remarks: justior sit oportet 


qui immerito affligitur quam qui immerito affligit ; or causal: 


a Deo, h.e., ita ut a Deo justificetur. All modern expositors 
rightly decide on the latter. Hahn justly maintains that DY 


and *}\Ya are found in a similar connection in other places; 


and ch, xxxii. 2 is perhaps not to be explained in any other 
way, at least that does not restrict the present passage. By — 
the servants of God, none but the angels, mentioned in the 
following line of the verse, are intended.. 0°¥ with 3 signi- 
fies imputare (1 Sam. xxii. 15); in ch. xxiv. 12 (comp. i. 22) ° 
we read mean, absurditatem (which Hupf. wishes to restore 
even here), joined with the verb in this signification. The 
form nonn is certainly not to be taken as stultitia from the 
verb oon ; the half vowel, and still less the absence of the 
Dagesh, will not allow this. MA (Olsh. § 213, c), itself un- 
certain in its etymology, presents no available analogy. The 
form points to a Lamedh-He verb, as 27h from MD), so per- 
haps from non, Niph. Nn, remotus, Micah iv. 7: being distant, 
being behind the perfect, difference; or even from non (Targ. 
son, Pa. 0) = mN?, weakness, want of strength.’ Both sig- 


1 Schnurrer compares the Arabic wahila, which signifies to be relaxed, 
forgetful, to err, to neglect. Ewald, considering the n as radical, com- 


pares the Arabic (3, to err, and Jk, med. wau, to be dizzy, uncon- 
scious ; but neither from bry nor from oon can the substantival form be 


sustained. 


CHAP. IV. 17-21. 95 


nifications will do, for it is not meant that the good spirits 
positively sin, as if sin were a natural necessary consequence 
of their creatureship and finite existence, but_that_eyen the 
holiness of the good spirits is never equal to the absolute holi- 
ness of God, and that this deficiency i is still greater in spirit- 
corporeal man, who has earthiness as the basis of his original 
nature. At the same time, it is presupposed that the distance 
between God and created earth is disproportionately greater 
than between God and created spirit, since matter is destined 
to be exalted to the nature of the spirit, but also brings the 
spirit into the danger of being degraded to its own level. 

Ver. 19. 4S signifies, like "3 48, quanto minus, or quanto 
magis, according as a negative or positive sentence precedes : 
since 180 is positive, we translate it here quanto magis, as 2 
Sam. xvi. 11. Men are called dwellers in clay houses: the 
house of clay is their @@aprov capa, as being taken de limo 
terre (ch. xxxili. 6; comp. Wisdom ix. 15); it is a fragile 
habitation, formed of inferior materials, and destined to ( 
destruction. The explanation which follows—those whose | 
iD’, ze. foundation of existence, is in dust—shows still more — 
clearly that the poet has Gen. ii. 7, iii. 19, in his mind. It i 
crushes them (subject, everything that operates destructively 
on the life of man) wy aDd, a.e. not: sooner than the moth | 
is crushed (Hahn), or more rapidly than a moth destroys ; 
(Ochler, Fries), or even appointed to the moth for destruc- 
tion (Schlottm.) ; but "BD signifies, as ch. ii. 24 (cf. 1 Sam. 
i. 16), ad instar: as easily as a moth is crushed. They last 
only from morning until evening: they are broken in pieces 
(N37, from N32, for nz); they are therefore as ephemere. . 
They perish for ever, without any one taking it to heart / 
(suppl. aby, Isa. xiii. 25, lvii. 1), or directing the hear | 
towards it, animum advertit (suppl. 2, ch. i. 8). 

In ver. 21 the soul is compared to the cord of a tent, if 
which stretches out and holds up the body as a tent, like 





96 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Eccl. xii. 6, with a silver cord, which holds the lamp hanging 

\_ from the covering of the tent. Olshausen is inclined to read 
pin’, their tent-pole, instead of O70), and at any rate thinks 
the accompanying 52 superfluous and awkward. But (1) the 
comparison used here of the soul, and of the life sustained 
by it, corresponds to its comparison elsewhere with a thread 

or weft, of which death is the cutting through or loosing (ch. 
_vi. 9, xxvii. 8; Isa. xxxviii. 12); (2) 02 is neither super- 
- fluous nor awkward, since it is intended to say, that their 
| duration of life falls in all at once like a tent when that 
\ which in them (p2) corresponds to the cord of a tent (i.e. the 
\Wp2) is drawn away from it. The relation of the members 
of the sentence in ver. 21 is just the same as in ver. 2: Will 
they not die when it is torn away, ete. They then die off in 
lack of wisdom, i.e. without having acted in accordance with 
the perishableness of their nature and their distance from 
| God; therefore, rightly considered: unprepared and suddenly, 


comp. ch. xxxvi. 12, Prov. y. 23. Oehler, correctly: with- 
ie mut having been made ' wiser by the ati lictions of ‘Ga The 





Gee ten by the scope “division, ends here. Bliphas now, 
with reference to it, turns to Job. 


Ch. v. 1 Call now,—is there any one who will answer thee ? 

And to whom of the holy ones wilt thou turn ? 

2 For he is a fool who is destroyed by complaining, 
And envy slays the simple one. | 

3 J, even I, have seen a fool taking root: 
Then I had to curse his habitation suddenly. 

4 His children were far from help, 
And were crushed in the gate, without a rescuer ; 

5 While the hungry ate his harvest, 
And even from-among thorns they took it away, 
And the intriguer snatched after his wealth. 


CHAP. V. 1-5. 97 


The chief thought of the oracle was that God is the abso- \ 
lutely just One, and infinitely exalted above men and angels. 
Resuming his speech from this point, Eliphaz tells Job that 
no cry for help can avail him unless he submits to the all-just 
One as being himself unrighteous; nor can any cry addressed 
to the angels avail. This thought, although it is rejected, 
certainly shows that the writer of the book, as of the prologue, 
is impressed with the fundamental intuition, that good, like 
evil, 6 tae are implicated in the affairs of men; for the “holy 


ones,” as in Ps. lxxxix., are the angels. ‘2 supports the nega- ~/ 
tion implied in ver. 1: If God does not help thee, no creature \ 


can help thee; for he who complains and chafes at his lot 
brings down upon himself the extremest destruction, since he 
~ excites the anger of God still more. Such a surly murmurer_/ 
against God is here called NN. ° is the Aramaic sign of the ob- 
ject, having the force of quod attinet ad, quoad (Ew. § 310, a).. 

Eliphaz justifies what he has said (ver. 2) by an example. 
He had seen such a complainer in increasing prosperity; then 
he cursed his habitation suddenly, z.e. not: he uttered forth- 
with a prophetic curse over it, which, though OXNB might 
have this meaning (not subito, but illico; cf. Num. xii. 4), the 
following futt., equivalent to imperff., do not allow, but: I 
had then, since his discontent had brought on his destruction, 
suddenly to mark and abhor his habitation as one overtaken 
by a curse: the cursing is a recognition of the divine curse, 
as the echo of which it isintended. This curse of God mani- 
fests itself also on his children and his property (vers. 4 sqq.). 
"YY is the gate of the city as a court of justice: the phrase, 
to oppress in the gate, is like Prov. xxii. 22; and the form 
Hithpa. is according to the rule given in Ges. § 54,2,b. The 
relative Ws, ver. 5, is here conj. relativa, according to Ges. 
§ 155, 1, e. In the connection DYSON, ON is equivalent to 
WY, adeo e spinis, the hungry fall so eagerly upon what the 
father of those now orphans has reaped, that even the thorny 

VOL. I. G 


98 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


fence does not hold them back. 0°38, as Proy. xxii. 5: the 
double prepos. o"P8 is also found elsewhere, but with another 
meaning. O')¥ has only the appearance of being plur. : it is 
sing. after the form P™¥, from the verb D%¥, nectere, and sig- 
nifies, ch. xviii. 9, a snare; here, however, not judicit laqueus 
(Béttch.), but what, besides the form, comes still nearer— 
the snaremaker, intriguer. The Targ. translates pom, 1.e. 
Anorai. Most modern critics (Rosenm. to Ebr.) translate :. 
the thirsty (needy), as do all the old translations, except the 
Targ.; this, however, is not possible without changing the 
form. The meaning is, that intriguing persons catch up 

(xv, as Amos ii. 7) their wealth. 

Eliphaz now tells why it thus befell this fool in his own 
person and his children. 


6 For evil cometh not forth from the dust, 
And sorrow sprouteth not from the earth ; 
7 For man is born to sorrow, 
As the sparks fly upward. | 
8 On the contrary, I would earnestly approach unto Bets 
And commit my cause to the Godhead; - 
9 To Him who doeth great things and unsearchable ; 
Marvellous things till there is no number : 
10 Who giveth rain over the earth, 
And causeth water to flow over the fields : 
11 To set the low in high places ; 
And those that mourn are exalted to prosperity. 


As the oracle above, so Eliphaz says here, that a sorrowful 
life is allotted to man,* so that his wisdom consequently consists 

1 Fries explains apy as part., and refers to Geiger’s Lehrb. zur Sprache 
der Mischna, 8. 41 f. , according to which dep signifies killed, and oop 
(= Rabb. >pnid) being killed (which, however, rests purely on imagina- 


tion) : not the matter from which mankind originates brings evil with it, 
but it is man who inclines towards the evil. Béttch. would read bin: 
man is the parent of misery, though he may rise high in anger. 


CHAP, V. 6-11. 99 


in accommodating himself to his lot: if he does not do that, 

he is an 8, and thereby perishes. Misfortune does not 

grow out of the ground like weeds; it is rather established in 

the divine order of the world, as it is established in the order 

of nature that sparks of fire should ascend. The old critics 

understood by \v ‘22 birds of prey, as being swift as light- 

ning (with which the appellation of beasts of prey may be 

- compared, ch. xxviii. 8, xli. 26); but HY signifies also a flame 

or blaze (Cant. viii. 6). Children of the flame is an appropriate 

name for sparks, and flying upwards. is naturally peculiar to 

sparks as to birds of prey; wherefore among modern expositors, 

Hirz., Ew., Hahn, von Gerl., Ebr., rightly decide in favour, 
of sparks. Schlottmann understands “angels” by children) 
of flame; but the wings, which are given to angels in Scrip- 

ture, are only a symbol of their freedom of motion. This 

remarkable interpretation is altogether opposed to the sen- 

tentious character of ver. 7, which symbolizes a moral truth 

by an ordinary thing. The waw in ‘23, which we have trans- 

lated “as,” is' the so-called waw adaquationis proper to the 

Proverbs, and also to emblems, e.g. Prov. xxv. 25. 

Eliphaz now says what he would do in Job’s place. - Ew. 
and Ebr. translate incorrectly, or at least unnecessarily: Never- 
theless I will. We translate, according to Ges. § 127, 5: 
Nevertheless I would; and indeed with an emphatic J: Never) 
theless I for my part. wi with ON is constr. pregnans, like 
Deut. xii. 5, sedulo adire. 713" is not speech, like 78, but 
cause, causa, ina judicial sense. 5 is God as the Mighty * 
One; DVO is God in the totality of His variously manifested 
nature. The fecundity of the earth by rain, and of the fields J 
(nixin=rura) by water-springs (cf. Ps. civ. 10), as the works 
of God, are intentionally made prominent. He who makes 
the barren places fruitful, can also change suffering into joy. 

. To His power in nature corresponds His power among men / 
(ver. 11), D%”? is here only as a variation for pwn, as Heiligst. 


100 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


rightly observes: it is equivalent to collocaturus, or qui in eo 

est ut collocet, according to the mode of expression discussed 

in Ges. § 132, rem. 1, and more fully on Hab. i. 17. The 

construction of ver. 116 is still bolder. 23& signifies to be 
‘ high and steep, inaccessible. It is here construed with the 

acc. of motion: those who go in dirty, black clothes because 

they mourn, shall be high in prosperity, z.e. come to stand on 
\. an unapproachable height of prosperity. 


12 Who bringeth to nought the devices of the crafty, 
So that their hands cannot accomplish anything ; 
13 Who catcheth the wise in their craftiness ; 
And the counsel of the cunning is thrown down. 
14 By day they run into darkness, 
And grope in the noon-day as in the night. 
15 He rescueth from the sword, that from their mouth, 
And from the hand of the strong, the bigia 
16 Hope ariseth for the weak, 
And folly shall close its mouth. 


/~ All these attributes are chosen designedly : God brings 
down all haughtiness, and takes compassion on those who 
need it. The noun 7*¥4n, coined by the Chokma, and out of 
Job and Proverbs found only in Mic. vi. 9, Isa. xxviii. 29, 
and even there in gnomical connection, is formed from &%, 
essentia, and signifies as it were essentialitas, realitas: it de- 
notes, in relation to all visible things, the truly existing, the 
real, the objective; true wisdom (i.e. knowledge resting on 
an objective actual basis), true prosperity, real profiting and 

( accomplishing. It is meant that they accomplish nothing 
that has actual duration and advantage. Ver. 13a cannot 

. be better translated than by Paul, 1 Cor. iii. 19, who here 
deviates from the LXX. With 7773, God’s seizure, which 

( prevents the contemplated achievement, is to be thought of. 
He pours forth over the worldly wise what the prophets call 


CHAP. V. 17-21. . SEE 


the spirit of deep sleep ([277A) and of dizziness (OY). On / 
the other hand, He helps the poor. In nn‘ an» the secon 
2 is local: from the sword which proceeds from their mouth 
(comp. Ps. lxiv. 4, lvii. 5, and other passages).’ Béttch. 
translates: without sword, i.e. instrument of power (comp. 
ch. ix. 15, xxi. 9); but jo with 20m leads one to expect that 
that from which one is rescued is to be described (comp. ver. 
20). Ewald corrects 277, which Olsh. thinks acute: it is, 
however, unhebraic, according to our present knowledge of 
the usage of the language; for the passives of 377 are used 
of cities, countries, and peoples, but not of individual men. 
Olsh., in his hesitancy, arrives at no opinion. But the text is 
sound and beautiful. mndy with pathetic unaccented ah (Ges. 
§ 80, rem. 2, /), from noiy a nowy, as Ps. xcii. 16 Chethib. 


17 Behold, happy is the man whom Eloah correcteth ; 
So despise not the chastening of the Almighty ! 

18 For He woundeth, and He also bindeth up ; 
Fe bruiseth, and His hands make whole. 

19 Ln six troubles He will rescue thee, 
And in seven no evil shall touch thee. 

20 In famine He will redeem thee from death, 
And in war from the stroke of the sword. 

21 When the tongue scourgeth, thou shalt be hidden; 
And thou shalt not fear destruction when it cometh. 


The speech of Eliphaz now becomes persuasive as it turns 
towards the conclusion. Since God humbles him who exalts 
himself, and since He humbles in order to exalt, it is a happy 
thing when He corrects (1357) us by afflictive dispensations ; 
and His chastisement (10%) is to be received not with a tur- 
bulent spirit, but resignedly, yea joyously: the same thought 
as Prov. iil. 11-13, Ps. xciv. 12, in both passages borrowed 
from this; whereas ver. 18 here, like Hos. vi. 1, Lam. iii. 
31 sqq., refers to Deut. xxxii. 89. 85°, to heal, is’ here con- 


102 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


/ jugated like a n> verb (Ges. § 75, rem. 21). Ver. 19 is 

formed after the manner of the so-called number-proverbs 
(Prov. vi. 16, xxx. 15, 18), as also the roll of the judgment 
of the nations in Amos i. ii.: in six troubles, yea in still 
more than six. J is the extremity that is perhaps to be 

\ feared. In ver. 20, the pret. is a kind of prophetic pret. 
The scourge of the tongue recalls the similar promise, Ps. 
xxxi. 21, where, instead of scourge, it is: the disputes of the 
tongue. “iv, from TI, violence, disaster, is allied in sound 
with viv. Isaiah has this passage of the book of Job in his 
memory when he writes ch. xxviii. 15. The promises of 
Eliphaz now continue to rise higher, and sound more delight- 
ful and more glorious. 


22 At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh, 

And from the beasts of the earth thou hast nothing to fear. 
23 For thou art in league with the stones of the field, 

And the beasts of the field are at peace with thee. 
24 And thou knowest that peace is thy pavilion ; 

And thou searchest thy household, and jindest nothing 

wanting. 

25 Thou knowest also that thy seed shall be numerous, 

And thy offspring as the herb of the ground. 
26 Thou shalt come to thy grave in a ripe age, 

As shocks of corn are brought in tn their season. 


27 Lo! this we have searched out, so it is; 
Hear it, and give thou heed to it. 


The verb pn¥ is construed (ver. 22) with ) of that which is 
despised, as ch. xxxix. 7, 18, xli. 21 [Hebr.]. NTAON is the 
form of subjective negation [vid. Ges. § 152, 1: Tr.]: only fear 
thou not = thou hast no occasion. In ver. 23, 792 is the 

a shortest substantive form for 3? na, The whole of nature 
will be at peace with thee: the stones of the field, that they 


CHAP. V. 22-27. 103 


do not injure the fertility of thy fields; the wild beasts of the 
field, that they do not hurt thee and thy herds. The same 
promise -that Hosea (ch. ii. 20) utters in reference to the last 
days is here used individually. From this we see how deeply the 
Chokma had searched into the history of Paradise and the Fall. 
Since man, the appointed lord of the earth, has been tempted 
by a reptile, and has fallen by a tree, his relation to nature, 
and its relation to him, has been reversed: it is an incongruity, 


i 


- which is again as a whole put right (Dinw), as the false pes 


of man to God. is put right. In ver. 24, nib’ (which might 
also be adj.) is predicate: thou wilt learn (AY™, pret. consec. 
with accented altima, as e.g. Deut. iv. 39, here with Tiphcha 
initiale s. anterius, which does not indicate the grammatical 

tone-syllable) that thy tent is peace, i.e. in a condition of 
contentment and peace on all sides. Ver. 24d is to be 


arranged: And when thou examinest thy household, then \ 


thou lackest nothing, goest not astray, 7.e. thou findest every- 


thing, without niissing anything, in the place where thou-l 


seekest it. 

Ver. 25 reminds one of the Salomonic Ps. Ixxii. 16. 
D'NYNS in the Old Testament is found only in Isaiah and 
the book of Job. The meaning of the noun nea, which 


occurs only here and ch. xxx. 2, is clear: Referring to the 


verb nds, Arabic soe (nl) to be shrivelled up, very aged, 


it signifies the maturity of old age,—an idea which may be 
gained more easily if we connect nb> with nbs (to be com- 
pleted), like NWP with MYP (to be hard).* In the parallel 
there is the time of the sheaves, when they are brought up to 
the high threshing-floor, the latest period of harvest. noy, of 
the raising of the sheaves to the threshing-floor, as elsewhere 
of the raising, i.e. the bringing up of the animals to the altar. 


1 We may also compare the Arabic US (from which comes cuhulije, 
mature manhood, opp. tufulije, tender childhood). 


104 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Cw 
va is here a heap of sheaves, (waS, as ch. xxi. 32, a se 


47@ 


pulchral heap, Cod>, distinct from TORN, a bundle, a single 


sheaf. 
The speech of Eliphaz, which we have broken up into 
V nine strophes, is nowended. Eliphaz concludes it by an epi- 
| ~{ mythionic distich, ver. 27, with an emphatic nota bene. He 
A’ speaks at the same time in the name of his companions. 
These are principles well proved by experience with which he 


confronts Job. Job needs to lay them to heart: tu scito tibi. 
All that _Eliphaz_says, considered in itself, is blameless. 
ae Job’s vehemence, which was certainly not to be 
approved. He says that the destroying judgment of God 
never touches the innocent, but certainly the wicked ; and at 
the same time expresses the same truth as that placed as a 
motto to the Psalter in Ps. i., and which is even brilliantly 
confirmed in the issue of the history of Job. When we find 
Isa. lvii. 1, comp. Ps. xii. 2, in apparent opposition to this, 
T28 PINT, it is not meant that the judgment of destruction 
comes upon the righteous, but that his generation experiences 
y \ ay the judgment of his loss (a#tati sue perit). And these are 
c eternal truths, that between the Creator and creature, even 
_ {an angel, there remains an infinite distance, and that no 
“  jcreature possesses a righteousness which it can maintain 
a before God. Not less true is it, that with God murmuring 
% }is death, and that it is appointed to sinful man to pass 
ge ‘through sorrow. Moreover, the counsel of Eliphaz is the 
s, right counsel: I would turn to God, etc. His beautiful con- 

5 } |, Seem exhortation, so rich in promises, crowns his speech. 
V It has been observed (e.g. by Lowenthal), that if it is allowed 
x fehat Eliphaz (ch. v. 17 sqq.) expresses a salutary spiritual 
econ of affliction, all coherence in the book is from the first 
destroyed. But in reality it is an effect producing not only 


yer | eZ a 4 
wie 
CHAP. V. 22-27. 105 


outward happiness, but also an inward holiness, which Eli- 
phaz ascribes to sorrow. It is therefore to be asked, how it 
consists with the plan of the book. There is no doctrinal 
error to be be discovered in the speech of Eliphaz, and yet he 


cannot Tbe. considered as a representative of the complete 


truth of ‘Script ure. oF ob ought to humble himself under this ee 


but since he does not, we must side with Eliphaz. 

He does not represent the complete truth of Scripture : 
for there are, according to Scripture, three kinds of suffer- 
ings, which must be carefully distinguished." The godless 
one, who has fallen away from God, is visited with aaieinc 
from God; for sin and the punishment of sin (comprehended 
even in the language in hy and nn) are necessarily con- 
nected as cause and effect. This suffering of the godless is the 
effect of the divine’justice in punishment; it is chastisement 
(70:9) under the disposition of wrath (Ps. vi. 2, xxxviii. 2; 
Jer. x. 24 sqq.), though not yet final wrath; it is punitive 
suffering (O73, Y2), tywwpla, pena). On the other hand, the 
sufferings of the righteous flow from the divine love, to which 
even all that has the appearance of wrath in this suffering 
must be subservient, as the means only by which it operates : 
for although the righteous man is not excepted from the 
weakness and sinfulness of the human race, he can neyer 
become an object of the divine wrath, so long as his inner life 
is directed towards God, and his outward life is governed by 
the most earnest striving after sanctification. According to 
the Old and New Testaments, he stands towards God in the 
relation of a child to his father (only the New Testament 
_ idea includes the mystery of the new birth not revealed in 
the Old Testament); and consequently all sufferings are 


1 Our old dogmatists (vid. e.g. Baier, Compendium Theologiz positive, 
ii. 1, § 15) and pastoral theologians (e.g. Danhauer) consider them as 
separate. Among the oldest expositors of the book of Job with which I 
am acquainted, Olympiodorus is comparatively the best. 


al 


} 
| 
; 


| 


I” 


106 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


fatherly chastisements, Deut. vill. 5, Prov. iii. 12, Heb. xii. 6, 
Apoe. iii. 19, comp. Tob. xii. 13 (Vulg.). But this general 
distinction between the sufferings of the righteous.and of the - 
Me ungodly is not sufficient for the book of Job. The sufferings 
of the righteous even are themselves manifold. ~God sends 
affliction to them more and more to purge away the sin which 
still has power over them, and rouse them up from the danger 
of carnal security; to maintain in them the consciousness of 
sin as well as of grace, and with it the lowliness of penitence; 
to render the world and its pleasures bitter as gall to them ; 
to draw them from the creature, and bind them to himself 
by prayer and devotion. ‘This suffering, which has the sin 
of the godly as its cause, has, however, not God’s wrath, but 
God’s love directed towards the preservation:and advance- 
ment of the godly, as its motive: itis the proper disciplinary 
suffering (1039 or NZ, Prov. iii. 11; masdela, Heb. xii.), 
It is this of which Paul speaks, 1 Cor. xi. 32. This. discipli- 
nary suffering may attain such a high degree as entirely to 
overwhelm the consciousness of the relation to God by grace; 
and the sufferer, as frequently in the Psalms, considers him- 
self as one rejected of God, over whom the wrath of God is 
passing. The deeper the sufferer’s consciousness of sin, the’ 
more dejected is his mood of sorrow; and still God’s thoughts 
concerning him are thoughts of peace, and not of evil (Jer. 
xxix. 11), He chastens, not however in wrath, but Davina, 
with moderation (Jer. x. 24). 
Nearly allied to this suffering, but yet, as to its cause and 
( purpose, distinct, is another kind of the suffering of the 
godly. God ordains suffering for them, in order to prove 
| their fidelity to himself, and their earnestness after sanctifi- 
| cation, especially their trust in God, and their patience. He 
| also permits Satan, who impeaches them, to tempt them, to 
sift them as.wheat, in order that he may be confounded, and 
the divine choice justified,—in order that it may be manifest 


- , CHAP. V. 22-27... 107 


that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor 
powers, are able to separate them from the love of God, and 
to tear away their faith (mx) from God, which has re- 
mained stedfast on Him, notwithstanding ‘every apparent 
manifestation of wrath. The godly will recognise his afflic- 
tion as such suffering when it comes upon him in the very 
midst of his fellowship with God, his prayer and watching, 
and his struggling after sanctification. For this kind of suf- 
fering—trial—Scripture employs the expressions 7D) (Deut. 
viii. 2, 16) and }03 (Prov. xvii. 3), metpacuds (Jas. i. 12; 1 
Pet. i. 6 sq., iv. 19; comp. Sir. ii. 1, sqq.). Such suffering, 
according to a common figure, is for the godly what the 
smelting-furnace or the fining-pot is to precious metals. A 
rich reward awaits him who is found proof against the trial, 
temptation, and conflict, and comes forth from it as pure, 
refined gold. Suffering for trial is nearly allied to that for 
chastisement, in so far as the chastisement is at the same time 
trial; but distinct from it, in so far_as every | trial is not also 


chastisement (i.e. having as its purpose the purging away of 


2 
A third kind of the suffering of the righteous is testimony 10 } 
L~ . 2? | 


salh. existin g sin). 


borne by suffering,—reproach, persecution, and perhaps even 

martyrdom, which are endured for the sake of fidelity to pr? 
God and His word. While he is blessed who is found proof! ;P__, Yow 
against trial, he is blessed in himself who endures this suffer- (J, y a 
yor 


ing (Matt. v. 11 sq., and other passages); for every other 
In this case there is not even the remotest connection J: 





suffering comes upon man for his own sake, this for God’s. . 





between the suffering and the sinfulness of the sufferer, ! 
Ps. xliv. is a prayer of Israel in the midst of this form of 
suffering. 2tavpos is the name expressly used for it in the 
New Testament—suffering for the kingdom of heaven’s sake. | 
Without a knowledge of these different kinds of human | 
suffering, the book of Job cannot be understood. “ Whoever 


108 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


sees with spiritual eyes,” says Brentius, “does not judge the 
moral character of a man by his suffering, but his suffering 
| md his moral character. af ee of this s spiritual 











Ee 


Fectiacingts the mistake of the fends, and likewise, from the 
very first, the mistake of Eliphaz. Convinced of the sincere 
| piety of his friend, he came to Job believing that his suffer-. 
' ing was a salutary chastisement of God, which would at last 
| turn out for his good. Proceeding upon this assumption, he 
_ blames Job for his murmuring, and bids him receive his 
affliction with a recognition of human sinfulness and the 
divine purpose for good. Thus the controversy begins. The 
causal connection with sin, in which Eliphaz places Job’s 
suffering, is after all the mildest. He does not go further 

than to remind Job that he is a sinner, because he is a man. 
But even this causal connection, in which Eliphaz connects 
Job’s sufferings, though in the most moderate way, with pre- 
vious sin deserving of punishment, is his mp@tov wedédos. 

In the next place, Job’s suffering is indeed not chastisement, 

‘ ¥but trial. Jehovah has decreed it for His servant, not to 
chasten him, but to prove him. ‘This it 1s that Eliphaz mis- 
takes ; and we also should not know it but for the prologue 

and the corresponding epilogue. Accordingly, the prologue 

and epilogue are organic parts of the form of the book. If 

these are removed, its spirit is destroyed. 

( But the speech of Eliphaz, moreover, beautiful and true 
* | as it is, when considered in itself, is nevertheless heartless, 
haughty, stiff, and cold. For (1.) it does not contain a 

, word of sympathy, and yet the suffering which he beholds 

‘}is so terribly great: his first word to his friend after the 

} seven days of painful silence is not one of comfort, but of 
moralizing. (2.) He must know that Job’s disease is not 

the first and only suffering which has come upon him, and 

that he has endured his previous afflictions with heroic sub- 














CHAP. VI. 2-4. 109 


a come upon Job. (3) Instead of recognising 
therein the reason of Job’s despondency, that he thinks that 
he has fallen from the love of God, and become an object of 
wrath, he treats him as self-righteous;* and to excite his 
feelings, presents an oracle to him, which contains nothing 


but what Job might sincerely admit as true. (4.) Instead of . 


considering that Job’s despair and murmuring against God is 
really of a different kind from that of the godless, he classes 
them together, and instead of gently correcting him, presents 
_ to Job the accursed end of the fool, who also murmurs against 
God, as he has himself seen it. Thus, in consequence of the 
false application which Eliphaz makes of it, the truth con- 
tained in his speech is totally reversed. Thus delicately and 
profoundly commences the dramatical entanglement. The 
skill of the poet is proved by the difficulty which the expositor 
has in detecting that which is false in the speech of Eliphaz. 
The idea of the book does not float on ni the suntace, It is 
clothed with flesh and blood. It i is ; submerged in the very 


action and history. pis 






































Job's First Answer.—Chap. vi. vii. 
Schema : 7. 6.7. 6.8. 6. 6. 8. 6. | 6.7. 11. 10.6.8 


[Then began Job, and said : | 
2 Oh that my vexation were but weighed, 
And they would put my suffering in the balance against it! 
3 Then tt would be heavier than the sand of the sea : 
Therefore my words are rash. 
4 The arrows of the Almighty are in me, 
The burning poison whereof drinketh up my spirit ; 


The terrors of Eloah set themselves in array against me. 
1 Qetinger: ‘‘Eliphaz mentioned the oracle to affect seriously ZS 


hidden hypocrisy of Job’s heart.” 





110 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Vexation (¥YD) is what Eliphaz has reproached him with 
(ch. y. 2). Job wishes that his vexation were placed in one 
scale and his 77 (Keri 737) in the other, and weighed together 
(7m), The noun 753 (743), from 79 (7%), flare, hiare, signifies 
properly Aiatus, then vorago, a yawning gulf, ydoya, then 
some dreadful calamity (vid: Hupfeld on Ps. vy. 10). 83, 
like 5102, Isa. xi. 15, to raise the balance, as pendeére, to let 
it hang down; attollant instead of the passive. This is his 
desire ; and if they but understood the matter, it would then 
be manifest (HAYS, as ch. iii. 13, which see), or? indeed 
then would it be manifest (‘2 certainly in this inferential 
position has an affirmative signification : vid. Gen.” xxvi. 22, 
xxix. 32, and comp. 1 Sam, xxv. 34, 2 Sam. ii. 27) that his 
suffering is heavier than the unmeasurable weight of the 
sand of the sea. 23! is neuter with reference to ‘N'). av, 
with the tone on the penult., which is not to be accounted-for 
by the rhythm as in Ps. xxxvii. 20, cxxxvii. 7, cannot be 
derived from nye, but only from 38, not however in the signi- 


fication to suck down, but from mb — myd, Arab, , # or also 


ld, temere loqui, inania effutire,—a signification which suits ex- 
cellently here." His words are like those of one in delirium. 
‘14Y is to be explained according to Ps. xxxviii. 3; OND, 
according to Ps. vii. 15. °A27Y" is short for Sy nondy Ty", 
they make war against me, set themselves in battle array 
against me. Béttcher, without brachylogy: they cause me 
to arm myself, put one of necessity on the defensive, which 
does not suit the subject. The terrors of God strike down 
all defence. The wrath of God is irresistible. The sting 


: yd», Prov. xx. 25, which is doubly accented, and must be pronounced — 


as oxytone, has also this meaning: the snare of a man who has 
thoughtlessly uttered what is holy (an interjectional clause = such an 
one has implicated himself), and after (having made) vows will harbour 

care (i.e. whether he will be able to fulfi] them). 


CHAP. VI. 5-7. 111 


of his suffering, however, is the wrath of God which his 


spirit drinks as a draught of poison (comp. ch. xxi. 20), and ~ 


consequently wrings from him, even from his deepest soul, . 


the thought that God is become his enemy; therefore his is 


an endless suffering, and therefore is it that he speaks so s 


despondingly. 


5 Doth the wild ass bray at fresh grass? 
Or loweth an ox over good fodder ? 
6 Is that which is tasteless eaten unsalted ? 
Or is there flavour in the white of an egg ? 
7 That which my soul refused to touch, 
The same is as my loathsome food. 


The meaning of the first two figures is: He would not 
complain, if there were really no cause for it; of the two 
others: It is not to be expected that he should smile at his 
suffering, and enjoy it as delicate food. imparty I have 
translated “over good fodder,” for rae is mixed fodder of 
different kinds of grain, farrago. “ Without salt” is virtually 
adjective to DBR, insipid, tasteless. What is without salt one 
does not relish, and there is no flavour in the slime of the 
yolk of an egg, z.e. the’ white of an egg (Targ.),' or in the 
slime of purslain (according to Chalmetho in the Peschito, 


7ce . 


Arab, lise fatua = purslain), which is less probable on 


account of 1") (slime, not: broth) : there is no flavour so that 


it can be enjoyed. Thus is it with his sufferings. -Those >) 


things which he before inwardly detested (dirt and dust of 
leprosy) are now sicut fastidiosa cibi mei, i.e. as loathsome 


food which he must eat. The first clause, ver. 7a, must be / 


/ 


taken as an elliptic relative clause forming the subject: vid. 


1 Saadia compares 6. Aboda zara, 40, a, where it is given as a mark of 
the purity of the eggs in the roe of fish: pyp2p wom pinay padn, 
when the white is outside and the yellow within. 


ne 


112 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Ges. § 123, 3, c. Such disagreeable counsel is now like his 
unclean, disgusting diet. Eliphaz desires him to take them 
as agreeable. ‘I in ‘73 is taken by Ges., Ew., Hahn, 
Schlottm., Olsh. (§ 165, 6), as constr. from ‘}, sickness, filth ; 
but "4, as plur. from 41, sick, unclean (especially of female 
menstruation, Isa. xxx. 22), as Heiligst. among modern com- 
mentators explains it, is far more suitable. Hitz. (as anonym. 
reviewer of Ewald’s Job in the liter. Centralblatt) translates : 
they (my sufferings) are the morsels of my food; but the 
explanation of 78 is not correct, nor is it necessary to go to 
the Arabic for an explanation of 73. It is also unnecessary, 
with Béttcher, to read ‘173 (such is my food in accordance 
with my disease); Job does not here speak of his diet as an 
invalid. 


8 Would that my request were fuljilled, 
And that Eloah would grant my eapectation, 
9 That Eloah were willing and would crush me, 
Let loose His hand and cut me off: 
10 Then I should still have comfort— 
(J should exult in unsparing pain)— 
That I have not disowned the words of the Holy One. 


ne His wish refers to the ending of his suffering by death. 
Hupfeld prefers to read ‘18M instead of ‘PM (ver. 8d); 
but death, which he desires, he even indeed expects. This is 
just the paradox, that not life, but death, is his expectation. 
“ Cut me off,” i.e. my soul or my life, my thread of life (ch. 
xxvii. 8; Isa. xxxviii.12). The optative jm’ ‘> (Ges. § 136, 1) 
is followed by optative futt., partly of the so-called jussive 
form, as OS‘, velit (Hiph. from Dy }, velle), and Ih, solvat (Hiph. 
from 13). In the phrase 1 VAN, the stretching out of the 
hand is regarded as the loosening of what was hitherto bound. 
The conclusion begins with ‘7%, just like ch, xiii. 5. But it 
is to be asked whether by consolation speedy death is to be 


CHAP. VI. 11-13. 113 


understood, and the clause with ‘2 gives the ground of his — 


claim for the granting of the wish,—or whether he means that 
just this: not having disowned the words of the Holy One 
(comp. ch. xxiii. 11 Sq.; and ONION in the mouth of Balaam, 


the non-Israelitish prophet, Num. xxiv. 4, 16), would be his. 
consolation in the midst of death. With Hupfeld we decide | 


in favour of the latter, with Ps. cxix. 50 in view: this con- 
sciousness of innocence is indeed throughout the whole book 


Job’s shield and defence. If, however, *N'2M2 (with Kametz _| 


impurum) points towards °3, guod, etc., the clause TIPDNY is 
parenthetical. The cohortative is found thus parenthetical 
with a conjunctive sense also elsewhere (Ps. xl. 6, li. 18). 
Accordingly: my comfort—I would exult, etc.—would be 
that I, etc. The meaning of “oD tripudiare, is confirmed by 


-7) 
4s 


the LXX. 7\Xouny, in connection with the Arabic dhe (of 


a galloping horse which stamps hard with its fore-feet), 
according to which the Targ. also translates 3438) (I will 
rejoice). For oom N?, comp. Isa, xxx. 14 sq. (break in 
pieces unsparingly). bony xd certainly appears as though it 
must be referred to God (Ew., Hahn, Schlottm., and others), 
since nn sounds feminine; but one can either pronounce 
npn = nas Milel (Hitz.), or take Son x} adverbially, and 
not as an elliptical dependent clause (as Ges. § 147, rem. 1), 
but as virtually an adjective: in pain unsparing. 


11 What ts my strength, that I should wait, 
And my end, that I should be patient ? 

12 Is my strength like the strength of stones ? 
Or is my flesh brazen ? 


1 The prithary meaning of sbp, according to the Arabic, is to be hard, 
then, to tread hard, firm, as in pulsanda tellus ; whereas the poetry of 
the synagogue (Pijut) uses bp in the signification to supplicate, and 


bp, litany (not: hymn, as Zunz gives it) ; and the Mishna-talmudic 120 


signifies to singe, burn one’ s self, and to draw back affrighted. 
VOL, I. H 


114 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


13 Or am I then not utterly helpless, 
And continuance is driven from me? 


~ 


“The meaning of the question (ver. 11) is: Is not ay 


strength already so wasted away, and an unfortunate end 
so certain to me, that a long calm waiting is as impossible as 
it is useless? W52 NN, to“draw out the soul, is to extend and 
distribute the intensity of the emotion, to be forbearing, to be 
patient. The question (ver. 11) is followed by O8, usual in 
double questions: or is my strength stone, etc. O80, which 
is so differently explained by commentators, is after all to be 
explained best from Num. xvii. 28, the only other passage in 
which it occurs. Here it is the same as 7 O8, and in Num. 
Non DX: or is it not so: we shall perish quickly altogether ? 
Thus we explain the passage before us. The interrogative 9 
is also sometimes used elsewhere for Non, ch. xx. 4, xli, 1 
(Ges. § 153, 3); the additional O8 stands per inversionem in 
the second instead of the first place: nonne an = an nonne, 
annon: or is it not so: is not my help in me ~or am I 
not utterly helpless? Ewald explains differently (§ 356, a), 
according to which D8, from the formula of an oath, is equiva- 
lent to 5. The meaning is the same. Continuance, 7¥4A, 
i.e. power of endurance, reasonable prospect is driven away, 
frightened away from him, is lost for him. 


14 To him who ie consumed gentleness is due from his friend, 
Otherwise he might forsake the fear of the Almighty. 
15 My brothers are become false as a torrent, 
As the bed of torrents which vanish away— 
16 They were blackish from ‘ce, 
Snow is hidden in them— 
17 In the time, when warmth cometh to them, they are de- 
stroyed. 
It becometh hot, they are extinguished from their place. 


CHAP. VI. 14-17. 115 


Ewald supplies between 14a and 14d two lines which have 
professedly fallen out (“from a brother sympathy is due to 
the oppressed of God, in order he may not succumb to exces- 
sive grief”). Hitzig strongly characterizes this interpolation 
asa * pure swindle.” There is really nothing wanting; but 


we need not even take 70M, with Hitz., in the signification . 


reproach (like Prov. xiv. 34): if reproach cometh to the 
sufferer from his friend, he forsaketh the fear of God. Dd 


(from DD, liguefiert) is one who is inwardly melted, the dis- © 
heartened. Such an one-should receive 195 from his friend, ° 


i.e. that he should restore him év mvevpate mpaiirntos (Gal. 
vi. 1). The waw (ver. 140) is equivalent to aliogui with the 
future subjunctive (vid. Ges. § 127, 5). Harshness might pre- 
cipitate him into the abyss from which love will keep him back. 
So Schnurrer: A flicto eahibenda est ab amico ipsius humani- 
tas, alioqui hic reverentiam Dei exuit. Such harshness. instead 
of charity meets him from his brothers, ze. friends beloved 
as brothers. In vain he has looked to them for reviving 
consolation. Theirs is no comfort; it is like the dried-up 
water of a wady. bn) is a mountain or forest brook, which 
comes down from the height, and in spring is swollen by 
melting ice and the snow that thaws on the mountain-tops ; 
xEluwappous, t.e. a torrent swollen by winter water. The melt- 
ing blocks of ice darken the water of such a wady, and the 
snow falling together is quickly hidden in its bosom (Dpynin). 


angen 


If they begin to be warmed (Pual 21, cognate to 228, Ezek. — 


xxi. 3, aduri, and 5’, comburere), suddenly they are reduced 
to nothing (N83, exstingui); they vanish away 18h, when it 
becomes hot. The suffix is, with Ew., Olsh., and others, to be 
taken as neuter; not with Hirz., to be referred to a suppressed 
ny: when the season grows hot. Job bewails the disappoint- 
ment he has experienced, the “decline” of charity?’ still 
further, by keeping to the figure of the mountain torrent. — 


1 Oetinger says that vers. 15-20 describe those who get ‘‘ consumption” 


116 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


18 The paths of their course are turned about, 
They go up in the waste and perish. 

19 The travelling bands of Téma looked for them, 
The caravans of Saba hoped for them ; 

20 They were disappointed on account of their trust, 
They came thus far, and were red with shame. 


As the text is pointed, NIMs, ver. 18, are the paths of the 
torrents. Hirz., Ew., and Schlottm., however, correct nims, 
caravans, which Hahn even thinks may be understood with- 


out correction, since he translates: the caravans of their way 
are turned about (which is intended to mean: aside from the_ 


way that they are pursuing), march into the desert and perish 
(i.e. because the streams on which they reckoned are dried 
up). So, in reality, all modern commentators understand it ; 
but is it likely that the poet would let the caravans perish in 
ver. 18, and in vers. 19 sq. still live? With this explana- 
tion, vers. 19 sq. drag along tautologically, and the feebler 
figure follows the stronger. Therefore we explain as follows: 
the mountain streams, pron), flow off in shallow serpentine 
brooks, and the shallow waters completely evaporate by the 
heat of the sun. WF2 mby signifies to go up into nothing 


(comp. Isa. xl. 23), after the analogy of jwya nbs, to pass 


away in smoke. Thus e.g. also Mercier: in auras abeunt, 
in nthilum rediguntur. What next happens is related as a 
history, vers. 19 sq., hence the prett. Job compares his 
friends to the wady swollen by ice and snow water, and even 
to the travelling bands themselves languishing for water. 
He thirsts for friendly solace, but the seeming comfort which 
his friends utter is only as the scattered meandering waters 
in which the mountain brook leaks out. The sing. N03 indi- 
vidualizes; it is unnecessary with Olsh. to read 3n03. 


when they are obliged to extend ‘the breasts of compassion” to their 
neighbour. 


CHAP. VI. 21-23 117 


21 For now ye are become nothing ; 
You see misfortune, and are affrighted. 
22 Have I then said, Give unto me, ; 
And give a present for me from your substance, 
23 And deliver me from the enemy's hand, | 
And redeem me from the hand of the tyrant ? 
In ver. 21, the reading wavers between % and x5, with the 
Keri 3; but 45, which is consequently the lectio recepta, gives 
‘no suitable meaning, only in a slight degree appropriate, as 
this: ye are become it, z.e. such a mountain brook; for pn¥n 
is not to be translated, with Stickel and others, estis, but facti 
estis, The Targum, however, translates after the Chethid: 
ye are become as though ye had never been, ¢.e. nothingness. 
Now, since xb, Aramaic MP, can (as Dan. iv. 32 shows) be _ 
used as a substantive (a not =a null), and the thought: ye 
are become nothing, your friendship proves itself equal to 
null, suits the imagery just used, we decide in favour of the 
Chethib ; then in the figure the 7h2 noy corresponds most to ~ 
this, and is also, therefore, not to be éxplained away. The - 
LXX.,, Syr., Vulg., translate % instead of %$: ye are become 
it (such deceitful brooks) to me. Ewald proposes to read 
5 onn mny }> (comp. the explanation, Ges. § 137, rem. 8),— 
a conjecture which puts aside all difficulty ; but the sentence 
with > commends itself as being bolder and more expressive. 
All the rest explains itself. It is remarkable that in ver. 215 
the reading 387A is also found, instead of 817: ye dreaded 
misfortune, and ye were then affrighted. 43) is here, as an 
exception, properispomenon, according to Ges. § 29, 8. 3, 
as Prov. v. 10, Lev. xxvi. 20, what one has obtained by 
putting forth one’s strength, syn. bsn, outward strength. 


24 Teach me, and I will be silent, 
And cause me to understand wherein I have failed. 


118 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


25 How forcible are words in accordance with truth! 

But what doth reproof from you reprove ? 
26 Do you think to reprove words ? 

The words of one in despair belong to the wind. 
27 Ye would even cast lots for the orphan, 

And traffic about your friend. 


7193, ver. 25, in the signification of wNp1D3 (Ps. cxix. 103), 
would suit very well: how smooth, delicate, sweet, are, etc. 
(Hirz., Ew., Schlottm.) ; but this meaning does not suit ch. ° 
xvi. 3. Hupfeld, by comparison with %%, bitter, translates : 
quantumvis acerba; but 7) may signify quidquid, though not 
quantumvis. Hahn compares the Arabic verb to be sick, and 
translates: in what respect are right words bad; but physical 
disease and ethical badness are not such nearly related ideas. 
Ebrard: honest words are not taken amiss; but with an 
inadmissible application of ch. xvi. 3. Von Gerl. is best: 
how strong or forcible are, etc. / is taken as related to 
728, in the signification to penetrate; Hiph. to goad; Niph. 
to be furnished with the property of penetrating,—used here 
of penetrating speech; 1 Kings ii. 8, of a curse inevitably 
carried out; Mic. ii. 10, of unsparing destruction. Words 
which keep the straight way of truth, go to the heart; on 
the contrary, what avails the reproving from you, i.e. which 
_ proceeds from you? 210, inf. absol. as Prov. xxv. 27, and in 
but a few other passages as subject; 03%, as ch. v. 15, the 
sword going forth out of their mouth. In 26d the waw 
introduces a subordinate adverbial clause: while, however, 
the words of one in despair belong to the wind, that they 
may be carried away by it, not to the judgment which retains 
and analyzes them, without considering the mood of which 
they are the hasty expression. The /futt. express the extent 
to which their want of feeling would go, if the circumstances 
for it only existed; they are subjunctive, as ch. iii. 13, 16. 


CHAP. VI. 28-30. 119 


bai, the lot, is to be supplied to %BA, as 1 Sam. xiv. 42. 
The verb 713, however, does not here signify to dig, so that 
nnv, a pit, should be supplied (Heiligst.), still less: dig out 
earth, and cast it on any one (Ebrard); but has the significa- 
tion of buying and selling with °Y of the object, exactly like 


ch. xl. 30. : 


28 And now be pleased to observe me keenly, 

I will not indeed deceive you to your face. 
29 Try it again, then: let there be no injustice ; 

Try tt again, my righteousness still stands. 
30 Is there wrong on my tongue ? 

Or shall not my palate discern iniquity ? 


He begs them to observe him more closely ; 2 723, as Kecl. 5 
ii. 11, to observe scrutinizingly. ON is the sign of negative 
asseveration (Ges. § 155, 2, /). He will not indeed shame- ~ \ 
lessly give them the lie, viz. in respect to the' greatness and 
inexplicableness of his suffering. The challenging 11’ we | 
do not translate: retrace your steps, but: begin afresh, to | 
which both the following clauses are better suited. So _ 
Schlottm. and von Gerlach. Hahn retains the Chethib ‘21, 
in the signification: my answer; but that is impossible: to 
answer is 2WF, not av. The ny drawn to inv by Redia 
mugrasch is more suitably joined with na“pty, in which 73 
refers neutrally to the matter of which it treats. They are 
to try from the beginning to find that comfort which will 
meet the case. Their accusations are now ; his complaints, 
on the contrary, are fully justified. He does not grant that me 
the outburst of his feeling of pain (ch. ili.) is mow : he has 
not so completely lost his power against temptation, that he 
would not restrain himself, if he should fall into nko, Thus 
wickedness, which completely contaminates feeling and utter-_/ 
ance, is called (Ps. lii. 4). 

Job now endeavours anew to justify his complaints by 


pte , 


oe 


120 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


fe , turning more away from his friends and more towards God, 
but without penetrating the darkness in which God, the 
es author of his suffering, is veiled from him. 


Ch. vii. 1 Has not man a warfare upon earth, 
And his days are like the days of a hireling ? 
2’ Like a servant who longs for the shade, 
And like a hireling who waits for his wages, 
3 So am I made to possess months of disappoint- 
ment, 
And nights of weariness are appointed to me. 


The conclusion is intended to be: thus I wait for death as 
refreshing and rest after hard labour. He goes, however, 
beyond this next point of comparison, or rather he remains on 
this side of it. S2¥ is not service of a labourer in the field, 
but active military service, then fatigue, toil in general (Isa. 
x]. 20; Dan. x. 1). Ver. 2 Ewald and others translate incor- 
rectly: as a slave longs, etc. 2 can never introduce a com- 
parative clause, except an infinitive, as e.g: Isa. v. 24, which 
can then under the regimen of this 2 be continued by a verb. 
jin.; but it never stands directly for wy, as 1123 does in rare 
instances. In ver. 3, SW retains its primary signification, 
nothingness, error, disappointment (ch. xv. 31): months that 
one after another disappoint the hope of the sick. By this it 

/ seems we ought to imagine the friends as not having come 

/ at the very commencement of his disease. Elephantiasis is a 
disease which often lasts for years, and slowly but inevitably 

_ destroys. the body. On 39, adnumeraverunt = adnumerate 

\ sunt, vid. Ges. § 137, 3*. | 


4 If I lie down, I think: 
When shall I arise and the evening break sails , 
And I become weary with tossing to and fro until the 
morning dawn. 


CHAP. VII. 4-6. 121 


5 My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of earth ; 

My skin heals up to fester again. 
6 My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle, 

And vanish without hope. 

Most modern commentators take 779 as Piel from TID : 
the night is extended (Renan: la nuit se prolonge), which is 
possible ; comp. Ges. § 52, 2. But the metre suggests another 
rendering : 1") constr. of 719 from 173, to flee away: and when 
fleeing away of the evening. The night is described by its 
commencement, the late evening, to make the long interval 
of the sleeplessness and restlessness of the invalid prominent. 
In p73 and 15 there is a play of words (Ebrard). 159, 
worms, in reference to the putrifying ulcers; and waa (with - 
xvyr ’3), clod of earth, from the cracked, scaly, earth-coloured 
skin of one suffering with elephantiasis. The prett. are used 
of that which is past and still always present, the fuét. consec. 
of that which foilows in and with the other. The skin heals, 
¥21 (which we render with Ges., Ew., contrahere se); the 
result is that it becomes moist again. DN‘, according to Ges. _ 
-§ 67, rem. 4 = DD’, Ps. lviii. 8. His days pass swiftly away ; 
the result is that they come to an end without any hope what- 
ever. 78 is like xepxis, radius, a weaver’s shuttle, by means 
of which the weft is shot between,the threads of the warp as 
they are drawn up and down. His days pass as swiftly by as 
the little shuttle passes backwards and forwards in the warp. 

Next follows a prayer to God for the termination of his 
pain, since there is no second life after the present, and con- 
sequently also the possibility of requital ceases with death. 

7 Remember that my life is a breath, 

That my eye will never again look on prosperity. 
8 The eye that looketh upon me seeth me no more ; 
Thine eyes look for me,—I am no more ! 


122 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


9 The clouds are vanished and passed away, 
So he that goeth down to Sheél cometh not up. 
10 He returneth no more to his house, 
And his place knoweth him no more. / 
11 Therefore I will not curb my mouth ; 
I will speak in the anguish of my spirit ; 
I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. 
* 
/~ We sce good, %.e. prosperity and joy, only in the present 
life. It ends with death. 2 with > injin. is a synonym 
~ of arp, ch. xx. 9. No eye ({Y femin.) which now sees me 
(prop. eye of my seer, as Gen. xvi. 13, comp. Job xx. 7, Ps. 
xxxi. 12, for 285, Isa. xxix. 15, or ‘285, Isa. xlvii. 10 ; accord- 
ing to another reading, *S) : no eye of seeing, t.e. no eye with 
the power of seeing, from ‘8, vision) sees me again, even if 
ae thy eyes should be directed towaiide me to help me; my life 
is gone, so that I can no more be the subject of help. For 
from Shedl there is no return, no resurrection (comp. Ps. ciii. 
16 for the expression); therefore will I at least give free course 
to my thoughts and feelings (comp. Ps. Ixxvii. 4, Isa. xxxviii. 
/ 15, for the expression). The 53, ver. 11, is the so-called D3 
talionis; the parallels cited by Michaelis are to the point, 
( Rack. xvi. 43, Mal. ii. 9, Ps. lii. 7. Here we first meet with 
the name of the lower world; and in the book of Job we 
learn the ancient Israelitish conception of it more exactly than 
~ anywhere else. We have here only to do with the name in 
connection with the grammatical exposition. Sines (usually 
gen. fem.) is now almost universally derived from by = bye), 
to be hollow, to be deepened; and aptly so, for they irhagined 
the Shedl as under ground, as Num. xvi. 30, 33 alone shows, 
on which account even here, as from Gen: xxxvil. 35 on- 
wards, niey 1) is everywhere used. It is, however, open to 
question whether this derivation is correct: at least passages 
like Isa, v. 14, Hab. ii. 5, Prov. xxx. 15 sq., show that in the 


CHAP. VII. 12-16; 123 


later usage of the language, ON, to demand, was thought of 
in connection with it; derived from which Sheél signifies 
(1) the appointed inevitable and inexorable demanding of 
everything earthly (an infinitive noun like ADDN, HPB); (2) 
conceived of as space, the place of shadowy duration whither 
everything on earth is demanded; (3) conceived of accord- 
ing to its nature, the divinely appointed fury which gathers@ 
in and engulfs everything on the earth. . Job knows nothing 


of a demanding back, a redemption from Sheél. /, 


12 Am I a sea or a sea-monster, 
That thou settest a watch over me ? 
13 For I said, My bed shall comfort me ; 
My couch shall help me to bear my complaint. 
14 Then thou scaredst me with dreams, 
And thou didst wake me up in terror from visions, 
15 So that my soul chose suffocation, 
Death rather than this skeleton. 
16 I loathe it, I would not live alway ; 
Let me alone, for my days are breath. 


Since a watch on the sea can only be designed to effect the 
necessary precautions at its coming forth from the shores, 
it is probable that the poet had the Nile in mind when he 


used O°, and consequently the crocodile by }3". The Nile is : 


also called D’ in Isa. xix. 5, and in Homer @xeaves, Egyptian 
oham (= @xeavos), and is even now called (at least by the 


Bedouins) bahhr Jad: The illustrations of the book, says 


von Gerlach correctly, are chiefly Egyptian. On the con- 
trary, Hahn thinks the illustration is unsuitable of the Nile, 
because it is not watched on account of its danger, but its 


utility ; and Schlottman thinks it even small and contemptible . 


without assigning a reason. The figure is, however, appro- 
priate. As watches are set to keep the Nile in channels as 


\ 


} 


) 


124 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


( 


soon as it breaks forth, and as men are set to watch that 
they may seize the crocodile immediately he moves here or 
there ; so Job says all his movements are checked at the © 
very commencement, and as soon as he desires to be more 


\— cheerful he feels the pang of some fresh pain. In ver. 13, 3 
after 82 is partitive, as Num. xi. 17; Mercier correctly : non- 


nihil querelam meam levabit. If he hopes for such repose, it 
forthwith comes to nought, since he starts up affrighted from 
his slumber. Hideous dreams often disturb the sleep of those 


suffering with elephantiasis, says Avicenna (in Stickel, S. 


£170). Then he desires death; he wishes that his difficulty 
i _of breathing would increase to suffocation, the usual end of 


it PM with Schlottm.), as e.g. DIN, Isa. x. 6 (Ewald, § 160, c). 
He prefers death to these his bones, z.e. this miserable skeleton 
or framework of bone to which he is wasted away. He 
despises, ze. his life, ch. ix. 21. Amid such suffering he 
would not live for ever. oan, like 0), ver. 7. 


— elephantiasis. P21 is absolute (without being obliged to point 


17 What is man that Thou magnifiest him, 
And that Thou turnest Thy heart toward him, 
18 And visitest him every morning, 
Triest him every moment ? 
19 How long dost Thou not look away from me, 
Nor lettest me alone till I swallow down my spittle ? 


~*~ The questions in ver. 17 sq. are in some degree a parody 


on Ps. viii. 5, comp. exliv. 3, Lam. iii. 23. There it is said 
that God exalts puny man to a kingly and divine position 


. among His creatures, and distinguishes him continually with 


new tokens of His favour; here, that instead of ignoring 
him, He makes too much of him, by selecting him, perishable 
as he is, as the object of ever new and ceaseless sufferings. 
MD, quamdiu, ver. 19, is construed with the pret. instead of 
the fut.: how long will it continue that Thou turnest not 


CHAP. VII. 20, 21. - 125 


away Thy look of anger from me? as the synonymous ‘277, | 
quousque, is sometimes construed with the pret. instead of the 
fut. e.g. Ps. Ixxx. 5. “Until I swallow my spittle” is a'pro- 1) 
verbial expression for the minimum of time. - ad 
20 Have I sinned—what could Ido to Thee? ! 

O Observer of men, 

Why dost Thou make me a mark to Thee, 

And am I become a burden to Thee? 

21 And why dost Thou not forgive my transgression, 

And put away my iniquity ? 

For now I will lay myself in the dust, 

And Thou seekest for me, and I am no more. 


“T have sinned” is hypothetical (Ges. § 155, 4, a): 
granted that I have sinned. According to Ewald and Olsh., 
so-bypss mt defines it more particularly: I have sinned by 7, ; 
what I have done to Thee, in my behaviour towards Thee ; but yy 
how tame and meaningless such an addition would be! It is 
an inferential question: what could I do to Thee? i.e. what 
harm, or also, since the fut. may be regulated by the pret.: 
what injury have I thereby done to Thee? The thought ~ \ 
that human sin, however, can detract nothing from the 
blessedness and glory of God, underlies this. With a measure 
of sinful bitterness, Job calls God ntwn 12, the strict and 
constant observer of men, per convicium fere, as Gesenius not 
untruly observes, nevertheless without a, breach of eins 
divinum (Renan: O Espion de Chomme), since. the appella- 
tion, in itself worthy of God (Isa. xxvii. 3), is used here only | 
somewhat unbecomingly. 259 is not the target for shooting / 
at, which is rather 8! (ch. xvi. 12, Lam. iii. 12), but the 
object on which one rushes with hostile violence (2 38). 
Why, says Job, hast Thou made me the mark of hostile 
attack, and why am I become a burden to Thee? It is not 
so in our text; but according to Jewish tradition, by, which 


/ 


rG 


126 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


we now have, is only a DID jpn, correctio scribarum,' for 
+>y, which was removed as bordering on blasphemy: why | 
am I become a burden to Thee, so that Thou shouldest seek 
to get rid of me? This reading I should not consider as the 
original, in spite of the tradition, if it were not confirmed by 
the LXX., eiul dé emi col dopriov. 
Here Job’s second speech ends; it consists of two parts, 
which the division of chapters has correctly marked. The 
~~ first part is addressed to the friends (nowhere specially to . 

Eliphaz), because Job at once considers the address of 
Eliphaz as at the same time an expression of the thoughts 
and disposition of the two others who remain sileht. In the 
second part he turns direct to God with his complaints, 
desponding inquiries, and longing for the alleviation of his 
sufferings before his approaching end. The correct estimate 
of this second speech of Job depends upon the right under- 
standing of that of Eliphaz. It is not to be supposed that 
Job in this speech makes too much of his dignity and merit, 
as that he intends expressly to defend his innocence, or even 
enter into the controversy (Ew., Léwenth.) ; for Eliphaz does 
not at present go so far as to explain his suffering as the 
suffering commonly inflicted as punishment. When Job (ch. 
vi. 10) incidentally says that he does not disown the words of 
the Holy One, it does not imply that his sufferings may be 
chastisement : on the contrary, Job even allows the possibility 
that he should sin; but since his habitual state is fidelity to 
God, this assumption is not sufficient to account for his 
suffering, and he does not see why God should so unmerci- 
fully visit such sinfulness instead of pardoning it (ch. vii. 
20, 21). 

It is not to be objected, that he who is fully conscious of 
sin cannot consider the strictest divine punishment even of 


1 Vid. the Commentary on Habakkuk, 8. 206-208; comp. Geiger, 
Urschrift und Uebersetzungen der Bibel, 8. 308 ff. 





CHAP. VII. 20, 21. 127 


the smallest sin unjust. The suffering of one whose habitual 
state is pleasing to God, and who is conscious of the divine 
favour, can never be explained from, and measured according 
to, his infirmities: the infirmities of one who trusts in God, 
or the believer, and the severity of the divine justice in the 


. punishment of sin, have no connection with one another. _ 


Consequently, when Eliphaz bids Job regard his affliction as 
chastisement, Job is certainly in the wrong to dispute with 
God concerning the magnitude of it: he would rather 
patiently yield, if his faith could apprehend the salutary 
design of God in his affliction; but after his affliction once 
seems to him to spring from wrath and enmity, and not from 
the divine purpose of mercy, after the phantom of a hostile 
God is come between him and the brightness of the divine 
countenance, he cannot avoid falling into complaint of un- 
mercifulness. For this the speech of Eliphaz is in itself not 
to blame: he had most feelingly described to him God’s 


merciful purpose in this chastisement, but he is to blame for 


not having taken the right tone. . 
The speech of Job is directed against the unsympathetic 
and reproving tone which the friends, after their long silence, 


have assumed immediately upon his first manifestation of — 


anguish. He justifies to them his complaint (ch. iii.) as the 
natural and just outburst of his intense suffering, desires 
speedy death as the highest joy with which God could re- 


ward his piety, complains of his disappointment in his friends, — 


from whom he had expected affectionate solace, but by whom 
he sees he is now forsaken, and earnestly exhorts them to 
acknowledge the justice of his complaint (ch. vi.). But can 
they? Yes, they might and should. For Job thinks he is 
no longer an object of divine favour: an inward conflict, 
which is still more terrible than hell, is added to his outward 
suffering. For the damned must give glory to God, because 
they recognise their suffering as just punishment: Job, how- 


— a 


4 


128 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


ever, in his suffering sees the wrath of God, and still is at the 
same time conscious of his innocence. The faith which, in 
the midst of his exhaustion of body and soul, still knows and 
feels God to be merciful, and can call him “ my God,” like 
Asaph in Ps. lxxiii.,—this faith is well-nigh overwhelmed in 
Job by the thought that God is his enemy,, his pains the 


\_ arrows of God. The assumption is false, but on this assump- 


tion Job’s complaints (ch. iii.) are relatively just, including, 
what he himself says, that they are mistaken, tlioughtless 
words of one in despair. But that despair is sin, and there- ~ 
fore also those curses and despairing inquiries ! 


‘a Is not Eliphaz, therefore, in the right? His whole treat- | 


ment is wrong. Instead of distinguishing between the com- 
plaint of his suffering and the complaint of God in Job’s 
outburst of anguish, he puts them together, without recog- 
nising the complaint of his suffering to be the natural and 
-unblameable result of its extraordinary magnitude, and as a 
sympathizing friend falling in with it. But with regard to 
the complaints of God, Eliphaz, acting as though careful for 
his spiritual welfare, ought not to have met them with his 
reproofs, especially as the words of one heavily afflicted de- 


| serve indulgence and delicate treatment; but he should have’ 
_combated their false assumption. First, he should have said — 
cto Job, “Thy complaints of thy suffering are just, for thy 


suffering is incomparably great.” In the next place, “ Thy 
cursing thy birth, and thy,complaint of God who has given 
thee thy life, might seem just if it were true that God has 
rejected thee; but that is not true: even in suffering He 
designs thy good; the greater the suffering, the greater the 
glory.” By this means Eliphaz should have calmed Job’s 
despondency, so as to destroy his false assumption; but he 
begins wrongly, and consequently what he says at last so 
truly and beautifully respecting the glorious issue of a patient 
endurance of chastisement, makes no impression on Job, He 


CHAP. VII. 20, 21. 129 


has not fanned the faintly burning wick, but his speech is a 
cold and violent breath which is calculated entirely to extin- 
guish it. | 


After Job has defended the justice of -his complaints — 


against the insensibility of the friends, he gives way anew to 


. ; j a if 
lamentation. Starting from the wearisomeness of human life * 


in general, he describes the greatness of his own suffering, 
which has received no such recognition on the part of the 
friends: it is a restless, torturing death without hope (ch. 
vii. 1-6). Then he turns to God: O remember that there 
is no second life after death, and’ that I am soon gone for 
ever; therefore I will utter my woe without restraint (vii. 
7-11). Thus far (from ch. vi. 1 onwards) I find in Job’s 
speech no trace of blasphemous or sinful despair. When he 
says (ch. vi. 8-12), How I would rejoice if God, whose word 
I have never disowned, would grant me my request, and end 
my life, for I can no longer bear my suffering,—I cannot with 
Ewald see in it despair rising to madness, which (ch. vii. 10) 
even increases to frantic joy. For Job’s disease was indeed 
really in the eyes of men as hopeless as he describes it. In 
an incurable disease, however, imploring God to hasten death, 
and rejoicing at the thought of approaching dissolution, is not 
a sin, and is not to be called despair, inasmuch as one does 
~ not call giving up all hope of recovery despair. 

Moreover, it must not be forgotten that the book of Job 
is an oriental book, and therefore some allowance must be 
made for the intensity and strength of conception of the 
oriental nature: then that it is a poetical book, and that frenzy 
and madness may not be also understood by the intensified 
expression in which poetry, which idealizes the real, clothes 
pain and joy: finally, that it is an Old Testament book, and 
that in the Old Testament the fundamental nature of man is 
indeed sanctified, but not yet subdued; the spirit shines forth 
as a light in a dark place, but the day, the ever constant con- 

' VOL, I. I 


/ 


—- 


130 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


sciousness of favour and life, has not yet dawned. The 
desire of a speedy termination of life (ch, vi. 8-12) is in ch. 
vii. 7-11 softened down even to a request for an alleviation 
of suffering, founded on this, that death terminates life for 
ever. In the Talmud (b. Bathra, 16, a) it is observed, on 


this passage, that Job denies the resurrection of the dead 


(o'non OYNna IVS WADw jx20); but Job knows nothing of a 
resurrection of the dead, and what one knows not, one cannot 
deny. He knows only that after death, the end of the present 
life, there is no second life in this world, only a being in 
Sheél, which is only an apparent existence = no existence, 
in which all praise of God is silent, because He no longer 
reveals himself there as to the living in this world (Ps. vi. 6, 
xxx. 10, Ixxxviii. 11-13, cxv.17). From this chaotic con- 
ception of the other side of the grave, against which even the 
psalmists still struggle, the doctrine of the resurrection of the 
dead had not been set forth at the time of Job, and of the 
author of the book of Job. The restoration of Israel buried 


in exile (Ezek. xxxvii.) first gave the impulse to it; and the 


resurrection of the Prince of Life, who was laid in the grave, 
set the seal upon it. The resurrection of Jesus Christ was 
first of all the actual overthrow of Hades. 

Mortis seu inferni, observes Brentius, in accordance with 
Scripture, ea conditio est, ut natura sua quoscunque comprehen- 
derit tantisper teneat nec dimittat, dum Christus, filius Dei, 
morte ad infernum descenderit, h.e. perierit ; per hune enim 
devicta morte et inferno liberantur quotquot fide renovati sunt. 
This great change in the destiny of the dead was incomplete, 
and the better hope which became brighter and brighter as 
the advent of death’s Conqueror drew near was not yet in 
existence. For if after death, or what is the same thing, 
after the descent into Sheél, there was only a non-existence 
for Job, it is evident that on the one hand he can imagine a 
life after death only as a return to the present world (such a 


CHAP. VII. 20, 21. * 131 


return does, however, not take place), on the other hand that 
no divine revelation said anything to him of a future life 
which should infinitely compensate for a return to the present 
world. And since he knows nothing of a future existence, it 
can consequently not be said that he denies it: he knows 
nothing of it, and even his dogmatizing friends have nothing 
to tell him about it. We shall see by and by, how the more 
his friends torment him, the more he is urged on in his long- 
ing for a future life; but the word of revelation, which could 


alone change desire into hope, is wanting. The more tragic | 


and heart-rending Job’s desire to be freed by death from his 
unbearable suffering is, the more touching and importunate 
is his prayer that God may consider that now soon he can no 
longer be an object of His mercy. Just the same request is 
found frequently in the Psalms, e.g. Ps. Ixxxix. 48, comp. 
cilil, 14-16: it involves nothing that is opposed to the Old 
Testament fear of God. Thus far we can trace nothing of 
frenzy and madness, and of despair only in so far as Job 


has given up the hope (wx) of his restoration,—not how-~ 


ever of real despair, in which a man impatiently and forcibly 
snaps asunder the bond of trust which unites him to God. If 
the poet had anywhere made Job to go to such a length in 
despair, he would have made Satan to triumph over him. 
Now, however, the last two strophes follow in which Job is 
hurried forward to the use of sinful language, ch. vii. 12-16: 
Am I a sea or a sea-monster, etc.; and ch. vii. 17-21: What 
is man, that thou accountest him so great, etc. We should 
nevertheless be mistaken if we thought there were sin here 
in the expressions by which Job describes God’s hostility 
against himself. We may compare eg. Lam. iii. 9, 10: “ He 
hath enclosed my ways with hewn stone, He hath made my 
paths crooked; He is to me as a bear lying in wait, a lion in 
the thicket.” It is, moreover, not Job’s peculiar sin that he 
thinks God has changed to an enemy against him ; that is the 


132 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


view which comes from his vision being beclouded by the 
conflict through which he is passing, as is frequently the case 
in the Psalms. His sin does not even consist in the inquiries, 
How long? and Wherefore? The Psalms in that case would 


abound in sin. But the sin is that he dwells upon these 


; 
: 


| 


doubting questions, and thus attributes apparent mercilessness 


\ and injustice to God. And the friends constantly urge him 


J 


on still deeper in this sin, the more persistently they attribute 
his suffering to his own unrighteousness. Jeremiah (in ch. 
iii. of the Lamentations), after similar complaints, adds : Then 
I repeated this to my heart, and took courage from it: the 
mercies of Jehovah, they have no end; His compassions do 
not cease, ete. Many of.the Psalms that begin sorrowfully, 
end in the same way; faith at length breaks through the 
clouds of doubt. But it should be remembered that the 


_change of spiritual condition which, eg. in Ps. vi., is con- 


Mi 
; 
; 


densed to the narrow limits of a lyric composition of eleven 


' verses, is here in Job worked out with dramatical detail as a 
' passage of his life’s history: his faith, once so heroic, only 


smoulders under ashes; the friends, instead of fanning it to 
a flame, bury it still deeper, until at last it is set free from its 


bondage by Jehovah himself, who appears in the whirlwind. 


Bildads First. Speech.—Chap. viii. 
Schema: 6.7. 6. 10. 8. 6.4 


[Then began Bildad the Shuhite, and said :] 
2 How long wilt thou utter such things, 
And the words of thy mouth are a boisterous wind? 


1 We will give an example here of our and Ewald’s computation of 
the strophes. ‘In the speech of Bildad, ch. viii.,” says Ewald, Jahrb. ix. 
35, ‘* the first part may go to ver. 10, and be divided into three strophes 
of three lines each.” This is right; but that the three strophes consist 
of three lines, i.e. according to Ewald’s use of the word, three (Masoretic) 


CHAP. VIII. 2-4 133 


3 Will God reverse what is right, 
Or the Almighty reverse what is just ? 
4 When thy children sinned against Him, 
He gave them over to the hand of their wickedness. 


Bildad* begins harshly and self-confidently with quousque 
tandem, }8~TY instead of the usual MIN“TY, mY, not: this, but: 
of this kind, of such kind, as ch. xii. 3, xvi. 2. 33 0% is 
poetical, equivalent to noi m, ch. i. 19; M9 is gen. comm. in 
the signification wind as well as. spirit, although more fre- 
quently fem. than mase. He means that Job’s speeches are 
like the wind in their nothingness, and like a boisterous wind 
in their vehemence. Bildad sees the justice of God, the 
_ Absolute One, which ought to be universally acknowledged, 
impugned in them. In order not to say directly that Job’s 


verses, is accidental. There are three strophes, of which the first con- 
sists of six lines = stichs, the second of seven, the third again of six. 
‘* Just so then,” Ewald proceeds, ‘‘ the second part, vers. 11-19, is easily 
broken up into like three strophes,” viz. vers. 11-13, 14-16,17-19. But 
strophes must first of all be known as being groups of stichs forming a » 
complete sense (Sinngruppen). They are, according to their idea, groups 
of measured compass, as members of a symmetrical whole. Can we, 
however, take vers. 14-16 together as such a complete group? In his 
edition of Job of 1854, Ewald places a semicolon after ver. 16; and 
rightly, for vers. 16-19 belong inseparably together. Taking them thus, 
we have in the second part of the speech three groups. In the first, 
vers. 11-15, the godless are likened to the reed; and his_house in pro- 
sperity to a spider’s web, since its perishableness, symbolized by the reed, 
is proved (qy’x, ver. 14). In the second, vers. 16-19, follows the figure 
of the climbing plant which ver. 19 (@ntDy") seems to indicate. In the 
third, vers. 20-22, the figure is given up, and the strophe is entirely epi- 
mythionic. Of these three groups, the first consists of ten, the second of 
eight, and the third of six lines = stichs. The schema is therefore as we 
have given it above: 6. 7. 6. 10. 8.6. We are only justified in calling 
these groups strophes by the predominance of the hexastich, which 
occurs at the beginning, middle, and close of the speech. 

1 Nothing can be said respecting the signification of the name saba 


even as a probable meaning, unless perhaps = s1753, sine mammis, i.e. 
brought up without his mother’s milk. 


2 . 
134 THE BOOK OF JOB 


children had. died such a sudden death on account of their 
sin, he speaks conditionally. If they have sinned, death is 
just the punishment of their sin. God has not arbitrarily 
swept them away, but has justly given them over to the 
destroying hand of their wickedness,—a reference to the 
prologue which belongs inseparably to the whole. 


5 If thou seekest unto God, 

And makest supplication to the Almighty, 
6 If thou art pure and upright ; 

Surely! He will care for thee, 

And restore the habitation of thy righteousness ; 
7 And if thy beginning was small, 

Thy end shall be exceeding great. 


There is still hope for Job (AAS, in opposition to his chil- 
dren), if, turning humbly to God, he shows that, although 
not suffering undeservedly, he is nevertheless pure and up- 
right in his inmost mind. Ver. 6a is so intended; not as 

Mercier and others explain: si in posterum puritati et justitie 
~ studueris. N78 IM, to turn one’s self to God earnestly 
seeking, constr. pregnans, like Dymo wi, ch. v. 8. Then 
begins the conclusion with MAy73, like ch. xii. 18. “The 
habitation of thy righteousness” is Job’s household cleansed 
and justified from sin. God will restore that ; pbvs might also 
signify, give peace to, but restore is far more appropriate. 
Completely falling back on nov, the Piel signifies to recom- 
pense, of like being returned for like, and to restore, of a 
complete covering of the loss sustained. God will not only 
restore, but increase beyond measure, what Job was and had. 
The verb. mase. after NNN here is remarkable. But we need 
not, with Olsh., read 73%: we may suppose, with Ewald, 
according to 174, e, that nns is purposely treated as mase. 
It would be a mistake to refer to Prov. xxiii. 82, xxix. 21, in 
support of it. 


CHAP. VIII. 8-10. . 135 


8 For inquire only of former ages, 
And attend to the research of their fathers— 
9 For we are of yesterday, without experience, 
Because our days upon earth are a shadow— 
10 Shall they not teach thee, speak to thee, 
And bring forth words from their heart ? 


This challenge calls Deut. xxxii. 7 to mind. 732? is to be 
supplied to }252; the conjecture of Olshausen, {3)3}, is good, 
but unnecessary. Nw is after the Aramaic form of writing, 
comp. ch. xv. 7, where this and the ordinary form are com- 
bined. The “research of their fathers,” ¢.e. which the fathers 
of former generations have bequeathed to them, is the col- 
lective result of their research, the profound wisdom of the 
ancients gathered from experience. Our ephemeral and 
shadowy life is not sufficient for passing judgment on the 
dealings of God; we must call history and tradition to our 
aid. We are oon (per apheresin, the same as Pion), yes- 
terday = of. yesterday; it is not necessary to read, with 
Olshausen, IDA, There is no occasion for us to suppose 
that ver. 9 is an antithesis to the long duration of the life of 
primeval man. 2 (ver. 10) is not the antithesis of mouth; 
but has the pregnant signification of a feeling, 2.e. intelligent 
heart, as we find 225 ws, a man of heart, i.e. understanding, 
ch. xxxiv. 10, 34. 38S), promunt, calls to mind Matt. xiii. 
52. Now follow familiar sayings of the ancients, not directly 
quoted,.but the wisdom of the fathers, which Bildad endea- 
vours to reproduce. 


11 Doth papyrus grow up without mire ? 
Doth the reed shoot up without water ? 

12 Jé is still in luxuriant verdure, when tt is not cut off, 
Then before all other grass tt withereth. 

13 So is the way of all forgetters of God, 


136 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


And the hope of the ungodly perisheth, 

14 Because his hope is cut off, 
And his trust is a spider's house: 

15 He leaneth upon his house and it standeth not, 
He holdeth fast to it and it endureth not. 


- 


Bildad likens the deceitful ground on which the prosperity 
of the godless stands to the dry ground on which, only for a 
time, the papyrus or reed finds water, and grows up rapidly: 
shooting up quickly, it withers as quickly ; as the papyrus 
plant; if it has no perpetual water, though the finest of 
grasses, withers off when most luxuriantly green, before it 
attains maturity. 23, which, excepting here, is found only in 
connection with Egypt (Ex. ii. 8, Isa. xviii. 2; and Isa. xxxv. 7, 
with the general 73? as specific name for reed), is the proper 


papyrus plant (Cypérus papyrus, L.): this name for it is | 


suitably derived in the Hebrew from 83, to suck up (comp. 
Lucan, iv. 186: conseritur bibuld Memphytis ceymba papyro) 
but is at the same time Egyptian, since Coptic kam, cham, 
signifies the reed, and ’gém, ’gdme, a book (like liber, from 
the bark of a tree).? 398, occurring only in the book of Job 
and in the history of Joseph, as Jerome (Opp. ed. Vallarsi, 


iv. 291) learned from the Egyptians, signifies in their lan- 


guage, omne quod in palude virem nascitur : the word is trans- 


' Vid. Champollion-Figeac, Aegypten, German translation, pp. 47 sq. 

* Comp. the Book of the Dead (Todtenbuch), ch. 162: ‘* Chapter on 
the creation of warmth at the back of the head of the deceased: Words 
over a young cow finished in pure gold. Put them on the neck of the 
dead, and paint them also on a new papyrus,” etc. Papyrus is here 
cama: the word is determined by papyrus-roll, fastening and writing, 
and its first consonant corresponds to the Coptic aspirated g. _ Moreover, 
we cannot omit to mention that this cama = géme also signifies a gar- 
ment, as in a prayer: ‘‘O my mother Isis, come and veil me in thy 
cama.” Perhaps both ideas are represented in volumen, involucrum ; it 
is, however, also possible that gome is to be etymologically separated 
from kam, cham = yp}. 


CHAP, VIII. 11—15. 137 


ferred by the LXX. into their translation in the form dys 
(ayer), and became really incorporated into the Alexandrian 
Greek, as is evident from Isa. xix. 7 (nny, LXX. Kal ro dye 
TO xAwpov) and Sir. xl. 16 (diye ert tavros Udatos Kal yeldous 
ToTamov Mpo TavTos YopTouv éexTiAjoeTar) ; the Coptic trans- 
lates pi-akhi, and moreover ake, oke signify in Coptic calamus, 
juncus.’ * 9p" NS describes ifs ‘condition: in a condition in 
which it is not ready for being gathered. By Ws, quippe, 
quoniam, this end of the man who forgets God, and of the 
42M, i.e. the secretly wicked, is more particularly described. 
His hope ip, from DOP, or from Dip, med. o,’ in neuter 
signification succiditur. One would indeed expect a figure 
corresponding to the spider’s web earlier; and accordingly 
Hahn, after Reiske, translates: whose hope is a gourd,—an. 
_ absurd figure, and linguistically impossible, since the gourd 
or cucumber is 8%8P, which has its cognates in Arabic and 
Syriac. Saadia® translates: whose hope is the thread of the 
sun. The “thread of the sun” is what we call the fliegender 
Sommer or Altweibersommer, [7.e. the sunny days in the latter 
months of the year]: certainly a suitable figure, but unsup- 
portable by any parallel in language.* We must therefore 


1 The tradition of Jerome, that \nx originally signifies viride, is sup- 
ported by the corresponding use of the verb in the signification to be 
green. So in the Papyr. Anastas. No. 3 (in Brugsch, Aeg. Geographie, 
S. 20, No. 115): naif hesbu achach em sim, his fields are green with 
herbs; and in a passage in Young, Hieroglyphics, ii. 69: achechut uot as ° 
em senem’t, the beautiful field is green with senem. The second radical 
is doubled in achech, as in wot-uet, which certainly signifies viriditas. 
The substantive is also found represented by three leaf-stalks on one 
basis ; its radical form is ah, plural, weaker or stronger aspirated, ahu or 
akhu, greenness: comp. Salvolini, Campagne de Rhamsées le Grand, p. 117 ; 
and Brugsch, above, 8. 25. 

2 Both are possible; for even from pop, the mode of writing, pip’, is 
not without numerous examples, as Dan. xi. 12, Ps. xciv. 21, evii. 27. 

3 Vid. Ewald-Dukes’ Beitrdge zur Gesch. der diltesten Auslegung, i. 89. 

4 Saadia’s interpretation cannot be supported from the Arabic, for 
the Arabs call the ‘‘ Altweibersommer” the deceitful thread (el-chaitt el- 


138 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


suppose that iP’, succiditur, first gave rise to the figure which 
follows :. as easily as a spider’s web is cut through, without 
offering any resistance, by the lightest touch, or a breath of 
wind, so that on which he depends and trusts is cut asunder. 
The name for spider’s web, %*23Y °3,' leads to the descrip- 
tion of the prosperity of the ungodly by Nn’ (ver. 15): His 
house, the spidér’s house, is not firm to him. Another figure 
follows: the wicked in his prosperity is like a climbing plant, 
which grows luxuriantly for a time, but suddenly perishes. ; 


16 He swells with sap in the sunshine, 
And his branch spreads itself over his garden. 
17 His roots intertwine over heaps of stone, 
He looks upon a house of stones. 
18 Lf He casts him away from his place, 
Lt shall deny him: I have not seen thee. 
19 Behold, thus endeth his blissful course, 
And others spring forth from the dust. 


The subject throughout is not the creeping-plant directly, 
but the ungodly, who is likened to it. Accordingly the ex- 


wstt 2 


bdttil), or ‘‘sunslime or spittle” (lu'ab es-schems), or pons (a word 
ce 


which Ewald, Jahrb. ix. 38, derives from Weis = Dip’, a word which 
does not exist, and 4c, chaff, a word which is not Arabic), from -eich., 
- to roam about, to be dispersed, to perish, vanish.: From this radical 
signification, chaita dr, like many similar old Arabic words with a fulness 
of figurative and related meaning, is become an expression for a number 
of different things, which may be referred to the notion of roaming about 
and dispersion. Among others, as the Turkish Kamus says, ‘t That 
thing which on extremely hot days, in the form of a spider’s web, looks 
as though single threads came down from the atmosphere, which is caused 
by the thickness of the air,” etc. The form brought forward by Ew., 


written with > or 4», is, moreover, a fabrication of our lexicons (F'l.). 

' The spider is called yaasy, for w»aasy, Arabic ‘ancabuth, for which 
they say ‘accabuth in Saida, on ancient Phoenician ground, as atta (thou) 
for anta (communicated by Wetzstein). 


CHAP, VIII. 20-22. 139 


pression of the thought is in part figurative and in part 
literal, MM D338 Na (ver. 175). As the creeper has stones 


eeeseies 
vel 


before it, and by its interwindings, as it were, so rules them 
that it may call them its own (v. Gerlach: the exuberant 
growth twines itself about the walls, and looks proudly down 
upon the stony structure) ; so the ungodly regards his fortune 
as a solid structure, which he has quickly caused to spring up, 
and which seems to him imperishable. Ewald translates: he 
separates one stone from another; 13, according to § 217, g, 
he considers equivalent to 123, and signifies apart from one 
another; but although 4!f = th, according to its radical idea, 
may signify to split, pierce through, still M3, when used as a 
preposition, can signify nothing else but, within. Others, e.g. 
Rosenmiiller, translate: he marks a place of stones, ¢.e. meets 
with a layer of stones, against which he strikes himself; for 
this also M°2 will not do. He who casts away (ver. 18) is not 
the house of stone, but God. He who has. been hitherto 
prosperous, becomes now as strange to the place in which he 
flourished so luxuriantly, as if it had never seen him. Behold, 
that is the delight of his way (course of life), i.e. so fashioned, 
so perishable is it, so it ends. From the ground above which 
he sprouts forth, others grow up whose fate, when they have 
no better ground of confidence than he, is the same. After 
he has placed before Job both the blessed gain of him who 
trusts, and the sudden destruction of him who forgets, God, 
as the result of the whole, Bildad recapitulates : 


20 Behold! God despiseth not the perfect man, 
And taketh not evil-doers by the hand. 

21 While He shall fill thy mouth with laughing, 
And thy lips with rejoicing, 

22 They who hate thee shall be clothed with shame, 
And the tent of the ungodly is no more. 


“'To take by the hand,” 1.2. ready to help as His own, as Isa. 


140 THE BOOK OF JOB. | 


xli. 13, xlii. 6. Instead of 7Y (ver. 21), there is no great diffi- 
culty in reading “iy: again (as eg. Ps. xlii. 6) He will fill; 
but even 7Y is supportable ; it signifies, like ch. i. 18, Ps. exli. 
10, while. On the form 73%, vid. Ges. § 75, 21, 6. This 
close of Bildad’s speech sounds quite like the Psalms (comp. 
.Ps. exxvi. 2 with ver. 21; Ps. xxxv. 26, cix. 29, exxxii. 18, 
with ver. 22). Bildad does all he can to win Job over. He 
calls the ungodly 782”, to show that he tries to think and 
expect the best of Job. 

We have seen that Job in his second speech charges God 
with the appearance of injustice and want of compassion. 
The friends act as friends, by not allowing this to pass with- 
out admonition. After Job has exhausted himself with his 
plaints, Bildad enters into the discussion in the above speech. 
He defends the justice of God against Job’s unbecoming 
words. His assertion that God does not swerve from the right, 
is so true that it would be blasphemy to maintain against him 
that God sometimes perverts the right. And Bildad seems 
also to make the right use of this truth when he promises 
a glorious issue to his suffering, as a substantial proof that 
God does not deal unjustly towards him ; for Job’s suffering 
does actually come to such an issue, and this issue in its ac- 
complishment destroys the false appearance that God had 
been unjust or unmerciful towards him. Bildad expresses 
his main point still more prudently, and more in accordance 
with the case before him, when he says, “ Behold! God does — 
not act hostilely towards the godly, neither does He make 
common cause with the evil-doer” (ver. 20),—a confession 
which he must allow is on both sides the most absolute truth. 
By the most telling figures he portrays the perishableness of 
the prosperity of those who forget God, and paints in glowing 
colours on this dark background the future which awaits Job. 
What is there in this speech of Bildad to censure, and how is 
it that it does not produce the desired cheering effect on J ob ? 


CHAP. VIII. 20-22. 141 


It is true that nothing that God sends to man proceeds 
from injustice, but it is not true that everything that He 
sends to him comes from ‘His justice. As God does not 
ordain suffering for the hardened sinner in order to improve 
him, because He is merciful, so He does not ordain suffering 
for the truly godly in order to punish him, because He is 
just. What we call God’s attributes are only separate phases 
of His indivisible holy being,—ad extra, separate modes of His 
operation in which they all share,—of which, when in opera- 
tion, one does not act in opposition to another; they are not, 
however, all engaged upon the same object at one time. One 
cannot -say that God’s love manifests itself in action in hell, 
nor His anger in heaven; nor His justice in the afflictions of 
the godly, and His mercy in the sufferings of the godless. 

Herein is Bildad’s mistake, that he thinks his common- 
place utterance is sufficient to explain all the mysteries of 
human life. We see from his judgment of Job’s children 
how unjust he becomes, since he regards the matter as the 
working out of divine justice. He certainly speaks hypothe- 
tically, but in such a way. that he might as well have said 
directly, that their sudden death was the punishment of their 
sin. If he had found Job dead, he would have considered 
him as a sinner, whom God had carried off in His anger. Even 
now he has no pleasure in promising Job help and blessing ; 
accordingly from his point of view he expresses himself very 
conditionally: If thou art pure and upright. We see from 
this that his belief in Job’s uprightness is shaken, for how 
could the All-just One visit Job with such severe suffering, 
if he had not deserved it! Nevertheless Ans 1w Jt ON (ver. 
6) shows that Bildad thinks it possible that Job’s heart may 
be pure and upright, and consequently his present affliction 
may not be peremptory punishment, but only disciplinary 
chastisement. Job must—such is Bildad’s counsel—give 
God glory, and acknowledge that he deserves nothing better ; 


142 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


and thus humbling himself beneath the just hand of God, he 
will be again made righteous, and exalted. 

Job cannot, however, comprehend his suffering as an act 
of divine justice. His own fidelity is a fact, his conscious- 
ness of which cannot be shaken: it is therefore impossible for 
him to deny it, for the sake of affirming the justice of God; 
for truth is not to be supported by falsehood. Hence Bildad’s 
glorious promises afford Job no comfort. -Apart from their 
being awkwardly introduced, they depend upon an assumption, 
the truth of which Job cannot admit without being untrue to 
himself. Consequently Bildad, though with the best intention, 
only urges Job still further forward and deeper into the conflict. 

But does, then, the confessioh of sin on the part of con- 
stantly sinful man admit of his regarding the suffering thus 
appointed to him not merely not as punishment, but also not 
as chastisement? If a sufferer acknowledges the excessive 
hideousness of sin, how can he, when a friend bids him regard 
his affliction as a wholesome chastisement designed to mortify 
sin more and more,—how can he receive the counsel with 
such impatience as we see in the case of Job? The utter- 
ances of Job are, in fact, so wild, inconsiderate, and unworthy 
of God, and the first speeches of Eliphaz and Bildad on the 
contrary so winning and appropriate, that if Job’s affliction 
ought really to be regarded from the standpoint of chastise- 
ment, their tone could not be more to the purpose, nor 
exhortation and comfort more beautifully blended. Even 
when one knows the point of the book, one will still be con- 
stantly liable to be misled by the speeches of the friends ; it 
requires the closest attention to detect what is false in them. 
The poet’s mastery of his subject, and the skill with which he 
exercises it, manifests itself in his allowing the opposition of 
the friends to Job, though existing in the germ from the very 
beginning, to become first of all in the course of the con- 
troversy so harsh that they look upon Job as a sinner under- 


CHAP. VIII. 20-22. 143 


going punishment from God, while in opposition to them he 
affirms his innocence, and challenges a decision from God. 

The poet, however, allows Bildad to make one declaration, 
from which we clearly see that his address, beautiful as it is, 
rests on a false basis, and loses its effect. Bildad explains the 
sudden death of Job’s children as a divine judgment. He 
could not have sent a more wounding dart into Job’s already 
broken heart; for is it possible to tell a man anything more 
heart-rending than that his father, his mother, or his children 
have died as the direct punishment of their sins? One would 
not say so, even if it should seem to be an obvious fact, and 
least of all to a father already sorely tried and brought almost 
to the grave with sorrow. Bildad, however, does not rely 
upon facts, he reasons only & priori. He does not know that 
Job’s children were godless; the only ground of his judgment 
is the syllogism: Whoever dies a fearful, sudden death must 
be a great sinner; God has brought Job’s children to such a 
death; ergo, etc. Bildad is zealously affected for God, but 
without understanding. He is blind to the truth of experi- 
ence, in order not to be drawn away from the truth of his 
premiss. He does not like to acknowledge anything that 
furnishes a contradiction to it. It is this same rationalism of 
superstition or credulity which has originated the false doc- 
trine of the decretum absolutum. With the same icy and 
unfeeling rigorism with which Calvinism refers the divine 
rule, and all that happens upon earth, to the one principle’ 
of absolute divine will and pleasure, in spite of all the contra- 
dictions of Scripture and experience, Bildad refers everything 
to the principle of the divine justice, and, indeed, divine jus- 
tice in a judicial sense. 

There is also another idea of justice beside this judicial 
one. Justice, API¥ or PT¥, is in general God’s dealings as 
ruled by His holiness. Now there is not only a holy will of 
God concerning man, which says, Be ye holy, for I am holy; 


144 THE BOOK OF Jos. 


but also a purpose for the redemption of unholy man spring- 
ing from the holy love of God to man. Accordingly justice 
is either the agreement of God’s dealings with the will of 
His holiness manifest in the demands of the law, apart from 
redemption, or the agreement of His dealings with the will 
of His love as graciously manifested in'the gospel ; in short, — 
either retributive or redemptive. If one, as Bildad, in the first 
sense says, God never acts unjustly, and glaringly maintains 
it as universally applicable, the mystery of the divine dispen- 
sations is not made clear thereby, but destroyed. Thus also 
Job’s suffering is no longer a mystery: Job suffers what he 
deserves ; and if it cannot be demonstrated, it is to be assumed 
in contradiction to all experience. This view of his affliction 
does not suffice to pacify Job, in spite of the glorious pro- 
mises by which it is set off. His conscience bears him witness 
that he has not merited such incomparably heavy affliction ; 
and if we indeed suppose, what we must suppose, that Job was" 
in favour with God when this suffering came upon him, then 
the thought that God deals with him according to his works, 
perhaps according to his unacknowledged sins, must be alto- 
gether rejected. 

(Fod does not punish His own; and when He chastises 
them, it is not an act of His retributive justice, but of His 
disciplinary love. This motive of love, indeed, belongs to 
chastisement in common with trial; and the believer who 
clearly discerns this love will be able to look upon even the 
severest affliction as chastisement without being led astray, 
because he knows that sin has still great power in him; and 
the medicine, if it is designed to heal him, must be bitter. If, 
therefore, Bildad had represented Job’s affliction as the chas- 
tisement of divine love, which would humble him in order the 
more to exalt him, then Job would have humbled himself, 
although Bildad might not be altogether in the right. But 
Bildad, still further than Eliphaz from weakening the erro- 


CHAP. VIII 20-22. 145 


neous supposition of a hostile God which had taken possession 
of Job’s mind, represents God’s justice, to which he attributes 
the death of his children, instead of His love, as the hand 
‘under which Job is to humble himself. Thereby the comfort 
which Job’s friend offers becomes to him a torture, and his 
trial is made still greater ; for his conscience does not accuse 
him of any sins for which he should now have an angry 
instead of a gracious God. 

But we cannot even here withhold the confession that the 
composition of such a drama would not be possible under the 
New Testament. The sight of the suffering of Christ and 
the future crown has a power in calming the mind, which 
makes such an outburst of sorrow as that of Job impossible 
even under the strongest temptation. “If the flesh should 
murmur and cry out, as Christ even cried out and was feeble,” 
says Luther in one of his consolatory letters (Rambach, 
Kleine Schriften Luthers, S. 627), “the spirit nevertheless is 
ready and willing, and with sighings that cannot be uttered 
will cry : Abba, Father, it is Thou; Thy rod is hard, but Thou 
art still Father ; I know that of a truth.” And since the con- 
sciousness of sin is as deep as the consciousness of grace, the 
Christian will not consider any suffering so severe but that 
he may have deserved severer on account of his sins, even 
though in the midst of his cross he be unable clearly to 
recognise the divine love. Even such uncharitable, cold- 
hearted consolation as that of Eliphaz and Bildad, which bids 
him regard the divine trial as divine chastisement, cannot 
exasperate him, since he is conscious of the need for even 
severer divine chastisement; he need not therefore allow the 
uncharitableness of the friend to pass without loving counter- 
exhortations. 

Hengstenberg observes, in the Ezcursus to his Commentary 
on the Psalms, that the righteousness on which the plea to be 
heard is based in the Psalms, like Ps. xvii., xviii. 21 sqq., 

VOL. I. K 


146 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


xliv. 18-23, is indeed a righteousness of conduct resting on 
righteousness by faith, and also this again is only to be consi- 
dered as the righteousness of endeavour ; that moreover their 
strong tone does not sound altogether becoming, according to 
our consciousness. We should expect each time, as it happens 
sometimes urgently (e.g. Ps. cxlili. 2), the other side,—that 
human infirmity which still clings to the righteous should 
be. made prominent, and divine forgiveness for it implored, 
instead of the plea for deliverance being based on the incon~ 
gruity of the affliction with the sufferer’s consciousness of 
righteousness towards God. We cannot altogether adopt 
such psalms and passages of the Psalms as expressive of our 
Christian feeling; and we are scarcely able to read them in 
public without hesitation when we attempt it. Whence is 
this? Hengstenberg replies, “The Old Testament wanted 
the most effectual means for producing the knowledge of sin » 
—the contemplation of the sufferings of Christ. The New 
Testament, moreover, possesses a more powerful agency of 
the Spirit, which does not search more into the depths of the 
divine nature than it lays open the depths of sin. Hence in 
Christian. songs the sense of sin, as it is more independent of 
outward occasions than formerly, so it is also more openly 
disclosed and more delicate in itself; its ground is felt to lie 
deeper, and also the particular manifestations. It was good 
that under the Old Covenant the cords of sinful conviction 
were not strung too tightly, as the full consolation was still 
not to be found. The gulph closed up again when the suffer- 
ings were gone.”* Such is the actual connection. And this 
development of the work of redemption in the history of 
mankind is repeated in the individual experience of every 
believer. As the individual, the further he progresses in the 
divine life, becomes the more deeply conscious of the natural 


1 Vid. Hengstenberg’s Commentary on the Psalms, iii., Appendix, p. 
lxiii. Clark's Foreign Theological Library. 1854. 


CHAP, IX, 2-4. . : 147 


depravity of man, and acquires a keener and still keener per- 
ception of its most subtle working ; so in the New Testament, 
with the disclosure of actual salvation, a deeper insight into 
sin is also given. When the infinite depth and extent of the 
kingdom of light is unveiled, the veil is for the first time 
removed from the abyss of the kingdom of darkness. Had 
the latter been revealed without the former in the dispensation 
before Christ, the Old Testament would have been not only 
what it actually was in connection with the then painful con- 
sciousness of sin and death,—a school of severe discipline pre- 
paratory to the New Testament, a school of ardent longing 
for redemption,—but would have become an abyss of despair. 


Job's Second Answer.—Chap. ix. x. 
Schema: 6. 6. 6. 10. 10. 9: 8. 9. | 9 (ch. ix. 34x. 2). 11. 10.12. 11. 


[Then Job began, and said :] 
2 Yea, indeed, I know tt is thus, 
And how should a man be just with God! 
3 Should he wish to contend with God, 
He could not answer Him one of a thousand. 


4 The wise in heart and mighty in strength, 
Who hath defied Him and remained unhurt ? 


Job does not (ver. 2) refer to what Eliphaz said (ch. 
iv. 17), which is similar, though still not exactly the same ; 
but “indeed I know it is so” must be supposed to be an 
assent to that which Bildad had said immediately before. 
The chief thought of Bildad’s speech was, that God does not 
pervert what is right. Certainly (0298, scilicet, nimirum, like 
ch. xil. 2),—says Job, as he ironically confirms this maxim of 
Bildad’s,—it is so: what God does is always right, because 
God does it; how could man maintain that he is in the right 
in opposition to God! If God should be willing to enter 
into controversy with man, he would not be able to give Him 


148 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


information on one of a thousand subjects that might be 
brought into discussion ; he would be so confounded, so dis- 
armed, by reason of the infinite distance of the feeble creature 
from his Creator. The attributes (ver. 4a) belong not to 
man (Olshausen), but to God, as ch. xxxvi. 5. God is wise 
of heart (22 = vods) in putting one question after another, 
and mighty in strength in bringing to nought every attempt 
man may make to maintain his own right; to defy Him ("¥PA, 
to harden, i.e. 119, the neck), therefore, always tends to the 
discomfiture of him who dares to bid Him defiance. 


5 Who removeth mountains without their knowing, 
That He hath overturned them in His wrath ; 

6 Who causeth the earth to shake out of its place, 
And its pillars to tremble ; 

7 Who commandeth the sun, and tt riseth not, 
And sealeth up the stars. 


wT Nor (ver. 5a) may also be translated: without one’s 
| perceiving it or knowing why ; but it is more natural to take 
the mountains as the subject. “WS, quod, that (not “as,” 
Ewald, § 333, a), after YT, as Ezek. xx. 26, Eccl. viii. 12. 
Even the lofty mountains are quite unconscious of the change 
which He effects on them in a moment. Before they are 
aware that it is being done, it is over, as the pret. implies ; 
the destructive power of His anger is irresistible, and effects 
its purpose suddenly. He causes the earth to start up from 
its place (comp. Isa. xiii. 13) which it occupies in space (ch. 
xxvi. 7); and by being thus set in motion by Him, its pillars 
tremble, i.e. its internal foundations (Ps. civ. 5), which are 
removed from human perception (ch. xxxviii. 6). It is not 
the highest mountains, which are rather called the pillars, as 
it were the supports, of heaven (ch, xxvi. 11), that are meant. 
By the same almighty will He disposes of the sun and stars. 
The sun is here called DIN (as in Judg. xiv. 18 7070 with 


CHAP. IX. 8-10. 149 


unaccented ah, and as Isa. xix. 18 ‘Jr ha-Heres is a play upon 
DIN WY, “HAvovz7ronus), perhaps from the same root as 7H, 
one of the poetical names of gold. At His command the sun 
rises not, and He seals up the stars, z.e. conceals them behind 
thick clouds, so that the day becomes dark, and the night is 
not made bright. One may with Schultens think of the 
Flood, or with Warburton of the Egyptian darkness, and the 
standing still of the sun at the word of Joshua; but these 
are only single historical instances of a fact here affirmed as 
a universal experience of the divine power. 


8 Who alone spreadeth out the heavens, 
And walketh upon the heights of the sea ; 
9 Who made the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades, 
And the chambers of the south ; 
10 Who doeth great things past finding out, 


And wondrous things without number. 


Ewald, Hirzel, and others, understand 73 (ver. 8) according 
to Ps. xviii. 10: He letteth down the clouds of heaven, and 
walketh on the heights of the sea of clouds, z.e. high above 
the towering thunder-clouds. But parallel passages, such as 
Isa. xl. 22, Ps. civ. 2, and especially Isa. xliv. 24, show that 
ver. 8a is to be understood as referring to the creation of the 
firmament of heaven; and consequently 10) is to be taken in 
the sense of expandere, and is a form of expression naturally 
occurring in connection with the mention of the waters which 
_ are separated by means of the y'p1. The question arises, 
whether 0° here means the sea of waters above the firmament 
or upon the earth. According to the idea of the ancients, 
the waters which descend as rain have their habitation far 
away in the infinite expanse of the sky; the ocean of the sky. 
(Egyptian Nun-pa), through which the sun-god Ra sails every 
day, is there. It is possible that “the heights of the sea”. 
here, and perhaps also “the roots of the sea” (ch. xxxvi. 30), 


150 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


/ 


may mean this ocean of the sky, as Hahn and Schlottmann 
suppose. But it is not necessary to adopt such an explana- 
tion, and it is moreover hazardous, since this conception of 
the celestial @¢\acca is not found elsewhere (apart from 
Apoe. iv. 6, xv. 2, xxii. 1). Why may not ‘93, which is 
used of the heights of the clouds (Isa. xiv. 14), be used also 
of the waves of the sea which mount up towards ‘heaven 
(Ps. cvii. 26)? God walks over them as man walks on level 
ground (LXX. repiratav éri Oardoons ws én’ edddovs) 3 _— 
they rise or lie calmly beneath His feet according to His 
almighty will (comp. Hab. iii. 15). | 

Job next describes God as the Creator of the stars, by 
introducing a constellation of the northern (the Bear), one 
of the southern (Orion), and one of the eastern sky (the 


Cr 


Pleiades). ¥, contracted from W32, Arabic (Axi, a bier, 


is the constellation of seven stars (septentrio or septentriones) 
in the northern sky. The Greater and the Lesser Bear 
form a square, which the Arabs regarded as a bier; the 
three other stars, bendth n‘asch, i.e. daughters of the bier 
(comp. ch. xxxvill. 32), seem to be the mourners. DD is 
Orion chained to the sky, which the ancients regarded as a 
powerful giant, and also as an insolent, foolish fellow’ (K. 
O. Miiller, Kleine deutsche Schriften, ii. 125). *1°3 is the 


Pleiades, a constellation consisting of seven large and other 
Gi 


smaller stars, Arabic |: Ps which, like the Hebrew (comp. 


Res, cumulus), signifies the heap, cluster (vid. ch. xxxviii. 31), 


and is compared by the Persian poets to a bouquet formed of 
jewels. It is the constellation of seven stars, whose rising 
1 The Arabic (\al> is similar, which combines the significations, an 


ignorant, foolhardy, and passionate man (vid. Fleischer, Ali’s hundert 
Spriiche, 8. 115 f.). 


CHAP. IX. 11-15. 151 


and setting determined the commencement and end of their 
voyages (meds, probably = constellation of navigation), 
and is to be distinguished from the northern septentriones. 
jo") “TN are, according to the Targ., the chambers of the 
constellations on the south side of the heavens, as also most 
expositors explain them (Mercier: sidera que sunt in altero 
hemispherio versus alterum polum antarcticum), according to 
which jf, or written defectively 2A, would therefore be 
equivalent to jon ‘3213; or perhaps, in a more general mean- 
ing, the regions of the southern sky (penetralia), which are 
veiled, or altogether lost to view (Hirzel). In ver. 10, Job 
says, almost verbatim, what Eliphaz had said (ch. v. 10). 
Job agrees with the friends in the recognition of the power 
of God, and intentionally describes those phases of it which 
display its terrible majesty. But while the friends deduce 
from this doctrine the duty of a humble deportment on the 
part of the sufferer, Job uses it to support the cheerless truth 
that human right can never be maintained in opposition to 


the absolute God. 


11 Behold, He goeth by me and I see not, 
And passeth by and I perceive Him not. 
12 Behold, He taketh away, who will hold Him back? 
Who will say to Him: What doest Thou? 
13 Eloah restraineth not His anger, 
The helpers of Rahab stoop under Him— 
14 How much less that I should address Him, 
That I should choose the right words in answer to Him; 
15 Because, though I were right, I could not answer,— 
To Him as my Judge I must make supplication. 


God works among men, as He works in nature, with a 
supreme control over all, invisibly, irresistibly, and is not re- 
sponsible to any being (Isa. xlv. 9). He does not turn or 
restrain His anger without having accomplished His purpose 


152 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


This is a proposition which, thus broadly expressed, is only 
partially true, as is evident from Ps. lxxviii. 38. The helpers 
of Rahab must bow themselves under Him. It is not feasible 
to understand this in a general sense, as meaning those who 
are ready with boastful arrogance to yield succour to any 
against God. The form of expression which follows in ver. 
14, “much less I,” supports the assumption that 37 "IY 
refers to some well-known extraordinary example of wicked 
enterprise which had been frustrated, notwithstanding the 
gigantic strength by which it was supported; and 39¥ may 
be translated by the present tense, sincé a familiar fact is 
used as synonymous with the expression of an universal 
truth. Elsewhere Rahab as a proper name denotes Egypt 
(Ps. Ixxxvii. 4), but it cannot be so understood here, because 
direct references to events in the history of Israel are con- 
trary to the character of the book, which, with remarkable 
consistency, avoids everything that is at all Israelitish. But 
how has Egypt obtained the name of Rahab? It is-evident 
from Isa. xxx. 7 that it bears this name with reference to its 
deeds ‘of prowess; but from Ps, Ixxxix. 11, Isa. li. 9, it is 
evident that Rahab properly denotes a sea-monster, which 
has become the symbol of Egypt, like tannin and leviathan 
elsewhere. This signification of the word is also supported 
by ch. xxvi. 12, where the LXX. actually translate «xjros, 
as here with remarkable freedom, iz’ adtod éxdupOnoav Kytn 
ta im ovpavov. It is not clear whether these “ sea-monsters” 
denote rebels cast down into the sea beneath the sky, or 
chained upon the sky ; but at any rate the consciousness of a 
distinct mythological meaning in 375 “Ty is expressed by this 
translation (as also in the still freer translation of Jerome, 
et sub quo curvantur qui portant orbem); probably a myth 
connected with such names of the constellations as K#jros and 
IIpicris (Ewald, Hirz., Schlottm.). The poesy of the book 


of Job even in other places does not spurn mythological 


CHAP. IX. 16-20. 153 


allusions; and the phrase before us reminds one of the Hindu. 
myth of Jndras’ victory over the dark demon Vritras, who 
tries to delay the descent of rain, and over his helpers. In 
Vritras, as in 379, there is the idea of hostile resistance. _ 
Job compares himself, the feeble one, to these mythical 
titanic powers in ver. 14.. *D 4S (properly: even that), or even 
AS alone (ch. iv. 19), signifies, according as the connection 
introduces a climax or anti-climax, either quanto magis or 
quanto minus, as here: how,much less can I, the feeble one, 
dispute with Him! “Wk, ver. 15, is best taken, as in ch. v. 5, 
in the signification guoniam. The part. Poel ‘OY we should 
_ more correctly translate “ my disputant” than “my judge ;” 
it is Poel which Ewald appropriately styles the conjugation of 
attack: DEY, judicando vel litigando aliquem petere; comp. Ges. 
§ 55, 1. The part. Kal denotes a judge, the part. Poel one 
who is accuser and judge at the same time. On such Poel- 
forms from strong roots, vid. on Ps: cix. 10, where wedorschu is 
to be read, and therefore it is written W7) in correct Codices. 


16 If when I called He really answered, 
I could not believe that He would hearken to me ; 
17 He would rather crush me in a tempest, 
And only multiply my wounds without cause ; 
18 He would not suffer me to take my breath, 
But would fill me with bitter things. 
‘19 Lf tt ts a question of the strength of the strong—: “ Be- 
hold here!” | 
And if of right—: “ Who will challenge me ?” 
20 Were I in the right, my mouth must condemn me ; 
Were I innocent, He would declare me guilty. 


The answer of God when called upon, i.e. summoned, is 
represented in ver. 16a as an actual result (pret. followed 
by fut. consec.), therefore ver. 16 cannot be intended to 
express: I could not believe that He answers me, but: I 


154 ; THE BOOK OF JOB. 


could not believe that He, the answerer, would hearken to 
me; His infinite exaltation would not permit such conde- 
scension. The 1wx which follows, ver. 17a, signifies either 
quippe qui or quoniam ; both shades of meaning are after all 
blended, as in ver. 15. The question arises here whether pw 
signifies conterere, or as cognate form with 4NXw, inhiare,—a 
question also of importance in the exposition of the Protevan- 
gelium. ‘There are in all only three passages in which it 
occurs : here, Gen. iii. 15, and Ps. exxxix.11. In Ps. exxxix. 
11 the meaning conterere is unsuitable, but even the signifi- 
cation inhiare can only be adopted for want of a better: 
perhaps it may be explained by comparison with yy, in the 
sense of obvelare, or as a denominative from 4W2 (the verb of 
which, 3, is. kindred to 33, ow3, flare) in the signification 
obtenebrare. In Gen. iil. 15, if regarded superficially, the 
meaning inhiare and conterere are alike suitable, but the 
meaning inhiare deprives that utterance of God of its pro- 
_ phetic character, which has been recognised from the begin-— 
ning; and the meaning conterere, contundere, is strongly 
supported by the translations. We decide in favour of this 
meaning also in the present passage, with the ancient trans- 
lations (LX X. éxrpiyn, Targ. PAP, comminuens). More- 
over, it is the meaning most generally supported by a com- 
parison with the dialects, whereas the signification inhiare 
can only be sustained by comparison with }xw and the Arabic | 
sdfa (to sniff, track by scent, to smell); besides, “to assail 
angrily” (Hirz., Ewald) is an inadmissible contortion of 
inhiare, which signifies in a hostile sense “ to seize abruptly” 
(Schlottm.), properly to snatch, to desire to seize. | 
Translate therefore : He would crush me in a tempest and 
multiply (multiplicaret), etc., would not let me take breath 
(respirare), but (3, Ges. § 155, 1, e. a.) fill me (29°23, with 
Pathach with Rebia mugrasch) with bitter things (09, with 
Dag. dirimens, which gives the word a more pathetic expres- 


CHAP. IX. 21-24, 155 


sion). The meaning of ver. 19 is that God stifles the attempt 
to maintain one’s right in the very beginning by His being 
superior to the creature in strength, and not entering into a 
dispute with him concerning the right. 133 (for "237 as 738, 
ch. xv. 23, for #8): see, here I am, ready for the contest, is 
the word of God, similar to guts citare possit me (in Jer. xlix. 
19, 1. 44), which sounds as an echo of this passage. The 
creature must always be in the wrong,—a thought true in 
itself, in connection with which Job forgets that God’s right 
in opposition to the creature is also always the true objective 
right. ‘5, with suffix, accented to indicate its logical connec- 
tion, as ch. xv. 6: my own mouth.’ In *WPy the Chirek of 
the Hiphil is shortened to a Sheva, as 1 Sam. xvii. 25; vid.. 
Ges. § 53, rem. 4. The subject is God, ‘not “my mouth” 
(Schlottm.) : supposing that I were innocent, He would put 
me down as one morally wrong and to be rejected. 


21 Whether I am innocent, I know not myself, 
My life is offensive to me. 

22 There is one thing—therefore I maintain—: 
The innocent and wicked He destroyeth. 

23 If the scourge slay suddenly, 

_ He laugheth at the melting away of the innocent. 
24 Countries are given into the hand of the wicked ; 
The countenance of its rulers He veileth— 

Is it not so, who else doeth it? 


Ver. 21 is usually considered to be an affirmation of inno- 
cence on the part of Job, though without effect, and even 
at the peril of his own destruction: “I am innocent, I boldly 
say it even with scorn of my life” (Schnurr., Hirz., Ewald, 
Schlottm.). But although ‘W52 YS x? may mean: I care 


? Olshausen’s conjecture, }'8, lessens the difficulty in Isa. xxxiv. 16, 


but here it destroys the strong expression of the violence done to the 
moral consciousness. 


156 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


nothing for my soul, ze. my life (comp. Gen. xxxix. 6), its 
first meaning would be: I know not my soul, ¢.e. myself ; and 
this sense is also quite in accordance with the context. He 
is innocent, but the contradiction between his lot and his 
innocence seems to show that his self-consciousness is decep- 
tive, and makes him a mystery to himself, leads him astray: 
respecting himself; and having thus become a stranger to 
himself, he abhors this life of seeming contradictions, for 
which he desires nothing less than its long continuance (vid. 
ch. vii. 16). The 8] NO8 which follows we do not explain: 
“it is all the same to me whether [I live or not,” but: it is all 
one whether man is innocent or not. He himself is a proof 
of this; therefore he maintains, ete. It is, however, also 
possible that this expression, which is similar in meaning to 
Eccles. ix. 2 (there is one event, 1M Mp», to the righteous 
and to the wicked), and is well translated in the Targ. by 
sw Nd'DD stn (there is one measure of retribution, x29 = 
MD, wérpov, Matt. vii. 2), refers to what follows, and that 
“therefore I maintain” is parenthetical (like ‘nx, Ps. exix. 
57; ox %, Isa. xlv. 24), and we have translated it accord- 
ingly. There is certainly a kind of suspense, and }>~Sy intro- 
duces an assertion of Job, which is founded upon the fact of 
the continuance of his own misfortune,—an assertion which 
he advances in direct contradiction to the friends, and which 
is expressly censured by Elihu. 

In vers. 23 sq., by some striking examples, he completes the 
description of that which seems to be supported by the con- 
flict he is called to endure. iv, a scourge, signifies a judg- 
ment which passes over a nation (Isa. xxviii. 15). It sweeps 
off the guiltless as well, and therefore Job concludes that 
God delights in 7D, zeipacjds, trial (compare above, p. 7, 
note), or perhaps more correctly the melting away (from DD», 
as ch. vi. 14) of the guiltless, ze. their dissolution in anguish 
and dismay, their wearing away and despondency. Jerome 


CHAP, IX. 25-28. 157 


rightly remarks that in the whole book Job says nihil asperius 
than what he saysin ver. 23. Another example in favour of 
his disconsolate 87 Nns is that whole lands are given into 
the hand of the wicked: the monarch is:an evil man, 
and the countenance of their judges He (God) covers, 
so that they do not distinguish between right and wrong, 
nor decide in favour of the former rather than of the 
latter. God himself is the final cause of the whole: if not, 
i.e. if it is not so, who can it then be that causes it? 5S 
(four times in the book of Job instead of the usual form 
_§IBS) is, according to the current opinion, placed per hyper- 
baton in the conditional instead of the interrogative clause ; 
and ) ‘58 are certainly not, with Hirzel, to be taken together. 
There is, however, not a proper hyperbaton, but \28 here 
gives intensity to the question; though not directly as ch. 
xvii. 15 (Ges. § 153, 2), but only indirectly, by giving in- 
tensity to that which introduces the question, as ch. xxiv. 25 
and Gen. xxvii. 87; translate therefore: if it really is not so 
(comp. the Homeric expression et 5 dye). It is indisputable 
that God, and no one else, is the final cause of this misery, 
apparently so full of contradiction, which meets us in the his- 
tory of mankind, and which Job now experiences for himself. 


25 My days were swifter than a runner, 
They fled away without seeing prosperity, 
26 They shot by as ships of reeds, 
, Asan eagle which dasheth upon tts prey. 
27 If my thought is: I will forget my complaint, 
L will give up my dark looks and look cheerful ; 
28 I shudder at all my pains, 
I feel that Thou dost not pronounce me innocent. 


Such, as described in the preceding strophe, is the lot of 
the innocent in general, and such (this is the connection) 
is also Job’s lot: his swiftly passing life comes to an end 


158 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


amidst suffering, as that of an evil-doer whom God cuts off 
in judgment. In the midst of his present sufferings he has 
entirely forgotten his former prosperity; it is no happiness 
to him, because the very enjoyment of it makes the loss of it 
more grievous to bear. The days of prosperity are gone, 
have passed swiftly away without nay, z.e. without lasting 
prosperity. They have been swifter 7] 3%. By reference 
to ch. vii. 6, this might be considered as a figure borrowed 
from the weaver’s loom, since in the Coptic the threads of 
the weft (fila subteminis) which are wound round the shuttle 
are called “runners” (vid. Ges. Thesaurus); but Rosenmiiller 
has correctly observed that, in order to describe the fleetness 
of his life, Job brings together that which is swiftest on 
land (the runners or couriers), in water (fast-sailing ships), 
and in the air (the swooping eagle). OY, ver. 26a, signifies, 
in comparison with, @que ac. But we possess only a rather 
uncertain tradition as to the kind of vessels meant by 
nas nx, Jerome translates, after the Targ.: naves poma 
portantes, by which one may understand the small vessels, 
according to Edrisi, common on the Dead Sea, in which corn 
and different kinds of fruits were carried from -Zoar to 
Jericho and to other regions of the Jordan (Stickel, S. 267) ; 
but if M38 were connected with 38, we might rather expect 
nay, after the form NWS (from WX), instead of N38. Others 
derive the word from "38, avere: ships of desire, ze. full- 
rigged and ready for sea (Gecatilia in Ges. Thes. suppl. p. 
62), or struggling towards the goal (Kimchi), or steering 
towards (Zamora), and consequently hastening to (Symma- 
chus, ozevdovcais), the harbour; but independently of the 
explanation not being suited to the description, it should then 
be accented ébch, after the form 73, 7¥P,-instead of ébéh. 
The explanation, ships of hostility (Syr.’), i.e. ships belong- 


‘ Luther also perhaps understood’ pirate ships, when he translated, 
“ wie die starcken Schiff.” 


CHAP. IX. 25-28. 159 


ing to pirates or freebooters, privateers, which would suit the 
subject well, is still less admissible with the present pointing 
of the text, as it must then be N28 (728), with which the 
Egyptian uba, against, and adverse (contrarius), may be com- 
pared. According to Abulwalid (Parchon, Raschi), 73% is 
the name of a large river near the scene of the book of Job; 
which may be understood as either the Babylonian name for 


_Yiver uss or the Abyssinian name of the Nile, addi ; and nas 


may be compared with map in relation to the Arabic, lubna. 
But a far more satisfactory explanation is the one now gene- 
rally received, according to the comparison with the Arabic 


/= . 
%u!, a reed (whence abaa-t-un, a reed, a so-called n. unitatis) : 


ships made from reeds, like N24 "D3, Isa. xviil. 2, vessels of 
papyrus, Sapides wamipiwa. In such small ships, with 
Egyptian tackling, they used to travel as far as Taprobane.: 
These canoes were made to fold together, plicatiles, so that 
they could be carried past the cataracts; Heliodorus describes 
them as ofvdpoyetata.* 

The third figure is the eagle, which swoops down upon its 
prey; tw, like Chaldee pw, by which the Targ. translates 
wn, Hab. i. 8; Griitz’ conjecture of yw (which is intended to 
‘mean flutters) is superfluous. Just as unnecessary is it, with 
Olshausen, to change "8 DX into ‘MIN ON; “if my saying 
(thinking) ” is equivalent to, “as often as I say (think).” 
m3) is here (as in the German phrase, ein Gesicht machen) 


1 There is no Egyptian word which can be compared to M3, whereas 
han (hani) or an (ana) in Egyptian, like the Hebrew 7'3x%, means a 
ship (vid. Chabas, Le Papyrus magique Harris, p. 246, No. 826, cf. pp. 
33, 47); it is written with the sign for set = downwards, since they 
fastened a stone at the front of the vessel, as was even known to 
Herodotus, in order to accelerate its speed in descending the river. From 
this one might conjecture for the passage before us JAN NvIN = swift’ 


sailers. 


160 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


an ill-humoured, distorted, wry face. When Job desires to 
give up this look of suffering and be cheerful (3527, like ch. 
x. 20, hilaritatem pre se ferre, vultum hilarem tnduere), the 
certainty that he is not favoured of God, and consequently 
that he cannot be delivered from his sufferings, all his anguish 
in spite of his struggles against it comes ever afresh before 
his mind. It is scarcely necessary to remark that ‘2p9n_is 
addressed to God, not'to Bildad. It is important to notice that 
Job does not speak of God without at the same time looking 
up to Him as in prayer. Although he feels rejected of God, 
he still remains true to God. In the following strophe he 
continues to complain of God, but without denying Him. 


29 If Iam wicked, why do I exert myself in vain ? 
30 Lf I should wash myself with snow water, 
And make my hands clean with lye, 
31 Lhen thou wouldst plunge me into the pit, 
And my clothes would abhor me. 
32 For He is not a man as I, that I should answer Him, 
That we should go together to judgment. 
33 There is not an arbitrator between us 
Who should lay his hand upon us both. 


The clause with strongly accented “I” affirms that j in rela- 
tion to God he is from the first, and unchangeably, a wicked, 
i.e. guilty, man (Ps. cix. 7) (Y¥, to be a wicked man, means 
either to act as such (ch. x. 15), or to appear as such, be 
accounted as such, as here and ch. x. 7; Hiph., ver. 20, to 
condemn). Why, therefore, should he vainly (2m, acc. adv., 
like breath, useless) exert himself by crying for help, and 
basing his plaint on his innocence? In ver. 30a the Chethib 
is 102, the Keri "3, as the reverse in Isa. xxv. 10; mo itself 
appears in the ionification water (Egyptian muau), in the 
proper names Moab and Moshe (according to Jablonsky, 
ec aqua servatus); in 22, however, the mo may be under- 


CHAP, IX, 29-33. 161 


stood according to Ges. § 103, 2. This is the meaning—no 
cleansing, even though he should use snow and 73 (a vege- 
table alkali), z.e. not even the best-grounded self-justification 
can avail him, for God would still bring it to pass, that his 
clearly proved innocence should change to the most horrible 
impurity. Ewald, Rédiger, and others translate incorrectly : 
my clothes would make me disgusting. The idea is tame. 
The Piel 2M signifies elsewhere in the book (ch. xix. 19, 
xxx. 10) to abhor, not to make abhorrent; and the causative 
meaning is indeed questionable, for 37 (Isa. xlix. 7) signi- 
fies loathing, as MB2'2 (ch. xxiii. 18) covering, and Ezek. xvi. 
25 certainly borders on the signification “to make detestable,” 
but yn may also be in the primary meaning, abominari, the 
strongest expression for that contempt of the beauty bestowed 
by God which manifests itself by prostitution. Translate : 
My clothes would abhor me; which does not mean: I should 
be disgusted with myself (Hirzel) ; Job is rather represented 
as naked; him, the naked one, God would—says he—so 
plunge into the pit that his clothes would conceive a horror of 
him, é.e. start back in terror at the idea of being put on and 
defiled by such a horrible creature (Schlottm., Oehler). For 
God is not his equal, standing on the same level with. him: 
He, the Absolute Being, is accuser and judge in one person ; 
there is between them no arbitrator who (or that he) should 
lay, ete. Mercier correctly explains: impositio manus est 
potestatis signum; the meaning therefore is: qui utrumque 
nostrum velut manu imposita coerceat. 


34 Let Hum take away His rod from me, 
And let His terrors not stupify me. 
39 Then I would speak and not fear Him, 
For not thus do I stand with myself. 
Ch. x. 1 My soul is full of disgust with my life, 
| Therefore I will freely utier my complaint ; 
VOL, I. L 


162 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. 
2 I will say to Eloah : Condemn me not ; 
Let me know wherefore Thou contendest with me! 


The two Optatives, vers. 34 sq., as is frequently the case 
with the Imper., are followed by the Cohortative as the con- 
clusion (7278, therefore will I speak; whereas M258) might 
be equivalent to, in order that I may speak) of a conditional 
antecedent clause. Dav is here the rod with which God 
smites Job; comp. ch. xiii. 21. If God would only remove 
his. pain from him for a brief space, so that he might recover 
himself for self-defence, and if He would not stifle his words 
as they come freely forth from his lips by confronting him 
with His overwhelming majesty, then he would fearlessly 
express himself; for “ not thus am I in myself,” ze. I am not 
conscious of such a moral condition as compels me to remain 
dumb before Him. However, we must inquire whether, 
according to the context, this special reference and shade of 
meaning is to be given to is-xd. There is a use of }2 = no- 
thing, when accompanied by a gesture expressive of contemp- 
tuous rejection, Num. xili. 33 (j27W»3, Isa. li. 6, as nothing) ;* 
and a use of j>-x> = not only so = not so small, so useless, 
2 Sam. xxiii. 5, accompanied by a gesture expressive of the 
denial of such contempt, according to which the present 
passage may probably be explained: I am in myself, ie. 
according to the testimony of my conscience, not so, i.e, not 
so morally worthless and devoid of right. 

His self-consciousness makes him desire that the possibility 
of answering for himself might be granted him; and since he is 
weary of life, and has renounced all claim for its continuance, 


! In both these passages (to which Bottcher adds Ps. exxvii. 2, ‘‘so 
= without anything further”), > has been considered to be the sing. of 


O33, gnats; but this sing. is an error, as ya, formerly considered to be 
the sing. of pry’. The respective sing. are 133, N¥"3. 


CHAP. IX. 84-X. 2. 163 


he will at least give his complaints free course, and pray the 
Author of his sufferings that He would not permit him to die 
the death of the wicked, contrary to the testimony of his own 
conscience. OP) is equivalent to Mp3, Hzek. vi. 9, after the 
usual manner of the contraction of double Ayin verbs (Gen. 
xi. 6, 7; Isa. xix. 3; Judg. v. 5; Ezek. xli. 7; vid. Ges. § 67, 
rem. 11); it may nevertheless be derived directly from 0)?3, 
for this secondary verb formed from the NMiph. 2 is sup- 
ported by the Aramaic. In like manner, in Gen. xvii. 11 
perhaps a secondary verb o2, and certainly in Gen. ix. 19 
and Isa. xxxiii. 3 a secondary verb 7/5) (1 Sam. xiii. 11), 
formed from the Miph. 753 (Gen. x. 18), is to be supposed ; 
for the contraction of the Miphal form 2\p into 9P2 is 
impossible ; and the supposition which has been advanced, 
of a root ~¥5 = jy" in the signification diffundere, dissipare is 
unnecessary. His soul is disgusted (fastidio affeeta est, or 
fastidit) with his life, therefore he will give free course to his 
plaint (comp. ch. vii. 11). rby is not super or de me, but, as 
ch. xxx. 16, in me; it belongs to the Ego, as an expression 
of spontaneity : I in myself, since the Ego is the subject, 
urrokeiwevov, of his individuality (Psychol. 8.151 f.). The 
inner man is meant, which has the Ego over or in itself; 
from this the complaint shall issue forth as a stream without 
restraint ; not, however, a mere gloomy lamentation over his 
pain, but a supplicatory complaint directed to God respect- 
ing the peculiar pang of his suffering, viz. this stroke which 
seems to come upon him from his Judge (3", seg. acc., as Isa. 
xxvil. 8), without his being conscious of that for which he is 
accounted guilty. 


3 Doth it please Thee when Thou oppressest, 

That Thou rejectest the work of Thy hands, 

While Thou shinest upon the counsel of the wicked ? 
4 Hast Thou eyes of flesh, 


164 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Or seest Thou as a mortal seeth ? 
5 Are Thy days as the days of a mortal, 
Or Thy years as man's days, 
6 That Thou seekest after my iniquity, 
And searchest after my sin? 
7 Although Thou knowest that I am not a aitibnthe man, 
And there is none that can deliver out of Thy hand. 


There are three questions by which Job seeks to exhaust 
every possible way of accounting for his sufferings as coming 
from God. These attempts at explanation, however, are at 
once destroyed, because they proceed upon conceptions which 
are unworthy of God, and opposed to His nature. Sirstly, 
Whether it gives Him pleasure (3{p, agreeable, as ch. xiii. 
9) when He oppresses, when He despises, i.e. keeps down 
forcibly or casts from Him as hateful (OND, as Ps. Ixxxix. 
59, Isa. liv. 6) the work of His hand; while, on the con- 
trary, He permits light to shine from above upon the design 
of the wicked, i.e. favours it? Man is called the 2 of 
the divine hands, as though he were elaborated by them, 
because at his origin (Gen. ii. 7), the continuation of which 
is the development in the womb (Ps. cxxxix. 15), he came 
into existence in a remarkable manner by the directly per- 
sonal, careful, and, so to speak, skilful working of God. 
That it is the morally innocent which is here described, may 
be seen not only from the contrast (ver. 3c), but also from 
the fact that he only can be spoken of as oppressed and 
rejected. Moreover, “the work of Thy hands” involves a 
negative reply to the question. Such an unloving mood of 
self-satisfaction is contrary .to the bounty and beneficence 
of that love to which man owes his existence. Secondly, 
Whether God has eyes of flesh, i.e. of sense, which regard 
only the outward appearance, without an insight into the inner 
nature, or whether He sees as mortals see, i.e. judges, cata 


CHAP. X. 3-7. 165 


tiv odpka (John viii. 15)? Mercier correctly : num ea facie 
judicas, ut affectibus ducaris more hominum. This question 
also supplies its own negative; it is based upon the thought 
that God looketh on the heart (1 Sam. xvi. 7). Thirdly, 
Whether His life is like to the brevity of man’s life, so that 
He is not able to wait until a man’s sin manifests itself, but 
must institute such a painful course of investigation with 
him, in order to extort from him as quickly as possible a 
confession of it? Suffering appears here to be a means 
of inquisition, which is followed by the final judgment when 
the guilt is proved. What is added in ver. 7 puts this sup- 
position aside also as inconceivable. Such a mode of pro- 
ceeding may be conceived of in a mortal ruler, who, on 
account of his short-sightedness, seeks to bring about by 
severe measures that which was at first only conjecture, and 
who, from the apprehension that he may not witness that 
vengeance in which he delights, hastens forward the criminal 
process as much as possible, in order that his victim may not 
escape him. God, however, to whom belongs absolute know- 
ledge and absolute power, would act thus, although, etc. Y, 
although, notwithstanding (proceeding from the signification, 
besides, insuper), as ch. xvi. 17 (Isa. liii. 9), xxxiv. 6. God 
knows even from the first that he (Job) will not appear as a 
guilty person (}W9, as in ch. ix. 29); and however that may 
be, He is at all events sure of him, for nothing escapes the 
hand of God. 

That operation of the divine love which is first echoed in 
“the labour of Thy hands,” is taken up in the following 
strophe, and, as Job contemplates it, his present lot seems to 
him quite incomprehensible. 


8 Thy hands have formed and perfected me 
Altogether round about, and Thou hast now swallowed 
me up|! 


166 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


9 Consider now, that Thou hast perfected me as clay, 
And wilt Thou turn me again into dust ? 
10 Hast Thou not poured me out as milk, 
And curdled me as curd? 
11 With skin and flesh hast Thou clothed me, 
And Thou hast intertwined me with bones and sinews ; 
12 Life and favour Thou hast shown me, 
And Thy care hath guarded my breath. 


The development of the embryo was regarded by the 
Israelitish Chokma as one of the greatest mysteries (Eccles. 
xi. 5; 2 Mace. vii. 22 sq.). There are two poetical passages 
which treat explicitly of this mysterious existence: this 
strophe of the book of Job, and the Psalm by David, cxxxix. 
13-16 (Psychol. S. 210). The assertion of Scheuchzer, 
Hoffmann, and Oetinger, that these passages of Scripture 
“include, and indeed go beyond, all recent systemata genera- 
tionis,” attributes to Scripture a design of imparting instruc- 
tion,—a purpose which is foreign to it. Scripture nowhere 
attempts an analysis of the workings of nature, but only 
traces them back to their final cause. According to the 
view of Scripture, a creative act similar to the creation of 
Adam is repeated at the origin of each individual; and the 
continuation of development according to natural laws is not 
less the working of God than the creative planting of the 
very beginning. Thy hands, says Job, have formed (A¥Y, to 
cut, carve, fashion; cognate are 28M, 3¥?, without the accom- 
panying notion of toil, which makes this word specially appro- 
priate, as describing the fashioning of the complicated nature 
of man) and perfected me. We do not translate: made; for 
n’y stands in the same relation to 873 and 13° as perjicere to 
creare and fingere (Gen. ii. 2; Isa. xliii. 7). 0 refers to the 
members of the body collectively, and 2°30 to the whole form. 
The perfecting as clay implies three things: the earthiness - 


CHAP. X. 8-12. 167 


of the substance, the origin of man without his knowledge 
and co-operation, and the moulding of the shapeless substance 
by divine power and wisdom. The primal origin of man, de 
limo terre (ch. xxxiii. 6; Ps. cxxxix. 15), is repeated in the 
womb. The figures which follow (ver. 10) describe this origin, 
which being obscure is all the more mysterious, and glorifies 
the power of God the more. The sperma is likened to milk ; 
the 7A (used elsewhere of smelting), which Seb. Schmid 
rightly explains rem colliquatam fundere et immittere in for- 
mam aliquam, refers to. the nisus formativus which dwells in 
it. The embryo which is formed from the sperma is likened 
to 72°33, which means in all the Semitic dialects cheese 
-(curd). “As whey” (Ewald, Hahn) is not suitable; whey 
does not curdle; in making cheese it is allowed to run off 
from the curdled milk. “ As cream” (Schlottm.) is not less 
incorrect ; cream is not Jac coagulatum, which the word sig- 
nifies. The embryo forming itself from the sperma is like 
milk which is curdled and beaten into shape. 

The consecutio temporum, moreover, must be observed here. 
It is, for example, incorrect to translate, with Ewald: Dost 
Thou not let me flow away like milk, etc. Job looks back 
to the beginning of his life; the four clauses, vers. 10, 11, 
under the control of the first two verbs (ver. 8), which influ- 
ence the whole strophe, are also retrospective in meaning. 
The futt. are consequently like synchronous imperff. ; as, then, 
ver. 12 returns to perff., ver. 11 describes the development 
of the embryo to the full-grown infant, on which Grotius 
remarks: Hic ordo est in genitura: primum pellicula fit, 
deinde in ea caro, duriora paulatim accedunt, and by ver. 12, 
the manifestations of divine goodness, not only in the womb, 
but from the beginning of life and onwards, are intended. 
The expression “ Life and favour (this combination does not 
occur elsewhere) hast Thou done to me” is zeugmatic: He 
has given him life, and sustained that life amidst constant 


168 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


proofs of favour; His care has guarded the spirit (7), by 
which his frame becomes a living and self-conscious being. 
This grateful retrospect is interspersed with painful reflec- 
tions, in which Job gives utterance to his feeling of the con- 
trast between the manifestation of the divine goodness which 
he had hitherto experienced and his present condition. As 
in ver. 80., ‘2yIM, which Hirzel wrongly translates: and wilt 
now destroy me; it is rather: and hast now swallowed me 
up, 7.¢. drawn me down into destruction, as it were brought 
me to nought; or even, if in the fut. consec., as is frequently 
the case, the consecutive and not the aorist signification pre- 
ponderates: and now swallowest me up; and in ver. 9 
(where, though not clear from the syntax, it is clear from the 
substance that ‘22vn is not to be understood as an imperfect, 
like the fuét. in vers. 10 sq.) : wilt Thou cause me to become 
dust again? The same tone is continued in the following 
strophe. Thus graciously has he been brought into being, 
and his life sustained, in order that he may come to such a 
terrible end. 


13 And such Thou hast hidden in Thy heart, 
I perceive that this was in Thy mind: 

14 Jf I should sin, Thou wouldst take note of it, 
And not acquit me of my iniquity. 

15 If I should act wickedly, woe unto me ! 
And were I righteous, I should not lift up my head, 
Being full of shame and conscious of my misery. 

16 And were I to raise it, Thou wouldst hunt me as a lion, 
And ever display on me Thy wondrous power, 

17 Thou wouldst ever bring fresh witnesses against me, 
And increase Thy wrath against me, 
I should be compelled to withstand continuously advancing 

troops and a host. 


This manifestation of divine goodness which Job has 


CHAP. X. 18-17. 169 


experienced from the earliest existence seems to him, as he 
compares his present lot of suffering with it, to have served 
as a veil to a hidden purpose of a totally opposite character. 
That purpose—to make this life, which has been so graciously 
called into existence and guarded thus far, the object of the 
severest and most condemning visitation—is now manifest. 
Both TDN and nxt-refer to what is to follow ; JOY ONT used of 
the thought conceived, the purpose cherished, as ch. xxiii. 14, 
xxvii. 11. All that follows receives a future colouring from 
this principal clause, “This is what. Thou hadst designed to 
do,” which rules the strophe. Thus ver. 14a is to be ren- 
dered: If I had sinned, Thou wouldst have kept me in 
remembrance, properly custodies me, which is here equivalent 
to custoditurus eras me. “MW, with the acc. of the person, 
according to Ps. cxxx. 3 (where it is followed by the ace. of 
the sin), is to be understood : to keep any one in remembrance, 
i.e.to mark him as sinful (Hirzel). This appears more appro- 
priate than rigide observaturus eras me (Schlottm.). ‘smn’, 
according to Ges. § 121, 4, might be taken for * mnv’ (viz. 
‘n8oM); but this is unnecessary, and we have merely translated 
it thus for the sake of clearness. His infirmities must not be 
passed by unpunished ; and if he should act wickedly (30, of 
malignant sin, in distinction from 8M), woe unto him (comp. 
otai wot, 1 Cor. ix. 16). According to the construction re- 
ferred to above, *np1¥) is pret. hypotheticum (Ges. § 155, 4, a) ; 
and the conclusion follows without waw apodosis: If I had 
acted rightly, I should not have raised my head, being full of 
shame and conscious of my misery. The adjectives are not 
in apposition to ‘wx (Bottcher), but describe the condition 

into which he would be brought, instead of being able (ac- 
_ cording to the ethical principle, Gen. iv. 7) to raise his head 
cheerfully. > constr. of M81, as YAY of Y2¥. It is needless, 
with Pisc., Hirz., Bottch., and Ewald, to alter it to M84, since 
ANI is a verbal adjective like 75%, 22, NYP. Moreover, AN? 


170 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


cannot be imperative (Rosenm., De Wette); for although 
imperatives, joined by waw to sentences of a different con- 
struction, do occur (Ps. Ixxvii. 2; 2 Sam. xxi. 3), such an 
exclamation would destroy the connection and tone of the 
strophe in the present case. 

Ver. 16. 782 is hypothetical, like ‘np, but put in the 
future form, because referring to a voluntary act (Ewald, 
§ 357, b): and if it (the head) would (nevertheless) exalt 
itself (AN3, to raise proudly or in joyous self-consciousness), 
then (without waw apod., which is found in other passages, 
e.g. ch. xxii. 28) Thou wouldst hunt me like a shachal (vid. 
ch. iv. 10),—Job likens God to the lion (as Hos. v. 14, xiii. 7), 
and himself to the prey which the lion pursues,—Thou wouldst 
ever anew show Thyself wonderful at my expense (3¥A, volun- 
tative form, followed by a future with which it is connected 
adverbially, Ges. § 142, 3, 6; NDNA, with @ in the last 
syllable, although not in pause, as Num. xix. 12; Ewald, 
§ 141, c.), ¢.e. wonderful in power, and inventive by ever new 
forms of suffering, by which I should be compelled to repent 
this haughtiness. The witnesses (O%Y) that God continually 
brings forth afresh against him are his sufferings (vid. ch. xvi. 
8), which, while he is conscious of his innocence, declare him to 
be a sinner; for Job, like the friends, cannot think of suffer- 
ing and sin otherwise than as connected one with the other: 
suffering is partly the result of sin, and partly it sets the mark 
of sin on the man who is no sinner. 275 ( fut. apoc. Hiph. 
Ges. § 75, rem. 15) is also the voluntative form : Thou wouldst 
multiply, increase Thy malignity against me. DY, contra, as 
also in other passages with words denoting strife and war, ch. 
xiii. 19, xxiii. 6, xxxi. 13; or where the context implies hos- 
tility, Ps. lv. 19, xciv. 16. The last line is a clause by itself 
consisting of nouns. S23) nip'n is considered by all modern 
expositors as hendiadys, as Mercier translates: dnpetor variis 
et sibi succedentibus malorum agminibus; and s2¥ is mostly 


CHAP. X. 18-22. 171 


taken collectively. Changes and hosts = hosts continuously 
dispersing themselves, and always coming on afresh to the 
attack. But is not this form of expression unnatural? By 
man Job means the advancing troops, and by say the 
main body of the army, from which they are reinforced; the 
former stands first, because the thought figuratively expressed 
in Wann and 3n is continued (comp. ch. xix. 12): the enmity 
of God is manifested against him by ever fresh sufferings, 
which are added to the one chief affliction. Béttcher calls 
attention to the fact that all the lines from ver. 14 end in %, 
a rhythm formed by the inflection, which is also continued in 
ver. 18. This repetition of the pronominal suffix gives inten- 
sity to the impression that these manifestations of the divine 
wrath have special reference to himself individually. 


18 And wherefore hast Thou brought me forth out of the 
womb ? 
I should have expired, that no eye had seen me, 
19 I should have been as though I had never been, 
Carried from the womb to the grave. 
20 Are not my days few? then cease 
And turn from me, that I may become a little cheerful, 
21 Before I go to return no more 
Into the land of darkness and of the shadow of death, 
22 The land of deep darkness like to midnight, 
Of the shadow of death and of confusion, 
And which is bright like midnight. 


The question Wherefore ? ver. 18a, is followed by futt. 
as modi conditionales (Ges. § 127, 5) of that which would and 
should have happened, if God had not permitted him to be 
born alive: I should have expired, prop. I ought to have 
expired, being put back to the time of birth (comp. ch. iii. 12, 
where the pret. more objectively expressed what would then 
have happened). These modi condit. are continued in ver. 19: 


172 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


I should have been (sc. in the womb) as though I had not 
been (comp. the short elliptical’ expression, Obad. ver. 16), 
i.e. as one who had scarcely entered upon existence, and that 
only of the earliest (as at conception); I should have been 
carried Onn, as ch. xxi. 832) from the womb (without seeing 
the light as one born alive) to the grave. This detestation 
of his existence passes into the wish, ver. 20, that God would 
be pleased at least somewhat to relieve him ere he is swal- 
lowed up by the night of Hades. We must neither with the 
Targ. translate: are not my days few, and vanishing away ? 
nor with Oetinger: will not my fewness of days cease? 
Both are contrary to the correct accentuation. Olshausen 
thinks it remarkable that there is not a weaker pausal accent 
to ‘2’; but such a one is really indirectly there, for Munach 
is here equivalent to Dechi, from which it is formed (wid. the 
rule in Comm. iiber den Psalter, ii. 504). Accordingly, Seb. 
Schmid correctly translates: nonne parum dies mei? ideo 
cessa. The Kert.substitutes the precative form of expression 
for the optative : cease then, turn away from me then (¢mper. 
consec. with waw of the result, Ewald, § 235, a); comp. the 
precative conclusion to the speech, ch. vii. 16 sqq., but there 
is no real reason for changing the optative form of the text. 
nv? (voluntative for Nw, ch. ix. 33) may be supplemented 
by 1, 38, YY, or 125 (ch. vii. 17) (not, however, with Hirz., 
wav, after ch. ix. 34, which is too far-fetched for the usage 
of the language, or with Bottch., 93ND, copias suas) ; my can 
however, like 0%, ch. iv. 20, signify to turn one’s self to, se 
disponere = to attend to, consequently jo nw, to turn the 
attention from, as }2 nyv, ch. vii. 19, Ps. xxxix. 14 (where, 
as here, 7352s) follows). 

He desires a momentary alleviation of his sufferings and 


1 x55 is there = xb "ws, like 55, Isa. lxv. 1 = xb syind [vid. Ges. 
§ 123, 3], and 9 is used as a conjunction as little as ° (vid. on Ps. 
xxxviii. 14). 


CHAP. X. 18-22. 173 


ease before his descent to Hades, which seems so near at hand. 
He calls Hades the land of darkness and of the shadow of 
death. nyby, which occurs for the first time in the Old 
Testament in Ps. xxiii. 4, is made into a compound from mandy, 
and is the proper word for the obscurity of the region of the 
dead, and is accordingly repeated later on. Further, he 
ealls it the land of encircling darkness ("NDY, defective for 
nna y, from sy, caligare, and with He parag. intensive for 
nay, in Amos iy. 13, who also uses »an, ch. y. 9, in common 
with Job), like midnight darkness. 58 cannot mean merely 
the grey of twilight, it is the entire absence of sunlight, 
ch. iii. 6, xxviii. 3, Ps. xci. 6; comp. Ex. x. 22, where the - 
Egyptian darkness is called nop qwn. Béttch. correctly 
compares 55x and 553: mersa ad imum h.e. profunda nox (the 
advancing night). Still further he calls it (the land) of 
the shadow of death, and devoid of order (OID, da. Yey. 
in the Old Testament, but a common word in the later 
Hebrew), i.e. where everything is so encompassed by the 
shadow of death that it seems a chaos, without any visible or 
distinct outline. It is difficult to determine whether Y5A) is 
to be referred to pax: and which lights (fut. consec. as the 
accent on the penult. indicates, the syntax like ch. ili. 21, 23, 
Isa. lvii. 3); or is to be taken as neuter: and it shines there 
(= and where it shines) like midnight darkness. Since y*51n 
(from yd’ = yp), to rise, shine forth; vid. on Ps. xcv. 4), as 
also 1x, does not occur elsewhere as neuter, we prefer, with 
Hirzel, to refer it to ~oX, as being more certain. Moreover, 
Sos is here evidently the intensest darkness, ipsum medullitium 
umbre mortis ejusque intensissimum, as Oetinger expresses it. 
That which is there called light, i.e. the faintest degree of 
darkness, is like the midnight of this world; “ not light, but 
darkness visible,” as Milton says of hell. 

In this speech (ch. ix. x.) Job for the first time assents to 
the principle on which the attack of the friends is founded. 


174 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


It is primarily directed against Bildad, but applies also to 
Eliphaz, for the two hold the same opinion. Therefore, 
because in the first part of the speech Job does not ex- 
pressly address him or all the friends, it cannot, with Ewald, 
be said that it bears the characteristics of a soliloquy. To 
ch. ix. 28 Job inclines towards the friends; and when he 
afterwards addresses God, all that he says to God is affected 
by the manner in which the friends have advanced against 
him. 

The maxim of the friends is: God does not pervert right, 
i.e. He deals justly in all that He does. They conclude from 
this, that no man, no sufferer, dare justify himself: it is his 
duty to humble himself under the just hand of God. Job 
assents to all this, but his assent is mere sarcasm at what they 
say. He admits that everything that God does is right, and 
must be acknowledged as right; not, however, because it is 
right in itself, but because it is the act of the absolute God, 
against whom no protest uttered by the creature, though with 
the clearest conviction of innocence, can avail. Job. sepa- 
rates goodness from God, and regards that which is part of 
His very being as a product of His arbitrary will. What 
God says and does must be true and right, even if it be not 
true and right in itself. ‘The God represented by the friends 
is a God of absolute justice ; the God of Job is a God of 
absolute power. The former deals according to the objective 
rule of right; the latter according to a freedom which, because 
removed from all moral restraint, is pure caprice. 

How is it that Job entertains such a cheerless view of the 
matter? The friends, by the strong view which they have 
taken up, urge him into another extreme. On their part, 
they imagine that in the justice of God they have a principle 
which is sufficient to account for all the misfortunes of man- 
kind, and Job’s in particular. They maintain, with respect 
to mankind in general (Eliphaz by an example from his own 


CHAP. X. 18-22. 175 


observation, and Bildad by calling to his aid the wisdom of 
the ancients), that the ungodly, though prosperous for a time, 
come to a fearful end; with respect to Job, that his affliction 
is a just chastisement from God, although designed for his 
good. Against the one assertion Job’s own experience of 
life rebels; against the other his consciousness rises up with 
indignation. Job’s observation is really as.correct as that of 
the friends; for the history of the past and of the present 
furnishes as many illustrations of judgments which have 
suddenly come upon the godless in the height of their pro- 
sperity, as of general visitations in which the innocent have 
suffered with the guilty, by whom these judgments have been 
incurred. But with regard to his misfortune, Job cannot and 
ought not to look at it from the standpoint of the divine jus- 
tice. For the proposition, which we will give in the words 
of Brentius, guidquid post fidei justificationem pio acciderit, 
innocenti accidit, is applicable to our present subject. 

If, then, Job’s suffering were not so severe, and his faith 
so powerfully shaken, he would comfort himself. with the 
thought that the divine ways are unsearchable; since, on the 
one hand, he cannot deny the many traces of the justice of 
the divine government in the world (he does not deny them 
even here), and on the other hand, is perplexed by the 
equally numerous incongruities of human destiny with the 
divine justice. (This thought is rendered more consolatory 
to us by the revelation which we possess of the future life ; 
although even in the later Old Testament times the last 
judgment is referred to as the adjustment of all these incon- 
gruities ; vid. the conclusion of Hcclesiastes.) His own lot 
might have remained always inexplicable to him, without his 
being obliged on that account to lose the consciousness of the 
divine love, and that faith like Asaph’s, which, as Luther 
says, struggles towards God through wrath and disfavour, as 
through thorns, yea, even through spears and swords. 


176 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Job is passing through conflict and temptation. He does 
not perceive the divine motive and purpose of his suffering, 
nor has he that firm and unshaken faith which will keep him 
from mistaken views of God, although His dispensations are 
an enigma to him; but, as his first speech (ch. iii.) shows, he 
is tormented by thoughts which form part of the conflict of 
temptation. The image of the gracious God is hidden from 
him, he feels only the working of the divine wrath, and asks, 
Wherefore doth God give light to the suffering ones ?—a 
question which must not greatly surprise us, for, as Luther 
says, “There has never been any one so holy that he has 
not been tormented with this guware, guare, Wherefore ? 
wherefore should it be so?” And when the friends, who 
know as little as Job himself about the right solution of this 
mystery, censure him for his inquiry, and think that in the 
propositions: man has no righteousness which he can main- 
tain before God, and God does not pervert the right, they: 
have found the key to the mystery, the conflict becomes 
fiercer for Job, because the justice of God furnishes him 
with no satisfactory explanation of his own lot, or of the 
afflictions of mankind generally. The justice of God, which 
the friends consider to be sufficient to explain everything 
that befalls man, Job can only regard as the right of the 
Supreme Being; and while it appears to the friends that 
every act of God is controlled by His justice, it seems to Job 
that whatever God does must be right, by virtue of His 
absolute power. 

This principle, devoid of consolation, drives Job to the 
utterances so unworthy of him, that, in spite of his conviction 
of his innocence, he must appear guilty before God, because 
he must be speechless before His terrible majesty,—that if, 
however, God would only for once so meet him that he could 
fearlessly address Him, he would know well enough how to 
defend himself (ch. ix.). After these utterances of his feel- 


CHAP. X. 18-22. 177 


ing, from which all consciousness of the divine love is absent, 
he puts forth the touching prayer: Condemn me not without 
letting me know why Thou dost condemn me! (ch. x. 1-7.) 
As he looks back, he is obliged to praise God, as his Creator 
and Preserver, for what He has hitherto done for him (ch. x. 
8-12); but as he thinks of his present condition, he sees that 
from the very beginning God designed to vent His wrath 
upon him, to mark his infirmities, and to deprive him of all 
joy in the consciousness of his innocence (ch. x. 13-17). He 
is therefore compelled to regard God as his enemy, and this 
thought overpowers the remembrance of the divine goodness. 
If, however, God were his enemy, he might well ask, Where- 
fore then have I come into being? And while he writhes 
as a worm crushed beneath the almighty power of God, he 
prays that God would let him alone for a season ere he passes 
away into the land of darkness, whence there is no return (x. 
18-22). 

Brentius remarks that this speech of Job contains inferni 
blasphemias, and explains them thus: non enim in tanto judicti 
horrore Deum patrem, sed carnificem sentit; but also adds, 
that in passages like ch. x. 8-12 faith raises its head even in 
the midst of judgment; for when he praises the mercies of 
God, he does so spiritu fidei, and these he would not acknow- 
ledge were there not a fidei scintilla still remaining. This is 
true. The groundwork of Job’s faith remains even in the 
fiercest conflict of temptation, and is continually manifest ; 
we should be unable to understand the book unless we could 
see this fidet scintilla, the extinction of which would be the 
accomplishment of Satan’s design against him, glimmering 
everywhere through the speeches of Job. The unworthy 
thoughts he entertains of God, which Brentius calls inferni 
blasphemias, are nowhere indulged to such a length that Job 
charges God with being his enemy, although he fancies Him 
to be an enraged foe. In spite of the imagined enmity of 
' VOL. I. M 


178 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


God against him, Job nowhere goes so far as to declare 
enmity on his part against God, so far as ods toa. He 
does not turn away from God, but inclines to Him in prayer. 
His soul is filled with adoration of God, and with reverence 


of His power and majesty; he can clearly discern God’s _ 


marvellous works in nature and among men, and His creative 
power and gracious providence, the workings of which he has 
himself experienced. But that mystery, which the friends 
have made still more mysterious, has cast a dark cloud over 
his vision, so that he can no longer behold the loving coun- 
tenance of God. His faith is unable to disperse this cloud, 
and so he sees but one side of the divine character—His 
Almightiness, Since he ‘consequently looks upon God as the 
Almighty and the Wrathful One, his feeling alternately 
manifests itself under two equally tragical phases. At one 
time he exalts himself in his consciousness of the justice of 
his cause, to sink back again before the majesty of God, to 
whom he must nevertheless succumb; at another time his’ 
feeling of self-confidence is overpowered by the severity of 
his suffering, and he betakes himself to importunate suppli- 
cation. | 

It is true that Job, so long as he regards his sufferings as 
a dispensation of divine judgment, is as unjust towards God 
as he believes God to be unjust towards him ; but if we bear 
in mind that this state of conflict and temptation does not 
preclude the idea of a temporal withdrawal of faith, and 
that, as Baumgarten (Pentat. i. 209) aptly expresses it, the 
profound secret of prayer is this, that man can prevail with 
the Divine Being, then we shall understand that this dark | 
cloud need only be removed, and Job again stands before the 
God of love as His saint. 


CHAP. XI. 2-6. 179 


_ Zophar’s First Speech_—Chap. xi. 


Schema: 11. 6. 6. 6. 11. 


[Then began Zophar the Naamathite, and said :] 
2 Shall the torrent of words remain unanswered, 
And shall the prater be in the right ? 
3 Shall thy vain talking silence the people, 
So that thou mockest without any one putting thee to shame, 
4 And sayest: my doctrine is pure, 
And I am guiltless in Thine eyes ? 
5 But oh that Eloah would speak, 
And open His lips against thee, 
6 And make known to thee the secrets of wisdom, 
That she is twofold in her nature— 
Know then that Eloah forgetteth much of thy guilt. 


When Job has concluded his long speech, Zophar, the ~ 
third and most impetuous of the friends, begins. His name, 
if it is to be explained according to the Arabic Esauitish 
name ¢l-assfar,' signifies the yellow one (flavedo), and the 
name of the place whence he comes, pleasantness (amenitas). 
The very beginning of his speech is impassioned. . He calls 
Job’s speech 025 35, a multitude of words (besides here, 
Proy. x. 19, Eccles. v. 2), and asks whether he is to remain 
unanswered ; 73)" ND, responsum non feret, from 2Y3, not in- 
the sense of being humbled, but : to be answered (of the sup- 
pliant : to be heard = to receive an answer). He calls Job 
nna’ vs, a prater (distinct from D237 wx, a ready speaker, 
Ex. iv.-10), who is not in the right, whom one must not 
allow to have the last word. The questions, ver. 2, are 
followed by another which is not denoted by the sign of a 
question, but is only known by the accent: Shall not thy 
O13, meaningless speeches (from 72 = x2, Barronoyelv), — 

1 Vid. Abulfeda’s Historia anteislamica ed. Fleischer, p. 168. 


180 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


put men (O°N, like other archaisms, e.g. San, always without 
the article) to silence, so that thou darest mock without any 
one making thee ashamed, 7.e. leading thee on ad absurdum? 
Thou darest mock God (Hirzel) ; better Rosenmiiller : nos et 
Deum. The mockery here meant is that which Zophar has 
heard in Job’s long speech; mockery at his opponents, in the 
belief that he is right because they remain silent. The futt. 
consec., vers. 3 sq., describe the conduct of Job which results 
from this absence of contradiction. Zophar, in ver. 4, does — 
not take up Job’s own words, but means, that one had better 
have nothing more to do with Job, as he would some day say. 
and think so and so, he would consider his doctrine blameless, 
and himself in relation to God pure. npd occurs only here in 
this book ; it is a word peculiar to the book of Proverbs (also 
only Deut. xxxil. 2, Isa. xxix. 24), and properly signifies the 
act of appropriating, then that which is presented for appro- 
priation, ze. for learning: the doctrine (similar to nyww, the 
hearing, dxo7, and then the discourse); we see from the | 
words “my doctrine is pure,” which Zophar puts into the 
mouth of Job, that the controversy becomes more and more 
a controversy respecting known principles. 

Ver. 5. With nhs, verum enim vero, Zophar introduces 
his wish that God himself would instruct Job; this would 
most thoroughly refute his utterances. jn’ "> is followed by 
the injin., then by futt., vid. Ges. § 136, 1; 0°23 (only here 
and Isa. xl. 2) denotes not only that which is twice as great, 
but generally that which far surpasses something else. The 
subject of the clause beginning with 3 is 8} understood, i.e. 
divine wisdom: that she is the double with respect to (?, as 
e.g. 1 Kings x. 23) reality (Mwin, as ch. v. 12, vi. 13, essentia, 
substantia), i.e. in comparison with Job’s specious wisdom and 
philosophism. Instead of saying: then thou wouldst perceive, 
Zophar, realizing in his mind that which he has just wished, 
says imperiously Y7} (an imper, consec., or, as Ewald, § 345, b, 


CHAP. XI. 7-9 181 


calls it, imper. futuri, similar to Gen. xx. 7, 2 Sam, xxi. 3): 
thou must then perceive that God has dealt far more leniently 
with thee than thou hast deserved. The causative NW (in 
Old Testament only this passage, and ch. xxxix. 17) denotes 
here oblivion dare, and the }o of 72539 is partitive. 


7 Canst thou find out the nature of Eloah, 
And penetrate to the foundation of the existence of the 
Almighty ? 
8 It is as the heights of heaven—what wilt thou do? 
Deeper than Hades—what canst thou know ? 
9 The measure thereof is longer than the earth, 
And broader than the sea. 


The majority of modern commentators erroneously trans- 
late 1PM searching — comprehension, and moon perfection, a 
meaning which this word never has. The former, indeed, 
signifies first in an active sense: finding out by search; and 
then also objectively: the object sought after: “the hidden 
ground” (Ewald), the depth (here and ch. xxxvill. 16 ; also, 
according to Ew., ch. vili. 8, of the deep innermost thought). 
‘The latter denotes penetrating to the extreme, and then the 
extreme, 7répas, itself (ch. xxvi. 10, xxviii. 3). In other words: 
the nature that underlies that which is visible as an object of 
search is called "pn; and the extreme of a thing, ze. the end, 
without which the beginning and middle cannot be under- 
stood, is called man. The nature of God may be sought 
after, but cannot be found out; and the end of God is unat- 
tainable, for He is both: the Perfect One, absolutus ; and the 
Endless One, injinitus. 

Vers. 8, 9. The feminine form of expression has reference 
to the divine wisdom (Chokma, ver. 6), and amplifies what 
is there said of its transcendent reality. Its absoluteness is 
described by four dimensions, like the absoluteness of the 
love which devised the plan for man’s redemption (Eph. iii. 


182 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


18).. The pronoun 8}, with reference to this subject of the 
sentence, must be supplied. She is as “the heights of heaven” 
(comp. on subst. pro adj. ch. xxii. 12); what wilt or canst 
thou do in order to scale that which is high as heaven? In 
ver. 9b we have translated according to the reading "72 with 
He mappic. This feminine construction is a contraction for 
mnt, as ch. v. 13, ony for onory; Zech. iv. 2, 153 for nna, 
and more syncopated forms of a like kind (vid. Comm. tiber den 
Psalter, i. 225, ii.172). The reading recorded by the Masora | 


is, however, 732 with He raph., according to which the word 


seems to be the accusative used adverbially ; nevertheless the 
separation of this acc. relativus from its regens by the insertion 
of a word between them (comp. ch. xv. 10) would make a 
difficulty here where 8 is wanting, and consequently nw» 
seems to signify mensura ejus whichever way it may be 
written (since ah raphe is also sometimes a softened form of 
the suffix, ch. xxxi. 22; Ewald, § 94, 5).. The wisdom of God 
is in its height altogether inaccessible, in its depth fathomless 
and beyond research, in its length unbounded, in its breadth 
incomprehensible, stretching out far beyond all human 
thought. 


10 When He passes by and arrests 
And calls to judgment, who will oppose Him ? 

11 For He knoweth the men devoid of principle, 
And seeth wickedness without observing it. 

12 But before an empty head gaineth understanding, 
A wild ass would become a man. 


In Hom God is conceived as one who manifests himself by 
passing to and fro in the powers of nature (in the whirlwind, 
Isa. xxi. 1). Should He meet with one who is guilty, and 
seize and bring him to judgment, who then (waw apod.) will 
turn Him back, i.e. restrain Him? npn is used of bringing to 


CHAP. XI. 10- 12. 183 


judgment, with reference to the ancient form of trial which 
was in public, and in which the carrying out of the sentence 
was partly incumbent on the people (1 Kings xxi. 9; Ezek. 
xvi. 40, xxiii. 46). One might almost imagine that Zophar 
looks upon himself and the other two friends as forming such 
an “assembly:” they cannot justify him in opposition to 
God, since He accounts him guilty. God’s mode of trial is 
summary, because infallible: He knows altogether Sw ‘nn, 
people who hypocritically disguise their moral nothingness (on 
this idea, vid. on Ps. xxvi. 4); and sees (looks through) }\s 
(from the root dn, to breathe), otherwise grief, with which 
one pants, in a moral sense worthlessness, without any trace 
whatever of worth or substance. He knows and sees this 
moral wretchedness at once, and need not first of all reflect 
upon it: non opus habet, as Abenezra has correctly explained, 
ut diu consideret (comp. the like thought, ch. xxxiv. 23). 

Ver, 12 has been variously misinterpreted. Gesenius in 
his Handwérterbuch’ translates: but man is empty and void 
of understanding; but this is contrary to the accentuation, 
according to which m2) wx together form the subject. 
Olshausen translates better: an empty man, on the other 
hand, is without heart ; but the fut. cannot be exactly so used, 
and if we consider that Piel has never properly a privative 
meaning, though sometimes a privative idea (as e.g. DPD, operam 
consumere in lapidos, scil. ejiciendos), we must regard a privative 
Niphal as likewise inadmissible. Stickel translates peculiarly: 
the man devoid of understanding is enraged against God; 
but this is opposed to the manifest correlation of 2123 and nab, 
which does not indicate the antithesis of an empty and sulky 
person (Béttcher) : the former rather signifies empty, and the 
latter to acquire heart or marrow (Heidenheim, 25 n3p*), so 
that 25 fills up the hollow space. Hirzel’s rendering partly 


1 Vid. Lexicon, Engl. edition, s.v. a2) Niphal.—Tr. 


184 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


bears out the requirement of this correlation: man has under- 
standing like a hollow pate; but this explanation, like that of 
Gesenius, violates the accentuation, and produces an affected 
witticism. The explanation which regards ver. 12 as descrip- 
tive of the wholesome effect of the discipline of the divine 
judgments (comp. Isa. xxvi. 9) is far better; it does not 
violate the accent, and moreover is more in accordance with 
the future form: the empty one becomes discerning thereby, 
the rough, humane (thus recently Ewald, Heiligst., Schlottm.) ; 
but according to this explanation, ver. 12 is not connected 
with what immediately precedes, nor is the peculiarity of the 
expression fully brought out. Hupfeld opens up another way 
of interpreting the passage when he remarks, nil dicto facilius 
et simplicius ; he understands 12a according to 126: But man 
is furnished with an empty heart, 2.e. receives at his birth an 
empty undiscerning heart, and man is born as a wild ass’s 
colt, i.e. as stupid and obstinate. This thought is satisfac- 
torily connected with the preceding; but here also 3133 is taken 
as predicate in violation of the accentuation, nor is justice 
done to the correlation above referred to, and the whole sen- 
tence is referred to the portion of man at his birth, in opposi- 
tion to the impression conveyed by the use of the fut. Ochler 
appears to us to have recognised the right sense: But an empty 
man is as little endowed with sense, as that a wild ass should 
ever er born as man—be, so to speak, born again and become 
a man.’ 

The waw in YY) is just like ch. v. 7, xii. 11, and brings into 


1 Wetzstein explains: ‘‘ But a man that barks like a dog (i.e. rages 
shamelessly) can become sensible, and a young wild ass (i.e. the wildest 
and roughest: creature) be born again as a man (i.e. beconie gentle and 
civilised),” from 335 = M23, since M2) is the commoner word for * bark- 
ing” in the Syrian towns and villages, and 333, on the other hand, is 
used among those who dwelt in tents, But we must then point it 333), 
and the antithesis a3" is more favourable to the Hebrew Tyas 


* hollowed out, empty.” 


CHAP, XI. 138-15. 185 


close connection the things that are to be compared, as in the 
form of emblematic proverbs (vid. Herzog’s Real Encyklo- 
pddie, xiv. 696): the one will happen not earlier than, and 
as little as, the other. The Miphal 233, which in Prov. 
xvii. 17 signifies to become manifest, here borders on the 
notion of regenerari ; a regeneration would be necessary if 

the wild ass’should become human,—a regeneration which is” 
inconceivable. It is by nature refractory, and especially when 
young (12 from ,lc fut. 7 in the signification vagari, hue illue 
discurrere, of a young, restless, wild, frisking animal). Just 
so, says Zophar, the vacuum in.an empty man is incapable of 
being filled up,—a side hit at Job, which rebounds on Zophar 
himself; for the dogma of the friends, which forms the sole 
contents of their hollowness, can indeed not fill with bright- 
ness and peace a heart that is passing through conflict. The 
peculiarity of the expression is no longer unintelligible; 
Zophar is the most impassioned of the three friends. 


13 But tf thou wilt direct thy heart, 
_And spread out thy hands to Him— 
14 Jf there is evil in thy hand, put it far away, 
And let not wickedness dwell in thy tents— 
15 Then indeed canst thou lift up thy face without spot, 
And shalt be firm without fearing. 


The phrase By P22 signifies neither to raise the heart 
(Ewald), nor to establish it (Hirz.), but to direct it, ze. give it 
the right direction (Ps. Ixxviii. 8) towards God, 1 Sam. vii. 3, 
2 Chron. xx. 33; it has an independent meaning, so that there 
is no need to supply Oxo Os, nor take PARTE to be for #mHd 
(after the construction in 2 Chron, XXX, 19). To spread out 
the hands in prayer is D'BD (WH) 1D; DO is seldom used 
instead of the more artistic D'‘D2, palmas, h.e. manus supinas. 
The conditional. antecedent clause is immediately followed, 
ver. 14, by a similarly conditional parenthetical clause, which 


186 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


inserts the indispensable condition of acceptable prayer; the 
conclusion might begin with 7?.777: when thou sendest forth 
thy heart and spreadest out thy hands to Him, if there is 
wickedness in thy hand, put it far away; but the antecedent 
requires a promise for its conclusion, and the more so since 
the pret. and fut. which follow D8, ver. 13, have the force 
of futt. ewact.: si disposueris et extenderis, to which the con- 
clusion: put it far away, is not suited, which rather expresses 
a preliminary condition of acceptable prayer. The conclusion 
then begins with 185, then indeed, like ch. vili. 6, xiii. 19, 
comp. vi. 3, with TAY *D, now indeed; the causal signification 
of *> has in both instances passed into the confirmatory (comp. 
1 Sam. xiy. 44, Ps. exviii. 10-12, cxxviii. 2, and on Gen. 
xxvi. 22): then verily wilt thou be able to raise thy counte- 
nance (without being forced to make any more bitter com- 
plaints, as ch. x. 15 sq.), without spot, ¢.2. not: without bodily 
infirmity, but: without spot of punishable guilt, sceleris et 
pene (Rosenmiiller). 2 here signifies without (Targ. NPT), 
properly: far from, as ch. xxi. 9, 2 Sam. i. 22, Prov. xx. 3. 
Faultless will he then be able to look up and be firm (Px 
from P¥*, according to Ges. § 71), quasi ex ere fusus (1 Kings 
vii. 16), one whom God can no longer get the better of. 


16 For thou shalt forget thy grief, 
Shalt remember it as waters that flow by. 
17 And thy path of life shall be brighter than mid-day ; 
If it be dark, it shall become as morning. 
18 And thou shalt take courage, for now there is hope ; 
And thou shalt search, thou shalt le down in safety. 
19 And thou liest down without any one making thee afraid ; 
And many shall caress thy cheeks. 
20 But the eyes of the wicked languish, 
And refuge vanisheth from them, 
And their hope is the breathing forth of the soul. 


CHAP. XI. 16-20. 187 


The grief that has been surmounted will then leave no 
trace in the memory, like water that flows by (not: water that 
flows away, as Olshausen explains it, which would be diffe- 
rently expressed; comp. ch. xx. 28 with 2 Sam. xiv. 14). It is 
not necessary to change TAN 3 into OMY *3 (Hirzel); ANS, as 
in ver. 13, strengthens the force of the application of this 
conclusion of his speech. Life (39h, from 720 to glide away, 
slip, i.e. pass away unnoticed,’ as aidév, both life-time, Ps. 
xxxix. 6, and the world, Ps. xlix. 2, here in the former sense), 
at the end of which thou thoughtest thou wert already, and 
which seemed to thee to run on into dismal darkness, shall be 
restored to thee (D\p’ with Munach on the ult. as ch. xxxi. 
14, not on the penult.) brighter than noon-day (}2, more than, 
i.e. here: brighter than, as e.g. Mic. vii. 4, more thorny than) ; 
and be it ever so dark, it. shall become like morning. Such 
must be the interpretation of AYA, It cannot be a sub- 
stantive, for it has the accent on the penult. ; as a substantive 
it must have been pointed NDWA (after the form MHYN, spn, 
and the like). It is one of the few examples of the paragogic 
strengthened voluntative in the third pers., like Ps. xx. 4, 
Isa. v. 19? (Ges. § 48, 3); the cohortative form of the future 
is used with or without O8 (vid. on Ps. Ixxiii. 16) in hypo- 
thetical antecedent clauses (Ges. § 128, 1). Translate there- 
fore: should it become dark (accordingly correctly accented 
with Rebia mugrasch), from >3y, to envelope one’s self, to darken 


1 Vid. Hupfeld on Ps. xvii. 14, and on the other hand Bottcher, infer. 
§ 275s8., who, taking 3$n in the sense of rooting into, translates: ‘‘ the 
mildew springs up more brilliant than mid-day.” But whatever judg- 
ment one may form of the primary idea. of “0M; this meaning of Ton is 


too imaginary. 
2 In other instances, as mn, Prov. i. 20, viii. 3, and naayn, Ezek. 


xxiii. 20, the ah is not the cohortative form, but either paragogic with- 
out special meaning or (so that the fut. has a double feminine form) a 
feminine termination, as is evident in ch. xxii. 21, where the ah is com- 
bined with the inflection. 


188 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


(whence MN5Y, ch. x. 22), not:-shouldst théu become dark 
(Schlottm.). The feminine forms are instead of the neuter, 
like TODA, it rains, Amos iv. 7; 73M, it becomes dark, Mic. 
_ iii. 6 (Ges. § 137, 2). 

The fut. is followed by perf". consecutiva in ver. 18: And 
thou shalt take confidence, for there is ground for hope for 
thee ; &%, with the force of real and lasting existence. 5M 
is also perf. consec., and is rightly accented as such. If it were 
to be interpreted et si erubueris pudore tranquille cubabis, it 
would require the accent on the penult., since it would be a 
perf. hypotheticum. But although the seeming antithesis of 
mam and nord (comp. ch. vi. 20) appears to favour this 
interpretation, it is nevertheless inadmissible, since it intro- 
duces a sadness into the promise: granted that thou shouldest 
be put to shame at this or that prospect; whereas, if 1pm be 
taken in the sense of scrutari, as it is used by our poet (ch. 
lii. 21, xxxix. 29) (not with Bottch., who comp. Eccles. v. 11, 
in the signification fodere = to labour in the field, in which 
meaning it is not common), the tone of sadness is removed, 
and the accentuation is duly observed: and thou shalt search 
about (i.e. examine the state of thy household, which is ex- 
pressed by #1?5) in ch. v. 24), thou shalt lay thyself down in 
peace (z.e. because thou findest everything in a prosperous 
condition, and hast no anxiety). This feeling of security 
against every harm that may befall one’s person or property, 
gained from trust in God, is expressed (ver. 19a) under the 
figure of the peaceful situation of a herd when removed from 
danger,—a figure which is borrowed from Ley. xxvi. 6, and 
is frequently repeated in the prophets (Isa. xvii. 2; Zeph. iil. 
13). The promises of Zophar culminate in a future exalta- 
tion which shall command reverence and inspire trust: e¢ 
mulcebunt faciem tuam multi, 32 nbn, to approach any one in 
humble entreaty, generally used in reference to God; less 
frequently, as here and Ps. xlv. 13, Prov. xix. 6, in reference 


CHAP. XI. 16-20, 189 


to men in high positions. The end of the wicked, on the 
other hand, is told in ver. 20. Zophar here makes use of the 
choicest expressions of the style of the prophetic psalms: mp2, 
otherwise frequently used of those who pine away with long- 
ing, here and ch. xvii. 5 of eyes that languish with unsatis- 
fied longing ; 573 (Aram. {i72), poetic for O99; wb? NBD, 
after the phrase WS) M52, he breathes forth his soul (Jer. 
xv. 9, comp. Job xxxi. 39). The meaning is not that death 
is their only hope, but that every expectation remains unful- 
filled ; giving up the ghost is that whither all their disap- 
pointed hopes tend. 3 

That Zophar, in the mind of the poet, is the youngest of 
the three speakers, may be concluded from his introducing 
him last of all, although he is the most impetuous. Zophar 
manifests a still greater inability than the other two to bring 
Job to a right state of mind. His standpoint is the same as 
that of the others; like them, he regards the retributive jus- 
tice of God as the principle on which alone the divine govern- 
ment in the world is exercised, and to which every act of this 
government is to be attributed, and it may indeed be assumed 
to be at work even when the relation of circumstances is 
mysterious and impenetrably dark to us. This limited view 
which the friends take of the matter readily accounts for the 
brevity of their speeches in comparison with Job’s. This one 
locus communis is their only theme, which they reiterate con- 
stantly in some new and modified form; while the mind of 
Job is an exhaustless fountain of thought, suggested by the 
direct experiences of the past. Before the present dispensa- 
tion of suffering came upon Job, he enjoyed the peace of true 
godliness, and all his thoughts and feelings were under the 
control of a consciousness, made certain by his experience, 
that God makes himself known to those who fear Him. | 
Now, however, his nature, hitherto kept in subjection by 
divine grace, is let loose in him; the powers of doubt, mis- 


190 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


trust, impatience, and despondency have risen up; his inner 
life is fallen into the anarchy of conflict; his mind, hitherto 
peaceful and well-disciplined, is become a wild “chaotic con- 
fusion ; and hence his speeches, in comparison with those of 
the friends, are as roaring cataracts to small confined streams.’ 
But in this chaos lie the elements of a new creation; the 
harsh pertinacity with which the friends maintain their one 
dogma only tends to give an impulse to it.. The new truth, 
the solution of the mystery, springs from this spiritual battle 
Job has to fight, from which, although not scathless, he still 
shall come forth as conqueror. 

When, therefore, Zophar regards the speeches of Job, 
which are the involuntary expression of the severity of his 
conflict, as a torrent of words, he shows that from the 
haughty elevation of his narrow dogma he does not under- 
stand this form of experience; and when he reproaches Job 
by saying, Whoever can babble so. much shows that he is not 
in the right, he makes use of a maxim which is true enough 
in itself, but its application to Job proceeds from the most 
uncharitable misconstruction of his suffering friend. As he 
looks upon Job, who, in the midst of his fierce conflict, 
struggles after comfort, but thrusts away all false consola- 
tion, he regards him as a cavilling opponent because he cuts 
the knot instead of untying it. He is so blinded by the idea 
that he is in possession of the key to the mystery, that he 
malignantly reproaches Job with being an_ incorrigible 
“ empty-pate.” As though there could be hollowness where 
there is a heart that seethes like metal in the refiner’s cru- 
cible; and as though the dogma of the friends, which forms 
the sole contents of their hollowness, could possibly impart 
light and peace to a heart so sorely troubled ! 

Is the dogma of the friends, then, so pure a doctrine | 
(qt np’) as that which, according to Zophar’s words, Job 
claims for himself? On Zophar’s side it is maintained that 


CHAP. XI. 16-20. 191 


God always acts in accordance with justice, and Job main- 
tains that God does not always so act. The maxim of the 
friends is false in the exclusiveness with which they maintain 
it ; the conclusion to which they are urged gives evidence of 
_ the fallacy of the premises: they must condemn Job, and 
consequently become unjust, in order to rescue the justice of 
God. Job’s maxim, on the other hand, is true; but it is so 
unconnected as it stands, that it may be turned over any 
moment and changed into a falsehood. For that God does 
not act everywhere as the Just One is a truth, but that He 
sometimes acts unjustly is blasphemy. Between these two 
Job hangs in suspense. For the stedfast consciousness of 
his innocence proves to him that God does not always act as 
the Just One; shall he therefore suppose that God deals 
unjustly with him? From this blasphemous inversion of his 
maxim, Job seeks refuge in the absolute power of God, 
which makes that just which is unjust according to the 
clearest human consciousness. ‘This is the feeble thread on 
_ which Job’s piety hangs. Should this be cut, it would be 
all over with him. The friends do their best to cut it in 
twain. Zophar’s speech is like a sword-thrust at it. 

For while Eliphaz and Bildad with cautious gentleness 
describe suffering more as chastisement than as punishment, 
Zophar proceeds more boldly, and demands of Job that he 
should humble himself, as one who has incurred punishment 
from God. Of sin on Job’s part which may have called 
down the divine judgment, Zophar knows as little as Job 
himself. But he wishes that God would grant Job some 
revelation of His infinite wisdom, since he refuses to humble 
himself. Then he would confess his folly, and see: that God 
not only does not punish him unjustly, but even allows much 
of his guilt to go unpunished. Job is therefore to turn 
penitently to God, and to put away that evil which is the 
cause of his suffering, in order that he may be heard. Then 


192 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


shall his hopeless condition become bright with hope; whereas, 
on the other hand, the downfall of the wicked is beyond 
recovery. Ewald aptly remarks that thus even ‘the conclud- 
ing words of the speeches of the friends are always somewhat 
equivocal. “ Eliphaz just adds a slight caution, Bildad intro- — 
duces the contrast in a few words, and Zophar adds but a 
word ; all these seem to be as the forerunners of a multitude — 
of similar harsh threatenings, ch. xv. xviii. xx.” 

What impression will this harsh treatment of Zophar’s 
produce on Job? Job is to humble himself as a sinner who 
is undergoing the punishment of his sin, though the measure 
of it is far below the degree of his guilt; and while he does 
not deny his sinful weaknesses, he is nevertheless convinced 
that he is righteous, and having as such experienced the 
favour of God, cannot become an object of punishment. 
Brentius discriminatingly observes here : Videntur et Sophar et 
reliqui amict Hiob prorsus ignorare quid sit aut efficiat Evan- 
gelion et fides in promissionem Dei; sic argumentantur contra 
Hiobem, quasi nullus unquam possit coram Deo fide justificari. 
The language is rather too much in accordance with the light — 
of the New Testament ; but it is true that the friends know 
nothing whatever of the condition of a truly righteous man, 
over whom the law with its curse, or the retributive justice 
of God, has no power. The interpretation of affliction in 
accordance with the recognition of this principle is strange to 
them; and this is just the issue which is developed by the 
drama in the case of Job—the idea which comes to light in 
the working out of the plot. Even Job does not perceive 
the solution of the mystery, but, in the midst of the conflict, 
is in a state of ignorance which excites compassion; the 
ignorance of the friends arising from their shallowness of 
understanding, on the contrary, creates aversion. When 
Zophar, therefore, wishes that God would grant Job some 
revelation of His infinite wisdom, it is indeed true that Job 


CHAP. XII. 2, 3. Tea 


is greatly in need of it; but it is self-deceiving pride which 
leads Zophar to imagine that he has no need of it himself. 
For this Wisdom which has decreed the suffering of Job is 
hidden from him also; and yet he does not treat the suffering 
of his friend as a divine mystery. He explains it as the 
working of the retributive justice of God; but since he 
_ endeavours thus to explain the mystery, he injures his cause, 
and if possible injures also the slender thread by which Job’s 
faith hangs. For should Job regard his sufferings as a just 
divine retribution, he could then no longer believe on God 
as the Just One. 


Job’s Third Answer.—Chap. xii.—xiv. 
- Schema: 5. 8. 8. 6. 6. 10. 8. | 4, 8. 10. 10. 6. 6. 6. 7. | 6. 7. 7. 7. 10. 7. 6. 


[Then Job began, and said :] 
Ch. xii. 2 Truly then ye are the people, 
And wisdom shall die with you ! 
3 I also have a heart as well as you ; 
I do not stand behind you; 
And to whom should not such things be known ? 


The admission, which is strengthened by ‘3 D8, truly 
then (distinct from 528 °3, for truly, ch. xxxvi. 4, similar to 
‘2 735, behold indeed, Ps. exxviii. 4), is intended as irony: ye 
are not merely single individuals, but the people = race of 
men (OY, as Isa. xl. 7, xlii. 5), so that all human understanding 
is confined to you, and there is none other to be found; and 
when once you die, it will seem to have died out. The LXX. 
correctly renders: yu) tyueis éoté avOpw7rot povor (according 
to the reading of the Cod. Alew.); he also has a heart like 
them, he is therefore not empty, 223, ch. xi. 12. Heart is, 
like ch. xxiv. 10, comp. 2253, ch. xi. 12, equivalent to vods, 
Siavora ; Ewald’s translation, “I also have a head even as 

VOL. I. N 


194 THE BOOK OF Jos. 


you” (“ brains” would better accord with the connection), is 
a western form of expression, and modern and unbiblical (vid. 
Division “ Herz und Haupt,” Psychol. iv. § 12). He is not 
second to them; }? DB), like ch. xiii. 2, properly to slip from, 
to be below any one; {> is not the comparative (Ewald). 
Oetinger’s translation is not bad: I cannot slink away at 
your presence. Who has not a knowledge of such things as 
those which they, by setting themselves up as defenders of 
‘God, have presented to him! ‘AN 7 is equivalent to ‘AYN, 
cvvovda, Isa. lix. 12. 


4 I must be a mockery to my own friend, 
I who called on Eloah and He heard me ; 
A mockery—the just, the godly man. - 
5 Contempt belongs to misfortune, according to the ideas of 
the prosperous ; 
It awaits those who are ready to slip. 
6 The tents of the destroyer remain. in peace, 
And those that defy God are prosperous, 
Who taketh Eloah into his hand. 


The synallage of 37Y7? for yd is not nearly so difficult as 


7 eee 
. 


many others: a laughing-stock to his own friend ; comp. Isa. 
ii. 8, they worship the work of their (his) own hands (1). 
“ One who called on Eloah (nipxd, for which 7i9Nd is found 
in Mss. at ch. xxxvi. 2) and He heard him” is in apposition 
to the subject; likewise nxn py, which is to be explained 
according to Prov. xi. 5, py (from pry, ide, to be hard, 
firm, stiff, straight), is one who in his conduct rules himself 
strictly according to the will of God; pan, one whose thoughts 
are in all respects and without disguise what they should be, 
—in one word: pure. Most old translators (Targ., Vulg., 
Luther) give 1°52 the signification, a torch. Thus eg. Levi 
v. Gerson explains: “According to the view of the prosperous 
and carnally secure, he who is ready for falterings of the feet, 


CHAP. XII. 4-6. 195 


t.é. likely to fall, is like a lighted torch which burns away 
and destroys whatever comes in contact with it, and therefore 
one keeps aloof from him; but it is also more than this: he 
is an object of contempt in their eyes.” ‘Job might not 
inappropriately say, that in the eyes of the prosperous he is 
like a despised, cast-away torch (comp. the similar figure, Isa. 
xiv. 19, like a branch that is rejected with contempt); and 
ver. 5b would be suitably connected with this if “iyind could 
be derived from a substantive 19, vacillatio, but neither the 
usage of the language nor the seriptio plena- (after which 
Jerome translates tempus statutwm, and consequently has in 
mind the oy, times of festal pilgrimages, which are also 
called pn in later times), nor the vowel pointing (instead of 
which "12 would be expected), is favourable to this. bn yi 
signifies vacillantes pede, those whose prosperity is shaken, and 
who are in danger of destruction that is near at hand. We 
therefore, like Abenezra and modern expositors, who are here 
happily agreed, take "25 as composed of 5 and 18, a word 
common to the books of Job (ch. xxx. 24, xxxi. 29) and 
Proverbs (ch. xxiv. 22), which is compared by the Jewish 
lexicographers, according both to form and meaning, to T2 
(ch. xxi. 20) and TS, and perhaps signifies originally dissolution 
(comp. 78), decease (Syr. /’jodo, escape ; Arab. faid, dying), 
fall, then generally calamity, misfortune : contempt (befits) 
misfortune, according to the thoughts (or thinking), idea of 
the prosperous. The pointing wavers between ninviy> and the 
more authorized minviyd, with which Parchon compares the 
nouns MWY and M799; the n, like 7 in the latter word, has 
Dag. lene, since the punctuation is in this respect not quite 
consistent, or follows laws at present unknown (comp. Ges. § 
21, rem. 2). Ver. 5b is now suitably connected: ready (with 
reference to 12) for those who stumble, i.e. contempt cer- 
tainly awaits such, it is ready and waiting for them, \>3, 
érowpos, like Ex. xxxiv. 2. : 


196 THE BOOK OF JOB, 


While the unfortunate, in spite of his innocence, has thus 
only to expect contempt, the tents, i.e. dwellings and posses- 


sions, of the oppressor and the marauder remain in pro- - 


sperity ; nour for sur, an intensive form used not only in 
pause (Ps. xxxvi. 8; comp. Deut. xxxiil. 37) and with greater 
distinctives (Num. xxiv. 6; Ps. cxxii. 6), but also in passages 
where it receives no such accent (Ps. xxxvi. 9, lvii. 2, xxiii. 
2). On Donk, instead of Drony, vid. Ges. § 93, 6, 3. The 
verbal clause (ver. 6a) is followed by a substantival clause (60). 
ninwa is an abstract plural from Ma, perfectly secure ; there- 
fore: the most care-less security is the portion of those who 
provoke God (L.XX. srapopyifovcr) ;+ and this is continued 
in an individualizing form: him who causes Eloah to go into 
his hand. Seb. Schmid explains this passage in the main 
correctly: gui Deum in manu fert h.e. qui manum aut poten- 
tiam suam pro Deo habet et licitum sibi putat quodlibet ; comp. 
Hab. i. 11: “this his strength becomes God to him,” é.e. he 
deifies his own power, and puts it in the place of God. But 
810 signifies, in this connection with ind (not 7°2), neither 
to carry, nor to lead (Gesenius, who compares Ps, Ixxiv. 5, 
where, however, it signifies to cause to go into = to strike 
into) ; it must be translated: he who causes Eloah to enter into 
his hand; from which translation it is clear that not the deifi- 
cation of the hand, but of that which is taken into the hand, 
is meant. This which is taken into the hand is not, however, 
an idol (Abenezra), but the sword; therefore: him who thinks 
after the manner of Lamech,’ as he takes the iron weapon of 
attack and defence into his hand, that he needs no other 


God. 


1 Luther takes n\n as the adverb to ‘p34: und toben wider Gott 


thiirstiglich (vid. Vilmar, Pastoraltheolog. Blatter, 1861, 8. 110-112) ; 
according to the Vulg., et audacter provocant Deum. 

* (Comp. Pentateuch, vol. i. p. 119, Clark’s Foreign Theological 
Library.—Tr. ] 


CHAP, XII. 7-10. 197 


7 But ask now even the beasts—they shall teach it thee ; 
And the birds of heaven—they shall declare it to thee : 

8 Or look thoughtfully to the ground—it shall teach it sae 
And the fish of the sea shall tell tt thee. 

9 Who would not recognise in all this 
That the hand of Jehovah hath wrought this, 

10 In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, 

And the breath of all mankind ? ! 


The meaning of the whole strophe is perverted if nst (ver. 
9) is, with Ewald, referred to “the destiny of severe suffer- 
ing and pain,” and if that which precedes is accordingly 
referred to the testimony of creation to God as its author. 
Since, as a glance at what follows shows, Job further on 
praises God as the governor of the universe, it may be 
expected that the reference is here to God as the creator 
and preserver of the world, which seems to be the meaning 
of the words. Job himself expresses the purpose of this 
hymn of confession, vers. 2 sq., xiii. 1 sq.: he will show the 
friends that the majesty of God, before which he ought, 
according to their demands, to humble himself in penitence, 
is not less known to him than to them; and with oda, verwn - 
enim vero, he passes over to this subject when he begins his 

third answer with the following thought: The perception 
~ in which you pride yourselves I also possess; true, I am 
an object of scornful contempt to you, who are as little able 
to understand the suffering of the godly as the prosperity 
of the godless, nevertheless what you know I also know: 
ask now, etc. Bildad had appealed to the sayings of the 
- ancients, which have the long experience of the past in their 
favour, to support the justice of the divine government ; 
Job here appeals to the absoluteness of the divine rule over 
creation. In form, this strophe is the counterpart of ch. viii. 
8-10 in the speech of Bildad, and somewhat also of ch. xi. 


198 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


7-9 in that of Zophar. The working of God, which infi- 
nitely transcends human power and knowledge, is the sermon 
which is continuously preached by all created things; they 
all proclaim the omnipotence and wisdom of the Creator. 
The plural niona is followed by the verb that refers to it, 
in the singular, in favour of which Gen, xlix. 22 is the 
favourite example among old expositors (Ges. § 146, 3). On 
the other hand, the verb might follow the collective 4iy in the 
plural, according to Ges. § 146, 1. ‘The plural, however, is 
used only in ver. 84, because there the verb precedes instead 
of following its subject. According to the rule Ges. § 
128, 2, the jussive form of the fut. follows the imperative. 
In the midst of this enumeration of created things, MY, as a 
substantive, seems to signify the plants—and especially as 
c+ even now, in the neighbourhood of Job’s ancient habi- 
tation, is the name of a well-known mountain-plant—under 
whose shade a meagre vegetation is preserved even in the hot 
season (vid. on ch. xxx. 4 sqq.). But (1) ™¥ as subst. is 
gen. masc. (Gen. ii. 5); (2) instead of 7N9, in order to 
describe a plant that is found on the ground, or one rooted 
in the ground, it must be paxmSy or ~>82; (3) the mention 
of plants between the birds and fishes would be strange. It 
may therefore be taken as the imperative: speak to the earth 
(LXX., Targ., Vulg., and most others); or, which I prefer, 
since the Aramaic construction §? ND, narravit ei, does not 
occur elsewhere in Hebrew (although perhaps implicite, Prov. 
vi. 22, Jnvn = 7b mwn, fabulabitur, or confabulabitur tidi), 
as a pregnant expression: think, i.e. look meditatively to the 
earth (Ewald), since MY (Mt’), like 135, combines the signifi- 
cations of quiet or articulate meditation on a subject. The 
exhortation directs attention not to the earth in itself, but to 
the small living things which move about on the ground, 
comprehended in the collective name >), syn. /Y (creeping 
things), in the record of creation. All these creatures, though 


CHAP. XII. 11-13. 199 


without reason and speech, still utter a language which is 
heard by every intelligent man. Renan, after Kwald, trans- 
lates erroneously: gui ne sait parmi tous ces étres. They do 
not even possess knowledge, but they offer instruction, and 
are a means of knowledge; 2 with Y?, like Gen. xv. 8, xlii. 
33, and freq. All the creatures named declare that the hand _ 
of Jehovah has made “ this,” whatever we see around us, 7d 
Breropevov, Heb. xi. 3. In the same manner in Isa. Ixvi. 2, 
Jer. xiv. 22, npN"PD is used of the world around us. In the 
hand of God, i.e..in His power, because His workmanship, 
are the souls of all living things, and the spirit (that which 
came direct from God) of all men; every order of life, high 
and low, owes its origin and continuance to Him. ® is 
the individual, and in this connection, in which 52 and 
nn (= m2) are certainly not unintentionally thus separated, 
the individual man. Creation is the school of knowledge, 
and man is the learner. And this knowledge forces itself 
upon one’s attention: quis non cognoverit? The perf. has 
this subjunctive force also elsewhere in interrogative clauses, 
e.g. Ps. xi. 3 (vid. on Gen. xxi. 7). That the name of God, 
JEHOVAH, for once escapes the poet here, is to be ex- 
plained from the phrase “the hand of Jehovah hath made 
this,’ being a somewhat proverbial expression (comp. Isa. 
xli. 20, Ixvi. 2). 

Job now refers to the sayings of the fathers, the authority 
of which, as being handed down from past generations, 
Bildad had maintained in his opposition to Job. 


11 Shall not the ear try sayings, 
As the palate tasteth food ? 

12 Among the ancients is wisdom, 
And long life is understanding. 

13 With Him is wisdom and strength ; 
Counsel and understanding are His. 


200 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


The meaning of ver. 11 is, that the sayings (p>, ch. viii. 
10, comp. v. 27) of the ancients are not to be accepted with- 
out being proved; the waw in 3M is waw adcequationis, as ch. 
v. 7, xi. 12, therefore equivalent to qguemadmodum ; it places 
together for comparison things that are analogous: The ear, 
which is used here like aic@nrypiov (Heb. v. 14), has the 
task of searching out and testing weighty sayings, as the 
palate by tasting has to find out delicious and suitable food ; 
this is indicated by 45, the dat. commodi. So far Job recognises 
the authority of these traditional sayings. At any rate, he. 
adds (ver. 12): wisdom is to be expected from the hoary- 
headed, and length of life is understanding, 4.e. it accom- 
panies length of life. “ Length of days” may thus be taken 
as the subject (Ewald, Olsh.); but 2 may also, with the old 
translations and expositors, be carried forward from the pre- 
ceding clause: év 5€ moAA@ Bio émiotipn (LXX.). We 
prefer, as the most natural: long life is a school of under- — 
standing. But—such is the antithesis in ver. 13 which 
belongs to this strophe—the highest possessor of wisdom, as 
of might, is God. Ewald inserts two self-made couplets be- 
fore ver. 12, which in his opinion are required both by the 
connection and “the structure of the strophe;” we see as 
little need for this interpolation here as before, ch. vi. 140. 
‘my and 45, which are placed first for the sake of emphasis, 
manifestly introduce an antithesis; and it is evident from the 
antithesis, that the One who is placed in contrast to the many 
men of experience is God. Wisdom is found among the 
ancients, although their sayings are not to be always im- 
plicitly accepted; but wisdom belongs to God as an attribute 
of His nature, and indeed absolutely, i.e. on. every side, and 
without measure, as the piling up of synonymous expressions 
implies : 192n, which perceives the reason of the nature, and 
the reality of the existence, of things; "¥Y, which is never 
perplexed as to the best way of attaining its purpose; 7253n, 


CHAP. XII. 14—16. 201 


which can penetrate to the bottom of what is true and false, 
sound and corrupt (comp. 1 Kings iii. 9); and also 1733, 
which is able to carry out the plans, purposes, and decisions 
of this wisdom against all hindrance and opposition. 

In the strophe which follows, from his own observation and 
from traditional knowledge (ch. xiii. 1), Job describes the 
working of God, as the unsearchably wise and the irresistibly 
mighty One, both among men and in nature. 


14 Behold, He breaketh down and tt cannot be built again, 
He shutteth wp, and it cannot be opened. — 

15 Behold, He restraineth the waters and they dry up, 
And He letteth them out and they overturn the earth. 

16 With Him is might and existence, 
The erring and the deceiver are His. 


God is almighty, and everything in opposition to Him 
powerless. If He break down (any structure whatever), it 
can never be rebuilt; should He close upon any one (?.e. the 
dungeon, as perhaps a cistern covered with a stone, Lam. iii. 
53, comp. Jer. xxxviil. 6 ; °Y with reference to the depth of the 
dungeon, instead of the usual 7Y2), it (that which is closed 
from above) cannot be opened again. In like manner, when 
He desires to punish a land, He disposes the elements accord- 
ing to His will and pleasure, by bringing upon it drought or 
flood. 8, coercet, according to the correct Masoretic mode 
of writing 18¥° with dagesh in the Ssade, in order clearly to 
distinguish in the pronunciation between the forms j‘a-ssor 
and jaa‘ssor (18) ;' WAN (for which Abulwalid writes 32") 
is a defective form of writing according to Ges. § 69, 3, 3; 
the form 3355" with the similarly pointed fut. consec., 1 Sam. 
xxv. 12, form a pair (31) noted by the Masora. By mvan, 
which is ascribed to God, is here to be understood that which 


* Vid. my notice of Bir’s Psalter-Ausgabe, Luth. Zeitschr. 1863, 8 ; 
and comp. Keil on Lev. iv. 13 (Pentat. vol. ii. p. 8307, Clark’s transl.). 


202 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


really exists, the real, the objective, knowledge resting’on an 
objective actual basis, in contrast with what only appears to 
be; so that consequently the idea of vers. 16a and 18a is 
somewhat veiled ; for the primary notion of 7220 is thickness, 
solidity, purity, like av«vérys.' This strophe closes like the 
preceding, which favours our division. The line with 1) is 
followed by one with {5, which affirms that, in the supremacy 
of His rule and the wisdom of His counsels, God makes evil 
in every form subservient to His designs. 


17 He leadeth away counsellors stripped of their vita 
And maketh judges fools. 
18 The authority of kings He looseth, 
Ana bindeth their loins with bands. 
19 He leadeth away priests stripped of their robes, 
And overthroweth those who are firmly established. 
20 He removeth the speech of the eloquent, 
And taketh away the judgment of the aged. 
21 He poureth contempt upon princes, 
And maketh loose the girdle of the mighty. 


In vers. 17, 19, bis is added to 7iD as a conditional 
accusative ; the old expositors vary in the rendering of this 
word; at any rate it does not mean: chained (Targ. on ver. 
17), from 5$v¥ (nv), which is reduplicated in the word nowy, 
a chain, a word used in later Hebrew than the language of 
the Old Testament (WW is the Old Testament word) ; nor 
is it: taken as booty, made captive (LXX. aiypanddrous; 
Targ. on ver. 19, 8133, in the quality of spoil) = Pbivi ; but » 


wf 


1 The primary notion of pon, wos is, to be thick, firm, solid, as the 


prim. notion of Wins» (to be foolish, silly) is to be thin, loose, not hold- 
ing together (as a bad texture). The same fundamental notions are 
represented in the expression of moral qualities (in distinction from 


intellectual) by pry, gone, and yuh, (gues gawey)s 


CHAP. XII. 17-21. 208 


‘ 


it is a neuter adjective closely allied to the idea of the verb, 
exutus, not however mente (deprived of sense), but vestibus ; 
not merely barefooted (Hirz., Oehler, with LXX., Mic. i. 8, 
avuTrodetos), which is the meaning of 4, but: stripped of 
their clothes with violence (vid. Isa. xx. 4), stripped in par- 
ticular of the insignia of their power. He leads them half- 
naked into captivity, and takes away the judges as fools 
(aim, vid. Psychol. 8. 292), by destroying not only their 
power, but the prestige of their position also. We find 
echoes of this utterance respecting God’s paradoxical rule 
in the world in Isa. xl. 23, xliv. 25; and Isaiah’s oracle 
on Egypt, ch. xix. 11-15, furnishes an illustration in the 
reality. 

It is but too natural to translate ver. 18: the bands of 
kings He looses (after Ps. exvi. 16, pw nnnp, Thou hast 
loosed my bands); but the relation of the two parts of the 
verse can then not be this: He unchains and chains kings 
(Hirz., Ew., Heiligst., Schlottm.); for the fut. consec. D8" 
requires a contrast that is intimately connected with the con- 
text, and not of mere outward form: fetters in which kings 
have bound others (n'250, gen. subjectivus) He looses, and 
binds them in fetters (Raschi),—an explanation which much 
commends itself, if 1D could only be justified as the con- 
struct of 1Di2 by the remark that “ the o sinks into u” (Ewald, 
§ 213, ¢). Di2 does not once occur in the signification vin- 
culum ; but only the plur. ODID and NiDin, vincula, accord 
with the usage of the language, so that even the pointing 
(DID proposed by Hirzel is a venture. D3, however, as 
constr. of 1D%, correction, discipline, rule (i.e. as the domi- 
nation of punishment, from "D’, castigare), is an equally suit- 
able sense, and is probably connected by the poet with On5 
(a word very familiar to him, ch. xxx. 11, xxxix. 5, xli. 6) on 
account of its relation both in sound and sense to Opi 
(comp. Ps. cv. 22). The English translation is correct: He 


204 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


looseth the authority of kings. 'The antithesis is certainly lost, 
but the thoughts here moreover flow on in synonymous 
parallelism. Pek 

Ver. 19. It is unnecessary to understand on, after 2 
Sam. viii. 18, of high officers of state, perhaps privy coun- 
cillors; such priest-princes as Melchizedek of Salem and 
Jethro of Midian are meant. 0'2N'%, which denotes inex- 
haustible, perennis, when used of waters, is descriptive of 
nations as invincible in might, Jer. v. 15, and of persons as’ 
firmly-rooted and stedfast. 5282, such as are tested, who 
are able to speak and counsel what is right at the fitting 
season, consequently the ready in speech and counsel. ‘The 
derivation, proposed by Kimchi, from 083, in the sense of ~ 
diserti, would require the pointing DON), OY is taste, judg- 
ment, tact, which knows what is right and appropriate under 
the different circumstances of life, 1 Sam. xxv. 33. Mp is 
used exactly as in Hos. iv. 11. Ver. 21a is repeated ver- 
batim, Ps. evii. 40; the trilogy, ‘Ps. cv.—cvii., particularly Ps. 
evii., is full of passages similar to the second part of Isaiah 
and the book of Job (vid. Psalter, ii. 117), O°?BS (only here 
and ch. xli. 7) are the strong, from Ps, to hold together, 
especially to concentrate strength on anything. MM!) (only 
here, instead of Mt), not from Mt), which is an imaginary root, | 
but from MM, according to Fiirst equivalent to PP, to lace, 
bind) is the girdle with which the garments were fastened 
and girded up for any great exertion, especially for desperate 
conflict (Isa. v. 27). To make him weak or relaxed, is the 
same as to deprive of the ability of vigorous, powerful action. 
Every word is here appropriately used. This tottering re- 
laxed condition is the very opposite of the intensity and 
energy which belongs to “the strong.” All temporal and: 
spiritual power is subject to God: He gives or takes it away 
according to His supreme will and pleasure. 


CHAP. XII. 22-25. 205 


22 He discovereth deep things out of darkness, 
And bringeth out to light the shadow of death ; 
23 He giveth prosperity to nations and then destroyeth them, 
Increase of territory to nations and then carrieth them 
away ; 
24 He taketh away the understanding of the chief people of 
the land, 
And maketh them to wander in a trackless wilderness ; 
25 They grope in darkness without light, 
He maketh them to stagger like a drunken man. 


The meaning of ver. 22 in this connection can only be, 
that there is nothing so finely spun out that God cannot 
make it visible. All secret plans of the wicked, all secret 
sins, and the deeds of the evil-doer though veiled in deep 
darkness, He bringeth before the tribunal of the world. The 
form of. writing given by the Masora is Nipoy with koph 
raphatum, consequently plur. from PY, like DMOMY, Dowy 
from OVY, Dyy, not from poy.' The LXX. translates svn 
TAavov, as it is also explained in several Midrash-passages, but 
only by a few Jewish expositors (Jachja, Alschech) by nyun. 
The word, however, is not 83012, but 830 with w sinistrum, 
after which in Midrash Esther it is explained by Syn; 
and Hirzel correctly interprets it of upward growth (Jerome 
after the Targ. unsuitably, multiplicat), and NOY, on the 
other hand, of growth in extent. The latter word is falsely 
explained by the Targ. in the sense of expandere rete, and 
Abenezra also falsely explains: He scatters nations, and 
brings them to their original peace. The verb now is here 
connected with rf as MMBT (Gen. ix. 27); both signify to 


? Kimchi in his Wérterbuch adopts the form nippy, but gives Abul- 
walid as an authority for the lengthened form, which, according to the 
Masora on Lev. xiii. 3, 25, is the traditional. The two excepticns where 
the form occurs with a long vowel are Prov. xxiii. 27 and this passage. 


206 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


make a wider and longer space for any one, used here of the 
ground where they dwell and rule. The opposite, in an un- 
propitious sense, is M2, which is used here, as 2 Kings 
xviii. 11, in a similar sense with MP3 (abducere, i.e. in servi- 
tutem). We have intentionally translated D3 nations, Dy 
people; for ‘3, as we shall show elsewhere, is the mass held 
together by the ties of a common origin, language, and 
country; (OY) DY, the people bound together by unity of 
government, whose membra precipua are consequently called 
Dyn wT, pann is, in this connection, the country, although 
elsewhere, as Isa. xxiv. 4, comp. xlii. 5, yoxn DY signifies 
also the people of the earth or mankind ; for the Hebrew lan- 
guage expresses a country as a portion of the earth, and the 
earth as a whole, by the same name. Job dwells longer on 
this tragic picture, how God makes the star of the prosperity 
of these chiefs to set in mad and blind self-destruction, ac- 
cording to the proverb, quem Deus perdere vult prius dementat. 
This description seems to be echoed in many points in Isaiah, — 
especially in the oracle on Egypt, ch. xix. (eg. N3W3, xix. 14). 
The connection 717 x5 1nn2 is not genitival; but 77 xb is either 
an adverbial clause appended to the verb, as pn xb, ch. xxiv. 
24, o2 xd, 1 Chron. ii. 30, 32, or, which we prefer as being 
more natural, and on account of the position of the words, a 
virtual adjective: in a trackless waste, as US ND, ch. xxviii. 
26; may xd, 2 Sam. xxiii. 4 (Olsh.). 

Job here takes up the tone of Eliphaz (comp. ch. v. 18 sq.). 
Intentionally he is made to excel the friends in a recognition 
of the absolute majesty of God. He is not less cognizant of 
it than they. 


Ch. xiii. 1 Lo, mine eye hath seen all, 
Mine ear hath heard and marked it. 
2 What ye know do I know also, 
I do not stand back behind you. 


CHAP. XIII. 3-6. | _ 207 


Job has brought forward proof of what he has stated at 
the commencement of this speech (ch. xii. 3), that he is not 
inferior to them in the knowledge of God and divine things, 
and therefore he can now repeat as proved what he main- 
tains. The plain 5d, which in other passages, with the force 
of Sdn, signifies omnes (Gen. xvi. 12; Isa. xxx. 5; Jer. xliv. . 
12) and omnia (ch. xlii. 2; Ps. viii. 7; Isa. xliv. 24), has the 
definite sense of hewc omnia here. mp (ver. 16) is not after 
the Aramaic manner dat. pro acc. objecti: my ear has heard 
and comprehended it (¢d); but dat. commodi, or perhaps only 
dat. ethicus: and has made it intelligible to itself (stb7); p32 
of the apprehension accompanying perception. He has a 
knowledge of the exalted and glorious majesty of God, ac- 
quired partly from his own observation and partly from the 
teachings of others. He also knows equal to (instar) their 
knowledge, ¢.e. he has a knowledge (Y7! as the idea implied 
in it, e.g. like Ps. Ixxxii. 5) which will bear comparison with 
theirs. But he will no longer contend with them. 


3 But I would speak to the Almighty, 
And I long to reason with God. 

4 And ye however are forgers of lies, 
Physicians of no value are ye all. 

5 Oh that ye would altogether hold your peace, 
Tt would be accounted to you as wisdom. 

6 Hear now my instruction, 
And hearken to the answers of my lips! 


He will no longer dispute with the friends; the more they 
oppose him, the more earnestly he desires to be able to.argue 
his cause before God. D258 (ver. 3) is disjunctive, like ava, 
_ and introduces a new range of thoughts; LXX. od pay 8é 
Gna, verum enim vero. True, he has said in ch. ix. that no 
one can maintain his cause before God; but his confidence 
in God grows in proportion as his distrust of the friends in- 


208 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


creases ; and at the same time, the hope is begotten that God 
will grant him that softening of the terror of His majesty 
which he has reserved to himself in connection with this de- 
elaration (ch. ix. 34, comp. xiii. 20 sq.). The infin. absol. 
nin, which in ch. vi. 25 is used almost as a substantive, and 
indeed as the subject, is here in the place of the object, as e.g. 
Isa. v. 5, lviii. 6: to prove, i.e. my cause, to God (Os>x, like 
ver. 15, 2878) I long. With os) (ver. 4) the antithesis is 
introduced anew: I will turn to God, you on the contrary 
(cat dpeis 5é). Since the verb 550, from its primary meaning 
to spread on, smear on (whence e.g. Talmudic mopD, the act 
of throwing on, as when plastering up the cracks of an oven), 
cogn. oR (whence DBA, plaster, and perhaps also in the signi- 
fication tasteless, ch. vi. 6 = sticky, greasy, slimy), does not 
signify, at least not at first, consuere, but assuere (without any 
relation of root with "57), we explain, not with Olshausen 
and others, concinnatores mendacii, such as sew together lies _ 
as patchwork; but with Hirzel and others, assutores mendacit, 
such as patch on lies, i.e. charge falsely, since they desire 
throughout to make him out to be a sinner punished accord- 
ing to his desert. This explanation is also confirmed by ch. 
xiv. 17. Another explanation is given by Hupfeld: sarci- 
natores falsi = inanes, inutiles, so that "PY signifies what 
lies — what deceives, as in the parallel member of the verse 
oon, nothingness, and also boy (ch. xvi. 2) in a similar con- 
nection, is not an objective but attributive genitive ; but Ps. 
cxix. 69 is decisive against this interpretation of 7p¥ ‘pip, 
The parallelism is not so exactly adjusted, as e.g. even "S59 
does not on account of the parallel with ys) signify patchers, 


1JIn the Talmudic, the jugular vein, the cutting of which produces 
death, is called obs (later ayy, Wwe), according to which (b. Chullin 


1212) it is explained; healer of the jugular artery, i.e. those who try to heal 
what is incurable, therefore charlatans,—a strange idea, which has arisen 
from the defective form of writing bby. The LXX. translates larai xaxav. 


CHAP, XIII. 7—11, | 209 


pamrat, but: they are not able to heal Job’s wounds with the 
medicine of consolation; they are medici nihili, useless phy- 
sicians. Prov. xvii. 28, “ Even a fool, when he holdeth his 
peace, is counted wise,” applies to them, s¢ tacuisses, sapiens 
mansisses ; or, as a rabbinical proverb of similar meaning, 
quoted by Heidenheim, says, myn mina nixdn, “the fatigue 
of comprehension is comprehension,” 2.¢. the silent pause be- 
fore a problem is half the solution. The jussive form ‘JM, it 
would be (Ges. § 128, 2), is used in the conclusion of the 
wish. Thus he challenges them to hear his N3\n (AN3in) 
and his nia, Hirzel is quite right when he says the former 
does not mean defence (justification), nor the latter proofs 
(counter-evidence); nnn is, according to his signification 
(significatus, in distinction from sensus), édeyyxos, correptio 
(LXX., Vulg.), and here not so much refutation and answer, 
as correction in an ethical sense, in correspondence with which 
Mma is also intended of reproaches, reproofs, or reprimands. 


7 Will ye speak what is wrong for God, 
-\ And speak what is deceitful for Him ? 
8 Will ye be partial for Him, 
Or will ye play the part of God’s advocates ? 
9 Would it be pleasant if He should search you out, 
Or can ye jest with Him, as one jesteth with men? 
10 He will surely expose you — 
Tf ye secretly act with partiality. 
11 Will not His majesty confound you, 
And His fear fall upon you? 

Their advocacy of God—this is the thought of this strophe 
—is an injustice to Job, and an evil service rendered to God, 
which cannot escape undisguised punishment from Him. 
They set themselves up as God’s advocates (PN? 34, like 
byad a4, Judg. vi. 31), and at the same time accept His 
person, accipiunt (as in acceptus = gratus), or lift it up, ie. 

VOL. I. O 


210 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


favour, or give preference to, His person, viz. at the expense 
of the truth: they are partial in His favour, as they are 
twice reminded and given to understand by the fut. energicum 
px’, The addition of "NDZ (ver. 10d) implies that they 
conceal their better knowledge by the assumption of an 
earnest tone and bearing, expressive of the strongest convic- 
tion that they are in the right. They know that Job is not 
a flagrant sinner; nevertheless they deceive themselves with 
the idea that he is, and by reason of this delusion they take 
up the cause of God against him. Such perversion of the 
truth in majorem Dei gloriam is an abomination to God. 
When He searches them, His advocates, out (129, as Prov. 
xxviii. 11), they will become conscious of it; or will God be 
mocked, as one mocketh mortal men? Comp. Gal. vi. 7 for 
a similar thought. ont is inf. absol. after the form 305, and 
snan is also to be derived from bon, and is fut: Hiph., the 
preformative not being syncopated, for nn (Ges. § 53, 
rem. 7); not Piel, from Onn (as 1 Kings xviii. 27), with the 
‘doubling of the middle radical resolved (Olsh. in his Lehrd. 
S. 577). God is not pleased with Aarpefa (John xvi. 2) 
which gives the honour to Him, but not to truth, such Gros 
OQcod GAN ov Kar’ erriyvwow (Rom. x. 2), such advocacy. 
contrary to one’s better knowledge and conscience, in which 
the end is thought to sanctify the means. Such advocacy 
must’ be put to shame and confounded when He who needs 
no concealment of the truth for His justification is manifest 
in His M8, ae. not: in the kindling of His wrath (after 
Judg. xx. 38, Isa. xxx. 27), but: in His exaltation (correctly 
by Ralbag: inom imxvinn), and by His direct influence 
brings all untruth to light. It is the boldest’ thought imagin- 
able, that one dare not have respect even to the person of 
God when one is obliged to lie to one’s self. And still it is 
also self-evident. For God and truth can never be anta- 
gonistic. 7 


CHAP. X'II. 12—16. 211 


12 Your memorable words are proverbs of dust, 
Your strongholds are become strongholds of clay ! 
13 Leave me in peace, and I will speak, 
And let what will come on me. 
14 Wherefore should I bear my flesh in my teeth ? 
L take my soul in my hands. 
15 Behold, He slayeth me—I wait for Him: 
Iwill only prove my way before Him. 
16 Even this would be my salvation, 
That a hypocrite dare not appear before Him. 


The words by which they exhort and warn him are called 


D’273!, not because they recall the experience and teaching of | 


the ancients (Hirz.), but as sayings to which attention and 
thought should be given, with the tone of xi~3t, ch. iv. 7 
(Hahn) ; as f>t 18D, Mal. iii. 16, the book of remembrance ; 
and mist nap, Esth. vi. 1, the book of memorabilia or memo- 
randa. These their loci communes are proverbs of ashes, 1.e. 
proverbs which, in respect to the present case, say nothing, 
passing away like ashes (758 = vanity, Isa. xliv. 20). While 
ver. 12a says what their speeches, with the weighty nota bene, 
are, ver. 12b says what their 0°33 become; for ? always 
denotes a xivyous = yéveots, and is never the exponent of 


the predicate in a simple clause.’ Like the Arabic 4e 


signifies a boss, back, then protection, bulwark, rampart : 
their arguments or proofs are called 0°23 (ninyy, Isa. xli. 21; 
comp. dyupdpata, 2 Cor. x. 4); these ramparts which they 
throw up become as ramparts of clay, will be shown to be 
such by their being soon broken through and falling in. 


a The Jewish expositors compare 1 Chron. iii. 2 on %335, but the $ 
there in ordviand is a clerical error (comp. 2 Sam. iii. 3). Reiske con- 
jectures *335 (lumps of clay), one of the best among his most venture- 


_ some conjectures. 


212 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Their reasons will not stand before God, but, like clay that 
will not hold together, fall to pieces. 

Ver. 13. Be silent therefore from me, he says to them, #.e: 
stand away from me and leave me in peace (opp. ON wenn, 
Isa. xli. 1): then will I speak, or: in order that I may abe 
(the cohortative usual in apod. imper.)—he, and he alone, 
will defend (%.e. against God) his cause, which they have so 
uncharitably abandoned in spite of their better knowledge 
and conscience, let thereby happen (729, similar to Deut. 
xxiv. 5) to him 2, whatever may happen (72y' 79); or more 
simply: whatever it may be, guidquid est, as 2 Sam. xviil. 22 
mpm, let happen whatever may happen; or more simply: 
whatever it may be, like 19°25 quodeunque, Num. Xxiil. 3; 
‘2 occurs also in a similar nee: thus placed last (Ewald, § 
104, d). 

Ver. 14. Wherefore should he carry away his flesh in his 
teeth, z.e. be intent upon the maintenance of his life, as a wild 
beast upon the preservation of its prey, by holding it between 
its teeth (mordicus tenet) and carrying it away? This is a 
proverbial phrase which does not occur elsewhere ; for Jer. 

xxxvill. 2 (thy life shall become as spoil, Dowie, to thee) is only 
similar in outward appearance. It may be asked whether 
ver. 146 continues the question begun with mip-by (vid. on Isa. 
i. 5): and wherefore should I take my soul in my hands, 
we. carefully protect it as a valuable possession? (Kichh., 
Umbr., Vaih.) But apart from Ps. cxix. 109 (my soul is 
continually in my hand),—where it may be asked, whether the 
soul is not there regarded as treasure (according to the cur- 
rent religious phrase: to carry his soul in his hand = to work 
out the blessedness of his soul with fear and trembling),— 
YB22 iD) OY signifies everywhere else (Judg. xii. 3; 1 Sam. xix. 
5, xxviii. 21) as much as to risk one’s life without fear of death, 
properly speaking: to fight one’s way through with one’s fist, 
perishing so soon as the strength of one’s fist is gone (Ewald) ; 


CHAP. XIII. 12-16. 213 


comp. the expression for the impending danger of death, 
Deut. xxviii. 66. If this sense, which is in accordance with 
the usage of the language, be adopted, it is unnecessary with 
Hirz., after Ewald, § 352, b, to take ‘52) for 'wp) D3: also, 
even my soul, etc., although it cannot be denied that}, like 
kai and et, sometimes signifies: also, etiam (Isa. xxxil. 7, 2 
Chron. xxvii. 5, Eccles. v. 6, and according to the accents, 
Hos. viii. 6 also; on the contrary, 2 Sam. i. 23, Ps. xxxi. 12, 
can at least be explained by the copulative meaning, and 
Amos iy. 10 by “and indeed”). The waw joins the positive 
to the negative assertion contained in the question of ver. 
14a (Hahn): I will not eagerly make my flesh safe, and will 
take my soul in my hand, i.e. calmly and bravely expose 
myself to the danger of death. Thus ver. 15 is most directly 
connected with what precedes. 

Ver. 15. This is one of eighteen passages in which the 
Chethib is x5 and the Keri \>; ch. vi. 21 is another.’ In the 
LX -X., which moreover changes Snes into bn, apyerOat, the 
rendering is doubtful, the Cod. Vat. translating édv pe 
xelpoantat, the Cod. Alex. dav un pe yep. The Mishna d. 
Sota, 27, b, refers to the passage with reference to the question 


1 In Fiirst, Concord. p. 1367, col. 1, the following passages are want- 
ing: 1 Sam. ii. 3, 2 Kings viii. 10, Ps. c. 3, cxxxix. 16, Prov. xix. 7, 
xxvi. 2, 1 Chron. xi. 20, which are to be supplied from Aurivillius, diss. 
p- 469, where, however, on the other hand, 2 Sam. xix. 7 is wanting. 
Ex. xxi. 8 also belongs to these passages. In this last passage Miihlau 
proposes a transposition of the'letters thus: my t'. x (if she displease her 
master, so that he knows her not, does not like to make her his concubine, 
then he shall cause her to be redeemed, etc.). [In his volume on Isaiah 
just published (1866), Dr Delitzsch appends the following note on ch. 
]xiii. 9 :—‘‘ There are fifteen passages in which the Keri substitutes sb 
for x5, vid. Masora magna on Lev. xi. 21 (Psalter, ii. 60). If we include 
Isa. xlix. 5, 1 Chron. xi. 20,1 Sam. ii. 16 also, there are then eighteen 
(comp. on Job xiii. 15); but the first two of these passages are very 
doubtful, and are therefore intentionally omitted, and in the third it is 
x5 that is substituted for 45 (Ges. Thes. 735, b). 2 Sam. xix. 7 also does 
not belong here, for in this passage the Keri is 3$.”—Tr.] 


214 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


whether Job had served God from love or fear, and in fayour 
of the former appeals to ch. xxvii. 5, since here the matter is 
doubtful (5:pvi 1277), as the present passage may be explained, 
“T hope in Him,” or “I hope not.” The Gemara, ib. 31, a, 
observes that the reading x> does not determine the sense, 
for Isa. Ixiii, 9 is written xd, and is not necessarily to be 
understood as 1, but can be so understood.! Among the 
ancient versions, the Targ., Syr., and Jerome (etiamsi occiderit 
me, in ipso sperabo) are in favour of 1. This translation of 
the Vulgate is followed by the French, English, Italian, and 
other versions. This utterance, in this interpretation, has a 
venerable history. The Electoress Louise Henriette von 
Oranien (died 1667), the authoress of the immortal hymn, 
“ Jesus meine Zuversicht”, [the English translation begins, 
“Jesus Christ,: my sure defence”], chose these words, 
“Though the Lord should slay me, yet will I hope in Him,” 
for the text of her funeral oration. And many in the hour 
of death have adopted the utterance of Job in this form as 
the expression of their faith and consolation.? Among these 
we may mention a:-Jewess. The last movement of the wasted 
fingers of Grace Aguilar was to spell the words, “ Though He 
slay me, yet will I trust in Him,”? 

The words, so understood, have an historic claim in their 
favour which we will not dispute. Even the apostles do not 
spurn the use of the Greek words of the Old Testament, 
though they do not accord with the proper connection in the 
original text, provided they are in accordance with sacred 
Scripture, and give brief and pregnant expression to a truth 
taught elsewhere in the Scriptures. Thus it is with this 
utterance, which, understood as the Vulgate understands it, 


1 Vid. Geiger, Lesestiicke aus der Mischnah (1845), 8. 37 f. 

* Vid. Géschel, Die Kurfiirstinnen zu Brandenburg aus dem Hause 
Hohenzollern (1857), 8. 28-32. 

8 Marie Henriquez Morales, bearbeitet von Piza (1860), 8. xii. 


CHAP. XIII. 12-16. 215 


is thoroughly Job-like, and in some measure the final solution 
of the book of Job. It is also, according to its most evident 
meaning, an expression of perfect resignation. We admit 
that if it is translated: behold, He will slay me, I hope not, 
i.e. L await no other and happier issue, a thought is obtained 
that also agrees with the context. But Shy does not properly 
mean to hope, but to wait for; and even in ch. vi. 11, xiv. 14, 
where it stands as much without-an object as here, it has no 
other meaning but that of waiting; and Luther is true to it 
when he translates: behold, He will destroy me, and I can- 
not expect it; it is, however, strange; and Béttch. translates : 
I will not wait to justify myself, which is odd. The proper 
meaning of 5m, prestolari, gives no suitable sense. Thus, 
therefore, the writer will have written or meant 5, since 
° Sm is also elsewhere a familiar expression with him, ch. 
xxix. 21, 23, xxx. 26. The meaning, then, which agrees both 
with the context and with the reality, is: behold, He will slay 
me, I wait for Him, i.e. I wait what He may do, even to 
smite with death, only I will (8, as frequently, e.g. Ps. xlix. 
16, does not belong to the word which immediately follows, 
but to the whole clause) prove my ways to Him, even 
before His face. He-fears the extreme, but is also prepared 
for it. Hirzel, Heiligst., Vaihinger, and others, think that 
Job regards his wish for the appearing of God as the certain 
way of death, according to the belief that no one can behold 
God and not die. But Dp? has reference to a different 
form of idea. He fears the risk of disputing with God, and 
being obliged to forfeit his life; but, as Sms 1b implies, he 
resigns himself even to the worst, he waits for Him to whom 
he resigns himself, whatever He may do to him; nevertheless 
(48 restrictive, or as frequently }28 adversative, which is the 
same thing here) he cannot and will not keep down the inward 
testimony of his innocence, he is prepared to render Him an 
account of the ways in which he has walked (i.e. the way of 


216 : THE BOOK OF JOB. 


His will)—he can succumb in all respects but that of his moral 
guiltlessness. And in ver. 16 he adds what will prove a 
triumph for him, that a godless person, or (what is suitable, 
and if it does not correspond to the primary idea,’ still — 
accords with the use of the word) a hypocrite, one who 
judges thus of himself in his own heart, would not so come 
forward to answer for himself before God (Hahn). It can be 
explained: that a godless person has no access to God; but 
the other explanation gives a truer thought. 17 is here used 
as neuter, like ch. xv. 9, xxxi. 28 comp. 11, xli. 3, Ex. xxxiv. 
10. Correctly LXX., xab rod76 pos atroBjoeras eis cwrnplav. 
myaw* here (comp. ch. xxx. 15) has not, however, the usual 
deeper meaning which it has in the prophets and in Psalms. 
It means here salvation, as victory in a contest for the right. 
Job means that he has already as good as won the contest, 
by so urgently desiring to defend himself before God. This 
excites a feeling in favour of his innocence at the onset, and 
secures him an acquittal. 


17 Hear, O hear my confession, 

And let my declaration echo in your ears. 
18 Behold now! I have arranged the cause, 

I know that I shall maintain the right. 
19 Who then can contend with me? 

Then, indeed, I would be silent and expire. 


Eager for the accomplishment of his wish that he might 
himself take his cause before God, and as though in imagina- 


1 The verb 43n signifies in the Arabic to deviate, to go on one side 
(whence e.g. ahhnaf, bandy-legged): hhani/, which is derived from it, is 


a so-called X5, évevriconwoy, which may mean both one inclining to the 


good and true (one who is orthodox), and in this sense it is a surname of 
Abraham, and one inclining to evil. Beidhawi explains it by mdil, inclin- 


ing one’s self to ; the synonym, but used only in a good sense, is | lel, 
el-' Adil. 


CHAP. XIII. 17-19. 217 


tion it were so, he invites the friends to be present to hear his 
defence of himself. 5% (in Arabic directly used for confes- 
sion = religion) is the confession which he will lay down, and 
mMns the declaration that he will make in evidence, ze. the 
proof of his innocence. The latter substantive, which signifies 
brotherly conduct in post-biblical Hebrew, is here an dz. Aey. 
from Nn, not however with Aleph prostheticum from Kal, but 
after the form M38 = 1721, from the Aphél = Hiphil of 
this verb, which, except Ps. xix. 3, occurs only in the book 
of Job as Hebrew (comp. the n. actionis, MNS, Dan. v. 12), 
Ewald, § 156, c. It is unnecessary to carry the ‘YOY on to 
ver. 17) (hear now.... with your own ears, as e.g. Jer. 
xxvi. 11); ver. 170 is an independent substantival clause like 
ch. xv. 11, Isa. v. 9, which carries in itself the verbal idea of 
A or NAA (Ps. xviii. 7). They shall hear, for on his part 
he has arranged, i.e. prepared (OEY JW, causam instruere, 
as ch. xxiii. 4, comp. xxxili. 5) the cause, so that the action 
can begin forthwith; and he knows that he, he and-no one 
else, will be found in the right. With the conviction of this 
superiority, he exclaims, Who in all the world could contend 
with him, i.e. advance valid arguments against his defence of 
himself? ‘Then, indeed, if this impossibility should happen, 
he would be dumb, and willingly die as one completely over- 
powered not merely in outward appearance, but in reality 
vanquished. ‘ny 2° following sin‘) (comp. ch. iv. 7) may 
be taken as an elliptical relative clause: qui litigare possit 
mecum (comp. Isa. 1. 9 with Rom. viii. 34, ris 6 xataxpivar) ; 
but since Mt Nin ‘9D is also used in the sense of' quis tandem 
or ecquisnam, this syntactic connection which certainly did 
exist (Ewald, § 325, a) is obliterated, and sin serves like mr 
only to give intensity and vividness to the %. On TAY "SD (in 
meaning not different to '8 °3), vid. ch. ili. 13, viii. 6. In ver. 
19 that is granted as possible which, according to the declara- 
tion of his conscience, Job must consider as absolutely impos- 


218 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


sible. Therefore he clings to the desire of being able to 
bring his cause before God, and becomes more and more) 
Dicorbed 3 in the thought. mAb, 


20 Only two things do not unto me, 
Then will I not hide myself from Thy countenance : 
21 Withdraw Thy hand from me, | 
‘ And let Thy fear not terrify me— 
22 Call then and I will answer, 
Or I will speak and answer Thou me ! 


He makes only two conditions in his prayer, as he has 


already expressed it in ch. ix. 834: (1) That God would grant . 


him a cessation of his troubles; (2) That He would not 
overwhelm him with His majesty. The chastening hand of 
God is generally called elsewhere; but in spite of this 
prevalent usage of the language, }3 cannot be understood 
here (comp. on the contrary ch. xxxiii. 7) otherwise than of 
the hand (ch. ix. 84: the rod) of God, which lies heavily on 
Job. The painful pressure of that hand would prevent the 
collecting and ordering of his thoughts required for meeting 
with God, and the 7°" (Codd. defectively 3ND8) of God 
would completely crush and confound him. But if God 
grants these two things: to remove His hand for a time, and 
not to turn the terrible side of His majesty to him, then he is 
ready whether God should himself open the cause or permit 
him to have the first word. Correctly Mercerus: optionem 
et dat ut aut actoris aut ret personam deligat, sua fretus inno- 
centia, sed interim sui oblitus et immodicus. In contrast with 
God he feels himself to be a poor worm, but his consciousness 
of innocence makes him a Titan. 

He now says what he would ask God; or rather, he now 
asks Him, since he vividly pictures to himself the action with 
God which he desires. His imagination anticipates the 
reality of that which is longed for. Modern expositors begin 


CHAP. XIII. 23-25. 219 


a new division at ver. 28. But Job’s speech does not yet 
take a new turn ; it goes on further continually uno tenore. 


23 How many are mine iniquities and sins ? 
Make me to know my transgression and sin !— — 
24 Wherefore dost Thou hide Thy face, 
And regard me as Thine enemy ? 
25 Wilt Thou frighten away a leaf driven to and fro, 
And pursue the dry stubble? 


When. }¥ and nxn, YWB and NNN, are used in close con- 
nection, the latter, which describes sin as failing and error, 
signifies sins of weakness (infirmities, Schwachheitsstinde) ; 
whereas. \y (prop. distorting or bending) signifies misdeed, 


and yw (prop. breaking loose, or away from, Arab. ju) 


wickedness which designedly estranges itself from God and 
removes from favour, both therefore malignant sin (Boshetts- 
stinde’). The bold self-confidence which is expressed in the 
question and challenge of ver. 23 is, in ver. 24, changed to 
grievous astonishment that God does not appear to him, and 
on the contrary continues to pursue him as an enemy without 
investigating his cause. Has the Almighty then pleasure in 
scaring away a leaf that is already blown to and fro? noyn, 
with He interrog., like 039, ch. xv. 2, according to Ges. § 100, 
4, YY used as transitive here, like Ps. x. 18, to terrify, scare 
away affrighted. Does it give Him satisfaction to pursue 
dried-up stubble? By M8 (before an indeterminate noun, 
according to Ges. § 117, 2) he points dextixads to himself : 
he, the powerless one, completely deprived of strength by 
sickness and pain, is as dried-up stubble ; nevertheless God is 
after him, as though He would get rid of every trace of a 


1 Comp. the development of the idea of the synonyms for sin in yon 
Hofmann, Schrifibeweis, i. 483 ff., at the commencement of the fourth 
Lehrstiick. 


220 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


dangerous enemy by summoning His utmost strength against 
him. 


26 For Thou decreest bitter things against me, 
And causest me to possess the iniquities of my youth, 
27 And puttest my feet in the stocks, | 
And observest all my ways. 
Thou makest for thyself a circle round the soles of my feet, 
28 Round one who moulders away as worm-eaten, 
As a.garment that the moth gnaweth. 


~ 


He is conscious of having often prayed: “ Remember not 
the sins of my youth, and my transgressions: according to 
Thy mercy remember Thou me,” Ps. xxv. 7; and still he 
can only regard his affliction as the inheritance (7.e. entailed 
upon him by sins not repented of) of the sins of his youth, 
since he has no sins of his mature years that would incur 
wrath, to reproach himself with. He does not know how to 
reconcile with the justice of God the fact that He again 
records against him sins, the forgiveness of which he implores 
soon after their commission, and decrees (303, as Ps. cxlix. 9, 
and as used elsewhere in the book of Job with reference to 
the recording of judgment) for him on account of them such 
bitter punishment (115, amara, bitter calamities; comp. 
Deut. xxxii. 32, “bitter” grapes). And the two could not 
indeed be harmonized, if it really were thus. So long as a 
man remains an object of the divine mercy, his sins that have 
been once forgiven are no more the object of divine judgment. 
But Job can understand his affliction only as an additional 
punishment. The conflict of temptation through which he 
is passing has made God’s loving-kindness obscure to him. 
He appears to himself to be like a prisoner whose feet are 
forced into the holes of a 1D, i.e. the block-or log of wood in 
which the feet of a criminal are fastened, and which he must 
shuffle about with him when he moves; perhaps connected 


CHAP. XIII, 26-28. . 221 


- 


Gs 4 
with ww, occludere, opplere (foramen), elsewhere N57) (from 


the forcible twisting or fastening), Chald. 8"1D, S27D, Syr. 
sado, by which Acts xvi. 24, Edkov = rrodoxdxn, is rendered ; 
Lat. cippus (which Ralbag compares), codex (in Plautus an 
instrument of punishment for slaves), or also nervus. The 
verb OYA which belongs to it, and is found also in ch. xxxiil. 
11 in the same connection, is of the jussive form, but is 
neither jussive nor optative in meaning, as also the future 
with shortened vowel (e.g. ch. xxvii. 22, x]. 19) or apocopated 
(ch. xviii. 12, xxiii. 9, 11) is used elsewhere from the pre- 
ference of poetry for a short pregnant form. He seems to 
~ himself like a criminal whose steps are closely watched (72%, 
as ch. x. 14), in order that he may not have the undeserved 
enjoyment of freedom, and may not avoid the execution for 
which he is reserved by effecting an escape by flight. In- 
stead of ‘Nims, the reading adopted by Ben-Ascher, Ben- 
Naphtali writes "2778, with Cholem in the first syllable ; both 
modes of punctuation change without any fixed law also. in 
other respects in the inflexion of M&, as of NMS, a caravan, 
the construct is both nims, ch. vi. 19, and nims&. It is 
scarcely necessary to remark that the verbs in ver. 27bc are 
addressed to God, and are not intended as the third pers. fem. 
in reference to the stocks (Ralbag). The roots of the feet 
are undoubtedly their undermost parts, therefore the ‘soles. 
But what is the meaning of 7pnnn? The Vulg., Syr., and 
Parchon explain: Thou fixest thine attention upon... , 
but certainly according to mere conjecture ; Ewald,:by the 
help of the Arabic tahhakkaka ala: Thou securest thyself 
. . -, but there is not the least necessity to depart from 
the ordinary use of the word, as those also do who explain : 
Thou makest a law or boundary (Aben-Ezra, Ges., Hahn, 
Schlottm.). The verb 7) is the usual word (certainly cog- 
- nate and interchangeable with PPM) for carved-out work (in- 


222 THE BOOK OF JOB. - 


taglio), and perhaps with colour rubbed in, or filled up with 
metal (vid. ch. xix. 23, comp. Ezek. xxiii. 14); it signifies 
to hew into, to carve, to dig a trench. Stickel is in some 
measure true to this meaning when he explains: Thou 
scratchest, pressest (producing blood) ; by which rendering, 
however, the Hithpa. is not duly recognised. Raschi is 
better, tu ?’affiches, according to which Mercerus: velut afjiaus 
vestigus pedum meorum adheres, ne qua elabi possim aut 
effugere. But a closer connection with the ordinary use of 
the word is possible. Accordingly Rosenm., Umbreit, and 
others render: Thou markest a line round my feet (drawest 
a circle round) ; Hirz., however, in the strictest sense of the 
Hithpa. : Thou diggest thyself in (layest thyself as a circular 
line about my feet). But the Hithpa. does not necessarily 
mean se insculpere, but, as ovEnn sibi exuere, MN|NN sibi 
solvere, }INNN sibt propitium facere, it may also mean sibi in- 
sculpere, which does not give so strange a representation: 
Thou makest to thyself furrows (or also: lines) round the 
soles of my feet, so that they cannot move beyond the nar- 
row boundaries marked out by thee. With i), ver. 28, a 
circumstantial clause begins: While he whom Thou thus 
fastenest in as a criminal, etc. Observe the fine rhythmical 
accentuation achdlo ‘asch. Since God whom he calls upon 
does not appear, Job’s defiance is changed to timidity. The 
elegiac tone, into which his bold tone has passed, is con- 
tinued in ch. xiv. 


Ch. xiv. 1 Man that is born of a woman, 
Short of days and full of unrest, 
2 Cometh forth as a flower and is cut down ; 
He fleeth as a shadow, and continueth not. 
3 Moreover, Thou openest Thine eyes upon him, 
And Thou drawest me before Thy tribunal. 


Even if he yields to the restraint which his suffering 


CHAP. XIV. 1-3 223 


\ 


imposes on him, to regard himself as a sinner undergoing 
punishment, he is not able to satisfy himself by thus per- 
suading himself to this view of God’s conduct towards him. 
How can God pass so strict a judgment on man, whose life 
is so short and full of sorrow, and which cannot possibly be 
pure from sin ?—Ver. 1. 058 is followed by three clauses in 
apposition, or rather two, for OWS 730) (LXX. yevvntos 
yuvatxos, as Matt. xi. 11; comp. yévvnua yur. Sir. x. 18) 
belongs to the subject as an adjectival clause: woman-born 
man, short-lived, and full of unrest, opens out as a flower. 
Woman is weak, with pain she brings forth children ; she is 
impure during her lying-in, therefore weakness, suffering, 
and impurity is the portion of man even from the birth (ch. 
xv. 14, xxv. 4). As 8? is the constr. of 7¥P, so (129) Ya” is 
from Ya’, which here, as ch. x. 15, has the strong significa- 
tion: endowed (with adversity). It is questionable whether 
bo, ver. 2, signifies et marcescit or et succiditur. We have 
decided here as elsewhere (vid. on Ps. xxxvil. 2, xe. 6, 
Genesis, S. 383) in favour of the latter meaning, and as the 
Targ. (cian), translated “he is mown down.” For this 
meaning (prop. to cut off from above or before, to lop off),— 
in which the verb rae) (dan, 202) is become technical for the 
meptTouy,—is most probably favoured by its application in 
ch. xxiv. 24; where Jerome however translates, stcué swmmt- 
tates spicarum conterentur, since he derives xn from 55p in 
the signification not found in the Bible (unless. perhaps 


retained in novo, Deut. xxiii. 26), fricare (Arab. b«, frigére, 


to parch). At the same time, the signification marcescere, 
which certainly cannot be combined with precidere, but may 
be with fricare (conterere), is not unnatural; it is more 
appropriate to a flower (comp. }"¥ b39, Isa. xl. 7); it accords 
with the parallelism Ps. xxxvii. 2, and must be considered 
etymologically possible in comparison with bonk, bo-p. But 


224 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


it is not supported by any dialect, and none of the old trans- 
lations furnish any certain evidence in its favour ; 210, Ps. 
xc. 6, which is to be understood impersonally rather than 
intransitively, does not favour it; and none of the passages 
in which 9° occurs demand it: least of all ch. xxiv. 24, 
where preciduntur is more suitable than, and ch. xviii. 16, 
preciditur, quite as suitable as, marcescit. For these reasons 
we also take bos, here, not as fut. Kal from 55», or, as Hahn, 
from 23 = >23, to wither, but as fut. Niph. from bn, to cut 
down. At the same time, we do not deny the possibility of 
the notion of .withering having been connected with 5», 
whether it be that it belonged originally and independently 
to the root 5p, or has branched off from some other radical 
notion, as “to fall in pieces” (LXX. here é&émecev, and 
similarly also ch. xviii. 16, xxiv. 24; comp. Dn, rags, 
n203, to come to pieces, to be dissolved) or “to become soft” 
(with which the significations in the dialects, to grind and to 
parch, may be connected). As a flower, which having opened _ 
out is soon cut or withered, is man: 4s, accedit quod, insuper. 
This particle, related to ém/, adds an enhancing cumulat. 
More than this, God keeps His eye open (not: His eyes, for © 
the correct reading, expressly noted by the Masora, is 72Y 
without Jod plur.), nr-oy, super hoc s. tali, over this poor 
child of man, who is a perishable flower, and not a “ walking 
light, but a fleeting shadow” (Gregory the Great), to watch. 
for and punish his sins, and brings Job to judgment before 
himself, His tribunal which puts down every justification. 
Elsewhere the word is pointed )5W103, ch. ix. 32, xxii. 4; here 
it is DB, because the idea is rendered determinate by the 
addition of Jy. 


4 Would. that a pure one could come from an impure ! 
Not a single one— — 
5 Lis days then are determined, 


CHAP. XIV. 4-6. 925 


The number of his months is known to Thee, 
Thou hast appointed bounds for him that he may not 
pass over: | 
6 Look away from him then, and let him rest, 
Until he shall accomplish as a hireling his day. 


Would that perfect sinlessness were possible to man; but 
since (to use a New Testament expression) that which is 
born of the flesh is flesh, there is not a single one pure. The 
optative {AY seems to be used here with an acc. of the 
object, according to its literal meaning, quis det s. afferat, as 
ch. xxxi. 31, Deut. xxviii. 67, Ps. xiv. 7. Ewald remarks 
(and refers to § 358, }, of his Grammar) that x, ver. 40, 
must be the same as %>; but although in 1 Sam. xx. 14, 
2 Sam. xiii. 26, 2 Kings v. 17, yb might be equivalent to the 
optative 15, which is questionable, still ms xd here, as an 
echo of 7nN"D psx, Ps. xiv. 3, is Job’s own answer to his 
wish, that cannot be fulfilled: not one, 7.¢..is in existence. 
Like the friends, he acknowledges an hereditary proneness to 
sin; but this proneness to sin affords him no satisfactory ex- 
planation of so unmerciful a visitation of punishment as his 
seems to him to be. It appears to him that man must the 
rather be an object of divine forbearance and compassion, 
since absolute purity is impossible to him. If, as is really 
the case, man’s days are D'S, cut off, i.e. dordwes, deter- 
mined (distinct from 0°09 with an unchangeable Kametz: 
sharp, 7.e. quick, eager, diligent),—if the number of his months 
is with God, i.e. known by God, because fixed beforehand by 
Him,—if He has set fixed bounds (Keri 9") for him, and he 
cannot go beyond them, may God then look away from him, 
i.e. turn from him. His strict watch (jo nyw, as ch. vii. 19; 
yo nw, x. 20), that he may have rest (2am, cesset), so that he 
may at least as a hireling enjoy his day. Thus ¥1° is inter- 
preted by all modern expositors, and most of them consider 

VOL. I. x 


226 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


the object or reason of his rejoicing to be the rest of evening 
when his work is done, and thereby miss the meaning. 

Hahn appropriately says, “He desires that God would 
grant man the comparative rest of the hireling, who must 
toil in sorrow and eat his bread in the sweat of his brow, but 
still is free from any special suffering, by not laying extra- 
ordinary affliction on him in addition to the common infirmi- 

ties beneath which he sighs. Since the context treats of 
freedom from special suffering in life, not of the hope of 
being set free from it, comp. ch. xiii. 25-27, xiv. 3, the 
explanation of Umbreit, Ew., Hirz., and others, is to be 
entirely rejected, viz. that God would at least permit man 
the rest of a hireling, who, though he be vexed with heavy 
toil, cheerfully reconciles himself to it in prospect of the 
reward he hopes to obtain at evening time. Job does not 
claim for man the toil which the hireling gladly undergoes in 
expectation of complete rest, but the toil of the hireling, 
which seems to him to be rest in comparison with the possi- 
bility of having still greater toil to undergo.” Such is the 
true connection.' Man’s life—this life which is as a hand- 
breadth (Ps. xxxix. 6), and in ch, vii. 1 sq. is compared to a 
hireling’s day, which is sorrowful enough—is not to be over- 
burdened with still more and extraordinary suffering. 


It must be asked, however, whether mx" seg. acc. here- 


signifies evdoxeiv (rov Biov, LX X.), or not rather persolvere ; 
for it is undeniable that it has this meaning in Lev. xxvi. 34 
(vid. however Keil [Pent. ii. 476]) and elsewhere (prop. 
to satisfy, remove, discharge what is due). The Hiphil is 
used in this sense in post-biblical Hebrew, and most Jewish 
expositors explain ny by ow. If it signifies to enjoy, W 
ought to be interpreted: that (he at least may, like as a 

1 In honour of our departed friend, whose Commentary on Job 


abounds in observations manifesting a delicate appreciation of the 
writer’s purpose and thought, we have quoted his own words. 


ee ee ae 


CHAP. XIV. 7-9. ee). 


hireling, enjoy his day). But this signification of Y (ut 
in the final sense) is strange, and the signification dum (ch. 
i. 18, viii. 21) or adeo ut (Isa. xlvii. 7) is not, however, 
suitable, if m¥v is to be explained in the sense of persol- 
vere, and therefore translate donec persolvat (persolverit). 
We have translated “ until he accomplish,” and wish “ ac- 
complish” to be understood in the sense of “ making com- 
plete,” as Col. i. 24, Luther (“ vollzdhlig machen”) = 


avravaTAnpoov. 


7 For there is hope for a tree: 
Tf it is hewn down, it sprouts again, 
And its shoot ceaseth not. 
8 If its root becometh old in the ground, 
And its trunk dieth off in the dust : 
9 At the scent of water it buddeth, 
And bringeth forth branches like a young plant. 


As the tree falleth so it lieth, says a cheerless proverb. 
Job, a true child of his age, has a still sadder conception of 
the destiny of man in death; and the conflict through which 
he is passing makes this sad conception still sadder than it 
otherwise is. The fate of the tree is far from being so hope- 
less as that of man; for (1) if a tree is hewn down, it 
(the stump left in the ground) puts forth new shoots (on 
ayer, vid. on Ps. xc. 6), and young branches (Np, the tender 
juicy sucker pocyos) do not cease. This is a fact, which is 
used by Isaiah (ch. vi.) as an emblem of a fundamental law 
in operation in the history of Israel: the terebinth and oak 
there symbolize Israel ; the stump (nay) is the remnant that 
survives the judgment, and this remnant becomes the seed 
from which a new sanctified Israel springs up after the old 
is destroyed. Carey is certainly not wrong when he remarks 
that Job thinks specially of the palm (the date), which is 
propagated by such suckers; Shaw’s expression corresponds 


228 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


exactly to binn x5: “when the old trunk dies, there is never 
wanting one or other of these offsprings to succeed it.” Then 
(2) if the root of a tree becomes old (ft) inchoative 
Hiphil: senescere, Ew. § 122, c) in the earth, and its trunk 
(313 also of the stem of an undecayed tree, Isa. xl. 24) dies 
away in the dust, it can nevertheless regain its vitality. which 
had succumbed to the weakness of old age: revived by the 
scent (1) always of scent, which anything exhales, not, per- 
haps Cant. i. 3 only excepted, odor = odoratus) of water, it 
puts forth buds for both leaves and flowers, and brings forth 
branches ($?, prop. cuttings, twigs) again, YO 193, like a 
plant, or a young plant (the form of ¥3 in pause), therefore, 
as if fresh planted, LX X. damep veddutov. One is here at 
once reminded of the palm which, on the one hand, is pre- 
eminently a ¢iAvdpov duror,' on the other hand possesses a 
wonderful vitality, whence it is become a figure for youthful 
vigour. The palm and the phcenix have one name, and not 
without reason. The tree reviving as from the dead at the 
scent of water, which Job describes, is like that wondrous 
bird rising again from its own ashes (vid. on ch. xxix. 18). 
Even when centuries have at last destroyed the palm—says 
Masius, in his beautiful and thoughtful studies of nature— 
thousands of inextricable fibres of parasites cling about the 
stem, and delude the traveller with an appearance of life. 


10 But man dieth, he lieth there stretched out, 
Man giveth up the ghost, and where is he ? 
11 The waters flow away from the sea, 
And a stream decayeth and dryeth up: 


1 When the English army landed in Egypt in 1801, Sir Sydney Smith 
gave the troops the sure sign, that wherever date-trees grew there must 
be water; and this is supported by the fact of people digging after it 
generally, within a certain range round the tree within which the roots 
of the tree could obtain moisture from the fluid.— Vid. R. Wilson’s Iistory 
of the Expedition to Egypt, p. 18. 





CHAP. XIV. 10-12. 229 


12 So man lieth down and riseth not again ; 
Till the heavens pass away they wake not, 
And are not aroused from their sleep. 


How much less favoured is the final lot of man! He dies, 
and then lies there completely broken down and melted away 
(won, in the neuter signification, confectum esse, rendered in 
the Targum by 728 and p2pens). The fut. consec. con- 


tinues the description of the cheerless results of death: He 
who has thus once fallen together is gone without leaving a 
trace of life. In vers. 11 sq. this vanishing away without 
hope and beyond recovery is contemplated under the figure 
of running water, or of water that is dried up and never 
returns again to its channel. Instead of aN Isaiah uses 
in (ch. xix. 5) in the oracle on Egypt, a prophecy in which 
many passages borrowed from the book of Job are interwoven. 
The former means to flow away (related radically with 2), 
the latter to dry up (transposed M3, Jer. xviii. 14). But 
he also uses 317, which signifies the drying in, and then Wa", 
which is the complete drying up which follows upon the 
drying in (vid. Genesis, S. 264). What is thus figuratively 
expressed is introduced by waw (ver. 12a), similar to the waw 
adequationis of the emblematic proverbs mentioned at ch. v. 
7, xi. 12: so there is for man no rising (O4p), no waking up 
(27), no éye(perPau (WY2), and indeed not for ever; for what 
does not happen until the heavens are no more (comp. Ps. 
Ixxil. 7, till the moon is no more), never happens; because 
God has called the heavens and the stars with their laws into 
existence, poy> 4y> (Ps. exlviii. 6), they never cease (Jer. 
xxxl. 35 sq.), the days of heaven are eternal (Ps. lxxxix. 30). 
This is not opposed to declarations like Ps. cii. 27, for the 
world’s history, according to the teaching of Scripture, closes 
with a change in all these, but not their annihilation. What 
is affirmed in vers. 10-12 of mankind in general, is, by 


230 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


the change to the plural in ver. 12c, affirmed of each indi- 
vidual of the race. Their sleep of death is O91 nv (Jer. li. 
39, 57). What Shedl summons away from the world, the 
world never sees again. Oh that it were otherwise! How 
would the brighter future have comforted him with respect 
to the sorrowful present and the dark night of the grave! 


13 Oh that Thou wouldst hide me in Sheél, 

That Thou wouldst conceal me till Thine anger change, 

That Thou wouldst appoint me a time and then remem- 

ber me! | 

14 If man dieth, shall he live again? 

All the days of my warfare would I wait, 

Until my change should come. 
15 Thou wouldst call and I would answer, 

Thou wouldst have a desire for the work of Thy hands— 
16 For now thou numberest my steps, 

And dost not restrain thyself over my sins. 


The optative jh. ‘2D introduces a wish that has reference to 
the future, and is therefore, as at ch. vi. 8, followed by futt. ; 


comp. on the other hand, ch. xxiii. 3, utinam noverim. The ~ 


language of the wish reminds one of such passages in the 
Psalms as xxxi. 21, xxvii. 5 (comp. Isa. xxvi. 20): “In the 
day of trouble He hideth me in His pavilion, and in the 
secret of His tabernacle doth He conceal me.” So Job 
wishes that Hades, into which the wrath of God now precipi- 
tates him for ever, may only be a temporary place of safety 
for him, until the wrath of God turn away (21%, comp. the 


causative, ch. ix. 13); that God would appoint to him, when ~ 


there, a ph, ze. a terminus ad quem (comp. ver. 5), and when 
this limit should be reached, again remember him in mercy. 
This is a wish that Job marks out for himself. The reality 
is indeed different: “if (édv) a man dies, will he live 
again?” The answer which Job’s consciousness, ignorant of 





P CHAP. XIV. 13-16. 231 


anything better, alone can give, is: No, there is no life after 
death. It is, however, none the less a craving of his heart 
that gives rise to the wish; it is the most favourable thought, 
—a desirable possibility,—which, if it were but a reality, 
would comfort him under all present suffering: “all the days 
of my warfare would I wait until my change came.” 82 is 
the name he gives to the whole of this toilsome and sorrowful 
interval between the present and the wished-for goal,—the 
life on earth, which he likens to the service of the soldier or 
of the hireling (ch. vii. 1), and which is subject to an inevi- 
table destiny (ch. v. 7) of manifold suffering, together with 
the night of Hades, where this life is continued in its most 
shadowy and dismal phase. And neron does not here signify 
destruction in the sense of death, as the Jewish expositors, 
by comparing Isa. ii. 18 and Cant. ii. 11, explain it; but 
(with reference to ‘Na¥, comp. ch. x. 17) the following after 
(Arab. 4iNs, succession, successor, te. of Mohammed), 
relief, change (syn. 739M, exchange, barter), here of change 
of condition, as Ps. lv. 20, of change of mind; Aquila, 
Theod., ddXrayua. Ob that such a change awaited him! 
What a blessed future would it be if it should come to pass! 
Then would God call to him in the depth of Shel, and he, 
imprisoned until the appointed time of release, would answer 
Him from the deep. After His anger was spent, God would 
again yearn after the work of His hands (comp. ch. x. 3), 
the natural loving relation between the Creator and His 
creature would again prevail, and it would become manifest 
that wrath is only a waning power (Isa. liv. 8), and love His 
. true and essential attribute. Schlottman well observes: 
“ Job must have had a keen perception of the profound 
relation between the creature and his Maker in the past, to 
be able to give utterance to such an imaginative expectation 
respecting the future.” 

__In ver. 16, Job supports what is cheering in this prospect, 


232 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


with which he wishes he might be allowed to console himself, 
by the contrast of the present. AY °D is used here as in ch. 
vi. 21; "3 is not, as elsewhere, where nny ‘3 introduces the 
conclusion, confirmatory (indeed now = then indeed), but 
assigns a reason (for now). Now God numbers his steps 
(ch. xiii, 27), watching him as a criminal, and does not 


restrain himself over his sin. Most modern expositors (Ew., 


Higst., Hahn, Schlottm.) translate: Thou observest not, my 
sins, 7.e. whether they are to be so severely punished or not ; 
but this is poor. Raschi: Thou waitest not over my sins, 7.¢. 
to punish them; instead of which Ralbag directly: Thou 
waitest not for my sins = repentance or punishment; but mY 
is not supported in the meaning: to wait, by Gen. xxxvii. 11. 
Aben-Ezra: Thou lookest not except on my sins, by supply- 
ing P?, according to Kccles, ii. 24 (where, however, probably 
Sosvin should be read, and » after DN, just as in ch. xxxiii. 
17, has fallen away). The most doubtful is, with Hirzel, to 
take the sentence as interrogative, in opposition to the paral- 
lelism: and dost Thou not keep watch over my sins? It 
seems to me that the sense intended must be derived from 
the phrase } 12, which means to keep anger, and conse- 
quently to delay the manifestation of it (Amosi.11). This 
phrase is here so applied, that we obtain the sense: Thou 
keepest not Thy wrath to thyself, but pourest it out entirely. 
Mercerus is substantially correct: non reservas nec differs 
peccatt met punitionem. 


17 My transgression is sealed up in a bag, 
And Thou hast devised additions to my iniquity. 
18 But a falling mountain moveth indeed, 
And a rock falleth from its place. 
19 Water holloweth out stone, . 
Its overflowings carry away the dust of the earth, 
And the hope of man—Thou destroyest. 


= 


: CHAP. XIV. 17-19. 233 


The meaning of ver. 17 is, not that the judgment which 
pronounces him guilty lies in the sealed-up bag of the judge, 
so that it requires only to be handed over for execution 
(Hirz., Ew., Renan), for although »¥S (though not exactly 
the punishment of sin, which it does not signify even in 
Dan. ix. 24) can denote wickedness, as proved and recorded, 
and therefore metonomically the penal sentence, the figure 
is, however, taken not from the mode of preserving impor- 
tant documents, but from the mode of preserving collected 
articles of value in a sealed bag. The passage niust be ex- 
plained according to Hos. xiii. 12, Deut. xxxii. 34, Rom. ii. 
5, comp. Jer. xvii. 1. The evil Job had formerly (ch. xiii. 
26) committed according to the sentence of God, God has 
gathered together as in a money bag, and carefully preserved, 
in order now to bring them home to him. And not this alone, 
however; He has devised still more against him than. his. 
actual misdeeds. Ewald translates: Thou hast sewed up my 
punishment ; but ban (vid. on ch. xiii. 4) signifies, not to sew 
up, but: to sew on, patch on, and gen. to add (ony, Rabb. 
accidens,. a subordinate matter, opp. %P¥), after which the 
LXX. translates évreonujvw (noted -in addition), and Geca- 
tilia ois (added to in collecting). It is used here just as 
in the Aramaic phrase S1pv rae) (to patch on falsehood, to 
invent scandal). 

The idea of the figures which follow is questionable. 
Hahn maintains that they do not describe destruction, but 
change, and that consequently the relation of ver. 19¢ to 
what precedes is not similarity, but contrast: stones are not 
so hard, that they are not at length hollowed out, and the 
firm land is not so firm that it cannot be carried away by the 
flood ; but man’s prospect is for ever a hopeless one, and only 
for him is there no prospect of his lot ever being changed. 
Thus I thought formerly it should be explained: considering 
the waw, ver. 19¢, as indicative not of comparison, but of 


234 CO THE BOOK OF JOB. 


contrast. But the assumption that the point of comparison 
is change, not destruction, cannot be maintained: the figures 
represent the slow but inevitable destruction wrought by the 
elements on the greatest mountains, on rocks, and on the 
solid earth. And if the poet had intended to contrast the 
slow but certain changes of nature with the hopelessness of — 
man’s lot, how many more appropriate illustrations, in which 
nature seems to come forth as with new life from the dead, 
were at his command! Raschi, who also considers the rela- 
tion of the clauses to be antithetical, is guided by the right 
perception when he interprets: even a mountain that is cast 
down still brings forth fruit, and a rock removed from its 
place, even these are not without some signs of vitality in 
them, >i3" = (712) ‘sa ny, which is indeed a linguistic im- 
possibility. The majority of expositors are therefore right . 
when they take the waw, ver. 19¢c, similarly to ch. v. 7, xi. 12, 
xil. 11, as waw adequationis. With this interpretation also, 
the connection of the clause with what precedes by DOIN 
(which is used exactly as in ch. i. 11, xi. 5, xil. 7, where it 
signifies verum enim vero or attamen) is unconstrained. The 
course of thought is as follows: With unsparing severity, 
and even beyond the measure of my guilt, hast Thou caused 
me to suffer punishment for my sins, but (nevertheless) Thou 
shouldst rather be gentle and forbearing towards me, since 
even that which is firmest, strongest, and most durable can- 
not withstand ultimate destruction ; and entirely in accord- 
ance with the same law, weak, frail man (438) meets an 
early certain end, and at the same time Thou cuttest off from 
him every ground of hope of a continued existence. The 
waw, ver. 19c, is consequently, according to the sense, more 
quanto magis than sic, placing the things to be contrasted over 
against each other. 53717 is a falling, not a fallen (Ralbag) 
mountain; and having once received the impetus, it continues 
gradually to give way; Renan: s’effondre peu a& peu. Carey, 


CHAP, XIV. 17-19. 235 


better: “ will decay,” for ba) (cogn. 5p3) signifies, decrease 
from external loss; specially of the falling off of leaves, Isa. 
xxxiv.4. The second figure, like ch. xviii. 4, is to be explained 
according to ch. ix. 5: a rock removes (not as Jerome trans- 
lates, transfertur, which would be Ph}, and also not as LXX. 
TaraiwOycerat, Schlottm.: becomes old and crumbles away, 
although in itself admissible both as to language and fact ; 
comp. on ch. xxi. 7) from its place; it does not stand abso- 
lutely, immoveably fast. In the third figure 0°28 is a pro- 
minent object, as the accentuation with Mehupach legarmeh 
or (as it is found in correct Codd.) with Asla legarmeh rightly 
indicates. PNY signifies exactly the same as (jaw, atterere, 
conterere. In the fourth figure, MSD must not be interpreted 
as meaning that which grows up spontaneously without 
re-sowing, although the Targum translates accordingly: it 
(the water) washes away its (i.e. the dust of the earth’s) 
after-growth (SND), which Symm. follows (ta wapanedeup- 
peva). It is also impossible according to the expression; for 
it must have been (987 75Y, Jerome is essentially correct : 
et alluvione paullatim terra consumitur. It is true that NSD in 
Hebrew does not mean effundere in any other passage (on 
this point, vid. on Hab. ii. 15), but here the meaning effusio 
or alluvio may be supposed without much hesitation; and in 
a book whose language is so closely connected with the 
Arabic, we may even refer to NAD = oe (kindred to Chin, 
ja’), although the word may also (as Ralbag suggests), by 
comparison with ND 1012, Prov. xxviii. 3, and disque, a storm | 
of rain, be regarded as transposed from n'p'nd, from 4ND in, 
Arab. to tear off, sweep away, Targ. to thrust away (= 57), 
Syr., Talm. to overthrow, subvertere (whence s'chifto, a 
cancer or cancerous ulcer). The suffix refers to 0%, and 
|bw/n before a plural subject is quite according to rule, Ges. § 
146, 3. mmD is mostly marked with Mercha, but according 


236 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


to our interpretation Dechi, which is found here and there in 
the Codd., would be more correct. 

The point of the four illustrations is not that not one of them 
is restored to its former condition (Oetinger, Hirz.), but that 
in spite of their stability they are overwhelmed by destruction, 
and that irrecoverably. Even the most durable things cannot 
defy decay, and now even as to mortal man—Thou hast _ 
brought his hope utterly to nought (M7287 with Pathach in 
pause as frequently ; vid. Psalter ii. 468). The perf. is preg- 
nans: all at. once, suddenly—death, the germ of which he 
carries in him even from his birth, is to him an end without 
one ray of hope,—it is also the death of his hope. 


20 Thou seizest him for ever, then he passeth away ; 
Thou changest his countenance and castest him forth. 

21 If his sons come to honour, he knoweth tt not ; 
Or to want, he observeth them not. 

22 Only on his own account his flesh suffereth pain, 
And on his own account is his soul conscious of grief. 


The old expositors thought that 72PNM must be explained 
by 1309 APNN (Thou provest thyself stronger than he, accord- 
ing to Ges. § 121, 4), because PA is intrans.; but it is also 
transitive in the sense of seizing forcibly and grasping, ch. 
xv. 24, Eccles. iv. 12, as Talm. 4PA (otherwise commonly 


a 3 


APN’ as prnn), Arab. i, comprehendere. The many suffer- 


ings which God inflicts on him in the course of his life are 
not meant; M¥39 does not signify here: continually, without 
intermission, as most expositors explain, but as ch. iv. 20, 
xx. 7, and throughout the book: for ever (Rosenm., Hahn, 
Welte). God gives him the death-stroke which puts an end 
to his life for ever, he passes away Salve, olyerat (comp. 
ch. x. 21); disfiguring his countenance, é.¢. in the struggle of 
death and in death by the gradual working of decay, distort- 





CHAP. XIV. 20-22. 237 


ing and making him unlike himself, He thrusts him out of 
this life (NY like Gen. iii. 23). The waw consec. is used here 
as e.g. Ps. exviii. 27. 

When he is descended into Hades he knows nothing more 
of the fortune of his children, for as Eccles. ix. 6 says: the 
dead have absolutely no portion in anything that happens 
under the sun. In ver. 21 Job does not think of his own 
children that have died, nor his grandchildren (Ewald) ; he 
speaks of mankind in general. 723 and “Y¥ are not here 
placed in contrast in the sense of much and little, but, as in 
Jer. xxx. 19, in the wider sense of an important or a destitute 
position ; 723, to be honoured, to attain to honour, as Isa. Ixvi. 
5. [2 (to observe anything) is joined with 5 of the object, as 
in Ps. lxxiii. 17 (on the other hand, mp, ch. xiii. 1, was taken’ 
as dat. ethicus). He neither knows nor cares anything about 
the welfare of those who survive him: “Nothing but pain 
and sadness is the existence of the dead; and the pain of his 
own flesh, the sadness of his own soul, alone engage him. He 
has therefore no room for rejoicing, nor does the joyous or 
sorrowful estate of others, though his nearest ones, affect him” 
(Hofmann, Schriftbeweis, i. 495). This is certainly, as Ewald 
and Psychol. S. 444, the meaning of ver. 22; but YPY is 
hardly to be translated with Hofmann “in him,” so that it 
gives the intensive force of iésos to the suf. For it is im- 
probable that in this connection,—where the indifference. of 
the deceased respecting others, and the absolute reference to 
himself of the existence of pain on his own account, are con- 
trasted,—y, ver. 22, is to be understood according to ch. 
xxx. 16 (Psychol. S. 152), but rather objectively (over him). 
On the other hand, ver. 22a is not to be translated: over 
himself only does his flesh feel pain (Schlottm., Hirz., and 
others); for the flesh as inanimate may indeed be poetically, 
so to speak zeugmatically, represented as conscious of pain, 
but not as referring its pain to another, and consequently as 


238 THE BOOK OF JOB. ~ 


self-conscious. On this account, r5y, ver. 22a, is to be taken 
in the signification, over him = upon him, or as yer, 226 
(beyond him), which is doubtful; or it signifies, as we have 
sought to render it in our translation in both cases, propter 
eum. Only on his own account does his flesh suffer, z.e. only 
applying to ‘himself, only on his own account does his soul 
mourn, #.¢. only over his own condition. He has no know- 
ledge and interest that extends beyond himself; only he 
himself is the object of that which takes place with his flesh 
in the grave, and of that on which his soul reflects below in 
the depths of Hades. According to this interpretation 78 
belongs to Y>y, after the hyperbaton described at p. 72 [eh. 
ii. 10], comp. ch. xiii. 15, Isa, xxxiv. 15. And he ¥y, ver. 
22, implies the idea (which is clearly expressed in Isa. Ixvi. 
24, and especially in Judith xvi. 17: Sodvau wip Kal cx@dn- 
kas els odpKas avTav Kal KravcovTat év aicOnce ews aidvos) 
that the process of the decomposition of the body is a source 
of pain and sorrow to the departed spirit,—a conception 
which proceeds from the supposition, right in itself, that a 
connection between body and soul is still continued beyond 
the grave,—a connection which is assumed by the resurree- 
tion, but which, as Job viewed it, only made the future still 
more sorrowful. 

This speech of Job (ch. xii—xiv.), which closes here, falls 
into three parts, which correspond to the divisions into 
chapters. In the impassioned speech of Zophar, who treats 
Job as an empty and conceited babbler, the one-sided dog- — 
matical standpoint of the friends was maintained with such 
arrogance and assumption, that Job is obliged to put forth 
all his power in self-defence. The first part of the speech 
(ch. xii.) triumphantly puts down this arrogance and as- 
sumption. Job replies that the wisdom, of which they pro- 
fess to be the only possessors, is nothing remarkable, and 
the contempt with which they treat him is the common lot of 


CHAP. XIV, 20-22. 239 


the innocent, while the prosperity of the ungodly remains 
undisturbed. In order, however, to prove to them that what 
they say of the majesty of God, before which he should 
humble himself, can neither overawe nor help him, he refers 
them to creation, which in its varied works testifies to this 
majesty, this creative power of God, and the absolute 
dependence of every living thing on Him, and proves that 
he is not wanting in an appreciation of the truth contained 

in the sayings of the ancients by a description of the absolute 
| majesty of God as it is manifested in the works of nature, 
and especially in the history of man, which excels every- 
thing that the three had said. This description is, however, 
throughout a gloomy picture of disasters which God brings 
about in the world, corresponding to the gloomy condition 
of mind in which Job is, and the disaster which is come 
upon himself. 

As the friends have failed to solace him by their descrip- 
tions of God, so his own description is also utterly devoid of 
comfort. For the wisdom of God, of which he speaks, is not 
the wisdom that orders the world in which one can confide, 
and in which one has the surety of seeing every mystery of 
life sooner or later gloriously solved; but this wisdom is 
something purely negative, and repulsive rather than attrac- 
tive, it is abstract exaltation over all created wisdom, whence 
it follows that he puts to shame the wisdom of the wise. Of 
the justice of God he does not speak at all, for in the narrow 
idea of the friends he cannot recognise its control; and of 
the love of God he speaks as little as the friends, for as the 
sight of the divine love is removed from them by the one- 
sidedness of their dogma, so is it from him by the feeling 
of the wrath of God which at present has possession of his 
whole being. Hegel has called the religion of the Old 
Testament the religion of sublimity (die Religion der Erha- 
benheit) ; and it is true that, so long as that manifestation of 


240 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


love, the incarnation of the Godhead, was not yet realized, 
God must have relatively transcended the religious con- 
sciousness. From the book of Job, however, this view can 
be brought back to its right limits; for, according to the 
tendency of the book, neither the idea of God presented by 
the friends nor by Job is the pure undimmed notion of God 
that belongs to the Old Testament. The friends conceive of 
God as the absolute One, who acts only according to justice ; 
Job conceives of Him as the absolute One, who acts accord- 
mg to the arbitrariness of His absolute power. According 
to the idea of the book, the former is dogmatic one-sidedness, 
the latter the conception of one passing through temptation. 
The God of the Old Testament consequently rules neither 
according to justice alone, nor according to a “sublime 
whim.” 

After having proved his superiority over the friends in 
perception of the majesty of God, Job tells them his deci- 
sion, that he shall turn away from them. The sermon they 
address to him is to no purpose, and in fact produces an 
effect the reverse of that intended by them. And while it 
does Job no good, it injures them, because their very defence 
of the honour of God incriminates themselves in the eyes of 
God. Their aim is missed by them, for the thought of the 
absolute majesty of God has no power to impart comfort to 
any kind of sufferer; nor can the thought of His absolute 
justice give any solace to a sufferer who is conscious that he 
suffers innocently. By their confidence that Job’s affliction 
is a decree of the justice of God, they certainly seem to 
defend the honour of God; but this defence is reversed as 
soon as it is manifest that there exists no such just ground 
for inflicting punishment on him. Job’s self-consciousness, 
however, which cannot be shaken, gives no testimony to its 
justice ; their advocaey of God is therefore an injustice to 
Job, and a miserable attempt at doing God service, which 


CHAP. XIV. 20-22. 241 


cannot escape the undisguised punishment of God. It is to 
be carefully noted that in ch. xiii, 6-12 Job seriously warns 
the friends that God will punish them for their partiality, 
i.e. that they have endeavoured to defend Him at the expense 
of truth. | 

We see from this how sound Job’s idea of God is, so far as 
it is not affected by the change which seems, according to the 
light which his temptation casts upon his affliction, to have 
taken place in his personal relationship to God. While above, 
ch. ix., he did not acknowledge an objective right, and the 
rather evaded the thought, of God’s dealing unjustly towards 
him, by the desperate assertion that what God does is in 
every case right because God does it, he here recognises an 
objective truth, which cannot be denied, even in favour of 
God, and the denial of which, even though it were a pientis- 
_sima fraus, is strictly punished by God. God is the God of 
truth, and will therefore be neither defended nor honoured 
by any perverting of the truth. By such pious lies the 
friends involve themselves in guilt, since in opposition to 
their better knowledge they regard Job as unrighteous, and 
blind themselves to the incongruities of daily experience and 
the justice of God. Job will therefore have nothing more to 
do with them; and to whom does he now turn? Repelled 
by men, he feels all the more strongly drawn to God. He 
desires to carry his cause before God. He certainly considers 
God to be his enemy, but, like David, he thinks it is better to 
fall into the hands of God than into the hands of man (2 Sam. 
xxiv. 14). He will plead his cause with God, and prove to 
Him his innocence: he will do it, even though he be obliged 
to expiate his boldness with his life; for he knows that 
morally he will not be overcome in the contest. He requires 
compliance with but two conditions: that God would grant a 
temporary alleviation of his pain, and that He would not 


overawe him with the display of His majesty. Job’s disput- 
VOL. I. Q . 


242 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


ing with God is as terrible as it is pitiable. It is terrible, 
because he uplifts himself, Titan-like, against God; and 
pitiable, because the God against which he fights is not the 
God he has known, but a God that he is unable“to recognise, 
—the phantom which the temptation has presented before his 
dim vision instead of the true God. This phantom is still the 
real God to him, but in other respects in no way differing 


from the inexorable ruling fate of the Greek tragedy. As in > 


this the hero of the drama seeks to maintain his personal 
freedom against the mysterious power that is crushing him 
with an iron arm, so Job, even at the risk of sudden destruc- 
tion, maintains the stedfast conviction of his innocence, in 
opposition to a God who has devoted him, as an evil-doer, to 
slow but certain destruction. The battle of freedom against 
necessity is the same as in the Greek tragedy. Accordingly 
one is obliged to regard it as an error, arising from simple igno- 
rance, when it has been recently maintained that the bound- 
less oriental imagination is not equal to such a truly exalted 
task as that of representing in art and poetry the power of 
the human spirit, and the maintenance of its dignity in the 
conflict with hostile powers, because a task that can only be 
accomplished by an imagination formed with a perception of 
the importance of recognising ascertained phenomena.’ In 
treating this subject, the book of Job not only attains to, but 
rises far above, the height attained by the Greek tragedy: 
for, on the one hand, it brings this conflict before us in all 
the fearful earnestness of a death-struggle; on the other, 
however, it does not leave us to the cheerless delusion that 
an absolute caprice moulds human destiny. This tragic 
conflict with the divine necessity is but the middle, not the 
beginning nor the end, of the book; for this god of fate is 
not the real God, but a delusion of Job’s temptation. Human 
freedom does not succumb, but it comes forth from the battle, 
1 Vid. Arnold Ruge, Die Academie, i. 8. 29. 


aed 


CHAP. XIV. 20-22. 243 


which is a refining fire to it, as conqueror. The dualism, 
which the Greek tragedy leaves unexplained, is here cleared 
up. The book certainly presents much which, from its tragic 
character, suggests this idea of destiny, but it is not its final 
aim—it goes far beyond: it does not end in the destruction of 
its hero by fate; but the end is the destruction of the idea of 
this fate itself. 

We have seen in this speech (comp. ch. xili. 23, 26, xiv. 
16 sq.), as often already, that Job is as little able as the 
friends to disconnect suffering from the idea of the punish- 
ment of sin. If Job were mistaken or were misled by the 
friends respecting his innocence, the history of his sufferings 
would be no material for a drama, because there would be no 
inner development. But it is just Job’s stedfast conviction 


-of his innocence, and his maintenance of it in spite of the 


power which this prejudice exercises over him, that makes 
the history of his affliction the history of the development of 
a new and grand idea, and makes him as the subject, on 
whom it is developed, a tragic character. In conformity 
with his prepossession, Job sees himself put down by his 
affliction as a great sinner; and his friends actually draw 
the conclusion from false premises that he is such. But he 
asserts the testimony of his conscience to his innocence; and 
because this contradicts those premises, the one-sidedness of 
which he does not discern, God himself appears to him to be 
unjust and unmerciful. And against this God, whom the 
temptation has distorted and transformed to the miserable 
image of a ruler, guided only by an absolute caprice, he 
struggles on, and places the truth and freedom of his moral 
self-consciousness over against the restraint of the condem- 
natory sentence, which seems to be pronounced over him in 
the suffering he has to endure. Such is the struggle against 
God which we behold in the second part of the speech (ch. 
xill.) : ready to prove his innocence, he challenges God to 


244 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


trial; but since God does not appear, his confidence gives 
place to despondency, and his defiant tone to a tone of lamen- 
tation, which is continued in the third part of the speech 
(ch. xiv.). 

While he has raised his head towards heaven with the 
conscious pride of a On ps3, first in opposition to the friends 
and then to God, he begins to complain as one who is thrust 
back, and yielding to the pressure of his affliction, begins to 


regard himself as a sinner. But he is still unable to satisfy 


himself respecting God’s dealings by any such forcible self- 
persuasion. For how can God execute such strict judgment 
upon man, whose life is so short and full of care, and who, 
because he belongs to a sinful race, cannot possibly be pure 
from sin, without allowing him the comparative rest of a 
hireling? How can he thus harshly visit man, to whose life 
He has set an appointed bound, and who, when he once dies, 
returns to life no more for ever? The old expositors cannot 
at all understand this absolute denial of a new life after death. 
Brentius erroneously observes on donec celum transierit : ergo 
resurget ; and Mercerus, whose exposition is free from all 
prejudice, cannot persuade himself that the electus et sanctus 
Dei vir can have denied not merely a second earthly life, but 
also the eternal imperishable life after death. And yet it is 
so: Job does not indeed mean that man when he dies is 
annihilated, but he knows of no other life after death but the 
shadowy life in Shedl, which is no life at all. His laments 
really harmonize with those in Moschos iii. 106 sqq.: 


Ai al, ral pardyat péev ray Kata Katrov ONwVTAL, 
*H ra ydwpa cédwa, 7d 7 evOarés oddrov dvnOor, 
"Torepov ad Gwovrt kab eis Eros GAXO pvovte’ 
"Appes 8 of weydrou Kal Kaptepol 4) cool avdpes, 
‘Orrote tpata Odvepes, avaxoor év xOovt Koiha 
Evbopes cb dda paxpov atéppova viyperov Urvov. 


a 
Be Pe 


CHAP. XIV. 20-22. 245 


Alas! alas! the mallows, after they are withered in the garden, 
Or the green parsley and the luxuriant curly dill, 

Live again hereafter and sprout in future years ; 

But we men, the great and brave, or the wise, 

When once we die, senseless in the bosom of the earth 

We sleep a long, endless, and eternal sleep. 


And with that of Horace, Od. iv. 7, 1: 


Nos ubi decidimus 
Quo pius Aeneas, quo dives Tullus et Ancus, 
Pulvis et umbra sumus ; 


Or with that of the Jagur Weda: “ While the tree that has 
fallen sprouts again from the root fresher than before, from 
what root does mortal man spring forth when he has fallen 
by the hand of death ?”’ These laments echo through the 
ancient world from one end to the other, and even Job is 
without any superior knowledge respecting the future life. 


1 Vid. Carey, The Book of Job, p. 447. We append here an extract from 
a letter of Consul Wetzstein, as giving an explanation of Job xiv. 7-9, 
derived from personal observation: ‘t The practice of cutting down the 
trees in order to obtain a new and increased use from them, is an impor- 
tant part of husbandry in the country east of the Jordan. It is, however, 
now almost confined to the region round Damascus, in consequence of 
the devastation of the country. This operation is called gemm (p14), and 
is performed only with the axe, because the stump would decay away if 
sawn. When the vine, after bearing from sixty to eighty years, loses its 
fruitfulness and begins to decay, it is cut down close to the ground in 
the second kanin (January). The first year it bears little or nothing, 
but throws out new branches and roots; and afterwards it bears plen- 
teously, for the vine-stock has renewed its youth. The fig-tree (tine) 
and the pomegranate (rumméne), when old and decayed, are cut down 
in like manner. Their shoots are very numerous, and in the following 
winter as many as ten young plants may be taken from the pomegranate. 
Those that are left on the old stem bear fruit in the fourth year. The 
walnut-tree (géze) ceases to bear much after 100 years, and becomes 
hollow and decayed. It is then cut down to within two or three yards 
from the ground. If the trees are well watered, the new shoots spring 
up in a year in uncommon luxuriance, and bear fruit in the second year. 
The new shoot is called darbine. From many trees, as the citron 
(limiine), ash (dardare), and mulberry (téte), this new shoot often attains 
a length of twelve feet in the first year, provided the tree has the conditio 
sine qua non which Job styles p' m’a—a plentiful supply of water.” 


246 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


He denies a resurrection and eternal life, not as one who 
has a knowledge of them and will not however know any- 
thing about them, but he really knows nothing of them: 
our earthly life seems to him to flow on into the darkness 
of Shedl, and onward beyond Shedl man has no further 
existence. 

We inquire here: Can we say that the poet knew nothing 
of a resurrection and judgment after death? If we look to 
the psalms of the time of David and Solomon, we must reply 
in the negative. Since, however, as the Grecian mysteries 
fostered and cherished #dvotépas édmidas, the Israelitish 
Chokma also, by its constant struggles upwards and onwards, 
anticipated views of the future world which reached beyond 
the present (Psychol. S. 410): it may be assumed, and from 
the book of Job directly inferred, that the poet had a percep- 
tion of the future world which went beyond the dim percep- 
tion of the people, which was not yet lighted up by any 
revelation. For, on the one hand, he has reproduced for us 
a history of the patriarchal period, not merely according to 
its external, but also according to its internal working, with 
as strict historical faithfulness as delicate psychological tact ; 
on the other, he has with a master hand described for us in 
the history of Job what was only possible from an advanced 
standpoint of knowledge,—how the hope of a life beyond 
the present, where there is no express word of promise to 
guide it, struggles forth from the heart of man as an un- 
defined desire and longing, so that the word of promise is the 
fulfilment and seal of this desire and yearning. For when 
Job gives expression to the wish that God would hide him in 
Sheél until His anger turn, and then, at an appointed time, 
yearning after the work of His hands, raise him again from 
Sheél (ch. xiv. 18-17), this wish is not to be understood other 
than that Shedl might be only his temporary hiding-place 
from the divine anger, instead of being his eternal abode. 


CHAP. XIV. 20-22. 247 


He wishes himself in Shedl, so far as he would thereby be 
removed for a time from the wrath of God, in order that, 
after an appointed season, he might again become an object 
of the divine favour. He cheers himself with the delightful 
thought, All the days of my warfare would I wait till my 
change should come, etc.; for then the warfare of suffering 
would become easy to him, because favour, after wrath and 
deliverance from suffering and death, would be near at hand. 
We cannot say that Job here expresses the hope of a life 
after death ; on the contrary, this hope is wanting to him, 
and all knowledge respecting the reasons that might warrant 
it. The hope exists only in imagination, as Ewald rightly 
observes, without becoming a certainty, since it is only the 
idea, How glorious it would be if it were so, that is followed 
up. But, on the one side, the poet shows us by this touching 
utterance of Job how totally different would be his endurance 
of suffering if he but knew that there was really a release 
from Hades; on the other side, he shows us, in the wish of 
Job, the incipient tendency of the growing hope that it might 
be so, for what a devout mind desires has a spiritual power 
which presses forward from the subjective to the objective 
reality. The hope of eternal life is a flower, says one of the 
old commentators, which grows on the verge of the abyss. 
The writer of the book of Job supports this. In the midst 
of this abyss of the feeling of divine wrath in which Job is 
sunk, this flower springs up to cheer him. In its growth, 
however, it is not hope, but only at first a longing. And this 
longing cannot expand into hope, because no light of promise 
shines forth in that night, by which Job’s feeling is con- 
trolled, and which makes the conflict darker than it is in 
itself. Scarcely has Job feasted for a short space upon the 
idea of that which he would gladly hope for, when the 
thought of the reality of that which he has to fear over- 
whelms him. He seems to himself to be an evil-doer who is 


248 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


reserved for the execution of the sentence of death. If it is 
not possible in nature for mountains, rocks, stones, and the 
dust of the earth to resist the force of the elements, so is it 
an easy thing for God to destroy the hope of a mortal all at 
once. He forcibly, thrust him hence from this life; and 
when he is descended to Hades, he knows nothing whatever 
of the lot of his own family in the world above. » Of the life 
and knowledge of the living, nothing remains to him hut the 
senseless pain of his dead body, which is gnawed away, and 
the dull sorrow of his soul, which continues but a shadowy 
life in Shedl. | 

Thus the poet shows us, in the third part of Job’s speech, 


a grand idea, which tries to force its way, but cannot. In _ 


the second part, Job desired to maintain his conviction of 
innocence before God: his confidence is repulsed by the idea 
of the God who is conceived of by him as an enemy and a 
capricious ruler, and changes to despair. In the third part, 
the desire for a life after death is maintained; but he is at 
once overwhelmed by the imagined inevitable and eternal 
darkness of Shedél, but overwhelmed soon to appear again 
above the billows of temptation, until, in ch. xix., the utter- 
ance of faith respecting a future life rises as a certain con- 
fidence over death and the grave: the yv@ous which comes 
forth from the conflict of the wioris anticipates that better 
hope which in the New Testament is established and ratified 
by the act of redemption wrought by the Conqueror of Hades. 


CHAP. XV. 2-6. 249 


THE SECOND COURSE OF THE CONTROVERSY.— 
CHAP. XV.—XXI. 


Eliphaz Second Speech.—Chap. xv. 
Schema : 10. 8. 6. 6. 6. 10. 14. 10. 


[Then began Eliphaz the Temanite, and said :] 
2 Doth a wise man utter vain knowledge, 
And fill his breast with the east wind ? 
3 Contending with words, that profit not, 
And speeches, by which no good is done? 
4 Moreover, thou makest void the fear of God, 
And thou restrainest devotion before God ; 
5 For thy mouth exposeth thy misdeeds, 
And thou choosest the language of the crafty. 
6 Thine own mouth condemneth thee and not J, 
And thine own lips testify against thee. 


The second course of the controversy is again opened by 
Eliphaz, the most respectable, most influential, and perhaps 
oldest of the friends. Job’s detailed and bitter answers seem 
to him as empty words and impassioned tirades, which ill 
become a wise man, such as he claims to be in assertions like 
ch. xii. 3, xiii. 2. 030 with He interr., like N2yn, ch. xiii. 25. 
m, wind, is the opposite of what is solid and sure; and OD? 
in the parallel (like Hos. xii. 2) signifies what is worthless, 
with the additional notion of vehement action. If we trans- 
late {02 by “belly,” the meaning is apt to be misunderstood ; 
it is not intended as the opposite of 3b (Ewald), but it means, 
especially in the book of Job, not only that which feels, but 
also thinks and wills, the spiritually receptive and active inner 
nature of man (Psychol. S. 266); as also in Arabic, el-battin 
signifies that which is within, in the deepest mystical sense. 
Hirz. and Renan translate the inf. abs. 025, which follows in 


250 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


ver. 3, as verb. jin.: se défend-il par des vaines paroles; but 
though the inj. abs. is so used in an historical clause (ch. 
xv. 35), it is not in an interrogative. Ewald takes it as the 
subject : “to reprove with words—avails not, and speeches— 
whereby one does no good;” but though 727 and DD might 
be used without any further defining, as in Aoyouaxeiv (2 Tim. 
li. 14) and Aoyouayia (1 Tim. vi. 4), the form of ver. 36 is 
opposed to such an explanation. The inf. abs. is connected 
as a gerund (redarguendo s. disputando) with the verbs in the 
question, ver. 2; and the elliptical relative clause }5D° Nd is 
best, as referring to things, according to ch. xxxv. 3: ser- 
mone (123 from 124, as sermo from serere) gut non prodest ; 
Dz Syyiy N°, on the other hand, to persons, verbis quibus nil 
utilitatis affert. Eliphaz does not censure Job for arguing, 
but for defending himself by such useless and purposeless 
utterances of his feeling. but still more than that: his 
speeches are not only unsatisfactory and unbecoming, 5k, 
accedit quod (cumulative like ch. xiv. 3), they are moreover 
irreligious, since by doubting the justice of God they de- 
prive religion of its fundamental assumption, and diminish 
the reverence due to God. “NY in such an objective sense 
as Ps. xix. 10 almost corresponds to the idea of religion. 
DNTP nm is to be understood, according to Ps. cii. 1, exlii. 3 
(comp. Ixiv. 2, civ. 34): before God, and consequently cus- 
tomary devotional meditation, here of the disposition of mind 
indispensable to prayer, viz. devotion, and especially reveren- 
tial awe, which Job depreciates (273, detrahere). His speeches 
are mostly directed towards God; but they are violent and 
reproachful, therefore irreverent in form and substance. 

Ver. 5. °2 is not affirmative: forsooth (Hirz.), but, confirma- 
tory and explicative. This opinion respecting him, which is 
so sharply and definitely expressed by MAN, thrusts itself irre- 
sistibly forward, for it is not necessary to know his life more 
exactly, his own mouth, whence such words escape, reveals 


CHAP. XV. 7-10. 251 


his sad state: docet (FDS only in the book of Job, from FON, 
discere, a word which only occurs once in the Hebrew, Prov. 
xxil. 25) culpam tuam os tuum, not as Schlottm. explains, with 
Raschi: docet culpa tua os tuum, which, to avoid being mis- 
understood, must have been 4>xn ynxon, and is a thought 
unsuited to the connection. PS is certainly not directly 
equivalent to tn, Isa. iii. 9; it signifies to teach, to explain, 
and this verb is just the one in thé mouth of the censorious 
friend. What follows must not be translated: while thou 
choosest (Hirz.); 1n3n) is not a circumstantial clause, but adds 
a second confirmatory clause to the first: he chooses the lan- 
guage of the crafty, since he pretends to be able to prove his 
innocence before God; and convinced that he is in the right, 
assumes the offensive (as ch. xiil. 4 sqq.) against those whe 
exhort him to humble himself. Thus by his evil words he 
becomes his own judge ("vw ) and accuser (72 wy after the 
fem. pna, like Prov. v. 2, xxvi. 23). The knot of the contro- 
versy becomes constantly more entangled since Job strengthens 
the friends more and more in their false view by his speeches, 
which certainly are sinful in some parts (as ch. ix. 22). 


7 Wast thou as the first one born as a man, 
And hast thou been brought forth before the hills ? 
8 Hast thou attended to the counsel of Eloah, 
And hast thou kept wisdom to thyself? 
9 What dost thou know that we have not known ? 
Doest thou understand what we have not been acquainted 
with ? 7 
10 Both grey-haired and aged are among us, 
Older in days than thy father. 


The question in ver. 7a assumes that the first created man, 
because coming direct from the hand of God, had the most 
direct and profoundest insight into the mysteries of the world 
which came into existence at the same time as himself. 


252 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Schlottman calls to mind an ironical proverbial expression of 
the Hindus: “ Yea, indeed, he is the first man; no wonder 
that he is so wise” (Roberts, Orient. Illustr. p. 276). It is 
not to be translated: wast thou born as the first man, which is 
as inadmissible as the translation of pym nnx, Hag. ii. 6, by 
‘a little” (vid. Kohler in loc.) ; rather pus (ie. Teas, as 
Josh. xxi. 10, formed from WS, like the Arabic rais, from 
ras, if it is not perhaps a mere incorrect amalgamation of the 
forms #1 and fiw, ch. viii. 8) is in apposition with the 
subject, and DS is to be regarded as predicate, according to 
Ges. § 139, 2. Raschi’s translation is also impossible: wast 
thou born before Adam? for this Greek form of expression, 
mpatos pov, John i. 15, 80, xv. 18 (comp. Odyss. xi. 481 sq., 
céeio paKkapTarTos), is strange to the Hebrew. In the parallel 
question, ver. 75, Umbr., Schlottm., and Renan (following 
Ewald) see a play upon Prov. viii. 24 sq.: art thou the 
demiurgic Wisdom itself? But the introductory proverbs 
(Prov. ch. i—ix.) are more recent than the book of Job (wid. 
supra, p. 24), and indeed probably, as we shall show else- — 
where, belong tothe time of Jehoshaphat. Consequently the 
more probable relation is that the writer of Prov. viii. 24 sq. 
has adopted words from the book of Job in describing the 
pre-existence of the Chokma. Was Job, a higher spirit- 
nature, brought forth, ze. as it were amidst the pangs of 
travail (nddin, Pulal from ‘in, Sn), before the hills? for the 
angels, according to Scripture, were created before man, and 
even before the visible universe (vid. ch. xxxvili. 4 sqq.). 
Hirz., Ew., Schlottm., and others erroneously translate the - 
futt. in the questions, ver. 8, as prs. All the verbs in vers. 
7, 8, are under the control of the retrospective character which 
is given to the verses by pws; comp. x. 10 sq., where 8375? 
has the same influence, and also ch. iii. 3, where the historical 
sense of Ip38 depends not upon the syntax, but upon logical 
necessity. Translate therefore: didst thou attend in the 


CHAP. XV. 7-10. 253 


secret council (71D, like Jer. xxiii. 18, comp. Ps. Ixxxix. 8) of 
Eloah (according to the correct form of writing in Codd. and 


in Kimchi, Michlol 54a, 1iD35, like ver. 11 Y27 and ch. 


xxii. 13 3925, with Beth raph. and without Gaja'), and didst 
then acquire for thyself (373, here attrahere, like the Arabic, 
sorbere, to suck in) wisdom? by which one is reminded of 
Prometheus’ fire stolen from heaven. Nay, Job can boast of 
no extraordinary wisdom. The friends—as EHliphaz, ver. 9, 
says in their name—are his cotemporaries; and if he desires 
to appeal to the teaching of his father, and of his ancestors 
generally, let him know that there are hoary-headed men 
among themselves, whose discernment is deeper by reason 
of their more advanced age. 43 is inverted, like ch. ii. 10 
(which see); and at the same time, since it is used twice, it is 
correlative: etiam inter nos et cant et senes. Most modern 
expositors think that Eliphaz, “in modestly concealed lan- 
guage” (Ewald), refers to himself. But the reference would 
be obvious enough; and wherefore this modest concealing, 
which is so little suited to the character of Eliphaz? More- 
over, ver. 10a does not sound as if speaking merely of one, 
and in ver. 10) Eliphaz would make himself older than he 
appears to be, for it is nowhere implied that Job is a young 
man in comparison with him. We therefore with Umbreit 
explain 32; in our generation. Thus it sounds more like 
the Arabic, both in words (kebir Arab., usual in the signif. 
grandevus) and in substance. Eliphaz appeals to the source 
of reliable tradition, since they have even among their races 
and districts mature old men, and since, indeed, according to 


1 As arule, the interrogative He, when pointed with Pathach, has Gaja 
against the Pathach [2 Sam. vii. 5]; this, however, falls away (among 
other instances) when the syllable immediately following the He has the 
tone, as in the two examples given above (comp. also Oyen, ch. vill. 3; 
bys, xill. 7), or the usual Gaja (Metheg) which stands in the anie-. 

penultima (Biir, Metheg-Setzung, § 23),. 


254 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Job’s own admission (ch. xii. 12), there is “wisdom among the 
ancient ones.” 


11 Are the consolations of God too small for thee, 
And a word thus tenderly spoken with thee? 

12 What overpowers thy heart ? 
And why do thine eyes wink, 

13 That thou turnest thy snorting against God, 
And sendest forth such words from thy mouth? 


By the consolations of God, Eliphaz means the promises 
in accordance with the majesty and will of God, by which 
he and the other friends have sought to cheer him, of course 
' presupposing a humble resignation to the just hand of God. 
By “a word (spoken) in gentleness to him,” he means the 
gentle tone which they have maintained, while he has passion- 
ately opposed them. pnd, elsewhere pyb (e.g. Isa. viii. 6, of 
the softly murmuring ane gently flowing Siloah), from 8 
(declined, "®8), with the neutral, adverbial ? (as nye), signi- 
nifies: with a soft step, gently. The word has no connection 
with wx, ON, to cover over, and is not third pret. (as it is 
regarded by Raschi, after Chajug): which he has gently said 
to you, or that which has gently befallen you; in which, as 
in Fiirst’s Handwérterbuch, the notions secrete (Judg. iv. 21, 
Targ. 3, in secret) and leniter are referred to one root. Are 
these divine consolations, and these so gentle addresses, too 
small for thee (JoD yn, opp. 1 Kings xix. 7), i.e. beneath thy 
dignity, and unworthy of thy notice? What takes away (Np, 
auferre, abripere, as frequently) thy heart (here of wounded 
pride), and why do thine eyes gleam, that thou turnest (2¥4, 
not revertere, but vertere, as freq.) thy ill-humour towards 
God, and utterest ror (so here, not =r)) words, which, because 
they are without meaning and intelligence, are nothing but 
words? OM, dar. yeyp., is*transposed from 12}, to wink, #.e, 
to make known by gestures and grimaces,—a word which does 


CHAP. XV. 14-16. 255 


not occur in biblical, but is very common in post-biblical, 
Hebrew (e.g. 10932) to wn, a deaf and dumb person expresses 
himself and is answered by a language of signs). Modern 
expositors arbitrarily understand a rolling of-the eyes; it is 
more natural to think of the vibration of the eye-lashes or 
eye-brows. 1, ver. 13, is as in Judg. viii. 3, Isa. xxv. 4, 
comp. xii. 11, and freq. used of passionate excitement, which 
is thus expressed because it manifests itself in wvéew (Acts 
ix. 1), and has its rise in the wvedua (Kecl. vii. 9). Job 
ought to control this angry spirit, @ywos (Psychol. S. 198) ; 
but he allows it to burst forth, and makes even God the 
object on which he vents his anger in impetuous language. 
How much better it would be for him, if he would search 
within himself (am. iii. 39) for the reason of those sufferings 
which so deprive him of his self-control ! 


14 What is mortal man that he should be pure, 

And that he who is born of woman should be righteous ? 
15 He trusteth not His holy ones, 

And the heavens are not pure in His eyes: 
16 How much less the abominable and corrupt, 

Man, who drinketh iniquity as water ! 


The exclamation in ver. 14 is like the utterance: mortal 
man and man born flesh of flesh cannot be entirely sinless. 
Even “the holy ones” and “the heavens” are not. The 
former are, as in ch. v. 1, according to iv. 18, the angels as 
beings of light (whether “IP signifies to. be light from the 
very first, spotlessly pure, or, vid. Psalter, i. 588 sq., to be 
separated, distinct, and hence exalted above what is common) ; 
the latter is not another expression for the 821719 “DIN (Targ.), 
the “angels of the heights,” but po” is the word used for the 
highest spheres in which they dwell (comp. ch. xxv. 5); for 
the angels are certainly not corporeal, but, like all created 
things, in space, and the Scriptures everywhere speak of 


256 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


angels and the starry heavens together. Hence the angels 
are called the morning stars in ch. xxxviii. 7, and hence both 
stars and angels are called DYN NI¥ and NiN3¥ (vid. Genesis, 
S. 128). Even the angels and the heavens are finite, and 
consequently are not of a nature absolutely raised above the 
possibility of sin and contamination. 

Eliphaz repeats here what he has already said, ch. iv. 18 
sq.; but he does it intentionally, since he wishes still more 
terribly to describe human uncleanness to Job (Oetinger). 
In that passage 48 was merely the sign of an anti-climax, 
here ‘D 98 is quanto minus. Eliphaz refers to the hereditary 
infirmity and sin of human nature in ver. 14, here (ver, 16) 
to man’s own free choice of that which works his destruction. 
He uses the strongest imaginable words to describe one 
actualiter and originaliter corrupted. 2903 denotes one who 
is become an bone or the abominated = — abominable 
laihis in she seddial ‘VIL. conjugation: to become sour, 
which reminds one of Sun, Rabb. Dyav 7k, as an image of 
evil, and especially of evil desire). It is further said of him 
(an expression which Elihu adopts, ch. xxxiv. 7), that he drinks 
up evil like water. The figure is like Prov. xxvi. 6, comp. 
on Ps. lxxiii. 10, and implies that he lusts after sin, and that 
it is become a necessity of his nature, and is to his nature 
what water is to the thirsty. Kyven Job does not deny this 
corruption of man (ch. xiv. 4), but the inferences which the 
friends draw in reference to him he cannot acknowledge. 
The continuation of Eliphaz’ speech shows how they render 
this acknowledgment impossible to him. : 

17 I will inform thee, hear me ! 

And what I have myself seen that I will. declare, 
18 Things which wise men declare 

Without concealment from their fathers— 





CHAP. XV. 17-19. 257 


19 To them alone was the land given over, 
And no stranger had passed in their midst— : 


Eliphaz, as in his first speech, introduces the dogma with 
which he confronts Job with a solemn preface : in the former 
case it had its rise in a revelation, here it is supported by his 
own experience and reliable tradition; for ‘nn is not in- 
tended as meaning ecstatic vision (Schlottm.). The poet uses 
mn also of sensuous vision, ch. vill. 17; and of observation 
and knowledge by means of the senses, not only the more 
exalted, as ch. xix. 26 sq., but of any kind (ch. xxiii. 9, xxiv. 
1, xxvii. 12, comp. xxxvi. 25, xxxiv. 32), in the widest sense. 
Mt is used as neuter, Gen. vi. 15, Ex. xiii. 8, xxx. 13, Lev. xi. 
4, and freq.’ (comp. the neuter si, ch. xiii. 16, and often), 
and ‘nun-n is a relative clause (Ges. § 122, 2): quod conspeat, 
as ch. xix. 19 guos amo, and Ps. Ixxiv. 2 in quo habitas, comp. 
Ps, civ. 8, 26, Prov. xxiii. 22, where the punctuation through- 
out proceeds from the correct knowledge of the syntax. The 
waw of MmpDN) is the waw apodosis, which is customary 
(Nigelsbach, § 111, 1, 0) after relative clauses (e.g. Num. 
xxiii. 3), or what is the same thing, participles (eg. Prov. 
xxiii. 24): et narrabo = ea narrabo. In ver. 18 n> xb is, 
logically at least, subordinate to 113, as in Isa. iii. 9,? as the 
Targum of the Antwerp Polyglott well translates: “ what 
wise men declare, without concealing ()2720 x51), from the 
tradition of their fathers ;” whereas all the other old trans- 
lations, including Luther’s, have missed the right meaning. 
These fathers to whom this doctrine respecting the fate of 
evil-doers is referred, lived, as Eliphaz says in ver. 19, in 
the land of their birth, and did not mingle themselves with 


1 So also Ps. lvi. 10, where I now prefer to translate ‘‘ This I know,” 
my neuter, like Prov. xxiv. 12, and referring forward as above, ver. 17. 

? Heidenheim refers to Hos. viii. 2 for the position of the words, but 
there Israel may also be an apposition: we know thee, we Israel. 


VOL. I. R 


258 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


strangers ; consequently their manner of viewing things, and 
their opinions, have in their favour the advantage of indepen- 
dence, of being derived from their own experience, and also of 
a healthy development undisturbed by any foreign influences, 
and their teaching may be accounted pure and unalloyed. — 
Eliphaz ‘thus indirectly says, that the present is not free 
from such influences, and Ewald is consequently of opinion 
that the individuality of the Israelitish poet peeps out here, 


and a state of things is indicated like that which came about — 


after the fall of Samaria in the reign of Manasseh. Hirzel 
also infers from Eliphaz’ words, that at the time when the 
book was written the poet’s fatherland was desecrated by 
some foreign rule, and considers it an indication for deter- 
mining the time at which the book was composed. But how 
groundless and deceptive this is! The way in which Eliphaz 
commends ancient traditional lore is so genuinely Arabian, 
that there is but the faintest semblance of a reason for sup- 
posing the poet to have thrown his own history and national 
peculiarity so vividly into the working up of the réle of 
another. Purity of race was, from the earliest times, con- 
sidered by “the sons of the East” as the sign of highest 
nobility, and hence Eliphaz traces back his teaching to a time 
when his race could boast of the greatest freedom from inter- 
mixture with any other. Schlottmann prefers to interpret 
ver. 19 as referring to the “nobler primeval races of man” 
(without, however, referring to ch, viii. 8), but 780 does not 
signify the earth here, but: country, as in ch. xxx. 8, xxii. 8, 
and elsewhere, and ver. 19) seems to refer to nations: % = 
barbarus (perhaps Semitic: 1273, 6 é&w). Nevertheless it is 
unnecessary to suppose that Eliphaz’ time was one of foreign 
domination, as the Assyrian-Chaldean time was for Israel : it 
is sufficient to imagine it as a time when the tribes of the 


desert were becoming intermixed, from migration, commerce, 
and feud. 


— 


‘CHAP. XV. 17-19. 259 | 


Now follows the doctrine of the wise men, which springs 
from a venerable primitive age, an age as yet undisturbed by 
any strange way of thinking (modern enlightenment and free 
thinking, as we should say), and is supported by Eliphaz’ 


own experience.’ 


1 Communication from Consul Wetzstein: If this verse affirms that 
the freer a people is from intermixture with other races, the purer is 
its tradition, it gives expression to a principle derived from experience, 
which needs no proof. Even European races, especially the Scandi- 
navians, furnish proof of this in their customs, language, and traditions, 
although in this case certain elements of their indigenous character have 
vanished with the introduction of Christianity. A more complete parallel 
is furnished by the wandering tribes of the ‘Aneze and Shardrdt of the 
Syrian deserts, people who have indeed had their struggles, and have 
even been weakened by emigration, but have certainly never lost their 

political and religious autonomy, and have preserved valuable traditions 
which may be traced to the earliest antiquity. It is unnecessary to 
prove this by special instances, when the whole outer and inner life of 
these peoples can be regarded as the best commentary on the biblical 
aceounts of the patriarchal age. It is, however, not so much the fact 
that the evil-doer receives his punishment, in favour of which Eliphaz 
appeals to the teaching handed down from the fathers, as rather the 
belief in it, consequently in a certain degree the dogma of a moral order in 
the world. This dogma is an essential element of the ancient Abrahamic 
religion of the desert tribes—that primitive religion which formed the 
basis of the Mosaic, and side by side with it was continued among the 
nomads of the desert; which, shortly before the appearance of Christianity 
in the country east of Jordan, gave birth to mild doctrines, doctrines 
which tended to prepare the way for the teaching of the gospel ; which 
at that very time, according to historical testimony, also prevailed in 
the towns of the Higdz, and was first displaced again by the Jemanic 
idolatry, and limited to the desert, in the second century after Christ, 
during the repeated migrations of the southern Arabs; which gave 
the most powerful impulse to the rise of Jslam, and furnished its best 
elements ; which, towards the end of the last century, brought‘ about 
the reform of Islamism in the province of Negd, and produced the 
Wahabee doctrine ; and which, finally, is continued even to the present 
day by the name of Din Ibrahim, “‘ Religion of Abraham,” as a faithful 
tradition of the fathers, among the vast Ishmaelitish igibes of the Syrian 
desert, ‘‘to whom alone the land is given over, and into whose midst no 
stranger has penetrated.” Had this cultus spread among settled races 
with a higher education, it might have been taught also in writings: if, 
however, portions of writings in reference to it, which have been handed 


260 THE BOOK OF JOB, 


20 So long as the ungodly liveth he suffereth, 
And numbered years are reserved for the tyrant. 
21 Terrors sound in his ears; 
In time of peace the destroyer cometh upon him. 
22 He believeth not in a return from darkness, 
And he is selected for the sword. 
23 He roameth about after bread: “ Ah! where is it?” 
He knoweth that a dark day is near at hand for him. 
24 Trouble and anguish terrify him ; 
They seize him as a king ready to the battle. 


All the days of the ungodly he (the ungodly) is sensible of | 
pain. YW stands, like Elohim in Gen. ix. 6, by the closer 


definition ; here however so, that this defining ends after the 
manner of a premiss, and is begun by Ni after the manner 
of a conclusion. bPinnn, he writhes, .e. suffers inward anxiety 


down to us by the Arabs, are to be regarded as unauthentic, it may also 
in ‘Jrék have been mixed with the Sabian worship of the stars; but 
among the nomads it will have always been only oral, taught by the 
poets in song, and contained in the fine traditions handed down uncor- 
rupted from father to son, and practised in life. 

It is a dogma of this religion (of which I shall speak more fully in the 
introduction to my Anthologie von Poesien der Wanderstémme), that the 
. pious will be rewarded by God in his life and in his descendants, the 
wicked punished in his life and in his descendants; and it may also, in 
ver. 19, be indirectly said that the land of Eliphaz has preserved this 
faith, in accordance with tradition, purer than Job’s land. If Eliphaz 
was from the Petrean town of Témdan (which we merely suggest as 
possible here), he might indeed rightly assert that no strange race had 
become naturalized there ; for that hot, sterile land, poorly supplied with 
water, had nothing inviting to the emigrant or marauder, and its natives 
remain there only by virtue of the proverb: 1614 hhibb el-wattan qat.tal, 
lakan dar es-st’ charab, ‘‘ Did not the love of one’s country slay (him 
who is separated from it), the barren country would be uninhabited.” 
Job certainly could not affirm the same of his native country, if this is, 
with the Syrian tradition, to be regarded as the Nukra (on this point, 
vid. the Appendix). As the richest province of Syria, it has, from the 
earliest time to the present, always been an apple of contention, and has 
not only frequently changed its rulers, but even its inhabitants. 








CHAP. XV. 20-24. 261 


and distress in the midst of all outeand appearance of happi- 


ness. Most expositors translate the next line: and throughout 


the number of the years, which are reserved to the tyrant. 
But (1) this parallel definition of time appended by waw 
makes the sense drawling ; (2) the change of /Y (oppressor, 
tyrant) for yum leads one to expect a fresh affirmation, hence 
it is translated by the LXX.: érn 8 apiOunra Sdedopéva 
Suvactn. The predicate is, then, like ch. xxxii. 7, comp. 
xxix. 10, 1 Sam. ii. 4 (Ges. § 148), per attractionem in the 
plur. instead of in the sing., and especially with 18D followed 
by gen. plur.; this attraction is adopted by our author, ch. xxi. 
21, xxxviii. 21. The meaning is not, that numbered, z.e. few, 


» years are secretly appointed to the tyrant, which must have 


been sh’ndth mispar, a reversed position of the words, as ch. 
xvi. 22, Num. ix. 20 (vid. Gesenius’ Thes.) ; but a (limited, 
appointed) number of years is reserved to the tyrant (j5¥ as 
ch. xxiv. 1, xxi. 19, comp. joo, ch. xx. 26; Mercerus: occulto 
decreto definiti), after the expiration of which his punishment 
begins. The thought expressed by the Targ., Syr., and 
Jerome would be suitable: and the number of the years (that 
he has to live unpunished) is hidden from the tyrant; but if 
this were the poet’s meaning, he would have written 13, and 
must have written WO}. ; 
With regard to the following vers. 21-24, it is doubtful 
whether only the evil-doer’s anxiety of ‘spirit is described in 
amplification of Sinn xin, or also how. the terrible images — 
from which he suffers in his conscience are realized, and how 
he at length helplessly succumbs to the destruction which his 
imagination had long foreboded. A satisfactory and decisive 
answer to this question is hardly possible; but considering 
that the real crisis is brought on by Eliphaz later, and fully 
described, it seems more probable that what has an objective 
tone in vers. 21-24 is controlled by what has been affirmed 
respecting the evil conscience of the ungodly, and is to be 


262 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


understood accordingly. The sound of terrible things (start- 
ling dangers) rings in his ears; the devastator comes upon 
him ("12 seg. acc. as ch. xx. 22, Prov. xxviii. 22; comp. Isa. 
xxvill. 15) in the midst of his prosperity. He anticipates it 
ere it happens. From the darkness by which he feels himself - 
menaced, he believes not ({28 seq. injin. as Ps. xxvii. 13, 
msnd, of confident hope) to return’ i.e. overwhelmed with a 
consciousness of his guilt, he cannot, in the presence of this 
darkness which threatens him, rise to the hope of rescue from 
it, and he is really—as his consciousness tells him—®¥ (like 
Wy, ch. xli. 25; Ges. § 75, rem. 5; Keri “py, which is omitted 
in our printed copies, contrary to the testimony of the Masora 
and the authority of correct mss.), spied out for, appointed to 
the sword, z.e. of God (ch. xix. 29; Isa. xxxi. 8), or decreed 
by God. In the midst of abundance he is harassed by the . 
thought of becoming poor; he wanders about in search of 
bread, anxiously looking out and asking where? (abrupt, like 
mn, ch. ix. 19), ze. where’ is any to be found, whence can 1 
obtain it? The LXX. translates contrary to the connection, — 
and with a strange misunderstanding of the passage: xataté- 
taxtar dé eis cita yupiv (ES ono, food for the vulture). He 
sees himself in the mirror of the future thus reduced to 
beggary; he knows that a day of darkness stands in readiness 
(N32, like ch. xviii. 12), is at his hand, 7.e. close upon him 
(1°32, elsewhere in this sense 19, Ps. cxl. 6, 1 Sam. xix. 3, 
and Oy, ch. i. 14). In accordance with the previous ex- 
position, we shall now interpret MP1 ¥, ver. 24, not of 
need and distress, but subjectively of fear and oppression. 
They come upon him suddenly and irresistibly ; it seizes or 
overpowers lim (72PNn with neutral subject ; an unknown 
something, a dismal power) as a king P39 Thy, LXX. 
orep otparnyos mpwroctarys mimo, like a leader falling 
m the first line of the battle, which is an imaginary inter- 
pretation of the text. The translation of the Targum also, 


CHAP. XV. 20-24. 263 


sicut regem qui paratus est ad scabellum (to serve the conqueror 
as a footstool), furnishes no explanation. Another Targum 
translation (in Nachmani and elsewhere) is: sicué rex qui 
paratus est circumdare se legionibus. According to this, 7'2 
comes from 173, to surround, be round (comp. 193, whence 
3nd, Assyr. cudur, xidapis, perhaps also WN, Syr. 177, whence 
chdor, a circle, round about); and it is assumed, that as 173 
signifies a ball (not only in Talmudic, but also in Isa. xxii. 
18, which is to be translated: rolling he rolleth thee into a 
ball, a ball in a spacious land), so "7°2, a round encampment, 
an army encamped in a circle, synon. of ayo. In this first 
signification the word certainly furnishes no suitable sense in 
connection with ny; but one may, with Kimchi, suppose 
that 12, like the Italian torniamento, denotes the circle as 
well as the tournament, or the round of conflict, i.e. the 
conflict which moves round about, like tumult of battle, 
which last is a suitable meaning here. The same appropriate 
meaning is attained, however, if the root is taken, like the 
Arabic 0S) in the signification turbidum esse (comp. 11?, ch. 
vi. 16), which is adopted of misfortunes as troubled experiences 
of life (according to which Schultens translates: destinatus 
est ad turbulentissimas fortunas, beginning a new thought 
with ‘ny, which is not possible, since $93 by itself is no 
complete figure), and may perhaps also be referred to the 
tumult of battle, twmultus bellict conturbatio (Rosenm.); or if, 
with Fleischer, one starts from another turn of the idea of 
the root, viz. to be compressed, solid, thick, which in a more 
certain way gives the meaning of a dense crowd.’ Since, 


1 The verb oS belongs to the root ANG , tosmite, thrust, guatere, per- 
cutere, tundere, trudere ; a root that has many branches. It is I. transitive 
cadara (fut. jacduru, inf. cadr)—by the non-adeption of which from the 
original lexicons our lexicographers have deprived the whole etymological 
development of its groundwork—in the signification to pour, hurl down, 
pour out, e.g. cadara-l-mda, he has spilt, poured out, thrown down the 
water; hence in the medial VII. form incadara intransitive, to fall, fall 


264 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


therefore, a suitable meaning is obtained in two ways, the 
natural conjecture, which is commended by Prov. vi. 11, 
fia TY, paratus ad hastam = peritus haste (Hupf.), accord- 
ing to ch. iii. 8 (where 1 = 199), may be abandoned. The 
signification circuitus has the most support, according to 
which Saadia and Parchon also explain, and we have pre- ° 
ferred to translate round of battle rather than tumult of con- 
flict; Jerome’s translation, gui preparatur ad proelium, seems 
also to be gained in the same manner. 


25 Because he stretched out his hand against God, 
And was insolent towards the Almighty ; 

26 Heassailed Him with a stiff neck, 
With the thick bosses of his shield ; 

27 Because he covered his face with his fatness, 
And addeth fat to his loins, 


down, chiefly of water and other fluids, as of the rain which pours down 
from heaven, of & cascade, and the like; then improperly of a bird of 
prey which shoots down from the air upon its prey (¢.g. in the poetry in 
Beidhawi on Sur. 81, 2: ‘‘ The hawk saw some bustards on the plain 
f’ancadara, and rushed down”); of a hostile host which rushes upon the 
enemy [first possible signification for .)4°3] ; of a man, horse, etc., which 
runs very swiftly, effuse currit, effuso curru ruit; of the stars that shall 
fall from heaven at the last day (Sur. 81, 2). Then also II. intransitive 
cadara (fut. jacdiru) with the secondary form cadira (fut. jacdaru) and 
cadura (fut. jacduru), prop. to be shaken and jolted; then also of fluid 
things, mixed and mingled, made turgid, unclean, i.e. by shaking, jolting, 
stirring, etc., with the dregs (the cudare or cuddde); then gen. turbidum, 
non limpidum esse (opp. \Xe), with a similar transition of meaning to that 
in turbare (comp. deturbare) and the German triiben (comp. traben or 
trappen, treiben, treffen). The primary meaning of the root takes another 
III. turn in the derived adjectives cudur, cudurr, cundur, cunddir, com- 
pressed, solid, thick ; the last word with us (Germans) forms a transition 
from cadir, cadr, cadir, dull, slimy, yeasty, etc., inasmuch as we speak of 
dickes Bier (thick beer), etc., cerevisia spissa, de la biere épaisse. Here 
the point of contact for the word 9y"5, tumult of battle, ~advos dvdpav, 
seems indicated: a dense crowd and tumult, where one is close upon an- 
other; as also pnd, nonbdy, signify not reciprocal destruction, slaughter, , 
but to press firmly and closely upon one another, a dense crowd.—FL. | 





CHAP. XV. 25-30. 265 


28 And inhabited desolated cities, 
Houses which should not be inhabited, 
Which were appointed to be ruins. 
29 He shall not be rich, and his substance shall not continue 
And their substance boweth not to the, ground. 
30 He escapeth not darkness ; 
The flame withereth his shoots; 
And he perisheth in the breath of His mouth. 


This strophe has periodic members: vers. 25-28 an ante- 
cedent clause with a double beginning (7622 because he has 
stretched out, "522 because he has covered ; whereas }7* may 
be taken as more independent, but under the government of 
the °> that stands at the commencement of the sentence) ; 
. vers. 29, 30, is the conclusion. Two chief sins are mentioned 
as the cause of the final destiny that comes upon the evil-doer : 
(1) his arrogant opposition to God, and (2) his contentment 
on the ruins of another’s prosperity. The first of these sins 
is described vers. 25-27. The fut. consec. is once used instead 
of the perf., and the simple fut. is twice used with the signifi- 
eation of an imperf. (as ch. iv. 3 and freq.) _ The Hithpa. 
72307) signifies here to maintain a heroic bearing, to play the 
hero; Iwynn to make one’s self rich, to play the part of a rich 
_ man, Prov. xiii. 7. And 783¥2 expresses the special promi- 
nence of the neck in his assailing God (Os 7, as Dan. 
vill. 6, comp. by, ch. xvi. 14); it is equivalent to erecto collo 
(Vulg.), and in meaning equivalent to #Bpe (UX X.). Also 
in Ps, Ixxv. 6, 182 (with Munach, which there represents a 
distinctive’) is absolute, in the sense of stiff-necked or hard- 
headed ; for the parallels, as Ps. xxxi. 19, xciv. 4, and espe- 
cially the primary passage, 1 Sam. ii. 3, show that pny is to 
be taken as an accusative of the object.. The proud defiance 
with which he challengingly assails God, and renders himself 

1 Vid. Dachselt’s Biblia Accentuata, p. 816. 


266 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


insensible to the dispensations of God, which might bring him 
to a right way of thinking, is symbolized by the additional 
clause: with the thickness (‘22 cognate form to "2¥) of the 
bosses of his shields. 33 is the back (,\;) or boss (wmbo) 
of the shield; the plurality of shields has reference to the 
diversified means by which he hardens himself. Ver. 27, 
similarly to Ps. xxiii. 4-7, pictures this impregnable carnal 
security against all unrest and pain, to which, on account of 
his own sinfulness and the distress of others, the nobler- 
minded man is so sensitive: he has covered his face with his 
fat, so that by the accumulation of fat, for which he anxiously 
labours, it becomes a gross material lump of flesh, devoid of 
mind and soul, and made fat, i.e. added fat, caused it to accu- 
mulate, upon his loins (eD2 for Y2D2) ; ny (which has nothing 
to do with | i, to cover) is used as in ch. xiv. 9, and in the 
phrase corpus facere (in Justin), in the sense of producing out- 
wardly something from within. 2°B reminds one of aryu-ehy) 
(as Aquila and Symmachus translate here), o-pim-us, and of 
the Sanscrit piai, to be fat (whence adj. pivan, pivara, ruapos, 
part. pina, subst. according to Roth pivas) ; the Arabic renders 
it probable that it is a contraction of M)°8B (Olsh. § 171, 0). 
The Jewish expositors explain it according to the misunder- 
stood 0°, 1 Sam. xiii. 21, of the furrows or wrinkles which 
are formed in flabby flesh, as if the ah were paragogic. 

Ver. 28 describes the second capital sin of the evil-doer. 
The desolated cities that he dwells in are not cities that he 
himself has laid waste; 28¢ distinctly refers to a divinely 
appointed punishment, for MYM does not signify: which 


they (evil-doers) have made ruins (Hahn), which is neither » 


probable from the change of number, nor accords with the 
meaning of the verb, which signifies “to appoint to something 
in the future.” Hirzel, by referring to the law, Deut. xiii. 
13-19 (comp. 1 Kings xvi. 34), which forbids the rebuilding 
of such cities as are laid under the curse, explains it to a 


* ee 





CHAP. XV. 25-30. 267 


certain extent more correctly. But such a play upon the 
requirements of the Mosaic law is in itself not probable in 
the book of Job, and here, as Léwenthal rightly remarks, is 
the less indicated, since it is not the dwelling in such cities 
that is forbidden, but only the rebuilding of them, so far as 
they had been destroyed; here, however, the reference is only 
to dwelling, not to rebuilding. The expression must there- 
fore be understood more generally thus, that the powerful 
man settles down carelessly and indolently, without any fear 
of the judgments of God or respect for the manifestations of 
His judicial authority, in places in which the marks of a just 
divine retribution are still visible, and which are appointed to 
be perpetual monuments of the execution of divine judgments.’ 
Only by this rendering is the form of expression of the ellip- 
tical clause ind sawA-ND explained. Hirz. refers 19> to D'M2: 
in which they do not dwell ; but ? av? does not signify: to 
dwell in a place, but: to settle down in a place; Schlottm. 
refers 19> to the inhabitants: therein they dwell not them- 
selves, i.e. where no one dwelt; but the ws which would 
be required in this case as acc. localis could not be omitted. 


1 For the elucidation of this interpretation of the passage, Consul 
Wetzstein has contributed the following: ‘‘ As one who yields to inor- 
dinate passion is without sympathy cast from human society because he 
is called muqdtal rabbuh, ‘ one who is beaten in the conflict against his 
God’ (since he has sinned against the holy command of chastity), and as 
no one ventures to pronounce the name of Satan because God has cursed 
him (Gen. iii. 14), without adding ‘aléh el-la ne, ‘God’s curse upon him!’ . 
so a man may not presume to inhabit places which God has appointed to 
desolation. Such villages and cities, which, according to tradition, have 
perished and been frequently overthrown (magliibe, mugélibe, mungalibe) 
by the visitation of divine judgment, are not uncommon on the borders of 
the desert. They are places, it is said, where the primary commandments 
of the religion of Abraham (Din Ibrahim) have been impiously trans- 
gressed. Thus the city of Babylon will never be colonized by a Semitic 
tribe, because they hold the belief that it has been destroyed on account 
of Nimrod’s apostasy from God, and his hostility to His favoured one, 
Abraham. The tradition which has even been transferred by the tribes 
of Arabia Petreea into Islamism of the desolation of the city of Higr (or 


268 — THE BOOK OF JOB. 


One might more readily, with Hahn, explain: those to whom 
they belong do not inhabit them ; but it is linguistically impos- 
sible for 195 to stand alone as the expression of this subject 
(the possessors). The most natural, and also an admissible 
explanation, is, that 12% refers to the houses, and that 1b, 
which can be used not only of persons, but also of things, is 
dat. ethicus. The meaning, however, is not: which are unin- 
habited, which would not be expressed as future, but rather 
by 2’ 072 PS or similarly, but: which shall not inhabit, ze. 
shall not be inhabited to them (2%, to dwell = to have in- 
habitants, as Isa. xiii. 10, Jer. 1. 13, 39, and freq.), or, as we 
should express it, which ought to remain uninhabited. | 
Ver. 29 begins the conclusion: (because he has acted 
thus) he shall not be rich (with a personal subject as Hos. 
xii. 9, and WY" to be written with a sharpened wy, like 13) 
above, ch. xii. 15), and his substance shall not endure (psp, to 
take place, Isa. vii. 7; to endure, 1 Sam. xiii. 14; and hold 
fast, ch. xli. 18), and 0929 shall not incline itself to the 
earth. The interpretation of the older expositors, non extendet 
se in terra, is impossible—that must be #82 73); whereas 


Medéin Salih) on account of disobedience to God, prevents any one from 
dwelling in that remarkable city, which consists of thousands of dwellings 
cut in the rock, some of which are richly ornamented ; without looking 
round, and muttering prayers, the desert ranger hurries through, even 
as does the great procession of pilgrims to Mekka, from fear of incurring 
the punishment of God by the slightest delay in the accursed city. The 
destruction of Sodom, brought about by the violation of the right of hos- 
pitality (Gen. xix. 5, comp. Job xxxi. 32), is to be mentioned here, for 
this legend certainly belongs originally to the ‘Din Ibrahim’ rather 
than to the Mosaic. At the source of the Rakkdd (the largest river of 
the Golan region) there are a number of erect and remarkably perforated 
jasper formations, which are called ‘ the bridal procession’ (e/-farida). 
This bridal procession was turned to stone, because a woman of the party 
cleaned her child that had made itself dirty with a bread-cake (qurss). 
Near it is its village (Ufine), which in spite of repeated attempts is no 
more to be inhabited. It remains forsaken, as an eternal witness that 
ingratitude (kufran en-ni'ma), especially towards God, does not remain 
unpunished.” 





CHAP. XV. 25-80. , 269 


Kal is commonly used in the intransitive sense to bow 
down, bend one’s self or incline (Ges. § 53, 2). But what 
is the meaning of the subject nd»? We may put’out of 
consideration those interpretations that condernn themselves ; 
D? 1D, ex tis (Targ.), or D? 1, quod tis, what belongs to them 
(Saad.), or 059, their word (Syr. and Gecatilia), and such 
substitutions as cxidv (nd¥ or 0d>¥) of the LXX., and radicem 
of Jerome (which seems only to be a guess). Certainly that 
which throws most light on the signification of the word is 
W32 (for Wo32 with Dag. dirimens, as ch. xvii. 2), which 
occurs in Isa. xxxiil. 1. The oldest Jewish lexicographers 
take this npn (parall. D7) as a synonym of mba in the signi- 
fication, to bring to an end; on the other hand, Ges., Knobel, 
and others, consider wd22 to be the original reading, because 
the meaning perficere is not furnished for.nd: from the Arab. 
Jb, and because Sy, standing thus together, is in Arabic an 
incompatible root combination (Olsh. § 9, 4). This union of 
consonants certainly does not occur in any Semitic root, but 
the Arab. ndla (the long a of which can in the inflection 
become a short changeable vowel) furnishes sufficient pro- . 
tection for this one exception; and the meaning consequi, 
which belongs to the Arab. ndla, fut. janilu, is perfectly suited 
to Isa. xxxili. 1: if thou hast fully attained (Hiph. as inten- 
sive of the transitive Kal, like P'Yt0, 72P) to plundering. If, 
however, the verb nos is established, there is no need for any 
conjecture in the passage before us, especially since the im- 
provement nearest at hand, nes (Hupf. mp3), produces a 
sentence (non figet in terra caulam) which could not be flatter 
and tamer ; whereas the thought that is gained by Olshausen’s 
more sensible conjecture, Dos (their sickle does not sink to the 
earth, is not pressed down by the richness of the produce of the 
field), goes to the other extreme.’ Juda b. Karisch (Kureisch) 


i Carey proposes to take ody = nbw», their cutting, layer for planting; 
but the verb-group Sr, Sin, dis (vid. supra, p. 224) is not favourable 


270 THE BOOK OF JOB. ? 


has explained the word correctly by ,J\\.: that which they 
have offered (from nédla, janilu) or attained (néla, janilu), 
i.e. their possession’ (not: their perfection, as it is chiefly 


explained by the Jewish expositors, according to n>: =m), 


When the poet says, “their prosperity inclines not to the 
ground,” he denies to it the likeness to a field of corn, which 
from the weight of the ears bows itself towards the ground, 


or to a tree, whose richly laden branches bend to the ground. 


We may be satisfied with this explanation (Hirz., Ew., Stickel, 
and most others) : Do from mp3 (with which Kimchi com- 
pares 073, Num. xx. 19, which however is derived not from 
199, but from 722), similar in meaning to the post-biblical 
ji, waywvas; the suff., according to the same change of 
number as in ver. 35, ch. xx. 23, and freq., refers to D'ywh. 
In ver. 30, also, a figure taken from a plant is interwoven 
with what is said of the person of the ungodly: the flame 
withers up his tender branch without its bearing fruit, and 
he himself does not escape darkness, but rather perishes 
by the breath of His mouth, ze. God’s mouth (ch. iv. 9, not 


to the supposition of a substantive on) i in this signification, according to 


the usual application of the language. 

1 Freytag has erroneously placed the infinitives nai] and mandi under 
Jb med. Wau, instead of under Jk med. Je, where he only repeats nail, 
and erroneously gives mandl the signification donum, citing in support of 
it a passage from Fakihat al-chulafa, where ‘aziz al-mandl (a figure bor- 
rowed from places difficult of access, and rendered. strong and impregnable 
by nature or art) signifies ‘‘one who was hard to get at” (i.e. whose 
position of power is made secure). The true connection is this: Jb 
med. Wau signifies originally to extend, reach, to hand anything to any one 
with outstretched arm or hand, the correlatum Jb med. Je: to attain, 
i.é. first to touch or reach anything with outstretched arm or hand, and 
then really to grasp and take it, gen. adipisci, consequi, assequi, impe- 
trare, with the ordinary infinitives nail and mandl. Therefore mandl 
(from Jb med, Je) signifies primarily as abstract, attainment; it may then, 
however, like nail and the infinitives generally, pass over to the concrete 
signification: what one attains to, or what one has attained, gotten, 
although I can give no special example in support of it.—FL. 





CHAP. XV. 31-35. : 271 


of his own, after Isa. xxxiii. 11). The repetition of id’ 
(“he escapes not,” as Prov. xiii. 14; “he must yield to,” 
as 1 Kings xv. 14, and freq.) is an impressive play upon 
words. 


31 Let him not trust in evil—he ts deceived, 
For evil shall be his possession. 
32 His day is not yet, then it is accomplished, 
And his palm-branch loseth its freshness. 
33 He teareth off as a vine his young grapes, 
_And He casteth down as an olive-tree his flower. 
34 The company of the hypocrite is rigid, 
And fire consumeth the tents of bribery. 
35 They conceive sorrow and bring forth iniquity, 
And their inward part worketh self-deceit. 


bs does not merely introduce a declaration respecting the 
future (Luther: he will not continue, which moreover must 
have been expressed by the Miph.), but is admonitory : may 
he only not trust in vanity (Munach here instead of Dechi, 
according to the rule of transformation, Psalter, ii. 504, § 4)— 
he falls, so far as he does it, into error, or brings himself into 
error ("YN), 3 pret., not part., and Niph. like Isa. xix. 14, 
wheré it signifies to be thrust backwards and forwards, or to 
reel about helplessly),—a thought one might expect after the 
admonition (Olsh. conjectures 393, one’ who is detestable) : 
this trusting in evil is self-delusion, for evil becomes his 
exchange (TA not compensatio, but permutatio, acquisitio). 
We have translated SY by “evil” (Unheil), by which we 
have sought elsewhere to render }'8, in order that we might 
preserve the same word in both members of the verse. In 
ver. 31a, 8 (in form = from xiv, in the Chethib W, the 


Aleph being cast away, like the Arabic bei, wickedness, from 


the v. cavum hamzatum sd-’a = saww’a) is waste and empty 


272 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


in mind, in 31b (comp. Hos. xii. 12) waste and empty in 
fortune; or, to go further from the primary root, in the former 
case apparent goodness, in the latter apparent prosperity— 
delusion, and being undeceived [“evil” in the sense of 
wickedness, and of calainity]. Ndion, which follows, refers to 
the exchange, or neutrally to the evil that is exchanged: the 
one or the other fulfils itself, z.e. either: is realized (passive 

of nbn, 1 Kings viii. 15), or : becomes complete, which means 
the measure of the punishment of his immorality becomes: 
full, before his natural day, i.e. the day of death, is come 
(comp. for expression, ch. xxii. 16, Eccles. vii. 17). The trans- 
* lation: then it is over with him (Ges., Schlottm., and others), 
is contrary to the usage of the Lesomune and that given by 
the Jewish expositors, NPR = boon (abscinditur or conteritur), 
is a needlessly bold suggestion Ver, 326. It is to be observed 
that 73239 is Milel, and consequently 3 pret., not as in Cant. 
i. 16 Milra, and consequently adj. 3 is not the branches 
generally (Luzzatto, with Raschi: branchage), but, as the pro- 
verbial expression for the high and low, Isa. ix. 13, xix. 15 (vid. 
Dietrich, Abhandlung cur hebr. Gramm. §. 209), shows, the 
palm-branch bent downwards (comp. Targ. Esth. i. 5, where 
‘2D signifies seats and walks covered with foliage). “ His 
palm-branch does not become green, or does not remain green” 
(which Symm. well renders: od« ev@adyjoer), means that as 
he himself, the palm-trunk, so also his family, withers away, 
In ver. 33 it is represented as 1D (= D3), wild grapes, or 
even unripe grapes of a vine, and as 783, flowers of an olive." 
In ver. 82) the godless man himself might be the subject: he 


1 Tn order to appreciate the point of the comparison, it is needful to 
know that the Syrian olive-tree bears fruit plentifully the first, third, and 
fifth years, but rests during the second, fourth, and sixth. It blossoms in 
these years also, but the blossoms fall off almost entirely without any 
berries being formed. The harvest of the olive is therefore in such years 
very scanty. With respect to the vine, every year an enormous quantity 
of grapes are used up before they are ripe. When the berries are only 
about the size of a pea, the acid from them is used in housekeeping, to 





“CHAP. XV. 31-35. 27 3 


casts down, like an olive-tree, his flowers, but in ver 32a this 
is inadmissible ; if we interpret: “he shakes off (Targ. 1h, 
excuttet), like a vine-stock, his young grapes,” this (apart 
from the far-fetched meaning of DN‘) isa figure that is un- 
true to nature, since the grapes sit firmer the more unripe 
they are; and if one takes the first meaning of pon, “he 
acts unjustly, as a vine, to his omphax” (e.g. Hupf.), whether 
it means that he does not let it ripen, or that he does not 
share with it any of the sweet sap, one has not only an indis- 
_ tinct figure, but also (since what God ordains for the godless 
is described as in operation) an awkward comparison. The 
subject of both verbs is therefore other than the vine and 
olive themselves. But why only an impersonal “one”? In 
ver. 30 15 Mm was referred to God, who is not expressly men- 
tioned. God is also the subject here, and Dion, which signi- 
fies to act with violence’ to one’s self, is modified here to the 
sense of tearing away, as Lam. ii. 6 (which Aben-Ezra has 
compared), of tearing out; }533, N't3, prop. as a vine-stock, as 
an olive-tree, is equivalent to even as such an one. 

Ver. 34 declares the lot of the family of the ungodly, which 
has been thus figuratively described, without figure: the 
congregation (i.e. here: family-circle) of the ungodly (424 
according to its etymon inclinans, propensus ad malum, vid. 
on ch. xiii. 16) is (as it is expressed from the standpoint of 
the judgment that is executed) AD2S, a hard, lifeless, stony 
mass (in the substantival sense of the Arabic galméd instead 
of the adject. mvao3, Isa. xlix. 21), ie. stark dead (LXX. 


prepare almost every kind of food. The people are exceedingly fond of 
things sour, a taste which is caused by the heat of the climate. During 
the months of June, July, and August, above six hundred horses and 
asses laden with unripe grapes come daily to the market in Damascus 
alone, and during this season no one uses vinegar ; hence the word "p23 
signifies in Syriac the acid (vinegar) xar ¢Zoxy». In Arabic the unripe 
grapes are exclusively called hhossrum ( arco); or, with a dialectic dis- — 
tinction, hissrim.—WETZST. 

VOL. I. 8 


274 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Odvaros ; Aq., Symm., Theod., d«apos), and fire has de- 
youred the tents of bribery (after Ralbag: those built by 
bribery ; or even after the LX-X.: olxous Swpodextav). The 
ejaculatory conclusion, ver, 35, gives the briefest expression 
to that which has been already described. The figurative 
language, ver. 35a, is like Ps. vii. 15, Isa. lix. 4 (comp. supra, 
p- 25); in the latter passage similar vividly descriptive infini- 
tives are found (Ges. § 131, 4, 6). They hatch the burdens 
or sorrow of others, and what comes from it is evil for them- 
selves. What therefore their {03, i.e. their inward part, with 
the intermingled feelings, thoughts, and strugglings (Olym- 
piodorus: xovAlav 6rov TO évtds yaoplov dyot Kal adbriy THY 
wuy7nv), prepares or accomplishes (}'3. similar to ch. xxvii. 17, 
xxxvili. 41), that on which it works, is 7270, deceit, with 
which they deceive others, and before all, themselves (New 
Test. amratn). 

With the speech of Eliphaz, the eldest among the friends, 
who gives a tone to their speeches, the controversy enters 
upon a second stage. In his last speech Job has turned 
from the friends and called upon them to be silent; he turned 
to God, and therein a sure confidence, but at the same time 
a challenging tone of irreverent defiance, is manifested. God 
does not enter into the controversy which Job desires; and 
the consequence is, that that flickering confidence is again 
extinguished, and the tone of defiance is changed into despair 
and complaint. Instead of listening to the voice of God, Job 
is obliged to content himself again with that of the friends, 
for they believe the continuance of the contest to be just 
as binding upon them as upon Job. They cannot consider 
themselves overcome, for their dogma has grown up in such 
inseparable connection with their idea of God, and therefore 
isso much raised above human contradiction, that nothing 
but a divine fact can break through it. And they are too 
closely connected with Job by their friendship to leave him 





CHAP. XV. 31-35. ° 275 


to himself as a heretic; they regard Job as one who is self- 
deluded, and have really the good intention of converting 
their friend. 

Eliphaz’ speech, however, also shows that they become still 
more and more incapable of producing a salutary impression 
on Job. For, on the one hand, in this second stage of the con- 
troversy also they turn about everywhere only in the circle of 
their old syllogism: suffering is the punishment of sin, Job 
suffers, therefore he is a sinner who has to make atonement for 
his sin; on the other hand, instead of being disconcerted by an 
unconditioned acceptation of this maxim, they are strengthened 
in it. For while at the beginning the conclusio was urged 
upon them only by premises raised above any proof, so that 
they take for granted sins of Job which were not other- 
wise known to them; now, as they think, Job has himself 
furnished them with proof that he is a sinner who has merited 
such severe suffering. For whoever can speak so thought- 
lessly and passionately, so vexatiously and irreverently, as 
Job has done, is, in their opinion, his own accuser and judge. 
It remains unperceived by them that Job’s mind has lost its 
balance by reason of the fierceness of his temptation, and that 
in it nature and grace have fallen into a wild, confused con- 
flict. In those speeches they see the true state of Job’s spirit 
revealed. What, before his affliction, was the determining 
principle of his inner life, seems to them now to be brought 
to light in the words of the sufferer. Job is a godless 
-one; and if he does affirm his innocence so solemnly and 
strongly, and challenges the decision of God, this assurance 
is only hypocritical, and put on against his better knowledge 
and conscience, in order to disconcert his accusers, and to 
evade their admonitions to repentance. It is nMMY pw, a 
mere stratagem, like that of one who is guilty, who thinks he 
can overthrow the accusations brought against him by assum- 
ing the bold bearing of the accuser. Seb. Schmid counts up 


276 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


quingue vitia, with which Eliphaz in the introduction to his 
speech (ch. xv. 1-13) reproaches Job: vexatious impious words, 
a crafty perversion of the matter, blind assumption of wisdom, 
contempt of the divine word, and defiance against God. Of 
these reproaches the first and last are well-grounded ; Job does _ 
really sin in his language and attitude towards God. With 
respect to the reproach of assumed wisdom, Eliphaz pays Job 
in the same coin; and when he reproaches Job with despis- 
ing the divine consolations and gentle admonitions they have 
addressed to him, we must not blame the friends, since their 
intention is good. If, however, Eliphaz reproaches Job with 
calculating craftiness, and thus regards his affirmation of his 
innocence as a mere artifice, the charge cannot be more 
unjust, and must certainly produce the extremest alienation 
between them. It is indeed hard that Eliphaz regards the 
testimony of Job’s conscience as self-delusion; he goes still 
further, and pronounces it a fine-spun lie, and denies not 
only its objective but also its subjective truth. Thus the 
breach between Job andthe friends widens, the entanglement 
of the controversy becomes more complicated, and the poet 
allows the solution of the enigma to ripen, by its becoming 
increasingly enigmatical and entangled. 

In this second round of the friends’ speeches we meet with 
no new thoughts whatever; only “in the second circle of the 
dispute everything is more fiery than in the first” (Oetinger): 
the only new thing is the harsher and more decided tone of 
their maintenance of the doctrine of punishment, with which 
they confront Job. They cannot go beyond the narrow limits 
of their dogma of retribution, and confine themselves now 
to even the half of that narrowness; for since Job contemns 
the consolations of God with which they have hitherto closed 
their speeches, they now exclusively bring forward the terrible 
and gloomy phase of their dogma in opposition to him. After 
Eliphaz has again given prominence to the universal sinful- 





CHAP. XV. 31-33; ° o7z 


ness of mankind, which Job does not at all deny, he sketches 
from his own experience and the tradition of his ancestors, 
which demands respect by reason of their freedom from all 
foreign influence, with brilliant lines, a picture of the evil- 
doer, who, being tortured by the horrors of an evil conscience, 
is overwhelmed by the wrath of God in the midst of his pro- 
sperity; and his possessions, children, and whole household are 
involved in his ruin. The picture is so drawn, that in it, as 
in a mirror, Job shall behold himself and his fate, both what 
he has already endured and what yet awaits him. 110 is the 
final word of the admonitory conclusion of his speech’: Job 
is to know that that which satisfies his inward nature is a 
fearful lie. | | , 
But what Job affirms of himself as the righteous one, is 
not now». He knows that he is spun xov (ch. xiv. 4), but 
_ he also knows that he is as o¥n py (ch. xii. 4). He is con- 
scious of the righteousness of his endeavour, which rests on 
the groundwork of a mind turned to the God of salvation, 
therefore a believing mind,—a righteousness which is also 
accepted of God. The friends know nothing whatever of 
this righteousness which is available before God. Fateor 
quidem, says Calvin in his Jnstitutiones, iii. 12, in libro Iob 
mentionem fieri justitic, que excelsior est observatione legis ; 
et hane distinctionem tenere opera pretium est, quia etiamsi quis 
leg satisfaceret, ne sic quidem staret ad examen illius justitie, 
que sensus omnes exsuperat. Mercier rightly observes: 
Eliphas perstringit hominis naturam, que tamen per fidem 
pura redditur. In man Eliphaz sees only the life of nature 
and not the life of grace, which, because it is the word of 
God, makes man irreproachable before God. He sees in 
Job only the rough shell, and not the kernel; only the hard 
shell, and not the pearl. We know, however, from the pro- 
logue, that Jehovah acknowledged Job as His servant when 
he decreed suffering for him; and this sufferer, whom the 


278 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


friends regard as one smitten of God, is and remains, as this 
truly evangelical book will show to us, the servant of Jehovah. 


Job’s First Answer.—Chap. xvi. xvii. 
Schema : 10. 10. 5.8.6. 10| 5.6.8.7. 8 


[Then began Job, and said :] 
Ch. xvi. 2 Ihave now heard such things in abundance, 
Troublesome comforters are ye all! 
3 Are windy words now at an end, 
Or what goadeth thee that thou answerest ? 
4 I also would speak like you, 
If only your soul were in my soul's stead. 
I would weave words against you, 
And shake my head at you ; 
5 I would encourage you with my mouth, 
And the solace of my lips should soothe you. 


The speech of Eliphaz, as of the other two, is meant to 
be comforting. It is, however, primarily an accusation; it 
wounds instead of soothing. Of this kind of speech, says 
Job, one has now heard ni39, much, 2.e. (in a pregnant sense) 
amply sufficient, although the word might. signify elliptically 


(Ps. evi. 43; comp. Neh. ix. 28) many times (Jer. fre- 


quenter); multa (as ch. xxiii. 14) is, however, equally suitable, 
and therefore is to be preferred as the more natural. Ver. 2b 
shows how MND is intended; they are altogether ony ‘NID, 
consolatores onerosi (Jer.), such as, instead of alleviating, only 
cause Spy, molestiam (comp. on ch. xiii. 4). In ver. 8a Job 
returns their reproach of being windy, i.e. one without any 
_ purpose and substance, which they brought against him, ch. 
xv. 2 sq.: have windy words an end, or (is vel=O8 in a 
disjunctive question, Ges. § 153, 2; comp. § 155, 2, d) if not, 
what goads thee on toreply? > has been already discussed 


CHAP. XVI. 2—5. 279 


on ch. vi. 25. The Targ. takes it in the sense of von : what 
makes it sweet to thee, etc.; the Jewish interpreters give it, 
without any proof, the signification, to be strong; the LX X. 
transl. wapevoyAyjoes, which is not transparent. Hirz., Ew., 


Schlottm., and others, call in the help of the Arabic aioe 


(Aramaic 79), to be sick, the IV. form of which signifies 
“to make sick,” not “to injure.”* We keep to the primary 
meaning, to pierce, penetrate; Hiph. to goad, bring out, 
lacessere : what incites thee, that (‘3 as ch. vi. 11, quod not 
quum) thou repliest again? The collective thought of what 
follows is not that he also, if they were in his place, could do 
as they have done; that he, however, would not so act (thus 
e.g. Blumenfeld : with reasons for comfort I would overwhelm 
you, and sympathizingly shake my head over you, etc.). This 
rendering is destroyed by the shaking of the head, which is 
never a gesture of pure compassion, but always of malignant 
joy, Sir. xii. 18; or of mockery at another’s fall, Isa. xxxvil. 
22; and misfortune, Ps. xxii. 8, Jer. xviii. 16, Matt. xxvii. 39. 
Hence Mere. considers the antithesis to begin with ver. 5, 
where, however, there is nothing to indicate it : minime id 
facerem, quin potius vos confirmarem ore meo—rather : that 
he also could display the same miserable consolation ; he 
represents to them a change of their respective positions, in 
order that, as in a mirror, they may recognise the hatefulness 
of their conduct. The negative antecedent clause si essem 

1 The primary meaning of ers (root_y«, stringere) is maceratum esse, 


by pressing, rubbing, beating, to be tender, enervated (Germ. dialectic 


and popul. abmaracht); comp. the nearest related Ure, then 3 >, 

Ure, ur, and further, the development of the meaning of morbus 

and werawxie ;—originally and first, of bodily sickness, then also of 

diseased affections and conditions of spirit, as envy, hatred, malice, etc. ; 
- vid. Sur. 2, v. 9, and Beidhawi thereon.—FL. 


280 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


(with 35, according to Ges. § 155, 2, /) is surrounded by 
cohortatives, which (since the interrogative form of interpre- 
tation is inadmissible) signify not only loquerer, but logui 
possem, or rather logui vellem (comp. e.g. Ps. li. 18, dare 
vellem). When he says: I would range together, etc. (Carey: 
I would combine), he gives them to understand that their 
speeches are more artificial than natural, more declamations 
than the outgushings of the heart; instead of Dd, it is 
Dna, since the object of the action is thought of as the 
means, as in ver. 4 WN" {D32, capite meo (for caput meum, Ps. 
xxii, 8), and O52, ver. 10, for O72, comp. Jer. xviii. 16, 
Lam. i. 17, Ges. § 138; Ew. takes 12n7 by comparison of 
the Arabic »*, to know (the IV. form of which, achbara, 
however, signifies to cause to know, announce), in a sense - 
that belongs neither to the Heb. nor to the Arab.: to affect 
wisdom. In ver. 5 the chief stress is upon “ with my mouth,” 
without the heart being there, so also on the word “ my lips,” 
solace (12 dar. Aey., recalling Isa. lvii. 19, oyna’ 23, offspring 
or fruit of the lips) of my lips, z.e. dwelling only on the lips, 
and not coming from the heart. In D338 (Piel, not Hiph.) 
the Ssere is shortened to Chirek (Ges. § 60, rem. 4). Accord- 
ing to ver. 6, D93N9 is to be supplied to 7M. He also could 
offer such superficial condolence without the sympathy which 
places itself in the condition and mood of the sufferer, and 
desires to afford that relief which it cannot. And yet how 
urgently did he need right and effectual consolation! He is 
not able to console himself, as the next strophe says: neither _ 
by words nor by silence is his pain assuaged. 


6 If I speak, my pain is not soothed ; 
And if I forbear, what alleviation do I eaperience ? 
7 Nevertheless now hath He exhausted me ; 
Thou hast desolated all my household, 
8 And Thou filledst me with wrinkles—for a witness was tt, 


CHAP. XVI. 6-9. 281 


And my leanness rose up against me 
Complaining to my face. | 
9 His wrath tore me, and made war upon me ; 
He hath gnashed upon me with His teeth, 
As mine enemy He sharpeneth His eyes against me. 


ON stands with the cohortative in the hypothetical antece- 
dent clause ver. 6a, and in 6 the cohortative stands alone as 
ch. xi. 17, Ps. Ixxiii. 16, exxxix. 8, which is more usual, and 
more in accordance with the meaning which the cohortative 
has in itself, Nigelsbach, § 89, 3. The interrogative, What 
goes fron me? is equivalent to, what (=nothing) of pain 
forsakes me. The subject of the assertion which follows 
(ver. 7) is not the pain—Aben-Ezra thinks even. that this is 
addressed in ver. 76—still less Eliphaz, whom some think, 
particularly on account of the sharp expressions which follow, 
must be understood (vid. on the other hand, p. 133), but God, 
whose wrath Job regards as the cause of his suffering, and 
feels as the most intolerable part of it. A strained connec- 
tion is obtained by taking 38 either in an affirmative sense 
(Ew.: surely), as ch. xviii. 21, or in a restrictive sense: only 
(= entirely) He has now exhausted me (Hirz., Hahn, also 
Schlottm.: only I feel myself oppressed, at least to express 
this), by which interpretation the “Fy, which stands between 
78 and the verb, isin the way. We render it therefore in 
the adversative signification: nevertheless (verum tamen) now 
he seeks neither by speaking to alleviate his pain, nor by 
silence to control himself ; God has placed him in a condition 
in which all his strength is exhausted. He is absolutely 
incapable of offering any resistance to his pain, and care has 
also been taken that no solacing word shall come to him 
from any quarter: Thou hast made all my society desolate 
(Carey : all my clan); 779 of the household, as in ch. xv. 34. 
Jerome: in nihilum redacti sunt omnes artus mei (3x 59, as 


282 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


explained by the Jewish expositors, e.g. Ralbag), as though 
the human organism could be called ™Y. Hahn: Thou 
hast destroyed all my testimony, which must have been ‘N1y 
(from iY, whereas 71), from 33, has a changeable Ssere). 
He means to say that he stands entirely alone, and neither 
sees nor hears anything consolatory, for he does not count his 


wife. He is therefore completely shut up to himself; God — 


has shrivelled him up; and this suffering form to which God 
has reduced him, is become an evidence, 7.e. for himself and 
for others, as the three friends, an accusation de facto, which 
puts him down as a sinner, although his self-consciousness 
testifies the opposite to him. 
Ver. 8. The verb 55? (Aram. D®?), which occurs only once 
beside (ch. xxii. 16), has, like 43 (in Gecatilia’s transl.), the 
primary meaning of binding and grasping firmly (LXX. 
érredadBov, Symm. xatédnoas, Targ. for 12, 7A, lengthened 
to a quadriliteral in 43, cogn. 7'2R), constringere, from 
which the significations comprehendere and corrugare have 
branched off; the signification, to wrinkle (make wrinkled), 
to shrivel up, is the most common, and the reference which 
follows, to his emaciation, and the lines which occur further 
on from the picture of one sick with elephantiasis, show that 
the poet here has this in his mind. Ewald’s conjecture, 
which changes 1°7 into 7%, ch. vi. 2, xxx. 13 = 37, as subject 
to ‘HDpn) (calamity seizes me as a witness), deprives the 
thought contained in “y?, which renders the inferential clause 
mn 4Y? prominent, of much of its force and emphasis. In 
ver. 8be this thought is continued: WN3 signifies here, accord- 
ing to Ps. cix. 24 (which see), a wasting away; the verb- 
group UND, IND, AF, bas, bx, etc., has the primary meaning 


1 On the other hand, pup, ,b3, abscindere, premordere, has no con- 


nection with yp, with which Kimchi and Reiske confuse it. This is 
readily seen from the opposite primary distinction of the two roots, Dp 
and yp, of which the former expresses union, the latter separation. 








CHAP. XVI. 10, 11. 283 


of taking away and decrease: he becomes thin from whom the 
fat begins to fail; to disown is equivalent to holding back 
recognition and admission ; the metaphor, water that deceives 
= dries up, is similar. His wasted, emaciated appearance, 
since God has thus shrivelled him up, came forth against him, 
told him to his face, i.e. accused him not merely behind his 
back, but boldly and directly, as a convicted criminal. God 
has changed himself in relation to him into an enraged 
enemy. Schlottm. wrongly translates: one tears and tortures 
me fiercely; Raschi erroneously understands Satan by “¥. 
In general, it is the wrath of God whence Job thinks his 
suffering proceeds. It was the wrath of God which tore him 
so (like Hos. vi. 1, comp. Amos i. 11), and pursued him hos- 
tilely (as he says with the same word in ch. xxx. 21); God 
has gnashed against him with His teeth; God drew or 
sharpened (Aq., Symm., Theod., d£uvev, WH? like Ps. vii. 13) 
His eyes or looks like swords (Targ. as a sharp knife, PINS, 
opindn) for him, ze. to pierce him through. Observe the aorr. 
interchanging with perf’. and imperff. He describes the final 
calamity which has made him such a piteous form with the 
mark of the criminal. His present suffering is only the con- 
tinuation of the decree of wrath which is gone forth concern- 
ing him. 


10 They have gaped against me with their mouth, 
In contempt they smite my cheeks ; 
They conspire together against me. 

11 God left me to the mercy of the ungodly, 
And cast me into the hands of the evil-doer. 


He does not mean the friends by those who mock and vex 
him with their contemptuous words, but the men around him 
who envied his prosperity and. now rejoice at his misfortune ; 
those to whom his uprightness was a burden, and who now 
consider themselves disencumbered of their liege lord, the 


284 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


over-righteous, censorious, godly man. The perfects here also 
have not a present signification; he depicts his suffering 
according to the change it has wrought since it came upon 
him. The verb Y5 is used with the instrumental Beth instead 
of with the acc., as ch. xxix. 23 (comp. on oYn3, ver. 4): they 
make an opening with their mouth (similar to Ps. xxii. 8, 
they make an opening with the lips, for didueunt labia). 
Smiting on the cheeks is in itself an insult (Lam. iii. 30) ; the 


additional 18773 will therefore refer to insulting words which — 2 
accompany the act. The Hithpa. xbonn, which occurs only — 


here, signifies not only to gather together a Non in general, Isa. 
xxxi. 4, but (after the Arab. tamdlaa ‘ala, to conspire against 
any one’) to complete one’s self, to strengthen one’s self (for 


a like hostile purpose) ; Reiske correctly : sibi invicem mutuam — 


et ausxiliatricem operam contra me simul omnes ferunt.? The 
meaning of my is manifest from ch. xxi. 11; from >Y, to 


suckle, alere (Arab. (Sle med. Wau, whence the inf. “aul, ‘uwil, 
and ‘ijdle), it signifies boys, knaves; and it is as unnecessary 


to suppose two forms, Y and ony, as two meanings, puer and 
pravus, since the language and particularly the book of Job 


1 Wetzstein thinks the signification conspirare for mxdon’ poor in this | 
connection, and prefers to translate: All together they eat themselves full 


upon me, xdonn as reflexive of xy, ch. xxxviii. 89, synon. of yriv9, as 
in ‘the Lovers of Amdsi@,” Ferhhdt, after the death of his beloved, cries 
out: We are not separated! To-morrow (i.e. soon) the All-kind One 
will unite us in paradise, and we shall satisfy ourselves one with another 


Su 
(esl lade uy Wass iy): One would, however, expect *31919 instead 
of by; but perhaps we may refer to the interchange of by soynn, ch. 


xxii. 26, xxvii. 10, with }1 asynn, Isa. Ixvi. 11. 
Bras 


2 The signification to help, which belongs to the I. form Le, proceeds 


from ¥\, to have abundance, to be well off; prop. to be able to furnish 
any one with the means (opes, copias) for anything, and thereby to place 
him in a position to accomplish it. Comp. the Lat. ops, opem ferre, opi- 


tulari, opes, opulentus (¢ Ao 
! 





CHAP. XVI. 12—14. 285 


has céined bay for the latter signification: it signifies in all three 
passages (here and ch. xix. 18, xxi. 11) boys, or the boyish, 
childish, knavish. The Arabic warratta leaves no doubt as to 
the derivation and meaning of ‘07; it signifies to cast down 
to destruction (warttah, a precipice, ruin, danger), and so here 
the fut. Kal °297 for ‘203 (Ges. § 69, rem. 3), precipitem 
me dabat (LXX. éppupe, Symm. évéBare), as the pret. Kal, 
Num. xxii. 32: praeceps = exitiosa est via. The preforma- 
tive Jod has Metheg in correct texts, so. that we need not 
suppose, with Ralbag, a 7°, similar in meaning to 07). 


12 I was at ease, but He hath broken me in pieces ; 
And He hath taken me by the neck and. shaken me to pieces, 
And set me up for a mark for himself. 
13 His arrows whistled about me ; 
He pierced my reins without sparing ; 
He poured out my gall upon the ground. 
14 He brake through me breach upon breach, 
He ran upon me like a mighty warrior. 


He was prosperous and contented, when all at once God 
began to be enraged against him; the intensive form 1278 
(Arab. farfara) signifies to break up entirely, crush, crumble 
in pieces (Hithpo. to become fragile, Isa. xxiv. 19) ; the 


corresponding intensive form /2¥2 (from /'¥8, Arab. V,<3, cogn. 


752), to beat in pieces (Polel of a hammer, Jer. xxiii. 29), to 
dash to pieces: taking him by the neck, God raised him on 
high in order to dash him to the ground with all His might. 
m2 (from 192, rnpeiv, like cxomés from oxérrecOat) is the 
target, as in the similar passage, Lam. iii. 12, distinct from 
yan, ch. vii. 20, object of attack and point of attack: God 
has set me up for a target for himself, in order as it were 
to try what He and His arrows can do. Accordingly ¥27 
(from 327 = 135, 10, jacere) signifies not: His archers | 


286 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


(although this figure would be admissible after ch. x. 17, xix. 
12, and the form after the analogy of 4, ¥, etc., is naturally 
taken as a substantival adj.), but, especially since God appears 
directly as the actor: His arrows (= VN, ch. vi. 4), from 2, 
formed after the analogy of 13, Di), etc., according to which it 
is translated by LX X., Targ., Jer., while most of the Jewish 
expositors, referring to Jer. 1. 29 (where we need not, with 
Bottch., point 0°25, and here 35), interpret by yn “yp. On 
all sides, whichever way he might turn himself, the arrows 
of God flew about him, mercilessly piercing his reins, so that 


his gall-bladder became empty (comp. Lam. ii. 11, and vid. 


Psychol. 8. 268). It is difficult to conceive what is here 
said ;' it is, moreover, not meant to be understood strictly 
according to the sense: the divine arrows, which are only an 
image for divinely decreed sufferings, pressed into his inward 
parts, and wounded the noblest organs of his nature. In ver. 
14 follows another figure. He was as a wall which was 
again and again broken through by the missiles or battering- 
rams of God, and against which He ran after the manner of 
besiegers when storming. 715 is the proper word for such 
breaches and holes in a wall generally; here it is connected as 
obj. with its own verb, according to Ges. § 138, rem. 1. The 
second yp (12 with Kametz) has Ssade minusculum, for some 
reason unknown to us. 

The next strophe says what change took place in his own 
conduct in consequence of this incomprehensible wrathful 
disposition of God which had vented itself on him. 


1 The emptying of the gall takes place if the gall-bladder or any of its 
ducts are torn; but how the gall itself (without assuming some morbid 
condition) can flow outwardly, even with a severe wound, is a difficult 
question, with which only those who have no appreciation of the stand- 
point of imagery and poetry will distress themselves. [On the ‘spilling 


of the gall” or *‘ bursting of the gall-bladder” among the Arabs, as the — 


working of violent and painful emotions, vid. Zeitschr. der deutschen mor- 
genlind. Gesellsch. Bd. xvi. 8. 586, Z. 16 ff.—FL.] 


a 





CHAP, XVI. 15-17. 287 


15 I sewed sackcloth upon my skin, 
And defiled my horn with dust. 

16 My face is exceeding red with weeping, 
And on mine eyelids ts the shadow of death, 

17 Although there is no wrong in my hand, 
And my prayer is pure. 


Coarse-haired cloth is the recognised clothing which the 
deeply sorrowful puts on, iudtiov otevoywpias Kad rrévOous, 
as the Greek expositors remark. Job does not say of it that 
he put it on or slung it round him, but that he sewed it upon 
his naked body ; and this is to be attributed to the hideous 
distortion of the body by elephantiasis, which will not admit 
of the use of the ordinary form of clothes. For the same 
reason he also uses, not “Ny, but "193, which signifies either 
the scurfy scaly surface (as 703 and On in Talmudic of the 
scab of a healing wound, but also occurring e.g. of the be- 
daggled edge of clothes when it has become dry), or svorn- 
fully describes the skin as already almost dead; for the healthy 
skin is called 7iy, 13, on the other hand, Bipoa (LXX.), hide 
(esp. when removed from the body), Talm. e.g. sole-leather. 
We prefer the former interpretation (adopted by Raschi and 
others): The crust in which the terrible Jepra has clothed his 
skin (vid. on ch. vii. 5, xxx: 18, 19, 30) is intended. *7?>¥ in 
ver. 150 is referred by Rosenm., Hirz., Ges., and others (as 
indeed by Saad. and Gecat., who transl. “TI digged into”), to 


boy J<), to enter, penetrate: “I stuck my horn in the dust;” 
: ) >? Mg | 


but this signification of the Hebrew Soy is unknown, it signi- 
fies rather to inflict pain, or scorn (e.g. Lam. iii. 51, mine 
eye causeth pain to my soul), generally with >, here with the 
accusative: I have misused, 7.e. injured or defiled (as the 
Jewish expositors explain), my horn with dust. This is not 
equivalent to my head (as in the Syr. version), but he calls 


288 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


everything that was hitherto his power and pride "32? (LXX., 
Targ.); all this he has together at the same time injured, i.e. 
represented as come to destruction, by covering his head 
with dust and ashes.. 
Ver. 16a. The construction of the Chethib is like 1 Sam. 
iv. 15, of the Keri on the. other hand like Lam. i. 20, ii. 11 
_ (where the same is said of "Y, viscera mea) ; V27'2M is a passive 
intensive form (Ges. § 55, 3), not in the signification: they 


are completely kindled (LXX. cuyxéxavrat, Jer. intumutt, - 
from the 7n, a which signifies to ferment), but: they — 


are red all over (from 727, ,.., whence the Alhambra, as a 
red building, takes its name), reddened, i.e. from weeping; 
and this has so weakened them, that the shadow of death (vid. 
on ch. x. 21 sq.) seems to rest upon his eyelids; they are there- 
fore sad even to the deepest gloom. Thus exceedingly miser- 
able is his state and appearance, although he is no disguised 
hypocrite, who might need to do penance in sackcloth and 
ashes, and shed tears of penitence without any solace. Hirz. 
explains 5Y as a preposition: by the absence of evil in my 


hands; but ver. 17a and 17 are substantival clauses, and 5y is — 
therefore just, like Isa. liii. 9, a conjunction (= 1vs~by). His 


hands are clean from wrong-doing, free from violence and 
oppression; his prayer is pure, pura; as Merc. observes, ex 
puritate cordis et fidei. From the feeling of the strong con- 
trast between his piety and his being’stigmatized as an evil- 


doer by such terrible suffering,—from this extreme contrast 


which has risen now to its highest in his consciousness of 
patient endurance of suffering, the lofty thoughts of the next 
strophe take their rise. } 
18 Oh earth, cover thou not my blood, 
And let my cry find no resting-place ! !— 
19 Even now behold in heaven is my Witness, 
And One who acknowledgeth me is in the heights ! 





CHAP. XVI. 18-22. 289 


20 Though the mockers of me are my friends— 
To Eloah mine eyes pour forth tears, 

21 That He may decide for man against Eloah, 
And for the son of man against his friend. 

22 For the years that may be numbered are coming on, 
And I shall go a way without return. 


Blood that is not covered up cries for vengeance, Ezek. 
xxiv. 7 sq.; so also blood still unavenged is laid bare that it 
may find vengeance, Isa. xxvi. 21. According to this idea, 
in the lofty consciousness of his innocence, Job calls upon the 
earth not to suck in his blood as of one innocently slain, but 
to let it lie bare, thereby showing that it must be first of all 
avenged ere the earth can take it up; and for his cry, i.e. the 
ery (‘NPY to be explained according to Gen. iv. 10) proceed- 
ing from his blood as from his poured-out soul, he desires 
that it may urge its way unhindered and unstilled towards 
heaven without finding a place of rest (Symm. otdous). 
Therefore, in the very God who appears to him to be a blood- 
thirsty enemy in pursuit of him, Job nevertheless hopes to 
find a witness of his innocence: He will acknowledge his 
blood, like that of Abel, to be the blood of an innocent man. 
It is en inward irresistible demand made by his faith which 
here brings together two opposite principles—principles which 
the understanding cannot unite—with bewildering boldness. 
Job believes that God will even finally avenge the blood which 
His wrath has shed, as blood that has been innocently shed. 
This faith, which sends forth beyond death itself the word of 
absolute command contained in ver. 18, in ver. 19 brightens 
and becomes a certain confidence, which draws from the future 


1 As, according to the tradition, it is said to have been impossible to 
remove the stain of the blood of Zachariah the son of Jehoiada, who was 
raurdered in the court of the temple, until it was removed by the destruc- 
tion of the temple itself. 


VOL. I. Tt 


290 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


* into the present that acknowledgment which God afterwards 
makes of him as innocent. The thought of what is unmerited 
in that decree of wrath which delivers him over to death, is 
here forced into the background, and in the front stands only 
the thought of the exaltation of the God in heaven above 
human short-sightednesss, and the thought that no one else 
but He is the final refuge of the oppressed: even now (te. 
this side of death)’ behold in heaven is my witness (730 an 
expression of the actus directus fidet) and my confessor (IY a 


poetic Aramaism, similar in meaning to 19, LX. X.6 cuvicrap — 
.Mov) in the heights. To whom should he flee from the — 


mockery of his friends, who consider his appeal to the testi- 
mony of his conscience as the stratagem of a hypocrite! OID 
from yD, Ps. cxix. 51, my mockers, i.e. those mocking me, 
lascivientes in me (vid. Gesch. der jid. Poesie, 8. 200). The 
short clause, ver. 20a, is, logically at least, like a disjunctive 
clause with ‘> or '3"n}, Ewald, § 362, 5: if his friends mock him 


—to Eloah, who is after all the best of friends, his eyes pour - 


forth tears (nb? stillat, comp. 3 of languishing, Isa, xxxviii. 
14), that He may decide (M3 voluntative in a final significa- 
tion, as ch. ix. 33) for man (> here, as Isa. xi. 4, ii. 4, of the 
client) against (DY, as Ps. lv. 19, xciv. 16, of an opponent) 
Eloah, and for the son of man 6 to be supplied here in a 
similar sense to ver. 21a, comp.-ch. xv. 3) in relation to (? as 
it is used in . . 12, e.g. Ezek. xxxiv. 22) his friend. Job 
longs and hopes for two things from God: (1) that He would 
finally decide in favour of 113, i.e. just himself, the patient 
sufferer, in opposition to God, that therefore God would 
acknowledge that Job is not a criminal, nor his suffering a 
merited punishment; (2) that He would decide in favour of 


1 Comp. 1 Kings xiv. 14, where it is probably to be explained : Jehovah 
shall raise up for himself a king over Israel who shall cut off the house 
of Jeroboam that day, but what ? even now (ny D3), 7c. He hath raised 
him up (+ but no, even now). 





CHAP. XVI. 18-22. 291 


DIN}3, z.c. himself, who is become an Kece homo, in relation 
to his human opponent (797, not collective, but individualizing 
or distributive instead of 1), who regards him as a sinner 
undergoing punishment, and preaches to him'the penitence 
that becomes one who has fallen. m3 is purposely only used 
once, and the expression ver. 210 is contracted in comparison 
with 21a: the one decision includes the other; for when God 
himself destroys the idea of his lot being merited punishment, 
He also at the same time delivers judgment against the 
friends who have zealously defended Him against Job as a 
just judge. ; 

Olsh. approves Ewald’s translation : “ That He allows man 
to be in the right rather than God, and that He judges man 
against his friend ;” but granted even that M3in, like DEY 
followed by an acc., may be used in ‘the signification : to 
grant any one to be in the right (although, with such a 
construction, it everywhere signifies éAéyyeuv), this rendering 
would still not commend itself, on account of the specific 
gravity of the hope which is here struggling through the 
darkness of conflict. Job appeals from God to God; he 
hopes that truth and love will finally decide against wrath. 
The meaning of m217 has reference to the duty of an arbi- 
trator, as in ch. ix. 33. Schlottm. aptly recalls the saying of 
the philosophers, which applies here in a different sense from 
that in which it is meant, nemo contra Deum, nisi Deus ipse. 
In ver. 22 Job now establishes the fact that the heavenly 
witness will not allow him to die a death that he and others 
would regard as the death of a sinner, from the brevity of the 
term of life yet granted him, and the hopelessness of man 
when he is once dead. 5D nis are years of number = few 
years (L.XX. éry dpuOunrta) ; comp. the position of the words 
as they are to be differently understood, ch. xv. 20. On the 
inflexion jecthdju, vid. on ch. xii. 6. Jerome transl. transeunt, 
but Ans cannot signify this in any Semitic dialect. But even 


292 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


that Job (though certainly the course of elephantiasis can 
continue for years) is intended to refer to the prospect of 
some, although few, years of life (Hirz. and others: the few 
years which I can still look forward to, are drawing on), does 
not altogether suit the tragic picture. The approach of the 
years that can be numbered is rather thought of as the 
approach of their end; and the few years are not those which 
still remain, but in general the but short span of life allotted 
to him (Hahn). The arrangement of the words in ver. 226 
also agrees with this, as not having the form of a conclusion 
(then shall I go, etc.), but that of an independent co-ordinate 
clause: and a path, there (whence) I come not back (an 
attributive relative clause according to Ges. § 123, 3, b) I shall 
“go (7>nN poetic, and in order to gain a rhythmical fall at 
the close, for 31>). Now follow, in the next strophe, short 
ejaculatory clauses: as Oetiuger observes, Job chants his 
own requiem while living. 


Ch. xvii. 1 My breath is corrupt, 
My days are extinct, 
The graves are ready for me. 
2 Truly mockery surrounds me, | 
And mine eye shall loiter over their disputings. 


Hirz., Hlgst., and others, wrongly consider the division of 


the chapter here to be incorrect. The thought in ch. xvi. 22 


is really a concluding thought, like ch. x. 20 sqq., vii. 21. 
Then in ch. xvii. 1 another strain is taken up; and as ch. xvi. 
22 is related, as a confirmation, to the request expressed in 


xvi. 19-21, so xvii. 1, 2 are related to that expressed in xvii. 3. | 


The connection with the conclusion of ch. xvi. is none the less 
close: the thoughts move on somewhat crosswise (chiastisch). 
We do not translate with Ewald: “ My spirit is destroyed,” 
because pan (here and Isa. x. 27) signifies not, to be destroyed, 
but, to be corrupted, disturbed, troubled; not the spirit (after 


1 
4 





CHAP. XVII. 1, 2. 293 


cus, usually of disturbance of spirit), but the breath is 
generally meant, which is become short (ch. vil. 15) and > 
offensive (ch. xix. 17), announcing suffocation and decay as 
no longer far distant. In ver. 1b the da yeyp. ‘2912 is 
equivalent to 12973, found elsewhere. In ver. le 03? is used 
as if the dead were called, Arab. ssdéchib el-kubir, grave- 
companions. He is indeed one who is dying, from whom the 
grave is but a step distant, and still the friends promise him 
long life if he will only repent! This is the mockery which 
is with him, 7.e. surrounds him, as he affirms, ver. 2a. A 
secondary verb, 2nn, is formed from the Hiph. ona (of which 
we had the non-syncopated form of the fut. in ch. xiii. 9), the 
Piel of which occurs in 1 Kings xviii. 27 of Elijah’s derision 
of the priests of Baal, and from this is formed the pluralet. 
penn (or, according to another reading, penn, with the same 
doubling of the 5 as in nibnny, deceitful things, Isa. xxx. 10; 
comp. the same thing in ch. xxxiii. 7, ndsox, their lions of 
God = heroes), which has the meaning foolery,—a meaning 
questioned by Hirz. without right,—in which the idea of 
deceit and mockery are united. Gecatilia and Ralbag take 
it as a part.: mockers; Stick., Wolfson, Hahn: deluded; but 
the analogy of pyviyy, ondyn, and the like, speaks in favour 
of taking it as a substantive. xo-px is affirmative (Ges. § 155, 
2, f/). Ewald renders it as expressive of desire: if only not 
(Hgst.: dummodo ne); but this signification (Ew. § 329, d) 
cannot be supported. On the other hand, it might be 
intended interrogatively (as ch. xxx. 25): annon illusiones 
mecum (Rosenm.); but this x5-px, corresponding to the second 
member of a disjunctive question, has no right connection in 
the preceding. We therefore prefer the affirmative meaning, 
and explain it like ch. xxii. 20, xxxi. 36, comp. il. 5. Truly 
what he continually hears, z.e. from the side of the friends, is 
only false and delusive utterances, which consequently sound 
to him like jesting and mockery. ‘The suff. in ver. 26 refers to 


294 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


them. nit7 (with Dag. dirimens, which renders the sound of 
the word more pathetic, as ch. ix. 18,-.Joel i. 17, and in the 
Hiph. form ‘n>, Isa. xxxiii. 1), elsewhere generally (Josh. 
i. 18 only excepted) of rebellion against God, denotes here 
the contradictory, quarrelsome bearing of the friends, not the 
_ dispute in itself (comp. cs,e, III. to attack, VI. to contend 
with another), but coming forward controversially; only to 
this is ‘JY bn suitable. yon must not be taken as —pbon 
here ; Ewald’s translation, “only let not mine eye come 
against their irritation,’ forces upon this verb, which always 
signifies to murmur, yoyyvfew, a meaning foreign to it, and 
one that does not well suit it here. The voluntative form 
bn = pn (here not the pausal form, as Judg. xix. 20, comp. 
2 Sam. xvii. 16) quite accords with the sense: mine eye shall 
linger on their janglings; it shall not look on anything that 
is cheering, but be held fast by this cheerless spectacle, which 
increases his bodily suffering and his inward pain. From 
these comforters, who are. become his adversaries, Job turns — 
in supplication to God. 


3 Lay down now, be bondsman for me with Thyself ; 
Who else should furnish surety to me?! 

4 For Thou hast closed their heart from understanding, 
Therefore wilt Thou not give authority to them. 

5 He who giveth his friends for spoil, 
The eyes of his children shall languish. 

It is unnecessary, with Reiske and Olsh., to read ‘27 
(pone queso arrhalbonem meum=pro me) in order that T°” 
may not stand without an object; now has this meaning 
included in it, and the 22.Y which follows shows that neither 
32 (Ralbag) nor Jt (Carey) is to be supplied; accordingly 
ow here, like gy (g2!,), and in the classics both ribévat 
and ponere, signifies alone the laying down of a pledge. 
Treated by the friends as a criminal justly undergoing 





CHAP. XVII. 3-5. 295 


punishment, he seeks his refuge in God, who has set the 
mark of a horrible disease upon him contrary to his desert, 
as though he were guilty, and implores Him to confirm the 
reality of his innocence in some way or other by laying down 
a pledge for him (t7ro@jnn). The further prayer is 271, a 
word of entreaty which occurs also in Hezekiah’s psalm, Isa. 
xxxviii. 14, and Ps. cxix. 122; 2 seg. acc. signifies, as noted 
on the latter passage, to furnish surety for any one, and gen. 
to take the place of a mediator (comp. also on Heb. vii. 22, 
where éyyvos is a synon. of mecirns). Here, however, the 
significant 7) is added: furnish security for me with Thy- 
self ; elsewhere the form is ay, to furnish security for 
(Proy. vi. 1), or 2B? before, any one, here with OY of the 
person by whom the security is to be accepted. The thought 
already expressed in ch. xvi. 21a receives a still stronger ex- 
pression here: God is conceived of as two persons, on the one 
side as a judge who treats Job as one deserving of punish- 
ment, on the other side as a bondsman who pledges himself 
for the innocence of the sufferer before the judge, and stands 
as it were as surety against the future. In the question, 
ver. 3b, the representation is again somewhat changed: Job 
appears here as the one to whom surety is given. Ypna, 
described by expositors as reciprocal, is rather reflexive: to 
give one’s hand (the only instance of the med. form of 
2 YPM)—to give surety by striking hands, dewxtera data 
sponsionem in se recipere (Hlgst.). And “rd is not to be 
explained after the analogy of the passive, as the usual 5 of 
the agent: who would allow himself to be struck by my 
hand, z.e. who would accept the surety from me (Wolfson), 
which is unnatural both in representation and expression ; 
but it is, according to Prov. vi. 1 (vid. Bertheau), intended of 
the hand of him who receives the stroke of the hand of him 
who gives the pledge. This is therefore the meaning of the 
question: who else (817 'D), if not God himself, should 


296 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


strike (his hand) to my hand, ze. should furnish to me a 
pledge (viz. of my innocence) by joining hands? There is 
none but God alone who can intercede for him, asa guarantee 
of his innocence before himself and others. This negative 
answer : None but Thou alone, is established in ver. 4. God 
has closed the heart of the friends against understanding, 
prop. concealed, z.e. He has fixed a curtain, a wall of partition, 
between their hearts and the right understanding of the 


matter; He has smitten them with: blindness, therefore He. 


will not (since they are suffering from a want of perception 
which He has ordained, and which is consequently known to 


Him) allow them to be exalted, z.e. to conquer and triumph. 


“The exaltation of the friends,’ observes Hirzel rightly, 
“would be, that God should openly justify their assertion of 
Job's guilt.” Lowenthal translates: therefore art thou not 
honoured; but it is not pointed Ob°n=opAnA, but op A, 
whether it be that DMX is to be supplied, or that it is 
equivalent to o92°9m (Ew. § 62, a, who, however, prefers to 
take it as n. Hithpa. like papA in the unimproved significa- 
tion: improvement, since he maintains this affords no right 
idea), according to the analogy of similar verb-forms (ch. 
xxxi. 15, Isa. Ixiv. 6), by a resolving of the two similar 
consonants which occur together. 

The hope thus expressed Job establishes (ver. 5) by a 
principle from general experience, that he who offers his 
friends as spoil for distribution will be punished most severely 
for the same upon his children: he shall not escape the divine 
retribution which visits him, upon his own children, for the 
wrong done to his friends. Almost all modern expositors are 
agreed in this rendering of pone as regards ver. 5a; but pon 
must not be translated “lot” (Ewald), which it never means ; 
it signifies a share of spoil, as e.g. Num. xxxi. 36 (Jerome 
predam), or even with a verbal force : plundering (from pon, 
2 Chron. xxviii. 21), or even in antithesis to entering into bond 





= —— nan es 


CHAP. XVII. 3-5. 297 


for a friend with all that one possesses (Stick., Schlottm.), a 
dividing (of one’s property) —distraining, as a result of the 
surrender to the creditor, to which the verb 73 is appro- 
priate, which would then denote denouncing before a court 
of justice, as Jer. xx. 10, not merely proclaiming openly, as 
Isa. iii. 9. We have translated “ spoil,” which admits of all 
these modifications and excludes none; the general meaning is 
certainly: one deserts (instead of shielding as an intercessor) 
his friends and delivers them*up ; 73? with a general subj., as 
ch. iv. 2 (if any one attempts), xv. 3, xxvii. 23. With respect 
to the other half of the verse, 50, the optative rendering : 
may they languish (Vaih.), to the adoption of which the old 
expositors have been misled by parallels like Ps. cix. 9 sq., 
is to be rejected ; it is contrary to the character of Job (ch. 
xxxi. 30). We agree with Mercerus: Nequaquam hoe per 
imprecationem, sed ut consequentis justissime pane denuncia- 
tionem ab Iobo dictum putamus. For ver. 5b is also not to 
be taken as a circumstantial clause: even if the eyes of his 
children languish (Ew., Hgst., Stick., Hahn, Schl.). It is not 
WI, but OY; and before supposing here a Synallage num. 
so liable to be misunderstood, one must try to get over the 
difficulty without it, which is here easy enough. Hence Job 
is made, in the intended application of the general principle, 
to allude to his own children, and Ewald really considers him 
the father of infant children, which, however, as may be seen 
from the prologue, is nothing but an invention unsupported 
by the history. Since it is 23 and not o722, we refer the 
suff. to the subj. of 9. The Waw of *2'!! Mich. calls Waw 
consecutivum ; it, however, rather combines things that are in- 
separable (certainly as cause and effect, sin and punishment). 
And it is T3, not 137, because the perf. would describe the 
fact as past, while the fut. places us in the midst of this 
faithless conduct. Job says God cannot possibly allow these, 
his three friends, the upper hand. One proclaims his friends 


298 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


as spoil (comp. ch. vi. 27), and the eyes of his children 
languish (comp. ch. xi. 20), z.e. he who so faithlessly disowns 
the claims of affection, is punished for it on that which he 
holds most dear. But this uncharitableness which he expe- 
riences is also a visitation of God. In the next strophe he 
refers all that he meets with from man to Him as the final 


cause, but not without a presage of the purpose for which it 


is designed. 


6 And He hath made me a proverb to the world, 
And I became as one in whose face they spit. 
7 Then mine eye became dim with grief, 
And all my members were like a shadow. 
8 The upright were astonished at it, 
And the innocent is stirred up over the godless ; 
9 Nevertheless the righteous holdeth fast on his way, 
And he that hath clean hands waxeth stronger and stronger. 


Without a question, the subj. of ver. 6a is God. It is the 
same thing whether °%%) is taken as inf. followed by the sub- 
ject in the nominative (Ges. § 133, 2), or as a subst. (LXX. 
OpvrAXnua; Aq., Symm., Theod., mapaB8orjv), like Pin, ch. 


xii. 4, followed by the gen. subjectivus. dvi is the usual word . 


for ridicule, expressed in parables of a satirical character, 
e.g. Joel ii. 17 (according to which, if $2 were intended as 
inf., D'DY ‘abn might have been expected) ; D'SY signifies 
both nations and races, and tribes or people, i.e. members of 
this and that nation, or in gen. of mankind (ch. xii. 2). We 
- have intentionally chosen an ambiguous expression in the 
translation, for what Job says can be meant of a wide range 


of people (comp. on ch. ii. 11 ad fin.), as well as of those in 


the immediate neighbourhood; the friends themselves repre- 
sent different tribes; and a perishable gipsy-like troglodyte 
race, to whom Job is become a derision, is specially described 
further on (ch. xxiv. xxx.). 








| 
: 
: 


“ _ —_a e > 


a or 


ee ae Eee 


~ 


CHAP. XVII. 6-9. 299 


Ver. 60. By MBA (translated by Jer. exemplum, and con- 
sequently mistaken for nw) the older expositors are reminded 
of the name of the place where the sacrifices were offered to 
Moloch in the valley of the sons of Hinnom (whence D373, 
ryéevva, hell), since they explain it by “the fire of hell,” but 
only from want of a right perception ;:the DE? standing with 
it, which nowhere signifies palam, and cannot here (where 
mn, although in the signification éyevouny, follows) signify a 
multo tempore, shows that nan here is to be derived from 53m, 
to spit out (as N53, gum, from #32). This verb certainly cannot 
be supported in Hebr. and Aram. (since pp is the commoner 
word), except two passages in the Talmud (Midda 42a, comp. 
Sabbath 99b, and Chethuboth 616); but it is confirmed by the 
Ethiopic and Coptic and an onomatopoetic origin, as the 
words mrvevv, Wvewv, spuere, Germ. speien, etc., show. Cog- 
nate is the Arabic taffafa, to treat with contempt, and the in- 
terjection tuffan, fie upon thee,” e.g. in the proverb (quoted by 
Umbreit) : ‘aint fihi watuffan ‘aletht, my eye rests om it wish- 
fully, and yet I feel disgust at it. Therefore n> (spitting 
upon the face) is equivalent to n'|2, Num. xii. 14, Deut. 
xxv. 9 (to spit in the face). In consequence of this deep 
debasement of the object of scorn and spitting, the brightness 
and vision of his eye (sense of sight) are become dim (comp. 
Ps. vi. 8, xxxi. 10) YD (always written with &, not D, in 
the book of Job), from grief, and his frames, i.e. bodily frame 
= members (Jer. membra, Targ. incorrectly: features), are 
become like a shadow all of them, as fleshless and powerless 
as a shadow, which is only appearance without substance. 

1 pin is related to the Sanskrit root shttiv, as réyn, rpvxvos, rpvla, and 
the like, to oréyn, orpdxyvos, orpvfw, vid. Kuhn’s Zeitschrift, Bd. iv. Abh. i. 
(the falling away of s before mutes). 

2 Almost all modern expositors repeat the remark here, that this tuffan 
is similar in meaning to paxa, Matt. v. 22, while they might learn from 


Lightfoot that it has nothing to do with p, to spit, but is equivalent to 
NP), neve, 


300 © THE BOOK OF JOB. 


His suffering, his miserable form (nwt), is of such a kind that 
the upright are astonished (09%, to become desolate, silent), 
and the guiltless (like himself and other innocent sufferers) 
become excited (here with vexation as in Ps, xxxvii. 1, as in 
ch. xxxi. 29 with joy) over the godless (who is none the less 
prosperous); but the righteous holds firm (without allowing 
himself to be disconcerted by this anomalous condition of 
things, though impenetrably mysterious) on his way (the way 
of good to which he has pledged himself), and the pure of hands 
(7903 as Prov. xxii. 11, according to another mode of writing 
no with Chateph-Kametz under the » and Gaja under the 1; 
comp. Isa. liv. 9, where the form of writing “325 wmigg’or is 
well authorized) increases (5D, of inward increase, as Eccles. 
i. 18) in strength (/28 only here in the book of Job); i.e. 
far from allowing suffering to draw him from God to the side 
of the godless, he gathers strength thereby only still more 
perseveringly to pursue righteousness of life and purity of 
conduct, since suffering, especially in connection with such 
experiences as Job now has with the three friends, drives him 
to God and makes his communion with Him closer and firmer. 
These words of Job (if we may be allowed the figure) are like 
a rocket which shoots above the tragic darkness of the book, 
lighting it up suddenly, although only for a short time. The 
confession which breaks through in lyric form in Ps. Ixxiii. 
here finds expression of a more brief, sententious kind. The 
point of Eliphaz’ reproach (ch. xy. 4), that Job makes void 
the fear of God, and depreciates communion with God, is 
destroyed by this confession, and the assurance of Satan (ch. 
ii. 5) is confronted by a fact of experience, which, if it should 
also become manifest in the case of Job, puts to shame and 
makes void the hope of the evil spirit. 


10 But only come again all of you! 
I shall not find a wise man among you.— 





CHAP. XVII. 10-12. 301 


11 My days are past, 

My purposes cut off, 

The cherished thoughts of my heart.— 
12 Ye explain night as day, 

Light is near when darkness sets in. 


The truly righteous man, even if in the midst of his afflic- 
tion he should see destruction before him, does not however 
forsake God. But (nevertheless) ye—he exclaims to the 
friends, who promise him a long and prosperous life if he will 
only humble himself as a sinner who is receiving punishment 
~-repeat again and again your hortatory words on penitence ! 
a wise man who might be able to see into my real condition, I 
shall not find among you. He means that they deceive them- 
selves concerning the actual state of the case before them; 
for in reality he is meeting death without being deceived, 
or allowing himself to be deceived, about the matter. His 
appeal is similar to ch. vi. 29. Carey translates correctly : 
Attack me again with another round of arguments, etc. 
Instead of Dow), as it is written everywhere else (generally 
when the speech i is drawing to a close), we find DPN) (as the 
form of writing DON, DDS occurs also in the subst. nows), perh. 
in order to harmonize with Dds, which is here according to 
rule instead of p>)3, which corresponds more to our form of a 
vocative clause, just as in 1 Kings xxii. 28, Mic. i. 2 (Ewald, 
§ 327, a)... In 382133 the jussive and imper. (for the 
Chethib \%2, which occurs in some Codd. and editions, is 
meaningless) are united, the former being occasioned by the 
arrangement of the words, which is unfavourable to the 
imper. (comp. Ew. § 229); moreover, the first verb gives the 
adverbial notion dterum, denuo to the second, according to 


Ges. § 142, 3, a. 


1 Comp. my Anekdota zur Gesch. der mittelalterlichen Scholastik unter 
Juden und Moslemen (1841), 8. 380. 


302 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


What follows, ver. 11, is the confirmation of the fact that 
there is no wise man among them who might be able to give 
him efficient solace by a right estimate of the magnitude and 
undeservedness of his suffering. His life is indeed run out; 
and the most cherished plans and hopes which he had hedged 
in and fostered for the future in his heart, he has utterly and 
long since given up. The plur. (occurring only here) of 72, 
which occurs also sensu malo, signifies projects, as non, ch. 


xxi. 27, xlii. 2; from Dnt, to tie ; Aben-Ezra refers to the Arab.. 


zamam (a thread, band, esp. a rein). These plans which are 


now become useless, these cherished thoughts, he calls °¥i9, 


peculia (from wn’, to take possession of) of his heart. Thus, 
after Obad. ver. 17, Gecatilia (in Aben-Ezra) also explains, 
while, according to Ewald, Beitrdge, S. 98, he understands the 
heart-strings, 7.e. the trunks of the arteries (for thus is bls 


to be explained), and consequently, as Ewald himself, and 


even Farisol, most improbably combines Yi with nip (N}). 
Similarly the LX X. ra dpOpa rijs xapdias, as though the 


"+ 
4 ee 


joints (instead of the valves) of the heart were intended; ~ 


probably with Middeldorpf, after the Syriac Hexapla, axpa 


is to be read instead of &p@pa; this, however, rests upon a — 


mistaking of ‘wy for wx. While he is now almost dead, 
and his life-plans of the future are torn away (PA), the 
friends turn night into day (n'Y, as Isa. v. 20); light is (we. 
according to their opinion) nearer than the face of darkness, 
i.e. than the darkness which is in reality turned to him, and 
which is as though it stared at him from the immediate 
future. Thus Nolde explains it as comparative, but connect- 
ing ver. 124 with 1", and considering 25 (which is impos- 
sible by this compar. rendering) as meaningless : lucem magis 
propinquam quam tenebras. It is however possible that ‘351 is 
used the same as in ch. xxiii. 17: light is, as they think, near 
before darkness, 7.e. while darkness sets in (ingruentibus tene- 
bris), according to which we have translated. If we under- 


CHAP. XVII. 13-16. 303 


stand ver. 126 from Job’s standpoint, and not from that of 
the friends, j 2p is to be’explained according to the Arab. 
ue W15, prope abest ab, as the LX-X. even translates: pas 
éyyos ard Tpoc@ov oxdTovs, which Olympiodorus interprets 
by ov paxpay oxdtovs. But by this rendering 3) makes the 
expression, which really needs investigation, only still lamer. 
Renderings, however, like Renan’s Ah! votre lumiére res- 
semble aux tenebres, are removed from all. criticism. The 
subjective rendering, by which ver. 126 is under the govern- 
ment of 1%, is after all the most natural. That he has 
darkness before him, while the friends present to him the 
approach of. light on condition of penitence, is the thought 
that is developed in the next strophe. 


13 If I hope, it is for Sheol as my house, 
In darkness I make my bed. 
14 Lery to corruption: Thou art my father !— 
To the worm: Thou art my mother and sister ! 
15 Where now therefore is my hope? 
And my hope, who seeth it ? 
16 To the bars of Sheél it descends, 
When at the same time there is rest in the dust. 


All modern expositors transl.: If I hope (wait) for Shedl as 
my house, etc., since they regard vers. 13 sq. as a hypothetical 
antecedent clause to ver. 15, consisting of four members, 
where the conclusion should begin with 8), and should be 
indicated by Waw apodosis. There is no objection to this 
explanation so far as the syntax is concerned, but there will 
then be weighty thoughts which are also expressed in the 
form of fresh thoughts, for which independent clauses seem 
more appropriate, under the government of O§, as if they 
were presuppositions. The transition from the preceding 
strophe to this becomes also easier, if we take vers. 13 sq. 
as independent clauses from which, in ver. 15, an inference is 


304 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


drawn, with Waw indicative of the train of thought (Ew. 
§ 348). Accordingly, we regard’ mpx7DN in ver. 13 as ante- 
cedent (denoted by Dechi, i.e. Tiphcha anterius, just as Ps. 
exxxix. 8a) and ‘m2 Swe as conclusion; the Waw apod. is 
wanting, as e.g. ch. ix. 27 sq., and the structure of the sentence 
is similar to ch. ix. 19. If I hope, says Job, “ Shedél is my 
house” = this is the substance of my hope, that Shedl will be 
my house. In darkness he has (7.e. in his consciousness, which 
anticipates that which is before him’as near and inevitable) 
fixed his resting-place (poet. strata, as Ps. cxxxii. 3). To cor- 
ruption and the worm he already cries, father! and, mother! 
sister! It is, as it seems, that bold figure which is indicated 
in the Job-like Ps. Ixxxviii. 19 (“my acquaintances are the 
realms of darkness”), which is here (comp. ch. xxx. 29) worked ° 
out; and, differently applied, perhaps Prov. vii. 4 echoes it. 
Since the fem. i is used as the object addressed by ‘os and — 
‘minx, which is besides, on account of its always collective 
meaning (in distinction from ny>in), well suited for this double 
apostrophe, we may assume that the poet will have used a 
masc. object for ‘3%; and there is really no reason against 
nnv here being, with Ramban, Rosenm., Schlottm., Béttcher 
(de inferis, § 179), derived not from MW (as nM), ver. 16d, 
from mm), but from NN’ (as nM, Isa. xxx. 30, from nn), 
especially since the old versions transl. nnv also elsewhere 
SiapOopa (putredo), and thereby prove that both derivations 
accord with the structure of the language. Now already 
conscious of his belonging to corruption and the worm as by 
the closest ties of relationship, he asks: Jiaqgue ubi tandem 
spes mea ? 

The accentuation connects ‘58 to the following word, in- 
stead of uniting it with 78, just as in Isa. xix. 12; Luzzatto 
(on Isa. xix. 12) considers this as a mistake in the Codd., 
and certainly the accentuation Judg. ix. 38 (7'* Kadma, SDS 
Mercha) is not according to our model, and even in this 





CHAP. XVII. 13-16. 305 


passage another arrangement of the accents is found, e.g. in 
the edition of Brescia." No other hope, in Job’s opinion, 
but speedy death is before him; no human eye is capable of 
seeing, z.e. of discovering (so e.g. Hahn), any other hope than 
just this. Somewhat differently Hirz. and others: and my 
hope, viz. of my recovery, who will it see in process of fulfil- 
ment? Certainly ‘mpn is in both instances equivalent to a 
hope which he dared to harbour; and the meaning is, that 
beside the one hope which he has; and which is a hope only 
per antiphrasin, there is no room for another hope; there is 
none such (ver. 15a), and no one will attain a sight of such, 
be it visible in the distance or experienced as near at hand 
(ver. 15). The subj. of ver. 16a is not the hope of recovery 
which the friends present to him (so e.g. Ew.), but his only 
real hope: this, avoiding human ken, descends to the lower 
world, for it is the hope of death, and consequently the death 
of hope. “13 signifies bars, bolts, which Hahn denies, although 
he says himself that 02 signifies beams of wood among other 
things; “bolts” is not here intended to imply such as are 
now used in locks, but the cross bars and beams of wood of 
any size that serve as a fastening to a door; vectis in exactly 
the same manner combines the meanings, a carrying-pole and 
a bar, in which signification 72 is the synon. of ma? The 
meanings assigned to the word, wastes (Schnurrer and others), 
bounds (Hahn), clefts (Béttch.), and the like, are fanciful 
and superfluous. On 2715, instead of 137, vid. Caspari on 
Obad. ver. 13, Ges. § 47, rem. 3. It is sing., not plur, 


1 This accentuates 7°} with Munach, \px with Munach, which accords 
with the matter, instead of which, according to Luzz., since the Athnach- 
word 'n)pn consists of three syllables, it should be more correctly accen- 
tuated Fx) with Munach, \px with Dechi. Both, also Munach Munach, 
are admissible ; vid. Bar, Thorath Emeth, 8. 43, § 7, comp. S. 71, not. 

2 Accordingly we also explain Hos. xi. 6 after Lam. ii. 9, and transl. : 
The sword moveth round in his (Ephraim’s) cities, and destroyeth his 
(Ephraim’s) bars (i.e. the bars of his gates), and devoureth round about, 
because of their counsels. 


VOL. I. U 


306 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


(Béttch.), for ver. 15 does not speak of two hopes, not even 
if, as it seems according to the ancient versions, another 
word of cognate meaning had stood in the place of the 
second ‘mpn originally. His hope goes down to the regions 
of the dead, when altogether there is rest in the dust. This 
“together, 17,” Hahn explains: to me and it, to this hope; 
but that would be pursuing the figure to an inadmissible 
length, extending far beyond ch. xx. 11, and must then be 
expressed 7M! 12>. Others (e.g. Hirz., Ew.) explain: if at the 
same time, %.e. simultaneously with this descent of my hope, 
there is rest to me in the dust. Considering the use of 7M) in 
itself, it might be explained: if altogether [entirely] there is 
rest in the dust; but this meaning integer, totus quantus, the 
word has elsewhere always in connection with a subj. or obj. 
to which it is referable, eg. ch. x. 8, Ps. xxxiii. 15; and, 
moreover, it may be rendered also in the like passages by 
“all together,” as ch. ili, 18, xxi. 26, xl. 13, instead of 
“altogether, entirely.” Since, on the other hand, the signi- 
fication “at the same time” can at least with probability be 
supported by Ps. exli. 10, and since Dx, which is certainly used 
temporally, brings cotemporary things together, we prefer 
the translation: “ when at the same time in the dust there is 
rest.” The descent of his hope to the bars of Hades is at the 
same time his own, who hopes for nothing but this. When 
the death of his hope becomes a reality, then at the same 
time his turmoil of suffering will pass over to the rest of the 
grave. 

As from the first speech of Eliphaz, so also from this first 
speech of Job, it may be seen that the controversy takes a 
fresh turn, which brings it nearer to the maturity of decision. 
From Eliphaz’ speech Job has seen that no assertion of his 
innocence can avail to convince the friends, and that the more 
strongly he maintains his innocence, even before God, he 
only confirms them in the opinion that he is suffering the 


CHAP. XVII. 18-16. 307 


punishment of his godlessness, which now comes to light, like 
a wrong that has been hitherto concealed. Job thus perceives 
that he is incapable of convincing the friends; for whatever 
he may say only tends to confirm them in the false judgment, 
which they first of all inferred from their false premises, but 
now from his own words and conduct. He is accounted by 
them as one who is punished of God, whom they address as 
the preachers of repentance ; now, however, they address him 
so that the chief point of their sermon is no longer bright 
promises descriptive of the glorious future of the penitent, 
but fearful descriptions of the desolating judgment which 
comes upon the impenitent sinner. This zealous solicitude 
for his welfare seems to be clever and to the point, according 
to their view ; it is, however, only « vexatious method of treat- 
ing their friend’s case; it is only roughly and superficially 
moulded according to the order of redemption, but without 
an insight into the spiritual experience and condition of him 
with whom they have here fo do. Their prudentia pastoralis 
is carnal and legal; they know nothing of a righteousness 
which avails before God, and nothing of a state of grace 
which frees from the divine vengeance; they know not how 
to deal with one who is passing through the fierce conflict 
of temptation, and understand not the mystery of the cross. 
Can we wonder, then, that Job is compelled to regard their 
words as nothing more than ny 25, as they regarded his? 
In the words of Job they miss their certainly compact dogma, 
in which they believe they possess the philosopher’s stone, by 
means of which all earthly suffering is to be changed into 
earthly prosperity. Job, however, can find nothing in their 
words that reminds him of anything he ought to know in his 
present position, or that teaches him anything respecting it. 
He is compelled to regard them as 5»y ‘onan, who make the 
burden of his suffering only more grievous, instead of lighten- 
ing it for him. For their consolation rests upon an unjust 


308 THE BOOK OF JOB, 


judgment of himself, against which his moral consciousness 
rebels, and upon a one-sided notion of God, which is contra- 
dicted by his experience. Their speeches exhibit skill as to 
their form, but the sympathy of the heart is wanting. Instead 
of plunging with Job into the profound mystery of God’s 
providence, which appoints such a hard lot for the righteous 
man to endure, they shake their heads, and think: What a 


great sinner Job must be, that God should visit him with so’ 


severe a punishment! It is the same shaking of the head of 
which David complains Ps. xxii. 8 and cix. 25, and which 


the incomparably righteous One experienced from those who 


passed by His cross, Matt. xxvii. 39, Mark xv. 29. These 
comparisons give us the opportunity of noting the remarkable 
coincidence of these pictures of suffering, in outline and 
expression; the agreement of Job xvi. 8 with Ps, cix. 24, 
comp. cix. 23 with Job xvii. 7, puts it beyond a doubt, that 
there is a mutual relation between Job xvi. 4 and Ps. cix. 25 
which is not merely accidental. 

By such unjust and uncharitable treatment from the 
friends, Job’s sufferings stand forth before him in increased 
magnitude. He exceeds himself in the most terrible figures, 
in order to depict the sudden change which the divine dispen- 
sation of suffering has brought upon him. ‘The figures are 
so terrible, for Job sees behind his sufferings a hostile hideous 
God as their author; they are the outburst of His anger, His 
quivering looks, His piercing darts, His shattering missiles, 
His sufferings are a witness de facto against him, the sufferer; 
but they are this not merely in themselves, but also in the 
eyes of the people around him. To the sufferings which he 
has directly to endure in body and soul there is added, as it 
were, as their other equally painful part, misconstruction and 


scorn, which he has to suffer from without. Not only does: 


he experience the wrath of God contrary to the testimony to 
his righteousness which his consciousness gives him, but also 


CHAP, XVII. 13—16. 309 


the scoff of the ungodly, who now deridingly triumph over 
him. Therefore he clothes himself in mourning, and lies with 
his former majesty in the dust; his face is red with weeping, 
and his eyes are become almost blind, although there is no 
wrong in his hand, and his prayer is free from hypocrisy. 
Who does not here think of the servant of Jehovah, of 
whom Isaiah, ch. liii. 9 (in similar words to those which Job 
uses of himself, ch. xvi. 16), says, that he is buried among the 
godless Yp2 mo Ndi ny pone-nd Sy? All that Job says here 
of the scorn that he has to endure by being regarded as one 
who is punished of God and tormented, agrees exactly with 
the description of the sufferings of the servant of Jehovah 
in the Psalms and the second part of Isaiah. Job says: they 
gape at me with their mouth ; and in Ps. xxii. 8 (comp. xxxyv. 
21) it is: all they that see me laugh me to scorn, they open 
wide the lips, they shake the head. Job says: they smite my 
cheeks in contempt; and the servant of Jehovah, Isa. 1. 6, is 
compelled to confess: I gave my back to the smiters, and my 
cheeks to them that pluck off the hair; I hid not my face 
from shame and spitting. Like Job, the servant of Jehovah 
in the Psalms and in Isaiah I. is delivered over into the hands | 
of the unrighteous, and reckoned among evil-doers, although he 
is the servant of Jehovah, and knows himself to be Jehovah’s 
servant. ‘he same hope that he expresses in Isa. ]. 8 sq. in 
the words: he is near who justifieth me, who will condemn 
me !—the same hope in Job breaks through the night of con- 
flict, with which his direct and indirect suffering has sur- 
rounded him. 

Just when Job becomes conscious of his doubled affliction 
in all its heaviness, when he feels himself equally rejected of 
men as of God, must this hope break forth. For there is 
only a twofold possibility for a man who thinks God has 
become his enemy, and that he has not a friend among men: 
either he sinks into the abyss of despair ; or if faith still exists, 


310 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


he struggles upwards through his desertion by God and man 
to the love that lies deep in the heart of God, which in 
spite of hostile manifestation cannot abandon the righteous. 
Whither shall Job turn when God seems to him as an 


enemy, and when he nevertheless will not renounce God? 


He can only turn from the hostile God to the God who is 
differently disposed towards him, and that is equivalent to 
saying from the imaginary to the real God, to whom faith 
clings throughout every outward manifestation of wrath and 
wrathful feeling.’ Since both, however, is one God, who only 
seems to be other than He is, that bold grasp of faith is the 
exchange of the phantom-god of the conflict of temptation 
for the true God. Faith, which in its essence is a perception 
capable of taking root, seizes the real existence behind the 
appearance, the heart behind the countenance, that which 
remains the same behind the change, and defies a thousand 
contradictions with the saintly Nevertheless: God nevertheless 
does not belie himself. 

Job challenges the earth not to hide his blood; unceasingly 
without restraint shall the cry of his blood rise up. What he 
says in ch. xvi. 18 is to be taken not so much as the expres- 
sion of a desire as of a demand, and better still as a command ; 
for even in case he should succumb to his sufferings, and 
consequently in the eyes of men die the death of a sinner, 
his clear consciousness of innocence does not allow him to 
renounce his claim to a public declaration that he has died 
guiltless. But to whom shall the blood of the slain ery out? 
To whom else but God; and yet it is God who has slain him? 
We see distinctly here how Job’s idea of God is lighted up 
by the prospect of a decisive trial of his cause. The God 
who abandons Job to death as guilty, and the God who 


' Compare the prayer of Juda ha-Levi, pox dD MIS (eM Oye 


Sie), in Kimpf's Nichtandalusische Poesien andalusischer Dichter 
(1858), ii. 206. 


ee — —_——— 


CHAP. XVII, 13-16. 311 


cannot (and though it should be even after death) leave him 
unvindicated, come forth distinct and separate as darkness from 
light from the chaos of the conflict of temptation. Since, 
however, the thought of a vindication after death for Job, 
which knows only of a seeming life after death, according to 
the notion that rules him, and which is here not yet broken 
through, is only the extreme demanded by his moral con- 
sciousness, he is compelled to believe in a vindication in this 
world ; and he expresses this faith (ch. xvi. 19) in these words : 
“Even now, behold, my Witness is in heaven, and One who 
acknowledgeth me is in the heights.” He pours forth tears to 
this God that He would decide between God and him, between 
his friends and him. He longs for this decision now, for he 
will now soon be gone beyond return. Thus Job becomes 
here the prophet of the issue of his own course of suffering ; 
and over his relation to Eloah and to the friends, of whom 
the former abandons him to the sinner’s death, and the latter 
declare him to be guilty, hovers the form of the God of the 
future, which now breaks through the darkness, from whom 
Job believingly awaits and implores what the God of the 
present withholds from him." 

What Job (ch. xvi. 20 sq.), by reason of that confident 
“ Behold, my Witness is in heaven,” had expressed as the end 
‘of his longing,—that God would vindicate him both before 
Himself, and before the friends and the world,—urges him 
onward, when he reflects upon his twofold afiliction, that he 
is sick unto death and one who is misjudged even to mockery, 
to the importunate request: Lay down now (a pledge), be 
surety for me with Thyself; for who else should ‘strike his 
hand into mine, 7.e. in order to become bondsman to me, that 


i Ewald very truly says: ‘‘ This is the true turn of the human con- 
troversy, which is favoured by the whole course of Job’s life, that he, 
though in the present utterly despairing of all, even God, still holds fast 
to the eternal hidden God of the future, and with this faith rises won- 
drously, when to all human appearance it seemed that he must succumb.” 


312 THE BOOK OF JOB, 


Thou dost not regard me as an unrighteous person? The 
friends are far from furnishing a guarantee of this ;-for they, 
on the contrary, are desirous of persuading him, that, if he 
would only let his conscience speak, he must regard himself 
as an unrighteous one, and that he is regarded as such by 
God. Therefore God cannot give them the victory; on the 
contrary, he who so uncompassionately abandons his friends, 
must on his own children experience similar suffering to that 
which he made heavier for his friend, instead of making it 
lighter to him. The three have no insight into the affliction 
of the righteous one; they dispose of him mercilessly, as of 
spoil or property that has fallen into the hands of the credi- 
tor; therefore he cannot hope to obtain justice unless God 
become surety for him with himself,—a thought so extraordi- 
nary and bold, that one cannot wonder that the old expositors 
were misled by it: God was in Christ, and reconciled the 
world with Himself, 2 Cor. v. 19. The God of holy love 
has reconciled the world with himself, the God of righteous 
anger, as Job here prays that the God of truth may become 
surety for him with the God of absolute sovereignty. 


When Job then complains of the misconstruction of his 


character, and tracing it to God, says: He hath made me 
pny rwind, one is reminded, in connection with this extrava- 
gant expression, of complaints of a like tone in the mouth of 
the true people of Israel, Ps. xliv. 15, and of the great suf- 
ferer, Ps. Ixix. 12. When we further read, that, according 
to Job’s affirmation, the godly are scared at his affliction, 
the parallel Isa. ii. 14 forces itself upon us, where. it is said 
of the servant of Jehovah, “ How were many astonied at 
thee.” And when, with reference to himself, Job says that 
the suffering of the righteous must at length prove a gain to 
him that hath clean hands, who does not call to mind the fact 
that the glorious issue of the suffering of the servant of 
Jehovah which the Old Testament evangelist sets before us, 


CHAP. XVII. 13-16. 313 


—that servant of Jehovah who, once himself a prey to oppres- 
sion and mocking, now divides the spoil among the mighty,— 
tends to the reviving, strengthening, and exaltation of Israel? 
All these parallels cannot and are not intended to prove that 
_ the book of Job is an allegorical poem; but they prove that 
the book of Job stands in the closest connection, both retro- 
spective and prospective, with the literature of Israel; that 
the poet, by the relation to the passion-psalms stamped on 
the picture of the affliction of Job, has marked Job, whether 
consciously or unconsciously, as a typical person; that, by 
taking up, probably not unintentionally, many national traits, 
he has made it natural to interpret Job as a Mashal of 
Israel ; and that Isaiah himself confirms this typical relation, 
by borrowing some Job-like expressions in the figure of the 
mm Ty, who is a personification of the true Israel. The book 
of Job has proved itself a mirror of consolation for the 
people, faithful to God, who had cause to complain, as in 
Ps. xliv., and a mirror of warning to their scoffers and 
persecutors, who had neither true sympathy with the miser- 
able state of God’s people, nor a true perception of God’s 
dealings. At the same time, however, Job appears in the 
light which the New Testament history, by the fulfilment of 
the prophecies of suffering in the Psalms, Isaiah, and also 
Zechariah, throws upon him, as atype of Him who suffers in 
like manner, in order that Satan may have his deserts, and 
thereby be confounded; who also has an affliction to bear 
which in itself has the nature and form of wrath, but has 
its motive and end inthe love of God; who is just so mis- 
judged and scorned of men, in order at length to be exalted, 
and to enter in as intercessor for those who despised and re- 
jected Him. At the same time, it must not be forgotten that 
there remains an infinite distance between the type and anti- 
type, which, however, must bein the very nature of a type, and 
does not annul the typical relation, which exists only exceptis 


314 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


excipiendis. Who could fail to recognise the involuntary 
picture of the three friends in the penitent ones of Isa. liii., 
who esteemed the servant of Jehovah as one smitten of God, 
for whom, however, at last His sacrifice and intercession avail? 

Job at last considers his friends as devoid of wisdom, be- 
cause they try to comfort him with the nearness of light, 
while darkness is before him; because they give him the 
hope of a bodily restoration, while he has nothing to expect 
but death, and earnestly longs for the rest of death. It is 
surprising that the speech of Job plunges again into complete 
hopelessness, after he has risen to the prospect of being vindi- 
cated in this life. He certainly does not again put forth that 
prospect, but he does not even venture to hope that it can be 
realized by a blessing in this life after a seeming curse. It is 
in this hopelessness that the true greatness of Job’s faith be- 
comes manifest. He meets death, and to every appearance 
is overwhelmed by death, as a sinner, while he is still con- 
scious that he is righteous. Is it not faith in and fidelity to 
God, then, that, without praying for recovery, he is satisfied 
with this one thing, that God acknowledges him? The 
promises of the friends ought to have rested on a different 
foundation, if he was to have the joy of appropriating them 
to himself. He feels himself to be inevitably given up as a 
prey to death, and as from the depth of Hades, into which he 
is sinking, he stretches out his hands to God, not that He 
would sustain him in life, but that He would acknowledge 
him before the world as His. If he is to die even, he desires 
only that he may not die the death of a criminal. And is 
this intended at the same time for the rescue of his honour? 
No, after all, for the honour of God, who cannot possibly 
destroy as an evil-doer one who is in everything faithful to 
Him. When, then, the issue of the history is that God 
acknowledges Job as His servant, and after he is proved and 
refined by the temptation, preserves to him a doubly rich and 


CHAP. XVIII. 2, 3. 315 


prosperous life, Job receives beyond his prayer and compre- 
hension ; and after he has learned from his own experience 
that God brings to Hades and out again, he has for ever con- 
quered all fear of death, and the germs of a hope of a future 
life, which in the midst of his affliction have broken through 
his consciousness, can joyously expand. For Job appears to 
himself as one who is risen from the dead, and is a pledge to 
himself of the resurrection from the dead. 


Bildads Second Speech.—Chap. xviii. 


Schema: 4. 9. 8. 8. 8. 4. 


[Then began Bildad the Shuhite, and said :] 

2 How long will ye hunt for words ? ! 
Attend, and afterwards we will speak.. 

3 Wherefore are we accounted as beasts, 
And narrow-minded in your eyes? 


Job’s speeches are long, and certainly are a trial of patience 
to the three, and the heaviest trial to Bildad, whose turn 
now comes on, because he is at pains throughout to be brief. 
Hence the reproach of endless babbling with which he begins 
here, as at ch. viii. 2, when he at last has an opportunity of 
speaking ; in connection with which it must, however, not be 
forgotten that Job also, ch. xvi. 3, satirically calls upon them 
to cease. He is indeed more entitled than his opponents to the 
entreaty not to weary him with long speeches. ‘The question, 
ver. 2a, if ‘82? is derived from /’?, furnishes no sense, unless 
perhaps it is, with Ralbag, explained : how long do you make 
close upon close in order, when you seem to have come to an 
end, to begin continually anew? For to give the thought : 
how long do you make no end of speaking, it must have been 
sib MNTW, as the LXX. (uéyps tivos od maton ;) involun- 
tarily inserts the negative. And what should the plur. mean | 


316 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


by this rendering? The form ‘33? = ‘8? would not cause 
doubt; for though O°? does not occur elsewhere in the Old 
Testament, it is nevertheless sufficient that it is good Ara- 
maic (}SP), and that another Hebr. plural, as "¥P, “¥P, Nip, 
would have been hardly in accordance with the usage of 
the language. But the plural would not be suitable here 
generally, the over-delicate explanation of Ralbag perhaps 
excepted. Since the book of Job abounds in Arabisms, and 


Pt F 
in Arabic Y2s3 (as synon. of ole) signifies venari, venando 
Svr Greer : 


capere, and (23 (L<Aic) cassis, rete venatorium; since, further, 
Ds2P DY (comp. WK OY, Jer. ix. 7) is an incontrovertible 
reading, and all the difficulties in connection with the refer- 
ence to /? lying in the myN“y for xbmoxcmy and in the plur. 
vanish, we translate with Castell., Schultens, J. D. Mich., and 
most modern expositors: how long (here not different from ch. 
vill. 2, xix. 2) will ye lay snares (construction, as also by the 


other rendering, like ch. xxiv. 5, xxxvi. 16, according to Ges. 


§ 116, 1) for words; which, however, is not equivalent. to 
hunt for words in order to contradict, but in order to talk on 
continually. Job is the person addressed, for Bildad agrees 
with the two others. It is remarkable, however, that he 
addresses Job with “you.” Some say that he thinks of Job 
as one of a number; Ewald observes that the controversy 


becomes more wide and general; and Schlottm. conjectures — 


that Bildad fixes his eye on individuals of his hearers, on 
whose countenances he believed he saw a certain inclination 
to side with Job. This conjecture we will leave to itself; but 
the remark which Schlottm. also makes, that Bildad regards 


* In post-bibl. Hebrew, oy3p has become common in the signification, 
proofs, arguments, as ¢.g. a Karaitic poet says, ‘Myo 'pn Dy3pa qow 1)", 
the oneness of thy name have I upheld with proofs; vid. Pinsker, Likute 
Kadmoniot. Zur Gesch. des Karaismus und der karédiischen Literatur, 
1860, 8. pp. a 


} 
| 
4 





CHAP, XVIII. 2, 3. na 317 


Job as a type of a whole class, is correct, only one must also 
add, this address in the plur. is a reply to Job’s sarcasm by a 
similar one. As Job has told the friends that they act as if 
they were mankind in general, and all wisdom were concen- 
trated in them, so Bildad has taken it amiss that Job connects 
himself with the whole of the truly upright, righteous, and 
pure; and he addresses him in the plural, because he, the 
unit, has puffed himself up as such a collective whole. _ This 
wrangler—he means—with such a train behind him, cannot 
accomplish anything: Oh that you would understand (39, 
as ¢.g. ch. xlii. 3, not causative, as vi. 24), ae. come to your 
senses, and afterward we will speak, ze. it is only then 
possible to walk in the way of understanding. That is not 
now possible, when he, as one who plays the part of their 
many, treats. them, the three who are agreed in opposition to 
him, as totally void of understanding, and each one of them 
unwise, in expressions like ch. xvii. 4,10. Looking to Ps. 
xlix. 13, 21, one might be tempted to regard D2 (on the 
vowel 7 instead of é, vid. Ges. § 75, rem. 7) as an interchange 
of consonants from 12273: be silent, make an end, ye projli- 
gati; but the supposition of this interchange of consonants 
would be arbitrary. On the other hand, there is no suitable 
thought in “ why are we accounted unclean?” (Vulg. sordui- 
mus), from Mi = N20, Lev. xi. 43 (Ges. § 75, vi.) ; the com- 
plaint would have no right connection, except it were a very 
slight one, with ch. xvii. 9. On the contrary, if we suppose 
a verb 728 in the signification opplere, obturare, which is 
peculiar to this consonant-combination in the whole range of 

the Semitic languages (comp. DOS, ell; obstruere, Aram. 


diy, oot, Arab. ob, e.g. Talm.: transgression stoppeth up, 


nova, man’s heart), and after which this nny has been 
explained by the Jewish expositors (Raschi: Don i3vnN), 
and is interpreted by ond (Parchon: ‘nyt AnD), we gain a 


318 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


sense which corresponds both with previous reproaches of . 
Job and the parallelism, and we decide in its favour with 
the majority of modern expositors. With the interrogative — 
Wherefore, Bildad appeals to Job’s conscience. These in- 
vectives proceed from an impassioned self-delusion towards 
the truth, which he wards off from himself, but cannot how- 
ever alter. 


4 Thou art he who teareth himself in his anger: 
Shall the earth become desolate for thy sake, 
And a rock remove from its place ? 
5 Notwithstanding, the light of the wicked shall be put out, 
And the glow of his fire shineth not; 
6 The light becometh dark in his tent, 
And his lamp above him is extinguished ; 
7 LHis vigorous steps are straitened, 
And his own counsel casteth him down. 


The meaning of the strophe is this: Dost thou imagine 
that, by thy vehement conduct, by which thou art become 
enraged against thyself, thou canst effect any change in the 
established divine order of the world? It is a divine law, 
that sufferings are the punishment of sin; thou canst no 
more alter this, than that at thy command, or for thy sake, 
the earth, which is appointed to be the habitation of man 
(Isa. xlv. 18), will become desolate (té‘dzab with the tone 
drawn back, according to Ges. § 29, 3, 6, Arab. with similar 
signification in intrans. Kal ¢‘azibu), or a rock remove from its 
place (on PAY, vid. ch. xiv. 18). Bildad here lays to Job’s 
charge what Job, in ch. xvi. 9, has said of God’s anger, that 
it tears him: he himself tears himself in his rage at the 
inevitable lot under which he ought penitently to bow. The 
address, ver. 4a, as apud Arabes ubique fere (Schult.), is put 
objectively (not: Oh thou, who); comp. what is said on Dp>, 
ch. xvii. 10, which is influenced by the same syntactic custom, 


CHAP. XVIII. 4-7. 319 


The LXX. transl. ver. 4b: Why! will Hades be tenant- 
less if thou diest (€av od aoPdvys)? after which Rosenm. 
explains: tud causd h. e. te cadente. But that ought to be 
4025, The peopling of the earth is only an-example of the 
arrangements of divine omnipotence and wisdom, the con- 
tinuance of which is exalted over the human power of voli- 
tion, and does not in the least yield to human self-will, as 
(ver. 4c) the rock is an example, and at the same time an 
emblem, of what God has fixed and rendered immoveable. 
That of which he here treats as fixed by God is the law of 
retribution. However much Job may rage, this law is and 
remains the unavoidable power that rules over the evil-doer. 
Ver. 5. D3 is here equivalent to nevertheless, or prop. 
even, duws, as e.g. Ps. cxxix. 2 (Ew. § 354, a). The light of 
the evil-doer goes out, and the comfortable brightness and 
warmth which the blaze (22, only here as a Hebr. word ; 
according to Raschi and others, étincelle, a spark ; but accord- 
ing to LXX., Theod., Syr., Jer., a flame; Targ. the bright- 
ness of light) of his fire in his dwelling throws out, comes to 
anend. In one word, as the pret. 1¥NM implies, the light in 
his tent is changed into darkness; and his lamp above hin, i.e. 
the lamp hanging from the covering of his tent (ch. xxix. 3, 
comp. xxi. 17), goes out. When misfortune breaks in upon 
him, the Arab says: ed-dahru attfaa es-sirdgi, fate has put out 
my lamp; this figure of the decline of prosperity receives 
here a fourfold application. The figure of straitening one’s 
steps is just as Arabic as it is biblical; i318 “IY¥, the steps 


of his strength (jis synon. of 43, ch. xl. 16) become narrow 
(comp. Prov. iv. 12, Arab. takdssarat), by the wide space 
which he could pass over with a self-confident feeling of 
power becoming more and more contracted ; and the purpose 
formed selfishly and without any recognition of God, the 
success of which he considered infallible, becomes his over- 
throw. 


320 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


8 For he is driven into the net by his own feet, 
And he walketh over a snare. 
9 The trap holdeth his heel fast, 
The noose bindeth him. 
10 His snare lieth hidden in the earth, 
fis nets upon the path ; 
11 Terrors affright him on every side, 
And scare him at every step. 


The Pual nw signifies not merely to be betrayed into, 
but driven into, like the Piel, ch. xxx. 12, to drive away, and 
as it is to be translated in the similar passage in the song 
of Deborah, Judg. v. 15: “And as Issachar, Barak was 
driven (i.e. with desire for fighting) behind him down into 
the valley (the place of meeting under Mount Tabor) ;” vara, 
which there signifies, according to Judg. iv. 10, viii. 5, 
“upon his feet = close behind him,” is here intended of the 
intermediate cause: by his own feet he is hurried into the 
net, z.e. against his will, and yet with his own feet he runs 
into destruction. The same thing is said in ver. 8b; the way 
on which he complacently wanders up and down (which the 
Hithp. signifies here) is 123¥, lattice-work, here a snare (Arab. 
schabacah, a net, from 42¥, schabaca, to intertwine, weave), 
and consequently will suddenly break in and bring him to 
ruin. This fact of delivering himself over to destruction is 
established in apocopated futt. (ver. 9) used as pres., and 


without the voluntative signification in accordance with the 


poetic licence: a trap catches a heel (poetic brevity for: the 
trap catches his heel), a noose seizes upon him, yoy (but with 
the accompanying notion of overpowering him, which the 
translation “bind” is intended to express). Such is the 
meaning of D')¥ here, which is not plur., but sing., from DOS 


(me), to tie, and it unites in itself the meanings of snare- 


CHAP. XVIII. 12-15. 321 


layer (ch. v. 5) and of snare; the form (as V8, I) corre- 
sponds more to the former, but does not, however, exclude 
the latter, as [3 and a=) (Aapurds) show. 

The continuation in ver. 10 of the figure of the fowler 
affirms that that issue of his life (ver. 9) has been preparing 
long beforehand; the prosperity of the evil-doer from the 
beginning tends towards ruin. Instead of pan we have the. 
pointing iban, as it would be in Arab. in a similar sense 
hhabluhu (from hhabl, a cord, a net). The nearer destruction 
is now to him, the stronger is the hold which his foreboding 
has over him, since, as ver. 11 adds, terrible thoughts (nind3) 
and terrible apparitions fill him with dismay, and haunt him, 
following upon his feet. yore, close behind him, as Gen. 
xxx. 30, 1 Sam. xxv. 42, Isa. xli. 2, Hab. iii. 5. The best 
authorized pointing of the verb is 1¥°5M, with Segol (Ges. § 
104, 2, c), Chateph-Segol, and Kibbutz. Except in Hab. iii. 14, 
where the prophet includes himself with his people, 75}, 
diffundere, dissipare (vid. ch. xxxvil. 11, xl. 11), never has a 
person as its obj. elsewhere. It would also probably not be 
used, but for the idea that the spectres of terror pursue him 
at every step, and are now here, now there, and his person is 
as it were multiplied. 


12 His calamity looketh hunger-bitten, 
And misfortune is ready for his fall. 

13 Jt devoureth the members of his skin ; 

j The first-born of death devoureth his members. 

14 That in which he trusted ts torn away out of his tent, 
And he must march on to the king of terrors. 

15 Beings strange to him dwell in his tent ; 
Brimstone is strewn over his habitation. 


The description of the actual and total destruction of the 
evil-doer now begins with ‘7° (as ch. xxiv. 14, after the 


manner of the voluntative forms already used in ver. 9). 
VOL. I. x 


322 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Step by step it traces his course to the total destruction, 
which leaves no trace of him, but still bears evident marks 
of being the fulfilment of the curse pronounced upon him. 
In opposition to this explanation, Targ., Raschi, and others, 
explain {3& according to Gen. xlix. 3: the son of his man- 
hood’s strength becomes hungry, which sounds comical rather 
than tragic; another Targ. transl.: he becomes hungry in 
his mourning, which is indeed inadmissible, because the signif. 
planctus, luctus, belongs to the derivatives of 73x, jax, but not 
to ps. But even the translation recently adopted by Ew., 
Stick., and Schlottm., “his strength becomes hungry,” is 
unsatisfactory ; for it is in itself no misfortune to be hungry, 
and 3¥1 does not in itself signify “exhausted with hunger.” 
It is also an odd metaphor, that strength becomes hungry ; 
we would then rather read with Reiske, 1382 ayn, famelicus in 
media potentia sua. But as ji signifies strength (ch. xviii. 7), 
so [8 (root jx, to breathe and pant) signifies both wickedness 
and evil (the latter either as evil = calamity, or as anhelitus, 
sorrow, Arab. ain); and the thought that his (¢.e. appointed to 
the evil-doer) calamity is hungry to swallow him up (Syr., 
Hirz., Hahn, and others), suits the parallelism perfectly: “and 
misfortune stands ready for his fall.”* ‘8 signifies prop. a 
weight, burden, then a load of suffering, and gen, calamity 
(root 1%, Arab. dda, eg. Sur. 2, 256, la jatiduhu, it is not 
difficult for him, and adda, comp. on Ps. xxxi. 12); and ipoyd 


ow 


1 If 335 elsewhere corresponds to the Arabic W-.¢), to be voraciously 


oa 
hungry, the Arab. ©), to be paralyzed with fright, might correspond 
to it in the present passage: ‘from all sides spectres alarm him (\Anya 
from ny = 2), to fall suddenly upon any one; or better: = Love, 
to hunt up, excitare, to cause to rise, to fill with alarm) and urge him 
forward, seizing on his heels; then his strength becomes a paralyzing 
fright (299), and destruction is ready to overwhelm him.” The ro°b 
(ay4, thus in Damascus) or ra‘b (ayh, thus in Hauran and among the 


Se 


CHAP. XVIII. 12-15. : 323 


not: at his side (Ges., Ew., Schlottm., Hahn), but, according 
to Ps. xxxy. 15, xxxviii. 18: for his fall (LXX. freely, but 
correctly : é€aic.ov) ; for instead of “ at the side” (Arab. ila 
ganbi), they no more say in Hebrew-than in Germ. “at the 
ribs.” 

Ver. 13 figuratively describes how calamity takes possession 
of him. The members, which are called 0% in ch. xvii. 7, 
as parts of the form of the body, are here called oa, as the 
parts into which the body branches out, or rather, since the 
word originally signifies a part, as that which is actually split 
off (vid. on ch. xvil. 16, where it denotes “ cross-bars”), or 
according to appearance that which rises up, and from this 
primary signification applied to the body and plants, the 
members (not merely as Farisol interprets: the veins) of 
which the body consists and into which it is distributed. iy 
(distinct from 723, ch. xvi. 15, similar in meaning to Arab. 
baschar, but also to the Arab. gild, of which the former sig- 
nifies rather the epidermis, the latter the skin in the widest 
sense) is the soluble surface of the naked animal body. 
nia 132 devours this, and indeed, as the repetition implies, 
gradually, but surely and entirely. “The first-born of the 
poor,” Isa. xiv. 30, are those not merely who belong (°23) to 
the race of the poor, but the poor in the highest sense and 
first rank. So here diseases are conceived of as children of 
death, as in the Arabic malignant fevers are called bend¢t el- 
Beduins) is a state of mind which only occurs among us in a lower 
degree, but among the Arabs it is worthy of note as a psychological fact. 


If the wahm ( sg), or idea of some great and inevitable danger or mis- 


fortune, overpowers the Arab, all strength of mind and body suddenly 
forsakes him, so that he breaks down powerless and defenceless. Thus on 
July 8, 1860, in Damascus, in a few hours, about 6000 Christian men 
were slain, without any one raising a hand or uttering a cry for mercy. 
Both European and native doctors have assured me the rob in Arabia 
kills, and I have witnessed instances myself. Since it often produces a 
stiffness of the limbs with chronic paralysis, all kinds of paralysis are 
called rob, and the paralytics mar éb.—W ETzsT. 


324 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


menijeh, daughters of fate or death; that disease which Bildad 
has in his mind, as the one more terrible and dangerous than 
all others, he calls the “ first-born of death,” as that in which 
the whole destroying power of death is contained, as in the 
first-born the whole strength of his parent.’ The Targ. under- 
stands the figure similarly, since it transl. Snid NPD (angel 
of death); another Targ. has instead Nnid "NY, the firstling 
of death, which is intended in the sense of the primogenita 
(= prematura) mors of Jerome. Least of all is it to be 
understood with Ewald as an intensive expression for n\n7j2, 
1 Sam. xx. 31, of the evil-doer as liable to death. While now 
disease in the most fearful form consumes the body of the 
‘evil-doer, ind2 (with Dag. f. impl., as ch. viii. 14, xxxi. 24, 
Olsh. § 198, b) (a:collective word, which signifies everything 
in which he trusted) is torn away out of his tent; thus also 
Rosenm., Ew., and Umbr. explain, while Hirz., Hgst., 
Schlottm., and Hahn regard 1np3p as in apposition to %dnx, 
in fayour of which ch. viii. 14 is only a seemingly suitable 
parallel, It means everything that made the ungodly man 
1 In Arabic the positive is expressed in the same metonymies with 
abu, e.g. aba *l-chér, the benevolent ; on the other hand, .e.g. ibn el-hhage 
is much stronger than abu *l-hhdge: the person who is called zbn is con- 
ceived of as a child of these conditions; they belong to his inmost nature, 
and have not merely affected him slightly and passed off. The Hebrew 
“D3 represents the superlative, because among Semites the power and 
dignity of the father is transmitted to the first-born. So far as I know, 
the Arab does not use this superlative ; for what is terrible and revolt- 
ing he uses ‘‘ mother,” e.g. umm el-faritt, mother of death, a name for the 
plague (in one of the modern popular poets of Damascus), umm el- 
gashshash, mother of the sweeping death, a name for war (in the same) ; 
for that which awakens the emotions of joy and grief he frequently uses 
‘‘daughter.” In an Arabian song of victory the fatal arrows are called 
bendt el-mét, and the heroes (slayers) in the battle beni el-mét, which is 
similar to the figure used in the book of Job. Moreover, that disease 
which eats up the limbs could not be described by a more appropriate 
epithet than ny D3. Its proper name is shunned in common life ; 
and if it is necessary to mention those who are affected with it, they 


always say sdddt el-gudhamé to avoid offending the company, or to escape 
the curse of the thing mentioned.—Wetzst, 


CHAP. XVIII. 12-15. 325 


happy as head of a household, and gave him the brightest 
hopes of the future. This is torn away (evellitur) from his 
household, so that he, who is dying off, alone survives. Thus, 
therefore, ver. 146 describes how he also himself dies at 
last. Several modern expositors, especially Stickel, after the 
example of Jerome (e¢ calcet super eum quast rex interitus), 
and of the Syr.\( precipitem eum reddent terrores regis), take 
ninda as subj., which is syntactically possible (vid. ch. xxvii. 
20, xxx. 15): and destruction causes him to march towards 
itself (Ges. : fugant eum) like a military leader; but since 
TY8I signifies to cause to approach, and since no YON (to itself) 
stands with it, 0d is to be considered as denoting the goal, 
especially as ° never directly signifies instar. In the passage 
advanced in its favour it denotes that which anything be- 
comes, that which one makes a thing by the mode of treat- 
ment (ch. xxxix. 16), or whither anything extends (e.g. in 
Schultens on ch. xiii. 12: they had claws li-machdlibi, i.e. 
“approaching to the claws” of wild beasts).' One falls 
into these strange interpretations when one departs from 
the accentuation, which unites mada 79 quite correctly by 
Munach. 

Death itself is called “the king of terrors,” in distinction 
from the terrible disease which is called its first-born. Death 
is also personified elsewhere, as Isa. xxviii. 15, and esp. Ps. 
xlix. 15, where it appears as a M5, ruler in Hades, as in 
the Indian mythology the name of the infernal king Jamas 
signifies the tyrant or the tamer. The biblical representation 
does not recognise a king of Hades, as Jamas and Pluto: the 
judicial power of death is allotted to angels, of whom one, . 
the angel of the abyss, is called Abaddon ()7238), Apoc. ix. 
11; and the chief possessor of this judicial power, 0 To Kpatos 
éywv tod Oavartov, is, according to Heb. ii. 14, the angel- 
prince, who, according to the prologue of our book, has also 

1 [Comp. a note infra on ch. xxi. 4.—TR.] 


326 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


brought a fatal disease upon Job, without, however, in this 
instance being able to go further than to bring him to the 
brink of the abyss. It would therefore not be contrary to 
the spirit of the book if we were to understand Satan by the 
king of terrors, who, among other appellations in Jewish 
theology, is called innn-by 1’, because he has his existence in 
the Thohu, and seeks to hurl back every living being into the 
Thohu. But since the prologue casts a veil over that which 
remains unknown in this world in the midst of tragic woes, 
and since a reference to Satan is found nowhere else in the 
book—on the contrary, Job himself and the friends trace 
back directly to God that mysterious affliction which forms 
the dramatic knot—we understand (which is perfectly suffi- 
cient) by the king of terrors death itself, and with Hirz., Ew.; 
and most expositors, transl.: “and it causes him to march 
onward to the king of terrors.” The “it” is a secret power, 
as also elsewhere the fem. is used as neut. to denote the “dark 
power” (Ewald, § 294, 4) of natural and supernatural events, 
although sometimes, e.g. ch. iv. 16, Isa. xiv. 9, the mase. is 
also so applied. After the evil-doer is tormented for a while 
with temporary nind3, and made tender, and reduced to ripe- 
ness for death by the first-born of death, he falls into the 
possession of the king of nina himself; slowly and solemnly, 
but surely and inevitably (as Tysn implies, with which is com- 
bined the idea of the march of a criminal to the place of 
execution), he is led to this king by an unseen arm. 

In ver. 15 the description advances another step deeper 
into the calamity of the evil-doer’s habitation, which is now 
become completely desolate. Since ver. 156 says that brim- 
stone (from heaven, Gen. xix. 24, Ps. xi. 6) is strewn over 
the evil-doer’s habitation, i.e. in order to mark it as a place 
that, having been visited with the fulfilment of the curse, 
shall not henceforth be rebuilt and inhabited (vid. Deut. 
xxix. 22 sq., and supra, on ch. xv. 28), ver. 15a cannot be 


CHAP. XVIII. 16-19. ‘ 327 


intended to affirm that a company of men strange to him 
take up their abode in his tent. But we shall not, however, 
on that account take minda_as the subj. of iawn, The only 
natural translation is: what does not belong to him dwells in 
his tent (Ew. § 294, b); Dan, elsewhere propos. (ch. iv. 11, 
20, xxiv. 7 sq.), is here an adverb of negation, as which it is 
often used as an intensive of PS, eg. Ex. xiv. 11. It is un- 
necessary to take the as partitive (Hirz.), although it can 
have a special signification, as Deut. xxviii. 55 (because not), 
by being separated from 2. The neutral fem. povin refers 
to such inhabitants as are described in Isa. xiii. 20 sqq., xxvii. 
10 sq., xxxiv. 11 sqq., Zeph. ii. 9, and in other descriptions 
of desolation. Creatures and things which are strange to the 
deceased rich man, as jackals and nettles, inhabit his domain, 
which is appointed to eternal unfruitfulness ; neither children 
nor possessions survive him to keep up his name. What does 
dwell in his tent serves only to keep up the recollection of the 
curse which has overtaken him.’ 


16 His roots wither beneath, 
And above his branch 1s lopped off. 
17 His remembrance is vanished from the land, 
And he hath no name far and wide on the plain ; 
18 They drive him from light into darkness, 
And chase him out of the world. 
19 He hath neither offspring nor descendant among his people, 
Nor is there an escaped one in his dwellings. 


The evil-doer is represented under the figure of a plant, 
ver. 16, as we have had similar figures already, ch. viii. 16 


1 The desolation of his house is the most terrible calamity for the 
Semite, i.e. when all belonging to his family die or are reduced to 
poverty, their habitation is desolated, and their ruins are become the 
byword of future generations. For the Beduin especially, although his 
hair tent leaves no mark, the thought of the desolation of his house, the 
extinction of his hospitable hearth, is terrible-—WETzsT. 


328 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


sq., xv. 30, 32 sq.;* his complete extirpation is like the dying 
off of the root and of the branch, as Amos ii. 9, Isa. v. 24, and 
“let him not have a root below and a branch above” in the 
inscription on the sarcophagus of Eschmunazar. Here we 
again meet with bn, the proper meaning of which is so dis- 
puted; it is translated by the Targ. (as by us) as Miph. 
aol, but the meaning “to wither” is near at hand, which, as 
we said on ch. xiv. 2, may be gained as well from the primary 
notion “to fall to pieces” (whence LX X. ésrumeceirat), as 
from the primary notion “to parch, dry.” 528 (whence Oro, 
formed after the manner of the Arabic IX. form, usually of 
failing ; vid. Caspari, § 59) offers a third possible explanation ; 
it signifies originally to be long and lax, to let anything hang 
down, and thence in Arab. (amala) to hope, i.e. to look out 
into the distance. Not the evil-doer’s family alone is rooted 
out, but also his memory. With yin, a very relative notion, 
both the street outside in front of the house (ch. xxxi. 32), 
and the pasture beyond the dwelling (ch. v. 10), are de- 
scribed ; here it is to be explained according to Prov. viii. 
26 (mim yx), where Hitz. remarks: “The LXX. trans- 
lates correctly douxyjtovs. The districts beyond each person’s 
land, which also belong to no one else, the desert, whither 
one goes forth, is meant.” So ys seems also here (comp. 
ch. xxx. 8) to denote the land that is regularly inhabited— 
Job himself is a large proprietor within the range of a city — 
(ch. xxix. 7)—and pin the steppe traversed by the wandering 
tribes which lies out beyond. Thus also the Syr. version 
transl. “al apat barito, over the plain of the desert, after which 


1 To such biblical figures taken from plants, according to which root 
and branch are become familiar in the sense of ancestors and descendants 
(comp. Sir. xxiii. 25, xl. 15 ; Wisd. iv. 3-5 ; Rom. xi. 16), the arbor con- 
sanguineitatis, which is not Roman, but is become common in the Christian 
refinement of the Roman right, may be traced back; the first trace of 
this is found in Isidorus Hispalensis (as also the Cabbalistic tree syne, 
which represents the Sephir-genealogy, has its origin in Spain). 


CHAP. XVIII. 16-19. 329 


the Arabic version is el-barrije (the synon. of bedw, bddije, 
whence the name of the Beduin'). What is directly said in 
ver. 17 is repeated figuratively in ver. 18; as also what has 
been figuratively expressed in ver. 16 is repeated in ver. 19 
without figure. The subj. of the verbs in ver. 18 remains in 
the background, as ch. iv. 19, Ps. Ixiii. 11, Luke xii. 20: they 
thrust him out of the light (of life, prosperity, and fame) into 
the darkness (of misfortune, death, and oblivion) ; so that the 
illustris becomes not merely ignodilis, but totally ignotus, and 
they hunt him forth (752) from the Hiph. 725 of the verb 
373, instead of which it might also be 172’ from 7), they 
banish him) out of the habitable world (for this is the signifi- 
cation of 52H, the earth as built upon and inhabited), There 
remains to him in his race neither sprout nor shoot ; thus the 
rhyming alliteration [] and 723 (according to Luzzatto on 
Isa. xiv. 22, used only of the descendants of persons in high 
rank, and certainly a nobler expression than our rhyming 
pairs: Germ. Stumpf und Stiel, Mann und Maus, Kind und 
Kegel). And there is no escaped one (as Deut. ii. 34 and 
freq., Arab. shdrid, one fleeing; shariid, a fugitive) in his 
abodes (19, as only besides Ps. lv. 16). Thus to die away 
without descendant and remembrance is still at the present 
day among the Arab races that profess Din Ibrahim (the 
religion of Abraham) the most unhappy thought, for the - 
point of gravitation of continuance beyond the grave is trans- 
ferred by them to the immortality of the righteous in the 
continuance of his posterity and works in this world (vid. 
supra, p. 260); and where else should it be at the time of 
Job, since no revelation had as yet drawn the curtain-aside 

1 The village with its meadow-land is el-beled wa ’I-berr. The arable 
land, in distinction from the steppe, is el-ardd el-dmira, and the steppe 
is el-berrije. If both are intended, ardd can be used alone. Used spe- 
cially, el-berrije is the proper name for the great Syrian desert; hence 


the proverb: el-hhurrije_fi 'l-berrije, there is freedom in the steppe (not 
in towns and villages).—W ETZsT. 


330 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


from the future world? Now follows the declamatory con- 
clusion of the speech. 


20 Those who dwell in the west are astonished at his day, 
And trembling seizeth those who dwell in the east ; 

21 Surely thus it befalleth the dwellings of the unrighteous, 
And thus the place of him that knew not God. 


It is as much in accordance with the usage of Arabic as 
it is biblical, to call the day of a man’s doom “ his day,” the 
day of a battle at a place “the day of that place.” Who are 
the 0°58 who are astonished at it, and the 0°72 whom 
terror (1Y¥ as twice besides in this sense in Ezek.) seizes, or 
as it is properly, who seize terror, z.e. of themselves, with- 


out being able to do otherwise than yield to the emotion (as — 


ch, xxi. 6, Isa. xiii. 8; comp. on the contrary Ex. xv. 14 sq.) ? 
Hirz., Schlottm., Hahn, and others, understand posterity by 
ons, and by op their ancestors, therefore Job’s cotem- 
poraries. But the return from the posterity to those then 
living is strange, and the usage of the language is opposed 
to it; for oN Ip is elsewhere always what belongs to the 
previous age in relation to the speaker (eg. 1 Sam. xxiv. 14, 
comp. Eccles. iv. 16). Since, then, *3»7p is used in the signi- 
fication eastern (e.g. 2327p oO”, the eastern sea = the Dead 
Sea), and jn in the signification western (eg. {NNT ON, the 
western sea = the Mediterranean), it is much more suited 
both to the order of the words and the usage of the language 
to understand, with Schult., Oetinger, Umbr., and Ew., the 
former of those dwelling in the west, and the latter of those 
dwelling in the east. In the summarizing ver. 21, the re- 
trospective pronouns are also pregn., like ch. viii. 19, xx. 29, 
comp. xxvi. 14: Thus is it, viz. according to their fate, de. 
thus it befalls them ; and 4&8 here retains its original affirma- 
tive signification (as in the concluding verse of Ps. lviii.), 
although in Hebrew this is blended with the restrictive. 


. 


CHAP. XVIII. 20, 21: 331 


has Rebia mugrasch instead of great Schalscheleth,' and dipr 
has in correct texts Legarme, which must be followed by 
yIrNd with J lluj on the penult. On the relative clause 
ON pend without "WX, comp. e.g. ch. xxix. 16; and on this 
use of the st. constr., vid. Ges. § 116, 3. The last verse is as 
though those mentioned in ver. 20 pointed with the finger 
to the example of punishment in the “desolated” dwellings 
which have been visited by the curse. 

This second speech of Bildad begins, like the first (ch. viii. 
2), with the reproach of endless babbling ; but it does not end 
like the first (ch. viii. 22). The first closed with the words : 
* Thy haters shall be clothed with shame, and the tent of 
the godless is no more ;” the second is only an amplification 
of the second half of this conclusion, without taking up again 
anywhere the tone of promise, which there also embraces the 
threatening. 

It is manifest also from this ioc that the friends, to 
express it in the words of the old commentators, know nothing 
of evangelical but only of legal suffering, and also only of 
legal, nothing of evangelical, righteousness. For the righteous- 
ness of which Job boasts is not the righteousness of single 
works of the law, but of a disposition directed to God, of 
conduct proceeding from faith, or (as the Old Testament 
generally says) from trust in God’s mercy, the weaknesses 
of which are forgiven because they are exonerated by the 
habitual disposition of the man and the primary aim of his 
actions. The fact that the principle, “suffering is the conse- 
quence of human unrighteousness,” is accounted by Bildad as 
the formula of an inviolable law of the moral order of the 
world, is closely connected with that outward aspect of human 
righteousness. One can only thus judge when one regards 
human righteousness and human destiny from the purely 


1 Vid. Psalter ii. 503, and comp. Davidson, Outlines of Hebrew Accen- 
tuation (1861), p. 92, note. 


332 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


legal point of view. A man, as soon as we conceive him in 
faith, and therefore under grace, is no longer under that 
supposed exclusive fundamental law of the divine dealing. 
Brentius is quite right when he observes that the sentence of 
the law certainly is modified for the sake of the godly who 
have the word of promise. Bildad knows nothing of the 
worth and power which a man attains by a righteous heart. 
By faith he is removed from the domaim of God’s justice, 
which recompenses according to the law of works; and 
before the power of faith even rocks move from their place. 
Bildad then goes off into a detailed description of the total 
destruction into which the evil-doer, after going about for 
a time oppressed with the terrors of his conscience as one 
walking over snares, at last sinks beneath a painful sickness. 
The description is terribly brilliant, solemn, and pathetic, as 
becomes the stern preacher of repentance with haughty mien 


and pharisaic self-confidence; it is none the less beautiful, _ 


and, considered in itself, also true—a masterpiece of the poet’s 
skill in poetic idealizing, and in apportioning out the truth in 
dramatic form. The speech only becomes untrue through 
the application of the truth advanced, and this untruthfulness 
the poet has most delicately presented in it. For with a 
view of terrifying Job, Bildad interweaves distinct references 
to Job in his description; he knows, however, also how to 
conceal them under the rich drapery of diversified figures. 
The first-born of death, that hands the ungodly over to death 
itself, the king of terrors, by consuming the limbs of the 
ungodly, is the Arabian leprosy, which slowly destroys the 
body. The brimstone indicates the fire of God, which, hay- 
ing fallen from heaven, has burned up one part of the herds 
and servants of Job; the withering of the branch, the death 
of Job’s children, whom he himself, as a drying-up root that 
will also soon die off, has survived. Job is the ungodly man, 
who, with wealth, children, name, and all that he possessed, is 


CHAP. XVIII. 20, 21. 333 


being destroyed as an example of punishment for posterity 
both far and near. 

But, in reality, Job is not an example of punishment, but 
an example for consolation to posterity ; and what posterity 
has to relate is not Job’s ruin, but his wondrous deliverance 
(Ps. xxii. 31 sq.). He is no ‘ay, but a righteous man; not 
one who yy ND, but he knows God better than the friends, 
although he contends with Him, and they defend Him. It 
is with him as with the righteous One, who complains, Ps. 
Ixix. 21: “Contempt hath broken my heart, and I became 
sick: I hoped for sympathy, but in vain; for comforters, and 
’ and Ps. xxxviil. 12 (comp. xxxi. 12, lv. 13-15, 
Ixix. 9, Ixxxvill. 9, 19): “My lovers and my friends stand 
aloof from my stroke, and my kinsmen stand afar off.” Not 
without a deep purpose does the poet make Bildad to address 
Jobin the plural. The address is first directed to Job alone; 
nevertheless it is so put, that what Bildad says to Job is 
also intended to be said to others of a like way of thinking, 
therefore to a whole party of the opposite opinion to himself. 
Who are these like-minded? MHirzel rightly refers to ch. 
xvii. 8 sq. Job is the representative of the suffering and 
misjudged righteous, in other words: of the “ congregation,” 
whose blessedness is hidden beneath an outward form of 
suffering. One is hereby reminded that in the second part 
of Isaiah the m7 2p is also at one time spoken of in the 
sing., and at another time in the plur.; since this idea, by a re- 
markable contraction and expansion of expression (systole and 
diastole), at one time describes the one servant of Jehovah, 
and at another the congregation of the servants of Jehovah, 
which has its head in Him. Thus we again have a trace of 
the fact that the poet is narrating a history that is of uni- 
versal significance, and that, although Job is no mere personi- 
fication, he has in him brought forth to view an idea connected 
with the history of redemption. The ancient interpreters 


found none;’ 


334 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


were on the track of this idea when they said in their way, 
that in Job we behold the image of Christ, and the figure of 
His church. Christi personam figuraliter gessit, says Beda ; 
and Gregory, after having stated and explained that there 
is not in the Old Testament a righteous man who does not 
typically point to Christ, says: Beatus Iob venturi cwm suo 
corpore typum redemtoris insinuat. | 


Job’s Second Answer.—Chap. xix. 
Schema: 10. 10. 10. 10. 10. 10. 


[Then began Job, and said :] 

2 How long will ye vex my soul, 
And crush me with your words ? 

3 These ten times have ye reproached me ; 
Without being ashamed ye astound me., 

4 And if I have really erred, 

My error rests with myself. 

a Tf ye will really magnify yourselves against me, 
And prove my reproach to me: 

6 Know then that Eloah hath wronged me, 
And hath compassed me with His net. 


This controversy is torture to Job’s spirit; enduring in 
himself unutterable agony, both bodily and spiritually, and 
in addition stretched upon the rack by the three friends with 





J 
f 
7 
} 
4 


their united strength, he begins his answer with a well-jus-_ 


tified quousque tandem. fF (Norzi: MM) is fut. energicum 
from 7317 (53), with the retention of the third radical, Ges. 
§ 75, rem. 16. And in 1223837 (Norzi: ‘228210 with quies- 
cent Aleph) the suff. is attached to the dn of the fut. energi- 
cum, Ges. § 60, rem. 3; the connecting vowel is a, and the 
suff. is ani, without epenthesis, not anni or an‘ni, Ges. § 58, 





CHAP. XIX. 2-6. 335 


4, In ver. 3 Job establishes his How long? ,Ten times is 
not to be taken strictly (Saad.), but it is a round number ; 
ten, from being the number of the fingers on the human 
hand, is the number of human possibility, and-from its posi- 
tion at the end of the row of numbers (in the decimal system) 
is the number of that which is perfected (vid. Genesis, S. 
640 sq.); as not only the Sanskrit dagan is traceable to the 
radical notion “to seize, embrace,” but also the Semitic awy 
is traceable to the radical notion “ to bind, gather together” 
(cogn. Wp). They have already exhausted what is possible 
in reproaches, they have done their utmost. Renan, in ac- 
cordance with the Hebr. expression, transl.: Vodla (", as e.g. 
Gen. xxvii. 36) la dixitme fois que vous minsultez. The dr 
yeyp. 130 is connected by the Targ. with 37 (of respect of 
persons = partiality), by the Syr. with 813 (to pain, of créve- 
ceur), by Raschi and Parchon with 133 (to mistake) or 132nn 
(to alienate one’s self), by Saadia (wid. Ewald’s Beitr. S. 99) | 
with 12 (to dim, grieve’); he, however, compares the Arab. 


_jAa» stupere (which he erroneously regards as differing only in 


sound from _xis to overpower, oppress) ; sha Abulwalid (vid. 
Rédiger in Thes. p. 84 suppl.) explains _t° \) ssi, ye gaze 


at me, since at the same time he mentions as possible that 
727 may be = _, to treat indignantly, insultingly (which 
is only a different shade in sound of 3)" and therefore refers 
to Saadia’s interpretation). David Kimchi interprets accord- 
ing to Abulwalid, 15 wnpnn; he however remarks at the same 
time, that his father Jos. Kimchi interprets after the Arab. 


“asp which also signifies “shamelessness,” 6 ps5 yn. Since 


the idea of dark wild looks is connected with RSS he has un- 


1 Reiske interprets according to the Arabic Se: denso et turbido agmine 
cum impetu ruitis in me. 


2In Sur. 93, 9 (oppress not the orphan), the reading iS is found 
alternating with esi. 


336 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


doubtedly this verb in his mind, not that compared by Ewald 


who translates, “ ye are devoid of feeling towards me”), and 
ae § ; : 


especially <., to deal unfairly, used of usurious trade in corn 
(which may also have been thought of by the LX X. éwixeuoOé 
pot, and Jerome opprimentes), which signifies as intrans. to be 
obstinate about anything, pertinacious. Gesenius also, Thes. 
p- 84, suppl., suggests whether 135" may not perhaps be the 
reading. But the comparison with © is certainly safer, and 
gives a perfectly satisfactory meaning, only 739" must not 
be regarded as fut. Kal (as pon}, Ps. Ixxiv. 6, according to 
the received text), but as fut. Hiph. for 374, according to 
Ges. § 53, rem. 4, 5, after which Schultens transl.: quod me 
ad stuporem redigatis. ‘The connection of -the two verbs in 
ver. 3b is to be judged of according to Ges. § 142, 3, a: ye 
shamelessly cause me astonishment (by the assurance of your 
accusations). One need not hesitate because it is ‘Sonn 
instead of yonn; this indication of the obj. by 2, which is 
become a rule in Arabic with the inf. and part. (whence e.g. 
it would here be muhkerina li), and is still more extended in 
Aramaic, is also frequent in Hebrew (e.g. Isa. liii. 11, Ps. 
exvi. 16, cxxix. 8, and 2 Chron. xxxii. 17, 5 0, after which 
Olsh. proposes to read *>-57NN in the passage before us). 


Much depends upon the correct perception of the structure + 


of the clauses in ver. 4. The rendering, e.g., of Olshausen, 
gained by taking the two halves of the verse as independent 
clauses, “yea certainly I have erred, I am fully conscious of 
my error,” puts a confession into Job’s mouth, which is at 
present neither mature nor valid. Hirz., Hahn, Schlottm., 
rightly take ver. 4a as a hypothetical antecedent clause (comp. 
ch. vii. 20, xi. 18): and if I have really erred (D288, as ch. 
xxxiv. 12, yea truly; Gen. xviii. 13, and if I should really), 
my error remains with me, ¢.e. I shall have to expiate it, with- 
out your having on this account any right to take upon your- 
selves the office of God and to treat me uncharitably; or 


CHAP. XIX. 2-6. 337 


- what still better corresponds with yon ‘AN: my transgression 
remains with me, without being communicated to another, i.e. 
without having any influence over you or others to lead you 
astray or involve you in participation of the guilt. Ver. 6 
stands in a similar relation to ver. 5. . Hirz., Ew., and Hahn 
take ver. 5 as a double question: “or will ye really boast 
against me, and prove to me my fault?” Schlottm., on the 
contrary, takes 58 conditionally, and begins the conclusion 
with ver. 5b: “if ye will really look proudly down upon me, 
it rests with you at least, to prove to me by valid reasons, 
the contempt which ye attach to me.” But by both-of 
these interpretations, especially by the latter, ver. 6 comes 
in abruptly. Even ‘58 (written thus in three other passages 
besides this) indicates in ver. 5 the conditional antecedent 
clause (comp. ix. 24, xxiv. 25) of the expressive yvdre odv 
(6): if ye really boast yourselves against me (vid. Ps. lv. 13 
sq., comp. xxxv. 26, xxxvill. 17), and prove upon me, i.e. in 
a way of punishment (as ye think), my shame, i.e. the sins 
which put me to shame (not: the right of shame, which has 
come upon me on account of my sins, an interpretation which 
the conclusion does not justify), therefore: if ye really con- 
tinue (which is implied by the fuét.) to do this, then know, 
etc. If they really maintain that he is suffering on account 
of flagrant sins, he meets them on the ground of this assamp- 
_ tion with the assertion that God has wronged him (‘2m short 
for *MavD MY, ch. viii. 3, xxiv. 12, as Lam. iii. 36), and has 
cast His net (W482, with the change of the 6 of Ti¥2 from ny, 
to search, hunt, into the deeper @ in inflexion, as ‘D3 from 
Did, THY, Ezek. iv. 8, from W2) over him, together with 
his right and his freedom, so that he is indeed obliged to 
endure punishment. In other words: if his suffering is really 
not to be regarded otherwise than as the punishment of sin, 
as they would uncharitably and censoriously persuade him, it 


urges on his self-consciousness, which rebels against it, to the 
VOL. I. b 


338 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


conclusion which he hurls into their face as one which they 
themselves have provoked. 


7 Behold I ery violence, and I am not heard ; 
I cry for help, and there is no justice. 
8 My way He hath fenced round, that I cannot pass over, 
And He hath set darkness on my paths. . 
9 He hath stripped me of mine honour, 
And taken away the crown from my head. 
10 He destroyed me on every side, then I perished, 
And lifted out as a tree my hope. 
11 He kindled His wrath against me, 
And He regarded me as one of His foes. 


He cries aloud DM (that which is called out regarded as 
accus. or as an interjection, vid. on Hab. i. 2), i.e. that illegal 
force is exercised over him. He finds, however, neither with 
God nor among men any response of sympathy and help; he 
cries for help (which }%¥, perhaps connected with YW, deus, 
from YW, gues, seems to signify), without justice, ze. the 
right of an impartial hearing and verdict, being attainable by 
him. He is like a prisoner who is confined to a narrow space 
(comp. ch. iii. 23, xiii. 27) and has no way out, since darkness 
is laid upon him wherever he may go. One is here reminded 
of Lam. iii. 7-9; and, in fact, this speech generally stands 
in no accidental mutual relation to the lamentations of Jere- 
miah. The “crown of my head” has also its parallel in Lam, 
v. 16; that which was Job’s greatest ornament and most 
costly jewel is meant. According to ch. xxix. 14, p1¥ and 
pavin were his robe and diadem. These robes of honour 
God has stripped from him, this adornment more precious 
than a regal diadem He has taken from him since, #e., his 
affliction puts him down as a transgressor, and abandons him 
to the insult of those around him. God destroyed him round 
about (destruwit), as a house that is broken down on all sides, 


CHAP. XIX. 12-15. 339 


and lifted out as a tree his hope. D3 does not in itself 
signify to root out, but only to lift out (ch. iv. 21, of the tent- 
cord, and with it the tent-pin) of a plant: to remove it from 
the ground in which it has grown, either to’ plant it else- 
where, as Ps. lxxx. 9, or as here, to put it aside. The ground 
was taken away from his hope, so that its greenness faded 
away like that of a tree that is rooted up. The fut. consec. 
is here to be translated: then I perished (different from ch, 
xiv. 20: and consequently he perishes); he is now already 
one who is passed away, his existence is only the shadow of 
life. God has caused, fut. Hiph. apoc. 104%, His wrath to 
kindle against him, and regarded him in relation to Him- 
‘ self as His opponents, therefore as one of them. Perhaps, 
however, the expression is intentionally intensified here, in 
contrast with ch. xiii. 24: he, the one, is accounted by God 
as the host of His foes; He treats him as if all hostility to 
God were concentrated in him. 


12 Lis troops came together, 
And threw up their way against me, 
And encamped round about my tent. 
13 My brethren hath He removed far from me, 
And my acquaintance are quite estranged from me. 
14 My kinsfolk fail, . 
And those that knew me have forgotten me. 
15 The slaves of my house and my maidens, 
They regard me as a stranger, 
Lam become a perfect stranger in their eyes. 


It may seem strange that we do not connect ver. 12 with 
the preceding strophe or group of verses; but between vers. 7 
and 21 there are thirty oréyov, which, in connection with the 
arrangement of the rest of this speech in decastichs. (acci- 
dentally coinciding remarkably with the prominence given to — 
the number ten in ver. 3a), seem intended to be divided into 


340 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


three decastichs, and can be so divided without doing violence 
to the connection. While in ver. 12, in connection with ver. 
11, Job describes the course of the wrath, which he has to 
withstand as if he were an enemy of God, in vers. 13 sqq. he 
refers back to the degradation complained of in ver. 9. In 
ver. 12 he compares himself to a besieged (perhaps on account 
of revolt) city. God’s D713 (not: bands of marauders, as 
Dietr. interprets, but: troops, .e. of regular soldiers, synon. 
of say, ch. x. 17, compe xxv. 3, xxix. 25, from the root 73, to. 
unite, join, therefore prop. the assembled, a heap; vid. Fiirst’s 
Handwérterbuch) are the bands of outward and inward suffer- 
ings sent forth against him for a combined attack (1M). 
Heaping up a way, «e. by filling up the ramparts, is for the 
purpose of making the attack upon the city with battering- 
rams (ch. xvi. 14) and javelins, and then the storm, more 
effective (on this erection of offensive ramparts (approches), ° 
called elsewhere nd$p ypu, vid. Keil’s Archidologie, § 159). 
One result of this condition of siege in which God’s wrath 
has placed him is that he is avoided and despised as one 
smitten of God: neither love ‘and fidelity, nor obedience and 
dependence, meet him from any quarter. What he has said 
in ch. xvii. 6, that he is become a byword.and an abomination 
(an object to spit upon), he here describes in detail. There 
is no ground for understanding ‘8 in the wider sense of 
relations ; brethren is meant here, as in Ps. Ixix.9. He calls 
his relations ‘2'7?, as Ps, xxxviii. 12. ‘YT are (in accordance 
with the pregnant biblical use of this word in the sense of 
nosse cum affectu et effectu) those who know him intimately 
(with objective suff. as Ps. Ixxxvil. 4), and YI"), as Ps. xxxi. 
12, and freq., those intimately known to him; both, there- 
fore, so-called heart- or bosom-friends. ‘N'2 3 Jer. well 
translates inguilini domus mee ; they are, in distinction from 
those who by birth belong to the nearer and wider circle of 
the family, persons who are received into this circle as ser- 


CHAP. XIX. 16-20. 341 


vants, as\ vassals (comp. Ex. iii. 22, and Arabic \., an 
associate, one sojourning in a strange country under the 
protection of its government, a neighbour), here espec. the 
domestics. The verb ‘n2v¥NA (Ges. § 60) is construed with 
the nearest feminine subject. These people, who ought to 
thank him for taking them into his house, regard him as 
one who does not belong to. it (1t); he is looked upon by 
them as a perfect stranger ("13), as an intruder from another 
country. 


16 J call to my servant and he answereth not, 
L am obliged to entreat him with my mouth. 
17 My breath ts offensive to my wife, 
And my stench to my own brethren. 
18 Even boys act contemptuously towards me ; 
If I will rise up, they speak against me. 
19 All my confidential friends abhor me, 
And those whom I loved have turned against me. 
20 My bone cleaveth to my skin and flesh, 
And I am escaped only with the skin of my teeth. 


His servant, who otherwise saw every command in his eyes, 
and was attent upon his wink, now not only does. not come 
at his call, but does not return him any answer. The one of 
the home-born slaves (vid. on Gen. xiv. 14"), who stood in the 
same near connection to Job as Eliezer to Abraham, is in- 
tended here, in distinction from ‘nm’. "3, ver. 15. If he, his 
master, now in such need of assistance, desires any service 
from him, he is obliged (fué. with the sense of being compelled, 
as e.g. ch. xv. 300, xvii. 2) to entreat him with his mouth. 
nnn, to beg if of any one for one’s self (vid. supra, p. 222), 


1 The (black) slaves born within the tribe itself are in the present day, 
from their dependence and bravery, accounted as the stay of the tribe, 
and are called faddwije, as those who are ready to sacrifice their life for 
its interest. The body-slave of Job is thought of as such am’ 9°. 


342 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


therefore to implore, supplicare; and ‘B73 here (as Ps. 
Ixxxix. 2, cix. 30) as a more significant expression of that 
which is loud and intentional (not as ch. xvi. 5, in contrast 
to that which proceeds from the heart). In ver. 17a, *7 
signifies neither my vexation. (Hirz.) nor my spirit = I 
(Umbr., Hahn, with the Syr.), for nm in the sense of angry 
humour (as ch. xv. 13) does not properly suit the predicate, 
and | >.) in the signification tpse may certainly be used in 
Arabic, where --,, (perhaps under the influence of the philo- 
sophical usage of the language) signifies the animal spirit- 
life (Psychol. 8. 154), not however in Hebrew, where ‘w) is 
the stereotype form in that sense. If one considers that the 
elephantiasis, although its proper pathological symptom con- 
sists in an enormous hypertrophy of the cellular tissue of 
single distinct portions of the body, still easily, if the bronchia 
are drawn into sympathy, or if (what is still more natural) 
putrefaction of the blood with a scorbutic ulcerous formation 
in the mouth comes on, has difficulty of breathing (ch, vii. 15) 
and stinking breath as its result, as also a stinking exhalation 
and the discharge of a stinking fluid from the decaying limbs is 
connected with it (vid. the testimony of the Arabian physicians 
in Stickel, S. 169 f.), it cannot be doubted that Jer. has lighted 
upon the correct thing when he transl. halitum mewm exhorruit 
uxor mea.’ ‘M7 is intended as in ch. xvii. 1, and it is unneces- 
sary to derive m1 from a special verb ™, although in Arab. 
the notions which are united in the Hebr. 14, dejlectere and 
abhorrere (to turn one’s self away from what is disgusting or 
horrible), are divided between ,\; med. Waw and iy med. Je 
(vid. Fiirst’s Handwérterbuch). 

In ver. 17 the meaning of ‘D130 is specially qucationsl 
In Ps. Ixxvii. 10, i39 is, like nisv, Ezek. xxxvi. 3, an infini- 
tive from }39, formed after the manner of the Lamed He 
verbs. Ges. and Olsh. indeed prefer to regard these forms 
as plurals of substantives (73h, MY), but the respective pas- - 


CHAP, XIX. 16-20. 343 


sages, regarded syntactically and logically, require infinitives. 
As regards the accentuation, according to which ‘msm is 
accented by Rebia mugrasch on the ultima, this does not 
necessarily decide in favour of its being injin., since in the 
1 pret. ‘2D, which, according to rule, has the tone on the 
penultima, the ultima is also sometimes (apart from the perf. 
consec.) found accented (on this, vd. on Ps. xvii. 3, and Ew. 
§ 197, a), as 33D, MDP, 4P, also admit of both accentuations.’ 
If ‘nian is infin., the clause is a nominal clause, or a verbal one, 
that is to be supplemented by the v. jin. 771; if it is first pers. 
pret., we have a verbal clause. It must be determined from 
the matter and the connection which of these explanations, 
both of which are in form and syntax possible, is the correct 
one. The translation, “I entreat (groan to) the sons of my 
body,” is not a thought that accords with the context, as 
would be obtained by the infin. explanation : my entreating (is 
offensive) ; this signif. (prop. to Hithp. as above) assigned to 
Kal by von Hofmann (Schriftbew. i. 2, 612) is at least not to 
be derived from the derivative j7 ; it might be more easily de- 


1 The ultima-accentuation of the form ‘njap is regular, if the Waw 


conv. pret. in fut. is added, as Ex. xxxiii. 19, 22, 2 Kings xix. 34, Isa. 
Ixy. 7, Ezek. xx. 38, Mal. ii. 2, Ps. Ixxxix. 24. Besides, the penultima 
has the tone regularly, e.g. Josh. v. 9, 1 Sam. xii. 3, xxii. 22, Jer. iv. 28, 
Ps. xxxv. 14, xxxviii. 7, Job xl. 4, Eccles. ii. 20. There are, however, 
exceptions, Deut. xxxii. 41 (*n\2v), Isa. xliv. 16 @nyon), Ps. xvii. 3 
(on), xeii. 11 (nba), exvi. 6 (mos). Perhaps the uliima-accentuation 
in these exceptional instances is intended to protect the, indistinct pro- 
nunciation of the consonants Beth, Waw, or even Resh, at the beginning 
of the following words, which might easily become blended with the final 
syllable ‘mn; certainly the reason lies in the pronunciation or in the 
rhythm (vid. on Ps. exvi. 6, and comp. the retreating of the tone in the 
infin. smbn (Ps. lxxvii. 11). Looking at this last exception, which has 
not yet been cleared up, ‘n\3n in the present passage will always be able 
to be regarded on internal grounds either as infin. or as 1 pret. The 
ultima-accentuation makes the word at first sight appear to be in/in., 
whereas in comparison with 74}, which is accented on the penult., and 
therefore as 8 pret., ‘mNM\ seems also to be intended as pret. The 
- accentuation, therefore, leaves the question in uncertainty. 


344 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


duced from 7293, Jer. xxii. 23, which appears to be a Miph. 
like 593, 7282 from Pf, but might also be derived from ANI = 


entree = 
vale 


ANN] by means of ,a transposition (vid. Hitz.). In the pre- 
sent passage one might certainly compare «>> the usual 


word for the utterance and emotion of longing and sympathy, 


or also Wy, fut. ¢ (with the infin. noun chanin), which occurs. 


in the signifn. of weeping, and transl. : my imploring, groan- 
ing, weeping, is offensive, etc. Since, however, the X. form 


of the Arab. oe (istachanna) signifies to give forth an offen- 


sive smell (esp. of the stinking refuse of a well that is dried 
up) ; and besides, since the significatn. fatere is supported for 
the root jn (comp. {T¥) by the Syriac chanino (e.g. meshcho 
chanino, rancid oil), we may also translate: “ My stinking 
is offensive,” etc., or: “TI stink to the children of my body” 
(Rosenm., Ew., Hahn, Schlottm.); and this translation is not 
only not hazardous in a book that so abounds in derivations 
from the dialects, but it furnishes a thought that is as closely 
as possible connected with ver. 17a.! 

The further question now arises, who are meant by ‘302 239, 
Perhaps his children? But in the prologue these have utterly 

1 Supplementary: Instead of istachanna (of the stinking of a well, 


perhaps denom. from |; , prop. to smell like a hen-house), the verb © 


hhannana (with 7) = ‘affana, ‘‘to be corrupt, to have a mouldy smell,” 
can, with Wetzstein, be better compared with Pia thence comes 2éf 
mohhannin = mo‘affin, corrupt rancid oil, corresponding to the Syriac 
‘ °n. Thus ambiguously do the sellers of walnuts in Damaseus cry out 
their wares with the words: el-mohhannin maugéd, ‘‘ the merciful One 
liveth,” i.e. He will send me buyers, and ‘‘there are (among them) cor- 
rupt (nuts),” i.e. Ido not guarantee the quality of my wares. In like 


manner, not only can jlo inf. dheir (dhér), to be offensive, be compared 
with >>}, but, with, Wetzstein, also the very common steppe word for 


‘‘to be bad, worthless,” 'y}, whence adj. zari (with nunation zaréjun). 


CHAP. XIX. 16-20. 345 


perished. Are we to suppose, with Eichhorn and Olshausen, 
that the poet, in the heat of discourse, forgets what he has 
laid down in the prologue? When we consider that this 
poet, within the compass of his work,—a work into which 
he has thrown his whole soul,—has allowed no anachronism, 
and no reference to anything Israelitish that is contradictory 
to its extra-Israelitish character, to escape him, such forget- 
fulness is very improbable; and when we, moreover, bear in 
mind that he often makes the friends refer to the destruction 
of Job’s children (as ch. viii. 4, xv. 30, xviii. 16), it is alto- 
gether inconceivable. Hence Schréring has proposed the 
following explanation: “ My soul [a substitution of which 
Hahn is also guilty] is strange to my wife; my entreaty does 
not even penetrate to the sons of my body, it cannot reach 
their ear, for they are long since in Shel.” But he himself 
thinks this interpretation very hazardous and insecure ; and, 
in fact, it is improbable that in the division, vers. 13-19, 
where Job complains of the neglect and indifference which 
he now experiences from those around him, 2 22 should 
be the only dead ones among the living, in which case it 
would moreover be better, after the Arabic version, to trans- 
Jate: “ My longing is for, or: I yearn after, the children 
of my body.” Grandchildren (Hirz., Ew., Hlgst., Hahn) 
might be more readily thought of ; but it is not even probable, 
that after having introduced the ruin of all of Job’s children, 
the poet would represent their children as still living, some 
mention of whom might then at least be expected in the 
epilogue. Others, again (Rosenm., Justi, Gleiss), after the 
precedent of the LXX. (viol taddaxidmv pov), understand 
the sons of concubines (slaves). Where, however, should a 
trace be found of the poet having conceived of his hero as a 
polygamist,—a hero who is even a model of chastity and 
continence (ch. xxxi. 1)? 

But must 1202 "3 really signify his sons or grandsons ? 


346 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Children certainly are frequently called, in relation to the 
father, 1292 "5 (e.g. Deut. vii. 13), and the father himself 
can call them ‘2392 "2 (Mic. vi. 7); but jo3 in this reference 
is not the body of the father, but the mother’s womb, whence, 
begotten by him, the children issue forth. Hence “ son of — 
my body” occurs only once (Proy. xxxi. 2) in the mother’s — 
mouth. In the mouth of Job even (where the first origin of 
man is spoken of), ‘301 signifies not Job’s body, but the womb 
that conceived him (vid. ch. iii. 10); and thus, therefore, it 
is not merely possible, but it is natural, with Stuhlm., Ges., 
Umbr., and Schlottm., to understand ‘3912 ‘32 of the sons of 
his mother’s womb, 7.e. of her who bare him; consequently, 
as “8S 23, Ps, Ixix. 9, of natural brethren (brothers and 
sisters, sorores uterine), .in which sense, regarding ‘nn 
according to the most natural influence of the tone as infin, 
we transl.: “and my stinking is offensive (supply 1) to the 
children of my mother’s womb.” It is also possible that the 
expression, as the words seem to be taken by Symmachus 
(viods ravdav pov, my slaves’ children), and as they are taken 
by Kosegarten, in comparison with the Arab. jb) in the 
signification race, subdivision (in the downward gradation, 
the third) of a greater tribe, may denote those who with him 
belong in a wider sense to one mother’s bosom, i.e. to the 
same clan, although the mention of ‘302 ‘22 in close con- 
nection with ‘nvs is not favourable to this extension of the 
idea. The circle of observation is certainly widened in 
ver. 18, where poy are not Job’s grandchildren (Hahn), but 
the children of neighbouring families and tribes ; omy (vid. 
ch. xvi. 11) is a boy, and especially (perh. on account of the 
similarity in sound between ay and ay) a rude, frolicsome, 
mischievous boy. Even such make him feel their contempt; 
and if with difficulty, and under the influence of pain which 
distorts his countenance, he attempts to raise himself (724ps, 
LXX. 6rav avacrd, hypothetical cohortative, as ch. xi. 17, 


CHAP. XIX. 16—20. 347 


xvi. 6), they make him the butt of their jesting talk (2 735, 
as Ps. 1. 20). 

Ver. 19. “iD ‘ND is the name he gives those to whom he 
confides his most secret affairs; Tip (vid. on Ps. xxv. 14) 
signifies either with a verbal notion, secret speaking (Arab. 
sdwada, III. form from sdéda, to press one’s self close upon, 
esp. as sdrra, to speak in secret with any one), or what is 
made firm, 7.e. what is impenetrable, therefore a secret (from 
sdda, to be or make close, firm, compact ; cognate root, 7D, 
wasada, cognate in signification, sirr, a secret, from sarra, 
Y, which likewise signifies to make firm). Those to whom 
he has made known his most secret plans (comp. Ps. lv. 
13-15) now abhor him; and those whom he has thus (71, as 
ch. xv. 17) become attached to, and to whom he has shown 
his affection,—he says this with an allusion to the three,— 
have turned against him. They gave tokens of their love 
and honour to him, when he was in the height of his hap- 
piness and prosperity, but they have not even shown any 
sympathy with him in his present form of distress.’ His 
bones cleave (P27, Aq. éxoAdn6y, LX X. erroneously écd- 
Tyoav, 1.€. NIP) to his skin, i.e. the bones may be felt and 
seen through the skin, and the little flesh that remains is 
wasted away-almost to a skeleton (vid. ch. vii. 15). | This is 
not contradictory to the primary characteristic symptom of 


1 The disease which maims or devours the limbs, da’u el-gudhdm [vid. 
supra, p. 69], which generically includes Arabian leprosy, cancer, and 
syphilis, and is called the ‘ first-born of death” in ch. xviii. 13, is still in 
Arabia the most dreaded disease, in the face of which all human sym- 
pathy ceases. In the steppe, even the greatest personage who is seized 
with this disease is removed at least a mile or two from the encampment, 
where a charbish, i.e. a small black hair-tent, is put up for him, and an 
old woman, who has no relations living, is given him as an attendant 
until he dies. No one visits him, not even his nearest relations. He is 
cast off as muqdtal ollah.Wetzst. The prejudice .combated .by the 
book of Job, that the leper is, as such, one who is smitten by the wrath 
of God, has therefore as firm hold of the Arabian mind in the Loris 
- day as it had centuries ago. 


348 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


the lepra nodosa; for the wasting away of the rest of the 
body may attain an extraordinarily high degree in connection 
with the hypertrophy of single parts. He can indeed say of 
himself, that he is only escaped (se soit échappé) with the skin 
of his teeth. By the “skin of his teeth” the gums are generally 
understood. But (1) the gum is not skin, and can therefore 
not be called “skin of the teeth” in any language; (2) Job 
complains in ver. 17 of his offensive breath, which in itself does 
not admit of the idea of healthy gums, and especially if it be 
the result of a scorbutic ulceration of the mouth, presupposes 
an ulcerous destruction of the gums. The current transla- 
tion, “with my gums,” is therefore to be rejected on account 
both of the language and the matter. For this reason Stickel 
(whom Hahn follows) takes ny as inf. from ny, and trans- 
iates: “J am escaped from it with my teeth naked” [lit. 
with the being naked of my teeth], z.e. with teeth that are 
no longer covered, standing forward uncovered. ‘This expla- 
nation is pathologically satisfactory ; but it has against it (1) 
the translation of y, which is wide of the most natural 
interpretation of the word; (2) that in close connection with 
nydons) one expects the mention of a part of the body that 
has remained whole. Is there not, then, really a skin of the 
teeth in the proper sense? The gum is not skin, but the 
teeth are surrounded with a skin in the jaw, the so-called 
periosteum. If we suppose, what is natural enough, that his 


offensive breath, ver. 17, arises from ulcers in the mouth (in 
connection with scorbutus, as is known, the breath has a_ 


terribly offensive smell), we obtain the following picture of 
Job’s disease: his flesh is in part hypertrophically swollen, 
in part fearfully wasted away; the gums especially are 
destroyed and wasted away from the teeth, only the perios- 
teum round about the teeth is still left to him, and single 
remnants of the covering of his loose and projecting teeth. 
Thus we interpret ‘28 “ty in the first signification of the words, 


i 


CHAP. XIX. 16-20. 349 


and have also no need for supposing that ver. 20d is a pro- 
verbial phrase for “Ihave with great care and difficulty 
escaped the extreme.” The declaration perfectly corresponds 
to the description of the disease; and it is altogether need- 
less with Hupfeld, after ch. xiii. 14, to read WA Wy, vitam 
solam et nudam vie reportavi, which is moreover inappro- 
priate, since Job regards himself as one who is_ dying. 
Symm. alters the position of the 2 similarly, since he trans- 
lates after the Syriac Hexapla: «al é&ériArov (nomi) 7d 


- Soya ois d80dcw pov, from Ho» = HI, Lie, nudare pilis, 


which J. D. Michaelis also compares; the sense, however, 
which is thereby gained, is beneath all criticism. On the 
aoristic MYPONN, vid. on ch. i. 15. Stickel has on this pas- 
sage an excursus on this ah, to which he also attributes, in 
this addition to the historic tense, the idea of striving after a 


? 


goal: “I slip away, I escape;” it certainly gives vividness to 
the notion of the action, if it may not always have the force 
of direction towards anything. Therefore: with a destroyed 
flesh, and indeed so completely destroyed that there is even 
nothing left to him of sound skin except the skin of his 
teeth, wasted away to a skeleton, and become both to sight 
and smell a loathsome object;—such is the sufferer the friends 
have before them,—one who is tortured, besides, by a dark 
conflict which they only make more severe,—one. who now 
implores them for pity, and because he has no pity to expect 
from man, presses forward to a hope which reaches beyond 
the grave. 


21 Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, 
For the hand of Eloah hath touched me. 

22 Wherefore do ye persecute me as God, 
And are never satisfied with my flesh? 

23 Oh that my words were but written, 


3900 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


That they were recorded in a book, 

24 With an iron pen, filled in with lead, 
Graven in the rock for ever ! 

25 And I know: my Redeemer liveth, . 
And as the last One will He arise from the dust. — 


In ver. 21 Job takes up a strain we have not heard previ- 
ously. His natural strength becomes more and more feeble, 
and his yoice weaker and weaker. It is a feeling of sadness 
that prevails in the preceding description of suffering, and 
now even stamps the address to the friends with a tone of 
importunate entreaty which shall, if possible, affect their heart. 
They are indeed his friends, as the emphatic ‘Y7, DAS affirms ; 
impelled towards him by sympathy they are come, and at 
least stand by him while all other men flee from him. They 
are therefore to grant him favour (}24, prop. to incline to) in 
the place of right; it is enough that the hand of Eloah has 
touched him (in connection with this, one is reminded that 
leprosy is called 933, and is pre-eminently accounted as plaga 
divina ; wherefore the suffering Messiah also bears the signi- 
ficant name ‘37 ‘27 N10, “ the leprous one from the school of 
Rabbi,” in the Talmud, after Isa. liii. 4, 8), they are not to 
make the divine decree heavier to him by their uncharitable- 
ness. Wherefore do ye persecute me—he asks them in ver. 
22—like as God (Px7iD2, according to Saad. and Ralbag= 
nPX“D3, which would be very tame); by which he means not 
merely that they add their persecution to God’s, but that 
they take upon themselves God’s work, that they usurp to 
themselves a judicial divine authority, they act towards him 
as if they were superhuman (vid. Isa. xxxi. 3), and therefore 
inhumanly, since they, who are but his equals, look down 
upon him from an assumed and false elevation. ‘The other 
half of the question: wherefore are ye not full of my flesh 
(de ma chair, with }2, as ch. xxxi. 31), but still continue to 


CHAP. XIX. 21-25. 351 


devour it? is founded upon a common Semitic figurative 
expression, with which may be compared our [Germ.] expres- 
sion, “to gnaw with the tooth of slander” [comp. Engl. 
“backbiting”]. In Chaldee, "7 ‘7)37P Oak, to eat the pieces 
of (any one), is equivalent to, to slander him; in Syriac, 
ochelgarsso is the name of Satan, like SidBoros. The Arabic 
here, as almost everywhere in the book of Job, presents a 


still, closer parallel; for oh Js) signifies to eat any one’s 


flesh, then (different from "¥2 box, Ps. xxvii. 2) equivalent 
to, to slander,’ since an evil report is conceived of as a wild 
beast, which delights in tearing a neighbour to pieces, as the 
friends do not refrain from doing, since, from the love of their 
assumption that his suffering must be the retributive punish- 
ment of heinous sins, they lay sins to his charge of which he 
is not conscious, and which he never committed. Against 
these uncharitable and groundless accusations he wishes (vers. 
23 sq.) that the testimony of his innocence, to which they 
will not listen, might be recorded in a book for posterity, or 
because a book may easily perish, graven in a rock (therefore 
not on leaden plates) with an iron style, and the addition of 
lead, with which to fill up the engraved letters, and render 
them still more imperishable. In connection with the re- 
markable fidelity with which the poet throws himself back 
into the pre-Israelitish patriarchal time of his hero, it is of 
no small importance that he ascribes to him an acquaintance 
not only with monumental writing, but also with book and 
documentary writing (comp. ch. xxxi. 35). 

The fut., which also elsewhere (ch. vi. 8, xiii. 5, xiv. 13, 


1 Vid. Schultens’ ad Prov. Meidanii, p. 7 (where ‘‘to eat his own flesh,” 
equivalent to ‘‘ himself,” without allowing others to do it, signifies to 


censure his kinsmen), and comp. the phrase val cdl JS) (aclu-I- 


a raédhi) in the signification arrodere existimationem hominum in Makkari, 
i. 541, 13. 


/ 
352 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


_ once the pret., ch. xxiii. 3, novertm) follows AY", quis dabat 
= utinam, has Waw consec. here (as Deut. v. 26 the pret.) ; 
the arrangement of the words is extremely elegant, 753 
stands per hyperbaton emphatically prominent. 203 and ppn 
(whence fut. Hoph. PM with Dag. implicitum in the n, comp- 
ch. iv. 20, and the Dag. of the p omitted, for 3pm, according 
to Ges. § 67, rem. 8) interchange also elsewhere, Isa. xxx. 8. 
"BD, according to its etymon, is a book formed of the skin of 
an animal, as Arab. sufre, the leathern table-mat spread on 
the ground instead of a table. It is as unnecessary to read 
wr (comp. ch. xvi. 8, LXX., els waprdpwv) instead of qy9 
here, as in Isa. xxx. 8. He wishes that his own declaration, in 
opposition to his accusers, may be inscribed as on a monument, 
that it may be immortalized," in order that posterity may be- 
hold it, and, it is to be hoped, judge him more justly than 
his cotemporaries. He wishes this, and is certain that his 
wish is not vain. His testimony to his innocence will not 
descend to posterity without being justified to it by God, the 
living God. Se 

Thus is ‘AYT 28) connected with what precedes. ‘nyt is 
followed, as in ch. xxx. 23, Ps. ix. 21, by the oratio. directa. 
The monosyllable tone-word *7 (on account of which Osi has 
the accent drawn back to the penult.) is 3 pret.: I know: 
my redeemer liveth; in connection with this we recall the 
name of God, nhyn %n, Dan. xii. 7, after which the Jewish 
oath per Anchialum in Martial is to be explained. PY: might 
(with Umbr. and others), in comparison with ch. xvi. 18, as 
Num. xxxv. 12, be equivalent to 039 bsi: he who will re- 
deem, demand back, avenge the shedding of his blood and 
maintain his honour as of blood that has been innocently 


syd is differently interpreted by Jerome: evermore hewn in the rock; 
for so it seems’ his vel certe (instead of which celte is also read, which 
is an old northern name for a chisel) sculpantur in silice must be ex- 
plained. 


SS  =—s = 


CHAP. XIX. 21-25. 353 


shed; in general, however, 5x3 signifies to procure compensa- 
tion for the down-trodden and unjustly oppressed, Prov. xxiii. 
11, Lam. iii. 58, Ps. exix. 154. This Rescuer of his honour 
lives and will rise up as the last One, as one who holds out 
over everything, and therefore as one who will speak the 
final decisive word. To {i048 have been given the significa- 
tions Afterman in the sense of vindex (Hirz., Ewald), or 
Rearman in the sense of a second [Uit. in a duel,] (Hahn), but 
contrary to the usage of the language: the word signifies 
postremus, novissimus, and is to be understood according to 
Isa. xliv. 6, xlviii. 12, comp. xli. 4. But what is the meaning 
of "ayy? Is it: upon the dust of the earth, having de- 
scended from heaven? ‘The words may, according to ch. xli. 
25 [Hebr., Engl. xli. 33], be understood thus (without the 
accompanying notion, formerly supposed by Umbreit, of 
pulvis or arena = palestra, which is Classic, not Hebraic) ; 
but looking to the process of destruction going on in his 
body, which has been previously the subject of his words, and 
is so further on, it is far more probable that rpy-y is to be 
interpreted according to ch. xvii. 16, xx. 11, xxi. 26, Ps. xxx. 
10. Moreover, an Arab would think of nothing else but the 


jw 


dust of the grave if he read a5 _s< in this connection." 


Besides, it is unnecessary to connect by pip, as perhaps 2. 
Chron. xxi. 4, and the Arab. (Je el: (to stand by, help) : 
spy-y is first of all nothing more than a defining of locality. 
To affirm that if it refer to Job it ought to be “5y, is un- 
founded. Upon the dust in which he is now soon to be laid, 

1 In Arabic pe belongs only to the ancient language (whence ‘afarahu, 
he has cast him into the dust, placed him upon the sand, inf. ‘afr) ; 
Asé (whence the Ghobar, a peculiar secret-writing, has its name) signi- 
fies the dry, flying dust ; ram) +, however, is dust in gen., and particu- 
larly the dust of the grave, a8 e.g. in the forcible proverb: nothing but 


the turdb fills the eyes of man. So common is this signification, that a 
tomb is therefore called turve 


VOL. I. Z 


354 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


into which he is now soon to be changed, will He, the Rescuer 
of his honour, arise (O%p, as in Deut. xix. 15, Ps. xxvii. 12, 
xxxv. 11, of the rising up of a witness, and as eg. Ps. xii. 6, 
comp. xciv. 16, Isa. xxxiii. 10, of the rising up and interposing 
of a rescuer and help) and set His divine seal to Job’s own 
testimony thus made permanent in the monumental inscrip- 
tion. O0ctinger’s interpretation is substantially the same: 
“T know that He will at last come, place himself over the 
dust in which I have mouldered away, pronounce my cause 
just, and place upon me the crown of victory.” 

A somewhat different connection of the thought is obtained, 
if ‘281 is taken not progressively, but adversatively: “Yet I 
know,” etc. The thought is then, that his testimony of his 
innocence need not at all be inscribed in the rock; on the 
contrary, God, the ever living One, will verify it. It is diffi- 
cult to decide between them; still the progressive rendering 
seems to be preferable, because the human vindication after 
death, which is the object of the wish expressed in vers. 23 sq., 
is still not essentially different from the divine vindication 
hoped for in ver. 25, which must not be regarded as an anti- 
thesis, but rather as a perfecting of the other designed for 
posterity. Ver. 25 is, however, certainly a higher hope, to 
which the wish in vers. 23 sq.forms the stepping-stone. God 
himself will avenge Job’s blood, i.e. against his accusers, who 
say that it is the blood of one who is guilty ; over the dust 


of the departed He will arise, and by His majestic testimony 


put to silence those who regard this dust of decay as the dust 
of a sinner, who has received the reward of his deeds. 

But is it perhaps this his hope of God’s vindication, ex- 
pressed in vers. 25-27, which (as Schlottmann and Hahn, 


' Hahn, after having in his pamphlet, de spe immortalitatis sub V.T. 
gradatim exculta, 1845, understood Job’s confession distinctly of a 
future beholding in this world, goes further in his Commentary, and 
entirely deprives this confession of the character of hope, and takes all as 
an expression of what is present. We withhold our further assent. 


‘ 





CHAP. XIX. 21-25. 355 


though in other respects giving very different interpretations, 
think) is, according to Job’s wish, to be permanently inscribed 
on the monument, in order to testify to posterity with what 
a stedfast and undismayed conviction he had died? The 
high-toned inéroitus, vers. 23 sq., would be worthy of the 
important inscription it introduces. But (1) it is improbable 
that the inscription would begin with ‘3s, consequently with 
Waw,—a difficulty which is not removed by the translation, 
“Yea, I know,” but only covered up; the appeal to Ps. ii. 6, 
Isa. iii. 14, is inadmissible, since there the divine utterance, 
which begins with Waw, per aposiopesin continues a suppressed 
clause; ‘38 ‘2 would be more admissible, but that which is 
to be written down does not even begin with ‘3 in either 
Hab. ii. 3 or Jer. xxx. 3. (2.) According to the whole of 
Job’s previous conduct and habitual state of mind, it is to be 
supposed that the contents of the inscription would be the 
expression of the stedfast consciousness of his innocence, not 
the hope of his vindication, which only here and there flashes 
through the darkness of the conflict and temptation, but is 
always again swallowed up by this darkness, so that the 
thought of a perpetual preservation, as on a monument, of 
this hope can by no means have its origin in Job; it forms 
everywhere only, so to speak, the golden weft of the tragic 
warp, which in itself even resists the tension of the two op- 
posites: Job’s consciousness of innocence, and the dogmatic 
postulate of the friends ; and their intensity gradually increases 
with the intensity of this very tension. So also here, where 
the strongest expression is given both to the confession of his 
innocence as a confession which does not shun, but even 
desires, to be recorded in a permanent form for posterity, and 
also at the same time in connection with this to the confidence 
that to him, who is misunderstood by men, the vindication 
from the side of God, although it may be so long delayed 


that he even dies, can nevertheless not be wanting. Accord- 


356 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


ingly, by ‘by we understand not what immediately follows, 
but the words concerning his innocence which have already 
been often repeated by him, and which remain unalterably 
the same ; and we are authorized in closing one strophe with 
ver. 25, and in beginning a new one with ver. 26, which 
indeed is commended by the prevalence of the decastich in 
this speech, although we do not allow to this observance of 
the strophe division any influence in determining the exposi- 
tion. It is, however, of use in our exposition. The strophe 
which now follows developes the chief reason of believing 
hope which is expressed in ver. 25; comp. the hexastich ch. 
xii. 11-13, also there in vers. 14 sqq. is the expansion of ver. 
13, which expresses the chief thought as in the form of a 
thema. 


26 And after my skin, thus torn to pieces, 
And without my flesh shall I behold Eloah, 
27 Whom I shall behold for my good, 
And mine eyes shall see Him and no other— 
My veins languish in my bosom. 
28 Ye think: “ How shall we persecute him?” 
Since the root of the matter is found in me— 
29 Therefore be ye afraid of the sword, 
For wrath meeteth the transgressions of the sword, 
That ye may know there is a judgment ! 


If we have correctly understood npy-by, ver. 25d, we cannot 
in this speech find that the hope of a bodily recovery is ex- 


pressed. In connection with this rendering, the oldest repre- — 
sentative of which is Chrysostom, 32 is translated either: — 
free from my flesh = having become a skeleton (Umbr., — 
Hirz., and Stickel, in comm. in obi loc. de Goéle, 1832, and — 
in the transl., Gleiss, Hlgst., Renan), but this "wan, if the p> _ 
is taken as privative, can signify nothing else but fleshless = — 


bodiless; or: from my flesh, i.e. the flesh when made whole 





CHAP. XIX. 26-29. 357 


again (viz. Kichhorn in the Essay, which has exercised con- 
siderable influence, to his Allg. Bibl. d. bibl. Lat. i. 8, 1787, 
von Célln, BCr., Knapp, von Hofm.,’ and others), but 
hereby the relation of ver. 265 to 26a becomes a contrast, 
without there being anything to indicate it. Moreover, this 
rendering, as "29 may also be explained, is in itself contrary 
to the spirit and plan of the book ; for the character of Job’s 
present state of mind is, that he looks for certain death, and 
will hear nothing of the consolation of recovery (ch. xvii. 
10-16), which sounds to him as mere mockery; that he, how- 
ever, notwithstanding, does not despair of God, but, by the 
consciousness of his innocence and the uncharitableness of 
the friends, is more and more impelled from the God of wrath 
and caprice to the God of love, his future Redeemer; and 
that then, when at the end of the course of suffering the 
actual proof of God’s love breaks through the seeming mani- 
festation of wrath, even that which Job had not ventured to 
hope is realized: a return of temporal prosperity beyond his 
entreaty and comprehension. 

On the other hand, the mode of interpretation of the older 
translators and expositors, who find an expression of the hope 
of a resurrection at the end of the preceding strophe or the be- 
ginning of this, cannot be accepted. The LX X., by reading 
o’p instead of ny’, and connecting nst 1Dp3 “My Op’, translates : 
avactycet Sé (Cod. Vat. only advacrijcat) wou To c@pa (Cod. 
Vat. 70 Séppa pov) 76 avavTrAodv por (Cod. Vat. om. pot) TadTa, 
—but how can any one’s skin be said to awake (Italic: super 
terram resurget cutis mea),” and whence does the verb 43 obtain 

1’ Von Hofmann (Schriftbeweis, ii. 2, 503) translates: ‘‘I know, however, 
my Redeemer is living, and hereafter He will stand forth [which must 


have been 7)y" instead of \p*] upon the earth and after my skin, this 
surrounding (35)3, Chaldaism, instead of mypp) after the form miypy), 
and from my flesh’ shall I behold God, whom I shall behold for myself, 
and my eyes see [Him], and He is not strange.” 

2 Stickel therefore maintains that this dyiorcéyves of the LXX. is to be 


358 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


the signification exhaurire or exantlare? Jerome's translation 
is not less bold: Scio enim quod redemptor meus vivit et in 
novissimo die de terra surrecturus sum, as though it were Dips, 
not o1p’, and as though nN could signify in novissimo die (in 
favour of which Isa. viii. 23 can only seemingly be quoted)! 
The Targ. translates: “I know that my Redeemer liveth, and 
hereafter His redemption will arise (become a reality) over 
the dust (into which I shall be dissolved), and after my skin 
is again made whole (thus' NBAX seems to require to be trans- 
lated, not intumuit) this will happen; and from my flesh I 
shall again behold God.” It is evident that this is intended 
of a future restoration of the corporeal nature that has be- 
come dust, but the idea assigned to \9p3 is without foundation. 
Luther also cuts the knot by translating: (But I know that 
my Redeemer liveth), and He will hereafter raise me up out 
of the ground, which is an impossible sense that is.word for 
word forced upon the text. There is just as little ground 
for translating ver. 26a with Jerome: et rursum cireumdabor 
pelle mea (after which Luther: and shall then be surrounded 
with this my skin); for 35>) can as NMiph. not signify cir- 
cumdabor, and as Piel does not give the meaning cutis mea 
circumdabit (scil. me), since Bp) cannot be predicate to the 
sing. Ny. In general, 1)p3 cannot be understood as Niph., 


but only as Piel; the Piel 2, however, signifies not: to | 


surround, but: to strike down, e.g. olives from the tree, Isa. 
xvii. 6, or the trees themselves, so that they lie felled on the 
ground, Isa. x. 34, comp. Wasi, to strike into the skull and 
injure the soft brain, then: to strike forcibly on the head 
(gen. on the upper part), or also: to deal a blow with a lance 


understood not of being raised from the dead, but of being restored to 
health ; vid. on the contrary, Umbreit in Stud. u. Krit. 1840, i., and 
Ewald in d. Theol. Jahrbb., 1848, iv. 

1 In this signification, to recover, prop. to recover one’s self, neAS is 
used in Talmudic ; vid. Buxtorf, myp and npn. The rabbinical expositors 
ignore this Targum, and in general furnish but little that is useful here. 





¢ 
SS _— 


CHAP. XIX. 26-29. 359 


or stick.'. Therefore ver. 26a, according to the usage of the 
Semitic languages, can only be intended of the complete de- 
struction of the skin, which is become cracked and broken by 
the leprosy ; and this was, moreover, the subject spoken of 
above (ver. 20, comp. xxx. 19). For the present we leave it 
undecided whether Job here confesses the hope of the resur- 
rection, and only repel those forced misconstructions of his 
words which arbitrarily discern this hope in the text. Free 
from such violence is the translation: and after this my skin 
is destroyed, ¢.e. after I shall have put off this my body, from 
my flesh (i.e. restored and transfigured), I shall behold God. 
Thus is “W2 understood by Rosenm., Kosegarten (diss. in 
Tob, xix., 1815), Umbreit (Stud. u. Krit. 1840, i.), Welte, 
Carey, and others. But this interpretation is also untenable. 
For, 1. In this explanation ver. 26a is taken as an antece- 
dent ; a prepos., however, like O08 or TY, used as a conj., has, 
according to Hirzel’s correct remark, the verb always imme- 
diately after it, as ch. xlii. 7, Lev. xiv. 43; whereas 1 Sam. 
xx. 41, the single exception, is critically doubtful. 2. It is 
not probable that the poet by "\y should have thought of the 
body, which disease is rapidly hurrying on to death, and by 
“wa, on the other hand, of a body raised up and glorified. 
3. Still more improbable is it that "#1 should be so used here 
as in the church’s term, reswrrectio carnis, which is certainly 
an allowable expression, but one which exceeds the meaning 
of the language of Scripture. wa2, cdp£, is in general, and 
especially in the Old Testament, a notion which has grown 
up in almost inseparable connection with the marks of frailty 


1 Thus, according to the Turkish Kamus: to sever the skull from 


(uy~) the brain, 7.e. so that the brain is laid bare, or also e.g. to split the 
coloquintida [or bitter cucumber], so that the seeds are laid bare, or: to 
crack the bones and take out the marrow, cognate with .4), for the 
act of piercing an egg is called both nagaba and nagafa-l-beidha. In 
Hebrew Pp) coincides with 433, not with 3p). 


360 | THE BOOK OF JOB. 


and sinfulness. And 4. The hope of a resurrection as a 
settled principle in the creed of Israel is certainly more 
recent than the Salomonic period. Therefore by far the 
majority of modern expositors have decided that Job does not 
indeed here avow the hope of the resurrection, but the hope 
of a future spiritual beholding of God, and therefore of a 
future life; and thus the popular idea of Hades, which else- 
where has sway over him, breaks out. Thus, of a future 
spiritual beholding of God, are Job’s words understood by 
Ewald, Umbreit (who at first explained them differently), 
Vaihinger, Von Gerlach, Schlottmann, Hélemann (Sédchs. 
Kirchen- u. Schulbl. 1853, Nos. 48, 50, 62), Konig (Die 
Onsterblichkeitsidee im B. Iob, 1855), and others, also by the 
Jewish expositors Arnheim and Léwenthal. This rendering, 
which is also adopted in the Art. Hiob in Herzog’s Real-Ency- 
. klopdédie, does not necessitate any impossible misconstruction 
of the language, but, as we shall see further on, it does not 
exhaust the meaning of Job’s confession. 

First of all, we will continue the explanation of each 
expression. “ON is a prepos., and used in the same way as the 


cer 


Arabic de is sometimes used: after my skin, ze. after the 


loss of it (comp. ch. xxi. 21, nN, after heis dead). 45)? is to 
be understood relatively : which they have torn in pieces, %¢. 
which has been torn in pieces (comp. the same use of the 
3 pers. ch. iv. 19, xviii. 18); and nxt, which, according to 
Targ., Koseg., Stickel de Goéle, and Ges. Thes., ought to 
be taken inferentially, equivalent to hoc erit (this, however, 
cannot be accepted, because it must have been ‘t}) INS MNn, 
wr de ENds, idque postguam, and moreover would require 
the words to be arranged “)y \pp2 "Mx), commonly however 
taken together with "\y (which is nevertheless mase.), is 
understood as pointing to his decayed body, seems better to 
be taken adverbially: in this manner (Arnheim, Stickel in 


. 
. 
; 
‘ 





CHAP. XIX. 26-29. 361 


his translation, von Gerl., Hahn) ; it is the acc. of reference, 
as ch. xxsiii. 12. The jo of ¥30 is the negative jo: free 
from my flesh (prop. away, far from, Num. xv. 25, Prov. 
xx. 3),—a rather frequent way of using this preposition (wid. 
ch. xi. 15, xxi. 9; Gen. xxvii. 39; 2 Sam. i. 22; Jer. xviii. 
45). Accordingly, we translate: “and after my skin, which 
they tear to pieces thus, and free from my flesh, shall I behold 
Eloah.” That Job, after all, is permitted to behold God in 
this life, and also in this life receives the testimony of his 
justification, does not, as already observed, form any objection 
to this rendering of ver. 26: it is the reward of his faith, 
_ which, even in the face of certain death, has not despaired of 
God, that he does not fall into the power of death at all, 
and that God forthwith condescends to him in love. And 
that Job here holds firm, even beyond death, to the hope of 
beholding God in the future as a witness to his innocence, 
does not, after ch. xiv. 13-15, xvi. 18-21, come unexpectedly ; 
and it is entirely in accordance with the inner progress of 
the drama, that the thought of a redemption from Hades, 
expressed in the former passage, and the demand expressed 
in the latter passage, for the rescue of the honour of his 
blood, which is even now guaranteed him by his witness: in 
heaven, are here comprehended, in the confident certainty 
that his blood and his dust will not be declared by God the 
Redeemer as innocent, without his being in some way con- 
scious of it, though freed from this his decaying body. In 
ver. 27 he declares how he will behold God: whom I shall 
behold'to me, z.e. I, the deceased one, as being for me (°9, like 
Ps. lvi. 10, exviii. 6), and my eyes see Him, and not a stranger. 
Thus (neque alius) LXX., Targ., Jerome, and most others 
translate; on the other hand, Ges. Thes., Umbr., Vaih., 
Stick., Hahn, and von Hofm. translate: my eyes see Him, 
and indeed not as an enemy; but “ signifies alienus and 
alius, not however adversarius, which latter meaning it in 


362 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


general obtains only in a national connection ; here (used as 
in Prov. xxvii. 2) it excludes the three: none other but Job, 
by which he means his opponents, will see God rising up for 
him, taking up his cause. 487 is pret. of the future, there- 
fore pret. propheticum, or pret. confidentie (as frequently in 
the Psalms). His reins within him pine after this vision of 
God. Hahn, referring to ch. xvi. 13, translates incorrectly : 
“ If even my reins within me perish,” which is impossible, 
according to the syntax; for Ps. Ixxiii. 26 has nba in the 
sense of licet defecerit as hypothetical antecedent. The Syriac 
version is altogether wrong: my reins (culjot) vanish com- 
pletely away by reason of my lot (‘pN3). It would be ex- 
pressed in Arabic exactly as it is here: culdja (or, dual, 
culataja) tadhtibu, my reins melt; for in Arab. also, as in 
the Semitic languages generally, the reins are considered as 
the seat of the tenderest and deepest affections (Psychol. 8. 
268, f), especially of love, desire, longing, as here, where 
moa, as in Ps. cxix. 123 and freq., is intended of wasting 
away in earnest longing for salvation. 

Having now ended the exposition of the single expressions, 
we inquire whether those do justice to the text who under- 
stand it of an absolutely bodiless future beholding of God. 
We doubt it. Job says not merely that he, but that his eyes, 
shall behold God. He therefore imagines the spirit as clothed 
with a new spiritual body instead of the old decayed one; 
not so, however, that this spiritual body, these eyes which 
shall behold in the future world, are brought into combina- 
tion with the present decaying body of flesh. But his faith 
is here on the direct road to the hope of a resurrection ; we 
see it germinating and struggling towards the light. Among 
the three pearls which become visible in the book of Job above 
the waves of conflict, viz. ch. xiv. 13-15, xvi. 18-21, xix. 
25-27, there is none more costly than this third. As in the 
second part of Isaiah, the fifty-third chapter is outwardly and 


—— i tt > sal 


—_—_ —s 


CHAP. XIX. 26-29. 363 


inwardly the middle and highest point of the 3 X 9 prophetic 
utterances, so the poet of the book of Job has adorned the 
middle of his work with this confession of his hero, wherein 
he himself plants the flag of victory above his own grave. 
Now in ver. 28 Job turns towards the friends. He who 
comes forth on his side as his advocate, will make Himself 
felt by them to be a judge, if they continue to persecute the 
suffering servant of God (comp. ch. xiii. 10-12). It is not 
to be translated: for then ye will say, or: forsooth then will 
ye say. This would be NN tS °3, and certainly imply that 
the opponents will experience just the same theophany, that 
therefore it will be on the earth.» Oehler (in his Veteris Zest. 
sententia de rebus post mortem futuris, 1846) maintains this 
instance against the interpretation of this confession of Job 
of a future beholding; it has, however, no place in the text, 
and Oehler rightly gives no decisive conclusion. For ver. 
28, as is rightly observed by C. W. G. Kostlin (in his Essay, 
de immortalitatis spe, que in 1. [obi apparere dicitur, 1846) 
against Oehler, and is even explained by Oetinger, is the 
antecedent to ver. 29 (comp. ch. xxi. 28 sq.): if ye say: 
how, 2.e. under what pretence of right, shall we prosecute 
him (oH, prop. pursue him, comp. Judg. vii. 25), and (so 
that) the root of the matter (treated of) is found in me (°3, 
not {2, since the oratio directa, as in ch. xxii. 17, passes into 
the oratio obliqua, Ew. § 338, a); in other words: if ye con- 
tinue to seek the cause of my suffering in my guilt, fear ye 
the sword, i.e. God’s sword of vengeance (as ch. xv. 22, and 
perhaps as Isa. xxxi. 8: a sword, without the art. in order to 
combine the idea of what is boundless, endless, and terrific 
with the indefinite—the indetermination ad amplificandum 
described on Ps. ii. 12). The confirmatory substantival 


1 He remains undecided between a future spiritual and a present 
beholding of God: harum interpretationum utra rectior sit, vix erit dijudi- 
candum, nam in utramque partem facile potest disputari. 


864. ° THE BOOK OF JOB. 


clause which. follows has been very variously interpreted. It 
is inadmissible to understand 19M of the rage of the friends 
against Job (Umbr., Schlottm., and others), or 229 nis of 
their murderous sinning respecting Job; both expressions 
are too strong to be referred to the friends. We must explain 
either: the glow, z.e. the glow of the wrath of God; are the 
expiations which the sword enjoins (Hirz., Ew., and others) ; 
but apart from iY not signifying directly the punishment of 
sin, this thought is strained; or, which we with Rosenm. and 
others prefer: glow, z.e. the glow of the wrath of God, are 
the sword’s crimes, 7.e. they carry glowing anger as their 
reward in themselves, wrath overtakes them. Crimes of the 
sword are not such as are committed with the sword—for 
such are not treated of here, and, with Arnh. and Hahn, to 
understand 29n of the sword “ of hostilely mocking words,” is 
arbitrary and artificial—but such as have incurred the sword. 
Job thinks of slander and blasphemy. These are even before 
a human tribunal capital offences (comp. ch. xxxi. 11, 28). 
He warns the friends of a higher sword and a higher power, 
which they will not escape: “that ye may know it.” ~W, 
for which the Keri is 1. An ancient various reading (in 
Pinkster) is PYT, (instead of YIN). The LXX. shows how 
it is to be interpreted: Ovuos yap én’ dvouous (Cod. Alex. 
—ols) érrenevoeTat, Kal TOTEe yYooovTat. According to Cod. 
Vat. the translation continues rod éorw abrév % dn (MY, 


comp. ch. xxix. 5, where “tw is translated by dA@dys); ac- — 


cording to Cod. Alex. dtu ovdapuod aidtav 4 tayus éoriv (MW 
from 11¥). Ewald in the first edition, which Hahn follows, 
considers, as Kichhorn already had, } as a secondary form 
of "IW; Hlgst. wishes to read "IW at once. ‘It might sooner, 
with Raschi, be explained: that ye might only know the 
powers of justice, ze. the manifold power of destruction 
which the judge has at his disposal. But all these explana- 
tions are unsupported by the usage of the language, and 








CHAP, XIX. 26-29. 365 


Ewald’s conjecture in his second edition: D21Y ‘Ns (where is 
your violence), has nothing to commend it; it goes too far 
from the received text, calls the error of the friends by an 
unsuitable name, and gives no impressive terniination to the 
speech. On the other hand, the speech could not end more 
suitably than by Job’s bringing home to the friends the fact 
that there is a judgment; accordingly it is translated by Aq. 
‘rt Kpiois; by Symm., Theod., é7v gore xpiows. w is= Ws once 
in the book of Job, as probably also once in the Pentateuch, 
Gen. vi. 3. }"1 or ™ are infinitive forms; the latter from the 
Kal, which occurs only in Gen. vi. 8, with Cholem, which 
being made a substantive (as e.g. 13), signifies the judging, 
the judgment. Why the Keri substitutes 1, which does not 
occur elsewhere in the signification judicium, for the more 
common }", is certainly lost to view, and it shows only that 
the reading »71¥ was regarded in the synagogue as the tradi- 
tional. } has everywhere else the signification judicium, e.g. 
by Elihu, ch. xxxvi. 17, and also often in the book of Pro- 
verbs, e.g. ch. xx. 8 (comp. in the Arabizing supplement, ch. 
xxxl.8). The final judgment is in Aramaic 827 82"; the last 
day in Hebrew and Arabic, }17 D1, jaum ed-din. To give to 
“ww, that [there is] a judgment,” this dogmatically definite 
meaning, is indeed, from its connection with the historical 
recognition of the plan of redemption, inadmissible; but. there 
is nothing against understanding the conclusion of Job’s 
speech according to the conclusion of the book of Ecclesiastes, 
which belongs to the same age of literature. 

The speech of Job, now explained, most clearly shows us 
how Job’s affliction, interpreted by the friends as a divine 
retribution, becomes for Job’s nature a wholesome refining 
crucible. We see also from this speech of Job, that he can 
only regard his affliction as a kindling of divine wrath, and 
God’s meeting him as an enemy (ch. xix. 11). But the more 
decidedly the friends affirm this, and describe the root of the 


366 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


manifestation as lying in himself, in his own transgression ; 
and the more uncharitably, as we have seen it at last in Bildad’s 
speech, they go to an excess in their terrible representations of 
the fate of the ungodly with unmistakeable reference to him: 
the more clearly is it seen that this indirect affliction of mis- 
construction must tend to help him in his suffering generally 
to the right relation towards God. For since the consolation 
expected from man is changed into still more cutting accusa- 
tion, no other consolation remains to him in all the world but 
the consolation of God; and if the friends are to be in the 
right when they persist unceasingly in demonstrating to him 
that he must be a heinous sinner, because he is suffering so 
severely, the conclusion is forced upon him in connection with 
his consciousness of innocence, that the divine decree is an 
unjust one (ch. xix. 5 sq.). From such a conclusion, how- 
ever, he shrinks back; and this produces a twofold result. 
The crushing anguish of soul which the friends inflict on 
him, by forcing upon him a view of his suffering which is as 
strongly opposed to his self-consciousness as to his idea of 
God, and must therefore bring him into the extremest diffi- 
culty of conscience, drives him to the mournful request, 
“Have pity upon, have pity upon me, O ye my friends” 
(ch. xix. 21); they shall not also pursue him whom God’s 
hand has touched, as if they were a second divine power in 
authority over him, that could dispose of him at its will and 
pleasure; they shall, moreover, cease from satisfying the in- 
satiable greed of their nature upon him. He treats the 
friends in the right manner; so that if their heart were not 
encrusted by their dogma, they would be obliged to change 
their opinion. This in Job’s conduct is an unmistakeable 
step forward to a more spiritual state of mind. But the stern 
inference of the friends has a beneficial influence not merely 
on his relation to them, but also on his relation to God. To 
the wrathful God, whom they compel him to regard also as 








CHAP. XIX. 26-29. 367 


unjust, he cannot in itself cling. He is so much the less able 
to do this, as he is compelled the more earnestly to long for 
vindication, the more confidently he is accused. 

When he now wishes that the testimony which he has laid 
down concerning his innocence, and which his cotemporaries 
do not credit, might be graven in the rock with an iron pen, 
and filled in with lead, the memorial in words of stone is but 
a dead witness; and he cannot even for the future rely on 
men, since he is so contemptuously misunderstood and de- 
ceived by them in the present. This impels his longing after 
vindication forward from a lifeless thing to a living person, 
and turns his longing from man below to God above. He 
has One who will acknowledge his misjudged cause, and set it 
right,—a Goél, who will not first come into being in a later 
generation, but liveth—who has not to come into being, but is. 
There can be no doubt that by the words ‘n 5x3 he means the 
same person of whom in ch. xvi. 19 he says: “ Behold, even 
now in heaven is my Witness, and One who acknowledges 
me is in the heights.” The °n here corresponds to the Any o3 
in that passage; and from this—that the heights of heaven 
is the place where this witness dwells—is to be explained the 
manner in which Job (ch. xix. 255) expresses his confident 
belief in the realization of that which he (ch. xvi. 20 sq.) at 
first only importunately implores: as the Last One, whose 
word shall avail in the ages of eternity, when the strife of 
human voices shall have long been silent, He shall stand 
forth as finally decisive witness over the dust, in which Job 
passed away as one who in the eye of man was regarded as 
an object of divine punishment, And after his skin, in such 
a manner destroyed, and free from his flesh, which is even 
now already so fallen in that the bones may be seen through 
it (ch. xix. 20), he will behold Eloah ; and he who, according 
to human judgment, has died the death of the unrighteous, 
shall behold Eloah on his side, his eyes shall see and not a 


368 THE BOOK OF JOB 


stranger; for entirely for his profit, in order that he may 
bask in the light of His countenance, will He reveal himself. 

This is the picture of the future, for the realization of 
which Job longs so exceedingly, that his reins within him 
pine away with longing. Whence we see, that Job does not 
here give utterance to a transient emotional feeling, a merely 
momentary flight of faith; but his hidden faith, which during 
the whole controversy rests at the bottom of his soul, and 
over which the waves of despair roll away, here comes forth 
to view. He knows, that although his outward man may 
decay, God cannot, however, fail to acknowledge his inner 
man. But does this confidence of faith of Job really extend 
to the future life? It has, on the contrary, been observed, 
that if the hope expressed with such confidence were a hope 
respecting the future life, Job’s despondency would be trifling, 
and to be rejected; further, that this hope stands in contra- 
diction to his own assertion, ch. xiv. 14: “ If man dies, shall 
he live again? All the days of my warfare would I wait, 
till my change should come ;” thirdly, that Job’s character 
would be altogether wrongly drawn, and would be a. psycho- 
logical caricature, if the thought slumbering in Job’s mind, 
which finds utterance in ch. xix. 25-27, were the thought of 
a future vision of God; and finally, that the unravelling of 
the knot of the puzzle, which continually increases in en- 
tanglement by the controversy with the friends, at the close 
of the drama, is effected by a theophany, which issues in 
favour of one still living, not, as ought to be expected by 
that rendering, a celestial scene unveiled over the grave of 
Job. But such a conclusion was impossible in an Old Testa- 
ment book. The Old Testament as yet knew nothing of a 
heaven peopled with happy human spirits, arrayed in white 
robes (the stola prima). And at the time when the book of 
Job was composed, there was also neither a positive revela- 
tion nor a dogmatic confession of the resurrection of the 





oe 
> 


CHAP. XIX. 26-29. 369 


dead, which forms the boundary of the course of this world, 
in existence. The book of Job, however, shows us how, from 
the conflict concerning the mystery of this present life, faith 
struggled forth towards a future solution.’ The hope which 
Job expresses is not one prevailing in his age—not one that 
has come to him from tradition—not one embracing man- 
kind, or even only the righteous in general. All the above 
objections would be really applicable, if it were evident here 
that Job was acquainted with the doctrine of a beholding of 
God after death, which should recompense the pious for the 
sufferings of this present time. But such is not the case. 
The hope expressed is not a finished and believingly appro- 
priating hope; on the contrary, it is a hope which is first 
conceived and begotten under the pressure of divinely decreed 
sufferings, which make him appear to be a transgressor, and 
of human accusations which charge him with transgression. 
It is impossible for him to suppose that God should remain, 
as now, so hostilely turned from him, without ever again 
acknowledging him. The truth must at last break through 
the false appearance, and wrath again give place to love. 
That it should take place after his death, is only the extreme 
which his faith assigns to it. 

If we place ourselves on the standpoint of the poet, he 
certainly here gives utterance to a confession, to which, as the 
book of Proverbs also shows, the Salomonic Chokma began 
to rise in the course of believing thought; but also on the 
part of the Chokma, this confession was primarily only a 
theologoumenon, and was first in the course of centuries made 
sure under the combined agency of the progressive percep- 
tion of the revelation and facts connected with redemption ; 
and it is first of all in the New Testament, by the descent 
to Hades and the ascension to heaven of the Prince of Life, 
that it became a fully decided and well-defined element of 


the church’s creed. If, however, we place ourselves on the 
‘VOL. I. 2A 


370 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


standpoint of the hero of the drama, this hope of future 
vindication which flashes through the fierceness of the con- 
flict, far from making it a caricature,' gives to the delineation 


of his faith, which does not forsake God, the final perfecting 


stroke. Job is, as he thinks, meeting certain death. Why 
then should not the poet allow him to give utterance to that 
demand of faith, that he, even if God should permit him 
apparently to die the sinner’s death, nevertheless cannot’ 
remain unvindicated? Why should he not allow him here, 
in the middle of the drama, to rise from the thought, that the 
ery of his blood should not ascend in vain, to the thought 
that this vindication of his blood, as of one who is innocent, 
should not take place without his being consciously present, 
and beholding with his own eyes the God by whose judicial 
wrath he is overwhelmed, as his Redeemer? This hope, 
regarded in the light of the later perception of the plan of 
redemption, is none other than the hope of a resurrection ; 
but it appears here only in the germ, and comes forward as 
purely personal: Job rises from the dust, and, after the 
storm of wrath is passed, sees Eloah, as one who acknow- 
ledges him in love, while his surviving opponents fall before 
the tribunal of this very God. It is therefore not a share 
in the resurrection of the righteous (in Isa. xxvi., which is 
uttered prophetically, but first of all nationally), and not a 
share in the general resurrection of the dead (first expressed 
in Dan. xii. 2), with which Job consoled himself; he does not 
speak of what shall happen at the end of the days, but of a 
purely personal matter after his death. Considering himself 
as one who must die, and thinking of himself as deceased, 
and indeed, according to appearance, overwhelmed by the 


1 If Job could say, like Tobia, ch. ii. 17 sq., Vulg.: flit sanctorum 
sumus et vitam illam exspectamus, quam Deus daturus est his qui fidem suam 
nunquam mutant ab eo, his conduct would certainly be different; but what 
he expresses in ch, xix. 25-27 is very far removed from this confession of 
faith of Tobia. 





— 


7 - “ 
jin te pt ee ee) 








CHAP. XIX. 26-29. 371 


punishment of his misdeeds, he would be compelled to despair 
of God, if he were not willing to regard even the incredible 
as unfailing, this, viz., that God will not permit this mark 
of wrath and of false accusation to attach to his blood and 
dust. That the conclusion of the drama should be shaped in 
accordance with this future hope, is, as we have already 
observed, not possible, because the poet’ (apart from his 
transferring himself to the position and consciousness of his 
patriarchal hero) was not yet in possession, as a dogma, of 
that hope which Job gives utterance to as an aspiration of 
his faith, and which even he himself only at first, like the 
psalmists (vid. on Ps. xvii. 15, xlix. 15 sq., Ixxiii. 26), had as an 
aspiration of faith ;' it was, however, also entirely unneces- 
sary, since it is indeed not the idea of the drama that there is 
a life after death, which adjusts the mystery of the present, 
but that there is a suffering of the righteous which bears the 
disguise of wrath, but nevertheless, as is finally manifest, is a 
dispensation of love. 

If, however, it is a germinating hope, which in this speech of 
Job is urged forth by the strength of his faith, we can, without 
anachronistically confusing the different periods of the develop- 
ment of the knowledge of redemption, regard it as a full, but 
certainly only developing, preformation of the later belief in the 
resurrection. When Job says that with his own eyes he shall 
behold Eloah, it is indeed possible by these eyes to understand 
the eyes of the spirit ;? but it is just as possible to understand 
him to mean the eyes of his renewed body (which the old theo- 
logians describe as stola secunda, in distinction from the stola 
prima of the intermediate state); and when Job thinks of him- 

1 The view of Bottcher, de inferis, p. 149, is false, that the poet by 
the conclusion of his book disapproves the hope expressed, as dementis 
somnium. 

2 Job’s wish, ch. xix. 23 sq., is accomplished, as e.g. James v. 11 shows, 


and his hope is realized, since he has beheld God the Redeemer enter 
Hades, and is by Him led up on high to behold God in heaven. We 


372 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


self (ver. 25b) as a mouldering corpse, should he not by his 
eyes, which shall behold Eloah, mean those which have been 
dimmed in death, and are now again become capable of see- 
ing? While, if we wish to expound grammatical-historically, 
not practically, not homiletically, we also dare not introduce 
the definiteness of the later dogma into the affirmation of Job. 
It is related to eschatology as the protevangelium is to soterio- 
logy; it presents only the first lines of the picture, which is 
worked up in detail later on, but also an outline, sketched in 
such a way that every later perception may be added to it. 
Hence Schlottmann is perfectly correct when he considers that 
it is justifiable to understand these grand and powerful words, 
in hymns, and compositions, and liturgies, and monumental 
inscriptions, of the God-man, and to use them in the sense 
which “the more richly developed conception of the last things 
might so easily put upon them.” It must not surprise us that 
this sublime hope is not again expressed further on. On the 
one hand, what Sanctius remarks is not untrue: ab hoe loco 
ad finem usque libri aliter se habet Iobus quam prius; on the 
other hand, Job here, indeed in the middle of the book, soars 
triumphantly over his opponents to the height of a believing 
consciousness of victory, but as yet he is not in that state of 
mind in which he can attain to the beholding of God on his 


behalf, be it in this world or in the world to come. He has” 


still further to learn submission in relation to God, gentle- 
ness in relation to the friends. Hence, inexhaustibly rich in 
thought and variations of thought, the poet allows the contro- 
versy to become more and more involved, and the fire in which 
Job is to be proved, but also purified, to burn still longer. 


assume the historical reality of Job and the consistence of his history with 
the rest of Scripture, which we have treated in Bibl. Psychol. ch. vi. § 3, 
on the future life and redemption. Accordingly, one might, with the 
majority of modern expositors, limit Job's hope to the beholding of God 
in the intermediate state; but, as is further said above, such particulariz- 
ing is unauthorized. 


—— oe eae 











CHAP. XX. 2-5. 373 | 


Zophar’s Second Speech.— Chap. xx. 
Schema: 8. 12. 10. 8. 12. 7. 2. 


[Then began Zophar the Naamathite, and said :] 
2 Therefore do my thoughts furnish me with a reply, 
And indeed by reason of my feeling within me. 
3 The correction of my reproach I must hear, 
Nevertheless the spirit of my understanding informeth me. 
4 Knowest thou this which is from everlasting, _ 
Since man was placed upon the earth : 
5 That the triumphing of the evil-doer is not long, 
And the joy of the godless is but for a moment ? 


All modern expositors take ver. 2 as an apology for the 
opposition which follows, and the majority of them consider 
82¥2 as elliptical for nxt aya, as Tremell., Piscator, and 
others have done, partly (but wrongly) by referring to the 
fiebia mugrasch. Ewald observes: “aya stands without 
addition, because this is easily understood from the }3 in 190.” 
But although this ellipsis is not inadmissible (comp. }9> = 
swix $05, ch. xxxiv. 25; Sys, Isa. lix. 18), in spite of it ver. 20 
furnishes no meaning that can be accepted. Most expositors 
translate: “and hence the storm within me” (thus e.g. 
Ewald); but the signification perturbatio animi, proposed by 
Schultens for ‘vn, after the Arab. ur is too remote from 
the usage of Hebrew. Moreover, this _ s\> signifies prop. to 
scare, hunt, of game; not, however : to be agitated, to storm, 
—a signification which even the corresponding Hebr. wan, 
properare, does not support. Only a few expositors (as Um- 
breit, who translates: because of my storm within me) take 
~ay2 (which occurs only this once in the book of Job) as 
prepos., as it must be taken in consideration of the infin. 
which follows (comp. Ex. ix. 16,xx.20; 1 Sam. i. 6; 2 Sam. 
x. 3). Further, 120 (only by Umbreit translated by “yet,” 


374 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


after the Arab. ldkin, lékinna, which it never signifies in 
Hebr., where ? is not = xd, but = ? with Kametz before the 
tone) with that which follows is referred by several expositors 
to the preceding speech of Job, eg. Hahn: “under such 
circumstances, if thou behavest thus ;” by most, however, it 
is referred to ver. 3, e.g. Ew.: “ On this account he feels called 
upon by his thoughts to answer, and hence his inward impulse 
leaves him no rest: because he hears from Job a contemptuous 
wounding reproof of himself.” In other words: in conse- 
quence of the reproach which Job casts upon him, especially 
with his threat of judgment, Zophar’s mind and feelings fall 
into a state of excitement, and give him an answer to which 
he now gives utterance. This prospective sense of }25 may at 
any rate be retained, though “12y2 is taken as a preposition 
(wherefore . . . and indeed on account of my inward com- 
motion); but it is far more natural that the beginning of 
Zophar’s speech should be connected with the last word of 
Job’s. Ver. 2 may really be so understood if we connect 
‘vin, not with _ le, win, to excite, to make haste (after which 
also Saad. and Aben-Ezra: on account of my inward hasten- 


ing or urging), but with Gam, to feel; in this meaning Wn is | 


usual in all the Semitic dialects, and is even biblical also; for 
Eccles. ii. 25 is to be translated: who hath feeling (pleasure) 


except from Him (read 120)? ¢.e. eveh in pleasure man is — 


not free, but has conditions fixed by God. 

With }2> (used as in ch. xlii. 3) Zophar draws an inference 
from Job’s conduct, esp. from the turn which his last speech 
has taken, which, as ‘32°? ‘p’yw! affirms, urges him inyolun- 
tarily and irresistibly forward, and indeed, as he adds with 


1 Thus it is to be read according to the Masoretic note, xdpy mS (i.e. 
plene, as nowhere else), which occurs in Codd., as is also attested by 
Kimchi in his Gramm., Moznajim, p. 8; Aben-Ezra in his Gramm., 
Zachoth 1,6; and the punctuator Jekuthiél, in his Darche ha-Nikkud 
(chapter on the letters x)n!). 





sil ee ay ~~ 





CHAP. XX. 2-5. 375 


Waw explic.: on account of the power of feeling dwelling 
in him, by which he means both his sense of truth and his 
moral feeling, in general the capacity of direct perception, 
not perception that is only attained after long reflection. On 
‘ay, of thoughts which, as it were, branch out, vd. on ch. 
iv. 18, and Psychol. 8.181. 20 signifies, as everywhere, to 
answer, not causative, to compel to answer. ‘WIN is n. actionis 
in the sense of ‘AY (Targ.), or wn (Ralbag), which also 
signifies “ my feeling (aic@nous),” and the combination *2 ‘yAn 
is like ch. iv. 21, vi. 13. Wherein the inference consists is 
self-evident, and proceeds from vers. 4 sq. In ver. 3 ex- 
pression is given to the ground of the conclusion intended in 
125: the chastisement of my dishonour, z.e. which tends to my 
dishonour (comp. Isa. lili. 5, chastisement which conduces to 
our peace), I must hear (comp. on this modal signification of 
the future, e.g. ch. xvii. 2); and in ver. 3b Zophar repeats 
what he has said in ver. 2, only somewhat differently applied: 
the spirit, this inner light (vid. ch. xxxii. 8; Psychol. S. 154, f), 
answers him from the perception which is peculiar to himself, 
i.e. out of the fulness of this perception it furnishes him with 
information as to what is to be thought of Job with his 
insulting attacks, viz. (this is the substance of the 7W7 of the 
thoughts, and of the ni3y of the spirit), that in this conduct of 
Job only his godlessness is manifest. ‘This is what he warn- 
ingly brings against him, vers. 4 sq.: knowest thou indeed 
(which, according to ch. xli. 1, 1 Kings xxi. 19, sarcastically 
is equivalent to: thou surely knowest, or in astonishment : 
what dost thou not know?!) this from the beginning, 2.e. this 
law, which has been in operation from time immemorial (or 
as Ew.: hoccine scis eternum esse, so that 372 is not a 
virtual adj., but virtual predicate-acc.), since man was placed: 
(OY injin., therefore prop., since one has placed man) upon 
the earth (comp. the model passage, Deut. iv. 32), that the 
exulting of the wicked & 3192, from near, ¢.e. not extending 


’ 


376 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


far, enduring only a short time (Arab. __y 5 often directly 
signifies brevis); and the joy of the godless les only for a 
moment, and continuing no longer ? 


6 Jf his aspiration riseth to the heavens, 
And he causeth his head to touch the clouds : 
7 Like his dung he perisheth for ever ; 
Those who see him say: Where is he? 
.8 As a dream he flieth away, and they cannot find him ; 
And he is scared away as a vision of the night. 
9 The eye hath seen him, and never again, 
And his place beholdeth him no more. 
10 His children must appease the poor, 
And his hands give up his wealth. 
11 His bones were full of youthful vigour ; 
Now tt is laid down with him in the dust. 


If the exaltation of the evil-doer rises to heaven, and he 
causes his head to reach to the clouds, z.e. to touch the clouds, 
he notwithstanding perishes like his own dung. Weare here 
reminded of what Obadiah, ver. 4, says of Edom, and Isaiah, 
ch. xiv. 13-15, says of the king of Babylon. SW is equivalent 
to SY, like xiv, Ps. Ixxxix. 10 = Nit; the first weak radical 
is cast away, as in ‘3 = 9D) » jcaclasnes machinator, Isa. 
xxxil. 5, and according to Olsh. in nv = nv, 2 Sam. xix. 
33. 33 is to be understood as causative (at least this is the 


most natural) in the same manner as in Isa. xxv. 12, and © 


freq. It is unnecessary, with Ew., Hirz., and Hlgst., after 
Schultens, to transl. 1539, ver. 7a, according to the Arab. - 
> (whence the name Geldl-ed-din): secundum majestatem — 
suam, or with Reiske to read 112, in magnificentia sua, and it 
is very hazardous, since the Hebrew >53 has not the meaning 


of Je, illustrem esse. Even Schultens, in his Commentary, 


has retracted the explanation commended in his Animadv., 


. 





Lard 


CHAP. XX. 6-11. 377 


and maintained the correctness of the translation, sicut stercus 
suum (Jer. sicut sterquilinium), which is also favoured by the 
similar figurative words in 1 Kings xiv. 10: as one burneth 
up (not:-brushes away) dung (230), probably :cow-dung as 
fuel, until it is completely gone. Pa (or iba with an audible 
Sh'vé) may be derived from Oba, but the analogy of ‘poy 
favours the primary form ba (Ew. § 255, 6); on no account 
is it ba. The word is not low, as Ezek. iv. 12, comp. Zeph. 
1.17, shows, and the figure, though revolting, is still very ex- 
pressive; and how the fulfilment is to be thought of may be seen 
from an example from 2 Kings ix. 37, according to which, 


“as dung upon the face of the field shall it be, so that they 


1,772 


cannot say: this is Jezebel.”* The continuation here, ver. 76, 


1 In Arabic, gille (nba) and gelle (nba) is the usual and preferred fuel 


(hence used as synon. of hhattab) formed of the dung of cows, and not 
indeed yoke-oxen (bagar ‘amméile), because they have more solid fodder, 
which produces no material for the gelle, but from cattle that pasture 
in the open fields (bagar bat.tale), which are almost entirely milking 
cows. This dung is collected by women and children in the spring from 
the pastures as perfectly dry cakes, which have the green colour of the 
grass. Every husbandman knows that this kind of dung—the product 
of a rapid, one might say merely half, digestion, even when fresh, but 
especially when dry—is perfectly free from smell. What is collected is 
brought in baskets to the forming or pressing place (matiba‘a, nyans), 
where it is crumbled, then with water made into a thick mass, and, 
- having been mixed with chopped straw, is formed by the women with 
the hand into round cakes, about a span across, and three fingers thick. 
They resemble the tanners’ tan-cakes, only they are not square. Since 
this compound has the form of a loaf it is called qurss (which also signifies 
a loaf of bread) ; and since a definite form is given to it by the hand, it 
is called ttabbu' (yyatd), collective ttébabi’, which *~ypy (yy), Ezek. iv. 
15, resembles in meaning; for ssaf", yay (cogn. ssaf hh, Mpy), signifies to 
beat anything with the palm of the hand. First spread out, then later 
on piled up, the geile lies the whole summer in the mattba'a. The domes 
(qubeb) are not formed until a month before the rainy season, 7.e. a circular 
structure is built up of the cakes skilfully placed one upon another like 
bricks; it is made from six to eight yards high, gradually narrowed and 
finished with a vaulted dome, whence this structure has its name, qubbe 
(n3p). Below it measures about eight or ten paces, it is always hollow, 


378 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


is just the same: they who saw him (partic. of what is past, 
Ges. § 134, 1) say: where is he? As a dream he flieth away, 
so that he is not found, and is scared away (11 Hoph., not 
1 Kal) asa vision of the night (49 everywhere in the book 
of Job instead of ith, from which it perhaps differs, as viswn 
from visio), which one banishes on waking as a trick of his 
fancy (comp. Ps. Ixxiii. 20, Isa. xxix. 7 sq.). Eyes looked 
upon him (A!¥ only in the book of Job in this signification of 
a fixed scorching look, cogn. 41’, adurere, as is manifest from 
Cant. i. 6), and do it no more; and his place (iP? construed 
as fem., as Gen. xviii. 24, 2 Sam. xvii. 12, Cheth.) shall not 
henceforth regard him (71, especially frequent in the book of 
Job, prop. to go about, cogn. Wn, then to look about one). 
The futt. here everywhere describe what shall meet the evil- 
doer. Therefore Ewald’s transl., “his fists smote down the 
weak,” cannot be received. Moreover, 1255, which must then 


and is filled from beneath by means of an opening which serves as a door. 
The outside of the qubbe is plastered over with a thick solution of dung ; 
and this coating, when once dried in the sun, entirely protects the 
building, which is both storehouse and store, against the winter rains. 
When they begin to use the fuel, they take from the inside first by 
means of the doorway, and afterwards (by which time the heavy rains are 
over) they use up the building itself, removing the upper part first by 
means of a ladder. By the summer the qubbe has disappeared. Many 
large households have three or four of these stores. Where walled-in 
courts are spacious, as is generally the case, they stand within ; where 
not, outside. The communities bordering on the desert, and exposed to 
attacks from the Arabs, place them close round their villages, which 
gives them a peculiar appearance. When attacked, the herds are driven 
behind these buildings, and the peasants make their appearance between 
them with their javelins. Seetzen reckons the gelle among the seven 
characteristics of the district of Haurdn (Basan). 

It appears that Ezek. iv. 12 sqq.—where the prophet is allowed the — 
usual cow-dung, the flame of which has no smell whatever, and its ashes, 
which smoulder fora long time, are as clean as wood ashes, instead of the 
cakes (bby) of human dung—is to be explained according to this custom. 


My fellow-travellers have frequently roasted mushrooms ( futir) and 
truffles ( faq’, ypp) in the early spring in the glowing ashes of the gelle. 
On the other hand, it would be an error to infer from this passage that 





CHAP. XX. 6-11. 379 


be read instead of 123, does not occur elsewhere in this athletic 
signification; and it is quite unnecessary to derive 37) from 
a A871 = 7 (to crush, to hurl to the ground), or to change it 
to 8% (Schnurrer) or 3831 (Olsh.); for although the thought, 
filios ejus vexabunt egeni (LX X. according to the reading 
Ordcevav, and Targ. according to the reading PYYN), is not 
unsuitable for ver. 104, a sense more natural in connection 
with the position of 122, and still more pleasing, is gained if 
m¥1 is taken in the usual signification: to conciliate, appease, 
as the Targ. according to the reading PY! (Peschito-word for 
aToxatavrdooew), and Ges., Vaih., Schlottm., and others, 
after Aben-Ezra, Ralbag, Merc.: filit ejus placabunt tenues, 
quos scilicet eorum pater diripuerat, vel eo inopie adigentur, ut 
pauperibus sese adjungere et ab illis inire gratiam cogantur. 
Its retributive relation to ver. 19a is also retained by this ren- 
dering. The children of the unfeeling oppressor of the poor 


the Semites made use of human dung for fuel; the Semites (including 
the Nomads) are the most scrupulously particular people respecting clean- 
liness. According to the above, Zeph. i. 17 may be explained: ‘‘ their 
flesh shall become like dung,” i.e. be burned or destroyed like dung. And 
also we understand the above passage in the book of Job, ‘‘as his heap 
of dung-cakes shall he be consumed away,” exactly like 1 Kings xiv. 10: 
‘“*T will burn (take away) the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a 
man burneth the dung-cakes until they are consumed.” The suff. in 
i003 3 refers to the habitation of the evil-doer, above whose grovelling joy 
the high dome of the dung-cakes rises, which, before one becomes aware 
of it, has disappeared ; and thinighdut the desteigtion of the sudden 
dieicuetion of the evil-doer, vers. 8, 9, the reader must keep the figure 
of this dome and its disappearing before his mind. If it be objected 
that by such a rendering 2032 would be expected, 1 Kings xiv. 10 shows 
that bP3 (3) was also used as a collective, and the Arabic gelle is never 
used in any other way, which is the more remarkable, as one from the 
first regards its termination as the “‘ y of unity.” My attendants on my 
journey from Damascus (where there is no geile, and consequently the word 


_is not used) always took it so, and formed the plural gellat and the col- 
sCE 


lective gilel, and were always laughed at and corrected: say fhe: UP Fe) 
or nee els !—Werzst. 


380 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


will be obliged, when the tyrant is dead, to conciliate the 
destitute; and his hands, by means of his children, will be 
obliged to give back his property, ¢.e. to those whom his cove- 


tousness had brought to beggary (jis, exertion, strength, ch. 


xviii. 7, then as jin, and synon. Dn, wealth, prob. from the radical 
meaning to breathe, which is differently applied in the Arabic 
aun, rest, and haun, lightness). Carey thinks that the deserip- 
tion is retrospective: even he himself in his lifetime, which, 
however, does not commend itself, since here it is throughout 
the deceased who is spoken of. As in ver. 9, so now in ver. 
11 also, perf. and fut. interchange, the former of the past, the 
latter of the future. Jerome, by an amalgamation of two 
distinct radical significations, translates: ossa ejus implebuntur 
(it should be tmpleta erant) vitiis adolescentie ejus, which is 
to be rejected, because Diy, Ps. xc. 8, is indeed intended of 
secret sin, but signifies generally that which is secret (veiled). 
On the contrary, DDoY, ch. xxxili. 25, certainly signifies 


adolescentia (Arab. Koglt), and is accordingly, after LXX., 


Targ., and Syr., to be translated: his bones were full of 
youthful vigour. In ver. 11, DUA, as ch. xiv. 19, can refer 
to the purely plural Ynipyy, but the predicate belonging to it 


would then be plur. in ver. lla, and sing. in ver. 110; on 


which account the reference to WHY, which is in itself far 
more suitable, is to be preferred (Hirz., Schlottm.) : his 
youthful vigour, on which he relied, lies with him in the dust 


(of the grave). 


12 If wickedness tasted sweet in his mouth, 
He hid it under his tongue ; 
13 He carefully cherished it and did not let it go, 
_ And retained it in his palate: 
14 His bread is now changed in his bowels, 
It is the gall of vipers within him. 





CHAP. XX. 12-16. 381 


15 He hath swallowed down riches and now he spitieth them 
out, 
God shall drive them out of his belly. 
16 He sucked in the poison of vipers, 
The tongue of the adder slayeth him. 


The evil-doer is, in vers. 12 sq., likened to an epicure; he 
keeps hold of wickedness as long as possible, like a delicate 
morsel that is retained in the mouth (Renan: comme un 
bonbon gu’on laisse fondre dans la bouche), and seeks to 
enjoy it to the very last. PHD, to make sweet, has here 
the intransitive signification dulcescere, Ew. § 122, ¢. N3N, 
to remove from sight, signifies elsewhere to destroy, here to 
conceal (as the Piel, ch. vi. 10, xv. 18). 52M, to spare, is 
construed with >Y, which is usual with verbs of covering and 
protecting. The conclusion of the hypothetical antecedent 
clauses begins with 'ver. 14; the perf. 1873 (with Kametz by 
Athnach) describes the suddenness of the change ; the N19 
which follows is not equivalent to mann? (Luther: His food 
shall be turned to adder’s gall in his body), but ver. 14b expresses 
the result of the change in a substantival clause. The bitter 
and poisonous are synonymous in the ancient languages; hence 
we find the meanings poison and gall (ver. 25) in 7719, and 
wx" signifies both a poisonous plant which is known by its 
thicarneay and the poison of plants like to the poison of ser- 
pents (ver. 16 ; Deut. xxxii. 33). bn (ver. 15) is property, 
without the accompanying notion of forcible acquisition 
(Hirz.), which, on the contrary, is indicated by the yoa, The 
following fut. consec. is here not aor., but expressive of the 
inevitable result which tke performance of an act assuredly 
brings: he must vomit back the property which he has swal- 
lowed down; God casts it out of his belly, i.e. (which is 
implied in YN, expellere) forcibly, and therefore as by the 
pains of colic. The LXX., according to whose taste the 


» 


382 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


mention of God here was contrary to decorum, transl. é 
oixias (read xotXias, according to Cod. Alex.) adrod é€edxioes 
avrov adyyedos (Theod. Svvaorns). The perf., ver. 15a, is 
in ver. 16a changed into the imperf. fut. P, which more 
strongly represents the past action as that which has gone 
before what is now described ; and the adovvdérws, fut., which 
follows, describes the consequence which is necessarily and 
directly involved in it. Ps, cxl. 4 may be compared with 
ver. 16a, Prov. xxiii. 32 with 16d. He who sucked in the 
poison of low desire with a relish, will meet his punishment 
in that in which he sinned : he is destroyed by the poisonous 
deadly bite of the serpent, for the punishment of sin is funda- 
mentally nothing but the nature of sin itself brought fully 
out. 


17 He shall not delight himself in streams, 
Like to rivers and brooks of honey and cream. 
18 Giving back that for which he laboured, he shall not swal- 
low it ; . . 
He shall not rejoice according to the riches he hath gotten. 
19 Because he cast down, let the destitute lie helpless ; 
He shall not, in case he hath seized a house, finish building 
it. | 
20 Because he knew no rest in his craving, 
He shall not be able to rescue himself with what he most 
loveth. 


As poets sing of the aurea etas of the paradise-like prime- 
val age: Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina nectaris ibant,' and 
as the land of promise is called in the words of Jehovah in 


1 Ovid, Metam. i. 112, comp. Virgil, Ecl. iv. 80: 
Et durx quercus sudabant roscida mella ; 
and Horace, Epod. xvi. 47: 
Mella cava manant ex ilice, montibus altis 
Levis crepante lympha desilit pede. 








CHAP. XX. 17-20. ° 383 


the Thora, “a land flowing with milk and honey,” the puffed- 
up prosperity to which the evil-doer has attained by injustice 
is likened to streams (niads, prop. dividings, and indeed per- 
haps of a country = districts, Judg. v. 15 sq., or.as here, of a 
fountain = streams) of rivers, of brooks (two gen. appositionis 
which are co-ordinate, of which Hupfeld thinks one must be 
crossed out; they, however, are not unpoetical, since, just as 
in Ps, lxxviii. 9, the flow of words is suspended, Ew. § 289, ¢) 
of honey and cream (comp. cream and oil, ch. xxix. 6), if 
‘Sma ‘na is not perhaps (which is more in accordance with 
the accentuation) intended as an explanatory permutative of 
madp2: he shall not feast himself upon streams, streamings 
of rivers of honey and cream (Dachselt) ; and by SION (seq. 
Beth, to fasten one’s gaze upon anything = feast one’s self 
upon it), the prospect of enjoying this prosperity, and indeed, 
since the moral judgment and feeling are concerned in the 
affirmation of the fact (OX, as ch. v. 22, Ps. xli. 3, Prov. iii. 
3, 25), the privilege of this prospect, is denied. This thought, 
that the enjoyment aimed at and anticipated shall not follow 
the attainment of this height of prosperity, is reiterated in a 
twofold form in ver. 18. ! 
Ver. 18a is not to be translated: He gives back that 
which he has gained without swallowing it down, which must 
have been 2%; the syntactic relation is a different one: the 
Waw of NP) is not expressive of detail; the detailing is 
implied in the partic., which is made prominent as an antece- 
dent, as if it were: because, or since, he gives out again that 
which he has acquired (33 only here instead of ', ch. x. 3 
and freq.), he has no pleasure in it, he shall or may not 
altogether swallow it down (Targ. incorrectly 1px", after 
the Arabic eb» to penetrate, attain an object). The forma- 
tion of the clause corresponds entirely with ver. 18). All 
attempts at interpretation which connect inven ona with 
avi, ver. 18a, are to be objected to: (he gives it back again) as 


384 THE BOOK OF Jon. 


property of his restitution, z.e. property that is to be restored 
(Schlottm.), or the property of another (Hahn). Apart from 
the unsuitableness of the expression to the meaning found in 
it, it is contrary to the relative independence of the separate 
lines of the verse, which our poet almost always preserves, and is 
also opposed by thé interposing of ybay xh. The explanation 
chosen by Schult., Oet., Umbr., Hirz., Renan, and others, 
after the Targ., is utterly impossible: as his possession, so his 
exchange (which is intended to mean: restitution, giving 
up); this, instead of on3, must have been not merely Dna, 
but ing, The designed relation of the members of the 
sentence is, without doubt, that smn n> is a nearer de- 
fining of pdy xh, after the manner of an antecedent clause, 
and from which, that it may be emphatically introduced, it 
begins by means of Waw apod. (to which Schult. not un- 
suitably compares Jer. vi. 19, 1 Kings xv. 13). The follow- 
ing explanation is very suitable: according to the power, i.e. 
entire fulness of his exchange, but not in the sense of “ to 
the full amount of its value” (Carey, as Rosenm.), connected 
with 2v, but connected with what follows: “ how great 
soever his exchange (gain), still he does not rejoice” (Kw.). 
But it is not probable that 5n here signifies power = a great 
quantity, where property and possessions are spoken of. ‘The 
most natural rendering appears to me to be this: according 
to the relation of the property of his exchange (Mn from 
“9, Syr. directly emere, cogn. In, 1nd, and perhaps also 
12, here of exchange, barter, or even acquisition, as ch. xv. 
31; comp. xxviii. 17, of the means of exchange), i.e. of the 
property exchanged, bartered, gained by barter by him, he is 
not to enjoy, i.e. the rejoicing which might have been ex- 
pected in connection with the greatness of the wealth he has 
amassed, departs from him. 

Jerome is not the only expositor who (as though the 
Hebrew tenses were subject to no rule, and might mean 





CHAP. XX. 17-20, 3885 


everything) translates ver. 19, domum rapuit et non edificavit 
eam (equivalent to quam non edificaverat). Even Hupfeld 
translates thus, by taking 1732" xb as imperfect = 3723 N? N37} 5 
but he, of course, fails to furnish a grammatical proof for 
the possibility of inferring a plusquamperfectum sense. It 
might sooner be explained : instead of building it (Lit. Central- 
blatt, 1853, Nr. 24). But according to the syntax, ver. 19a 
must be an antecedent clause: because he crushed, left (there- 
fore: crushed by himself) the destitute alone ;' and 19d the 
conclusion: he has pillaged a house, and will not build it, i.e. 
in case he has plundered a house, he will not build it up. 
For On n’2, according to the accents, which are here correct, 

is not to be translated: domus, quam rapuit, but hypotheti- 
cally: si (éav) domum rapuit, to which 132 sb) is connected 
by Waw apod. (comp. ch. vii. 21b); and 23 signifies here, 
as frequently, not: to build, but: to build round, build addi- 
tions to, continue building (comp. 2 Chron. xi. 5, 6; Ps. 
Ixxxix. 3, 5). In ver. 20 similar periodizing occurs: be- 
cause he knew not bys (neutral = mow, Prov. xvii. 1; Ew. 

§ 293, c), contentment, rest, and sufficiency (comp. Isa. lix. 8, 
ody yt? x5) in his belly, i.e. his craving, which swallows up 
everything: he will not be able to deliver himself (dr like 
‘wb, ch. xxiii. 7, as intensive of Kal: to escape, or also = 
wD) pdn, which Amos ii. 25 seems to favour) with (3 as ch. 
xix. 20) his dearest treasure (thus e.g. Ewald), or: he will 
not be able to rescue his dearest object, prop. not to effect 
a rescue with his dearest object, the obj., as ch. xvi. 4, 10, 
xxxi. 12, conceived of as the instrument (vid. e.g. Schlottm.). 
The former explanation is more natural and simple. “DN, 


1 The Targ. translates: because he brought to ruin the business of 
the poor (ary after jay in Ezekiel) ; and Parchon: because he brought 


to ruin the courts of the poor (after the Mishna-word Haw, a paved 
floor) ; but sty, according to the Masora on Isa, lviii. 2 (comp. Kimchi, 
Michlol, p. 35), is to be read aI, asa verb. 


VOL. I. 2B 


386 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


that which is exceedingly desired (Ps. xxxix: 12, of health 
and pleasantness; Isa. xliv. 9, of idols, as the cherished 
objects of their worshippers), is the dearest and most precious 
thing to which the sinner clung with all his soul, not, as 
Bottch. thinks, the soul itself." 


21 Nothing escaped his covetousness, 
Therefore his prosperity shall not continue. . 

22 In the fulness of his need it shall be strait with him, 
Every hand of the needy shall come upon him. 

23 It shall come to pass: in order to fill his belly, 
He sendeth forth the glow of His anger into him, 
And He causeth it to rain upon him into his flesh. 

24 He must flee from an iron weapon, 

Therefore a brazen bow pierceth him through. 

25 It teareth, then it cometh forth out of his body, 
And the steel out of his gall, 

The terrors of death come upon him. 


The words of ver. 21a are: there was nothing that escaped 


09-59 


(™Y, as ch. xviii. 19, from MW, 0-4, aufugere) his eating 


(from DDN, not from 3%), i.e. he devoured everything with- 
out sparing, even to the last remnant; therefore {2%0, his 
prosperity, his abundant wealth, will not continue or hold out 
(dm, as Ps. x. 5, to be solid, powerful, enduring, whence 


1 Hupfeld interprets: non fruitur securus ventre suo h. e. cibo quo venter 
potitus erat et deliciis quas non salvas retinebit (or also ver. 206 as a clause 
by itself: cum deliciis suis non evadet), but without any proof that 3 yy 


can signify frui, and }y3 metonymically food, whereas the assertion that 
ow cannot be equivalent to by, and cannot be used of rest with refer- 


ence to the desire, is unfounded. In Hebrew the neuter adj. can be used 
as a substantive, just as in Greek, e.g. rd doQuatc, security, ro ebruyéc, 


success (comp. e.g. the combination nx) DN), and iby signifies 


release and ease (Arab. followed by uy), without distinction of what 
disturbs, be it danger, or pain, or any kind of emotion whatever. 








CHAP. XX. 21-25. 387 


Dn, 4 = Aires ). Hupf. transl. differently: nzhil et superstes 


ad vescendum, itaque non durant ejus bona ; but Mw signifies 
first elapsum, and j2-y propterea ; and we may retain these 
first significations, especially since ver. 21a is not future like 
21. The tone of prediction taken up in ver. 210 is con- 
tinued in what follows. The inf. constr. mw (prop. “niNdn, 
but with Cholem by the Aleph, since the Waw is regarded as 
"nm, superfluous), formed after the manner of the verbs 
Lamed He (Ew. 238, c), is written like MS7p, Judg. viii. 1 
(comp. on the other hand the seriptio defectiva, Lev. viii. 
33, xii. 4); and ipa (with Sin, as Norzi decides after Codd., 
Kimchi, and Farisol, not Samech) is to be derived from PaY 
(PD), sufficientia (comp. the verb, 1 Kings xx. 10): if his 


¢or 4ur 


sufficiency exists in abundance, not from PaY = diiey diiio, 


complosio, according to which Schultens explains: if his 
joyous clapping of hands has reached its highest point 
(Elizabeth Smith: “while clapping the hands in the ful- 
ness of joy”), to which mxbo is not suitable, and which 
ought at least to be '22 pa’. Therefore: in the fulness 
of his need shall he be straitened ("8 with the tone drawn 
back for 78° on account of* the following monosyllable, 
although also apocopated futt. follow further on in the strict 
future signification, according to poetic usage), by which not 
merely the fearful foreboding is meant, which just in the 
fullest overflow makes known his impending lot, but the real 
calamity, into which his towering prosperity suddenly changes, 
as ver. 226 shows: All the hands of the destitute come upon 
him (Nia seg. acc.: invadere) to avenge on him the injustice 
done to the needy. It is not necessary to understand merely 
such as he has made destitute, it is 3°59 ; the assertion is 
therefore general: the rich uncompassionate man becomes a 
defenceless prey of the proletaries. 


388 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Ver. 23. The ‘}‘ which opens this verse (and which also 
occurs elsewhere, e.g. ch. xviii. 12, in a purely future signi- 
fication), here, like "7", 2-Sam. v. 24 (Ew. § 333, 5), serves to 
introduce the following N>v* (it shall happen: He shall send 
forth); ‘J (e.g. Gen. xl. 1) frequent in the historical style, 
and 7!) in the prophetical, are similarly used. In order to 
fill his belly, which is insatiable, God will send forth against 
him His glowing wrath (comp. Lam. i. 13, from on high hath 
He sent fire into my bones), and will rain upon him into 
his flesh, or his plumpness (Arab. fi lachmihi). ‘Thus we 
believe ipanba must be understood by referring to Zeph. i. 
17; where, perhaps not without reference to this speech of 
Zophar, the proba, which serves to explain ver. 7, coincides 
with pines, which serves to explain this nba; and the right 
meaning is not even missed by the LX X., which translates 
Kal Tas cdpKas aitav as BorPita.’ <A suitable thought is 
obtained if pin? is taken in the signification, food: He will 
rain upon him his food, z.e. what is fit for him (with Beth of 
the instrument instead of the accusative of the object), or: 
He will rain down (His wrath) upon him as his food (with 
Beth essent., according to which Ew.: what can satisfy him; 
Bridel: pour son aliment ; Renan: en guise de pain) ; but we 


give the preference to the other interpretation, because it is | 


at once natural in this book, abounding in Arabisms, to sup- 


pose for nin} the signification of the Arab. os, which is also — 


supported in Hebrew by Zeph. i. 17; further, because the 
Targ. favours it, which transl. AML, and expositors, as Aben- 


Ezra and Ralbag, who interpret by nv23; finally, because it ; 


gives an appropriate idea, to which Lam. i. 13 presents a 
commendable parallel, comp. also James v. 3, and Koran, 
1 This passage is translated: and their blood is poured forth as dust, 


i.e. useless rubbish (Arab. el-ghabra p> ays), and their flesh as filth. 
The form of inflection prod is referable to pnd after the form Dw. 


=. os ia 
{> a : 
—_—=—--.- -~_— 





CHAP. XX. 21-25. 389 


Sur. 2, 169: “those who hide what God has sent down by 
the Scripture, and thereby obtain a small profit, eat only fire 
into their belly.” That iY can be used pathetically for 
yoy is unmistakeably clear from ch. xxii. 2, comp. xxvil. 23, 
and on Ps. xi. 7; the morally indignant speech which 
threatens punishment, intentionally seeks after rare solemn 
words and darksome tones. Therefore: Upon his flesh, 
which has been nourished in unsympathizing greediness, 
God rains down, i.e. rain of fire, which scorches it. This is 
the hidden background of the lot of punishment, the active 
principle of which, though it be effected by human agency, 
is the punitive power of the fire of divine wrath. Vers. 
24 sq. describe, by illustration, how it is worked out. The 
_ evil-doer flees from a hostile superior power, is hit in the back 
by the enemy’s arrows; and since he, one who is overthrown, 
seeks to get free from them, he is made to feel the terrors of 
inevitably approaching death. 

Ver. 24. The two futt. may be arranged as in a conditional 
clause, like Ps. xci. 7a, comp. Amos ix. 2-4; and this is, as it 
seems, the mutual relation of the two expressions designed by 
the poet (similar to Isa. xxiv. 18): if he flee from the weapons 
of iron, i.e. the deadly weapon in the thick of the fight, he 
succumbs to that which is destructive by and by: the bow 
of brass (NWN) poet. for NWN, as Ps. xviii. 35, athongen it 


might also be an adj., since eth, as the Arab. figs shows, is 


really a feminine termination) will pierce him through (fut. 
Kai of Fon, ils, to press further and further, press after, 
here as in Judg. v. 26). The flight of the disheartened is a 
punishment which is completed by his being hit while fleeing 
by the arrow which the brazen bow sends with swift power 
after him. In ver. 25 the Targ. reads ™3 with He mappic., 
and translates: he (the enemy, or God) draws (stringit), and 
it (the sword) comes out of its sheath, which is to be rejected 


390 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


because 13 cannot signify vagina. Kimchi and most Jewish 
expositors interpret 732 by 533; the LX-X. also translates it 
capa. To understand it according to 3 (back), of the hinder 
part of the body, gives no suitable sense, since the evil-doer is 
imagined as hit in the back, the arrow consequently passing — 
out at the front ;} whereas the signification body is suitable, 
and is also made sufficiently certain by the cognate form 73. 
The verb 52v’, however, is used as in Judg. iii. 22: he who 
is hit draws the arrow out, then it comes out of his body, into 
which it is driven deep; and the glance, i.e. the metal head of 
the arrow (like 39, Judg. iii. 22, the point in distinction from 
the shaft), out of his gall (97) = 7770, ch. xvi. 13, so called 
from its bitterness, as yon, xoXos, comp. yAdos, XAwpos, from 
the green-yellow colour), since, as the Syriac version freely 
translates, his gall-bladder is burst.’ Is 7M, as a parallel 
word to 88", to be connected with inv», or with what 
follows? The accentuation varies. The ordinary interpunc- 
tion is pin with Dechi, nm Mercha, or more correctly 
Mercha-Zinnorith, 7. Rebia mugrasch (according to which, 
Ew., Umbr., Vaih., Welte, Hahn, Schlottm., and Olsh. 
divide) ; inn» is, however, also found with <Athnach. 
Although the latter mode of accentuation is only feebly 
supported, we nevertheless consider it as the more correct, 
for DYN YY, in the mind of the poet, can hardly have formed 
1 Thus sings the warrior Canaan Téar (died about 1815) after the 
loss of his wife :— 
‘* My grief for her is the grief of him whose horse is dashed in pieces in 
the desert. 
The way is wild, and there is no help from the travellers who have — 
hurried on before. 
My groaning is like the groaning of one who, mortally wounded be- 
tween the shoulders, : 
Will flee, and trails after him the lance that is fastened in him.” 
—WETZsT. 
2 Abulwalid (in Kimchi) understands the red gall, i.e. the gall-bladder, 


by mp, after the Arabic mardre. If this is pierced, its contents are 
emptied into the lower part of the body, and the man dies. 





CHAP, XX. 26-29. 391 


a line of the verse. If, however, Dos poy son is now taken 
together, it is a matter for inquiry whether it is to be 
explained: he passes away, since terrors come upon him 
(Schult., Rosenm., Hirz., Von Gerl., Carey),. or: terrors 
come upon him (LXX., Targ., Syr., Jer., Ramban). We 
consider the latter as the only correct interpretation ; for if 
357° ought to be understood after ch. xiv. 20, xvi. 22, the 
poet would have expressed himself ambiguously, since it is at 
least as natural to consider D'8 as the subject of 7bn', as to 
take novos wy as an adverbial clause. The former, however, 
is both natural according to the syntax (vid. Ges. § 147, a) 
and suitable in matter: terrors (é.e. of certain death to him 
in a short time) draw on upon him, and accordingly we decide 
in its favour. 


26 All darkness is reserved for his treasured things, 
A fire that is not blown upon devoureth him ; 
Tt feedeth upon what is left in his tent. 
27 The heavens reveal his iniquity, 
And the earth riseth up against him. 
28 The produce of his house must vanish, 
Flowing away in the day of God’s wrath. 


29 This is the lot of the wicked man from Elohim, 
And the heritage decreed for him from God. 


As in Ps. xvii. 14 God’s store of earthly goods for the 
children of men is called P5¥ (5), so here the stores laid up 
by man himself are called 'H5¥. Total darkness, which will 
finally destroy them, is decreed by God against these stores 
of the godless, which are brought together not as coming 
from the hand of God, but covetously, and regardless of Him. 
Instead of OY it might also have been fS¥ (ch. xv. 20, 
xxl. 19, xxiv. 1), and instead of YAY? also ya? (Deut. 
xxxill. 19); but POY is, as ch. xl. 13 shows, better suited 


392 “THE BOOK OF JOB. 


to darkness (on account of the 6, this dull-toned muda, 
with which the word begins). qwin-ep signifies sheer dark- 
ness, as in Ps. xxxix. 6, 5an-Ss, sheer nothingness; Ps. xly. 
14, m29-52, sheer splendour ; and perhaps Isa. iv. 5, 2-53, 
sheer glory. And the thought, expressed with somewhat of 
a play upon words, is, that to the @ycavpifew of the godless 
corresponds a Oncavpifew of God, the Judge (Rom. ii. 5; 
James v. 38): the one gathers up treasures, and the other 
nothing but darkness, to whom at an appointed season 
they shall be surrendered. The IMODNA which follows is re- 
garded by Ges. as Piel instead of snbawn, but such a resolving 
of the characteristic sharpened syllable ‘of Piel is unsupport- 
able; by Hirz., Olsh. § 250, 6, as Pual instead of INDSNA, but 
SDN signifies to be eaten, not (so that it might be connected 
with an accusative of the obj.) to get to eat; by Ew., Hupf., 
as Kal for snPINA, which is possible both from the letters 
and the matter (vid. on Ps. xciv. 20) ; but more correctly it 
is regarded as Poel, for such Poel forms from strong roots 
do occur, as DEY (vid. on ch. ix. 15), and that the Cholem of 
these forms can be shortened into Kametz-chatuph is seen 
from WN, Ps. cix. 10 (vid. Psalter in loc.).! The Poel is in 
the passage before us the intensive of Kal: a fire which is 
not blown upon shall eat him up. By this translation M8) is 
equivalent to M83, since attention is given to the gender of 
ws in the verb immediately connected with it, but it is left 
‘ out of consideration in the verbs m5) and YY which stand 
further from it, which Olshausen thinks doubtful; there are, 


1 Such a contraction is also presented in the readings SIA, Ps. 
Ixii. 4; wD, Ps. ci. 5; and ppd, 1 Chron. xxiii. 6, xxiv. 3. All 
these tients are not resolved forms of Piel (Ges., Berth., Olsh. § 248, a), 
but contracted forms of Poel with Kametz-chatuph instead of Cholem. 
snnA, ch. xiii. 9, is not a resolved form of Piel, but a non-syncopated 
Hiphil. [It should be observed that the Chateph-Kametz in ‘‘wedorschu” 
above and at p. 158 is used as an unmistakeable sign of the 6.—Tr.] 


- 








CHAP. XX. 26-29. 393 


however, not a few examples which may be adduced in 
favour of it, as 1 Kings xix. 11, Isa. xxxiii. 9; comp. Ges. § 
147,rem.1. Certainly the relative clause n= xd may also be 
explained by supplying 72: into which one has not blown, or 
that one has not blown on (Symm., Theod., avev duojparos) : 
both renderings are possible, according to Ezek. xxii. 20, 22; . 
but since the masc. 7, follows, having undoubtedly wis: as its 
subject, we can unhesitatingly take the Synallage gen. as be- 
ginning even with nai. A fire which needs no human help 
for its kindling and its maintenance is intended (comp. on 
12 ND, ch. xxxiv. 20); therefore “fire of God,” ch. i. 16. 
This fire feasts upon what has escaped (7, as ver. 21, ch. 
- xviii. 19), ¢.e. whatever has escaped other fates, in his tent. 
yy. (Milel) is fut. apoc. Kal; the form of writing Y1 (fut. 
apoc. Niph.) proposed by Olsh. on account of the change of 
gender, i.e. it is devoured, is to be rejected for the reason 
assigned in connection with nd). The correct interpretation 
has been brought forward by Schultens. 

It is not without reference to ch. xvi. 18, 19, where Job 
has called upon earth and heaven as witnesses, that in ver. 27 
Zophar continues: “the heavens reveal his guilt, and the 
earth rises against: him;” heaven and earth bear witness to 
his being an abhorrence, not worthy of being borne by the 
earth and shone upon by the light of heaven; they testify 
this, since their powers from below and above vie with one _ 
another to get rid of him. ip? is connected closely with 
{5 (which has Lamed raphatum) by means of Mercha-Zinnorith, 
and under the influence of the law, according to which before 
a monosyllabic accented word the tone is drawn back from 
the last syllable of the preceding word to the penultima (Ew. 
§ 73, 3), is accented as Milel on account of the pause. In 

1 This mode of accentuation, which is found in Codd. and is attested 


by grammarians (vid. Norzi), is grammatically more intelligible than 
that of our editions, which have the Mercha with the final syllable. For 


394 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


ver. 28, Ges., Olsh., and others translate: the produce of his 
house, that which is swept together, must vanish away in the 
day of His wrath; i732 corrase (opes), Niph. from 73. But 
first, the suff. is wanting to n122 ; and secondly, 158 O13 has no 
natural connection in what precedes. The Niph. ny in the 
signification diffluentia, derived from 122, to flow away (comp. 
.s;, to flow), is incomparably better suited to the passage 
(comp. 2 Sam. xiv. 14, where Luther transl. : as water which 
glides away into the earth). The close of the description is 
similar to Isa. xvii. 11: “In the day that thou plantedst, thou 
causedst it to increase, and with the morning thy seed was 


in flower—a harvest-heap in the day of deep wounding and — 


deadly sorrow.” So here everything that the evil-doer hoards 
up is spoken of as “ vanishing in the day of God’s wrath.” 

The speech now closes by summing up like Bildad’s, ch. 
xviii. 21: “This is the portion or inheritance of, ¢.e. the lot 
that is assigned or falls to, the wicked man (YU DIN, a rare 
application of O58, comp. Prov. vi. 12, instead of which vox 
is more usual) from Elohim, and this the heritage of his 
(i.e. concerning him) decree from God.” 28 (198) with an 
objective suff., which also occurs elsewhere of the almighty 
word or command of God (vid. on Hab. iii. 9), signifies here 
God’s judicial arrangement or order, in this sense just as 
Arabic as Hebraic, for also in Arab. amr (plur. sai 
signifies command and order. 

The speech of Zophar, ch. xx., is his ultimatum, for in the 
third course of the controversy he takes no part. We have 
already seen from his first speech, ch. xi., that he is the most 
impassioned of the friends. His vehemence is now the less 
excusable, since Job in his previous speech has used the truly 


while mgipn, as Milel, is the pausal-form of the fem. part. Hithpalel 
for nonipna (napipni) with pausal @ instead of @, it ought to be as 


Milra, a passive form ; but the Hithpalal has no meaning here, and is in 
general not firmly supported within the range of biblical Hebrew. 





4 


CHAP. XX. 26—29. 395 


spiritual language of importunate entreaty and earnest warn- 
ing in reply to the friends. The friends would now have 
done well if they had been silent, and still better if they had 
recognised in the sufferer the tried and buffeted servant of 
God, and had withdrawn their charges, which his innermost 
nature repudiates. But Zophar is not disposed to allow the 
reproach of the correction which they received to rest upon 
him ; in him we have an illustration of the fact that a man 
is never more eloquent than when he has to defend his injured 
honour, but that he is also never more in danger of regarding 
the extravagant images of natural excitement as a higher in- 
spiration, or, however, as striking justifications coming from 
the fulness of a superior perception. It has been rightly 
remarked, that in Zophar the poet describes to us one of those 
hot-heads who pretend to fight for religion that is imperilled, 
while they are zealous for their own wounded vanity. In- 
stead of being warned by Job’s threat of judgment, he thrusts 
back his attempt at producing dismay by a similar attempt. 
He has nothing new to bring forward in reply to Job; the 
poet has skilfully understood how to turn the heart of his 
readers step by step from the friends, and in the same degree 
to gain its sympathy for Job. For they are completely spent 
in their one dogma ; and while in Job an endless multitude of 
thoughts and feelings surge up one after another, their heart 
is as hermetically closed against every new perception and 
emotion. All that is new in the speech of Zophar, and in 
those of the friends generally, in this second course of the 
controversy, is, that they no longer try to lure Job on to 
penitence by promises, but endeavour to bring him to a right 


‘state of mind, or rather to weaken his supposedly-mad assault 


upon themselves, by presenting to him only the most terrible 
images. It is not possible to illustrate the principle that the 
covetous, uncompassionate rich man is torn away from his 
prosperity by the punishment God decrees for -him, more 


396 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


fearfully and more graphically than Zophar does it; and this 
terrible description is not overdrawn, but true and appropriate, 
—but in opposition to Job it is the extreme of uncharitable- 
ness which outdoes itself: applied to him, the fearful truth 
becomes a fearful lie. For in Zophar’s mind Job is the 
godless man, whose rejoicing does not last long, who indeed 
raises himself towards heaven, but as his own dung must he 
perish, and to whom the sin of his unjust gain is become as 
the poison of the viper in his belly. The arrow of God’s 
wrath sticks fast in him; and though he draw it out, it has 
already inflicted on him a deservedly mortal wound! The 
fire of God which has already begun to consume his posses- 
sions, does not rest until even the last remnant in his tent is 
consumed. ‘The heavens, where in his self-delusion he seeks 
the defender of his innocence, reveal his guilt, and the earth, 
which he hopes to have as a witness in his favour, rises up as 
his accuser. Thus mercilessly does Zophar seek to stifle the 
new trust which Job conceives towards God, to extinguish 
the faith which bursts upwards from beneath the ashes of the 
conflict. Zophar’s method of treatment is soul-destroying; 


he seeks to slay that life which germinates from the feeling — 


of death, instead of strengthening it. He does not, however, 
succeed ; for so long as Job does not become doubtful of his 
innocence, the uncharitableness of the friends must be to 


him the thread by which he finds his way through the laby- 


rinth of his sufferings to the God who loves him, although 
He seems to be angry with him. 


Job's Third Answer.—Chap. xxi. 
Schema: 10.10. 10, 11. 10, 10. 5, 2. 
[Then began Job, and said :] 


2 Hear, oh hear, my speech, 
And let this be instead of your consolations. 


- 
ee ee ee es 








CHAP. XXI. 2-6. 397 


3 Suffer me, and I will speak, 

And after I have spoken thou mayest mock. 
A As for me, then, doth my complaint concern man, 

Or wherefore should I not become impatient ? 
5 Turn ye to me and be astonished, 

And lay your hand upon your mouth. 
6 Even if I think of it I am bewildered, 

And my flesh taketh hold on trembling— : 


The friends, far from being able to solve the enigma of 
Job’s affliction, do not once recognise the mystery as such. 
They cut the knot by wounding Job most deeply by ever 
more and more frivolous accusations. Therefore he entreats 
them to be at least willing to listen (YY with the gerund) to 
his utterance (7PN) respecting the unsolved enigma; then 
(Waw apodosis imper.) shall this attention supply the place 
of their consolations, 7.e. be comforting to him, which their 
previous supposed consolations could not be. They are to 
bear with him, 7.e. without interruption allow him to answer 
for himself (8Y with Kametz before the tone, as Jonah i. 
12, comp. *77?, 1 Kings xx. 33, not as Hirz. thinks under the 
influence of the distinctive accent, but according to the estab- 
lished rule, Ges. § 60, rem. 1); then he will speak (+238 contrast 
to the “ye” in ‘x without further force), and after he has 
expressed himself they may mock. It is, however, not ayen 
(as Olshausen corrects), but yen (in a voluntative signific. 
os syen), since Job here addresses himself specially to Zophar, 
. the whole of whose last speech must have left the impression 
on him of a bitter sarcasm (capkacpds from capxdfew in the 
sense of ch, xix. 225), and has dealt him the freshest deep 
blow. In ver. 4 ‘MY is not to be understood otherwise than 
as in ch. vii. 13, ix. 27, x. 1, xxiii. 2, and is to be translated 
“my complaint.” Then the prominently placed ‘258 is to be 
taken, after Ezek. xxxiii. 17, Ges. § 121, 3, as an emphatic 


398 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


strengthening of the “my”: he places his complaint in con- 
trast with another. This emphasizing is not easily understood, 
if one, with Hupf., explains: nonne hominis est querela mea, 
so that 1 is equivalent to Non (which here in the double 
question is doubly doubtful), and ° is the sign of the cause. 
Schultens and Berg, who translate DIND more humano, explain 
similarly, by again bringing their suspicious 5 comparativum’ 
here to bear upon it. The ) by ‘n'y (if it may not also be 
compared with ch. xii. 8) may certainly be expected to denote — 
those to whom the complaint is addressed. We translate : 
As for me, then, does my complaint concern men? The 
‘238 which is placed at the beginning of the sentence comes — 
no less under the rule, Ges. § 145, 2, than § 121, 3. In 
general, sufferers seek to obtain alleviation of their sufferings 
by imploring by words and groans the pity of sympathizing 
men; the complaint, however, which the three hear from 
him is of a different kind, for he has long since given up the 
hope of human sympathy,—his complaint concerns not men, 
but God (comp. ch. xvi. 20).?. He reminds them of this by 
asking further: or (08), as ch. viii. 3, xxxiv. 17, xl. 9, not: 
and if it were so, as it is explained by Nolde contrary to the 
usage of the language) why (interrogative upon interrogative: 
an quare, as Ps. xciv. 9, xon DN, an nonne) should not my 
spirit (disposition of mind, @vyds) be short, de. why should 
I not be short-tempered (comp. Judg x. 16, Zech. xi. 8, 
with Prov. xiv. 29)=impatient? Diirr, in his commentatio 
super voce M4, 1776, 4, explains the expression habito simul 


1 In the passage from Ibn-Kissai quoted above, p. 825, Schultens, 
as Fleischer assures me, has erroneously read WA instead of 


Wl, having been misled by the frequent failing of the upper 


stroke of the §, and in general } is never = Ww), and also S never = 9, as 
has been imagined since Schultens. 

* An Arabian proverb says: ‘‘The perfect patience is that which 
allows no complaint to be uttered ila el-chalg against creatures (men).” 


CHAP. XXI. 2-6. 399 


halitus, qui tratis brevis esse solet, respectu, but the significa- 
tion breath is far from the nature of the language here; nn 
signifies emotional excitement (comp. ch. xv. 13), either long 
restrained (with 778), or not allowing itself to be restrained 
and breaking out after a short time (yp). That which causes 
his vexation to burst forth is such that the three also, if they 
would attentively turn to him who thus openly expresses him- 
self, will be astonished and lay their hand on their mouth 
(comp. ch. xxix. 9, xl. 4), ae. they must become dumb in 
recognition of the puzzle,—a puzzle insoluble to them, but 
which is nevertheless not to be denied. wn is found in 
Codd. and among grammarians both as Hiph. %9 hashammu 
(Kimchi) and as Hoph. %2¥7, or what is the same, 1980 hosh- 
shammu (Abulwalid) with the sharpening of the first radical, 
which also occurs elsewhere in the Hoph. of this verb (Lev. 
xxvi. 34 sq.) and of others (Olsh. § 259, 6, 260). The point- 
ing as Hiph. (UH for %9YN) in the signification obstupescite 
is the better attested. Job himself has only to think of this 
mystery, and he is perplexed, and his flesh lays. hold on 
terror. The expression is like ch. xviii. 20. The emotion is 
conceived of as a want arising from the subject of it, which 
that which produces it must as of necessity satisfy. 

In the following strophe the representation of that which 
thus excites terror begins. The divine government does not 
harmonize with, but contradicts, the law maintained by the 
friends. 


7 Wherefore do the wicked live, 
Become old, yea, become mighty in power ? 
8 Their posterity is established before them about them, 
And their offspring before their eyes. 
9 Their houses have peace without fear, 
And the rod of Eloah cometh not upon them. 
10 His (the evil-doer’s) bull gendereth and faileth not ; 


400 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


His cow calveth easily, and casteth not her calf. 
11 They let their little ones run about as a flock, — 
And their children jump about. f 


The question in ver. 7 is the same as that which Jeremiah 
also puts forth, ch. xii. 1-3. It is the antithesis of Zophar’s 
thesis, ch. xx. 5, and seeks the reason of the fact established 
by experience which had also well-nigh proved the ruin of 


Asaph (Ps. Ixxiii. comp. Mal. iii. 13-15), viz. that the un- — 


godly, far from being overtaken by the punishment of their 
godlessness, continue in the enjoyment of life, that they attain 
to old age, and also a proportionately increasing power and 
wealth. The verb Phy, which in ch. xiv. 18, xviii. 4 (comp. 
the Hiph. ch. ix. 5, xxxii. 15), we read in the signification pro- 
moveri, has here, like the Arabic “ataga, ‘atuga, the signification 
to become old, wtate provehi ; and bn 123, to become strong in 
property, is a synonym of on mvn, to acquire constantly in- 
creasing possessions, used in a similar connection in Ps. Ixxiii. 
12. The first feature in the picture of the prosperity of the 
wicked, which the pang of being bereft of his own children 
brings home to Job, is that they are spared the same kind of 
loss: their posterity is established (i232, constitutus, elsewhere 
standing in readiness, ch. xii. 5, xv. 28, xviii. 12, here stand- 
ing firm, as ¢.g. Ps. xciii. 2) in their sight about them (so that 
they have to mourn neither their loss by death nor by separa- 
tion from their home), and their offspring (D'S¥8¥, a word 
common only to the undisputed as well as to the disputed 
prophecies of Isaiah and the book of Job) before their eyes ; 
2) must be carried over to ver. 8b as predicate: they are, 
without any loss, before their eyes. The description passes 
over from the children, the corner-stones of the house (wid. 
Ges. Thes., s.v. 132), to the houses themselves. It is just as 
questionable here as in ch. v. 24, Isa. xli. 8, and elsewhere, 
whether D{?¥ is a subst. (= mbvia) or an adj.; the substantival 


ee ee a 


= sn 





7 ——. 


— — Eee —_ 


= 








~ 


. 


CHAP. XXI. 7—11. 401 


rendering is at least equally admissible in such an elevated 
poetic speech, and the plur. subject 07°N3, which, if the predi- 
cate were intended to be taken as an adj., leads one to expect 
p»nidyi, decides in its favour. On 7550, without (far from) 
terrifying misfortune, as Isa. xxii. 3, NYPD, without a bow, 
vid. on ch. xix. 26. That which is expressed in ver. 9a, 
according to external appearance, is in ver. 9 referred to 
the final cause; Eloah’s 02, rod, with which He smites in 
punishment (ch. ix. 34, xxxvii. 13, comp. Isa. x. 24-26, 
where viv’, scourge, interchanges with it), is not over them, 
i.e. threatens and smites them not. 

Ver. 10 comes specially to the state of the cattle, after the 
state of the household in general has been treated of. Since 
jniv and 1N78 are interchangeable, and are construed according 
to their genus, the former undoubtedly is intended of the 
male, not also émvxoivws of the female (LXX. 7% Bods, 
Jerome, Saadia), as Rosenm., after Bochart, believes it must 
be taken, because 13) is never said de mare feminam ineunte, 
but always de femina que concipit. In reality, however, it 
is with 7ay otherwise than with my, whose Pael and Aphel 
certainly signify concipere (prop. transmittere sc. semen in a 
passive sense). On the other hand, 12y, even in Kal, signifies 
to be impregnated (whence 73\Y, the embryo, and the biblical 
2Y, like the extra-biblical 112Y, the produce of the land), the 
Pael consequently to impregnate, whence S1ayD (from the 
part. pass. 12Y) impregnated (pregnant), the Jthpa. to be 


‘impregnated, as Rabb. Pual Nay, impregnated (by which 


nay also signifies pregnant, which would be hardly possible 
if 12» in this sexual sense were not radically distinct from 
nay, wep-av). Accordingly the Targ. translates 12) by pon 
(impregnans), and Gecatilia translates mw by s (admis- 

sarius eorum), after which nearly all Jewish expositors ex-_ 
plain. This explanation also suits Dp >, which LXX. 
translates ov« @pmoToxnoe (Jer. non abortivit), Symm. in a like 

VOL. I. 2C 


402 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


sense ovx é&étpwoe, Aq. oix é&éBade, Saad. la julzig.. The 
reference of mw to the female animal everywhere assumed is 
incorrect; on the contrary, the bullock kept for breeding is 
the subject; but proceeding from this, that which is affirmed 
is certainly referred to the female animal. For bya signifies 
to cast out, cast away; the Hiph. therefore: to cause to cast 
out; Rabb. in the specified signification : so to heat what has 
sucked in that which is unclean, that it gives it back or lets it 
go (ban wybnd). Accordingly Raschi explains: “he injects 
not useless seed into her, which might come back and be 
again separated (nda) from her inward part, without impreg- 
nation taking place.” What therefore 12) says positively, 
Syyoy xbi says negatively : neque efficit ut ejiciat. It is then 
further, in ver. 9, said of the female animal which has been 
impregnated that she does not allow it to glide away, te. the 
fruit, therefore that she brings forth (O>B as Nb, wn), and 
that she does not cause or suffer any untimely birth. 

At the end of the strophe, ver. 11, the poet with delicate 
tact makes the sufferer, who is become childless, return to the — 
joy of the wicked in the abundance of children. nv signifies 
here, as Isa. xxxii. 20, to allow freedom for motion and exer- 
cise. On ony, vid. on ch. xvi. 11, xix. 18. It has a similar 
root (,\\c, alere) to the Arab. ‘ajjil (collect. “ijdl), servants, 
but not a similar meaning. The subj. to ver. 12 are not 
the children, but the “wicked” themselves, the happy fathers _ | 
of the flocks of children that are let loose. } 


12 They raise their voice with the playing of timbrel and harp, 
And rejoice at the sound of the pipe. 


2The Aruch under Sys quotes a passage of the Tosefta: D*y'2 ‘yyy 
odaxn npn vipy nnn nda pimp, the cast away (Wiirflinge) eggs 
(i.e. such as have fallen away from the hen from a stroke on the tail or — 
some other cause, and which are not completely formed) are allowed as 
food ; he may eat them who does not loathe them. 





CHAP. XXI. 12-16. 403 


13 They enjoy their days in prosperity, 
And in a moment they go down to Sheél. 
14 And yet they said to God: “ Depart from us ! 
We desire: not the knowledge of Thy ways. 
15 What is the Almighty, that we should serve Him ! 2 
And what doth it profit us that we should importune 
Him ?”— 
16 Lo! they have not their prosperity by their own hand, 
The thought of the wicked be far from me ! 


Ddip is to be supplied to 38%, as in Isa. xlii. 11; and instead 
of §N2 with 2 of the musical accompaniment (as Ps. iv. 1, 
xlix. 5), it is to be read 4h after the Masora with Kimchi, 
Ramban, Ralbag, and Farisol,’ but not with Rosenm. to be 
explained : personant velut tympano et cythera, but: they raise 
_ their voice as the timbrel and harp sound forth simultaneously; 
2 as Isa. xviii. 4 (which is to be transl.: during the clear 
warmth of the sunshine, during the dew-clouds in the heat 
of harvest). hm (Arabic du’, Spanish adufe) is tvpravov 
(rd7ravov), N32 (Arab. candre) xivipa or KtOdpa (Dan. iii. 5), 


IY or ny, ch. xxx. 31 (from 33Y, flare ; vid. on Gen. iv. 21), 


the Pan-pipe (Targ. from a similar root S238, whence the 
name of the ambubaje). In ver. 13a the Keri gives the more 
usual pe (ch. xxxvi. 11) in place of the Chethib 2 ', though 
bp occurs in Isa. Ixv. 22 without this Keri ; 152° signifies con- 
swment, and %92 usu deterent: they use up their life, enjoy it 
to the last drop. In connection with this one thinks of a coat 


1 The Masora observes 7)N\5 ms (not occurring thus elsewhere), and 
accordingly this 45 is distinguished in the Masoretic 2D) IN 41M jd a8 


myna AD (alphabetic list of words which take at one time the prefix 5 
and at another the prefix 3), from m3, which occurs elsewhere. The 
Targ. has read sn; the reading of Raschi and Aben-Ezra is question- 
able. 


404 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


which is not laid aside until it is entirely worn out. It is 
therefore not, as the friends say, that the ungodly is swept 
away before his time (ch. xv. 32), also a lingering sickness 
does not hand him over to death (xviii. 13 sq.), but 2273, in a 
moment (comp. ch. xxxiv. 20, not: in rest, te. freedom from 
pain, which ¥2) never signifies), they sink down to Hades 
(ace. loci). The matter does not admit of one’s deriving the 


fut. 71 here, as ch. xxxix. 22, xxxi. 34, from the Niph. of . 


(Aram. for 7), which is the only certain example of a Hebrew 
verb Pe Nun ending with n, whose fud. is NN}, Ps. xxxviil. 3, 
also NM (Prov. xvii. 10; Jer. xxi. 13), instead of 0}, and in 
the inflexion its n (after the analogy of 373}, Isa. xxxiii. 12) 
is doubled; as an exception (vid. Psalter, ii. 468), the lengthen- 
ing of the short vowel (AM, Olsh. § 83, 6) by Silluk does not 
take place, as e.g. by Athnach, ch. xxxiv. 5. 

The fut. consec. 128%, in which ver. 14 is continued, does 
not here denote tempovrally that which follows upon and from 
something else, but generally that which is inwardly con- 
nected with something else, and even with that which is con- 
tradictory, and still occurring at the same time, exactly as 
Gen. xix. 9, 2 Sam. iii. 8, comp. Ew. § 231, 6: they sink 
down after a life that is completely consumed away, without 
a death-struggle, into Hades, and yet they denied God, would 
not concern themselves about His ways (comp. the similar 
passage, Isa. lviii. 2), and accounted the service of God and 
prayer (2 ¥3B, precibus adire) as useless. The words of the 
ungodly extend to ver. 156; according to Hirz., Hlgst., 
Welte, and Hahn, ver. 16a resumes the description: behold, — 
is not their prosperity in their hand? ¢.e. is it not at their 
free disposal? or: do they not everywhere carry it away with 
them? But ver. 16 is not favourable to this interrogative 
rendering of X> (= Non), Schlottm. explains more correctly : 
behold, their prosperity is not in their power; but by taking 


the verb NNN, terrore percelli ; it is to be referred to NM or NM3 





CHAP. XXI. 12-16. 405 


not only ver. 16a (like Schnurrer), but the whole of ver. 16, 
as an utterance of an opponent, which is indeed impossible, 
because the declining of all fellowship with the godless would 
be entirely without aim in the mouth of the opponent. For 
it is not the friends who draw the picture of the lot of the 
punishment of the godless with the most terrible lines possible, 
who suggest the appearance of looking wishfully towards the 
godless, but Job, who paints the prosperity of the godless in 
such brilliant colours. On the other hand, both sides are 
agreed in referring prosperity and misfortune to God as final 
cause. And for this very reason Job thinks that DYTONATNN 723, 
which he makes the godless, in vers. 14, 15, express in their 
own words, so horrible. 

Ver. 16a is therefore to be taken as Job’s judgment, and 
16d as the moral effect which it produces upon him. {7 intro- 
duces the true relation of things; D3 signifies, as ch. xx. 
21, their prosperity; and O73 ND (the emphatic position of 
n3 is to be observed) that this is not in their hand, 1.e. arbi- 
trary power, or perhaps better : that it is not by their own 
hand, i.e. that it is not their own work, but a gift from above, 
the gift even of the God whom they so shamelessly deny. 
That God grants them such great and lasting prosperity, is 
just the mystery which Job is not able to bring forth to view, 
without, however, his abhorrence of this denying of God 
being in the slightest degree lessened thereby. Not by their 
own hand, says he, do they possess such prosperity—the 
counsel (NY, similar to ch. v. 13, x. 3, xvill. 7: design, prin- 
ciple, and general disposition, or way of thinking) of the 
wicked be far from me; i.e. be it far from me that so I 
should speak according to their way of thinking, with which, 
on the contrary, I disavow all fellowship.. The relation of 
the clauses is exactly like ch. xxii. 18, where this formula of 
detestation is repeated. 4M is, according to the meaning, 
optative or precative (Ew. § 223, b, and Ges. § 126, 4*), 


406 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


which Hahn and Schlottm. think impossible, without assign- 
ing any reason. It is the perf. of certainty, which expresses 
that which is wished as a fact, but with an emotional excla- 
mative accent. In ancient Arabic it is a rule to use the 
perf. as optative; and also still in modern Arabic (which 
often makes use of the fut. instead of the perf.), they say 
e.g. la can, i.e. he must never have been! The more detest- 
able the conduct of the prosperous towards Him to whom 
they owe their prosperity is, the sooner, one would think, the 
justice of God would be called forth to recompense them 
according to their deeds ; but— 


17 How rarely is the light of the wicked put out, 

And their calamity breaketh in upon them, 

That He distributeth snares in his wrath, 
18 That they become as straw before the wind, 

And as chaff which the storm sweepeth away ! ? 
19 “ Eloah layeth up his iniquity for his children!” 

May He recompense it to him that he may feel it. 
20 May his own eyes see his ruin, 

And let him drink of the glowing wrath of the Almighty. 
21 For what careth he for his house after him, 

When the number of his months is cut off ? 


The interrogative 752 has here the same signification as in 
Ps, Ixxviii. 40: how often (comp. ch. vii. 19, how long? xiii. 
23, how many ?), but in the sense of “ how seldom?!” How 
seldom does what the friends preach to him come to pass, 
that the lamp of the wicked is put out (thus Bildad, ch. 
xviii. 5 sq.), and their misfortune breaks in upon them (3), 
ingruit ; thus Bildad, ch. xviii. 12: misfortune, M8, prop. 
pressure of suffering, stands ready for his fall), that He 
distributes (comp. Zophar’s “ this is the portion of the wicked 
man,” i.e. what is allotted to him, ch. xx. 29) snares in His 
wrath. Hirz., Ew., Schlottm., and others, translate pra, 





CHAP, XXI. 17-21. | AQT 


after the precedent of the Targ. (f27Y, sortes), “ lots,” since 
they understand it, after Ps. xvi. 6, of visitations of punish- 
ment allotted, and as it were measured out with a measuring- 
line; but that passage is to be translated, “the measuring- 
lines have fallen to me in pleasant places,” and indeed ban 
can signify the land that is allotted to one (Josh. xvii. 14, 
comp. 5); but the plural does not occur in that tropical 
sense, and if it were so intended here, onan or pnp pan 
might at least be expected. Rosenm., Ges., Vaih., and 
Carey transl. with LX X. and Jer. (wdives, dolores) “ pains,” 
but odan is the peculiar word for the writhings of those in 
travail (ch. xxxix. 3), which is not suited here. Schnurr. and 
Umbr. are nearer to the correct interpretation when they 
understand oan like o'ns, Ps. xi. 6, of lightning, as it were 
fiery strings cast down from above. If we call to mind in 
how many ways Bildad, ch. xviii. 8-10, has represented the 
end of the godless as a divinely decreed seizure, it is certainly 
the most natural, with Stick. and Hahn, to translate (as if it 


Cs wt 


were Arabic ble) “ snares,” to be understood after the 


idea, however, not of lightning, but generally of ensnaring 
destinies (e.g. "22 ‘dan, ch. xxxvi. 8). 

Both ver. 17 with its three members and ver. 18 with two, 
are under the control of m2. The figure of straw, or rather 
chopped straw (Arab. tébn, tabn), occurs only here. The 
figure of chaff is more frequent, eg. Ps. i. 4.. Job here puts 
in the form of a question what Ps. i. maintains, being urged 
on by Zophar’s false application and superficial comprehension 
of the truth expressed in the opening of the Psalter. What 
next follows in ver. 19a is an objection of the friends in vin- 
dication of their thesis, which he anticipates and answers; 
perhaps the clause is to be spoken with an interrogative 
accent: Eloah will—so ye object—reserve his evil for his 
children? {3i8, not from jix, strength, wealth, as ch. xvii. 


408 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


7, 12, xx. 10, xl. 16, but from }&, wickedness (ch. xi. 11) and 
evil (ch. xv. 35), here (without making it clear which) of 
wickedness punishing itself by calamity, or of calamity which 
must come forth from the wickedness as a moral necessity 
[comp. on. ch. xv. 31]. That this is really the opinion of 
the friends: God punishes the guilt of the godless, if not in 
himself, at least in his children, is seen from ch. xx. 10, v. 4. 
Job as little as Ezekiel, ch. xviii., disputes the doctrine of 
retribution in itself, but that imperfect apprehension, which, 
in order that the necessary satisfaction may be rendered to 
divine justice, maintains a transfer of the punishment which 
is opposed to the very nature of personality and freedom: 
may He recompense him himself, YT, that he may feel it, 
i.e. repent (which would be in Arab. in a similar sense, fa- 
jalamu; YT as Isa. ix. 8, Hos. ix. 7, Ezek. xxv. 14). 

Ver. 20 continues in the same jussive forms; the ar. yeyp. 
13 signifies destruction (prop. a thrust, blow), in which sense 
the Arab. catd (commonly: cunning) is also sometimes used. 


The primary signification of the root 13, aS, is to strike, push ;) 


from this, in the stems olf, med. Wau and med. Je, 3S, ASS, 


the most diversified turns and applications are developed ; 
from it the signif. of Ti3, ch. xli. 11, f1°3, xxix. 23, and 
according to Fleischer (vid. supra, pp. 263 sq.) also of 17°23, 
are explained. Ver. 200, as Ps. lx. 5, Obad. 16, refers to the 
figure of the cup of the wrath of God which is worked out 
by Asaph, Ps. Ixxv. 9, and then by the prophets, and by the 
apocalyptic seer in the New Testament. The emphasis lies 
on the signs of the person in 139 (YY) and 7A, The rather 
may his own eyes see his ruin, may he himself have to drink 
of the divine wrath; for what is his interest (what interest 
has he) in his house after him? np puts a question with a 
negative meaning (hence le is directly used as non) ; 75M, 


prop. inclination, corresponds exactly to the word “interest” — 


CHAP. XXI. 17-21. 409 


(quid ejus interest), as ch. xxii. 3, comp. Isa. lviii. 3, 13 (follow- 
ing his own interest), without being weakened to the signifi- 
cation, affair, wpayua, a meaning which does not occur in 
- our poet or in Isaiah. Ver. 210. is added as a circumstantial 
clause to the question in 21a: while the number of his own 
months . . ., and the predicate, as in ch. xv. 20 (which see), 
is in the plur. per attractionem. Schnurr., Hirz., Umbr., and 
others explain: if the number of his months is drawn by lot, 
2.é. is run out; but 780 as v. denom. from /'7, in the significa- 


tion to shake up arrows as sticks for drawing lots (Arab. ees 


an arrow and a lot, just so Persian ¢ir) in the helmet or 
elsewhere (comp. Ezek. xxi. 26), is foreign to the usage of 
the Hebrew language (for oyyno, Judg. v. 11, signifies not 
those drawing lots, but the archers) ; besides, 7/39 (pass. 
78M) would signify “to draw lots,” not “to dispose of by lot,” 
and « disposed of by lot” is an awkward metaphor for “run 
out.” Cocceius also gives the choice of returning to /’¥N, 
yhdos, in connection with this derivation: calculati sive ad 
calculum, t.e. pleno numero egressi, which has still less ground. 
Better Ges., Ew., and others: if the number of his months 
is distributed, 7.e. to him, so that he (this is the meaning 
according to Ew.) can at least enjoy his prosperity undis- 
turbed within the limit of life appointed to him. By this 
interpretation one misses the i$ which is wanting, and an in- 
terpretation which does not require it to be supplied is there- 
fore to be preferred. All the divers significations of the verbs 
V8 (to divide, whence Prov. xxx. 27, /¥4, forming divisions, 
i.é@. in rank and file, denom. to shoot with the arrow, Talm. 
to distribute, to halve, to form a partition), 789 (to divide, ch. 


xl. 30 ; to divide in two equal parts), V.2> (to divide, whence 
é2>, portio), and L.<+ (to separate, particularize)—to which, 


however, b= (to draw, write), which Ew. compares here, does 


410 THE BOOK OF JOB 


not belong—are referable to the primary signification scindere, 
to cut through, split (whence /‘f, an arrow, LX X. 1 Sam, xx. 
20, cx/fa); accordingly the present passage is to be explained: 
when the number of his months is cut off (Hlgst., Hahn), or 
cut through, 7.e. when a bound is set to the course of his life 
at which it ends (comp. Y83, of the cutting off of the thread of 
life, ch. vi. 9, xxvii. 8, Arab. * »o). Ch. xiv. 21 sq., Eccles. 
iii. 22, are parallels to ver. 21. Death is the end of all clear 
thought and perception. If therefore the godless receives the 
reward of his deeds, he should receive it not in his children, 
but in his own body during life. But this is the very thing ~ 
that is too frequently found to be wanting. 


22 Shall one teach God knowledge, 
Who judgeth those who are in heaven? 
23 One dieth in his full strength, 
Being still cheerful and free from care. 
24 His troughs are full of milk, 
And the marrow of his bones is well watered. 
25 And another dieth with a sorrowing spirit, 
And hath not enjoyed wealth. 
26 They lie beside one another in the dust, 
And worms cover them both. 


The question, ver. 22, concerns the friends. Since they 
maintain that necessarily and constantly virtue is rewarded by 
prosperity, and sin by misfortune, but without this law of the 
divine order of the world which is maintained by them being 
supported by experience : if they set themselves up as teachers 
of God, they will teach Him the right understanding of the 
conduct which is to be followed by Him as a ruler and judge 
of men, while nevertheless He is the Absolute One, beneath 
whose judicial rule not merely man, but also the heavenly 
spirits, are placed, and to which they must conform and bow. 
The verb 793, instead of being construed with two acc., as 





CHAP. XXI, 22-26. _ 411 


in the dependent passage Isa. xl. 14, is here construed with 
the dat. of the person (which is not to be judged according 
to ch. v. 2, xix. 3, but according to diddoxew Tiwi Ts, to teach 
one anything, beside the other prevailing construction). With 
x11 a circumstantial clause begins regularly : while He, how- 
ever, etc. Arnh. and Léwenth. translate: while, however, 
He exaltedly judges, i.e. according to a law that infinitely 
transcends man ; but that must have been 5172 (and even thus 
it would still be liable to be misunderstood). Hahn (whom 
Olsh. is inclined to support): but He will judge the proud, 
to which first the circumstantial clause, and secondly the 
parallels, ch. xxv. 2, xv.15, iv. 18 (comp. Isa. xxiv. 21), from 
which it is evident that 0% signifies the heavenly beings (as 
Ps. Ixxviii. 69, the heights of heaven), are opposed: it is a 
fundamental thought of this book, which abounds in allusions 
to the angels, that the angels, although exalted above men, 
are nevertheless in contrast with God imperfect, and there- 
fore are removed neither from the possibility of sin nor the 
necessity of a government which holds them together in unity, 
and exercises a judicial authority over them. The rule of the 
all-exalted Judge is different from that which the three pre- 
sumptuously prescribe to Him. 

The one (viz. the evil-doer) dies fen DYYS, in ipsa sua inte- 
gritate, like nyn nyya, ipso illo die; the Arabic would be 
Boxe ci, since there the eye, here the bone (comp. Uhlemann, 
Syr. Gramm. § 58), denote corporeality, duration, existence, 
and therefore identity. nA is intended of perfect external 
health, as elsewhere Dh ; comp. 0°22", Prov. i. 12. In ver. 
236 the pointing Now (adj.) and New (3 pret.) are inter- 
changed in the Codd. ; the following verbal adjective favours 
the form of writing with Kametz. As to the form, however 
(which Réd. and Olsh. consider to be an error in writing), it 
is either a mixed form from pxw and %Sv with the blended 
meaning of both (Hw. § 106, c), to which the comparison with 


412 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


oy (= bv’) is not altogether suitable, or it is formed from 
DN by means of an epenthesis (as AySt from Ay, wstuare, 
and opba, BdéAcapov, from nwa), and of similar but intensi- 
fied signification; we prefer the latter, without however 
denying the real existence of such mixed forms (vid. on ch. 
xxvi. 9, xxxiii. 25). This fulness of health and prosperity is 
depicted in ver. 24. The ancient translators think, because 
the bones are mentioned in the parallel line, *2*®Y must also be 
understood of a part of the body: LXX. éyxara, Jer. viscera ; 
Targ. ‘M2, his breasts, Bugia! (for Hebr. Dv, TY); Syr. 
version gabauh (= ganbauh), his sides in regard to 8DbY, Syr. 
‘attmo = NOON, side, hip; Saad. auddguhu, his jugular veins, 
in connection with which (not, however, by this last render- 
ing) nbn is read instead of abn : his bowels, etc., are full of 
fat.2 But the assumption that YY must be a part of the 
body is without satisfactory ground (comp. against it e.g. 
ch. xx. 17, and for it xx. 11); and Schlottm. very correctly 
observes, that in the contrast in connection with the repre- 
sentation of the well-watered marrow one expects a reference 
to a rich nutritious drink. To this expectation corresponds 


1 Vid. Handschriftliche Funde, 2. 8. V. 
2 Gesenius in his Thes. corrects the ANTS which was found in 


vy 4c 


Saadia’s manuscript translation to AYN TNS, dolar, \, which is intended to 
mean repositoria jus, but is really not Arabic ; a a TINTS is the 


correct plur. of —J,: his jugular veins, which occurs not merely of 
horses, but also of animals and men. Saadia, with reference to the fol- 


Dt IR ae ae 
lowing 2on INP, has thought of the metaphorical phrase bolo 4) wis: 
“he has milked his jugular vein,” ¢.e. he has, as it were, drawn the blood 
from his jugular veins = eum jugulavit, vid. Bibliotheca Arabo-Sicula, p. 
of: ‘and with the freshly milked juice of the jugular veins, viz. of the 


enemy (-' oJ] ar wes) our infant ready to be weaned is nourished 


in the midst of the tumult of battle, as soon as he is weaned.” The 
meaning of Saadia’s translation is then: his jugular veins are filled with 
fresh blood, swollen with fulness of blood.—FL. 








CHAP. XXI. 22~26. 413 


_ the translation: “his resting-places (i.e. of his flocks) are full of 
milk,” after the Arab. .,be or .,2e<, which was not first com- 


pared by Schultens and Reiske (epaulia), but even by Abul- 
walid, Aben-Ezra, and others. But since the reference of 
what was intended to be said of the cattle at the watering- 
places to the places where the water is, possesses no_ poetic 
‘beauty, and the Hebrew language furnished the poet with an 
abundance of other words for pastures and meadows, it is 
from the first more probable that yyy are large troughs,— 
like Talm. Yd, a trough, in which the unripe olives were laid 
in order that they might become tender and give forth oil, that 
they may then be ready for the oil-press (12), and {0 denotes 
this laying in itself,—and indeed either milk-tubs or milk-pails 
(ainb padiny’), or with Kimchi (who rightly characterizes this 
as more in accordance with the prosperous condition which is 
intended to be described), the troughs for the store of milk, 
which also accords better with the meaning of the verb jny, 


Y aS OY 


2s, to lay in, confire.' From the abundance of nutriment 


in ver. 24a, the description passes over in 245 to the well- 
nourished condition of the rich man himself in consequence 


i The verb uae: compared by tlie Orientals themselves with wey 
cognate in sound and meaning, has the primary signification to lie secure 


and to lay secure, as usess a resting-place of camels, sheep, and goats 


Fad 


about the watering-places, is only specifically distinct from wes a& cow- 


shed, cow-stall. The common generic notion is always a resting-place, 


wherefore the Kamus interprets ‘attan by wattan. wa-mebrek, viz. round 
Cr 


about the drinking-places. ware as n. loci, written matén by Barth 


in his Wanderungen durch die Kiistenliinder des Mittelmeeres, Bd. i- (vid. 
Deutsch. Morgenlind. Zeitschrift,,iv. S. 275) 8. 500, 517, is similar in 


6 £f50 


meaning. The verb wee impf. j attunu, also j attina, n. act. ‘uttin, a v. 
intrans., signifies, viz. of camels, etc., to lay themselves down around the 


414 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


of this abundance. 4 (Arab. oo oF even a, as 49 = b,. 


naurag = 2712) is the marrow in the bones, e.g. the spinal 
marrow, but. also the brain as the marrow of the head 
(Psychol. S. 233). The bones (Prov. iii. 8), or as it is here 
more exactly expressed, their marrow, is watered, when the — 
body is inwardly filled with vigour, strength, and health ; 
Isaiah, ch. viii. 11, fills up the picture more (as a well-watered 


garden), and carries it still further in ch. lxvi. 14 (thy bones — 


shall blossom like a tender herb). The counterpart now 
follows with “N (and the other, like ch.i.16). ‘The other 
(viz. the righteous) dies with a sorrowful soul (comp. Job’s 
lament, ch. vii. 11, x. i.), i.e. one which is called to experience 
the bitterness of a suffering life ; he dies and has not enjoyed 
mie2, any of the wealth (with partitive Beth, as Ps. exli. 4, 
comp. supra, ch. vii. 13), has had no portion in the enjoyment 
of it (comp. Job’s lament, ch. ix. 25). In death they are then 
both, unrighteous and righteous, alike, as the Preacher saith: 
NS mpd comes upon the wise as upon the fool, Eccles. ii. 15, 
comp. ix.2 sq. They lie together in the dust, z.e. the dust of 
the grave (vid. on ch. xix. 25), and worms cover them. What 
then is become of the law of retribution in the present world, 


drinking-troughs, after or even before drinking from them. On the other 


hand, uae impf.j attinu, also j' attunu, n. act.‘attn, av. trans. used by the 
dresser of skins: to lay the skins in the tan or ooze (French, conjire ; low 
Latin, tanare, tannare, whence French, tanner, to tan, tan, the bark) until 


they are ready for dressing, and the hairs will easily scrape off. Hence uae | 


' ‘ 
impf. j attanu, n. act. ‘attan, a v. intrans. used of skins : to become tender 


by lying in the ooze, and to smell musty, to stink, which is then trans- — 


ferred to men and animals: to stink Jike a skin in the ooze, comp. situs, 
mould, mildew, rust.—FL. Starting from the latter signification, mace- 
rare pellem, Lee explains: his bottles (viz. made of leather); and 
Carey: his half-dressed skins (because the store of milk is so great that 
he cannot wait for the preparation of the leather for the bottles) ; but the 
former is impossible, the latter out of taste, and both are far-fetched. 





CHAP, XXI. 27-81. . 415 


which the friends maintained with such rigid pertinacity, and 
so regardless of the deep wound they were inflicting on Job? 


27 Behold I know your thoughts 
And the stratagems, with which ye overpower me ! 
28 When ye say: Where is the house of the tyrant, 
And where the pavilions of the wicked—: 
29 Have ye not asked those who travel, 
Their memorable things ye could surely not disown : 
30 That the wicked was spared in the day of calamity, 
In the day of the outburst of wrath they were led away. 
31 Who liketh to declare to him his way to his face? 
And hath he done aught, who will recompense tt to him? 


Their thoughts which he sees through, are their secret 
thoughts. that he is such an evil-doer reaping the reward of 
his deeds. i812 (which occurs both of right measures, good 
wise designs, Prov. v. 2, vill. 12, and of artful devices, 
malicious intrigues, Proy. xii. 2, xiv. 17, comp. the definition 
of nitatD bya, Prov. xxiv. 8) is the name he gives to the deli- 
cately developed reasoning ‘with which they attack him; Dion 


o@re 


(comp. Arab. (wrad, to act harshly, violently, and over- 


bearingly) is construed with oy in the sense of forcing, apart 
from the idea of overcoming. In ver. 28, which is the ante- 
cedent to ver. 29, beginning with 728N°3 (as ch. xix. 28), 
he refers to words of the friends like ch. viii. 22, xv. 34, — 
xvill. 15, 21. 272 is prop. the noble man, whose heart impels 


(22, W3) him to what is good, or who is ready and willing, 


/ ws 


and does spontaneously that which is good (GN), vid. 


Psychol. S. 165; then, however, since the notion takes the 
“reverse way of generosus, the noble man (princely) by birth 
and station, with which the secondary notion of pride and 


416 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


abuse of power, therefore of a despot or tyrant, is easily as 
here (parall. DYvh, comp. TY, Isa. lili. 9, with the same word 
in the parallel) combined (just so in Isa. xiii. 2, and similarly 
at least above, ch. xii. 21,—an anomaly of name and conduct, 
which will be for the future put aside, according to Isa. xxxii. 


5). It is not admissible to understand the double question _ 


as antithetical, with Wolfson, after Prov. xiv. 11; for the 
interrogative 78 is not appropriate to the house of the 23, 
in the proper sense of the word. Ver. 28, navn is not 
an externally but internally multiplying plur.; perhaps the 
poet by n‘2 intends a palace in the city, and by mav SAN a 
tent among the wandering tribes, rendered prominent by its 
spaciousness and the splendour of the establishment.! Job 
thinks the friends reason a priori since they inquire thus; the 
permanent fact of experience is quite different, as they can 
learn from 377 ‘739, travellers, i.e. here: people who have tra- 
velled much, and therefore are well acquainted with the stories 
of human destinies. The Piel 133, proconing from the, radi- 
cal meaning to gaze fixedly, is an évavriudaonpor, since it sig- 
nifies both to have regard to, ch. xxiv. 19, and to disown, 
Deut. xxxii. 27; herevit is to be translated: their nh ye 


, 7 , st 
cannot nevertheless deny, ignore (as Arab. G and SI): 


nh are tokens, here: remarkable things, and indeed_ the 


Sin 


remarkable histories related by them; 4! (collective plat, 


S 


mm). signs, is also similarly used in the signification of is, 
example, historical teaching. 


1 Although the tents regularly consist of two divisions, one for the men 
and another for the women, the translation ‘‘ magnificent pavilion” 
(Prachtgezelt), disputed by Hirz., is perfectly correct; for even in the 
present day a Beduin, as he approaches an encampment, knows the tent 
of the sheikh immediately: it is denoted by its size, often also by the 
lances planted at. the door, and also, as is easily imagined, by the rich 
arrangement of cushions and carpets. Vid. Layard’s ave Discoveries, 
pp. 261 and 171. 








le a i 


CHAP. XXI. 27-81. ; 417 


That the "3, ver. 30, as in ver. 28, introduces the view of 
the friends, and is the antecedent clause to ver. 31: quod (s?) 
vos, dicitis, in tempora cladis per tram divinam unmisse servart 
et nescium futuri velut pecudem eo deduct improbum (Bittcher, 
de inf. § 76), has in the double ? an apparent support, which 
is not to be denied, especially in regard to ch. xxxviii. 23 ; it 
is, however, on account of the omission of the indispensable 
MONN in this instance, an explanation which does violence 
to the words. The ‘3, on the contrary, introduces that which 
the accounts of the travellers affirm. Further, the 5 in bir? 
indicates here not the terminus ad quem, but as in my, in the 
evening, the terminus quo. And the verb 4¥N, ‘cohibere, 
signifies here to hold back from danger, as ch. xxxiii. 18, 
therefore to preserve uninjured. Ew. translates ver. 300 
erroneously : “in the day when the floods of wrath come on.” 
How tame would this ban, “to be led near,” be! This 
Hoph. signifies elsewhere to be brought and conducted, and 
occurs in ver. 32, as in Isa. lv. 12 and elsewhere, of an honour- 
able escort; here, in accordance with the connection: to be 
led away out of the danger (somewhat as Lot and his family 
by the escort of angels). At the time, when streams of wrath 
(72Y, the overflowing of vexation = outburst of wrath, like 


the Arab. s1<, the overflowing of the eye = tears) go forth, 


they remain untouched: they escape them, as being under a 
special, higher protection.’ Ver. 31 is commonly taken as a 


1 This interpretation, however, is unsatisfactory, because it does not do 
justice to the twofold es which seems, according to ch. xxxvili. 23, to be 
intended to indicate the terminus ad quem; perhaps vers. 29 and 30 are 
to be transposed. If ver. 30 followed ver. 28, it would retain its natural 
sense as belonging to the view of the friends: ‘‘ For the wicked is reserved 
for the day of calamity, and to a day of wrath they are led” (Say as 
Isa. liii. 7, Jer. xi. 19). Then Spy nyap N17) also adds a suitable echo 
of the contradiction in Job’s mouth. Béottch. rightly calls attention to 
the consonance of Say with yy, and of nay with nap. 


VOL. I. 2D 


418 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


reflection on the exemption of the evil-doer: God’s mode of 
action is exalted above all human scrutiny, although it is not 


reconcilable with the idea of justice, ch. ix. 12, xxiii, 13. | 


But the ‘brady *2, who will recompense it to him, which, 
used of man in relation to God, has no suitable meaning, and 


must therefore mean: who, after God has left the evil-doer 
unpunished—for which, however, NYY 87 would be an un-— 


suitable expression—shall recompense him, the evil-doer? is 
opposed to it. Therefore, against Ew., Hirz., and Hgst., it 
must with most expositors be supposed that ver. 31 is a re- 
flection referable not to God, but to the evil-doer : so powerful 
is the wicked generally, that no one can oppose his pernicious 
doings and call him to account for them, much less that any 
one would venture to repay him according to his desert when 
he has brought anything to a completion (MWY Nin, inten- 
tionally thus seriously expressed, as elsewhere of God, e.g. Isa. 
xxxviii. 15). In the next strophe, that which is gathered 


from the accounts of travellers is continued, and is then fol- | 


lowed by a declamatory summing up. 


32 And he is brought to the grave, 
And over the tomb he still keepeth watch. 
33 The clods of the valley are sweet to him, 
And all men draw after him, 
As they preceded him without number. 


34 And how will ye comfort me so vainly ! 
Your replies are and remain perfidy. 


During life removed at the time of dire calamity, this un- — 


approachable evil-doer is after his death carried to the grave 
with all -honour (53%, comp. x. 19), and indeed to a splendid 


tomb; for, like m22v¥ above, nap is also an amplificative — 
plural. It is certainly the most natural to refer pW, like — 


23%, to the deceased. The explanation: and over the tomb 


, 





CHAP. XXI. 32-84, 419 


one keeps watch (Béttch., Hahn, Réd., Olsh.), is indeed in 
itself admissible, since that which serves as the efficient sub- 
ject is often left unexpressed (Gen. xlvili. 2; 2 Kings ix. 21; 
Isa. liii. 9 ; comp. supra, on ch. xviii. 18); but that, according 
to the prevalent usage of the language, 3pv* would denote 
only a guard of honour at night, not also in the day, and that 
for clearness it would have required 173 instead of ¥73, are 
considerations which do not favour this explanation, for 1p¥ 
signifies to watch, to be active, instead of sleeping or resting ; 
and moreover, the placing of guards of honour by graves is 
an assumed, but not proved, custom of antiquity. Neverthe- 
less, 1pv* might also in general denote the watchful, careful 
tending of the grave, and the magdm (the tomb) of one who 
is highly honoured has, according to Moslem custom, servants 
(chddimin) who are appointed for this duty. But though 
the translation “one watches” should not be objected to on 
this ground, the preference is to be given to a commendable 
rendering which makes the deceased the subject of pw. 
Raschi’s explanation does not, however, commend itself: 
“buried in his own land, he also in death still keeps watch 
over the heaps of sheaves.” The LXX. translates similarly, 
él cwpav, which Jerome improperly, but according to a 
right sentiment, translates, in congerie mortuorum. For after 
the preceding mention of the pomp of burial, ¥73, which 
certainly signifies a heap of sheaves in ch. v. 26, is favoured by 
the assumption of its signifying a sepulchral heap, with refer- 
ence to which also in that passage (where interment is like- 
wise the subject of discourse) the expression is chosen. Haji 


Gaon observes that the dome (73?, 43, the dome and the 


sepulchral monument vaulted over by it)* erected over graves 
according to Arab custom is intended; and Aben-Ezra says, 


"1 Vid. Lane’s Manners and Customs of thé Modern Egyptians (trans- 
lated by Zenker). 


420 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


that not exactly this, but in general the grave-mound formed 
of earth, etc., is to be understood. In reality, v1 (from the 
verb ww}, cumulare, commonly used in the Talmud and 
Aramaic) signifies cumulus, in the most diversified connec- 
tions, which in Arabic are distributed among the verbs (wie, 


woS, and Gore, especially tumulus, Arab. “eae (broader 


pronunciation Wis>). If by grave-mound a mound with 
the grave upon it can be understood, a beautiful explanation 
is presented which accords with the preference of the Beduin 
for being buried on an eminence, in order that even in death — 
he may be surrounded by his relations, and as it were be able 
still to overlook their encampment: the one who should have 
had a better lot is buried in the best place of the plain, in an 
insignificant grave; the rich man, however, is brought up to 
an eminence and keeps watch on his elevated tomb, since 
from this eminence as from a watch-tower he even in death, 
as it were, enjoys the wide prospect which delighted him so 
while living.’ But the signification collis cannot be sup- 
ported ; v3 signifies the hill which is formed by the grave 
itself, and ver. 33 indeed directs us to the wady as the place 
of burial, not to the hill... But if wis the grave-mound, it 
is also not possible with Schlottm. to think of the pictures on 
_ the wall and images of the deceased, as they are found in the 
Egyptian vaults (although in ch. iii. 14 we recognised an allu- 
sion to the pyramids), for it cannot then be a v7) in the strict 
sense that is spokeh of; the word ought, like the Arabic @oa> 
(which the Arab. translation of the New Testament in the 
London Polyglott uses of the prnueiov of Jesus), with a 


Take my bones,” says an Arabian poem, “and carry them with 
you, wherever you go; and if ye bury them, bury them opposite your 
encampment! And bury me not under a vine, which would shade me, 
but upon a hill, so that my eye can see you!” Vid. Ausland, 1863, Nr. 
15 (Ein Ritt nach Transjordanien). 





CHAP. XXI. 32-34. 421 - 


mingling of its original signification, to have been used in 
the general signification sepulerum. This would be possible, 
but it need not be supposed. Job’s words are the pictorial 
antithesis to Bildad’s assertion, ch. xviii. 17, that the godless 
man dies away without trace or memorial; it is not so, but as 
may be heard from the mouth of people who have experience 
in the world: he keeps watch over his tomb, he continues 
to watch although asleep, since he is continually brought 
to remembrance by the monument built over his tomb. A 
keeping watch that no one approaches the tomb disrespect- 
fully (Ew.), is not to be thought of. “pw is a relative nega- 
tion of the sleep of death : he is dead, but in a certain manner 
he continues to live, viz. in the monument planting forward his 
memory, which it remains for the imagination to conceive of 
as a mausoleum, or weapons, or other votive offerings hung 
upon the walls, ete. In connection with such honour, which 
follows him even to and beyond death, the clods of the valley 
(est et terra levis) are sweet (3PM is accentuated with Mercha, 
and {> without Makkeph with little-Rebia) to him; and if 
death in itself ought to be accounted an evil, he has shared 
the common fate which all men after him will meet, and 
which all before him have met; it is the common end of 
all made sweet to him by the pageantry of his burial and his 
after-fame. Most modern expositors (Ew., Hirz., Umbr., 
Higst., Welte) understand the 9%", which is used, certainly, 
not in the transitive signification: to draw after one’s self, 
but in the intransitive: to draw towards (LX X. dzredevcertav), 
as Judg. iv. 6 (vid. Ges. Thes.), of an imitative treading of 
the same way ; but pix7b3 would then be an untrue hyperbole, 
by which Job ‘would expose himself to the attack of his 
adversaries. 

In ver. 34 Job concludes his speech ; the Waw of 7's), 
according to the idea (as e.g. the Waw in 1s}, Isa. xliii. 12), is 
an inferential ergo. Their consolation, which is only avail- 


422 THE BOOK OF JOB. | 


able on condition of penitence, is useless; and their replies, 
which are intended to make him an _evil-doer against the 
testimony of his conscience, remain ayn, It is not necessary 
to construe: and as to your answers, only by» remains. The 
predicate stands per attractionem in the sing.: their answers, 
reduced to their true value, leave nothing behind but Syn, end 
in yp, viz. ovndwa, Josh. xxii. 22, perfidious sinning against 
God, z.e. on account of the sanctimonious injustice and un 
charitableness with which they look suspiciously on him. 


Job has hitherto answered the accusations of the friends, 


which they express in ever-increasingly terrible representa- 
tions of the end of the godless, presenting only the terrible 
side of their dogma of the justice of God, with a stedfast 
attestation of his innocence, and with the ever-increasing 
hope of divine vindication against human accusation. In 
him was manifest that faith which, being thrust back by 
men, clings to God, and, thrust back by God, even soars 
aloft from the present wrath of God to His faithfulness and 
mercy. ‘The friends, however, instead of learning in Job’s 
spiritual condition to distinguish between the appearance 
and the reality in this confidence, which comes back to 
itself, see in it only a constant wilful hardening of himself 
against their exhortations to penitence. It does not confound 
them, that he over whom, according to their firm opinion, the 
sword of God’s vengeance hangs, warns them of that same 
sword, but only confirms them still more in their conviction, 
that they have to do with one who is grievously self-deluded. 

Zophar has painted anew the end of the evil-doer in the 
most hideous colours, in order that Job might behold himself 
in this mirror, and be astonished at himself. We see also, 
from the answer of Job to Zophar’s speech, that the passion- 
ate excitement which Job displayed at first in opposition to 
the friends has given place to a calmer tone; he has already 
got over the first impression of disappointed expectation, and 





CHAP. XXI. 32-84. 423 


the more confidently certain of the infallibility of divine | 
justice he becomes, the more does he feel raised above his 
accusers. He now expects no further comfort; careful 
attention to what he has to say shall henceforth be his con- 
solation. He will also complain against and of men no more, 
for he has long since ceased to hope for anything for himself 
from men; his vexation concerns the objective indefensi- 
bility of that which his opponents maintain as a primeval law 
of the divine government in the world. The maxim that 
godlessness always works its own punishment by a calamitous 
issue, is by no means supported by experience. One sees 
godless persons who are determined to know nothing of God, 
and are at the same time prosperous. It is not to be said 
that God treasures up the punishment they have deserved. 
for their children. The godless ought rather to bear the 

_ punishment themselves, since the destiny of their children 
no longer concerns them after they have enjoyed their fill of 
life. That law is therefore a precept which human short-— 
sightedness has laid down for God, but one by which, 
however, He is not guided. The godless who have lived 
prosperously all their days, and the righteous who have 
experienced only sorrow, share the common lot of death. 
One has only to ask persons who have had experience of the 
world : they can relate instances of notorious sinners who 
maintained their high position until death, and who, without 
being overtaken by divine judgments, and without human 
opposition and contradiction, were carried in honour to the 
grave, and their memory is immortalized by the monuments 
erected over their tomb. From this Job infers that the 
connection into which the friends bring his suffering with 
«supposed guilt, is a false one, and that all their answers are, 
after all, reducible to an unjust and uncharitable judgment, 
by which they attack (2) God. 


Job has more than once given expression to the thought, 


424 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


that a just distribution of prosperity and misfortune is not 
to be found in the world, ch. ix. 22-24, xii. 6. But now for 
the first time he designedly brings it forward in reply to the 
friends, after he has found every form of assertion of his 


innocence unavailing, and their behaviour towards him with — 


their dogma is become still more and more inconsiderate and 
rash. Job sins in this speech ; but in order to form a correct 
judgment of this sinning, two things must be attended to. 
Job does not revel in the contradiction in which this lasting 
fact of experience stands to the justice of divine retribution, 
he had rather be ignorant of it; for he has no need of it in 
order, in spite of his affliction, to be able to hold fast the con- 
sciousness of his innocence. No indeed! if he thinks of this 
mystery he is perplexed, and shuddering comes over him, ch. 
xxi. 6. And when he depicts the prosperity of sinners, he 
expresses his horror of the sins of such’ prosperous men in 
the words: The counsel of the ungodly be far from me! (ch. 
xxi. 16), in order that it may not be erroneously imagined 
that he lusts after such prosperity. 

If we compare Zophar’s and Job’s speeches one with 
another, we are obliged to say, that relatively the greater 
right is on the side of Job. True, the Scriptures confirm 
what. Zophar says of the destruction of the evil-doer in in- 
numerable passages ; and this calamitous end of one who has 
long been prosperous and defiant, is the solution by which the 
Old Testament Scriptures (Ps. xxxvii. Ixxiii.; Jer. xii. 1-3; 
Hab. i. 13-ii.) remove the stumbling-block of the mysterious 
phenomenon of the prosperity of the evil-doer. But if we 
bear in mind that this solution is insufficient, so long as that 
calamitous end is regarded only outwardly, and with refer- 
ence to the present world,—that the solution only becomes 
satisfactory when, as in the book of Ecclesiastes, in reply to 
a similar doubt to that which Job expresses (Eccles. vii. 15, 
viii. 14), the end is regarded as the end of all, and as the 





. - 
a. a 





CHAP. XXI. 32-34, 425 


decision of a final judgment which sets all contradictions 
right,—that, however, neither Zophar nor Job know anything 
of a decision beyond death, but regard death as the end 
whither human destiny and divine retribution tend, without 
being capable of any further distinction: we cannot deny 
that Job is most in the right in placing the prosperous life 
and death of the godlessas based upon the incontrovertible 
facts of experience, in opposition to Zophar’s primeval excep- 
tionless law of the terrible end of the godless. The speeches 
of Zophar and of Job are both true and false,—both one- 
sided, and therefore mutually supplementary. The real final 
end of the evil-doer is indeed none other than Zophar de- 
scribes; and the temporal prosperity of the evil-doer, lasting 
often until death, is really a frequent phenomenon. If,. how- 
ever, we consider further, that Job is not able to deny the 
occurrence of such examples of punishment, such revelations 
of the retributive justice of God, as those which Zophar 
represents as occurring regularly and without exception ; 
that, however, on the other hand, exceptional instances un- 
deniably do exist, and the friends are obliged to be blind to 
them, because otherwise the whole structure of their oppo- 
sition would fall in,—it is manifest that Job is nearer to 
the truth than Zophar. For it is truer that the retributive 
justice of God is often, but by far not always, revealed in 
the present world and outwardly, than that it never becomes 
manifest. 

Wherein, then, does Job’s sin in this speech consist ? 
Herein, that he altogether ignores the palpably just distribu- 
tion of human destinies, which does occur frequently enough. 
In this he becomes unjust towards his opponent, and inca- 
pable of convincing him. From it, it appears as though in 
the divine government there is not merely a preponderance 
of what is mysterious, of what is irreconcilable with divine 
justice, but.as though justice were altogether contradicted. 


426 THE BOOK OF JOB. ~ 


The reproach with which he reproaches his opponents: Shall 
one teach God understanding? is one which also applies to 
himself ; for when he says that God, if He punishes, must 
visit punishment upon the evil-doer himself, and not on his 
children, it is an unbecoming dictation with regard to God’s 
doing. We should be mistaken in supposing that the poet, 
in ch. xxi. 19-21, brings forward a concealed contradiction 


to the Mosaic doctrine of retribution; nowhere in the Old 


Testament, not even in the Mosaic law, is it taught, that 
God visits the sins of the fathers on the children, while He 
allows them themselves to go free, Ex. xx. 5, comp. Deut. 
xxiv. 16, Ezek. xviii., Jer. xxxi. 29 sq. What Job asserts, 
that the sinner himself must endure the punishment of his 
sins, not his children instead of him, is true; but the thought 
lying in the background, that God does not punish where He 


ought to punish, is sinful. Thus here Job again falls into — 


error, which he must by and by penitently acknowledge and 
confess, by speaking unbecomingly of God: the God of the 
future is again vanished from him behind the clouds of temp- 
tation, and he is unable to understand and love the God of 


the present ; He is a mystery to him, the incomprehensibility — 


of which causes him pain. “The joyous thought of the 
future, which a little before struggled forth, again vanishes, 
because the present, into the abyss of which he is again 
drawn down, has remained perfectly dark the whole time, 
and as yet no bridge has been revealed crossing from this 
side to that.” . 





CHAP. XXII. 2-5. 427 


THE THIRD COURSE OF THE CONTROVERSY.— 
CHAP. XXII.-XXVI. 


Eliphaz Third Speech.—Chap. xxii. 
Schema,; 8. 8. 4. 6. 8. 4. 10. 10. 


[Then began Eliphaz the Temanite, and said :] 
2 Is aman profitable unto God? 
No, indeed ! the intelligent man is profitable to himself. 
3 Hath the Almighty any profit if thou art righteous, 
‘Or gain if thou strivest to walk uprightly ? 
4 Will,He reprove thee for thy fear of God, 
Will He go with thee.into judgment ? 
5 Is not thy wickedness great, 
Thine iniquities infinite ? 

The verb {3D, in the signification to be profitable, is pecu- 
liar to the book of Job (although also 2D and N22 elsewhere, 
according to its primary signification, does not differ from 
yin, noyin, by which it is explained by Kimchi) ; the correct — 
development of the notion of this verb is to be perceived from 
the Hiph., which occurs in ver. 21 in this speech of Eliphaz 
(vid. Ges. Thes.) : it signifies originally, like }2¥, .,C., to rest, 
dwell, especially to dwell beside one another, then to become 


accustomed to one another (comp. }2¥, a neighbour, and Ss, a 


friend, confidant), and to assist one another, to be serviceable, 
to be profitable ; we can say both ‘7230, I have profit, ch. xxxiv. 
9, and j20,'it is profitable, ch. xv. 3, xxxv. 3, here twice with a 
personal subj., and first followed by >, then with the by usual 
also elsewhere in later prose (eg. 5y 2, 1 Chron. xiii. 2, 
comp. supra, ch. x. 3, to be pleasant) and poetry, which 
gladly adopts Aramaisms (as here and Ps. xvi. 6, Sy 75¥, well- 


428 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


pleased), instead of 5, whence here indy, as ch. xx. 23, pathetic 
for ‘Oy. The question, which is intended as a negative, is 
followed by the negative answer (which establishes its nega- 
tive meaning) with "3; ab is, like Ps. xiv. 2, the intelli- 
gent, who wills and does what is good, with an insight into 
the nature of the extremes in morality, as in Prov. i. 3 inde- 
pendent morality which rests not merely on blind custom is 
called 5am spi. ° y51 7, it is to the interest of any one — 
(different from 1 Sam. xv. 22, vid. on ch. xxi. 21), and 
? ys 1, it is to the gain of any one (prop. the act of cut- 
ting, cutting off, ze. what one tears in pieces), follow as 
synonyms of j2D. On the Aramaizing doubling of the first 
radical in the Hiph. DAN (instead of ON), vid. Ges. § 67, rem. 
8, comp. 3. It is translated an lucrum (et) si integras facias 
vias tuas. The meaning of the whole strophe is mainly 
determined according to the rendering of 7820 (like 
ynyvaon, ch. xxxix. 26, with Dechi, and as an exception with 
Munach, not removed to the place of the Metheg; vid. Psalter, 
ii. 491, Anm. 1). If the suff. is taken objectively (from fear 
of thee), e.g. Hirz., we have the following line of thought: 
God is neither benefited by human virtue nor injured by 
human sin, so that when He corrects the sinner He is 
turning danger from himself; He neither rewards the godly 
because He is benefited by his piety, nor punishes the sinner 
because by his sinning he threatens Him with injury. Since, 
therefore, if God chastises a man, the reason of it is not to 
be found in any selfish purpose of God, it must be in the sin 
of the man, which is on its own account worthy of punish- 
ment. But the logical relation in which ver. 5 stands to 
ver. 4 does not suit this: perhaps from fear of thee . . .? 
no, rather because of thy many and great sins! Hahn is 
more just to this relation when he explains: “ God has no 
personal profit to expect from man, so that, somewhat from 
fear, to prevent him from being injurious, He should haye 





CHAP. XXII. 2-5. 429 


any occasion to torment him with sufferings unjustly.” But 
if the personal profit, which is denied, is one that grows out 
_ of the piety of the man, the personal harm, which is denied 
as one which God by punishment will keep far from Himself, 
is to be thought of as growing out of the sin of the man; and 
the logical relation of ver. 5 to 4 is not suited to this, for ver. 
_ 5 assigns the reason of the chastisement to the sin, and denies, 
as it runs, not merely any motive whatever in connection 
with the sin, but that the reason can lie in the opposite of 
sin, as it appears according to Job’s assertion that, although 
guiltless, he is still suffering from the wrath of God. 

Thus, then, the suff. of ynsqnn is to be taken subjectively : 
on account of thy fear of God, as Eliphaz has used 7nxy 
twice already, ch. iv. 6, xv. 4. By this subjective rendering 
vers. 4 and 5 forma true antithesis : Does God perhaps punish 
thee on account of thy fear of God? Does He go (on that 
account) with thee into judgment? No (it would be absurd 
to suppose that) ; therefore thy wickedness must be great (in 
proportion to the greatness of thy suffering), and thy misdeeds 
infinitely many. If we now look at what precedes, we shall 
have to put aside the thought drawn into vers. 2 and 3 by Ewald 
(and also by Hahn): whether God, perhaps with the purpose 
of gaining greater advantage from piety, seeks to raise it by 
unjustly decreed sufferings; for this thought has nothing to 
indicate it, and is indeed certainly false, but on account of 
the force of truth which lies in it (there is a decreeing of 
suffering for the godly to raise their piety) is only perplexing. 

First of all, we must inquire how it is that Eliphaz begins 
his speech thus. All the exhortations to penitence in which 
the three exhaust themselves, rebound from Job without 
affecting him. Even Eliphaz, the oldest among them, full of 
a lofty, almost prophetic consciousness, has with the utmost 
solicitude allured and terrified him, but in vain. And it is 
the cause of God which he brings against him, or rather his 


430 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


own well-being that he seeks, without making an impression 
upon him. Then he reminds him that God is in Himself the 
all-sufficient One; that no advantage accrues to Him from 
human uprightness, since His nature, existing before and 
transcending all created things, can suffer neither diminution 
nor increase from the creature; that Job therefore, since he 
remains inaccessible to that well-meant call to penitent humi- 
liation, has refused not to benefit Him, but himself; or, what 
is the reverse side of this thought (which is not, however, 
expressed), that he does no injury to Him, only to himself. 
And yet in what except in Job’s sin should this decree of 
suffering have its ground? [If it is a self-contradiction that 
God should chastise a man because he fears Him, there must 
be sin on the side of Job; and indeed, since the nature of 
the sin is to be measured according to the nature of the 
suffering, great and measureless sin. This logical necessity 
Eliphaz now regards as real, without further investigation, 
by opening out this bundle of sins in the next strophe, and 
reproaching Job directly with that which Zophar, ch. xx. 
19-21, aiming at Job, has said of the yes. In the next 
strophe he continues, with °3 explic. : 


6 For thou distrainedst thy brother without cause, 
And the clothes of the naked thou strippedst off. 

7 Thou gavest no water to the languishing, 
And thou refusedst bread to the hungry. 

8 And the man of the arm—the land was his, 

_ And the honourable man dwelt therein. 

9 Thou sentest widows away empty, 

And the arms of the orphan are broken. 


The reason of exceeding great suffering must be exceeding 
great sins. Job must have committed such sins as are here 
cited; therefore Eliphaz directly attributes guilt to him, 
since he thinks thus to tear down the disguise of the hypo- 





Se 





= > ie 


CHAP. XXII. 6-9. 431 


crite. The strophe contains no reference to the Mosaic law: 
the compassionate Mosaic laws respecting duties towards 
widows and orphans, and the poor who pledge their few and 
indispensable goods, may have passed before the poet’s mind ; 
but it is not safe to infer it from the expression. As specific 
Mohammedan commandments among the wandering tribes 
even in the present day have no sound, so the poet dare not 
assume, In connection with the characters of his drama, any 
knowledge, of the Sinaitic law; and of this he remains con- 
scious throughout: their standpoint is and remains that of 
the Abrahamic faith, the primary commands (later called the 
ten commands of piety, el-felahh) of which were amply suff- 
cient for stigmatizing that to which this strophe gives promi- 
nence as sin. It is only the force of the connection of the © 
matter here which gives the futt. which follow ‘5 a retro- 
spective meaning. ban is connected either with the accusa- 
tive of the thing for which the pledge is taken, as in the 
law, which meets a response in the heart, Ex. xxii. 25 sq.; or 
with the accus. of the person who is seized, as here 78; or, 
if this is really (as Bir asserts) a mistake that has gained a 
footing, which has Codd. and old printed editions against it, 
rather POX. LXX., Targ., Syr., and Jer. read the word as 
plural. O'SHY (from OMY), like yuyvot, James ii. 15, nudi 
(comp. Seneca, de benefjiciis, v. 13.: si quis male vestitum et 
pannosum videt, nudum se vidisse dicit), are, according to our 
_ mode of expression, the half-naked, only scantily (vid. Isa. 
xx. 2) clothed. | 

Ver. 8. The man of the arm, Yt, is in Eliphaz’ mind Job 
himself. He has by degrees acquired the territory far and 
wide for himself, by having brought down the rightful pos- 
sessors by open violence (ch. xx. 19), or even by cunning and 
unfeeling practices, and is not deterred by any threat of a 
curse (ch, xv. 28): JOST i>, he looked upon it as his, and his 
it must become; and since with his possessions his authority 


432 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


increased, he planted himself firmly in it, filled it out alone, 
like a stout fellow who takes the room of all others away. 
Umbr., Hahn, and others think Job’s partiality for power and 
rank is described in ver. 8; but both assertions read straight- 
forward, without any intimation of co-operation. The address 
is here only suspended, in order to describe the man as he was 
and is. The all-absorbing love of self regulated his dealings. 
In possession of the highest power and highest rank, he was 
not easy of access. Widows and orphans, that they might 


not perish, were obliged to turn suppliantly to him. But — 


the widows he chased away with empty hands, and the arms of 


the orphans were crushed. From the address a turn is also 
here taken to an objective utterance turned from the person . 


addressed, intended however for him; the construction is like 


bay? nisi, unleavened bread is eaten, Ex. xiii, 7, according 
to Ew. § 295, 6. The arms are not conceived of as stretched . 


out for help (which would rather be "7!), nor as demanding 
back their perverted right, but the crushing of the arms, as 
Ps, xxxvii. 17, Ezek. xxx. 22, and frequently implies a total 
destruction of every power, support, and help, after the 


analogy of the Arabic phrase compared by Ges. in his Thes. 
pp. 2688, 4336. The arm, Yt (él 0, oftener ade or scl), 


signifies power, ch. xl. 9, Ps. Ixxvii. 16; force and violence, 
ver. 8, ch. xxxv. 9; self-help, and help from without, Ps, 


Ixxxiii. 9 (comp. Ps. xliv. 4). Whatever the orphans pos- 


sessed of goods, honour, and help still available, is not merely 
broken, it is beaten into fragments. 


10 Therefore snares are round about thee, 
And fear terrijieth thee suddenly; 
11. Or perceivest thou not the darkness, 
And the overflow of waters, which covereth thee ? 


On account of this inhuman mode of action by which he 


ee se ee Te i, a 


Ee 





CHAP. XXII. 10, 11. 433 


~ has challenged the punishment of justice, snares are round 
about him (comp. Bildad’s picture of this fate of the evil- 
doer, ch. xviii. 8~10), destruction encompasses him on every 
side, so that he sees no way out, and must without any 
escape succumb to it. And the approaching ruin makes 
itself known to him time after time by terrors which come 
suddenly upon him and disconcert him; so that his outward 
circumstances being deranged and his mind discomposed, he 
has already in anticipation to taste that which is before him. 
In ver. 11, O81 N? is by no means to be taken as an even- 
tual circumstantial clause, whether it is translated affirma- 
tively : or darkness (covers thee), that thou canst not see; or 
interrogatively : or does darkness (surround thee), that thou 
seest not? In both cases the verb in the principal clause is 
wanting ; apart from the new turn, which 1s introduces, being 
none, it would then have to be explained with Lowenthal : 
or has the habit of sinning already so dulled thy feeling and 
darkened thine eye, that thou canst not perceive the enor- 
mity of thy transgression? But this is a meaning forced 
from the words which they are not capable of ; it must have 
been at least FWa WN is, or something similar. Since 
{wn is (to be accented without Makkeph with Ménach, Dechi) 
cannot form a principal clause of itself, Hxin is without 
doubt the verb belonging to it: or (18 as ch. xvi. 3) seest 
thou not darkness? Because, according to his preceding 
speeches, Job does not question the magnitude of his 
sufferings, but acknowledges them in all their fearfulness ; 
therefore Hahn believes it must be explained: or shouldst 
thou really not be willing to see thy sins, which encompass 
thee as thick dark clouds, which cover thee as floods of 
water? The two figures, however, can only be understood 
of the destruction which entirely shrouds Job in darkness, 
and threatens to drown him. But destruction, in the sense 
in which Eliphaz asks if Job does not see it, is certainly 
VOL. I. ‘25 


434 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


intended differently to what it was in Job’s complaints. Job 
complains of it as being unmerited, and therefore mysterious; 
Eliphaz, on the other hand, is desirous that he should open 
his eyes that he may perceive in this darkness of sorrow, 
this flood of suffering, the well-deserved punishment of his 
heinous sins, and anticipate the worst by penitence. 3B3N Nd 
is a relative clause, and belongs logically also to qwn, comp. 
Isa. lx. 2, where NYBY is also found in ver. 6 (from yay, 
abundare; comp. ¢25, PBD, ch. xx. 22). Eliphaz now insi- 
nuates that Job denies the special providence of God, because 
he doubts the exceptionless, just government of God. In 
the second strophe he has explained his affliction as the result 
of his uncharitableness; now he explains it as the result of 
his unbelief, which is now become manifest. 


12 Is not Eloah high as the heavens? 
See but the head of the stars, how exalted! ~ | 

13 So then thou thinkest : “ What doth: God know ? 
Can He judge through the thick cloud ? 

14 Clouds veil Him that He seeth not, , 
And in the vault of heaven He walketh at His pleasure.” 


Because Job has denied the distribution of worldly fortune, 
of outward prosperity and adversity, according to the law of 
the justice that recompenses like for like, Eliphaz charges 
him with that unbelief often mentioned in the Psalms (Ixxiii. — 
11, xciv. 7; comp. Isa. xxix. 15, Ezek. viii. 12), which — 
denies to the God in heaven, as Epicurus did to the gods 
who lead a blessed life in the spaces between the worlds, a— 
knowledge of earthly things, and therefore the preliminary — 
condition for a right comprehension of them. The mode — 
of expression here is altogether peculiar. D2¥ M24 is not 
ace. loci, as the like accusatives in combination with the verb 
}2¥, Isa. Ivii. 15, may be taken: the substantival clause would — 
lead one to expect 7242, or better 1232 (ch. xi. 8); it is 





.- 


CHAP. XXII. 12-14. 435 


rather (similar to ch. xi. 8) nomin. predicati: Eloah is the 
height of the heavens = heaven-high, as high as the heavens, 
therefore certainly highly, and indeed very highly, exalted 
aboye this earth. In this sense it is continued with Waw 
explic.: and behold (= behold then) the head of the stars, 
that, or how (‘3 as in Gen. xlix. 15, 1 Sam. xiv. 29, quod 
= quam) exalted they are. O81 has Asla (Kadma) in 
correct texts, and 199 is written 12) (rdémmu) with a so-called 
Dag. affectuosum (Olsh. § 83, 0). It may be received as 
certain that wn, the head (vertex), beside 787 (not 15D), does 


not signify the sum (Aben-Ezra). But it is questionable 


whether the genitive that follows ws” is gen. partitivus : 
the highest among the stars (Ew., Hirz., Schlottm.), or gen. 
epenegeticus : the head, i.e. (in relation to the rest of the 
universe) the height, which is formed by the stars, or even 
which they occupy (Ges. calum stellatum); the partitive . 
rendering is to be preferred, for the Semitic perception 
recognises, as the plural D°2¥ implies, nearer and more 
distant celestial spheres. The expression “head of the stars” 
is therefore somewhat like fastigium celi (the extreme height, 
i.e. the middle of the vault of heaven), or culmen aereum (of 
the ther separating the strata of air above); the summit of 
the stars rising up into the extremest spheres is intended 
(we should say : the fixed stars, or to use a still more modern 


‘expression, the milky way), as also the 10° naturally refers to 


b’2219 wT as one notion (summitas astrorum = summa astra). 

The connection of what follows with Waw is not adversa- 
tive (Hirz., Ew., and others: and yet thou speakest), it is 
rather consecutive (Hahn: and since thou speakest ; better : 
and in consequence of this thou speakest; or: thus speakest 


. thou, thinkest thou then). The undeniable truth that God is 


exalted, and indeed absolute in His exaltation, is misapplied 
by Job to the false conclusion: what does God know, or 
(since the perf. in interrogative sentences frequently corre- 


























436 THE BOOK OF JOB. 

sponds to the Latin conjunctive, vid. on Ps. xi. ee . 
God know, or take knowledge, .e. of anything that h g 
earth? In ver. 13d the potential takes the place of t 
perfect: can He rule judicially behind the dark ¢ 
over the world below from nisin He isshut out? 


a 


verbal origin with the Arab. pet post, prop. distance, ee 


succession, but of wider use) signifies here, as in ch. 1 
7, behind, pone, with the secondary notion of being 
passed or covered by that which shuts off. Far from 4 
an unlimited view of everything earthly from His bso lu 
height, it is veiled from Him by the clouds, so that E e 
not what occurs here below, and unconcerned about it 
walks the circle of the heavens (that Which vaults tes eal 
the inhabitants of which seem to Him, according to Is . 
22, as grasshoppers) ; 1207 is here, after the analogy of K 5 
joined with the accus. of the way over which He walks 7 
His pleasure: orbem ceelum obambulat. By such unwo thy 

views of the Deity, Job puts himself on a par with the god 
less race that was swept away by the flood in ancient da 
without allowing himself to be warned by this example 
punishment. 


15 Wilt thou observe the way of the ancient world, 
Which evil men have trodden, ’ 

16 Who were withered up before their time, 
Their foundation was poured out as a stream, 

17 Who said unto God: Depart from us ! 

And what can the Almighty do to them? — 
‘18 And notwithstanding He had filled their houses with not 
The counsel of the wicked be far from me! | ee 
While in Ps. exxxix. 24 nb 7 prospectively signifies a ~ 
way of eternal duration (comp. Ezek. xxvi. 20, oh ny, of the — 
people who sleep the interminably long sleep of the grave), — 


* 


CHAP. XXII. 15-18. 437 












ay trodden by people (‘N, comp. ‘W28, ch. xxxiv. 36) 
ickedness. Those worthless ones were withered up, ie. 


order their time was’ not yet come. On %1),' vid. on ch. 
|. 8; LXX. correctly, cwvehjpOnoav dwpor, nevertheless 
N wBdvew is too feeble as a translation of pop; for as 
! : signifies to take with the tip of the finger, whereas (28 
nifies to take with the whole bent hand, so pp, in confor- 
“mity to the dull, emphatic final consonant, signifies “to bind 
a B ficealy together.” In ver. 166 P¥¥ is not perf. Pual for P¥ 
7 (Ew. § 83, 6), for this exchange, contrary to the law of vowels, 
of the sharp form with the lengthened form is without 
mple; it must at least have been written P¥Y (comp. 
a adg. xviii. 29). It is fut. Hoph., which, according to ch. xi. 
a. £O, , might be P¥!; here, however, it is with a resolving, not 
; om of the Jod, as in Lev. xxi. 10. The fut. has the 
signification of the imperfect which it acquires in an historic 





connection. It is not to be translated: their place became a 

stream which has flowed away (Hirz.), for the mn which 
) would be required by such an interpretation could not be 
omitted; also not: flumen effusum est in fundamentum eorum 
(Rosenm., Hahn, and others), which would be Din’, and 
would still be very liable to be misunderstood; also not: whose 
foundation was a poured-out stream (Umbr., Olsh.), for then 


, 1 This 1p, according to the Masora, is the middle word of tis book 
_ of Job MpDA ‘ie 





438 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


there would. be one attributive clause inserted in the other; 
but: their solid ground became. fluid like a stream (Ew., 
Hlegst., Schlottm.), so that 192, after the analogy of the verbs 
with two accusatives, Ges. § 139, 2, is a so-called second ace. 
of the obj. which by the passive becomes a nominative (comp. — us 
ch. xxviii. 2), although it might also be an apposition of the 
following subj. placed first: a stream (as such, like such a _ 
one) their solid ground was brought into a river; the ground 
on which they and their habitations stood was placed under — 
water and floated away: without doubt the flood is intended ; . 
reference to this perfectly accords with the patriarchal pre- 
and extra-Israelitish standpoint of the book of Job; andthe 
generation of the time of the flood (297 7) is accounted 
in the holy scriptures of the Old and New Testament as a 
paragon of. godlessness, the cotemporaries of Noah are the 
ameobvres, D-IND, Kat’ éEoynv (comp. 1 Pet. iii. 20 with 
Ps. Ixyiii. 19). | 
Accordingly they are now here also further described (ver. _ 
17) as those who said to God, “ Depart from us,” and what — 
could the Almighty do to them (12? instead of 32), which was 4 
to be expected, since, as in ch. xix. 28, there is a change 
from the oratio directa to obliqua)! Olshausen explains with 
Hahn: “with respect to what thou sayest: and what then 
does the Almighty do to them (for it)? He fills their houses 
with prosperity, while the counsel of the wicked is far from 
me (notwithstanding I am unfortunate).” But this explana- 
tion is as forced (since 7) without a NMS or WONN standing 
with it is taken as the word of Job) as it is contrary tothe 
syntax (since the circumstantial clause with sim is not recog- 
nised, and on the other hand ‘3) N33), instead of which it ought 
at least to have been '3) °3123, is regarded as such an one), 
No indeed, just this is an exceedingly powerful effect, that 
Eliphaz describes those godless ones who dismiss God with 
2D ND, to whom, according to Job’s assertion, ch. xxi. 13 » 





CHAP. XXII. 19, 20. 439 


sq., undimmed prosperity is portioned out, by referring to a 
memorable fact as that which has fallen under the strict 
judgment of God; and that with the very same words with 
which Job, ch. xxi. 16, declines communion with such pros- 
perous evil-doers: “ the counsel of the wicked be far from 
me,” he will have nothing more to do, not with the wicked 
alone, but, with a side glance at Job, even with those who 
place themselves on a level with them by a denial of the just 
government of God in the world. 2 ODB, as the following 
circumstantial clause shows, is intended like Ps. lxviii. 29, 
comp. xxxi. 20, Isa. xxvi. 12: how can the Almighty then 
help or profit them? Thus they asked, while He had filled 
their houses with wealth—Eliphaz will have nothing to do 
with this contemptible misconstruction of the God who proves 
himself so kind to those who dwell below on the earth, but 
who, though He is rewarded with ingratitude, is so just. 
’ The truly godly are not terrified like Job, ch. xvii. 8, that 
retributive justice is not to be found in God’s government of 
the world; on the contrary, they rejoice over its actual mani- 
festation in their own case, which makes them free, and 
therefore so joyous. 


19 The righteous see it and rejoice, 
And the innocent mock at them: 
20 “ Verily our opponent is destroyed, 
And the fire hath devoured their abundance.” 


This thought corresponds to that expressed as a wish, hope, 
or anticipation at the close of many of the Psalms, that the 
- retributive justice of God, though we may have to wait a 
long time for it, becomes at length the more gloriously mani- 
fest to the joy of those hitherto innocently persecuted, Ps. 
Iviii. 11 sq. The obj. of 38, as in Ps. cvii. 42, is this its 
manifestation. ind is not an ethical dative, as in Ps. lxxx. 7, 
but asin Ps. ii. 4 refers to the ungodly whose mocking pride 


440 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


comes to such an ignominious end. What. follow in ver. 20 
are the words of the godly; the introductory 7x} is wanting, 
as e.g. Ps. ii. 3. NO-DN can signify neither st non, as ch. ix. 
24, xxiv. 25, xxxi. 31, nor annon, as in a disjunctive question, 
ch. xvii. 2, xxx. 25; it is affirmative, as ch. i. 11, ii. 5, xxxi. 
36—an Amen to God’s peremptory judgment. On 7033 (he 
is drawn away, put aside, become annulled), vid. supra, p. 282. 
2°? (for which Aben-Ezra is also acquainted with the read- 
ing VDP with yop pop, ze. Ws) has a pausal @ springing from 
é,as ch. xx. 27, HOM PNY for Aoa\pNN; Ruth iii. 2, wnyW; Isa. 
xlvii. 10, 9285 (together with the reading "89, comp. 1 Chron. 
xii. 17, 2009). The form O'? is remarkable; it may be more 
readily taken as part. pass. (like 0°¥, positus) than as nom. 
infin. (the act of raising for those who raise themselves) ; per- 
haps the original text had wp (32P), ON is no more to be 
translated their remnant (Hirz.) here than in Ps. xvii. 14, at 


least not in the sense of Ex. xxiii. 11; that which exceeds the ~ 


necessity is intended, their surplus, their riches. It is said of 
Job in b. Megilla, 28a: MN M323 FN) AVS, he was extrava- 


gant (prodigus) with his property. The fire devouring the 


wealth of the godless is an allusion to the misfortune which ° — 


has befallen him. 
After this terrible picture, Eliphaz turns to the exhorta- 


tion of him who may be now perhaps become ripe for re- 
pentance. 


21 Make friends now with Him, so hast thou peace ; 
Thereby good will come unto thee. 
22 Receive now teaching from His mouth, 
And place His utterances in thy heart. 
23 If thou returnest to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up 
again ; 
If thou puttest away iniquity far from thy tents. 
24 And lay by in the dust the gold ore, 





~~ 
es 


CHAP. XXII. 21-25. | 441 


And under the pebbles of the brooks the gold of Ophir. 
25 So shall the Almighty be to thee gold ore in abundance, 
And silver to thee of the brightest lustre. 


The relationship of the verbs }20, }2¥, and soi: has been 


ae ed 


already discussed on ver. 2: the Hiph. signifies to be on 
friendly terms with any one; to enter into, or to stand in, 
an intimate relationship to any one (Ps. cxxxix. 3) ; then also 
(as the Greek dudciv) to get accustomed to, to be used to 
(Num. xxii. 30). The second imper. is consecutive, as e.g. 


Urcec, 


Proy. iii. 4: and have as the result of it peace (Arab. prrn:lé) 


= so shalt thou have peace, Ges. § 130, 2. In ver. 21 the 
first thing to be done is to clear up the form JO8i3A or 
(according to another reading which is likewise well attested) 
qnsian, Olshausen (in Hirz. and in his Gramm.) and Rédiger 
(in Thes. p. 11, suppl.) explain this form the same as the _ 
other forms which come under consideration in connection 
with it, viz. ANNAA (veniat), Deut. xxxili. 16, and ‘NN3m, Keri 
NNIA) (et venisses, addressed to Abigail), 1 Sam. xxv. 34, as 
errors in writing; whereas Ew., § 191, c, sees in JONi3NM the 
erroneous form MXi2A = Ni3n with a superfluous feminine 
termination, in MMNi3F an extension of the double feminine 
by the unaccented ah of intention, and in ‘NN3 a transfer 
of the inflexion of the perf. to the fut. Confining ourselves 
to the form which occurs here, we refer to what was said 
above, p. 187, note 2: JNNI2n is not a forma mixta from - 
qian and W832, but the mistaken double feminine ANi3N with 
suff., the ah of which, although the tone is on the penult., is 
not He voluntativum, as Isa. v. 19, but He femin. The ex- 
-ception of such double feminines is made as certain in Hebrew 
by the regular form nnp33 (= ny with a second feminine ter- 
mination), and by examples like Proy. i. 20, Ezek. xxiii. 20, 
and also Josh. vi. 17, 2 Sam. i. 26, Amos iv. 3 (comp. even 


a 


4492 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


Olsh. in his Gramm. S. 449), as the double plural and its 
further formation by a feminine termination in Arabic. — It is 
therefore unnecessary, with Olsh. and Réd., after the prece- 
dent of the ancient versions, to read 782A (which is found 
in 19 Codd. in de Rossi): proventus tuus bonus erit. The 
suff. in pha, as Isa. Ixiv. 4, Ezek. xxxili. 18, comp. piney, 
Isa. xxxviii. 16, is intended as neuter, as the fem. is used else- 
where (e.g. Isa. xxxviii. 16, {73): by it, ze. by such conduct, 
good (prosperity) shall come to thee, and indeed, as the mi3 
construed with the acc. implies, in a sudden change of thy 
previous lot, coming about without any further effort on thy 
part. In the certainty that it is God’s word which he presents " 
to his friend (the very certainty which Eliphaz also expresses 
elsewhere, e.g. ch. xv. 11), he further admonishes him (ver. 
22) to receive instruction from God’s mouth ("5 as Prov. 
ii. 6), and to allow His (Ged’s) utterances a place in his 
heart, not to let them die away without effect, but to imprint 
them deeply on his mind. prope 

‘Ver. 23. If he return to the Almighty (72 35¥ as freq., e.g. 
Isa. xix. 22, comp. xlv. 24, instead of the otherwise usual 
by awi, of thorough and complete conversion), he will be 
built up again, by his former prosperity being again raised 
from its ruins.’ 123, to build, always according to the con- 
nection, has at one time the idea of building round about, 
continuing to build, or finishing building (vid. on ch. xx. 19) ; 
at another of building up again (ch. xii. 14; Isa. lviii. 12), 
referred to persons, the idea of increasing prosperity (Mal. 
iii. 15), or of the restoration of ruined prosperity (Jer. xxiv. 
6, xxxiii. 7), here in the latter sense. The promissory 237 
is surrounded by conditional clauses, for ver. 23b (comp. ch. 
xi. 14) is a second conditional clause still under the govern- 
ment of D8, which is added for embellishment ; it opens the 
statement of that in which penitence must be manifested, if 


it is to be thorough. The LXX. translates day 5é ém- 


Eo 





‘aie! 


CHAP. XXII. 21-25. et ee 


otpadns Kai TaTreweons, i.e. 1M, which Ewald considers as 
the original; the omission of the 08 (which the poet other- 
wise in such connections has formerly heaped up, e.g. ch. 
vili. 5 sq., x1. 13 sq.) is certainly inconvenient. ‘And yet we 
should not on that account like to give up the figure indi- 
cated in 723n, which is so beautiful and so suited to our poet. 
The statement advanced in the latter conditional clause is 
then continued in ver. 24 in an independent imperative clause, 
which the old versions regard as a promise instead of exhor- 
tation, and therefore grossly misinterpret. The Targ. trans- 
lates: and place on the dust a strong city (7.e. thou shalt 
then, where there is now nothing but dust, raise up such), as 
if (¥2 could be equivalent to 82 or 1¥2!2,—a rendering to 
which Saadia at least gives a turn which accords with the 
connection: “regard the stronghold ( .-4\) as dust, and 
account as the stones of the valleys the gold of Ophir;” better 
than Eichhorn: “pull down thy stronghold of violence, and 
demolish (12m) the castles of thy valleys.” On the other 
~ hand, Gecatilia, who understands 1¥2 proportionately more 
correctly of treasures, translates it as a promise: so shalt 
thou inherit treasures (slo) more numerous than dust, and 
gold ore (133) (more than) the stones of the valleys; and 
again also Rosenm. (repones pre pulvere argentum) and Welte 
interpret ver. 24 as a promise; whereas other expositors, 
who are true to the imperative mw, explain MY estimare, and 
sayy pulveris instar (Grot., Coce., Schult., Dathe, Umbr.), 
by falsely-assigning to >Y here, as to ? elsewhere, a meaning 
which it never has anywhere; how blind, on the other hand, 
since the words in their first meaning, pone super pulverem, 
furnish an excellent thought which is closely connected with 
the admonition to rid one’s self of unjust possessions. “¥3, like 


i (by which Abulwalid explains it), is gold and silver ore, 


i.e. gold and silver as they are broken out of the mine, there- 


is 


444 _ THE BOOK OF JOB. 


fore (since silver is partially pure, gold almost pure, and 
always containing more or less silver) the most precious 
metal in its pure natural state before being worked, and con- 


sequently also unalloyed (comp. -<) and gis which likewise 


signifies auwrum argentumve nativum, but not ab excidendo, 
but a nitore); and “to lay in the dust” is equivalent to, 
to part with a thing as entirely worthless and devoid of 
attraction. The meaning is therefore: put away from thee 
the idol of precious metal with contempt (comp. Isa. ii. 20), 
which is only somewhat differently expressed in the parallel: 
lay the Ophir under the quartz (2) agreeing with 1y2) of 
the brooks (such as is found in the beds of empty. wAdys), 
i.e. place it under the rubble, after it has lost for thee its 
previous bewitching spell. As cloth woven from the fila- 
ments of the nettle is called muslin, from Mossul, and cloth 
with figures on it “damask, Pwo” (Amos iii. 12), from 
Damascus,! and aloes-wood ,}Ar<c, from Coromandel; so the 
gold from Ophir, i.e. from the coast of the Abhira, on the 
north coast of the Runn (Old Indian Irina, i.e. Salt Sea), east 
of the mouth of the Indus,?'is directly called 78. When 
Job thus casts from him temporal things, by the excessive 
cherishing of which he has hitherto sinned, then God him- 
self will be his imperishable treasure, his everlasting higher 
delight. He frees himself from temporal 1¥2; and thé 
Almighty, therefore the absolute personality of God himself, 
will be to him instead of it D°¥3, gold as from the mine, in 


1 We leave it undecided whether in a similar manner silk has its name 
pirate (warate), Armenian metaks, Aramaic NDIND, }opu»D, from 
Damascus (Ewald and Friedr. Miiller). 

2 Thus 9°5)s" has been explained by Lassen in his pamphlet de Pen- 
tapotamia, and his Indische Alterthumskunde (i. 589). The LXX. (Cod. 
Vat.) and Theodot. have Zw@«/p, whence Ges. connects Ophir with 
Arrian’s Oi77apa and Edrisi’s Sufara in Guzerat, especially since Sojir 
is attested as the Coptic name for India. .The matter is. still not settled. 


~ 


' 





CHAP. XXII. 21-25. : 445 


rich abundance. This is what the contrast of the plur. (782 
without Jod plur. is a false reading) with the sing. implies ; 
the LXX., Syriac version, Jerome, and Arabic version err 
here, since they take the 2 of 3"¥3 as a preposition. 

The ancient versions and lexictographers furnish no expla- 
nation of Mayin, The Targ. translates it SOM AIPA, and 
accordingly it is explained by both jpn (strength) and nay 
(height), without any reason being assigned for these signifi- 
cations. In the passagé before us the LXX. transl. dpydpuov 
memrupapevov from 4Y, in the Targum signification to blow, 
forge; the Syriac version, argentum computationum (pwn), 
from }y in the Targum-Talmudic signification to double 
(= Hebr. 5p>). According to the usage of the language in 
question, 4}, from the Hiph. of which mayin is formed, signi- 
fies to become feeble, to be wearied; but even if, starting 
from the primary notion, an available signification is attained 
for the passage before us (fatigues = toilsome excitement, 
synon. }'") and Ps. xev. 4 (climbings = heights), the use of 
the word in the most ancient passages citable, Num. xxiii. 22, 
xxiv. 8, 19 Os) nbyins, still remains unexplained ; for here the 
notion of being incapable of fatigue, invincibility, or another 
of the like kind, is required, without any means at hand for 
rightly deriving it from ¥!, to become feeble, especially as 
the radical signification anhelare supposed by Gesenius (comp. 
jis from the root’ j) is unattested. Accordingly, we must go 
back to the root #), 9, discussed on Ps. xcv. 4, which signifies 
to rise aloft, to be high, and from which ys’, or with a trans- 
position of the consonants }y" (comp. YY and 4), acquires 
the signification of standing out, rising radiantly, shining afar 
off, since 5’, to become weary, is allied to the Arab. Wis, 
fut. 1; this 4 (vp), on the other hand, to i), ascendere, 
adolescere, xt, elatum, adultum esse, and sty Cminere, and 
tropically completum, perfectum esse. Thus we obtain the 
signification eminentie for mayin. In Ps. xev. 4, as a 


446 THE BOOK OF JOB, 


‘numerical plur., it signifies the towerings (tops) of the moun- 
tains, and here, as in the passages cited from Numbers, either 
prominent, eminent attributes, or as an intensive plur. excel- 
lence; whence, agreeing with Ewald, we have translated . 
“silver of the brightest lustre” (comp. “YD! eminentia, 
splendor, Ezek. xxviii. 7). 


26 For then thou shalt delight thyself in the Almighty, 
And lift up thy countenance to Eloah ; 
27 If thou prayest to Him, He will hear thee, 
And thou shalt pay thy vows. 
28 And thou devisest a plan, and it shall be established to ha 
And light shineth upon thy ways. 
29 if they are cast down, thou sayest, “ Arise!” 
And him that hath low eyes He saveth. 
30 LHe shall rescue him who is not guiltless, 
And he is rescued by the purity of thy hands. 


N72 might also be translated “then indeed” (vid. on ch. 
xi. 15), as an emphatic resumption of the promissory 77 
(tum erit), ver. 25; but what follows is really the confirma- 
tion of the promise that God will be to him a rich recom- 
pense for the earthly treasures that he resigns; therefore: 
for then thou shalt delight thyself in the Almighty (vid. the 
primary passage, Ps. xxxvii. 4, and the dependent one, Isa. 
lviii. 14; comp. infra, ch. xxvii. 10), i.e. He will become a 
source of highest, heartfelt joy to thee (ey as interchanging — 
with 2 by np’). Then shall he be able to raise his counte+ 
nance, which was previously depressed (3953; Gen. iv. 6 sq.), _ 
in the consciousness of his estrangement from God by dearly — 
cherished sin and unexpiated guilt, free and open, confident 
and joyous, to God. If he prays to Him (AYA may be 
thus regarded as the antecedent of a conditional clause, 
like M2, ch. xx. 24), He will hear him; and what he has 
vowed in prayer he will now, after that which he sup- 





CHAP. XXII. 26—30. 447 


plicated is granted, thankfully perform ; the. Hiph. ‘nyn 
(according to its etymon: to offer the incense of prayer) 
occurs only in Ex. vii.—x. beside this passage, whereas 113 
(to cut in pieces, cut off) occurs here for the first time in the 
signification, to decide, resolve, which is the usual meaning 
of the word in the later period of the language. On Mm) 
(with Pathach, according to another reading with Kametz- 
chatuph), vid. Ges. § 47, rem. 2. Moreover, the paratactic 
clauses of ver. 28 are to be arranged as we have translated 
them ; Dip signifies to come to pass, as freq. (e.g. Isa. vii. 7, 
in connection with ™, to come: into being). That which he 
designs (728) is successful, and is realized, and light shines 
upon his ways, so that he cannot stumble and does not miss 
his aim,—light like moonlight or morning light; for, as the 
author of the introductory Proverbs, to which we have already 
so often referred as being borrowed from the book of Job 
(comp. ch. xxi. 24 with Prov. iii. 8), ingeniously says, ch. iv. 
18: “The path of the righteous is as the morning light 
(733 383, comp. Dan. vi. 20), which shineth brighter and 
brighter unto the height of day (i.e. noonday brightness).” 
Ver. 29. BUT refers to 7'277; for if it is translated: in 
case they lower (Schlottm., Renan, and others), the suff. is 
wanting, and the thought is halting. As avin signifies to 
make low, it can also signify to go down (Jer. xili. 18), and 
said of ways, “ to lead downwards” (Rosenm., Ew., Hahn). 
The old expositors go altogether astray in ver. 29a, because 
they did not discern the exclamative idea of 3. The noun 
m3i—which is formed from the verb 7)3 = 783, as 183, arro- 
gance, Prov. viii. 13; 753, healing, Prov. xvii. 22; 773, miti- 
gation, Nah. iii. 19 (distinct from 13, the body, the fem. of 
12), without the necessity of regarding it as syncopated from 
msi (Olsh. § 154, d), as now, 1 Sam. i. 17, from noxvi—does not 
here signify pride or haughtiness, as in ch. xxxili. 17, Jer. 
xiii. 17, but signifies adverbially swrsum (therefore synon. of 


448 - THE BOOK OF JOB. 


mpb, which, being formed from Sp, elevatio, with He of direc-— 
tion and Dag. forte implic., as 138, 77 = paddannah, harrah,— 

perhaps, however, it is to be read directly nbd, with He fem.,— 

is accordingly a substantive made directly into an adverb, like 

m3): suppose that (‘2 = édv, as D8 = ei) thy ways lead down- 

wards, thou sayest: on high! i.e. thy will being mighty in 

God, thy confidence derived from the Almighty, will all at 

once give them another and more favourable direction: God 

will again place in a condition of prosperity and happiness, 

—which ye (defectively written; LXX.: caoev; Jer. and 

Syr., however, reading Ys: salvabitur), according to its 

etymon, Arab. .. .«\) Signifies,—him who has downcast eyes _ 
(LXX. cigovra opOarpois). 31! 

Ver. 30. It may seem at first sight, that by °P27s, the 
not-guiltless (X'=}'N =P, e.g. Isa. xl. 29, 2 Chron. xiv. 10, 
Ges. § 152, 1), Eliphaz means Job himself in his present 
condition ; it would then be a mild periphrastic expression 
for “the guilty, who has merited his suffering.” -If thou 
returneést in this manner to God, He will—this would be the 
idea of ver. 30a—free thee, although thy suffering is not 
undeserved. Instead now of proceeding: and thou shalt be 
rescued on account of the purity of thy hands, i.e. because 


thou hast cleansed them from wrong, Eliphaz would say: © 


and this not-guiltless one will be rescued, 7.e. thou, the not- 
guiltless, wilt be rescued, by the purity of thy hands. But 
one feels at once how harsh this synallage would be. Even 


Hirzel, who refers ver. 30a to Job, refers 30 to some one 


else. In reality, however, another is intended in both cases 
arranged as to be supplemented by 783 23, ver. 300. Even 


1In Rabbinic also this abbreviated negative is not ¢ (as Dukes and 


Geiger point it), but according to the traditional pronunciation, 9%, ¢.g- 


AWE x (impossibile). 


- 
-) 


(Ew., Schlottm., Hahn, Olsh.); and ver. 30a is just so 





CHAP. XXII. 26-30. 449 


old expositors, as Seb. Schmid and J. H. Michaelis, have 
correctly perceived the relation: liberabit Deus et propter 
puritatem manuum tuarum alios, quos. propria innocentia ipsos 
deficiens non esset liberatura. The purity of the hands (Ps. 
xviii. 21) is that which Job will have attained when he has 
put from him that which defiles him (comp. ch. ix. 30 with 
xvii. 9). Hirzel has referred to Matt. vi. 33 in connection 
with vers. 24 sq.; one is here reminded of the words of our 
Lord to Peter, Luke xxii. 32: ov roré éructpépas otipiEov 
Tovs aderghovs cov. Eliphaz, although unconsciously, in these 
last words expresses prophetically what will be fulfilled in 
the issue of the history in Job himself. 

The speech of Eliphaz opens the third course of the 
controversy. In the first course of the controversy the 
speeches of the friends, though bearing upon the question of 
punishment, were embellished with alluring promises; but 
these promises were incapable of comforting Job, because 
they proceeded upon the assumption that he is suffering as 
a sinner deserving of punishment, and can only become free 
from his punishment by turning to God. In the second 
course of the controversy, since Job gave no heed to their 
exhortations to penitence, the friends drew back their pro- 
mises, and began the more unreservedly to punish and to 
threaten, by presenting to Job, in the most terrifying pictures 
of the ruin of the evil-doer, his own threatening destruction. 
The misconstruction which Job experiences from the friends 
has the salutary effect on him of rooting him still more 
deeply in the hope that God will not let him die without 
having borne witness to his innocence. But the mystery of 
the present is nevertheless not cleared up for Job by this 
glimpse of faith into the future. On the contrary, the 
second course of the controversy ends so, that to the friends 
who unjustly and uncharitably deny instead of solving the 


mystery of his individual lot, Job now presents that which | 
VOL. I. 2F 


450 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


is. mysterious in the divine distribution of human fortune in 
general, the total irreconcilableness of experience with the 
idea of the just divine retribution maintained by them. In 
that speech of his, ch. xxi., which forms the transition to the 
third course of the controversy, Job uses the language of the 
doubter not. without sinning against God. But since it is 
true that the outward lot of man by no means always corre- 
sponds to his true moral condition, and never warrants an 
infallible conclusion respecting it, he certainly in that speech 
gives the death-blow to the dogma of the friends. The poet 
cannot possibly allow them to be silent over it. Eliphaz, the 
most discreet and intelligent, speaks. His speech, considered 
in itself, is the purest truth, uttered in the most appropriate 
and beautiful form. But as an answer to the speech of Job 
the dogma of the friends itself is destroyed in it, by the false 
conclusion by which it is obliged to justify itself to itself. 
The greatness of the poet is manifest from this, that he 
makes the speeches of the friends, considered in themselves, 
and apart from the connection of the drama, express the 
most glorious truths, while they are proved to be inadequate, 
indeed perverted and false, in so far as they are designed to 
solve the existing mystery. According to their general sub- 
stance, these speeches are genuine diamonds; according to 
their special application, they are false ones. 

How true is what Eliphaz says, that God neither blesses 
the pious because he is profitable to Him, nor punishes the 
wicked because he is hurtful to Him; that the pious is pro- 
fitable not to God, but to himself; the wicked is hurtful not 
to God, but himself; that therefore the conduct of God 
towards both is neither arbitrary nor selfish! But if we 
consider the conclusion to which, in these thoughts, Eliphaz 
only takes a spring, they prove themselves to be only the 
premises of a false conclusion. For Eliphaz infers from 
them that God rewards virtue as such, and punishes vice as 








CHAP. XXII. 26-30. 451 


such; that therefore where a man suffers, the reason of it is 
not to be sought in any secondary purpose on the part of 
God, but solely and absolutely in the purpose of God to 
punish the sins of the man. The fallacy of the conclusion 
is this, that the possibility of any other purpose, which is 
just as far removed from self-interest, in connection with 
God’s purpose of punishing the sins of the man, is excluded. 
It is now manifest how near theoretical error and practical 
‘falsehood border on one another, so that dogmatical error is 
really in the rule at the same time dév«ia. For after Eliphaz, 
in order to defend the justice of divine retribution against 
Job, has again indissolubly connected suffering and the 
punishment of sin, without acknowledging any other form of 
divine rule but His justice, any other purpose in decreeing 
suffering than the infliction of punishment (from the recog-- 
nition of which the right and true comfort for Job would 
have sprung up), he is obliged in the present instance, against 
his better knowledge and conscience, to distort an established 
fact, to play the hypocrite to himself, and persuade himself of 
the existence of sins in Job, of which the confirmation fails him, 
and to become false and unjust towards Job even in favour 
of the false dogma. For the dogma demands wickedness in 
an equal degree to correspond to a great evil, unlimited sins 
to unlimited sufferings. Therefore the former wealth of Job 
must furnish him with the ground of heavy accusations, which 
he now expresses directly and unconditionally to Job. He 
whose conscience, however, does not accuse him of mammon- 
worship, ch. xxxi. 24 sq., is suffering the punishment of a 
covetous and compassionless rich man. Thus is the dogma 
of the justice of God rescued by the unjust abandonment of 
Job. | 

Further, how true is Eliphaz’ condemnatory judgment 
against the free-thinking, which, if it does not deny the 
existence of God, still regards God as shut up in the heavens 


“a - ‘ 
Oe 
a 


452 THE BOOK OF JOB. 


without concerning himself about anything that takes place 
on earth! The divine judgment of total destruction came 
upon a former generation that had thought thus insolently 
of God, and to the joy of the righteous the same judgment 
is still executed upon evil-doers of the same mind. This is 
true, but it does not apply to Job, for whom it is intended. 
Job has denied the universality of a just divine retribution, 
but not the special providence of God. LEliphaz sets retribu- 
tive justice and special providence again here in a false corre- 
lation. He thinks that, so far as a man fails to perceive the 
one, he must at once doubt the other,—another instance of 
the absurd reasoning of their dogmatic one-sidedness. Such 
is Job’s relation to God, that even if he failed to discover a 
single trace of retributive justice anywhere, he would not deny 
His rule in nature and among men. For his God is not a 
mere notion, but a person to whom he stands in a living relation. 
A notion falls to pieces as soon as it is found to be self-contra- 
dictory ; but God remains what He is, however much the 
phenomenon of His rule contradicts the nature of His person. 
The rule of God on earth Job firmly holds, although in 
manifold instances he can only explain it by God’s absolute 
and arbitrary power. Thus he really knows no higher 
motive in God to which to refer his affliction; but neverthe- 
less he knows that God interests himself about him, and that 


He who is even now his Witness in heaven will soon arise 


on the dust of the grave in his behalf. For such utterances 


of Job’s faith Eliphaz has no ear. He knows no faith beyond ; 


the circle of his dogma. 


The exhortations and promises by which Eliphaz then (ch. 


xxii. 21-30) seeks to lead Job back to God are in and of 
themselves true and most glorious. There is also somewhat 
in them which reflects shame on Job; they direct him to that 
inward peace, to that joy in God, which he had entirely lost 
sight of when he spoke of the misfortune of the righteous in 





™ . 
—leeelld sesh “ee 


CHAP. XXII. 26-30. 453 


contrast with the prosperity of the wicked." But even these 
beauteous words of promise are blemished by the false 
assumption from which they proceed. The promise, the 
Almighty shall become Job’s precious ore, rests on the 
assumption that Job is now suffering the punishment of his 
avarice, and has as its antecedent: “ Lay thine ore in the 
dust, and thine Ophir beneath the pebbles of the brook.” 
Thus do even the holiest and truest words lose their value 
when they are not uttered at the right time, and the most 
brilliant sermon that exhorts to penitence remains without 
effect when it is prompted by pharisaic uncharitableness. 
The poet, who in general has regarded the character of 
Eliphaz as similar to that of a prophet (vid. ch. iv. 12 sqq.), 
makes him here at the close of his speech against his will 
prophesy the issue of this controversy. He who now, con- 
sidering himself as ‘pi, preaches penitence to Job, shall at_ 
last stand forth as 'p) °x, and will be one of the first who 
need Job’s intercession as the servant of God, and whom he 
is able mediatorially to rescue by the purity of his hands. 

1 Brentius: Prudentia carnis existimat benedictionem extrinsecus in hoc 
seculo piis contingere, impiis vero maledictionem, sed veritas docet, benedic- 
tionem piis in hoc seculo sub maledictione, vitam sub morte, salutem sub 


damnatione, e contra impiis sub benedictione maledictionem, sub vita mor- 
tem, sub salute damnationem contingere. 


END OF VOL. I. 


MURRAY AND GIBB, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH. 


1?) 





2 oo 


gl et . 


; © 2 nes Pedy 
be e A 
r 
r La « . 
‘ A Var nec Rait-?4 15°95 ee.) 
\@ 4 -~ ba 
1 ¢ + 
. * 5 - FF Pf. 
£9 ae ASH oa ws 
x ~ 7 “ 
: a bY Si. F 3 ‘*) 
<< = i+ ar a 
” : | 1%, 
4 
-_ . ¥ 
: 4 
; “a7 : : 
‘ j 
« . ee ; ‘ 
‘ 4 : Ab é 


i . 
b 1958t) eis | it a) Jes be 





: 


fe ish ta & abd, pd Vib. 
fivia tart ree iS fi 





Works Publishey by CT. & C. Clark, Evinburgh. 





° 








































In crown 8vo, price 5s., cloth, 


THE FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS OF CHRISTIANITY. 


A SERIES OF APOLOGETIC LECTURES. 
By CH. EK. LUTHARDT, 


DOCTOR AND PROFESSOR OF THEOLOGY ; AUTHOR OF ‘COMMENTARY ON ST JOHN’S GOSPEL.’ 


_ * We have never met with a volume better adapted to set forth the evidences of Chris- 
tianity in a form suited to the wants of our day. There is no obscurity in the thoughts 
or in the style; the language is simple, the ideas clear, and the argument logical and, 
_ generally, to our mind, conclusive. ..... The whole of this vast argument is illustrated 
_ by various and profound learning in ancient and modern writers, and the notes them- 
_ selves are an interesting study. We confidently recommend these valuable lectures, both 
to the student and the general reader, as containing an unusual amount of thought and 
_ information conveyed in elegant and forcible language.’—From London Guardian. 


, ‘A remarkable book, exactly hitting the times, and one which all earnest thinkers, and 
especially all earnest leaders of other men’s thoughts, will do well to study..... Dr 
Luthardt addresses himself to the work of establishing apologetically, on the basis, and 
in some sort after the manner of Pascal, “that Christianity is truth, truth ever young and 
always fresh, universal truth, and, therefore, equally adapted and equally satisfying to all 
ages and all degrees of civilisation.” The author is equal to his undertaking; and 
with readers who are not resolved beforehand to be dissatisfied with whatever reasoning 
molests their fancies, or crosses their will, he will be held, at all leading points, to have 
made out his case, and to have proved, that while the humanistic and naturalistic theory 
of the universe is as rotten in its logic as it is magnificent and self-opinionated in its 
_ theorizing, Christianity is the only true key to the mysteries of earth and heaven. After 
_ tracing historically the “ views of the world,” which in ancient and modern times have 
_ opposed the Christian doctrine respecting it, the author proceeds, in a series of brilliant 
yet closely reasoned arguments, at once to combat these antagonist theories, and to vindi- 
cate and maintain the truth which they garble or deny. The paradox of man’s relation 
_ to the world; the anomalies of our knowledge, feeling, and will; the riddles of life in all 
their multitudinousness and complexity, he contends, find no solution apart from the 
revelation of Christ. So, with regard to the divine existence, ‘ Atheism is not a necessity 
of the reason, but an arbitrary act of the will.” Pantheism, considered as to its practical 
_ tendencies, “ annihilates religion, abolishes the very postulates of morality, and destroys 
_ hope;” at the same time, viewed scientifically, it is utterly wanting, for it only lives by 
_ carrying ona perpetual juggle between the finite and the infinite, and the conscience and 
| the heart of man are alike outraged by its imbecile attempts to meet their just and peremp- 
_ tory claims. The Scripture doctrine of a personal God is the one verity, in which the 
_ demands of our intelligence and of our moral constitution together are fully and com- 
_ pletely answered. In like manner, as against all Pantheistic and purely materialistic 
| views of the origin of the world and of man, the author argues the scientific truth of 
_ creation, in the proper sense of the term, and of the unity of the human species. Then, 
_ keeping his eye steadily fixed on the positiveand constructive, rather than on the destruc- 
tive and negative, Dr Luthardt goes on to show, that whereas religion is a universal and 
_ absolute necessity, Christianity is demonstrably the only religion worthy of human nature 
_ and of God; and that, while our mental constitution on the one hand, and our moral con- 
_ dition on the other, imperiously call for miraculous revelation, Christianity, by the facts 
_ of its birth, by the course of its history, and above all by the person and character of its 
_ Founder, is certified to us, beyond rational question, as such a revelation, as indeed the 
_ one sole, grand, universal, all-comprehending, divine discovery of God and of the truth 
_ of God to man. / 
_ ‘We give but a glimpse of Dr Luthardt’s reasoning. Our readers must follow it for 
themselves. No young Englishman of the present day should fail, if possible, to read 
these very striking and valuable lectures, ‘The matter of them is not all new ; the logi- 
cal points are not all put with equal force; and here and there we may remark what is 
_ dubious or weak; but as a whole the work is one of singular originality, beauty, force, 
| and moral impressiveness, and for effectual dealing with contemporary religious anxieties 
and errors, nothing could be more timely, or, in the main, more suitable and contenting. 
Questions of faith, such as those which now agitate the public mind, will never, it is true, 
_be settled on the field of controversy alone; but, so far as they belong to this field, Dr 
 Luthardt discusses them with great fairness and ability ; and, what is not his least merit, 
' all through his work he points with unerring finger to the real sources of modern un- 
belief, and to the only proper method available for the finding and holding of the truth.’ 
C— Quarterly Review. 














Works Publishev by C. & C. Clark. 








In demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d., 
A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL 


COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF GENE 


WITH A NEW TRANSLATION. — 
BY JAMES G. MURPHY, LL.D., T.C.D. 


‘Dr Mury sal as em has ogre a great service on a difficult department of seriptu 11 
ing.’— i 
‘A work of deysirig Sake scholarship, abounding in rich and noble. thou 
remarkably fresh and suggestive.’— mpetton? Magazine. 
‘This is emphatically a great work; the subject is great, and so is the m 
—Christian Wiiness. 





BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 
In demy 8vo, price 9s., 


A CRITICAL AND EXEGETICAL 


COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF EXODU 


In demy 8vo, price 10s. 6d., 


THE EARLY SCOTTISH CHURCH: 


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF SCOTLAND FROM THE FIRST TC 
THE MIDDLE OF THE TWELFTH CENTURY. 


BY THOMAS M‘LAUCHLAN, ae F.S.A.S. 


‘The author has given it an air of thoroughness and origina —— will 
claim to a permanent place in literature. We do not now bp e cs se 
but we are able to bear witness to its genuine character.’—Journal of ature 

‘To those who delight to trace in the distant past the germs of ts present, “4 
Earl Scottish Church” will afford gratification and instruction.’—Reader. 

e regard the work before us as the most important contribution which neal 
eis for many years towards the illustration of Early Scottish Church History.’—Un 
Presbyterian Magazine. . 

‘An able, honest work, conscientiously executed, after extensive reading, with 
thorough knowledge of the ancient language and history of Scotland.’—Jnverness Court 
fi ‘A work marked by sound judgment, great candour, and extensive reading.’—JVonce 

ormist. 

















In Two Volumes, demy 8vo, price 21s., 


A HISTORY OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. 


BY WILLIAM G. SHEDD, D.D., 
PROFESSOR OF THEOLOGY, UNION COLLEGE, NEW YORK. 


‘The high reputation of Dr Shedd will be increased by this remarkable work. — 
style is lucid and penetrating. No one can master these volumes without being qu 
ened and strengthened.’—American Theological Review. a 

‘We do not hesitate to pronounce the an de a great improvement on an 
had before. To the young student it will be valuable as a guide to his crit 
and to the literary man it will be indispensable as a book of reference.’—Bibli: S 

‘We hail the appearance of the volumes as being much wanted at the present t 
our own country.’—Clerical Journal. ¥ 





In foolscap 8vo, price 5s., 


THE PARABLES OF CHRIST ILLUSTRATED & rou 


BY DR F. G LISCO. 








¥ f y 
Adel anit v 
Mey Vc 








’ he ih Pad 
one = ied 
wy eval eS 
+ 
















tat 4 ( } 
\ | . 1 Dn at i 
bs ia Bea Ahir 
: Vi 
a 5 tile 
as 
kan 
] 4 
Ae 4 ; 
La -) - 
ir i : 





al ad 
eh “ir 
Se: 
<< 

- 


é 
; 7. 
> 


_- 
Soe ~ 
. 
*. 
ae 
a= 
& 





»: 






at 


? “Yi 
Heh ae 
tp Ve As 


MAb A eh ‘ad 

Y ls “ 
Py 7 
ay ' * 
( 1 . 








. 
: 
| 
- 
pe 
* 





: ‘ fa . ty 
a Oy 4 





AL 7 
ie ri! 
eis 3. 4 i 
x 709 
i), oF 
a 
ej 
_* 
5 
Fi AAS ats 
Gan Sf 
BH 





“ 
: 
i 
\" 
‘ 
\ 
j 
j 
#, 
1 
‘ 
, 
' ; 
\r 
et 
a. | 
¢ 
7 
. 
| 


BINDING Liot freEbD lo i940 





— 
































LEE ; 
ay party! i 
| || University of Toronto || 
Bia Library 
o 4 | 
Coe m4 es 
£ 
| ||DO NOT 
| || REMOVE 
EI THE 
= S\/ICARD 
ok 
_§ 3] ||FROM 
2022 
> £4 | THIS 
& |||POCKET 
g 
® § Acme Library Card Pocket 
i Eo ||| LOWE-MARTIN CO. LiMiTED 
E aed + 


























. see 








WY 
RG . 
RK SY 
WIAA QQAAAAAwe 
Wks \ \ . \ AN 
RAY VN. A 
NS RN MAG 


\ 


SIN 
AN AK 
ROY 
\) \ 
\ \ 
\ 
AN 
A 


\\ 
\ \ 


\ 


\ 
INA 
AN 
LY 
XS 


YC LY \ . 

OO <«~ 

. —rsti—_ 
A ASS \\ \\ AN AK AN AY \ A AS 
\ \X \ \ ~ \« \\ 

\ 


x 


AMY \ 
YY WN y \\ YY SY 
<< 


\ 


\ 


SRS 


WA 
AN 





