F.B.MEYER 


GOULD  LIBMRY 
stern  NAZARENE  COLIEOE 


BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/blessedareyetalkOOmeye 


BLESSED  ARE  YE: 

TALKS  ON  THE  BEATITUDES 
Bv  F.  B.  MEYER,  B.A. 

AUTHOR  OF 

“The  Shepherd  Psalm.” 


Published  at  2 & 3 Bible  House 
New  York,  by  Thomas  Whittaker 
IN  the  year  of  our  Lord,  mdcccxcviii 


1308 


Copyright,  1898, 

By  Thomas  Whittaker. 


BURR  PRINTING  HOUSE,  NEW  YORK. 


PREFACE 


JT  was,  so  the  Evangelist  tells  us,  from  the 
mountain  slopes  above  Capernaum,  that  our 
Lord  delivered  the  sermon,  of  which  the  Beati- 
tudes form  the  noble  and  sublime  introduction. 


Now,  it  is  with  mountains  that  we  are  wont 
to  associate  far-reaching  views  which  stretch  to 
the  golden  horizon,  and  the  streams  which 
descend,  with  musical  roar,  to  water  the  plains. 


In  these  respects,  how  remarkable  the  resem- 
blance between  this  Octave  of  Blessedness,  and 
the  mountain  on  which  the  Lord  was  sitting, 
5 


6 


PREFACE 


when  these  gracious  words  proceeded  from  His 
mouth ! For  sublimity,  for  comprehensiveness, 
and  for  power  of  enriching  the  lowlands  of 
human  life,  it  is  hard  to  find  a parallel  even  in 
His  words. 


It  is  impossible  to  exhaust  them.  The  matur- 
ing experience  of  Christian  manhood  is  as  unable 
to  explore  all  their  wealth  of  meaning  as  the 
open-eyed  wonder  of  the  young  disciple.  And 
the  simple  purpose  of  this  booklet  is  to  show 
some  of  the  pathways  that  conduct  into  the  heart 
of  these  mountains  of  God. 


F.  B.  Meyer. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

I.  The  Eight  Gates  into  the  City 


OF  Blessedness  ....  9 

II.  The  Key  to  the  Kingdom  . . 22 

III.  The  Secret  of  Comfort  . . 35 

IV.  The  Heritage  of  the  Earth  . . 49 

V.  Hungry — Thirsty — Filled  . . 61 

VI.  It  Goeth  Forth  and  Returneth  . 75 

VII.  The  Beatific  Vision  ...  88 

VHI.  Swords  into  Pruning-Hooks  . loi 

IX.  Martyrs  and  Prophets  . • n? 

X.  Through  the  Gates  . . .131 


7 


“BLESSED  ARE  YE” 

I 

THE  EIGHT  GATES  INTO  THE  CITY 
OF  BLESSEDNESS 

^FTER  a year’s  ministry  in  Judsea,  the 
records  of  which  are  scanty,  the  Lord 
Jesus  went  down  to  inaugurate  His  public 
ministry  in  Galilee.  Rejected,  because  of  the 
Bethesda  miracle,  by  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees, 
He  threw  Himself  on  the  masses  of  the  people. 
Threatened  with  death.  He  took  steps  to  make 
His  kingdom  permanent  by  gathering  around 
Him  His  closest  friends,  and  by  selecting  from 
them  twelve  to  be  with  Him,  and  to  go  forth  to 
preach  the  glad  tidings  of  the  Gospel  of  Peace. 

The  night  before  the  morning,  which  was  to 
be  thus  signalized,  was  spent  by  Him  in  prayer. 
He  assured  Himself,  during  those  lone  dark 
9 


lO 


BLESSED  ARE  YE 


hours,  more  fully  of  His  Father’s  purpose ; 
received  definitely  at  the  Father’s  hands  those 
that  had  been  His,  but  who  were  now  to  be 
transferred  to  Himself ; asked  with  a new  ten- 
derness that  they  might  be  worthy  of  their  high 
calling  as  the  foundation  stones  of  the  New 
Jerusalem.  Thus  He  girded  Himself  beneath 
the  quiet  stars  for  what  awaited  Him  on  the 
morrow. 

As  the  dawn  broke  He  called  unto  Him  whom 
He  would.  The  band  of  the  disciples  furnished 
those  who  were  now  chosen  apostles.  From 
those  who  had  been  attracted  to  Him  by  His 
marvellous  personality,  as  well  as  by  the  indica- 
tion of  the  Baptist,  He  selected  the  twelve  who 
were  summoned  to  be  foremost  in  peril  and 
temptation,  as  they  were  to  be  nearest  and  closest 
in  sympathy  and  friendship. 

Finally,  with  these  beside  Him,  He  descended 
the  mountain  slope  to  a little  level  place,  where 
a vast  crowd  awaited  Him,  gathered  from  the 
whole  surrounding  country,  and  beseeching  His 
miraculous  healing  for  their  sick.  ''And  He 
healed  them.”  Then  the  multitudes  settled  down 
to  hear  this  marvellous  discourse,  the  inaugura- 


THE  EIGHT  GATES 


II 


tion  of  His  kingdom,  the  unfolding  of  His 
Galilean  ministry.  It  was  a great  occasion. 
Below,  the  lake ; above,  the  morning  sky ; around, 
the  hills,  on  the  flanks  of  which  lay  long  lines  of 
fleecy  cloud;  the  air  fragrant  with  the  scent  of 
flowers  and  new-mown  grass,  and  thrilling  with 
the  expectation  of  the  expectant  throng.  The 
newly-healed  and  their  bearers,  friends  and 
critics,  apostles  and  disciples,  hanging  on  those 
lips  that  spake  as  never  man  spake. 

This  was  the  Sinai  of  the  New  Dispensation. 

But  how  great  the  contrasts ! 

Moses  w^as  a servant ; here  the  Son. 

Moses  spake  amid  the  peal  of  thunder  and  the 
quivering  of  the  earth;  here  it  was  a perfect 
spring  morning,  and  the  only  sounds  were  those 
of  nature,  or  the  murmur  of  the  towns  below 
stealing  around. 

Moses  bore  ten  awful  words,  graven  on 
granite  tables ; but  these  were  gentle,  tender 
words,  written  on  fleshly  tablets  of  the  heart. 

Moses  was  storm-girt  and  terrible;  but  grace 
and  truth  came  by  this  wondrous  Man,  whose 
words  reach  down  to  the  weakest,  humblest, 
weariest. 


12 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


Moses  spake  of  the  curse;  but  He  opened  His 
mouth,  and  taught  them,  saying.  Blessed. 

It  was  meet  that  the  Master  should  open  His 
public  ministry  with  beatitudes, — It  was  thus 
He  finished  it.  ''  It  came  to  pass,  while  He 
blessed  them.  He  parted  from  them,  and  was 
carried  up  into  heaven.”  His  last  words  bent 
back  again  to  His  first  words,  as  in  a bridal 
ring;  and  all  were  goldened  with  the  radiance 
of  eternity.  And  since  He  has  been  hidden  from 
our  gaze,  unseen  though  loved.  His  voice  from 
out  the  throne  has  spoken  many  a beatitude 
beside,  recorded  for  us  in  the  Book  of  Revelation. 
How  ill  do  they  understand  our  Master,  who  fear 
Him  as  hard  and  austere.  He  is  inspired  by 
motives  of  the  purest  benevolence;  and  if  He 
use  the  knife  it  is  only  to  cut  away  what  conflicts 
with  our  purest  bliss,  and  of  which  we  would 
be  eager  to  be  relieved,  if  we  knew,  as  certainly 
as  He,  what  makes  for  our  peace. 

His  every  act  pure  blessing  is, 

His  path,  unsullied  light.” 

Blessedness  is  the  attitude  of  Deity, — Before 
Jesus  came  men  were  content,  or  happy,  or  mad 


THE  EIGHT  GATES 


13 


with  hilarious  excitement,  but  not  really  blessed. 
This  was  a new  word  for  them,  or  it  was  an  old 
word,  new  minted.  They  knew  nothing  of  this 
deep  sweet  secret  of  enjoying  even  in  this  world 
something  of  the  very  life  of  the  Deity.  No 
climber  had  as  yet  made  his  way  to  the  lake  that 
lay  far  up  among  the  hills,  mirroring  Infinity 
and  Eternity  in  its  pellucid  surface.  Only  He 
who  had  come  down  from  heaven,  and  during 
His  earthly  ministry  was  in  heaven,  knew  of  its 
existence,  or  of  the  path  that  led  to  it. 

God  is  significantly  called  ''  the  Blessed  God.’' 
From  all  eternity.  His  vast  and  glorious  nature 
has  been  as  blessed  as  the  vault  of  heaven  seems 
full  of  ether.  And  Jesus  came  down  from 
heaven  to  discover  to  us  this  fact,  and  to  make  us 
understand  our  privilege.  Since  we  have  been 
made  in  the  likeness  of  God,  we  are  capable,  each 
one,  of  a similar  blessedness.  One  spirit  with 
the  Lord,  we  are  privileged  to  share  the  very 
blessedness  that  fills  His  heart.  Not  in  quantity, 
but  in  quality ; not  in  measure,  but  in  essence,  we 
may  know  what  the  blessedness  of  the  blessed 
God  is. 

It  is  for  us  now  and  here. — Not  away  in  some 


14 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


distant  world  of  bliss,  where  our  circumstances 
shall  be  entirely  favorable,  and  the  mystery  of 
sin  and  death  ended,  but  in  whatsoever  situation 
we  may  be  found  at  this  present  hour.  Our  real 
troubles  are  not  in  our  circumstances,  but  in 
ourselves;  and  there  have  been  thousands  who, 
in  precisely  those  straits  which  now  cost  us  such 
anguish,  have  been  deeply  and  infinitely  blessed. 
If  we  had  lived  Paul’s  life,  in  our  present  state  of 
heart,  we  should  have  known  nothing  of  his 
rapturous  experiences ; and  if  he  could  live  in 
ours  to-day,  however  tempest-tost  and  troubled, 
he  would  find  in  it  the  elements  of  such  exceeding 
rapture,  that  whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  it,  he 
would  not  be  able  to  tell. 

Jesus  came  to  show  that  blessedness  did  not 
consist  in  our  outward  environment.  Indeed, 
He  distinctly  taught  that  we  might  expect  to 
suflfer  additional  distresses  for  His  and  righteous- 
ness’ sake.  But  amidst  all  He  was  intent  on 
teaching  that,  if  we  possessed  certain  moods  and 
were  animated  by  a certain  temper,  we  might  be 
truly  blessed.  He  shows  in  these  matchless 
words  that  blessedness  is  possible  in  the  saddest 
lives,  if  only  we  will  bear  ourselves  simply, 


THE  EIGHT  GATES 


15 


bravely,  truly,  purely.  Blessed  are  the  poor  in 
spirit.  . . . Blessed  are  they  that  have  been 
persecuted  for  righteousness’  sake:  for  theirs  is 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  (Matt.  v.  10). 

This  blessedness  is  for  all — These  waters  run 
in  the  valley,  accessible  to  the  rootlets  of  the 
tiniest  flower,  and  to  the  cup  of  the  child.  I used 
to  think  that  God  had  put  His  best  gifts  on 
a high  shelf  for  us  to  reach  up  to  them.  I now 
find  that  the  best  are  on  the  lowest  shelves, 
on  the  level  of  the  nursery  floor,  that  the  babes 
may  get  them.  There  is  a capacity  for  blessed- 
ness in  each  and  all,  just  as  there  is  a capacity 
for  beauty,  for  love,  for  joy.  The  water  of  the 
Avell  of  Bethlehem  was  for  David  alone,  but  the 
water  of  the  deep  well  of  God’s  bliss,  which  our 
mighty  Saviour  has  won  for  us  at  awful  cost,  is 
for  each  poor  outcast  who  comes,  pitcher  in  hand, 
to  take  it  freely. 

There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God.  He 
does  not  exclude  any.  He  welcomes  all.  Whoso- 
ever thou  art,  thou  art  bidden  to  this  feast ; thou 
mayest  eat  angels’  food;  thou  mayest  be  blessed 
in  thy  poor  measure,  as  the  Eternal  God  is  in 
His  ; thou  mayest  be  ever  with  Him,  and  all  that 


i6 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


He  has  be  thine.  Sunshine  and  wild  flowers  are 
for  village  children  equally  as  for  the  sons  of 
peers ; and  the  blessedness  which  thrills  the  holy 
ones  within  the  vail,  may  shed  its  glow  and 
fragrance  on  thy  heart  also. 

There  are  eight  doors  into  the  blessed  life. — 
Like  the  gates  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  they  stand 
open  day  and  night ; and  one,  at  least,  faces  each 
of  us.  We  have  but  to  walk  out  of  ourselves  and 
into  that  open  doorway,  and  so  into  the  blessed 
life.  It  is  impossible  to  be  a Christian  and  not 
within  easy  reach  of  one  of  these  open  doors,  be- 
cause if  we  cannot  lay  claim  to  purity,  meekness, 
or  mercifulness,  we  can  at  least  class  ourselves 
among  those  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  right- 
eousness, and  long  to  be  filled  ; or  among  those 
who,  in  their  deep  consciousness  of  poverty, 
count  themselves  to  have  no  part  or  lot  in  the 
matter ; or  among  those  that  mourn,  because  they 
cannot  mourn  enough,  and  beat  their  breasts  be- 
cause they  cannot  weep  purer  and  more  unselfish 
tears. 

Thou  art  not  pure  in  heart : then  that  dpor  into 
blessedness  is  blocked  against  thee;  but  thou  art 
sore  sorrowful  that  thou  art  not  pure:  then  go 


THE  EIGHT  GATES 


17 


into  the  kingdom  through  the  door  of  mourning 
and  contrition. 

Thou  art  not  meek,  thy  proud  spirit  frets 
within  thee,  never  prouder  than  when  assuming 
the  garb  of  humility,  not  to  be  outdone  by 
others  in  pretensions  to  holiness;  but  thou  art 
consumed  by  a hunger  for  righteousness,  which 
refuses  to  be  satisfied,  then  pass  in  through  that 
door  and  be  blessed. 

Eight  is  an  octave;  and  is  the  number  of  resur- 
rection.— Seven  speaks  of  a completed  work,  as 
at  the  creation,  but  eight  introduces  a new  week. 
It  was  on  the  eighth  day  that  Jesus  rose  from 
the  dead.  Blessedness  is  possible  only  to  those 
who  have  passed  into  the  resurrection  life,  be- 
cause to  them  only  is  opened  the  possibility  of 
attaining  to  those  properties  of  spirit  which  have 
been  indicated. 

It  is  not  enough  to  look  to  Jesus  on  the  cross 
as  our  Substitute,  we  must  be  identified  with 
Him  as  our  Head,  and  realize  that,  through  our 
union  with  Him,  we  have  been  transferred  to 
''  the  heavenlies,”  where  He  lives  and  reigns 
with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  must 

belong,  by  spiritual  affinity,  to  the  age  of  Pente- 
2 


i8 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE 


cost.  We  must  know  the  infilling  and  anointing 
of  the  Holy  One.  We  must  accept  the  death  of 
Christ,  as  isolating  us  from  the  life  of  worldliness 
and  fleshliness,  and  introducing  us  into  the  power 
and  grace  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  When  this  is 
fully  realized,  and  Christ  is  formed  within  us  by 
the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  shall  become 
conscious  of  the  uprising  within,  like  the  slender 
snowdrops  through  the  hard  mould  of  winter,  of 
those  dispositions  which  are  the  keys  and  doors 
to  blessedness. 

Blessedness  has  many  aspects, — It  contains  the 
promise  of  victory  and  supremacy : ''  theirs  is  the 
kingdom.’’  It  breathes  comfort  over  the  troubled 
and  perplexed : ''  they  shall  be  comforted.”  It 
gives  the  earth  as  a heritage,  so  that  all  things 
become  the  property  of  the  soul  which  is  united 
with  God.  It  satisfies  and  fills.  It  strews  life’s 
pathway  with  the  mercy  of  man  as  well  as  of 
God.  It  involves  the  faculty  of  vision.  It  stamps 
its  possessor  as  a child  of  the  Highest.  It  sheds 
the  oil  of  joy  on  the  head,  and  casts  the  mantle 
of  praise  over  the  spirit  of  heaviness.  Such  are 
the  creeks,  bays,  and  inlets  of  that  inland  sea. 

All  these  may  be  thine.  As  each  of  the  con- 


THE  EIGHT  GATES 


19 


ditions  tends  to  induce  all  the  rest,  so  does  each 
of  the  rewards  pass  ultimately  into  the  possession 
of  the  obedient  and  believing  soul.  Poverty  of 
spirit  leads  to  mourning,  and  this  to  meekness, 
and  this  to  an  inappeasable  hunger,  and  this  to 
mercifulness,  and  this  to  purity  of  heart,  and  this 
to  peacemaking.  Similarly,  we  begin  and  end 
with  the  kingdom  of  heaven — that  is,  our  experi- 
ence climbs  upward  as  a spiral,  and  ends  where 
it  began,  only  in  a fuller  and  richer  experience. 
It  is  the  same  day,  but  there  is  a difference  be- 
tween the  light  of  the  meridian  and  of  dawn. 
But  between  these  two  experiences  of  the  king- 
dom lie  comfort,  possession,  filling,  mercy,  vision, 
peace,  and  joy,  and  the  one  inevitably  unfolds 
into  another,  as  one  hour  into  the  next  in  the  up- 
ward climbing  of  the  sun. 

Christ  reverses  men's  most  cherished  notions, — 
But  lately  I stood  beside  a lake,  in  whose  calm 
waters,  as  they  lapped  the  shore,  I saw  the 
foliage  of  the  brake,  which  fringed  the  margin, 
reflected.  But  everything  was  reversed.  What 
was  highest  on  the  land  was  deepest  in  the  water, 
what  was  lowest  on  the  land  was  highest  in  the 
water.  The  tree-tops  lay  fathoms  deep,  the 


20 


‘"BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


daisies  and  anemones  were  close  at  hand;  and 
I saw  that  this  was  a parallel  of  what  is  happen- 
ing around.  What  is  much  esteemed  by  man 
is  reckoned  little  of  in  the  estimate  of  eternity. 
The  gold  for  which  we  strive,  and  on  which  we 
count,  is  employed  to  make  the  pavement  of  the 
New  Jerusalem.  Whilst  the  humility  which 
washes  disciples’  feet,  the  meekness  which  takes 
an  insult  quietly,  are  the  royal  and  leading 
features  of  that  heavenly  world.  The  King  rides 
on  an  ass,  and  an  ass’s  foal.  Of  the  pride,  and 
circumstance,  and  power,  which  men  put  first, 
Christ  makes  nought ; of  the  meekness  and 
humility,  which  men  despise,  Christ  makes  all. 
He  lifts  poverty  out  of  the  dunghill,  and  makes 
it  sit  among  the  princes  of  the  heavenly  realm; 
and  Mordecai  is  exalted  above  Haman. 

Christ  realised  the  characteristics  and  blessed- 
ness of  which  He  spoke. — He  was  poor  in  spirit, 
and  classed  Himself  among  the  babes : our  King 
was  meek  and  lowly  of  heart ; He  hungered 
after  God,  and  spent  the  nights  in  endeavoring  to 
appease  His  hunger;  so  merciful  that  publicans 
and  sinners  were  attracted  to  Him ; so  pure  that 
He  always  beheld  the  Father’s  presence;  ever 


THE  EIGHT  GATES 


21 


making  peace,  and  incessantly  persecuted.  Oh, 
lovely  pattern  of  all  Thou  didst  inculcate!  All 
unconsciously  Thou  wast  limning  Thyself  in 
these  sentences. 

His,  too,  was  this  blessedness.  Storms  of 
evil-speaking  and  evil-doing  might  assail  Him; 
but  deep  in  His  heart  the  life  of  God  lay  warm, 
as  nature  hides  the  secret  of  the  coming  year 
deep  in  her  breast,  whilst  wintry  storms  sweep 
over  the  sky. 

Listen  to  Him;  learn  of  Him;  be  like  Him; 
receive  Him  into  thine  heart ; let  Him  be  revealed 
within  thee,  so  shalt  thou  also  be  conformed  to 
these  qualities,  and  participate  in  this  bliss. 


/IR06t  JSlesaeD  Chxiet ! ZbOBc  whom  Zbon  best 
blCBB,  are  blcBBCb  inDeeD ; leaD  mCt  1F  bCBCCcb  ^Tbee, 
b^  Zb^  Qoob  Spirttt  Into  the  emolument  of  tbCBC 
blcBBim^  wbicb  fTbou  bast  prepared  for  them  that 
lopc  tibee,  anD  wbtcb  pass  tbe  minb  of  man  to 
conceive^ 


II 

THE  KEY  TO  THE  KINGDOM 

''  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven” — Matt.  v.  3. 

H AD  Salome  and  her  sons  remembered  this 
beatitude,  they  would  never  have  asked 
Christ  to  make  them  sit,  one  on  His  right,  and 
the  other  on  His  left  in  His  kingdom.  They 
would  have  seen  that  it  was  not  for  Christ  to  give 
thrones  by  an  act  of  His  royal  prerogative,  but 
that  places  of  power  were  conditioned  by  the 
preparation  of  heart  in  those  who  aspired  tg  hold 
them.  The  throne  is  given  to  those  for  whom  it 
is  prepared ; but  they  must  previously  have  been 

prepared,  and  the  preparation  of  heart  involves 
22 


THE  KEY  TO  THE  KINGDOM  23 


the  poverty  in  spirit  from  which  the  golden  ladder 
of  beatitudes  climbs  upward  to  blessedness. 

Earthly  thrones  are  generally  built  with  steps 
up  to  them ; the  remarkable  thing  about  the 
thrones  of  the  eternal  kingdom  is  that  the  steps 
are  all  down  to  them.  We  must  descend  if  we 
would  reign,  stoop  if  we  would  rise,  gird  our- 
selves to  wash  the  feet  of  the  disciples  as  a 
common  slave  in  order  to  share  the  royalty  of  our 
Divine  Master. 


What  is  this  Poverty  of  Spirit? 

I.  We  must  distinguish  between  poverty  of 
spirit  and  mean-spiritedness, — None  so  poor  in 
spirit  as  Jesus,  yet,  in  all  His  bearing,  with 
Pharisee,  and  Scribe,  and  Sanhedrin,  there  was 
an  heroic  bearing,  a strength  and  intrepidity  of 
spirit,  a royalty  of  mien,  which  filled  them  with 
astonishment,  and  compelled  the  involuntary 
homage  of  his  foes.  ''  Behold  a man ! ’’  said 
Pilate,  as  He  came  forth  from  the  cruel  scourging 
which  was  enough  to  take  the  manhood  out  of 
its  victims,  but  in  this  case  had  left  His  majesty 


24 


BLESSED  ARE  YE^’ 


undiminished.  ''  Perceive  ye  not/'  said  the 
Pharisees  among  themselves,  how  we  prevail 
nothing?  Behold,  the  world  is  gone  after 
Him.'-  And  this  trait  has  always  characterized 
the  followers  of  Christ.  They  have  counted 
themselves  poor,  weak,  the  offscouring  of  all 
things,  but  they  have  never  been  deficient  in 
those  brave,  strong,  nobler  qualities  of  the  soul 
which  have  enabled  them  to  stand  unmoved 
amid  the  hatred  of  their  fellows,  as  some  gaunt 
rock  amid  the  ceaseless  buffeting  of  the  waves. 

2.  We  must  distinguish  between  poverty  of 
spirit  and  circumstances. — Many  have  turned 
away  from  what  is  fair  and  beautiful  and  right 
in  nature,  art,  intellectual  attainment,  and  the 
acquisition  of  property.  They  have  said  to 
themselves.  Let  us  fling  away  the  wealth  and 
treasure  of  our  life,  so  shall  we  be  poor  in  spirit. 
But,  surely,  a man  may  strip  himself  of  all  his 
belonging;  his  heart  atrophied  for  want  of  objects 
to  love ; his  mind  wasting  for  want  of  knowledge ; 
his  imagination  starved  for  want  of  nourishment ; 
his  life  shortened  for  want  of  the  necessaries  of 
physical  existence,  and  yet  he  may  be  as  far  as 
possible  from  true  poverty  of  spirit. 


THE  KEY  TO  THE  KINGDOM  25 

''  Bethink  Thee,  Lord,  while  Thou  and  all  the  saints 
Enjoy  themselves  in  heaven ; and  men  on  earth 
House  in  the  shade  of  comfortable  roofs, 

Sit  with  their  wives  by  fires,  eat  wholesome  food. 
And  wear  warm  clothes,  and  even  beasts  have  stalls, 
I,  'tween  the  spring  and  downfall  of  the  light. 

Bow  down  one  thousand  and  two  hundred  times 
To  Christ,  the  Virgin  Mother,  and  the  saints; 

Or  in  the  night,  after  a little  sleep, 

I wake;  the  chill  stars  sparkle;  I am  wet 

With  drenching  dews,  or  stiff  with  crackling  frost, 

I wear  an  undrest  goat-skin  on  my  back; 

A grazing  iron  collar  grinds  my  neck; 

And  in  my  weak,  lean  arms,  I lift  the  cross." 

That  is  the  boast  of  a man  who  has  failed  to 
discriminate  between  the  voluntary  poverty  of 
circumstances  and  the  humility  of  the  spirit.  All 
through  such  a life,  the  proud  self  asserts  its 
vehemence,  demanding  recognition,  and  bringing, 
not  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  but  the  firstfruits  of 
its  toil.  You  may  bestow  all  your  goods  to  feed 
the  poor,  and  give  your  body  to  be  burned,  and 
yet  not  come  within  a thousand  miles  of  true 
poverty  of  spirit;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  you 
may  be  rich  in  this  world's  goods,  your  heart 
warm  with  human  love,  and  your  mind,  ''  like 


26 


"BLESSED  ARE  YE 


storied  windows  richly  dight/’  receiving  the 
many-colored  light  of  truth,  and  yet  carry  ever 
the  poverty  of  spirit  which  is  as  much  the  habit 
and  girdle  of  the  soul  as  the  horsehair  tunic 
which  some  of  the  greatest  of  the  popes  have 
worn  next  their  skin  beneath  the  splendid 
pontifical  attire. 

3.  We  must  also  distinguish  between  poverty 
of  spirit  and  self-depreciation. — There  are  people, 
most  objectionable,  as  I think,  who  are  always 
saying,  I am  nothing  and  nobody.  They  insist 
on  taking  the  back  seats,  and  declaring  that 
they  are  not  worth  your  notice.  And  yet  you 
feel  that  they  are  as  proud  and  desirous  of  the 
first  places,  as  those  who  in  the  Lord’s  parable 
took  the  best  positions  at  the  feast.  Indeed,  the 
pride  that  apes  humility  is  more  detestable  than 
that  which  casts  off  all  disguise.  We  sometimes 
act  humbly  because  we  are  proud  of  a reputation 
of  humility.  We  sit  near  the  door  that  we  may 
have  the  pleasure  of  being  asked  to  the  front. 
We  assume  a seraphic  smile  when  most  annoyed, 
because  we  are  so  eager  to  pass  muster  with  the 
saints.  Oh,  for  the  humility  which  does  not 
count  itself  humble ! for  the  face  which  shines 


THE  KEY  TO  THE  KINGDOM  27 


and  we  wist  it  not ! for  the  simplicity  of  the  little 
child  that  does  not  turn  back  with  admiration 
on  itself ! 

For  true  poverty  of  spirit  we  must  turn  to  our 
blessed  Lord,  who,  though  He  was  rich,  yet,  for 
our  sakes,  became  poor.  In  His  case  the  spring 
of  his  action  was  altogether  outside  His  own 
lovely  and  glorious  nature,  and  was  found  in 
His  Father.  He  did  not  forego  the  use  of 
marvellous  power,  or  the  flow  of  unrivalled 
language,  or  that  wealth  of  a noble  nature  with 
which  He  was  endowed  by  the  very  constitution 
of  His  being.  But  all  was  held  subservient  to 
the  will  of  His  Father.  No  ambition  lured  Him 
forward,  no  fear  held  Him  back,  no  desire  to  win 
power  apart  from  the  paths  marked  out  by  the 
Father  was  allowed  to  divert  Him  from  the 
chosen  track  of  obedience.  May  we  dare  to  say 
that  Christ  as  man  denied  the  exercise  of  His 
Divine  attributes,  that  He  might  speak  the  words 
the  Father  gave  Him,  do  the  works  that  the 
Father  wrought  through  Him,  and  fulfil  the  plan 
of  life  which  the  Father  unfolded  step  by  step. 
In  absolute  poverty  of  spirit.  He  received  from 
God  the  impulse,  power,  and  grace  of  daily  living. 


28 


BLESSED  ARE  YE 


Poverty  of  spirit,  therefore,  is  probably  indi- 
cated by  two  characteristics.  It  has  no  pride  of 
possession,  and  it  is  unconscious  of  ability  to 
meet  the  demands  made  on  it  by  the  exigencies 
of  its  ministry. 

Poverty  of  spirit  has  no  pride  in  its  possessions, 
— At  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  life,  we 
earnestly  endeavor  after  the  acquisition  of  certain 
virtues  and  graces.  We  have  read  of  them,  or 
seen  them  exemplified  in  others,  until  they  have 
cast  over  us  the  spell  of  their  fascination.  We 
strive  for  them,  and  sometimes  congratulate 
ourselves  on  their  partial  attainment.  Surely, 
the  soul  says  to  itself,  as  it  compares  the  present 
with  the  past,  I am  purer,  humbler,  gentler  than 
I was!  There  is  an  arraying  of  the  soul  in 
treasures  and  jewels,  as  when  the  young  girl 
takes  from  her  drawer  one  ornament  after 
another,  which  has  been  given  by  admirers  and 
friends.  Full  often  this  self-complacency  is 
shattered  by  some  terrible  fall,  or  by  repeated 
failure,  till  we  come  to  see  that  we  have  no  more 
claim  to  possess  goodness  than  a room  to  possess 
light.  These  things  are  not  our  own,  but 
received  from  Jesus,  and  enjoyed  only  in  propor- 


THE  KEY  TO  THE  KINGDOM  29 


tion  as  we  abide  in  Him,  and  He  in  us.  I am 
not  good,  but  Jesus  is  in  me  the  source  of 
goodness;  I am  not  humble,  but  Jesus  dwells 
within  me,  bringing  every  proud  thought  and 
imagination  into  captivity  to  Himself.  I am  not 
strong,  but  I receive  Him  who  is  made  unto  me 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption. In  absolute  dependence  upon  the 
Saviour  for  the  constant  supply  of  His  own 
nature  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  exemplify 
that  growing  sense  of  need  which  is  one  of  the 
sure  signs  of  the  humble  and  contrite  heart  which 
God  will  not  despise. 

Poverty  of  spirit  is  unconscious  of  ability  to 
meet  the  demands  made  on  it  by  the  exigencies 
of  its  ministry. — Men  come  smitten  by  a great 
need.  ''  I am  in  mental  perplexity — explain  my 
difficulty.''  ''  I am  bound  hand  and  foot  by  the 
devil — loose  me."  ''  I am  needing  more  of  the 
Holy  Ghost — teach  me."  ''  My  child  is  griev- 
ously vexed  with  a devil — deliver  her."  In 
reply  the  poor  in  spirit  say,  We  have  nothing 
which  will  suffice  for  needs  like  yours.  Silver 
and  gold  have  we  none,  but  there  is  one  thing  we 
can  do,  we  can  pray,  we  can  put  you  in  union 


30 


BLESSED  ARE  YE^’ 


with  God,  we  are  willing  to  become  the  channel 
through  which  God  can  meet  your  need/’ 

Was  not  this  precisely  the  attitude  of  the 
apostle  who  said,  that  he  held  the  treasure  of  God 
in  an  earthen  vessel;  though  sorrowful,  he  was 
always  rejoicing;  though  poor,  he  made  many 
rich ; though  he  had  nothing,  yet  he  possessed  all 
things  ? 

How  MAY  We  become  Poor  in  Spirit? 

First,  never  look  on  any  virtue  as  inherent  to 
your  character,  but  attribute  each  gift  and  grace 
to  the  dower  of  the  Almighty.  Be  content  to  be 
a branch.  If  the  fruit  hangs  ripe  and  full, 
magnify  the  properties  of  the  root  to  which  it 
must  be  attributed.  Live  by  the  Son,  as  He 
by  the  Father.  The  light  that  shines  on  sea  and 
shore  might  rather  be  credited  to  the  earth  which 
is  made  beautiful  by  it,  than  that  any  grace  of  the 
Christian  character  should  be  credited  to  you  or 
me,  as  though  it  were  in  any  sense  our  own. 
What  hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not  received? 

Secondly,  contrast  yourself  not  with  those 
below  you,  but  with  God  above.  We  are  too 


THE  KEY  TO  THE  KINGDOM  31 


prone  to  compare  our  white  robes  with  the 
stained  garments  of  others,  rather  than  with  those 
robes  which  were  whiter  than  a fuller  could 
white  them. 

Thirdly,  look  on  all  the  good  in  your  neighbors. 
There  is  much  more  than  we  sometimes  suppose, 
even  in  those  who  do  not  profess  to  be  religious. 
Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  on 
the  things  of  others.  Let  each  account  the  other 
better  than  himself.  There  may  be  reasons  why 
others,  have  fallen  short  of  the  highest  attain- 
ment, which  if  they  had  operated  in  our  case 
would  have  dragged  us  to  a lower  depth ; whilst, 
if  others  had  had  our  advantage  they  would 
almost  certainly  have  stood  far  in  advance  of 
anything  that  we  have  attained. 

Fourthly,  consider  yourself  a trustee  of  God 
for  others,  so  that  whenever  any  demand  is  made 
on  you  for  help,  teaching,  deliverance,  you  may 
confess  before  God  your  utter  incompetence,  and 
humbly  claim  that  He  should  pass  through  your 
hand  the  wealth  of  bread  which  the  poor  travel- 
ler, who  has  come  to  your  house,  craves. 


32 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


And  what  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven? 

When  Jesus  spoke — and  the  same  holds  still — 
the  kingdom  was  in  mystery.  It  had  not  been 
manifested,  nor,  indeed,  will  it  be  until  our  King, 
now  in  hiding,  is  crowned  King  of  the  world. 
It  consists  not  in  meat  and  drink,  but  in  right- 
eousness, joy,  and  peace  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 

It  is  the  synonym  of  dignity,  for  those  who  have 
the  kingdom  must  be  the  children  of  the  King. 
They  are  sons,  heirs  of  God  the  Father,  joint-heirs 
with  the  King  Himself. 

It  is  the  condition  of  great  influence,  for  the 
kingdom  of  God  means  peace  on  earth,  goodwill 
toward  men.  To  our  Lord,  the  throne  meant 
a greater  ability  to  bless  men,  and  that  is  the  only 
reason  why  men  should  desire  to  sit  on  the  right 
or  left  of  His  throne.  To  seek  the  kingdom  for 
purposes  of  ostentation,  self-emolument,  and 
pride,  were  a vain  and  worthless  ambition,  des- 
picable and  contemptible ; but  to  desire  it  that  men 
may  be  rightly  influenced,  that  the  laws  of  right 
and  healthy  living  should  be  laid  down  and 
maintained,  that  the  poor  should  be  avenged,  and 
the  wronged  vindicated,  this  were  a purpose 


THE  KEY  TO  THE  KINGDOM  33 


worthy  of  God  Himself.  This  is  why  the  poor 
in  spirit  long  for  the  royalties  of  the  kingdom. 

Lastly,  it  is  the  equivalent  of  large  wealth. 
A kingdom  in  liquidation  is  an  anomaly.  We 
are  wont  to  associate  with  the  ideal  king  wealth 
like  that  of  Solomon,  of  whom  it  is  said,  that  in 
his  days  silver  was  as  stones,  and  cedars  as 
sycamore  trees,  and  that  he  exceeded  all  the 
kings  of  the  earth  in  wealth.  Abundance ! 
Largeness ! Unbounded  resource ! Inexhaust- 
tibleness ! Such  are  the  words  that  characterize 
the  ideal  kingdom.  So  in  the  spiritual  life. 

We  find  Madame  Guyon  saying:  ‘‘This  vast- 
ness, or  enlargedness,  which  is  not  bounded  by 
anything,  increases  every  day;  so  that  my  soul, 
partaking  of  the  qualities  of  her  spouse,  seems 
also  to  partake  of  His  immensity.’’ 

And  Thomas  a Kempis  in  the  Imitation : “ They 
that  willingly  and  freely  serve  Me  shall  receive 
grace  for  grace.  And  if  heavenly  grace  and  true 
charity,  there  will  be  no  envy,  nor  narrowness  of 
heart,  neither  will  self-love  busy  itself.  For 
Divine  Love  overcometh  all  things,  and  enlargeth 
all  the  powers  of  the  soul.” 

This  is  very  wonderful.  “ Not  after  the 
3 


34 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


manner  of  men.”  The  soul  which  is  ever  seeking 
to  aggrandize  itself,  and  augment  its  stores,  will 
miss  the  true  royalty  of  life,  the  treasures  by 
which  men  are  enriched.  But  he  who  in  the 
utter  abnegation  of  the  self-life  shall  cast  himself 
as  a broken  and  emptied  vessel  before  God,  will 
learn  to  say  with  Hannah — 

“ The  bows  of  the  mighty  men  are  broken. 

And  they  that  stumbled  are  girded  with  strength, 
They  that  were  full  have  hired  out  themselves  for 
bread  ; 

And  they  that  were  hungry  have  rest. 

The  Lord  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust, 

He  lifteth  up  the  needy  from  the  dunghill, 

To  make  them  sit  with  princes, 

And  inherit  the  throne  of  glory.” 


^bou,  Q Xorb,  blbat  become  poor  that  through 
poverty  we  mt^bt  be  mabe  rich ; enricb  me,  1F 
pra^  OTee,  wltb  tbla  eame  poverti^  of  spirit,  that  1T 
mai2  be  a jolnts^belr  with  tTbee  In  IklnsDom* 


Ill 

THE  SECRET  OF  COMFORT 


''Blessed  are  they  that  mourn:  for  they  shall  he 
comforted” — Matt.  v.  4. 

Son  came  out  from  the  infinite  blessed- 
ness of  God  to  give  man  the  key  to 
perfect  blessedness,  not  only  in  the  life  hereafter, 
but  in  this,  so  that  in  human  hearts,  also,  the  tide 
might  rise,  which  is  ever  full  in  the  heart  of  the 
Infinite  One.  Blessedness  is  more  than  glad- 
ness, pleasure,  the  rapture  of  possession — perhaps 
words  cannot  define  it — ^but  the  heart  knows  when 
it  enters  upon  its  heritage. 

The  conditions  of  human  life,  which  men 
naturally  dread,  are  shown  by  Jesus  to  be  the 
35 


36  BLESSED  ARE  YE 

elements  out  of  which  blessedness  becomes 
possible.  He  goes  carefully  through  the  various 
experiences  to  which  our  race  is  heir — our  tears, 
poverty,  hunger,  temptation,  persecution — and 
shows  that  these  are  the  material  out  of  which 
blessedness  is  produced,  as  the  moisture  of  the 
air  is  necessary  for  the  production  of  the  glories 
of  sunrise  and  sunset. 

So  comprehensive  and  far-reaching  is  this 
beatitude,  that  attempts  have  been  made  to  limit 
its  scope  and  diminish  its  range  of  blessing. 
Surely  those  only  can  be  meant  who  sorrow  with 
a godly  sorrow  that  needs  no  repentance!  It  is 
remarkable  how  persistently  men  have  interposed 
such  reservations  on  the  munificence  and  large- 
ness of  God's  gifts.  They  assure  one  another 
that  God  cannot  mean  all  He  says,  and  that  it  will 
be  a profound  mistake  to  trust  too  absolutely  in 
His  assurances.  But,  in  spite  of  it  all,  notice 
the  calm  strength  of  these  words,  ''  Blessed  are 
they  that  mourn : for  they  shall  be  comforted." 
Surely  it  means  that  every  sorrow  carries  in  itself 
a clue  to  blessedness,  and  that  there  is  no  sorrow 
for  which  there  are  not  healing  and  help  in  the 
Gospel  of  Christ.  In  this  soil  grow  all  the  herbs 


THE  SECRET  OF  COMFORT  37 


which  are  suitable  for  the  healing  of  broken 
hearts.  For  all  mourning  He  has  the  oil  of  joy; 
for  every  heavy-laden  spirit  a garment  of  praise. 

Let  no  mourner  turn  away  from  these  words, 
as  though  they  meant  all  else  but  him ; and  were 
too  wonderful,  too  rare,  for  those  to  participate 
in  whose  sorrow  is  ordinary  and  common.  Like 
all  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  they  are  for 
zvhosoever  will.  They  may  be  safely  trusted 
to  the  uttermost.  Whoever  thou  art,  and  what- 
ever the  awful  sorrow  which  is  gnawing  at 
thine  heart,  thou  shalt  be  comforted.  The  seed 
of  a harvest  of  blessedness  is  hidden  in  these 
dark  pods.  An  eternal  weight  of  glory  is 
within  thy  reach,  which  will  make  thy  present 
affliction,  when  reviewed  from  the  distant  future, 
seem  light  in  comparison.  Even  though,  till 
now,  thou  hast  not  professed  thyself  a Christian, 
thy  grief  may  be  the  means  of  leading  thee  to 
the  source  of  everlasting  consolation.  Only 
do  not  wrap  thyself  around  with  the  heavy 
garments  of  proud  disappointment,  do  not  shut 
thyself  up  alone  with  thy  grief,  do  not  let  it 
harden  and  corrode  thee,  but  humble  thyself 
under  the  mighty  hand  of  God. 


38 


“BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


There  are  Five  Fountains  of  Tears. 

That  opened  by  bereavement. — Sometimes  the 
blow  is  sudden  and  unexpected ; we  had  no  idea 
that  that  light  farewell  was  to  be  the  last,  and 
that  the  face  would  never  turn  back  to  give 
another  sunny  smile  where  the  path  passes  out  of 
sight.  Sometimes  the  dear  one  fades  as  autumn 
leaves  or  the  waning  moon,  visibly,  gradually, 
inevitably.  As  long  as  there  is  life,  we  are  too 
eager  on  its  careful  tending  to  give  way  to  tears ; 
but  when  all  is  over,  in  moments  of  reaction  and 
despair,  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  are 
broken  up.  Then  Rachel  weeps  for  her  children, 
and  refuses  to  be  comforted,  because  they  are 
not ; Martha  and  Mary  weep  to  heart-break  at 
their  brother’s  grave. 

For  such  there  is  comfort.  Not  in  talking 
about  change  or  diversion ; not  in  platitudes  about 
the  common  lot  of  man;  not  in  invoking  Time 
to  festoon  the  ruin  by  hanging  drapery  of  flowers 
and  creeping  plants ; but  by  opening  the  heart  to 
God,  that  He  may  instil,  first  by  drops,  then 
by  slender  rills,  and  afterward  by  torrents.  His 


THE  SECRET  OF  COMFORT  39 


own  blessed  peace.  It  is  God  that  the  bereaved 
soul  needs  most  of  all ; and  if  bereavement  leads 
to  Him ; if  the  soul,  deprived  of  its  natural 
support  and  comfort,  turns  its  thought  and 
desire  to  the  infinite  light ; if  it  is  led  to  feel  the 
futility  and  failure  of  all  that  earth  can  give,  and 
seeks  the  treasures  which  are  hidden  in  the  hand 
of  God  for  all  who  come  for  them ; if  the  spirit, 
in  its  brokenness,  seeks  the  tender  touch  of  the 
Good  Physician  for  its  wounds  and  bruises,  then 
comfort  will  arise,  the  Comforter  will  come,  Jesus 
will  say,  I am  glad  for  your  sakes  I was  not 
there,  to  the  intent  that  ye  may  believe.’’ 

The  face  is  the  mirror  of  the  heart,  and  how 
often  in  the  calm,  gentle  look  on  the  countenance, 
the  reposeful  manner,  the  tender  thoughtfulness 
for  others,  which  characterize  those  whose  life 
has  been  bereft  of  its  light  and  joy,  we  recognize 
that  this  beatitude  has  been  fulfilled.  Blessed 
are  they  that  mourn : for  they  shall  be  com- 
forted.” Not  in  the  full  life,  but  in  the  emptied 
one;  not  in  the  sunny  path,  but  in  the  shadowed 
one ; not  in  the  house  dight  for  the  wedding,  but 
in  that  where  darkened  attire  and  subdued 
undertones  tell  of  recent  sorrow,  will  you  find 


40 


BLESSED  ARE  YE 


that  rare  plant  growing  most  prolifically,  which 
Jesus  called  blessedness. 

That  opened  hy  care  and  disappointment, — We 
enter  life  with  such  high  hope.  Not  more  gay  is 
the  colt,  careering  across  the  field,  startled  by  the 
scream  of  the  engine  and  the  rush  of  the  train 
of  carriages!  How  soon  are  we  caught,  and 
curbed,  and  put  to  the  collar!  Can  it  be  that 
the  lightheartedness,  the  spring,  the  absence  of 
care,  are  forever  ended?  Ideals  blurred  and 
disappointed,  years  eaten  with  the  canker-worm, 
sunny  mornings  overcast  by  thick  clouds ! 
Poverty  in  circumstance,  feebleness  of  health, 
disappointment  in  love,  the  heart  bereft  of  love, 
the  spirit  broken  by  harsh  tyranny,  the  constant 
limitation  of  small  means,  dread  of  the  pauper’s 
dole.  How  countless  are  the  ills  to  which  we  are 
subject  in  this  world!  From  how  many 
sources  are  the  salt  drops  contributed  to  the  brine 
of  the  ocean  of  grief!  But  Christ  says  that 
blessedness  may  be  found  even  here. 

There  are  compensations  in  grief,  and  care, 
and  disappointment.  How  many  have  confessed 
that  they  had  never  known  the  love  of  God,  if 
human  love  had  not  disappointed  them ; had 


THE  SECRET  OF  COMFORT  41 


never  found  the  true  riches,  unless  they  had  lost 
the  heaped-up  stores  on  which  their  hearts  were 
fixed;  had  never  realized  the  meaning  of  the 
Eternal  and  Divine,  till  the  transience  and  vanity 
of  earthly  things  were  no  longer  the  text  of  the 
preacher,  but  the  experience  of  the  heart?  It 
is  in  moments  of  heart-break  at  the  failure  of  all 
our  hopes,  that  the  Interpreter  comes  near 
to  show  unto  man  what  is  right  for  him.  Then 
God  is  gracious  unto  him,  and  is  heard  saying, 
''  Deliver  from  going  down  into  the  pit,  let  his 
life  behold  the  light.’"  Life  without  pain  and 
trial  is  like  a Chinese  picture,  with  no  depth  or 
shadow. 

That  opened  by  the  undertones  of  life, — Even 
in  lives  which  do  not  share  in  the  causes  of  grief 
already  mentioned  there  is  a dark  undercurrent, 
a sense  of  sadness,  and  oppressive  melancholy. 
Low  and  plaintive  chords  hide  in  every  instru- 
ment, subtly  underlie  the  most  rapturous  out- 
bursts, and  perhaps  touch  us  more  than  they. 
There  are  shady,  lonely,  forbidding  spots,  the 
lairs  of  fever  and  malaria,  in  the  loveliest  woods, 
on  the  fairest  summer  days ; expressions  of 
unrest  and  dissatisfaction  cross  the  sunniest 


42 


‘‘BLESSED  ARE  YE 


faces ; wailing  notes  sweep  over  every  harp 
strung  by  earth’s  poets.  “ Vanity  of  vanities,  all 
is  vanity.”  It  is  the  old  complaint,  and  as  true 
as  it  is  old. 

But  this  is  well.  There  may  be  blessedness 
here.  The  heart  of  man  must  have  some  bitters 
in  the  cup  of  life,  or  he  would  drain  it  to 
intoxication  and  death.  There  must  be  freckle 
in  the  leaf,  and  stain  on  the  flower,  or  man 
would  forget  that  they  were  made  to  fade. 

“ I thank  Thee  more  that  all  our  joy 
Is  touched  with  pain; 

That  shadows  fall  on  brightest  hours; 

That  thorns  remain; 

So  that  earth’s  bliss  may  be  our  guide, 

And  not  our  chain.” 

Broken  cisterns  drive  to  the  Fountain  of  living 
waters.  The  vanity  of  all  discloses  the  conclu- 
sion of  the  whole  matter.  The  creaking  tree 
impels  the  bird  to  build  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock. 

That  opened  by  sorrow  for  sin. — This  is  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Trouble  may  make 
us  rebellious,  passionate,  hard ; but  when  the 
Spirit  of  God  comes  to  us,  already  broken  and 
crushed  by  trouble,  and  speaks  to  us  of  the  love 


THE  SECRET  OF  COMFORT  43 


of  God,  of  the  ideals  we  have  missed,  of  the 
stains  and  rents  with  which  we  have  defiled  our 
robes,  of  the  hurt  we  have  done  to  those  entrusted 
to  us  for  our  succor  and  comfort,  of  the  tears 
we  have  caused  to  flow,  of  the  stumbling-blocks 
we  have  cast  before  the  weak,  of  the  talents  we 
have  buried,  of  the  thorns  we  have  sown,  tears 
of  godly  sorrow  flow  freely,  and  of  these  there 
is  no  need  to  repent.  Let  man’s  heart  be  brought 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  under  the  cross,  and  in 
contact  with  the  broken  heart  of  Christ;  let  us 
look  on  Him  whom  we  pierced;  let  us  realize 
what  sin  is  in  the  sight  of  the  love  and  grief  of 
God,  and  the  strongest  will  battle  in  vain  with 
the  tears  that  rise  unbidden  to  the  eyes.  But 
each  tear  is  the  seed-germ  of  blessedness.  Blessed 
mourning  this ! 

It  is  better  to  mourn  for  sin  than  for  its 
consequences.  It  is  not  difflcult  to  do  the  latter. 
When  we  are  reaping  the  bitter  penalty  of 
mistake  and  crime,  it  is  easy  to  be  regretful. 
''  Oh,  that  I had  not  done  this ! Would  that  I 
had  been  more  thoughtful  and  careful ! Might 
I but  have  my  chance  again ! ” So  we  all  exclaim 
often  enough.  But  this  is  not  sorrow  for  sin. 


44 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


That  is  deeper,  nobler  mourning  far.  Its  tears 
are  purer.  In  it  is  no  taint  of  selfishness  or 
dread  of  penalty.  The  convicted  sinner  weeps 
with  unfeigned  anguish,  as  he  sees  what  his  sin 
has  meant  to  God,  to  Divine  Love  and  human,  to 
those  who  have  passed  beyond  his  recall,  or  must 
forever  be  influenced  for  the  worse  by  his  irrevo- 
cable past.  And  God  carefully  gathers  up  these 
tears,  puts  them  in  His  bottle,  writes  them  in 
His  book. 

That  opened  by  the  anguish  of  the  world. — 
No  true  man  can  witness  this  unmoved.  Every 
breath  of  air  is  laden  with  cries  and  sighings  and 
prayers  for  help.  The  whole  world  groaneth 
and  travaileth  together  in  pain.”  Children  in 
an  agony  of  fear  beneath  the  heavy  hand  of 
drunken  mothers  and  fathers;  women  wronged, 
maltreated,  deserted ; young  hearts  thrust  relent- 
lessly back  from  those  whom  they  had  been  wont 
to  count  true ; the  slave  in  the  Arabian  dhow,  the 
Armenian  subjected  to  nameless  indignity  and 
torture,  the  cancer-ward,  the  madhouse;  the 
torture-chamber  of  disease — Ah,  my  God,  my 
very  soul  writhes  as  I write,  when  wilt  Thou 
bring  this  scene  of  woe  to  an  end ! how  long  ere 


THE  SECRET  OF  COMFORT  45 

Thou  dost  arise  to  say  that  there  shall  be  no  more 
delay ! 

But  it  is  blessed  to  mourn  thus,  for  they  that 
share  with  Christ  in  His  griefs  for  men  shall 
share  His  triumph  when  He  sees  of  the  travail 
of  His  soul  and  is  satisfied;  when  He  shall  have 
destroyed  the  works  of  the  Devil,  and  put  down 
all  rule,  authority,  and  power.  And  even  now 
there  is  blessedness  in  arising  to  relieve,  so  far 
as  we  can,  the  sorrow  around  us,  for  it  is  in 
helping  others  that  we  cease  to  brood  over  our 
own  misfortunes,  it  is  in  wiping  the  tears  of  men 
that  we  forget  to  weep. 

All  that  brings  us  in  contact  with  the  Man  of 
sorrows,  and  acquaints  us  with  His  grief,  is 
wholesome  and  blessed.  If  you  would  know 
Jesus,  you  must  find  Him,  where  Jairus  is 
weeping  over  his  daughter,  and  the  widow 
is  following  her -boy  to  the  grave,  in  the  porches 
of  Bethesda  and  the  dark  shadows  of  Gethsem- 
ane,  and  such  sorrow  as  we  have  been  describing 
takes  us  there. 

How  bravely  and  nobly  does  Christ  speak. 
All  others  sit  as  still  in  the  presence  of  uncon- 


46 


“BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


trollable  sorrow  as  Job’s  comforters  did ; or  they 
endeavor,  with  well-meant  words,  to  divert  the 
troubled  heart  from  its  sources  of  anguish,  but 
he  says,  do  not  be  afraid  of  sorrow,  or  evade  it, 
or  count  it  as  a wilderness ; face  it ; bow  yourself 
under  the  mighty  hand  of  God;  look  up  into 
His  face,  and  believe  that  all  has  been  permitted 
with  the  tenderest  purpose;  ask  Him  to  tell  you 
His  secret : trust  Him  through  all : out  of  the 
wrestle  of  the  dark  night  will  come  the  salutation 
of  the  Prince  at  the  break  of  day. 

In  the  judgment  of  Christ  there  is  no  grief  that 
cannot  be  consoled,  no  mourner  that  cannot  be 
comforted,  no  woe  out  of  which  the  oil  of  joy 
cannot  be  extracted.  Let  us  dare  believe  this, 
and  turn  to  Him,  though  our  faces  be  wet  with 
tears,  and  our  backs  torn  and  bleeding,  believing 
that  He  has  balm  enough,  anodynes,  and  cordials, 
to  turn  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning. 


These  are  the  Consolations  of  Christ. 

A sense  of  the  love  of  God,  that  it  is  in,  around, 
over,  and  beneath  us ; always  and  everywhere ; in 


THE  SECRET  OF  COMFORT  47 


every  circumstance,  glad  or  sorrowful;  in  every 
experience,  patent  to  the  world,  or  hidden  in  our 
hearts. 

The  secret  of  humility,  which  resigns  itself  to 
the  circumstances  of  life,  because  it  has  learnt 
to  trace  them,  either  to  the  appointment,  or  per- 
mission, of  a love  that  cannot  err,  or  be  unkind. 

The  realization  of  the  unseen  and  eternal, 
which  encompasses  our  little  life,  as  the  blue 
ether  does  our  world,  dipping  into  its  valleys, 
lying  about  its  mountains,  and  encompassing 
its  path. 

The  presence  of  the  Comforter, — I will  send 
Him  unto  you,’’  the  Master  said.  How  vast  the 
change  He  wrought.  Before  He  came,  the 
disciples  were  benumbed  in  hopeless  grief.  Par- 
alyzed with  pain,  they  sat  crushed  and  hopeless 
in  the  upper  room  till  the  glad  hour,  when  Jesus 
was  revealed  as  risen,  living,  glorified,  by  the 
blessed  Paraclete.  Then  their  sorrow  was  turned 
into  joy;  and  there  was  fulfilled  the  Saviour’s 
assurance  that  He  would  see  them  again,  and 
their  hearts  should  be  glad  and  their  joy  none 
should  take  away.  It  is  from  the  darkness  of 
the  pit  that  men  see  the  stars ; and  in  the  darkness 


48 


“BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


of  sorrow  we  behold  the  face  of  Christ,  revealed 
by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

The  hope  of  Heaven, — There  we  shall  meet 
again  the  beloved  and  sainted  dead;  whilst  tears 
will  be  wiped  from  off  all  faces  by  the  hand  of 
God.  The  adversities  and  pangs  of  earth  sub- 
merged in  the  exceeding  joy.  All  sin,  and 
failure,  and  shortcoming  forever  terminated. 
The  mystery  of  evil  explained;  the  entail  of  sin 
ended:  Death  and  Hades  cast  into  the  Lake  of 
Fire:  whilst — 

Truth,  and  peace,  and  love,  shall  ever  shine 

About  the  supreme  throne 

Of  Him,  in  whose  happy-making  sight  alone, 

When  once  our  heavenly-guided  soul  shall  climb, 

Then  all  this  earthly  grossness  quit. 

Attired  with  stars,  we  shall  forever  sit 

Triumphing  over  death,  and  chance,  and  thee,  O Time. 


© ^Tbou,  wbo  bast  ascenbeb  on  high  that  G^bou 
mlgbtst  give  tbelbol^  Spirit  to  comtort  us  in  all  our 
sorrows  anb  attlictions ; impart  1bim  to  me  also, 
that  H ma^  be  able  to  comtort  others  with  Ibis 
tenber  consolations* 


IV 

THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  EARTH 

''Blessed  are  the  meek:  for  they  shall  inherit  the 
earth” — Matt.  v.  5. 

HIS  is  the  third  regiment  in  the  Lord’s 
great  army,  the  third  gate  into  the  blessed 
life,  the  third  step  downward  to  the  throne.  But 
what  sort  of  character  is  indicated?  And  how 
do  the  meek  differ  from  the  poor  in  spirit? 

There  is  evidently  a distinction.  The  Lord 
said  that  He  was  meek  and  lowly  in  heart  (Matt, 
xi.  29)  ; whilst  the  apostle  plied  his  converts  with 
motives  borrowed  from  the  lowliness  and  meek- 
ness of  Christ  (Eph.  iv.  2).  But  what  is  that 
distinction?  The  key  to  it  is  suggested  by  a 
passage  from  that  memorable  last  epistle,  in 
4 


50 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


which  Paul  the  aged  gave  his  final  instructions 
to  the  young  Timothy,  and  especially  as  to  his 
behavior  toward  those  who  opposed  themselves. 

The  servant  of  the  Lord,”  he  says,  ''  must  not 
strive;  but  be  gentle  unto  all  men,  apt  to  teach, 
patient  in  meekness,  instructing  those  that  oppose 
themselves  ” (2  Tim.  ii.  24,  25).  Here  meekness 
seems  specially  demanded,  when  we  are  sum- 
moned to  meet  the  opponents  of  our  faith  or  the 
traducers  of  our  personal  testimony. 

May  we  not  say,  therefore,  that  poverty  of 
spirit  and  lowliness  of  mind  are  one  and  the  same 
thing,  and  denote  the  attitude  of  the  spirit  toward 
God,  when  conscious  of  the  immeasurable  dis- 
tance between  His  majesty  and  its  minuteness. 
His  purity  and  its  sinfulness;  whilst  meekness 
is  the  attitude  of  the  spirit  toward  men,  and 
especially  toward  the  wrong  of  the  world — to  the 
evil  that  men  perpetrate  on  each  other,  and 
especially  on  the  saints  of  God  ? 

Lowliness  will  always  be  a characteristic  attri- 
bute of  true  saintliness.  The  very  elders  fall 
down  before  the  throne,  and  cast  their  crowns 
at  the  feet  of  God  in  utter  self-abasement.  But, 
in  heaven,  though  meekness  will  always  shine 


THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  EARTH  51 


with  its  mild  ray  in  the  prismatic  band  of  perfec- 
tion, there  will  be  less  room  for  its  exercise,  for 
those  that  oppose  will  have  been  taken  out  of  the 
way,  whilst  the  enemy  and  avenger  will  have 
been  forever  stilled. 

Meekness  is  consistent  with  strength  of  char- 
acter.— It  is  not  always  thought  so.  Meekness 
is  often  used  as  a synonym  for  weakness,  and 
meek  people  held  in  a considerable  degree  of 
contempt.  There  is  no  epithet  that  men  of  the 
world  would  more  quickly  and  vehemently  resent 
than  the  appellation  ''  meek.’’  A young  officer 
would  rather  have  a paving-stone  hurled  at  him 
than  this.  A molluscous  flabbiness,  a contemp- 
tible namby-pambyism,  an  absence  of  backbone 
and  muscle  are  the  ideas  which  are  generally 
summoned  to  our  mind,  when  a man  is  classed 
among  the  meek. 

Here,  as  so  often,  the  superficial  judgment  of 
the  world  is  falsified  by  a wide  acquaintance  with 
human  character.  Moses,  the  meekest  of  men, 
was  the  strong  leader  of  the  Jewish  exodus,  the 
Justinian  of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth,  the 
Washington  of  the  Jewish  state.  The  meek 
Paul  was  as  strong  in  bearing  persecution,  as  he 


52 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


had  formerly  been  in  inflicting  it,  and  stood  like  a 
rock  against  the  insidious  and  persistent  attempts 
of  the  Judaizers.  His  strong  common  sense  laid 
the  broad  foundations  of  the  Church  in  such  wise 
that  Jew  and  Gentile  could  meet  as  one.  His 
strong  intellect  has  laid  the  march  of  religious 
thought  for  eighteen  centuries.  And  who  shall 
say  that  Jesus  Christ  was  not  strong,  viewing  His 
nature  only  from  the  human  side  ? Lamb  though 
He  was.  He  was  the  Lion  of  the  Tribe  of  Judah. 
The  meekness  with  which  He  received  the  insults 
of  His  foes  did  not  veil  the  strength  which 
extorted  the  involuntary  homage  of  Pilate.  What 
strength  to  resist  the  soft  seductions  of  the 
tempting  voices  that  bade  Him  spare  Himself! 
What  strength  to  carry  out  the  purpose  of 
redemption,  though  He  knew  well  all  it  would 
involve ! 

Man’s  misconception  of  this  strength  of  meek- 
ness is  largely  due  to  the  gentle  guise  which  she 
adopts,  the  restraint  which  she  exercises  over 
herself,  her  soft  footfall,  her  modulated  tones. 
They  do  not  pierce  through  the  hiding  of  her 
power,  and  realize  that  there  is  even  greater 
power  required  for  the  restraining  of  the  mani- 


THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  EARTH  53 


festations  of  power,  than  in  letting  them  have 
free  play.  It  is  a stronger  thing  for  a man  of 
vehement  and  impetuous  temper  to  speak  and 
act  gently  in  the  face  of  great  provocation,  than 
to  blurt  out  indignant  words  and  bluster  like  a 
north-east  wind ! The  soft  hand  that  restrains  the 
fiery  steed,  is  obviously  as  strong,  and  stronger. 
Ah!  passionate  souls,  that  pour  out  showers  of 
glowing  coals  at  every  provocation,  ye  little 
know  how  evident  is  your  weakness,  where  ye 
vaunt  yourselves  of  strength,  and  how  much  more 
evident  your  strength  would  be  if  ye  made  the 
unruly  passions  within  heed  the  strong  sway  of 
a steadfast  purpose. 

The  meek  man  resists  the  incitement  of  per- 
sonal resentment. — When  wrong  approaches  us, 
it  awakens  two  sentiments  in  our  hearts,  the  one 
personal,  the  other  more  general;  the  first  is 
the  quickest  and  keenest,  the  other  manifests 
itself  generally  after  years  of  learning  in  the 
school  of  experience.  It  is  natural  for  us  to  be 
stung  to  the  quick  by  a feeling  of  resentment 
under  rebuff,  or  slight,  or  rudeness,  or  wrong. 
It  is,  perhaps,  rather  an  acquirement  when  men 
so  identify  their  wrongs  with  the  evil  of  the 


54 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


world  that  they  pass  from  the  consideration  of 
personal  indignity,  absorbed  by  the  view  of  the 
sea  of  tears  and  blood  which  is  weltering  around 
the  world,  visiting  every  shore,  invading  every 
home. 

With  the  meek  man  this  order  is  reversed. 
When  wrong  is  done  to  him,  he  is  led  by  the 
grace  of  God  to  mourn  over  it,  as  an  indication 
of  the  misery  of  the  soul  that  perpetrates  the 
wrong,  and  of  the  great  weight  of  injustice  and 
tyranny  beneath  which  the  world  groans.  In 
other  words,  he  suffers  like  a child  of  the  Great 
Father;  understands  something  of  the  anguish 
of  God’s  heart  in  contact  with  the  wrong  of  the 
world;  leaves  God  to  vindicate  and  avenge,  and 
prays  for  the  speedy  coming  of  the  day  when  all 
wrongs  shall  be  righted,  and  tears  wiped.  The 
meek  man  joins  his  prayers  with  those  of  Christ, 
the  supreme  Sufferer,  that  the  Father  would 
forgive  those  who  do  more  evil  than  they  know. 

The  meek  man  is  a quiet  man. — The  Apostle 
Peter  beautifully  joins  these  two  virtues  together 
when  he  says  that  women  are  not  to  seek  their 
adornments  in  jewels  or  dress,  but  in  the  garb 
of  the  meek  and  quiet  spirit.  The  meek  spirit  is 


THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  EARTH  55 


quiet.  It  bears  and  suffers  in  silence.  It  does 
not  retail  its  wrongs,  save  in  the  ear  of  God,  and 
then  it  does  not  ask  Him  to  requite,  but  to 
convert.  It  weeps  more  for  the  wrong-doer  than 
for  its  wounds,  though  they  may  bleed  freely. 
It  anoints  its  head,  and  washes  its  face,  and 
appears  not  to  men  to  suffer.  Nipped  by  the 
sharp  frost,  it  does  not  waste  regret  over  its 
tender  shoots,  but  strikes  its  roots  deeper  down 
into  the  dark  loam  of  mother-earth.  And  out  of 
this  quiet  confidence  comes  the  heroic  strength 
which  bears,  believes,  hopes,  and  endures  all 
things,  till  it  conquers  by  the  sheer  force  of 
patience.  Nothing  will  so  soon  stop  cannon  shot 
as  sand. 

The  meek  man  rather  hears  wrong, — When 
the  apostle  was  urging  his  converts  not  to  go  to 
law  with  one  another,  he  said  to  them,  Why  do 
ye  not  rather  take  wrong?’’  What  a mistake 
it  is  to  allow  the  passion  that  would  do  us  harm 
to  ignite  a kindred  passion!  Let  us  understand 
that  the  evil  of  speech  and  act  which  would  injure 
us  is  set  on  fire  of  hell,  and  nothing  could  better 
fulfil  the  purpose  of  our  great  adversary  than 
that  the  passions  should  pass  from  the  wrong-doer 


56 


“BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


to  the  wronged,  and  from  him  again  to  others. 
When  the  brazier  is  full  of  coals,  and  it  is  over- 
turned so  as  to  ignite  a house,  we  have  an  illus- 
tration of  the  way  in  which  a man  whose  soul 
is  filled  with  rancor,  malice,  and  envy  may  spread 
his  thoughts  and  feelings.  This  is  the  great 
peril  for  us  all.  Men  of  quick  temper  are 
extremely  inflammable.  They  are  like  touchwood 
to  the  flame,  gunpowder  to  the  spark.  The  meek 
man,  on  the  contrary,  meets  wrong  with  a passive 
resistance  which  quenches  its  fire;  with  a calm 
and  gentle  answer  he  turns  away  wrath.  With 
a resolute  refusal  to  be  inflamed,  he  establishes 
a quarantine  through  which  the  first  germs  of 
the  epidemic  cannot  pass.  The  spirit  of  meekness 
resembles  the  eucalyptus : it  is  antiseptic,  espe- 
cially to  the  spread  of  passion.  If  we  could  only 
surround  every  angry  man  with  a ring  of  meek 
souls,  his  passion  would  burn  itself  out  with 
comparative  small  damage. 

The  meek  man  believes  that  the  evil  wrought 
to  him  is  permitted  by  God  for  wise  purposes, — 
As  David  climbs  Olivet,  Shimei  comes  out  to 
curse  him.  Abishai  urges  to  be  allowed  to  still 
his  vituperations  forever,  but  the  meek  king  says. 


THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  EARTH  57 


God  hath  said,  Curse  David.  Let  him  curse.’’ 

In  those  strong  and  bitter  words  David  detected 
another  voice,  the  voice  of  One  who  loved  him 
as  a Father,  whilst  He  held  his  sin  in  utter 
detestation.  Oh,  it  is  well  always  to  look  for  the 
appointment  or  permission  of  God!  His  ap- 
pointment in  the  chastisement  which  comes  in  the 
course  of  providence.  His  permission  in  the 
stripes  which  come  to  us  from  the  hands  of  the 
children  of  men.  It  is  easy  to  be  meek  toward 
Judas  and  the  mailed  band  when  we  can  say. 
Shall  I not  drink  the  cup  which  my  Father  hath 
put  into  my  hands  ? 

The  meek  are  marvellously  guided, — ''  The 
meek  will  He  guide  in  judgment:  and  the  meek 
will  He  teach  his  way.”  The  passionate  soul  is  ^ 
unable  to  detect  the  movements  of  God’s  guiding 
pillar.  Passion  raises  a storm  which  blurs  the 
heavens  and  ruffles  the  calm  waters  of  the  lake.  1 
In  the  eagerness  with  which  the  many  waters  of 
the  soul  argue  and  advise,  the  still  small  voice 
of  the  Divine  Counsellor  is  drowned.  When, 
therefore,  you  have  been  wronged,  be  calm  and 
still.  Wait  for  God.  He  will  indicate  the  way 
He  would  have  you  take,  the  answer  He  would 


58 


BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


have  you  write,  the  acts  of  love  with  which  you 
should  retaliate. 

The  meek  shall  he  vindicated, — It  is  foretold 
of  the  Messiah  that  He  shall  ''  reprove  with 
equity  for  the  meek  of  the  earth.’’  Not  only 
hereafter,  but  now,  is  the  judgment-seat  set  up, 
at  which  the  oppressed  plead  their  cause  against 
their  oppressors,  and  the  Lord  hearkens  and 
hears.  It  is  remarkable  how  perpetually  wrongs 
perpetrated  on  the  defenceless  come  back,  like  the 
boomerang  of  the  savage,  on  their  persecutors. 
Into  the  pit  they  dig  they  fall.  Adonibezek  cuts 
off  the  thumbs  and  toes  of  seventy  kings,  and  his 
own  are  cut  off.  The  Jews  crucify  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  and  so  many  of  them  are  crucified  by 
the  Romans  that  wood  fails  for  the  crosses.  The 
Rover  sinks  the  Inchcape  bell,  and  perishes  on 
the  rock  from  which  it  tolled. 

The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth, — Even  now 
the  meek  soul  gets  the  best  out  of  life.  The 
world  does  not  think  so.  It  thinks  that  the  meek 
must  be  worsted  because  they  will  not  stand  upon 
their  rights,  nor  wield  the  sword  in  self-defence, 
nor  meet  men  on  their  own  terms.  But,  as  ever, 
Christ’s  words  stand  the  test  of  experience.  The 


THE  HERITAGE  OF  THE  EARTH  59 


meek  find  more  pleasure  in  simple  joys  than 
wrong-doers  in  all  their  wealth.  Pure  hearts 
find  wells  of  peace  and  bliss  in  common  sights 
and  sounds.  There  is  no  twinge  of  conscience 
or  bitter  memory  of  wrong-doing  to  jar  on  the 
sweet  consent  of  holy  song  ever  arising  in 
nature.  The  lowly  valley  of  Bunyan's  Shepherd 
Boy  had  as  much  delight  as  the  Delectable  Moun- 
tains themselves.  Do  not  be  greatly  concerned 
when  wrong  is  done  you.  Possess  your  soul  in 
patience.  Hide  under  the  wing  of  God.  Do  not 
let  anything  rob  you  of  your  power  of  being  glad 
with  children,  birds,  flowers,  humble  and  innocent 
joys. 

Without  doubt  the  time  is  coming  when  the 
world  itself  will  be  conquered  by  the  meekness 
and  gentleness  of  Christ  and  His  saints.  The 
gentle  dawn  will  master  the  blustering  night; 
the  soft-treading  spring  will  quell  the  storms  of 
winter.  The  knights  of  the  cross,  clad  in  the 
soft  garments  of  holiness  and  gentleness,  shall 
yet  dissipate  the  dark  squadrons  of  sin. 

Wouldst  thou  have  this  meekness?  There 
is  no  fountain  from  which  it  flows  save  that 
opened  in  the  heart  of  Christ,  and  communicated 


6o 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


by  the  Spirit  of  God,  whose  fruit  it  is.  How 
meekly  the  Spirit  of  God  has  borne  with  the 
strife,  rejection,  contradiction  of  men.  What 
consummate  meekness  was  ever  manifested  by 
our  holy  Lord ! Let  us  abide  in  Him,  asking  that 
He  will  repeat  in  us  His  characteristic  grace,  and 
enable  us  to  breathe  again  upon  the  world  the 
spirit  by  which  He  was  animated  in  life  and 
death. 

© /Hbeeft  anO  ©entle  Saviour,  wbo,  wben  tibou 
waet  revtleb,  vcvllcet  not  again,  when  tTbou  bibat 
auff er,  tbreateneb  not,  give  me  of  tCbv  Spirit,  that  1T 
mav  be  calm  anb  strong  in  tbe  enburance  of  wrong, 
anb  overcome  evil  with  goob^ 


V 

HUNGRY— THIRSTY— FILLED 

^^Blessed  are  they  that  hunger  cmd  thirst  after  righteous- 
ness:  for  they  shall  he  filled/' — Matt.  v.  6. 

^^HIS  characteristic  of  hunger  and  thirst 
arises  naturally  out  of  the  foregoing  ones. 
Up  to  this  we  have  considered  the  passive  side 
of  Christian  character — the  poverty  of  spirit  that 
lies  low  before  God,  and  dares  not  think  of  itself 
more  than  a redeemed  sinner  may — the  sorrow 
that  mourns  in  secret  over  the  evil  of  the  world 
and  of  the  heart — the  meekness  which  has  learned 
to  take  rebuff,  rebuke,  and  injury  calmly  and 
quietly.  But  now  the  active  element  begins  to 

6i 


62 


‘‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’^ 


assert  itself.  The  man  whose  face  has  been 
buried  in  the  dust,  or  stained  with  tears,  or 
covered  with  marks  of  contumely  and  reproach, 
now  lifts  it  toward  God,  crying,  with  David,  “As 
the  hart  panteth  after  the  water  brooks,  so 
panteth  my  soul  after  Thee,  O God.’’  You 
misjudged  him.  You  thought  that  he  was  alto- 
gether deficient  in  force,  and  unable  to  exert 
himself ; now  you  discover  that  the  whole  strength 
of  his  nature  passes  through  channels  which 
elude  the  common  view  of  men,  and  shows  itself 
in  vehement  passion  toward  the  Unseen  and 
Eternal. 

The  desire  of  the  regenerate  soul  is  not  simply 
^ toward  God,  but  for  righteousness.  To  be  right, 
to  do  right,  to  conform  in  all  things  to  the  out- 
lines and  spirit  of  God’s  ideal,  to  have  a con- 
science void  of  offence,  to  be  uncondemned  by  the 
heart — this  is  the  desire  of  the  soul.  It  is  not 
enough  to  be  conscious  of  weakness  and  igno- 
rance, or  to  mourn  for  sin;  the  true  penitent 
desires  to  learn  the  secret  of  walking  before  God 
in  holiness  and  righteousness  all  his  days. 

Our  one  regret  should  be  that  our  desires 
after  God  and  His  righteousness  are  wSO  fickle  and 


HUNGRY— THIRSTY— FILLED  63 


faint.  There  is  pain  in  hunger;  nothing  is  more 
terrible  than  to  suffer  thirst  bred  by  the  heat  and 
sand  of  the  desert.  But  how  rarely  do  we  meet 
with  biographies  and  experiences  that  come 
within  measurable  comparison  with  these  natural 
cravings  for  food  and  drink!  Why  is  it?  May 
we  not  ask  how  to  increase  and  augment  this 
hunger  for  God,  so  that  we  shall  not  need  to 
exert  so  strong  an  outward  pressure  on  ourselves 
to  observe  times  of  prayer  and  worship,  but  shall 
leap  out  in  desire  toward  God  and  the  remem- 
brance of  His  name,  desiring  these  as  the  hungry 
man  counts  the  moments  to  his  meal?  Let  us 
take  it  to  heart  that  we  know  so  little  of  those 
passionate  yearnings  for  God  which  have  dwelt 
in  all  holy  hearts,  and  the  lack  of  which  is  one  of 
the  most  serious  signs  of  declension  in  the  inner 
life.  May  God  create  in  us  hunger  and  thirst 
like  that  which  Jesus  knew,  even  though  it 
should  introduce  a new  and  constant  pain  into 
our  lives,  that  we  may  be  led  by  it  to  know  the 
blessedness  that  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God 
can  bring. 


64 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


I.  The  Spiritual  Appetite. 

It  results  from  the  constitution  of  our  nature, 
— We  cannot  go  deeper  than  nature.  We  cannot 
go  behind  or  beyond  it,  for  nature  is  what  has 
been  born  (Lat.  natura),  born  out  of  God’s 
thought  by  God’s  power.  When  we  speak  of 
nature  we  must  pass  in  thought  from  her  to  her 
parent  God,  and  find  a sufficient  answer  to  all 
questions  and  difficulties  by  saying,  God  has  so 
willed  it,  therefore  it  is  as  it  is.” 

All  the  strong  basal  instincts  of  human  nature 
must  be  traced  back  to  the  make  of  our  moral 
being  as  it  was  planned  by  Almighty  wisdom, 
and  wrought  by  infinite  power.  Do  you  ask 
why  a belief  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  the 
hereafter,  is  found  in  every  nation  under  heaven  ? 
Why  lying,  theft,  and  murder  are  accompanied 
with  the  blush  of  shame,  and  the  desire  of  con- 
cealment; why,  in  the  oldest  settlements  of  man, 
there  are  traces  of  the  altar  and  temple : and  why 
human  hearts  are  irresistibly  drawn  toward  each 
other,  finding  indissoluble  and  indestructible 
affinities?  It  is  only  possible  to  answer  by  say- 
ing, ''  These  things  are  as  they  are  from  the 


HUNGRY— THIRSTY— FILLED  65 


very  nature  with  which  God  has  endowed  us/' 
They  are  necessary,  constitutional,  essential,  as 
much  so  as  the  features  of  the  face,  and  the 
general  principles  of  mathematics  and  arithmetic. 

We  hunger  and  thirst,  because  our  physical 
nature  has  been  so  created  that  it  must  needs  go 
out  of  itself  for  its  supplies  of  nutriment.  No 
one  of  us  is  self-contained,  or  independent 
of  the  great  world  of  which  we  form  a part. 
The  difficulties  and  questions  of  how  it  came  to 
be  so  do  not  alter  the  fact.  Similarly,  God  made 
our  souls  for  Himself.  Deep  within  us.  He  has 
put  necessities  and  desires,  that  crave  for  satis- 
faction from  the  Unseen,  Eternal,  and  Divine. 

We  have  a vision  of  the  land  of  righteousness 
and  blessedness  from  which  we  have  come. 
Trailing  clouds  of  glory,  our  race  has  descended 
into  this  murky  atmosphere,  but  it  can  never 
forget  the  note  of  perfect  music  which  it  once 
heard,  the  vision  of  perfect  beauty  which  it  once 
beheld.  Man  is  haunted  by  the  thought  of  God, 
his  original  home ; and  however  low  he  is  plunged 
in  sin  and  wickedness,  he  does  not  utterly  forget  ; 
and  there  will  be  a time  in  his  life  when  the 
gagged,  imprisoned,  drugged  soul,  will  arise  and 
5 


66 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


come  forth  and  begin  to  cry  with  exceeding 
bitterness,  ''  I have  perverted  that  which  was 
right,  and  it  profited  me  not ; ” Thy  Spirit  is 
good ; lead  me  into  the  land  of  uprightness ; ” 
I have  gone  astray  like  a lost  sheep ; seek  Thy 
servant.” 

It  produces  pain, — There  are  many  sources  of 
pain ; but  perhaps  primarily  God  has  instituted  it 
to  compel  us  to  take  measures  for  our  health  and 
safety.  The  intense  suffering  produced  by  the 
decaying  tooth  is  intended  to  force  us  to  conserve 
an  implement  so  necessary  to  mastication.  The 
pain  of  hunger  and  thirst  is  designed  to  force  us 
to  take  food,  without  which  the  body  would 
become  exhausted  and  die.  How  tenderly  the 
love  of  God  deals  with  His  children  when  He 
forces  them  by  pain  to  take  measures  for  their 
own  preservation ! 

So  in  the  moral  sphere,  we  should  be  thankful, 
when  we  are  discontented  with  ourselves,  when 
in  self-abhorrence  we  cry  out  for  God’s  unsullied 
righteousness,  when  we  turn  from  the  tortuous 
policy  with  loathing,  when  we  go  about  smitten 
with  infinite  unrest.  Treasure  such  an  experi- 
ence, for  thus  the  grace  of  God  leads  back  to 


HUNGRY— THIRSTY— FILLED  67 


Himself.  The  vanity  of  vanities  ’’  of  Ecclesi- 
astes, so  often  wrung  from  Solomon's  soul,  was 
the  one  symptom  of  returning  health. 

It  is  universal. — As  we  have  never  met  man  or 
woman  incapable  of  hunger  or  thirst,  so  there 
is  no  human  soul  which  is  not  capable  of  possess- 
ing God,  and  does  not  need  Him  for  a complete 
life.  Often  the  spiritual  appetite  is  dormant,  as 
that  of  a man  debauched  with  drink.  The 
child,  whose  stomach  is  cloyed  with  sweets;  the 
invalid,  who  has  long  suffered  under  the  pressure 
of  a wasting  illness,  may  have  no  appetite,  but  at 
any  moment  it  may  awake.  Thus  with  the 
hunger  of  the  soul  for  God.  It  awoke  in  the 
woman  that  was  a sinner,  in  the  thief  on  the 
cross,  and  Zacchseus  the  publican.  Take  it 
bitterly  to  heart  if  it  has  not  gnawed  at  your 
complacency,  and  destroyed  your  peace.  Be 
very  anxious  if  you  know  no  yearnings  for 
a better  life,  no  desires  after  righteousness,  no 
dissatisfaction  with  the  present,  no  tireless  search 
for  God.  These  are  grave  symptoms. 

Reduce  all  the  activities  of  man  to  their  ulti- 
mate reason,  and  it  will  be  discovered  to  be  as 
Jesus  said — What  shall  we  eat?  What  shall  we 


68 


BLESSED  ARE  YE 


drink  ? Wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed  ? Per- 
haps in  these  northern  climes  we  might  add,  How 
shall  we  be  housed?  These  elemental  necessities 
are  the  motor  forces  of  the  world.  Similarly,  all 
the  feverish  quest  of  men  in  music,  art,  the  love 
of  beauty,  the  pursuit  of  the  chief  good,  to  say 
nothing  of  religion,  may  be  traced  back  to  the 
desire  of  the  soul  for  something  which  it  has  not 
attained.  It  cannot  be  satisfied  in  itself.  It 
does  not  always  know  what  it  needs,  any  more 
than  the  babe  does  who  feels  the  pains  of  hunger, 
and  cries  passionately  or  bitterly.  During  the 
great  famines  in  China  and  India,  the  natives 
have  fed  on  a kind  of  edible  earth,  making  it  into 
loaves.  It  has  stayed  their  cravings,  but  they 
have  grown  gradually  weaker  till  they  have  lain 
down  to  die.  The  nardoo  plant  of  Australia 
closely  resembles  flour,  but  lacks  the  nutritive 
property,  and  those  who  feed  on  it,  though 
insensible  of  hunger,  after  a few  weeks  die  of 
starvation.  Thus  men  who  seek  for  that  which 
is  not  bread,  who  refuse  the  fair  loaf  of  God’s 
gift,  which  is  Christ,  and  feed  on  ashes,  rnay  suc- 
ceed in  stilling  the  cravings  for  the  unseen  and 
eternal,  and  yet  perish  of  that  fatal  lack  of  God. 


HUNGRY— THIRSTY— FILLED  69 


II.  The  Nurture  of  Spiritual  Appetite. 

We  know  too  little  of  it.  We  cannot  always 
say  with  the  Psalmist,  I was  glad  when  they 
said  unto  me,  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord  U nor  yet  My  soul  breaketh  for  the  long- 
ing that  it  hath  unto  Thy  judgments  at  all  times  U 
nor  with  Job,  I have  esteemed  the  v.wds  of  His 
mouth  more  than  my  necessary  food.’’ 

Here  are  a few  simple  directions  for  the  stimu- 
lating of  our  desire  for  God. 

Beware  of  the  other  food  you  take. — When 
children  are  unable  to  take  the  meal  their  mother 
has  provided,  she  suspects  them  of  having  visited 
the  confectioner’s  shop  on  their  way  home  from 
school,  so  that  their  appetite  has  become  cloyed 
and  sickly.  May  it  not  be  that  before  we  can 
have  an  eager  taste  for  God’s  Word,  we  shall 
have  to  put  away  some  of  the  reading  in  which 
we  now  indulge,  and  which  is  little  better  than 
garbage?  Sensational  novels,  frivolous  talk, 
indulgence  in  appetite  and  sense,  quickly  incapa- 
citate us  for  enjoying  God. 

Take  exercise. — The  more  we  do,  the  more 


70 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


food  we  require,  and  the  more  we  enjoy  it.  Manly 
sports;  long,  vigorous  walks;  muscular  exertion 
of  any  kind,  will  supply  the  source  of  hunger 
which  will  make  the  roughest  food  palatable; 
and  it  is  they  whose  hand  is  seldom  off  the 
plough,  who  sow  beside  all  waters,  and  are  instant 
in  season  and  out  of  season,  that  are  most  glad 
when  the  bells  call  to  rest  and  food. 

Take  a tonic. — There  is  no  tonic  for  spiritual 
appetite  to  compare  to  the  biography  of  a holy 
life.  It  is  well  to  have  such  an  one  constantly 
at  hand.  Frequently  the  story  of  the  exercises  of 
a man’s  soul  before  God  has  started  others  on 
a more  passionate  quest  for  the  Holy  Grail. 

Get  up  into  the  mountains. — The  best  appetite 
invigorator  is  the  keen,  bracing  air,  which 
breathes  around  those  natural  altars  of  the  world 
which  God  has  reared,  where  the  pines  grow, 
and  the  glacier  moves  slowly  down,  and 
the  sounds  of  the  valley  seem  far  away.  There 
is  nothing  so  healthy  as  to  go  up  with  Christ  into 
the  high  mountain  apart  when  He  prays.  The 
tides  of  blood  are  aerated  by  the  purer  atmos- 
phere ; the  eye  sparkles  with  clearer  vision ; the 
appetite  of  the  soul  becomes  keener. 


HUNGRY— THIRSTY— FILLED  71 


Let  us  never  rest  with  low  levels,  attenuated 
aspirations,  or  the  mean  standards  which  content 
our  fellows.  The  only  hope  of  the  young  artist 
is  that  he  should  not  be  content  with  the  stand- 
ard that  prevails  in  the  provincial  town  of  his 
birth,  but  aim  after  that  presented  in  the  highest 
masterpieces.  The  only  hope  of  the  cygnet,  born 
in  the  farmyard,  is  that  it  should  not  be  content  to 
paddle  in  the  pond  which  suffices  for  the  ducks. 
The  hope  of  the  soul  is  to  refuse  comparison  with 
those  beneath,  and  to  keep  the  eye  fixed  on  the 
righteousness  of  God  as  it  is  revealed  in  the  life 
and  words  of  Jesus.  ''  Not  as  though  I had 
already  attained,  but  I press  on.’’  Let  us  see  to 
it  that  we  apply  the  highest  standards  of  right 
to  ourselves,  to  our  relations  with  our  fellow-men, 
and  to  our  attitude  before  God,  so  that  we  could 
be  content  to  live  alone  with  God,  as  the  one 
all-satisfying  food  of  the  soul.  Hudson  Taylor 
said  the  other  day,  ''  I have  been  forty  years  in 
China,  it  is  forty  years  since  I first  landed  on  her 
shores,  I have  done  but  little  there,  I have  learnt 
much,  and  this  of  all  things — to  live  alone  with 
God,  to  know  God  Himself,  to  know  that  His 
heart  is  love,  and  that  His  heart  actuates  His  hand 


72 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


to  help.”  Here  is  an  ideal  after  which  we  may 
well  aspire. 

III.  The  certain  Gratification  of  this 
Appetite. 

God  never  sends  mouths,  the  old  proverb  says, 
but  He  sends  with  them  the  food  to  fill  them. 
Young  lions  never  seek  that  which  His  hand  does 
not  open  to  give.  The  fish,  and  the  fly  at  which 
it  snatches;  the  bird,  and  the  berries  on  the 
hawthorn  bush ; the  babe,  and  the  milk  stored  in 
its  mother’s  breast,  are  perfectly  adapted  to  each 
other.  The  instinct  for  immortality,  and  the 
mansions  which  Christ  has  gone  to  prepare;  the 
desire  for  the  city,  and  the  city  which  hath  foun- 
dations ; the  lively  hope  to  which  we  are  begotten 
by  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  its  fruition,  are 
in  perfect  harmony.  Whatever  you  and  I have 
longed  for  in  our  best  and  holiest  moments,  may 
have  its  consummation  and  bliss,  because  God 
has  prepared  for  our  perfect  satisfaction.  No 
hunger  without  food  to  match  it ; no  wing  with- 
out air  to  match  it;  no  fire  without  water  to 
match  it ; no  babe’s  cry  without  the  mother’s  love 


HUNGRY— THIRSTY— FILLED  73 


to  match  it ; and  no  soul  hungering  and  thirsting 
after  the  righteousness  of  God  without  God  to 
meet  and  match  it. 

Do  you  ask  what  is  the  bread  of  God,  which 
can  satisfy  the  insatiable  craving  of  man’s  heart? 
Jesus  says,  “ I am  that  Bread  of  Life,  he  that 
cometh  to  Me  shall  never  hunger ; he  that  believ- 
eth  in  Me  shall  never  thirst.  I am  the  Bread  of 
Life  which  came  down  from  heaven,  of  which 
a man  may  eat  and  not  die.  The  bread  that 
I shall  give  is  my  Flesh  that  I shall  give  for  the 
life  of  the  world.  He  that  drinketh  of  the  water 
that  I shall  give  shall  never  thirst.” 

Christ  is  made  unto  us  righteousness.  In 
other  words,  the  man  who  has  Christ,  and  gets 
right  with  Him,  who  is  brought  into  adjusted 
relationship  with  Christ,  almost  unconsciously 
gets  right  with  himself,  with  men,  with  the  great 
system  of  law,  and  with  God.  Do  not  fret  about 
the  infinite  demands  that  surround  you.  Do 
one  thing.  Let  Christ  be  Alpha  and  Omega. 
With  Him  as  foundation-stone,  your  building 
shall  stand  four-square  to  God  and  man. 

Are  you  filled  ? Do  you  know  what  it  is  to  be 
satisfied?  Have  you  ever  been  filled?  Has  it 


74 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


ever  occurred  to  you  to  ask  what  the  apostle 
meant  by  saying  that  the  disciples  were  complete 
in  Him?  If  not,  and  you  truly  desire  these 
experiences,  God  will  supply  all  your  need  out  of 
His  riches  in  glory.  To  ask,  is  to  have.  To 
seek,  is  to  receive.  To  hunger  and  thirst,  is  to 
be  satisfied.  Lift  up  your  heart  unto  the  Lord, 
and  say,  ''  Fill  me.”  Cry  for  Him  with  an 
exceeding  great  cry.  For  bread  He  will  not  give 
a stone  or  a serpent  for  fish.  Believe  that  you 
receive  simultaneously  with  your  request,  and 
you  will  know  the  blessedness  of  the  pain  which 
has  brought  you  to  God,  the  blessedness  of  being 
satisfied  from  God,  the  blessedness  of  desiring 
more  of  God ; and  yours  shall  be  the  song  of  the 
Virgin  Mother — ''  He  hath  filled  the  hungry  with 
good  things.”  ''  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as 
with  marrow  and  fatness;  and  my  mouth  shall 
praise  Thee  with  joyful  lips.” 

XTo  ^bee,  3Lorb,  tf  come  witb  beairea  wbicb  c:bou 
baet  implanteb,  anb  alone  canst  eatlef^ ; give  me 
Zb^eclt ; tor  ^bee  H was  mabe,  anb  apart  from  tTbee 
H cannot  flnb  reet  or  satlsfactlom  ticeb  ie  meat 
Inbeeb,  anb  XLb^  bloob  brink  Inbeeb. 


VI 

IT  GOETH  FORTH  AND  RETURNETH 

''Blessed  are  the  merciful:  for  they  shall  obtain 
mercy” — Matt.  v.  7. 

J^OTICE  where  our  Saviour  puts  this  beati- 
tude, the  heart  of  which  is  mercy.  It 
follows  that  longing  after  righteousness  which 
is  the  characteristic  of  the  righteous,  because 
mercy  is  the  white  flower  on  the  stem  of  a right- 
eous life.  Indeed,  the  absence  of  mercy  in  our 
temper  and  disposition  shows  that  our  righteous- 
ness is  that  of  the  ceremonialist,  as  that  of  Saul, 
who  was  blameless  as  touching  the  righteousness 
which  is  of  the  law,  but  utterly  devoid  of  those 
Christian  virtues  which  indicate  the  presence  of 
75 


;6 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


the  truly  holy  heart.  The  religion  which  is 
devoid  of  mercy  is  that  of  the  exterior  form,  but 
destitute  of  the  inward  power.  It  was  therefore 
with  a Divine  insight  that  our  Lord  put  mercy 
after  righteousness — first,  because  a man  must 
be  right  before  he  can  be  merciful;  and  second, 
he  must  be  rightly  adjusted  with  the  Fountain 
of  mercy  so  that  the  Divine  quality  of  mercy  can 
pass  unhindered  through  him,  and  approve  him 
to  be  a son  of  the  All-Merciful.  Search  your 
heart,  and  see  if  you  have  learnt  forgiveness  for 
the  sinning,  and  pity  for  the  sorrowful;  not 
otherwise  can  you  account  yourself  righteous 
after  God’s  fashion. 

Mercy  is  the  exclusive  prerogative  of  Chris- 
tianity. The  schools  of  ancient  morality  had  four 
cardinal  virtues — justice  in  human  relations, 
prudence  in  the  direction  of  affairs,  fortitude  in 
bearing  trouble  and  sorrow,  temperance  or  self- 
restraint  ; but  they  knew  nothing  of  mercy,  which 
is  not  natural  to  the  human  heart.  It  is  an  exotic 
which  Christ  brought  with  Him  from  heaven. 
As  long  as  the  Lord  Jesus  tarried  amongst  men, 
He  poured  forth  mercy  in  its  double  form  of 
forgiveness  and  succor,  to  those  that  hated  and  to 


IT  GOETH  FORTH  AND  RETURNETH  77 


those  that  were  wronged;  and  when  He  passed 
back  to  the  Father,  the  Church  took  up  His 
blessed  work,  and  came  to  the  world,  as  the  dew 
distilling  on  the  parched  pastures,  to  become  the 
saviour  and  regenerator  of  society.  She  found 
the  most  horrible  practices  in  vogue,  which  she 
stayed;  the  most  preposterous  customs,  which 
she  tempered ; amusements  and  games,  which  she 
discountenanced  and  finally  abolished.  She  ex- 
tended her  beneficent  sceptre  to  captives,  and 
women  oppressed  with  innumerable  wrongs,  and 
little  children.  Regardless  of  her  own  suffer- 
ings, she  existed  apparently  for  the  sole  reason 
of  ministering  to  those  that  wronged  and  op- 
pressed her,  as  well  as  to  those  who  were  being 
trampled  under  foot  by  greed  and  lust  and  hate. 
Thus  mercy  sprang  out  of  the  ground  in  response 
to  the  righteousness  which  looked  down  from 
heaven. 

I.  The  Quality  of  Mercy. 

It  is  evidently  a phase  of  love,  for  each  of  these 
beatitudes  enshrines  some  aspect  of  the  Love  of 
God  in  the  soul  of  man. 


78 


“BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


The  first  is  Love  in  her  humility,  with  such 
great  thoughts  of  the  possibilities  within  her 
reach  that  she  counts  herself  not  to  have  at- 
tained. 

The  second  is  Love  in  tears,  bewailing  the 
lovelessness  of  the  world. 

The  third  is  Love  suffering  wrong  in  the  hope 
of  vanquishing  it. 

The  fourth  is  Love  impelled  by  insatiable 
desire  for  fuller  satisfaction. 

The  fifth,  of  which  we  are  now  treating,  is 
Love  retaliating  on  wrong. 

The  sixth  is  Love  burning  with  a faith  so  pure 
that  evil  cannot  withstand. 

The  seventh  is  Love  so  equable  that  it  can 
quiet  and  steady  anger  and  strife. 

The  eighth  is  Love  misunderstood  and  perse- 
cuted. 

Each  is  therefore  a facet  on  which  the  sunlight 
falls,  and  from  which  it  is  reflected  at  a new 
angle,  and  with  a new  beauty.  Let  the  Love  of 
God  dwell  in  you  richly,  and  as  it  passes  out 
from  you  to  strike  the  many  evils  of  the  world, 
each  phase  of  sin  will  elicit  and  reflect  some 
special  quality.  Some  day  it  may  appear  that 


IT  GOETH  FORTH  AND  RETURNETH  79 


sin  was  permitted,  in  order  to  set  forth  the  per- 
fect beauty  of  Divine  love,  just  as  clouds  unravel 
the  contents  of  the  light  into  rainbow  hues. 

There  is  a distinction  between  Meekness  and 
Mercifulness. — Meekness  is  the  passive,  mercy 
the  active  side  of  Love.  The  meek  man  entering 
into  union  with  the  love  of  God,  which  is  ever- 
suffering  beneath  the  wrong  of  the  world,  and 
knowing  that  the  power  of  evil  will  presently  be 
broken  by  meek  forbearance,  suffers  with  the 
long-suffering  of  God.  But  mercy  goes  farther. 
It  takes  measures  with  the  wrong-doer.  In 
mercy  our  love  issues  forth  toward  the  per- 
petrator of  injury,  pitying,  bending  down  with 
tender  hand  and  gentle  touch,  pouring  in  oil  and 
wine,  and  endeavoring,  by  the  coals  of  fire  it 
heaps  on  the  offender,  to  melt  his  obdurate  heart, 
and  bring  him  to  a happier  state.  Mercy  seeks 
out  the  wrong-doer,  if  so  be  that  it  may  lead  him 
to  repentance,  notices  the  first  symptom  of  return 
and  meets  it,  welcomes  him  with  kisses,  undoes 
the  injury  which  he  has  wrought  to  himself,  and 
reinstates  him  in  the  old  place. 

There  is  also  some  difference  between  mercy 
and  forgiveness.  Love  is  the  parent  and  root 


8o 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


of  all.  Grace  is  love  coming  forth  to  meet  those 
who  had  forfeited  all  claim  upon  it.  Forgiveness 
is  love  assuring  the  wrong-doer  that  the  past  is 
forgotten.  Mercy  tries  to  ameliorate  the  con- 
dition of  the  sinner.  Whenever  wrong  is  done 
you,  think  less  of  what  you  suffer  than  of  the 
state  of  his  heart,  its  darkness  and  misery,  who 
has  done  the  ill,  and  when  you  have  conceived 
of  it,  seek  to  alleviate  it.  This  is  mercy. 


II.  The  Circumstances  which  awake 
Mercy. 


First,  Sin, — In  Psalm  li.  we  have  the  plaintive 
cry  of  a broken  heart.  Have  mercy  upon  me, 
O God,  according  to  Thy  lovingkindness : accord- 
ing unto  the  multitude  of  Thy  tender  mercies 
blot  out  my  transgressions  . . . against  Thee, 
Thee  only,  have  I sinned  . . . that  the  bones 
which  Thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice.”  Forgive- 
ness is  not  enough,  the  broken  bones  cry  out  for 
mending.  Forgiveness  does  not  necessarily 
include  reparation  of  the  hurt,  which  wrong-doing 


IT  GOETH  FORTH  AND  RETURNETH  8i 


inflicts  on  the  wrong-doer.  The  drunkard  may 
be  forgiven,  and  yet  have  to  bear  the  results  of 
injury  to  his  body  and  nerve;  nevertheless,  when 
such  an  one  is  forgiven,  he  may  also  count  on 
the  mercy  of  God,  pitying  that  trembling,  palsied 
hand,  and  that  wrecked  constitution,  and  endeav- 
oring so  far  as  may  be  possible,  to  undo  the 
havoc,  and  to  bring  again  his  flesh  as  fair  as  that 
of  a little  child.  Thus  mercy  rejoices  against 
judgment. 

Second^  Stiff ering. —Lvike  x.  37  tells  of  the 
mercy  of  the  stranger  to  which  even  the  Scribe 
bore  unwilling  testimony.  ''  Which  of  these,’’ 
asked  the  Lord,  after  He  had  vividly  portrayed 
Priest,  Levite,  and  Samaritan,  ''  proved  neighbor 
to  him  that  fell  among  the  thieves  ? ” And  the 
Scribe  was  compelled  to  admit,  ''  He  that  showed 
mercy  on  him.” 

In  such  a state  of  things  as  that  which  sur- 
rounds us  in  any  great  city,  we  must  be  careful 
to  allow  Qur  mercy  to  flow  freely  forth.  Nothing 
is  worse  than  to  be  always  checking  it  from 
fear  of  imposition.  Better  to  be  deceived  and 
wronged  now  and  again,  than  to  be  always 

withholding  the  hand.  We  must  take  care,  of 
6 


82 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


course,  not  to  harm  men  by  encouraging  them 
in  idleness  and  lying  fraud.  It  is  the  truest 
mercy  often  to  withhold  the  dole  of  charity  from 
those  who  would  misspend  it.  We  must  see 
to  it,  also,  that  we  are  not  content  with  the 
impulsive  act  of  benevolence,  which  flings  some 
coin  to  the  outstretched  hand  to  save  itself  the 
trouble  of  investigating  the  need,  and  ascertain- 
ing the  best  way  of  meeting  it.  Mercy  may 
refuse  to  give  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  that 
it  may  help  permanently  and  efficiently.  We 
must  be  very  careful,  also,  not  to  entrust  the 
giving  of  our  alms  to  the  paid  hand  of  agents 
and  professional  almoners.  Organized  charity 
is  a symptom  of  Christianity  which  retains  the 
name  of  Christ,  but  from  which  His  Spirit  has 
fled.  If  mercy  is  to  rise  spontaneously  and 
perennially,  it  must  be  nurtured  by  personal  con- 
tact with  sorrow  and  suffering.  Its  own  hands 
must  bind  the  sores,  and  smooth  the  pillow,  and 
arrange  the  disordered  room,  and  watch  through 
the  night-vigils. 

Third,  Ignorance  and  Infirmities, — Hebrews 
ii.  17,  X.  15.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  a merciful  and 
faithful  High  Priest  . . . touched  with  the  feel- 


IT  GOETH  FORTH  AND  RETURNETH  83 


ing  of  our  infirmities,  and  able  to  have  compas- 
sion on  the  ignorant  and  erring. 

Mercy  does  not  wait  for  sorrow  and  need  to 
appeal  to  her.  She  goes  to  seek  them.  She 
does  not  wait  for  the  injury  to  be  wrought  on 
her,  before  being  prompted  to  retaliate  in  heaven’s 
own  kind,  but  her  lovely  form  casts  a light  as  it 
passes  through  the  squalid  street,  climbing  the 
creaking  staircase,  and  pursuing  the  victims  of 
the  great  wrong  of  the  world  where  they  hide 
their  festering  sores.  Oh,  beautiful  is  the  light 
on  Mercy’s  face,  when  she  beholds  some  scene  of 
want  and  woe,  from  which  the  refinement  and 
culture  of  the  world  would  turn,  disgusted  and 
loathing.  This  is  work  that  she  loves.  Here 
she  is  in  her  element.  She  needs  no  teaching, 
for  the  heaven-born  instincts  of  her  heart  prompt 
her.  Her  voice  is  musical  with  the  tones  of  the 
Incarnate  Saviour.  Her  hand  is  deft  and  soft. 
Her  tread  is  beautiful  as  it  passes  along  the 
mountain  track,  rugged,  storm-swept,  difficult  to 
the  foot.  To  have  seen  her  would  make  you 
think  that  you  had  met  one  of  the  daughters  of 
the  family  of  God. 


84 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


HI.  The  Benediction. 

It  has  been  noticed  that  the  three  first  beati- 
tudes touch  the  lower  plane  of  our  experience 
by  which  need  has  to  be  met  with  its  opposite. 
Hence  the  blessedness  consists  in  imparting  the 
appropriate  satisfaction,  but  the  fifth,  sixth,  and 
seventh — that  is,  the  three  which  lie  on  the  hither 
side  of  desire — are  those  of  the  saint,  whose 
blessedness  consists  in  having  more  of  the  quality 
already  possessed.  Hence,  mercy  is  the  appro- 
priate reward  of  those  who  already  show  it. 

Have  you  ever  noticed  the  way  in  which  these 
attributes  of  the  blessed  life  demand  the  coming 
of  the  Comforter?  Matthew  v.  demands  John 
XV.  and  xvi.  The  commandments  of  the  forty 
days  demand  the  gift  of  Pentecost.  The  traits 
of  Christian  character  must  be  burnt  in  by  the 
Baptism  of  Fire.  There  must  be  a power  yet 
to  be  revealed  by  which  these  rare  and  precious 
exotics  may  be  made  to  bloom  on  the  wintry  soil 
of  the  soul.  The  law  of  love  is  given  in  all  its 
fulness  on  this  mount  of  beatitudes,  as  the  law 
of  righteousness  amid  the  thunders  of  Sinai,  that 
being  hopeless  of  ourselves,  we  may  be  shut  up 


IT  GOETH  FORTH  AND  RETURNETH  85 


to  faith  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  alone  can  work 
in  us  the  fruit  of  the  Divine  life.  The  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gen- 
tleness, meekness  . . 

The  merciful  alone  experience  all  the  merciful- 
ness of  God, — It  was  after  Job  had  pitied  and 
prayed  for  his  friends  that  his  own  captivity  was 
brought  again.  ''  See,’’  says  the  apostle,  ''  the 
end  of  the  Lord,  that  He  is  full  of  pity,  and 
merciful.”  If  we  go  through  the  world  minister- 
ing to  others,  God  will  come  and  minister  to  us. 
His  angels  will  come  around  us  with  their  gentle 
ministry,  doing  for  us  as  we  have  sought  to  do 
for  others.  ''  Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the 
poor,  the  Lord  will  remember  him  in  time  of 
trouble.” 

In  one  of  His  most  striking  parables  our  Lord 
depicts  the  forgiven  steward,  who  took  his 
brother  by  the  throat,  demanding  payment,  as 
forfeiting  the  clemency  which  his  Lord’s  mercy 
had  brought  him.  ''  Shouldest  not  thou  also 
have  had  mercy  on  thy  fellow-servant,  as  I had 
mercy  upon  thee?  And  he  delivered  him  up  to 
the  tormentors.”  That  cannot  mean  that  God 
ever  withdraws  His  mercy  from  the  soul  He  has 


86 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


once  forgiven,  because  God  cannot  change  His 
mind,  but  it  means  surely  that  the  unmerciful 
cannot  claim  God’s  mercy.  If,  therefore,  thou 
hast  not  forgiven,  thou  hast  not  been  forgiven. 
Each  time  you  utter  the  Lord’s  Prayer — Forgive, 
according  to  the  measure  of  my  own  forgiveness 
— you  really  say.  Do  not  forgive  me  because  I 
have  not  forgiven,  and  I dare  not  ask  Thee  to 
do  for  me  what  I have  not  done  for  my  brother 
sinner. 

Be  sure  that  in  coming  days  you  will  need 
forgiveness,  more,  perhaps,  than  you  realize,  for 
you  do  not  know  yourself ; but,  at  such  a time, 
the  failure  to  show  mercy  will  arise,  and,  lifting 
its  voice,  will  plead  against  you  and  overpower 
your  plea  for  forgiveness. 

The  merciful  may  count  on  mercy  from  their 
fellows. — None  are  treated  so  mercilessly  as  the 
merciless.  With  what  measure  ye  mete  it  shall 
be  measured  to  you  again.  Let  any  one  be 
censorious  in  criticism,  vindictive  and  malicious, 
quick  to  resent  a wrong,  bitter  and  uncharitable 
in  speech,  relentless  in  demanding  reparation; 
and  the  time  will  come  when  that  soul  will  need 
mercy  from  its  fellows,  and  meet  the  stolid  stare 


IT  GOETH  FORTH  AND  RETURNETH  87 


of  indifference.  And  Adonibezek  said,  Three- 
score and  ten  kings,  having  their  thumbs  and 
their  great  toes  cut  off,  gathered  their  meat 
under  my  table:  as  I have  done,  so  God  hath 
requited  me.’’ 

On  the  other  hand,  those  who  are  tender  and 
gentle  in  their  judgment,  patient  and  forbearing 
in  disposition,  peaceable  and  easy  to  be  entreated, 
quick  to  forgive  the  wrong-doer,  and  to  repair 
the  wrong,  will  never  be  in  need  of  mercy,  but 
in  hours  of  darkness  and  peril,  forgotten  acts  of 
kindness  will  arise  from  long-buried  seeds,  and 
mercy  which  had  gone  forth  to  bless  others  will 
return  from  its  long  journey  and  many  errands, 
in  time  to  comfort  and  requite  the  heart  from 
which  it  started  forth.  ''  Blessed  are  the  merci- 
ful, for  they  shall  obtain  mercy.” 


1bow  great  bae  been  tTbi^  goobneee  to  me,  Q Xorb, 
wbo  am  not  worths  of  tbe  least  of  all  fTbs  mercies ; 
make  me  tenber  anb  forgiving  to  ms  fellow:=serv=s 
ants,  as  fTbou  bast  been  to  me ; that  tbelr  hearts 
mas,  In  turn,  be  softeneb,  anb  taught  tbe  law  of 
meres  anb  long=6ufferlng* 


VII 


THE  BEATIFIC  VISION 

"Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart:  for  they  shall  see  God.’’ 
—Matt.  V.  8. 


o F all  the  eight  beatitudes,  none  arrests  us 
with  a greater  sense  of  sublimity  and 
majesty  than  this;  and  none,  in  its  possession, 
more  absolutely  distinguishes  the  religion  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Like  some  inaccessible  Alpine 
peak,  covered  with  virgin  snow,  this  conception 
of  the  pure  heart  towers  up  amid  all  the  great 
words  of  this  marvellous  discourse. 

To  be  pure  in  behavior  and  life  was  admitted 
by  the  Stoics  to  be  the  sign  and  token  of  true 

manhood;  but  to  be  pure  in  heart  has  been 
88 


THE  BEATIFIC  VISION 


89 


deemed  an  inaccessible  and  untenable  position. 
Even  if  it  were  Christ’s  by  the  peculiar  constitu- 
tion of  His  nature,  it  cannot,  so  men  argue, 
become  the  attribute  of  natures  which  were 
conceived  in  sin  and  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  are 
impressed  with  the  evil  impulses  of  generations 
of  self-indulgence.  To  know  sin  only  to  abhor 
it,  to  keep  so  strong  a hold  on  appetite  that,  like 
some  spirited  horse,  it  shall  only  fulfil  its  legiti- 
mate purpose,  to  be  always  blameless  and  harm- 
less, to  wear  ever  the  white  flower  of  a stainless 
life,  to  allow  no  lewd  visitant  to  cross  the 
threshold  of  the  soul,  to  permit  no  foul  picture 
to  remain  for  a moment  on  the  lens  of  the  inner 
eye,  to  love  all  men  and  women  with  a pure  and 
unselfish  affection  in  which  there  is  no  taint  or 
stain — this  is  an  ideal  which,  if  it  flitted  before 
the  minds  of  men  like  a bright  vision,  was  not 
attained  until  Jesus  came  with  that  omnific  word, 
which  said  to  the  leper,  ''  I will,  be  thou  clean,” 
and  in  that  early  miracle  gave  a sign  of  the 
characteristic  of  His  life,  in  saving  those  who 
had  been  deeply  dyed  in  the  ditch  of  sensual 
indulgence,  and  making  them  bright  jewels  in 
His  crown.  Thus  pure  white  paper  is  woven 


90 


‘‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


from  rags,  and  diamonds  manufactured  out  of 
charcoal. 

Purity  of  Heart  will  Ensure  Purity  of 
" Life  and  Conduct. 

This  connection  has  been  too  often  overlooked, 
and  the  order  forgotten.  Many  have  insisted  on 
the  careful  regimen  of  the  body,  frugal  diet, 
vigorous  exercise,  cleanliness  of  person ; and  have 
reiterated  the  ancient  maxims  of  the  Stoical 
philosophy — Touch  not.  Taste  not.  Handle  not; 
though  discovering,  as  the  apostle  said,  long  ago, 
that  these  things  have  indeed  a show  of  will- 
worship,  and  humility,  and  severity  to  the  body, 
but  are  not  of  any  value  against  the  indulgence 
of  the  flesh. 

No,  the  secret  of  purity  lies  deeper.  Begin 
with  the  outward,  and  you  may  or  may  not 
affect  the  inward  temper  of  the  soul.  Begin  with 
the  inward  temper,  and  the  effect  on  the  outward 
will  be  immediate  and  transfiguring. 

Purity  of  heart  means  the  control  of  the  im- 
agination. Away  from  the  realm  of  sense  there 
lies  a world  of  illusion,  the  atmosphere  of  which 


THE  BEATIFIC  VISION 


91 


is  brilliant  but  deadly,  its  scenery  bewitching  but 
corrupting,  the  inhabitants  wicked  spirits,  some 
of  whom  are  robed  in  exquisite  costumes  veiling 
their  deformity,  whilst  others  are  at  no  pains  to 
hide  their  loathsomeness.  Thither  imagination 
can  at  will  transport  us.  Like  a swift  shallop 
it  can  convey  us  to  those  mystic  shores;  and 
disembarking  we  can  take  our  part  in  unseemly 
revels,  whilst  our  face  is  buried  in  our  hands,  in 
the  attitude  of  prayer,  or  our  outward  presence 
is  sharing  in  the  amenities  of  the  home-circle. 
But  no  heart  can  be  kept  pure,  unless  the  fancy 
is  kept  sternly  under  control.  It  must  not  be 
permitted  to  bear  us  away  into  the  world  of 
unholy  and  sensuous  dreams,  or  to  introduce  into 
the  temple  of  the  soul  any  picture  which  would 
taint  or  defile. 

Purity  of  heart  means  the  rigorous  care  of  the 
affections,  'We  must  love.  Not  to  love  is  to 
lose  God  and  heaven  out  of  life;  not  to  love 
is  to  miss  the  inner  secret  of  blessedness ; not  to 
love  is  to  deny  the  exercise  of  our  noblest  powers. 
We  wrong  the  nature  with  which  God  has 
endowed  us  when  we  refuse  to  love.  But  our 
afifections  resemble  the  tendrils  of  clinging  plants. 


92 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


they  reach  out  altogether  in  wrong  directions, 
or  too  profusely  in  right  ones.  So  our  love 
strays  to  those  to  whom  we  ought  not  to  give  it, 
or  overflows  with  undue  extravagance  to  those 
who  have  a claim  to  something  but  not  all. 
Nothing  is  more  hurtful  than  a friendship  which 
monopolizes  all  the  thought  and  force  of  the 
lovers,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others,  and  espe- 
cially of  God.  We  must  love  God  in  others,  and 
them  in  God,  only  where  His  will  permits,  and 
to  the  extent  which  is  compatible  with  His  claims 
for  the  first  place.  Whenever  you  feel  your 
heart  giving  out  strongly  to  another,  be  very 
careful  to  consider  whither  the  strong  tide  is 
bearing  you,  and  stay  whilst  yet  it  is  possible  to 
resist  its  current. 

""  The  intention  of  the  soul  must  be  single. — To 
do  God’s  will,  whatever  it  costs ; to  follow  in  the 
line  of  His  command,  whatever  it  involves ; to 
live  within  the  limits  He  has  laid  down,  whatever 
be  the  solicitation  to  outstep  them.  The  eye 
must  be  single.  The  soul  must  resolve  within 
itself  that  it  will  absolutely  yield  to  God,  though 
the  surrender  involve  the  loss  of  all  beside. 
Impurity,  when  traced  to  its  source,  will  often 


THE  BEATIFIC  VISION 


93 


be  found  to  arise  from  a lack  of  decision  that 
God’s  way  and  will  shall  be  paramount,  and  that  ^ 
nothing  shall  be  permitted,  even  for  a moment,  to 
conflict  with  them.  - — 

The  attitude  of  the  will  is  also  all-important. — 
This,  after  all,  is  the  key  to  the  position.  The  j 
will  is  the  custodian  of  the  soul.  Conscience  ' 
pleads  as  the  prophet  and  priest  of  God;  the 
affection  and  emotions  put  in  their  passionate 
plea;  memory  recites  the  results  of  past  experi- 
ence; the  imagination  presents  vivid  portrayals 
of  the  consequences  of  certain  acts;  the  judgment 
sits  upon  the  bench,  sums  up  and  gives  its 
decision;  but,  after  all,  it  is  for  the  will  to  act. 
We  may  almost  say  that  it  holds  the  destinies  of 
life,  at  its  belt  swings  the  key  with  which  it  opens 
and  none  shuts,  with  which  it  shuts  and  none 
opens.  The  will  is  like  the  front  wheel  of  the 
bicycle,  which  gives  the  direction  to  the  move- 
ments of  the  machine ; it  resembles  the  steersman 
of  the  packet,  standing  weather-beaten  behind  the 
wheel ; it  is  the  prime  minister  of  the  inner  court, 
its  executive  and  marshal. 

Oh,  that  thou  and  I,  my  reader,  may  choose 
purity  above  all,  setting  our  will  toward  it  with 


94 


BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


understanding  tenacity,  preferring  it  above  our 
chief  good,  ever  prepared  to  surrender  everything 
if  only  this  may  be  our  lot,  to  count  no  sacrifice 
too  great,  no  cliff  too  steep ! Dost  thou  not  think 
that  God  would  meet  us,  and  accomplish  that  on 
which  our  decisions  were  fixed?  Could  He  lead 
us  to  such  high  resolves,  only  to  disappoint  and 
mock?  Is  not  the  conception  of  such  a state 
a prophecy  of  what  God  is  prepared  to  realize? 
Surely  it  is  not  in  vain  that  His  Spirit  has  indited 
the  prayer,  ''  Cleanse  Thou  the  thoughts  of  our 
hearts  by  the  inspiration  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  that 
we  may  perfectly  serve  Thee,  and  worthily  mag- 
nify Thy  holy  name.” 


The  Law  of  Purity  is  Clearly  Revealed. 

It  is  the  great  gift  of  the  gospel  to  teach  men 
that  Purity  is  possible — possible  for  those  who 
have  suffered  most  from  the  law  of  a depraved 
heredity,  possible  to  those  whose  habits  of  evil 
living  and  thinking  have  been  most  debased, 
possible  for  those  who  have  striven  in  vain  to 
keep  the  marble  palace  of  the  inner  life  from  be- 


THE  BEATIFIC  VISION 


95 


ing  defiled  by  the  tides  of  ink  which  sweep 
through  the  world.  Let  any  one  follow  the  Di- 
vine prescription,  they  will  find  the  vision  of  the 
pure  in  heart  is  not  a dream,  but  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  prepared  to  do  for  the  inner  life  what 
He  did  for  the  leprous  flesh.  He  can  effect  in 
our  experience  that  temper  of  soul  v/hich  knows 
evil  only  to  abhor  it,  which  is  conscious  of  the 
presence  of  the  tempter  only  to  loathe  his  sug- 
gestion, which  detects  the  hideous  form  beneath 
the  dazzling  garb  of  one  who  appears  to  be  an 
angel  of  light.  Remember  the  words  of  the 
apostle  in  which  he  reminded  his  converts  that 
they  had  been  delivered  from  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness, and  been  translated  into  the  kingdom  of 
light  and  love,  the  kingdom  of  God’s  dear  Son. 

And  what  is  the  prime  condition  of  this  heart- 
purity?  The  answer  comes  back  clear  and  suffi- 
cient from  the  lips  of  Peter,  when  speaking  of 
God’s  work  through  him  amongst  the  Gentiles. 

God,”  says  he,  ''  which  knoweth  the  heart,  bear 
them  witness,  giving  them  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
He  made  no  distinction  between  us  and  them, 
cleansing  their  hearts  by  faith.” 

And  how  does  Faith  cleanse  the  heart?  There 


96 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


are  many  ways  in  which  she  performs  her  holy 
office. 

She  brings  the  soul  to  the  Cross,  and  bids  it 
behold  the  dying  Saviour,  and  asks  how,  in  view 
of  such  sorrow  and  anguish,  borne  to  put  away 
its  sin,  it  can  ever  dare  to  open  those  wounds 
again,  or  add  one  stab  of  pain  to  that  infinite 
agony. 

She  applies  to  the  soul  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ  that  cleanseth  from  all  sin,  and  there  is 
nothing  which  so  effectively  produces  inward 
purity  as  forgiveness  based  upon  the  sacrifice  of 
the  Redeemer.  The  ease  with  which  the  penitent 
and  believing  heart  can  claim  forgiveness  does  not 
conduce  to  sin,  but  begets  a holy  fear  which 
makes  it  increasingly  abhorrent. 

She  has  the  marvellous  power  of  handing  over 
to  Christ  every  suggestion  of  the  Evil  One. 
Whilst  the  fiery  dart  is  flaming  through  the  air, 
and  before  it  reaches  the  soul.  Faith  catches  it 
upon  her  shield.  When  the  sooty  hand  is 
reached  out  to  pluck  her  white  flower.  Faith  sud- 
denly interposes  the  protective  covering  of  the 
purity  of  Christ.  To  hand  over  to  Jesus  every 
approaching  temptation,  each  evil  suggestion,  all 


THE  BEATIFIC  VISION 


97 


haunting  fancies,  when  as  yet  they  are  in  the  air, 
and  have  not  put  their  foot  within  the  thresh- 
old of  the  soul,  is  the  lesson  which  faith  teaches. 

But  better  than  all.  Faith  appropriates  the 
Purity  of  Christ.  In  the  moment  of  temptation 
she  lifts  her  thought  and  prayer  to  Him  to  claim 
that  His  purity  should  so  fill  the  soul  with  its 
perfect  heat  and  light,  that  there  should  be  no 
room  for  impurity  to  lurk  in  any  corner.  Per- 
haps it  would  be  better  to  say  that  Faith  appro- 
priates Christ  as  its  purity,  rather  than  the  Purity 
of  Christ.  A person  must  always  help  us  better 
than  an  attribute,  and  Christ  Himself  is  made 
more  to  us  than  any  single  quality  of  His  nature. 
The  whole  is  greater  than  its  part. 

It  has  been  discovered  that  there  is  no  bacillus 
that  can  withstand  sunlight,  and  certainly  no  im- 
purity can  remain  in  the  heart  which  is  perfectly 
filled  with  the  presence  of  Christ,  maintained 
there  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Darkness 
cannot  coexist  with  light.  Let  the  light  in,  and 
the  darkness  needs  no  other  method  of  expurga- 
tion. It  seems  to  me  needless  to  stay  to  argue 
whether  the  root  of  sin  is  extracted  or  not;  the 
one  point  is  to  let  the  refiner  of  silver  pass  our 
7 


98 


•‘BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


nature  through  the  baptism  of  fire  of  which  the 
Baptist  spoke,  when  he  foretold  that  the  Lamb 
of  God  should  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
with  fire.  When  once  the  refining  fire  has  passed 
through  the  heart,  and  is  maintained  within  it, 
purity  will  be  as  natural  as  breathing  to  a man, 
as  singing  to  a happy  child. 


The  Guerdon  is  Transcendently  Attractive. 

They  shall  see  God.” — To  see  the  king’s  face 
was  the  object  of  ambition  to  loyal  courtiers  and 
subjects  in  the  old  days,  when  the  Queen  of  She- 
ba congratulated  the  servants  of  Solomon  on  be- 
ing able  to  stand  always  before  him.  And  to 
Absalom  it  was  the  keenest  sign  of  disgrace  that 
he  was  not  allowed  to  see  the  face  of  the  king,  his 
father. 

This  is  the  thought  that  probably  underlies  this 
beatitude.  Only  the  pure  in  heart  can  stand  in 
the  inner  circle,  searched  by  those  eyes  that  are 
too  pure  to  look  upon  sin.  Only  garments  which 
are  unstained  can  pass  muster  in  the  throne-room 
of  the  Supreme.  This  truth  was  symbolized  in 


THE  BEATIFIC  VISION 


99 


the  purity  of  ablution,  ceremonial  and  dress, 
which^  prevailed  in  the  ancient  tabernacle ; and  it 
remains  true  forever  that  without  holiness  no 
man  can  see  the  Lord.  If,  then,  you  and  I would 
dwell  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  and 
abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty ; if  we 
would  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all  the  days 
of  our  life,  we  must  be  pure  in  heart. 

The  pure  in  heart  see.  They  are  seers.  They 
get  at  truth  first-hand.  They  see  God  in  nature, 
beneath  each  flower,  and  tree,  and  waterfall ; they 
see  Him  in  every  incident  of  providence;  and 
circumstance  does  but  reveal  His  plan  and  is  as 
the  slight  gauze  that  conceals  His  movements; 
they  see  Him  in  human  love,  and  tender  voices,  in 
the  caress  of  the  little  child,  and  faithfulness  of 
the  true  woman ; they  see  Him  in  Scripture  which 
burns  like  the  bush  of  the  desert  because  He  is 
there;  and  their  most  cherished  aspiration  is  to 
behold  His  face  in  righteousness,  and  to  be  satis- 
fied when  they  awake  with  His  likeness. 

It  is  good  to  have  the  eye  of  the  soul  cleansed, 
that  it  may  see  what  prophets  and  kings  have 
been  unable  to  discover  by  the  exercise  of  the  in- 
tellect. It  is  of  this  spiritual  lens  that  the  apostle 


lOO 


BLESSED  ARE  YE  ’’ 


speaks  when  he  says,  He  that  is  spiritual  discern- 
eth  all  things,  though  he  is  himself  discerned  by 
no  man.  Even  here  and  now  we  see  God,  but 
what  will  not  be  our  rapture  when  this  gross  veil 
of  flesh  and  infirmity  is  rent  in  twain  from  the 
top  to  the  bottom,  and  we  are  permitted  to  stand 
before  the  throne,  because  the  garments  of  the 
soul  have  been  washed  and  made  white  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb ! 


•ffn  Cbee  waa  no  Bin,  Saviour;  c:bou  waat 
tbe  QwilclCBBf  apotleas  Xamb  of  OoO ; baptise  me 
into  tbe  jFire  of  tTb^  purity,  anb  let  me  walk  with 
fTbee  in  pure  unapotteD  robea^ 


VIII 

SWORDS  INTO  PRUNING-HOOKS 

Blessed  are  the  peacemakers : for  they  shall  he  called 
the  sons  of  God/" — Matt.  v.  9. 

utterance  of  this  beatitude  indicates  the 
state  of  the  world,  as  indeed  all  the  beati- 
tudes do.  From  these  photographs  of  the  char- 
acteristics of  the  children  of  God  we  may  learn 
the  characteristics  of  the  world  out  of  which  they 
have  come.  We  know  that  we  are  of  God,  be- 
cause we  have  learnt  something  of  this  poverty  of 
spirit,  this  Divine  sorrow,  this  meekness,  this 
hunger,  this  mercy,  this  purity;  but  we  know, 
also,  that  the  whole  world  around  us  is  as  the  di- 
rect antipodes  of  these  holy  qualities.  We  are 
learning  to  be  poor  in  spirit,  but  the  world  is 
proud;  we  mourn,  with  bitter  tears,  over  our 
own  sin  and  the  sins  of  the  world,  but  the  world 
sins  without  tears.  We  know  what  it  is  in  some 
small  measure  to  bear  insult  patiently,  but  the 

lOI 


102 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE 


world  proudly  resents  insult.  We  are  conscious 
of  a Divine  hunger  and  thirst  after  the  eternal 
righteousness,  without  which  the  unrest  of  our 
heart  will  never  be  content,  whilst  the  men 
around  us  are  satisfied  if  their  senses  and  appe- 
tites are  satisfied.  We  know  something  of  what 
it  is  to  have  the  love  of  God  pouring  through  us 
in  merciful  kindness  toward  the  evil  that  would 
work  us  injury,  whilst  the  world  knows  no  mer- 
cy, but  men  take  their  brothers  by  the  throat, 
saying,  ''  Pay  me  what  thou  owest.''  We  know 
a little  of  that  yearning  for  the  snow-clad  peaks 
of  purity,  whilst  we  recognize  that  the  world  lies 
in  the  power  of  the  Evil  One,  and  we  have  only 
just  escaped  the  corruption  which  is  in  the  world 
through  lust. 

The  strong  emphasis  which  our  Saviour  lays 
on  peacemaking  shows  the  world  around  to  be 
full  of  peacebreaking,  and  so  devoid  of  God’s 
halcyon  rest.  Is  it  not  because  men  have  lost  the 
Fatherhood  that  they  have  lost  the  Brotherhood? 
The  tender  love  of  the  father  to  the  child,  and  the 
father’s  love  recognized  by  the  child,  is  the  great 
bond  and  tie  of  the  home-circle,  widened  to  in- 
clude the  universe.  But  since  men  have  lost  the 


SWORDS  INTO  PRUNING-HOOKS  103 


consciousness  of  the  love  of  God,  and  have  lost, 
in  consequence,  the  responsive  love  which  should 
go  forth  to  Him  from  their  heart,  they  are  con- 
sumed by  the  greed,  lust,  jealousy,  hatred,  and 
suspicion  which  are  at  the  root  of  the  peaceless- 
ness  of  the  world.  Therefore  God  calls  us.  His 
little  children,  to  His  side,  in  Jesus  Christ,  and 
He  says,  ''  Children,  I have  a great  work  on  hand 
in  the  world;  all  the  universe  beside  is  in  peace 
except  your  little  planet  and  its  surrounding  at- 
mosphere, in  which  the  devil  and  his  angels  have 
their  seat;  but  I can  never  rest  until  My  peace 
has  overcome  the  strife  and  war  and  discord  of 
the  human  family  and  of  the  devil  realm  that 
prompts  it : come,  therefore,  and  I will  send  you 
forth,  and  your  feet  shall  be  beautiful  upon  the 
mountains  as  you  publish  peace.  My  sons  and 
daughters,  help  Me  to  bring  peace  again  to  man ; 
be  peacemakers,  and  so  inherit  the  blessedness  of 
God.’’ 

Now  we  will  notice,  first,  the  qualifications 
which  are  necessary  to  the  peacemaker ; secondly, 
the  method  in  which  he  shall  do  his  work ; third- 
ly, the  abundant  recognition  which  it  will  secure. 


104 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


L The  Qualifications  of  the  Peacemaker. 

This  beatitude  follows  the  one  in  which  our 
Saviour  shows  the  bliss  of  the  pure  heart : 

Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see 
God.” 

The  order  of  these  beatitudes  is  extremely  in- 
structive, and  one  leads  to  the  other  like  the  steps 
of  a great  staircase  ever  upward  to  the  climax. 
Obviously  purity  of  heart  must  precede  peace- 
making; and  for  this  reason — that  it  is  only  the 
pure  of  heart  who  can  see  God,  and  it  is  only  in 
so  far  as  we  see  God  going  forth  to  make  peace 
that  we  can  follow  His  example.  As  it  was  true 
of  Christ,  so  it  is  true  of  us,  all  true  living  must 
be  the  reflection  of  what  we  see  the  Father  doing 
(John  v.  19).  This  is  a very  profound  thought, 
and  it  certainly  underlay  the  entire  ministry  of 
our  blessed  Saviour,  so  that  everything  He  did 
was  the  reflection  of  the  movements  of  His 
Father’s  nature.  When  He  wrought  in  the  cre- 
ation of  the  universe  He  was  working  out  the 
creative  thought  of  His  Father;  and  when  He 
stepped  out  from  His  Throne  and  the  angel’s 
anthem  told  of  ''  peace  on  earth,  and  goodwill 


SWORDS  INTO  PRUNING-HOOKS  105 


toward  men/’  it  was  only  that  He  might  achieve 
upon  our  sin-stricken  world  the  deep  yearning 
of  the  Father’s  heart  for  the  pacification  of  its 
children.  When,  finally,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
died  upon  the  Cross  it  was  not  the  act  and  deed 
of  His  loving  heart,  apart  from  the  Father,  but 
just  the  repetition  and  reflection,  in  terms  that 
man  could  read  and  understand,  of  yearnings  and 
pity  in  the  Father’s  heart,  of  which  they  were  the 
translation.  And  so  all  through  this  wonderful 
era  in  which  Jesus  Christ  is  still  working  amongst 
men  to  achieve  the  Divine  purposes. 

Amongst  the  many  arguments,  then,  by  which 
we  may  endeavor  to  stir  ourselves  and  induce 
others  to  become  peacemakers,  probably  the  loft- 
iest is  the  one  which  leads  the  Christian  constant- 
ly to  inquire,  What  is  my  Father  doing ; what  is 
my  Father  caring  for;  in  which  direction  are  the 
energies  of  the  Eternal  Nature  now  proceeding, 
for  if  I can  only  discover  these,  the  truest  policy 
for  myself,  for  my  blessedness,  and  the  blessed- 
ness of  others  is  that  I should  concur  with  and 
advance,  so  far  as  I can,  those  mighty  move- 
ments.” Therefore  the  purity  of  heart  in  which 
a man  sees  God  seems  necessary,  as  the  prerequi- 


io6 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


site  for  the  peacemaking  which  is  occupying  our 
thoughts.  And  if,  day  by  day,  before  we  started 
forth  on  our  daily  pilgrimage,  we  were  only  pure 
enough  in  heart  to  stand  before  the  presence  of 
the  King  and  to  ascertain  in  which  direction  He 
was  most  strenuously  occupied  ;to  learn  from  Him 
what  great  design  He  had  in  hand ; then,  as  sons 
of  the  Father,  and  as  brothers  of  Christ,  we 
should  become  interested  in  that  in  which  He  was 
interested,  and  enthusiastic  over  that  upon  which 
He  had  set  His  heart.  We  should  go  forth  day 
by  day,  saying,  ''  Whither  are  Thy  steps  leading, 
O Prince  of  Peace?  We,  Thy  young  brothers 
and  sisters,  would  fain  place  our  footprints  where 
Thine  have  left  their  impress.  There  are  homes 
that  Thou  art  entering  to  allay  fear,  unrest  and 
disquietude,  we  will  follow ; where  there  are 
hearts  that  are  tossed  like  the  restless  sea,  over 
which  Thou  art  about  to  speak  Thy  ‘ peace  be 
still,’  we  will  breathe  it  also;  and  where  healing, 
rest-giving  ministries  have  to  be  performed  to 
men,  then  we  will  be  there,  too,  to  further  Thee 
in  Thy  work.” 

There  is  not  much  hope  of  any  of  us,  with  our 
limited  resources  and  powers,  accomplishing 


SWORDS  INTO  PRUNING-HOOKS  107 


much  of  this  great  work  of  peacemaking  in  the 
world  if  we  look  only  to  ourselves.  But  our 
power  is  immensely  multiplied  when  we  have 
learnt  to  see  God;  to  live  in  communion  with 
Christ;  to  open  our  being  to  the  blessed  Holy 
Spirit,  the  Dove  of  Peace,  that  we  may  co-operate 
with  God,  and,  watching  Him,  may  do  in  earth 
what  He  is  doing  in  heaven.  ''  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart : for  they  shall  see  God.’’  ''  Blessed 
are  the  peacemakers : for  they  shall  be  called  sons 
of  God.”  See  how  the  two  are  associated. 

Secondly,  we  must  he  prepared  for  sacrifices. 
God  made  peace  by  blood.  It  is  a very  wonder- 
ful conception  of  redemption,  which  is  presented 
to  us  in  the  New  Testament.  As  SMkespeare 
says,  ''  God  who  might  haye  vantage  took,  found 
out  the  remedy.”  It  is  so  wonderful  to  think 
that  when  all  our  world  and  race  were  at  war 
with  God — He,  so  far  as  He  could,  and  at  infinite 
cost,  put  out  of  the  way  the  cause  of  hostility. 
But  He  could  only  do  it  at  the  cost  of  blood.  I 
confess  that  I have  no  plumb-line  to  fathom  all 
that  is  meant  by  making  peace  through  the  blood 
of  the  Cross.  We  know  that  the  blood  is  the 
life;  and  that,  when  on  Calvary,  the  blood  of 


io8 


BLESSED  ARE  YE  ’’ 


God’s  Lamb  was  shed,  it  was  as  though  the  life 
of  the  Son  of  God  were  poured  out.  He  was  the 
substitute  and  sacrifice  for  sin,  though  probably 
there  was  something  deeper  even  than  this  in  the 
draining  out  the  energy  of  the  flesh,  that  being 
utterly  exhausted,  helpless  as  to  His  natural  life. 
He  might  be  lifted  up  to  become  the  Second 
Adam,  and  to  give  life  to  men.  These  are  deep 
conceptions.  There  is  an  objective  side  in  which 
the  death  of  Christ  deals  with  God’s  broken  law, 
and  a subjective  side  in  which  the  death  of  Christ 
somehow  deals  with  our  flesh  life ; but  all  we  need 
to  emphasize  now  is  the  fact  that  when  God  made 
peace  it  was  based  on  righteousness,  and  the  de- 
mands of  righteousness  were  met  at  the  cost  of 
infinite  suffering,  of  which  the  emblem  is  shed 
blood.  Melchizedek  was  first  the  king  of  right- 
eousness before  he  could  be  the  priest  of  peace. 
If  righteousness  means  meeting  the  claims  of  a 
broken  law,  which  had  been  violated,  and  which 
man  could  not  meet,  then  the  cost  of  laying  the 
deep  foundation  of  righteousness  on  which  the 
temple  of  peace  was  to  be  reared,  could  only  be  at 
infinite  cost,  the  cost  of  blood ; and  if  zve  are  to 
make  peace  with  men  it  will  have  to  be  at  heavy 


SWORDS  INTO  PRUNING-HOOKS  109 

cost  to  ourselves.  If  there  is  strife  between  our- 
selves and  others,  as  we  were  once  at  war  with 
God,  it  may  be  needful  for  us,  at  a great  cost  of 
tears  and  anguish,  to  remove  from  between  them 
and  us  the  obstacles  to  peace.  It  will  cost  us 
something  to  make  and  maintain  peace.  We 
shall  have  to  sacrifice  our  pride,  reputation,  the 
maintenance  of  our  fancied  rights,  to  say  nothing 
of  ease  and  self-indulgence,  if  we  shall  repair  the 
wrong  of  the  evil-doer,  and  readjust  broken  rela- 
tionships. The  ambassadors  of  peace  through- 
out the  world  have  had  to  expend  their  very  life 
blood  in  their  endeavor  to  make  peace,  consist- 
ently with  the  demands  of  righteousness.  For 
the  most  part  they  have  met  those  demands,  that 
on  this  basis  they  might  build  the  temple. 

Thirdly,  we  should  ever  carry  within  us  the 
peace  of  God.  God  is  the  centre  of  peace,  ''  the 
God  of  peace,’’  from  whose  nature  the  undula- 
tions of  ever-widening  circlets  of  peace  are 
spreading  through  the  world.  We  were  once  at 
enmity,  but  we  have  been  graciously  attracted 
back  to  Him,  and  as  His  children  have  become 
filled  with  His  peace.  ''  Let  the  peace  of  God 
rule  in  your  heart.”  We  shall  never  be  able  to 


no 


‘‘BLESSED  ARE  YE 


make  peace  in  the  world  until  we  have  learnt 
the  secret  of  peace  ourselves.  Let  Jesus  Christ 
utter  His  word  “ Peace  be  unto  you.’’  Let  Him 
show  you  His  hands  and  His  side.  Let  Him 
breathe  upon  you  the  spirit  of  peace,  and  say, 
“ Receive  the  Holy  Ghost.”  Let  that  peace  stand 
sentinel  at  your  heart’s  gate.  Be  careful  to 
watch  against  the  intrusion  of  anxiety,  care,  and 
worry,  and  whenever  these  things  come,  treat 
them  as  Nehemiah  did  the  Tyrian  fishwomen, 
whom  he  kept  outside  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  be- 
cause it  was  the  Sabbath.  Do  not  let  the  cries  of 
the  world’s  fever  and  tumult  break  the  Sabbath- 
keeping of  your  heart.  Live  in  peace.  Rather 
suffer  wrong  than  allow  peace  to  be  broken  on 
your  account.  Follow  peace  with  all  men.  Car- 
ry always  in  your  heart  the  serene  calm  and  on 
your  face  the  placid  look.  Let  there  be  no  jar- 
ring irritated  note  in  your  voice.  Let  all  your 
movements  be  consistent  with  the  rhythm  of 
God’s  perfect  peace.  Go  through  the  world  with 
soft  tread,  carrying  everywhere  the  atmosphere 
of  God’s  home.  And  then  at  night,  having  done 
all,  by  your  act,  your  look,  your  word,  your  be- 
havior, to  instil  peace  into  this  troubled  world. 


SWORDS  INTO  PRUNING-HOOKS  iii 


return  back  to  your  Father's  bosom,  as  a little 
child  who  has  been  at  school  all  day  amid  rough 
companions,  but  joyfully  returns  to  his  home  at 
night.  So  go  back  to  the  God  of  peace  and  steep 
your  weary  soul  in  His  infinite  restfulness,  and 
tell  Him  all  your  anxiety  for  yourself  and  others. 
Lean  your  head  back  upon  His  bosom  and  rest 
there,  and  the  God  of  peace  will  give  you  peace, 
and  enable  you  to  go  forth  again  on  the  morrow 
upon  a similar  mission.  So  we  shall  shed  the 
peace  of  heaven  over  the  sorrows  and  troubles 
of  earth. 

II.  The  Method  in  which  he  shall  do  his 
Work. 

There  are  three  or  four  avenues  in  which  we 
are  to  perform  this  blessed  office. 

First,  with  regard  to  our  own  adversaries — to 
those  who  are  hostile  to  us  and  seeking  to  harm 
us.  Never  lose  your  peace  with  such,  but  see  if 
there  is  anything  you  can  do,  consistently  with 
the  claims  of  honor  and  justice,  even  though  at 
heavy  cost  to  yourself,  to  remove  the  cause  of 
trouble.  Take  out  of  the  way,  so  far  as  you  can. 


II2 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


the  obstacles  to  peace.  It  is  better  to  suffer 
wrong  than  to  allow  some  thorn  of  misunder- 
standing and  ill-will  to  rankle  between  yourself 
and  another.  St.  Paul  was  very  clear  against  be- 
liever going  to  law  with  believer ; he  insisted  that 
it  was  far  better  to  suffer  wrong.  And  as  to  our 
relations  with  others,  it  is  probably  better,  after 
due  remonstrance,  to  suffer  than  to  avenge  our- 
selves. The  only  thing  which  really  justifies  us 
breaking  the  outward  reign  of  peace  by  physical 
force  or  by  appeal  to  law  is  when  some  evil-doer 
is  carrying  out  a policy  of  tyranny,  oppression, 
and  high-handed  wrong  against  the  defenceless 
and  helpless.  In  other  cases,  when  there  is  a 
cause  of  misunderstanding,  seek  out  thine  adver- 
sary, tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him 
alone,  try  to  put  away  the  cause  of  stumbling  and 
offence,  and  if  worse  becomes  worst,  suffer. 

Secondly,  we  have  to  go  forth  incessantly  pour- 
ing oil  upon  the  troubled  waters.  Not  stirring 
up  strife,  not  suggesting  suspicion,  but  allaying 
discord,  and  putting  loving  and  charitable  con- 
structions upon  things  which  irritate  and  annoy. 
Very  often  the  peacemaker,  by  a suggestion  he 
makes,  by  the  new  light  he  casts  upon  a word  or 


SWORDS  INTO  PRUNING-HOOKS  113 


action,  will  allay  the  irritable  feeling  which  was 
leading  to  a breach  of  peace.  We  may  often 
mediate  between  two  parties  at  strife,  when  our 
heart  is  perfectly  pure  and  our  eye  single  and  our 
judgment  well  balanced. 

Thirdly,  we  must  endeavor  to  spread  counsels 
of  peace.  Judged  by  human  standards  of  com- 
putation, the  progress  of  peace  among  men  is  ter- 
ribly slow. 

It  is  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years  now 
since  the  angels  sang  their  carol,  and  yet  peace 
seems  still  to  have  fled  the  world.  See  the  nations 
of  Europe  armed  to  their  teeth.  Take  the  daily 
paper  any  morning,  and  glance  down  the  tele- 
grams. Recall  the  incessant  struggle  in  Parlia- 
ment and  the  Law  Courts,  on  the  Stock  Ex- 
change, in  the  money  markets,  and  in  business. 
Look  into  the  churches  which  profess  the  name 
of  Jesus,  and  consider  the  discord  and  jealousy 
everywhere.  There  is  plenty  of  work  for  the 
sons  of  peace  to  do  everywhere,  and  often  their 
hearts  fail  and  are  discouraged.  Judged  by  our 
standards  the  dawn  is  so  long  in  breaking. 
Men’s  swords  flash  so  defiantly  and  suddenly  in 

the  air,  while  counsels  of  peace  are  slow  as  the 
8 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


114 

flower  of  the  cactus-plant.  But  the  morning  will 
break.  Meanwhile,  every  new  convert  to  the 
great  cause  of  international  arbitration,  every 
quarrel  that  is  composed,  every  passion  that  is 
calmed,  every  sword  which  is  transformed  to  a 
pruning-hook,  is  another  step  in  the  great  cause 
which  we  espoused,  when  we  first  ranged  our- 
selves on  the  side  of  Christ. 

Fourthly,  we  must  urge  men  to  be  reconciled 
to  God.  It  is  only  when  the  heart  is  right  with 
God  that  it  is  right  universally.  To  be  wrong 
with  Him,  is  to  be  at  war  with  all  beside.  The 
ill  works  out.  Diseased  blood  means  boils,  and 
blains,  and  sores.  The  unrestful  heart  is  the 
source  of  disturbance  everywhere.  Our  one  mes- 
sage to  man  is : God  is  at  peace  with  you,  be  at 
peace  with  Him.  He  is  reconciled,  be  ye  recon- 
ciled. Sonship  will  involve  brotherhood. 

No  such  effort  is  ever  lost,  no  such  word  ever 
falls  to  the  ground,  no  endeavor  to  make  peace 
leaves  the  peacemaker  poorer.  You  either  have 
the  satisfaction  of  seeing  your  work  accom- 
plished, or  the  peace  of  God  comes  back  like  the 
dove  to  Noah’s  ark — ''  your  peace  shall  return 
to  you.” 


SWORDS  INTO  PRUNING-HOOKS  115 
III.  Our  Reward. 

''  You  shall  be  called  sons  of  God.'’  The  em- 
phasis is  on  the  word  called.  We  are  sons  to 
start  with — we  could  not  enter  into  the  Father's 
plans  if  we  were  not ; but  we  shall  be  called  sons 
of  God.  As  it  is  said  of  Christ,  that  He  was 
proved  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power  by  His 
resurrection — He  had  been  the  Son  of  God  be- 
fore, but  He  was  declared  to  be  so  on  that  day. 
So,  as  we  go  about  amongst  men,  carrying  peace 
in  our  hearts  and  shedding  it  abroad,  they  will 
say,  “ That  man  is  a child  of  God."  Men  do  not 
believe  in  one  man's  talk,  or  in  the  other  man's 
profession,  but  they  do  believe  in  a quiet  holy  en- 
deavor to  make  and  keep  peace.  It  is  easy  to 
recognize  this  Godlike  virtue  of  peace,  because 
the  world  has  so  little  of  it.  It  shines  like  a star 
amid  a stormy  sky  full  of  cloud-wrack.  Christ, 
speaking  of  His  peace,  said,  ''  Not  as  the  world 
giveth,  give  I unto  you." 

There  is  no  peace  outside  Christ,  and  directly 
peace  really  soaks  into  the  Christian  man's  heart, 
and  flashes  through  his  life,  and  shines  through 
his  every  movement,  it  is  the  most  convincing 
proof  that  Christian  people  have  got  something 


ii6 


‘‘BLESSED  ARE  YE 


the  world  cannot  bestow  or  even  imitate.  They 
are  called  sons  of  God. 

There  is  a time  coming,  and  it  cannot  be  far 
away,  when  all  God’s  sons  and  daughters  will  be 
gathered  to  the  Father’s  home  and  tread  the 
courts  of  His  palace.  Let  us  try  to  imagine  that 
the  present  “ little  while  ” has  vanished,  and  our 
Lord  has  come,  with  all  His  saints,  to  His  bridal 
feast.  See  the  regiments  of  His  followers,  as 
they  pass — First  the  poor  in  spirit,  followed  by 
the  bands  of  the  meek,  of  them  that  mourn,  of 
those  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness. 
Here  are  the  merciful,  and  here  the  pure  in  heart, 
and  here  the  peacemakers.  And  as  this  last  regi- 
ment passes  by,  mark  how  the  bright  throngs  of 
spectators  cry,  These  are  the  sons  of  God,  they 
are  likest  God,  they  show  His  name  written  in 
their  foreheads.” 

There  is  nothing  apparently  in  all  the  universe 
so  Godlike  as  this  endeavor  to  make  peace,  not 
by  glozing  over  the  surface,  but  by  dealing  with 
those  causes  which  underlie  the  quarrel  and  strife 
of  the  world. 

O (3ob  Of  peace,  grant  me  peace  unepeak:® 
able,  tbat  11  mai2  abounO  in  peace,  tbrougb  tbe 
power  of  tbe  Iboli^  <3bo0t 


IX 

MARTYRS  AND  PROPHETS 

Blessed  are  they  which  are  persecuted  for  righteous- 
ness' sake:  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,"  etc, — Matt.  v.  10-12. 

^^HIS  beatitude  completes  the  octave,  but 
there  is  no  special  reason  why  our  Lord 
should  not  have  finished  with  the  seventh,  because 
the  eighth  is  altogether  so  different  to  the  fore- 
going. They  rather  deal  with  character,  this 
with  condition;  they  with  the  internal  quality  of 
the  Christian  soul,  this  with  its  external  relation. 
So  far  as  we  understand  the  first  seven,  they 
might  be  developed  in  the  spirit,  apart  from  all 

the  world  beside,  immured  in  some  secluded  grot- 
117 


ii8 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


to  apart  from  the  world;  but  this  indicates  that 
our  Lord’s  conception  for  His  Church  was  that  it 
would  be  constantly  in  the  midst  of  the  world ; 
not  of  it,  but  in  it;  and  therefore  in  perpetual 
collision  and  antagonism  with  its  evil. 

He  seems  to  have  been  sketching  His  own 
life.  These  beatitudes  tell  the  story  of  our 
Saviour’s  personal  life,  as,  indeed,  it  is  the  story 
of  His  life  as  developed  step  by  step  in  the  be- 
liever’s heart.  They  are  therefore  objectively 
and  subjectively  historical.  They  are  objectively 
historical,  for  we  know  that  our  Lord  Jesus  was 
poor  in  spirit,  emptied  Himself,  mourned  and 
wept  for  the  sin  of  man;  was  meek;  hungered 
and  thirsted  for  righteousness ; was  merciful  and 
pure  in  heart;  and  that  He  came  to  make  peace. 
All  these  qualities  in  our  Saviour’s  experience 
brought  Him  to  the  Cross — brought  Him  into 
collision  with  the  evil  of  the  world,  and  in  three 
years  to  Calvary.  Thus  the  beatitudes  afford  a 
true  history  of  the  progress  of  our  Saviour’s  life 
from  the  emptying  of  the  incarnation  to  the  lay- 
ing down  of  His  life  for  men. 

They  are  also  true  of  each  one  of  us.  We  be- 
gin by  being  poor  in  spirit,  broken  in  heart,  and 


MARTYRS  AND  PROPHETS  119 


lowly  in  mind.  We  pass  through  phase  after 
phase  of  added  knowledge  of  God  and  of  His 
truth ; and  as  we  do  so  we  approximate  always 
more  and  more  to  the  climax  of  the  Cross,  and 
just  in  proportion  as  we  are  like  Christ  in  the  at- 
tainment of  these  lovely  qualities,  we  become  like 
Him  also  in  our  suffering  and  sorrow  even  to 
death. 

How  clearly  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  predicts 
the  effect  which  these  qualities  will  have  upon 
the  world.  It  is  as  if  He  said,  It  is  impossible 
for  you  to  be  thus  and  thus  without  incurring  a 
very  avalanche  of  hate,  but  in  the  midst  of  it  all, 
you  may  retain  the  blessed  placidity  and  rest 
which  I have  promised.  There  is  no  need  that 
the  benedictions  which  I have  already  uttered 
to  those  who  are  merciful  and  meek  and  pure 
in  heart,  should  forsake  you  when  you  stand 
at  the  stake  or  are  nailed  to  the  Cross,  for  the 
blessed  life  is  altogether  independent  of  outward 
circumstances ; it  may  be  deeply  seated  and  root- 
ed in  the  soul  when  all  without  is  in  turmoil  and 
war.’' 

One  of  the  Scotch  martyrs,  when  they  were 
putting  the  faggots  at  his  feet,  said,  ''  Methinks 


120 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE 


they  are  casting  roses  before  me”  Another  of 
the  martyrs,  when  he  was  about  to ‘die,  said,  I 
was  glad  when  they  said  to  me.  Let  us  go  into 
the  house  of  the  Lord/’  And  it  is  said  of  the 
great  Argyle,  that  when  his  physician  felt  his 
pulse,  as  he  laid  his  head  upon  the  block,  he 
could  detect  no  fluttering,  but  the  quiet  steady 
beat  of  health  and  peace.  Since,  then,  the  quali- 
ties our  Saviour  characterized  in  the  beatitudes 
were  inevitably  driving  Him  and  all  His  fol- 
lowers into  collision  with  the  world,  it  was  very 
delightful  and  beautiful  of  Him  to  say,  “ In  the 
midst  of  all  this  you  may  be  blessed;  yea,  you 
may  rejoice,  your  heart  may  leap  and  bound  with 
exceeding  joy.”  And  the  more  we  think  about 
it,  the  more  sure  it  seems  that  all  those  who  died 
for  the  faith  had  some  special  grace  given  which 
enabled  them  to  be  more  than  conquerors,  and  it 
will  come  still  to  those  who  are  accounted  worthy 
to  suffer  for  Christ  amongst  men. 

Let  us  notice,  first,  why  we  are  persecuted; 
secondly,  the  manner  of  the  persecution ; thirdly, 
the  blessedness  which  is  possible  amidst  it  all. 


MARTYRS  AND  PROPHETS  121 


I.  The  Cause  of  Persecution. 

It  is  twofold.  First  we  are  ''  Persecuted  for 
righteousness'  sake,"  and  then  He  says,  “ And 
shall  persecute  you  for  My  sake."  Evidently 
men  must  feel  that  His  cause  was  righteousness ; 
that  He  was  the  righteous  Servant  of  God,  and 
that  righteousness  was  no  longer  an  abstraction 
or  sentiment,  because  He  had  embodied  it.  This 
is  a great  distinction,  and  makes  it  so  much 
easier  to  suifer  for  Him.  It  is  well  enough  to 
suffer  for  a cause,  the  cause  of  justice,  truth,  and 
righteousness,  but  how  much  better  to  think  of 
suffering  for  Him ! It  is  an  inspiration  to  realize 
that  righteousness  is  Christ,  and  that  whenever 
men  suffer  for  righteousness  they  do  really  suffer 
for  Him  who  is  the  Prince  of  Righteousness  and 
the  King  of  Truth?  Wherever  there  is  right  in 
the  world  for  which  men  suffer,  the  cause  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  somehow  implicated  in  it.  But 
how  wonderful  that  Jesus,  at  the  very  beginning 
of  His  ministry,  a Nazarene  peasant,  standing 
amid  a number  of  peasants  on  the  Mount  of 
Beatitudes,  should  identify  the  cause  of  right- 


122 


‘‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


eousness  with  Himself  in  this  marvellous  com- 
bination. “ For  My  sake,”  He  said. 

Now  why  is  it  that  the  world  hates  and  per- 
secutes us  for  His  sake?  There  are  just  these 
reasons.  First,  that  the  more  there  is  of  Christ 
in  us,  the  more  we  condemn  the  world,  and  there 
is  nothing  the  ungodly  man  so  dislikes  as  to  have 
the  search-light  of  unsullied  purity  flashed  in 
upon  the  workings  of  his  heart  and  life.  Jesus 
Christ  is  to  the  ungodly  what  the  sun  at  noontide 
is  to  the  diseased  eye;  what  the  bounding  joyous- 
ness of  the  child  is  to  the  weakened  nerve.  And 
hence  it  is  in  proportion  as  we  are  living  in  the 
power  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  are  bringing  to  bear 
the  influence  of  our  character  and  life  upon  other 
men  that  they  wince  beneath  the  impinging  ray; 
they  shrink  from  it ; it  causes  them  pain,  and  they 
turn  naturally  in  indignant  hatred  on  those  who 
have  thus  inflicted  upon  them  suffering. 

Secondly,  the  more  there  is  of  Christ  in  us,  the 
more  we  offend  the  pride  of  men  and  women 
around,  who  desire  to  have  the  admiration  which 
we  have,  or  which  true  godliness  has,  but  which 
they  are  not  able  to  win,  through  their  inability  to 
pay  the  price  for  it.  Hence  jealousy  and  envy 


MARTYRS  AND  PROPHETS  123 


immediately  begin  to  work.  Remember  how 
Aristides  was  hated,  because  he  was  always  called 
The  Just.’’  Men  who  were  notoriously  unjust 
envied  him  the  love  of  his  fellow-citizens.  And 
so  there  will  always  be  a great  jealousy  on  the 
part  of  the  ungodly  toward  those  who  love  Christ. 

Thirdly,  the  Christ-spirit  in  any  one  of  us  is 
always  aggressive,  and  compels  us  to  attack  the 
vested  interests  of  wrong-doing.  The  Lord  Jesus 
never  contemplated  that  His  children  should  go 
quietly  through  the  world  exerting  only  a nega- 
tive influence.  He  expected  that  there  would  be 
a constant  positive  effect  proceeding  from  His 
Church,  that,  like  salt,  it  would  sting.  But  when 
the  craft  is  in  danger,  when  the  receipts  fall  off, 
we  naturally  rouse  the  indignation  of  those  who 
suffer  in  consequence.  The  search-light  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  diseased  conscience,  the  constant 
feeling  that  the  Christian  possesses  a character 
which  the  ungodly  cannot  emulate,  and  which 
wins  an  admiration  they  cannot  receive,  together 
with  the  fear  that  worldly  position  and  pos- 
sessions are  threatened  by  the  progress  of  the 
Christ-spirit — all  these  things  tend  to  make  men 
hate  us. 


124 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE 


And  yet  the  source  of  hatred  really  lies  deeper 
than  all  this.  It  seems  as  if  there  is  a malignancy 
of  hatred  in  evil  against  the  good  which  cannot  be 
perfectly  explained  by  any  of  these  reasons,  and 
which  must  be  attributed  to  that  eternal  war  and 
hatred  which  exist  between  Satan  and  all  his 
legions,  and  Jesus  Christ  and  the  armies  of 
heaven.  There  is  a great  war  in  the  universe,  a 
fire  raging  beyond  the  range  of  our  sight,  and 
we  may  be  pretty  sure  the  signs  of  it  will  break 
out  whenever  we  manifest  on  earth  something  of 
the  purity  and  beauty  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
These  are  the  causes  of  persecution. 


II.  The  Forms  which  this  Persecution 

TAKES. 

Our  Lord  characterizes  it  in  three  distinct  ways 
— first,  in  word ; secondly,  in  act ; and  thirdly,  in 
imputation  of  evil.  In  word  men  reproach  us ; in 
act  they  persecute  us ; in  imputation  of  evil  they 
say  all  manner  of  evil  against  us  falsely  for  His 
sake.’'  We  need  hardly  dwell  upon  this.  We 
know  something  of  the  hiss  of  the  serpent.  We 


MARTYRS  AND  PROPHETS  125 

have  all  suffered  more  or  less  from  the  unkind 
word.  We  know  what  it  is  for  stories  to  pass 
round  and  round,  for  we  ourselves  have  been  only 
too  prone  to  take  them  upon  our  lips  and  pass 
them  forward.  The  word  and  the  act,  how  many 
have  suffered,  how  many  are  suffering?  Think 
of  the  eight  hundred  Quakers — to  take  one  of  the 
smallest  religious  sects — who  in  the  reign  of 
Charles  II.  suffered  for  their  religion,  and  the 
one  million  pounds  exacted  from  that  body  in 
payment  of  fines  for  conscience’  sake,  and  of  all 
the  countless  numbers  who  have  suffered  for  the 
cause  of  Christ. 

And  then  as  to  the  imputation  of  evil.  I do 
not  think  any  of  us  should  shrink  from  it.  We  are 
very  anxious  about  our  character,  but  if  we  live 
close  to  Christ,  men  will  impute  to  us  all  manner 
of  evil.  They  will  impugn  our  motives,  misrep- 
resent our  actions,  and  circulate  malicious  stories 
about  us.  The  nearer  we  live  to  Christ  the  more 
certain  it  is  it  will  be  so ; that  if  they  called  Him 
Beelzebub  they  will  call  us  the  same.  My  belief 
is  that  we  should  be  very  careless  about  these 
things,  and  that  the  only  time  when  we  should 
defend  our  character  should  be  when  aspersions 


126 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


on  it  may  injure  the  cause  of  Christ;  that  as  far 
as  we  are  concerned  we  should  be  content  to  lose 
our  character  and  be  counted  the  offscouring  of 
all  things. 

When  these  reports  are  circulating,  and  these 
stories  being  told,  and  these  unkind  words  being 
hurled  from  lip  to  lip,  we  should  immediately 
turn  to  our  Master  and  tell  Him  we  are  content 
to  suffer  with  and  for  Him.  Ask  Him  to  inter- 
cede for  and  to  vindicate  us,  if  it  is  His  will  we 
should  be  vindicated,  and  if  not,  to  give  us  grace 
to  suffer  patiently  and  wait.  We  are  so  eager  to 
stand  well ; we  are  so  sorry  if  the  least  thing  is 
said  against  us ; we  are  so  irritated  if  we  are  mis- 
understood and  misrepresented;  we  are  so  anx- 
ious to  write  the  explanatory  letter  to  the  paper 
or  the  private  individual.  It  is  a profound  mis- 
take. We  should  be  content  to  trust  God  with 
the  aspersion,  to  leave  to  Him  our  vindication, 
and  meanwhile  to  plod  on,  doing  our  work  quiet- 
ly day  by  day,  as  in  His  sight,  only  being  more 
tender  and  thoughtful  and  careful  of  those  who 
have  done  us  wrong.  That  is  the  true  Christian 
spirit. 


MARTYRS  AND  PROPHETS  127 


III.  The  Beatitude. 

Why  is  it  that  we  are  blessed,  and  how  does  the 
blessedness  come?  The  Master  says  that  they 
which  are  persecuted  for  righteousness’  sake  have 
the  kingdom,  and  that  was  the  very  promise  with 
which  He  commenced  this  series  of  Beatitudes, 
''  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.”  It  would  almost  seem, 
therefore,  as  if  we  had  come  back  to  where  we 
started,  but  it  is  not  quite  so.  It  is  quite  true  that 
the  poor  in  spirit  have  the  kingdom,  and  that 
those  who  are  persecuted  have  the  kingdom,  but 
we  must  remember  that  just  as  steps  in  the  spiral 
staircase  always  come  back  upon  their  starting- 
point,  but  upon  a higher  level,  so  we  come  back 
to  the  kingdom,  but  upon  a higher  level  than  we 
were  when  we  started  with  the  poor  in  spirit,  and 
it  may  be  that  this  series  is  constantly  repeating 
itself  in  higher  rounds.  It  may  be  that  we  shall 
begin  to-day,  by  poverty  of  spirit,  to  climb  up  the 
spiral  staircase  toward  this  eighth  beatitude,  and 
then  starting  again  from  this  eighth  beatitude  we 
shall  pass,  so  to  speak,  through  a higher  series. 


128 


‘"BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


passing  through  the  same  notes  but  in  another 
key.  We  shall  never  get  away  from  mourning, 
only  we  shall  mourn  for  deeper  reasons.  We  shall 
never  cease  to  be  learning  the  lesson  of  meekness, 
but  it  will  be  a deeper  down  meekness  than  ever 
before,  one  that  dyes  our  very  heart  fibre.  We 
shall  always  be  seeking  purity,  but  we  shall  have 
new  conceptions  of  purity,  and  as  we  know  these 
things  in  a more  perfect  degree  we  shall  be  per- 
secuted more,  and  so  every  time  we  will  come 
back  and  back  and  back  to  where  we  started,  but 
higher  up.  Persecuted  for  righteousness’  sake 
and  yet  possessing  the  kingdom. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  looking  over  the 
wall  of  time;  there  were  patent  to  Him  things 
which  none  but  He  knew  of.  In  the  tenth  verse 
He  speaks  in  the  past  tense,  but  in  the  present 
tense  in  the  eleventh  verse.  ''  Blessed  are  they 
that  have  been  persecuted  for  righteousness’  sake, 
for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,”  as  if  at  that 
moment  He  saw  all  the  spiritual  witnesses  to  the 
truth  of  God  who  had  suffered  from  the  time  of 
Abel,  and  He  says,  ''  I see  them,  and  they  have 
already  entered  upon  the  royalties  of  the  eternal 
world,  and  sit  on  thrones  and  judge;”  and  then 


MARTYRS  AND  PROPHETS  129 


turning  to  His  disciples  He  said,  ''  Blessed  are  ye 
when  men  shall  revile  you : for  your  reward  is 
great  in  heaven/’  In  future,  when  we  are  per- 
secuted, I think  it  will  help  us  if  we  seek  to  look 
into  the  future,  as  Jesus  did,  and  realize  the 
greatness  of  our  reward,  for  every  reward  that 
we  receive  in  heaven  will  carry  with  it  greater 
opportunity  of  blessing  in  the  ages  that  are  yet  to 
be.  That  was  why  the  Lord  spoke  about  thrones. 
The  thrones  on  which  we  are  to  sit  imply  that 
we  shall  be  able  more  widely  to  help  those  need- 
ing help ; to  serve  God  more  efficiently ; to  min- 
ister before  Him,  and  carry  His  blessed  gospel, 
.perhaps  to  regions  of  the  universe  where  it  has 
never  been  heard.  We  shall  indeed  be  blessed 
if  the  persecution  of  this  world  shall  make  us 
more  fit  to  serve  and  minister  in  the  next. 

Notice  how  the  Lord  Jesus  puts  the  martyr 
upon  the  same  footing  as  the  prophet.  He  said. 
So  persecuted  they  the  prophets,”  as  if  the  mar- 
tyr were  a prophet.  It  is  a profound  thought, 
but  a very  true  and  deep  one.  The  prophet  stood 
among  his  fellows  witnessing  to  the  unseen  and 
eternal ; the  martyr  or  the  sufferer  does  the  same. 
So  that  the  fagots  on  which  the  martyrs  of  Christ 
9 


130 


‘‘BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


have  been  burnt  have  lighted  up  the  souls  of  men 
almost  as  much  as  the  words  of  prophets  have 
done,  and  have  cast  a glow  upon  the  centuries. 
Prophets  witness  to  the  unseen  and  eternal  by 
their  words,  sufferers  do  it  by  their  agonies.  If 
we,  day  by  day,  are  willing  to  suffer  for  Christ  in 
the  workshop  or  in  the  home,  we  are  drawing 
aside  the  veil  of  the  unseen  and  eternal,  through 
our  fiery  trials  people  are  catching  a glimpse  of 
the  faith  and  heroism  and  strength  of  Christian- 
ity, and  we  are  witnessing  to  the  reality  of  things 
unseen  by  ordinary  vision,  but  which  animate  us 
to  endure. 


XLo  XLbcCf  GoD,  1f  fleet  to  blDe  from  tbe  tc^ 
buke  anO  bate  of  mam  wbo  Dall^  purauee,  op*- 
presses,  anO  wrests  m^  worbs;  bibe  me  in  tbe 
secret  of  tTb^  pavtUon,  f entreat  tTbee,  from  tbe 
strife  of  tongues* 


X 

THROUGH  THE  GATES 

Blessed  are  they  that  wash  their  robes,  that  they  may 
have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter  in 
through  the  gates  into  the  city” — Rev. 
xxii.  14. — R.  V. 

^J^HIS  has  been  truly  called  the  last  beatitude 
of  the  ascended  Christ.  It  is  characteris- 
tic of  our  dear  Lord  that,  as  He  had  shown  us 
the  way  of  Blessedness  from  the  Mount  on  which 
He  taught  His  disciples,  so  He  should  complete 
the  cycle  by  this  last  crowning  and  significant 
benediction,  which  embraces  certain  conceptions 
that  could  not  have  been  presented,  because  they 
would  not  have  been  understood,  until  the  Cross 
had  been  borne,  and  the  Blood  shed. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  the  very  great  altera- 
tion which  the  R.V.  makes  in  the  text,  therein  fol- 

131 


132 


‘^BLESSED  ARE  YE 


lowing  the  most  approved  ancient  MSS.  For- 
merly the  words  read  thus  : Blessed  are  they  that 
do  His  commandments ; and  though  it  was  clear 
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  do  so,  apart  from 
His  grace  who  bought  us  by  His  blood,  and  now 
waits  to  succor  us  by  His  Spirit — yet  the  stress 
of  the  verse  was  evidently  on  that  obedience  to 
commandment  which  savored  strongly  of  the  old 
covenant.  To  make  entrance  into  the  City  of 
God  depend  primarily  on  obedience,  was  not 
perhaps  what  we  might  have  expected,  after  all 
that  is  said  in  the  Epistles  about  our  absolute  in- 
debtedness for  all  to  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
God’s  grace.  Of  course  such  obedience  is  due 
to  the  operation  of  God’s  grace;  of  course,  also, 
the  work  of  God  in  the  soul  can  only  be  attested 
and  vindicated  by  its  effect  on  our  outward  life; 
but  we  must  feel  that  there  is  greater  propriety  in 
this  final  stress  being  laid  on  the  redemption 
which  was  purchased  for  us  by  the  Blood  of  the 
Cross.  There  seems  a fitness  in  this  emphatic 
reference  to  what  Christ  has  done  for  us  on  the 
Cross,  as  distinguished  from  what  we  are  called 
upon  to  do  for  Him. 


THROUGH  THE  GATES 


133 


I.  The  Homogeneousness  of  our  Saviour's 
Life. 

The  angels  that  stood  beside  the  little  group 
which  gathered  on  the  Ascension  Mount,  said 
emphatically:  This  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken 

up  from  you  into  Heaven,  shall  so  come,  in  like 
manner.  Evidently  they  had  no  thought  that  the 
passage  of  the  centuries,  less  or  more,  would  alter 
Him  in  one  trait  of  His  character,  or  in  one  as- 
pect of  holy  helpfulness  to  the  sons  of  men. 
However  long  the  interval  between  His  departure 
and  return,  however  important  the  events  that 
might  transpire  in  the  meanwhile,  however  lofty 
the  dignity  to  which  He  might  be  exalted.  He 
would  always  be  the  same  Jesus — the  same  yes- 
terday, to-day,  and  forever. 

Some  years  ago  I was  privileged  to  make  the 
friendship  of  a distinguished  Indian  missionary 
who,  out  of  his  intense  devotion  to  the  country 
which  he  had  adopted  for  his  Master's  sake,  wore 
the  native  dress,  ate  the  native  food,  and  even  sat 
in  the  native  fashion.  On  his  return  to  England 
on  furlough,  he  still  maintained  these  customs; 
and  on  my  remonstrating  with  him,  and  suggest- 


134 


BLESSED  ARE  YE 


ing  that  what  might  be  suitable  for  India  was  un- 
necessary in  England,  he  replied : If  I were  to 

alter  my  style  of  living  on  my  return  to  England, 
the  natives  might  suppose  that  I had  only  put  on 
the  appearance  of  likeness  to  themselves,  whereas 
I wish  them  to  realize  that  for  the  love  of  Christ  I 
have  actually  identified  myself  with  their  inter- 
ests, and  have  become  an  Indian/' 

This  will  assist  us  to  realize  how  close  is 
Christ’s  identification  with  us.  His  Incarnation 
is  not  a semblance  merely,  like  the  robes  of  light 
in  which  He  girds  Himself.  He  has  become  one 
with  us  in  a very  real  and  literal  fashion,  and  now 
that  He  has  passed  from  our  view  He  is  not  less 
the  Son  of  man  because  He  is  the  acknowledged 
Son  of  the  Highest;  and  He  pursues  the  same 
course  of  thought,  action,  and  ministry,  as  when 
he  sojourned  on  our  earth,  sat  on  the  mountain, 
walked  beside  the  lake,  or  floated  across  its  heav- 
ing bosom. 

What  an  illustration  of  this  fact  is  presented 
here!  He  was  sent  to  bless  (Acts  iii.  26). 
When  He  opened  His  mouth  and  taught.  He  said. 
Blessed,  blessed,  blessed  (Matt.  v.  3,  etc.).  His 
hands  dropped  with  the  spices  of  blessing  when 


THROUGH  THE  GATES 


135 


He  placed  them  on  the  latch  of  men’s  hearts. 
Never  was  He  happier  than  when  He  wove  some 
benediction  into  His  ordinary  talk  (Luke  vii.  23). 
He  blessed  the  food  men  eat,  and  transformed  a 
common  meal  into  a sacrament.  He  was  in  the 
act  of  blessing  with  outspread  hands,  when  He 
was  severed  from  those  who  loved  Him,  and 
borne  upward  to  heaven  (Luke  xxiv.  50,  51). 
The  last  view  men  caught  of  our  Saviour’s  per- 
son, was  in  the  act  of  blessing,  with  outstretched 
hands,  as  when  the  priest  came  out  of  the  temple 
and  blessed  the  waiting  congregation.  It  is  in 
harmony,  therefore,  with  all  we  know  of  Jesus,  to 
find  Him  uttering  such  a benediction  as  this ; and 
it  is  also  in  conformity  with  what  He  tells  us  will 
be  His  greeting  to  those  who  have  faithfully 
obeyed  and  imitated  Him : ''  Come,  ye  blessed  of 
My  Father.” 

Wherefore  let  us  doubt  not,  but  steadfastly 
believe,  that  this  same  Jesus  is  the  same  loving 
Saviour  who,  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  so  lovingly 
blessed  all  who  came  to  Him,  and  who,  from  His 
throne  in  the  glory,  still  stoops  over  our  lives, 
with  His  hands  full,  pressed  down  and  running 
over  with  the  blessings  which  He  desires  to  pour 


136 


“BLESSED  ARE  YE” 


into  our  lives,  making  us  most  blessed  forever, 
and  filling  us  with  joy  by  His  countenance. 


il.  The  Force  of  this  Metaphor. 


^‘Blessed  are  they  that  zvash  their  robes” — 
This  book  is  dominated  by  Hebrew  methods  of 
thought,  and  in  the  robe  we  must  detect  an  allu- 
sion to  character,  which  is  to  the  soul  what  our 
clothes  are  to  the  body.  Character  is  the  robe  in 
which  the  inner  man  arrays  himself.  Indeed,  the 
word  ''  habit  ’’  (and  character  is  just  the  collec- 
tion of  our  habits)  is  used  alike  of  the  material 
dress,  and  of  the  inner  and  moral  life.  When 
Joshua  is  described  as  standing  before  the  Angel, 
clothed  in  filthy  garments,  and  when  the  prodigal 
returns  to  his  father  in  rags,  we  can  but  under- 
stand that  their  character  is  reflected  in  thp  con- 
dition of  their  dress : and  that  each  is  far  re- 
moved from  the  purity  of  heart  and  behavior 
without  which  none  can  see  the  Lord. 

By  nature  the  robe  of  our  souls  is  splashed  and 
foul.  ''  All  our  righteousness,’^  the  prophet  says. 


THROUGH  THE  GATES 


137 


are  as  filthy  rags/’  And  if  our  righteous- 
nesses are  such,  what  must  not  our  wickednesses 
be ! Not  that  all  have  gone  to  the  same  excess  of 
riot,  nor  have  dyed  their  robes  to  an  equal  degree 
of  blackness;  but  that  there  is  only  One  of  the 
sons  of  Adam  that  has  escaped  some  spot  or  stain 
or  wrinkle.  The  Lamb  was  without  blemish, 
and  without  spot : all  else  need  to  wash  their  robes 
of  some  pollution  that  has  left  its  finger-mark 
upon  them.  The  meek  were  not  always  meek; 
the  pure  not  always  chaste ; the  poor  in  spirit  not 
always  humble;  and  if  it  were  not  for  the  foun- 
tain opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness,  the  cleanli- 
ness of  God’s  home  were  forever  an  inaccessible 
ideal. 

But,  as  this  book  so  constantly  tells  us,  there 
is  a glorious  possibility  of  becoming  cleansed. 

These,”  says  the  Seer,  have  washed  their 
robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  Blood  of  the 
Lamb.”  And  if  they  succeeded  in  this,  we  may, 
so  long  as  ''  the  Blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God’s  Son, 
cleanseth  from  all  sin.” 

I.  Be  willing  that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  have 
entire  control  of  the  deepest  springs  of  thought 
and  motive,  so  that  never  again  you  may  harbor 


138 


BLESSED  ARE  YE 


the  least  thing  that  may  grieve  Him  who  bought 
you  by  His  blood  to  be  wholly  His.  Dwell  much 
on  His  infinite  and  ineffable  claims;  and  beware 
lest  you  count  the  blood  by  which  you  have  been 
redeemed  an  unholy  thing. 

2.  Spend  much  time  in  meditation  upon  that 
supreme  act  of  the  Divine  Substitute,  in  virtue  of 
which  He  died  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  that 
our  old  man  should  be  annulled  and  brought  to 
nought,  that  we  should  no  longer  serve  sin.  And 
let  the  cross  put  a finality  to  your  subjection  be- 
neath the  reign  of  evil  habit  and  desire.  In 
that  He  died,  He  died  unto  sin  once  . . . like- 
wise reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed 
unto  sin.’’ 

3.  Ponder  much  the  tenderness  of  Him  who 
died  on  the  Cross,  and  is  now  exalted  to  be  a 
Prince  and  a Saviour ; His  great  horror  of  sin ; its 
cost  to  Him,  and  His  ability  to  deliver  the  soul 
that  trusts  in  Him  from  the  tyrant  evils  that  have 
too  long  devastated  it.  Thus  a great  hatred  of 
sin  will  become  your  second  nature,  and  that 
blessed  penitence  and  compunction  will  be  yours, 
which  shall  dissolve  you  in  floods  of  penitential 
grief. 


THROUGH  THE  GATES 


139 


4.  Remember,  too,  what  Dr.  Chalmers  called 
the  expulsive  power  of  a new  affection,  and  ask 
that  the  love  of  Jesus,  as  evidenced  in  His  cross, 
may  so  constrain  you  that  you  may  no  longer  live 
to  yourself,  but  to  Him  Vv^ho  died  and  rose  again. 

5.  Above  all  plead  that  promise  of  His,  which 

so  well  embraces  our  deepest  desires,  and  answers 
them : Then  will  I sprinkle  clean  water  upon 

you,  and  ye  shall  be  clean : from  all  your  filthi- 
ness, and  from  all  your  idols,  will  I cleanse  you ; 
I will  put  My  Spirit  within  you,  and  cause  you  to 
walk  in  My  ways.’’  Let  us  claim  that  God 
would  fulfil  in  us  whatever  He  may  mean  by 
those  great  words.  Oh,  to  live  under  the  shelter 
of  the  Cross,  beneath  the  flow  of  the  cleansing 
blood,  in  fellowship  with  Him  who  came  by 
water  and  blood — not  by  water  only,  but  by  water 
and  blood. 

The  Greek  word  might  bear  the  force : Blessed 
are  they  that  are  washing  their  robes.  That  we 
have  been  washed  once  is  not  enough;  we  must 
go  again  and  again  to  the  Fountain  opened  for 
sin  and  uncleanness.  Whenever  we  are  conscious 
of  the  least  defilement,  and  before  it  can  breed 
and  spread ; whenever  conscience  accuses  us ; 


140 


^‘BLESSED  ARE  YE 


whenever  we  have  lost  our  place  and  feel  out  of 
fellowship  with  God — we  must  get  back  again 
to  the  Laver,  just  at  the  entrance  of  the  Holy 
Place. 

Oh  souls  of  men,  defiled  and  unfit  for  God's 
pure  eye,  will  ye  not  seek  the  pardon  and  salva- 
tion which  emanate  from  the  Cross,  and  are  to  be 
received  by  faith,  that  ye  too  may  have  the  right 
to  the  tree  of  life,  and  enter  in  through  the  gates 
into  the  city? 


III.  The  Results  that  will  Accrue. 


Right  to  the  tree  of  life/' — On  the  last  page 
of  the  Bible,  we  meet  with  the  tree  of  life,  from 
which  in  the  first  pages  we  are  told  that  man  was 
warned  away.  But  here  the  restrictions  are  re- 
moved. The  Cherubim  with  flaming  sword  are 
withdrawn.  God  Himself  gives  us  a right  to 
come,  and  invites  to  eat  abundantly  of  its  precious 
fruit. 

Why  is  this?  Why  may  we  take  that  from 
which  our  first  parents  were  debarred  ? The  an- 


THROUGH  THE  GATES  141 

swer  is  not  far  to  seek.  We  have  been  redeemed 
by  the  precious  blood  from  the  consequences  of 
our  transgression.  The  proud  spirit  of  indepen- 
dence and  isolation  from  God  has  been  replaced 
by  a tender,  humble,  renewed  spirit.  Life  will 
not  now  be  spent  in  the  energy  of  the  self-prin- 
ciple, but  in  living  dependence  on  the  true  Vine ; 
therefore  the  Life,  which  is  life  indeed,  is  the  glad 
requisite  and  possession  of  the  cleansed  soul.  It 
has  become  one  of  those  sheep  that  hear  the  Shep- 
herd’s voice,  and  of  whom  He  said : I give  unto 
them  eternal  life ; I am  come  that  they  might  have 
life  more  abundantly. 

Right  to  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the 
city, — Excluded  from  the  garden  at  the  begin- 
ning, man  is  welcomed  to  the  city  which  hath 
foundations,  when  the  mystery  of  redemption,  of 
sin  and  sorrow,  is  complete.  The  garden  stands 
for  solitude,  comparative  sluggishness,  and  eva- 
nescence; the  city  for  society,  activity,  and  per- 
manence. Who  will  not  be  glad  to  reach  that 
city,  and  enter  its  gates!  Like  those  of  Peter’s 
prison,  they  will  open  to  us  of  their  own  accord ! 
And  best  of  all,  we  shall  have  no  perturbation  or 
anxiety  lest  our  presence  there  should  be  chal- 


142 


BLESSED  ARE  YE’’ 


lenged.  Pointing  to  the  Blood  which  has 
cleansed  us,  we  may  insist  on  our  right  to  be 
there,  through  the  Blood  of  the  Cross  which  has 
blotted  out  the  handwriting  that  was  against  us, 
and  opened  to  us  a fellowship,  which  death  can- 
not annul,  with  the  great  multitude  of  the  saints. 


© 1T  bumble  asb,  tbat  wben  XLbon  calleet 
me  from  tbte  worlb  of  ein  anb  sorrow,  fTbou 
woulbst  ^rant  me  an  abunbant  entrance  to  tlbg 
Mngbom  anb  gloria,  through  tbe  :fl5loob  of  Jesus 
Christ,  fTbg  Som 


u 


GOULD  LIBRARY 
EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEOK 

NEASE  LIBRARY  EASTERN  NAZARENE  COLLEGE 

BT382  .M4  GOULD 


3 2999  00042  4734 


