an Varn saint sedis 
oo. “shah ML 


tae agile Pabst inl ea | 


vba opel 
inert sida) 41} #12 Pe; 
‘ gad 


Rasa 
ehh 4 SR 
M dairies ji 


me Ge Md 4s ght 49%, a 
i 


hn Say 
x) Pare ve 


Et | ON 
+ ie, ft ha be 


bald 
OO me seit ig 
sae tial Meat esiat(? 
Mc maa ‘6 ailitex 
Ch laine, bate ta 
fh Ht bd, i) ee 


Tht 
bein res 


pq aes 
Grin Liartic? a 
a Say x 


aie ty 
as fal nah 
kt if NYE HE | 


aa Avie ended 
et Cart 4 
obs 


ate nin Wo 


Tie FSH Eby 


Mohn fi 


cis 
1a AAA et 
re bit Lye 
ters c te Laie d. 
sin ADs at hed 
ied iets ti 


ho oe ' Shick: 


Tite atte eet} eae Poe ole 


Mate a habs Go Re pute” 


‘ 
“4 (‘ 

ys 
he 


te ie 
M ne A yenpes Asst? mati 
: #5 1) they p> ” 
(anh C9 pee ger a as 


RS) 40 joeseden 
og ihe i ie ‘ee £0 
ay ie Halieaesian Uns es 
diet 
Ps 4 Migs 
aa Lee 


ae 


oi) ie poate ce 
hits Ab a 


aT 


eal an oti aes 
} is 


Hain? 
iY Me a poe 


ik 
5 


tiie at Lae 
bret Pal a 


af qa bi i} 
ares 


gay 
ote. 
y pe % 

iid Kan 


nis 
shite he 


eR ah 


ith Pot {44 ibe 


Wy ty: oe a 


u 
3 


Es 


iy yas 
ruse, oe 


if He fora Do 
i caret ae 
ir 


3 = i 
ish 
Wert) 
pe i ae 
fai Py ee 


Sei jbs 

t a 

ae ae ifs 
A nal 


nh iia 
f Gia ipa 


EMR We eit 
ted esi ohst 
‘ si aa 


ahaa 
sf pate 
aovanls ae 


+ i CBRN 
itt Wee) Vea 


Hass athe paid itt 
‘ait 
fi anh 


ole ee 
Pah 4: Se ih 
11a Fo ds a oft sahagei 
Sar Ch had iigd 


: td 
waa tad 
litt biked 


a it at 


4 hela He Mae) 


ant 


ats i 


ip i 
1 ies at ap 
Ai ied ti ty 
‘Se Ny welsh th 
Teeth 


hee its 


ia yy tll ‘Ni cee ite 


tT he eae 
stay baer 


t ; 
ray) " ; ‘ 
at ‘e Se a 
ited dag sat eke Yi Patent ia i 


i. 


sf 
ree ies 





Mit 
Sarr 


aye 
ae he Na) a 


i ae ans 


BR 9220" SB ie le Opie 
Taylor, Howard, 
Borden of Yale '09 








WILLIAM WHITING BORDEN. 


Frontispiece. 





Borden of Yale ’og 


AAA CF PRine> ih bE 


“The Life abet Counts 7" 
dub 2-198 





By 
Mrs. Howard Taylor 


Author of 
“ Pastor Hsi”, ‘‘ Hudson Taylor”’, 
“The Call of China’s Great North-West’, etc 


With Portraits, Illustrations and Maps 


THE CHINA INLAND MISSION, LONDON 
PHILADELPHIA, TORONTO, MELBOURNE, AND 
SHANGHAI 

AGENTS: THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY 
4 BOUVERIE STREET, LONDON, E.C.4. . . 1926 


The life 
that I now live in the flesh 
I live 
by the faith of the Son of God 
Who loved me 


and gave Himself for me. 
GAL. ii. 20. 


Printed in Great Britain dy R. & R. Ciank, Limitep, Edinburgh. 


To 
THE MOTHER 
WHO LOVED AND GAVE 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Princeton Theological Seminary Library 


https://archive.org/details/bordenofyaleO9thoOtay| 


On the far reef the breakers 
Recoil in shattered foam, 
Yet still the sea behind them 
Urges its forces home ; 
Its chant of triumph surges 
Through all the thunderous din— 
The wave may break in failure, 
But the tide is sure to win. 


O mighty sea, thy message 

In changing spray is cast : 
Within God’s plans of progress 

It matters not at last 
How wide the shores of evil, 

How strong the reefs of sin— 
The wave may be defeated, 

But the tide is sure to win. 

Selected. 


vii 





Ve Sap sh RC Ra ‘Ssicieatt hess mn re 
seamen rs an 20% ce cat mma oe 

Per se aed & alah ane. aay ago § 
PAY ¥! h iv Vie i ry Bae hp ia featre ja ert ‘an oc a 














‘+ 














iY mS) : Vara ri re ee mm ey bvai Mi ati a ae x is 
‘Ng tah a aa ipo WAT SER gut TRY cle 
SG RO eae ah Raed: ae a. 
via: ‘ i 2) ee Svan At PBR AL OR bh be 

Ab or oye ak, ve \ 1 oe , 


wet 


er! | kg ar 





Ee a ae | 

secon ka adie e hae . eral i as 
0h ats hitiel coins: 
ML Maier stats rae ki nia ah Dale 


e S aa 












5 z - a . = ~ a ~~ 
P i <5 are Or tas = at a PS ee ee a a 
ee Sl a So oe Oa a Sing oe eg oe f —— 
— - = en 


reves 





sas pf 


INTRODUCTION 


WHEN the death of William Whiting Borden was 
cabled from Egypt, it seemed as though a wave of 
sorrow went round the world. There was scarcely 
a newspaper in the United States that did not pub- 
lish some account of a life which had combined 
elements so unusual, and letters from many lands 
attested the influence of its high ideals and un- 
selfish service. It is probably true, as was stated 
in the Princeton Seminary Bulletin, that no young 
man of his age had ever ‘given more to the service 
of God and humanity; for Borden not only gave 
his wealth, but himself, in a way so joyous and 
natural that it was manifestly a privilege rather 
than a sacrifice. 

From Chicago, the city of his birth, came the 
following testimony : 

‘** A church friend of mine, working in the office 
of the Western Union Telegraph Company, was 
much tried by the scoffings of an unbeliever con- 
cerning everything to do with religion. Whatever 
might be said on the other side was met with argu- 
ment and denial. My friend, though an intelligent 
man and an earnest Christian, has little time for 


general reading and did not know of your son until 
1X 


x BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


an account of his consecrated life appeared in the 
daily paper. Upon reading it he at once felt that 
it might mean something to this unbeliever, so he 
laid the paper on his desk and awaited results. The 
scoffer read the article through, then coming to my 
friend said : 

*** T cannot understand it! There is no account- 
ing for such a life.’ 

‘* He was completely silenced by the revelation 
of the power of God in the life your son lived. 
This is a small incident, Madam, but my friend 
has been deeply impressed and, with me, rejoices 
to know that Mr. Borden’s biography is to be 
published.” 


A Richmond journal, reaching a hundred thou- 
sand young people in the South, admitted that 
Borden’s theory of converting his many possessions 
of talent, vigorous strength and wealth into eternal 
values might not accord with the popular receipt 
for making the most of life. 

But”, the editorial continued, ‘“‘ even though 
he was cut off in his early prime, before actually 
reaching his distant sphere of labour, it is doubtful 
whether any life of modern times has flung out to 
the world a more inspiring example. His invest- 
ment has borne rich returns already and will con- 
tinue to yield its peculiar fruit. There are thou- 
sands of talented and favoured young men who 
will, in the light of Borden’s conception of invest- 
ment values, come to a new view of Christian service. 
Material possessions and natural endowments will 


INTRODUCTION Xl 


be appraised not by a standard of self-indulgence 
or worldly ambition but by their adaptability for 
building the Kingdom of God. Here was a fearless 
spirit, not fettered by worldly wisdom in the dis- 
position of his powers and possessions, who looked 
out and up, beyond all these, and grasped the really 
great thing of value for which to spend them.” 


“Tt was not the million dollars that came to\Y 
this young American ’’, commented another editor, 
‘‘ which made his life a victory and his death a 
world-wide call to young men and women to learn 
the secret of that victory. It was in things that — 
every man can share that William Borden found 
the way to the life which is Christ and the death 
which is gain. And China and the Moslem world 
shall yet share that gain, as his burning torch is 
used to kindle in other lives the fires of a like 
passion for Jesus Christ.”’ 


ae 











me ee “ 


ead 







w ik 7 
j ‘ie 4 aN P 


“a S a fa’ 
iy nae Jo 
i a 


bE 
- 











La 


- 
em 


= Sp 


+.~+ ae 
oe 
—- 
= 
PS 





SS 


Conn oD 


ll. 
12. 
13. 
14. 


15. 
16. 
Ly, 
18. 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 


PART I.—EARLY YEARS 


. BOYHOOD 


Tue Hitt ScHoou 


. RouND THE WORLD 


RounpD THE WorLD—continued 


. Cominc Home 


PART IJ.—YALE UNIVERSITY 


. FRESHMAN i 
. FRESHMAN—continued . 
. SOPHOMORE 

. Upper CLASSMAN 

10. 


VACATIONS 


PART III].—PRINCETON SEMINARY 


STUDIES AND Home LIFE 
WipER ACTIVITIES 
MISSIONARY OUTLOOK . 
STEWARDSHIP 


PART IV.—AFTERWARDS 


CAIRO i 

Tue FInisHED COURSE 
‘* ROUND FAITHFUL ”’ 
Tur UNFINISHED TASK 


Xili 


106 
124 
133 
156 


173 
187 
206 
226 


237 
257 
266 
282 






| eo aoa 
) + Pi (i ; ? Smelter: 


i , " ; ty a | 
i ‘ | : - | a uy i" i My a ve, 
Ree 048 apse: 5 ha aoe 
Ba ie | | ve 

; :! iain ‘ “ i elt ; ith 

RI mG = | “ i 
d ww Sf 

Be ae Solel sha tan it 


ES ECAR AOE Uf Bee He shine wipe q 


' . , ef 
4 a. is 4 p 4 4 a 7 . “, 


‘ it, J : Fe j hs 4 
hea? i ‘ iw ; 7 i , Lp! > wi 
. i. . lant ‘ 2 f aa 

M ts we. ij 7 
' J rs 
in : r 4 ‘ 

] 2 ' P 4 

» i ; f 
ie 


‘—e a 
peek i 


me eet ( a , a a MEE ot oe 
ets oh, HTS Pan Wi Anite “14 rea 


oe : | OBA. ; ae f : | ; 





ILLUSTRATIONS 


William Whiting Borden : : . Frontispiece 
William’s Birthplace . : j : 5 
William at Five Years old . 7 
Borden Hall, near Canterbury ; NB og8 
The Hill School ; : ; ; eigen! Ee: 
William in 1904 ; : ‘ id eG 
Outline Map of India . oh iby ou 
The Golden Temple at Aine : : ruGte 
The Dak Bungalow near Madura. ; Sh api ite: 
Borden and his Guide on the Alps . : He ty i 
Yale Campus from Harkness Tower. ‘ ! teas 
Yale—Branford Court Memorial Quadrangle : iy ee 
Borden in his Freshman Year : ' ‘ 1 ABS 
Map of the Moslem World : : ‘ er LOs 
Conference Group at Lakeville ; : : i Loe 
Class Deacons of Borden’s Year , : Rete Rey 
Borden as he graduated ‘ : : : . 148 
Borden at entrance to Yale Hope Mission . dhl 
The white-sailed T’satsawassa. : : : Bahr bis 
Picnicking near Shelving Rock : : ; s) PEGS 
Princeton Seminary . f ; ; : . 208 
The Moody Church, Chicago . A : iO 
Map showing Distribution of Moslems in China : . 214 
His Last Resting-place ; ; : . Si 260 
Map of China and Dependencies ; ; . 283 
Tibetans at ‘‘ The Gospel Inn ”’ , ; . 284 


xV 











ah eRtnERTS. 14 
once Ra ; Rahs ue ae Ride <a yeaa 


ha Bhan eiaae Vib ROL Ch PR aN Say ye 
A i] set ed yi) , J % vo ' A \ Lik 


WBA tuk Ae yh YR ro) ; uta 
‘ ve rT eth lpr at UF } ty ee 4 ive, | 
ae i Ly VLRO Wat hae 8 ‘ BH weopnt, sy 


SO Rc ae ede PAS ye, “partion: eae ie 
igh YOR Ce rhe x ye mena > ¥ atts nisi 


Le tel sa? ‘ } [ ea) ‘ Atay D.20 . Ia ‘ “ie J J 
oN ie ra a Saat ae ie oe P Vor aly, Whe QA fe oiler ek EM Ne 
sa AY ue Fab it bey x ij > 3 E 0 Wise! A lity sae ee Oe @ abit AM ive 4 


(AUST SS TREN ea (year boreiaete it tw a a, 
IS TRS SSRN EGR ana eat 1 aber ie aoe 


i Ss 5 ' ) BER i a: “a »: 4 aN) ¥ i yj i’ mee eit We a i ia at she | ot 
UAE AT a Le Pe ea bet ya Ot See 
| Bs i oc baa idhenbogipihl ty 


Pea ee Rags anh 


Br3 





bigske We ih, 


an me bi: 


PART I 
EARLY YEARS 


‘Oh, what a glorious yoke are youth and Grace, Christ and 


a young man!” 
SAMUEL RUTHERFORD. 


“Jt is the God-governed and not the self-governed life which 


counts for most, which is the best worth while.”’ 
Selected. 


CHAPTER I 


BOYHOOD 
Born, November 1, 1887 


** Out of the heart are the issues of life.”,-— Prov. iv. 23. 


THERE must be beginnings. To those who knew 
Borden only in student days it may seem out of 
keeping with such virility and strength to present 
him as a child. Yet childhood comes first and 1s 
full of the germs and seeds of later developments. 
While he was a sophomore at Yale, for example, an 
unexpected discovery connected him in an interest- 
ing way with the curly-headed little fellow of ten 
years previously. 

His elder brother had recently married, and in 
preparing the Chicago home for the occupation of 
the young couple some papers came to light that 
recalled a long-past experience. One Sunday after- 
noon when William was only six, Mrs. Borden had 
gathered the children around her as usual for a 
Scripture lesson. Several cousins of their own ages 
were with them, the eldest being about eleven. 
Apropos of something in the lesson, Mrs. Borden 
suggested that they should each take a slip of paper 
and write down what they would most like to be 
when they grew up. 

This was done in a serious spirit. No one saw 

3 


A BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


what the others had written, and all the slips were 
put away in a sealed envelope and forgotten. 
When found ten years later and returned to those 
who had written them, the ideals of those early 
days proved to have been realized to a remarkable 
degree. One boy had wanted to be a gentleman 
like his father. One of the girls wished to travel 
abroad, another ‘“‘ to help God and the soldiers of 
my country ” :—all through the world-war the 
latter was to render exceptional service. And 
William had written : 


y whol 42 an ontest WWW Wher 


% ee uf, purr tre cr dpprrey 
wrk tenel antl fb pbaner. 

To his last day, by the grace of God, the man could 
have looked into the eyes of the child without shame. 

Borden’s love of a good ‘‘ roughhouse”’ was early 
foreshadowed by his devotion to active and even 
dangerous games. He was “a regular little 
monkey ’’, his mother recalled, “for running round 
and having a good time”. His cousin, John 
Whiting, was his chief ally in escapades of all sorts. 
Together they attended successive schools in 
Chicago, and with another companion spent their 
holidays in congenial ways. It was nothing un- 
usual for the three to start out on Saturday at five 
A.M., ending up at supper time, John Whiting tells 


us, ‘“‘ dead tired out ”’. 


1 William attended the University School and the Latin and Manual 
Training Schools in Chicago, before going to the Hill School, Pottstown, 
Pennsylvania. 


i 7 ua ; ; (P = 
SPR Rye Sara Oo 7 ON eh er 
NECA ATU hcpep sane Manda ea 
ee oy, NRO ae es 
nae 2, ae oak nas! at he nd 
Ly ‘4 : oe) Se Fi ae i ae a Pie Pr. (Pe 8 
Tals 


hy or ot cor . 
mr i re Hn ie i ny ‘ . cae) fe 
tps Tal Leer 
. 4 es eee ae ey | 2 AL 
Ad ol . ahh Ny ays ae | aes “AY a 


. . LOLs ry ha ate 
co ie § ag Le \ ri .& 


a . 


‘Si 


? : ye 
l a % ; : is 
~ ) 
sedis ee 





GW oe 
ro din ee Phe e 


ag 
, aa 


ne tae 








89 BELLEVUE PLACE, CHICAGO. 
William's birthplace and the home of his childhood, 


To face page 5. 


BOYHOOD Bs 


We found that by the use of ropes we could travel along 
the roofs of the houses in Bellevue Place, almost the entire 
length of the block. For a time this afforded us consider- 
able amusement. Another diversion was to go down to 
the river and put in the day knocking around among the 
boats tied to the various docks. We used to go all over 
the boats, climbing the rigging, ete. The noon meal we 
would get wherever we could, generally from the kitchen 
of one of the three houses. 

Late one Saturday afternoon we decided that we wanted 
to play in the gymnasium of the school William and Kelso 
attended. That the building was locked up for the week- 
end made no difference. We found the cover of a coal- 
hole loose ‘and dropped in through that. We fooled around 
the gym until tired, then took a leisurely shower and 
dressed, not realising how late it was. We got out by a 
window which we had to leave unfastened. I was visiting 
William at the time and when we reached home, about 
seven-thirty P.M., we were met by Mr. and Mrs. Borden, 
worried and almost alarmed over our non-appearance. 
When the cause of our tardiness was discovered, we were 
promptly sent to bed with bread and milk for supper. It 
was meant for punishment, but nothing could have suited 
us better. We were tired and hungry, and while it was 
only bread and milk, the supply was unlimited. 


A marked characteristic of Borden in later life 
was his unflinching loyalty to the doing of hard 
things. Fishing, hunting, sailing, all had their - 
attractions for the boy, as may be seen from his 
early letters, but he seems to have loved hard jobs 
best of all. When he and his cousin, for example, 
discovered a wreck after a terrible storm and the 
Lake Shore Drive was flooded and covered with 
débris, it was second nature to turn in at once and 
help. A ship loaded with lumber had gone to 
pieces and the great timbers were lying at all angles 
along the shore. Seeing from the windows the work 


6 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


that had to be done, the little fellows of seven or 
eight were soon out in the storm, gathering up the 
lumber and putting it in orderly piles. A gang of 
Italian labourers appeared before long, but William 
and John Whiting kept on working, and at the end 
of the day lined up with the others and received 
their pay. 

A chief enjoyment when about ten years old 
was to go down on Saturday to their uncle’s foundry, 
some distance from Chicago, and spend their holiday 
working around with the men. Of this they never 
seemed to tire. The house of an uncle in Indiana also 
offered attractions along the line of work, and that of 
all sorts. It was a farm to which as a child William 
had often been sent to escape the severe winds of 
the Chicago spring. Of these visits his aunt wrote: 

He was never idle, always inclined to make work his 
play and to find in work well done ample compensation 
for his efforts. I remember that on his visit in the spring 
of 1898 William wanted to make cider. His uncle told 
him that after years of neglect the cider-press was unfit for 
use and could never be made sufficiently clean again. But 
William cleaned the cider-press. I can see the little fellow 
now, making many trips up the hill for hot water, carrying his 
buckets two atatime. After several hours of scraping and 
scrubbing, the press was spotless and cider-making began. 

On a visit in the spring of 1900, when he was twelve, 
William was up at sunrise and in the barn before the men 
arrived, beginning their day’s work for them. This was 
the time he took such interest in the McKinley saw-mill, 
making strawberry-boxes, going to work and stopping with 
the mill whistle. At the end of his visit Mr. McKinley 
handed him a sum of money, saying he had earned it, but 
William declined payment on the ground that it had been 
a privilege to learn. 

On his last stay with us, May 1912, he was the same 


73 
.) 


ee | 
e#) 



























a ne. 
ee amen ae 


f 
' & 
al 
Wh 


hi =e rea ees “ Ban's 
Eig aime Lee ane Ee yd 
pe i Al: 13 Seal ee: ae +5 st i ae oa 


Ne i= : ” of a - Ls A art’ + A : - _ 
ies e ss ae ant oe , ae: ra > Sit ire A eo i’. ES BS ; a - . by 
os : y 





eo 
é 





e oO 
Teer j ver ee 5 4 OL) 
“ He uy eA ote vie - Tes ws A - Ve. 
Les ae 4 ya RAL RA ae } 
i . ” hit 5 ' nie hf koa ay 7 as x in é me 


7 oe ic : ae eee Nt i a naa om eeu { ves Oh 
> : ribs on A _ ll : ane” teal Mi Jee re i.e \ ; a gan 
ss 7 a, my |i | ie : i }) > x ‘ a nee i a nae i , ) ee 5 r 





ae: = ci ra . ; 
uae aly a7 ’ . $ i $ “ee fk hae i oe f 7 

ye, : a? Ana aie ven ep at ; Ee Ia, | 
| fi} iw Coardir wei taes. oft eae ye 

i SUMRTIE Oe edn emt, ees 


Nokes oie ayy’ os, ea * ¢ * eer eh i Teh ss dae ; arte fos 


ty mn . s Tey ¥ ‘ 
iy Pagal?) AGL ee epees! ae wT, wy; NR oh i igi Dee 
cant ¥) es ate Pig: aie ; fai htel . ey “ay ‘* i 7 ' LO th, ou 
; ns 7 ity ys” A ; + bel a ty wnt 1 » 
wr y f * a 2 ¢ \ 4 Ps, o ‘ ( adv @ yen a" ¥ 1m 
: eae Xe ’ F Nee we tie & he * ‘ 
Be fis ez Wot CMN Ret Phe hoes yn ewe Soya Pe f 


; ' 7 er: 
: ate. i . : : Woe ‘et 
hi | a ae ne fie toe 7 eee, i lian 28 fl ng jou wi: ma 


. an ea OP See Th ; ee? + are 
MPT TF 137. \ 6 y +i Arte .. 
a Y 4 a h fy Ye sf ai eth ry An a too 

Sa age as Gn sony i ae 


rhs . 
eh Co d *Oree./ by ht” a | ali 
— eM! JL ae ae Lif ifs a * sine 7 le hy ae 








mm a 5 
Le? doy eae eee 
J ve PO) 7 | oe 









WILLIAM AT FIVE YEARS OLD. 


~ 


To face page 7. 


BOYHOOD 7 


dear, affectionate, lovable boy as of old. He arrived at 
six A.M. and we had an early breakfast, after which we went 
out on the porch and William saw the teamster, an old 
man of seventy-five who had been in the employ of the 
family for about forty years, driving toward the corn-cut. 
William hailed him joyously, jumped off the porch, ran 
down the hill and was soon beside him on the wagon. 
Gently he put his arm round the old man’s shoulder, and 
when they reached the corn-crib he took the shovel and 
filled the wagon with corn, driving off with him and empty- 
ing the load at its destination. He then went over to the 
McKinley saw-mill, greeting many acquaintances and help- 
ing them in their work as in earlier years. 

I always think of William as I used to see him when a 
boy, coming home after a day’s work in his blue sweater— 
rosy cheeks, eyes full of love and hair covered with shavings 
—calling to me as he started to run up the hill, hoping he 
had not detained supper. Was there ever another boy 
of his means, so humble, with a heart so full of love and 
with such pure thoughts ! 


One of the deepest things in Borden’s life was 
devotion to his mother, and that too was very mani- 
fest in the child. From the time when he used to 
play quietly in her room “ not to disturb her writ- 
ing’, and leaving his toys would steal up behind 
her chair to raise the wavy hair at the back of her 
neck and kiss her without a word, on to the days 
of bereavement, after his father’s death, when he 
made time in the midst of college claims and studies 
to write to her every day, he was more like a lover 
than a son. This attitude comes out in his very 
first letter, written when just five years old : 


Nov. 23, 1892. 


Dear Mama—lI send my love to you. I wish you would 
come to my house. Sorry that you don’t come home. 
Well I am. 


8 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 
And a little later, on her birthday : 


Dear Mama—lI did not have enything to give you. I 
am very sorry that I did not enything for you. So I gave 
you a bunch of flowers and this letter. 

Goodbye, from Witi1amM BorDEN. 


He was quite a correspondent, even in those days, 
and the observation and attention to detail apparent 
in his early letters gave promise of the man whom 
nothing escaped. 

89 BELLEVUE PLACE. 


DEAR GRrANDMAMA—How are you feeling. I think 
the baby is awful cuning. It has a little cold in her head. 
She is 19 in. long, and weighs 6 lbs. One day the butcher 
came in and found the maids all so happy because it was a 
little baby, so he told Mrs. Hatch and Mrs. Hatch told 
Mrs. Stone and Mrs. Stone told Mrs. Shelden. 

Goodby from WILLIAM BORDEN. 


LAKE GENEVA, WIS. 


Dear GRANDMOTHER—Papa bought a new sailboat for 
us. We have sailed down to Golf Club and back twice. 
The first day we fished I caught 11 fish, Papa 11, John 3. 
The baby has been in the bathtub for the first time. Miss 
Duns has gone. Every night the baby comes downstairs, 
and Mama reads John Halafax aloud to us. Papa bought 
a new covered carriage for Mama and the baby. We are 
going ciscoe-fishing to-day.—Yours truly, 

W. BorDEN. 


98 BELLEVUE PLACE, 
January 1898. 


Dear Para—I hope you and your father are feeling 
well and enjoying your visit to New York. . . . Saturday 
Jan. 15th it snowed all day nearly. Friday 14th we had 
thirteen children hear and played all sorts of games. After 
everybody was gone and everybody asleep except Marie, 


BOYHOOD 9 


Mama and myself, we smelt gas and went searching all over 
the house trying to find it. We did not find it but opened 
some windows, by that time it was twelve o’clock. It was 
snowing when I went to bed, and on Saturday as I told 
you before. In the morning we went out by the build-out 
and coasted down those day-hills onto a pond of ice. There 
was skating but it was not good so we didn’t go. About 
ten o’clock we came back and hitched on wagons. One 
time I got laughing so I couldn’t hold onto my rope and 
let go, and then I couldn’t run fast enough to catch up 
with it again. In the afternoon a lot of boys were out 
hitching, and we all hitched our sleds together and made a 
long train that reached from our house to the Maniers 
nearly. I was at the front and it pulled my arms nearly 
off. Kelso was at the end and it switched him all over 
into the curbstone and everywhere. We had supper at 
7 o'clock. . . . Your loving son, 
WitiiaM WuitTinc BorpeEn. 


The baby is just as sweet as can be, hair is all curled. 


BORDEN, INDIANA. 


Derar Mama—We have arrived here safe and sound, 
the train was 20 minutes late. After breakfast John and 
Papa went hunting, I did not go with them, papa shot one 
bird, he was a nice fat quail and that is all they got. 

After lunch John and I went out and shot at a target 
with a rifle and revolver and papa went off hunting but 
did not get anything. He is asleep now and it is just 
20 minutes of 5 and is getting dark. This is written on 
Wednsday.—Your loving son, W. W. Borpben. 


BORDEN, INDIANA. 


Dear Mama—Monday I was down at Mr. McKinley’s 
saw mill, they sawed long boads off and made short ones 
for krates and me and another man stacked them up. In 
the afternoon I went with Jim McKinley up on the knobs 
for hay, the roads were very mudy and we had to let the 
horses rest. When we got back they had the big rip-saw 
going. . . . Monday morning Mr. Burns and I fed the pigs 


10 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


and then began to boil some potatoes for them. We built 
such a big fire that they boiled over and put part of the 
fire out. Tuesday morning Fraulein and Mary went out 
walking and I went down to the saw mill and stayed all 
morning. They have been getting a drag-saw ready, and 
will have it going before we get back in the afternoon. 
We were sawing a big red oak and nearly in the middle we 
found two big bullets. The saw had sawd them in two. 
It took an hour to get through sawing that one big log. 


Hope all are well.—Your loving 
WILLIAM. 


Written Tuesday. 


ELKHORN LODGE, 
Estes Park, COLORADO. 


Dear Grama—lI hope you are feeling well. The 3rd 
day that we were up here Papa, Mary and I went fishing 
over to the Big Thomson which is about half a mile south 
of our house, but we didn’t catch anything. .. . A little 
while after that we went fishing again, and John caught 
10 but the rest of us didn’t catch anything. 

About two weeks ago, this being Tuesday the 18th, 
John, Mary, Ella James and I went out after some of 
James’s horses. We went out about 2 o’clock and we 
hunted the country high and low all over Beaver Flat and 
didn’t get home until 8 o’clock, and Papa was just starting 
out in the buggy after us. 

Now I’m going to tell you where we went and what we 
did. Well first we forded the Fall River and rode way up 
into Horshoe Park, but we didn’t find the horses there, so 
we came back and crossed the river in a place where it 
was pretty deep and then we had to go through a lot of 
bushes which nearly swept us off our saddles. Then we 
crossed the ridge right near Deer Mountain. We found to 
get across into Beaver Flat that we had to go across a rail 
fence, so John took off some of the rails but one and then 
the horses jumped or stepped over the one. Well we went 
on and came to another rail fence and managed it in the 
same way. Then we came to a Barb Wire Fence! Well 
we finally managed to pull up one of the posts and laid it 
down and made the horses go over, all but mine who’s 


BOYHOOD 11 


name was Buckskin and he positively refused to go over, 
and in trying to make him go over he backed off and pulled 
him onto the Barb Wire and tore his pants and cut his 
finger. 

Well, seeing my horse wouldn’t go over, I had to go 
back and get out as best I could. . . . I then rode up into 
Beaver Flat about 3 miles, and was just about half way 
back when I met John, Ella and Mary. We went back 
where I’d been, only we went farther, but could not find 
the horses, so we went home. 

On Saturday the 22nd their was going to be a Base Ball 
game, so we all went in the hayracks. We stopped at the 
Post Office and got some balls, and most everybody bought 
candy and gum and treated everybody to it. We got to 
the field which was up the Thomson a little way. They 
started to make the diamond. It began to rain and every- 
body that could got under the wagon, it stopped after a 
while and they practised. I will give you a copy of the 
score card. . . . We won as you see, and coming back 
yelled, 

** Ripetak, sipetak, siss bum ba! 
Elkhorn, Elkhorn, ra! ra! ra! 
Who are we ? who are we ? 
We are the gang from James’, see! ”’ 


Here I say goodby, your loving grandson, 
Witiram W. BorpDeEn. 


It was a happy, wholesome life, and in their 
father the children had an understanding friend. 
Every night he worked with them over their lessons, 
and they knew that he was no less interested in 
their games and sports. He was a man of few 
words, but the intimacies of home-life revealed the 
strength and nobility of his character. The follow- - 
ing lines give an impression of his influence over his 
children. They were written by William’s elder 
sister, while still at Vassar College. 


12 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Oh Lord, I thank Thee that Thou gavest me 

This strength to cling to all my childhood years, 
This noble man, my father, mine to be— 

Though not as now—mine through eternity. 

See, Lord ! I am almost smiling through these tears, 
For Thou hast made me rich of all mankind 

By giving me to be his daughter-friend ; 

For his was caim nobility of mind 

That, selfless, saw the truth and gave clear-lined 
Full justice unto all things, to the end ! 


A sense of justice born of a pure heart 

That loved a few dear ones, how sacredly ! 
Silent and grave, long hours he spent apart 

In thought, until a word of love would start 

A deep sweet look behind his eyes, and he 
Would sit with us and talk from his great store, 
Of beauty, poetry, and of great men. 

And as the days and years opened the door 

Of his dear heart to me I loved him more, 

As I had more of love to give, and then— 


Then, Lord, you took him from me and I wept. 

It seemed so piteous, for I loved him so, 

Until I fell upon my knees and crept 

A little child to Thee, and wearied slept, 

While quiet drifted down like cooling snow 

Upon my throbbing heart. A voice then said, 

‘“* Dear child, give Me yourself and all your fears, 
He now is living, loving you, not dead ; 

For him, for you, for this, My blood was shed.” 
And I awoke—strange—smiling through my tears. 


Some of his strongest traits Borden inherited 
through his father, who came of old Puritan stock. 
For the love of conquest which had taken the 
Bordens of Bourdonnaye to England with the 
Norman Duke (1066) was followed centuries later 
by the love of freedom which made them exiles for 
conscience’ sake. To exchange the rich pastures 







ty P . ‘ he 

mee oe ey : Le a 
eer r rte ay Aun 4 f 
Vie te eee. 
aL Ae ines : : ry 


P: im is i ai " “ 
= - i] F V 4 
a Pie i | = ¥ ai aa t mur aaa in i <9 
Yi: ae ar baled ANAS oa WA aoe Aa 
ee eo Sy etl aaa 
4 “ED ie; AP & ye / - 
Pe oan Vek gee tak 5h | 
7 LAS i as ; a 
De J ere F or “i 
Ay Aan eee } re rs 
1 o-¢ a —_ — 4 
sl 4 Pi D ‘ , 
m i Awl +7 ) i His ly ia 
ae! 7 ; Co a f ‘ . ‘ / 
iN Jose salt Ageia Ys, 
ait © ity ee ar ro 
t AV ae h ‘ i ; _ : 
bag Ae Cute es VM , 
on vie ok , edie 
Fito Uo aa Sane 
oe a % F ’ Aid A? i " 
yy Da hae Pry" 
m ig as - ei ee Wi: yp. 
? iki © "i oe ALR 
vy) 0) Po ol aaa eae 
4 ao 7 ’ 4 
¢ i , J Peay 40) 
{ a - } a ee i 
hi i Oe as ; A f 
< ass | a PS Ab Res on 2 oy, tt 
1 Pe key! \ Mh 4 aT 
- nd Poh we Cay he Pore" i 
a jae am osha AT i "Pas Gh ese A, he fen ee, ¢. eae 
{ ~" j TA ] 
i iy a Ris ft feat iv ti f ry | 4 d a 4 ai ] ie \ a 
; | eet AF ae bat are ie | oa 
es = * ve ie - 
ee ee ol 
“a , ies ey . - } , mA Bole ‘ 
th oe MENS 
ra) i ied ue f AVIS : 
_ ea | ey Ay}. Ly 
70 Seen ie 
oy ee 
Marca 
Me Oss x ee FAL ® 
fied Gul ed ® , 
oP aL Or tow 
r »i iron ot. ' By i 
1 shah re”: ai 
TR 9 cn 
pone i | ae ei) - 
4 ps 7 Py? i ‘ 
ay ‘J ‘ ee a ry 2 
ivf, ul ’ * 7 
Lins af oi ! ae 
ana) 
; ' o Me Ses : ‘ i» ‘ 
ah me eel, 
“RNs treotae * wad? ee 
: ko 4 A 
| AR i LY on oe ‘2 
ee Wicker 
a : 4 
ts 






bee 
“el 7 
ae 









Da tet 
ay. 7 





ce VES SASS A COA APU SERIO CVUMGESOMS GUY SONU OU) PSA Sy Seid) PELL © ae Sea Oe UN waar 
pey fay} pres oy a[doad 0M Jay{ ‘asnoy plo 9AtqovIq]e Ysour w “{[BFT Usplog 4% pelTRg “plo saved puvsnoyy & st Yorya Jo qivd Syoummyy vB YIM 
‘SUIMOGSUIFTIG IBIU VSVI[LA 9[}FTT [NJIYS!I[op B@ punog ‘AroxsIIp oy} ur dn paYoo, pey om YOY ‘Ueptog JO} papvaH{,, + 0FOIM WBITITM YOR yng V 


“XUNGUALNVO UVAN “TIVH NAGUOd 








BOYHOOD 13 


and woodlands of Kent for the barren shore and 
tangled forests of New England was no easy step, 
but Richard and John Borden, who seem to have 
been brothers, were driven to it by the distress of 
the times. The burning of heretics had ceased in 
their day, but ostracism and persecution were still 
the common lot of “* dissenters ”’. 

And so it came about that the first child born of 
European parents in Rhode Island (1688) was 
Matthew, third son of Richard Borden. Much in- 
teresting information is available concerning the 
family, for at an early period they joined the Society 
of Friends, whose practice it is to keep careful 
records concerning its members. “ Glad should 
every Borden be that his ancestors were Quakers,” 
writes their historian in California, and as one turns 
her illuminating pages,! noting the contribution of 
generation after generation to the development of 
this great country, one cannot but echo the senti- 
ment. 

' The tendency of the family was always to move 
westward, and in the sixth generation a certain 
John Borden settled in Indiana, who was the great- 
grandfather of the William Borden of this record. 

On his mother’s side Borden came of a long line 
of soldiers, magistrates and preachers, reaching back 
to the early annals of English history. The best 
blood of the old country was in their veins, but the 
terrible years of Archbishop Laud’s administration 
(1628-1640) had driven them too from the land 


1 Historical and Genealogical Record of the Borden Family, by Hattie 
Borden Weld, Los Angeles, Cal. 


14 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


they loved. Colonel William Whiting, who brought 
the name to America, belonged to the Suffolk branch 
of the family, and came with his wife Susannah 
from Yarmouth on the East Coast. With about a 
hundred others, they founded the city of Hartford, 
Connecticut, and became members of the first church 
established there, under ‘“‘ the animated and able 
ministry ’ of the Rev. Thomas Hooker.! 

Three generations later, Charles Whiting married 
the beautiful Elizabeth Bradford, a descendant of 
Governor William Bradford of Plymouth Colony 
and of John Alden, who won as his bride “‘ the 
Puritan maiden Priscilla’’.2 The sons of this 
Charles Whiting, himself a soldier, lived in the 
stormy days of the Revolutionary War and bore a 
brave part in its vicissitudes. A tribute is paid to 
one of them, William Bradford Whiting, in the 
family records, where he is spoken of as “ a gentle- 
man and a Christian, an upright, honourable man, 
possessing great dignity of manner and such in- 
tegrity of character that his very presence was a 
rebuke to the wicked”. In middle life he moved 
his home from Connecticut to Canaan, a beautiful 
part of the State of New York, which thus became 


1 The old records show that Colonel William Whiting was ‘‘ one of the 
civil and religious fathers of Connecticut ’’ ; Magistrate of the colony, and 
Treasurer until his death. In his will he left the sum of five pounds toward 
mending the highways betwixt his dwelling and the meeting-house, and no 
less than twenty-five pounds to his “dear and loving Pastor toward the 
publication of his work on the 17th of John, and any else he doth 
intend ”’. 

* Governor Bradford, “the very prop and glory of Plymouth Colony”’, 
and John Alden were thus among Mrs. Borden’s ancestors who came over 
on the Mayflower, and so were Priscilla Mullins and her parents, and a 
certain Thomas Rogers from whom, on the maternal side, Elizabeth 
Bradford was descended. 


BOYHOOD 15 


the residence of Mrs. Borden’s more immediate 
ancestors. 

William Bradford Whiting’s descendants moved 
with the times, and the old homestead at Canaan 
was forsaken for regions further west. Detroit was 
little more than a village when Mrs. Borden’s father 
settled there, John Talman Whiting, long associated 
with shipping interests on the Great Lakes. Mrs. 
Borden (Mary de Garmo) was one of seven children, 
and passed on many of his lovable qualities to her 
son, William Whiting. 


But there was something more important that — 


she passed on to this child, for when William was — 
about seven years old Mrs. Borden entered upon a 
new experience spiritually which was deeply to 
affect his life. A devoted mother before, she now 
became an earnest, rejoicing Christian. To her, 
Christ was real and fellowship with Him satisfying 
in no ordinary degree. Instead of losing every- 
thing when she turned to Him from the gaieties and 
allurements of the world, she found that she had 
gained not only peace with God but a new zest in 
living, a new joy in home and loved ones. New 
friends were brought into the family circle; new 
interests and ideals filled her life. In the Moody 
Church to which she transferred her membership, 
she found opportunities for service and the clear 
Bible teaching she coveted for the children. The 
result was very evident in the life of her younger 
son, who owed the strength and grasp of his spiritual 
convictions largely to that church home. 

It was there he took his first step in open 


16 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


confession of Christ. Seated by his mother one 
Sunday morning, he heard Dr. R. A. Torrey, then 
pastor of the Moody Church, give the invitation 
to the communion service about to be held. 

“Ts it not time that you were thinking about 
this yourself, William ? ” his mother whispered. 

‘‘T have been,”’ was the unexpected reply. 

When the elements were handed from pew to 
pew, to Mrs. Borden’s surprise, William quietly took 
the bread and wine as did those about him.’ Rather 
taken aback at this interpretation of her question, 
Mrs. Borden mentioned the matter to Dr. Torrey, 
who smiled and said : 

‘“‘ Let him come and see me about it to-morrow.” 

Young though he was, his answers to Dr. Torrey’s 
questions made it evident that he was ready for 
the step he had taken, and the interview led to his 
joining the church in the regular way. 

Another important decision was made when Dr. 
Torrey gave an opportunity for all who wished to 
dedicate their lives to the service of God to indicate 
this purpose by rising for prayer. He made his 
meaning very plain, that it, was a step of life-con- 
secration. William quietly rose—a little fellow in 
a blue sailor-suit. He had to stand a long, long 
time while the service went on, but there was no 
wavering, and it was a consecration from which he 
never drew back. 

Dependence upon prayer and love for the Word 
of God were becoming even then the warp and woof 
of his life. ‘* Getting off to school ”’ was a rush for 
him as for other boys. He hated to be late, and with 


BOYHOOD 17 


books strapped on his back and cap and lunch-box 
in hand might be in “a tearing hurry”. But, 
somehow, there was always time for the little word 
of prayer with Mother without which the day 
would not have been right. They would just drop 
on their knees together and pray that William 
might know in his experience the power of the blood 
of Jesus Christ. That was their daily prayer in 
those early years, and later it was that the will of ~ 
God might be done in his life. 

As to his love of the Bible, Mrs. Borden can never 
forget the picture she saw one evening on going to 
his room when the children had returned from a 
delightful party. Instead of finding William un- 
dressing, there he was, just as he had come home, 
in his velvet suit with knee-breeches, pumps and a 
stiff collar, seated on the edge of the bed, eagerly 
and serenely reading his Bible, from which he looked 
up at her with beaming eyes. 

Later, on a journey round the world, his com- \ 
panion remarked that however long the day of 
sight-seeing might be, the boy never failed to close 
it with Bible reading and prayer. All through 
college and seminary it was the same. Strenuous 
as life was for him in their Princeton home—with 
all his work in theology, religious and social claims, 
business responsibilities, and examinations looming 
ever in the background—when his mother went to 
his study the last thing at night, it would be to find 
him deep in the Book he loved, from which he would 
look up with the same light in his eyes. 


CHAPTER II 


THE HILL SCHOOL 
1902-1904. Ait. 14-16 


«What! know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy 
Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your 
own? For ye are bought with a price : therefore glorify God in your 
body, and in your spirit, which are God’s.”—1 Cor. vi. 19, 20. 

Birthday verse given to William by his mother, when he was about 

eight years old, which became the keynote of his life. 
Tux glory of The Hill School when William entered 
‘+ as a lad of fourteen was not its assembly-hall and 
library, its gymnasium or athletic fields. Much of 
the splendid equipment of to-day had not yet come 
into existence. But the school had reached high- 
water mark in the last decade of the life of its great 
head master. What he was among his boys, four 
hundred of whom overflowed class-rooms and 
dining-hall, may be judged from the inscription on 
the simple marble that marks his resting-place in 
the ivy-covered cloister of the chapel : 


JOHN MEIGS 
STRONG, IMPETUOUS, TENDER, 
SERVANT OF CHRIST 
MASTER OF BOYS 
MAKER OF MEN 
HIS COURAGE WAS THE FOUNDATION OF THE SCHOOL 


HIS PASSION FOR TRUTH ITS LIGHT 
18 


“oT abn anf OL 
punois yovq Ul BSINOD J[OG pue PTI 11VqQzOO}J ‘spunoi8 [OOYDR ey} SUIMOYS MOIA oue|do10Vy 


‘VINVATASNNGd ‘NMOLSLLOd “IOOHOS 'ITIH HHL 








“rit a ‘: 
ed Te.) v= 
>. a , 


Lh. ie 7 
CN PY eraaaee 


THE HILL SCHOOL 19 


‘‘ Obstacles are the glory of life ’’, was one of his - 
Sayings, and no slackness or shirking was tolerated 
at “The Hill”. “ Prompt, alert, indefatigable 
himself, he demanded the same of all about him *, 
and masters as well as boys awoke under his in- 
fluence to a new, stimulating realization of what 
they could accomplish. There was a buoyancy, a 
spirit of energetic enthusiasm that was contagious, 
as a head master wrote who had once been on the 
faculty of The Hill. 

Everybody was systematically yet happily busy. There 
seemed to be never an idle minute. And the background 
of the picture was equally satisfying—a combination of 
perfectly-kept equipment and quiet appointments, bespeak- 
ing good breeding, artistic taste and culture. Through it 
all appeared a seriousness of purpose, not obtrusive yet 
hardly concealed by the various devices for interesting the 
boys in the realities of life. . . . Whether in the genial, 
comfortable air of the dining-room, amid the varied activity 
of the athletic field, or in the more rarefied atmosphere of 
the schoolroom-chapel, there was the same heartiness and 
stimulus, physical, intellectual and spiritual, and the centre 
of it all, the animating spirit of this city on the hill was 
‘ Professor’ . . . Its ideals were his ideals and its system 
was the device of his genius for making those ideals practical 
and applying them to the everyday problems of life. 

There was, under the influence of Dr. Meigs, a 
splendid insistence upon the sanctity of the body, 
“its reverent, radiant uses”’. With all his power 
he sought to make his boys understand that the 
strength of noblest manhood is built on purity, and 
that impurity is weakness and shame. “ Self-rever- 
ence, self-knowledge, self-control ’’, he ‘believed 


* From The Master of the Hill, by Walter Russell Bowie, from which 
further quotations are made in this chapter. 


20 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


with Tennyson, “lead life to sovereign power ’”’. 
But he was far from trusting in moral training alone 
to develop the all-round manhood he had in view. 
A pencilled memorandum gives some of his deeper 
thoughts in this connection. 


The school must educate, develop, guide and instruct 
that spiritual faculty which, by whatever name we call it, 
is supreme. There is no other restraining power [than 
religion]. Sympathy, the innate horror of doing wrong to 
a fellow creature; self-respect, the innate horror of doing 
wrong to ourselves, are real powers in all finer natures. 
But a restraining power is needed. . . . The problem of 
school morality will be solved by a religious motive or none. 


Coming from a great educator this statement 1s 
notable, and the way in which he and his colleagues 
acted upon it gave a character all its own to The Hill 
School. The religion which John Meigs led the 
boys to understand and seek after was no artificial 
piousness ; “‘ it was a deep and manly and straight- 
forward choice of Christ as pattern and Master and 
Lord”. In this connection he noted: 


As with the aspiring athlete and the eager learner, so 
must it be with the young Christian. He must be taught 
to study the great Book of rules for daily living; to seek 
his great Captain in difficulty, and to ask for guidance in 
prayer ; to heed the coach who has gained wisdom and 
victory in his longer game of life; and to share counsels, 
joy and confidences in brotherly meetings for prayer. He 
‘must realise that the test of his religious life is what he is 
and what he does when he is not on his knees in prayer, not 
reading his Bible, not listening to great preachers and not 
participating in religious meetings. 


About the Sunday services of the school there | 


was the same naturalness and appeal to the boy 


THE HILL SCHOOL 21 


*“ where he lives’. Distinguished preachers came 
for the regular “ Chapel”’, but the characteristic 
thing was the Vesper Hour, when hymns were sung 
and the man who knew and understood them best 
would sometimes speak and always pray. One of 
his boys wrote : 


The real picture of the Professor, which always comes 
clear and distinct from memories of the old school-days, 
is as he sat at his desk in the schoolroom of a Sunday evening 
at the song service, and the hymn [I always associate with 
him is ‘‘ Kin Feste Burg’. . . . That is what he looked and 
what he was—a firm, strong, kindly, helpful citadel. There 
seemed to be something in the Professor’s face as he came 
down the aisle at the close of those song services on Sunday 
nights that I never quite caught at any other time, a some- 
thing words will not tell. 


And there were other things Hill boys could never 
forget, among them the Professor’s utter sincerity 
and truthfulness and his hatred of everything mean 
and underhand. They remember that he never 
stole upon them unawares, but that “ always his 
heavy footfall—every ounce of his great frame 
telling at each step—resounded through the cor- 
ridors as he approached ; and in the memory of that 
sound they find their most vivid impression of what 
is meant by the hatred of sham, subterfuge and 
- unfairness ”’. 

‘““ Truth-speaking and truth-loving”’, he con- 
sidered, ‘‘ the very bedrock of character ’’, and with 
these he classed obedience, which in his thought 
stood for ‘* willing conformity to the right standards 
of the school, which all must aceept who accept 
its life’? ; obedience not so much to rules as to “ the 


22 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


high majesty of accepted duty”. On this point 
he could have “no refusal and no evasion”. To 
the father of a boy about to be expelled he wrote : 

His vital and fatal lack is that of obedience. He has 
so indulged himself that self-pleasing is the law of his life, 
and deference to a higher law seems repugnant. Your... 
experience will reinforce my position touching the vital 
necessity of submission to law as the primal condition of 
moral as well as physical life and well-being. 

Dr. Meigs was keenly alive also to the importance 
of organised games and athletics, on account of the 
moral training they afford and their contribution 
to purity of life. He was fortunate in having se- 
cured the services of Michael F. Sweeney, the holder 
when he came to The Hill, and for years afterwards, 
of the world’s record for the high jump. A member 
of the faculty tells us that— 

He became not only the physical director of the 
gymnasium and track-work but also the coach and con- 
trolling spirit of all the organised games in the school. 
Between him and the head master there was a sympathy 
and understanding which grew into the most loving identity 
of purpose, and into all his relationships with the boys .. . 
Mr. Sweeney brought not only his technical skill but the 
power of a Christian idealism which left its deep impress on 
the spirit of many a lad who would hardly have been reached 
through any other channel. 

Borden had come to the great school well grounded 
in the principles for which it stood. Sincerity and 
truthfulness were part of his character; one could 
never think of him in connection with any sham. 
There was so little self-consciousness about him, or 
morbid craving for appreciation, that one who 
knew him most intimately could say : 


THE HILL SCHOOL 23 


In all the years I was in close touch with him, I never 
saw him do one thing for effect. 


A school friend, while he spoke of William as “ a 
sturdy fighter”, recalled also his “reserve and 
dignity and steady, quiet strength”. Outwardly 
he was undemonstrative, but his home letters reveal 
the same warm-hearted, earnest, impetuous boy as 


of yore. 
Sept. 27, 1902. 

Dear MorHEeR—To-day is the first time since I left 
Boston that we have seen the blue sky or sunshine. It has 
been raining steady since the eveningsI arrived until 
yesterday evening. I like the school very much, all the 
old fellows are nice to the new fellows, asking us to come 
and see them in their rooms, etc. 

My room is in the east wing, second floor, number 4. 
Mv roommate is a very nice fellow, a little older than I am, 
and two or three inches taller. . . . A great many of the 
old fellows here knew John [his elder brother], most of them 
are sixth formers. All the old teachers are very nice to 
me and they seem very jolly, especially Mr. Rolfe, Mr. 
Hallock and Mr. Weed whom I suppose you met... . 

I like Professor and Mrs. John-very much from what I 
have seen of them so far. Many parents came down with 
the fellows the first day, and even some sisters. Our room 
is very nice; it has two large windows looking out on the 
quadrangle. Under the sill of each is a small window-seat 
which could be made quite nice if they had cushions and 
pillows on them... . | 

I am taking football for exercise and I am now trying 
for the second team, but I don’t think there is much chance 
of my making it. 

Last night they had the first meeting of the Y.M.C.A. 
Throop Wilder is President and John Holabird is Vice- 
President. The meeting was great! Throop spoke first, 
and then a good many of the old fellows got up and spoke. 
Dwight Meigs led in prayer, and then other fellows gave 


short prayers. 


24 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


This year there are more new fellows than ever, and 
Professor had to turn away some because he couldn’t 
accommodate them. I sit at Mr. Weed’s end of the fifth- 
form table, which is right at the end of Mrs. John’s table. 

Give my love to Granny and everybody and tell them I 
expect to write soon.—Your loving son, WILLIAM. 


Oct. 4, 1902. 


Dear Sis—I received your letter yesterday and thank 
you for it very much. As my roommate gets about three 
letters every mail, I like to get one once in a while. 

Talk about work—I have six studies, Chemistry, English 
History, French, Greek, English and Bible History. The 
Eng. Comp. is fierce. We have to make a literal translation 
of parts of Virgil or Cesar, and in class change this into 
idiomatic English. Then again we have to write on the 
character of people in the Sir Roger de Coverley papers, in 
the style of Steele. 

We have had two Y.M.C.A. meetings, at one of which 
Boyd Edwards, who was at Northfield, spoke. I have 
joined it, also my “ wife’’.2 Throop Wilder is fine, he 
is Pres. of Y.M.C.A. and of the Athletic Association. 

I am out trying for the second team, it is pretty hard 
work. There are a great many Chicago fellows here. .. . 

Hoping you will write soon again.—I am, Your loving 
brother, BILL. 

I haven’t been homesick a bit. 

Oci. 26, 1902. 

Dear FatHER—Mother says you are working over the 
plans of our Camden house day and night. I haven’t 

1 There were two Mrs. Meigs, beloved of the Hill School—one the 
mother of the Professor, who for many years had been the mainspring of 
its life, and the other ‘‘ Mrs. John’ who came to it as his bride in the fall 
of 1882. Of the value of her contribution to the school it would be difficult 
to speak adequately. ‘‘ That which, joined to the influence of John Meigs 
himself,’ wrote his biographer, ‘‘ more than any other thing set the tone 
and created the spirit of The Hill was the touch of Mrs. Meigs upon the 
boys. In the lovely ‘sky-parlour’, up in the tower of the old stone 
building of the head master’s house, with its wide windows looking out 
over the tranquil trees, many a boy in his talks with her has caught the 
gleam of new meanings for his life, going down to the school again with the 


power of finer purpose in his soul.”’ 
* His roommate, Eugene Delarno. 


THE HILL SCHOOL 25 


noticed any pictures of summer houses in the magazines. 
Harry Widener is the son of the man who owns that house 
you liked so much. You remember we were looking at it 
in a magazine at Camden last summer. . . . 

We have had three football games so far. The first two 
were with the Haverford Grammar School and Princeton 
Freshmen, the score in each game was 0 to 0. The third 
game was a perfect cinch for us, the score being 41 to 0 in 
favour of Hill. Only one goal was missed. Monday [to- 
morrow] the annual interclass track will be held, Iam going 
into the shot-put. It is a handicap meet, so I will have a 
little show but not much. 

I wish you would get me a shot gun and give it me for 
my birthday, so that I could have it down here and shoot a 
little, so that I could go hunting at Christmas vacation. | 
will put an account of my expenses up to the present time 
in here. 





With lots of love.—Your son, WILLIAM. 
Football supplies $3-20 Class paper . $1:90 Stamps . - $0-10 
Posters .. . 1:05 Clothes : . 1:00 Hill banner : -50 
Contribution . -50 Enpp’s (t.e. tuck) ‘30 Thumb Tacks . 09 
Clothes pressed 1:00 Paper . é : ‘02 Carfare : : 10 
Eatables . : -20 Stamps . ; ‘10 Soda . ‘ : “15 
Screw Driver . -14 Epp’s . ; . 45 Pillow ; | E50 
Book-rack : -20 Contribution . 1:00 Reading-room fee 1-00 
Picture wire. -20 Window cushions 9:98 Epp’s. ; ‘ 35 

Contribution . 65 
$25-68 
Oct. 26, 1902. 


Dear Motuer—Last Saturday we only danced for a 
little while and all sat around on the floor and sang songs. 
I liked it much more than dancing and hope we will do it 
again. . . . I suppose you are waiting until Nov. 1 | his 
birthday] to send down anything, but when you do I wish 
you would send plenty of fruit and cake ; and we can have 
jam, so I wish you would throw in a few glasses of different 
kinds of jelly, which help along the sandwiches we have 
daily at 11.45. 

Mr. Speer! was here to-day and preached, he was fine. 


1 Dr. Robert E. Speer. 


26 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


He seems to have changed a great deal, his voice is terribly 


deep bass. 
I will have to stop now as the Prep bell for bed has rung. 
With lots of love, WILLIAM. 


Jan. 18, 1903. 


DEear MotHer—We have had good weather lately, and 
today is simply fine. The sky is clear and cloudless. The 
air is cool and bracing. I intend to take a long walk this 
afternoon with some fellows. 

About my examinations. I passed Algebra easy enough, 
and got a 100 in it I think. But I did not pass Geometry. 
However, Mr. Shephard let me go into the class, and I will 
try again to pass it Monday and he will help me, sort of 
tutoring and I hope to pass it to-morrow. I took an exam. 
in Lorna Doone and the result was rather surprising. I 
got 95 in it. There wasn’t a single mistake in spelling or 
punctuation in the whole thing, and he had not made a 
single mark of correction anywhere. It was quite long, 
taking me nearly two hours of steady writing. 

I have a terribly hard time in studying now, in fact I 
scarcely do anything but study. Study at night, every 
spare minute from the time I get up until school begins. 
Then at the recesses. After lunch I have about an hour 
and a half spare time. Then I have to prepare my lessons 
for the afternoon session, and then begin the same program 
again after supper. 


Feb. 2, 1903. 


DEAR MoTHER—You say you like my hard work, well I 
don’t think you would if you knew how terrible it is. I 
work every little spare minute that I have, almost, and 
when Saturday comes you’re just about played out and 
don’t get a decent rest before it begins again the next week. 
And then if you get a “ third list ” after working so terribly 
hard it makes you feel sort of discouraged. Our English 
is the worst stuff imaginable. It is Carlyle’s Essay on 
Burns. Why it is something awful! You can’t make 
head or tail out of it, and it takes about two hours’ hard 
study to know anything about it at all. 


THE HILL SCHOOL 27 


We look forward to getting through with this term and 
scratch off a day on the calendar every day. There are 
now about eight weeks left of toil and drudgery. The 
weather here is awful too, one day it’s summer and the next 
winter, first rain and then snow, etc. 

I am losing weight quite fast now under Mr. Sweeney’s 
work. I have lost 4 Ibs. and lose about 3 Ibs. a week. I 
will soon be a skeleton, won’t I! But I guess it won’t 
matter much. . . . Yours with lots of love, WILLIAM. 


Mar. 1, 1908. 

Dear MotuEer—lI was very glad to get your letter as I 
had not had one for almost a week. 

This evening we had a fine recital by Leland T. Powers 
of Boston. He gave Monsieur Beaucaire and was simply 
great. He is wonderful the way in which he can change 
his voice and expression from that of a woman to that of a 
man in aninstant. You wouldn’t think it possible he could 
change his appearance so much as he does by simply 
mussing up his hair, or some other little thing like that. 
After giving M. Beaucaire he gave a short and very funny 
thing about some old country parson and other country 
people. This simply kept us roaring all the time. 

Mr. Speer was here today and preached both this morning 
and afternoon. Many of the fellows here criticize him, and 
one of the teachers. But I don’t think they know what 
they are talking about, and it makes me sore to hear them. 
I am getting to like Mr. Rolfe more and more all the 
time. He is simply great. Always happy and cheery, 
never harsh or gruff except when he has to stop fellows from 
rough-housing, and even then he is nice and makes a joke 
out of it or does something else... . 

Just think only three weeks more of study. If I escape 
exams. I might be able to leave here Tuesday afternoon or 
evening, March 24th. My, but won’t I be glad when I get 
out of here! I tell you it will be a relief to get away from 
the toil and grind of this place for a little while at least. 

You must tell me about Johnny and everything you can 
about J , Teddy, and anything that is going on at home. 

With lots of love to everyone,—Your loving son, 

WILLIAM. 





28 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Mar. 8, 1908. 


Dear MotuEer—I was awfully glad to hear from you 
twice this week. 

About my coming home and my vacation, I am not in 
for any exams. so far, and I think I am safe for this last 
week. Now ifIcan possibly manage by toil and labour and 
grinding to keep out for two weeks more, then I will be safe. 
Just think Mother, exams. begin the 24th of this month, and 
I hope to be able to leave that night, getting to Chicago 
the next evening! Only sixteen more days and I may be 
out of this awful working place, and the winter term will 
be over. You can never appreciate how terrible this winter 
term is. As for the length of my vacation, it will be just 
three weeks I think. 


That he realized his hope is evident from the 
following letter : 


My DEAR Mr. BorpEN—I am very happy to congratulate 
you on William’s excellent record for the past term and to 
inform you that he is one of twenty members of the school 
who have been excused from all of their examinations.— 
Faithfully yours, JoHN MEIGs. 


March 31st, 1908. 


The summer term brought new and varied ex- 
periences. ‘To his mother he wrote: 


April 17, 1903. 


The trees here have quite large leaves and fruit trees 
are in full bloom. Everything is fine and I think this term 
will pass pretty quick. 

I want you to write me as often as possible and give me 
all the news about everything you possibly can. Some- 
times I feel like punching the fellow’s head who sits in the 
mail window and says, ‘‘ Nothing for Borden ”’, three times 
a day for sometimes three and four days in succession ! 
Tell me about the doings of John, Mary and Baby, ete. 


THE HILL SCHOOL 29 


April 20, 1903. 

Dear Motuer—The weather continues simply fine 
here; beautiful warm sunshiny days, everything blooming 
as if it were midsummer. 

We have lots of fun now, playing outdoor games, base- 
ball, track, etc. The Gun Club shooting is good fun and I 
have improved greatly since last term. If I keep on im- 
proving I might have some chance of making the Gun Team 
and I will certainly work hard for it. 

My studies will be pretty hard this term I think. But 
I can manage to get along all right, so you needn’t worry. 
This last week I got two seconds and five firsts in subjects. 

I came very near forgetting to tell you about the sermon 
on Sunday. Campbell Morgan was here and preached a 
fine sermon in the morning, which was said to be the best 
ever given here. It certainly was fine. It was on Mark 
1.11 and 6.3. ‘ Thou art my beloved son in whom [ am 
well pleased ”, and, “Is not this the carpenter” : man’s 
view and God’s view. Mr. Morgan demonstrated that it 
must have been the eighteen years of Christ’s life of which 
we know nothing, save that he was a carpenter, in which he 
had pleased God. Then he went on to meditate on how 
much good an apprentice of His would have gotten. He 
said he did not think Christ would have talked of heaven 
or hell, but would have simply given him an example to 
follow, by His every-day life in which there was no blemish. 

Some of the fellows thought it was a little long, but I did 
not and wanted more. It was wonderful, the way he held 
everyone spellbound by his talk. For five or ten minutes 
no one would stir while he talked, then as if to relieve the 
strain he would change his tone. Then the people would 
shift their positions slightly and settle down again and so 
on. It certainly was fine and I hope he comes again. 


June 14, 1908. 
Dear MoruEr—I got your letter from Camden and was 
glad to hear from you. 
Now Commencement is all over and we have begun work 
again, at least what’s left of us. For there are only fifth 
and sixth formers here now. . . . On Tuesday morning the 


30 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


swimming contests were held. Our team was scratch in 
the relay-race, and we got second place. 

In the afternoon, it being clear, the inter-class track 
meet was held. It was very close and exciting throughout. 
The sixth form won with 48 points, we were second with 40. 
. . . The next morning the drill was held on the field. It 
was not very hot and hence the drill did not seem very bad. 
Our company did not drill very well and so we did not get 
the prize. Right after the drill, the closing exercises were 
held in the gym. Prizes were given out and also gold 
medals. . . . Eugene got three prizes of books for ex- 
cellence in Latin, Greek and Bible History. I got one in 
Geom. I am seventeenth in the school, twelfth on second 
honour list and seventh in our form. 

Lunch right after that was simply great. Only one 
table was left in, to serve stuff from, and everybody stood 
up. There was salmon, chicken croquettes, two or three 
kinds of salad, sandwiches, bouillion and everything. 
About half a dozen different desserts. I took a liberal 
portion of everything and came very near regretting it. 


November 22, 1903. 


Dear MotuER—It seems a perfect age since I had any 
communication with the outside world. We have been 
to Lawrenceville, and our team got beaten by a score of 
six to five. It seems awfully queer—the feeling that 
football is over. It seems unnatural, as if something had 
come to an end. But I will tell you about our trip to 
Lawrenceville. 

I was taken with the team as a sub. We left here 
Friday afternoon and got to Trenton about 8.00. We went 
to the Trenton House for the night. It is an awfully old 
affair, must have been there in Washington’s time. The 
hall-ways were a regular labyrinth, and we walked a terrible 
way before finding our rooms. In the morning after 
breakfast Mr. Sweeney gave us a talk in one of the fellows’ 
rooms. I never knew what he was like before. He was 
wonderful. He talked to us for about an hour on all points 
in football, and especially “‘ fighting ”. I’m sure he thrilled 
every fellow, he did me I know. 


THE HILL SCHOOL 31 


After lunch we went out to Lawrenceville. The game 
was at 2 o’clock. Their team outweighed ours nearly 
twenty pounds to the man, but that didn’t keep our fellows 
from fighting just as hard. Lawrenceville teams usually 
have weight, while ours have Hill spirit. In the first half 
no scoring was done, and the ball was in their territory 
most of the time. In the second half we scored a touch- 
down. Our man was so tired that he missed the goal, 
which really lost us the game. Then with only a few 
minutes left to play, the teams lined up again. Their 
weight told now and they pushed us down to about our 
ten yard line. We held them and punted out. They 
came on again, were held again, and then came on and 
crossed the line. They kicked the goal, making the score 
6to 5. It was mighty hard for our fellows to lose like that, 
and they all felt mighty badly over it. They played simply 
fine and nobody has any kick coming. 

I hope to be home in less than three weeks from now. 
Not very long, is it? Ill be mighty glad to get home and 
see you. I’m going to work these next two weeks, and then 
maybe I won’t have any third week here.—Y our loving son, 

WILLIAM. 


After the Christmas vacation : 
January 31, 1904. 


Dear Motuer—We have been having pretty good 
weather here and lots of snow. Yesterday we hired a 
bobsled and went coasting out here on a hill and had pretty 
good fun. The sled was an enormous one and held nine 
or ten. 

A Dr. —— was here to-day to preach, he was very sad. 
In the morning he read a thing he called the first chapter 
of the Ephesians, but it wasn’t out of the Bible and was 
as different as you could imagine. Then his sermon wasn’t 


any good and was without a point. In the afternoon he 


didn’t even try to preach a Christian sermon but gave us 
one from a Confucianist in Japan. He has spent about 
twenty years in Japan and is quite an authority on it. 
This was about some fool and a class of fools, and the point 
was ‘What we had come into the world for’. It was 


32 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


‘better I thought than his morning attempt, but nothing 
much at that. He is a teacher or something at the Union 
‘Theological Seminary. Gene thinks it the best in the 
country, and says practically everyone goes there to prepare 
for the ministry. I disagreed, and he said his grandfather 
had founded it. I then said that it had probably changed 
a great deal since that time. That man getting up there 
and reading his text out of some book which didn’t resemble 
a Bible in any way, just made me tired and fixed him for 
me. I thought how bad things are getting to be. 

I don’t know whether I told you about Mr. Weed or not, 
but anyway he was off nearly two weeks. His mother was 
expected to die any moment, but she didn’t and has now 
recovered. As a result he is feeling mighty happy and 
thankful. In Bible Class tonight he read about the miracle 
of the wine at the marriage feast. Then he said that it was 
the modern idea that the man who believed in miracles was 
way behind the times. But he said things would happen in 
our lives so that we would have to believe in them. He 
said, ‘‘ I have seen miracles within the last two weeks and 
believe in them.’ It was good that, after some of Dr.—’s 
trash. I know you think the same way, and it makes me 
tired to hear all this talk against the old beliefs. 

Mr. Weed is going to put the lights out in just a minute 
and I will have to say good night.—Your loving son, 

WILLIAM. 


Happily for the boy’s faith he was well-grounded 
in the Word of God, so that anything that seemed 
to him contrary to the truth awoke an energetic 
reaction in his soul. Looking back on these and 
similar experiences, he wrote to the Committee of 
the Chicago Avenue Church some years later : 

I am very thankful for the teaching I received at the 
Moody Church and Institute before I was fifteen years of 
age, because it kept me firm in my beliefs in spite of 
opposition and criticism which I was not able to answer. 


The great truths of the deity of Christ, His vicarious atone- 
ment, and the inspiration and authority of the Bible had 


THE HILL SCHOOL 33 


been indelibly impressed upon me. I was specially im- 
pressed by the testimony of our Lord Himself to this last 
matter, and was willing to wait until I could go to Seminary 
and be prepared to meet the critics on their own ground. 
Hoping that the good work may go on and that many 
may be won to Christ and strengthened in the faith as I was. 
—Il remain, Very sincerely yours, 
Witiram W. Borpen. 


Debates, orations and the Class dance were ab- 
sorbing as spring came again, not to speak of the 
war news from the Far East. 

February 3, 1904. 


Dear MotuEer—I have heard from both Mary and 
Marjorie and each says she can come. Mary said Miss 
Kellogg would chaperon her. It was the first I knew about 
such a thing and it might have made trouble. But it is 
all right, and I am all fixed now except to order more flowers 
for Miss Kellogg. 

We have to get two sets of flowers, one for the dance on 
Friday night and the other for the show on Saturday night. 
I have ordered violets and bridesmaid roses to the amount 
of six dollars. Then we have to have a rig to go riding in, 
dramatic-club seats, etc., besides the fourteen dollars I 
spoke of in my last letter... . 

Gene delivered his oration the other night, and it went 
off very well. In fact, all the orations so far have been 
remarkably good, and it’s up to us who come later to do as 
well. As I have told you, mine comes Friday, the second 
speaker. I get scared off and on by spells. 

I am very much interested in watching this war between 
Russia and Japan, and I suppose you must be. We rush 
over to the reading room after breakfast for a glimpse at 
the morning papers before going to study. The newsboy 
who sells papers here in the evening does a flourishing 
business, and you have to hustle to get one. Japan seems 
to be doing the Russians up on the sea. . . . I should think 
you might write to Huntingdon Wilson for news, although 
it would be rather old by the time it reached here. 

D 


; 


34 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


The remaining letters for the year are missing— 
save one, which gives a last impression of Borden 
at The Hill. He graduated in 1904, receiving a 
grade of 83:6; standing fourth in a form of forty- 
eight boys of whom he was the youngest. 


February 21, 1904. 


DEAR MotTHER—This morning we had Communion 
Service in the (new) chapel at eight o’clock. Mr. Speer and 
Dr. Cuthbert Hall conducted and it was very nice. Of 
course attendance was not compulsary ; only a few were 
Bere pares 

The Dedication Service was very good. Mr. Speer and 
Dr. Hall both made addresses. 

It is after lights now, and I will have to say, Good-bye.— 
Your loving son, WILLIAM. 





CHAPTER III 


ROUND THE WORLD 
1904-1905. Ait. 16-17 


“Something hidden. Go and find it. Go and look behind the 
Ranges— 
Something lost behind the Ranges. Lost and waiting for you. Go!” 
R. KIpuine. 
THE war between Japan and Russia was still in 
progress when, in the summer of 1904, Borden set 
out on a journey round the world. He had 
graduated from The Hill at sixteen, and his parents 
felt that a year spent in this way would be well 


_ worth while before he entered college. It was no 


small responsibility Mr. Walter Erdman had under- 
taken in consenting to travel with him. Scholarly, 
brilliant, full of humour, recently graduated from 
Princeton University and Seminary, a more de- 
lightful companion could hardly have been found, 
but his chief recommendation in Mr. and Mrs. 
Borden’s eyes lay in his fine Christian character. 

‘’ T remember our talks about William down in 
the pine grove at Camden,” he wrote years later, 
‘“ when you were wondering what sort of companion 
I should make for him, and I was wondering how 
I could measure up to your ideals.” 


He remembered also Mr. Borden’s helpfulness 
35 


36 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


when seeing them off from Chicago. Partly in boy- 
ish bravado, William prolonged his farewells, swing- 
ing on to the train when it was already in motion. 

‘ William,” called his father sharply, “ don’t do 
things like that! It isn’t fair to Mr. Erdman.” 

“Tt was a word of caution that was not for- 
gotten,” wrote the latter, ‘save possibly on two 
occasions—once when he was clambering over the 
fortifications of the old castle at Ajmere, and once 
when his familiarity with nautical matters and the 
management of a yacht tempted him to climb 
thoughtlessly on the rail and swing from the hal- 
liards of an ocean liner. The Captain administered 
a sharp rebuke on that occasion. William called 
him ‘ an old stiff’ in private—but he came down. 

‘Tt was inevitable that a boy of his physical 
endowments and active disposition should be on 
the whole more interested in doing than in seeing 
things, and one does not wonder that he was more 
enthusiastic over a swim in the phosphorescent sea 
before the shrine at Kamakura than in studying the 
wonderful lines and graceful bulk of its great bronze 
Buddha. He remonstrated with me a little for 
being willing to see it twice! One might have sup- 
posed that so active and independent a nature 
would be impatient of advice or restraint. Yet, 
excepting the occasions mentioned, his activity 
never gave cause for concern, and there was no 
time when he failed to accept suggestions or recog- 
nize the force of another’s judgment.” 

It was a September day when the s.s. Korea put 
out from San Francisco. Fog hung over the Golden 





WILLIAM IN 1904. 


To face page 36. 


7 
=> 
—— 


oa 


\ rao 


Ake 





ROUND THE WORLD 37 


Gate, and the departure seemed a small affair com- 
pared with the outgoing of the transatlantic liners 
from New York. What Borden thought of it all 
may be seen from his unstudied letters : 


Sept. 20, 1904. » 


DrEAREST MotuER—We are off at last, and so far it 
seems quite nice, although in some respects a little speck 
disappointing. 

We went down to the wharf quite early and our bags 
were taken up to the room by a lot of little Chinamen 
dressed in dark blue with a round black hat with a red top- 
knot to it. They were certainly very funny and cute. 
Most of them take the end of their queue and put it in their 
coat pocket. Our steward is a very nice Chinaman dressed 
like the ones I have just described... . 

The scene at the dock was quite queer, very different 
from the departure of an Atlantic steamer. Chinamen 
swarmed everywhere, and there were also a good many 
Japs mixed in. All the servants and sailors are Chinamen 
and they seem to be very competent. Some of them are 
comical in their appearance and actions and I enjoy watch- 
ing them, especially the sailors about their work. 

Our fellow passengers are mostly married people, in fact 
there aren’t more than half a dozen young folk that I have 
noticed. The Chinamen are by far the most interesting 
bunch. There is an open space between the promenade 
deck and the poop where they congregate—fat, thin, old 
and young, some with gray queues and others with black. 
I watched them eating this afternoon with their chopsticks. 
About ten of them squatted around one pot of rice and a 
pot of some sort of meat. Each man had a little tin pan 
which he filled with rice. They ate by holding the pan up 
to the mouth and then shoving in the rice with their chop- 
sticks, which they held in one hand. They picked up 
pieces of meat with their chopsticks and smeared them 
round in a common bowl of gravy. Several of these groups 
were scattered over the deck and it made a very queer 
spectacle. 


38 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Sept. 21, 1904. 


Dear MotuEer—To-day we have gotten pretty well 
settled and have had a chance to look around a bit. Our 
chairs are located on the port side, near the forward end 
of the promenade deck. Our neighbours are a couple of 
young men starting out as missionaries. They are Jones 
and Gibb, and were on the train with us coming out to San 
Francisco. 

Then there is a Mr. Lamb and his wife and little boy. 
Mr. Lamb is a classmate of Walter’s, and he and his wife are 
going to the Philippines as missionaries. They are very 
nice and awfully jolly. Mr. Lamb and I got permission 
from the chief engineer and went all through the engine- 
room. One of the assistants showed us over and explained 
everything. He also took us into the stoking rooms of 
which there are five or six. It wasn’t nearly as hot as I 
expected, in fact I don’t believe it troubled the stokers at 
all. The stokers are Chinese and they work for seven 
dollars a month, rather small wages, isn’t it? Whenever 
they get hungry, they haul out a few coals, build a fire 
right on the floor and cook themselves some chow. It 
seems that there are a lot of Chinese on board who travel 
back and forth just to gamble. They certainly do it with 
a vengeance. To-day revealed five or six new games, and 
they were busy playing most of the day. 

The colour of the water out here as it surges away from 
the ship is remarkable. It is a deep indigo blue and 
doesn’t seem to be affected by the colour of the sky. 


A day at Honolulu, where the water was like 
melted opals in colouring and clear as crystal, was 
welcome. Native boys, eager to dive for money, 
swam out to meet the ship, some of whom, scrambling 
on board, took-off even from boats on the hurricane 
deck. The Aquarium with its rainbow-coloured fish, 
bathing, surf-riding, and a drive to various points 
of interest made the time pass quickly, until a fresh 
contingent of passengers came on board, wearing 


ROUND THE WORLD 39 


wreaths of flowers after the custom of the island, 
and the journey was resumed toward the setting 
sun. 


Tuesday, Oct. 4, 1904. 


Dear UNCLE FRED AND AuntT LaurA—I received the 
Round Robin to which you contributed so much and thank 
you very much for it. I often wish to be sailing (yachting) 
out here, where the trades blow steadily and the sea is 
comparatively smooth. 

Going round the world may be quite a trip, but it isn’t 
anything uncommon among these passengers. There are 
three or four who are on their fourth trip around, and several 
on their third and second. So we sink into insignificance. 
We have a couple of German and Austrian Counts and 
Countesses, an Italian doctor and also several German 
university men, one with scars on his cheek. Then there 
is an Admiral of the U.S. Navy and a Bishop. So you see 
we have quite a few celebrities. 

We have only seen the smoke of one boat since we left 
San Francisco. The Pacific is quite large. 

With love.—Your nephew, 

Wixti1am W. BorpbeEn. 


His respect for the Pacific was further increased 
by encountering a typhoon before they reached 
Japan, as we learn from his journal : 


Strong breeze from the south-east and fairly big sea 
running. Life-lines put up on the lower deck and all 
awnings taken down. Wind developed to a gale in the 
afternoon. Hove to about seven and rode typhoon during 
the night. 

Rained hard early in the morning with wind still blowing 
a gale. Engines started and kept at half speed from 
5.30 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. Shipped big seas over the prow. 
Sea quieted down in the afternoon and full speed was 
put on. 


Next day they were in Yokohama. 


40 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Japan was not the fascinating vision it would 
have been had they visited it in spring, when the 
cherry and wistaria are in bloom. Fall colours 
touched the hills with beauty, but it was more the 
people than the country that appealed to Borden. 

Fifty years only had elapsed since Commodore 
Perry had effected, in 1853-4, the introduction of 
the Island Kingdom into the family of nations, and 
only thirty years since the famous Iwakura Commis- 
sion had been sent out “‘ to survey the world and 
cull its best for the future development of Japan ”’. 
But what had not that brief period witnessed of 
progress along the lines of national education, re- 
presentative government and facility of communica- 
tion! Hundreds of miles of railway connected all 
the important cities of the main island, where previ- 
ously there had been none. Schools, colleges and 
universities had sprung up in which tens of thousands 
were pursuing an up-to-date curriculum, and to the 
worship of the imperial line which had occupied the 
throne for more than two thousand years had been 
added modern parliamentary government, with a 
constitution granting liberty hitherto undreamed 
of in oriental lands. 

Side by side with all this had gone territorial 
expansion and increase of prestige and population. 
The war with China concluded ten years previously 
had brought Formosa under the sovereignty of 
Japan; and the war with Russia still in progress 
had raised her to the first rank among naval and 
military powers. So it was a new Japan to which 
our travellers came, and yet the old was everywhere 


ROUND THE WORLD Al 


present, and the mingling of East and West was 
almost bewildering. In the fine station at Yoko- 
hama, for example, the clatter of wooden clogs on 
the pavement was deafening, and in the narrow 
oriental streets it was alarming to see children play- 
ing almost under the wheels of modern vehicles. 
One of his first letters was to his younger sister : 


IMPERIAL HOTEL, TOKIO, 
October 18, 1904. 

DEAR, DEAR JoycE—lI wish you were here to enjoy all 
the funny little people with their queer ways and dress. I 
know you would have a beautiful time. But as you can’t 
see them, I will try and tell you about them. 

I never saw so many children before as there are here 
in Japan. They seem to be everywhere, in groups of four 
or five and sometimes more, playing in the streets. None 
of the boys and girls that run around wear any socks, but 
they all wear queer little wooden clogs which they hold on 
with the big toe and the next one. I should think that they 
would keep coming off all the time, but they never do. 
The little girls all wear kimonos, something like Mary’s 
only much prettier, some of them being all gold and red 
and purple. As soon as their hair is long enough, they do 
it up in a queer little bunch on top of their head just like 
their mothers. None of the girls or women wears any kind 
of hat, as it would muss their hair all up. 

The boys wear the same kind of shoes and kimonos as 
the girls but their hair is fixed different. It is clipped 
quite short, in a ring all round the head. Then right on 
top a little round spot is shaved to make it look nice. The 
boys, or at least a good many of them, wear little soldier 
hats and look very cute. 

Girls littler than you go around playing with a tiny 
little baby tied on their back. The baby hangs there in 
warm weather with its little bare feet hanging down and 
in cold weather is all bundled up so that you can only see 
the top of its head. The baby sleeps whenever it feels 
like it, and the little girl goes right on playing just the 


A2 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


same. Do you think you could sleep while I was running 
around with you on my back? I don’t. All the boys 
and girls seem very good. It is rare to see one crying 
unless it is very young or has been hurt. They haven’t 
any toys to speak of, although there are plenty in the 
stores, yet they seem very happy and have a good time. 

The newspaper men, not boys, go running through the 
streets shouting the news, with bells jangling at their 
waists to attract attention. They are mostly extras that 
are sold in this way, and the paper itself is about the size 
of this sheet I am writing on. 

When it rains the people all carry big paper umbrellas, 
some of them very pretty. Some of the men have big straw 
hats instead of umbrellas, and sometimes a whole suit, or 
long coat, made out of this rice-straw. I shouldn’t think 
it would be very dry or comfortable, but they wear them 
anyway. 

With lots and lots of love, WILLIAM. 


Their first railway journey was a short one, south 
from Yokohama to the shrines of Kamakura, about 
which he wrote to his mother : 

October 9, 1904. 


At the station we took rickshaws and went first to see 
the Dai Butsu.! . . . We approached the statue by a stone 
walk through a very pretty garden, only there wasn’t a 
bit of grass. On account of the trees we couldn’t see the 
statue until quite close to it. It is a very impressive and 
remarkable piece of work considering it dates from A.D. 
1243. Around the image foundation stones may be seen 
in the ground. These supported the temple that once 
covered the statue. It has been gone a long time, as a 
result of tidal waves. .. . 


1 Buddhism had been in Japan for four centuries before it could be 
said to have become part of the national life. ‘This colossal image of 
Buddha (the Dai Butsu) was erected to commemorate the welding together 
of the alien faith, first brought over by Korean missionaries, with the 
indigenous cult of Japan. ‘‘ The copper used in the construction of this 
magnificent image was to represent Shintoism while the gold was to repre- 
sent Buddhism.” 


. 


ROUND THE WORLD A3 


From the Dai Butsu we went to another Buddhist 
temple on the top of a hill overlooking the sea. This was 
the temple of the Goddess of Mercy, and there were many 
small idols round the walls. One of them was all stuck-up 
with pieces of paper. These are prayers, and a string of 
them hangs near by to which the worshipper helps himself. 
After chewing it a while, he throws it—if it sticks, the 
prayers are answered ; otherwise not. 


Tokyo, the capital, and beautiful Nikko in the 
mountains north of it, were no disappointment. 
Through the kindness of a Japanese friend, they 
were permitted to drive through the grounds of 
the Palace, seeing something of the surroundings 
of the Mikado who was the hundred and twenty- 
second representative of his imperial line. No 
other dynasty in the world approaches such a 
record, and it was easy to understand the passionate 
loyalty of the people to a family which they believe 
to have been descended from the gods and which 
has given them such a succession of almost uni- 
formly good rulers. 

Parliamentary government had existed for only 
fifteen years—‘‘ a time, no doubt, of many thrills 
on the part of the people, far and near, who for the 
first time in the nation’s history were taking part in 
the administration of national affairs ”’. 


Nikko, Oct. 16, 1904. 


Dear MotHER—At present we are at Nikko, a beautiful 
spot up in the mountains. In the valley is a very pretty 
little stream and the mountains are covered with maples 
which are just beginning to change their colour. Well, I 
must go back and tell you what we did in Tokyo. 

Last Wednesday we were shown through the Houses of 
Parliament by a very nice Jap, He took us into all the 


AA, BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


various offices and we saw the pictures of several presidents, 
etc. The room in which the Representatives meet is 
simple and not unusual. The House of Peers is much 
more gorgeous, especially the Mikado’s office-room. This 
is beautifully fitted out with gold-lacquer screens and a 
cloth of gold over the desk. The Imperial box also is very 
fine with such things as silks and gold lace, ete. . 

Friday we had a very interesting time. In the morning 
we went to the school where Mr. Hatta teaches and then 
went to call on a Japanese lady, Mrs. Fuki O. Kami. Her 
house was in the suburbs of the city in a pretty little 
compound. After walking through the garden we came to 
a very nice house with sliding walls made of rice paper. 
The maid greeted us to her knees and bumped her head on 
the floor at nearly every word. While we waited we were 
served tea and were then informed by Mr. Hatta that we 
were to be received at another house, as Mrs. Kami wished 
to treat us as very distinguished visitors. So we walked a 
short distance to another cute little house and after 
removing our shoes went in. 

Walt had known Mrs. Kami in America, so we took the 
liberty of asking to be allowed to sit Japanese style instead 
of in the chairs offered to us. After we had talked a while 
(Mrs. Kami speaks very good English) the maid came on her 
knees pushing a tray with tea before her. There were also 
some small green and pink rice-cakes which we had some 
difficulty in picking up with chop-sticks, but which were 
really very good. We were informed that Mrs. O. Kami 
was quite rich, and that probably accounts for her two 
houses and also for the gown she had on. It was a kimono 
with very long sleeves. The cloth was a mixture of brown 
silk and old gold and it was simply stunning. . . . 


In company with Mr. O. Kami they went to see 
some war-pictures. 


We arrived at the theatre and checked our shoes, as 
everyone here does instead of leaving their hats and coats. 
The floor of the theatre was divided into little squares, 
about four feet each way, and in one of these we squatted. 


ROUND THE WORLD AB 


Between the pictures, tea and cigarettes flourished on all 
sides. The pictures themselves weren’t anything special 
and we found the people more interesting. 


A visit to the hospital enabled them to realize 
something of what the war was costing day by day. 


We met two officers, both of whom had been fearfully 
wounded while fighting at Port Arthur. The first one, 
who spoke English very well, told us a little about it. 
He said they were so close to the Russians that they could 
hear one another talking and could throw stones across. 
Everything was very neat, clean and comfortable. The 
nurses looked nice in their white uniforms and high caps. 
We distributed flowers and books and towels which are 
appropriate Japanese gifts. 


Of their journey westward to the former capital 
of the islands, lovely Kyoto, he tells in more than 
one letter. For they stopped by the way to obtain 
near views of Fujiyama, to enjoy the hot springs of 
a remote valley, and to climb passes from which 
the clouds lifted giving glimpses of the sacred 
mountain. After one climb, 

‘¢ We had a hot sulphur bath,” he wrote, “ which 
was simply great! The Japanese tubs are made of 
wood and are about three feet deep and oblong in 
shape. Instead of climbing into them you step 
down. I think they are fine, and enjoy boiling in 
them up to my neck! I am afraid they will spoil 
me for any others.” 

To reach Nagoya they had to travel part of the 
way on a man-power railroad. 

The car we got into was a perfect cube, measuring about 


five feet on a side. It was meant to seat four, but at 
various stages on the journey we had a number of fellow- 


46 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


passengers. Three coolies pushed us slowly up the hill and 
then jumped on while we coasted down at a terrific rate. 
Just why the car stayed on the track going round sharp 
curves I cannot tell, but it did, and that’s the main point. 


Kyoto palaces, gardens, temples and shops were 
of the finest, but they found, as Dr. Charles Erdman 
wrote on his later visit, that 

“It is a city ‘wholly given to idolatry’. Of 
course one will enjoy a visit to the grounds and 
buildings of the Mikado’s palace; he will struggle 
against the temptation to bankrupt himself in the 
shops, which are the most attractive in the land, 
but his real concern in Kyoto will be with its count- 
less temples. We rambled through acres of these, 
carefully depositing our shoes outside in the rain 
and walking in cloth slippers over vast expanses of 
polished floors and becoming more and more de- 
pressed by realizing the familiar fact that a proud 
modern empire, one of the five great powers of the 
world, is in the deadening grasp of false religions 
and degrading cults.”’ 

Of one of the temples at Kyoto Borden wrote : 


November 5, 1904. 


The most interesting temple we visited was the Sangu- 
sanguido or Temple of the 33,333 Gods. The building that 
contains this outfit is a shabby-looking place about four 
hundred feet long by sixty wide. The images all represent 
the same goddess, Kivanna, Goddess of Mercy. They are 
made of wood and gilded. Right opposite the entrance 
is a huge image said to be carved out of one willow-tree. 
On either side are five hundred idols, each about five feet 
high. They are arranged in ten rows of fifty, each row 
rising above the one in front of it. The images are meant 
to represent the eleven-faced-thousand-handed Goddess of 


ROUND THE WORLD AIT 


Mercy, but they only have one face and twenty-one pairs 
of hands. I suppose it would have been too much work 
to make them all. The 33,333 are obtained by counting 
the small effigies held in the hands and in the haloes of the 
large ones. It is a very strange sight.! 


In the midst of all he was seeing and doing, these 
were the things that went deepest. There is one 
picturesque letter on Japanese paper, six inches 
wide and seven feet long, in which he gives a de- 
tailed account of a display of national wrestling at 
Osaka, which they watched for hours. But there 
is another letter, written to his mother, that shows 
what his first contact with heathenism was meaning 
in his own life. He had been less than a month in 
Japan when he wrote : 


Kyoto, November 8, 1904. 


I have received your birthday note with all the others, 
which was a very pleasant surprise. Your request that I 
pray to God for His very best plan for my life is not a hard 
thing to do, for I have been praying that very thing for a 
long time. Although I have never thought very seriously 
about being a missionary until lately, I was somewhat 
interested in that line as you know.? I think this trip is 
going to be a great help in showing things to me in a new 
light. I can’t explain what my views were, but I met such 
pleasant young people on the steamer who were going out 
as missionaries, and meeting them influenced me... . 


1 Seventy per cent of the population of Japan (which is given at 78 
millions) is to be found in rural districts. They live in hamlets, of which 
there are 56 thousand. ‘* Scarcely any penetration has as yet been made 
by missionary forces into this rural area. Even near Tokyo there are 
large districts in which the missionaries are only as one to more than a 
million of the population. Over 40 millions, it is stated, are even to-day 
practically untouched by the Gospel. To these farmer-folk, fishermen and 
boat-people, idolatry is a very sordid thing. It leaves unmet the real 
hunger of the heart.” —The Missionary Review of the World, for October 1903. 

2 At the Hill School Borden had been chairman of the Mission Study 
Band. 


48 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Walt has so many friends here whom we meet in nearly 
every city that I have seen a great deal of the work that is 
being done. While talking with them we learn of the work 
and the opportunities, etc., so that I realize things as I never 
did before. When I look ahead a few years it seems as 
though the only thing to do is to prepare for the foreign 
field. Of course, I want a college course and then perhaps 
some medical study, and certainly Bible study, at Moody 
Institute perhaps. 

I may be a little premature, but I am beginning to think 
a little different. I don’t know what you will think of this, 
but anyway I know you can help me. 


With lots of love, WILLIAM. 


CHAPTER IV 


ROUND THE WORLD—continued 


1904-1905. it. 17 


“Christ has no hands but our hands to do His work to-day ; 
He has no feet but our feet to lead men in His way ; 
He has no tongue but our tongue to tell men how He died ; 
He has no help but our help to bring them to His side.”’ 
Selected. 


CHINA may not have the charm of Japan, but to 
Borden it appealed immediately. ‘“‘ I think I am 
going to like it better,” he wrote, impressed with 
the strength and virility of the people. 


SHANGHAI, Nov. 19, 1904. 


DEAR MotHEeR—We are now in China and such a change ! 
It is perfectly impossible to imagine how different itis. . 
This is the most cosmopolitan place I have ever seen, and 
yet we hear that Hongkong is even more so, but I can’t 
see how it could be. 

At the Bund where we landed we were immediately 
introduced to several very Chinese things. Of course the 
rickshas were nothing new, but the wheelbarrows! They 
are the queerest affairs I have ever seen. One wheel about 
two feet in diameter and a frame on either side for the load. 
The coolie has a strap from the handles which goes under 
his arms and over his neck. Four grown people is the most 
they carry and that is a pretty heavy load. The load 
isn’t always balanced and of course that makes it harder 
yet. I think I would prefer to walk every time. The 
Chinese merchants go up and down the Bund in their 

49 E 


50 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


carriages and practically every foreign resident has one, 
so that there is a continual stream of carriages, rickshas 
and wheelbarrows. There are several varieties of policemen 
but the most impressive are the Indians with their large 
red turbans, heavy braided beards and immense stature. 
Most of them are over six feet and some nearly seven. 

We are staying at the Astor House which is very nice 
and is the place where you meet everyone, that is everyone 
who is travelling. We went over to the China Inland 
Mission and consulted Mr. Stevenson on our plans for China. 


The plan worked out in Mr. Stevenson’s study 
filled the time to be given to China in the most 
interesting way possible, and when the travellers 
left by river-steamer for Hankow they were antici- 
pating visits to Pekin and not a few other places. 
In his journal Borden noted : 

November 20, 1904. 

Travelling all day up the mouth of the Yangtze, which 


is practically a sea, it is so wide. Immense reeds, fifteen 
or twenty feet high, grow along the banks. 


November 21. 


Lots of fun to watch the steerage passengers all try to 
get in and out of the junks and up and down the narrow 
gangway of the steamer at the same time. The result was 
they got very excited, and all shouted and argued and 
pushed and shoved each other until I expected most of 
them would go overboard. But only one did, and he got 
out all right. 

The river varies in width from one to six or seven miles. 
At times the current is very swift. 


November 22. 


Arrived at Kiu-kiang about four in the afternoon. Two 
Chinese fell in and nearly got drowned, between the 
steamer and the dock. When they were hauled out, they 
went for each other and had a pig-tail pulling contest which 
was rather unique and interesting. 


ROUND THE WORLD 51 
And in a letter to his father : 


It took us four days to cover the six hundred miles to 
Hankow. On Wednesday morning we came in sight of 
the city, and while we were still several miles off a number 
of men came out in sampans and jumped on board while 
the steamer was going fullspeed. This is rather a dangerous 
proceeding and requires some skill. They were the repre- 
sentatives of native inns, eager to secure business. 

At Hankow there is a difference of fifty feet in the depth 
of the water in summer and winter. Also the tide is some- 
times felt up there. This would be the tide they had had 
at Shanghai two or three days previously. So there must 
be two or three high tides on the river at the same time, 
with as many low ones in between. 

Hankow has a large foreign concession and a fine Bund, 
better even than Shanghai. The foreign and native cities 
do not overlap much. You just step through a gate from 
the concession and are at once plunged into the narrow 
dirty streets of the crowded Chinese city. Across the 
Yangtze is Wu-chang, a purely native city which is larger 
than Hankow. On the opposite bank of the Han River, 
which flows into the Yangtze at this point, is another city. 
The combined population of all three is about a million and 
a half. 


But it is the unexpected that happens, and instead 
of travelling extensively in China, Borden was soon 
confined to a sick bed in a hospital. They did, 
however, get in two weeks in the Yangtze Valley, 
including a delightful time at Nanking where they 
were guests of Dr. Stewart of the American Methodist 
College. They had crossed the Pacific with these 
friends, and were more than glad to see again one 
bright girl who had had much to do with their 
enjoyment of the voyage. Borden missed the 
society of people of his own age, and it is safe to 
say that the Ming tombs did not suffer in interest 


52 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


through the companionship they had at Nanking. 
In this connection he wrote : 


I have come to the conclusion that young people of 
either sex never travel out here and in fact don’t exist! I 
almost feel as though we were breaking the rules. We have 
met scarcely any young people. There were two fellows 
and two or three girls on the Korea, no more. In Japan, 
none. However, we hope for better things as we reach 
more civilized regions. 


All the early part of December, William was 
suffering from fever, and when they reached Canton 
it was found to be typhoid. This added seriously 
to Mr. Erdman’s responsibilities, who was thankful 
to get him safely to the hospital on Victoria Peak 
overlooking the city and harbour of Hongkong. 
Happily the illness proved to be a mild attack and 
the patient was soon convalescent. On Christmas 
Day he was writing : 


Although in bed, I manage to pass the time very well, 
reading a good deal, magazines, interesting books and my 
Bible. . . . We see a few American papers now and then, 
and I have learned most of the scores of the big games. 

We stayed in Canton four days and saw a good deal and 
met some of the missionaries. Canton is a most interesting 
city, but I won’t weary you with any more accounts of 
temples and the like. We were conveyed through the 
narrow streets in chairs carried by three bearers. They 
are quite comfortable. The streets with their busy throngs 
and open shops are always interesting. They vary in 
width from about twenty feet, in residence portions, to six 
or seven in business quarters. Sometimes they were so 
narrow that the chairs almost scraped both sides at once. 
I saw dried rats in great quantities hung up in the food- 
shopsffor sale, but no edible birds’-nests though we looked 
for them. 


ROUND THE WORLD 53 


His love of yachting and boat life generally made 
him specially interested in the river population of 
Canton. He was accustomed on their own boat, 
the T'satsawassa, to narrow quarters, but never had 
imagined that people could be born and married, 
live and die, rear their families and marry off their 
children without ever having a home on shore. 
And so many of them ! 


HONGKONG, December 27, 1904. 


DEAR FATHER—There are some three hundred and 
fifty thousand boat-people in Canton I am told. They 
live in small sampans which line the river-banks about 
ten deep, and simply choke all the small canals. <A boat 
perhaps twenty feet long will hold a family of six or 
seven. I couldn’t see where they stowed themselves 
away, but they do it somehow. A great many keep 
chickens as well, hung out over the stern in a basket 
which serves as a chicken-yard. Some of the kids and 
women have empty cans tied to their backs to act as life- 
preservers if they should fall overboard. For one China- 
man will seldom rescue another, because the rescuer has to 
keep the rescued for the rest of his life, if he happens to 
want to be kept. And sometimes they will bargain with a 
drowning man before pulling him out! But to return to 
the river-people—they live and die on their boats, and are 
not allowed on shore by the land-people, who do not want 
their business taken away from them. 


The work of the Y.M.C.A. in Canton had greatly 
interested him, as he wrote in that same Christmas 
letter, and he had been trying to take part in it a 
little. a 

I got into conversation with a young business man who \ 
said he was a Christian and made it a great point that he 
always went to church. The start of our argument was 


that he was railing at missions and saying they were no 
good, etc. Well, I tried to defend them, and we got deeper 


54 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


and he turned out to be practically an infidel, not believing 
in anything the Bible said. I told him what I believed 
and he said I was young and didn’t know better, that in a 
few years I would think differently. He couldn’t have 
been more than twenty-five himself. I managed to quote 
a few verses to which he could not say anything, but I 
didn’t put up a very good argument as I got rather fussed 
and excited. I wished at the time that I knew my Bible 
Berbers). ae 

This is my first Christmas away from home and my 
first one spent in bed. It is rather different from what I 
suppose is going on at 89.1 But I am not kicking.: As I 
lie here several thousand miles away, home seems pretty 
nice and I feel it would be fine to be there. But when I do 
get back, it will be nice to think that I’ve been out here. 
We may get home before the first of September by a good 
deal, but cannot tell just now. 


That he was home-sick was not to be disguised, 
but as he became stronger the desire to shorten their 
trip passed away. Java had to be given up and 
their plans for India curtailed, but what he and 
Mr. Erdman lost in this way was more than made 
up by the deepening friendship between them. Of 
those days Mr. Erdman wrote : 


His Bible was always on his bed in the hospital, except 
when the fever was at its height. I remember finding him 
poring over the tenth chapter of Genesis one morning, with 
a new interest in its geographical and ethnological state- 
ments aroused by his first impressions of new races and men 
of other tongues. It was a little Bible with fine print, too 
fine indeed for practical use, but it must have become dear 
to him, for I have seen it since, open, on his study table at 
Princeton. 

The voyage to India completely brought back his 
strength and he was eager for all possible excursions among 
the foot-hills of the Himalayas, at Darjeeling and elsewhere, 


1 89 Bellevue Place, his home in Chicago. 












Outline Map 
of 


(ee INDIA 
eS Miles 


100 0 100 200 300 


Route taken by M! Erdman and 
William shown thus :— 


























CENTRAL - 
PROVINCES: 





“MY SORE . » Madras 
be ey eer 

















tantord’s beog. Estab, london, 


OUTLINE MAP OF INDIA. 


The black line showing the journey made by Mr. Erdman and William. 


To face page 54. 


a wens 


_ 


a ie 4 


— 


“>, 3 


o 


ae 
: 


— ae mii. 





ROUND THE WORLD 55 


and for opportunities not open to the ordinary tourist of 
shooting the spiral-horned black-buck when we were visit- 
ing friends in an isolated mission-station in the Central 
Provinces. His interest in the archeological and archi- 
tectural features of the Orient was rapidly increasing, 
quickened by visits to the wonderful temples in South 
India and by the fascination of the Taj Mahal, and his 
imagination was stirred by the monuments of Egypt. In 
the closing months of travel, his growing interest in the 
achievements of man was manifested in what was to his 
fellow-traveller at least an unexpected appreciation of the 
art treasures of the galleries of Europe. But all the time, 
though one did not realize it then, he was being specially 
impressed with the spiritual destitution of the people of the 
countries we were visiting. 


Sunrise over the Himalayas was the sight of a 
lifetime! Borden and his companion had_ been 
two weeks in India. They had left Calcutta the 
night before and had come up from the teeming 
plains of the Ganges by a mountain railway with a 
gauge of only two feet, through a dense jungle 
which did not lose in interest because ‘ everyone 
said it was full of tigers and leopards ’—a regular 
Mowgli jungle! It was misty when they reached 
Darjeeling and cold enough to make them realize 
that they were at an altitude of seven thousand feet. 
Few Hindus were to be seen, but in the crowded 
bazaar they found themselves surrounded by hardy 
mountain people, distinctly Mongol in appearance. 
There were Tibetans clad in sheepskins, from the 
land of mystery beyond the Himalayas; Nepalese 
and Bhooties from the equally forbidden countries 
lying to the east and west, and enterprising mer- 
chants even from China. 


56 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


It seemed a little strange, on leaving the railway, 
to have one’s things carried up the steep hill-paths 
by women, and at the hotel to have men chamber- 
maids as well as waiters. But the women of 
Bhootan are said to be the strongest in the world. 
Barefooted, with large triangular baskets on their 
backs and the help of a strap that goes over the head, 
they carry the heaviest loads, apparently with ease. 
Men and children share the labour, carrying stone, 
wood, grain and what not, up the steep hillsides— 
sturdy, healthy, cheerful creatures, a contrast in 
almost every way with the enervated people of the 
plains. But nowhere in Bhootan, Nepal or Tibet 
was there a voice raised to tell these mountain 
races sunk in immorality, living in fear of demons 
and in dread of death, of the one and only Saviour. 

The next morning was still misty, and they were 
not called at four A.M. to take the expected ride to 
Tiger Hill. But about six they woke to their first 
view of the highest mountains in the world. 

To his father William wrote : 


We looked right from the hotel porch, out across deep 
ravines filled with mist, at the mighty range of the Hima- 
layas. The ranges we could see from the hotel were about 
forty miles away, and consisted of about ten peaks of 
which Kinshinjunga, twenty-eight thousand feet, was the 
highest. They were a solid mass of snow and towered above 
us clearly outlined against the blue sky. Our first view 
was very good but we had a better one next morning. 

We got started a little after four, while the stars and 
moon were still bright, for Tiger Hill. This “ hill’’, only 
nine thousand feet high, is about six miles from the hotel. 
I enjoyed the horseback ride very much although I nearly 
froze. We got to the top just as dawn began to break, 


ROUND THE WORLD BY 


and the effects of light and shade were wonderful. To our 
right was a perfect wall of snow-capped peaks about twenty 
thousand feet high, stretching away for a hundred miles. 
Directly west was the great range with Junga init. Then 
more to the left was a line of foot-hills about eleven or 
twelve thousand feet high, wooded and without snow. 
Beyond these, when the sun got higher, we could plainly see 
the peak of Mt. Everest, a hundred and twenty miles away. 
With the glasses we could see very distinctly the sharp lines 
and great bare cliffs. We spent nearly two hours on the hill 
and enjoyed every minute. 


Oh, the wonder of that mighty rampart beyond 
which lies Tibet! What words can paint the 
grandeur, purity and loveliness of its eternal snows, 
“shining in the dawn-light like some celestial 
country high above this lower world of human life 
and pain’’? All around them at Darjeeling were 
touching evidences of the unsatisfied longing of 
hearts that search in vain for comfort amid life’s 
mysteries. The faith of the mountain people is 
more simple and appealing than the heathenism of 
the plains. 


It was at Madura, near the sandy, southern point 
of the Indian peninsula, that they had their intro- 
duction to the worship of Siva, whose mark—a 
horizontal smear—they had seen on so many fore- 
heads. Imagine “a hot plain, a red road, shaded 
by the foliage of great overhanging trees in which 
monkeys were playing; the village folk coming 
home from the fields in the evening time ; the village 
wells surrounded by women and girls with their 
water-jars; bullocks and buffaloes resting after 
the toils of the day, and the smoke of little wood 


58 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


or weed fires filling the air”. In such surroundings 
they spent the night at a dak bungalow before 
visiting the great temple at Madura, one of the 
largest of the Dravidian temples of southern India. 
Covering a square twelve acres in extent, it domin- 
ated the surrounding country with its massive 
gopura, something between a pagoda and a pyramid, 
rising to a commanding height above each entrance. 
William’s description of this place shows his re- 
action to Hinduism.seen for the first time. 


January 1905. 


The Madura temple has five large gopura which are over 
two hundred feet high and four smaller ones. The outside 
of these structures is a solid mass of carved stone images 
of Hindu gods. Inside the wall is another enclosure with 
its gopura, and inside this is the sacred place which none 
but Hindus are allowed to enter. The rest of the space 
is taken up with bazaars, priests’ quarters, etc. . . . The 
interior of the temple contains many images and corridors 
with wonderful stone monoliths. In the centre is the 
‘‘ Tank of the Golden Lilies’. I am sure I didn’t discover 
any appropriateness about the name. The water was 
covered with green slime, and yet pilgrims were washing 
themselves and their clothes in it as well as drinking 
from it. It is supposed to wash away their sins... . Of 
course we were not allowed to go into some of the inner 
chambers and I guess it was just as well, for the worship 
of Siva to which the temple is given over is the foulest 
thing imaginable. 

The three principal Hindu gods are Brahma the creator, 
Vishnu the preserver and Siva the destroyer and reproducer. 
All the large temples we have seen and innumerable small 
shrines, are dedicated to the worship of Siva. You 
probably know something about this already—but if you 
don’t I can’t tell you, as it is too awful. The fact that 
this vile teaching is the most universal and popular thing 
in Hinduism is enough to offset everything that Hinduism 





TWO OF BORDEN’S PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN IN INDIA. 


1. The Golden Temple at Amritzar. Headquarters of the Sikh religion. 
2. The dak-bungalow near Madura. 


To fice page 58. 


2) a 
Wart he ee bs , 
Mara vt aoe a 


5 ’ 


a) 
s] N 
1 


A 


A) 
A) 


i> 
2 by A we 
| Pl ‘ler \ ‘i Vie a d rs wel 
ohary i J A | y ie ae ; 
¥ va L | = y. re A 


hn veh 
s jue , i. 
a) m ‘ey 


o 





ROUND THE WORLD 59 


may have done for the people, if it has done anything but 
degrade them. 

It makes me tired to have a person who knows little or 
nothing about it say that these people are as well off with 
their religion as we are with ours, or rather that theirs is 
as good as ours. Five minutes’ explanation of facts in any 
one of a dozen temples I have visited would disillusion such 
a person. 


He would not put in plainer language the things 
these temples stand for—the deification of lust, the 
actual worship of symbols of vice, and the slavery 
of tens of thousands of women and girls “ married 
to the gods’. Around the tempies in this part of 
India many monkeys gather and are looked upon 
as sacred. It was saying a good deal when one who 
knows the conditions wrote : 

‘Wealth and labour could not have been de- 
voted to baser practices than the erection of the 
vast enclosures dedicated to Siva and Vishnu. Even 
the sacred monkeys are disgraced by association 
with indescribable vileness.”’ 

Another aspect of idolatry and superstition was 
seen when they reached Madras just in time for the 
annual festival of Juggernaut. It was impossible 
to describe it adequately, but Borden did the best 
he could under difficulties. 


Feb. 1, 1905. 


Well I must hurry on to Madras. The city itself is 
nothing to see, but we were fortunate in being able to 
witness the festival of the Juggernaut. This had always 
been a sort of unreal fairy tale to me until I saw it. We 
took a carriage about nine thirty p.m. and drove towards 
the native quarter of the city. On the way we passed 
groups of people all hurrying in the same direction, some 


60 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


on foot and some crowded into little bullock carts. The 
whole native population seemed to be centering on one 
point. 

Immediately we entered the native city, it was all we 
could do to get the carriage through the crowds of people. 
Imagine the crowd at a parade at home, only dress them 
differently—-men and women with red shawls about them- 
selves, fakirs smeared from head to foot with ashes and 
dirt, making a ghastly combination, naked children and 
nearly everyone with some kind of a caste mark on his or 
her face. The street along which the procession was to 
pass was dimly lit up, adding to the weirdness of the 
scene. 

Finally the approach of the car was heralded by the 
pushing of the crowds and a vanguard of men beating 
kettledrums and a number of men with torches. And 
then came the car itself, a truly wonderful sight, drawn 
by two long lines of men. It was a square shrine about 
thirty feet high on wheels. The whole thing was a solid 
mass of gilt and was brilliantly lit up by numerous torches. 
The men would raise a great shout and then pull the 
clumsy affair a short distance, stop and start again, and 
so on. Of course since the British Government came into 
power, the practice of people throwing themselves beneath 
the wheels of the car, to procure immediate transition to 
heaven, has been stopped. Nevertheless, I can easily see 
how a religiously fanatical people could, under the excite- 
ment of the moment, do such a thing. I was very glad 
that I had seen it all, and am sure I won’t forget it for some 
time. 


And now they were at Benares, the sacred city 
on the Ganges, which is much the same to-day as 
when Macaulay wrote, “ It was commonly believed 
that half a million human beings were crowded into 
that labyrinth of lofty alleys, rich with shrines and 
minarets, and balconies, and carved oriels, to which 
the sacred apes clung by hundreds. The traveller 
could scarcely make his way through the press of 


ROUND THE WORLD 61 


holy mendicants and not less holy bulls. The 
broad and stately steps which descended from these 
swarming haunts to the bathing places were worn 
every day by the feet of an innumerable multitude 
of worshippers.” 

In Borden’s letter to his mother it is interesting 
to get the point of view of a healthy-minded boy 


among such scenes. 
February 6, 1905. 


DEAR MotHER—I was rather disappointed in Benares 
as a sacred city, it is too dirty, and its temples are com- 
paratively poor and small affairs. However, it has 
interesting features, of which the ghats are foremost. 

These ghats are steps or landing places which lead down 
to the Ganges. They are very numerous and practically 
line the whole water front. Some, in fact the majority, are 
bathing ghats for all classes of people. I mean there is a 
separate ghat for nearly every caste. There is only one 
burning ghat worthy of mention, and there all the dead 
of Benares are cremated. Benares is so holy that death 
within its precincts practically insures eternal happiness 
for the Hindu. The result is pilgrims come there simply 
to die. The best way to see these ghats is to take a boat 
on the river, which we did twice. In this way you get a 
very good view of everything. People are bathing con- 
tinually in the sacred stream. They wash themselves and 
their clothes in it, pray to it, drink it and throw their dead 
into it. It is quite a sight to see all this going on. The 
people bathe in their clothes, and many of them have no 
dry things to put on, and go away shivering in their wet 
garments. And it is cold here now in India. There is 
frost at night, and an overcoat is comfortable even during 
the day. It is really the strangest climate I ever met. I 
shivered all day, and then read in the paper that in the sun 
it had been 120° Fahrenheit ! 

But to return, we took a boat and went down stream 
for some distance, seeing people of all classes at their 
religious duties. ... The burning ghat, though not a 


62 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


pleasant sight, was quite interesting. Several corpses were 
in the process of cremation when we saw it. The bodies 
are placed on piles of wood right in the open, and the ashes 
are thrown into the Ganges with people bathing not fifty 
feet off. The bodies are placed in certain positions 
according to the creed of the deceased, some with the head 
pointing east, others west, etc. All day long throughout 
the year the smoke of one or more pyres rises from this 
place. Another method of disposing of the dea@ is to 
weight the bodies with stones and drop them in mid-stream. 
We saw several disposed of in this way. 

“Holy”? men and priests die, if possible, looking out 
over the river. As we passed down we saw an old man, 
a living skeleton, seated on the bottom step near the water 
with a friend propping him up. When we came back he 
was dead. He was one of the “ holy’ men. I hope you 
won’t mind hearing about these things, but they are actual 
everyday occurrences and I couldn’t well help seeing them. 

The city itself is a dirty hole, full of beggars, fakirs and 
temples, with narrow streets in which sacred cows, donkeys 
and goats run around loose, getting in everyone’s way. 
Right in the midst of this Hindu sanctum is the Mosque 
of Aurungzebe, the Mohammedan invader. He built this 
thing there just to insult the Hindus, and it is there yet, 
but his present followers have to enter by the side door as 
the Hindus have blocked up the main entrance. I have 
learned that, as a rule, any native with a beard is a 
Mohammedan, and those who have their whiskers dyed 
red have been to Mecca. Well this mosque has two tall 
minarets, one of which we climbed to get a view of the 
city. 

The temples are disappointing. They are right in the 
crowded part of the city and are very dingy places indeed. 
We were only allowed to look in and not to enter, of which 
I was not sorry. Cows came and went with impunity in 
the Golden Temple, which was positively sickening even 
from the doorway. The ‘“‘ Well of Knowledge” was a 
foul-smelling hole into which everyone threw flowers and 
water. We didn’t approach very close, though the priest 
wanted us to make an offering of flowers. 


ROUND THE WORLD 63 


And here the millions come and go, still seeking 
to wash away their sins. The “sacred” cow is 
still the emblem, more than the emblem, the em- 
bodiment of the Hindu’s highest hope, and if they 
cannot die by the Ganges, even scholarly men will 
send for a cow to be brought into the room and have 
the hgirs of its tail spread over their faces, that they 
may breathe their souls away in the most sacred 
atmosphere they know.? 

And we know that “‘ God so loved the world that 
He gave His only begotten Son that whosoever be- 
lieveth in Him should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life ”’. 

From Benares the travellers passed on up the 
Ganges to Allahabad, at the junction of that river 
with the Jumna—another focus of idolatrous 
worship, though at one time and for centuries under 
the heel of Moslem power. They reached the city 
as the annual Mela was commencing, when thousands 
of pilgrims were pouring in from far and near. For 
Allahabad is the site of “ the greatest Mela in India, 
when more than a million devout Hindus pour up 
from all over the land to bathe in the mingling of 
the waters of the two sacred rivers. There is 
probably no religious spectacle equal to it any- 
where else in the world. Under no other religion 
and in no other land could hundreds of naked men 
with matted locks and grotesquely daubed bodies 


1 There are temples like the temple of Vithoba, at Pandharpur, the 
great place of pilgrimage in the Deccan, where the cow is actually made an 
object of worship. The belief that the excreta of the cow have power to 
cleanse men from sin is well-nigh universal among Hindus.—From the 
Report on India and Persia, by Dr. Robert E. Speer, published in 1922, 
p. 152. 


64 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


be regarded as the highest embodiment of holiness, 
nor could such rites pass for religion and as accept- 
able with God.” 4 

It was these fakirs who specially interested 
Borden, though the vast concourse of people, their 
absorption in their devotions and the sadness and 
weariness of many faces made also a deep impres- 
sion. All the questions he wanted to ask at Alla- 
habad found ready answers, for they were privileged 
to have as their escort a missionary who had been 
long in India. ‘‘ You can learn more from a mis- 
sionary in half an hour,” he wrote with appreciation, 
‘than you can pick up yourself in a couple of months 
of travel.”’ 

February 12, 1905. 


Dr. Lucas came in on Friday from his camp. He goes 
to the country and visits villages through the week. He 
has been out thirty-four years and knows a thing or two. 
He told us that the Tessul Dhar, a native official, had 
promised him an elephant to use at the Mela. So Saturday 
morning we started off for the Mela grounds. 

On the way we passed groups of pilgrims, some in 
bullock carts but most walking. Many of the men carried 
baskets in which Dr. Lucas told us they would carry back 
bottles of the sacred water to their friends far away, after 
getting a priest to seal it and mark it as the original 
article. Groups of women passed along the road chanting 
mournfully. All the pilgrims had the same sad expression 
on their faces—no trace of hope or happiness. They had 
been coming there and their ancestors before them, and 
yet were just as badly off as ever. But they keep on 
coming. 

After some delay the elephant appeared and four of us 
clung to his back while he got on his feet, somewhat in the 


1 From the Report on India and Persia, by Dr. Robert E. Speer, 
published in 1922, p. 54. 


ROUND THE WORLD 65 


fashion of the camels at the World’s Fair. From the back 
of this creature we had a splendid view of the sea of 
turbaned heads. The road leading up to the levee was 
lined with shops containing all sorts of things. Bottles for 
holy water, powder for caste marks, flowers for offerings, 
jewelry, shawls, ete. This levee, called a “‘ bund” out 
here, was a good place to watch the approach of the 
pilgrims. They would come up the slope until they saw 
the river and then prostrate themselves in the dust and 
hurry on. I noticed that the women were much more 
painstaking than the men, who often did not stop at all. 
We rode with our elephant through the throng to the river 
bank, where we saw the crowds in bathing. It was cold 
and some of the poor beggars nearly shook to pieces in 
their wet clothes. . 

When we had gone as far as practicable, on account of 
the crowd, Walt and I got down and walked with Dr. Lucas 
to see the shrines, fakirs, etc. At the road sides were 
crowds of beggars with all sorts of deformities. Dr. Lucas 
explained that they consider any deformity a mark of divine 
power and consequently a holy thing. There were so many 
of these that a poor pilgrim could hardly be expected to 
offer something to all. But they would walk down the line 
with a bag of rice and drop a few grains at each place. In 
this way small heaps of rice and other food stuffs would 
collect in front of each one. 

But the fakirs were the most interesting sight of all. 
I don’t believe I have attempted to describe a fakir. He 
wears nothing but a loin cloth; his body is smeared or 
painted with ash-dust in such a way that it never comes 
off, but remains a dull grey color; his hair is long, and 
from sprinklings of ashes and more sprinklings of water, it 
hangs like pieces of half-inch rope. There were about two 
dozen of these men, but not all of them were self-torturists. 
However, there were about ten, either sitting or lying on 
boards full of spikes. To be sure the spikes were somewhat 
blunted, but it must have been very uncomfortable until 
they got hardened to it. There was one man sitting in a 
swing with one leg on the ground and his hands above his 
head. I noticed that his arms were very small and 

rp 


66 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


shrunken, and on inquiring we learned that he had held 
them up that way for seven years. The pain at first must 
have been frightful, but now he couldn’t get them down 
if he wanted to and can only move his hands a very little. 
I had never expected to see anything like this. Dr. Lucas 
says that the British Government has put a stop to the 
worst of their self-torturing practices, and he told us some 
that he had seen which I won’t repeat. 


It is difficult for westerners to enter with any 
understanding into the state of mind that produces 
such results. To see a man kneel or lie on his back 
in the blazing sun with his head completely buried 
in the ground, for a whole day at a time, would not 
impress us with a sense of his holiness or with any 
desire to worship him. But it is very different with 
those whose one hope for the next life is the accumu- 
lation of merit in this. 

At that very time there was in Bengal a woman 
who had been a fakir like the worst of those Borden 
saw at Allahabad. Having means of her own, she 
had visited all the most important temples in India, 
north, south, east and west, to try to escape the 
burden of sin. Her awful guilt was that her 
husband had died young, when she was only a 
child of thirteen, and of course it was attributed 


1 ** The Hindu devotee ”’, as Bishop Thoburn tells us, “‘ flatters himself 
that he can by his penances of various kinds accumulate merit. The word 
penance to his mind conveys no idea of repentance, but solely that of a 
means of acquiring personal merit. In the next place he is possessed with 
the idea that matter is inherently evil, and that, since his union with a 
material body is the source of most of his misfortunes, he must make war 
on the body to liberate the soul. . , 

‘©No doubt a large number, of both sexes, choose a life of asceticism 
because they find it the simplest and easiest way of securing their daily 
bread. . . . But many of them show abundant evidence that they are 
sincere in their purpose, and persist through long lives of severe suffering 
and privation in faithfully following the course they have chosen.” 


ROUND THE WORLD 67 


to some wickedness on her part in a previous life. 
To atone for this unknown sin and to obtain relief 
for heart and conscience she spent seven long years 
travelling on foot from shrine to shrine, facing un- 
told hardship and danger; but the burden grew 
only heavier as time went on. 

Then she determined to become a fakir. She 
had not suffered enough. She would give three 
years to self-inflicted torture, in the ways enjoined 
by the sacred books as pleasing to the gods. And 
this plan she carried out, though the sufferings she 
endured seem incredible. 

For one period of six months she sat without 
shelter in the sun all day with five fires burning 
around her, the perspiration streaming from every- 
pore. Even wealthy men would bring wood and 
keep the fires burning as an act of merit. With no 
clothing but a loin-cloth, her body smeared with 
ashes and her long hair with cow-dung, she was an 
object of veneration to the pilgrims, many of whom 
worshipped her as they fed the fires. At night she 
took her place in the temple, standing before the 
idol—actually standing on one foot with the other 
drawn up against it, from midnight until daylight 
—her hands pressed together in the attitude of 
prayer, imploring the god to reveal himself to her. 

And then, to increase her sufferings, when the 
cold season came with frosty nights, she went down 
at dark to the sacred pond and sat with the water 
up to her neck, counting her beads hour after hour, 
till dawn appeared. Thus she called upon Ram 
day and night, with no response. 


68 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


“Tf thou art God,” she used to plead, “ reveal 
thyself to me. Reach forth and take the offering 
I bring. Let me see, hear or feel something by 
which I may know that I have pleased thee, and 
that my sin is pardoned ’—but there was no sign, 
no rest, no peace. 

When the years of her long endurance were 
ended, she went to Calcutta, eut off her once- 
beautiful hair and threw it into the Ganges as an 
offering, exclaiming : 

‘““There—I have done and suffered all that can 
be required of mortal man, yet without avail !” 

She had lost faith in the idols and had ceased to 
worship them. 

“There is nothing in Hinduism,” was the con- 
clusion forced upon her, “ or I would have found 
then. 

Think of the privilege of bringing to such a soul 
the message of the love of God in Christ. Think 
of the joy on earth as well as in heaven when the 
seeking sinner and the seeking Saviour met at last. 
That, indeed, is something worth living for, worth 
dying for, the glorious compensation of the mission- 
ary’s life! And when the poor tortured fakir be- 
comes the spirit-filled preacher, telling by lip and 
life the riches of redeeming grace, think of the 
wonder of that transformation? Chundra Lela, 
Pandita Ramabai, Sadhu Sundra Singh—what wit- 
nesses these and many another to the power of the 
living Christ ! 


1 For a fuller account of this wonderful woman, see the brief biography 
entitled, An Indian Priestess : The Life of Chundra Lela, by Mis. Ada Lee. 
Morgan and Scott, London, E.C. 


ROUND THE WORLD 69 


This was the brighter side to our travellers’ ex- 
periences in India, for they did see and hear much of 
the transformation that is coming, slowly but surely, 
over the mingled peoples of that great land.1 

That Borden was thinking over these things is 
evident from his last letter from India. He had 
been writing to his sister at Vassar College about 
the native state of Rajputana—of Jeypore, the 
capital, with its wide streets, pink houses and 
fascinating medley of colour, its magnificent horses, 
trains of camels, and the “ Barbaric splendour ”’ of 
its Maharajah, who kept elephants and tigers to 
fight in his arena. But it was Sunday, and he 
turned to other things. 


RAJPUTANA HOTEL, ABU. 
February 26, 1905. 


Dear MotHer—I have just been reading over some of 
your letters and enjoying them so much. I do not expect 
to get any more until we reach Cairo. 

Walt and I have Bible study together every day when 
possible, and I enjoy it very much. He is able to point 
out many things that are new to me, and I am beginning to 
see what a wonderful storehouse of good things the Bible is. 
I pray every day for all my dear family. I also pray that 
God will take my life into His hands and use it for the 


1 “India is being converted. The ideas that lie at the heart of the 
Gospel are slowly but steadily permeating the whole of Hindu society, 
modifying every phase of Hindu thought.—A prominent non-Christian 
judge, a native of India. 

“It is the Christian’s Bible that sooner or later will work out the 
regeneration of India.’”’—The Maharajah of Travancore. 

“It is a new heart that India requires, a transformation of life and 
character. Who can give that to India except a divine Saviour ? Send us 
missionaries who are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, who are not 
ashamed of the Cross; men and women who are living in close personal 
touch with the Master ; men and women who have sat at His feet. They 
will meet India’s need ’’.—-Words of an Indian Christian. See ‘* Jesus 
Christ in the Thinking of Asia”? in The Missionary Review of the World 
for April 1924, p. 252 et seq. 


70 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


furtherance of His Kingdom as He sees best. I feel sure 
that He will answer my prayer. It strengthens me to know 
that you are also praying for this. 

I have so much of everything in this life, and there are 
so many millions who have nothing and live in darkness ! 
I don’t think it is possible to realise it until one sees the 
East. I know it is no easy thing to serve the Lord, but 
others have been enabled to do so, and there is no reason 
why I should not. Mark 10. 27. 


Among the letters he had been re-reading was a 
sheet of paper he had carried with him all the way 
from Japan—not a letter, only a few verses in his 
mother’s writing, sent to him for the birthday he 
had spent so far from home. All through college 
and seminary years he kept it. It was among his 
special papers to the last. 


Just as I am, Thine own to be, 
Friend of the young, who lovest me, 
To consecrate myself to Thee— 

O Jesus Christ, I come. 


In the glad morning of my day, 

My life to give, my vows to pay, 

With no reserve and no delay— 
With all my heart, I come. 


I would live ever in the light, 

I would work ever for the right, 

I would serve Thee with all my might— 
Therefore to Thee I come. 


Just as I am, young, strong and free, 

To be the best that I can be 

For truth and righteousness and Thee— 
Lord of my life, I come. 


CHAPTER V 


COMING HOME 


Summer 1905. Aet. 17 


‘**The meaning of being a Christian is that in response for the gift 
of a whole Christ I give my whole self to Him.” 
ALEX. MacLarEn, D.D. 


Ir was not until they were in Rome that Borden 
seems to have received a reply to his special letter 
from Japan. His mother understood and rejoiced ; 
his father wanted him to wait until he was twenty- 
one before committing himself to any decision as 
to his life-work. In the meanwhile the travellers 
had visited not only China, the Straits Settlements 
and India, but Egypt, Palestine and Asia Minor, 
and the chief treasure cities of Greece and Italy. 
To his father, William wrote from Naples : 


May 18, 1905. 


I have been enjoying myself more since we got into 
civilization again. . . . French is certainly useful here in 
Italy, although a great deal of English is spoken. I can 
understand French when not spoken at express speed, and 
some Italian, but the difficulty is to make oneself under- 
stood! It is really quite amusing. You ought to hear 
my attempts in Italian and French and English all at once. 

I hope to have my Homer pretty well in shape by the 
time I get back, so as not to be bothered with it at Camden. 
I suppose you will be going up there soon. Have my golf 

71 


72 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


clubs ready ; I am longing for a whack at the ball. Have 
you any kind of automobile in mind which you prefer? I 
would like to know. 

Please tell me a little about Chicago polities. How is 
Dunne? Whom did you vote for and what do you think 
about municipal ownership ? 

FLORENCE, May 28, 1905. 


We were nearly two weeks in Rome and saw a great 
many interesting things. I am curious to know how long 
you and Mother spent there on your wedding trip. There is 
an awful lot to see, isn’t there? I wrote to Mother telling 
her about some of the places and pictures we had seen, but 
not nearly all. So I will tell you what we did and enjoyed 
most. 

The afternoon of our first day we drove by the Colosseum, 
through the Arch of Constantine, around across the Tiber 
and back to our hotel, stopping at the Pantheon on the way. 
Horatius must have been a pretty good swimmer to cross 
the Tiber, if it flowed as swiftly then as it does now. The 
Colosseum is very interesting, I think. We went all over it 
from top to bottom. They have excavated some since you 
were in Rome and have laid bare the old pavement outside 
the amphitheatre on the side opposite the Forum. There 
was a wooden model, a reconstruction of the original, which 
gave one a very good idea of what it must have looked like 
in all its glory. 

The Pantheon, you remember, is the only building of 
ancient Rome in anything like perfect preservation. Its 
dome is very large and has a hole, thirty feet across, in the 
centre. The caldarium (hot room) of the baths was always 
made in this way, a dome with a hole closed by bronze 
doors in order to be able to control the temperature of the 
room. This hadn’t struck me until Dr. Forbes pointed it 
out. He says that the Pantheon was really at one time 
nothing but the caldarium of the baths of Agrippa, son-in- 
law of Augustus. 

Dr. Forbes, by the way, has been in Rome thirty-four 
years and is now the leading archaeological authority. You 
may have heard him lecture when you were here. We went 
with him three times and found him exceedingly interesting. 


I 


COMING HOME 73 


The places we went to were the Palatine Hill, the Forum and 
the excursion to Tivoli and Hadrian’s Villa. His talks were 
very interesting and instructive, given as they were on the 
exact spot where the events related took place. Romulus 
and Remus are facts and no longer legends. The legend of 
the wolf is explained by the fact that the wife of Faustulus 
was named Luca. Faustulus was one of the Sabines who 
lived by the Tiber, and his wife brought up Romulus and 
Remus. In the quarrel between Romulus and Remus, the 
two parties were led by Faustulus and Quintibius. The 
legend was that these two men were buried where they fell. 
Dr. Forbes has discovered their tombs seven feet below the 
level of the Forum of Caesar—I mean the Roman Forum, 
but at the period around a.p. As no one could be buried 
within the limits of Roma Quadrata this proves that the 
walls did not extend that far, and that the Forum was the 
battle-ground between the rival clans of Romulus and 
Remus on the Palatine and Quirinal hills. We were shown 
where Cicero delivered his orations and the spot where 
Julius Caesar’s body was burned. It was exceedingly 
interesting, but I couldn’t begin to tell you all about it. 

I enjoyed the collections of antiques about as much as 
anything. My, but aren’t there a lot of fine statues! [Dm 
not sure which I prefer. As a group, I guess the Laocoén 
is about as good as any. I think I prefer Perseus with the 
head of Medusa to the Apollo Belvedere. And I certainly 
prefer the features and expression of Mercury. But then, 
I didn’t have time enough to study them, although I did 
go to it two or three times. Now that I have seen the 
Marble Faun I must read the book, and shall when I find 
time. Undoubtedly, Rome excels in its collections of 
statues and antiques, but the pictures aren’t in it with 
those here in Florence for instance. So perhaps I’m not 
all wrong when I say that I didn’t care much for the 
pictures, while I did enjoy the sculptures. 

I learned of two pictures, or rather a whole gallery 
which I hadn’t visited, the Corcini. I wanted very much 
to see Van Dyck’s Madonna and also Carlo Dolci’s. But 
I made a mistake about the hour to which the gallery 
remained open, and consequently missed seeing them. J 


74 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


was very much struck by the prints, and may say they 
were the only ones which I really cared for. Carlo Dolci’s 
is simply great, and it will be one of the first things I see 
if I ever get to Rome again. You may not remember the 
picture, but I have a fine carbon print of it to show you 
when [I arrive. 


Venice brought delightful relaxation. 


June 1, 1905. 


We are now in the city of watery streets and gondolas, 
having arrived last night. After dinner we strolled over to 
St. Mark’s, heard the band play and had some ice cream. I 
expect to enjoy our stay here. 


It was warm June weather, and every day they 
had a swim at the Lido followed by afternoon-tea, 
much appreciated after the sight-seeing of the 
morning, while evening was spent in a gondola, 
meeting friends, listening to music and watching 
the lights over the water. In the Doges’ Palace 
they met an American party of seven young ladies 
with a chaperone who proved to be friendly as well 
as interesting, and they had already joined company 
with a Mrs. A. and her daughter, the latter a 
young graduate of Bryn Mawr under appointment 
as a missionary to India. So the week in Venice 
passed all too quickly, filled with many interests. 


June 4, 1905. 


Mrs. A. invited us to go out in their gondola last night. 
It was simply great! The lights on the Grand Canal and 
the little dark Rios were a picture. We went way up to 
the north-eastern corner of the city, to the Three Bridges, 
and then out by the Guidecca and back down the Grand 
Canal. We lay alongside one of the singing barges and 
listened to the music for an hour or so. It was fine! I 
suppose you know all about it, for you and father must 


COMING HOME a: 


have enjoyed just such nights here together. I think I 
would like to come here on my wedding trip, if I ever have 
one. . . . Walt and I were remarking the other day that 
we had only met three American girls on our whole trip, 
until now. There’s nothing like a real true American girl : 
French, German, English or Irish aren’t in it ! 


In the midst of all this gaiety it is surprising to 
find how earnestly he was thinking about deeper 
things. From Rome he had written : 


May 17, 1905. 


Daruinc MotHEer—I am glad that you have told Father 
about my desire to be a missionary. I am thinking about 
it all the time, and looking forward to it with a good deal of 
anticipation. I know that I am not at all fitted or prepared 
yet, but in the next four or five years I ought to be able to 
prepare myself. I have been reading Mr. Speer’s book on 
Missionary Principles and Practice. It is very good, in 
my opinion. He takes up the different kinds of missionary 
work, educational, medical and evangelistic, and discusses 
them with regard to the different countries. You may have 
read it, and if you haven’t I think you would like it. 

I don’t think I want to go through a Seminary, but 
thorough Bible study is what I do need. As Dr. Torrey 
says, “It’s much more important and profitable to know 
what God has to say on a subject than what men have to 
say.” I would like some medical skill . . . enough so as 
not to be absolutely helpless and ignorant. But I really 
oughtn’t to try and form plans of my own but let God do 


it for me, and then it’s sure to be right. . . . I will be 
mighty glad when I can talk things over meth you. 
Lots and lots of love, WILLIAM. 


And now amid all the charms of Venice : 


June 4, 1905. 


I have just finished reading Mr. Speer’s book. It has 
helped me a great deal. I especially noticed the two 
chapters he takes to the Student Volunteer Movement. He 


76 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


shows very clearly what the motto, ‘‘ The Evangelization of 
the World in this Generation ’’ means, and how perfectly 
possible it is, provided we pray the Lord of the harvest to 
send forth labourers. There is something inspiring in the 
project tome. It is something fine, something worth every 
effort to accomplish and which will repay us when we have 
done our duty. 

When I got through reading, I knelt right down and 
prayed more earnestly than I have for some time for the 
mission work and for God’s plan for my life, and also for 
His plan for the lives of every one of my family. Oh 
Mother, do pray for me. College is so near and there will 
be such a lot of things to do, tremendous opportunities ! 
Pray that I may be guided in everything, small and great. 


A month had been kept for England ; but before 
crossing the Channel, a brief visit to Switzerland 
introduced Borden to real mountain climbing, which 
was to become his highest enthusiasm as far as 
personal enjoyment was concerned. Their first 
mountain was the Titlis, eleven thousand feet high, 
and with nails in their boots and a good guide they 


set out from Engelberg. 
June 18, 1905. 


We walked that afternoon for an hour and a half to 
Trubsee. There we found a little hotel perched on the edge 
of a cliff, overlooking the town and valley of Engelberg. 
It was simply great, and after our walk a nice simple Swiss 
meal tasted pretty fine. We had our first glass of fresh milk 
since leaving America. Right back of the hotel rose the 
range of snowy mountains, some of them quite peaked, 
others less so. The Titlis is not peaked, but its summit is 
entirely covered with snow. 

At 2.15 A.M. we arose and had something to eat. Two 
other parties, Germans, were going up also. After the first 
few minutes we left them and went on ahead, slowly but 
steadily, hardly stopping at all for an hour and a half. 
During that time we had been climbing up an easy sloping 










iM 

: t¥ Q ty) ery ‘et va ial a!, 
| i ot | CAM NR: beh ema) Lt avert broues ‘ 
mie % oy ‘ MONG AL sft ks) te 


“ Wiad Ne a! i 
} es sigh? OTR, é 
=i pe 7 ot yan ay 7 Tey M + + ee #s - 
ad stg Sar ee One eae vp a5 ve 
= i. i hay y % nN) “FF : 4” be ; Ht) : 9 } he eh ly - Wie ti i N a b ; 
as Lh re eye rye hi. h ‘er went j rn m A Sn 
ae ft Wh O im Vie et yt ater Ne : 
wi od lt acl MN ivy thy hy , : ‘ed Liye tAviM 7 es ree “ 
Th eae S I ee a TL. bee st (Chg Pn rahi ros Aces 
"? TE ee ns Sa, fo (AN RRRRE LAME 9 fot + Vouk ’ 
nik A OF con (| i" NAEP in 1 eat wi ma? 
eins i ei PG eit : ; 4 yh 
wr i a & e1 ¢ Ay ve ged fousl , ive i ' ve ; * 4 : 4 
\ 4 A f akon ah ‘ * he vei 
; i : whet pa Ay 1 ei ae P 1 hah ae teal , 
sheet RSE Ne one Ne A oo 
1 Apr ae ‘ A“) Paws ae 
wk NaN. ine ie mi ie ye ay 4 K { + a Mie af Bs d v 175) P ade oT i 
7 ‘wh ik iy Yi AT co a ‘f ee : / i . A . ae 
th AS aa Wien te a a v/a Wit A i 
ere ay \ vp . 5 <s ry ‘ af J f es aay 1 wu cA rary ris Ny 4, ie 
P r a 4 nN 7 7 - 
% py iter!) 0 re ij P ry & eh ' mike Fie « Re if - » Z 
Wie - raw) } 7 thi x ? \ at ay a "7 {2 7 th wi } role Ps } o Fj 
: ae 7 ‘ ut \ - oF . 4 i] : ef - se $ ; A , A sake v 
rat Won y, 4 Ade Oh ‘Se { ‘ he ~ if 7 ae, > ta out iy j 
h) aellN f wa » «& te al shat ' Ay? ¢ : . i : i :- + 
7 nae ys 7 J ¥ J », i - 4 ‘ ie %. ew : a pA i Ri 
Nei ER Ay LAR Sako Pi 4 tv, bry Ne Wa tems ey, Py 
Ma wat; ' V ; \. l y Te a ay , 4 i, 1} on Fe, wa ¢ Pal eu : hs ‘ 
, i y id ; 4 a *, Was 
7 seh 5, a 1 ® ihe Ao PERI D “eh tiie _ nie ah acre: Hi i . 
ra ‘ (Paes ca VA a! hi nie ti ee '\) ? Ne | 
vf ai rt : * an) anty i Je eySeis " Vy Al ee ae ’ Or ee a ' 
¥ 2 H i »* r AR i ah ha hee any 
4 hg ed Ya! + at ‘ Mn ’ by. : cba? f 0 t i eite y ius 
‘FF ail ‘hy F ie oll ‘Y ra ' 
1 i i ca » . t Rees ‘ ye! 4 
ei \ afr , 7 ‘ ey , r Pa Ay ho t | ‘yee i % ht 
a ' y : ~ A : 4 
- ; / } , Moat ea ote, he , f : aie a 9 
d Ai B i yr oy é Ae U ASE, aL . Sh. ob 
. N , \ 154 , , ry a Yi 7. oe fs oe a '; 
B +5 ; r q ‘ 7 FF "4 / ty 4 area 2 oe. ii. | 
Aho ; ' f : ‘ ‘ {624 feos | yA ia 
Sera ec’ oes bi ey CMTE AAI 2* ge ean 
~ ‘le > é ‘ is Tbs F j "ht Ce wi ‘ 4 
4 > ih re “ ‘' : fA, 4 se new ‘ Pah, Cth 
f ' a; om t » Pee [ hi es ‘ ny e Sa 
icus aoe eye ¥ j y ‘A - ie I c seat :. ' ha rade | 
A ip % wo | ig / hi us ¥ + ve ea fe ti [ if) 
ne. yr gE Oe Pda A 1 ’ is Ae ! iy oe 
iy , me be! en 2 ‘ { Ai #= > gu) hg ae Ne Le ay 
ry Lard 4, Aa, : , iis ie ; ' 
: Fis, y en eli nas me ne P | a= ht 4 i co 
an ; i AL £ bd Vary 
On 





aa Ob fa 
Baris} ape 5 " wi: 


Mh ives 
“(Gy 


BORDEN AND HIS GUIDE ON ONE OF THE HIGH ALPS. 





To face page 77. 


COMING HOME ri 


foothill and had crossed some snowfields. The snow at 
this altitude was soft, still we didn’t sink in more than an 
inch or so. When we had rested a moment we hitched up, 
the guide taking the lead, I next and Walt last. 

From there on it was all snow and quite a pull, but we 
reached the top in about an hour and twenty minutes, 
which was fair time. It was then about six and the sun 
was up and giving considerable warmth. We were very 
lucky in having a fine view of the mountains over towards 
Interlaken, Monte Rosa and the Dome in the distance, with 
the Jungfrau and many others nearer. It was worth three 
hours’ hard work. I felt fine; the last stretch had gone 
very easily as I had gotten my stride and second wind. 
After we had eaten a little we started down, Walt leading 
and the guide last. We slid wherever we could, standing 
up and leaning back on our alpenstocks. It was great 
sport, and we laughed and shouted and had a fine time. 
After a bit the crust got thinner and we couldn’t go so well, 
as we would break through and tumble over. We stopped 
only a few moments at the hotel to gather our belongings, 
and then went right on down to Engelberg, getting the nine 
A.M. train back to Lucerne. 


In some ways the best was reserved for the last, 
for the travellers reached England in the midst of 
the London season, when the international cham- 
pionships were being contested in tennis, cricket 
and other sports. Paris had been delightful, and 
Borden had taken special lessons in a school for 
chauffeurs, learning to drive a car in the Bois de 
Boulogne. He had wandered through miles of 
pictures in the Louvre and had marvelled at the 
glory of Versailles, a palace indeed! But the 
Anglo-Saxon in him rejoiced to set foot on British 
— soil. 

‘‘ What bliss to be back in a land”’, he wrote, 
‘where people talk English !”’ 


78 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 
LONDON, July 7, 1905. 


We have been having delightful weather here for a week 
and have enjoyed ourselves very much. 

We went out to Wimbledon and saw some fine tennis 
last Tuesday. To-morrow we will go and see some of the 
finals which will be very good. Wednesday we went to the 
Henley Regatta, at Henley on Thames. It was a fine sight. 
We got a canoe and paddled around among the crowd. The 
very first boat we went alongside had Barbara (a cousin) 
and her friends init. It was rather remarkable considering 
that there were ten thousand people there. We only 
stayed for the morning races and returned to London about 
two. We saw the American eight defeated by the famous 
Leander crew. 

Went to St. Paul’s Cathedral the other day and climbed 
up to the whispering gallery and down into the crypt to the 
tombs of Wellington, Nelson and others. The Bank of 
England and Exchange are in that part of the town, so we 
visited them also. On the way back we went down a little 
court off Fleet Street and saw the Church of the Knight 
Templars, a pretty little old building. Oliver Goldsmith’s 
Tomb was just outside. ‘The most interesting thing we did 
was to take lunch at the Cheshire Cheese. This is the 
original Inn at which Dr. Sam Johnson and others used to 
meet, “‘ Ye Olde Cheshyre Cheese.” 

In the afternoon we went over to Lord’s cricket grounds 
to see the Cambridge-Oxford match. It was evidently 
quite a social event, as everyone was there and in their 
best. The field also was fine, but after watching the 
match for a while we had had enough of cricket and retired. 
To-day we spent our morning at the Tower which I found 
very interesting. 


There were museums and picture galleries to see, 
the Houses of Parliament, Westminster Abbey and 
Hampton Court. There was boating on the Thames, 
coming home in the long summer evening by four- 
horse coach, shopping, calling on friends, and more 
than one visit to Shepherd’s Bush where “ the 


COMING HOME 79 


finest tennis in the world ”’ was being played. And 
amidst it all there was a new and deeper gladness, 
for to Borden had come perhaps the most vital ex- 
perience of his life. ‘“‘ I believe and I belong” was 
henceforth to have new meaning. His own account 
of what took place is better than anything that can 
be said about it. 


HoTEL RUSSELL, LONDON, 
Friday, July 7, 1905. 

Drar MotuEer—lI thought I would write you two letters 
this time, as I have several things to speak about. Last 
Sunday and Monday were a sort of Convention to me. I 
went to four meetings, every one of which was fine. 

Sunday morning, Walt and I went over to Dr. Campbell 
Morgan’s church, to hear Dr. Dixon of Boston preach. 
The sermon was very good. As I took notes, I can tell you 
all about it. One thing he said after the Scripture reading 
was, “ Don’t test the Bible by the book or the sermon ; 
test the book or the sermon by the Bible... .” Heisa 
man who preaches the Gospel, like Dr. Torrey. 

Dr. Torrey, as you know, has been holding meetings 
here in London for five months. This last month or so 
they have been in a specially constructed hall on the Strand, 
seating about five thousand. Sunday was the last day of 
these meetings. Walt and I went in the afternoon. The 
hall was by no means full, but there were fifteen hundred I 
guess. 

Dr. Torrey spoke about being “‘ born again’”’, and 
mentioned some of the foolish ideas people have about it. 
His sermon was meant to straighten things out. I know 
that my own ideas were somewhat hazy, and I wasn’t at 
all sure about it. ButIamnow. The text was John 3. 6, 
‘“* That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is 
born of the Spirit is spirit ’’>—and Dr. Torrey gave five 
proofs by which we can tell whether we are “ born again ”’, 
born of the Spirit, or not. Every proof was a verse of 
Seripture. That’s what I like, lots of the Word of God and 
little of man. The five proofs were very convincing and 
plain. 


80 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


In the letter he could only state the points made, 
but in the full notes taken at the time he went more 
into detail. The proofs as he gave them were the 
following : 


Ist. 1 John 2.29. ‘“* Every one that doeth righteousness 1s 
born of Him.” Righteousness equals such actions as are 
straight. Straight action is conduct that is conformed to 
a straight edge. And the straight edge of life is the Word 
of God. Righteousness equals the practice of such actions 
as are conformed to the Word of God. Do we practise 
righteousness ? If we-do, we are born of God. 

2nd. 1 John 3. 9. ‘‘ Whatsoever is born of God doth not 
commit sin.’ Sin is something done, a breaking of the 
law; and the law is the revealed will of God. Sin, there- 
fore, is transgression of the will of God. “ Every one that 
doeth sin, doeth also lawlessness: and sin is lawlessness.”’ 
1 John 3. 4. The regenerate man does not wilfully and 
intentionally sin. 

3rd. 1 John 3. 14. “* We know that we have passed out 
of death into life because we love the brethren.” The brethren 
are all those who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. Love 
for the brethren, positive and negative, is explained in 
verses 16-18. We ought to love to the extent of giving 
our lives—literally, if necessary—as God did for us. “ Let 
us not love in word, neither with the tongue, but in deed 
and in truth’, v. 18. Love for the brethren is a proof of 
rebirth. 

4th. 1 John 5.1. ‘* Whosoever believeth that Jesus ts the 
Christ is born of God.” Christ equals the Anointed One 
of God. Belief equals absolute conviction. Whosoever 
is convinced absolutely that Jesus is the Anointed One of 
God is born of God. 

5th. 1 John 5. 4. ‘* Whosoever is born of God over- 
cometh the world.” A regenerate person has that within 
him which overcomes the world. 

Summary: One who is “born again” practises 
righteousness ; is not committing sin; loves the brethren ; 
believes that Jesus is the Christ ; overcomes the world. 
We cannot do all this by ourselves, therefore what are we 


COMING HOME 81 


todo? Answer, John1.12. ‘“ As many as received Him, 
to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to 
them that believe on His Name.” So we have only to 
believe in Jesus and receive Him, and immediately we have 
power to become sons of God. 

(The next thing to do is to use this power. W. W. B.) 


Missing dinner at the hotel, Borden hastened 
back to the evening meeting. The vast hall, seated 
for five thousand, was filled to capacity, and a deep 
hush fell on the listeners as Dr. Torrey gave his 
closing message. To-day versus To-morrow was his 
theme, and men were made to feel that they simply 


could not afford to put off the vital matter of 
salvation. 


“ To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your 
hearts. 7°" Heb. 3'7. 


‘“ Boast not thyself of to-morrow, for thou 
knowest not what a day may bring forth.” Prov. 
27.1. 


The wise man accepts Christ to-day ; the foolish 
puts it off till to-morrow. 


Of his experience that night Borden continued 
in the letter to his mother : 


After this Dr. Torrey called for decisions. Fifty or 
sixty came forward and confessed Christ. Dr. Torrey told 
us to speak to those about us. I had an awful tussle, and 
almost didn’t, for I thought the people around me were all 
Christians. However I wasn’t sure, and so decided not to 
be the foolish man of “to-morrow”. I spoke to a lady 
next to me, and others, but they were all saved. However, 
I felt much better, and know it will be easier to do next 
time. 

In the After Meeting, Miss Davis sang the song, “I 
surrender all”’, and an invitation was given to those who 

G 


82 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


had never publicly done so, whether Christians or not, to 
do so then. I stood up with several others, and we sang 
the chorus : 


I surrender all, I surrender all ; 
All to Thee, my blessed Saviour, 
I surrender all. 


Dr. Torrey then gave us a little talk on, The Way of 
Life. He also spoke on, How to keep on with the Christian 
Life when it is begun : 

1. Look always at Jesus. 

2. Keep confessing Jesus everywhere. 

3. Keep studying God’s Word, Matt. 4. 4. 

4. Keep praying every day, 1 Thess. 5. 17. 

5. Go to work. 

The first four I am doing and the fifth I will do. 

Well, when I got home that night I felt there was a 
difference. You know the expression, “‘ for heaven’s sake ”’, 
that I have used so much. I knew it was wrong and yet 
I couldn’t stop it. Before last Sunday I had been praying 
about it, but not very earnestly I am afraid, for though I 
managed to keep it from my lips, it got started several 
times. That night I prayed not only that my life might 
be controlled but my thoughts also, and I meant it. I 
expected a direct answer and got it the next day, and I 
have been kept in that matter ever since. I don’t think 
I ever had any real definite experience like that before, and 
it has strengthened my faith. And now I am praying more 
earnestly about things for which we have been praying 
SOMETIME ieee 

You won’t be able to get any answer to me about all 
this, but we will talk things over when I arrive. 


A deep conviction that to accept Christ as 
Saviour means to accept Him as Lord was part of 
this experience, and a conviction leading to action. 
Personal work was the outcome. It was no easier 
for Borden at seventeen to witness for Christ than 
it is for other young fellows of his age. He was 





COMING HOME 83 


reserved by nature. But he had taken a step that 
must have consequences. In his journal he had 


written for that Sunday : 
July 2, 1905. 


Fine address. I was greatly helped and surrendered all 
to Jesus at the invitation. 


Surrender in his case meant not only giving up 
worldly amusements and indulgences, it meant 
taking on his Master’s yoke, living with Him for 
others, always and everywhere. And it was very 
practical. Of the very next Sunday he wrote to 
his mother : 


In the evening I started out to call on E. W. at the 
Coburg Hotel. I didn’t feel just right about it, as I know 
you don’t like us to make such calls on Sunday. However, 
I went ahead. Walking down Oxford Street, I came to a 
place where an out-door service was being held. Some- 
thing told me to stop and help, but I went on. I had 
almost gotten to the Coburg when I heard the singing of 
another group and after a few minutes decided to go back. 
So I did and joined the group. It was a Wesleyan Mission 
Band, holding a Gospel service. 

After the meeting was over, I spoke to a young fellow 
and asked him if he believed in Jesus Christ. He said he 
didn’t and didn’t ever intend to. We stood on the street 
corner and talked until eleven p.m. He had evidently read 
some books written by a destructive critic, and I wasn’t 
well enough versed to meet his questions in a way to con- 
vince him. He was a very nice young fellow, and gave 
me his address and said he would be very glad if I could 
convince him. I am going to get Pierson’s Many Infallible 
Proofs, and try some more with him. 


And he did, spending an entire afternoon hunting 
him up in Shoreditch, a very unattractive part of 
London. But the address proved to be fictitious. 


84 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


There was no such house or person to be found. It 
was a keen disappointment ; but who shall say how 
much of blessing came to Borden himself—and to 
countless others—through his faithfulness in _per- 
sonal work which began with that full and glad 
surrender to Jesus Christ as Lord ? 

It is the surrendered life that counts, for through 
it God can work. 


PART II 
YALE UNIVERSITY 


Tue life that counts must toil and fight ; 

Must hate the wrong and love the right ; 

Must stand for truth, by day, by night— 
This is the life that counts. 


The life that counts must hopeful be ; 

In darkest night make melody ; 

Must wait the dawn on bended knee— 
This is the life that counts. 


The life that counts must aim to rise 
Above the earth to sunlit skies ; 
Must fix its gaze on Paradise— 

This is the life that counts. 


The life that counts must helpful be ; 

The cares and needs of others see ; 

Must seek the slaves of sin to free— 
This is the life that counts. 


The life that counts is linked with God ; 
And turns not from the cross, the rod ; 
But walks with joy where Jesus trod— 
This is the life that counts. 
A. W. 


CHAPTER VI 


FRESHMAN 
1905-1906. dit. 17-18 


** Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way ? by taking 
heed thereto according to thy word.’’—Ps. 119. 9. 


‘Thy word have I hid in my heart that I might not sin against 
thee.’’—Ps. 119. 11. 


Borden’s college mottos ; the first he illuminated for his room ai 
Yale, the second he wrote in full on the fly-leaf of his pocket Testament. 
It was at Camden that the reunion took place—the 
summer home on the coast of Maine which Mr. 
Borden had recently built. The golf-links, bathing 
and yachting, delightful as they were, all took a 
secondary place compared with the renewed family 
intercourse and especially the times when William 
could be alone with his mother. College was draw- 
ing near, and there was more to look forward to than 
to look back upon after the first few days. 

Is life anywhere on earth more real, more intense, 
more crowded with interest and full of opportunity 
than during the brief formative years of a college 
course ? Into this absorbing life Borden plunged 
a month or so after his return to America. Yale 
with its fine old campus and still finer traditions 
was a new world to him, but one in which he was 


soon to take no unworthy part. 
87 


88 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


YALE, September 28, 1905. 


DEAR MotuEer—I am here, as you know, and the crises 
have passed. Yesterday I took my Iliad examination and 
this afternoon learned that I had successfully passed it. 
As this was my only condition, I am now a member in full 
standing of the class of 1909... . 

On our arrival in New Haven, John [his brother] came 
up with me to this house, 242 York Street. My room is at 
the back and has a large bay-window in three sections, with 
an immense window-seat. As none of my trunks had 
arrived, I went over with him to his rooms in White Hall. 
He and George have a very nice suite, two bedrooms and a 
sitting-room. Things were in an awful mess though, as 
last year’s occupants hadn’t removed their stuff. We 
wandered around a while and met a good many fellows I 
knew. My trunks came in the afternoon, but I didn’t 
unpack much, as the general opinion is that it is best not 
to do so until Thursday. John took M. H. and myself 
down to Mori’s to dine. This is a little place—quite 
historic—where the fellows feed more or less. The tables 
have initials carved all over them, and in one room there 
is a special table on which seniors leave their trade marks. 

After dinner I went back home and John left me. 
About 8.30 some sophomores came in and made me do a 
few foolish stunts which didn’t amount to much. I sang 
them a song and attempted to “ scramble ” like an egg, a 
very difficult thing to do, I assure you! However, they 
went after a few minutes and I was left in peace for the rest 
of the night. 

The next morning I passed my Iliad examination, and 
in the afternoon registered at Alumni Hall. There also we 
were assigned to divisions and given study schedules, etc. 
In the afternoon I went out and watched the football 
practice and while out there met Bob Noyes, a Hill fellow, 
who very kindly invited me to dinner. So that night, the 
‘* awful night ’’, I dined with him and some other fellows, 
after which we went over to the campus to see the wrestling. 
Our dinner had taken us a long time, so we were late and 
the wrestling had already begun when we arrived. The 
seniors, without hats and with coats on inside out, were 


FRESHMAN 89 


seated in a large circle with their torches on the ground in 
front of them. In the centre were all the big “ Y ”’ men 
who were running the performance. I could only get a 
glimpse now and then of the doings inside, but the 
sophomores won the match by winning the third bout, 
the heavy weight, after the first two had been drawn. 

After this the whole crowd adjourned to York Street 
and for a few minutes things were quite lively. Being 
peacefully inclined, we stayed up on the porch of 242 and 
looked on. Later, one of my visitors of the night before 
arrived, more or less drunk. There might have been 
something doing only Bob Noyes told him to leave me alone, 
for which I was thankful. I went over and slept with John 
that night, as George was putting up with someone else. 
So you see I have been well taken care of. I must quit 
now as there are lots of things to be done. 


Oct. 1, 1905. 


Dear MotHER—This is Sunday evening and I have time 
to write you. I will take up the tale where I left off. 

Friday morning our recitation began and I rather 
enjoyed mine. I don’t think the work will be very hard. 
However I won’t loaf just because it seems easy. . . . Lam 
out trying for the freshman football eleven. As there are 
ninety-nine others doing likewise, there is a pretty good 
chance of your wish being fulfilled—that I should not make 
the team. 

The opening of College has brought out all sorts of 
things. Nearly everyone uses a translation in his studies, 
that is in Greek and Latin. The great majority smoke, go 
to the theatre Saturday night and do their studying on 
Sunday. Rather a hopeless state of affairs! However, 
there are some fine Christian men in College and in my own 
class too, I believe. And I hope to be able to do something, 
by the grace of God, to help in the right direction. I am 
taking meals next door at a table with seven other fellows. 
One of these fellows only, besides myself, doesn’t smoke 
and study on Sunday. I have only just met him but he 
seems like a pretty nice fellow. I must not criticise but 
rejoice that I am here in a position to give to others a little 


90 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


of what I have received. I am thankful for all the true 
teaching I have had from you, dear Mother, and Mr. 
Lombard, Walt and others. I know you are praying for 
me, so I don’t have to ask you to. And there are others 
also. I just had a letter from Walt, in which he said that 
an old English lady in the Mission had told him that she 
had prayed for us every day for the past year. What a 
thing Christian fellowship is and what a power prayer! I 
wish I had that little poem you sent me once, about the 
ploughman at his work, praying, and the missionaries 
wondering how their words had such power, ‘“‘ because they 
did not see someone unknown, perhaps, and far away, on 
bended knee.” 4 

This morning President Hadley preached in Chapel and 
gave a very good sermon for the opening of a college year. 
Only in impressing the necessity of having a fixed purpose 
in life and distinguishing between right and wrong, he 
neglected to say what our purpose should be, and where we 
should get the ability to persevere and the strength to 
resist temptations—things which seemed rather essential 
to me. 

I forgot to mention the Dwight Hall reception which 
was held Friday night. The freshman class was invited to 
meet the President. I went and after we had all been 
introduced the President spoke and then others—the 
captains of the various teams and John Magee. The 
quartet also added to the entertainment and refreshments 
were served. It was a very nice informal gathering and I 
met a good many fellows. .. . 


* The weary ones had rest, the sad had joy 
That day, and wondered ‘“ how? ” 
A ploughman singing at his work had prayed, 
‘** Lord, bless them now.” 


Away in foreign lands they wondered “ how ”’ 
Their simple word had power. 

At home, the “** Gleaners ”’, two or three, had met 
To pray an hour. 


Yes, we are always wondering “* how ? ” 
Because we do not see 

Someone, unknown perhaps, and far away, 
On bended knee. 


FRESHMAN 91 


Oh, I nearly forgot about this evening’s meeting! Dr. 
Henry Wright, son of the Dean, gave us a splendid address 
in Dwight Hall. It was the real true thing, and as he dealt 
with matters closely related to college life it was very 


helpralers 5°. 

Dwight Hall and Henry Wright were to have so 
large a part in Borden’s experiences at Yale that it 
is important to understand their relation to the life 
of the University. From the recently published 
biography of Dr. Wright it is evident that he was in 
America very much what Henry Drummond had 
been in Scotland. His brilliant scholarship was 
almost lost sight of in his spiritual fervour, complete 
consecration and passion for winning men to Christ. 
He had a genius for friendship, and was young 
enough (twenty-eight when Borden entered) to be 
closely in touch with student life. He had taken 
his Doctor’s degree in classics and had already been 
two years on the faculty, of which his father was 
Dean, as a Tutor in Greek and Latin. He had also 
been General Secretary of the Yale Y.M.C.A. (1898- 
1901), and it was during that period of his post- 
graduate studies that he came to be a campus figure. 

Dignified, kindly, a trifle shy at times, always eager to 
be of use, he grew into the hearts of faculty and students 
alike. ‘‘ In connection with my own undergraduate days,”’ 
said Prof. B. W. Kunkel of Lafayette College, * I look upon 
Henry’s smile of greeting at the head of the stairs in Dwight 
Hall, as we came to the meetings, as one of the benedictions 
which helped me through the week.” ! 

Dwight Hall, the home of the Y.M.C.A., was 
still, when Borden entered Yale, what Henry Wright 


1 Krom The Life of Henry B. Wright, by George Stewart, Jr. Association 
Press, New York, p. 32. 


92 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


had made it. It stood for a high type of scholar- 
ship as well as Christian manhood. From the Sun- 
day evening services, often gathering hundreds, to 
the group meetings and personal talks in the little 
room on the top floor, it was the scene of much of 
the best work done in the University. And it was 
the inheritor of a glorious past. For the Y.M.C.A., 
organized in 1881, had not been a beginning so 
much as a culmination of Christian activity in the 
University. It had- been “adopted as the best 
channel for the expression of the rich heritage of 
two centuries of Yale’s religious traditions ”’. 

Founded in the first instance (in 1701) as a 
college for training men for the ministry of the 
gospel, Yale has always had a deeply religious basis, 
and has been visited in the past by many remark- 
able revivals of spiritual life. Under the mighty 
preaching of Whitfield, then only twenty-five years 
of age, the first of these took place (1740) and they 
have been repeated at intervals, so that we read of 
a whole series of revivals under the presidency of 
the first Dr. Timothy Dwight, continued through 
the lifetime of his devoted colleague, Professor 
Chauncey A. Goodrich. ‘As an undergraduate or 
instructor, the latter must have witnessed and was 
an important factor in all but two of the nine- 
teen revivals that graciously visited Yale from 
the accession of President Dwight up to the Civil 
War ”’.? 

1 See Two Centuries of Christian Activity at Yale, by Henry B. Wright 


and others. Published in 1901. 
2 Ibid. p. 74. 


a0 ahnd a0nf OJ, 





ONO, SSAUYIVH VY WO Udy, 


‘SOdKVO AWIVA 








¥- 


} 
17 
' 
il 
. 
‘ 
: 
> 
. 
* 4 
Vv : 
: 
- { 
¢ 
‘ 
‘ 
~ 
ij 
i. 
j i 
. 
‘ 
bs ‘ 
‘ 
* 
* 
= 
' 
> 
1 
i) 
< -@ 
. ; 
. 
¢ 
i ‘ ‘ 
‘ . 
bs sx 
~ at 
Ways ft ; 
rm” 
‘ i 
is 
i ~ 
© 
\ : wt 4 
' 
' 
f - 
| “=< oe, | 
é oP 7 





ins ta oe we lh 


FRESHMAN 93 


As far back as 1812-13 a revival swept the 
College which was distinctly a student movement. 
Several members of the senior class had been pray- 
ing, mostly unknown to each other, for a spiritual 
awakening. Active opposition was expected from 
one student in particular, Elias Cornelius by name, 
and definite prayer was made for his conversion. 
Not long after, a sudden and complete change in 
this man made a great impression on the student 
body. He broke with evil companions and _ pro- 
fanity, and soon was rejoicing in the consciousness 
of Christ’s presence and power to save. ‘“ He led 
nearly twenty members of his own class to the 
Christian faith . . . and by his labours from eighty 
to a hundred of all classes were awakened to a new 
sense of their Christian responsibility.” 1 

Another remarkable revival in 1825 was due to 
the prayers of a single individual of but little stand- 
ing in the College. He invited members of the 
University Church of more influence than himself 
to his room and besought them to awaken others 
to prayer and effort for the conversion of those 
around them. His earnestness was used of God, 
and a deeply spiritual movement was the result. 

From the period of the Civil War to the visits 
of D. L. Moody, the control of the voluntary re- 
ligious life of the University was passing more and 
more into the hands of the students themselves. 
Christian work by students for students, in time 
became centred in the Y.M.C.A., under whose 
auspices several revivals of more recent date had 


1 Ibid. p. 68. 


94 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


taken place, including that of 1900, when John R. 
Mott and Robert E. Speer were so powerfully used 
of God that no fewer than a hundred undergraduates 
professed conversion. 

Five years later, with a new generation of 
students, there was need for all the prayer and 
effort centred at Dwight Hall, into which Borden 
wholeheartedly entered. John Magee, now a mis- 
sionary at Nanking, was the Graduate Secretary, 
and it was not long before he discerned the intense 
reality behind the young freshman’s spiritual life 
and convictions. 

‘The school is not a knowledge shop so much 
as a great assay of human souls,’’ Professor Meigs 
of ‘The Hill” had written. Borden, at Yale, was 
being tested in that great assay, and was conscious 
of the same process in the lives of others. All 
around him it was going on—men making or marring 
their future. To him the Word of God meant so 
much in meeting the temptations of daily life 
and he was finding such strength in the companion- 
ship of the Lord Jesus Christ that he longed to 
share these great realities with others. So the 
purpose was forming in his heart of attempting 
to start a group for Bible study among those who 
would not avail themselves of the influences of 
Dwight Hall. The intimate correspondence with 


his mother continued : 
SUNDAY, October 15, 1905. 


Just after chapel service this morning we had our class 
prayer meeting at which several of us spoke on the 
possibilities of the year. John Magee invited me to come 
to the Volunteer Band at five this afternoon. There were 


FRESHMAN 95 


about ten present and we had a very nice little meeting and 
time of prayer. There are some fine fellows here in the 
upper classes, I can tell you. 

I have talked over the matter of my group Bible Study 
Class with Arthur Bradford and decided that paraphrasing 
Galatians is a little too strenuous for the sort of men to be 
reached. The object of these groups is to interest fellows 
who do not attend the Wednesday evening meeting in 
Dwight Hall, led by Dr. Wright. So I have been looking 
over methods of Bible study suggested by Dr. Torrey and 
decided upon Chapter Study as the best. You know the 
method, giving out questions to be answered. And I think 
John is the book to take, because it is written that men 
might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, “ ane 
that believing ye might have life through his name”. 1 
haven’t spoken to the fellows yet but expect to do so thie 


evening. 
October 20, 1905. 


Am I busy ? I will tell you what I am doing, and you 
can judge for yourself. To begin with I have twelve 
recitations a week to prepare, which isn’t much, very little 
in fact. 

Monday evening at 6.45, Freshman Religious Committee 
.meets in Bill Barnes’ room, Vice-President of Dwight Hall. 

Wednesday evening at 6.40, the 1909 Bible Class meets 
in Dwight Hall, led by Dr. Wright. 

Thursday evening at 6.45, our Mission Study Class 
meets. Herbert Malcolm, a member of the Volunteer Band, 
1907 man, leads this. 

And then Sunday. That day starts with Chapel at 
10.30. Immediately after this comes our Class Prayer 
Meeting with which I have more or less to do and will 
probably lead at times. At five in the afternoon there is a 
meeting of the Volunteer Band, and at 6.40 a general meet- 
ing held in Dwight Hall. The preacher of the morning 
_usually addresses this. 

Besides these things, I intend to go down at least twice 
a week to the Oak Street Boys’ Club. 

Then [I have been appointed chairman of a com- 
mittee to promote interest and collect funds for the Yale 


96 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Hall work here in New Haven and the Yale Mission in 
China... . 

My exercise, that is football, takes rather more time than 

I wish it did. ... 

I spoke to M. H. tonight about starting up a class in 
Bible Study. I approached him first as he is the key, so 
to speak, of a certain bunch of fellows I want to get at. 
He thought it would be a very good thing and said he would 
consider it. If possible I would like to have a first sort of 
explanatory meeting next Sunday. But I have my doubts 
about accomplishing this. However, a beginning has been 
made, for which I am thankful. 

Please send me Dr. Torrey’s Vest Pocket Companion for 
Christian Workers, best text for personal use. I have lost 
mine. 


It was at one of those many mectings in Dwight 
Hall that Borden met his friend, the one who more 
than any other was to share his college life. Of 
that first meeting and his own impressions, Charley 
Campbell wrote : 


We were crowded together in Bill Barnes’ room. Barnes 
was a junior at the time, Vice-President of the Y.M.C.A., 
and leader of the freshman religious work. Bill Borden 
was sitting on the floor with his back against the wall and 
his knees drawn up near his chin. I remember noticing 
him particularly. As we left the meeting he joined me and 
we walked back together to York Street. Bill told me then, 
as I remember, of his trip around the world and of his 
interest in missions. This was the beginning of the friend- 
ship which has meant so much to me. 

About the early days of our acquaintance I would like 
to say a little, as they show one of Bill’s finest character- 
istics, real democracy. I lived in freshman year in Pierson 
Hall, the one college-owned dormitory on York Street and 
not considered so swell as the private-owned dormitories. 
I not only lived in Pierson, but away up on the fifth floor. 
Anyone had to have courage to climb to the top of Pierson. 
My first impulse after meeting Bill and seeing his room at 


"96 26nd a0nf OT, 
‘el Suvsipenyy [vldowWey 4aN0D paloyuvag 


“ALISUMAINA @IVA 3 





ol as 
+ UT ot ry 
ws > s 
: | he ee a t? 
: : f Pay ‘ 
e the, if ay vs he 


4, Pe 7 


7 i 





FRESHMAN 97 


Garland’s was to hold aloof. I felt he was too well off, and 
imagined he would not care to have much to do with me. 
How appreciative I felt and how drawn to Bill when I found 
him climbing up those Pierson steps, not once but often ! 
And what times we would have! There was always the 
religious bond that drew us together; but Bill’s spirit of 
fun was sure to show itself, and a good “ rough-house ”’ or 
game was in order. I think of one evening when we staged 
a complete track-meet in my room and Bill was the heavy 
competitor in all the events possible. 

During this fall [1905] Bill went out for the freshman 
football team, and played very good ball. He did not 
make the team but came very near doing so. In fact in 
the game with Princeton freshmen he was told to warm 
up to go in, but time was called or something of that sort 


prevented. 


It was well on in the first term when Bill and I began to 
pray together in the morning before breakfast. I cannot 
say positively whose suggestion it was, but I feel sure it 
must have originated with Bill. We had been meeting 
only a short time when a third, Farrand Williams, joined 
us and soon after a fourth, James M. Howard. These 
meetings were held in Bill’s room just before we went to 
breakfast. The time was spent in prayer after a brief 
reading of Scripture. Our object was to pray for the 
religious work of the class and college, and also for those of 
our friends we were seeking to bring to Christ. I remember 
so well the stimulus Bill gave us in those meetings. His 
handling of Scripture was always helpful. From the very 
beginning of the years I knew him he would read to us from 
the Bible, show us something that God had promised and 


then proceed to claim the promise with assurance. 


This group for prayer was the beginning of the daily 
groups that spread to everyone of the college classes. From 
the membership of two at the start, the group in our class 
grew until it had to be divided in sophomore year, and by 


_the end of that year there were similar groups in each of the 


| 


) 





—————— er reo eS 


classes. _ It was not passed down from the seniors to the * 

juniors, but came up from the freshmen to the seniors. And 

very real blessing was given in answer to our prayers—quite 
H 


98 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


a number were converted. \ I remember one with whom Bill 
worked very hard, a fellow with a scientific turn of mind 
who wanted everything proved. Bill must have looked 
down with joy from the Place to which he has gone when, 
some years later, this man came out brightly as a Christian. 

Bill was always picking out the toughest proposition 
and going through thick and thin to win him for Christ. 

. His life, how true it rang! He came to college far 
ahead, spiritually, of any of us. He had already given his 
heart in full surrender to Christ—had really done it. He 
had formed his purpose to become a foreign missionary, 
and all through college and seminary that purpose never 
wavered. One can easily see the advantage this would 
give aman. His life was determined. We who were his 
classmates learned to lean on him and find in him a strength 
that was solid as a rock, just because of this settled purpose 
and consecration. 


Unconsciously the young freshman was becoming 
a force in the best life of the University, but so un- 
consciously ! To himself it seemed quite otherwise. 
One cannot but notice, in the letters to his mother 
of that fall and winter, the earnestness with which 
she was seeking to overcome inconsistencies and 
weaknesses. 

October 29, 1905. 


My group work has not commenced yet, but I hope to 
get it going before long, by the end of the football season. 
Mr. Mott was here last Sunday and I had a few moments’ 
talk with him in the afternoon. He wished to be re- 
membered to you. This Sunday also he was here and 
gave us a couple of very fine talks—this morning on the 
required characteristics of leadership and this evening in 
Dwight Hall, a distinctly evangelistic meeting, something 
rather unusual for this place. Mr. Mott spoke very 
strongly on Sin, especially on ‘‘ Be sure your sin will find 
you out’”’. After his time was up he asked the fellows who 
wanted eh learn how to deal with temptation to meet in 


BORDEN IN HIS FRESHMAN YEAR. 


To face page 98. 








FRESHMAN 99 


another room. So we met, only about two-fifths having 
left, and there again he spoke very earnestly. . . . 


The following Sundays brought a different ex- 
perience. A preacher with an international repu- 
tation led the services, but to an earnest mind 
grappling with the realities of life left much to be 
desired. 

November 12, 1905. 

Dr. has been here for the last two Sundays, preaching 
in Chapel and talking in Dwight Hall in the evenings. He 
makes me tired, he’s so smooth and subtle and pleasing to 
everyone. His talks are interesting in a way, but what he 


says merely amounts to human ethics. He takes texts 
simply “ as pegs to hang his own thoughts on ”’. | 





Perhaps the preacher did not realize what that 
hour might mean, as he faced the serried ranks in 
the college chapel. Had he had the vision of what 
lay behind in those hundreds upon hundreds of 
lives, the temptations and dangers, possibilities and 
needs, he surely would have wanted to give them 
more than just eloquence and ethics. Borden was 
having his own struggles. 

December 3, 1905. 


I am at present a little discouraged about my Bible 
Class. . . . I find it very difficult to get started somehow, 
and am a little afraid of what may happen when it is started. 
There is a great deal to be done here and I don’t feel that I 
am doing much of anything. 

I am sorry to say that I don’t even manage to keep up 
my own Bible study systematically, without breaks. I 
keep it up for a week or so, and then something happens 


and I miss a day. 


In my opinion we get the saddest bunch of preachers you 
could scrape up in the U.S.A., and to-day we had one from 


Scotland who almost takes the cake. I think I'll live at 


100 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


the Moody Institute when I get back to Chicago. But 
seriously, I will go with you whenever there’s anything to 
go to. You know I won’t be going to dances, so I'll have 
lots of time. 


The Christmas vacation was evidently a time 
when his armour was buckled on afresh, and he 
came back determined to put first things first in a 
new way. 


January 14, 1906. 


It seems sort of nice and very natural to be back here 
again. I am thankful to say that I have been enabled to 
get up every morning, so far, in time to have Bible study 
and prayer before beginning the day’s work. I hope with 
God’s help to keep it up... . 

The term has started well as far as sermons go. Mr. 
Speer was here this morning and evening and gave us two 
very good talks. In the morning he read a part of the tenth 
of Matthew, taking as his text verses 32 and 33, the subject 
being “‘ Confession and Denial’’. He spoke on character 
as essential to strong manhood, and religion as necessary to 
character, and showed that religion—Christianity—is a 
question of personal attitude toward Jesus Christ. It is 
confession or—denial. 

The Dwight Hall meeting as you know is voluntary, but 
the room was packed, some fellows even standing, a thing 
they wouldn’t think of doing in Chapel. I guess there were 
about five hundred present. There, too, he gave a very 
powerful talk on ** Apart from me ye can do nothing ”’, and 
““T can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth 
mele t 

I have a regular night now for going to the Boys’ Club. 
I go down every Saturday with Charlie Campbell. He is a 
corker, and I am glad I’m getting to know him. 

This afternoon I had quite atime. I thought I’d study 
up the question of procrastination. So I did, and as a 
result I felt that it was up to me to go and speak to B.B. 
about Bible study. Well, I went to his room about quarter 
of four and he was reading a magazine. I tried to start the 


FRESHMAN 101 


subject and couldn’t seem to get up courage. I sat there 
for a solid hour scarcely saying a word and didn’t accomplish 
anything. I had a Mission Band meeting at five, so I had 
to go, but I got B. to walk along with me as he was going 
that way, towards Dwight Hall, thinking I might speak to 
him on the way. I didn’t however. 

Ned Harvey led the Band Meeting and gave us a very 
good talk from Philippians 1. 6, 9 and 10. When he was 
through he asked as usual whether there was anything 
special to be brought up. I immediately thought of that 
verse in James, ‘‘ Confess your faults one to another and 
pray one for another’. I felt that I ought to confess. 
For a moment I hesitated, but I was given strength to do 
so, thank God. I read the verse and said that I knew that 
I must learn to save people here before I could hope to do so 
anywhere else, and that I had had a good chance this 
afternoon to speak to a fellow and had failed, and that I 
wanted their prayers. I just managed to get this out 
before I was overcome with emotion and sat down. This 
evening I had another chance at B. and finally managed to 
get on the track by a roundabout way, still cowardly and 
fearful! The result is that B. has said he will study with 
me. We haven’t arranged the details, but 1 have more 
confidence and faith that through Christ I can carry out 
what is begun. Philippians 1. 6, ‘‘ Being confident of this 
very thing, that He which hath begun a good work in you 
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ ”’. 

Get the Church to pray for me. I’ve only “ begun ”’. 
And you may be sure I am praying for you, dear Mother, 
who have done so much for me and for each member of our 
dear family. 


Another letter affords a glimpse into a very 
different side of college life. The week of the 
annual *“‘ Promenade ”’ had come, and many of the 


students had visitors. 
January 21, 1906. 
Chapel this morning was chuck full of Prom girls, 
naturally, and also full of fellows, as many as could get 
in, who came to “‘rubber”’. Mr. Speer preached a good 


102 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


sermon on distinctions between right and wrong. After 
the service, according to college custom, the sophs all lined 
up outside and made remarks about the girls as they came 
out, and yelled! It wasn’t exactly a Sunday performance. 

However, we had a very nice little prayer meeting, 
fairly well attended. The subject was Sabbath Observance. 
Various subjects, studying, travelling, playing games, etc., 
were brought up. Finally one of the fellows got up and 
reminded us of what Mr. Speer had just said—that if there 
was any doubt about a thing, it was pretty sure to be wrong, 
and it was best to give it a wide margin. It seemed to me 
that that just about hit the nail on the head... . 

You probably know that fellows, a good many, go to 
the theatre and then afterwards go around and “ pick up ”’ 
chorus girls and usually come home drunk about one A.M. 
Well one of the leaders of this sort of thing made rather 
elaborate plans for a spree. He invited a good many 
fellows, about thirty out of our class, each to chip in five 
dollars. The plan was to take the whole chorus of the play, 
the one that was here last night, and drive out to some 
dance hall and have a high old time. The way I learned 
of it was this—another fellow was asked who wouldn’t go, 
and he came and told me, to see what we could do to stop it. 
He had been informed that they would have about ninety 
dollars’ worth of punch. However, that’s a mere detail. 
I didn’t know any of the fellows at all well who were going, 
so couldn’t do much. However, we saw a good many of 
the upper classmen, and the result was it didn’t come off, 
for which I am very thankful. This is, of course, an 
extreme case, but it’s an example of what sometimes 
happens. I heard someone in the hall, just this minute, 
say that there would have been about fifty chorus girls and 
seventy-five fellows. 


That he was far from thinking himself better 
than other people comes out in many letters, but 
he was growing. 


To-day hasn’t been just as I would have liked. The 
morning sermon . . . was simply “sad”. However, our 


FRESHMAN 103 


little prayer meeting was better attended and a better 
spirit shown in it than ever before. I went off walking in 
the afternoon. ‘Tried to find Bethany Mission and as we 
failed, kept on walking and didn’t get back until supper 
time. Spent the early part of the evening in watching one 
of the fellows do tricks, and now it’s late and B. is studying. 
So you see I have been pretty successfully “‘ hindered ’’, or 
rather I have allowed myself to be, for I confess I didn’t 
make much effort, sort of shirked my duty. Oh yes, and I 
absolutely forgot about our Band Meeting, and missed that. 
I don’t know just what’s wrong—but the fact is I’ve failed 
again. Guess I haven’t fed upon God’s Word enough, nor 
prayed enough. I will try again. 
Your loving son, WILLIAM. 


January 31, 1906. 


There is a group of men here in College, it might be 
called a personal-workers’ group, which meets every 
Tuesday in Dr. Wright’s room. James Howard, Charlie 
Campbell and I were chosen from our class. As Dr. Wright 
says, it doesn’t mean any honour, it means work... . There 
are about fourteen in the group now. Dr. Wright first 
reads a short passage and says a few words. Then there 
is general discussion, each one bringing up his case, and 
then prayer. It is fine. We get to know some of the best 
men in college intimately. I realize here more than ever 
before that a man’s true friends are his Christian friends. 
. . . I am sure these little gatherings will be a help to me 
and will accomplish great things here at Yale.1 


February 18, 1906. 
I have only missed my Morning Watch once or twice this 


term. . . . I can easily believe that it is next in importance | 


1 Professor Benjamin Wisner Bacon, who was then college pastor, 
spoke of these gatherings as the very ‘“* heart of heart ” of Christian activity 
at Yale. ‘* They were held in the little room under the eaves on the top 
floor at Dwight Hall, none being asked save the little inside group whom 
Henry (Wright) and the rest believed to be 100 per cent consecrated. 
You may be sure I felt it an honour to be with these heart and soul Christian 
boys. . . . Henry was of course always the leader, richest in experience, 
wisest in counsel, most indefatigable in effort. It was the very breath of 
life to him to be about his Father’s business.”’ 


ane 


} 
; 
f 
; 


on ee 


> 


104 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 
to accepting Christ. For I know that when I don’t wait 


__upon God in prayer and Bible study, things go wrong. The 


other night I had a fine chance to testify to that very fact, 
or rather to the fact that when I do pray and study things 
go better, and I am sorry to say didn’t make good use of it. 
I happened to mention to a fellow that I was nearly always 
up and dressed by 7.30, and knowing that I seldom went to 
breakfast before 8.00 he wanted to know what I did in the 
interval. I don’t think I was exactly ashamed or afraid, 
but I didn’t reply as I should have done. I merely said in 
a vague way that I attended to certain things. Wasn’t it 
foolish! I’m afraid it’s one of my great troubles, not 
explaining myself. I know I’ve gotten into the habit of 
refusing to do things without saying why I refuse. I 


suppose the reason is that I feel that it would be like 


judging the fellows who are doing the thing, whatever it 
may be. However, in the future I am going to pray that 
I may be on the lookout for opportunities of confessing my 
belief and may stand for right against wrong. I’m sorry to 
say that I have done nothing with B. or any of the other 
fellows lately... . ) 

In our Band Meeting this afternoon, there were only five 
of us; the point was brought out very strongly that 
“ Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that 
build it ” and “‘ Apart from me ye can do nothing’”’. We 
all felt our need of God’s help and the necessity for greater 
consecration on our part. One of the fellows confessed that 
he wasn’t wholly consecrated by any means, and I’m afraid 
I’m not. But I want tobe... . Keep praying for me. 


“I am keeping up my wrestling,’ he wrote to 
his father about the same time, “ and like it very 
much. It certainly is a science! The last few 
days I have had to go easy because of a mat-burn 
on my arm—+.e., the skin rubbed off and rather an 
awkward sore made.”’ 

“ Yesterday I wrestled in the tournament and 
got beaten,” he added a little later, “ My class is 


FRESHMAN 105 


‘middle heavy weight’. My opponent was about 
a head taller than I am, but the same weight. He 
is a senior and knows John. We had two bouts of 
five minutes each, and neither succeeded in putting 
the other down. So after the rest we went at it 
again, and this time were to wrestle till one of us 
was thrown. Well, after forty-nine minutes of 
rather strenuous exercise he succeeded in getting 
me down. I lost about three pounds in the process, 
but did not suffer any injuries and feel fine now.” 


CHAPTER VII 


FRESHMAN—continued 


1906. At. 18 


* «* God has His best things for the few 
Who dare to stand the test : 
God has His second best for those 
Who will not have His best. 


*¢ J want in this short life of mine 
As much as may be pressed 
Of service true to God and men ; 


Help me to have Thy best.” 
Selected. 


‘‘Ir one would understand the student life of 
America at its best during the last three decades, 
he should turn to the student conferences,’’ wrote 
the biographer of Dr. Henry Wright, °° for there are 
focussed the aspirations of Christian youth in its 
highest mood of dedication. . .. Among all the 
events of the college year making for emancipation 
of the spirit and dedication of life, he placed the 
student conferences first.’’ In the middle and at 
the close of Borden’s freshman year came two out- 
standing experiences of this sort. 

The first was the Missionary Convention of the 
Student Volunteer Movement at Nashville, attended 
by over four thousand delegates. The Yale con- 


tingent was a strong one, and the way in which 
106 


FRESHMAN 107 


Charley Campbell came to be included in it was a 
surprise to himself if not to his friend. 


I was not one of those chosen. The last night before 
the delegation was to leave, I was in bed and almost asleep 
when a number of upper-classmen filed into my room. I 
believe Bill was with them. They told me that it was 
financially possible for them to take one more delegate, and 
wanted me to go. Ofcourse, I went. I have always had a 
conviction that Bill was back of that. If not, it was at 
any rate the kind of thing he was always doing, while keep- 
ing out of sight himself. 

What a time we had on that long train journey to 
Nashville! Bill and others of us would adjourn to the 
baggage car occasionally, to let off steam in games that 
usually came from his fertile imagination. One of his 
games went by the name of “ hot-hand ”.1_ The man who 
was “it”? must face the side of the car, with his eyes closed, 
supporting his head against the car. The rest would then 
group themselves behind him, and anyone was at liberty 
to take a whack. After each impact he had to guess who 
it was that had hit him. If his guess was correct, the giver 
of the blow had to change places with him; if incorrect, 
another whack was in order. Bill shone at this game, 
in both capacities! Then there would be high-kicking 
contests and other games, all in the rapidly-moving car. 

And so we reached Nashville, full of life and spirits, 
where we separated for the different homes in which we 
were to be entertained. Those were days of wonderful 
inspiration for us all. . . . If Bill was responsible for my 
going to Nashville, he was used of God to bring me a step 
further on in Christian experience, for it was there I gave 
my life to God in consecration for any work to which He 
might call me. 3 


Among the speakers, secretaries of boards and \’ 
visitors to the Convention, of whom there were 
hundreds, and the foreign missionaries representing 


* Learned from watching sailors on a German steamer, on his trip round 
the world. 


108 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


twenty-six countries, one man stood out for Borden 
with a burning message. He was a man with a map. 
Charged with facts and with enthusiasm, grim with 
earnestness, filled with a passion of love for Christ 
and the perishing, Samuel Zwemer made that great 
map live, voicing the silent appeal of the Moham- 
medan world. Two hundred millions of our fellow- 
creatures in the lands coloured green on the map— 
two hundred millions under the sway of Islam, held 
in a bondage than which none on earth is more 
relentless, more deadening, and to its womanhood 
more degrading—what a challenge to the Christian 
church! From China to the west coast of Africa 
and from the steppes of Russia right down to Zanzi- 
bar stretched that great sweep of green, sparsely 
dotted here and there with centres from which 
Christian light was spreading. Yet, as Dr. Zwemer 
showed, never before had there been such open doors 
for the evangelization of the Moslem world. ‘‘ The 
hour is ripe”? was the burden of his message, and 
he sustained it with startling facts. 

Making full allowance for all that was being done 
by missionaries in Moslem lands, the speaker pointed 
out country after country, province after province, 
still absolutely without the Light of Life, as far 
as their Mohammedan population was concerned. 
Some had no missionaries at all, such as Afghanistan 
with its four million Moslems; some had mission- 
aries among their heathen races but none for the 
followers of the prophet. In China, for example, 
with fifteen million Moslems, not a single missionary 
was set apart for their evangelization. Yet the 


“SOL a0 aov{ OL 
"+ * *ule[sy Jo ABMS OY Jopun 


“ 


UdsIp[[YO puw UIOM “Mel JO SMOTT[IW perpuny OAJ—dewM ayy UO papRYs SPURT 944 UT SoinzveI0- AOT[eJ IMO Jo SUOTT[IW perpuNny OA, ,, 
‘dTHYOM WH ISOW HHL AO dVN 


Uopu07gezS7' S099 s psojuezo 





Vo ialiv deS RV. 








JOU] oF Pee ener 











prey X 


\N 





Ny 
\ 








““*Sua{SOW 4o Uolquodoud 
JOUIW © UYIM SaiuquNo) 





S{reAaud wrejs] a4ayM SaluzuNno) 


WV1SI 
JO NOILNGINLSICG AHL 








ye i * 


eS ee eee 
tou en ee Ley 


°«* ve 4 | theta) 


ee 


—s, 


ti ae 


A 
> 
~ 


me ed 
ae ee 


se 
“~— 


FRESHMAN 109 


door was no longer closed to the inland provinces 
in which most of them are found. 


‘“‘ When the door opens,” Dr. Zwemer urged, “‘ we ought 
to press in, sacrificing our lives if need be for God, as the 
Moslems did at Khartum for their Prophet. If the call 
voiced by those who have already spoken moved us deeply, 
coming from Persia, from Turkey, from Egypt, from India, 
if that was a call from God, what shall be said of the mute 
appeal of the seventy millions of the wholly unevangelized 
Moslem world? Shall we stand by and allow these seventy 
millions to continue under the curse and in the snare of a 
false religion, with no knowledge of the saving love and 
power of Christ, not because they have proved fanatical and 
refused to listen, not because they have thrust us back, but 
because none of us has ever had the courage to go to those 
lands and win them to Jesus Christ ? 

‘Of course it will cost life. It is not an expedition 
of ease nor a picnic excursion to which we are called... . 
It is going to cost many a life, and not lives only, but 
prayers and tears and blood. Leadership in this movement 
has always been a leadership in suffering. There was 
Raymond Lull, the first missionary to the Moslems, stoned 
to death in Algiers; Henry Martyn, pioneering in Persia 
with the cry, ‘Let me burn out for God’. We who are 
missionaries to Moslems to-day call upon you to follow with 
us in their train, to go to these waiting lands and light the 
beacon of the love of Christ in all the Mohammedan world, 
Did He not live, pray, suffer for Moslems as well as for us ? 
Shall we do less if the call comes? Let us be like those 
Scots of Bruce who were ready to falter until that man on 
the white charger took the heart of Bruce in its casket and 
swinging it round cried out, ‘ Oh, heart of Bruce, lead on!’ 
As he flung it toward the enemy and bore down upon them 
you could not have held those soldiers back with bands of 
steel. Say not it is the appeal of the Mohammedan world 
or of the missionaries—it is the call of the Master. Let us 
answer with the shout, ‘Oh, heart of Christ, lead on!’ 
And we will follow that ery and win the Mohammedan 
world for Him.” 


110 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


More Moslems in China than there are in Persia ; 
more Moslems in China than in the whole of Egypt ; 
more Moslems in China even than in Arabia, home 
and cradle of Islam, and no one giving himself to 
their evangelization—little wonder that with a 
nature like Borden’s the facts demanded a response. 
-“ We do not plead for missions,” Dr. Zwemer is 
wont to say. “ We simply bring the facts before 
you and ask for a verdict.” 


‘If thou forbear to’deliver them that are drawn unto 
death, and those that are ready to be slain ; if thou sayest, 
Behold we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the 
heart consider it ? and he that keepeth thy soul, doth not 
he know it ? and shall not he render to every man according 
to his works ?”’ } 


Borden went back from Nashville committed 
in heart to that great enterprise, should the Lord 
confirm the call. He did not say much about it, 
but from that time his most intimate friends knew 
that he was definitely considering work among 
Moslems in some unoccupied field. 

On the return of the Yale delegation, reports 
had to be given in various meetings, and he wrote 
about one particular Sunday : 


March 26, 1906. 


DEAR Motuer—Yesterday was a rather strenuous day 
and I’m glad it’s over. Our prayer meeting was well 
attended and the fellows did very well. One fellow’s 
testimony was especially good. He said he had gone down 
there [Nashville S.V. Convention] believing that foreign 
missions were useless, but that he had come back ashamed 
of himself and thoroughly convinced that they were doing 


1 Proverbs 24. 12. 


FRESHMAN 111 


good. Another of the fellows gave a brief sketch of the 
Student Volunteer Movement. Another told a little about 
Medical Missions. Harold Stokes spoke on The Inadequacy 
of the Non-Christian Religions. I followed, on The Ade- 
quacy of the Christian Religion, and told the story Dr. 
Leary of Malaita told us ; also I made things personal and 
hope I hit somebody. Charley Campbell spoke last on 
Responsibility, and did splendidly. I am indeed thankful 
for the way God helped us. 

In the evening Ken Latourette, a senior, Charley and 
myself, spoke at the Calvary Baptist Church. I tried to 
say too much, and as I only had ten minutes, got balled-up 
and did rather poorly. However, the other fellows did very 
well, and as I came in between it didn’t matter so much. 
I’m afraid there was a little pride and ambition inside. 
The three of us speak again Friday and Sunday evening 
next, and I’m going to be more careful. 

Took some exercise to-day for the first time. My marks 
for this term are all A’s except Greek, which is C; my 
general average is A. We have to pick our courses for 
Sophomore year soon, and I will send a book giving courses 
of study so that you and Father can look it over. . . 

Wish I were in Lakewood with you, but 

Lots of love, your son, WILLIAM. 





He did not mention, in connection with his 
Greek, something that came out in a letter from his 
friend, Ken Latourette, now Professor of Missions 
at. Yale. 


My first recollection of Bill is in a Greek class in which 
we both recited to Professor ——-. Dear old Professor 
was a rare scholar and a splendid Christian gentleman, but 
he had a quick temper and at times was subject to queer 
dislikes. For some reason I could never account for, he 
seemed totally to misunderstand and thoroughly to dislike 
Bill. For one who prepared as conscientiously as did Bill, 
it was very galling to be systematically, openly and unjustly 
berated. Although very indignant, he never retorted in 
any way, and I cannot now remember that he ever spoke 





112 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


of the experience, except when someone else mentioned 
it, and then he said only a few words of apology for 
Professor 





Just at this time the course of life in the Univer- 
sity was arrested for Borden and his more intimate 
friends by the sudden death of one of their class- 
mates. How much it meant to him may be seen 
from the following letter : 

April 1, 1906. 


There was a fellow in our class, from Ohio, who was very 
bright in his studies but who came here with no reference 
for moral character. The Faculty let him in hoping it would 
be all right, but it wasn’t. He got in with the wrong bunch 
and led a fast life. Last Monday he was taken sick and 
removed to the Infirmary. It was found that he had 
pleurisy, pneumonia and water on the heart, the last being 
the most serious. 

Now I had been meaning to try and get hold of this 
fellow, but had never done anything. Few of us knew his 
sickness was serious until Wednesday, when it was rumoured 
that he was dying. Charley, Bill Williams and I went to 
the Infirmary, to find out for sure. We were told that he 
was unconscious and not likely to live out the day. Im- 
mediately, we came back here to my room and prayed— 
there was nothing we could do. This was about two o’clock. 
He died at three, and I don’t know whether he regained 
consciousness or not. . . . It’s an awful lesson to me, and 
should make the whole University stop and think. Yet, 
already the thing is being forgotten. 


The class decided to send flowers for the funeral 
and to wear mourning buttons for a month, and 
Borden as chairman of a committee for the purpose 
was to draw up a resolution to send to the family. 


I appointed the committee, consisting of three of his 
most intimate friends, and Charley. We did what was to 
be done, and it was but little. Now, Charley and I want 


FRESHMAN 113 


to get hold of the three other fellows, who are all fast 
themselves. I went up to see them the other night, and 
found them playing cards with poker chips on the table 
and the door locked ! 

And yet, it is not hopeless. Charley has been working 
with a fellow who was about the same as these. Formerly 
he avoided Charley, but now he looks for him. I can see a 
change in his face already. I do hope and will work hard 
and pray for these fellows, one of whom by the way may 
be rusticated for six weeks. It’s awful—the need for Christ 
here at Yale! I am thankful for our Personal Workers’ 
Group, for our Volunteer Band and for friends like Charley 
and others. 


The current of his thoughts was changed a few 
days later by an unexpected visit from his parents. 
It was early in April, and everything was tingling 
with the new life of spring. To John and William 
it was a special pleasure to show their father the 
college campus, and the joy of those hours was un- 
shadowed by any premonition of coming sorrow. 
Strange to say, it was only a week later that William 
was writing from Chicago, telling of the grief of their 
home-coming : ! 

Friday, April 13, 1906. 

Father and Mother were east about a week ago and had 
a fine visit with us. First they went to Vassar and heard 
the debate, in which Mary did very well. This pleased 
Father immensely. Then they came on to Yale, and John 
and I had a nice visit with them. It was the first time 
Father had visited either John or myself at school or college. 
After leaving us they went down to New York, got Mary 
and went to Lakewood. There Mary spent a day or two 
with them and had a fine time... . 


Back in Chicago, Father was perfectly well apparently, 
and had nice visits with most of his near relatives and 


? A letter to Dr. Henry W. Frost of the China Inland Mission. 
I 


114 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


friends. Saturday evening last he was taken sick, and on 
Sunday became critically ill. It was then we were 
summoned. Mary got here Monday evening in time to 
see him, though he was unconscious. John and I arrived 
on Tuesday morning, three or four hours after he had 
passed away. 


William was only eighteen, but from that time 
he took more than a son’s place at his mother’s side. 
With him, love was a matter of deeds rather than 
of words, and in the midst of his college work he 
made time to write to her daily, with few excep- 
tions. What that correspondence meant, keeping 
him in touch with all that concerned her, bringing 
the strong comfort of his sympathy into her aching 
loneliness, only a mother’s heart can understand. 
If it cost some sacrifice, some moments of weariness 
after the strenuous day, the letters never showed 
it. They were always cheery and tender, and fre- 
quently contained charges not to reply unless she 
felt equal to writing. 

April 21, 1906. 


DrAr MotrHer—lI haven’t much to tell you this evening, 
but just thought I’d write a little note to send you my 
love. ... The weather continues pleasant and I can 
literally see the leaves grow from day to day. ... I will 
try and write often, but don’t you try to. 


April 24, 1906. 


Tuesdays are always my hard days, that is, busy ones, 
as you can easily see when I tell you how my time is 
occupied. 

I get up about seven, dress, have my Morning Watch, 
which I like to call my “ breakfast ’’—for “* man doth not 
live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out 
of the mouth of God ’’—go to breakfast and then Chapel. — 


FRESHMAN ES 


From eight thirty until four in the afternoon my studies 
keep me busy. From four to five I try and get in an 
hour’s practice (piano) and at five we have our meeting for 
personal workers. After that, supper and study until nine, 
when my Bible Study Group meets for about an hour. 

This has been the program to-day, so you see that until 
now, 10.30 p.m., I have been kept moving. But I sort of 
like it; it’s just about enough. 

Farrand brought another fellow down to my room 
to-night for our Bible Class. He is sort of an earnest- 
minded agnostic, and we hope to get hold of him as well 
as the others. 


April 28, 1906. 


This afternoon Jim Whittaker and I went off on a 
glorious horseback ride together. We went way out in 
the country and then struck down to the Sound and came 
back to New Haven along the shore. The air and every- 
thing was fine and I enjoyed it immensely. 


May 3, 1906. 


We had an examination in Ruskin and Byron the other 
day in which I am quite sure I did well. Also my standing 
in Analytical Geometry is nearly as good as in Trigonometry. 
In fact everything goes well but my Greek. I somehow 
find that hard and tiresome and don’t seem to make a great 
success of it. But I’m going to work hard these few, for 
they are few, remaining weeks and see if I can’t get as good 
in it as in my other subjects. 


May 4, 1906. 


At our last group meeting I asked the fellows what they 
thought about our present method, and the majority were 
for continuing it. Some of them are doing work outside 
(Bible Study). . . . I gave Tom the name of Dawson’s book, 
Modern Ideas of Evolution, and think he will get it soon if 


he hasn’t already done so. I have gotten my sceptical 


friend a little bit interested on the evolution theory, and 
may be able to do something with him. 


116 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


May 5, 1906. 


To-day was the day of the track games and the old Hill 
distinguished herself by winning the meet with a margin of 
ten and a half points. I saw Mr. Sweeney and the fellows, 
most all of whom I knew. It was fine. . . . After supper 
Farrand and I went over to Charley’s room and had a good 
rough-house. It was real interesting and amusing. I 
have to relax Saturday afternoon and evening, but now 
I’m going to do a little work for Monday. 

To-morrow being Communion, we don’t have any prayer 
meeting. I think Ill try and get in a little more Bible 
study and have a few talks with fellows. . . . Mother, I 
know youw’re tired. I can see it in your handwriting. 
You’ve got to get rested and strong. So don’t try and 
write or exert yourself unnecessarily in any way. 


May 9, 1906. 


I am rather enjoying my track work and as Johnny 
Mack, the trainer and coach, condescends to say a word 
now and then, I’m almost getting a “‘ swelled head’, but 
not quite. I suppose if I work hard, after two or three 
years I may be some good. I am working with both shot 
and hammer, each weighing sixteen pounds. 


May 12, 1906. 


To-day, Yale distinguished herself in many ways. They 
easily won from Princeton in Track, won the Inter-collegiate 
shoot from Penn, beat Holy Cross in Baseball, 10-7 I believe, 
the Freshman Crew beat out the Columbia Freshmen, and 
the Freshman Ball team was also victorious. Quite a day, 
was it not? I relaxed all right! 


May 13, 1906. 


Charley has just been in and told me some very en- 
couraging things about his work with certain fellows. The 
more I see of him and the better I come to know him, the 
more I see to wonder at and admire. He’s taught me more 
than one lesson. A fellow said to me the other day, “ It 
would be a mighty good thing for the College if there were 
a few more fellows like Charley Campbell.”? He’s as near 


FRESHMAN 117 


perfect as anyone I have ever known. If I’m to be up at 
six (for their early prayer meeting) I must go to bed. Lots 
otf love. 

May 15, 1906. 


This evening we had our little Bible study group, seven 
fellows being present. We took up the fifth chapter of 
John which has important teachings on the Divinity of 
Christ, the Second Coming and the Resurrection, the 
Authority of the Old Testament, ete. We had an interest- 
ing and I hope a profitable time. 

I have a good many openings now which I ought to 
make use of. You know I said Charley had taught me a 
good many things. Well perhaps two principal ones are 
__to_have patience and not to waste time. I was up in his 
room the other day and when he had finished what he was 
doing he said, “* What useful thing can I do next ?”’ With 
such an example, and there are others, I guess there’s hope 
for me. 

May 17, 1906. 


Thank you for the book, God’s Image in Man, which 
arrived to-day. . . . As I was up at a quarter to six and 
have been going pretty well all day, I am a little tired. 
However, it is early yet, and I have my work ready for 
to-morrow, so I expect a good rest. I’m sorry, but I haven’t 
anything much to say. I love you very dearly and am 
looking forward to the time when I shall see you. 


May 21, 1906. 

We have just celebrated Omega Lambda Chi to-night, 
which is a rather strenuous proceeding. First we all—the 
whole college—danced around hippity-hop, finally ending 
up at the campus. ‘Then there was a race between the 
sophomores and freshmen. After this we had a tug-of-war. 
Nearly the whole college tacked on, seniors and sophs at 
one end and juniors and freshmen at the other. We just 
walked it over to York Street when somebody foolishly 
tried to take it into Pearson Hall. Then the sophs got it 
going and we couldn’t stop them for quite a while. Had 
an awful scrap which finally ended up on Chapel Street. I 
have a small piece of the rope... . 


118 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


But there is something more interesting to tell you. As 
things have worked out it seems almost providential that I 
stayed here. For Saturday night Farrand and I went down 
to Savin Rock, one of those ‘“‘ rotten ’’ summer resorts. 
They have a lot of merry-go-rounds and such amusements, 
but also saloons and dance halls. We went to the dance 
hall and found a mess in the saloon. A lot of college 
fellows in various stages of drunkenness with a lot of loose 
women, also more or less drunk. It was positively dis- 
gusting. I am thankful to say that there were no fellows 
from our class there. 

But there was a fellow there who had been expelled from 
Hill, whom I knew.- He is living here in New Haven, 
tutoring. Well, I watched him and spoke to him after I 
saw him go to a couple of these women. But he wouldn’t 
come away. So we just literally followed them and got 
on the same car as they did to return to New Haven. 
There’s no use describing that ride. Finally his girl got 
off alone and said “‘ Good-night ”’ very distinctly, for us to 
hear. I went and spoke to the fellow and he was mad as 
thunder and a little under the influence of liquor. After a 
block or two he slipped off and was starting back. I spoke 
to him but he wouldn’t stop, so Farrand and I had to use a 
little physical force to restrain him. . . . We had to stop 
him. Of course he was very obstinate, but after about 
half or three-quarters of an hour we won him around and 
he walked home with us. We said everything we could 
think of and prayed when we got home. He’s in with an 
awful bunch and I don’t know just what to do. But we 
know that “‘ with God all things are possible”. 

Charley has been working with a fellow most of the 
year. His boast was that he’d broken every commandment 
but one. As he isn’t in jail, [ suppose that one is murder. 
Well, Charley and I prayed that he might get a talk with X. 
The other day his uncle died and on returning he nearly 
went off again (that is to the bad) but went up to Charley’s 
room instead, and he was there alone. Charley told me 
how hard it was, how he beat around the bush, and prayed. 
But thank God, he won out, and had a fine talk with X., 
who has decided to give Christ a chance in his life. Charley 


FRESHMAN 119 


and I prayed and took Christ’s words, ‘‘ Him that cometh 
unto me, I will in no wise cast out’’. I feel convinced 
that X. is started all right, and what’s more I think he’s 
going to be a power. For he is a skilful debater and if he 
found Christ he could have a strong influence. It’s 
wonderful, isn’t it, and glorious ! 

Sunday I had another talk with S., my sceptical, 
indifferent friend, but accomplished very little apparently. 
The preacher was fine I thought and very helpful. 

This morning we met again at 6.30 and had a fine time 
of prayer. 


May 238, 1906. 


This afternoon I went down and called on my friend 
whom I was with at Savin Rock, the other night. He was 
tutoring, but came down and saw me. Later we went to 
the ball game together. I had hoped to bring him to the 
Bible Class and then maybe have a talk afterwards, but I 
couldn’t do this. However he isn’t mad at me and I’m 
going to see him again. 


May 24, 1906. 


This was Tap Day, rather an interesting event to 
witness for the first time! On the first stroke of five 
o’clock the tapping began, and continued for about three- 
quarters of an hour. Tapping is rather a misnomer, for 
they hit the men most tremendously and rush them off to 
their rooms. B.C. went Scroll and Keys and B.B. was the 
last man tapped for Skull and Bones. Bill Barnes also 
went Bones. This is a great honour, as it means he is 
head of that Society for next year. It’s all very well in a 
way, but they make entirely too much of it, it seems to me. 

Well as a result of this excitement I haven’t done my 
work as I should, and must get busy now. 


1 The day when the senior societies make known their elections—the 
most coveted honour in an undergraduate’s career. Skull and Bones, 
Scroll and Keys and Wolf’s Head are the senior fraternities. As, collec- 
tively, they only take in about forty-five new members each year, the large 
majority of aspirants is necessarily disappointed. 


120 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


May 25, 1906. 


We have only a week and a half more of recitations now. 
It is hard to realize that freshman year is nearly over. I 
have seen nine fellows to-day about Bible study next year, 
and all have expressed their willingness to join a group. 
S., my sceptical friend, is one of these, and a fellow who 
doubts the immortality of the soul is another. I think it is 
going fine. 
May 28, 1906. 
Farrand is working now with a fellow who has been 
going with women. He is the son of a Presbyterian Elder, 
and says his father would be simply dumbfounded if he 
should hear about it. It’s pitiful and awful. I keep 
hearing things, and am beginning to realize that it’s much 
more widespread than I had supposed. 
May 29, 1906. 


We have just had quite a time with a fellow. Charley, 
Farrand and I were walking along when a man, a town 
fellow, came up half-drunk and spoke to us. He swore, 
as they always do, and Charley asked him if he knew who 
Christ was, whose name he had just spoken. Well, this 
started things and I brought him up to my room and we 
talked things over and prayed with him. He was quite 
deeply touched once or twice, but wouldn’t take any 
definite action. However, we saw him home after having 
filled him up with water so that he didn’t want any more 
liquor. He was quite intelligent and said he would come 
and see us again. We did what we could and are trusting 
God for the rest. 

May 30, 1906. 


To-day we have had a holiday. In the morning Mitch, 
Jim, Whitaker, Farrand and I went off for a horseback 
ride. The horses were frisky, the country beautiful and 
the air fine. . . . In the afternoon we went down to the 
harbour and got a motor-boat, which I ran, being the 
only one who had had much experience with engines. 
We had some good fun and I enjoyed being on the water, 
the first time since last summer. Altogether it has been a 
day of pure sport, and I guess it has done us all good. 


FRESHMAN 121 


Borden’s freshman year came to a wonderful 
climax in the Yale Summer Conference that fol- 
lowed Commencement. Debarred from the Student 
Conference at Northfield on account of its early 
date that year, they arranged for a gathering of 
their own under the leadership of Dr. Henry 
Wright, availing themselves of the grounds and 
buildings of the Hotchkiss School at Lakeville, 
Conn. One feature of the conference was a special 
course of training given to men who were to be 
leaders of voluntary groups for Bible study in the 
following year, for Borden’s plan of small separate 
groups was to be extended to all the classes. A 
canvass had already been made, and out of Borden’s 
class alone more than a hundred and fifty men were 
reported as willing to take up regular study in this 
way. ‘This meant the preparation of a large body 
of leaders, who were keen to get all they could from 
the full programme of the conference. 

Half the substantial reporter’s notebook Borden 
had had with him in London is filled with jottings 
from this Lakeville Conference, showing how very 
much it meant to him. Even in those full days of 
meetings, sports and personal work—for he was 
leading one of the daily groups for Bible study—he 
found time to write with the same loving thought- 
fulness to his mother. 


July 8, 1906. 


Whom do you suppose we had with us Sunday? S. D. 
Gordon! Before breakfast a few of us met in Henry 
Wright’s room for prayer—our personal workers’ group. 
Afterwards we met with Mr. Gordon. At 10 a.m. he gave 


122 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


us a talk on Power. It was wonderful. I will tell you 
more about it later. In the afternoon, down by the 
brook, he spoke on John 7. 37-39 in his quiet way. 

Monday our regular Bible study groups started. The 
subject was Jesus and the Father. Beginnings are all 
hard, and possibly this was a hard subject to draw the 
fellows out on... . To-day the subject was Jesus and 
Sin, a splendid one indeed, and we all got along much 
better. In my group is a Chinese nobleman’s son. I’m not 
sure but that he is a Viceroy’s son. He is one of our 
classmates, and is interested, as is shown by the fact that 
he is here. 

In the course of study on Student Summer Missions, 
Henry (Dr. Wright) is outlining for us ten studies on Traits 
of Manhood. We had “ Honesty ” this morning, and it 
was splendid. I must get some boys together as soon as I 
get back to Camden. 

Charley and all the rest are here, and it’s fine! I am 
rooming with Farrand and think he may come to Camden 
with me. . . . Charley, I am afraid, can’t come. I must 
close now, as I am to play on The Hill team against the 
Grads. Until just a moment ago I forgot that you were 
praying forme. The recollection has given me strength. 

I am remembering you. Don’t be lonely. 


In his notebook Borden had written after Sun- 
day’s talks : 


Say “ No ” to self, ‘‘ Yes ” to Jesus every time. A steep 
road—hard work? But every man on this road has One 
who walks with him in lock-step. His presence overtops 

everything that has been cut out... . 
In every man’s heart there is a throne and a cross. If 
Christ is on the throne, self is on the cross; and if self, 
even a little bit, is on the throne, Jesus is on the cross in 
that man’s heart. . . . If Jesus is on the throne, you will 


1 “Tf any man thirst let him come unto me and drink. He that 
believeth on me . . . out of him shall flow rivers of living water.” Rivers, 
Jordans, but clear as crystal. The proposition of the world is into, turning 
man into a Dead Sea. The proposition of Jesus is out of. Note that 
out of.—F rom Borden’s notes. 


FRESHMAN 123 


go where He wants you to go. Jesus on the throne 
glorifies any work or spot. . 

If you are thirsty, and ae is enthroned, drink. Drink- 
ing, the simplest act there is, means taking. ‘‘ He that 
_ believeth on Me, out of him shall flow rivers of living water. 
This spake He of the Spirit.”” To “believe” is to know, 
because of His word. How shall I know that I have power 
to meet temptation, to witness for Him? Believe His 
word : it will come. 


Lord Jesus, I take hands off, as far as my life is con- 
cerned. I put Thee on the throne in my heart. Change, 
cleanse, use me as Thou shalt choose. I take the full power 
of Thy Holy Spirit. I thank Thee.—May never know a 
tithe of the result until Morning. 


CHAPTER VIII 


SOPHOMORE 


1906-1907. Att. 18-19 


‘** His lamps are we, 
To shine where He shall say : 
And lamps are not for sunny rooms 
Nor for the light of day ; 
But for dark places of the earth 
Where shame and wrong and crime have birth; 
_ Or for the murky twilight grey 
Where wandering sheep have gone astray, 
Or where the lamp of faith burns dim 


And souls are groping after Him.” 
A. J. FLINT. 


Was it one result of the step taken at the Lakeville 
Conference that in sophomore year Borden was 
drawn into most unexpected and fruitful work for 
others? The Living Water was flowing out in 
new, unlooked-for channels. 

But first he had to face the fraternity question 
which had been causing him a good deal of exercise 
of mind. There were five junior (Greek letter) 
societies at Yale, as well as the three senior frater- 
nities already referred to in Borden’s letters. Un- 
less a man had been elected in sophomore year to 
membership in one of the five, the senior societies 
would as a matter of course pass him by. Each of 


the junior societies received thirty new members 
124 


SOPHOMORE 125 


annually, and as with the senior fraternities, the 
greatest possible secrecy was observed in all their 
proceedings. A fraternity man would “ keep still ”’ 
if his society were even mentioned. It was this 
secrecy and the exclusiveness of the system that 
troubled Borden, whose uncle had been one of the 
founders of Wolf’s Head, of which his brother was 
amember. “He could have had anything here that 
he wanted,”’ wrote Dr. Kenneth Latourette in this 
connection. But, though feeling no less than others 
how hard it would be to be shut out, Borden had 
his misgivings. His friend Charles Campbell re- 
calls : 


Shortly before college opened, Bill asked me to come to 
Poughkeepsie! to talk over the society question. He 
invited James M. Howard and E. F. Jefferson at the same 
time. The discussion centred about such questions as 
these: Could we as Christians go into a secret society ? 
Would such action harm or help our work for Christ ? It 
was a new thought to most of us. We had taken the society 
system very much for granted, and had never questioned 
whether it was right or wrong for us to join one of the 
fraternities. But Bill took nothing for granted. He wasa 
servant of Jesus Christ, and everything must be tested 
and bear the stamp of Christ’s approval before he would 
enter upon it. 

The element of secrecy was one of Bill’s difficulties with 
regard to joining a fraternity. As a Christian he felt that 
he should not go into anything that he did not clearly 
understand beforehand. Then he feared that the fraternity 
system led to the forming of cliques in the college. He did 
not wish to be set apart from the class. Further, Bill did 
not wish to have anything come between him and God. 
He had given himself wholeheartedly to Christ, to be His 

1 A place on one of the most beautiful reaches of the Hudson River, 


where Mrs. Borden had taken a house to be near Vassar College in her 
daughter’s senior year. 


} 


126 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


follower pure and simple, and he wanted that relation 
kept always real. Therefore he felt he had no right to 
vow allegiance to any secret, man-made organization. 

This attitude is entirely comprehensible to the thought- 
ful Yale man who thinks back to his freshman year and 
remembers how certain men lose their heads and set out 
to make a fraternity as the be-all and end-all of existence. 
I remember Bill’s telling me of one classmate who said that 
he should consider his college course a failure unless he 
made Delta Kappa Epsilon among the first ten elected. 
Happily such insanity does not continue long after the 
verdant stage. This man, as I remember, never made 
Delta Kappa at all, but another fraternity in its second 
election, and I am sure he did not, as a senior, think his 
course a failure—certainly we, his classmates, did not. 


The discussions at Poughkeepsie brought out 
much that was to be said on both sides, but no 
definite decision was arrived at. The first fraternity 
elections would not be given out until a month after 
college reopened, so Borden and his friends went 
back with the question more or less unsettled. The 
position this little group held in the estimation of 
their classmates is seen in an interesting light as 
the letter continues : 


A short time before the fraternity elections were given 
out, the class elected the ‘‘ Deacons”. At Yale, during 
our time, each class chose four men at the beginning of 
sophomore year who acted as deacons in the University 
Church and were charged with responsibility for the reli- 
gious work of their class. The day of the elections, Bill, 
Jim Howard, Pop Jefferson and I prayed that God would 
guide the choice, so that the right people should be 
appointed. As it turned out, the four of us were chosen ! 
We always used to laugh about that—it seemed so like 
praying for ourselves. 

Soon after came the first elections to the junior frater- 
nities. We had talked together many times since the visit 


SOPHOMORE 127 


in Poughkeepsie, and had discussed the society question 
from every point of view. I think Bill talked the matter 
over with Henry Wright and one or two others, and of 
course with his mother. The final outcome was Bill’s 
decision to go into no society. The others of us decided to 
join if we had the opportunity.1 Bill adhered to this 
decision all through his college course, never joining a 
secret society, though he did join the Elihu Club, a non- 
secret organization, at the close of his junior year. 


That the decision cost him a good deal is evident 
from letters to his mother: 
October 8, 1906. 


Last night I had several callers—two bunches of Psi U 
men, one of Delta K.E., one of Zeta Psi. But as I’m not 
worrying, it didn’t bother me, and I was able to study 
between their visits. I knew most of them. 


October 6, 1906. 


I have had more ups and downs in the last day or two 
than I’ve ever had before, I think. Nothing very serious 
to be sure, but annoying. Just at present I’m recovering 
from a down. Your little notes are a great source of com- 
fort and enjoyment. I am going out to get some exercise 
now, throwing the hammer. 


October 18, 1906. 

Well, I guess I wanted to go in a good deal more than I 
realized. . . . I have not slept much the last few nights I 
know. The question yesterday resolved itself into this: 
Are secret societies a good thing—from the Christian 
standpoint, of course? I cannot feel that they are either 
good or necessary, therefore I cannot go into one and lend 
them my support. I hope that God will bless Jim and Jeff 
and Charley and use them mightily, but I cannot see my 
way clear. It is settled. 


He felt like a different man, he wrote as soon as 
this decision was reached. ‘ Busy and happy ” 


1 All three were among the first elected. 


128 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


was his next report. The sacrifice had been great, 
greater perhaps than anyone realized, but the 
reward was great too. Far from losing influence 
by not being a member of a fraternity, Dr. Kenneth 
Latourette stated that “‘as a matter of fact he had 
more influence with his classmates in his senior 
year than ever before”. He had more freedom 
also, and more time to give to his work as a deacon 
and in other spiritual ways. And this meant much, 
as it proved, in connection with unexpected de- 
velopments. 

It was on his nineteenth birthday, the first of 
November, that John Magee, the graduate Secretary 
of the Y.M.C.A., stopped him in Dwight Hall and 
asked for a few minutes’ conversation. There were 
matters in which he needed help that he felt Borden 
could give. 

New Haven, a seaport town midway between 
New York and Boston, was a place where vagrants 
of all sorts were apt to congregate. Work was to 
be had on the docks, and it was a half-way house 
for tramps and hoboes moving from one city to the 
other. It was also the location of the county jail, 
from which prisoners were constantly being dis- 
charged with no one to give them a helping hand. 
For while drinking saloons and infamous resorts 
were to be found in abundance there was no Rescue 
Mission with its doors always open to those who 
needed succour. This state of things appealed to 
John Magee from a double point of view. He saw 
the need of the down-and-out; he saw also the 
possible influence of such a mission upon the college 


SOPHOMORE 129 


community, as a witness to the living, saving power 
of Christ. And he believed that Borden would see 
and feel it too. 

“For,” as a modern writer has well stated, 
“there is an empiricism of religion which is worth 
attention. It challenges the sceptic to explain both 
the conversion of the sinner and the beauty of the 
saint. If religion can change a man’s whole char- 
acter in the twinkling of an eye, if it can give a 
beauty of holiness to human nature such as is felt 
by all men to be the highest expression of man’s 
spirit, truly it is a science of life which works and 
one which its critics must explain. ... Let the 
sceptic bring his indictment against the lives of 
those who attribute to Christ alone the daily 
miracle of their gladness.” 

What could the unbeliever make, for example, 
of a man who had been the terror of the worst ward . 
in New York, a river-thief who would not have 
hesitated, as he said himself, “‘ to cut a man’s throat 
for a five dollar bill, and kick him overboard ’, who 
was sentenced to fifteen years’ hard labour in Sing- 
sing when he was only nineteen, and came out to sink 
ever deeper into drunkenness and sin, with no power 
to break his chains—until Christ met and trans- 
formed him? Yet that man was Jerry McAuley, 
who established in his old haunts the first of such 
Rescue Missions, and was a means of temporal and 
spiritual blessing to thousands. 

What would the sceptic do with the educated, 
able man of business, entangled in the meshes of 


the drinking habit, sinking from depth to depth of 
K 


130 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


misery, until his friends, home and wife all gone, 
haunted by crimes he had committed—a hundred 
and twenty forgeries against one man alone—tor- 
mented with the horrors of delirium tremens, there 
was nothing before him but the jail or suicide, and 
he had chosen the latter? Yet that man was Samuel 
H. Hadley, McAuley’s successor in the Water Street 
Mission, and like him an apostle of the lost. 
Truly “‘if any man be in Christ Jesus he is a new 
creation ”’. 

Knowing such facts as these it was little wonder 
that Magee and Borden began to pray that a similar 
mission might be established in New Haven, for the 
sake of the University no less than for the unfor- 
tunate. To his mother Borden wrote : 


November 1, 1906. 


John Magee is trying his best to do just what we have 
wanted done—to develop the evangelistic element and 
spirit here at Yale. As you may know, Dr. J. W. Dawson 
is to be here for a week in February.t. The present head 
of the McAuley Mission in New York is a college graduate 
who went down, down, and was converted about two years 
ago, Edward C. Mercer. They had him at Princeton 
recently, and John has been enquiring to see how it went 
down there. He found that it was fine, and he is going to 
invite him here to speak at Dwight. That’s just what I’ve 
been hoping for, and I think you have too. John is really 
a corker and is doing a lot. 

He had me up in his room to-day to speak about the need 
for a good City Mission here in New Haven. . . . The plan 
is to get a suitable building in the down-town district and 
have a real Rescue Mission, run by a man from Water 
Street, or some such place, and a few picked men from the 


1 A well-known writer and preacher who had had remarkable experiences 
in revival and midnight meetings. 


SOPHOMORE 131 


University. . . . It would be great !—just the thing to take 
a few sceptics down and let them see the Spirit of God really 
at work regenerating men. 


November 8, 1906. 


Last night I went over and saw Magee. Mr. Skinner 
and old Brother Martin (converted drunkards) met with us, 
and we talked over plans for the City Mission. I tell you 
it was inspiring to hear those men talk! . . . We decided 
to pray over the matter for a week and see what would 
develop. I hope to go to the prison with them a week from 
Sunday. They go once a month. The prospects for the 
Mission are very bright, and I feel sure we shall have it, if 
it is the Lord’s will. 


Meanwhile his classroom work was not neglected. 
At the close of freshman year Borden had discovered 
that his marks were not up to Phi Beta Kappa 
standard, and he decided to change his habits of 
study. Previously he had gone on the method of 
studying up for each recitation just before it came. 
Now he set himself to prepare a day ahead, and 
never retired for the night without having all his 
preparation completed for the following day. 

“Tt was a hard method to live up to”, com- 
mented his friend Campbell, “and showed his 
strength of will. Think of what it meant on Satur- 
day to get all Monday’s work out of hand. For 
Bill never studied on Sunday. He would work till 
eleven or eleven-thirty at night, but not later. Then 
he could sleep quietly, and be ready for whatever 
calls upon his time might come. It meant much 
in his mental make-up and when it came to ex- 
aminations.” 

“I figured up yesterday where my time went 
per week ’’, Borden wrote early in sophomore year, 


132 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


‘and found that about thirty-five hours are wasted 
somehow. I am going to see if I can’t systematize, 
so as to get the most use out of them.”’ 

That he must have been successful in this effort 
is evident from the amount of work he was able to 
get through in addition to his studies as the year 
went on. The daily prayer-groups were still kept 
up, as he wrote to his mother in December : 


You just must come to New Haven and meet these 
fellows, J. B. and B. R: especially. The latter is the latest 
addition to our group and is growing every day. It is 
interesting that out of our bunch of eleven, eight should 
be A men, one B and two C; a pretty good showing I 
think. 


The responsibilities of Class Deacon were taken 
seriously by the four friends. It seems that the 
office, which is much respected, dates back to the » 
founding of “The Church of Christ in Yale”, in 
1756. Up to that time the students and faculty 
had attended the old Congregational Church on 
The Green, but it was felt that a different style of 
preaching was desirable from that suited to the 
usual mixed assembly. Much opposition had to 
be overcome, but ultimately the University Church 
was organized on Congregational lines. As in that 
fellowship the officers are not elders but deacons, 
the term “ Class Deacon ” was adopted to designate 
the students chosen by the undergraduate body as 
their representatives in church affairs. 

In Borden’s time they held their meetings weekly, 
a committee of twelve men, four from each of 
the sophomore, junior and senior classes, charged 





CONFERENCE GROUP AT LAKEVILLE, 1906. 
Borden is in the middle of the front row, marked with an xX. Campbell is on the reader’s 


right, at the back. The Chinese Classmate, probably C. T. Wang, is seated next 
to Borden. 





THE CLASS DEACONS OF BORDEN’S YEAR. 


On the famous Yale fence. Left to right, Jefferson, Campbell, Howard, Borden. 


To face page 132. 





SOPHOMORE 133 


with the spiritual interests of their fellow-students.2 
These meetings were times of sincere prayer for 
help and guidance, and resulted in “ strong friend- 
ships that gave a certain sense of unity to the reli- 
gious life in the college”. Borden and his friends 
had been already on the Freshman Religious Com- 
mittee, and brought to these new opportunities 
the same earnest aggressive spirit. 

And all the while, Borden was writing just as 


frequently to his mother. 
October 21, 1906. 

Charley, Jeff and I got together to-day and divided up | 
the class (consisting of about three hundred men). The 
plan is for each deacon to have a quarter of the class as his 
parish and to know every individual man. It will take time, - 
but we believe it will pay. 

October 24, 1906. 

Things are going to hum this year, or I’m very much 
mistaken. We deacons meet with Joe Twitchell, ’06, the 
College Y.M.C.A. Secretary, every Wednesday evening. 
He is very amusing in his impetuosity, but very frank 
and good-natured. 

December 10, 1906. 

You will be pleased to hear that X. is getting on very 
well in every way (the classmate who formerly boasted that 
he had broken every commandment but one). He leads a 
Sunday School class and has a Phi Beta Kappa stand in his 
studies. Rather a contrast with last year ! 

Had my first exam. to-day, Physics. It was very hard. 

Have received six Christmas invitations. Guess I’m 
still in society ! 


1 “ The verdict of men most in touch with life on the campus is that 
the morals and tone of the undergraduates are unusually high and clean, 


and steadily improving. That such is the case is largely due to the presence ; 


year after year of this small, earnest body of men, elected by the classes, but 
connected with and under the control of the Church, to lead the Christian 
work and set an example of manly living.” From Two Centuries of 
Christian Activity at Yale. Chapter on ‘“‘ The Class Deacons ”, by S. H. 
Fisher, p. 208. 


134 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Sunday, January 20, 1907. 


We have had a fine time to-day, and I feel like singing 
the Doxology. .. . 

You remember I told you that the first meeting of our 
Bible Class with the new teacher wasn’t much good. Well, 
Wednesday we had an extra good prayer meeting at noon, 
and had faith. The result was we had a fine meeting that 
evening, though not many fellows were present. Charley 
and I spoke to Mr. C. afterwards and said that we were 
behind him in prayer. He was very nice, and we feel 
confident for the future. 

My Mission Study class went very nicely on Thursday. 

I am thankful to say I have been doing a little more 
real work for Christ. I asked N.S. to go and hear Gipsy 
Smith, and he said he would if possible. I also wrote to 
M. T., following up our talk at Camden. D. W. was on my 
heart, and I wrote a pretty plain letter to him. This is 
about all my long-distance work. 

With F. I haven’t done much more, but the door is open. 
My work with S. is going finely. After our Bible groups 
to-day, which went very well, I had the best talk with him 
I’ve ever had. He’s nearly there, I believe. 

Charley’s work is going well. He has a new group 
started to-day (Bible Study) among some seemingly 
impossible fellows. He is getting hold of perhaps the 
brightest man in the class, who is also one of the most 
dissipated. . . . 

This afternoon and evening though were the best. At 
Band Meeting a Mr. Smeet from China spoke to us. He 
was filled with the Spirit and gave a wonderful message 
which stirred Ken and me deeply, and we are going to work 
more for volunteers out of 1909. The evening service had 
a fine message for us too. Everything is leading up to the 
meetings Feb. 3-9, in answer to prayer. 

Here on my floor things are going badly. The fellows 
play cards a great deal—most of it is gambling, and on 
Sunday too. 

January 25, 1907. 

Things have been moving here in a great way. We went 
over our class again among the group leaders and made a 


SOPHOMORE 135 


new canvass. Charley and I each took a hard bunch of 
fellows, and after a little prayer went trusting in God. The 
way opened up wonderfully, and we each have a new group 
started, mine of four men, his of ten. Charley has three 
groups now, and I two beside my Mission Study Class. So 
we are busy-—with our studies and exercise. 


Yet at this very time they were planning for the 
rescue work which early in the new year took shape 
as The Yale Hope Mission. The visit of Dr. Dawson 
and Mr. Mercer could hardly have been more oppor- 
tune, demonstrating the power of Christ and the 
need in men’s lives for such a Saviour. 


February 10, 1907. 

I have just come from the last of our special services, 
and it was fine. . . . The meetings have had a great effect. 
Mr. Mercer’s talks have opened men’s eyes to the evil of the 
“social glass”. (That was what ruined him, while in the 
University of Virginia.) ‘‘ Shef’”’? has been moved as never 
before and is ripe for the reaping.1 Every man in the 
University must be reached! .. . 

I just want to say right now that any day in which work 
is not done for Christ is wasted. Moreover, I’m a fool for 
letting such days be—for they are not pleasant. 


It was a welcome development therefore when, 
a few weeks later, the Rescue Mission was opened 
which provided new opportunities for the work he 
and others were learning to put first in their lives. 
Much of hope and prayer lay behind the modest 
beginning, of which Charley Campbell wrote : 


A room had been rented in a cheap hotel in just the 
right quarter—the room which has been used ever since for 
the meetings. It had hideous dark red paper in those days. 
Later on, Bill bought the entire building, and we now have 


* “ Shef”, or Sheffield, was the scientific department of the University 
with over a thousand students. 


136 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


downstairs dormitories and shower baths, and a place in 
which clothes can be fumigated, as well as a good, in- 
expensive lodging-house upstairs, known as the Hotel 
Martin. For two dollars a week a man can have a room 
to himself, a little home. 

But we had no such helps in those early days and did 
the more ourselves in consequence. I can remember 
distinctly how we carted hymn-books in my suit-case 
down to the hall for that first meeting. _ The handle of the 
suit-case broke, and we had to hoist it up on our shoulders 
and carry it through the streets ! ~ Bill was heart and soul 
in it all. It was great to see him in those meetings—so 
earnest in his presentation of the truth and in dealing with 
those who came forward for prayer. Afterwards, he would 
often take men around until he could find a place for them 
_ to sleep, and pay the lodging-house charge himself so as to | 
avoid putting temptation in their way by giving them 
money. 


It was the sixteenth of March when this begin- 
ning was made, and before the month was over 
Borden was writing to his mother of a man from 
Water Street who was coming to live on the pre- 
mises and take charge of the growing work. 


Mr. Bernhardt was a graduate of the University of 
Georgia and did post-graduate work at Vanderbilt. He 
rose to the position of cashier in a big southern Express 
Company. Then, through gambling, he got into debt. 
This led to stealing, first a little, then more, then a large 
sum and he was caught. Result—five years in a southern 
prison which he found to be “‘ a literal hell’. He went in 
a comparatively innocent boy, and came out “a fiend ”’. 
He could get nothing to do, so he deliberately became a 
professional criminal and was before long an international 
character. One of his sentences was, ‘‘ work in the mines 
under the lash for three and a half years, never seeing 
daylight’? ! 


+ After ‘‘ Daddy Martin ”’, greatly beloved. 


SOPHOMORE 137 


In all, he spent over twenty-two years in prison. After 
the last term he “lost his nerve” and determined to be 
aman. He travelled eight thousand miles in search of 
employment, without success. At last, stranded in New 
York, he was about to commit suicide. On his way to the 
river he heard singing from the Water Street Mission and 
turned in. Nothing happened that night or the next, but 
the third night the great change came. I cannot tell you 
all about it—but he is a Christian now and no mistake ! 

His present job is clerking in a cheap Bowery hotel, 
but he is always ready, Mr. Mercer says, to go anywhere 
and speak for Christ. His ambition is to get into rescue 
work and devote his whole time to it. This is the man we 
have asked to come and take the Yale Hope Mission. All 
he wants is a clean place to sleep, three meals a day, 
decent clothes and some money in his pocket to “ help the 
other fellow”. Sixty dollars a month he says is too much, 
in addition to board and lodging, so we are to give him 
fifty. 


Bernhardt was no disappointment. Many a 
man on the Yale campus as well as on the streets 
of New Haven had reason to thank God for his 
coming. 

‘The Yale Hope Mission is booming at present 
beyond all expectation ”, Borden wrote at the end 
of the month. ‘“ Bernhardt began last Sunday, 
and that evening eight men came forward, several 
of them in dead earnest. I was unable to go down 
last night, but Magee told me that seven more were 
seeking salvation. Bernhardt is fine, and is taking 
hold of the work wonderfully ”. 


CHAPTER IX 


UPPER CLASSMAN 


1907-1909 Att. 19-21 


‘It takes great strength to bring your life up square 
With your accepted thought and hold it there : 


It is so easy to drift back, to sink, 
So hard to live abreast of what you think.” 
C.P.S. 


It was characteristic of Borden and of his friend 
Campbell that they did not room together either 
in junior or senior year. But they were on the 
same floor in White Hall and had what they valued 
most, the opportunity of being helpful to others. 
With lively recollections Campbell wrote : 


In the selection of quarters for junior year, Bill had 
chosen a room in White Hall on Berkeley Oval, just off 
the old college campus. Malcolm B. Vilas of Cleveland was 
his room-mate, a boy of fine character who had taken a 
positive Christian stand at the Lakeville Conference at the 
close of freshman year.!_ Next door, I lived with Louis G. 
Audette, and across the way were two other class-mates, 
Sandford D. Stockton and Frank Assman. It was a great 
combination, made up of very different types, and what 
times we did have! Every now and then we would get 
rid of superfluous energy in a big rough-house. We would 


1 The suite occupied by Borden and Vilas, a study and two bedrooms, 
was on the fourth floor of White Hall (number 380) with an open outlook 
toward the Yale gymnasium and West Rock. 

138 


UPPER CLASSMAN 139 


nag at Bill until we had him roused and then something 
would be doing. Around that room he would go like a 
tornado, crushing all opposition. It was a sight to see 
him really roused. He was a fellow of unusual physical 
strength and knew how to use it to advantage. I found 
that the best way to treat Bill when he went at me was to 
give right in. This seemed to mollify him, while resistance 
only spurred him on to greater efforts. We used to have 
many a tussle, but he was altogether too strong for the 
average man, and with his knowledge of wrestling was 
more than a match for any of us. We would laugh at him 
because of his strength and call him a “ brute ”’. 

The activities in the religious work went along much the 
same. There were the Bible groups, the mission study 
classes, the daily prayer groups, the Wednesday evening 
Bible classes, the Volunteer Band meetings and the Yale 
Hope Mission, all of which occupied Bill’s time. The last 
named was specially absorbing for Bill this year. I 
believe he took one night a week at the Mission, conducting 
the service. 

In our Christmas vacation (junior year) Bill went with 
Mrs. Borden and Joyce to the Lake Placid Club in the 
Adirondacks. It was a beautiful winter with several feet 
of snow on the ground in the mountains. Bill and his 
mother with their wonted hospitality decided to have a 
house-party. So invitations came to Isabel Corbiere, 
Mary Abbe and three of my sisters, with Mac Vilas, Bill 
Roberts, Lou Audette and myself. All but Mac Vilas were 
able to accept, and we arrived on New Year’s Eve. 

How crisp the mountain air was as we drove up in 
sleighs from the station and started in for a glorious party ! 
We cast off all thought of work and settled down to healthy 
outdoor sport. Bill was in the thick of it. We would all 
dress up in our warmest old clothes and go out to the 
toboggan course. The snow was soft and all kinds of 
stunts were possible. We spent a good deal of time trying 
to go down the hill standing on the toboggans. Four or 
five of us would get on one toboggan, standing up, and 
would then launch out. There always came the time when 
one would lose balance and upset the rest, and away we 


140 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


would go head first into the snow. It was fine healthy 
sport, and Bill was right in his element. 

Over on the road, coasting on the bob-sled was possible, 
and near the Club was good skating. One day we all 
ploughed off in the deep snow and climbed a little mountain 
near by. Every night we would turn up tired, healthily 
so, and ready for the biggest kind of dinner and the soundest 
sort of sleep. Bill simply revelled in good fellowship and 
sport such as this, and it did one good to be with him. He 
made an ideal host and always saw that his guests had a 
good time. 


Few letters are.available for junior and none 
for senior years, as Mrs. Borden, who was at that 
time in very poor health, was living in New Haven 
to be near her son, but the recollections of class- 
mates tell a good deal. The last of his own letters 
follow that Christmas in the Adirondacks. 


January 13, 1908. 


Dear Moruer—Things have been moving here since 
we came back and I am very thankful. 

I believe I wrote you that we had gotten our prayer 
group started. It has been going nicely so far and will 
continue so I’m sure. Our mission study work promises 
very well indeed, not only the group I spoke of, but all the 
others. We shall have about twice as many men as we 
have had before. 

Well, Saturday, things began to happen. Mr. and Mrs. 
Asher (Saloon Evangelists) conducted a union meeting of 
the missions in town. Charley and I prayed that it might 
be the right kind of meeting and then went to get some 
fellows to go. I got the whole of my last year’s group, the 
tough bunch, and they stayed until the invitation was 
given. The meeting was fine, and Dr. Dawson who was 
here last year contributed not a little to its success. 

Afterwards, I talked with a man until eleven, and hope 
to be able to help him more. On Friday Charley got a 
fellow he is working with to go to one of the Chapman 


UPPER CLASSMAN 141 


meetings and I went to the Mission, and as the fellow who 
was leading (Bernhardt being away) didn’t want to give the 
invitation, I did it. About'eight men came forward and I 
conducted things as best I could. I feel very hopeful about 
some of them and that we’ve got a most important work on 
our hands. 

As it’s late, I’ll reserve the rest, and best, for to-morrow. 

Lots of love, WILLIAM 


January 14, 1908. 


I think you will be interested in my report of Sunday’s 
happenings. The evening service was led by Dr. Dawson 
and was one of the most remarkable I’ve seen here yet. He 
spoke on the Price of Perfectness, from the rich young ruler 
passage, and put it very straight to the fellows. At the 
close he gave an invitation for all who wanted to follow 
Christ (I’ve forgotten just his words) and about twenty 
responded. 

Right after I went over and saw a fellow named B., one 
of those I’d had at the Mission the night before. I started 
right in—having found him alone providentially—and we 
talked for about two hours, with the result that he finally 
decided that he would take Christ and try it. There are 
three others I want to get after. 


January 20, 1908. 


Had a very nice group meeting which I didn’t deserve, 
as I had expected the “ Prom” to be more attractive. 
After it was over, S. spoke up and said that he was practi- 
cally a Christian, believing almost as I did. He is (or was) 
the sceptical fellow I’ve been working with for months, 
since freshman year in fact. I expect to see him come out 
openly now in a very short time. It is wonderful. 


* To him that hath shall be given ”’ was certainly 
true in Borden’s case, for one upon another, even 
in junior year, responsibilities came crowding upon 
him. The Student Missionary Union of colleges in 
the Connecticut Valley held its annual conference 


142 “ BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


at New Haven that fall and Borden was chairman 
at all the meetings. Months of preparation lay 
behind the success of the gathering, and all the 
responsibility for speakers and arrangements had 
been on his shoulders. Stephen W. Ryder, a class- 
mate who helped him, wrote : 


As a stenographer and typewriter, I often took his 
dictation of letters to his friends. I specially remember 
quite an extensive correspondence which devolved upon him 
as chairman of Connecticut Valley Student Missionary 
Conference. His apologies, his thoughtful explanations 
and general care to avoid misunderstandings, his desire to 
please, encourage and inspire others often impressed me. 
He sought no subterfuges or excuses, nor dealt in flattery 
to serve his ends. There was always frankness and sin- 
cerity in his letters. 


John Magee among others was impressed with 
the organizing ability Borden showed in handling 
this undertaking. 


Bill was busy enough with all he was doing in College 
to take the time of any ordinary man. But he seemed to 
have little difficulty in running this Conference, in spite of 
the large amount of work connected with it, of which I had 
had experience. It was held in New Haven that year 
(1908) and I remember hearing a number of people remark 
on Bill’s ability as a presiding officer. He was a regular 
John R. Mott, and had everything at his fingers’ ends, 
everybody knowing just what meetings were to be held, 
and where, through his conciseness and clearness. All his 
correspondence beforehand, tentative programmes, bills, 
etc., were kept in such orderly fashion that he never had to 
waste time looking for anything. 

This same ability in handling affairs came out in our 
work together in the Yale Hope Mission. Bill gave a great 
deal of attention to it, though he did not let it interfere 
with his other work as far as I could see. He went down to 





ua 
7 7 ek . ve ar ¢ os ; . 
eee oo eee aod cure? '’ ue oS saehy’ A 
7 J ti Aah) : . oJ eo. a9 ae 
i ia ne icine > mas Te wk i Ps é 
ome a P 
ty Be ae eves ae ie ay ie rule meh iv 
a gene ni Sat te has.’ eee 
| WP itiges oft Aa’ af UH: = ae, a 


? 
j ' ' 
_ Te 2 ne ’ ‘ ; » ) oem 
| re ae ieve y * o ue } ts : Hl 4 2 “a oh 
4 7 } y s 
DT “er ) yide Ms te ‘ i. ayy J 1 een 1" ia? 4 
ta raj. as | ri ‘ 2 . 7% Py woh _@ st F 
ear .@ At et ; Rite es & 7 y —e BA a a ‘ae é Je 
bale Ti. i Se Ay a ai al, 4 (7 q Wats ww mer! 1 
wy vt als haves — a fri ike he 7 ro), : iP tals rim 
LAT; Bi tate aT te ee: ay, Ay ic Crur) i Ps ra ¥ hye ¥ Nay 
7 Py aay. © j if 7 
LD Se see er en ae Pr inae be ay Magia ts C62 \ en 
1 oy OT? iAP Chee es dy vey i Ps . ne ; 
v4 ft Aw 2» A Be ‘- 4 . » My " 4 ny © 
if nas ys e at ak ms x 7 iu ww ‘ a 9 
te tha raed Chaney As pilin oe oe ae ae ee 
eA As > Y 7 ’ . rey }' - af 4 ta .¥ - aces >a "Pe yet 
7 my a Se et Pea ey a Yi. es BW, wn ‘ 
¢ N ‘ 5 f ; “se - Al a chu 
17 i Meade A; ws pert) Pe icy Aeneas Pn a ; 
/ ee, i, if i= ie De, Ha sical ve od: o's if f Lina 
a ¥) yy ; ‘ ; > Jat Hl a Pi . 
: ; : ; : ai ‘ya ee : ve | ; 
, ~ = iy of ya) 7 j « i > ina ae i 7 
’ sy 2 + 7 jh : us 1s * er 
5? ( “ a ; i ad i ' 
. | Bua 4 i ’ ; e's : : " i 
7 Ua. is fF oma Wye f) Rt ey, 
‘ x ron , pier i | , ¥ 1? ie ' “Pi by ar VJ 
: | “ pment ud? eh io " 
7 : a Wie. re ome : ‘ ad < a4 A i aT FAL ie ‘ 
vs 5 8 iJ) Yi Ad t-, f i 7 bTtA | 
> io Lig { : ' sas, ‘ 
wv. eh en Ae ) Shir a | 
Wie zit) Jenny ; : he 
. ie vi , ; ; (yrs a 2 . ; 3 A 
, } rh ‘ j . 4 -, 
ee : ' fi es liv rete, en 
+t; «a 4 4 » i ey 
i : i a cop mie ve °° ' { - r } 
[ ’ : aoe a? « ‘ 1) Py : , } 
RE NT COS tt ia Vs bey 
a \ a : ms yd ' Od eee 
A ‘he , . J ¥ a ve 4 rt 
my \e 4 i bh Attys Ba : y wh 4% 
F * . oer. 
‘- - Yau ; : a“ ae KG. 
P i ey ; ‘ ‘ Ps 7 wh art , ! » re 
> oe ¢ 7 ' , J yr j AINE j Lo 
i rh ee, E j 7 ae TAA: 
,/ é a = b { ; wy a) Aalto . iar 
4 ‘ ° ; < F ny an yal ee 
ay) ry i) ‘ aa , Ser ¥ 
any f ’ : é a4 ’ mi ia ne \ 
- j rae ae Wa 
5 a4 7 ae, 
wy Hi he > ' i 7 aS : ” Wh Ra Les " 
Fak - a \ i i ay at, hide HAL | 
a aieé f f lea ey 7 i 
. ot 4 e ‘ 4 5 L riot L Mie 5)" " 
" ; yi - ; > ae pa . yan 
' fn ; i ot eri a | 
Bicerber an (ees Beret eee, ALE. 
a L) i ry, 
yoy ‘a ot meee fe TA ae ‘ 
q ae i aa F wos! an Ca : i b, § . 
“ pth ’ 1 ie ae, yA bd has aye ae Py - 
i f i ah We ii 7) hs a : wT), iu + ‘EN 
Ge f ad aah Ce =e 
’ ; f PALES, 
tm f ' Ss j : "us y | f : ‘ 
‘v \ , 4 , i x ma i 1 
gsi) ba el rt 3 4 Hier Ae! ot) Mh) 
a) a bry % ‘ i, 4 in rinvey ( 
i ‘ as jf 7 =p | i 173 pun Venta 4- 
; ‘a ‘ Wie sy? alka Pe 
i4 ' ty J sey hf hg at 
4 y anh OP A i < ' A ‘ 4 : ot y aT ‘ 
eg, i — chal af ° i: ‘ Why | ( af 
: | oti vi Pal , oe! geek oe rk 
EN tye gs) tate ' . any i Os RA 
; 4 ci b ob ‘ oo en — : 5 ‘ a * * ’ 
" o in ate Ng} Je. ae. F a “a id 7 a 
¥ A shed . “4 i. . 4 2 = o> 4) by! Fh ft 
‘ ‘ } § a q i 
ae J ’ ; fi w yy 
fi et BG aes As ge Pigg Lee 
P53 os he a Ae “A fan 2) So hbe i, ‘ 
AS r ey Xs Nie ‘| ey gi art ‘ f ; n ie ts Nef). n 
ay ‘v ” ‘ee eas? “ed es ee nf ' “he ns } 
epee 9 J ; ‘fet ' a 4 ; 
aed igs ew ane a haa Re - oh ee | 4) ‘ 
i] q =f 7 ® r) 
j S ray el Oe F ] j 
ia toe + 


+ Peel Bf 
A a 7 7 f ‘ . : ; 

7 Pe" hd vids wart 

ve ~) yy) ae if mah, ae hae AG ¢ pre ; 

. We ‘i ‘atts We hae"! ~ kG ae heh iat 4 eat a’ 

ny % hae va 

: re a oe 
i 4 a ay 


ee yo 
mers Bey! r my et vai ' 





“ai 
tet oe 
‘Ta sony | iy dei \ ea fae “y . 
: me Ww i 


{ 


“ 
ea ae . 
uF fi? aa : \'» ‘ 
i wae’ 6 Ce Pak 
’ > 





BORDEN AS HE GRADUATED FROM YALE, 1909. 


To face page 143. 








UPPER CLASSMAN 143 


the meetings a great deal, and might often be found in the 
lower parts of the city at night—on the street, in a cheap 
lodging-house or some restaurant to which he had taken a 
poor hungry fellow to feed him—seeking to lead men to 
Christ. 


Yet his studies were not neglected, for in Feb- 
ruary of junior year when the list of those who had 
made Phi Beta Kappa was announced, Borden was 
one of thirty chosen, and when the society organized 
a little later he was elected president for the coming 
year. In this connection Charles Campbell recalled : 


At the Phi Beta Kappa banquet, which came late in the 
winter of 1908, Bill as president of the society took the lead. 
The Phi Beta Kappa banquet is perhaps the finest of the 
yearly banquets given at Yale. Many celebrated men are 
invited from other colleges and most of the best known 
professors of the University itself, so that the dinner is 
quite an affair. I have a pleasant recollection of the digni- 
fied way in which Bill presided and made the opening 
address. It was a striking illustration of the maturity and 
balance of the man. 


Borden’s college activities were summarized in 
the Yale Alumni Weekly as follows : 


He was president of Phi Beta Kappa. In athletics he 
was active in football, baseball, crew and wrestling, rowing 
on the winning, 1909, club crew in the fall of junior year,! 
and playing on the winning Philosophical and High Oration 
baseball team and on the Phi Beta Kappateam. He served 
on the Class Book Committee and on the Senior Council. 
Elected a Class Deacon, he devoted himself largely to 
religious work. He was unwilling to join any fraternity or 


1 “ One of the events of the regatta on Lake Whitney ”, wrote Mr. C. 
Campbell, “ was a race between the four class crews. This was won by 
1909, Bill’s class. I have before me the cup awarded to him for his part 
in this race. It is inscribed: ‘ Fall Regatta, 1907 ; Club Championship, 
won by 1909. W. W. Borden, Number four ’.” 


144 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


secret society, because he feared that it might set him 
apart from the body of the class. He accepted, however, 
an election to the Elihu Club. 

Not a little additional work was entailed by his 
election to the Senior Council, with its special rela- 
tion to the faculty, and by his duties as a member 
of the Senior Class Book Committee. 

‘‘ Bill was keenly interested in doing his full 
share of drudgery for the good of his class ”’, wrote 
a fellow-deacon. ‘‘ I remember going into his room 
frequently when he was summing up class-statistics. 
He spent hours collecting from the blanks the votes 
for individual preferences. Often he would pause 
for a rest, and joke about some bright answer to a 
question.” 

His own standing, when the Class Book appeared, 
was third in the vote for ‘‘ the hardest worker ”’, 
fourth among “‘ the most energetic ”’, ninth among 
‘‘ the most to be admired ”’, and seventh in the vote 
for ‘‘ the one who had done most for Yale”; this 
in a class of close upon three hundred. 

But it was in the small, intimate meetings of the 
Student Volunteer Band that Borden was most 
himself, as Stephen W. Ryder recalls : 

It was there the flame of his spiritual life seemed to glow 
most brightly. There reserve was thrown aside; he was 
among those who were in sympathy with his life-purpose. 


His presence in the Band kept the spiritual tone right up to 
concert pitch. ... It will always be an inspiration to 


\remember him there, in his true element. 


' And Dr. Kenneth Latourette : 


j 


j 
' is his missionary motive. He was so sane and unpre- 


ty, 


Of course the outstanding thing in one’s memory of Bill 





UPPER CLASSMAN 145 


tending about it, and yet it was so completely a part of his 
life. The memory of it and his courage to carry the gospel 
to unreached fields is a constant rebuke and inspiration to 
me. He had the Pauline spirit. I recall how he quoted 
him, about not wanting to build on another man’s founda- 
tion (Romans 15. 20, 21). The stedfastness of that purpose 
of Bill’s had no small part, I am sure, in bringing the largest 
Volunteer Band in Yale’s history into the days of his college 
life. 


The same friend touched the secret of the power 
of that life when he wrote: 


How easy Bill was to pray with! He was a jolly 
fellow—loved a rough-house: delighted to get hold of a 
man and crack his ribs! He could be jolly with the rest, 
and when the crowd was gone it would be Just as natural 
for him to say, 

“Come into the bedroom and let us have prayer 
together.”’ 

There was no sense of incongruity about it. I remember 
very vividly—how could one ever forget—those times of 
prayer, when just the two of us would kneel down and take 
to God some of the problems we were facing. Bill was so 
simple in his prayer life, so natural, so trustful! He was 
the easiest man to pray with I have ever known. 


Prayer was to him his most important work, as » 


well as the breath of his life. He hada card-system 
for recording prayers and their answers in connec- 
tion with individuals who were on his heart, and a 
loose-leaf note-book in which he listed subjects for 
prayer in groups, one for each day of the week. To 
take in the meaning of those notes even for one day 
is a revelation of the depth and thoroughness of the 
prayer life they represent, reaching out to the ends 
of the earth. It helps one to understand the state- 


ment made by his most intimate friend, Campbell : 
L 


146 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Through all the time I have known him, when there has 
been opportunity, we have never parted without going on 
our knees‘and praying for God’s work. 


It is easy to see how much this friendship must 
have meant to the two who were in every way so 
fitted for and worthy of each other.1_ But there 
was nothing exclusive about it, any more than 
about Borden’s religion. ‘“‘ Bill was to me the rarest 
Christian spirit I have ever known ”’, was the esti- 
mate of one now on the faculty—and yet he was so 
very human too! 

‘No picture of Bill at New Haven would be 
complete”, wrote Jefferson to another of the Class 
Deacons, ‘“‘ without the old slouch hat he used to 
wear so often. Remember it? It was of brownish 
grey, pointed at the top, torn on the side, and with 
a large convenient hole used to hang it up by. One 
time I set fire to Bill’s hat. When he discovered 
the flame he was suddenly active to rescue the 
treasure and punish me for my presumption.” The 
hat, it may be added, was not discarded even after 
this fiery ordeal. 

Mac Vilas, his room-mate for two years at Yale, 
spoke of him as, “‘ a Christian, first, last and all the 
time ’’; but he was interested in recalling details 
that showed that he was not narrow in his sym- 


1 ‘‘ Campbell prepared for Yale at Kingsley School and at the Montclair 
Military Academy. He got a Philosophical Oration appointment and is a 
member of Phi Beta Kappa; a member of the University track team for 
the last three years ; he won his ‘ Y’ in the pole vault in the inter-collegiate 
meet, sophomore year. Elected a Deacon, sophomore year, his chief 
interest in college has been Dwight Hall, of which he is president. He is 
an active Bible group leader. He served on the Class Day committee. 
Zeta Psi. Skull and Bones.”—From The History of the Class of 1909, Yale 
College. 








UPPER CLASSMAN 147 


pathies, and that socially as well as physically he 
was an all-round man. 


In the letter he wrote accepting an invitation to be 
usher at my wedding, Bill spoke about not being a social 
light, etc., but we were delighted with the way he entered 
into the spirit of the occasion, and I believe he had just as 
much fun as the most frivolous of the rest of us. I mention 
this because it shows that his social instinct was strong. 
Here were a dozen or more young men and women, and 
Bill was simply one of us. All the girls told Helen that he 
was most entertaining and attractive to them, and they 
were girls used to meeting all sorts of men. ; 

Bill also went to the 1909 Tea at our Junior Prom., with 
Helen and me and my aunt, who chaperoned Helen, and 
was very much at home on that occasion. I had a good 
time, too. Bill was not slow at the ‘fussing game’’, as 
his taking girls to the inter-collegiate matches also indicates. 
I, personally, was very happy to see this trait in him, and if 
it had not been there to a considerable extent our Cleveland 
~ social butterflies ” would never have enthused over him 
as they did. 

Bill’s interest in business affairs was something I 
frequently observed. He read the N ew York Times 
regularly at College, and also took and read the Wall Street 
Journal. I know that he was fairly conversant with the 
stock quotations from day to day and that he followed the 
big financial developments eagerly. How he could go the 
Wall Street Journal was a mystery to me. I think Prof. 
Emery’s lectures in economics had something to do with 
starting his interest in those things. 

Bill was very reticent about mentioning his financial 
affairs tome. In fact, I don’t remember ever asking him a 
single thing about them, as I considered it none of my 
business. This reticence was, to my mind, another indication 
that he would have been a shrewd business man. He was 


able to keep his own counsel, to say little but think and 


work hard. Bill seemed to pay considerable attention to 
his Chicago business affairs, for he corresponded a good 
deal with Mr. Spink (I used to see the printed envelopes), 


148 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


and I remember his mentioning several business trips to 
Chicago. ... 

As to his wrestling, you know what a bull he was and 
how hard he wrestled and rough-housed. I remember in 
senior year one night, when Jeff was holding Lou and 
Frank at bay easily, how Bill just for fun rushed in, grabbed 
Jeff by the legs and tossed him back on his couch without 
much effort. You were there, I am sure. How thankful 
I am for those happy, happy days together, Charley ! 
Len Parks can also witness to Bill’s physical prowess and 
athletic enthusiasm. They used to wrestle together quite 
frequently, and Len was no slouch, but he couldn’t throw 
Bill. He told me once that Bill was a “‘ regular bear ’”’, 
and that though he didn’t go in for fancy holds, etc., he was 
the hardest man to tackle in the whole gym. Len, I believe, 
threw even Bill Goebel a few times, but not Bill Borden. 

Bill was also a loyal rooter for the teams at Yale. He 
attended practically all the games and meets, as I recall it. 
I remember well how he stood on Derby Avenue, between 
the bridge and the lower entrance to the track and baseball 
field, on the day in November 1907 when we had the first 
cross-country run with Harvard. As we came up the little 
rise on Derby Avenue, before entering the gate, there was 
Bill, who had come down to meet us runners. When he 
saw that I was in the lead, he let out a most encouraging 
yell! Perhaps it was partly surprise—and I wouldn’t 
blame him if it was. You and all the other fellows may 
have been there, I don’t remember about that, but Bill’s 
enthusiasm for and interest in his room-mate I can never 
forget. He had come down a little further than most of 
the fellows to give his encouraging support. 

I believe I am right in saying that Bill was elected to 
every class office for which he was nominated, and I well 
remember one stormy class-meeting—we could scarcely 
hear ourselves speak—when a word of suggestion from him 
brought order out of the chaos, and showed very clearly 
the quality of the fellows’ respect and admiration for him. 


Others also recall characteristics which impressed 
them : 


UPPER CLASSMAN 149 


No matter if some said he was too religious, or others 
that he was too narrow, or that he was heavy, there was 
one thing nobody at Yale ever questioned—that was that 
he was strong. He was red-blooded and he had the punch. 
He played hard and he studied hard and was intense in his 
religious beliefs. When he bucked the football line, every 
ounce of his hundred and seventy-five was back of him. 
When he was elected to the presidency of Phi Beta Kappa 
he received the highest scholarship honour in Yale. There | 
was power written all over him. You either followed him 
or you let him alone. . . . I can vouch that he was the 
strongest religious force in our class at Yale.! 


He certainly was one of the strongest characters I have 
ever known,” and he put backbone into the rest of us at 
College, who were interested in the same things but did not 
have the strength he had. There was real iron in him, and 
I always felt he was of the stuff martyrs were made of, and 
heroic missionaries of more modern times. Our point of 
view differed on many things ; but it was always refreshing 
to discuss matters with him even if we disagreed, because 
I knew so well his strength of purpose and consecration. I 
had complete trust in him asa man. . . . He never seemed 
to lose his vision for a single instant. . . . Among many 
fine qualities, the supreme impression he made upon others, 
it seems to me, was that of moral rectitude. 


Bill was the great example to me of one who seemed to 
realize always that he must be about his Father’s business, 
and not wasting time in the pursuit of amusement... . 
He was a man who had very high ideals and lived up to 
them ; who impressed his sincerity upon you by his daily 
life among his fellows, no matter how restricting his beliefs 
might be. We disagreed about some things, and I thought 
Bill narrow, but as the years pass I am beginning to see 
that his perspective was the one which I am only just 
reaching. But I want to say that even when I disagreed 
with him, there was never a moment that I did not respect 


+ Max Parry, a leading member of the class of 1909. 
* John Magee, writing from China. 


150 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


him for those same beliefs and the way in which he lived 
up to them.? 


In his sophomore year we organized Bible-study groups 
and divided up the class of three hundred or more, each 
man interested taking a certain number, so that all might, 
if possible, be reached. The names were gone over one by 
one, and the question asked, ‘“‘ Who will take this person or 
that ?”? When it came to one who was a hard proposition 
there would be an ominous pause. Nobody wanted the 
responsibility. Then Bill’s voice would be heard: ‘‘ Put 
him down to me.” 

Thus he got together a group of the hardest to reach, 
the least attractive, and worked for them faithfully. Ina 
house in College Street he had three of his incorrigibles, 
anything but promising material for a Bible class. I re- 
member one meeting of the group when only one man was 
present, while another listened through a half-open door 
into the next room. But Bill held on, glad that they gave 
him the opportunity. 

His rugged yet simple faith in Christ as Saviour and 
Lord, and in the Bible as God’s inspired Word, is a tonic to 
me, for one, whenever I am tempted to drift into barren 
doubtings or a purely intellectual attitude toward our 
faith. But with all his convictions as to the futility of 
higher criticism and his distrust of the so-called new 
theology, I cannot recall hearing him speak unkindly, or 
even frequently, of the many who preached it to us from 
the Yale pulpit or lecture desk. He was always the 
Christian gentleman.? 


There never was a time during those years when Bill 
was not looking for the opportunity of doing personal 
work.? 

Joe Twitchell’s remark in our Deacons’ meeting one 
night was interesting, as showing something of Bill’s idea 
of personal work. Joe said, ‘‘ Bill hunts up the worst 
skunk in College, and goes after him.” 4 


1 Farrand Williams. * Professor Kenneth Latourette. 
3 Charles Campbell. 
* KE. I, Jefferson, Class Deacon and famous Yale first baseman, 


UPPER CLASSMAN 151 


One of the passions of his life was for righteousness. He 
had indeed that ‘“ hunger and thirst’? we read about in 
Matt. 5. 6. His prayer-life was full of petitions that 
illustrated this, and his actual living illustrated it too. 

I remember, in this connection, that after we had finished 
our final examinations in College we had a four days’ 
interval before Commencement, and Bill with a few others 
of us ran up to his place in Maine and attempted to sail his 
boat down to New Haven. We had head-winds all the 
way, and could do no better than reach Cape Cod and put 
in to Hyannisport in time to take a train to New Haven. 
As we walked up the streets of Hyannisport, where Bill had 
spent a summer as a boy, he remembered that at the close 
of that vacation he had gone away owing some shopkeeper 
in the place a few cents. He had forgotten all about it, but 
it came back to him as we walked up the street that day, 
and he must needs find the little shop and pay the debt, that 
he might be straight with the world. That was his nature 
all through. If he found anything wrong with his life, he. . 
set to work to make it right. 

But there is another characteristic of Bill’s that I want 

to speak about, that is his great loving heart, which always 
seemed to me his richest and rarest quality. There were 
many, perhaps, who, seeing him in a casual way busy with 
the work he had to do, set him down as severe and un- 
approachable. We knew that the very opposite was true. 
He had one of the most affectionate, lovable natures of any 
man I have ever known. No one who visited in his home 
could for a moment doubt this. But I mean more than 
family love. He had a way, for example, when walking 
with a friend, of putting his arm over his shoulder as they 
talked. I can feel the great loving touch of his arm about 
my shoulder now. 

After graduation we attended Northfield again, sleeping 
ina tent as before. For two summers, at least, Bill waited 
at table during the Conference. He never did this if there 
was a man needing the job to help to make expenses. But 
if the coast was clear, on would go the waiter’s apron and he 
would do the work, getting nothing to eat himself until the 
crowd had left the dining-room. He never told me why he 


152 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


did this. It may have been partly to keep friends company 
who had to wait for monetary reasons. But I always felt 
it went deeper than that, and that Bill was trying to be 
among us as “he that serveth”’.} 


Just one more picture from the Yale Hope Mis- 
sion, from one of the early converts : 


I came in here on the twenty-seventh of March, 1908. 
I was on a drunk and hadn’t much use for religion. I’m 
not going to tell the worst part of my life, but I was a 
rambler all right—a down-and-out bum. There was only 
three states in the Union I hadn’t been in. I had heard of 
the Mission, same as a good many of them do. I knew it 
was the only thing that would save me from booze. Well, 
I went out, that first night. I had a Christian mother, and 
I got to thinking of her and I came back. That was the 
twenty-ninth of March, and that night Bill was here and he 
spoketome. Bill was a great personal worker. He always 
believed in getting right down and talking to a man. If 
Bill had anything to say he gave it right out. I know the 
gist of what he said to me that night. 

“What are you going to do about it? Can’t you see 
where you’ve missed the road ?”’ 

He would tell you to hope again; tell you of the God 
who’d made the universe and held you in the hollow of His 
hand and could help you if you’d only ask. That’s the way 
he talked. He was one good boy. I could never forget him 
as long as I breathe—no, I never forget him. And he barely 
twenty that night I first knew him! He was at Yale 
College here then, and Louis Bernhardt was superintendent 
of the Mission. 

I went forward and kneeled down and Bill came and 
kneeled down beside me, and he explained as much as he 
could the power of Jesus Christ, and how it was only Him 
who could help me. I never drank from that night to this, 
never felt like it—never felt like it, from that twenty-ninth 
day of March to this—and before that I was drunk most 
of the time. I had been drunk about all that winter. Bill 


1 Charles Campbell. The reference is to Luke 22. 27. 





BORDEN AT THE ENTRANCE TO THE YALE HOPE MISSION. 


** Never knowed his like in this world. He must have done for hundreds just what he done 
for me. He was always trying to study into the lives of men, to see how they’d work out 
and how he could help ‘e1n.”’ 


To face page 152, 


4 


— 


=_.t * 


PP +a 


ti & 


im 





UPPER CLASSMAN 153 


was a great man to watch you and not say much, but just 
ask how you were getting along. Well, after I was con- 
verted I come every night—didn’t miss a night after that 
for seven weeks. 

It’s all fresh in my mind yet. I got work, too, soon. 
I got a job on an ice-wagon. That was one of the greatest 
tests on the booze question that a man ever got. I was 
boss of the team that year, and went back and was boss 
again the second summer. I was boss sixteen or seventeen 
months altogether. I hadn’t worked only three weeks 
when they put me in charge of the team. 

I saw Bill right along those times, except in his vacation ; 
then he was in Europe. And he wrote me a letter. After 
some time I went back to the shop, and then I was foreman 
in the New Haven County Jail, where I’d served time in a 
cell. About two years after I was converted I was re- 
married right in this building, right up-stairs. I think Bill 
sent a letter that he couldn’t come. He knew I was going 
to be married. He met my wife and family—seemed 
tickled to death, too, to meet ’em. We've got a home now 
in Yalesville, Connecticut, and a big garden, plenty of land, 
lots of chickens, and a piano in the house—makes quite a 
change from when I first came to the Mission drunk, with 
no prospects but whiskey! There’s not been a day since 
my conversion that I haven’t had money in my pocket, 
not a day from that day to this. God has wonderfully 
blessed me. 

After my conversion I was baptized and joined the 
Church. If Bill hadn’t opened this Mission I’d been dead. 
My old chum who was once on bums with me, he’d never 
have been converted if it hadn’t been for this Mission. We 
was holding prayer meetings at different houses. They'd 
come in drunk sometimes. Then I always took ’em after 
the meetings and gave ’em a talking to just before they left. 
Told ’em about this work here at Yale Hope Mission. 
There’s no time in a drunkard’s life when he don’t have 
serious thoughts. When he drowns his conscience in booze, 
he’s tearing away from the voice of God, I think. Well, 
someone asked my chum to come when the meeting was 
at my house. He said he would if Jack Clark would lead. 


154 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


He knew that what God did for Jack Clark He could do for 
him. There was about twenty-four there and I led, and 
that night Whitney Todd, my chum, was converted. He 
lives right in Yalesville now and is foreman of a shop. 
He’s got his wife and children with him, and he’s always 
got his hand out to the man that’s down. So you see you 
cannot trace what Yale Hope Mission’s done by what you 
see lying around. Not till the books of Heaven are opened 
will you know what Bill Borden done by opening Yale Hope 
Mission. .. . 

He was great at individual work. As a talker, he’d 
hasten through his address and get to work with the men, 
always aiming to get close to the man he was talking with 
always with his hand on nis shoulder. He didn’t believe 
in talking over peoples’ heads, but tried to land right on his 
man and bring his thoughts right home. He would interest 
you quicker than the ordinary man, because he had a more 
sympathetic way to start in. He seemed to reach out and 
win you. I watched him from night to night, and always, 
as soon as the invitation was given to come forward, he 
would be off the platform and right down among the men, 
and he’d urge them to accept a better life. He was always 
sympathetic, and he never went at a man in the same way 
twice. He had a habit of putting his hand on a man’s 
shoulder, and they’d most always break down when he 
spoke to them. 

I never knew a feller just like Bill. I’d like to get a hold 
of one of his pictures. Seems to me if I saw one I’d ’most 
try to steal it. I never knew a feller like him. He was 
a gentleman in every sense of the word, and a Christian 
through and through. That was first and last in his life. 
He enjoyed life, and people who came in contact with him, 
seeing his happy spirit, would say, ‘“‘ Why, life is worth 
living after all.” 

Why, the way he came amongst us, you would never 
think he was a man of wealth, and he always dressed so 
plain. He had a peculiar way, very interesting to me. 
He wouldn’t tell you anything about himself, but he had a 
way of making you talk and tell things. It seemed to be 
his whole object, to know how I was and about my life so 


UPPER CLASSMAN am LG 


as he could help. It couldn’t seem possible a man could be 
so humble and yet so great. He could talk to anyone, 
didn’t matter who they was. And he’d get down with his 
arms round the poor burly bum and hug him up. 

Never knowed his like in this world. I know he must 
have done for hundreds just what he done for me. He was 
always trying to study into the lives of men, to see how 
they’d work out and how he could help ’em. 


It was Professor Henry Wright who said, ‘ It 
is my firm conviction that the Yale Hope Mission 
has done more to convince all classes of men at Yale 
of the power and practicability of Christianity to 
regenerate individuals and communities than any 
other force in the University.” 


CHAPTER X 
VACATIONS 


1906-1912. At. 18-24 


‘* No duty could overtask him, 
No need his will outrun ; 
Or ever we could ask him 
His hands the work had done.” 
J. G. WHITTIER. 


BorpDEN loved the sea, and was at home on it and 
in it. Most of his vacations during student years 
were spent at Camden, Maine, where he almost 
lived on the white-sailed Tsatsawassa. Talking 
with the captain of the yacht one day, who knew 
and loved him as did few others, Mrs. Borden re- 
marked : 

“You at any rate must have seen him off duty— 
off his guard.” 

“Mrs. Borden,” was the unexpected reply, 
* William was never off his guard.” 

It was a true word, for in spite of all the good 
times, in the midst of them indeed, he was as steady 
in his higher allegiance as the needle to the pole. 
This comes out in the recollections of those who 
played as well as worked with him. 

* There were few things that Bill liked better 


than to don his canvas jeans and jumper and sit 
156 





Ch Sam 
a oe 





SA. 


S: 
PUZZLING OUT A PROBLEM, 


WHITE-SAILED TSATSAI A; 


THE 
A QUIET MOMENT ON BOARD 


Me 


») 


To face page 157. 


VACATIONS 157 


behind the tiller of his yacht in a spanking good 
breeze,” wrote a medical-student friend. ‘“ Many 
a pleasant sail I have had with Bill, and many a 
time we have been together in sloppy weather. 
One well-remembered summer we took a cruise down 
the Nova Scotia shore, and there is no time like a 
cruise for getting to know one another. Bill was 
our skipper and an ideal one, but he didn’t stop at 
being in charge. There were few meals we ate that 
he hadn’t cooked. Life on the boat was full of joy 
from beginning to end with Bill to keep things 
going. 

‘‘One morning we were becalmed in the middle 
of the Bay of Fundy. It was a hot sultry day, and 
we had been talking about sharks. Suddenly Bill 
said: ‘Sharks or no sharks, here goes!’ And he 
was overboard in a moment, swimming round the 
yacht. 

‘“‘ One learned in those days more of the secret of 
Bill’s life, that his strength lay in his prayer-life. 
No matter what the weather might be, he would 
always hand over his trick at the wheel and go 
below for his times of quiet. I remember him dis- 
tinctly one very rough day, with the boat standing 
on her beam-end, coming below and climbing up 
on his berth and losing himself in his God.” 


‘¢'The time I came to know him best was on the © 


cruise we had in August, 1911,” wrote Mrs. Henry W. 
Frost, who had chaperoned a merry house-party 
on the yacht. “I cannot think of an instance 
during those seven days of good thorough testing 
in close quarters, when William did not put every- 


158 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


one’s comfort and pleasure before his own. He 
was captain and steersman, steward and cook for a 
party of ten hungry people, and well he did it. It 
was something more than the salt sea air that made 
his coffee and tea and corned-beef hash and pan- 
cakes so popular. 

‘Between times he was ready for any game. 
Stretched out in the cockpit at dominoes, his hearty 
laugh rang out with any success that was achieved. 

“ On Sunday we went to morning service ashore, 
and in the evening as we finished our meal and had 
a sing, with perfect naturalness and simplicity he 
led in a brief prayer service. It was always a 
pleasure to me to have him conduct prayers. His 
Scripture reading, while reverent, was so natural 
and his prayers so direct and simple, conveying the 
feeling that God was near and real.” 

Many were the happy days at Camden that Mr. 
Charles Campbell recalled. 

Three weeks of one summer and the larger part of 
another I was with Bill Borden. That time, spent largely 
out of doors, opened my eyes to Bill’s real self even more 
than had close association with him at College. At Yale I 
had learned that he was a rare man to work with; our 
weeks together in his summer home showed me that he 
was a rare man indeed to play with. At College I knew, 
as did all his friends, the strength and intensity of the 
serious purpose of his life; our happy, every-day comrade- 
ship at Camden taught me more of his very human and 
lovable boyishness, and his enjoyment of outdoor life and 
play. There was no mistaking the fact that Bill liked to 
sail, that he liked to swim, play tennis and golf. His laugh 
was always the heartiest, his enthusiasm the most contagi- 


ous, and his delight at doing well the most evident. 
One of our sailing trips was from Camden to Beverley 


VACATIONS 159 


Farms, on the Massachusetts north-shore. We had hardly 
rounded the lighthouse at the entrance to Camden harbour 
when we realized that a stiff breeze was blowing. A few 
hours later, with Monhegan Island astern, we were facing 
the full force of the open ocean. By six P.M. we were off 
Portland and, with wind and rain-storms becoming more 
frequent, held a consultation as to whether we should run 
for shelter. Just then a coaster, which had been wallowing 
southward, emerged from a squall, her top-sail and top- 
mast gone, and, changing her course, ran for Portland 
Harbour. That decided Bill; but his decision was that, 
having started for Beverley, to Beverley we would go. 
Through the stormy night that followed, Bill was quiet 
and self-possessed, and I remember that when he took his 
turn at the wheel his strength and confidence seemed an 
assurance that all would be well. Serious though the 
situation was, Bill could laugh when he sang out to us at 
midnight that the lines with which we had been towing our 
power-dinghy had parted, taking pleasure in fighting the 
battle out with only our own resources to depend on. 

Some of my most vivid recollections of Bill cluster round 
those different sailing trips. They range from the above 
experience to the spectacle of Bill in rough weather, 
seated in the cabin, calmly disposing of quantities of grape- 
nuts and condensed milk. Great was our secret admiration 
for one who could perform such a feat at a time when the 
rolling of the boat had put some of us hors de combat. 

I remember one evening anchoring off Bar Harbour 
about seven o’clock. By the time all was ship-shape the 
sun had set and the riding lights were shining from all the 
boats in the harbour. Before getting supper, Bill sug- 
gested that we have a swim. The air was chilly, and the 
black water rippling by with the outgoing tide looked 
colder than I had ever seen it. But overboard we went, 
swam a few strokes, took another dive, and were out 
again and dressing. The splendid reaction put us in the 
best of spirits as we prepared supper. I can see Bill now, 
hustling round that cabin, whistling, singing, just full of the 
joy of living. 

It was that same time, I think, that we sat on deck talk- 


160 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


ing of another trip when we had put into Bar Harbour after 
sailing the entire preceding night. We had anchored at 
about the same spot, and as soon as possible had turned in 
for a little sleep. Before long we had wakened to find the 
boat dragging her anchor and almost upon the rocks. I can 
feel Bill’s hearty slap upon my back and hear his laughter 
still, as we recalled how we had had to hustle to get out 
of danger. 

Of another sort was an experience one day off the 
Massachusetts coast. We had been watching a school of 
whales blowing at some little distance. A few moments 
later one of them came lazily to the surface, not a hundred 
feet from our fifty-foot yacht. In some alarm one of the 
party called to Bill, who was at the wheel, to keep the 
boat off. His response was to edge in a little nearer, with— 
‘“‘ Oh, let’s have a good look!” 

He was brushing up his Greek, the summer of our 
graduation from Yale, with a view to the entrance examina- 
tion at Princeton. Out in the yacht he would often go 
below and plug away at Greek. He did a great deal of 
studying aboard his boat during the years I knew him, 
and was a past-master at making the odd moments count. 

One day we sailed over to Eagle Island to take part in 
some races that were being run there. The wind was very 
light, and we came to the starting-line just after our race 
had begun. There was no time to report to the judges and 
no time to put the tender ashore. Bill managed everything. 
We just hauled the tender up on deck and went after the 
boats that had already started. All through the race Bill 
was captain, giving his orders and making every point to 
get the most out of his boat. We were heeled far over 
most of the time, as a good wind had sprung up. It all 
resulted in our crossing the winning line well in the lead. 
We were not allowed the victory, because we had not 
reported beforehand, but the winning was just as real all 
the same. 

Sailing and tennis with Bill were always great fun, but 
the best hours of our visits were passed in quite another 
way. Before going to Camden a friend had wonderfully 
opened the Bible to me, giving me a new insight into its 


VACATIONS 161 


content. I mentioned this to Bill, and he at once suggested 
further Bible-study together. It had been good to play 
with him, but to join him in the one thing nearest his heart 
was worth incomparably more. 


And it was not only to his guests that Borden’s 
life meant much during the summer vacations. 
Many residents in Camden and the vicinity looked 
forward to his coming, and through his friendship 
some found the Friend who transforms life from 
within. 

Among those was the gardener, a valuable em- 
ployee of the family, who had fallen under the power 
of strong drink. Mrs. Borden had done all she 
could to help him, but without success, and one day 
when she was away from home he was found in- 
toxicated near the house. Next morning he sent a 
note to William saying that he was ill and could 
not come to work, a situation which was explained 
by Melanie, who had found him—the children’s 
former nurse. Waiting only to get her to pray with 
him about the visit, William set out to see the 
gardener. But when he reached the house it was 
only to be told that he did not feel like seeing any- 
one that day. 

** I know the reason,” William said to his wife, 
** but please ask him to let me come in.”’ 

The talk that followed resulted in a transforma- 
tion that brought blessing to the whole family. 
For the man himself a new life began that day, and 
months later William was writing from College: 

J. is a constant source of joy and thanksgiving 


to God, is he not?” 
M 


162 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


But of all his Camden friends it was Captain 
Arey who knew Borden best and to whom his life 
meant most. The following recollections are given 
just as they came from his heart: 


I’ve known him ever since he first come to Camden, and 
that must have been about nine years ago. If anyone 
showed on their outside the happiness of being a Christian 
it was Mr. Borden. When he talked it just seemed as if 
you could feel his earnestness. 

When we two was out alone—we went all the way to 
New Haven alone once—I have seen him kneel for perhaps 
an hour at a time and never lift his head. The villagers 
loved him, everybody loved him. He was so noble-looking! 
When he came up in the spring, he always shook hands 
with everybody. All the summer-people don’t do that. 
If twas a stranger or a fisherman, didn’t make no difference. 
He always spoke to everybody, like as if he wanted to, 
and shook hands with them. 

William was a nice hand to sail a boat. You didn’t 
need no one else when he was along. I used to be afraid 
he’d fall in the water, at first. He was always singing and 
jumping around. He’d climb away up the riggin’ and get 
into the row-boat behind. He did everything well he tried 
to do. He was so strong, too! When he’d go out and work 
at the riggin’, I’d be afraid he’d break the sail, he was so 
strong. Sometimes he’d steer and sometimes he’d help 
with the sails, but he was an expert on the boat. He could 
take a chart and go anywhere with it. Of course, he’d 
studied into it and learned it. It didn’t seem hard for him 
to go through with anything he undertook—it just seemed 
easy. 

One awful good feature he had ; if the boat wasn’t fixed 
up quite as it ought to be, perhaps if ladies came aboard 
and the brass wasn’t cleaned, I’d tell him about it, and he’d 
smile and say it was allright. He never spoke a cross word 
to me all the time I was with him. 

He lent me two books by Gordon, J'alks on Prayer 
and J'alks on Power. We have a Young Peoples’ Meeting 


VACATIONS 163 


in the Baptist Church here. After the summer in London 
when he was converted, he would sometimes lead our 
prayer-meeting. If I had the job, I’d get him to do it 
for me. Others did too, for they liked to hear him. He 
could always hold the audience. Sometimes the young 
people are a little noisy at their meeting, but they was still 
when he spoke. 

Sometimes he’d tell us he was going to be a missionary— 
seemed to think he was mapped out forit. If *twas worldly 
pleasure he’d wanted, he could have had everything. But 
he was so much different from others! All his pleasure 
seemed to be in going about doin’ people good. The last 
summer here at one of the meetings he said he was goin’ to 
the Mohammedans. He spoke about the National Bible 
Institute one night, but I don’t remember just what he said. 

If we was out all night on the boat, he’d roll in the 
blanket and sleep on deck. The others would be in the 
cabin. There might be a bed to spare, but he’d take the 
deck. He liked it better. 

One summer here, he and Mr. T. held open-air meetings. 
They’d begin right in front of the hotel, about 7.30, and 
get the crowds sort of interested. They had a little organ 
and would sing. William could sing quite well. He had a 
strong voice. ‘Then they’d go into the Opera House, which 
they’d rented for a while. Sometimes it was crowded full. 
The last two evenings they’d have after-meetin’s, and many 
stayed. After the meeting was opened—in the Opera 
House—anybody could speak. Many did. The superin- 
tendent of the mills spoke one night, and sometimes 
ministers would come and speak. 

It was blowin’ awful heavy one night—dark and rainy. 
Two other fellers was out with us, his friends. About two 
o’clock in the morning, the bran’ new boat we was towin’, 
the steam-launch, rolled over and sunk, the rope parted. 
I remember what he said. 

‘ The boat’s gone,” he called down to the other fellers. 
* We can go faster now!” 

Lots and lots of boats that night that was about as big 
as the T'satsawassa was wrecked—that is, the sails were 
torn and the spars broke, so that they had to be towed in. 


164 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


The storm commenced about eleven o’clock. James Perry 
and another of William’s friends was with us. I don’t 
think any of us slept. I know I didn’t, and I know William 
didn’t. It was about six o’clock next morning when we 
got into Beverley Farms and anchored (after a record run 
of nearly two hundred miles in eighteen hours). When all 
was made safe, William said : 

“Now we'll have family prayers, and give thanks for 
gettin’ in.” 

He always had prayers for us every mornin’. Whoever 
was on the boat, we always had prayers and a blessin’ at 
table. Sometimes she’d be so keeled over that we’d be 
standin’ up, but that didn’t make no difference. We always 
had a blessin’. If we was in port Sunday mornin’, we'd 
go ashore to church. Perhaps I’d stay aboard—someone 
had to be there. But before he’d go ashore, he’d have 
prayers with me on the boat. He was always thoughtful, 
that way, of others. If he’d been my own brother he 
couldn’t have used me any better. 

Once he and Mary was out, and a fog and heavy sea came 
on. We couldn’t get back to the landing stage, so they 
went to my house and stayed all night. He just said so 
natural-like to my wife: 

“Have you anything to eat? We didn’t get much 
supper! Can you give us some milk and cake?” 

My wife went to all the meetin’s. She likes him, too. 
He wasn’t like one of the summer people! Td be awful 
glad to have his picture, so’d my wife. 

When he and I’d go out alone sometimes, I’d ask where 
he’d like to go. 

‘““ Anywhere,” he’d say, “so as to get out where it’s 
quiet.”’ 

And he’d go down into the cabin with his Bible or some 
other book and study all the time we was out. It might be 
three hours or so. And when we’d come in, he seem to be 
kind of refreshed in his mind. 

He always read the Bible before turnin’ in at night. It 
didn’t matter who was there. If I was alone with him, 
he’d read it to me and explain it. Yes, he was jolly and 
he was happy in the work he was undertakin’. 








PICNICKING NEAR SHELVING ROCK, 


Harriet and ‘The Parson”. 


Pa 


To fuce page 165. 


VACATIONS 165 


A group of later recollections, running on into 
Princeton years, come from the family of his College 
friend, Sherwood Day. The Days were fortunate 
in having a camp of their own, tucked away on the 
low shoulder of a mountain overlooking Lake 
George. William loved the spot, close to that ex- 
quisite expanse of water, and loved still more the 
Christian fellowship recalled in the following letters 
from Mrs. Day and two of her daughters, Bryn 
Mawr students : 


In the very first conversation I ever had with Bill, we 
discovered that we both believed in the inerrancy of the 
Bible, and I can feel yet the hearty grasp of his outstretched 
hand as we laughed in serious sympathy over our common 
orthodoxy! That was the summer he joined us at Shelving 
Rock. I had hesitated to invite him, because it was real 
camping, and I fancied he might need some conveniences 
which are no longer considered luxuries but necessaries. I 
soon learned, however, that comforts were easily dispensable 
with him, and that no change of surroundings interfered 
with his habitual walk with God. 

That same summer Harriet was withus. You remember 
how she dubbed him “‘ the Parson ’’, but you cannot know 
the amused little smile with which he responded to her fun. 
They two frolicked together so much that I remember 
Sherwood’s saying : 

‘I wish the College fellows could see this side of Bill!” 

We knew that he went in for athletics and out-door life, 
but until then it seemed as if even they were serious under- 
takings. But with Harriet the playful side was brought 
out, and we were so glad to know the boy under the manly 
exterior. 


I, too, loved his standing simply and firmly for the eternal - 
verities of our faith. That staunchness of his, after all his 
thought and study, has meant much to me. And I have 
learned much, too, from the way Bill stood for truth. We 


166 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


always noticed that the more earnest he became, the lower, 
not the louder, he spoke. When others in argument would 
raise their voices, he would grow more quiet and speak more 
low, with the result that everyone listened. 

I recall one day a somewhat heated discussion of the 
suffrage question. We finally got down to Genesis, Mother 
basing her plea against it on the teachings of that book, 
upon which one of our pro-suffrage guests denied much 
belief in Genesis, anyway. I don’t remember that up to 
that point Bill had said much, but somehow, the first thing 
I knew, he was talking along and the other guests were 
listening. We all listened. Much that he said was beyond 
us. We did not know enough to follow it fully. But the 
impression was made that there is such a thing as a deep 
scholarly conviction as to the authority and inspiration of 
the book (Genesis) and that the speaker was no unthinking 
conservative, but an intelligent believer in the Bible. 

I do not know that he convinced the friends in question. 
They did not talk long. But he did what I felt at the time 
was perhaps more needed, showed that we could hold to 
the old views in these matters, after thinking. Real 
certainty and security in the truth is unruffled when the 
attack comes. He was so sure, as on that occasion, of what 
he believed—Him whom he believed—that he did not get 
excited and loudly insist on his opinions. He could wait 
to say what he knew. And the more you knew him the 
more sure you felt that, keen and active as his intellect was, 
that knowledge was the result of no mere theological train- 
ing, but of personal experience, and prayerful Spirit-guided 
study of the Word of God. 

The thought of him always challenges me. I mean that 
one knew that he was holding himself and always would 
hold himself to what he felt to be best and highest. He 
would not stoop to petty excuses or take advantage of 
loopholes for self-indulgence. Here at camp he was up 
early for his Morning Watch as regularly as, I am sure, he 
must have been at the Seminary. I can see his Testament 
coming out of his pocket now! As surely as he carried 
that Testament he carried his religion. You felt he would 
never be one to want a vacation from religious duties. 


VACATIONS 167 


They were not “‘ duties”? to him. It was just natural to 
him to take that morning hour for fellowship with God, 
and he bore its imprint all through the day. 

It was always an opportune time with Bill to speak of 
the deepest things, because with him they were the realest 
things. His spiritual life affected all his living, the hearti- 
ness and wholesomeness of his fun as well as his religious 
activities. . . . If there arose in his mind a doubt about 
the rightness of something, he put the doubtful thing aside 
at once. For example, he became much interested in a 
card-game someone was playing here in camp and took 
some share in it. Then, one day he would not play it any 
more, and you knew he had questioned the rightness of his 
taking such a keen interest in the game and had shut down 
on it immediately. It was this steadfast turning from 
doubtful things that gave him, I think, the atmosphere of 
separateness that was part of his power. 

And then, I suppose, this single-mindedness in his 
spiritual life was the secret of that fixity of purpose which 
took him straight along whither he had set out. What Bill 
started, you might be quite sure he would finish. From the 
room in which I write I can see where a limb has been cut 
off a tree, high up from the ground. He cut it off. Someone 
had expressed a wish that the dead limb might go, because 
it looked like an ugly clenched fist, and he set out to do it. 
The ladder was not long enough and he had to prop it up— 
it was on a steep hillside, and almost dangerous to do so. 
He had to hang on with his right arm and saw with his left, 
in an almost impossible position. I can see him doing it 
now, sawing and resting and sawing again, but sticking at 
it until the limb fell. 

One other thing I want to speak of, but I don’t quite 
know what to call it. It was something that made you 
feel that everything would be all right as long as he was 
around. It was partly, I suppose, his consideration for 
others. 

When, one evening last September, we ran down to the 
Sagamore, to take him there to get an automobile for Lake 
George, he discovered that we had no flash-light in the 
launch with which to examine the engine if necessary. He 


168 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


insisted upon giving us his, one from his travelling bag, 
because he felt we ought not to be without it. And as we 
started home, leaving him there on the dock, he called out 
to Rosalie and me—novices at running the engine—not to 
forget about an oil-cup, I think it was, that it was important 
we should attend to. | 

He was such a one to rely on! And it seemed to me 
that his Lord’s spirit of service had so permeated his life 
that it not only led him to set his face to the field of greatest 
need, but meanwhile made his life full of little services, day 
by day, that many would not see the occasion for. It was 
easy to see his force, his devotion to Christ’s cause, but it 
was only after having him around that you began to 
appreciate what a Christlike man he was. / 


A kindness he did in a New York station is one of the 
things I have recalled repeatedly. We were going out to 
take a train, when I noticed that he had dropped behind, 
and turning, I saw him helping a very poor immigrant 
woman who was struggling along with many bundles and 
a baby in her arms. How well I remember, at camp, how 
he used to stand near the kitchen door and watch for a 
chance to be of use. We often said that the table was never 
cleared so quickly as when Bill did it. 

And what a help he was in some German I had to do (for 
an examination at Bryn Mawr)! The days at camp were 
pretty well filled with picnics, canoeing, swimming, etc., 
and it was not easy to make time for study. He was 
anxious that I should finish that German reading. If a 
thing had to be done, it was his way to do it and then put 
it from his mind. When there were a few minutes before 
it was time to start on a picnic or other outing he would 
say: °° Can’t we get some of that German done now?” I 
do not know how I should ever have “ tackled ”’ it without 
this encouragement. His help during the few days he was 
there gave me, so to speak, “a running start’’, and I was 
able to finish it in the required time. .. . 

But with all his seriousness there was abundant playful- 
ness and love of fun. He had an inexhaustible store of 


VACATIONS 169 


tricks, which kept us entertained many an evening. I 
remember specially a spelling-game called ‘“‘ Ghost ’’ which 
he enjoyed immensely. 

And one other thing about Bill—his instant and full 
obedience to the will of God. There never seemed to be 
any conflict in his life between duty and pleasure, for the 
moment he saw what his duty was, he did it. There was 
no procrastination about him. If the thing was hard to 
do, it made no difference. Feelings were out of the reckon- 
ing. ‘‘ Obedience irrespective of feeling’? was, perhaps, 
the strongest thing about his life. 

One of the most vivid memories I have of him is as he 
sat before our open fire at camp one Sunday evening. We 
were all there singing hymns, and the only light was that of 
the fire which shone full on his face. How earnest it was, 
and with what joyousness he sang the hymns he loved best ! 
“ O Love that will not let me go” and “ In the secret of 
His presence ” were among his favourites. But it was not 
the firelight only that brought that light to his face. These 
lines come to me as I recall the scene and especially that 
look of joy and calm: 


** Beautiful now his face had grown, 
But the beauty was something not his own; 
A solemn light from that blessed land 
Within whose border he soon must stand.” 


‘“ His ideals and ambitions were so great,” wrote 
Klsa Frost, then a young nurse in a hospital, “‘ that 
anyone who knew him at all could not but be in- 
fluenced by them, and to us who counted ourselves 
friends of his they were much more. 

“My most vivid remembrance of William has 
not to do with any football game or sailing, but with 
a Communion Service we all attended together at 
Camden. I somehow think of him most often then 
—not that he did or said anything to fix it in my 
mind, but just that he seemed to be so in the spirit 


170 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


of the service. When at times I am tempted to 
wonder whether the end in view is worth all the 
work and struggle, just to remember the separa- — 
tions and hardships he was facing is enough to start 
me on again.”’ 





PART III 
PRINCETON SEMINARY 


Many crowd the Saviour’s kingdom, 
Few receive His Cross. 

Many seek His consolation, 
Few will suffer loss, 

For the dear sake of the Master, 
Counting all but dross. 


Many sit at Jesus’ table, 
Few will fast with Him, 

When the sorrow-cup of anguish 
Trembles to the brim: 

Few watch with Him in the garden 
Who have sung the hymn. 


But the souls who love Him truly 
Both in woe and bliss, 

These will count their very heart’s blood 
Not their own but His ! 

Saviour, Thou who thus hast loved me, 


Give me love like this. 
Selected. 


CHAPTER XI 


STUDIES AND HOME LIFE 
1909-1912. dit. 21-24 


**'The purpose of his life had been ‘ to turn many to righteousness.’ 
. - . The Bible was the source of all his power. He learned it, he 
loved it, he lived it. It made him what he was. And I am hearing 
from all parts of the world testimonies from men and women who 
were drawn to give their lives to the Saviour through his teaching. 
That is a noble purpose to live for, is it not ?’’—Written of the Rev. 
Prebendary Webb Peploe, by his widow. 
BorvDEn’s life at Princeton was strenuous almost 
beyond belief, for in addition to his studies, many 
outside claims were crowding upon him. He was 
now of age and had considerable share in the 
management of large financial interests. His 
mother had come to live at Princeton, partly in 
order that his younger sister might see as much of 
him as possible. Their home was a centre of hos- 
pitality, and as Mrs. Borden was still far from 
strong, upon William devolved the keeping of house- 
hold accounts as well as a host’s responsibilities. 
His studies were absorbing, even more so than he 
had anticipated, and the pressure of other interests 
was not allowed to encroach upon the time they 
demanded. All this meant a heavy programme 
and no little exercise of self-discipline. 


He had decided upon taking the full course at 
173 


174 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Princeton Seminary largely on account of ques- 
tionings that had disturbed his mind during his 
senior year at Yale. When urged to return as 
graduate secretary of the Y.M.C.A. he exclaimed to 
a College friend : 

** Gee whiz! I want to pull out for a while and 
see where [am. I must take time for thought and 
study rather than rush on in the same sort of 
activities.”’ 

So honest and earnest a nature could not be 
satisfied with uncertainty in the most vital issues. 
Three years of close mental application was a price 
he willingly paid for the strength that comes from 
knowledge and settled convictions. He was at the 
same time enlarging his missionary outlook by a 
special course of study for his Yale M.A. This had 
been gone over in detail with Professor Harlan P. 
Beach, before leaving College, who wrote : 

The ground covered was enough Arabic to secure the 
degree if offered alone, and in addition a broad course of 
missionary reading, mostly having to do with the science of 
missions, Mohammedanism and missionary biographies. 
He was duly entered as a graduate student with permission 
to pass his examinations at his convenience. Had he done 
so, he would have covered more than even the best Master’s 


Degree men are required to take. ‘“ Factors in Missionary 
Efficiency ’’ was the theme decided upon for his thesis. 


Borden did not share the view expressed by some 
Student Volunteers that it will be time enough when 
they reach the mission field to study missions. 
Even amid the pressure of College and Seminary life 
he was following out a steady course of missionary 
reading, which made him always interesting and 


STUDIES AND HOME LIFE 175 


helpful at the Band meeting and gave definiteness 
to his prayers. There was nothing half-way about 
such a preparation. It was deep and thorough- 
going. 

“Thus Bill entered upon three years of busy, 
happy life at Princeton,”’ wrote his friend Campbell. 
“The studies were absorbing and the social life 


congenial. He was a member of the Benham Club, 


the oldest eating club of the Seminary. He played 
most of the games, but was especially fond of tennis. 
He was a leader among the Student Volunteers and 
was always present at the early morning prayer 
service of the Band each Wednesday. 

“In addition to the duties and pleasures that 
centred about his life in the Seminary, Bill had many 
responsibilities outside Princeton itself. In the fall 
of 1909 he had been made a trustee of the Moody 
Bible Institute in Chicago. In the spring of 1910 
he was appointed a delegate to the Edinburgh Mis- 
sionary Conference by the China Inland Mission, 
and in the fall was made one of the directors of the 
National Bible Institute of New York City. He 
also became a member of the North American 
Council of the China Inland Mission and of the 
American Committee of the Nile Mission Press. 

‘“ It is easy to see that the calls on his time would 
be many. Few men of his age could so well have 
handled the duties that pressed upon him from all 
these quarters. His singleness of purpose helped 
him and gave such direction to his life that no one, 
even among his nearest friends, saw anything but a 
quiet, consistent, unhurried doing of each task that 


vv 


176 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


came. Almost every month he went to New Haven 
to look over the work of the Yale Hope Mission. 
The unusual feature of his relationship to all such 
organizations was that he was never satisfied with 
merely giving generous financial aid. In addition, 
he always gave time, thought and counsel, usually 
conducting a service at the Mission when he went 
to New Haven. New York, New Haven and 
Chicago trips succeeded one another, and still he 
never seemed to neglect his work, though he 
carried a much heavier schedule than the average 
man. More than this, he stood very high in 
scholarship. 

‘* Life at Princeton was brightened by the happy 
home influences that surrounded him. The Borden 
home was hospitably open to all. Students, mis- 
sionaries and prominent lay workers were frequent 
visitors. The tennis court, back of the house, was 
the scene of many hotly contested games. In spite 
of his busy life, Bill never neglected his body. He 
made it a point to get an hour’s exercise daily if it 
was possible. How his eyes would light up at the 
prospect of a good game of tennis! Back he would 
come from a class, hustle into tennis clothes and then 
out to the court. He was never more than an 
average tennis player, but he played hard all the 
time and gave his opponent plenty of work.” 


It is interesting to see from letters written only 
a little later the impression Borden made upon 
members of the Faculty during those full years at 
Princeton. 


STUDIES AND HOME LIFE 177 


“I never saw, perhaps, a finer example of mens 
sana wm corpore sano,” recalled Professor Brenton 
Greene. “I used to think as I saw him from my 
study window dashing down Library Place on his 
bicycle to the early morning recitations, ‘ that man 
is so strong and so sane that his prospect of life is 
better than that of any other student in our 
Seminary.’ 

‘* His memory was as wax to receive an impres- 
sion and as marble to retain it. He had the happy 
faculty of seeing at once the gist of a question and 
going straight to the point. Yet he never relied on 
this power, but used every means at his command. 
Rarely if ever was he absent from the classes, and I 
cannot recall a single instance of inattention on his 
part. As might have been expected, he attained 
the natural result. He became distinguished as a 
scholar. . . . I well remember my deep regret, the 
feeling of positive loss, at the time of his graduation, 
when I read his last paper, knowing that I should 
never have another from him.” 


‘*‘ No student has exerted a greater personal in- 
fluence over me than did William Borden,” wrote 
Professor Charles Erdman. “ This was due both 
to the fact of our intimate friendship and to his 
peculiarly strong and impressive personality. His 
judgment was so unerring and so mature that I 
always forgot there was such a difference in our 
ages. His complete consecration and devotion to 
Christ were a revelation to me, and his confidence 


in prayer a continual inspiration. 
N 


178 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


‘* He had doubtless inherited unusual gifts, but 
these were developed by the most careful and per- 
sistent discipline, requiring great determination and 
fixity of purpose. . . . There was much in his life 
to tempt him to less strenuous work, to lure him to 
self-indulgence and content with imperfect achieve- 
ment. There was also the test of resolution that 
comes from apparently conflicting duties. His re- 
sponsibilities were great, his days crowded with a 
multiplicity of demands. Neither social duties, 
however, nor filial duties, nor the duties of Christian 
stewardship were allowed to draw him from the 
supreme duty of preparation for his chosen work. 
The strain of unremitting application was relieved 
by a keen sense of humour and a delight in the 
society of relatives and friends. His friendship was 
one of the most stimulating with which I have been 
blessed.” 


‘It was as his teacher in Church History that I 
knew him best,” said Dr. John de Witt. “ His 
fidelity, high intelligence and rare grasp of the sub- 
jects brought before him made on me a deep im- 
pression. But it was his spiritual ideal of life, his 
absolute loyalty to it, the sound judgment he showed 
in actualizing it, not only in the choice of his work 
and field, but in the details of daily activity and the 
simplicity and sincerity of his character, that led me 
not only to respect but to reverence him. I have 
had a few students among the many I have taught 
who have distinctly called into action this feeling 
of reverence, and he was one of them.” 


STUDIES AND HOME LIFE 179 


A like note is found in not a few other letters 
from men of experience and Christian standing. 
Dr. Henry W. Frost, for example, Director in North 
America of the China Inland Mission, invited Borden, 
when only twenty-two, to a seat on its Council. 
They had been in correspondence for years, and Dr. 
Frost, who knew him intimately, felt no hesitation 
in asking him to become one of the burden-bearers 
at the heart of the Mission, sharing the prayer and 
faith as well as the problems of those responsible 
for rts direction. 

The disparity in age was seldom noticed,’ he 
recalled. “ There was an equality of mind which 
made him one with those with whom he was associ- 
ated. None could help noticing the freshness of 
thought and enthusiasm of spirit characteristic of 
youth, and the Council rejoiced in these. But they 
were not accompanied by immaturity of judgment. 
When he spoke, it was evident that he was thinking 
carefully and broadly. He was a constant illustra- 
tion of the fact that it is no vain thing for a man, 
even a young man, to obey the injunction ‘If any 
of you lack wisdom let him ask of God.’ Christ, 
through the study of the Word and through prayer, 
was made unto him ‘ wisdom’. His advice, there- 
fore, was sought by not a few who, in the average 
case, would have gone to the man of more years. 
And he seldom failed to help. If he did fail, his 
eagerness to be of assistance made him a greater 
help than the average man would have been, though 
more wise through experience.” 

Borden’s love for the faith principles of the China 


180 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Inland Mission was strong and growing. He owed 
not a little in the deeper things of the spiritual life 
to his friendship with Dr. Frost, whose love for him 
was almost that of a father for a son. William had 
long consulted him in matters of importance, and 
especially as to his prospective relations with the 
Mission. In this connection, Dr. Frost continued : 


The first time William Borden spoke to me about offering 
himself to the China Inland Mission was while he was in his 
sophomore year at Yale. He had already come to feel that 
his work should be in China and desired to put himself in a 
position to reach that land. But I felt he was then too 
young to come to a positive conclusion as to the country in 
which he should serve, and I advised him to postpone 
considering the matter. 

At the end of his university course he again consulted 
me about going to China. Once more I advised him to 
defer the decision, and urged him to prepare himself further 
by taking the seminary course at Princeton. This he did, 
with credit to himself and to the Seminary. 

Toward the end of his studies at Princeton, he again 
offered himself to the Mission for work in China. This time 
I was persuaded that God was indeed in the matter of his 
_ application. But to further test him, I asked if he had 
considered offering himself to the Presbyterian Board rather 
than to us. He replied that he had; that he highly 
esteemed the Presbyterian Board, but that there were three 
reasons why he was more drawn to the China Inland 
Mission—firstly, on account of its imter-denominational 
character ; secondly, because of its emphasis upon evange- 
listic work; and thirdly, because it held the personal and 
pre-millennial coming of Christ. So at last we considered 
his application and accepted him for service in China. 


This was only ten days before Borden’s gradua- 
tion from Princeton, so that he had already been for 
more than two years a member of the Council. It 


STUDIES AND HOME LIFE 181 


was an unusual coincidence when his case came up 
for final consideration and, as a candidate, he had 
to be asked to withdraw while the Council pro- 
ceeded to accept one of its own members as a pro- 
bationer of the Mission. 

But all this took place gradually, while the busy 
years at Princeton were passing on. During his 
first summer vacation from the Seminary, Borden 
went to Europe, as we have seen, representing the 
China Inland Mission at the Gicumenical Missionary 
Conference in Edinburgh (1910), where he was the 
youngest of two thousand delegates. It was there 
that Mrs. Borden learned for the first time that his 
decision was taken to give himself definitely to 
work for Mohammedans in China, if that proved to 
be the Lord’s will. Miss Annie Van Sommer had 
arranged for a gathering of representative workers 
from Mohammedan lands at the house where she 
was staying. Dr. Zwemer was chairman, and Mr. 
(now Canon) Gairdner and Dr. St. Clare Tisdall, all 
from Cairo, were there. In order to introduce 
people to one another, Dr. Zwemer asked each to 
rise and give his or her name and field. When 
Borden’s turn came, he mentioned without hesita- 
tion as his prospective field the Mohammedans of 
North-West China. 

That was a full summer! The missionary 
gatherings in Edinburgh were followed by a brief 
visit to Norway with Mr. Robert P. Wilder, who 
was then working among students in England and 
on the Continent. Of Borden’s stay in their Nor- 
wegian home Mr. Wilder wrote: 


182 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


He took a real interest in our home-life and all our 
doings. He helped the children to learn to ride their 
bicycles, running by each of them in turn. Mrs. Wilder 
specially remembers how, when a box of aerated water had 
come by train and she was thinking of sending to the station 
for it, we saw to our surprise William Borden coming up the 
steep hill with the box on his shoulder. . . . He and I had 
long talks over God’s Word and work, frequently pausing to 
pray about the matter we were discussing. He seemed 
never out of sight of the Mercy Seat. 


A week in the Engadine gave Borden the con- 
quest of the Piz Pallu and the Piz Julier as glorious 
memories, and a few days at Lucerne brought de- 
lightful intercourse with Mr. and Mrs. Charles 
Campbell, who were there on their wedding journey. 


He joined us in Lucerne. There were also a young 
Trishman and his bride in the same Pension, and for several 
days we five had a great time! We went to the Glacier 
Garten ; went rowing on the lake and swimming in it, and 
altogether acted like a bunch of kids. Our afternoon teas 
were a wonderful mixture of assorted cakes and unlimited 
cups of tea. 


Three weeks in Hanover were given to intensive 
study of German, and opened Borden’s eyes to 
threatened dangers. To Dr. Frost he wrote : 


HANOVER, July 20, 1910. 


Only to-day I read in a London paper “ Unity of 
Christendom — gigantic task! Twenty-four American 
Episcopalians have undertaken to bring about a union of 
Christians all over the world—Protestants, Greek Catholics, 
Roman Catholics, everybody, everywhere!’ Things are 
certainly rushing to the climax. I wonder what will come 
next ? 

People talk about peace in Peace Congresses, but in 
reality here in Europe they are preparing for a great 


STUDIES AND HOME LIFE 183 


struggle I believe. . . . How wonderful that we have “ that 
blessed hope”’ to look forward to, ‘“‘ the glorious appearing 
of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ ! ” 


On the voyage home he was deep in Arabic with 
a view to the advanced course he was taking in that 
language and Aramaic. ‘I spent most of my time 
in London buying books,” he wrote to his friend 
Campbell, ‘‘and am taking home a small library of 
theological and Oriental literature.” 

Back in Princeton he threw himself as before into 
all the religious and other activities of seminary 
life. Letters from many of his classmates might 
be quoted, but the following from the Rev. James 
M‘Cammon, now a missionary in China, will suffice 
to give an impression of his influence. 


His thoroughness, especially in his studies, was evident 
to us all. He kept up his work from day to day, so that he 
was not ‘‘ rushed ”’ as many of us were when examinations 
came round. So well did he have his knowledge in hand 
that long before the three hours’ period for an exam was 
over he would have finished his paper and handed it in, to 
the plaudits of his fellow-students. It was my habit to 
look in on a class-mate in Alexander Hall daily, and there, 
two or three afternoons in the week, I was sure to find Bill 
Borden and his friend, Mr. Fowler, doing extra-curriculum 
work on Arabic. On one such occasion I discovered that 
they had formed the project of making an Arabic Concord- 
ance of the Bible, and had actually begun work upon it. I 
had known of their studiousness before, but this more than 
astonished me. 

He was one of the most faithful attendants we had at the 
Y.M.C.A. and Student Volunteer meetings in the Seminary. 
He took his turn in leading such meetings, and his messages 
were of a devotional and missionary character that 
evidenced thorough preparation of mind and heart. One 
term he undertook to go through the Reports of the 


184 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


World’s Missionary Conference which he had attended in 
Edinburgh, giving them in the form of a résumé week by 
week. Those talks I shall never forget. His mastery of 
the facts was astonishing. He gave us in clear, condensed 
statements, from carefully prepared notes, a synopsis of 
each of these Reports, bringing out the spiritual bearing 
of the facts dealt with. It was a remarkable evidence 
of his knowledge as well as zeal in connection with foreign 
missions. ... 

He was a convinced believer in the personal and pre- 
millennial coming of our Lord. He looked for that glorious 
Advent as the hope of the Church and the only hope for the 
world. I often had conversations with him on this subject, 
and the extent of his knowledge and intensity of his con- 
victions left their mark on my mind. One of my most 
prized possessions is a book on the Lord’s Coming he once 
gave me as we were talking together. 

Another conviction that dominated his life was that the 
Bible, from first to last, is the inspired Word of God. To 
him it was the Book of books. He had not only an 
intellectual grasp of its teachings such as one may get in a 
theological seminary, but he had the spiritual understanding 
of it which only comes through prayerful and devotional 
study in humble dependence on the Spirit of God. . . . 

The secret of William Borden’s life, as it seems to a 
fellow-student, was his belief in the sufficiency and abiding 
presence of the Lord Jesus Christ. For this was more than 
a belief, it was with him an experimental reality. 


This reality and the strength he derived daily 
from his study of the Word of God made him feel 
intensely the drift away from these things in 
modern university life, a subject upon which he had 
written to Mr. Wilder, as leader of the Student 
Volunteer Movement, in the hope of Te him 
to return to America : 


STUDIES AND HOME LIFE 185 


PRINCETON, January 29, 1910. 


The spirit that prevails is this: in all scientific studies 
Darwinian evolution is taught, often anti-theistically, and 
seldom is any attempt made to harmonize it with the early 
part of Genesis, for example. Ussher’s chronology is still 
the cause of trouble, in the light of geology, ete. But these 
are the least serious issues. Much more serious is the 
general agnostic atmosphere pervading everything and 
deadening all convictions, those as to sin and truth 
included. In line with this, a broad spirit of tolerance 
is insisted upon, especially in matters of religion, and any 
and all are branded as narrow who dare think otherwise. 
That word “ narrow ”’ is one of Satan’s deadliest weapons, 
it seems to me; for most people would apparently rather 


be shot than be called narrow. Thus it is even as Christ. ~ 


predicted—the broad way to destruction is thronged, but © 
few are climbing the narrow way that leads to life. 

When we come to distinctively Christian and religious 
matters, the situation is even worse. “ Practically every- 
one ”’ believes that the Bible is full of contradictions and 
errors, etc., ete. Kven earnest Christians seem to feel that 
it doesn’t matter. The New Testament fares little better 
than the Old at the hands of critics, and the supernatural 
is expunged from both. And against all this scarcely a 
voice of any authority is raised in protest, from within the 
ranks. In the women’s colleges things are even worse, as 
I know from my sister who was at Vassar and from a recent 
conversation with one of the Y.W.C.A. secretaries, who is 
firm in the faith and alive to the situation. 

In spite of everything the work of the Y.M.C.A. goes 
on, men are really won to Christ, and many good workers 
are sent into active Christian service. But it is in spite of 
all this. 

Now the leaders, I feel, do not all of them by any means 
see the real tendency of this modern teaching, especially 
of the Biblical teaching, which in the name of Christianity 
really discredits Christ and the Christian faith. Either 
they do not clearly see the issues, or if they do, they seek to 
compromise. This is evident from the kind of speakers 


186 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


approved of, and still more so from the Bible teachers and 
teaching that are popular. There is tremendous zeal and 
energy among many students and leaders here, and my 
only desire is that they should find the truth. Dr. Zwemer 
sees all these things clearly and has helped a lot, but now 
he is going, and as far as I know there is no one with a 
theological training (which is almost essential, to enable 
one to see the real issues) who can take his place and help 
to keep the student movement pure, strong and evangelical. 
The need is tremendous and the opportunity immense. I 
should like nothing better than to get into the fight, right 
here in the American colleges, should the Lord close my 
way to the foreign field. 

One other word I would like toadd. The teaching about 
the kingdom of God is entirely with the idea that it is 
gradually to be brought in by our making the world better. 
This of course fits in with the socialistic ideas of the day, 
but hardly with Scripture! And here again, in the college 
world scarcely a voice is raised in support of God’s Word. 

I do hope you will come and help. I feel sure it would 
mean a better quality of work here, and a greater number of 
really equipped men for the work abroad. And I would 
like to add a word about the China Inland Mission, which 
I am only beginning really to know and with which you 
doubtless are better acquainted. What I want to say is 
that if you join yourself with them in some capacity, you 
will have a praying constituency behind you such as no 
other organization I know of would afford. 


CHAPTER XII 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 


1910-1912. At. 22-24 


** And evermore beside him on his way 
The unseen Christ shall move, 
That he may lean upon His arm and say, 
‘Dost Thou, dear Lord, approve ?’ ” 
H. W. LONGFELLOW. 


Ir was the summer of 1910. Borden was leaving 
for Europe to attend the Edinburgh Conference, , 
and on the steamer, amid all the bustle of departure, ~ 
was engrossed in conversation with a friend whose 
acquaintance he had recently made. 

‘* T want to help you in the work you are doing,” 
he said quietly, ‘“‘and will send you a hundred 
dollars a month for the next year. If you will come 
to my cabin I will write the first cheque now.” 

‘*We went down’, Mr. Don O. Shelton recalled 
when that friendship had become one of the most 
precious in his life, ‘‘ and he wrote the cheque and 
gave it to me. When I reached home I found it 
was for two hundred dollars. ‘ He is going abroad’, 
I thought, ‘and has made it for two months this 
time.’ But exactly one month later came another 
cheque for two hundred dollars, and again the 


following month, two hundred. ‘ He is giving it 
187 


188 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


all in six months’, was my conclusion. But when 
he returned at the end of the summer he continued 
to send two hundred dollars a month through the 
entire year. _ 

**I was learning to know Will Borden, one of 
whose characteristics it was always to do better than 
he promised, more and not less than he led you to 
expects: 

Needless to say, this was when he felt his con- 
fidence to be well founded, as in the case of The 
National Bible Institute under the leadership of 
Mr. Shelton. 

Twenty years of work in the Y.M.C.A. and in 
Bible Conferences had convinced this earnest evan- 
gelist that something new and different in the way 
of approach was needed if the multitudes who never 
darken a church door were to hear the gospel. He 
had given up a promising career for no other reason 
than that he realised the Christian man’s responsi- 
bility for a situation such as we have around us 
to-day. More than half the people in the United 
States, as he well knew, are outside the membership 
of any church. Seventy-five per cent of the young 
men are bowing down to gods of wealth, lust and 
pleasure, and are worshipping them alone. 

** Of what value is it preaching to empty seats,”’ 
he questioned, “ when the people who ought to 
occupy them are in crowded tenements or on street 
corners or in the parks, and do not hear the faintest 
whisper of the message ? ” 

The outcome, after much prayer and considera- 
tion, was a simple, earnest effort on the part of busi- 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 189 


ness men, chiefly, to reach the crowds in the city of 
New York. It was on a June day in 1907 that the 
first meeting was held at the busy hour of noon. A 
low platform under a tree in Madison Square 
Garden was all the equipment, with a little organ 
and a group of singers to lead familiar hymns. The 
speakers were business men, the language was that 
of the newspaper rather than the theological hall. 
But the results were amazing. It was no unusual 
thing to see three hundred men listening with 
riveted attention through the daily half-hour, and 
very soon other noon meetings had to be com- 
menced—and a School for Lay Evangelists, to meet 
the need of training for such work. 

‘‘ The people hear the gospel gladly,”’ Mr. Shelton 
was writing a few weeks later. ‘ In Madison Square 
Garden more men have assembled daily to hear the 
message than gather on Sundays for any Protestant 
church service in Greater New York, with two or 
three exceptions. And what representative throngs 
we have! Working-men from near-by buildings, 
clerks from offices, boot- blacks sitting on their 
kits, street cleaners, messenger boys, police officers, 
contractors, well-to-do business men, drunkards, 
the unemployed and discouraged, editors and pro- 
fessional people, all listening with the same interest. 
The attention is so close at times as to be pathetic. 
. . . The gospel is still the most winsome message 
in the world. 

‘* We never take up a collection. The one object 
is to reach men, and from the beginning we have had 
crowds of them. The work thus far has resulted in 


190 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


many transformations of character. Some of those 
who have been greatly helped have expressed their 
purpose to unite with churches at once. We be- 
lieve that we are carrying out Christ’s idea in going 
to the people and not waiting for them to come to 


23 


us. 

All this interested Borden deeply, and further 
acquaintance with the work only increased his sense 
of its value, so that when he was asked in the fall 
of 1910 to become one of the directors of the 
National Bible Institute, it was a call he could not 
refuse. The position was no sinecure. It involved 
frequent journeys to New York to attend the 
Board Meetings, and the problems of the work 
called for much thought and prayer. A large part 
of his vacation in the summer of 1911 was spent in 
the heat and hurry of New York, taking a full share 
in meetings and other activities. Of this Mr. 
Shelton writes : 


I find in my diary under date of May 8, 1911, the follow- 
ing sentences: “‘ Mr. William W. Borden came up from 
Princeton to-day to co-operate for a few weeks in the work 
of the National Bible Institute. A noble, generous, 
Christ-like young man—a rare gift of God to the work 
under his care!” 

We placed a desk for him in my own office, and he con- 
tinually manifested an eager desire to enter into the work 
in every possible way. Responsibility for our four gospel 
halls was delegated to him, and he kept in close touch with 
the superintendents, counselling with them in regard to all 
the details. He investigated men who were being con- 
sidered for positions of trust. He gave much thought and 
prayer to drafting the “‘ Principles and Practice” of the 
National Bible Institute, and prepared a document which 
has been of exceeding great value in its development. . . . 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 191 


It is a joy to recall his first appearance at our Madison 
Square meeting in the open air. His address was brief, but 
remarkably vigorous and direct. He stood there as a 
witness to the saving power of Jesus Christ. As he spoke, 
I rejoiced that the large company of listeners had before 
them one of the manliest, purest and noblest of our Lord’s 
modern witnesses. His radiant face, unaffected manner, 
and joyous, fervent testimony to the power of the Christian 
faith made the occasion memorable. .. . 

As a member of the Board of Directors he was a valued 
counsellor. He turned the white light of Scripture on every 
matter that came up for consideration. His presence in any 
meeting was a moral and spiritual tonic. 


A 
mond 


All his work began, continued and ended in prayer. m 


Again and again, at our office, he would suggest before tak- 
ing up the consideration of any important matter that 
we should unite in waiting upon God. Prayer was to him 
the first means to be used in accomplishing any object. 
And how simple, direct, unselfish and childlike his prayers 
were! He prayed as one confident that his aon rast 
Father would hear and answer. 


That he was thinking deeply about the work of 
the National Bible Institute was evident from the 
fact that he had arranged, before coming to New 
York, for a visit that he thought would be helpful 
from a representative of the China Inland Mission. 
“ Owe no man anything, but to love one another ” 
was a scriptural injunction that was pontine 
with him, and he wanted the practical methods 
explained by which a Mission with a thousand 
foreign and four thousand native workers was en- 
abled to carry it out. With an intimate knowledge of 
the book-keeping of the Mission, Miss Mary Brayton, 
now its Assistant Treasurer in Philadelphia, had 
consented to make the matter plain, and it was an 


192 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


interesting hour in the New York office as it was all 
talked over in detail. 

By never making a purchase, large or small, 
until there was money in hand to pay for it, the 
visitor explained, and by carefully estimating run- 
ning expenses and putting aside a daily proportion 
of the income, whatever it might be, to meet them, 
there were always funds in hand for coming charges. 


One cannot be running out every day to pay one’s gas 
bill! But we can and do put aside a dollar and a half a 
day, or whatever the proportion may be, towards it. We 
do the same for our rent, fuel, electric light, taxes on pro- 
perty and all other running expenses, so that the money 
is there when it is needed. We paid the rent on Saturday, 
for example, but on Monday we begin just the same putting 
away for the next month or quarter. And these funds are 
never drawn upon for any other purpose. We reckon that 
we have spent that money already. And as to other things, 
we never give an order unless we have actual cash in hand 
to meet it. We do not draw upon probabilities. 


*“ If the China Inland Mission can do it, never 
making an appeal for funds nor taking a collection,”’ 
Borden exclaimed, “surely we can, by prayer and 
watchfulness! And I do think we ought not to 
buy even a broom until we have money in hand to 
pay for it.” 

But it was not only in these ways he sought to 
be of use. The work was growing fast and it was 
hard to keep pace with its requirements. Per- 
manent offices were badly needed, and some place 

in which the students could meet for their classes. 
A hall also was required for the old Jerry McAuley 
Mission which had passed into Mr. Shelton’s care. 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 198 


The neighbourhood in which they hoped to locate 
was a desperate one, almost every corner for 
many blocks in all directions being occupied by 
saloons or dance-halls, with a plentiful sprinkling of 
moving-picture houses. Thousands of young people 
thronged the streets at night, and there were few 
places open to them in which the influences were 
not harmful. 

The time had come for action, so Borden set to 
work under Mr. Shelton’s direction to make the 
needs and opportunities known and to gather a 
circle of praying friends. Together they investi- 
gated every street in that section of ‘“‘ the tender- 
loin”, and made a map showing exactly what there 
was and was not—a map which was in itself the 
most powerful of appeals. The circular Borden 
sent out, signed with his own name as chairman of 
the Building Committee, contained the map in full, 
dotted over with more than three hundred ‘hell-traps 
of various sorts, and the plea for the activities of 
the National Bible Institute where it was so much 
needed “‘as a protest against iniquity and for the 
reaching of the sin-sick and the protection of the 
innocent ”’. 

More important still was his work that summer 
in forming the “ Circle of Intercession’. This was 
his own idea, born of his conviction that prayer is 
fundamental and not secondary in work for God. 
Buildings might be put up and organization de- 
veloped, but unless prayer kept pace with these 
activities all would be in vain. So it was for prayer 


Borden appealed most earnestly of all. 
O 


194 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


‘‘Our Circle of Intercession has become most 
dear to us,’’ Mrs. Shelton wrote, when these efforts 
had been rewarded, ‘‘ for we realize that it was 
through Mr. Borden’s consecrated energy and per- 
severance that it was formed two years ago. That 
was a wonderful summer for us—Mr. Borden gave 
so much time and thought in Mr. Shelton’s office 
to the work; and for me there stands out vividly 
the morning when he most feelingly expressed his 
sympathy because of a dreaded ordeal before me. 
Every contact with him revealed the depths of a 
wonderful Christian character.” 

Back for his last year at Princeton, Borden was 
harder at work than ever, preparing a course of 
lectures he was to deliver to the students of the 
National Bible Institute. The Epistle to the Gala- 
tians was his subject, and the long list of books he 
consulted shows how thorough was his preparation. 
Luther’s commentary he enjoyed especially, but it 
was only one of several. How he could possibly 
make time in the midst of his third year in Seminary 
to complete and deliver these seven lectures is a 
mystery. Week by week his class in the Marble 
Collegiate Church numbered from sixty to a hundred. 

“His handling of this difficult Epistle showed 
that he had completely mastered his material,” 
was Mr. Shelton’s comment. ‘‘ His outlines were 
clear and comprehensive, and he made the book a 
living message to the hearers.” 

Early in 1912 the National Bible Institute was 
passing through a time of no little trial. In spite 
of the Directors’ efforts to keep clear of debt, a 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 195 


deficit of five thousand dollars had accumulated. 
There was much prayer about it, and an earnest 
desire to learn by past experience. But how was 
the deficit to be wiped out ? 

A meeting of the Board was called, for it looked 
as though there would have to be serious retrench- 
ment. Borden had come up from Princeton. His 
financial contributions to the work were consider- 
able, and no one was looking to him to do more. 
The morning had passed in earnest conference and 
prayer. 

~ I must make the 2.04 train,” he said at length, 
‘and shall have to run for it.” 

He was writing on a slip of paper as he spoke, 
and pushing it across the table to the Treasurer, 
Mr. Hugh Monro, he made for the door. It was a 
cheque for five thousand two hundred dollars! 
Without a word he had taken up the entire indebted- 
ness. It was not only the gift, but the way in which 
it was done that was so like him! Nobody dreamed 
he was writing a cheque, and before they realized 
it he was gone. 


But he gave more than money. A few weeks 
later he was in the throes of his final examinations 
at Princeton. The mountains were calling him. 
After a heavy winter’s work he was eager for a few 
weeks in Switzerland among the glaciers he loved. 
His passage was taken and everything was ready 
when it came to his knowledge that Mr. Shelton 
was on the verge of a breakdown. Calling at his 
office Borden found that the doctor had ordered him 


196 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


to take complete rest and change. The need for it 
was urgent, but there seemed no one to take his place. 

‘Looks as though I might have to change my 
plans a bit, and help,” was the entry in Borden’s 
journal for that day. 

Quietly then his passage was given up and the 
trip postponed. He was sufficiently familiar with 
the National Bible Institute to step in effectively, and 
before long was fully in charge. This meant that 
he was responsible not only for the office-work. 
There were the daily open-air meetings, the over- 
sight of the students in their classes and practical 
training, the charge of four Rescue Missions and of 
the monthly magazine, as well as the financial care 
of all this work. 

It was a serious undertaking, the more so as 
Borden had decided before entering upon it that 
he must not be his own Providence in the matter of 
supplies. Mr. Shelton was not himself in a position 
to finance the work, and when sufficient means were 
not forthcoming he and his helpers had no resource 
but prayer. To strengthen them in their attitude ~ 
of looking to the Lord in faith had long been Borden’s 
desire. He believed that the promises of God were 
absolutely true and dependable. Here then was 
an opportunity for proving the reality of his own 
faith as well as strengthening that of his fellow- 
workers. He would continue to give just as he had 
been giving, but would not permit himself to escape 
difficulties by the easy method of drawing upon his 
own banking account. And this led to a remark- 
able experience, as Mrs. Shelton writes : 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 197 


There followed a time of severe testing along financial 
lines for the young substitute. Days passed without a 
dollar coming in—and mission superintendents and others 
needing their salaries! Some time before, Mr. Borden had 
faced the question of making up known deficiencies in the 
various Christian enterprises in which he was interested, 
and as his gifts were always thoughtfully and prayerfully 
given he had decided against it. Yet here was a tempta- 
tion! How much easier to put his hand in his pocket and 
make up this lack than to spend hours in prayer alone and 
with friends, awaiting God’s gracious answer. But the 
answers came—and with them such a sense of the reality 
and nearness of the living God as days and hours of ease 
could never have afforded. 


It was the hottest summer that had been known 
in New York for many years, and the Bordens had 
just moved from Princeton to a house on Fifty- 
fifth Street for the time being. It was convenient 
to be nearer the office, but the heat of the city was 
overpowering. In spite of this, Mrs. Borden went 
with her son to some of the noonday meetings and 
put off her sailing for Europe until he could come. 
But that was weeks ahead and meanwhile the pres- 
sure of the work was heavy. 

‘* Gee,’ William exclaimed in the office one day, 
‘“‘if I had known what I was coming up against, I 
doubt whether I would have made this suggestion ! ”’ 

Yet in addition to all his other occupations he 
was caring for an invalid uncle that summer. He 
made time to go frequently to Long Beach, where 
his relatives were staying, to be a cheer to his aunt 
and to wheel the patient up and down the board- 
walk in a chair, returning to the city by an early 
train in the morning. 


198 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


‘<'The Price of Power ” was the title of an article he 
was writing at Long Beach one Sunday for the paper 
of which Mr. Shelton was editor. It was the out- 
growth of a thought that had long been in his mind. 
A saying quoted by Mr. Moody had deeply impressed 


him: “ The world has yet to see what God can do > 


with a fully consecrated man.” To be such a man 
was his highest ambition, and he was learning how 
real and practical is the price that has to be paid. 
He was learning that it comes into everything, and 
that it may be expressed in the one inclusive word, 
obedience. Obedience toward God had come to be 
the keynote of his life—instant, glad obedience. To 
him, the Word of God was final. 

*’ On the other hand—” some of us are tempted 
to say. 

To him there was no “ other hand ”’. 

If he saw that in anything his life did not square 
with the Word of God, that ended it. The secret 
of power, he had learned, was that secret open to all 
— ‘the Holy Spirit whom God hath given to them 
that obey Him” (Acts 5. 82). He was speaking 
from experience when he wrote : 


There must be a definite determination to do God’s will 
—a will to obey. Christ laid down the conditions of 
discipleship as denying self and following Him, and that is 
just what is required here. Each one must examine his 
life and put away all sin, not holding on to anything which 
the Spirit tells him he should let go. 

One of the hardest things anyone can have to do is to 
confess he has wronged another. But we read, “ If thou 
bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy 
brother hath aught against thee, leave there thy gift 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 199 


before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy 
brother, and then come and offer thy gift”’.1 We touch 
upon this matter of confession to others because it has 
played such a prominent part in spiritual awakenings, and 
because of the conviction that lack of such confession is the 
cause of much powerlessness in Christian service. 

Questions of life-work also need to be met squarely and 
the enquiry honestly made: ‘‘ Lord, what wilt Thou have 
metodo?” The answer may not come at once, but there 
should be a willingness and determination to do His will, 
whatever service it may involve, at home or abroad. These 
are but suggestions to indicate what is involved in absolute 
consecration to Christ, which is so necessary to real 
obedience. Do you lack power? Ask yourself, Have | 
ever fully surrendered? Have I definitely consecrated 
myself, put myself at God’s disposal, to use as He deems 
best ? 

It must be admitted, however, that there are those who 
at some time of vision or conflict have won a victory and 
taken this great step, and yet have not subsequently had 
real power in their lives. What is the reason? Cases 
differ, but may we not say that it was probably through 
failure to make this principle of complete obedience per- 
manent in their lives? Christ’s rule for discipleship as 
given in Matthew 16. 24 has been referred to above. Do 
you know how it reads in Luke, and what the additional 
feature is which has there been preserved for us? It is 
just one word: ‘If any man would come after me, let 
him deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow 
me.” Daily—that is the thing to note. It is not enough 
to take up the cross once and then lay it down when the 
burden grows wearisome. 

The need for daily application of this principle appears 
in two ways : first, old questions which have been faced and 
downed as we thought, will come up again; and secondly, 
there will arise new problems which were not covered by 
the original act of consecration. Many who have faced the 
question of life-work, and decided for the foreign field, 
illustrate this. It was at tremendous cost they made the 


1 Matthew 5. 23, 24. 


200 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


decision, and possibly there was the thought that after- 
wards all would be plain sailing. But no: the same old 
problems had to be fought out, and there were new ones 
too to face. The principle of Christ’s supremacy could not 
be lost sight of for a moment. Satan, when defeated, left 
Christ but for a little season. How much less, when he has 
been ousted from our lives at some conference or on some 
mountain-top, will he despair of finding a foothold when we 
are on the plain of everyday living again. Obedience, 
which is the price of power, must not only be absolute but 
daily. Are we paying this part of the price ? 

It may be there are others who have consecrated them- 
selves to Christ and do seek to make this a daily attitude of 
life, and yet fail to receive real power. Where this is the 
case, may it not be due to imperfect application of the 
principle of obedience ? It is comparatively easy to isolate 
the great issues, the big problems, and to deal with them 
by the grace of God. But there are many so-called “ little 
things’? which are apt to be overlooked. These grieve 
and quench the Spirit in no less real a way than the others.! 
They are difficult to deal with, and many Christians do not 
seem to recognize what they are at all—though ignorance 
does not save us from the consequences in this any more 
than in other spheres. We must study the Word of God, 
daily see ourselves in that glass, asking God to search us 
and know our hearts, try us and know our thoughts, and 
see if there be any wicked way in us. 

Mr. Speer in his Principles of Jesus has indicated four 
great guiding principles that our Lord laid down—namely, 
purity, honesty, unselfishness and love. These are simple 
and plain enough; yet how many of us are checking up 
our every thought and word and deed by these? How 
many of us are asking in everything, “ Is this pleasing to 
Him?” Our personal habits, our amusements, all our 
intercourse with others, business or social, should be con- 
sidered in this light. We must seek not merely to avoid 


1 “ Self-pleasing in little things brings darkness. The lightest cloud 
before the sun will prevent it from focussing its rays to a burning point 
through the convex glass. Spiritually, the result is the same, even 
with small, thin, scarcely visible acts of  self-will.”—ALEXANDER 
MactarENn, D.D. 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 201 


quenching the Spirit; we must be careful lest we grieve 
Him. 

Obedience, absolute and unqualified, which is made a 
daily principle of living, carried even into little things, this 
is the price of power. 

Of course there must not be a selfish motive, and we 
must not fail to ask in definite believing prayer for the Holy 
Spirit. But if the conditions are met, God will make good 
His promise, “‘ Ye shall receive power”. How the power 
will manifest itself in our lives need not concern us here. 
The saying still holds good—* The world has yet to see 
what God can do with a fully consecrated man.” Only as 
filled with His Spirit can we hope to win men from darkness 
to light and to faith in Christ. Shall we not each one 
resolve, from henceforth, to obey Him absolutely in all 
things, small and great ? 


Reality was what gave his words their power. 
Before Mr. Shelton’s return to the office Borden 
was tested, himself, in the matter of putting duty 
before pleasure. A great occasion was on hand, 
the first reunion of his class at Yale, and he managed 
to get away for the week-end. But the triennial 
banquet, the climax of the proceedings, did not 
come until Monday, and there was a Board meeting 
of the National Bible Institute that day that he felt 
he should attend. Great was the consternation of 
his class-mates when it appeared that he was leaving 
before the banquet. Many old friends were there, 
among them his room-mate, Mac Vilas. 

“ Indeed you won’t go to New York,” they ex- 
claimed with insistence. ‘‘ We won’t let you go!” 

‘** But we might as well have talked to the Rock 
of Gibraltar,’’ Vilas said. 

Borden managed to return the following day, 
and that he entered fully into the spirit of the 
occasion may be seen from the note in his journal : 


202 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


“ Attended to a few things at the office and left for 
New Haven, getting there just in time for the picture 
and the parade to the field for the game, which Yale 
won from Harvard, 9-6. Our class wore farmers’ 
costumes. It was a great jollification ! ” 


The summer had taken more out of the young 
substitute than he realized, but even on the voyage 
to Europe for a much-curtailed holiday he was 
working at an important task. The Moody Bible 
Institute of Chicago, of which he was a Director, 
thought it timely to prepare a statement setting 
forth the doctrinal standards of the institution. 
Borden was on the committee appointed for that 
purpose. His application papers to the China In- 
land Mission had already called for such a statement, 
and he had with him the Doctrinal Basis of the 
National Bible Institute, covering the same ground, 
which had been largely his work. This he enclosed 
with his letter to Chicago, concerning which Dr. 
Gray wrote to Mrs. Borden: “ The letter is much 
valued by me, and I trust that when the biographer 
has finished with it, it may be returned to my hands.” 

Kronprinz Wilhelm, 
July 21, 1912. 


Dear Dr. Gray—In accordance with your wishes I am 
taking this opportunity to draw up my suggestions for the 
proposed doctrinal basis of the Moody Institute. 


First, the purpose : 

As I understand it, the need is for a statement embodying 
what we feel is essential to sound doctrine in the teaching 
and work of the Institute. This statement should be an 
aid to the trustees, not only as a standard for checking up 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 203 


the teaching staff, but also to guide them in the selection 
of new trustees at any time—written assent to the doctrinal 
basis being required of all present and future members of 
the Board of Trustees as well as the teaching staff, and also 
a pledge to give notice of any future change of opinion, and 
willingness to resign if requested to do so. 


Second : 


What is the essential to sound doctrine? I feel that 
the inspiration and authority of Scripture; God: His 
being and attributes; Christ: His person (Deity) and 
work (atonement) ; the Holy Spirit : His person and work ; 
man’s sinful state and need of regeneration; the way of 
salvation from the guilt of sin (justification by faith alone) 
and from the power of sin (sanctification) ; the return of 
Christ and future rewards and punishments are the 
essentials, 


Third: 


The order and phrasing of the statement. I would say 
at once that I do not feel that it will be possible to employ 
Scripture language only, both from the nature and extent 
of the ground to be covered and the exigencies of the 
present day with its requirement of great exactness. We 
should, however, seek to be as brief as may be consistent 
with clearness. Coming then to the actual phrasing, I 
would suggest the following : 


DocTRINAL Basis 
OF 
THE Moopy BIBLE INSTITUTE 


We believe in the inspiration, integrity, and authority 
of the Bible. By this is meant a miraculous guiding work 
of the Holy Spirit in their original writing, extending to all 
parts of the Scriptures equally, applying even to the choice 
of words. Moreover, it is our conviction that God has 
exercised such singular care and providence through the 
ages in preserving the written word, that the Scriptures as 
we now have them are in every essential particular as 
originally given, so that the result is the very word of God, 


204 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


the only infallible rule of faith and practice, containing all 
things necessary to salvation and sound doctrine. 

We believe that there is one living and true God, a 
spirit infinite, eternal and incomparable, etc. (see West- 
minster Shorter Catechism). And we believe that in unity 
of this Godhead there are three persons, the Father, the 
Son and the Holy Spirit (see Episcopalian Prayer Book). 

We believe in the deity of our Lord Jesus Christ and in 
His death on the cross as a true substitute, and that His 
death was a sufficient expiation for the guilt of all men. 

We believe in the Holy Spirit as a Divine person, 
distinct from the Father and the Son, who convicts the 
world of sin, regenerates and dwells in the true believer, 
quickening and empowering him in all his life and service. 

We believe that all men are by nature sinful and unable 
to save themselves, and that “‘ except a man be born again, 
he cannot see the kingdom of God ”’. 

We believe that men are justified by faith (in Jesus 
Christ) alone and are accounted righteous before God only 
for the merit of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 

We believe that sanctification is a work of God’s free 
grace whereby, being renewed in the whole man, we are 
enabled more and more to die unto sin and to live unto 
righteousness. 

We believe in the second coming of our Lord, as a 
personal, visible and glorious advent on this earth. 

We believe in the everlasting conscious blessedness of the 
saved and in the everlasting conscious punishment of the lost. 

As a conclusion I would suggest an adaptation of the 
paragraph in the Moody Church statement to the effect 
that while specifying these doctrines, we by no means 
undervalue or set aside any Scriptures of the Old or New 
Testaments. 

Of course I do not pretend that this is final, but it em- 
bodies my thoughts for the present. I hope you can read 
it all. Kindly keep the enclosed typewritten statement 
with this letter (of which I have no copy by the way) as I 
would like to refer to the two together in Chicago when we 
meet next fall, p.v.—Sincerely yours, 

Wiuu1am W. Borven. 


WIDER ACTIVITIES 205 


‘So often nowadays we are told that it does 
not matter what men think, it only matters what 
they do,” wrote a friend of Borden’s from Bryn 
Mawr College. “It is a striking contrast to turn 
back to the Gospels and find the Lord Himself re- 
versing this emphasis. His great question was, 
‘What think ye of Christ?’ ‘Who do men say 
that Iam ?’ 

“This Bill realized fully. He knew that it 
mattered supremely what he thought. He was a 
great help to me always in the Christian life, and I 
wish that more might know of his devotion to 
Christ. I wish that people who say it doesn’t 
matter what you believe could only see how much 
it mattered to him, and the results those very beliefs 
produced in his life.” 


CHAPTER XIII 


MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 


1912. Att. 24 


‘‘The Master said, ‘ Come, follow ’— 
That was all. 
Earth’s joys grew dim, 
My soul went after Him ; 
I rose and followed— 
That was all. 


Will you not follow if you hear His call ?”’ 
Selected. 


COMMENCEMENT exercises were especially memor- 
able the year that Borden graduated from Princeton, 
as they coincided with the Centennial celebrations 
of the Seminary. From all over the world came 
congratulatory messages, for Princeton—the oldest 
seminary of the Presbyterian Church in America— 
had graduated almost six thousand students, over 
four hundred of whom had gone abroad as mission- 
aries. Many distinguished visitors were there for 
the occasion and the Borden home was full of guests. 
‘* President Patton was at his best,’? William 
wrote, ‘“‘and preached a tremendous sermon on 
‘The faith once for all delivered to the saints ’.”’ 
Dr. Speer’s missionary address was equally 
inspiring. After recalling the devoted lives of 


Princeton graduates in many a field, he continued : 
206 


MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 207 


We owe it to the fathers who went before us to stand 
afraid at no opportunity and flinch at no call. They taught — 
us the glory of unswerving fidelity. The men who have.’ 
gone out from these halls have always known the duty of — 
staying by duty until the sun went down. They were | 
taught that God is patient and that His servants need not 
be anxious or afraid. mi 


The world-situation which confronts us in these 
days he spoke of as God’s gift to us, and not God’s 
gift only, but God’s test of our worthiness to be the 
heirs and executors of such a past. 


od 


The Seminary has always sought to breed in her sons a 
dauntless and unfearing supernaturalism. The missionary 
enterprise is too vast for a mere human will to sustain. 
Its difficulties, its necessities, its problems, its ideals call 
for God. Its sufficiency is in Him alone. Here, men 
learned that God was in the beginning and that God stands 
back of the end. With God and for God such men have 
dared all things, and have not fainted nor grown weary. 


In the midst of the celebrations came the granting 


of diplomas to the graduating students. In his 
Line-A-Day journal, Borden noted : 


May 6, 1912. 


Got our diplomas in Alexandria Hall. The academic 
procession was quite brilliant. Four fine addresses in the 
afternoon. Speer’s was best, on Princeton in the Mission 
Field. 


And the following day : 
Had our final prayer-meeting of the Benham Club. 


Little more than six months remained for Borden 
of life in his own land, but how full they were of 
far-reaching activities! ‘‘ He fulfilled a great time 


208 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


in a short time,’ as was said of Keith Falconer. 
He was running a race, and his eye was on the 
goal. 

The very day that he had taken this last ex- 
amination at Princeton, for example, found him in 
New York with Dr. John R. Mott, deep in plans for 
the work he was to take up in the fall in connection 
with the Student Volunteer Movement. A three 
months’ schedule had been made out for visits to 
many colleges. He was to speak especially on the 
need of the Moslem world, before sailing himself for 
Egypt on his way to China. It was felt that a few 
months at Cairo, in the language school, would be 
of advantage, not only for the study of Arabic and 
the Koran but of Mohammedanism generally, before 
attempting to meet it in its strongholds in Western 
China. 

Released from his responsibilities in Mr. Shelton’s 
office, Borden had spent a few weeks in Switzerland, 
climbing the Jungfrau and the Wetterhorn, and had 
returned to New York refreshed for his work in the 
colleges. Then came his ordination, which took 
place in the Moody Church, Chicago, as its elders 
recorded : 


He was one of our boys. This was the church of his 
childhood. . . . Here he returned for ordination after com- 
pleting his Seminary course, and as we examined him in 
view of that step his testimony rang true as steel to every 
cardinal doctrine of Holy Writ. 

On September 9, 1912, we set him apart to the ministry 
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ in a foreign land, 
little thinking that his ministry was to be to our Lord 
himself in the better land. 


"806 2bnd anf O7, 


“AUVNIWAS NOL 














MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 209 


The service was simple but impressive, marked 
by contrasts that gave the daily papers a good deal 
to say at the time. That a man of his age and 
prospects should turn away from all the world could 
offer and devote himself to a life of loneliness and 
hardship in a remote province in China, “ the darkest 
and meanest section of the Orient’, as one paper 
seriously said, became a nine days’ wonder. But 
another Chicago daily gave an account of the pro- 
ceedings that must have arrested attention, printing 
in full on its front page the hymn that seemed to 
sum up all there was to be said : 

When I survey the wondrous cross 
On which the Prince of Glory died, 


My richest gain I count but loss 
And pour contempt on all my pride. 


Were the whole realm of nature mine, 
That were an offering far too small ; 
Love so amazing, so divine, 
Demands my life, my soul, my all. 


Borden did not see the papers. That side of the 
matter was painful to him. In a circular letter to 
twelve Princeton class-mates who kept up a corre- 
spondence, he mentioned the fact of his ordination, 
adding : 


I am sorry there was such unnecessary publicity, and 
hope you fellows will discount what was said very liberally. 


The real impressiveness of the service lay in the 
love and sympathy of the great assembly for one 
who had grown up among them, whose consecration 
to Christ they knew full well; in the sermon by Dr. 


James Gray, Dean of the Bible Institute, and the 
P 


210 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


charge given by Dr. John Timothy Stone, Pastor of 
the Fourth Presbyterian Church, and in the prayers 
with which Borden was committed to the Lord, on 
the spot from which Moody had so often preached, 
as the ministers and elders gathered round him: 

We set him apart for the work to which he was called. 
The hands of the lowly were laid upon his head. The 
Holy Spirit filled him. The grace of the Omnipotent was 
in his life. 

That grace was very real in his mother’s experi- 
ence as well, in the hour which was to her the climax 
of her sacrifice. From his childhood she had con- 
secrated him to the Lord, and his call to missionary 
work had come as an answer to her many prayers. 
Yet, since his father’s death, she had learned to 
lean upon him in everything, and the very thought 
of separation seemed at times unbearable. Firm 
as a rock, there had been no wavering in his purpose. 
He knew as well as she did that her deepest desire 
was one with his own. They stood together, and 
his strength had helped her no less than his tender- 
ness. But the separation had hitherto been pro- 
spective. Now it was coming near. His ordination 
meant, as Mrs. Borden realized, that they were 
committed to the sacrifice that seemed as if it must 
cost her very life. 

And then—there is no explaining it apart from 
the presence of the Lord Himself—in that hour she 
held back nothing, a wonderful peace filled her 
heart. Physical weakness, even, was replaced by 
strength, so that she was able to meet all the de- 
mands of the dreaded situation when it came, with 





O. 


JHICAG 


isl,, {C 


1 


THE MOODY CHURGC 


ce page 210, 


a 


To f 





MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 211 


gladness. For there is a fellowship with Christ 
which infinitely compensates any cost at which it 
is won. 

To a friend who expressed surprise, about this | 
time, that he was “throwing himself away as a | 
missionary ”’, Borden replied : 

** You have not seen heathenism.”’ | 

He had; and the constraining love of Christ 
made him, as one of his Princeton class-mates put it, 
‘a missionary, first, last and all the time”. ar 

‘No one would have known from Borden’s life | 
and talk that he was a millionaire,”’ wrote another, | 
‘ but no one could have helped knowing that he was | 
a Christian and alive for missions.”’ 


Yet, to him, souls were just as precious in America 
as across the ocean, and his responsibility as great 
for all whom he could reach. His friend, Mr. Hugh 
Monro, Treasurer of the National Bible Institute, 
said in this connection : 


Not a few of us, under the influence of evangelistic 
services, or some other spiritual tonic, are filled with zeal 
for the salvation of others. At certain seasons, when we 
have given ourselves specially to prayer, perhaps, and the 
study of God’s Word, we are awakened to a new concern 
about the spiritual welfare of those around us. But there 
was nothing spasmodic about Borden’s zeal. He had that 
_ unique thing, an abiding passion for the souls of men. It 
was his constant thought; it seemed never absent from 
his mind. 

Most of us look for occasions which may afford a suit- 
able opportunity for soul-winning, and excuse our lack of 
devotion and diligence because we feel that such an oppor- 
tunity is not present. We continually hesitate to broach 


212 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


the subject of another’s salvation, lest the occasion should 
not be favourable. Yet Borden found such opportunities 
continually. 


Visiting with his mother, for example, in the 
home of some relatives, he became concerned about 
the butler, who was giving way to drink. At dinner 
one evening, when not sober, he let some ice-cream 
slip off a plate, almost ruining a Worth gown. 
Learning that he had been dismissed, Mrs. Borden 
mentioned the matter to William. It was not 
their responsibility, maybe, but the following 
Sunday his mother’s maid, walking in the direction 
of the butler’s house, heard quick steps behind her 
and found William at her side. 

‘* Melanie,’ he said, ‘‘ I am going to enquire for 
X. Couldn’t we have prayer together that God 
will speak to him to-day ? ” 

‘‘So we stopped right there on the street,” his 
old friend recalled. ‘“‘ Then Mr. William went on 
to the house, and the butler truly turned to the 
Lord that day. Only a fortnight later, he took 
pneumonia and died.” 

Did Borden regret the effort he had made to see 
him ? 

It was not easy in his busy life to make time for 
correspondence, but did he regret the letters he 
wrote, at some sacrifice, to a poor fellow in jail to 
whom, apparently, he was a stranger ? 

‘‘T think of you a great deal,’’ came the answer 
from a Connecticut prison, “and I am more than 
thankful for what you have done for me. I have 
had a hard time getting back to faith, but with your 


MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 213 


help and the help of God I can call myself a Christian 
again. . . . I have received a letter from my wife 
saying that you have sent her a copy of St. John’s 
Gospel. She is very thankful to you for it, also for 
what you have done for me. You cannot imagine 
how much the brute I feel when I think of having 
done what I have—leaving my wife and baby, to 
be locked up in a felon’s cell. . . . I hope with the 
help of God that henceforth I will be a better man.” 

The real test for fitness for missionary work 
abroad is not so much a high educational standard 
as the faith and love, the prayer and devotedness, 
that win men at home. 


Borden’s message in the colleges was of the sort | 
to appeal to a strong type of personality. Fuller 
knowledge had but deepened his conviction that 
the two hundred millions of the Moslem world offered 
by far the hardest as well as the most neglected field 
for missionary enterprise. The very difficulties } 
attracted him. | 

Kansu, for example—that lonely, far-off province 
in North-West China, with its three million Moslems 
among a hardy population of Mongols, Tibetans 
and Chinese—was the sphere in which he hoped to 
labour. Peking was much more central, strategic, 
some would have said. There were not a few 
mosques in the capital, and a post as organizing 
secretary for work among Mohammedans through- 
out China could easily have been arranged. But 
Borden was looking for a harder billet. Just 
because Kansu was isolated, thrust out between 


214 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Mongolia and Tibet, because the missionaries were 
few and the work difficult, because the people he 
longed to reach were there in multitudes, and no 
one was set apart for work among them, Kansu was 
the place of his choice. 

Ho-chow was there with its bigoted, proud race 
of Moslems, Arab by descent. ‘There, too, were the 
Tung-hsiang, remnants of the old Hun tribes in the 
mountains, long since converted to Islam at the 
point of the sword. And there were the Salas from 
distant Samarkand, with their Turkish speech and 
faces, Moslem exiles who had tramped across Central 
Asia, hundreds of years ago, to find a home beside 
the Yellow River. And these virile, dominating 
sons of Islam were mingled in the western part 
of the province with Tibetans from the border- 
marches and Mongols from north of the Great Wall. 
More than this, the Great Road running through 
the province—itself a thousand miles from east to 
west—led on across the Gobi Desert to the Moslem 
heart of Central Asia, linking up city after city in 
which no missionary had ever laboured, and giving 
access to the mingled peoples of that vast region, 
one of the most neglected, from the missionary point 
of view, in the world. That waiting heart of Asia, 
how it appealed to him, just because so few were 
willing to lay down their lives that these, too, might 
have the message of Redeeming Love ! 

A handful of brave men and women were there, 
representing the two missions working in the 
province, and forty days’ Journey westward, two 
lonely pioneers, almost as far from the nearest mis- 

















NY 
DWN 
\\ WN \ \\ \\ ANY 
A ~ \ 
WW ~ \\\ / 
vy’ “AS SHAN 
: “Gi 
KANSU.- 


(HENS! 





(szechwan 


A Crores : en 


(KWANTUNG 

















> SHOWING THE DISTRIBUTION OF MOSLEMS } 





be a4 
orp 
; ey weak oa) 
: c Nee Pre eee 
Z ih 7 ney Pal na 
[ at a ay a 
i F i= ‘Tal 
f v “ Wy Ss, 
’ Ve : 7 
ee ‘ ee a 
j a) ; _ ® 
, [ y s . > as La fa - ‘ eon 
fetelye’ oe Ue eel 
: » s ) -\.% j ¢ . ; \ } J ? 7 r a” ‘ ie 
UpiDamaiek +“ eee ty é) A a 
>, ae i ' t { - nee 
ar oy Ave , *'’ . ie ® : 4 : a 7 J iy 
oe VE 4 on, ‘ ‘y ae 4 >a we ( . a 
=F : pre 
(| > i”, , ‘ i) 
x AVS 1c; v4 ; oat a . 
/ * : 4 : ; 
4 is ' 7 
: An A ing tn ae ri 
i 5 7 “4p 8 
H , 
la i. i H 
| * y ‘\ , i 
e4 
- | > s ® ) 
' " As ‘,' a | 4 
; h) i 
iS , j i ‘a 
AOS: , , hes P i 
' vi ‘ i J 
h ‘i . ~ . ' 
“ahd wey sv a i - 
i a) ray ae 
=, , a. 
: ae ’ T tee 
* " 7 - 
* { 
- 
= ‘ “4 
es ee eee 
* 4 
wid we 
{ “ ) ’ \ 
. i] 
Fs « F e ; t { ~< 
| ‘ F “eh! " : it Pa 1% 
' uy ‘nS ( Je ’ 
i A j 
{ . 
be — - - t. = 
A 4, 7 ‘ £ 
4 26) ; ‘ i. 3 
Bias ‘ ced i i Vi. 7 
‘ ‘ re : ae r. 
X, bE : ‘45 ‘ y ¥ 
| i : 
+ oe Fi J 
. 1 ‘ 4 
' ' Z 
y ‘ e - 
» oy y a 
‘ s} 7 ¢ 
: ; ’ a * P i ; eo See 
r) -# , oe, ‘ i 
&» . » 
. i | t ? er ' NEO aes 
; 7 “pl a | : 
‘ ¥ , 4\/ 
5 ae ww : ae re i rea OA eae 
$ , , 7 
‘ ’ vs 
J a Py ‘ . i : 
att Y 4 é 
as ’ I i wits i 
é4 i My -+ » 
oy i , is 
j : ! ? 
) : é i 
‘ , ¥ 
: , . “ ie 
’ a ‘ iy 
; ‘ 
. 4 ie aa 
a4 4 Ai oe 
BS : 4 ic : 
; » , 
‘4 ’ V5, % i s J 4 
a i 4 ‘ - eo ele, 
’ ; we fi ‘ , *& 
aT 1's 
ii 4 e . i : fhe r 
1 7 j ¢ 4 
te | are 
kia a ies 
‘ i ; i ) at im 
i (a wet i) 
| * ae | 
4 . ty 
Ps PI : Y re, 
al ice ok oi 
: as j wh, ‘ . 
a j 3 G — i ne! \ 
Paes RY: ae 
: ; Bre hy oy a ; y ie ate oe 
he J hyd? \) ae 
: Pts ‘ : ’ it { . / . iin, 
a," 4“ ’ is } iS Lal i, 
‘ + ' : a i, Wey it 
’ J ) Pia a? 4 any 
Ps U ; a ¢ 
: A 4 ip ati - : J 9 : a) re 
‘ ie - : » 4 4 ; rh is - Po 
Vs : a : ’ : :] , . a. My a ie > ee J of 
_ * a7 ve » & ; , at | j Ae } 7 , . / 1 - Z 
i) sacs ei. f + oe i, t> | © > gh SA £ o pe 
4 ad *9 ¢ 7 i -< ‘ray 45 fant : 4, Ye, 
, ra" \ = Ca Bis y 
5 ran if ie ok ae co) oe seul a ey - wal Y oy ; 
bl ape Pus ¢ ed Ur a ee a. a 4). ; 
i ‘ — é a? j “ rh ibe __ ee J 
= 2 are’ ee. ae ee hey es 






MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 215 


sionaries on the other side.!_ More than sixty cities 
in Kansu itself without a witness for Christ; four- 
fifths of its population still unreached ; three million 
Moslems for whom no one could be spared, because 
the inadequate staff was absorbed in work among 
the Chinese; no doctor, no hospital in the entire 
province, and those vast lands beyond with millions 
more for whom there were so few to care—that was 
the sphere that attracted Borden. And that is the 
sphere that with but little change as regards its 
Mohammedan population is waiting still.? 

With a background of such thoughts and pur- 
poses, Borden brought to his work in the colleges 
a reality that could not but be felt. The joy and 
inspiration of a great task possessed him, and he 
could not speak of missionary work, even in its 
hardest phases, as sacrifice. To him it was privilege 
of the highest order, the privilege that comes not to 
angels but to men, and to us once only, now, in this 
fleeting life. 

Two books were his travelling companions at 
this time, and give some idea as to his talks in the 
colleges—one, the mission-study book for the year, 
Dr. Zwemer’s Unoccupied Mission Fields of Africa 
and Asia, full of facts that were the strongest argu- 

1 The China Inland Mission and the Christian and Missionary Alliance 
were the only missions working in Kansu at that time. The solitary 
outpost in Central Asia is the city of Ti-hwa-fu, in which Mr. George Hunter 
and Mr. P. C. Mather of the China Inland Mission are still holding the fort 
alone. Pray for them and for the people to whom their lives are given. 

2 Fuller information about this most interesting province can be obtained 
from two books written on the spot, recent publications of the China Inland 
Mission : The Call of China’s Great North-West, by the present writer, and 


Despatches from North-West China, by Miss Mildred Cable and Miss 
Francesca French. 


Pere ai 
‘ 


we Oe ae 


216 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


ments, and the other a little paper-covered volume 
so worn and marked as to tell its own story. Many 
a journey it had taken with him, and its truths 
were being wrought into his deepest life. The little 
book cannot be purchased but it can be obtained 
as a gift from the author, and in that way is in keep- 
ing with its theme, ‘“‘ The Threefold Secret of the 
Spirit”. Divided into three parts, it deals first 
with the secret of the incoming of the Holy Spirit ; 
then with the secret of His fulness ; and lastly with 
the secret of His constant manifestation in our lives. 
Borden’s copy is marked in the way he had with all 
his best-loved books, one sentence standing out as 
meaning much to him. 

“The supreme human condition of the fulness of 
the Spirit is a life wholly surrendered to God to do 
His will.” 

To do His will”: nothing greater or more 
glorious could be desired, and Borden knew of 
nothing that brought deeper satisfaction. Life was 
not, to him, a question of being or having this or 
that ; it was simply a question of the will of God— 
knowing it, doing it, loving it. And such a life, he 
knew, was possible even in college, through the in- 
dwelling of the Holy Spirit. So his message was 
one of gladness and power. 

Beginning at Schenectady, New York, in Sep- 
tember, he managed to visit no fewer than thirty 
colleges and seminaries before sailing for Egypt in 


1 A copy of The Threefold Secret of the Spirit, by James H. McConkey, 
will be sent free, post paid, to anyone who will write to the publishers 
for it. Address: Silver Publishing Company, 1013 Bessemer Buildings, 
Pittsburg, Pa. 


MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 217 


December. One to three days in a place gave 
opportunity for interviews as well as meetings, and 
his time was so filled that it was with difficulty he 
got away on his twenty-fifth birthday to spend the 
evening with his mother. 

In many an interview Mr. Robert Wilder’s 
question came to his mind, and with the background 
of all experience at sea he would ask : 

‘* Are you steering or drifting ? % Wr 

The question served to open up the subject of a 
student’s choices in life. The danger of drifting 
was manifest. If a man said he was steering, it 
was easy to go on: 

*’ What is your goal, and Who is with you on 
board ? ” q 

To cut out indecision was what Borden urged. 

In a Greek Testament given to a friend he had 
written: “ If any man wills to do His-will,.he.shall 
know .. .”’ (John 7. 17). 
- “Tt was a favourite passage of his,’ wrote the 
class-mate, “‘and one upon which his own Christian 
activities were built up. Like his Master, he realized 
that it was nearly always a question of whether a 
man wanted to or not. Bill always referred the 
matter back to the will. In talking over a Bible 
group which was failing, the leader having grown 
lax, Iremember Bill’s saying that it might have been 
the best group in our class if the leader had been 
willing to pay the price.”’ 

The uttermost for the utmost was the price as 
he saw it—the uttermost of surrender on our part 
for the utmost of what God will do in and through 


? 


218 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


us. It was a high ideal. Often Borden would meet 
one to whom it seemed too high with another 
question : 

‘Are you willing to be made willing ? ” 

‘‘T remember that to some of us this directness 
of appeal seemed at times to lack sympathy with 
the other person’s point of view,” continued his 
friend. ‘‘ But it was the sort of thing to draw out 
the best that was in a man, and gathered to itself 
those who were willing.”’ 

One thing evident to all was that the speaker 
himself was paying the price and finding it a wonder- 
fulexchange. And this gave force to the missionary 
side of his message, which consisted chiefly in a clear 
presentation of facts. For Borden felt with Dr. 
Zwemer that we do not need to plead the cause 
of missions. The case is there. All we ask is a 
_ verdict. | 
| ‘‘Tf ten men are carrying a log,” he said, at 
Andover, ‘‘ nine of them on the little end and one 
at the heavy end, and you want to help, which end 
will you lift on?” } 

Difficulties he spoke of as a challenge to faith 
and consecration, and while not minimizing them, 
especially in presenting the situation in Moslem 
lands, he laid but the more emphasis on our Lord’s 
own words: ‘‘ The things that are impossible with 
men are possible with God.” 

Of his own spirit in this work and the impression 


he made on students and others, something may be 
1 In proportion to the population, there were five hundred times as 

many ministers of the gospel in the United States as there were ordained 

missionaries in China. | 


MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 219 


gathered from the following letters. Mrs. Henry W. 
Frost wrote of his visit to Philadelphia : 


While in and near the city we had asked him to stay 
with us. One morning I met him in the hall, just starting 
for one of the theological schools. He stopped hesitatingly, 
and then said : 

“Mrs. Frost, would you have a little prayer with me 
before I go? I don’t think they want me very much, as 
my invitation comes from quite a small group of students.” 

We had prayer together, and I said, ‘‘ Will you be back 
to luncheon, William ? ” 

“Oh, I don’t know,” was his reply: and then laughingly, 
* They may not want me any longer ! ”’ 

As a matter of fact he stayed all day and had a very 
interesting time. 


An intimate friend heard him when he addressed 
the German department of the Rochester Theo- 
logical Seminary. 


After the address, he said that if there were any questions 
they cared to ask, though he would not promise to answer 
them all, he would be glad to try. Many questions followed 
—wise and otherwise—and I marvelled at his unfailing 
patience and complete lack of pride or self-consciousness, 
though he, the teacher, was probably the youngest of them 
all. During the months since I had seen him, a wonderful 
grace and sweetness had come into his life, but there was 
not one whit less of strength or humour. 


And a Yale class-mate, who attempted to draw 
him out on the subject of marriage, wrote from 
New Brunswick : 


At the end of November, when Bill was here to give a 
talk in the Seminary, he came to my room and lay down 
on the couch, having caught a feverish cold. We talked 
over many matters. In a joking way I asked him when he 
was going to marry. He replied seriously that he thought 


220 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


it was cruel for a man who was going into one of the most 
difficult of missionary fields to ask any girl to go with him, 
because the woman always fared the worst, often suecumb- 
ing when the man survived ; that he had no intention of 
marrying—it would be wrong to the girl and would hinder 
his highest efficiency in the field he had in view. Bill’s 
thorough-going decision on this question, which is so hard 
for many to settle, is another indication of his complete 
surrender of himself to the great work to which he was 
called. 

Borden strongly approved the rule of the China 
Inland Mission with regard to out-going mission- 
aries, whether mén or women, that they should 
remain unmarried for the first two years in China, 
so as to give undivided attention to the study of 
the language and have the best opportunity of 
becoming acclimatized and getting into touch with 
the people. It hardly needed the experience of the 
Mission to prove that this was wise and helpful. 
To him it seemed common sense, and an obvious 
application of the Master’s words: ‘‘ Seek ye first 
the kingdom of God... .” 

His own problem extended, however, far beyond 
the two years. What about the period, long or 
short, when he would be practically homeless and 
exposed to no little hardship and danger? In one 
of his much-read books he had marked the lines 
from Meyer’s St. Paul: 

Yes, without cheer of sister or of daughter, 
Yes, without stay of father or of son, 


Lone on the land and homeless on the water 
Pass I in patience till the work be done. 


After his last meeting in December, concluding 
his three months’ work in the colleges, he was dining 


MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 221 


with Dr. and Mrs. Angell in Rochester, and the 
latter wrote of being “ deeply impressed with the 
fire and ardour of his faith ”’. 

As he sat at table with us, talking of all he hoped to do 
for and in China, his face became glorified, his eyes shone 
with a light which only divine things can awaken. At the 
same time there was a poise, a dignity and balance which 
showed that his was not the mind of a fanatic. He was 
one who had counted the cost but never flinched for a 
moment. 

** Those were fruitful months,’ wrote Mr. Fennell 
P. Turner, General Secretary of the Student Volun- 
teer Movement. “ William was used to lead 
students in many colleges and universities to give 
their lives to foreign missionary service. The last 
letter I received from him enclosed the ‘ declaration 
card’ of a Student Volunteer who had signed it 
after his visit, and sent it on to him in Cairo. In 
years to come there will be missionaries in many 
fields who owe their decision, under God, to William’s 
unselfish service during his last months in this 
country.” 

One cannot wonder that the leaders of the 
Volunteer Movement desired that such strong 
effective work should be continued. But Borden 
had last arrangements to make before leaving for 
Kgypt and felt that his departure should not be 
delayed. It was like him not to put off going until 
after Christmas even. His work in the colleges did 
not end until the tenth of December, and it would 
have seemed natural to take the Christmas vacation 
at home and set out early in the new year. But 
the S.S. Mauretania was sailing on the seventeenth 


222 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


and was due to reach Port Said on New Year’s Day. 
It meant only one week for packing and final pre- 
parations, but two or three weeks longer at the 
other end. Time was to Borden one of his most 
important stewardships. His mother did not hold 
him back, so it was a foregone conclusion. To him 
could never be imputed “the ungirt loin and the 
untrimmed lamp ’’. 

One last touch there had been with Yale class- 
mates, of which his friend Campbell wrote : 


On November twenty-eighth, Bill was usher at my 
sister’s wedding to Louis G. Audette. Other Yale fellows 
were there. We had a jolly time and Bill was in for all the 
fun. The wedding was an evening affair, after which Bill 
packed off to the city to be with his mother, as the days 
before he sailed were getting few. 


He had kept up his visits to the Yale Hope 
Mission through all his other engagements and had 
provided, financially, for its being carried on under 
the care of Mr. Don O. Shelton of the National Bible 
Institute. Even in December he managed to run 
down again to New Haven, giving a Sunday evening 
to the dear old work. His love for it was just the 
same as when he had gone into it with all the hopes 
and fears of a beginner, six years previously. Bern- 
hardt had been called to a larger sphere,? but his 
place was ably filled by Mr. and Mrs. William Ellis, 
the latter saved, himself, from the depths of sin and 
misery. ‘‘ Bill Ellis”? and “ Bill Borden” were a 
great combination when they could be together in 
the meetings. 


1 Prison Reform work in Atlanta, Georgia, 


MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 223 


‘** What has impressed you most since you came ~ 
to America?” Dr. Henry W. Frost asked a much- 
travelled visitor. 

Without hesitation came the reply: “ The sight 
of that young millionaire kneeling with his arm 
around a ‘bum’ in the Yale Hope Mission.”’ 


The last Sunday of all William spent quietly 
with his mother. They went to church together 
in the morning, little thinking it was for the last 
time, and on the following day he took part in the 
meeting held regularly in their home for prayer for 
the Moslem world. Several friends came to dinner 
that evening, including Dr. and Mrs. Frost and Mr. 
Shelton. William was leaving the next day, and 
by common consent the five or six men with whom 
he had been most closely associated in work for 
God foregathered in his room for a last hour of 
prayer and fellowship. It was Mr. Shelton who 
wrote : 

We prayed that our beloved friend might be kept in 
safety throughout his long journey, and guided and upheld 
in all his ways. And then he prayed for us, and for the 
work we represented. He was so strong and vigorous in 


body and mind that night that we anticipated for him long 
and useful service. And in less than four months... 


But happily they did not know it then. 

In the quiet of her room that night, weary and 
worn and sad, Mrs. Borden fell asleep, asking herself 
again and again, “Is it, after all, worth while ? ”’ 
In the morning as she awoke to consciousness, the 
still small voice was speaking in her heart, answering 


224 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


the question with these words: ‘‘ God so loved the 
world that He gave His only begotten Son . . .” 

‘Tt was strength for the day,” she said, “ 
for all the days to come.”’ 

From childhood, William’s constant prayer with 
his mother had been that the will of God might be 
done in his life, and as they parted on the Maure- 
tania it was still the same. Did it come back to 
him afterwards, as it did to her, that their last 
petition together was that he might be taken to 
China and made a blessing among its Moslem 
millions—but only, ‘if it be Thy will” ? 

To the companion of his first long journey, 
Mr. Walter Erdman, Borden wrote after leaving : 


and 


It is not easy. There are many temptations and 
adversaries. Pray for me that I may have strength. 


Among the Christmas letters opened in England 
was a faded sheet bearing a Christmas carol, with 
the refrain : 


Glory in the highest and goodwill to men. 
Peace on earth, peace on earth. 


Beneath the verses and on the back of the page 
Mrs. Borden had written : 


Darling, a blessed Christmas to you! This is one of 
our old song-sheets used at “‘89”’, years and years ago, 
when we were all together. Never did I realize so clearly 
the missionary meaning of Luke 2. 101 as I did yesterday | 
morning while sitting by your side in church. 

Just one word more: I will never cease to be grateful 
for the rich blessing you have been to me, Dear, a comfort 


1 ** Good tidings of great joy which shall be éo all people.” 


MISSIONARY OUTLOOK 225 


and a strength all your years to your devoted mother. 
What a rich New Year is unfolding before you! It was so 
beautiful having you with us in our little prayer-circle— 
just one more of the loving touches God has put to these 
last days. 


CHAPTER XIV 


STEWARDSHIP 


1912. Ait. 24 


*‘ Who is there to-night who can always see the shadow of the Cross 
falling upon his banking account ? Who is there who has the mark 
of the nails and the print of the spear in his plans and life, his love 
and devotion and daily program of intercession? Who is there 
who has heard the word of Jesus and is quietly, obediently, every 
day, as He has told you and me, taking up his cross to follow Him ?”’ 

Rev. SAMUEL M. Zwemer, D.D. 


Two remarkable wills were probated within a few 
days of each other in the spring that followed 
Borden’s sailing for Egypt, one his own, made in 
the fall of 1912, and the other that of J. Pierpont 
Morgan, who died possessed of almost a hundred 
million dollars. Though a devout believer, who 
prefaced his will with the statement, ‘‘ I commit 
my soul into the hands of my Saviour, in full con- 
fidence that having redeemed it and washed it in 
His most precious blood, He will present it faultless 
before the throne of my Heavenly Father’’, Mr. 
Morgan at the age of seventy-five left little more 
than half as much to the work of God as William 
Borden left at twenty-five. 

Mrs. Borden and her sister, going over William’s 


cheque books recently, found that during the three 
226 


STEWARDSHIP 227 


years at Princeton Seminary he had given away 
about seventy thousand dollars to Christian work, 
as far as the stubs in hand show. This was a sur- 
prise to them, as he never referred to his giving. 

Perhaps nothing is more distinctive than the 
way in which people do kindnesses, especially in 
the matter of financial help. Easy as it may seem, 
it is one of the most difficult things to give helpfully. 
Borden’s way was characteristic. 

* Few Christians of ample means ”’, said Mr. 
Hugh Monro, “succeed in realizing such a degree 
of detachment from their possessions as to remove 
all sense of restraint in their dealings with their 
fellows of every station. Borden had learned the 
art of administering wealth on a large and generous 
scale, without a trace of self-consciousness and with 
complete self-effacement.”’ 

And his friend Campbell recalled : 


Bill always followed the injunction, ‘“‘ Let not thy left 
hand know what thy right hand doeth’’. He insisted that 
not even his initials should appear when a list of bene- 
factions was published. It almost seemed to irritate him 
if he was found out. His best friends never knew even a 
small percentage of the gifts he was making. Many 
surprising incidents would come to light if all who had been 
helped by him could be induced to tell their stories. Bill’s 
cheque-books show how little he spent for himself and how 
much he was doing for others. 


Standing in the doorway of their Princeton home, 
Borden’s love of cars was awakened one day as a 
fine automobile flashed by. 

*“ Gee!” he exclaimed, ‘‘ Wouldn’t I like a car 
like that!” 


_ 228 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


“Why do you not get one, William?” asked 
a friend who was with him. 

‘ T cannot afford it’, was the unexpected reply. 

His money was not his own, and there were 
always ways in which it was needed for the Master. 
A Princeton class-mate wrote : 


I have been told that he felt one of his temptations was 
to ownacar. He never purchased one, because he thought 
that for him it would be an unjustifiable luxury, I 
remember one Saturday afternoon in New York going with 
him to the automobile show in a hall at Madison Square 
Garden. He knew all the various makes, and pointed out 
to me the advantages of the different cars. But we left 
the hall to take dinner at the Y.M.C.A. and spend the 
evening down at the Katherine Slip and Doyer Street 
Missions. And he had filled his pockets and mine with 
copies of St. John’s Gospel to use in personal work.' 


And Mrs. Borden said : 


I think William’s real reason for the stand he took about 
a car was that he deprecated the luxury seen in the lives of 
so many Christians. He did not feel justified in using his 
money, which he held distinctly as a stewardship, for any 
such purpose. All the time we were in Princeton I think 
he was longing to get away into simpler living. 


The impression that his giving made upon his 
own home-church is interesting. Sometimes even 
generous gifts produce a strained relationship in 
church-life, but there is nothing of that sort in the 
picture his Chicago friends put before us : 


. Though separated from us a good deal during the last 
ten years, Borden never lost his heart-interest in the work 
of the Lord in this place. His frequent letters and visits 
and his constant gifts bore witness to that... . 


1 Rev. L. C. M. Smythe of Charleston, S.C., now a missionary in Japan. 


STEWARDSHIP 229 


He inaugurated and supported in this church the largest 
Daily Vacation Bible School in Chicago, which brought more 
street children into our Sunday School and services than 
any other movement we are undertaking. 

He was the largest giver to our Fresh Air Work, to our 
Sunday School and to the general expenses of the church 
during the last years of his life, and he left to this church 
one hundred thousand dollars, realizing the wonderful 
opportunity it has as a down-town church to “ preach the 
gospel to every creature ” within the reach of its influence, 
in this teeming city of thirty different nationalities. .. . 

He believed that this church could do a great foreign 
missionary work here at home . . . but he did not stop 
at that. During his lifetime he made use of his money in a 
world-wide ministry, yet so quietly that his left hand knew 
not what his right hand did. After his departure, how- 
ever, his statesmanlike grasp of the problem of the 
evangelization of the world in this generation became 
apparent, for he bequeathed practically the whole of his 
inheritance, about one million dollars, in four nearly equal 
parts, all for the purpose of preaching Christ—one-fourth 
to be used in Chicago, another quarter in other parts of the 
home-land, the third portion in China, and the remainder 
in other foreign countries. .. . ? 

This was Borden: quiet but powerful; saying little 
but doing much; rich but self-denying ; humble in spirit 
but imperial in purpose; a general in organization, but 
always willing to be a private in service. He declined our 
urgent invitation to preach in the Moody Church, on the 
ground that he was not capable, but he was not ashamed 
to tell of his faith in Jesus on the street corner. His heart 
went out to the uncared for, Christless millions of Kansu, 
but he did not overlook the worthy widow, orphan and 
cripple in the back streets of Chicago, as some of us well 
knew. He was intent upon seeking to win for Christ and 
His service the young men of our colleges and universities, 
and to this end the last months of his life in America 
were given, but that did not prevent his thinking of, 
praying for and giving to the care of little children and 
the aged. 


230 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


His provision for the China Inland Mission mani- 
fested the same breadth of mind and tenderness of 
spirit. 

“I do not like to speak of his money ”’, Dr. 
Henry W. Frost said in this connection. ‘‘ We 
seldom thought of it while he was with us. But I 
refer to his bequest to the mission that I may 
mention his desire with regard to a portion of it. 
He asked that a hundred thousand dollars might 
be invested in order that the interest upon it should 
be used for aged and infirm missionaries. A young 
man of twenty-four thinking of and providing for 
old and infirm missionaries! Could anything be 
more far-reaching in thought and sympathy ? ” 

When the provisions of the will were made public, 
the Rev. E. Y. Woolley, acting pastor of the Moody 
Church, wrote to Mrs. Borden : 

‘’ What a remarkable document it is! The Chi- 
cago Tribune has the best report of it, which no 
doubt you have seen. Its testimony to Jesus Christ 
as Lord and Saviour will do untold good. And 
what noble bequests! The whole world will be 
touched for Christ by your son’s life and act. . . . 

Mr. Borden’s magnificent gift to the work of 
the Lord in and through the Moody Church has 
inspired our people to do and dare greater things 
for His glory. One very poor and very sick old 
lady, who has been praying and giving for a new 
church for several years, was just transported with 
praise to God when she heard of this.” 

The Rev. Charles R. Erdman, D.D., of Princeton 
Seminary, in his published sketch of Borden’s life, 





STEWARDSHIP 231 


An Ideal Missionary Volunteer, made the following 
statement with regard to his will : 


It is an extraordinary document, not only in view of 
the actual bequests which it provides, but also because of 
the spirit it manifests of loyalty to Christ and devotion to 
the work of world evangelization. It is in itself a missionary 
appeal. Its largest provision is for the China Inland 
Mission, in connection with which the donor had expected 
to serve and on whose Council he held a place. For the 
work of this mission he bequeathed the sum of $250,000 ; 
and with unique sympathy and thoughtfulness for one so 
young, this was added: “I suggest that $100,000 of this 
amount be invested, and the income thereof be used for the 
support and maintenance of missionaries and other workers 
connected with said Mission who through age or infirmity have 
become incapacitated for active service in the mission field 
or at home, and who are in need of and deserving of aid.” 

The sum of $100,000 was left to the National Bible 
Institute of New York; and like amounts to the Moody 
Bible Institute of Chicago, and to the Chicago Avenue 
Church ; $50,000 each was given to Princeton Theological 
Seminary, to the Board of Foreign Missions of the Presby- 
terian Church, U.S.A., to the Board of Foreign Missions of 
the Presbyterian Church, U.S. (South), to the Board of 
Foreign Missions of the United Presbyterian Church, and to 
the Chicago Hebrew Mission; and $25,000 each to the Nile 
Mission Press, to the American Bible Society, to the Chicago 
Tract Society, and to the Africa Inland Mission. Of the 
remaining estate the China Inland Mission and the three 
Presbyterian Boards were made the residuary legatees. . . . 

Another provision suggests that William Borden had a 
definite and adequate missionary message. Nothing troubled 
him more than to see men of culture, ability and devotion 
planning to undertake missionary work while they were 
evidently ignorant of the great essential truths of the 
gospel. He therefore requested that his money should be 
used in the support of only such men as held absolutely to — 
the deity of Christ and His vicarious atoning death for 
sinners. ‘‘ It is further my desire”, so runs the will, “ that 


232 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


the said bequests hereinbefore made be used and disposed 
of in accordance with the following recommendations by 
me, to wit: That each of said bequests be used for and in 
connection with missionaries and teachers who are sound 
in the faith, believing in such fundamentals as the doctrine 
of the divine inspiration and authority of the Scriptures, 
the doctrine of the Trinity, including the deity of Jesus 
Christ, and in the doctrine of the atonement through the 
substitutionary death of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 


So statesmanlike a leader as Dr. John R. Mott 
was profoundly impressed with the quality of this 
young man’s living and giving, as may be seen from 
the following letter to his mother : 


My association with William has given me a keen 
appreciation of the value of the service which he accom- 
plished for Christ and His kingdom by his life, by his 
witness, by his gifts, and by his activities. It has been on 
my mind for some time to write you to express my personal 
conviction as to the marked contribution which he made to 
his generation within the sphere of his influence. He 
exerted a great influence in the direction of the conservation 
and expansion of the spiritual life of our colleges. This 
he did through his constant and helpful work in the 
Christian Association and Volunteer Movement during his 
student days, as well as in his many personal relationships. 

The sincere solicitude he manifested that the central 
points of our Christian faith might be preserved in purity 
and reality was one of the strong personal factors of which 
we have not had too many in resisting the movements and 
influences tending to disintegrate faith, The manner in 
which he sought to bring to bear the vital and superhuman 
power of Christianity upon the needs and problems of 
individuals and of society both during his college and 
seminary days was simply splendid. From the time I 
became acquainted with him as an undergraduate until I 
last saw him, his dominant ambition seemed to be the 
world-wide spread of the kingdom of Christ. He did as 
much as any young man whom I knew to help realize the 





STEWARDSHIP 233 


watchword of the Volunteer Movement—‘‘ The Evangeliza- 
tion of the World in this Generation.” 

There is another aspect of his life and work which 
impressed me very deeply, and that was his attitude and 
practice with reference to money. I have read many 
comments in religious periodicals of different countries 
regarding the disposition which he made of his estate in his 
will. Without doubt he set an example to the rapidly 
multiplying number of wealthy young men and women ; 
but to my mind even more instructive than his final will was 
his life-habit as a young man with reference to his money. 
This to my mind was truly remarkable. As you know, ] 
was brought into the most intimate relations with him on 
this side of his life, in connection with different Christian 
enterprises which he so generously helped to promote. 

I would like to mention a few things which characterized 
his giving. It manifested foresight and rare discernment. 
I have seldom met a person who showed such penetration 
of mind in estimating the worthiness of causes, in seizing 
opportunity at the flood and in anticipating results. His 
conscientiousness in the use of his money was always 
apparent. His chief concern seemed to be that of not 
making simply a good use of the money but the very best 
use of it. One was conscious of the fact that he regarded 
himself as a trustee and in no sense a proprietor. 

His thoroughness in investigating objects was nothing 
less than remarkable. I have known a great many wise 
donors, but only one or two others who employed as 
thorough processes in seeking to estimate the worthiness 
of causes and the wisest ways of helping. He had evidently 
chosen a few clear guiding principles to help him determine 
his duty as he faced opportunity to relate his gifts to the 
plans of the Kingdom. These principles were such as led 
him to devote his money to promoting the most vital 
spiritual processes. 

These traits, together with his prayerfulness in deter- 
mining what to do with his money and in following his gifts, 
and above all his wonderful generosity, mark him out as a 
model to the young men of his generation to whom God 
may have entrusted financial power. 





+ ’ i 
meh pe 





Gs ye oe wi mutt | ‘vm site ne seastumabadiele 
GAA Seu ie ae eas 0S casio) etal on hina 
¥ Bok iy eam Biba saat Yin boeqeac trode sat 
i bar ahistitia, wi} -2ete: taht Dinodlqnab! vows We 
Bee Aenea beds, bavtenbl beberle 2 enh) eRRIOEDT aR 
: (Pio ti oatih Ao aigadtou macys MU ODUM MT 
co aes ee ae hed ty savant: at dainty vies pre 
Sh Mba onl ed alepeanedt cin 496) alee bh geodae JAE 
PO Ie joa Ry PLU yiewraly: ‘ya ahbawarey Sage “sola v4 orf a 
he ey Lian rte aid Ait Sek cing pares ove bein, a if 
¥ atin ras ‘of ( t's pAepsye 14, ybaive te BITS wey # eh iy tite Pie? # 
bed: oy py ire av uth ane Filia ‘on 
ame trom ae mia Ua gdaa dint, J gares ‘pal sapcti § Gly 
Enspi Sel) J cot ai Ue pphloogiod sé otihehk te pris 
aap slo MGtG ts * is nega 4 Tesserk onog Ga eal, datetiet una qt he 
-baatratacajacia Angatney lu WV vorteem ut wtf bbe 
a, VAwons trated) stay i rie level Stateot ipsa 4 ert 2 
Riau richie: (Sau Toes tit bi a Wy deer ea doen sae shea ory , 
Bi uehhy. abana, TAG eae epee iy auidibohls art Werid este Shy ates 5 ti ke 
RW en Aide divans. yoideaisitie onl bap bonkers Nah ae 
f Ae nk: Vou aNd. Ok wheeled st aby #4 ‘ 
- ‘wa dealt. wul-vand, sesnitai eran Yio ifoe ae , 
Es ae Wi er kD tal ind anupeacer oo EW Renlenogy: aise MG in meres 
ie lair wih siuty do END ey “ashe ally Ve. thes igi ie 
| ‘aodubyqarg aioehoe ‘nin atbae hia ti rf fish) 
ANU 2 Bebe be nos ‘mh! cefliscal Deg) Mit HUE Hee Dele atom 
Beli: SUAS Tete i Qe on” a antiod ly. sf A nestAyie 
Rat realy sgt Si riven PU eit ites (asa nila, nis | 
} " Oia oh acho luted vad hn Vy rj wis ong nie {e' 
oe cb aabaa yeh Ly a eh Ley ew Painter hf hinge ar 
Soweto tei sh er bachy Ryton rg kM Thee 
bead de py bige.3?t fet wis aching lib eet ephiaasySatvitg  Gatad ‘bak “ba 
fied! a ate anare @rahee ‘eonbinty wens ty , sero ara: win 
Loan Ae nk Shtier.” eat AST ROenap Nay: OF WOE ani caday 





















































, « 
petra 


1 en 





Re by aif iehavhalen igi i vial da Rr enran istdtsenys 
yoy ae ny ia it, a: meh navi ae Fane a POTN Sy, Dart sisi) ceed Miah i aa 
Silex, diay jer Pebewtas hoolhyy focus abt fay sa i 

ve ra corey ad era shied rm wait . 


nA . ad. % 
! Wistar seas es hd Ney ddl a nan 





= 
~ < . 


PART IV 
AFTERWARDS 


Oh, let me live as if Christ died 
But yestertide— 
And I had seen and touched His pierced side : 


I would rejoice as one who knows 
How soon he rose, 
To tread beneath His feet our unseen foes. 


And I would work as if heaven bright 
Were now in sight ! 
What if to-morrow bring that great delight ! 


Selected. 


— — 
ee ee 


CHAPTER XV 
CAIRO 


1913. Ait. 25 


‘‘ Having set my hand to the plough, my resolution was peremptorily 
taken, the Lord helping me, never to look back any more, and never 
to make a half-hearted work of it. Having chosen missionary work 
in India, I gave myself wholly up to it in the determination of my 
own mind. I united or wedded myself to it in a covenant the ties of 
which should be severed only by death.” 

Rev. ALEXANDER Durr, D.D. 


Catro with its brilliant sunshine and lure of colour 
and all its dust and heat was not new to Borden. 
He had visited it with Rev. Walter Erdman eight 
years previously, when they had travelled up the 
Nile to Assouan, seven hundred miles toward the 
heart of the dark continent. The colossal ruins of 
Karnak, the rock-hewn tombs of the kings, the 
temples of Thebes and Phile, the statues of Memnon 
and other remains of the ancient world stirred them 
profoundly. From Assouan William had written : 


Upper Egypt completely fulfils my expectations—the 
Nile itself, the contrast of the fresh green fields with the 
quivering sand beyond, the groves of date palms, villages of 
flat-roofed houses, camels with their dusky riders crossing 
the desert which stretches away as far as eye can see. It 
really is delightful. 

Our first donkey-ride in Egypt took us through the town 


and out into the desert to the Bishareen encampment. 
237 


238 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


These people are Soudanese, I believe, and very different 
from any others we have seen. They wear their hair 
hanging in loose gimlet-curls, about eight inches long. 
They are quite black and have clear-cut features, at least 
those we have seen have. 

There really is an awful mess of Orientals here in 
Egypt, very difficult to sort out! There are Egyptians 
and Turks as white as any of us, who wear the red fez, the 
only way I have of knowing them to be natives. Then there 
are people of various shades of blackness who wear the fez 
also. Besides these there are innumerable Arabs, Soudanese 
and other races. 


But now it was as-a missionary, not a traveller, 
that Borden was in Cairo—that great city that Dr. 
Maltbie Babcock wrote of as ‘“‘a huge melange, an 
ecumenical potpourri, a huddle of the ends of the 
earth and the first and last of civilizations ”’. 

It was not at Shepheard’s Hotel, where he 
had stayed before, but at the Y.M.C.A. that he 
took up his quarters. Met at the railway station 
by Dr: Zwemer, he was soon introduced to the very 
heart of things in the missionary community. He 
found himself unexpectedly in touch with China as 
well, for a missionary from Hongkong had dis- 
covered a Chinese student in El Azhar university, 
of whom he spoke to Borden on the day of his 
arrival. The lonely student, it appeared, was from 
the very province in which William was hoping to 
labour (Kansu), and was so cut off from his own 
country that he did not even know of the fall of the 
Manchu dynasty or the establishment of the new 
republic. Borden was eager to meet him, and 
almost the first entry in his journal was : 


CAIRO 239 


January 7, 1913. 


Went to El Azhar with Mr. Gairdner. Met the only 
Chinese student there—the first Chinese Moslem I have 
ever seen, so far as I know. 


What a world of interest that El Azhar proved 
to be, with its white-turbaned students, nine or ten 
thousand of them, from many lands, including 
Russia, Persia, North and Central Africa, Abyssinia, 
India, Arabia, and a couple of hundred professors 
(Sheikhs) every one of whom had spent at least twelve 
years studying in the university itself! Old as it 
was, dating from the tenth century, and entrenched 
in Moslem bigotry and pride, it was not unaffected 
by the Christian influences at work around it. Only 
a few months before Borden’s coming an article had 
appeared in a religious paper in which one of its 
professors had written : 


Do not say that it is impossible to convert an Azhar 
Sheikh and bring him to Christ, for with God all things are 
possible. Was I not a fanatical sheikh in El Azhar, and was 
I not by God’s grace converted ? To-day I pray that my 
fellow-sheikhs may be won even as I was. 


Numbers of students were attending the Monday 
evening meetings for Moslems that winter, at which 
Michael Mansour was speaking in great power. 
‘‘ Mighty in the Scriptures and in the Koran as well”, 
he was attracting great crowds. A foreign mis- 
sionary was always in the chair, to keep order, and 
Borden was soon in his element distributing Arabic 
Scriptures and tracts. | 

From the Y.M.C.A. headquarters it was no great - 


240 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


distance to the American Mission where Dr. Zwemer 
lived, and where these Monday evening meetings 
were held, or to the compound of the Church Mis- 
sionary Society at which a good deal of Borden’s 
time was spent. For it was there that the students 
of the new Study Centre took their courses in Arabic 
with the Rev. W. H. T. Gairdner, and in Islam and 
practical work with other missionaries. Hight or 
ten were taking the complete course and were at- 
tending Dr. Zwemer’s lectures at the Y.M.C.A. and 
in the theological seminary. It was a keen, live 
circle, and one to which Borden was soon contri- 
buting a good deal. Mr. Gairdner found him “ brim 
full of energy and hope, bringing a new element into 
our midst’. And Dr. Zwemer wrote : 


I never saw a man come to Egypt with eyes more open 
to see the kingdom of God. Other men come to see the 
dead Pharaohs, to study history or join the great company 
of tourists all over the land, never once lifting their eyes to 
see the fields “‘ white unto harvest’’. Borden had not been 
in Cairo two weeks before he organized the students of the 
theological seminary to attempt a house-to-house canvass 
with Christian literature for the whole city with its eight 
hundred thousand people. 

Here was a man with the frame of an athlete, the mind 
of a scholar, the grasp of a theologian as regards God’s truth, 
and the heart of a little child, full of faith and love; a man 
who was so tender in the relations of home-life that our 
children used to nestle upon his knee as if they had known 
him for years—and he a comparative stranger. . 

Knowing that he had to learn Chinese, he came to Cairo 
to perfect himself in Arabic. Some people shrink from the 
foreign field, questioning, * Could I learn the language ? ”’ 
Here was a man who deliberately set before himself the task 
of learning not one but two of the most difficult languages 
in the world, before entering upon his life-work of declaring 


CATRO 241 


the unsearchable riches of Christ to Chinese Moham- 
medans. ... 

At Yale, at Princeton, in Cairo we see him digging deep, 
thinking deep and studying hard. . . . He did not import 
doubts to the Orient, he imported his great convictions of 
the eternal truth of God. . . . When he lived in Cairo he 
was a friend to the Coptic Christians and the Armenian 
Christians. He was a brother to the American missionaries 
and to the British missionaries. He attended the Scotch 
church and the American church, and at the last all sorts 
and conditions of Christians met together to do him honour. 


Borden’s Cairo letters are interesting in the light 
of these recollections, brief though they had to be 
on account of his studies. His eagerness to acquire 
Arabic may be judged from the fact that two weeks 
after his arrival in Cairo he was making arrange- 
ments to board in a Syrian family, so that he might 
hear it spoken as much as possible. The plan about 
which he wrote to his mother did not materialize 
until a month later. 

January 15, 19138. 


Saturday we had a very interesting session at the Study 
Centre, and in the afternoon I went out with Mr. Gairdner 
to visit old Cairo and the C.M.S. hospital. As this is well 
on the outskirts of the city we got a good ride on our wheels. 
Later we called on a Syrian family in which Mr. Gairdner 
thought I might be received as a paying guest. They hada 
surprisingly nice place, and as it was an unexpected visit 
the cleanliness and order could not have been put on for 
our benefit. They insisted upon giving us refreshments, 
which consisted of some kind of liquid in little liqueur 
glasses, quite harmless, followed by a teaspoonful of grated 
cocoanut put into our mouths by our hostess ! 

Sunday, I started my first work for Moslems by distri- 
buting khutbas, little sermons in Koranic style gotten out 
by the Nile Press. It required some courage to take the 
first plunge, with my two words of the spoken language, 

R 


242 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


“ Do you read Arabic ?” and begin offering these booklets 
on the streets. But I soon found that it went very well, 
and I have given out about fifty already. Only one or two 
have declined to take them. 

Monday night I went to my first service in Arabic. It 
was at the American Mission headquarters and most inter- 
esting. A few weeks ago, it seems, a rumour got abroad 
that Mudbuli, a Moslem saint, had come out of his tomb 
and had taken refuge in the Greek church near by—a 
pretty good exchange, considering the dilapidated state of 
the tomb. Of course, the more educated scoffed at the 
idea, but multitudes believed it, with the result that there 
was quite a riot at the time. Soon after, in a newly pub- 
lished Moslem book attacking Christianity, the author said 
that the resurrection of Christ was just like this Mudbuli 
affair, the story of alot of silly women. He called attention 
to this as a great joke! But there is a Moslem convert here, 
Michael Mansour, a former El Azhar student, who went to 
the place where the book was printed and got out five 
hundred circulars saying he would answer the above 
statement, debating it with anyone who would come. 
This was the gathering Dr. Zwemer and I attended. He 
was half expecting a riot, as the place was packed with 
Moslems. The meeting opened and closed with prayer, 
however, and Mansour spoke for nearly an hour, holding 
their attention so that there was no disturbance and only 
one or two went out. It was a great triumph, and though 
I could only understand an occasional word, I was very 
glad to be there. 

This afternoon I had a fine time, going off into the native 
bazaar with Dr. Zwemer to a book shop. It was near the 
Azhar, and we had a fine chance to get rid of all the 
khutbas we had, to students and others, and one of them 
bought a Gospel. Among the books we purchased were 
some Korans, and when these were put in the bottom of the 
carriage there were strong objections immediately and they 
had to be put up on the seat beside the driver. The outing 
was great fun, for we not only did this work but had a 
great time together. This book-shop man, by the way, is 
an enquirer who has been already a couple of times to see 


CAIRO 243 


Dr. Zwemer. Things are on the jump here, especially when 
you are with Dr. Zwemer. ; 


He had not time to write about the fascination 
of the street-life in Cairo, with all its movement 
and colour. ‘“* Old Cairo is a bazaar,” as Dr. Bab- 
cock put it, “‘ its narrow lanes overhung with cornice 
that almost touch ; with awnings of rugs, balconies, 
grated windows through which secluded eyes peep; 
booths, like mere vestibules, with no windows or 
doors, their owners sitting, Turk-fashion, smoking, 
haggling, finally demanding your ‘ last price’, and 
following you often far along the way ; with camels, 
donkeys, dogs, water-sellers with their clanging 
brass cups, vendors of everything with cries to 
match, whips cracking like torpedoes ; with Nubians, 
Abyssinians, Greeks, Copts, Arabs, veiled women 
in black silk baloons and high-heeled slippers, fel- 
lahin women with no veils but with tattooed skin 
and with babies on their backs, rug men and scarab- 
sellers, jewellers and brass-workers dragging you 
into their dens, beggars, cripples, children crying 
‘ Baksheesh ’. Oh, the streets of Cairo! The 
Mouski Bazaar no one who has seen can ever forget.”’ 

Every phase of missionary work in this cosmo- 
politan city interested Borden, and his sympathy 
and eagerness to learn were winning many friends. 
He was finding ways, too, in which he could wisely 
give financial help. At the Y.M.C.A. he was in 
touch with young men of various nationalities, 
whom he joined in sports as well as meetings. ‘‘ He 
was a splendid young man, so healthy, mentally, 


244 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


morally and spiritually,” wrote a Syrian friend 
with whom he was reading French. And _ the 
Christian Endeavour Mecting was long remembered 
at which he spoke on the topic, ‘‘ Be a Christian : 
Why not ?” 

He laid himself out to encourage the Egyptian 
Student Movement. It was a gift of his that made 
possible the obtaining of much better quarters, 
including a room set apart for Bible study. Here 
the students of different institutions could meet in 
sroups, one school-having one night, and another 
school another. 

“It is for this Bible-room that they are asking 
for a picture of Mr. Borden,” one of their missionary 
friends wrote a little later. ‘‘ They say that he 
was such a help to them, and his blessing is still with 
them in their work.” 

He was making time also for what in earlier days 
he used to call his “‘ long-distance work ’’—letters 
to people with whom he had spiritual contacts. To 
a Mr. H., for example, he wrote in March : 


I’can sympathize with you in the matter of controlling 
your thoughts, for that is a thing we all have to fight for. 
You are right in saying we may commit great sins in our 
minds, though we do not do so outwardly. This is the 
view of sin which Christ gives us in the Sermon on the 
Mount, Matthew 5 and 6. However, I believe that in this 
as in all other things we can gain the victory by faith, 
through His aid, who was “‘ tempted in all points like as we 
are, yet without sin.” .. . 

The principle on which we want to work is to crowd 
out the bad with the good. If we merely seek to put away 
evil without replacing it with active good, we may find that 
worse things come in. ° I have been helped by the suggestion 


CAIRO 245 


that when we are tempted to harbour evil thoughts we 
should at once think of Christ, or repeat some verse of 
Seripture—in this way spoiling the picture, so to speak, 
by letting in a flood of light. Our object must be to bring 
‘‘ every thought into subjection to the obedience of Christ.” 
2 Cor. 10. 5. | 

Chief among his interests at this time was the 
distribution of the booklets in Koranic style to) 
which allusion has been made already. The idea 
had come to Borden early in his stay in Cairo. 
Writing about it to friends in New York, Dr. Zwemer 
said : 

‘* How glad I am to hear of your good prayer 
meetings at the home of Mrs. Borden. Her son is 
a benediction to the work here, not only at the 
Y.M.C.A. but in both the missions. He is a spiritual 
power and up-to-date in his methods. At his sug- 
gestion we are starting the distribution of khutbas all 
over Cairo, the students of the theological seminary 
working with us.” 

It was a movement with prayer power behind 
it, and before long it was taken up by others in the 
missionary community, so that within six months 
of its beginning Mr. A. T. Upson, superintendent of 
the Nile Mission Press could say : 

‘‘ There never has been a time in the history of 
mission-work at this centre when there were so 
many enquirers.”’ 

For the tract distribution led to many talks and 
much personal work. And who shall say how much 
further the results were carried, remembering that 
Cairo is the intellectual centre of the Mohammedan 
world ? 


246 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


All unconscious of the forces his earnest purpose 
would set in motion, Borden was giving every hour 
he could spare to his own share in this work. ‘The 
khutbas were brief pointed discourses, written by 
Sheikh Abdullah, a converted El Azhar man, be- 
ginning with some passage from the Koran and 
leading up to clear teaching from the Bible. Borden 
appreciated their value. His idea was that there 
should be a shop-to-shop and, if possible, house-to- 
house distribution of these tracts. In his direct 
way he went to the Seminary students and put it 


before them. 

‘“‘T will pay for the khutbas, if you fellows will 
help me carry them.”’ 

And help they did right. heartily, seeking to 
reach out with the gospel all through that great city 
of Cairo. To his mother Borden wrote : 


February 5, 1918. 


Yesterday, we had a report of our khutba distribution 
and found that all had gone off without excitement, save in 
the case of Dr. Zwemer and the students who had accom- 
panied him to a fanatical part of the city. With them, too, 
all went well for a time, till they met an old man who 
wanted to know by whom the tracts had been written, and 
who got quite excited when he learned that it was a former 
El Azhar student who had become a Christian. Dr. 
Zwemer, seeing that there was going to be trouble, tried 
to get the students away and to disperse the crowd by going 
into a shop. But the crowd waited outside, and there was 
no way of escape. Finally, the old man continuing his 
attack, they were all marched off to the police station. 

The officer looked at the khutbas and listened to the 
charge. ‘“‘ Why,” he said, “this is nothing but Chris- 
tianity ! You can read about this any day.” And he let 
them go. 


CAIRO 247 


The result was that the wind was quite taken out of 
the old man’s sails, and they were able to distribute a lot 
of khutbas right in the police headquarters, which would 
have been inaccessible to them otherwise. They invited 
the people to come to the Monday night meeting for 
Moslems, and the man who made the trouble was there 
all right last Monday night. Sorry I missed the excite- 
ment! But I have another section of the city which is less 
liable to afford interest of this kind. 

February 12, 1918. 

Dr. Zwemer has just started a new thing—putting 
Christian notices into the daily papers, inviting inquiry 
by letter or in person. He has already received several 
answers. ; 

My Arabic is going rather slowly just at present. I 
seem to have struck a snag. It certainly is difficult ! 
However, I hope to overcome by the help of God and with 
due perseverance. . . . Dr. Zwemer preached a fine sermon 
at the American Mission, Sunday night. Afterwards we 
met an American girl, a graduate of Holyoke, whom we 
had both known in Student Volunteer days. She had 
just arrived with a party. It was nice to see someone like 
that. 

February 17, 1913. 

I have bought a ‘“‘ tarboush”’, as they call the red fez 
here, to wear when we go to investigate Islam in some form 
or other, that I may not be so liable to be the one investi- 
gated. It is really remarkable how effective such a slight 
change proves as a disguise. A great many of the natives 
wear European dress, you see, save for just this hat. So 
when we put it on they do not know whether we are 
‘“‘ Christians ’’ or not, and can be quite sure that we are not 
tourists. All of which is valuable. 

I bought mine as we were going to a zikr the other night 
with Mr. Swan of the Egypt General Mission, but it rained 
so that we called it off. . . . I have not yet explained what 
a zikr is: briefly, a repetition of the Moslem creed by 
Dervishes, until they are exhausted. To-morrow is the 
Prophet’s birthday, so we expect to see plenty of them, as 
they go on all night. 


248 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


We are still distributing khutbas, and it is going all right. 
Dr. Zwemer seems to think that as they are read more and 
more by Moslems all over the city there may be some kind 
of an outburst that would hinder our distributing them 
freely. We shall soon have the Sermon on the Mount, 
however, ready for distribution in the same form, and that 
no one can take exception to. 


March 1, 1918. 


Thursday night we had an interesting trip with Mr. 
Swan into the back streets of Cairo. The zikr we were 
going to see had been changed, we found, to another night, 
but just before reaching the place we came into a cemetery 
and heard the chanting of another zikr coming from a little 
old house off to one side. The star-lit night, the graves 
and their surroundings, all made a wonderful setting for 
the weird intonation we could hear so distinctly, even at a 
distance. 

Mr. Swan talked with the men at the place we went to, 
telling them of Him who is the Way. The same Arabic word 
is used in the Bible for ‘‘ way ” as these Dervishes apply to 
themselves, in the sense of sect or order. It was really 
quite remarkable how they listened and seemed to take it 
all in. At one place, while I was waiting for the others, 
I was asked by a woman to read an Arabic letter for her. 
I was wearing the fez, of course. And later in the evening 
when we met a drunken Moslem who was rather talkative, 
he addressed me as ‘*‘ Mahmoud Effendi ’”—Mahmoud being 
a Moslem name! 


Not only the Egyptian woman took him for a 
native. An American gentleman and _ his family 
who visited Cairo about this time had a similar 
experience. They put up at Shepheard’s, and in 
the evening went out to see if they could find any 
preaching going on. 

“ Only a few steps from the hotel’, wrote Mr. 
J. S. Kimber, “‘ we found one of the mission halls. 


CAIRO 249 


Near the door we saw a man who, though he was 
wearing a fez, we thought might understand English. 
While I was asking him one or two questions, my 
eldest son came up and said : 

‘““¢T think I must have met you at Princeton. 
Are you not Mr. Borden ? ’ 

‘‘To my surprise the stranger said he was. He 
then gave us all the information we needed, and 
volunteered to guide us amid the tremendous scenes 
of the celebration of Mahomet’s birthday. 

‘Sometime later, we had been to hear Dr. 
Zwemer preach and had returned to the hotel, when 
I saw our friend in the lobby talking with a lady 
from the States, a young graduate from Mount 
Holyoke. I asked my son whether it would not be 
worth while for him to wait until the conversation 
was finished, and then to invite Mr. Borden to take 
a late dinner with us. After remonstrating a little 
about not being suitably dressed, or something of 
that sort, he consented. The dinner was pretty 
well under way when he joined us at table. He 
took his seat smilingly, and at once bowed his head 
in a reverent and silent ‘ blessing’. It was a beauti- 
ful sight, and one, as we remarked, not often seen at 
Shepheard’s.”’ 

By this time Borden was living in the family to 
whom he had paid a surprise visit with Mr. Gairdner. 
He had moved from the Y.M.C.A. to this Syrian 
home in the Shubra quarter, glad to be entirely 
among Arabic-speaking people. Of the kindness of 
the Hassoons and the comfort of his surroundings 
he wrote to his mother : 


“e cacreneeienathanaaencinate tur ae REY TOT 


250 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


March 1, 1918. 


While we do use a good deal of English, I hear Arabic 
spoken all around me, and am given lessons by various 
members of the family, at meals and any other time I wish. 
The flat is on the third floor of a house near the station, 
right by the tracks, but I do not mind that. I have a room 
facing north looking over other, lower houses, so that I 
get quite a view. My room is rather small for what I have 
in it, but as I have the use of the dining-room and library 
as well, for study and writing, it does not much matter. 

The family consist of Mr. and Mrs. Hassoon, his sister, 
who goes by the name of Sitt (Miss) Paulina, and a niece, 
Sitt Negla. They are all very nice and most solicitous in 
trying to stuff me at every meal, claiming that I do not like 
the food unless I eat a great deal! It is really very good, 
and if I do not eat more it is simply because I have had 
enough. I have forgotten to mention the two little kiddies, 
Hilda and Vera. Vera, the younger, has great big brown 
eyes, and is really very cute. ... 

You ask if I am getting proper food, and I can honestly 
say that Iam. Some of the dishes are strange, and one or 
two not much to my liking, but in the main they are 
excellent. Some things which at home are luxuries are in 
common use here, artichokes for instance, which we often 
have, cooked in the most delicious manner. Then we have 
a good deal of rice, which you know I like. 


It was a time of a good deal of excitement in 
the city, on account of the Prophet’s birthday and 
subsequent festivities. The Dervish dances were 
in full swing, attracting great crowds day and night. 
For Cairo, as Borden was learning, is the centre of 
the secret organization known as the Dervishes, 
with its thirty-two great mystic orders, “‘ the very 
warp and woof of the Mohammedan religion ”’. 
While giving most of his time to the language, which 
he wrote was “no afternoon-tea party ”’, Borden 


CATRO 251 


was making a study of this strange development in 
the life of the people round him. The day he moved 
to the Hassoons he had “‘ put in some hard licks at 
Arabic”, as he wrote in his journal, had called on 
Mr. J. Pierpont Morgan at Shepheard’s Hotel with 
Dr. Zwemer, and was writing to his mother at night 
describing some of their experiences. 


Feb. 20, 19138. 


I mentioned in a recent letter that we were going to 
see some zikrs at the celebration of the Prophet’s birthday. 
This we did on Monday night, and it certainly was interest- 
ing, though I fear I shall not be able to describe it at all 
adequately. A large piece of level ground had been taken 
and tents erected in a great square, an entrance being left at 
oneside. Each of the tents was assigned to a Dervish order, 
or some department of the Government. The tents them- 
selves were very attractive, made of Oriental tapestries in 
rich red hues, and lighted with glass chandeliers, each of 
which had a dozen or more big candles. The effect was 
very brilliant. The floor in the centre of each tent was 
occupied by the Dervishes, who stood or sat in a circle, 
or if there were many of them in two long rows facing one 
another. 

They all repeat more or less the same things—the name 
of Allah, the Moslem Creed, the opening sura of the Koran, 
or the ninety-nine beautiful names of God—but the accom- 
panying motions differ. Some sit and move their heads, 
first to one side, then to the other and down on the chest, 
swaying their bodies at the same time, back and forth. 
Others stand, bending from the waist in rhythmic motions. 
This was what the Merganiyeh Order were doing as they 
repeated : 

‘La illaha il Allah, 
Muhammed raisul Allah”. 


At first they would bend slowly, then gradually increase the 
pace till they were all going full speed, the leader keeping 
time by clapping his hands or coming in with a solo refrain 


252 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


in the marvellous way of intoning these fellows have. One 
could not watch them without feeling the grip of the thing, 
although knowing it was nothing but a deliberate attempt 
to induce a state of ecstasy or auto-hypnosis. The Govern- 
ment has put a stop to many of the worst excesses, so that 
now these big functions are comparatively tame, and they 
seldom go to the former extremes. 

One man Mr. Swan pointed out to us is known as “ the 
Protestant Dervish”. He preached repentance from sin, 
very much like a Protestant minister, though, of course, 
without any mention of Christ as the atonement and the 
One who delivers from the power of sin. He had quite an 
audience, which he managed much as an evangelist would 
at home—getting responses from them and letting them ask 
questions, first of all telling them good stories to get them 
in a favourable humour. Dr. Zwemer calls him “ the Billy 
Sunday of Islam ”’! 

The next night, Tuesday, was the climax of the cele- 
brations. . . . The Dervishes all paraded through the city, 
chanting and dancing, each Order making a company with 
its Sheikh riding on horseback. I followed them a long way, 
and saw them as they came into the grounds at Abbasiyeh. 
It was really very picturesque. . . . In the evening there 
was an immense crowd, chiefly to see the fireworks—“ an 
invention of the evil one ” that Mohammed certainly never 
supposed would come to be connected with his birthday. 
The crowds hurrying through the streets, the brilliant lights 
and all the excitement, reminded me very much of the 
festival of Juggernaut in Madras. 


It was not only as a student, however, but as a 
missionary that Borden went ‘“ zikr-hunting” as 
he called it. His companion was often a young 
German missionary named Straub, who was with 
him at the Study Centre. The following letter has 
an interest all its own, describing as it does the last 
night of Borden’s active service. 

“ His zeal made me ashamed of myself,’ wrote 


CAIRO 253 


Mr. Straub. ‘He always had his pockets full of 
khutbas, and lost no opportunity of distributing 
them. .. . He was greatly interested in getting 
acquainted with the national life and the doings of 
the Dervishes. For this purpose we went to Mo- 
hammedan festivals where ztkrs were taking place, 
each wearing a red fez so as not to attract attention. 

“ The last time we went together was on Thurs- 
day in Passion Week (March 20). It was the 
anniversary of the saint Abul Llya 11k SUL. ort 
What crowds of people were there to be seen— 
people of all classes and ages, men and women, 
people who were well and people who were sick! 
As these occasions partake of the character of 
national holidays, all sorts of amusements were 
going on. The illumination was truly fairy-like. 

‘“ Ags our chief interest was in the various 22krs, 
we were drawn to one tent from which the sound of 
chanting reached us— Allah, Allah!’ For a long 
time we stood, side by side, watching the strange 
motions of the men who were swinging forward and 
backward in strict rhythm, shouting their ‘ Allah, 
Allah’. The tempo of these motions grew quicker 
and quicker; ° Allah, Allah’ sounded hoarser and 
hoarser, until finally nothing but heavy breathing 
could be heard. Several of the Dervishes fell un- 
conscious to the ground. We noticed one man 
close beside us wrought up to the highest pitch, and 
saw foam gushing from his mouth. We, too, felt the 
excitement, and were full of pity for these poor, 
deluded people, whose way of worship was so un- 
worthy. . . . About midnight we started, arm in 


254 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


arm, for home, and had scarcely seated ourselves 
in the trolley when Mr. Borden took his remaining 
khutbas and handed them to those nearest to him.” 
His earnestness of spirit had been not a little 
deepened by a startling occurrence of which he 
wrote to his friend, Dr. Inglis Frost, in March : 


An event here in Cairo has saddened us all and made 
me realize afresh the heroism of the doctor in his every-day 
work, I refer to the sudden death of Dr. Payne of the 
Church Missionary Society, a man beloved by hundreds and 
filled with the Spirit of Christ. I only met him twice, soon 
after my arrival, and the next thing I knew he was dead. 

I wish I could give you the full medical particulars, as 
you would be interested. As far as I could ascertain he 
was attending a patient suffering from spinal meningitis. 
The patient coughed in his face, and infection followed 
apparently. This took place on a Sunday, and the follow- 
ing Wednesday, about 5 a.m., he passed to the home above. 

His funeral, attended as it was by a great crowd of 
natives and Europeans, was a most eloquent testimony to 
his loving faithfulness in serving his Master. 


As they were leaving the cemetery Borden said 
to a companion: ‘‘ Now we must work all the 
harder, for the time is short.”’ 

This made him the more appreciate his oppor- 
tunities for learning the spoken language and coming 
into touch with the life of the people in the home 
of his Syrian friends. From a letter written by Mr. 
Gamil B. Hassoon, we may almost see him with 
their eyes : 


It is beyond power to describe his great zeal and diligence 
in studying the difficult Arabic language. But though he 
was so absorbed, so fond, so overwhelmed with his studies, 
he did not make Arabic his only aim. He looked to what 
was higher and nobler, and appointed a large portion of 


CAIRO 255 


his time for reading the sacred Scriptures. His Bibles, and 
he had many of them, were all visited by his eyes. Many 
were the remarks on their margins made in his hand-writing, 
and the texts underlined, which showed that he had chosen 
them and probably put them into memory. His reading 
the Scriptures was not in the order of a daily duty. He 
read them because he loved them. 

His life and deeds agreed to what he read. He loved 
everybody ; and as arule when you find one who loves like 
that you may be sure of his love to God. . . . In a conver- 
sation I had with him I found that he loved the Y.M.C.A. 
with a wonderful love; and when our talk turned on the 
Arabic branch, his love to this seemed not less than to the 
other. I knew from him that he wanted to strengthen the 
Arabic branch by all the power he could, financially, morally 
and mentally, so that it might attain a level with the 
greatest European associations, and surpass them if possible. 
Many times he expressed to me his pleasure in the progress 
this branch had taken in the short time since it was 
organized, despite all obstacles. 

His love to Orient and Orientals was a profound, true 
love. He was very pleased with many of our noble habits 
which he had not experienced before. He was very kindly 
sociable in our society, and in a few days, not exceeding 
the number of the fingers of one hand, he became one of us— 
Orientalist, with the full meaning of the word. He loved 
to communicate and mix up himself with us and we with 
him, preferring to change his long-accustomed habits and 
acquire our ways, so that he might prepare himself with 
what would agree with the taste of Orientals among whom 
he hoped to live. . . . The kindness and sociability God 
endowed him with were very great. 

He denied himself, and had a special motto written on a 
paper in his pocket: “‘ My Lord, enable me to conquer my 
will and overcome my desires.”” And he had another motto: 
‘* Not my will but Thine be done.” .. . 

What impressed me most was his strong faith. He did 
not think that there was anything impossible to do in the 
service of the Lord. In the books he and I read, we found 
that it is nearly impossible to enter into Tibet or Afghani- 


256 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


stan, to bring the gospel to the Mohammedans there. But 
that fact was not to shake his faith. And he went further, 
believing that it is most possible that the gospel shall in a 
few years be preached in Mecca, the centre of Islam itself. 
He loved to be where the fight is hottest. . . . The un- 
occupied fields of the Moslem world were his target, and 
all the time he was preparing himself for the evangelization 
of such fields. . 

He was very fond of Mohammedans. Once he came 
home with a very pleased face. 

‘* What is it makes you look so happy?” I asked. 

He had met, he said, two Azhar Sheikhs, and stopped 
them by the way. They spoke to him in Arabic, something 
he could not understand. But he did all he could, and led 
them a long distance to Dr. Zwemer’s house. Showing 
them the house, he said, “‘ Koll yom gomaa ” (every Friday). 
And he spent with them fifteen minutes by the roadside, 
using the few Arabic words he knew. 

I asked him to repeat the Arabic he used, and we had 
great fun of it! But it was good enough to make those 
men understand that he wanted to gain them for Christ, 
and they parted with peace. To my full belief they went 
to Dr. Zwemer’s on Friday. . . . 

William had a winning look and an attractive spirit. 
He was meek and kind. My love to him is very great, and 
I remember every movement of his. . . . Although he was 
a rich man he denied himself the privileges of rich people, 
and lived as simply as any missionary could live. He was 
following the footsteps of Jesus. 

Once a friend said to me: ‘‘ Your guest is a millionaire.” 

‘Ido not know anything about his dollars,” I replied. 

When I came in I told Mr. Borden what I heard, but he 
did not confirm it. 

“People often mistake us”, he said, “for the rich 
Condensed Milk firm that bears the name of Borden.” 

This put me into an opinion that he was not so rich, 
and I kept on treating him as a brother, not as to please a 
millionaire. I am sure he liked it that way. He was 
perfectly at home with that poor family of mine, and we 
lived together with great peace and love. 





CHAPTER XVI 


THE FINISHED COURSE 


April 1918. Et. 25 


** Greater love hath no man than this”. . . .—JoHw 15. 18. 


Dr. ZwEMER had left for Yedda when a telephone 
call came from the Hassoon family on Good Friday, 
the twenty-first of March. It was to say that their 
guest was far from well. Mrs. Zwemer went over 
at once to the house by the railroad station, and 
found that Borden had seen the doctor already, who 
had told him to stay in bed. There was headache 
and some fever, but nothing serious apparently. 
He had been out a good deal in connection with his 
canvass of the city and with the zikrs that were 
going on, and might have contracted influenza, 
which was prevalent at the time. 

Next morning the message was that he was better, 
so that it was a surprise to hear in the afternoon 
that he had been taken to the hospital. It was 
probably heat stroke, the doctors said, but no one 
could see the patient. 

Easter Sunday came with all its gladness, but a 
shadow lay on the little missionary community, 


for Borden’s place was empty. The hospital was 
257 S 


258 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


five miles away, but after the morning service one 
of his friends went out to obtain fuller information. 

“He was told”, wrote Mrs. Zwemer, scarcely 
believing it possible, ‘‘ that Mr. Borden had cerebral 
meningitis—which stunned us all. I chased the 
doctor from place to place, and saw him personally 
that evening, but he would not give any hope, only 
that Mr. Borden was no worse, and that serum had 
been injected into the spinal cord.” 

So the blow fell, and that bright strong young 
life was suddenly challenged by suffering, if not 
death itself. Over the succeeding days a veil of 
mystery is hung—at least for those who were watch- 
ing, near and far, with stricken hearts. As day by 
day the cables carried messages of alternate hope 
and fear, life seemed to stand still for many, and a 
great volume of prayer went up to God without 
ceasing. 

One tragic element in the situation was that the 
relatives in America were unable to communicate 
with Mrs. Borden. She had already left with her 
younger daughter to join William in the Lebanon 
Mountains for the summer, sailing for Alexandria 
direct. They were not due in Gibraltar till the first 
of April, and efforts to reach them by wireless proved 
unsuccessful. Happily the older sister, who had 
just returned from India with her family, was still 
in London. Upon hearing of the illness she set out 
for Cairo at once, but it was the second of April 
before she could arrive. 

Meanwhile Mr. Gairdner was visiting the patient 
daily, and Mr. Giffen of the American Mission ob- 


a —— Sl 


THE FINISHED COURSE 259 


tained permission to see him once and again. The 

_ risk of infection was very serious, but Mrs. Zwemer 
could not keep away. Repeatedly she visited and 
prayed with him, bearing also all the burden of 
communication by letter and cable with those at 
home. 

It was there in America that consternation and 
sorrow found their fullest expression. Miss Whiting, 
Mrs. Borden’s sister, set aside everything to be in 
the Borden home in New York, answering letters 
and cables and keeping in touch with the large circle 
of enquiring friends. To her sister she wrote : 


I telephoned Mr. Frost and he came up of his own accord 
and remained until the following day at noon. He was 
most kind and could do a good deal of enquiring, writing 
notes, etc., while I had to be out. Mr. Delavan Pierson 
suggested a circle of prayer in which he and his wife would 
join; so Mr. Frost arranged this with Mr. Don O. Shelton. 

Mr. Shelton telephoned me that hardly anything else 
had been thought of for the day—all the workers of the 
Institute met with him in the morning, and the Board of 
Directors in the afternoon, and that prayer would be con- 
tinued strong and steady until William’s recovery was 
assured. 

Laura telegraphed Mrs. H. who went at once to Dr. 
A. B. Simpson, and there also daily prayer is offered. 
You, of course, are as earnestly thought of as William. .. . 
I telephoned the Erdmans and telegraphed to many others, 
trying not to leave out any one you would wish to have 


reached. Mr. Frost wrote to Mr. Crowell . . . who would 
be the one to speak to William’s friends at the Moody 
Church. . . . Charlie Campbell spent all one afternoon 


here. In many ways he made William seem so near ! 


And then, a little later : 


It has been a blessing and even a joy to be here, where 


260 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


I could come in touch with your friends and William’s, 
and to hear them speak the words of love and admiration 
and sorrow. Even the men are not ashamed to be found 
in tears. No one, no one can understand. They and we 
can only know. Dr. W. J. Erdman showed the marks of the 
struggle in his face and bearing as he said : 

“It is the strangest, most mysterious working of the 
divine providence I have ever experienced. The world had 
such need of William ! ” 


But in Cairo, in the shaded room at the Anglo- 
American hospital, who shall say that there was 
question or mystery ? Suffering there was, intense 
and prolonged, for Borden was fighting the bravest 
fight of all his life. But he was not alone. Had not 
his prayer from childhood been that the will of 
God should be done in his life? There was no 
shrinking now. All those Easter days, as he lay 
there, he could not but think of the young doctor- 
missionary whose sudden call had come just in the 
same way. Only a few weeks previously he had 
stood by that new-made grave. What if, for him- 
self too, the call had come ?_ No reserve, no retreat, 
no regrets had any place in Borden’s consecration 
to God. With Adam McCall, the young leader on 
the Congo, falling as one of the first missionary 
pioneers in that great region of Central Africa, he 
might have said : 


Thou knowest the circumstances, Lord. Do as Thou 
pleasest, I have nothing to say. Iam not dissatisfied that 
Thou are about to take me away. Why should I be? I 
gave myself, body, mind and spirit to Thee—consecrated 
my whole life and being to Thy service. And now, if it 
please Thee to take me instead of the work I would have 
done for Thee, what is that tome? Thy will be done. 


a i a le a la Pe 





THE FINISHED COURSE 261 


Glory, not only mystery, surrounds the earthly 
close of such a life. 

Among the friends who risked infection and were 
permitted to see him was his dear Syrian host, who 
wrote : 


As soon as I stepped into the room, he, in spite of his 
great suffering, gave me a wonderful smile which is printed 
on my memory. He then sat up in bed, but very soon 
had to lay himself down again. . . . I sat by his bedside 
for a short time and spoke to him with all the oriental and 
brotherly kindness I could master at that critical moment. 
I was greatly astonished that all his sufferings did not 
hinder him from showing gratitude and love. I passed my 
hand over his forehead and wiped away the drops of sweat 
that stood there, and asked God to help and cure him. He 
smiled again and held my hand in his and pressed it very 
gently but warmly, in such a manner which made me feel 
his love. He was not so very able to speak much, but his 
eyes spoke, and transmitted to my heart all that was in his 
heart and mind. And thus I left him for the last time. 


Meanwhile Mrs. Borden and her younger daughter 
were nearing Cairo. Dr. Zwemer had returned from 
Yedda, where he had been enabled to witness for 
Christ within thirty miles of Mecca itself, and while 
in quarantine at Suez had received “the terrible 
tidings of Borden’s illness”. From the second 
Sunday he was with him frequently, and even then 
there seemed hope, at times, that the patient’s 
splendid constitution would hold out. He recog- 
nized his elder sister who had come from London 
and with the nurses was doing all that love and skill 
could devise. He knew that his mother was ex- 
pected, and asked for her in semi-consciousness, 
often saying: “‘ Poor Mother! Poor Mother!” His 


262 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


work, too, was much upon his heart, for in delirium 
he talked about it constantly. 

‘ This is the fifteenth day ’’, Dr. Zwemer wrote 
early in April, “‘ and he is slightly better to-night, 
although this morning the doctor had no hope. Mrs. 
Zwemer has done heroic work, both in visiting and 
In praying, as well as keeping in touch with Mrs. 
Borden by cable. The latter will be in Brindisi 
to-night and sails for Port Said to-morrow.” 

Three days later it was still with a glimmer of 
hope that he left for Port Said to meet the steamer. 
They had hardly cast anchor before he was on board, 
at five A.M., bringing what seemed good news to 
those who had so dreaded the arrival. In the relief 
of hearing that William was still living, the beauty 
of the spring morning and the novelty of all around 
them impressed itself upon the iar members 
of the party, one of whom wrote : 


We went ashore in small boats, and everything was 
very interesting and strange. Our steamer was over-run 
with Arabs and negroes of all descriptions. The harbour 
sparkled with light and bright colours. The ride from the 
water’s edge to the railway station was also fascinating, 
with the first high palms, the veiled women and the bright 
picturesque costumes of the Arabs. 

We left by train at 8 a.m. and had a fine run to Ismailia, 
following for many miles the banks of the Suez Canal. It 
was surprising to find the canal so narrow, and that yet 
the largest ocean-steamers can pass through. . . . Almost 
at once after leaving the canal, the desert began—long 
stretches of sand with beautiful vistas, far away, where the 
sand would look bright pink. Here and there would be a 


* A young Swiss lady, Miss Ada von Fallenberg, who had been with 
Mrs. Borden for some years as companion to her younger daughter. 





~— ee 





THE FINISHED COURSE 263 


green patch, wherever water was to be found, while hard 
by the same soil was just barren wilderness. ‘ 

After a long time the Nile deposit began to apinedtrdarle 
soil, very different from the sandy stretches, and getting 
more and more black as we came into the cultivated land 
of Goshen. There, Arab life was all around us. Already 
in the desert we had seen camels wandering about, either 
alone or with Bedouin in floating garments. Now we passed 
real native villages—mud huts, people sitting around, 
children, veiled Moslem women, men loading camels, 
families riding on donkeys. . . . We had morning prayers 
and sang hymns, that one especially with the chorus : 


‘Stayed upon Jehovah, hearts are fully blest ; 
Finding as He promised, perfect peace and rest.”’ 


Afterwards this meant so much to Mrs. Borden and 
Joyce. 

At Ismailia, half-way to Cairo, a telegram was brought 
to us: ‘* William not so well.” Dr. Zwemer said it had 
been like that all the time. Having reached a certain 
satisfactory level, he would drop below that level every 
second day, improving again the next day, so that we need 
not be over-anxious... . 

We went on. It was only a few stations farther that a 
second telegram came to Dr. Zwemer, right to the car. It 
was the end. 

I cannot tell you about that next hour or so on the 
train. Dr. Zwemer was the greatest comfort—but oh, it 
was dreadful! It broke my heart to see Mrs. Borden and 
sweet little Joyce. We reached Cairo at 1 p.m. William 
had passed away at 9. a.m. I cannot believe it even yet.... 

The funeral had to be the same afternoon. His death 
was absolutely peaceful, without any struggle; he just 
simply stopped breathing. Dear, dear Mrs. Borden—what 
a sorrow, what a loss ! 


When she could write, ten days later, Mrs. Borden 
herself told all the rest there was to tell—and it was 
everything : 


264 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


I do not want you to think of us as overwhelmed, for 
wearenot. God’s loving care and mercy have been evident 
on every side ; and it has been a real joy to be in the place 
where William, in those few short weeks, became so 
honoured and loved, and was so happy |“ The missionaries 
have all been most kind and thoughtful, and Dr. and Mrs. 
Zwemer wonderful in their loving sympathy and untiring 
efforts on our behalf. Dr. Zwemer has been son and brother 
in one. He loved William and could scarcely speak of him 
with unbroken voice. Mr. Gairdner, head of the language 
school where William was studying, visited him daily 
through all his illness, though it is considered dangerous 
to go near the sufferer. The nurses they tell me were 
devoted, and so were the Arab boy-attendants, night and 
day, keeping the flies away. As yet, it is all more like a 
dream than reality. 

But I wanted to tell you just one thing that you may 
not hear from anyone else: and that is that, when we saw 
| him, it seemed as though William had been transformed 
into the very likeness of Christ, through suffering. I should 
never have known him, his beard and moustache had grown 
and the contour of his face was changed. 

We had been in doubt as to whether to go to the hospital 
| to see him, altered as he would inevitably be; but thank 
God, we did—Joyce and I with Mr. Gairdner. We were 
told not to go near the bed, but that at a distance it would 
be safe. We approached a long, low building, standing 
right on the ground, so that it seemed as though we might 
be going to the tomb itself, and the question “ Who will 
roll us away the stone?” was almost on my lips. The 
door was opened, and immediately we were in the presence 
of all that remained here of our William. 

I was so shocked at the change that I turned to beg 
Joyce not to look or to come in, but she had already done 
so, and said in the gentlest voice—afterwards, I thought, 
like the voice of an angel : 

“ But Mother, did you see how he looks like all the 
pictures of Christ ? ”’ 

I looked again, and then indeed I saw. 

One hardly dared speak of it to others, fearing it would 





THE FINISHED COURSE 265 


be thought irreverent or fanciful. But I did mention it 
to Douglas in Mr. Gairdner’s hearing, who quietly said : 

‘““ Yes, and you only stood at the threshold. If you had 
gone nearer you would have seen the resemblance more 
clearly.”’ e 

I said that, standing there, I could only think of the 
words: ‘‘ His visage was more marred than any man’s.” 

“ Yes,”? said Mr. Gairdner, ‘“‘ His visage—more marred 
than any man’s.” 

It put such a holy, wonderful touch upon it all. 

‘* Perfect through suffering.’ It was as though we had 
been permitted a glimpse into the mystery of suffering, 
human and Divine, and had seen that through it God had, 
so to speak, given the final touches to William’s life. 


“ Christ Jesus my Lord — for whom I have 
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them 
but refuse, that I may win Christ, and be found 
in Him.” 


‘And Jesus, looking upon him, loved him.” 


CHAPTER XVII 


‘* FOUND FAITHFUL ”’ 


99 


‘‘ His servants shall serve Him and they shall see His face... 
—Rev. 22. 3, 4. 


Far away in Kashmir, a Yale man, one of Borden’s 
friends, was anxiously awaiting tidings. The mail 
arrived, bringing home-letters, and was leaving 
again in a few hours. In his loneliness, Sherwood 
Day, the young missionary, wrote : 


I cannot realize it yet. Last week when your letter 
told of Bill’s illness, I knew that the crisis must be over, 
and asked that all might be well; and it has been so, I am 
sure. I feel that I want to be by myself a while and think, 
yet this must go to-night. I cannot say all I would, but 
you will understand. 

Somehow, as I read your letter, I have a sense of victory 
and power that seems to bring that ‘‘ Other Room ”’ very 
near. Bill seems nearer and more gloriously living than 
he did at Yale or Cairo. . . . I cannot put on paper what 
his change of field means to me. He is the first of my 
friends whom I really loved, to be in that Other Place, and 
it makes that place very real. In fact, except for the pain 
to Mrs. Borden and his family, I am very happy in it all— 
a happiness that hurts, but one that rejoices in the victory 
of the thing. All victory is gained through pain, but it is a 
pain that spells joy—one of those strange things in life. 

I have absolutely no feeling of a life cut short. A life 
abandoned to Christ cannot be cut short. ‘‘ Cut short” 


means not complete, interrupted, and we know that our 
266 





“FOUND FAITHFUL’’ 267 


Master does no half-way jobs. We must pray, now, that 
those to whom God wants this to appeal, may listen. I am 
sure we can feel that He wants to use it, and that He counts 
on us to help. 

I am glad for Bill! In His immediate presence—no 
longer a clouded, imperfect experience, but a wholly satis- 
fying one. What his life means to us all! I mean the life 
we knew, the one he has finished, or the part he has finished. 
Put that loyalty, that staunchness, the quality for which 
weaker men called him “narrow’’, over against the 
“modern ”’ line of things, and how Bill’s life stands out ! 
A splendid mind, a splendid body and a great soul—all 
handed over to the One who does all things well. It will 
mean more and more to me, as I try to do what my Master 
wants of me in this country, to know that Bill has finished 
his job and is just Over There. It all seems so near! . . 

I feel this is the greatest thing Bill ever meant to me— a 
sort of volunteering for another, shall we call it, ‘‘ foreign 
field ”’ ? 


Amid the flood of sorrow that flowed so deep 
and wide, this was the conviction that seemed to 
dominate all others. 

There could scarcely a greater loss befall us 
than this ’’, wrote Dr. Robert E. Speer, in the first 
shock of grief. ‘‘ William Borden was one among 
a million. There was no better among the younger 
men who have gone out from our colleges in the last 
ten years. . . . It seems impossible that all that 
strength and devotion can have been taken away 
from the work of the Church down here. Evidently 
there are missionary undertakings of even greater 
importance elsewhere.”’ 

And to Mrs. Borden : 

“You do not need to be told anything of your 
son’s noble qualities of character, his simply rock- 


268 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


like faith, his loyalty that knew no limit, his re- 
markable abilities and above al! the unreserved 
devotion to his Master. It is not possible to under- 
stand the providence that has taken him, except on 
the supposition that God has more important mis- 
sionary work to be done elsewhere than it is possible 
for men to do here on earth, and that He needed 
your son in the ministry of those who serve Him 
day and night, and who look upon His face as they 
do service.”’ 

In Cairo also this note was struck of triumphant 
faith. It was so manifest in Mrs. Borden’s life that 
the Syrian friend whose home seemed so empty 
could write of her help in their grief ! 

** I shall not forget that smiling, loving face of 
yours as long as I live. You were a great comfort ° 
to us, and we thank God for your coming to Cairo 
in the time of our trial.” 

From the hospital, the nurse who had been in 
charge wrote of “‘ the memory of a brave man who 
had faced illness with fortitude and patience, and 
never grumbled or complained, and a brave mother 
who did not make other people suffer because she 
was heart-broken ”’. 

"The funeral was very informal’’, a_ friend 
who was with Mrs. Borden could write. ‘‘ The 
Anglo-American hospital is beautifully located on 
the island of Gezira, in the midst of green meadows, 
palms and roses. From there we went to the 
American cemetery. How strange it was to have 
Arabs doing everything! A great many friends 
and missionaries were present, the Syrian gentleman, 


HIS LA 





T RESTING-PLACE. 





To face page 269. 


— 


“FOUND FAITHFUL” 269 


too, in whose family William had lived. They are 
lovely people, simply devoted to William. Mrs. 
Zwemer says that the conditions in their home were 
perfectly all right, and that there was no risk to 
health in being there. The food was good, and 
William was in no way tired or run-down when he 
contracted the disease. 

‘Mr. Gairdner read the service and the Scrip- 
tures. Dear old Dr. Watson prayed, and so did 
Dr. Giffen and Dr. Zwemer. We sang ‘ Face to 
face with Christ, my Saviour’. I shall never forget 
it as long as I live. We stayed to the very last. 
The sun was going down, and the glow in the west 
was wonderful. They planted flowers on the grave, 
and it looked very beautiful.” 

A missionary who was present added : 


As we sang hymns during the service the Mohammedan 
grave-diggers, standing a little way back, looked astonished, 
for 1t was all in such sharp contrast with the hideous and 
meaningless wailing which takes place at a Moslem funeral. 
Still greater was their astonishment as they watched the 
little company of native Christians weeping over the grave 
of a foreigner—one they had learned to love as a brother. 
Never shall I forget the feeling that came to us with our 
closing hymn : 


“Sing it softly through the gloom, 
While the heart for mercy craves ; 
Sing in triumph o’er the tomb— 
Jesus saves, Jesus saves !”’ 


Our very souls were lifted out of their mourning into a 
glad and glorious triumph, and we could indeed say: “‘ O 
death, where is thy sting ; O grave, where is thy victory ? ” 


Even the rude, varnished coffin could bring no 


270 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


pang to the mother’s heart, different as it was from 
the casket that would have been provided at home. 
As she saw it lowered into the grave, containing 
all that was mortal of her son, a feeling not of pain 
at the outward lack of harmony swept over her, 
but of wonderful joy and comfort in the thought of 
that entire life spent for Christ, scarcely a moment 
of it wasted. 

The surroundings were very different in Prince- 
ton when the Memorial Service was held that 
gathered professors, students and friends in one 
common grief, but the note of victory was the same. 
Miss Whiting wrote : 


Some day you will read the true and appreciative words 
spoken at Princeton on Friday, but I wish you could have 
been there to feel the spirit of love and reverence. Dr. 
Charles Erdman said it was the most wonderful testimony 
and tribute he had ever listened to. .. . 

The day was ideal—Princeton in its first spring beauty ; 
the hour, five o’clock, was perfect. Dr. Patton himself 
conducted the service in a way so dignified, reverent and 
affectionate that nothing more seemed needed. The chapel 
was nearly filled with students who had known William, 
and the service throughout was simple, strong, solemn, 
tender and triumphant. . .. As I listened, the whole of 
William’s life seemed to sweep before me. There was not 
one word too much, nor undeserved. I marvelled that 
they had understood so truly and loved so deeply in the 
space of but three years. 


Another Memorial Service in Princeton had a 
significance all its own. It was held in the little 
African Methodist Church, where Borden had taught 
in the Sunday School for two winters. The pastor 
learned in that meeting, for the first time, that 


“FOUND FAITHFUL ” 271 


Borden had been wealthy in his own right. They 
had loved him for himself : 

“For his deep consecration and unassuming 
Christ-like life. We never at any time asked him to 
contribute a single dollar. We asked him to teach, 
not to give.” 

So the coloured children sorrowed for the loss 
of their friend. 

At New Haven too, in the Yale Hope Mission, 
a touching service was held, the room packed with 
men of the very class Borden had sought to reach. 
One after another told of the new life that had come 
to them because of what he was and did, and one 
of the professors who had differed from him widely 
as to theological views, spoke of the house being 
filled with the fragrance of his love and service. 

There and in the Moody Church in Chicago men 
were riveted by the story of what the grace of God 
had done in one they had known so well. <A friend 
who was present wrote : 


2 Chron. 16. 9 has been in my mind ever since Friday 
evening. God is ever intently looking for those whose 
hearts are right toward Him, that in and through them He 
may “ show himself strong’. And oh, the joy of his heart 
when He finds such a one! As William grew in knowledge 
of God, he lived up to that knowledge ; as he learned more 
of God’s will, he obeyed that will. He followed the Lord 
wholly. As with absorbing interest the great company 
listened to what God had wrought, one could not but feel 
that the fire of a holy purpose was lighted in the hearts of 
some of those young men and women. 


In the Marble Collegiate Church, New York, 
crowded to its full capacity, the number of students 


272 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


present and their interest were also remarkable. 
Mr. Charles Campbell was among the speakers and 
Mr. Delavan Pierson, Editor of The Missionary~ 
Review of the World, who was impressed with “ the 
strong note of triumph and praise to God”. Mr. 
Don O. Shelton presided. The words of Mr. Hugh 
R. Monro had special weight, as the testimony of a 
business man well known in the great city : 


The thing that impressed me in my contact with 
William Borden was the fact that he was living the Christian 
life successfully. I suppose we all recognize the deep and 
abiding blessings of our discipleship. Some of us have a 
continuous consciousness of the abundant grace brought 
to us in Christ. Yet even in advanced Christian experience 
there is often an overpowering sense of insufficiency and 
failure, so that we are constrained to confess and bewail 
our weaknesses. Where there is triumph in one direction 
there may be failure in another. But more than any other 
young man I have ever known Borden seemed to have con- 
tinuous victory. His life was so truly under the control 
of divine power that it breathed the spirit of the conqueror. 
It was an imperial spiritual life. 

To myself there comes a new sense of assurance as I 
think of it, because I recognize that this overcoming life 
was not lived in the strength of any innate ability or natural 
gifts. It was the grace of God in him that made his life 
victorious and such a benediction to those with whom he 
came in contact. The same resources are available to your 
faith and to mine, so that while his life is a rebuke to the 
poverty of our spiritual experience it is a summons also to 
a closer following of the Saviour. .. . 


So it was in other Memorial Services, in Japan, 
Korea, India and South Africa, for the circle touched 
by this young life was practically world wide. As 
to America, a friend could write, ‘‘ All the papers 
in the country seem to have told about William ” ; 


“FOUND FAITHFUL” 273 


and another, “‘I never heard, on all sides, such 
regret and sorrow expressed over the death of any 
young man. . . . Surely you must feel the volume 
of prayer that is rising for you from many hearts.”’ 

‘* How strong his influence is, even in this re- 
mote corner!’ wrote a missionary in Korea. 
“Many of our Christians know of him and his 
faithful consecration to the Lord. So he continues 
_ to live here below in many souls made better by his 
example.”’ 

And from Cape Town came the following : 

** You have no idea, Mrs. Borden, what William’s 
life has meant to the South African students who 
knew him at Princeton, and what it means just now 
to the whole Dutch Reformed Church out here. 
Next Sunday the story will be told to the children 
practically throughout the whole Union of South 
Africa, in hundreds of Sunday Schools.”’ 

More permanent records, also, carried the message 
of his life far and wide, in several languages. Two 
of his own addresses were put into Arabic by Dr. 
Zwemer’s arrangement,! who wrote of the booklet : 
“Tt will make a fine message. I am calling it 
in Arabic: Two Questions by a Young Man to 
Young Men.” 

A sketch intended especially for Moslem readers 
was prepared by Mr. St. Clair Tisdall and published 
in English and in Arabic. A little later it was 
translated into Persian and Hindustani and cir- 
culated by the thousand, then into Dutch and 
Chinese. Of the latter translation made by a 


1 What it Means to be a Christian and The Price of Power. 
A 


274 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


master of that difficult language,’ Mr. F. H. Rhodes 
of the China Inland Mission said : 


As the first Chinese booklet published for free dis- 
tribution among Mohammedans in China, this story of 
Borden’s life marks a distinct advance in bringing the 
gospel to these neglected millions. Requests for the book 
have come from practically all the districts where mission- 
aries are in contact with Islam, and some even from 
Mohammedans themselves who have heard of the memorial. 
Thirty-five thousand copies have been put into the hands 
of Moslems, and as they are now being read, passed on to 
others and carried farther into regions where Christ is not 
named, we trust that the number who will hear the message 
will be much larger than the number published. Already 
the story seems to have opened the way for several mission- 
aries to get into closer touch with the followers of Islam in 
their fields. 


Thus in nearly every province of China proper, 
in Manchuria and far out on the great road across 
Central Asia, Borden’s love to Christ was the means 
of making known the love of God in Christ to 
followers of the Prophet. It was a wonderful 
ministry, wider possibly than he might have accom- 
plished in person, and its outcome who can tell ? 

But to come back to America. A sketch of 
Borden’s life by Dr. Charles Erdman appeared in 
The Missionary Review of the World, and was so 
much valued that it had to be published separately 
in pamphlet form. Yet another, written from the 
point of view of the college student, came from the 
pen of Charles Campbell, with all the freshness of a 
class-mate’s understanding and appreciation. 

A volume in itself might be made of the letters 


1 The Rev. F. W. Baller. 


“FOUND FAITHFUL” 275 


that flowed in—letters from leaders in the front 
rank of Christian activity, as well as from fellow- 
students and friends of his own age. From the 
National Parliament in Peking and the House of 
Commons in London, from great city churches, 
oriental universities and lonely mission-stations 
came the same testimony. 

“Mr. Borden has become a national character 
in his life and influence’”’, said a leading man in 
Chicago. “It gratified me to hear him speak as 
he did ’”’, wrote Dr. J. Timothy Stone, ‘‘ because 
he is careful as to what he says, and views every- 
thing with a broad and real justice.”’ 

From the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in 
New York, Dr. Jowett wrote : 

“His life just now is standing before the 
American people like some perfumed flower from 
the garden of God.” 

‘‘Apart from Christ, there is no explanation of 
such a life’’, said Professor Charles Erdman at 
Princeton. 

*’ I know of no young man in this country or in 
England ”’, wrote Dr. R. A. Torrey, ‘‘ from whose 
life I expected greater things. But God has His 
own way of carrying out His purposes. He has 
some larger plan of usefulness through your son’s 
departure than could have been realized by his 
remaining here.”’ 

The loss is wholly inexplicable ’’, came in a 
letter from Dr. Charles R. Watson of Egypt, ‘‘ but 
the thing which forbids doubt or criticism is, from 
the human side, William’s own spirit of perfect 


276 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


surrender. He had given himself to his Lord for 
life or for death, and where he trusted we cannot 
but share his trust.” 

On his return from Asia, Dr. John R. Mott said 
that missionaries in every part of the world bore testi- 
mony to the influence of the life of William Borden, 
and that at the Student Conferences that summer 
(1913) no appeal was being used with such power as 
the story of his consecration. 

"Many young men live stronger, purer, more 
yielded lives’, wrote a fellow-student, ‘‘ because 
of the life your boy lived and because of the death 
he died. You cannot hear of them all. You will 
know some day. The name of Will Borden was 
more used than any other during the recent great 
Convention in Kansas City. Japanese students 
remarked that the investment of life as Borden 
invested it was the greatest of all investments. 
The memory of such a son must be a blessing. 
I am glad he lived and lives.” 

‘At Bryn Mawr ”’, a girl friend wrote, ‘“‘ when 
Dr. W. J. Erdman preached here in May, he told 
of William as an example of the Spirit-filled life— 
and oh, Mrs. Borden, it was a marvellous witness ! 
I know it must have struck deep into many hearts.” 

Dr. Henry W. Wright, of Yale University 
said : 

*’ No undergraduate since I have been connected 
with Yale has done so much for Christ in four short 
years as Bill did. I feel very lonely trying to work 
without his visible presence to cheer and inspire 
me," 


“FOUND FAITHFUL” 277 


Mrs. Walter Erdman wrote from Korea : 

*’ William’s life has touched many of whom you 
have never heard, and no one can measure its in- 
fluence. As for Walter, you can hardly realize 
what a blow it has been to him. It is the loss of a 
cherished brother, rather than a friend.”’ 

And the Rev. Walter Erdman himself : 

“We have been praying to-night that you may 
be comforted in the assurance that the love of God 
does not change, even when our understanding is 
baffled by His acts, and that our lives may be puri- 
fied and made stronger through the inspiration of 
William’s friendship and love and his loyalty to 
Christ. I learned more things from William about 
simplicity of faith and steadfastness of purpose than 
he did from me, during the year we were together 
while he was still a boy, and the memory of our 
comradeship will be dearly prized until we meet 
BPA. ss 

‘** T have been thinking more and more, since the 
news came, that the length of time God permits us 
to stay here is not related to a certain amount of 
work He wants us to do, so much as to a certain 
closeness of relationship to Himself He wants us to 
attain. Some of us who are less useful, perhaps, 
are allowed to live on longer that we may learn 
more and be perfected in understanding. And as 
for the mystery of the interruption of such a work 
as his was and promised increasingly to be, while 
there is no explanation now, I like to think that it 
is not interrupted, but that as he desired to serve 
so he will be permitted to serve, only with higher 


278 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


powers. I think of him as still working for Mo- 
hammedans in some relation to the proclamation 
of the gospel.” 

Mr. Fennell P. Turner of the Student Volunteer 
Movement wrote of the fellow-worker he had 
loved : 

‘’ Few men plan their preparation with such care 
and earnestness or carry out their plans with such 
faithfulness. What great things we expected of 
him, and how he is missed! But we have this 
assurance : the life so truly given to God was His 
life and the work William was preparing to do was 
His work. On His heart rests a far greater burden 
for the Moslems of China than we can possibly feel. 
He will not permit His work to suffer or be hindered 
because His servant was not allowed to enter upon 
it as he had planned.” 

And a class-mate who had preceded Borden to 
China wrote from Nanking : 

‘* Somehow, already, I seem able to look down 
the years a bit and see, not one, but many giving 
their all to the Master to take up the work for 
Mohammedans here in China which William had — 
planned to do. Just as Keith Falconer and Horace 
Pitkin did more even in death than in life, may we 
not believe that God will, out of seeming loss, get 
great glory to Himself and call many to fill the 
breach? William was taken while doing with great 
joy and enthusiasm the work to which God had 
called him. When my call comes, I pray that I 
may be found doing my Lord’s work with like faith- 
fulness and devotion.” , 





‘*FOUND FAITHFUL” 279 


Finally our thoughts are carried back to Cairo, 
for the words of Dr. Zwemer linger longest, spoken 
in the place and among the friends Borden had last 
loved. There in the American Mission were gathered 
representatives of all forms of Christian service 
through the city, and with them men wearing the 
fez and the white turban of the Azhar student. 
Few leaders had influenced Borden more than Dr. 
Zwemer, and none could have had truer insight as 
he spoke at that Memorial Service from the words : 
“IT have fought a good fight, I have finished my 
course, I have kept the faith ’’.! 


One of the great characteristics of this life we mourn 
and in which we rejoice is that our friend and brother was 
a soldier, every inch—a soldier of Jesus Christ. Those 
who knew him best knew that he was fighting, and now he 
“has fought ”’. 

He won that greatest victory of all, the victory over 
himself. Charles Kingsley, who knew that life was not a 
bed of ease or a garden of roses, wrote : 


« The very air teems thick with leaguéd fiends ; 
Each word we speak has infinite effects ; 
Each soul we pass must go to heaven or hell. . . . 
Be earnest, earnest, earnest—mad an thou wilt : 
Do what thou doest as if the stake were heaven 
And this thy last deed ere the judgment day.” 


And Borden was earnest. No one could say of him that 
he trifled with the thing men are trifling with all around, 
the great talent of life. | 
He won the victory over his environment. By some 
the victory has to be won over poverty; by others over 
heredity, or over shame and temptation ; but Borden won 
the victory over an environment of wealth. He felt that 
life consisted not in “the abundance of things a man 


1 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. 


ee 


280 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


possesseth ”, but in the abundance of things which possess 
the man. 

- He won the victory in great measure over sin and 
temptation. There is not a young man living in America 
to-day who has not to fight a deadly battle for character. 
Borden fought and won—for two reasons: he always 
carried his sword and looked up for strength. He was a 
man of the Bible, as his Greek Testament and the Bibles 
he used for study and devotion show, and he was a man of 
prayer. . . . Even in the smallest details of life he looked 
up for wisdom and strength. 

Another great thing that comes into a man’s life is 
“urgency”. At college as well as here in Cairo, Borden 
felt the call of urgency, and to him this was linked with 
thoughts of the Moslem world. I found underlined in his 
Testament: “I must work the works of Him that sent 
me while it is day.” 

The real secret of this full-orbed life was that, like St. 
Paul, Borden could say, ““I have kept the faith’. How 
many men in these days—men at the beginning of their 
ministry, or in pulpits, or at the end of their service—have 
to cry, “ God knows, I have lost the faith”. Borden held 
to the Bible. He believed it from cover to cover. His 
faith had been tested, for he had met destructive criticism 
in his college course. He hada grasp of the oracles of God, 
and to us it was a great joy to see that belief in the Book 
had made him a missionary. 

He gripped the essentials; he had no shibboleth ; his 
was no narrow creed. This gathering is indicative of his 
wide fellowship. His Egyptian brethren could never have 
told to which regiment he belonged in the army of God. 
He was too big a man to wear the distinctive colours of any 
regiment. He kept the faith—but he did not keep the 
faith to himself. Ask the man who met him. 

‘‘ Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteous- 
ness.’ He now wears the crown of life and glory. ‘“O 
God, to us may grace be given to follow in his train | ” 


~~ Only to-day I was reading in Pilgrim’s Progress of the 


death of Valiant for Truth : 
~ “ My sword I give to him that shall succeed me in my 


“FOUND FAITHFUL” 281 


pilgrimage, and my courage and strength to him that can 
getit. My marks and scars I carry with me, to be a witness 
for me that I have fought His battles who will now be my 
rewarder.’ . . . So he passed over, and all the trumpets 
sounded for him on the other side.” 


CHAPTER XVIII 


THE UNFINISHED TASK 


1926 


“What though he standeth at no earthly altar, 
Yet in white raiment on the golden floor, 
Where love is perfect and no footsteps falter, 


He serveth as a priest for evermore.” 
Selected. 


In far-away Kansu some new influence is telling. 
Since Borden passed to the place of higher powers 
a great change has come over the province to which 
his life was given, so that far from being what it was, 
one of the most barren fields in China, it is becoming 
fruitful. Wonderful things are happening there, 
right in the midst of that great Mohammedan popu- 
lation, that put to shame our small expectations 
and little faith. 

But the position is critical. That part of China 
is becoming one of the most charged with high explo- 
sive powers in the world. Bolshevism has to be 
reckoned with there now, as well as Mohammedanism 
and the most bigoted forms of idolatrous worship. 
The doors are open still for the most wide-spread 
proclamation of the gospel, and hungry hearts are ~ 
welcoming the Bread of Life. Men, women—yes, 


and many children—are coming to the Saviour who 
282 





ee -- = cr —— a - —_— . ahw te et } rr, cad ee ae ee te. A ek a 


“SSHIONGGNAdAd SLI GNV VNIHO AO d¥W 
‘UOpuo7Geas7 F0a9 S PsOsueIO 





oos 0 
Sa[1W Jo afeog 
nsuey JO uolztsod s1Zayesys ayy Suimoys 


esoulo 4 “ee esse Me on oe . j WNIHD waLvaH9 


«°®? 
2 


N3IMN4d: i fins f 
ga,  ISONWIN? _MOHOIIM 


ONMINVHS 


SUIMOIS.: 
PBunede « 
SHIH On 


S 


Vo Teens Geet Sey 





THE UNFINISHED TASK 283 


never had a chance to hear of Him before. But who 
can tell how long the doors may remain open ? 

God needs lives that count, up there in these 
days—the world needs them, China needs them, 
Mongolia needs them, Tibet needs them unspeak- 
ably, the Moslems of Central Asia need them, wait- 
ing in age-long darkness. 


*“ From many a mosque there comes the call to prayer ; 
I hear no voice that calls on Christ for light, 
But still I wait 
For the messenger of Christ who cometh late.” 


Remote as it is, that province is on the firing 
line to-day. It is strategic in the most vital sense. 
Russia knows this, and is tightening her grasp 
upon the great highway that runs through Kansu 
into China. China knows this, and is making her 
railway and motor road as rapidly as possible, to 
connect Peking with this imperilled line of communi- 
cation between her populous provinces and vast 
outlying dependencies. Islam knows this, and is 
appropriating every place of power, firmly intrenched 
already in that western corner of the republic. There 
is no time to be lost. Already the tension is great, 
and the few missionaries who are toiling amid 
wonderful opportunities write of an outlook that 
could hardly be more serious. Bolshevism is coming 
in like a flood. Look at that long frontier-line of 
Russia right up against China, north and west, for 
thousands of miles, and consider what the pressure 
must be where the one road runs through that is 
most practicable. This must be the route of the 


284 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


coming railway. Already General Feng’s officers 
are there putting through the line. Their Christian 
influence is telling. It was a cheer to see two of 
them come in to the most remote of all the little 
Christian churches out on the great road, to join 
reverently in the Communion Service not long 
ago. 

The last station in the province at which there 
are foreign missionaries (men) is away back at 
Liangchow, more than two weeks’ journey from the 
outpost missionary women have reached at Su-chow, 
the Western Gate of China. The next station be- 
yond, in the heart of Central Asia, is forty days’ 
journey farther west, and there are no witnesses for 
Christ (missionaries) between, or northward in 
Mongolia or southward in Tibet for hundreds and 
hundreds of miles. The population is not great : 
—no, but it numbers millions. The field is hard in 
every possible way :—yes, it needs lives that count, 
‘ stedfast through union with the Anointed One ’’.1 
The people are wild and rough :—but what hearts ! 
Look at the faces of these three Tibetans! See the 
light beginning to dawn there, responsive to Chris- 
tian love. 

Think of that band of preachers sent out by the 
last little church to be founded in that far north- 
west, a church only six years old, but which is 
evangelizing the whole region with its own unpaid, 
voluntary workers, men and women. Think of the 
need of prayer—for them, for their leader, the young 
Chinese doctor who was used to bring the Light, 


1 2 Cor. 1. 21; Rotherham’s version. 


————ae* 





TIBETANS WELCOMED AT ‘‘THE GOSPEL INN”, 


This Inn has been opened for them at Sining, Kansu. Pray that the Light of Life may shine 
indeed into many such hearts. 


To face page 284, 


ep oeete 
eu ae 






‘4! wy 
iy hee my , ; i. 
ob ASA iis a ak oh a | 
fade = tyes oe Be wa, £ ; ol 
= ey ; a ait Al! | eee ? 
i fr ee ie, a iS Pe wa? p pd, ie if \ : aren 
j - > x : “aj \ a as “v4 
; ‘ va 4 a, x a ‘ee 
REY EPs Nae cliny ween ae 
* oak gt ' p lng : j 7 ‘ 
‘ i es he ' B 
ae * ; ' a > 

0 > \ ‘iy * J 

; al) ~ ; .) , sf . 5 Ps rt : : ' 
F , 
s° j iy 4) " =" 4 
A. "\s . v wa 
7 vi os * Md 
7 7 .% 
“4 rt ~ % ue At : 7 » ’ 
«aii ye? ee n ' ; ‘ 
j 4 1) a’ Ate ‘ y- 
¥ » *./ i at Ps 
gee .- ry Ae Me q y. eh ‘ 
» ' of) ’ ) boas ‘ ; ‘i 
} ~ 7] , ' i he ~y 8 
; yi 4 a i 

v ms Pe “y vi ube 

’ yl ; om | a & 

, »~ A : 

As ’ ad ‘h x i 
"3 - « “9  & ' 
Lc Bs war 
é »*%, 
es itp hot ast 1 : 
. a ; . : a t : 
sy if ‘ ' } o 
i 5 = ‘ ; . 
Q i wo , = : by 

t a")! Ce | ee gt ae : 

Oe vi " 0,4." f ; 74 

os ee Ne J ai a | : 

ya ae 4 Lr 4 yA 
belive ry fe: * ‘ os + 7 
- a's aes ‘ ; 
bt t > L> @) 
; ay a ; : : 
i ; Pe an ey an } ’ : 
4 aN 5 hd av \ , * : 
4 .) co Vea > a _ ‘ . 
= tee « ; 
’ * " a ; : 
i A ee . 1 eee a 
é ie RK A Me = ‘; 4 Sy a 
a On ae 4 diy ; ie ; 
»* : eo Pi mg 2 ss ] 
e .] ; ‘ ow” ‘ 
mh of? es 
Mit: (ikea CAP RA oe ies sere ; 
; : ahve ) y z 
1 Ab 2 ‘ ) J es ; Ay 
ae aed Lb eae aia 
a4 Lins 7° oy Me 
e-. : aa’ : 
eh aa us * . 
| tae - * if eA 
¢ 7 t re “ ~ 
a 5 ; 
‘ y a bd - - ~, 7 c 
ie ‘aed ¥ qs nah 4 1? " , ”, ae 
h: Me etl Ae wn f : Ae 
pee tl tae &: i cal COC orane 
, . Pp : « es | U bs ; 
\ ie fe yea, \ ei ee 7 ae 
ae Loy 
’ : > } ‘y ey ; 

i i . ; 
mass By ra "54 7 on MA a Lek ai 
ey wai oe a . avi B es ; ; 

cea ‘ sb Pedy TOR | 
x ‘os he 5 ane i ” - ’ y ? 
ve od * ; ‘be ; " : : ae i 
« ; ‘; 

12 ARE ne i 
a > ve) ) Ao! “ : “ih 
oad, Jiao ne f : 4 
va ‘ Beko P 7 ; 

Fw ' 7 y i , iy 
ae C > , - t r 
‘ ie vo ed - ; ’ J 
; it Ag _ eo wee a i 
7, ~| ’ i i - 

br ' : i 
is ge ” ‘ey "i y y “? ; é My 
~ i we » ¢ 2 ; 4) 

1 5 f 7 r 
¢ ox > bias Whee ) \ ei) i. 

P 7 iy PFA . i $4 wS¥ 4 
he c er 5a _ : 2 

} " 1? ‘i 1 4 “> 
) ¥ ‘ 2 a ys 7 J 
as . : 7 ~% ‘34 a 2 
ws y ra ew) 14-5" ‘ens ss 
¢ 
¢ ° ' ae 

: te, 3 a. 

; ny ws " i 
" i : 

7 2 LY 
nay e % S*h ity -f ‘ me ity 4 yLAu 
ee ee at. 
‘ 
a 
‘ ' ply 4s i y ‘ : : 
\ i a } ue 
‘ 2 i = ee , 7 te | 
: sal : ii q* a 5 ; 

, : ¥ 
1.” 6 y b i be 
ht (ae ; L 
} . 4 id 

; ne 

’ 4 a j 7 f is 

A ol f Lae ys sat = ; 

a wr) é ¥ thie 

i j 4 .-)'s/ 7 

= why i, 8 ia om arta % 

; ve a : ~ : 
Any 1 Tabs . ) ry Raa oe t 

a 7 > ; : 7 

‘ ae i en, ee Pe Te 5-7 


THE UNFINISHED TASK 285 


for the missionaries who are helping them, three 
ladies all alone. Think of the longing of the heart 
of Christ over that waiting world of Central Asia in 
all its darkness, sin and need, and over the Moslems 
of Kansu itself, three millions, for whom one young 
missionary has recently been set apart. 

Think of him and his wife and little children (boys 
of three and five years old) in the first Christian home 
in the crowded Moslem suburb of Ho-chow, the 
Mecca of China. A little hospital has been opened. 
there, the only Moslem hospital in China. It has 
no doctor and no nurse, save when Dr. and Mrs. 
George King or some of their helpers can come over 
from the Borden Memorial Hospital at Lanchow, 
three days’ journey away. And round that little 
new light-centre is a population of hundreds of 
thousands of Moslems, possibly a million, within 
easy reach. Are not lives that count needed there? 
Will you by constant, earnest prayer help to make 
and keep those young missionaries spiritually, men- 
tally, physically efficient ? For there are prayers 
that count as well as lives that count. Will you 
pray such prayers? 3 

Borden’s life counted because it was rooted in 
Christ, fed daily upon His word, was subject to His 
Spirit, breathed the atmosphere of prayer, was 
poured out for others. 


Each of us can put a fulness of meaning all our a 


own into his simple act of faith: 


“Lord Jesus, I take hands off as far as my life 
is concerned. I put Thee on the throne in my heart. 


286 BORDEN OF YALE ’09 


Change, cleanse, use me as Thou shalt choose. I 
take the full power of Thy Holy Spirit. I thank 
Thee.” 


We too, ‘‘ may never know a tithe of the result 
until Morning ”’. 


COMMISSIONED 287 


COMMISSIONED 


“As the Father hath sent me, even so send I you.”—Joun 20. 21. 


Out from the realm of the glory-light 

Into the far-away land of night, 

Out from the bliss of worshipful song / 

Into the pain of hatred and wrong, 

Out from the holy rapture above 

Into the grief of rejected love, 

Out from the life at the Father’s side 

Into the death of the crucified, 

Out of high honour and into shame 

The Master willingly, gladly came: 
And now, since He may not suffer anew, 
As the Father sent Him so sendeth He you. 


Henry W. Frost, D.D. 


; : 
t : 
i 

‘ 


Pes e 
tT pit t 4 


14, a ys ae a ae Mi 
fa} Te an ee Te 
ye Lh a italien is ai) 

, aN hat if 

Pei taoks a) 








ach + 
1 


PV asc, 











DATE DUE 


Brodart Co. Cat. #55 137 001 Printed in USA 











it 
ie. 
ici 
phe 
wri ibet 
hotet ‘ 
(ibid hid 
eeu 
t 
Hy 
pee 
‘ 
( 
eid 
4s 
t t 
f 
' 2 
ete bob 
at 
pee ; 
J 
He) n 
eb 
\ r 
Pay 
degen 
4 ‘ 
jo t 
wh 4 
6 feta 
‘ 
bay ( 
‘ Ha 
be 
* rk lap ha 
te 
' 
PEER HUE 
f te 
4 ‘ 
Hrnht ‘ 
AF " 
defeat’ 
bey 
Sai 
ih 
+) eet 
i 
uit ‘ 
cde, be 
Voemehee al 
brbeyee 
bibthebeh 
rhe 
ia 
' Ail 
] 
dal e¢ 
i fy 
i fl 
ei / 
ri ‘ 
































" 














of 











ry 

















beet 
i 
; 
woud 
wy 
’ 
‘ 
o 
ie 
6. 
i 
oi 
§ 
‘ 




















; 
ie 
; 
' 
u { 
, 
' ’ 
ee i 
a ' 
” 
‘ s 
; + 
6 
t » 
gy ‘ 
Give 
#« a 
i pick 
7 " 
, } 
‘i * 


yO a 











’ ny 
‘ 
' 
A § ‘ 
; 
+o 
et 
' t 
' uff tat 
Veit 
fit 
oe 
iv 
; Heal 
beth & 
ti al 
Pane a eT oe 
bifeperelebepes 
it 
i , 
pO Vintinge 


‘4 


Princeton Theological Seminary-Speer Library 


UL 


1 1012 01027 3425 

















‘ 
wed 
y vi 
J 
¢ ta 
/ t 
ij i ; 
} my | M 
i 4 : 
‘ 5 . ‘e 
1 
t i 
i fia i 
‘ 
i ; t } 
’ , 
’ Pi 
' r 
J / 
“6 
“ 
‘ » 
ey 
#4 t 
4 ’ C 
» ’ 4 ' 
; elle i 
‘ he ? 
’ ; 
pi y “4 { 
Hh} yee : j r 
’ 
; y 
‘ c ‘ i ’ 
¢ 7 
- { j ‘ 
. f * j ‘ 
; i ‘ ‘ 
. : F 
; wey ‘ ; 
v ” 
t § Ait ‘ ’ ‘¥ 
rey ; ; * 
, ; 
‘ ‘ ' ri r 
ver 
5 ’ 
i } ¥ 
$ ; ¢ ' i ; 
f ’ , t ‘ " j 
‘ ‘ " ; P 
t an. , 
vit ‘ 
i ' ¥ 
i , ; 
‘ ® f ‘ y 
f i v ¥ } 
" " “ 5 
py i | , 
4 \ ; ‘ ; 
‘ ' Wier F ‘ . . 
{ d i 
’ hat ’ : 
i ‘ ety 7) 4 ae 
i ; ’ 
+d ¥ i ; ; uy 
; ' 4 fe + ’ 
i ' \ vile j 1 F 
| i+ ih R 
s} ‘ ‘ oi ue 
t : 
f i 4 ; M 
y ' ‘ ots ‘ 
¥ » ‘ ; 4 
HP Mat ‘ A ) 
i f * , rhe ty i 
; bile ‘ 
‘ ye vs bods 
f ‘ y ead “ Wiis ¢ 
Phase 
‘ Fig ih 
\ i ro r ; “af ; 
F r : 
re f retiegt 
ke iy fy {Hho t + Ww el 
" } s ne 
t ? \ 4 m4 
wily me } ; 
tri 4 { view t 
, a bight » 








