BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 


gE IA 


i 9999 08634 802 4 | 


ay OE: MNO Cy ‘Si ey, VO fer LEE ie HY 


tithe VE. ZB o Sd by Vy lannng?e bbls 


OF 


WLEAM ME RY UMANNING, 


Boston, IB42. 


nt 


+ 7 
ails 


’ 

a 
ts rt 
(4 

’ 

be iy 
R 


BRIEF NARRATIVE 
BAPTIST MISSION 


INDIA. 


INCLUDING AN ACCOUNT OF 


TRANSLATIONS OF THE SCRIPTURES, 


INTO THE VARIOUS 


Languages of the East. 


CEE) 


WITH AN 


APPENDIX, 


BRINGING THE NARRATIVE DOWN TO THE YEAR 


E81 I. 


* Attempt great things—Zxpect great things.” CAREY, 


* The heavenly shaster will be received by all India, and the’ 
Hindoos will become one cast.” A NINDOO:? 


BOSTON: 


‘PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY LINCOLN & RDMARD Ey 
No. 53, Cornhill. 


‘ hs q 7 er 
ff £ 
ADVERTISEMENT. 


AS the history of the Baptist Mission in India is interspersed 
through the several numbers of Periodical Accounts, it has been 
thought desirable that a brief and connected Narrative of the 
leading facts should be drawn up, both for the conyenience of 
our constant readers, and the information of such persons as 
may feel aninterest in the undertaking, but who are not ac- 
quainted with its rise and progress. [ London Ed. 


= 


Gontents, 
Page 


Sect. I. The formation of the Society, and the send- 
ing out of its two first Missionaries, 3 
Sect. II. The arrival of the Missionaries in India, 
and their settlement in the neighbour- 
hood of Malda; .\.: 33 (3s 4. en 
Sect. II. Progress of the Mission from 1795 to 
y's Sn ee ee 
Sect. [V. Four other Missionaries sent out, and the 
seat of the Mission removed to Seram- 
POs om. cei ep gy ee ge) 2. 8 ee 
Sect. V. Progress of the Mission at Serampore, 
| Jrom 1800 to 1807, containing the prin- 
cipal events under each year succes- 1% 
Stvelifg a we aww 
Sucr. VI. Progress of the Mission continued to the 
beginning of 1809, including a list of 
the persons baptised from the com- 
mencement, &Cc. ' 5 
APPENDIX, 2 1s leicss- ee tet a.) eek 


BRIEF NARRATIVE 


OF THE 


BAPTIST MISSION. 


SECTION IL. 


The Formation of the Society, and the sending out 
uf its two first Missionaries. 


AT an association of ministers and churches held at 
Nottingham, in 1784, it was resolved to set apart an 
hour on the first Monday evening in every month for 
extraordinary prayer for the revival of religion, and for 
the extending of Christ’s kingdom in the world. This 
resolution was attended to for about seven. years with 
some degree of zeal and importunity. 

In 1787, Mr. Carey was ordained pastor of the church 
at Moulton, and joined the association. From his first 
entering on the work of the ministry, if not from an earlier 
period, his maind appears to have been deeply impressed 
with the state of the heathen world. In reference to 
this object he made himself acquainted with the geogra- 
phy, population, aad religion of the various nations of 
the earth; and with the labours of christians, both of 
early and later ages, in propagating the gospel. He al- 
so acquired some considerable knowledge of various lan- 
guages, particularly Latin, Greek and Hebrew; and all 
seemed to be directed to the same end. Whenever he 

met with his brethren in the ministry, he would seldom 
omit to converse with them on the importance and prac= 
ticability of missions. 


4 


4. Brief Narrative 


These conversations, together with the monthly pray- 
er meetings, wrought considerably on the minds of the 
ministers. It seemed scarely reconcileable with sincer- 
ity to pray month after month, and year after year, for 
the enlargement of Christ’s kingdom, and use no means 
for enlarging at. 

About 1790, Mr. Carey visited Birmingham, and be- 
came acquainted with Mr. Pearce, whose kindred soul 
entered with ardour into all hisviews. Some of the 
leading members also of Mr. Pearce’s church were 
much interested in his proposals, and promised to as- 
sist him. 

Tn the spring of 1791, at a ministers’ meeting held at 
Clipstone, the two sermons that were preached, bore 
much upon this subject. One was delivered by Mr. 
Sutcliff, from 1 Kings xix. 10, J have been very jealous. 
Jor the Lord God of hosts, &c. And the other by Mr. 
Fuller, from Hag. 1. 2. Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, 
saying, This people say the timeéis not come, the time 
that the Lord’s house should be built. After worship 
was over, Mr. Carey perceiving the minds of his breth- 
ren impressed by what they had been hearing, was very 
desirous, that before they parted they would come to 
some resolution on the forming of a Missionary Society. 
The only resolution that was formed however at this: 
time was, that as Mr. Carey was known to have a man- 
uscript by him on the subject, he should be requested to 
revise and print it for the consideration of the religious: 
public. 

In the spring of 1792, the annual association was 
held at Nottingham, and Mr. Carey was one of the 
preachers. His sermon was founded on Isaiah liy. 2, 3. 
Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth 
the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen 
thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; for thou shalt 
break forth on the right hand and on the left, §c. Hay- 
ing observed in his introduction, that the church was: 
here addressed as a desolate widow, dwelling in a little 
cottage by herself; that the command to enlarge her 
tent contained an intimation that there should be an en- 
largement in her family ; and that toaccount for so un= 
expected a change, she was told, that her ‘* Maker was: 


her husband,”’ who should be called «* The God.of the 


¢ 


Of the Baptist Mission. 6 


whole earth ; he took up what he conceived to be the 
spirit of the passage in two exhortations, viz. EXPECT 
GREAT THINGS—ATTEMPT GREAT THINGS. ‘The effect 
of this discourse was considerable. A resolution was 
passed, that a plan should be prepared against the next 
ministers’ meeting at Kettering, for forming a society 
Sor propagating the gospel among the heathen ; and Mr. 
Carey generously engayed to devote the profits which 
might arise from his late publication on the subject, to 
the use of such a society. 

In agreeing upon a plan we had no difficulties to en- 
counter from diversity of opinion, for in every thing of 
importance there was a happy unanimity. We con- 
versed on all subjects, without debating on any. The 
general principles on which the society was formed, 
were, in respect of civil government, to yield a cordial 
and unreserved obedience in every thing consistent with 
our duty toGod; and in respect of christians of other 
denominations, to cherish a catholic spirit towards them, 
and engage in a ready co-operation with them in every 
thing which did not require a sacrifice of religious prin- 
ciple. Considering the present divided state of Chris- 
tendom, however, it appeared to us that each denomina- 
tion, by exerting itself separately, would be most likely 
to answer the great ends of a mission. Hence the name 
by which we at first chose to designate ourselves was, 
The Particular (or Calvinistic) Baptist Society for pro- 
pagating the gospel among the heathen. But so far 
were we from having in view the exclusive promotion of 
our own peculiar principles as Baptists, that we were de- 
termined fromthe beginning, if no opportunity appeared 
for sending out Missionaries of our own, that we would 
assist other societies already in being amongst the Pres- 
byterians and the Moravians. 

Some of the greatest difficulties which we had to en- 
counter were the following : We were inexperienced in 
the work—we knew of no opening for a mission in any 
one part of the world more than another—we had no 
funds to meet the expense that must attend an under- 
taking of the kind—our situation in an inland part of 
the country was inconvenient for foreign correspondence 
—the persons who would have the management would 
five at such a distance from each other us to render fre= 


“et 


0 Brief Narrative 


quent consultation impracticable—and, finally, in form- 
ing a society there would be danger of its falling under 
irreligious influence. From these and other considera- 
tions, those who were expected to engage in the work 
entered upon it with much fear and trembling. 

On Oct. 2, 1792, the ministers met at Kettering, and 
after the public work of the day was over, retired for 
prayer. They then, in a most solemn manner, pledged 
themselves to God, and to one another, to make a triad 
for introducing the gospel amongst the heathen. They 
were not insensible of their want of experience, but hop- 
ed that He, whose cause it was, would endue them with 
wisdom as occasions required, and guide them with his 
eye.—As to funds, they opened a subscription at the 
time, the amount of which, though only 13]. 2s. 6d. 
was sufficient for present purposes. They had no idea 
of appealing to the public till a more specific object 
could be proposed to their consideration.—In respect of 
foreign correspondence, they hoped to find friends at the 
different sea-ports who would be willing to assist them, 
which hope has been fully realised.—As to the difficulty 
of a number of persons residing in different parts of the 
kingdom acting together, they felt themselves obliged to 
encounter it as well as they could, and to supply the want 
of personal intercourse by writing. On this account. 
however, they found it impracticable to have a large act- 
ing committee, or for the members of it to go out at 
certain periods, and others to be chosen in their stead. 
Finally, with respect to preserving the society from ir- 
religious influence, though every person who should sub- 
scribe 10]. at once, or 10s. 6d. per rie was consid- 
ered a member, yet as the committee, to whom the man- 
agement was intrusted, consisted either of ministers, or 
respectable characters in the different churches, who 
would act without any pecuniary reward, and whose 
places, as they should die, would be filled up at a gener- 
al meeting by others of like character, it was thought as 
great a preservative as human means could suggest ; and 
such it has hitherto proved. The names of the first 
committee were, John Ryland, Reynold Hogg, William 
Carey, John Sutcliff, and Andrew Fuller. Reynold 
Hoge was chosen Treasurer, and Andrew Fuller, Sec- 

retary. 


Of the Baptist Mission. 7 


Mr. Pearce of Birmiagham was present at this meet~ 
ing, aud entered into the undertaking with all his heart. 
On returning home he stated particulars to his fends, 
who immediately formed an assistant society amongst 
themseives, aad collected 701. towards the fund. 

On Oct. 31, 1792, a meeting was held at Northamp- 
ton, Mir. Pearce was added to the committee, and an 
address to the public ordered to be drawn up. 

On Noy. 13, the committee met again at Northamp- 
ton. Here they learned that Mr. John Thomas, who 
had been several years in Bengal, preaching the gospel 
to the natives, was then in London, endeavouring to 
establish a fund for a mission to that country, and that 
he was desirous of engaging a companion to return with 
him to the work. The committee considered this as a 
probable opening in Providence, and resolved that the 
Secretary should make inquiry concerning Mr. Thomas, 
as to his character, principles, abilities, success, &c. 
that if things should prove agreeable, he might be invit- 
ed to go out as one of their missionaries. : 

Inquiry was made, and the accounts which were re- 
ceived proved satisfactory. It appeared that Mr. Thom- 
as was by profession a surgeon ;_ that after having em- 
braced the gospel under the ministry of Dr. Stennett, 
he, in the year 1783, went out as surgeon of the Oxford 
East Indiaman ; that while he was in Bengal he felt a 
desire to communicate the gospel to the natives ; and 
that being encouraged to do so by a religious friend, he 
obtained his discharge from the ship, and after learning 
the language, continued from the year 1787 to 1791, 
preaching Christ in different parts of the country. He 
described the Hindoos as superstitious ; attached to 
what is called cast, and very immoral ; but tolerant, and 
willing to hear whatever was respectfully addressed to 
them. He also mentioned a few individuals of whose 
conversion to Christ he entertained hope; namely, 
Ram Boshoo, Mohun Chund, and Parbotee. The two 
jatter were Brahmans. 

On Jan. 10, 1793, a committee meeting was held at 
Kettering, when the Secretary reported the result of his 
inquiries respecting Mr. Thomas, which was satisfactory 
to all present. The committee being fully of opinion 
that a door was now open for a mission to the East 


8 Brief Narrative 


Indies, resolved to invite Mr. Thomas to go out as ene 
of their missionaries ; and to endeavour to furnish him 
with a colleague. Mr. Carey being present, and his 
mind towards missionary work well known, was asked, 
if he were willing to accompany Mr. Thomas ? To which 
he readily answered in the affirmative. 

Within the last two or three years Mr. Carey had 
removed from Moulton to Leicester, but had never lost 
sight of this great object, nor concealed from the people 
he served his earnest desire, whenever opportunity offer- 
ed, to engage in it; and though the church at Leicester 
were greatly attached to him, and he tothem, yet when 
they heard of his consenting to go, they could not con- 
scientiously object té it, but freely gave him up, trusting 
in God to supply them with another pastor. 

In the former part of this meeting Mr. Thomas was 
not present ; the committee however were employed in 
reading his papers, which had been communicated to 
ihem. In the evening he himself arrived at Kettering, 
and fully acceded to all that was proposed to him. 

The committee then resolved to support him and 
Mr. Carey, with their families, to the utmost of their 
power, till they should be able to support themselves. 

The next step was to calculate the expense of sending 
thern out, and to obtain the means of defraying it. The 
expense was estimated at 5001. which sum required to 
be raised in ¢out three or four months. To accomplish 
this the committee frankly stated to the religious public 
their plan, requesting that so far as it appeared to be 
deserving of encouragement, they would encourage it, 
Letters also were addressed to the most active ministers 
of the denomination throughout the kingdom, requesting 
their concurrence and assistance. The result was, that 
more than twice the sum which had been asked for was 
collected ; yet, when the work was finished, the actual 
_expense had so far exceeded the estimate, that there were 
only a few pounds to spare. One principal cause of this 
was the circumstance of Mr. Carey’s whole family, with 
Mrs. Carey’s sister, being induced to accompany him, 
At first it was supposed that Mr. Carey would go out 
with only his eldest son, and with a view of returning ; 
but when things came to a crisis, Mrs. Carey consented 
to go with kim, provided her sister would accompany 


Of the Baptist Mission. & 


her; and this circumstance, though it added to the 
expense, yet, upon the whole, was considered as favoura~ 
ble to the object. 

On March 20, 1793, a meeting was held at Leicester 
for prayer, and the solemn designation of the missiona- 
ries. At this meeting Messrs. Fawcett of Hebden 
Bridge, Hopper of Nottingham, Mills of Sheepshead, 
Blundel of Arnsby, Staugiton of Northamptou, Morris 
of Clipstone, Yates of Leicester, Bruin of Glen; Trinder 
of Northampton, Wilson of Oiney, and Hobson of 
Walgrave, were added to the cominittee. 

Our brethren set sail on June 13, 1793, on board the 
Princessa Maria, a Danish Indiaman. After their 
departure we had time for reflection, ln reviewing the. 
events ofa few preceding months we were much impress- 
ed. We could scarcely believe that such a number of 
impediments hadin so short a time been removed. The 
fear and trembling which had possessed us at the outset, 
had insensibly given way to hope and joy. Upborne by 
the magnitude of the object, and by the encouraging 
promises of God, we had found difficulties subside as we 
‘approached them, and ways opened beyond all our ex- 
pectations. The thought of having done something 
towards enlarging the boundaries of our Saviour’s king- 
dom, and of rescuing poor Heathens and Mahometans 
from under Satan’s yoke, rejoiced our hearts. “We 
were glad also to see the people of God offering so 
willingly ; some leaving their country, others pouring in 
their property, and all waiting in prayers to heaven for a 
blessing. A new boiad of union was furnished between 
distant ministers an@ churches. Some who had back- 
shdden from God were restored, and others who had 
long been poring over their unfruitfulness, and ques- 
tioniug the reality of their personal religion, having 
their attention directed to Christ and his kingdonr, lost 
their fears, and found that peace which in other pursuits 
they had sought in vain. Christians of different denom- 
mations discovered a common bond of affection > and 
instead of always dwelling on things wherein they 
differed, found their account in uniting in those wherein 
they were agreed. In short, our hearts were enlarged ; 
and if no other good had arisen from the undertaking, 
than the effeet produced upon our own minds, and 

B 2 


10 _ Brief Narrative [Sect. I. 


the minds of christians in our own country, it were more 
than equal to the expense. 


od 


SECTION II. 


The arrival ofthe Missionaries in India, and their set- 
tlement in the neighbourhood of Malda. 


AFTER many anxious thoughts about our brethren, 
fetters were received on July 29, 1794, informing us of 
their safe arrival, and containing a few particulars, as to 
their difficulties and their prospects. They met with 
Ram Boshoo soo. after their arrival ; but found to their 
grief that he had not kept himself from idols. The let- 
ters, upon the whole, contained as much encouragement 
as could be expected. We afterwards learned, however, 
that for the first three or four months, Mr. Carey was 
reduced to great straits and trials. Through a number 
of occurrences, which he could not prevent, the invest- 
ment, which was taken out for their immediate support, 
was sunk; and he, with his wife and family, ima for- 
eigen land, were utterly destitute of the means of subsist- 
ence, Taking his family with him, he went about fom 
ty miles east of Calcutta in a boat. On Feb. 6, 1794, 
he stopped at Dehatta, the residence of the late Charles 
Short, Esq, who afterwards married his wife’s sister, and 
whose generosity and kinduess, in a time of such extrem- 
ity, ought never to be forgotten. 

In this neighbourhood he built hn an house, or tent, 
and thought of taking land, and of cultivating it for his 
support: but early in March he received a letter from 
Maida, inviting him to go, with his family, and take 
the oversight ofaa indigo-factory, belonging to Mr. U—. 
His colieague also, Mr. Thomas, who had stopped at 
Calcutta, under an idea of supporting himself by his 
profession, received, a little before, a similar imvitation, 
Circumstanced as they were, they could not but consid- 
er it as an interposition in providence in favour both of 
them and their object, and accordingly comphed with it. 

This undertaking however occasioned some reflections 
at home, chiefly among those who were notso fully ac- 


1794.] Of the Baptist Mission. 11 


quainted with the terms on which the Missionaries left 
their country, which were, that they were to be support- 
ed by the society till they should be able to support 
themselves. Conscious as they were of acting from the 
purest motives, the fears which were entertained by 
some lest they should get entangled in worldly pursuits, 
grieved them, The strainin which Mr. Carey wrote in 
his journal at the time, is sufficiently expressive of his 
disinterested regard for the mission. ‘* What is there,” 
says he, *inall this world worth living for, but the 
presence and service of God ? I feel a burning desire 
that all the world may know this God, and serve him. 
Oh, how long will it be ere I shall know so much of the 
language of the country, as to preach Christ crucified in 
it ! Tam resolved to write to the Society, that my cir- 
cumstances are such that I shall not need their future 
support, and to devote a sum monthly for the printing 
of the Bengalee Bible.” 

Mr. Carey was not able to set off for Malda till May 
23, 1794. Whilethus detained he seems to have felt 
much from the want of christian society, and of being 
able to preach to the natives; and yet to have been great- 
ly supported. <I seem,” says he, in his journal of . 
April 8, “ to be cast out of the.christian world, and am 
_ unable yet to speak with any advantage to the heathens, 
I have no friend to stir up, or encourage me in the 
things of God. The infidelity of Europeans grieves 
me. ‘They tell me that the conversion of the natives is 
impossible. In England I should uot be discouraged 
by the sayings of unbelievers; but here I have no chris« 
tian friend to sympathize with me, nor am I able te 
make the trial by preaching the gospel. All my hope is 
in God. Without his power no European could. possi- 
bly be converted, and his power cau convert any Hindoo, 
When I reflect that HE hath stirred me up to the work, 
and wrought wonders in preparing the way, I can hope 
in his promises, and am encouraged and strengthened.” 
_ It was observed, that under all the trials of the first 
year, our dear brother, in his communications to the 
Society, made the least of them ; and was much more 
concerned Jest they should be discouraged, than for any 
thing which he himself endured. 


iz r | Brief Narrative [ Sect. m1: 


Arriving at Malda on June 15, he found himself in. 
very agreeable society. Next day he preached twice in 
English, and his friend and colleague, Mr. Thomas, 
met him. His pleasure was great on this occasion, 
being heightened by the recollection of the last six 
months, ‘I feel,” said he, ‘‘ as if released from a 
_ prison, and restored to the joys of christian fellowship.— 
Surely the Lord is not thus making room for us, and 
removing every difficulty out of the way, without some 
gracious designs towards us.”’ 

Mr. Carey then accepted the superintendence of am 
Indigo-factory at Mudnabatty, and Mr. Thomas of 
another at Moypauldiggy, both in the neighbourhood of 
Malda ; and covenants were granted to them by the 
British government. Letters were then sent to England 
expressing great pleasure in their being able to decline 
at present any further assistance, and hoping that the 
funds of the Society would be employed in another 
mission. 

On the arrival of these letters, a meeting was held at 
Arnsby, April’7, 1795. The question was put respect- 
ing another mission, and which was thought by all 
present to be desirable. At the same time two young 
men, Mr. Jacob Grigg, and Mr. Jas. Rodway, had 
offered themselves as missionaries, and were considered 
as suitable persons. The committee therefore resolved 
on another mission to Africa, in the neighbourhood of 
Sierra Leone. In the autumn of 1795, the missionaries 
left England ; but through the indiscretion of one of 
them, and the ill health of the other, the undertakin 
failed. 

The Rev. Mr. Hogg, finding his situation ineonsistent 
with the treasurership, proposed to resign it. The com- 
mittee thanked Mr. Hoge for his past attentions, and 
chose in his stead Mr. King of Birmingham. Mr, Jos. 
Deut of Northampton was at the same time chosen a 
member of the committee instead of Mr. Trinder, de- 
ceased, The members also of the Assistant Society at 
Birmingham were incorporated into the committee of 
the Primary Society. At the same time it was resolved 
to propose it to the subscribers, in the next Number of 
the Periodical Accounts, Whether a small part of the 
Society’s funds might not be properly applied to the 


S 


1794-9.] Of the Bapiist Mission. 43 


encouragement of preaching the gospel in the most un- 
enlightened villages in our own country ? 

Ia the spring of 1796, Mr. John Fountain, offering 
himself as a missionary, was accepted, and sent out to 
join the brethren in India. The same year it was pro- 
posed that two of the Bristol students during the vaca- 
tion should supply the churches at Salisbury and 
Broughton, and that Mr. Sattery and Mr. Steadinan, the 
pastors of those churches, should be requested for that 
time to preach the gospel through the county of Corn- 
wall. This request was complied with ; and as it was 
thought to be productive of good effects, the same was 
repeated the next year by Messrs. Steadman and 
Franklin. - 

The above measures were engaged in mostly under 
an idea that our brethrenin India were now able to sup- 
port themselves ; but ina little time they found their 
resources precarious, and again requested our assistance. 
It was then resolved to pay them the whole of their ar- 
rears, and to continue to allow them as from the begin- 
ning. 


SECTION III. 
Progress of the Mission in Bengal from 1794 to 1799. 


THE missionaries being settled as superintendents of 
the Indigo works at Mudnabatty and Moypauldiggy, 
they had each an opportunity of addressing the work- 
men, aud of making excursions to the surrounding vil- 
lages. But during the first year Mr. Carey had repeat- 
ed attacks of an intermittent fever with a dysentery. 
Mrs. Carey also, and their eldest son were much afflict- 
ed ; and their third son, Peter, at five years of age, died 
ofa mortification in his bowels. As soon as they were 
able toapply themselves to the work, they set up schools 
at their respective factories ; preached every Lord’s day, 
and frequently on week days ; and Mr. Thomas was partic- 
ularly kind to the poor, in administering medicines, and 
conversing with them. Many people besides the work- 
men attended their preaching. But for a considerable 


14 Brief Narrative [Sect. LIZ. 


time it seemed to be without effect. There were, how- 
ever, a Mi. Long anda Mr. Powell, two Englishmen 
who had settied in Bengal, who were each baptized ; and 
on Nov. 1, 1795, they, with tue missionaries, formed a 
ehurch, and commemorated the Lord’s death in the 
Supper. Mr. Long was afterwards excluded for im- 
proper conduct ; but Mr. Powell continued an useful 
character till his death, which was at Dinagepore, on 
Sept. 25, 1802. 

After two years labour some appeared to be impressed 
by the word. ‘* My pundit,” says Mr. Thomas, ‘* asks 
questioas, sheds tears, and requests part of the serip- 
tures of us.’”’ His name was Podo Loson. Mr. Carey 
also entertained considerable hopes of a young brahman 
of the name of Cassinaut. The brahman, Mohun Chund, 
also, who had professed to believe the gospel while Mr. 
Thomas was first in India, came to them, and continued 
for some time with them. Toward the end of 1796, 
just at the time of Mr. Fountain’s arrival, there were 
several Mahomedans who appeared not a little promis- 
ing ; particularly Sookmun at Mudnabatty, and Yardee, 
Doorgotteea, &c. at Moypauldiggy ; where also there 
was a general attention to the word. But none of them 
had resolution enough to give up their casé, nor have 
they since associated with christians. 

These disappointments must have been very discour- 
aging ; yet, while the parties continued promising, they 
served no doubt to strengthen the hands of the missiona- 
ries. Early in 1797 they visited Bootan, and were 
kindly treated by the Soubah, a person in authority. 
The effect was, a desire, whenever opportunity offered, 
to introduce the gospel into the country. 

Nor were the whole of their labours in this neighbour- 
hood in vain. Mr. Carey was situated within about 
thirty, and Mr. Thomas within about fifteen English 
miles of the city of DINAGepors, containing a popula- 
tion equal to Birmingham or Manchester. From this 
city a letter was received, signed by five Hindoos, inti- 
mating that about three years before that time the brah- 
mean Mohun Chund bad been there, and had told them a 
little about the gospel of God ; promising also to send 
them certain parts of the translation, but which had not 
beensent. The object of the letter was to request a sight 


1794-9.] Of the Baptist Mission. 15 
ef the translation, and some person to be sent to give 
them further instruction. 

About the same time they heard of a Mr. Ignatius 
Fernandez, a gentleman of Portuguese extraction re- 
siding in that city, who was desirous of hearing the gos- 
pel. Upon the whole they determined to go, First Mr. 
‘Fountain and Mr. Powell went over ; then Mr. Fernan- 
dez paid a visit to Mr. Thomas ; and afterwards Mr. 
Carey went and preached. Mr. Fernandez embraced 
the gospel with much affection, and proved a most 
amiable and valuable character. At his own expense 
he built a place for christian worship, and his heart and 
house were always open to the missionaries. | Here also 
they met with Mr. William Cuninghame, Register of 
the civil court, and assistant to the magistrate at Dinage- 
pore, whose regards to them and the gospel greatly en- 
deared him tothem. From the magistrate himself also 
they received much friendly treatment. 

Mr. Fernandez was afterwards baptized. It wasat his 
house that Mr. Fountain, Mr. Thomas, and Mr. Powell 
died. He is at this time the diligent and useful pastor 
of a church in the same place. 

Nor was the introduction of the gospel at Dinagepore 
the only permanent effect of the labours of the missiona- 
ries in the neighbourhood of Malda. About fifty lads 
were taught to read and write, who would otherwise 
have known nothing. It was there, too, that the scrip= 
tures were translated into the Bengalee language ready 
to be printed as soon as opportunity offered. We have 
also of late been informed of pleasing appearances in 
that neighbourhood by the ministry of some of the native 
preachers. May they reap in joy the harvest for which 
the missionaries sowed in tears ! 


— 


SECTION IY. 


Four other Missionaries sent out, and the seat of the 
Mission removed to Serampore. 


AS repeated requests had been made for more mission- 
aries, and particularly for one who should understand the 


16 Brief Narrative ‘[Sect. IV. 


‘printing business, the committee paid every possible at- 
tention to this object. In the spring of 1799, they were 
enabled to send out four men and four women ; namely, 
Mr. and Mrs. Marshman, Mr. and Mrs. Grant, Mr. 
and Mrs. Brunsdon, Mr. William Ward, and “Miss 
Tidd. Mr. Ward understood the printing business, 
and Mr. and Mrs. Marshman had kept a school. 

The imstructions given them were, among other things, 
to ** beware, both from a principle of conscience and 
from a regard to their own interest, and that of the mis- 
sion, of intermeddling with any political concerns—to be 
obedient to the laws im all civil affairs—to respect mag- 
istrates, bdth supreme and subordinate, and teach the 
same things to others—in fine, to apply themselves 
wholly to the all-important concerns of that evangelical 
service to which they had so solemnly dedicated them- 
selves.”’ Moreover, that ‘* however gross might +be the 
idojatries, and heathenish superstitions that might fall 
under their notice, they should sedulously avoid all ~ 
rudeness, insult, or interruption, during the observance 
of such superstitions, observing no methods but those of 
Christ and his apostles, namely, the persevering use of 
scripture, reason, prayer, meekness, and love.” 

Our brethren embarked on board the Criterion, com- 
mauded by Capt. Wickes, on May 25, 1799 ; and after 
an agreeable voyage, arrived at the Danish settlement of 
Serampore, on Oct. 13, of the same year. From thence 
they wrote to Mr. Carey, and waited his answer. 

On Lord’s day, Oct. 27, they had public worship, and 
the Danish Governor, (Col. Bie) with several other gen- 
tlemen attended. Thesame day Mr. Grant was taken 
ilofa cold, attended with a kind of stupor; and the 
following Thursday died. The governor, his family, 
and a number of Europeans attended the funeral. 

On Nov. 9, Mr. Fountain arrived from Mudnabatty, 

and was married to Miss Tidd ; and, onthe 14th, he 
and Mr. Ward set off to visit Mr. Carey at that place, 

Circumstances at this time were difficult and delicate. 
Mr. Carey had made all the interest he could, that the 
four missionaries and their wives, might be per mitted to 
proceed and settle in the neighbourhood of Malda, but 
without effect. As they could not come to bim, the 
only alternative was, whether he should go to them, or 


1794-9.] . Of the Baptist Mission. 17 


whether they should labour separately. The decision 
of this question was the object of Mr. Ward’s journey. 
Ta respect of Mudnabatty, the factory at that place 
had, owing to the failure of the crops, been given up. 
Aud Mr, Carey, with a view to provide for the mission, 
had taken a small place at Kidderpore, about twelve 
miles distant, where he intended to carry on a little busi- 
ness, aud to erect some dwellings for the other missiona- 
nes. The relinquishing of this undertaking would be a 
loss of 5001. They had formed a church—God had 
given them some Europeans for their hire—a degree of 
light had. been diffused among the natives—a school 
was established*—the state of things at Dinagepore was 
, promising—the society would be burdened with new ex- 
penses, &c: &c. Onthe other hand Mr. Carey’s en- 
gagements at Mudnabatty were within a few weeks of 
terminating—at Serampore they would meet with pro- 
tection aud accommodation—the great ends of the mis- 
sion, particularly the printing of the scriptures, were 
likely to be answered in that situation rather than 
in the other—the country was more populous.—All 
things considered, Mr. Carey determined to remove. 
It was not a light matter to him; buta necessity seem- 
ed to be laid upon him. On Jan. 10, 1800, he arrived 
at Serampore; and the next day was introduced to the 
Governor, who received him in a very friendly manner. 
The first object of attention was to settle a plan of fam- 
ily government. All the missionaries were to preach 
and pray in turn; one to superintend the affairs of the 
family for a month, and then another ; Mr. Carey was 
appointed treasurer, and keeper of the medicine chest : 
Mr. Fountain, librarian ; Saturday evening was devoted 
to adjusting any differences which might arise during 
the week, and pledging themselves to love one another ; 
finally, 2# was resolved that no one should engage in any 
private trade ; but that whatever was done by any mem-~ 
ber of the family, should be done for the benefit of the 
mission. 
_ The rent of the lodgings which they at present oceu- 
pied was very high. They therefore purchased a house, 


_* This however must have been given up, on removing to 
Kidderpore, equally as to Serampore. 
ee C 


18 Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


by the river side, with a pretty large piece of ground. 
It had various accommodations, but the price alarmed 
them ; yet the rent in four years would have amounted 
to the purchase, 4 

Mr. Carey having nearly finished the translation of 
the Old and New Testament into Bengalee ; having 
also obtained a press, and agreed with a letter founder at 
Calcutta for types, all things were now in readiness for 
printing. Accordingly, the press being set up, under 
the direction of Mr. Ward, they proceeded to advertise 
for subscribers to the Bengalee Bible. And as it was 
necessary for their support to attend to printing in gene- 
ral, and to open a school to be superintended by Mr. 
and Mrs. Marshman, each was included in the advertise- 
ment. As an encouragement at the out-set, they were 
promised the Government printing, and the teaching of 
the Governor’s children. Some inquiry was made by 
the Governor-General, respecting the press; but on 
being informed that (official papers for the Danish Goy- 
ernment excepted,) its operations were confined to the 
printing ofthe Scriptures, and religious tracts, and that 
the missionaries made it an invariable rule to print 
nothing of a political nature, he was satisfied. 


— 


SECTION V. 


Progress of the Mission at Serampore from 1800 to 
1807, containing the principal events under each 
year successively. 


1800. 


AS soon as the missionaries were settled at Serampore, 
those who had acquired the language began preaching 
the gospel both in the town and neighbourhood, The first 
sheet of the Bengalee New Testament was struck off 
May 16. They printed 2000 copies, besides five hun- 
dred of the gospel by Matthew, for immediate distribu- 
tion. Early in June they opened a Bengalee school, in 
which the children of those natives who chose to send 
them, were taught gratis; and by the 20th of July 


1800.] Of the Baptist Mission. 19 


there were forty scholars. A native of the name of 
Gokool, residing at Serampore, appeared to be much 
affected with what he heard and saw. Early in August 
Mr. Ward speaks of having had Mr. Carey’s two eldest 
sons in his room for religious conversation and instruc- 
tion; and says, ** they wept, read, prayed, and asked 
questions.”” ‘* All our brethren,” says Mr. Carey about 
the same time, ‘‘ have lately been more than usually 
solicitous for the spread of the gospel.” 

Mr. Fountain had been visited by a severe dysentery, 
which laid him aside for several weeks. He had so far 
recovered, however, as to set off with Mrs. Fountain on 
a journey up the country, and on July 26th reached 
Dinagepore. By letters which he wrote to his brethren, 
it appeared that he was nearly recovered ; but: the dis- 
order returned, and on Aug. 20th, at the house of Mr. 
Fernandez, he. died, AJl was done for him that medical 
skill and christian kindness could do;_ but all was inefs 
fectual. He was resigned and happy. 

In October, Mr. Marshman and Mr. Ward began to 
preach to the natives ; and Felix Carey going out with 
the latter, addressed them in a striking, simple, and 
evangelical strain. 

Soon after this an afflicted lady came up the river from 
Calcutta. She intended to have gone farther, but feel- 
ing herself unable, stopped at Serampore. Having tak- 
en lodgings at the hotel, she inquired for an English 
prayer-book. As no such article could be had at the 
hotel, her desire was communicated to the missionaries. 
But neither could they furnish her with the article she 
wanted. Mr. Marshman, however, wrote her a friendly 
note, and accorapanied it with two other books, pointing 
out the way to everlasting life. The lady came next 
morning to the mission-house, apparently in great dis- 
tress of mind, and inquiring what she must do? She re- 
quested permission to stop during family worship. The 
hymn sung on that occasion was, ‘ Come, ye sinners, 
poor and wretched.’’ She was greatly affected, and ask- 
ed leave to attend with them every day during her con- 
tinuance at Serampore. After this she was desirous of 
hearing more about the way of salvation, and Mr. Marsh- 
man discoursed on the atonement as the ground of ac< 
eeptance with God, read the agony in the garden, the 


20 Brief Narrative [ Sect. V. 


53d chapter of Isaiah, and the third chapter of the Ro- 
mans, while she with the greatest eagerness drank in the 
doctrine of the cross. Ina short time she returned to 
Calcutta, and died ; and, they had every reason to hope, 
in the faith of Christ. 

After the lady’s decease, Mr. Marshman saw her hus- 
band, from whose account of her last end his hopes were 
strengthened. The event also appeared to have made a 
considerable impression on his mind. He proved to be 
conversant with the Bible, and yet totally ignorant of the 
way of salvation. He was quite astonished at what was 
stated to him from Rom. iii. 23—28. After a long and 
serious conversation, nearly at midnight, they both kneel- 
ed down, and prayed in succession. The gentleman’s 
name was Rolt. He was afterwards baptized, and mar- 
ried for his second wife Mc. Brunsdon’s widow. 

Mr. Thomas, who was preaching in Bheerboom, avout 
the end of October paid a visit at Serampore, and 
brought with him a Hindoo, whose name was Faxira, 
of whom he entertained great hopes. Fakira of his own 
accord proposed to be baptized, and all were satistied 
with his profession ; but before the time, he left Seram- 
pore, and went amongst his relatives, with a view, as he 
said, first to fetch his child. Whether his resolution 
failed him, or whether he was forcibly detained by his 
relations, the missionaries heard no more of him. 

During this visit, Mr. Thomas’s conversations and 
prayers were observed to be more than usually impres- 
sive. He himself says, in his journal of Oct. 12, “I 
longed for the out-pouring of God’s Spirit, and did ask 
for it believingly for an hour or more together. At 
midnight I was enabled to pour out strong cries and 
supplications to God.’ Speaking also of the other mis- 
sionaries, he says, ** The holy unction appears on them 
all, especially of late.” A weekly prayer-meeting was 
set up at Mr. Thomas’s. desire, fer the success of the 
mission ; and what was observed of Mr. Carey, seems to 
have been common to them all, that the death of Christ 
awas more and more the theme of their preaching. 

Early in November many repaired to the mission- 
house for the gospel by Matthew, which was given to all 
who desired it. On the 25th, Mr. Thomas was called 
to attend a man whose arm was dislocated. After the 


1800.] Of the Baptist Mission. Qu 


operation, he talked to him very impressively concerning 
his salvation. The name of the man was Kristno. He. 
wept like a child, and even sobbed while Mir. T. talked, 
to him. Gokool, of whom mention has been made 
before, lived near him, and was present at the time. 
Two days after this, Kristno wanted to come to the 
mission-house for instruction ; for he said, they had not 
only cured his arm, but brought him the news of salva- 
tion. He aad. Gokool came together and heard the 
word. ‘The consequence was, Gokool’s wife and family 
deserted him ; but those of Aristno were like-minded 
with himseif. The family of the latter was then visited. 
The women appeared to have learned more of the gos- 
pel than was expected ; and after having heard it more 
particularly explained, they declared for Christ. 

On the 22d of December, Gokool and Kristno came 
and ate publicly with the missionaries, by which act 
they threw away their cast. The servants, and as many 
as witnessed it, were astonished, as they had all said, 
No one would lose cast for the gospel ; nor were the 
missionaries much short of being so. They saw that 
day what they had been waiting and hoping tor many 
years, and concerning which they had met with so many 
disappointments. This insurmountable difficulty, as it 
had been considered, seemed now to give way without 
any effort on the part of the missionaries. ‘* God,”’ as 
Mr. Marshman observed, ‘ has done it with perfect 
ease. Thus the door of faith is opened to the Gentiles ; 
who shall shut it ?- The chain of the cast is broken, who 
shall mend it ?” 

The same evening, Gokool without his family, but 
Kristno with his, came and offered themselves willingly 
to the church, each making a solemn profession of faith 
im Christ, and of obedience to his commands, Their 
hearts, to use the words of Gokoo/, seemed ‘* nailed to 
Christ.””, Mr. Thomas was almost overcome with joy. 
At the close of the meeting they all stood up and sung, 
** Salvation, O the joyful sound,” &ce. 

It was soon noised abroad that these people had lost 
cast: and now a time of trial drew near. The next day 
a great company of people assembled, two thousand or 
thereabouts, pouring out their execrations upon them. 


Taking them by force, they first dragged them before 
C2 


Q2 Brief Narrative — [Sect. V. 


the Danish magistrate; but he, instead of censuring, 
commended them for what they had done. Being dis- 
missed, they came a second time with Aristno with a 
new charge, accusing him of refusing to deliver up his 
daughter to a man who had contracted for her in mar- 
riage. The magistrate however defended Kristno, and 
assured the girl that she should not be compelled to 
marry the man against her consent. The governor also 
promised the missionaries that they should not be inter- 
rupted in baptizing. 

The hubbub that had thus been raised did not shake 
the resolution of AKristno; but his family, and Gokool, 
were intimidated by it. On the 27th they sent to the 
mission-house, saying, ‘“* they wished to put off their 
baptism for a few weeks.’’? The next day, (Lord’s day 
the 28th) was the time appointed for baptizing. Mristno 
came forward, and with Felix Carey, was baptized in the 
Hoogly. A considerable number of Europeans and 
natives attended; many of whom appeared to be struck 
with the solemnity of the ordinance. ‘* When Kristno 
came from dressing, (which here is a very short work 
a German lady who was present, took him by the han 
and held him for some moments. She was unable to 
make him understand her words, but she manifestly 
thanked him in her heart for having renounced the 
worship of devils.” After the Lord’s supper had been 
celebrated, Kristno said he was ‘* full of joy.” 


1sol. 


On the first day of January, Mr. Fernandez, with his 
son, and Mr. Powell arrived from Dinagepore. His de- 
sign was to be baptised, and to place his son at school. 
Gokool having absented himself from the missionaries, 
was sitting melancholy in his house. Kvristno’s heart 
was happy, and his conversations and prayers in his fam- 
ily appear to have been blessed to the restoring of them 
toa right mind. Being asked by a European in the 
street, ‘© What he got by his late profession of christian= 
ity 2” he answered, ‘* He got nothing but joy and com-. 
fort ; it was the work of love.” ? 


1801.] Of the Baptist Mission. 23 
On Loid’s day the 18th, Mr. Fernandez and Joy- 


moont, (Kristno’s wife’s sister) were baptised, and join- 
ed the church. At a conversation meeting on the 22d, 
she said, ** She had found a treasure in Christ greater 
than every thing else in this world.” Kristno said his 
chief ‘* thoughts now were about the salvation of others.”’ 

About this time Mr. Ward called on a Scotch gentle- 
man who had met with some severe worldly losses. 
He said he was religiously educated, and that this res- 
trained him a good deal till be came into India, when 
he became like other Europeans. Ten years ago his 
troubles came on. They failed however to produce any 
good inhim. He came to Serampore five years since, 
but continued to live without God till he attended wor- 
ship at the mission-house when he felt a new kind of sen- 
sations. After that he borrowed and read the most 
valuable books in the mission library. His happiest 
hours, he said, were at a throne of grace. His Bible 
was to hima new book. His afflictions appeared ina 
| new and interesting light. The law was new ; and the 
_ way of salvation was precious. 

A widow of the name of Unna who lived in Kristno’s 
| family, was observed to weep in hearing Mr. Ward dis- 
| course to them. She came afterwards with the other’ 
_ women to the mission-house. She said one day to Mr. 
Carey, «* Formerly, I never saw my sins: now I per- 
| ceive that I am a sea ofsin.” On Feb. 13th she made 
an open profession of Christ’s name. Rasoo also 
| (Krisino’s wife) was present, and appeared to be of the 
same mind. On Lord’s day, the 22d, they were both 
_ baptised, 
|The effect of these baptisings was, that all the children 
_ of the Bengaiee school were taken away by their parents, 
lest they should be made christians ; and the only chil- 
/ dren left for instruction were those of Kristno, to whom 
the missionaries now paid the greater attention, and 
_ amongst whom there were some hopeful appearances. 
| The baptised Hindoos appeared to grow much in 
knowledge and affection. Their mauner of speaking 
| was singular and impressive. ‘* Christ (said one) is my 
joy, my hope, my all. Tf worldly thmgs draw my 
mind from him, I say, Mind, why dost thou leave 
Christ ? There is no ether Saviour. If thou leave him, 


ow Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


thou fallest into hell. I charge thee, Mind, that thou 
keep close to Christ.” —** | was formerly (said another) 
in prison. ‘The light of the gospel came to the prison 
door, and I got out. My prayer now is, that Satan 
may iMprisou meno more, If call to mind continually 
the suiieriags of Christ.” 

Tie priating of the New Testament being finished, a 
meeting for thauksgiving was appointed, Copies were 
presented to the Governor, and the Governor-general, 
which were favourabiy received. All things wore an en- 
couraging aspect; except that the state of Mr. Bruns- 
don’s health excited strong apprehensions that they 
would be called to part with him. 

In April, Kristno’s eldest daughter, Golook, was for- 
cibly taken away by the person who had contracted for 
her in marriage, and carried to Calcutta. As she was 
passing by a police-office, she cried out for justice. The 
men who carried her off, were of course detained, 
When the magistrate inquired into her complaint, she 
answered, ‘I have heard of the love and sufferings of 
Christ ; these things have laid hold of my mind: I am 
a christian of choice; and am not willing to go with 
this man.”” The magistrate said, he * could not sepa- 
rate them, but would take care that she should profess 
what religion she chose.”? This however was what he 
could not, or did nor perform ; and the young woman 
was much grieved at being left, contrary to her will, in 
the hands of idolaters. It was also a great trial to 
Kristno and his family. ‘The women endeavoured to 
find her out, and to furnish her with a New ‘Testament 
and some hymus. 

About this time Mr. Carey was appointed by Marquis 
Wellesly to an important station in the New College of 
Fort-William. He had no expectation of any enh ap~ 
plication being made to him; and when it was made, 
had some hesitation as to complying with it, lest it 
should interfere with his proper work as a missionary. 
Nor did he accede to the appointment till he had con- 
sulted with his brethren, who thought that it might pro- 
mote rather than obstruct the great objects of the mis 
sion, _ Every temporal advantage that might arise from 
it would, oa the ground of their established rules, be on- 
ly so much added to the missionary stock, 


On the morning of May sth, the British flag was 
hoisted at Serampore. At ten o'clock the missionaries 
were ordered to appear at the Government-house. On 
presenting themselves they were treated with the utmost 
civility, both by the late Danish Governor, and the En- 
glish Commander, and told to go on with their school, 

_ preaching, &c. im the same peaceable way as before.—- 
On the xgth, Gokool, who had fainted at the outset, 
came forward again, resolved to join the gospel standard, 
let the consequences be what they might. On June 
7th, he was baptized ; and what was more surprising, 
his wife, who had made such violent opposition, was pres~ 
ent, and seemed to express some approbation of the gos- 
pel. She had listened to her husband more attentively 
of late, and her prejudices seemed to be giving way. 

Next day Mr. Carey accompanied Kristno to Cal- 
cutta to see his daughter. He talked affectionately to 
the family ; but while they seemed to be listening to his 
words, he perceived something going forward indicative 

| of mischief. He therefore stepped into his palanquin, 

aud ordered the bearers to take him away. The oppo- 
: 
| 


1801.] Of the Baptist Mission. 25 
| 


sitiou which they made to this, left very little doubt of 
its being their intention to assassinate him. — 

Kristno was now in the habit of talking to his neigh- 
bours who came to him at his work, in some such strain 
as this :—*¢ In all your worship there is no fruit. None 
of the debtas died for sinners; but Jesus Christ came 
into the world for this. This is the greatest love I ever 
heard of. At the house of the missionaries I have seen 
such love as I never saw before. When a man believes 
in Christ he gets a new mind. This is the fruit of be- 
coming a christian, &c. &c.’? The missionaries from 
such specimens lioped that he would soon be able to 

reach Christ to his countrymen. | 

On the 3d of July, Mr. Brunsdon, after a long afflic- 
| tion, died at Calcutta. This, with the deaths which pre- 
| ceded it, was a heavy loss to the mission. Early in 
| August, the missionaries were visited by their much re- 
| spected friend, Capt. Wickes, from Philadelphia ; who 
_ rejoiced to hear of all the mercy and the truth which the 
_ Lord had shewn them. 

_ Gokool’s wife, whose name was Komal, had now be- 
come an attentive hearer and behever of the gospel ; 


26 ~ Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


and as she was always considered as being of a frank and 
open temper, the missionaries had the less apprehension 
of being imposed upon. Ona the fourth of October, she 
was baptised. ‘* We have now, (says Mr. Marshman) 
six baptised Hindoos, whom we esteem more precious 
than gems. Yet we need great prudence in our con- 
duct towards them. We have to encourage, to strength- 
en, to counteract, to advise, to disapprove, to teach, and 
to do all in such a manner as to endear our Saviour and 
ourselves to them.” 

About the same time, the missionaries. purchased the 
house and premises adjoining their own. The garden 
and out-buildings contained more than four acres of land. 
By this addition they had room not only for the schools, 
and for the printing and binding business, but also for 
any new missionaries that might arrive. They made 
themselves trustees for the society, as they had done in 
the first purchase. 

On the 13th of this month died Mr. John Thomas, at 
the house of Mr. Fernandez, at Dinagepore. This was 
the fourth death that had taken place among the mis- 
sionaries within the last two years. For the memoirs of 
these four missionaries, we must refer to the periodical 
accounts, Nos. vit.—x. 

During this month, Mr. Ward and Kristno visited 
certain parts of the country from whence persons had 
come for religious instruction, preaching and distribute 
ing papers as they proceeded ; and some of the women 
went to visit their femaie relations up the country, where 
they also conversed about the gospel. Mr. Ward in his 
excursion was detained by a police officer on much the 
same grounds as have been lately alleged, namely, that 
the Company had given no orders jor the natives to lose 
cast. Mr. W. assured him that the papers were entirely 
religions ; and on his offering to sign them with his own 
name, the officer released him. The papers thus signed 
were sent to Calcutta, and examined. Some alleged, 
that it was improper to attack the religion of the natives ; 
but others answered that there was nothing more in the 
papers than had been always tolerated in the Roman 
Catholics in the Company’s territories. Nothing there-~ 
fore came of it ; and during the administration of Mar- 
quis Wellesly nothing more was heard on the subject; 


a a a 


1802.] Of the Baptist Mission. 27 


During the months of November and December there 
were many people inquiring after the gospel, and some 
hopeful appearances among the Portuguese Catholics at 
Calcutta. | 

In the course of this year, Col. Bie transmitted to his 
Government an account of the settlement of the mission- 
aries at Serampore, in consequence of which his Danish 
Majesty directed the Royal College of Commerce at 
Copenhagen to signify his pleasure to the Governor of 
Serampore, that the society of missionaries be considered 
as under his Majesty’s protection and patronage, which 
they accordingly signified by a letter, bearing date Sept. 
5, 1801. 

The Governor-General also of British India was pleas- 
ed to assure one of the missionaries, that he ‘* was per- 
fectly acquainted with all the concerns and operations at 
Serampore, and felt great satisfaction at their affairs be- 
ing attended with a degree of success.” 


1802. 


THIS year was introduced by a solemn thanksgiving 
to God for his great goodness during that which was 
past, with the baptizing of a native of the name of. 
Petumber Shingee. He had about a month before read 
a tract, which had so impressed his mind that he resolved 
to find out the writer. Onthe 12th of December, 1801, 
he came to the mission-house and heard the gospel ; on 
the 20th threw away his cast, and on January 3d was 
baptized. He appeared from the first to be very sincere 
and decided, and has proved an honourable and useful 
character. He is since dead.* 

In the first three months of this year there was much 
to encourage, and much to try the missionaries. Per- 
sons arrived from the district of Jessore for New Testa- 
ments in consequence of having read some of the tracts 
distributed in the preceding October; many were in- 
quiring after salvation ; several Europeans were impress= 


ed with the reality of religion ; Letters on the Evidences 


of Christianity had been published in the Calcutta 


* See the Memoir ofhim in Periodical Accounts, No. xvil. 


28 Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


Gazette, and were now reprinted at Serampore.—On the 
other hand, some unpleasant things took place among 

the baptized, which cailed for a faithful and prudent ex- 
ercise of discipline ; difficulties also arose on the em- 
ployment of the converts ; and cases occurred of husbands 
whose unbelieving wifes refused to live with them. 

On the 4th of April, a native who had previously lost 
cast, of the name of Syam Dass, was baptized. He 
proved to be a simple-hearted good man, and was in- 
strumental to the conversion of one of his neighbours, 
(Bharut;) butdied, or was murdered on a journey in 

_theautumn of the same year, about five months after his 
baptism. 

About this time a brahman came to Serampore, who 
lived with Dutou. Dulol isa famous leader of a Hin- 
doosect. They are a kind of Deists, setting light by 
the superstitions of the country, and by the cast; but 
making light also of sin, heaven and hell. He said that 
Dulol sent him to get baptized first, and that he himself 
would follow, and bring with him an hundred thousand 
disciples ! The missionaries had no faith in this tale : 
they thought it right, however, to pay him a visit. For 
this purpose Mr. Carey, Mr. Marshman, and Kristno 
(who had formerly been one of his disciples) set off for 
Ghospara, the place of his residence. ‘They perceived 
him to be a designing man, living in state wpon the 
credulity of his followers ; and full of the notion, that 
whatever evil we did, it was God that wrought it in us. 
After a little fnendly but faithful conversation, they 
parted. The only favourable impression which struck 
them was, that this sect was calculated to shake the 
superstitions of the country, and so might prove subser- 
vient to the gospel. . 

--On May 10th, Mr. Ward and Mrs. Fountain were 
married. Heretofore the marriages had been performed 
_by an English clergyman ; but the missionaries haying 
been advised to marry their own people, they, with the 
concurrence of the civil authorities, drew up a simple 
form for the purpose ; and the business was conducted 
to the satisfaction of all present. Soon after this, three 
Mussulmans came from a distance of about sixty miles 
to inquire after this new way. The missionaries invited 
them to stay a few days and judge. They were yery 


1802.] | Of the Baptist Mission. ab 


inquisitive, and stated their objections candidly. When 
the way of salvation was pointed out, they paid great 
attention, and departed quite pleased with their visit, 
inviting the missionaries 1nto their part of the country. 

Kristno having lost much of his former employment 
by becoming a christian, the Governor was very kind in 
employing him, and in sending for his children to hear 
them read. Sristno was also employed by Mr. Rolt. 
This kindness was the more acceptable, when others, 
even Europeans, who pretended to be christians, were 
joining the idolaters in ridiculing and reproaching him. 

The native free-school, which had been deserted on the 
first baptizing, began to recover its former state. Its 
funds also, which were supported by the liberal dona- 
tions of the friends of the gospel in different parts of the 
country, exceeded all expectations. 

Golook, Kristno’s eldest daughter, having returned to— 
her father’s house, prayed the missionaries to baptize — 
her. After waiting about a month, they complied with 
her request. She was baptized on June 6.—Miss 
Rumohr also, a German lady who resided at Serampore, 
was baptized on the 13th. At this time, Mr. Marsh- 
man says, ‘* There is a greater number of inquirers than 
at any former period.”’ 

Ona July 4, four more were baptized ; namely, Peroo, 
a Mussulman; Bharut, a Hindoo, whose conversion was 
occasioned by a conversation with Syam Dass ; Petumber 
Mittre, a kaist from Jessore ; and Dropodee, his wife. 

Mr. Marshman going one evening about this time to 
‘the house of Kristno, found them spinning. Upon in- 
quiry, he found that what a woman might earn by indus- 
try, bears as great a proportion to the wages of a man, as 
the same employment used to doin Entland. He took 
occasion from thence to mention the advantages which 
they, as christians, would derive from industry, frugality, 
and contentment with small things; adverting to the 
case of many poor but honourable christians.in England, 
who thus adorned the gospel. This is a necessary les- 
son here, as their ideas of industry and economy are gen- 
erally very lax.. roy . 
~ ‘Towards the end of this month, a Mussulman, whose 

name was. Moorad, came from Ponchetaluckphool, or as 
they usually call it by way of contraction,’ Luckphool, 
D 


30 Brief Narrative [Sect..P. 


with an imvitation from a considerable number of peo-~ 
ple in that part of the country to go and preach the gos- 
pel to them. It was determined that Mr. Marshman 
should go with Moorad. They set out on the 10th of 
August, taking Petumber Mittre and Bharut with them. 
Arriving at Luckphool on Lord's day the 15th, they 
stopped under a large tree, which was the appointed 
place for hearing. The people came together and re- 
ceived them in the most affectionate manner. Each sit- 
ting down on the grass, they entered immediately on the 
subject. After having heard with much earnestness for 
about half an hour, they entreated the preacher to rest, 
and take some refreshment. He did so, and then renew- 
ed his subject. They heard with great attention, put 
- questions to him as he proceeded, and insisted on proof 
for every thing; but all in the most candid manner. 
The idea of God’s hatred of sin being manifested more 
by the death of his Son, than if the whole world had been 
punished, struck them sensibly. 

Having discoursed four or five hours, Mr. M. observed 
that they must needs be weary, and proposed to retire to 
his boat. To this they consented; but they followed 
him to the boat, and while he lay down to sleep, were in 
full conversation with Petumber. In about two hours 
he rose and renewed his work. Taking these words as 

-the ground of his discourse, ‘* We pray you in Christ’s 
stead, be ye reconciled to God,” he described the dis- 
tance that sinners were at from God; and the insuf- 
ficiency of all other ways of reconciliation but the gospel. 
After this they retired to a veranda, where they spent the 
evening, sitting round and asking questions on Christ, 
the resurrection, a future state, &c. At nine o’clock 
Mr. M. retired, full of thankfulness and astonishment at 
what had passed in the day ! 

These people, amounting to some hundreds, had for 
the last fourteen years begun to dislike the idolatry of 
the country ; and attaching themselves to a grave elder- 
ty man, as their goroo or teacher, had from that time 
been inquiring after the right way. Nero (for that 
was the old man’s name) had taught them that there was 
one God, whom he called Father, who alone was to be 
worshipped ; that sin was to be forsaken ; and that a 
farther revelation was to be expected. It was in conse- 


1802.] Of the Baptist Mission. Bt 


quence of his having heard of the missionaries that 
Moorad was sent to Serampore, to request them to come 
and visit them. After Mr. Marshman had spent the 
Lord’s day amongst them, as above related, the old man 
took him aside for private conversation, and appeared to 
be, very averse to brahmanism, and friendly to the gospel 
as opposed to it, recommending it also to his people, as 
being the revelation which he had given them to expect. 
Many of the people accompanied Mr. Marshmau several 
miles on his return, and seemed to part with him with 
much reluctance. 

**T never saw any Hindoos,”’ says Mr. M. ‘ except 
Kristno’s family, listen to the gospel like these people : 
time can only discover how they really feel towards it. 
Their behaviour towards me was very atfectionate.”’ 

In returning home, Mr. M. called on another goroo, 
who had nearly 20,000 followers. His name was Seeb 
Ram Dass, and his residence at Juggerdandakatty. 
- There was much less pomp and artifice in him than in 
Dulol: and much less conviction and affection than in 
Neelo and his people at Luckphool. The general im- 
pression was, that they were loosened from the Hindoo 
and Mahomedan systems, which marked the hand of 
providence, and might be introductory to the gospel. 

On Sept. 4, Mr. Rolt of Calcutta was baptized, and 
joined the church at Serampore. Upon the whole, many 
things wore an encouraging aspect. They were balanc- 
ed however by others of a different complexion. Gokool 
required to be excluded, and Petumber Mittre to be 
suspended. On the 25th, Mr. Powell died ; and about 
the same time Syam Dass was supposed to be murdered. 

On the 27th, three of the Luckphool people arrived 
at Serampore, with intelligence of the brahmans having 
raised a persecution against them. Mr. Marshman soon 
after his departure had been hung in effigy by:them ; 
and these messengers on their setting out were hissed 
away by the mob. They requested to be visited again. 

On Oct. 11th, Mr. Ward and William Carey set out 
with them for Luckphool. On their arrival they had 
much conversation with Neelo and his friends, who 
agreed to set up a school, and proposed building a place 
for Christian worstip.— During this year Mr. and Mrs, 
Chamberlain were sent out by the committee to assis* 
in the labours of the India Missioix 


“92 Brief Narrative {Sect. Vs 


1803. 


THIS year was introduced with some painful events 
‘among the baptized natives. Aristno, though an up- 
nght character upon the whole, yet by giving way to 
temper produced a schism in the church, which, had it 
not been managed with great prudence, might have been 
of serious consequence. By means of expostulation and 
forbearance ail was rectified. j 

While these things exercised the patience of the mis- 
sionaries, they were encouraged by perceiving symptoms 
ef repentance in Gokool whom they had been obliged to 
exclude; also by the coming of two inquirers after the 
gospel, Boodhessa, and Kristno Presaud. ‘The former 
was a Mussulman; and had made an eight day’s 

ernie im consequence of having seen a tract. The 
atter was a young brahman from Dahatta. On Jan. 22d, 
they were both baptized. Boodhessa being very desir- 
eus for some person to go with him to his part of the 
country, Kristno was appointed for that purpose.—On 
the 27th, Mr. and Mrs. Chamberlain arrived at Seram- 
pore. The pleasure with which they were received by 
the native christians, as well as by the missionaries, was 
great. ‘‘ They cannot talk our language,” said they, © 
“‘ but we perceive that all our hearts are one: we are 
united in the death of Christ.””—Towards the end of this 
month, besides the New Testament, the first volume of 
the Old, the Psalms, and a part of Isaiah were finished, 
and began to bea good deal read in different places. A 
new fount of N aggree types was nearly completed ; and 
a house was taken in Calcutta for preaching: to both 
Europeans and Natives. 

In February they speak of * the affairs of the mission 
growing more and more weighty.” Several new inquir- 
ers atrived : amongst whom was Sheetaram a sooder, — 
from Bishoohurry in Jessore, and who on the 27th was 
baptized. "Lhe zeal, the simplicity, and the good con- 
duct of this man proved, as will be seen, a great blessing 
to several of his relations and neighbours. 

Gokool having of late discover ed much of a right spir- 
it, was forgiven, and on March 5th restored to commu- 


+ 


* 


1803.] Of the Baptist Mission. $F 


nione On the 6th, Petumber Shingee began preaching 
toa mixed congregation of Hindoos, Mussulmans, Ar= 
menians and. English. After praying a short time ‘with 
fervour and. consistency he sat down, and with his hands 
joined together and stretched out, craved their attention. 
He then. spoke for.an hour with faithfulness and proprie~ 
_ty, and closed with prayer. The missionaries were 
pleased and satisfied with this his first attempt ; and as 
it was the first sermon from a native, considered it as an 
important era in the history of the mission, and the in~ 
crease of such preachers to be the grand desideratum for 
the conversion of the Hindoos.. 

The duty ofa christian native who had: more than one 
wife at the time of his conversion, was discussed about 
this time. The result seems to have been this, that 
though the New Testament condemns polygamy, yet 
where the party has more wives than one at the time of 
_his becoming a christian, he is not required to put any 
ef them away, only that he shall be uuqualified for the 
ministry - 

During this month, Mr. Marshman: paid another visit- 
to Luckphool, and talked seriously te those who profess~ 
ed to believe in Christ, and yet from fear of temporal 
inconveniences declined to be baptized in his name. It. 
appeared. to Mr. M. from this visit very doubtful, 
whether the zeal which these people discovered on his: 
first going amongst them, did not arise more from oppo 
sition to the power and influence of the br nae than 
from any just sentiments of the gospel.. 

Lord’s day, April 3, was introduced by a morning meet-~ 
ing of thanksgiving to God for his mercies. After break= 
fast, Sadutsa.. the brother of Boodhes sa, a farmer ; Ram 
Koteen, a young kaist, of respectable connexions in 
Calcutta ; and. William Carey » Mr. Carey’s second son,. 
_were baptized. In the afternoon it was observed, they 
had a lovely company at the Lord’s supper ; and that 
their anxiety for converts to Christ was now in a meas~ 
ure changed into anxiety for those who were already 
converted. 

The next day Kristno Presaud was married to Onun- 
da, Kristno’s se cond daughter. The marriage was: 
conducted much in the same way as Mr. Ward’s had 
been. Mr. Carey, after explaining the nature and 

D2 


34 Brief Narrative [Sect. Vs 


ends of marriage, and noticing the impropriety of the 
Hindoo customs, read certain portions of scripture, and 
afterthem the marriageagreement. The parties then join-~ 
ed hands, promised love, faithfulness, obedience, &c. 
then signed the agreement, to which others added their 
_ ames as witnesses. A prayer for a divine blessing fol- 
lowed, and the whole was concluded with a temperate 
and cheerful repast of raisins, plantains, &c. The day 
following they had a supper at the house of Kristno, the 
bride’s father, where all sat down together without 
distinction of colour or country. This to spectators was 
anew thing. It was begun and ended with prayer and 
praise, and afforded a glorious triumph over the cast. 

On the 25th, Sheetaram arrived, bringing with him his 
sister QOomaree, aud two other persons; namely, 
Golamee, a Mussuiman, and Kyemee, a Hindoo widow, 
who were desirous of hearing the gospel.—During this 
month several of the native brethren, as Kristno Presaud, 
Ram Roteen, §e. went into the villages to talk with the 
people about Christ. They were treated with abuse, | 
but bore it with christian meekness, telling their abusers 
that they ‘only did what every sect did, who, whether 
Hindoos or Mussulmans, were allowed to perform their 
poohjahs in the streets; and that insults, stripes, and 
even death were good for them, so that God by them did 
but turn their hearts.” 

On the first: of May, Fazoo, a Mussulman from 
Barrobazar, Radhamonee, a Hindoo woman from the 
same place, and Oomaree the sister of Sheetaram, were 
baptized. The missionaries thought favourably of the 
two other persons who came with Skeetaram ; but owing 
to some circumstances, which did not affect their charac- 
ter, their baptism was deferred. Those who were baptiz- 
ed, after being commended to the grace of God, return- 
ed to their own homes. Kristne Presaud, the young 
brahman, delivered his first sermon in Bengalee, much 
to the satisfaction of the brethren. A letter from Chinsu- 
rah informs them of the death of a lady who had been 
one of Mrs. Marshman’s boarders, and that there was 
hope in her latter end. 

On the 3d of July, Bhoyerub or Bhyrub, a young. 
_koolen brahman, from the neighbourhood of Calcutta, 
and John, formerly a Mussulman, of late called a 


1803.] Of the Baptist Mission. a: 14 


Portuguese, were baptized.—Soon after this, Sheetaram 
returns, bringing with him Giolamee and Kheymee, who 
on the 19th are baptized. 

In August a new and improved edition of the Bengalee 
New. Testament was begun, as only six hundred copies 
remained of the first impression. 

In September, Kristno visited Luckphool and Bishoo- 
hurry. On his return he gave a pleasing account of 
Sheetaram’s walk in his family. The four members at 
Bishoohurry observe the Lord’s day, and meet for wor- 
ship. Others also come in an evening, and sit and talk 
with him. Sheetaram is a mild and inoffensive’character, 
greatly respected ; and though unable to read, yet is 
very active in recommending the Saviour. 

Mr. Ward’s health being impaired by too great an at- 
tention to business, he this month took a journey to 
Dinagepore, accompanied by young Fernandez, Kristno 
Presaud, and Ram Roteen. They preached at many 
places. Kristno Presaud addressed his countrymen 
with much earnestness and fluency. They found Mr. 
Fernandez full of love and good works towards the 
natives. He supports a native school, and administers 
much relief to the afflicted poor. 

During the last three months some very improper con- 
duct was found to have taken place among the younger 
branches of one of the families of the christian natives, 
and in which some of the elder branches were more or 
less implicated: but by a faithful and persevering use 
of discipline, the parties were about this time restored to 
a right state of mind, and to the fellowship of the church. 

For several weeks past, Gokool seemed to be drawing 
near his end. His mind was_ steadily fixed in 
the faith of Christ. On October 7th, he died. 
** About two hours before his death, (says Mr. Marsh- 
man) he called the native brethren round him to sing and 
pray. He was perfectly sensible, resigned, and tranquil. 
Some of the neighbours had been trying to persuade 
_ him to employ a native doctor; but as all their medi- 
cines are accompanied with heathen incantations, he 
refused them, saying, he would have no physician but 
Jesus Christ. ‘* How isit, said they, that-you, who have 
turned to Christ, should be thus afflicted ?”” My afflic- 
tion, replied he, is on account of my sins: my Lord 


36 Brief Narrative [ Sect. V. 


does all things well. Observing Komal to weep, (whowas 
a most affectionate wife) he said, Why do you weep for 
me? His tranquiland happy end has made a deep impres- 
sion oa our friends. They say one to another, May my 
mind be as Gokool’s was / 

As this was the first christian native who had died, it 
was the desire of the missionaries to set such an example 
of christian burial as might be favourable to the gospel. 
A decent coffin was made for him by Kristno, lined at 
his own expense, both inside and out, with white muslin. 
A great number of people being assembled, they sung 
an hymn ; after this two of the Missionaries and two of 
the native brethren took up the corpse, and with the as- 
sistance of two others, carried it to the grave. Mr. 
. Marshman addressed the spectators. They appeared to 
be much impressed by the love which christians discoy- 
ered to one another even in death, and with the differ- 
ence between this and throwing their relations half dead, 
into the river, or burning their bodies with perhaps a sol- 
itary attendant. 

On the 23d of this month (October) a brahman from 
Assam, near Boutan, having been two or three months. 
at Serampore, and professing to believe in Christ, was: 
baptized. His name was Pudmu Nabhu. 

On the 2d of November, Sheetaram and Golamee ar- 
rive, and bring with them an elderly man whose name 
is Kobeer. Atter tarrying awhile, they depart, leaving 
him, at his own desire, to hear more about the gospel. 

In December, Sheetaram returns to Serampore, and 
he and Kobeer prevail on Mr. Marshman to visit their 
neighbourhood ; to which he consents, minding to take: 
Luckphool in his way. On the 23d he set out with 
them, and took Kristno. with him. At Luckphool they 
were received as usual with kindness. Nee/o, the eld. 
goroo, Sooker Bishes, Torribut Bishes, Moorad, &c.. 
haye some christian notions, and support a christian 
school amongst them ; but are afraid to appear openly 
on the side of Christ. Mr. M. diseovers much heathen- 
ish error in the conversation of old Neelo, and finds 
them alli disbelieving in future punishment, and holding 
-with universal salvation. Coming to Buishoohurry,. 
where there are four members, they are received with 
great affection, and have a congregation, gathered by 


1804.] . Ab? Of the Baptist Mission. 37 


the previous invitation of Sheetaram. From thence, 
accompanied by Sheetaram, they depart for Arenda, the 
village of Kobeer. On their way they call, according to 
promise, on some who had been to hear the preceding 
evening, where, in the yard of an aged and respectable 
farmer, they preach with much pleasure to about seven- 
ty people. Arriving at the house of Kobeer, they find 
him to be the head of a family of more than twenty per- 
sons, and greatly respected. After preaching and con- 
versing with many people, they, accompanied by Kobeer 
and Sheetaram, return to Serampore. 

During this year the Society presented a copy of the 
New Testament, and of the pentateuch, to his Majesty, 
by the hands of Robert Bowyer, Esq. His Majesty was 
pleased graciously to accept of them, and to direct that 
his thanks should be given to the Society. During this 
year also a plan was laid for translating the Scriptures 
into various other eastern languages, 


1804, 


In the autumn of the preceding year, four more young 
mén had been set apart for the work of the mission ; viz. 
John Biss, Richard Mardon, William Moore, and Josh= 
wa Rowe. On the 3d of January in the present year, 
they with their wives set sail for India, by way of Amer- 
ca. After a tedious and perilous voyage, during which 
they received much kindness from friends, both in Amer- 
ica and at Madras, they all arrived safe at the place of 
their destination. 

_ To return to the proceedings at Serampore.—On the 

8th of January, John Fernandez is baptized. On the 
16th his father, Mr. Fernandez ‘of Dinagepore, is set 
apart to the work of the ministry.. On his return from 
Serampore, Pudmu Nabhu, the Assam brahman, goes 
with him, in his way to hisown country. Fears are en- 
tertained for Boodhessa, Sadutsa, Tazoo,and Radhamo- 
nee, who all live near each other at Barrobazar. 

On Feb. 5th, a prayer meeting is held for a blessing 
on the undertaking of Mr. and Mrs. Chamberlain, who 

were about going to a new station. At the same time 
Kristno and Petumber Shingo are solemnly set apart for 


38 Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


the work of the ministry, with prayer, and the laying on 
of hands. | 

In the course of this year, fourteen more natives were 
baptized. Among them were Kobeer of Arenda, whom 
Mr. Marshman had visited at the close of the cblguas 
year, and Ram Mohun,a brahman, who has since prov 
- a useful minister, As a list of the baptized will be given 
at the end, we omit the names of many in the narrative. 

On the 19th of May, a letter 1s received from Mr, 
Chamberlain, informing the brethren that he had taken 
a piece of ground at Cutwa for a missionary station. 
Two more schools are opened ; one at Arenda, under 
the care of Kobeer ; and the other at Bishoohurry, su- 
perintended by Sheetaram. At these schools, adults 
as well as children, frequently attend for instruction. 
Ten thousand copies of Luke, the Acts, and the Epistle 
tothe Romans, are printed for distribution. 

On July 7th, Totoram died, but little more than 
three months after his baptism. All who knew him spoke 
well of him. As he was borne to the grave by his breth- 
ren, both Europeans and natives, the spectators observed, 
“ This is great love; they are kind to those that join 
‘them, even to the last.”’ OG eG 

On October 14th, Ram Mohun, the brahman who had 
been baptised on April Ist, preached at Calcutta to about 
forty natives, and with much freedom declared unto 
them the way of salvation.—Mohun, the husband of 
Kristno’s eldest daughter, Golook, comes and lives with 
her, and hears the gospel.—-On the 23d, Mr. Felix Ca- 
rey is married to a young person of Calcutta. 

Ou the Gth of November, Mr. Ward sets off on a visit 
to Jessore. Calling at Sooksaugur, finds Petumber’s 
wife in a hopeful state of mind. Coming to Luckphool 
finds the school in rather a promising condition, but the 
people otherwise.. Proceeding to Bishoohurry, he found 
things more pleasing. A young man whose name is Go- 
look, and who superintends the school, appeared to be on 
Christ’s side. Going from thence to Arenda, he found 
Kobeer’s wife and children had left him for fear of losing 
cast. | From the same cause the school was diminished, 
‘On reaching Sooksangur, in his way home, he is greatly 
affected with the afMlictive intelligence of the death of 
Mrs. Chamberlain, who died at Cutwa on the 14th of 


1805.] Of the Baptist Mission. Bo 


this month. Her amiable spirit had endeared her to all 
who knew her.—About this time some of the native 
_ christians are insulted aud abused by their heathen neigh- 
bours; but endure it with meekness. 

Towards the end of the year, several disorders and 
some defections take place among the baptised. Byrub 
the brahman, and after him, Bishhoonaut Mittre, and 
Baxoo, are excluded for immorality. Yet upon the 
whole the missionaries are not disheartened. ‘* Notwith- 
standing various disappointments and discouragements 
{say they) the church never appeared in a more prosper- 
ous state than at present.” Speaking of the school, un- 
der Mr. Marshman, they represent it as a nursery to the 
church ; and of the press, under the direction of Mr. 
Ward, as the grand engine of the mission. By means 
of the latter, they hope to give the word of God to ma- 
ny eastern nations. Estimating the extent of the coun- 
try and the population, where those languages are spok- 
en into which they are employed in translating it, they 
reckon the Bengalee and Maharastra or Mahratta, each 
equal to Great Britain ; the Ootkul or Orissa, to lre- 
land; the Yelinga and Kurnata, each to England ; 
the Tamul, to Spain; and the Hindostanee, to France 
and Italy. 


1805. 


THIs year was introduced bya plan for erecting a 
new place of worship at Calcutta. On the first of Jan- 
uary, 4800 rupees were subscribed towards it.—On the 
6th Deep Chund, the companion of Fotick from Jessore, 
and Mrs. Felix Carey, were baptized. 

_ A parcel of ground, with buildings upon it, adjoining 
to'the mission premises, being on sale, it was thought 
advisable to secure it ; and on March 28th it was pur- 
chased for 14,000 rupees, or about 1800!. The money 
was borrowed ; but a warehouse belonging to the estate 
was let, for nearly enough to pay the interest. 

The spiritual state of the mission being at this time 
rather low, a meeting for humiliation and prayer is held 
on April 7th. The same day Mohun, the husband of 
Golook, was baptized. 


40° Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


On the morning of May 17th, Mr. Ward visited Pe- 
tumber Shingo, who was now very ill. While standing 
by his bed side, the good old man spake as follows :— 
* T do not attribute it to my own wisdom, or to my own 
‘goodness, that I became a christian. It is ail of grace ! 
It is all of grace !—TI have tried all means for my re- 
covery ; all are vain: God is my only hope. Life is 
good, death is good ; but to be wholly emancipated is 
better.”"——Mr, Ward reminded him of the use of afflic- 
tion to wean us from the world. He answered, “ I 
have a wife, a daughter, a son-in-law, &c. I have tried 
to induce them to embrace the gospel by presents, and 
by persuasions; but they refused. I am therefore 
weaned from them all. I can only pray for their salva- 
tion. This is the only way in which I can now manifest 
my loveto them. He considered it, he said, as a great 
honour that God had given him the respect of all his 
brethren. He spoke with respect of Aristno Presaud, 
as the person who amongst all the native brethren, 
most adorned the gospel. He lamented many things 
amongst them. Many of the brethren were now stand- 
ing round the bed, and hearing him, to whom Mr. 
Ward recommended the dying advice of the venerable 
man as most weighty and solemn. 

The next day Col. Bie died, much respected and la- 
mented as a Governor. <A great part of the night pre- 
ceding his death, he was said to be praying most fer- 
vently to the Saviour. The poor natives said at his in- 
terment, *“ Never shall we see agother such a master.” 

On June 2d, Kangalee, a byraggee from the neigh- 
bourhood of Cutwa, and Caleb Hiorns, brother of Mrs. 
Rolt, lately arrived from England, were baptised. The 
former had heard of the gospel, and had been seeking 
after some person to give him further information, 
when he met with Bydenaut, who told him all he wish- 
ed toknow, and brought him to Serampore. He was 
greatly affected when speaking before the church. On 
the 15th Sheetaram arrives with two of his neighbours ; 
Bykonta, of the writer casz, and Lochon, a husbéndman. 
On the 22d they were both baptised. On July 7th, 
Mr. Joseph Maylin, an Englishman, who has long re- 


1805.] Of the Baptist Mission. Al 


sided in the upper provinces of India, having lately em- 


braced the gospel, is baptised. 

On August 4th, Kodeer arrives, bringing with him 
Beeshonaut, a neighbour of his, about thirty-five years 
old, whois earnestly desirous to find the way of life. 
All the native brethren, (who know the Hindoo charac- 
ter much better than Europeans do) think well of him. 
On the 18th he is baptised. These successful labours 
of Kobeer, Sheetaram, &c. gave the missionaries to per- 
ceive more and more the importance of encouraging 
Native preachers. Kawnye preached well the same 
day. , 
About four years ago Mr. Ward, being on a visit at 
Calcutta, went with Aristno to a village called Ram- 
kreeshnofiore, on the other side of the river, oppo- 
site Calcutta. Here they left a number of small tracts 
and a New Testament ; declaring, it seems, that ‘¢ the 
Testament was for the use of the whole village, and 
that he who could read the best, should keep it, and 
readit to all who wished to hearit.” Till now the 
effects were unknown. Arisino, on revisiting the vil- 
lage, meets with a byraggee, who tells him that the 
books have been read, and that several persons are con- 
vinced by them. 

On the 2ist of August, Petumber Shingo died. “ A 
little before his departure,” says Mr. Moore, “ he called 
the brethren who were at hand, and desired them to 
sing Krisino’s hymn, Salvation by the blood and right- 
eousness of Christ. And while they were thus engaged, 
the tears of joy bedewed his placid face ; and in this 
happy frame of mind he breathed his last!” He has 
been,” says Mr. Carey, “ a very honourable member of 
the church. His conversation on his death bed was 
highly encouraging and edifying. He frequently ob- 
served that he had obtained the peace which Peul wish- 
ed in the introduction to his epistles.’* KXrisino, who 
visits Ramkreeshnofiore, or as they call it by contraction, 
Kreeshnopfiore, is greatly delighted to see the effects of 


the New Testament and the tracts. -He tells of ten 


or eleven persons at and in the vicinity of Calcutta, who 


*See a memoir of him in No. xviii. Per. Accounts. 


42 Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


are inquiring, ‘“ How they may obtain the fruits of 
Christ’s death.” He is surprised at the knowledge they 
have obtained. The next morning after the interment 
of Pretumber, two persons came to the house, who, from 
what they had heard and seen, were much impressed 
in favour of the gospel. The name of one of them 
was Goluk, a young man from Calcutta. After visiting 
the mission house most days, on the 27th he came to 
abide with them. 

On Sept. Ist. Bhagvat, a young brahman, and Felloo, 
he mother of Fotick, whom he had brought with him 
from Jessore, are baptised. About the same time the 
relations of Goluk are using all means to induce him to 
relinquish christianity. Mr. Ward, after much con- 
versation with them, told them that they could not take 
him away by force ; and that they ought not, if they 
could. On leaving them he said to Goiwk, “ Here are 
four of your relations, and you have a mother also at 
Serampore. If you choose, you may go with them ; 
but if not, go with me.” They allowed this was fair. 
The young man then said, “* He would not go with them, 
but with Mr. Ward,” who accordingly took him to the 
Mission-house ; and on the 15th, he was baptised. 

During thismonth, Mr. Moore, Mr. Wm. Carey, and 
three of the native brethren, set out on a missionary 
tour through the country to Dhacca, where, being inter- 
rupted by a Collector, and afterwards by a Magistrate, 
they were obliged to desist. On their return they call- 
ed on acongregation of Hindoo Catholics, with whom 
they conversed freely, and offered them a New Testa- 
ment; hut the priest being absent, they dare not re- 
ceive it. Though there did not appear to be any thing 
like true religion amongst these people, yet the mission- 
aries could not but observe a difference as to their man- 
ners, when compared with those of the heathen na- 
tives. They took well all that was said tothem, and 
expressed their gratitude for the visit. They were in- 
vited in return to visit Serampore, should any of them 
be coming that way. 

On the 6th of October, the brethren, Marshman and 
Ward, were chosen co-pastors with brother Carey ; 
and the brethren Mardon, Biss, Moore, Rowe, Arisino, 


1806.] Of the Baptist Mission. 43 


and Krisino-Presaud, were set apart to the office of 
deacons. During this and the two following months 
twenty-one persons were baptised, seven of whom came 
from Kristnopore, and were the fruits of the New Tes- 
tament and tracts which were left at that village. One 
of them, named Krisino Dass, referring to Mr. Ward’s 
having declared concerning the Testament, that ‘ It 
was for the use of the whole village, and that he who 
could read the best should keep it, and read it to all 
who wished to hear it,” said, ‘* He had got it, and that 
the reading of it had changed his ideas, made him 
leave off idolatry, and put his trust in Christ.” The 
Testament was produced, and was nearly worn out by 
reading. ‘Ten out of the twenty-one were baptised on 
November 3d. ‘“ A solemn seriousness,” says Mr. 
Biss, * pervaded the company. Some who seemed to 
know nothing of the power of religion, nevertheless, 
shed tears.” Atthe Lord’s Supper there was great joy 
through the whole church, singing and making melody 
in their hearts to the Lord. 

In the autumn of this year, Captain Wickes being in 
London, the committee sent by him a thousand guin- 
eas which had been collected in England, Scotland, and 
Ireland, towards the translation of the scriptures into 
the eastern languages. On the Captain’s arrival in 
America, he expressed a wish in the public papers that 
the friends of religion in his country would add some- 
thing toit. The result was, that by the generols ex- 
ertions of the different denominations, the original sum 
was considerably more than doubled, and sent in dollars 
to Serampore. 


1800. 


IN November, 1805, the secretary received a letter 
from Rob. Ralston, Esq. of Philadelphia, informing him 
that Capt. Wickes would in the spring following sail 
ina shipof his for Holland; after which he would 
touch at London, in his way to Bengal; and that if 
we had any persons or goods to send, he would take 
them free of charge as to passage or freightage. The 


44 Brief Narrative [Seet. V. 


society having two young men on probation, Mr. Chater, 
and Mr. Robinson, availed themselves of this kind offer 
to send them out. On April 12th they set sail for 
Serampore. 

Early in January, Mr. Maylin and Mr. Fernandez, 
jun, set sail for England, by way of America. Mr, 
Fernandez, sen. came down at this time to take leave 
of his son, and brought with him two natives who wish- 
ed to be baptized. Their names were Vundkishore and 
Heduram. On the 26th they were baptized. On the 
27th, a new church was formed for Dinagepore. Sev- 
eral of the members who resided in that part of the 
country, with Mr. and Mrs. Biss, were dismissed from 
the Serampore church for this purpose ; and wha@ 
chose Mr. Fernandez for their pastor. 

A young man, of the name of Burford, grandson of a 
Baptist minister of that name, a predecessor of Mr, 
Booth, heard Mr. Ward at Calcutta: and being deeply 
impressed with a sense of his sins, came to Serampore 
and opened his mind to Mr. Ward. He wept much, 
A few days after this, he seemed to find rest for his soul 
in the doctrine of Christ, which was recommended to 
him. 

The principal events of the first six months of this 
year are the following—Ground for the new chapel at 
Calcuita, in a place called the Loll Bazar, is purchased 
for 7250 rupees 3 and after investing it in the hands of 
ten trustees, a shed or temporary mat-house is erected 
for present use—Proposals for subscriptions to the 
translation of the scriptures into the eastern languages 
are publicly advertised, and by June 14,000 rupees are 
subscribed—Mr. Biss has a dangerous liver complaint 
—Seeboo, a native brother in Jessore, dies ; and, con- 
irary to his own desire, is burnt after the manner of 
idolaters. He dies declaring his faith in Christ, and 
recommended his wife to believe in him—Some are 
excluded for immorality ; but others are received al- 
most every month. Out of about forty, received within 
a year, four or five appear suspicious characters—The 
native preachers are very active, and in general very 
acceptable—-The shed is opened in Calcutta, and many 
resort to it: some hearing with great attention, others 


1806.] Of the Baptist Mission. 45 


mocking and loading both the missionaries and the na- 
tive christians with reproach.—The converts at Kristno- 
pore suffer much from their heathen neighbours ; but 
bear all with patience and fortitude. During this pe- 
riod there appear to have been fourteen persons baptiz- 
ed; among whom were Mr. Epliraim Burford, the 
young man above mentioned, and three more from 
Kristnopore, the village where the New Testament was 
left, and read. Upon the whole, things at this time 
wear a very promising appearance. ‘ We have,” says 
Mr. Marshman, in a letter of August 18th, “ the ut- 
most reason for thankfulness with regard to the whole 
of our affairs. In no period has the mission appeared 
more promising.” 

About the same time an extraordinary church meet- 
ing was called, in which the native brethren were given 
to understand the importance of their entering with all 
their hearts into the great object of the mission, and 
using ali proper means to promote the salvation of 
their countrymen ; and that as they could not support 
their families while engaged in this service, the church 
would allow them for the time which was so employed. 
—Of these itinerating excursions of the native brethren 
there are two journals, printed in No. xvii. of the Peri- 
odical Accounts, for a specimen: the one of Dee/i 
Chund, and the other of Kristno Dass, both in the true 
spirit of christianity. 

But it was the will of God in the midst of these open- 
Ing prospects to try them, and that in a way to whiclr 
they had not been accustomed. 

On August 5th, Mr. Moore writes from Dinagepore, 
that on their arrival at that city, a servant of the magis- 
trate came to the boat demanding their names, occupa- 
tion and place of residence ; to which they readily made 
answer, declaring also the object of their journey. The 
result was, they were required to return to Serampore: 

On the 23d of Augusi, the brethren, Chater and 
Robinson, with their wives, arrived in the ship, Benja- 
min Franklin, Capt. Wickes. On presenting them- 
selves at the police office, some demur was made as to: 
their being permitted to proceed to Serampore. Next 

; E 2 


46 Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


day, on Mr. Carey’s going to the office, he was told by 
one of the magistrates that they had a message to him 
from the Governor-general, and which was, “ that as 
government did not interfere with the prejudices of the 
natives, it was his request that Mr. Carey and his col- 
leagues would not.” This request as explained by 
the magistrates, amounted to this—“ They were not to 
preach to the natives, nor suffer the native converts to 
preach; they were not to distribute religious tracts, 
nor suffer the people to distribute them ; they were not 
to send forth converted natives, nor to take any step, 
by conversation or otherwise, for persuading the na- 
tives to embrace christianity.” 

Mr. Carey inquired whether they had any written 
communication with the Governor-general ; and was 
answered in the negative. He then took leave of them, 
assuring them that neither he nor his brethren wished 
to do any thing disagreeable to government, from 
which they could conscientiously abstain. 

Some of the foregoing particulars, however, were 
softened in a subsequent conversation between the 
Magistrates anda friend to the missionaries. ‘ It was 
not meant,” they then said, ‘to prohibit Mr. Carey 
or his brethren from preaching at Serampore, or in 
their own house at Calcutta ; only they must not 
preach at the Loll Bazar. It was not intended to pre- 
vent their circulating the scriptures; but merely the 
tracts abusing the Hindoo religion ; and that there was 
no design to forbid the native christians conversing 
with their countrymen on christianity, only they must 
not go out under the sanction of the missionaries.” 

The Governor-general at this time was Sir George 
Barlow, who not only professed to believe in Christian- 
ity, but had expressed his persuasion that it would 
prevail in India. The news of the Vellore mutiny had 
jately reached Calcutta. 

In a conversation that took place between the mag- 
istrates and a friend of the missionaries, they ackuowl- 
edged themselves ‘ well satisfied with their character 
and deportment, and that no complaint had ever been 
lodged against them.” An order of council however 
‘Was passed, commanding Messrs. Chater and Robinsop 


is06.] Of the Baptist Missvon. AF 


to return to Europe, and refusing Capt. Wickes a 
clearance unless he took them back with him. 

This order being communicated, it was represented 
to government, that Capt. W. cleared out from Rotter- 
dam for Serampore; that his clearing out from En- 
gland to Serampore was no more than a necessary step 
to accomplish the first intended voyage: that Messrs. 
Chater and Robinson were then at Serampore, and had 
joined the mission under their direction, and the pro- 
tection of the king of Denmark. 

This representation produced an inquiry whether the 
mission was really under the protection of Denmark. 
To this the Danish governor gave an explicit answer, 
An amicable discussion between the Captain and the 
Magistrates followed, in which he assured them that 
neither he nor the missionaries wished to give offence, 
and that if friendly representations couid not prevail, 
rather than oppose government, they would give up 
the two brethren. Capt. W. was on this furnished 
with his passports. As government however appeared 
to be dissatisfied with the continuance of the two mise 
sionaries, to remove. every subject of complaint as far 
as they could, a new mission to Rangoon, in the king- 
dom of Burmah, was contemplated; and Mr. Chater 
with another brother, agreed to goto that country, to 
make observations on its practicability. 

Here matters rested, and the missionaries went on 
pretty much as usual, only that they had no preaching 
at the Loll Bazar: and hoping that things in a little 
time might take a favourable turn, devoted more of their 
attention for the present to the instruction of the young- 
er missionaries, and less of it to itinerating excursions. 

The adversaries of christianity (of whom there are 
many in India) not having fully accomplished their end 
with the Government abroad, directed their attention 
tothatat home. A tract was translated and sent to 
England, in which the missionaries are represented as 
calling the natives “ barbarians,’”’ and their siasters 
“barbarian shasiers,” when in the original they had 
only intreated them not to reject the Bible as being the 
shaster of the barbarians, or “ M/’lecches,’’ a name by 
which they designate all who are not of the cast. Af- 


48 Brief Narrative (Sect. V. 


ter this a pamphlet appeared by a Mr. Twining, and 
was followed by several more, written by Major Scott 
Waring, and others; some abounding in low abuse, 
others openly espousing the cause of idolatry, and all 
filled with unfounded statements, and ineffectual en- 
deavours to trace the Vellore mutiny to the attempts at 
christianizing the natives. The charges produced in 
these pamphlets were answered by the friends of the 
gospel. 

While the missionaries were afflicted from one quar- 
ter, they were encouraged from another. When the 
Armenians and Portuguese in Calcutta perc ceived their 
difficulties, they came forward, and fitted up places for 
them on their own premises. From September to the 
end of the year, seven more natives were baptized, and 
anew mission to Rangoon undertaken. Mr. Chambers 
lain and Mr. Mardon were diligently engaged up the 
country ; but in September the former sustained a sec- 
ond bereavement in the death of his wife. , On Dec. 
25th, the missionaries say, “ During the past year we 
have baptized twenty-two persons. ‘These, with one at 
Cutwa and another at Dinagepore, make the whole 
number baptized a hundred and four, ten of whom are 
Europeans. In the course of the last six years we have 
been under the necessity of excluding thirteen, and six 
have been removed by death.” 

Towards the close of the year an event occurred 
more than ordinarily impressive. Three persons from 
Luckphool, Meeloo, Torrzbut, and Sookur Bishess, who 
had long professed to believe the gospel, but declined 
an open prolession of it, came on a visit to Serampore. 
In conversing with Sookur Bishess, the missionaries 
warned him of the danger of temporizing in the man- 
ner he had hitherto done, assuring him that if he was 
ashamed of Christ before men, Crist would be asham: 
ed of him before his Father and before his angels. He 
declared, that “ He thought there was no way to heaven 
besides the Saviour, and that if he thought himself near 
death, he would make an open profession of his name.” 
He was then reminded of the uncertainty of life, and in- 
treated to consider whether his refusal to appear pub- 
licly on the Lord’s side did not proceed from his secret 


1907.) Of the Baptist Mission. 43 


ly regarding sin, and fearing men more than God. 
The example of others of his countrymen were men- 
tioned, to shew that where the heart was really given to 
God every thing else vanished. He seemed impress- 
ed, but not determined. On the sixth day after his re- 
turn he was murdered in his own village, with circum- 
stances peculiarly awful. It seems he had, though un- 
known to the missionaries, carried on a criminal inter- 
course with a woman, some of whose relations belong- 
ed to a gang of robbers. ‘These men had long resolved 
to be revenged on him ;_ and having heard that he had 
been at Serampore, they imagined he must have obtain- 
ed asum of money there: an idea which has been 
circulated from the beginning to scandalize the gospel, 
though nothing can be more void oftruth. Thinking 
this a favourable opportunity, they one night beset the 
house, where he and this woman were ; and after bring- 
ing them out bound, set fire to it, Having loosed the 
woman, they threatened to throw him into the fire, un- 
less he would discover where. he had hidden the sup- 
posed sum of money. He, probably hoping to escape, 
led them to a tree at some distance, and told them to 
dig underneath it. After digging some time in vain, 
one of them, enraged, pierced him through with a spear 
and shed out his bowels; another cut him across the 
breast ! and a third cut off his head! 


1807. 


Mr. Biss’s complaint getting worse, he was ordered 
by Dr. H. to return to Europe, asthe only possible 
mean of saving his life. On Jan. the~5th, he and his 
family embarked for America. During the first fort- 
night his health seemed to be greatly amended ; but af- 
ter this he relapsed, and on Feb. 5, died! 

A Hindoo, whose name was Seedoo Roy, having seett 
some religious tracts, came to Cutwa for further in- 
struction. He appears to have believed the gospel ; 
and being a person who had considerable influence in 
his village, had recommended it to others. He kept up 
christian worship in his own heuse on the Lord’s. day.. 


50: Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


and some of his neighbours attended with him. Mr. 
Chamberlain received much pleasure from him, and ex- 
pected that he would soon be baptized; but in the 
month of January this year he died. His relations 
burned his body, after the manner of the Hindoos, but 
it was contrary to his desire. He earnestly wished to 
have been taken to Cutwa, instead of Gonga, to die. 
During his illness he exhorted those who used to meet 
with him for worship, not to forsake the assembling of 
themselves together, nor to cease publishing the glories 
of the Saviour. ‘ I am going,” said he, “ but we shall 
soon see each other again.”’ He had conversed much 
with his wife ; and when he died, she did not beat her 
forehead, and cry aloud, as is the custom of women in 
that country on such occasions. Being asked why she 
did not: she answered, ** What use is that? I'sit and 
think of what he said to me.” 

On January the 24th, the brethren Mardon and Cha- 
ter set sail for Rangoon. They had been recommended 
tothe grace of God by the church at Serampore, with 
many prayers for their prosperity. About the same 
time cheering accounts are received from the neigh- 
bourhood of Malda, where the native preachers are 
heard with much interest, and treated with kindness by 
many oftheir countrymen. Five or six hundred often 
assemble to hear them, when no European is present. 
Bykonta, one of the native brethren, returns from Jes- 
sore full of joy: his wife has forsaken her father’s 
house, resolved to cleave unto him, and to the Saviour. 
At Cutwa, brother Chamberlain and several of the na- 
tive christians labour with diligence and success. Three 
persons, namely, Komal, Soogul Mookurgee ( a-Koolin 
brahman) and Pindyabund (a byraggee) are baptised. — 
Things also appear promising at Dinagepore; and 
though at Serampore they have baptised only one dur- 
ing the first three months, and labour under some re- 
strictions, yet the translating and printing of the scrip- 
tures go on, and upon the whole they speak of their ef- 
forts to spread the gospel as being but little diminish- 
ed.—-On March the 18th, letters are received from 
Rangoon, and every thing wears the most favourable. 
appearance as to that important undertaking. 


1807.] Of the Baptist Mission. 51 


During the months of April, May, and June, ten per- 
sons were baptized ; among whom were a respectable 
Portuguese family of Calcutta: namely, Mr. and Mrs. 
Derozio, and two of their daughters ; also a Serjeant 
Oaky, whose father was a member of the Baptist church 
at Kingstanly in Gloucestershire.—A new church was 
formed in Jessore, of which Ram Mohun and Kawnee 
were chosen deacons—the brethren at Cutwa were also 
formed intoa church— and a petition was presented to 
Government for leave to erect a new chapel in Calcutta, 
signed by one hundred and fifteen of the inhabitants, 
many of whom were merchants of the first respectabili- 
ty, and to which a favourable answer was returned. 

On the 3lst of May, Ram Mohun is set apart by 
prayer and the laying on of hands for the work of the 

ministry. 

During this summer, Mr. Fernandez was heavily 
afflicted. Two persons were on this account obliged to 
wait some months for baptism. They were baptized, 
however, on the 21st of June. Their names were 
Dhanukora, and his wife Dhashishhurry. 

In June and July, several Europeans correspond 
With the missionaries, and afford pleasing hope of a 
work of grace. One was reproved for his profane lan- 
guage, by a Hindoo ; another heard the christian na- 
tives converse about Christ, and was filléd with shame 
at his own ignorance ; and another was impressed by 
his conversation with a serious lady, whom he after- 
wards married. ‘ We are acquainted with nine or ten, 
(says Mr. Moore) in Calcutta, most of whom we knew 
not four months ago, but who now afford us hope.” 

On the 6th of July, at the monthly prayer mecting, a 
consultation was held about the mission to Burmah, and 
the minds of the two brethren sounded as to their wil- 
lingness to return to that country. Brother Chater 
was stillof the same mind; but brother Mardon de- 
clined it. on account of ill health. He was afterwards 
succeeded by brother Felix Carey. 

On Lord’s day, Aug. 2, a soldier of the name of 
John Azell, from the neighbour hood of Basingstoke in 
Hampshire, was baptised by Mr. Ward, at Calcutta, 
The same day were baptised by Mr. Carey at Seram- 


52 Brief Narrative [Sect. V. 


pore, a native of the name of Scedoo Ram, from Jessore, 
and a Mr. Pritchet, a young man, the son of a clergy- 
man of South Wales. He had been taken prisoner by 
the French, and carried into the Isle of France, where, 
during his imprisonment, he was brought to serious 
reflection on the state of his soul. 

About this time twelve of the Portuguese at Calcut- 
ta sien an affectionate letter to Mr. Ward, expressing 
their faith inthe gospel, and attachment to him as a 
minister of it. 

Soon after this, an event occurred which filled the 
friends of the mission with deep concern, and furnish- 
ed its adversaries with a momentary triumph. A tract 
which had been printed in Bengalee, and which in 
that language contained nothing offensive, was put into 
the hands of a native to be translated into Persic. The 
translation being finished, it was, through the pressure 
of business, inadvertently printed without being first in- 
sfected by the missionaries. It proved, unhappily, that 
the translator had introduced several strong epithets, 
calling Mahomet a tyrant, &c. which it was alleged 
would irritate his followers ; and though no such ef- 
fects had been produced, yet a copy of it being con- 
veyed to a person in office under government, it 
was taken up in a serious manner. Mr. Carey was 
sent for; but being unacquainted with the circum- 
stances of the case, he could only acknowledge 
the impropriety of the epithets, and promise to in- 
quire into the cause of their appearance in the tract 
in question. Had the object of the party been merely 
to prevent the disturbance of the public tranquillity, 
things would have issued here : Mr. Carey, on learn- 
ing particulars, would have made an apology, and cor- 
rected whatever was improper. But before he had time 
to do this, proceedings were commenced, which, had 
they been carried into execution, must have been not 
only ruinous to the mission, but greatly injurious to 
the cause of christianity in India. In consequence, 
however, of an explanation, anda respectful Memorial 
presented to the Governor-General, the most serious 
part of the proceedings was formally revoked. On this 
occasion two of the missionaries waited on his Lord- 


1807.] Of the Baptist Mission. 53 


ship to thank him for the candour with which he had 
attended to their Memorial ; to which his Lordship re- 
plied, that zothing more was necessary than a mere ex- 
amination of the subject, on which every thing appeared 
ina clear and favourable light. 

But as all the printed tracts had passed under exam- 
ination, and as two others, as well as that in Persic, 
were objected to, the missionaries were required in fu- 
ture, not to print any tracts without first submitting 
the copy to the inspection of government. 

Concerning the epithets, &c. objected to, the mis- 
sionaries say, ** Though there is nothing in any of the 
tracts but what would be perfectly harmless in En- 
gland, and has been actually so here; yet as such 
things lay us open to ahimadversion from those who 
are averse to the mission, and are of no use in the con- 
version of the natives, we wish they had not been used.” 
No restrictions however were laid on the translation 
or circulation of the scriptures. 

Irom the time that the Jessore brethren were form- 
ed into a church, one of the native preachers has gone 
Over at least once in a month to assist them, and to ad- 
minister the Lord’s supper amongst them. Mr. Wil- 
liam Carey having visited them in September, gave a 
pleasing account, on his return, of what he saw and 
heard in some parts of that district. He mentioned 
eight or nine persons, besides the members, who ap- 
peared to be inquiring in good earnest what they must 
do to be saved. 

On the 11)th of Octoker, a Mr. and Mrs. Pittman were 
baptized ; and on the first of November, Miss William: 
son, a lady from Elgin. Scotland. 

The state of public morals amongst Europeans is 
supposed never to have been lower than at this time. 
Plays, masquerades, and every species of dissipation, 
are on the increase ; and amongst people of this de- 
Scription it need not be added, the religion of Jesus. 
Christ is scouted. Yet it prospers, even among En- 
ropeans ; and theugh the natives plainly perceive that 
it is not the wish of many of their superiors that they 
should become christians, yet they are not the less in- 
clined to inquire after the good and the right way. It 

¥ 


54 Brief N. arrative [ Sect. V. 


may also be to the honour of the gospel thus to make 
its way.—‘ Not by might, nor by power; but by my 
Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts.” 

The following is the state of the translations, as given 
by Mr. Carey, at the end of the year 1807. ‘ The 
work of printing the Scriptures is now going on in six 
languages, and that of translating them in six more. 
The Bengalee is all printed, except from Judges vii. to 
the end of Esther; the Sungscrit New Testament to 
Acts xxvii. ; the Orissa to John xxi.; the Mahraiia 
(2d. ed.) to the end of Matthew ; the Hindostance (new 
version) to Mark v.; and Matthew is begun printing in 
Guzerattee, 

“The translation is carried on nearly to the end of 
John, in Chinese, Telinga, Kurnata, and the language of 
the Seeks. It is also carried on to a pretty large extent 
in Persian, and begun in Burmah. 

In addition to the translations carrying on at Seram- 
pore, the missionaries received manuscript copies of 
the gospels translated into Malayala, the language 
spoken in ‘Travancore and the adjoining countries. 
They were translated from the Syriac, under the di- 
rection of the bishop of the Syrian churches in those 
parts, and sent to Serampore to be printed. . 

Towards the latter end of this year several of the 
native brethren were diligently employed in preaching 
the gospel. The following are extracts from the jour- 
nal of Deefi Chund,and Ram Presaud. * We tarried in 
the neighbourhood of Goamalty about a month anda 
half, preaching daily to the farmers who were cultivat- 
ing the indigo plant, and to many other strangers. We 
also visted many villages, and distributed tracts. At 
Miniary,* we continued a weck, preaching to and con- 
versing with great numbers, who had never heard the 
gospel from their own countrymen before. At Pur- 
neah we preached two days together in the market-place 
to great multitudes, some heard with a ready mind, oth- 
ers derided. In the last part of our journey, the gos- 
pel was a new sound, multitudes heard who had never 


* The residence of the late Mr. William Grant, sometimes 
written Munoharee. 


™ 


1807.] Of the Baptist Mission. 55 


heard it before, and who: may never hear it again, or 
know its value, till they see the Son of Man coming in 
the clouds of heaven !’’ 

In October died Mr. Creighton of Goamalty, and Mr. 
William Grant of Munoharee, both at the same place, 
and within a fortnight of each other. The labours of 
these excellent men in establishing schools, circulating 
the scriptures, and otherwise promoting christianity, 
were of great importance to the cause of Christ in Ben- 
gal, and their death would of course be severely felt. 
They were lovely and fileasant in their lives, say the 
missionaries, and in their death they were not divided ! 
The former had drawn up some valuable thoughts on 


‘the establishment of schools, which are printed in the 


Periodical Accounts, Vol. III. p. 445; and the latter 
bequeathed twenry thousand rupees (about 25001.) to 
the mission, ¢e2 thousand to the translations, and ten 
thousand for the support of an evangelical ministry in a 
church called the mission church in Calcutta. In con- 
sequence of these events Mr. Mardon was soon after- 
wards stationed at Goamalty, and Mr. Moore at Muno- 
haree. 

Towards the end of November the brethren, James 
Chater and Felix Carey, with their families, after 
forming themselves into a church, and choosing brother 
Chater for their pastor, and after being committed to 
God by their brethren, embarked for Rangoon, where 
they safely arrived after a voyage of eighteen days. 

In a review of the year 1807, fifteen it appears have 
been added to the church at Serampore and Calcutta, 
among whom were five Europeans and an American ; 
three to that at Cutwa ; and two to that at Dinagepore ; 
two were restored after exclusion ; two called to the 
ministry, and two new churches formed ;—new 
rules were formed suited to the present state of the 
mission, every station being independent of the other, 
but all united as a general body ;—a considerable ad- 
vance was made in ten of the translations ; two new 
founts of type completed, viz. the Orissa, and the 
Muhratta, and two others begun, viz. the Burmah and 
Chinese ; a new and improved fount of agree also be- 
gun ;—with respect to Prinding, an impression of 1500 


56 Brief Narrative [Sect. VZ, 


copies of the fourth volume of the Bengalee Old Testa- 
ment, (containing all the prophets,) completed; the 
third volume, comprising the historical books, in the 
press, which, when finished, would complete the Ben- 
galee Bible ; an edition of 10,000 copies of Luke, the 
Acts, and the epistle te the Romans, completed ; the 
New Testament in the Shanscrit and Orissa considera- 
bly advanced ; the Hindostanee, Mahratia and Guzu- 
raleé, put to press. 


SECTION VI. 


Progress of the Mission continued to January 1809, in- 
cluding a List of the Persons baptised a the come 
mencement, Ic. 


ON January 28, Serarinere was taken by the En- 
glish, but without making any difference in the situa- 
tion of the missionaries. A considerable addition was 
made about this time to their audience, not only on 
Lord’s days, but at their ordinary family worship. 

Mr. F. Carey, having studied medicine at Calcutta, 
introduced the Vaccine inoculation at Rangoon. Af- 
ter having inoculated about fifty in the city with suc- 
cess, he was sent for by the Governor to perform the 
operation on his children. This circumstance prqtea 
favourable to their settling as missionaries. 

In February Mr. and Mrs. Mardon departed for ‘Rete 
new residence at Goamalty, Kreeshno Dass, Goburdhun 
and Ram Presaud, with their wives and families, ac- 
companied them, and who on their arrival formed them- 
selves into a church. 

About this time several died. One of them was a 
Mr. Burney, a teacher of the orphan school at-Calcut- 
ta, one of the first fruits of Mr. Thomas’ early labours. 
He had some occasion to visit Rangoon, was taken ill 
before his arrival, and died early in the month of 
March, very happy, in the house of the missionaries. 
They had another death in April, at Serampore, of an 
eminent Hindoo. christian, whose name was /uiick. 


- 1808.] Of the Baptist Mission. cy 


He was baptised in 1804, and during the four years of 
his christian progress, had been instrumental in the 
conversion of his mother and his sister (B/aneec,) also 
of Kanaee, Kristno, and Deeft Chund, his neighbours. 
At the time of Futick’s death, Deefp Chund had, to the 
great grief of his friends, gone back into idolatry. 
This lay heavy on /uzick’s mind, and before his depar- 
ture he intreated the brethren to seek after that poor 
wanderer.* 

The members of the infant church at Goamalty had 
a large portion of affliction during this summer. Mr, 
Mardon for some time lost the use of his speech. He 
and Mrs. Mardon were both very ill fora long time, 
and obliged to leave the station for the sake of medical 
assistance. The natives. wept on their departure. 
There was also much affliction among them, so that for 
the greater part of the season they were unable to en- 
gage in any active labours. ‘ But to shew,” as Mr. 
Mardon says, “ that. success does not depend on the 
streng th and exertions of poor mortals, the Lord hath 
wrought among the heathen for his great name’s sake !” 
They had begun with seven. Mr. Ephraim Burford, 
who had joined the church at Serampore in 1806, being 
engaged in the indigo business in the neighbourhood 
of Goamalty, removed his communion to them, and on 
Lord’s day, June 19th, four were baptised, viz. Mr. 
Johnsen, an assistant in the indigo works, and three na- 
tives; which made their pumber twelve. Mr. Mardon 
also speaks of several more of whose conversion he en- 
tertained great hopes, and of two persons in particular 
who had died, and Whose death was attended with some 
circumstances peculiarly affecting. 

One was a byraggee of the name of Sudhasingha of 
the Rajpoot cast, who was going on a pilgrimage to the 
temple of Jaggurnaut. Mr. Mardon observing him to 
stop under a tree at Goamalty, and being unable at that 
time to speak much himself, requested Kreeshno Dass 
to go and speak to him. He accordingly went, and in 


* See an interesting Account of Futick’s family in Periodic- 
al Accounts, Vol. III. p, 398, and which is continued, on ocea- 
sion of his death, in No, X1X. p. 511. 

F2 


58 Brisp- Navveiwe [Seet. VI. 


conversation told him of the sufferings and death of 
Christ for the salvation of sinners. The poor man 
seemed to feel the subject as suited to his case. He 
said * he would take Christ for his refuge, and instead 
of prosecuting his journey to Jaggurnaut, would stop 
and hear more of the word of God, believing that by 
this his soul would be purified.” * On hearing this,” 
says Mr. Mardon, ‘* Kreeshno came to me almost in 
raptures to know what he should do. I requested him 
to take the man to his house, and instruct him in the 
way of salvation. I went over shortly after and spoke 
to him alittle myself. He was very attentive. In the 
course of the day the native brethren, especially Kreesh- 
no, conversed with him freely, and in the evening di- 
rected their prayers particularly on his behalf. He ate 
with them without hesitation, making nothing, as it 
would seem, of his cast ! The next morning he threw 
off his poita and necklace, as useless things ! His body 
was in a very weak state. Next morning he appeared 
as usual, but in a few hours lost his speech, and seemed 
to be in pain. About three in the afternoon, surround 
ed by us all, he died. May we not hope that this was 
a brand plucked out of the burning ?” 

Another was a Hindoo, an inquirer after the way of 
salvation, whose name was Heeradee. ‘ Nearly two 
months ago (says Mr. Mardon in a letter of Sept. 6.) 
he was bitten by a mad jackall in the corner of his 
mouth. It is only a week yesterday since I heard of it, 
when the natives brought him hither to get some med 
icines for him. On Monday last he began to feel the 
effects of the bite, and concluded he’should die. Mrs. 
Mardon went over twice to see him. He was very 
earnest in prayer, not only for himself, but also for the 
church, that the Lord would pour out his blessing up- 
on it. He was much in prayer the ensuing night. 
Yesterday he began to be enraged. The native breth- 
ren were afraid to come near him. Mr. Johnson visit- 
ed him repeatedly. In the evening he and Mr. Burs 
ford were obliged to tie him down to the bedstead. 
This morning he appeared much the same. At inter- — 
vals, however, the fits would leave him, and his reason 
return, and those seasons he would improye by prayer, 


1808. ] Of the Baptist Mission. 59 


or by talking about Jesus. He had the use of his rea- 
son it seems at last, for he expired with prayer upon 
his lips, between eight and nine o’clock this morning ! 
He has left a widow and two children.” 

During this year Mrs. F. Carey and Mrs. Chater, 
being very unwell at Rangoon, it was thought necessary 
for them to goto Serampore. On May 14th, they and 
their children arrived. After a while Mr. Felix Carey 
followed them. ‘Towards the latter end of the year, he 
and Mrs. Chater returned to Rangoon, leaving Mrs. F- 
Carey at Serampore. In December, after being deliv- 
ered of her third child, she died. Mr. Chater, who by 
reason of these afflictions, was left alone for some time, 
was making progress in the language, in which he was 
assisted not only by his teacher, but by the kindness of 
a Mr. Babasheen, an Armenian gentleman, in office un- 
der government, and who discovered much interest in 
the settlement of the missionaries in the country. Be- 
sides this, Mr. Chater began building a dwelling house 
and a place of worship, towards the expenses of which 
he obtained a handsome collection from among the 
merchants. 

The Armenian brother, Carapfett Chator, after visit- 
ing Jessore in company with Scdukram, was sent to re- 
side among the brethren in that district. 

At Serampore twelve were added in three of the sum- 
mer months ;. and Deefp Chund who had fallen into 
idolatry, came back with contrition, and was restored to 
the church. The account which he gave of the occa- 
sion of his fall, the state of mind under it, and the ef- 
fects of several visits from his brethren, together with 
a letter from the church, were very affecting.* 

The Danish clergyman at Serampore being dead, a 
question was moved among the inhabitants, who should 
succeed him ? The majority expressed their wish, that 
the missionaries might be permitted to do so. A peti- 
tion was accordingly presented to the Governor-Gener- 
al for the purpose, and which being granted, the parish 
church has from that time (about September) been oc- 
cupied by some one of the brethren. They accept of 
‘no pecuniary reward for their services. 


See the particulars in the Periodical Accounts No, xix. p. 549. 


Go Brief Narrative [Sect. VE, 


- Towards the latter end of September there was a 
second examination of the lads engage in the study of 
the Chinese language, held at Serampore ; at which were 
present the Vice-president of the Asiatic Society, with 
several other European gentlemen, who expressed 
their satisfaction in very strong terms, and their con- 
viction that nothing but perseverance was necessary to 
the complete acquisition of the Chinese language.  Re- 
wards were presented to the lads. 

In October they say, “ almost all the increase which 
the Serampore church has lately received has been 
from CatcuTTa. The opening of the new chapel is 
anxiously looked for by many. Our brother Oaky of 
that city, whose father is or was a member of the Bap- 
tist church at Kingstanley in Gloucestershire, died this 
month in the blessed hope of everlasting life. Ina let- 
ter dated Nov. 29th they speak of having stationed 
Kreeshnoo (the first christian convert) at Calcutta, where 
he is constantly employed in preaching and conversing 
about Christ, sometimes to natives, and sometimes to 
Europeans. . They also mention their having access to 
the frison, (the jailor and his wife having jomed the 
church) and also to the disfensary, at both which places 
there is great opportunity of addressing the afflicted and 
miserable people. 

No particular review of the events of this year has 
been received, but in a letter from Mr. Ward, dated 
Jan. 12th, 1809, he says, “ Brother Robinson is going 
up to form a station on the borders of Boozan, though 
on the Company’s territories. He goes alone, but sis- 
ter R. will soon follow him. Hf this succeed, we shall 
have ten missionary stations, viz. 


Bootan, Robinson. 
Dinagepfore, Fernandez. 
Saddamaihl, Wim. Carey. 
Goamalty, . Mardon. 
Miniary, Moore. 

Cuiwa, Chamberlain. 
Jessore, Carapeit Chator. 
Serampore, Carey, &c. 
Calcutia, Carey, &c. 


Rangoon, Chater, and F. Carey. 


1808.) Of the Baptist Mission. 61 


The Shanscrit Testament is out, the last volute of 
the Bengalee Bible, with another volume of the Ra- 
mayuna; the Orissa New Testament I hope will be 
out in March; the new chapel in Calcutta (70 feet 
square) was opened on Jan. Ist, and last Lord’s day we 
baptised in it: several others are coming forward ; 
Mrs. Carey is unwell, all the rest of us are well. The 
publications in England against the mission have cre- 
ated no alarm here.—-Lord Minto received the Shan- 
scrit New Testament very graciously. 

Mr. Marshman, in a letter dated the 14th of the 
game month, says, ** things with us are through mercy 
well: we are full of encouragement and hope.” 

In the autumn of 1808, a brief Memoir of the Trans- 
lations having been printed, Mr. Fuller visited the 
horth of England and Scotland to collect for them. 
The liberality with which the friends of Christ of all 
denominations, in Scotland especially, came forward in 
support of this important object, may be seen by the 
appendix to No. xviii. of the Periodical Accounts. It 
exceeded every thing which had gone before it, in the 
three preceding visits of 1799, 1802,and 1805, and 
affords a pleasing hope, that the work will not stop for 
want of support. 


oe 


The following is a List of Persons baptised in Benga, 
belonging to the church of Christ at Serampore, and the 
other churches formed from it. 


ed 


———— 


List of Persons baptized in Bengal. 


Ajjeuorseos0 sarod Sa0yyo “1g 
asossaf UI MON 
Axeuorssti 

unwparqsny 

DOST Yptes 943 Ut pag 

‘ aiossaf Ul MONT 


rautof ¥ 

9081 ‘wef papnjoxg 
j ouesUT MONT 
TIARA JoNSe_ 


Joruas SAaiey wenytan ‘sayy MON 


Aauinof ev uo pap z0 ‘pazapanyy 
SOL Y31ez 9G} UE parp SagyIearg 


“£OBT Yyrey ay} Ur par 
pulyq jsomyy 


9194} YoInys 343 Jo IoOjseg 

\ 
Pogr SAajsrurut ayy 03 payyeg 
Axseuorssrpy 


*LOLY “‘Sny papnpoxy 
*‘tOSI ‘3dag Ypres aI UT parq 


TRE fee Fe 


“LNAWAO TI WS 
WO NOLLVOLIS LNASTUd 


aiodweitasg e}Nd]VD jo sey Bunod yw | Sz 
£510370N UI Saezeqouieg | Aauries B ‘OT “ON JO JOYJOAgG | bz 
o1odaseuig ag haloes j wos puodas s; ae ‘ta te 
*g10ssaf ut nyooysig sapoos 8 Soopuip: J zz 
SAxjsTuyW ay 03 payed Se} no7RD pezideq ueuryqeig ysary | rz 
PUIYSIP B10} eNY Ur Saezeqoreg r urmyossnyy y } Oz 
feynoeg uvadoing | 61 
‘oviq 3Sk] 943 JO BIN | BI 
arossaf ut Ss0q3 R00] ;eyg ysrey y | Zr 
sseq weg Sq passasdur 60371¢ ; oopurp | OT 
Sour yseo }S0] pey OYA URUITassnyy | ST 
Sou Ape] uewmsayg | tr 
Souq UNO JO aytms “b yo s9z}y3neq | £1 
£a10duiviag 3889 JSO] pey OYM Oopurzy | ZI 
Sj0ta{sIq ar0ssaf ur Sa0010g page ‘ysrey yw | rr 
Sou 3SE] 9Y3 JO DJtAX | OT 
‘ond oopurry | 6 
Sarodweiag AOPIM Oopuly] | g 
feynoeD “bon Somistry go agtm | Z 
*a10dweiag JIISIS $,9FIM S,OUISLiy | O 
farodadeutcy asangnz0g e Ssueyrayy | .S 
SaqynoTeD Je pauonrig aaquadies Soopurzy | 
asdwg uewing ‘uooduey Aaied “4 JO wos ysopyq | © 
“erp 
“Uy UI d10Jaq Woy “yy ‘IY 
Aq paziyjdeq §Aep sty} drys 
03731 owig ~MOTJ9$ -YOINYD 0} paywpy | ct 


arodaseuiq, *ASS31pynedAopy 


“AONACISAY 


sewoU.y, “Al 0} Mayqdan 


‘NOLLV TAY UO LSVO 


- 


‘ON 


| 


A LA Ss 


uoyoy wry 
Yopes 10 ‘yesynpeg 
Aare Wei 
wieiejzaays 
Pntsarg Ousiy 
yesasopoog 


WOW sowel 
aapodnig: 

VINA, JOquinjog 
yusngg 

oo1ag 

aAqouny "vy *D ssi 
HOojoH 

sspq weg 

nZurg toquinjag 


jnuw0y 

yes [ooyoy 

euun 

oosey 

souoursof 
zopueulag snijeusy 


Theg ouysnry 
Aaiwy xiaq 


Su0'T WEITTTAL 
T940g janwes 


‘SHAVN 


I ‘AON 
S6L1 


qdaisiLdvg 
NaBMA 


‘wsuag wi sarumuorssipyy ayn fq pazudvg suossag fo sv] 


List of Persons baptised in Bengal. 


: arodaseuiq 3e MON 


sayosard S10z1soduroo aajeduag 
Posvaz Si jr YIeG BUUDH 

Ost] AOF VLpUy 

dJd}srWMpooyos 

May}eoY Ay} Suowe psig 


purlsug 1oj pojredaq 
pes 94} UT pad 
BOB Yses By} UT pag 
soujo-dunung 


Yves oy} UT paid 

Paivas Si jr yorq auosy 
sayoeaid *1oj1sodwiod sajesusg 
JUESQUIZL URT}SIAG9 satel 
FOgI papnjoxy 

Ja}pvieys jnsiqnog 

BOBt UPS 9Y2 Ul paid 


Aas ity, 991 0} payeg | 


org suosd Avaz ony 

FOL YIeF 843 Ur pag 

, TpyAqneg 
AaseUMOOYIS pue zayokraag 
purysuq ul Mon 


Ajaqry Jo paeey JON, 
od 
Ou 

Papnjoxg 


9081 ‘4senuef pepnjoxy 
Ajaje] Jo pavay 30N 


CI TNT re, 


aioduieiag Uayy Se}4nITeD JO 
atodmeiag ye mou Saiossaf 
atodweiac 

JNAsIp aiossaf 


0} Arm sig uo volnewy ur MON 


aiossaf ‘Atinyooysig 
J9IA}sIp a1ossal 
emMynD 

®}4NI]2D Je 90ug 
e33nI}eD 

PUrTIOOg Woy 
ai0ssaf ul eaafueg 


PUIstIp ueaping 

alossaf Ul epuay 

P}SIP uempang 
aiodueiag jv ou £0371 
WII}stp a10ssaf 

ingeuaysiy 

Pjisip uemping fai:odjnmvf 
asodwe.as 3% Mou 60}31q 
aiossaf ur vaafueg 

Axeruryyy ye Mon 
angnesyoog 

Arinqooysig avau ¢ea}00g 
Pequpaysiooyy 
@0ssaf-—epuary 10 epung 
asodaztuig jo 


 Swessy 

0331p Asmyooysig 

erossaf ur ajodesseg 

ByNIVD 

anodqtasg 

aossaf ur Arunqooysig 
ond 

BOWEN Ur sezeqo1eg 


yeraung 


Soquinjag ye passaidwr 4siny 


1? ‘on YONG Jo sayioy 
uruyeig 3unods y 

dJaaqoy JO Inogysiau “isiwy y 
uemysijsuq 

3SBD AIA 

weivjaays Jo souvjuienboy 
aasdeidg 

FOYW “SAJAL OF JOYIOIG 
adzYSnNep £,0ujzsisy -6 Jo *qsnyT 
uradoing y 

WIEN V 


OP 0} JayIOIq “YsIvey PY 
£¢ ‘ON 0} Maydou Soopuryy 
urwyeig y 
ond 
sey V 
utuljassnyy 
awe] ‘uewyeig y 
ond 
oopuryy 
anSeuaysty jo uewyrig 
ong 
og 
ystey & fog 
JaAvaM B fOopulTy 
$ ‘ON *Zapuewsag ‘ry JO uog 


urwytig y 

62% “ON SWBILISIYS JO ayy 
ueuljassnyy ¥ 

urwyassnyy ® Ajsawsi0g 
uewyeig Junos y 

‘TT "ON Suivivjaays JO 193819 


UEUIOM OCOpUTTT 


uLwyassnyay 


09 Woojoyy 
os ooTaq 
gs yeaszeyg 
Ls qneuocoysig 
9s urjAewy ydasof ‘zy 
ss eyuoyAg 
ts uoyo'y 
es daresury 
ts suUIOIF qaleo 
1s unyoyy 
os Aaied xTogq ‘sz 
Ob punyo daaq 
gb 31771, JNeUOYssig 
LY oouo,,, 
OF doo10g 
SY savuey Jo oAumepy 
tb juney wey 
c+ ooxng 
tr punuewey 
ib yng 
ob ag}uNey nury 
(oa unygop wey 
ge Asanyy 
L¢ Weiejoy, 
of qnevaphig 
$¢ AISAOOY 10 s399q0H 
ve Zapurusag stmoy uyot 
£e AygeN nwupng 
we ; sawmoyy 
1¢ geurrjoxy 
of f- uyof 
6t qnikyg 10 qniokoug 
8@ _ aat0wO 
Nay 4 dauowrypey 
Qu oozey, 


CL LC PAT rE tet 


List of Persons baptised in Bengal. 


64 


s9}9R.Ieq [NFAIqQnog 
JopsSOdMIOD URISIag 

QOgr Staqmaydas papni>xq 
JULIIUIF, URISIAYO ATTEN 


90gI Ssaquiaidas popnjpxg 
JaIMjoORJNULIM OZIPUT 

doys Surpury 

prog 

pezneysoc y 

YMCJ OUI UE Pte: 


£LOgr *yI1e3 oy} UT paid 
9081 Systes oy UT PIIG 


SOR SyIeF ANI UT PIG 
Ppopnyox gy 

Ayyeuorse300 sayoeaag 
Ajyeworse200 sayoeaad faoyzo “1a 
Pepnpoxg 


so}sOdMOD sojeBuog 


Aas turur ay} 03 payed 


BRUIay sty 
JURIOUIFI ULIASIAYD BArjzEN 


“LNAWAO TING 


wO NOILVOALIS LNasaud 


JULIOUIF UeTSIIY JANeN 


he 
' ey MoIeD 


gsodwelsg ye mou Seujeg 
PLYSIp esossaf wos 
arossaf UT d]eYPND JO 
oma 
_stodureiag 
MOUYIMT eau q1odezy 
“Aqemvop ye Hon 
=  eayng 
4 qeimoy 
oiodureiag ye MOU f03}IG 
eRNoeVQ Aq Yermoy 
peqepaysi00yy 
arodwursag 
ovid 
asodaseurg Aq tyeweppes 
aiossaf ut epynyiq 
ei0ssaf *Aarnyooysig itany 
peqepays1o0yy 
aioduresag 
CAG Lika) 
xozsSOdutos Essig fo31G 
ssoduieras 
aiodwmeszag Aou fe3\No]eD 
ona 
arodwesas 
aougo Burjuisd Ss10durviag 
*O1}!p ‘oud 
‘OP oI 
*oytp “oun 


Ayewroy Mou farodoujzstaywey 


eyNIVD 
Ayeweoy ye ou £0331 
alodouys11y wey 


srodurviag 


*‘yJa] Waeq pey JuoUIeIsay MON 
2 aayM SeyQNoPeDQ sv9U sFeyIA VW 


“FONACISA 


aasof v 
uEUTlassnyAy 

i comentanienemtell 

; edoud V 

gl ‘on Snewooysey jo jt 
Queadas 40 JajuadieD 


~ wemysys0g 

£S on SaajeBuey JO asian 

98 ‘ON JO asta furWIOM Juno, 
onid 

urw duno x 

GL ‘on SunzAayD JO aT 

8 ‘ON Seung jo sazyaneg 

og 

aassriAg 

aa100g Y 

AgjooZuesy Jo 99100 Y 

nyingioy V 

ULUT plo *48e2 AoAva AN 

aasseiig 

sRYV 

6 ‘ON S[OoHOH JO wos paydopy 

$7 ‘ON SU0}JOY Wey Jo asin 

+ jo sayysnep pue ‘17 jo asim 

UNYOYL Wey 0} ME]-Ul-Jay}OW 

sasoporjse Suemyeig 

$9 ‘ON Syneutedzef jo ayy 

§Q ‘on Suoypsoqnoy Jo Ost 

sR] 943 JO OFIM 


osansnilog VW 


oasderlg 


II ‘ON S1aquinjeg JO MOPIAA 


JodomswyWweYy jo sity y 


‘NOILVTauY UO LSVO 


Lt 6 Ee 


‘on | 


eee 


punueyoung 
qeouryw 

aoseq 

unyow 

TON wey 

piozing wyeiydg 
Usoesuey 
runwiof 

qniyes 

Plvyoesogy 
epunuy 

eymiug 

oopingy Jo weinpey 
aaoys1ynpunn 
weaqonyeg 

o0qeas 

unjzAay 

ooysny 10 Jnewooysey 
JOUPHNTO 

BIN OOPPON, 
punyd dooy 
pueyd 

ypunuy 
ssuowoUsiy 
yneuassey 
Qa1OPwWEF) IO JauMOD 
doropny 
dauayooy 

sseq oujsiIy 
YNwys AavyAy ‘SATA 
sseq woypioqgacy 
sstq yneusossef 
Joosog 
equinypinagnf 


wirrynqes 


‘STIAVN 


eTNepERy 


Z Ane 
i 


> sew 
9 Indy 
oOo! 

@ Ye 
z ‘Gea 


gzuefoogr 


I *s0q 


£ ‘Aon 


£1 ‘pO 


9 "~PO 


—— 
GasiLdva 
NaHM ! 


eg a a a TIN 


SIO“ OS:puy 


Srritfrethet- "ther Bate pe cnemmenemennrmspemenniapcrrese 


ag PE RT TRL A TE SEE SOSA 
asoduitsac Uewom Dp eSuld 
eB} NIeD OIG 

ou uradoung 
071d 3SET YZ JO FILA 

031d od 
{ Ayjeuron iv oopulH V 
€}}NIeD pue siodwre1zag sutadoing pur ssanen 
arodureiag 1V uewmysr3uy 
uvadoing 


OTZ0I9 SSTIAT 0} JURAIZS 
adoang 0} pauinjoy 

ade yo srvak OL 
Ayayjyry ay} Ul sarpjos v7 


puey jo JoeANyND 
SO8I YATES 9U} UE PI 


ZoIpUeUIIT ‘SATA, MON 
queyd1ayy 
210 Surjuig 


LOBI Ypey ay UE psig 
41006 Ara, 


qseq auoy 


doys Surpurg 
Papnyoxy 
Ayjewrog ye Aon 


eyNIeD 
@sodwieiag 


e}nIyeD 
01T}SIP Bossa JO 


e3yng]e9 
oid 
diodaseurgq Aq *tyemeppes 
WENYLAA W40g *AsaqTIAe Jo JuRaliac 
ong 
e10daszeurq uay} foy31q 
ong 
ey4NIeD 
eaAyny 
ene 
onIp Mou og 
gioduiesag way} fasossaf wos 
ond 
eajznD 
d10doujsiy_WeYy 
atodueiag 
sioduleiag stag yonueyD 
piodaseurg Aq jyeweppec 
a1odmrsag 
} JONIsIp ueAping 
siodueiag w9q} ‘eueg 
PHIstp atossaf wor 
SuoBeyy1yD Jo sey 


uURWIOM OOpUTE 
puryj}oos Suls;q wolg 
FSET 9YI JO BJTM 
urwowy 

oopury 

ueUYys[a AA 
urwysysuq 

BSE] OY) JO ITAA 


uvearysysuq 

QwUIP Jo ORIG 
"a IIA $0 Jayysneq 
JSP od JO OTA 
asangnz10g 


uradoing 
“yponng JO Aaydan 

1b "on S391}Ng Jo sa}S1¢ 
uewWiyeig pio uy 


62 ‘ON Suaajesury jo saqsi¢ 


XO ‘ON SurBIANGES so az Ay 
WePWIOA asan3nj10g 
uewyeig y 

7 SayLA Ss, 10qstynpuNT 
nyNnqroy & OIG 

oopury Sunod v 


S3INILD Je Aszy pavay Ysivy yw 


sadof & seo 19ARa AA 
PWNILD Je PIOM 9y} paeazy 
3D AIIM 


: f2u.cty 5. 
St uosunof “yw 
tr: ouoWw 
EP: douadWsYg 
ttI sepnaog 
7? 03} Of1 wooly 

“ZIA Ssuosiad JATaM J, 
67: ayo f ugof 
8TtI sejsn0og==—- 
Lt} epurlog 
ra UOSUIVTTITAA SSITAL 
Str UeUI NI “Sl 
bz uewiiid “JA 
£71 wey ogess 
Aas Hed 3'Y 
IZ} yexv uyof 
O71 Arsnystaseqq 
Orr eroynueygd 
gts AxeO preapy 
E1% OLZO1NOG VIAL] SStyAy 
gir OLZOlag PIaWY Sst 
Sty OIZOLag JSPNg ‘SITAT 
bri O1zZ0128d ‘WA IN 
£1y sseq ueqog 
TIT FEHOW “TIAL 
IIy VIIpPuUnYyO 199qCT 
Olr aoueyug 
Gos . WaTsnA_oopy [nZoog 
801 jewoy 
Lox oozey 
901 Suunf 
Sor unyowngnf 
tor 
for punysri0yH 
zor qnidg 
101 pnesaig wiry - 
oo! eougsiiy Uelig 
66 WeIayBES 
36 qemoodmey 


‘ 


ee 


JIQUHZA 


yNsuy 


6r aun, 
-gunft 
0} [hdy 
“OIL 
0 
‘uel 80g) 
Xr ‘AON 


FI ‘30 


Zz sny 


It sunt 


€ Avw 
6 


S$ tady 


OF your 
vuef Log: 


Z sag 
@ “AON 
spo 


Z ‘ydag 
> ‘Sny 
é Ang 


* 


APPENDLX, 


APPENDIX. 


The preceding Narrative, which terminates to- 
wards thé close of 1808, was drawn up by 
the Rev. Andrew Fuller, D. D. of England: 
The following Appendix, comprising the ac- 
count of the Mission, translations, ec. to the 
beginning of 1811, is supplicd by Mr. Wiliam 
Johns, Missionary to India, now in this Country. 


1808. (Concluded. J 


' In February, another Hindoo was ordained to ‘the 
Work of the ministry. Our native brother, Rughoo, a 
‘venerable old man, died this month in the full exercise 
of faith. Accounts have reached Serampore, that there 
are several pious soldiers in a regiment at Berhampore. 

About twenty one persons have been added to the 
¢ehurch in 1808. The following conversations between 
Krisino, and some Hindoos, in a journey of the former 
to Orissa, are very interesting. 

Krisino. You are going to see Juggernaut; but he 
is made ofa piece of wood. If there be such an one as 
Juggernaut, he cannot live in wood, nor in stone ; he 
would stay in the mind of a man. 

Brahmans, (angrily:) What! do you say that our 
Juggernaut is only a piece of wood ? 

Kristno. Exercise your judgment. If Juggernaut 
can drive away sin from the hearts of men, and give 
them a holy mind ; then he is truly God: but he can- 
mot dothis If a man steal and go to Juggernautto be 
pardoned, “he cannot take sin out.of the heart, for fe — 
will return to his stealing again. After considerable 
conversation, Aristno told them of Jesus Christ, * whose 
blood cleanseth from all sin!” After this they met 


APPENDIX. 6F 


with a native from Orissa, who told Kristno, that he: 
should be born eighty /acks of times, (a dack, 100,000,): 
alluding to the Hindoo doctrine of transmigration ; that 
he did not know what form he should become, but that 
the last ime he would be aman. Aristno told him, that 
men were born once, and would die once, and after this,. 
they would appear before the judgment seat of Christ. 
Then he proceeded to direct him to the great Salva- 
tion provided of God in Jesus Christ ;. and. of the bless-- 
ed hope which the christian has. of being raised again 
in the likeness of his Lord. During this time, numbers 
crowded about them, who assented to its truth ; and 
this man.also acknowledged the truth concerning Christ. 
He continued a fellow traveller with them all that day 
and agreat partofthe next. The brahmans of Orissa 
in conversation, manifested great dislike to the gospel ; 
many stood by as spectators, among, whom, one woman 
listened with earnest attention. 


1809. 


A tetter from Mr. Rowe, (dated Dec. 1809,) wilk 
shew the interesting state of the mission in this year. 
ile commences with blessing God, for having removed 
certain restrictions, which on the preceding year seem 
to have operated in some degree against the missiona- 

‘ries. ‘* God has been exceeding gracious to us, and for 
which we have reason for abundant thankfulness. But 
when we add to this the increase made to his church, 
our obligations multiply. Sixty three persons have 
been baptized during the present year, and others are 
proposed as candidates for baptism. Brother Chamber- 
lain has been greatly blessed in his labours among the 
soldiers at Berhampore,about 40 miles from, and a little 
north of Cutwa: 36 of the above number were of these 
soldiers. These friends feel much interested in the 
cause of God, and lately made a collection among them- 
selves for the mission, amounting to about 10/. sterling. 
Two or three of them have gifts for public speaking, 
and when destitute of a ministering brother, one of these. 


68 APPENDIX. 


gives an exhortation. It is a matter of great joy to see 
a church of pious men in aregiment of soldiers, con- 
sisting at this time, probably of 40 members !” 

Mr. Chamberlain describes this extraordinary work 
amongst the soldiers more fully, in a letter to Dr. 
Staughton, dated Feb. 1810. ‘On one Lord’s day 9 
were baptized, and on a following one, 12. One of 
these persons died a short time afterwards, triumphing 
in the faith of the gospel. In 1808, this man was a 
‘performer on the stage, at the barracks of Berhampore. 
At the last ordinance season, three persons were 
brought to hear the word of God ina singular way. 
One of the brethren was going to meeting on the 
Lord’s day afternoon, when he met a soldier noted for 
his irreligion, whom he asked to go to meeting; he 
promised, though in a thoughtless way, that he would. 
On meeting his comrades he told them that he had 
promised to go to meeting in the evening ; they laugh- 
ed at him ; but he told them he would keep his word ; 
upon which, they, laughing, said that they also would 
go. They went, and it is hoped that God in his mercy, 
met them all at that time. The word of God then spok- 
en by one of the elders reached their hearts.—-They 
have been regular in their attendance ever since, and in 
their conduct are changed from ‘ lions to lamds.2 Two 
of them were papists. On being ridiculed for chang- 
ing their religion, one of them replied, ‘ No, you are 
wrong there: I have not changed my religion, for I. 
never had any; it is religion that has changed me.’ 
Another, a Roman Catholic by profession, was formerly 
a-great persecutor; and one day beat his brother, 
without mercy, for changing his religion : He also is a 
subject of mercy,—now in his turn suffers persecution, 
and bears it patiently. In short, the work of God in 
this regiment is full of wonders. Such a display of the 
power of divine grace we have never before witnessed : 
God in this work wonderfully owns the simple means of 
grace. Mr. Parsons, an evangelical Episcopalian, has 
doubtless been very useful amongst them, and for 
them ; but he acknowledged, that he found them to be 
of great use to himself.—The barracks now ring with 


om 


APPENDIX. G9 


the joyous songs of Zion, where, in times past, were 
heard only the yells of profaneness,—the profane are 
thunderstruck! The work is progressive—ringleaders 
in vice come out from among their fellows, which 
serves to thin the ranks daily. 

This church in the army consists of 48 baptized 
members. Three have been removed by death ; one is 
now ill, who would have been of the church, if Provi- 
dence had permitted. Several have died in the hospi- 
tal, in very hopeful circumstances.—Abdut 20 are the 
subjects of inquiry.—O magnify the Lord with us ‘”— 
_ Dr. Carey, writing on the same subject, says, ** The 
persons first brought under concern, were convinced of 
believers’ baptism, merely by the word of God, not 
knowing that the person, to whom one of them acciden- 
tally mentioned it, (Mr. Mardon) wasa Baptist ; as you. 

‘may judge, the surprise of the soldiers was great.”’ 


From Dr. Carey to.Dr. Baldwin, Nov. 1809, 


“ When I first arrived inthis country, Nov. 11, 1793, . 
there was one evangelical minister of the church of 
England in this town, who had been here for several 
years, and..besides him, I: knew of no one who professed | 
love to God, except: myself and my colleague, Mr. 
Thomas.—I have however reason to believe that there 
might be about half a dozen more in different parts of 
the country. I and my-colleague removed to a great 
distance up the country, when I had to study the lan-- 
guage, and where we- published the gospel to the 
inhabitants around. At the present time, through the: 
smiles of our gracious.God, things wear a different. 
aspect; besides six evangelical Episcopalians, ‘two - 
presbyterians, or independent ministers, there’ are 9 
Stations occupied by Baptist ministers in this presiden- - 
ey; and 5 churches constituted, in connexion with our 
mission, besides the church and mission station at. 
Rangoon, in the Burman empire.” 

From a later date the statement is thus given; 5 
“Episcopalians, 6. Independents, 1 Presbyterian, 2. 
Lutherans, and 17 Baptists, (including 3. Hindoo 
preachers.) Besides 3 missionaries in Ceylon, and 1 in 
China; making in all 35—to which Dr. Carey adds,— 


a 


70 ) APPENDIX. 


“‘ We are all of one heart, and help each other as much 
as we can.” It may be observed that this remarkable 
increase of labourers in the Eastern harvest has been 
within the 16 years of Dr. Carey’s residence in India.— 
He speaks of it asa most encouraging circumstance. 
The additions to the churches this year amounted to 
eighty six. 


1810, 


Tue Lord has graciously planted 5 churches in 
Bengal, one in Orissa, and one in the Burman empire. 
In these churches there have been added in this year, 
one hundred and five persons, who were baptized and 
received into communion, besides several restored, who 

‘had been suspended from communion, or excluded. 

The churches above mentioned are so spread over 
Bengal and Orissa, that the word of God is more or 
less published throughout the greater part of these 
countries : I say more or less, because the means bear 
no proportion to the extent of country. Three new 
missions have begun within the last. 12 or 13 months. 

Brother Robinson, attended by brother Cornish, 
(called to the ministry by the church at Calcutta,) is 
now gone to Bootan. What reception they will meet 
with, we cannot say ; but the cause is in the hands of 
God, who cares much more for it than we do. 

Brother and sister Chamberlain, attended by brother 
Peacock, (also called to the ministry by the church at 
Calcutta) and his wife, are gone to begin a new mission 
in a remote part of Hindoostan, at the city of Agra, to 
the N. W. of Calcutta, about four months’ journey. 

Brother Moore has been settled at Patna, nearly in 
the same direction, rather more northerly, and about 
midway between Agra and Calcutta. May the God of 
all goodness protect them, and set before them an open 
door, that no man can shut, and so bless their labours 
in these parts, that the word of the Lord may sound 
out from them to all the surrounding regions. 3 

In Jessare, Carapeit Arratoon, a native missionary, has 
been very successful. Within a few months (March) 
he has baptized 30 natives; 10 persons were baptized 
en one occasion, Some of them live ata great distance 


APPENDIX, 71 


from the missionary, who, to obviate the inconvenience, 
‘administers the Lord’s Supper every first day of the 
week, at a different place each time, so that in a month 
they all have opportunity to unite in breaking of bread. 
One or two of them are at the distance of two hundred 
miles ; yet are diligent to enjoy the opportunities. 

At Calcutta and Serampore, we have seldom a month 
Without baptisings. Seven were added to us at one time. 
‘About 20 persons, who attend worship at Calcutta, are 
under concern of soul, besides several who attend the 
ministry of the excellent Mr. Thomason, at the Epis- 
-copal church. In Serampore there are 10 persons de- 
sirous of joining the church. Those who have been 
baptized at Serampore are Hindoos ;—at Calcutta, chief- 
ly Portuguese Catholics. Two things are particularly 
necessary, more labourers, and yet greater outpourings 
of the Almighty Srpirit. 

. We have been called to lament the death of Mrs. 
Robinson ; she died at Dinagepore, whither she had 
been brought by brother R. for medical assistance. 

Our brother, John Peter, has been successful in 
Orissa, and a church is planted there. Both he, and our 
beloved brother /rratoon, are of the Armenian nation. 

The religious soldiers have been called to the Jsle of 
france ; there were 30 members in full communion, and 
one of their number is set over them as pastor, so that 
now there is a Baptist church organized, in the 22d 
regiment. 

Five other pious young men from another regiment, 
went with them in this expedition. Should they suc- 
ceed in taking the Island, they willimmediately endeay- 
our to erect the banner of the cross there, and invite 
sinners to believe in the crucified Saviour. Mr. Cha- 
ter lately arrived at Calcutta from Rangoon, on account 
of the indisposition of his wife. That country isin a 
miserable state as it respects political affairs, but the 
following are among many encouraging circumstances 
relative to that missionary station. 

Mr. Chater and Felix Carey study the language with 
success ; they bave written some tracts init; and 
have begun to translate the New Testament inco it. 
They are beloved by all,rich and poor, small and greati 


PA APPENDIX. 


Two valuable young men were lately sent thither from 
the London Missionary Society ; but one of them (Mr. 
Brain) has since been removed by death. The surviving 
one (Mr. Pritchett) resides with Mr. Felix Carey at 
Rangoon. | 

The missionary station at Cutwa will be occupied by 
Mr. William Carey, from Saddamahl, in consequence 
of Brother Chamberlain’s removal to Agra, Saddamahl 
and Dinagepore will now form but one station, under 
brother Fernandez.; those places being within 20 miles: 
of each other. 


PRESENT STATE or truz TRANSLATIONS. 
From Dr. Carey, to Dr. Staughton. March.1810, 


‘ The work of translation goes forward, and [now 
entertain the hope, of living to see the wordof Ged print- 
edin twelve of the eastern languages. The probable 
period of human life will admit of this; and it is what 
my soul desires. Formerly I thought that if 1 could 
but see the whole Bible translated into the language of 
Bengal, and printed, I could say with Simeon, * Lord, 
now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace.” I have 
been.spared to see that ; and have seen much more than 
my Most sanguine expectations could have grasped. 

The whole Bible has been printed some time in Ben- 
galee, and a second edition of some parts of it. The 
New Testament and Pentateuch in Sungskrit; the 
New Testament and the Old from Job to Malachi, in 
Orissa ; the New Testament in the Hindoostanee and 
Mahratta. nthe Chinese the gospels by Matthew and 
Mark are printed. off, and I hope the New Testament 
will be published in that language sooner than was ex- 
pected. We have begun printing in the language of 
the Shikhs or Seeks, and in the @urman lancuage >— 


and in this year, 1811, we hope the Zedinga and Kurna-— 


ta will be begun.—The latter with the Guzeratzee has 
hitherto been delayed, chiefly for want of pecuniary aid. 
The translations are all much farther advanced than the 


printing, and in due time, I trust that most of, or all 


the nations of the East * will hear in their own tongues 
the wonderful works of God.” Let al] unite in prayer 


J 


APPENDIX. ree) 


for this object.”—In a former letter, Dr. C. remarks, 
“ There are at least 20 other languages more spoken in 
the East, including the Islands, into no one of which a 
single sentence of the word of God is yet translated. 
It is not, however, (he adds) too much to entertain a 
hope, that we may see a beginning made in some of 
these languages, 

* A circumstance highly important to the Eastern 
world, is a step lately taken by the corresponding com- 
mittee of the British and Foreign Bible Society, of which 
3 of us are members; (Messrs. Carey, Ward and Marshe 
man.) This isthe forming a BIBLIOTHECA BIBLIA 
in Calcutta; in which Bibles of all sorts and languages 
will be placed for sale at low prices. This plan was 
proposed by Rev. Mr. Brown, and will, I trust, do 
much towards an extended circulation to the Bible, as 
it is not unlikely, that individuals may purchase copies, 
to distribute to the poor, of this and of the neighbouring 
nations.” 

Speaking again of the success which God has given 
to their labours, Dr. Carey ina letter to Dr. Staughton, 
(both of whom were present at the first vestry meeting 
of the society in 1792,) thus writes, “ Little did you 
or I think that the undertaking, then an embryo, 
would have had the success it has had. I did expect 
success, and I had my eye upon the translation of God’s 
word, into one language; but the whole, wasthen rather 
like a pleasing reverie, than areality. To God be all 
the glory of what has been done ; may he carry on and 
perfect his own work.” 

The following shews the numbers that have been 
baptized since 1800, in the respective years. 


In 1800 - 2-—yiz. Felix Carey and the high- 
1801 * 6. ly esteemed Kristno, 
aos 9: 

1808 - 14, 
1804 . 15. 
1805 - 33. 
sg ne TS 
1807 - 20. 
a006 2 > 1. 
1809 - 80. 
1810 =o OS. 


Tetal baptized, 331 


v4 APPENDIX: 


Of the whole number baptized, some relapsed into theie 
former idolatries, by the repeated solicitations of their connec- 
tions ; many of whom were again reclaimed.—Some have. 
died in the blessed hope of the gospel—and the greater part 
are ornaments to their profession of christianity. 


The following will give at. one view the languages in which 
the missionaries are employed ; and the probable extert of 
country over which the different languages are spoken. 


FROBARLE EXTENT TO WHICH, 

as atheiiabegie + THEY ARE SPOKEN. 

1. Bengalee, About the United States. 

2. Sungskrit, Read over all India. 

3. Orissa, About Ireland, 

4. Hindoosthanee,. About France and Italy. 

5. Mahratta, About Great Britain. , 

6. Seek, 

7. Burman, Burmah about 17 mills, 

8. Chinese, Read all over China, 300 mills, 
9. Telinga, About England, 

10. Kurnata, ‘Fhe same. 
11. Guzerattee, 
12. Bootan, Bootan. and Thibet. 


_ Besides which, a manuscript copy of the New Testament 
in Malayala, and also a translation into the Zamu/, are received 
for printing at Serampore; the former translated under the 
direction of the bishop of the Syrian christians ; and the latter 
ley a valuable missionary from the London Society, now dead. 


The stations with the names of the Missionaries at one-view== 
and the direction of these stations from Calcutta. 


STATIONS, MISSIONARIES. 


i. Serampore and Calcutta, oe hada oe 
2. Chowgacha, (Jessore,) N. East. Carapeit Arratoon.* 

3. Cutwaand Berhampore, N.byW. William Carey, jun. 

4. Goamalty, near Malda, N.byW. Mardon. 

5. Dinagepore & Saddamahl, N.byE. Fernandez, sen. 

6. Orissa, S.W. — John Peter.* 

7. Rangoon, S.E. Chater & Felix Carey. 
8. Barbaree, (Bootan, ) N. Robinson & Cornish.¢ — 
9. Bankipore, (Patna, ) N. W. Moore. | 
10. Agra, N. W. Chamberlain & Peacock.f - 


The first seven-stations have churches. 


* Marked thus are native preachers, ordained. j 
} Europeans, not sent out as Missionaries from England, but 
have joined the church, and called into the ministry at Caleutt, 


APPENDIX. TS 


Arrival of 2 Missionaries in New York—Em- 
bark for dndia—wDriven back by tempestuous 
weather.—Letter from Dr. Fuller—Address 
to the Christian Public to aid in the Trans- 

tation of the Scriptures. | 


Arrivep in New York from London on Dec. 23, 
1810, after a voyage of 44 days, Mr. and Mrs. Lawson, 
Mr. and Mrs. Johns, and Miss Chaffin, all of whom 
were destined to join the missionaries at Serampore. 
They were received at New York by the friends. of the 
mission in that city, with every mark of christian friend- 
ship ;, and by the kindness of those friends were enter- 
tained, during their stay, free of all charge to the mis- 
sionaries themselves, or to the society under whose pat- 
tonage they cameout. About the close of April they 
_ left New York for Philadelphia, with the intention of 
embarking ina vessel destined from that port for Calcute 
ta. At Newcastle in Delaware, they were joined by 
two other missionaries and their companions, who in- 
tended to disembark at Madras, on a mission under the 
superintendance of * The (Londen) Missionary Society. 

After being off the Capes of Delaware about 3 or 4 
days, (during which they sustained a heavy and contmu- 
ed gale,) in lat. 86°. long: 66°, the vessel met with 
‘an alarming accident ; besides carrying away her top- 
‘masts, it Was found that the head of the mainmast was 
sprung. These circumstances rendered it necessary 
for her to return to port. 

‘On the Ist of June, the missionaries relanded in 
Philadelphia, highly grateful for their preservation and, 
deliverance whilst exposed to the furious elements, 
On consulting with their friends, the voyage, as it re- 
spects the missionaries, was abandoned, though reluc- 
‘tanily on their part, on account of the difficulty of pro- 
curing conveyatice to that remote region, under the 
existing disagreement between this country and Furope. 

Though painful at first, tie circumstance seems prov- 
tential, as.it gives. the missiouaries an opportunity te 


26 APPENDIX. 


acquaint the public with the depressed state of the 
Society’s funds, mentioned in a letier just received by 
them, (now in this country,) from the venerable Dr. 
Fuller. And which renders an appeal to their benevo- 
lence necessary on account of the translations ; and it may 
be confidently hoped, that such an appeal will. not be 
ineffectual, especially as the American public has re- 
cently manifested a new and increasing interest for the 
propagation of the gospel in India. 


BXTRACT FROM DR. FULLER’S LETTER. 


Kettering, (Eng.) Aug. 2, 1811. 
Very dear brethren and sisters, 


“ We have heard of your being driven back by tem- 
*‘ pestuous weather ; we are thankful that yourlives were 
“spared. Doubtless God has some wise ends to ane 
“ swer by this event, though we cannot tell what they 
“are. JI hope you will be reconciled to your situation, 
still away be opened. Meanwhile you will allow us to 
“ press upon you economy, and to recommend, if possi- 
“ ble, some employment during your stay, that shall 
“ enable you in some good degree to support your- 
“selves: for partly through the expense attending 
* your going out, and partly from the number of drafts 
“ from India, on account of the trans/ations, which have 
“this spring amounted to about 21,333 dollars, I 
‘¢ assure you our funds are considerably more than ex- 
“ hausted.—Mr. Sutchf® and Dr. Ryland have been in- 
“to Scotland, to collect in my stead. They obtained 
“about 5,777 dollars; yet we are not able at present 
‘to meet our demands, and it may be « year ere we 
“ shall be —I trusi not only the love of that cause in 
66 which you are so nobly embarked, but the generosity 
“ of your minds wili concur with the above recommen- 
“¢ dation, aiid induce you to diminish your expenses as 
¢ much as possible, ‘nd so to unite with us in struggling 
& through our difhculues.” ) 

Yours, very affectionately, 


ANDREW FULLER, 
Secretary to the Soctety, 


APPENDIX. 7 


ADDRESS 
To the Christian Publie. 


IN thus introducing the subject to general notice, 
we would remind the friends of religion, that the Bap- 
tist missionaries in India have been employed in that | 
extensive country from the year 1793, to the present 
time, a period of 18 years. The first years were years 
of difficulty ; since which God has abundantly owned 
them, and succeeded their unremitting and arduous 
exertions, beyond their most sanguine expectations, and 
much to the admiration and gratitude of the thousands 
of Christian Israel. | 

Their OD en and favourite pursuit is the transla- 
tion of the Holy Scrifuures ; an employ for which they 
are remarkably qualified as it respects zeal, talents and 
situation. The name of Carey is of balmy fragrance. 
The respectability of his situation in the College of 
Fort William as Professor of the Shanscrit and Benga- 
lee Languages is well known. His devoting annually 
to the work, his whole salary of about 6,000 dollars, 
affords an instance of the utmost disinterestedness ! 

We would assure the religious public, that this is 
the one great cause of God—it is their own—And to 
quote from Dr. Carey’s memoir,* “It is not on our 
own account that we desire supplies, but merely to 
spread the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, by dis- 
seiminating Ais sacred word among the nations around 
us, now sitting in “ darkness and in the region of the 
shadow of death.” 

In soliciting aid for the translations of the scriptures 
into the numerous languages of the East—‘ the pure 
word of eternal life without gloss or comment,’ we 
have the co-operation of that grand institution of mod- 
ern times, ‘ The British and Foreign Bible Society,’ 


. * See memoir of the translations of the Scriptures into the 
languages of the East. : 
sf | 


7s APPENDIX. 


whose approbation of this mission, (denominated by Dr. 
Buchanan, ‘‘the Shanscrit school for the translations,” 
and from the same author we add—‘ the Bengalee, 
the Orissa and the Mahratta,’*) and whose concern for 
its success is seen, in their having voted near 5000 dol- 
lars annually for 3 years, to be appropriated to this 
object. 

As it respects the friends to the kingdom of Christ 
in Scotland, they have repeatedly been forward with 
their Itberal aid. And the love of the American breth- 
ren was generously testified on a former occasion, when 
almost unsolicited, near seven thousand dollars were 
collected by the exertions of its friends among various 
denominations—than which there cannot be a higher 
encomium on American liberality—A triumph of the 
christian temper in the exercise of the best affections 
of the heart. © 

_After a lapse of a few years it appears necesary 
again to address the friends of the Holy Scriptures, in 
this country—to call on them to aid a second time in 
giving the word of God to “ four hundred millions of 
Heathens,”—Surely we may hope the appeal cannot be 
made in vain. Itis the work of God, and not of man. 
It is the work of God, and not exclusively of any set of 
men It is the work of God, and must prevail. And 
the time fast approaches when to have engaged in it 
will be deemed a nobler honour than to have assisted in 
the conquests of empires! It is of God, and shall re- 
main unmoved, when thrones are demolished, and the 
empires of this period, like those of past ages, shall per- 
haps have ceased, and have passed away forever. 


* See Christian Researches, pages 209 and 240.. 


ADDENDA. 


ee 


WE have here given an extract from ‘ The Memoirs 
of the Translations,’ shewing some of the peculiar 
qualifications which the missionaries possess for the 
important work of translating and printing the scrip- 
tures into the 

CHINESE LANGUAGE. 


“ We haveto mention with gratitude the goodness 
of Providence in erecting for us a Chinese Foundery, if 
it may be so termed. About eighteen months ago, 
(now nearly four years*) we began to employ, under 
Chinese superintendance, certain natives of Bengal, 
for many years accustomed to cut the flowers employed 
in printing cottons, and have found them succeed be- 
yond our expectations. The delicate workmanship 
‘required in their former employ, fits them admirably 
for cutting the stronger lines of the Chinese charac- 
ters, when they are written, and the work superintend- 
ed by a Chinese artist. Of the execution you will 
soon have an opportunity of judging from the original 
text of the first volume of Confucius, printed off witha 
translation in a 4to. of 724 pages, and now waiting for 
a preliminary dissertation on the language, by Dr. 
Marshman. We, many months ago, (now years*) be- 
gan printing a newly revised copy of the Gospel by 
Matthew, to the middle of which we have nearly ad- 
vanced, though the difficulty of afterwards correcting 
the blocks, causes us to advance with slow and careful 
circumspection. The New Testament is printed in 
8vo, or size resembling that of the work of Confucius, 
so common, and so highly venerated among the Chi- 
nese. The pages are cut on one block; when printed 
off, the page is folded so as to have the two blank 
sides inward, in the manner of the Chinese. The 
blocks are of the wood of the ¢amarind tree. We have 
also retained another learned Chinese to superintend 


* Editore- 


80 APPENDIX. 


the cutting of the characters, and examine the trans- 
lation with brother Marshman. Alter the latter has 
gone through it in various ways with Mr. Lassar, he 
carefully examines it again with this learned Chinese 
alone, causing Aim to read it, and give Ads idea of the 
meaning of every sentence and character. As he has 
not the least previous acquaintance with the sense of 
the passage, (being unable to speak a sentence of Eng- 
lish) brother Marshman has an opportunity of marking 
the least deficiency from the original, and of canvassing 
¢anew such passages with Mr. Lassar, which is constantly 
done, previously to their being written for engraviog. 
I: may be observed also, that as this man boards with ug 
be has no connexion with Mr. Lassar, and indeed from 
disposition common to the generality of Asiatics, ig 
suificiently disposed to find fault with his work, if op- 
portunity offers. This disposition, however, is kept with- 
in due bounds by brother Marshman’s examining the 
dictionary with him, for every character to which he as- 
cribes a sense different from that which is used in the 
eopy, under revision. Thus, dear brethren, has Divine 
Providence favoured us with the means of acquiring 
this difficult language : with those to study it whose 
youth and collateral studies fit them peculiarly for the 
Jabour : with the means of counter-excamining the trans- 
lation : and with a ress to carry forward the printing 
of itto any extent. From calculating how many pages 
of the original the blocks of the Chinese already cut 
have included, the probability is, that 700 of these 
blocks will nearly complete the New ‘Testament. 
These, although they contain each nearly three hun- 
dred characters, we are able to get engraved for some 
thing less than 4 dollars each. Seven hundred multi- 
plied by this number give 2800 dolls. So that it is 
quite probable that 3000 dollars will complete the en- 
graving of the whole New Testament in Chinese. 
When this is done, any number of copies can be 
thrown off at pleasure. It is supposed that these 
‘blocks may bear to have ten thousand taken off. If, _ 
however, it be only /e/f/ that number, at so moderate a 
price can Chinese paper be obtained in Calcutta, that, 
considering the number ef copies, the version will be. 


APPENDIX. Si’ 


cheaper, notwithstanding its being the first, than any ver- 
sion of the New Testament which we have hitherto been 
able to print. May the Lord enable us to improve our 
advantages to the advancement of his cause.” 


NCO 


ee ee 


REMARKS. 


BY an article in the Literary Panorama for April, 
1808, it appears that the expense of engraving in 
Britain a Chinese M.S. Harmony of the 4 gospels, 
was estimated at 15,555 dolls. On this ‘scale, the en- 
graving of the whole New ‘Testament must have 
amounted to about ten times the sum which engraving 
it in India will cost. The work of Confucius bas been 
dedicated by permission to the Governor-general, Lord 
Miwnro, and isin great forwardness. Ina second me- 
moir published by the missionaries, they speak of Mr, 
Lawson’s joining them, as promising great usefulness, 
he being a proficient in the beautiful and important art 
of engraving op wood. One of the blocks containing a 
page of Matthew’s gospel in Chinese has been sent to 
this coyntry, and is in possession of the Rev. Dr. 
Staughton of Philadelphia, whose politeness has oblig- 
ed many of the curious with a sight of this interesting 
performance. 

The Editor of the present ‘edition of the Narrative 
was highly gratified, when at. Salem, with a sight of the 
first part of the New Testament in the Chinese, brought 
from Serampore by a Captain of an Indiaman, and pre- 
sented by him to that valuable institution, THe SaLem 
East Inpr1A Marine Socirtry, which, with several 
other of the Eastern versions of the scriptures, may be 
seen in their elegant museum. 


82 
GEOGRAPHICAL REMARKS. 


The province of Bengal is larger than Great Britain. The 
great rivers, Ganges* and Burrampooter,t with their numer- 
ous branches and adjuncts, intersect the whole country, in such 
a wonderful variety of directions, that except round Burdwan, 
Birboom, &c. every place is situate within thirty miles of some 
navigable stream; and generally within a third part of that 
distance. Thirty thousand boatmen are always employed by 
this inland navigation. 

The rivers in Bengal are extremely variable in their course 
or channel, owing to the nature of the soil, which is that of 
sand or black mould ; nothing: so coarse as gravel being found 
nearer the sea than (Oudanulla) 400 miles up the Ganges. 
This noble river receives, in its course through the plains, 
elevenrivers, some of which are equal ta the Rhine, and none 
smaller than the Thames, besides as many of lesser note. 
About 300 miles from the sea the Delta of the Ganges begins, 
The two westermost branches, viz. the Cossimbazar and the 
Jellinghy rivers, unite and form the Hoogly. The former is 
almost dry from October to May, and the latter is unnavigable 
for two or three of the driest months; therefore the only 
subordinate branch of the Ganges (except the Hoogly) which is 
always navigable, is the Chundnah, separating at Moddapour, 
and terminating in the Hooringotta river. 

The hot season begins with March, and continues to the end 
of May. The rainy season continues from June to September. 
By the latter end of July all the lower parts of Bengal, contigu- 
ous to the two great rivers, are overflowed to an extent of above 
100 miles in width, nothing appearing but villages and trees. 
Embarkations of every kind traverse the inundation: while 
husband ry and grazing are both suspended! The periodical 
rains and intense heat —produce a luxuriance of vegetation 
unknown in Europe; and the rich variety of the vegetable 
creation delights the eye of every spectator. 

The lower part of the Delta, called the Sunderbunds, which 
is one hundred and eighty miles broad next the sea, is equal 
in extent to the principality of Wales. This tract is complete- 
ly enveloped in woods, and so abounds with tygers and other 
wild beasts, that all attempts to clear it have been yet in vain ! 
Here salt is prepared, equaltothe consumption of Bengal and 
its dependencies ; while those who make it are in constant peril 
of their lives, as the tygers not only appear on the margin, but 
often, in the night-time, swim to the boats lying at anchor in 
the middle ot the river. 

SERAMPORE, the Seat of the Mission, is about 15 miles. 
north of Calcutta. 


* The Hindoostanee name of this riveris Pudda or Padda. itis also named Burra Gonga, 
or the Great River, and Gonga, the River, by way of eminence. This explains the plrdse} 
§*bathingin Gonga,’”? which often occurs in the Periodical Accounts. < 

+ The name in Sungskrit is Brabmapooter, y ¢. the son of Brahmas. - 


NOTICE. 


Any contributions made for this object, viz. The trans. 
tations of the Scrifitures——or in aid of the mission, (if for 
the latter it should be sficcified)/—may be deposited with 
Dr. Bartpwin of Boston—The Rev. Lucius Bottes of 
Salem—Joun CAULDWELL, Esq. 304 Pearl Street, New 
Yorke—or RopER? Rarston, Esq. Philadelphia. 


| 


AT alate and numerously attended meeting of the 
BOSTON FEMALE SOCIETY, organized in 1800, 
with a view to the support of Missionary undertak- 
ings ; it was 

RESOLVED, uwnanimously,—“ Thatthe whole sub- 
scriptions of the frresent year be appropriated 
to the Zranslations of the Scriptures, carrying on 
so extensively and successfully by the mission- 
aries at Serampore, in Bengal.” 


We would recommend the laudable example of these 
united christians, (for the society consists of various 
denominations,) to others, that according to the ability 
which God giveth, all might come forward and assist 
in giving the Holy Scriptures to four hundred millions of 
itolaters !. (Centtnel, Nov. 9, 1811. 


Lincoln & Edmands, 


NO. 53 CORNHILL, BOSTON, 


Receive subscriptions for Dr. GILL’s COMMENTARY, 
to be comprised in nine vols. quarto, at 6 dols. per yol. Two 
vols. of the work are ready for delivery. 


SCOTT’s COMMENTARY, royal octavo, in 6 vols. printed on 
paper of three different qualities, price per vol. 2 dols. 2.50 
and 3.00. Two vols. received. 


SCOTT’s COMMENTARY, handsomely printed in quarto, 5 
vols. at 6 dols. per vol.—With the addition of Butterworth’s 
Concordance, and valuable maps, 6.50 per vol. Three yols. 
are received. 


Dr. ADAM CLARKE’s COMMENTARY, an original work, 
elegantly printed, to be comprised in 20 or 30 numbers, at 
1.50 per No. Three numbers are received. 


FAMILY BIBLES 
With and without Apocrypha, with Concordance, Plates, Maps, 
&ec. at various prices, from 3.50 to 18 dols. POCKET BI- 
BLES, English & American elegant editions, various prices. 
TESTAMENTS, various prices—constantly for sale. 


7 
é 


ALSO, 


CHEAP RELIGIOUS TRACTS, 

Happily adapted to the object of gratuitous circulation. On 
cash purchases of five dols. a discount of 5 per cent made— 
on ten dols. 10 per cent. Orders from different parts of the 
Union answered with promptness. 


ALSO, 
Cruden’s Concordance, 10 dols —Butterworth’s ditto. 5 dolls. 
Brown’s do 1 dol. Buck’s Theological Diction- 


arv, 4.50. Wright’s Complete Life of Christ, his Aposiies, 
Evangelists, Disciples, &c. with plates, 5dols. Abridgment 
of the Book ofthe Martyrs, 2.25. Burder’s History of the - 
Bible, 5dols. English Harmony of the 4 Gospels, 2.55. 


Just received, from Philadelphia, 
Peautifully printed, the First American Edition of 


Tre MANIAC, 
WITH OTHER POEMS, 


BY JOHN LAWSON, 


Missionary to India. 


\ 
: 


bi Be ¥ ree tet oF 
use, from ft: 
Bates Halil, 
returned Wi 
within such hb 
book can be tai 
Library, while * 
Branch. 

Books can * 
renewed with 
slip with th 
cents for: 
the t 
who cannot - 
are paid. 

No book *: 
the borrow 
wm ike ions 


~? 


| Po M., 


Al M.\, «: 
March. 
ber, i 


