ftMM^^^^ 


tmavy  ofth$  'theological  ^eminar^ 

PRINCETON    .    NEW  JERSEY 


PRESENTED  BY 

Jiobert  P,  Brodsky 

3V  3790  .E25  1869 
:3arle,  A.  B. 
Bringing  in  sheaves 


^  .'K, 


dIbs 


^^/<' 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 


^^s  OF  PR/^ 


Oa 


DEC   18  1963 


^OeiCAL   st^ 


BY 


^ 


REV.    A.    B.    EARLE 


TENTH     THOUSAND. 


BOSTO^ST: 
PUBLISHED   BY   JAMES   H.  ExiRLE, 

No.  96  WASrnNGTON  ST. 

1869. 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1868,  by 

JAMES   H.  EARLE, 

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  District  of  Massachusetts. 


Stereotyped  at  the  Boston  Stereotype  Foundry, 
No.  19  Spring  Lane. 


TO   ALL 

WHOSE     PRAYER    IS, 

"O  LORD,  Revive   Tht  Work:' 

EJis  Book 
Is  Affectioxately  Inscribed 

BY  THE   AUTHOR. 


PREFACE. 


The  publication  of  this  volume  has  been  urged  upon 
me  by  ministers  and  laymen  of  different  denominations, 
for  a  number  of  years  past,  as  a  duty  I  owe  to  the 
cause  of  Christ.  Among  the  requests  for  such  a  work, 
one  came  to  me,  some  ten  years  ago,  signed  by  nearly 
two  hundred  persons. 

But,  while  I  have  believed  that  such  a  work  might  be 
useful,  it  has,  until  recently,  seemed  unadvisable  for  me 
to  undertake  it,  as  there  appeared  to  be  no  way  of  doing 
so  without  turning  aside  from  my  loved  and  aj)pointed 
work  as  an  evangelist,  which  I  was  unwilling  to  do  so 
long  as  strength  was  given  me  to  preach  to  perishing 
men. 

A  few  months  since,  however,  the  way  seemed  opened : 
My  sons,  having  finished  their  college  course,  were  in  a 
situation,  before  entering  upon  their  chosen  avocations, 
to  assist  me  in  preparing  the  work.  Accordingly,  when 
they  had  rested  for  a  season  from  the  fatigue  of  study, 
and  myself  from  the  exhaustion  and  weariness  of  my 

(5) 


6  PREFACE. 

Pacific  tour,  the  book  was  commenced,  and  has  been 
carried  forward  as  rapidly  as  possible  under  the  circum- 
stances. I  have  only  been  able  to  work  on  it  at  inter- 
vals, as  I  have  found  here  and  there  a  spare  hour,  until 
my  return  home  in  June,  for  a  season  of  rest  from  con- 
stant preaching. 

In  all  the  variety  of  matter  and  subjects  which  have 
been  presented,  the  principal  aim  has  been  to  answer  the 
question  that  Christians  are  everywhere  asking,  —  "  How 
are  we  to  labor  the  most  successfully  to  promote  revivals 
of  religion  ?  " 

I  have  endeavored  clearly  to  present  my  own  experi- 
ence and  observation  in  revivals ;  and  in  these  I  think 
will  be  found  the  means  which  God  has  appointed  and 
signally  blessed  in  the  quickening  of  his  people  and  the 
conversion  of  souls  —  means  which  I  have  always,  I 
believe  without  a  single  exception,  seen  blessed  to  the 
renewing  of  God's  work. 

I  have  given  no  system  of  rules,  or  set  of  measures,  to 
be  used  in  revivals,  as  I  know  of  none. 

Perhaps  my  views  can  most  clearly  and  fully  be 
learned  from  Chapter  I.,  and  the  sermons  on  "  Faith,"  and 
"  Joy  Restored." 

The  chaj-  *;,ers  of  "  Revival  Gleanings  "  give  some  idea 
of  the  character  and  results  of  meetings  in  which  these 
means  have  been  employed,  although  they  come  far 
short  of  the  reality. 

Had  the  accounts  of  these  meetings  been  fuller,  they, 
perhaps,  would  have  been  more  satisfactory ;  still  I  trust 
they  will  not  be  entirely  wanting  in  interest,  and  above 
all  in  power  to  do  good.     The  selection  and  arrange- 


PREFACE.  7 

ment  of  them  have  not  been  according  to  the  order  of 
time  or  importance  of  locaUty,  although,  generally,  the 
more  recent  have  been  mentioned,  because  they  were 
most  readily  remembered. 

The  chapter  on  the  "  Rest  of  Faith,"  I  can  but  believe 
will,  in  some  measure  at  least,  meet  the  earnest  desire  of 
the  Christian  world  in  helping  believers  reach  that  state 
of  union  with  Christ  in  which  they  can  more  fully  honor 
him,  and  labor  with  greater  success  in  his  cause. 

I  submit  it  to  the  careful  and  prayerful  consideration 
of  all,  with  the  hope  that  it  may  prove,  as  in  my  own 
case,  the  balm  for  wounded  hearts  and  the  rest  for  weary 
souls. 

The  book  contains  "  opinions  of  pastors,"  and  personal 
allusions  and  letters  which  would  be  wholly  out  of  place 
but  for  the  purpose  I  have  had  of  deepening  through 
them  the  conviction  of  the  need  and  importance  of 
evangelistic  labor;  not  on  my  own  account,  for  my 
reception  and  the  confidence  in  me  have  been  all  that 
any  man  could  desire,  but  because  I  want  to  see  men 
who  have  the  necessary  qualifications  entering  this 
department  of  ministerial  labor.  A  great  field  lies  open, 
and  the  demand  for  laborers  is  great ;  prejudice  is  rapid- 
ly melting  away ;  pastors  feel  that  they  are  in  want  of 
just  such  help. 

A  few  sermons  are  given  because  I  am  so  often  asked 
for  them.  Many  persons  come  to  me,  and  say,  in  refer- 
ence to  this  or  that  sermon,  "  I  was  greatly  benefited  by 
it :  can  I  not  obtain  it  ?" 

The  book  was  not  designed  to  tell  what  I  have  done : 
far  fi'om  me  be  such  a  folly ;  and  farther  still  that  of 


8  PREFACE. 

taking  to  myself  credit   of  results  in  the  accomplish* 
ment  of  which  I  have  only  been  God's  instrument. 

To  those  who  are  unknown  to  me  the  book  comes  with 
the  hope,  deep  in  my  heart,  that  it  may  be  to  them  a 
source  of  comfort  and  strength ;  to  those  with  whom  I 
have  been  associated  it  comes  as  the  letter  of  a  friend, 
filled  with  tender  regard  and  sympathy,  and  an  earnest 
desire  and  prayer  that  they  may  be  rejoiced  and  blessed 
as  they  read  its  pages,  —  and  to  all  with  the  hope  that,  by 
and  byj  when  the  battle  is  fought,  and  the  victory  won, 
we  may  meet  in  the  "  better  country,"  and  sit  down  with 
"  Christ's  whole  family,"  never  to  part  again.  O,  will 
one  be  left  out  ?  Will  a  single  reader  of  this  book  go 
away  upon  the  left  hand  of  the  Judge,  down  to  the  night 
of  endless  despair  ? 

May  the  messages  spoken  in  weakness  be  made  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  who  reads 
these  pages !  My  earnest  prayer  is,  that  the  book  may 
accomplish  its  simple  purpose,  and  prove  itself  a  Revival 
Help. 

A.  B.  Eaklb. 

Newton,  Mass.,  August,  1868. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 
HOW   CAN   I   BEST   PROMOTE   A   REVIVAL  ? 

PAGB 

Revival  begins  like  Fire.  —  Often  with  one  Christian.  —  Chris- 
tian's own  Heart.  —  Definiteness.  —  Series  of  Meetings.     .     15 

CHAPTER  n. 

FAITH. 

Sermon  preached  in  Fall  River,  Mass.,  in  1863 23 

CHAPTER  III. 

REVIVAL  GLEANINGS. 

Albany.  —  East   Bridgewater,  —  Chelsea.  —  Springfield.  — 
Cincinnati.    .     .  38 

CHAPTER  IV. 

PROVINCE   OF   NEW   BRUNSWICK. 

Seeking  Rest.  —  Finding   Work.  —  St.   John.  —  Burton.  — 
Frederickton.  —  Grand  Lake.  —  Kindness  of  the  People.      .     54 

(9) 


10  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  V. 

JOY  RESTORED. 
Sermon  preached  in  Tabernacle  Church,  New  York,  in  1868. .    62 

CHAPTER  VL 

INCIDENTS. 

"Ma,  give  him  my  two  one-dollars."  —  "Try  it  on  me.'*  — 
"  She  wUl  never  call  me  '  Father '  again." 81 

CHAPTER  VII. 
REVIVAL  GLEANINGS  —  CONTINUED. 

Amsterdam.  —  Abington.  —  HaverMll.  —  Fall  River.  —  Wash- 
ington  89 

CHAPTER  Vm. 

INCIDENTS. 

Sermon  on  a  Wood-Pile.  —  "  Jesus  will  take  care  of  me."  .    .  107 

CHAPTER  IX. 

WHY  MUST  I  GIVE  UP  MY  WILL  ? 

The  Will  the  Seat  of  Rebellion  against  God.  —  Case  of  Lady 
in  Massachusetts.  —  Business  Man.  —  Teacher  in  College. 
—  Judge.  —  "Measures." 117 

CHAPTER  X. 

UNPARDONABLE   SIN. 

Sermon  delivered,  Sunday  Evening,  October  14, 1866,  in  Union 
Hall,  San  Francisco,  Cal 128 


CONTENTS.  11 

CHAPTER  XI. 

FIREMEN'S  MEETING. 
Report  from  Brooklyn  Daily  Eagle 145 

CHAPTER  XII. 

LETTERS  FROM  YOUNG  CONVERTS  AND  OTHERS. 

Little  Sadie.  —  Family  Letter.  —  Ohio  Letter,  sent  with  a  pair 
of  Socks.  —  *'  Would  like  to  be  a  Minister."  —  Twenty-five 
Years  of  Wandering.  —  "A  Happy  New  Year."  —  A  Sabbath 
School  Class  not  too  young  for  Jesus.  —  "Almost  Fourscore." 
—  "  Part  Way  up."  —  A  Granddaughter's  Request.  —  Little 
Scolder. —  Grateful  Deacon.  —  From  two  little  Brothers. — 
*'  In  such  an  Hour  you  came."  —  Burdened  for  Friends.  — 
Cannot  save  ourselves.  —  "  No  other  Refuge."  —  The  Way 
little  Freddie  made  his  Will.  —  From  two  little  Sisters.  — 
"  Must  work  as  well  as  wish." 152 

CHAPTER  Xm. 

VERMONT   MEETING. 

Origin.  —  Character.  —  Influence 167 

CHAPTER  XIY. 

COME  OVER  AND  HELP  US. 

Elizabeth.  —  Richmond.  —  Grand  Rapids.  —  Lynn.  —  Napa.  — 
Vancouver.  —  Vallcjo.  —  New  Hampshire.  —  Corvallis.  — 
Baltimore.  —  Newport 176 


12  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

THE   OPINION   OF  PASTORS. 

Geo.  B.  Ide.  —  Edward  N.  Kirk.  —  Robert  Turnbull.  —  J.  D. 
Clark. —  S.  D.  Phelps. —H.  Harvey. —Wm.  Hague.— 
Geo.  C.  Baldwin.  —  J.  R.  Kendrick.  —  Thomas  Armitage.  — 
Geo.  D.  Boardman • 187 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

TITLE  EXAMINED. 

Sermon  preached  in  Tremont  Temple,  Boston 202 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

EVANGELISTS.  —  THEIR  TRIALS  AND  JOYS. 

Division  of  Ministerial  Labor.  —  Work  of  the  Evangelist. — 
Trials.  —  Much  of  the  Time  away  from  Home.  —  Distrust 
and  Prejudice.  —  Necessity  of  saying  "  No."  —  Parting  with 
new-made  Friends.  —  Joys.  —  Necessity  of  living  near  the 
Savior.  —  Constantly  making  new  Friends.  —  Immediate 
Results.  —  Greatest  Joy  in  Reserve 228 

CHAPTER  XVIIL 

UNION  MEETINGS. 

Consistent  with  Denominational  Differences.  —  Require  no 
Compromise.  —  Reasons  for  Confidence  in  them.  —  Lead 
Christians  to  speak  more  kindly.  —  Convince  Unconverted 
of  Reality  in  Religion.  —  Gambler.  —  Physician.  —  Two 
Instances  of  such  Meetings.  —  Churches  prepared  to  receive 
Converts.  —  Spirit  moving  Denominations 230 


CONTENTS.  13 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
FOUR  DAYS'  MEETINGS. 

Chester.  —  Charlestown.  —  Ogdensburg.  —  Fairfax.  —  Bristol. 

—  Saxton's  Kiver.  —  Amsterdam 251 

CHAPTER  XX. 

REVIVAL  GLEANINGS  —  CONTINUED. 

Boston.  —  New  York  City.  —  Philadelphia.  —  Lawrence.  — 
Dover,  Great  Falls,  and  South  Berwick.  — Concord. —  Bid- 
deford  and  Saco.  —  Brooklyn.  —  Syracuse 2G9 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

THE   WORK  ON   THE   PACIFIC   COAST. 

Sources.  —  San  Francisco  Ministerial  Union.  —  Their  Letter. 

—  Acceptance.  —  Farewell  Services.  —  Arrival  on  the  Pa- 
cific Coast.  —  Meeting  in  San  Francisco 280 

CHAPTER  XXIL 

THE   WORK   ON    THE    PACIFIC   COAST  —  CONTINUED. 

Sonora  and  Columbia.  —  Oakland.  —  Stockton.  —  Sacramento. 

—  Petaluma.  —  San  Jose.  —  Santa  Clara.  —  Marysville.  — 
Placerville 295 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 
THE   WORK   ON   THE    PACIFIC    COAST—  CONTINUED. 

Oregon.  —  Portland.  —  Oregon  City.  —  Salem 318 


14  dONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

THE  WORK  ON  THE  PACIFIC  COAST  —  CONTINUED. 
Nevada.  —  Virginia  City  and  Gold  Hill.  —  Carson 331 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

THE  WORK   ON  THE    PACIFIC    COAST  —  CONTINUED. 

California.  —  Nevada  City.  —  Grass  Valley.  —  Santa  Cruz.  — 
Farewell  Services.  —  Return  Home 340 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

THE  WORK  ON  THE  PACIFIC  COAST  —  CONTINUED. 

Retrospect.  —  Results.  —  General  Features.  —  Expressions  of 
Feeling.  —  Messages. 351 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

THE  REST  OF  FAITH. 

The  Desir :  —  Testimony.  —  The  Way.  —  How  retained.  — 
My  own  Experience 363 


BRmama  m  sheaves. 


CHAPTER  I. 

"HOW  CAN  I  BEST  PROMOTE  A  REVIVAL? »» 

MANY  pastors,  who  have  been  unable  to  secure 
the  needed  help  in  holding  a  series  of  meet- 
ings, write  me,  requesting  an  answer  to  this  question  : 
"  How  can  I  best  promote   a  revival  of  religion  ?  " 

Others,  with  whom  I  meet,  are  saying,  "It  has 
been  many  years  since  we  have  had  a  revival  in  our 
town,  and  I  am  half  discouraged  —  I  know  not  what 
to  do." 

Frequently  the  remark  is  made,  "Our  congre- 
gation is  small,  and  but  little  interest  is  manifest  in 
the  subject  of  religion ;  if  you  can  come,  do  not  be 
in  a  hurry  to  leave  us  —  this  is  a  very  hard  field." 

For  these  and  all  other  laborers  who  desire  to 
know  my  views  concerning  the  best  means  of  pro- 
moting revivals  of  religion,  and  with  whom  I  can- 

(15) 


16  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

not  converse  in  person,  the  thoughts,  in  this  brief 
chapter,  are  specially  written. 

A  revival  of  religion,  like  a  fire,  must  begin 
somewhere  :  "  Behold,  how  great  a  matter  a  little 
fire  kindleth  !  " 

A  fire  often  begins  with  a  little  match,  and  works 
its  way  through  the  combustible  material  about  it 
until  it  has  swept  over  a  wide  region.  The  great 
fire  in  Portland  orighiated  with  a  fire-cracker.  So 
a  work  of  grace  often  commences  with  a  single 
Christian  —  never  with  the  whole  church.  As  soon 
as  that  one  Christian  is  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
he  goes  after  others,  to  lead  them  to  the  Savior,  or 
to  induce  believers  to  join  him  in  efibrts  for  a  re- 
vival. Jesus  fulfils  his  promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with 
you ;  "  and  others  are  soon  moved  and  melted,  and 
the  work  begins  to  widen. 

So  that  whoever  would  promote  a  revival  of  re- 
ligion should  begin  with  his  own  heart,  and  pray, 
and  confess,  and  believe,  until  he  feels  his  heart  all 
subdued  and  melted  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  —  until  his 
love  to  Christ  is  glowing,  fervid,  burning,  —  and 
until  he  finds  himself  groaning  over  the  lost  con- 
dition of  men,  and,  like  Jesus,  being  in  an  agony 
prays  more  earnestly. 

Then,  when  his  heart  is  in  this  state,  let  him  get 
a  few,  if  he  cannot  many,  to  join  him  in  special 
prayer  for  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.     Let  that 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.     •  17 

little  company  hold  on  in  united,  persistent  prayer, 
"  nothing  wavering,"  until  the  windows  of  heaven 
are  opened. 

The  disciples  at  Jerusalem  continued  in  prayer 
about  ten  days,  before  they  received  the  promised 
power  from  on  high.  It  does  not  appear  that  the 
meeting,  with  so  many  ministers  in  attendance, 
attracted  much  attention,  until  the  disciples  were 
fully  anointed,  and  filled  with  the  Spirit. 

They  could  have  accomplished  but  little  had  they 
preached  and  labored  without  this  preparation  ;  but 
as  soon  as  it  was  received,  the  multitude  were 
drawn  to  the  place  in  great  numbers,  and  were  con- 
founded when  they  saw  the  power  that  rested  on 
those  Galileans  ;  a  new  power  attended  their  preach- 
ing. This  work  commenced  with  those  believers, 
and  spread  with  great  rapidity  all  over  the  country. 

So  it  must  be  with  all  who  would  labor  success- 
fully in  leading  souls  to  Christ;  they  must  tarry  at 
Jesus'  feet  until  they  have  power  with  God;  — 
then  they  will  have  power  with  men.  The  gift 
there  received  will  be  with  them  wherever  the}^  go, 
diffusing  its  sweet  and  holy  influence,  and  God's 
work  will  be  revived,  and  sinners  converted. 

1  have  observed,  for  nearly  forty  years  past,  that 
the  secret  of  success  in  promoting  revivals  of  re- 
li«:i()n  is  in  havinoj  our  own  hearts  filled  with  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

2 


18  '     BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

It  IS  not  enough  for  those  of  us  who  preach,  that 
our  sermons  be  able,  sound,  and  well  delivered,  or 
that  we  preach  what  are  sometimes  called  revival  ser- 
mons, and  that  we  also  visit  and  converse  with  men 
about  their  souls'  interest.  It  is  not  enough  that  the 
church  be  aroused  and  go  to  work  actively  for  a  re- 
vival :  all  this  can  be  done,  and  but  few  souls  be 
saved.  Nothing  can  be  a  substitute  for  real  "  power 
from  on  high."  No  amount  of  study  or  talent,  no 
effort,  however  untiring,  can  take  the  place  of  the 
fullness  of  Christ's  love;  "Not  by  might,  nor  by 
power  [human],  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord." 

I  have  known  ministers  to  preach,  and  their 
churches  to  unite  with  them,  day  after  day,  for 
weeks  together,  for  a  revival,  and  yet  very  little  to 
be  accomplished. 

The  failure  was  not  because  the  Spirit  was  un- 
willing to  work  with  them  and  bless  their  efforts, 
nor  because  a  continued  meeting  is  not  of  divine 
appointment,  but  because  they  had  not  the  needed 
power  with  God. 

I  am  often  invited  to  assist  pastors  and  churches 
in  a  series  of  meetings,  with  a  view  of  gathering 
in  the  multitudes,  "  who  are  unreached  by  the  ordi- 
nar}^  means  of  grace."  Important  as  it  is  to  reach 
this  class,  I  have  never  found  any  way  of  doing  so, 
or  of  reaching  the  unconverted  in  the  regular  con- 
gregations,   until   Christians    were    filled    with   the 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  19 

Spirit,    and    humbled   iu    the  dust    in    agonizing 
prayer. 

The  multitudes  flock  to  the  house  of  God,  when 
Christ's  children  enjoy  the  fuHness  of  His  love,  and 
no  more  complaint  is  heard  about  small  congrega- 
tions, and  little  interest  in  the  subject  of  religion. 
For  this  reason,  it  is  usually  quite  as  well  to  com- 
mence a  series  of  meetings  with  a  small  assembly, 
and  in  unpleasant  weather;  since,  under  such  cir- 
cumstances, the  church  —  at  least  some  portion  of  it 

will  be  more  likely  to  get  fully  into  the  work,  and 

have  power  with  God,  than  when  the  congregations 
are  crowded,  and  the  surroundings  more  promising. 
So  clear  has  this  point  been  to  my  ov/n  mind  for 
years,  I  have  said  to  the  pastors  and  churches  with 
whom  I  have  been  called  to  "labor,  that,  if  there  was 
not  a  revival  of  religion,  I  should  not  complain  of 
the  church,  but  take  the  blame  mostly  to  myself, 
believing  that  if  I  am  right  and  have  power  with 
God,  others  will  feel  that  power,  and  sinners  will 
be  converted  :  there  will  be  a  revival. 

Let  me  say,  then,  to  pastors  and  to  the  churches  : 
If  you  believe  the  glory  of  God  demands  a  revival  in 
your  midst,  and  you  desire  to  be  instrumental  in  ad- 
vancing the  work  and  bringing  sinners  to  the  Savior, 
first  see  that  your  own  hearts  are  thoroughly  melted 
and  subdued,  under  a  deep  sense- of  the  condition 
of  lost  men,  and  that  you  are  filled  with  the  Spirit 


20  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

and  constrained  by  the  love  of  Christ ;  then  get  a 
few,  if  you  cannot  more,  to  meet  with  you,  and 
pray  with  and  for  one  another,  until,  like  those 
who  prayed  with  Peter  and  John,  you  are  all  filled 
with  the  Holy  Spirit :  then  expect  a  powerful 
revival  of  religion.  Barnabas  was  "a  good  man, 
and  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  of  faith,"  and,  as  a 
result,  "  much  people  was  added  unto  the  Lord." 
Do  not  seek  to  produce  an  undue  excitement  in  the 
community,  neither  be  afraid  of  as  much  interest  as 
was  manifest  among  the  people  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost. 

In  your  prayer  meetings  have  a  definite  object  in 
view.  If  you  desire  an  immediate  outpouring  of 
the  Spirit,  ask  God  for  that ;  if  the  fullness  of  his 
love  in  your  hearts,  let  that  be  the  burden  of  your 
prayer;  if  the  conversion  of  a  friend,  agonize 
for  that :  whatever  you  desire,  look  for  it  at  once. 
"  What  things  soever  ye  desire,  when  ye  pray,  be- 
lieve that  ye  receive  them,  and  ye  shall  have  them." 
If  you  would  have  a  great  blessing,  ask  for  it  in 
faith,  in  Jesus'  name.  The  Father  has  nothing  too 
good  or  great  to  give  for  his  Son's  sake.  Jesus 
is  the  pledge  of  all  that  Infinite  Love  can  bestow, 
or  that  we  can  receive.  "How  shall  he  not  with 
him  also  freely  give  us  all  things." 

If,  in  your  judgment,  you  need  some  one  to  assist 
you  for  a  few  days  or  weeks,  secure  such   aid,  but 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  21 

do  not  rely  on  any  human  arm ;  make  any  special 
efforts  you  think  needed,  but  rely  chiefly  on  having 
power  with  God  in  prayer  yourself.  Human  in- 
strumentalities must  be  employed  in  the  convers  on 
of  sinners,  but  the  excellency  of  the  power  is  jf 
God. 

One  of  the  divinely  appointed  means  for  pro- 
moting revivals  of  religion,  is,  at  suitable  times,  to 
hold  a  series  of  meetings  for  days  or  weeks  together. 
Among  the  other  departments  of  ministerial  labor, 
the  Savior  appointed  evangelists  to  assist  in  these 
meetings,  whenever  and  wherever  they  might  be 
needed. 

In  the  days  of  Nehemiah,  we  find  Ezra,  the 
priest,  on  a  pulpit  of  wood,  which  had  been  made 
Aor  the  occasion,  engaged  in  a  series  of  meetings, 
which  continued  for  many  days.  Ezra  and  those 
who  assisted  him  read  and  explained  the  word  of 
God  one  fourth  part  of  the  day,  and  spent  another 
fourth  in  prayer  and  confession  of  sin  ;  in  this  way 
they  continued  the  meeting  until  there  was  a  great 
revival  of  religion  among  them,  and  a  marked  re- 
form in  their  habits  and  manner  of  living.  Neh. 
viii.  ix. 

The  apostles  also,  after  Christ's  ascension,  held  a 
meeting  about  ten  days,  with  a  large  number  of 
minist<  rs  present.  "  These  all  continued,  with  one 
uccord    rUay   by  day],  in  prayer  and   supplication 


22  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

with  the  women,"  until  the  Spirit  was  poured  out 
upon  them,  and  they  received  the  promised  power 
from  on  high.  Then  they  were  ready  for  a  larger 
congregation ;  and  the  multitudes  were  quickly 
attracted  to  the  place,  and  the  displays  of  grace 
"vere  so  marvellous,  and  the  conversions  so  numer- 
ous, that  there  was  an  addition  to  the  church,  on  a 
single  day  of  the  meeting,  of  about  three  thousand 
new  members. 

Let  me,  then,  again  say  to  all  Christians  who 
desire  and  labor  for  the  conversion  of  souls :  First, 
be  right  yourself;  spend  days  and  nights,  if  neces- 
sary, in  humiliation,  fasting,  and  prayer,  until  the 
Spirit  comes  down  upon  you,  and  you  feel  that  you 
have  power  with  God ;  then  you  will  have  power 
with  men  in  leading  them  to  Christ. 

Let  none  of  us,  w^ho  proclaim  the  gospel,  preach 
complaining,  scolding  sermons,  or  make  unkind 
remarks  about  those  who  differ  with  us,  or  who  do 
not  come  up  to  the  work  as  we  would  have  them. 
Let  the  melting,  subduing  love  of  Christ  flow  from 
our  hearts  and  lips ;  the  unconverted  will  then  be- 
gin to  cry  out,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we 
do  ?  "  and  we  shall  find  ourselves  in  the  midst  of  a 
glorious  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  with  a  host  of 
busy  hands  and  loving  hearts  about  us,  reaping  and 
bringing  in  the  sheaves,  and  with  no  more  need 
of  asking,  "How  can  I  best  promote  a  revival?  " 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  23 


CHAPTER   n. 

FAITH.* 
**  Have   faith  in   God."  —  Mark  xi.  22. 

FAITH  is  a  persuasion  of  the  mind,  resting 
upon  evidence. 
Faith  must  have  a  basis  to  rest  upon ;  we  cannot 
have  faith  in  the  absence  of  evidence.  God  never 
asks  any  one  to  believe  anything  without  furnishing 
a  basis  for  that  belief.  Does  he  ask  us  to  believe 
in  his  own  existence,  —  he  opens  the  great  volume 
of  nature,  and  bids  us  look  up.  Does  he  require 
u^  to  receive  the  Scriptures  as  divinely  inspired, — 
they  bear  in  themselves  the  evidence  of  their  divine 
origin.  Does  he  bid  us  come  to  him  in  prayer,  — 
he  furnishes  us  with  daily  answers  to  prayer. 

Some  persons  have  faith  in  appearances ;  that  is, 
they  believe  they  are  going  to  have  a  revival  of 
religion,  because  there  is  a  general  solemnity  and 
seriousness  in  the  community.  This  is  not  faith  in 
God,  but  in    appearances :    withdraw  these  indica- 

*  A  Sermon  preached  in  Fall  River,  Mass.,  in  1863. 


24  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

tions,  and  faith  has  nothing  to  rest  upon.  To  true 
faith  in  God  the  darkness  and  the  light  are  both 
alike. 

We  hear  others  say  they  have  faith  to  believe 
th^  would  have  a  glorious  revival,  could  they 
secure  the  labors  of  a  favorite  minister :  this  is 
faith  in  a  minister  or  measure  —  not  in  God.  Get 
your  minister,  if  in  your  judgment  he  would  do 
you  good,  but  let  your  faith  anchor  in  God  and 
his  promises. 

As  faith  must  have  a  basis  to  rest  upon,  let  us 
see  what  ground  we  have  to  expect  an  immediate 
revival  of  religion,  and  souls  to  be  converted  to 
God,  if  we  go  on  with  this  meeting,  and  preach, 
and  pray,  and  exhort,  and  sing,  and  visit. 

1.     God  appointed  these  means  to  effect  this  end. 

God,  who  cannot  make  a  mistake,  and  who  knows 
all  about  the  difficulties  to  be  overcome  in  a  dark, 
cold  time,  bids  us  go  and  preach,  pray,  exhort,  aflJi 
sing,  in  simple  faith,  and  he  will  bless. 

No  matter  how  dark,  or  cold,  or  dead, —  we  are  to 
look  for  an  immediate  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  in 
the  use  of  these  means.  I  have  come  to  believe 
that  God  means  just  what  he  says  in  his  word,  and 
I  expect  an  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  w^henever  and 
wherever  the  means  are  used  in  faith. 

If  God  had  told  me  to  go  into  your  graveyard 
and  sing  "Old  Hundred"  among  the  graves,  and 


BRINGINO  IN  SHEA  VES.  25 

that  by  this  means  the  dead  would  be  raised,  I 
would  come  to  one  and  another  of  you,  and  ask 
if  you  had  any  friends  in  that  graveyard ;  and  if 
so,  to  get  ready  to  receive  them  —  they  were  going 
to  be  raised.  Perhaps  you  would  ask  me,  "Can 
you  raise  the  dead?"  I  should  answer,  "Xot  at  all ; 
but  God  has  sent  me  to  sing  'Old  Hundred'  among 
the  graves,  and  says  through  this  means  he  will 
raise  the  dead,"  I  should  expect  to  see  the  graves 
open,  and  the  dead  come  forth.  My  faith  would  not 
rest  in  any  power  of  yours  or  mine,  but  in  the  fact 
that  God  appointed  this  means  to  effect  this  end. 

Just  so  when  Jesus  sa3's,  "  Go  preach  my 
word,  and,  lo  !  1  am  with  you,  and  will  pour  out 
my  Spirit  upon  you,"  we  should  expect  him  to  do 
it.  I  do  expect  it ;  I  have  not  one  fear  but  that  we 
shall  have  a  glorious  result,  if  we  use  these  means 
in  faith  in  this  place. 

Moses  had  faith  in  God,  when  he  lifted  the  brazen 
serpent  to  the  bitten  Israelites  ;  his  faith  was  not  in 
the  piece  of  brass,  nor  in  his  own  power  to  heal, 
but  in  the  fact  that  God  had  appointed  that  piece 
of  brass  thereby  to  make  his  power  known. 
As  Moses  lifted  that  piece  of  brass  in  the  wilder- 
ness, so  must  Jesus  be  lifted  to  the  view  of  lost 
men. 

We  can  have  faith  in  God,  in  using  these  means, 
then,  because  he  appointed  them  to  eflect  this  end. 


26  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

2.  Another  strong  ground  for  faith  in  God,  in 
using  these  means,  to  expect  an  immediate  revival 
of  religion,  is,  that  God's  heart  and  hand  are  in 
this  wo]k. 

God  felt  so  deeply  for  the  salvation  of  souls, 
before  we  cared  anything  about  it,  that  he  gave  his 
own  Son  to  die  for  them. 

*'  This  was  compassion  like  a  God, 

That,  when  the  Savior  knew 
The  price  of  pardon  was  his  blood, 
His  pity  ne'er  withdrew." 

God  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  tries 
no  experiment  —  has  all  necessary  resources  of 
providence  and  grace  ;  so  that  we  can  follow  where 
he  leads,  with  unwavering  faitli. 

How  often  does  some  providence  occur,  that  is 
made  the  means  of  a  powerful  work  of  grace.  In 
one  part  of  Maine,  nine  churches  united  in  asking 
me  to  assist  them  in  a  series  of  union  meetings ; 
but  before  I  reached  the  place,  death  had  taken  one 
of  the  pastors,  ahnost  instantly,  out  of  the  world. 
This  pastor  had  drawn  off  the  names  of  more  than 
twenty  persons,  whom  he  Avas  going  to  seek,  at 
once,  to  bring  to  the  Savior.  One  day,  with  these 
names  in  his  pocket,  he  went  to  the  post-office,  and 
died  before  reaching  ,\i\ii  home  again.  The  eti'ect 
was  so  great  upon  his  congregation  and  the  coin- 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  27 

munity,  that  it  was  necessary  to  commence  meet- 
ings at  once ;  and,  when  I  reached  the  place,  more 
than  a  hundred  persons  were  anxious  about  their 
souls. 

While  I  was  holding  a  series   of   meetings   in 


,  N.  Y.j'one  evening  a   hidy  was    passing 

near  the  church  door,  and  one  of  the  sisters  asked 
her  to  come  in,  saying,  "We  are  having  good 
meetings  here;  quite  a  revival  has  commenced, 
and  I  would  like  to  have  you  attend  some  of  these 
interesting  services."  The  lady  replied,  "  Do 
you  think  I  would  go  into  such  a  meeting — a  re- 
vival meeting?  No,  never!"  This  lady  went  on 
home,  scorning  the  meeting  and  religion.  A  day 
or  two  after  this  she  was  passing  that  church  door 
ao^ain  while  the  conore2:ation  were  sinijinof  one  of 
their  sweet  revival  hymns.  The  notes  went  through 
the  open  door  and  reached  her  ear.  She  paused, 
and  said,  "  That  sounds  good."  The  same  sister 
who  had  invited  her  in  before,  again  at  the  door, 
said,  "Come  in  and  hear  more."  She  replied, 
"I  am  too  proud  to  sit  down  in  a  meeting-hou^^e, 
mdess  I  can  own  a  seat."  The  sister  told  her  she 
might  have  their  seat,  which  could  be  emptied  for 
her  at  once.  This  was  done,  and  the  lady  spent  the 
rest  of  the  evening  in  our  meeting ;  her  heart  was 
deeply  moved.  Within  one  short  week  this  lady 
and  her  husband  w^ere  both  rejoicing  in   a  Savior's 


28  BRINi}ING  IN  SHEAVES. 

love.  Very  soon  both  iiDited  with  that  church. 
So  we  see  that  God  here  blessed  the  songs  of  praise 
to  the  salvation  of  souls. 

One  of  the  greatest  victories  ever  won  by  Jehosh- 
aphat  w^as  won  by  singing :  "  And  when  he  had 
consulted  with  the  people,  he  appointed  singers 
unto  the  Lord,  and  that  should  praise  the  beauty 
of  holiness  as  they  went  out  before  the  army,  and 
to  say.  Praise  the  Lord ;  for  his  mercy  endureth 
forever.       And     when    they   began   to     sing    and 

praise, (their   enemies)  were  smitten." 

2  Chron.   20:    21,   22. 

We  find,  then,  as  in  all  ages,  God  blessed  his 
people  when  they  sung  his  praise. 

I  would  urge  all  who  desire  to  promote  revivals 
of  religion,  and  to  lead  men  to  Jesus,  to  have  the 
best  singing  you  can  in  all  your  meetings.  Sing 
with  life  and  spirit.  God  appointed  singing,  and 
will  bless  it.     Have  faith  in  God. 

How  often  we  see  a  whole  community  moved  by 
the  power  of  a  little  prayer-meeting.  Peter  was 
brought  out  of  prison,  while  the  church  were  pray- 
ing in  the  house  of  Mary,  the  mother  of  John. 

"Prayer  is  appointed  to  convey 
The  blessings  God  de?igns  to  give." 

Lot  the  "  nothing-wavering "  prayer  be  offered, 
and  it  cannot  fail. 


BRINOING  IN  SHEAVES.  29 

Have  fiiith  in  God  when  you  pray,  for  he  ap- 
pointed these  means  to  effect  this  end. 

"  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you  ;  seek,  and  ye 
shall  find;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto 
vou ;  "  but  let  it  be  done  in  faith. 

3.  God  has  always  blessed  these  means,  when 
they  have  been  used  in  faith. 

None  ever  knew  a  failure,  except  when  faith  was 
lacking. 

The  w^alls  of  Jericho  fell  down  after  they  had 
been  compassed  about  in  faith ;  yet  I  presume 
many  of  those  who  went  round  those  walls,  like 
many  church  members  now,  had  no  faith  in  God, 
but  marched  with  those  that  had. 

God  honors  all  the  faith  he  finds  in  his  people. 
I  would  advise  all  to  use  what  faith  they  have,  for 
in  this  w^ay  faith  grows  —  it  is  strengthened  by  use. 
Just  as  David's  faith,  after  he  had  rescued  the  lamb 
from  the  mouth  of  the  lion  and  the  paw  of  the  bear, 
became  so  strong  he  believed  he  could  kill  Goliath. 

Naaman,  the  Syrian,  went  into  the  Jordan  to  wash 
seven  times,  with  very  great  unbelief  (yet  he  must 
have  had  a  little  faith,  or  he  would  not  have  gone  at 
all)  ;  but,  after  the  wonderful  cure,  he  went  home 
with  strong  faith.  He  found  God's  word  reliable. 
God  always  blesses  the  use  of  the  means  he  has 
appointe  1,  when  used  in  faith;  and  he  blesses  in 
proporti^  n  to  the  strength  of  our  faith. 


30  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

When  Ezekiel  preached  to  the  dry  bones,  there 
was  nothing  remarkable  in  his  sermon  or  manner 
of  presenting  the  truth,  but  simply  in  his  faith  in 
God.  His  faith  did  not  rest  in  any  wonderful  skill, 
or  power  in  preaching,  nor  in  any  favorable  appear- 
ances, but  in  God.  He  would  do  just  what  God 
directed  him  to  do,  knowing  that  God  could  not 
make  a  mistake,  and  that  he  was  able  to  do  just  as 
he  promised.  So,  standing  up  among  the  bones,  — 
dried,  and  bleached,  and  scattered  as  they  were, 
—  Ezekiel  began  to  cry,  "Dry  bones,  hear  the  word 
of  the  Lord !  Dry  bones,  live  !  Dry  bones,  come 
together!"  Power  accompanied  the  means  ^od 
appointed,  and  bone  came  to  his  fellow-bone,  and 
they  were  clothed  with  flesh  and  sinews.  But  the 
breath  of  life  was  not  yet  in  them.  Then  followed 
prayer,  or  calling  on  the  wind  to  blow  upon  the 
slain.  The  breath  of  life  entered  into  them,  and 
there  stood  upon  their  feet  an  army  of  men.  By 
this  figure  Ezekiel  was  shown  how  God  saves 
sinners. 

As  Ezekiel  went  among  those  dry  bones  and 
preached  to  them,  and  called  on  the  wind  to  blow 
upon  them,  and  they  lived,  so  Christians  must  go 
among  wicked  men,  and  preach  and  pray,  and  use 
the  means  God  has  appointed,  in  faith,  and  he 
will  bless  these  means,  and  save  souls,  and  build 
up  his  church. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  31 

Perhaps  some  one  will  ask  why  God  docs  not 
bless  the  labors  of  all  his  ministers,  alike,  in  the 
conversion  of  souls.  It  is  because  they  do  not  ex- 
pect it.  They  hope  God  will  bless  their  labcirs ; 
they  pray  him  to  do  it ;  they  really  desire  it,  but 
do  not  in  faith,  without  wavering,  expect  it.  Faith 
is  as  necessary  here,  as  is  lire  to  produce  heat. 
Persons  may  perish  in  the  cold,  surrounded  with 
good  fuel,  for  the  want  of  fire  to  kindle  it ;  so  men 
can  go  down  to  eternal  death,  under  the  ablest  pre- 
sentation of  truth,  just  for  the  want  of  faith  in  God 
on  the  part  of  the  preacher  and  those  thnt  hear.  So 
important  is  faith  in  God,  that  Jesus  said  to  the 
anxious  around  him,  "  Only  believe  ;  "  "All  things 
are  possible  to  him  that  believeth." 

"  Could  my  zeal  no  respite  know, 
Could  my  tears  forever  flow, 
All  for  sin  could  not  atone  : 
Thou  must  save,  and  thou  alone  I 
Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring; 
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  cling." 

A  beautiful  illustration  of  this  occurred  in  one  of 
my  meetings.  A  citizen,  about  thirty  years  of  age, 
had  such  a  clear  view  of  himself  as  a  sinner  in  the 
sight  of  God,  and  felt  so  deeply  that  he  must  have 
help  or  perish,  that  he  came  to  my  room,  after 
midnight,  to  know  what  he  should  do  to  be  saved. 
O,  the  agony  of  his  soul!     He  walked  the  floor 


32  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

crying,  "  I  shall  perish  !  What  shall  I  do  ?  What 
shall  I  do?"  He  kneeled  down  by  a  chair,  and 
literally  laid  his  face  on  the  carpet.  But  he 
soon  rose,  saying,  "  I  must  be  lost !  "  His  groans 
and  cries  were  heart-rending.  I  saw  plainly  that 
he  needed  to  get  a  clear  view  of  Jesus  and  his 
work,  and  asked  him  not  to  groan,  but  to  be  calm, 
an:l  listen  to  me  for  a  moment.  After  getting  his 
attention,  I  told  him  that  his  tears  and  overwhelm- 
ing anguish  Tvould  not  help  him,  but  he  must  let  go 
of  all  reliance  upon  anything  but  Jesus,  and  simply 
believe.  I  then  repeated  a  portion  of  the  old  Scotch 
hymn  (God  be  thanked  for  that  good  Scotch  brother 
who  wrote  it !),  — 

"  Nothing,  either  great  or  small, 
Nothing,  sinner,  no; 
Jesus  died  and  paid  it  all, 
Long,  yes,  long  ago. 

**  Jesus  paid  it  all, 

All  the  debt  I  owe ; 
And  nothing,  either  great  or  small, 
Remains  for  me  to  do." 

Looking  up  through  his  tears,  he  asked,  "Is 
that  it,  Mr.  Earle?  Is  that  the  way?"  I  replied, 
"  That  is  exactly  the  way."  But  the  light  was  not 
yet  clear  enough  for  him  freely  to  embrace  Jesus 
by  a  simple  faith.  He  commenced  groaning  and 
pleading    again,    saying,    "O,  what    shall  I  do?" 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  33 

I  said  to  him,  "  Don't  groan ;  let  me  have  your 
attention  a  little  longer."  I  then  repeated  the  last 
stanza  of  that  beautiful  hymn,  — 

*'  Cast  your  deadly  doing  down, 
Down,  all  at  Jesus'  feet ; 
Stand  in  him,  in  him  alone, 
All  glorious  and  complete. 

"Jesus  died  and  paid  it  all. 
All  the  debt  I  owe ; 
And  nothing,  either  great  or  small, 
Eemains  for  me  to  do." 

As  the  Spirit  shed  light  upon  his  dark  mind,  he 
smiled  through  his  tears,  and  said,  "I  believe 
that  is  it;  yes,  that  is  it  —  'Jesus  died  and  paid  it 
all.'  I  thought  I  must  do  something,  and  could  not 
see  what  I  could  do.  How  glad  I  am  that  I  came 
here  to-night.  I  can  trust  Jesus  now ;  yes,  I  can 
trust  him."  I  then  asked  him  to  kneel  down  and 
tell  Jesus  he  could  trust  him.  After  doing  this,  he 
left  me,  saying,  "  O,  I  am  so  happy  now  1 " 

So  that  not  only  does  our  success  depend  upon 
our  faith  in  God,  but  the  weeping,  groaning,  peni- 
tent sinner  cannot  be  saved  without  faith  in  Jesus. 

How  necessary,  when  we  use  the  means  God  has 
appointed  for  the  salvation  of  men  and  the  spread 
of  the  gospel,  that  we  "  have  faith  in  God." 

Let  me  mention  an  incident  or  two  that  have 
greatly  strengthened  my  faith.  A  few  years  ago, 
3 


34  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES 

in  a  ministers'  conference,  the  text  for  criticism 
was,  "Is  not  the  set  time  to  favor  Zion  come?" 
Among  other  questions  raised,  was  this:  "Is  it 
perfectly  safe  for  a  minister  to  commence  a  series 
of  meetings  in  a  church  or  community  where  there 
are  no  indications  of  a  revival  of  religion?  Ought 
he  to  go  to  work  expecting  an  immediate  outpour- 
ing of  the  Spirit?"  I  had  just  begun,  as  it  were,  to 
believe  God,  and  take  him  at  his  word,  and,  with 
several  others,  said,  "It  is  safe."  In.  a  few  days 
I  commenced  a  series  of  meetings  in  a  little  church 
of  about  twenty  members,  who  were  very  cold  and 
dead,  and  much  divided  —  the  only  green  spot 
being  a  little  prayer-meeting,  kept  up  by  two  or 
three  sisters.  I  preached  the  first  evening,  and 
closed  the  meeting  at  eight  o'clock.  There  was  not 
one  to  speak  or  pray.  I  succeeded  the  next  even- 
ing in  getting  one  brother  to  say  a  few  words,  and 
closed  again  about  eight  o'clock,  but  said  to  the 
people,  "  We  will  go  on  with  the  meeting."  All 
around  looked  dark,  but  to  the  eye  of  faith  the 
darkness  and  the  light  are  both  alike. 

The  next  morning  I  rode  six  miles,  to  a  min- 
ister's study,  to  get  him  to  pray  with  and  for  me. 
We  both  kneeled  at  the  same  chair  and  prayed, 
feeling  and  believing  that  faith  in  God  could  not  be 
disappointed.  I  went  back,  and  said  to  that  little 
church,  "If  you  can  just  make  out  to  board  me. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  35 

I  will  stay  with  you  until  God  opens  the  windows 
of  heaven.  God  has  promised  to  bless  these  means, 
and  I  believe  he  will."  I  trusted  it  all  to  Jesus, 
and  went  to  work ;  and  within  ten  days  there  were 
so  many  anxious  souls,  that  I  met  one  hundred  and 
tifty  of  them  at  a  time  at  an  inquiry  meeting, 
while  Christians  were  praying  in  another  house  of 
worship.  A  powerful  work  of  grace  followed,  and 
I  thmk  several  hundred  souls  were  led  to  Jesus. 
This  greatl^^  strengthened  my  faith  in  God. 

On  another  occasion  I  commenced  a  meeting  near 
Boston,  and  preached  the  first  evening  on  this  same 
subject  —  Faith  in  God.  We  had  a  pleasant  even- 
ing and  a  large  assembly.  Everything  seemed 
favorable.  I  told  the  congregation  that  I  believed 
we  should  have  a  great  work,  and  they  must  pro- 
vide seats  for  the  aisles  of  the  meeting-house. 

The  very  next  day  a  terrible  snow-storm  came 
on,  so  that  we  were  shut  out  of  the  meeting-house 
and  in  our  homes.  For  six  successive  days  I 
preached  in  a  private  parlor  at  my  boarding-place 
(which  was  only  a  few  rods  from  the  church)  to 
ten  or  fifteen  persons.  This  w^as  a  trial  of  my  faith  ; 
yet  I  knew  God  was  able  to  fulfill  his  promises,  and 
I  believed  he  would. 

About  the  seventh  day,  the  storm  being  over,  we 
came  together  again  in  the  meeting-house.  On  the 
first  or  second  evening  one  hundred  men  and  women 


36  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

cam 3  forward  for  prayer,  deeply  convicted.  While 
the}'  were  "shut  up  at  home,  the  Spirit  of  God  had 
been  at  work  upou  their  hearts.  God  had  given  a 
voice  to  the  howling  winds,  and  moved  the  hearts 
of  his  people  just  as  well  as  though  they  had 
gathered  in  his  house.  A  great  work  followed, 
and  many  precious  souls  were  brought  to  Jesus. 

With  these  and  many  other  tests  of  God's  prom- 
ises, I  have  come  to  believe  and  trust  him,  so  that  I 
can  follow  where  he  leads. 

Let  me  ask  you  all  to  go  home  from  this  meeting, 
to  preach,  and  pray,  and  sing,  and  visit,  in  faith. 
Do  all  you  can ;  speak  to  all  of  Jesus ;  but  rely 
alone  on  God,  asking  and  expecting  great  things. 
If  the  clouds  look  dark,  and  the  angel  says,  "Let 
me  go,"  let  your  grasp  be  firm,  and  say,  — 

*'  Nay,  I  cannot  let  thee  go, 
Till  a  blessing  thou  bestow; 
Do  not  turn  away  thy  face  — 
Mine's  an  urgent,  pressing  case. 
Once  a  sinner,  near  despair, 
Sought  thy  mercy-seat  by  prayer : 
Mercy  heard  and  set  him  free,  — 
Lord,  that  mercy  came  to  we. 

"  Many  years  have  passed  since  then. 
Many  changes  have  I  seen. 
Yet  have  been  upheld  till  now,  — 
Who  could  hold  me  up  but  Thou? 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  37 

Nay,  I  must  maintain  my  hold ; 
'Tis  thy  goodness  makes  me  bold ; 
I  can  no  denial  take, 
When  I  plead  for  Jesus'  sake." 

Note.  —  The  meetings  in  Fall  Eiver  began  with 
seventeen  persons  present  at  the  first  one ;  at  the 
closing  meeting  there  were  present  nearly  two 
thousand.  It  was  thought  there  were  one  thousand 
cc  nversions  as  the  immediate  fruit  of  this  meetinsr. 


38  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES> 


CHAPTER  III. 

REVIVAL    GLEANINGS. 

ALBANY,  N.  Y.  —  In  this  city  I  have  labored 
in  two  meetings  ;  the  first  was  held  on  Wash- 
ington Avenue,  in  a  hall  fitted  up  for  the  purpose. 

Ten  or  twelve  members  from  different  churches 
in  the  city  had  united  in  forming  a  mission  station 
on  this  street,  and  I  was  invited  to  hold  a  series  of 
meetinofs  there.     This  was  in  1859. 

So  much  interest  was  manifested,  that  several 
times  when  we  closed  our  evening  meeting  at  nine 
and  a  half  o'clock,  and  a  part  of  the  audience  left, 
there  were  enough  outside,  about  the  doors,  to  fill 
all  vacant  places  in  the  hall. 

On  one  occasion  I  said  to  the  congregation, 
"If  any  of  you  feel  that  you  are  sinners,  and  will 
do  anything  you  can  to  find  Jesus,  I  will  stay  with 
you  until  you  do  find  him.  I  feel  safe  to  take  God 
at  his  word." 

Six  men  and  five  women  took  the  front  seats, 
feeling  that   they   were   great    sinners.     This  was 


BRINGi  NG   IN  SHEA  VES.  39 

after  dismissini?  the  cons^reofation  twice.  After  all 
but  a  few  who  remained  to  pray  had  retired ♦  and 
the  way  of  salvation  through  Jesus  had  been 
pointed  out,  we  all  bowed  in  prayer  for  the  imme- 
diate conversion  of  these  eleven  individuals,  they 
having  said,  "We  will  pray  for  ourselves,  and  as 
far  .as  we  know  will  give  ourselves  now  to  the 
Savior."  It  was  a  moment  of  deep  solemnity. 
The  Holy  Spirit  was  there  to  enlighten  and  lead 
the  blind  to  Jesus.  Within  two  hours  every  one 
of  the  eleven  had  found  Jesus. 

This  w^ork  went  on  for  four  wrecks  with  increasing 
interest,  and  many  hearts  and  homes  were  made 
happv  in  Albany. 

After  a  short  time  many  of  the  converts  came 
together,  and  asked  the  few  Christians  who  had 
labored  so  earnestly  for  their  salvation  to  organize 
a  church  and  receive  them  into  it. 

Accordingly  six  brethren  and  four  sisters  united 
in  forming  what  was  then  called  the  "  Washington 
Avenue  Baptist  Church."  This  was  done  on  Thurs- 
day. The  following  Sabbath  I  baptized  forty-four 
happy  converts,  and  administered  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per in  the  evening.  On  that  occuision  the  following 
vijies  were  sung  as  I  had  never  heard  them  before : 

"  All  hail  the  power  of  Jesus'  name  1 
Let  angels  prostrate  fall ; 
Bring  forth  the  royal  diadem, 
A'^.d  crown  him  Lord  of  all." 


40  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

Deacon  Patten  gave  the  building  and  land  to  the 
new  churjh,  and  became  one  of  its  members.- 

After  a  brief  connection  with  this  church,  this 
dear  brother  was  called  home  —  "  crossed  the  flood  " 
—  to  join  the  other  branch  of  Christ's  family.  He 
remembered  the  church  in  his  will,  leaving  them 
ten  thousand  dollars,  which,  with  other  blessings  of 
God's  providence,  and  the  faithful  labors  of  their 
first  pastor,  Rev.  William  P.  Everett,  enabled  them 
to  purchase  the  State  Street  meeting-house  and 
land,  changing  their  name  to  the  "  Calvary  Baptist 
Church." 

This  is  now  a  strong  church,  of  nearly  four  hun- 
dred members. 

I  shall  always  feel  a  peculiar  interest  in  this 
church,  and  it  will  ever  hold  a  warm  place  in  my 
heart. 

I  went  to  Albany  for  the  second  meeting,  at  the 
request  of  the  Pearl  Street  Baptist  church.  Rev. 
W.  Bridgeman,  pastor.  Soon  after  commencing, 
it  was  thought  desirable  to  have  a  union  meeting, 
and  for  five  weeks  services  were  held  alternately 
with  the  Pearl  Street  church,  and  Dr.  E.  L.  Ma- 
goon's  church  on  Hudson  Street. 

On  the  last  Sabbath  of  the  meeting  a  union  com- 
munion was  held  in  Pearl  Street  Church. 

One  hundred  of  the  converts,  having  bern  pre- 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  41 

viously  baptized,  at  this  time  received  the  right 
hand  of  fellowship,  in  the  following  order  :  Those 
uniting  with  the  Pearl  Street  church  received  the 
right  hand  of  fellowship  from  their  pastor,  while 
Dr.  Magoon  and  myself  follow^ed,  cordially  grasp- 
ing the  hand  of  each  of  the  new  members.  Those 
going  with  the  Hudson  Street  church  received  the 
right  hand  of  fellowship  from  their  pastor,  while 
Brother  Bridgeman  and  I  followed,  giving  each  a 
hearty  grasp  of  the  hand.  It  was  a  delightful  hour, 
and  no  one  present  will  soon  forget  it.  At  the 
close,  all  joined  in  singing,  with  overflowing  hearts, 

*'  Nearer,  my  God,  to  thee, 
Nearer  to  thee !  " 

East  Bridgewater,  Mass.  —  There  had  been 
formed  at  this  place  a  Methodist  class,  numbering 
about  twenty  persons,  and  they  had  hired  for  a 
place  of  worship  the  meeting-house  belonging  to 
the  Universalist  society.  Thus,  with  so  few  sup- 
porters, and  with  prospects  to  the  eye  of  sense  so 
uncertain,  this  church  began  a  career  which,  as  we 
look  back  upon  it  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  years,  we 
can  see  was  one  of  great  influence  for  good. 

At  this  early  period  in  the  history  of  this  society 
I  was  invited  to  labor  in  a  series  of  meetinofs  with 
them.  From  the  commencement,  God  was  with  us 
and  blessed  our  efibrts.     The  town  seemed  to  be 


4-2  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

shaken  to  its  very  foiiudjitioii  by  the  power  of  God's 
Spirit  working  upon  the  hearts  of  men;  and  sinners 
by  scores  flocked  to  the  fold  of  Christ. 

The  "  Abington  Standard  "  published  the  follow- 
ing, in  regard  to  the  spiritual  condition  of  this  town 
at  the  time  of  the  revival :  "  There  is  one  event  in 
the  religious  history  of  East  Bridge  water  which 
soems  worthy  of  notice.  When  the  celebrated 
Whitefield  was  in  this  country,  some  one  hundred 
and  twenty  years  ago,  an  efibrt  was  made  to  secure 
his  services  at  that  village,  and  he  himself  expressed 
a  strong  desire  to  labor  there ;  for  even  then  the 
place  was  notorious  for  its  wickedness.  The  efibrt, 
however,  failed,  and  an  old  gentleman  publicly 
prophesied  that  there  would  not  be  a  revival  there 
during  that  generation. 

"  Until  the  present  time  there  has  been  none  ;  and, 
during  the  century  and  over  that  has  intervened, 
that  part  of  the  town  has  been  known  by  its  own 
inhabitants  as  the  *  God-forsaken  village.'  Now  a 
change  has  taken  place.  Meetings  are  crowded, 
and  many  are  turning  from  their  evil  ways." 

A  business  man  came  to  my  room  one  day,  deep- 
ly concerned  about  his  spiritual  welfare.  After  a 
little  conversation,  he  asked  me  if  he  could  not  be 
come  a  Christian  and  be  a  "  silent  partner."  Being 
assured  that  there  was  no  provision  for  "  silent 
partners"  in  the    great    company  of  Christian  be- 


BRINGING  IN  S.U^AVES.  43 

lievers,  he  humbly  submitted  to  Christ,  aud  was 
willing  to  confess  him  before  men. 

A  young  man,  who  had  seemed  to  have  no  regard 
for  the  teachings  of  the  Bible,  was  convicted  of  sin, 
but  hesitated  to  give  himself  to  Christ,  through  fear 
that  he  could  not  meet  his  old  companions.  But, 
after  a  little  delay,  he  yielded,  and  found  pardon 
and  peace  in  Jesus. 

Still  that  dread  of  meeting  his  former  associates 
worried  him  ;  and  one  day,  to  avoid  meeting  them, 
as  he  thought  he  was  certain  to  do  if  he  went  by  the 
road,  he  took  a  circuitous  way  through  the  fields. 
But  way  back  there  he  met  the  very  group  which 
he  had  sought  to  avoid.  They  at  once  asked  him 
if  he  had  become  religious.  Then  his  fear  left 
him,  aud  he  talked  to  them  about  Jesus,  and  in- 
vited them  to  come  with  him.  They,  instead  of 
making  sport,  as  he  had  expected,  seemed  not  only 
willing,  but  eager,  to  hear  his  testimony  and  heed 
his  warnings. 

Thus  what  appeared  to  be  a  mountain  of  difficul- 
ty, was  now  a  pleasure.  "It  is  not  in  man  that 
walketh  to  direct  his  steps." 

While  additions  Avere  made  to  other  churches,  as 
the  fruit  of  this  meeting,  that  little  Methodist  class 
of  twenty  persons  in  a  few  months  became  a  church 
wdth  over  two  hundred  members.  They  have  since 
built  a  nice  and  commodious  house  of  worship,  and 


44  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

constitute  one  of  the  largest  and  most  prosperous 
churches  in  that  region. 

Let  me  relate,  for  the  encouragement  of  those 
who  desire  to  be  active  laborers  for  Christ,  how  I 
came  to  go  to  East  Bridgewater.  A  Christian 
brother,  who  had  been  an  earnest  worker  in  the 
meetings  held  in  Abington,  and  who  was  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  religious  history  of  East  Bridge- 
water,  and  mourned  the  eflect  of  the  long  spiritual 
drought,  had  for  a  long  time  felt  a  great  desire  to 
see  a  work  of  orrace  in  that  villao;e. 

Doubtless  he  had  prayed  to  God  for  the  fulfill- 
ment of  this  desire ;  but  that  was  not  all :  feeling 
the  value  of  the  soul,  and  the  need  of  immediate 
effort,  he  came  to  me,  and  presenting  the  great 
wants  of  the  place,  urged  me,  w^th  more  than  usual 
earnestness,  to  go  and  labor  for  the  salvation  of  this 
people.  In  addition  to  this,  he  voluntarily  took 
from  his  own  purse  quite  a  sum  of  money,  to  be 
used  for  the  promotion  of  this  work. 

So  I  think  it  safe  to  say  he  was  not  only  the 
means  of  my  going  to  East  Bridgewater,  but  I  be- 
lieve hundreds  of  souls  to-day,  rejoicing  in  the 
Savior's  love,  are  indebted,  so  far  as  human  instru- 
mentality is  concerned,  to  the  prayers  and  efforts 
of  this  good  brother. 

Chelsea,  Mass.  —  The   union   meeting  held  in 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  45 

this  city,  in  the  spring  of  1866,  was  blessed  with  a 
deep  and  far-reaching  work  of  grace.  There  was  a 
marked  spirit  of  unity  and  harmony  among  Chris- 
tians of  different  denominations  :  they  seemed  to 
feel  that  they  were  indeed  members  of  Christ's 
fiimily,  and  were  laboring  for  a  common  cause. 

An  unusually  large  number  were  engaged  in 
these  meetings,  as  may  be  judged  from  the  follow- 
ing incident :  At  one  of  our  evening  meetings, 
after  a  short  discourse  from  the  words,  "  AYho  is  on 
the  Lord's  side  ?  "  an  opportunity  was  given  for  any 
present  to  speak  of  their  reasons  for  being  on  the 
Lord's  side.  Then  there  rose  up,  one  after  another, 
—  from  the  gray-headed  grandfather  to  the  little 
schoolboy, — three  hundred  ana  seventy-five  per- 
sons,—  and  spoke  for  Jesus.  At  this  point  the 
hour  for  closing  the  meeting  had  arrived,  and  the 
people  were  dismissed,  although  many  more  were 
ready  and  waiting  to  "  stand  up  for  Jesus." 

The  following  extract  we  take  from  the  "  Congre- 
gational ist  : "  — 

"  The  religious  interest  in  Chelsea  is  increasing. 
On  Sunday  evening  last  Kev.  Mr.  Earle  preached 
to  an  audience  of  not  less  than  fifteen  hundred  per- 
sons, in  Kev.  Mr.  Plumb's  church,  and  the  latter 
preached  at  the  same  time  in  the  vestry,  while  it 
was  estimated  that  as  many  were  obliged  to  turn 
back  for  want  of  room  as  were  present  at  both 
services. 


46  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

"Meetings,  in  which  the  two  Congregational  and 
the  two  Baptist  churches  join,  are  held  daily. 
Among  those  who  have  publicly  and  heartily  borne 
testimony  to  the  saving  power  of  the  gospel,  and 
consecrated  themselves  to  the  service  of  Christ,  are 
a  lawyer  and  a  physician,  both  of  whom  have  long 
been  among  the  leading  men  of  the  city." 

The  membership  of  several  of  the  churches  was 
largely  increased  by  this  revival,  particularly  of 
those  with  which  the  meetings  were  chiefly  held  — 
Rev.  Dr.  Mason's  and  Rev.  Mr.  Plumb's  ;  with  the 
latter  over  one  hundred  united  at  a  single  com- 
munion season,  more  than  forty  of  them  being 
heads  of  families. 

Springfield,  Mass.  —  Although  I  was  invited 
hftre  to  labor  more  particularly  with  Dr.  Ide's 
church,  the  meeting  soon  became,  in  spirit  and 
form,  a  union  meeting,  embracing  the  different 
evangelical  denominations  of  the  city. 

City  Hall,  the  largest  audience  room  in  the  city, 
was  secured  for  many  of  our  meetings,  where  were 
sometimes  gathered  as  many  as  three  thousand  per- 
sons, while  many  were  obliged  to  turn  away,  being 
unable  to  get  in. 

As  the  interest  was  not  denominational,  so  it  was 
not  sectional ;  but  throughout  the  entire  city  the 
great  subject  of  conversation  was   "  The  Meeting." 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  47 

War  was  not  the  all-absorbing  question ;  but  men 
found  time  to  talk  about  Religion. 

The  awakening  was  not  confined  to  Springfield, 
but,  to  an  extraordinary  degree,  was  felt  in  many  of 
the  villages  and  towns  in  "the  surrounding  country. 

Special  trains  of  cars  were  run  for  the  accommo- 
dation of  those  wishing  to  attend  the  meetings ; 
this  was  particularly  the  case  on  the  railroad  con- 
necting Springfield  with  Chicopee  and  Northampton, 
when  extra  trains  waited  until  after  ten  o'clock  at 
night  to  carry  the  people  back  to  their  homes  — 
some  with  hearts  overflowing  with  love  to  God,  and 
others  deeply  concerned  about  their  souls. 

The  "Daily  Union,"  of  March  17,  1864,  says,  in 
reference  to  an  evening  meeting  in  City  Hall : 
"Strongmen,  in  the  pride  and  strength  of  man- 
hood, were  led  to  inquire  what  they  should  do  to 
be  saved.  No  one  who  was  there  could  doubt  for  a 
moment  the  reality  of  religion.  There  was  no  ex- 
citement, no  shouting,  no  noisy  demonstrations ; 
but  every  one  was  calm,  thoughtful,  and  deeply 
impressed  with  the  solemnity  of  the  occasion." 

The  Spirit  of  God  reached  all  classes.  Work- 
men connected  with  the  U.  S.  Armory  at  Spring- 
field were  constant  attendants  of  these  meetings, 
and  manifested  their  interest  in  them,  and  in  the 
subject  of  religion,  by  sending  the  following 
petition,  signed  by  nearly  six  hundred  of  their 
number :    - 


48  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

"  Springfield,  March  9,  1864. 

"Eev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

"Dear  Sir:  Are  you  willing  to  hold  a  meeting 
at  City  Hall,  some  evening  during  your  stay  in  our 
city,  with  special  reference  to  the  men  connected 
with  the  Armory  where  we  are  employed?" 

This  petition  is  in  my  possession,  with  that  long 
list  of  names,  just  as  they  were  signed  upon  one 
roll,  very  much  soiled  by  the  finger-marks  of  those 
working-men,  and  I  prize  it  just  as  it  is. 

In  compliance  with  this  request  the  meeting  was 
held,  and  it  was  a  solemn,  heavenly  season  —  one 
which  we  ma}^  believe  many  of  those  noble  men 
will  look  back  upon  from  eternity  with  great  joy. 
It  was  thought  over  four  hundred  persons  rose  that 
evening,  and  requested  the  prayers  of  Christians 
that  they  might  be  brought  into  the   fold  of  Christ. 

Among  the  business  men  who  were  earnestly 
ensraofed  in  these  meetins^s  was  W.  J.  Holland,  a 
publisher.  Though  Springfield  was  his  place  of 
business,  his  home  at  that  time  was  in  Belchertown, 
some  twenty-five  miles  distant,  where  he  was 
teaching  a  very  interesting  Bible  class  of  young 
ladies. 

He  became  so  anxious  for  the  conversion  of  this 
class  that  he  determined  to  make  an  efi'ort  to  bring 
them  where  they  could  attend  our  meetings.  Five 
of  the  eight  members  of  his  class  came  with  him. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  49 

For  these  he  obtained  boarding-places,  and  went 
with  them  to  liieeting. 

One  afternoon,  after  his  class  had  attended  sev- 
eral meetinirs,  Mr.  Holland  felt  so  anxious  about 
them  that  he  could  not  go  to  meeting  nor  attend  to 
business,  but  spent  the  time  in  his  room  in  agoniz- 
ing prayer  for  their  immediate  conversion. 

During  that  afternoon  service  they  were  deeply 
concerned  about  their  souls,  and,  before  leaving  the 
church,  each  one  of  those  five  young  ladies  sought 
and  found  Christ ;  and  when  they  met  their  teacher 
in  the  evening,  all  were  rejoicing  in  a  Savior's  love. 

The  object  of  their  visit  was  uow^  accomplished, 
and  it  became  necessary  for  them  to  return  to  their 
homes.  The  evening  before  their  return,  this  happy 
band  of  classmates  gathered  in  front  of  the  pulpit 
to  have  a  parting  grasp  of  the  hand  with  the  Chris- 
tians to  whom  they  had  become  so  much  endeared. 
They  came  among  us  —  strangers ;  but  now  were 
going  to  leave  us  —  "  no  more  strangers  and  for- 
eigners, but  of  the  household  of  God."  Much  that 
is  pleasant  and  important  in  their  life  experience 
must  ever  centre  within  the  few  days  spent  in 
Springfield. 

Mr.    Holland    presented  me    with   a    beautifully 
bound  album,   made  expressly  for  his    class,    and 
containing  his  own    photograph    and    that  of  each 
member  of  the  class. 
4 


50  BRINGTNG  IN  SHEAVES. 

One  day,  while  in  Washington,  a  soldier,  dressed 
in  uniform,  stopped  me  on  the  street^and,  grasping 
my  hand  very  earnestly,  called  me  by  name.  I  did 
not  know  him,  but  he  knew  me,  and  said,  "  I  came 
from  my  home  in  Connecticut,  and  attended  one  of 
your  evening  meetings,  and  heard  you  preach, 
while  you  were  holding  a  meeting  in  Springfield. 
I  felt  that  I  was  a  smner,  and  from  that  time  had  no 
peace  until  I  gave  my  heart  to  God.  The  Savior  is 
precious  to  me  now." 

I  could  but  rejoice  with  him,  as  I  looked  upon 
his  happy  face  and  heard  his  words,  tracing  back 
his  present  joy  to  the  "  godly  sorrow  "  of  that  one 
night  in  Springfield.  "  Cast  thy  bread  upon  the 
waters  :  for  thou  shalt  find  it  after  many  days." 

Without  attempting  any  estimate  of  the  number 
of  conversions,  some  idea  may  be  gained  from 
the  words  of  one  of  the  pastors  ;  "  As  the  fruit  of 
this  meeting,  over  six  hundred  united  with  the 
churches."  A  new  Baptist  church  sprang  up  from 
that  meeting,  and  has  been  a  growing,  working 
church  ever  since,  and  is  exerting  a  deep  and  wide- 
felt  influence  throughout  the  city. 

Many  converts  were  also  gathered  into  the 
churches  in  adjoining  towns,  as  the  result  of  that 
meeting. 


Cincinnati,  Ohio  —  The  following  extract  from 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  51 

the  "  Journal  and  Messenger  "  gives  a  very  correct 
idea  of  the  meeting  in  this  city  :  — 

"  Last  Sabbath  was  the  final  day  of  brother  Earless 
visit  to  our  city.  It  was  every  way  a  most  solemn 
and  important  day.  In  the  morning,  at  the  Sab- 
bath school  of  the  Ninth  Street  church,  the  regu- 
lar lessons  were  dispensed  with,  and  an  hour  devoted 
to  prayer  and  short  addresses  from  various  persons. 
But  the  marked  feature  of  the  session  was  the 
declaration  from  a  number  of  scholars  that  they 
had  found  the  Savior.  In  their  own  childish  way 
they  rose  and  confessed  a  new-found  trust  in  Jesus. 
Just  as  the  hour  for  closing  came,  a  large  number 
of  the  scholars  signified  a  desire  to  become  Chris- 
tians.    It  was  an  atfectinc^  siofht. 

"In  the  afternoon  a  union  service  was  held  in 
the  First  Baptist  church.  Brother  Earle  preached 
from  the  words,  *  Friend,  how  camest  thou  in 
hither  not  having  a  wedding  garment?'  The 
design  of  the  sermon  was,  to  show  through  what 
difficulties  of  the  divine  placing  a  man  must  press 
his  way  to  ruin. 

"Then  followed  a  union  communion  of  the  three 
Baptist  churches.  The  entire  house  was  filled 
with  communicants.  After  this  service,  the  fol- 
lowing resolution  was  passed  :  — 

"  *  Since  for  several  weeks  past,  brother  A.  B.  Earle 
has  been  with  us  preaching  a  Savior  for  lost  men, 


52  BRINGING    IN  SHEAVES. 

f  nd  siuce  quite  a  number  among  us  have  received 
his  message,  and  come  to  the  Savior,  and  found  for- 
giveness for  sin,  and  because  many,  widely  wander- 
insr,  have  returned  witli  renewed  resohition  to  the 
Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  their  souls,  therefore  we, 
the  members  of  the  three  churches  herein  named, 
the  Ninth  Street  Baptist,  the  First  and  Second 
Baptist  churches,  of  Cincinnati,  who  have  been 
united  in  this  w^ork,  esteem  it  simply  due  our 
brother,  that,  in  this  public  manner,  we  express 
our  confidence  in  him,  declare  our  Christian  affec- 
tion for  him,  thank  him  for  the  great  good  he  has 
done  aaiong  us,  and  that  we  do  now  most  heartily 
(.ommend  him  to  the  churches  in  his  important 
work.' 

"  The  closins:  service  was  held  in  the  Ninth  Street 
church  in  the  evening. 

"  The  results  have  been  great.  Many  have  come 
to  the  Savior,  and  many  are  now  seeking  him.  In- 
deed, it  seems  as  if  the  work  in  this  direction  had 
but  begun.  Many  who  have  been  negligent  are 
now  earnest  and  at  work.  The  accumulation  of 
moral  power  to  the  churches  is  most  noticeable. 
Religion  holds  a  larger  place  in  the  thoughts  of 
men  than  it  did.  They  are  easier  of  approach. 
All  through  the  city  there  is  an  unwonted  thought- 
fulness. 

"The  churches  have  clasped  each  other's  hands. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  53 

and  felt  their  warm  pressure,  and  do  not  mean  to 
let  go.  As  churches,  we  are  better  organized  for 
work  than,  perhaps,  we  ever  were  before.  The 
brethren  are  aroused  and  ready  for  toil.  With 
God's  help,  we  shall,  in  all  the  churches,  accom- 
plish much  for  the  Master  this  winter.  And  our 
prayers,  our  love.,  and  our  thanks  shall  follow 
brother  Earle." 


54  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

PROVINCE    OF  NEW  BRUNSWICK. 

IN  the  summer  of  1858,  after  a  year  of  hard  and 
constant  work  in  the  "  States,"  during  which  I 
had  preached  more  than  five  hundred  sermons,  I 
went,  with  my  family,  to  one  of  the  British  Prov- 
inces, hoping  to  find  retirement  and  rest  for  a  few 
weeks  on  those  quiet,  healthy,  hospitable  shores. 

The  steamer  in  which  we  embarked  at  Boston 
'anded  us  safely  at  the  wharf  in  St.  John,  New 
Brunswick,  Friday  evening,  July  23. 

"  A  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way  :  but  the  Lord 
directeth  his  steps."  *  I  had  sought  this  land  for 
rest;  and,  I  thought,  "I  am  among  strangers,  my 
plan  will  surely  be  carried  out,  and  I  shall  not 
have  to  preach  for  a  few  .weeks,  at  least  not  often  ;  " 
but  God's  purpose  seemed  to  be  that  I  should  preach 
from  fifteen  to  twenty  times  a  week.  The  seed  was 
already  sown,  and  the  way  open  for  me  to  go  to 
V  ork  at  once  and  help  gather  in  the  harvest. 

Before  I  had  been  three  days  in  the  city  I  com- 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  55 

mencccl  pieaching,  and  went  on  from  that  time 
until,  within  about  five  months,  I  had  preached, 
in  different  parts  of  the  province,  over  three  hun- 
dred times,  and  trust  fifteen  hundred  or  two  thou- 
sai;d  souls  had  been  "  born  again,"  as  the  fruit  of 
our  meetings. 

I  found  a  kind  and  generous-hearted  people 
there,  everywhere  welcoming  me  as  a  servant  of 
Jesus.  It  would  give  me  much  pleasure  to  "  repeat 
the  vision  so  divine."  Many  of  the  scenes  in  which 
I  was' permitted  to  take  part  were  very  interesting, 
and  have  left  a  deep  impression  on  my  mind. 

At  St.  John  a  large  number  found  tiie  Savior 
precious,  and  connected  tvith  the  difterent  churches. 
Though  more  or  less  characteristic  of  all  revivals 
of  religion,  it  was  especially  true  of  the  work  in 
this  city,  that  many  who  had  wandered  far  away 
from  God  saw  their  sin,  and,  returning,  sought 
with  tears  their  Father's  face.  Some  who  had  once 
confessed,  but  since  denied  Christ  before  men, 
ct  lid  now  say, 

"  The  Shepherd  souglit  his  sheep ; 

The  Fatlier  sought  his  child ; 
They  followed  me  o'er  vale  and  hill, 

O'er  desert,  waste,  and  wild : 
They  found  me  nigh  to  death, 

Famished,  and  faint,  and  lone ; 
They  bound  me  with  the  bands  of  lore ,' 

They  saved  the  wandering  one. 


56  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

"  I  was  a  wayward  child ; 

I  once  preferred  to  roam ; 
But  now  I  love  my  Fatlier'y  voice  — 
I  love,  I  love  liis  home." 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  add  my  tribute  of  love 
and  respect  to  the  memory  of  two  warm-hearted, 
active  men,  who  w^ere  here  my  fellow-laborers 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord  —  Rev.  Mr.  Robinson, 
of  the  Brnsscls  Street  church,  and  Rev.  Mr.  De 
Mill.  As  we  labored  toij^ether  in  that  precious 
revival,  we  did  not  know  which  of  us  hetd  the 
longest  lease  of  life  ;  but  now,  only  a  few  years 
have  passed,  and  they  have  been  summoned  across 
the  swellings  of  Jordan,  to  give  an  account  of  their 
stewardship,  and,  I  believe,  have,  been  welcomed  to 
the  "mansions"  of  the  blessed,  and  have  received 
the  approval,  "  \Vell*done." 

After  preaching  a  hundred  times  in  St.  John,  I 
went  up  the  St.  John  River,  to  labor  a  short  time  at 
Burton. 

The  quiet  ride  on  the  broad  bosom  of  that  beau- 
tiful, majestic  stream,  lined  as  it  was  on  either  side 
with  so  much  to  attract  and  delight  the  eye,  seemed 
a  fitting  introduction  to  the  sweet  and  holy  scenes 
of  the  work  of  grace  that  followed.  At  one  point, 
high,  rocky  cliffs  pictured  their  ragged  forms  in  the 
clear  mirror  at  their  feet,  while  from  the  op})osite 
side  a  thick  forest  let  down   its  w living  image  uptm 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  57 

ilie  river's  surface.  At  another  turn  of  the  river 
the  Indians  had  taken  temporary  possession  of  the 
land,  by  phicing  here  and  there  little  conical  wig- 
wams, built  of  poles  and  bark,  'from  the  top  of 
which  we  could  imagine  the  curling  smoke  w^as 
bearing  upward  with  it  to  the  "Great  Spirit" 
curses  upon  the  white  man  for  d<istroying  the 
hunting-grounds  of  the  red  man.  Again  the  pic- 
ture changed,,  and  we  looked  out  upon  highly  culti- 
vated farms,  with  their  green  meadows  and  fields 
of  yellow  grain  gently  sloping  from  the  hills  on 
either  side. 

After  such  a  ride,  with  the  thoughts  it  would 
naturally  suggest,  any  one  ought  to  be  better  fitted 
to  tro  to  work  in  a  revival  meetino:. 

While  at  Burton,  the  meetings  were  held  every 
other  day  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  which 
we  were  obliged  to  cross  in  boats  ;  so  day  after  day 
we  passed  back  and  forth,  from  side  to  side,  but 
always  realizing  the  presence  of  the  same  blessed 
Spirit,  melting  and  uniting  our  hearts. 

While  we  were  engaged  in  prayer  one  afternoon, 
a  man,  about  ■sixty  years  of  age,  who  had  cursed  us 
and  our  meetings,  was  so  convicted  of  sin  while  at 
work  in  his  field  near  the  place  of  meeting,  that  he 
left  his  team  and  came  where  we  w^ere,  crying  for 
mercy,  and  saying,  "O,  I  am  such  a  sinner!  Can 
Uod   forgive   such  a  sinner?      Will   you    pray  for 


58  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

me?"  Yes,  we  could  pray  for  him.  There  was 
efficacy  enough  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  to  wash  away 
even  his  sins.  He  was  soon  rejoicing  in  the  Sa- 
vior's love. 

Frequently  more  than  a  hundred  carriages  could 
be  seen  about  the  place  of  meeting,  many  persons 
riding  fifteen  or  twenty  miles  to  be  present. 

The  churches  there  were  accustomed  to  receive 
converts  as  soon  as  they  gave  evidence  of  a  change 
of  heart,  and  on  two  occasions  there  were  so  many 
to  be  baptized  that  I  was  one  of  five  ministers 
engaged  in  baptizing  at  the  same  time  and  place. 

One  Sabbath  afternoon,  when  I  was  expecting  to 
preach  my  closing  sermon  in  the  evening  and  leave 
for  home  the  next  day,  not  less  than  three  hundred 
anxious  souls  requested  us  to  pray  for  them,  many 
of  them  rising  for  prayer  in  their  carriages  and  on 
the  ground  outside  of  the  meeting-house,  as  not 
more  than  half  of  the  congregation,  it  was  believed, 
were  able  to  get  inside. 

Here  was  a  trial  for  me.  My  family  needed  my 
attention,  for  it  was  time  for  us  to  return  home  ; 
these  three  hundred  anxious  souls  also  had  a  claim 
upon  me.  My  duty  seemed  to  be  to  go  home  with 
my  famil}^  and  then  return  to  the  province.  This 
I  did,  and  j) reached  one  hundred  and  fifty  times 
more. 

From  Burton  I  went  to  Frederickton,  the  capital 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  59 

of  New  Brunswick,  where,  during  our  meeting  of 
two  weeks,  we  enjoyed  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  trust  many  souls  found  peace  in  Christ. 
Many  leading  men,  occupying  positions  of  trust 
and  influence,  were  actively  engaged  with  us  in  the 
Master's  service. 

At  Grand  Lake  almost  every  person  seemed  to 
be  awakened  and  interested  in  religion ;  the  un- 
godly sought  to  know  Christ,  and  Christians  to 
know  him  better. 

From  ten  to  thirty  ministers  were  generally  pres- 
ent with  us,  many  believing  they  and  their  churches 
would  be  more  benefited  in  the  end  by  their  re- 
maining in  our  meeting.  I  found  them  a  noble 
class  to  work  with.  May  God  bless  the  ministers 
of  New  Brunswick ! 

I  went  out  at  midnight,  near  my  boarding-place, 
while  at  Grand  Lake,  and  could  distinctly  hear  the 
voice  of  prayer  in  the  houses,  in  the  barns,  in  the 
fields,  and  in  the  streets.  Sometimes  I  could  hear 
anxious  persons  praying  in  the  chamber,  in  the 
kitchen,  and  in  the  parlor  of  the  house  where  I 
stopped,  at  one  o'clock  at  night. 

Very  late  one  night,  ten  men  and  women,  deeply 
concerned  about  their  souls,  were  assembled  at  my 
boarding-place,  desiring  me  to  point  out  to  them 
Ihc  "  way  of  life."     I  had   already  conversed  and 


60  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

prayed  with  so  many  during  the  day  and  evening 
that  nature  was  ahuost  exhausted,  and,  after  a  few 
woi'ds  with  them,  I  said,  "I  can  do  no  more.  You 
know  the  way  to  Jesus.  Go  into  that  room  ahjne, 
and  pray  for  yourselves."  They  did  so  ;  and  while 
1  rested,  those  ten  persons  w^ere  prajdng  for  them- 
selves, without  a  Christian  with  them.  In  the 
course  of  an  hour  they  all  came  out  of  the  room 
with  bright  faces,  rejoicing  in  the  pardoning  love 
of  Jesus. 

On  the  seventh  morning  of  my  stay  at  Grand 
Lake,  a  large  number  of  ministers  and  others  came 
together  for  a  friendly  greeting  and  exchange  of 
good  wishes ;  and,  after  several  prayers  had  been 
ofiered,  nearly  all  accompanied  me  to  the  shore  of 
the  lake,  where  a  vessel  was  waiting.  AVith  a 
warm  grasp  of  the  hand,  and  a  sweet,  parting 
hymn,  we  separated,  to  meet  next  at  the  judgment- 
seat  of  our  Eedeemer. 

After  holding  six  or  eight  three-days  meetings  in 
different  parts  of  the  province,  which  God  crowned 
with  his  rich  blessing,  I  took  the  last  steamer  going 
to  Boston  that  winter,  and  returned  to  my  home, 
full  of  gratitude  for  my  visit  to  New  Brunswick. 

One  incident  of  our  visit  will  show  the  large- 
heartcdness  of  this  good  people.  Soon  after  our 
arrival  at  St.  John,  we  thought  it  would  be  pleasant 


BRIHGING   IN  SHEAVES.  61 

to  Spend  a  few  weeks  at  a  summer  resort  near  the 
city,  on  the  shore  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  Some  of 
the  citizens,  learning  of  our  wish,  took  the  matter 
out  of  our  hands,  and  themselves  secured  and  com- 
fortably furnished  a  house  for  us  about  two  miles 
out  of  the  city,  where  we  passed  seven  weeks  very 
pleasantl}^  many  bringing  to  my  family  such  things 
as  they  thought  for  their  comfort,  while  I  preached 
each  day  in  the  city.  When  w^e  were  ready  to  leave, 
the  people  came  again  and  carried  .the  furniture 
back,  refusing  any  compensation  for  what  they  had 
done. 

This  and  many  other  generous  expressions  of 
their  good  feeling  towards  me  and  my  family  have 
bound  my  heart  to  the  people  there,  and  my  visit 
will  be  treasured  among  the  pleasantest  recollec- 
tions of  my  life. 

I  have  a  strong  desire  to  visit  them  again,  and 
spend  another  season  of  labor  there ;  but,  if  not 
permitted  to  realize  this,  I  can  say,  — 

*'  Sweet  is  the  thought,  the  promise  sweet, 
That  friends,  long-severed  friends,  shall  meet; 
That  kindred  souls,  on  earth  disjoined, 
Shall  meet,  from  earthly  dross  refined, 
Their  mortnl  cares  and  sorrows  o'er, 
And  mingle  hearts,  to  part  no  more." 


62  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 


CHAPTER  V. 

SERMON.— JOY  RESTORED. 

*' Restore  unto  me  the  Jot  of  thy    Salvation.** 

Psalm  li.  12. 

THE  Psalmist  does  not  say,  "  Restore  unto  me 
salvation,"  —  he  had  salvation  already;  nor, 
"Restore  my  hope,"  —  he  had  a  good  hope;  nor, 
"  Restore  me  to  thy  family,"  —  he  had  not  left  the 
family  of  his  Lord ;  no,  this  is  the  burden  of  his 
heart :  "I  do  not  enjoy  religion  as  I  used  to,  conse- 
quently I  cannot  teach  transgressors  thy  ways,  and 
sinners  are  not  converted  through  my  influence ; 
therefore,  *  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  salva- 
tion.'" 

We  may  have  wealth,  and  not  enjoy  it.  Every 
earthly  source  of  comfort  may  surround  us,  and 
yet  we  derive  but  little  comfort  from  them.  We 
may  be  miserable  in  the  most  costly  and  magnifi- 
cent home. 

So  we  may  be  regenerated,  truly  members  of 
Christ's  family,  and  at  the  same  time  be  unhappy. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  63 

We  may  be  heirs  of  heaven,  and,  while  journeying 
here  below,  have  in  our  possession  the  key  to  our 
Father's  rich  storehouse,  and  yet  be  fretful  and 
complaining,  having  just  religion  enough  to  make 
ourselves  and  our  friends  miserable. 

M}'  aim  in  this  discourse  will  be  to  show  that  it 
is  the  duty  of  every  Christian  to  enjoy  the  fullness 
of  Christ's  love. 

I.  Religion  is  a  joyful  subject  in  itself.     It 

**  Never  was  designed 

To  make  our  pleasures  less." 

There  is  enough  to  make  the  Christian  always  joy- 
ful, in  the  mere  fact  that  he  has  been  taken  "  out  of 
a  horrible  pit,"  and  placed  upon  the  solid  "Eock  ;  " 
that  he  has  exchanged  rags  and  tilth  for  purity  and 
robes  of  matchless  beauty ;  that  he  has  been  made 
an  actual  possessor  of  "  all  things  "  in  lieu  of  pov- 
erty and  bankruptcy.  It  is  not  strange  that  young 
Christians  say,  as  I  remember  I  used  to,  sometimes, 

"I  wonder  why  old  saints  don't  sing, 
And  make  the  heavenly  arches  ring 
With  loud  hosannas  to  their  King." 

The  love  of  Jesus  orjaddens  the  soul  as  naturallv 
as  fire  produces  heat.  Everything  about  it  is  joy- 
ful:  no  sorrow,  no  gloom,  not  even  a  shadow;  its 
fruits  are  "  love,  joy,  and  peace."     So  that  when 


64  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

the  fiillness  of  Christ's  love  is  ours,  we  cannot  be 
unhappy,  anywhere,  living  or  dying.  "  Great  peace 
have  they  which  love  thy  law." 

Home  is  pleasanter ;  friends  are  dearer ;  life  is 
worth  more  ;  the  business,  the  social,  and  the  do- 
mestic relations,  all  things  around  and  above,  are 
made  brighter  by  this  love. 

What  Christian,  then,  who  is  not  now  resting  in 
Jesus  by  faith,  does  not  desire  to  join  in  David's 
pra3^er,  "Kestore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  salva- 
tion?" 

Another  reason  why  we  should  enjoy  the  fullness 
of  Christ's  love  is :  We  dishonor  him  every  hour 
we  live  without  it. 

The  Christian  represents  Jesus  to  the  world. 
He  bears  his  image.  If  he  wears  a  gloomy,  sad 
face,  the  unconverted  are  repelled  from  his  Mas- 
ter. 

Men  must  judge  of  religion  by  those  who  are 
considered  its  possessors ;  and  they  will  embrace 
or  reject  it  according  to  the  manner  in  which  it  is 
exhibited  before  them. 

If  I  were  to  carry  from  a  picture  gallery  the 
photograph  of  a  man  well  known  to  you,  as  one 
who  always  wore  a  bright,  happy  face,  and  yet  the 
picture  represented  him  with  a  sad,  gloomy  expres- 
sion, would  you  not,  although  there  were  traces  of 
the  mnn's  features  in  the  picture,  go  reluctantly,  if 


BRTXGING  IN  SHEAVES.  65 

at  all,  to  that  gallery  for  your  own  picture?  What 
greater  injury  could  I  do  that  estal)lishment  than 
by  carrying  about  that  picture? 

So,  when  a  Christian  cai'ries  about  a  sad,  dejected 
countenance,  'he  misrepresents  religion :  the  im- 
penitent, especially  the  young  among  them,  say, 
when  they  see  his  gloomy  face,  "Religion  may  be 
good  for  the  aged,  the  sick,  and  the  dying,  but  not 
for  the  youthful  and  the  vigorous." 

O,  how  wrong  this  impression  !  Religion  is,  in- 
deed, good  for  the  sick,  the  dying,  and  the  aged, 
and  still  better  for  those  in  health,  and  for  those  in 
the  morning  of  life  ! 

My  dear  Christian  friend,  you  have  no  right  to 
be  seen  anywhere,  either  on  the  street  or  at  your 
home,  at  the  social  gathering  or  about  your  busi- 
ness, wearing  a  gloomy  face. 

Do  you  ask,  "Would  you  not  have  us  weep?" 
Most  certainly  you  should  weep.  Jesus  wept ;  the 
apostles  wept;  the  prophets  wept;  Christians,  in  all 
ages,  have  wept;  a  heart  that  embraces  in  its  sym- 
pathies the  wants  and  woes  of  a  world  cannot  help 
weeping.  We  were  unworthy  the  name  of  men 
and  women,  much  more  that  of  Christians,  did  we 
never  weep.  But  let  our  tears  run  over  a  shining 
face ;  let  all  see  that  religion  makes  our  hearts 
peaceful  and  happy,  even  while  we  weep  over  lost 
sinners,  or  mourn  the  death  of  our  loved  ones. 

5 


60  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

**From  those  celestial  springs 

Such  streams  of  pleasure  flow, 
As  no  increase  of  riches  brings, 
Nor  honors  can  bestow." 

Only,  then,  when  the  Christian  has  the  fulhiess 
of  Christ's  love  in  his  heart  does  he  truly  represent 
religion ;  his  first  duty,  therefore,  to  Jesus  and  to 
the  world,  is,  to  obtain  this  blessing,  this  unfailing 
source  of  constant  peace  and  joy  and  well-doing. 
N^othing  has  such  an  effect  on  the  wicked. 

If  I  were  preaching  in  a  house  that  would  accora- 
aiodate  thousands  of  people,  and  wished  to  see  it 
tilled,  and  to  hear  within  its  walls  the  cries  of  anx- 
ious souls,  I  would  not  rely  upon  eloquence,  or 
argument,  or  eccentricities,  but  rather  upon  gather- 
ing iM'ound  me  a  company  of  Christians  who  were 
living  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  religion.  Every 
countenance  would  be  lighted  up  with  happiness, 
and  the  only  way  in  which  young  converts  could  be 
distinguished  fri/m  older  Christians  would  be  by 
the  fact  that  the  latter  were  the  brighter  and  hap- 
pier of  the  two  classes,  inasmuch  as  they  knew 
and  enjoyed  more  of  Christ's  love. 

The  wicked,  cold  professors,  people  of  every 
class,  would  surely  be  attracted,  and  the  place 
crowded,  for  happiness,  like  a  magnet,  attracts 
people  towards  its  possessor,  and  the  happiness 
of     the     Christian    the     most    powerfully    of  all, 


BRING  INa  IN  SUE  A  VES.  67 

BiDcc  it  is  the  purest,  the  deepest,  and  tht  only 
ul)idi  ng. 

And  it  would  not  be  long  before  you  would  hear 
some  impenitent  man  say,  "I  hope  the  minister  will 
not  do  all  the  talking  to-night ;  I  want  to  hear  the 
deaeohs,  and  those  Christians  who  have  been  mem- 
bers of  the  church  so  many  years,  they  do  look  so 
happy." 

Another  would  say,  "  There  is  deacon  B. ;  I  heard 
him  speak  last  night;  his  voice,  manner,  and  coun- 
tenance seemed  ditfcrent  from  what  they  used  to. 
I  know  he  is  enjoying  religion,  and  I  wish  I  was, 
it  does  make  these  Christians  so  happy. 

"There  is  that  man  just  in  front  of  the  pulpit: 
and,  by  the  way,  I  have  not  seen  him  sit  there,  be- 
fore, in  a  long  time ;  he  used  to  be  very  stiif  and 
solemn  —  never  laughed  himself,  and  never  wanted 
others  to  laugh ;  but  now  he  looks  genial,  humble, 
and  happ3%  and  really  seems  to  love  everybody,  and 
to  desire  to  see  them  feel  and  look  happy.  I  like 
him  now  ;  in  fact,  I  believe  I  used  to  judge  him 
too  severely." 

Thus  does  the  happy  Christian  make  religion  at- 
tractive, lie  is  a  dillerent  man  from  what  he  was 
when  hg  did  not  have  the  joy  of  religion ; 

*'  Jesus,  all  the  day  long, 
Is  Ills  joy  and  his  song. 

His  power  over  wicked  men  has  increased  a  hun- 


eS  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

dred  fold.  It  is  the  power  of  love  —  glowing, 
burning  love  to  Jesus  and  to  a  lost  world.  He 
is  no  longer  a  shrinking,  cringing  disciple  :  that 
wiched  timidity,  behind  which  he  used  to  hide  and 
excuse  himself  from  duty,  is  gone.  A  humble  but 
holy  boldness  has  taken  its  place. 

Like  the  sun,  he  throws  off  light  and  warmth 
along  his  path.  In  his  home  and  in  his  business  he 
makes  all  about  him  more  happy,  and  attracts  them 
towards  Jesus. 

I  recall  a  striking  illustration  of  this  :  During  a 
meeting  in  which  I  was  engaged  in  one  of  the  sub- 
urban towns  of  Boston,  a  lady,  connected  with  one 
of  the  city  churches,  but  residing  in  that  place, 
found  she  was  not  the  humble,  happy  Christian  she 
once  was.  She  came  to  me,  asking  how  she  might 
obtain  anew  the  joy  of  salvation  ;  she  felt  she  loved 
Jesus,  but  so  faintly  that  the  warmth  and  power  of 
that  love  were  gone.  The  conflict  was  long  and 
severe.  On  one  occasion,  she  said  to  me,  "My 
husband  has  become  sceptical.  He  rejects  the 
Bible.  It  is  of  no  use  to  speak  to  him.  I  have 
scarcely  any  hope  of  his  being  converted.  But,  O 
that  I  could  enjoy  the  Savior's  love  as  I  used  to  !  " 

At  length  the  desire  of  her  heart  was  granted, 
and  all  the  joy  of  her  first  love  to  Jesus  was  re- 
stored to  her. 

And  nvnv,  though  she  had. been  a  Christian,  and 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  69 

a  kind,  careful  wife  and  mother,  she  seemed  ahnost 
like  another  person.  The  false  representations  of 
religion  were  ended.  Its  sweetness  and  happine&i 
shone  in  every  feature  of  her  face,  gave  melody  to 
the  tones  of  her  voice,  and  added  a  new  charm  to 
all  she  did. 

She  went  about  the  house  sinojinoc  the  sono-s  of 
Zion.  Anything  that  was  not  sinful,  that  would 
make  her  husband  happier  and  her  home  pleasanter, 
she  cheerfully  performed,  saying  but  little,  how- 
ever, about  the  change  in  her  feelings  ;  she  did  not 
need  to,  it  was  so  apparent.  Her  husbimd  saw  it, 
and  compared  her  present  state  with  her  past. 
Somehow  this  led  him  to  look  into  his  own  heart. 
The  conviction  was  forced  upon  him  that  religion 
was  a  reality,  and  one  he  could  not  do  without. 

Some  four  days  after  this  change  in  his  wife,  I 
called  on  him,  to  learn  why  he  rejected  the  Bible 
and  religion.  I  asked  him  to  be  frank  with  me, 
and  tell  me  if  he  had  no  desire  to  be  a  Christian. 

He  replied,  "Mr.  Earle,  I  have  said  nothing 
about  it  to  my  wife ;  but,  sir,  I  feel  I  am  a  lost 
sinner,  and  if  you  wall  pray  for  me,  I  will  kneel 
down  with  you  right  here."  And,  pointing  to  his 
wife,  who  was  at  that  moment  passing  through  the 
room,  with  the  tears  on  her  bright  face,  he  con- 
tinued, "That  woman,  my  own  dear  wufe,  has  had 
more   power   over   me   for   a  few  days  past  than 


70  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

everything  else  put  together.  She  has  been  a 
professor  of  religion  for  years,  but  I  knew  she 
did  not  enjoy  religion ;  and  I  said,  if  that  was  all 
there  was  in  religion,  1  did  not  want  it.  But,  for 
the  last  few  days,  she  has  looked  and  acted  almost 
like  an  angel ;  and,  sir,  I  cannot  stand  it ;  there  is 
a  power  in  her  sweet,  happy  face  that  melts  my 
heart.  I  cannot  withstand  the  attraction  of  such  a 
religion." 

And  all  this  because  the  joy  of  salvation  was  re- 
stored to  the  heart  of  that  Christian  wife  !  O,  the 
power  of  Christ's  love  when  it  burns  and  glows  in 
the  heart ! 

And  perhaps  some  pious  wife  who  hears  me 
now  has  gone  alone  to  the  table  of  our  Lord,  for 
many  long  years,  just  because  her  love  to  Jesus 
has  been  feeble  and  faint,  and,  consequently,  her 
representation  of  religion  unattractive  and  false. 

Some  of  these  parents  have  not  seen  their  chil- 
dren converted,  for  no  other  reason  than  that  they 
have  not  had  the  joy  of  salvation  tilling  their  hearts 
and  running  over  in  their  lives ;  they  are  Christ's 
own  redeemed  ones,  but  do  not  live  as  becomes  his 
family,  every  member  of  which  ought  to  be  a  well- 
spring  of  joy,  pouring  its  streams  of  gladness  into 
every  heart  within  its  reach. 

So,  in  every  department  of  Christian  labor  and 
responsibility,  believers  fail  of  success  for  this  same 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  71 

reason ;  they  may  work  and  pray  much,  but  all 
avails  very  little  if  the  fullness  of  Christ's  love  be 
wanting. 

Another  reason  why  Christians  should  enjoy  the 
fullness  of  Christ's  love  is,  The  church  cannot  other- 
wise take  care  of  converts. 

In  the  'divine  arrangement,  the  church  is  the 
mother  of  Christ's  redeemed  children. 

The  most  suitable  place  for  the  new-born  babe  is 
in  its  mother's  arms.  The  infant  Moses  was,  by 
the  appointment  of  God,  returned  to  his  mother  to 
be  nursed,  inasmuch  as  she  loved  him  most,  and 
would,  therefore,  give  him  the  best  care. 

So  God  has  ordered  that  the  church  shall  take 
care  of  and  nourish  the  young  converts.  The  re- 
quisite love  and  sources  of  nourishment  have  been 
given  by  him  to  the  church,  and  to  her  alone.  So 
that  if  she  is  negligent  of  her  converts,  they  have 
no  other  resource,  and  will  droop,  and  sink  into 
a  state  of  inactivity  and  spiritual  death. 

If,  then,  the  church  loses  the  warmth  of  her  love 
to  Christ,  and  becomes  cold,  she  commits  a  great 
wrong,  inasmuch  as  she  can  never  do  her  duty  to 
her  members,  nor  take  care  of  young  converts, 
should  they  connect  with  her,  if  she  is  in  a  luke- 
warm state. 

It  is  on  this  account  that- many  young  members 
become  indifferent  to  the  ordinances  of  God's  house, 


72  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

forsake  the  pmyer-meetiDg,  and  finally  leave  the 
church  of  Christ  altogether ;  so  that  the  guilt,  in 
part,  rests  upon  the  older  members.  They  do  not 
enjoy  the  fullness  of  Christ's  love. 

It  is  plainly  the  duty,  therefore,  of  every  Chris- 
tian who  does  not  now  enjoy  the  fullness  of  Christ's 
love,  to  offer,  from  the  depths  of  the  heart,  the 
prayer  of  our  text,  "Kestore  unto  me  the  joy  of 
thy  salvation  ;  "  not  only  that  he  may  teach  trans- 
gressors the  way  of  salvation,  and  see  sinners  con- 
verted unto  God,  but  also  that  converts  may  be 
nourished  and  tenderly  cared  for  when  they  come 
into  the  church. 

So  true  it  is  that  Christians  cannot  do  their  duty 
towards  young  converts  unless  they  are  enjoying 
t\\Q  fullness  of  Christ's  love. 

This  is  still  more  important  for  a  minister.  He 
can  bring  into  his  sermons  no  substitute  for  the 
warm,  glowing  love  of  Jesus. 

He  may  become  pale  and  careworn  with  study ; 
he  may  visit  and  labor  among  his  people ;  he  may 
give  his  time  and  talents  entirely  to  the  w^ork ;  but 
3^et  he  will  not  be  successful  in  winning  souls  until 
his  heart  is  filled  with  holy  love. 

Christ  will  say  to  him,  as  he  did  to  the  church  at 
Ephesus,  "I  have  somewhat  against  thee,  because 
thou  hast  left  thy  lir^t  love."  He  had  but  one 
thing  against  them,  —  they  did  not  love  him  as 
they  once  did. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  73 

And  in  the  case  of  the  Laodiceans,  he  would 
rather  have  them  array  themselves  against  him  than 
live  in  a  lukewarm  condition. 

And  it  is  not  uncommon  to  see  churches  dying 
out,  apparently  because  they  are  in  the  same  state 
as  those  two  ancient  churches.  Their  members  do 
not  enjoy  religion ;  the  love  of  Christ  is  a  mere 
spark  on  the  hearthstone  of  their  hearts,  and, 
consequently,  they  will  not  and  cannot  do  their 
duty  to  those  around  them. 

From  such  churches  Christ  seems  to  turn  away, 
not  only  because  he  is  grieved,  but  also  because 
they  are  fruitless,  and  a  dishonor  to  his  cause. 

j\lany  a  minister  of  good  talents  and  character, 
and  who  is  willing  to  work  hard  in  his  calling,  is 
moving  about  from  place  to  place,  unsuccessful, 
and  unable  often  to  obtain  even  a  support,  because 
his  heart  is  not  filled  with  the  love  of  Christ.  But 
let  him  obtain  that  blessing  and  he  becomes  a  new 
man.  The  tone  of  his  voice  is  chan2:ed ;  his  coun- 
tenauce  beams  with  peace  ;  his  heart  is  warm ;  his 
preaching  tender  and  persuasive  ;  even  his  old  ser- 
mons are  delivered  with  a  new  and  strange  power 
and  charm ;  the  empty  seats  in  his  church  fill  up  ; 
new  and  warmer  friends  gather  about  him ;  con- 
versions are  continually  occurring  under  his  labors, 
and  the  people  say,  "  He  seems  like  another  man." 

The  love  of  Jesus  has  developed,  warmed,  and 


74  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

energized  all  his  powers,  and  made  him  humble, 
and  yet  courageous  for  the  truth. 

The  Spirit  has  opened  his  e^es,  that  he  may  un- 
derstand the  Scriptures.  He  has  been  "  endued 
from  on  high  "  with  the  power  of  love.  The  blessed 
Spirit  accompanies  all  his  labors.  He  gathers  many 
souls  into  the  "fold,"  has  a  foretaste  of  heaven 
while  here  on  earth,  and,  at  last,  goes  to  his  final 
reward,  where  he  hears  the  Master  say,  "  Well 
done." 

An  incident  in  my  own  experience,  some  twenty 
years  ago,  taught  me  a  lesson  I  shall  never  forget : 

I  commenced  a  series  of  meetings  in  a  town  in 
New  York,  with  the  Congregationrd  and  Baptist 
churches  united.  I  thought  myself  fully  prepared 
for  the  work,  and  entered  into  it  looking  for  imme- 
diate and  larcre  results. 

My  first  aim  was  to  preach  so  as  to  lead  the 
churches  nearer  to  Christ.  Accordingly!  prepared 
five  sermons  for  Christians,  as  clear  and  pointed  as 
I  knew  how  to  make  them.  The  first  four  had  no 
{  pparent  effect.  I  wondered  at  it.  The  fifth  was 
prepared  with  a  scorpion  in  the  lash ;  it  was  a 
severe  one,  and  the  last  harsh  sermon  I  have 
preached,  and  the  last  I  ever  exjDect  to  preach; 
but  this,  too,  was  powerless. 

I  then  went  to  my  closet,  and  there  on  my  knees 
asked  Jesus  what  could  be  the  difficulty  with  those 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  7o 

Christians.  It  did  not  enter  my  mind  that  the 
trouble  could  be  anywhere  else  than  among  them. 
I  had  preached  with  tears  in  my  eyes,  and  been 
anxious  to  see  a  revival,  and  had  no  thought  ])ut 
that  the  preacher  w^as  in  a  right  state.  But  there 
in  my  nloset  God  revealed  to  me  my  own  heart, 
showing  me  that  the  difficulty  was  with  myself,  and 
not  with  the  church  ;  I  found  myself  as  cold  as  those 
I  was  trying  to  benefit.  My  tears,  even  in  the  pul- 
pit, had  been  like  water  running  from  the  top  of  a 
cake  of  ice  when  the  w^arm  rays  of  the  sun  are  fall- 
ing upon  its  surface,  but  which  becomes  hard  and 
cold  again  as  soon  as  the  sun  goes  down. 

I  told  the  Congregational  pastor  of  what  I  had 
discovered,  and  asked  him  the  condition  of  his  own 
heart.  He  frankly  confessed  that  he  was  in  the 
same  state  as  myself. 

We  prayed  together  several  times.  I  felt  that  I 
could  not  live  in  that  state  and  accomplish  much. 
Accordingly  I  went  home  and  shut  myself  in  my 
room,  resolved  to  spend  the  night  in  prayer,  if 
necessary.  O,  the  struggle  of  that  night !  Hour 
after  hour  I  wrestled  alone  with  God.  My  heart 
had  been  full  of  coldness,  and  I  not  aware  of  it. 
No  wonder  the  churches  had  not  come  np  to  the 
work  I  I  renewedly  and  repeatedly  gave  myself  to 
the  Savior,  determined  not  to  let  the  angel  depart 
until  my  heart  was  filled  and  melted  with  the  love 


76  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

f)f  Jesus.  Towards  morning  the  victory  came.  The 
ice  was  all  broken,  melted,  and  carried  away;  the 
warmth  and  glow  of  my  "first  love"  filled  my 
heart;  the  current  of  feeling  was  changed  and 
deepened ;  the  joy  of  salvation  was  restored. 

In  the  morning  I  went  out,  took  the  unconverted 
by  the  hand,  and  said  the  same  things  as  on  days 
previous ;  but  now  they  were  melted  to  tears  over 
their  sin  and  danger. 

I  prepared  and  preached  another  sermon  to  the 
churches  —  no  lash,  nothing  harsh  about  it.  They 
broke  down,  confessed  their  own  need  of  a  special 
preparation  of  heart,  and  gave  themselves  anew  to 
the  work,  which  from  that  hour  went  forward 
rapidly  and  successfully. 

Thus  I  learned  the  necessity  of  having  my  heart 
filled  with  the  love  of  Christ,  if  I  would  see  the 
salvation  of  the  Lord  follow  my  labors. 

Since  then  I  have  spoken  kindly  of  ministers 
w^ho  do  not  see  the  conversions  for  which  they 
labor.  Yet  I  am  convinced,  and  more  and  more 
every  year,  that  generally  the  fault  is  in  the  min- 
ister's own  heart,  —  coldness,  growing  out  of  the 
absence  of  the  joy  of  salvation. 

I  have  thus  tried  to  present  some  of  the  reasons 
why  Christians  should  enjoy  the  fullness  of  Christ's 
love.  We  ought  to  look  upon  it  as  the  greatest 
privilege,  the  most  desirable  of  al)   our  blessings, 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  77 

rather  than  as  a  duty  from  which  we,  perhaps,  would 
turu  away,  if  we  could;  for  we  do  not  attain  solid 
happiness,  abiding  rest,  and  sweet  peace  until  the 
fuUness  of  that  love  is  ours.  O,  how  differently,  too, 
everything  looks  to  us  then  !  Our  complaints  cease  ; 
we  cannot  retain  hard  feelings  towards  any  one  ;  all 
is  peace  and  love  at  home  and  away  from  home  ; 
and  we  speak  tenderly  even  of  those  w^e  think  have 
done  us  an  injury. 

In  a  town  where  I  was  engaged  in  a  meeting, 
several  members  had  left  the  church  because  of  a 
certain  resolution  it  had  passed.  One  of  them 
came  to  me  one  evening,  as  I  was  about  to  dismiss 
the  congregation,  and,  with  much  earnestness,- 
asked  me  to  request  the  church  to  wait  a  few 
minutes,  nntil  he  had  (to  use  his  own  words) 
"given  them  a  blowing  up  ;  they  have  abused  me," 
said  he,  "and  cannot  be  blessed  until  they  acknowl- 
edge it,  and  undo  what  they  have  done."  I  asked 
him  if  he  would  not  defer  his  speech,  inasmuch  as 
it  would  have  an  injurious  effect  on  the  meetings 
just  at  that  stage  in  their  progress.  He  consented 
to  wait  a  few  days.  He  came  again  at  the  expira- 
tion of  tlie  time ;  but  again  was  prevailed  upon  to 
wait.  He  was  a  good  man,  and  I  knew  if  God 
restored  unto  him  the  joy  of  salvation,  he  would 
feel  and  talk  differently. 

Before  long  his  wife  came  forward  for  prayer.     I 


78  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

asked  him  to  pray  for  her.  He  did  so ;  and  in  that 
prayer  the  draft  was  opened  for  the  fire  to  burn  in 
his  bosom,  and,  in  a  short  time,  the  love  of  Christ 
filled  his  heart. 

Everything  then  began  to  look  differently  to  him. 
All  his  old  love  for  the  church  came  back.  Again 
be  asked  to  speak  to  the  church.  The  privilege 
was  readily  granted.  With  a  happy  face  and  a 
humble,  loving  spirit,  he  said  to  them,  "If  you  can 
consent  to  receive  me  back,  I  will  return,  and  will 
say  nothing  about  my  old  complaint  —  I  am  satisfied 
to  let  it  pass."  So  changed  did  everything  seem, 
when  he  had  the  joy  of  religion  in  his  heart. 

My  dear  Christian  hearer,  let  me  ask.  Are  you 
now  enjoying  the  fulhiess  of  Christ's  love?  Were 
you  ever  nearer  Jesus  than  you  are  at  present  ?  Have 
you  that  same  tender,  happy  heart  you  once  had? 
Or  is  it  the  case  that  you  were  never  very  happy 
in  Jesus'  love  ?  In  either  case,  —  whether  you  have 
less  love  and  joy  than  you  once  had,  or  have  never 
known  much  happiness  in  your  religious  experience, 
—  do  not  rest  until  you  can  say,  "My  cup  runneth 
over."  The  effort  to  regain  your  first  love  may, 
and  no  doubt  will,  cost  you  more  than  it  did  to  be 
converted.  You  will  be  like  a  man  who  has 
strayed  avvay  from  his  lantern  —  he  must  travel  in 
the  dark,  until   he   finds   it.     Or  like  the  woman 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  7y 

spoken  of  ill  the  gospel,  who,  having  lost  one  of  her 
ten  pieces  of  silver,  was  obliged  to  search  long  and 
diligently,  making  at  the  same  time  all  her  other 
property  and  labors  secondary,  imtil  she  fonnd  it; 
but  she  found  it  at  length,  and  was  hapi)y  —  so  happy 
that  she  called  her  friends  and  neighbors  together  to 
rejoice  with  her;  anc]  you  will  be  happy  when  you 
have  regained  the  jo}^  of  salvation,  and  you  will 
want  those  around  you  to  rejoice  with  you. 

Let  me,  then,  in  conclusion,  say  to  each  believer 
who  is  within  the  sound  of  my  voice.  Be  thorough 
in  the  examination  of  the  state  of  your  heart ;  not 
now  as  to  the  evidences  of  your  hope,  but  as  to 
your  love  to  Jesus,  —  whether  you  have  all  yonr  first 
love,  and  all  the  increase  thereof  which  you  may 
and  ought  to  have.  Is  it  as  pleasant  and  as  easy 
as  it  used  to  be  to  speak  to  the  impenitent,  and 
warn  them  of  their  danger?  Are  the  closet  and 
the  prayer-meeting  as  dear  to  you  as  they  once 
were?  'T^f  not,  let  me  urge  you  to  go  to  Jesus,  as 
you  did  when  you  felt  yourself  a  lost  sinner.  Ask 
Christians  to  pray  with  and  for  you.  Do  not  offer 
another  cold,  half-hearted  prayer  to  God.  Go 
down  to  the  lowest  door  of  mercy,  and  knock,  and 
seek,  and  ask  importunatel}-,  until  you  feel  your 
heart  running  over  Avith  the  fullness  of  Jesus'  love, 
and  then  ask  and  receive  the  grace  to  abide  in  that 


80  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

blessed  condition  until  you  are  transferred  to  that 
home  on  high  where  there  is  fulhiess  of  joy  for- 
evermore. 

"  If  ye  abide  in  me,  and  my  words  abide  in  you, 
ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done 
unto  you." 

Amen. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  81 


CHAPTER   VI. 

INCIDENTS. 

**  Ma,  give  him  my  two  one-dollars." 

AT  the  close  of  a  series  of  meetings  m  Spring- 
field, Mass.,  a  mother  handed  me  a  little 
girl's  picture  wrapped  in  two  one-dollar  bills, 
at  the  same  time  relating  the  following  touching 
incident : — 

Her  only  child,  at  the  age  of  six  years,  gave  her 
heart  to  the  Savior,  giving,  as  the  pastor  with 
whom  I  was  laboring  said,  the  clearest  evidence 
of  conversion. 

At  once  she  went  to  her  mother  and  said,  "Ma, 
1  have  given  my  heart  to  Jesus  and  he  has  received 
me;  now,  won't  you  give  your  heart  to  him?" 
(The  parents  Avere  both  unconverted  at  the  time.) 
The  mother  replied,  "I  hope  I  shall  some  time,  dear 
Mary."  The  little  girl  said,  "Do  it  now%  ma," 
and  urged  the  mother,  with  all  her  childlike  earnest- 
ness, to  give  herself  to  the  Savior  then. 


82  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

Finding  she  could  not  prevail  in  that  way,  she 
sought  to  secure  a  promise  from  her  mother,  feel- 
ing sure  she  would  do  what  she  promised  ;  for  her 
parents  had  made  it  a  point  never  to  make  her  a 
promise  without  carefully  fultilling  it.  So  time 
after  time  she  would  say,  "Promise  me,  ma;"  and 
the  mother  would  reply,  "  I  do  not  like  to  promise 
you,  Mary,  for  fear  I  shall  not  fulfill." 

This  request  was  urged  at  times  for  nearly  six 
jears,  and  finally  the  little  petitioner  had  to  die  to 
secure  the  promise. 

Several  times  during  her  sickness  the  parents 
came  to  her  bedside  to  see  her  die,  saying  to  her, 
"  You  are  dying  now,  dear  Mary."  But  she  would 
sa3^  "No,  ma,  I  can't  die  till  you  promise  me." 
Still  her  mother  was  unwilling  to  make  the  promise, 
lest  it  should  not  be  kept.  She  intended  to  give 
her  heart  to  Jesus  some  time,  but  was  unwillinof  to 
do  it  "  now." 

Mary  grew  worse,  and  finally  had  uttered  her  last 
word  on  earth :  her  mother  was  never  again  to  hear 
that  earnest  entreaty,  "Promise  me,  ma." 

But  the  little  one's  spirit  lingered,  as  if  it  w^ere 
detained  by  the  angel  sent  to  lead  her  mother  tt) 
Jesus,  that  the  long-sought  promise  might  b(j  heard 
before  it  took  its  fli<yht. 

The  weeping  mother  stood  watching  the  counte- 
nance of  the  dying  child,  who  seemed  to  say,  by  her 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  83 

look,  "Ma,  promise  me,  and  let  me  go  to  Jesus.** 
There  was  a  great  struggle  in  her  heart  as  she  said 
to  herself,  "  Why  do  I  not  promise  this  child  ?  I 
mean  to  give  my  heart  to  Jesus ;  why  not  now?  If 
I  do  not  promise  her  now,  I  never  can." 

The  Spirit  inclined  her  heart  to  yield.  She 
roused  her  child,  and  said,  "Mary,  I  will  give  my 
heart  to  Jesus."  This  was  the  last  bolt  to  be 
drawn ;  her  heart  was  now  open,  and  Jesus  enterec 
at  once,  and  she  felt  the  joy  and  peace  of  sin^ 
forgiven. 

This  change  was  so  marked,  she  felt  constrained 
to  tell  the  good  news  to  her  child,  that  she  might 
bear  it  with  her  when  she  went  to  live  with  Jesus ; 
so,  calling  her  attention  once  more,  she  said, 
"Mary,  I  have  given  my  heart  to  Jesus,  and  he 
is  my  Savior  now." 

For  six  years  Mary  had  been  praying  to  God 
and  pleading  with  her  mother  for  these  words  ;  and 
now,  as  they  fell  upon  her  ear,  a  peaceful  smile 
lighted  np  her  face,  and,  no  longer  able  to  speak, 
she  raised  her  little,  pale  hand,  and  pointing  upward, 
seemed  to  say,  "Ma,  we  shall  meet  up  there." 
Her  life's  work  was  done,  and  her  spirit  returned 
to  Him  who  gave  it. 

The  mother's  heart  was  full  of  peace,  though  her 
loved  one  had  gone.  She  now  felt  very  anxious  that 
her  husband  should  have  this  blessing  which  she 
found  in  Chr'^^t. 


{>4  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

The  parents  went  into  the  room  where  the 
remains  were  resting,  to  look  up.  n  the  face  of  her 
who  slept  so  sweetly  in  death,  when  the  mother 
said,  "  Husband,  I  promised  our  little  Mary  that 
I  would  give  my  heart  to  Jesus,  and  he  has 
received  me.     Now,  won't  you  promise?" 

The  Holy  Spirit  was  there.  The  strong  man 
resisted  for  a  while,  then  yielded  his  will,  and 
taking  the  little  cold  hand  in  his,  kneeled  and  said, 
"  Jesus,  I  will  try  to  seek  thee."  '    . 

The  child's  remains  wera  laid  in  the  grave.  The 
parents  were  found  in  the  house  of  prayer — the 
mother  happy  in  Jesus,  and  the  father  soon  having 
some  evidence  of  love  to  Christ. 

When  I  closed  my  labors  in  Springfield,  Dr.  Ide 
said  to  his  congregation,  "  I  hope  you  will  all  give 
brother  Earle  some  token  of  your  regard  for  his 
services  before  he  leaves."  As  this  mother  heard 
these  words,  she  said  she  could,  as  it  were,  see  her 
little  Mary's  hand  pointing  down  from  heaven,  and 
hear  her  sweet  voice  saying,  "  Ma,  give  him  my 
two  one-dollars." 

Those  two  one-dollars  I  have  now,  wrapped 
around  the  picture  of  that  dear  child,  and  wherever 
I  go,  little  Mary  will  speak  for  the  Savior. 

Reader,  is  there  not  some  loved  one  nov/  point- 
ing down  from  heaven  and  saying  to  you,  "  Give 
your   heart   to   Jesus "  ?      Are    you    loving    some 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  85 

earthly  object  more  than  Jesus  ?  God  may  sever 
that  tie  —  may  take  away  your  little  Mary,  or 
AVillie,  or  some  dear  friend.  Will  you  not  come 
to  Jesus,  without  such  a  warning? 

"Try  it  on  me." 

We  were  in  the  midst  of  an  interesting  series  of 
meetings  in  Oneonta,  New  York.  Among  those 
attending  from  no  promising  motives,  was  Mr. 
Olin,  a  lawyer  of  marked  ability  and  influence  in 
the  town. 

One  evening,  at  the  close  of  the  sermon,  when  an 
opportunity  was  given  for  remarks,  Mr.  Olin  rose, 
and,  in  a  bold  and  defiant  tone,  said,  "  Mr.  Earle,  I 
have  heard  you  speak  repeatedly  in  these  meetings 
of  the  '  power  of  prayer,'  and  I  don't  believe  a  word 
of  it ;  but  if  you  want  to  try  a  hard  case,  take  me." 
I  said,  "Mr.  Olin,  if  you  will  come  to  the  front 
seat,  we  will  pray  for  you  now."  He  replied,  "  I 
will  do  nothing  of  the  kind ;  but  if  you  have  '  power 
in  prayer,'  try  it  on  me." 

Befoi-e  closing  the  meeting,  I  requested  all  who 
were  willing,  to  go  to  their  closets  at  a  given  hour, 
and  pray  earnestly  for  Mr.  Olin;  and  I  requested 
I  iin  to  remember,  at  that  hour,  that  we  were  pray- 
ini*'  for  him. 

The  second  or  third  evening  after  this,  Mr.  Olin 


86  BRINGING  IN  SLEAVES. 

rose  ill  our  meeting,  and  urged  us  to  pray  for  him. 
I  asked  him  if  he  would  come  forward,  and  let  ms 
pray  with  him ;  he  said,  "Yes,  anywhere,  if  God 
will  only  have  mercy  on  so  great  a  sinner."  In  a 
tew  days  he  was  a  rejoicing  Christian,  and  soon 
after  sold  his  law  books,  and  became  a  preacher  of 
the  gospel.  He  is  now  a  presiding  elder  in  the 
Methodist  church. 

"She  will  never  call  me  'father'"  again." 

A  few  years  ago  I  was  laboring  in  a  town  in  the 
State  of  New  York.  Living  near  the  place  was  a 
man  bitterly  opposed  to  religion  and  religious 
meetings  —  an  enemy  of  Jesus,  though  a  kind 
father.  He  could  not  be  induced  to  attend  our 
meetings  or  seek  the  Savior. 

The  idol  of  his  heart  was  a  little  daughter,  just 
beginning  to  call  him  father.  When  at  home,  he 
spent  much  of  his  time  holding  or  carrying  her 
about  the  house ;  so  that  whenever  he  came  in 
sight,  she  would  hold  up  her  little  hands  and  say, 
"Pa,  come,"  or  "Pa,  take  me."  He  loved  to  hear 
that  voice,  and  heed  that  call,  but  the  gentle  call  of 
the  "  still,  small  voice "  found  no  answer  in  his 
heart,  until  God  severed  the  delicate  cords  that 
bound  little  Josephine  to  earth. 

God  seemed  to  place  her  coffin  across  the  father's 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  87 

life-path,  to  warn  him  of  death  and  a  juc.grnent  to 
come. 

At  her  funeral  I  made  some  remarks  from  these 
words,  "  Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  me." 
I  said,  "Parents,  if  you  want  your  little  children 
tenderly  cared  for,  if  you  wish  to  give  them  every 
possible  opportunity  for  intellectual  and  moral  im- 
provement, if  you  want  to  know  they  are  in  th-e 
best  society  —  »Jesus  says,  Let  them  come  and  live 
with  me.'* 

At  the  close  of  the  services  in  the  house,  the 
coffin  was  placed  on  a  table  in  the  yard,  that  the 
large  number  present  might  look  upon  the  face 
of  the  little  sleeper,  as  she  lay  among  the  beauti- 
ful flowers  arranged  by  loving  hands. 

When  all  others  had  looked  at  the  remains,  the 
father  came  to  look  for  the  last  time  upon  the  face 
of  her  whom  he  had  loved  so  tenderly.  For  a  few 
moments  he  stood  in  silence,  looking  upon  that 
marble  countenance,  his  tears  falling  upon  her  ftice ; 
then,  as  if  his  grief  could  be  endured  no  longer, 
he  sobbed  out,  in  the  most  heart-rending  manner, 
"  She  will  never  call  me  *  father  '  again  !  She  will, 
never  call  me  '  father  '  again  I  " 

All  around  him  were  weeping. 

When  asked  if  the  coffin  could  be  closed,  he 
replied,  "  No,  you  must  not  close  this  coffin."  "  O, 
the  little  darling  will  never  call  me  <  father*  again  !  " 


88  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

He  finally  consented  to  have  the  cofiin  closed. 

I  went  to  the  grave ;  and,  returning  to  his  home, 
was  sitting  with  him  in  his  parlor,  when  he  saw 
some  book  or  plaything  belonging  to  his  daughter, 
and,  springing  up  and  walking  the  floor,  he  ex- 
claimed, "  She  will  never  call  me  *  father'  again." 

Asking  his  attention  for  a  few  moments,  I  said 
to  him,  "I  am  not  sure  your  little  Josephine  Avill 
never  call  you  '  father '  again.  She  is  now  walking 
the  <  golden  streets,'  and  perhaps  is  this  moment 
saying,  <  I  wish  my  dear  father  was  up  here  —  it  is 
so  beautiful.'  If  you  should  be  converted  and  go 
to  heaven,  the  very  first  voice  you  would  hear  on 
your  arrival  there  might  be  your  loved  Josephine's, 
saying,  *  O,  my  dear  father,  have  you  come  to  live 
with  me  in  heaven  ?  '  " 

Soon  he  became  calm,  and  appeared  thoughtful 
for  a  while,  and  then  deliberately  said,  "By  the 
grace  of  God  I  will  seek  Jesus ;  I  will."  He 
sought  and  found  a  precious  Savior,  was  found  in 
the  house  of  prayer,  and  the  last  I  knew  of  him, 
was  preaching  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed 
God;  and  little  Josephine,  who  is  waiting  "across 
the  river,"  may  again  call  him  "  father." 

"E'en  the  hour  that  darkest  seemeth 
Will  his  changeless  goodness  prove; 
From  the  gloom  his  brightness  streameth; 
God  is  wisdom,  God  is  love." 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  89 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

REVIVAL  GLEANINGS  —  CONTINUED. 

AMSTERDAM,  N.  Y.  —  At  the  urgent  request 
of  Christians  of  different  denominations,  I 
commenced  a  series  of  meetings  in  Sanford  Hall, 
April  22,  1858. 

In  several  of  the  churches,  meetings  had  been 
held  nearly  every  evening,  for  some  months,  and 
only  one  hopeful  conversion  reported  during  the 
time. 

Many  had  been  earnestly  praying  for  a  few  influ- 
ential men  in  the  place,  thinking  if  they  were 
converted  the  whole  community  would  be  moved. 
But  this  did  not  seem  to  be  God's  plan. 

For  many  days  thick  darkness  surrounded  the 
meeting.  The  wicked  seemed  to  say  to  Christians, 
"Where  is  your  God?" 

■  Alter  two  weeks  of  hard  labor,  God  showed  us 
that  the  cause  of  the  delay  was  not  the  hardness  of 
wicked  men. 

Though  Christians   had   beien  active,   and  were 


90  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

still  ready  to  make  any  sacrifice  for  souls,  yet  they 
lacked  power  with  God,  and,  consequently,  with 
men.  But  they  could  not  be  easily  convinced  that 
they  were  not  ready  for  a  revival  of  religion. 
Many  said  they  were  fully  in  the  work,  and  did  not 
know  why  the  blessing  was  delayed. 

Early  one  morning,  all  who  were  willing  to  lay 
all  on  God's  altar  anew,  and  seek  the  fullness  of 
his  love,  met  in  the  hall,  and,  without  any  known 
reservation,  made  a  new  consecration.  They  now 
asked  God  to  convert  the  men  so  long  prayed  for, 
or  in  any  other  way  revive  his  work. 

The  offering  was  then  and  tliere  accepted,  and 
one  soul  was  born  into  the  kingdom  during  that 
morning  meeting.  At  once  the  Spirit  filled  all  the 
place  where  we  were  assembled. 

Instead  of  the  iniiuential  men,  a  group  of  chil- 
dren and  youth  first  sought  and  found  the  Savior. 
These  young  converts  now  became  God's  laborers 
to  bring  their  parents  and  others  to  Jesus.  It  was 
an  affecting  scene  when  the  children  rose,  and, 
with  tearful  eyes,  requested  prayers  for  fathers  or 
mothers,  brothers  or  sisters. 

Soon  the  hall  was  so  crowded  that  outsiders  said, 
''The  building  will  fall ;  it  is  not  safe  for  so  many 
to  enter  it." 

One  of  the  first  to  bow  in  submission  to  Jesus 
was  a  young  lawyer,  who  had  said  to  a  pious  parent, 


BRINGING    IN  SHEA  VES.  91 

**  Mother,  don't  make  a  fool  of  yourself  by  asking 
prayers  for  your  husband  and  children."  That  son 
became  an  earnest  worker  in  the  cause  of  Christ, 
and  has  since  passed  to  his  heavenly  home. 

Joy  and  peace  now  filled  the  hearts  of  God's 
people,  more  than  compensating  for  their  previous 
anxiety.  The  impenitent  seemed  awed  and  sub- 
dued by  the  sensible  presence  of  the  Spirit. 

A  young  man  remarked  to  one  who  had  been  an 
active  worker  in  the  meetings  from  the  first,  "  I 
supposed  religion  made  one  gloomy  ;  but  the  last 
few  niijhts  at  the  hall  have  convinced  me  that 
Christians  have  joys  sinners  know  nothing  of." 
The  young  man  has  since  fallen  in  battle,  and  the 
brother  to  whom  he  made  this  remark  has  also  gone 
to  his  reward. 

Among  the  rich  fruits  of  that  "hall  meeting" 
was  the  or^^anization  of  a  Youno^  Men's  Christian 
Association,  which  has  been  ke^t  up  for  ten  years, 
with  great  interest  and  profit. 

A  Saturday  evening  prayer  meeting,  started  at 
that  time,  has  been  sustained  through  all  these  years 
by  the  young  ladies,  who  have  felt  that  it  was  "  a 
sweet  hour  of  prayer." 

Abington,  IIass.  — With  its  four  villages,  some- 
what noted  for  good  schools  and  large  shor  manu- 
factories, Abington,  like  any  manufacturing  town, 


92  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

is  an  important  centre  of  influence,  since  it  employs 
many  persons  whose  homes  are  in  other  towns,  and 
who,  consequently,  carry  away  with  them  the  good 
or  evil  influences  received.  Hence  the  added  im- 
portance of  the  ffreat  awakening  throughout  this 
town  in  the  winter  of  1856-57. 

The  meetings  began  in  that  part  called  East 
Abingtoj^. 

The  congregation  at  first  was  very  small.  It 
was  at  a  thinly  attended  afternoon  meeting  that 
the  few  praying  ones  seemed  to  "get  hold  of  God," 
as  it  were,  with  a  feeling  that  their  prayers  had 
been  heard,  and  the  power  of  God  was  about  to  be 
felt  in  the  town.  During  the  progress  of  this 
afternoon  meeting,  a  scofiing  infidel,  in  his  store, 
was  so  wrought  upon  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  —  had 
such  a  sense  of  his  sinfulness,  and  felt  so  certain 
that  he  must  spend  eternity  in  the  world  of  despair, 
—  that  he  thought* he  would  go  out  and  end  his 
present  miseries  by  taking  his  own  life.  But  his 
second  thought  was,  that  there  would  be  no  use  in 
that;  he  recollected  to  have  heard  Christians  say 
that  the  worst  of  sinners  might  find  pardon  and 
peace  in  Christ,  and  he  said,  "I  will  accept  Christ 
as  my  Savior,  and  devote  myself  to  his  service." 
God  heard  the  prayer  which  followed  that  resolu- 
tion ;  and  at  our  meeting  in  the  evening  we  were 
much  surprised  and  rejoiced,  when  he  stood  before 
us,  a  wit?iess  of  God's  pardoning  grace. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  93 

A  wealthy  business  man  in  the  phice  had  left  his 
office  for  a  game  of  billiards.  With  the  game  un- 
finished he  went  home  to  dine,  and  before  leaving 
his  house  went  into  the  cellar  to  arrange  his 
furnace ;  and  while  there  was  so  stricken  down 
under  the  power  of  God,  that  he  felt  hardly  able 
to  leave  the  house,  but  thought  he  must  go  and 
finish  his  game.  As  he  went  out,  he  met  at  the 
gate  the  converted  infidel,  spoken  of  above,  who 
said  to  him,  "Come  with  me  to  meeting."  He  re- 
plied, "I  will;"  and  went,  and  became  a  follower 
of  Jesus.  He  is  to-day  a  strong  pillar  in  the  Con- 
gregational church. 


South  Abington.  — Here  was  to  be  a  trial  of  faith. 
The  way  seemed  fully  prepared,  the  people  ready. 
A  large  number  gathered  at  our  first  meeting,  and 
I  said  we  might  look  for  a  great  work  of  grace ; 
that  we  would  soon  see  the  aisles  filled.  We  went 
home  that  night  with  glad  hearts,  confident  that  the 
work  was  oroin<r  ricrht  on  with  srreat  success. 

But  the  next  morning  all  was  changed.  A  ter- 
rible snow-storm  had  shut  us  out  of  the  church  and 
in  our  homes. 

For  six  successive  days  I  preached  in  a  private 
parlor  at  my  boarding-place,  only  a  few  rods  from 
the  church,  to  perhaps  ten  or  fifteen  persons. 

About  the  seventh  day  the  snow  had  melted  and 


94  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

drifts  settled  so  that  the  church  was  opened,  and 
we  came  together  again. 

But  the  Spirit  of  God  had  been  at  work  upon 
the  hearts  of  the  people  while  they  were  shut  up  at 
home. 

The  Lord  had  made  "the  clouds  his  chariot,"  the 
storm  and  tempest  messengers  of  his  coming. 

iSTo  time  seemed  to  have  been  lost.  At  the  first 
or  second  meeting  one  hundred  persons  requested 
our  prayers  for  their  conversion.  And  for  weeks 
the  work  went  forward  with  increasing  power,  de- 
veloping Christian  zeal  and  love,  and  carrying  the 
joy  of  pardon  to  all  ages  and  classes  among  the 
kind  people  of  that  quiet  village. 

Centre  Abington.  —  The  meetings  here  were  in 
the  Congregational  church,  and  were  much  like 
those  in  other  parts  of  the  town,  except  that  a 
larger  proportion  of  the  converts  were  men  hard- 
ened in  sin,  and  whom  we  least  expected. 

One  young  man,  who  professed  to  be  a  Univer- 
salist,  came  into  the  meeting  one  evening  for  the 
purpose  of  getting  something  to  make  sport  of,  as 
he  afterwards  told  us.  But  he  went  out,  at  the 
close  of  the  service,  under  deep  conviction  for  sin, 
was  converted,  and  is  now  preaching  the  everlasting 
gospel. 

Men  almost  given  up  as  hopeless  knelt  among 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  95 

the  anxious,  by  the  side  of  little  children  from  the 
Sahbath  scIkjoI,  and  together  they  were  heard  re- 
joicing in  hope.  Many  were  the  homes  gladdened 
by  this  precious  work  of  grace.  Around  some 
hearthstones  the  family  gathered  for  the  first  time 
to  establish  an  altar  of  prayer;  in  many  others, 
new  voices  joined  in  the  sacred  services. 

It  may  be  interesting  to  some  to  know  how  1 
came  to  labor  in  Abington,  inasmuch  as  my  first 
meeting  in  the  State  of  Massachusetts  was  held  in 
this  town. 

Brother  William  Everett,  at  that  time  pastor  of  a 
small  church  in  the  town,  had  previously  met  me  in 
New  York,  and  from  that  time  had  felt  a  great  de- 
sire to  have  me  labor  with  him.  But  his  church 
being  small,  and  hardly  able  to  meet  current 
expenses,  he  did  not  feel  free  to  ask  me  to  help 
him. 

Still  he  did  not  give  up  the  hope  of  some  time 
having  the  meeting ;  and,  while  he  considered  the 
subject  and  prayed  over  it,  his  prayers  were  an- 
swered, and  a  way  opened  in  a  manner  quite  differ- 
ent from  his  expectations. 

One  of  Boston's  well  known  Christian  merchants, 
an  active  and  generous  leader  among  the  laymen  of 
the  Baptist  denomination,  spent  a  night  with  brothei 
Everett,  and  during  the  evening  was  made  ac- 
quainted with  the  wants  of  the  church  and  the  de- 


96  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

sire  of  the  pastor.  The  next  morning  he  handed 
fifty  dollars  to  brother  Everett,  saying,  "  Send  for 
brother  Earle  to  come  and  preach  fifty  dollars' 
worth."  The  gift  was  accepted,  further  arrange- 
ments made,  and,  before  many  months,  the  town  was 
enjoying  the  precious  revival  just  sketched.  Eter- 
nity alone  can  reveal  the  influence  of  that  fifty 
dollars,  given  to  promote  the  cause  of  the  Re- 
deemer, by  one  who  was  then  a  stranger  to  me, 
but  now  one  of  my  dearest  and  most  valued  friends, 
George  W.  Chipman. 

Haverhill,  Mass. — The  "Boston  Eecorder" 
(since  united  with  the  "  Congregationalist ")  said 
of  this  meeting,  "The  revival  of  religion  in  this 
vicinity  has  been,  thus  far,  one  of  unusual  interest 
and  power.  Rev.  Mr.  Earle  commenced  preaching 
in  the  Third  Baptist  church  (Rev.  B.  Wheeler's), 
in  Haverhill,  the  latter  part  of  April.  .  .  .  Short- 
ly after  the  coming  of  Mr.  Earle,  ^yq  churches 
(three  Congregational  and  two  Baptist)  joined  in  a 
union  meeting  under  his  special  direction. 

"  The  meetings  were  held  in  the  different  places 
of  worship  belonging  to  these  churches,  as  circum- 
stances seemed  to  require.  They  had  hardly  begun 
before  marked  tokens  of  the  Spirit's  presence  were 
manifest,  especially  upon  the  members  of  the 
churches.     Great  solemnity,  a  new  spirit  of  self- 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES,  97 

consecration,  of  humility,  of  devotion,  seemed  to 
fill  idl  hearts. 

"Soon  sinners  became  anxious,  the  inquu^ 
meetings  began  to  be  numerously  attended,  con- 
versions multiplied,  and  the  whole  community  was 
shaken  as  by  the  power  of  God. 

"]\Iore  than  two  hundred  inquirers  and  recent 
converts  were  gathered  in  one  room  more  than  once 
during  these  meetings.  There  was  little  need  of 
urging  persons  to  make  themselves  known  as  in- 
quirers, for  multitudes  seemed  anxious  to  take  any 
and  every  step  that  might  help  them  to  come  to 
Christ. 

"  There  was  no  noisy  excitement,  no  groanings 
or  outcries;  but  there  were  tears,  and  prayers,  and 
earnest  exhortations,  and  pungent  sermons,  and 
clear,  pointed  directions  to  the  sinner,  and  deep, 
solemn  earnestness. 

"  The  result  has  been  most  happy  in  this  entire 
community.  The  number  of  conversions  I  cannot 
state  exactly.  Judging  from  observation  among 
my  own  people,  I  should  think  there  must  be  from 
three  to  four  hundred  in  this  immediate  vicinity, 
tliat,  in  the  judgment  of  charity,  have  passed  from 
death  unto  life.   .   .   . 

"  Almost  all  the  pupils  in  the  Female  Academy 
at  Bradford,  that  were  not  already  Christians,  have 
luring  this  revival  beeouie  ho[)efully  converted. 
7 


98  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

"The  work  now  seems  to  be  extending  to  the 
towns  around  us,  and  some  two  hundred  hopeful 
converts  are  reported  from  the  diiferent  churches 
within  ten  or  Hfteen  miles  of  us." 

At  the  close  of  the  meetings  in  Haverhill,  the 
pastors,  and  recent  converts  and  others,  united 
with  me  in  visiting  some  of  the  churches  in  the 
country  around.  Large  wagons  were  fitted  up, 
some  of  them  carrying  fifty  persons,  and  in  this 
way  we  visited  five  churches,  holding  meetings 
through  one  day  and  evening  with  each.  1 
preached  short  sermons,  after  which  those  Chris- 
tians accompanying  me  talked,  and  prayed,  and 
sung.  God  blessed  these  means  wonderfully,  in 
the  quickening  of  Christians  and  the  conversion  of 
sinners,  until  it  was  believed  there  were  three 
hundred  conversions  in  the  country  around  Ha- 
verhill. 

After  visiting  these  different  churches,  a  final, 
closing  meeting  was  held  in  the  large  town  hall, 
that  we  might  have  a  few  parting  words,  bid  each 
other  "  God-speed,"  and  separate  to  our  homes. 
The  ten  churches  with  which  I  had  labored  were 
represented  at  this  meeting. 

I  have  on  my  table  a  most  interesting  memento 
of  the  precious  seasons  enjoyed  in  Haverhill — a 
very  large  and  richly  bound  album,  holding  two 
hundred  photographs.     One  evening  I  was  invited 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  99 

to  attend  a  social  gathering  to  be  held  in  Music 
Hall.  About  six  hundred  persons  were  present, 
and  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  this  album,  con- 
taining photographs  of  many  of  the  young  converts, 
of  the  pastors  and  other  friends,  was  presented  to 
me,  accompanied  by  the  best  wishes  and  j)i'a3'ers 
of  a  large  number  of  friends. 

In  this  album  may  be  seen  the  picture  of  an  old 
man  bending  over  a  book,  as  if  in  deep  study,  his 
hair  almost  white,  his  cheeks  furrowed,  his  brow  a 
little  contracted,  and  over  all  a  pleasant  smile, 
indicating  that  there  is  within,  that  peace  which 
"  passeth  all  understanding."  With  his  name  and 
his  works  thousands  are  familiar.  Many  an  hour 
has  been  spent  by  teacher  and  pupil  studying  and 
worrying  over  the  questions  which  he  has  put  forth. 
He  has  exerted  a  wide  influence  in  the  discipline  of 
youthful  minds,  and  his  name  is  prominent  among 
mathematicians.  This  good  man  w^as  a  constant 
attendant  of  our  meetings,  an  active  worker  in  the 
cause  of  Christ,  a  Christian  gentleman. 

On  my  occasional  visits  to  the  Academy  at  Brad- 
ford, to  converse  with  the  young  ladies  on  the 
subject  of  religion,  he  always  chose  to  be  my 
companion.  Though  he  was  still  active  in  the 
Master's  service,  his  work  was  almost  done :  to 
use  the  expression  of  good  old  father  Porter,  *  he 
stood  on  the  platform,  satchel  in  hand,  waiting  for 
the  heavenly  train.' 


100  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES 

Very  soon  after  the  close  of  our  meeting  the 
summons  came,  and  he  went  home;  and  there  was 
transferred  from  the  church-book  of  earth  to  that 
of  heaven  the  name  of  Benjamin  Greenleaf. 

Fall  River,  Mass.  —  Seventeen  persons  were 
present  at  my  first  meeting  here ;  at  the  closing 
meeting  there  were  as  many  hundred.  The  interest, 
at  first  scarcely  perceptible,  steadily  and  rapidly 
increased  up  to  the  last  night  of  the  meeting. 

A  very  correct  idea  of  these  meetings  may  be 
gained  from  the  following  letter  in  the  Xew  York 
Observer,  of  February  21,  18G3  :  "We  are  enjoy- 
ing a  glorious  work  of  grace  in  this  city.  It  com- 
menced in  one  of  the  Baptist  churches  with  the 
labors  of  Rev.  A.  B.  Earle,  whose  success  as  an 
evangelist  has,  for  several  years  i^ast,  been  so 
great.  An  invitation  was  extended  by  him  and  the 
church  to  the  pastors  and  members  of  all  evangel- 
ical churches  in  the  city,  to  come  in  and  labor 
together  for  a  general  revival  throughout  the  city. 
A  few  members  from  different  churches  accepted 
the  invitation,  and  became  deeply  interested  in  the 
work.  .  .  . 

"  The  tokens  of  the  approach  of  God,  in  his 
majesty  and  glory,  became  apparent.  *  Behold, 
hovv  good  and  how  pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to 
dwell  together  in  unity.'     Soon  the  fruits  began  to 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  l\)\ 

appear.  It  was  indeed  a  surprise  visit  to  many  of 
our  churches.  The  promise,  *  Before  they  call  I 
will  answer;  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking  I  will 
hear,'  w^as  fully  realized. 

"  Soon  converts  began  to  be  multiplied,  and 
many  were  amazed  and  in  doubt,  saying  one  to 
another.  What  meaneth  this?  Instead  of  the  war 
and  the  condition  of  the  country,  which  had  been 
so  long  the  all-engrossing  theme,  religion  became 
the  subject  of  conversation  at  the  corners  of  the 
streets,  the  marts  of  business,  and  in  the  work- 
shops and  mills.  All  classes  and  all  ages  were 
alike  moved,  from  the  little  school-child  to  those 
who  had  grown  gray  in  the  service  of  Satan.  Such 
was  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  that  the  strong  oaks 
of  Bashan  were  made  to  bow  with  as  much  ease  as 
the  willows  by  the  watercourses.  It  is  '  the 
Lord's  doing,  and  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes.' 

"In  two  of  the  seven  churches  visited,  it  was 
estimated  there  were  one  hundred  conversions 
during  the  last  week.  Many  remarkable  answers 
to  prayer,  and  many  deeply  interesting  religious 
experiences,  have  come  to  our  knowledge,  but  the 
limits  of  this  communication  will  not  allow  of  their 
being  specified.  Allow  me  to  allude  to  one  of  the 
rich  iVuits  of  this  blessed  work. 

"Our  High  School  is  composed  of  advanced 
scholars,   many  of   whom  are  being  titted  iov  col- 


102  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES 

lege,  others  for  teachers,  as  well  as  other  spheres 
of  iufluence,  and  is,  therefore,  regarded  with  pecu- 
liar interest  as  containing  the  flower  of  our  3^outh. 

"  Last  week  was  vacation,  and  many  of  the 
pupils  attended  the  meetings  and  were  converted. 
The  principal,  who,  though  regarded  as  a  religious 
man,  had  never  made  a  profession,  nor  taken  an 
active  part  in  religious  meetings,  entered  upon  his 
duties  the  present  week,  '  filled  with  the  Spirit.' 

"  The  scene  on  Monday  morning,  on  reopening 
the  school,  as  related  by  him  in  one  of  our  meet- 
ings, was  one  never  to  be  forgotten.  The  opening 
exercises  had  been,  reading  the  Scriptures  and 
singing ;  but  he  proposed  on  this  occasion  adding 
prayer  also.  He  requested  all  to  bow  their  heads 
upon  their  desks  (with  which  request  every  one 
complied),  while  he  led  in  a  prayer,  which,  as 
subsequently  reported  by  one  of  his  pupils,  seemed 
divinely  inspired.  His  own  choked  utterances 
were  responded  to  by  sobs  and  tears  in  every  part 
of  the  house.  When  the  time  for  recess  arrived, 
there  seemed  to  be  no  desire  for  the  accustomed 
sports,  but  a  request  was  made  that  one  of  the 
recitation-rooms  might  be  occupied  for  a  prayer 
meeting,  where  the  recent  converts  spent  the  time 
in  praying  and  laboring  with  their  unconverted 
schoolmates,  of  whom  fifteen  or  twenty  were 
deeply  anxiot  s. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  103 

"It  was  ascertained  that  of  uinety  scholars  be- 
loughig  to  the  school,  forty-five  were  hopefully 
converted,  many  of  whom  were  giving  proof  of 
their  high  vocation  by  their  earnest  labors  to  bring 
others  to  Jesus.  Prayer  continues  to  be  oflered 
each  morning,  and  teachers  and  scholars  are  united 
in  their  efibrts  for  the  conversion  of  the  whole 
school. 

"  The  work  still  goes  on." 

It  is  believed  that  more  than  a  thousand  souls 
were  born  again  as  the  fruit  of  this  meeting,  and 
more  than  half  that  number  connected  with  the 
churches  in  the  cit}^,  and  many  with  those  in  the 
vicinity. 

Washington,  D.  C. — The  meeting  in  this  city 
was  at  the  time  of  the  second  inauguration  of 
Abraham  Lincoln,  and  yet  was  crowned  with  a 
large  blessing.  There  were  not  so  many  conver- 
sions as  in  many  other  places,  —  only  about  one 
hundred  having  given  me  their  names  as  among 
the  converts ;  still  I  think  the  work  was  glorious  in 
its  results.  The  city  was  full  of  strangers  from  all 
parts  of  our  land ;  many  of  them  were  reached  by 
the  meeting,  and  heavenly  blessings  were  bestowed 
upon  them,  which  they  carried  to  their  homes  and 
made  the  means  of  good  to  others. 

Brave  soldiers,  heroes  of  many  a  battle-field,  there 


104  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES 

put  on  the  "  armor  of  God,"  and  went  away  to  bo 
still  better  and  braver  soldiers,  nnder  the  banner  «f 
Jesus. 

But  of  all  the  sweet  memories  of  that  meetino^, 
which  come  crowding  my  mind  and  heart  eager 
for  expression,  there  is  room  in  this  sketch  for 
l)ut  one  : 

A  few  days  after  leaving  the  city  there  came  to 
me  the  following  cheering  letter  :  — 

"  Washington,  D.  C,  March  25,  1865. 

"  Dear  Brother  Earle  : 

"  Good  news  for  you  !  Night  before  last  Hon. 
Amos  Kendall  rose  in  our  meeting  and  said  he 
believed  he  was  converted  many  years  ago,  but 
obstacles  arose  which  placed  him  in  the  dark. 
Since  the  meeting  you  held,  he  had  been  very 
much  exercised. 

"  After  giving  his  views  of  religion,  and  the  duty 
of  all  believers  in  Christ,  he  said  he  was  determined 
for  the  balance  of  his  life  to  be  known  as  on  the 
Lord's  side,  and  wished  to  unite  with  the  church. 
He  referred  to  your  sermon  of  last  Sabbath,  from 
the  words,  *  Almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a 
Christian.'" 


Mr.  Kendall's  reasons  for  uniting  with  the  church 
may  best  be  learned  from  one  of  his  own  letters  ; 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  105 

and  if  they  lead  those  simihirly  situated  carefully 
to  consider  them,  the  pujlication  of  this  incident 
will  have  accomplished  its  highest  purpose  :  — 

"Washington,  D.  C,  March  31,  18G5. 

"  Rev.  a.  B.  Eahle. 

"  My  dear  Sir  :  .  .  .  I  have,  ever  since  conver- 
sion, longed  to  see  a  Christian  church,  the  members 
of  which  should  live  religion  as  well  as  profess  it. 
In  those  who  formed  the  '  Calvary  Baptist  Church  ' 
I  thought  I  saw  a  company  of  sincere  believers. 
They  were  poor,  and,  without  any  definite  purpose 
to  become  one  of  them,  I  determined  to  aid  them 
in  w^orking  out  their  destiny.   .   .   .  "" 

"The  impulse  which  decided  me  to  unite  with 
them  was,  in  part,  a  belief  that  I  could  do  more 
good  in  the  church  than  out  of  it,  and  in  part,  that 
my  position  w-as  in  efiect  a  standing  argiunent  with 
the  world  against  Christianity.  I  felt  that  I  was 
looked  upon  and  spoken  of  as  a  good  man,  but  not 
a  Christian  ;  involving  the  plain  inference,  that  to  be 
a  good  man  it  was  not  necessary  to  be  a  Christian. 

"  But,  my  dear  sir,  I  find  it  very  hard  to  recover 
that  blissful  sereiiity  which  once  pervaded  my 
whole  nature. 

"  I  ask  you  to  i  ray  for  me. 

Your  friend, 

Amos  Kendall." 


106  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

A  year  later,  in  a  letter  asking  me  to  assist  his 
pastor  in  a  series  of  meetings,  he  writes  with  much 
more  assurance  —  the  "  blissful  serenity  "  of  former 
days  was  restored.  Obedience  to  Jesus  had 
opened  his  heart  to  a  stronger  faith  and  love,  and 
in  their  train  had  come  joy  and  peace.  The  church 
had  been  to  him  a  happy  home ;  and  he  had  been  to 
it  an  active  and  strong  helper. 

Distinguished  as  have  been  the  honors  bestowed 
upon  him  for  his  services  in  our  national  affairs, 
and  widely  as  he  is  known,  his  generous  liberality 
towards  the  advancement  of  the  Redeemer's  cause 
will,  I  think,  give  a  still  more  enduring  honor  and 
precious  memory  to  the  name  of  Amos  Kendall. 


BRINGING*  IN  SHEAVES.  107 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

INCIDENTS. 

Sermon  on   a  Wood- pile. 

WHILE  I  was  holding  a  series  of  union  meet- 
ings in  Manchester,  N.  H.,  in  the  early  part 
of  1864,  a  boy,  about  fifteen  years  of  age,  who 
was  living  with  a  gentleman  ten  or  twelve  miles 
from  the  city,  came  to  visit  his  widowed  mother, 
and  attended  our  meetings.  ^ 

The  second  cveninj]^  of  his  attendance  he  decided 
to  give  himself  to  the  Savior.  This  he  did,  and  at 
once  became  an  earnest  worker  in  the  Master's  ser- 
vice. 

Soon  after  this  the  gentleman  with  whom  he  was 
living  came  to  the  city,  and  desired  him  to  go  back 
with  him.  "No,"  he  said,  "  I  cannot  go  while  these 
meetings  continue."  (No  wonder  he  felt  so  !  Tlic 
whole  city  and  region  around  were  being  moved  by 
the  power  of  the  Spirit ;  scores  and  hundreds  were 
under  conviction  for  sin  ;  and,  as  the  fruit  of  tJie 
work,  it  was  thouglit  as    many  as  fifteen  hundred 


108  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES, 

were  converted.)  But  his  mother  advised  him  to 
return,  telling  him  he  could  carry  the  Savior  with 
him.  This  placed  the  matter  in  a  new  light,  and, 
after  looking  it  all  over,  he  said,  "  Yes,  I  can  carry 
the  Savior  with  me  ;  I  will  go."  With  this  feeling 
he  returned  to  his  home  in  the  countr}^,  where  he 
soon  had  an  opportunity  for  knowing  and  showing 
to  others  whether  or  not  he  had  brought  the  Savior 
with  him.  In  the  course  of  the  day  he  went  out  to 
split  some  w^ood  ;  and,  while  he  was  thus  engaged, 
several  of  his  young  associates,  among  whom  he 
was  a  favorite,  hearing  the  sound  of  his  axe, 
gathered  around  the  wood-pile  where  he  was  at 
w^ork.  And  there,  standing  on  that  wood-pile,  and 
holding  his  axe  in  his  hand,  this  boy  delivered  a 
message  for  Jesus,  which  has  already  been  the 
means  of  bringing  hundreds  into  the  church  of 
Christ. 

The  boys  began  at  once  to  question  him  :  "  We 
hear  there  is  a  great  revival  at  Manchester ;  is  it 
true  ?  " 

"It  is  so,  boys,"  was  the  reply,  "and  I  have 
given  myself  to  Jesus,  and  wish  you  w^ould  give 
yourselves  to  him." 

They  did  not  need  long  arguments  and  repeated 
appeals  to  move  their  young  hearts,  but  responded 
at  once  to  his  invitation,  saying,  "  We  wish  we 
wfre  Christians." 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  109 

He  then  asked  them  to  go  and  get  as  many  of 
their  companions  as  they  could,  and  come  to  his 
room,  and  they  would  have  a  meeting  that  evening. 

At  the  appointed  time  a  hirge  number  of  boj^s 
came  to  his  room.  Our  young  brother  said  to 
them,  "I  will  do  just  as  Mr.  Earle  does  at  Man- 
chester." He  then  read  from  the  word  of  God  and 
prayed  with  them.  After  this,  he  said,  "  Mr.  Earle 
says  at  Manchester,  if  any  would  like  to  have 
Christians  pray  for  them,  he  would  like  to  have 
them  rise ;  so,  if  you  would  like  to  have  me  pray 
for  you,  I  wish  you  would  let  me  know."  Xcarly 
all  desired  him  to  pray  for  them,  and  many  of  them 
prayed  for  themselves  in  that  first  meeting.  God 
was  perfecting  praise  out  of  those  young  lips. 

At  the  close  of  this  meeting  they  agreed  to  meet 
again  on  the  following  evening. 

A  larger  number  were  present  at  the  second 
meeting,  among  them  a  business  man,  w4io  came  to 
listen  to  the  boys.  God's  Spirit  moved  upon  his 
heart,  and  he  was  soon  converted. 

The  work  thus  begun  continued  to  widen  until  it 
had  gone  among  all  the  churches  in  the  village,  and 
several  of  the  adjoining  villages ;  and  over  three 
hundred  were  soon  gathered  into  the  churches  in 
that  vicinity  —  all  this,  apparently,  the  fruit  of 
that  boy's  sermon  on  the   w^ood-pile.    . 

But  this  was  not  all. 


LIO  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

About  six  months  after  leaving  Manchester,  I 
was  in  a  printing-office  in  Boston,  and  there  found 
this  same  boy  setting  type.  I  asked  him  if  he  was 
learning  the  printer's  trade.  The  reply  is  well 
worthy  of  record.  Said  he,  "Mr.  Earle,  my  father 
is  dead,  and  my  mother  is  poor;  I  am  trying  to 
earn  money,  that  I  may  get  an  education  and  preach 
the  gospel." 

This  moved  my  heart.  I  thought  how  many 
rich  men  have  money  enough  and  to  spare,  while 
this  boy  is  working  hard  to  earn  a  few  dollars  to 
prepare  himself  to  preach  Christ.  Then  and  there 
I  said,  "Jesus,  I  will  do  more  for  thy  cause  than  I 
have  been  doing."  I  left  him  to  labor  on  long 
enough  to  satisfy  himself  that  it  was  not  excite- 
ment. 

A  few  months  after,  I  called  there  again,  and 
finding  he  could  leave  at  any  time,  said  to  him, 
"  Go  home  at  once,  and  ask  your  mother  to  arrange 
your  clothes ;  go  to  school,  and  prepare  for  the 
work  of  the  ministry,  and  send  your  bills  to  me  ; 
be  prudent  and  careful  in  your  expenses,  and  I  will 
see  to  your  wants,  although  it  may  require  a  sacri- 
fice on  my  part." 

This  is  now  the  third  year  since  he  commenced 
his  stfi  dies.  He  has  this  summer  entered  Dart- 
mouth College,  and,  although  he  is  a  member  of  a 
different  denomination  from  myself,  it  has  been  my 


BRiyGING  IN  SHEAVES.  HI 

privilege  so  far,  with  the  assistance  of  kind  friends, 
to  see  that  his  bills  were  paid,  and  I  hope  it  will 
be  in  my  power  to  continue  to  do  so,  until  he  is  on 
the  walls  of  Zion,  preaching  the  glorious  gospel  to 
perishing  men. 

"  We  all  must  speak  for  Jesus, 
Where'er  our  lot  may  fall ; 
To  brothers,  sisters,  neighbors, 
In  cottage,  and  in  hall." 

"Jesus  will  take  caee  of  me." 

These  were  the  last  words  uttered  by  Ella  Gil- 
key,  as  she  passed  away  from  earth,  to  live  with 
Him  who  said,  "Suffer  little  children,  and  forbid 
them  not,  to  come  unto  me ;  for  of  such  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven." 

In  the  winter  of  1860-61  I  was  holding  a  series 
of  meetings  in  Watertown,  Mass.,  during  which  a 
large  number  found  Jesus  precious  —  many  believ- 
ing they  found  him  in  my  room ;  thus  rendering 
that  room  ever  memorable  and  dear  to  me. 

Among  those  who  there  gave  themselves  to  the 
^Savior  was  Ella.  Coming  in  one  morning,  w^ith 
tears  on  her  face,  she  said,  "Mr.  Earle,  I  came  up 
here  to  give  my  heart  to  Jesus.  I  feel  that  I  am  a 
great  sinner.  Will  you  pray  for  me  ?  "  I  replied, 
"I  will  pray  for  you,  Ella,  and  I  can  pray  in  faith 


112  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

if  you  see  that  you  are  a  sinner ;  for  Jesus  died  for 
sinners." 

After  pointing  out  the  way  of  salvation,  I  asked 
her  if  she  would  kneel  down  by  my  side  and  pray 
for  herself,  and,  as  far  as  she  knew,  give  herself  to 
elesus,  to  be  his  forever. 

She  said,  "I  will ;  for  J  am  a  great  sinner." 

Could  one  so  young,  and  kind  to  everybody,  be 
a  great  sinner?  Yes,  because  she  had  rejected  the 
Savior  until  she  was  twelve  years  old ;  and  when 
the  Holy  Spirit  had  knocked  at  the  door  of  her 
heart,  she  had  said,  "No,  not  yet.  Go  thy  way 
for  this  time." 

We  kneeled  down,  and  after  I  had  prayed,  sh<3 
said,  "Jesus,  take  me  just  as  I  am.  I  give  myself 
to  thee  forever.  I  will  love  and  serve  thee  all  my 
life." 

The  door  of  her  heart  was  now  open,  and  Jesus 
entered  and  took  possession.  The  tears  were  gone 
from  her  face,  which  was  now  covered  with  smiles. 

And  I  believe  holy  angels  in  that  room  witnessed 
the  transfer  of  her  heart  to  Jesus,  and  then  went 
back  to  heaven  to  join  in  songs  of  thanksgiving ; 
for  "joy  shall  be  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that^ 
repenteth." 

Ella  then  went  down  stairs,  her  face  beaming 
with  joy  as  she  thought  of  her  new  relation  to 
Jesus,  and  said  to  her  mother,  "I  have  given  my- 


BRINGING  IN  SUEA  VES.  1 1 3 

self  to  Jesus,  and  he  has  received  me.  O,  I  am 
so  happy  !  " 

Little  did  we  think  that  in  a  few  days  she  would 
be  walking  the  "golden  streets"  with  the  blood- 
washed  throng. 

Like  the  Kedeemer,  who,  when  at  her  age,  said 
\{)  his  mother,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about 
my  Father's  business?"  she  seemed  to  long  to  be 
doing  good. 

"  '  What  can  I  do  for  Christ,'  she  said, 
*  Who  gave  his  life  to  ransom  me? 
I'll  take  my  cross,  and  by  him  led, 
His  humble,  faithful  child  will  be.'  " 

Among  other  subjects  of  prayer,  there  was  one 
which  particularly  weighed  upon  her  heart ;  it  was 
for  the  conversion  of  an  older  brother.  One  day, 
after  earnestly  praying  that  this  dear  brother 
might  be  led  to  accept  the  Savior,  she  said  to  her 
mother,  "O,  I  think  he  will  be  a  Christian  !  "  At 
another  time  she  said,  "  I  would  be  willing  to  die 
if  it  would  bring  him  to  Jesus." 

Could  she  speak  from  her  bright  home  above,  I 
believe  she  would  say  to  this  brother,  and  to  all 
who  are  delaying,  — 

"  '  Delay  not,  delay  not;  why  longer  abuse 

The  love  and  compassion  of  Jesus,  thy  God? 
A  fountain  is  opened ;  how  canst  thou  refuse 

To  wash  and  be  cleansed  in  his  pardoning  blood? '  " 

8 


114  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

Anxious  to  obey  her  Savior  in  all  things,  she 
obtained  permission  from  her  parents  to  present 
herself  to  the  church  for  baptism ;  and,  in  the 
absence  of  a  pastor,  I  baptized  her,  with  several 
others,  a  few  weeks  after  her  conversion. 

The  next  Tuesday  after  her  baptism  she  was 
present  at  our  evening  meeting,  and  gave  her  last 
public  testimony  for  Jesus.  When  an  opportunity 
was  given  for  any  one  to  speak,  Ella  arose,  and, 
turning  to  the  congregation,  said,  in  a  clear, 
earnest  tone,  "  If  there  are  any  here  who  have  not 
given  their  hearts  to  Jesus,  do  it  now." 

As  I  sat  in  ray  room  at  her  flither's  that  night, 
after  meeting,  I  heard  her  voice  mingling  with  his, 
in  songs  of  praise,  until  near  the  midnight  hour. 
Less  than  three  days  after  this,  Ella  was  called 
away  from  us,  to  sing  in  heaven  the  song  of  Moses 
and  the  Lamb. 

As  death  drew  near,  she  said  to  her  parents,  "I 
am  going  home,"  and  commenced  singing  her 
favorite  hymn :  — 

"  O,  happy  day,  that  fixed  my  choice 
On  thee,  my  Savior,  and  my  God ; 
Well  may  this  glowing  heart  rejoice, 
And  tell  its  raptures  all  abroad." 

"Yes,"  she  whispered,  "it  was  a  happy  day." 
Then  putting  her  arm    around    her  father's  neck, 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  115 

whose  heart  seemed  almost  broken,  she  said, 
"  Don't  care  for  me,  father ;  Jesus  will  take  care 
of  me." 

These  were  her  last  conscious  words ;  the  smile 
of  affection  lingered  a  little  longer  on  her  face,  the 
look  of  love  in  her  eyes,  and  its  pressure  in  her 
band,  and  then  her  spirit  took  its  flight,  mid  angel 
guards  and  guides,  leaving  behind  her  the  clearest 
evidence  of  love  to  Jesus,  and  a  worthy  example 
of  fidelity  to  him,  though  she  had  followed  him  but 
one  short  month. 

On  the  first  Sabbath  of  February  I  gave  the  hand 
of  felloAVship  to  a  large  number  of  new  members, 
and  Ella  would  have  been  with  them  had  she  lived. 
It  so  happened  that,  near  the  place  where  she 
would  have  stood,  there  was  a  vacant  spot.  I 
directed  the  attention  of  the  large  assembly  to  that 
openiug,  and  asked,  "Where  is  Ella  to-day?" 
For  a  moment  all  was  still,  and  the  entire  congre- 
gation appeared  to  be  bathed  in  tears,  when  I  said, 
"Jesus  seems  to  say,  <I  have  given  Ella  the  hand 
of  fellowship  up  here.' " 

A  few  days  after  her  death,  her  parents,  in  look-* 
Ing  over  her  portfolio,  found  she  had  written, 
xmknown  to  any  one,  in  the  middle  of  a  blank 
book,  as  if  intended  only  for  God's  eye,  the  follow- 
ing deed,  which  shows  her  depth  of  purpose  and 
complete  dedication  to  Christ :  — 


116  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

''December  21,  1860. — This  day  I  have  given 
my  heart  to  the  Savior,  and  have  resolved  to  do 
just  what  he  tells  me  to  do,  and  to  take  np  my 
cross  daily  and  follow  him,  —  my  eyes  to  weep 
over  sinners,  and  my  month  to  speak  forth  his 
pr.dse  and  to  lead  sinners  to  Christ. 

Ella  J.  Gilkey." 

And  in  the  vestry  of  the  church  at  Watertown, 
these  words,  printed  in  large  type,  and  handsomely 
framed,  now  hang  upon  the  wall,  where  all  who 
enter  may  read  them ;  so  that,  in  the  hours  of 
Sabbath  school,  and  in  the  prayer  meeting  and 
social  gathering,  Ella,  though  in  heaven,  still 
speaks,  and  continues  her  work  for  Jesus. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  117 


CHAPTER  IX. 

WHY  MUST  I  GIVE  UP  MY  WILL? 

MANY  persons  pray  and  labor  to  become 
Christians,  but  do  not  succeed,  simply  be- 
cause they  do  not  surrender  their  wills  to  God. 
The  provisions  of  the  gospel  are  ample,  Christ  is 
willing  to  receive,  and  the  Father  waits  to  embrace 
them  in  the  arms  of  his  love ;  still  the  peace  and 
joy  of  sins  forgiven  are  unknown  to  them. 

These  persons  are  sincere,  and  really  want  to  be- 
come Christians ;  but,  alas  !  many  of  them  live  and 
die  only  seekers  —  never  finding  Christ. 

Many  wonder  how  this  can  be  so :  the  reason  is, 
the  will  is  not  given  iij). 

The  seat  of  the  rebellion  against  God  is  in  the 
will.  Generally,  the  seeker  after  Christ  gives  up 
all  the  larger  objects,  but  clings  to  some  little 
thing,  in  itself  of  no  importance.  He  will  let  go 
of  the  mountain,  but  cling  to  the  straw  —  not 
realizing  that  the  will  can  have  as  firm  a  hold  upon 
the  straw  as  upon  the  mountain. 


118  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

We  often  near  men  speak  in  this  way  :  "  I  will  fol- 
low thee,  hut — "  or,  "  I  will  give  up  all,  except — "  or 
again,  "  I  will  clo  anything  eZse."  Such  seekers  will 
not  find  the  light  until  all  conditions  are  left  o  .it. 

The  following  incidents  are  given  to  ilhistrate 
what  I  have  said ;  they  also  show  all  the  impor- 
tance I  attach  to  what  is  sometimes  called 
"machinery,"  or  "measures,"  in  a  meeting. 

I. 

Some  years  ago,  while  engaged  in  a  meeting  in 
Massachusetts,  I  met  w^ith  a  lady  who  had  been  an 
earnest  and  sincere  seeker  after  Christ  for  five 
years. 

She  had  been  greatly  prejudiced  against  what 
she  called  an  "  anxious  seat ;  "  and  had  been  taught 
that  God's  pardoning  love  could  be  found  in  one 
place  as  well  as  another,  and,  consequently,  the 
particular  seat  in  a  meeting-house  could  make  no 
difierence. 

This  was  true ;  for  the  Savior  will  receive  the 
penitent  soul  at  one  time  or  place  as  readily  as  at 
another  —  at  home  alone  as  soon  as  in  public,  and 
in  a  front  seat  no  more  freely  than  in  any  other. 

"If  this  is  so,"  said  she,  "  why  ask  me  to  take  an 
anxious  seat?"  The  matter  seemed  so  clear  to  her 
own  mind,  that  she  deliberately  said,  "I  will  never 
go  to  an  anxious  seat  to  be  converted." 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  119 

With  this  feeling,  she  had  prayed  and  wept,  and 
sought  Christ  for  five  years  ;  but  all  in  vain.  Her 
prayer  had  been,  "  Thou  knowest,  O  Lord,  I  desire 
to  be  a  Christian,  and  that  one  seat  is  as  good  as 
another.  O,  then,  take  me  as  I  am  —  a  poor,  lost, 
helpless  sinner  I 

•         '  Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring ; 
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  cling.'" 

When  no  answer  came  to  her  prayer,  she  was 
almost  led  to  question  the  reliability  of  the  promise, 
"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 

As  the  revival  progressed,  a  large  number  of  her 
friends  and  acquaintances  were  converted.  Nearly 
all  of  the  choir,  of  which  she  was  a  prominent 
member,  had  found  Christ  precious  —  many  of 
them  had  gone  to  the  front  seat. 

Sometimes  she  seemed  almost  angry,  and  at 
other  times  was  bathed  in  tears ;  but  still  she  said, 
"I  will  not  go  to  an  anxious  seat." 

At  last,  one  evening,  after  scores  had  gone  for- 
ward for  prayer,  she,  while  sitting  almost  alone  in 
the  place  occupied  by  the  choir,  yielded  the  con- 
troversy, and  said,  "  I  will  give  up,  and  do  what  I 
have  so  long  said  I  would  not,  and  if  Jesus  will 
take  me  any  sooner  on  the  front  seat  than  here,  I 
will  go  there." 


120  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

But  she  learned  that  the  difficulty  was  not  in  any 
particular  part  of  the  house,  but  in  her  will ;  that 
when  this  was  given  up,  and  she  was  willing  to  go 
anywhere  oi'  do  anything  that  would  not  disgrace 
a  sinner,  then,  and  not  till  then,  would  the  Savior 
accept  her. 

As  she  came  near  the  desk,  having  Wi^lked  the 
whole  length  of  the  main  aisle,  I  asked  her  if  she 
had  come  to  take  the  oft-rejected  anxious  seat.  She 
replied  that  she  had.  Finding  that  every  front  seat 
was  occupied,  I  said  to  her,  "If  your  will  is  given 
up,  Christ  will  receive  you  in  one  place  as  soon  as 
another." 

She  then  went  to  a  little  foot-bench  near  the 
desk,  and  had  hardly  taken  her  seat  before  she 
felt  that  her  sins  were  forgiven,  and  Christ  was  her 
Savior.  The  long-sought-for  peace  was  found  at 
length,  without  her  taking  the  anxious  seat ;  but 
not  until  she  was  willing,  and  had  made  an  efibrt 
to  take  it. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  will  must  be  given  up 
before  conversion,  and  that  all  there  is  in  any  meas- 
ure, or  change  of  seats,  or  position,  is  to  test  the 
will,  and  assist  the  anxious  soul  the  sooner  to  give 
up  all  to  Jesus. 

II. 

The  folly  of  saying  "  I  will  not "  is  further  il- 
lustrated in  the  case  of  a  business  man,  of  good 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  121 

moral  character,  who  became  interested  in  one  of 
our  meetings  in  New  York. 

He  told  us  that  he  had  been  praying  and  seeking 
to  become  a  Christian  for  fifteen  years,  but  had 
said  he  never  would  go  to  a  front  seat  for  praj^er  — 
he  knew  better  than  to  do  that ;  others  had  found 
Christ  without  this  public  demonstration,  and  he 
could. 

It  was  true  others  had  found  Christ,  and  he 
could,  without  any  public  expression  of  this  kind ; 
but  it  is  also  true  that  no  one  can  be  converted  to 
God  until  he  is  willing  to  yield  every  point.    / 

Thus  determined,  this  man  had  sought,  through 
those  long  years,  the  Christian's  hope ;  but  all  in 
vain.  He  was  willing  to  take  other  steps,  Avhich 
most  persons  would  think  equally  unpleasant,  but 
was  not  willing  to  go  to  anything  called  an  "  anxious 
seat." 

One  evening  he  stood  up  in  a  large  assembly, 
and,  with  deep  feeling,  asked  the  pastor  to  pray  for 
/lim.  They  kneeled  together,  while  the  pastor 
prayed  fervently  for  his  conversion  —  the  man 
seeming  to  realize  his  lost  condition,  but  still  say- 
ing he  did  not  believe  in  going  to  any  particular 
seat ;  but  no  relief  came. 

At  length  I  asked  if  there  was  not  something 
which  he  had  not  given  up.  He  said  he  had  given 
up  all  except  a  foolish  thing,  as  he  viewed  it ;  and 


J  22  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

that  was,  his  determination  not  to  go  to  the  front 
seats  for  prayer. 

I  urged  him  to.  give  up  his  will  in  this  also,  and 
go  and  kneel  for  prayer  in  the  very  spot  he  had  so 
long  avoided.  He  looked  the  matter  over,  his 
pride  and  will  uniting  against  the  step ;  but  at  last 
he  yielded,  and  deliberately  said,  "I  wdll  do  just 
what  I  said  I  never  would."  He  started ;  but 
before  he  had  reached  the  front  seat  the  burden 
which  had  so  long  weighed  him  down  was  removed, 
and  he  felt  that  his  sins  were  forgiven  and  Jesus 
had  accepted  him  :  thus  clearly  showing  that  the 
seat,  which  he  had  not  yet  reached,  had  nothing  to 
do  with  his  conversion,  and  that  all  the  trouble  was 
in  not  yielding  his  will. 

This  brother  has  sinc*^  been  to  me  with  the  urgent 
request  that  I  would  tell  every  anxious  soul  1  met 
about  his  case,  that  they  might  not  perish  by  refus- 
ing to  give  up  their  wills. 

III. 

A  teacher  in  one  of  the  colleges  of  New  York 
was  at  his  home  for  a  vacation,  where  I  was  hold- 
ing a  series  of  meetings,  and  as  the  interest  in 
them  increased,  became  anxious  about  his  soul ; 
but,  belisving  God  would  as  readily  receive  him  in 
secret  as  if  he  made  his  feelings  known,  he  decided 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  123 

to  let  no  one  know  of  his  anxiety  until  he  was  sure 
his  sins  had  been  forgiven. 

No  matter  who  spoke  to  him  about  his  soul,  ho 
was  determined  to  manifest  no  unusual  concern 
about  the  future.  Holding  to  this  decision,  he 
prjij^ed  and  wrestled  for  weeks,  but  found  no  peace. 

It  was  not  necessary  to  let  people  kuow  of  his 
desire,  in  order  that  he  might  be  converted  to  God ; 
but  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  be  willing  to 
let  them  know. 

He  returned  to  the  college  at  the  commencement 
of  the  term,  still  desiring  to  become  a  Christian, 
but  determined  that  no  one  should  know  of  his 
feelings  until  he  had  found  the  Savior.  He  was 
ready  to  do  anything  else  —  to  part  with  every  sin, 
and  consecrate  all  to  Christ;  seemed  in  earnest, 
nnd  really  to  desire  to  be  a  child  of  God. 

He  wondered  why  one  so  sincere,  so  anxious, 
could  find  no  peace.  He  knew  of  no  reason  for 
doubting  Christ's  ability  and  willingness  to  save 
him,  and  believed  he  would  do  it  as  readily  with- 
out any  public  demonstration  as  with.  Jesus  had 
said,  "Enter  into  thy  closet,  and  when  thou  hast 
shut  thy  door,  pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in 
secret ;  and  thy  Father,  which  seeth  in  secret,  shall 
reward  thee  openly." 

He  saw  no  necessity  for  making  his  feelings 
public  until  he  was  sure  of  his  adoption  into  the 


124  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

family  of  Christ;  for  he  might  fail,  he  thought, 
and  then  would  always  regret  that  he  had  spoken 
of  his  desire. 

Here  he  discovered  the  dilBculty  —  he  had  made 
a  condition  :  No  one  should  know  he  wanted  to  be  a 
Christian  until  he  was  sure  himself  that  he  was  one. 

Thus,  hardly  knowing  it  himself,  he  had  been 
limiting  God,  by  marking  out  one  path  in  which  he 
was  not  willing  God  should  lead  him. 

Sitting  alone  in  his  study  one  evening,  and 
w^ondering  why  he  was  unable  to  enter  into  the 
"way  of  life,"  the  thought  occurred  to  him  that  the 
trouble  might  be  in  his  unwillingness  to  ask  any 
one  to  pray  for  him;  and  at  once  he  said,  "I  will 
give  up  my  way,  and  go  now  and  ask  one  of  the 
professors  Xo  pray  for  me."  He  left  his  room  for 
this  purpose,  having  given  up  all  conditions,  and 
feeling  willing  to  follow  w^herever  God  might  lead ; 
but  before  he  had  reached  the  foot  of  the  stairs  he 
received  evidence  of  sins  forgiven.  All  that  had 
seemed  so  dark  a  few  minutes  before  was  now 
bright ;  and  what  had  seemed  so  strange  through 
those  long  weeks  was  now  made  plain. 

Happy  in  the  Lord,  he  returned  to  his  room 
without  seeing  any  Christian,  or  asking  any  one  to 
pray  for  him ;  thus  showing  that  there  was  ao 
virtue  in  the  particular  act,  but  in  being  willing  to 
perform  it. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  125 

IV. 

The  presiding  judge  of  a  district  in  which  I  oDce 
held  a  meeting  became  deeply  convicted  of  sin,  and 
privately  asked  Christians  to  pray  for  him,  but, 
through  pride  and  prejudice,  he  had  become  very 
much  opposed  to  kneeling  at  a  Methodist  altar  ;  — 
the  meetings  in  that  place  were  held  in  a  Methodist 
church. 

lie  attended  the  meetings,  but  usually  sat  in  the 
back  part  of  the  house.  Once  or  twice  he  rose  for 
prayer,  but  would  not  go  to  the  altar  for  prayer. 
He  asked  one  of  the  ministers  if  he  could  not  be 
converted  without  kneeling  at  a  Methodist  altar, 
and,  of  course,  was  told  he  could.  Still  he  found 
no  peace,  although  he  sought  it  carefully  with 
tears. 

So  deeply  did  he  feel  his  sins,  that  he  sent  out  at' 
midnight  for  a  minister  he  knew,  to  pray  with  and 
for  him ;  and  they  both  prayed  earnestly,  the 
judge  knowing  Jesus  could,  and  believing  he  would, 
receive  him  without  his  going  to  the  altar;  that 
the  place  he  occupied  made  no  difference.  That 
this  was  true,  the  result  showed ;  but  it  also 
showed  that  he  could  not  be  accepted  by  Christ 
until  he  was  willing  to  go  to  that  despised  altar. 

At  that  midnight  hour,  while  the  pastor  and 
judge  were  pleading  for  the  salvation  of  the  latter, 


126  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

he  seemed  to  throw  himself  upon  the  Savior, 
saying,  "Jesus,  take  me  just  as  I  am."  In  the 
judgment  of  the  pastor  he  found  the  sought-for 
peace. 

The  next  day  two  of  the  pastors  came  to  me,  and 
said,  "We  think  the  judge  is  converted,  and  will 
let  the  congregation  know  it  this  evening,  if  you 
give  him  an  opportunity." 

I  said  I  would  give  him  a  good  opportunity  to 
speak;  but  was  sure  he  was  not  converted,  and 
could  not  be  until  he  was  willing  to  kneel  at  a 
Methodist  altar. 

In  the  evening,  after  the  sermon,  I  said,  "If 
there  is  one  present  who  thinks  God  has  forgiven 
his  sins,  we  would  like  to  hear  that  one  speak  a  few 
words."  All  eyes  were  turned  towards  the  judge  ; 
but  he  had  nothing  to  say.  We  then  bowed  in 
prayer,  the  judge  kneeling  in  the  aisle,  and  pray- 
ing for  himself  as  a  lost  sinner — this  time  giving 
up  all,  and  feeling  willing  to  go  even  to  the  spot 
to  which  he  had  so  often  refused  to  go. 

After  this  season  of  prayer  he  arose,  and,  turn- 
ing to  me,  said,  "Mr.  Earle,  I  am  now  willing  to 
go  anywhere.  I  have  found  Jesus  precious.  I  am 
willing  to  kneel  at  a  Methodist  altar,  or  do  any- 
thing Christ  wishes."  I  replied,  "  We  do  not  want 
vou  at  this  altar  if  your  will  is  given  up  ;  it  was 
only  necessary  that  you  be  willing  to  kneel  here." 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  127 

He  then  gave  clear  testimony  before  all  that  he 
had  fonnd  no  peace  until  he  was  willing  to  go  to 
that  altar;  but  the  moment  he  yielded  his  will  he 
found  peace,  without  actually  going  there. 

This  case,  like  the  others  related  in  this  chapter, 
shows  the  necessit}^  of  a  full  surrender  of  the  will 
before  conversion,  and  also  all  the  importance  that 
can  be  attached  to  "  measures." 

Many  anxious  persons  suppose  they  have  given 
up  all  until  the  will  is  tested  by  some  simple  thing 
W'hich  has  no  virtue  in  itself,  but  shows  whether 
the  individual  is  in  complete  submission  to  God 
or  not. 

I  think  it  is  well,  sometimes,  to  ask  the  inquirers 
to  meet  Christians  in  another  room,  to  stop  after 
meeting  for  conversation,  or  something  of  the  kind, 
without  adopting  any  set  of  measures :  let  the 
occasion  and  circumstances  suggest  their  own 
measures,  or  none  at  all,  according  to  the  judg- 
ment of  the  person  conducting  the  services. 

I  tind  measures,  as  they  are  called,  that  seem 
ver}^  objectionable  in  a  time  of  coldness  in  religion 
are  looked  at  quite  differently  by  the  same  persons, 
when  the  heart  is  weighed  down  w^ith  earnest  desire 
for  the  salvation  of  souls. 


128  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 


CHAPTER  X. 

SERMON.— THE  UNPARDONABLE  SIN.* 

"Ani>  whosoever    speaketh    a    word  against  the   Son   op 
man,  it  shall  be  forgiven  him  :  but  whosoever  speaketh 

AGAINST    THE    HOLT   GhOST,    IT    SHALL   NOT    BE   FORGIVEN  HIM, 
NEITHER    IN    THIS    WORLD,  NEITHER  IN  THE  WORLD  TO    COME."  — 

Matt.  xii.  32. 

EVERY  person  will  see  at  once  that  there  is  a 
difference  between  speaking  against  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  speaking  against  Jesus.  If  you  will 
look  at  the  connection  you  will  see  that  the  Phari- 
sees had  been  charging  Christ  with  being  in  league 
with  the  devil.  "Now,"  said  the  Redeemer,  "you 
can  call  me  a  devil,  and  say  I  cast  out  devils  through 
the  prince  of  devils,  and  yet  be  forgiven  ;  but  when 
my  Father  comes,  by  his  Spirit,  and  bears  testimony 
that  I  am  his  Son,  and  you  reject  that  testimony,  for 
that  sin  there  is  no  forgiveness."     One  is  speaking 


*  Delivered  Sunday  evening,  October  14,  1866,  in  Union  Hull, 
San  Francisco,  Cal. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  129 

Rjrainst  Jesus  in  the  absence  of  li^^ht,  and  the  other 
is  speaking  against  him  under  the  clear  evidence  of 
his  divinity.  I  understand  this  to  l)e  the  distinction 
between  speaking  against  Christ  and  speaking 
against  the  Holy  Giiost. 

I  know  there  are  various  opinions  about  the  un- 
purdonable  sin.  Some  suppose  it  could  only  have 
been  committed  by  those  who  saw  Christ's  miracles, 
and  heard  his  instructions  from  his  own  lips ; 
others  think  it  has  been  committed  since  that  time,  - 
but  in  very  rare  instances ;  while  others  believe 
they  have  committed  it,  and  spend  their  lives  in 
gloomy  forebodings,  unfit  for  the  service  of  G(jd  or 
the  society  of  men.  And  yet  I  believe  this  sin  has 
been  committed  in  thousands  of  instances  little  sus- 
pected. I  heard,  some  time  ago,  of  a  dying  man 
asking  a  minister  to  pray  with  him.  The  minister 
kneeled  down,  but  could  not  utter  a  word,  and  rose 
from  his  knees.  Said  the  dying  man,  "Why  will 
you  not  pray  with  me?"  The  minister  replied,  "  I 
do  not  know  why  I  could  not  speak  in  prayer,  but 
will  try  again."  He  kneeled  down  and  tried  in  vain 
to  utter  words  in  prayer.  God  has  said,  "There  is 
a  sin  unto  death  ;  I  do  not  say  you  shall  pray  for 
it."  God  does  not  always  mark  this  sin  in  this 
manner,  but  clearly  shows  us  that  when  it  is  com- 
mitted he  will  not  hear  prayer  for  it. 

I  shall  answer,  as  clearly  as  I  can,  four  questions. 
9 


130  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

1.  M^hat  is  the  unpardonable  sin? 

The  process  by  which  this  sin  is  committed  is 
very  simple  :  it  is  to  continue  to  say  "iVc>,  no,  no," 
to  the  offers  of  mercy,  until  you  are  a  sinner  let 
alone  or  given  np  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  thus 
left,  conscience  no  longer  exercises  its  functions, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  no  longer  applies  the  truth. 
When  this  state  is  reached,  the  soul  is  usually  calm 
and  quiet.  The  individual  can  then  sleep  well,  and 
go  on  with  his  business,  without  much  trouble  about 
his  soul's  salvation ;  the  conscience  is  then  measur- 
ably at  ease,  the  "spirits  light  and  gay."  He  did 
not,  does  not,  will  not,  know  or  feel  that  he  is 
doomed. 

It  is  generally  believed  that  the  Pharisees  did 
finally  succeed  in  committing  this  sin ;  and,  if  you 
will  go  with  me,  we  will  see  how  they  managed  to 
do  so.  We  see  in  their  case,  from  first  to  last,  a 
wilful  and  a  continued  rejection  of  evidence.  No 
matter  how  plain  and  conclusive  the  evidence 
Christ  gave  them  of  his  divinity,  they  said, 
"Away  with  it !  Away  with  it !  "  Look  at  a  few 
instances  of  this  rejection  of  light :  The  sisters  of 
Lazarus  sent  for  Jesus  when  their  brother  \yas  sick. 
Jesus  waited  until  Lazarus  had  been  dead  four  da^^s, 
then  went  to  the  grave,  in  the  presence  of  a  large 
number  of  these  men,  and,  when  the  stone  was  re- 
moved, Jesus  said,  "Lazarus,  come  forth."     It  is 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  131 

thought  Lazarus  lay  on  something  like  a  table,  or 
shelf,  not  in  a  coffin,  and  that  he  threw  his  feet  to 
the  ground,  raised  himself  up,  and  stood  wrapped 
in  his  grave-clothes.  Jesus  said,  "  Loose  him,  and 
let  him  go." 

This  miracle  was  laid  before  the  Pharisees,  as  if 
to  ask  them,  "  Will  you  now  receive  Jesus  as  the 
Christ?"  They  reply,  "Away  with  the  evidence  !  " 
I  ask  you,  my  hearers,  do  you  not  see  in  this  a 
wilful  rejection  of  light?  But  they  had  not  com- 
mitted the  unpardonable  sin  yet :  God  is  long  suf- 
fering. 

By  and  by  a  girl  about  twelve  years  of  age  died, 
and  was  laid  out  in  an  upper  chamber.  Jesus  went 
into  that  chamber,  and  said,  "Talitha  cumi,"  that 
is,  "Maid,  arise ;  "  and  she  was  restored  to  the  re- 
joicing family.  "Pharisees,  will  you  now  embrace 
me  as  your  Savior?"  "Away  with  him!  Away 
with  him  !  "     But  it  was  not  yet  too  late. 

After  this  a  young  man  died,  and  was  being  car- 
ried on  a  bier  to  the  grave.  Jesus  approached  that 
bier,  and  said,  "Young  man,  arise  ; "  and  the  young- 
man  arose,  and  was  restored  to  his  friends.  This 
evidence  of  Christ's  divinity  was  also  rejected,  and 
Jesus  still  waiting  to  be  gracious. 

The  Pharisees  heard  that  Christ  was  a  little  out 
of  tovn,  preaching,  and  they  sent  officers  to  arrest 
him.     I  should  not  wonder  if  those  officers  carried 


132  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

with  them  chains  and  handcuffs,  to  bind  him  if 
necessary  ;  but  after  listening  to  him  a  few  minules 
they  were  deeply  affected,  and  returned  without 
him.  The  Pharisees  inquired,  "  Why  have  ye  not 
brought  him?"  "Never  man  spake  as  this  man," 
jaid  the  officers.  Why  did  not  the  Pharisees  say, 
"Officers,  if  you  think  he  is  the  Redeemer  of  lost 
men,  we  will  weigh  the  evidence"?  But  no  :  they 
say,  "We  will  not  receive  him,  if  even  our  own 
officers  are  converted  to  him."  They  cry,  "Away 
with  him  I "  O,  the  deep  depravity  of  the  human 
heart !  Yet  they  had  not  rejected  half  the  light 
that  we  have.  But  there  was  mercy  for  these  men 
yet. 

Christ  was  brought  before  Pilate  to  be  con- 
demned; but,  after  a  fair  examination,  Pilate  said, 
"I  find  no  fiiult  in  him;  I  will,  therefore,  release 
Jesus  unto  you."  But  they  cried,  "Not  this  man, 
but  Barabbas."  Pilate,  therefore,  went  back  into 
the  hall,  and  asked  him  if  he  was  the  Son  of  God. 
Jesus  satisfied  him  of  his  divinity.  Then  Pilate 
took  a  basin  of  water  and  washed  his  hands  in 
their  presence,  and  said,  "Take  ye  him  and  crucify 
him  :  I  find  no  fault  in  him."  The  Pharisees  said, 
"His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  children."  Then 
Pilate  delivered  him  to  them  to  be  crucified,  and 
the  soldiers  led  him  away. 

After  he  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  a  very  affecting 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  133 

scene  fo  lowed,  which  gave  clear  evidence  of  Christ's 
divinity.  As  the  blood  streamed  from  his  hands 
and  feet,  Jesus  cried,  *•  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me?"  The  great  veil  or  curtain  of 
the  temple  was  torn  from  top  to  bottom,  and  the 
sun  seemed  to  muffle  its  face  for  three  hours  over 
the  dying  Jesus ;  the  graves  were  opened  around 
Jerusalem  :  and  so  fully  did  the  Father  vindicate  the 
Son,  that  even  the  captain  of  the  guards  smote  upon 
his  breast,  and  said,  "  Surely  this  was  the  Son  of 
God."  Christ  here  evidently  saw  the  sword  of 
divine  wrath  raised  to  strike  his  murderers  down, 
and  cried,  "Father,  forgive  them ;  they  know  not 
what  they  do."  That  is,  "Father,  my  murderers 
have  not  all  the  evidence  of  my  divinity  I  am  go- 
hig  to  give  them." 

They  went  to  Pilate,  and  said  (O,  what  bitterness 
against  Christ !),  "  We  remember  that  deceiver  said, 
if  we  put  him  to  death,  the  third  day  he  would  rise 
again ;  now  we  want  a  guard,  in  order  to  make  him 
secure  until  three  days  are  past,  that  we  may  prove 
him  to  be  an  imposter."  A  heavy  guard  of  Koman 
soldiers  was  furnished,  and  Christ's  dead  body  put 
in  a  new  tomb,  and  guarded  from  Friday  night  until 
Sunday  morning.  Jesus  was  sweetly  sleeping  in 
the  embrace  of  death  all  this  time  :  thus  teaching 
his  children  that  the  grave  is  not  a  gloomy  place  to 
those  who  love  God. 


134  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

Sunday  morning  the  Futher  seemed  to  say  to  one 
of  the  angels,  "You  can  now  go  and  roll  away  the 
stone."  The  angel  flew  to  the  sepulchre,  and  rolled 
back  the  stone,  and  sat  down  upon  it,  I  think,  with 
folded  wings,  and  doubtless  said  in  his  heart,  "How 
much  depends  on  the  resurrection  of  that  body  I " 
While  the  angel  sat  looking  upon  the  corpse,  tlie 
Savior  arose,  as  if  it  had  been  from  a  sweet  night's 
rest,  and  walked  out,  in  the  presence  of  the  sol- 
diers. The  soldiers  went  to  the  Pharisees  and  told 
them  that  Christ  had  done  as  he  said ;  that  he  had 
just  arisen  from  the  dead  in  their  presence.  This 
was  soon  hushed,  and  the  soldiers  were  paid  large 
sums  of  money  to  swear  that  his  disciples  had  stolen 
him  away  while  they  were  asleep.  All  this  evi- 
dence they  rejected,  and  still  could  be  forgiven. 

One  more  proof  of  Christ's  divinity  was  to  be 
given  them  by  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  after  his 
ascension.  This  was  done  ten  days  after  his  de- 
parture, in  a  wonderful  manner,  adding  three  thou- 
sand to  the  Messiah's  kingdom  in  a  single  day. 
The  Pharisees,  by  rejecting  this  last  evidence,  to- 
gether with  all  that  had  preceded,  seemed  to  fix  the 
black  seal  of  death  upon  their  souls.  O,  the  doom 
of  the  sinner  when  God  has  giveji  him  up  !  Then 
he  is  a  sinner  let  alone. 

2.  I  will  now  notice,  very  briefly,  the  inquiry, 
What  persons  can   commit  the  unpardonable  sin? 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  135 

If  what  1  biive  just  said  is  true,  then  any  one  who 
can  deliberately  reject  the  offers  of  mercy,  and  say 
2io  to  Christ's  invitations,  is  in  danger  of  being  left 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  perish. 

Our  danger  is  greater  than  the  Pharisees'  was, 
because  we  have  more  light  than  they.  All  the 
evidence  they  had  of  Christ's  divinity  we  have, 
together  with  the  accumulated  evidence  of  eighteen 
hundred  years. 

"In  the  cross  of  Christ  I  glory, 

Towering  o'er  the  wrecks  of  time; 
All  the  light  of  sacred  story- 
Gathers,  round  its  head  sublime." 

All  this  light  is  shining  around  your  pathway ; 
and  it  the  Pharisees  could  commit  this  sin,  how 
much  more  easily  can  you  commit  it,  young  man, 
or  young  woman.  I  do  not  know  why  you  have 
rejected  the  Savior  so  long  and  so  often.  Do  think 
of  it  I  how  many  times  you  have  said  JVo  to  the 
calls  of  the  gospel.  O,  your  peril !  I  hope  it  is 
not  too  late  !     Do  not  say  JVo  to  this  call  to-night. 

3.  How  does  this  sin  show  itself  after  it  has 
been  committed? 

Generally  it  shows  itself  in  one  of  two  ways. 
One  is,  by  calling  out  the  malignity  of  the  heart 
against  Christ  and  his  people.  In  this  state,  noth- 
ing torments  the  sinner  more  than  a  revival  of 
religion.     The  very  ringing  of  the  bells  that  call 


136  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

Christians  to  .the  house  of  prayer  annoys  him : 
nothing  is  too  severe  for  him  to  say  against 
religion. 

But  the  most  ordinary  way  in  which  this  sin 
show^s  itself  is,  by  shutting  up  the  heart  in  indif- 
ference, so  that  the  one  who  has  committed  it  has 
no  feeling  on  the  subject,  no  fears,  no  trouble ;  has 
no  idea  that  he  has  committed  this  sin,  but  is 
perfectly  calm  and  easy.  The  terrors  of  the  law 
cause  no  alarm.  Christ's  claims  on  him  do  not 
move  him.  In  fact,  no  view  of  religion  troubles 
him ;  he  is  at  ease ;  he  is  not,  as  many  suppose,  in 
great  distress  for  fear  he  has  committed  this  sin ; 
full  of  gloom  and  fearful  forebodings,  fearing  it 
is  too.  late  for  him  to  be  saved.  It  does  not  show 
itself  in  this  way,  but,  on  the  contrary,'  removes 
fear ;   he  is  a  sinner  let  alone. 

We  often  find  persons  near  death  without  re- 
ligion, and  yet  without  fear.  If  asked  a  few 
minutes  before  death  if  they  would  like  to  have  a 
Christian  pray  with  them,  they  say.  No ;  or  if  they 
would  like  to  have  the  Bible  read  to  them,  they  do 
not  wish  to  see  the  Bible.  Ask  them  if  they  are 
not  afraid  to  meet  God,  they  say  they  are  not  in 
the  least ;  they  are  ready  to  meet  him  any  minute. 
In  this  state,  there  is  great  reason  to  fear  that  the 
sin  in  question  has  been  committed. 

Wc  find  many  church  members,  and  others  who 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  137 

have  been  church  members,  in  this  indifferent  state. 
They  do  not  weep  over  the  unconverted,  nor  warn 
them  as  though  they  felt  for  them  tit  all.  Where 
this  has  continued  long,  it  is  a  bad  indication : 
such  professors  should  be  alarmed.  Do  I  speak 
to  one  in  this  indifferent  state?  O  that  I  could 
sound  a  note  of  alarm,  that  might  reach  a  tender 
chord  in  your  heart,  and  break  this  spell  of  in- 
difference ! 

I  do  not  know  that  I  can  show  how  this  sin 
manifests  itself,  better  than  by  repeating  those 
beautiful  lines  of  Dr.  Alexander  ;  — 

**  There  is  a  line  by  us  unseen 
That  crosses  every  path  — 
The  hidden  boundary  between 
God's  patience  and  his  wrath. 

"  To  pass  that  limit  is  to  die  — 
To  die  as  if  by  stealth ; 
It  does  not  quench  the  beaming  eye, 
Nor  pale  the  glow  of  health. 

"The  conscience  may  be  still  at  ease, 
The  spirits  light  and  gay ; 
That  which  is  pleasing  still  may  please, 
And  care  be  thrust  away. 

"  But  on  that  forehead  God  has  set 
Indelibly  a  mark, 
Unseen  by  man,  for  man,  as  yet, 
Is  blind  and  in  the  dark. 


138  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

**  Indeed,  the  doomed  one's  path  below 
May  bloom  as  Eden  bloomed; 
He  did  not,  does  not,  will  not  know, 
Or  feel  that  he  is  doomed. 

"  He  feels,  perchance,  that  all  is  well, 
And  every  fear  is  calmed ; 
He  lives,  he  dies,  he  wakes  in  hell  — 
Not  only  doomed,  but  damned. 

"0,  where  is  that  mysterious  bourn 
By  which  our  path  is  crossed, 
Beyond  which  God  himself  has  sworn. 
That  he  who  goes  is  lost  ?  " 

Let  me  entreat  you,  my  dear  hearer,  if  it  is  not 
too  late,  if  God's  patience  is  not  exhausted  by  your 
long-continued  rejection  of  his  offers  of  mercy,  if 
one  faint  wish  or  desire  lingers  in  your  bosom  to 
become  a  Christian,  cherish  it  as  you  would  the 
last  ray  of  hope  of  heaven.  Let  everything  go 
until  you  find  Christ  precious.  To-morrow  it  may 
be  too  late,  even  if  life  is  spared.  Your  situation 
may  be  like  that  of  a  man  of  whom  I  lately  heard, 
who  entered  a  dark,  winding  cave,  carrying  with 
him  a  lamp  and  ball  of  twine.  That  he  might  find 
his  way  out  of  the  cave,  in  case  his  light  went  out, 
he  fastened  one  end  of  the  twine  outside,  and  un- 
wound it  as  he  walked  into  the  cave.  In  this  man- 
ner he  had  gone  a  long  distance  into  those  dark 
recesses,  sometimes  climbing  over   rugged  rocks, 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  I39 

and  then  descending  into  low,  damp  passages,  until 
at  length  he  entered  a  large  and  spacious  apartment, 
containing  very  rare  and  beautiful  curiosities. 
Desiring  to  bring  from  the  cave  some  of  these  rich 
treasures,  he  set  down  his  lamp,  and  placed  his 
ball  by  it  —  only  for  a  moment.  While  breaking 
off  a  stalactite  of  peculiar  beauty,  his  lamp,  by 
some  means,  tipped  over  and  went  out.  Supposing 
he  could  easily  tind  his  lamp  and  ball  of  twine,  he 
commenced  feeling  about  in  the  dark  cave  :  but  his 
efforts  were  in  vain.  No  human  ear  was  there  to  hear 
his  cries  for  help,  as  he  crawled  lirst  in  one  direc- 
tion and  then  in  another,  searching  for  that  thread. 
Could  he  but  grasp  again  that  weak,  that  little 
thread,  it  would  lead  him  back  to  the  sunlight, 
never  before  so  dear. 

Long,  weary  days  and  nights  were  spent  search- 
ing for  that  only  ray  of  hope ;  but  all  to  no  purpose 
—  he  was  never  again  to  look  upon  the  faces  of  the 
dear  ones  at  home.  His  lifeless  body  was  found  in 
that  dark  cavern  lons^  afterwards. 

O,  what  reflections  he  must  have  had  when 
starving  and  dying  in  that  cave  !  What  would  he 
not  have  given,  could  he  have  held  once  more  that 
thread  in  his  trembling  fingers.  But  the  light  once 
gone  out,  his  doom  w^as  fixed  —  he  must  perish. 

So,  my  dear  hearer,  you  have  a  little  desire  at 
this  hour  to  become  a  Christian.     The  Holy  Spirit, 


140  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

though  often  grieved  and  insulted  by  your  rejec- 
tion of  his  kind  and  earnest  entreaties  to  embrace 
Jesus,  still  shines  in  the  dark  recesses  of  your  soul. 
As  in  the  cave,  when  the  light  went  out,  the  thread 
was  lost,  so  when  the  Spirit  leaves  you,  the  silken 
thread  of  desire  is  lost,  and  you  are  in  the  dark 
cave  of  sin  without  a  guide  to  lead  you  out  to  hope 
and  heaven;  and  your  lamentation  will  be,  "The 
harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is  ended,  and  we  are 
not  saved." 

But  I  must  answer  the  fourth  question. 

4.  Why  cannot  this  sin  be  forgiven  as  well  as 
others?  If  the  blood  of  Christ  cleanses  from  all 
sin,   why  not  from  this? 

It  is  not  because  the  person  is  a  greater  sinner 
than  others,  but  because  he  rejects  the  only  remedy 
God  has  for  his  sins,  and  continues  this  rejection 
until  he  is  a  sinner  let  alone ;  then  conscience  does 
not  exercise  its  functions,  and  the  Spirit  ceases  to 
apply  the  truth,  and  he  must  perish. 

You  remember  the  fiery  flying  serpent  that  came 
among  the  Israelites.  When  it  struck  a  man,  it 
was  certain  death ;  no  remedy  could  be  found ; 
every  person  stung  died.  Moses  went  to  God  for 
a  remedy.  God  said  to  him,  Take  a  piece  of 
brass,  of  the  shape  and  size  of  the  fiery  serpent,  and 
raise  it  on  a  pole,  and  when  any  man,  rich  or  poor, 
aged  or  younir,  cries  out,  "I  am  stung!"  tell  him 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  141 

to  look  at  that  piece  of  brass.  That  was  God's 
remedy  —  the  only  one  in  the  world.  All  who 
looked  M  ere  cnrcd.  Every  one  knows  the  brass 
could  not  remove  the  poison,  but  was  a  type  of  the 
Redeemer  on  the  cross  —  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the 
serpent,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up." 

Suppose  a  man  to  cry  out,  "I  am  stung,  but  will 
not  do  anything  unless  I  can  give  a  reason  for  it." 
He  will  not  look  at  that  piece  of  brass  for  a  remedy, 
but  rejects  it,  and  puts  it  under  his  feet,  and  then 
prays  for  help.  God  would  say  to  him,  "Your 
disease  is  incurable,  for  the  simple  reason  that  you 
have  rejected  the  only  remedy  that  can  remove  the 
poison." 

So  the  sinner  has  only  to  reject  the  gospel  of 
Christ  and  the  olfers  of  mercy,  until  the  grieved 
Spirit  takes  his  final  departure,  and  God  has  given 
him  up ;  then  his  sin  is  unpardonable,  because  he 
has  rejected  the  only  way  by  which  God  can 
save  him. 

O,  how  deeply  do  I  now  feel  the  solemnity  of 
this  hour,  with  three  or  four  thousand  precious 
souls  before  me.  Perhaps  many  of  you  are  making 
the  final  decision,  whether  you  will  embrace  the 
Savior  now,  or  again  say,  "  Go  thy  way  for  this 
time."  Let  me  urge  you  not  to  say  it,  but  open 
yo  ur  heart  now  to  the  Holy  Spirit. 

*'  0,  grieve  hiiu  not  away, 
*Tis  Mercy's  hour." 


142  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

I  think  I  feel  as  the  nurse  did,  in  the  hospital, 
with  his  thumb  on  the  great  artery,  while  a  wounded 
soldier  arranged  his  matters  to  die. 

After  a  severe  battle,  a  soldier  had  his  limb 
amputated  very  near  his  body.  The  veins  had  been 
taken  up,  and  he  seemed  to  be  doing  well ;  but  on 
one  occasion,  as  the  nurse  was  dressing  his  wounds, 
the  blood  began  to  flow  freely.  The  nurse  held  the 
vein  with  his  thumb,  and  sent  for  a  physician,  who, 
on  entering  the  room,  said,  "It  is  well,  my  brave 
fellow,  that  it  was  not  the  large  artery  —  I  can  take 
this  up."  A  short  time  after,  the  blood  flowed 
more  freely  than  before,  and  the  skilful  nurse, 
placing  his  thumb  this  time  on  the  large  artery, 
which  had  broken  open,  sent  again  for  the 
physician. 

After  a  careful  examination  of  the  whole  matter, 
it  was  decided  that  the  artery  could  not  be  taken 
up  without  removing  the  thumb  of  the  nurse  ;  and 
if  his  thumb  was  removed,  the  soldier  must  die 
immediately. 

It  only  remained  for  the  brave  man  to  make 
immediate  arrangements  for  death.  About  three 
hours  were  employed  in  sending  messages  to  loved 
ones,  and  in  arranging  his  efiects  before  he  left  the 
world.  When  this  was  done  —  the  nurse  still 
holding  the  vein,  and  knowing  that  death  would 
follow  in  three  minutes  after  lifting  his  thumb  — 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  143 

the  brave  but  dying  soldier  said,  "  Now,  kind  nurse, 
you  can  take  ofl'  your  thumb  :  I  must  go.  Fare- 
well to  all." 

Now  came  the  severe  trial  to  the  nurse  —  how 
could  he  lift  his  thumb  under  such  circumstances  ! 
The  accumulated  blood  already  rendered  it  dif- 
ficult to  hold  the  artery ;  so,  turning  his  eye  from 
the  soldier,  he  lifted  his  thumb,  and  in  three 
minutes  death  had  done  its  work. 

I  think  I  feel  very  much  as  this  nurse  did  —  fear- 
ing, as  I  do,  that  with  many  in  this  congregation 
the  crisis  has  come  when  you  are  to  decide  where 
you  will  spend  eternity.  I  fear  this  is  for  some  of 
you  the  line 

"That  marks  the  destiny  of  men 
For  glory  or  despair." 

As  the  nurse  felt  that  he  could  not  lift  his  thumb, 
and  yet  must,  so  with  me  now  —  How  can  I  close 
this  sermon,  and  end  this  entreaty,  without  know- 
ing that  you  will  not  grieve  the  Spirit  away  this 
time? 

Let  me  ask  the  Eecording  Angel  to  hold  his  pen, 
while  each  one  of  you  in  this  hall  decides  the  ques- 
tion—  whether  you  will  cherish  what  little  desire 
you  have  to  become  Christ's,  what  little  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  influence  still  lingers  about  your 
heart,  or  say,  "Go  thy  way  for  this  time,"  which 
may  be  forever  ! 


144  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

But  I  must  not  linger.  Let  me  request  every 
person  in  the  hall  —  whether  professor  of  religion 
or  not  —  who  intends  to  cherish  what  desire  he 
has  to  serve  God,  to  rise  on  his  feet. 

Thank  God,  nearly  every  one  present  has  risen  ! 
May  God  help  us  all  to  keep  our  resolution,  for 
Jesus'  sake. 

Amen. 

At  the  close  of  this  sermon,  a  short  time  was 
tspent  in  silent  prayer,  after  which  it  was  believed 
not  less  than  five  hundred  persons  requested  us  to 
pray  that  they  might  receive  forgiveness  of  sin. 
As  nearly  as  I  can  ascertain,  not  less  than  five 
thiyusand  souls  have  been  brought  to  embrace 
Christ  throuojh  the  intluence  of  this  sinojle  sermon. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  I45 


CHAPTER  XI. 

FIREMEN'S   MEETING. 

ONE  evening,  during  a  series  of  meetings  held 
with  the  Second  Baptist  church  in  Brooklyn, 
N.  Y.,  I  preached,  by  special  appointment,  to  the 
firemen,  and  have  thought  it  might  be  interesting 
and  profitable,  instead  of  a  general  account  of  the 
meeting,  to  quote  from  the  "  Daily  Eagle "  of 
March  12,  1858,  the  following  report  of  the 
sermon :  — 

"  Last  evening  the  members  of  Neptune  Engine 
Company,  No.  7,  of  Brooklyn,  attended  in  a  body 
the  Second  Baptist  church,  on  Leonard  Street,  to 
listen  to  a  sermon  by  Rev.  A.  B.  Earle.  As  the 
announcement  was  made  public,  the  attendance  at 
the  church  was  so  great  that  nearly  half  that  came 
could  not  get  inside. 

"  The  services  were  opened  by  prayer,  followed 
by  singing,   after  which   Mr.   Earle   delivered  his 
discourse.     He  spoke  in  a  plain  but  earnest  man- 
ner, engaging  the  deep  attention  of  his  audience. 
10 


146  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

"  The  text  selected  was  from  Mark  ix.  44 : 
*  Where  the  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not 
quenched.'  He  said  he  should  call  their  attention 
more  particularly  to  the  latter  clause  of  the  text. 
He  thought  nothing  would  grieve  them  more  than 
to  meet  with  a  fire  which  they  could  not  put  out ; 
they  would  go  home  sorrowful  at  heart  should  such 
an  event  happen  to  them.  They  had  often  met 
and  subdued  this  enemy  —  fire ;  they  had  always 
quenched  it ;  but  he  should  speak  to  them  of  a  fire 
which  could  never  be  quenched. 

"  He  then  divided  his  text  into  two  parts  ;  first, 
What  the  worm  is  that  dieth  not,  and  why  it  does 
not  die ;  second,  What  the  fire  is  that  is  not 
quenched,  and  why  it  is  not  quenched. 

"The  worm  that  never  dies  is  guilty  memory, 
—  the  remembrance  of  past  guilt.  Memory  is 
like  a  living,  gnawing  worm,  producing  a  restless 
pain  in  the  soul,  as  a  gnawing  worm  would  do  in 
the  vitals  of  the  body.  Impressions  once  made 
upon  the  mind  can  never  be  eflaced.  A  name  once 
heard  or  mentioned,  though  forgotten  for  a  time, 
will  return  in  after  years  when  circumstances  shall 
recall  it.  Incidents  of  childhood  carry  their  recol- 
lection to  the  grave.  Memory  is  active  when  all 
else  is  still.  In  moments  of  peril  the  memory  is 
more  vivid  and  active,  and  thoughts  of  the  past 
crowd  upon  the  brain  with  inconceivable  rapidity. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  147 

"Instances  are  often  related  of  men  in  peril,  by 
sea  or  land,  who  have  seen  the  events  of  former 
days  recalled  by  memory ;  words  and  deeds  they 
had  thought  forgotten  have  returned  to  them ; 
(heir  past  life  has  seemed  to  come  before  their 
mental  vision  with  startling  reality.  When  the 
soul  shall  have  dropped  its  fetters,  and  passed 
beyond  the  restraints  of  flesh,  memory  will  still  be 
fresh  and  active.  This  memory  which  tenants  the 
body  during  life,  and  clings  to  the  spirit  hereafter, 
is  the  gnawing  of  the  deathless  worm.  This  worm 
draws  all  its  nourishment  from  this  world. 

"  He  cited  as  an  instance  of  the  activity  of  mem- 
ory, and  its  effects,  the  case  of  a  prisoner  who  was 
removed  from  one  prison  to  another,  where  the 
treatment  w^as  better.  The  man  said  he  did  not 
like  the  new  prison  as  well  as  the  old  one,  although 
he  did  not  have  to  work  as  hard,  had  better  food 
and  kinder  keepers ;  but  in  the  new  prison  the 
convicts  were  not  allowed  to  speak  to  each  other ; 
and  in  this  terrible  silence  his  memory  was  ever 
active  —  it  was  all  thinks  thinks  think.  So  it  will 
be  hereafter:  we  shall  be  constantly  thinking. 
We  should  therefore  be  careful  how  we  store  the 
memory,  since  its  recollections  will  ever  be  present 
with  us. 

"  In  the  second  part  of  his  discourse  he  con- 
sidered the  fire  that  can  never  be  quenched. 


148  BRxNQING   IN  SHEAVES. 

"  They  might  believe  that  no  fire  could  break  out 
in  the  city  which,  by  their  skill  and  activity,  they 
could  not  put  out ;  and  their  fellow-citizens,  con- 
fident in  their  ability,  went  to  their  repose,  feeb'ng 
that  by  the  vigilance,  tact,  and  energy  of  the  fire- 
men their  lives  and  property  were  secure.  But 
there  is  a  fire  that  cannot  be  quenched:  it  is 
remorse,  or  the  realization  of  our  sin  in  the  dark 
world  of  despair.  The  Savior  says  it  is  better  to 
have  but  one  eye  than  to  be  cast  into  hell,  where 
the  worm  dieth  not  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched. 

"  The  fire  of  God's  wrath  is  the  sinner's  realiza- 
tion of  his  wickeduess,  and  a  guilt}^  remembrance 
of  the  past.  The  reason  this  fire  cannot  be 
quenched  is,  there  is  nothing  there  with  which  to 
quench  it.  Suppose  a  building  was  wrapped  in 
flames,  and  the  firemen  brought  their  engines  to 
the  spot,  but  could  find  no  water ;  they  would  be 
powerless,  however  good  their  intentions.  So  with 
the  fire  of  God's  wrath  —  the  guilty  remembrance 
in  the  world  of  despair :  there  will  be  nothing 
with  which  to  put  it  out ;  there  is  nothing  here 
that  can  quench  it  but  the  blood  of  Jesus. 

"He  called  their  attention  to  the  heroic  fireman, 
young  Sperry,  of  New  Haven,  who  went  into  a 
burning  building  to  save  a  child  supposed  to  be 
there,  and  lost  his  own  life.  He  felt  assured  there 
was  not  one  among  that  company  whom   he  ad- 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  I49 

dressed  but  would  rush,  as  Spcrry  did,  into  the 
flames  to  save  a  fellow-creature's  life.  So  if  he 
(^the  speaker),  by  rushing  into  the  flames  of  per- 
dition, could  drag  a  brother  out  of  the  fire,  how 
readily  would  he  do  it. 

"An  Indian,  who  had  been  converted,  was  ask  ad 
by  a  white  man  to  describe  how  religion  came  to 
him.  He  led  the  while  man  out  to  the  woods,  and 
gathering  some  dry  leaves,  arranged  them  in  a 
circle,  and  put  a  little  worm  in  the  centre  of  it. 
He  then  set  the  leaves  on  tire.  The  worm  sought 
escape,  first  on  one  side,  then  on  another,  but  there 
was  no  way  out;  so,  drawing  itself  again  to  the 
centre  of  the  circle,  it  sank  into  a  numb  and  listless 
state.  The  Indian  then  lifted  the  woi'm  from  the 
fire  with  his  fingers,  and  said,  *  This  is  the  way 
God  saved  me  !  Jesus  plucked  me  out  of  the 
flames."  So  nothing  but  the  hand  of  God  can  save 
any  one ;  nothing  but  the  blood  of  Jesus  can 
quench  the  tires  of  a  guilty  soul. 

"  To  be  saved  we  must  be  born  again.  Some 
people  suppose  they  would  be  happy  if  they  could 
get  to  heaven.  They  are  mistaken;  they  could 
not  be  happy  there,  unless  this  fire  within  them 
had  been  quenched  here.  A'  guilty  soul  in  heaven 
would  be  like  a  convicted  murderer  pardoned  at 
the  last  moment  by  the  governor  of  a  state.  He  is 
nt)W  a  free   man,   and  the   law  cannot  touch   him. 


150  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

He  returns  to  his  home  and  his  family.  His  wife 
welcomes  him  back  with  joy,  and  his  children  gather 
around  him.  Still  he  cannot  be  happy  :  conscious- 
ness of  guilt  haunts  him.  The  governor  may  par- 
don, but  cannot  justify.  Eemorse  preys  upon  him, 
and  he  feels  that  he  cannot  stay  in  that  happy  home 
—  it  is  no  place  for  him  while  blood  is  on  his  soul. 

"  The  preacher  then  drew  a  metaphor,  strikingly 
applicable  to  his  hearers,  illustrating  the  free 
agency  of  man  in  his  own  salvation. 

"  Suppose  the  exterior  of  a  building  was  con- 
structed of'  fire-proof  materials ;  fire  could  not 
reach  it  on  the  outside,  and  it  could  be  opened 
only  from  the  inside.  Suppose  this  building  should 
take  fire  from  the  inside,  and  yon  knew  there  was 
a  citizen  within,  liable  to  perish  in  the  flames. 
You  would  go  there  with  your  engine,  and  seek  to 
save  him ;  but  you  could  not  reach  the  flames  from 
the  outside,  and  could  do  nothing  unless  the  man 
opened  the  door.  If  he  would  be  saved,  he  must 
open  the  door,  and  that  speedil}^,  for  the  flames 
were  gathering  closer  around  him  each  minute.  So 
it  is  with  each  of  us  —  every  man  holds  the  key  of 
the  door  to  his  own- heart.  Jesus  says  to  every 
one,  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock;  if  you 
will  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  and  save  you. 

"  There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood  that  will 
extinguish  this  fire,  and  it  will  be  poured  upon  the 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  151 

guilty  soul  if  the  door  is  opeued ;  for  the  blood  of 
Christ  cleanscth  from  all  sin.  But  when  we  pass 
out  of  this  world  this  blood  cannot  be  obtained,  and 
the  fire  cannot  be  quenched. 

"  Mr.  Earle,  after  thanking  the  audience  for  their 
attention,  concluded  with  an  earnest  exhortation  to 
them  to  seek  for  the  truth  and  light  of  the  gospel. 

"At  the  close  of  the  sermon  the  cono^reofation 
were  invited  to  remain  for  a  prayer  meeting  which 
would  follow ;  many  of  the  visitors  left,  but  the 
firemen  kept  their  seats  until  the  meeting  closed." 


152  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

LETTERS  FROM  YOUNG  CONVERTS  AND  OTHERS. 

WE  give  the  following  letter  from  little  Sadie, 
as  written  by  her  mother,  in  Sadie's  simple 
words :  — 

"  Tell  brother  Earle  I  am  sorry  that  he  is  go- 
ing away.  Tell  him  I  will  pray  for  him  twice 
a  day,  and  he  must  not  forget  to  pray  for  little 
Sadie.  I  feel  so  very  happy  this  beautiful  day.  Tell 
him  that  I  love  Jesus  better  than  any  body  in  the 
wide  world.  I  love  my  own  angel  Georgie,  that 
went  to  Jesus  when  papa  was  in  the  war.  I  want 
to  see  Jesus  holding  our  little  lamb  in  his  arms ; 
for  Georgie  prayed,  and  I  will  always  pray  to  Jesus. 
Tell  him  that  when  I  went  to  tell  my  dear  teacher 
that  I  was  going  to  give  my  heart  to  Jesus,  the 
devil  said  to  me,  *  Don't  go;  don't  do  it,  Sadie.' 
But  I  said,  *  Yes,  I  will.'  And  when  I  came  home, 
and-  knelt  down  at  the  bed,  and  prayed,  he  came 
again,  and  said,  *  Don't  pray.'  But  1  said,  'I  will,' 
and  1  did,  and  felt  so  happy.     Tell  him  I  will  try 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  153 

and  be  a  good  girl,  and  then  I  \vill  see  them  all  in 

heaven. 

Your  little  friend, 

Sadie. 

**  Dayton,  Ohio,  January  29,  18G6." 


A  family  letter,  signed  by  the  father,  mother, 
and  three  children  :  — 

"Hartford,  December  26,  1864. 

"  Dear  Brother  Earle  :  The  love  of  Christ 
coiistraineth  us  to  declare  to  you  that  our  hearts 
have  burned  within  us  while  you  have  talked  with 
us  and  opened  to  us  the  Scriptures.  Our  souls  are 
drawn  out  towards  you,  as  we  believe  you  are  one 
of  our  blessed  Saviors  reflectors  to  our  race. 
When  you  came  among  us,  two  of  our  number 
were  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd ;  but  now  we 
trust  that  we  are  all  pursuing  the  way  to  the  fold 
on  high.  God  grant  that  we  ma}^  meet  each  other 
there." 

Ohio  letter ;  sent  with  a  pair  of  socTcs. 

♦'  Dayton,  January  29,  1866. 

•*Dear  Brother  Earle:  Will  you  accept  this 
pair  of  homespun  socks  —  made  of  Ohio  wool, 
spun  and  knit,  primitive   style,  b}^    'Buckeye'  in- 


154  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

dustry,  insured  to  be  warm  and  durable,  but  far 
less  so  than  the  friendship  of  your  many,  many 
friends  in  Ohio  ?  I  need  not,  like  the  old  lady  who 
knit  socks  for  the  soldiers,  attach  a  note,  saying  to 
the  wearer,  '  Let  the  toe  never  be  turned  from  the 
foe,'  for  you  have  told  us  that  in  the  whole  armor 
of  God  there  is  no  shield  for  the  back,  no  provis- 
ion for  the  coward,  none  for  defeat  nor  surrender. 
So  I  have  no  fear  but  that  you  will  continue  to  fight 
Satan  and  sin  as  long  as  your  feet  need  protection 
from  the  chill  winters  of  earth. 

"I  pray  that  you  may  still  be  successful,  win  and 
conquer,  till  the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation 
promotes  you  to  fields  elysian,  where,  with  feet 
immortal,  you  haste  along  the  shining  ranks,  under 
orders  divine,  file  in  with  angel  hosts,  whose  feet 
need  not  even  be  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the 
gospel  of  peace,  for  no  rugged,  thorny  ways  are 
there  to  tread,  and  all  is  peace." 

"Would  like  to  be  a  Minister." 

*'  Dayton,  January,  1866. 

"Dear  Sir:  I  am  a  little  boy  twelve  years  old, 
but  I  love  Jesus  and  his  people.  I  would  like  to 
be  a  minister  of  the  gospel.  Pray  for  me  that  I 
may  become  one  in  God's  good  time." 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  155 

Another  lad,  fifteen  years  of  age,  writes:  "It 
seems  to  me,  the  height  of  my  ambition  in  this 
world  would  be  to  stand  up  and  preach  the  gospel. 
To  this  end  I  hope  I  may  have  your  most  earnest 
prayers." 

God  seems  to  have  planted  such  seed  in  the  hearts 
of  many  of  the  youth  interested  in  our  meetings, 
and  to  have  nourished  that  seed,  until  scores  of  liv- 
ing ministers,  now  gathering  sheaves  in  the  great 
harvest-field,  can  look  back  to  these  same  meetings 
as  God's  seed-time,  when  he  said  to  them,  "  Go 
preach." 

Twenty-five  Yeaes  of  WANDERma. 

"  Chelsea,  April  18,  1866. 

"Rev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

"  Dear  Sir  :  As  you  have  not  my  name  upon  your 
little  book,  will  you  add  it  as  the  name  of  one  who 
has  returned  from  his  wanderings,  after  a  period  of 
twenty-five  years,  and  is  now  in  the  enjoyment 
of  his  first  love  ?  I  thank  God  for  a  praying  wife, 
the  prayers  of  Christians,  and  your  kind  invita- 
tions, which  have  been  instrumental  in  bringing  mo 
back  to  the  Savior." 


156  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES» 


*«A  Happy  Neav  Year." 

"  Sacramento,  Cal.,  January  1,  1867. 

"Dear  Mr.  Earle  :  On  this  beautiful,  sunny 
morning,  I  wish  you  a  very,  very  'Happy  New 
Year.'  I  am  glad  you  came  to  our  city,  ])ut  I  am 
sad  that  you  must  leave  us  so  soon.  I  rellcct, 
however,  that  as  you  made  me  happy  by  coming 
here,  so  others  will  be  made  happy  v.he^ever  you  go. 

"I  shall  always  remember  you,  and  in  truth  can 
say,  with  my  little  brother,  I  wish  you  could  be 
with  us  always.  I  shall,  at  least,  always  remember 
and  love  you." 

A   Sabbath   School   Class  not  too  young  for 

Jesus. 

"Dayton,  January  29,  18G6. 

«Eev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

"  Dear  Sir :  You  will  remember  me  as  the  Sab- 
bath school  teacher  who  did  not  want  her  class  con- 
verted, because  she  thought  they  were  too  A^oung. 
I  have  earnestly  prayed  that  God  would  forgive  me 
this  sin,  and  convert  every  member  of  my  class. 
Two  of  them  think  they  have  found  the  Savior ; 
three  more  are  feeling  deeply  on  the  subject. 

"Pray  for  me,  that  I  may  be  a  faithful  teacher, 
and  that  each  member  of  my  class  may  be  a  Chris- 
tian." 


BRINGING   IN  SUEA  VES.  157 

"Almost  Four-score." 

♦'Concord,  N.  H.,  May  16,  1864. 

"Kev.  Mr.  Earle. 

"Dear  Sir:  I  am  almost  fourscore  years  old. 
I  will  ask  sometimes  to  be  remembered  in  your 
prayers,  that  my  heavenly  Father  will  watch  over 
me  through  the  remainder  of  my  earthly  pilgrim- 
age ;  keep  me  from  sinning  against  him ;  give 
me  sweet  submission  to  his  w^ill ;  be  my  support 
when  called  to  pass  through  the  dark  valley ; 
and,  through  the  infinite  riches  of  his  grace  in 
Christ  Jesus,  be  my  portion  forever." 

"Part  Way  Up." 

"Cincinnati,  January  6,  1866. 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Earle  : 

"By  your  coming  to  our  city  I  have  received  new 
light  on  religious  matters.  My  proud  heart  has 
been  humbled.  I  have  set  up  the  fomily  altar, 
where  I  read  and  pray.  I  have,  as  yet,  but  little 
feeling,  except  growing  stronger  in  my  resolution. 
I  cannot  go  back  ;  I  must  go  forward  ;  my  word  is 
pledged. 

"  I  feel  like  being  part  way  up  an  inclined  plane  ; 
to  press  forward  and  upward,  Jesus  may  be  found  ; 
to  go  back  is  sure  destruction." 


158  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

A  Granddaughter's  Eequest. 

"Dayton,  Ohio,  Januaryj  1866. 

"  Dear  Brother  Earle  : 

"  I  want  to  ask  you  to  please  pray  for  my  dear 
old  grandfather,  whose  hairs  are  white  wnth  many 
winters.  O,  do  not  forget  him  in  your  prayers, 
that  he  may  seek  the  Savior  ere  it  is  too  late." 

From  a  Little  Scolder. 

"  Makchester,  N.  H.,  1864. 

«  Dear  Mr.  Earle  : 

"  You  have  almost  brought  me  to  the  Savior.  I 
think  I  have  found  him,  and  he  is  precious  to  my 
soul.  You  remember  my  telling  you  I  could  not 
keep  from  scolding.  I  prayed  that  night  very 
earnestly,  and  I  believe  God  helped  me,  because 
the  next  day  I  tried  very  hard  and  almost  suc- 
ceeded. I  am  going  to  try  every  day.  I  want  to 
love  God  still  more." 

From  a  Grateful  Deacon. 

"  Burlington,  Vt.,  June  26,  1866. 

«  My  dear  Brother  Earle  : 

"  I  have  much  to  be  thankful  to  God  for.  I  hayo 
a  kind,  Christian  wife,  two  kuid,  Christian  daugh- 
ters, and  a  little  jewel  just  given  us,  to  be  cared 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  I59 

for  and  trained  for  heaven.     O,  how  much  I  love 
them  !     Yet  I  love  my  dear  Savior  more  than  these. 

"Now,  my  dear  brother,  I  cannot  express  the 
gratitude  I  feel  towards  you  for  what  3'ou  have 
been  enabled  to  do  for  me  and  mine,  and  the  cause 
of  Christ  in  this  place,  during  the  past  two  weeks. 
I  have  felt,  in  being  in  your  company,  that  I  was 
getting  as  near  my  Savior's  representative  as  man 
could  get.  I  have  enjoyed  your  words  of  counsel 
and  cheer.  I  have  felt  that  God,  by  his  Holy 
Spirit,  was  with  you  at  all  times.  My  heart  was 
drawn  out  towards  you  before  you  came  here  ;  but 
how  much  stronger  does  the  magnet  draw  as  I  come 
nearer  to  it !  Why  is  this  ?  The  answer  to  my 
mind  is,  Because  of  your  nearness  to  my  blessed 
Savior. 

"  I  feel  that  I  have  come  to  love  Christ  and  his 
cause  more ;  have  found  a  nearness  to  God  that  I 
have  never  known  before.  I  feel  that  I  am  abetter 
man,  and  better  prepared  to  labor  in  the  vineyard ; 
my  implements  are  in  a  better  condition  for  use. 
My  purposes  are  very  much  strengthened. 

"  While  I  say  these  things  for  myself,  I  know  I 
can  say  the  same  for  my  family,  and  especially 
would  I  mention  my  wife's  parents.  Mother  says, 
*  How  many  sermons  brother  Earle  has  preached, 
taking  for  his  text.  The  food  he  eats,  the  clothes  he 
wears,  and  everything  his  eye  rests  upon.'" 


IGO  BRINGING  IN  SUEAVES. 

From  two  little  brothers,  sons  of  one  of  the 
leading  members  of  the  San  Francisco  Ministerial 
Union :  — 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Earle  :  I  am  very  glad  you  came 
here,  for  since  I  gave  my  heart  to  Jesas  in  your 
room  I  have  been  very  happ}^  I  wish  you  would 
stay  here  a  little  longer,  for  I  think  these  meetings 
are  doing  a  great  deal  of  good.  I  hope  3^ou  will 
pray  for  all  the  boys  that  have  come  to  Christ 
while  you  have  been  here,  and  remember  that  we 
will  all  pray  for  you.  Wherever  you  go  on  this 
coast,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  rest  on  your  labors ; 
and  may  you  get  home  safely  to  your  children,  and 
meet  us  all  in  heaven  at  last." 

From  the  other  brother:  — 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Earle  :  I  am  exceedingly  happy 
since  I  gave  my  heart  to  the  Savior.  I  know  that 
Christ  has  received  me  into  his  fold.  I  am  very  glad 
that  you  came  to  this  city.  One  reason  why  I  am  glad 
is,  that  by  you  I  found  a  precious  Redeemer.  I  wish 
you  could  stay  here  longer,  and  advance  the  religion 
of  Jesus.  I  hope  that  wherever  you  go  you  may  be 
the  means  of  leading  many  sinners  to  Christ.    When 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  161 

you  are  returning  to  Boston,  you  may  remember 
that  I  am  praying  for  you.  I  thank  you  very  much 
for  all  your  kindness  to  me." 

"In  such  an  Hour  you  came.'* 

/ 

"  Cincinnati,  January  6,  1866. 

"  Kind  Friend  :  You  are  about  to  leave  us  for 
another  field  of  labor.  I  can  say,  with  many 
thanks,  it  has  been  good  for  me  that  you  have 
been  here.  Three  years  ago  a  light  from  the 
'shining  shore'  flickered  across  my  life-path. 
I  listened  to  a  *  still  small  voice,'  saying,  '  Give 
me  thine  heart.'  I  learned  to  know  that  voice, 
and  loved  it.  I  'laid  down  my  arms,'  laid  my 
burdens  at  the  feet  of  the  great  Shepherd.  One 
after  another  have  the  blossoms  in  our  home-gar- 
den been  culled  to  bloom  anew  in  Paradise.  On 
the  billow  of  earthly  sorrow  Christ  has  laid  his 
hand,  and  said,  '  Peace,  be  still.'  But  —  must  I  say 
it?  —  there  have  been  times  when  I  seemed  all  alone 
—  there  was  no  Christ ;  weary  —  no  rest ;  hungry  — 
no  manna.  All  was  dark.  In  such  an  hour  you 
came.  Your  plain  teaching  and  perfect  trust  helped 
me  to  say,  'The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd.'  I  have 
wept  bitter,  scalding  tears  at  my  unworthiness ; 
but  you  have  said, '  The  Lord  loveth  his  erring  ones.' 
Many  of  your  sermons  will  be  treasured  in  memory 
11 


1 62  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

forever ;  they  will  be  green  spots  in  the  desert  of 
life. 

"My  earnest  wish  and  prayer  is,  that  God  may 
ever  be  with  you,  Christ's  promises  your  stay,  and 
holy  angels  forever  over  you." 

Burdened  for  Friends. 

'*  Stockton,  Cal.,  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Brother  Earle  :  I  have  an  aching  heart 
to-day  —  a  heavy-laden  heart.  I  feel  as  did  Jacob 
of  old,  that  I  cannot  let  the  angel  of  God  depart : 
'I  will  not  let  thee  go  except  thou  bless  me.' 

"  I  cannot  bear  the  thought  that  ours  may  be  a 
divided  family  in  the  other  world.  I  desire  the 
prayers  of  Christians  for  my  dear  parents.  O,  how 
dreadful  if  they  should  be  lost !  Will  you  pray  for 
me  that  I  may  have  faith  in  God  ?  " 

We  cannot  save  Ourselves. 

"  Sacramento,  January  1,  1867. 

"Rev.  Mr.  Earle. 

"Dear  Brother  in  Christ:  To-day,  I  think,  is 
the  happiest  *  New  Year '  I  ever  experienced. 

"  I  thank  God  for  the  sermon  you  preached  from 
the  text,  'Have  faith  in  God.'  From  that  time  1 
have  seen  my  utter  helplessness,  and  inability  to 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  163 

save  myself  by  auy  act  of  my  own.  I  have  been 
enabled  to  see  the  beautiful  simplicity  of  faith  — 
of  taking  God  at  his  word.  Then  and  there  I  took 
Christ  as  my  all  in  all,  and  have  since  been  sweetly 
resting  in  him  by  faith." 

"No  OTHER  Refuge.** 

"  San  Jose,  Cal.,  February  11,  1867. 

"  Dear  Brother  Earle  :  .  .  .  My  experience 
for  several  days  has  been  gloomy.  My  mind  has 
been  exercised  in  a  peculiar  manner,  and  I  have 
been  tempted  to  doubt  the  genuineness  of  my 
conversion  to  God. 

"The  doubts  in  my  mind,  and  the  pecnliar  rela- 
tions of  my  business  life  and  associations  at  the 
present  time,  render  my  work  in  the  good  cause  an 
up-hill  one  of  no  ordinary  grade.  For  several  days 
I  have  not  seen  a  single  ray  of  light  —  not  one 
bright  spot  to  dispel  the  inky  blackness  which 
seems  to  press  down  close  on  my  defenceless 
head;  and  often  has  the  cry  been  forced  from 
me,  — 

•  Cover  my  defenceless  head 
With  the  shadow  of  Thy  wing.* 

"  I  have  no  other  refuge  in  this  storm  but  Christ, 
and  to  his  cross  I  will  cling  even  though  I  perish 
there. 


164  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

"I  have  made  an  entire  surrender  of  soul  and 
body,  with  everything  I  know  of,  to  God ;  and  I 
cannot  think  .he  is  doing  anything  else  than  testing 
my  faith  in  the  fire  of  a  furnace  seven  times 
heated. 

•  O  for  a  faith  that  will  not  shrink, 
Though  pressed  by  every  foe, 
That  will  not  tremble  on  the  brink 
Of  any  earthly  woe  ! '  " 

The  writer  of  this  letter  is  a  business  man  in  San 
Jose.  He  rose  one  evening  in  our  meeting,  and 
requested  prayer  for  four  persons.  He  says  he 
made  this  request  in  derision,  but  sat  down  a  con- 
victed sinner,  and  did  not  rest  until  he  found  peace 
in  Christ. 

The  Way  little  Freddie  made  his  Will. 

The  following  letter  was  written   by  Freddie's 

►uster :  — 

"  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  March  17,  1866. 

"Dear  Brother  Earle  :  .  .  .  Little  Fred- 
die was  always  ready  to  give,  especially  to  the 
Sabbath  school.  When  the  Tabernacle  Baptist 
Church  was  built,  Mr.  Spencer,  our  superintend- 
ent, asked  the  children  if  they  would  not  help 
pay    for    the     building,    telling   them    that   every 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  1G5 

three  cents  they  brought  would  pay  for  two 
bricks.  Dear  little  Freddie,  who  was  then  five 
years  old,  collected  as  much  money  as  he  could,  in 
order,  as  he  said,  that  he  might  own  some  of  the 
bricks.  But  he  did  not  live  long,  to  enjoy  the  Sab- 
bath school  on  earth.  The  last  Sabbath  he  spent 
with  us  he  wept  bitterly  because  he  could  not  go  to 
Sabbath  school. 

"He  had  just  been  promoted  from  the  infant 
class,  and  his  teacher  had  given  him  a  Testament. 
As  we  stood  around  his  dying  bed,  he  asked  for  his 
Testament,  and,  clasping  it  in  his  hands,  said,  *  Give 
all  my  money  to  the  Sabbath  school,'  and  fell 
asleep,  as  he  had  lived,  in  Jesus." 

The  following  letters,  from  two  little  sisters, 
show  how  differently  even  young  Christians  can 
regard  the  same  truth.  To  both  Jesus  was  precious. 
To  one  this  was  simply  a  matter  of  happy  experi- 
ence ;  to  the  other,  it  was  the  evidence  of  her  con- 
version : 

«  Mr.  Earle  :  I  think  I  have  found  the  Savior, 
and  he  is  precious,  I  want  you  to  remember  me  in 
your  prayers,  and  I  will  remember  you  in  mine. 

Laura." 


166  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

The  other  sister  writes,  — 

«  Mr.  Earle  :  I  hnow  I  have  found  the  Savior, 

because  he  is  so  precious.     Prav  for  me  that  I  may 

be  one  of  God's  flowers. 

Nellie." 

"Must  Work  as  well  as  Wish." 

"  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  Januarys  1866. 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Earle  ;  .  .  .  I  have  often 
wished  to  be  a  Christian.  You  taught  me  that  to 
become  one  I  must  wo7'k  as  well  as  wish,  — seek  if 
I  would  find.  I  felt  the  truth  of  your  teachings, 
and  sought  my  Savior,  and  trust  I  found  him ;  for 
I  have  sweet  peace  and  happiness,  such  as  life's 
pleasures  never  gave.  All  the  years  of  my  life  will 
be  too  short  to  serve  him.  ...  I  know  that  with 
my  human  heart  I  cannot  live  Christ-like,  unless  he 
leads  me.  ...  I  want  to  do  some  good  while  I  live, 
—  to  bring  some  weary,  sin-laden  soul  to  Jesus.  I 
want  to  be  willing  even  to  bear  the  cross,  and  if, 
by  and  by,  I  may  w^ear  the  crown,  I  don't  want  it 
to  be  a  starless  one. 

"You  will  always  be  remembered,  for  you  were 

instrumental   in  having  my  name   written   in   the 

Lamb's  book  of  life.  .  .  . 

Georgia."^ 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  167 


CHAPTER   Xm. 

THE  VERMONT  MEETING. 

GOD  works  through  means  of  his  own  sover . 
eign  choosing ;  often,  perhaps  always,  in  hii 
moral  world,  through  individual  instrumentalities. 
It  would  seem  as  if  God  loved  to  set  the  great  seal 
of  his  strength  upon  what  otherwise  were  weakness. 
He  touches  the  spring  of  a  single  human  heart  as 
tenderly  and  absolutely  as  if  it  were  the  only  heart ; 
then  touches  corresponding  springs  in  many  others, 
and  when  all  is  ready,  he  places,  at  the  weakest 
point  it  may  be,  a  little  battery  in  shape  of  some 
event  or  providence,  and  the  whole  unconscious 
community  of  hearts  is  stirred  into  sudden  life  and 
responsive  action. 

In  the  yecr  1866  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  in  this 
manner :  first  ujDon  the  heart  of  one  man  who  was 
to  be  the  mover  in  the  matter,  and  then  upon  the 
hearts  of  many  ministers  and  church  officers  in 
Vermont,  producing  such  a  new  impulse  and  inter- 
est as  culminated  at  length  in  a  unanimous  call  for 


168  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

a  convention  of  Christians  of  all  denominations  in 
the  state,  to  be  held  in  the  city  of  Burlington,  for 
the  purpose  of  making  a  united  effort  to  get  nearer 
to  Christ  individually,  and  of  consultation  with  each 
other  as  to  the  best  means  of  promoting  a  revival 
of  religion  in  the  churches.  The  people  came 
together  upon  the  fifth  day  of  September,  and  con- 
tinued the  meeting  through  three  days,  holding 
each  day  three  sessions,  each  session  continuing 
three  hours.  Some  remained  in  the  place  of  meet- 
ing from  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  five  in 
the  afternoon,  spending  the  interval  at  noon  in 
prayer  and  inquiry  for  entire  consecration  to 
Christ. 

In  the  words  of  Rev.  John  Quincy  Adams,  who 
was  present,  "  No  description  of  these  meetings 
can  be  given  to  one  who  was  not  present.  At  the 
first  meeting  we  attended,  on  the  morning  of  the 
fifth,  brother  Earle,  who  had  been  requested  to 
preside  over  the  convention  and  direct  its  move- 
ments, and  who  had  preached  the  evening  previous, 
gave  us  a  discourse  from  the  text,  *  Restore  unto 
me  the  joy  of  thy  salvation.' 

*'  At  the  close  of  that  sermon  about  fifty  ministers 
came  forward  and  knelt  at  the  altar,  making  then 
and  there  an  unconditional  surrender  of  themselves 
to  God.  And  from  that  meeting  until  the  close  of 
the    convention   on  Friday,  testimony  after  testi- 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  169 

mony  to  the  reception  of  the  rich  blessing  of  God 
in  lending  Christians  into  a  higher  knowledge  of 
Christ  and  his  requirements  of  them,  was  given. 
The  sensible  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  at 
times  almost  too  much  to  be  borne;  and  the  whole 
audience  would  be  melted  into  tears,  or  feelings 
would  find  vent  in  sobs  or  audible  expressions  of 
praise. 

"  On  the  morning  of  the  eighth,  by  the  special 
suggestion  and  urgent  request  of  some  of  the 
brethren,  about  an  hour  and  a  half  was  occupied  in 
relating  personal  experiences  of  the  blessedness 
and  vital  importance  of  an  entire  -  self-dedication  to 
Christ. 

"  Almost  every  moment  between  the  public  meet- 
ings was  occupied  in  conversation  with  inquirers 
upon  this  subject,  who  literally  besieged  us,  so 
that  we  gladly  went  without  our  food  to  afford 
time  to  converse  and  pray  with  them. 

"  At  the  close  of  the  sermon  on  Friday  evening 
sixty  or  seventy  testified  that  they  had  formally 
Sfiven  themselves  wholly  and  forever  to  God.  Old, 
gray-headed  ministers  tearfully  and  solemnly  de- 
clared that  they  were  *  never  in  such  a  meeting 
before.' " 

At  the  close  of  the  public  services  we  retired 
to  the  vestry  to  hold  an  experience  meeting,  to 
recount  the  nianncr  in  which  each  came  nearer  to 


170  JBRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

the  Savior;  and  it  seemed  as  if  the  very  place 
was  filled  with  the  power  and  presence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

A  correspondent  of  the  "New  York  Examiner" 
says,  "The  meeting  at  Burlington,  Vt.,  last  Aveek, 
under  the  direction  of  Rev.  A.  B.  Earle,  was  one 
of  an  extraordinary  character.  It  was  evident  that 
the  brethren  who  met  there  had  been  waiting  on 
God  in  secret  before  coming  together  publicly. 
The  attendance  was  very  large  ;  almost  every  church 
in  the  state  being  represented,  and  several  brethren 
from  other  states  being  in  attendance,  and,  like  the 
meeting  on  the  duxy  of  Pentecost,  the  brethren 
were  *with  one  accord  in  one  place.' 

« Earnest  desires  for  personal  holiness  were 
expressed  by  all,  especially  the  pastors  of  the 
churches.  The  most  entire,  and  solemn,  and  irrev- 
ocable consecrations  were  deliberately  uttered  by 
one  after  another.  More  than  once  about  fifty 
pastors  were  bowed  together  before  God,  pledging 
themselves  to  renounce  all  worldly  ambition  and  all 
self-seeking,  and  consecrate  themselves  and  their 
entire  being  anew  to  the  service  of  God.  The 
testimony  of  not  a  few  was  given  to  the  reception 
of  an  increased  measure  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and,  in 
several  instances,  the  declaration  that  a  new  ex- 
perience had  been  realized,  as  the  result  of  an 
entire  consecration  to  God,  and  the  reception,  by 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  17] 

faith,  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  all  his  fullness, 
as  their  Savior. 

"  Constantly  increasing  power  was  manifested 
\\\)m  the  commencement  to  the  close.  Each  meet- 
ing was  better  than  the  preceding  one.  Frequently 
the  entire  audience  was  melted,  and  nothing  but 
sobs  could  be  heard. 

"  The  preaching  by  brother  Earle  was  character- 
ized by  great  simplicity,  and  every  sermon  seemed 
specially  prompted  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

"When  the  opportunity  was  presented  for  per- 
sons to  come  forward  for  prayer,  not  less  than  two 
hundred  took  the  front  seats,  which  had  to  be 
vacated  to  accommodate  them.  In  some  instances 
the  midnight  hour  heard  the  voice  of  prayer  in  the 
dwellings  and  hotels  where  the  delegates  were 
stopping,  and  in  others  the  rising  of  the  sun  was 
anticipated  by  earnest  supplications. 

"  I  think  we  may  confidently  look  for  a  glorious 
revival  of  religion  in  Vermont  this  foil  and  winter ; 
and  I  hope  that  other  states  will  imitate  this  move- 
ment inaugurated  at  Burlington. 

'•The  universal  testimony  was,  'I  was  never  in 
such  a.  meeting  in  my  life.' " 

The  experiences  alluded  to  in  the  above  did  not 
lose  their  depth  or  fervor  with  the  close  of  the 
meeting,  —  the  work  of  the  Spirit  thus  manifesting 
itself  in  their  permanancy  as  well  as  blessedness. 


172  BRINGING  IN  SUEAVES. 

One  says,  several  months  afterwards,  in  a  letter, 
"  I  have  been  a  professor  of  religion  for  more  than 
thirty  years.  I  have  never  lost  sight  of  m}^  Master, 
although  I  have  followed  him  a  great  vvAy  off.  I 
now  seem  to  have  him  by  my  side  by  night  and 
day,  in  the  market  and  in  the  church,  and  I  do  feel 
that  he  is  a  blessed  Savior." 

Another  says,  "For  years  I  have  had  the  form 
of  godliness  without  its  power ;  have  been  thought 
to  live  when  I  was  dead.  O,  those  years  of  joyless 
life!  —  knowing  my  Master's  will,  feeling  alive  to 
duty  intellectually,  but  not  willing  to  do  it !  I 
have  always  clung  to  my  church,  and  never  thought 
of  leavinsr  it,  though  well  knowino:  how  unworthy 
I  was.  God  would  not  let  me  alone.  But  to  live 
a  stranger  to  the  peace  of  God,  and  yet  find  no  joy 
in  sin,  is  awful.  *I  will  arise  and  go  to  my 
Father,'  I  resolved.  He  met  me  while  yet  afar  ofl'. 
O,  the  joy  of  being  home  again  !  I  cannot  tell  the 
comfort  and  blessedness  of  the  past  week.  Earth 
even  seems  changed ;  the  Bible  is  precious  beyond 
all  other  books,  and  above  all,  Jesus  is  my  Savior 
now.  It  seems  as  if  I  had  lived  in  the  twilight, 
and  now  I  rejoice  in  summer  suns  and  flowery 
fields." 

A  minister,  called  by  his  brethren  "  one  of  the 
strongest  men  in  Yermont,"  was  able  to  attend  but 
one  day,  but  speaks  of  it  as  one  of  the  most  impor- 


BRINGING  IN  SUE  A  YES.  173 

tant  days  of  his  life,  as  he  then,  with  fuller  and 
more  solemn  purpose  than  ever  before,  dedicated 
himself  to  God  and  his  cause,  and  received  an  im- 
petus for  all  coming  time. 

In  a  letter  written  by  a  brother  from  New  York, 
who  attended  this  meeting,  he  speaks  of  being 
present  at  some  county  meetings  in  his  own  state, 
and  of  engagements  to  attend  several  others,  simi- 
lar in  character  to  the  one  in  Vermont,  and  says,  in 
conclusion,  "These  meetings  were  the  immediate 
results  of  the  Burlington  convention.  I  feel  that 
to  have  been  one  of  the  most  important  meetings 
since  the  day  of  Pentecost." 

Still  another  testifies  :  "  The  Lord  is  blessing  the 
feeble  instrumentalities  made  use  of  throughout  the 
state,  such  as  'four  days'  meetings,'  &c.,  which  all 
acknowledge  have  grown  out  of  that  great  meeting 
in  Burlington." 

"The  good  influence  of  the  meeting  held  here  just 
before  your  departure  for  the  Pacific  coast,"  writes 
another,  "has  been  seen  and  felt  in  many  direc- 
tions, both  in  and  out  of  the  state.  There  seems  to 
be  a  more  general  inquiry  among  the  ministers  and 
laymen,  *  \A'hat  can  be  done  for  our  churches,  and 
for  the  souls  of  impenitent  men?'  Meetings  on  a 
lesser  sCale  are  being  held  all  over  the  state,  and 
in  other  states  also,  with  blessed  results.  The 
meeting  at  Burlington  is   often    referred  to,  very 


174  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

tenderly  and  gratefully,  as  being  a  marked  manifes- 
tation of  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  answer 
to  prayer." 

Thus  God  works.  And  the  vibration  of  that  one 
little  battery  may  have  for  its  circuit  a  continent 
or  a  world,  for  still  the  work  goes  on. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  lib 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

"COME   OVER  AND  HELP  US.** 

THE  following  letters  are  given,  —as  specinaeus 
of  those  that  come  to  me  by  almost  every 
ijiail,  —to  show  the  need  of  more  evangelists.  To  at 
least  twenty-nine  out  of  every  thirty  such  requests 
I  am  under  the  painful  necessity  of  saying,  "  No." 

"  Is    IT   NOT   THE    SpIRIT    OF    GOD  ?  " 

"  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  September  4,  1865. 

«  My  dear  Brother  Earle  :  I  can  hardly  ex- 
press to  you  how  earnestly  we  desire  your  coming 
among  us.'  I  wrote  you  three  letters  a  year  ago, 
and  when  we  learned  that  you  could  not  come  last 
fall  or  winter  we  felt  a  deep  regret.   .   .   . 

«  Our  church  is  at  a  point  in  its  jiistory  when  a 
few  weeks'  labor  of  an  experienced  evangelist  will, 
we  believe,  through  the  blessing  of  God,  result  in 
untold  good.   .   .   . 

"  And  now,  my  dear  brother,  do   not  say,  '  Nay.' 


176  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES, 

I  feel  that  I  cannot  have  you  disappoint  us.  I 
seem  to  hear  the  cry  of  the  perishing  in  this  com- 
munity, whom  the  pastors  and  churches  have  failed 
to  reach,  saying,  *Come  over  and  help  us.'  If  it 
were  necessary,  I  would  gladly  go  and  see  you,  and 
lay  the  case  before  you  more  forcibly  than  it  is 
possible  to  do  in  a  brief  letter. 

"  I  have  prayed  earnestly  over  this  matter,  and 
feel  as  if  I  could  lay  my  hand  upon  you,  and  say, 
*  You  must  come.'  Is  it  not  the  Spirit  of  God?  Is 
not  God  moving  my  heart  and  the  hearts  of  the 
brethren  to  send  for  you  ?  I  now  leave  the  matter 
with  you  and  with  God.  May  he  direct  youK  heart 
towards  us,  even  as  he*  has  directed  ours  towards 
you. 

"  Though  I  have  not  seen  you,  yet  I  feel  that  I 
know  you  in  the  Lord. 

Yours  in  the  gospel, 

G.  W.  C,  Pastor:' 

"Richmond,  Va.,  1868. 

«  Eev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

*  My  dear  Brother :  I  address  you  in  the 
name  of  the  Baptist  pastors  of  this  city.  .  .  .  We 
have  seen  with  deep  interest  the  accounts  of  your 
labors  among  the  churches  in  the  North,  and  recog- 
nize you  as  one  whom  it  has  pleased  God  our 
Savior  to  bless  with  remarkable  success  in  reviv- 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  I77 

iiig  Christians  and  winning  souls.  Our  churches 
are  greatly  in  need  of  such  gracious  influences  as 
have  attended  your  ministry.  AVe  have,  therefore, 
agreed  to  solicit  you  ailectionately  and  urgently,  to 
make  us  a  visit  early  next  fall,  and  spend  several 
weeks  with  us  laboring  tor  the  salvation  of  souls. 
We  are  prepared  to  welcome  you  with  open  hearts. 

"  We  trust  you  will  favorably  consider  our 
reijUest,  and  at  an  early  day  appoint  a  time  when 
wc  may  expect  you.   .   .   . 

"  In  the  service  of  a  common  Master, 

Yours  affectionately, 

I.  A.  C." 

m 

"Grand  Rapids,  Mich.,  August  27,  18GG. 

"My  dear  Brother  Earle  :  I  wrote,  and  re- 
ceived a  letter  from  you  almost  two  years  ago,  about 
coming  here  and  holding  a  series  of  meetings. 
We  have  been  laboring  and  praying,  and  feel  that 
the  time  has  come  for  you  to  do  us  good.  There 
have  been  a  few  conversions.  We  all  feel  that  we 
must  love  Jesus  more,  and  do- more  for  him.  Can 
you  come  and  preach  Jesus  to  us?  You  shall  have 
the  hearty  help  oi  all  the  church.  .  .  .  Do,  mj  dear 
brother,  if  possible,  help  us. 

Yours  truly, 

C.  B.  S." 
12 


178  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES, 


"Come  now." 

"Lynn,  February  9,  1860 

«  Dear  Brother  Earle  :  We  want  you  here  — 
want  you  very  much  —  want  you  now.  Can  you 
not  come,  and  come  soon?  One  has  come  out  on 
the  Lord's  side  —  others  are  anxious.  There  is 
evidently  a  preparation  and  an  asking  after  the 
Lord.  We  need  evening  preaching — evangelistic 
labor.  We  need  you.  I  know  you,  and  have 
fellowship  and  sympathy  with  j^ou.  The  brethren 
know  of  you,  and  say,  *  Come  now.' 

Sincerely  yours  in  Christ, 

A.  O.,  Pastor:' 

From  the  pastors  and  members  of  the  evangelical 
churches  of  Napa,  California  :  — 

*'  Napa,  February  4,  1867. 

"  Kev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

"Dear  Sir:  We,  the  undersigned,  pastors  and 
members  of  the  different  evangelical  churches  of 
Napa,  having  watched  with  deepest  interest  the 
progress  of  your  efforts  since  your  arrival  on  this 
coast,  and  earnestly  desiring  that  we  and  ours  may 
enjoy  the  benefit  of  your  labors,  which  God  has 
been  graciously  pleased  to  bless  abundantly  in 
those  places  which  you  have   already  visited,  do 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  179 

unitedly  and  cordially  invite  you  to  hold  with  us  a 
scries  of  religious  meetings  as  soon  as  it  may  bo 
convenient. 

"Assuring  you  of  our  prayerful  interest  in  3^our 
work,  and  promising  our  hearty  cooperation  and 
support,  we  hope  that  ere  long  you  may  come  to 
us  '  in  the  fullness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ.' " 

To  this  was  attached  a  long  list  of  names.  But 
I  could  not  go. 

From  Washington  Territory  :  — 

"  A^ANCOUTER,  TV.  T.,  April  11,  1867. 

"  Rev.  Mr.  Earle  :  The  citizens  of  Vancouver, 
and  the  United  States  garrison  at  this  point,  would 
be  pleased  to  have  you  come  to  our  city  and  preach 
to  us. 

"  The  undersigned  feel  anxious  that  you  should 
visit  this  city,  for  a  day  or  two  at  least.  Should 
you  find  it  in  your  power  to  comply  w^ith  our 
request,  be  pleased  to  have  us  informed  when  it 
would  best  suit  your  convenience." 

To  this  long  list  of  names,  also,  I  was  obliged  to 
say,  «  No." 


180  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

«  Do   NOT   ANSWER,    NaY." 

"  Vallejo,  Cal.,  March  4,  18G7. 

*»Kev.  Mr.  Earle. 

<  Dear  Sir :  Souls  are  perishing  here,  and  we 
would  urge  upon  you  our  claims.  Do,  we  beseech 
you,  come  and  visit  this  phice.  We  feel  assured 
that  a  great  harvest  is  here  awaiting  the  reaper. 
Will  you  come  and  thrust  in  the  sickle  ?  Do  not 
answer,  Nay.  The  truth  has  long  been  faithfully 
preached,  and  we  are  not  without  the  evidence  of 
God's  blessing;  yet  our  hearts  are  not  satisfied, 
and  Christians  are  unitedly  praying  for  a  special 
outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  there  is  a  general 
assurance  tJiat  God  will  open  the  windows  of  heaven 
and  pour  a  large  blessing  upon  us. 

Mrs.  H.  B.  R., 
Wife  of  Rev.  II,  B,  i?.,  Pi^eshyterian  Minister 
at  Vallejo. 

"P.  S.  Since  writing  the  above  your  communi- 
cation, in  reply  to  my  husband's,  has  been  received, 
and  our  hearts  are  pained.  I  think  we  shall  have 
to  follow  the  example  of  a  certain  man  who  caused 
his  neighbor  to  rise  and  give  him  bread  because  of 
his  importunity.  Do  try  and  spare  us  a  little  time 
and  effort,  and  our  prayers  and  blessings  will  be 
upon  you. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  \%\ 

"  That  God  may  open  your  pathway  to  this  place 
is  the  earnest  prayer  of  your  friend,  E.  S.  R." 

From  a  cold  church  : 

" ,  N.  H.,  August,  18G5 

"Rev.  Mr.  Earle. 

"  Dear  Sir :  It  is  more  than  twenty  years  since 
there  were  more  than  two  added  to  our  church  by 
baptism  at  one  time.  During  this  period  quite  a 
number  have  left  us  to  form  other  churches ;  many 
have  left  town,  and  others  have  been  called  by  their 
Master  to  come  up  higher.  The  remainder  of  us 
are  very  cold  or  lukewarm,  and  feel  unable  to  con- 
tend with  the  hosts  of  our  adversary.  AYe  have 
tried  to  arouse  ourselves  at  several  different  times, 
and  to  set  ourselves  about  our  Master's  business, 
but  soon  fell  back,  if  possible  into  a  worse  condi- 
tion than  before. 

"  There  are  but  very  few  of  us  that  take  part  in 
meetings,  and  none  of  us  feel  able  or  qualified  to 
do  so. 

"  Our  pastor  has  been  sick,  and  is  now  in  a  dan- 
gerous condition.  It  is  doubtful  if  he  is  able  to 
preach  this  fall,  if  at  all. 

"  Some  of  us  wanted  to  send  for  you  last  fall,  but 
others  thought  we  were  unprepared  to  receive  a  re- 
vival preacher,  because  we  were  so  cold.  I  have 
talked  w^ith  quite  a  number  of  late,  and  they  are 


182  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES, 

nuanimous  in   fjivor  of  inviting  you  to   come  and 
labor  with  ns  this  fall. 

"The  churches  are  very  feeble  all  around  us,  so 
far  as  spiritual  strength  is  concerned." 

From  the  President  of  Corvallis  College  :  — 

"  Corvallis,  Oregon,  April  12,  1867. 

"Rev.  a.  B.  Earle  :  The  brethren  of  the  Pres- 
byterian, Baptist,  and  Methodist  churches,  to  you 
send  greeting ! 

"We  feel  truly  grateful  to  Almighty  God  for 
that  degree  of  success  which  has  thus  far  attended 
your  labors  and  ministry  in  Oregon.  It  is  our 
prayer  that  God's  people  may  be  united  in  the 
great  work  of  salvation,  and  then  we  may  confi- 
dently expect  still  greatei  displays  of  divine  power 
in  awakening  and  converting  sinners. 

"  We  feel  great  need  of  revival  influence  in  our 
midst.  For  this  we  are  laboring,  for  this  we  are 
prayuig. 

"To  aid  us  in  our  endeavors  to  glorify  God,  and 
advance  the  interests  of  Christ's  kingdom,  it  is  the 
earnest  desire  and  request  of  tb-  different  churches 
in  our  city  that  you  spend  a  few  days  with  us.  I 
am  confident  there  is  no  city  in  Oregon  where  your 
ministry  is  more  needed.  We  learn  that  your  visit 
in  Oregon  is  limited  to  a  few  weeks;  yet  we  feel 
that  could  you  fully  realize  our  wants,  a  share,  at 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  183 

least,  of  your  precious  time  would  be  given  to 
Corvallis.  May  God  direct  you,  and  if  consistent 
with  his  will,  give  you  a  mission  to  our  people,  and 
that  a  mission  of  salvation  !  May  God  continue  to 
bless  your  labors  I 

"In  behalf  of  the  churches  of  Corvallis,  I  sub- 
scribe myself. 

Yours  fraternally, 

W.  A.  F., 

President  of  Corvallis  College. '*' 

*  Praying  God  to  send  you  to  Baltlaiore." 

"  Baltimore,  Md.,  November  28,  ISGi. 

«  Dear  Brother  Earle  :  It  is  with  emotions 
almost  impossible  to  describe  that  I  attempt  to  pen 
you  this  heartfelt  epistle. 

"  I  have  been  in  Baltimore  now  over  one  year, 
preaching,  and  God  has  owned  my  poor  eflbrts,  and 
I  have  had  the  gratification  of  baptizing  nearly 
thirty  happy  converts,  and  of  seeing  my  congrega- 
tion more  than  trebled,  and  our  prospects  some- 
what encouraging ;  yet  we  are  far  from  a  general 
revival  s])irit. 

"  O,  what  desolation  is  experienced  for  the  want 
of  some  faithful  and  unflinching  one  to  *  stand  up 
for  Jesus.'  I  have  been  led  to  cry  out  in  the  bit- 
terness of  heart,  in  the  words  of  the  j^rophet,  *  By 
whom  shall  Jacob  rise,  for  he  is  small?' 


184  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

"  There  is  no  such  field  for  well-directed  effort  in 
all  the  land  as  here.  Now,  brother  Earle,  I  have 
been  praying  God  to  send  you  to  Baltimore.  O, 
that  my  j^rayers  may  be  answered !  For  do  be- 
lieve, from  what  I  know  of  you,  that  you  wculd  sv.q 
the  salvation  of  God.  Are  you  at  liberty  to  come? 
Can  you  feel  that  duty  calls  this  way  ?  O,  may 
God  direct ! 

Yours  affectionately, 

E.  F.  C." 

The  widely-known  and  honored  Dr.  F.,  of  that 
city,  has  sent  a  like  request.  But  I  have  not  yet 
been  able  to  say  "  Yes  "  to  either  of  them. 

"This  Fashionable  City." 

"  Newport,  R.  I.,  August  6,  1868. 

«Eev.  a.  B.  Eaele. 

"  My  dear  Sir ;  .  .  .  Can  you  not  come  to 
Newport  this  August?  Even  if  you  cannot  stay 
beyond  a  few  days,  or  preach  more  than  two  or 
three  sermons,  come. 

"  I  long  for  this  fashionable  city,  now^  in  August, 
in  the  full  tide  of  fashion,  in  all  this  wonderful 
pomp  of  pride  and  wealth,  to  feel  God's  power. 

"  Who  knows  but  God  may  give  you  some  of 
these   disciples  of  Mammon   and  Pleasure   as  tro- 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  185 

phies  for  Christ?     God  is  omnipotent.     O,  what  a 
field  this  for  divine  grace  ! 

Most  affectionately,  yours, 

C.  H.  M." 

Only  those  in  similar  situations  can  know  what 
ii  costs  me  to  deny  these  petitions  that  are  con- 
stantl}-  coming,  with  pleading  so  earnest,  from  large 
churches  and  from  small  churches,  from  churches 
cold  and  from  those  active  and  growing,  and  rep- 
resenting almost  every  evangelical  denomination. 

Official  calls  are  usually  accompanied  or  followed 
by  private  letters  from  pastors  burdened  for  their 
churches;  from  church  members  longing  to  see 
their  pastors  more  in  earnest  in  the  work  of  saving 
souls ;  from  parents  weary  with  praying  for  uncon- 
verted children,  and  from  devoted  Christian  wdves 
anxious  for  the  conversion  of  their  husbands,  each 
case  having  its  peculiar  and  strong  claims. 

And  when,  in  response  to  such  urgent  need,  I 
am  obliged  to  sit  down,  and  hurriedly  write,  "I 
cannot  be  with  you,"  then  am  I  moved  to  pray,  "  O 
Lord,  raise  up  more  evangelists  !  Call  into  this 
work  men  after  thine  own  heart,  who  shall  be  will- 
ing to  renounce  worldly  honor  and  ease,  that  they 
may  win  souls  to  Jesus." 

Young  men,  wdio  may  read  these  pages,  does 
not  God  call  upon  ^ou  to  enter  this  branch  of  the 


186  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

Christian  ministry?  The  mere  fact  of  a  want  of 
more  men  is  not,  of  conrse,  a  call  to  enter  this  or 
any  department  of  the  ministry,  but  it  is  a  call  for 
you  to  offer  yourselves  to  the  Lord,  and,  with  a  will- 
ingness to  go  or  stay,  seek  to  know  his  will. 

Pastors,  has  not  God,  by  special  adaptation,  in- 
tended some  of  you  for  this  work  ? 

Christian  friends,  of  whatever  name  or  place, 
will  you  not  join  with  me  in  the  prayer  that  God 
will  multiply  the  number  of  those  whose  special 
work  is  the  promotion  of  revivals  ?  "  The  harvest 
truly  is  plenteous,  but  the  laborers  are  few :  pray 
ye  therefore  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  he  will 
send  forth  more  laborers  into  his  vineyard,"  and, 
among  them,  more  evangelists. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES,  187 


CHAPTER  XV. 

THE  OPINION  OF  PASTORS. 

BY  request,  I  give  a  few  letters  from  some  of 
the  pastors  with  whom  I  have  labored.  Their 
value  to  any  one  but  myself,  and  my  apology  for 
consenting  to  their  publication,  are,  that  they 
answer  the  inquiries  so  frequently  made  about  the 
character  of  these  meetings,  and  the  permanency  of 
their  results,  and  the  work  of  an  evangelist. 

From  Rev.  Dr.  Ide  :  — 

"  Springfield,  Mass.,  March  21,  1864. 

"Rev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

"  My  very  dear  Brother :  At  the  close  of  your 
labors  with  my  people  I  feel  it  to  be  both  my  duty 
and  my  privilege  to  express  to  you  my  deep  sense 
of  obligation  for  your  assistance  iu  the  glorious 
work  of  the  Spirit  now  in  progress  among  us,  and 
my  entire  satisfaction  with  your  ministrations. 

"Your   preaching    has    been    thorough,    sound, 


188  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

evangelical,  tender,  and  winning,  adapted  alike  to 
quicken  believers  and  to  arouse  and  melt  sinners. 

"During  the  four  weeks  that  you  have  been  with 
us,  I  do  not  recollect  that  you  have  said  or  done  a 
thing  that  has  not  met  my  cordial  approval. 

"  Your  labors  have  been  grejitly  blessed  to  the 
revival  of  gracious  affections  in  the  hearts  of  Chris- 
tians ;  and  hundreds  in  this  city,  converted  through 
your  instrumentality,  will  in  eternity  praise  God 
that  he  sent  you  to  us. 

"  I  believe  that  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  has 
given  you  the  office  and  the  qualifications  of  a  true 
evangelist :  that  he  is  with  you  in  your  work. 

"I  know  that  I  speak  the  feeling  of  every  pious 
heart  in  the  city,  and  of  large  numbers  who  are  not 
pious,  when  I  say  that  I  most  heartily  thtuik  you 
for  your  coming,  and  pray  that  the  same  divine 
blessing  that  attended  your  visit  here  may  still  fol- 
low you  wherever  Providence  may  lead  you. 
Very  affectionately  yours, 

Geo.  B.  Ide.  " 

From  Eev.  Dr.  Kirk  :  — 

"  Boston,  May  14,  1866. 

"Rev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

"  Dear  Brother :  It  makes  me  happ}^  to  find  a 
hnppy  Christian,  made  so,  not  by  temperament  or 
indiscriminating  good  nature,  but  by  the  fullness  of 
Ch.'ist's  Spirit. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  189 

"I  bless  God,  and  thank  you,  for  your  labors  in 
Boston.  I  have  long  waited  for  an  evangelist  with 
whom  I  could  cordially  coqDerate.  After  more 
than  twenty  years  of  w^aiting,  God  has  gi*anted  me 
this  desire  of  my  heart. 

"  I  congratulate  you,  both  on  the  revelation  the 
Lord  has  made  to  you  of  himself,  and  on  the  bless- 
ing which  has  crowned  your  labors  here  and  else- 
where. The  good  you  have  been  enabled  to 
accomplish  here  cannot  be  comprehended  by  any 
statistical  statement.  It  embraces  several  classes 
of  benefits  imparted  to  great  numbers  of  persons  in 
the  city  and  out  of  it. 

"  Ministers  have  learned  of  you  to  live  nearer  the 
Savior,  to  preach  more  scripturally,  simpl}^  and 
earnestly  than  was  their  wont.  They  have  learned 
to  draw  their  hearers  to  more  prompt  and  definite 
decisions  on  the  vital  question,  Shall  I  submit  to 
Jesus?  Backsliders,  to  an  uncommon  extent,  have 
been  reclaimed  during  this  revival.  Sinners  have 
been  converted  to  God.  Besides  all  tliis,  a  sweet 
influence  has  been  diffused  through  the  community. 
Without  compromising  the  truths  of  the  Bible,  you 
have  awakened  no  opposition  needlessly. 

"  All  pastors  who  seek  the  salvation  of  men  will 
find  their  facilities  for  doing  good  greatly  increased 
in  consequence  of  your  labors. 

"  Myself  I  regard  as  a  better  man  and  minister 


190  BRINGING  IN  SnEA\  ES. 

for  having  known  yon,  and  been  associated  with 
you  in  this  blessed  work,  the  memory  of  which  will 
enter  heaven  with  us,  and  diffuse  its  fragiance 
through  d:ernity.  Let  us  give  all  the  glory  to 
whom  it  belongs. 

Yours  in  the  fellowship  of  Christ, 

Edward  N.  Kirk." 

From  Rev.  Dr.  Turnbull :  — 

"Hartford,  Ct.,  December  2Q,  1864. 

"Eev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

"  My  dear  Brother :  I  wish  cordially  to  thank 
you  for  your  labors  of  love  among  us  in  this  c\iy, 
in  connection  with  the  two  Baptist  churches. 

"  Incessantly,  night  and  day,  have  you  given 
yourself  to  the  work  :  preaching  with  great  sim- 
plicity and  power  the  fundamental  truths  of  the 
gospel ;  holding  inquiry  meetings,  and  conversing 
with  the  anxious  at  your  room. 

«I  thank  you,  especially,  for  your  uniform  pa- 
tience and  kindness  in  all  your  intercourse  with 
inquirers  and  others.  You  have  won  the  cordial 
esteem  and  love  of  the  members  of  our  churches 
and  of  the  pastors  who  have  labored  with  you. 

"  May  the  Lord  bless  you  in  all  your  efforts  to  do 
g-^od,  and  in  all  your  future  course  of  life. 
Your  friend  and  brother, 

Robert  Turnbull." 


BRINGING  IN  SUEAVES.  191 

From  Rev.  I.  D.  Clark,  in  the  "Watchman  and 
Reflector  " :  — 

"  I  know  of  no  man  so  well  adapted  to  the  work 
of  a  successful  evangelist  as  brother  Earle.  Plain, 
direct,  and  forcible  in  his  preaching;  careful  and 
discreet,  and  yet  sagacious  in  his  management  of  a 
meeting  beyond  any  man  I  have  ever  seen ;  this,  with 
his  almost  marvellous  faith,  persistency,  and  iron 
power  of  endurance,  make  him,  what  he  has  been 
for  years,  a  power  in  the  church. 

"Instead  of  weakening  the  pastoral  tie,  he 
strengthens  it,  unites  the  church  in  a  deeper  piety, 
and,  like  John  the  Baptist,  prepares  the  way  for  a 
still  more  blessed  work  after  his  leaving.  At  least 
so  it  has  been  with  us." 

From  Rev.  Dr.  Phelps  :  — 

'•New  Haven,  Ct.,  June  6,  1865. 

«  Mr  DEAR  Brother  Earle  :  Before  you  leave 
lis  this  afternoon,  I  must,  in  a  word,  express  to 
you  my  gratitude  to  God  and  to  you  for  the  great 
privilege  I  have  enjoyed  the  past  five  weeks  in 
being  permitted  to  witness  and  join  in  your  evan- 
gelic labors  among  my  people  and  in  this  city. 

"We  have  been  quickened,  edified,  refreshed, 
and    brought    nearer    to    Christ,    in    hearing    the 


192  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

gospel  from  you,  and  in  kneeling  in  prayer  with 
you. 

"Your  conduct  of  revival  meetings  has  been 
judicious,  scriptural,  and  adapted  to  win  souls. 

"The  Master  has  been  with  us,  and  made  you  the 
honored  instrument  of  the  conversion  of  many 
precious  souls  among  us.   .   .   . 

"  May  our  blessed  Lord,  my  dear  brother,  long 
spare  you  to  labor  as  an  evangelist ;  and  may  we 
sometimes  share  in  your  labors  here  again. 

"  You  will  ever  have  a  warm  place  in  our  hearts, 
and  a  remembrance  in  our  prayers. 

Yours  affectionately, 

S.  D.  Phelps." 

From  Eev.  Dr.  Harvey,  in  the  "Journal  and 
Messenger  " :  — 

"  Brother  Earle's  work  with  us  has  been  greatly 
blessed.  The  sound  judgment  and  clear  views  of 
the  gospel  which  characterize  him,  with  his  kind, 
earnest  spirit,  and  strong  faith,  have  given  him  a 
large  place  in  the  confidence  and  affection  of  Chris- 
tians here,  and  mark  him  as  a  man  singularly 
adapted  for  such  labors. 

"His  sermons  have  been  distinguished,  not  so 
much  by  novelty  of  subject  matter,  or  mere  logical 
demonstration,  as  by  the  vivid  illustration  of  the 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  193 

great  common  truths  of  the  gospel,  and  the  earnest 
enforcement  of  them  on  the  conscience  and  the 
heart. 

"We  have  had  no  noise. 

"  The  large  and  solemn  congregations  which  have 
often  crowded  our  spacious  house  attest  the  power 
of  the  truth  as  presented  by  him." 

From  Rev.  Dr.  Hague,  in  the  "  Watchman  and 
Reflector":  — 

"  Again  and  again  have  we  been  asked  by  friends, 
far  and  near,  *  What  do  you  think  of  Mr.  Earle  as 
an  evangelist  and  a  co-worker?  Does  he  exert  an 
influence  that  is  healthful  and  enduring?  Wherein 
lieth  his  power?'  Some  who  are  mere  lookers  on 
ask  these  questions  from  the  mere  impulse  of  curi- 
osity, and  many  others  from  a  sincere  desire  to 
know  the  truth.  Now  this  question  as  to  the 
secret  of  power  is  more  easily  asked  than  an- 
swered ;  for  spiritual  power  is  like  some  of  the 
hidden  forces  of  nature,  that  may  be  recognized  by 
their  eff'ects,  while  they  are  so  subtile  as  to  escape 
{uialysis.  The  realm  of  material  nature  is  full  of 
hidden  forces  that  baffle  every  efi'ort  of  science  to 
define.  So  it  is  in  the  spiritual  realm  ;  there  is 
power  that  is  felt,  but  '  thou  canst  not  tell  whence 
it  Cometh  nor  whither  it  goeth.'  Its  'springs  are 
13 


194  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

in  God.'     We  have  often  met  men,  in  all  depart 
raents  of  life,  whose  power  w^e  have  acknowledged, 
while  we  conld  not  define  it  or  characterize  it  by 
any  combination  of  graphical  words. 

"  Such  a  man,  no  doubt,  w^as  Barnabas,  the  co- 
worker of  Paul.  His  power  was  great.  Luke 
acknowledges  it ;  takes  note  of  it  as  having  been 
mightily  felt  at  Antioch.  But  he  does  not  report 
a  single  address,  exhortation,  speech,  prayer,  or 
sermon  ;  simply  says  of  Barnabas,  *He  was  a  good 
man,  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith;  and 
much  people  was  added  unto  the  Lord.' 

"  Now,  in  regard  to  Mr.  Earle,  his  ministrations 
are  incessant  but  never  w^earisome.  We  never  feel 
disposed  to  report  his  sermons,  but  rather  say, 
*  Come  and  hear  him,'  '  Come  and  see  him.' 

"First  of  all,  you  will  say  to  yourself,  he  is 
honest,  he  is  in  earnest,  he  is  simple-hearted,  he 
believes  what  he  says,  he  is  a  transparent  char- 
acter ;  he  has  gained  your  sympathy  and  confi- 
dence. 

"  Next,  you  are  consciously  inclined  to  give  him 
your  attention,  and  yield  yourself  to  his  friendly 
suggestions,  that  seem  so  apt,  so  judiciously  put, 
so  exactly  adapted  to  your  condition.  They  reveal 
you  to  yourself;  they  touch  the  points  of  your 
own  unexpressed  experiences  ;  they  meet  your  deep 
heart  needs.     All   at  once,   *■  before  you  know  it,' 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  195 

as  one  said,  you  will  respond  to  bis  appeals.  You 
forget  he  is  a  minister,  so  far,  at  least,  as  to  regard 
him  officially;  you  think  of  him  as  a  good  man,  a 
fellow  sinner,  a  loving  brother,  a  jo^^ous  Christian, 
\Yho  has  a  heavenly  treasure  that  he  desires  to  im- 
part, and  that  you  Avould  receive. 

"If  you  must  tell  somebody  where  his  power 
lies,  you  will  say  it  is  in  his  simplicity  and  godly 
sincerity,  and  a  profound  heart  experience,  which 
tells  its  own  story  and  wins  you." 

From  Eev.  Dr.  Baldwin,  in  the  "  Christian  Era"  : 

"  Trot,  N.  Y.,  February  28,  1863. 

"  Deae  Brother  Webster  ;  Yours  of  the  twen- 
ty-seventh, containing  this  inquiry,  '  Will  you  oblige 
me  and  my  readers  by  giving  us  an  account  of 
the  labors  of  Rev.  A.  B.  Earle  in  Troy,  and  their 
results  as  far  as  they  can  now  be  judged  of?'  was 
duly  received,  and  I  make  the  following  condensed 
reply. 

*  Although  I  had  heard  much  of  brother  Earlo, 
I  Lad  never  met  him  until  he  came  here  five  weeks 
since  to  labor  with  me.  Without  ever  having 
seen  him,  I  invited  him  '  to  come  over  and  help ' 
me,  for  two  reasons.  One  was  the  warm  com- 
mendations I  heard  of  him  and  his  labors,  from 
pastors  with  whom  he  had  labored.      From  them 


X96  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

I  never  heard  but  one  opinion.  The  decisive 
reason,  however,  was  this  :  While  absent,  visiting 
the  army,  nearly  a  year  ago,  brother  Earle  preached 
one  sermon  in  my  pulpit.  When  I  came  hon  e, 
I  found  that  that  one  sermon  had  produced  a  deep 
religious  imjpression  upon  my  people ;  and  then  I 
resolved  to  secure  his  aid  in  a  series  of  meetings  I 
proposed  to  hold  the  following  winter.   .   .   . 

"  With  regard  to  him  and  his  labors  in  general, 
I  can  truthfully  say  that  our  expectations  have  been 
more  than  realized.     His  solemn,  earnest,  and  kind 
manner;    his  freedom  from  all  vulgarities  of   ex- 
pression,   or    eccentricities    of   style;    his    simple- 
heartedness  and  entire  devotion  to  his  work ;  his 
honest   piety,   incessant   prayerful ness,  and  strong 
faith;  his  plain,  scriptural,  pointed  preaching ;  his 
obvious  dependence  on  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  free- 
dom   from    devotion  to  any  particular  routine  of 
measures ;    his    warm    and    loving   exhibitions    of 
<  Christ  crucified,'  and  his  fidelity  in  bringing  the 
law  truths   in  direct   contact  with  the  conscience ; 
his  yearning  after  the  salvation  of  souls,  and  his 
developments  of  the  blessedness,  importance,  and 
means  of  attaining  the  higher  Christian  life,  —  these 
and  similar  elements  in  him,  his  preaching  and  his 
work,  have   secured  to  him  the  affection  and  con- 
fidence of  my  own  soul  and  that  of  my  beloved 
people. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES,  19  7 

"To  me,  as  a  pastor,  he  has  been  a  most  afFec- 
tioiiate,  confidential  friend,  as  well  as  a  most  efficient 
helper.  No  man  could  labor  with  another  more 
considerately,  more  faithfully,  than  he  has  with  me  ; 
and  1  commend  him  to  all  my  brethren  in  the 
ministry  as  worthy  of  their  most  implicit  confi- 
dence. 

"The  work  in  our  church  has  been  the  deepest, 
most  thorough,  and  general  I  have  ever  witnessed 
in  a  pastorate  among  them  of  nearly  nineteen  years, 
during  which  time  God  has  graciously  favored  us 
with  many  precious  *  visitations  from  on  high.' 

"The  unanimous  judgment  of  my  most  spiritual 
people  is,  that  for  clearness  and  thoroughness  they 
have  never  heard  the  experiences  of  those  already 
received  into  the  church  surpassed. 

"  We  regret  that  on  account  of  his  many  press- 
ing engagements,  our  beloved  brother  is  abo  it  to 
leave  us,  for  the  work  appears  as  promising  as  ever. 
But  we  shall  always  bless  God  that  he  came  to  us ; 
he  is  embalmed  in  our  grateful  aflfections.  All  will 
be  rejoiced  to  see  him  in  Troy,  and  none  so  much 
as  myself  and  my  family,  who  have  enjoyed  his 
society  during  these  weeks  in  our  own  house. 
Fraternally, 

Geo.  C.  Baldwin." 


198  DRIXGING   IN  SHEAVES 

Kev.  J.  R.  Keuclrick,  D.  D.,  in  the  "  Examiner 

and  Chronicle  "  :  — 

"...  Brother  Earle's  labors  have  been  inde- 
fatigable, earnest,  and  in  one  view  almost  super- 
human. It  is  little  less  than  a  miracle  that  his 
ph3^sical  system  endures  with  apparent  ease  the 
steady  strain  of  five  weeks'  continuous  toil. 

"His  preaching  has  been  plain,  pungent,  some- 
times startling  and  lacerating  in  its  stern  fidelity, 
yet  always  kind  and  free  from  bitterness,  unchari- 
tableness,  and  the  language  of  denunciation.  It 
has  been  marked,  not  merely  by  simplicity,  direct- 
ness, and  tenderness,  which  I  expected,  but  by  a 
real  power,  which,  I  confess,  took  me  by  surprise. 
It  is  often  fresh,  quaint,  and  truly  original,  giving 
a  new  aspect  and  force  to  truths  which  familiarity 
and  stereotyped  modes  of  treatment  have  degraded 
into  impotence. 

"Brother  Earle  evidently  understands  human 
nature  very  thoroughly,  and  here,  in  my  judgment, 
lies  one  great  secret  of  the  efiectiveness  of  his  la- 
bors, so  far  as  those  labors  are  open  to  our  view 
on  the  human  side.  I  have  already  intimated  fjat 
Lis  spirit  is  gentle  and  genial,  tolerant  and  encofir- 
aging  towards  those  who  do  not  fully  share  his 
views  or  unite  in  all  his  measures.  Thu8  he  car- 
ries with    him    the  warm  regards  of  all   those  to 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  199 

whom  he  has  ministered,  unci  lives  in  pleasant  re- 
membrances after  his  departure  to  other  fields. 

"  One  of  the  happiest  effects  of  our  meetings  has 
been  to  vitalize  the  piety  of  a  good  many  languid 
disciples,  and  rouse  them  to  a  hearty  service  in  the 
Master's  cause.  Our  church  is  left,  I  think,  not  in 
an  exhausted  state,  ready  for  reaction  and  depres- 
sion, but  in  a  healthy,  working  condition,  inspired 
and  exhilarated  by  Christian  love  and  hope." 

Rev.  Thomas  Armitage,  D.  D.,  in  the  same  pa- 
per :  — 

«  ,  .  .  I  have  never  had  an  opportunity  of  toil- 
ing side  by  side  Avith  our  brother  till  now,  and 
although  his  method  of  presenting  truth  is  so 
different  from  my-  own,  I  shall  esteem  it  a  great 
privilege  to  pass  through  another  siege  with  him, 
whenever  the  providence  of  God  may  open  the 
way. 

"  A  number  of  friends  who  are  not  acquainted 
with  brother  Earle,  have  asked  me  wherein  his 
ability  lies.  He  often  takes  occasion  himself  to 
say  that  he  aims  at  nothing  profound  or  oratorical 
in  his  preaching,  yet  his  sermons  are  so  good  that 
they  hold  the  attention  and  stir  the  hearts  of  almost 
all  classes  of  minds.  He  preaches  like  a  man  in 
earnest.     Both  in  the  pulpit  and  out  of  it,  he  is 


200  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

a  pattern  of  Christian  manliness.  There  is  nothing 
that  borders  even  on  the  small  and  mean,  either 
in  his  spirit  or  manner.  Common  sense  is  one 
of  his  handmaids,  and  comes  at  his  beck.  She 
seldom  fails  him.  A  Christ-like  tenderness  runs 
through  all  his  appeals,  both  to  the  converted  and 
the  unconverted.  With  this  is  blended  a  child-like 
simplicity.  These  are  followed  by  an  indefatigable 
toil,  the  most  indefatigable  that  I  have  ever  wit- 
nessed. And  the  w^hole  of  these  are  crowned  by 
unceasing  prayer,  and  by  an  unwavering  faith  in 
God. 

"In  leaving  us  he  carries  with  him  the  warm  love 
both  of  pastor  and  people,  and  our  earnest  prayers 
that  he  may  long  be  spared  to  the  churches,  and 
that  showers  of  blessings  may  accompany  him 
wherever  he  goes." 

From  Eev.  Dr.  Boardman  :  — 

*'  Philadelphia,  May  5,  1868. 

«  My  dear  Brother  :  I  cannot  part  with  you 
without  giving  formal  expression  to  my  feelings 
of  gratitude  that  you  have  been  permitted  to  labor 
among  us. 

'''  For  years  I  have  been  convinced  that  Christ, 
in  his  administration  of  his  church,  has  a  place 
for  the  office  of  *  evangelist,'  in  the  modern,  tech- 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  201 

nical  use  even  of  that  term.  My  only  doubt  has 
been  concerninof  the  fitness  of  those  who  have 
thought  themselves  called  to  that  office,  —  not 
concerning  the  office  itself. 

"  I  cheerfully  bear  record  that,  in  the  toilsome 
and  patient  fidelity  with  which  you  have  exercised 
the  office  while  among  us, — in  the  earnestness 
and  simplicity  of  style  which  has  marked  your 
preaching,  —  in  the  kindness  of  spirit  with  which 
you  have  treated  the  severest  themes  of  the  law, — 
in  the  absence  of  eccentricities  and  mechanical 
artifices,  —  in  the  helpful  spirit  with  which  you 
have  cooperated  with  me,  and  in  your  full  and 
distinct  recognition  of  the  supremacy  of  the  pas- 
toral office,  —  in  this  I  recognize  evidences  that 
God  has  indeed  called  you  to  *  do  the  work  of  an 
evangelist'   (2  Tim.  iv.  5). 

"May  God  long  spare  your  life,  and  keep  you 
humble,  and  continue    to    make  you   instrumental 
in    winning    to    Christ    multitudes     who    in    His 
gracious  purpose  are  ordained  to  eternal  life. 
Aflectionately  yours, 

Geo.  D.  Boahdman. 

«Rev.  a.  B.  Earle." 


202  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES, 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

SERMON.  —  TITLE  EXAMINED.* 

"  Many  will  sat  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not 
prophesied  in  thy  name?  and  in  thy  name  have  cast  out 
devils?   and  in  thy  name  done  many  wonderful  works? 

And    THEN    WILL   I    PROFESS    UNTO    THEM,  I    NEVER   KNEW   YOU  ; 
DEPART  FROM  ME,  YE  THAT  WORK  INIQUITY."  —  Matt.  vii.  22,  23. 

THE  Savior  in  these  few  words  lifts  the  veil  that 
conceals  from  us  the  future,  and  permits  us 
to  look  upon  a  scene  of  the  judgment,  at  the  final 
assembling  of  all  people  and  nations  to  receive 
their  everlasting  sentence.  It  is  one  of  mingled 
grief  and  happiness,  joyful  surprise  and  bitter  dis- 
appointment :  some,  who  were  all  their  lives  in 
doubt  and  fear  about  their  hopes  of  heaven,  receive 
from  Jesus  a  welcome  and  a  crown;  while  others, 
who  had  been  loud  in  proclaiming  their  devotion  to 
God,  or  had  gone  through  life  without  any  fear 
about  their  salvation,  are  doomed  to  the  abode  of 

*  Preached  in  Tremont  Temple,  Boston. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  203 

the  lost,  and  turn  away  in  horror  and  despair  upon 
the  hopeless  "  left  hand." 

0,  who  can  tell  the  disappointment,  when  those 
who  have  lived  and  died  in  the  fellowship  of  the 
church,  and  have  gone  to  the  judgment  expecting 
a  welcome  among  the  white-robed  throng  that 
dwell  on  the  banks  of  the  river  of  life,  receive, 
instead,  the  sentence  from  the  Judge,  "I  never 
knew  you  :  depart  from  me  "  !  What  could  make 
amends  for  the  anguish  of  such  a  disappointment? 
And  yet,  our  text  tells  us,  this  will  be  the  ex- 
perience of  many  at  that  approaching  trial. 

Let  me,  therefore,  urge  upon  each  one  of  you,  my 
hearers,  the  importance  of  a  thorough  examination 
of  your  hope,  or  your  title  to  heaven. 

1.  We  should  be  thorough,  because  it  is  a 
matter  of  faith,  and  not  of  sight. 

Were  it  something  we  could  see  with  our  eyes,  and 
our  hands  could  handle,  we  could  then  very  quickly 
aud  easily  satisfy  ourselves  as  to  its  validity.  But 
such  is  not  the  case  —  it  is  in  no  w^ay  connected 
with  the  bodily  senses  ;  its  evidences  lie  wholly  out- 
side of  their  province.  It  is  wholly  a  matter  of 
faith,  —  we  speak  of  a  clear  title  as  the  "  assurance 
of  faith :  "  the  Scriptures  affirm  it  still  more  ex- 
plicitly, telling  us,  "Faith  is  the  substance  of  things 
hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  as 
though  this  faith  was  to  its  possessor  what  the  deed 


204  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

of  your  house  is  to  you  —  a  clear,  genuine  title, 
signed  and  sealed.  But  while  the  title  to  your 
house  can  be  read  at  any  time,  and  its  genuineness 
ascertained  without  difficulty,  your  title  to  heaven 
requires  the  most  careful  and  thorough  examination, 
because  its  evidences  are,  as  I  have  observed,  be- 
yond the  reach  of  the  bodily  senses ;  and  it  is  still 
more  difficult,  because  these  evidences  vary  with 
your  faith.  When  your  fiiith  is  clear  and  strong, 
they  are  clear ;  and  obscure  and  weak,  when  your 
faith  is  weak  and  clouded.  How  unwise  and 
dangerous,  then,  is  a  hasty,  superficial  examina- 
tion of  a  title,  on  the  genuineness  of  which  our 
eternal  happiness  depends,  when  the  evidences  of 
that  title  are  so  subject  to  change,  and  must  be  read 
only  through  the  medium  of  the  spiritual  vision  ! 

2.  We  should  be  thorough,  because  it  is  often 
difficult  to  distinguish  between  a  movement  of  the 
animal  feelings  and  true  religious  affections  and 
impulses. 

Many  professors  of  religion  go  to  meeting  and 
appear  very  happy,  and  honestly  think  themselves 
Christians,  and  yet,  in  truth,  they  know  nothing  of 
the  love  of  Christ;  their  happiness  is  no  deeper 
than  their  emotional  nature. 

A  person  who  loves  Jesus  may  be  cast  down  and 
sad,  while  another  may  apparently  be  happy  in  him, 
and  yet  be  a  stranger  to  pa.'doning  grace. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  205 

Emotions  come  and  go,  like  the  waves  of  the 
sea,  with  our  changing  circumstances.  The  fruits 
of  tlie  Spirit  appear,  on  a  superficial  examination, 
to  be  closely  imitated  in  the  natural  and  unrenewed 
heart,  —  so  that  we  want  a  better  evidence  than 
the  mere  fact  that  we  are  happy.  We  want  a  title 
that  is  unmoved  by  sorrows  ;  that  neither  floods  nor 
tlames  can  destroy  ;  — 

*'  A  faith  that  shines  more  bright  and  clear 
When  tempests  rage  without; 
That  when  in  danger  knows  no  fear, 
In  darkness  feels  no  doubt. 

**That  bears,  unmoved,  the  world's  dread  frown, 
Nor  heeds  its  scornful  smile ; 
That  seas  of  trouble  cannot  drown, 
Nor  Satan's  arts  beguile." 

3.  We  should  be  thorough,  because  we  are  in 
danger  of  being  satisfied  with  the  existing  standard 
of  religion  in  the  community  where  we  live. 

The  standard  of  piety,  in  most  places,  is  very 
low.  Christians  have  been  "  measurino^  themselves 
by  themselves,  and  comparing  themselves  among 
themselves,"  until  that  dwarfed  and  imperfect 
pattern  seems  to  be  about  the  only  one  we  employ, 
or  care  to  employ.  If  we  reach  that,  we  are  quite 
likely  to  settle  down  into  a  contented  state,  without 
making  much  further  eflbrt. 


206  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES, 

Many  are  evidently  relying  very  much  on  the 
fGrms  of  religion,  without  its  vitality  and  power, 
and  that,  too,  in  our  evangelical  churches. 

The  standard  of  admission  to  our  churches  is 
also  low  in  very  many  cases ;  a  few  tears  over  sin, 
a  little  outward  change,  and  especially  a  certain 
correctness  of  theory  and  deportment,  far  too  often 
open  the  door  to  church  membership,  while  the 
heart  is  still  unrenewed. 

We  need,  therefore,  great  care  in  our  examina- 
tion, lest  we  take  up  with  a  mere  human  standard 
of  religion. 

Jesus  has  given  a  pattern  in  his  own  life  on  the 
earth,  and  in  the  plain  teachings  of  his  word ;  by 
that,  men  must  measure  themselves.  O,  that  we 
might  all  do  so,  for  therein  would  we  find  safety  ! 

4.  Another  reason  for  a  thorough  examination  of 
our  title  is,  A  deceived  soul  is  a  constant  dead 
weight  in  the  church. 

The  man  who  is  deceived  may  pray,  or  preach,  or 
exhort,  but  his  heart  will  not  be  in  his  work.  He 
cannot  speak  from  heart  experience  ;  and  as  heart 
must  answer  to  heart,  you  do  not  feel  what  he  says  ; 
or  your  heart,  if  warm  and  active  with  the  love 
of  Christ,  cannot  unite  with  his  :  it  finds  there  nO 
answering  voice,  not  even  a  resting-place,  and,  like 
Noah's  dove,  turns  back  to  its  home. 

A  warm-hearted,    earnest   Christian   will    some- 


BRINGING  IN  SUEAVES.  207 

times  kneel  down  to  join  in  prayer  with  a  deceived 
soul,  and  wonder  why  his  heart  is  not  moved  and 
led  by  the  prayer ;  he  cannot  see  any  cause  unless 
it  be  in  himself.  But  the  secret  is,  one  heart  has 
been  made  alive  by  renewing  grace,  while  the 
other  is  still  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  The 
deceived  soul  cannot  pronounce  the  family  lan- 
guage ;  his  lips  may,  but  that  does  not  answer,  for 
it  is  a  heart  lano^uaire,  and  no  man  can  make  his 
heart  say,  «  Abba,  Father,"  but  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  It  matters  not  how  rich  or  influential  the 
deceived  soul  may  be,  he  is  still  a  dead  weight  in 
the  church. 

Simon  made  a  profession  of  religion,  joined  the 
church,  prayed  and  talked  with  the  rest,  was  rich 
and  influential,  and  yet  he  was  regarded  as  an 
injury  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  just  because  he  was 
a  deceived  soul,  still  "  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and 
in  the  bond  of  iniquity ;  "  his  "  heart  was  not  right 
:n  the  sight  of  God,"  and,  so  long  as  that  was  the 
case,  nothing  could  counterbalance  the  burden  such 
a  heart  w^as  to  the  church. 

And  so  it  has  ever  been  and  ever  will  be.  A 
deceived  soul,  in  the  church,  is  a  dead  weight. 

5.  We  should  be  thorough  in  the  examination  of 
our  hearts,  because  God  will  be  thorough  with  us 
at  the  judgment,  no  matter  how  careless  we  may 
be  here. 


208  BKINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

O,  what  a  fearful  ordeal  every  person  will  there 
pass  through,  whether  he  be  a  true  Christian,  a 
deceived  soul,  or  one  who  never  professed  any 
interest  in  Christ!  "Every  man's  work  shall  be 
made  manifest :  for  the  day  shall  declare  it,  because 
it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire ;  and  the  fire  shall  try 
every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is." 

Like  the  fire  that  brings  out  the  half-obliterated 
letters  and  designs  on  a  worn  piece  of  silver,  the 
fire  and  light  of  the  judgment  will  reveal  the  real 
character  of  the  letters  on  our  titles  to  heaven — ■ 
whether  they  were  drawn  with  the  red  blood  of 
Jesus  or  the  pencil  marks  of  earth. 

O,  the  bitter  remorse  of  such  an  hour,  when  the 
church  member  learns  that  his  title  is  spurious  ! 

Let  us,  then,  before  it  is  too  late,  examine  our 
hopes  carefully  and  thoroughly,  each  for  himself. 
Let  us  not  trust  to  the  judgment  of  the  church  or 
of  our  friends,  for  no  one  can  know  our  hearts  as 
well  as  ourselves.  We  know  best  whether  we  love 
to  pray,  whether  we  weep  over  lost  sinners,  whether 
we  love  God's  people ;  and  so  in  regaixl  to  all  the 
evidences,  we  can  best  search  our  hearts  for  them. 

6.  Another  reason  for  a  thorough  examination 
of  our  title  is.  Many  professing  Christians,  and 
even  ministers  of  the  gospel,  have  actually  found 
themselves  deceived,  after  having  been  members  of 
the  church  for  years. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  209 

A  young  man  of  fine  talent  and  promise,  after 
completing  his  studies,  was  settled  over  one  of  our 
large  churches. 

The  people  were  delighted  with  their  new  pastor : 
his  education,  his  eloquence,  his  devotion  to  his 
work,  and  his  theology,  even,  were  all  they  could 
wish ;  his  discourses  were  listened  to  with  great 
pleasure  by  large  congregations. 

But  soon  those  who  knew  Christ  experimentally, 
md  had  power  with  God  in  prayer,  became  satis- 
fied that  their  pastor  was  an  unregenerated  man. 

All  was  right  except  his  heart.  The  church, 
however,  did  not  wish  to  part  with  him,  or  to  injure 
his  influence.  Accordingly,  they,  unknown  to  him, 
appointed  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer  for  his  con- 
version. 

But  as  they  were  assembling  to  humble  them- 
selves before  God  for  that  purpose,  the  pastor  saw 
a  brother  who  never  could  keep  a  secret,  passing 
by  his  study,  and  inquired  of  him  why  so  many  of 
the  people  were  going  into  the  church.  The  plain, 
straightforward  reply  was,  "We  are  going  to  pray 
that  God  will  convert  your  soul,  pastor." 

This  information  deeply  moved  the  heart  of  the 
pastor;  he  went  to  his  room,  fell  on  his  knees,  and 
asked  God  to  show  him  his  real  condition. 

And  there,  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  his  people 
and  his  own  petitions,  the  Spirit  revealed  to  him 
14 


210  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

the  startling  truth  that  his  heart  was  still  unre- 
newed, and  led  him  to  give  himself  to  Jesus,  and 
obtain  an  experimental  knowledge  of  the  way  of 
salvation. 

From  that  day  he  was  all  the  church  could  desire. 

Very  many  professing  Christians  have  discovered 
a  shuilar  mistake  in  time  to  correct  it,  and  secure  a 
genuine  title.  But  multitudes,  as  our  text  teaches, 
pass  through  life  in  a  careless  state,  expecting  to 
reach  heaven,  and,  dying  with  that  hope  in  their 
hearts,  go  to  their  final  reward,  thinking  to  be  wel- 
come within  the  "  pearly  gates  "  of  the  New  Jerusa- 
lem ;  yet  there  learn,  to  their  utter  dismay  and 
sorrow,  they  had  been  deceived,  and,  when  it  is  too 
late  to  make  any  change,  hear  from  the  lips  of  the 
Judge  their  everlasting  doom  :  "  I  never  knew  you  : 
depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity." 

Who  can  conceive  the  magnitude  of  such  a  dis- 
appointment, not  of  a  hypocrite,  not  of  an  out- 
wardly immoral  character,  but  of  a  soul  in  one 
sense  sincere,  and  yet  deceived;  thought  to  have 
been  born  again,  and  yet,  in  reality,  in  the  **bond 
of  iniquity  " ! 

"  0,  wretched  state  of  deep  despair, 
To  see  my  God  remove, 
And  fix  my  dreadful  station  where 
I  must  not  taste  his  love  1 " 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  211 

Let  me  then  urge  you  to  make  a  most  thorough 
examination  of  your  title  for  heaven.  Do  not  rest 
until  you  can  say,  "I  know  whom  I  have  believed, 
and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which 
I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day." 

"  Yes,  I'm  secure  beneath  thy  blood, 
And  all  my  foes  shall  lose  their  aim : 
Hosanna  to  my  Savior  God, 

And  my  best  honors  to  his  name." 

To  assist  you  in  making  this  examination,  I  will 
answer,  as  well  as  I  am  able,  the  question.  What 
ought  to  satisfy  me  that  I  am  a  Christian? 

And',  perhaps,  I  can  do  this  in  no  better  way 
than  by  making  use  of  "  Ten  Evidences  of  Conver- 
sion," which  I  prepared  some  years  ago,  and  now 
have  with  me  on  this  little  card.*  On  one  side  are 
these  "  evidences,"  and  on  the  other  ten  questions 
for  "self-examination,"  for  older  Christians,  and 
which  were  drawn  up  originally  only  for  my  own 
heart.  At  such  times  as  the  present  many  wish 
to  obtain  them.  I  have  already  given  away,  in  this 
manner,  some  fifty  thousand  copies,  and  now,  to- 
night, any  who  desire  a  copy  will  be  welcome  to 
one  after  the  close  of  the  meetiufi:. 

I  wish  each  one  of  you  would  carefully  examine 

*  Pages  22G  and  227. 


212       '  BRINGING    TN  SHEAVES. 

these  evidences,  and  settle  in  your  own  mind  whether 
you  have  one,  two,  half,  or  all  of  them ;  and  if  you 
find  one,  —  and  but  one,  —  take  courage,  and  hope 
for  others. 

1.  "  A  full  surrender  of  the  will  to  God." 

As  the  will  is  the  seat  of  the  rebellion  against 
God,  this  stronghold  is  the  most  obstinately  de- 
fended and  the  very  last  to  be  surrendered. 

Men  will  give  up  their  property,  their  health, 
their  honor,  their  homes,  and  in  some  cases  even 
their  lives,  sooner  than  surrender  their  wills.  And 
yet  no  one  can  be  regenerated  until  this  is  done  : 
though  the  man  give  up  all  else,  it  is  in  vain,  so 
lono:  as  he  retires  within  this  fortress  and  refuses 
its  surrender. 

So  that  the  first  evidence  of  a  genuine  hope  in 
Christ  is,  a  will  given  up  to  God. 

In  the  case  of  the  anxious  sinner,  this  act  of 
surrender  is  at  once  followed  by  a  change  :  it  is 
the  first  step  in  the  way  of  salvation.  The  rebel- 
lion in  his  heart  is  gone,  and,  like  Saul  of  Tarsus, 
his  prayer  is,  "Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?'' 
He  may  think  himself  still  in  his  sins,  yet  the 
change  is  apparent,  though  he  may  still  be  seeking 
pardon ;  he  is  willing  to  do  the  very  things  he  had 
stoutly  refused  to  do  until  now.  He,  perhaps,  had 
said,  <  No  one  shall  know  my  feelings,  until  I  am 
sure  I  am  a  Christian  ;  "  yet  now  he  is  heard  in  the 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  21  o 

crowded  assembly,  asking  for  prayer.  Or,  perhaps, 
he  is  the  first  to  accept  the  invitation  to  go  forward 
with  those  who  are  anxious,  although  he  had  as- 
serted that  he  never  would  take  such  a  step.  The 
sentiment  of  his  heart  is,  — 

*'  I  can  hold  out  no  more; 

I  sink,  by  dying  love  compelled, 
And  own  TlTee  conqueror." 

My  hearer,  have  you  this  evidence  of  your  conver- 
sion? When  the  lines  are  clearly  drawn,  and  you 
feel  that  you  are  called  on  to  give  up  God's  way  or 
your  own,  do  you  adopt  the  latter  course?  If  so, 
rejoice;  if  not,  you  have  reason  for  great  anxiety. 
Christians  are  not  perfect :  there  are  times  when 
they  commit  this  sin  of  putting  self  before  God ; 
but  if  this  is  habitual,  and  3^ou  find  no  real  desire 
or  purpose  to  make  God's  will  first  and  supreme, 
you  lack  the  most  important  evidence  of  a  genuine 
title  for  heaven. 

2.  "  The  removal  of  a  burden  of  sin  suddenly  or 
gradually." 

The  burden  of  conviction  for  sin  varies  greatly 
with  different  individuals  :  some  persons  are  over- 
whehned  with  a  sense  of  their  guilt,  while  others 
complain  that  they  have  scarcely  any  feeling,  and 
pray  for  deeper  conviction. 

Yet,  when  conversion  takes  phice,  these  burdens 


214  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

are  removed,  though,  in  one  case,  as  suddenly  as 
Bunyau's  pilgrim  lost  his  at  the  cross,  and,  in 
others,  so  gradually  that  neither  the  hour  nor  the 
day  can  be  told.  This  difference  in  the  removal  of 
these  burdens  may  be  illustrated  in  this  simple 
way:  — 

Suppose  two  men  each  have  a  sack  of  sand  tied, 
with  strings,  upon  their  shgulders,  and  in  one  case 
the  strino^s  are  cut  —  the  sack  with  its  contents 
instantly  falls  to  the  ground ;  but  in  the  other  case 
a  small  hole  is  made  in  the  sack  —  the  sand  runs 
out  slowly,  and  the  man  is  so  gradually  relieved  of 
his  burden  he  scarcely  realizes  when  it  was  removed, 
nor  can  he  fix  upon  any  moment,  and  say,  "At  that 
time  my  load  was  taken  away."  Yet  the  latter  was 
as  great  and  real  a  change  as  the  former,  and  the 
real  work  —  that  done  by  the  knife  in  cutting  the 
strings,  and  in  opening  the  sack — was  as  instantane- 
ous in  one  case  as  the  other,  only  the  results  or 
evidences  followed  gradually  in  one  case  and  in- 
stantly in  the  other. 

If,  then,  your  burden  is  gone,  and  you  feel  that 
some  love  to  God  and  his  people  has  taken  its 
place,  you  have  an  evidence  of  a  change  of  heart, 
no  matter  though  you  cannot  tell  the  time  of  the 
change. 

If  there  be  "  the  full  corn  in  the  ear,"  there  has 
surely  been  «  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear." 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  215 

3.  "A  new  feeling  of  love  to  Christians  and  to 
Jesus." 

This  is  one  of  the  best  evidences,  and  almost  the 
first  change,  the  renewed  soul  discovers. 

"We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto 
life,  because  we  love  the  brethren." 

The  3^oung  convert  seeks  the  society  of  Chris- 
tians —  they  appear  so  different  to  him  ;  when  the 
prayer  meeting  has  closed,  he  waits  that  he  may 
speak  with  them  ;  his  song  now  is,  — 

"  Lonely  I  no  longer  roam, 

Like  the  cloud,  the  wind,  the  ware ; 
Where  you  dwell  shall  be  my  home, 
Where  you  die  shall  be  my  grave." 

If  you  discover  this  evidence,  and  only  this,  be 
encouraged,  and  go  forward  in  the  Christian  jour- 
ney ;  the  morning  star  is  the  harbinger  of  the  full- 
orbed  sun. 

I  was  baptized  and  taken  into  the  church  when  I 
had  only  this  one  evidence.  I  was  determined  to 
go  forward,  and  perform  the  duties  required  of  a 
faithful  Christian.  And,  as  I  went  on,  evidences 
bi^gan  to  multiply.  I  was  like  the  travellc/r,  who, 
finding  one  mile-post,  passes  on  to  another,  and 
then  on  to  still  another,  and  so  on  in  his  journey, 
each  one  increasing  the  evidence  that  he  is  ou  the 
right  road,  and,  also,  is  steadily  approaching  the 
desired  city. 


216  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

God  has  said,  "  Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow 
on  to  know  the  Lord." 

If  you  find  one  spark  of  this  love  in  your  heart, 
thankfully  cherish  it,  although  it  may  have  come  so 
gradually,  and  may  still  be  so  faint,  you  can  but 
just  discern  that  it  is  there.  The  wind  sometimes 
blows  much  more  softl}^  than  at  other  times ;  yet  it 
is  as  really  the  wind  that  whispers  in  the  zephyr  as 
that  thunders  in  the  hurricane.  So  in  conversion  : 
some  come  into  the  kingdom  shouting  their  love 
to  God,  their  evidences  seem  to  them  so  clear ; 
and  others  come  with  but  a  gentle  breath  of  love ; 
yet  both  conversions  are  equally  genuine  and  pre- 
cious. 

4.  "  A  new  relish  for  the  word  of  God." 

All  true  conversions  are  followed  by  a  new  love 
for  the  Scriptures.  There  is  a  lingering  over  the 
inspired  page,  unknown  before ;  the  words  of  Jesus 
are  full  of  beauty  and  sweetness;  the  objections 
that  once  were  made  are  gone.  It  is  no  longer  a 
gloomy  book.  The  convert  finds  some  of  its  con- 
tents wrapped  in  mystery ;  yet  he  understands 
enough  of  its  truths  to  lead  him  to  say,  "  O,  how 
love  I  thy  law  !     It  is  my  meditation  all  the  day." 

There  may  be  times  when  none  of  this  love  is 
felt. 

Emotions  vary  with  circumstances ;  one  class 
may  be   wholly  thrown   out  of   sight    for  a  time, 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  217 

and  another  altogether  different  aroused  by  some 
change  in  our  surroundings, — thus  all  relish  for 
the  Bible  may  temporarily  seem  to  be  wanting. 
But  even  at  such  a  time  we  need  not  be  wholly 
cast  down  and  discouraged;  there  is  good  reason 
to  believe  we  have  been  "  born  again,"  if  we  can 
remember  seasons  when  we  could  say,  "  My  soul 
hath  kept  thy  testimonies  ;  and  I  love  them  exceed- 
ingly :  "  such  love  is  the  fruit  of  a  renewed  heart. 

5.  "Pleasure  in  secret  prayer,  at  least  at  times." 

This  is  a  good  evidence  of  a  change  of  heart ; 
for  it  is  very  natural  that  we  should  find  pleasure 
in  converse  with  those  we  lov^  :  and  since  prayer 
is  converse  with  God,  we  must  have  some  love  for 
him  if  we  find  pleasure  in  this  exercise. 

"  Behold  he  prayeth,"  is  one  of  the  first  signs 
of  spiritual  life  :  a  renewed  soul  will  pray. 

I  think  no  unregenerated  person  ever  enjoyed 
secret  prayer  for  a  single  hour.  If,  then,  you 
do  enjoy  secret  prayer,  even  at  times,  and  exhibit 
some  of  the  fruits  of  true  prayer  in  your  life,  you 
have  good  reason  to  hope  that  you  are  an  heir  of 
heaven,  although  you  may  never  have  had  the  con- 
viction and  the  light  you  desired. 

"  Prayer  is  the  breath  of  God  in  man, 
Returning  whence  it  came ; 
Love  is  the  sacred  fire  within, 
And  prayer  !^he  rieing  flame." 


21.8  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

6.  "  Sin,  or  sinful  thoughts,  will  cause  pain." 

Unholy  thoughts  are  often  thrown  into  the  minds 
of  even  the  most  devoted  Christians,  and  while 
they  are  endeavoring  to  serve  God  —  perhaps  in 
the  closet,  or  in  the  pra3^er  meeting,  or  in  the  pul- 
pit. The  Christian  will  always  be  liable  to  them 
while  on  the  earth.  But  there  is  no  sin  in  them 
unless  they  are  cherished.  Only  when  they  are 
pleasing,  and  are  cherished,  do  they  make  us 
guilt}^ 

Jesus  had  such  thoughts  thrown  into  his  mind. 
The  devil  suggested  to  him  that  he  give  up  the 
purpose  for  which  he  came  into  the  world,  and 
become  universal  king;  but  the  thought  was  in- 
stantly hurled  back  upon  Satan,  its  author. 

Afi^ain  it  was  suo;o^ested  that  he  throw  himself 
down  from  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple  —  only  a 
thought ;  but  Jesus  found  no  pleasure  in  it,  and 
rejected  it  wholly  and  at  once,  vanquishing  the 
tempter  with  the  "sword  of  the  Spirit,"  "It  is 
written,  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy 
God." 

And  thus  He  "  who  knew  no  sin  "  teaches  his 
followers  that  no  matter  how  vile  and  unholy  the 
thought  that  may  come  into  their  minds,  there  is 
no  taint  of  sin  about  it  if  it  is  at  once  rejected. 

The  question,  therefore,  for  us  to  settle  about 
these  unholy  thoughts  is  this  :     Do  they  produce 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  219 

loathing  and  sorrow?  If  Ihey  do,  there  is  evidence 
in  that  pain  of  love  to  Jesus.  But  if  they  produce 
pleasure,  and  are  cherished,  they  are  "swift  wit- 
nesses" against  us.  Are  they  unwelcome  visitors  ? 
Then  take  fresh  courage  for  your  heavenward 
journey. 

7.  "  Desire  and  effort  for  the  salvation  of  others." 
The  natural  impulse  of  the  "  new  man  "  is,  to  lead 
others  to  the  Savior. 

"  Then  will  I  tell  to  sinners  round 
What  a  dear  Savior  I  have  found ; 
I'll  point  to  thy  redeeming  blood, 
And  say,  '  Behold  the  way  to  God.'  '* 

Andrew's  first  impulse,  after  his  conversion,  was 
to  seek  the  salvation  of  those  about  him.  "He 
first  findeth  his  own  brother  Simon,"  tells  him  what 
a  precious  Savior  he  has  found,  and  then,  as  we 
are  told,  "  He  brought  him  to  Jesus." 

And  Philip,  when  his  heart  had  been  changed  by 
pardoning  love,  went  in  search  of  his  brother  Na- 
thanael;  and  although  Nathanael  tried  to  excuse 
himself,  on  the  ground  that  Jesus  was  a  Nazarene, 
Philip,  in  his  new  love  and  zeal,  conquered,  and  led 
him  to  the  Master. 

My  dear  hearer,  do  you  weep  over  lost  men? 
Does  it  sometimes  seem  as  if  you  must  go  at  once 
to  the  sinner,  and  show  him   his  danger  and  need 


220  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

of  a  Savior?  Aud  yet  are  you  troubled  aiid  hin- 
dered by  the  fear  that  you  yourself  are  not  a  child 
of  God? 

Then  let  me  say  to  you,  Throw  aside  that  fear, 
and  go  to  work  for  Jesus,  as  your  heart  prompts 
you.  Those  desires  are  evidences  of  your  love  to 
Jesus. 

8.  "A  desire  to  obey  Christ  in  his  commands 
and  ordinances." 

You  need  not  be  troubled  to  know  how  you  came 
by  such  a  desire ;  but,  if  you  find  you  have  it, 
accept  it  with  joy  as  an  evidence  that  you  have  been 
born  again.  I  refer,  of  course,  to  a  desire  to  obey 
all  the  commands  and  ordinances,  not  isolated  and 
particular  ones.  There  may  be  some  selfish  reason 
for  desiring  to  obey  some  particular  command ;  this 
must  be  the  ruling  desire  of  your  heart  in  reference 
to  every  known  command,  in  order  to  be  of  real 
value  as  an  evidence  of  a  new  heart. 

Our  Master  says,  "  If  a  man  love  me,  he  will 
keep  my  w^ords :  "  that  means,  I  suppose,  he  will 
desire  so  to  do,  and  will  actually  obey  those  com- 
mands so  far  as  he  understands  them  and  has  op- 
portunity. The  heart  is  the  controlling  power; 
whatever  a  man  loves  most,  to  that  he  devotes  him- 
gelf ;  if,  therefore,  there  be  the  indwelling  of  a 
spirit  of  obedience  to  God,  and  an  effort  to  do  his 
will,  it  is  an  evidence  of  love  to  him. 


BRINGING  IN  SUEAVES.  221 

No  person  should  cill  himself  a  Christian  while 
living  in  known  neglect  of  one  of  Christ's  com- 
mands or  ordinances. 

The  renewed  soul  is  anxious  to  know  and  do  the 
whole  will  of  God ;  with  one  of  old,  he  says, 
"  Make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments, 
for  therein  do  I  delight." 


*'  I  would  not  sigh  for  worldly  joy, 
Or  to  increase  my  worldly  good; 
Nor  future  days,  nor  powers  employ, 
To  spread  a  sounding  name  abroad. 

'Tis  to  my  Savior  I  would  live ; 

To  him  who  for  my  ransom  died ; 
Nor  could  all  worldly  honor  give 
Such  bliss  as  crowns  me  at  his  side.** 


9.  "Deep  humility  and  self-abasement." 
This   must  have   a   prominent   place  among  the 
evidences  of  conversion. 

Whoever  has  seen  himself  a  guilty,  condemned 
sinner,  vile  and  wretched,  under  the  curse  of  a 
holy  law,  justly  doomed  to  death,  with  no  merit 
of  his  own^  no  ability  to  save  himself,  and  one  who 
if  saved  at  all  must  be  saved  by  pure,  undeserved, 
unrequited  grace,  —  whoever  has  thus  seen  himself 
will,  when  he  has  been  actually  thus  saved  and 
freed  from  the  sin  and  curse  that  were  resting  on 
him,  be  very  likely  to  feel  humble. 


222  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES, 

"  'Tis  faith  that  lays  the  sinner  low, 
And  covers  him  with  shame ; 
Renouncing  all  self-righteousness, 
It  trusts  in  Jesus'  name." 

A  whole-hearted  Christian  will  be  humble,  like 
nis  Lord,  who  "  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant ; "  for  we  are 
told  in  the  word  of  God,  "if  any  man  have  not  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his." 

My  hearer,  can  you  claim  this  evidence  —  "deep 
humility  and  self-abasement"? 

10.  "A  growing  desire  to  be  holy  and  like 
Christ." 

This  is  the  crowning  evidence  of  all.  "  A  little 
leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump : "  where  the 
leaven  of  grace  has  been  implanted  there  will  be 
this  "growing  desire  to  be  holy  and  like  Christ,"  — 
an  inward  hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteous- 
ness. 

The  unrenewed  man  has  no  such  desire ;  he  may 
seek  to  be  free  from  some  faults  and  vices,  and  to 
make  for  himself  a  character  that  men  will  esteem ; 
but  he  has  no  desire  to  follow  Jesus,  and  imitate 
him  in  holiness  and  self-denying  devotion  to 
God. 

The  renewed  man,  on  the  other  hand,  desires 
this  likeness  to  Jesus  above  all  things  else ;  hia 
unceasing  prayer  is, — 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  223 

«*  Nearer,  my  God,  to  thee, 

Nearer  to  thee ! 
E'en  though  it  be  a  cross 

That  raisetli  me ; 
Still  all  my  song  shall  be, 
Nearer,  my  God,  to  thee, 

Nearer  to  thee." 

And  even  when  the  "  dark  river  "  has  been  crossed, 
and  he  is  being  conducted  by  angel  guides  towards 
his  home  in  glory,  he  is  represented  as  still  longing 
to  be  nearer  and  more  like  Jesus  : 

**  And  when  on  joyful  wing 

Cleaving  the  sky, 
Sun,  moon,  and  stars  forgot, 

Upward  I  fly ; 
Still  all  my  song  shall  be. 
Nearer,  my  God,  to  thee, 

Nearer  to  thee  !  " 

Let  me,  then,  inquire,  my  dear  hearer,  if  you  can 
claim  one  or  more  of  these  evidences  that  you  are  a 
child  of  God? 

If  you  can,  then  offer  your  thanksgiving  to  God. 
If  but  a  single  ray  of  sunshine  from  the  cross  has 
crept  into  your  darkened  heart,  be  encouraged, 
cherish  all  the  warmth  and  light  thus  afforded  you, 
and  go  forward,  lookifig  for  the  coming  of  other  and 
brighter  evidences ;  "  then  shall  we  know,  if  wo 
follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.'* 


224  BRINGING  IN  SIIEAVLS. 

No  Christian,  however  near  the  Savior,  will  real- 
ize all  these  evidences  at  the  same  time ;  generally 
but  one. 

One  day  he  will,  perhaps,  say,  "I  wanted  to  be 
constantly  in  secret  prayer,  it  was  so  delightful 
and  precious.  I  could  feel  the  truth  of  those  sweet 
lines,  — 

*  There  is  a  place  where  Jesus  sheds 
The  oil  of  gladness  on  our  heads ; 
A  place  of  all  on  earth  most  sweet ; 
It  is  the  blood-bought  mercy-seat.'  " 

The  next  day  he  has  not  so  much  inclination  to 
pray,  but  rather  a  strong  desire  to  read  the  word 
of  God,  and  says,  "How  sweet  are  thy  words  unto 
my  taste  !  Yea,  sweeter  than  honey  to  my  mouth." 
At  another  time  all  his  thoughts  and  feelings  go  out 
for  the  salvation  of  lost  men.  So  he  vibrates  back 
and  forth,  —  now  to  this  evidence,  and  now  to 
that. 

Do  not,  then,  expect  all  these  evidences  to  be 
found  in  active  exercise  at  the  same  time.  And 
even  though  you  may,  for  a  time,  seem  to  be  con- 
fined to  one,  remember  that  a  renewed  heart  is  just 
as  necessary  for  the  production  of  that  one  as  for  all ; 
the  tree,  and  the  usual  operations  of  nature,  are  as 
essential  to  give  us  a  single  specimen  of  ripe  fruit 
as  to  load  our  garners. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  225 

How  many  of  yon,  my  dear  hearers,  are  now 
prepared  to  say,  I  believe  I  have  been  born  again  ; 
^nd,  with  what  evidence  I  have,  I  will  go  forward 
and  perform  the  duties  of  a  faithful  Christian  as 
well  as  I  can,  thankful  for  what  light  I  have,  and 
hoping  for  more  ? 

j\Iay  Jesus  bless  us  all  with  a  genuine  title  for 
heaven,  and  say  to  each  of  us,  at  the  judgment, 
"  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  king- 
dom prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  tho 
world." 

Amen. 

15 


TEN  EVIDENCES  OF  CONVERSION. 

FOR  YOUNG  CHRISTIANS. 

1.  A  full  surrender  of  the  will  to  God. 

2.  The  removal  of  a  burden  of  sin,  gradually 

or  suddenly. 

3.  A  new  feeling  of  love  to  Christians  and  to 

Jesus. 

4.  A  new  relish  for  the  Word  of  God. 

5.  Pleasure  in  secret  prayer,  at  least  at  times. 

6.  Sin,  or  sinful  thoughts,  will  cause  pain. 

7.  Desire  and  efforts  for  the  salvation  of  others. 

8.  A  desire  to  obey  Christ  in  his  commands 

and  ordinances. 

9.  Deep  humility  and  self-abasement. 

10.  A  growing  desire  to  be  holy  and  like  Christ. 

—  1  John  iii.  3. 

Are  ^o\x  a  CWisiVaii^     \i  ivot,^\vy^ 


SELF-EXAMINATION, 

FOR  OLDER  CHRISTIANS, 


o>«<< 


1.  Do  I  search  my  heart  to  the  bottom,  and 

act  out  my  convictions  ? 

2.  Do   I   believe   I   control    my   tongue    and 

temper  ? 

3.  Do  I  really  believe  the  Bible  is  the  law  of 

my  heart  and  life  ? 

4.  Do  I  convince  men  that  I  believe  there  is 

an  eternal  Hell  ? 

5.  Am  I  greatly  concerned  for  the  salvation 

of  men  ? 

6.  Do  I  act  like  a  Christian  in  my  family,  and 

among  my  intimate  friends  ? 

7.  Do  I  fully  believe  I  have  been  born  again  % 

8.  Do  I  know  that  I  have  power  with  God  in 

prayer  ? 

9.  Do  I  believe  I  have  been  baptized  with  the 

Holy  Spirit  since  my  conversion  ? 
10.  Am  I   sweetly  resting  in  Christ,  by  faith, 
now? 


(227) 


228  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 


CHAPTER  XVn. 

EVANGELISTS. 

Their  Teials  and  Joys. 

WHEN  our  Redeemer  "  ascended  up  on  high, 
he  gave  gifts  unto  men " —  "some,  apostles  ; 
and  some,  prophets ;  and  some,  evangelists ;  and 
some,  pastors  and  teachers ;  for  the  perfecting  of 
the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the  ministrj^,  for  the 
edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ ;  till  we  all  come  in 
the  unity  of  the  faith,  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the 
measure  of  the  stature  of  Christ." 

Thus  we  see  that  the  work  was  not  to  be  done 
through  one  department  of  Christian  labor,  nor 
were  different  offices  to  be  merged  in  one,  and 
placed  on  one  man ;  but  there  were  to  be 
several  distinct  offices  of  ministerial  labor,  each 
calling  for  special  qualifications,  and  each  filled  by 
its  own  special  workmen,  yet  all  working  in  perfect 
harmony,  and  for  the  same  end  —  the  perfecting 
of  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  229 

The  Savior  having  established  these  different 
departments,  has  always  placed  his  seal  of  approba- 
tion on  them,  and  says  to  those  who  labor  in  either 
of  them,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world." 

One  of  these  departments,  as  we  have  seen,  is 
that  filled  by  the  evangelist. 

An  evangelist  is  a  minister  who  is  not  settled 
over  a  church,  at  least  permanently,  but  is  tempo- 
rarily to  fill  a  vacancy,  to  form  new  churches,  and 
to  assist  pastors  and  churches  in  special  labor  for 
the  salvation  of  souls,  whenever  such  labor  is 
needed. 

Work  began  in  this  branch  of  service  w^ith  the 
commencement  of  the  church  of  Christ.  Thus  we 
find  Philip,  the  evangelist,  going  forth  and  engaging 
in  meetings  in  different  places,  for  the  purpose  of 
promoting  revivals  of  religion. 

"  He  went  down  to  the  city  of  Samaria,  and 
preached  Christ  unto  them,"  continuing  the  meet- 
ing for  some  days  and  perhaps  weeks.  The  work 
became  so  deep  and  general,  that  Peter  and  John 
were  sent  down  from  Jerusalem  by  the  brethren,  to 
assist  in  carrying  it  forward. 

After  a  while  these  brethren  returned  to  Jeru- 
salem, but  Philip  went  on  towards  Gaza,  baptizing 
the  eunuch  on  the  way.     So  pressing  were  the  calls 


230  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

for  this  kind  of  labor,  that  the  "  Spirit  caught  away 
Philip,"  and  hastened  him  on  to  other  places  that 
were  waiting  for  him.  His  next  field  of  labor  was 
at  Azotus ;  but  how  long  he  remained  there  we  are 
not  told.  From  Azotus  he  went  on,  and  preached 
in  al.  the  cities  till  he  came  to  Cesarea.  Here  was 
his  home  —  the  evangelist's  home. 

Paul  and  his  company  stopped  with  this  evange- 
list, and  rested  several  days.  It  was  no  doubt  a 
pleasure  to  Philip  and  his  family  to  entertain  such 
distinguished  guests. 

But  my  principal  object  at  this  time  is  to  speak 
of  a  few  of  the  trials  and  joys  of  an  evangelist : 

One  great  trial  in  this  work  is,  the  necessity  of 
being  from  home  most  of  the  time. 

Those  who  have  homes,  where  the  dear  ones 
dwell,  and  where  the  purest  bliss  and  peace  on 
earth  can  be  found,  understand  at  once  the  pain  of 
such  separation.  It  is  hard  to  leave  home  for  a 
single  month ;  but  to  be  away  from  it  year  after 
year,  for  ten  months  out  of  twelve,  when  life  is  so 
very  brief,  is  one  of  the  hardest  trials  in  the  w^ork 
of  an  evangelist.  And,  besides,  home  has  so  many 
sweet  and  soothing  associations,  so  many  holy, 
purifying  influences,  which  are  just  what  a  minister 
needs  in  his  work,  —  to  be  deprived  of  all  these 
for   so  great   a  portion   of  the   time   is   no  small 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  231 

Bacri6ce.  O,  the  joy  of  my  bounding  heart,  when, 
after  weeks,  and  perhaps  months  of  unceasing  toil 
and  anxiety,  I  turn  towards  my  home,  weary  and 
worn  !  No  matter  how  long  the  journey,  or  rough 
the  way,  or  chilly  the  winds,  I  heed  them  not  on 
the  homeward  track. 

I  have  often,  at  such  times,  repeated  the  ex- 
pressive lines :  — 

*'  What  do  we  reck  on  a  weary  way, 
Though  lonely  and  benighted, 
When  we  know  there  are  lips  to  chide  our  stay, 
And  eyes  that  will  beam,  love  lighted?" 

But  when  home  is  reached  after  such  an  absence, 
one  or  two  days  are  usually  all  I  can  spend  with 
my  family  before  duty  calls  me  away  to  another 
meeting,  already  pledged. 

I  often  say  to  my  family,  1  trust  we  shall  know 
each  other  in  heaven,  where  we  may  dwell  together 
without  interruption,  and  our  joy  be  the  greater, 
when  the  "  sheaves,"  gathered  through  these  years 
of  separation  are  brought  into  the  garners  above. 
With  this  thought  before  us,  we  often  sing  these 
beautiful  lines :  — 

"  When  the  holy  angels  meet  us, 
As  we  go  to  join  their  band, 
We  sliall  know  the  friends  that  greet  U8 
In  the  glorious  spirit  laud. 


232  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

"  We  shall  see  the  same  eyes  shining 
On  us  as  in  days  of  yore  ; 
We  shall  feel  their  dear  arms  twining 
Fondly  round  us  as  before." 

But  yet,  with  all  this  prospect  of  meeting  and 
dwelling  with  the  loved  ones  in  the  "  better  coun- 
tr}^"  the  separation  from  them  here  is  a  very 
severe  trial ;  and  I  can  only  say,  as  did  that  heroic 
missionary,  Mrs.  Comstock,  — "  Jesus,  I  do  this  for 
thee." 

Another  of  the  evangelist's  trials  is,  the  distrust 
and  prejudice  cherished,  even  among  good  men,  in 
regard  to  his  work  ! 

Many  pastors  feel  such  a  prejudice  towards  this 
department  of  ministerial  labor,  that  they  say,  "I 
will  never  invite  an  evangelist  to  assist  me ; "  and 
not  a  few  of  their  members  sustain  them  in  this 
position.  This  feeling  becomes  so  strong  that 
they  honestly  think,  as  Nathanael  did  about  our 
Savior's  coming  out  of  "Nazareth,"  that  no  good 
can  come  from  such  a  source. 

This  is,  no  doubt,  in  part  the  result  of  misrepre- 
sentation, and  the  want  of  a  careful  examination  of 
the  subject.  And  much,  no  doubt,  is  chargeable  to 
the  want  of  wisdom,  and  prudence,  on  the  part  of 
those  of  us  who  are  attempting  to  perform  the  dif- 
ficult work  of  an  evangelist. 

But   while    our   mistakes   have  given   cause  for 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  233 

deep  regret  and  sorrow,  they  are  not  a  sufiicient 
cause  for  the  rejection  of  this  divine  appointment. 

Would  there  not  be  the  same  reasons  for  reject- 
ing the  pastoral  office  ? 

Is  it  not  marked  by  mistakes  and  inconsistencies 
equally  great? 

One  of  the  disciples  sold  his  Lord  for  a  small 
sum  ;  another  denied,  with  an  oath,  that  he  knew 
him.  Pastors  have  fallen  into  grievous  sins,  while 
the  ministry  of  others  is  marked  by  many  im- 
prudences. Yet  we  do  not  cast  aside  the  pastoral 
relation  on  that  account.  We  do  not  say  that  all 
work  among  men  should  be  suspended,  because 
everything  that  is  done  is  imperfect. 

So  with  the  work  of  an  evangelist :  it  has  been 
attended  with  inconsistencies,  which  have  pained 
the  hearts  of  good  men ;  yet,  like  the  pastoral 
office,  it  must  be  perpetuated,  notwithstanding  its 
faults. 

And  therefore,  those  who  are  called  to  this 
work  must  go  forward  in  it,  no  matter  what  its 
trials. 

Years  ago  I  made  up  my  mind  to  go  on  with  this 
work,  and  do  what  I  could  in  the  great  harvest- 
lield,  and  bring  as  many  souls  to  Jesus  as  possible, 
without  stopping  to  defend  it  against  prejudice  or 
opposition.  And  yet  no  one  feels  more  keenly 
^hau  myself   an  ur^kind  word,  or  look,  or  act,   or 


234  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

IS  more  sensitive  to  the  touch  of  distrust  or  preju- 
dice. But  knowing  how  siiort  my  time  is,  and  that 
Jesus  has  used,  and  no  doubt  will  continue  to  use, 
imperfect  men  in  gathering  the  ripened  harvest,  I 
aim  to  speak  kindly  of  all,  and  go  on  with  my  work, 
grateful  for  the  success  that  has  attended  these 
efforts. 

*'  Soon  the  reaping  time  will  come, 
And  angels  shout  the  harvest-home." 

It  is  a  great  trial  also  to  be  obliged  to  say  "  No," 
to  so  many  calls  for  such  labor.  O,  how  often  the 
Macedonian  cry  is  heard,  " '  Come  over  and  help  us  I ' 
if  not  for  a  week,  come  even  for  one  day."  Al- 
though the  heart  yearns  to  go,  a  great  proportion 
of  these  calls  must  be  refused. 

The  burden  of  soul  at  certain  stages  of  a  meeting 
is  sometimes  almost  crushing.  No  one  can  realize 
this  who  has  not  borne  the  responsibility  of  con- 
ducting a  series  of  revival  meetings. 

It  is  often  necessary  to  converse  and  pray  with 
different  inquirers  many  times  in  a  single  evening, 
until  Nature  seems  unable  to  endure  more. 

When  one  meeting  is  closed,  he  must  pass 
directly  to  another  field,  and  so  on  for  months 
without  rest,  until  his  whole  being  seems  to  be 
utterly  prostrated,  and  Jesus,  by  the  Spirit,  whis- 
pers, as  he  did  to  the  disciples,  "  Come  ye  your- 
selves apart  into  a  desert  place,  and  rest  a  while : 


BRINGING   IN  SL  EAVES.  235 

for  there  were  so  many  coming  and  going,  and 
they  had  no  leisure  so  much  as  to  eat." 

It  is  a  trial  to  be  obliged  to  part  with  friends 
almost  as  soon  as  their  acquaintance  ii  formed. 

It  is  necessary  in  this  work  to  go  to  a  new  field 
almost  every  month,  and  sometimes  every  week. 
All  are  strangers,  many  hardly  seeing  the  necessity 
of  the  pastor's  calling  in  such  aid.  But  soon 
prejudice  and  coldness  give  place  to  warm,  glowing 
love  to  Christ  and  his  people,  and  with  a  company 
of  happy  converts  in  our  midst,  the  acquaintance 
and  friendship  formed  under  such  circumstances, 
even  in  a  few  days,  are  very  pure  and  strong ;  and 
to  be  obliged  to  tear  away  from  all  this  so  often  is 
a  great  trial. 

Habit  does  not  render  it  any  easier.  It  is  just  as 
painful  now,  after  having  held  about  two  hundred 
series  of  meetings,  in  different  parts  of  the  country, 
to  part  at  the  close  of  these  seasons,  where  we  have 
wept,  and  prayed,  and  rejoiced  together,  as  it  was 
many  years  ago. 

O,  the  strength  of  friendship  formed  at  Jesus' 
feet  I 

"  It  cannot  in  Eden  be  found, 
Not  yet  in  a  Paradise  lost ; 
It  grows  on  Immanuel's  ground, 
And  Jesus'  dear  blood  it  did  cost." 

Such  are   some  of  the  trials   in  the  work  of  an 


236  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

evangelist ;    but   they   are    far    outweighed   by    its 

One  great  source  of  comfort  in  his  Avork  is  the 
nooesi^ity  of  livmg  near  the  Savior,  if  he  would 
have  success. 

Most  pulpits  are  now^  supplied  with  good,  and 
in  many  instances  talented  ministers,  who  preach 
clearly  the  gospel  of  Christ :  the  ground  is  ploughed, 
and  the  seed  sown,  and  only  needs  the  showers 
and  harvest  sun  to  commence  "  bringing  in 
sheaves,"  so  that  the  evangelist's  work  consists 
largely  in  helping  "gather  in  the  harvest."  To  do 
this  work,  he  must  have  "  power  with  God."  He 
must  abide  in  Christ  if  he  would  reach  and  move 
the  hearts  of  men. 

It  is  said,  "Barnabas  was  a  good  man,  and  full 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  faith ;  and  much  people  was 
added  to  the  Lord." 

We  ought  all  to  abide  in  the  fullness  of  Christ's 
love;  but  if  we' do  not  frvom  choice,  it  is  a  great 
blessing  to  be  compelled  by  the  very  nature  of  our 
work  to  do  so. 

This  alone  is  an  ample  reward  for  any  sacrifice 
we  can  make. 

There  is  also  the  joy  of  constantly  making  new 
friends  —  and  very  warm  and  lasting  friends  are 
those  made  in  a  revival.  What  a  joy,  then,  to 
be  yearly  increasing  the  number  of  real  friends 
1)3'  tl)()u.sands  ! 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  237 

Another  joy  in  this  work  is  that  of  seeing  im- 
mediate results  from  his  hibors.  He  hibors  for  this, 
and  looks  for  it  —  if  he  is  right  himself —  without 
a  doubt,  and  is  not  disappointed.  Here  the  reapgr 
overtakes  the  sower,  and  both  rejoice  together. 

Every  month  of  his  labor  he  is,  perhaps,  per- 
mitted to  see  hundreds  of  precious  souls  gathered 
into  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  the  churches  great- 
ly revived  and  strengthened. 

Who  can  describe  the  joys  tliat  rise 
Through  all  the  courts  of  Paradise ; 
To  see  a  penitent  return, 
To  see  an  heir  of  glory  born?  " 

But  the  greatest  joy  connected  with  the  work  of 
a  faithful  evangelist  is  in  reserve  for  him  until  his 
labors  are  ended,  and  he  has  passed  within  the 
pearly  gates  of  the  New  Jerusalem. 

Then,  when  the  glories  of  that  wondrous  world 
have  fully  burst  upon  his  enraptured  vision ;  when 
his  feet  have  really  pressed  its  gold-paved  streets, 
and  the  bright,  beautiful  banks  of  its  tlowing  river ; 
when  the  music  of  the  harps  of  gold,  and  of  angel 
voices  have  thrilled  his  soul;  when  he  has  really 
seen  and  bowed  himself  before  the  Savior ;  when  he 
begins  to  realize  the  blessedness  and  peace  of  such 
a  home,  —  who  shall  describe  the  joy  of  his  heart, 
as,  from  that  white-robed  throng  there  come  many 
thousands,  gathering  around  him,  grasping  him  by 


238  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

the  hand  in  gratitude  and  love,  and  lead  him  to  the 
Redeemer,  saying,  "Jesus,  we  have  believed  on 
thee,  and  been  led  to  this  beautiful  world  through 
this  one  whom  thou  didst  appoint  to  'do  the  work 
of  an  evangelist'  in  thine  earthly  kingdom  !  "  O,  the 
joy  of  such  an  hour !  And  as  the  endless  ages  roll 
on,  and  his  expanding  mind  ranges  in  wider  fields 
of  knowledge,  and  comprehends  more  and  more  the 
glories  and  wonders  of  the  "  inheritance  of  the 
saints,"  that  joy  will  be  ever  growing  deeper  and 
sweeter,  as  he  meets  from  time  to  time  those  who 
were  brous^ht  there  throuo^h  his  labors. 

There  may  be  greater  trials  in  other  departments 
of  ministerial  labor  than  in  that  of  the  evangelist, 
but  there  cannot  be  greater  joys.  And  he  whom 
God  calls  to  this  work  may  well  rejoice  and  give  to 
it  all  his  strength  and  powers. 

**  0,  faint  not  in  the  day  of  toil, 

When  harvest  waits  the  reaper's  hand ; 
Go,  gather  in  the  glorious  spoil, 
And  joyous  in  His  presence  stand." 


BRINQINQ  IN  SHEA  VES.  239 


CHAPTER  XVni. 

UNION  MEETINGS. 

FOR  a  number  of  years  past  I  have  endeavored, 
when  convenient,  to  have  all  evangelical  de- 
nominations, who  were  willing,  unite  in  meetings 
in  which  I  have  been  called  to  labor,  believing  it 
to  be  better  for  the  Redeemer's  cause  in  the  world, 
and  for  the  salvation  of  lost  men,  that  Christians  of 
every  name  should  work  together  in  these  special 
efforts.  And  although  I  have  often  labored  with 
single  churches  of  my  own,  and  also  of  other 
denominations,  yet  I  have  usually  felt  satisfied  that 
it  would  have  been  as  well  for  that  single  church, 
and  much  better  for  the  cause  of  Christ  generally, 
had  all  the  churches  within  a  reasonable  distance 
united  in  the  work. 

1  have  never  seen,  or  heard,  or  read  anything  to 
change  my  views  on  this  subject,  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, my  experience  and  observation  have  been 
constantly  strengthening  them. 

I  have  no  sympathy  with   denominational  quar- 


240  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

rels.  All  Christiaus  ought  to  exhibit  towards  each 
other  the  spirit  of  their  Master  ;  they  should  be  oue 
in  him,  and  love  oue  another  as  brethren. 

This  they  can  do,  and  still  differ  in  their  opin- 
ions. Their  highest  interests  are  one ;  they  have 
the  same  Savior,  and  journey  towards  oue  home,  so 
that  however  dissimilar  their  views  of  some  of  the 
o)-dinances  in  the  church,  they  can  love  as  children 
of  the  same  Father,  and  unite  heartily  in  work 
for  him.  Nor  does  this  compel  them  to  hold  their 
opinions  loosely  and  half-heartedly ;  such  a  thiug 
would  be  dishonorable  and  unmanly  in  any  one. 
I  respect  and  love  a  Christian  the  more  for  being 
firm  in  his  denominational  views ;  it  is  his  duty,  as 
it  is  that  of  every  man,  fully  and  decidedly  to 
believe  what  he  professes,  and  to  practise  what  he 
believes. 

My  own  denominational  sentiments  have  ever 
been  dear  to  me,  and  never  more  so  than  now ; 
and  so  I  think  it  should  be  with  every  one. 

But,  as  I  have  laboi-ed,  and  wept,  and  prayed 
with  thirteen  or  fourteen  difierent  denominations, 
in  our  own  country  and  the  British  Provinces,  I 
have  learned  to  love  all  in  whom  I  find  the  spirit 
of  Christ.  And,  as  I  cannot  and  must  not  be  the 
judge  of  their  hearts,  I  concede  to  them,  what  I 
ask  them  to  concede  to  me  —  the  credit  of  entire 
sincerity. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  241 

I  never  allow  myself,  when  holding  nnion  meet- 
ings, to  compromise  what  I  believe  to  be  true  ;  but 
intend  to  preach,  and  pray,  and  labor  just  the 
same  as  when  alone  with  my  own  denomination. 

11',  as  some  maintain,  the  churches  strive  wrong- 
fully to  secure  for  themselves  the  new  converts, 
the  blame  must  rest  where  it  justly  belongs.  But 
I  see  no  reason  for  unkind  feeling  between  the 
different  denomiuatigns,  although  each  preach  and 
practise  what  they  believe  to  be  right. 

I  am  accustomed,  in  every  revival,  to  urge  the 
converts  carefully  and  prayerfully  to  search  the 
Scriptures,  that  they  may  learn  the  will  of  Jesus, 
and,  having  learned  it,  to  go  and  do  what  they 
believe  he  w^ould  have  them. 

Beyond  this  it  does  not  seem  necessary  for  me  to 
go,  nor  can  I  think  it  would  be  wise ;  because, 
believins:  it  best  to  leave  the  ^vork  in  the  hands  of 
the  pastors  while  the  interest  is  rising  instead  of 
waning,  my  stay  in  any  revival  is  usually  short, 
closing  while  many,  frequently  hundreds,  are  still 
inquiring  the  way  of  life.  Further  and  more  par- 
ticular direction,  if  needed,  is  left  with  the  pastors 
and  churches.  I  may  have  erred ;  but  this  has 
been  my  usual  course,  and  probably  will  be  in  the 
future. 

1  will  mention  a  few  reasons  for  my  confidence 
in  the  usefuhiess  and  [)r()priety  of  union  meetings, 

k; 


242  BRINGING  IN  SUEA  VES, 

where  special  efforts  ure  to  be  made  for  a  revival 
of  religion. 

They  lead  Christians  to  speak  more  kindly  and 
tenderly  of  what  they  call  each  other's  errors. 

As  they  work  together  they  come  to  a  better 
understanding  of  each  other,  and  learn  how  few 
things  there  are  in  which  they  difier,  and  how 
many  in  which  they  agree.  Their  hearts  are  drawn 
nearer  together,  and  they  love  one  another  as  never 
before ;  and,  as  a  natural  consequence,  they  speak 
more  carefully  and  kindly  of  each  other,  and  of 
those  tilings  in  which  they  differ. 

In  times  of  revival  the  joy  of  salvation  is 
restored,  and  this  tends  to  the  same  result ;  no 
one,  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  religion,  can  speak 
unkindly  of  another.  So  that  when  Christians  unite 
in  labor  for  a  revival,  everything  is  at  work  remov- 
ing the  disposition  to  speak  of  others  in  any  way  but 
kindly  and  lovingly.  O  that  the  sweet  influences 
of  these  seasons  of  refreshing  might  permanently 
abide  in  the  hearts  of  all  believers  ! 

What  forbearance,  what  deep  and  tender  love, 
what  union  of  effort,  what  searchings  after  truth, 
what  casting  away  of  error,  what  rapid  triumphs 
for  Christ,  what  an  attractive  exhibition  of  the  real 
spirit  of  Christ  would  then  be  manifest ! 

Union  meetings  convince  the  unconverted  of  a 
reality  in  religion. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  243 

When  they  see  Christians  who  differ  in  their 
denominational  views,  bowing  together  in  prayer 
and  hiboring  harmonionsly  and  lovingly  in  a  re- 
vival, notwithstanding  all  they  have  said  and  pub- 
lished in  support  of  the  practices  of  their  various 
churches,  they  are  constrained  to  say,  "  We  think 
you  are  honest.  We  now  believe  there  is  a  reality- 
in  religion." 

A  well-known  gambler  in  Massachusetts  w^as 
brought  to  Christ  through  just  this  influence,  and 
said  to  me,  "Mr.  Earle,  wherever  you  go,  tell  the 
world  of  my  conversion ;  tell  them  I  could  with- 
stand the  appeals  of  each  denomination  when  they 
worked  separately,  but  when  they  united  in  a 
meeting,  and  I  saw  the  spirit  of  love  prevailing 
among  them,  I  felt  its  power,  and  gave  myself  to 
the  Savior." 

A  talented  physician,  who  had  advocated  infidel 
sentiments  for  many  years,  came  into  one  of  our 
meetings  on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  publicly  made 
this  statement :  "  For  the  last  four  years  I  have 
been  convinced  that  there  was  no  real  foundation 
for  infidelity  ;  and  when  I  looked  upon  the  difierent 
denominations,  often  speaking  unkindly  of  each 
other,  and  refusing  to  work  together  for  the  salva- 
tion of  souls,  I  felt  there  was  about  as  little  in  the 
churches  to  rest  upon.  But  when  I  attended  this 
union  meeting,  and  saw  the  brotherly  love  mani-i 


244  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

festecl,  then  I  felt  there  was  a  reality  in  religion, 
and  that  I  needed  it.  Nothing  seemed  to  reach  mo 
until  I  felt  the  power  of  this  union  of  denomi- 
nations." 

Such  cases  are  becoming  common ;  and  they 
show  clearly  that  when  the  impenitent  see  intelli- 
gent men,  who  honestly  differ  on  points  that  seem 
to  them  of  sufficient  importance  to  require  separate 
organizations,  so  far  merging  their  differences  as  to 
toil  and  weep  side  by  side  for  the  salvation  of 
souls,  they  are  convinced  thereby  of  a  reality  in 
religion. 

I  will  mention  two  instances,  out  of  many,  where 
churches  of  different  denominations  united  and 
labored  harmoniously  together  for  a  number  of 
weeks,  each  administering  the  ordinances  according 
to  their  own  views,  in  the  presence  of  the  other, 
without  apparently  disturbing  in  the  least  the  good 
feeling  in  the  meeting,  but,  on  the  contrary,  pro- 
ducing a  marked  effect  in  leading  men  to  Christ : 

One  occurred  in  New  York  more  than  twenty 
years  ago.  Two  denominations  —  Congregational 
and  Baptist  —  united  in  a  series  of  meetings,  and 
continued  them  three  months ;  afternoons  and 
evenings  of  one  week  all  worked  together  in  one 
church,  and  the  following  week  in  the  other,  thus 
alternating  back  and  forth,  from  week  to  week. 
When  the  meeting  had  been  going  on  about  four 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  245 

weeks,  the  time  came  for  the  Baptists  to  have  their 
communion  season  and  receive  new  members.  At 
this  point,  if  at  all,  trouble  was  to  be  expected. 

The  ministers  and  deacons  assembled  to  consider 
what  to  do :  whether  to  pass  by  the  ordinances, 
because  the  two  denominations  differed  in  regard  to 
them,  or  observe  them,  each  church  according  to 
their  belief,  with  the  other  present  as  spectators, 
and  thus  show  to  the  world  that  they  could  differ 
on  these  points,  and  yet  love  each  other,  and  work 
together  cordially,  leaving  each  denomination  to  be 
responsible  to  God  for  their  peculiar  views. 

It  Avas  decided  to  adopt  the  latter  course ;  and, 
accordingly,  on  the  following  Sabbath  the  Baptists 
observed  both  ordinances,  just  as  they  would  have 
done  alone,  —  oivins:  their  reasons  for  not  invitini? 
to  the  communion  table  the  other  church,  who 
were  present  as  spectators. 

The  Holy  Spirit  descended  upon  the  great  con- 
gregation with  melting  power,  and  all  seemed  im- 
pressed with  the  fact  that  Christians  could  honestly 
differ  and  yet  love  one  another.  Thajt  w^eek  the 
I'cvival  was  much  more  powerful  than  it  had  been 
at  any  previous  time. 

Four  weeks  more  of  this  united  labor  passed, 
and  then  the  Congregational  church  observed  the 
ordinance  of  the  supper,  receiving  at  the  same  tiniG 
several  adults  and  infants,  according  to  their  belief 


246  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

and  practice ;  —  this  time  the  Baptist  church  v\'ere 
present  as  spectators. 

The  house  was  crowded.  Again  the  Spirit  filled 
the  place  ;  and  the  ungodly  went  away,  at  the  close 
of  the  service,  feeling  that  they  no  longer  had  an 
excuse  for  doubting  the  value  of  the  religion  of 
Jesus. 

A  few  weeks  after  this,  when  it  was  thought  best 
to  close  the  extra  meetings,  the  last  day  was  spent 
in  hearing  converts  relate  their  Christian  experience, 
in  the  presence  of  both  churches.  Those  candidates 
intending  to  join  the  Congregational  church  were 
then  requested  to  take  seats  on  one  side  the  aisle, 
and  those  to  join  the  Baptist,  on  the  other.  When 
this  was  done,  each  pastor  brought  forward  the 
"articles  of  faith  and  practice"  of  his  church,  and 
examined  the  candidates  for  admission  to  that 
church,  as  thoroughly  as  he  would  have  done  had 
they  been  alone. 

At  the  close  of  the  meeting,  all  bowed  in  prayer 
and  thanks2:ivin2f  to  God,  who  had  so  richlv  blessed 
his  people  throughout  that  delightful  three  months' 
union  meeting :  and  all  hearts  found  expression  in 
the  language  of  the  familiar  hymn,  — 

"  Among  the  saints  on  earth 
Let  mutual  h)ve  be  found; 
Heirs  of  the  same  inheritance 

With  mutual  blessings  crowned.** 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  247 

Each  pastor  has  since  expressed  a  strong  desire 
to  repeat  that  union  *  meeting,  so  productive  of 
good. 

The  other  case-  was  where  the  Baptist,  Methodist, 
and  Congregational  churches  united  in  a  meeting, 
and  carried  it  on,  with  great  success,  for  four 
weeks.  Many  hundred,  it  was  believed,  found 
Christ  precious.  The  meeting  was  held  one  or  two 
djiys  in  one  church,  then  in  another,  and  so  on 
through  the  four  weeks. 

As  the  Baptist  church  had  no  pastor,  I  recom- 
mended, at  the  close  of  mv  labors,  that  all  the  con- 
verts  read  and  pray  and  search  the  Scriptures, 
as  the}^  had  opportunity,  for  five  weeks,  to  learn 
their  duty ;  and  that,  if  any  one  in  the  three 
churches  spoke  unkindly  of  the  other  denominations, 
with  an  evident  view  of  influencing  them  to  join 
their  church,  they  mark  that  member  —  for  it 
would  be  an  evidence  that  he  was  not  enjoying 
much  love  to  Jesus,  and  therefore  his  words  on 
those  matters  should  have  little  weight. 

AYith  these  suggestions  I  left  them,  promising  to 
return  in  five  wx^eks,  and  meet  all  the  converts  and 
the  three  churches,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  forenoon, 
to  hear  experiences. 

When  the  day  came,  we  all  met  according  to  the 
appointment.     The    entire    day  and    evening  were 


248  BRINGING   IN  SUE  A  VES. 

spent  in  bearing  the  experiences  of  the  young 
<3on  verts. 

At  the  close,  each  '^^"^^i^  *'-  the  presence  of  the 
others,  appointed  the  time  and  place  for  meeting 
those  converts  who  had  decided  to  johi  that  church, 
and  completing  the  examination  according  to  tlie 
views  and  practice  of  such  church. 

The  utmost  harmony  and  good  feeling  prevailed 
between  the  churches,  and  Christ's  cause  was 
greatly  honored  and  strengthened. 

These  results  have  been  experiened  in  so  many 
other  places  as  to  confirm  me  fully  in  expecting 
them,  wherever  the  different  denominations  heartily 
unite  in  working  for  the  salvation  of  men. 

On  the  Pacific  coast,  wherever  I  labored,  the 
denominations  united,  and  I  found  their  power  over 
the  community  greatly  increased  thereby. 

When  we  are  united  to  Christ,  we  are  strong ;  so 
when  we,  who  are  his  children,  are  united,  I  believe 
we  are  strengthened.  One  may  "  chase  a  thousand," 
but  "  two  put  ten  thousand  to  flight." 

Another  reason  for  a  union  of  difierent  denomina- 
tions, in  special  efibrt  for  a  revival,  is,  that  the 
churches  where  the  converts  go  will  be  prepared 
to  receive  them. 

When  this  is  the  case,  the  converts,  as  they  join 
the  various  churches,  are  not  taken  to  the  arms  of 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  249 

a  cold  mother,  but  find  her  warm,  loving,  and 
ready  to  nourish  them.  But  when  the  revival  is 
confined  to  one  church,  and  converts  —  as  some  are 
almost  sure  to  do  —  go  to  some  other  church  and 
connect,  they  find  no  warmth,  no  nourishment;  and 
after  a  little  while,  we  may  hear  that  they  have  not 
held  uut  well,  and  have  been  excluded.  They 
may  have  truly  loved  Jesus,  but  the  unrevived 
church  had  no  such  warm  milk  as  was  needed 
by  these  babes  in  Christ,  and  so  they  drooped 
and  fell. 

The  Spirit  of  God,  I  believe,  is  moving  the 
denominations  in  regard  to  this  subject  —  not  only 
in  favor  of  protracted  effort  for  the  salvation  of 
men,  but  united  efibrt.  Calls  come  to  me  for  such 
meetings  from  all  parts  of  the  country  —  from  the 
Atlantic  states,  the  Pacific  coast,  from  our  terri- 
tories and  the  British  Provinces,  and  even  from  the 
Sandwich  Ishmds ;  so  that  I  have  now  on  hand 
requests. for  such  meetings,  from  at  least  two  hun- 
dred churches  of  other  denominations,  besides  those 
from  my  own. 

O  for  more  laborers,  and  more  evangelists,  to 
meet  the  urgent  calls  from  all  parts  of  the  civilized 
world  ! 

When  this  demand  is  met,  we  may  soon  begin 
to  sing,  — 


250  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

"  See,  Jehovah's  banner  furled; 

Sheathed  his  sword :  he  speaks  —  'tis  done  I 
Now  the  kingdoms  of  this  world 
Are  the  kingdom  of  his  Son. 

"Hallelujah!  hark!  the  sound, 
From  the  centre  to  the  skies, 
Wakes  —  above,  beneath,  around  — 
All  creation's  harmonies." 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  251 


CHAPTER   XIX. 

FOUE  DAYS'  MEETINGS. 

THE  BurliDgton  meeting  closed ;  T  hastened 
home  for  a  day,  then  on  to  New  York,  and 
embarked  for  the  Pacific  coast.  For  nearly  a  year 
I  was  absent  from  the  Atlantic  States ;  yet  during 
all  that  time  the  leaven  of  that  one  meeting  was  at 
work,  and  had  proved  itself  of  divine  implanting. 
The  great  and  eflfectual  door,  which  our  fathers  had 
known  forty  years  ago,  had  again  opened  to  the 
church,  and  into  it  earnest  Christians  were  pressing. 

Immediately  on  my  return,  calls  came  for  meet- 
ings, three  or  four  days  in  length,  —  "  like  the  one 
at  Burlington."  States,  counties,  and  associations 
had  been  holding  them,  and  with  great  success. 

In  October  I  met  the  churches  of  the  "  Wood- 
stock Association,"  for  one  of  these  meetings  at 

Chester,  Vt.  —  The  interest  was  wide-spread, 
and  drew  together  people  from  all  the  country 
around :  mechanics  closed  their  shops ;   merchants 


252  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

left  their  stores  ;  farmers,  their  fields  ;  women,  their 
homes,  —  find  came  to  the  place  of  worship. 

The  "  Watchman  and  Eeflector,"  of  October  24, 
1867,  contains  the  following  letter  :  "...  Friends 
in  Boston,  Burlington,  and  Brandon  had  been  pray- 
ing earnestly,  as  they  had  at  many  other  points, 
that  the  Spirit  would  descend  in  great  power  upon 
the  meeting.   .   .   . 

"The  clouds  hung  down  close  upon  the  moun- 
tains. Appearances  all  bespoke  a  long,  uncom- 
fortable rain ;  and  before  night,  sure  enough,  it 
came  down  in  torrents.  If  it  shut  out  those  who 
had  not  yet  left  their  homes,  it  shut  in  those  who 
had  come,  so  that  they  had  nothing  but  God's 
promises  to  rely  upon.   .   .   . 

"Sunday  was  a  memorable  day;  our  Father 
smiled,  and  held  back  the  rain,  and  parted  the 
clouds,  and  gently,  yet  powerfully,  shed  abroad  his 
Spirit  in  the  hearts  of  saints  and  sinners. 

"The  Baptist  house  was  too  small,  and  we  went 
over  and  packed  the  large  Congregational  church, 
above  and  below.    .   .   . 

"  In  the  afternoon  the  subject  of  the  '  unpardon- 
able sin'  was  presented,  to  an  audience  still  as 
d(ath.  All  seemed  as  if  taken  to  the  very  point 
of  decision  ;  and  when  the  people  were  invited  to 
express  their  intention  to  cherish  whatever  degree 
of  interest  was  then  felt,  almost  the  entire  assembly 
arose.   .   .   . 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  253 

"  111  the  evening  the  expression  on  the  part  of  the 
congregation  was  even  more  full  and  emphatic  than 
in  the  afternoon.  A  second  meeting  was  appointed 
after  the  dismission  of  the  assembly.  The  body  of 
the  house  was  nearly  full.  From  eighty  to  one 
hundred  came  to  the  front  seats  for  special  prajer. 
When,  at  ten  o'clock,  this  meeting  was  dismissed, 
many  bowed  their  heads  and  hearts,  and  could  not 
go.   .   .   . 

"  These  meetings  w^ere  open  to  all. denominations  : 
Methodists,  Congregational ists,  and  Baptists,  alike 
felt  that  it  was  good  to  be  there." 

The  plan  was  to  close  that  evening ;  but  so  deep 
was  the  feeling,  I  consented  to  remain  through  the 
next  day,  and  take  the  midnight  train  for  Massa- 
chusetts. 

This  last  day  was  the  best  of  all.  The  academy 
in  the  place  w^as  closed,  and  worldly  matters  quite 
generally  made  secondary,  so  great  was  the  inter- 
est. At  the  evening  meeting,  at  the  close  of  the 
sermon,  those  who  believed  they  had  that  day 
obtained  hope  in  Christ  were  requested  to  rise. 
Forty-six  at  once  responded ;  one  hundred  spoke 
for  Jesas. 

The  memory  of  that  evening  is  precious. 

A  month  after  this  meeting  it  w^as  my  pleasure 
to  preach  again  in  Chester,  one  afternoon  and  even- 
ing.    The  work   had  continued.     More  than  one 


254  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

hundred  persons,  who  either  had  no  hope,  or  had 
just  started  in  the  way  of  life,  but  were  groping 
in  twilight,  knelt  in  the  aisles  and  around  the  desk, 
to  be  prayed  for. 

The  hearts  of  God's  people  were  as  warm  as 
when  I  left  them ;  work  for  Jesus  had  brought  its 
reward,  as  it  always  does.  When  we  complain  of 
spiritual  coldness  and  leanness,  we  have  only  to  go 
to  work  for  the  Master  obediently  and  sincerely, 
and  our  cause  of  complaint  will  be  gone. 

Charlestown,  Mass.  — At  the  invitation  of  the 
"Boston  North  Baptist  Association,"  I  began  a  four 
days'  meeting,  with  the  churches  of  that  body,  at 
Charlestown,   Mass.,  October  17,   1867. 

The  attendance,  at  the  opening,  was  not  large ; 
but  the  presence  of  the  Master  Workman,  and  the 
evidences  that  he  had  been  preparing  the  ground 
throughout  the  association,  were  marked  in  the 
tone  of  the  meeting,  and  in  the  requests  made  by 
pastors  and  their  people  for  friends  that  lay  heavy 
on  their  hearts. 

In  the  afternoon  nearly  the  entire  congregation 
knelt  down  before  God,  and  solemnly  renewed  their 
covenant  with  him. 

The  second  day  was  one  of  gracious  triumph  for 
Jesus ;  the  powers  of  darkness  were  routed ;  the 
clouds   rolled   away ;    and   the   place   seemed   the 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  255 

school  of  Christ,  where  all  were  sitting  at  his  feet, 
learning  of  him. 

On  the  Sabbath  the  Spirit  fell  more  especially  on 
the  unconverted,  a  large  number  of  whom  asked 
the  prayers  of  God's  people. 

Monday  afternoon  the  pastors  came  back  to  join 
in  a  closing  service,  and  all  felt  it  to  be  a  season  of 
delight  and  blessino^. 

Among  the  incidents  of  that  meeting  one  comes 
touchingly  to  the  minds  of  many  of  us,  as  we  recall 
the  name  of  our  esteemed  brother  Fulton,  fother  of 
the  successful  pastor  of  Tremont  Temple  church, 
Boston  : 

Prompt  at  the  meetings,  quick  to  hear  and  obey 
the  call  of  duty,  ready  for  w^ork,  zealous  for  the 
Master,  he  yet  seemed  dissatisfied  with  himself 
and  his  work. 

And  on  one  occasion  of  great  heart-searching 
among  Christians,  he  expressed  a  deep  longing  to 
know,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  his  feet  w^ere  on  the 
Rock ;  and  w^hen  an  opportunity  was  given,  he  at 
once,  with  his  usual  decision,  went  forward  and 
knelt  with  those  who  sought  a  clearer  evidence  of 
their  acceptance. 

We  wondered  then,  but  now  is  it  not  all  un- 
ravelled and  made  plain?  Had  not  his  inner  ear 
caught  the  footsteps  of  the  dread  messenger?  the 
premonition  that  his  title  to  an  inheritance  among 


256  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

the  blessed  was  about  to  be  tested  at  the  gates  of 
heaven?  Yes,  the  longing  soul  was  already  plum- 
ing itself  for  its  upward  flight,  beyond  all  doubt, 
and  fear,  and  sin,  to  rest  forever  with  its  Savior; 
for  he  had  hardly  time  to  reach  his  western  home 
before  there  came  back  the  tidings,  "  Mr.  Fulton  is 
dead  !  "  That  prompt  tongue  was  silent ;  that  ear- 
nest eye  closed  forever ;  that  meeting  at  Charles- 
town  had,  in  truth,  been  the  "vestibule  of  heaven" 
to  him,  where  we  had  almost  seen  him  throwing 
off  the  sin-stained,  travel-worn  garments  of  earth, 
and  gathering  around  him  the  folds  of  the  spotless 
robes  of  heaven. 

My  brother  ministers,  who  of  us  will  go  next? 
Are  we  ready  to  lay  down  the  sickle  and  meet  the 
summons? 

I  trust  many  still  ivaiting  on  this  side  the  river, 
were  anointed  from  on  high  in  this  meeting,  and 
are  now,  even  here  amid  the  Avork  and  trials  of  life, 
calmly  anchored  in  the  haven  of  God's  promises. 

Ogdensburg,  N.  Y.  —  On  the  last  day  of  Octo- 
ber I  started  for  Ogdensburg,  to  begin  the  first  of  a 
series  of  four  days'  meetings,  to  be  held  in  Novem- 
ber, stopping  on  my  way  at  Amsterdam  and  Herki- 
mer to  or'ive  some  account  of  the  work  on  the 
Pacific  coast,  and  reaching  my  destination  Saturday 
evening. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  257 

The  meetiug  began  on  the  following  morning, 
with  a  good  attendance  from  among  the  churches 
of  the  "  St.  Lawrence  Association  "  —  the  body  that 
had  called  the  meeting. 

Though  we  started  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  the 
progress  of  the  work  was  by  no  means  slow.  The 
way  grew  brighter  at  each  step,  and  soon  emerged 
into  the  clear  sunlight,  where  we  found  our  hands 
filled  with  work  and  our  hearts  w4th  gladness. 
Christ  revealed  himself  unto  his  people,  and  they 
communed  with  him  as  a  Friend.  There  were 
those  in  attendance  who  learned  for  the  first  time, 
in  their  own  experience,  what  the  love  and  friend- 
ship of  Jesus  meant.  Believers  bowed  anew  in 
submission  to  their  Father  in  heaven,  and  looking 
upon  all  the  events  of  life,  whether  sweet  or  bitter, 
dark  or  light,  as  coming  from  him,  found  peace  and 
contentment. 

Holy  faith  and  love  grew  rapidly  during  those 
four  short  days ;  and  from  the  precious  closing 
meeting  on  AVednesday  evening  w^e  went  away  to 
our  phices  in  the  battle  of  life,  happier  and  stronger 
for  our  work  than  when  we  came  together. 

Fairfax,  Vt.  — Long  before  the  dawn  of  another 
day  the  cars  were  hurrying  me  away  towards  Fair- 
fax, where  I  was  to  begin  a  similar  meeting  with 
the  churches  of  the  "  Lamoille  Association." 
17 


258  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

This  meeting  opened  with  a  hirge  attendance, 
and  marked  manifestations  of  the  Spirit's  presence, 
and  gave  to  sight  as  well  as  faith  promise  of  a  good 
work.  The  promise  was  realized  :  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  shone  about  us,  and  his  salvation  appeared 
unto  many. 

His  people  laid  their  all  anew  upon  his  altar,  and 
he  bestowed  upon  them,  in  turn,  his  richest  gift^. 
The  "river,  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the 
city  of  God,"  flowed  far  and  wide,  increasing  in 
depth  and  power  each  day,  until  on  the  fourth  and 
last  day  it  rested  on  all  the  place  "  like  a  sea  of 
glory,"  and  bore  to  many  hearts  and  homes  the 
priceless  blessings  of  life  and  peace. 

A  letter  in  the  "  Watchman  and  Keflector,"  of 
November  21,  says  of  this  meeting,  ".  .  .A  large 
attendance  from  the  churches,  with  nearly  every 
one  of  the  pastors,  mdicated  the  deep  interest  felt 
in  the  meeting. 

"  Throughout  the  session  the  power  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  was  very  marked.   .   .   . 

"  Christians  were  very  much  revived,  and  re- 
turned to  their  churches  prepared  to  work. 

"  At  the  close  of  the  exercises  the  following 
resolutions  were  adopted  :  — 

^'■'■Resolved,  That  the  Lamoille  Association  grate- 
fully recognize  the  hand  of  God  in  the  present 
gathering  of  Christians  at  Fairfax,  and  acknowledge 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  259 

its  obligations  to  him  for  the  wonderful  work  of 
grace  disphiyed  in  the  quickening  of  his  children 
and  the  conversion  of  sinners. 

"  '•Resolved,  That  we  do  cordially  recommend  to 
our  sister  associations  to  hold  similar  meetings/  ..." 

Bristol,  Yt.  —  The  meeting  at  Fairfax  closed 
on  Monday  evening,  and  the  same  night,  bidding 
the  delightful  town  good  by,  I  started  for  Bristol, 
to  meet  the  churches  of  the  "Addison  Association," 
for  a  meeting  of  the  same  character. 

The  first  day  was  stormy  ;  the  attendance,  small ; 
the  prospect,  not  very  encouraging.  We  could  not 
tell  then,  what  God  had  in  store  for  us ;  but  on  the 
second  day  all  question  was  gone.  The  storm 
abated,  and  the  people  came  crowding  into  the 
village  from  every  direction,  for  long  miles,  and 
gathered  together,  with  one  accord,  in  the  place 
appointed  for  the  meeting. 

From  this  time  until  the  close  it  was  a  season  of 
rare  sweetness  and  heavenly  blessing. 

On  the  second  day  nearly  the  entire  congrega- 
tion, large  though  it  was,  renounced  all  seltish 
ambition,  and  pledged  themselves  to  be  the  Lord's, 
in  thoir  hearts,  their  lives,  and  their  all.  Jesus 
was  present  among  his  people,  ratifying  the  cov- 
enant by  a  gracious  fultillment  of  his  promises. 

Genuine  consecration  to  God  will  at  once  mani- 


260  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

fest  itself  in  the  life  —  a  change  will  he  see7i ;  this 
was  mjirkecl  in  this  case.  At  the  evening  service 
following  this  aftcrnooi>'s  work,  the  Spirit  was  pres- 
ent in  great  power,  searching  hearts  as  with  a 
lighted  candle.  Dnty  was  thus  made  plain,  and  it 
was  promptly  met  and  obeyed.  Christians  saw 
wrongs  they  had  done  their  fellow-men,  and  con- 
fessed them  on  the  spot.  One  brother  grasped  the 
hands  of  two  fellow-Christians  with  whom  he  had 
been  at  variance,  acknowledged  his  wrong,  and 
asked  their  forgiveness  ;  and  amid  sobs  and  con- 
fessions, mutual  forgiveness  and  reconciliation  fol- 
lowed. The  scene  broke  down  the  cono^res^ation  : 
disputes,  complaints,  and  coldness  rapidly  melted 
away,  and  at  the  close  our  hearts  were  one  in 
Christ  Jesus. 

The  last  evenino^  of  the  meetins^  was  one  of 
mingled  rejoicing  and  weeping :  believers  were 
happ3^  in  the  Lord  ;  Jesus  led  them  up  to  Pisgah's 
height ;  the  impenitent  were  in  deep  sorrow  on 
account  of  sin,  and  more  than  fifty  of  them  asked 
the  praj^ers  of  Christians. 

We  could  not  tarry  all  night,  as  did  the  disciplct^ 
at  Troas  ;  but  another  meeting,  —  the  final,  parting 
service  —  was  appointed,  to  be  held  the  next  mornii  g 
at  half  past  seven.  And  at  that  Pentecostal  hour, 
the  weather  quite  cold,  and  the  darkness  hardly 
gone,  a  large  congregation   gathered  at  the  church. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  261 

I  preached  a  short  sermon,  and  then,  in  the  remain- 
inir  time  before  nine  o'clock,  —  the  hour  I  was  com- 
pelU'd  to  leave, — seventy-five  persons  spoke  for 
Jesus,  and  others  led  in  prayer  and  songs  of  praise. 

The  paper,  just  quoted  from,  says,  in  a  letter  from 
a  correspondent :  "  .  .  .It  was  not  long  befoiti  the 
place  of  meeting  was  crowded  to  its  utmost  capa- 
city ;  sinners  were  found  inquiring  the  way  of  life, 
and  converts  were  rejoicing  in  hope. 

"  Brother  Earle's  engagements  compelled  him  to 
leave  on  Friday  morning,  after  a  meeting  as  nearly 
approaching  the  joys  of  heaven  as  anything  we 
expect  to  participate  in,  this  side  the  land  of  rest. 

"The  work  continues  not  only  unabated,  but  with 
daily  augmenting  power,  and  is  extending  itself 
into  the  adjacent  towns.  From  forty  to  fifty  are 
already  rejoicing  in  a  new-found  hope,  and  new 
cases  of  inquiry  are  of  daily  occurrence.   .   .   ." 

At  a  later  date.  Deacon  S.  wrote:  "The  good 
work  still  goes  on ;  Christians  are  alive  to  the 
work,  and  are  taking  their  neighbors  by  the  hand, 
saying,  '  Forgive  me  for  my  poor  Christian  life  and 
neglect  in  not  coming  to  you  before,  and  asking  you 
to  come  to  the  Savior.'  I  have  seen  some  toucning 
scenes  of  this  description  between  parents  and 
children.   .  .   . 

"  To-day  is  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer,  that  God 
may  prepare  his  children  to  go  over  the  town,  anc' 


262  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

converse  with  every  person  on  the  subject  of  re- 
ligion. Brethren  and  sisters  are  undertaking  this 
work,  who,  two  weeks  ago,  would  have  shrunk 
from  it  instantly ;  so  it  is,  God  works  through  you 
in  Bristol.   .   .   . 

"  I  cannot  find  language  to  express  my  gratitude 
for  your  coming  to  Bristol ;  and  in  this  I  know 
every  soul  in  the  place  would  join.   .   .    ." 

Saxton's  River,  Yt.  — Leaving  Bristol,  I  spent 
an  afternoon  and  evening  at  Chester,  and  before 
the  morrow's  sun  had  risen  was  on  my  way  to  begin 
a  similar  meeting,  at  ten  A.  M.,  with  the  various 
denominations  at  Saxton's  River. 

This  meeting,  though  not  associational,  had 
quite  an  extensive  influence,  and  was  well  at- 
tended. 

For  many  miles  the  people  came,  on  foot,  in 
private  carriages,  and  by  public  conveyance,  some- 
times packing  every  available  seat  and  standing- 
place  in  the  church. 

At  times  the  entire  congregation  seemed  swayed 
by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  sinners  were  crying  for 
mercy,  and  Christians  were  pleading  with  and  for 
them,  and  for  one  another.  But  Jesus,  ever  nigh 
to  hear  and  save,  turned  the  mourning  of  many 
into  rejoicing,  and  the  terrors  of  a  broken  law  gave 
way  to  the  joys  of  pardoning  grace. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  263 

The  closing  meeting  was  one  of  great  refreshing ; 
our  Father  bestowed  his  benediction  upon  us,  and 
w^e  parted,  faith  pointing  to  the  meeting  above, 
where  separation  never  comes. 

**  There  is  a  world  above, 

Where  parting  is  unknown ; 
A  long  eternity  of  love, 

Formed  for  the  good  alone ; 
And  faith  beholds  the  dying  here 
Translated  to  that  glorious  sphere." 

But  the  work  did  not  stop  with  this  four  days' 
meeting.  Says  a  friend,  in  a  letter  nearly  a  month 
later  ;  "  .  .  .1  want  to  tell  you  what  is  being  done 
in  Saxton's  Eiver.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  moving 
with  mighty  power ;  it  does  seem  as  though  the 
place  was  being  shaken  from  centre  to  circumfer- 
ence ;  old  and  young  are  coming  to  Christ;  and 
religion  seems  to  be  the  theme  in  every  shop  and 
store  in  the  village.   .   .   . 

"  We  all  thank  our  dear  Savior  for  directing  you 
here,  and  we  feel  that  God  through  you  has  worked 
a  great  work  among  us.  It  is  the  saying  of  many 
that  this  place  has  never  been  visited  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  with  such  power  as  at  the  present  time.  .   .   ." 

One  of  the  pastors,  writing  for  a  Boston  paper, 
at  a  still  later  date,  says,  "...  The  true  revival 
spirit  was  poured  on  the  place,  and  we  are  enjoying 


264  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

a  more  general  and  deeper  work  of  grace  than  has 
been  witnessed  here,  perhaps,  for  forty  years.   .   .   . 

"Both  the  churches  in  the  pla(?e  united  in  those 
meetings,  and  both  are  now  reaping  a  rich  harvest. 

"A  very  beautiful  scene  was  witnessed  as  brother 
Earle  closed  his  labors  with  ns.  When  leaving  the 
house  of  God  for  the  last  time,  as  he  was  about  to 
start  for  home,  an  interesting  company  of  little  girls 
were  gathered  in  the  vestibule,  weeping,  and  de- 
siring to  speak  with  him.  When  asked  by  him 
what  they  desired,  with  sobbing  and  tears  they 
said,  'We  are  all  sinners,  and  want  you  to  pray  for 
usi'  He  knelt  in  their  midst,  and  in  simple  ftiith 
commended  them  to  God.  Four  of  the  dear  little 
girls,  at  least,  are  rejoicing  in  the  Savior's  love,  as 
we  write." 

Weary  in  body,  but  glad  in  heart,  because  of 
what  God  had  done,  I  reached  my  home ;  and 
though  I  had  worked  hard,  preaching  usually  three 
times  a  day,  meeting  inquirers  from  sunrise  until 
midnight,  and  travelling  often  by  night,  I  felt  that 
I  would  not  exchange  the  sweet  memories  of  that 
journey  for  those  of  the  most  tempting  route  of 
pleasure  travel. 

Amsterdam,  N.  Y.  —  The  meeting  here  began 
Thursday   morning,    January    17,    1868,    and   was 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  9(j5 

continued  throngh  live  clays.  Four  denominations 
united  in  the  work,  and  met  one  day  in  one  ehnrch, 
the  next  day  in  another,  and  so  on  through  the 
meeting. 

The  Young  Men's  Christian  Association,  men- 
tioned in  another  place,  had  for  some  time  been 
helping  prepare  the  way  for  the  meeting,  and  now 
gave  to  it  all  their  characteristic  energy  and  ear- 
nestness. 

Prayerful ness,  zeal,  and  brotherly  hxve  marked 
this  entire  season  of  lal)or.  Frequently  prayer  was 
continued  until  the  midnight  hour. 

The  heavenly  showers  at  once  began  to  descend 
on  all  the  place. 

The  Master  of  the  vineyard  was  present  to  direct 
and  bless. 

The  attendance  soon  became  too  great  to  be 
accommodated  in  any  one  church.  Accordingly, 
Christians  retired  as  fast  as  necessary,  and  gave 
their  places  to  the  impenitent.  In  this  way,  on 
Sunday  evening,  the  Presbyterian  church  was 
densely  packed  with  a  congregation  quite  largely 
made  up  of  those  who  had  no  hope ;  l)elievers 
bad  retired  to  the  session-room,  where  they  con- 
tinued in  prayer  during  the  sermon ;  others  had 
gone  to  private  houses.  One  group  remained  on 
their  knees  in  prayer,  without  once  rising,  from 
seven  until  nine  that  evening.     And  we  may  believe 


266  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

prayer  was  heard  ;  for  at  that  time  the  Spirit  fell  in 
great  power  upon  the  congregation  in  the  church. 
So  deep  was  the  conviction  for  sin,  we  were  obliged 
to  ask  Christians  to  vacate  the  session-room  for  the 
anxious,  nearly  two  hundred  of  whom  immediately 
resorted  there  for  prayer  and  direction. 

On  Monday  evening  the  meeting  in  the  Methodist 
church  was  of  much  the  same  character. 

Christians  were  greatly  blessed  in  their  own 
hearts.  The  remark  was  made  in  regard  to  one 
of  the  ministers,  and  one  who  came  to  be  a  faithful 
worker,  "You  would  not  know  him;  he  appears 
altogether  different ;  even .  his  voice  is  entirely 
changed,  — I  actually  would  not  have  recognized  it, 
had  I  not  seen  him  when  he  was  speaking."  So 
marked  is  the  change  when  the  joy  of  salvation  is 
restored  to  the  Christian  ! 

Many  sought  a  closer  union  with  Christ,  —  a  rest 
in  him  by  faith.  A  little  company  have  since  met 
with  reference  to  that  object,  and  very  sweet  and 
precious,  I  learn,  have  been  their  experiences. 

A  letter  says  of  the  close  of  this  meeting, 
"  .  .  .  The  farewell  meeting  on  Tuesday  morning 
was  melting.  The  love  and  union  between  the 
ministers,  and  also  the  churches,  were  truly  beauti- 
ful. There  seemed  to  be  one  common  interest,  — 
no  more  feeling  for  their  own  than  for  other 
churches." 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  267 

The  interest  had  reaehed  such  a  height,  that  at 
this  closing  service  nearly  two  hundred  anxious 
souls  requested  the  prayers  of  Christians.  God's 
people  met  the  responsibility,  and  carried  the  work 
forward  for  weeks  with  great  success. 

A  letter,  written  some  weeks  after  my  departure, 
says,  "...  We  have  had  a  glorious  work  in  Am- 
sterdam. There  must  have  been  two  hundred  and 
fifty  conversions,  already,  and  they  are  all  such 
bright,  active  converts.  Large  additions  have  been 
made  to  the  churches.  An  unusually  large  propor- 
tion of  the  converts  are  young  men.  And  still  the 
work  goes  on.  We  all  iind  plenty  of  work  to  do 
for  Jesus.   .   .  ." 

Such  is  the  outline  of  some  of  the  four  days' 
meetings  among  the  churches. 

And  from  these  my  own  experiences  in  such 
meetings,  from  the  success  that  has  everywUere 
attended  them,  and  from  the  fact  that  the  church, 
years  ago,  reaped  similar  blessings  from  them,  I 
am  led  to  the  firm  conviction  that  in  them  we  have 
one  of  the  most  valuable  agencies  that  can  be  em- 
ployed, at  the  present  day,  in  promoting  revivals 
of  religion. 

They  can  hardly  be  objected  to  on  any  ground  : 
They  are  practicable ;  neighboring  churches  can 
easily  come  together  for  such  a  work  for  four  days. 


2QS  BRINGING   :X  SHEAVES. 

They  bring  together  the  best,  most  active,  and 
earnest  element  of  our  churches  for  deliberation, 
prayer,  and  labor.  They  thus  lead  out  of  forms 
of  service  that  have  become  stereotyped  and  life- 
less, correct  mistakes,  and  give  to  all  the  benefits 
of  the  experience  of  each. 

They  promote  harmony  and  love  between  Chris- 
tians of  different  churches  and  denominations. 

They  enlarge  our  conceptions  of  the  power  and 
resources  of  the  church,  and  thus  strengthen  our 
faith  and  courage. 

And,  to  crown  it  all,  they  are  generally  followed 
by  a  precious  revival  of  religion. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  269 


CHAPTER  XX. 

REVIVAL   GLEANINGS. 

BOSTON,  MASS. —In  the  spring  of  1859  I 
hold  a  meeting  in  Treniont  Temple,  and 
preached  about  eighty  times.  This  was  a  very 
precious  meeting,  and  wide-spread  in  its  results. 
As  the  Temple  will  seat  about  three  thousand 
persons,  and  the  seats  are  free  for  all,  it  is  a  great 
resort  for  the  multitude.  Many  came  from  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  city  and  country  to  this  meet- 
ing, found  Christ  precious,  and  carried  the  in- 
fluence far  and  wide.  I  learned  that  between  one 
and  two  hundred  converts  united  with  the  Temple 
church,  and  many  with  other  churches,  as  the  fruit 
of  this  meetino^.  I  held  another  meetino:  in  the 
same  place  in  1862.  This  meeting  continued  about 
three  months.  My  home  during  this  last  meeting 
was  in  the  family  of  Deacon  Timothy  Gilbert,  the 
founder  of  the  Temple  enterprise,  who  has  since 
gone  to  his  reward  on  high. 

*'  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed." 


270  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

Ill  the  spring  of  1866  I  held  a  union  meeting 
in  Boston  with  the  Shawraut  Avenue  (Baptist), 
Park  Street,  and  Mount  Vernon  (Congregational) 
churches ;  dividing  the  five  weeks  of  the  meeting 
between  the  three.  I  need  say  but  little  more 
about  this  meeting  than  to  refer  the  reader  to 
the  notice  given  of  it  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of 
this  volume,  by  Kev.  Dr.  Kirk  and  Rev.  Dr. 
Hague. 

I  held  another  meeting  of  four  weeks  in  Boston, 
in  the  First  Baptist  church,  January,  1868,  Rev. 
Dr.  Neale,  pastor.  This  meeting  w^ill  be  cherished 
among  the  pleasant  memories  of  my  life.  There  is 
a  noble  class  of  working  members  in  this  renowned 
church  of  two  hundred  years'  standing. 

The  work  is  still  progressing.  I  give  below  the 
pastor's  account  of  the  meeting,  taken  from  the 
"Watchman  and  Reflector"  of  January  23,  1868. 

"Rev.  a.  B.  Earle  in  Boston. 

"  Allow  me  to  say  a  word  in  your  paper  of  the 
recent  labors  of  Rev.  Mr.  Earle  in  my  church.  I 
had  hoped  that  by  special  and  continuous  meetings, 
the  church,  pastor,  and  all,  might  be  quickened 
anew;  that  the  effort  might  be  blessed  to  the 
children  of  the  Sabbath  school ;  that  Christians  who 
have  thought  to  cherish  their  piety  in  secret  might 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  271 

bo  led  to  make  open  profession  of  faith ;  and  that 
strangers  in  the  city,  young  men  from  the  country, 
and  persons  "svho  do  not  attend  church  anywhere, 
might  be  induced  by  the  excitement  of  the  occasion 
to  come  into  the  meetings,  and  thus  be  reached  by 
the  gospel.  It  is  with  grateful  emotions  that  I 
am  able  now  to  say  that  these  anticipations  have 
been  more  than  realized.  Many  conversions  have 
already  occurred  among  the  young  people  of  the 
congregation,  and  the  number  is  multiplying  daily. 
The  members  of  the  church  are  awakened  to  new 
life.  There  is  among  them  a  fervency  in  prayer, 
a  sense  of  personal  responsibility,  and  an  activ- 
ity of  individual  eflbrt,  that  I  have  not  seen  for 
years,  and  which  are  so  essential  to  a  church's 
prosperity. 

"  Mr.  Earle  is  admirably  fitted  to  this  service  by 
his  long  experience  and  personal  character.  He  is 
a  laborious,  praying,  and  most  trustworthy  man. 
His  preaching  is  faithful,  earnest,  direct.  He  deals 
in  no  claptrap  or  otfensive  personalities.  He 
interferes  with  no  pastoral  prerogative,  but  goes  to 
his  work  like  a  true  ambassador  of  the  cross,  with 
strong  faith  and  most  untiring  persistence,  and 
watches  for  souls  as  one  that  must  give  account. 
Resorting  to  no  arts  to  secure  personal  favor,  he 
has  yet  greatly  endeared  himself  to  us  all.  The 
farewell  meeting  and  the  parting  interview  will  be 


272  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

loug  remembered  by  the  church  ;  attached  friends, 
rejoicing  converts,  and  a  grateful  pastor  gathered 
around  him.  There  was  a  delightful  mingling 
of  smiles  and  tears  as  we  took  him  by  the  hand 
and  sung, — 

*  Blest  be  the  tie  that  binds 
Our  hearts  in  Christian  love.* 

"  The  kindest  wishes  and  many  prayers  will  fol- 
low our  brother  in  his  future  labors." 

New  York  City,  Fifth  Avenue.  —  The  meet- 
ins:  in  this  church  was  commenced  the  last  of 
January,  1868. 

Although  I  had  engaged  to  be  with  them  the 
year  before,  I  was  released  until  after  my  return 
from  the  Pacific  coast. 

The  church  is  not  so  central  as  those  "  down 
town,"  along  the  old  and  crowded  thoroughfares  of 
business  ;  still  the  ability  of  its  pastor,  the  character 
of  its  members,  and  its  position  in  the  midst  of  the 
wealth  and  fashion  of  the  city,  gave  it  a  wide  in- 
fluence, and  drew  to  its  services  quite  a  large  attend- 
ance. The  ordinary  congregations  were  sometimes 
increased  to  overflowing  during  the  meeting,  but 
usually,  only  enough  to  comfortably  fill  the  house. 
Among  those  who  came  in  from  other  churches 
were  man}  whose  familiar  faces  called  to  my  mind 


BRING  I  NO   IN  SHEAVES.  27?> 

plciisaiit  memories  of  former  meetings  in  the 
city. 

The  pastor  had  been  preparing  the  way  for  the 
meeting,  and  without  reserve  threw  his  whole 
heart  and  strength  into  it.  I  trust  we  w^ere  one 
in  heart  and  effort. 

The  church  slowly  but  surely  rallied  to  the  work, 
and  put  on  their  strength,  and  went  out  after  the 
unconverted,  and  led  them  to  Chi'ist.  So  that  a 
precious  revival  was  enjoyed. 

My  principal  object,  however,  in  this  account  is 
to  o-ive  a  sin2:le  incident  in  this  meetino:.  A  Broad- 
way  merchant  was  awakened  by  the  artless  words 
of  his  little  son:  "Father,  are  you  a  Christian?.  I 
don't  see  any  seal  on  your  forehead." 

The  circumstances  were  these :  During  the 
morning  service,  one  Sabbath,  a  gentleman  devoted 
to  his  business  and  the  pleasures  of  the  world, 
noticed  his  little  boy  persistently  holding  his 
lingers  in  his  ears.  Surprised,  he  asked,  "  Charlie, 
why  do  you  hold  your  lingers  in  your  ears?" 
"Why,"  said  he,  "Mr.  Earle  made  us  all  cry,  in 
Sunda}^  school,  this  morning,  and  I  don't  want  to 
cry  here  in  church,  so  I  am  not  going  to  hear  what 
he  says."  By  and  b}^  looking  around  him,  and 
noticing  that  nobody  seemed  to  be  crying,  he 
ventured  gradually  to  remove  his  lingers  from  his 
ears.  Just  then  1  was  speaking  of  the  *'  sealing  " 
18 


274  BRINOING   IN  SHEAVES. 

mentioned  by  John  in  the  seventh  of  Revelation,  and 
I  made  a  remark  something  like  this  :  "  My  brethren, 
would  you  be  willing  to  have  a  plain,  broad  seal 
put  upon  your  forehead,  so  that,  wherever  you 
went,  every  one  could  see  it,  and  learn  that  you 
were  a  Christian?  Would  it  not  keep  you  from 
some  places  \yhich  you  now  visit?" 

This  aroused  his  attention  and  curiosity,  and, 
turning  about,  he  whispered,  "Father,  what  is  a 
Christian  ?  " 

The  unconverted  father  replied  as  best  he  knew 
how.  The  boy  looked  searchingly  at  his  father's 
forehead,  and  asked,  "Father,  are  you  a  Christian? 
I  don't  see  any  seal  on  your  forehead."  The  fiither 
afterwards  said,  that  had  his  boy  drawn  a  pistol  on 
him  he  could  not  have  startled  him  more  suddenly 
and  painfully.  The  question  sped  straight  to  his 
heart,  as  an  arrow  of  conviction ;  he  knew  not 
what  to  reply. 

He  was  determined,  however,  not  to  yield  to  his 
feelings,  and  in  the  afternoon  went  out  for  his 
customary  pleasure  drive.  But  the  pleasure  was 
gone ;  he  felt  no  interest  in  the  ride ;  his  boy's 
Bermon  was  rankling  in  his  heart,  —  he  could  not 
get  rid  of  it ;  his  eyes  went  straight  to  the  fore- 
head of  every  one  he  passed,  in  search  of  the 
<*  seal." 

He  resisted  the   Spirit  for  several  days ;  but  at 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  275 

length  yielded  so  far  as  to  come  again  to  the  meet- 
ings. The  sermon,  that  evening,  was  on  "  The 
Unpardonable  Sin."  His  conv^ictions  grew  stronger  ; 
Charlie's  words  sounded  louder  than  ever,  — 
"Father,  are  you  a  Christian?  I  don't  see  any 
seal  on  your  forehead."  Fear  lest  he  had  com- 
mitted the  sin  that  never  can  be  forgiven,  now 
added  its  termr.  He  felt  that  he  could  not,  must 
not  dela}' ;  if  it  were  not  already  too  late,  it  soon' 
might  be.  He  seized  the  offered  opportunity,  and 
presented  himself  as  a  subject  of  prayer ;  with  his 
whole  heart  he  sought  pardon.  Soon  he  was  re- 
joicing in  hope,  and,  not  long  after,  he  was  baptized, 
and  received  into  the  church. 

And,  before  I  left,  little  Charlie  came  to  me,  say- 
ing, "Mr.  Earle,  I  wish  you  would  put  my  name  in 
your  little  book  ;  for  I  think  I  love  the  Savior  now. 
I  don't  want  to  stop  my  ears  ixny  more  when 
you  speak." 

People  from  other  churches  and  other  cities 
shared  in  the  blessings  of  this  work.  Thus,  I  am 
told,  a  precious  revival  was  commenced  in  Patter- 
son, N.  J.  Many  families  and  churches  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  city  were  blessed  in  the  same  way. 

Such  seems  to  be  the  divine  plan  in  regard  to 
revivals ;  by  some  providence,  people  from  other 
localities  are  drawn  into  them,  and  thus  the  work  is 
e:x  tended. 


276  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

Tabernacle  Church.  —  Here  I  found  a  noble 
company  of  working  members.  The  Spirit  had 
preceded  me  —  all  was  ready,  and  a  blessed  work 
followed.  This  church  is  located  on  the  crowded 
thoroughfare ;  the  throng  came,  and  many  found 
Christ  precious,  and  carried  the  influence  of  the 
meeting  in  every  direction.  Although  a  large 
amount  of  wealth  is  found  in  this  church,  and  an 
able  pastor,  I  have  seldom  found  a  more  humble, 
working  body  of  members. 

Many  of  the  converts  united  with  this  church, 
and  large  numbers  with  other  churches  in  the  city 
and  vicinity.  A  further  account  of  this  and  the 
Fifth  Avenue  meeting  is  given  by  their  pastors,  in 
another  chapter. 

Philadelphia,  Penn. — I  left  New  York,  and 
commenced  meeting  here,  in  April,  1868,  with  the 
First  and  Tabernacle  Baptist  churches,  alternating 
between  the  tw^o. 

With  the  strong  hold  both  pastors  have  on  their 
people,  and  the  large  number  of  regular  attendants 
in  each  congregation,  our  audiences  were  very 
large,  sometimes  numbering  two  thousand.  The 
Spirit  had  prepared  the  way,  so  that  the  city  of 
William  Penn  seemed  all  ripe  and  ready  for  the 
sickle.  Many  were  gathered  into  the  fold  of 
Christ;    but  I  have  no  space  for  particulars,    and 


BRINGIXG  IN  SHEA  VES.  217 

cau  ouly  say,  after  a  short,  but  precious  meeting 
of  three  weeks,  I  left  for  Syracuse,  thankful  for 
the  acquaintance  formed  and  the  blessings  received. 

Lawrence,  Mass.  —  In  1859  I  assisted  the  pas- 
tor. Rev.  F.  Remington,  in  a  meeting  of  four  weeks 
in  this  city.  More  than  fift}^  converts  were  received 
into  the  church  the  last  Sabbath  of  the  m.eeting,  and 
many  others  gave  themselves  to  Christ  in  that 
precious  revival,  among  them  some  who  were 
shortly  afterwards  killed  by  the  falling  of  the 
"  Lawrence  ]Mills." 

Dover  and  Great  Falls,  N.  H.,  and  South 
Berwick,  Me.  — This  was  my  first  series  of  meet- 
ings in  the  fall  of  1864.  Twelve  churches  united 
in  this  work  of  four  weeks.  A  part  of  the  time  I 
preached  in  Dover  in  the  morning,  South  Berwick 
in  the  afternoon,  and  Great  Falls  in  the  evening, 
and  so  on  day  by  day.  I  can  only  say  here,  I 
expect  to  praise  God  forever  with  many  happy 
souls  brought  to  Christ  during  this  glorious  union 
meeting. 


Concord,  N.  H.  —  This  meeting  was  held  In 
1  S64.  All  the  evangelical  churches  united.  Meet- 
ings were  held  two  days  in  one  church,  then  two  in 
the  next,  and  in  this  way  with  each  one.     A  verj 


278  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES 

precious  revival  was  enjoyed,  the  sweet  fragrance 
of  wliich  will  spread  throughout  eternity. 

BiDDEFORD  AND  Saco,  Me.  —  Nine  churches  united 
in  this  meetino'  in  1864. 

Meetings  were  held  in  two  large  halls,  one  in 
Biddeford,  the  other  in  Saco,  alternately,  a  day  at  a 
time  in  each.  The  power,  and  preciousness,  and 
wide-spread  results  of  this  meeting  will  only  be 
seen  when  we  reach  the  "  better  country."  Our 
dear  brother  Packard  laid  down  his  life  at  the 
commencement  of  this  work. 

Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  —  This  meeting  was  held  in 
1866.  As  Strong  Place  and  the  Tabernacle 
churches  called  this  meeting,  the  largest  share  of 
the  services  were  held  with  them,  but  mornings, 
and  several  times  during  the  whole  day,  in  other 
churches  of  different  denominations.  In  this  way 
we  held  meetings  in  twelve  different  churches. 
The  meeting  continued  forty  days.  The  season  was 
glorious.  The  pastors  and  members  of  these 
churches  will  ever  hold  a  warm  place  in  my  heart 
for  their  earnest  and  hearty  cooperation  in  these 
services,  and  their  great  liberality  to  me.  May 
our  dear  Savior  bless  and  keep  them  all. 

The  volume  in  heaven  contains  a  full  account  of 
all  these  meetings.  May  the  final  review  bo 
pleasant  to  us  all. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  279 

Syracuse,  N.  Y.  —  I  commenced  meeting  here 
ill  May,  18G8.  This  meeting  also  was  with  the 
two  Baptist  churches. 

Their  pastors  are  young,  but  men  given  up  to 
God,  and  of  fine  talents.  I  do  not  know  how 
many  have  united  with  the  churches,  but  hear  the 
work  continues.  I  thank  God  for  my  visit  to 
Syracuse. 

It  was  now  June,  and  having  preached  more  than 
four  hundred  times  since  October  last,  without  rest, 
1  bade  the  churches  good  by,  and  hastened  to  my 
home  in  Newton,  ^Nlass.,  to  rest  for  a  season,  and 
complete  this  volume. 


280  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

THE   WORK   ON   THE   PACIFIC   COAST. 

THE  recent  remarkable  work  of  grace  ia  the 
Pacific  States  having  been  watched  with  un- 
common interest  in  the  other  portions  of  our 
country,  because  of  the  peculiar  relation  of  their 
people  to  us,  they  having  gone  out  from  among 
us,  leaving  here  their  youthful  homes,  their  friends, 
and  often  their  families  ;  and,  as  a  natural  conse- 
quence, a  very  general  desire  having  been  expressed 
that  I  W(nild  give  fuller  information  concerning  it, 
I  have  consented  to  do  so  in  this  form ;  yet  I 
shrink  from  the  attempt,  since  the  canvas  herein 
afforded  is  too  narrow  for  anything  but  a  bird's-eye 
glance  —  the  merest  outline.  What  a  marvellous 
history  of  incident  and  experience  belongs  to  any 
revival !  How  then  hope,  in  these  few  pages,  to 
describe  this  work,  embracing  as  it  does  so  many 
revivals,  and  interest  and  influence  so  'wide! 

And  this  t-hrinking  is  increased  by  the  fact  of  my 
ignorance  of  much  of  the  work,  since,  in  the  differ- 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  281 

ent  places  I  visited,  it  continued  after  my  depar- 
ture ;  and,  besides,  many  a  lamp  was  lighted  in 
those  places  and  then  borne  away  to  distant  and 
neighboring  towns,  where  other  revivals  were 
kindled  by  it.  In  all  these  movements  the  circles 
swept  beyond  my  vision,  and  their  results  and 
character  are,  to  a  great  extent,  unknow^n  to  me. 
Still,  perhaps,  I  may  be  able,  in  some  measure,  to 
meet  the  desire  on  both  sides  of  our  continent,  and 
also  realize  the  hope  I  cherish  of  lierebv  increasiuof 
faith  in  Christian  labor,  and  above  all  of  h(>norin<r 
the  Divine  Leader  of  this  work. 

When  and  where  this  w^ork  really  began,  we  can- 
not fully  know;  its  sources  are  far  and  wide,  like 
the  springs  that  feed  our  wide-sweeping  rivers. 
Could  we  trace  this  river  of  salvation  back  through 
its  lirst  silent,  secret  streams,  to  its  sources,  we 
should  be  led  to  manj'  a  mountain  side,  quiet 
valley,  busy  town,  secluded  cottage,  and  there 
find  them  in  pastors'  studies,  mothers'  closets,  and 
consecrated  sanctuaries,  wdiere  burdened  Jacobs 
wrestle  in  unyielding  prayer.  God  knows  all  these 
placej;  the  work  is  all  traced  out  l)y  his  eye,  and 
in  due  time  he  will  openly  reward  those  who  toiled 
in  secret. 

But,  to  human  e3'e,  the  most  obvious  starting- 
point  is  in  the  summer  of  1866,  with  the  San  Fran- 
cisco Ministerial  Union,  —  a  body  of  ministers  then 


282  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

recently  organized,  and  representing  most  of  the 
evangelical  churches  of  that  city  and  vicinity.  Here 
seemed  to  be  the  cuhiiiuatiou  of  whatever  forces 
had  hitherto  been  in  operation  —  the  gathering  of 
the  waters,  and  the  first  bursting  forth  of  the 
stream  that  was  to  grow  deep  and  strong  more 
rapidly  than  the  one  Ezeldel  saw  flowing  from  be- 
neath the  temple.  This  may  best  be  seen  in  the 
following  letter :  — 

"  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  July  5,  18G6. 

"Eev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

"Dear  Brother:  At  a  meeting  of  the  San  Fran- 
cisco Ministerial  Union,  this  week,  it  was  voted 
unanimously  to  invite  you  to  visit  this  city  to  hold 
a  protracted  meeting  under  the  auspices  of  the 
Union. 

"  This  Ministerial  Union  embraces  the  ministers 
in  this  city  and  vicinity  of  most  of  the  evangelical 
churches. 

"  The  circumstances  that  have  led  to  this  invita- 
tion are  as  follows :  Two  months  ago  the  subject 
proposed  for  the  consideration  of  the  Union  was, 
*Our  duty,  as  gospel  ministers,  to  the  masses  of 
the  city  who  are  unreached  by  the  gospel.' 

"This  subject  was  earnestly  considered,  and,  in 
view  of  its  importance,  postponed  one  month ; 
again  thoroughly  discussed,  and  then   referred  to 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  283 

this  committee,  to  report  to  the  Union  some  definite 
plan  of  action. 

"This  week  a  report  was  submitted  to  the  Union, 
embracing  the  following  recommendations  :  That  a 
daily  union  noon-day  prayer  meeting  be  at  once 
established ;  that  all  the  churches  represented  in 
the  Union  be  recommended  to  establish  additional 
neighborhood  prayer  meetings ;  that  the  ministers 
in  those  churches  give  special  prominence,  in  their 
pulpit  ministrations,  to  such  subjects  as^  seem  best 
adapted  to  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord ;  and  that 
Rev.  A.  B.  Earle  be  invited  to  hold  a  protracted 
meeting  as  mentioned  above. 

"After  a  very  full  and  fraternal  conference,  these 
recommendations  were  severally  adopted.   .   .   . 

"  Should  you  respond  to  our  call,  you  may  expect 
the  cordial  cooperation  of  pastors  and  people,  — 
though  the  percentage  of  evangelical  Christians  is 
lamentably  small. 

"No  evangelist  has  ever  labored  here.  While 
revival  seasons  have  been  enjoyed  to  a  greater  or 
less  extent  in  all  our  churches,  there  has  never 
been  any  general  religious  movement  such  as  has 
been  experienced  in  so  many  cities  of  the  East.  .  .  . 

"  We  pray  that  the  Lord  will  guide  you. 
"D.  B.  Cheney, 
E.  C.  BissELL,      ^  Committee: 
O.  C.  Wheeler, 


284  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

Such  were  the  first  apparent  steps  of  this  work ; 
small  and  insignificant  they  may  seem,  yet  the 
religious  movement  that  has  grown  out  of  them 
lanks,  for  universality  of  interest  and  power, 
among  the  "  great  awakenings  "  of  these  latter 
times. 

These  recommendations  were  immediately  put 
in  operation ;  extra  meetings  were  commenced ; 
special  effort  made  by  many  pastors  and  churches ; 
and  the  call  forwarded  to  me. 

At  once  it  was  a  disturbing  element  in  my  path, 
a  new  force  introduced,  and  one  that  very  soon 
was  felt  to  be  drawing  me  towards  a  new  and 
unexpected  region.  Till  then  my  work  seemed 
plainly  to  lie  among  the  Atlantic  States ;  calls 
numberless  were  before  me ;  engagements  already 
made.  Why,  then,  go  away?  Why  leave  a  broad 
and  i)romising  home  field  for  one  so  far  away? 
Could  duty  lie  in  that  direction?  For  a  time  it 
seemed  not ;  but  somethins:  bea^an  to  chans^e  con- 
victions  ;  friends,  too,  began  to  say,  "  God  is  in  it ;  '* 
Dr.  Kirk,  Dr.  Bright,  Dr.  Backus,  and  others  who 
aro  wont  to  watch  the  leadings  of  Providence  from 
a  high  stand-point,  said,  "Go."  At  length,  on  m\' 
knees,  in  my  study,  in  prayer,  with  my  wife,  the 
answer  came  —  light  from  the  golden  gates  of  the 
New  Jerusalem  fell  upon  the  path  over  the  seas 
into  the   "golden  gate"  of  the  Pacific,  —  my  way 


BniN<J!rNG  IN  SHEAVES.  285 

was  clear,  and  without  hesitation  I  telcofraphccl,  "I 
will  come.      Will  siiil  September  11." 

Grateful  I  shall  ever  be  that  my  wife  accompanied 
me  ;  for  whatever  success  attended  my  labors  wa3 
due,  in  no  small  measure,  to  her  cheerful  presence, 
her  faith  ever  bright  and  strong,  her  clear  and  com- 
prehensive views  of  truth,  and  her  serene  and  close 
communion  with  God. 

Farewell    services    were    held    in    Stronsr   Place 

o 

church,  Brookl3'n,  N.  Y.,  on  the  evening  previous 
to  our  departure.  Tender  words  of  sympathy  and 
love  were  spoken  by  assembled  friends  and  fol- 
low^ers  of  the  Redeemer. 

Dr.  Armitage,  pastor  of  the  Fifth  Avenue  Baptist 
church,  was  there  to  say,  "  Early  last  spring  we 
made  an  engagement  with  brother  Earle  to  help  us  ; 
that  engagement  is  temporarily  broken ;  to-night  I 
bid  him  God-speed,  willingly  surrendering  my 
claim  for  the  present. 

"  Our  bi'other  has  asked  us  to  pray  for  him. 
Let  us  ask  him  to  pray  for  us.  His  prayer  ascend- 
ing from  the  Pacific,  ours  from  the  Athintic,  shall 
meet  and  form  the  bow  of  foith  which  shall  span 
the  continent." 

Dr.  Taylor,  pastor  of  one  of  the  Congregat.onal 
churches  in  Brooklyn,  said  many  things  in  his  own 
kind,  elo(iuent  w\ay, —  among  them,  "  I  was  reared  to 
feel  a  prejudice  against  evangelists.      I  remember 


286  BR INGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

comiDg  to  brother  Earle  hesitatingly,  doubtiiigly, 
when  I  asked  him  to  preach  to  my  people.  As 
far  as  brother  Earle  is  concerned,  I  have  no 
questions  to  ask,  for  God  has  answered  them 
all." 

Such  was  the  character  of  expressions  that  fell 
Irom  many  li^Ds  that  evening. 

My  own  words  of  farewell  came  from  the  depths 
of  a  heart,  sorrowful  at  parting,  yet  hushed  into 
peace,  that  I  was  going  sustained  by  such  benedic- 
tions. 

A  report,  in  one  of  the  New  York  papers,  says 
of  the  close  of  this  service,  "Brother  Earle  led  in 
a  closing  prayer,  and  with  a  hymn  of  parting  the 
assembly  was  dismissed.  Not  to  the  doors,  but  to 
the  pulpit,  the  people  crowded. 

"We  stood  near  the  man  who  wins  souls  to 
Christ,  and  heard  the  expressions  of  love  and 
anxiety  which  each  uttered. 

"Young  converts  said  to  their  friend,  *Pray  for 
us,'  while  the  older  pilgrims  said  to  him,  *  We  shall 
pray  for  you.'  How  many  times  <  God  bless  you  ' 
was  uttered ! " 

The  importance  which  Christians  in  the  Atlantic 
States  attached  to  this  work,  and  the  prayerful  in- 
terest with  which  they  followed  my  own  connection 
with  it,  are  so  well  expressed  in  an  article  in  the 
"New  York  Examiner  and  Chroricle,"  I  cannot  do 


B  RING  mar  r]\   SHEAVES.  287 

better  than  give  some  exrracts  :  "  At  the  formation 
of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society,  in  England,  JNIr. 
Fuller  said,  <  There  is  a  gold  mine  in  India,  but  it 
seems  almost  as  deep  as  the  centre  of  the  earth. 
Who  will  explore  it?'  *  I  will  go  down,'  said  Mr. 
Gary,  'but  remember  that  you  must  hold  the 
ropes.' 

*'  There  is  gold  in  California,  mines  more  pre- 
cious than  any  that  have  yet  been  worked,  —  mines 
deep  and  inexhaustible,  that  have  been  sadly  neg- 
lected in  the  search  for  less  precious  treasure. 

"The  question  has  been  asked,  anxiously  and  re- 
peatedly, Who  will  venture  to  explore  them? 

"At  last.  Rev.  Mr.  Earle,  an  honored  evangelist, 
in  answer  to  an  invitation  from  Christians  of  various 
denominations,  saj'S, 'I  will  go.'  And  in  leaving, 
he  has  turned  to  his  brethren  of  the  east,  and  said, 
*  Remember  that  you  must  hold  the  ropes.' 

"Few,  we  think,  present  at  the  farewell  meet- 
ing on  the  eve  of  Mr.  Earle's  departure,  w^ere  not 
deeply  impressed  with  the  faith  of  this  good  man. 
It  was  simple  and  child-like,  but  so  strong  as  to  be 
truly  sublime. 

"  He  confidently  expects  great  things ;  but,  like 
Paul,  his  expectation  rests,  in  a  great  measure,  on 
the  prayers  of  his  brethren. 

"He  goes  down  to  explore  the  mine,  but  he  ex- 
pects us  to  hold  the  ropes  ;  and  it  cannot  be  denied 


288  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

that  Christians  in  the  Atlantic  States  owe  vast 
responsibilities  to' the  Pacific  Coast.  We  have  not 
sent  the  gospel  to  California  as  promptly  and  as 
liberally  as  she  has  sent  gold  to  us  :  the  balance  of 
account  is  sadly  against  us.  Now  is  the  time  to 
settle  this  long-standing  account.  Let  us  meet  our 
obligations ;  let  us  follow  this  eastern  evangelist 
on  his  mission  with  our  prayers ;  let  us  antici- 
pate his  arrival  with  telegraphic  messages,  by  the 
way  of  the  mercy-seat,  heaven,  and  the  throne  of 
God.   .   .   . 

"Let  every  church,  then,  to  which  the  cause  of 
the  Redeemer  generally  is  dear,  and  every  Christian 
who  has  a  husband,  brother,  son,  or  friend  on  that 
coast,  not  fail  to  send  up  their  prayers  to  God  for  a 
blessing  u[)on  brother  Earle,  that  he  may,  in- 
deed, be  an  evangelist  of  Christ  to  the  people  of 
California.   .   .   . 

"Remember,  brethren,  we  hold  the  ropes." 
When,  on  the  day  following  this  farewell  service, 
the  steamer  lifted  her  moorin2:s  from  the  Atlantic 
Coast,  —  the  home  of  my  youth  and  manhood,  and 
the  scene  of  n\y  labors  hitherto,  —  and  bore  me 
away  towards  the  distant  Pacitic  shores,  my  heart 
was  comforted  by  the  thought  of  those  prayers  tluit 
were  sure  to  follow  me  ;  and  during  all  my  absence 
the  blessings  from  morning  and  evening  sacrifices, 
In  which  my  name  Avas  remembered,  in  homes  frciii 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  289 

St.  John  to  Washington,  fell  upon  me  as  the 
benediction  of  henven. 

My  welcome  at  San  Francisco  was  warm  and 
hearty,  making  me  sure  the  promise  of  cooperation 
would  be  carried  out  to  the  fullest  extent. 

The  harvest  had  already  commenced  ;  the  special 
means  proposed  by  the  Union  had  been  followed  by 
the  blessing  of  Gocf ;  many  souls  were  rejoicing  in 
hope,  others  were  inquiring,  and  I  doubt  not  the 
work  would  have  «rone  on  had  the  vessel  in  which  I 

o 

traversed  the  sea  gone  down  to  the  bottom  with  all 
its  human  freight. 

Immediately  on  my  arrival,  one  common  union 
meeting  was  established  as  the  working-ground  and 
rallying-point  for  the  various  denominations  and 
churches  connected  with  the  Ministerial  Union.  For 
this  purpose  the  Union  had  secured  Piatt's  Hall  as 
the  regular  place  of  meeting,  and  the  occasional  use 
of  Union  Hall,  because  these  were  much  larger 
than  any  of  the  churches ;  and  the  expense  of 
hiring  these  halls — some  fifteen  hundred  dollars 
—  gives  an  idea  of  the  heartiness  with  which  the 
people  entered  into  the  work.  The  same  spirit  was 
manifest  in  all  they  did ;  in  the  crowded  attend- 
ance, in  their  thoughtfulness  as  "hearers,"  and 
promptness  as  "doers  of  the  word."  Very  soon 
deep,  quiet  feeling  was  manifest  over  the  entire 
city.     Men  were  awakened  to  the  solemn  issues  of 


290  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

life  as  never  before ;  the  "  unseen  "  seemed  to  sweep 
over  and  sink  out  of  sight  the  "  seen  ; "  people  felt 
they  were  living  for  eternity. 

Some  idea  of  the  extent  of  the  work,  even  at  the 
end  of  the  first  two  weeks,  may  be  obtained  from 
the  following  extracts  from  an  article  in  one  of  the 
daily  papers,  "The  Altai"  "A  religious  revival, 
such  as  has  never  before  been  experienced  on  this 
coast,  is  now  in  progress  in  this  city.   .   .   . 

"Mr.  Earle  arrived  in  this  city  a  little  over  two 
weeks  ago.  .  .  .  He  commenced  his  services  on  Sun- 
day, October  seventh,  in  Dr.  A.  L.  Stone's  church. 
On  Monday,  the  eighth,  he  preached  in  Dr.  Scud- 
der's  church.  On  Tuesday,  in  Dr.  Cheney's ; 
and  most  of  the  time  since  has  been  preaching  in 
Piatt's  Hall,  twice  each  day ;  on  Sunday,  at  Union 
Hall.   .   .   . 

"The  congregation  which  assembled,  on  Sunday 
evening  last,  at  Union  Hall,  was  the  largest  ever 
collected  under  one  roof  on  this  coast ;  every  avail- 
able space  for  standing  room  was  occupied ;  there 
could  not  have  been  less  than  three  thousand 
auditors  present,  and  there  were  at  least  one  thou- 
sand who  could  not  get  into  the  hall,  and  were 
obliged  to  leave  without  hearing  Mr.  Earle. 

"  But  the  number  attending  these  services  is  the 
least  remarkable  thing  about  them.  The  interest 
pervt^ding    the    assemblage,     amounting    even   to 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  291 

solemnity  of  devotiou,  is  extraordinary,  and  the 
quiet,  order,  and  reverence  displayed  is  aston- 
ishini?.   .   .   . 

"  Without  any  attempt  at  the  graces  of  the  pulpit, 
the  effect  produced  by  his  preaching  is  beyond  com- 
parison the  greatest  that  has  come  within  our  ex- 
perience. .  .  .  To  listen  to  him  once  attracts  your 
attention ;  the  second  time  increases  it ;  the  third 
time  deepens  it  to  interest ;  and  further  attendance 
renders  it  absorbing.   .  .   . 

"  The  feeling  which  has  been  aroused  by  his 
preaching  and  services  is  deepening,  and  extend- 
ing, and  widening  every  day.  The  members  of  the 
various  churches  appear  to  be  deeply  exercised ; 
and  many  of  those  who  are  not  members,  who 
have  attended  these  services,  have  come  under  deep 
conviction ;  and  some,  of  a  class  and  position 
which  would  popularly  be  supposed  the  last  to 
come  under  such  influences,  have  yielded  to  the 
influences  surrounding  them,  and  are  seeking  for- 
giveness of  their  sins. 

"Yet  there  is  no  excitement,  nor  endeavor  to 
create  excitement,  but  calm  expositions  of  the 
gospel  and  appeals  to  the  judgment. 

"  There  are  in  this  city  now  a  number  of  min- 
isters from  the  interior,  who  have  been  daily  attend- 
ants on  Mr.  Earle's  ministrations,  and  their  unan- 
imous verdict  is  :  *  His  heart  is  in  this  work  ;  he  ia 


292  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

truly  a  servant  of  God,  filled  with  his  love,  and 
wholly  given  to  his  service  ;  and  if  we  will  go  to 
our  flocks,  lay  our  hands  on  God's  altar  and  submit 
our  wills  to  him,  and  preach  the  love  of  God  as  dis- 
played in  the  gospel,  with  the  simplicity,  and  plain- 
ness, and  fervor  of  Mr.  Earle,  such  a  blessing  will 
come  down  from  hqaven  that  there  shall  not  be 
room  enough  to  contain  it.'  ..." 

Thus  were  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
the  hearts  of  men,  all  over  the  city,  manifesting 
themselves.  It  was  not  the  work  of  man.  While 
I  gratefully  appreciate  the  kindness  and  esteem  ex- 
pressed towards  myself  in  this  and  other  similar 
articles  in  the  diflerent  papers,  the  glory  of  the 
work  is  God's.  I  was  only  one  out  of  many  used 
by  him  in  bestowing  his  blessing. 

Christians,  either  under  the  leadership  of  the 
earnest  pastors,  or  singly  and  alone,  went  every- 
where about  the  city  working  for  Christ ;  their 
ranks,  too,  rapidly  filled  up ;  every  convert,  every 
returned  wanderer,  was  at  once  an  addition, — a 
new  centre  from  which  good  was  radiating  into  sur- 
rounding masses.  The  first  impulse  of  the  young 
convert  is  to  try  and  do  something  for  his  Savior, 
and  this,  if  led  into  wise  channels  and  encouraged 
by  older  disciples,  becomes  a  great  source  of  ad- 
ditional power  in  any  revival.  The  love  of  Christ 
in  the  heart  is  ever  a  controlling  power  in  the  life,  — 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  293 

the  great  wheel  iit  the  foundutioii,  that  turns  the 
endless  and  diverse  machinery  of  the  outward  life. 

The  name  of  Christ  was  above  every  other :  to 
the  sinner  it  told  of  a  full  atonement,  a  safe  hiding 
place,  while  all  the  sweetest  and  dearest  associa- 
tions gathered  about  it  anew  to  those  who  had  fled 
to  him  for  refuge.  Ij;  was  above  every  denomina- 
tional name,  —  Congregationalist,  Presbyterian, 
^Methodist,  or  Baptist ;  this  was  the  watchword 
that  opened  the  door  of  every  Christian  heart  to 
all  other  believers ;  all  were  marshalled  under  this 
one  banner. 

This  was  true  of  all  the  meetings  in  which  I  was 
engaged  on  the  coast;  everywhere  it  was  a  com- 
mon, united  effort  for  Christ. 

I  continued  my  labors  here  five  wrecks,  preach- 
ing twice  each  day ;  on  Sunda}^  three  times. 

The  Spirit  reached,  with  his  convicting,  convert- 
mg  power,  people  of  every  age  and  condition,  in 
every  part  of  the  city ;  converts  multiplied  by 
hundreds. 

Saturday  afternoons  I  usually  met  the  children 
from  the  schools  in  some  place  where  all  could 
come  together.  Sweet  is  the  memory  of  those 
seasons ;  and  I  think  I  shall  never  see  anything  so 
beautiful  as  to  make  me  forijct  the  sea  of  bright, 
youthful  faces,  there  upturned  towards  mine,  eager 
to  catch  the  words  that  told  them  about  Jesus  ;  (jr 


294    ^  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

those  occasions  when  several  hundred  of  them  came 
forward  and  knelt  together  at  Jesus'  feet,  asking 
him  to  bless  them,  as  he  did  children  when  he  was 
upon  the  earth. 

At  the  end  of  the  time  mentioned  I  left  the 
work  at  San  Francisco  in  the  hands  of  the  pastors 
and  people,  and  turned  towards  other  fields. 

My  time  for  returning  to  the  east  was  given  up ; 
the  reaping-time  on  the  Pacific  Coast  had  come. 
Calls,  urgent  and  beseeching,  were  daily  coming 
from  every  part  of  the  coast,  and  I  dare  not  leave. 


BRINGING   IN  SUE  AVE  S.  295 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

THE  WORK  ON  THE  PACIFIC  COAST  —  CONTINUED. 

SONORA  AND  CoLiBiBiA,  Cal.  —  These  cities, 
only  a  few  miles  apart,  quiet,  aucl  not  large, 
situated  in  the  interior  of  the  state,  in  the  midst  of 
an  extensive  mining  region,  were  my  next  field  of 
labor. 

iMeetings  were  commenced  and  carried  on  in 
both  places  at  the  same  time.  I  preached,  general- 
ly, in  one  city  in  the  afternoon,  and  in  the  evening 
in  the  other,  many  of  the  people  also  going  back 
and  forth  to  each  service. 

There  was  no  other  way  to  meet  the  demand  in 
both  places. 

If,  as  we  sometimes  hear,  mining  commnnities 
are  more  careless  about  the  things  of  religion  than 
other  people,  I  did  not  discover  it,  either  here  or 
elsewhere.  The  interest  in  the  meetings  was  gen- 
eral and  heart}^  and  the  truth  as  instrumental  in 
conversion  of  sinners  as  in  other  places.  And,  in- 
deed, I  have  never  found  any  great  distinction  in 
this  respect  among  different  classes  or  individuals. 


290  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

To  every  heart  there  is  an  avenue  for  the  truth  • 
and  if  we  only  have  the  clear  eye  and  loving  heart 
to  discover  the  porter  at  the  gate,  an  entrance  is 
nearly  as  free  and  easy,  and  the  road  about  as  short 
and  direct,  in  one  case  as  another. 

Out  of  the  sinking  mire  and  thick  darkness  of 
our  fallen,  unrenewed  state,  we  are  ever  stretching 
a  helpless  hand  up  towards  the  light ;  and  that  hand 
the  earnest,  loving  Christian  may  grasp,  and  there- 
by, under  God,  save  the  soul  from  death. 

The  work  daily  grew  in  power,  giving  continually 
new  and  striking  proof  that  "  the  gospel  of  Christ  is 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  to  every  one  that 
believeth." 

At  an  evenino:  meetinof  in  Columbia  there  were 
present  four  praying  wives,  sitting  by  the  side  of 
their  unconverted  husbands.  The  Spirit  was  mov- 
ing upon  the  whole  congregation.  Before  long 
those  wives  rose  and  requested  prayer  for  their 
husbands.  This  melted  the  hearts  of  those  strong 
men,  and,  before  the  meeting  closed,  their  burden 
of  sin  had  become  so  heavy  they  were  on  their 
knees,  with  their  wives,  in  agonizing  prayer. 

The  scene  moved  many  to  tears.  Christians 
silently  joined  in  the  petition. 

God  heard  and  forgave,  and  they  went  home 
rejoicing  in  hope  ;  and  four  happier  households  are 
rarely  found. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  297 

On  one  occasion,  at  Sonora,  after  I  had  been 
talking-  to  the  Sunday  school  children,  all  of  them, 
with  the  exception  of  one  little  lad,  came  forward, 
hi  response  to  a  request  that  all  who  loved,  or 
desired  to  lov^e  Jesus,  would  take  the  front  seats. 

That  little  boy  afterwards  came  to  me,  with  tears 
on  his  face,  and  asked  me  to  pray  that  Jesus  would 
foririve  and  save  him ;  and  it  was  not  long  before 
he,  too,  w\as  numbered  among  the  rejoicing  ones. 

The  interest  was  now  becoming  very  deep ;  the 
i^umber  of  converts  rapidly  increasing,  when,  at 
the  end  of  eight  days,  I  was  compelled  to  say 
good  by  to  the  much-loved  people  of  Sonora  and 
Columbia. 

Oakland,  Cal.  — Across  the  baj^  from  San  Fran- 
cisco, at  this  attractive  town,  —  the  educational 
centre  of  that  region,  and  the  home  of  many  of  the 
business  and  professional  men  of  San  Francisco, — I 
spent  the  next  ten  days  in  a  delightful  season  of 
labor  with  the  different  denominations. 

The  windows  of  heaven  were  opened  wide  ;  the 
revival  spread  not  only  among  the  permanent  in- 
habitants of  the  town,  but  also  through  the  schools 
and  seminaries,  bringing  many  of  the  scholars  to 
the  feet  of  the  Great  Teacher,  where  they  learned 
the  alphabet  of  all  true  knowledge  —  "  the  fear  of 
the  Lord,"  which  "is  the  beginning  of  wisdom.'^ 


2r^3  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

In  one  school  thirty  boys  believed  they  had  met 
with  this  change  of  heart;  and  testimony  to  like 
happy  experiences  came  from  various  other  schools. 
This  added  a  very  important  result  to  the  work,  in 
extending  its  influence  into  other  places  —  often 
quite  distant  —  where  these  converted  scholars  re- 
siled. A  single  instance  will  be  given  in  another 
chapter. 

The  churches  of  Oakland,  and  many  of  its  pleas- 
a.jt  homes,  will  long  be  remembered  for  varied  and 
ojarvellous  displays  of  God's  sovereignty  in  the 
conversion  of  sinners. 

Many  persons  were  lifted  to  the  heights  of  joy 
ittud  peace,  after  long  days  of  wandering  in  the 
depths  of  despair;  others,  who  had,  at  the  time,  no 
particular  anxiety  of  mind,  heard  the  invitation, 
♦*Come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest,"  believed 
it  w^as  meant  for  them,  and,  without  waiting  for 
more  feeling,  came  at  once,  and  found  Jesus.  One 
found  pardon  while  surrounded  by  a  group  of  pray- 
ing friends,  another  alone  in  his  room  ;  one  in  his 
store,  another  in  the  inquiry  meeting ;  one  on  the 
street,  another  while  listening  to  a  sermon  i  and 
60  through  the  whole  long  list  of  new  experiences 
there  were  touched  almost  hourly  these  a'ld  other 
widely  differing  chords,  all,  however,  vil/ating  in 
1  armony  with  one  single  key-note  —  Salvation 
throuo^h  the  blood  of  Jesus. 


BRINGING  IN  SUEA  VES.  299 

After  ten  days  I  departed,  leaving  the  people 
grateful  for  the  past,  and  strong  in  heart  for  the 
future. 

Stockton,  Cal.  —  Winding  along  between  the 
banks  of  the  San  Joaquin  River  to  Stockton,  a 
county-seat  and  charming  city  in  the  midst  of  a  lux- 
uriant farming  region,  I  there  saw,  during  a  stay  o\ 
twelvre  days,  one  of  the  most  powerful  revivals  1 
have  ever  passed  through  in  so  short  a  time. 

The  whole  city  seemed  shaken  by  the  mighty 
power  of  the  Spirit.  Men  were  stricken  down 
under  conviction  for  sin,  in  the  very  streets  and 
places  of  business.  The  bitterest  enemies  of  Christ 
were  ready  to  renounce  anything  and  everything 
for  the  most  humble  place  among  his  children. 

The  meetings  became  the  common  theme  of  con- 
versation, and  the  common  place  of  resort. 

Such  was  the  unity  and  love  among  Christians 
of  every  name,  the  impenitent  were  overcome  by 
the  very  sight,  and  constrained  to  seek  admission 
into  such  a  fiimily.     Love  made  religion  oMractive. 

A  prominent  physician,  who  had  long  been  an 
infidel,  and  had  led  many  young  men  into  the 
bewildering  mazes  of  that  soul-destroying  error, 
said  J  when  he  saw  the  love  between  the  different 
denominations,  "I  cannot  stand  this  ;  I  must  believe 
and  share  in  such  a  religion." 


300  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

Before  long  he  rose  in  a  crowded  meeting,  asked 
permission  to  speak,  and  then  calihig  the  attention 
of  the  3^onng  men  in  wliose  minds  he  had  sown  the 
seeds  of  infidelity,  said  he  wanted  to  take  back 
every  word  he  had  ever  uttered  in  support  of  in- 
fidelity, and  to  acknowledge  the  truth  of  the  Bible 
and  Christianity,  and  urge  all  to  seek  an  interest  in 
the  atonement  of  Christ.  Not  only  believers,  but 
his  companions  in  infidelity,  were  much  afiected  by 
the  appeal. 

He  soon  found  hope  in  Christ,  and  has  since  been 
an  active  Christian  laborer,  doing  what  he  can  to 
undo  his  former  infidel  teachings. 

The  little  ones  from  the  Sunday  schools  and  the 
public  schools  looked  up  in  my  face,  with  sweet 
confidence,  and  said,  "  We  don't  want  you  to  go 
away,  for  since  you  came  we  have  learned  to  love 
Jesus."  The  poor  and  the  aged  grasped  my  hand, 
saying,  "  Thank  you  for  coming ;  through  you  we 
have  found  Jesus  and  happiness ;  life  uo  longer 
seems  dreary." 

People  surrounded  with  an  abundance  of  the 
good  things  of  this  life  said,  "  We  never  knew 
hou  to  enjoy  our  mercies  until  these  meetings  were 
held  ;  now  we  love  the  Giver,  and  enjoy  them  as 
coming  from  his  hand ;  his  service  sweetens  them 
aH,  and  gives  a  charm  to  life,  unknown   till   now." 

Blessed  work! — to  bring  men,  through  Christ, 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  301 

into  communication  with  tlie  heart  of  our  Father, 
yearning  with  unutterable  love  over  our  fallen  race  ! 
Thus  richly  did  the  blessings  of  salvation  fall 
upon  Stockton,  bringing  pardon  to  the  condemned 
siiiner,  hope  to  the  wandering,  peace  to  the  sorrow- 
ing, light  to  those  in  darkness,  purer  faith  and  love 
to  the  older  disciples,  and  better  purposes  into  all 
the  channels  of  business  and  social  life,  making  the 
city  glad  with  the  presence,  and  vocal  with  the 
praises  of  Jesus. 

Saceamento,  Cal.  — From  thence  I  went  on,  by 
a  stage  route  of  half  a  hundred  miles,  over  muddy 
roads,  and  under  rainy  skies,  to  Sacramento,  the 
capital  of  the  state. 

The  "  rainy  season,"  wdiich  had  also  prevailed 
during  the  meeting  at  Stockton,  was  now  at  its 
height;  and  an  imperious,  though  fitful  sway  it 
was,  that  the  storm-king  was  holding :  now  giving 
way, for  a  while  to  the  sunshine,  and  now  again 
gathering  his  dark  battalions  in  greater  strength, 
and  rushing  back  to  the  contest  suddenly  and 
angrily,  deluging  town  and  country,  sometimes 
marking  his  path  with  the  debris  of  ruined  roads, 
crops,  fences,  and  even  dwellings,  and  always  — 
until  he  again  left  the  field  —  making  men  shun  his 
presence,  and  seek  a  covert  from  his  missiles. 

Surely  not  a  promising  time,   from  the   stand- 


302  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

point  of  mere  reason,  to  labor  for  a  revival,  espe- 
daily  in  the  midst  of  the  very  worldly  influences 
connected  with  a  seat  of  government.  But  faith 
looks  upon  the  clouds  only  as  the  chariot  of  her 
God,  who,  in  carrying  out  his  purposes, 

"Plants  his  footsteps  on  the  sea, 
And  rides  upon  the  storm ;  " 

and  rests  as  calmly  on  his  promises,  in  rain  and 
cloud,  as  in  sunshine ;  in  summer's  heat  as  in 
winter's  cold. 

In  the  exercise  of  this  faith,  work  was  com- 
menced. It  was  not,  indeed,  a  light  task:  labor, 
hard  and  unyielding,  was  demanded.  Far  into  the 
night  God's  faithful  children  wrestled  in  prayer; 
but  the  promises  were  found  sure ;  the  blessing 
came.  The  spiritual  rain  was  more  abundant  and 
more  powerful  than  the  natural.  Men  could  escape 
the  latter  under  their  roofs,  but  the  former  reached 
them  even  there,  and  sweeping  from  them  their 
confidence  in  all  earthly  foundations,  constrained 
them  to  flee  for  safety  to  the  "  Kock  of  Ages,"  and 
to  hide  themselves  under  the  covert  of  the  Al- 
mighty. 

An  unconverted  lawyer,  writing  for  one  of  the  daily 
papers,  —  "The  Bee,"  —  says,  "It  was  supposed 
Rev.  Mr.  Earle  w^ould  close,  Tuesday  evening,  but  so 
great  and  universal  is  the  interest  awakened  in  our 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  303 

community  by  the  unexampled  success  resulting 
from  the  joint  efforts  of  himself  and  the  several 
energetic  ministers  cooperating  with  him,  ho  ha.s 
finally  yielded  to  the  united  solicitation  of  the 
pastors  and  people  to  postpone  his  appointment 
for  Petaluma,  and  stay  until  next  week. 

"Never  before,  I  think,  in  this  city,  have  there 
been  so  large  meetings,  and  manifestations  of  such 
deep  and  earnest  feeling  on  religious  subjects.   .   .   . 

"It  is  curious  to  hear  the  various  views  expressed 
by  different  persons  regarding  Mr.  Earle. 

"One  class  says,  'He  is  not  an  eloquent  man;' 
another,  *  He  is  the  embodiment  of  eloquence  it- 
self.' One  sa3^s,  '  He  is  not  logical  at  all ; '  another, 
*  He  is  the  most  logical  and  convincing  man  I  ever 
heard.'  .   .   . 

"In  one  conclusion  nearly  all  seem  to  agree  :  his 
perfect  sincerity  in  the  truth  of  his  utterances,  and 
the  possession  of  wonderful  power.  This  is  evi- 
denced by  the  attendance  of  representatives  of 
nearly  all  the  mechanical,  laboring,  and  profes- 
sional classes,  who,  yielding  homage  at  the  shrine 
of  intellect  and  goodness,  listen  with  extreme 
delight,  and  many  of  whom  have  embraced  his 
faith.   .   .   . 

"  That  he  is  doing  a  vast  amount  of  good  none 
will  deny.   ..." 

Throughout  the  city  there  was  great   joy :  few 


30-4  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

went  empty  from  the  great  feast  which  divine  Love 
had  spread. 

One  of  the  pastors  spoke  for  many  hearts,  when 
he  wrote  me,  after  this  meeting,  «I  live  in  a  new 
world.  The  sun  shines  all  the  time.  I  have  night- 
less  day  in  my  soul.     I  now  rest  in  Jesus." 

Thus  while  dark  clouds  overhang  the  earth,  may 
the  believer  dwell  in  the  Sunshine,  whose  light  will 
be  undimmed  when  sun,  moon,  and  stars  are  no 
more. 

Twenty  days  passed,  and  I  took  my  leave  of  the 
kind  people  of  this  busy,  prosperous  city,  rejoicing 
over  scores  and  hundreds  of  new-born  souls,  and 
the  peace  bestowed  on  Christians ;  and  all  this  dur- 
ing the  mud  and  storm  of  the  California  "rainy 
season." 

"Ye  fearful  saints,  fresh  courage  take; 
The  clouds  ye  so  much  dread 
Are  big  with  mercy,  and  shall  break 
In  blessings  on  your  head." 

Petaluma.  —  This  genial  city,  attractively  situ- 
ated near  the  bay,  seemed,  like  the  rest  of  the  coast, 
ready  for  the  work  of  the  Lord ;  and  the  opening 
of  the  meeting  there  m'oved  the  machinery  of  the 
social  and  individual  life  of  the  whole  city,  as 
"  raising  the  gate "  of  one  of  our  mills  sets  the 
(ountless  looms  and  hands  at  work,  and  fills  every 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  30.5 

room  and  story  within,  and  the  place  around,  with 
the  sound  of  busy  activity.  Attendance  upon,  and 
interest  in  the  meetings,  were  almost  universal.  A 
single  incident  show^s  this  fact.  The  hall,  in  which, 
becauEC  of  its  superior  size,  the  meetings  were  held, 
had  been  engaged  by  a  theatrical  company.  When 
the  evening  for  the  performance  came,  we  w^ent  — 
Tvith  no  word  of  fault-hnding  —  to  one  of  the 
churches.  Only  eight  persons  attended  the  theatre  ; 
the  performance  was  given  up ;  and  two  of  the 
actors  came  into  the  meeting,  and  there  believed 
they  found  hope  in  Christ. 

Events  and  expressions,  apparently  of  slight  im 
portance,   w^ere  sufficient,  under  the  great  pressure 
of  the  Spirit's  presence,  to  lead  men  to  seek  an  in- 
terest in  Christ. 

The  judge  of  one  of  the  judicial  courts  —  a 
thorough  man  of  the  world  —  w^as  converted  through 
the  instrumentality  of  his  little  son,  who,  in  the 
meeting  at  Oakland,  while  at  school  there,  had 
found  the  Savior.  Vacation  brought  him  home, 
his  heart  full  of  love  to  Jesus ;  and  at  once  he 
was  at  work  for  his  father's  conversion. 

Returning  from  meeting  one  evening,  he  asked 
his  father  to  pray.  "I  will  kneel  and  you  m:iy 
pray,"  said  he,  unable  to  resist  his  only  cl  ild. 
"No,  father;  I  want  you  to  pray,"  was  the  reply. 
At  length  the  worldl}^  man  kneeled  down  by  the  sido 
20 


306  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

of  the  young  pleader,  and,  as  he  told  us,  "offered 
some  sort  of  a  prayer."  In  a  few  days,  after  a 
severe  conflict,  he  fully  gave  up  his  will  to  Christ, 
and  found  peace  in  believing. 

He  has  since  been  an  earnest  Christian ;  some- 
times presiding  at  the  sessions  of  the  court  during 
the  day,  and  in  the  evening  preaching  in  one  of  the 
churches,  with  his  brethren  of  the  bar  in  front  of 
him  among  his  hearers. 

Those  thirteen  days  at  Petahnna  were  full  of 
rejoicing ;  the  blessings  of  salvation  were  bestowed 
in  free  and  rich  abundance ;  the  peace  of  heaven 
fell  upon  the  hearts  of  God's  people,  and  its  glory 
upon  their  faces. 

The  judge,  of  whose  conversion  I  have  spoken, 
has  written  me  :  "...  Everything  goes  on  finely  in 
this  city  ;  no  jingling  of  consequences  between  the 
different  denominations,  as  to  unfair  means  in  pro- 
curing additions  to  their  churches ;  all  get  a  fair 
share,  and  all  seem  satisfied. 

"O,  such  a  change  in  this  place  !  If  you  could 
see  it  as  it  appears  to  me  and  to  others,  I  know 
you  would  not  regret  your  labor  of  love  among  us." 

San  Jo&e,  Cal.  — From  Petaluma,  a  route  wind- 
ing along  steamboat  and  railroad  lines,  by  way  of 
San  Francisco,  —  the  connecting  link  between  many 
of  the  inland  cities  and  towns,  —  brought  me  to  San 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  307 

Jose,  a  most  delightful  city,  the  seat  of  the  county 
government,  and  situated  in  a  rich  farming  region, 
charming  with  woodland,  plain,  and  hill. 

I  well  remember,  as  we  drew  near  the  city,  ask- 
ing a  fellow-passenger,  with  whom  I  w^as  conversing 
about  the  city  and  the  anticipated  meetings,  the 
size  of  the  churches.  "  O,"  said  he,  "you  will  find 
the  smallest  church  in  San  Jose  plenty  large  enough 
for  all  w4io  wdll  care  to  attend."  Such  was  the 
judgment  he  had  drawn  from  what  he  had  seen  in 
years  past.  Perhaps  he  could  not  say,  "the  lines 
have  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant  places."  Be  that 
as  it  may,  the  meetings  were  hardly  under  Avay  be- 
fore no  church  could  accommodate  the  throno^s. 

Nearly  every  person  in  the  city  was  in  some 
way  moved  by  the  meetings  ;  some,  indeed,  only  to 
derision,  others  to  curiosity ;  but  the  greater  part 
to  thoughtful,  growling  interest. 

Men  could  refuse  to  yield  to  the  strivings  of  the 
Spirit ;  but  whatever  their  calling  or  condition  they 
could  not  bar  them  from  their  hearts. 

One  of  the  hotel  keepers  —  a  man  I  could  but 
esteem  for  many  generous  and  honorable  traits  of 
character  —  was  fully  convinced  of  his  lost  condi- 
tion and  his  need  of  Christ ;  frankly  admitted  it  all ; 
*  but,"  said  he,  "I  cannot  sell  rum  and  be  a  Christian  ; 
and  as  I  shall  be  unable  to  carry  on  my  hotel  if  I 
give  up  rum-selling,  and  so,  perhaps,  be  unable  to 


308  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

support  ray  family,  1  must  give  up  becoming  a 
Christitm."  O,  how  my  heart  ached  for  him,  lest 
because  of  that  decision  I  should,  at  the  judgment, 
see  him  going  away  "on  the  left  hand" — forever 
lost ! 

Another  man  in  the  same  business  was  brought 
to  the  same  test,  but,  with  a  courage  w^orthy  the 
imitation  of  any  among  believers  or  impenitent  who 
are  engaged  in  callings  that  stand  in  the  way  of  the 
welfare  of  their  souls,  he  met  it  unflinchingly. 
One  Saturday  evening  he  went  home  from  the 
meeting  determined  to  make  the  sacrifice  of  any- 
thins:  that  risked  the  salvation  of  his  soul,  and 
before  midnight  had  removed  his  bar  and  put  away 
his  stock  of  liquors  !  In  a  few  clays  he  w^as  rejoi- 
cing in  hope,  and  not  long  after  connected  with  one 
of  the  churches. 

Here,  also,  occurred  one  of  those  peculiarly  in- 
teresting incidents  I  was  often  permitted  to  meet 
with  during  my  stay  on  the  coast  —  the  conversion 
of  people  once  known  to  me  at  the  east,  or  of  those 
whose  friends  had  given  me  special  entreaty  to  try 
and  lead  them  to  Christ  : 

A  husband  and  wife,  and  wife's  brother,  all  of 
whom  had  been,  long  years  before,  residents  of  the 
same  village  as  m3^self,  and  had  there  been  un- 
reached by  all  their  religious  privileges,  were  now 
living  in  this  city;  and  here,  so  far  from  our  old 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  309 

home,  \vc  again  met,  and  they,  through  the  preach- 
ins:  of  thch-  former  fellow-townsman,  in  this  distant 
city,  were  at  length  reached  by  the  sovereign  power 
of  God,  and  led  to  Jesus.  Well  may  the  poet 
sing,  — 

'*  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way, 
His  wonders  to  perform." 

God's  sovereignty  was  also  remarkably  displayed 
in  the  conversion  of  a  leader  among  pleasure- 
seekers  : 

This  man,  for  some  reason,  rose  in  the  meeting 
and  asked  prayers  for  four  persons,  purely  in  de- 
rision. 

He  sat  down ;  but  the  sport  was  gone ;  deep 
conviction  of  sin  seized  him ;  and  now,  in  honest 
agony  of  soul,  he  cried  for  mere}'  for  himself.  His 
companions,  too,  who  had  thought  to  share  in  the 
pleasure,  shared,  instead,  the  burden  of  conviction. 
At  length  he,  with  some  of  them,  found  "the  Way," 
and  obtained  pardon  and  peace. 

In  a  general  revival,  like  this,  the  Spirit  moves 
upon  more  hearts  than  we  are  wont  to  think,  and 
were  people  honest  to  the  impressions  thus  pro- 
duced, few  would  pass  through  such  a  season  uncon- 
verted. Perhaps  the  following  incident  will  help 
bring  out  this  truth,  so  alarming  to  those  who 
have  gone   through  revivals  and  are   still   impcni- 


310  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

tent,  and  so  encouraging  to  Christian  faith  and 
effort : 

A  prominent  teacher,  an  unbeliever  in  the  divini- 
ty of  Christ  and  in  portions  of  the  Bible,  came  to 
m}''  room,  at  the  request  of  his  friends,  with  no 
apparent  concern  for  himself. 

Courteously,  but  firmly,  he  spoke  of  his  views. 
We  did  not  ars^ue  much :  but  before  leavinor  he 
promised  he  would  not  knowingly  grieve  the  Spirit, 
by  disobeying  his  voice.  He  felt  safe  in  making 
such  a  promise,  as  he  was  not  aware  of  being  the 
subject  of  the  Spirit's  operations  ;  but  in  the  course 
of  three  days  lie  rose  in  the  meeting,  and  acknowl- 
edged that  the  Spirit  was  striving  with  him,  and  had 
shown  him  he  was  a  sinner,  and  miglit  find  pardon 
througli  an  almighty  Savior,  and,  therefore,  his 
promise,  as  well  as  his  burdened  heart,  constrained 
him  to  ask  for  prayer. 

A  few  days  more  and  he  again  spoke  in  the 
public  assembly,  but  no  longer  in  doubt  of  the 
divinity  of  Christ;  all  was  peace,  as,  with  a  heart 
overflowing  with  love  to  his  Savior,  he  told  how  he 
had  found  him,  and  been  pardoned  through  his  blood. 

Since  returning  east  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of 
receiving  an  official  letter  informing  me  of  my 
election  as  an  honorary  member  of  a  Young  Men's 
Christian  Association  in  San  Jos^  —  an  organiza- 
tion not  in  existence  there  at  the  time  of  the  meet- 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  311 

Jiig,  but  which  has  since  grown  up  as  one  of  its 
fruits.  Already  it  has  rooms  litted  up  and  supplied 
with  reading  matter,  at  an  expense  of  two  thousand 
dollars  ;  has  three  mission  schools  under  its  care ; 
and,  like  most  of  these  blessed  organizations,  which 
are  so  often  the  children  or  parents  of  revivals,  is  a 
warm,  living  power  for  good. 

But  I  must  linger  no  longer  over  San  Jos^ ;  the 
picture  of  those  thirteen  days,  if  filled  out,  would 
present  the  varied  experiences  of  -some  hundreds 
of  young  converts,  and  of  a  still  larger  nnmber  of 
older  Christians  who  were  quickened,  and  an  entire 
city  made  glad  and  bright. 

Santa  Claea,  Cal.  —  Seven  days  were  spent  at 
Santa  Clara,  a  city  only  four  miles  distant,  sur- 
rounded with  the  same  lovely  scenery,  and  present- 
ing the  comfortable  look  of  a  New  England  town. 

A  good  work  was  begun ;  spiritual  forces  oper- 
ated rapidly;  the  showers  of  grace  fell,  and  seed 
newly  sown  or  long  slumbering  burst  into  life,  and 
gave  considerable  of  a  harvest  even  in  those  few 
days.  The  churches  were  revived,  and  made  ear- 
nest in  the  INIaster's  service,  and  a  goodly  number 
of  the  impenitent  brought  into  the  kingdom  of 
Christ ;  among  them  were  men  respected  for  their 
honorable  lives,  others  hardened  in  sin ;  w^omen, 
who  seemed  only  to  lack  the  one  blessing  which 


312  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

the  loving  Miiry  of  Bethany  chose  for  her  part ;  and 
children,  some  of  pious  parents,  others  from  homes 
where  Christ  was  not  welcomed. 

The  shortness  of  the  time  tended  to  prompt 
decision  and  resolute  action.  The  work  advanced 
so  rapidly,  under  these  quickening  influences,  that 
on  the  seventh  and  hist  day  of  my  stay  two  hundred 
unconverted  men,  women,  and  chiklren  rose  in  the 
meeting,  asking  the  prayers  of  Christians. 

Marysville,  Cal.  — With  sorrow  did  I  leave  the 
work  at  Santa  Clara,  while  God's  people  were  trem- 
bling under  such  responsibilities ;  but  there  was  no 
other  course,  and  commending  them  to  God,  I  de-. 
parted  for  Marysville,  a  flourishing  city  at  the  junc- 
tion of  the  Feather  and  Yuba  Rivers,  and  near  the 
terminus  of  one  of  the  inland  lailroads. 

The  rainy  season  was  still  pouring  down  its 
floods.  The  place,  too,  had  been  represented  as 
one  of  uncommon  spiritual  inactivity  and  barren- 
ness. One  of  the  pastors  had  written,  "I  dare  not 
say  there  is  any  special  religious  interest  man- 
ifested. ...  I  should  say  the  indications  are  not 
yet  even  of  the  size  of  a  man's  hand.  Right  views 
t)f  the  Christian  religion  and  of  the  character  of 
Christians  seem  impossible  to  the  generality  of  the 
people  of  this  city. 

"The  membership  of  the  churches  being  small, 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  313 

and  working  male  members A^eiy  few,  we  shall  not 
muster  in  all  a  very  strong  force  to  aid  you ;  but 
there  are  a  few  faithful  women  and  praying  men 
who  may  be  relied  on,  I  think.   .   .   . 

"  I  dare  not  say  I  am  sanguine  of  great  results. 
The  truth  has  been  plainly  preached.  .  .  .  God 
is  the  same,  yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever.  I  do 
not  see,  I  confess,  how  the  truth,  ineffectual  hereto- 
fore in  converting,  is  to  be  made  effectual  just 
now,  because  coming  from  other  lips. 

"And  I  say  to  you,  in  all  candor,  my  desire  for 
your  coming  arises  from  the  same  motive  which 
leads  a  fond  parent  to  send  for  an  eminent  physician 
from  afar,  with  the  hope  that  a  beloved  child  may 
be  saved  through  his  skill,  —  resident  physicians 
having  failed.   ..." 

Here,  perhai^s,  the  question  again  comes  up, 
"How  could  you  be  willing  to  enter  such  a  lield,  or 
undertake  a  case  that  was  considered  so  hopeless?" 
The  natural  heart  says,  "  Such  a  step  is  presump- 
tion." But  faith  says,  "It  is  reasonable  —  nothing 
is  ever  more  reasonable  than  to  take  God  at  his 
word ;  the  same  power  that  brought  together  and 
clothed  with  life  and  beauty  the  dry  bones,  in  the 
vision  of  Ezekiel,  has  promised  to  raise  those  who 
are  '  dead  in  trespasses  and  sinw,'  wherever  and 
whenever  the  means  —  no  matter  how  feeble  —  are 
U'^cd;  and  he  w'll  keep  his  promise." 


314  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.      ■ 

Faith  was  honored,  as  it  always  is.  I  have  labored 
longer  in  other  places,  and  seen  many  more  conve£- 
sions,  but  never  among  three  hundred  converts 
have  I  known  so  many  mature  business  and  profes- 
sional men.  Those  holding  the  highest  positions 
in  the  city  were  among  the  first  to  seek  the  Savior. 
The  mayor,  the  sherifi',  several  physicians,  lawyer?, 
and  business  men,  came  forward,  at  one  time,  under 
deep  conviction,  and  knelt  with  the  anxious. 

The  whole  city  was  stirred.  The  largest  places 
were  sought  for  the  meetings  ;  but  none  were  large 
enough.  Says  the  "  Marysville  Appeal,"  "  The 
largest  religious  congregation  ever  assembled  in 
this  city  met  at  the  Marysville  Theatre,  on  Sunday 
evening,  to  hear  Rev.  Mr.  Earle's  sermon  on  the 
*  Unpardonable  Sin.'  .  .  .  The  parquette,  dress 
circle,  stage,  and  gallery  Avere  filled,  and  hundreds 
present  were  without  seats.   ..." 

Only  those  who  have  borne  an  active  part  in 
such  a  revival  can  know  how  severe  and  wearing  if 
the  labor.  I  remember  leaving  the  church,  one 
afternoon,  by  the  side  door,  for  a  quiet  walk  out- 
side the  city,  that  I  might,  if  possible,  avoid  seeing 
any  one,  so  completely  exhausted  was  I  in  body  and 
mind.  On  my  way,  I  saw  a  lady  at  the  gate  of  an  ele- 
gant residence,  apparently  waiting  for  me.  I  could 
not  avoid  meeting  her,  and  as  I  came  up,  she  said, 
"Mr.  Earle,  will  you  not  come   in  and  pray  for 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  315 

me  ?  "  Just  then  her  sister  crossed  the  street,  and 
made  the  same  request.  Surprised,  I  said,  "  What, 
are  you  not  Christians?"  "We  are  not,  but 
feel  we  must  be."  "Will  you  both  give  youi 
hearts  to  Jesus,  if  I  will  go  in  and  pray  for  you?  " 
'*  We  will."  And  so,  going  into  the  house,  we 
kneeled  in  believing  prayer,  and  the  beautiful 
parlor  was  honored  with  the  presence  of  Jesus,  who 
came  and  spoke  peace  to  those  sisters ;  and  I  went 
to  my  room,  more  weary  perhaps,  yet  after  all  glad 
that,  while  "a  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way,  the 
Lord  directeth  his  steps." 

Placerville,  Cal.  —  Seventeen  days  in  that 
delightful  field,  each  crowned  with  blessing !  and 
then  on  to  Placerville,  a  city  built  up  by  the  once 
rich  placer  diggings,  and  now  again  starting  ahead 
under  the  impetus  of  quartz  mining. 

Well  do  I  recall  our  first  meeting  here ;  the 
mpleasantness  connected  with  this,  as  every  other 
change  from  the  scenes  of  a  revival  to  those 
of  a  new  place  of  labor,  was  at  once  dispelled. 
The  Spirit  seemed  to  shed  down  upon  ns  the 
atmosphere  of  heaven.  And  at  the  close,  the 
brcthrer  and  sisters  gathered  around  me,  grasping 
my  hand  heartily,  and  welcoming  me,  with 
kindling  eye  and  smiling  face,  until  I  felt  myself 


316  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

110  more  among  strangers,  but  in  the  presence  of 
my  Father's  family. 

This  good-will  and  sympathy  soon  pervaded  the 
city,  so  abundant  were  "  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit." 

Here  as  elsewhere,  though  people  in  every  con- 
dition, and  from  all  the  evangelical  denominations, 
were  workinsr  too^ether,  not  a  discordant  note  was 
heard  during  my  entire  stay. 

All  other  interests  seemed  absorbed  in  this  one : 
merchants  left  their  stores ;  mechanics  turned  the 
ke}^  upon  the  shop-door ;  miners  left  the  mills  and 
the  mines ;  women  their  homes ;  children  their 
play  and  their  study,  —  and  all,  with  one  accord, 
sousfht  the  meetino^s.  And  back  from  these  meet- 
ings  many  of  them  went,  rejoicing  in  Jesus,  to 
work  for  the  salvation  of  their  impenitent  friends. 

Men  who  had  been  digging  —  not  alwa3's  with 
the  best  success  —  for  "  corruptible  "  treasure,  now, 
at  last,  found  contentment  in  the  possession  of  an 
"  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  eternal  in  the  heav- 
ens." Discouragements  and  losses  were  crowded 
out  of  mind  by  these  satisfjdng  portions  God  was 
so  freely  bestowing. 

Blessed  religion,  that  can  carry  peace  and  happi- 
ness wherever  it  goes!  Christian,  be  earnest, 
seize  every  opportunity  to  carry  its  hopes  to  the 
homes  of  sorrow  and  despair  !     Lift  up  disheartened 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  317 

men  aiitl  women  with  the  story  of  the  cross,  the 
promises  of  the  gospel ! 

One  whom  God  blessed  here,  writes,  "My  heart 
.'s  so  full  of  gratitude  towards  God  for  sending  you, 
and  you  for  coming  among  us,  with  such,  O,  such 
words  of  light  and  life,  I  cannot  keep  silence." 

The  influence  of  this  work  was  marked  in  the 
outsvard  life  of  the  whole  community.  That  indi- 
viduality—  that  sort  of  personality,  in  which  all 
cities  share,  and  which  differs  in  each,  seemed  trans- 
formed, and  irradiated  with  the  light  and  beauty 
of  reli«^ion. 

O,  how  many  cities  and  villages  in  our  land  need 
the  implanting  in  their  hearts  of  this  germ  of  a  new 
and  better  life  !  There  are  places,  pleasant  in  sit- 
uation and  general  appearance,  where  I  should  be 
loath  to  make  my  home,  because  they  have  become 
formal,  and  selfish,  or  given  up  to  sin  and  amuse- 
ments, through  excessive  worldliness,  or  neglect  of 
the  inner  life  and  power  of  religion. 

AV  rites  cue  of  the  pastors,  "  The  people  of  our 
city  feel  under  lasting  obligations  to  you,  and  will, 
at  least  during  the  present  generation,  keep  your 
memory  green.   ..." 

Friends  in  Placerville,  I  do  not  doubt  3our 
regard,  nor 'can  I  forget  you.  Your  pastors,  your 
churches,  your  hundreds  of  rejoicing  converts,  your 
people  generally,  are  warmly  remembered  ! 


318  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

THE    WOKK    ON    THE    PACIFIC    COAST  —  CONTINUED, 

PORTLAND,  OREGON.  —  On  into  this  great, 
ripe  field,  beyond  the  boundaries  of  Cali- 
fornia, and  within  those  of  Oregon,  God  seemed 
plainly  to   call  me. 

In  the  fiill,  while  at  San  Francisco,  a  request 
came  from  the  pastors  in  Portland,  urging  the  im- 
portance of  that  city,  and  its  need  of  God's  reviv- 
ing word.  Others  followed  ;  to  all,  my  replies  were 
favorable,  but  not  enough  so,  perhaps,  to  make  my 
comuig  sure.  Accordingly  a  good  deacon  made  up 
his  mind  to  lay  the  case  before  me  in  person. 
And  so,  leaving  a  large  business,  down  the  coast 
he  came,  a  thousand  miles,  to  where  I  was  then 
laboring,  presented  anew  the  wants  of  his  city, 
and  informed  me  he  was  not  going  back  until  I 
went  with  him. 

Faithfully  did  he  keep  his  word.  Through  tho 
rest  of  my  stay  at  Marysville,  and  during  the  entire 
meeting  at  Placerville,  he  remained  with  me,  strong 
in  faith,  and  unyielding  in  purpose,  until  at  length 


BRmOTNG  IN  SUEAVES.  ♦  319 

the  way  was  open  for  me  to  go  on  with  hhn  to 
Porthiud. 

On  our  way,  while  the  steamer  was  taking  on 
wood  and  water  at  Astoria,  a  sort  of  trading-post, 
solitary  and  alone,  among  the  forests  and  mountains 
of  the  coast,  I  saw  a  man,  with  care-worn  face, 
anxiously  looking  over  the  passengers,  and  at 
length  fixing  his  eye  upon  me.  In  a  moment  my 
hand  was  grasped,  and  the  man  I  had  been  watch- 
ing said,  "  Are  you  brother  Earle,  the  evangelist?" 
Finding  I  was,  he  said,  "I  have  been  watching  the 
boats  in  hopes  to  meet  you,  and  have  you  preach 
here  while  the  boat  was  waiting ;  I  can  find  no  min- 
ister within  a  hundred  miles  who  can  come  and 
cheer  and  help  me.     I  feel  almost  alone." 

The  people  were  soon  called  together  in  a  hall, 
whore  he  usually  ministered.  Many  of  the  passen- 
gers left  the  boat  and  joined  in  the  service.  Jesus 
met  us,  and  warmed  our  hearts  with  his  love. 
Much  feeling  was  manifested,  and  at  the  close  an 
intense  desire  was  expressed  for  me  to  remain,  and 
it  was  almost  impossible  for  me  not  to  do  so.  My 
heart  ached  that  I  could  not. 

Glad  was  the  welcome  at  Portland.  There  were 
tears  of  joy  that  God  had  answered  their  prayers 
and  sent  them  help. 

The  importance  of  this  city,  as  a  field  for  Chris- 
tian labor,   had  not  been  overrated.     It   was    the 


320  •  BRINOING   IN  SHEA  YES. 

centre  of  business  and  travel  for  the  north-western 
portion  of  our  Pacific  coast,  as  was  San  Francisco 
for  more  extensive  regions  in  the  southern  limits, 
and  was  lilie  a  great  heart,  sending  pulsations  along 
the  large  arteries  far  into  the  interior,  and  along 
the  coast.  Work  done  for  Christ  in  Portland  was 
felt  far  and  wide,  and  gave  extraordinary  oppoi- 
tunity  for  shaping  the  future  of  an  entire  state. 

We  felt  that  a  great  work  must,  and,  because  our 
Master  was  divine,  would  be  accomplished.  Like 
Basil  of  old,  standing  before  the  barred  gates  of  the 
cathedral,  and  commanding  them,  in  the  name  of 
Christ,  to  open  to  the  waiting  believers,  there 
were  Christians  in  Portland  who  feared  not  to 
knock  at  the  strongholds  of  sin  and  unbelief,  and 
demand  their  capitulation  in  the  name  of  their  Al- 
mighty Savior.  Nor  were  we  put  to  shame.  The 
victory  was  o*n  the  Lord's  side. 

My  ow^n  labors  were  necessarily  limited  to  seven- 
teen days.  Yet  at  the  end  of  that  time  the  tri- 
umph for  the  cause  of  Christ  was  great;  sinners 
had  been  brought  into  his  kingdom  by  hundred !a ; 
Christians  were  awake  and  active,  and  an  interest 
in  the  meetings  manifest  all  over  the  city. 

"  The  Oregonian,"  one  of  the  daily  papers  of 
Portland,  says,  ".  .  .  It  is  remarkable  that,  go  where 
you  will,  on  the  street,  into  business  houses,  down 
upon   the   wharf,  among   families,  eveiywhere,  the 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  321 

subject  of  *Rev.  Mr.  Eurle'  {incl  the  revival  meet- 
inirs  is  sure  to  be  broached  and  discussed.  The 
talk  is  not  confined  to  church-going  people.  Every- 
body is  discussing  the  matter,  each  one  from  his 
own  special  standpoint.   .   .   . 

"There  can  certainly  be  no  complaint  about  a 
lack  of  interest  in  religion  in  Portland." 

The  fruits  of  this  interest  were  abundantly 
seen  in  the  crowded  attendance  upon  the  meet- 
ings, the  close  attention  and  deep  feeling  there 
manifest. 

The  inquiry  meetings  were  places  of  great 
interest.  The  aged  came,  with  but  the  remnant 
of  a  wasted  life,  and  tremblingly,  as  they  felt 
their  earthly  tabernacle  dissolving,  asked  God 
to  give  them  one  of  the  "  many  mansions."  In 
great  mercy  he  heard  them,  pardoned  their  sins, 
and  gave  them  the  desire  of  their  hearts.  The 
little  ones,  just  starting  on  the  journey  of  life, 
came  to  Jesus,  asking  him  to  take  them,  and 
lead  them  safely  through  the  dangers  and  duties 
of  the  way ;  and  tenderly  they  were  received, 
and  taken  under  his  special  watch-care  and  love. 
"  Prodigal  sons,"  feeding  on  husks,  bethought 
them  of  the  plenty  in  their  Father's  house,  and 
arose,  and  came  to  him,  and  were  welcomed  with 
all  that  love  which,  through  Jesus,  forgives  and 
blots  out  our  sins. 
21 


322  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

Christians  confessed  their  unfaithfuhiess  to  their 
unconverted  friends.  A  loved  pastor  visited  a  for- 
mer settlement,  took  many  of  the  impenitent  by 
the  hand,  and  told  them  he  had  not  done  his  d;ity 
to  them  when  settled  among  them ;  and  then,  with 
such  holy  peace  upon  his  countenance,  that  one  of 
them  said,  "Pastor,  you  don't  look  as  you  used  to," 
urged  them  to  seek  an  interest  in  the  atonement ; 
and,  through  that  simple  sermon,  men  who  had  for 
years  sat  unmoved  by  his  most  studied  preaching 
were  convicted  and  converted. 

The  "  Pacific  Christian  Advocate "  says  of  this 
work,  "...  The  interest  has  increased  from  day 
to  day.  The  evening  congregations  have  crowded 
the  Presbyterian  church,  the  aisles  and  gallery  be- 
ing filled,  and  very  many  persons  have  been  com- 
pelled to  stand  during  the  services. 

"  On  Saturday  evening  last  an  opportunity  was 
given  for  Christians  to  give,  in  a  few  words,  a 
reason  for  being  on  the  Lord's  side ;  and  in  less 
than  an  hour  and  a  half  over  two  hundred  persons 
had  spoken.   .   .   . 

"On  Sunday  the  congregation  again  occupied 
the  large  court-room,  which  was  densely  packed  on 
the  several  occasions  of  worship.  A  deep  solem- 
nit}'  pervaded  the  entire  audience.  Christians  were 
happy  in  the  Lord ;  and  the  falling  tears,  seen  on 
every  hand,   gave  evidence  of  penitence  and  con- 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  323 

tntiou  of  spirit  on  the  part  of  scores  of  unconverted 
persons.  .  .  .  Very  many  have  professed  conver- 
sion. Believers  have  been  wonderfully  quickened 
and  refreshed  in  spirit. 

"The  members  of  the  different  churches  have 
cooperated  as  brethren ;  names  have  been  forgot- 
ten ;  all  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  never  wit- 
nessed greater  harmony  and  clearer  exhibitions  of 
brotherly  love.   .   .   . 

"A  wonderful  calmness  has  characterized  the 
services  generally.  .  .  .  There  has  been  nothing 
of  vehemence,  frenzy,  or  fanaticism.   .   .   . 

"This  glorious  work  in  our  midst  has  surely  the 
seal  of  God's  approbation.   ..." 

Here  I  met  a  noble  Christian  woman,  whose  ex- 
perience taught  me  anew  the  preciousness  of  our 
religion : 

She  was  an  old  lady,  the  widow  of  a  Baptist 
clergyman.  God  had  given  them  eleven  children, 
many,  if  not  all  of  whom,  had  grown  to  years  of 
maturity. 

Then,  one  after  another,  he  had  taken  ten  of 
them  and  the  father  to  himself,  —  two  or  more 
while  serving  their  country  in  the  late  war. 

Her  last  surviving  child,  a  daughter  living  in 
San  Francisco,  urged  her  to  come  and  live  with 
her.  She  consented,  sold  her  home  in  Ohio,  took 
the  proceeds,   some   three   thousand   do'lars,   and 


324  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

started.  On  the  steamer,  while  sick,  she  was 
robbed  of  all  she  had,   and  left  in  poverty. 

On  her  arrival  at  San  Francisco  she  found  her 
daughter  had  been  dead  three  days,  and  just 
buried. 

Thus  was  she  bereft  of  all,  and  left  alone  and 
penniless  among  entire  strangers.  Her  case,  how- 
ever, becoming  known,  means  were  raised  for  her 
to  start  for  Idaho,  where  she  hoped  to  meet  her 
daiighter's  husband.  On  her  way  Christian  women 
in  Portland  became  interested  in  her,  and  offered 
her  a  home  among  them.  There  I  met  her.  She 
loved  the  meetings.  In  one  of  them  she  said,  with 
a  face  calm  and  beautiful  with  holy  peace  and  con- 
tent, "  I  don't  think  any  one  can  have  so  much  to  oe 
grateful  to  God  for  as  I  have."  Then  she  recounted, 
not  afflictions^  but  mercies  received  all  through 
her  life  ;  among  them,  she  said,  one  of  the  greatest 
had  been  that  all  her  children  gave  evidence  of 
a  prei)aration  for  heaven  ;  there  she  hoped  soon  to 
meet  them  and  her  loved  husband,  to  part  no  more 
forever.  And  w^hile  the  summons  across  the  river 
writs,  this  seems  the  daily  language  of  her  heart :  — 


So  I  am  watching  quietly 

Every  day. 
Whenever  the  sun  shines  brightly, 

I  rise  and  say, 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  325 

*  Surely  it  is  the  shining  of  His  face !  * 
And  look  unto  the  gates  of  His  high  place 

Beyond  the  sea : 
For  I  know  He  is  coming  shortly 

To  summon  me. 
And  when  a  shadow  falls  across  the  window 

Of  my  room, 
Where  I  am  working  my  appointed  task, 
I  lift  my  head  to  watch  the  door  and  ask 

If  He  is  come; 
And  the  angel  answers  sweetly 

In  my  home,  l 

'  Only  a  few  more  shadows, 

And  He  will  come.'  " 

Blessed  is  the  Christian's  hope  that  thus  sustains 
under  such  an  experience  of  bereavement  and  af- 
fliction !  To  Jesus,  who  gives  it,  be  everlasting 
love  and  service  ! 

Here  1  must  leave  the  record  of  this  work ;  and, 
with  the  exception  of  the  one  from  the  pastors 
given  in  another  chapter,  turn  my  pen  away  from 
the  many  precious  letters  which  tell  of  its  blessings. 

Oregon  City,  Oregon.  —  On  my  way  to  Salem, 
where  I  had  promised  to  labor  for  a  season,  I  was 
almost  compelled  —  so  urgent  was  the  solicitation 
for  help  —  to  stop  at  Oregon  City,  '•  the  Lowell  of 
the  Pacific  coast,"  and  whose  magnificent  water- 
power  promises  to  make  it  worthy  the  comparison 
with  that  famous  manufacturing  city. 


326  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

Two  diiys  were  here  crowded  with  work  for  the 
Master,  and  crowned  with  his  favor. 

Earnest,  praying  souls  were  here,  —  those  bur- 
dened for  Zion,  whose  hearts  and  lives  ran  sweetly 
in  the  poet's  lines  :  — 

"  I  love  thy  kingdom,  Lord, 
The  house  of  thine  abode, 
The  church  our  blest  Redeemer  saved 
With  his  own  precious  blood. 

"  For  her  my  tears  shall  fall ; 
For  her  my  prayers  ascend ; 
To  her  my  cares  and  toils  be  given, 
Till  toils  and  cares  shall  end." 

The  desire  for  a  revival  was  most  intense ;  hard- 
ly surpassed  anywhere  on  the  coast.  The  people 
were  ready  to  work,  and  very  pleasant  indeed  to 
work  with. 

Yet  I  could  not  prolong  my  stay,  and  was, 
therefore,  limited  in  my  preaching  to  three  sermons 
on  the  day  of  my  arrival,  three  on  the  following 
day,  and  one  early  on  the  morning  of  my  de- 
parture. 

Yet  much  good  was  felt  to  have  been  done  in 
that  short  time.  It  seemed,  in  the  spiritual  life  of 
that  phice,  like  the  rain  that  falls  on  the  dry  and 
parched  earth,  purifying  the  face  of  nature,  and 
reviving    and    quickening   vegetation.      Christians 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  327 

were  greatly  refreshed,  and  were  led  to  a  still  more 
loving  and  active  service.  Deep  feeling  was 
awakened  among  the  impenitent,  some  of  whom 
found  peace  in  believing. 

Salem,  Oregon.  —  In  this  flourishing  city  —  the 
capital  of  the  state  —  the  people  quite  generally  were 
looking  forward  to  the  meetings  with  large  desires 
and  expectations.  Nor  was  this  feeling  confined  to 
the  city  and  vicinity  :  persons  were  boarding  there 
who  had  come  twenty,  thirty,  and  forty  miles, 
solely  to  attend  the  meetings.  Some  thirty  minis- 
ters, many  of  them  weary  with  toil  in  large  and 
difficult  parishes,  were  present;  and  very  pleasant 
was  it  for  us  to  labor  with  and  for  one  another. 

There  were  those,  among  all  classes,  who  were 
ready  to  do  any  work  for  Jesus. 

Men  and  women  of  the  highest  standing  counted 
the  lowliest  service  for  him  a  privilege. 

Governor  Woods  brought  to  the  work  the  influ- 
ence of  his  official  position,  as  well  as  private  char- 
acter as  a  Christian  man.  Well  may  the  state  feel 
proud  of  this  man,  who,  instead  of  fearing  to  be 
known,  in  his  high  office,  as  a  follower  of  Jesus, 
jcunts  the  badge  of  that  discipleship  the  highest 
of  all  honors ! 

Business  men  took  their  employees  into  the 
counting-room,  and,  with  closed  doors,  urged  them 


328  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

to  give  their  hearts  to  Jesus.  At  home  men  gath- 
ered the  whole  family  together,  from  the  drawing- 
room  and  the  kitchen,  and  there  read  the  Bible, 
spoke  of  Jesus,  and  prayed  with  so  much  unction 
from  on  high,  that  the  service  became  more  like  an 
inquiry  meeting. 

The  tide  of  religious  feeling  swept  over  the  entire 
city,  carrying  away  the  refuge  of  hardened  sinners, 
moralists,  infidels ;  men,  women,  and  children,  of 
almost  every  condition  of  life  and  character  found 
in  our  cities,  daily  fled,  by  scores,  to  the  Ark  of 
Safety.  Blessed  Ark  !  in  it  there  is  room  for  all, 
and  safety  for  all  from  the  coming  storm  of  divine 
wrath  ! 

Very  large  was  the  number  of  those  who  were 
enabled,  by  this  meeting,  to  say  to  some  Christian 
laborer,  as  a  little  boy  wrote  me,  "If  I  meet  you 
in  heaven  I  shall  take  you  by  the  hand  and  tell 
Jesus  you  were  the  means  of  bringing  me  to  him." 

Thirteen  days  went  by,  leaving  behind  them,  as 
the  fruit  of  this  work,  rejoicing  converts,  working 
churches,  happy  homes,  and  great  joy  throughout 
the  city. 

Other  engagements  prevented  my  remaining 
longer.  The  urgent  calls  from  the  entire  coast  for- 
bade my  staying  long  in  one  place,  and  I  was  ac- 
customed to  leave  while  yet  the  sun  of  the  spiritual 
harvest-day  was  mounting  the  heavens  towards  the 
zenith. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  329 

I  was  now  so  worn  it  was  plainly  a  necessity  for 
me  to  leave  the  field  so  promisingly  spread  before 
me  in  Oregon  and  vicinity,  and,  after  meeting 
engagements  already  made,  return  home  for  rest  as 
soon  as  possible. 

Or  my  way  to  Portland,  where  I  was  to  take  the 
boat  for  San  Francisco,  I  preached  once  more  at 
Oregon  City. 

Reaching  Portland,  the  interest  seemed  not  to 
have  abated.  The  meetings,  for  the  one  day  I 
could  remain,  were  something  like  the  glad  family 
reunions  of  our  New  Eni^rland  "  Thankso^iviuo:." 
Young  converts,  and  Christians  longer  in  the  way 
of  life,  told  what  great  things  God  had  done  for 
them,  and,  through  their  labors,  for  others. 

On  the  next  day  the  steamer  for  San  Francisco 
bore  me  away  from  the  warm-hearted  people  of 
Oregon,  from  the  cities  and  villages  among  its 
majestic  mountains  and  smiling  valleys,  and  from 
those  in  neighboring  regions  where  hands  were  still 
outstretched  for  help ;  and  while  the  ocean  leagues 
were  rapidly  increasing  between  us,  my  thoughts 
still  lingered  among  them,  sorrowful,  and  loath  to 
depart. 

And  still,  beloved  friends,  far  away  though  you 
are,  as  I  recall  the  sweet  seasons  of  labor  for  the 
Master  with  some  of  you,  and  the  wants  of  God's 
cause    among   others   of  your   number,    my  heart 


330  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

warms  with  the  old  love  towards  you,  and  turning 
to  the  only  sure  Reliance,  "I  commend  you  to  God, 
and  to  the  word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able  to  build 
you  up,  and  to  give  you  an  inheritance  among  them 
which  are  sanctified." 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  331 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

THE  WORK  ON  THE    PACIFIC    COAST  —  CONTINUED, 

FOUR  days  upon  the  water,  and  we  were  ouce 
more  in  San  Francisco.  But  not  to  tarry: 
on,  through  California  meadows,  fragrant  wdth 
new-mown  hay,  and  tempting  w^ith  flowers  and 
ripened  fruits,  up  the  steep  and  rugged  Sierra 
Nevada  Mountains,  over  the  deep  snows  that  crown 
them  with  perpetual  winter,  and  down  their  western 
slope,  wound  my  path,  bringing  me  at  length  to  the 
young  and  rapidly  growing  state  of  Nevada. 

Virginia  City  and  Gold  Hill,  Nevada.  — 
My  labors  here  began  wdth  the  united  churches 
of  Virginia  City  and  Gold  Hill,  cities  lying  side  by- 
side,  thriving  and  busy,  and  presenting  —  especially 
because  of  the  position  of  the  former  —  a  field  of 
rare  importance.  One  of  the  pastors  gave  in  his 
letters  so  graphic  a  description  of  the  character  of 
•  that  city,  and  the  feeling  there,  and  one  wdiich 
presented  so  admirably  some  of  the  general  features 
of  the    most    important   Pacific    cities,   it   may  bo 


332  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

well  to  give  free  extracts:  "  .  :  .  I  have  longed, 
and  plead,  and  prayed  for  some  Pentecostal  evan- 
gelist to  come  over  and  help  us.  Ko  portion  of  onr 
land  has  been  so  wanting  in  faith  and  the  power  of 
the  Spirit.  The  ministers  and  churches  have  never 
witnessed  a  great  awakening  on  this  coast,  and 
have  been  unwilling  to  try  God.  Once  aroused 
they  will  trust  the  source  of  their  strength.   .   .   . 

"  The  seed  has  been  sown,  and  the  time  has 
arrived  when  the  reaping  should  commence." 

In  another  letter  he  wrote  :  "...  No  city  on 
this  coast  has  such  need  of  a  spiritual  blessing  as 
Virginia.  The  great  bullion  centre  of  the  Pacific, 
it  calls  together  all  chisses  —  capitalists,  mechanics, 
laboring  and  professional  men.   .   .   . 

"  As  a  wealth-producing,  instead  of  a  mere 
trading  community,  it  is  the  heart  which  gives  the 
throbbing  current  of  vitality  to  all  financial  and 
business  interests. 

"Virginia  has  been  equally  the  fountain  of 
demoralizing  power.  .  .  .  The  Spirit  of  God  has 
prepared  the  way  and  the  time  for  its  conquest, 
and  we  look  with  joy  and  hope  to  see  the  banner  of 
Jehovah-Jesus  floating  in  triumph  over  it. 

"  Matters  are  evidently  ripening  for  a  work  of 
real  power  and  prevalence  in  this  community.  .  .  . 
Prayer  for  Virginia  has  been  evidently  answered. 
.   .   .   The  Episcopal  clergyman  —  a  truly  evangel- 


BRINGING   m  SHEA  VES.  333 

ieal  man  —  is  in  earnest  to  have  3'our  assistance  in 
view  of  the  evident  presence  of  the  Spirit.   .   .   . 

"There  are  other  indications  in  the  earnest 
desires  of  leading  representative  business  men,  that 
show  a  special  inihience  of  the  Spirit  preparing  the 
way  for  a  harvest-work  which  will  bring  great  glory 
to  the  Lord  of  the  harvest.  A  leadii>J  merchant 
remarked,  a  few  days  since,  that  the  mass  of  his 
class  were  never  in  a  state  of  such  readiness  to  be 
influenced  and  won  to  Christ.  Some,  whose  busi- 
ness or  professional  engagements  call  them  away, 
seem  very  sad  in  view  of  the  possibility  of  not 
being  able  to  attend  on  your  services. 

"Many  of  these  impressions  are  the  result  of 
appeals  from  relatives  and  friends  in  other  cities, 
who  have  been  subjects  of  the  Spirit's  operations  in 
connection  with  your  labors,  —  many,  the  life-long 
subjects  of  prayer  on  the  part  of  pious  friends,  and 
DOW  looking  for  a  work  strong  enough  to  carry 
them  beyond  the  partial  and  unsuccessful  endeavors 
of  other  occasions.   ... 

"All  the  ministering  brethren,  with  God's  people, 

and  many  of  our  first-class  non-professing  men,  are 

■  intensely  anxious  for  you  to  come  immediately.  .  .  . 

"The  future  of  this  metallic  state  must  now  be 
made,  and  will  be  more  aflected  by  the  mighty  out- 
pouring of  the  Spirit  on  your  visit  than  any  and  all 
othei   eflbrts.     This  city  and  state  must  be  saved. 


334  BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES. 

We  must  all  put  our  hearts  and  strength  with  yours 
in  the  hopeful  endeavor.   ..." 

As  soon  as  the  meeting  here  was  opened,  all  that 
had  been  said  of  the  interest,  and  more,  was  ap- 
parent; people  of  every  name,  age,  and  condition 
came,  quiet  and  earnest,  crowding  every  seat,  aisle, 
and  corner\)f  the  house  of  God. 

The  busy,  driving  throng  were  moved  by  the 
Spirit's  power.  The  Spirit  reached  men's  hearts, 
in  the  mines,  in  the  crushing-mills,  on  the  street,  in 
the  nois3^  marts  of  trade,  in  their  quiet  homes,  as 
well  as  in  the  sanctuary. 

In  the  latter  place  God  honored  most  the  faith 
and  labors  of  his  people,  and  there  displayed  the 
riches  of  his  grace  in  daily  bringing  many  into  his 
kingdom. 

An  editorial  in  one  of  the  daily  papers  of  Virginia 
City,  "The  Trespass,"  says,  " This  city  never  before 
witnessed  so  profound  an  interest  in  religion,  as 
is  now  evident  under  a  single  wreck's  labors  of  Eev. 
Mr.  Earle. 

"  Six  services  were  held  yesterday.  All  were 
thronged.  The  preaching  service  of  the  morning 
was  one  of  uncommon  tenderness  ;  there  was  scarce- 
ly a  dry  eye  in  the  house ;  stalwart  men  were 
melted  under  the  winning  representations  of  the 
truth. 

"  The  evening  sermon  on  the  *  Unpardonable  Sin 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  335 

reached  a  culmiDation  of  impressiveness  which  can 
be  realized  only  by  those  who  witnessed  it.  The 
church  was  crowded  inside  and  out  by  assembled 
multitudes  :  no  efFort  for  excitement,  no  strange, 
startling  statements ;  but  the  simple,  conclusive 
setting  forth  of  the  subject  brought  the  whole 
mass,  almost  without  an  exception,  to  their  feet,  in 
a  most  solemn  testimony  of  a  fixed  purpose  to 
cherish  the  interest  each  felt  in  his  personal 
salvation. 

"  The  community  seemed  to  be  there  almost  in  a 
body ;  and  yet  so  thoughtful  and  quiet,  the  tickiug 
of  a  clock  could  have  been  heard. 

"  At  the  conference  meeting,  scores  of  men  and 
women,  heads  of  families,  —  husbands  and  wives, 
■ — came  forward  for  prayer. 

"  Many  submitted  to  Christ  on  the  spot.   ..." 

Here,  among  these  large-hearted  people,  occurred 
one  of  those  never-to-be-forgotten  episodes  in  the 
minister's  life,  w^hich  turn  towards  him  the  silver 
lining  of  the  cloud  that  may  have  gathered  over  him. 

It  was  in  the  very  solid  and  substantial  form 
of  a  silver  brick,  weighing  some  thirty  pounds, 
"Presented" — as  was  engraved  upon  its  polished 
surface  —  "to  Kev.  A.  B.  Earle,  by  his  friends  in 
Story  County,  Nevada."  , 

I  was  then,  and  am  now,  unable  to  express  my 
appreciation  of  this  gift,  which  so  generously  rep- 


336  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

resents  not  only  the  business  of  these  people, 
among  whom  this  meeting  was  held,  and  the  great 
wealth  of  their  mines,  but,  especially  and  above  all, 
the  wealth  and  the  greatness  of  their  hearts ;  yet 
my  thanks  —  if  I  cannot  express  them  as  I  w^ould  — 
are  none  the  less  warm  and  fervent  in  my  heart. 

Through  the  kindness  of  "  Wells,  Fargo,  &,  Co." 
the  brick  was  forwarded  to  New  York  free  of  charge. 

Kind  donors,  each  and  all,  may  He  who  sits  on 
the  circle  of  the  heavens,  and  "  keeps  count,"  repay 
you  with  that  "  loving  favor,  which  is  to  be  chosen 
rather  than  silver  and  gold." 

Carson,  Nevada.  —  Seventeen  days,  filled  with 
work  from  morning  to  midnight,  and  rich  in  heaven- 
ly blessings,  went  their  rapid  round,  and  I  passed 
on  to  Carson,  the  capital  of  the  state,  the  centre  of 
much  refinement  and  wealth,  and  not  lacking  in 
worldliness. 

My  home  was  with  Governor  Blasdell ;  a  man 
to  w^hose  excellences  as  a  statesman  there  is  added 
the  crowning  glory  and  qualification  of  a  Christian 
character. 

There  was  the  same  craving  for  special  revival 
labors  as  elsewhere.  People  came  long  distances 
to  attend  the  meetings,  sacrificing  money  and  the 
comforts  of  home,  with  the  hope  of  receiving  better 
treasure. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  337 

•  * 

Tlie  blessings  of  mercy  and  love  were  bestowed 
abundantly  on  every  band,  on  all  who  came  to  the 
cross  and  submitted  to  Jesus. 

The  multitudes  that  came,  thronging  the  places 
of  meeting,  were  sometimes  moved,  as  one  man, 
by  the  Spirit's  power,  and,  when  the  oppor- 
tunity was  given,  would  rise,  with  one  consent, 
to  express  not  merely  an  interest  in  the  things  of 
religion,  but  a  purpose  to  share  in  its  hopes  and 
enjoyments. 

Christians  came  to  be  refreshed,  and,  having 
received  the  coveted  blessing,  almost  invariably 
went  out  to  work  for  Jesus,  — to  such  activity  does 
the  enjoyment  of  religion  ever  tend.  And  I  rejoice 
that  there  is  this  working  side  so  closely  connected 
with  the  rejoicing  side  of  our  religion.  Herein  is 
its  outward,  aggressive,  and  progressive  power. 

Christian,  go  work,  not  repiningly,  but  gladly, 
—  thanking  God  every  night  that  each  day  is  a  day 
of  w^ork ;  be  content,  though  here  we  toil,  "there's 
sweet  rest  in  heaven ; "  here,  the  sowing  and  the 
reaping,  —  afterwards,  the  thanksgiving  feast,  in 
our  Father's  house  on  hiofh. 

o 

"  Beyond  the  gatliering  and  the  strewing, 

I  sliall  be  soon ; 
Beyond  the  ebbing  and  the  flowing, 
Beyond  the  coming  and  the  going, 

I  shall  be  soon. 

22 


338  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

Love,  rest,  and  home ! 

Sweet  hope ! 
Lord,  tarry  not,  but  come !  " 

The  work  prevailed  in  every  part  of  the  city  : 
where  life  was  busiest  and  most  crowded  ;  in  quiet 
avenues  and  suburbs ;  in  store  and  office,  and  in 
dwelling,  —  so  that  in  every  neighborhood  and 
street,  and  almost  in  every  family,  there  was  the 
light  of  an  earnest,  loving.  Christian  life ;  and  thus 
that  "  leaven,"  of  which  our  Savior  spoke,  was  at 
work  in  all  the  city,  leavening  and  transforming  the 
outer,  and  much  of  the  inner  life  of  the  city. 

Said  one  of  the  pastors,  in  a  letter  some  time  after 
the  meeting,  "  Our  town  life  has  changed.   ..." 

Governor  Blasdell,  with  his  peculiar  advantages 
for  discovering  the  real  condition  of  the  city,  also 
wrote  me,  "...  The  good  done  is  not  confined  to 
those  who  have  united  with  the  churches, /or  a  dif- 
ferent spirit  pervades  the  entire  eomraunity.   ..." 

This  was  my  last  meeting  in  Nevada,  though  the 
call  was  almost  universal  for  me  to  remain,  and  the 
field  one  of  great  promise  and  attractiveness. 

Professors  of  religion  and  non-professors  stood 
side  by  side  to  welcome  me.  Let  me  give  a  single 
illustration  —  the  caso  of  Austin,  a  city  ranking 
high  in  importance  and  inflnence.  Among  the  re- 
quests from  this  place  was  one  signed  by  ninety- 
nine  of  its  principal  men,  quite  a  large   number  of 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  339 

them  in  the  legal  profession.  The  clerk  of  the 
District  Court,  who  circuluted  the  petition,  said  h*; 
believed  every  man  in  the  city  would  have  signed 
it  had  there  been  an  opportunity.  The  governor 
also  urged  the  case,  and  even  offered  to  accomp  uiy 
mc.  But  I  could  not  go.  Such  were  the  fields 
spread  out  before  me  through  the  state. 

Friends  in  Nevada,  in  heart  I  reach  out  my  hand 
towards  you,  and  grasp  yours  in  loving  greeting; 
and  I  beseech  you,  do  not  give  up  the  work.  Con- 
secrate to  it  the  riches  of  your  material  resources, 
the  activity  of  your  hands,  and  the  earnestness  of 
your  hearts,  which  you  have  ah-eady  so  well  em- 
ployed in  building  up  the  temporal  interests  of  your 
state.  Then  will  you,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  in 
like  manner  secure  that  spiritual  prosperity  you  so 
much  iesire.  May  God  help  and  richly  bless 
you  ah ! 


340  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

THE  WOEK  ON  THE    PACIFIC    COAST  —  CONTINUED. 


O 


VER   the   Sierras    again !     Now    riding,    and 


now  walkins:  to  liofhten  the  stasfe  !  One  hour 
blinded  with  the  drifting  dust,  and  another,  slowly 
toilino*  throuo^h  the  drifted  snow !  So  was  the 
twenty  hours'  ride  from  Nevada  back  to  California 
diversified,  until,  at  early  morn,  I  found  myself 
once  more  in  the  familiar  streets  of  Placerville. 

And  at  seven  and  a  half  o'clock  on  that  summer 
morning  I  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  the  people 
again  in  one  of  the  chnrches.  Warm  were  the 
greetings.  The  whole  service,  —  the  attendance, 
the  interest,  the  spirit  manifested,  —  carried  us 
vividly  back  to  former  meetings.  I  was  preaching 
to  the  same  ready  hearers,  listening  to  the  same 
voices.  In  that  brief  hour  we  lived  over  the  past, 
and,  with  brighter  hopes  and  stronger  faith,  looked 
across  the  dark  river,  — 

"  To  the  spring-embosomed  shore, 
Where  the  sweet  light  shineth  ever." 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  343 

Nevada  City,  Cal.  —  Only  a  few  hours  iit 
Placerville,  then  on  through  Sacramento  to  Nevada 
City,  —  an  active  business  place,  the  noise  of 
whose  manufactories  and  quartz  mills  greets  the 
oar  by  day  and  by  night. 

Prosperous  as  was  the  city  in  material  thii\gs,  in 
spiritual  it  was  represented  as  very  barren.  One 
uf  the  pastors  wrote  me,  « .  .  .  Nevada  City  is 
emphatically  a  hard  place.  .  .  .  There  is  no  time 
to  entertain  the  blessed  Savior.  .  .  .  Ordinary 
means  are  powerless  to  awaken  the  people  here. 
If  you  can  come,  they  will  hear  jo\x.  Some  who 
never  see  the  inside  of  a  church  are  inquiring  for 
you.   .   .  ." 

But  whatever  the  indifference  had  been  in  the 
past,  the  Spirit  seemed  to  have  dispelled  it  at  the 
opening  of  this  meeting.  From  the  first  there  was 
no  lack  of  interest.  The  largest  places  in  which 
we  assembled  were  filled  with  attentive  hearers. 
The  work  was  deep  and  thorough ;  the  foundations 
of  men's  hopes  were  tried  as  by  fire.  Some  in  the 
church  saw  they  had  been  building  "  on  the  sand." 
One  of  the  pastors  w^as  almost  ready  to  assert,  posi- 
tively, he  had  never  known  anything  about  religion, 
by  experience,  until  that  meeting. 

Sceptics  threw  aside  their  infidelity,  and  fled  to 
the  cross  ;  miners  left  their  unsatisfying  search  after 
go.d  and  silver,  and  sought  with  success  enduring 


342  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

riches,  and  clasped  to  their  hearts,  with  an  ever- 
lasting hope,  a  title  to  boundless  wealth,  and  a  hap- 
py home  above ;  and  many  a  man,  f\ir  away  from 
loved  ones,  took  up  his  hitherto  wearisome,  lonely 
round  of  daily  toil  with  zest  and  pleasure,  because 
n^w  it  was  done  for  Jesus. 

Christians  Avere  at  work  as  though  they  had  never 
thrown  ofi'  the  harness,  or  allowed  the  rust  to  gather 
on  their  armor.  The  converts,  too,  were  a  large 
company  of  active,  rejoicing  laborers. 

Grass  Yalley,  Cal. —  At  the  end  of  fourteen 
days  duty  called  me  away  from  that  pleasant  field 
of  labor  to  Grass  Yalley,  a  city  four  miles  distant, 
presenting  many  attractions, —  a  happy  home,  where 
one  may  be  sure  of  warm  friends. 

The  city  was  waiting  for  the  work,  —  looking  for 
the  opening  of  the  "  windows  of  heaven."  The 
blessing  seemed  already  on  its  way,  and  when  it 
came  there  was  abundance  of  work  for  all  to  do. 
Some  faithful  ones  were  ready  for  work ;  but  the 
great  mass,  as  in  every  revival,  had  first  to  build 
ovei  against  their  own  houses  before  they  could 
help  others. 

The  cono:re£:ations  crowded  the  church  within  an-i 
without,  presenting  an  appearance  something  like 
those  of  John  Foster,  in  England,  who,  it  is  said, 
"  was  accustomed  to  have  two  audiences,  one  with- 


BRINGING  IN  SUEA  VES.  343 

iu  the  church  and  the  other  withcuit,  listeninor 
eagerly  through  the  open  'windows." 

The  hardest  hearts  and  the  most  tender  were 
alike  touched  by  the  Spirit.  Men  grown  gray  in 
sin,  and  children  who  nightly  lisped  that  simple 
prayer  of  childhood,  "Now  I  lay  me  down  to 
sleep,"  kneeled  together  among  the  anxious, 
seeking  Jesus,  and  none  were  turned  away  because 
too  young  or  too  old  : 

"  Over  the  city  went  the  cry, 
*  Jesus  of  Nazareth  paSseth  by ! '" 

and  as  it  was  in  those  days,  when  he  was  on  the 
earth  in  human  form,  so  now  the  multitudes  thronged 
about  him,  and  were  healed  by  him,  not  indeed  of 
bodily,  but  of  spiritual  diseases. 

The  expressions  and  letters  of  these  rejoicing 
ones  are  full  of  interest.  A  little  girl,  who,  though 
young  in  years,  had  drunk  deep  of  the  cup  of  sor- 
row, wrote  me  a  letter,  containing  this  little  ser- 
mon, and  bit  of  experience  :  "  Tell  the  little  chil- 
dren about  the  Savior ;  tell  them  how  a  young  girl 
found  him  while  she  was  the  chief  of  sinners.  Tell 
the  girls,  in  your  travels,  not  to  wait  till  they  get  to 
be  as  old  as  I  am.  I  have  no  father,  and  am  starting 
out  on  God'*  mission  alone ;  no  one  to  guide  or 
take  me  by  the  hand,  and  say,  '  Come,  my  daugh- 
ter, ^ome  to  Jesus ; '  but  I  think  Christ  may  bring 
me  through.   ..." 


344  BRINGING   IN  SUE  AVE  S. 

In  his  own  artless  way,  a  little  boy  wrote  me,  "1 
want  you  to  pray  that  i  may  grow  up  to  be  a  true 
Christian.  If  I  die  before  you  do,  I  would  like  to 
hold  a  light  in  the  Avindow  for  you  ;  and  if  you  die 
before  I  do,  I  should  like  for  you  to  be  the  one  to 
hold  it  for  me.   ..." 

One  Vvho  had  long  been  a  Christian  wrote,  "I 
thank  God  for  a  brighter  sky,  and  stronger  faith, 
through  your  preaching." 

Santa  Cruz,  Cal. — After  twelve  days,  I  left 
this  wide  and  growing  work,  to  meet  an  engagement 
of  long  standing  with  the  churches  of  Santa  Cruz, 
a  favorite  resort  of  those  seeking  rest  and  recreation 
at  the  sea  shore,  and  not  inappropriately  called 
"  the  Newport  of  the  Pacific." 

My  stay  was  very  limited,  as  the  time  for  sailing 
homeward  was  near  at  hand.  Yet,  brief  as  it  was, 
I  was  permitted  to  see  a  quickening  of  religious 
thought  and  feeling  through  the  city. 

"What  shall  I  do,  then,  with  Jesus?"  was  the 
frequent  inquiry.  Some  rejected  him,  others  em- 
braced him. 

The  clouds  were  lifted  from  many  hearts  and 
homes  where  Jesus  was  welcomed  as  a  guest. 

O,  how  his  presence  lights  up  and  beautifies  any 
dwelling,  be  it  lowly  or  elegant !  Then  does  it 
become  truly  a  home. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  345 

"  For  aye,  by  day  and  night, 
He  keeps  the  portal ;  suffers  nought 
Defile  the  temple  he  has  bought, 

And  filled  with  joy  and  light." 

Those  few  da^'s  at  Santa  Cruz  will  ever  furnish 
a  pleasing  retrospect ;  not  simply  because  of  the 
attractions  of  that  lovely  watering-place,  much  as 
they  were  prized,  but  chiefly  because  the  thanks  of 
pastors  and  their  people,  and  of  rejoicing  converts, 
assure  me  that  Jesus  was  honored  in  the  awaken- 
ing of  the  careless,  the  salvation  of  souls,  and  the 
reviving  of  his  love  among  his  disciples. 

On  my  way  thence  to  San  Francisco,  the  people 
of  San  Jose  had  arranged  for  me  to  preach  once 
more  in  their  city. 

The  church  was  crowded  with  familiar  faces. 
The  ties  of  Christian  love  seemed  stronger  than 
ever. 

The  w^ork  had  gone  on ;  new  tv?stimony  was  given 
of  pardoning  love ;  converts  had  grown  strong, 
working  for  Jesus. 

We  parted  sadly ;  yet  most  of  ns,  as  Christians, 
only  for  "a  little  while,"  — 

*'  A  little  while  to  tell  the  joyful  story 

Of  Him  who  made  our  guilt  and  curse  his  own ; 
A  little  while,  ere  we  behold  the  glory. 

To  gain  fresh  jewels  for  our  heavenly  crown." 

From  San  Jose  1  went  on,  directly  through  San 


346  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

Francisco  to  Oakland,  where  a  service  similar  to 
the  last  had  been  appointed. 

It  was  a  delightful  reunion  of  hearts  endeared  in 
a  common  and  holy  cause.  The  peace  that  Jesus 
gives  was  with  us. 

There  was  much  to  be  told  of  God's  dealings 
with  us  since  our  separation. 

The  hour  was  much  too  short ;  but  at  its  close 
we  could  look  up  and  sing,  — 

"  We  shall  meet  beyond  the  river, 
Where  the  surges  cease  to  roll." 

On  the  morrow  I  went  back  to  San  Francisco  to 
take  my  leave  of  the  Pacific  coast,  arrangements 
having  been  made  by  the  Ministerial  Union  for 
farewell  services  on  that  evening  in  the  large  and 
handsome  church  just  built  by  Dr.  Scudder's 
society. 

My  heart  was  growing  sorrowful,  —  the  realiza- 
tion that  my  work  there  was  drawing  to  a  close 
could  not  be  kept  back. 

Ministers,  brethren  and  sisters,  young  converts, 
and  the  impenitent,  whom  we  had  learned  to  love, 
were  calling  upon  us,  and  expressing  their  sorrow 
at  our  departure. 

Sweet  memories  of  the  past  mingled  w  th  sad 
thoughts  of  the  regions  still  asking  and  entreating 
help. 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  347 

Nine  and  a  half  months  before,  I  had  landed 
on  those  shores,  a  stranger ;  sent  for  to  work 
with  the  pastors  and  churches  for  the  Savior, 
and  not  knowing  what  was  before  me.  Some, 
timid  and  unbelieving,  had  whispered  of  failure, 
and  consequent  dishonor  to  Jesus:  "The  field  is 
difficult;  men  become  indifibrent  to  spiritual  things 
in  the  search  for  gold  ;  the  ablest  pastors  are  there, 
and  yet  say  they  fail  to  reach  the  masses."  True, 
abler  pastors  than  were  laboring  on  the  Pacific 
coast  could  not  be  found ;  and  had  success  de- 
pended on  mere  human  power  I  should  never  have 
gone,  for  I  could  do  no  better  work  than  the  pas- 
tors. But  as  God  had  said,  "Not  by  might,  nor 
by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,"  I  was  ready  to  go  in 
his  name,  believing  his  promises  were  as  reliable 
on  the  Pacific  coast  as  in  the  most  favored  cities  of 
the  Atlantic. 

And  so  putting  my  trust  in  God,  I  had  obeyed 
the  call,  and  entered  on  the  part  of  the  work  as- 
signed me. 

The  pastors  had  done  their  part.  The  results  — 
some  of  which  are  here  given  —  can  only  be  known 
fully  in  eternity. 

And  now,  though  that  work  was  still  going  on, 
my  part  therein  was  done  ;  no  more  was  I  to  share 
in  its  cares,  its  joys,  and  its  sorrows.  I  was  now 
going  away,  —  no  more,   however,   a  stranger;  — 


348  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

tender  chords  of  friendship  bound  me  to  mm  um- 
bered hearts  and  homes,  and  everywhere  I  was 
welcomed  as  a  brother  beloved. 

We  were  now  to  meet  —  pastors  and  people  of 
San  Francisco,  and  of  other  places  where  I  had 
labored  —  to  recount  God's  doings  on  the  coast, 
and  utter  the  sad  farewells. 

The  hour  came.  Up  to  the  courts  of  the  Lord 
came  his  people,  a  victorious  host.  My  heart 
was  moved  at  the  sight  of  such  a  general  and  hearty 
tribute  to  one  whose  services  had  been  so  imper- 
fect. I  could  only  say,  down  in  my  heart,  "Jesus, 
thou  hast  used  me  —  as  thou  hast  many  others  of 
these  brethren  —  as  a  channel  for  conveying  thy 
blessings  upon  these  people  :  for  the  warm  place 
this  has  given  me  in  their  hearts,  I  thank  thee ;  but 
the  glory  all  belongs  to  thee  I  " 

The  exercises  were  tender  and  melting ;  pastors 
and  other  brethren  spoke  out  of  warm  hearts,  I  am 
sure,  and  their  kind  words  are  not  forgotten. 

Amid  such  scenes  and  crowding  memories  I 
preached  my  fiirewell  sermon ;  gathering  into  it 
some  account  of  the  work  over  the  coast,  which  the 
brethren  had  desired  to  hear  and  I  could  find  no 
other  opportunity  to  give. 

The  meeting  closed  ;  but  long  we  Imgered,  press- 
ing into  the  fiying  moments  those  last  and  sweetest 
expressions  of  friendship  which  live  in  the  heart 
through  life  and   beyoud  the  grave. , 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  349 

111  the  morning  our  friends  again  surrounded  us ; 
this  time,  at  the  wharf  where  we  were  about  to 
embark.  Hurried  but  tender  were  the  W(;rds,  — 
quick  but  hearty  the  grasping  of  hands,  —  until  the 
steamer  loosened  her  fastenings  from  the  Paciiic 
shore,  and  bore  us  out  over  the  beautiful  bay  to 
the  sea.  With  tearful  eyes  we  watched  those  loved 
friends,  the  receding  city  and  shore,  uiitil  at  length, 
a  dim  speck  in  the  distance,  they  faded  from  sight, 
ours,  thereafter,  only  in  memory's  watch  and  ward. 

Our  voyage  was  cheered  by  the  company  of 
several  of  our  Pacific  friends ;  among  them  Rev. 
William  M.  Martin,  of  Virginia  City, — a  man 
w^hose  large  heart,  genial  culture,  and  Christian 
nobility  have  forever  endeared  him  to  the  people  of 
Nevada;  also,  Rev.  D.  B.  Cheney,  D.  D.,  of  San 
Francisco,  —  an  able  pastor,  and  one  whose  rare 
executive  ability  had  given  him  a  wide  and  moulding 
influence  on  that  coast,  and  who  was  now,  with  his 
family,  reluctantly  leaving  his  post,  compelled  by 
physical  prostration  to  seek  a  change  of  climate. 

The  thoughtful  kindness  and  Christian  care  and 
courtesy  of  Captain  Farnsworth,  the  commander  of 
our  steamer  on  the  Pacific,  made  for  him  a  host  of 
f.  lends  of  those  who,  like  ourselves,  were  so  fortu- 
nate as  to  secure  a  passage  in  his  vessel. 

Daily,  at  the  twilight  hour,  our  Father's  watch- 
care  was  publicly  acknowledged  and  invoked  ;  and, 


350  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

perhaps,  never  did  such  worship  seem  more  pre- 
cious than  there  amid  the  dangers  of  the  ocean. 

On  a  quiet  Sabbath  evening,  under  the  light  of 
August's  full  moon,  our  vessel  glided  to  her  Wharf, 
and  we  stepped  once  more  on  the  familiar  shores 
of  New  York,  grateful  for  the  care  and  blessing 
vouchsafed  to  us  during  our  absence. 

Many  who  had  bid  us  "  God-speed  "  on  our  de- 
parture, had  assembled  in  Strong  Place  Church, 
Brooklyn,  to  welcome  us  home  ;  but  an  unexpected 
delay  of  the  steamer  in  quarantine  prevented  our 
reachiug  the  city  in  time  to  meet  them. 

On  the  morrow  we  hastened  towards  home  and 
children ;  and,  at  length,  welcome  came  the  cry, 
«  Home  at  last !  " 

Very  soon  a  reaction' came  on,  —  I  had  over- 
worked,—  and  for  weeks  I  was  under  the  physi- 
cian's care,  in  a  very  dangerous  and  suffering 
condition. 

With  the  return  of  health,  the  brethren  in  New 
York  and  Brookl3'n  again  arranged  for  a  reception. 
We  met  in  the  same  church  where  the  farewell 
services  had  been  held  :  but  now  all  was  rejoicing. 
Fervent  and  loving  was  the  welcome.  Some  account 
of  the  work  on  the  Pacific  coast  was  given ;  and, 
together,  we  praised  God  for  his  great  goodness. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  351 


CHAPTEK  XXVI. 

THE  WORK  ON  THE  PACIFIC  COAST  —  CONTINUED. 

G^  O  with  me,  in  the  swift,  silent  trcacl  of  thought, 
r  once  more  along  my  Pacific  pathway.  Bright 
and  sunny  it  winds  among  the  lands  and  cities  of 
three  states,  a  full  five  thousand  miles,  bridging 
almost  a  year,  and  linking  two  ocean-journeys  of 
six  thousand  miles  each. 

Scattered  here  and  there  over  this  route  are 
eleven  different  denominations,  many  times  that 
number  of  churches,  and  more  than  three  hundred 
ministers,  with  whom  I  labored,  receiving  the  most 
unbounded  confidence  and  cooperation ;  and  at 
least  one  hundred  thousand  people  who  heard  from 
me  the  glad  news  of  salvation,  as  it  fell  from  my 
lips  in  more  than  five  hundred  sermons,  and  which 
was  again  repeated  and  testified  to  by  believers, 
in  almost  as  many  prayer  and  inquiry  meetings. 
Here,  among  these  people,  it  was  believed  I  was 
permitted  to  see  five  thousand  souls  born  int(;  the 
kingdom  of  Christ;  and  a  work  not  far  behind  this 


352  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

in  importance,  in  the  increase  of  religious  fervor 
and  activity  among  Christians. 

People  who,  after  a  long  absence,  have  visited 
some  of  these  cities  since  the  meetings,  have  said  to 
me,  "I  hardly  knew  the  place;  old  acquaintances, 
who  used  to  care  only  for  pleasure  or  money- 
making,  began  at  once  to  talk  about  religion,  — 
everybody  seemed  different." 

As  this  work  was  invariably  carried  on  by  the 
anited  efforts  of  different  denominations,  it  perma- 
nently increased  tlie  love  and  sympathy  between 
them. 

It  was  seen  that  differences  of  creed  among 
Christians  need  not  be  walls  of  separation,  and 
sources  of  distrust  and  envy  ;  that  the  Christian 
church,  under  whatever  name,  in  its  mission  on 
earth,  is  a  means,  not  an  eiid,  — the  staging  of  the 
one  great  spiritual  temple,  whose  foundation  is 
Christ. 

Said  Gen.  R.,  "There  has  been  no  revival  like 
this  since  the  days  of  Whitefield." 

The  following  extract  from  a  communication 
made  by  a  committee  of  ministers  of  Virginia  City 
and  Gold  Hill,  Nevada,  repeats  a  sentiment  often 
expressed  in  other  places  :  "  .  .  .  Mr.  Earle's  labors 
have  resulted  in  a  lasting  blessing  to  these  cities,  to 
the  ministers,  to  the  churches,  to  public  and  private 
:norals,  to  families,  to  individuals,  to  children,  .and 


BRINGING   IN  SUE  A  VES.  353 

to  strangers.  He  will  never  be  forgotten  by  these 
people ;  hundreds  will  bless  hun,  in  the  New  Jeru- 
salem, who,  but  for  his  labors,  never  would  have 
entered  there.   ..." 

The  following,  from  a  pastor  in  San  Jos^,  rep- 
resents a  class  of  letters  that  reach  me  from  the 
coast : — 

"  San  Jose,  December  13,  1867. 

"  Dear  Brother  Earle  :  Your  works  and  la- 
bors of  love  meet  us  in  the  prayer  meeting,  the 
Sunday  school,  and  in  social  life.  .  .  .  Thus  far 
not  one  of  the  converts  here,  so  far  as  I  know,  has 
gone  away  backward.  .  .  .  No  man  need  hope  for 
a  warmer  reception,  this  side  of  heaven,  than  the 
people  of  San  Jose  would  give  you,  if  they  had  an 
opportunity.  .  .  .  You  know  something  of  my 
deep  interest  in  your  meetings  in  California.  But 
really  I  had,  at  the  time  of  your  leaving,  by  no 
means  an  adequate  idea  of  the  greatness  and  glory 
of  the  work,  even  to  human  view.   ..." 

None  of  us  can  take  credit  to  ourselves  in  this 
work,  —  the  way  was  so  thoroughly  prepared  by 
the  Spirit,  and  all  was  so  plainly  carried  on  by 
him.  He  seemed  to  have  left  no  portion  of  the 
coast  unreached  by  his  special  influences ;  and  the 
people,  thus  aroused,  were  ready  to  enter  into  the 
23 


354  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

.meetings  with  that  whole-heartedness  so  character- 
istic of  them. 

With  too  little  confidence  in  their  own  unaided 
efibrts,  they  turned  to  me  from  every  quarter,  when 
I  landed  among  them,  as  one  divinely  sent  to  do 
the  work  of  an  evangelist. 

The  call  w^axed  louder  during  all  my  stay.  From 
all  parts  of  the  three  states  to  which  my  labors 
were  confined,  and  from  Idaho,  Colorado,  and 
Washington,  came  the  most  urgent  appeals,  signed 
by  representative  men  in  the  churches,  irrespective 
of  denomination,  and  by  representative  men  out  of 
the  churches.  One  of  the  requests  from  Oregon, 
for  instance,  asking  me  to  visit  the  county  seats, 
was  signed  by  the  governor,  by  twenty  pastors, 
and  by  men  in  other  positions. 

And  wherever  I  went,  whatever  the  business  of 
the  people,  whatever  the  weather,  there  was  au 
enthusiasm  and- an  interest  in  the  meetings  almost 
unlimited. 

The  services  were  invariably  quiet  and  orderly ; 
never  was  there  the  slightest  disturbance ;  and  the 
treatment  shown  me  was  always  kind,  cordial,  and 
generous. 

Tl  ere  was  no  time  or  place  for  rest.  Only  a 
single  day  did  I  take  for  recreation  or  visiting  the 
natural  wonders  with  which  the  Creator  has  so 
richly  furnished  that  coast. 


BRINGING  iN  SHEAVES.  355 

On  my  way  to  a  meeting  in  the  region  of  tlie 
^  big  trees  "  of  California,  I  could  not  resist  the 
temptation  to  make  a  pilgrimage  of  a  few  hours  to 
those  monuments  of  the  past,  — trees  whose  infant 
branches  may  have  b6en  stirred  by  winds  that  had 
hardly  been  hushed  since  they  bore  towards  heaven 
the  last  incense  from  the  altars  of  the  Jewish 
Temple,  or  hurried  Paul  on  his  way  to  Rome  ! 

There  they  stood  in  silent  grandeur  I  From  a 
throne  four  thousand  feet  above  the  sea,  they 
towered  up  beyond,  towards  the  blue  sky,  three 
hundred  and  four  hundred  feet  in  height,  and  in 
circumference  nearly  one  quarter  as  great ! 

I  have  listened  to  the  thundering  voices  of 
Niagara ;  have  gazed  on  mountain  peaks  forever 
buried  in  snow ;  have  looked  upon  the  majestic, 
speaking  ocean,  bounded  only  by  the  blue  sky  ;  — 
but  among  them  all  nothing  has  so  hushed  my  soul 
into  silence,  with  a  sense  of  the  majestic  presence  of 
the  Intinite,  and  the  place  of  his  dwelling,  as  did 
these  mighty,  untitled  peers  of  the  forest,  — these 
living  witnesses  of  unnumbered  generations  of  the 
dead. 

We  have  now  glanced  over  this  work,  the  mem- 
cries  of  which  are  among  the  sw^eetest  of  my  life ; 
have  together  visited  some  of  its  scenes ;  heard 
some  of  its  records  of  joy,  and  gathered  up  some  of 
its  results  :  we  have  made  but  a  flying  visit,  when 


356  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

it  needed  to  have  been  like  that  of  the  tourist  who 
spends  days  and  weeks  at  each  point  of  interest 
along  his  route,  —  so  crowded  with  incident  and 
thrilling  with  interest  is  the  history  of  every  day  of 
this  work,  every  meeting,  and  every  place  in  which 
it  was  carried  on.  But  we  can  no  longer  linger  :  and 
turning  away  from  the  retrospect,  while  standing,  ns 
it  were,  among  the  wonders  and  glories  of  Nature 
just  mentioned,  we  could  wish  the  place  were  some 
Pisgah,  from  which  we  could,  with  reverent  hand, 
lift  the  veil  of  the  future,  and  look  upon  the  full, 
garnered  harvest  of  this  work  of  grace,  whose 
beginning  only,  we  hope,  is  herein  traced,  —  but 
such  a  vision  is  not  for  mortal  eyes. 

But  when  "  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on  im- 
mortality," —  when  time  shall  be  no  more,  —  then^ 
what  is  unknown  here  will  be  known ;  what  is  un- 
finished here,  finished ;  and  then  we  shall  have  an 
eternity  in  which  to  talk  of  these  and  all  the 
wonders  of  redeeming  love. 

To  you,  in  these  Atlantic  States,  whose  hearts 
were  with  us  in  this  work,  I  turn,  in  the  name  of  our 
Pacific  brethren,  to  thank  you  for  your  interest  and 
your  prayers. 

You  did  "hold  the  ropes."  Your  messages  over 
the  "  spiritual  telegraph "  reached  the  throne  of 
grace,  and  thence  those  for  whom  they  were  sent ; 
for  them  and  for  myself  I  heartily  thank  you. 


BRING  TNG  IN  SUE  A  VES.  357 

Some  time  before  my  departure  from  the  coast, 
eM 
letter 


the  Ministerial  Uniou  sent  me  the  following  kind 


"  San  Francisco,  May,  1867. 
'  Eev.  a.  B.  Earle. 

"  Esteemed  Brother :  At  the  regular  meeting  of 
the  San  Francisco  Ministerial  Union,  the  following 
preamble  and  resolutions  were  unanimously  adopted, 
and  ordered  to  be  sent  to  you.   .   .   . 

^^ '' WJiereas ,  This  Union,  one  year  ago,  entered 
upon  the  consideration  of  "  our  duty  as  gospel  min- 
isters to  the  masses  of  this  city,  who  are  unreached 
by  the  gospel,"  which  consideration  resulted  in  call- 
ing to  this  coast  Rev.  A.  B.  Earle  to  labor  as  an 
evangelist;  and, 

'''Wliereas,  The  labors  of  Mr.  Eai-le  have  been 
most  signall}^  blessed  of  God,  in  promoting  revivals 
of  religion,  and  in  leading  sinners  to  the  Savior; 
and, 

"  *  WTiereas,  There  is  the  fullest  reason  to  believe 
that  the  continuance  of  his  labors  here  would  be 
productive  of  great  good  to  the  cause  of  evangelical 
religion ;  therefore, 

''^  ^Resolved,  That  we  gratefully  recognize  the 
guiding  hand  and  abounding  mercy  of  our  heavenly 
Father  in  leading  his  servant  hither,  and  in  giving 
him  so  great  success  in  his  chosen  sphere  of  labor, 
and  that  we  express  to  Mr.  Earle  our  full  and  cor- 


358  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

dial  approbation  of  his  labors  iu  this  city  and  on 
the  coast. 

"  '•Resolved,  That  we  earnestly  invite  Mr.  Earle 
to  prolong  his  stay  on  the  coast,  at  least  another 
season,  to  labor  with  such  church  or  churches  as 
may  invite  him  in  city  or  country,  resuming  his 
labors  here  as  soon. as  may  be  after  completing  his 
present  engagements,  and  securing  to  himself  a 
suitable  season  of  relaxation  and  rest.' 

"A.  L.  Stone,  Qhairman, 

"H.  A.  Sawtelle,  Secretary'^ 

Brethren  of  the  Ministerial  Union,  this  letter,  so 
full  of  confidence  and  good  will,  only  adds  another 
to  your  man}^  and  constant  acts  of  kindness  and 
cooperation.  From  the  spirit  of  your  call,  from 
my  knowledge  of  some  of  your  number,  who,  like 
your  chairman, — the  former  loved  and  honored 
pastor  of  Park  Street  Church,  Boston, —  are  known 
and  esteemed  here  at  the  east,  I  knew  I  might 
expect  much  from  you  :  but  so  much  as  you  were 
ev^r  ready  to  do  I  had  hardly  anticipated.  I 
thank  you  most  sincerely  for  it  all.  I  am  still  in 
the  hands  of  the  Master  who  sent  me  to  you,  and 
whatever  his  bidding  in  the  future,  I  shall  joyfully 
obey,  and  none  the  less  so  if  it  be  to  visit  your 
coast  again. 

And  now,   brethren  and   sisters  on   the    Pacific 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  359 

coast,  over  the  ^vide  separating  lands  of  a  continent 
my  thoughts  hasten,  and  linger  among  you.  For 
your  confidence  in  me,  for  your  open  hearts  and 
homes,  for  your  generous  support,  I  thank  you. 
For  your  willing  minds  and  hands,  for  the  prompt- 
ness with  which  you  sprang  to  the  work,  for  your 
union  of  hearts,  for  the  honor  you  have  added  to 
the  cause  of  our  Savior,  in  the  name  of  the  church, 
and,  above  all,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  I  thank  you.. 
Go  on ;  be  not  weary  in  w^ell  doing.  It  is  for  you 
to  say  where  the  work  you  have  so  well  begun 
shall  end. 

*'  0,  watch,  and  fight,  and  pray; 
The  battle  ne'er  give  o'er ; 
Renew  it  boldly  every  day, 
And  help  divine  implore." 

Young  converts,  you  have  a  warm  place  in  my 
heart ;  I  saw  you  when  the  burden  of  sin  lay  heavy 
upon  you,  and  afterwards  when  Jesus  had  rolled  it 
away,  and  you  were  at  peace ;  I  saw  you  at  work 
for  the  Master,  and  learned  to  lean  upon  you. 
Keep  near  Jesus ;  visit  no  place,  engage  in  no 
pursuit  or  pleasure  where  Jesus  cannot  go  with 
you  ;  cultivate  his  love  ;  let  that  be  the  controlling 
power  of  your  life ;  it  will  never  lead  you  to  do 
wrong.  Trust  Jesus  to  keep  you;  you  cannot  keep 
yourself:  but  he  is  able  to  keep  your  heart,  and  the 
streams  that  flow  from  it. 


360  BRINGING   IN  SHU  A  VES. 

**  Man's  weakness  waiting  upon  God, 
Its  end  can  never  miss ; 
For  men  on  earth  no  work  can  do 
More  angel-like  than  this." 

My  unconverted  friends,  yon  gave  me  a  cordial 
welcome ;  you  were  kind  and  generous  ;  you  mani- 
fested a  deep  interest  in  the  meetings,  and  seemed 
to  stand  almost  on  the  threshold  of  the  (^pen  door 
of  mercy,  yet  you  did  not  enter,  and  there  I  left 
you.  The  parting  was  a  sad  one  to  me  ;  not  sim- 
ply because  1  loved  you  and  prized  your  friendshijj, 
but  chiefly  because  you  had  no  hope  in  Jesus.  I 
could  better  have  borne  the  brief  separation  here 
had  there  only  been  the  assurance  that,  at  the 
judgment  dajs  we  should  not  be  compelled  to 
say  "  farewell "  forever.  O,  how  could  I  see  any 
of  you  turning  away  "  on  the  left  hand  1 " 

"  The  Spirit  calls  to-day; 
Yield  to  his  power ; 
O,  grieve  him  not  away  — 
'Tis  Mercy's  hour." 

Brother  ministers,  —  fellow-laborers  in  a  work 
sometimes  trying,  often  toilsome  and  self-denying, 
and  yet  with  a  bright  side  ever  sweet  and  delight- 
ful.—  above  the  noisy  dashing  of  two  oceans  I 
seem,  even  now,  to  hear  your  bold,  clear,  unmis- 
takable trumpet-blasts  from  the  walls  of  Zion.     1 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  361 

believe  still  greater  victories  are  before  you.  For 
the  confidence  you  gave  me,  for  your  forbearance 
with  my  faults  and  mistakes,  for  your  kindness,  I 
thank  ycu.  For  your  unwearied  labors  during  all 
the  days  and  months  of  the  work  among  you,  the 
whole  church  honor  and  thank  you. 

I  have  wanted  to  mention  each  of  you  by  name, 
and  tell  the  worth  and  character  of  each,  and  the 
affection  I  have  towards  you,  but  I  have  been  com- 
pelled to  forego  that  pleasure. 

Nowhere  have  I  found  more  devoted  and  more 
able  pastors,  more  genial  companions,  than  among 
you  ;  and,  though  you  labor  under  peculiar  difBcul- 
tics,  nowhere  on  our  continent  have  ministers  such 
opportunities  for  moulding  states,  and  laying  the 
foundations  of  social  and  civil  life. 

With  the  completion  of  that  bond  of  national  life 
and  strength,  that  route  for  a  world's  commerce  and 
travel,  —  the  Pacific  Railroad, — 3^our  coast  is  des- 
tined to  march  with  giant  strides  to  one  of  the 
proudest  and  most  influential  positions  on  the  face 
of  the  globe  ;  and  for  the  teeming  life,  the  new  and 
manifold  wants  of  that  hastening  period,  you,  under 
God,  are  to  be  the  leaders  towards  a  true  Christian 
development  and  character. 

May  God  help  you,  and  prepare  you  for  the  great 
and  noble  work  ! 

Just  now,  hero  in  my  New  England  home,  as  my 


3G2  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

pen  is  finishing  this  sketch,  I  turn  my  eyes  towards 
the  far  west,  where  the  setting  sun  is  hicliug  itself 
from  the  gathering  darkness,  behind  its  curtains  of 
crimson  and  gold  :  and  in  heart  I  follow  the  waning 
light  over  the  distant  hills  to  the  rich,  warm  shores 
of  the  Pacific ;  and  there,  with  my  eye  upon  your 
faces,  my  loved  friends,  one  and  all,  and  my  hand 
in  yonrs,  "I  bow  my  knees  unto  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  the  whole  family  in 
heaven  and  earth  is  named ;  that  he  would  grant 
you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  glory,  to  be 
strengthened  with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner 
man ;  that  ye  may  be  able  to  comprehend,  with  all 
saints,  what  is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth, 
and  height,  and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which 
passeth  knowledge  ;  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  all 
the  fullness  of*  God." 

And  as  the  last  rays  of  the  sun  glimmer  and  die 
on  the  western  horizon,  I  seem,  with  you,  and  with 
the  long  line  of  saints  whom  Christ  has  ransomed 
out  of  every  nation  and  people,  to  catch  the  glad 
strains  of  the  imprisoned  apostle's  ascription  of 
praise  :  "Now  unto  Him  that  is  able  to  do  exceeding 
abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,  accord- 
ing to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us,  unto  Him  be 
glory  in  the  church  by  Christ  Jesus,  throughout  all 
ages,  world  without  end.     Amen." 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  363 


CHAPTER    XXVII. 


THE  REST   OF  FAITH. 


CHRIST'S  chilclreo,  in  different  parts  of  the 
country,  are  earnestly  inquiring  how  they  can 
abide  in  the  fullness  of  his  love.  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  moving  the  whole  Christian  church  in  this  direc- 
tion. Many  think  there  is  a  place  of  rest  herey 
where  the  soul  can  enjoy,  without  interruption,  the 
fullness  of  Christ's  love.  They  are  seeking  light  on 
this  subject ;  they  seem  to  be  asking  for  "  the  old 
paths,"  "where  is  the  good  way,"  that  they  "  may 
find  rest  to  their  souls,"  and,  like  Enoch,  walk  with 
God. 

In  this  hungering  after  Christ,  this  inward  un- 
rest, this  longing  for  the  fullness  of  Christ's  love, 
I  see  signs  of  great  promise  to  the  church  and  the 
world.  Christ  is  saying  to  his  church,  "  Come  up 
higher;"  and  she  is  coming. 

Christians  in  the  past  have  felt  the  need  of  this 
llcssing,  and  sought  and  found  it. 

Rev.  Dr.  Payson   says,  "Were  I  to   adopt  tho 


364  BRINGING   IN  SULIVES. 

figurative  language  of  Bunyan,  I  might  date  this 
letter  from  the  laud  of  Beulah,  of  which  I  have  been 
for  some  weeks  a  happy  resident. 

"  The  Celestial  City  is  full  in  my  view  ;  its  glories 
beam  upon  me ;  its  breezes  fan  me ;  its  odors  are 
wafted  to  me ;  its  sounds  strike  my  ears,  and  its 
spirit  is  breathed  into  my  heart.  Nothing  sepa- 
rates me  from  it  but  the  river  of  death,  which  now 
appears  but  as  an  insignificant  rill,  that  may  be 
crossed  at  a  single  step  whenever  God  gives  per- 
mission. 

"The  Sun  of  righteousness  has  been  gradually 
drawing  nearer  and  nearer,  appearing  larger  and 
brighter  as  he  approached,  and  now  he  fills  the 
whole  hemisphere,  pouring  forth  a  flood  of  glory, 
in  which  I  seem  to  float  like  an  insect  in  the  beams 
of  the  sun,  exulting,  yet  almost  trembling,  while  I 
gaze  upon  this  excessive  brightness,  and  wonder- 
ing, with  unutterable  wonder,  why  God  should 
deign  thus  to  shine  upon  a  simple  w^orm." 

After  experiencing  this  great  increase  ot  faith, 
Dr.  Pay  son  cried  out,  in  view  of  his  former  distress- 
ing doubts,  and  the  great  loss  he  had  thereby  sus- 
tained in  his  own  enjoyment  and  usefulness,  "  O 
that  I  had  known  this  twenty  years  ago  !  " 

Mrs.  Edwards,  wife  of  President  Edwards,  says, 
"In  1742  I  sought  and  obtained  the  full  assurance 
of  faith.     I  cannot  find  language  to  express  how 


BRINGING   IN  SHEA  VES.  365 

certain  the  everlasting  love  of  God  appeared  :  the 
everlastins:  mountains  and  hills  were  but  shadows 
to  it.  ]\Iy  safety  and  happiness,  and  eternal  enjoy- 
ment of  God's  immutable  love,  seemed  as  durable 
and  unchangeable  as  God  himself.  Melted  and 
overcome  by  the  sweetness  of  this  assurance,  I  fell 
ii:to  a  great  flow  of  tears,  and  could  not  forbear 
weeping  aloud. 

"  Tho  presence  of  God  was  so  near  and  so  real, 
tviat  I  seemed  scarcely  conscious  of  anything  else. 
My  soul  was  filled  and  overwhelmed  with  ligJU^  and 
love,  and  joij  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  seemed  just 
ready  to  go  away  from  the  body.  This  exaltation 
of  soul  subsided  into  a  heavenly  calm  and  a  rest  of 
soul  in  God,  which  was  even  sweeter  than  what 
preceded  it." 

I  could  give  a  great  cloud  of  witnesses,  all  testi- 
fying to  the  same  thing :  that  is,  after  receiving 
evidence  of  regeneration,  they  felt  a  longing  of 
heart  for  something  higher  —  a  fullness  of  love  —  a 
state  of  heart  that  would  enable  them  to  abide  in 
Christ  without  interruption. 

This  they  sought  and  found,  and  many  of  them, 
after  ten  or  twenty  years,  are  still  enjoying  the 
same  blessing  with  increasing  sweetness. 

The  anxious  inquiry  presents  itself,  "How  can  I 
reach  this  state  of  rest  in  Christ?" 

You  must  believe  such  a  state  is  attainable.     To 


366  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

ask  and  soarch  for  a  thing  you  do  not  believe  can 
be  obtained,  is  solemn  mockery.  "  What  thing 
soever  ye  desire,  when  ye  pray,  believe  that  ye 
receive  them,  and  ye  shall  have  them." 

The  first  thing,  then,  to  be  settled  in  your  own 
n  'nd,  is  this  :  "  Do  I  fully  believe  Christ  has  made 
provision  for  me  to  abide  —  without  interruption  — 
in  the  fullness  of  his  love?" 

If  one  doubt  remains  in  your  mind  about  this, 
you  will  not  obtain  it,  however  anxious  or  earnest 
you  are  in  your  efforts. 

This  blessing,  as  well  as  all  others,  must  be 
received  through  Jesus.  There  is  no  other  name  or 
way  through  which  any  soul  can  find  rest.  "  If  ye 
shall  ask  anything  in  my  name,  I  will  do  it;"  that 
is,  any  promise,  with  Christ's  name  on  it  as  the 
indorser,  the  Father  will  honor.  So  that  every 
promise  in  the  Bible  is  "yea  and  amen  in  Christ 
Jesus."  Nothing  is  too  good  or  great  for  the  Father 
to  give  you  for  the  Son's  sake.  "How  shall  he  not 
with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things?"  Jesus  is 
the  pledge , of  all  you  need,  or  that  Infinite  Love 
can  bestow. 

Yoa  must  come  to  Jesus  by  a  simple,  childlikb 
faith,  believing  just  what  he  has  said.  When  he 
says  to  you,  "Come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give  you 
rest,"  your  immediate  reply  should  be, — 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  367 

"  Just  as  I  am,  tliou  wilt  receive, 
"Wilt  welcome,  pardon,  cleanse,  relieve. 
Because  thy  promise  I  believe,  — 
O  Lamb  of  God,  I  come,  I  come." 

This  rest  will  be  found  only  when  you  seek  it 
with  an  undivided  heart. 

"  And  ye  shall  seek  me  and  find  me,  when  ye 
shall  search  for  me  with  all  your  heart." 

You  will  need  to  trust  God  in  all  things,  tempo- 
ral and  spiritual. 

If  he  hides  his  face  from  you,  and  all  appears 
dark,  you  need  not  be  troubled ; 

"  God  is  his  own  interpreter, 
And  he  will  make  it  plain." 

If  you  hav0  no  emotion,  no  joy,  no  light  for  the 
present  —  no  matter,  trust  God  in  the  dark.  Let 
your  faith  look  to  the  other  side  of  the  cloud  for 
the  "  silver  lining." 

*'  Behind  a  frowning  providence 
He  hides  a  smiling  face." 

Having  consecrated  all  to  Jesus,  take  nothmg 
from  the  altar ;  but  expect  him  to  give  you  the 
evidence  of  your  acceptance,  without  one  doubt, 
just  when  and  as  he  pleases,  with  or  without  emo- 
tions, whether  you  realize  any  change  in  your  feel- 
ings or  not. 

Do  not  stagger  at  the  promise  :  "  Though  it  tarry, 


368  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

wait  for  it;  because  it  will  surely  come,  it  will  not 
tarry;"  that  is,  it  will  not  tarry  a  moment  after 
you  are  prepared  for  its  reception. 

This  rest  is  retained  by  faith  alone  —  not  by  faith 
and  works.  Christ  needs  no  assistance  from  you 
or  au}^  one  else,  to  keep  your  heart  in  perfect  peace, 
hut  asks  you  to  leave  it  all  to  him,  and  says,  "Only 
believe."  Then  you  can  say,  "I  know  whom  I  have 
believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep 
what  I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day." 

Be  faithful  and  watchful ;  but  do  not  depend  on 
either.  Your  own  promises  and  resolutions,  so  far 
as  keeping  you  in  the  love  of  Christ  is  concerned, 
are  ropes  of  sand.  "  We  are  kept  by  the  power  of 
God,  through  faith,  unto  salvation." .  Christ  says 
Lo  you  in  this  matter,  "  Only  believe."  Your  faith, 
like  Abraham's,  is  counted  to  you  for  righteousness. 

If  your  faith  in  Christ  is  unwavering,  nothing 
can  interrupt  your  peace  and  rest.  The  darkness 
and  the  light  are  both  alike  to  faith.  If  your  way 
seems  dark  and  hedged  up  for  the  present,  you  need 
not  be  troubled. 

"  Faith  is  the  brightest  evidence 
Of  things  beyond  our  sight; 
It  pierces  through  the  veil  of  sense, 
And  dwells  in  heavenly  light." 

There  is  one  way  by  which  we  may  know  when 
we  are  resting  in  Christ  by  faith.     It  is  when  wo 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  369 

are  bearing  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  whieh  is  "  love, 
joy,  peace,  long-sullcring,  gentleness,  goodness, 
faith,  meekness,  temperance."  If  we  do  not  bear 
this  fruit,  we  are  not  abiding  in  the  fullness  of 
Christ's  love,  no  matter  what  we  profess.  It  is 
well  for  every  one  to  test  himself  by  this  rule. 

I  am  very  sorry  to  find  persons  claiming  to  live 
near  the  Savior,  who  manifest  a  harsh,  unkind,  and 
even  a  fault-finding  spirit ;  and  in  some  instances 
their  lives  are  unchristian.  In  this  way  Christ  is 
greatly  dishonored,  and  many  anxious  Christians, 
who  long  to  get  up  higher  and  abide  in  Him,  are 
hindered  and  kept  back.  A  Christian,  sweetly  rest- 
i.ig  in  Christ,  will  have  great  patience ;  will  speak 
kindly  even  to  those  he  thinks  are  wrong;  will  have 
warm  and  glowing  love  for  Christ  and  his  people, 
and  will  walk  in  the  light.  If  he  lacks  these  things, 
he  is  not  right,  and  Jesus  says,  "Friend,  come  up 
higher." 

He  may  have  severe  trials  of  his  faith,  but  will 
say,  "It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  he  will." 

His  emotions  may  be  changeable.  The  wind 
may  ruffle  the  surface-water,  but  the  deep  fountain 
beneath  is  calm  and  peaceful. 

lie,  no  d()ul)t,  will  keenly   feel    the    trials   that 

rfj]()ve  loved   ones  from  him,  yet  will  say,  "The 

Lord   has  given,   and   the  Lord   has   taken   away  ; 

blessed    be   the  name  of  the  Lord."     Christ's  own 

24 


370  BRINOING  IN  SHEAVES. 

finger  takes  up  the  bleeding  veins  severed  by  these 
afflictions. 

This  state  will  prevent  gloomy  and  distressing 
fears  about  the  future.  It  teaches  the  Christian, 
the  great  lesson  :  In  whatever  situation  Providence 
places  him,  therewith  to  be  content.  The  fear  of 
death  is  greatly  removed ;  he  knows  he  has  not 
dying  grace  now,  and  does  not  need  it,  but  believes 
Christ's  word,  "As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength 
be."  He  sweetly  rests  in  Jesus,  expecting  grace 
and  help  just  when  needed. 

"Lord,  give  us  such  a  faith  as  this, 
And  then,  whate'er  may  come, 
We'll  taste,  e'en  here,  the  hallowed  bliss 
Of  an  eternal  home." 

My  own  Experience.— About  ten  years  ago,  I 
began  to  feel  an  inexpressible  hungering  and  long- 
ing for  the  fullness  of  Christ's  love.  I  had  often  had 
seasons  of  great  joy  and  peace  in  Christ,  and  in  his 
service.  I  had  seen  many  precious  souls  brought 
i^ito  the  fold  of  Christ.  I  fully  believe  I  then 
belonged  to  Christ  —  that  my  name  was  in  his 
family  record. 

I  loved  the  work  of  the  ministry,  but  had  long 
felt  an  inward  unrest,  a  void  in  my  soul  that  was 
not  filled.  Seasons  of  great  joy  would  be  followed 
by  seasons  of  darkness  and  doubt.  If  I  had  peace, 
I  feared  it  would  not  continue,  and  it  did  not. 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  371 

Many  anxious  Christians  came  to  uic,  complain- 
ing of  the  same  thing.  How  could  I  help  them  on 
that  point,  when  I  did  not  know  how  to  get  right 
myself?  1  took  them  to  the  seventh  chapter  of 
Romans,  and  there  left  them,  saying,  "O,  wretched 
man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the 
body  of  this  death?"  I  was  there  myself,  and 
supposed  I  must  live  and  die  there. 

In  this  state  I  was  exposed  to  severe  temptations 
and  attacks  of  the  enemy.  I  made  strong  and 
repeated  resolutions  that  I  would  be  faithful,  but 
could  not  keep  them.  Then  I  sought  and  found 
forgiveness  again,  and  was  happy,  and  said,  "  O, 
that  I  could  always  enjoy  such  peace  !  "  But  it  was 
soon  disturbed  by  some  word,  or  act,  or  heart- 
wandering. 

Thus  I  lived  on  for  many  years  :  now  happy  in 
my  Christian  experience,  and  now  unhappy  ;  some- 
times doubting  and  fearing,  and  sometimes  resting. 
God  gave  me  success  in  winning  souls,  and  granted 
me  many  hours  of  sweet  communion  with  my 
Savior,  for  which  I  am  truly  grateful ;  still  I  was 
unsatisfied  —  I  wanted  an  uninterrujpted  rest  and 
peace. 

I  often  read  those  precious  words,  uttered  by  our 
Savior,  "If  ye  abide  in  me,  ancj  my  words  abide  in 
you,  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  done 
unto  you."     I  longed  and  prayed  to  be  there,  but 


372  BRING ING  IN  SHEAVES. 

knew  not  the  way.  O,  that  some  one  had  then 
taught  me  the  way  of  rest  in  Jesus  ! 

I  frequently  met  Christians  who  claimed  sinless 
perfection;  many  of  them  were,  indeed,  a  better 
type  of  Christians  than  ordinary  professors ;  but 
they  did  not  seem  perfect  to  me.  The  rest  in 
Jesus,  for  which  I  longed,  was  still  unfound. 

At  last  I  felt  that  the  question  for  me  to  settle 
was  this,  —  Can  an  imperfect  Christian  sweetly  and 
constantly  rest  in  a  perfect  Savior,  without  con- 
demnation? 

This  I  revolved  in  my  mind  for  a  long  time.  I 
read,  as  far  as  I  could,  the  experiences  of  those  who 
seemed  to  live  nearest  to  Christ.  I  searched  the 
Scriptures  for  light,  and  asked  such  as  I  believed 
had  power  with  God,  to  pray  with  and  for  me,  that 
I  might  be  led  aright  on  this  great  question.  At 
length  I  became  satisfied  that  Christ  had  made  pro- 
vision for  me  and  all  his  children  to  abide  in  the 
fullness  of  his  love  without  one  moment's  in- 
terruption. 

Having  settled  this,  I  said  :  — I  need  this  ;  I  long 
for  it ;  I  caunot  truly  represent  religion  without 
it,  and  Christ  is  dishonored  by  me  every  da}^  I  live 
without  it. 

I,  therefore,  deliberately  resolved,  by  the  help  of 
my  Eedeemer,  to  obtain  it  at  any  sacrifice ;  little 
realizing  how  unlike  Christ  I  then  was,  or  how 
much  would  be  needed  to  bring  me  there. 


BRIXGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  373 

I  first  procured  a  blank  book,  which  I  called  my 
"Consecration  Book,"  and  slowly  and  solemnly,  on 
my  knees,  wrote  in  it  the  following  dedication:  — 

"  Andover,  February  10,  1859. 

"  This  day  I  make  a  new  consecration  of  my  all  to 
Christ. 

"  Jesus,  I  now  and  forever  give  myself  to  thee ; 
my  soul  to  be  washed  in  thy  blood  and  saved  in 
heaven  at  last ;  my  whole  body  to  be  used  for  thy 
glory ;  my  mouth  to  speak  for  thee  at  all  times  ;  my 
eyes  to  weep  over  lost  siiniers,  or  to  be  used  for  any 
purpose  for  thy  glory  ;  my  feet  to  carry  me  where 
thou  shalt  wish  me  to  go ;  my  heart  to  be  burdened 
for  souls,  or  used  for  thee  anywhere  ;  my  intellect 
to  be  employed  at  all  times  for  thy  cause  and 
glory.  I  give  to  thee  my  wife,  my  children,  my 
property,  all  I  have,  and  all  that  ever  shall  be  mine. 
I  will  obey  thee  in  every  known  duty. 

A.  B.  E." 

I  the.i  asked  for  grace  to  enable  me  to  carry  out 
that  vow,  and  that  I  might  take  nothing  from  the 
altar.  I  supposed,  with  this  consecration,  entire  as 
far  as  knowledge  went,  I  should  soon  receive  all 
that  my  longing  heart  could  contain ;  but  in  this  I 
was  sadly  mistaken. 

I  think  I  then   came  nearer  to  Christ.     But  as 


574  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

clearer  light  began   to  shine  into  my  heart,  I  saw 
more  of  its  vileness. 

I  find  in  ray  journal  the  following  :  — 

"Boston,  December  22,  1859. 

"  The  last  three  weeks  have  been  weeks  of  great 
searching  of  heart.  I  never  had  my  heart  so 
searched  before.  I  detect  pride,  envy,  self-will, 
a  great  deal  of  unbelief,  my  love  to  the  Savior  to  be 
very  weak.  Yet  I  have  consecrated  all  to  Christ, 
and  cannot  withdraw  it  from  the  altar.  O,  can  a 
worm  so  vile  be  like  Christ?  I  know  it  is  possible  ; 
and  if  I  am  ever  to  be  like  him,  why  not  now,  while 
I  am  where  I  can  do  good  in  leading  others  to 
him?" 

I  felt  like  a  patient  who,  though  in  the  hands  of 
a  skilful  physician,  groans  and  writhes  under  the 
severe  treatment  which  has  been  found  necessary  in 
order  to  save  his  life.  But  my  constant  prayer 
was,  "Be  thorough  with  me,  Jesus;  be  thorough." 
Many  a  discouraging  day  followed  this  consecration 
and  these  heart-searchings.  I  grew  weak,  ind 
small,  and  unworthy,  in  my  own  estimation. 

At  times  my  joy  and  peace  were  almost  rn- 
bounded.  Sometimes  I  felt  that  I  grasped  the 
prize  so  earnestly  sought,  but  was  shown  some  hid- 
den sin  in  my  heart  which  greatly  humbled  and 
distressed  me.     How  fully  I  realized  the  words  of 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  375 

J.  B.  Taylor,  who  said,  while  seeking  this  blessing, 
"  Notwithstanding  my  profession  that  I  had  crucitied 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  I  have  had 
keener  sorrows  for  indwelling  sin  than  I  ever  ex- 
perienced before  conversion. 

"  O,  the  distress  which  I  have  felt  on  account  of 
pride,  envy,  love  of  the  world,  and  other  evil  pas- 
sions which  have  risen  np  and  disturbed  my  peace, 
and  separated  between  God  and  my  soul  I  "  How 
many  have  realized  all  this,  and  even  more,  in  their 
struggles  after  abiding  rest  in  Jesus. 

One  sin  that  troubled  me  most,  and  was  the  hard- 
est to  overcome,  was  a  strong  \vill,  —  a  desire,  and 
almost  a  determination,  to  have  my  o\vn  way; — •.. 
and  thus  —  even  in  regard  to  little  things,  or  any 
little  injury  or  supposed  wrong — to  speak  without 
reflection,  and  sometimes  severely,  even  to  those  I 
knew  were  my  friends;  to  say,  "I  will  do  this," 
and  «I  will  not  do  that." 

This  I  clearly  saw  must  be  overcome,  if  I  would 
become  a  consistent  and  useful  Christian.  As  I 
could  not  do  it  myself,  I  gave  it  over  to  Jesus  :  he 
could  give  me  grace  to  overcome  even  this.  But  I 
f  jund  I  gave  nothing  into  the  hands  of  Jesus,  ex- 
cept by  a  simple  faith,  ^ly  faith  w^as  very  deficient 
and  weak  :  to  believe  the  promises  fully  was  not 
so  easy.  I  believed  the  theory  of  religion,  but  to 
have  my  heart  grasp  the  reality,  without  wavering, 


37(3  BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES. 

was  more  difficult.  Yet  I  found  my  faith  growing 
stronger,  until  at  last  I  came  to  believe  just  what 
God  has  said  in  his  word.  I  found  first  the  blade 
of  faith,  then  the  ear,  and  then  the  full  corn  in  the 
ear.  No  rest  could  be  obtained  until  I  could  be- 
lieve just  what  God  had  said,  and  trust  him  fully. 

I  felt  that  I  must  have  in  my  heart  something  I 
did  not  then  possess.  Before  I  could  be  tilled  with 
the  fullness  of  Christ's  love  I  must  be  emptied  of 
self.  O,  the  longing  of  my  heart  for  what  I  then 
believed,  and  now  believe,  to  be  sweet  and  constant 
rest  in  Jesus  !  I  believed  I  should  receive  it,  and 
thought  it  was  near. 

I  soon  found  it  easier  to  resist  temptation.  I 
began  to  trust  Christ  and  his  promises  more  fully. 

With  this  mingling  of  faith,  desire,  and  expecta- 
tion, I  commenced  a  meeting  on  Cape  Cod.  After 
re-dedicating  myself,  in  company  with  others,  anew 
to  God,  I  was  in  my  room  alone,  pleading  for  the 
fullness  of  Christ's  love,  when  all  at  once  a  sweet, 
heavenly  peace  filled  all  the  vacuum  in  my  soul, 
leaving  no  longing,  no  unrest,  no  dissatisfied  feel- 
ing in  my  bosom.  I  felt,  I  knew  that  I  was  ac- 
cepted fully  of  Jesus.  A  calm,  simple,  child-like 
trust  took  possession  of  iny  whole  being.  I  felt 
that  if  I  had  a  thousand  hearts  and  lives,  I  would 
give  them  all  to  the  Savior ;  my  grateful  love  to 
him  found  expression  in  those  glowing  lines,  — 


BRINGING   IN  SHEAVES.  377 

"  O,  for  a  thousand  tongues  to  sing 
My  dear  Redeemer's  praise; 
The  glories  of  my  God  and  King, 
The  triumphs  of  his  grace !  " 

Then,  for  the  first  time  in  my  life,  I  had  that  rest 
which  is  more  than  peace.  I  had  felt  peace  before, 
l)iit  feared  I  should  not  retain  it ;  now  I  had  peace 
without  fear,  which  really  became  rest. 

That  night  I  retired  to  sleep  without  one  fear,  — 
much  like  a  tired  babe  resting  in  its  mother's  arms. 
I  believed  Jesus  had  received  me,  and  would  keep 
me.  I  had  no  fear  of  losing  that  happy  state  ;  the 
fear  which  had  so  disturbed  my  rest  was  taken 
away.  I  seemed  in  a  new  world  ;  my  burden  was 
gone,  my  cup  was  full,  and  Jesus  was  present  with 
me.  I  felt  not  only  that  I  was  forgiven  and 
cleansed,  but  that  Jesus  would  hereafter  keep  me; 
that  I  should  not  have  to  help  him  keep  me,  as  I 
had  been  vainly  trying  to  do,  but  could  trust  it  all 
to  him  ;  that  now  I  had  two  hands  instead  of  one 
to"  work  with.  I  was  a  Christian  before.  I  loved 
Christ,  and  his  people,  and  his  cause  ;  3^et  did  not, 
could  not,  trust  myself  without  fear  in  his  hands. 
But  now  I  seemed  all  at  once  to  lose  a  great  burden 
of  care  and  anxiety. 

I  found  that  much  of  my  care  had  been  not  only 
useless,  but  a  hinderance  to  my  success,  rendering 
my  work  in  Christ's   cause  much  harder   and   less 


378  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

pleasant  to  myself.  I  had  been  like  the  traveller 
with  a  heavy  burden  on  his  back,  who,  when  in- 
vited by  a  friend  to  ride  in  his  carriage  and  rest 
himself,  took  his  seat  with  his  burden  still  weighing 
him  down.  When  asked  to  lay  his  burden  off 
while  riding,  and  rest,  he  replied,  "  O,  sir,  yon  have 
been  so  kind  to  let  me  ride,  I  will  carry  my  burden 
myself."  I  had  not  learned  to  lay  my  burden  on 
Jesus  while  toiling  in  his  vineyard,  which  would 
have  rendered  my  work  comparatively  light  and 
easy. 

The  Bible  seemed  like  a  new  book.  I  had,  as  it 
were,  read  with  a  veil  before  my  eyes.  All  through 
the  week  I  labored  on  without  fear  of  losing  the 
long-sought,  and  now  so  highly-prized,  blessing. 
T  believed,  in  the  hour  of  temptation,  Christ 
would  keep  me,  and  I  should  not  lose  that  happy 
state. 

This  change  occurred  about  five  o'clock  on  the 
evening  of  the  second  day  of  November,  1863  ;  and 
although  I  never  felt  so  weak  and  small,  yet  Jesus 
has  been  my  all  since  then.  There  has  not  been 
one  hour  of  conscious  doubt  or  darkness  since 
that  time.  A  heaven  of  peace  and  rest  fills  my 
soul.  Day  and  night  the  Savior  seems  by  me. 
Preaching  is  a  luxury,  —  it  is  a  glorious  work. 
In  prayer  Christ  does  not  seem  far  away,  but 
near  and  with  me.     The  Bible  still  appears  like  a 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  379 

ucw  book.  All  Christians  are  clearer  to  me  than 
ever  before.  All  earthly  ties  arc  more  precious 
to  nie  ; — home,  friends,  all  blessings,  temporal  or 
spiritual,  are  dearer  and  brighter  than  ever  before. 
That  terrible  fear  and  torment  about  death  is  in  a 
great  measure  gone.  Thought  is  quickened.  My 
views  of  truth  are  much  clearer  than  before. 
I  have  come  to  believe  just  what  God  says.  I 
can  trust  him,  and  go  forward,  even  "  with  sealed 
orders." 

My  success  in  leading  souls  to  Jesus  has  been 
much  greater  than  before.  My  joy  in  telling  the 
world  of  Christ  and  his  goodness  constantly  in- 
creases. And  as  I  realize  more  and  more  the  great- 
ness of  his  love,  and  the  perfection  of  his  character, 
my  swelling  heart  often  cries  out,  — 

**  0,  could  I  speak  the  matchless  worth, 
O,  could  I  sound  the  glories  forth. 
Which  in  my  Savior  shine  !  " 

O,  that  I  had  an  angel's  tongue,  or  could  in  some 
way  express  to  others  the  love  I  bear  to  Jesus  I 

♦'  I'd  sing  the  characters  he  bears, 
And  all  the  forms  of  love  he  wears, 
Exalted  on  his  throne." 

If  any  one  should  ask  if  tl/:  is  "sinless  perfec- 
tion," I  would  answer.  No,   by  no  means.     I  feel 


380  BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES. 

very  imperfect  and  weak,  yet  I  am  enabled  to 
believe  and  trust  Jesus ;  and  he  is  so  near  that  I 
have  realized,  in  several  instances  of  little  i neons  s- 
tcncies,  that  before  the  dark  wave  reached  my  soul 
to  produce  condemnation,  Jesus  said,  "Peace,  be 
still." 

Temptation  is  presented,  but  the  power  of  it  is 
broken.  I  seem  to  have  a  present  Savior  in  every 
time  of  need  ;  so  that  for  several  years  I  have 
done  the  trusting  and  Jesus  the  keeping ;  it  is 
much  easier  now  to  resist  temptation  than  it  was 
before. 

I  feared  the  crosses  would  be  much  heavier  if  I  was 
nearer  Jesus ;  but  they  are  much  lighter  now ;  so 
that  I  can  sum  it  all  up  in  a  few  words,  and  call  it, 
not  perfection,  not  a  sinless  state,  but  rest,  —  the 
rest  of  faith,  —  a  calm,  sweet  resting  all  with 
Christ.  This  state  of  heart  is  reached  only  by 
faith,  and  retained  only  by  faith  —  not  by  helpmg 
Christ  take  care  of  us,  but  by  trusting  him  to  do 
it  all. 

Does  any  one  ask  how  an  imperfect  Christian  can 
rest  in  a  perfect  Savior,  and  feel  no  condemnation? 
I  answer.  It  is  by  Christ's  meeting  all  the  demands 
of  the  law  for  us,  in  such  a  way  that  the  soul 
Kializes  no  condemnation. 

Suppose  you  h.\\l  a  great  many  debts  coming  due 
every  day  —  a  constant  source  of  grief  and   pain 


BRINGING  IN  SHEA  VES.  381 

because  you  were  unable  to  meet  the  demands, 
though  they  were  just.  After  a  long  season  of  dis- 
tress and  worrying,  a  kind,  rich  friend  says  to  yoi;, 
"I  know  all  about  your  indebtedness,  and  your  in- 
ability to  meet  it,  but  if  you  will  come  to  my  house 
and  trust  all  to  me,  I  promise  you  undisturbed  rest 
as  long  as  you  choose  to  remain  with  me ;  no  one 
shall  trouble  you."  You  fully  believe  and  trust 
him,  and  go  to  his  home.  A  short  time  after  reach- 
ing his  home,  you  hear  his  bell  ring.  He  goes  to 
the  door.  Some  one  inquires  if  you  are  in  the 
house ;  your  friend  replies  that  you  are,  and  asks 
what  is  wanted.  The  creditor  at  the  door  says,  "  I 
have  a  bill  of  fifty  dollars  I  would  like  to  have  him 
settle."  The  bill  is  promptly  paid  by  your  friend, 
without  disturbing  you.  Thus  your  rich  friend 
continues  to  meet  all  just  demands  brought  against 
you  during  your  stay  with  him.  He  knew,  before 
he  made  the  ofler,  just  what  he  was  undertaking 
to  do,  and  that  he  had  all  needed  means  to  do 
with. 

Do  you  not  see  how  you  could  rest,  and  yet 
know  that  your  rich  friend  was  daily  meeting  de- 
mands that  you  were  entirely  unable  to  pay,  while 
his  means  were  unbounded? 

This  rich,  precious  friend  is  Jesus,  who  said  to 
me  long  ago,  when  I  was  worrying  over  my  inability 
to  keep  myself,  6r  atone  for  one  sin,  <' Come  unto 


382  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

me,~and  I  will  give  you  rest."  "All  power  in 
heaven  and  in  earth  is  given  into  my  hands."  "I 
came  into  this  world  to  help  just  such  sinners  as 
you  are."  But  I  did  not,  and  seemingly  could  nc»t, 
believe  it,  and  continued  to  worry.  But,  at  last,  1 
was  enabled  to  believe  just  what  Jesus  said,  and 
trust  him  entirely,  and  at  once  he  gave  me  rest,  — 
not  fear  —  not  torment,  —  but  sweet,  constant, 
abiding  rest. 

Thus,  while  I  believe  and  trust  Christ  entirely, 
nothing  wavering,  he  gives  me  rest  —  not  Jesus 
and  my  faitV  fulness,  but  Jesus  alone,  gives  me 
rest.  So  that  Christ  is  made,  at  this  very  point,  to 
those  who  trust  all  to  him,  wisdom,  righteousness, 
sanctification,  and  redemption.  Christ  meets  at 
first,  and  all  along  the  way,  the  demands  of  the  law 
against  us,  on  the  simple  condition  that  we  fully 
believe,  and  trust  all  to  him. 

In  this  way,  an  imperfect  Christian  can,  by  a 
firm,  unwavering  faith,  rest  in  a  perfect  Savior 
without  condemnation.  "There  is,  therefore,  now 
no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ 
Jesus,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the 
Spirit."  In  this  way  unwavering  faith  is  counted 
(as  it  was  to  Abraham)  for  perfect  satisfaction  for 
every  claim  the  perfect  law  of  God  brings  against 
the  soul.     So  that  we  are  saved  from  eternal  death 


BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES.  383 

by  faith,  and  saved  now  from  fear  and  condemna- 
tion by  faith  ;  and  those  who  thus  believe  do  (not 
shall)  enter  into  rest. 

The  diiferencc  between  his  experience  before 
and  after  this  rest  in  Jesus,  is  this :  Before,  he 
was  complaining,  and  confessing  his  departures 
from  Christ;  now,  he  is  joyful,  and  sweetly  rest- 
ing in  Christ :  before,  when  he  was  happy,  he  was 
fearful  he  should  lose  his  happiness ;  now,  he  is 
very  happy,  and  has  no  fear  of  losing  it.  The  very 
steps  by  which  he  has  reached  this  state  show  him 
how  to  retain  it. 

There  is  no  change  in  his  doctrines  or  opinions 
—  his  sentiments  were  never  dearer  to  him.  The 
difference  is  in  his  faith —  he  has  let  go  of  all  but 
Jesus,  and  relies  on  him  alone  for  peace  and  rest, 
and  is  not  disappointed. 

Reader,  are  you  sweetly  resting  in  Christ  by 
faith?  If  so,  make  an  effort  to  lead  all  around  you 
there  ;  but  if  not,  let  me  urge  you,  at  once,  without 
dismissing  the  subject  from  your  thoughts,  to  give 
yourself  to  the  Savior  anew,  and  do  not  cease  your 
importunity  until  you  are  filled  with  all  the  fullness 
of  his  love. 

You  then  are  just  prepared  to  grow  in  divine 
things.  The  roots  of  your  faith  can  strike  deep 
into  the  soil  of  truth  and  love,  and  need  not  be  dis- 


384  BRINGING  IN  SHEAVES. 

turbed  again  until  transplanted  into  heavenly  joil, 
there  to  continue  to  grow  and  flourish  in  the  garden 
of  the  Lord. 

*'  Then  shall  I  see,  and  hear,  and  know, 
All  I  desire  or  wish  below, 
And  every  power  find  sweet  employ 
In  that  eternal  world  of  joy." 


Princeton  Theological  Semina7  Libraries 


1    1012  01232  2394 


'^       DATE  DUE        V       *.  , 

Xl'f-^il^^flfefl 

t 

' 

>■ 

■'^■^w™'  "ij-"  ■-■-'  ■*' 

■ 

SMUlSffi^' 

'vV 

-^ 

GAYLORD 

, 

'iv'**r-^^*^ 


%'^.':j 


*..:.^*^^ 


