THIS  BOOK 

IS  FROM 

THE  LIBRARY  OF 

Rev.  James  Leach 


C.  H.  SPURGEON 

A  BIOGRAPHT 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive 

in  2010  witii  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/clispurgeonbiograOOfull 


C.  H.  SPURGEON 

A  BIOGRAPHy 


BY 

W,    Y.    FULLERTON 

AUTHOR   OK 

'  THOMAS    SPURGEON  :    A    BIOGRAPHY,"    "  AT   THE   SIXTIF.TH    MILESTONE, 

"life's   DUSTY   WAV,"    "  GOD's    HIGH    WAV,"    "tHE    PRACTICE 

OF  Christ's  presenxe,'  etc. 


ILLUSTRATED 


LONDON 
^)  WILLIAMS  AND   NORGATE 

14  HENRIETTA    STREET,   COVENT   GARDEN,  W.C.  2 
1920 


Printed   in    Great    Britain    by 

Richard  Clay  &  Sons,    Limited, 

brunswick  st.,  stamford  st.,  s.e.  1, 

and  bungay,  suffolk. 


"  What  the  hand  is  to  the  lute. 
What  the  breath  is  to  the  flute, 
What  is  fragrance  to  the  smell, 
What  the  spring  is  to  the  well, 
What  the  flower  is  to  the  bee, 
That  is  Jesus  Christ  to  me. 

"  What's  the  mother  to  the  child, 
What  the  guide  in  pathless  wild, 
What  is  oil  to  troubled  wave, 
What  is  ransom  to  the  slave. 
What  is  water  to  the  sea. 
That  is  Jesus  Christ  to  me." 

Arranged  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 


PREFACE 

The  contemporary  sketches  of  the  Hfe  of  Spurgeon 
are  an  interesting  conglomerate  of  significant  facts, 
but  they  scarcely  give  an  adequate  picture  of  the  man 
as  he  lived  and  laboured  with  such  prodigious  energy. 
It  seemed  desirable,  therefore,  that  before  those  who 
knew  him  and  shared  in  his  ministry  had  passed  away, 
some  one  who  had  the  privilege  of  his  friendship 
should  say  the  things  about  him  that  still  needed 
to  be  said,  and  place  the  familiar  things  in  truer 
perspective  than  was  possible  at  the  time. 

That  pleasant  burden  has  been  placed  upon  me,  and 
in  fulfilment  of  the  charge  I  have  allowed  to  drop  out 
of  sight  a  multitude  of  particulars  which  were  only 
interesting  at  the  moment,  not  chronicling  events  as 
in  an  epoch,  but  presenting  the  personality  as  in  an 
epic,  although  I  can  only  summon  common  prose  in 
the  doing  of  it. 

Sir  Sidney  Lee,  in  his  Leslie  Stephen  lecture  on  the 
"  Principles  of  Biography,"  says  excellently  that 
"  the  aim  of  biography  is,  in  general  terms,  to  hand 
down  to  a  future  age  the  history  of  individual  men 
and  women,  to  transmit  enduringly  their  character  and 
exploits.  Character  and  exploits  are  for  biographical 
purposes  inseparable.  Character  which  does  not 
translate  itself  into  exploit  is  for  the  biographer  a 
mere  phantasm.  But  character  and  exploit  jointly 
contribute   biographic    personality.     Biography   aims 

vii 


viii  PREFACE 

at  satisfying  the  commemorative  instinct  by  exercise 
of  its  power  to  transmit  personality." 

This  biography  is  only  historic  in  its  earlier  chapters ; 
beyond  these  it  seeks  to  focus  the  light  on  different 
aspects  of  the  man,  rather  than  to  diffuse  it  in  a 
narrative  of  the  years  and  their  happenings.  This 
plan  has  its  drawbacks,  but  I  hope  that  the  advantages 
may  be  appreciated,  and  if  any  seek  the  details  of 
the  time  they  will  find  them  available  elsewhere. 

Very  heartily  I  express  my  indebtedness  to  Mr. 
William  Higgs  for  placing  at  my  disposal  his  remark- 
able collection  of  contemporary  records,  and  to  the 
Rev.  Charles  Spurgeon  and  Mrs.  Thomas  Spurgeon 
for  their  generous  co-operation. 

To  introduce  Spurgeon  to  a  generation  that  never 
knew  him,  and  to  keep  alive  his  memory  in  a  century 
he  never  knew,  is  honour  enough  for  any  man  :  a 
supreme  privilege  to  a  man  who  knew  and  honoured 
and  loved  him,  and  owes  to  him  more  than  he  can 
ever  express  or  repay. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER   I 

THE   SPURGEON    COUNTRY  .  .  .  .  .  .1 

The  county  of  Essex — Godly  ancestry — ^Horatio  Nelson — 
The  spelling  of  the  name — Parentage — The  grandfather — 
Memories  of  Stamboume — Spurgeon  as  a  boy — At  school — 
Newmarket — Surrey — Men  tone. 

CHAPTER   II 

THE   SEARCH    FOR   GOD        .......  17 

Five  years'  quest — His  mother's  in6uence — Wesley's  mother — 
The  terrors  of  the  law — Scepticism — Essay  on  "  Antichrist 
Unmasked  " — The  search  becomes  intense — The  memorable 
morning — "  I  thought  I  could  dance  all  the  way  homo." 

CHAPTER  III 

THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER   ......    33 

Preaching  as  a  boy — Richard  Knill's  prophecy — The  cook  at 
Newmarket  —  Baptism  —  Tract  distribution  —  Sunday  School 
addresses — His  first  speech — At  Cambridge — His  first  sermon 
— The  Church  at  Waterbeach — Incidents — His  first  convert — 
"  The  sauciest  dog  that  ever  barked  in  a  pulpit  " — ^His  first 
hymn — The  word  of  the  Lord. 

CHAPTER  IV 

THE   VOICE   IN    THE   CITY    (THE    JOHN    KNOX   CHAPTER).  .  56 

The  vmexpected  invitation — The  first  Sunday  in  London — 
London  as  it  then  was — Farewell  to  Cambridge — His  first 
home — The  Baptists  of  London — The  verdict  of  Sheridan 
Knowles — ^A  fit  instrument  for  God's  use — The  irresistible 
impulse — Cholera  in  London. 

CHAPTER  V 

THE    PROPHET    OF    THE    PEOPLE    (THE    GEORGE    WHITEFIELD 

chapter)  ........        72 

Trained  in  the  desert — New  Park  Street  crowded — His  audacity 
— Exeter  Hall — Caricatures — Criticism  and  slajider — The  en- 
larged chapel — Hackney  Downs — John  Anderson — Conceit — 
Estimates  of  the  yoiuig  preacher — The  Royal  Surrey  Gardens 
Music  Hall — The  panic — The  renewed  ministry — Dr.  Camp- 
bell— Principal  Tulloch — Preaching  at  the  Crystal  Palace — 
The  Times — Three  years'  ministry. 

ix 


X  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  VI 

THE  ROMANTIC  YEARS  (THE  JOHN  CALVIN  CHAPTER)  .     .111 

The  fourteen  early  years — The  Agricultural  Hall  services — 
Incessant  labour — Scotland — Ireland — Paris — The  first  holiday 
— Geneva — John  Calvin's  preaching — Spvirgeon's  Calvinism — 
Crowds  in  all  parts  of  the  country — Some  Scotch  incidents — 
American  invitations — Lectures— -John  Bright — Ovation  on 
London  Bridge — "  Over  the  water  to  Charlie." 

CHAPTER  VII 

THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE  .  .  .  .  .  .133 

The  Romance  within  the  Romance — Choice  of  site — The  de- 
sign of  the  building — The  opening — The  great  thirty  years — 
A  Sunday  morning  service — A  Sunday  evening  service — 
Report  of  a  sermon — One  of  the  sights  of  London — Compari- 
sons— The  silver  wedding  —  The  jubilee  —  Dr.  James  A. 
Spurgeon — Dr.  A.  T.  Pierson — Thomas  Spurgeon. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  .  .  .  .  .  .162 

Courtship  —  Marriage —  Twin  sons  —  The  new  home  —  John 
Ruskin's  visits — Sir  James  Y.  Simpson — An  opal  ring  and  a 
bullfinch — Westwood — Titles  of  books — Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book 
Fund — Sunday  evening  ser\'ices — Burglary — Holidays  in  Scot- 
land— The  habit  of  prayer — Soliloquies  at  the  Lord's  Table — 
Two  nights  in  prayer — His  wide  outlook. 

CHAPTER   IX 

A   WORD    PORTRAIT   ........       183 

At  Cambridge — The  philosophy  of  clothes — Early  descriptions 
— ^His  personality — Various  opinions — The  face— The  eye — Tlie 
voice — Pulpit  action — Timiditj' — His  diction — ^His  memory — 
His  freedom — A  Puritan — Finding  texts — Proud  rather  than 
vain — Was  he  a  scholar  ? — Was  he  a  gentleman  ? — Examples 
—  Rebuking  with  gentleness  —  Firmness  —  Humility  with 
dignity — Generosity — Rhapsody. 

CHAPTER  X 

spurgeon's    "sermons"    (the   HUGH    LATIMER   CHAPTER)       .       206 

Published  for  sixty-three  years — Sir  William  Robertson  Niccll 
— ^Hugh  Latimer — The  Pulpit  Library — The  New  Park  Street 
Pulpit — World-wide  acceptance — Some  notable  utterances — 
Preaching  in  his  sleep — Instances  of  blessings — ^INIore  incidents. 

CHAPTER   XI 

"spurgeon's  college"  ......     227 

The  name — Its  simple  origin — Number  of  students — The 
building  of  the  College — Friday  afternoon  lectures — The 
College  Series  of  books — Spurgeon's  sajrings — The  Tabernacle 
and  the  College — The  Pastor's  College  Conferences. 


CONTENTS  xi 


CHAPTER  XII 


PAGE 


•*  spurgeon's  orphanage"   ......  241 

Mrs.  Hillyard's  proposal — Choosing  the  site — Opening  of  the 
early  buildings — Rev.  V.  J.  Charlesworth — The  Girls'  Wing — 
The  President's  visits — Mr.  Charles  Spurgeon — Spurgeon's 
greatest  sermon — Memorial  by  George  Tinworth, 

CHAPTER  XIII 

A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  ......       247 

His  power  of  recognition — When  the  light  failed — Random 
shots — Flank  attacks — God  hears  the  ravens — Baptism — 
Mentone  stories — Painless  dentistry — Dr.  Clifford — Redhead 
— Three  madmen — ^Visitors  and  visiting — Dean  Stanley — 
Charles  Spurgeon — Letters  to  children — ^Music — Mortifying 
the  "  old  man  " — Repartees — Lord  Rosebery — Crying  child — 
"Jesus  died  for  me." 

CHAPTER   XIV 

A   BUNDLE    OF   OPINIONS  ......       266 

Comparisons  with  other  preachers — Humorist  and  orator — 
Like  mediaeval  preachers — Ransacking  the  stores  of  modem 
literature — Cobden's  sole  rival — His  heart  had  twelve  gates — 
His  irony — His  spontaneity — Eccentricity — Vast  reserves — 
Representative  of  English  life  —  Directness  of  appeal — 
Vocabulary  of  common  people — Simple  terms — Not  one  of  a 
class — Bible  language — The  doctrine  of  Nazareth  and  Jerusalem. 

CHAPTER   XV 

BOOK   TALK       .........       280 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  writings — The  aggregate  of  his  output — His 
library — The  College  Library — The  Colportage  Association — 
Reviews  of  books — His  reading — Inscriptions  in  books. 

CHAPTER   XVI 

SOME   MINOR   DISCUSSIONS  ......       289 

The  Strict  Baptists — The  Rivulet  Controversy — Baldwin  Brown 
— Dr.  Cvunming — Bishop  Samuel  Wilberforce  and  the  House 
of  Lords — On  tobacco — Parker  to  Spurgeon — Correspondence 
— Open  Letter — Parker  on  Spurgeon. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

TWO   GREAT   CONTROVERSIES        ......       303 

Spurgeon  not  a  debater — Comparison  between  the  two  un- 
related controversies — Baptismal  Regeneration — The  blizzard 
of  pamphlets — The  relation  of  Spurgeon  to  the  Baptists — At 
the  Baptist  Union  Assemblies — The  Downgrade  articles — 
Vote  of  censure — The  City  Temple  meeting — A  wrong  turning 
— William  Carey — The  outcome — The  Spurgeon  statue. 


xii  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  XVIII  PxoE 

TWO    IMPORTUNATE    QUESTIONS  .....       817 

Spurgeonism— Why  not  a  new  denomination  ? — ^Mr.  Spurgeon's 
answer — The  secret  of  his  success  ? — Suggested  explanations — 
The  combination  of  quahties — The  one  thing  more. 

CHAPTER   XIX 

THE   TRIUMPHANT   END       .......       830 

The  final  scene — Tlie  beginning  of  the  end — Last  services  in 
the  Tabernacle — Three  months'  illness — The  prayers  of  the 
people — Recovery  —  Letters  —  Eastbourne  — Men  tone — "  Your 
mother  is  here  " — Breaking  the  long  silence — "  My  work  is 
done  " — Memorial  services — The  attention  of  the  world  for 
twelve  days — Palm  branches — The  tribute  at  the  tomb — 
The  epitaph — His  last  word. 

CHAPTER  XX 

SPURGEON   IN   HISTORY       .......  340 

Greater  than  his  pulpit  contemporaries — Paul  to  Augustine — 
Luther  and  Calvin — Wesley  and  Carey— Chalmers — Men  of 
the  same  period — Eight  mountain  peaks — At  the  aalute. 

INDEX 358 


LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS 


SPURGEON   IN   HIS   PULPIT  AT  THE  TABERNACLE  .    Frontispiece 

Sketch  by  Harry  Furniss. 

Pacing  page 
HIS    BIRTHPLACE  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .16 

From  a  painting  by  Thmnas  Spurgeon. 

THE    COTTAGE    AT    TEVERSHAM     WHERE    THE     FIRST    SERMON 

WAS   PREACHED  .......  48 

Fiom  a  painting  by  Thomat  Spurgeon. 

AN   EARLY   PORTRAIT  .......  96 

THE    METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE,    EXTERIOR   AND    INTERIOR      144 
PORTRAIT   OF   MRS.   SPURGEON      .  .  .  .  .  .176 

A   CONTEMPORARY   CARTOON  ......       192 

Frmn  a  drawing  in  "  The  Hornet." 

FACSIMILE   OF   SERMON    NOTES      ......       208 

THE    LAST   PORTRAIT,    JUST   BEFORE   HIS    FATAL   ILLNESS  .       336 


»U 


SPURGEON    RECORDS 

C.  H.  Spurgeon's  Autobiography,  compiled  by  his  wife  and  his 

private  secretary.     Four  large  volumes. 
The  Life  and  Work  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  by  G.  Holden 

Pike.     Six  subscription  volumes. 
From  the  Usher's  Desk  to  the  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  by  R.  Shindler. 
From  the  Pulpit  to  the  Palm  Branch. 
The  Prince  of  Preachers,  by  James  Douglas,  M.  A. 
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon — a  Monograph,  by  George  C.  Lorimer. 
The  Life  and  Labours  of  Charles  H.  Spurgeon,   by  George  C. 

Needham. 
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  by  One  who  knew  him. 
The  LAfe  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  by  Charles  Ray. 
Personal    Reminiscences    of  Charles    Haddon    Spurgeon,    by    W. 

Williams. 
C.  H.  Spurgeon — his  Life-story,  by  James  J.  Ellis. 
Spurgeon,  the  People's  Preacher,  by  the  Authors  of  "  The  Life  of 

General  Gordon." 
The  Essex  Lad  who  became  England's  Greatest  Preacher,  by  J. 

Manton  Smith. 
I'he  Spurgeon  Family,  by  W.  Miller  Higgs. 
James  Archer  Spurgeon,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  by  G.  Holden  Pike. 
Pastor  C.  H.  Spurgeon  to  his  Forty-Third  Birthday,  by  George 

J.  Stevenson,  M.A. 
Anecdotes  and  Stories   of  the  Rev.   C.   H.   Spurgeon,   by  Oliver 

Creyton. 
The  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon — Twelve  Realistic  Sketches,  by  a  Travelling 

Correspondent. 

The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle :    Its  History  and  Work,  by  C.  H. 

Spurgeon. 
Memories  of  Siambourne,  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon, 


XV 


CHARLES    HADDON    SPURGEON 


CHAPTER  I 

THE   SPURGEON    COUNTRY 

1465-1769 
June  19,  1834>— January  31,  1892 

The  whole  of  East  Anglia  may  claim  the  Spurgeon 
family,  but  Essex  holds  the  primacy  as  the  Spurgeon 
country,  and  the  parishes  round  about  Stambourne 
still  bear  that  name.  With  its  great  hemisphere  of 
sky,  Essex,  like  Nazareth  of  the  olden  days,  lies  near 
the  stream  of  the  world's  traffic,  but  is  shut  off  from 
it.  And  Spurgeon,  in  his  touch  with  the  life  of  his 
time,  his  aloofness  from  it,  and  his  open  vision  of  the 
wide  heavens,  resembles  his  native  country. 

"  There  is  a  gap  in  the  suburbs  of  London.  The 
suburbs  of  London  stretch  west  and  south,  and  even 
west  by  north,  but  to  the  north-eastward  there  are 
no  suburbs;  instead  there  is  Essex.  Essex  is  not  a 
suburban  county ;  it  is  a  characteristic  and  individual- 
ised country  which  wins  the  heart.  Between  dear 
Essex  and  the  centre  of  things  lie  two  great  barriers, 
the  East  End  of  London,  and  Epping  Forest.  Before 
a  train  could  get  to  any  villadom  with  a  cargo  of 
season-ticket  holders,  it  would  have  to  circle  around 
the  rescued  woodland  and  travel  for  twenty  unprofit- 
able miles;  and  so  once  you  are  away  from  the  main 
Great  Eastern  lines,  Essex  still  lives  in  the  peace  of  the 


2  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

eighteenth  century,  and  London,  the  modern  Babylon 
is,  hke  the  stars,  just  a  Hght  in  the  nocturnal  sky."  ^ 

As  far  back  as  1465  we  find  the  names  of  two 
Spurgeons  as  witnesses  to  a  legal  document;  in  1575 
Thomas  Spurgeon  was  tenant  of  the  Manor  of  Dynes, 
Great  Maplestead,  where  even  to-day  there  is  a  holding 
known  as  Spurgeon's;  at  Much  Dunmow,  Felsted, 
Blacknotlye,  Eastwood,  Thundersley,  and  South  Bean- 
flet  there  were  also  Spurgeons  at  the  end  of  the 
sixteenth  century. 

In  the  seventeenth  century  one  Job  Spurgeon, 
who  was  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  great-grandfather's  great- 
grandfather, had  a  distress  levied  on  him  for  attending 
a  Nonconformist  meeting,  and  six  years  later  was  fined 
for  the  same  offence.  As  he  refused  to  pay  the  fine, 
he  and  three  others  were  required  to  give  sureties 
for  their  good  behaviour  or  go  to  prison.  To  prison 
they  went,  and  in  a  winter  remarkable  for  its  cold, 
three  of  them  lay  upon  straw  for  fifteen  weeks,  but 
Job  Spurgeon,  *'  being  so  weak  that  he  was  unable  to 
lie  down,  sat  upon  a  chair  the  most  of  the  time."  ^ 
Upon  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  remarked  with  some 
pride,  "  I  had  far  rather  be  descended  from  one 
who  suffered  for  the  faith,  than  bear  the  blood  of  all 
the  emperors  in  my  veins." 

The  direct  line  of  the  preacher's  ancestry  can  be 
traced  through  the  Spurgeons  of  Halstead  for  eleven 
or  twelve  generations.  In  1551  a  Richard  Spurgeon 
held  land  in  the  district;  in  1718  Clement  Spurgeon 
took  sittings  in  the  Independent  Chapel :  two  years 
later  the  same  Clement  Spurgeon  and  his  w4fe  con- 
veyed to  the  trustees,  for  £15,  the  piece  of  ground  on 
which  the  meeting-house  was  built,  and  in  his  will 
he  disposed  of  considerable  property.  His  brother, 
John  Spurgeon,  an  apothecary,  bequeathed  £100  to 


THE   SPURGEON   COUNTRY  3 

be  invested  towards  the  repairs  of  the  Meeting  House, 
and  his  son,  Samuel  Spurgeon,  was  minister  of  the 
church  that  worshipped  in  it.  An  interesting  entry 
in  the  Church  Book,  one  of  several  of  a  similar  nature, 
may  be  cited  :  "  April  9th,  1736.  To  cash  paid  ye 
Rev.  Mr.  Spergin  for  preaching  one  whole  Lord's 
Day  155."  Another  son  was  the  grandfather  of  that 
James  Spurgeon,  minister  of  Stambourne,  who  was 
grandfather  to  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.^ 

By  far  the  most  notable  item  in  the  old  records  is 
in  the  Parish  Register  of  Burnham  Thorpe.  Under 
date  March  13,  1769,  the  certificate  of  marriage  of 
Elizabeth  Spurgeon  has  the  name  spelt  by  the 
Rector  in  that  form  in  the  second  line,  and  on  the 
seventh  line  signed  by  the  lady  herself  as  Elizabeth 
Spurgin.  One  of  the  witnesses,  a  lad  of  ten  years  of 
age,  signed  as  "  Horace  Nelson,"  but  his  first  name 
was  afterwards  altered,  in  his  father's  writing,  to 
"  Horatio,"  no  less  a  person  than  the  great  admiral 
that  was  to  be,  and  here  the  lines  of  two  notable  men 
cross,  and  Trafalgar  Square  has  something  to  say  to 
Newington  Butts. ^ 

There  are  at  least  nineteen  known  variants  of  the 
family  name.  Two  have  already  been  noted.  As 
early  as  1273  we  find  a  William  Sprigin  in  Norfolk ;  in 
1576  Robert  Spurgynne  was  Vicar  of  Fouldon;  in 
1712  John  Spurgeon  Mayor  of  Yarmouth.  Other 
forms  are  Spirjon,  Spurrgon,  Spurggin,  Spurrgin, 
Spourgion,  Spugin,  Spurgyn,  Spurgen,  Spurginn, 
Spourgian,  Spurgion,  Spurgine,  Spurgien,  Spurggon. 
The  name  is  almost  as  baffling  as  that  of  Shakespeare.^ 

It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  first  Spurgeons 
in  England  were  Norsemen.  The  name  may  be  con- 
sidered as  a  diminutive  of  "  Sporr,"  the  old  Norse 
word  for  sparrow,   not  an  inapt  suggestion  for  the 


4  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

heraldry  of  the  family,  whether  we  think  of  homeliness 
or  of  multitude. 

The  current  opinion  that  the  family  is  of  Dutch 
origin  has  no  evidence  to  support  it.  It  is  probably 
founded  on  a  misconception  of  a  statement  by  the 
preacher  of  the  clan  when  he  said  :  "I  remember 
speaking  to  a  Christian  brother  who  seemed  right 
happy  to  tell  me  that  he  sprang  from  a  family  which 
came  from  Holland  during  the  persecution  of  the  Duke 
of  Alva,  and  I  felt  a  brotherhood  with  him  in  claiming 
a  like  descent  from  Protestant  forefathers.^''  At  the 
same  time  it  may  be  conjectured  that  as  so  many 
Dutch  refugees  settled  in  East  Anglia,  it  is  highly 
probable  that  there  was  an  appreciable  mixture  of 
Dutch  blood  in  the  family.  Spurgeon  was  of  con- 
ventional Dutch  build,  and  there  is  a  portrait  of  him 
and  a  portrait  of  Paul  Kruger  which  very  closely 
resemble  each  other  ! 

Throughout  the  generations,  though  few  of  the 
Spurgeons  seem  to  have  been  great  in  the  eyes  of  the 
world,  there  was  evidently  a  tradition  of  piety  handed 
down  from  sire  to  son.  Though  grace  does  not  run 
in  the  blood,  there  is  a  disposition  towards  grace  that 
appears  to  be  hereditary.  The  children  of  saints, 
like  the  children  of  consumptive  parents,  have  a 
tendency  in  the  direction  of  their  parents'  chief 
qualities,  but  no  inevitable  destiny  in  that  direction. 
Spurgeon  himself,  exponent  of  God's  sovereignty  as 
he  was,  never  thought  lightly  of  his  ancestry.  "  There 
is  a  sweet  fitness,"  he  said,  "  in  the  passing  of  holy 
loyalty  from  grandsire  to  father,  and  from  father  to 
son."  His  most  ardent  desire  for  his  own  sons, 
happily  fulfilled,  was  that  they  might  be  in  the  godly 
succession,  and  take  up  the  work  of  God  when  it 
should  drop  from  his  hands. 


THE  SPURGEON  COUNTRY  5 

In  a  quaint  little  cottage  at  Kelvedon,  in  Essex, 
still  standing  almost  unchanged  since  that  day, 
C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  born  on  June  19,  1834,  ten  days 
after  William  Carey  had  died  in  India.  He  had  no 
memories  of  the  place,  for  when  he  was  but  ten 
months  old  the  family  removed  to  Colchester.  Few 
of  the  people  of  the  village  associate  the  house  with 
the  event;  when  Thomas  Spurgeon  visited  it  some 
years  ago  he  only  found  one  old  man  who  knew  of 
it,  and  he  remarked  that  he  thought  Spurgeon's  side 
should  buy  it.  In  answer  to  further  inquiry  it  turned 
out  that  he  had  the  very  proper  notion  that  the 
Nonconformists  should  make  the  cottage  a  memorial 
of  the  great  preacher.'* 

His  mother,  whose  maiden  name  was  Eliza  Jarvis, 
was  born  at  Otton  Belchamp  on  May  3,  1815,  so  that 
she  was  little  more  than  nineteen  years  of  age  at  the 
time  of  her  son's  birth;  his  father,  born  at  Clare  in 
Suffolk  on  July  15,  1810,  being  about  twenty-four. 

Of  his  mother,  her  second  son,  James  Archer,  said 
that  she  was  "  the  starting-point  of  all  greatness  and 
goodness  that  any  of  us  by  the  grace  of  God  have 
enjoyed,"  ^  and  her  elder  son  always  held  her  in 
reverence.  The  father  was  engaged  in  business  during 
the  week,  and  for  sixteen  years  ministered  on  Sundays 
to  the  Independent  congregation  at  ToUesbury, 
removing  from  Colchester  to  Braintree,  afterwards  to 
Cranbrook,  then  to  London  to  take  charge  of  the 
church  in  Fetter  Lane.  Thence  he  migrated  to  the 
church  at  Upper  Street,  Islington,  and  after  a  long 
life  died  at  Croydon  on  June  14,  1902,  his  wife  having 
preceded  him  in  1888. 

Our  thoughts  now  travel  to  Stambourne,  its  manse, 
and  its  minister,  and  especially  to  the  boy  who, 
towards  the  end  of  the  year  1835,  was  taken  there, 


6  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

when  he  was  about  eighteen  months  old,  to  remain 
with  his  grandfatlier  for  six  years.  The  old  legend 
that  he  was  sent  away  from  home  to  his  grandparents 
because  he  was  one  of  seventeen  children  is  a  romance. 
There  were,  indeed,  seventeen  children  born  to  his 
parents,  nine  of  whom  died  in  infancy,  but  as  he  was 
the  eldest  and  his  father  was  not  endowed  with  the 
prophetic  gift,  that  could  scarcely  have  been  the 
reason  for  his  removal.  The  fact  that  the  eldest  of 
his  six  sisters  was  born  in  January  1836  may  have  had 
more  to  do  with  it,  and  similar  reasons  no  doubt 
accounted  for  his  prolonged  stay  at  Stambourne. 
His  brother  was  born  on  June  8,  1837.  In  these  days 
of  eugenics,  when  we  are  told  that  it  is  the  fifth  or 
sixth  child  of  large  families  that  attains  distinction,  it 
may  be  borne  in  mind  that  Spurgeon  was  the  first. 

For  fifty-four  years  James  Spurgeon,  the  grand- 
father, was  minister  of  the  people  who  worshipped  in 
the  Meeting  House  at  Stambourne.  He  was  a  man 
of  wide  sympathies  and  was  on  excellent  terms  with 
the  Rector  of  the  parish.  He  had  great  preaching 
gifts,  and  wherever  he  went  he  was  able  to  call  men  to 
Christ.  "  I  heard  your  grandfather,  and  I  would 
run  my  shoes  off  my  feet  to  hear  a  Spurgeon,"  was 
once  said  to  the  grandson  in  his  early  preaching  days. 
The  grandfather  had  a  dry  humour  of  his  own,  too; 
on  one  occasion,  when  he  was  asked  how  much  he 
weighed,  he  answered  :  "  Well,  that  all  depends  on 
how  you  take  me  :  if  weighed  in  the  balances  I  am 
afraid  I  shall  be  found  wanting,  but  in  the  pulpit  they 
tell  me  I  am  heavy  enough."  His  influence  on  the 
lad  committed  to  his  care  was  abiding.  Grandmother 
Spurgeon  was  "  a  dear,  good,  kind  soul,"  and  no  doubt 
took  her  share  of  the  training,  but  it  was  chiefly  Aunt 
Ann,   one  of  the  eight  children,  the  only  one  who 


THE   SPURGEON   COUNTRY  7 

remained  unmarried,  who  mothered  him,  and  for  her 
he  ever  cherished  a  warm  affection. 

A  characteristic  story  of  his  grandfather  conveys  a 
better  idea  of  his  attachment  to  the  Gospel,  and  his 
unconventional  methods  in  declaring  it,  than  pages 
of  description,  and  suggests  that  his  grandson  had 
caught  his  spirit.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  in  the  after  years, 
was  announced  to  preach  at  Haverhill  in  Suffolk, 
and — an  exceptional  incident — he  was  late  in  arriving. 
So  his  grandfather  began  the  service,  and  as  the 
expected  preacher  was  absent,  he  proceeded  with 
the  sermon.  The  text  was  "  By  grace  ye  are  saved." 
He  had  got  some  way  into  the  discourse  when  some 
unrest  at  the  door  made  him  aware  that  his  dis- 
tinguished grandson  was  in  the  chapel.  "  Here  comes 
my  grandson,"  he  exclaimed,  "  he  can  preach  the 
Gospel  better  than  I  can,  but  you  cannot  preach  a 
better  Gospel,  can  you,  Charles?  "  Still  pressing  up 
the  aisle,  his  grandson  replied,  "  You  can  preach 
better  than  I  can.  Pray  go  on."  Of  course  his 
grandfather  refused,  but  he  told  him  the  text,  ex- 
plained that  he  had  already  shown  the  people  the 
source  and  fountain-head  of  salvation — "  grace  " — and 
was  now  speaking  of  the  channel  of  it,  "  through 
faith."  The  younger  preacher  took  up  the  theme, 
and  advanced  to  the  next  point — "  but  not  of  your- 
selves " — and  was  setting  forth  the  weakness  and 
inability  of  human  nature,  when  his  grandfather 
interrupted,  and  said,  "  I  know  most  about  that." 
So  for  five  minutes  he  discoursed,  and  then  his  grand- 
son continued  again,  having  his  grandfather's  whis- 
pered commendation  "  Good  !  Good  !  "  as  he  warmed 
to  his  subject,  until  at  some  special  point  the  old  man 
ejaculated,  "Tell  them  that  again,  Charles."  Ever 
after,  when  Charles  recalled  the  text,  there  came  to 


8  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

him  with  recurring  force  the  words,  "  Tell  them  that 
again."  The  incident  was  almost  reproduced  at  a 
later  date  in  the  Tabernacle  when  he  shared  the 
sermon  with  me,  and  we  both  preached  on  the  text, 
"  Him  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out  " — 
the  same  Gospel  from  grandfather  to  biographer  ! 

Towards  the  end  of  his  life  Spurgeon's  mind  reverted 
more  and  more  to  those  early  days  :  he  had  an  instinct 
that  his  life  was  drawing  to  a  close,  and  his  last  book 
was  Meinories  of  Stamhourne.  To  choose  the  views 
for  the  volume  he  went  down  to  the  neighbourhood 
on  June  8,  1891,  the  morning  after  he  had  preached 
what  proved  to  be  his  last  sermon  in  the  Tabernacle. 
His  friends  pleaded  with  him  to  refrain  from  the 
journey,  but  nothing  would  hinder  him — there  was 
something  in  his  heart  that  turned  him  back  upon  his 
past.  The  illness  which  was  to  prove  fatal  seized 
him  while  he  was  away  from  home,  and  on  the  Friday 
he  hurried  back,  to  be  laid  aside  completely  for  three 
months. 

The  memories  of  those  early  years  include  the 
Manse  with  its  brick  hall-floor  sprinkled  with  sand, 
the  sand  being  kept  in  a  cupboard  under  the  stairs; 
its  windows  in  part  plastered  up  to  escape  the  window 
tax ;  its  attic,  to  which  the  lad  surreptitiously  climbed 
one  day  and  discovered  the  treasures  of  darkness — 
books,  books,  books.  Here  he  made  his  first  acquaint- 
ance with  the  Puritan  writers,  though  as  a  boy  he  was 
chiefly  interested  in  their  bindings ;  here,  too,  he  found 
a  copy  of  The  Pilgrim'' s  Progress  and  read  it,  becoming 
so  enamoured  of  it  that  he  re-read  it  during  his  life 
at  least  a  hundred  times. 

Occasionally  he  used  to  disappear  and  was  searched 
for  in  vain.  Not  till  many  years  after  did  he  reveal 
his    hiding-places.     One    was    beneath    the    horsing- 


THE   SPURGEON   COUNTRY  9 

block  in  front  of  the  Meeting  House,  amongst  the 
leaves  of  the  lime-trees  which  were  thrown  there  and 
made  a  pleasant  resting-place;  the  other  was  in  an 
altar-like  erection  over  a  tomb  where  one  of  the  slabs 
of  stone  at  the  side  moved  easily,  so  that  the  boy 
could  enter,  pull  it  back  again  into  its  place,  and 
shut  himself  off  from  all  the  world.  Many  a  time 
he  heard  them  call  him,  heard  their  feet  running  in 
search  of  him,  but  he  answered  not.  "  Where  he 
went  to,  his  guardian  angels  knew,  but  none  on  earth 
could  tell."  "  Dreaming  of  days  to  come  befell  me 
every  now  and  then  as  a  child,  and  to  be  quite  alone 
was  my  boyish  heaven." 

He  records  that  his  climax  of  delight  was  to  see 
the  huntsmen  with  their  red  coats  as  they  chased  the 
fox,  and  at  that  time  he  stoutly  declared  that  he 
was  going  to  be  a  huntsman. 

"  I  remember  well,  in  my  early  days,"  he  says, 
"  seeing  upon  my  grandmother's  mantelshelf  an 
apple  contained  in  a  phial.  This  was  a  great  wonder 
to  me,  and  I  tried  to  investigate  it.  My  question  was, 
'  How  came  the  apple  to  get  inside  so  small  a  bottle  ?  ' 
The  apple  was  quite  as  big  round  as  the  phial ;  by  what 
means  was  it  placed  within  it  ?  Though  it  was  treason 
to  touch  the  treasures  on  the  mantelpiece,  I  took 
down  the  bottle  and  convinced  my  youthful  mind  that 
the  apple  never  passed  through  its  neck ;  and  by  means 
of  an  attempt  to  unscrew  the  bottom,  I  became 
equally  certain  that  the  apple  did  not  enter  from 
below.  I  held  to  the  notion  that  by  some  occult 
means  the  bottle  had  been  made  in  two  pieces,  and 
afterwards  united  in  so  careful  a  manner  that  no  trace 
of  the  join  remained.  I  was  hardly  satisfied  with 
the  theory,  but  as  no  philosopher  was  at  hand  to 
suggest  any  other  hypothesis,  I  let  the  matter  rest. 


10  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

One  day  the  next  summer,  I  chanced  to  see  upon  a 
bough  another  phial,  the  first  cousin  of  my  old  friend, 
within  which  was  growing  a  little  apple  which  had 
been  passed  through  the  neck  of  the  bottle  while  it 
was  extremely  small.  '  Nature  well  known,  no 
prodigies  remain.'  The  grand  secret  was  out."  This 
became  his  classic  illustration  of  the  necessity  of 
getting  young  people  into  the  house  of  God,  and  into 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  while  they  are  small,  that  they 
may  grow  there. 

No  doubt  the  boy  was  precocious.  At  his  grand- 
father's house,  before  he  left,  he  was  allowed  to  read 
the  Scriptures  at  family  worship.  Once  when  the 
reading  was  in  the  Apocalypse  he  came  to  the  expres- 
sion "  the  bottomless  pit,"  and  he  paused  and  asked 
the  meaning  of  it.  "  Pooh,  pooh,  child,"  said  his 
grandfather,  "go  on."  The  next  morning  he  read 
the  same  chapter,  asked  the  same  question,  and 
received  the  same  answer,  and  so  continued,  until  at 
length  his  grandfather  capitulated,  and  inquired  what 
puzzled  the  child.  "  If  the  pit  has  no  bottom,  where 
would  all  those  people  fall  who  dropped  out  at  the 
lower  end?" — a  question  w^hich  rather  startled  the 
propriety  of  the  worshippers,  and  had  to  be  answered 
at  another  time.  His  horror  when  the  explanation 
was  given,  and  he  was  told  that  there  was  no  depth 
to  which  a  soul  can  sink  that  has  not  a  deeper  depth 
beyond,  made  an  impression  on  his  heart  never  to  be 
effaced. 

It  is  easy  to  see,  in  retrospect,  that  those  early 
Stambourne  years  gave  colour  and  bent  to  his  whole 
life.  It  was  well  that  he  had  no  formal  schooling 
(save  only  such  elementary  instruction  as  he  could 
glean  from  old  Mrs.  Burleigh  of  the  village)  until 
he    had   looked    out    on    life    from    the   comparative 


THE   SPURGEON   COUNTRY  11 

solitude  of  the  place.  He  had  a  mind  that  did  not 
need  to  be  forced,  and  the  simplicity  of  his  early 
surroundings  remained  with  him  to  the  end.  He 
describes  the  people  of  those  days  as  "  mainly  real 
Essex ;  they  talked  of  places  down  in  '  the  Shires  ' 
as  if  they  were  in  foreign  parts  :  and  young  fellows 
who  went  down  into  '  the  Hundreds  '  were  explorers 
of  a  respectable  order  of  hardihood."  Years  after, 
when  he  was  returning  from  a  continental  holiday 
and  heard  that  there  had  been  an  earthquake  in 
Essex,  he  declared  that  he  was  glad  that  something 
had  shaken  the  people  at  last. 

When  the  time  came  to  leave  his  grandfather,  it 
was  the  sorrow  of  his  early  life.  They  wept  together, 
and  the  grandfather  sought  to  comfort  him  by  telling 
him  that  when  he  looked  up  to  the  moon  that  night 
at  Colchester,  he  was  to  remember  that  it  was  the 
same  moon  his  grandfather  was  looking  at  from 
Stambourne.  For  years  the  boy  never  looked  at  the 
moon  thereafter  without  thinking  of  his  grandfather. 
There  was  genius  in  the  thought. 

Subsequent  holidays  were  often  spent  at  Stam- 
bourne. On  one  occasion  his  grandmother  promised 
him  a  penny  for  every  hymn  of  Isaac  Watts  that  he 
could  perfectly  repeat  to  her.  So  quickly  did  he  learn 
them  that  she  reduced  the  price  to  a  halfpenny,  and 
still  it  seemed  that  she  might  be  ruined  by  the  calls 
on  her  purse.  But  then  came  a  diversion,  for  his 
grandfather,  finding  the  place  overnm  with  rats, 
promised  the  boy  a  shilling  a  dozen  for  all  that  he 
could  kill,  so  he  gave  up  hymn-learning  for  rat- 
catching,  which  seemed  to  pay  better.  But  I  have 
heard  him  declare  in  later  days  that  the  hymns  paid 
the  best,  for  he  was  able  to  use  them  in  his  sermons 
to  advantage. 


12  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

When  he  went  home  to  Colchester,  he  found  three 
children  there,  two  sisters  and  a  brother,  and  naturally 
he  became  their  hero.  Like  many  another  boy,  he 
wrote  poems,  and  edited  a  magazine.  One  copy  of  it 
remains,  in  which  its  readers  are  reminded  of  a 
prayer  meeting,  and  encouraged  to  attend  it  by  the 
thought  that  blessings  come  through  prayer.  At 
first  he  attended  a  school  kept  by  a  Mrs.  Cook,  but 
having  mastered  all  that  she  could  teach  him  he  was 
transferred,  in  a  little  while,  to  a  more  advanced 
establishment  conducted  by  Mr.  Henry  Lewis.  Here, 
when  he  was  between  ten  and  eleven  years  of  age,  he 
gained  the  First  Class  English  prize.  White's  Natural 
History  of  Selborne,  a  book  which  he  treasured  all 
his  days. 

It  was  in  this  school  that  he  suddenly  seemed  to 
fail  in  his  studies,  going  steadily  down  to  the  bottom 
of  the  class.  The  teacher  was  at  first  nonplussed, 
until  it  occurred  to  him  that  the  top  place  was  away 
from  the  fire  and  opposite  a  draughty  door.  He 
therefore  reversed  the  position  of  the  scholars,  and 
very  speedily  young  Spurgeon  worked  his  way  up 
again. 

When  about  fourteen  the  two  brothers  were  sent 
to  All  Saints'  Agricultural  College  (now  St.  Augus- 
tine's) at  Maidstone,  where  an  uncle  of  his  was  one 
of  the  tutors.  Here  also  he  quickly  mastered  his 
studies.  On  one  occasion  he  had  a  discussion  Avith  a 
clerical  examiner  on  the  subject  of  Baptism,  and  as  a 
result,  though  he  came  from  a  Congregational  family 
and  was  a  student  in  an  Anglican  college,  he  deter- 
mined that  if  grace  should  ever  work  a  change  in  him 
he  would  be  baptised.  At  another  time  he  pointed 
out  an  arithmetical  mistake  of  his  uncle's,  and  as  a 
result  of  this  was  told  that  he  had  better  take  his 


THE   SPURGEON   COUNTRY  13 

books  and  study  under  an  old  oak-tree  growing 
beside  the  banks  of  the  Medway.  His  mathematical 
facility  at  this  time  was  so  pronounced  that  he  was 
allowed  to  calculate  the  tables  which  are  still  in  use 
in  one  of  the  Life  Insurance  Societies  of  London. 
As  I  write  I  have  on  my  desk  the  copy  of  The  Christian 
Year  in  calf,  presented  to  him  at  this  school  at 
Christmas  1848,  *'  for  proficiency  in  religious  know- 
ledge, mathematics,  the  languages,  and  the  applied 
sciences." 

"  How  my  father  ever  contrived  to  give  us  the 
training  that  he  did,  puzzles  me,"  said  his  brother 
James.  "  I  know  that  he  burdened  himself  to  pay 
for  the  best  education  Nonconformity  could  command. 
If  it  was  not  better — I  do  not  think  it  could  have  been 
— it  was  because  no  better  was  available."  ^ 

The  Spurgeon  country  must  include  Cambridgeshire, 
for  Newmarket,  Cambridge  and  Waterbeach  now 
come  into  the  story.  When  Mr.  E.  S.  Leeding  died 
at  Norwood  in  1890,  Mr.  Spurgeon  penned  the  follow- 
ing note  :  "  Mr.  Leeding  was  usher  in  the  school  of 
Mr.  Henry  Lewis  of  Colchester  in  1845,  and  I  was 
one  of  the  boys  under  his  care.  He  was  a  teacher 
who  really  taught  his  pupils,  and  by  his  diligent  skill 
I  gained  the  foundation  upon  which  I  built  in  the 
after  years.  He  left  Colchester  to  open  a  school  in 
Cambridge,  and  I  to  go,  first  to  Maidstone  and  then 
to  Newmarket,  for  some  two  years.  Then  we  came 
together  again;  for  I  joined  him  at  Cambridge  to 
assist  in  his  school,  and  in  return  to  be  helped  in  my 
studies.  He  has  left  it  on  record  that  he  did  not 
think  that  there  was  need  for  me  to  go  to  any  of  the 
Dissenting  colleges,  since  I  had  mastered  most  of  the 
subject  studies  therein;  and  his  impression  that  I 
might,  while  with  him,  have  readily  passed  through 


14  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

the   University,  if  the  pulpit  had  not  come  in  the 
way." 

Cambridgeshire  seemed  at  first  but  Uke  a  cold 
stepmother  to  the  lad  who  had  migrated  from  Essex, 
but,  when  he  was  called  to  leave  it,  he  left  a  great  part 
of  his  heart  behind.  We  may  guess  how  the  iron 
entered  his  soul  in  the  early  days  by  some  references 
he  made,  in  a  moment  of  confidence,  years  afterwards. 
Recalling  the  time  when  he  taught  in  the  school, 
"  not  big  enough  to  be  a  master,  and  not  small  enough 
to  be  a  boy,"  he  quoted  Goldsmith  as  saying  that  a 
man  had  better  be  hanged  than  have  such  work  to 
do,  and  declared  that  if  the  choice  were  given  to 
him,  though  he  might  hesitate  at  first,  in  the  end 
he  would  choose  the  alternative  of  hanging.  "  I 
had  no  college  education,"  he  continued.  "  I  do  not 
say  this  by  way  of  boasting,  far  from  it.  I  would 
have  learned  more  if  I  had  had  the  opportunity,  but, 
that  not  being  the  case,  I  made  the  very  best  of  the 
opportunities  I  had."  ^ 

When,  at  forty  years  of  age,  he  lectured  on  "  Young 
Men,"  he  said  in  all  seriousness  that  he  was  an  old 
one.  "  I  might  have  been  a  young  man  at  twelve, 
but  at  sixteen  I  was  a  sober,  respectable  Baptist 
parson,  sitting  in  the  Chair  and  ruling  and  governing 
the  Church.  At  that  period  of  my  life,  when  I  ought 
perhaps  to  have  been  in  the  playground,  developing 
my  legs  and  sinews,  which  no  doubt  would  have  kept 
me  from  the  gout  now,  I  spent  my  time  at  my  books, 
studying  and  working  hard,  sticking  to  it,  very  much 
to  the  pleasure  of  my  schoolmaster."  '  All  that  in 
Cambridgeshire. 

But  to  the  Spurgeon  country  Surrey  must  be 
annexed,  the  county  where  he  won  his  great  pulpit 
triumphs,    about    which    he    resolved    early    in    his 


THE   SPURGEON   COUNTRY  15 

ministry — "  God  sparing  my  life,  I  will  not  rest  till 
this  dark  county  of  Surrey  be  filled  with  places  of 
worship,"  whose  lanes  and  villages  were  known  to 
him  in  the  after  years  as  to  few  beside.  "  England 
to  me  for  a  country,"  John  Ploughman  wrote,  "  Surrey 
for  a  county,  and  for  a  village  give  me — no,  I  shan't 
tell  you,  or  you  will  be  hunting  John  Ploughman  up. 
There  is  a  glorious  view  from  the  top  of  Leith  Hill 
in  our  dear  old  Surrey,  and  Hindhead  and  Martha's 
Chapel  and  Boxhill  are  not  to  be  sneezed  at."  On 
Wednesdays,  which  were  his  Sabbaths,  he  would 
generally  seek  out  some  of  the  county  byways,  visit 
some  of  its  churches  or  historic  sites,  and  drive  along 
the  courses  of  its  rivers,  the  Wey,  the  Mole  and  the 
Wandle,  for  the  last  of  which  he  had,  like  Ruskin,  a 
peculiar  affection. 

"  Twenty  years  ago  there  was  no  lovelier  piece 
of  lowland  scenery  in  South  England,  nor  any  more 
pathetic  in  the  world,  by  its  expression  of  sweet 
human  character  and  life,  than  that  immediately 
bordering  on  the  sources  of  the  Wandle,  and  including 
the  low  moors  of  Addington,  and  the  villages  of 
Beddington  and  Carshalton,  with  all  their  pools  and 
streams.  No  clearer  or  diviner  waters  ever  sang  with 
sweet,  constant  lips  of  the  Hand  that  '  giveth  rain  from 
heaven  ' ;  no  pastures  ever  lightened  in  springtime 
with  more  passionate  blossoming  :  no  sweeter  homes 
ever  hallowed  the  heart  of  the  passers-by  with  their 
pride  of  peaceful  gladness— fain  hidden — yet  full- 
confessed."  ^ 

Of  course  he  travelled  throughout  Great  Britain, 
he  visited  Ireland,  Holland,  Switzerland,  Heligoland, 
Germany,  France,  but  mostly  he  was  a  stay-at-home. 
There  is,  however,  at  Mentone  one  little  bit  of 
sunshine  land,  between  the  Alps  Maritimes  and  the 


16  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

tideless  sea,  which,  made  fragrant  and  beautiful  by 
its  ohve  orchards,  its  orange  groves,  and  its  flower 
gardens,  and  memorable  by  his  repeated  visits, 
might  almost  be  called  his  second  home.  There  he 
passed,  as  he  would  have  wished,  from  his  day's 
work,  so  well  done,  to  that  other  land  which  is  also 
Spurgeon-country. 


CHAPTER   II 

THE   SEARCH   FOR   GOD 

January  \S^5— January  6,  1850 

The  boy  Spurgeon  continued  in  quest  of  Christ  for 
five  years — from  the  time  when  he  was  between  ten 
and  eleven  years  old  until  he  was  between  fifteen 
and  sixteen.  Into  those  years  there  was  crowded  a 
world  of  experience  which  enabled  him  in  his  subse- 
quent ministry  to  probe  the  secrets  of  many  hearts. 
He  learnt  more  of  the  things  that  matter  in  those 
years  than  most  men  learn  in  a  lifetime. 

That  one  so  young,  so  sheltered,  trained  from  his 
babyhood  in  the  ways  of  God,  could  have  felt  so  much 
and  have  had  such  exercises  of  soul  may  seem  im- 
possible, his  own  account  of  his  darkness  and  despair 
may  appear  exaggerated;  but  those  who  are  versed 
in  the  ways  of  God  will  understand.  "  To  make  a 
man  a  saint,"  says  Pascal,  "  grace  is  absolutely 
necessary,  and  whoever  doubts  it,  does  not  know 
what  a  saint  is  or  what  a  man  is."  Spurgeon  early 
learnt  to  know  both.  He  arrived  at  some  knowledge 
of  his  own  heart  and  some  knowledge  of  God's  heart. 
By  his  very  wanderings  he  was  assured  that  grace  was 
seeking  him  all  the  while. 

"  I  must  confess,"  he  says,  "  that  I  never  would 

have  been  saved  if  I  could  have  helped  it.      As  long 

as  ever  I  could,  I  rebelled,  and  revolted,  and  struggled 

against   God.     When    He    would    have    me    pray,    1 
c  17 


18  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

would  not  pray,  and  when  He  would  have  me  listen 
to  the  sound  of  the  ministry,  I  would  not.  And  when 
I  heard,  and  the  tear  rolled  down  my  cheek,  I  wiped 
it  away  and  defied  Him  to  melt  my  soul.  But  long 
before  I  began  with  Christ,  He  began  with  me." 

"  To  all  swift  things  for  swiftness  did  I  sue ; 
Cling  to  the  whistling  mane  of  every  wind. 
But  whether  they  swept,  smoothly  fleet, 
The  long  savannahs  of  the  blue ; 

Or  whether,  thunder-driven, 
They  clanged  His  chariot  'thwart  a  heaven 
Plashy  with  flying  lightnings  round  the  spurn  o'  their  feet : 
Fear  wist  not  to  evade,  as  Love  wist  to  pursue."  ^ 

It  was  to  his  mother  he  owed  his  first  awakening. 
Her  prayers,  no  less  than  her  exhortations,  aroused 
him  to  concern  of  soul.  His  father  has  told  that  once 
on  the  way  to  a  preaching  engagement  his  heart 
smote  him  that  he  was  caring  for  other  people  and 
neglecting  his  own  family.  So  he  turned  back  home. 
On  his  arrival  he  was  surprised  to  find  no  one  in  the 
lower  rooms,  but  on  ascending  the  stairs  he  heard  the 
voice  of  prayer.  Quietly  listening  outside  the  door, 
he  discovered  that  his  wife  was  pleading  for  her 
children,  and  specially  interceding  for  Charles,  her 
firstborn  and  strong-willed  son.  That  son  repeats 
the  story  as  it  was  told  him  by  his  father,  and  adds, 
"  My  father  felt  that  he  might  safely  go  about  his 
Master's  business  while  the  dear  wife  was  caring  so 
well  for  the  spiritual  interests  of  the  boys  and  girls 
at  home,  so  he  did  not  disturb  her,  but  proceeded  at 
once  to  fulfil  his  preaching  engagement."  ^ 

Ambrose  might  well  tell  Monica  to  comfort  her  heart 
about  Augustine,  that  it  was  impossible  for  the  child 
of  such  tears  as  hers  to  be  lost.  In  this  sphere  the 
believing  mother  counts  most.  Ziegenbalg  was  sent 
to  Tinnevelly  by  his  mother's  prayers;    they  were 


THE   SEARCH   FOR   GOD  19 

not  answered  even  when  she  lay  dying,  but  as  she 
pointed  to  the  corner  of  the  room  where  she  had  so 
often  knelt,  her  last  cry  to  God  was,  "  Father,  remem- 
ber what  I  said  to  Thee  there."  And  God  remem- 
bered. The  story  of  Ziegenbalg  stirred  the  heart  of 
the  mothers  of  the  Wesley,  and  she  began  in  earnest 
to  seek  the  salvation  of  her  children.  To  her  absent 
husband,  Susannah  Wesley  wrote  :  "  I  am  a  woman, 
but  I  am  also  the  mistress  of  a  large  family.  And 
though  the  superior  charge  of  the  souls  contained  in  it 
lies  upon  you,  yet  in  your  long  absence  I  cannot  but 
look  upon  every  soul  you  leave  under  my  charge  as 
a  talent  committed  to  me  under  a  trust.  I  am  not 
a  man  nor  a  minister,  yet  as  a  mother  and  a  mistress 
I  felt  I  ought  to  do  more  than  I  had  yet  done.  I 
resolved  to  begin  with  my  own  children ;  in  which  I 
observe  the  following  method : — I  take  such  a  propor- 
tion of  time  as  I  can  spare  every  night  to  discourse 
with  each  child  apart.  On  Monday  I  talk  with  Molly, 
on  Tuesday  with  Hetty,  Wednesday  with  Nancy, 
Thursday  with  Jacky,  Friday  with  Patty,  Saturday 
with  Charles."  ^  What  wonder  that  John  and  Charles 
Wesley,  the  two  boys  of  the  home,  emerged  as  God's 
heralds  from  such  influence,  or,  from  similar  influence, 
Charles  and  James  Spurgeon,  the  two  sons  of  another 
home  ! 

Every  Sunday  evening  their  mother  was  accus- 
tomed to  gather  the  children  round  the  table,  and  as 
they  read  she  would  explain  the  Scripture,  verse  by 
verse,  to  them.  Then  she  prayed,  and  her  son 
declares  that  some  of  the  words  of  her  prayers  her 
children  can  never  forget.  Once  she  said,  "  Now, 
Lord,  if  my  children  go  on  in  their  sins,  it  will  not  be 
from  ignorance  they  perish,  and  my  soul  must  bear 
swift  witness  against  them  at  the  day  of  judgment 


20  LIFE  OF  SPURGEON 

if  they  lay  not  hold  of  Christ."  That  was  not  at  all 
in  the  modern  vein,  but  it  was  the  arrow  that  reached 
the  boy's  soul.  "  The  thought  of  a  mother  bearing 
swift  witness  against  me,  pierced  my  conscience,  and 
stirred  my  heart."  There  was  enough  in  him  to 
cause  his  mother  anxiety.  His  father  recalled  that 
his  wife  once  said  to  him,  speaking  of  their  eldest  son, 
"  What  a  mercy  that  boy  was  converted  when  he  was 
young." 

In  the  first  sermon  he  published  in  London,  he  says, 
"  There  was  a  boy  once — a  very  sinful  child — who 
hearkened  not  to  the  counsel  of  his  parents ;  but  his 
mother  prayed  for  him,  and  now  he  stands  to  preach 
to  this  congregation  every  Sabbath.  And  when  his 
mother  thinks  of  her  first-born  preaching  the  Gospel, 
she  reaps  a  glorious  harvest  that  makes  her  a  glad 
woman." 

His  father,  too,  shared  in  the  training.  When  the 
boy  returned  home  from  his  grandfather's  house,  he 
greatly  scandalised  the  congregation  on  Sunday  by 
singing  the  last  line  of  each  verse  twice.  His  father 
took  him  to  task,  but  he  said  that  his  grandfather  did 
it,  and  he  would  do  it  too.  So  his  father  told  him 
that  if  he  did  it  again  he  would  give  him  a  whipping 
that  he  would  remember  as  long  as  he  lived.  Sunday 
came,  and  again  the  boy  sang  the  last  lines  twice. 
It  must  have  been  amusing,  for  he  had  no  singing 
voice.  After  the  service  his  father  asked  him  if  he 
remembered  what  he  had  said.  The  boy  remem- 
bered. Father  and  son  then  walked  into  the  wood, 
passing  a  wheat- field  on  the  way,  the  father  trying  to 
win  his  son  to  repentance.  There  they  knelt  and 
prayed  together,  and  both  were  greatly  moved. 
Turning  back  to  the  wheat- field,  the  father  plucked  a 
stalk  of  wheat,  and  told  Charles  to  hold  out  his  hand. 


THE  SEARCH  FOR  GOD  21 

The  wheat-stalk  was  laid  gently  across  it.  "I  told 
you  I  would  give  you  a  whipping  you  would  never 
forget.  You  will  never  forget  that,"  said  his  father. 
The  gentle  sternness  of  the  punishment  broke  him 
down,  and  won  him  over,  and  he  never  forgot  it. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  lad  became 
morbid  during  those  years.  He  lived  two  lives,  one 
keen,  natural,  bookish,  observant;  the  other  absorbed, 
fearful,  doubting,  insurgent.  If  he  had  spoken  of 
his  trouble  there  were  those  round  him  who  could, 
perhaps,  have  helped  him  out  of  it;  but  he  battled 
alone,  hiding  his  thoughts  from  them  all,  save  once 
when  he  spoke  to  his  grandfather  of  his  fear  of  being 
a  lost  soul,  and  was  somewhat  comforted  for  a  while. 
He  would  not  believe  because  others  believed;  he 
must  have  an  assurance  of  his  own;  he  would  not 
rest  until  he  knew. 

He  bears  witness  that  by  restraining  grace,  and 
through  the  influence  of  his  father  and  grandfather, 
he  was  kept  from  many  outward  sins,  in  which  others 
indulged,  and  that  at  times  he  thought  he  was  quite 
a  respectable  lad.  "  But  all  of  a  sudden  I  met 
Moses,"  he  quaintly  observes.  "  Then  there  came 
to  my  startled  conscience  the  remembrance  of  the 
universality  of  law.  I  thought  of  what  was  said  of 
the  old  Roman  empire,  under  the  rule  of  Csesar :  if  a 
man  once  broke  the  law  of  Rome,  the  whole  world 
was  one  vast  prison  to  him,  for  he  could  never  get 
out  of  the  reach  of  the  Imperial  power.  So  did  it 
come  to  be  in  my  aroused  conscience." 

"  Let  none  despise  the  stirrings  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  hearts  of  the  young,"  he  says  in  another  place; 
"  let  not  boyish  anxieties  and  juvenile  repentances 
be  lightly  regarded.  I,  at  least,  can  bear  my  personal 
testimony  to  the  fact  that  grace  operates  on  some 


22  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

minds  at  a  period  almost  too  early  for  recollection. 
When  but  young  in  years  I  felt  much  sorrow  for  sin. 
Day  and  night  God's  hand  was  heavy  on  me.  If  I 
slept  at  night  I  dreamed  of  the  bottomless  pit,  and 
when  I  awoke  I  seemed  to  feel  the  misery  I  had 
dreamed.  Up  to  God's  house  I  went;  my  song  was 
but  a  sigh.  To  my  chamber  I  retired,  and  there,  with 
tears  and  groans,  I  offered  up  my  prayer  without  a 
hope  and  without  a  refuge,  for  God's  law  was  flogging 
me  with  its  ten-thonged  whip,  and  then  rubbing  me 
with  brine  afterwards,  so  that  I  did  shake  and  quiver 
with  pain  and  anguish. 

"  It  was  my  sad  lot  to  feel  the  greatness  of  my  sin 
without  a  discovery  of  the  greatness  of  God's  mercy. 
I  had  to  walk  through  this  world  with  more  than  a 
world  upon  my  shoulders,  and  I  wonder  to  this  day 
how  it  was  that  my  hand  was  kept  from  rending  my 
own  body  in  pieces  through  the  awful  agony  which 
I  felt  when  I  discovered  the  greatness  of  my  trans- 
gression. I  used  to  say,  '  If  God  does  not  send  me  to 
hell,  He  ought  to  do  it.'  I  sat  in  judgment  upon 
myself  and  pronounced  the  sentence  that  I  felt  would 
be  just.  I  could  not  have  gone  to  Heaven  with 
my  sin  unpardoned,  even  if  I  had  the  offer  to  do  it, 
for  I  justified  God  in  my  own  conscience,  while  I 
condemned  myself." 

In  the  midst  of  this  "  law-work,"  to  use  a  phrase 
well  understood  by  our  fathers,  he  used  to  read  the 
first  thing  when  he  woke  in  the  morning  from  Alleine's 
Alarm  to  Sinners,  or  Baxter's  Call  to  the  Unconverted, 
or  Doddridge's  Rise  and  Progress  of  Religion  in  the 
Soul,  or  James's  Anxious  Inquirer,  but  about  them  all 
he  says,  "  It  was  like  sitting  at  the  foot  of  Sinai." 
He  read  the  Bible  through,  but  found  that  its 
threatenings  seemed  to  be  printed  in  capitals  and  its 


THE   SEARCH   FOR  GOD  23 

promises  in  small  type.  With  perverse  ingenuity,  as 
with  others  in  the  like  case,  he  twisted  everything 
to  his  own  hurt,  applied  the  cheering  words  to  others, 
the  w^oeful  ^vords  to  himself. 

''  Oh,  the  many  times  I  have  wished  that  the 
preacher  would  tell  me  something  to  do  to  be  saved ! 
Gladly  would  I  have  done  it,  if  it  had  been  possible. 
If  he  had  said,  '  Take  off  your  shoes  and  stockings  and 
run  to  John  o'  Groats,'  I  would  not  even  have  gone 
home  first,  but  would  have  started  ofi  that  very  night 
if  I  might  win  salvation.  How  often  have  I  thought 
that  if  he  had  said,  '  Bare  your  back  to  the  scourge 
and  take  fifty  lashes,'  I  would  have  said,  '  Here  I  am; 
come  along  with  your  whip,  and  beat  as  hard  as  you 
please,  so  long  as  I  can  obtain  peace  and  rest,  and  get 
rid  of  my  sin.'  Yet  the  simplest  of  all  matters — 
believing  in  Christ  crucified,  accepting  His  finished 
salvation,  being  nothing  and  letting  Him  be  every- 
thing, doing  nothing,  but  trusting  to  what  He  has 
done — I  could  not  get  a  hold  of  it." 

It  is  not  every  one  who  has  a  deep  experience  that 
can  describe  it;  in  the  extracts  that  follow  no  doubt 
allowance  must  be  made  for  the  preacher's  rhetoric. 
But  there  is  Reality  behind  the  words,  a  sense  of  the 
Actual  that  followed  him  all  his  life. 

Without  wonder  we  find  him,  when  he  had  attained 
to  peace,  saying,  "  I  love  to  bless  God  for  every  terror 
that  ever  scared  me  by  night,  and  for  every  foreboding 
fear  that  alarmed  me  by  day.  It  has  made  me 
happier  ever  since,  for  now,  if  there  be  a  trouble 
weighing  upon  my  soul,  I  thank  God  that  it  is  not 
such  a  burden  as  that  which  bowed  me  to  the  very 
earth,  and  made  me  creep  along  the  ground,  like  a 
beast,  by  reason  of  heavy  distress  and  affliction." 
And  again,  "  Full  often  have  I  found  it  good  when  J, 


24  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

have  talked  with  a  young  convert  in  deep  distress 
about  his  sin,  to  tell  him  something  more  of  his 
anxious  plight  than  he  knew  how  to  express,  and  he 
has  wondered  where  I  found  it,  though  he  would  not 
have  wondered  if  he  had  known  where  I  had  been, 
and  how  much  deeper  in  the  mire  than  he.  When  he 
has  talked  about  some  terrible  thought  that  he  has 
had,  with  regard  to  the  impossibility  of  his  own 
salvation,  I  have  said,  '  Why  !  I  have  thought  that 
a  thousand  times,  and  yet  have  overcome  it  by  the 
help  of  God's  Spirit.'  " 

Let  us  try,  then,  to  follow  him  as  he  seeks  to  follow 
himself  during  those  dark  years :  "  Once  I,  like 
Mazeppa,  lashed  to  the  wild  horses  of  my  hist,  and 
bound  hand  and  foot,  incapable  of  resistance,  was 
galloping  on  with  hell's  wolves  behind  me,  howling 
for  my  body  and  my  soul  as  their  just  and  lawful 
prey." 

But  deeper  yet  in  apprehension  of  the  eternal, 
this  :  "  When  I  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
under  conviction  of  sin,  I  had  a  clear  and  sharp  sense 
of  the  justice  of  God.  Sin,  whatever  it  might  be  to 
other  people,  became  to  me  an  intolerable  burden. 
It  was  not  so  much  that  I  feared  hell  as  tliat  I  feared 
sin;  and  all  the  while  I  had  upon  my  mind  a  deep 
concern  for  the  honour  of  God's  name,  and  the 
integrity  of  His  moral  government.  I  felt  that  it 
would  not  satisfy  my  conscience  if  I  could  be  forgiven 
unjustly."     No  shallow  theology  here. 

He  came  to  close  grips,  too,  with  the  power  of  evil. 
"  Ah  !  I  recollect  a  dark  hour  with  myself,"  he  says, 
"  when  I,  who  do  not  remember  to  have  even  heard 
a  blasphemy  in  my  youth,  much  less  to  have  uttered 
one,  found  rushing  through  my  mind  an  almost 
infinite  number  of  curses  and  blasphemies  against  the 


THE   SEARCH   FOR   GOD  25 

Most  High  God.  I  specially  recall  a  narrow  and 
crooked  lane  in  a  country  town,  along  which  I  was 
walking  one  day,  while  I  was  seeking  the  Saviour. 
On  a  sudden,  it  seemed  as  if  the  floodgates  of  hell  had 
been  opened  :  my  head  became  a  very  pandemonium, 
ten  thousand  evil  spirits  seemed  to  be  holding  carnival 
within  my  brain,  and  I  held  my  mouth  lest  I  should 
give  utterance  to  the  words  of  blasphemy  that  were 
poured  into  my  ears.  Things  I  had  never  heard  or 
thought  of  before  came  rushing  impetuously  into  my 
mind,  and  I  could  scarcely  withstand  their  influence. 
It  was  the  devil  throwing  me  down  and  tearing  me. 
These  things  sorely  beset  me ;  for  half  an  hour  together 
the  most  fearful  imprecations  would  dash  through  my 
brain.  Oh,  how  I  groaned  and  cried  before  God  ! 
That  temptation  passed  away;  but  ere  many  days 
it  was  renewed  again,  and  when  I  was  in  prayer,  or 
when  I  was  reading  the  Bible  these  blasphemous 
thoughts  would  pour  in  upon  me  more  than  at  any 
other  time." 

There  came  a  time  when  he  even  persuaded  himself 
that  he  was  an  atheist.  It  was,  of  course,  a  passing 
phase,  but  it  was  real  while  it  lasted.  In  one  of  his 
finest  early  passages,  when  he  was  preaching  in 
London,  he  describes  his  brief  apostasy.  In  passing 
we  may  take  this  extract  as  a  sample  of  the  rush  of 
his  youthful  oratory,  somewhat  flamboyant,  it  is  true, 
but  absolutely  compelling.  No  wonder  he  gained  the 
ear  of  the  people. 

"  I  have  never  been  thoroughly  an  unbehever  but 
once,  and  that  was  not  before  I  knew  the  need  of  a 
Saviour,  but  after  it.  It  was  just  when  I  wanted 
Christ  and  panted  after  Him,  that,  on  a  sudden,  the 
thought  crossed  my  mind— which  I  abhorred,  but  could 
not  conquer— that  there  was  no  God,  no  Christ,  no 


26  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

heaven,  no  hell ;  that  all  my  prayers  were  but  a  farce, 
and  that  I  might  as  well  have  whistled  to  the  winds 
or  spoken  to  the  howling  waves.  Ah  !  I  remember 
how  my  ship  drifted  through  the  sea  of  fire,  loosened 
from  the  anchor  of  my  faith  which  I  had  received 
from  my  fathers.  I  no  longer  moored  myself  hard 
by  the  coasts  of  Revelation ;  I  said  to  reason,  '  Be 
thou  my  captain  ' ;  I  said  to  my  own  brain,  '  Be  thou 
my  rudder ' ;  and  I  started  on  my  mad  voyage. 
Thank  God  it  is  all  over  now;  but  I  will  tell  you  its 
history.  It  was  one  hurried  sailing  over  the  tem- 
pestuous ocean  of  free  thought.  I  went  on,  and  as  I 
went,  the  skies  began  to  darken;  but  to  make  up  for 
the  deficiency,  the  waters  were  gleaming  with  corusca- 
tions of  brilliancy.  I  saw  sparks  flying  upwards  that 
pleased  me,  and  I  felt,  '  If  this  be  free  thought,  it 
is  a  happy  thing.'  My  thoughts  seemed  gems,  and 
I  scattered  stars  with  both  my  hands;  but  anon, 
instead  of  these  coruscations  of  glory,  I  saw  grim 
fiends,  fierce  and  horrible,  start  up  from  the  waters; 
and  as  they  dashed  on,  they  gnashed  their  teeth, 
and  grinned  upon  me;  they  seized  the  prow  of  my 
ship,  and  dragged  me  on,  while  I,  in  part,  gloried  in 
the  rapidity  of  my  motion,  but  yet  shuddered  at  the 
terrific  rate  with  which  I  passed  the  old  landmarks 
of  my  faith.  I  went  to  the  very  verge  of  the  dreary 
realms  of  unbelief.  I  went  to  the  very  bottom  of  the 
sea  of  infidelity.  As  I  hurried  forward  at  an  awful 
speed,  I  began  to  doubt  if  there  was  a  world.  I 
doubted  everything,  until  at  last  the  devil  defeated 
himself  by  making  me  doubt  my  own  existence.  I 
thought  I  was  an  idea  floating  in  the  nothingness  of 
vacuity;  then,  startled  with  the  thought,  and  feeling 
that  I  was  substantial  flesh  and  blood  after  all,  I  saw 
that  God  was,  and  Christ  was,  and  Heaven  was,  and 


THE   SEARCH  FOR  GOD  27 

Hell  was,  and  that  all  these  things  were  absolute 
truths.  The  very  extravagance  of  the  doubt  proved 
its  absurdity,  and  then  came  a  Voice  which  said, 
'  And  can  this  doubt  be  true  ?  '  Then  I  awoke  from 
the  death-dreams,  which,  God  knows,  might  have 
damned  my  soul  and  ruined  my  body  if  I  had  not 
awoke.  When  I  arose  faith  took  the  helm;  from 
that  moment  I  doubted  not.  Faith  steered  me  back ; 
faith  cried  '  Away  !  Away  !  '  I  cast  my  anchor  on 
Calvary,  I  lifted  my  eye  to  God,  and  here  I  am  alive, 
and  out  of  hell.  Therefore  I  speak  what  I  do  know. 
I  have  sailed  the  perilous  voyage  :  I  have  come  safe 
to  land.  Ask  me  to  be  an  infidel !  No.  I  have  tried 
it ;  it  was  sweet  at  first,  but  bitter  afterwards.  Now, 
lashed  to  God's  Gospel  more  firmly  than  ever,  standing 
as  on  a  rock  of  adamant,  I  defy  the  arguments  of  hell 
to  move  me,  for  '  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and 
I  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which 
I  have  committed  unto  Him.'  " 

But  not  at  once  did  he  arrive  at  such  assurance. 
His  intellect  seems  first  to  have  come  to  poise,  for  a 
month  or  two  before  the  memorable  day  when  he 
found  God  in  Christ  as  a  living  experience,  he  wrote 
an  essay  entitled  Antichrist  and  her  Brood  ;  or  Popery 
Unmasked^  the  manuscript  of  which  has  been  carefully 
bound  and  preserved.  It  has  two  hundred  and  ninety- 
five  pages,  and  is  a  distinct  achievement  for  a  lad  of 
fifteen  years.  It  was  a  kind  of  holiday  amusement, 
and  although  it  did  not  secure  the  prize  in  the  com- 
petition for  which  it  was  entered,  two  years  afterwards 
a  sum  of  money  reached  him,  in  recognition  of  his  effort, 
from  Mr.  Arthur  Morley  of  Nottingham,  who  had 
initiated  the  contest. 

By  that  time  he  was  an  avowed  Christian,  and  it 
is  more  than  interesting   to   see   how  he  used   the 


28  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

unexpected  gift  that  came  to  him.  He  says  in  a  letter 
to  his  father  from  Cambridge  on  December  31,  1851  : 
"  When  I  wrote  my  essay  on  my  knees  in  the  Uttle 
room  upstairs,  I  solemnly  vowed  to  give  two  tithes 
of  anything  I  might  gain  by  it  to  the  Lord's  cause." 
Then  he  mentions  that  as  to  the  remainder,  he  wants 
to  send  it  "  as  a  little  present  to  you  and  dear  Mother." 
"  I  know  a  lad  in  Christ,"  he  said  long  subsequently, 
"  who  adopted  the  principle  of  giving  a  tenth  to  God. 
When  he  won  a  money  prize  for  an  essay  on  a  religious 
subject,  he  felt  that  he  could  not  give  less  than  one- 
fifth  of  it.  He  had  never  after  that  been  able  to 
deny  himself  the  pleasure  of  having  a  fifth  to  give." 

But  the  lad  was  not  in  Christ  yet,  although  it  is 
significant  that  in  his  essay  he  quotes  on  the  thirty- 
eighth  page  the  very  text  that  wrought  his  deliver- 
ance— "  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends 
of  the  earth  " — so  little  does  the  letter  of  Scripture 
avail  without  the  Spirit  of  God. 

The  search  for  God  now  became  intense.  "  Our 
own  experience,"  he  says,  "  recalls  to  us  the  period 
when  we  panted  for  the  Lord,  even  for  Him,  our  only 
want.  Vain  to  us  were  the  mere  ordinances — vain 
as  bottles  scorched  by  the  simoom,  and  drained  of 
their  waters.  Vain  were  ceremonies — vain  as  empty 
wells  to  the  thirsty  Arab.  Vain  were  the  delights  of 
the  flesh — bitter  as  the  waters  of  Marah,  which  even 
the  parched  lips  of  Israel  refused  to  drink.  Vain 
were  the  directions  of  the  legal  preacher — useless  as 
the  howling  of  the  wind  to  the  benighted  wanderer. 
Vain,  worse  than  vain,  were  our  refuges  of  lies,  which 
fell  about  our  ears  like  Dagon's  temple  on  the  heads 
of  the  worshippers.  One  only  hope  we  had,  one  refuge 
for  our  misery.  Save  where  the  Ark  floated,  North, 
Southj   East  and  West,   was  one  broad  expanse  of 


THE   SEARCH  FOR  GOD  29 

troubled  waters.  Save  where  that  star  burned,  the 
sky  was  one  field  of  unmitigated  darkness.  Jesus. 
Jesus.  Jesus  !  He  alone,  He  without  another,  had 
become  the  solitary  hiding-place  against  the  storm. 

"  I  cried  to  God  with  groanings— I  say  it  without 
exaggeration — groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered  !  and 
oh,  how  I  sought,  in  my  poor  dark  way,  to  overcome 
first  one  sin  and  then  another,  and  so  to  do  better, 
in  God's  strength,  against  the  enemies  that  assailed 
me,  and  not,  thank  God,  altogether  without  success, 
though  still  the  battle  had  been  lost  unless  He  had 
come  who  is  the  Overcomer  of  Sin,  and  the  Deliverer 
of  His  people,  and  had  put  the  hosts  to  flight." 

Then  came  the  memorable  6th  day  of  January 
1850.  He  rose  before  the  sun,  to  pray  and  to  read 
one  of  his  bedside  books.  But  he  found  no  rest. 
As  he  says  himself,  God  was  ploughing  his  soul,  ten 
black  horses  in  His  team — the  ten  commandments — 
and  cross-ploughing  it  with  the  message  of  the  Gospel, 
for  when  he  heard  it,  no  comfort  came  to  his  soul. 
Already  he  had  been  the  round  of  the  chapels,  but  in 
vain,  and  "  had  it  not  been  for  the  goodness  of  God 
in  sending  a  snowstorm  one  Sunday  morning,"  he 
might  have  still  wandered  in  darkness  and  despair. 
The  storm  prevented  him  reaching  the  place  of 
worship  whither  he  was  bound,  and  instead  he  turned 
into  the  Primitive  Methodist  Chapel,  Artillery  Street, 
Colchester. 

It  was  not  the  place  of  his  choice,  but  it  was  the 
place  that  God  had  chosen;  not  the  morning  of  his 
hope,  but  the  morning  of  God's  deliverance;  not 
the  preacher  appointed  for  the  day,  who  was  probably 
snowed  up,  but  the  messenger  entrusted  with  the 
key  that  led  into  the  light  the  lad  who  for  five  weary 
years  had  been  groping  in  the  shadows. 


30  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

There  were  a  dozen  or  fifteen  persons  in  the  chapel — 
no  more,  and  the  preacher  was  an  unlettered  man. 
The  minister  is  unknown,  though  no  doubt  he  knows 
now  how  great  a  deed  he  did  that  day. 

The  text  was  "  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved,  all 
the  ends  of  the  earth,"  but  the  preacher  did  not 
pronounce  the  words  rightly.  Yet  there  was  a  gleam 
of  hope  in  them  to  the  seeker  in  the  side  pew.  As 
Spurgeon  recalled  it,  and  he  had  a  remarkable  verbal 
memory,  the  sermon  ran  on  this  fashion — 

"  My  dear  friends,  this  is  a  simple  text  indeed. 
It  says.  Look.  Now  lookin'  don't  take  a  deal  of 
pains.  It  ain't  liftin'  your  foot  or  your  finger.  It 
is  just  '  Look.'  Well,  a  man  needn't  go  to  College 
to  learn  to  look.  You  may  be  the  biggest  fool  and 
yet  you  can  look.  A  man  needn't  be  worth  a  thousand 
a  year  to  be  able  to  look.  Any  one  can  look  :  even 
a  child  can  look.  But  then  the  text  says  '  Look  unto 
Me.'  Ay  !  "  said  he  in  broad  Essex,  "  many  on  ye 
are  lookin'  to  yourselves,  but  it's  no  use  lookin'  there. 
You'll  never  find  any  comfort  in  yourselves.  Some 
look  to  God  the  Father.  No,  look  to  Him  by-and-by. 
Jesus  Christ  says,  '  Look  unto  Me.^  Some  on  ye  say, 
'  We  must  wait  for  the  Spirit's  workin'.'  You  have 
no  business  with  that  just  now.  Look  to  Christ. 
The  text  says,  '  Look  unto  Me.'  " 

Whether  he  had  reached  the  end  of  his  tether, 
having  spun  out  about  ten  minutes,  or  whether  he 
was  lifted  out  of  himself,  and  spoke  words  given  to 
him  at  that  moment,  he  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  stranger, 
easily  distinguished  amid  the  little  company,  and 
said,  "  Young  man,  you  look  very  miserable."  It 
was  a  blow  struck  right  home,  and  although  the 
young  man  had  never  had  such  a  personal  word  from 
the  pulpit  before,  he  was  too  much  in  earnest  to  resent 


THE   SEARCH   FOR   GOD  31 

it.  He  continued,  "  You  always  will  be  miserable — 
miserable  in  life  and  miserable  in  death  if  you  don't 
obey  my  text;  but  if  you  obey  now,  this  moment 
you  will  be  saved."  Then  lifting  up  his  hands,  he 
shouted,  as  only  a  Primitive  Methodist  of  the  epoch 
could,  "  Young  man,  look  to  Jesus  Christ !  Look  ! 
Look  !  Look  !  You  have  nothin'  to  do  but  to  look 
and  live." 

What  more  he  said  young  Spurgeon  never  knew, 
for  in  a  moment  he  saw  the  way  of  Salvation,  and 
was  possessed  by  the  thought  of  the  freeness  and 
simplicity  of  it.  "I  had  been  waiting  to  do  fifty 
things,"  he  said;  "but  when  I  heard  the  word 
Look,  I  could  have  almost  looked  my  eyes  away.  I 
could  have  risen  that  instant,  and  sung  with  the 
most  enthusiastic  of  them  of  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ,  and  the  simple  faith  that  looks  alone  to  Him. 

"  I  thought  I  could  dance  all  the  way  home.  I 
could  understand  what  John  Bunyan  meant  when  he 
declared  he  wanted  to  tell  the  crows  on  the  ploughed 
land  all  about  his  conversion.  He  was  too  full  to 
hold.  He  must  tell  somebody."  In  the  hght  of  the 
passion  that  constrained  him  to  witness  for  Christ 
in  the  coming  years,  it  is  almost  surprising  that  then 
and  there  he  did  not  break  out  in  testimony  to  the 
mighty  change  that  had  been  wrought  in  him.  There 
was  no  doubt  about  it.  "  As  Richard  Knill  said, 
'  At  such  a  time  of  the  day,  clang  went  every  harp  in 
heaven,  for  Richard  Knill  was  born  again  ' ;  it  was 
even  so  with  me."  He  felt  that  if  beside  the  door 
of  the  place  as  he  went  out  there  had  been  a  pile  of 
blazing  faggots,  he  could  have  stood  upon  them 
without  chains,  glad  to  give  his  flesh  and  blood  and 
bones  to  be  ashes,  if  only  that  might  have  testified 
his  love  to  Jesus. 


32  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  Between  half-past  ten,  when  I  entered  that  chapel, 
and  half-past  twelve,  when  I  returned  home,  what  a 
change  had  taken  place  in  me  !  "  * 

He  thought  at  first  that  he  had  never  heard  the 
Gospel  before,  that  the  preachers  he  had  listened  to 
had  not  preached  it,  but  he  came  to  see  the  difference 
between  the  effectual  calling  of  God  and  the  general 
proclamation  of  the  Gospel.  As  to  Ezekiel,  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  to  him  expressly  ^  that  morning, 
and  he  was  nevermore  separated  from  his  Saviour. 

"  I  looked  to  Him,  He  looked  on  me, 
And  we  were  one  for  ever." 

A  tablet  was  erected  in  the  chapel  in  1897  over  the 
spot  where  Spurgeon  sat,  and  the  pulpit  from  which 
the  sermon  was  preached  was  subsequently  removed 
to  the  Stockwell  Orphanage. 

It  is  interesting  that  in  the  East  window  of  the 
parish  church  at  Kelvedon,  the  village  of  his  birth, 
there  is,  under  the  figure  of  the  Saviour  on  the  Cross, 
the  text,  "Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved." 


CHAPTER   III 

THE   APPRENTICE   PREACHER 

1844-1853 

Spurgeon  was  destined  to  be  a  preacher,  and  he 
began  early.  Like  many  other  boys,  he  held  mimic 
services  with  his  brother  and  sisters  in  the  Colchester 
home.  He  was  often  found  on  the  hay -rick  or  in  the 
manger  praying  or  reading  aloud.  One  of  the  family 
remembered  how  frequently  he  would  quote  the 
verse — 

"  Now  will  I  tell  to  sinners  round. 
What  a  dear  Saviour  I  have  found." 

"  I'll  point  " — and  here  he  would  raise  his  index 
finger  and  point  upwards.  (Evidently  a  favourite 
gesture,  for  one  of  his  early  photographs  has  the  finger 
pointing  to  the  skies.)  Then  he  would  finish  the 
stanza — 

"  I'll  point  to  Thy  redeeming  blood 
And  say,  '  Behold  the  way  to  God.'  " 

But  earlier  still,  when  he  was  but  six  years  of  age, 
he  gave  evidence  of  his  vocation.  It  is  his  Aunt 
Ann  that  tells  the  story.  During  his  first  visit  to 
Stambourne  he  heard  his  grandfather  lamenting, 
time  and  again,  over  the  inconsistent  life  of  one  of 
his  flock,  and  one  day  he  suddenly  declared  his  inten- 
tion to  kill  old  Roads,  the  man  in  question;  and  in 
spite  of  the  warning  his  grandfather  gave  him  as  to 

D  33 


34  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

the  awful  fate  of  murderers,  he  persisted  in  his  resolve. 
"I'll  not  do  anything  bad,"  he  declared,  "but  I'll 
kill  him."  Shortly  afterwards  he  astonished  them  by 
asserting  that  he  had  done  the  deed.  In  answer  to 
all  questions  he  declared  that  he  had  done  no  wrong, 
but  that  he  had  been  about  the  Lord's  work,  that  he 
had  killed  old  Roads,  who  would  never  trouble  his 
grandfather  any  more. 

The  mystery  was  solved  by  the  appearance  of  old 
Roads  himself,  who  shortly  afterwards  called  at  the 
Manse,  and  told  how  he  had  been  sitting  in  the  public- 
house,  with  his  paper  and  mug  of  beer,  when  the  boy 
entered,  and  pointing  to  him  said,  "  What  doest  thou 
here,  Elijah,  sitting  with  the  ungodly,  and  you  a 
member  of  the  Church,  and  breaking  your  pastor's 
heart  ?  I'm  ashamed  of  you.  I  wouldn't  break  my 
pastor's  heart,  I'm  sure."  The  sermon  in  its  brevity 
and  simplicity  and  directness  might  also  be  put 
alongside  that  other  which,  ten  years  afterwards,  led 
the  young  preacher  himself  to  surrender  his  life  to 
Christ,  as  this  one  led  old  Roads.  During  the  four 
years  that  followed,  the  old  man  lived  an  exemplary 
life;  he  could  not  read,  but  he  knew  that  the  words 
of  life  were  in  the  Bible,  and  with  pathetic  love  for 
the  Book,  he  counted  the  very  leaves  of  it. 

The  greatest  impulse  the  boy  Spurgeon  received 
in  the  direction  of  the  pulpit  came  from  Richard  Knill, 
who  visited  his  grandfather's  house  on  missionary 
deputation  when  the  boy,  ten  years  of  age,  was  also 
a  guest. 

This  Richard  Knill  was  a  man  all  aglow  for  Christ. 
The  story  of  his  own  decision  to  serve  the  Lord  is 
worth  recalling.  When  he  told  his  mother  of  his 
desire  to  go  to  India,  she  flamed  forth  on  him  and 
declared  that  she  would  never  consent,  that  he  should 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     35 

have  waited  until  she  and  his  father  were  beneath  the 
clods  of  the  valley  before  thinking  of  such  a  thing. 
But  she  presently  came  to  another  mind,  and  not  only 
consented,  but  urged  him  to  go,  glad  that  she  had 
an  Isaac  to  put  on  the  altar.  On  the  day  of  his 
departure  she  took  off  her  wedding-ring  and  said, 
"  This  is  the  dearest  thing  I  possess.  It  was  given 
to  me  by  your  dear  father,  as  a  pledge  of  his  love,  on 
our  wedding-day.  I  have  worn  it  more  than  forty 
years,  and  now,  in  the  expectation  that  I  shall  never 
see  you  again  in  this  world,  I  give  it  to  you.  Your 
father  gave  it  to  me  as  a  pledge  of  his  love,  and  in 
his  presence  I  give  it  to  you  as  a  token  of  our  united 
love  to  you."  ^  He  was  invalided  home,  and  after- 
wards spent  some  years  in  St.  Petersburg,  subse- 
quently settling  in  England.  His  portrait  is  in  the 
vestry  of  Queen  Street  Congregational  Chapel,  Chester, 
of  which  he  was  the  minister,  and  beneath  it  he  has 
written  his  message  for  all  who  come  after  him. 
"  Brethren,  the  heathen  are  perishing.  Shall  we  let 
them  perish?  God  forbid."  His  mother's  ring 
pledged  him  to  Christ  with  undying  ardour  all  his  life. 
He  died  on  January  2,  1857,  and  up  to  that  time  it 
was  stated  that  no  man  ever  had  so  many  of  his  tracts 
circulated  as  he  had;  in  England  and  America  some 
fourteen  millions  of  them  had  been  scattered,  and 
they  were  also  translated  into  ten  other  languages. 

This  was  the  man  who,  with  an  instinct  that  had 
its  origin  in  his  own  walk  with  God,  attached  himself 
to  the  boy  at  Stambourne,  asked  him  where  he  slept, 
so  that  he  might  waken  him  in  the  morning,  called 
him  at  six  o'clock  the  next  day,  and  took  him  out  to 
one  of  the  yew-tree  arbours  in  his  grandfather's 
garden.  There  he  told  him  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and 
with    arm    round    the    boy's    neck    prayed    for    him. 


36  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

During  the  three  days  of  his  stay  he  sought  every 
opportunity  of  winning  his  Hfe  for  Christ,  and  then 
at  morning  prayer,  in  the  presence  of  the  wliole 
family,  he  took  the  boy  on  his  knee  and  spoke  as  an 
oracle  of  God.  "  This  child  will  one  day  preach  the 
Gospel,"  he  said,  "  and  he  will  preach  it  to  great 
multitudes.  I  am  persuaded  that  he  will  preach  in 
the  chapel  of  Rowland  Hill."  It  was  a  singular  utter- 
ance, difficult  to  explain,  and  it  doubtless  helped  in 
part  to  bring  about  its  own  fulfilment.  Having 
spoken,  he  gave  the  boy  sixpence — that  would  help 
him  to  remember  it — and  made  him  promise  to  learn 
the  hymn,  and  to  see  that  it  was  sung  when  he 
preached  in  Rowland  Hill's  Chapel — 

"  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way 
His  wonders  to  perform." 

So  when  Spurgeon  preached  at  Surrey  Chapel,  London, 
and  also  when  he  ministered  at  Wotton-under-Edge, 
where  Rowland  Hill  had  his  summer  residence,  the 
hymn  was  sung,  and  the  preacher,  filled  with  emotion, 
told  the  story.  *'  To  me  it  was  a  very  wonderful 
thing,  and  I  no  more  understood  at  that  time  how  it 
came  to  pass  than  I  understand  to-day  why  the  Lord 
should  be  so  gracious  to  me,"  is  his  mature  comment 
on  the  sequence  of  incidents. 

In  the  autumn  of  1849  he  went  as  an  articled  pupil 
to  the  school  of  Mr.  John  Swindell,  at  Newmarket, 
Cambridgeshire.  During  the  Christmas  holidays  the 
great  spiritual  crisis  of  his  life  came.  He  had  been 
prepared  for  it,  doubtless,  by  frequent  conversations 
with  Mary  King,  the  cook  of  the  Newmarket  house- 
hold, to  whom  he  says  that  he  was  also  indebted 
for  much  of  his  theology.  "  Many  a  time  we  have 
gone  over  the  Covenant  of  Grace  together,  and  talked 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     37 

of  the  personal  election  of  the  saints,  their  union 
with  Christ,  their  final  perseverance,  and  what  vital 
godliness  meant ;  and  I  do  believe  that  I  learnt  more 
from  her  than  I  should  have  learned  from  any  six 
doctors  of  divinity  of  the  sort  we  have  nowadays." 

The  ministry  they  attended  was  somewhat  barren; 
once  when  he  asked  the  old  housekeeper  why  she 
went,  she  made  the  quaint  reply  that  a  hen  scratching 
on  a  heap  of  rubbish  does  not  get  any  corn,  bvit  it 
shows  that  it  is  looking  for  it,  is  using  the  means  to 
get  it,  and  is  warmed  by  the  exercise.  Mr.  Spurgeon 
had  a  great  regard  for  old  Mary,  and  in  her  later 
years  made  her  an  allowance  in  memory  of  old  times. 

After  his  enlightenment  he  returned  to  Newmarket 
to  take  up  his  duties  and  studies.  He  called  upon 
the  minister  of  the  church,  but  was  not  received, 
called  four  successive  days,  but  was  unable  to  gain 
an  interview;  his  temper  may  be  gauged  by  the 
fact  that  he  then  wrote  to  him  saying  that  he  would 
go  down  to  the  Church  Meeting  and  propose  himself 
for  membership.  This  seems  to  have  brought  things 
to  a  climax,  for  he  was  admitted  to  fellowship  on 
April  4,  1850. 

From  the  earliest  days  of  his  Christian  life,  after 
his  conversion,  he  dwelt  in  the  spiritual  tropics. 
There  were  no  half  shades  with  him,  no  mists  to  make 
the  grey  light  of  dawn  or  gloaming,  it  was  cither 
day  or  night :  a  man  was  either  for  God  or  against 
Him.  As  for  himself,  he  was  on  God's  side  with 
all  the  power  of  his  being  all  the  time. 

On  the  first  day  of  February  1850  (remember  that 
the  snowy  Sunday  at  Colchester  was  on  January  6) 
he  dedicated  himself  anew  to  God.  "  O  Great  and 
Unsearchable  God,  who  knowest  my  heart  and  triest 
my  ways,  with  humble  dependence  upon  the  support 


38  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  I  yield  myself  to  Thee ;  as  Thy 
own  reasonable  sacrifice,  I  return  to  Thee  Thine  own. 
I  would  be  for  ever  unreservedly,  perpetually  Thine; 
whilst  I  am  on  earth  I  would  serve  Thee,  and  may  I 
enjoy  Thee  and  praise  Thee  for  ever.     Amen." 

In  a  diary  which  he  gave  to  his  wife  soon  after 
their  marriage,  opened  only  after  his  death,  there 
are  entries  from  April  6  to  June  20  of  this  year.  On 
April  22  he  writes,  "  Went  this  evening  to  the  prayer 
meeting;  engaged  in  prayer.  Why  should  I  fear 
to  speak  of  my  only  Friend?  I  shall  not  be  timid 
another  time ;  "  and  on  May  5  there  is  the  clause, 
"  Five  of  us  engaged  in  prayer."  He  was  evidently 
feeling  his  feet. 

He  had  not  yet  sat  down  at  the  Lord's  Table, 
for  though  he  had  never  even  heard  of  Baptists  until 
he  was  fourteen,  he  had  been  convinced,  partly  by 
the  Church  of  England  catechism  and  partly  by 
study  of  the  New  Testament,  that  believers  in  Christ 
should  be  baptised  in  His  name  after  they  believed, 
and  logically  enough  he  desired  baptism  before  his 
first  communion.  So  he  cast  about  for  a  Baptist 
minister,  and  failed  to  find  one  nearer  than  Isleham, 
where  Mr.  W.  W.  Cantlow,  formerly  a  missionary  in 
Jamaica,  ministered.  Like  an  obedient  son  he  wrote 
to  his  parents  asking  their  consent,  which  was  readily 
given,  not  without  a  warning  from  his  father  that 
he  must  not  trust  in  his  baptism,  and  a  playful 
reminder  from  his  mother  that  though  she  had  often 
prayed  that  her  son  might  be  a  Christian,  she  had 
never  asked  that  he  should  be  a  Baptist.  Just  as 
playfully  he  retorted  that  the  Lord  had  dealt  with 
her  in  His  usual  bounty,  and  had  given  her  exceeding 
abundantly  above  what  she  had  asked. 

It  was   on   his   mother's   birthday,   May   3,    1850, 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     39 

that  he  "  put  on  Christ,"  when  he  was  within  a  few 
weeks  of  being  sixteen  years  of  age.  Up  early  in 
the  morning,  he  had  two  hours  for  prayer  and  dedica- 
tion, then  a  walk  of  eight  miles  to  Isleham  Ferry, 
on  the  river  Lark,  a  beautiful  stream,  dividing  Suffolk 
from  Cambridgeshire,  which  is  dear  to  local  anglers. 
It  was  Friday,  and  there  was  not  such  a  concourse 
of  people  as  assembled  when  there  was  a  baptism  on 
a  Sunday.  Still,  quite  a  respectable  number  were 
present.  Never  having  seen  a  baptism,  the  young 
confessor  was  somewhat  nervous.  Two  women  were 
also  to  be  baptised — ^Diana  Wilkinson  and  Eunice 
Fuller,  who  held  it  a  great  honour  ever  afterwards 
that  they  were  baptised  the  same  day  as  Spurgeon. 
His  own  description  of  the  scene  is  worth  transcribing — 

"  The  wind  blew  down  the  river  with  a  cutting 
blast  as  my  turn  came  to  wade  into  the  flood;  but 
after  I  had  walked  a  few  steps,  and  noted  the  people 
on  the  ferry-boat,  and  in  boats,  and  on  either  shore, 
I  felt  as  if  heaven  and  earth  and  hell  might  all  gaze 
upon  me,  for  I  was  not  ashamed,  then  and  there,  to 
own  myself  a  follower  of  the  Lamb.  My  timidity 
was  washed  away;  it  floated  down  the  river  into 
the  sea,  and  must  have  been  devoured  by  the  fishes, 
for  I  have  never  felt  anything  of  the  kind  since. 
Baptism  also  loosed  my  tongue,  and  from  that  day 
it  has  never  been  quiet." 

The  evening  was  spent  in  happy  converse  in  the 
Isleham  vestry.  There  was  a  prayer  meeting,  at 
which  the  newly-baptised  disciple  prayed ;  "  and 
people  wondered  and  wept  for  joy  as  they  listened 
to  the  lad."  He  was  back  at  Newmarket  in  the 
morning,  and  on  the  following  Sunday  he  sat  down 
at  the  Lord's  Table  and  also  became  a  Sunday  School 
teacher. 


40  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  I  did  not  fulfil  the  outward  ordinance  to  join  a 
party,  and  to  become  a  Baptist,  but  to  be  a  Christian 
after  the  apostolic  fashion;  for  they,  when  they 
believed,  were  baptised.  It  is  now  questioned  whether 
John  Bunyan  was  baptised;  but  the  same  question 
can  never  be  raised  concerning  me.  I,  who  scarcely 
belong  to  any  sect,  am  nevertheless  by  no  means 
willing  to  have  it  doubted  in  time  to  come  whether 
or  no  I  followed  the  conviction  of  my  heart."  So 
he  wrote  years  after. 

His  earliest  service  for  the  Church  was  the  dis- 
tribution of  tracts :  on  Saturday  afternoons  he 
visited  seventy  people,  not  only  handing  in  the 
tracts  to  the  houses,  but  "  endeavouring  to  draw 
their  attention  to  spiritual  realities."  The  Saturday 
after  his  baptism  saw  him  at  this  work,  which  he 
had  taken  up  some  weeks  earlier. 

On  Sunday  afternoon  he  was  in  the  Sunday  School. 
Once  before  he  had  attempted  to  take  a  class,  during 
a  visit  to  Stambourne,  but  was  not  much  encouraged. 
"  I  felt  myself  a  failure,  and  I  fancied  that  some 
around  me  were  not  brilliant  successes."  But  now 
that  he  was  rejoicing  in  Christ,  and  spoke  of  things  he 
had  himself  tasted,  he  was  able  to  hold  the  atten- 
tion of  his  boj^s.  When  they  began  to  fidget,  he  took 
it  as  a  signal  that  he  must  give  them  an  illustration. 
One  boy  at  times  said,  "  This  is  very  dull,  teacher. 
Can't  you  pitch  us  a  yarn  ?  "  and  the  apprentice 
preacher  learnt  the  lesson  which  he  never  afterwards 
forgot,  that  truth  in  a  tale  is  often  remembered 
when  the  sermon  is  forgotten. 

But  he  was  in  deadly  earnest  all  the  time.  On 
May  8  he,  who  was  afterwards  supposed  to  be  the 
harlequin  of  the  pulpit,  wrote  in  his  diary,  "  Teachers' 
business  meeting.     Too  much  joking  and  levity  to 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     41 

agree  with  my  notions  of  what  a  Sunday  School 
teacher  should  be  "  1 

At  a  subsequent  teachers'  meeting  it  was  suggested 
that  the  teachers  should  alternate  with  the  super- 
intendent in  giving  the  closing  address  of  the  school. 
When  Spurgeon's  turn  came  he  was  so  successful 
that  the  superintendent  asked  him  to  speak  every 
Sunday,  but  naturally  he  demurred.  The  matter 
was  compromised  by  Spurgeon  taking  the  super- 
intendent's days,  and  on  these  afternoons  the  older 
people  began  to  come  too,  so  that  the  school  almost 
became  like  a  Church  service. 

His  witness  for  Christ  broke  the  bounds  of  the 
school.  In  season  and  out  of  season  he  was  ready 
to  bear  testimony.  Newmarket,  with  its  racing 
atmosphere,  was  not  a  very  congenial  place  for 
Christian  service,  but  at  any  rate  he  could  refrain 
from  going  on  to  the  racecourse.  Not  content  with 
this,  he  was  ready  to  rebuke  others  when  he  thought 
they  needed  rebuke.  Seeing  a  professing  Christian 
about  to  enter  a  dancing  booth  at  the  village  fair, 
he  went  up  to  him  and,  perhaps  remembering  his 
earnest  preaching  exploit  at  Stambourne,  said,  "  What 
doest  thou  there,  Elijah?  Art  thou  going  in  there?  " 
But  this  time  the  appeal  was  fruitless. 

From  his  diary  it  is  evident  that  Paul  was  his  hero. 
On  May  9  of  this  early  year  he  writes,  "  Make  me  to 
be  an  eminent  servant  of  Thine,  and  to  be  blessed 
with  power  to  serve  Thee  like  Thy  great  servant 
Paul."  On  June  7,  "Could  I  be  like  Paul,  how 
honoured  I  should  be  I  " 

People  had  not  then  begun  to  talk  about  the 
sub-conscious  mind,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  great 
thoughts  were  even  then  stirring  in  his  soul.  Already 
he  had  the  strong  impression  that  he  was  to  be  a 


42  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

preacher,  and  he  has  told  us  that  sometimes  he  even 
dreamt  that  his  sermons  would  be  printed.  But  his 
fondest  dreams  came  nowhere  near  the  future  reality. 

That  ardent  affection  for  the  Lord  Jesus  which 
has  been  deemed  extravagant  in  his  after-life,  was 
already  evident,  and  it  was  as  real  to  him  as  to  Samuel 
Rutherford,  of  whom  he  has  written  :  "  Let  it  be 
known  that  Spurgeon  counted  Rutherford's  Letters 
as  the  nearest  thing  to  inspiration  in  all  human 
literature."  His  own  diary  contains  such  sentences 
as  these :  "  Beloved,  Thine  is  enduring  beauty." 
"  Life  of  my  soul,  forgive  me  when  I  am  so  blind 
as  to  look  on  an  earthly  object,  and  forget  Thy 
divine  beauties."  "  Desire  of  my  heart,  keep  me 
nearer  Thy  bosom." 

Before  we  close  the  diary  two  other  expressions 
may  be  noted — a  confession,  "  Pride  is  yet  my 
darling  sin;"  a  desire,  "Lord,  give  me  much  of 
Berean  nobility." 

His  first  speech  in  public,  outside  the  Sunday 
School,  was  at  a  missionary  meeting  on  Monday, 
September  10,  1849.  It  was  given  in  the  school 
where  he  was  a  pupil.  Professor  J.  D.  Everett,  of 
Queen's  College,  Belfast,  his  fellow-student,  recalls 
both  the  circumstance  and  the  date,  and  says  that 
"  he  spoke  fluently."  In  the  same  place  he  gave 
another  missionary  speech  on  June  14  of  the  following 
year.  Here  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  say  that  in  the 
beginning  of  his  ministry  in  London  he  seriously 
faced  the  question  whether  he  was  not  called  to 
preach  the  Gospel  in  China,  and  that  right  through 
his  life  his  sympathies  were  always  strong  with 
those  who  had  gone  overseas  with  the  message  of 
life. 

In  those  early  days  young  Spurgeon  was  accus- 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     43 

tomed  to  repeat,  to  Mr.  Everett  and  other  intimates, 
long  passages  from  the  open-air  orations  at  Colchester 
Fair  of  Mr.  Davids,  the  Congregational  minister 
there;  he  could  also  repeat  many  passages  from 
Grace  Abounding,  and  he  was  not  only  a  good  sermon 
taster,  but  a  generous  critic  of  pulpit  utterances. 

In  August  1850  he  moved  to  Cambridge,  to  a  school 
established  by  Mr.  Leeding,  who  had  been  usher 
at  the  Colchester  School  when  young  Spurgeon  was 
there,  and  here  he  remained  for  three  formative  years 
as  assistant  without  a  salary,  learning  and  teaching, 
and,  as  we  shall  see,  preaching  too.  With  gratitude 
he  recalled  that  in  this  home  at  9,  Union  Road,  each 
morning  from  eight  o'clock,  for  half  an  hour,  the 
members  of  the  household  returned  to  their  rooms 
for  prayer  and  meditation. 

Towards  the  end  of  his  time  in  Cambridge  it  became 
necessary  for  him  to  earn  some  more  money,  though 
he  never  sought  money  for  its  own  sake.  In  Novem- 
ber 1852  he  wrote  to  his  mother,  "  I  had  rather  be 
poor  in  God's  service  than  rich  in  my  own."  And 
there  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  poor,  for  earlier  in  the 
same  year  he  calculated  that  at  midsummer  he 
might  have  £15  in  hand,  to  provide  himself  with 
books  and  other  necessities. 

So  at  the  end  of  1853  the  following  advertisement 
appeared  in  a  Cambridge  newspaper :  "  No.  60,  Park 
Street,  Cambridge.  Mr.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  begs  to 
inform  his  numerous  friends  that  after  Christmas 
he  intends  taking  six  or  seven  young  gentlemen  as 
day  pupils.  He  will  endeavour  to  the  utmost  to 
impart  a  good  commercial  education.  The  ordinary 
routine  will  include  Arithmetic,  Algebra,  Geometry 
and  Mensuration ;  Grammar  and  Composition ; 
Ancient  and  Modern  History;    Geography,   Natural 


44  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

History,  Astronomy,  Scripture  and  Drawing;  Latin 
and  the  elements  of  Greek  and  French  if  required. 
Terms  £5  per  annum."  Surely  a  very  modest 
announcement.  But  that  school  was  never  started, 
the  beginning  of  his  great  career  prevented  it. 

When  he  first  came  to  Cambridge  he  joined  the 
St.  Andrew's  Street  Baptist  Church,  where  Robert 
Hall,  in  his  day  England's  greatest  preacher,  had  for 
some  time  ministered;  where  Robert  Robinson,  the 
author  of  the  hymn  "  Come,  Thou  Fount  of  every 
blessing,"  had  also  been  pastor.  An  amusing  incident, 
revealing  his  sense  of  the  equality  of  the  saints  and 
of  the  aristocracy  of  grace,  is  best  told  in  his  own 
language — 

"  When  I  joined  the  Baptist  Church  at  Cambridge, 
one  of  the  most  respectable  churches  that  can  be 
found  in  the  world,  one  of  the  most  generous,  one  of 
the  most  intelligent — this  was  a  great  many  years 
ago,  when  I  was  young — nobody  spoke  to  me.  On 
the  Lord's  Day  I  sat  at  the  Communion  table  in  a 
certain  pew.  There  was  one  gentleman  in  it,  and 
when  the  service  was  over,  I  said  to  him,  '  I  hope 
you  are  quite  well,  sir  ?  '  He  said,  '  You  have  the 
advantage  of  me.'  I  answered,  '  I  don't  think  I 
have,  for  you  and  I  are  brothers.'  '  I  don't  quite 
know  what  you  mean,'  said  he.  *  Well,'  I  replied, 
'  when  I  took  the  bread  and  wine  just  now,  in  token 
of  our  being  one  in  Christ,  I  meant  it.  Did  not 
you  ?  '  We  were  by  that  time  in  the  street ;  he  put 
both  his  hands  on  my  shoulders— I  was  about  sixteen 
years  old  then— and  he  said,  '  Oh,  sweet  simplicity  !  ' 
Then  he  added,  '  You  are  quite  right,  my  dear  brother, 
you  are  quite  right ;  come  in  to  tea  with  me.  I  am 
afraid  I  should  not  have  spoken  to  you  if  you  had 
not  first   addressed   me.'     I  went  to  tea  with   him 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     45 

that  evening;  and  when  I  left,  he  asked  me  to  go 
again  the  next  Lord's  Day,  so  I  went,  and  that 
Sabbath  Day  he  said  to  me,  *  You  will  come  here 
every  Sunday  evening,  won't  you  ?  '  So  old  Mr. 
Watts  and  young  Mr.  Spurgeon  became  fast  friends." 

Soon  he  began  in  Cambridge,  as  in  Newmarket, 
to  address  the  Sunday  School,  and  he  read  an  essay 
on  Sunday  School  work  at  the  Teachers'  Institute  of 
the  town,  but  he  had  never  yet  delivered  a  set  discourse 
to  a  congregation  met  for  worship. 

There  was  at  that  time  a  Mr.  James  Vinter  in 
Cambridge,  who  was  President  of  the  Preachers' 
Association,  a  Society  that  still  continues  its  good 
work  for  the  villages.  "  Bishop  Vinter,"  the  name 
by  which  he  was  generally  known,  called  one  Saturday 
morning  on  young  Spurgeon,  just  as  the  school  was 
dismissed,  and  asked  him  "to  go  over  to  Teversham 
the  next  evening,  for  a  young  man  was  to  preach 
there  who  was  not  much  used  to  services,  and  very 
likely  would  be  glad  of  company."  Evidently  he 
knew  his  man.  A  definite  request  to  preach  would 
have  met  with  a  refusal,  but  the  leader  of  the  band 
of  preachers  knew  that  this  young  recruit  had  it  in 
him,  and  only  needed  to  get  started.  The  ruse  was 
perhaps  pardonable,  anyhow  it  was  successful. 

So  Spurgeon,  accompanied  by  another  young  man 
somewhat  older  than  himself,  started  off  in  the 
early  evening,  walked  through  Barnwell,  along  the 
Newmarket  Road,  and  at  length  the  younger  man 
expressed  the  hope  that  his  companion  would  realise 
the  presence  of  God  when  he  preached.  Aghast,  the 
older  man  declared  that  he  had  never  preached, 
could  not  preach,  would  not  preach,  and  unless 
Spurgeon  preached  there  would  be  no  sermon.  Both 
were  perplexed,  but  his  companion  suggested  that  if 


46  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

he  would  give  one  of  his  Sunday  School  addresses  it 
would  do  excellently,  and  they  both  went  forward. 
And  the  Lord  Himself  drew  near  and  went  with 
them,  as  with  the  two  to  Emmaus.  Spurgeon  re- 
proached himself  for  his  hesitancy :  "  Surely,"  he 
thought,  "  I  can  tell  a  few  poor  cottagers  of  the 
sweetness  and  love  of  Jesus,  since  I  feel  them  in  my 
own  soul." 

His  biographer  may  be  pardoned  if  he  expresses 
sympathy  with  the  preacher  of  the  evening,  since  all 
unexpectedly  his  own  first  sermon  in  England  was 
preached  in  the  same  village  of  Teversham  on  Easter 
Sunday  1875,  and  on  one  of  his  latest  visits  to  Cam- 
bridge he  was  reminded  of  it  by  one  who  recalled  the 
text. 

Spurgeon's  text  on  that  notable  evening  was  "  Unto 
you  that  believe  He  is  precious,"  and  under  the  low- 
pitched  roof  of  the  thatched  cottage  he  spoke  the 
praises  of  his  Lord.  When  he  finished,  delighted 
with  the  fact  that  he  had  not  broken  down  (so  low 
was  his  estimate  of  his  own  powers),  he  took  up  the 
hymn-book,  when  an  aged  voice  cried  out,  ''  Bless 
your  dear  heart,  how  old  are  you?  "  Somewhat  on 
his  dignity  the  preacher  said,  "  You  must  wait  until 
the  service  is  over  before  making  any  such  inquiries. 
Let  us  now  sing."  So  they  sang,  and  then  there 
was  a  free  friendly  talk,  during  which  the  question 
was  renewed,  "How  old  are  you?"  and  Spurgeon 
gave  the  quaint  and  almost  prophetic  reply,  "  I  am 
under  sixty  "  (he  died  at  fifty-seven).  "  Yes,  and 
under  sixteen,"  said  the  old  lady;  to  whom  the 
preacher  replied,  "  Never  mind  my  age,  think  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His  preciousness."  Then 
he  promised  to  come  again  if  the  gentleman  in 
Cambridge  thought  him  fit  to  come  ! 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     47 

His  fame  soon  spread  round  the  countryside,  and 
he  was  invited  to  preach  both  on  Sundays  and  week- 
days. He  describes  his  methods  at  this  time.  In 
the  early  morning  he  was  up  praying  and  reading 
the  Bible,  then  school  duties  until  about  five  in  the 
evening  he  set  off,  almost  daily,  to  tell  the  villagers 
round  about  Cambridge  what  he  had  learned  during 
the  day,  and  he  found  that  the  things  he  had  thought 
of  during  the  day  were  wrought  into  the  fibre  of 
his  being  when  he  proclaimed  them  to  others.  He 
frankly  confesses  that  he  said  many  odd  things  and 
made  many  blunders,  but  he  had  friendly  audiences 
and  there  were  no  reporters. 

Toward  the  end  of  October  1851,  he  engaged  to 
supply  the  pulpit  of  the  church  at  Waterbeach,  six 
miles  from  Cambridge,  the  village  where  Rowland 
Hill  is  supposed  to  have  preached  his  first  sermon. 
The  chapel  was  a  primitive  structure  with  a  thatched 
roof.  The  promise  was  but  for  a  few  Sundays,  but 
he  remained  with  the  people  for  more  than  two 
years.  At  first  they  contributed  very  little  towards 
his  expenses,  so  he  continued  his  week-day  work  at 
the  school,  but  at  length  they  gave  him  £45  a  year. 
As  he  had  to  pay  twelve  shillings  a  week  for  the  two 
rooms  he  occupied,  his  income  was  scanty,  and  had 
they  not  shared  their  produce  with  him  he  could  not 
have  continued  with  them.  But  the  Lord  whom 
he  served  supplied  his  needs,  sometimes  through 
unexpected  channels. 

There  was  a  miser  in  the  village,  and  somebody 
said  to  the  pastor,  "  He  has  never  been  known  to 
give  anything  to  anybody,"  to  which  he  replied 
that  he  knew  better,  for  one  Sunday  afternoon  he  had 
given  him  three  half-crowns,  and  he  had  bought  a 
new    hat  with    the  money.      "  Well,"   rejoined    the 


48  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

friend,  "  I  am  quite  sure  he  never  forgave  himself 
such  extravagance,  and  that  he  must  have  wanted 
his  three  half-crowns  back  again."  Instead  of  that, 
the  old  man  came  the  next  Sunday,  and  asked  his 
minister  to  pray  for  him  that  he  might  be  saved 
from  covetousness,  for  the  Lord  had  told  him  to 
give  half  a  sovereign,  and  as  he  had  kept  back 
half  a  crown,  he  could  not  rest  at  night  for  thinking 
of  it. 

Different  from  this  was  an  old  gentleman  familiarly 
known  as  Father  Sewell.  A  meeting  on  behalf  of 
Home  Missions  was  being  held,  and  he  was  only 
able  to  get  to  it  at  the  very  end.  The  pastor  said, 
"  Our  brother  who  has  just  come  in  will,  I  am  sure, 
close  the  meeting  by  offering  prayer  for  God's  blessing 
on  the  proceedings  of  the  evening."  He  stood  up, 
but  instead  of  praying  began  to  feel  in  his  pockets. 
"  I  am  afraid  that  my  brother  did  not  understand 
me,"  Mr.  Spurgeon  said.  "  Friend  Sewell,  I  did  not 
ask  you  to  give,  but  to  pray.'^  To  which  the  bluff 
old  saint  replied,  "  Ay  I  Ay  !  but  I  could  not  pray 
till  I  had  given;  it  would  be  hypocrisy  to  ask  a 
blessing  on  that  which  I  did  not  think  worth  giving 
to." 

Both  pastor  and  people  lived  in  a  world  that 
even  then  was  out  of  the  main  current  of  English 
life;  a  rural  world  that  preserved  much  of  the  sim- 
plicity and  religious  sincerity  of  the  Puritan  era, 
feared  God  and  reverenced  His  word.  The  qualities 
of  the  people  were  well  matched  by  the  single-hearted 
devotion  and  clear-cut  theology  of  the  young  preacher, 
who  had  the  Lord  always  before  him,  and  walked 
with  God  day  by  day. 

Waterbeach  was  notorious  for  its  drunkenness 
and   profanity  when   Spurgeon  went  to  it  as   God's 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     49 

messenger.  "In  a  short  time  the  httle  thatched 
chapel  was  crammed,  the  biggest  vagabonds  of  the 
village  were  weeping  floods  of  tears,  and  those  who 
had  been  the  curse  of  the  parish  became  its  blessing. 
I  can  say  with  joy  and  happiness  that  almost  from 
one  end  of  the  village  to  the  other,  at  the  hour  of 
eventide,  one  might  have  heard  the  voice  of  song 
coming  from  every  roof-tree,  and  echoing  from  almost 
every  heart."  Which  reminds  us  of  the  change 
wrought  by  Richard  Baxter  at  Kidderminster. 

A  labourer's  wife  was  his  first  convert,  and  he 
prized  that  soul  more  than  all  the  multitude  that 
came  after.  Early  on  the  Monday  morning  he  drove 
down  to  her  cottage  to  see  his  first  spiritual  child. 
"  If  anybody  had  said  to  me,  '  Somebody  has  left 
you  twenty  thousand  pounds,'  I  should  not  have 
given  a  snap  of  my  fingers  for  it  compared  with  the 
joy  which  I  felt  when  I  was  told  that  God  had  saved 
a  soul  through  my  ministry.  I  felt  like  a  boy  who 
had  earned  his  first  guinea,  or  like  a  diver  who  had 
been  down  to  the  depth  of  the  sea,  and  brought  up 
a  rare  pearl." 

He  was  ever  seeking  such  pearls.  One  night  at 
Waterbeach  he  shared  a  room  with  a  young  man  who 
jumped  into  bed  without  praying,  and  Spurgeon, 
seizing  the  opportunity,  asked  him  how  it  would 
be  if,  going  to  sleep  prayerless,  he  never  wakened 
again.  It  ended  on  them  both  rising,  and  after  two 
hours  the  young  man  was  converted  as  they  knelt 
together.  On  another  occasion,  in  the  same  room, 
Spurgeon  woke  his  companion  to  tell  him  that  he 
had  had  such  a  vision  of  the  judgment  of  sinners  that 
he  dare  not  sleep,  and  the  next  day  he  preached  such 
a  sermon  on  the  fate  of  the  lost  that  the  faces  of 
the  people  blanched  and  their  knees  trembled.     For 


50  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

scores  of  years  afterwards  that  terrible  sermon  was 
recalled  by  those  who  had  heard  it. 

Of  the  deacons  the  young  pastor  spoke  with  much 
esteem.  One  of  them,  a  Mr.  King,  instead  of  rebuking 
him  openly  for  some  unguarded  statement,  just  stuck 
a  pin  into  his  Bible  at  Titus  ii.  8  :  "  Sound  speech, 
that  cannot  be  condemned;  that  he  that  is  of  con- 
trary part  may  be  ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to 
say  of  you." 

As  an  example  of  his  daring  utterances,  one  day 
he  declared  that  a  change  of  nature  was  absolutely 
necessary,  for  if  a  thief  went  to  Heaven  without  it, 
he  would  be  a  thief  still,  and  would  go  round  the 
place  picking  the  angels'  pockets.  During  the  week 
the  Mayor  of  Cambridge  took  him  to  task,  and  told 
him  that  the  angels  have  no  pockets.  Quite  gravely 
Mr.  Spurgeon  said  he  had  not  known  that,  but  he 
was  glad  to  be  assured  of  the  fact  by  a  gentleman 
who  did  know,  and  that  he  would  put  the  thing 
right  on  the  first  opportunity.  On  the  following 
Monday  he  walked  into  Mr.  Brimley's  shop  and  said, 
"I  set  that  matter  right  yesterday,  sir."  "  What 
matter?"  he  inquired.  "Why,  about  the  angels' 
pockets."  "  What  did  you  say  ?  "  the  elder  man  asked 
in  despairing  tones.  "  Oh,  sir,  I  just  told  the  people 
that  I  was  sorry  I  had  made  a  mistake,  but  that 
the  Mayor  of  Cambridge  had  assured  me  that  the 
angels  had  no  pockets,  so  I  would  say  that  if  a  thief 
got  among  the  angels,  without  having  his  nature 
changed,  he  would  try  to  steal  the  feathers  out  of 
their  wings."  Upon  which  his  critic,  who  had  several 
times  found  fault  with  him,  said,  "  Then  I'll  never 
try  to  set  you  right  again " — which  was  exactly 
what   young   Spurgeon   wanted   him   to   say. 

Such   an   incident   lends   point   to   the   remark   of 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     51 

Mr.  Sutton  of  Cottenham,  who  said  that  Spurgeon  was 
"  the  sauciest  dog  that  ever  barked  in  a  pulpit." 
He  liad  invited  the  popular  preacher  over  to  his  village, 
and  the  people  were  arriving  in  all  sorts  of  convey- 
ances, when  he  was  taken  aback  to  find  in  his  vestry 
one  so  young,  nor  did  he  dissemble  his  disappoint- 
ment. The  old  minister  sat  in  the  pulpit  in  case 
the  boy  should  break  down.  But  the  preacher  was 
equal  to  the  occasion.  He  read  the  chapter  in 
Proverbs  where  it  is  written,  "  The  hoary  head  is  a 
crown  of  glory,"  and  then  stopped  and  said,  "  I 
doubt  it,  for  this  very  morning  I  met  a  man  with  a 
hoary  head,  yet  he  had  not  learnt  common  civility 
to  his  fellow-men."  Proceeding  with  the  reading, 
he  finished  the  verse,  "if  it  be  found  in  the  way 
of  righteousness."  **  Ah  I  "  he  said,  "  that's  another 
thing.  A  hoary  head  would  then  be  a  crown  of 
glory,  and  for  the  matter  of  that  so  would  a  red 
head,  or  a  head  of  any  colour."  The  reading  finished, 
he  preached,  and  as  he  came  down  from  the  pulpit, 
the  old  minister  slapped  him  on  the  back,  said  he 
was  never  better  pleased  with  a  sermon  in  all  his 
life,  and  then  told  him  he  was  a  saucy  dog. 

At  Waterbeach  the  afternoon  service  followed 
quickly  after  the  morning  service,  with  but  a  small 
interval,  and  one  Sunday  after  dinner,  which  came 
between,  Spurgeon  was  quite  unable  to  recollect 
even  the  subject  of  the  sermon  he  had  prepared  for 
the  second  service.  "  Oh,  never  mind,"  said  the 
farmer,  ''  you  will  be  sure  to  have  a  good  word  for 
us."  Just  at  that  moment  a  blazing  log  fell  out  of 
the  fire.  "  There,"  said  his  host,  "  there's  a  sermon 
for  you.  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the 
fire  ?  "  And  on  that  text  he  preached,  and  the 
sermon  had  converting  power. 


52  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

Two  sets  of  books,  with  floral  frontispieces,  contain- 
ing the  outlines  of  his  earliest  sermons,  have  been  pre- 
served, containing  the  "firebrand"  discourse  amongst 
the  rest.  Some  idea  of  the  extent  of  the  service  he 
rendered  to  the  country  may  be  gathered  from  the 
fact  that  before  his  call  to  London  he  had  preached 
six  hundred  and  seventy  sermons. 

Of  these  early  days  his  brother  James  says,  "  When 
I  drove  my  brother  about  the  country  to  preach,  I 
thought  then,  as  I  have  thought  ever  since,  what 
an  extraordinary  preacher  he  was.  What  wonderful 
unction  and  power  I  remember  in  some  of  those 
early  speeches  I  The  effect  upon  the  people  listening 
to  him  I  have  never  known  exceeded  in  after  years. 
He  seemed  to  have  leaped  full-grown  into  the  pulpit. 
The  breadth  and  brilliance  of  those  early  sermons, 
and  the  power  that  God's  Holy  Spirit  evidently  gave 
to  him,  made  them  perfectly  marvellous.  When  he 
went  to  Waterbeach  his  letters  came  home,  and 
were  read  as  family  documents,  discussed,  prayed 
over,  and  wondered  at.  We  were  not  surprised, 
however,  for  we  all  believed  that  it  was  in  him."  ^ 

On  one  occasion,  the  fame  of  the  Waterbeach  pastor 
having  spread,  he  was  invited  to  Isleham.  The  deacons 
hoped  for  such  crowds  that  they  borrowed  the  largest 
chapel  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  when  the  day 
came  the  congregation  in  the  morning  numbered 
exactly  seven  persons.  Nothing  daunted  he  preached 
one  of  his  best  sermons,  with  the  result  that  in 
the  evening  there  was  not  standing  room  in  the 
place. 

It  was  during  this  period  that,  for  the  Jubilee 
Services  at  Waterbeach  on  June  26,  1853,  he  com- 
posed one  of  his  finest  hymns.  It  is  a  remarkable 
production  for  a  youth  of  nineteen. 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     53 

"  When  once  I  mourned  a  load  of  sin, 
When  conscience  felt  a  wound  within. 
When  all  my  works  were  thrown  away, 
When  on  my  knees  I  knelt  to  pray. 

Then,  blissful  hour,  remembered  well, 

I  learnt  Thy  love,  Immanuel ! 

"  When  storms  of  sorrow  toss  my  soul, 
When  waves  of  care  around  me  roll, 
When  comforts  sink,  when  joys  shall  flee. 
When  hopeless  gulfs  shall  gape  for  me. 

One  word  the  tempest's  rage  shall  quell, 
That  word.  Thy  name,  Immanuel. 

"  When  for  the  truth  I  suffer  shame, 
When  foes  pour  scandal  on  Thy  name. 
When  cruel  taunts  and  jeers  abound. 
When  '  bulls  of  Bashan  '  gird  me  round. 
Secure  within  my  tower  I'll  dwell, 
That  tower.  Thy  grace,  Immanuel. 

"  When  hell,  enraged,  lifts  up  her  roar. 
When  Satan  stops  my  path  before, 
When  fiends  rejoice  and  wait  my  end. 
When  legion'd  hosts  their  arrows  send. 

Fear  not,  my  soul,  but  hurl  at  hell 

Thy  battle-cry,  Immanuel. 

"  When  down  the  hill  of  life  I  go. 
When  o'er  my  feet  death's  waters  flow, 
When  in  the  deep'ning  flood  I  sink, 
When  friends  stand  weeping  on  the  brink, 
I'll  mingle  with  my  last  farewell 
Thy  lovely  name,  Immanuel. 

"  When  tears  are  banished  from  mine  eyes. 
When  fairer  worlds  than  these  are  nigh. 
When  heaven  shall  fill  my  ravished  sight. 
When  I  shall  bathe  in  sweet  delight. 

One  joy  all  joys  shall  far  excel, 

To  see  Thy  face,  Immanuel." 

The  question  of  going  to  a  theological  college  for 
further  study  occurred  to  him  again  and  again.  He 
was  inclined  towards  such  a  course,  but  did  not  wish 
to  take  it  at  the  expense  of  other  people,  and  besides, 
he  says  (writing  to  his  father),  *^  J  am  now  very  well 


54  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

off,  I  think  as  well  off  as  any  one  of  my  age,  and  I 
am  sure  quite  as  happy.  Now  shall  I  throw  myself 
out,  and  trust  to  Providence  as  to  whether  I  shall 
ever  get  another  place  as  soon  as  I  leave  College  ?  " 
At  which,  in  view  of  the  future  that  awaited  him,  we 
can  afford  to  smile. 

But  at  length  he  had  some  definite  thought  of 
entering  Stepney  College,  now  Regent's  Park  College, 
and  when  Dr.  Angus,  the  Principal,  visited  Cambridge 
on  February  1,  1852,  to  preach  at  St.  Andrew's  Street 
Chapel,  he  expressed  a  desire  to  see  the  young  preacher. 
It  may  be  noted  here  that  Joseph  Angus  for  two 
years  had  been  pastor  of  the  church  at  New  Park 
Street,  London,  to  which  Spurgeon  was  afterwards 
to  be  called;  that  for  some  time  afterwards  he  was 
Secretary  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society,  and  in 
later  years  was  on  the  Committee  which  issued  the 
Revision  of  the  Scriptures  in  1881. 

An  appointment  was  made  for  Dr.  Angus  to  meet 
Mr.  Spurgeon  in  the  house  of  Mr.  Macmillan,  the 
publisher.  Punctually  the  young  man  called,  and 
was  shown  into  the  drawing-room,  where  he  waited 
for  two  hours,  feeling  too  much  impressed,  as  he  says, 
by  his  own  insignificance,  and  the  greatness  of  the 
tutor  from  London,  to  venture  to  ring  the  bell  and 
make  inquiries  as  to  the  unreasonably  long  delay. 
At  length  he  ventured  to  ring,  and  was  informed 
that  the  Doctor  had  waited  a  considerable  time  for 
him  in  another  room,  and  had  at  length  been  com- 
pelled to  go  to  London  by  train.  The  stupid  girl 
who  had  put  him  in  the  drawing-room  had  forgotten 
to  tell  any  one  in  the  house  of  the  young  man's 
arrival,  and  so  it  came  to  pass  that  the  two  men, 
anxious  to  see  each  other,  were  in  the  same  house 
at  the  same  time  and  missed  each  other. 


THE  APPRENTICE  PREACHER     55 

Of  course,  Spurgeon  was  much  disappointed,  but 
that  afternoon,  on  his  way  to  a  village  appointment, 
he  was  walking  over  Midsummer  Common  to  the 
little  wooden  bridge  that  used  to  be  on  the  road  to 
Chesterton,  when,  in  the  centre  of  the  Common,  the 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him.  A  loud  voice  seemed 
distinctly  to  say,  "  Seekest  thou  great  things  for 
thyself?  seek  them  not."  And  then  and  there  he 
renounced  his  thought  of  a  collegiate  course.  Dr. 
Angus  made  a  mistake,  to  which  as  a  college  official 
he  was,  of  course,  liable,  when  he  wrote  two  days 
later  to  Mr.  Watts,  "  I  should  regret  for  your  friend 
to  settle  without  thorough  preparation.  He  may  be 
useful  in  either  case,  but  his  usefulness  will  be  much 
greater,  it  will  fill  at  all  events  a  wider  sphere,  with 
preparation  than  without  it."  Which,  of  course,  is 
all  true,  but  the  writer  was  quite  oblivious  of  the 
fact  that  Spurgeon  was  already  serving  his  appren- 
ticeship and  learning  his  business  in  practical  ways. 

But  he  had  set  his  face  like  a  flint,  never  after- 
wards to  seek  great  things  for  himself.  Bishop  Ken, 
in  the  two  books  he  oftenest  used,  wrote,  "  Et  tu 
quseris  tibi  grandia?  Noli  quaerere;  "  but  the  words 
were  written  on  Spurgeon's  heart.  He  had  no  need 
to  offer  the  beautiful  old  Moravian  Litany,  "  From 
the  unhappy  desire  of  becoming  great,  preserve  us, 
gracious  Lord  and  God,"  but  greatness  came,  though 
he  did  not  seek  it. 


CHAPTER   IV 

THE    VOICE    IN    THE    CITY 

November  28,  1S53^ April  28,  1854 

While  the  young  preacher  of  the  Fens  was  busy 
at  Waterbeach,  and  content  to  stay  there,  a  church 
in  London  was  seeking,  and  apparently  seeking  in 
vain,  for  a  pastor  under  whose  ministry  it  might 
retrieve  its  fallen  fortunes.  It  was  one  of  the  leading 
Baptist  churches  of  the  Metropolis,  one  of  the  six 
that  had  a  membership  of  over  three  hundred.  The 
churches  at  Edgware  Road  and  Dorset  Square  excelled 
it  in  numbers,  but  amongst  the  hundred  and  thirteen 
churches  of  its  own  order  at  that  time  in  London, 
most  of  them  small,  the  church  at  New  Park  Street 
held  an  honoured  and  influential  place,  its  chapel 
probably  being  the  largest  of  all  the  Baptist  Church 
buildings. 

The  situation  of  the  chapel  was  very  unfavourable, 
and  as  a  consequence  the  congregation  for  years  had 
declined.  An  earlier  building  in  Carter  Lane  was 
demolished  to  make  way  for  the  widening  of  the 
road  to  London  Bridge  on  the  south  side  of  the  river, 
and  in  a  fit  of  parsimony  a  new  site  was  chosen  with 
a  very  inconvenient  approach.  The  direct  road  from 
it  led  over  Southwark  Bridge,  where  a  toll  was  charged, 
and  no  hackney  carriages  could  be  hired  within  half 
a  mile.  It  lay  so  low  that  it  was  frequently  flooded, 
find   when   factories   and   warehouses   sprang  up   all 

58 


THE   VOICE   IN   THE   CITY  57 

around  it,  naturally  enough  the  people  moved  their 
residences  elsewhere.  It  was,  in  fact,  what  we  would 
now  call  a  down-town  church.  "  A  more  dingy, 
uninviting  and  repelling  region  than  where  the  chapel 
is  situated  I  have  seldom  explored,"  said  one  pastor. 
'*  It  is  in  a  gloomy,  narrow  street,  surrounded  by  small, 
dirty-looking  houses.  Within  a  minute's  walk  of  the 
chapel  you  see  written  up  at  the  corner  of  a  little 
street  '  Bear  Garden.'  " 

During  its  history  of  two  hundred  years  it  had  at 
least   three   notable    preachers,  whose  portraits   may 
still  be  seen  in  the  vestry  of  the  Metropolitan  Taber- 
nacle.     Benjamin   Keach,    who   had   suffered   in   the 
pillory  for  his  faith,  and  left  some  writings  on  the 
Metaphors  and  Parables  of  Scripture,  was  pastor  for 
thirty-six  years,  from  1668  to  1704.     Dr.  John  Gill, 
who  followed  him,  was  minister  for  fifty-one  years, 
from   1720  to   1771.     Ponderous   in  appearance   and 
in  utterance,  his  learned  and  laborious  Commentary 
is  still  to  be  found  in  some  libraries.     For  a  long  time 
his   pulpit,    preserved   in   one   of  the   rooms   of  the 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  was  used  by  the  students 
of  the  Pastor's  College  for  their  trial  sermons.     He 
was  a  very  pronounced  Calvinist,  and  in  his  portrait 
his  nose  has  a  distinct  tilt;    Mr.  Spurgeon  was  accus- 
tomed to  say  that  he  was  turning  it  up  at  Arminians. 
Dr.  John  Rippon,  famous  for  his  selection  of  hymns, 
the  first  issued  by  the  Baptists,   had  a  ministry  of 
no  less  than  sixty-three  years,   from   1773  to   1836. 
He  came  to  the  church  when  he  was  but  twenty 
years  old,  and  some  of  the  older  members  left  because 
of   his    youth.     Subsequently    three    or    four    others 
ministered  to  the  church,  without  distinction,  until, 
in  a  building  accommodating  twelve  hundred  persons, 
there  was  only  a  congregation  of  two  hundred,     jfor 


58  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

three  months  the  pastorate  was  vacant,  and  then 
they  made  the  great  discovery. 

It  was  made  very  unexpectedly,  but  its  genesis 
was  quite  simple.  Mr.  George  Gould,  a  deacon  of 
the  church  at  Loughton,  Essex,  happened  to  be  in 
Cambridge,  and  attended  the  anniversary  gathering 
of  the  Cambridge  Sunday  School  Union  in  the  Guild- 
hall. Young  Spurgeon  was  one  of  the  speakers. 
The  manners  of  the  time  may  be  guessed  from  the 
fact  that  the  two  other  speakers  did  not  hesitate  to 
declare  their  contempt  for  the  young  man.  One 
of  them  asked  why  he  had  left  his  few  sheep  in  the 
wilderness,  and  the  other  wished  that  boys  would 
tarry  at  Jericho  until  their  beards  were  grown  before 
attempting  to  instruct  their  seniors.  It  rather  looks 
as  if  young  Spurgeon  had  been  somewhat  aggressive  : 
he  was  certainly  not  lacking  in  confidence,  for  he 
asked  permission  to  reply,  and  reminded  the  people 
that  those  who  were  bidden  to  stop  at  Jericho  were 
not  boys  whose  beards  had  not  grown,  but  men 
whose  beards  had  been  shaved  off  by  their  enemies, 
and  that  an  old  minister  who  had  disgraced  his  calling 
resembled  them  more  than  a  young  minister  who 
was  seeking  to  fulfil  it.  It  was  a  random  shot,  but 
it  hit  the  mark,  for  the  description  exactly  fitted  one 
of  his  detractors.  The  affair  was  unimportant  save 
for  the  fact  that  it  deepened  the  impression  on  the 
visitor's  mind,  which  the  address  had  made,  and 
when,  on  his  return  to  London,  Mr.  Thomas  Olney, 
one  of  the  New  Park  Street  deacons,  lamented  to  Mr. 
Gould  that  they  could  not  find  a  suitable  pastor  for 
their  church,  he  recalled  the  incident  and  suggested 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  name. 

It  was  not  surprising  that  the  first  suggestion  of 
the  unknown  preacher  was  forgotten,  but  on  their 


THE   VOICE   IN   THE   CITY  59 

next  encounter  the  subject  came  up  again;  Thomas 
Olney  then  consulted  his  fellow-deacon,  James  Low, 
and,  willing  to  try  the  experiment,  he  wrote  to 
Waterbeach,  the  only  address  he  knew,  inviting  Mr. 
Spurgeon  to  preach  for  a  Sunday. 

So  on  his  arrival  at  the  chapel  at  Waterbeach  on 
the  last  Sunday  of  November  1853,  the  invitation 
awaited  Mr.  Spurgeon.  Such  a  thing  was  so  little 
anticipated  that,  having  read  it,  he  passed  the  letter 
over  to  Robert  Coe,  one  of  the  deacons,  declaring 
that  there  must  have  been  a  mistake,  the  invitation 
was  evidently  meant  for  somebody  else.  But  the 
deacon  sorrowfully  shook  his  head  and  replied  that 
he  did  not  think  there  was  any  mistake  :  what  he 
had  long  dreaded  had  happened  at  last,  but  he  was 
surprised  that  the  Londoners  had  heard  of  their 
pastor  quite  so  soon.  "  Had  it  been  Cottenham,  or 
St.  Ives,  or  Huntingdon,"  he  said,  "  I  should  not 
have  wondered  at  all ;  but  going  to  London  is  rather 
a  great  step  from  this  little  place."  The  modest 
doubts  of  the  preacher  were  not,  however,  quite 
dispelled,  so  the  next  day,  November  28,  he  sent 
a  cautious  answer  to  the  invitation,  expressing  his 
wilhngness  to  come  to  London  for  a  Sunday,  but 
hinting  that  the  invitation  had  probably  been  sent 
to  him  in  error,  that  he  was  only  nineteen  years  of 
age,  and  quite  unknown  beyond  his  own  neighbour- 
hood. A  second  letter  from  London  set  his  mind 
at  rest,  and,  still  wondering,  he  arranged  to  preach 
at  New  Park  Street  on  December  18,  1853. 

It  was  with  no  sense  of  elation  that  he  started  for 
the  great  city.  Indeed,  his  heart  was  heavy  within 
him,  and  again  and  again  he  repeated  to  himself  the 
text,  "  He  must  needs  go  through  Samaria."  He 
felt  that  he   was   being   forced   along   an   undesired 


60  LIFE  OF  SPURGEON 

path,  wished  he  had  stayed  at  home,  and  in  the 
midst  of  the  preparations  for  Christmas  in  the  big 
city  he  was  somewhat  bewildered. 

None  of  the  congregation  offered  him  hospitahty 
on  the  occasion  of  his  visit.  With  scant  courtesy, 
which  was  the  measure  of  their  expectation,  they 
sent  their  preacher  to  a  boarding-house  in  Queen's 
Square,  Bloomsbury,  a  neighbourhood  which  has 
since  decayed  and  has  again  risen  to  new  respect- 
abihty,  and  here  he  was  given  a  bedroom,  more  hke 
a  cupboard,  over  the  front  door.  The  boarders  looked 
askance  at  the  new  arrival,  who  was  unversed  in 
town  ways;  his  very  clothes  proclaimed  his  country 
breeding.  He  had  a  great  black  satin  stock  round 
his  neck,  and  in  special  honour  of  the  occasion  he 
produced  a  blue  handkerchief  with  white  spots.  The 
young  men  gave  him  some  tall  talk  about  the  wonder- 
ful preachers  of  London,  and  sent  him  to  his  little 
bedroom  so  depressed  that,  with  the  added  torture 
of  the  street  traffic,  he  was  unable  to  sleep. 

It  was  a  most  unsympathetic  reception,  and  had 
not  the  preacher  been  conscious  of  his  calling,  assured 
that  he  had  stirred  neither  foot  nor  finger  to  secure 
the  invitation,  he  might  have  been  tempted,  even 
at  the  last  moment,  to  evade  the  appointed  task. 
Indeed,  when  he  arrived  at  New  Park  Street  the 
following  morning  and  saw  the  building,  which 
appeared  to  him  very  imposing,  he  was  amazed  at 
his  own  temerity. 

But  once  in  front  of  the  congregation,  which  was 
very  sparse,  about  eighty  people,  he  gained  confi- 
dence, and  delivered  his  message  from  James  i.  17  : 
"  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from 
above,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights, 
with   whom   is   no   variableness,  neither  shadow  of 


THE   VOICE   IN   THE   CITY  61 

turning."  Neither  preacher  nor  congregation  guessed 
that  he  himself  was  the  finest  illustration  of  the  text. 
Quite  an  unusual  interest  was  aroused  during  the 
service;  one  of  the  deacons  declared  after  it  that 
if  the  preacher  were  only  with  them  for  three  months 
the  place  would  be  crowded.  The  news  of  the 
wonderful  young  man  from  the  country  spread, 
visits  were  paid  to  friends  during  the  afternoon, 
urging  them  to  come  in  the  evening,  and  a  greatly 
increased  congregation  then  gathered,  amongst  them 
the  lady  who  was  afterwards  to  be  his  wife,  to  listen 
to  a  discourse  from  Rev.  xiv.  5  :  "  They  are  without 
fault  before  the  throne  of  God."  The  very  choice 
of  texts  was  unconsciously  prophetic ;  the  whole  life  of 
Spurgeon  lay  between  them  like  a  parenthesis.  From 
God  he  came,  to  God  at  length  he  went,  and  his 
unceasing  vocation  all  the  while  was  to  magnify  God 
in  the  eyes  of  the  people. 

The  people  were  so  excited  that  they  would  not 
move  until  the  deacons  assured  them  that  they  would 
do  their  best  to  induce  the  young  preacher  to  come 
again,  and  before  Spurgeon  left  the  building  he  was 
urged  to  repeat  the  visit.  His  own  account  of  the 
day  is  worth  recording  :  ''  The  Lord  helped  me  very 
graciously.  I  had  a  happy  Sabbath  in  the  pulpit, 
and  spent  the  interval  with  warm-hearted  friends; 
and  when  at  night  I  trudged  back  to  the  Queen's 
Square  narrow  lodging,  I  was  not  alone,  and  I  no 
longer  looked  on  Londoners  as  flinty-hearted  bar- 
barians. My  tone  was  altered,  I  wanted  no  pity  of 
any  one ;  I  did  not  care  a  penny  for  the  young  gentle- 
men lodgers  and  their  miraculous  ministers,  nor  for 
the  grind  of  the  cabs,  nor  for  anything  else  under 
the  sun.  The  lion  had  been  looked  at  all  round, 
and  his  majesty  did   not   appear  to  be   a  tenth   as 


62  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

majestic  as  when  I  had  only   heard   his   roar  miles 
away." 

Writing  to  his  father  some  days  later,  he  says, 
"  I  spent  the  Monday  in  going  about  London,  climbed 
to  the  top  of  St.  Paul's,  and  left  some  money  with  the 
booksellers."  In  his  Coynmentary  and  Commentators, 
he  tells  us  that  he  bought  the  Commentary  of  Thomas 
Scott  with  his  first  pulpit  fee  in  London,  though  he 
afterwards  came  to  think  of  it  as  "  nothing  but  milk 
and  water." 

The  London  of  seventy  years  ago  was  very  different 
from  the  London  of  to-day.  In  size  and  population 
it  was  about  a  quarter  of  what  it  is  now,  and  it  lay 
largely  on  the  north  side  of  the  Thames.  On  the 
west  side  it  was  practically  bounded  by  the  Edgware 
Road;  Fulham,  Hammersmith  and  Brompton  were 
market  gardens.  On  the  east  it  reached  to  Stepney 
Green;  Hackney  and  Bow  were  open  country,  and 
the  Isle  of  Dogs  a  marsh  seven  feet  below  high-water 
mark.  On  the  north  side  it  included  the  district 
within  a  line  drawn  east  and  west  from  the  top  side 
of  Regent's  Park;  Kentish  Town  and  Hampstead 
were  still  open.  South  of  the  river,  gardens  lay 
between  Lambeth  and  Southwark;  Newington,  Ken- 
nington  and  Stockwell  were  hamlets;  Rotherhithe, 
save  for  a  row  of  houses  backing  on  to  the  river 
bank,  was  open;  Battersea  was  market  gardens; 
Camberwell  and  Peckham  New  Town  were  villages; 
and  Deptford,  Greenwich  and  Woolwich  lay  quite 
apart.  Lines  of  villas,  with  fields  behind,  ran  out 
beyond  the  city  along  the  main  thoroughfares— 
Clapham  Road,  Brixton  Road,  New  Kent  Road, 
Bow  Road,  Kingsland  Road,  Hampstead  Road, 
Edgware  Road,  Bayswater  Road,  and  these  were 
chiefly  occupied  by  retired  people.     The  merchants 


THE   VOICE   IN   THE   CITY  63 

of  the  day  mostly  lived  in  the  squares  of  Blooms- 
bury,  but  such  of  them  as  had  their  homes  further  out 
rode  into  business  on  hprseback,  or  drove  in  their 
carriages.  It  was  estimated  that  about  half  a  million 
workers  came  into  the  City  every  day. 

There  were  stage  coaches,  that  came  into  London 
from  the  surrounding  suburbs  in  the  morning  and 
returned  in  the  evening,  and  omnibuses,  that  ran 
from  place  to  place  within  the  limits,  the  front  seats 
on  either  side  of  the  driver  being  eagerly  prized, 
though  it  was  a  somewhat  perilous  operation  to 
clamber  up  the  steep  steps  that  led  to  them,  clinging 
to  a  leather  strap  the  while.  The  rotund  drivers  of 
these  omnibuses,  their  faces  generally  bloated  with 
beer-drinking,  were  the  wits  of  the  day,  and  made 
merry  as  they  passed  each  other,  or  raced  along  the 
same  roads.  Hansom  cabs  were  not  yet  invented, 
and  the  four-wheeled  "  growlers "  were,  like  the 
omnibuses  of  the  day,  carpeted  with  straw. 

There  were  no  tramways,  no  underground  railways, 
no  tubes.  St.  Pancras,  Liverpool  Street,  Victoria 
and  Marylebone  stations  had  no  existence,  and  Hunger- 
ford  Market  was  on  the  site  now  occupied  by  Charing 
Cross  Station.  There  were  no  railway  bridges  across 
the  river.  The  North-Western  Railway  ran  into 
Euston,  the  Great  Northern  into  King's  Cross  and 
the  South- Western  into  Waterloo,  but  the  Great 
Western  Railway  found  its  terminus  at  Westbourne 
Park,  the  Eastern  Counties  Railway  at  Shoreditch, 
the  Blaekwall  Railway  at  Fenchurch  Street,  and  the 
Dover,  Brighton  and  South  Coast  Railway  at  London 
Bridge.  There  was  also  a  station  of  the  South- 
Eastern  Railway  at  Bricklayer's  Arms.  There  was  no 
Holborn  Viaduct.  The  Thames  Embankment  did  not 
exist,  save  only  the  terrace  of  the  Houses  of  Parliament. 


64  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

That  was  the  London  to  which  Spurgeon  came. 
The  dull  Georgian  aspect  of  its  architecture  was  just 
beginning  to  change,  but  its  social  condition  was 
deplorable.  Great  areas  of  slums  abounded;  it  was 
estimated  that  over  three  thousand  children  under 
fourteen  years  of  age  were  living  as  thieves  and 
beggars;  more  than  twenty  thousand  over  fifteen 
years  of  age  existed  in  idleness,  and  at  least  a  hundred 
thousand  were  growing  up  without  education.  Ragged 
schools  were  even  then  places  of  peril  to  their  teachers, 
and  the  common  lodging-houses  sheltered  tens  of 
thousands,  "  in  lairs  fitter  to  be  the  habitation  of 
hogs  rather  than  of  human  beings."  But  people 
were  beginning  to  care;  Lord  Shaftesbury  was 
leading  a  crusade  against  the  exploitation  of  the 
poor;  it  was  a  time  of  transition;  the  city  was 
ready  for  a  voice,  and  was  not  too  large  to  be  reached 
by  it. 

No  other  preacher  who  supplied  the  pulpit  at  New 
Park  Street  during  the  vacant  months  had  been 
invited  a  second  time,  but  Spurgeon  came  again  on 
the  first,  third,  and  fifth  Sundays  of  January  1854, 
and  so  great  was  the  success  of  his  ministry  that  on 
January  25  he  was  invited  to  occupy  the  pulpit  for 
six  months,  with  a  view  to  permanent  acceptance 
of  the  pastorate. 

He  had  given  the  deacons  scant  encouragement 
from  the  beginning.  Writing  to  his  father  after  his 
earliest  visit,  he  says  that  when  it  was  suggested 
that  he  should  come  to  them,  he  had  told  them 
"  that  they  did  not  know  what  they  were  doing,  nor 
whether  they  w^ere  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body, 
they  were  so  starved  that  a  morsel  of  the  Gospel 
was  a  treat  to  them."  And  when  the  definite  call 
of  the  church  reached  him,  given  with  only  the  votes 


THE   VOICE   IN   THE   CITY  65 

of  one  man  and  four  women  against  it,  he  replied 
from  60,  Park  Street,  Cambridge,  that  he  dared  not 
accept  an  unquahfied  invitation  for  so  long  a  time. 
"  My  objection  is  not  to  the  length  of  the  time  of 
probation,"  he  added,  "  but  it  ill  becomes  a  youth 
to  promise  to  preach  to  a  London  congregation  so 
long  until  he  knows  them  and  they  know  him.  I 
would  engage  to  supply  for  three  months  of  that 
time,  and  then,  should  the  congregation  fail  or  the 
church  disagree,  I  would  reserve  to  myself  the  liberty, 
without  breach  of  engagement,  to  retire,  and  you  on 
your  part  would  have  the  right  to  dismiss  me  without 
seeming  to  treat  me  ill.  Enthusiasm  and  popularity 
are  often  like  the  crackling  of  thorns,  and  soon  expire. 
I  do  not  wish  to  be  a  hindrance  if  I  cannot  be  a  help." 

His  first  home  in  London  was  at  75,  Dover  Road, 
in  the  borough  of  Southwark.  From  this  address 
on  March  2,  1854,  he  wrote  to  his  Uncle  James  at 
Stambourne  a  witty  letter,  in  which  occurs  the  follow- 
ing paragraph  :  "  But  to  joke  no  more,  you  have 
heard  that  I  am  now  a  Londoner,  and  a  little  bit  of 
a  celebrity.  No  college  could  have  put  me  in  a 
higher  situation.  Our  place  is  one  of  the  pinnacles 
of  the  denomination.  But  I  have  a  great  work  to 
do,  and  have  need  of  all  the  prayers  the  sons  of  God 
can  offer  for  me."  In  a  kind  letter  from  the  same 
address,  which  he  wrote  about  the  same  time  to  the 
Misses  Blunson,  the  ladies  with  whom  he  had  lodged 
at  Cambridge,  he  says,  "  I  get  on  very  well  in  my 
present  lodgings,  but  not  better  than  with  you,  for 
that  would  be  impossible." 

One  of  the  earliest  presents  from  the  deacons  was 
a  dozen  white  pocket-handkerchiefs  :  a  hint  that  it 
was  time  that  the  blue  handkerchiefs  with  white 
spots   were   put   away.     The   deacons   in   those   days 


66  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

wore  white  cravats  to  be  in  keeping  with  their  office, 
and  they  expected  their  minister  to  do  hkewise. 

The  suggested  probation  was  cut  short  by  a  requisi- 
tion to  the  deacons  of  the  church,  signed  by  fifty  of 
the  men  members,  asking  for  a  special  Church  Meeting. 
Accordingly  the  church  gathered  on  April  19,  and 
passed  a  resolution  in  which  they  record  with  thank- 
fulness the  esteem  in  which  the  preacher  was  held, 
the  extraordinary  increase  in  the  congregations  both 
on  Lord's  Days  and  on  week-days,  and  "  consider  it 
prudent  "  (mark  the  word)  "  to  secure  as  early  as 
possible  his  permanent  settlement  amongst  us."  On 
April  28  Mr.  Spurgeon  replied,  "  There  is  but  one 
answer  to  so  loving  and  candid  an  invitation.  / 
accept  it.^^  Then,  asking  for  their  prayers,  he  con- 
tinues, "  Remember  my  youth  and  inexperience, 
and  pray  that  these  may  not  hinder  my  usefulness. 
I  trust  also  the  remembrance  of  these  will  lead  you 
to  forgive  mistakes  I  may  make,  or  unguarded  words 
that  I  may  utter." 

Neither  he  nor  the  church  had  any  misgivings  as 
to  the  future,  but  the  Baptists  of  London  seem  either 
to  have  been  unconscious  of  his  coming,  or  to  have 
tacitly  agreed  to  ignore  him.  In  the  Baptist  Manual 
of  1854  the  minister  of  New  Park  Street  is  said  to 
be  "J.  Spurgeon,"  evidence  enough  that  he  was 
considered  of  no  importance.  The  Baptist  ministry 
of  London  at  that  time  included  such  names  as 
Drs.  Brock,  Steane,  Howard  Hinton,  Charles  Stovel, 
Jabez  Burns,  W.  G.  Lewis,  J.  Aldis  and  C.  W.  Banks. 
Mr.  Leechman  was  at  Hammersmith,  though  that 
was  not  then  counted  as  part  of  London.  It  is  on 
record  that  at  an  early  meeting,  when  Mr.  Spurgeon 
was  present,  one  of  the  London  ministers  prayed 
for  "  our  young  friend  who  has  so  much  to  learn, 


THE   VOICE   IN   THE   CITY  67 

and  so  much  to  unlearn,"  and  that  he  took  it  quite 
pleasantly. 

But  there  were  men  in  the  Churches  that  had 
vision,  amongst  them  Mr.  Sheridan  Knowles,  the 
actor  and  playwriter,  who  had  been  baptised  by  Dr. 
Brock  about  that  time,  and  was  appointed  as  teacher 
of  elocution  in  Stepney  College,  now  Regent's  Park. 
On  the  day  a  presentation  was  made  to  him  by  the 
students,  he  entered  the  class-room  and  immediately 
said,  "  Boys,  have  you  heard  the  Cambridgeshire 
lad?  "  None  of  them  had  heard  him;  as  a  matter 
of  fact  he  had  only  been  preaching  two  Sundays. 
Mr.  G.  H.  Davies  reports  what  followed.  "  Go  and 
hear  him  at  once,"  he  said;  "his  name  is  Charles 
Spurgeon.  He  is  only  a  boy,  but  he  is  the  most 
wonderful  preacher  in  the  world.  He  is  absolutely 
perfect  in  oratory;  and,  beside  that,  a  master  in  the 
art  of  acting.  He  has  nothing  to  learn  from  me  or 
any  one  else.  He  is  simply  perfect.  He  knows 
everything.  He  can  do  anything.  I  was  once  lessee 
of  Drury  Lane  Theatre ;  were  I  still  in  that  position 
I  would  offer  him  a  fortune  to  play  for  a  season  on 
the  boards  of  that  house.  Why,  boys,  he  can  do 
anything  he  pleases  with  his  audience !  He  can 
make  them  laugh  and  cry  and  laugh  again  in  five 
minutes.  His  power  was  never  equalled."  Then 
he  asserted  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  live  to  be  the 
greatest  preacher  of  the  age,  and  that  his  name 
would  be  known  everywhere. 

If  it  were  not  so  well  attested  this  incident  might 
be  received  with  some  caution;  as  it  is,  it  may  be 
put  alongside  the  earlier  prediction  of  Richard  Knill, 
and  counted  as  a  prophecy  concerning  the  prophetic 
voice  that  had  just  been  raised  in  the  great  city. 

That  it  was  prophetic  cannot  in  the  retrospect  be 


68  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

gainsaid.  As  has  been  already  hinted,  the  times 
were  ripe  for  a  message  from  God,  and  it  cannot 
be  doubted  this  was  the  prepared  messenger.  Here 
was  a  man  whom  God  had  prepared,  whom  God  could 
trust.  He  had  much  to  learn  still  of  the  ways  of 
men,  but  in  the  ways  of  God  his  apprenticeship  was 
over.  He  was  a  preacher  full  grown — so  mature, 
indeed,  that  not  a  few  who  listened  to  his  earliest 
sermons  in  the  villages  imagined  that  they  could 
not  be  his  own. 

If  we  seek  to  find  the  reason  on  God's  side  why  he 
was  so  much  used,  "  we  infer  that  it  was  due  to  the 
fact  that  there  was  nothing  in  him  necessitating 
delay.  He  could  be  placed  in  the  seat  of  honour, 
for  he  had  the  spiritual  grounding  requisite.  He 
could  serve  the  relative  end,  for  the  basis  of  it  had 
been  laid  in  his  own  heart.  The  light  was  there — it 
needed  but  a  stand  adequate  to  its  power  of  illumina- 
tion. And  specially  should  be  instanced  this  point — 
that  he  had  the  true  Christian  foil  in  respect  of  honour, 
namely,  humility.  He  had,  as  we  have  just  seen, 
forsworn  the  search  of  great  things  for  himself, 
and  what  is  this,  in  the  economy  of  Grace,  but  the 
forerunner  of  promotion?  "  ^ 

But  if  he  had  no  great  stalking  ambition  for  himself, 
he  felt  within  him  a  compulsion  not  to  be  resisted. 
On  the  previous  September  27,  while  he  was  still  at 
Waterbeach,  he  wrote  to  his  grandfather  :  "I  have 
a  good  field  of  labour  here,  but  I  want  to  do  more 
if  possible.  I  often  wish  I  were  in  China,  India  or 
Africa,  so  that  I  might  preach,  preach,  preach  all  day 
long.  It  would  be  sweet  to  die  preaching."  And  it 
was  not  only  the  exercise  of  preaching  that  appealed 
to  him,  it  was  the  result  of  it.  "  Souls,  souls,  souls,"  he 
said,  "  I  hope  this  rings  in  my  ears,  and  hurries  me  on." 


THE   VOICE   IN   THE   CITY  69 

On  the  human  side  one  other  quahty  fitted  him 
for  liis  great  vocation.  In  his  first  letter  to  the 
London  church  he  himself  states  it,  when  he  writes 
with  the  simple  emphasis  of  truth,  "  I  have  hardly 
ever  known  what  the  fear  of  man  means."  It  was 
almost  a  reincarnation  of  the  spirit  of  John  Knox. 
Words  written  of  the  Scottish  reformer  might  as 
truly  be  written  of  Spurgeon  :  "  Behind  him  was  the 
Cross  of  Christ,  before  him  the  judgment  seat  of 
Christ,  and  between  the  two  he  stood  watching  for 
souls  as  one  that  must  give  account."  The  spirit 
that  inspired  them  was  the  same.  W.  T.  Stead 
lamented  at  Melrose  that  England  never  had  a  John 
Knox  in  her  pulpit.  "  Maybe  not,"  said  the  old 
lady  who  acted  as  guide,  "  but  you  have  Mr. 
Spurgeon."  ^ 

Ten  years  afterwards,  in  his  great  sermon  on 
"  Baptismal  Regeneration,"  he  not  only  named  his 
hero,  he  dared  to  speak  as  his  hero  would  have  spoken. 
"  We  want  John  Knox  back  again.  Do  not  talk 
to  me  of  mild  and  gentle  men,  of  soft  manners  and 
squeamish  words ;  we  want  the  fiery  Knox,  and  even 
though  his  vehemence  should  '  ding  our  pulpits  into 
blads,'  it  were  well  if  he  did  but  rouse  our  hearts 
to  action.  We  want  Luther  to  tell  men  the  truth 
unmistakably  in  homely  phrase.  The  velvet  has  got 
into  our  ministers'  mouths  of  late,  but  we  must 
unrobe  ourselves  of  soft  raiment,  and  truth  must 
be  spoken  and  nothing  but  truth;  for  of  all  lies 
which  have  dragged  millions  down  to  hell,  I  look 
upon  this  as  being  the  most  atrocious — that  in  a 
Protestant  Church  there  should  be  found  those  who 
swear  that  baptism  saves  a  soul.  Call  a  man  a 
Baptist,  or  a  Presbyterian,  or  a  Dissenter,  or  a  Church- 
man, that  is  nothing  to  me ;    if  he  says  that  baptism 


70  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

saves  the  soul,  out  upon  him,  out  upon  him;  he 
states  what  God  never  taught,  what  the  Bible  never 
laid  down,  and  what  ought  never  to  be  maintained  by 
men  who  profess  that  the  Bible,  and  the  whole  Bible, 
is  the  religion  of  Protestants." 

Let  Carlyle  describe  both  Knox  and  Spurgeon. 
"  Reality  is  of  God's  making  :  it  is  alone  strong.  How 
many  pented  bredds,  pretending  to  be  real,  are  fitter 
to  swim  than  to  be  worshipped.  This  Knox  cannot 
live  but  by  fact;  he  clung  to  reality  as  the  ship- 
wrecked sailor  to  the  cliff.  He  is  an  instance  to  us 
how  a  man,  by  sincerity  itself,  becomes  heroic;  it 
is  the  grand  gift  he  has.  We  find  in  Knox  a  good, 
honest,  intellectual  talent,  no  transcendent  one,  a 
narrow,  inconsiderable  man,  as  compared  with  Luther ; 
but  in  heartfelt,  instinctive  adherence  to  truth,  in 
sincerity,  as  we  say,  he  has  no  superior.  Nay,  we 
might  ask,  What  equal  he  has  ?  The  heart  of  him  is 
of  the  true  Prophet  cast.  '  He  lies  there,'  said  the 
Earl  of  Morton,  at  his  grave,  '  who  never  feared  the 
face  of  man.'  He  resembles,  more  than  any  of 
the  moderns,  an  Old-Hebrew  Prophet.  The  same 
inflexibility,  intolerance,  narrow-looking  adherence  to 
God's  truth,  stern  rebuke  in  the  name  of  God  to  all 
that  forsake  truth;  an  Old-Hebrew  Prophet  in  the 
guise  of  an  Edinburgh  minister  of  the  sixteenth 
century.  We  are  to  take  him  for  that :  not  require 
him  to  be  other."  ^ 

Such  a  courage  was  constantly  reinforced  from  its 
Source.  An  early  example  of  the  strengthening  of 
his  heart  amidst  human  weakness,  although  it  slightly 
anticipates  our  story,  may  be  given  in  his  own  words. 
It  is  especially  valuable  as  illustrating  the  thorough- 
ness and  simplicity  of  his  ministry,  even  from  the 
beginning.     In  his  exposition  of  the  ninety-first  Psalm 


THE   VOICE   IN   THE   CITY  71 

in  The  Treasury  of  David,  perhaps  the  noblest  of  his 
writings,  he  says,  "  In  the  year  1854,  when  I  had 
scarcely  been  in  London  twelve  months,  the  neigh- 
bourhood in  which  I  lived  was  visited  by  Asiatic 
cholera,  and  my  congregation  suffered  from  its  inroads. 
Family  after  family  summoned  me  to  the  bedside  of 
the  smitten,  and  almost  every  day  I  was  called  to 
visit  the  grave.  I  gave  myself  up  with  youthful 
ardour  to  the  visitation  of  the  sick,  and  was  sent  for 
from  all  quarters  of  the  district  by  persons  of  all 
ranks  and  religions.  I  became  weary  in  body  and 
sick  at  heart.  My  friends  seemed  falling  one  by  one, 
and  I  felt  or  fancied  that  I  was  sickening  like  those 
around  me.  A  little  more  work  and  weeping  would 
have  laid  me  low  amongst  the  rest :  I  felt  that  my 
burden  was  heavier  than  I  could  bear,  and  I  was 
ready  to  sink  under  it.  As  God  would  have  it,  I  was 
returning  mournfully  from  a  funeral,  when  my 
curiosity  led  me  to  read  a  paper  which  was  wafered 
up  in  a  shoemaker's  shop  in  the  Dover  Road.  It 
did  not  look  like  a  trade  announcement,  nor  was  it, 
for  it  bore  in  a  good  bold  handwriting  these  words  : 
'  Because  thou  hast  made  the  Lord,  which  is  my 
refuge,  even  the  Most  High,  thy  habitation  :  there 
shall  no  evil  befall  thee,  neither  shall  any  plague 
come  nigh  thy  dwelling.'  The  effect  on  my  heart 
was  immediate.  Faith  appropriated  the  passage  as 
her  own.  I  felt  secure,  refreshed,  girt  with  immor- 
tality. I  went  on  with  my  visitation  of  the  dying 
in  a  calm  and  peaceful  spirit;  I  felt  no  fear  of  evil 
and  I  suffered  no  harm.  The  providence  which 
moved  the  tradesman  to  place  those  verses  on  the 
window  I  gratefully  acknowledge,  and  in  the  remem- 
brance of  its  marvellous  power  I  adore  the  Lord  my 
God." 


CHAPTER  V 

THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE 

May  lS54i— December  1859 

From  the  beginning  there  were  those  who  recog- 
nised the  young  London  preacher  as  a  prophet  for 
his  time,  and  as  the  weeks  went  on  the  discovery  was 
made  by  increasing  numbers.  Their  estimate  was  a 
true  one,  for  in  retrospect  to-day  no  more  fitting 
words  can  be  found  to  describe  him  than,  "  There 
was  a  man  sent  from  God."  Before  he  attained  his 
majority  he  was  conscious  that  he  was  a  man  with  a 
mission,  and  such  a  man  always  bears  a  charmed  Hfe. 

Dr.  Joseph  Parker,  speaking  in  the  Tabernacle 
years  after,  at  the  Spurgeon  Jubilee,  said  :  "  A  greater 
Baptist  than  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  to  pass  through  all 
the  stages  he  had  passed  through  in  popular  estima- 
tion. A  reed  shaken  with  the  wind,  a  nine  days' 
wonder,  a  flash  in  the  pan,  a  little  momentary  flutter 
— that  was  the  first  step.  Then  the  man  clothed  in 
soft  raiment,  seeking  for  himself,  feathering  his  own 
nest,  making  a  good  thing  of  it — that  was  the  next 
step.  But  a  prophet,  yea,  more  than  a  prophet — 
that  was  the  last  step  in  the  process,  and  to  that 
step  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  come."  ^ 

But  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  prophet  all  along.  Like 
Paul,  he  could  in  his  measure  say  that  the  Gospel  he 
preached  was  not  after  man.  "  For  neither  did  I 
receive  it  from  man,  nor  was  I  taught  it,  but  it  came 

72 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    73 

to  me  through  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Like 
the  elder  Pitt,  he  leaped  full-grown  upon  the  stage, 
an  acknowledged  prince  amongst  his  fellows,  wielding 
his  tools  with  skill,  and  fulfilling  his  task  with  ease. 

"  He  was  not  '  dandled  and  cosseted  by  a  superfine 
education '  into  a  great  preacher,  any  more  than 
Edmund  Burke  was  prepared  by  similar  advantages 
to  become  a  distinguished  legislator  and  orator. 
Nitor  in  adversum  was  the  motto  of  both."  ^  Even 
a  Jewish  writer  could  recognise  the  seal  of  God  on 
such  a  ministry.  '^  Spurgeon  was  a  powerful  instance 
of  the  difference  between  scholastic  attainment  and 
genius,"  he  says.  "  There  was  much  of  the  Old 
Hebrew  Prophet  about  him,  and,  like  all  Puritans, 
his  soul  was  saturated  with  the  Old  Testament."  ^ 

It  was  an  Anglican  journal  that  declared,  at  his 
death,  that  "  every  now  and  then  some  one  takes 
the  world  by  storm.  Without  succeeding  to  any- 
body else's  post,  the  newcomer  makes  for  himself  a 
definite  place  in  the  world's  consciousness,  and  a 
recognised  influence,  for  good  or  for  ill,  in  some 
department  of  the  world's  work.  He  may  be  states- 
man, soldier,  poet,  artist  or  preacher,  but  he  is  unique. 
That  is  the  type  of  man  whose  influence  lives  on,  and 
whose  figure  becomes  historical.  If  we  mistake  not, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  belongs  to  this  small  class  of  persons 
whose  career  seems  independent  of  circumstances  just 
as  their  genius  is  independent  of  training."  * 

His  prophetic  gift  became  daily  more  evident. 
Wider  and  wider  grew  the  circle  of  his  influence, 
steadier  and  steadier  the  light  shone.  While  eccle- 
siastics debated,  and  journalists  laughed,  the  people 
eagerly  sought  for  the  building  that  seemed  as  if  it 
had  been  placed  in  that  South  London  by-way  to 
elude  their  search.     But,  like  his  Master,  Spurgeon 


74  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

could  not  be  hid.  The  scene  when  he  was  preaching 
there  in  those  early  days  was  recalled  in  a  vein  of 
friendly  banter  by  a  Society  journal,  famous  for  its 
caricatures,  when  seventeen  years  afterwards  it 
selected  him  as  its  subject.  "  In  1853,"  it  said, 
"  the  fame  of  his  natural  oratory  won  for  him  the 
position  of  minister  of  New  Park  Street  Chapel, 
which  soon  overflowed  with  his  audiences,  so  that 
the  narrow  streets  were  blocked,  and  the  public- 
houses  were  crowded  with  those  who  could  not  find 
room  in  the  chapel,  or  who,  on  leaving  it  with  an 
awakened  sense  of  sin,  felt  it  to  be  a  relief  to  quench 
the  spirit  in  a  mug  of  beer."  ^ 

That  half- humorous,  half-true  description  by  a 
man  of  the  world,  reflects  the  heterogeneous  con- 
ditions of  the  time.  After  a  few  months  it  became 
quite  evident  that  the  chapel  was  all  too  small  for 
the  congregations  that  gathered  in  increasing  volume. 
Not  only  the  seats,  but  the  aisles,  and  even  the  window- 
sills  were  crowded,  and  hundreds  lingered  at  the  doors 
in  the  hope  of  hearing  snatches  of  the  sermon.  Of 
course  the  atmosphere  became  stifling,  and  from  the 
beginning  that  was  a  thing  he  could  not  endure. 
"  His  eyes  continually  hungered  for  the  sight  of  green 
fields,  and  his  homestead  in  later  years  was  always 
so  situated  that  his  ear  could  drink  in  the  song  of 
the  morning  lark,  and  the  matin  strains  of  the  night- 
ingale, and  his  heart  feel  th^  sweet  and  refining 
influence  that  comes  from  wood  and  vale."  ^  But 
though  he  urged  the  deacons  to  improve  the  venti- 
lation of  the  place,  nothing  was  attempted  until 
one  morning  it  was  discovered  that  some  one  had 
been  round  the  building  and  had  broken  a  good  many 
of  the  windows.  It  was  suggested  in  the  officers' 
meeting   that   a   reward    should   be   offered    for   the 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    75 

discovery  of  the  person  who  had  dared  to  do  such  a 
thing,  but  Spurgeon  dissuaded  them  from  this  course, 
and  the  offender  was  never  discovered,  though 
several  persons  made  a  shrewd  guess  as  to  his  iden- 
tity. If  the  offer  of  the  reward  had  been  successfully 
made,  Spurgeon  himself  would,  of  course,  have  been 
both  the  winner  and  the  culprit.  The  nearest  he 
ever  came  to  a  confession  was  when  he  showed  a 
stout  stick  "  that  might  have  done  it."  Anyhow, 
the  deacons  were  stirred  to  action. 

The  young  preacher  was  never  scared  by  the  assump- 
tions of  officials.  Once  in  those  early  days  he  was 
somewhat  late  for  an  engagement,  an  exceptional 
occurrence,  and  a  pompous  deacon  met  him,  severely 
holding  out  his  watch,  face-front,  as  he  approached. 
As  if  quite  unconscious  of  the  implied  rebuke,  Spurgeon 
took  the  watch  in  his  hand,  examined  it  carefully, 
and  handed  it  back  saying  that  it  really  was  a  very 
good  watch,  but  seemed  somewhat  out  of  repair. 

But  the  crowning  audacity  was  witnessed  one 
Sunday  when  the  preacher,  turning  to  the  wall 
behind  the  pulpit,  declared  that  "  by  faith  the  walls 
of  Jericho  fell  down,  and  by  faith  this  wall  shall 
come  down  too."  It  was  certainly  an  entirely  uncon- 
ventional method  of  suggesting  an  enlargement  of 
the  premises ;  the  deacons  were  aghast  at  the  proposal, 
and  one  of  them  did  not  scruple  to  tell  him  that  they 
must  not  hear  of  it  again.  In  spite  of  that,  a  little 
later  he  carried  the  church  with  him,  and  two  thousand 
pounds  were  spent  in  throwing  schools  and  vestries 
into  the  chapel,  and  building  a  new  school  at  the 
side  with  sliding  windows,  so  that  it  might  be  used 
if  necessary  for  the  congregation.  This  work  occupied 
from  February  11  to  May  27,  1855,  and  during  the 
alterations  the  services  were  held  in  Exeter  Hall. 


76  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

Such  a  course  would  to-day  cause  slight  comment. 
Then  it  was  considered  quite  extraordinary  that  a 
congregation  should  meet  for  Christian  worship  in  a 
public  hall.  If  any  hall  might  have  been  counted 
suitable  for  the  purpose,  it  was  the  already  famous 
gathering-place  of  the  May  Meetings,  but  the  pro- 
prieties of  the  time  seemed  to  be  seriously  com- 
promised by  the  action.  Spurgeon  was  not  indeed 
the  first  to  hold  religious  services  in  secular  buildings, 
any  more  than  Columbus  was  the  first  to  cross  the 
Atlantic,  but  previous  attempts  had  been  chiefly 
provincial  and  inconspicuous.  Now  in  the  very 
heart  of  the  metropolis  and  under  the  eye  of  the 
London  Press  this  invasion  was  witnessed,  and  the 
leader  of  the  movement  had  to  accept  the  honour 
and  the  opposition  which  are  the  usual  lot  of  pioneers. 

The  hall  was  crowded  from  the  beginning,  the 
Strand  was  blocked  with  carriages,  and  Spurgeon 
began  to  be  the  talk  of  the  town.  Slanders  and 
fables  grew  with  the  crowd,  nothing  seemed  too 
absurd  to  contribute  to  the  gossip  of  the  hour. 
Some  of  the  criticisms  were  amusing,  many  of  them 
ill-natured,  and  they  need  not  be  recalled ;  their  authors 
probably  were  afterwards  ashamed  of  them.  On 
March  4,  1855,  he  wrote  to  his  father  about  one 
"  slanderous  libel,"  and  says,  ''  For  myself  I  will 
rejoice,  the  devil  is  roused,  the  Church  is  awakening, 
and  I  am  counted  worthy  to  suffer  for  Christ's  sake. 
Good  ballast,  father,  good  ballast." 

To  this  period  belong  several  of  the  most  effective 
of  the  legion  of  caricatures  that  have  enlivened  the 
records  of  his  life.  One  of  them  represents  a  bishop 
drawing  a  coach  with  two  horses,  "  Church  and 
State  " ;  the  other  the  young  preacher  with  flowing 
hair  seated  on  a  locomotive  engine — "  The  Spurgeon  " 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    77 

—the  titles  being  "  The  Slow  Coach  "  and  "  The 
Fast  Train."  Another,  entitled  "  Brimstone  and 
Treacle,"  represented  two  preachers,  one  with  eyes 
and  mouth  wide  open  and  hands  extended,  the  other 
in  his  robes  with  simpering  smile.  A  third,  "  Catch- 
em-alive  o',"  represents  Spurgeon  with  a  tall  hat  of 
fly-paper;  the  people  as  flies.  A  fourth  the  Arch- 
bishop of  Canterbury  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  as  conductors 
on  rival  omnibuses.  It  is  evident  that,  at  any  rate, 
Spurgeon  was  counted  as  different  from  the  ordinary 
run  of  preachers. 

These  things  told  upon  him  severely  at  first.  He 
writes,  for  instance,  to  the  lady  who  was  to  be  his 
wife  :  "  I  am  down  in  the  valley  partly  because  of 
two  desperate  attacks  upon  me,  but  all  the  scars  I 
receive  are  scars  of  honour,  so,  faint  heart,  on  to  the 
battle." 

The  deep  heart-searching  that  these  attacks  caused 
him  may  be  guessed  from  a  passage  in  one  of 
his  sermons  two  years  later.  "  I  shall  never  forget 
the  circumstance,"  he  says,  "  when  a  slanderous 
report  against  my  character  came  to  my  cars,  and 
my  heart  was  broken  in  agony  because  I  should  have 
to  lose  that,  in  preaching  Christ's  Gospel.  I  fell  on 
my  knees  and  said,  '  Master,  I  will  not  keep  back 
even  my  reputation  from  Thee.  If  I  must  lose  that 
too,  then  let  it  go ;  it  is  the  dearest  thing  I  have,  but 
it  shall  go,  if,  like  my  Master,  they  shall  say  I  have  a 
devil  and  am  mad;  or,  like  Him,  a  drunken  man 
and  a  winebibber.'  "  But  soon  the  reproaches  came 
so  thick  and  fast  that  they  wrought  their  own  cure, 
and  a  little  while  after  we  find  him  in  a  different 
mood.  "  This  I  hope  I  can  say  from  my  heart — if 
to  be  made  as  the  mire  of  the  street  again,  if  to 
be  the  laughing-stock  of  fools  and  the  song  of  the 


78  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

drunkard  once  more,  will  make  me  more  serviceable 
to  my  Master,  and  more  useful  to  His  cause,  I  will 
prefer  it  to  all  this  multitude,  or  to  all  the  applause 
man  can  give."  And  to  the  end  he  was  able  to  bear 
blame  rather  than  praise.  He  valued  the  goodwill 
of  people  as  much  as  the  rest  of  us,  and  yearned  for 
friendship,  but  early  he  had  learnt  the  worthlessness 
of  merely  human  applause  or  blame.  In  a  very  real 
sense  he  was  hidden  in  God's  pavilion  from  the 
strife  of  tongues.  "  I  grew  inured  to  falsehood  and 
spite.  The  stings  at  last  caused  me  no  more  pain 
than  if  I  had  been  made  of  iron;  but  at  first  they 
were  galling  enough." 

''  I  was  reading  some  time  ago,"  he  said  on  one 
occasion,  ''  an  article  in  a  newspaper,  very  much  in 
my  praise.  It  always  makes  me  feel  sad — so  sad 
that  I  could  cry — if  ever  I  see  anything  praising  me ; 
it  breaks  my  heart ;  I  feel  I  do  not  deserve  it,  and  then 
I  say,  '  Now  I  must  try  to  be  better,  so  that  I  may 
deserve  it.'  If  the  world  abuses  me,  I  am  a  match 
for  that;  I  begin  to  like  it.  It  may  fire  all  its  big 
guns  at  me,  I  will  not  return  a  solitary  shot,  but 
just  store  them  up,  and  grow  rich  upon  the  old  iron." 

To  his  friend  to  whom  he  wrote  at  intervals  during 
the  early  years,  speaking  of  the  early  success  at 
New  Park  Street,  and  the  enlargement  of  the  chapel, 
he  says  in  a  pithy  sentence,  "  Our  harvest  is  too  rich 
for  the  barn."  Later  he  writes,  "  Really  I  never 
seem  to  have  an  hour  to  call  my  own.  I  am  always 
at  it,  and  the  people  are  teasing  me  almost  to  death 
to  let  them  hear  my  voice.  It  is  strange  that  such 
power  should  be  in  one  small  body  to  crowd  Exeter 
Hall  to  suffocation,  and  block  up  the  Strand,  so  that 
pedestrians  have  to  turn  down  by-ways,  and  all 
other  traffic  is  at  a  standstill."     "  I  believe  I  could 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    79 

secure  a  crowded  audience  at  dead  of  night  in  a 
deep  snow."  The  extent  of  his  labours  at  this  time 
may  be  guessed  by  a  reference  in  a  subsequent  letter. 
"  Eleven  times  this  week  have  I  gone  forth  to  battle, 
and  at  least  thirteen  services  are  announced  for  next 
week.  Congregations  more  than  immense.  Every- 
where, at  all  hours,  places  are  crammed  to  the  doors. 
The  devil  is  wide  awake,  but  so  too  is  the  Master." 

Voices  which  gave  a  friendly  note  were  not  wanting. 
One  wrote  :  "It  was  a  remarkable  sight  to  see  this 
round-faced  country  youth  thus  placed  in  a  position 
of  such  solemn  and  arduous  responsibility,  yet 
addressing  himself  to  the  fulfilment  of  its  onerous 
duties  with  a  gravity,  self-possession  and  vigour 
that  proved  him  well  fitted  to  the  task  he  had 
assumed."  '  Another,  "  We  found  him  neither  ex- 
travagant nor  vulgar.  His  voice  is  clear  and  musical ; 
his  language  plain ;  his  style  flowing  yet  terse ;  his 
method  lucid  and  orderly;  his  matter  sound  and 
suitable;  his  tone  and  spirit  cordial;  his  remarks 
always  pithy  and  pungent,  sometimes  familiar  and 
colloquial,  yet  never  light  nor  coarse,  much  less 
profane.  To  the  pith  of  Jay  and  the  plainness  of 
Rowland  Hill,  he  adds  much  of  the  familiarity  of  the 
Huntingtonian  order  of  ultra-Calvinistic  preachers."  ^ 
Still  another,  "  His  appearance  and  labours  in  this 
metropolis  have  excited  in  all  religious  circles,  and 
even  beyond  them,  attention  and  surprise,  if  not 
admiration.  Scarcely  more  than  a  youth  in  years, 
comparatively  untutored,  and  without  a  name,  he 
enters  the  greatest  city  in  the  world,  and  almost 
simultaneously  commands  audiences  larger  than  have 
usually  listened  to  her  most  favoured  preachers  "  ^ 

"  Beyond  a  doubt,"  says  Edwin  Paxton  Hood  in 
The  Lamps   of  the   Temple,    "  the   lad   is   impudent, 


80  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

very  impudent;  were  he  not,  he  could  not,  at  sueh 
an  age,  be  where  he  is,  or  what  he  is.  It  must  be 
admitted  that  amongst  all  the  popularities  there  is 
no  popularity  like  his.  Among  this — remarkable  or 
not,  according  to  the  reader's  ideas — is  the  treatment 
of  the  young  preacher  by  his  brethren — shall  we  say 
brethren? — in  the  ministry.  We  understand  they 
have  generally  agreed  to  treat  him  as  a  black  sheep. 
He  is  said  to  imitate  Robert  Hall  and  William  Jay. 
We  should  give  him  a  different  location.  He  has 
the  unbridled  and  undisciplined  fancy  of  Hervey 
without  his  elegance ;  but  instead  of  that  the  drollery 
of  Berridge  and  the  ubiquitous  earnestness  of  Row- 
land Hill,  in  his  best  days.  He  who  determines 
never  to  use  a  word  that  shall  grate  harshly  on  the 
ears  of  a  refined  taste,  may  be  certain  that  he  will 
never  be  extensively  useful;  the  people  love  the 
man  who  will  condescend  to  their  idiom,  and  the 
greatest  preachers — those  who  have  been  the  great 
apostles  of  a  nation — have  always  condescended  to 
this.  Bossuet,  Massillon,  Hall,  Chalmers,  McAU, 
were  the  doctors  of  the  pulpit;  at  their  feet  sat  the 
refinement,  the  scholarship,  the  politeness  of  their 
times;  but  such  men  as  Luther  and  Latimer,  St. 
Clara  and  Keen,  Whitfield  and  Christmas  Evans — 
such  men  always  seized  on  the  prevailing  dialect, 
and  made  it  tell  with  immense  power  on  their  audi- 
tors," As  to  Spurgeon,  "  he  is  the  topic  and  theme 
of  remark  now  in  every  part  of  England ;  and  severe 
as  some  of  his  castigators  are,  he  returns  their  casti- 
gations  frequently  with  a  careless,  downright  hearty 
goodwill." 

One  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  earliest  and  staunchest 
friends  was  Mr.  James  Grant,  editor  of  The  Morning 
Advertiser,  a  paper  that  then  ranked  with  The  Times 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    81 

in  circulation  and  influence.  After  the  second  service 
in  Exeter  Hall,  he  wrote,  "  It  will  easily  be  believed 
how  great  must  be  the  popularity  of  this  almost 
boyish  preacher,  when  we  mention  that  yesterday 
both  morning  and  evening  the  large  hall,  capable  of 
holding  from  four  thousand  to  five  thousand  people, 
was  filled  in  every  part.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
Mr.  Spurgeon  possesses  superior  talents,  while  in 
some  of  his  happier  flights  he  rises  to  a  high  order  of 
pulpit  oratory.  It  is  in  pathos  that  he  excels,  though 
he  does  not  himself  seem  to  be  aware  of  that  fact. 
%He  is  quite  an  original  preacher;  has  evidently  made 
George  Whitefield  his  model;  and  like  that  unparal- 
leled preacher,  the  prince  of  pulpit  orators,  is  very 
fond  of  striking  apostrophes."  ^^ 

In  the  following  year  Mr.  Grant  reverted  to  the 
same  comparison.  "  Never  since  the  days  of  George 
Whitefield,"  he  said,  "  has  any  minister  of  religion 
acquired  so  great  a  reputation  as  this  Baptist 
preacher,  in  so  short  a  time.  Here  is  a  mere  youth, 
a  perfect  stripling,  only  twenty-one  years  of  age, 
incomparably  the  most  popular  preacher  of  the  day. 
There  is  no  man  within  her  Majesty's  dominions  who 
could  draw  such  immense  audiences;  and  none  who, 
in  his  happier  efforts,  can  so  completely  enthral  the 
attention,  and  delight  the  minds  of  his  hearers. 
Some  of  his  appeals  to  the  conscience,  some  of  his 
remonstrances  with  the  careless,  constitute  specimens 
of  a  very  high  order  of  oratorial  power.  When  pro- 
nouncing the  doom  of  those  who  live  and  die  in  a 
state  of  impenitence,  he  makes  the  vast  congregation 
quake  and  quail  in  their  seats.  He  places  their 
awful  destiny  in  such  vivid  colours  before  their  eyes 
that  they  almost  imagine  they  are  already  in  the 
regions  of  darkness  and  despair."  ^^ 


82  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

The  shrewdness  of  this  appreciation  may  be  ad- 
mitted when  we  find  Spurgeon  himself  writing  in 
1879,  "  There  is  no  end  to  the  interest  that  attaches 
to  such  a  man  as  George  Whitefield.  Often  as  I 
have  read  liis  fife,  I  am  conscious  of  a  distinct  quick- 
ening whenever  I  turn  to  it.  He  livedo  other  men 
seem  only  to  be  half-alive;  but  Whitefield  was  all 
life,  fire,  wing,  force.  My  own  model,  if  I  may  have 
such  a  thing  in  due  subordination  to  my  Lord,  is 
George  Whitefield;  but  with  unequal  footsteps  must 
I  follow  in  his  glorious  track." 

To  Spurgeon  we  might  apply  the  words  of  John 
Wesley,  when,  preaching  the  funeral  sermon  of  George 
Whitefield,  he  spoke  of  his  unparalleled  zeal,  his  inde- 
fatigable activity,  his  tender-heartedness  to  the  poor, 
deep  gratitude,  tender  friendship,  frankness  and  open- 
ness, courage  and  intrepidity,  great  plainness  of 
speech,  steadiness,  integrity.  "  Have  we  read,"  he 
said,  "  of  any  person  since  the  Apostles  who  testified 
the  Gospel  of  the  Grace  of  God  through  so  widely 
extended  a  space,  through  so  large  a  part  of  the 
habitable  world  ?  Have  we  read  of  any  person  who 
called  so  many  thousands,  so  many  myriads,  of  sinners 
to  repentance?  " 

In  the  midst  of  these  labours,  it  was  little  wonder 
that  his  voice  was  overtaxed;  he  had  not  learnt  yet 
its  perfect  use.  The  services  in  Exeter  Hall  proved 
almost  too  much  for  him.  His  wife  records  that 
"  sometimes  his  voice  would  almost  break  and  fail 
as  he  pleaded  with  sinners  to  come  to  Christ,  or 
magnified  the  Lord  in  His  sovereignty  and  righteous- 
ness. A  glass  of  chili  vinegar  always  stood  on  a  shelf 
under  the  desk  before  him,  and  I  knew  what  to 
expect  when  he  had  recourse  to  that  remedy.  I 
remember  with  strange  vividness  the  Sunday  evening 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    83 

when  he  preached  from  the  text,  '  His  name  shall 
endure  for  ever.'  It  was  a  subject  in  which  he 
revelled,  it  was  his  chief  delight  to  exalt  his  glorious 
Saviour,  and  he  seemed  in  that  discourse  to  be 
pouring  out  his  very  soul  and  life  in  homage  and 
adoration  before  his  Gracious  King.  But  I  really 
thought  he  would  have  died  there,  in  face  of  all  those 
people.  At  the  end  he  made  a  mighty  effort  to  recover 
his  voice;  but  utterance  well-nigh  failed,  and  only  in 
broken  accents  could  the  pathetic  peroration  be  heard — 
'Let  my  name  perish,  but  let  Christ's  name  last  for  ever! 
Jesus  !  Jesus !  Jesus  !  Crown  Him  Lord  of  all !  You 
will  not  hear  me  say  anything  else.  These  are  my  last 
words  in  Exeter  Hall  for  this  time.  Jesus!  Jesus! 
Jesus  !  Crown  Him  Lord  of  all ! '  and  then  he  fell 
back  almost  fainting  in  the  chair  behind  him." 

When  the  congregation  returned  to  the  enlarged 
chapel  on  May  31,  1855,  it  was  discovered  that  the 
expenditure  on  it  was  almost  wasted,  for  while  several 
hundreds  more  gained  admittance,  the  disappointed 
crowds  were  greater  than  ever,  and  after  a  year's 
trial  Exeter  Hall  had  again  to  be  requisitioned. 
Meanwhile  as  occasion  served,  Spurgeon,  like  White- 
field,  took  to  the  fields.  Writing  before  their  marriage 
to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  on  June  3  of  the  same  year,  he  says 
about  a  service  in  a  field  at  Hackney  :  "  Yesterday 
I  climbed  to  the  summit  of  a  minister's  glory.  My 
congregation  was  enormous,  I  think  ten  thousand, 
but  certainly  twice  as  many  as  at  Exeter  Hall.  The 
Lord  was  with  me,  and  the  profoundest  silence  was 
observed;  but  oh,  the  close— never  did  mortal  man 
receive  a  more  enthusiastic  oration  1  I  wonder  I  am 
alive  !  After  the  service  five  or  six  gentlemen  en- 
deavoured to  clear  a  passage,  but  I  was  borne  along, 
amid  cheers,   and   prayers,   and  shouts,   for  about  a 


84  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

quarter  of  an  hour — it  really  seemed  more  like  a 
week !  I  was  hurried  round  and  round  the  field 
without  hope  of  escape  until,  suddenly  seeing  a 
nice  open  carriage,  with  two  occupants,  standing 
near,  I  sprang  in,  and  begged  them  to  drive  away. 
This  they  most  kindly  did,  and  I  stood  up,  waving 
my  hat,  and  crying,  ''  The  blessing  of  God  be  with 
you  !  "  while  from  thousands  of  heads  the  hats  were 
lifted  and  cheer  after  cJieer  was  given.  Surely  amid 
these  plaudits  I  can  hear  the  low  rumbling  of  an 
advancing  storm  of  reproaches;  but  even  this  I  can 
bear  for  the  Master's  sake." 

Nor  was  he  mistaken.  His  friend  W.  P.  Lockhart, 
at  his  death,  recalled  some  of  the  phases  of  the  storm 
so  soon  to  break ;  "  One  remembers  that  long  years 
ago,  on  the  occasion  of  some  popular  demonstration 
in  London,  his  carriage  was  driven  through  the  crowd, 
and  when  its  occupant  was  recognised  he  was  heartily 
hooted  by  the  mob,  and  one  remembers  also  the 
scornful  notices  of  a  portion  of  the  Press,  which  drew 
from  him  one  of  the  most  striking  things  he  ever 
uttered—'  A  true  Christian  is  one  who  fears  God, 
and  is  hated  by  the  Saturday  Review.''  Perhaps  one 
of  the  most  remarkable  criticisms  in  those  early  days 
was  that  of  Lord  Houghton— then  Monckton  Milnes— 
who  said  of  him,  '  When  he  mounted  the  pulpit  you 
might  have  thought  of  him  as  a  hairdresser's  assis- 
tant; when  he  left  it,  he  was  an  inspired  apostle.' 
The  people  might  frown  or  fawn,  it  mattered  little 
to  him,  not  one  jot  did  he  abate  of  what  he  believed 
to  be  the  truth  of  God.  His  Pauline  Calvinism,  his 
sturdy  Puritanism,  his  old-fashioned  apostolic  gospel, 
remained  unchanged  to  the  end." 

For  a  year  all  the  services  continued  in  the  enlarged 
chapel  at  New  Park  Street.     The  two  outstanding 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    85 

occasions,  when  all  the  gatherings  were  wonderful, 
were  the  Watch-night  Service  at  the  end  of  1855, 
and  his  marriage  on  January  8,  1856.  One  of  his 
earliest  friends  was  John  Anderson,  the  minister  of 
Helensburgh,  and  he  visited  London  this  year.  His 
attention  was  first  attracted  to  him  by  the  reading 
of  one  of  his  printed  sermons.  "  I  had  no  sooner 
read  a  few  paragraphs  of  it  than  I  said,  '  Here  at 
last  is  a  preacher  to  my  mind,  one  whom  not  only  I, 
but  Paul  himself,  I  am  persuaded,  were  he  on  earth, 
would  hear,  approve  and  own.'  I  remember  well 
saying  to  myself,  '  I  would  rather  have  been  the 
author  of  that  sermon  than  of  all  the  sermons,  or 
volumes  of  sermons,  published  in  my  day.'  I  had 
lately  before  this  been  reading  Guthrie  and  Caird, 
but  here  was  something  entirely  different,  and,  to  my 
mind,  in  all  that  constitutes  a  genuine  and  good 
Gospel  sermon,  infinitely  superior." 

By  the  courtesy  of  a  police  officer,  Mr.  Anderson, 
because  he  had  come  from  Scotland,  was  admitted 
to  the  chapel,  already  crowded  when  he  arrived. 

"My  friend  and  I  thought  ourselves  happy,  like 
Eutychus  of  old,  in  being  permitted  to  sit  '  in  a 
window,'  with  a  dense  crowd  in  the  passage  at  our 
feet.  I  asked  a  man  near  me  if  he  came  regularly; 
he  said  he  did.  '  Why,  then,'  I  asked,  '  do  you  not 
take  a  seat?'  'Seat,'  he  replied,  'such  a  thing  is 
not  to  be  had  for  love  or  money.  I  got  a  ticket  for 
leave  to  stand.'  The  Church,  I  am  told,  is  seated 
for  fifteen  hundred,  but  what  with  the  schoolroom 
and  passages,  which  were  choke-full,  there  could  not 
have  been  fewer  in  it  than  three  thousand.  The 
service  commenced  with  the  singing  of  a  hymn. 
Never  did  I  hear  such  singing;  it  was  like  the  voice 
of  many  waters,  or  the  roll  of  thunder.     Then  came 


86  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

the  prayer.  Phrenologically  speaking,  I  should  say 
that  veneration  is  not  largely  developed  in  Mr. 
Spurgeon;  yet  that  prayer  was  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  and  impressive  I  have  ever  heard.  He 
prayed  for  the  unconverted.  '  Some,'  he  said,  '  were 
present  who  were  in  that  state,  who  in  all  likelihood 
would  never  be  in  that  or  any  other  church  again — 
who  were  that  night  to  hear  their  last  sermon — 
who,  the  next  Lord's  day,  would  not  be  in  this  world, 
and  where  would  they  be?  There  was  but  one 
place  where  they  would  be — in  Hell.'  He  then  said, 
or  rather  cried  out,  '  O  God !  must  they  perish  ? 
Wilt  thou  not  save  them  and  make  the  sermon  the 
means  of  their  conversion  ?  '  The  effect  was  over- 
whelming :  many  wept,  and  I  am  not  ashamed  to 
say  I  was  one  of  them. 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  equally  great  in  the  tender  and 
in  the  terrible.  Nor  is  he  without  humour.  His 
taste,  according  to  some,  is  bad.  It  is,  I  admit, 
often  so.  But  then  think  of  the  immaturity  of  his 
years.  I  was  told  he  was  conceited.  I  saw  no 
proofs  of  it;  and  if  I  had,  was  I  on  that  account  to 
think  less  of  his  sermons?  I  do  not  say  that  I  will 
not  eat  good  bread  because  the  baker  is  conceited. 
His  conceit  may  be  a  bad  thing  for  himself,  his  bread 
is  very  good  for  me.  I  am  far  from  thinking  Mr. 
Spurgeon  perfect.  In  this  respect  he  is  not  like 
Whitefield,  who  from  the  first  was  as  perfect  an 
orator  as  he  was  at  the  last.  In  respect  of  his  power 
over  an  audience,  and  a  London  one  in  particular, 
I  should  say  he  is  not  inferior  to  Whitefield  himself."  ^^ 

Mr.  Anderson  afterwards  became  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
warm  friend,  and  he  treasured  a  book  presented  to 
him  in  which  was  the  following  inscription— 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    87 

"  To  my  dear  friend  John  Anderson,  whose  bound- 
less generosity  compels  me  to  add  an  injunction  to  all 
men,  women  and  children  on  the  face  of  the  earth, 
that  none  of  them  dare  accept  this  volume  of  him 
when  he  shall  offer  it,  seeing  that  this  is  a  small 
token  of  the  undying  love  of 

"C.  H.  Spurgeon." 
February  21,  1859. 

As  to  the  question  of  conceit,  that  criticism  fol- 
lowed him  all  his  life,  and  in  later  years  he  gave  a 
sufficient  answer.  "  A  friend  of  mine  was  calling 
upon  him  some  time  ago,"  writes  one  after  his  death, 
"  and  happened  to  say,  '  Do  you  know,  Mr.  Spur- 
geon, some  people  think  you  conceited  ?  '  The  great 
preacher  smiled  indulgently,  and  after  a  pause  said, 
'  Do  you  see  those  bookshelves  ?  They  contain  hun- 
dreds, nay,  thousands  of  my  sermons  translated  into 
every  language  under  heaven.  Well,  now,  add  to 
this  that  ever  since  I  was  twenty  years  old  there 
never  has  been  built  a  place  large  enough  to  hold 
the  numbers  of  people  who  wished  to  hear  me  preach, 
and,  upon  my  honour,  when  I  think  of  it,  I  wonder 
I  am  not  more  conceited  than  I  am.'  "  Upon  which 
the  writer  remarks,  "  That  is  the  kind  of  bonhomie 
that  disarms  criticism."  ^^ 

Thirty-five  years  afterwards.  Sir  William  Robert- 
son Nicoll  takes  down  the  volume  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
Serinons  preached  in  1855,  and  this  is  what  he  says — 

"  The  life  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  book,  its  red-hot 
earnestness,  at  once  impresses  the  reader.  Those 
who  think  of  the  preacher  as  in  early  days  little  more 
than  a  buffoon,  might  be  challenged  to  find  in  his 
first  volume  of  sermons  anything  to  provoke  a  smile. 
The  burden  of  all  is  '  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come ; 


88  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

lay  hold  on  eternal  life.'  The  order  is  intentional, 
for  the  supreme  thought  in  the  preacher's  mind  is 
the  imminent  peril  of  his  hearers.  He  does  not 
shrink  from  the  terrible  pictures  of  the  damned  in 
their  misery  and  despair;  but  the  earnestness  of 
his  pleading  with  men  is  even  more  awful.  Flee  from 
the  wrath  to  come ;  this  burden  is  hardly  found  now, 
not  even  in  the  sermons  of  the  same  distinguished 
preacher.  There  is  something  soporific  in  the  air. 
But  if  the  object  of  preaching  is  to  reproduce  the 
New  Testament,  a  change  must  come,  and  perhaps 
it  may  come  from  an  unexpected  place.  Perhaps 
the  interpreters  of  natural  law  may  yet  tell  us  that 
punishment  is  in  its  nature  everlasting,  and  then 
Christianity  will  come  with  its  gospel  declaring  that 
the  sentence  of  the  law  may  be  reversed. 

''  It  goes  along  with  this  that  Mr.  Spurgeon's  view 
of  the  world,  even  in  his  youth,  was  severe.  Perhaps 
these  moods  come  ever  and  anon  to  all  greatly- 
endowed  natures;  moods  produced  by  unsought  and 
wringing  facts;  moods  when  love  becomes  anxiety, 
when  hope  sinks  to  misgiving  and  faith  to  hope, 
when  it  seems  as  if  the  world  were  indeed  very  evil 
and  the  times  waxing  late. 

"  The  young  preacher  was  from  the  first  a  theo- 
logian. We  do  not  mean  merely  that  he  was  a 
Calvinist,  he  was  much  more  than  that.  He  pos- 
sessed the  theological  temper,  without  which  the  final 
message  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Apostolic  Epistles 
is  practically  useless  and  enigmatic. 

"  '  I  think  I  am  bound  to  give  myself  unto  reading, 
and  not  to  grieve  the  Spirit  by  unthought-of  effu- 
sions,' says  the  youth.  He  has  been  faithful  to  that 
conviction,  and  to  this  diligence  the  splendour  of  his 
long  and  high  career  is  largely  due.    We  have  often 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    89 

expressed  the  conviction  that  even  by  his  own 
admirers  scant  justice  is  done  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
intellectual  power;  the  maturity,  the  freshness,  the 
range  of  this  book,  only  deepen  this  belief.  Coming 
from  a  youth  of  twenty,  it  is  a  miraculous  production. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  never  presumed 
on  his  talents,  he  has  gone  on  storing  up  treasure,  and 
speaks  from  a  full  and  exercised  mind."  ^^ 

About  this  time  a  pamphlet  was  issued  by  a  Doctor 
of  Divinity,  which  caused  a  great  stir  in  religious 
circles.  It  was  entitled  "  Why  so  popular  ?  An 
hour  with  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon."  It  is  addressed 
to  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself,  and  says — 

"  Your  ministry  has  attained  the  dignity  of  a 
moral  phenomenon.  You  stand  on  an  eminence  which, 
since  the  days  of  Whitefield,  no  minister — with  a 
single  exception,  if  indeed  there  be  one — of  any 
church  in  this  realm  has  attained.  You  have  access 
to  a  larger  audience  than  the  magic  of  any  other 
name  can  gather.  You  have  raised  a  church  from 
obscurity  to  eminence,  perhaps  I  might  add  (rumour 
is  my  authority)  from  spiritual  indigence  to  affluence. 

"  Nor  has  God  given  you  favour  with  your  own 
people  alone.  Blessed  with  a  vigorous  mind,  and 
great  physical  energy,  you  have  consecrated  all  to 
your  Master's  service,  and  hence  you  have  become 
an  untiring  evangelist.  East,  west,  north,  south, 
in  England,  Wales  and  Scotland,  your  preaching  is 
appreciated  by  the  people,  and  has  been  blessed  of 
God.  No  place  has  been  large  enough  to  receive  the 
crowds  that  flocked  to  hear  the  '  young  White- 
field,'  and  on  many  occasions  you  have  preached 
the  glorious  Gospel,  the  sward  of  the  green  earth 
being  the  floor  on  which,  and  the  vs\\i\t  of  the  blue 


90  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

heaven  the  canopy  under  which,  you  announced  to 
uncounted  thousands  '  all  the  words  of  this  life.'  " 

At  length  arrangements  were  made  to  return  to 
Exeter  Hall  for  the  evening  service,  the  morning 
service  being  continued  in  the  chapel.  The  first 
Exeter  Hall  service  in  this  second  series  was  on 
June  8,  1856,  and  the  crowds  were,  if  possible,  greater 
than  before — so  great  indeed  that  it  became  clear 
that  a  larger  building  was  necessary.  So  on  Octo- 
ber 6  a  meeting  was  held  to  initiate  the  enterprise; 
the  structure  was  spoken  of  as  likely  to  be  "  the 
largest  chapel  in  the  world,"  and  a  fund  was  started 
for  its  erection.  The  need  became  all  the  more  ap- 
parent when  the  proprietors  of  Exeter  Hall  intimated 
that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  let  their  building 
continuously  to  one  congregation. 

Some  temporary  expedient  was  necessary.  Happily 
at  this  time  the  Surrey  Music  Hall,  capable  of  holding 
ten  thousand  to  twelve  thousand  people,  became 
available.  It  was  erected  in  the  Royal  Surrey 
Gardens  for  concert  purposes,  and  the  bold  idea 
occurred  to  several  people  that  it  might  be  utilised 
for  Mr.  Spurgeon's  services.  Some  thought  it  would 
be  too  large,  others  that  it  would  be  very  unsuitable 
to  hold  Divine  service  in  a  place  of  worldly  amuse- 
ment. This  aspect  of  the  question  would  present  no 
difficulty  to  us  in  the  present  day,  so  many  ventures 
of  a  similar  nature  have  since  been  made,  but  nothing 
of  the  kind  had  then  been  attempted. 

The  news  that  Spurgeon  was  to  preach  in  the 
Concert  Hall  ran  through  London  like  wildfire.  "  In 
the  squares,  the  streets,  the  lanes,  the  alleys,  as  well 
as  in  the  workshops  and  counting-houses,  and  all  the 
chief  places  of  concourse,  it  h£ts  been,  through  each 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    91 

successive  day,  the  one  great  object  of  thought  and 
converse."  On  the  Sunday  evening,  October  19, 
1856,  the  crowds  that  had  been  gathering  since  the 
afternoon  were  enormous.  The  streets  in  the  vicinity 
were  packed  with  people.  Ten  thousand  persons 
were  in  the  Hall  and  another  ten  thousand  in  the 
Gardens  unable  to  enter.  The  sight  of  the  people 
at  first  unnerved  the  preacher,  but  he  soon  rallied, 
and  took  his  place  in  the  rostrum  to  pass  through 
the  ordeal  of  his  life. 

His  friend  Dr.  Campbell,  who  was  present,  wrote — 

"  Ecclesiastically  viewed  Sunday  last  was  one  of 
the  most  eventful  nights  that  have  descended  on  the 
metropolis  for  generations.  On  that  occasion  the 
largest,  most  commodious  and  most  beautiful  building 
erected  for  public  amusement  in  this  mighty  city 
was  taken  possession  of  for  the  purpose  of  proclaiming 
the  gospel  of  salvation.  There,  where  for  a  long 
period  wild  beasts  had  been  exhibited,  and  wilder 
men  had  been  accustomed  to  congregate,  in  countless 
multitudes,  for  idle  pastime,  was  gathered  together 
the  largest  audience  that  ever  met  in  any  edifice  in 
these  Isles  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  a  Nonconformist 
minister." 

The  service  began  before  the  appointed  time. 
After  a  few  words  of  greeting  there  came  a  prayer, 
a  hymn,  and  the  Scripture  reading,  with  a  running 
comment,  according  to  the  general  custom.  After 
another  hymn,  prayer  was  again  being  offered  when 
suddenly  there  was  a  cry  of  "  Fire  !  The  galleries 
are  giving  way,  the  place  is  falling."  It  may  have 
been  hysterical  excitement,  much  more  probably  it 
was  the  criminal  work  of  miscreants  bent  on  plunder. 
A  terrible  panic  ensued,  many  of  the  people  rushed 


92  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

for  the  doors,  stumbled,  fell,  were  piled  on  each 
other;  the  balustrade  of  the  stairs  broke  and  people 
toppled  over.  Seven  lost  their  lives,  and  twenty- 
eight  were  taken  to  hospital  seriously  injured. 

In  the  midst  of  it  all,  the  preacher,  ignorant  of  the 
extent  of  the  disaster,  unconscious  that  there  had 
been  any  fatal  accident,  endeavoured  to  quell  the 
tumult.  Many  of  the  people  resumed  their  seats 
when  it  became  apparent  there  was  no  cause  for 
alarm,  and  in  response  to  repeated  cries,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
endeavoured  to  preach.  He  told  them  that  the  text 
which  he  had  intended  to  take  was  in  the  third  chapter 
of  Proverbs,  the  thirty-third  verse,  "  The  curse  of 
the  Lord  is  upon  the  house  of  the  wicked;  but  He 
blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just,"  and  asked  the 
people  to  retire  gradually.  There  was  renewed  dis- 
turbance, and  a  hymn  was  sung.  Again  the  preacher 
urged  the  people  to  retire,  and  then  he  himself  was 
carried  fainting  from  the  pulpit,  and  the  next  day, 
stunned  and  helpless,  taken  to  a  friend's  house  in 
Croydon  that  he  might  escape  callers  and  in  quietness 
recover  his  mental  balance.  As  he  was  being  assisted 
from  the  carriage  at  Croydon  a  working-man  saw  him, 
and  stammered  :  "  It's  Mr.  Spurgeon,  isn't  it  ?  It 
must  be  his  ghost,  for  last  night  I  saw  him  carried 
out  dead  from  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall." 

If  he  had  been  dead  his  enemies  would  have  re- 
joiced, but,  being  alive,  he  was  traduced  and  slandered 
by  almost  the  entire  newspaper  press.  The  Saturday 
Review  excelled  itself  in  vituperation — the  wonder  was 
that  such  a  personage  could  be  notable  at  all,  it  was 
almost  useless  to  hold  up  Mr.  Spurgeon  as  a  very 
ordinary  impostor :  "  We  do  not  see  why  Mr.  Spurgeon 
should  have  a  monopoly  of  brazen  instruments  south 
of  the  Thames.     Whitefield  used  to  preach  at  Mxs, 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    93 

In  these  days  of  open  competition  we  perceive  no 
reason  why  the  practice  should  not  be  inverted. 
The  innovation  would  only  be  the  substitution  of  one 
set  of  amusements  for  another ;  or  rather,  an  addition 
to  our  list  of  Sunday  sports."  "  This  hiring  of 
places  of  amusement  for  Sunday  preaching  is  a 
novelty,  and  a  powerful  one.  It  looks  as  if  religion 
were  at  its  last  shift.  It  is  a  confession  of  weakness, 
rather  than  a  sign  of  strength.  It  is  not  wrestling 
with  Satan  in  his  strongholds— to  use  the  old  earnest 
Puritan  language — but  entering  into  a  very  cowardly 
truce  and  alliance  with  the  world."  Nearly  all  the 
London  papers  joined  in  the  chorus  of  condemnation. 

Meanwhile  Mr.  Spurgeon,  unconscious  of  most  of 
it,  spent  days  of  depression  and  heart-searching  in 
his  retirement;  no  light  shone  upon  him,  until  on 
walking  in  his  friend's  garden,  suddenly  the  message 
came  to  his  heart  concerning  his  Master :  "  Where- 
fore God  has  highly  exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a 
name  that  is  above  every  name,"  and  straightway 
he  was  comforted.  It  mattered  nothing  what  became 
of  Spurgeon  if  Jesus  was  exalted  and  praised.  So  with 
only  an  interval  of  one  Sunday,  he  was  back  again, 
discoursing  on  the  text  in  New  Park  Street  Chapel 
on  November  2,  1856.  He  declared  his  forgiveness 
of  those  whose  malice  had  caused  the  accident,  but 
asserted  his  determination  to  preach  in  the  place 
again. 

He  describes  these  days  of  darkness  in  his  first 
book,  The  Saint  and  his  Saviour :  "  Who  can  con- 
ceive the  anguish  of  my  sad  spirit?  I  refused  to  be 
comforted  :  tears  were  my  meat  by  day  and  dreams 
my  terror  by  night.  My  thoughts  were  all  a  case  of 
knives,  cutting  my  heart  in  pieces  until  a  kind  of 
stupor  of  grief  ministered  a  mournful  medicine  to  me. 


94  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

I  sought  and  found  a  solitude  which  seemed  congenial 
to  me.  I  could  tell  my  griefs  to  the  flowers,  and  the 
dews  could  weep  with  me.  My  Bible,  once  my  daily 
food,  was  but  a  hand  to  lift  the  sluices  of  my  woe. 
Prayer  yielded  no  balm  to  me.  There  came  the 
'  slander  of  many  ' — barefaced  fabrications,  libellous 
slanders,  and  barbarous  accusations.  These  alone 
might  have  scooped  out  the  last  drop  of  consolation 
from  my  cup  of  happiness,  but  the  worst  had  come  to 
the  worst,  and  the  utmost  malice  of  the  enemy  could 
do  no  more." 

"  On  a  sudden,  like  a  flash  of  lightning  from  the 
sky,  my  soul  returned  to  me.  I  was  free,  the  iron 
fetter  was  broken  in  pieces,  my  prison  door  was  open, 
I  leaped  for  joy  of  heart.  The  Name,  the  precious 
Name  of  Jesus,  was  like  Ithuriel's  spear,  bringing 
back  my  soul  to  its  right  and  proper  state.  I  was  a 
man  again,  and,  what  is  more,  a  believer.  The 
garden  in  which  I  stood  became  an  Eden  to  me,  and 
the  spot  was  most  solemnly  consecrated  in  my  most 
grateful  memory.  Then  did  I  give  to  my  Well- 
Beloved  a  song  touching  my  Well-Beloved.  Then 
did  I  cast  my  burden  on  the  Lord.  I  could  have 
riven  the  very  firmament  to  get  at  Him,  to  cast 
myself  at  His  feet,  and  lie  there  bathed  in  the  tears 
of  joy  and  love.  Never  since  the  day  of  my  con- 
version had  I  known  so  much  of  Him,  never  had 
my  spirit  leaped  with  such  unutterable  dehght. 
Scorn,  tumult,  and  war  seemed  less  than  nothing  for 
His  sake.  I  girded  up  my  loins  to  run  before  His 
chariot  and  shout  forth  His  glory." 

Two  more  Sundays  elapsed,  and  then  he  was  back 
to  the  scene  of  the  tragedy.  But  not  now  in  the 
evening;  it  seemed  to  be  the  safer  course,  although 
it  was  even  more  daring,  to  hold  the  morning  service 


THE   PROPHET   OF   THE   PEOPLE        95 

in  the  Music  Hall,  and  from  November  23,  1856,  to 
December  1859  this  arrangement  was  continued. 
The  smallest  acquaintance  with  Church  matters  will 
make  it  apparent  that  this  was  a  far  severer  test  of 
the  preacher's  power  over  the  people  than  the  service 
on  the  Sunday  evening.  But  they  came  in  unceasing 
crowds,  and  an  entirely  new  set  of  people  were 
touched.  The  matter  cannot  be  put  better  than  it 
was,  thirty  years  later,  by  one  of  the  leading  London 
newspapers,  which  at  the  time  of  the  accident  had 
not  a  hard  enough  word  to  say  of  him. 

"  Curiously  enough,"  it  writes,  "  it  was  an  accident 
of  a  serious  nature  that  first  drew  the  attention  of 
the  world  in  general  to  the  rising  influence  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon.  The  young  preacher — he  was  then  very 
young — had  already  secured  an  immense  following  on 
the  south  side  of  London.  But  the  world  on  the 
other  side,  the  world  north  of  the  Thames,  the  world 
of  society  and  of  the  clubs  and  the  West  End,  the 
world  of  Bloomsbury  and  Fitzroy  Square,  the  world 
of  Maida  Vale  and  Highgate,  all  these  various  micro- 
cosms knew  little  or  nothing  of  the  powerful  young 
preacher  whose  congregations  had  already  far  out- 
grown the  capacity  of  New  Park  Street  Chapel  in 
Southwark." 

But  when  the  accident  happened — 

*'  Mr.  Spurgeon  became  famous  at  once.  Society 
went  out  of  its  way,  put  itself  to  trouble,  to  hear  the 
young  preacher  whose  admirers  could  not  be  con- 
tained in  a  building  of  less  size  than  the  Great  Music 
Hall. 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon,  of  course,  would  have  been  known 
to  the  whole  public  of  these  countries  in  time,  even 


96  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

if  there  had  never  been  a  panic  and  a  rush  and  a 
catastrophe  in  the  Surrey  Music  Hall.  But  he  found 
himself  famous  the  morning  after  the  accident,  and 
he  kept  his  fame.  Naturally  he  met  with  some 
severe  and  scornful  criticism.  One  celebrated  critic, 
who  made  a  special  pilgrimage  to  the  south  side  to 
hear  him,  contrasted  him  in  words  of  melancholy 
scorn  with  Irving  and  Whitefield.  But  the  critic  had 
not  heard  Irving  or  Whitefield.  Perhaps  if  he  had 
been  a  critic  when  Irving  was  still  preaching,  he  would 
have  drawn  disparaging  comparison  between  him 
also  and  Whitefield.  Perhaps  if  he  had  lived  in 
Whitefield's  days  he  Avould  have  lamented  the  de- 
generacy of  the  age  that  accepted  such  a  man  as  a 
popular  preacher.  As  a  pulpit  orator  he  had  special 
advantages.  He  had  a  voice  of  marvellous  power, 
penetration,  and  variety  of  tone.  His  voice  has  been 
compared  with  that  of  O'Connell,  of  the  late  Lord 
Derby,  of  Mr.  Gladstone,  of  Dr.  McNeile,  the  famous 
Iviverpool  preacher,  and  of  various  other  orators 
living  or  dead.  He  had  resources,  readily  drawn 
upon,  of  pathos  and  a  certain  kind  of  humour;  and 
he  could  vivify  his  sermons  by  all  manner  of  telling 
and  homely,  sometimes  perhaps  too  homely,  illustra- 
tions. He  never  preached  over  his  listeners  or  at 
them.  He  always  talked  directly  to  them.  He  was 
always  intensely  in  earnest.  His  emotions  carried 
himself,  as  well  as  his  congregation,  away. 

"  The  qualities  by  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  secured  his 
influence  have  ever  since  enabled  him  to  keep  it, 
and  broaden  it,  and  deepen  it.  It  can  hardly  be 
said  that  his  influence  passed  nmch  outside  what 
we  may  call  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  denominational 
sphere.  It  did  not  overflow  the  obvious  limitations 
to  anything  like  the  same  extent  that  Mr.  Beecher's 


C.    H.    SPURGEON  :    AN    EARLY    PORTRAIT. 


THE  PROPHET  OF  THE  PEOPLE    97 

influence  did  at  one  time  in  the  United  States.  The 
various  Httle  worlds  of  which  we  have  already  spoken 
went  out  of  their  courses  to  hear  Mr.  Spurgeon,  but 
they  went  back  again."  ^* 

All  that  was  to  some  extent  true,  but  Mr.  Spurgeon 
had  compelled  even  the  highest  in  the  land  to  listen. 
True,  his  appeal  was  chiefly  to  the  middle  class.  At 
the  time  of  the  accident  one  London  newspaper  seized 
on  this  point.  Commenting  on  the  ordinary  con- 
gregations, it  asks,  and  it  might  almost  be  dealing 
with  the  conditions  of  to-day — 

"  But  where  are  the  artisan  classes  ?  So  very  scanty 
is  their  attendance  upon  the  most  noted  preachers, 
that  it  is  their  adhesion  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  which  has 
made  that  gentleman  a  prodigy  and  a  phenomenon. 
In  the  list  of  killed  and  wounded  at  the  Music  Hall 
are  journeymen  painters,  tanners,  and  milliners'  girls. 
It  is  worth  while  to  ask  the  reason  why. 

"  A  single  hearing  is  sufficient  to  answer  the 
question,  supposing  that  the  hearer  can  also  see. 
There  never  yet  was  a  popular  orator  who  did  not 
talk  more  and  better  with  his  arms  than  with  his 
tongue.  Mr.  Spurgeon  knows  this  instinctively,  and 
when  he  has  read  his  text  he  does  not  fasten  his  eyes 
on  a  manuscript  and  his  hands  on  a  cushion.  As 
soon  as  he  begins  to  talk  he  begins  to  act;  and  that 
not  as  if  declaiming  on  the  stage,  but  as  if  conversing 
with  you  in  the  street.  He  seems  to  shake  hands 
with  you  all  round  and  put  every  one  at  his  ease. 
His  colours  are  taken  from  the  earth  and  sky  of 
common  human  experience  and  aspirations.  He 
dips  his  pencil,  so  to  speak,  in  the  veins  of  the  nearest 
spectator,  and  makes  his  work  a  part  of  every  man's 
nature.     He  does  not  narrate  occurrences,  he  describes 


98  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

them  with  a  rough  graphic-  force  and  faithfulness. 
He  does  not  reason  out  his  doctrines,  but  announces, 
explains,  and  applies  them.  In  the  open  air  some  one 
may  interrupt  or  interrogate,  and  the  response  is  a 
new  effect.  In  short,  this  man  preaches  Christianity, 
his  Christianity,  at  any  rate,  as  Ernest  Jones  preaches 
Chartism,  and  as  Gough  preaches  temperance."  ^^ 

Dr.  Campbell  again  spoke  in  defence  of  the  young 
preacher — 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  in  all  respects  original,"  he  said, 
"  a  preacher  of  Heaven's  own  formation ;  and  hence 
all  is  nature  and  all  is  life,  while  that  life  and  that 
nature  are  among  the  millions  a  power.  Is  he  abiTipt, 
blunt,  direct?  It  is  nature.  Is  he  idiomatic,  col- 
loquial, playful,  dramatic?  It  is  nature.  Nature  is 
power;  artifice  impotence.  Without  nature  no  man 
can  please  much  and  please  long.  Nature  responds 
only  to  nature ;  it  turns  a  deaf  ear  to  all  that  is  con- 
trary. Art  may  captivate  the  fancy;  nature  alone 
can  subdue  the  heart.  What,  then,  is  the  source  of 
this  unprecedented  attraction?  It  is  primarily  in 
the  soul  of  the  man,  a  soul  large,  liberal,  and  loving. 

"  Since  the  days  of  Whitefield  no  man  has  exacted 
so  much  attention  in  this  metropolis,  and  the  result, 
as  in  a  former  age,  is  a  great  diversity  of  sentiment. 
Such  things,  however,  would  seem,  as  in  the  case  of 
Whitefield,  only  to  help  him  onward.  When  Foote, 
of  unhappy  memory,  wrote  The  Minor,  bringing 
Whitefield  on  the  stage  as  Dr.  Squintum — for  the 
great  orator  was  marked  by  that  visual  peculiarity 
— he  did  much  to  excite  public  attention  and  confirm 
Whitefield's  hold  of  the  better  section  of  society.  All 
such  opposition  and  misrepresentation  only  tend  to 
further  the  popularity  it  is  sought  to  check.   It  operates 


THE   PROPHET   OF   THE   PEOPLE        99 

like  air  on  the  furnace,  which  would  languish  and  die 
but  for  the  action  of  the  atmosphere. 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  no  negative  theologian.  White- 
field  in  this,  as  in  other  respects,  had  much  in  common 
with  Spurgeon.  Essences  must  not  be  confounded 
with  accidents.  The  peculiarities  which  often  dis- 
tinguish great  men  have  no  necessary  connection 
with  the  truth  which  they  propagate  in  common. 
A  firm  friend  of  Whitefield  has  left  it  on  record  that, 
whether  he  looked  grave  or  gay,  it  was  nature  acting 
in  him.  His  laugh  was  hearty,  his  weeping  '  loud  and 
passionate,'  and  while  his  manner  was  natural,  his 
language  was  simple — John  Bunyan's  English.  It 
was  indeed  that  he  used  '  market  language.'  Spur- 
geon, too,  we  repeat,  is  in  everything  a  child  of  nature ; 
he  is  everywhere  at  home.  A  master  of  dialogue,  he 
is  not  less  master  of  powerful  declamations — the  two 
great  things  for  which  Whitefield  himself  was 
remarkable."  ^^ 

For  three  years  the  services  in  the  Music  Hall 
continued  with  unabated  success,  and  the  current  of 
public  opinion  gradually  changed.  Even  The  National 
Review  gave  him  a  good  word.  Quoting  one  of  his 
sayings,  it  said  there  was  nothing  vulgar  in  it,  though 
it  was  grotesque  as  a  gargoyle;  and  contrasting  his 
style  with  much  of  the  ornate  and  hazy  preaching  of 
the  day,  it  declared — 

"  If  we  must  choose  between  the  two,  we  do  not 
know  whether  it  is  not  less  bad  to  handle  spiritual 
truths  as  you  would  handle  a  bullock,  than  to  handle 
them  as  you  would  handle  a  mist." 

A  costermonger  of  Kennington,  questioned  in  1908, 
remembered  Spurgeon  in  the  Surrey  Gardens  days  : 


100  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  He  was  a  stout  man  and  wore  a  broad-brimmed  hat. 
People  used  to  say  that  he  ran  down  the  theatre, 
and  yet  he  copied  a  lot  of  his  antics  from  there."  ^' 

To  gain  entrance  to  the  services,  tickets  were  neces- 
sary— this  in  order  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  people 
bent  on  mischief.  All  sorts  of  folk  applied  for  these 
tickets.  A  service  in  1857  is  described  by  "  an  eye- 
witness "  :  "  Every  seat  was  occupied  by  half-past 
ten  o'clock,  when  the  doors  were  opened  to  the 
public,  then  there  was  a  rush  of  excited  and  hurried 
people,  and  in  ten  minutes  every  inch  of  standing 
room  was  occupied.  Dr.  Livingstone  sat  on  the 
platform,  and  the  Princess  Royal,  as  well  as  the 
Duchess  of  Sutherland,  were  said  to  be  present." 
Lord  Palmerston  on  one  occasion  secured  a  ticket, 
but  was  prevented  attending  by  his  old  enemy,  the 
gout.  It  was  even  said  that  Queen  Victoria,  disguised, 
was  herself  once  present. 

A  reference  in  the  Greville  Memoirs  has  often  been 
quoted.     It  bears  date  February  8,  1857 — 

"  I  have  just  come  from  hearing  the  celebrated 
Mr.  Spurgeon.  He  is  certainly  very  remarkable,  and 
undeniably  a  fine  character ;  not  remarkable  in  person ; 
in  face  resembling  a  smaller  Macaulay ;  a  very  clear  and 
powerful  voice  which  was  heard  through  the  hall;  a 
manner  natural,  impassioned,  and  without  affectation 
or  extravagance;  wonderful  fluency  and  command  of 
language,  abounding  in  illustration,  and  very  often  of 
a  familiar  kind,  but  without  anything  ridiculous  or 
irreverent.  He  preached  for  about  three-quarters  of 
an  hour,  and,  to  judge  by  the  use  of  handkerchiefs  and 
the  audible  sobs,  with  great  effect."  ^^ 

Principal  Tulloch,  himself  a  famous  preacher, 
visited  the  Surrey  Music  Hall  in  May  1858,  in  com- 


THE   PROPHET   OF   THE   PEOPLE        101 

pany  with  Professor  Ferrier,  the  metaphysician,  and 
in  his  Life,  written  by  Mrs.  Ohphant,  the  following 
descriptive  passage  occurs,  Mr.  Spurgeon  being 
described  by  the  authoress  as  "  one  of  the  wonders 
of  society,  competing  with  Mr.  Charles  Kean,  if  not 
surpassing  him,  in  public  interest." 

"  We  have  just  been  to  hear  Spurgeon,"  Tulloch 
wrote,  "  and  have  both  been  so  much  impressed  that 
I  wish  to  give  you  my  impressions  while  they  are 
fresh.  As  we  came  out  we  both  confessed,  '  There  is 
no  doubt  about  ihat^''  and  I  was  struck  with  Ferrier's 
remarkable  expression,  '  I  feel  it  would  do  me  good 
to  hear  the  like  of  that,  it  sat  so  close  to  reality.' 

"  The  sermon  is  about  the  most  real  thing  I  have 
come  in  contact  with  for  a  long  while.  Guthrie  is 
as  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal  to  it;  and 
although  there  is  not  the  elevated  thought  and 
descriptive  felicity  of  Caird  (the  latter  especially, 
however,  not  wanting),  there  is  more  power.  Power, 
in  fact,  and  life  are  its  characteristics,  and  I  could 
not  help  being  pleased  that  I  had  hit  upon  the  man 
pretty  well  in  the  notice  of  him  along  with  Robertson 
and  Guthrie,  which  was  never  published. 

"  The  place  is  fully  adapted  for  preaching,  being 
the  largest,  lightest,  and  airiest  building  I  ever  saw. 
It  was  crammed,  of  course,  but  not  in  the  least  uncom- 
fortable, as  round  all  the  thickly-studded  benches 
there  was  a  wide  and  open  corridor,  with  window- 
doors  open,  out  and  in  of  which  you  could  walk  into 
the  gardens  (Surrey  Gardens)  as  you  liked;  and 
Ferrier  kept  taking  a  turn  now  and  then  during  the 
sermon.  He  began  the  service  with  a  short  prayer, 
then  sang  the  twenty-third  Psalm,  but  instead  of  our 
fine  old  version,  some  vile  version,  in  which  the  simple 


102  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

beauty  of  the  hymn  is  entirely  lost.  Then  he  read 
and  expounded  the  thirty-second  chapter  (I  think)  of 
Numbers.  His  remarks  were  very  good  and  to  the 
point,  with  no  display  or  misplaced  emotion.  He 
then  prayed  more  at  length,  and  this  was  the  part  of 
the  service  I  least  liked. 

"  He   preached   from   the   same   chapter   he   read, 
about  the  spies  from  the  land  of  Canaan — the  good  and 
bad  spies.     It  was   a  parable,   he   said,   of  religion. 
Canaan  is  not  rightly  taken  as  a  type  of  heaven,  but 
of  the   religious   life.     Then,  after  speaking  of  men 
of  the  world  judging  religion  (which,  however,  they 
had  no  right  to  do)  from  those  who  professed  it  rather 
than   from   the   Bible— which   in   thought   and   grasp 
was  the  fullest  part  of  the  sermon— he  said  he  would 
speak  of  two  classes  of  people,  the  bad  spies  first, 
those  who  made  a  great  ado  about  religion  and  did 
not  show  its  power,  and  then  the  good  spies.     His 
description  here  was  graphic  beyond  what  I  can  give 
you  an  idea  of,  the  most  telling  satire,  cutting  home, 
yet  not  overdone,  as  he  spoke  of  the  gloomy  religionist 
who  brought  up  a  bad  report  of  the  land  of  religion, 
making  himself  and  his  wife  and  children  miserable, 
drawing  down  the  bhnds  on  a  Sunday,  '  almost  most 
religious  when  most  miserable,  and  most  miserable 
when  most  religious  ' ;    then  the  meek-faced  fellow, 
who  can  pray  all  Sunday  and  preach  by  the  hour, 
and  cheat  all  Monday,  always  ready  with  his  prayer- 
book,    but   keeping   a   singular   cash-book,    wouldn't 
swear,    but   would   cheat   and   lie.     Then,   again,    he 
showed  still  higher  powers  of  pathos  in  describing  the 
good  spies— the  old  blind  saint  who  had  served  God 
for  fifty  years  and  never  found  Him  fail;    the  con- 
sumptive girl  testifying  of  the  goodness  of  her  Saviour 
as  the  dews  of  death  gathered  on  her  brow.     And 


THE   PROPHET   OF   THE   PEOPLE        103 

then  of  all  who  only  lived  as  Christians— the  good 
wife  who  converted  her  husband  by  her  untiring 
gentleness,  and  having  supper  ready  even  at  twelve 
o'clock  at  night;  the  servant  who,  because  she  was 
religious,  cleaned  knives  better  without  losing  their 
edge ;  the  Christian  merchant ;  the  wife  who,  unknown 
to  fame,  and  having  no  time  for  teaching  or  district 
visiting,  achieved  her  household  work  day  by  day. 

"  In  fact,  the  whole  was  a  wonderful  display  of 
mental  vigour  and  Christian  sense,  and  gave  me  a 
great  idea  of  what  good  such  a  man  may  do.  The 
impression  made  upon  Ferrier,  which  he  has  just 
read  over  to  me  as  he  has  written  it  to  his  wife,  '  is 
driving  downright.'  He  improves  in  look,  too,  a 
little,  as  he  warms  in  preaching.  At  first  he  cer- 
tainly is  not  interesting  in  face  or  figure— very  fat 
and  podgy ;  but  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  fellow,  look 
as  he  may.  His  voice  is  of  rare  felicity,  as  clear  as  a 
bell— not  a  syllable  lost."  ^^ 

On  the  day  of  National  Humiliation  on  account  of 
the  Indian  Mutiny,  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  in  the 
Crystal  Palace  to  a  congregation  of  23,654  persons, 
counted  in  at  the  turnstiles,  and  up  to  that  date 
the  assembly  was  described  as  "  the  largest  ever 
addressed  by  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel  in  Europe  or 
the  world  "—which  was  perhaps  true.  The  trains 
began  to  run  at  half-past  seven  in  the  morning,  and 
by  noon  the  immense  congregation  was  ready  for  the 
preacher.  The  collection  amounted  to  £675,  including 
£200  from  the  Crystal  Palace  Company,  and  was 
"  not  far  short  of  all  the  other  collections  in  London 
put  together."  The  text  was  from  Micah,  sixth 
chapter,  and  ninth  verse  :  "  Hear  ye  the  rod,  and 
who  hath  appointed  it."     The  service  was  acknow- 


104  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

ledged  to  be  the  most  memorable  thing  in  connection 
with  the  observance  of  the  day,  but,  of  course,  there 
was  the  usual  bout  of  criticism. 

Three  interesting  incidents  may  be  mentioned — 

"  Seated  near  the  pulpit,"  writes  one  who  was 
present,  "  I  observed  Mrs.  Spurgeon  take  her  place 
just  before  her  husband  appeared,  and  that  she  was 
visibly  affected  by  the  mighty  concourse  of  souls, 
all  with  upturned  faces,  and  fixed  gaze  upon  one 
man,  and  all  about  to  be  thrilled  to  the  core  by  that 
man's  impassioned  appeals  to  them  to  be  saved  alive. 
While  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  concealing  her  emotion  as 
best  she  might,  I  saw  the  pastor  beckon  far  off  with 
his  forefinger  to  one  of  the  deacons,  a  stout,  grey- 
haired  man  of  rubicund  complexion,  and  with  a 
defect  in  one  eye.  He  was  in  very  glossy  black, 
which  was  the  orthodox  dissenting  uniform  in  those 
far-off  days,  and  walked  with  a  limp  which  made  his 
progress  up  the  pulpit,  or  rather  platform,  steps 
tantalisingly  slow.  Some  brief,  but  evidently  im- 
portant, instruction  was  at  last  whispered  by  Mr. 
Spurgeon  in  the  lame  man's  ear,  and  twenty-five 
thousand  people  were  agog  with  curiosity  to  know 
what  this  could  possibly  be  at  such  a  time,  when  the 
whole  vast  place  was  quivering  with  anticipated  and 
suppressed  emotional  excitement.  I  happened  to 
be  seated  so  near  Mrs.  Spurgeon  that  when  the 
worthy  deacon  '  made  for  her,'  in  his  crab-like, 
ponderous  way,  it  was  unavoidable  that  I,  at  least, 
one  of  the  vast  and  silent  crowd  of  expectants, 
should  hear  what  had  delayed  the  pastor,  and  what 
the  urgent  matter  was  which  he  had  at  such  a  critical 
moment  to  communicate.  In  a  hoarse  whisper  I 
heard   this  :     '  Mr.    Spurgeon   says,    please    will   you 


THE   PROPHET   OF   THE   PEOPLE        105 

change  your  seat,  so  that  he  will  not  be  able  to  see 
you;  it  ('it'  was  doubtless  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  emo- 
tion) makes  him  nervous,'  and  the  lady  immediately 
moved  to  another  seat  not  visible  from  the  preacher's 
place."  20 

The  second  incident  in  connection  with  the  service 
happened  some  days  previous  to  it,  when  Mr.  Spur- 
geon  went  to  the  Crystal  Palace  to  try  the  acoustics 
of  the  place.  Having  to  say  something,  he  said 
something  worth  saying — "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God 
that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  A  workman 
busy  in  one  of  the  galleries  heard  the  words,  that 
seemed  to  come  to  him  from  heaven,  and,  smitten 
with  conviction  of  sin,  he  put  down  his  tools  and 
went  home,  nor  did  he  rest  until  he  was  able  to  rejoice 
in  Christ  as  his  Saviour. 

The  third  incident  has  a  psychological  interest. 
Though  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  not  conscious  of  any 
special  strain  at  the  time,  he  went  to  sleep  that 
Wednesday  night  and  did  not  awake  until  Friday 
morning  ! 

The  turn  of  the  tide  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  favour  is 
marked  by  a  letter  which  appeared  in  The  Times  on 
April  13,  1857,  supported  by  a  laudatory  leading 
article,  both  probably  written  by  the  same  hand, 
and  that  hand  not  unfamiliar  with  the  Editor's 
writing-table.  The  Times  in  those  days  was  the 
mirror  of  public  opinion,  and  its  utterance  is  therefore 
the  more  notable.  Apart  from  its  biographical  in- 
terest, the  letter  is  worth  transcribing  for  its  literary 
flavour.    It  was  entitled  "  Preaching  and  Preaching  " — 

"  Sir, 

"  One  Sunday  morning  about  a  month  ago 
my  wife  said,  '  Let  us  send  the  children  to  St.  Mar- 


106  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

garet's  to  hear  the  Archbishop  of  preach  on 

behalf  of  the  Society  for  Aged  Ecclesiastical  Cripples, 
which  is  to  celebrate  to-day  its  three  hundredth 
anniversary.'  So  the  children  went,  though  the 
parents,  for  reasons  immaterial  to  mention,  could  not 
go  with  them.     '  Well,   children,   how  did  you  like 

the  Archbishop  of ,  and  what  did  he  say  about 

"  the  Aged  Ecclesiastical  Cripples  "  ?  '  Here  the 
children — for  it  was  during  their  dinner — attacked 
their  food  with  great  voracity,  but  never  a  word 
could  we  get  out  of  their  mouths  about  the  spiritual 
feast  of  which  they  had  just  partaken.  No !  not 
even  the  text  could  they  bring  out.  The  more  they 
were  pressed  the  more  they  blushed,  and  hung  their 
heads  over  their  plates,  until  at  last,  in  a  rage,  I 
accused  them  of  having  fallen  asleep  during  the 
service.  This  charge  threw  my  first-born  on  his 
defence,  and  he  sobbed  out  the  truth,  for  by  this 
time   their   eyes   were   full   of  tears.     '  Why,    papa ! 

we    can't   say   what   the   Archbishop    of said, 

because  we  could  not  hear  a  word  he  said.  He  is 
very  old  and  has  got  no  teeth ;  and,  do  you  know,  I 
don't  think  he  has  got  any  tongue  either,  for,  though 
we  saw  his  lips  moving,  we  could  not  hear  a  single 
word.'  On  this  I  said  no  more,  but  I  thought  a 
good  deal  of  '  the  Aged  Ecclesiastical  Cripples  '  and 
their  venerable  advocate,  and,  being  something  of  a 
philologist,  I  indulged  in  dreamy  speculations  on  the 
possibility  of  an  alphabet  composed  entirely  of 
labials;  and  if  my  wife  had  not  roused  me  by  some 
mere  matter-of-fact  question,  I  almost  think  I  should 
have  given  my  reflections  to  the  world  in  the  shape 
of  a  small  pamphlet  entitled  '  The  Language  of 
Labials;  or,  How  to  Preach  Sermons  without  the 
Aid  of  either  Tongue  or  Teeth;    published  for  the 


THE   PROPHET   OF  THE   PEOPLE        107 

benefit  of  the  Society  of  Aged  Ecclesiastical  Cripples, 
and    dedicated,    of     course    by    permission,    to    the 

Archbishop  of .' 

"  Now  listen  to  another  story.  A  friend  of  mine, 
a  Scotch  Presbyterian,  comes  up  to  town  and  says, 
'  I  want  to  hear  Spurgeon;  let  us  go.'  Now,  I  am 
supposed  to  be  a  High  Churchman,  so  I  answered, 
'  What,  go  and  hear  a  Calvinist — a  Baptist — a  man 
who  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  himself  for  being  so 
near  the  Church  and  yet  not  within  its  pale !  ' 
'  Never  mind,  come  and  hear  him.'  Well,  we  went 
yesterday  morning  to  the  Music  Hall  in  the  Surrey 
Gardens.  At  first  I  felt  a  strange  sensation  of 
wrongdoing.  It  was  something  like  going  to  a 
morning  theatrical  performance  on  Sunday;  nor 
did  a  terrific  gust  of  wind  which  sent  the  '  Arctic 
Regions,'  erected  out  of  lathes  and  pasteboard,  in  a 
style  regardless  of  expense,  flying  across  the  water 
of  the  lake,  tend  to  cheer  a  mind  depressed  by  the 
novelty  of  the  scene.  Fancy  a  congregation  con- 
sisting of  ten  thousand  souls  streaming  into  the  hall, 
mounting  the  galleries,  mumming,  buzzing,  and 
swarming — a  mighty  hive  of  bees,  eager  to  secure  at 
first  the  best  places,  and  at  last  any  place  at  all. 
After  waiting  more  than  half  an  hour — for,  if  you 
wish  to  have  a  seat,  you  must  be  there  at  least  that 
space  of  time  in  advance — Mr.  Spurgeon  ascended 
the  tribune.  To  the  hum  and  rush  and  trampling 
of  men  succeeded  a  low,  concentrated  thrill  and 
murmur  of  devotion,  which  seemed  to  run  at  once 
like  an  electric  current  through  the  breath  of  every 
one  present,  and  by  this  magnetic  chain  the  preacher 
held  us  fast  bound  for  about  two  hours.  It  is  not 
my  purpose  to  give  a  summary  of  his  discourse.  It 
is   enough  to  say   of  his   voice  that  its  power  and 


108  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

volume  are  sufficient  to  reach  every  one  in  that  vast 
assembly;  of  his  language,  that  it  is  neither  high- 
flown  nor  homely;  of  his  style,  that  it  is  at  times 
familiar,  at  times  declamatory,  but  always  happy 
and  often  eloquent ;  of  his  doctrine,  that  neither  the 
Calvinist  nor  the  Baptist  appear  in  the  forefront  of 
the  battle  which  is  waged  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  with 
relentless  animosity,  and  with  Gospel  weapons,  against 
irrcligion,  cant,  hypocrisy,  pride,  and  those  secret 
bosom  sins  which  so  easily  beset  a  man  in  daily  life; 
and,  to  sum  up  all  in  a  word,  it  is  enough  to  say  of 
the  man  himself  that  he  impresses  you  with  a  perfect 
conviction  of  his  sincerity. 

"  But  I  have  not  written  so  much  about  my  chil- 
dren's want  of  spiritual  food  when  they  listened  to 

the  mumbling  of  the  Archbishop  of  ,  and  my 

own  banquet  at  the  Surrey  Gardens,  without  a  desire 
to  draw  a  practical  conclusion  from  these  two  stories, 
and  to  point  them  by  a  moral.  Here  is  a  man  not 
more  Calvinistic  than  many  an  incumbent  of  the 
Established  Church,  who  '  mumbles  and  mumbles,' 
as  old  Latimer  says,  over  his  liturgy  and  text.  Here 
is  a  man  who  says  the  complete  immersion,  or  some- 
thing of  the  kind,  of  adults  is  necessary  to  baptism. 
These  are  his  faults  of  doctrine,  but  if  I  were  the 

examining    chaplain    of    the    Archbishop   of ,    I 

would  say,  '  May  it  please  your  Grace,  here  is  a  man 
able  to  preach  eloquently,  able  to  fill  the  largest 
church  in  England  with  his  voice;  and,  what  is 
more  to  the  purpose,  with  people.  And  may  it 
please  your  Grace,  here  are  two  churches  in  this 
metropolis,  St.  Paul's  and  Westminster  Abbey.  What 
does  your  Grace  think  of  inviting  Mr.  Spurgeon,  this 
heretical  Calvinist  and  Baptist,  who  is  able  to  draw 
ten  thousand  souls  after  him,  just  to  try  his  voice, 


THE   PROPHET   OF   THE   PEOPLE        109 

some  Sunday  morning,  in  the  nave  of  either  of  these 
churches  ?  At  any  rate,  I  will  answer  for  one  thing, 
that  if  he  preaches  in  Westminster  Abbey,  we  shall 
not  have  a  repetition  of  the  disgraceful  practice  now 
common  in  that  church,  of  having  the  sermon  before 
the  anthem,  in  order  that  those  who  would  quit  the 
church  when  the  arid  sermon  begins,  may  be  forced 
to  stay  it  out  for  the  sake  of  the  music  which 
follows  it.' 

"  But   I  am   not,    I  am   sorry  to  say,   examining 

chaplain  of  the  Archbishop  of ,   so  I  can  only 

send  you  this  letter  from  the  devotional  desert  in 
which  I  reside,  and  sign  myself, 

"  Habitans  in  Sicco." 

Broad  Phylactery, 
Westminster. 

In  the  leading  article  the  question  is  asked  con- 
cerning the  Establishment — 

"  How  is  it,  then,  that  the  Church  never  has  a 
monster  preacher?  The  reason  is  that  a  loud  voice 
requires  its  proper  material  to  exert  itself  upon. 
The  voice  is  notoriously  the  most  sympathetic  thing 
in  nature.  It  cannot  be  loud  and  soft  indiscrimin- 
ately. Some  things  are  made  to  be  shouted,  and 
others  to  be  whispered.  Nobody  shouts  out  an 
axiom  in  mathematics ;  nobody  balances  probabilities 
in  thunder — Nemo  consilium  cum  clamore  dat.  There 
must  be  a  strong  sentiment,  some  bold  truth,  to  make 
a  man  shout.  In  religion  there  must  be  something 
extravagant  in  the  way  of  doctrine.  The  doctrine  of 
conversion  or  of  irresistible  grace  can  be  shouted,  but 
if  a  man  tried  ever  so  hard  to  shout  in  delivering  a 
moderate  and  sensible  doctrine  on  freewill  he  would 
find  himself  talking  quietly  in  spite  of  himself.     It 


110  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

admits  of  question  whether  a  httle  extravagance  and 
a  Httle  onesidedness  might  not  be  tolerated  for  the 
sake  of  a  good,  substantial,  natural,  telling  appeal 
to  the  human  heart." 

This  appeal  to  the  human  heart  at  the  Music  Hall 
drew  together  the  crowds  for  three  years.  "  Spur- 
geon's  eloquence  was  not  the  eloquence  of  literary 
vanity,  but  the  eloquence  of  moral  power."  There 
were,  of  course,  ebbs  and  flows  in  the  congregation, 
especially  towards  Christmas  time,  but  the  numbers 
at  the  end  were  as  great  as  at  the  beginning.  The 
end  came  because  the  proprietors  of  the  place  pro- 
posed to  open  the  Hall  for  Sunday  evening  concerts. 
Their  purpose  was  frustrated  at  first  by  the  plain 
intimation  that  if  they  did  it,  Mr.  Spurgeon  would 
withdraw,  and  as  the  fee  for  the  Sunday  morning 
service  was  probably  the  only  thing  that  kept  them 
from  bankruptcy  they  desisted.  But  at  length  the 
announcement  was  made  that  the  Gardens  would  be 
opened  on  December  18,  1859,  so  Mr.  Spurgeon 
preached  his  last  sermon  there  on  the  previous 
Sunday  morning,  December  11.  The  Sunday  con- 
certs did  not  prosper,  the  income  from  the  Sunday 
services  was  lost,  and  in  trying  to  make  the  best  of 
both  worlds  they  gained  neither,  becoming  bankrupt 
soon  afterwards.  The  site  of  the  gardens  has  long 
since  been  disposed  of  for  building  purposes,  and  is 
now  covered  with  houses.  The  Music  Hall  was 
destroyed  by  fire.  One  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  latest  acts 
was  to  open  "  The  Surrey  Gardens  Memorial  Hall  " 
near  the  spot,  and  there  an  encouraging  mission  work 
is  to-day  being  carried  forward. 

The  year  before  both  Westminster  Abbey  and  St. 
Paul's  Cathedral  had  been  thrown  open  for  popular 
services. 


CHAPTER   VI 

THE    ROMANTIC    YEARS 

1854-1867 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  able  truthfully  to  boast  that 
the  doctrines  of  grace  that  he  preached  at  the  begin- 
ning of  his  ministry  he  preached  to  the  end.  But  he 
would  have  admitted  freely  that  with  the  years  there 
was  a  change  in  emphasis  and  a  development  of  style. 
Indeed,  in  the  preface  to  the  volume  of  his  sermons 
for  1855  he  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  during 
that  year  he  gave  more  place  to  the  subject  of  the 
Second  Coming  of  Christ  than  before,  and  he  preached 
the  doctrine  consistently  during  the  rest  of  his  life, 
though  he  gave  less  place  to  it  in  later  years,  and 
never  at  any  time  committed  himself  to  any  theory 
of  the  order  of  events. 

A  friendly  critic  once  suggested  to  him  that  the 
sermons  preached  between  1860  and  1867  were  not 
on  the  high  level  of  the  earlier  or  later  ones.  "  Yes, 
it  may  be  so,"  he  answered.^  The  reason  is  obvious; 
during  the  earlier  years  he  was  addressing  the  crowd, 
later  he  spoke  to  congregations  as  crowded  as  before, 
but  largely  to  interested  and  converted  people,  and 
the  dashing  eloquence  of  the  initial  years  gradually 
gave  place  to  the  mellower  and  more  placid  style 
which  characterised  his  last  quarter  of  a  century. 
The  years  between  were  perhaps  scarcely  as  effective. 

But  those  earlier  years,  including  the  years  of  the 

111 


112  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

transition,  were  full  of  romance.  The  period  is  quite 
easily  marked  off ;  it  began  with  the  London  ministry, 
for  which  the  previous  years  had  been  the  preparation, 
and  ended  with  the  great  services  in  the  Agricultural 
Hall,  Islington,  from  March  24  to  April  21,  1867,  held 
during  the  renovation  of  the  Tabernacle.  These 
were  the  fourteen  romantic  years. 

It  may  be  recorded  here  that  those  services  in  the 
Agricultural  Hall  were  each  attended  by  some  twenty 
thousand  people.  Apart  from  the  solitary  gathering 
in  the  Crystal  Palace  they  were  the  largest  crowds 
he  ever  addressed.  Drawn  from  all  parts  of  the 
metropolis,  they  enabled  the  preacher  to  lay  hold  of 
a  new  constituency,  and  consolidated  his  influence 
in  the  city.  He  used  to  recall  that  a  musician,  testing 
his  voice  in  the  Tabernacle  and  in  the  Agricultural 
Hall,  found  that  it  was  a  tone  and  a  half  higher  in 
the  larger  building — naturally  and  insensibly  he  had 
adjusted  his  speech  to  the  wider  range.  It  may  also  be 
noted  that  D.  L.  Moody,  visiting  London  at  the  time, 
heard  Spurgeon  in  this  Hall,  little  dreaming  that  he 
himself  would  one  day  preach  in  the  same  building, 
though,  owing  to  a  difference  in  the  seating  arrange- 
ments, his  audiences  were  scarcely  so  large. 

Part  of  the  experience  of  those  romantic  years  has 
been  chronicled  in  the  two  previous  chapters,  but 
only  as  far  as  it  related  to  his  pulpit  work  in  London ; 
we  have  as  yet  taken  no  notice  of  his  varied  preaching 
services  elsewhere,  nor  of  his  utterances,  other  than 
sermons,  which  attracted  much  attention.  To  these 
this  chapter  is  devoted,  leaving  the  early  history  of 
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  which  chronologically 
belongs  to  this  period,  to  the  chapter  that  follows. 

It  was  no  uncommon  thing  for  the  young  preacher, 
in  the  exuberance  of  his  early  days,  to  preach  ten  to 


THE   ROMANTIC   YEARS  113 

twelve  times  a  week.  He  was  in  request  in  all  parts 
of  London  and  the  home  counties  :  later  he  went 
further  afield. 

The  earliest  of  many  visits  to  Scotland  was  in  1855. 
This  was  his  first  long  journey,  and  it  was  therefore  to 
him  of  very  special  interest.  His  reputation  had 
preceded  him,  and  he  had  great  crowds.  Outside 
Greyfriars  Church  in  Glasgow  it  was  estimated  that 
there  were  twenty  thousand  people  clamouring  for 
entrance.  The  newspaper  criticism  largely  echoed  the 
London  press,  mingling  praise  with  scorn — 

"  Like  his  great  model,  Whitefield,  he  seems  blessed 
with  '  no  constitution.'  He  is  endowed  with  a  voice 
strong,  clear,  bell-like,  which  could  be  heard  by  many 
thousands,  and  with  a  physical  frame  equal  to  a  vast 
amount  of  hard  work.  In  contour  of  face,  he  reminds 
us  something  of  John  Caird,  and  his  eye  has  the 
lustrous  light  of  genius  in  it."  ^ 

That  on  the  one  hand;  on  the  other:  "In  our 
estimation  he  is  just  a  spoilt  boy."  ^ 

In  Edinburgh  he  felt  himself  to  be  a  failure,  he 
thought  the  Spirit  of  God  had  deserted  him,  and  he 
told  the  people  that  the  chariot  wheels  had  been  taken 
off.  He  was  subject  to  such  moods  to  the  end,  but 
a  confession  like  that  shows  clearly  enough  that  at 
other  times,  in  spite  of  his  easy  eloquence,  his  reliance 
was  on  God's  Spirit,  and  not  on  himself. 

On  one  of  these  occasions  of  gloom  "  he  became 
impressed  with  the  idea  that  he  was  only  a  waiter, 
and  not  a  guest,  at  the  Gospel  feast,"  and  so  he  retired 
to  a  village,  determined  not  to  preach  again  until  the 
question  was  settled.  On  the  Sunday  he  went  to  a 
little  Methodist  Chapel,  where  the  service  was  con- 
ducted by  a  local  preacher.     He  tells  us  that  as  he 


114  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

listened  "the  tears  flowed  from  my  eyes — I  was 
moved  to  the  deepest  emotion  by  every  sentence  of 
the  sermon,  and  I  felt  all  my  difficulty  removed,  for 
the  Gospel,  I  saw,  was  very  dear  to  me,  and  had  a 
wonderful  effect  on  my  heart.  I  went  to  the  preacher 
and  said,  '  I  thank  you  very  much  for  the  sermon.' 
He  asked  who  I  was,  and  when  I  told  him  he  turned 
as  red  as  possible,  and  said,  '  Why,  it  was  one  of  your 
own  sermons  I  preached  this  morning.'  '  Yes,'  I 
said,  '  I  know  it  was ;  but  that  was  the  very  message 
I  wanted  to  hear,  because  I  then  saw  that  I  did  enjoy 
the  very  word  I  myself  preached.'  " 

This  Scottish  visit  laid  the  foundation  for  the  great 
influence  that  Spurgeon  had  to  the  end  in  that 
country,  where  his  sermons  were  read  more  regularly 
and  valued  more  greatly  than  perhaps  anywhere  else. 
A  second  visit  in  1859,  during  the  progress  of  the 
phenomenal  services  in  the  Metropolis,  increased  his 
reputation. 

On  April  28,  1858,  in  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music 
Hall,  a  sermon  was  given  on  behalf  of  the  Baptist 
Missionary  Society,  which  was  probably  the  most 
memorable  in  its  history,  for  on  a  Wednesday  morn- 
ing the  great  building  was  thronged.  On  several 
other  occasions  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  again  for  the 
Missionary  Society,  and  in  1870  he  spoke  for  the 
Bible  Translation  Society. 

Meanwhile  in  the  summer  of  1858  he  visited  Ireland, 
and  the  minister  of  my  own  church.  Dr.  James 
Morgan,  of  Fisherwick  Place,  who  heard  him  thrice 
out  of  the  four  times  he  preached  in  Belfast,  my 
native  city,  has  written — 

"  I  was  not  disappointed,  although  the  mass  of  the 
people    were.     When    he    preached    in    the    Botanic 


THE   ROMANTIC  YEARS  115 

Gardens  he  was  well  heard  of  seven  thousand  persons. 
He  was  well  received,  and  deserved  to  be  so  for  his 
plain,  honest  and  good  preaching  and  deportment. 
I  much  question  if  his  influence  was  as  good  as  that 
of  Mr.  Grattan  Guinness,  who  preceded  him  by  a  few 
months.  There  was  a  great  contrast  between  them. 
Mr.  vSpurgeon  was  gay,  lively  and  humorous;  Mr. 
Guinness  was  solemn  and  earnest,  and  very  reserved. 
Mr.  Spurgcon  is  by  far  the  abler  man,  yet  were  there 
a  poll  to-morrow  in  Belfast  for  the  two,  it  would  be 
in  favour  of  Mr.  Guinness."  ■* 

It  will  not  be  forgotten  that  the  great  Irish  revival 
came  the  following  year,  1859.  Though  it  could  not 
be  traced  to  the  influence  of  any  preacher,  breaking 
out  spontaneously  in  many  quarters  about  the  same 
time  without  any  attributable  human  cause,  it  is  not 
without  interest  to  trace  God's  hand  in  sending  His 
messengers  before  His  face  to  prepare  the  path  of 
His  feet.  In  my  boyhood's  days  the  two  evangelical 
names  that  were  treasured  in  all  our  hearts  were 
these — C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  H.  Grattan  Guinness. 

In  February  1860,  while  the  great  Tabernacle  was 
being  built,  after  a  week  spent  in  Dublin,  a  visit  was 
paid  to  Paris.  It  was  arranged  by  the  Rev.  William 
Blood,  who  escaped  from  the  burning  of  the  "  Amazon." 
The  visit  was  so  great  a  success  that  a  special  pamphlet 
giving  a  description  of  it  was  published.  Mr.  Spurgeon 
was  then  preaching  each  Sunday  at  Exeter  Hall,  and 
the  Paris  visit  was  therefore  strictly  limited  as  to 
time.  He  preached  three  times  in  the  American 
Chapel,  and  twice  in  the  Oratoire.  Each  evening 
he  was  invited  to  the  residence  of  some  person  of 
position  in  the  city,  and  these  salon  gatherings  were 
as  remarkable  as  the  public  services.     He  also  visited 


116  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

the  College  at  Passy  and  addressed  the  missionary 
students  there.  Neither  Scotland  nor  Ireland  had 
given  him  such  a  genial  reception.  Dr.  Frederic 
Monod  wrote  that  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  a  new  proof 
that  God  does  nothing  by  halves.  If  He  calls  one  of 
His  servants  to  special  work,  He  gives  him  the  special 
endowments  necessary  for  it."  Dr.  Grand-Pierre 
wrote,  "  One  would  willingly  hear  him  during  two 
hours  at  a  time.  Among  the  requisites  to  oratory 
which  he  possesses,  three  particularly  struck  us — a 
prodigious  memory,  a  full,  harmonious  voice,  and  a 
most  fruitful  imagination.  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  in  reality 
a  poet."  And  M.  Prevost-Paradol,  a  distinguished 
writer  of  the  time,  a  Roman  Catholic,  declared  that 
he  was  "  the  most  natural,  and,  we  would  willingly  say, 
the  most  inspired  orator  we  have  ever  had  the  pleasure 
of  hearing." 

At  this  time  we  find  a  verdict  calmly  given  that 
"  his  name  is  the  most  popular  in  Christendom," 
and  a  shrewd  judge  of  men  declared  that  "  he  acts 
in  everything  as  if  he  had  been  the  first  actor,  and  as 
if  this  were  the  first  age  of  Christian  Society,  with 
neither  ancestry  nor  precedent."  Indeed,  a  High 
Church  critic,  on  being  asked  where  he  would  put 
Spurgeon,  seeing  that  his  ministry  was  so  manifestly 
blessed  of  God,  declared  that  he  was  like  Melchizedek, 
without  predecessor  and  without  successor.  He  was 
the  man  most  talked  about  everywhere,  beloved 
and  despised  according  to  circumstances.  Bishop 
Wilberforce,  on  being  asked  whether  he  did  not  envy 
the  Nonconformists  their  possession  of  Spurgeon, 
gave  the  caustic  answer,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy 
neighbour's  ass." 

At  the  end  of  April  1863  a  visit  was  paid  to  Holland, 
where  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  in  the  chief  cities  with 


THE   ROMANTIC  YEARS  117 

much  acceptance,  sometimes  speaking  for  two  hours 
at  a  stretch.  In  conversation  long  afterwards,  though 
he  lamented  that  he  found  it  difficult  to  approach 
individuals  on  spiritual  matters,  he  told  me  that  one 
of  his  most  encouraging  interviews  was  when  he 
visited  the  Queen  of  Holland,  and  talked  with  her 
heart  to  heart.  This  was  on  Friday  morning,  April  24. 
There  may  be  put  alongside  that  the  greeting  of  a 
-peasant  woman,  who  came  with  much  emotion,  grip- 
ping his  hand  at  the  door  of  the  Dom-Kirk  at  Utrecht, 
and  said,  "  Oh,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  God  bless  you  !  If 
you  had  only  lived  for  my  soul's  sake  you  would  not 
have  lived  in  vain  !  " 

The  months  of  June  and  July  1860  were  given  to  a 
Continental  tour,  Mr.  Spurgeon's  first  holiday  in 
seven  years.  Belgium,  the  minor  German  states,  and 
Switzerland  were  visited.  The  chief  interest  lies 
in  his  visit  to  Geneva,  where  he  preached  twice  in 
Calvin's  pulpit.  "  The  first  time  I  saw  the  medal  of 
John  Calvin,  I  kissed  it,"  he  says.  "  I  preached  in 
the  Cathedral  of  St.  Peter.  I  did  not  feel  very  com- 
fortable when  I  came  out  in  full  canonicals,  but  the 
request  was  put  to  me  in  such  a  beautiful  way  that  I 
could  have  worn  the  Pope's  tiara  if  they  had  asked 
me.  They  said,  '  Our  dear  brother  comes  to  us  from 
another  country.  Now  when  an  ambassador  comes 
from  another  country,  he  has  a  right  to  wear  his  own 
costume  at  court,  but,  as  a  mark  of  a  very  great 
esteem,  he  sometimes  condescends  to  the  weakness 
of  the  country  which  he  visits,  and  will  wear  Court 
dress!'  'Well,'  I  said,  'yes,  that  I  will,  certainly; 
but  I  shall  feel  like  running  in  a  sack.'  It  was  John 
Calvin's  cloak,  and  that  reconciled  me  to  it  very 
much." 

Amongst  the  books  he  most  valued  were  Calvin's 


118  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

works;  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Commentaries 
in  his  hbrary  is  written,  ''  The  volumes  making  up  a 
complete  set  of  Calvin  were  a  gift  to  me  from  my  own 
most  dear  and  tender  wife." 

It  may  be  said  of  Spurgeon,  as  of  Calvin,  that 
"  nowhere  does  the  whole  personality  stand  out  in 
such  clear  relief  as  in  his  sermons."  The  style  of 
preaching  was  also  very  similar.  The  following 
estimate  of  Calvin  with  slight  changes  might  have 
been  written  of  Spurgeon — 

"  He  was  a  born  preacher.  For  years  the  spacious 
church  of  St.  Pierre  in  Geneva  was  thronged,  not 
once  or  twice,  but  several  times  a  week  to  hear  him. 
He  was  the  star  of  the  Genevan  pulpit,  but  his  words 
carried  far  beyond  the  city  in  which  they  were  spoken. 
Seldom  has  any  man  addressed  a  wider  audience  or 
received  a  more  grateful  response.  His  sermons  became 
models  and  standards  for  hundreds  of  pastors  who 
were  confined  to  such  help  as  their  publication 
supplied. 

"  Admiral  Coligny,  warrior,  diplomatist,  and  saint, 
was  not  the  only  one  who  made  them  his  daily 
provender.  It  was  on  John  Calvin's  sermons  on 
Ephesians  that  John  Knox  stayed  his  soul  as  he  lay 
on  his  death-bed. 

"  There  is  something  of  a  perennially  modern  note 
in  Calvin's  preaching.  He  was  not  afraid  to  risk 
the  charge  of  vulgarising  his  theme  by  the  use  of  the 
picturesque  language  of  colloquial  social  intercourse. 
Whatever  enabled  him  to  grip  the  people's  attention 
and  penetrate  to  their  consciences  and  hearts  was 
legitimate.  Much  of  his  preaching  was  familiar  talk 
poured  forth  by  a  man  whose  humanism  could  accord 
with    a    love    for    popular    speech.     If    vernacular 


THE   ROMANTIC   YEARS  119 

and  classical  alternatives  presented  themselves,  the 
vernacular  commonly  received  the  preference. 

"  Proverbs  tripped  from  his  tongue  as  though 
coined  on  the  spot  for  the  occasion,  and  gave  agreeable 
piquancy  to  his  words.  Illustrations  and  metaphors 
he  drew  from  all  sources,  sometimes  surprising  by 
their  unexpectedness,  coming  from  the  lips  of  such  a 
man.  An  early  translation,  reproducing  the  flavour 
of  the  original,  represents  him  as  saying,  '  We  would 
fain  live  in  pleasure  that  God  should  dandle  us  like 
little  cockneys.'  Often  he  indulges  in  quite  dramatic 
passages,  making  the  characters  with  whom  he  is 
dealing  express  themselves  in  racy  soliloquy  or 
dialogue.  Instead  of  making  Moses,  on  receiving 
the  order  to  ascend  the  mountain,  point  out  how 
fatiguing  and  dangerous  that  would  be  for  one  of 
his  years,  Calvin  pictures  him  as  exclaiming,  '  That's 
all  very  fine  !  And  I'm  to  go  and  break  my  legs 
climbing  up  there,  am  I  ?  Of  all  things  in  the  world  ! 
That's  a  fine  prospect !  ' 

"  Beza  tells  us  that  he  despised  ostentatious, 
pretentious  eloquence.  He  held  it  wrong  to  seek  to 
give  brilliance  and  charm  to  God's  Word  by  em- 
bellishment of  language  and  subtleties  of  exposition. 
In  his  case  the  man  was  the  style,  and  the  man  shaped 
the  style.  All  was  nervous,  spirited,  earnest,  eager, 
mostly  level  to  the  intelligence  of  the  humblest  man 
who  came  to  hear  him,  with  that  throb  of  suppressed 
passion  often  beating  through  it  which  touches  the 
fringes  of  one's  consciousness  as  the  sound  of  a 
distant  ear-drum."  ^ 

These  paragraphs,  as  we  have  said,  might  almost 
have  been  written  of  Spurgeon.  And  not  only  did 
he  resemble  the  great  Reformer  in  style,  and  in  the 


120  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

number  of  sermons  he  preached — Calvin  is  supposed 
to  have  preached  between  three  and  four  thousand — 
his  heart  was  estabhshed  in  the  same  faith  in  God's 
sovereignty.  "  I  can  recall  the  day  when  I  first 
received  those  truths  into  my  soul,"  he  says,  and  from 
his  diary  we  know  that  day  was  April  7,  1850,  "  when 
they  were,  as  John  Bunyan  says,  burnt  into  my 
heart  as  with  a  hot  iron;  and  I  can  recollect  how  I 
felt  that  I  had  grown  on  a  sudden  from  a  babe  into 
a  man,  that  I  had  found,  once  for  all,  the  clue  to  the 
truth  of  God.  One  week-night,  when  I  was  sitting 
in  the  House  of  God — I  was  not  thinking  much  about 
the  preacher's  sermon,  for  I  did  not  believe  it — the 
thought  struck  me,  '  How  did  you  come  to  he  a 
Christian  ? '  I  sought  the  Lord.  '  But  how  did 
you  cojyie  to  seek  the  Lord  ? '  The  truth  flashed 
across  my  mind  in  a  moment.  I  should  not  have 
sought  Him  unless  there  had  been  some  previous 
influence  in  my  mind  to  make  me  seek  Him.  I 
prayed,  thought  I ;  but  then  I  asked  myself,  '  How 
came  I  to  pray  ?  '  I  was  induced  to  pray  by  reading 
the  Scriptures.  '  How  came  I  to  read  the  Scriptures  ?  ' 
Then  in  a  moment  I  saw  that  God  was  at  the  bottom 
of  it  all,  and  that  He  was  the  Author  of  my  faith; 
and  so  the  whole  doctrine  of  grace  opened  up  to  me, 
and  from  that  doctrine  I  have  not  departed."  "  And 
his  Calvinism  was  no  nineteenth- century  Laodician 
compound."  ® 

*'  You  may  take  a  step  from  Paul  to  Augustine," 
he  once  said  to  his  students,  "  then  from  Augustine 
to  Calvin,  and  then — well,  you  may  keep  your  foot  up 
a  good  while  before  you  find  such  another."  In 
another  student  talk  he  said  that  John  Newton  put 
Calvinism  in  his  sermons  as  he  put  sugar  into  his  tea, 
tiis  whol(?  ministry  w^s  flavQured  with  it;   then  he 


THE   ROMANTIC   YEARS  121 

added,  "  Don't  be  afraid  of  putting  in  an  extra  lump 
now  and  then." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  amongst  the  most  eager  celebrants 
of  the  tercentenary  of  Calvin's  death  on  May  27,  1864. 
He  agreed  with  John  Knox,  who  said  that  in  Geneva, 
in  Calvin's  day,  was  "the  most  perfect  school  of  Christ 
that  ever  was  on  the  earth  since  the  days  of  the 
Apostles." 

Preaching  in  Leeds  for  the  Baptist  Union  in  a 
Methodist  Chapel  on  a  memorable  occasion,  he  read 
the  tenth  chapter  of  Romans.  Pausing  at  the 
thirteenth  verse,  he  remarked,  "  Dear  me !  How 
wonderfully  like  John  Wesley  the  apostle  talked  ! 
Whosoever  shall  call.  Whosoever.  Why,  that  is  a 
Methodist  word,  is  it  not?"  "Glory!  Glory! 
Hallelujah !  "  came  the  responses.  "  Yes,  dear 
brothers,"  the  preacher  added,  "  but  read  the  ninth 
chapter  of  the  epistle,  and  see  how  wonderfully  like 
John  Calvin  he  talked — '  That  the  purpose  of  God 
according  to  election  might  stand.'  "  Smiles  on  the 
faces  of  those  that  had  before  been  silent  were  the 
only  response  to  this  utterance.  "  The  fact  is," 
continued  the  preacher,  "  that  the  whole  of  truth 
is  neither  here  nor  there,  neither  in  this  system  nor 
in  that,  neither  with  this  man  nor  that.  Be  it  ours 
to  know  what  is  Scriptural  in  all  systems  and  to 
receive  it." 

Wherever  he  went  the  people  thronged  upon  him 
to  hear  the  word  of  life.  Thousands  gathered  in 
Parker's  Piece  in  Cambridge,  and  the  desire  to  speak 
to  him  was  so  great  that  friends  with  clasped  hands 
had  to  form  a  circle  round  him  to  make  it  possible 
for  him  to  walk  to  the  house  where  he  was  being 
entertained.  Under  Cheddar  Cliffs  he  preached  to 
thousands  who  had  gathered  from  all  parts  of  the 


122  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

district.  At  Trowbridge  so  great  was  the  desire  to 
hear  him  that,  having  preached  in  the  afternoon  and 
evening,  lie  held  another  crowded  service  at  ten 
o'clock  at  night.  At  Risca,  in  South  Wales,  he  preached 
three  sermons  one  after  the  other,  and  on  a  later  visit, 
in  the  open  air  near  by  he  again  preached  to  thousands, 
the  people  swaying  beneath  the  word  like  corn  in  the 
summer  winds.  At  Abercarne,  where  some  twenty 
thousand  people  gathered,  there  were  some  great 
persons  present  in  their  carriages  who  attempted  to 
get  near  the  speaker,  upon  which  the  preacher  cried 
that  "  four  horses  and  a  carriage  would  occupy  the 
ground  of  fifty  people,  so  the  horses  and  carriages 
must  remain  where  they  are."  A  similar  scene  took 
place  at  Melbourne,  near  Cambridge,  when  the  service 
was  to  be  held  in  a  field.  When  Spurgeon  arrived 
the  field  was  half  covered  with  vehicles,  and  he  made 
a  request  that  the  horses  should  be  taken  from  the 
carriages.  "  We  cannot  edify  the  horses,  but  the 
carriages  will  be  a  great  comfort  to  the  occupants." 

At  Castleton,  in  South  Wales,  there  were  enormous 
crowds  in  the  open  air.  At  Naunton,  near  Chelten- 
ham, the  experience  was  repeated.  At  Dunnington 
the  hymn- sheets  used  for  the  services  are  preserved 
yet.  Pepphard,  near  Caversham,  was  the  scene  of 
another  great  conventicle — "  He  do  put  the  spade 
in  deep,  don't  he?  "  said  one  of  his  village  hearers. 
At  Ogbourne  St.  George,  near  Marlborough,  the 
service  was  to  have  been  in  the  open  air,  but  the  weather 
became  wintry,  so  a  wealthy  farmer  had  a  tent  erected ; 
then  there  came  a  heavy  fall  of  snow,  but,  nothing 
daunted,  the  farmer  cut  up  a  rick  of  straw,  and  made 
a  path  with  it  from  village  to  tent,  about  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  distant.  At  Lymington  a  monster  booth, 
holding  nearly  three  thousand  people,  was  crowded. 


THE   ROMANTIC   YEARS  123 

At  Swansea,  although  it  was  midnight  when  he  arrived, 
hundreds  of  persons  welcomed  him  at  the  railway 
station.  The  next  morning  was  wet,  so  he  preached 
two  sermons  in  chapels,  instead  of  one  in  the  open 
air,  and  the  weather  clearing  he  preached  again  in  the 
field  to  thousands  of  hearers.  At  Carlton,  in  Bedford- 
shire, there  were  open-air  sermons  afternoon  and 
evening,  with  tea  between  in  chapel,  schoolroom,  and 
booth. 

At  the  opening  of  City  Road  Chapel,  Bristol,  the 
crowd  in  the  afternoon  was  so  great,  and  those  outside 
so  unruly,  that  after  a  brief  address  the  service  had 
to  be  concluded.     At  a  subsequent  visit  in  1868  in 
connection  with  the  Baptist  Union  meetings  he  was 
announced  to  preach  on  Thursday  evening,  October  15, 
and  so  great  was  the  demand  to  hear  him  that  the 
evening  before  he  promised  to  preach  also  at  nine 
on  the  next  morning.    Colston  Hall  was  again  crowded. 
At  Halifax  six  thousand  persons  gathered  in  a  large 
wooden  structure  three  times  in  one  day,  and  as  the 
crowds  were  dispersing  in  the  evening,  some  boards 
gave  way,  and  the  people  in  one  of  the  galleries  were 
thrown  against  each  other;    there  were  screams  from 
the   frightened    folk,  but  fortunately  no  worse  con- 
sequence than  two  broken  legs.     The  entire  structure, 
overloaded    by    snow,    and    beaten    by   a    boisterous 
wind,  fell  three  hours  afterwards.     The  timbers  were 
split  to   shivers   so   completely  that  most  of  it  was 
rendered  useless  for  building.     It  came  very  near  to  a 
disaster  more  tragic  than  that  at  the  Surrey  Music 
Hall.      Little    wonder    that    Spurgeon    was    always 
nervous  thereafter  about  a  crowd.     Persons  he  feared 
not  at  all,  a  multitude  of  people  made  him  tremble. 
But  then  it  is  the  racehorse,  not  the  carthorse,  that 
trembles  on  the  verge  of  the  task. 


124  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

At  Bradford  the  largest  building  was  too  small; 
at  Birmingham  crowds  of  six  thousand  gathered; 
the  secretary  who  dispensed  the  tickets  had  so  many 
applications  that  his  door-bell  was  broken.  Stockton- 
on-Tees  gave  a  worthy  greeting  to  its  visitor.  Dudley 
and  Wolverhampton  were  not  behind  in  enthusiasm. 
Liverpool,  which  offered  a  Welsh,  as  well  as  an  English 
audience,  seems  to  have  fired  the  heart  of  the  preacher 
to  new  earnestness  for  the  rest  of  the  year.  At  some 
of  these  places  collections  were  taken  for  the  new 
Tabernacle;  the  gifts  of  the  people  at  all  of  them 
were  generous;  at  two  village  places  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
preaching  for  poor  pastors,  was  unconventional  enough 
to  ask  an  offering  to  purchase  the  minister  a  new  suit 
of  clothes.  At  Cheltenham  he  met  Grattan  Guinness, 
then  in  his  prime,  for  the  first  time,  both  of  them 
preaching  in  the  town  the  same  evening.  Guinness 
was  at  that  time  "  bidding  fair  to  rival  the  renowned 
Mr.  Spurgeon  as  another  modern  Whitefield."  Brown- 
low  North  was  also  spoken  of  as  "  The  Northern 
Spurgeon.' 

One  of  the  most  interesting  of  these  country  visits 
was  to  Stambourne  on  March  27,  1856.  Again 
crowds.  He  also  revisited  Waterbeach.  In  1866, 
when  the  Free  Church  Assembly  was  in  session,  he 
visited  Edinburgh,  and,  to  judge  of  the  interest  he 
excited  by  the  eagerness  there  was  to  hear  him, 
Spurgeon  eclipsed  the  General  Assembly,  while  at 
that  Assembly  itself  he  was  to  the  majority  the 
principal  figure.  People  climbed  over  the  raihngs 
of  Free  St.  George's  in  the  afternoon  to  hear  him 
preach,  and  broke  down  one  of  the  doors  of  the 
United  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  evening.  Another 
Scotch  visit  included  most  of  the  northern  cities; 
five  thousand  tickets,  ranging  in  price  from  a  shilling 


THE  ROMANTIC   YEARS  125 

to  half  a  crown,   were   sold   before   he   entered   the 
town  of  Aberdeen. 

Years  after  he  said,  "  I  cannot  remember  visiting 
a  single  village  or  town  that  I  have  visited  a  second 
time,  without  meeting  with  some  who  praised  the 
Lord  that  they  heard  the  Word  of  truth  there  from 
my  lips." 

A  service  of  great  interest  was  held  on  Clapham 
Common  on  July  10,  1859.  A  fortnight  before,  a 
tree  on  the  Common  had  been  struck  by  lightning, 
and  a  man  sheltering  under  it  killed.  Ten  thousand 
persons  gathered  round  the  stricken  tree  to  listen  to 
the  appeal,  "  Be  ye  therefore  ready  also,"  and  a 
collection  was  taken  for  the  widow.  In  aid  of  a 
chapel  at  Epsom  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached,  on  June  11, 
1858,  two  sermons  from  the  Grand  Stand  of  the 
racecourse.  One  was  from  the  text  "  So  run  that  ye 
may  obtain."  When  Bunyan's  tomb  in  Bunhill 
Fields  was  restored  he  also  spoke  at  length  in  City 
Road  Chapel,  the  afternoon  of  May  21,  1862  being 
too  wet  for  anything  but  the  briefest  service  at  the 
grave. 

Truly  these  were  romantic  years.  Crowds,  crowds 
everywhere.  "  If  crowds  come  to  hear  a  preacher," 
he  once  said  to  his  students,  "  some  are  ready  to  say, 
'  Oh  !  they  are  running  after  a  man.'  What  would 
you  have  them  run  after — a  woman?  "  The  people 
had  a  true  instinct,  the  old  gardener  leaning  on  his 
spade  voiced  it — "  Spurgeon  !  Ah,  there  was  no 
humbug  about  him  !  " 

Here  I  may  perhaps  be  permitted  to  quote  myself 
in  the  biography  of  Thomas  Spurgeon  in  illustration 
of  the  extent  to  which  his  father  was  venerated  and 
almost  adored — 

"  I   know    of    an    old    man    in    a    country   district 


126  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

which  Spurgeon  was  to  visit  who  asked  permission 
from  his  master  to  attend  the  preaching.  The  farmer 
insisted  on  the  day's  work  being  done  first,  and  so 
the  old  man  began  at  the  first  sign  of  dawn  to  use 
the  scythe,  and  at  every  sweep  of  it  he  said  '  Spm'geon ! 
Spurgeon  !  Spurgeon  ! '  until,  having  finished  his  task, 
with  a  glad  spirit  he  got  away  to  hear  the  man  whose 
name  had  inspired  his  heart  for  years  and  been  on  his 
lips  all  the  morning. 

"  Dr.  MacArthur  of  New  York  tells  that  on  passing 
the  cottage  by  the  gate  of  Melrose  Abbey  he  dis- 
covered how  Spurgeon  was  honoured  there.  *  I  saw 
an  old  Scotch  lady,  with  white  hair,  and  the  bloom 
of  heather  on  her  cheek,  sitting  and  reading.  She 
was  the  wife  of  the  gatekeeper,  and  I  could  not  help 
noticing,  without  intending  to  be  intrusive,  that  she 
was  reading  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons.  I  said 
to  her,  "  I  am  glad  you  are  reading  that  sermon,  for 
I  love  the  man  and  the  sermons,"  and  I  added,  "  Do 
you  know,  I  expect  to  see  him  and  hear  him  next 
Sunday."  She  looked  at  me  a  moment  and  then 
exclaimed,  "  Oh  !  what  wadna  /  gie  to  see  his  face  and 
hear  his  voice  ! "  So  she  called  her  husband  that  he 
might  look  at  me,  because  I  was  to  look  at  Spurgeon 
on  Sunday,  and  she  said,  "  I  dinna  wish  to  envy  ye, 
but  I  wad  gie  all  I  hae  if  I  could  see  him  mysel."  '  "  '^ 

"  I  dinna  want  to  die,"  said  an  old  North-country- 
man, "  till  I  gan  to  London  to  see  Madame  Tussaud's 
and  hear  Mr.  Spurgeon,"  and  a  traveller  relates  that, 
getting  lost  in  a  Highland  glen,  he  found  that  the 
people  who  knew  nothing  about  either  Gladstone  or 
Beaconsfield  woke  up  at  the  name  of  Spurgeon. 
There  was  no  kirk  in  the  glen,  and  they  just  met 
together  and  read  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons. 
One  old  man  said,  "  I  wad  shoost  gang  on  ma  twa 


THE   ROMANTIC   YEARS  127 

bonds  and  knees  a'  the  way  to  Glesca  tae  get  a  sicht 
o'  him."  8 

Of  course  there  were  still  contrary  voices — were 
until  the  end.  One  doctor  of  divinity,  in  giving  the 
ordination  to  his  own  son  in  Bristol,  declared  that  he 
would  prefer  a  decent  dog  to  one  that  was  always 
barking,  and  warned  the  young  minister  against  "  the 
Barnums  of  the  pulpit  who  draw  large  gatherings, 
collect  large  amounts,  and  preach  many  sermons  "  ! 

There  were  also  kindly  critics.  One,  who  remained 
unknown,  used  to  send  the  preacher  a  weekly  list  of 
mispronunciations  and  other  errors  in  the  previous 
Sunday  morning's  sermon.  These  communications 
were  always  welcome.  If  a  phrase  was  used  too 
frequently,  the  writer  would  say,  "  See  the  same 
expression  in  such  and  such  a  sermon."  He  remarked 
in  one  letter  that  Spurgeon  quoted  too  frequently 
the  line  *'  Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring,"  and  added, 
"  We  are  sufficiently  informed  of  the  vacuity  of  your 
hand  "  ! 

Mr.  Spurgeon  never  visited  America,  though  he 
was  invited  on  several  occasions.  In  1859  he  was 
offered  £10,000  for  some  sermons  in  New  York,  but 
he  preferred  to  go  unfettered,  and  actually  intended 
to  go  the  following  year.  Meanwhile  he  became  the 
centre  of  Anti-Slavery  controversy.  His  sermons 
were  being  published  in  America,  and  had  a  large  sale, 
but  it  seemed  as  if  he  had  changed  his  views  on  the 
subject  of  slavery.  The  fact  was  that  the  American 
publishers  suppressed  all  references  to  the  topic  in 
sermons.  When  this  was  discovered  he  was  bluntly 
asked  whether  he  had  consented  to  the  expurgation 
of  his  sermons,  and  in  reply  he  drew  attention  to  the 
fact  that  though  the  question  of  slavery  had  not  thrust 
itself  upon  him  in  the  ordinary  duties  of  his  Englisli 


128  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

ministry,  he  counted  slavery  as  a  crime  of  crimes. 
He  followed  this  with  a  strong  denunciation  of  the 
whole  system,  and  as  a  result  the  circulation  of  his 
sermons  dwindled,  especially  in  the  Southern  States, 
and  his  visit  to  America  was  abandoned.  In  later 
years  he  was  urged  to  cross  the  Atlantic.  To  one  of 
these  invitations,  promising  him  not  money  (for  the 
astute  pleader  knew  that  was  not  the  proper  bait  for 
Spurgeon),  but  the  opportunity  of  preaching  to  ten 
thousand  people,  Spurgeon  answered  that  he  had  no 
wish  to  speak  to  ten  thousand  people,  his  only 
ambition  was  to  do  the  Will  of  God. 

After  the  first  early  years  he  renounced  all  idea  of 
visiting  foreign  shores.  Mr.  John  Cook,  of  tourist 
fame,  once  offered  to  take  him  up  the  Nile  like  a 
prince,  without  expense  to  him,  but  he  declined  the 
generous  offer.  When  his  son  Thomas  was  in  Auckland 
his  heart  almost  led  him  to  accept  an  invitation 
to  New  Zealand  that  was  pressed  upon  him,  but  the 
impossibility  of  such  a  visit  soon  became  apparent. 

Content  to  exercise  his  ministry  in  London,  he  did 
not  need  to  go  afield,  for  representatives  of  all  the 
world  came  to  him.  An  American  outside  the 
Tabernacle  asked  another  man,  "  At  what  time  do 
they  open  the  doors  ?  I  am  a  stranger  from  California, 
six  thousand  miles  from  here."  "  Sorry  I  can't  tell 
you,  but  I  am  a  little  way  from  home  myself,"  quietly 
responded  his  neighbour;  "I  come  from  Sydney,  a 
little  matter  of  twelve  thousand  miles  from  here,  I 
reckon." 

Quite  early  he  began  to  lecture  as  well  as  preach. 
The  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  sought  his 
help  in  its  series  of  "  Exeter  Hall  Lectures,"  and  with 
a  spice  of  mischief  the  young,  unlettered  country 
bumpkin  instantly  chose  a  Latin  title  for  his  subject. 


THE   ROMANTIC   YEARS  129 

"  De  Propaganda  Fide."  All  London  wanted  to  be 
there.  Spurgeon  was  coming  out  in  a  new  phase. 
"  What  could  he  know  about  Latin  ?  "  Encouraging 
as  the  attendance  at  the  other  lectures  of  the  series 
had  been,  that  night,  January  4,  1859,  the  crowd  was 
overwhelming,  distinguished  men  were  present  in 
considerable  number,  and  excitement  ran  high.  All 
through  it  was  a  great  success,  it  was  cheered  at  the 
close,  and  characterised  as  being  neither  lecture  nor 
sermon,  and  yet  for  that  occasion  better  than  either. 
The  lecture  strongly  condemned  war,  and  denounced 
the  opium  traffic. 

One  reference  evoked  such  approval  from  the  men 
in  the  audience  that  it  almost  seemed  as  if  the  applause 
would  never  end.  "  I  would  rather  dress  as  a  Quaker 
than  I  would  wear  the  things  some  men  do,"  he  said; 
"  and  I  would  rather  see  my  sisters  in  Christ  habited 
as  Quakers  than  that  they  should  magnify,  enlarge 
and  increase  themselves  as  they  now  do."  In  a 
leading  article  afterwards  Dr.  Campbell  remarked, 
"  The  stroke  was  the  most  electric  one  ever  witnessed 
in  that  Hall.  The  ladies  who  were  present,  and  the 
number  was  not  inconsiderable,  were  placed  in  a 
plight  most  pitiable.  The  good-natured,  yet  deeply 
derisive  cheering  was  tremendous,  and  long,  very 
long  continued.  If  that  vast  assembly  might  be 
taken  as  a  fair  representation  of  the  young  men  of 
England,  the  ladies  of  the  nation  stand  reprehended, 
laughed  at,  and  ridiculed  by  gentlemen  from  John 
o'  Groats  to  Land's  End."  ^  A  popular  cartoon  soon 
appeared  representing  Spurgeon  inside  a  crinoline 
snapping  the  hoops  asunder. 

Though  scarcely  a  lecture,  a  previous  quiet  talk 
with  his  own  people  at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music 
Hall   on   "A   Christian's   Pleasures  "    had   provoked 

K 


130  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

the   merriment  of  Punchy   which   came   out  with   an 
article  on  "  The  Spm'geon  Quadrille." 

When  the  Tabernacle  work  was  in  full  swing  a 
series  of  Friday  evening  lectures  was  given  by  Mr. 
Spurgeon.  He  began  with  "  Shrews,  and  how  to 
Tame  Them,"  followed  with  "  Eminent  Lord  Mayors," 
"Southwark,"  "The  Two  Wesleys,"  "Eccentric 
Preachers,"  and  several  on  Natural  History  with 
specially  prepared  diagrams.  "He  seems  always 
to  do  best  what  he  is  doing  last,"  says  a  friendly 
reporter.  "  Throughout  the  hour  and  three-quarters 
he  frequently  spoke  with  all  the  force  and  vehemence 
which  distinguished  his  ordinary  preaching ;  and  then 
be  it  remembered  that  this  was  after  four  hours  in 
the  lecture-room,  and  the  exertions  of  the  previous 
Thursday  night,  w^hile  only  thirty-six  hours  remained 
till  the  commencement  of  the  overwhelming  services 
of  the  Lord's  Day." 

Two  later  lectures  aroused  wide  attention.  Paul 
du  Chailiu  had  recently  published  his  Explorations 
and  Adventures  in  Equatorial  Africa,  and  his  state- 
ments had  been  received  with  some  caution,  especially 
his  account  of  the  gorilla.  His  discoveries  were 
afterwards  confirmed,  but  Spurgeon  believed  in  him 
from  the  beginning,  and  with  Nineveh  Layard  in  the 
chair,  and  du  Chailiu  at  his  side,  he  lectured  to  a 
crowd  that  filled  the  Tabernacle  to  excess.  For 
some  occult  reason  this  aroused  the  fury  of  the  Press. 
More  cartoons  appeared;  one  representing  Spurgeon 
as  "  Greatheart "  amongst  a  crowd  of  gorillas; 
another  "  A  gorilla  lecturing  on  Mr.  Spurgeon,"  with 
his  hand  on  the  head  of  a  bust  of  the  preacher. 

A  second  lecture  which  acquired  world-wide  fame 
was  "  Sermons  in  Candles."  In  an  address  to  his 
students  Spurgeon  told  them  that  if  they  could  sec 


THE   ROMANTIC  YEARS  131 

nothing  in  the  world  but  a  tallow  candle,  they  might 
find  illustrations  enough  to  last  them  six  months. 
They  demurred,  and  so  he  promised  to  prove  his 
words,  and  the  Candle  lecture  was  the  result.  All 
sorts  of  candles  and  lamps  were  used  as  object  lessons, 
and  the  lecture,  which  continually  grew,  was  given 
again  and  again,  always  with  great  acceptance,  and 
it  was  also  widely  copied  by  others. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  invited  to  repeat  his  lecture  on 
George  Fox  to  the  Society  of  Friends  at  their  Institute 
in  Bishopsgate  in  London.  So  on  November  6,  1866, 
he  was  gTceted  by  a  large  representation  of  the 
Society,  some  twelve  hundred.  He  felt  a  strong 
desire  to  lead  in  audible  prayer,  but  silent  petition 
was  considered  more  fitting.  Matthew  Arnold  was 
there,  and  wrote  afterwards  to  his  mother :  "  Last 
night  Lord  Houghton  went  with  me  and  William  Foster 
to  Spurgeon's  lecture.  It  was  well  worth  hearing.  It 
was  a  study  in  the  way  of  speaking  and  management 
of  the  voice,  though  his  voice  is  not  beautiful  as  some 
people  call  it,  nor  is  his  pronunciation  quite  pure. 
Still  it  was  a  most  striking  performance;  he  kept  up 
one's  interest  and  attention  for  more  than  an  hour 
and  a  half,  and  that  is  a  great  thing.  I  am  very 
glad  I  have  heard  him."  ^^ 

When  the  people  had  nearly  all  dispersed  one  of  the 
audience  came  up  to  speak  to  the  lecturer;  it  was 
John  Bright,  with  whose  oratory  his  own  has  been 
so  often  compared,  and  who,  like  him,  for  some  years 
enjoyed  "the  beatitude  of  malediction." 

Thus  the  romantic  years  passed.  Amid  praise  and 
blame  he  held  on  his  way.  In  a  time  of  violent 
criticism  Mrs.  Spurgeon  wondered  what  she  could  do 
to  smooth  his  path,  so  she  had  a  text  illuminated  in 
old  English  type  and  hung  in  their  bedroom,  where 


132  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

every  morning  he  could  see  it,  and  many  a  time  his 
heart  was  cahned  as  he  read — 

Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,  and 
persecute  you,  and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil 
against  you  falsely,  for  My  sake.  Rejoice  and 
be  exceeding  glad  :  for  great  is  your  reward  in 
Heaven,  for  so  persecuted  they  the  prophets 
which  were  before  you. — Matt.  v.  11,  12. 

But,  like  his  Master,  he  grew  in  favour  with  God 
and  man.  A  boy  in  America  w^as  asked  in  an  examina- 
tion who  was  the  Prime  Minister  of  England.  His 
answer  was  "  C.  H.  Spurgeon."  This  can  be  matched 
by  something  overheard  at  Mentone.  Spurgeon  was 
walking  on  the  promenade,  and  a  carriage  was 
passing  along  the  road.  Said  the  coachman  to  the 
person  he  was  driving,  "  Do  you  know  who  that  is  ? 
that  is  the  Pope  of  England  !  "  The  people  too  were 
at  last  on  his  side.  On  the  great  day,  March  7,  1863, 
when  Queen  Alexandra  made  her  public  entry  into 
London,  Spurgeon  drove  into  town  in  his  closed 
brougham.  There  was  a  block  on  London  Bridge, 
and  one  of  his  hearers  recognised  him.  The  news 
spread,  those  on  the  bridge  pressed  round  the  carriage, 
struggled  to  see  his  face,  almost  wrenched  his  hand  off  in 
their  fervour,  cheered  him  again  and  again,  giving  him 
an  ovation  that  even  the  Princess  might  have  envied. 

During  these  years  it  was  no  uncommon  thing,  on 
Sunday  mornings  on  the  north  side  of  the  river,  for 
the  conductors  of  the  omnibuses  that  were  about 
to  cross  the  bridges  to  the  south,  all  of  them  converg- 
ing on  the  Tabernacle,  to  entice  people  into  their 
conveyances  by  a  device  more  romantic  than  most  of 
them  guessed.  With  gusto  they  cried,  "  Over  the 
water  to  Charlie  !  " 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE 

September  29,  1856 — April  10,  1861 ;  and  afterwards 

The  building  of  the  Tabernacle  was  itself  a  romance, 
but  there  was  a  romance  within  a  romance  which 
first  of  all  deserves  mention.  It  was  known  only  to  a 
few  at  the  time  of  its  occurrence,  and  was  not  told 
in  public  till  the  meeting  which  celebrated,  on  May  19, 
1879,  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  ministry. 
I  heard  him  tell  it  then  as  a  notable  instance  of  the  way 
God  encourages  His  servants  by  "  hidden  evidences," 
as  well  as  by  those  that  are  open  to  all  the  world. 

There  were  not  wanting  those  who  opposed  the 
venture ;  they  "  wished  to  keep  the  eagle  in  a  small 
cage,  but  there  was  no  use  doing  that;  the  eagle 
would  either  break  his  wings  or  break  the  cage," 
and  happily  it  was  the  cage,  and  not  the  wings,  that 
got  broken.  But  if  the  warmest  exponents  of  the 
building  of  what  even  then  was  spoken  of  as  "  the 
largest  chapel  in  the  world  "  had  known  what  was 
before  them,  they  might  have  hesitated.  Fortunately 
faith  often  goes  to  its  greatest  exploits  blindfold. 

When  on  Michaelmas-day,  1856,  New  Park  Street 
Chapel  was  crowded  to  discuss  the  suggestion,  a  sum 
of  £12,000,  or  at  most  £15,000,  was  considered  adequate 
to  provide  such  a  structure  as  appeared  necessary. 
The  building  actually  cost  £31,322.  At  the  close 
of  1859  a  sum  of  £16,868  had  been  collected,  and 

133 


134  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

about  as  much  again  was  needed.  Mr.  Spurgeon 
never  had  any  misgivings  on  the  matter,  and  his 
spirit  sustained  others  when  they  were  about  to  faint. 
His  faith  was  accompanied  by  works,  for  before  the 
Tabernacle  was  opened  he  had  contributed  over 
£5000  to  the  project  himself,  and  it  was  through  his 
personal  effort  that  much  of  the  rest  was  gathered. 

If  he  sustained  the  faith  of  others,  his  own  faith 
was  sustained  in  a  remarkable  way,  as  remarkable 
as  the  visit  of  the  Ravens  to  Elijah  by  the  brook 
Cherith.  He  was  one  day  in  1859  driving  with  a 
friend  to  preach  in  the  country,  when  a  carriage 
overtook  him,  and  the  gentleman  in  it  asked  him 
if  he  would  get  out  of  his  vehicle  and  ride  with  him 
in  his  gig,  as  he  wanted  to  speak  to  him.  It  was  evident 
that  he  had  started  in  pursuit  of  the  preacher.  When 
they  were  together,  the  stranger  told  him  that  as  a 
business  man  he  was  sure  he  would  succeed  in  the 
great  enterprise  he  had  in  hand — it  was  God's  work 
and  could  not  fail.  But  he  added,  "  You  will  have 
many  friends  that  will  feel  nervous  about  it.  I  want 
you  never  to  feel  anxious  or  downcast.  What," 
he  said,  "  do  you  think  will  be  required  at  the  out- 
side to  finish  it  off  altogether  ?  "  Spurgeon  replied, 
"£20,000."  "Then,"  said  he,  "I  will  let  you  have 
£20,000,  on  condition  that  you  keep  only  so  much 
of  it  as  you  need  to  finish  the  building.  I  only  expect 
to  give  £50,  but  you  shall  have  bonds  and  leases  to 
the  full  value  of  £20,000  to  fall  back  upon."  The 
securities  were  duly  delivered  to  Mr.  Spurgeon;  and 
during  the  next  two  years,  when  many  wise  heads 
were  wagging  at  the  extravagance  of  the  project 
and  the  hopelessness  of  carrying  it  through,  Spurgeon 
had  the  means  in  hand  to  finish  it  if  everybody  else 
had  deserted  him.     "  They  little  knew,"  he  exclaimed 


THE   GREAT  TABERNACLE  135 

on  that  silver-wedding  evening,  "  how  much  reason 
I  had  for  my  assurance,  nor  how  my  faith  had  been 
strengthened  by  this  token  of  God's  favour."  The 
generous  benefactor  knew  his  man,  for  he  was  only 
called  upon  to  give  his  £50 ;  from  the  beginning  Spur- 
geon  had  determined  that  he  should  not  be  required 
to  give  any  more. 

For  a  moment  we  may  pause  and  ask  whether  in 
fact  faith  with  such  a  token  is  easier  or  more  difficult — 
faith,  remember.  George  MuUer  on  one  occasion 
had  £3000  balance  in  the  bank,  and  some  one  asked 
him  whether  he  did  not  now  find  it  easy  to  trust  God. 
With  true  insight  he  said,  "  No,  I  find  myself  apt  to 
trust  the  £3000  !  " 

"  What  need  of  faith,  if  skies  were  always  clear  ? 

'Tis  for  the  trial-time  that  this  was  given. 

Though  skies  be  dark,  the  sun  is  just  as  near, 

And  faith  may  find  him  in  the  heart  of  heaven,"  ^ 

Clear  sky  or  dark  sky,  Spurgeon  was  conspicuous 
for  his  faith,  and  faith  evoked  faith,  his  trust  in  God 
led  others  to  trust  him.  In  the  after  years  it  was  no 
uncommon  thing  for  those  who  wished  to  bestow 
money  on  worthy  objects  and  scarcely  knew  what 
objects  to  choose,  to  say,  "  Let  us  send  it  to  Spurgeon, 
he  will  know  how  to  make  the  best  use  of  it." 

Even  he  had  his  fits  of  nervousness,  especially 
when  he  was  ill.  On  one  occasion  when  his  recovery 
was  being  hindered  by  his  doubt  as  to  whether  he 
would  be  able  to  meet  all  the  obligations  entailed 
on  him  by  the  things  for  which  he  had  made  himself 
responsible,  one  of  his  deacons,  after  a  visit  to  the 
invalid,  whom  he  had  been  unable  to  comfort,  returned 
in  a  little  while  to  his  bedside  bringing  with  him  the 
scrip  that  represented  all  his  investments,  and  pouring 
the  papers  on  his  bed  he  said,  "  There  !   I  owe  every- 


136  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

thing  that  I  have  in  the  world  to  you,  and  you  are 
welcome  to  all  that  I  possess.  Take  whatever  you 
Aeed,  and  do  not  have  another  moment's  anxiety." 
It  was  the  best  of  medicine.  "  It  seemed  to  me," 
Spurgeon  wrote  afterwards,  "  very  much  as  the  water 
from  the  well  of  Bethlehem  must  have  appeared  to 
David."     Of  course  he  used  none  of  it. 

The  selection  of  a  site  for  the  new  Tabernacle  was 
a  matter  of  difficulty— Holloway,  Clapham  and  Ken- 
sington were  discussed,  but  at  length  the  Fishmongers' 
Company  were  persuaded  to  sell  part  of  their  land 
where  there  were  some  Almshouses  "  at  the  Butts 
of  Newington."  In  the  olden  days,  1546  or  there- 
abouts, three  Anabaptists  had  been  burnt  near  the 
spot.  A  special  Act  of  Parliament  was  needed  to 
ensure  the  legality  of  the  transfer  of  the  freehold,  and 
Mr.  William  Joynson  of  St.  Mary  Cray  deposited 
sufficient  money  to  carry  it  through.  The  new  Taber- 
nacle was  destined  to  be  built  near  the  Surrey  Gardens 
Music  Hall. 

An  architectural  competition  was  opened  for  the  best 
plans  for  the  new  building,  and  at  the  end  of  January 
1859,  sixty-two  sets  of  drawings  and  one  model  had 
been  received.  These  were  exhibited  for  public 
inspection.  Twenty-eight  of  them  were  described 
in  The  Builder  of  February  12,  1859,  which  also  states 
that  "  considerable  excitement,  of  course,  prevails." 
The  design  which  gained  the  first  prize  was  not 
accepted,  but  the  eighth  in  the  hst,  by  Mr.  W.  W. 
Pocock,  to  which  the  Committee  allotted  the  second 
prize,  after  some  alterations  to  reduce  the  cost,  was 
adopted.  In  sitting  space  the  accommodation  was 
larger  than  the  Surrey  Hall,  which  with  three  galleries 
contained  19,723  feet,  while  the  Tabernacle,  with  two 
galleries,  contained  25,225  feet.     There  were  thirteen 


THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE  137 

tenders  for  the  building,  the  highest  being  £26,370, 
the  lowest  that  of  Mr.  WiUiam  Higgs,  £21,500.  The 
foundation  stone  was  laid  by  Sir  Samuel  Morton  Peto 
on  August  16,  1859,  beneath  it  being  placed  a  Bible, 
the  Baptist  Confession  of  Faith,  Dr.  Rippon's  Hymn 
Book,  and  a  declaration  by  the  deacons  of  the  Church. 
An  invalid  sent  from  Bristol  £3000  to  be  put  on  the 
stone,  with  a  challenge  that  if  twenty  others  would 
give  £100  each  he  would  add  £2000  to  match  theirs. 
Before  many  weeks  his  challenge  was  accepted  and 
the  extra  £2000  paid. 

"It  is  a  matter  of  congratulation  to  me,"  Mr. 
Spurgeon  said  in  his  speech,  "  that  in  this  city  we 
should  build  a  Grecian  place  of  worship.  There  are 
two  sacred  languages  in  the  world,  the  Hebrew  of  old, 
and  the  Greek  that  is  dear  to  every  Christian's  heart. 
The  standard  of  our  faith  is  Greek,  and  this  place  is 
to  be  Grecian.  Greek  is  the  sacred  tongue,  and  Greek 
is  the  Baptist's  tongue.  We  may  be  beaten  in  our 
own  version  sometimes ;  but  in  the  Greek  never.  Every 
Baptist  place  should  be  Grecian,  never  Gothic."  ^  So, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  year  of  his  ministry  in 
London,  this  young  man  of  twenty-five  saw  his  dreams 
materialise.  "  Long  ago,"  he  said,  "  I  made  up 
my  mind  that  either  a  suitable  place  must  be  built  or 
I  would  resign  my  pastorate;  you  by  no  means  con- 
sented to  the  latter  alternative ;  yet  I  sternly  resolved 
that  one  or  the  other  must  be  done — either  the  Taber- 
nacle must  be  erected,  or  I  would  become  an  Evan- 
gelist, and  turn  rural  dean  of  all  the  commons  in 
England,  and  vicar  of  all  the  hedgerows."  ^ 

It  would  have  been  little  wonder  if  his  heart  had 
been  lifted  up  in  pride.  Instead  of  that  we  find  him 
one  evening  after  the  workmen  had  left  encountering 
the  Secretary  of  the  Building  Committee  on  the  site. 


138  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

When  they  had  walked  about  for  a  while,  Spurgeon 
proposed  that  they  should  seek  God's  blessmg  on 
the  work.  So,  kneeling  down,  those  two  "  in  the  twi- 
light, with  the  blue  sky  over  them,  and  piles  of  bricks 
and  timbers  all  around  them,"  committed  the  building 
and  the  men  engaged  on  it  to  God's  care;  and  there 
was  not  a  single  serious  accident  during  the  whole 
progress  of  the  work. 

On  August  21,   1860,  a  meeting  was  held  on  the 
floor  of  the  unfinished  building,  when  Spurgeon  justi- 
fied the  name  chosen  for  it.     It  was  truly  "  Metro- 
politan,"  because   more   than   a   million   people   had 
contributed  to  it,  and  it  was  but  a  "  Tabernacle," 
because  God's  people  are  still  in  the  wilderness.     On 
March  18,  1861,  a  prayer  meeting  was  held  at  seven 
o'clock  in  the  morning  in  the  building,  then  almost 
completed,  and  a  week  later  another.     On  the  after- 
noon of  that  day,  March  25,  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached 
his  first  sermon  in  it,  the  text  being,   "  And  daily 
in  the  temple,  and  in  every  house,  they  ceased  not 
to  teach  and  preach  Jesus  Christ."     In  the  evening 
Dr.  Brock  discoursed  on  the  words,  "  Christ  is  preached ; 
and  I  therein  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice."     On  Good 
Friday,  March  29,  Spurgeon  preached  twice,  and  was 
able  to  announce  that  all  the  money  needed  for  the 
building  had   been   given,    and   that  the  Tabernacle 
was  therefore  ready,  free  of  debt,  for  worship  on  the 
following  Lord's  Day,  March  31.     On  the  following 
Tuesday  there  was  a  Baptism;    on  Wednesday,  April 
10,  a  great  Communion   Service;    and  so   for  three 
weeks  the  opening  services  and  meetings  continued, 
a  prelude  to  the  marvellous  ministry  to  be  maintained 
there  until,  on  June  7,  1891,  thirty  years  later,  worn 
out  with  labours  abundant,  with  pain  and  weariness, 
Spurgeon  stood  in  his  accustomed  place  and  preached 


THE   GREAT  TABERNACLE  139 

in  the  Tabernacle  for  the  last  time.  The  building 
itself  was  burnt  to  the  ground  on  Wednesday,  April 
20,  1898,  the  fagade  and  outer  walls  being  the  only 
part  of  the  original  structure  left.  Under  the  ministry 
of  Thomas  Spurgeon,  one  of  his  twin-sons,  it  was 
re-erected  at  a  cost  of  £45,000,  with  smaller  seating 
capacity,  and  was  again  opened  for  worship  free  of 
debt  on  Wednesday,  September  19,  1900.  It  has 
been  widely  discussed  whether,  when  the  great  Taber- 
nacle was  destroyed,  it  was  wise  to  build  another : 
whether  it  would  not  have  been  better  to  have  built 
four  or  five  places  of  worship  in  the  suburbs.  Such 
a  question  is  altogether  beside  the  mark ;  the  attach- 
ment of  the  people  to  the  old  place,  and  the  sentimental 
interest  attaching  to  the  site,  made  only  one  course 
possible. 

After  the  building  of  the  first  Tabernacle,  an  attempt 
was  made  to  continue  services  in  New  Park  Street 
Chapel,  but  it  became  apparent  that  there  was  no 
need  for  such  a  large  church  building  in  the  district, 
and  it  was  eventually  sold  for  business  purposes. 

The  original  Tabernacle  was,  outside  the  walls, 
174  feet  in  length,  the  auditorium  being  146  feet 
long,  81  feet  broad  and  62  feet  high.  There  were 
3600  seats,  but  by  side  seats  and  flap  seats  in  the  aisles 
there  was  accommodation  for  about  1000  more.  Times 
without  number  another  1000  somehow  found  some 
sort  of  accommodation  within  the  walls.  On  the 
evening  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Jubilee,  when  Lord  Shaftes- 
bury presided,  one  of  the  deacons  who  had  charge  of 
the  building,  and  who  always  personified  it,  said, 
"We  counted  eight  thousand  out  of  her;  I  don't 
know  where  she  put  'em,  but  we  did." 

I  may  be  permitted  again  to  quote  from  my  bio- 
graphy of  Thomas  Spurgeon— 


140  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"It  is  almost  impossible  for  the  present  generation 
to  realise  how  great  was  the  renown  of  Spurgeon  at 
his  zenith.  He  was  not  only  followed  and  admired, 
he  was  trusted  and  loved  beyond  his  fellows.  Thomas 
Binney  was  London's  greatest  preacher  when  Spurgeon 
arrived,  and  at  first  he  was  inclined  to  deride  the  boy 
in  the  pulpit  as  a  charlatan,  but  he  quickly  saw  his 
mistake,  and  to  a  gathering  of  students  he  said  :  '  I  have 
enjoyed  some  amount  of  popularity;  I  have  always 
been  able  to  draw  together  a  congregation ;  but  in  the 
person  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  we  see  a  young  man,  be  he  who 
he  may  and  come  whence  he  will,  who  at  twenty-four 
hours'  notice  can  command  a  congregation  of  twenty 
thousand  people.  Now  I  have  never  been  able  to  do 
that,  and  I  never  knew  of  anybody  else  who  could  do  it.' 

"  D.  L.  Moody  had  not  then  appeared  upon  the 
scene,  but  mighty  as  was  his  influence  his  verdict  on 
Spurgeon  was  :  '  In  regard  to  coming  to  your  Taber- 
nacle, I  consider  it  a  great  honour  to  be  invited ;  and, 
in  fact,  I  should  consider  it  an  honour  to  black  your 
boots,  but  to  preach  to  your  people  would  be  out  of 
the  question.  If  they  will  not  turn  to  God  under 
your  preaching,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though 
one  rose  from  the  dead.'  He  did,  however,  preach 
in  the  Tabernacle  afterwards,  and  in  his  London 
campaign  he  got  Spurgeon  to  preach  for  him.  In 
writing  to  thank  him  he  said  :  '  I  wish  you  could  give 
us  every  night  you  can  for  the  next  sixty  days.  There 
are  so  few  men  who  can  draw  on  a  week-night.' 
Remember  that  this  was  twenty-two  years  after  Spur- 
geon had  come  to  London,  and  that  during  all  that 
time  he  was  able  at  any  time  to  command  a  crowd  as 
great  as  Chrysostom  in  Constantinople  or  Savonarola 
in  Florence,  though  each  of  them  commanded  it  for 
a  much  shorter  time. 


THE   GREAT  TABERNACLE  141 

"  That  was  the  wonder  of  it :  he  built  a  Taber- 
nacle seating  between  five  and  six  thousand  persons, 
able  to  contain  over  seven  thousand,  and  for  thirty- 
eight  years  he  maintained  his  congregation  there  and 
elsewhere  in  London.  Francis  and  Bernard,  Wesley 
and  Whitefield  gathered  as  great  throngs,  but  they 
passed  from  place  to  place,  while  Spurgeon  remained 
rooted  to  the  metropolis.  Henry  Ward  Beecher  and 
Canon  Liddon  were  as  popular,  but  they  did  not 
preach  so  continuously  nor  so  long.  There  are,  indeed, 
not  wanting  some  who  trace  back  through  the  history 
of  the  Church  and  only  find  Spurgcon's  peer  in  Paul."  * 

"  How  many  thousands  have  been  converted  here  !  " 
he  exclaimed  at  the  prayer  meeting  on  May  26,  1890, 
as  he  looked  round  the  building.  '*  There  has  not  been 
a  single  day  but  what  I  have  heard  of  two,  three  or 
four  having  been  converted;  and  that  not  for  one, 
two,  or  three  years,  but  for  the  last  ten  years  !  " 
Surely  that  is  a  thing  unmatched  in  the  history  of  the 
Church.  The  membership  of  the  Church  when  he 
came  to  it  in  New  Park  Street  in  1854  was  232;  at 
the  end  of  1891  there  had  been  baptised  and  added 
to  the  Church  14,460  others;  and  the  membership 
then  stood  at  5311.  At  one  Communion  Service 
100  persons  were  admitted  to  membership  and 
150  at  another;  the  greatest  number  added  to  the 
membership  in  any  one  year  was  571,  in  1872 ;  in  1874 
there  were  509,  and  510  in  1875.  It  is  notable  that 
directly  the  Tabernacle  was  occupied  the  additions  to 
the  Church  year  by  year  were  double  the  additions  at 
New  Park  Street,  showing  that  the  size  of  the  fishing- 
pond  bears  some  relation  to  the  number  of  fishes 
caught. 

Every  Sunday,  with  few  exceptions,  for  thirty  years 
that  great  building  was  crowded  morning  and  evening, 


142  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

and  the  Thursday  evening  congregations,  often  over- 
flowing into  the  top  gallery,   were  more  wonderful 
than  all.     "  Somebody  asked  me  how  I  got  my  con- 
gregation," he  once  said;    "I  never  got  it  at  all.     I 
did  not  think  it  was  my  duty  to  do  so.     I  only  had 
to  preach  the  Gospel.     Why,   my  congregation  got 
my  congregation.     I  had  eighty,  or  scarcely  a  hundred, 
when   I  preached  first.     The  next  time  I  had  two 
hundred  :    every  one  who   heard  me  was  saying  to 
his  neighbour,  '  You  must   go  and   hear  this  young 
man !  '     Next  meeting  we    had    four    hundred,   and 
in  six  weeks  eight  hundred.     That  was  the  way  in 
which   my   people   got   my   congregation.     Now   the 
people    are    admitted    by    tickets.     That    does    very 
well;   a  member  can  give  his  ticket  to  another  person 
and  say,  '  I  will  stand  in  the  aisle,'  or  '  I  will  get  in 
with  the  crowd.'     Some  persons,  you  know,  will  not 
go  if  they  can  get  in  easily,  but  they  will  go  if  you  tell 
them  they  cannot  get  in  without  a  ticket.     That  is  the 
way    congregations    ought   to   bring   a    congregation 
about  a  minister.     A  minister  preaches  all  the  better 
if  he  has  a  large  congregation.     It  was  once  said  by  a 
gentleman  that  the  forming  of  a  congregation  was 
like  the  beating  up  of  game,  the  minister  being  the 
sportsman.     But,"    he    added,    "  there    are    some    of 
our    ministers    that    can't    shoot !     I    really    think, 
however,  that  I  could  shoot  a  partridge  if  I  fired  into 
the  midst  of  a  covey,  though  I  might  not  do  so  if 
there  were  only  one  or  two." 

His  biographer  was  for  some  time  a  seat-holder 
in  the  Tabernacle,  and  well  remembers  the  astonish- 
ment and  excitement  of  strangers  who  came  for  the 
first  time.  I  remember  especially  one  lady  who  had 
gained  early  admittance,  and  was  quietly  settling 
in  the  place  I  had  offered  her,  when  the  doors  were 


THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE  143 

opened  to  the  public,  and  the  rush  began  all  over  the 
building.  She  rose  in  alarm,  thinking  some  dreadful 
thing  had  happened,  and  then,  realising  the  situation, 
she  asked  with  panting  breath,  "  Is  it  always  like  this  ?  " 
There  are  three  realistic  descriptions  of  Tabernacle 
services  given  by  outsiders  which  will  perhaps  give 
a  more  vivid  idea  of  them  than  any  account  written 
from  within.  The  first  refers  to  a  Sunday  morning 
in  1879— 

"  It  was  high  time  to  go  and  hear  Spurgeon.  We 
had  procrastinated  long  enough  about  the  matter, 
and  now  it  must  be  put  off  no  longer.  What  if  the 
Tabernacle  were  a  Sabbath-day's  journey  distant? 
We  ought  to  be  able  to  manage  that  exertion  for  once 
in  a  way;  and  anything  was  better  than  the  grave 
reproach  under  which  we  lay  as  long  as  it  could  be 
said  of  us  that  we  lived  in  London  and  yet  had  never 
been  to  hear  the  foremost,  if  not  the  most  remarkable, 
of  London  preachers.     So  we  made  the  effort  and  went. 

"  We  had  heard  so  much  about  the  magnitude  of 
the  congregations  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle 
that  we  were  determined,  at  any  rate,  that  it  should  not 
be  our  fault  if  we  missed  an  eligible  seat.  Accordingly 
we  found  ourselves  in  the  enclosure  rather  more  than 
half  an  hour  before  the  stated  time  of  service.  A  few 
people  were  passing  the  gates  with  us,  but  as  yet  there 
was  no  indication  of  '  the  crush.'  Congratulating 
ourselves  on  being  thus  beforehand,  we  pushed  boldly 
forward,  with  a  view  to  enter  the  building  by  one 
of  its  fifteen  doors,  when  there  confronted  us  no  less 
than  three  scandalised  individuals,  whose  faces  wore 
every  expression  of  horror  and  indignation.  '  You 
cannot  get  in  without  a  ticket,'  was  the  hopeless 
announcement.     '  Tickets,'  we  exclaimed,   '  we  have 


144  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

none.'  '  Then  take  your  place  on  the  steps,'  was  the 
chilhng  rejoinder;  'the  general  public  is  admitted  at 
five  minutes  to  eleven.'  It  was  bad  enough  to  have 
our  zeal  thus  damped  at  the  outset,  but  to  be  reminded 
that  we  were  nothing  better  than  a  portion  of  '  the 
general  public  '  was  a  hard  blow.  We  did  not,  how- 
ever, like  to  forego  the  advantage  due  to  our  punctu- 
ality without  an  effort.  If  this  had  been  a  concert 
now,  or  a  theatre,  we  had  about  us  a  silver  key  which 
would  doubtless  have  gained  us  admission;  but  the 
janitors  of  a  place  of  worship,  we  considered,  were 
surely  not '  tippable  '  subjects.  While  we  were  rather 
in  a  dilemma,  a  fourth  individual  came  up  with  a 
packet  of  small  envelopes  in  his  hand.  '  I  can  give 
you  a  ticket,'  said  he,  '  if  you  wish  to  go  in.'  We 
were  ready  to  fling  our  arms  round  his  neck  as  we 
gasped  '  How  much  ?  '  '  We  make  no  charge,'  replied 
he  with  the  envelopes,  loftily,  handing  us  one ;  '  but 
you  can  put  what  you  like  in  this  towards  the  support 
of  the  Tabernacle,  and  drop  it  in  yonder  box  !  '  This, 
then,  was  the  incantation,  the  '  open  sesame '  we  had 
been  seeking.  Seizing  the  welcome  envelope,  we 
retired  to  a  corner,  and  followed  the  direction  given 
us;  after  which,  with  a  proud  sense  of  being  rather 
better  than  one  of  the  general  public,  we  marched 
triumphantly  forward,  inwardly  reflecting  that  what- 
ever the  fervour  of  the  spirit  animating  the  authorities 
of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  their  diligence  in 
business  was  exemplary. 

"  The  great  clock  on  the  platform  points  to  ten 
minutes  to  eleven,  and  then  suddenly  we  hear  three 
smart  claps  from  the  other  end  of  the  building.  The 
effect  of  the  signal  is  magical.  We  rise  from  our  seats, 
and  next  moment  find  ourselves  in  the  longed-for 
pew.     There  is  a  buzz  of  conversation,  which  is  at 


INTERIOR    DURING    WATCH-NIGHT   SERVICE. 

(A  Photograph  by  gaslight.     See  page  159.) 


exterior 
The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle. 


THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE  145 

first  quite  alarming.  Is  this  a  place  of  worship  or  a 
concert  hall?  one  mentally  inquires.  People  talk 
in  unabated  voices  and  even  laugh ;  and  one  of  the  old 
ladies  in  one  pew  waves  her  umbrella  affectionately 
to  her  crony  in  another.  It  doesn't  seem  very  reveren- 
tial, but  we  put  it  down  to  the  disturbing  effect  of  a 
great  number  of  people.  But  all  are  not  here  yet. 
The  clock  crawls  on  to  five  minutes  to  eleven,  and 
we  think  of  '  the  general  public '  outside.  A  glance 
shows  that  there  are  still  a  fair  number  of  empty  places 
for  them ;  and  at  the  thought,  lo !  here  they  come. 
The  aisles  resemble  for  the  moment  the  platform  of  a 
railway  station  on  an  excursion  day — at  least  as 
far  as  the  eagerness  of  the  candidates  for  the  seats 
goes.  The  noise,  happily  for  our  reputation  as  a  body 
of  worshippers,  is  not  quite  so  great.  And  now  every 
seat  is  full.  The  flaps  along  the  aisles  are  let  down 
and  occupied,  the  gangways  in  the  galleries  are  packed, 
the  back  pews  up  in  the  ceiling  are  tenanted,  and  we 
know  that  at  last  we  are  here  assembled.  But  how 
can  any  one  voice  make  itself  heard  here,  above  this 
hubbub  of  shuffling  and  talking  and  laughing?  We 
are  within  twenty  yards  of  the  platform,  and  even 
yet  have  our  misgivings  about  hearing;  and  what  of 
those  poor  '  general  publicans  '  away  there  as  far  as 
one  can  hurl  a  ball  ? 

*'  It  is  eleven  o'clock.  The  door  at  the  back  of  the 
platform  opens,  and  a  stout,  plain  man,  with  a  familiar 
face,  advances  haltingly  to  the  table,  followed  by 
some  dozen  deacons,  who  proceed  to  occupy  the 
stalls  immediately  behind  the  pastor's  seat.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  is  not  a  young  man  now,  and  to  us  he  looked 
feeble  in  body  and  not  in  health.  We  rather  envied 
his  feelings  as,  having  spent  a  moment  in  prayer, 
he  looked  round  the  vast  assembly,  and  were  by  no 


146  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

means  disposed  to  grudge  him  an  iota  of  the  pride 
whieh,  mingled  with  thankfulness,  must  assuredly 
have  filled  his  breast  at  the  sight.  '  Now  let  us  pray,' 
he  said,  and  in  an  instant  there  fell  a  hush  over  that 
entire  company  whieh,  had  we  not  witnessed  it, 
we  could  scarcely  have  imagined  possible.  The 
first  sentence  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  prayer  was  delivered 
in  absolute  silence ;  and  we  had  no  difficulty  in  setting 
at  peace,  once  for  all,  our  misgivings  as  to  the  possi- 
bility of  hearing.  Dropping  coughs  presently  broke 
the  stillness  of  the  congregation,  which  sometimes 
conspired  to  make  an  absolute  tumult ;  but  from 
first  to  last  Mr.  Spurgeon's  voice  rose  superior  to  all, 
nay,  even  seemed  to  gain  power  from  these  very 
oppositions. 

"  He  read  through  the  opening  hymn  while  a  tardy 
batch  of  the  general  public  was  thronging  the  aisles 
and  bustling  into  seats,  without  strain  or  effort,  and 
in  a  voice  which  must  have  penetrated  to  every  corner 
of  the  building.  Mr.  Spurgeon,  we  understand,  has 
on  more  than  one  occasion  said  that  he  can  whisper 
so  as  to  be  heard  in  every  part  of  the  Tabernacle, 
and  that  he  can  shout  so  as  to  be  heard  nowhere. 
In  this  art  lies  the  secret  of  his  mechanical  power  as 
a  speaker.  It  is  not  by  stentorian  exertion,  but  by 
well-regulated  modulation  and  studied  articulation, 
that  he  succeeds  as  he  does  in  bringing  all  within 
the  compass  of  his  voice.  The  process  is  exhausting 
neither  to  his  audience  nor  (it  would  seem)  to  the 
speaker — the  former  are  talked  to  rather  than  shouted 
at,  and  the  latter,  instead  of  waging  a  hopeless  struggle 
with  space,  is  mainly  concerned  to  keep  his  voice  at  a 
sufficiently  subdued  pitch  during  the  service. 

"  To  any  one  who  has  not  been  in  a  similar  scene, 
a  hymn  sung  by  a  full  congregation  at  the  Metropolitan 


THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE  147 

Tabernacle  has  a  thrilling  effect.  It  is  no  ordinary 
thing  to  see  four  and  a  half  thousand  people  rise 
simultaneously  to  their  feet,  still  less  to  hear  them 
sing.  For  a  moment  during  the  giving  out  of  the 
hymn  it  occurred  to  us  to  look  wildly  round  for  the 
organ,  which  surely  must  be  the  only  instrument 
which  could  lead  all  those  voices.  There  is  none  : 
and  we  are  sensible  of  a  pang  of  hurried  misgiving 
as  we  nerve  ourselves  to  the  endurance  of  all  the 
excruciating  torments  of  an  ill-regulated  psalmody. 
A  gentleman  steps  forward  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  side 
as  the  last  verse  is  being  read,  and  at  once  raises  a 
familiar  tune.  What  is  our  delight  when  not  only 
is  the  tune  taken  up  in  all  its  harmonies,  but  with 
perfect  time  and  expression !  The  slight  waving 
of  the  precentor's  book  regulates  that  huge  chorus, 
as  a  tap  will  regulate  an  engine.  The  thing  is  simply 
wonderful.  We  feel  that  tight  sensation  of  the  scalp 
and  that  quiver  down  the  spine  which  nothing  but  the 
combination  of  emotion  and  excitement  can  produce. 
We  are  scarcely  able  for  a  while  to  add  our  voices 
to  that  huge  sea  of  melody  which  rises  and  falls  and 
surges  and  floods  the  place.  If  Mr.  Spurgeon's  powers 
of  voice  are  remarkable,  those  of  his  precentor  are, 
to  our  thinking,  marvellous.  His  voice  can  be  heard 
above  all  the  others,  he  holds  his  own,  and  is  not  to 
be  run  away  with,  and  in  the  closing  hymn  he  is  as 
unflagging  as  in  the  first.  '  Now,  quicker,'  cries  Mr. 
Spurgeon,  as  we  reach  the  last  verse ;  and  it  is  wonder- 
ful to  notice  the  access  of  spirit  which  this  produced. 
We  sit  down,  deeply  impressed.  After  all,  what 
instrument  or  orchestra  of  instruments  can  equal  in 
effect  the  concert  of  the  human  voice,  especially  in 
psalmody  ? 

"  The  reading  of  Scripture  followed,  accompanied  by 


148  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

a  shrewd,  earnest  running  commentary,  which,  though 
sometimes  lengthy,  never  became  wearisome.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  is  not  one  of  those  who  beheve  that  Holy 
Scripture  is  its  own  expounder,  and  certainly  in  carry- 
ing out  this  view  he  manages  to  present  the  lesson 
selected  in  a  good  deal  less  disconnected  manner  than 
many  who,  with  less  ability,  attempt  a  similar  experi- 
ment. Another  hymn,  chanted,  followed,  and  then 
a  prayer.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  prayers  are  peculiar,  their 
chief  characteristic  being,  to  judge  by  the  specimen 
we  heard,  boldness.  We  do  not  mean  to  insinuate 
that  he  rants,  or  becomes  vulgarly  familiar  in  his 
addresses  to  the  Deity.  But  he  wastes  no  words 
in  studied  ornament,  his  petitions  are  as  downright 
as  fervent,  and  his  language  is  unconventional.  '  This 
is  Thy  promise,  O  Lord,'  he  exclaims  towards  the 
close  of  this  prayer,  '  and  Thou  mayst  not  run  back 
from  it.'  We  have  rarely  heard  this  style  of  address 
adopted  more  freely  than  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  we 
must  confess  that  it  does  not  exactly  accord  with  our 
prejudices.  Still  we  may  safely  say  the  earnestness 
of  his  prayer  went  far  to  atone  for  what  struck  us 
as  the  minor  defects  of  language,  which,  after  all, 
may  have  been  the  reverse  of  defects  to  the  uncritical 
portion  of  our  fellow-worshippers. 

"  The  most  remarkable  part  of  the  whole  service, 
however,  was  the  sermon.  And  here  we  may  as  well 
observe  at  once,  that  any  one  who  goes  to  the  Metro- 
politan Tabernacle  expecting  to  be  entertained  by  the 
eccentricities  of  the  preacher  is  doomed  to  absolute 
disappointment.  .  .  .  We  could  not  help  admiring  his 
choice  of  words.  It  is  pleasant  to  hear  once  more 
half  an  hour  of  wholesome  Saxon  all  aglow  with  earnest- 
ness and  sparkling  with  homely  wit.  You  yield 
yourself   irresistibly    to    its    fascination,    and    cannot 


THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE  149 

help  feeling  that  after  all  this  is  better  stuff  than  most 
of  the  fine  talking  and  Latin  quotations  and  elaborate 
periods  heard  elsewhere.  Mr.  Spurgeon  told  a  story 
in  the  course  of  his  sermon.  It  was  an  extremely 
simple  one  about  a  simple  subject,  but  the  effect  was 
remarkable.  The  coughing  gradually  died  away, 
or  became  very  deeply  smothered,  and  a  complete 
silence  fell  on  the  audience.  With  masterly  skill 
the  speaker  worked  up  the  narrative,  omitting  nothing 
that  could  give  it  power,  and  admitting  nothing  that 
would  weaken  it.  You  saw  the  whole  scene  before 
you;  you  heard  the  voice  of  those  who  spoke;  you 
shuddered  at  the  catastrophe;  you  sighed  when  all 
was  over.  '  And  so  it  is  with  us,'  said  the  preacher, 
and  not  another  word  was  necessary  to  apply  the 
moral. 

"  While  the  sermon  was  going  on,  we  could  not 
resist  the  impulse  to  look  round  and  see  how  our  old 
ladies  were  enjoying  it.  It  did  one  good  to  see  one 
nodding  her  approval  of  each  sentence,  and  sometimes 
lifting  her  hand  to  her  tell-tale  eyes.  Other  two 
sat  close  together,  and  we  are  certain  that  their  ribs 
must  have  ached  by  the  time  it  was  all  over  from  the 
amount  of  mutual  nudging  that  went  on.  Indeed 
as  we  looked  round  galleries  and  basement,  and  saw 
that  sea  of  attentive  faces,  we  felt  reproved  for  our 
own  inattention,  and  gave  over  taking  observation, 
to  listen. 

"  Punctually  to  the  time  (and  nothing  can  exceed 
the  punctuality  of  everything  connected  with  the 
Tabernacle)  Mr.  Spurgeon  closed  his  Bible,  and  with 
it  his  address.  As  if  reheved  from  a  spell,  the  con- 
gregation coughed  and  fidgeted  and  stretched  itself 
to  such  an  extent  that,  for  the  first  time  that  morning, 
the  preacher's  voice  seemed  ^t  fault.     But  the  con- 


150  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

eluding  hymn  gave  ample  opportunity  for  throwing 
off  the  pent-up  energies  of  his  listeners,  and  the  final 
prayer  was,  like  the  first,  pronounced  amid  a  tense 
silence."  ^ 

The  second  description  is  of  a  Sunday  evening  when 
the  regular  congregation  vacated  their  places,  as  for 
some  years  they  did  once  a  quarter,  to  give  outsiders 
a  better  opportunity  of  hearing  Mr.  Spurgeon.  The 
writer  says — 

"At  6.15  we  find  ourselves  in  Newington,  opposite 
the  most  stolid  and  matter-of-fact-looking  place  of 
worship.  Nothing  can  be  more  practical-looking 
than  this  vast  edifice.  Not  an  inch  of  space  is  devoted 
to  idle  ornament,  not  a  ton  of  stone  is  sacrificed  to 
effect.  There  is  a  Greek  portico,  no  doubt;  but  the 
portico  of  the  Greeks  was  useful  to  keep  the  sun  from 
the  philosophers  who  taught,  and  the  portico  of  the 
Tabernacle  is  useful  to  keep  the  rain  off  those  who 
come  to  learn. 

"  People  are  crowding  in  at  about  the  rate  of  two 
hundred  a  minute,  quite  as  fast  as  the  business-like 
doors  can  swallow  them  up.  Tram-cars  and  omni- 
buses come  up  to  the  gates,  set  down  their  swarm  of 
serious-looking  folk  and  pass  away  empty.  Now 
and  then  a  hansom  cab  rattles  up,  drops  a  common- 
place bride  and  bridegroom,  or  a  commonplace  elderly 
couple,  and  departs.  But  the  vast  majority  of  those 
who  come  arrive  on  foot,  and  toil  up  the  steps  with 
laggard  feet,  as  though  they  had  walked  from  a  great 
distance.  We  do  not  observe  any  of  the  very  poor. 
The  waifs  and  strays  of  many  shires  remote  from 
London,  and  the  usual  visitors  from  the  two  cities, 
twelve  towns,  and  the  one  hundred  and  forty-seven 
villages  that  go  to  make  up  the  metropolis,  appear 


THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE  151 

all  to  be  in  the  social  zone  between  the  mechanic 
and  the  successful  but  not  fashionable  tradesman.  We 
find  no  one  as  low  as  a  working  man,  no  one  who 
follows  any  liberal  or  learned  profession."  (Here  the 
narrator  is  wrong,  but  not  so  wrong  as  if  it  had  been 
a  morning  service.)  "  There  is  a  steady  persistence 
in  the  way  these  people  come  up  these  steps,  as  though 
they  were  quite  sure  of  finding  within  exactly  what 
they  seek.  There  is  no  hesitancy  or  loitering.  Each 
one  has  come  to  hear  Spurgeon  preach,  and  each 
one  is  resolved  to  get  as  good  a  seat  as  possible.  The 
congregation  does  not  look  super-spiritualised  or 
super- depraved.  It  is  Sunday,  and  its  worldly  work 
for  the  week  is  over,  and  this  day  has  been  laid  aside 
for  rest  and  the  business  of  the  other  world,  and  this 
congregation  has  come  to  look  after  its  work  for  the 
other  world  or  to  rest. 

"  At  twenty  minutes  past  six  we  enter.  All  places 
on  the  floor  have  been  occupied  for  some  time;  all 
seats  on  the  first  tier  are  full,  so  we  cHmb  up  the  steep, 
high  stone  steps  through  the  square,  desolate-looking 
stair-well.  Everything  here,  as  outside,  is  practical, 
except  the  steps,  which  are  so  high  as  almost  to  be 
impracticable.  In  a  moment  we  are  in  the  spacious 
body  of  the  church.  Beyond  all  doubt,  this  is  one 
of  the  most  novel  sights  in  London.  The  vast  lozenge- 
shaped  space  is  paved  with  human  heads  and  packed 
'  from  garret  to  basement '  with  human  forms. 
'  Over  the  clock '  there  is  a  little  room  to  spare,  but 
in  less  than  five  minutes  the  seats  there  are  appro- 
priated, and  for  fully  five  minutes  before  the  hour 
at  which  the  service  is  announced  to  begin  there  is 
not  a  vacant  seat  in  the  church. 

"  Inside,  too,  all  is  practical  and  business-like  in 
the  arrangements.     The  light  is  capital,  the  colour 


152  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

is  cheerful,  the  seats  are  comfortable  and  commodious. 
There  is  no  attempt  to  produce  a  dim  religious  light, 
no  subduing  or  dulling  of  spent  tertiary  colours, 
no  chance  of  any  one  posing  as  a  martyr  because 
of  occupying  one  of  the  seats.  When  the  acoustical 
properties  of  the  building  are  tested  they  are  found 
to  be  most  admirable.  The  place  was  evidently 
designed  and  built  that  the  congregation  might  sit 
in  comfort,  and  hear  and  see  without  strain  to  the 
senses. 

"  Fortune  favoured  me,  and  we  got  a  place  in  the 
first  row,  about  half-way  down  the  left-hand  side  of 
the  platform.  Upon  the  seat  to  be  occupied  by  each 
person  is  a  half-sheet  of  paper,  printed  on  one  side,  and 
bearing  the  heading  '  Hymns  to  be  sung  at  the  Metro- 
politan Tabernacle  on  Lord's  Day  evening,  August  11, 
1878.'  Under  the  heading  comes  the  following  para- 
graph preceding  the  hymns  :  '  It  is  earnestly  requested 
that  every  sincere  worshipper  will  endeavour  to  join 
in  the  song,  carefully  attending  to  time  and  tune; 
and,  above  all,  being  concerned  to  worship  the  Lord 
in  spirit  and  in  truth.  The  hymns  are  selected  from 
"  Our  own  Hymn  Book,"  compiled  by  Mr.  Spurgeon. 
It  is  a  special  request  that  no  one  will  attempt  to 
leave  the  Tabernacle  until  the  service  is  quite  con- 
cluded, as  it  creates  much  disturbance,  and  renders 
it  difficult  to  hear  the  preacher.'  For  the  present, 
each  person  has  the  half-sheet  of  paper  folded  up, 
or  is  studying  it,  or  using  it  as  a  fan. 

"  On  a  level  with  the  first  tier  of  seats  is  Mr.  Spur- 
geon's  platform.  It  protrudes  into  the  well  of  the 
amphitheatre,  so  that  it  is  visible  from  all  parts  of 
the  church.  Upon  it  are  a  table,  chair  and  sofa.  On 
the  table  rests  a  Bible.  From  the  platform  to  the 
floor  runs  down  each  side  ^i  semi-spiral  flight  of  stairs 


THE   GREAT  TABERNACLE  153 

leading  to  a  lower  platform,  situated  immediately 
under  and  in  front  of  the  higher.  The  carpet  of  the 
platform  and  the  cover  of  the  sofa  are  of  the  same 
hue— deep  red,  approaching  plum  colour. 

"  Precisely  at  thirty  minutes  past  six  several  men 
come  down  the  passage  directly  behind  the  platform. 
First  of  these  is  a  stout,  square-built,  square- jawed 
man  of  between  forty  and  fifty.  Although  most  of 
those  present  this  evening  are  strangers,  there  is  no 
commotion  upon  the  entry  of  the  famous  preacher. 
There  are  two  reasons  for  the  apparent  insensibility, 
one  physical,  one  mental.  The  physical  reason  is 
that  the  building  is  so  admirably  constructed,  so 
successfully  focussed  upon  the  small  patch  of  platform, 
that  every  man,  woman  and  child  in  the  house  can  see 
the  preacher  from  the  moment  he  reaches  the  parapet 
of  his  balcony.  The  mental  reason  is  that  at  the  root 
of  the  attendance  of  this  vast  concourse  here  this 
evening  lies  the  business  idea.  There  is  no  personal 
enthusiasm  toward  the  preacher.  The  people  have 
come  on  business,  and  are  too  good  business  people 
to  jeopardise  their  business-like  calm  by  a  disturbing 
interest  in  anything  whatever  but  the  subject-matter 
of  the  evening's  service.  It  is  rarely  that  a  preacher 
of  such  wide  and  lasting  popularity  exercises  so  little 
personal  magic  over  a  congregation. 

"  The  service  opens  with  a  prayer.  Looking  down 
from  the  height  at  which  we  sit,  the  great  number 
of  bright- coloured  hats  and  bonnets  of  the  women 
on  the  floor  of  the  house  look  like  a  parterre  of  flowers, 
and,  higher  up,  the  first  tier,  sloping  from  the  back 
to  the  front,  presents  the  appearance  of  flowers  on 
a  vast  stand.  At  the  beginning  of  the  prayer  the 
whole  multitude  bend  forward  with  one  impulse, 
the  bright  hats  and  bonnets  and  bald.  ?ind  grey  heads 


154  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

are  lost  to  view,  and  in  their  stead  appears  a  dark 
grey  surface,  made  up  of  broadcloth-clad  backs  of  the 
men  and  dark  shoulder  articles  of  the  women. 

"  When  the  prayer  is  concluded  there  is  a  faint 
rustling  sound,  and  looking  down  again  we  see  the 
heads  are  now  uplifted,  and  close  to  each  head  a  half- 
sheet  of  paper  held  at  a  convenient  distance  for  reading. 
We  glance  carefully  round,  and  as  far  as  we  are  able 
to  see  no  one  is  without  a  paper  and  every  one  seems 
studying  his  own.  There  are  four  hymns  in  all,  and 
one  is  about  to  be  sung.  Mr.  Spurgeon  gives  it  out 
slowly  and  with  enormous  distinctness.  The  effect 
of  his  voice  in  giving  out  the  hymn  is  very  peculiar. 
The  words  come  separately  and  individually,  and  take 
their  place,  as  it  were,  with  intervals  between  them, 
like  men  who  are  to  assist  at  a  pageant,  arriving  one 
by  one  and  marching  to  their  posts.  The  first  stanza 
having  been  read  over  and  the  first  line  repeated, 
all  rise  to  their  feet  by  one  act  of  accord.  The  choir 
start  the  hymn  "  (a  special  band  of  singers  for  this 
particular  evening),  "  and  between  five  and  six 
thousand  voices  take  it  up  with  great  precision  as 
to  time  and  great  accuracy  as  to  tune.  The  vast 
volume  of  sound  does  not  deafen  or  disgust.  It  is 
mild  and  suppressed.  You  know  it  has  the  strength 
of  a  giant,  but  you  feel  it  is  not  using  it  tyrannously. 
x4t  our  back  is  a  poor,  slender-looking  man  with  a  red- 
brown  beard.  He  is  like  a  shoemaker  out  of  work. 
His  voice  comes  in  with  clear,  sharp  edge,  a  counter- 
tenor. By  our  side  is  a  woman,  a  maid-of-all-work 
we  guess  her  to  be.  She  strikes  in  only  now  and  then 
with  a  few  low  contralto  notes  she  is  sure  of ;  she  never 
risks  a  catastrophe  up  high.  She  has  only  about  three 
and  a  half  notes,  but  she  never  loses  a  chance  of  con- 
tributing them   when  the   occasion    offers.     On  our 


THE   GREAT  TABERNACLE  155 

other  side  is  a  fresh-coloured  schoolgirl  home  for  the 
holidays.  Her  voice  is  a  thin  soprano,  and  seems 
to  roughen  the  edges  of  the  counter-tenor's.  But 
when  this  happens  there  floats  in  upon  our  exercised 
ears  the  dull,  low  boom  of  a  rolling  bass.  Who  the 
owner  of  the  bass  is  we  cannot  find  out.  We  look 
around  vainly  endeavouring  to  discover.  Now  we 
fix  on  one,  now  on  another,  but  this  ignis  jatuus  of  a 
voice  eludes  our  most  exhaustive  efforts  to  run  it 
to — flesh.  Meanwhile  abroad  in  the  hollow  roof  of 
the  building  the  confluent  concord  of  five  thousand 
voices  swells  the  hymn  to  an  imperial  psean."  ^ 

Ten  years  later,  we  find  a  description  of  the  preacher, 
rather  than  of  the  service,  which  is  worthy  of  being 
quoted — 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon's  text  was,  '  I  will  give  you  rest,' 
and  he  got  a  number  of  headings  out  of  and  by  means 
of  an  ingenious  device  well  known  to  grammarians, 
by  a  changing  of  the  emphasis  in  this  way — 

*'  I  will  give  you  rest. 
I  will  give  you  rest. 
I  will  give  you  rest. 
I  will  give  you  rest. 

"  Besides  that,  he  got  a  fresh  effect  in  the  course  of 
his  sermon  by  reading  it  very  staccato,  in  the  manner 
of  Uncle  Tom,  who  had  to  spell  painfully  through  his 
Bible,  thus  :  '  I — will — give — you — rest.'  Indeed,  from 
what  he  said,  he  appears  to  think  that  if  we  could 
unlearn  our  spelling  lessons  we  should  get  a  better 
idea  of  what  we  read  by  being  forced  to  go  more 
slowly  over  it,  an  idea  which  is  not  to  be  ridiculed. 
I  know  that  on  the  same  principle  I  often  seem  to  get 
a  clearer  view  of  the  inner  meaning  of  a  passage  in  a 


156  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

foreign  author,  which  I  have  had  a  difficulty  in  trans- 
lating.    What   seemed   to    hold   the   interest   of  his 
audience  most  was  Mr.  Spurgeon's  frequent  ad  cap- 
tandum  little  touches  of  pathos,   such  as,   '  If  your 
mother — ah  !    you  have  no  mother  now — were  to  give 
you  a  little  book  with  her  name  in  it  you  would  not 
part  with  it  for  its  weight  in  silver.'     Then  there  were 
little  personal  touches,  as  when  he  told  of  the  sleep- 
less nights  he  had  spent  through  headaches,  and  how 
he  got  rid  of  worries — '  God  knows,'   he   added,   '  I 
have  more  than  most.'     And  there  was  a  touch  of 
romantic  sadness,  the  sadness  of  age  which  looks  back 
on  youth,  as  he  told  how  merry  he  used  to  be  in  the 
early  days  of  his  Christian  life,  and  how  a  grave  com- 
forter had  said,  '  The  black  ox  has  not  gored  you  yet,' 
and  truly,  I  thought  to  myself,  atra  cura,  the  grim, 
haunting   figure   behind   the  horseman,  grows    more 
constant  in  his  attendance  as  we  grow  older,  be  we 
Christians  or  not.     And  again,  when  relating  a  touching 
little  incident  about  an  old  friend  who  had  '  gone 
home,'  he  said  that  among  that  huge  congregation 
there  were  some  who  would  be  gone  before  they  met 
again,  and  he  added,  with  a  sadness  that  drove  home 
his  previous  reflection,  '  I  could  wish  it  were  my  lot 
to  go  first  among  you.'     But  I  cannot  say  that  his 
personal  appearance  gave  the  impression  that  these 
gloomy  thoughts  came  from  bad  health;    on  the  con- 
trary, except  that  he  is  a  little  stiff  in  the  legs,  the 
preacher  looks  as  strong  and  energetic  as  ever  he  did, 
and  made,  as  he  spoke,  all  the  usual  marchings  and 
countermarchings  between  the  rails  of  the  platform, 
the  Bible  stand  and  the  chair,  which  he  now  and  then 
balanced  on  his  hand."  ^ 

It  would  be  impossible  to  recall  all  the  associations 
of  the  sanctuary  which  to  so  many  was  as  the  very 


THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE  157 

gate  of  heaven.     It  became  the  rendezvous  of  seeking 
souls  as  well  as  one  of  the  show  places  of  the  metro- 
polis.    Visitors   to   London   went   as    naturally    "  to 
hear  Spurgeon,"   as  they  went  to  St.   Paul's   or  to 
Westminster    Abbey.     "  To    far    the    larger    number 
of  Americans  who  crossed  the  Atlantic  there  were 
two  desires;   one  was  to  visit  Shakespeare's  tomb  in 
the  lovely  church  by  the  river  at  Stratford-on-Avon ; 
the  other  to  listen  to  Spurgeon  in  the  Metropolitan 
Tabernacle."     One  of  these  distinguished  Americans 
who  came  over  prejudiced  against  the  preacher  told 
me  recently,  that  in  a  few  minutes  after  the  service 
at  the  Tabernacle  began  he  was  completely  won  over 
in  his  favour,  and  with  a  wide  knowledge  of  American 
life,  he  added  that  the  only  voice  he  ever  heard  com- 
parable to  Spurgeon's  was  that  of  James  G.  Blaine, 
once  candidate  for  the  Presidency  of  the  Republic. 
General  Garfield,  recalling  his  visit  in  1867,  wrote  in 
his  diary :  "  God  bless  Mr.  Spurgeon  !     He  is  helping 
to  work  out  the  problem  of  religious  and  civil  freedom 
for  England  in  a  way  he  knows  not  of." 

"  For  a  generation  no  country  trip  to  town  has  been 
complete,"  writes  a  friendly  critic,  "  without  a  visit 
to  the  great  religious  theatre — we  use  the  word  in  no 
invidious  sense — where  Mr.  Spurgeon  so  completely 
filled  the  stage.  And  yet  the  man  who  wielded  and 
maintained  this  tremendous  influence  was  at  no  pains 
to  accommodate  his  teaching  to  new  light,  to  soften 
its  inexorable  conclusion,  to  shade  off  its  pitiless 
dilemmas.  The  web  of  his  speech  was  as  simple  as 
that  of  John  Bright's,  and  the  effect  he  produced 
on  his  hearers  strikingly  similar.  The  mere  mental 
refreshment  of  such  a  method  to  men  and  women 
must  have  been  enormous,  apart  from  the  moral 
stimulus.     The  sight  of  the  strong  face,  and  the  homely 


158  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

figure  moving  easily  about  the  platform,  the  flow  of 
simple  Saxon  speech,  the  rich,  deep  voice,  that  pene- 
trated to  every  spot  of  the  vast  oval  of  the  Tabernacle, 
one  can  recall,  but  never  completely  realise  the  attrac- 
tion they  had  for  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands 
of  Englishmen."  ^ 

The  place  the  Tabernacle  had  in  English  life  may  be 
guessed  from  the  fact  that  at  the  Crystal  Palace  on 
August  2,  1877,  it  was  the  great  set-piece  in  the  fire- 
work display,  and  there  was  included  a  "  Fire-Portrait " 
of  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

"  He  was  one  of  the  two  most  delicate  elocutionists 
I  have  ever  heard,"  writes  a  visitor,  "  the  other  is 
Lord  Coleridge.  What  made  the  elocution  of  both 
so  extraordinary  is  that  they  both  spoke  without 
the  slightest  apparent  effort.  There  was  no  motion 
of  the  body,  scarcely  even  a  visible  movement  of 
the  lips;  yet  the  voice  penetrated  to  the  remotest 
fringe  of  the  audience ;  not  a  cadence,  not  a  half-tone, 
was  lost."  ^ 

"  While  they  were  worshipping  with  him,"  wrote 
R.  W.  Dale,  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round 
about  them,  and  this  has  never  been  to  the  same  extent 
their  experience  in  listening  to  any  other  man.  Never 
again  will  they  listen  to  a  preacher  at  whose  word  God 
will  become  so  near,  so  great,  so  terrible,  so  gracious ; 
Christ  so  tender  and  so  strong;  the  Divine  Spirit 
so  mighty  and  so  merciful;  the  Gospel  so  free;  the 
promises  of  God  so  firm ;  the  troubles  of  the  Christian 
man  so  light;  his  inheritance  in  Christ  so  glorious 
and  so  real.  Never  again.  It  is  wonderful  that  such 
large  numbers  of  Christian  men  should,  in  the  Divine 
order,  be  made  so  dependent  on  one  man." 

Two  men  from  the  same  country  town  once  encoun- 
tered each  other  under  the  portico  of  the  Tabernacle 


THE   GREAT   TABERNACLE  159 

as  they  waited  for  the  doors  to  open.  The  one,  an 
avowed  Christian,  expressed  to  the  other,  a  person 
whose  hfe  was  apparently  engrossed  with  the  things 
of  this  world,  his  astonishment  at  meeting  him  there. 
"  Ah !  "  he  answered  in  a  tone  of  unfeigned  solemnity, 
"  every  man  has  his  own  tale  told  here." 

In  the  after  years  Moody  himself  commanded  no 
greater  crowds  when  he  conducted  a  Mission  in  the 
Tabernacle.  In  company  with  Manton  Smith,  I 
also  conducted  several  Missions  there,  and  on  occasion 
had  crowds  that  blocked  the  road  and  stopped  the 
tramcars,  and  at  the  Watch-night  services  for  many 
years  saw  the  great  building  thronged,  but  that  was 
only  occasional,  and  was,  of  course,  the  reflex  of 
Spurgeon's  own  influence.  The  only  photograph  of 
the  congregation  filling  the  Tabernacle  was  taken  at 
one  of  those  midnight  meetings,  the  photographic 
plate  being  exposed  under  the  gaslight  for  the  half- 
hour  during  which  I  was  speaking.  It  is  reproduced 
opposite  page  144.  A  popular  Temperance  Mission, 
too,  was  once  held  in  the  building,  the  audience 
cheering  for  many  minutes  when  Spurgeon  donned 
the  blue  ribbon.  Missionary  meetings  often  attracted 
overflowing  congregations,  and  for  many  years  the 
Liberation  Society  drew  crowds  there  for  its  annual 
demonstration,  until  Lord  Morley  was  one  year  an- 
nounced as  a  speaker,  and,  feeling  that  the  religious 
character  of  the  movement  was  compromised,  the 
Tabernacle  was  denied  to  the  Society. 

Two  of  the  greatest  occasions,  apart  from  the  preach- 
ing services,  were  at  the  silver  wedding  of  pastor  and 
people,  and  at  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  Jubilee.  On 
the  first,  on  May  20,  1879,  as  the  result  of  a  great 
bazaar,  a  sum  of  £6476  was  presented  to  the  pastor, 
the  bulk  of  which  he  promptly  gave  as  an  endowment 


160  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

to  the  almshouses  long  connected  with  the  Church, 
and  the  balance  to  other  good  works.  The  Jubilee 
meetings  were  held  on  June  18  and  19,  1884,  and  again 
a  presentation  was  made ;  this  time  the  sum  reached 
£4500.  It  would,  no  doubt,  have  been  considerably 
more  if  it  had  been  known  that  it  might  have  been 
for  the  pastor's  own  use;  but  people  expected  that 
he  would  give  it  all  away — as  he  practically  did,  paying 
first  for  the  Jubilee  house  behind  the  Tabernacle, 
sending  some  help  to  his  son  toward  the  building 
of  his  Tabernacle  in  New  Zealand,  giving  Mrs.  Spurgeon 
some  for  her  Book  Fund,  making  a  donation  to  St. 
Thomas'  Hospital,  which  so  often  received  poorer 
members  of  the  Church,  helping  the  almshouses  again, 
the  Colportage  Association,  the  fund  for  poor  ministers, 
and  so  on.  This  action  was  only  in  keeping  with  his 
whole  career  :  "  Literally  he  gave  away  a  fortune, 
walking  through  life  from  day  to  day  with  open  heart 
and  open  hand." 

From  the  beginning  of  1868  until  the  end  Mr.  Spur- 
geon had  the  help  of  his  brother.  Dr.  J.  A.  Spurgeon, 
in  Church,  College  and  Orphanage,  indeed  in  every- 
thing to  which  he  put  his  hand  his  brother  was  there 
to  second  his  efforts.  A  very  deep  affection  existed 
between  the  two.  James  Archer  Spurgeon  was  pastor 
at  Southampton  for  some  years,  then  at  Notting  Hill, 
and  while  he  helped  at  the  Tabernacle  he  established 
the  Church  at  West  Croydon,  one  of  the  most  flourish- 
ing Churches  near  London  to-day.  For  two  years 
after  his  brother's  death  he  remained  as  acting-pastor 
at  the  Tabernacle,  resigning  in  favour  of  his  nephew 
when  he  was  called  to  the  pastorate. 

So  the  years  passed.  At  the  Tabernacle  there  was 
almost  a  monotony  of  success  :  thither  the  tribes 
came  up  on  great  occasions,  until  there  came  the  day — 


THE   GREAT  TABERNACLE  161 

Tuesday,  February  8,  1892 — when  only  the  body  of 
the  great  preacher  was  on  the  platform,  his  voice 
silent,  and  his  eye  unseeing,  as  the  crowd  of  sixty 
thousand  people  passed  in  solemn  procession  before 
his  coffin.  Other  crowds  filled  the  building  four  times 
the  next  day,  and  once  again  on  the  10th  for  the  funeral 
sermon,  preached  by  Dr.  A.  T.  Pierson,  whose  presence 
there,  for  months  before  and  after,  attracted  crowds 
as  great  as  even  Spurgeon  commanded. 

For  seven  years  the  Tabernacle  also  witnessed  the 
ministry  of  Thomas  Spurgeon :  the  great  scenes  asso- 
ciated with  his  welcome,  the  services  bravely  sustained 
in  spite  of  bodily  weakness,  the  Spurgeon  tradition 
constantly  upheld,  until  the  fire  demolished  the 
structure  that  had  been  founded  in  faith  and  had  so 
fully  answered  the  purpose  for  which  it  had  been 
erected.  It  would  have  been  scarcely  fitting  if  so 
revered  a  structure  had  ended  in  an  ordinary  way. 


M 


CHAPTER  VIII 

AN    INTIMATE    INTERLUDE 

It  was  scarcely  to  be  expected  that  Spurgeon, 
different  from  other  men  in  so  many  ways,  would 
act  like  an  ordinary  lover.  Nor  did  he.  We  have 
seen  that  the  lady  who  was  to  be  his  wife,  Miss 
Susannah  Thompson,  was  present  at  his  first  Sunday 
evening  service  in  London,  and  that  she  was  scarcely 
prepossessed  in  his  favour.  She  was  already  seeking 
to  follow  Christ,  and  the  ministry  of  Mr.  Spurgeon 
was  much  blessed  in  leading  her  to  fuller  devotion  to 
His  service,  and  naturally  enough  her  early  prejudices 
soon  vanished. 

She  has  herself  told  the  story. ^  One  day  there 
arrived  at  her  home,  7  St.  Ann's  Terrace,  Brixton 
Road,  an  illustrated  copy  of  The  Pilgrim'' s  Progress, 
inscribed  "  Miss  Thompson,  with  desires  for  her 
progress  in  the  blessed  pilgrimage,  from  C,  H. 
Spurgeon— April  20, 1854."  It  was  a  sign  of  growing 
interest,  as  well  as  of  pastoral  care,  and  her  own 
deepening  sentiment  gradually  led  her  to  consult 
Mr.  Spurgeon  as  to  her  state  before  God.  So  the 
friendship  steadily  grew. 

When  the  Crystal  Palace  was  opened  on  June  10, 
1854,  a  party  of  friends,  including  Miss  Thompson 
and  Mr.  Spurgeon,  were  present  at  the  inauguration, 
sitting  on  some  raised  seats  where  the  great  clock  is 
now  fixed.  They  were  in  a  merry  mood,  and  while 
they  waited  for  the  ceremony  Mr.  Spurgeon  handed 

162 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  163 

her  a  copy  of  Martin  Tapper's  Proverbial  Philosophy, 
open  at  a  passage  to  which  he  pointed  as  he  asked 
her  the  question,  "  What  do  you  think  of  the  poet's 
suggestion  in  those  verses  ?  "     She  read — 

"  Seek  a  good  wife  from  thy  God,  for  she  is  the  best  gift  of  His 

providence  ; 
Yet  ask  not  in  bold  confidence  that  which  He  hath  not  promised ; 
Thou  knowest  not  His  good  will :   be  thy  prayer  then  submissive 

thereunto. 
And  leave  thy  petition  to  His  mercy,  assured  that  He  will  deal 

well  with  thee. 
If  thou  art  to  have  a  wife  of  thy  youtli,  she  is  now  living  on  the 

Earth ; 
Therefore  think  of  her,  and  pray  for  her  weal."  ^ 

It  was  a  singular  wooing.  "  Do  you  pray  for  him  who 
is  to  be  your  husband  ?  "  he  softly  whispered  to  the 
trembling,  blushing  girl  at  his  side,  who  said  nothing, 
could  say  nothing,  and  saw  nothing,  but  with  beating 
heart  felt  that  heaven  was  coming  near.  When  the 
ceremony  was  nearly  over,  another  whisper  came, 
"  Will  you  come  and  walk  round  the  Palace  with 
me  ?  "  and  breaking  away  from  the  others,  who  perhaps 
were  not  so  obtuse  as  they  looked,  the  two  went  out 
into  the  enchanted  ground.  He  was  wise  enough 
to  delay  the  definite  proposal  of  marriage  for  some 
weeks,  until,  on  August  2,  1854,  in  her  grandfather's 
garden,  they  gave  themselves  to  each  other,  she 
with  her  adoring  heart,  and  sweet  face  framed  in  the 
curls  that  fell  on  each  side  of  it,  he  with  his  clear  eye, 
swift  brain,  high  collar,  white  tie,  and  protruding 
tooth. 

In  anticipation  of  Church  membership  she  addressed 
to  her  pastor  a  letter  setting  forth  her  Christian 
experience,  to  which  he  responded  in  a  letter  dated 
January  11,  1855,  couched  in  old-world  phraseology. 
Here  is  a  sentence :  "  Dear  purchase  of  a  Saviour's 
blood,  you  are  to  me  a  Saviour's  gift,  and  my  heart 


164  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

is  full  to  overflowing  with  the  thought  of  such  con- 
tinued goodness."  He  baptised  her  at  New  Park 
Street  on  February  1,  1855. 

The  courtship  lasted  another  year,  but  the  lover 
was  a  busy  man  and  sometimes  absent-minded.  He 
generally  spent  Monday  morning  with  his  fiancee, 
revising  his  sermon,  she  keeping  quiet  the  while,  and 
perhaps  thinking  the  more.  Once  when  she  accom- 
panied him  to  a  service  he  forgot  all  about  her,  and 
left  her  struggling  with  the  crowd  while  he  slipped 
into  the  vestry.  She  went  home  indignant,  but  when 
the  service  was  over  he  came  running  to  the  house 
seeking  her,  and  after  remonstrance  by  her  mother, 
the  lovers  were  reconciled. 

During  the  year  they  collaborated  in  choosing  the 
selections  which  were  afterwards  published  under  the 
title  Smooth  Stones  taken  from  Ancient  Brooks.  On 
December  22  he  sent  her  a  copy  of  The  Pulpit  Library, 
the  first  published  volume  of  his  sermons,  with  the 
inscription,  "  In  a  few  days  it  will  be  out  of  my  power 
to  present  anything  to  Miss  Thompson.  Let  this  be 
a  remembrance  of  our  happy  meetings  and  sweet 
conversations.— C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

The  wedding  day  was  January  8,  1856.  About 
two  thousand  persons  were  crowded  into  the  chapel, 
the  adjoining  streets  were  thronged,  Dr.  Alexander 
Fletcher  of  Finsbury  Chapel  performed  the  ceremony, 
and  then  bride  and  bridegroom  left  for  a  brief  visit 
to  Paris.  Twelve  days  later  the  preacher  was  back  in 
his  pulpit,  and  subsequently  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon 
were  publicly  welcomed  by  the  congregation. 

The  union  was  a  joy  in  both  lives,  though  for  most 
of  her  married  life  the  wife  was  an  invalid,  and  the 
husband  was  at  frequent  intervals  tormented  with 
gout.     "  Put  your  foot  in  a  vice,"  he  said,  "  and  turn 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  165 

the  screw  as  tight  as  you  can — ^that  is  rheumatism; 
give  it  an  extra  turn,  and  that  is  rheumatic  gout." 
These  physical  troubles  and  his  incessant  labours  kept 
them  a  good  deal  apart,  but  the  love  that  bound  them 
together  never  slackened,  indeed,  it  grew  in  beauty 
and  tenderness  with  the  years.  To  the  "  Tirshatha," 
as  she  called  him,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  ever  gave  a  reverent 
homage,  even  when  for  his  good  she  ruled  him  with  a 
gentle  despotism.  To  him,  she  was  ever  "  our  angel 
and  delight,"  and  he  was  never  happier  than  in 
inventing  some  new  method  of  giving  her  joy. 

Twin  sons  were  born  to  them  on  September  20, 
1856,  in  their  first  London  home,  217  New  Kent 
Road.  The  elder  was  named  Charles,  after  his  father, 
the  younger  Thomas  because  he  was  the  twin.  Thomas 
once  gave  a  different  reason;  he  said  that  as  his 
mother's  maiden  name  was  Thompson,  it  was  quite 
natural  that  he  should  be  Son  Tom.  The  story  that 
their  father,  when  he  heard  of  their  birth,  exclaimed, 
"  Not  more  than  others  I  deserve,  but  God  has  given 
me  more,"  is  apocryphal;  probably  somebody  sug- 
gested that  it  was  what  he  might  have  said.  But 
he  was  quite  elated  at  the  event;  his  father  to  the 
end  laughed  when  he  recalled  that  on  the  letter 
his  son  sent  him  announcing  the  birth  of  his  twin 
boys,  the  figure  2  was  written  five  times  outside  the 
envelope. 

The  Sabbath  month  after  the  boys'  birth  was  not 
over  before  the  home  was  shadowed  by  the  tragedy 
at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Hall.  Their  father,  as  we  have 
seen,  spent  a  while  at  Croydon,  and  when  at  length 
he  overcame  the  horror  that  had  enwrapped  him, 
mother  and  boys  joined  him  there,  and  the  parents 
joyfully  dedicated  their  children,  as  far  as  they  might, 
to  the  Lord  and  to  His  service. 


166  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

In  the  family  Bible  there  is  an  entry  in  their 
father's  writing  that  his  twin  sons  were  born  at 
Bengal  Place,  New  Kent  Road,  September  20,  1857, 
and  then  below,  in  another  ink,  "  By  some  strange 
mistake  I  have  put  57,  it  should  have  been  56. — 
C.  H.  Spurgeon."     Even  Jove  nods  sometimes. 

At  the  beginning  the  young  couple  had  to  stint 
themselves  a  good  deal  in  order  to  support  the  College, 
which  was  then  in  a  state  of  embryo,  but  things 
became  easier,  and  they  were  able  to  move,  in  1857, 
to  their  second  home,  Helensburgh,  Nightingale 
Lane,  at  that  time  quite  rural  in  its  surroundings. 
It  was  an  old  house,  originally  an  eight-roomed 
cottage,  but  altered  and  enlarged  by  its  previous 
owners,  and  it  had  a  garden  which  greatly  delighted 
its  new  occupants. 

Here  in  1858  came  John  Ruskin,  who  was  a  frequent 
attendant  at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall,  to  inquire 
after  Mr.  Spurgeon,  who  had  been  seriously  ill.  It  was 
the  first  day  of  the  patient's  convalescence,  and  Mr. 
Ruskin  "  threw  himself  on  his  knees  and  embraced 
him  with  tender  affection  and  tears."  He  had 
brought  two  charming  engravings  and  some  bottles 
of  wine  of  a  rare  vintage  to  comfort  the  sufferer, 
though  whether  the  wine  was  the  best  medicine  for 
the  gout  may  be  doubted.  On  the  occasion  of  another 
visit,  having  brought  nothing,  he  left  the  invalid  for 
a  while,  and  returned  with  a  volume  of  Tennyson, 
all  he  had  been  able  to  buy  in  the  neighbourhood.  He 
also  sent  him  an  original  set  of  Modern  Painters,  and 
he  contributed  £100  to  the  Tabernacle  Building  Fund. 

Two  letters  that  passed  between  these  two  men 
show  the  footing  on  which  they  stood  towards  each 
other.  J.  Ruskin,  "  affectionately  yours,"  wrote  from 
Denmark  Hill  on  November  25,  1862— 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  167 

'*  My  dear  Friend, 

"  I  want  to  have  a  chat  with  you.  Is  it  possible 
to  get  it — quietly — and  how,  and  where,  and  when? 
I'll  come  to  you — or  you  shall  come  here — or  whatever 
you  like.  I  am  in  England  only  for  ten  days — being 
too  much  disgusted  with  your  goings  on — yours  as 
much  as  everybody  else's — to  be  able  to  exist  among 
you  any  longer.  But  I  want  to  say  '  Good-bye ' 
to  you  before  going  to  my  den  in  the  Alps." 

Upon  which  "  yours  ever  most  truly  and 
affectionately,  C.  H.  Spurgeon,"  replied — 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Ruskin, 

"  I  thought  you  had  cast  me  off ;  but  I  perceive 
that  you  let  me  alone  when  all  is  right,  and  only  look 
me  up  when  you  are  getting  disgusted  with  me. 
May  that  disgust  increase  if  it  shall  bring  me  oftener 
into  your  company  ! 

"  I  shall  be  delighted  to  see  you  to-morrow,  here, 
at  any  time  from  ten  to  twelve,  if  this  will  suit  you. 
I  wish  I  had  a  den  in  the  Alps  to  go  to;  but  it  is  of 
no  use  for  me  to  grow  surly,  for  I  am  compelled  to 
live  among  you  sinners,  and  however  disgusted  I 
may  get  with  you  all,  I  must  put  up  with  you,  for 
neither  Nature  nor  Providence  will  afford  a  den  for 
me." 

Of  the  disgust  with  things  in  general  which  Ruskin 
felt  during  those  years  a  sample  is  given  by  Mr. 
Spurgeon  himself.  He  says,  "  Mr.  Ruskin  came  to 
see  me  one  day,  and  amongst  other  things  he  said 
that  the  Apostle  Paul  was  a  liar  and  that  I  was  a 
fool !  '  Well,'  I  replied,  '  let  us  keep  the  two  things 
separate;  so  first  of  all  tell  me  how  you  can  prove 
that  the  Apostle   Paul   was   a   liar  !  '     '  He  was   no 


168  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

gentleman,  and  he  was  a  liar  too,'  answered  Mr. 
Ruskin.  '  Oh,  indeed,'  I  rejoined.  '  How  do  you  make 
that  out?'  'Well,'  he  said,  'there  was  a  Jewish 
gentleman  came  to  him  one  day,  and  asked  him  a 
polite  question — "How  are  the  dead  raised  up,  and 
with  what  body  do  they  come?"  Paul  began  by 
saying  to  him  "  Thou  fool," — which  proved  that  the 
Apostle  was  no  gentleman;  and  then  he  continued, 
"  That  which  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  except  it 
die,"  which  was  a  lie.' 

"  '  No,'  I  answered,  '  it  was  not  a  lie.  Paul  was 
speaking  the  truth.'  'How  do  you  prove  that?' 
asked  Mr.  Ruskin.  '  Why,'  I  replied,  '  very  easily. 
What  is  death?  Death  is  the  resolution  into  its 
elements  of  any  compound  substance  which  possessed 
life.' 

"  Mr.  Ruskin  said,  '  That  is  the  most  extraordinary 
definition  of  death  that  I  ever  heard,  but  it  is  true.' 
'  Yes,'  I  said,  '  it  is  true,  and  that  is  what  happens  to 
the  seed  when  it  dies;  it  is  resolved  again  into  its 
original  elements,  and  the  living  germ  which  is  within 
it  becomes  the  centre  and  source  of  the  new  life  that 
springs  out  of  it.' 

"  '  Then,'  said  Mr.  Ruskin,  '  what  do  you  mean 
when  you  talk  of  the  death  of  the  soul  ?  '  'I  mean,' 
I  replied,  '  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  God ;  it 
was  originally  with  God,  and  when  it  is  separated 
from  Him  it  dies  to  God ;  that  is  its  death,  but  that 
death  is  not  non-existence.  The  separation  of  the 
soul  from  the  body  is  the  separation  from  itself  of 
that  which  quickened  it,  and  it  falls  back  into  its 
original  condition.' 

"  '  Well,'  said  Mr.  Ruskin,  '  you  have  proved  that 
Paul  spoke  the  truth,  but  you  have  not  proved  him 
to  be  a  gentleman.' 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  169 

"  '  At  all  events,'  I  answered,  '  the  Apostle  was  as 
much  a  gentleman  as  you  were  just  now  when  you 
called  me  a  fool.' 

"  '  So  you  are,'  said  Mr.  Ruskin,  '  for  devoting 
your  time  and  talents  to  that  mob  of  people  down  at 
Newington  when  you  might  employ  them  so  much 
more  profitably  upon  the  intellectual  and  cultured 
few,  like  that  Jewish  gentleman  who  came  to  Paul, 
and  others  that  I  might  name.' 

"  I  replied,  '  I  always  like  to  be  the  means  of  saving 
people  whose  souls  are  worth  saving,  and  I  am  quite 
content  to  be  the  minister  of  that  mob  down  at 
Newington,  and  let  those  who  want  to  do  so  look  after 
the  cultured  and  refined.'  " 

The  early  students  at  his  College  used  to  come  to 
his  house  an  hour  or  two  on  Saturday  mornings  for 
informal  talk,  and  many  a  person  in  trouble  came  to 
him  for  comfort.  In  1869,  by  the  kindness  of  some 
friends,  the  house  was  rebuilt,  and  while  the  work 
was  in  progress  the  family  removed  to  Brighton. 
Here,  in  the  hope  of  restoring  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  health, 
an  operation  was  performed  by  Sir  James  Y.  Simpson. 
He  journeyed  twice  from  Edinburgh,  and  when 
questioned  as  to  his  fee  answered  :  "  Well,  I  suppose 
it  should  be  a  thousand  guineas,  and  when  you  are 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury  I  shall  expect  you  to  pay 
me ;   till  then  let  us  consider  it  settled  by  love." 

Leaving  the  boys  at  school  at  Brighton,  Mrs. 
Spurgeon  returned  to  Nightingale  Lane,  much  better 
in  health,  to  find  that  in  the  renovation  and  refurnish- 
ing her  every  desire  for  herself  and  her  husband  had 
been  anticipated.  A  room  adjoining  her  husband's 
study  had  been  specially  fitted  up  for  her,  the  lawn 
had  been  laid  out  so  that  it  was  suitable  for  the  game 
of  bowls,  always  a  favourite  pastime  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's. 


170  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

In  one  of  the  trees  the  old  pulpit  from  New  Park 
Street  had  found  a  resting-place,  the  stairs  leading  up 
to  a  quiet  eyrie  where  the  preacher  could  retire  when 
he  wished  to  be  quite  alone. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  in  those  early  days  often  away 
from  home.  One  morning,  as  he  was  preparing  to 
start  on  a  journey,  he  noticed  his  wife  in  tears,  and 
asked  her  a  question  which  startled  her.  It  was 
whether  any  of  the  children  of  Israel,  when  they 
brought  a  lamb  to  the  Lord's  altar  as  an  offering  to 
Him,  wept  when  they  saw  it  laid  there.  "  Why,  no," 
she  replied.  And  then  he  suggested  that  she  was 
giving  him  as  they  gave  their  sacrifice,  and  so  the 
tears  were  dried.  If  ever  afterwards  there  was  a 
sign  of  sorrow  at  his  absence,  he  would  bring  the 
smiles  instead  of  tears  by  the  question,  "  What ! 
crying  over  your  lamb?  " 

On  one  of  these  occasions  he  asked  her  if  there  was 
anything  he  could  bring  her  on  his  return,  and,  with 
the  whim  of  an  invalid,  she  replied  that  she  should 
like  an  opal  ring  and  a  piping  bullfinch.  He  laughed 
as  he  bade  her  good-bye;  there  was  little  likelihood 
of  her  desire  being  granted.  But  the  Lord  is  very 
pitiful  to  His  tired  children.  An  old  lady  whom  Mr. 
Spurgeon  had  once  visited  had  meanwhile  sent  a  note 
to  the  Tabernacle  that  she  wished  some  one  to  call 
on  her,  as  she  wished  to  send  Mrs.  Spurgeon  a  present. 
When  it  arrived,  behold  it  was  the  opal  ring,  and  he 
brought  it  back  to  her  with  triumph.  Soon  afterwards 
came  the  visit  to  Brighton,  and  one  day,  on  his  return 
from  London,  Mr.  Spurgeon  brought  a  cage  containing 
the  piping  bullfinch.  He  had  visited  a  dying  man  who 
was  somewhat  disturbed  by  the  piping  of  the  bird, 
and  his  wife  had  begged  him  to  take  the  bird  to  Mrs. 
Spurgeon,    declaring   that    she    would   entrust   it   to 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  171 

nobody  else,  and  hoping  that  its  songs  would  cheer 
her  when  she  was  so  often  left  alone.  So  the  Lord 
condescends  not  only  to  meet  the  needs  of  His  children, 
but  also  their  wishes  ! 

During  the  last  twelve  years  of  his  life,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
had  his  home  at  Westwood,  Beulah  Hill,  Upper 
Norwood.  It  was  somewhat  singular  how  the  change 
was  made.  Some  business  took  him  to  the  new 
district,  and  in  passing  over  the  hill  he  noticed  that 
the  house,  which  could  not  be  seen  from  the  road, 
was  for  sale.  It  had  been  suggested  to  him  that 
perhaps  if  he  lived  on  higher  ground  his  health,  and 
possibly  his  wife's  health,  might  be  better.  On  his 
return,  in  repassing  the  house,  his  secretary  alighted, 
read  the  bill,  and  discovered  that  cards  were  necessary 
to  view  the  premises.  But  the  impression  on  his 
mind  was  so  deep  that  he  sent  a  message  giving  his 
name,  and  asked  whether  he  could  see  the  house 
without  having  a  card.  His  name  was  enough.  When 
he  saw  the  house  he  exclaimed  that  it  was  too  grand 
for  him,  and  yet  he  could  not  get  the  thought  of  it 
out  of  his  mind.  But  he  did  not  send  any  one  to  the 
sale.  On  that  very  day,  however,  the  builder  of  the 
house  at  Nightingale  Lane  called  on  him,  inquiring 
whether  he  had  ever  thought  of  selling  his  present 
residence,  for  his  next-door  neighbour  would  like  it 
for  his  son-in-law,  who  was  returning  from  abroad. 
Then  it  was  learnt  that  "  Westwood  "  had  not  been 
sold,  and  after  some  further  inquiry  it  appeared  that 
it  could  be  almost  bought  for  the  price  his  neighbour 
was  willing  to  give  for  Helensburgh  House,  and  without 
further  delay  the  two  bargains  were  completed.  The 
new  home  was  charming,  not  too  extensive,  with 
garden,  lawns,  lake,  and  some  small  fields  beyond, 
where  Mrs.  Spurgeon  afterwards  found  grazing  for  two 


172  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

or  three  cows.  There  was  a  fernery,  a  rosery,  a  vinery 
and  some  other  glass,  two  large  rooms  looking  on  to 
the  garden,  one  of  which  made  a  capital  study,  and 
the  other  an  admirable  library.  As  Mr.  Spurgeon 
in  the  earlier  home  had  fitted  up  a  room  for  his  wife, 
she,  during  one  of  his  visits  abroad,  had  a  little  room, 
opening  off  the  study,  built  for  him.  In  the  study  he 
did  most  of  his  work,  Mr.  J.  L.  Keys,  his  amanuensis, 
at  one  side  of  the  long  table,  and  Mr.  Joseph  Harrald, 
his  "  Armour-bearer,"  at  the  other,  he  himself  at  his 
own  table  crosswise  at  the  top.  The  door  to  the  little 
inner  sanctum  furnished  by  his  wife  was  just  behind 
him,  so  that  he  could  slip  in  and  out  as  he  liked. 

His  working  books  were  in  this  room,  the  biblical 
volumes  arranged  in  Bible  order.  The  top  shelves 
contained  "  dummy  "  volumes,  with  fancy  titles,  a 
number  of  them  suggested  by  the  names  of  his  students. 
Eastward  Ho  !  by  A.  G.  Brown ;  Cuff  on  the  Head ; 
Pains  and  Aches,  by  Feltham;  Tydeman  on  Cleanli- 
ness ;  Gauge's  Rivers.  Others  were  just  witticisms  : 
Jonathan  on  Exaggeration;  John  Bull  on  Bragging; 
The  Elevation  of  Parliament,  by  Guido  Faux;  Hints 
on  Honeypots,  by  A.B. ;  The  Composition  of  Milk, 
by  A  Dealer;  Absalom  on  the  Mule;  Balaam  on  the 
Donkey ;  Gilpin  on  Riding  Horses. 

Earl  Cairns  had  a  similar  conceit.  When  his 
library  door  in  Bournemouth  was  shut  it  seemed  to 
be  part  of  the  shelves.  Here  it  was  only  dummy 
backs  of  books  which  made  the  room  look  as  if  it 
had  no  door  at  all.  It  will  not  be  abusing  the  privi- 
lege of  a  guest,  and  may  be  interesting  as  the  fancy  of 
a  great  man,  if  I  record  some  of  them  :  Five  Minutes 
in  China;  Gaelic,  the  Language  of  Eden;  Gladstone's 
Great  Impostures;  The  Dog,  by  Barker;  Natural 
History  of  Bores;  Bores  of  St.  Stephen's;  Hansard's 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  173 

Drowsy  Evenings;  Silliman's  Private  Thoughts; 
Jonah's  Account  of  the  Whale ;  History  of  the  Middhng 
Ages. 

Spurgeon  deHghted  in  his  garden;  he  did  not 
bot anise,  but  he  knew  most  of  the  flowers  and  plants. 
A  frequent  visitor  says,  "  We  went  into  the  vinery 
one  day  when  the  tree  was  in  full  leaf.  He  said, 
sniffing  the  odour  from  the  branches :  '  Well  done, 
Solomon,  the  vines  do  give  a  good  smell,  there  is  no 
fragrance,  no  perfume,  nothing  will  describe  it  but 
good.  You  instinctively  feel  it  is  healthy  to  take 
in  the  scent  of  the  vine.'  "  ^ 

Between  the  library  and  the  dining-room  was 
Mrs.  Spurgeon's  book-room,  from  whence  the  parcels 
of  books  were  despatched  to  ministers  by  means  of 
her  "  Book  Fund."  Mrs.  Spurgeon  continued  to 
reside  at  Westwood  till  her  death  on  October  22,  1903, 
and  from  the  beginning  of  the  Book  Fund  until  that 
time  she  distributed  over  200,000  volumes,  as  well  as 
countless  copies  of  her  husband's  sermons. 

The  Fund  began  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  handed  his 
wife  the  corrected  proof  of  the  first  volume  of  his 
Lectures  to  My  Students.  When  she  had  read  it  she 
declared  that  she  wished  she  could  place  a  copy  in 
the  hands  of  every  minister  in  England.  "  Then  why 
not  do  it?  "  her  husband  said,  and  with  his  practical 
mind  he  added,  "How  much  will  you  give?" 
Although  she  was  scarcely  prepared  for  such  a 
challenge,  it  suddenly  occurred  to  her  that  she  had 
some  money  at  her  disposal,  accumulated  by  her 
hobby  of  saving  every  five-shilling  piece  that  came  to 
her.  On  counting  her  hoard  she  discovered  that  she 
had  enough  money  to  send  out  a  hundred  copies, 
and  so  the  "  Book  Fund "  was  born.  When  its 
inauguration   became    known    there    was    a   rush    of 


174  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

applicants  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  as  well  as 
from  all  sections  of  the  Church,  and  the  work  so 
approved  itself  to  God's  stewards  that  means  were 
generously  forthcoming.  It  is  a  question  whether  there 
was  more  joy  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  received  the 
books  than  in  the  heart  of  the  gracious  lady  who 
counted  the  sending  of  them  her  bit  of  service  through 
her  twenty-eight  later  years.  The  story  is  gracefully 
told  in  two  volumes.  Ten  Years  of  My  Life  and  Ten 
Years  After.  ]\Irs  Spurgeon  was  much  helped  by 
her  companion,  Miss  Thorne. 

Occasionally  Mrs.  Spurgeon  would  invite  her 
neighbours  to  a  service  on  Sunday  evening  in  the 
study.  I  remember  addressing  them  one  Sunday. 
Once  the  window  was  opened  to  freshen  the  room 
after  one  of  these  services,  and  it  was  forgotten. 
During  the  night  a  burglar  discovered  it,  entered  and 
stole  a  few  things,  the  most  valuable  being  a  gold- 
headed  stick  presented  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  by  J.  B. 
Gough.  As  the  gold  bore  Spurgeon's  name  it  was 
afterwards  the  means  of  identifying  the  burglar,  as  he 
sought  the  next  day  to  dispose  of  it.  He  then  wrote 
to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  saying,  amongst  other  things,  that 
he  did  not  know  it  was  the  "  horflings'  Spurgeon  " 
who  lived  there,  and  ending  up  by  the  pithy  advice, 
"  Why  don't  you  shut  your  windows,  and  keep  a 
dog  ?  "  This  led  to  the  advent  of  "  Punch,"  the  pug- 
dog  who  gave  his  master  unending  pleasure  and  very 
greatly  interested  his  visitors. 

The  news  of  the  robbery  led  Punch  (the  journal, 
not  the  dog)  to  publish  a  humorous  page  entitled 
"  The  Diary  of  a  Burglar."  Various  exploits  in  his 
profession  are  chronicled  :  "  Last  night  did  a  stylish 
little  piece  of  work.  Robbed  Spurgeon's  house. 
Not  so  much  for  the  swag  as  to  create  a  sensation. 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  175 

Have  always  been  a  follower  and  admirer  of  his,  but 
shouldn't  have  been  if  I'd  known  how  precious  few 
valuables  he  keeps  on  the  establishment.  Nothing 
but  tracts  and  reports  and  '  Notes  for  Discourses.' 
Returned  these,  of  course,  after  reading  one  or  two — 
especially  one  very  elegant  discourse  on  '  Theft.' 
Returned  the  whole  lot — with  compliments  on  the 
very  elegant  language  of  the  one  I  have  mentioned — 
apologising  for  the  temporary  abstraction.  Shall 
really  think  of  giving  up  my  pew — quite  disgusted."  '* 
A  piece  of  fooling  which  was  given  and  taken  in 
excellent  part. 

No  account  of  the  home  could  be  complete  without 
a  reference  to  "  Old  George,"  the  faithful  servant  of 
many  years,  who  anticipated  his  master's  wants,  and 
often  insisted  on  things  that  were  for  his  benefit. 
His  second  name  was  "  Love  joy  " — the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit,  he  would  say — "  Love,  joy." 

In  addition  to  his  winter  furlough  at  Mentone,  of 
which  we  will  speak  later,  Spurgeon  generally  secured 
two  or  three  summer  weeks  in  the  Highlands.  For  one 
or  two  years  he  was  guest  of  Mr.  John  Anderson,  but 
generally  he  was  entertained  by  Mr.  James  Duncan 
at  Benmore,  taking  a  friend  or  two  with  him.  On 
these  occasions  he  preached  each  Sabbath  at  Rothesay, 
Dunoon,  or  on  the  lawn  in  front  of  the  house.  One 
year  I  was  a  privileged  visitor.  The  first  Sunday 
thousands  of  people  came,  and  a  homely  sermon  was 
given,  which  one  of  the  Glasgow  papers  the  next 
day  criticised  somewhat  severely,  but  not  unjustly. 
Spurgeon  answered  the  criticism  the  next  vSunday. 
On  the  Monday  he  telegraphed  to  his  publishers  to 
see  whether  his  last  sermon  in  the  Tabernacle  had  been 
published;  the  answer  was  in  the  negative,  so  he 
preached  it  again.     The  text  was  "  Mercy  shall  be 


176  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

built  up  for  ever."  The  effect  in  his  own  pulpit  had 
been  great;  given  in  the  open  air,  with  an  immense 
crowd  drinking  in  every  word,  it  was  astonishing. 
As  the  sermon  progressed  mercy  was  built  higher  and 
higher,  until  it  pierced  the  heavens,  and  sat  down  on 
the  throne  of  God.  The  preacher  excelled  himself. 
That  was  his  answer  to  the  newspaper. 

There  is  a  record  of  another  great  service  during 
his  summer  furlough.  He  was  announced  to  preach 
on  Sunday  morning,  July  28,  1878,  at  Rothesay.  On 
the  Saturday  crowds  came  to  the  place  and  every 
available  room  was  occupied.  About  three  o'clock 
Mr.  Duncan's  yacht  arrived  in  the  bay,  and  anchored 
amongst  the  many  others  that  had  been  attracted 
there.  In  a  few  minutes  the  news  of  his  arrival  had 
spread  over  Rothesay.  The  next  morning  Spurgeon 
preached  to  a  crowd  of  fifteen  thousand  to  twenty 
thousand  persons.  After  the  service  he  rested  for 
a  while  in  the  Provost's  garden  to  give  the  crowds 
time  to  disperse,  but  Mr.  A.  G.  Short,  who  tells  the 
story,  says  that  they  evidently  did  not  intend  to  leave 
him  quite  in  that  fashion.  They  knew  he  would  have 
to  leave  in  a  boat  to  reach  the  yacht,  and  they 
gathered  in  thousands  along  the  sea-wall.  When  Mr. 
Spurgeon  stepped  into  the  boat,  and  the  sailors 
began  to  ply  their  oars,  as  one  looked  along  the  crescent- 
shaped  front,  it  seemed  as  if  every  person  in  that 
vast  gathering  had  brought  a  white  handkerchief  for 
the  special  purpose  of  waving  it  in  his  honour.  That 
v/as  Scotland's  way  of  bidding  a  Sabbath  adieu  to 
the  great  and  good  man  she  loved  so  well;  and  not 
until  he  was  on  board  the  yacht  did  the  farewell 
signals  cease  to  flutter  in  the  evening  breeze. 

Adjacent  to  the  house  at  Benmore  Mr.  Duncan  had 
built  a  picture  gallery,  with  the  same  ground  space, 


MRS.    SPURGEON. 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  177 

approximately,  as  the  Tabernacle,  and  had  gathered 
a  great  collection  of  paintings,  many  of  Dore's  amongst 
them.  Here  an  hour  would  be  spent  each  evening. 
During  the  day  there  would  be  walks  round  the 
estate,  and  talks  on  all  sorts  of  topics;  occasionally 
there  would  be  an  excursion. 

At  one  place — Colintraive — a  party  of  four  of  us 
found  only  two  rooms  available  in  the  little  inn,  and 
drew  lots  to  fix  our  places;  mine  was  with  our  host, 
and  Mr.  Higgs  was  placed  with  his  pastor.  I  recall 
the  excitement  of  a  good  woman  as  we  walked  that 
evening  along  the  beach.  She  came  running  up  to 
two  of  us,  crying  out,  ''  Spurgeon's  here  !  Spurgeon's 
here  1  "  One  especial  day  I  remember  when  w^e 
went  out  in  the  launch  fishing  in  Loch  Eck,  caught  a 
salmon,  cooked  it  on  the  lakeside,  and  feasted  in 
royal  picnic  fashion.  How  these  memories  abide  ! 
One  Sunday  morning  I  preached  at  Kilmun.  I  went 
upstairs  to  prepare,  and  he  was  amongst  the  others 
downstairs.  As  I  sat  in  my  room  I  heard  a  gentle 
knock  at  the  door,  and  when  I  opened  it  found  him 
outside;  he  had  climbed  the  stairs,  no  very  easy  task 
for  him,  to  help  me.  "  I  have  come  to  pray  with  you 
before  you  go,"  he  said.  Then  we  knelt  down,  and 
he  prayed  as  he  might  have  prayed  for  himself,  that 
I  might  be  helped  to  preach  in  power.  But  there  was 
the  human  side  to  the  incident  too,  for  the  next  day 
Spurgeon  pointed  out  the  house  next  door  to  the 
church,  with  a  notice  exhibited,  "  Mangling  done 
here,"  and  insisted  that  that  was  where  I  had  preached. 

The  home  life  was  ideal,  chastened  indeed  by 
frequent  sufferings,  but  never  fretful  nor  constrained. 
It  was  a  deep  joy  to  the  parents  when  the  sons  were 
baptised,  a  great  gratification  when  they  began  to 
preach    in    a    cottage    at    Wandsworth.     Both    had 


178  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

entered  upon  business  careers,  one  in  a  City  merchant's 
office,  the  other  as  an  engraver  on  wood,  but  their 
preaching  power  developed.  Charles,  the  elder,  after 
pastorates  at  Greenwich,  Nottingham,  Cheltenham  and 
Hove,  has  now  become  his  father's  successor  at  Spur- 
geon's  Orphanage;  Thomas,  the  younger,  after  his 
ministry  in  Australia  and  New  Zealand,  became  his 
father's  successor  at  the  Tabernacle,  carried  on  the 
work  there  for  fourteen  years,  and  on  October  20, 
1917,  died.  Two  years  afterwards,  his  son  Harold, 
in  unveiling  the  stained  glass  window  at  the  Orphanage, 
showed  in  his  speech  some  Spurgeonic  power. 

If  we  may  venture  to  observe  the  inner  life  of  this 
man  so  greatly  honoured  of  God  in  the  world,  we  shall 
not  find  Spurgeon  often  on  his  knees;  and  that  not 
because  he  did  not  pray,  but  because  he  prayed 
incessantly.  In  the  New  Jerusalem  there  is  no 
temple,  because  it  is  all  temple.  Between  the  closing 
of  one  book  and  the  opening  of  another  with  Spurgeon 
there  were  the  shut  eyes  and  the  moving  lips.  "  I 
always  feel  it  well  just  to  put  a  few  words  of  prayer 
between  everything  I  do,"  he  once  said  to  an  intimate 
friend.  He  seldom  wrote  a  letter  without  raising 
his  heart  to  God  for  guidance.  Archibald  G.  Brown 
tells  how  in  a  railway  journey  with  iiim  they  knelt 
down  and  spent  a  time  in  prayer.  Dr.  Wayland 
Hoyt  says,  "  I  was  walking  with  him  in  the  woods 
one  day  just  outside  London,  and,  as  we  strolled  under 
the  shadow  of  the  summer  foliage,  we  came  upon  a  log 
lying  athwart  the  path.  '  Come,'  said  he,  as  naturally 
as  one  would  say  it  if  he  were  hungry,  and  bread  were 
put  before  him,  '  Come,  let  us  pray.'  And  kneeling 
beside  the  log,  he  lifted  his  soul  to  God  in  the  most 
loving  outpouring  and  yet  reverent  prayer.  Then, 
rising  from  his  knees  as  naturally,  he  went  strolling 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  179 

on,  talking  about  this  and  that.  The  prayer  was  no 
parenthesis  interjected.  It  was  something  that  be- 
longed as  much  to  the  habit  of  his  mind  as  breathing 
did  to  the  habit  of  his  body."  Dr.  Cuyler  bears  a 
similar  testimony.  In  one  of  the  Surrey  woods  they 
were  conversing  in  high  spirits  when  suddenly  Spur- 
geon  stopped  and  said,  "  Come,  Theodore,  let  us 
thank  God  for  laughter."  That  was  how  he  lived. 
"  From  a  jest  to  a  prayer  meant  with  him  the  breadth 
of  a  straw." 

His  idea  of  prayer  was  the  passing  over  the  counter 
of  a  cheque  bearing  an  honoured  name.  There  was 
no  need  for  pleading,  the  name  pleaded;  it  was  only 
necessary  to  wait  till  the  money  was  paid.  And  he 
acted  his  faith;  there  was  a  calm  serenity  about  him 
in  spite  of  the  burdens  he  bore.  Once  when  dining 
with  a  gentleman  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Regent's 
Park,  it  transpired  that  £1000  was  needed  the  next 
morning  to  pay  the  builder  of  the  Orphanage.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  said  he  had  prayed  about  it  and  had  confi- 
dence it  would  come.  Dr.  Brock,  who  was  also  a 
guest,  said  he  thought  that  they  should  speak  with 
caution  about  such  things,  and  he  had  scarcely  said 
it  when  a  telegram  was  handed  in  saying  that  somebody 
had  called  at  the  Tabernacle  and  left  £1000  ! 

He  told  me  himself  that  he  never  got  so  near  to  God 
as  on  the  Tabernacle  platform  when  he  prayed;  this 
was  the  reason  that  so  many  were  impressed  by  his 
public  intercessions  even  more  than  by  his  sermons, 
though  they  were  all  of  a  piece.  This  the  reason,  too, 
why  when  he  preached  he  preferred  to  take  the  whole 
service  himself;  in  his  homely  way  he  said,  "  I  like  to 
get  the  juice  out  of  the  meat." 

''  It  was  marvellous  to  hear  his  soliloquies  at  the 
Lord's  Table — his   language  there  would  have  been 


180  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

considered  extravagant  if  one  did  not  know  how 
perfectly  real  it  was.  From  praying  he  would  take 
to  talking,  and  from  talking  he  would  stand  and 
soliloquise  about  his  Lord,  and  the  audience  felt  that 
he  was  simply  enraptured  with  Him."  ^  How  he 
would  weep  when  he  was  in  close  communion  with  his 
"  Well-Beloved,"  the  name  he  oftenest  used  for  his 
Saviour !  One  of  his  friends  even  says  that  he  some- 
times needed  to  drink  water  to  supply  his  fount  of 
tears. 

Only  twice  in  his  life  did  he  spend  a  whole  night  in 
prayer.  The  second  time  was  when,  on  October  2, 
1879,  he  bade  his  son  Tom  good-bye  as  he  went  to 
the  Antipodes,  never  expecting  to  see  him  again. 
The  hopes  that  he  had  cherished  of  his  sons  standing 
by  his  side  were  shattered.  He  preached  in  his 
pulpit  that  evening  about  Hannah,  "  a  woman  of  a 
sorrowful  spirit  " — the  sermon  is  in  the  1880  volume — 
and  then  he  went  home  to  agonise  in  prayer,  and  he 
got  the  victory,  made  the  renunciation  gladly,  and 
never  turned  back.  The  other  occasion  is  too  sacred 
for  us  to  intrude  upon  it,  but  here  too  he  triumphed. 
"  There  are  dungeons  underneath  the  Castle  of 
Despair  as  dreary  as  the  abodes  of  the  lost,"  he  once 
said,  "  and  some  of  us  have  been  in  them." 

Once  in  time  of  physical  suffering  the  pain  became 
almost  unendurable,  and  his  prayer  became  a  direct 
challenge  to  God.  He  told  Him  that  he,  an  earthly 
father,  could  not  bear  to  see  any  child  of  his  suffer  so 
intensely,  that  if  he  saw  him  tormented  as  he  himself 
then  was  he  would  at  any  rate  put  his  arms  under 
him  to  sustain  him.  He  dared  to  chide  the  Almighty, 
and  in  doing  it  stilled  his  own  heart.  When  the  nurse 
returned  to  his  room,  he  declared  that  he  would  soon 
be  easier,  and  sure  enough  the  pain  ceased. 


AN   INTIMATE   INTERLUDE  181 

He  had  his  ambitions,  but  they  were  worthy  ones. 
"  I  beseech  you,"  he  once  said,  "  to  Uve  not  only  for 
this  age,  but  for  the  next  also.  I  would  fling  my  shadow 
through  eternal  ages  if  I  could."  ^ 

In  the  secret  of  his  own  spirit  he  was  a  mystic, 
but  he  never  dared  to  preach  beyond  what  was 
written.  He  thundered  out  the  message  of  the  wrath 
of  God,  but  in  an  intimate  moment  he  ventured  to 
say,  "  While  I  believe  in  eternal  punishment,  and  must 
do,  or  throw  away  my  Bible,  I  also  believe  that  God 
will  give  to  the  lost  every  consideration,  consistent 
with  His  love.  There  is  nothing  vindictive  in  Him, 
nor  can  there  be  in  His  punishment  of  the  ungodly." 
In  fact,  though  he  contended  earnestly  for  the  truth 
in  Jesus,  he  was  no  bigot,  nor  did  he  ever  imagine 
that  any  finite  mind  could  comprehend,  much  less 
systematise,  the  whole  of  divine  truth.  But  he  knew 
what  he  knew,  and  would  not  be  moved  from  it.  He 
gloried  in  the  Cross,  and  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  as 
a  Substitute  for  guilty  men,  but  he  recognised  the 
mystery  of  Redemption  that  lies  beyond  man's 
understanding.  He  often  quoted  that  phrase  in  the 
litany  of  the  Greek  Church,  *'  Let  thine  unknown 
sufferings  atone  for  our  unknown  sins." 

In  one  of  his  morning  sermons  in  1886,  entitled, 
"  The  Three  Hours'  Darkness,"  he  said  some  memor- 
able words.  Some  of  them  have  been  quoted  by  Dr. 
Robertson  Nicoll  in  his  charming  book  on  Mysticism  : ' 
"  The  great  modern  teacher  of  substitution,  the 
apostle  Spurgeon,  in  his  sermon  on  the  Miraculous 
Darkness,  says  that  'this  darkness  tells  us  all  that 
the  Passion  is  a  great  mystery  into  which  we  cannot 
pry.  I  try  to  explain  it  as  a  substitution,  and  I  feel 
that  where  the  language  of  Scripture  is  explicit,  I 
may  and  must  be  explicit  too,     But  yet  I  feel  that  the 


182  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

idea  of  substitution  does  not  cover  the  whole  of  the 
matter,  and  that  no  human  conception  can  completely 
grasp  the  whole  of  the  dread  mystery.  It  was  wrought 
in  darkness  because  the  full,  far-reaching  meaning 
and  result  cannot  be  beheld  of  finite  mind.  Tell 
me  the  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  a  grand  example 
of  self-sacrifice — I  can  see  that  and  much  more.  Tell 
me  it  was  a  wondrous  obedience  to  the  will  of  God — 
I  can  see  that  and  much  more.  Tell  me  it  was  the 
bearing  of  what  ought  to  have  been  borne  by  myriads 
of  sinners  of  the  human  race,  is  the  chastisement  of 
their  sin — I  can  see  that,  and  found  my  best  hope 
upon  it.  But  do  not  tell  me  that  this  is  all  that  is 
in  the  Cross.  No,  great  as  this  would  be,  there  is 
much  more  in  the  Redeemer's  death.  God  veiled 
the  Cross  in  darkness,  and  in  darkness  much  of  its 
deep  meaning  lies,  not  because  God  would  not  reveal 
it,  but  because  we  have  not  capacity  to  discern  it 
all." 

This  breadth  of  heart  was  revealed  on  another 
occasion  when  in  his  prayer  at  a  Thursday  evening 
service  he  dared  to  go  far  beyond  his  creed,  and  in  his 
passion  for  the  souls  of  men  cried,  "  Lord,  hasten  to 
bring  in  all  Thine  elect— and  then  elect  some  more." 


CHAPTER  IX 

A    WORD    PORTRAIT 

1851-1892 

The  earliest  word  picture  of  Spurgeon  we  possess 
is  one  drawn  by  himself  of  the  days  when  he  began 
preaching  in  Cambridgeshire,  in  the  year  1851.  "  I 
must  have  been  a  singular-looking  youth  on  wet 
evenings,"  he  says,  "  for  I  walked  three,  five,  and 
even  eight  miles  out  and  back  again  in  my  preaching 
work,  and  when  it  rained,  I  dressed  myself  in  water- 
proof leggings  and  a  macintosh  coat,  and  I  carried  a 
dark  lantern  to  show  me  the  way  across  the  fields." 

One  of  his  Cambridge  pupils  says  that  "  the 
prevailing  fashion  and  dress  never  troubled  young 
Spurgeon;  whether  people  were  reminded  by  the  cut 
of  his  coat  or  the  shape  of  his  stock  of  a  former 
generation  or  of  the  present  was  a  matter  of  no  con- 
cern. Thus  on  a  certain  dark  and  damp  winter 
afternoon,  just  before  breaking-up  time,  the  door  of 
the  room  opens,  and  the  figure  who  enters,  laughing 
merrily  at  what  he  supposes  may  be  his  own  some- 
what odd  appearance,  is  none  other  than  young  Mr. 
Spurgeon,  in  the  costume  of  an  itinerant  preacher  of 
the  Fens.  Completely  enveloped  in  an  oilskin  suit, 
the  junior  tutor  had  looked  in  just  to  show  Mr. 
Leeding  and  the  lads  at  their  desks  what  he  appeared 
like  when  fully  equipped  for  the  rain.  "  Here  I 
am,  going  off  to  fight  the  battles  of  the  Lord,"  he 

183 


184  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

remarked,  and  away  he  went  to  keep  a  preaching 
appointment  in  a  village.^ 

As  that  deals  with  clothes,  it  may  be  said  at  once 
that  he  was  never  very  particular  about  what  he  wore, 
as  long  as  he  was  comfortable.  He  generally  dressed 
in  broadcloth  and  wore  a  frock-coat,  but  he  never 
went  to  a  fashionable  tailor.  In  one  of  his  scrap- 
books  there  is  an  advertisement  taken  from  a  tailor- 
ing journal  in  which  he  is  represented  in  an  immaculate 
and  perfectly -fitting  frock-coat,  the  contour  of  his 
body  being  adapted  to  the  necessities  of  the  case. 
It  represents  him  as  he  never  was.  In  a  familiar 
talk,  I  remember  with  what  mirth  he  enlarged  on 
what  he  considered  to  be  the  most  comfortable 
garment  for  travelling  in  cold  weather — a  good  rug 
with  two  cuts  crosswise  in  the  centre  through  which 
the  head  could  be  thrust  when  warmth  of  body  was 
needed,  while  the  rug  could  be  spread  over  the  knees 
just  the  same  for  warmth  of  leg.  He  declared  that 
he  once  drove  over  London  Bridge  into  the  city  thus 
arrayed  ! 

Still  pursuing  the  philosophy  of  clothes — on  one 
of  his  visits  to  the  Continent  with  several  of  his 
friends,  he  brought  up  the  rear  as  they  entered  their 
hotel  in  Paris.  The  others  were  somewhat  stylishly 
garmented,  he,  as  usual,  carried  his  wide-brimmed 
soft  hat  in  his  hand,  and  the  porter  of  the  hotel, 
remembering  that  he  had  seen  him  before,  and 
mistaking  him  for  the  courier  of  the  party,  beckoned 
him  to  his  side  and  asked  in  a  whisper,  "  Who  are  these 
gentlemen  you  have  brought  with  you  this  time  ?  " 

Mrs.  Spurgeon,  who  as  a  girl  heard  him  on  his  first 
Sunday  evening  in  London,  says  that  "  his  countrified 
manners  and  speech  excited  more  regret  than  rever- 
ence;  the  huge  stock,  the  badly-trimined  h^ir,  aqcj 


A  WORD   PORTRAIT  185 

the  blue  pocket-handkerchief  with  white  spots 
attracted  most  of  my  attention,  and,  I  fear,  awakened 
some  feelings  of  amusement." 

One  of  his  warmest  admirers  wrote  in  1859 :  "  His 
figure  is  awkward,  his  manners  plain,  and  his  face, 
except  when  illumined  by  a  smile,  admittedly  heavy." 
Another  on  a  subsequent  occasion  writing  of  him 
said  :  "  The  features  so  often  described  as  heavy 
were  lighted  by  a  sunny,  beautiful  smile,  that  seemed 
to  shed  over  his  figure  a  radiance  comparable  only 
to  the  silver  sheen  on  the  bosom  of  a  glassy  lake. 
His  form,  though  not  tall,  and  somewhat  rounded 
at  the  shoulders,  was  still  erect  enough  to  suggest 
considerable  physical  vigour,  and  was  remarkably 
compact;  and  when  he  stood  up  to  speak  his  feet 
were  solidly  placed  on  the  ground,  and  his  entire 
bearing  was  such  as  to  indicate  a  man  of  firmness  and 
determination."  ^ 

Professor  Everett,  his  companion  at  Newmarket, 
says  of  him  in  his  early  days  :  "  He  was  rather  small 
and  delicate,  with  pale  but  plump  face,  dark  brown 
eyes  and  hair,  and  a  bright,  lively  manner,  with  a 
never-failing  flow  of  conversation.  He  was  rather 
deficient  in  muscle,  did  not  care  for  cricket  or  other 
athletic  games,  and  was  timid  at  meeting  cattle  on 
the  road."  ^ 

He  was,  as  has  been  indicated,  under  medium 
height,  short  from  loin  to  knee,  so  that  he  never  sat 
far  back  in  a  chair,  but  with  body  well  developed, 
chest  deep  and  wide  (forty-one  inches  over  the 
waistcoat),  head  massive  (twenty-three  inches  round) 
and  covered  with  thick  dark  hair,  which  afterwards 
turned  iron  grey;  the  ear  being  remarkable,  its 
orifice  opening  to  the  front,  instead  of  to  the  side, 
like  most  other  ears,    From  his  j^outh  he  was  stout 


186  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

in  build.  When  he  first  went  to  Waterbeach  they 
thought  him  too  pale  and  too  young  to  be  much  of  a 
preacher,  and,  later  on,  an  observer,  describing  him 
in  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall,  said :  "  He  was 
pallid,  without  whiskers,  with  his  hair  parted  down 
the  middle."  But  one  of  the  earliest  ballads  about 
him  when  he  came  to  London  had  a  refrain  which 
embodied  the  popular  estimate  :  "  O  my  plump,  my 
rosy  Spurgeon." 

"  The  very  build  of  this  man,  as  in  the  case  of  John 
Bright,  marks  him  out  as  a  man  of  the  people. 
Physically  he  has  no  angles.  Note  men  of  this  make. 
Notwithstanding  their  diversity,  they  have  this  in 
common — they  require  no  introduction  anywhere. 
Whatever  the  company,  they  are  at  their  ease.  There 
is  no  putting  them  out.  This  applies  whether  there 
be  education  or  not.  Where  there  is  education  and 
intelligence,  as  in  the  case  with  which  we  are  now 
concerned,  we  sec  perfect  naturalness  and  facility 
of  movement;  the  power  to  rise  or  stoop  to  the 
occasion  without  the  least  suspicion  of  stiffness;  the 
ability  to  give  out  and  take  in,  whatever  the  circum- 
stances or  situation  might  be  !  "  *  Amongst  living 
examples  of  men  of  this  sort,  Mr.  Will  Crooks  in  some 
manners  and  movements  strangely  recalls  Spurgeon. 

But  his  personality  was  so  many-sided  that  as  far 
as  outward  characteristics  went  there  were  many 
Spurgeons.  During  his  stay  at  Mentone  in  1888  a 
celebrated  portrait  painter  called  at  the  Hotel  Beau- 
Rivage  and  suggested  that  he  might  be  favoured 
with  some  sittings.  Mr.  Spurgeon  smilingly  replied, 
"  You  cannot  paint  me,"  and  then,  mentioning  the 
name  of  another  artist,  he  added,  "  I  sat  several 
times  at  his  urgent  request.  On  the  fourth  or  fifth 
occasion  he  threw  down  his  brush  ^ith  the  remark, 


A   WORD   PORTRAIT  187 

*  I  cannot  paint  your  portrait,  Mr.  Spurgeon.  You 
have  sat  to  nie  all  these  times,  and  you  have  never 
looked  twice  alike.  Your  face  seems  quite  altered 
on  each  occasion.'  "  Upon  which  his  Mentone  visitor 
exclaimed,  "  Well,  if  he  could  not  paint  your  portrait, 
I  am  sure  I  cannot  " — and  that  was  the  end.^ 

A  Scotch  writer,  after  Mr.  Spurgeon's  death,  said 
that  he  "  had  a  strong  resemblance  in  his  earlier  days 
to  John  Macdonald  of  Ferintosh,  whom  Scottish 
Highlanders  called  the  Apostle  of  the  North.  Dr. 
Macdonald  was  the  handsomer  man,  and  had  especially 
a  fine  pair  of  eyes.  But  their  ways  of  standing  in 
the  pulpit,  of  rolling  out  their  words  in  natural  and 
musical  intonation,  and  of  filling  each  paragraph 
with  matter  which  did  not  crowd  it,  were  singularly 
alike.  And  there  were  deeper  resemblances.  Both 
were  Pauline  theologians,  both  had  a  natural  ex- 
pansiveness  and  bonhomie^  both  were  born  preachers 
and  rulers  of  the  multitude,  both  believed  in  preach- 
ing, in  preaching  incessantly,  and  in  not  only  preaching, 
but  unfolding  Christ.  The  only  time  I  ever  met 
Spurgeon  I  could  not  help  telling  him  of  his  resem- 
blance to  the  great  Highlander  and  to — John  Bunyan. 
He  could  not  quite  deny  the  latter.  The  former  he 
had  to  take  on  faith."  ^ 

Paxton  Hood  draws  his  portrait  in  the  early  days  : 
"  We  were  greatly  amazed,  as  we  stood  at  his  chapel 
doors  waiting  to  enter,  to  see  him  as  he  came  and 
passed  along  to  the  vestry  respectfully  lift  his  hat 
and  bow  again  and  again  to  his  w^aiting  auditors; 
there  was  so  much  audacious,  good-natured  simplicity, 
both  in  the  act  itself  and  on  the  face  of  the  actor, 
that  we  could  not  help  smiling  right  heartily.  It  was 
evident  he  was  not  indisposed  to  appropriate  to 
himself  a  certain  amount  of  personal  homage.    His 


188  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

face  is  not  coarse,  but  there  is  no  refinement  in  it; 
it  is  a  square  face;  his  forehead  is  square;  we  were 
wishing,  although  we  are  not  phrenologists,  that  it 
had  indicated  a  little  more  benevolence  of  character."  ^ 

On  one  occasion  a  phrenologist  did  interview  him, 
and  published  his  opinion,  giving  a  table  of  the  com- 
parative sizes  of  the  various  organs.  Comparison, 
Size,  Weight,  Benevolence,  Approbativeness,  Firm- 
ness, Hope  and  Individuality  being  most  developed; 
Cautiousness,  Veneration,  Conscientiousness,  Imita- 
tion, Eventuality  and  Awe  coming  next  and  being 
equal  to  each  other ;  none  of  the  characteristics  being 
small.  This  is  noted  for  what  it  is  worth.  "  I  infer," 
said  the  phrenologist,  "  that  he  is  not  pugnacious,  but 
desires  distinction.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  success  is  attri- 
butable in  no  small  measure  to  laudable  ambition." 

"  He  had  a  remarkable  face  and  head,"  Dr.  Parker 
wrote.  "  The  head  was  the  very  image  of  stubborn- 
ness :  massive,  broad,  low,  hard ;  the  face  was  large, 
rugged,  social,  brightened  by  eyes  overflowing  with 
humour  and  softened  by  a  most  gracious  and 
sympathetic  smile."  Dr.  Cuyler,  in  comparing  him 
with  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  said  there  were  only  two 
things  they  had  in  common,  "  both  were  fat,  and 
both  were  humorous." 

He  once  playfully  remarked  to  me  that  he  had  not 
a  single  redeeming  feature  in  his  face,  but  the  face 
itself  was  eloquent  to  those  who  could  see.  Again 
quoting  my  friend,  and  his  friend,  James  Douglas : 
"  Look  then  at  the  portrait  of  Charles  Haddon 
Spurgeon,  and  what  do  you  find  there?  Caution 
marked,  certainly,  but  candour  more.  You  will  look 
a  long  time  on  the  countenance  before  you  find  a  trace 
of  reserve.  Concealment,  in  this  case,  is  not  one  of 
the  fine  ^rts.    Where  concealment  dwells,  the  lips  ^i:e 


A   WORD   PORTRAIT  189 

not  parted  in  this  fashion,  but  tightly  compressed,  nor 
could  the  eyes,  as  here,  lie  so  calm  in  repose. 

"  Could  any  face  more  fully  suggest  geniality, 
friendliness,  warmth  of  affection  and  overflowing 
hospitality?  His  greeting  was  as  warm  as  sunshine. 
It  mattered  not  what  might  be  the  shadow  on  the 
spirit,  or  the  trouble  of  the  heart — it  vanished  away 
at  the  voice  of  his  welcome.  There  was  a  light  on  his 
countenance  that  instantly  dissipated  all  gloom. 

"  Lavater  has  placed  language  in  the  eye,  but  what 
may  we  not  place  there?  The  whole  soul  looks  out 
of  her  windows.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  eye  denoted  repose, 
and  at  the  same  time  intense  observation.  His  is  not 
the  dreamy  or  contemplative  eye  in  the  least  degree. 
He  is  wide-awake,  he  sees  everything  there  is  to  be 
seen.  He  can  tell  at  a  glance  who  are  present  and 
who  are  absent  in  his  great  congregation.  His  is  an 
eye  that  in  conscious  hours  never  slumbers.  He  is 
as  quick  in  perception  as  he  is  ready  in  speech  ! 

"  Another  thing  strongly  marked  in  his  eye  is  his 
mirth;  but  no  photograph  can  bring  this  out,  for  it 
appears  in  the  twinkle.  His  is  the  laughing,  gleeful 
eye.  His  love  of  fun  stood  him  to  the  end,  and  no 
saddening  of  experience  could  tone  it  down  one  jot."  ® 

He  could  not  sing  at  all,  and  yet  his  voice  was  music. 
Everybody  who  tried  to  describe  it  spoke  of  it  as 
silvery.  There  were  both  quality  and  ease  in  its 
tones,  comparable  most  of  all  to  the  clear  voices  of 
a  company  of  choir-boys.  His  first  notes  stilled  the 
largest  crowd,  and  his  whisper,  which  could  easily 
be  heard  over  all  the  great  Tabernacle,  thrilled  his 
hearers.  Modulation  and  compass,  enunciation  and 
emphasis  were  perfect. 

"  We    remember    four    beautiful    voices,"    said    a 
West-country    writer.     "  Mr.    Gladstone's    had,    and 


190  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

still  has  occasionally,  the  sound  of  a  trumpet.  Mr. 
Bright's  was  like  the  *  Vox  Humana '  on  a  fine  organ. 
Professor  Maurice,  when  reading  the  Lessons,  was  as 
one  inspired,  though  we  can  scarcely  find  a  comparison 
for  the  pathos  of  his  elocution.  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
voice,  however,  was  probably  the  finest  voice  that 
was  ever  heard  in  the  pulpit — it  was  like  a  flute."  ® 

He  could  never  understand  any  one  needing  to  be 
taught  elocution,  to  him  it  all  came  naturally.  The 
only  flaw  I  ever  detected  in  his  speech  was  the  quite 
usual  Saxon  habit  of  pronouncing  "  ah  "  at  the  end 
of  a  word  as  if  it  were  "  re  " — a  fault  so  common 
that  in  the  modern  science  of  phonetics  it  is  accepted 
and  taught.  But  there  should  surely  be  a  distinct 
difference  between  the  pronunciation  of  "  Noah " 
and  "  Nore." 

In  his  early  preaching  there  was  a  good  deal  of 
gesture  and  movement.  Once,  in  the  'seventies,  I 
saw  him  rush  across  the  Tabernacle  platform  as  he 
spoke  of  Joab  fleeing  to  the  Temple  and  clutching 
hold  of  the  horns  of  the  altar.  For  the  moment  he 
was  Joab,  and  as  he  cried  out  to  Benaiah  that  he 
would  not  come  forth  to  the  sword — "  Nay,  but  I  will 
die  here,"  the  people  caught  their  breath  as  they 
looked  and  listened  and  felt.  But  such  outbursts 
were  infrequent,  entirely  absent  toward  the  end. 
Even  at  the  beginning  he  was  credited  with  a  great 
deal  that  never  happened.  He  never  slid  down  the 
rail  of  the  pulpit  stairs  to  show  how  easy  it  was  to 
backslide.  One  reason  was  that  there  were  no  pulpit 
stairs  visible  to  the  congregation  at  the  time  the 
story  was  told,  although  it  was  actually  vouched  for 
by  supposed  eye-witnesses.  In  later  years  he  often 
prea;ched  with  one  knee  on  a  chair,  the  back  of  which 
he  held  with  a  hand. 


A   WORD   PORTRAIT  191 

When  he  came  to  London  first  there  was  an  odd 
mixture  of  shyness  and  self-assurance  in  his  character. 
He  dared  to  say  the  most  astounding  things,  yet 
shrunk  within  himself  when  he  was  misunderstood. 
This  meant  a  great  deal  of  silent  suffering,  and  it  was 
only  a  sense  of  his  vocation  which  kept  him  strong. 
He  says :  "  My  success  appalled  me ;  and  the  thought 
of  the  career  which  it  seemed  to  open  up,  so  far  from 
elating  me,  cast  me  into  the  lowest  depths,  out  of 
which  I  uttered  my  miserere  and  found  no  room  for 
a  '  Gloria  in  Excelsis.'  I  hope  I  was  not  faithless,  but 
I  was  timorous,  and  filled  with  a  sense  of  my  own 
unfitness.  I  dreaded  the  work  which  a  gracious 
Providence  had  prepared  for  me.  I  felt  a  mere  child, 
and  trembled  as  I  heard  the  voice  which  said,  '  Arise 
and  thresh  the  mountains  and  make  them  as  chaff.'  " 

To  the  end  he  was  timid  to  a  degree  in  things  which 
most  people  face  quite  easily.  For  example,  he 
hesitated  to  cross  a  road  without  some  one  to  help 
him.  Yet  he  used  to  tell  that  one  day,  near  the  Bank 
of  England,  a  blind  man  caught  his  arm  and  asked  him 
to  guide  him  over  what  is  probably  one  of  the  most 
dangerous  crossings  in  London.  He  told  him  that  he 
was  afraid  to  venture  across  himself.  "  But  you  can 
see,"  said  he.  "  Oh  yes,  I  can  see,"  said  Spurgeon, 
"  but  I  am  afraid."  To  which  the  blind  man  responded, 
"  If  you  can  see,  I'll  trust  you,"  and  the  trust  banished 
the  timidity,  and  helped  both  Spurgeon  and  the  blind 
man  across.  "  I  knew  I  could  trust  you,"  the  blind 
man  said  when  they  were  over,  and  Spurgeon  declared 
that  to  be  trusted  so  completely  just  lifted  him  out 
of  himself — he  dared  not  fail  such  confidence  :  and  then 
he  urged  the  people  to  trust  Christ  and  count  Him 
as  doubly  bound  to  His  promise  by  their  trust. 

"  It  was  no  trouble  to  him  to  clothe  his  thoughts, 


192  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

and  to  give  them  in  doing  so  eloquent  expression. 
Words  trooped  to  his  service  as  required,  and  the 
thought  he  had  to  enunciate  shone  forth  clear  as 
crystal.  He  was  extempore  in  the  true  sense  of  the 
term,  for  his  notes  were  but  the  barest  bones  of  his 
thought.  On  the  spot  he  mused  and  the  fire  burned. 
If  the  thought  was  sublime,  he  would  give  it  sublime 
expression ;  if  homely,  he  bedecked  it  accordingly. 

"  He  had  mental  faculty  far  in  excess  of  the  average. 
He  did  with  ease,  and  spontaneously,  mental  feats 
which  men  of  name  struggle  in  vain  to  accomplish. 
Besides,  he  had  what  every  large  brain  has  not, 
large  method  and  power  of  concentration.  He  could 
grasp  the  bearings  of  a  subject,  hold  his  theme  well 
in  hand,  and  display  his  thought  like  troops  in  a 
tactical  movement."  ^ 

He  has  testified  that  one  instant  result  of  his  con- 
version was  that  the  heterogeneous  knowledge  that 
he  possessed  before,  jumbled  in  his  brain  "  in  glorious 
confusion,"  as  he  described  it,  seemed  afterwards 
to  be  ranged  on  shelves,  so  that  he  was  able  to  lay  his 
hand  upon  everything  just  when  he  needed  it;  and 
this  power  continued  through  his  life. 

"  Further,  historic  memory  was  about  as  perfect 
with  him  as  it  could  well  be,  and  no  tale  that  he  ever 
had  to  tell  suffered  in  the  telling  of  it.  While  he 
elaborated  with  ease  his  ideas,  he  made  them  portable 
and  easy  to  bear  away  by  a  happy  epigrammatic 
finish.  It  is  marvellous  how,  when  he  had  expounded 
a  thought,  he  could  thus  make  it  live  for  ever  in  a  few 
terse,  pithy  words.  The  same  faculty  shines  forth  in 
his  correspondence.  He  had  the  power — a  power  in 
daily  exercise,  a  power  of  impromptu,  of  loading 
language  to  a  degree  we  have  never  seen  approached."  ^ 

During  his  early  days  in  London  he  invited  Mr. 


A    CONTEMPORARY    CARTOON. 

{From  a  drawing  in  "  The  Hornet:') 


A  WORD   PORTRAIT  193 

J.  D.  Everett  to  his  home,  and  they  spent  half  a  day 
together.  To  him  he  spoke  simply  and  without 
affectation  of  himself,  and  told  him  that  he  could 
always  say  exactly  what  he  intended,  in  the  time  which 
he  intended.  His  visitor  brought  away  the  impression 
that  his  great  power  was  to  him  a  simple  matter  of 
fact,  of  which  he  had  no  more  reason  to  be  proud 
than  a  bird  of  its  power  to  fly  or  a  fish  of  its  power  to 
swim.  One  of  his  most  marked  characteristics  was 
the  consummate  ease  with  which  he  did  his  work. 
This  was  at  the  root  of  what  was  called  his  irreverence. 
"  I  remember  suggesting  to  him,"  Professor  Everett 
says,  "  that  a  man  ought  to  feel  and  show  some  sense 
of  awe  in  the  presence  of  the  Master,"  and  his  reply 
was  to  the  effect  that  such  awe  was  foreign  to  his 
nature — that  he  felt  perfectly  at  home  with  his 
Heavenly  Father.^^ 

Principal  Edwards  of  Bala  notes  this  quality  as 
specially  distinguishing  him :  "In  an  address  on 
preaching  I  ventured  to  say  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was 
the  only  preacher  I  ever  heard  from  whose  lips  the 
preacher's  language  seemed  to  me  at  the  time  quite 
adequate  to  express  the  truths  of  the  Gospel.  Great 
preachers  seem  often  themselves  to  be  oppressed  with 
an  uneasy  sense  of  inability  to  convey  to  their  hearers 
the  depth  and  richness  of  Christian  thoughts.  It 
betrays  itself  sometimes  in  an  exaggerated  action, 
sometimes  in  the  repetition  of  the  same  idea  in 
different  words.  Nothing  of  this  appeared  in  Mr. 
Spurgeon.  His  theology  was  the  hardest  of  all 
theologies  to  couch  in  ordinary  language.  One  step 
beyond,  it  would  have  plunged  him  into  scholastic 
metaphysics.  Yet  he  was  perfectly  at  his  ease,  and 
seemed  to  revel  in  preaching  the  profoundest  mysteries 
of  Christianity  to  the  common  people.     It  was  Mr. 


194  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

Spurgeon's  transcendent  greatness  as  a  preacher  that 
he  could  do  with  apparent  ease  what  many  other 
great  preachers  cannot  do  without  a  painful  appear- 
ance of  effort.  What  is  the  explanation  of  his  master- 
ful repose?  For  one  thing,  though  he  was  very 
original  in  his  way,  he  was  not  a  speculative  theologian, 
struggling  to  give  tongue  to  new  thoughts.  What 
he  saw,  he  saw  as  clear  as  sunlight,  and  what  he  did 
not  see  with  perfect  clearness,  he  did  not  see  at  all. 
He  was  like  Chalmers,  who  could  walk  round  an  idea, 
not  like  Edward  Irving,  whose  ideas  '  loomed.'  Again, 
he  was  steeped  in  the  language  of  the  seventeenth 
century.  Whether  the  Calvinism  of  the  Puritans 
is  true  or  not,  it  is  a  great  theology,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon 
believed  it  to  be  not  only  true,  but  the  whole  truth  of 
God.  Not,  certainly,  that  he  spoke  to  his  own  age  in 
the  cumbersome  if  majestic  phraseology  of  Hooker  or 
Howe,  but  his  beliefs  were  thought  and  hammered  out 
in  the  language  of  a  past  generation,  and  whenever 
the  English  of  Mr.  Bright  would  not  express  satis- 
factorily a  theological  idea  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  felt 
he  must  preach,  he  found  ample  stores  to  his  hand  in 
the  Puritan  divines.  He  was  really  master  of  two 
languages  :  the  language  of  a  theological  past,  and  the 
non-theological  language  of  the  nineteenth  century."  ^^ 
This  brings  us  up  against  the  oft-quoted  opinion 
that  Spurgeon  was  the  last  of  the  Puritans.  It  might 
with  equal  assurance  have  been  said  before  he  came 
that  the  Puritan  day  was  already  past.  We  may 
content  ourselves  by  remarking  that  whatever  the 
outward  guise,  there  are  abiding  elements  in  Puritan 
thought  and  practice  which  are  bound  to  re-appear 
whenever  the  problems  of  life,  and  the  relation  of 
man  to  God,  are  seriously  considered.  For  "  the 
Puritan  conception  of  life  on  the  earth  has  always 


A  WORD   PORTRAIT  195 

been  that  of  a  battle  and  a  march,  under  watchful 
heavens,  towards  superlative  issues,  with  great 
destinies  involved."  ^^ 

A  student  of  his  time  has  expressed  Spurgeon's 
debt  to  the  Puritans  in  words  that  are  worth  reading, 
whether  we  agree  with  them  or  not — 
.  "  Spurgeon  was  the  one  great  teacher  of  the  century 
whose  mind  was  steeped  in  Puritan  ideas,  theology 
and  literature.  In  fact  this  remarkable  man  knew 
more  about  Puritanism  than  any  of  the  Puritans 
themselves.  His  vast  learning  consisted  almost 
entirely  of  this  kind  of  erudition,  and  in  this  field  he 
was  one  of  the  greatest  of  masters.  This  was  at  once 
the  chief  strength,  and  also  the  only  weakness,  of  his 
splendid  ministry.  His  mind  was  early  surrendered 
to  the  Puritan  hermeneutics,  and  all  his  homiletic 
power  was  modified  by  the  impress  of  the  mediaeval 
mould  in  which  he  preferred  to  cast  his  youthful 
thought.  A  curious  and  beautiful  study  will  be 
furnished  for  those  who  are  interested  in  this  noble 
life.  They  will  mark  a  problem  in  the  higher  psycho- 
logy which  will  not  admit  of  easy  solution.  Here 
was  a  great  soul,  a  Master  in  Israel,  who  used  to  say, 
as  he  profoundly  felt,  that  as  every  man  must  have 
some  infallibility,  his  infallibility  was  the  Bible. 
And  yet,  all  unconsciously,  this  great  student  in  the 
greatest  realm  of  study  failed  just  at  this  very  point ; 
for  it  was  Puritanism,  after  all,  and  not  absolutely 
and  solely  the  Bible,  which  was  really  the  rock  of 
infallibility  for  his  reliance.  He  never  emancipated 
his  intellect  from  the  fascination  exercised  over  him 
by  Charnock,  and  Owen,  and  Coles."  ^^ 

"  The  Puritan  writers  were  to  him  what  the  Primi- 
tive Fathers  are  to  trained  theologians,"  says  another 
critic,  whose  colour  can  easily  be  guessed. 


196  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

Once  when  sitting  together  on  a  Scotch  hillside 
I  told  him  a  story  of  Moody,  to  whom  a  young  preacher 
came  complaining  of  the  difficulty  he  had  in  finding 
texts.  Holding  up  the  Bible,  Moody  said,  "  That's 
not  my  difficulty,  I've  a  book  full  of  them;  my 
difficulty  is  to  find  the  sermons  to  put  behind  them." 
Spurgeon  heard  the  story  with  interest,  and  then  he 
said,  ''  My  difficulty  is  to  find  the  text,  for  when  a 
text  grips  me  I  have  found  the  sermon." 

"  I  confess,"  he  once  wrote,  "  that  I  frequently 
sit  hour  after  hour  praying  and  waiting  for  a  subject, 
and  that  this  is  the  main  part  of  my  study  :  much 
hard  labour  have  I  spent  in  manipulating  topics, 
ruminating  upon  points  of  doctrine,  making  skeletons 
out  of  verses,  and  then  burying  every  bone  of  them 
in  the  catacombs  of  oblivion,  drifting  on  and  on  over 
leagues  of  broken  water,  till  I  see  the  red  lights,  and 
make  sail  to  the  desired  haven.  I  believe  that  almost 
every  Saturday  of  my  life  I  prepare  enough  outlines 
of  sermons,  if  I  felt  at  liberty  to  preach  them,  to  last 
me  a  month,  but  I  no  more  dare  use  them  than 
an  honest  mariner  would  run  to  shore  a  cargo  of 
contraband  goods." 

On  that  same  Scotch  hillside  I  quoted  to  him  some 
bits  of  Dr.  Joseph  Parker's  sermons,  and  then  recalled 
the  story,  probably  apocryphal,  that  when  the  City 
Temple  was  being  planned  the  minister  of  the  Old 
Poultry  Chapel,  on  being  asked  what  sort  of  building 
he  wanted,  replied,  "  Build  me  a  church  that  when 
Queen  Victoria  passes  down  Holborn  she  will  point  to 
it  and  ask,  '  What  place  is  that  ?  '  and  they  will  say, 
'  That  is  where  Joseph  Parker  preaches.'  "  Spurgeon 
was  silent  for  a  minute,  and  then  said,  looking  at  me 
quizzically,  "  That  is  just  what  I  should  have  felt, 
but  I  should  have  been  too  proud  to  say  it." 


A  WORD   PORTRAIT  197 

Perhaps  that  half-humorous  estimate  of  himself 
had  some  hidden  truth  in  it.  He  was  proud  rather 
than  vain.  On  March  23,  1855,  as  a  very  young  man, 
he  wrote :  "  My  pride  is  so  infernal  that  there  is  not 
a  man  on  earth  who  can  hold  it  in,  and  all  their  silly 
attempts  are  futile ;  but,  then,  my  Master  can  do  it, 
and  He  will."  At  the  beginning  of  his  ministry  he 
accepted  the  title  "  Reverend " ;  in  middle  life  he 
chose  to  be  known  without  any  title;  but  in  later 
years  he  suffered  himself  to  be  called  Pastor  C.  H. 
Spurgeon,  in  deference  to  a  fashion  that  had  then 
a  vogue  amongst  Pastor's  College  men.  Several 
University  degrees  were  conferred  upon  him,  but  he 
put  them  aside,  and  he  did  not  encourage  his  students 
to  seek  academic  honours.  He  did  not  even  attempt 
to  give  his  sons  the  opportunity  of  a  University 
career,  though  he  urged  them  to  seek  theological 
training.  The  honours  of  the  world,  including  the 
intellectual  world,  he  held  cheap;  intellect  he  valued, 
and  he  was  always  a  book-lover,  but  he  ever  felt  after 
the  eternal  things  rather  than  the  temporal.  His 
chief  ambition  might  have  been  phrased  in  the  ancient 
stanza — 

"  Oh,  would  I  were  graduate  in  that  College 
Where  love  is  known  that  passeth  knowledge. 
Where  saints  do  comprehend  and  dwell 
In  love  incomprehensible." 

Two  questions  are  raised  by  one  of  the  early  criti- 
cisms on  his  work  in  one  of  the  leading  papers.  After 
some  rather  ill-natured  remarks  about  his  success, 
the  writer  uses  him  as  a  foil  for  some  exhortations 
to  the  clergy  of  that  day.  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  doubtless 
sincere,  but  surely  the  success  of  such  a  person  in 
drawing  large  audiences  to  listen  to  him,  in  rousing 
them  to  attention,  and  in  exciting  their  imaginations 


198  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

and  feelings,  ought  to  prove  to  the  clergy  of  a  higher 
grade  who  are  educated  as  gentlemen,  and  have  the 
tastes  and  manners  of  their  class,  and  who  are  accus- 
tomed w^eek  by  week  to  address  congregations  boasting 
of  greater  refinement  than  those  of  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
that  if  they  would  cease  to  drawl  and  drone,  as  so 
many  of  them  do,  and  infuse  a  little  more  life  and. 
spirit  into  their  discourses,  they  would  greatly  increase 
their  own  popularity  and  usefulness.  Dulness  is 
almost  as  fatal  a  defect  in  a  preacher  as  in  an  author, 
and  Mr.  Spurgeon,  if  all  accounts  be  true,  is  anything 
but  dull.  The  success  of  any  preacher  who  would 
break  in,  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  done,  upon  the  pre- 
vailing monotony  and  listlessness,  would  not  be 
diminished  by  his  being  a  gentleman  and  a  scholar."  ^* 

The  questions  raised  by  this  paragraph  are  whether 
or  not  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  scholar  and  a  gentleman. 
Judged  by  University  standards  it  can  scarcely  be 
contended  that  he  was  a  scholar,  and  he  never  assumed 
that  pose.  But  Dr.  William  Wright  of  the  Bible 
Society,  formerly  of  Damascus,  himself  a  scholar, 
and  Spurgeon's  neighbour  at  Norwood,  has  told  us 
how  he  has  found  him  preparing  his  sermon  with  a 
Greek  Lexicon  on  one  side  of  his  table  and  a  Hebrew 
Lexicon  on  the  other.  The  fact  was  that  he  had  a 
great  weight  of  learning,  but  it  was  never  his  habit 
to  parade  it.  He  was  an  omnivorous  reader,  had 
something  like  Macaulay's  faculty  for  swift  reading, 
and  had  an  eye  so  rapid  and  a  mind  so  acute  that  he 
could  take  in  paragraphs  as  most  readers  take  in 
sentences,  and  he  could  remember  what  he  read. 
But  he  was  not  a  technical  scholar,  nor  ever  pre- 
tended to  be,  and  he  had  no  patience  with  scholarly 
pretensions. 

"  He  knew  so  much,"  says  Dr.  Lorimer,  "  that  it 


A   WORD   PORTRAIT  19» 

was  unnecessary  for  him  to  make  a  parade  of  know- 
ledge, and  he  saw  so  deeply  into  the  springs  of  the 
human  heart  and  the  sources  of  social  changes,  and 
acquired  information  with  such  rare  facility  that  he 
easily  out-ranked  most  of  his  enlightened  contem- 
poraries. As  Thomas  Carlyle  expressed  it,  he  very 
early  in  life  acquired  strength  to  stand  by  himself, 
and  live  without  and  above  praise." 

He  reminded  a  man  who  with  great  air  of  learning 
had  told  him  he  was  an  Agnostic,  that  the  Latin 
equivalent  was  "  Ignoramus."  Spurgeon  was  neither 
Agnostic  in  the  spiritual  sphere,  nor  Ignoramus  in 
the  intellectual. 

It  may  also  be  freely  conceded  that  judged  by 
aristocratic  standards  Spurgeon  was  not  a  gentleman. 
He  came  of  plain  people,  and  he  never  gave  himself 
airs.  But  even  The  Saturday  Review  at  last  acknow- 
ledged that,  "  if  not  very  well  bred,  he  was  not  in  the 
least  ill-blooded."  From  the  beginning  he  had  fine 
instincts,  and  early  learnt  the  ways  of  men,  developing 
with  the  years  in  matters  of  taste.  He  mixed  with 
the  highest  as  their  equal,  put  the  humblest  at  ease 
in  his  presence,  said  the  right  word  at  the  right 
moment,  took  pains  to  remember  people,  was  gener- 
osity itself,  both  in  thought  and  action,  and  if  "  a 
gentleman  is  one  who  does  not  put  his  feelings  before 
others'  rights,  or  his  rights  before  their  feelings,"  then 
Spurgeon,  the  democrat,  was  a  gentleman. 

As  was  said  of  Wendell  Phillips  :  "  His  high  chair 
was  placed  in  a  Puritan  household,  which  means  that 
he  was  reared  in  an  atmosphere  of  high  thinking  and 
holy  living.  It  also  meant  that  at  the  most  plastic 
period  of  his  mental  growth  he  was  familiarised  with 
ideals  of  grave  and  decorous  conduct,  that  he  was 
taught  to  esteem  lightly  the  frivolities  and  pleasures 


200  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

of  the  time,  that  he  was  impregnated  with  sharply- 
defined  principles  of  right  and  wrong,  and  filled  with 
an  almost  oppressive  sense  of  personal  responsibility 
for  the  use  made  of  life  and  its  opportunities."  ^^ 

He  was  the  soul  of  courtesy.  Could  anything 
excel  in  dainty  rebuke  the  answer  he  sent  to  Miss 
Lydia  Thompson,  the  actress,  when,  having  introduced 
a  song  about  Mr.  Spurgeon  into  her  play,  and  finding 
the  newspapers  inclined  to  protest,  she  wrote  to  him 
on  the  subject? 

"  Dear  Madam,"  he  wrote  in  reply,  "  I  am  very 
grateful  for  your  courteous  inquiry,  and  feel  sure  that 
I  may  leave  what  is  purely  a  question  of  taste  in 
your  hands."     The  song  was  immediately  withdrawn. 

An  answer  as  apt  was  once  given  to  a  person  who 
called  at  his  house  without  an  appointment,  and  when 
refused  an  interview,  would  not  take  a  denial.  He 
sent  a  second  message  that  "  one  of  the  Master's 
servants  wanted  to  see  him  on  the  Master's  business." 
Spurgeon  sent  a  reply  that  he  was  very  sorry,  but  at 
that  very  moment  he  was  engaged  with  the  Master 
Himself,  and  had  no  time  for  the  servant." 

A  third  retort  may  find  a  place  here.  A  self- 
important  individual  introduced  himself  one  day,  and 
declared  that  the  Lord  had  told  him  that  he  was  to 
preach  in  the  Tabernacle.  "  That  is  singular,"  said 
Spurgeon,  "  for  I  am  in  daily  communication  with  the 
Lord,  and  He  has  said  nothing  to  me  about  it."  There 
was  nothing  more  to  be  said. 

He  appreciated  nice  things,  delighted  in  his  flowers, 
admired  fine  scenery,  was  proud  of  his  horses  and  took 
good  care  of  them.  He  always  said  they  were  Jews, 
for  though  they  took  him  to  the  Tabernacle  on 
Sundays,  they  alwaj^s  rested  on  Saturdays.  He 
loved  to  show  his  friends  round  his  gardens  and  then 


A   WORD   PORTRAIT  201 

sit  in  a  summer-house  and  converse  with  them,  or 
occasionally  play  a  game  of  bowls.  His  tastes  in 
fruits  was  peculiar  :  he  never  tasted  a  strawberry, 
but  peaches  made  a  strong  appeal  to  him.  He  insisted 
on  his  garden  being  properly  kept;  one  gardener 
who  professed  to  have  attained  religious  perfection 
had  to  be  dismissed  for  carelessness,  and  Spurgeon 
declared  that  he  would  have  a  sinner  next  time.  He 
had  no  patience  with  cant. 

Which  recalls  another  incident  illustrating  his 
instinct  in  mingling  rebuke  with  gentleness.  When 
Dr.  David  Thomas  published  anonymously  his  book, 
The  World  of  Cant,  he  held  up  to  ridicule  the 
Reverend  Falcon  Small.  The  shafts  of  his  somewhat 
bitter  wit  were  evidently  meant  for  his  neighbour, 
Dr.  Newman  Hall,  who  bore  it  patiently  for  some 
time,  but  as  the  book  gained  currency  wrote  a  pro- 
testing letter  in  reply,  which  in  strength  of  invec- 
tive outdid  anything  in  the  book.  Having  written 
it,  he  took  it  to  Spurgeon  to  ask  his  opinion.  Spurgeon 
read  the  letter  carefully,  and  handing  it  back  declared 
it  was  excellent,  and  that  the  writer  of  the  book 
deserved  it  all.  "  But,"  he  added,  "  it  just  lacks 
one  thing."  His  visitor,  quite  gratified,  was  all 
attention.  "  Underneath  the  signature,  '  Newman 
Hall,'  you  ought  to  put  the  words,  '  Author  of  Come 
to  Jesus.''  "  I  should  like  to  have  been  there  as  the 
two  saintly  men  for  a  few  minutes  looked  at  each 
other.     Then  Newman  Hall  tore  the  letter  in  pieces. 

Though  gentle,  Spurgeon  was  not  pliant.  He  would 
go  great  lengths  in  friendship,  but  he  could  at  times 
be  stern.  It  was  his  dictum  that  if  you  had  to  kill 
an  insect  it  was  best  to  crush  it  with  one  effort.  He 
could  be  blunt  and  severe,  and  though  naturally 
trustful,   could   be   indignant   and   strike   hard.     His 


202  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

own  transparency  of  character  made  him  liable  to 
be  imposed  upon,  but  woe  to  the  deliberate  impostor 
when  he  was  discovered.  To  the  unwitting  offender 
he  was  all  tenderness  and  grace.  The  son  of  one  of  his 
deacons,  after  a  prolonged  absence  from  the  services 
at  the  Tabernacle,  returned,  and  meeting  the  Pastor 
soon  afterwards,  declared  that  his  conscience  would 
not  let  him  stay  away  any  longer.  "  Ah !  "  said 
Spurgeon,  calling  him  by  his  first  name,  "  you 
have  a  good  conscience,"  and  then  he  banished  the 
answering  smiles  of  the  young  fellow  by  adding, 
"  almost  as  good  as  new,  for  you  haven't  used  it 
much." 

In  his  character  there  was  a  blend  of  humility  and 
dignity.  "  To  him  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  less  than  the 
least  of  all  saints,  but  the  minister  of  the  Metropolitan 
Tabernacle  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Lord's  hosts, 
and  was  not  a  person  to  be  trifled  with.  That  was 
the  secret  of  the  apparent  inconsistency."  ^® 

His  generosity  knew  scarcely  any  bounds.  What 
he  once  said  about  Hugh  Stowell  Brown  might  have 
been  said  of  himself :  "  There  was  room  enough  in 
his  heart  for  all  the  fleets  of  Europe  to  anchor." 
That  was  because  the  love  of  God  was  shed  abroad 
so  abundantly  in  his  heart.  Punshon's  estimate  of 
the  American  divine  might  have  been  used  of  Spurgeon 
too :  "  Sweep  a  circle  seven  feet  around  the  Cross,  and 
you  take  in  all  there  was  of  Alfred  Cookman." 

My  friend  Benwell  Bird  tells  that  when  in  the  early 
years  he  invited  Spurgeon  to  Birmingham,  where  he 
was  minister,  a  young  photographer  in  his  congrega- 
tion desired  him  to  ask  his  guest  to  allow  his  photo- 
graph to  be  taken.  Spurgeon  seemed  disinclined  to 
grant  the  request,  so  Mr.  Benwell  Bird  pressed  it, 
told  him  that  he  would  be  driven  to  the  studio  and 


A  WORD   PORTRAIT  203 

back  again,  and  that  if  he  consented  it  would  help 
the  young  man  and  give  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  to 
others.  This  forced  Spurgeon  to  declare  that  he 
devoted  the  profit  from  the  sale  of  his  photographs 
to  the  support  of  a  widow,  and  that  he  did  not  want 
to  interfere  with  their  sale. 

In  keeping  with  this  was  his  offer  in  1866  to  devote 
the  profits  on  his  magazine,  The  Sword  and  Trowel, 
to  the  encouragement  of  his  students  to  insure  their 
lives,  the  money  to  go  to  the  reduction  of  the  pre- 
miums. But  this  plan  came  to  nothing.  Many  a 
five-pound  note  was  sent  to  his  correspondents  when 
they  sought  his  help  in  need.  During  one  of  his 
visits  to  Mentone  some  one  sent  him  a  gift  of  £5  to 
help  in  his  expenses.  The  same  day  he  met  a  minister 
who  had  been  ordered  there  for  his  health,  and  knowing 
something  of  his  circumstances  he  handed  the  cheque 
to  him,  saying  that  his  own  expenses  had  already 
been  met.  He  knew  the  value  of  money,  and  was  not 
careless  in  the  spending  of  it,  but  there  was  not  a 
streak  of  meanness  in  his  nature  :  he  gave  with  both 
hands  to  those  in  need,  and  never  in  niggard  fashion. 

At  one  time  he  was  offered  a  competence  if  he  would 
join  a  mercantile  firm  in  the  City,  but  he  refused. 
At  another,  one  of  the  leading  publishers  in  the  City 
offered  him  £30,000  for  the  copyright  of  his  works; 
but  he  was  disinclined  to  change  from  his  old  firm, 
though  it  would  have  been  very  much  to  his  financial 
advantage  if  h^  had  done  so.  Once  he  was  left  a 
handsome  legacy,  but  finding  that  there  were  relatives 
of  the  testator  in  need  and  unprovided  for,  he  did  not 
accept  it. 

"  It  was  he  who  made  hfe  for  his  disciples  a  more 
august  thing  in  contact  with  him,  and  made  them 
capable  of  higher  efforts  and  nobler  sacrifices.     But 


204  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

even  those  who  stood  further  away  knew  as  if  by 
instinct  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  man  of  the  stuff 
of  which  saints  are  made.  They  knew  that  whoever 
else  might  sink  into  self-seeking,  or  fall  down  before 
the  golden  image  of  the  world,  that  would  he  never. 
They  knew  that  religion  was  always  the  prevailing 
and  mastering  idea  of  his  life.  He  was  one  of  those 
elect  few  to  whom  religious  cares  and  interests  were 
what  secular  cares  and  interests  are  to  most  men.  He 
was  self-controlled,  observant,  and  wise,  and  he  had 
a  homely  shrewdness  and  humour  which  were  very 
refreshing.  Mr.  Spurgeon  played  his  part  well  in  the 
practical  world,  but  his  life  was  not  there.  The  growth 
of  the  Kingdom  of  Grace  was  his  prosperity ;  the  open- 
ing of  a  new  vein  of  spiritual  life  was  his  wealth.  The 
one  road  to  his  friendship  was  a  certain  like-minded- 
ness.  This  spirituality  is  so  rare  in  men  of  great 
powers  that  it  is  invariably  the  way  to  influence. 
It  inspires  a  kind  of  awe.  Men  bow  before  it,  feel 
themselves  in  the  presence  of  the  eternal  world,  think 
wistfully  of  their  own  state,  and  are  touched  for  a 
moment  at  least  by  a  certain  sense  of  wonder  and 
regret."  ^'  It  was  not  for  nothing  that  he  was  known 
as  "  The  Governor,"  but  the  title  was  more  an  indica- 
tion of  love  than  of  authority. 

His  soul  was  seen  best  when  he  was  listening  to  some 
one  else  speaking  the  praises  of  his  Lord.  He  would 
clasp  his  hands,  catch  his  breath,  the  tears  would  fill 
his  eyes  and  overflow,  his  face  would  shine  with  a 
radiance  other  than  of  earth,  and  his  rapture  would 
communicate  itself  to  those  around.  The  speaker 
would  be  touched  with  the  contagion,  and  at  the  end 
Spurgeon  would  rise  to  announce  a  hymn  or  to  lead 
in  prayer.  At  such  times  you  saw  the  real  man,  the 
man  to  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  more  dear 


A   WORD   PORTRAIT  205 

than  all  the  universe,  whose  boast  was  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long. 

A  rhapsody  written  in  his  later  years  is  truer  of 
him  to  the  life  than  anything  else  I  know. 

"  All  my  soul  was  dry  and  dead 
Till  I  learned  that  Jesus  bled — 
Bled  and  suffered  in  my  place, 
Bearing  sin  in  matchless  grace. 

"  Then  a  drop  of  heavenly  love 
Fell  upon  me  from  above, 
And  by  secret  mystic  art 
Reached  the  centre  of  my  heart. 

"  Glad  the  story  I  recount, 
How  that  drop  became  a  fount, 
Bubbled  up  a  living  well, 
Made  my  heart  begin  to  swell. 

"  All  within  my  soul  was  praise, 
Praise  increasing  all  my  days ; 
Praise  which  could  not  silent  be. 
Floods  were  struggling  to  be  free. 


*t50* 


"  More  and  more  the  waters  grew. 
Open  ^vide  the  flood-gates  few. 
Leaping  forth  in  streams  of  song 
Flowed  my  happy  life  along. 

"  Lo,  a  river  clear  and  sweet 
Laved  my  glad,  obedient  feet ! 
Soon  it  rose  up  to  my  knees. 
And  I  praised  and  prayed  with  ease. 

"  Now  my  soul  in  praises  swims, 
Bathes  in  songs  and  psalms  and  hymns 
Plunges  down  into  the  deeps, 
All  her  powers  in  worship  steeps. 

"  Hallelujah  !     O  my  Lord, 
Torrents  from  my  heart  are  poured  ! 
I  am  carried  clean  away. 
Praising,  praising  all  the  day. 

"  In  an  ocean  of  delight, 
Praising  God  with  all  my  might, 
Self  is  drowned.     So  let  it  be. 
Only  Christ  remains  to  me." 


CHAPTER   X 

SPURCEON's    "  SERMONS  " 

1855-1917 

Great  as  was  the  influence  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
preaching,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  the  influence 
of  his  printed  sermons  was  not  greater.  The  series 
was  begun  the  year  after  he  came  to  London,  and  was 
continued  during  his  hfe  and  after  his  death.  There 
are  sixty-three  volumes  of  them  in  all,  each  containing 
from  fifty-two  to  sixty  sermons,  except  the  last 
volume,  which  is  incomplete  owing  to  war  conditions. 
If  it  is  asked  how  it  was  possible  to  print  so  many 
sermons  after  Mr.  Spurgeon's  death,  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that,  except  during  his  holidays,  there  were 
three  sermons  preached  every  week  and  only  one 
published.  From  early  years  all  were  reported,  so 
there  remained  a  great  number  of  manuscripts  avail- 
able when  the  preacher's  voice  was  silent.  The 
publication  of  the  sermons  almost  synchronises  with 
the  combined  ministry  of  father  and  son  at  the 
Tabernacle,  and  in  the  biography  of  Thomas  Spurgeon 
I  have  ventured  to  call  those  years  "  The  Spurgeon 
Era." 

The  chief  difficulty  in  appraising  the  sermons  is  the 
number  of  them.  Nobody  can  sit  down  of  set  purpose 
and  read  them  all,  and  even  the  most  regular  Spurgeon 
readers  only  know  their  own  years.  But  there  the 
volumes    are,    sixty-three    of    them,    with    perhaps 

206 


SPURGEON'S   'SERMONS'  207 

another  dozen  containing  sermons  on  connected 
subjects,  a  great  monument  of  the  fertile  heart  and 
brain  that  produced  them,  and  a  great  legacy  to  the 
Church  of  Christ  that  only  needs  working  over  to 
have  its  riches  revealed.  If,  instead  of  issuing  his 
sermons  hot  from  his  heart,  Spurgeon  had  published 
only  a  few  volumes  of  selected  discourses  containing 
the  purple  patches  scattered  so  plentifully  over  the 
whole  field,  a  great  sermonic  literature  would  have 
been  the  result,  but  the  world-wide  influence  of  the 
sermons  on  human  lives  would  have  been  missed. 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon's  power  is  diffused.  He  has  given 
us  no  masterpiece  like  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,  and 
few  will  read  enough  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  in  future 
generations  to  know  what  manner  of  man  he  was, 
even  as  few  read  Bunyan's  Sermons.  But  there  is 
spread  over  the  great  surface  of  his  innumerable 
productions  what  might  have  made  him  famous  if 
he  had  sought  fame,  and,  as  Mr.  Haweis  has  discern- 
ment enough  to  see,  the  comparatively  narrow  range 
to  which  the  Baptist  confines  himself  makes  his 
wonderful  fertility  and  freedom  unmistakably  the 
result  of  genius. 

"  The  chief  desire  amongst  Christians  is  to  gain 
an  assurance  of  God's  Love,  and  to  this  subject  Mr. 
Spurgeon  constantly  recurs,  not  discussing  it  with  a 
wave  of  the  hand,  but  taking  it  up  fully  and  elabor- 
ately. Many  excellent  sermons  act  merely  as  a 
mental  stimulus  :  they  instruct,  and  even  to  some 
extent  excite,  but  they  do  not  meet  the  deep  needs 
of  the  soul.  It  is,  we  believe,  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
chief  sources  of  power  that  he  devotes  himself  almost 
entirely  to  the  great  concern.  It  is  this  that  has  made 
his  writings  so  dearly  prized  by  the  dying.  There  is 
no  more  enviable  popularity  than  the  popularity  this 


208  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

eminent  minister  has  amongst  those  who  are  in  the 
presence  of  the  profoundest  reaUties.  When  clever- 
ness and  eloquence  have  lost  their  charms,  the  dying 
often  listen  hungrily  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  writings,  when 
nothing  else,  save  the  Word  of  God,  has  any  charm 
or  power."  ^ 

"  Said  Dr.  Pusey  once  :  *  I  love  the  evangelicals 
because  of  their  great  love  for  Christ.'  And  multi- 
tudes of  educated  Christian  men  loved  Charles 
Spurgeon,  spite  of  intellectual  differences,  for  that 
reason.  From  the  days  when  Samuel  Rutherford  so 
preached  his  Master  as  to  compel  the  Duke  of  Argyll 
once  to  cry  out,  '  Oh,  man,  keep  on  in  that  strain  ! ' 
no  one,  we  may  safely  say,  has  set  forth  the  claims 
of  Christ  to  men's  love  and  service  with  such  winning 
sweetjniess,  and  such  melting  pathos,  with  such 
eloquence  of  the  inmost  soul,  as  Charles  Spurgeon. 
It  may  be  that  the  dark  background  of  his  theology, 
to  which  the  mind  of  this  age  could  not  by  any  effort 
accommodate  itself,  threw  into  greater  relief  this  side 
of  his  teaching.  The  outside  darkness  of  unbelief 
and  irreligiousness  was,  indeed,  made  very  terrible. 
But  the  inner  world  of  spiritual  experience  was 
wondrous  fair.  And  no  human  computation  will  be 
able  to  reckon  the  number  of  weary  toilers  in  the 
working  and  lower  middle  classes  whose  narrow 
surroundings  have  been  brightened  and  idealised  by 
the  glow  from  the  realm  of  faith  to  which  he  intro- 
duced them.  It  was  a  great  thing  which  this  man 
achieved,  to  convince  multitudes  of  struggling  people, 
in  the  midst  of  a  life  which  everything  tended  to 
belittle,  that  their  character  and  career  were  a  matter 
of  infinite  concern  to  the  Power  who  made  them,  that 
they  could  not  afford  to  treat  sin  lightly,  or  to  throw 
themselves  away  as  though  they  were  of  no  account."  ^ 


<^  .^^„^„.^.^  .nC^^c^  ^t,^--.-^-— '?  '^  . 

NOTES  FOR  THE  SEBMON  "  THE  BEAUTT  OF  THE  OLIVE 
TREE." 

{Preached  April  17,   1879.) 


SPURGEON'S   'SERMONS'  209 

A  review  of  the  sermons  demands  a  volume  rather 
than  a  chapter,  and  a  great  reward  awaits  the  investi- 
gator patient  enough  to  compile  that  volume,  but 
even  without  such  guidance  as  a  volume  might  give 
they  are  invaluable.  The  wise  preacher  or  writer  on 
religious  subjects  will  do  well  if,  after  mapping  out 
his  own  course,  he  sees  "  what  Spurgeon  has  to  say 
about  it."  Sir  William  Robertson  Nicoll,  finding 
himself  short  of  books  in  his  first  Highland  parish, 
discovered  that  a  shoemaker  in  the  village  had  a  set 
of  Spurgeon's  Sermons,  and  he  set  himself  to  read 
them  all,  with  the  result  that  he  became  one  of 
Spurgeon's  warmest  admirers.  Let  not  the  reader 
be  deceived  by  their  apparent  simplicity — it  is  the  ease 
of  genius,  there  is  depth  as  well  as  clearness ;  Spurgeon 
was,  in  fact,  one  of  the  great  Doctors  of  Divinity,  he 
had  an  intuitive  knowledge  of  the  ways  of  God,  and 
of  the  needs  of  the  human  heart,  and  in  all  his  preach- 
ing his  one  object  was  to  commend  God  to  men. 
Robert  Louis  Stevenson,  in  writing  to  a  friend  in 
London,  says :  "  I  wish  you  to  get  Pioneering  in  Neiv 
Guinea.  It  is  a  missionary  book,  and  has  less  pre- 
tensions to  be  literature  than  Spurgeon's  Sermons^ 
But  even  if  Spurgeon's  Sermons  had  no  claim  to  be 
considered  as  literature,  it  would  be  wise  advice, 
"  I  wish  you  to  get  them."  A  distinguished  professor 
in  one  of  our  theological  Colleges  was  accustomed 
at  times  after  his  divinity  lectures  to  read  one  of  the 
sermons  to  his  students,  and  he  generally  introduced 
it  by  saying,  "  Now  let  us  have  some  of  Spurgeon's 
heart- warming  mixture." 

"  Honest  Hugh  Latimer,  in  the  middle  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  has  probably  more  in  common 
with  the  great  Baptist  preacher  than  any  of  his  con- 
temporaries.    It  was  surely  a  wise  remark,  and  as  it 


210  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

was  made  by  a  Jesuit  it  is  not  likely  to  be  unfairly 
favourable  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  that  no  one  really  loves 
his  religion  unless  he  is  able  to  make  a  joke  of  it. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  may,  as  Matthew  Arnold  has  said  of 
Socrates,  '  be  terribly  at  ease  in  Sion.'  But,  then,  a 
man  to  whom  the  spiritual  is  equally  realised  with 
the  material  is  not  likely  to  speak  with  bated  breath 
of  the  truths  of  religion."  ^ 

For  that  testimony  The  Daily  News  is  responsible ; 
this  from  The  Times  :  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  laid  his  founda- 
tion in  the  Bible.  His  utterances  abound  with 
Scriptural  text,  figure,  metaphor  and  allusion.  What- 
ever he  says  sends  his  hearers  to  the  sacred  record. 
But  starting  from  this  basis,  he  has  added  to  it  a 
stock  of  reading  such  as  few  men  can  show  in  their 
talk  or  in  their  writing.  He  cannot  be  accused  of  not 
being  a  man  of  the  world,  or  of  not  knowing  the  ways 
of  the  world,  for  he  reads  the  Book  and  the  book  of 
nature  too.  His  style  is  illustrated  with  almost 
pictorial  brightness.  What  remains?  The  very  tail 
of  the  matter.  He  occasionally  drops  a  phrase  to 
provoke  a  smile  from  the  soft  cheeks  of  ladies  and 
gentlemen,  and  to  make  them  think  for  the  moment 
that  they  could  say  the  thing  better.  We  are  not 
sure  that  Latimer  and  Ridley's  sermons  would  not 
jar  on  modern  refinement  quite  as  much,  but  they 
never  would  have  reformed  the  Church  of  England 
with  smooth  words  and  a  pure  classic  style."* 

The  Bishop  of  Ripon,  in  his  Cathedral,  after  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  death,  went  further  :  "It  was  once  said 
of  Hugh  Latimer  that  towards  the  end  of  his  career 
he  spoke  invariably  from  the  same  text.  Whenever 
he  spoke  he  opened  his  Bible  and  addressed  the  people 
from  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  '  Whatsoever  things  were 
written  aforetime  were  written  for  our  learning,  that 


SPURGEON'S   *  SERMONS'  211 

we,  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures, 
might  have  hope.'  The  reason  was  that  the  text 
gave  him  the  opportunity  to  speak  of  all  things  which 
were  written  in  the  past  which  he  believed  were  for 
the  learning  and  education  of  men  in  the  present. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  once  quoted  that  fact  in  Hugh  Latimer's 
life;  but  he  added  that,  were  he  to  choose  one  text 
on  which  he  would  always  be  bound  to  preach,  he 
would  chose,  '  To  know  the  love  of  Christ  that  passeth 
knowledge,  that  you  may  be  filled  unto  all  the  fulness 
of  God;'  for  there,  he  said,  his  theme  would  be 
inexhaustible."  Then  the  Bishop  added  significant 
words,  which  indicate  perhaps  the  wise  method  of 
proclaiming  the  Word  of  God  to  the  men  of  to-day. 
"  The  power  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  lay  in  this,  that  though 
from  a  critical  standpoint  he  did  not  understand  the 
Old  Testament,  yet  being  so  much  imVmed  with  the 
spiritual  conception  he  had  drawn  from  patient  and 
careful  study  of  the  Bible,  he  often  escaped  the  very 
mistakes  which  from  a  critical  standpoint  he  might 
have  fallen  into." 

He  preached  from  every  book  of  the  Bible,  from 
some  texts  several  times.  It  is  remarkable  that  the 
sermons  unpublished  at  the  time  of  his  death,  no  less 
than  the  published  sermons,  even  when  they  deal 
with  the  same  theme,  avoid  repetition.  Of  course, 
on  occasion,  when  preaching  away  from  home,  he 
would  repeat  a  sermon,  generally  the  sermon  of  the 
previous  Sabbath,  but  even  in  such  cases,  such  was 
the  productiveness  of  his  mind  that  he  would  some- 
times prefer  to  preach  an  original  sermon. 

"  What  a  storehouse  the  Bible  is,"  he  once  said  at 
a  meeting  of  the  Bible  Society,  "  since  a  man  may  con- 
tinue to  preach  from  it  for  years,  and  still  find  that 
there  is  more  to  preach  from  than  when  he  began  to 


212  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

discourse  upon  it.  What  pyramids  of  books  have 
been  written  upon  the  Bible,  and  yet  we  who  are 
students  find  no  portion  over-expounded,  but  large 
parts  which  have  been  scarcely  touched.  If  you  take 
Darling's  Cyclopaedia  and  look  at  a  text  which  one 
divine  has  preached  upon,  you  will  see  that  dozens 
of  others  have  done  the  same ;  but  there  are  hundreds 
of  texts  which  remain  like  virgin  summits,  whereon 
the  foot  of  the  preacher  has  never  trod.  I  might 
almost  say  that  the  major  part  of  the  Word  of  God 
is  still  in  that  condition  :  it  is  still  an  Eldorado 
unexplored,  a  land  whose  dust  is  gold."  "  For 
twelve  years  most  of  my  sermons  have  been  reported 
and  printed,"  he  said  to  the  students  at  New  College 
on  October  26,  1866,  "  and  yet  in  my  search  for 
something  new  I  pace  up  and  down  my  study,  em- 
barrassed with  the  abundance  of  topics,  not  knowing 
which  to  choose."  ^ 

"  While  reading  the  penny  sermons  of  Joseph  Irons, 
which  were  great  favourites  with  me,  I  conceived  in 
my  heart,"  he  says,  "  that  some  time  or  other  I 
should  have  a  Penny  Pulpit  of  my  own."  ^  His 
earliest  attempt  was  a  series  of  Waterbeach  Tracts, 
published  the  first  year  he  was  in  London.  The  next 
year,  1854,  his  sermon  preached  on  August  20  was 
published  in  The  Penny  Pulpit  (No.  2234  of  the  Series), 
and  in  September  1854,  expositions  by  Spurgeon 
were  given  in  The  Baptist  Messenger.  These  excited 
so  much  interest  that  in  1855  the  dream  of  a  separate 
publication  was  realised,  and  The  New  Park  Street 
Pulpit  was  started  on  January  7,  the  first  sermon 
being  on  the  text,  "I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not; 
therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed." 
Spurgeon  always  swam  in  deep  waters.  For  seven 
years    these    eight    page,   small-print   sermons,   con- 


SPURGEON'S   'SERMONS'  213 

tinued ;  then  the  abohtion  of  the  paper  duty  made  it 
possible  to  have  twelve  pages  and  larger  type,  and  the 
title  was  changed  to  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit, 
and  so  continued  until  the  end. 

Sermons  preached  on  Sunday  and  Thursday  evenings 
still  continued  to  appear  in  The  Penny  Pulpit,  and  as 
an  outcome  three  volumes  of  the  Pulpit  Library  were 
published,  which  are  now  very  rare.  The  first  printed 
sermon  on  the  text,  "Is  it  not  wheat  harvest  to- 
day ?  "  is  included,  and  it  is  a  wonderful  production 
for  a  young  man  of  twenty.  "  I  think  how  surprised 
some  of  God's  people  will  be,"  he  exclaims,  "  when 
they  get  to  heaven.  They  will  see  the  Master  and 
He  will  give  them  a  crown.  '  Lord,  what  is  this  crown 
for  ?  '  '  That  crown  is  because  thou  didst  give  a 
cup  of  cold  water  to  one  of  My  disciples.'  '  What,  a 
crown  for  a  cup  of  cold  water?'  'Yes,'  says  the 
Master,  '  that  is  how  I  pay  My  servants.  First  I 
give  them  grace  to  give  the  cup  of  water,  and  then, 
having  given  them  grace,  I  will  give  them  a  crown.'  " 
The  first  sermon  in  Volume  II  of  the  Pulpit  Library, 
"  Prove  Me  Now,"  was  preached  on  the  morning  of  the 
day  when  the  disaster  occurred  at  the  Surrey  Gardens 
Music  Hall  in  the  evening,  and  contains  the  almost 
prophetic  sentence,  "  See  what  God  can  do,  just 
when  a  cloud  is  falling  on  the  head  of  him  whom  God 
has  raised  up  to  preach  to  you."  In  this  volume  also 
is  "  The  Parable  of  the  Ark,"  in  which  the  deliverance 
from  the  Flood  is  cleverly  allegorised. 

Considerably  more  than  a  hundred  millions  of  the 
weekly  sermons  have  been  sold,  and  they  have  been 
reproduced  in  numberless  other  ways.  On  one  occa- 
sion the  publishers  received  an  order  for  a  million 
copies,  on  another  a  quarter  of  a  million  copies  were 
bought  to  be  distributed  in  volumes  of  twelve  or 


214  LIFE   OF  SPURGEON 

more  to  the  students  in  the  Universities,  Members  of 
Parhament,  the  Crowned  Heads  of  Europe,  and  the 
householders  in  Ireland.  So  highly  were  they  valued 
that  one  gentleman  paid  for  their  insertion  in  several 
of  the  Australian  papers  week  by  week  as  advertise- 
ments in  order  to  reach  the  people  in  the  Bush.  At 
one  time  an  enterprising  American  newspaper  syndi- 
cate cabled  the  Sunday  morning  sermon  across  the 
Atlantic,  and  continued  it  until  it  was  discovered  that 
a  rival  newspaper  had  managed  to  tap  the  wires. 
Upon  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  the  characteristic 
paragraph  :  "  The  sermons  were  not  long  telegraphed 
to  America,  so  that  our  friends  who  feared  that  the 
Sabbath  would  be  desecrated  may  feel  their  minds 
relieved.  We  are  not  sorry,  for  the  sermons  which 
we  saw  in  the  American  papers  may  have  been  ours, 
but  they  were  so  battered  and  disfigured  that  we 
would  not  have  owned  them.  In  the  process  of  trans- 
mission the  eggs  were  broken  and  the  very  life  of  them 
was  crushed.  We  much  prefer  to  revise  and  publish 
ourselves."  The  sermons  were  also  frequently  re- 
ported and  reproduced  in  the  religious  press,  and 
were  translated  into  scores  of  other  languages.  A 
special  edition  in  German  was  printed  for  the  Leipsic 
Book  Fair  of  1861.  Though  they  have  ceased  to  be 
published  week  by  week,  the  demand  for  them  still 
continues,  and  possibly  if  the  publishers  could  re- 
arrange a  selection  of  them  according  to  topics,  or 
in  Bible  order,  they  might  yet  have  a  great  mission  to 
fulfil.  At  Spurgeon's  request  I  once  made  a  selection 
of  his  sermons  on  "  The  Holy  Spirit,"  which  appeared 
to  me  worthy  to  be  put  beside  Owen  on  the  Spirit; 
but  it  involved  the  reprinting  of  the  sermons,  and  his 
publishers  postponed  the  matter. 

The  first  day  I  was  in  London  he  captured  me. 


SPURGEON'S   'SERMONS'  215 

Both  morning  and  evening  I  was  at  the  Tabernacle, 
and  I  sat  enthralled  as  he  discoursed  on  "  The  full 
soul  loatheth  an  honeycomb;  but  to  the  hungry  soul 
every  bitter  thing  is  sweet."  I  was  the  hungry  soul 
and  the  things  were  not  bitter.  And  as  from  the 
furthest  corner  of  the  top  gallery  later  in  the  day  1 
heard  him  talk  on  the  text,  "  By  this  shall  all  men 
know  that  ye  are  My  disciples,  if  ye  love  one  another," 
I  felt  I  was  part  of  a  great  family.  I  heard  him  often 
afterwards,  and  have  many  memories  of  those  golden 
days;  two  must  suffice,  both  of  the  first  sermon 
after  his  return  from  Mentone  in  different  years.  On 
the  first  occasion  he  was  in  splendid  vigour,  and  his 
subject  was,  "  I  have  yet  to  speak  on  God's  behalf." 
As  he  developed  his  message,  he  seemed  like  a  Hon 
in  his  royal  consciousness  of  strength  and  his  scorn 
of  all  opponents.  The  next  time  he  was  tender  and 
almost  pensive,  but  never  have  I  known  more  what 
"  unction  "  means  than  then  in  his  subject,  "  Suppos- 
ing Him  to  be  the  Gardener." 

Two  collections  representative  of  his  ministry  have 
been  made,  one  by  himself  in  the  "  Preachers  of  the 
Age "  Series  ~  he  chose  the  title.  Messages  to  the 
Multitude,  the  month  he  died;  and  another  by  Sir 
William  Robertson  Nicoll  for  a  volume  containing 
twenty-four  sermons,  published  by  Thomas  Nelson 
&  Sons.  Both  of  them  contain  the  sermon,  "  Sup- 
posing Him  to  be  the  Gardener,"  and  both  another 
which  roused  a  great  interest  at  the  time,  and  was 
several  times  redelivered — "  There  go  the  Ships." 

"  Roughly  the  volumes  may  be  divided  into  three 
classes,"  the  Editor  of  the  second  compilation  says. 
"  There  are  those  that  represent  the  period  of  extreme 
youth.  Then  there  is  the  period  of  his  greatest 
powers,  running  perhaps   up  to   1876,     The  glow  is 


216  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

unabated;  the  force,  the  grip,  the  strenuousness  of 
appeal  he  himself  never  rivalled.  Then  come  the 
later  sermons.  They  are  more  full,  perhaps,  than 
their  predecessors  of  mellow  wisdom,  of  the  wisdom 
of  a  deeply  exercised  spirit,  and  they  are  perhaps 
more  touched  with  a  growing  gloom.  For  Spurgeon 
in  his  later  days  believed  that  he  saw  around  him 
and  before  him  a  decay  of  faith."  It  was  the  sermons 
in  the  middle  period  that  appealed  most  strongly  to 
Dr.  James  Denney.  He  was  inclined,  like  some 
others,  to  despise  Spurgeon,  but  by  his  wife's  influence 
was  induced  to  read  him,  with  the  result  that  "  it 
was  Spurgeon,  perhaps,  as  much  as  any  one,  who  led 
him  to  the  great  decision  of  his  life — the  decision  to 
preach  Christ  our  righteousness."  ' 

Here  a  story  by  my  former  comrade  in  mission 
service,  Manton  Smith,  a  story  at  which  Spurgeon 
was  greatly  amused,  may  be  interpolated.  One 
Monday  morning  he  started  froiu  Burnham,  in  Essex, 
to  get  to  Creeksea  Ferry,  in  order  to  catch  the  omnibus 
to  Southend.  When  he  crossed  the  Ferry  he  found 
that  the  omnibus  had  gone,  so  he  had  a  walk  of 
twelve  miles  before  him.  It  was  very  early  in  the 
morning.  Soon  he  overtook  an  old  man  on  the  road 
and  they  fell  a-talking.  The  old  man,  in  answer  to 
a  question,  told  him  that  he  had  a  Bible,  but  it  was  not 
much  use  to  him  nowadays,  for  the  print  was  so  small, 
but  he  said,  "  I'se  got  three  old  trac's,  and  they  is 
beautiful,  they  is;  they's  a  kind  o'  sort  o'  sermon- 
trac's,  sir."  "Where  did  you  get  them?"  said  my 
friend.  "  Why,  sir,  from  the  werry  village  where 
I  am  going  to  this  morning,  from  a  barber  there.  I 
called  in  one  day  when  I  was  over  this  way,  and  he 
gave  me  them,  and  real  nice  they  are  too.  I  reads 
one  and  the  t'other,  and  then  the  t'other,  and  then 


SPURGEON'S   'SERMONS'  217 

I  begins  again.  They  are  written  by  a  Mr.  Spurgeon  : 
I  don't  know  if  you  have  ever  heard  of  him."  He  was 
assured,  and  it  seemed  a  pity  that  he  could  not  have 
more  of  the  tracts,  so  a  sixpence  was  given  him  and  he 
was  advised  to  ask  for  one  called  "  There  go  the 
Ships,"  and  to  get  it  if  he  could;  as  he  lived  at  the 
seaside  it  would  be  sure  to  interest  him.  When 
Manton  Smith  told  the  story  at  the  Tabernacle  Mr. 
Spurgeon  laughed  until  he  cried.  "  Is  it  summat 
about  ships,  sir?  "  "Yes,  it  is  all  about  ships,  and 
it  will  interest  you  very  much,  I  am  sure."  "  I  should 
hke  to  get  that,"  he  said;  "  I'll  be  sure  to  ask  him. 
Let's  see — what  do  you  say  they  call  it?  "  "  '  There 
go  the  Ships  ' ;  now  don't  forget !  "  "  No,  I  won't 
forget.  What  did  you  say  it  was?"  Before  they 
parted  he  asked  the  title  again,  and  as  it  was  evident 
that  the  old  man's  memory  was  somewhat  treacherous, 
the  name  was  written  on  a  slip  of  paper  for  him,  and 
off  he  went  to  get  some  more  "  kind  o'  sort  o'  sermon- 
trac's."  8 

A  third  volume  of  sermons,  entitled  Grace  Trium- 
phant, was  issued  by  the  Religious  Tract  Society. 
None  of  them  appears  anywhere  else.  I  had  the 
privilege  of  editing  it.  The  proof-sheets  were  read 
among  the  Alps,  and  the  sermons  are  Alpine  in 
thought  and  diction. 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  method  of  preparing  his  sermons  is 
not  to  be  recommended  to  others  who  are  without 
his  gifts.  Generally  he  had  a  number  of  friends  to 
see  him  on  Saturday  afternoons,  and  after  tea  he  would 
frequently  conduct  family  worship  with  them.  They 
all  understood  that  they  must  leave  at  seven  o'clock 
sharp.  Then,  as  he  used  to  say,  he  began  to  get  some 
food  for  his  sheep.  Sometimes  the  Sunday  morning 
sermon  came  easily,  and  in  an  hour  or  two  he  had 


218  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

completed  his  preparation,  having  his  notes  written 
on  half  a  sheet  of  ordinary  notepaper,  possibly  over- 
flowing to  the  other  side  of  the  sheet.  The  fact  was 
that  he  believed  in  preparing  himself  rather  than  the 
sermon,  and,  as  he  wrote  so  much,  his  power  of 
accurate  expression  was  exceptional.  The  Sunday 
evening  sermon  was  generally  prepared  on  Sunday 
afternoon.  He  was  a  rapid  worker,  his  thoughts 
had  the  speed  and  the  vividness  of  lightning.  That 
was  one  reason  why  he  never  spent  long  in  private 
prayer — he  said  to  me  more  than  once  that  he  thought 
of  twenty  things  in  five  minutes.  He  went  to  the 
pulpit  with  the  assurance  that  he  would  be  able  to 
clothe  his  ideas  appropriately  at  the  moment,  and 
many  of  his  illustrations  came  to  him  during  the 
delivery  of  the  sermon. 

The  early  sermons  were  but  slightly  revised,  but 
the  preacher  became  more  exacting  with  himself  as 
the  years  advanced.  It  was  his  custom  to  begin  the 
revision  of  his  Sunday  morning's  discourse  early  on 
Monday.  The  words  used  in  speech  have  not  the 
same  force  in  type,  and  a  sermon  to  be  read  with  the 
same  acceptance  as  it  was  heard  must  be  pruned  and 
amplified,  balanced  and  arranged.  It  would  astonish 
many  of  his  readers  to  know  what  care  he  bestowed 
on  his  sermons.  By  constant  practice  he  was  able 
on  Sunday  mornings  to  preach  long  enough  to  fill 
just  the  twelve  necessary  pages,  but  at  other  times 
than  Sunday  mornings  sometimes  he  preached  longer, 
and  sometimes  shorter.  During  his  long  illness  and 
the  subsequent  convalescence  before  his  death,  it 
was  given  to  me  to  revise  his  sermons,  and  I  was 
gradually  emboldened  to  make  large  alterations  in 
them,  to  develop  a  seven-page  sermon  into  twelve 
pages,  to  take  a  piece  from  a  long  sermon  and  put  it 


SPURGEON'S   'SERMONS'  219 

in  a  short  one,  and  to  add  illustrative  paragraphs 
here  and  there.  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself,  when  he 
was  able  to  scan  the  sermons  of  these  ten  months,  was 
both  interested  and  baffled  when  he  tried  to  separate 
his  own  words  from  those  of  his  editor. 

The  sermon  to  which  greatest  testimony  has  been 
borne  of  converting  power  was  preached  in  the 
revival  year,  1859.  The  text  was  "  Compel  them  to 
come  in."  It  is  said  that  some  hmidreds  afterwards 
joined  the  Church  as  a  result  of  its  influence,  and  from 
the  ends  of  the  earth  scores  of  others  have  declared 
that  it  was  the  means  of  their  salvation.  Two  other 
sermons  preached  in  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall 
were  specially  blessed.  One  entitled  "  Looking  unto 
Jesus,"  is,  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  confessed,  "  one 
of  the  most  simple  of  the  series,  and  likely  to  be  over- 
looked by  those  who  are  seeking  anything  original 
and  striking,"  but  it  is  evidently  a  fit  vehicle  for  God's 
Spirit,  for  in  its  printed  form  it  has  led  many  to  the 
Saviour,  as  it  did  when  it  was  preached.  The  other, 
"  The  Shameful  Sufferer,"  has  also  had  abundant 
testimony  borne  to  its  usefulness.  In  1861  a  sermon 
on  "  Simeon,"  twenty-four  pages  long,  was  printed 
in  gold,  and  sold  for  a  shilling,  in  aid  of  the  building 
of  the  Tabernacle.  Has  any  other  sermon  been 
deemed  worthy  of  golden  type? 

The  sermons  numbered  500,  1000  and  1500  are 
all  of  them  simple  statements  of  the  Gospel,  and  have 
been  largely  used  in  bringing  people  to  Christ.  The 
same  may  be  said  of  No.  2000,  issued  after  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  death.  Interesting  meetings  were  held 
to  celebrate  the  issue  of  the  first  three,  and  thank- 
offerings  were  given  on  behalf  of  the  College,  that 
other  men  might  be  trained  to  preach  the  same 
Gospel.     It   is    singular   that   the   sermon   chosen    a 


220  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

month  before  for  publication  during  the  week  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  funeral  was  on  "  David  serving  his  Genera- 
tion by  the  Will  of  God."     It  had  an  immense  sale. 

A  distinguished  minister  has  given  it  as  his  judg- 
ment that  "  the  sermon  entitled  '  Things  that  Accom- 
pany Salvation '  is  the  most  eloquent,  and  exhibits 
greater  mental  power  than  any  Mr.  Spurgeon  ever 
delivered."  It  is  certainly  a  most  picturesque  dis- 
course, but  it  can,  I  think,  be  matched  by  others. 
The  leap-year  sermon  on  February  29,  1880,  which 
was  a  Sunday,  aroused  much  attention.  The  text 
was  "  One  born  out  of  due  time." 

There  was  a  remarkable  experience  in  connection 
with  the  sermon  No.  74,  in  the  second  volume  of  The 
New  Park  Street  Pulpit.  On  the  Saturday  evening 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  mind  was  directed  to  the  text,  "  Thy 
people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  Thy  power," 
but  the  sermon  wovild  not  come,  although  he  worked 
late.  Worn  and  dispirited  he  appealed  to  Mrs. 
Spurgeon.  She  advised  him  to  go  to  rest,  and 
promised  to  wake  him  early  in  the  morning  that  he 
might  have  time  enough  then  to  prepare.  He  had 
scarcely  got  to  sleep  before  he  began  to  talk  in  his 
sleep  and  to  preach  in  his  talk  a  sermon  on  the  text. 
Mrs.  Spurgeon  noted  the  points  as  he  gave  them,  and, 
overjoyed,  determined  to  keep  awake  repeating  them. 
But  at  length  she  fell  asleep  too,  and  neither  husband 
nor  wife  woke  until  the  usual  hour.  With  a  start 
he  rose,  wondering  what  he  should  do,  when  his  wife 
quieted  him  by  telling  him  what  he  had  preached  in 
his  sleep.  "  Why,  that's  just  what  I  wanted !  " 
he  exclaimed.  "It  is  wonderful !  "  he  kept  saying, 
and  at  the  appointed  hour  he  stood  in  his  pulpit  and 
preached  it,  though  he  gave  the  people  no  hint  that 
he  was  preaching  it  for  the  second  time, 


SPURGEON'S   'SERMONS'  221 

An  experience  of  quite  a  different  kind  came  to 
him  after  a  week  of  great  depression.  He  felt  that 
the  only  text  he  could  take  was  "  My  God,  My  God, 
why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?"  and  he  poured  out 
his  soul's  bitterness  as  he  spoke  to  the  people.  At 
the  close  of  the  service  there  came  to  him  a  man  on 
the  verge  of  despair,  who  began  to  hope  because 
there  seemed  to  be  one  man  at  least  who  under- 
stood him,  and  from  that  day  he  walked  in  the 
sunlight,  bearing  testimony  years  afterwards  that  the 
change  was  abiding.  The  preacher  at  once  understood 
his  own  experience,  and  counted  his  week's  eclipse  of 
joy  a  small  price  to  pay  for  the  privilege  of  leading 
another  soul  back  from  the  horror  of  thick  darkness. 

When  Bishop  Welldon  went  as  a  boy  to  Germany, 
his  grandmother,  much  to  his  benefit,  gave  him  some 
volumes  of  Spurgeon's  Sermons  as  a  stay  to  his  faith. 
A  newspaper  correspondent  during  the  South  African 
War  wrote  that  in  passing  through  Cape  Colony  he 
generally  found  in  Boer  households  a  piano  and  a 
copy  of  Spurgeon's  Sermons  in  Dutch;  and  Dr. 
Andrew  Thomson  declares  that  he  has  "  seen 
Spurgeon's  Sermons  again  and  again  in  Christian 
homes  in  the  continent  of  Europe,  and  not  least  in 
the  manses  and  chalets  of  the  Waldenses  among  the 
Cottian  Alps." 

David  Livingstone  carried  through  Africa  the 
Sermon  "Accidents,  not  Punishments,"  No.  408; 
it  was  returned  at  length  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  with  a  note 
along  the  top  "  Very  good.  D.  L.,"  and  was  treasured 
by  the  preacher.  Alongside  Livingstone's  pathetic 
copy  there  lay  in  his  house  a  copy  of  the  French 
edition  of  the  same  sermon,  printed  from  lithographic 
plates  on  writing  paper,  in  order  that  it  might  look 
like  manuscript  as  it  was  read  from  the  pulpit. 


222  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

In  Serbia  for  some  time  the  priests  did  not  preach, 
but  the  Bishop  issued  an  order  that  preaching  was 
to  begin  on  a  certain  day,  and  the  Minister  of  Finance, 
to  make  it  possible,  translated  three  of  Spurgeon's 
sermons  and  sent  them  to  six  hundred  and  fifty 
priests;  so  on  the  particular  Sunday  in  which  they 
were  called  to  preach  they  were  equipped  for  the  task. 
It  would  be  interesting  to  know  what  happened 
afterwards.  In  Russia  the  sermons  were  frequently 
issued  "  by  authority." 

"  I  am  aware  that  my  preaching  repels  many,"  he 
said.  "  If  a  man  does  not  believe  in  the  inspiration 
of  the  Bible,  for  instance,  he  may  come  and  hear  me 
once,  and  if  he  comes  and  hears  me  no  more  that  is 
his  act,  not  mine.  My  doctrine  has  no  attraction  for 
the  man,  but  I  cannot  change  my  doctrine  to  suit 
him."  George  Eliot  in  scorn  wrote  of  him  :  "  This 
Essex  man  drove  bullock  wagons  through  ecclesiastical 
aisles;  his  pulpit  gown  was  a  smock-frock."  But 
the  seal  of  God  was  on  his  ministry  all  through.  A 
man  once  came  to  take  a  sitting  at  the  Tabernacle, 
and  hesitatingly  said  to  its  Pastor,  "  I  may  not  come 
up  to  all  that  you  expect  of  me,  for  I  have  heard 
that  if  I  take  a  sitting  here  you  will  expect  me  to  be 
converted,  and  I  cannot  guarantee  that."  "  I  do 
not  want  you  to  guarantee  it,"  was  the  reply;  "I 
do  not  mean  the  word  '  expect '  in  that  sense  at  all ; 
but  I  do  hope  it  will  be  so."  "  Oh,"  he  said,  "  and 
so  do  I ;  I  am  going  to  take  a  sitting  with  that  very 
view."  "  And  it  was  so,"  adds  Spurgeon,  "  of  course 
it  was  so."  ^  Many  a  time  he  uttered  his  behef  that 
there  was  not  a  seat  in  the  Tabernacle  but  somebody 
had  been  converted  on  it. 

He  preached  for  conversions,  and  without  conver- 
sions there  was  no  welcome  to  the  Church.   A  man  once 


SPURGEON'S   'SERMONS'  223 

came  offering  £7000  to  any  object  connected  with  the 
Tabernacle  on  condition  that  he  might  be  accepted  as  a 
member.  Astonished  at  the  refusal  which  was  kindly 
given  to  him,  he  pressed  his  claim.  "  No,"  said  Mr. 
Spurgeon,  "  nor  if  you  offered  me  seventy  times  seven 
thousand  pounds."  Years  afterwards  he  returned  in 
chastened  mood  to  thank  Spurgeon  for  his  rejection, 
and  was  then  received  as  a  simple  believer  in  Christ 
Jesus. 

When  Mr.  Gladstone  visited  the  Tabernacle  on 
January  8,  1882,  the  preacher  gave  one  of  his  simplest 
Gospel  sermons  on  the  text  "  Who  touched  My 
clothes?"  The  friendship  between  the  two  men 
was  not  in  the  least  affected  by  Mr.  Spurgeon's  strong 
opposition  to  the  first  Home  Rule  Bill. 

Very  seldom  he  preached  on  public  affairs,  but  on  a 
few  special  occasions  he  did  so  with  effect.  His 
sermon  on  the  Crimean  War,  entitled,  "  Healing  for  the 
Wounded,"  had  a  prodigious  sale,  and  contributed 
materially  to  calm  the  public  mind  in  the  darkest 
moments  of  the  Siege  of  Sevastopol.  A  notable 
sermon  during  the  cholera  visitation  in  1866  was 
preached  on  August  12  of  that  year  from  Amos  iii. 
3-6.  In  1862,  when  a  collection  was  taken  for  the 
sufferers  from  the  disaster  at  the  Hartley  Colleries, 
an  effective  sermon  had  as  its  text,  "  If  a  man  die, 
shall  he  live  again?"  The  death  of  the  Prince 
Consort  called  forth  another  sermon  which  was  widely 
appreciated.  "  Londoners  will  remember  the  way  in 
which  they  were  moved  by  the  loss  of  many  lives  in 
the  sinking  of  the  Princess  Alice,  a  pleasure  steamer 
which  went  down  in  the  Thames.  The  sermon 
preached  by  Spurgeon  at  the  time  served  to  give  the 
disaster  a  vividness  of  spiritual  meaning  which 
affected    many."     The    text    on    the    occasion    was, 


224  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  He  sent  from  above ;  He  drew  me  out  of  many 
waters."  ^^ 

The  record  of  blessing  on  the  printed  sermons  is 
apt  to  grow  gloriously  monotonous.  A  woman  whose 
husband  had  fled  the  country  consulted  the  preacher, 
and  after  he  had  prayed  with  her,  he  dared  to  tell  her 
that  her  husband  would  be  converted,  and  yet  be  a 
member  of  the  Tabernacle  Church.  About  that  time  on 
board  ship  the  husband  stumbled  on  one  of  the  sermons, 
became  a  changed  man,  and  a!  few  months  later  was 
in  triumph  introduced  by  his  wife  to  Mr.  Spurgeon. 

On  a  ship  coasting  to  Oregon  some  one  produced  a 
volume  of  the  Sermons,  and  after  some  pressure 
induced  one  of  the  passengers  to  read  a  sermon  aloud. 
Nearly  all  the  rest  of  the  passengers,  and  as  many  of 
the  crew  as  were  at  liberty,  gathered  round  the  reader. 
Some  time  afterwards  at  San  Francisco  he  was 
accosted  by  a  man  who  declared  that  he  had  heard 
him  preach.  "  I  am  not  a  preacher,  my  friend," 
he  said.  Then  it  turned  out  that  he  had  heard  the 
Spurgeon  sermon  read,  and  the  sailor  added,  "  I  never 
forgot  that  sermon  :  it  made  me  feel  that  I  was  a 
sinner,  and  I  have  found  Christ,  and  I  am  so  glad  to 
see  you  again." 

In  a  South  American  city  there  was  an  Englishman 
confined  for  life  in  the  prison.  A  fellow-countryman 
visited  him  and  discovered  that  some  years  before 
another  Englishman  had  called  upon  him  in  a  similar 
manner,  and  left  behind  him  two  English  novels,  but 
between  the  leaves  of  one  of  the  novels  was  a  sermon 
of  Spurgeon's  entitled  "  Salvation  to  the  Uttermost." 
It  referred  to  the  murderer  Palmer,  and  gave  the 
prisoner  such  hope  in  Christ  that,  though  he  never 
expected  to  be  hberated,  he  was  able  to  rejoice  in  his 
Saviour, 


SPURGEON'S   'SERMONS'  225 

In  an  assembly  at  Chicago  a  plea  was  made  for  a 
missionary  in  the  Far  West,  on  the  ground  that  through 
the  reading  of  Spurgeon's  Sermons  no  less  than  two 
hundred  people  had  been  converted  there.  A  woman 
in  Scotland  tried  to  burn  her  Bible  and  a  copy  of  one 
of  the  Sermons  ;  twice  it  dropped  out  of  the  fire, 
the  second  time  half-consumed,  and,  her  curiosity 
excited,  she  read  the  fragment  and  was  converted 
through  it.  A  man  keeping  sheep  in  the  Bush  near 
Ballarat  picked  up  a  sheet  of  a  newspaper,  one  of 
those  in  which  the  sermons  were  inserted  as  advertise- 
ments; had  it  been  in  sermon  form  he  declared  he 
would  not  have  read  it,  but  seeing  it  in  the  news- 
paper, he  became  enlightened  and  changed.  Only 
a  month  ago  I  travelled  with  a  man  who  in  his  youth 
had  been  engaged  in  a  printing  office.  One  day  he 
picked  from  the  waste-paper  basket  a  crumpled  paper, 
which  turned  out  to  be  a  Spurgeon  sermon  on  the 
Atonement,  and  it  opened  to  him  the  way  of  life  and 
led  him  to  an  honourable  Christian  career. 

In  describing  a  service  at  the  temporary  Hall 
erected  for  Mr.  Moody  at  Bow  Road  on  one  of  his 
visits  to  London,  a  reporter  says  of  the  evening  when 
Mr.  Spurgeon  preached,  his  text  being,  "  The  poor 
committeth  himself  unto  Thee  "  :  "  We  have  attended 
pretty  regularly  the  services  of  Moody  and  Sankey, 
but  were  quite  unprepared  to  find  such  a  surging 
crowd  of  people  outside  the  barriers  after  the  an- 
nouncement that  the  Hall  was  full."  Carey  Bonner, 
who  as  a  young  man  was  present  that  evening,  speaks 
of  it  as  the  turning-point  in  his  life.^^ 

Of  course  there  are  not  wanting  humorous  incidents 
in  cornection  with  the  sermons.  One  of  them  was 
so  blessed  to  a  lady  that  she  bought  twenty  copies  of 
it  and  had  them  bound  in  a  volume;  and  in  Holland 

Q 


226  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

there  was  a  person  who  read  the  sermons  with  pleasure 
until  he  was  told  that  Spurgeon  was  a  carnal  and 
worldly  man  who  wore  a  moustache,  and  then  he 
was  not  able  to  read  them  any  longer. 

Ian  Maclaren's  story  of  the  Scotch  wife  who  gave 
the  parting  injunction  to  her  husband  going  to  town, 
"  Dinna  forget  Spurgeon,"  is  memorable,  as  his  own 
testimony  is  like  that  of  thousands  of  others,  "  I 
cannot  forget." 


CHAPTER   XI 


"  spurgeon's  college 


Mr.  Spurgeon  spoke  of  his  College  as  "  his  first- 
born and  best  beloved."  ''  This  is  my  life's  work, 
to  which  I  believe  God  has  called  me,"  he  said  at 
another  time,  "  and  therefore  I  must  do  it.  To  preach 
the  Gospel  myself,  and  to  train  others  to  do  it,  is  my 
life's  object  and  aim."  It  has  often  been  debated 
whether  in  the  name  he  gave  his  College  the  apostrophe 
should  come  before  the  final  "  s  "  or  after  it;  whether 
he  intended  it  to  be  "  The  Pastor's  College  "  or  "  The 
Pastors'  College  " ;  the  College  appertaining  to  the 
Pastor,  or  the  College  for  the  training  of  pastors. 
Doubtless  it  was  the  first,  the  personal  tie  was  its 
chief  distinction.  The  College  centred  in  Spurgeon; 
his  helpers  did  well  in  the  training  of  the  men,  but 
he  was  the  life  and  inspiration  of  it  all.  It  was  not 
the  Tabernacle  College,  much  less  the  Metropolitan 
College,  as  it  is  now  named  in  The  Baptist  Handbook. 
It  was  Spurgeon's  own.  It  is  still  in  existence,  and 
doing  excellent  work  along  Spurgeon's  lines,  but  it 
is  idle  to  say  that  it  is  just  the  same.  It  is  no  longer 
the  Pastor's — Spurgeon  is  not  there;  the  apostrophe 
is  now  shifted  to  the  end  of  the  word. 

Spurgeon  introduced  a  new  directness  in  preaching, 
and  he  communicated  it  to  his  students.  He  taught 
them  to  speak  plainly  and  to  articulate  clearly.  Dr. 
Binney  had  prepared  the  way;  he  followed,  and 
attracted  many  others  to  his  standard.     Before  his 

227 


228  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

day  Dr.  Vaughan  tells  us  "  the  great  object  of  educated 
preachers  has  been  to  acquit  themselves  learnedly, 
or  to  acquit  themselves  elegantly."  ^  Carlyle  said 
that  "  the  most  enthusiastic  Evangelists  did  not 
preach  a  gospel,  but  keep  describing  how  it  should 
and  might  be  preached." 

"  Suddenly  a  change  sprang  up,"  said  a  great 
London  paper,  "  numbers  of  young  men,  inspired  by 
the  teaching  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  went  out  into  the 
villages  and  hamlets,  preaching  a  crusade  against 
indifference.  Eyed  contemptuously  by  the  dignitaries 
of  the  Church,  and  coldly  by  the  leaders  of  Dissent, 
they  were  yet  warmly  received  by  the  people  to  whom 
they  appealed.  The  preachers  were  '  hot  gospellers,' 
it  is  true,  but  they  spoke  the  language  of  the  heart. 
The  pathos  of  the  unlettered  sermons,  the  wild  melody 
of  the  tunes  they  taught  the  people,  their  palpable 
sincerity,  their  undying  zeal,  soon  attracted  the 
villagers  in  throngs,  and  excited  everywhere  curiosity 
on  the  part  of  those — Churchmen  and  Dissenters  alike 
— who  considered  themselves  as  the  regular  depositories 
of  the  Gospel.  The  movement  spread ;  young  men, 
hearing  of  the  success  which  had  already  attended 
those  who  had  first  taken  the  field,  went  out  in  shoals ; 
and  there  was  very  soon  not  a  village  but  had  its 
local  preacher,  or  a  hamlet  that  could  not  boast  its 
tiny  meeting-house. 

"  Fired  by  the  example  of  the  peripatetic  preachers 
and  of  the  young  disciples  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  who, 
proceeding  from  his  College,  have  baptised  right  and 
left  the  converts  to  their  views,  the  old-fashioned 
Nonconformist  minister  has  roused  himself  to  greater 
activity,  and  bestirred  himself  to  maintain  the  position 
that  was,  for  the  moment,  imperilled."  ^ 

It    all    began    quite    naturally.     A    young    man— 


*SPURGEON'S   COLLEGE'  229 

Thomas  William  Medhm'st— was  converted  by  Spur- 
geon's  ministry,  and  at  once  began  to  preach.  Through 
his  preaching  two  members  were  added  to  New  Park 
Street  Chapel,  and  this  led  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  suggest 
that  he  should  prepare  himself  for  pastoral  work. 
Accordingly,  in  July  1855,  he  was  sent  to  a  Collegiate 
School  at  Bexley  Heath.  Once  a  week  he  spent 
several  hours  with  Spurgeon,  and  on  March  21,  1857, 
he  took  up  residence  with  the  Rev.  George  Rogers  of 
Albany  Road,  Camberwell,  a  Congregational  minister, 
who  afterwards  became  the  Principal  of  the  Pastor's 
College. 

On  September  22,  1855,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  a  letter 
to  him  in  which  occurs  the  following  prophetic 
sentence  :  "  I  have  been  thinking  that  when  you 
are  gone  out  into  the  vineyard,  I  must  find  another 
to  be  my  dearly  loved  Timothy,  just  as  you  are." 

Soon  after  his  studies  started  the  first  student 
became  temporary  pastor  of  a  church  at  Kingston- 
on-Thames,  Mr.  Spurgeon  arranging  that,  in  addition 
to  the  amount  Medhurst  was  receiving  for  his  services, 
he  should  be  paid  what  was  being  expended  on  his 
tuition  at  Bexley  Heath.  At  the  end  of  the  first 
quarter  this  money  was  offered  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  to 
the  student,  with  the  remark  that  the  deacons  would 
not  have  given  that  extra  if  it  had  not  been  put  in 
that  way  to  them.  Medhurst  would  not  take  the 
money,  so  the  second  student  was  installed. 

"  The  work  did  not  begin  out  of  any  scheme,"  Mr. 
Spurgeon  said,  "  it  grew  out  of  necessity."  The 
importance  he  attached  to  adequate  training  for  the 
ministry  may  be  judged  by  the  sacrifices  he  made 
to  secure  it.  "  When  we  think  of  a  young  man  who 
had  recently  married,  who  was  still  under  twenty- 
three  years  of  age,  devoting  a  main  part  of  his  naeans 


230  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

to  such  service,  his  wife  in  the  meantime  practising 
the  most  rigorous  economy  in  the  household  in  order 
to  enable  him  to  do  it,  we  shall  not  doubt  his 
enthusiasm."  ^ 

It  was  said  of  him  at  the  time,  "  He  is  not  by  any 
means  the  foe  of  learning,  but  he  is  more  the  friend 
of  souls,"  and  it  was  this  love  for  the  souls  of  men 
that  he  sought  by  word  and  example  to  instil  into 
his  disciples.  He  said  to  his  own  students  often  what 
he  once  said  to  those  at  Cheshunt  College  :  "  You  are 
preparing  for  the  ministry,  but  do  not  wait  till  you 
have  entered  it — you  may  never  live  to  do  that.  Win 
your  highest  honour,  secure  your  best  diploma  now. 
Begin  with  speed,  with  fire,  with  learning,  and  live 
to  save  men  now."  *  I  sought  to  follow  his  advice 
and  preached  with  some  frequency  while  I  was  in 
College.  When  objection  was  taken  to  this  course, 
Spurgeon  one  day  said  to  me  that  that  was  just  what 
he  himself  had  done ;  what  he  learned  during  the  day 
he  preached  in  the  evening,  and  those  who  poured 
cold  water  on  my  efforts  were  little  aware  that  he  was 
pouring  on  oil. 

The  breadth  of  his  sympathy  may  be  inferred  from 
the  fact  that  he  had  a  Paedo-Baptist  as  Principal — 
and  many  a  friendly  tirade  those  two  have  had  on 
the  subject  of  baptism;  his  adherence  to  principle 
gauged  by  the  crest  he  chose  for  the  College,  a  hand 
grasping  a  cross,  with  the  motto  "  Et  teneo,  et 
teneor." 

The  number  of  students  grew  apace.  In  1861  he 
had  twenty,  the  next  year  thirty-nine,  the  year 
following  sixty-six,  and  in  some  subsequent  years 
there  were  more  than  a  hundred.  Besides  the  College 
men,  evening  classes  were  initiated  for  those  in 
business,  and  these  were  attended  by  numbers  varying 


'SPURGEON'S   COLLEGE'  231 

from  a  hundred  to  two  hundred,  the  income  of  the 
College  rising  in  1863  to  £4,400.  Sometimes  funds 
were  low.  On  one  occasion  Mr.  Spurgeon  offered  to 
sell  his  carriage  and  horses  to  sustain  the  effort,  but 
the  College  commanded  increasing  confidence,  so  that 
in  1866  it  had  a  third  of  the  students  in  the  nine  Baptist 
Colleges  in  the  kingdom  and  a  third  of  the  income. 

It  was,  of  course,  objected  that  too  many  men  were 
being  turned  out,  and  that  many  of  them  were  of 
inferior  quality,  to  which  the  President  responded 
that  "  the  muffs  are  the  men  who  will  preach ;  if  you 
do  not  educate  them  they  will  be  worse  than  ever  " ; 
and  he  was  quite  content  if  he  could  get  one  first-class 
man  out  of  every  eight.  The  result  has  been  that 
many  of  the  most  useful  and  distinguished  men  of 
his  denomination  have  been  Spurgeon's  men.  There 
have  only  been  two  students  received  into  the  College 
who  were  not  Baptists.  At  his  death  in  1892,  nearly 
nine  hundred  men  had  been  trained  for  the  ministry. 

They  came  to  him  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom — 
one  walked  all  the  way  from  the  Highlands  of  Scotland 
—and  gradually  they  arrived  from  all  parts  of  the 
world.  On  one  occasion  there  were  two  young  men 
applicants  for  the  College,  and  he  put  the  same 
questions  to  both  as  to  the  other  man's  qualifications 
and  merits,  on  the  supposition  that  he  had  but  one 
place  to  offer.  In  each  case  the  man  was  so  disin- 
terested that  he  praised  the  other,  and  said  that  he 
ought  to  have  the  preference,  and  Spurgeon  was  so 
pleased  with  their  conduct  in  recognising  the  merits 
of  the  other  that  he  decided  to  take  both. 

But  wherever  the  men  came  from,  it  was  clearly 
understood  that  the  College  did  not  exist  to  make 
ministers,  but  to  train  them.  Unless  a  man  could 
show  some  evidence  that  he  was  called  to  preach,  and 


232  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

had  already  proved  that  he  was  able  to  fulfil  the 
calling,  there  was  no  welcome  for  him,  however  great 
his  gifts  in  other  directions;  but  if  he  commended 
himself  as  a  preacher,  there  was  no  barrier,  however 
deficient  he  was  in  learning  or  in  station.  This  meant, 
of  course,  a  graduation  in  the  College  classes,  for  some 
students  needed  to  acquire  the  rudiments  of  English, 
and  it  implied  also  a  lowering  of  the  average  of 
scholarship.  But  it  raised  up  a  race  of  pulpit  men, 
and  not  a  few  of  Spurgeon's  students  gathered  crowds 
round  them,  filled  empty  places  of  worship,  built  new 
ones,  and  found  their  way  into  the  leading  churches 
of  their  own  denomination.  Some  of  them  occupy 
prominent  places  amongst  the  Baptists  of  to-day. 

When  the  Tabernacle  was  built  the  College  classes 
were  held  in  rooms  underneath  it,  but  as  the  numbers 
increased  a  separate  building  became  necessary,  and 
the  College  block  was  erected  at  the  rear  of  the 
Tabernacle  on  freehold  land  purchased  from  the 
Ecclesiastical  Commissioners.  It  had  once  been  the 
rectory  garden,  and  Spurgeon  declared  that  he  intended 
to  grow  dissenters  in  it  instead  of  cabbages.  The 
foundation  stone  was  laid  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself 
on  October  14,  1873,  and  the  College  was  opened  by 
a  series  of  special  invitation  meetings  during  September 
1874.  The  building  and  furnishing  cost  over  £15,000, 
and  in  course  of  time  funds  were  accumulated  which 
might,  if  occasion  required,  be  used  to  wind  up  the 
Institution,  and  meanwhile  could  be  lent  out  to  help 
in  the  building  of  chapels.  The  premises  also  serve 
admirably  for  part  of  the  Sunday  School. 

From  the  beginning  the  ultimate  object  of  the 
College  was  the  conversion  of  the  people.  The  first 
student,  Mr.  Medhurst,  once  came  complaining  that 
he   had   been   preaching   for   three   months   without 


'SPURGEON'S   COLLEGE'  233 

knowing  of  a  single  soul  having  been  converted. 
"  Why,"  said  Spurgeon,  "  you  don't  expect  conver- 
sions every  time  you  open  your  mouth,  do  you  ?  " 
"Of  course  not,"  was  the  answer.  "Then  that  is 
just  the  reason  you  haven't  had  them,"  he  rephed. 
But  Spurgeon  himself  was  once  caught  out  in  the 
same  way.  He  preached  in  a  large  shed  in  connection 
with  Mr.  Howard's  works  at  Bedford.  Tea  followed ; 
and  after  tea  an  old  gentleman  said  to  him  :  "  There 
was  one  thing  I  did  not  like  this  afternoon.  You 
prayed  that  the  Lord  might  be  pleased  to  bring,  here 
and  there,  one  or  two  men  out  of  the  throng.  I  could 
not  pray  that.  I  wanted  all  of  them."  "  You  are 
quite  right,  sir,"  replied  Spurgeon  in  all  humility. 

In  the  College  the  great  event  of  the  week  was 
the  Friday  afternoon  lecture  by  the  President.  Not 
that  it  was  always  a  lecture.  There  would  be  read- 
ings from  the  poets  on  occasion.  Young's  "  Night 
Thoughts  "  was  a  favourite,  as  were  Milton,  Cowper, 
Wordsworth  and  Coleridge,  and  Dr.  Hamilton's 
"  Christian  Classics  "  ;  often  Puritan  writers  were  laid 
under  contribution;  and  always  the  reading  or  the 
lecture  was  in  itself  a  lesson  in  elocution.  Two 
volumes  of  Lectures  to  My  Students  have  been  published, 
and  they  are  as  valuable  to-day  as  when  they  were 
issued.  They  have  had  a  great  circulation  and 
deserve  it.  In  the  second  volume  there  are  two 
lectures  on  "  Posture,  Action  and  Gesture,"  with 
illustrative  pictures  which  may  make  the  preachers 
wish  that  they  could  see  themselves  as  others  see 
them.  A  critic  of  wide  experience  and  sound  judg- 
ment has  told  me  that  he  considers  the  lecture  on 
"  The  Holy  Spirit  in  Connection  with  our  Ministry," 
in  the  second  volume,  the  finest  thing  he  has  ever  read 
on  the  Spirit's  work. 


234  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

The  "College  Series"  also  included  a  volume  on  The 
Art  of  Illustration,  with  examples ;  the  famous  book 
on  Commenting  and  Commentaries,  which  is  a  monu- 
ment of  research,  full  of  practical  sagacity  (Mr.  Spur- 
geon  said  that  he  had  read  tons  of  books  in  its 
preparation),  and  a  volume  containing  eighteen 
"  Speeches."  Many  a  man  would  be  content  with 
these  nine  volumes  as  a  life  work. 

But  the  things  that  abide  in  the  memory  of  his 
students  are  not  those  than  can  be  printed  in  lectures. 
There  were  more  intimate  words,  words  that  might 
have  been  spoken  by  a  father  to  his  sons,  words 
uttered  when  reserve  was  cast  aside,  and  the  mind 
and  heart  freely  opened  to  those  whom  he  loved  in 
the  Gospel. 

"  Now  you  will  have  a  brief  holiday,"  he  said  with 
a  smile  on  one  occasion  before  the  summer  vacation. 
"  If  you  talk  at  meetings,  talk  sense.  If  you  preside, 
preside  as  well  as  you  can.  Your  chief  business,  how- 
ever, will  be  to  take  things  remarkably  easy.  And 
don't  get  courting — that  is  not  good  for  students. 
Keep  yourselves  to  yourselves.  Come  back,  as  some 
one  puts  it,  with  your  hearts  and  manners  uncracked. 
Walk  in  the  fields,  like  Isaac,  by  all  means,  and 
meditate,  but  don't  hft  up  your  eyes  for  Rebecca, 
she  will  come  soon  enough." 

"  Run  a  steam-roller  of  tremendous  faith  over  the 
holes  made  in  the  roadway  of  Christianity  by  the 
sceptic,"  he  advised.  "  It  will  then  be  a  better  road, 
and  you  may  expect  happier  and  increased  traffic." 

As  to  the  attitude  of  the  Pastor  to  the  deacons  he 
argued :  "  A  minister  is  to  take  the  oversight  of  the 
flock.  Deacons  are  not  shepherds,  but  part  of  the 
flock,  therefore  a  minister  must  take  the  oversight 
of  the  deacons." 


*SPURGEON'S   COLLEGE'  235 

"It  is  a  great  mercy  to  be  a  minister,"  he  said  on 
one  occasion ;  "  preaching  has  often  driven  me  to  my 
knees,  and  chained  me  to  my  Bible."  But  at  another 
time  his  word  was  :  "  I  hke  to  go  into  the  pulpit  saying 
'  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner  ' ;  Luther  trembled 
before  he  went  into  the  pulpit,  so  did  John  Welsh 
and  John  Newton." 

"  Christ's  presence  with  you  in  the  service  will  fill 
it  with  more  than  the  fragrance  of  a  thousand  flowers." 

"  The  grace  of  God  will  teach  you  to  be  exact  and 
circumspect  in  little  things.  I  believe  it  will  teach 
a  boy  to  play  marbles  without  cheating." 

"  Matthew  Henry  says  that  if  religion  has  done 
nothing  for  your  tempers,  it  has  done  nothing  for 
your  souls." 

"  Many  sinners  seem  bullet  proof,  but  we  must  get 
at  them  somehow.  Go  to  their  houses  and  dine  with 
them  and  get  familiar  with  their  joints." 

"  Thomas  Adams  was  a  divine  moralist  rather  than 
a  theologian.  Be  sure  you  get  his  exposition  of 
second  Peter.  He  was  the  Shakespeare  of  the  pulpit, 
and  he  says  some  wonderful  things." 

"  Read  Bunyan  much ;  his  Holy  War  for  religious 
experience.  Have  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  at  your 
finger-ends." 

"  Richard  Baxter  is  the  most  forceful  of  writers. 
If  you  want  to  know  the  art  of  pleading,  read  him, 
especially  his  sermon  on  'Making  Light  of  It,'  and  his 
Reformed  Pastor ^ 

*'  Study  successful  models.  I  made  Whitefield  my 
model  years  ago.  Buy  his  sermons,  published  by 
Milner  and  Sowerby :  there  are  other  editions  which 
do  not  faithfully  represent  him." 

"  The  Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  the  loftiest  piece 
of  writing  in  the  human  tongue." 


236  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  Whenever  I  meet  a  young  Spurgeonite — and  I  do 
not  know  where  it  is  possible  to  go  without  meeting 
one — I  find  him  bouncing  about  hke  an  india-rubber 
ball,  as  irrepressible  as  John  Brown;  whatever  he 
may  have  in  his  knapsack,  he  goes  marching  on." 

"  A  large  church  is  to  be  preferred  to  a  small  one  : 
the  latter  has  many  attractions,  but  it  is  not  unlike 
a  row-boat  which  a  man  is  in  danger  of  upsetting  if 
he  moves  about,  whereas  the  former  is  like  an  ocean 
steamer,  on  which  he  can  parade  without  the  possibility 
of  upsetting  the  whole  concern." 

A  London  newspaper  having  said  that  Mr.  Spur- 
geon's  sermons  of  the  previous  Sunday  were  not  at 
all  striking,  he  remarked  :  "I  have  read  the  account 
with  great  amusement;  it  is  not  the  work  of  a 
shepherd  to  strike  his  sheep,  but  to  feed  them." 

"  The  best  preacher  is  the  man  who  charges  his  gun 
with  all  he  knows,  and  then,  before  he  fires,  puts 
himself  in." 

"  There  is  raw  material  in  a  Publican  which  you 
seldom  find  in  a  Pharisee.  A  Pharisee  may  polish  up 
into  an  ordinary  Christian;  but  somehow  there  is  a 
charming  touch  about  the  pardoned  sinner  which  is 
lacking  in  the  other." 

"  I  would  like  to  see  churches  erected  as  the  book- 
sellers' shops  are  in  Paternoster  Row.  If  anybody 
wants  to  build  a  chapel  next  door  to  me  let  him  come 
forward.  I  am  not  afraid  of  any  of  them.  I  am 
getting  old  and  greyheaded,  but  if  some  one  starts 
a  coach  and  horse  near  me,  I  will  start  another  horse 
to  my  coach." 

"  Be  '  High  Calvary  '  preachers,  as  one  in  mistake 
described  '  High-Calvinistic  '  preachers.  A  minister 
should  be  able  to  say  the  word  '  Grace  '  in  his  sleep." 

"  I  believe  they  have  abandoned  me  as  an  old  hulk. 


'SPURGEON'S   COLLEGE'  237 

I  have  been  told  that  it  would  require  a  surgical 
operation  to  get  a  new  idea  into  my  head.  Anyhow, 
I  know  that  it  would  require  a  good  many  surgical 
operations  to  get  the  old  ideas  out." 

"  The  greatest  difficulty  I  have  ever  had  to  accom- 
modate myself  to  the  requirements  of  the  Church  of 
England,  was  on  one  occasion  when  I  tried  to  get  into 
a  hansom  cab  with  my  neighbour,  Mr.  Burman  Cassin, 
the  Rector  of  Old  St.  George's,  South wark.  He  was 
several  inches  stouter  than  I  am." 

"  Follow  the  example  of  the  cook,  who,  when  she 
sends  up  a  well-cooked  dinner,  does  not  send  up  the 
cooking  utensils  with  it.  You  do  the  same,  leave 
your  cooking  utensils  in  the  study,  and  give  the 
people  the  result  of  their  use,  and  see  that  you  prepare 
something  worthy  to  set  before  them." 

*'  The  Lord  walked  in  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the 
day.  Walked,  lest  it  should  be  thought  He  was  in 
haste  to  punish.  Not  in  the  early  morning,  lest  He 
seem  to  be  fresh  with  anger.  Not  at  midday,  as 
though  burning  with  wrath.  But  in  the  cool  of  the 
day,  when  the  earth  was  silent,  that  man  might 
meditate,  and  the  dews  began  to  weep  for  man's 
misery,  and  evening  began  to  light  her  lamps,  that  man 
might  have  hope  in  darkness.  Then,  and  not  till  then, 
came  forth  the  offended  Father." 

"  God  seems  to  talk  to  me  in  every  primrose  and 
daisy,  and  smile  at  me  from  every  star,  and  whisper 
to  me  in  every  breath  of  morning  air,  and  to  call  aloud 
to  me  in  every  storm." 

Occasionally  the  Friday  afternoon  was  given  up 
to  extempore  preaching,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  quoted 
as  the  best  thing  of  its  kind  the  response  of  a  student 
to  whom  fell  the  word  "  Zacchseus."  He  rose  imme- 
diately and  said,  "  Mr.  President  and  brethren,  my 


238  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

subject  is  Zacchseus,  and  it  is  therefore  most  appro- 
priate to  me ;  for  first,  Zacchseus  was  little  of  stature, 
as  am  I ;  secondly,  Zacchaeus  was  up  a  tree ;  so  am  I ; 
thirdly,  Zacchaeus  made  haste  to  come  down ;  and  so 
will  I,"  and  thereupon  the  speaker  resumed  his  seat. 
The  students  called  to  him  to  go  on,  but  the  President 
said,  "  No,  he  could  not  add  anything  to  such  a  perfect 
little  speech  without  spoiling  it." 

Of  course  all  sorts  of  cranks  applied  for  admission 
to  the  College,  and  they  were  dealt  with  very  abruptly. 
"  I  have  more  than  once  felt  myself  in  the  position 
of  the  Delphic  oracle,"  Mr.  Spurgeon  records,  "  not 
wishing  to  give  wrong  advice,  and  therefore  not  able 
to  give  any.  I  had  an  inquiry  from  a  brother  whose 
minister  told  him  he  ought  not  to  preach,  and  yet 
he  felt  that  he  must  do  so.  I  thought  I  would  be  safe 
in  the  reply  I  gave  him,  so  I  simply  said,  '  My  brother, 
if  God  has  opened  your  mouth,  the  devil  cannot  shut 
it;  but  if  the  devil  has  opened  your  mouth,  I  pray 
the  Lord  to  shut  it  directly.'  Some  time  afterwards, 
I  was  preaching  in  the  country,  and  after  the  sermon 
a  young  man  came  up  to  me  and  thanked  me  for 
encouraging  him  in  preaching.  For  the  moment  I 
did  not  recall  the  circumstances,  so  he  reminded  me 
of  the  first  part  of  my  reply  to  his  inquiry.  '  But,' 
I  said,  '  I  also  told  you  that  if  the  devil  had  opened 
your  mouth  I  prayed  the  Lord  to  shut  it.'  '  Ah,'  he 
exclaimed,  '  but  that  part  of  the  message  did  not 
apply  to  me.'  " 

Deacons  seeking  ministers  for  their  churches  often 
applied  to  Mr.  Spurgeon.  One  asked  him  to  send  a 
student  who  could  "  fill  the  chapel,"  and  got  an 
answer  saying  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  not  one  big 
enough,  but  he  thought  he  could  send  one  who  might 
fill  the  pulpit.     A  reply  came  saying  that  that  was 


'SPURGEON'S   COLLEGE'  239 

really  what  they  wanted,  and  a  minister  was  accord- 
ingly sent.  I  believe  it  was  Mr.  Whale.  Times 
innumerable  the  choice  of  a  minister  was  left  to  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  discretion,  and  he  took  the  responsibility 
of  sending  men  to  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Canada, 
Hayti,  the  Falkland  Islands,  South  America,  South 
Africa  and  Amsterdam. 

The  Tabernacle  Church  was  for  many  years  the 
largest  supporter  of  the  College;  it  became  a  point 
of  honour  to  contribute  as  many  pounds  as  were 
represented  by  the  year,  £1870  in  1870,  and  £1890 
in  1890.  The  Church  also  entertained  the  men  who 
yearly  met  for  Conference.  These  Conferences,  usually 
held  the  week  before  the  Baptist  Union  week  in  the 
spring,  began  in  1865,  and  have  been  continued  ever 
since,  frequently  attended  by  some  five  hundred 
ministers.  The  President's  address,  which  Mr.  Spur- 
geon  gave  twenty-seven  years  in  succession,  was  the 
great  event  of  the  gathering.  The  last  of  these, 
entitled  "  The  Greatest  Fight  in  the  World,"  was 
separately  published,  and  had  an  immense  circulation. 
One  gentleman  posted  a  copy  to  every  minister  and 
clergyman  in  Great  Britain,  and  it  was  translated  into 
several  other  languages. 

The  closing  day  of  the  Conferences  called  forth  a 
sermon  by  the  President,  and  this  was  followed  by 
memorable  Communion  Services,  which  always  ended 
by  the  brotherhood  singing  with  linked  hands  some 
verses  from  the  metrical  version  of  Psalm  cxxii, 
"  Pray  that  Jerusalem  may  have  peace  and  felicity." 
This  is  now  known  as  The  College  Psalm,  and 
"  Hallelujah  for  the  Cross  "  is  known  as  The  College 
Anthem. 

Two  organisations  have  for  many  years  supple- 
mented the   work   of  preparation  for  the   ministry. 


240  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

The  Pastor's  College  Society  of  Evangelists,  now 
extinct,  furthered  mission  work  in  our  own  country, 
and  sent  forth  six  or  eight  men  in  the  service,  amongst 
them  my  colleague  of  fifteen  years,  Manton  Smith, 
whose  Gospel  witness,  singing,  and  cornet-playing 
were  renowned  all  over  the  kingdom  and  beyond. 
"  The  Pastor's  College  Missionary  Association,"  still 
existent,  has  helped  to  support  missionaries  in  North 
Africa,  France  and  South  America,  but  has  never 
attained  wide  dimensions,  men  generally  preferring 
to  go  forth  in  connection  with  recognised  Missionary 
Societies. 

The  College  itself  is  still  being  maintained  with 
vigour.  There  is  room  for  such  a  School  of  the 
Prophets,  and  it  is  to  be  earnestly  hoped  that  means 
for  its  support  may  be  forthcoming  for  many  years. 


CHAPTER  XII 

"  spurgeon's  orphanage  " 

Paraphrasing  Elijah's  challenge,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
once  exclaimed,  "  The  God  that  answers  by  Orphan- 
ages, let  Him  be  Lord."  None  need  fear  to  uphold 
the  challenge,  for  by  that  test  Christ  is  victor.  It 
was  He  who  taught  the  world  the  worth  of  children — 
"  of  such  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven." 

For  many  years  the  Church  which  now  has  its 
home  in  the  Tabernacle  has  maintained  almshouses  : 
in  previous  chapters  it  has  been  noted  how  Mr. 
Spurgeon  devoted  large  sums  of  money  to  their 
enlargement.  But  at  one  of  the  Monday  evening 
prayer  meetings,  which  in  his  day  were  phenomenal, 
the  Pastor  said :  "  We  are  a  large  Church,  and  should 
be  doing  more  for  the  Lord  in  this  great  city.  I  want 
us  to  ask  Him  to  send  us  some  new  work;  and  if  we 
need  money  to  carry  it  on,  let  us  pray  that  the  means 
may  also  be  sent."  So  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  was 
really  born  in  a  prayer  meeting. 

Soon  afterwards  Mrs.  Hillyard,  a  clergyman's  widow, 
at  that  time  in  fellowship  with  "  Brethren,"  afterwards 
associated  with  the  Tabernacle  Church,  determined  to 
devote  her  money  to  the  service  of  God,  but  was 
doubtful  as  to  the  right  purpose,  and  the  best  means. 
She  was  advised  to  place  it  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  hands, 
as  he  was  a  man  of  affairs,  as  well  as  a  man  of  God. 
Soon  afterwards  she  saw  an  article  in  The  Sword 
and  Trowel  for  August  1866  advocating  the  establish- 

R  241 


242  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

merit  of  schools  where  "  all  that  we  beheve  and  hold 
dear  shall  be  taught  to  the  children  of  our  poorer 
adherents."  Upon  this  she  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon 
telling  him  of  her  desire  to  establish  an  Orphanage, 
and  asking  his  assistance. 

He  looked  upon  it  as  a  direct  answer  to  the  prayers 
of  the  people,  and  asked  for  further  particulars.  In 
reply  Mrs.  Hillyard  said  that  there  was  need  of  an 
orphan  home  requiring  neither  votes  nor  patronage, 
where  boys  would  be  trained  in  simple  Gospel  prin- 
ciples. Mr.  Spurgeon  and  Mr.  William  Higgs  made 
an  appointment,  and  when  they  called  at  her  modest 
home  they  feared  that  there  had  been  some  mistake. 
So  they  began  the  interview  by  saying  that  they  had 
called  about  the  £200  she  had  mentioned  in  her  letter. 
"Did  I  write  £200?  "  exclaimed  the  lady;  "  I  meant 
£20,000."  "  Oh  yes,"  said  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "  you  did 
put  down  £20,000,  but  I  thought  perhaps  there  was  a 
nought  or  two  too  many." 

In  the  subsequent  discussion  Spurgeon  was  first  of 
all  careful  to  inquire  whether  there  was  not  some 
relative  to  whom  the  money  ought  to  be  given,  and 
that  point  settled  in  the  negative,  he  then  made  the 
suggestion  that  the  money  should  be  sent  to  George 
Muller  at  Bristol,  for  whom  he  had  always  a  great 
admiration.  But  nothing  would  do  but  that  Mr. 
Spurgeon  himself  should  inaugurate  the  work,  and 
as  this  found  a  response  in  his  own  heart,  the  matter 
was  settled  then  and  there.  In  the  Board  Room  of 
the  Orphanage  there  is  a  stained  glass  window  repre- 
senting the  interview.  Mrs.  Hillyard  lived  for  some 
years  to  rejoice  in  the  good  work  which  she  had  so 
successfully  initiated,  and  her  last  words  as  she  died 
on  January  13,  1880,  were,  "  My  boys  !     My  boys  !  " 

Some   astute   business   brains   (including  his   own) 


'SPURGEON'S  ORPHANAGE'     243 

were  at  once  set  to  work  to  secure  a  site  and  to  pro- 
ject plans  for  the  Orphan  Homes.  The  first  condition 
was  that  they  should  be  within  easy  reach  of  the 
Tabernacle,  and  though  this  greatly  increased  the 
difficulty,  a  plot  of  ground  sufficient  for  the  purpose 
was  found  behind  some  houses  in  the  Clapham  Road. 
The  negotiations  almost  broke  down  when  the  vendor, 
presuming  on  Mr.  Spurgeon's  anxiety  to  establish 
the  Orphanage,  tried  to  impose  higher  terms  on  him 
than  those  at  first  indicated.  The  Committee  was 
inclined  to  seek  another  site,  but  Spurgeon  himself 
went  to  see  the  owner,  pointed  out  to  him  the  unsuit- 
ability  of  his  property  for  any  other  purpose,  and  at 
length  told  him  that  he  was  inclined  to  fine  him  a 
thousand  pounds  because  of  his  obstinacy.  Upon  this 
the  original  terms  were  confirmed,  and  though  there 
was  some  delay  in  realising  the  securities  that  Mrs. 
Hillyard  meant  to  put  at  Mr.  Spurgeon's  disposal, 
the  buildings  were  at  length  completed,  and  a  festival 
of  praise  was  held  in  the  grounds  on  September  9, 
1869. 

So  much  interest  had  by  this  time  been  aroused, 
that  several  friends  were  ready  each  to  bear  the  cost 
of  one  of  the  houses — an  illustration  of  the  wisdom 
of  the  word  that  "  he  that  belie veth  shall  not  make 
haste."  The  Silver  Wedding  House  was  raised  by  a 
gift  which  a  lady  had  received  from  her  husband  on 
her  silver  wedding  day.  She  afterwards  willed 
£25,000  to  the  Orphanage.  The  Merchant's  House 
was  the  gift  of  a  business  man.  The  Workmen's  House 
was  the  combined  gift  of  the  contractors  and  the 
artisans  at  work  on  the  building,  the  former  giving 
the  materials,  the  latter  the  work.  Unity  House  com- 
memorated a  saintly  lady.  The  Testimonial  Houses 
were  the  gift  of  the  Baptists  of  Great  Britain.     The 


244  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

Sunday  School  House  came  from  the  efforts  of  the 
Tabernacle  Sunday  School  and  the  College  House  from 
men  educated  in  the  College. 

Help  poured  in,  and  if  at  times  the  stream  appeared 
as  if  it  would  cease,  the  unfailing  method  was  that  the 
Trustees  themselves  gave  what  they  could  and  then 
betook  themselves  to  prayer.  Not  once  or  twice,  but 
dozens  of  times  the  answer  came.  At  one  time  £10,000 
was  given.  At  another  an  unknown  helper  sent 
£1000  for  the  College  and  £1000  for  the  Orphanage, 
saying  "  the  latter  led  me  to  contribute  to  the  former," 
a  specially  grateful  evidence  that  the  new  venture  of 
faith  was  not  likely  to  interfere  with  the  older  ones. 

The  coming  as  Head  Master  of  the  Orphanage  of 
the  Rev.  Vernon  J.  Charlesworth,  who  up  to  then  had 
been  assistant  to  Newman  Hall  at  Surrey  Chapel,  was 
an  event  of  first  importance.  His  influence  on  the 
boys,  his  advocacy  of  the  Orphanage,  and  his  guidance 
of  affairs,  were  a  great  asset  for  many  years,  until  in 
1914  he  finished  his  course.  Mr.  Thomas  Spurgeon 
was  then  appointed  Director,  and,  on  his  resignation, 
Mr.  Charles  Spurgeon  took  up  the  work  as  President- 
Director,  which  he  is  carrying  forward  with  such 
conspicuous  success  to-day. 

In  1879  the  girls'  wing  of  the  Orphanage  was  in- 
augurated, Mrs.  Hilly ard  giving  the  first  £50  and  Mr. 
Spurgeon  the  second  £50.  Though  the  extension  was 
undertaken  with  some  hesitancy,  similar  experiences 
of  God's  goodness  attended  this  enterprise,  the  neces- 
sary funds  were  forthcoming,  the  quadrangle  was  com- 
pleted, with  Infirmary,  Gymnasium  and  Dining  Hall, 
and  there  it  stands  to-day,  a  monument  of  philanthropy 
and  faith. 

In  the  Main  Hall  there  is  a  memorial  of  the  Founder 
executed  in  terra-cotta  by  Mr.  George  Tinworth,  and 


'SPURGEON'S  ORPHANAGE'     245 

the  fine  collection  of  engravings  of  the  Reformation 
collected  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  exhibited  on  the  walls  of 
the  same  Hall,  where  also  are  the  two  stained  glass 
windows,  one  in  memory  of  Mr.  Charlesworth,  one  in 
memory  of  Thomas  Spurgeon.  Mr.  F.  G.  Ladds,  once 
himself  a  sharer  in  the  benefits  of  the  Orphanage,  has 
been  for  years  Secretary  of  the  Institution. 

The  President  was  always  received  with  uproarious 
joy  when  he  visited  the  Orphanage.  "  As  to  the  happi- 
ness of  the  orphans,  there  is  no  doubt  about  it.  When 
Mr.  Spurgeon  opened  the  door  there  was  a  shout  of 
delight  at  the  appearance  of  their  friend.  It  was  like 
a  welcome  to  an  old  schoolfellow,  and  was  repeated  in 
every  house  we  entered ;  not  the  kind  of  cheer  which 
requires  a  lead,  but  one  that  sprang  up  on  the  instant 
when  it  was  known  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  at  the 
Orphanage."  ^ 

"  Some  time  ago,"  he  said,  "  a  friend  who  often 
aids  the  Orphanage  gave  us  six  dozen  bunches  of 
turnips,  and  he  merrily  added,  '  I  hope  some  one  will 
send  you  the  mutton,'  and  sure  enough  about  an  hour 
afterwards  a  farmer  sent  a  whole  sheep." 

Three  things  are  to  be  noted.  The  Orphan  Homes 
are  open  to  all  denominations — indeed,  amongst  those 
who  have  been  received,  children  of  Anglican  parents 
predominate  over  those  of  any  other  denomination. 
In  the  second  place,  need  is  the  supreme  plea,  there 
are  no  votes  necessary,  and  no  canvassing  is  allowed. 
And  in  the  third  place,  there  is  no  distinctive  dress 
either  for  the  girls  or  boys.  They  are  clothed  like 
other  young  people,  with  corresponding  gain  to  their 
individuality  and  happiness.  In  its  early  days  a 
woman  with  eight  children,  belonging  to  the  Anglican 
Church,  applied,  when  the  Orphanage  was  full,  to 
have  one  of  her  boys  accepted.     There  was  no  room, 


246  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

they  said.  "  Never  mind,"  said  Spurgeon,  "  squeeze 
in  the  Httle  boy.     Squeeze  him  in,"  and  they  did. 

In  fact,  as  I  ventured  to  say  at  one  of  its  June 
Festival  meetings,  the  Orphanage  is  the  greatest 
sermon  Mr.  Spurgeon  ever  preached.  It  has  five 
hundred  heads,  two  hundred  and  fifty  of  them  girls' 
heads,  two  hundred  and  fifty  of  them  boys'  heads,  all 
the  heads  contributing  to  the  appeal  and  the  applica- 
tion at  the  end  of  the  sermon — praise  to  the  Great 
Lover  of  Children,  who  taught  His  people  this  divine 
way,  and  help  to  those  who  care  for  them  in  His 
Name. 

To  end,  Spurgeon  himself  may  be  quoted :  "  Some- 
body has  written  to  me  that  he  will  put  the  Orphanage 
in  the  corner  of  his  will.  I  said,  '  Do  not  do  that  on 
any  account,  because  if  you  put  it  in  the  corner  you 
will  tear  it  off  some  day.  Kindly  put  it  in  the  centre 
and  see  that  it  is  done  in  the  right  way.'  " 


CHAPTER  XIII 

A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS 

A  LIFE  like  Spurgeon's,  that  touched  so  many  people 
in  so  many  ways,  could  not  fail  of  incidents.  ManjA 
stories  about  him  gained  currency  which  were  untrue. 
Some  of  them  had  been  told  of  preachers  of  previous 
generations,  and  some  were  the  inventions  of  nimble 
wits,  but  there  are  enough  remarkable  experiences, 
coincidences,  and  excitements  in  his  history  to  warrant 
at  least  a  chapter  to  themselves.  The  difficulty  is  to 
know  what  to  choose. 

Let  us  begin  with  his  power  of  recognising  folks. 
He  could  tell  at  a  glance  whether  the  regular  members 
of  his  congregation  were  present,  and  his  recollection 
of  those  whom  he  had  only  casually  met  was  pheno- 
menal. Dr.  William  Wright  tells  how  as  a  young 
man  he  spoke  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  on  his  visit  to  Belfast, 
and  on  his  first  furlough  from  Damascus  he  visited 
the  Tabernacle  one  Sunday  morning.  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
to  his  astonishment,  immediately  recognised  him. 

Of  course  sometimes  he  failed.  "  How  are  you, 
Mr.  Partridge?  "  he  said  to  one  gentleman  who  came 
into  his  vestry  to  greet  him.  "  I  am  well,  sir,"  he 
answered,  "  but  my  name  is  Patridge,  not  Partridge." 
To  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  instantly  retorted,  "  Ah,  well, 
I  promise  you  that  I  will  make  game  of  you  no  more." 
But  he  was  not  always  even  so  fortunate  as  that. 
After  a  crowded  meeting  a  man  pressed  through  the 
throng  and  mfide  frantic  efforts  to  grasp  the  preacher's 

?47 


248  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

hand.  At  length  he  succeeded,  and  asked  whether 
Mr.  Spurgeon  did  not  remember  him.  Spurgeon  was 
nonplussed  for  once,  but  he  answered,  "  My  dear 
fellow,  I  have  forgotten  your  name,  but  your  face  is 
quite  familiar  to  me."  Whereupon  the  excited  indivi- 
dual cried  out,  "  Well,  that  is  singular,  seeing  that  you 
rendered  me  the  greatest  service  one  man  could  render 
another — you  buried  my  wife."  "  Hullo,  Dr.  Way- 
land  !  I  am  glad  to  see  you.  Are  you  the  author  of 
Wayland's  Moral  Science  ?  "  was  his  greeting  to  an 
American  visitor.  "  No,"  replied  the  newcomer,  "  but 
the  author  of  Wayland's  Moral  Science  was  the  author 
of  me." 

Once  in  New  Park  Street,  at  an  evening  service, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  had  announced  the  hymn  preceding  the 
sermon,  and  then  he  opened  the  Bible  to  find  his  text, 
which  he  had  carefully  studied.  But  a  text  on  the 
opposite  page  caught  his  eye  and  he  felt  impressed 
to  preach  upon  it.  It  came  upon  him  like  a  lion  from 
a  thicket.  As  the  people  were  singing,  he  was  sigh- 
ing, and  wondering  what  to  do.  He  could  not  get 
away  from  it,  so  he  announced  the  new  text  and  got 
through  firstly  and  secondly,  but  could  not  think  of 
anything  beyond.  He  was  inwardly  chiding  himself 
for  his  rashness,  when — the  light  went  out.  There 
was,  of  course,  some  excitement,  but  he  quieted  the 
people,  told  them  the  gas  would  soon  be  lighted  again, 
and  went  on  talking  about  saints  in  the  darkness  and 
sinners  in  the  light.  If  he  had  announced  his  first 
text  he  could  scarcely  have  continued  an  ordered  dis- 
course under  the  circumstances,  but  it  was  quite  easy 
to  make  the  transition  when  his  mind  was  free.  When 
the  lamps  were  again  lighted,  the  congregation  was 
"  as  rapt  and  subdued  as  ever  a  man  had  in  his  life." 
And  at  an  early  Church  meeting  two  persons  came  to 


A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  249 

seek  Church  membership  who  had  been  converted 
that  night,  one  during  the  first  part  of  the  sermon, 
the  other  during  the  second  part. 

Many  times  the  preacher  has  been  guided  to  say 
things  that  seemed  almost  uncanny  in  their  apphc- 
abihty.  He  once  said  that  there  was  a  man  in  the 
gallery  listening  to  him  with  a  gin  bottle  in  his  pocket. 
It  so  happened  that  there  was  such  a  man,  and  he  was 
startled  into  conversion.  A  woman  of  the  city  who 
had  determined  on  suicide  came  in  with  the  crowd 
to  hear  a  last  message  that  might  prepare  her  to  die. 
The  text  arrested  her — "  Seest  thou  this  woman." 
The  discourse  changed  her  heart,  and  she  confessed 
Christ  as  her  Saviour. 

There  was  a  man  who  regularly  attended  the 
Tabernacle,  but  his  wife  consistently  refused  to  accom- 
pany him.  But  one  evening,  when  her  husband  had 
gone  to  the  service,  her  curiosity  overcame  her 
obstinacy.  That  she  might  not  be  recognised  she 
put  on  some  very  plain  things,  and  quite  sure  that  she 
would  be  unknown,  she  pushed  her  way  in  with  the 
crowd.  The  text  that  evening  was,  "  Come  in,  thou 
wife  of  Jeroboam,  why  feignest  thou  thyself  to  be 
another?  "  The  result  was  that  her  prejudices  were 
overcome  and  she  began  to  attend  with  her  husband. 
He  told  Mr.  Spurgeon  about  it,  his  only  complaint 
being  that  the  preacher  should  compare  him  to 
Jeroboam. 

A  man  was  won  for  Christ  because  the  preacher 
pointed  to  him  and  said  :  "  There  is  a  man  sitting  there 
who  is  a  shoemaker;  he  keeps  his  shop  open  on  Sun- 
days; it  was  open  last  Sabbath  morning.  He  took 
ninepence  and  there  was  fourpence  profit  on  it :  his 
soul  is  sold  to  Satan  for  fourpence."  The  man  was 
afraid  to  go  and  hear  Spurgeon  again  for  fear  he 


250  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

might  tell  the  people  more  about  him,  for  what  he 
said  at  first  was  all  true ;  but  at  last  he  came  and  the 
Lord  met  with  him. 

One  Sunday  evening  Mr.  Spurgeon,  pointing  to  the 
gallery,  said  :  "  Young  man,  the  gloves  you  have  in 
your  pocket  are  not  paid  for."  After  the  service  a 
young  fellow  came  beseeching  him  not  to  say  anything 
more  about  it,  and  the  circumstances  led  to  his 
conversion. 

In  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall  one  morning 
several  young  men  continued  to  wear  their  hats  even 
after  the  service  began.  In  the  middle  of  the  opening 
hymn  Spurgeon  told  the  congregation  that  he  had 
lately  visited  a  Jewish  synagogue,  and  in  accordance 
with  the  custom  of  the  place  he  had  worn  his  hat 
during  the  service.  "  But,"  he  added,  "it  is  the 
Christian  practice  to  uncover  in  a  place  of  worship. 
I  will  therefore  ask  these  young  Jewish  gentlemen 
kindly  to  remove  their  hats."     Of  course  they  did. 

A  similar  flank  attack  discomfited  a  party  of  under- 
graduates who  came  to  the  Guildhall  in  Cambridge 
when  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  speaking  there.  They  stood 
up  in  front  of  the  people,  intercepting  their  view  of  the 
preacher.  But  when  the  preacher  quietly  remarked : 
"  If  the  bodies  of  those  young  getlenmen  were  as 
transparent  as  their  intentions  they  might  continue 
to  stand.  As  it  is,  I  hope  they  will  resume  their  seats." 
They  hastily  sat  down. 

Once,  when  he  was  preaching  in  a  country  place, 
he  noticed  a  change  come  over  a  woman  who  sat  near 
the  front  of  the  congregation.  There  was  no  mistaking 
it.  "  I  think  our  sister  is  dead,"  he  said.  His 
description  of  the  circumstance  was  that  she  was 
"  washed  into  heaven  on  a  wave  of  joy." 

When  visiting  Tring  in  hk  e^rly  days  he  said  that 


A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  251 

God  had  answered  his  prayers  before  he  was  converted. 
Some  ultra-Calvinists  found  fault  with  his  teaching, 
and  took  him  to  task  for  it,  quoting  a  text  which  they 
thought  was  in  the  Bible,  but  may  be  searched  for 
there  in  vain — "  The  prayer  of  a  sinner  is  abomina- 
tion to  the  Lord."  "  How  can  a  dead  man  pray  ?  " 
they  asked.  There  was  quite  a  little  ring  formed 
round  him,  and  he  maintained  his  position.  But, 
''  after  all,"  he  says,  "  the  victory  was  won  not  by 
Barak,  but  by  Deborah."  A  very  old  woman  in  a  red 
cloak  managed  to  squeeze  herself  into  the  aisle,  and 
turning  to  his  accusers  she  said :  "  What  are  you 
battling  about  with  this  young  man?  Yovi  say  that 
God  does  not  hear  the  prayers  of  unconverted  people, 
that  He  hears  no  cry  but  that  of  His  own  children. 
What  do  you  know  about  the  Scriptures  ?  Your 
precious  passage  is  not  in  the  Bible  at  all,  but  the 
Psalmist  did  say,  '  He  giveth  to  the  beast  his  food,  and 
the  young  ravens  which  cry.'  Is  there  any  grace  in 
them?  If  God  hears  the  cry  of  the  ravens,  don't 
you  think  He  will  hear  the  prayer  of  those  who  are 
made  in  His  own  image?  You  don't  know  anything 
at  all  about  the  matter,  so  leave  the  man  alone,  and 
let  him  go  on  with  his  Master's  work." 

One  evening  he  advised  his  people  when  they  went 
home  to  get  a  sheet  of  paper  and  write  on  it  either 
the  word  "  Saved  "  or  the  word  "  Condemned."  A 
man,  whose  wife  and  children  were  members  of  the 
Church,  who  had  only  gone  to  the  Tabernacle  to 
please  them,  took  a  sheet  of  paper  when  he  went  home 
and  began  to  write  the  latter  word.  One  of  his 
daughters  went  up  to  him,  put  her  arms  round  his 
neck  and  said,  "  No,  father,  you  shan't  write  that." 
Her  tears  fell  on  the  paper ;  the  mother  came  up  and 
pleaded  with  him :  they  all  knelt  in  prayer  together ; 


252  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

and  when  he  rose  he  put  another  curve  to  the  letter 
"  C  "  which  he  had  written,  turning  it  into  an  "  S," 
and  then  finished  the  word  "  Saved." 

At  a  session  of  the  Congregational  Union  where 
Mr.  Spurgeon  was  to  speak,  he  entered  when  some  one 
else  was  on  his  feet.  There  was  a  little  hubbub,  and 
the  speaker  soon  sat  down.  The  Chairman  hurriedly 
chose  a  hymn,  and  it  happened  to  be  one  for  an  infant 
baptism.  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  sitting  beside  Mr.  Samuel 
Moriey,  and  leaning  over  to  him,  he  asked  how 
Mrs.  Moriey  was  getting  on.  "  Getting  on,"  said  Mr. 
Moriey,  "she  is  quite  well."  "How  is  the  baby? 
Alive  and  well,  I  trust,"  continued  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and 
about  this  juncture  the  people  began  to  discover  what 
a  blunder  had  been  made.  The  baptismal  hymn  was 
concluded  hurriedly,  and  the  people  were  very  much 
amused  when  Mr.  Spurgeon,  on  rising  to  speak, 
repeated  what  he  had  whispered  to  Mr.  Moriey,  and 
added  that  he  was  very  disappointed  at  not  having 
to  witness  the  very  interesting  ceremony  the  hymn 
had  led  him  to  expect. 

When  he  was  the  guest  of  Canon  Wilberforce  at 
Southampton,  in  company  with  a  number  of  High 
Church  clergymen,  Lord  Radstock  and  others,  the 
discussion  turned  on  the  question  of  baptismal 
regeneration.  Lord  Radstock  intervened  by  saying : 
"  What  sort  of  persons  do  these  become  whom  you 
regenerate  in  baptism ?  "  "I  will  tell  you,  '  Eyes  have 
they,  but  they  see  not ;  ears  have  they,  but  they  hear 
not;  noses  have  they,  but  they  smell  not,  neither 
speak  they  through  their  throats.  And,'  "  added  Mr. 
Spurgeon  in  a  whisper  that  everybody  heard,  "  '  they 
that  make  them  are  like  unto  them.'  "  Canon  Wilber- 
force afterwards  spoke  at  the  Tabernacle  on  the 
occasion  of  Mr,  Spurgeon's  Jubilee,  and  appliec^  to 


A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  253 

Spurgeon  some  of  Augustine's  words,  "  He  whose  life 
is  lightning,  his  words  are  thunders  for  God." 

One  year  at  Mentone  Mr.  Edward  Jenkins,  the 
author  of  Ginx's  Baby,  was  present,  and  he  persis- 
tently and  somewhat  rudely  ridiculed  believers'  bap- 
tism. There  were  quite  a  number  of  persons  present, 
arid  they  all  looked  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  take  up  the 
cudgels.  But  he  was  silent.  Before  they  separated, 
however,  he  suggested  that  they  should  all  go  on  an 
excursion  to  Ventimiglia,  in  Italy,  the  next  day,  and 
the  matter  was  so  arranged.  On  reaching  the  Cathe- 
dral there,  Spurgeon,  as  one  familiar  with  the  place, 
led  the  way  into  the  crypt.  When  the  company  had 
gathered  round  the  baptistery,  he  turned  to  Mr. 
Jenkins,  saying  :  "  You  understand  Italian  better  than 
we  do.  Will  you  kindly  interpret  to  us  what  the  guide 
is  saying?  "  Willingly  and  unsuspectingly,  he  con- 
sented. "  This  is  an  ancient  baptistery,"  he  began ; 
"  he  says  that  in  the  early  Christian  Church  baptism 
was  always  by  immersion."  The  crypt  rang  with 
laughter,  and  the  objector  confessed  that  the  answer 
he  had  received  was  no  less  crushing  because  it  had 
been  given  after  a  day's  delay. 

Another  Mentone  experience  was  of  a  different 
character.  An  organ-grinder  had  been  trying  to 
attract  attention  for  some  time  in  the  garden  of  the 
hotel,  when  Mr.  Spurgeon,  noticing  his  forlorn  look, 
asked  if  he  might  have  the  instrument.  So  he  began 
to  grind  the  music  :  the  attention  of  the  people  in  the 
hotel,  as  well  as  the  passers-by,  was  attracted,  and  he 
soon  had  a  pile  of  coins,  amounting  to  sixteen  francs, 
thrown  to  him.  Then  he  insisted  on  some  of  the  others 
taking  their  turn,  but  naturally  none  of  them  were  so 
successful. 

Even  when  he  was  ill  he  could  extract  merriment 


254  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

from  his  surroundings.  Quite  good-humouredly  he 
told  of  a  curate  who  felt  it  his  duty  to  call  upon  him 
one  year  on  his  arrival  at  Mentone.  He  was  shown  up 
into  the  sitting-room,  and  after  introducing  himself 
he  said,  "  And  I  hope  you  are  bettah."  He  was 
assured  on  the  point.  Then  his  visitor  went  to  the 
stove  and  said,  "  I  do  like  a  fiah.  Something  so 
English  about  a  fiah."  Back  to  the  invahd,  "  And 
you  really  are  bettah."  Again  the  assurance  was 
given;  again  preference  for  an  open  fire  rather  than 
a  stove  was  expressed,  and  the  good  man  bowed  him- 
self out,  having  really  done  a  great  deal  of  good  in 
another  way  than  he  intended.  No  matter  how 
depressed  Spurgeon  was  afterwards,  it  always  roused 
him  if  one  asked  him  if  he  was  not  bettah,  and  if  he 
did  not  like  a  fiah. 

Another  year,  depressed  and  ill,  he  had  reached  his 
hotel  in  Marseilles,  and  asked  for  a  fire  to  help  him 
to  bear  his  pain,  about  which  he  once  wrote  :  "  Lucian 
says,  '  I  thought  a  cobra  had  bitten  me  and  filled  my 
veins  with  poison;  but  it  was  worse,  it  was  gout.' 
That  was  written  from  experience,  I  know."  When 
the  porter  came  to  light  the  fire  he  brought  vine 
branches  to  kindle  it,  and  Spurgeon  simply  called 
out  in  agony,  as  he  thought  of  the  destiny  of  fruitless 
branches  of  the  Vine,  good  for  no  work,  only  fit  to  be 
burned. 

Yet  another  Mentone  story.  A  simple  lunch  of 
biscuits  and  milk,  taken  in  the  hotel  garden,  often 
formed  Mr.  Spurgeon's  midday  meal.  He  was,  as 
all  the  residents  in  the  hotel  were  aware,  a  total 
abstainer  from  intoxicants.  Amongst  the  residents 
was  a  lady,  anything  but  well-disposed  towards  him, 
and  one  day  she  thought  her  chance  of  doing  him  an 
ill  turn  had  come.     He  was  evidently  a  humbug,  and 


A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  255 

she  was  at  no  pains  to  conceal  the  fact.  She  had 
heard  his  secretary  come  downstairs  and  ask  for 
whisky  and  milk,  and  it  was  therefore  clear  that 
drinking  was  being  done  on  the  sly.  One  of  the  ladies 
to  whom  she  imparted  the  information  happened  to 
be  a  friend  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  she  frankly  said  she 
did  not  believe  a  word  of  it.  Then  the  mystery  was 
explained  by  the  defective  hearing  of  the  suspicious 
person.  Mr.  Harrald  had  simply  asked  for  "  biscuits 
and  milk  "  for  the  accustomed  lunch. 

On  December  30,  1888,  after  conducting  a  service 
at  Mentone,  Mr.  Spurgeon  went  to  a  villa  to  have  tea. 
Resting  his  stick  on  the  marble  outside  the  carpet,  it 
suddenly  gave  way  and  he  fell  down  the  marble  steps. 
He  turned  over  twice,  two  of  his  front  teeth  were 
shaken  out,  and  the  money  in  his  pocket  was  thrown 
into  his  Wellington  boots.  On  being  picked  up  he 
remarked,  "  Painless  dentistry,"  but  in  writing  to  his 
friend  Newman  Hall,  he  said,  "  Yet  I  pity  the  dog 
that  has  felt  as  much  pain  in  his  four  legs  as  I  have 
in  one." 

In  the  summer  of  1890  the  clock  on  the  Tabernacle 
rostrum  was  stolen  by  a  humorous  burglar  under  the 
plea  that  "  the  reverend  gentleman  was  less  concerned 
with  Time  than  with  Eternity." 

When  Mr.  Spurgeon  went,  years  ago,  to  preach  for 
Dr.  Clifford,  whose  church  was  then  at  Praed  Street, 
he  said  in  the  vestry  before  the  service,  "  I  cannot 
imagine,  Clifford,  why  you  do  not  come  to  my  way  of 
thinking,"  referring  to  his  Calvinistic  views.  "  Well," 
answered  John  Chfford,  "  you  see,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  I 
only  see  you  about  once  a  month,  but  I  read  my 
Bible  every  day."  Dr.  Clifford  is  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
most  ardent  admirers  :  he  has  treasured  some 
Spurgeon  relics,  amongst  them  the  notes  of  one  of 


256  LIFE   OF  SPURGEON 

his  sermons,  written  on  the  back  of  an  envelope; 
another  a  copy  of  the  printed  sermon  No.  95,  on 
"  The  Day  of  Atonement,"  which  he  heard  Spurgeon 
dehver  in  New  Park  Street  on  April  10,  1856,  coming 
to  London  on  pm-pose.  On  his  copy  of  the  sermon  he 
has  written,  "  The  atmosphere  of  expectation  and  of 
admiration;  the  ease  and  energy  of  the  preacher, 
made  the  occasion  memorable. — J.  Clifford." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  generally  arrived  at  the  Tabernacle 
early  enough  to  choose  the  hymns  for  the  service, 
and  often  he  chose  the  tunes  too.  One  day  he  said 
to  the  precentor,  "  What  tune  shall  we  have  to  this 
hymn?"  He  answered  that  "Redhead"  would  be 
suitable.  At  this  juncture  one  of  the  deacons,  whose 
hair  was  decidedly  bright,  entered.  "  Why,"  said 
Spurgeon,  mentioning  his  name,  "  here  is  your  tune 
— Redhead."  "  My  hair  is  not  red,  but  golden,"  he 
answered.  "  Yes,"  said  Spurgeon  in  a  flash,  "  eighteen 
carat." 

On  three  occasions  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  an  interview 
with  a  madman  under  dangerous  conditions,  but  his 
coolness  triumphed  in  each  case.  One  came  into  the 
vestry  at  the  Tabernacle,  shut  the  door,  and  declared 
that  he  had  come  to  cut  Mr.  Spurgeon's  throat.  "  I 
would  not  do  that,"  he  replied,  "  see  what  a  mess  it 
would  make  on  the  carpet."  "  Oh,  I  never  thought 
of  that !  "  he  said,  and  was  quietly  led  out  of  the  room. 

The  second  occasion  was  when  he  was  lying  ill  at 
the  Hotel  des  Anglais  at  Mentone.  He  had  persuaded 
all  his  friends  to  go  for  a  walk,  and  scarcely  had  they 
left  when  a  man,  evidently  mad,  rushed  in  and  said, 
"  I  want  you  to  save  my  soul."  With  presence  of 
mind,  Spurgeon  told  him  to  kneel  down  by  the  bed, 
and  he  prayed  as  best  he  could.  Then  he  told  him  to 
go  away  and  return  in  half  an  hour.     It  turned  out 


A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  257 

that  he  had  eluded  the  vigilance  of  his  keepers.  As 
soon  as  he  was  gone,  the  doctor  and  servants  were 
summoned,  but  he  had  stabbed  some  one  in  the  street 
before  he  could  be  overtaken,  and  in  a  few  days  he 
met  with  a  tragic  end. 

The  third  was  in  his  own  house.  Spurgeon  hap- 
pened to  be  in  the  entrance  hall  when  some  one 
knocked  loudly  at  the  door,  and  to  save  trouble  he 
opened  it  himself.  A  man  with  a  huge  stick  sprang 
in,  slammed  the  door,  and  stood  with  his  back  against 
it,  declaring  that  he  had  come  to  kill  Mr.  Spurgeon. 
The  great  thing  was  to  get  rid  of  him,  so  Mr.  Spurgeon 
said,  "  You  must  mean  my  brother  :  his  name  is 
Spurgeon."  He  thought  he  could  give  his  brother  at 
Croydon  warning  in  good  time.  "  Ah  !  "  said  the 
maniac,  "it  is  the  man  that  makes  jokes  I  mean  to 
kill."  "  Then  you  must  mean  my  brother,  he  makes 
jokes,"  Mr.  Spurgeon  said,  and  the  unwelcome  visitor 
was  evidently  shaken  in  his  intention.  But  he  drew 
himself  up  and  said,  "  No,  I  believe  you  are  the  man," 
and  then  he  asked  Spurgeon  whether  he  knew  a  certain 
asylum.  "  That's  where  I  live,  and  it  takes  two  men 
to  hold  me.  Are  you  strong?"  "Yes,  terrific," 
said  Spurgeon.  "  Stronger  than  ten  men  ?  "  "  Ten 
men !  "  thundered  Spurgeon  in  his  loudest  voice, 
"  that's  nothing  :  you  don't  know  how  strong  I  am. 
Give  me  that  stick."  Thoroughly  cowed,  the  man 
handed  it  over,  and  Spurgeon,  opening  the  door,  told 
him  that  if  he  was  not  out  of  the  house  that  minute 
he  could  break  every  bone  in  his  body.  The  man 
fled,  and  information  was  given  to  the  police  that  soon 
resulted  in  his  being  again  under  restraint. 

Impostors  often  tried  to  see  him.  One,  who  repre- 
sented himself  as  the  son  of  Beecher,  obtained  an 
interview  and  walked  round  the  garden  with  Spurgeon. 


258  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

When  he  asked  that  a  cheque  might  be  cashed, 
suspicion  was  aroused,  and  he  was  shown  off  the 
premises  as  soon  as  possible.  A  few  days  afterwards 
a  gentleman  was  murdered  in  a  tunnel  on  the  Brighton 
Railway.  The  murderer  was  caught,  and  when  his 
portrait  appeared  in  the  newspapers,  Spurgeon  at  once 
recognised  his  visitor. 

One  afternoon  he  visited  the  home  of  one  of  his 
deacons  at  Orpington.  His  hostess  took  him  out  for 
a  drive  in  a  dog-cart  with  a  very  spirited  horse. 
Passing  under  a  railway  bridge  just  as  a  train  was 
crossing,  the  horse  began  to  rear,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon 
in  alarm  said,  "  Oh  !  what  shall  I  do?  "  "  Do,"  said 
his  hostess,  a  strong,  self-reliant  woman,  perfectly 
familiar  with  horses,  as  she  pushed  him  back  into  his 
seat,  '*  Do  what  I  do  in  the  Tabernacle  when  you  are 
preaching,  and  I  want  to  shout — sit  still." 

One  day,  when  dining  with  a  friend,  a  foreign  Rabbi 
was  also  a  guest.  Hot  ducks  were  part  of  the  fare, 
of  which  the  Rabbi  was  not  allowed  to  partake.  He 
gave  two  or  three  significant  sniffs,  and  got  in  that 
way  as  much  of  the  ducks  as  he  dare.  Then,  turning 
to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  he  said,  "  Moses  very  hard,  Moses 
very  hard."  "  Yes,"  Spurgeon  answered,  "  there  is 
a  yoke  upon  the  neck  which  neither  your  fathers  nor 
you  have  been  able  to  bear." 

"  I  remember  spending  a  very  pleasant  evening 
with  Dean  Stanley,"  he  once  said.  "  The  Dean  was 
in  excellent  spirits  and  spoke  of  disestablishment. 
'  When  we  are  all  disestabhshed  and  disendowed,' 
he  said,  '  what  do  you  propose  to  do  with  the  Abbey 
and  St.  Paul's?  Which  do  you  propose  to  buy  for 
your  own  use?  But  really,  you  must  not  buy  St. 
Paul's,  that  you  must  leave  for  the  Cardinal,  it  will 
remind  him   of  St.   Peter's.'     And   so   he   went   on. 


A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  259 

laughing  heartily  at  his  fancy  sketch  of  the  future 
of  the  disestablished  Church.  He  was  always  very 
cordial." 

Mr.  Charles  Spurgeon  tells  two  stories  of  occasions 
when  he  preached  with  his  father.  In  the  East  of 
London  the  father  was  announced  to  preach  on  behalf 
of  a  small  Baptist  Chapel,  and  the  Congregationalists 
lent  their  building  opposite  for  the  service.  There 
was  such  a  crowd  that  the  son  preached  in  the  Baptist 
Chapel  to  the  overflow.  In  the  evening  he  was 
announced  to  preach  in  the  Baptist  Chapel,  but  again 
there  was  an  overflow,  and  his  father  came  at  his  call 
and  preached  in  the  schoolroom  opposite.  The  second 
occasion  was  at  Pollockshaws,  when  the  father 
preached  in  a  church  to  a  congregation  of  about  a 
thousand,  and  the  son  took  the  overflow  of  three 
thousand  or  more;  an  incident  that  greatly  amused 
the  father. 

At  one  of  the  College  Conferences  Dr.  Usher  prayed 
very  earnestly  for  the  children  of  the  assembled 
ministers.  This  suggested  to  Spurgeon  that  he  might 
write  to  the  sons  and  daughters ;  so  he  had  two  letters 
lithographed,  one  suitable  for  the  younger  children, 
and  the  other  adapted  for  those  older,  and  these  were 
sent  to  those  whose  names  were  furnished  by  members 
of  the  Conference.  Many  were  led  by  these  letters  to 
decide  for  Christ.  Years  after,  this  suggested  to  me 
the  idea  of  addressing  the  senior  scholars  of  our 
schools  in  Leicester  in  this  way ;  so  I  had  two  letters 
prepared  in  facsimile,  one  for  boys  and  one  for  girls, 
and  scores  of  them  responded.  Mr.  Thomas  Spurgeon 
once  did  the  same  thing  in  the  Tabernacle  School. 

A  clergyman  and  his  wife  gained  seats  in  the  first 
gallery  near  the  preacher.  The  sermon  over,  they 
rose  to  go,  and  in  trying  to  get  out  of  the  pew  knocked 


260  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

down  some  hymn-books  and  made  a  noise.  The 
husband  pulled  the  wife's  dress  to  try  and  detain  her. 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  who  had  been  quietly  looking  on,  said 
in  a  confidential  whisper,  "  You  had  better  go,  sir,  or 
you  will  hear  more  of  it." 

Spurgeon  had  a  rooted  objection  to  instrumental 
music  in  the  worship  of  God.  But  he  came  at  length 
to  tolerate  an  American  organ  in  mission  services, 
and  he  made  Manton  Smith  a  present  of  a  silver 
cornet,  on  which  was  inscribed  the  text  from  the 
ninety-eighth  Psalm,  "  With  trumpets  and  sound  of 
cornet,  make  a  joyful  noise  before  the  Lord  the  King." 
Once  when  asked  his  opinion  of  a  grand  organ,  he 
answered,  "  Yes,  it  praises  its  maker  very  well."  He 
also  disliked  choirs  and  he  detested  anthems.  After  a 
special  musical  performance  he  was  told  that  one  of 
the  pieces  was  supposed  to  have  been  sung  by  David. 
"  Then  I  know  why  Saul  threw  his  javelin  at  him," 
he  replied,  much  to  the  chagrin  of  the  choirmaster. 

When  he  went  to  Kingston-on-Thames  to  preach 
for  his  first  student,  Mr.  Medhurst,  an  old  woman,  in 
answer  to  the  question  how  she  liked  him,  said  that 
she  would  have  liked  him  much  better  "  if  he  had  not 
imitated  our  dear  pastor  so  much."  That  almost 
equals  the  story  of  the  person  who  did  not  appreciate 
Shakespeare,  because  he  was  so  full  of  quotations. 

During  the  Irish  Revival  of  '59,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
crossed  to  Ireland.  He  was  greeted  in  the  steamer  as 
"  Brother,"  and  discovered  that  of  the  crew,  all  but 
three  had  been  converted.  Coming  back,  one  man 
came  up  to  him  and  showed  him  a  leather-covered 
book  in  Welsh,  asking,  "  Do  you  know  the  likeness  of 
that  man  in  front  ?  "  He  answered  that  he  knew, 
and  asked  if  they  read  the  sermons  the  book  con- 
tained.    "  Yes,  sir,"  came  the  answer,  "  I  read  them 


A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  261 

aloud  as  often  as  I  can.  If  we  have  a  fine  passage 
coming  over,  I  get  a  few  round  me  and  read  them  a 
sermon."  Another  man  told  him  of  a  gentleman  who 
stood  laughing  while  a  hymn  was  being  sung,  so  one 
of  the  sailors  proposed  that  they  should  pray  for  him. 
They  did  so,  and  the  man  was  suddenly  smitten  down, 
and  on  the  quay  began  to  cry  for  mercy,  and  plead 
with  God  for  pardon. 

At  one  of  the  Annual  College  Conferences,  the  first 
meeting  on  the  Monday  evening  was  to  be  at  Kings- 
gate  Street  Chapel.  A  number  of  the  ministers  were 
passing  through  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields  on  their  way  to 
the  meeting,  when  somebody  asked,  "  Is  this  the  Royal 
College  of  Surgeons?  "  (The  Royal  College  is  there.) 
"  No,"  one  of  the  men  answered,  "it  is  the  Royal 
College  of  Spurgeons."  Alongside  this  retort  may 
be  put  the  answer  of  a  boy  at  an  examination  in  one 
of  our  Secondary  Schools.  "What  is  caviare?  "  he 
was  asked.     He  answered,  "  Spurgeon's  roe." 

On  his  way  to  the  poll  on  one  occasion,  Spurgeon 
met  his  friend  Mr.  Offord,  and  told  him  where  he  was 
going.  His  friend  reminded  him  of  his  heavenly 
citizenship,  and  chided  him  for  taking  part  in  poli- 
tical matters.  "  You  should  mortify  your  old  man," 
he  said.  "  That  is  what  I  am  going  to  do,"  said 
Spurgeon.  "  My  old  man  is  a  Tory,  and  I  am  going 
to  vote  Liberal." 

There  is  a  pretty  story  of  an  old  lady  whom  he 
visited  in  her  illness.  She  began  to  tell  him  how  much 
she  owed  to  him  spiritually,  and  he  told  her  not  to 
talk  any  more  about  it.  "  But  I  will,"  she  answered, 
"  for  my  former  pastor,  Joseph  Irons,  once  preached  a 
sermon  on  the  words,  '  Thou,  O  Solomon,  must  have 
a  thousand,  and  those  that  keep  the  fruit  thereof  two 
hundred.'     And  he  said,  '  Give  Solomon  his  thousand, 


262  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

but  let  his  ministers  have  their  two  hundred.'  So  I 
must  tell  you  how  I  have  been  blessed  through  your 
ministry.     You  shall  have  your  two  hundred." 

Spurgeon  began  preaching  as  a  boy,  and  even  to  the 
end  there  was  much  of  the  boy  in  him.  Once  he 
longed  so  much  for  the  coming  of  his  holiday  that  he 
persuaded  Mrs.  Spurgeon  to  mark  a  piece  of  tape  with 
the  dates  and  hang  it  on  the  chandelier  over  the  table. 
Each  day  a  bit  was  solemnly  cut  off  after  dinner,  and 
at  length  only  about  an  inch  was  left.  Preparations 
were  then  made  for  the  journey,  but  at  the  last 
moment  he  was  taken  ill,  and  never  more  was  a  tape 
hung  up  to  mark  the  passing  days. 

In  visiting  a  friend  he  saw  a  rosemary  bush  in  the 
garden,  and  playfully  remarked,  "  Oh,  rosemary  !  you 
know  what  people  say  about  it,  I  suppose  ?  '  Where 
the  rosemary  grows,  the  missus  is  the  master.'  "  Next 
time  he  was  in  his  friend's  garden  the  rosemary  bush 
was  gone. 

When  he  visited  Mr.  Tinworth,  the  artist  complained 
to  him  of  a  criticism  that  had  been  passed  on  his 
panel,  "  The  enemy  sowing  tares."  "  You  see  I  have 
depicted  him  sowing  with  his  left  hand,  and  this 
person  said  that  was  not  correct.  I  did  not  know 
what  to  say  to  him."  "  Why,"  said  Spurgeon,  "  you 
should  have  told  him  that  he  never  saw  Satan  sowing 
tares  with  his  right  hand." 

A  minister  once  put  a  case  to  him.  There  was  a 
hearer  who  objected  so  much  to  the  Gospel  he  preached, 
that  though  for  the  look  of  the  thing  he  attended  the 
church,  when  the  sermon  began  he  put  a  finger  in 
each  ear  so  that  he  could  not  hear.  The  question  was, 
what  would  Spurgeon  do  in  a  case  like  that.  "  Why," 
he  said,  without  hesitation,  "  I  would  pray  that  a  fly 
might  light  on  his  nose." 


A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  263 

Some  of  his  critics  even  to  the  end  pursued  him 
with  their  pin-pricks.  He  was  really  troubled  once 
at  Mentone  when  a  person,  without  sense  of  the  fitness 
of  things,  sent  a  letter  through  the  post  to  him,  after 
addressing  it  "To  the  Unprofitable  Servant,  C.  H. 
Spurgeon." 

On  one  of  the  occasions  when  the  Regent's  Park 
students  met  with  those  of  the  Pastor's  College,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  left  the  choice  of  subjects  to  Dr.  Angus. 
He  suggested  the  two  titles  *'  Culture  "  and  "  Go," 
evidently  thinking  that  the  second  would  be  appro- 
priate to  Spurgeon,  and  with  courtesy  asked  him 
which  he  would  select.  Spurgeon  mischievously 
chose  "  Culture  "  !  Both  speakers  acquitted  them- 
selves well. 

Mr.  George  Moore,  the  London  merchant,  was  a 
generous  supporter  of  Mr.  Spurgeon.  Once  when 
visiting  him  at  his  home  in  the  North,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
complimented  Mrs.  Moore  on  her  husband's  influence. 
"  You  are  a  Queen,"  he  said,  "  for  your  husband  is 
'  King  of  Cumberland  '  " — referring  to  his  power 
amongst  the  farmers  and  people  around.  "  Oh  no,  he 
is  not  that,"  the  wife  replied.  "  No,"  was  the  quick 
reply,  "  he  is  Mo(o)re."  Samuel  Smiles  tells  the 
story. 

Sir  Evan  Spicer  tells  how  his  father  once  asked 
Spurgeon  to  speak  at  a  meeting  on  Saturday,  and  the 
answer  was,  "  I  wouldn't  go  to  heaven  on  a  Saturday 
— if  I  had  to  come  back  again." 

Once  he  was  asked  where  the  devil  is  in  this  age. 
"  Time  enough  to  ask  the  question,"  he  answered, 
"  when  we  miss  him." 

One  of  his  friends,  whose  business  chiefly  consisted 
in  the  sale  of  a  celebrated  brand  of  ox  tongues,  sent 
him  a  number  of  packets  as  a  present.     In  return 


264  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

Spurgeon  sent  him  two  or  three  of  his  books  of 
sermons,  with  the  inscription,  "  Samples  of  my  own 
preserved  tongue." 

Dr.  Jowett  recounts  a  conversation  he  had  with 
Lord  Rosebery,  who  once,  when  visiting  the  Tabernacle 
when  the  service  was  somewhat  disturbed  by  a  faint- 
ing woman,  was  very  much  struck  with  the  calmness 
with  which  Spurgeon  regarded  the  incident.  Looking 
round  he  said,  "  Oh,  it's  only  Mary  So-and-so,"  and 
she  was  soon  removed.  Contrasting  this  with  an 
experience  he  had  when  a  little  while  after  he  went  to 
hear  a  great  preacher  in  Brooklyn,  who  was  quite 
upset  when  a  similar  incident  happened  in  his  con- 
gregation, Lord  Rosebery  praised  Spurgeon  for  his 
absolute  self-control,  and  his  genial,  all-inclusive 
humanity. 

A  baby  cried  during  one  of  the  services  at  the 
Tabernacle,  and  instead  of  being  irritated,  the  preacher 
prayed  that  the  little  life  might  early  be  claimed  for 
God.  As  the  boy  grew  up  he  was,  of  course,  told  that 
Mr.  Spurgeon  had  prayed  for  him,  and  at  length  he 
became  a  minister  of  the  Gospel.  To  one  who  was 
also  present  on  the  occasion  he  lately  wrote,  "As  we 
were  both  there  that  day,  early  in  the  'eighties,  just 
after  I  had  made  my  decision  for  Christ,  my  father 
took  me  in  to  see  C.  H.  S.,  and  recalled  the  incident. 
'  Yes,'  he  said,  '  it  was  about  1872.  I  have  prayed 
like  that  twice.  The  Lord  has  found  you,  do  you  go 
and  find  the  other  one.' "  The  following  week  he 
used  the  incident  on  Exeter  Hall  platform  as  an 
illustration  of  prayer  answered  after  many  days. 

At  breakfast  one  morning  in  his  own  home,  when 
he  and  I  were  alone,  and  talked  about  intimate  things, 
he  said,  "  Fullerton,  there  is  one  prayer  I  have  lately 
been  praying— that  the  Lord  would  give  me  a  short 


i 


A   CHAPTER   OF   INCIDENTS  265 

memory  for  grudges."  Never  man,  I  think,  needed 
to  pray  such  a  prayer  less,  but  he  knew  his  own  heart 
best,  and  ever  illustrated  the  pregnant  saying  of 
Agassiz,  that  "heavy  heads  always  bow." 

During  Mr.  Spurgeon's  short  convalescence  in  his 
last  illness,  his  neighbour,  Robert  Taylor,  the  Pres- 
byterian minister  of  Upper  Norwood,  who  often 
visited  him,  asked  him  one  day  if  he  could  put  into 
few  words  his  Christian  faith.  "It  is  all  in  four 
words,"  he  answered,  and  the  answer  is  memorable — 
"  Jesus  died  for  me." 


CHAPTER   XIV 

A   BUNDLE   OF   OPINIONS 

There  have  been  so  many  and  diverse  opinions 
expressed  about  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  his  work  that  it 
seems  desirable  that  some  of  them  should  have  perma- 
nent place  in  the  record  of  his  life.  They  will  form 
a  sort  of  composite  picture  of  the  man  that  may 
perhaps  be  nearer  the  reality  than  any  description 
or  estimate  issuing  from  one  pen.  This  chapter  will 
therefore  consist  of  extracts  selected  with  some  dis- 
crimination from  material  that  has  not  been  absorbed 
by  previous  chapters. 

"  Among  these  names,  as  lustrous  as  the  brightest, 
and  yet  shining  with  a  radiance  all  its  own,  gleams 
that  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  the  greatest  of 
modern  Puritan  preachers,  who  approached  nearer  to 
Bunyan  than  an}'^  other  in  the  quality  of  his  imagina- 
tion, and  to  Wesley  in  the  thoroughness  of  his  practical 
endeavours,  who  rivalled  Hooker  in  the  mastery  of 
Saxon  speech,  and  Henry  Ward  Beecher  in  his  poetic 
temperament  and  Shakespearean  acquaintance  with 
the  varying  moods  of  the  human  microcosm."  ^ 

"  It  has  been  said  that  none  of  his  sermons  are 
masterpieces  of  eloquence,  like  some  of  Bossuet's, 
Saurin's  or  Lacordaire's,  and  that  they  even  fail  as 
models,  being  excelled  by  those  of  Frederick  Robert- 
son and  Alexander  Maclaren.  All  this  may  be  so; 
but  unless  I  misjudge  humanity,  his  discourses  will 
long  continue  after  his  life  to  be  an  unfailing  source 

266 


i 


A   BUNDLE   OF   OPINIONS  267 

of  comfort  to  simple  and  troubled  souls.  Estimated 
by  their  attractiveness  and  their  immediate  spiritual 
force,  they  undoubtedly  surpass  all  contemporaneous 
preaching."  ^ 

"  The  voice  was  that  of  Chrysostom,  the  ardour  was 
that  of  Wesley,  the  unction  was  that  of  Savonarola, 
the  doctrine  was  that  of  Bunyan,  the  wit  was  that 
of  Thomas  Adams,  the  originality  was  that  of  Christ- 
mas Evans,  the  fervour  was  that  of  John  Howe,  the 
boldness  was  that  of  Calvin,  the  simplicity  was  that 
of  Whitefield,  the  pathos  was  that  of  Toplady.  Yes, 
it  was  the  composite  character  of  Spurgeon's  preaching 
which  really  accounted  for  its  infinite  charm.  Herein 
he  differed  from  every  other  preacher,  and  herein 
is  to  be  found  the  reason  of  the  almost  amusing 
perplexity  of  innumerable  critics.  Again  and  again 
he  used  to  say,  with  a  gleam  in  his  eyes,  that  American 
hearers  had  accosted  him  in  his  vestry  with  refreshing 
candour,  assuring  him  that  they  really  wondered  what 
it  could  be  that  made  him  so  famous,  as  they  had 
many  more  remarkable  preachers  than  himself.  They 
might  as  well  have  wondered  why  a  kaleidoscope 
elicits  delight,  with  its  endless  varieties  of  beautiful 
forms  flung  out  by  the  simplest  materials."  ^ 

"  Though  he  was  not  equal  to  Liddon  for  subtlety 
of  thought  and  refinement  of  expression,  or  to  Beecher 
for  philosophic  presentation  of  Bible  truth,  or  to 
Parker  for  striking  and  suggestive  sayings,  or  to 
Maclaren  for  deep  and  connected  exposition  of  Scrip- 
ture, yet  he  towered  above  them  all,  and  occupied 
a  unique  place  as  a  herald  of  the  Gospel,  a  preacher 
to  the  common  people.  Men  have  discussed  the 
secret  of  his  power,  and  have  given  different  explana- 
tions of  it,  but  all  have  been  agreed  about  the  fact 
of  power. 


268  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  To  hear  him  preach,  especially  in  his  own  Taber- 
nacle, was  to  feel  his  marvellous  power,  even  though 
it  was  difficult  to  understand  or  explain  it.  There 
was  the  perfect  ease  of  manner,  the  voice  of  such 
remarkable  clearness,  compass,  flexibility  and  volume ; 
the  directness  of  the  address,  the  tremendous  force 
of  conviction  that  throbbed  in  each  sentence,  the 
purpose  that  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the 
service  was  kept  well  in  view,  the  pure,  homely,  Saxon 
style  and  apt  illustration,  the  earnest  and  pathetic 
appeal.  And  withal  there  was  a  strong  magnetic 
force  which  riveted  the  attention  of  his  audience  and 
kept  them  spellbound.  '  We  are  never  great,'  says 
Schiller,  '  but  when  we  play,'  and  listening  to  the 
orator  in  the  Tabernacle,  carried  away  on  the  full 
flowing  tide  of  his  own  thought  and  emotion,  speaking 
so  easily,  simply,  naturally  and  effectively,  we  have 
found  in  him  the  truest  greatness."  ^ 

"  In  the  intensity  and  purity  of  his  inner  life  Spur- 
geon  had  more  in  common  with  old-fashioned  saints 
of  the  type  of  John  Woolman  and  George  Muller  than 
with  the  Laodicean  type  of  religion  which  is  prevalent 
in  the  churches  of  to-day.  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a 
humorist  and  an  orator.  The  saint  pure  and  simple 
is  not  always  a  genial  person.  Readers  of  the  lives 
of  Woolman  and  Muller  may  have  their  hearts  touched 
to  finer  issues,  but  inasmuch  as  their  mental  outlook 
is  narrow,  and  their  prevailing  temperament  sombre 
and  serious,  they  have  little  or  no  influence  over  people 
given  to  humorous  and  innocent  hilarity."  ^ 

"  He  has  been,  not  unjustly,  compared  to  the  friar 
preachers  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and,  of  course,  the  parallel 
has  been  drawn  between  him  on  the  one  hand  and 
Wesley  and  Whitefield  on  the  other.  He  was  like 
any    mediaeval   mission    preacher :    he    accepted    the 


A   BUNDLE   OF   OPINIONS  269 

system  in  which  he  found  himself  and  upon  its  basis 
preached  a  repentance  of  heart.  On  the  other  hand, 
he  resembles  the  Wesleys,  and  still  more  Whitefield, 
in  the  style  of  his  preaching,  in  the  quality  and  char- 
acter of  his  theology,  and  in  the  personal  effect  of  his 
preaching.  He,  too,  had  a  personal  following,  as  had 
the  Wesleys  and  Whitefield.  He  knew  that  definite- 
ness  and  sincerity  are  the  qualities  of  a  great  preacher. 
Thus  well-educated  men  could  be  moved  by  the  reality 
of  his  preaching  as  well  as  charmed  with  its  literary 
merits.  A  greater  mistake  cannot  be  made  than  that 
which  thinks  or  speaks  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  as  an  unedu- 
cated man.  He  was  the  master  of  an  English  style 
which  many  a  scholar  might  envy,  and  which  was 
admirably  fitted  for  his  purposes.  This  style  could 
only  have  been  acquired  by  great  pains,  and  by  the 
constant  study  of  the  best  literary  models,  which 
it  recalls.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  knowledge  of  the  Bible 
was,  of  course,  thorough;  he  knew  it  in  its  subject 
matter,  and  he  knew  it  in  its  old-fashioned  English 
dress,  and  with  that  he  was  content."  ^ 

"  The  truth  is,  that  instead  of  limiting  himself  to 
commonplace  illustrations,  Spurgeon  turned  round 
his  gaze  on  nature,  on  society  at  large,  and  gathered 
from  each  and  all  whatever  he  saw  available  for  the 
illustration  of  the  subject  he  had  before  him.  He 
cared  little  for  authority,  or  the  formulas  of  creeds 
and  articles,  and  instead  of  confining  himself  to  the 
language  of  the  schools,  and  of  previous  divines  and 
theologians,  he  would  ransack  the  stores  of  modern 
literature,  profane  as  well  as  sacred,  not  objecting 
to  a  phrase  or  a  sentiment  because  it  came  from 
Shakespeare  or  Scott,  Dr.  Johnson  or  Robert  Burns."  ^ 
"  He  could  not  help  talking  sense,  and  the  sense 
of  a  master  of  strong  English  often  assumes  a  more 


270  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

or  less  comic  form.  You  see  precisely  the  same  thing 
in  John  Ploughman's  Talk,  where  many  of  his  strings 
of  sentences,  in  their  crisp  and  energetic  form,  rouse 
just  the  sense  of  unexpectedness  and  enlightening  incon- 
gruity which  is  the  foundation  of  all  true  humour." 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  knew  his  audience,  and  spent  his 
life  in  trying  to  warm  respectability  into  virtue,  and 
acquiescence  in  Christianity  into  energetic  obedience 
to  its  commands ;  and  if  that  is  not  good  work,  there 
is  none.  Whether  he  succeeded  or  not,  is  for  a  higher 
knowledge  than  ours  to  decide ;  but  he  turned  a  vast 
chapel  into  a  sort  of  college  for  making  good  ministers, 
and  made  of  a  huge  middle- class  congregation,  drawn 
together  mainly  by  delight  in  his  preaching,  an  effective 
centre  of  all  good  work.  That  looks,  at  all  events, 
like  Christian  success. '^ ' 

"  For  directness  and  felicity  of  homely  illustra- 
tions he  was  Cobden's  sole  rival.  His  discourses 
were  full  of  shrewd  sayings — pithy  Saxon  utterances 
such  as  Franklin  loved.  Their  style  was,  however, 
exquisitely  simple,  and  everything  was  put  with  a 
touch  of  pathos,  a  homely  humour,  which  gave  even 
to  his  platitudes  the  semblance  of  vivid  and  vigorous 
originality."  ® 

"  His  intellectual  qualities  were  of  the  supremest 
kind.  I  have  met  many  great  men,  but  never  one 
so  swift  in  perception,  so  rapid  in  seizing  on  the  prime 
element  in  every  cause,  so  prompt  in  discussion. 
To  listen  to  his  talk  on  books  one  would  think  that 
he  had  done  nothing  but  read  in  the  library  all  his 
life,  and  to  mark  his  publications  would  fancy  that 
he  had  done  nothing  but  write.  His  heart  had  twelve 
gates  that  were  not  shut  at  all  by  day.  There  were 
few  such  men  of  business.  iJe  had  resource,  ingenuity 
and   judgment  that   gave   him   infinite   self-reliance. 


A   BUNDLE   OF   OPINIONS  271 

He  worked  swiftly,  while  such  was  his  humour,  his 
fertile  mind,  his  ready  thought,  his  affluent  speech, 
that  no  speaker  had  ever  equalled  him  in  our  genera- 
tion— perhaps  few  in  any  generation,  in  power  of 
swaying  masses  of  his  fellow-men."  ^ 

"  There  is  a  passage  in  Carlyle's  article  on  Burns 
in  The  Edinburgh  Review  which  might  have  been 
written  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon :  '  To  every 
poet,  preacher,  or  orator,  we  might  say  :  Be  true, 
be  sincere  if  you  would  be  believed.  Let  a  man  but 
speak  with  genuine  earnestness  of  the  thoughts,  the 
emotions,  the  actual  condition  of  his  own  heart,  and 
other  men,  so  strangely  are  we  all  knit  together  by 
sympathy,  must  and  will  give  heed  to  him.  In  culture, 
in  extent  of  view,  we  may  stand  above  the  preacher 
or  below  him ;  but  in  either  case,  his  words,  if  earnest 
and  faithful,  will  awaken  an  echo  within  us;  for  in 
spite  of  all  casual  varieties  in  outward  or  inward  rank, 
as  face  answers  to  face,  so  does  the  heart  of  man  to 
man.'  "  lo 

"  He  was  utterly  free  from  cant.  He  hated  it 
and  denounced  it,  and  no  trace  of  it  was  found  in  his 
own  language.  He  was  what  we  call  racy.  There 
was  a  fine,  honest  brusqueness  about  him.  He  never, 
feared  the  face  of  man.  In  vituperation  in  its  best 
sense  he  had  no  rival.  His  irony  was  not  a  keen 
rapier,  but  a  terrible  bludgeon,  with  which  he  dealt 
blows  that  never  needed  repetition.  He  introduced 
a  note  of  new  realism  into  the  pulpit.  He  spoke  out 
of  the  depths  of  himself,  and  followed  the  traditions  of 
no  man's  eloquence.  If  he  soared  into  the  heights 
of  poetic  imagination  it  was  by  accident,  it  was  a 
natural  flight ;  it  was  too  spontaneous  to  be  despised."  ^^ 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  displayed  his  innate  strength  of 
character  whilst  he  was  still  young;    and  we  think 


272  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

of  him  as  old,  not  because  of  his  years,  but  rather 
because  of  the  marvellous  opulence  of  his  activities, 
and  the  irresistible  energy  with  which  he  seized  the 
sceptre  of  pulpit  pre-eminence,  and  the  indisputable 
ability  with  which  he  held  it  to  the  close  of  his  career. 
In  short,  it  is  a  chief  element  in  the  problem  of  the 
prophet-preacher's  unannounced  but  indisputable 
fame,  that  he  took  a  foremost  place  amongst  the 
leaders  of  the  religious  life  of  the  world  in  his  dawning 
manhood;  took  it  easily  and  with  full  assurance  of 
conviction,  and  kept  it  with  unbroken  steadfastness 
for  more  than  thirty-five  years  out  of  his  fifty-seven. 

"  He  substituted  naturalness  for  a  false  and  stilted 
dignity,  passion  for  precision,  plain,  homely  Saxon 
for  highly- Latinised  English,  humour  and  mother- wit 
for  apathy  and  sleepiness,  glow  and  life  for  machinery 
and  death.  It  is  difficult  to  say  what  rank  coming 
generations  will  assign  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  amongst 
the  world's  preachers ;  but  it  is  certain  that  his  work 
as  a  leader  of  our  religious  life  introduced  a  new  era, 
and  filled  it  with  seeds  of  energy  that  will  be  reproduc- 
tive for  ever."  ^^ 

"  There  never  was  a  man  more  spontaneous  in 
all  he  did,  and  less  ambitious.  He  studied  day  and 
night,  and  filled  his  unerring  memory  with  pious 
thoughts  and  suggestive  histories,  but  it  was  never 
as  men  read  for  examinations,  or  even  as  men  investi- 
gate for  research  and  discovery;  it  was  solely  with 
the  object  of  winning  souls  to  Christ.  Whatever 
could  be  done  for  this  end,  with  might  and  main  he 
would  do.  Whatever  could  be  spoken  to  reach  the 
intricacies  of  the  human  heart,  that  he  longed  to  speak. 
He  was  a  consummate  dramatist,  and  might  have 
earned  a  reputation  either  as  an  actor  or  a  novelist, 
had  he  chosen,  but  his  heart  was  in  one  sacred  direc- 


A   BUNDLE   OF   OPINIONS  273 

tion,  and,  like  St.  Paul,  he  emphatically  knew  nothing 
save  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified.  He  was  the 
finest  possible  elocutionist,  and  yet  he  never  formally 
studied  elocution.  He  was  the  most  consummate 
mimic,  and  yet  had  never  trained  himself  artistically. 
Constant  devotion  to  one  aim  and  end  drew  out  all 
his  faculties  to  their  most  definite  expression,  so  that 
he  was  throughout  the  orator  born,  and  not  in  the 
least  item  artificially  moulded.  That,  however,  which 
infused  vitality  into  his  speaking,  and  relieved  it 
from  an  otherwise  inevitable  monotony  when  always 
addressed  to  one  topic  was  a  native  mother-wit. 
Spurgeon  was  essentially  a  humorist.  This  lent  buoy- 
ancy to  his  spirits,  brightness  to  his  imagination, 
and  perpetual  freshness  to  his  discourses.  He  was 
an  often  unconscious  but  always  close  observer  of 
men  and  morals.  The  kaleidoscope  of  humanity 
invariably  yielded  to  his  inspection  its  most  charming 
colours."  ^^ 

"  Very  solid  and  even  commanding  qualities  were 
requisite  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  youth  to  gain  the  suffrages 
of  the  vast  tract  of  the  middle  classes  which  formed 
his  constituency — a  mass  which  was  in  its  way  a 
fastidious  one.  Eccentricity,  if  carried  far  enough, 
was  always  effective,  but  then  it  required  a  considerable 
amount  of  moral  courage  for  its  practice,  and  moral 
courage  implies  a  good  deal  more  than  mere  eccen- 
tricity. It  has  seldom  been  the  chosen  mission  of  the 
reformer,  or  the  revivalist,  or  in  general  of  the  awakener 
of  souls  to  preach  to  the  bourgeoisie.  The  class  is 
by  no  means  so  easily  moved  as  the  miner  and  the 
peasant ;  it  seems  trenched  in  an  armour  of  respecta- 
bility, which,  for  that  matter,  appears  to  put  it  outside 
the  need  for  collective  conversion.  It  will  remain 
among  Mr.  Spurgeon's  titles  to  honour  that  he  reached 


274  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

the  most  difficult  class  by  legitimate  and  honourable 
means."  ^^ 

"  To  come  into  contact  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  to 
feel  in  his  personality  a  potent  charm  which  can 
scarcely  be  described.  It  was  instinctively  realised 
that  the  man  was  richer,  nobler,  than  his  words  and 
works.  To  spend  a  day  with  him  was  to  observe  a 
wonderful  play  of  faculty.  Now  there  is  an  outburst 
of  tenderness  and  sympathy  which  reveals  the  wealth 
of  a  gentle,  loving  heart;  anon  there  are  flashes  of 
wit  and  humour  which  light  up  the  topic  of  conversa- 
tion ;  then  there  is  some  telling  epigram,  or  racy  anec- 
dote, or  kindly  sarcasm;  and  again  some  scathing 
denunciation  descends  upon  that  which  he  regards 
as  evil.  And  all  is  so  natural  and  unconstrained  as 
to  suggest  vast  reserves  within,  as  yet  untouched, 
and  that  the  nuggets  thus  brought  to  the  surface  are 
only  a  faint  indication  of  the  untold  wealth  of  the 
mine."  ^^ 

"  Charles  Spurgeon  passed  through  the  greatest 
peril  that  can  beset  a  man's  character,  and  he  came 
out  of  it  not  only  unscathed,  but  with  an  ever-increas- 
ing reputation.  A  preacher  who  attains  unbounded 
popularity  at  twenty  is  exposed  to  temptations  which 
few  can  successfully  withstand.  He  was  for  a  year 
or  two  the  sensation  of  the  town.  The  cleverest 
satirical  writers  of  the  period  made  him  the  butt  of 
their  almost  constant  attacks.  Exaggerated  praise 
on  the  one  hand,  and  ignorant  and  ill-tempered  vitu- 
peration on  the  other,  would  have  effectually  spoiled 
any  but  a  man  of  genuine  sincerity.  But  fame  was 
by  no  means  Mr.  Spurgeon's  only  snare.  From  an 
early  period  in  his  career  he  has  been  trusted  with  the 
dispensing  of  enormous  sums  of  money.  Others, 
also,    have    been    similarly    trusted,    have    doubtless 


A   BUNDLE   OF   OPINIONS  275 

been  equally  honest,  but  it  has  happened  to  few  to 
escape,  as  he  has  done,  even  the  breath  of  suspicion."  ^^ 

"  Taking  all  things  into  account,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
seems  to  be  the  greatest  preacher  of  the  century- 
above  Chalmers,  Robertson,  Newman,  Liddon.  He 
was  learned  in  certain  departments  of  theology  that 
lent  themselves  to  spiritual  preaching,  and  he  had  an 
inexhaustible  store  of  noble  words  which  waited  upon 
him  like  nimble  servers.  He  was  as  characteristic 
an  Englishman  as  our  generation  has  seen,  and  possibly, 
after  Mr.  Gladstone,  the  ablest."  ^"^ 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  been  to  a  large  extent  no  unfair 
representative  of  English  life  and  thought,  capable  of 
putting  before  men  in  words,  an  adequate  expression 
of  their  half-unconscious  thought.  To  condemn  Mr. 
Spurgeon  is  thus  to  pass  sentence  on  no  small  part 
of  his  countrymen."  ^^ 

"  Nobody  ever  heard  Mr.  Spurgeon  preach  without 
remembering  something  that  he  had  said. 

"  What  is  more,  there  is  not  one  in  the  whole  of 
that  great  mass  of  human  beings  (in  the  Tabernacle) 
who  does  not  feel  that  Mr.  Spurgeon's  discourse  is 
absolutely  addressed  to  him  as  much  as  if  it  were 
given  to  him  alone."  ^^ 

"  A  young  man  after  hearing  Spurgeon  wrote  to 
his  mother,  '  They  say  there  were  six  thousand  present 
in  the  Tabernacle,  but  to  me  it  was  as  though  I  were 
alone,  and  he  was  speaking  to  me.'  " 

"  The  Church  of  England  owes  him  a  deep  debt  of 
gratitude,  and  if  he  would  stoop  to  the  office  would 
profit  more  largely  by  making  him  Bishop  of  Southwark 
and  St.  Giles,  and  having  an  exchange  between  St. 
Martin's  Church  and  the  Tabernacle."  20 

"  It  might  be  said  of  his  style  what  Macaulay  said 
of  Bunyan's  :    '  The  vocabulary  is  the  vocabulary  of 


276  LIFE   OF  SPURGEON 

the  common  people.'  Yet  no  writer  has  said  more 
exactly  what  he  meant  to  say.  For  magnificence, 
for  pathos,  for  vehement  exhortation,  for  subtle  dis- 
quisition, for  every  purpose,  the  poet,  the  orator, 
the  divine,  this  homely  dialect,  the  dialect  of  the 
plain  working-man,  was  perfectly  sufficient."  ^i 

"  Spurgeon  is  not  to  be  classed  with  types  like 
Erasmus  or  Fenelon  or  Leighton,  but  with  men  like 
Knox  and  Luther,  and  Cromwell  and  Baxter.  He 
was  a  man  of  infinite  capacity,  with  a  sense  of  ready 
wit,  and  felt  it  more  seemly  that  he  should  even  make 
his  congregation  smile  than  allow  them  to  slumber. 
God,  death,  judgment  and  the  life  to  come,  were 
intense  realities  with  him."  ^^ 

"  He  was  as  far  above  Liddon  as  Liddon  was  above 
Farrar."  23 

"  I  confess  that  when  I  had  the  privilege  of  a  little 
talk  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  I  have  looked  at  him,  and 
listened  to  him,  and  said  to  myself,  '  What  is  there 
in  this  man  that  has  made  him  the  most  popular 
preacher  that  ever  spoke  the  English  tongue  ?  '  I 
have  always  believed  that  the  chief  secret  of  his 
attractiveness  was  the  fact  that,  in  every  sermon, 
no  matter  what  the  text  or  the  occasion,  he  explained 
the  way  of  salvation  in  simple  terms.  There  are 
thousands  of  people  everywhere  who,  beneath  their 
superficial  indifference  or  apparent  opposition,  long 
in  their  hearts  to  know  what  they  must  do  to  be  saved. 

"  Once  when  I  happened  to  be  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
study,  he  showed  me  a  book  which  he  had  just  received. 
It  was  a  Russian  translation  of  a  select  number  of 
his  sermons,  published  with  the  imprimatur  of  the 
Archimandrite  of  Moscow  for  the  use  of  the  Greek 
Church.  If  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  would 
follow  the  example  of  the  exalted  Russian  dignitary, 


A   BUNDLE   OF   OPINIONS  277 

it  would  prove  a  great  blessing  to  many  of  his  parochial 
clergy.  An  acquaintance  of  mine,  crossing  the  Atlantic, 
met  a  Jesuit  Father  from  South  America,  and  that 
priest  told  him  that  he  regularly  read  every  sermon 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  that  he  could  lay  his  hands  on, 
and  that  he  owed  more  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  than  to  any 
other  living  man.  The  Day  of  Judgment  alone  will 
reveal  the  extent  to  which  millions  of  all  faiths  in  all 
lands  have  been  converted  and  edified  by  Mr.  Spur- 
geon's sermons,  and  all  because  he  was  not  too  clever 
and  too  learned  to  explain  the  way  to  Christ 
intelhgibly."  2* 

"As  we  have  said,  he  was  positive  from  the  very 
nature  of  his  work.  Once  when  he  was  sailing  past 
the  coast  of  Ayrshire,  the  land  of  Burns,  and  some  one 
remarked,  '  Surely  He  who  gathers  up  the  fragments 
that  nothing  be  lost,  will  find  something  worth  saving, 
something  good  in  poor  Burns  ' ;  he  replied  quickly, 
*  O,  that  is  no  use  to  me.'  Doubtless  he  meant  that 
to  his  six  thousand  he  must  sharply  draw  the  line-— 
black  or  white,  no  tints — he  must  say,  '  You  are  saved 
or  lost,  for  ever  saved,  for  ever  lost.'  "  ^^ 

"  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  is  not  one  of  a  class, 
but  an  individual  chosen  for  the  accomplishment 
of  a  special  work;  and  mentally,  morally  and  physic- 
ally, he  is  in  every  way  adapted  to  his  mission.  His 
seeming  defects,  in  the  eye  of  some,  are  special  excel- 
lences. He  is  not  to  be  judged  by  the  petty  rules 
that  poor  mortals  have  derived  from  the  creeping 
experience  of  the  past.  Nothing  were  easier  than  to 
prove  that  he  is  often  wild  and  erratic,  and  trans- 
gresses the  canons  of  the  schools.  He  is  above  the 
schools.  He  is  a  law  to  himself,  and  wholly  unamen- 
able to  the  tribunals  of  criticism.  He  simply  exerts 
the  powers,  peculiar  and  wonderful,  with  which  God 


278  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

has  endowed  him.  He  reads,  he  expounds,  he  prays, 
he  preaches,  as  nobody  else  ever  did,  or  probably 
ever  will  do.  He  is  an  original  and  rebel  in  everything. 
But  his  insurgency  notwithstanding,  he  is  the  imper- 
sonation of  the  profoundest  loyalty  to  a  higher  law. 
Comets  are  not  less  amenable  to  law  than  suns. 
Through  his  disobedience  he  achieves  his  triumphs 
and  rules  his  millions."  ^^ 

"  England's  greatest  contribution  to  the  spread 
of  the  Gospel  in  the  nineteenth  century  was  Charles 
Haddon  Spurgeon.  Through  him  God  wrought  signs 
and  wonders,  adding  another  chapter  to  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  There  is  no  class  or  type  in  which 
Spurgeon  can  be  included.  He  stands  alone,  a  new 
species  among  the  varieties  of  ministers,  a  sun  that 
outshines  the  stars  in  splendour. 

"  No  great  preacher  retains  his  supremacy  except 
by  becoming  universal.  Spurgeon,  the  sturdy  Pro- 
testant Baptist,  was  a  true  Catholic.  No  modern 
preacher  has  touched  and  held  so  large  and  varied 
a  constituency.  I  recognise  that  the  surest  way  to  the 
dethronement  of  kings  in  the  realm  of  thought  is  to 
claim  for  them  despotic  sovereignty.  Each  teacher 
elected  to  permanent  influence  must  die  to  live.  The 
local  and  the  sectional  fall  away.  The  dross  is  taken 
away  that  the  gold  may  go  into  the  currency  of  the 
Kingdom. 

"  In  1854,  The  Baptist  Magazine,  at  the  end  of  its 
pages,  recorded  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  removed  from 
Waterbeach  to  New  Park  Street,  that  the  chapel 
was  filled  and  several  candidates  awaited  baptism. 
This  was  told  in  a  brief  paragraph.  The  cautious 
editor  made  no  comment.  He  did  not  know  he  was 
chronicling  the  most  noteworthy  event  in  the  history 
of  British  Baptists,   and  the  advent   of  a   preacher 


A   BUNDLE   OF   OPINIONS  279 

without  a  compeer  in  the  story  of  the  Christian 
pulpit. 

"  The  poor  pedants  of  the  pulpit  who  made  merry 
over  young  Spurgeon's  homely  Saxon  speech,  did 
not  observe  that  almost  all  the  words  he  used  came 
from  the  Authorised  Version  of  the  English  Bible, 
which,  as  Mark  Rutherford  declares,  '  is  sufficient 
for  nearly  everything,  including  science,  that  a  human 
being  can  know  or  feel.'  "  ^^ 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  reckoned  as  the  highest  compliment 
ever  paid  to  him  the  words  of  an  open  enemy  who  said  : 
'  Here  is  a  man  who  has  not  moved  an  inch  forward 
in  all  his  ministry,  and  at  the  close  of  the  nineteenth 
century  is  teaching  the  theology  of  the  first  century, 
and  in  Newington  Butts  is  proclaiming  the  doctrine 
of  Nazareth  and  Jerusalem  current  eighteen  hundred 
years  ago.'  "  ^^ 

Dr.  J.  H.  Jowett,  at  the  welcome  meeting  of  the 
present  pastor  of  the  Tabernacle,  Rev.  H.  Tydeman 
Chilvers,  declared  that  Spurgeon's  greatness  had  four 
qualities  :  The  tremendous  Gospel  he  preached,  which 
was  not  only  that  man  could  be  saved,  but  that  he 
could  be  saved  to  the  uttermost.  The  fact  that  he 
was  so  joyous — he  always  brought  a  song-bird  into 
his  sermon.  Ruskin  had  declared  that  the  first  sign 
of  renaissance  of  art  was  the  introduction  of  a  bird 
into  a  certain  picture.  Then  there  was  his  human 
touch,  and  finally  his  humour.  "  As  far  as  I  can  read 
Spurgeon,  and  I  am  always  reading  him,  whenever 
he  brought  in  humour,  it  was  not  a  drawing-room 
lamp,  fighting  up  a  single  room;  it  was  always  a 
street  lamp,  to  show  people  the  way  home." 


CHAPTER  XV 

BOOK    TALK 

The  title  of  this  chapter  has  been  chosen  so  that 
we  can  wander  among  books,  and  browse  where  we 
will. 

The  largest  book  that  Spurgeon  produced  was  The 
Interpreter.  It  consists  of  selected  Scriptures  for 
each  morning  and  evening  in  the  year,  with  a  homily 
and  hymns.  But  as  the  author  did  not  approve 
of  printing  prayers,  it  lacks  the  very  thing  which 
would  commend  it  to  many  families.  It  is  as  big  as 
a  family  Bible,  and  in  past  years  was  often  to  be  met 
with  in  Christian  households. 

The  smallest  book  he  wrote  was  The  Clue  of  the  Maze, 
one  of  those  waistcoat -pocket  volumes  which  at  one 
time  were  so  popular.  It  was  written  during  a  holiday 
at  Mentone,  and  is  designed  to  lead  doubters  back 
to  faith. 

The  greatest  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  works  is  undoubtedly 
The  Treasury  of  David.  I  have  the  original  edition 
of  seven  volumes,  in  calf,  a  wedding  present  from  the 
early  publishers,  and  the  new  edition  of  six  volumes, 
in  cloth,  with  a  frontispiece  to  each  volume,  sent  to 
me  by  the  later  publishers.  It  is  a  monumental  work, 
containing  not  only  comments  on  all  the  Psalms  by 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  but  extracts  from  authors  of  all  ages 
and  conditions.  There  is  nothing  like  it  in  literature. 
Years  ago,  when  crossing  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and 
lost  in  wonder  as  I  gazed,  a  friend  came  to  my  side, 

280 


BOOK   TALK  281 

and  said,  "  There  is  only  one  word  for  it."  I  waited 
breathlessly  to  have  my  own  feelings  interpreted. 
"  It  is  immense,"  he  whispered.  Well,  the  research 
evidenced  in  this  work  is  just  that.  Dr.  Jowett  says 
about  it :  "I  have  for  many  years  sought  and  found 
nutriment  for  my  own  pulpit  in  this  marvellous  exposi- 
tion. He  is  not  eclipsed  even  when  set  in  the  radiant 
succession  of  Calvin  and  Luther  and  Paul."  The 
first  volume  was  issued  in  1869,  the  last  in  1885,  so 
that  about  twenty  years  were  spent  in  its  production. 
The  author  tells  us  that  only  those  who  have  meditated 
profoundly  on  the  Psalms  can  have  any  adequate 
conception  of  the  wealth  they  contain,  that  sometimes 
as  he  pondered  over  them  holy  fear  fell  upon  him, 
and  he  shrank  from  the  attempt  to  explain  themes 
so  sublime.  The  work  seems  to  have  grown  more 
difficult  as  he  advanced,  the  material  available  on  the 
later  Psalms  being  much  more  meagre  than  on  the 
early  ones.  The  hundred  and  fourth  Psalm  demanded 
forty  pages ;  the  hundred  and  ninth  Psalm  was  inter- 
preted with  the  news  of  the  Bulgarian  atrocities  then 
ringing  throughout  the  world ;  the  hundred  and  nine- 
teenth Psalm  almost  occupies  a  whole  volume,  having 
nearly  four  hundred  pages  given  to  it,  and  Mr.  Spur- 
geon's  own  comments  on  it  were  afterwards  published 
separately  under  the  title,  The  Golden  Alphabet  of  the 
Praises  of  Holy  Scripture.  At  the  end  of  all  the 
author  speaks  of  his  joy  in  the  whole  work  :  "  Happier 
hours  than  those  which  have  been  spent  on  these 
meditations  on  the  Songs  of  Zion  he  never  expects 
to  see  in  this  world." 

The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  a  Commentary  on  the 
Gospel  according  to  Matthew,  one  of  the  last  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  works,  is  issued  in  similar  style  to  The 
Treasury, 


282  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

There  are  three  volumes  of  daily  readings  :  Morning 
by  Morning ;  Evening  by  Evening  ;  and  The  Cheque- 
book of  the  Bank  of  Faith,  the  latter  written  during 
the  troubles  of  the  Down- Grade  Controversy,  greatly 
sustaining  the  author  as  he  wrote  them.  These  have 
permanent  value. 

In  addition  to  the  sixty-three  volumes  of  the  regular 
issue  of  the  Sermons,  there  are  three  volumes  of  "  The 
Pulpit  Library,"  now  almost  unobtainable,  and  five 
other  volumes  selected  at  different  times  :  Types  and 
Emblems,  Trumpet  Calls  to  Christian  Energy,  The 
Present  Truth,  Storm  Signals,  and  Farm  Sermons, 
containing  about  twenty  sermons  each.  Messages 
for  the  Multitudes,  and  Sermons :  a  Selection,  have 
been  issued  by  separate  publishers.  Another  volume, 
entitled  Till  He  Come,  contains  some  Communion 
addresses,  while  Facsimile  Pulpit  Notes  gives  views 
of  the  Tabernacle,  as  well  as  the  sermons  preached 
from  the  notes,  and  there  are  seven  volumes  of  reprints 
on  various  topics — The  Song  of  Solomon,  the  Parables, 
the  Miracles,  the  Messiah,  etc.  In  addition  to  these, 
over  thirty  different  selections  have  been  issued  in 
the  "  Twelve  Sermon  Series."  The  Saint  and  the 
Saviour  and  Grace  Triumphant,  published  by  other 
firms,  also  contain  original  material,  so  that  there 
are  at  least  seventy-five  distinct  sermon  volumes. 

There  is  a  collection  of  proverbs  in  two  volumes, 
entitled  The  Salt  Cellars.  About  these  a  friendly 
reviewer  said  :  "  We  are  more  interested  in  Mr.  Spur- 
geon's  applications  than  in  many  of  the  proverbs. 
The  reader  asks  himself  as  he  lights  on  some  familiar 
or  unfamiliar  proverb,  '  Come,  now,  I  wonder  what  Mr. 
Spurgeon  will  make  of  that.'  For  one  never  knows 
what  he  will  make  of  it.  The  old-fashioned  applica- 
tion of  ^sop's   Fable   every  child  could  anticipate, 


BOOK  TALK  283 

but  there  is  no  such  commonplace  and  prosaic  certainty 
about  Mr.  Spurgeon's  appUcations,  and  therefore  they 
have  to  be  read."  And  in  response  to  another 
criticism  he  wrote  to  George  Augustus  Sala  :  "I  Uke 
the  parts  in  which  you  pitch  into  me  quite  as  well  as 
those  in  which  you  praise."  These  volumes  contain 
many  of  the  proverbs  published  year  by  year  in  John 
Ploughman's  Almanack,  with  shrewd  comments 
thereon. 

That  brings  us  to  John  Ploughman'' s  Talk,  and  its 
scarcely  less  successful  second,  John  Ploughman's 
Pictures,  Dr.  Stalker  thinks  that  the  first  "  is  certain 
of  immortality  among  the  popular  classics  of  England." 
It  has  had  a  great  vogue,  and  is  just  packed  with  wit 
and  wisdom.  Sermons  in  Candles,  the  famous  lecture, 
is  issued  in  the  same  style,  and,  since  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
death,  Mr.  J.  L.  Keys,  his  amanuensis,  has  issued, 
through  another  publisher,  another  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
lectures,  What  the  Stones  Say,  an  illustrated  volume. 

Of  illustrations  and  extracts  there  are  ten  volumes, 
including  one  from  Thomas  Brooks,  to  which  reference 
has  been  made  in  an  earlier  chapter,  and  another  from 
Thomas  Manton,  described  as  Flowers  from  a  Puritan's 
Garden,  Distilled  and  Dispensed.  There  is  also  the 
Spurgeon  Birthday  Book.  Nine  popular  volumes  are 
addressed  to  various  classes,  and  a  series  of  seven  little 
books  form  the  shilling  series,  The  Bible  and  the 
Newspaper  leading  the  way. 

Two  of  the  most  valuable  books  to  put  into  the 
hands  of  those  who  are  seeking  Christ  are  All  of  Grace, 
which  is  crystal  clear,  and  has  been  the  means  of 
leading  scores  of  persons  to  the  Saviour,  and  According 
to  Promise,  which  seeks  to  entice  people  to  Christ. 
Spurgeon  used  often  to  say  that  the  best  way  to  get 
a  hungry  man  to  eat  a  dinner  is  to  put  a  dinner  on  the 


284  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

table  before  him.  Around  the  Wicket  Gate  is  another 
volume  with  the  same  intent. 

Already  in  the  "  College  "  chapter  the  nine  volumes 
for  students  have  been  mentioned,  and  another,  issued 
against  Mr.  Spurgeon's  will  by  another  house,  entitlt^d 
The  Pastor  in  Prayer,  is  very  choice.  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
prayers  were  in  later  years  always  reported  for  his 
own  use,  but  he  steadfastly  refused  to  publish  them. 
Here  are  twenty-six  that  have  escaped  from  their 
prison. 

Prayers  suggest  hymns.  Dr.  Theodore  Cuyler  men- 
tioned among  his  virtues  this — that  he  had  never 
compiled  a  hymn-book.  But  the  compilation  of 
Our  Own  Hymn-Book  is  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  credit,  and 
the  section  of  it  entitled  "  The  Golden  Book  of  Com- 
munion with  Jesus  "  is  not  to  be  equalled  in  any  other 
collection  of  hymns  of  similar  character.  He  himself 
has  written  some  hymns  that  have  already  an  assured 
place;  amongst  them,  "Sweetly  the  holy  hymn," 
"  Amidst  us  our  Beloved  stands,"  "  The  Holy  Ghost 
is  here."  There  are  others,  less  well  known,  that  yet 
attain  a  high  standard  of  excellence.  Take,  for 
instance,  his  version  of  the  fifteenth  Psalm — 


"  Lord,  I  would  dwell  with  Thee 
On  Thy  most  holy  hill ; 
Oh,  shed  Thy  grace  abroad  in  me, 
To  mould  me  to  Thy  will. 

"  Thy  gate  of  pearl  stands  wide 
For  those  who  walk  uiaright ; 
But  those  who  basely  turn  aside 
Thou  chasest  from  Thy  sight. 

"  Oh,  tame  my  tongue  to  peace, 
And  tune  my  heart  to  love; 
From  all  reproaches  may  T  cease. 
Made  harmless  as  a  dove. 


BOOK   TALK  285 

"  The  vile,  thougli  proudly  great, 
No  flatterer  find  in  me; 
I  count  Thy  saints  of  poor  estate 
Far  nobler  company. 

"  Faithful,  but  meekly  kind, 
Gentle,  yet  boldly  true, 
I  would  possess  the  perfect  mind 
Which  in  my  Lord  I  view. 

"  But,  Lord,  these  graces  all 
Thy  Spirit's  work  must  be  ; 
To  Thee,  through  Jesus'  blood  I  call — 
Create  them  all  in  me." 

A  number  of  booklets  by  Spurgeon  have  also  been 
issued.  Perhaps  The  Greatest  Fight  in  the  World, 
his  last  Conference  address,  published  in  the  form  made 
familiar  to  us  by  Henry  Drummond,  has  had  the  largest 
circulation.  Spurgeon' s  Almanack  was  also  published 
year  by  year. 

At  intervals  pictorial  albums  have  been  issued 
describing  the  Tabernacle,  the  Orphanage,  and  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  home,  and  the  last  work  that  engaged 
him  was  a  memorial  of  his  early  days.  Memories  of 
Stambourne. 

There  yet  remain  the  annual  volumes  of  The  Sword 
and  the  Trowel,  which  began  in  1865,  and  was  con- 
tinued until  the  end — twenty-eight  years.  Buried 
in  these  volumes  is  some  of  the  best  work  the  Editor 
ever  did,  and  they  will  repay  working  over. 

The  whole  Spurgeon  Library,  therefore,  taking 
no  count  of  tractates,  consists  of  no  less  than  135 
volumes,  of  which  he  was  the  author,  and  twenty- 
eight  which  he  edited,  163  volumes  in  all,  or,  including 
the  reprints,  176  !  If  we  add  the  albums  and  the 
pamphlets,  we  get  an  output  of  200  books  ! 

At  the  time  of  his  death  there  were  12,000 
volumes  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  library,  in  addition  to  those 


286  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

that  he  had  sent  to  furnish  the  well-filled  shelves 
of  the  library  in  the  College.  The  Westwood  col- 
lection was  scattered,  some  souvenir  volumes  going 
to  friends  in  this  country,  and  the  remainder  to 
America. 

The  story  is  interesting.  When  the  Baptist  World 
Congress  was  being  held  in  London  in  1905,  a  friend 
of  the  William  Jewell  College  in  Missouri  viewed  the 
collection,  and  after  he  returned  home,  the  trustees 
of  the  College,  whom  he  had  interested,  determined 
to  purchase  it,  and  cabled  over  an  offer  of  £500,  asking 
Dr.  Thirtle  to  carry  through  the  negotiations.  Two 
days  later  the  evening  papers  of  St.  Louis  announced 
that  the  William  Jewell  College  had  become  possessors 
of  Spurgeon's  library.  The  books,  varying  in  size 
from  folios  to  duodecimos,  and  numbering  some 
7000,  many  of  them  rare  volumes,  were  on  their 
arrival  welcomed  as  the  sign  of  a  new  era  in  the  College 
life.  It  was  argued  that  the  College  must  have  a  new 
library  building  to  hold  them,  and  that  expansion 
must  proceed  everywhere  else  in  the  Institution.  The 
appeal  for  enlargement  was  made,  and  the  "  Spurgeon 
Library  "  formed  the  chief  factor  in  bringing  a  response 
of  a  million  dollars  for  the  College  treasury.  Americans 
are  disposed  to  boast  that  the  most  eloquent  memorial 
of  the  great  preacher  is  with  them,  rather  than  with 
his  British  kinsfolk  and  friends. 

If  jt  is  asked  what  did  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  read, 
the  answer  is  that  he  read  everything.  His  daily 
newspaper  was  The  Times.  The  Bible  was  his  con- 
stant study,  perhaps  next  came  John  Bunyan— 
*'  prick  him  anywhere,"  he  says,  "  and  you  will  find 
that  his  blood  is  Bibline."  Carlyle's  French  Revolution 
was  read  again  and  again.     Bos  well's  Johnson,  Lock- 


BOOK  TALK  287 

hart's  Life  of  Scott,  and  Mrs.  Oliphant's  Life  of  Irving 
were  favourites.  Scott  and  Dickens  had  their  turn, 
and  of  course  the  Puritans.  Then  he  read  the  books 
he  reviewed  in  his  magazine,  and  he  was  always  on 
the  look-out  for  rare  volumes  that  he  desired,  as  they 
might  be  catalogued  by  secondhand  booksellers. 
Dr.  Maclaren  once  had  a  race  with  him  for  an  old 
volume.  Dr.  Angus  on  another  occasion  was  also 
just  too  late. 

In  many  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  books  the  autograph 
of  the  author  was  preserved,  and  Spurgeon's  own 
comments  lent  value  to  some  of  the  volumes.  As 
an  example,  on  the  fly-leaf  of  Things  New  and  Old,  by 
John  Spenser,  MDCLVIII— 

"  The  richest  book  in  my  library, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon. 
"  I  had  an  old,  dilapidated  copy  given  to  me  by 
that  great  offender  W.  L.  Oliver.  When  he  was 
condemned  I  found  that  it  was  not  his  book,  and  there- 
fore he  had  no  right  to  give  it  to  me.  I  returned  the 
copy  to  its  rightful  owner,  mourning  because  my 
treasure  was  gone.  But  my  generous  God  instantly 
sent  me  this  complete  copy,  and  the  dear  brother  who 
sent  it  knew  nothing  of  my  thoughts  and  wishes. 
Praise  be  to  my  generous  God  !  " 

He  delighted  in  scattering  books.  Of  Mrs.  Spur- 
geon's Book  Fund  we  have  already  spoken  in  the 
"  Intimate  "  chapter.  At  every  Conference  she  pre- 
sented a  volume  to  the  ministers  attending,  and  those 
who  took  special  part  were  sure  to  have  a  book, 
autographed  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  acknowledgment. 

The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Colportage  Associa- 
tion,  founded  in   1866,   was   always  Mr.   Spurgeon's 


288  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

special  care.  At  the  close  of  1891  some  ninety-six 
colporteurs  wefe  employed,  and  from  the  beginning 
up  to  that  time  the  total  value  of  the  sales  was  no  less 
than  £153,784,  while  nearly  twelve  million  visits  had 
been  paid  to  the  homes  of  the  people.  The  Association 
still  continues  its  good  work,  having  its  office  and 
packing-room  in  the  College  buildings. 

So  Mr.  Spurgeon,  the  preacher,  was  in  a  very  real 
sense  a  Bookman.  He  knew  books,  he  wrote  books, 
he  read  books,  he  distributed  books,  he  reviewed 
books ;  his  opinions  on  current  literature  were  greatly 
valued,  and  his  own  books  eagerly  bought.  By  them 
he  still  speaks  to-day  to  many  who  never  heard, 
and  never  could  have  heard,  his  voice.  So  the  seed 
is  multiplied,  some  thirtyfold,  some  sixtyfold,  some 
a  hundredfold,  and  the  harvest  is  at  length  gathered 
into  the  barn. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

SOME   MINOR    DISCUSSIONS 

For  years  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  probably  the  most 
discussed  man  in  the  kingdom,  and  it  was  inevitable, 
when  the  tongues  and  pens  of  other  people  were  so 
busy,  that  he  himself  should  be  drawn  into  the  fray. 

The  first  discussion  began  soon  after  his  advent  in 
London.  It  arose  amongst  the  high  Calvinists,  and 
began  by  the  publication  in  The  Earthen  Vessel  of  an 
article  by  Mr.  Charles  Waters  Banks,  who  afterwards 
became  his  loyal  friend.  The  article  just  raised  the 
question  as  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  standing  in  the  Christian 
Church.  After  recording  the  success  of  his  ministry 
it  proceeds  :  "  But,  then,  very  solemn  questions 
arise.  '  What  is  he  doing  ?  '  '  Whose  servant  is  he  ?  ' 
'  What  proof  does  he  give  that,  instrumentally,  his 
is  a  heart-searching,  a  Christ-exalting,  a  truth-unfold- 
ing, a  sinner-converting,  a  church-feeding,  a  soul- 
saving  ministry?  '  " 

In  the  following  month,  January  1855,  "  Job,"  who 
was  doubtless  the  Rev.  James  Wells  of  Surrey  Taber- 
nacle, a  preacher  then  at  the  zenith  of  his  power, 
wrote,  expressing  doubts  as  to  the  young  man's 
conversion,  and  declaring  that  though  he  spoke  some 
truth,  and  had  a  partial  moral  influence,  yet  his  hearers 
were  likely  to  be  fatally  deluded.  In  later  numbers 
of  the  magazine  the  Editor  could  go  no  further  than 
to  ask  prayer  "  for  this  young  man,  whom  we  earnestly 
hope  the  Lord  has  sent  among  us." 

U  289 


290  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

It  makes  quaint  reading,  and  in  view  of  the  future 
most  foolish.  Probably  some  of  the  things  discussed 
by  others  to-day  will  seem  as  quaint  and  foolish  in  the 
days  to  come.  Mr.  Wells  and  Mr.  Spurgeon,  after  the 
building  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  were  neigh- 
bours. It  is  said  that  they  once  met  in  the  street, 
and  Mr.  Wells  asked  Mr.  Spurgeon  whether  he  had 
ever  seen  the  inside  of  Surrey  Tabernacle.  He  replied 
that  he  had  not,  but  would  very  much  like  to  see  it, 
upon  which  Mr.  Wells  said  that  if  he  would  come 
some  Monday  morning  he  would  show  him  round,  and 
there  would  then  be  time  enough  to  thoroughly  venti- 
late the  place  before  the  next  Lord's  Day.  Upon  that, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  asked  Mr.  Wells  if  he  had  ever  seen  round 
his  Tabernacle,  and  Mr.  Wells  answered  that  he  had 
looked  in  one  Saturday,  giving  the  date.  "  Ah,"  said 
Spurgeon,  "  that  accounts  for  the  delightful  fragrance 
of  the  services  the  following  Sabbath  !  " 

Though  Mr.  Spurgeon  did  not  belong  to  them,  he 
had  ever  a  great  admiration  for  the  Strict  Baptists. 
One  of  the  permanent  influences  of  his  career  was, 
indeed,  the  early  training  he  received  amongst  the 
Calvinists  of  the  Eastern  Counties.  The  wonder  is 
that  he  broke  away  from  the  sterner  school.  Baptists 
in  those  days  were  a  puzzle  to  outsiders,  they  were 
divided  into  "  Particular,"  those  that  believed  in 
particular  redemption;  and  "General,"  those  who 
affirmed  that  Christ  died  for  all  men.  There  was 
another  division,  "Strict  Baptists"  —  those  who 
admitted  to  the  Lord's  Table  only  such  as  had  been 
baptised;  and  "Open  Baptists" — those  who  wel- 
comed all  believers  to  the  Communion  Service.  Then, 
again,  amongst  the  Open  Baptists  were,  and  are,  those 
who  grant  Church  membership  apart  from  baptism, 
and   those   who,    though   they   have   an   open   table, 


SOME   MINOR   DISCUSSIONS  291 

demand  baptism  before  entrance  to  the  Church.  The 
General  and  the  Particular  Baptists  have  long  since 
united,  but  there  are  still  those  who,  being  high 
Calvinists,  hold  aloof,  and  indeed  these  again  are 
divided  into  two  sections.  But  the  doctrinal  and 
ecclesiastical  lines  do  not  necessarily  agree. 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  position  was  Calvinistic,  accompanied 
by  Open  Communion.  He  once  told  me  with  appre- 
ciation how  he  was  worsted  in  argument  by  an 
American  divine.  During  a  drive,  the  visitor  made  a 
number  of  inquiries,  and  discovered  the  practice  of 
the  Church  at  the  Tabernacle,  how  it  admitted  people 
to  the  Lord's  Table  who  were  not  baptised,  and  refused 
them  membership  unless  baptised.  "  Which  means, 
that  they  are  good  enough  for  the  Lord,  and  yet  not 
good  enough  for  you  !  "  said  his  guest.  And  Spurgeon 
had  to  admit  that  the  logic  was  not  on  his  side.  But, 
then,  neither  the  world  nor  the  Church  can  live  on 
logic  alone. 

What  is  known  as  "  The  Rivulet  "  controversy  rose 
over  a  little  book  of  verse  published  by  Rev.  T.  T. 
Lynch  under  that  title.  Here,  again,  in  retrospect  it 
seems  much  hubbub  about  very  little.  Some  of  the 
poetry  has  found  its  way  into  our  hymn-books,  some 
is  forgotten.  In  The  Christian  Cabinet  of  May  23, 
1856,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  a  lengthy  article,  good- 
humouredly  pointing  out  the  weaknesses  of  the  book. 
"  If  I  should  ever  be  on  amicable  terms  with  the  chief 
of  the  Ojibewas,  I  might  suggest  several  verses  from 
Mr.  Lynch  as  a  portion  of  a  liturgy  to  be  used  on  the 
next  occasion  when  he  bows  before  the  Great  Spirit 
of  the  West  Wind.  Hark !  O  ye  Delawares,  Mohawks, 
Choctaws,  Chickasaws,  Blackfeet,  Pawnees,  Shaw- 
nees,  and  Cherokees,  here  is  your  primitive  faith  most 
sweetly  rehearsed — not  in  your  own  wild  notes,  but 


292  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

in  the  white  man's  language,"  and  then  he  quoted 
the  verse,  "  My  God  in  nature  I  confess."  The  con- 
troversy was  so  fierce  at  the  time  that  the  autumn 
meeting  of  the  Congregational  Union  was  postponed 
because  of  it. 

But  in  spite  of  this,  perhaps  because  of  it,  in  a 
speech  at  Exeter  Hall,  while  the  feeling  was  still  bitter, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  said,  "  I  am  about  to  quote  the  words  of 
a  good  man,  who  I  think  is  very  much  misunder- 
stood."    Then  he  gave  the  verse — 

"  Let  us  with  a  wind-like  song 
Freshen  all  the  air  of  life  : 
Singing  makes  the  heart  grow  strong  : 
Now  to  wdn  seems  worth  the  strife." 

And  only  a  little  while  before  his  death  he  reviewed 
a  volume  of  Lynch's  sermons,  and  said  that  they 
contained  "  a  great  deal  of  the  Gospel  in  solution." 

Four  years  afterwards  the  storm  raged  around  the 
head  of  Baldwin  Brown,  who  had  just  published  his 
volume  The  Divine  Life  in  Man.  Two  articles  by 
Howard  Hinton  in  The  Freeman  condemning  the  book 
were  so  unfavourably  reviewed  by  that  journal,  that 
seven  ministers,  amongst  them  Mr.  Spurgeon,  wrote 
a  protest,  which,  with  gaucherie  characteristic  of  the 
time,  was  itself  criticised.^  This  led  to  further  dis- 
cussion and  a  final  letter  from  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  two 
other  papers,  and  a  retort  by  Baldwin  Brown.  Even 
one  of  the  papers  that  published  Mr.  Brown's  letter 
expressed  surprise  that  the  doctrines  of  Maurice,  which 
he  championed,  could  be  counted  compatible  with  the 
evangelic  faith. 

The  next  discussion  was  with  Dr.  Gumming,  who, 
in  the  midst  of  his  prophetic  studies,  was  also  known 
as  The  Times  Bee  Master.  In  a  book  on  "  Bees  " 
in  1864  he  made  some  strictures  on  the  Baptismal 


SOME   MINOR   DISCUSSIONS  293 

Regeneration  Controversy,  to  which  reference  will  be 
made  in  the  next  chapter,  and  said  :  "  I  wish  somebody 
would  send  Mr.  Spurgeon  a  super  of  good  honey. 
Three  months'  diet  on  this  celestial  food  would  induce 
him  to  give  up  those  shockingly  bitter  and  unchristian 
tirades  he  has  lately  been  making  against  the  clergy 
of  the  Church  of  England."  In  answer  Spurgeon  in 
The  Times  advised  his  brother  of  Crown  Court  to  give 
less  honey  and  more  salt  in  his  public  ministrations, 
reminded  him  that  honey  was  prohibited  in  the 
ancient  sacrifices,  because  it  so  speedily  became  acid, 
whereas  salt  was  good.  In  the  end  Dr.  Cumming  was 
offered  a  brick  of  the  best  salt,  carriage  paid,  if  only 
he  would  follow  this  reasonable  advice. ^ 

On  Monday,  June  29,  1868,  the  Bishop  of  Oxford, 
speaking  on  the  Irish  Church  in  the  House  of  Lords, 
amidst  much  responsive  laughter,  referred  to  a  letter 
Mr.  Spurgeon  had  written  in  April  to  John  Bright, 
who  had  presided  at  a  meeting  of  the  Liberation  Society 
in  the  Tabernacle,  Mr.  Spurgeon  being  too  ill  to  be 
present.  Bishop  Wilberforce  poked  fun  at  Spurgeon's 
rheumatic  gout,  and  said  that  he  had  sent  a  written 
communication  in  which  he  said  that  the  Irish  clergy 
were  the  very  best  of  the  clergy  of  the  Establishment, 
and  that  for  that  reason  he  thought  that  they  should 
be  the  first  to  be  favoured  with  the  great  blessing  of 
disendowment.  Their  lordships  would  remember  how 
Isaac  Walton  said  they  were  to  treat  the  frog,  put  it 
on  the  hook  "  tenderly,  as  if  they  loved  it."  The 
Bishop  then,  amid  further  laughter  and  cheers, 
quoted  another  letter  of  Spurgeon's,  addressed  to  the 
Baptist  Churches,  complaining  of  their  niggardly 
support  of  their  ministers. 

To  this  Mr.  Spurgeon  made  a  spirited  reply  in  The 
Daily   Telegraph,   which,   in  a  leading   article,   sums 


294  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

up   the    situation    and   vindicates   Spurgeon.     Some 
sentences  will  bear  quotation — 

"  There  are  gleeful  sounds  of  merriment  in  many  a 
country  rectory  over  the  discomfiture  of  Spurgeon  by 
Wilberforce;  there  is  a  grim  smile  of  delight  on  the 
face  of  many  a  Dissenting  Minister  at  the  discomfiture 
of  Wilberforce  by  Spurgeon. 

"  Whether  it  was  altogether  decorous  for  a  spiritual 
peer  of  the  realm  to  caricature  in  his  place  in  Parlia- 
ment the  voice  and  manner  of  a  Dissenting  Minister, 
we  do  not  care  to  discuss.  All  we  mean  to  say  is  that 
if  Mr.  Spurgeon  mimicked  the  Bishop  of  Oxford  in  the 
Tabernacle,  or  on  the  platform  of  Exeter  Hall,  every 
Churchman  in  the  Bishop's  School  would  have  con- 
sidered the  act  as  a  proof  of  '  the  vulgarity  of  Dissent.' 
We  know,  however,  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  Bishop 
to  be  vulgar  :  he  can't  manage  it ;  the  nature  of  his 
office  prevents  him ;  and  accordingly  we  are  convinced 
that  the  Bishop  of  Oxford  was  really  very  gentle- 
manly after  a  new  fashion. 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  displayed  a  creditable  amount 
of  good  taste  and  good  temper  in  his  reply.  Com- 
pared with  the  ordinary  line  of  religious  polemics  his 
rejoinder  is  mildness  itself.  There  is,  however,  an 
undercurrent  of  drollery  in  it  which  may  make  the 
Bishop  tremble  for  his  laurels.  The  sting  of  his 
adversary's  letter  lies  in  the  '  Dr.  Samuel  Wilberforce ' 
at  the  end  of  it,  and  in  the  date  '  Clapham.'  As  it 
happens,  the  world  already  associates  those  two  names 
very  intimately  together;  but  a  new  and  grotesque 
juxtaposition  is  suggested  when  we  remember  that  the 
son  of  William  Wilberforce,  sitting  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  does  not  miss  an  opportunity  of  sneering  at  the 
school  with  which  his  father  used  to  work."  ^ 


SOME   MINOR   DISCUSSIONS  295 

Six  years  afterwards  Spurgeon  became  the  centre  of 
a  controversy  on  Tobacco  Smoking.  Dr.  George  F. 
Pentecost,  who  had  been  a  guest  at  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
home,  and  had  expressed  in  glowing  terms  his  admira- 
tion of  the  preacher  and  his  work,  on  his  return  from 
his  continental  tour  again  visited  the  Tabernacle. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  asked  him  to  divide  the  sermon  with 
him,  one  taking  the  doctrine  and  the  other  the  enforc- 
ing and  illustration  of  it.  All  unwittingly,  as  Dr. 
Pentecost  afterwards  declared,  he  spoke  of  his  struggles 
in  renouncing  his  cigar,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  afterwards 
felt  that  he  could  not  allow  the  matter  to  go  by 
default.  So  he  rose  and  declared  that  he  hoped  that 
very  evening  to  smoke  a  cigar  to  the  glory  of  God. 

The  utterance  was  very  widely  discussed  :  many 
were  grieved ;  many  applauded ;  before  long  Spurgeon's 
photograph  appeared  on  tobacco  packets.  In  a  letter 
to  The  Daily  Telegraph  he  gave  his  view  of  the  situa- 
tion, the  irony  of  which  is  not  lessened  by  the  fact 
that  Dr.  Pentecost  afterwards  himself  became  a 
smoker.     Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote — 

"  I  demur  altogether  and  most  positively  to  the 
statement  that  to  smoke  tobacco  is  in  itself  a  sin. 
It  may  become  so,  as  any  other  indifferent  action  may, 
but  as  an  action  it  is  no  sin.  Together  with  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  my  fellow -Christians  I  have  smoked, 
and,  with  them,  I  am  under  the  condemnation  of 
living  in  habitual  sin,  if  certain  accusers  are  to  be 
beheved.  As  I  would  not  knowingly  live  in  the 
smallest  violation  of  the  law  of  God,  and  sin  is  the 
transgression  of  the  law,  I  will  not  own  to  sin  when  I 
am  not  conscious  of  it.  There  is  growing  up  in  society 
a  Pharisaic  system  which  adds  to  the  commands  of 
God  the  precepts  of  men ;    to  that  system  I  will  not 


296  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

yield  for  an  hour.  The  preservation  of  my  liberty 
may  bring  upon  me  the  upbraidings  of  many  good 
men,  and  the  sneers  of  the  self-righteous ;  but  I  shall 
endure  both  with  serenity,  so  long  as  I  feel  clear  in  my 
conscience  before  God.  The  expression  '  smoking  to 
the  glory  of  God  '  standing  alone  has  an  ill  sound,  and 
I  do  not  justify  it ;  but  in  the  sense  in  which  I  employed 
it  I  still  stand  to  it.  No  Christian  should  do  anything 
in  which  he  cannot  glorify  God,  and  this  may  be 
done,  according  to  Scripture,  in  eating  and  drinking 
and  the  common  actions  of  life.  When  I  have  found 
intense  pain  relieved,  a  weary  brain  soothed,  and  calm, 
refreshing  sleep  obtained  by  a  cigar,  I  have  felt  grateful 
to  God  and  have  blessed  His  Name  :  this  is  what  I 
meant,  and  by  no  means  did  I  use  sacred  words 
triflingly.  If  through  smoking  I  had  wasted  an  hour 
of  my  time — if  I  had  rendered  my  mind  less  vigorous — 
I  trust  I  should  see  my  fault  and  turn  from  it;  but 
he  who  charges  me  with  these  things  shall  have  no 
answer  but  my  forgiveness.  I  am  told  that  my  open 
avowal  will  lessen  my  influence,  and  my  reply  is  that 
if  I  have  gained  any  influence  through  being  thought 
different  from  what  I  am,  I  have  no  wish  to  retain  it. 
I  will  do  nothing  upon  the  sly,  and  nothing  about 
which  I  have  a  doubt."  * 

On  April  25,  1890,  there  appeared  in  The  British 
Weekly  "An  Open  Letter — Parker  to  Spurgeon."  It 
was  the  week  the  Pastor's  College  Conference  was  in 
session,  and  the  letter  aroused  strong  feeling  amongst 
"  Spurgeon's  men,"  as  well  as  amongst  the  general 
evangelical  public.  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  the  word  that 
no  notice  was  to  be  taken  of  it,  did  not  speak  of  it 
himself,  and  getting  a  hint  that  Mr.  Hugh  D.  Brown 
of  Dublin,  who  was  to  be  one  of  the  speakers  at  the 


SOME   MINOR  DISCUSSIONS  297 

College  meeting  that  evening  in  the  Tabernacle, 
intended  to  speak  of  the  open  letter  of  Sanballat  to 
Nehemiah,  he  deftly  managed  to  crowd  him  out. 

The  letter  was  all  the  more  astonishing  because 
hitherto  Dr.  Parker  had  shown  great  friendliness  to 
Mr.  Spurgeon.  In  November  1865,  on  two  successive 
Fridays  he  had  lectured  in  the  Metropolitan  Taber- 
nacle on  "  Nonconformity  in  Relation  to  the  Book 
of  Common  Prayer,"  and  on  "  Reasons  for  a  Noncon- 
formist Aggressive  Policy,"  to  crowded  audiences. 
On  February  15,  1883,  Parker  and  Spurgeon  had 
exchanged  pulpits,  Spurgeon  preaching  in  "  The  City 
Temple  "  on  behalf  of  a  Colportage  Society  for  the 
City  of  London  which  Dr.  Parker  was  founding.  At 
the  Orphanage  Festival  of  June  in  the  same  year 
Parker  offered  to  preach  for  the  Orphanage  in  his 
church,  and  afterwards  did  so. 

Spurgeon  was  scarcely  as  much  surprised  as  some  of 
his  friends,  for  something  had  happened  in  between. 
The  something  was  that  on  February  23,  1887, 
Dr.  Parker  wrote  to  him — 

"  My  dear  Friend, 

"  There  is  nothing  worth  preaching  but  the 
old  Evangelical  faith.  The  longer  I  live  and  work  the 
more  I  see  this  to  be  the  case.  Upon  this  subject  I 
want  a  public  conference  between  ministers  of  all 
denominations — gathered  from  all  parts  of  the  country, 
and  beginning,  say,  on  October  25th.  I  want  you  to 
preach  the  opening  sermon  in  your  pulpit — or  in  my 
own.  That  is  all.  The  occasion  should  be  devoted 
to  clear  and  simple  testimony  as  to  our  faithfulness 
to  Evangelical  doctrine.  I  earnestly  entreat  you  to 
co-operate — make  your  own  suggestions,  fix  your  own 
time  and  place,  lay  down  your  own  conditions,  only 


298  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

let  us  unite  in  the  holy  and  needful  work.     The  God 
of  heaven  be  your  daily  comfort  and  eternal  hope  ! 

"  Ever  yours, 

"  Joseph  Parker." 

To  this  Spurgeon  replied  the  next  day,  February  24, 

1887— 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  agree  with  you  that  there  is  nothing 
worth  preaching  but  the  old  Evangelical  faith,  and  I 
would  gladly  co-operate  with  all  believers  in  the  spread 
of  it,  but — 

"  I  feel  I  have  no  right  whatever  to  question  you 
about  your  course  of  procedure.  You  are  a  distin- 
guished man  with  a  line  of  your  own,  but  your  conduct 
puzzles  me.  I  can  only  understand  a  consistent  course 
of  action,  cither  for  the  faith  or  against  it,  and  yours 
does  not  seem  to  exhibit  that  quality.  I  am  sorry  that 
frankness  requires  me  to  say  this,  and  having  said 
it,  I  desire  to  say  no  more. 

"  I  think  that  we  had  better  each  go  his  own  way 
in  brotherly  friendliness,  each  hopeful  of  the  other. 
To  discuss  your  procedure  would  not  be  wise.  In 
your  letter  just  received  I  greatly  rejoice,  and  if  this 
line  of  things  is  to  be  followed  up,  you  will  find  me 
the  heartiest  of  friends,  but  at  this  present  I  had 
better  say  no  more. 

"  Yours  with  the  kindest  wishes,  and  great  admira- 
tion of  your  genius, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Dr.  Parker  answered  on  March  1,  1887 — 

"  My  dear  Friend, 

"  I  have  no  idea  as  to  your  meaning.  If 
thou  hast  aught  against  thy  brother,  go  and  tell  him 


SOME   MINOR  DISCUSSIONS  299 

his  fault  between  thee  and  thy  brother.  But  as  your 
health  is  uncertain,  I  will  so  far  modify  the  terms  as  to 
go  to  you  at  your  house  at  any  mutually  convenient 
time.  This  strikes  me  as  the  Christian  way — the 
Lord's  own  way — why  should  we  invent  another? 
"  You  have  no  warmer  friend  on  earth  than 

"  Joseph  Parker." 

The  next  day,  March  2,  1887,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
responded — 

"  Dear  Dr.  Parker, 

"  If  I  had  aught  against  you  I  would  see  you 
gladly ;  but  I  have  no  personal  offence,  nor  shadow 
of  it.  Your  course  to  me  has  been  one  of  uniform 
kindness,  for  which  I  am  most  grateful. 

"  The  question  is  very  different.  You  ask  me  to 
co-operate  with  you  in  a  Conference  for  the  vindica- 
tion of  the  old  Evangelical  faith.  I  do  not  see  my 
way  to  do  this.  First,  I  do  not  believe  in  the  Con- 
ference; and  secondly,  I  do  not  see  how  I  could  act 
with  you  in  it,  because  I  do  not  think  your  past  course 
of  action  entitles  you  to  be  considered  a  champion  of 
the  faith. 

"  There  is  nothing  in  this  which  amounts  to  having 
aught  against  you.  You  have,  no  doubt,  weighed  your 
actions  and  are  of  age.  These  are  not  private  but 
public  matters,  and  I  do  not  intend  to  go  into  them 
either  in  my  house  or  yours. 

"  The  Evangelical  faith  in  which  you  and  Mr. 
Beecher  agree  is  not  the  faith  which  I  hold ;  and  the 
view  of  religion  which  takes  you  to  the  theatre  is  so 
far  off  from  mine  that  I  cannot  commune  with  you 
therein. 

*'  I  do  not  feel  that  these  are  matters  in  which  I 


300  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

have  the  shghtest  right  to  call  you  to  account.  You 
wrote  to  me,  and  I  tried  to  let  the  matter  go  by.  You 
write  me  again  and  compel  me  to  be  more  explicit, 
altogether  against  my  will.  I  do  not  now  write  for 
any  eye  but  your  own,  and  I  most  of  all  desire  that 
you  will  now  let  the  matter  drop.  To  go  further  will 
only  make  you  angry  and  it  will  not  alter  me.  I  do 
not  think  the  co-operation  sought  would  be  a  wise 
one,  and  I  had  rather  decline  it  without  further 
questioning. 

"  To  make  this  public  would  serve  no  useful  end. 
I  have  told  you  of  the  matter  alone,  and  now  I  must 
decline  any  further  correspondence. 

''  Yours  with  every  good  wish, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

To  which  the  same  evening  a  post-card  reply  was 
written — 

"  Best  thanks,  and  best  regards. — J.  P." 

Then  came  the  Open  Letter.  The  first  wonder  is, 
why  it  was  written.  The  second,  why  it  was  pub- 
lished. The  references  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  doctrine 
may  be  omitted. 

"  My  dear  Spurgeon, 

"  I  know  I  may  speak  frankly,  because  I  am 
speaking  to  a  man  whose  heart  is  big  and  warm,  a 
heart  that  has  an  immense  advantage  over  his  head. 
When  people  ask  me  what  I  think  of  Spurgeon,  I 
always  ask,  which  Spurgeon — the  head  or  the  heart — 
the  Spurgeon  of  the  Tabernacle  or  the  Spurgeon  of  the 
Orphanage. 

"  I  will  speak  frankly  as  to  a  brother  beloved. 
Let  me  advise  you  to  widen  the  circle  of  which  you 


SOME   MINOR   DISCUSSIONS  301 

are  the  centre.  You  are  surrounded  by  offerers  of 
incense.  They  flatter  your  weakness,  they  laugh  at 
your  jokes,  they  feed  you  with  compliments.  My 
dear  Spurgeon,  you  are  too  big  a  man  for  this.  Take 
in  more  fresh  air.  Open  your  windows,  even  when 
the  wind  is  in  the  East.  Scatter  your  ecclesiastical 
harem.  I  do  not  say  destroy  your  circle  :  I  simply 
say  enlarge  it.  As  with  your  circle,  so  with  your 
reading. 

"  Other  men  will  write  you  in  a  vein  of  condolent 
flattery,  and  will  hold  up  their  riddled  gingham  to 
save  you  from  the  refreshing  shower,  but  you  know 
as  well  as  I  do  that  their  good  offices  are  meant  for 
themselves  and  not  for  you. 

"  Good-bye,  you  sturdy,  honest  old  soul.  You  have 
been  wondrously  useful,  and  wondrously  honoured. 
I  would  double  all  your  honours  if  I  could.  Am  I 
become  your  enemy  because  I  tell  you  the  truth  ?  In 
your  inmost  soul  you  know  I  am  not  your  enemy,  but 
your  friend." 

During  Mr.  Spurgeon's  illness  Dr.  Parker  wrote 
another  letter  to  him  in  The  British  Weekly  of  October 
8,  1891,  which  somewhat  atoned  for  the  first. 

"  I  tell  you,"  he  said,  "  that  your  way  of  taking 
what  seems  to  me  a  hard  lot  quite  breaks  me  down 
into  a  new  experience  of  love.  I  know  how  sadly  I 
should  have  failed.  What  if,  after  all,  you  should 
prove  to  be  the  broadest-minded  man  among  us?  " 

And  after  Mr.  Spurgeon's  death  Dr.  Parker  paid  a 
generous  tribute  to  him  in  The  Times,  in  which  occur 
the  following  sentences  :  "  The  only  pulpit  name  of 
the  nineteenth  century  that  will  be  remembered  is 
no  longer  the  name  of  a  living  man.  His  simplicity, 
his     constancy,    his    stand -stillness,    won    for    him, 


302  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

through  many  difficulties,  a  unique  and  invincible 
position  in  Christian  England.  Mr.  Spurgeon  had 
but  one  sermon,  and  it  was  ever  new.  Other  young 
preachers  are  naturally  great  in  the  treatment  of 
Biblical  narrative  and  anecdotes.  They  can  handle 
drama  better  than  doctrine.  Mr.  Spurgeon  boldly 
went  at  once  to  the  deepest  and  greatest  themes. 
At  nineteen  he  preached  to  countless  thousands  from 
such  texts  :  '  Accepted  in  the  Beloved  ' ;  '  No  man 
Cometh  unto  Me  except  the  Father  draw  him  ' ;  '  And 
of  His  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace.' 
Some  men  have  never  ventured  to  take  those  texts 
even  after  a  lifetime  of  service.  Mr.  Spurgeon  took 
them  at  once,  as  the  very  seven  notes  that  made  all 
God's  music,  and  he  did  so  by  Divine  right  and 
impulse.  As  he  began,  so  he  continued  :  he  never 
changed ;  he  never  went  in  quest  of  the  fourth  dimen- 
sion or  of  the  eighth  note ;  his  first  and  his  last  were 
one." 

"  That  great  voice  has  ceased.  It  was  the  mightiest 
voice  I  ever  heard :  a  voice  that  could  give  orders  in 
a  tempest,  and  find  its  way  across  a  torrent  as  through 
a  silent  aisle.  Very  gentle,  too,  it  could  be,  sweet  and 
tender  and  full  of  healing  pity." 

And  on  December  8,  1902,  Thomas  Spurgeon  wrote  : 
*'Dr.  Parker  has  gone.  I  was  at  the  funeral  service. 
One  forgets  even  '  The  Open  Letter '  at  the  open 
grave." 

And  now  neither  Spurgeon  nor  Parker  has  any  need 
of  controversy.     They  both  know. 


CHAPTER   XVII 

TWO    GREAT    CONTROVERSIES 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  too  earnest,  too  intent  on  the 
eternal  meaning  of  things,  too  sure  of  his  own  standing, 
to  be  a  good  controversiaUst.  His  instinct  led  him  to 
conclusions  that  others  approached  only  by  logic, 
and  he  was  therefore  not  apt  to  be  too  patient  with 
those  who  debated  every  step  of  the  way,  or  lost  them- 
selves in  details,  failing,  as  he  judged,  to  see  the  wood 
because  of  the  trees,  and  the  city  because  of  the  houses. 

He  was  a  witness,  not  a  debater.  He  could  plead 
nobly,  but  he  had  such  faith  in  the  Truth  that  he 
preferred  to  trust  it  to  do  its  own  work.  "  The  best 
way  to  defend  a  lion,"  he  frequently  said,  "is  to  let 
it  out  of  its  cage."  "  I  am  no  enemy,  no  disputant, 
no  caviller,"  he  wrote  to  Charles  Williams.  "  I  only 
want  to  do  the  right  thing,  and  if  it  should  seem  harsh, 
I  want  to  do  it  in  love  and  tenderness."  And  at  an 
earlier  time  :  "  A  little  anger  costs  me  so  much,  and  is 
so  apt  to  blaze  into  a  battle  royal,  that  it  is  a  calamity 
to  be  aroused,  and  an  event  memorably  mournful." 
But,  speaking  for  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society  in 
Exeter  Hall  on  April  28,  1864,  he  said :  "  When  the 
gage  of  battle  is  thrown  down,  I  am  not  the  man  to 
refuse  to  take  it  up." 

If  we  look  at  his  life  steadily,  and  endeavour  to  see 
it  whole,  we  shall  note  that  its  two  great  unrelated 
controversies  were,  from  his  central  evangelical  stand- 
point,   the    complement    of   each    other.     Whatever 

303 


304  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

heat  they  engendered  at  the  time,  together  they 
complete  his  testimony.  In  the  first  he  contended 
against  superstition,  and  in  the  second  against 
modernism,  aiming  one  blow  at  Anglicanism,  and 
another  at  Nonconformity;  opposing  first  those  who 
had  a  creed  they  did  not  believe,  and  then  those  who 
would  not  put  their  belief  into  a  creed.  He  stood 
in  the  centre,  and  it  was  his  jealousy  for  God  which 
made  him  warn  first  the  left  wing  and  then  the  right 
wing  of  the  army,  that  they  were  in  danger  of  being 
captured  by  the  enemy.  He  went  out  to  the  fray 
in  both  cases  assured  of  result,  but  in  neither  did  he 
foresee  what  the  result  would  be.  In  the  first  he 
was  prepared  to  suffer,  and  things  turned  out  to  his 
advantage ;  in  the  second  he  expected  sympathy,  and 
he  suffered.  In  both  cases  it  was,  at  the  time,  a 
drawn  battle,  stalemate,  in  fact;  but  the  witness 
remains,  and  the  scars  of  the  conflict  are  to  the 
combatant  but  signs  of  honour. 

During  the  second  controversy  a  suggestive  com- 
parison was  made  :  "  When  Newman  went  abroad 
in  1832  with  his  consumptive  friend,  Hurrell  Froude, 
his  thought  by  day  and  his  dream  by  night  seems  to 
have  been  the  quickening  of  a  Church  which  would 
fight  against  the  spirit  of  the  day  and  fix  the  minds 
of  its  children  upon  the  eternal  realities,  which  the 
modern  spirit  of  our  own  time  is  so  anxious  to  soften, 
blanch  and  water  down.  There  was  a  passion  at  this 
time  in  all  Newman  said  and  did.  He  harps  upon 
the  lukewarmness  of  the  age  and  the  indifference  to 
eternal  truth  which  it  displays.  He  felt  to  the  bottom 
of  his  heart  that  he  was  doing  a  work  of  which  he 
himself  knew  neither  the  scope  nor  the  goal,  and  that 
so  far  as  he  was  acquitted  by  his  own  conscience,  he 
did  not  much  care  what  man  said  of  him."  ^ 


TWO   GREAT   CONTROVERSIES  305 

The  Baptismal  Regeneration  Controversy  was 
inaugurated  by  a  sermon  in  the  Metropohtan  Taber- 
nacle on  June  5,  1864.  Before  he  preached  it,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  warned  his  publishers  that  he  was  about  to 
destroy  at  a  blow  the  circulation  of  his  printed  sermons, 
but  the  blow  must  be  struck.  Instead  of  destroying 
the  sale  of  them,  there  has  never  been  such  a  demand 
for  any  sermon  as  for  that.  In  these  days,  when 
newspapers  circulate  a  million  copies  a  day,  it  may  seem 
a  small  thing  to  say  that  a  sermon  had  at  once  a 
circulation  of  a  quarter  of  a  million,  but  in  those 
days,  and  for  a  sermon  in  any  day,  such  a  sale  is 
phenomenal. 

The  text  was  :  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach 
the  Gospel  to  every  creature.  He  that  belie veth  and 
is  baptised  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  damned."  The  preacher  plunged  at  once  into 
his  protest  :  "  If  I  should,  through  speaking  what  I 
believe  to  be  the  truth,  lose  the  friendship  of  some  and 
stir  up  the  wrath  of  more,  I  cannot  help  it.  The 
burden  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  and  I  must  deliver 
my  soul.  I  have  been  loath  enough  to  undertake 
the  work,  but  I  am  forced  to  it  by  an  awful  and 
overwhelming  sense  of  solemn  duty. 

"  I  know  of  nothing  more  calculated  to  debauch 
the  public  mind  than  a  want  of  straightforwardness  in 
ministers.  If  baptism  does  regenerate  people,  let 
the  fact  be  preached  with  a  trumpet  tongue,  and  let 
no  man  be  ashamed  of  his  belief  in  it.  God  forbid 
that  we  should  censure  those  who  believe  that  baptism 
saves  the  soul,  because  they  adhere  to  a  Church  which 
teaches  the  same  doctrine.  So  far  they  are  honest 
men;  and  in  England,  wherever  else,  let  them  never 
lack  full  toleration.  I  hate  their  doctrine,  but  I  love 
their  honesty." 


306  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  Never,"  said  Dr.  Campbell,  "  has  the  error  been 
exhibited  to  the  public  eye  with  colouring  so  vivid,  and 
never  was  it  pressed  home  on  the  clerical  conscience 
with  a  force  so  thrilling,  resistless,  and  terrible." 

"  Oh,  for  a  truly  reformed  Church  of  England  and 
a  godly  race  to  maintain  it !  "  the  preacher  cried. 
"  The  world's  future  depends  on  it,  under  God,  for  in 
proportion  as  truth  is  marred  at  home,  truth  is  maimed 
abroad." 

The  sermon  is  sixteen  pages  long,  so  it  must  have 
occupied  more  than  an  hour  in  delivery.  It  is  well 
worth  reading  to-day.  On  the  day  following,  the 
students  of  the  College  united  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  in 
spending  the  whole  afternoon  in  prayer  for  a  blessing 
on  the  sermon  when  it  should  be  printed. 

Upon  its  appearance  the  whole  religious  world 
joined  in  the  fray.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  part  in  the 
controversy  was  to  preach  other  sermons;  one  three 
weeks  later  :  "  Let  us  go  forth  unto  Him  without  the 
camp,  bearing  His  reproach ;  "  a  month  after  that  a 
sermon  on  "  Children  brought  to  Christ,  not  to  the 
Font,"  and  two  months  after  that  a  sermon  on  "  The 
Book  of  Common  Prayer  weighed  in  the  Balances  of 
the  Sanctuary." 

In  these  discourses  he  answered  directly  and  indi- 
rectly the  blizzard  of  pamphlets  and  sermons  which 
his  original  sermon  had  called  forth — there  must  have 
been  a  hundred  and  fifty  of  them.  At  my  side  as  I 
write  are  nine  volumes  of  pamphlets,  leather-bound, 
and  five  of  them  contain  those  that  were  issued  on 
this  subject.  In  the  corner  of  my  room  is  another 
pile  of  them.  Spurgeon  himself  looks  down  on  me 
from  his  portrait  on  the  wall  in  front  of  me,  framed  in 
the  palm  branches  that  came  from  France  on  his 
coffin,  and  as  I  think  of  the  furore  which  his  words 


TWO   GREAT   CONTROVERSIES  307 

aroused  more  than  fifty  years  ago,  of  the  friendship 
which  afterwards  grew  up  between  him  and  the 
leaders  of  that  very  Church  against  which  he  then  bore 
his  witness,  of  the  self-same  Church  to-day  still  con- 
tinuing in  the  self-same  way,  I  wonder  at  the  seeming 
futility  of  it  all.  But  then  I  remember  that  though 
the  waves  break,  the  tide  comes  surely  in,  that  even 
half  a  century  is  but  a  hand-breadth  in  the  cycles  of 
God,  and  that  no  witness  for  Christ  and  the  truth  of 
Christ  can  be  lost. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was 
much  troubled  in  the  midst  of  the  conflict.  "  I  hear 
you  are  in  hot  water,"  said  a  friend  to  him  at  the  time. 
"  Oh  no,"  he  answered,  "it  is  the  other  fellows  who 
are  in  the  hot  water.  I  am  the  stoker,  the  man  who 
makes  the  water  boil." 

A  quarter  of  a  century  afterwards,  the  second 
controversy  began,  with  result  strangely  similar  to 
the  first.  Then  it  became  necessary  for  Mr.  Spurgeon 
to  resign  from  the  Evangelical  Alliance,  now  he 
resigned  from  the  Baptist  Union.  But  as  he  after- 
wards returned  to  the  Alliance,  it  might  have  been 
hoped,  had  his  life  been  spared,  that  he  would  again 
enjoy  the  fellowship  of  his  Baptist  brethren.  We 
do  not  forget  that  he  wrote  :  "  Garibaldi  complained 
that  by  the  cession  of  Nice  to  France  he  had  been 
made  a  foreigner  in  his  native  land,  and  our  heart 
is  burdened  with  a  like  sorrow ;  but  those  who  banish 
us  may  yet  be  of  another  mind,  and  enable  us  to 
return."  ^ 

When  Thomas  Spurgeon  and  Archibald  G.  Brown 
were  co-pastors  of  the  Church  at  the  Metropolitan 
Tabernacle,  some  question  was  raised  as  to  whether 
the  Baptist  Union  might  meet  in  the  building.  Said 
Thomas  Spurgeon  :  "  The  Baptist  Union  almost  killed 


308  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

my   father."     "  Yes,"   said  Mr.   Brown,    "  and  your 
father  ahuost  killed  the  Baptist  Union." 

Yet  until  this  severance  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been 
most  cordial  towards  the  Baptist  organisation.  In 
the  autumn  of  1865,  the  Baptist  journal.  The  Freeman, 
had  lamented  that  "  there  are  voices  in  our  midst 
which  would  ring  through  the  land,  but  which  are 
silent  except  to  their  own  congregation.  There  are 
men  whom  we  should  all  gladly  follow,  but  they  carry 
no  standard,  and  utter  no  call.  Almost  the  only 
exception  to  this  statement  is  Mr.  Spurgeon.  But 
through  the  peculiarity  of  his  position  Mr.  Spurgeon 
has  hitherto  stood  very  much  alone.  He  is  the  head  of 
a  denomination  within  a  denomination.  He  takes  little 
part  in  the  concerns  of  the  Baptist  body  as  such. 
We  believe  this  is  not  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  desire. 
If  we  are  not  mistaken,  he  has  expressed,  again  and 
again,  the  desire  to  unite  more  heartily  with  his 
brethren.  Why  should  he  not  do  so?  Is  there 
anything  that  keeps  him  apart  from  the  Baptist  body 
in  spite  of  himself?  No  man  would  be  welcomed 
more  cordially  by  the  denomination  generally,  as  a 
counsellor  and  a  brother  beloved." 

In  the  metropolis  there  is  another  union  of  Baptists 
— "  The  London  Baptist  Association."  Mr.  Spurgeon 
had  preached  for  it,  and  his  discourse  was  often 
referred  to  as  its  "  Funeral  Sermon,"  for  although 
crowds  came  to  hear  the  preacher,  the  Association 
itself  languished  for  years.  At  length,  in  this  same 
year,  1865,  the  new  Association  which  still  flourishes 
was  formed.  The  invitation  asking  for  co-operation 
in  its  foundation  was  sent  out  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  a 
few  other  ministers.  The  first  meeting  was  for  minis- 
ters only,  the  second  included  deacons.  Eighty 
were  present  at  the  first  gathering,  when  Mr.  Spurgeon 


TWO   GREAT   CONTROVERSIES  309 

presided.  "  The  brethren  assembled  represented  well- 
nigh  every  shade  of  opinion  amongst  us,  although,  if 
any  party  predominated,  we  should  say  it  was  that 
of  our  Strict  Communion  brethren.  Still,  it  was 
most  apparent  that  the  ruling  wish  of  all  present  was 
to  give  as  little  place  as  possible  to  differences  of 
opinion,  and  rather  to  find  the  common  basis  on  which 
they  could  practically  agree.  We  are  thankful,  too, 
that  the  basis  of  this  new  Association  is  so  broad," 
wrote  The  Freeman.  "  It  does  not  rest  in  a  creed, 
but  simply  with  wide  basis  of  evangelical  sentiment."  ® 

It  may  be  of  interest  to  record  that  one  of  the  first 
acts  of  the  new  Association  was  to  appoint  a  day  of 
fasting  and  prayer.  November  5  was  chosen,  and  the 
brethren  were  reminded  that  intercession  would  be 
more  profitable  than  bonfires  and  fireworks.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  was  its  President  in  1869. 

For  many  years  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  at  the 
Autumn  Assembly  of  the  Baptist  Union  in  the  pro- 
vinces, and  occasionally  he  took  part  in  the  spring 
meetings,  especially  in  1878,  when  he  proposed  Rev. 
George  Gould  for  the  office  of  Vice-President. 

In  1881  he  wrote  to  The  Baptist  newspaper  a  letter 
which  appeared  on  May  27,  in  which  occurs  the 
sentence  :  ''  No  one  more  heartily  desires  the  pros- 
perity of  the  Union  than  I  do ;  no  one  is  more  satisfied 
with  its  designs  and  plans.  If  there  be  any  mutterings 
of  tempest,  they  certainly  do  not  arise  from  me  or 
from  any  of  those  who  gathered  with  me  at  the 
Conference." 

His  last  appearance  at  the  Union  meetings  was  at 
Liverpool  in  1882,  when  he  yielded  to  the  twice- 
repeated  invitation  of  Hugh  Stowell  Brown,  protesting 
at  the  same  time  that  it  was  unfair  always  to  ask  him 
to  be  the  preacher,  when  so  many  others  could  fulfil 


310  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

the  service.  On  this  occasion,  after  the  sermon,  a 
spontaneous  collection  of  some  £131  was  given  to  the 
Orphanage. 

During  the  Assembly  Mr.  Spurgeon  listened  to  the 
paper  read  by  Rev.  T.  Vincent  Tymns  on  "  EvangeUs- 
tic  Work  in  Large  Towns."  In  one  passage  he  declared 
that  the  spirit  of  the  Cross  was  often  manifested 
outside  recognised  Christian  circles,  and  he  illustrated 
his  point  by  referring  to  the  brawny  English  soldiers 
on  the  Egyptian  battlefield,  of  whom  they  had  read 
a  few  days  before.  "  The  terror-stricken  army 
exclaimed,  '  The  Nazarenes  are  coming,'  and  expected 
immediate  slaughter ;  but  lo  !  the  hated  Nazarenes 
bound  up  their  wounds,  gave  the  sick  their  own 
day's  allowance  of  water  in  that  dry  and  scorching 
land,  and  left  the  harvest  of  their  fields  to  be  gathered 
in  unharmed.  Truly,  a  little  of  the  Nazarene  was 
there  in  many  a  rude  soldier  who  confessed  Him  not, 
and  amidst  those  scenes  of  carnage,  I  read  a  prophecy 
of  victory  for  Him  who  first  said  :  '  If  thine  enemy 
hunger,  feed  him;  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink.'"  As 
Mr.  Spurgeon  listened  the  tears  rolled  down  his  cheeks, 
and  he  afterwards  commended  the  paper  by  describing 
it  as  "  All  good."  ^  That  was  his  farewell  to  gatherings 
of  the  Baptist  Union. 

In  March  and  April  1887  there  appeared  in  The 
Sword  and  Trowel  two  unsigned  articles  entitled 
"  The  Down-Grade,"  dealing  largely  with  the  history 
of  the  past,  and  drawing  attention  to  the  insidious 
ways  in  which  heresy  creeps  into  the  churches.  A 
footnote  was  appended  to  the  first :  "  Earnest  atten- 
tion is  requested  for  this  paper.  There  is  need  of 
such  a  warning  as  history  affords.  We  are  going 
downhill  at  break-neck  speed  "  That  was  the  first 
shot  in  the  campaign  which  is  now  known  as  "  The 


TWO   GREAT   CONTROVERSIES  311 

Down-Grade  Controversy."  In  August  an  article 
by  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  appeared  in  his  magazine 
under  the  title  "  Another  Word  concerning  the  Down- 
Grade  " ;  "A  Reply  to  Sundry  Critics  and  Inquirers  " 
in  the  September  magazine;  "The  Case  Proved"  in 
October;  "A  Fragment  upon  the  Down-Grade  Con- 
troversy "  in  November;  "  Restoration  of  Truth  and 
Revival  "  in  December.  In  the  Preface  to  the  1887 
volume  occur  the  words  :  "  Something  will  come  of 
the  struggle  over  The  Down- Grade.  The  Lord  has 
designs  in  connection  therewith  which  His  adversaries 
little  dream  of.  Meanwhile,  it  behoves  all  who  love 
the  Lord  Jesus  and  His  Gospel  to  keep  close  together, 
and  make  common  cause  against  deadly  error.  There 
are  thousands  who  are  of  one  mind  in  the  Lord;  let 
them  break  through  all  the  separating  lines  of  sect, 
and  show  their  unity  in  Christ,  both  by  prayer  and 
action." 

At  first  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  in  general  terms  as  to 
the  growing  declension  in  faith,  but  gradually  details 
were  given  and  the  Baptist  Union  was  named.  On 
October  8,  he  wrote  withdrawing  from  it,  and  at  a 
specially  summoned  meeting  on  December  13,  the 
Council  of  the  Union  deputed  four  of  its  members 
to  visit  him  at  Mentone  (whither  he  had  gone  for  his 
winter's  rest),  "  that  they  may  deliberate  with  him 
as  to  how  the  unity  of  our  denomination  in  truth, 
and  love,  and  good  works  may  best  be  maintained." 
Mr.  Spurgeon  telegraphed  that  he  would  prefer  to 
see  them  when  he  returned  to  England,  so  on  January 
13,  1888,  Dr.  Clifford,  Dr.  Culross  and  Dr.  Booth,  the 
Secretary,  had  an  interview  with  him  at  Westwood. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  Council  on  January  18,  what 
has  been  termed  "  The  Vote  of  Censure  "  was  passed. 
"  As  Mr.  Spurgeon  declines  to  give  the  names  of  those 


312  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

to  whom  he  intended  them  to  apply,  and  the  evidence 
supporting  them,  those  charges,  in  the  judgment  of 
the  Council,  ought  not  to  have  been  made."  An 
answer  which  was  more  worthy  of  a  pettifogging 
lawyer,  a  peevish  woman,  or  a  petulant  child,  than  of 
a  body  of  high-minded  men.  What  the  resolution 
said  was  the  thing  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  ought 
to  have  been  allowed  to  say.  There  was  no  principle 
involved  :  it  was  only  a  question  of  good  manners ; 
and  if  one  clear,  strong  voice  had  said  as  much  that 
day,  I  think  the  resolution  would  not  have  been  passed. 
This  is  the  vote  which  some  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  friends 
have  since  then  sought  to  have  erased  from  the  Minutes 
of  the  Council.  But  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  wrote  : 
"  All  questions  about  the  vote  of  censure,  as  far  as  I 
am  concerned,  may  be  set  aside,  and  let  the  one 
question  be  discussed  in  all  good  temper,  and  let  the 
truth  be  contended  for  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Shall  the  Baptist  Union  be  a  resort  for  men 
of  every  school  of  thought,  or  shall  it  be  declared  to 
be  an  evangelical  institution  ?  " 

The  issue  at  last  was  narrowed  down  to  that,  and 
though  at  the  time  I  was  unconnected  with  the 
Union,  not  being  a  pastor  of  a  Church,  he  wrote  to  me 
to  the  same  effect.  Had  he  lived,  that  was  the 
point  at  which  he  would  have  aimed,  and  to-day  we 
may  rejoice  that  there  is  the  Declaratory  Statement 
published  with  the  Annual  Report — 

''1.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  God  and 
Saviour,  is  the  sole  and  absolute  authority  in  all 
matters  pertaining  to  faith  and  practice,  as  revealed 
in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  that  each  Church  has 
liberty  to  interpret  and  administer  His  Laws. 

^'  2,  That   Christian  Baptism  is  the  immersion  in 


TWO   GREAT   CONTROVERSIES  313 

water,  into  the  Name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  of  those  who  have  professed  repentance 
toward  God,  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
'  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures,  was 
buried,  and  rose  again  the  third  day.' 

"  3.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  every  disciple  to  bear 
personal  witness  to  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  to 
take  part  in  the  evangelisation  of  the  world." 

At  the  Council  Meeting  of  February  21  a  Declara- 
tory Statement  was  suggested;  on  April  23  it  was 
altered  as  to  the  question  of  the  interpretation  of 
Matt.  XXV.  46,  which  was  cited,  with  a  footnote 
saying  that  some  brethren  "  have  not  held  the  common 
interpretation  of  those  words  of  our  Lord." 

At  the  Assembly  in  the  City  Temple  on  April  23, 
Charles  Williams  of  Accrington  moved  the  resolution 
accepting  the  Declaration  with  the  footnote,  and  made 
a  speech  dealing  more  with  the  footnote  than  with  the 
resolution.  Dr.  James  A.  Spurgeon  seconded  the 
resolution,  but  not  the  speech,  and  so  it  was  hoped 
that  the  difficulty  had  been  solved. 

In  the  February  1888  Sword  and  Trowel  there  was 
an  article  on  "  The  Baptist  Union  Censure,"  and  as  a 
supplement  to  the  May  Sword  and  Trowel  there  was 
a  statement  modifying  somewhat  the  "  Notes  "  that 
had  been  written  and  printed  before  the  City  Temple 
meeting.  Mr.  Spurgeon  says  :  "In  the  Declaration 
I  rejoice,  and  still  more  in  the  kindly  spirit  which 
found  joy  in  conciliating  opponents;  but  the  speech 
of  Mr.  WiUiams  launches  us  upon  a  shoreless  sea." 

That  was  written  on  April  27.  On  April  26,  in 
a  personal  letter  to  a  friend,  he  says  :  "  My  brother 
thinks  he  has  gained  a  great  victory,  but  I  believe 
we   are   hopelessly  sold.     I  feel  heart-broken.     Cer- 


314  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

tainly  he  has  done  the  very  opposite  of  what  I  should 
have  done.  Yet  he  is  not  to  be  blamed,  for  he  followed 
his  best  judgment.  Pray  for  me,  that  my  faith 
fail  not." 

The  Pastor's  College  Conference  this  year  was 
reorganised  as  The  Pastor's  College  Evangehcal  Con- 
ference. Some  eighty  of  the  old  students  held  aloof, 
and  a  threat  from  one  of  them  that  he  would  force  his 
way  into  the  Conference,  of  which  he  rightly  said  he 
was  a  member,  led  to  the  dissolution  of  the  old  body, 
and  the  inauguration  of  the  new,  on  a  basis  which  the 
minority  were  not  willing  to  accept. 

There  was  a  wrong  turning  taken  somewhere, 
when  men  whose  hearts  drew  them  together  found 
themselves  sundered.  At  the  end,  Mr.  Spurgeon  had 
no  other  honourable  course  than  to  withdraw,  but  a 
little  prescience  on  the  part  of  the  Union  might  have 
avoided  that  dilemma.  I  venture  to  say  that  if,  say, 
Dr.  Shakespeare  had  then  been  Secretary,  the  Down- 
Grade  Controversy  would  have  taken  a  different 
direction.  The  protest  would  have  been  uttered,  and 
rightly  uttered,  laut  the  personal  equation  would  have 
been  different.  The  leading  members  of  the  Council 
felt  that  they  could  not  submit  to  what  they  thought 
to  be  the  tyranny  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  while  he  would 
not  trust  what  he  thought  to  be  the  "  trimming  " 
of  the  Council.  The  Assembly  voted  for  what  they 
thought  to  be  the  settlement  of  the  Controversy ;  had 
they  known  the  inwardness  of  the  case  the  Union 
would  have  been  rent  in  twain.  The  whole  question 
was  taken  in  hand  too  late.  The  Autumn  Assembly 
at  Sheffield  was  allowed  to  pass  without  any  action; 
what  was  done  the  following  Spring  might  then  have 
been  anticipated.  Mr.  Spurgeon  asserted  that  he 
had   spoken   and   written  to  the   leaders  again   and 


TWO   GREAT   CONTROVERSIES  315 

again;  the  officials  declared  that  he  had  never  made 
any  representations  to  them  on  the  subject — they 
probably  meant  that  particular  aspect  of  the  subject; 
and  he  probably  meant  the  whole  case,  and  not  the 
case  only  as  it  concerned  the  Baptist  Union. 

Could  the  lamentable  result  have  been  avoided? 
I.  cannot  but  believe  that  if  Spurgeon  himself  could 
have  come  to  the  Assembly  and  spoken  face  to  face 
with  the  delegates,  an  atmosphere  would  have  been 
created  in  which  clearer  vision  would  have  been 
possible.  But  he  had  already  resigned.  Had  there 
even  been  a  telephone,  things  might  have  been 
different.     Might.     Who  can  say? 

William  Carey  was  separated  for  some  years  from 
the  Baptist  Missionary  Society  that  he  had,  in  e:ffect, 
founded.  The  Committee  and  he  could  not  see  eye 
to  eye.  If  he  had  only  met  the  Committee  it  would 
have  been  different.  But,  then,  he  never  took  a  fur- 
lough.    Happily  it  all  came  right  in  his  case  at  last. 

To  Dr.  Culross,  Spurgeon  wrote  :  "  I  am  in  fellow- 
ship with  you — Union  or  no  Union."  To  Dr.  Clifford, 
Spurgeon  said  :  "  You  are  a  General  Baptist,  and  you 
hold  your  own  views  :  you  and  I  understand  one 
another."  Dr.  Maclaren  never  took  any  part  in  the 
controversy,  though  he  was  one  of  the  four  appointed 
to  interview  Spurgeon.  Dr.  Booth,  singularly  enough, 
had  consulted  Spurgeon  on  "  Down-Grade  "  matters 
even  before  Spurgeon  had  made  any  protest  at  all. 

The  outcome  of  the  controversy  has  been  both 
good  and  bad.  In  the  fog  of  the  moment  the  blows 
meant  for  one  man  fell  on  another,  the  protest  against 
one  thing  branched  out  into  something  quite  different ; 
useless  remedies  were  proposed ;  energy  that  might 
have  been  better  directed  was  spent  in  pursuing 
shadows.     But  many  a  man  wavering  in  the  faith  was 


316  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

recalled  to  his  old  allegiance,  many  a  simple  believer 
was  encouraged,  and  the  Greatheart  who  dared  the 
hazard  for  the  sake  of  his  Lord,  and  for  the  faith  that 
was  dear  to  him,  though  he  suffered  for  it,  did  not 
suffer  in  vain.  The  last  words  he  said  to  one  of  his 
dearest  friends,  on  the  platform  of  Heme  Hill  Station, 
before  he  went  to  Mentone  for  the  last  time,  were  : 
"  The  fight  is  killing  me."  But  he  never  for  a  moment 
thought  of  turning  back;  the  man  who  had  lived  for 
Christ  was  also  willing  to  die  for  Him,  and  he  had  so 
greatly  won  the  love  of  his  friends,  that  if  it  only 
might  have  been  possible,  many  of  them  would  have 
been  willing  to  die  instead. 

The  very  Baptist  Union  from  which  he  differed, 
when  it  built  its  Church  House,  counted  it  its  chiefest 
honour  to  put  a  commanding  statue  of  Spurgeon  in 
its  Entrance  Hall,  and  there  the  noble  figure  stands 
to-day,  evidence  to  all  that  his  memory  is  cherished 
and  his  name  revered. 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

TWO    IMPORTUNATE    QUESTIONS 

In  review  of  this  influential  life  two  questions 
arise  and  insist  on  an  answer.  The  first :  What  was 
the  secret  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  success  ?  the  second : 
Things  being  as  they  were,  why  did  he  not  found  a 
new  denomination  ? 

Let  us  take  the  second  question  first.  If  Spurgeon 
has  not  left  behind  him  a  body  of  Spurgeonites,  it  is 
not  because  the  idea  never  occurred  to  him,  nor 
because  he  lacked  the  opportunity  of  founding  a  sect ; 
not  because  occasion  did  not  arise  when  such  a  coterie 
seemed  inevitable,  nor  that  he  was  without  prompting 
to  establish  it.  In  view  of  the  peculiar  position  he 
occupied  in  relation  to  the  ecclesiastical  organisation 
of  his  day,  and  the  extent  of  his  following,  it  is 
surprising  that  he  resisted  the  pressure,  both  from 
within  and  from  without,  towards  the  embodiment 
of  his  spirit  in  a  Church  order  all  his  own. 

Considering  that  up  to  the  outbreak  of  the  Great 
War  1226  students  had  been  trained  in  the  College, 
and  that  many  of  these  were  pioneers,  often  organising 
Churches  in  new  districts,  it  would  have  been  a 
comparatively  easy  thing  to  have  formed  them  into  a 
distinct  regiment  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  especially 
as  at  the  beginning  Spurgeon's  men  were  looked  upon 
with  some  coldness,  not  to  say  suspicion,  even  among 
the  Baptists  to  whom  they  were  attached. 

That  some  thought  of  organising  his  men  into  a 

317 


318  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

body  was  in  his  mind,  even  in  the  early  years,  is 
evident  by  a  reference  in  a  letter  to  his  first  student, 
written  probably  in  1866  :  "I  hope  to  see  all  our 
Churches  in  one  host.  The  time  approaches  for  the 
formation  of  a  distinct  body  or  confederation.  We 
will  fill  the  nation  with  the  Gospel,  and  then  send 
our  armies  out  the  world  over.  Big  words,  but  written 
in  faith  in  a  great  God."  ^ 

When  Spurgeon  in  later  years  withdrew  from 
the  Baptist  Union,  it  seemed  almost  inevitable  that 
he  would  attempt  to  realise  his  early  dream.  The 
thought  and  hope  of  many  people  at  the  time  were 
voiced  in  the  following  paragraph — 

"  Dr.  Dale  may  be  more  intellectual,  Dr.  Maclaren 
more  eloquent,  and  Dr.  Parker  more  eccentric,  but, 
for  a  variety  of  reasons,  Mr.  Spurgeon's  personality 
looms  bigger  on  the  horizon  than  any  of  his  contem- 
poraries. Now  that  he  has  ceased  to  belong  to  the 
Baptist  Union,  he  will  feel  that  it  is  more  than  ever 
his  duty  to  use  plain  words  about  solemn  truths. 
His  secession  is  condemned  by  those  who  differ  from 
him,  but  has  he  lost  a  single  member  of  his  con- 
gregation? Spurgeon  may  not  endeavour  to  bring 
into  existence  a  new  sect  :  he  cannot  help  his  followers 
calling  themselves  by  his  name.  Spurgeonism  will 
have  no  infancy  and  no  childhood,  it  starts  in  the 
vigour  of  manhood;  and  bearing  in  mind  its  origin, 
it  would  not  be  rash  to  predict  that  it  will  supplant 
the  creed  it  repudiates,  for  there  is  no  room  in  the 
constitution  of  Nonconformist  organisation  for  Catholic 
theologians."  ^ 

"  I  have  often  been  suspected  of  sinister  designs," 
he  said  on  June  1,  1868,  at  the  Stockwell  Orphanage, 
where  there  was  so  great  a  gathering  that  a  ton  of 
bread  was  cut  up  for  the  visitors.     "  A  little  time 


1 


TWO  IMPORTUNATE   QUESTIONS         319 

ago  I  was  talking  to  a  brother  who  himself  told  me 
the  reasons  why  he  used  to  dislike  me.  He  said  he 
was  afraid,  for  one  reason,  that  I  was  going  to  start 
a  new  denomination.  '  Well,'  I  said,  '  I  could  have 
done  it  had  I  liked,  could  I  not  ?  '  '  Undoubtedly,' 
was  the  answer,  '  and  many  would  have  followed 
you.'  '  Well,  but  I  did  not  do  it.'  The  thought  of 
doing  such  a  thing  might  have  been  pleasing  to 
human  flesh,  but  I  consider  that  there  are  sects  enough 
without  making  another."  ^ 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  after  his  Down- 
Grade  protest  he  had  had  inclination  and  vigour 
enough  to  come  out  into  the  open,  and  call  people 
to  his  own  standard,  there  would  have  been  a  large 
response,  not  only  from  the  Baptists,  but  from  all 
evangelical  denominations,  including  Anglicans,  and 
many  of  those  called  Brethren  would  probably  have 
joined  too.  He  must  have  been  strongly  tempted 
to  make  the  venture.  But  he  maintained  his  charity 
and  sanity  on  the  subject. 

Here  are  some  words  of  his,  uttered  in  the  very 
thick  of  the  conflict  :  "  Why  not  found  a  new 
denomination?  It  is  a  question  for  which  I  have 
no  liking.  There  are  denominations  enough,  in  my 
opinion,  and  if  there  is  a  new  denomination  formed, 
the  thieves  and  robbers  who  have  entered  other 
gardens  walled  around  would  climb  into  it  also, 
and  nothing  would  be  gained.  Besides,  the  expedient 
is  not  needed  among  Churches  which  are  each  self- 
governing  and  self-determining  :  such  Churches  can 
find  their  own  affinities  without  difficulty,  and  can 
keep  their  own  coasts  clear  of  invaders.  Oh,  that 
the  day  would  come  when,  in  a  larger  communion 
than  any  sect  can  offer,  all  those  who  are  one  in 
Christ  may  be  able  to  blend  in  perfect  unity  !     This 


320  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

can  only  be  by  way  of  growing  spiritual  life,  clearer 
light  upon  the  more  eternal  truth,  and  a  closer  cleaving 
to  Him  who  is  the  Head,  even  Jesus  Christ."  * 

All  the  time,  even  when  he  withdrew  from  some 
of  his  brethren,  his  heart  was  crying  out  for  fellowship 
with  all  the  saints.  He  never  was  a  sectarian,  scarcely 
even  a  denominationalist.  The  great  increase  in  the 
body  of  Baptists  during  his  lifetime  was  chiefly 
owing  to  his  influence,  but  always  his  sympathies 
reached  far  beyond  that  Church.  It  was  a  singular 
irony  that  he  who  loved  all  who  loved  Christ  in 
sincerity,  should  find  himself  at  last  isolated  from 
those  who  were  nearest  to  him.  That  was  the  iron 
that  entered  into  his  soul. 

"  There  is  no  word,"  he  wrote  long  before,  "  so 
hateful  to  our  heart  as  Spurgeonism  :  no  thought 
further  from  our  soul  than  attempting  to  form  a  new 
sect.  We  preach  no  new  Gospel,  desire  no  new 
objects.  We  love  the  truth  better  than  any  sect, 
and  are  in  open  unison  with  the  great  body  of  Baptists 
because  not  able  to  endure  isolation.  '  Let  my 
name  perish,  but  let  Christ's  name  endure  for  ever,' 
said  George  Whitefield,  and  so  has  Charles  Spurgeon 
said  a  hundred  times."  ^ 

The  way  was  open  for  him  to  follow  John  Wesley, 
and  he  had  the  opportunity  and  ability  to  take  it, 
but  he  deliberately  chose  the  way  of  George  White- 
field,  his  hero  from  earliest  days;  and  though  White- 
field's  name  is  not  borne  by  any  Church,  his  influence, 
especially  amongst  the  Calvinistic  Methodists  of 
Wales  and  amongst  the  Presbyterians  of  America, 
is  probably  as  lasting  as  Wesley's;  Spurgeon's 
influence,  too,  not  only  amongst  the  Baptists,  but 
in  the  evangelical  ranks  of  all  the  Churches,  will  endure 
for  ever.     He  greatens  with  the  years. 


TWO   IMPORTUNATE   QUESTIONS         321 

What,  then,  was  the  secret  of  his  success  ?  I 
have  asked  the  question  of  many,  and  the  most 
remarkable  answer  was  given  by  Sir  Wilham  Robert- 
son NicolL  He  must  often  have  asked  it  of  himself, 
for  without  an  instant's  hesitation  he  answered : 
"The  Holy  Ghost."  That  is  inclusive  and  all- 
sufficient.  Spurgeon  was  not  alone.  "  The  Lord 
was  with  Joseph,  and  he  was  a  prosperous  man," 
we  read,  or,  as  Tyndale  puts  it,  "  he  was  a  luckie 
fellow."  That,  too,  is  the  solution  of  Spurgeon's 
achievements.  And  if  he  was  the  fit  and  chosen 
instrument  for  God,  we  must  believe  that  he  was 
raised  up  at  the  right  moment,  and  trained  in  the 
best  way  for  the  work  he  had  to  do;  that  God,  who 
was  with  him  from  his  infancy,  chose  also  his  heredity, 
and  endowed  him  with  the  powers  and  grace  that 
fitted  him  for  his  task. 

Spurgeon  himself  ascribed  his  success  not  so  much 
to  his  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  as  to  the  Gospel  he 
had  to  preach.  To  him  it  was  the  truth  that  pre- 
vailed, but,  then,  others  preached  the  same  truth 
without  the  same  success,  so  there  must  be  added 
reasons  for  the  result  in  Spurgeon's  case.  Often  he 
said  that  the  reason  of  the  blessing  was  "  My  people 
pray  for  me,"  but,  then,  other  Churches  pray  for  their 
pastors  too. 

The  silvery  voice  has  again  and  again  been  credited 
with  the  drawing  power  of  the  preacher.  It  suited 
him  perfectly,  it  was  a  trumpet,  clear,  startling, 
arresting — not  a  violin.  But  opinion  was  not  unani- 
mous even  on  this  subject.  "  In  point  of  compass 
and  richness,  the  voice  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  not  to  be 
mentioned,"  says  an  early  writer,  "  in  comparison 
with  that  of  Mr.  James  of  Birmingham,  or  with  that 
of  Dr.  Raffles;    and  to  compare  his  power  in  tliis 


322  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

way  with  that  of  the  late  agitator,  O'Connell,  would 
indeed  be  to  compare  small  things  with  great.  It  is 
a  comparatively  level  voice.  So  that,  while  Mr. 
Spurgeon  has  made  the  pulpit  more  attractive  than 
any  living  man,  he  has  done  so  by  means  of  a  voice 
which  can  scarcely  be  called  oratorical."  ^ 

Another  early  critic  who  set  himself  to  fathom 
the  problem  said  :  '*  If  I  cannot  discover  the  secret 
of  your  popularity  in  what  you  preach,  can  I  find 
it  in  any  peculiarity  in  your  mode  of  preaching? 
Here  is,  in  my  judgment,  the  explanation  of  the 
secret.  You  have  strong  faith,  and,  as  a  result,  intense 
earnestness.  In  this  lies,  as  in  the  hair  of  Samson, 
the  secret  of  your  power."  '^ 

Years  afterwards  another  observer  stumbled  on 
the  same  explanation  :  "  Mr.  Spurgeon's  most  strik- 
ing characteristic  was  in  his  extraordinary  earnestness. 
It  is  not  for  nothing  nowadays  that  one  meets  a  man 
so  desperately  in  earnest  as  he  is."  ^  While  still 
another  wrote :  "  One  who  is  as  great  a  teacher 
with  his  pen  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  with  his  tongue  has 
told  us  '  that  there  is  no  substitute  for  thorough- 
going, ardent,  and  sincere  earnestness.'  Spurgeon's 
earnestness  was  indeed  Zeal,  and  there  were  many 
in  those  early  days  who  called  him  Zealot,  and 
questioned  the  sincerity  of  such  apparently  consuming 
ardour." 

"  Were  we  asked  to  give  in  half  a  dozen  words  the 
secret  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  commanding  influence  over 
the  hearts  of  men,"  says  another,  "  we  should  attribute 
it  first  to  his  courage  and  earnestness,  and  secondly 
to  his  practical  common  sense."  ^ 

"  Mr.  Spurgeon's  art,"  said  the  leading  Enghsh 
newspaper,  "  was  to  put  old  truths  into  a  new  dress, 
or  to  present  them  in  a  new  form,  in  which  they  were 


TWO   IMPORTUNATE   QUESTIONS         323 

more  likely  to  come  home  to  the  apprehension  and 
to  the  hearts  of  his  hearers.  In  all  this  his  want  of 
learning  was  in  one  way  a  distinct  advantage  to 
him.  His  range  of  view  was  narrowed  by  it,  but  his 
standing  ground  was  more  secure."  ^^ 

With  equal  confidence  another  verdict  is  given : 
"  Undoubtedly  the  great  secret  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
success  has  been  his  utter  indifference  to  popularity, 
combined  with  manly  sincerity,  and  the  genius  for 
commanding  an  audience."  ^^ 

An  interviewer  has  added  another  quality  to  the 
list  :  "  He  might  be  a  great  orator — one  could  almost 
detect  that  by  the  music  in  his  voice  and  the  play 
of  his  mouth,  even  if  we  had  not  known  it  before — 
but  I  judged  that  it  was  his  inestimable  quality  of 
good-fellowship,  as  well  as  his  greatness  as  a  preacher 
and  philanthropist,  that  had  won  him  such  wide- 
spread affection  and  regard."  ^^ 

"  What  was  the  secret  of  this  great  man's  success 
in  life?"  asks  The  Speaker.  "Unquestionably  the 
foundation  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  success  was  his  wonder- 
ful gift  as  a  preacher.  Some  are  inclined  to  belittle 
his  oratorical  powers.  It  can  only  be  because  they 
have  not  themselves  been  '  under  the  wand  of  the 
magician  ' — of  its  own  kind  there  was  nothing  to 
equal  it  in  the  pulpit  of  any  church  in  the  land. 

"  But  other  churches  have  had  preachers  of  an 
eloquence  hardly  inferior  to  that  of  Mr.  Spurgeon. 
How  comes  it  that  they  never  won  the  hearts  of  the 
people  of  Great  Britain  as  he  did?  Canon  Liddon's 
name  occurs  so  naturally  when  we  speak  of  pulpit 
eloquence ;  Bishop  Alexander,  Archbishop  Magee, 
and  many  others  might  fairly  have  competed,  so  far 
as  mere  gifts  of  speech  were  concerned,  with  the 
pastor  of  the  Tabernacle.     Yet  not  one  of  them  held 


324  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

his  place  in  English  life,  or  anything  approaching 
to  it.  We  mean  no  disrespect  to  these  eminent 
men  when  we  say  that  Mr.  Spurgeon's  triumph, 
his  unrivalled  success  in  holding  the  hearts  of  so 
large  a  body  of  his  fellow-countrymen,  was  distinctly 
a  triumph  of  character.  The  British  public  had 
arrived  at  the  conviction  that  he  was  absolutely 
sincere,  simple,  unpretending  and  straightforward. 

'^  In  this  triumph  of  personal  character,  and  in 
one  other  feature  of  his  life's  work  we  may  read  the 
secret  of  his  astonishing  success.  That  other  feature 
was  the  stern  fidelity  he  showed,  from  first  to  last, 
to  the  Puritan  creed  of  his  forefathers.  Never  for  a 
moment  did  he  waver  in  the  conviction  that  the 
truth  he  learned  as  a  boy  was  everything.  Is  it 
wonderful  that  when  the  old  Puritanism  was  preached, 
not  merely  with  eloquence,  but  with  such  genuine 
fervour  of  conviction,  the  preacher  should  have  rallied 
round  himself  thousands,  and  scores  of  thousands, 
who  found  in  him  the  very  champion  and  leader 
for  whom  they  had  long  been  hoping  and  praying? 
Narrow-minded,  bigoted,  crude,  ignorant,  all  these 
terms  of  reproach  were  flung  in  turn  at  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
and  they  hurt  him  no  more  than  did  the  passing 
breeze. 

"  Nor  can  those  who  knew  him,  and  who  knew 
his  preaching,  forget  that,  despite  the  stern  fidelity 
which  he  showed  to  a  creed  that  was  no  longer  that 
of  the  world,  he  had  a  heart  filled  with  love  for  his 
fellow-creatures,  with  compassion  for  the  sinner, 
with  the  burning  desire  that  when  the  end  of  all 
things  had  come,  and  the  Great  Account  was  closed, 
no  human  soul  which  had  found  itself  moved  by  the 
Divine  Spirit  might  fail  of  salvation.  And  with  it 
all  he  was  no  priest.     Never  once  were  the  sympathies 


TWO  IMPORTUNATE   QUESTIONS        325 

of  a  priest-hating  people  ruffled  by  the  shghtest 
assumption  of  spiritual  authority  on  the  part  of 
their  teacher."  ^^ 

In  all  these  estimates  it  is  taken  for  granted  that 
there  was  a  secret  to  be  discovered  in  Spurgeon's 
life.  The  thing  was  so  inexplicable  along  ordinary 
lines,  so  different  from  that  of  ordinary  people,  and 
yet  the  product  was  so  simple  and  inevitable,  that 
it  is  natural  to  ask  if  there  is  not  behind  something 
occult  and  unusual. 

I  asked  his  son  the  secret,  and  he  was  inclined  to 
ascribe  it  to  the  fact  that  he  was  always  working, 
never  off  duty,  putting  all  his  powers  under  tribute 
to  one  end.  That  indeed  is  true.  Here,  for  instance, 
is  the  record  of  a  day  :  "  Leaving  home  early  in  the 
morning,  I  went  to  the  chapel,  and  sat  there  all  day 
long,  seeing  those  who  had  been  brought  to  Christ 
by  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  Their  stories  were 
so  interesting  to  me  that  the  hours  flew  by  without 
my  noticing  how  fast  they  were  going.  I  may  have 
seen  some  thirty  or  more  persons  during  the  day, 
one  after  the  other,  and  I  was  so  delighted  with 
the  tales  of  mercy  they  had  to  tell  me,  and  the 
wonders  of  grace  God  had  wrought  in  them,  that  I 
did  not  know  anything  about  how  the  time  passed. 
At  seven  o'clock  we  had  our  prayer  meeting.  I 
went  in  and  prayed  with  the  brethren.  After  that 
came  the  Church  Meeting.  A  little  before  ten  I 
felt  faint,  and  I  began  to  think  at  what  hour  I 
had  my  dinner,  and  I  then  for  the  first  time  remem- 
bered that  I  had  not  had  any  !  I  never  thought  of 
it.  I  never  even  felt  hungry,  because  God  had  made 
me  so  glad."  ^* 

His  friend,  W.  P.  Lockhart  of  Liverpool,  tells  how 
he  introduced  him  on  one  occasion  to  Mr.  Alexander 


326  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

Balfour  of  the  city.  Mr.  Balfour,  sitting  down  beside 
him,  said  with  that  intensity  of  manner  which  always 
characterised  him :  "  Mr.  Spurgeon,  I  want  to  know 
how  you  get  through  the  work  you  do.  Tell  me  how 
you  manage  it."  Mr.  Spurgeon,  looking  up  with  a 
smile,  said :  "I  suppose  you  think  that  a  man  who 
works  twelve  hours  a  day  can  get  through  a  good 
deal  of  work  ?  "  "  Yes,"  said  Mr.  Balfour.  "  Well," 
said  Spurgeon,  "  I  work  eighteen  !  " 

"  We  can  no  more  tell  why  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  great 
preacher  than  why  Turner  was  so  great  a  painter, 
Napoleon  so  great  a  general,  or  Pitt  so  great  a  states- 
man." ^^  "  If  you  come  to  analyse  the  success  of  most 
men  you  cannot  do  it,  for  success  defies  analysis. 
It  depends,  primarily,  of  course,  on  a  man's  integrity 
and  ability,  but  it  is  the  little  touches — what  M. 
Thiers  called  the  negligences — which  make  a  picture 
complete."  ^® 

A  sporting  paper  praised  Mr.  Spurgeon's  voice, 
but  added :  "Of  course  it  is  not  enough  to  have  a 
fine  organ  to  discourse  excellent  music.  You  must 
have  the  music  too,  and  this  was  supplied  in  Spur- 
geon's case  by  his  bluff  common  sense,  his  humour, 
and  his  fluency  of  speech,  combined  with  a  faith  that 
was  almost  childlike  in  its  simplicity  and  freedom 
from  guile.  In  Spurgeon's  case  one  of  the  first 
circumstances  prepossessing  the  auditor  in  his  favour 
was  that  he  had  no  Sunday  voice."  ^^ 

There  is  considerable  divergence  in  these  estimates 
of  the  man.  On  the  human  side  the  reasons  assigned 
for  his  greatness  are  his  voice,  his  faith,  his  earnest- 
ness, his  courage,  the  novelty  of  his  presentation, 
his  indifference  to  popularity,  his  sincerity,  his  good- 
fellowship,  his  character,  his  fidelity  to  Puritan 
doctrine,  combined  with   love  to  the  people  and  the 


TWO   IMPORTUNATE   QUESTIONS         327 

absence  of  priestism,  his  powers  of  work  and  devotion 
to  the  task  in  hand,  his  common  sense,  his  fluency 
of  speech,  his  freedom  from  guile. 

Which  of  them  is  right?  None.  Nor  if  we  single 
out  other  qualities  not  named  in  the  list  shall  we 
be  any  nearer  the  solution.  It  was  not  the  possession 
of  one  outstanding  characteristic  which  worked  the 
miracle,  but  the  combination  of  all — and  one  other 
thing  beside. 

How  often  some  brilliant  endowment  in  a  man  is 
neutralised  or  weakened  by  the  absence  of  some 
balancing  characteristic.  And  how  frequently  a 
man  of  mediocre  talents  who  holds  them  in  poise 
succeeds  where  the  man  of  outstanding  genius  fails. 
Once  in  a  century  there  is  given  to  us  the  balanced 
man  of  genius,  the  brilliant  man  who  is  a  whole  man, 
and  then  the  world  wonders.  We  may  say  it  is  this 
or  that  which  accounts  for  his  career  :  as  a  fact  it 
is  this,  and  that,  and  a  dozen  other  things  in  com- 
bination, in  proper  proportion,  in  living  unity,  that 
creates  the  wonderful  result. 

"  We  shall  not  again  see  the  singular  combination 
of  qualities  that  made  Mr.  Spurgeon  such  a  pioneer," 
writes  a  newspaper  which  none  of  the  readers  of 
this  biography  ever  sees.  "  His  distinguishing  traits 
were  leonine  courage,  perfect  sincerity,  thorough 
conviction,  and  a  manly  determination  to  do  the 
work  that  he  specially  felt  himself  called  to."  ^^ 

I  quote  again  his  friend  W.  P.  Lockhart,  a  man  of 
lesser  gifts  but  similar  character  :  "It  was  not  his 
voice  nor  his  fertility  of  illustration ;  the  richness  of 
his  Bible  knowledge  nor  the  abundance  of  his  Puritanic 
lore;  his  seerlike  faculty  nor  his  power  to  express  in 
lusty  Saxon  exactly  what  was  passing  before  his 
mind's  eye;   his  mother- wit  (used  as  a  servant,  and 


328  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

never  allowed  to  become  a  master),  his  lion-hearted 
boldness,  nor  his  tearful  tenderness.  Not  one  of 
these,  nor  all  of  them  put  together,  made  him  what 
he  was." 

"  Nor  all  of  them  put  together  !  "  His  neighbour, 
Dr.  W.  Wright  of  the  Bible  Society,  says  :  "  Mr. 
Spurgeon  had  a  marvellous  combination  of  gifts 
which  contributed  to  his  greatness,  a  voice  that  you 
heard  with  pleasure  and  could  not  help  hearing,  a 
mind  that  absorbed  all  knowledge,  whether  from  books 
or  nature,  that  came  within  his  range,  an  eye  that 
took  a  wide  angle  and  saw  everything  within  view, 
a  memory  that  he  treated  with  confidence  which  never 
disappointed  him,  a  great,  large  heart  on  fire  with 
the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  souls.  And  then 
he  showed  a  practical  common  sense  in  doing  things, 
both  sacred  and  secular,  and  a  singleness  of  aim, 
joined  with  transparent  honesty,  that  ensured  the 
confidence  of  all  who  knew  him.  You  could  not  help 
loving  him  if  you  came  within  his  spell.  But  the 
chief  secret  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  power  was  his  faith 
in  the  living  God,  and  in  the  power  of  His  Gospel. 
He  had  as  real  a  belief  in  the  Gospel  as  a  merchant 
has  in  his  money."  ^^ 

But  he  might  have  had  all  these  and  yet  missed 
the  mark.  "It  is  possible,  say  the  men  of  science, 
to  produce  separately  by  chemical  means  every 
constituent  of  a  glass  of  vintage  port.  The  one  thing 
science  cannot  do  is  to  mix  them  so  as  to  make  a 
glass  of  port  :  put  them  together  and  only  a  nauseous 
mess  results.  Some  gifted  human  beings  are  as 
mysteriously  deficient.  There  is  a  type  of  man  who 
possesses  most  of  the  qualities  of  greatness,  but  lacks 
the  one  quality  of  all— the  mysterious  force  that 
fuses  them  into  a  living  whole.     The  Italian  Eclectic 


TWO   IMPORTUNATE   QUESTIONS        329 

school  of  painting  illustrated  this  imperfect  synthesis. 
It  aimed  at  perfection  by  the  apparently  rational 
plan  of  combining  all  possible  perfections.  It  strove 
at  once  for  the  fire  of  Michel  Angelo,  for  the  design 
of  the  Roman  school,  for  the  glowing  colour  of  Lom- 
bardy,  the  action  and  light  and  shade  of  the  Venetians, 
for  Correggio's  grace  and  the  symmetry  of  Raphael. 
It  failed.  The  Caracci  were,  no  doubt,  great  painters, 
but  leagues  behind  the  greatest."  ^^ 

The  great  man  is  not  an  aggregation  of  qualities, 
however  luminous  or  beautiful.  He  is,  as  we  have 
seen,  a  living  unity,  and  his  great  qualities  are  but 
the  expression  of  something  greater  within. 

"His  life  was  gentle,  and  the  elements 
So  mixed  in  him,  that  nature  might  stand  up 
And  say  to  all  the  world,  This  was  a  man." 

It  is  the  living  mixture  that  produces  the  result, 
and  when,  as  in  Spurgeon's  case,  there  is  added  to 
the  great  gifts  of  nature,  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwelling  within  the  man,  as  in  a  holy  temple, 
who  can  be  surprised  at  the  result,  at  once  so  natural, 
so  singular  and  creative  ?  It  has  been  well  said 
that  "  Spurgeon  was  born  with  the  key  to  the  heart 
of  humanity  in  his  hand."  ^^ 


CHAPTER  XIX 

THE    TRIUMPHANT    END 

In  the  last  hour  of  the  last  day  of  January  1892, 
the  spirit  of  Spurgeon  sped  home  from  his  loved 
Mentone.  After  forty  years  of  unexampled  ministry, 
he  entered  into  rest.  Two  or  three  days  before  the 
end  he  said  to  his  secretary,  "  My  work  is  done,"  and 
after  that  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  await  the 
summons.  There  were  no  raptures,  no  heroics,  nor 
were  there  any  fears  or  hesitations.  Shortly  after 
ten  o'clock  Harrald  was  sure  he  saw  a  company  of 
angels  hovering  over  the  Berceau;  at  five  minutes 
past  eleven  only  the  body  was  left  on  the  bed ;  before 
twelve  Mrs.  Spurgeon  led  the  little  group  in  praise 
and  prayer.  It  was  so  quiet,  yet  it  was  so  triumphant. 
All  the  bugles  were  blown  as  he  departed,  and  the 
trumpeters  sounded  for  him  on  the  other  side.  It  was 
a  right  enough  instinct  which  made  the  mourners 
choose  as  his  text,  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight ;  I 
have  finished  my  course;  I  have  kept  the  faith." 
When  it  was  quoted  at  the  funeral  people  asked  when 
he  said  it.     He  never  said  it,  he  did  it  all  the  time. 

Like  John  Calvin,  Jonathan  Edwards,  Jeremy 
Taylor,  George  Whitefield  and  William  Tyndale, 
Spurgeon  was  fifty-seven  when  he  died,  but  he  was 
not  young,  for  he  began  early  and  he  had  laboured 
long,  and  departed  full  of  days  and  of  grace. 

The  earliest  premonition  of  the  end  was  on  April  26, 
1891,  when,  for  the  first  time  for  forty  years,  he  was 

330 


THE   TRIUMPHANT   END  331 

compelled  by  a  fit  of  nervousness  to  leave  the  pulpit 
after  entering  it.  The  next  Lord's  Day  he  was  able 
to  preach,  on  the  following  Sunday  too,  and  also  on 
the  morning  of  May  17.  Then  illness  overtook  him, 
and  only  once  more,  on  Sunday  morning,  June  7, 
did  he  stand  in  his  pulpit  commending  Christ  to  the 
people.  In  spite  of  his  weakness  he  insisted  on  going 
that  week  to  Haverhill,  that  he  might  revisit  Stam- 
bourne  in  preparation  for  the  book  of  boyhood's 
memories  which  he  was  writing.  There  on  the 
Friday  his  illness  reappeared,  and  he  returned  to 
London.  For  more  than  a  month  he  lay,  most  of  the 
time  unconscious,  sometimes  imagining  that  he  was  in 
a  strange  house  and  asking  to  be  taken  home,  only 
now  and  then  free  from  the  delirium  that  was  such  a 
grief  to  those  who  waited  round  his  bed. 

During  one  of  these  times  a  letter  arrived  from  Mr. 
Gladstone  for  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  which  read — 

"  Dear  Madam, 

"  In  my  own  house,  darkened  at  the  present 
time,  I  have  read  with  sad  interest  the  daily  accounts 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  illness ;  and  I  cannot  help  conveying 
to  you  the  earnest  assurance  of  my  sympathy  with 
you  and  with  him,  and  of  my  cordial  admiration,  not 
only  of  his  splendid  powers,  but  still  more  of  his 
devoted  and  unfailing  character.  May  I  humbly 
commend  you  and  him,  in  all  contingencies,  to  the 
infinite  stores  of  the  Divine  love  and  mercy,  and 
subscribe  myself, 

"  My  dear  Madam, 

"  Faithfully  yours, 

"  W.  E.  Gladstone." 

To  this  Mrs.  Spurgeon  sent  a  suitable  reply,  but  the 
invalid  insisted  on  adding  a  postscript.     This  is  it — 


332  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  P.S. — Yours  is  a  word  of  love  such  as  those  only 
write  who  have  been  into  the  King's  Country,  and 
seen  much  of  His  Face.  My  heart's  love  to  you. — 
C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

Many  other  distinguished  persons  also  wrote. 

How  well  I  remember  the  suspense  of  that  anxious 
month.  I  was  at  the  Manor  House,  Newton  Harcourt, 
near  my  home  in  Leicester,  and  every  morning  a 
porter  from  Great  Glen  Station  would  come  along 
the  canal  tow-path  with  the  telegram  from  Westwood 
giving  the  doctors'  bulletin.  The  tide  ebbed  and 
flowed.  At  the  Tabernacle  prayer  meetings  were 
held  continually,  and  it  seemed  as  if  every  promise  of 
the  Scripture,  and  every  argument  of  faith,  were  used 
in  pleading  with  God  for  the  patient's  recovery. 

"  Rarely,  if  ever,"  wrote  Dr.  Clifford,  "  has  a  warmer 
regard,  or  a  more  widespread  interest  in  an  invalid 
been  excited.  Love  is  victorious.  Convictions  are 
like  bands  of  iron  that  cannot  be  broken ;  but  opinions 
are  as  the  weakest  twine  snapped  in  a  moment,  or 
burnt  in  the  first  outleap  of  the  flame  of  affection.  "^ 

On  August  9,  the  first  letter  in  the  Pastor's  own 
hand  was  read  to  the  congregation  at  the  Tabernacle — 

"  The  Lord's  Name  be  praised  for  first  giving  and 
then  hearing  the  loving  prayers  of  His  people  !  Through 
these  prayers  my  life  is  prolonged.  I  feel  greatly 
humbled,  and  very  grateful,  at  being  the  subject  of 
so  great  a  love  and  so  wonderful  an  outburst  of 
prayer. 

"  I  have  not  strength  to  say  more.  Let  the  Name 
of  the  Lord  be  glorified. 

"  Yours  most  heartily, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon.'^ 


THE   TRIUMPHANT   END  333 

It  soon  became  evident  that  though  he  was  better 
there  could  yet  be  no  thought  of  resuming  work,  so 
in  October  a  fortnight's  change  was  arranged  at 
Eastbourne.  As  day  after  day  Mr.  Spurgeon  went 
for  a  drive,  respectful  crowds  would  be  outside  his 
hotel  waiting  to  see  him  start.  He  bore  the  change 
so  well  that,  arrangements  having  meanwhile  been 
made  for  Dr.  A.  T.  Pierson  to  occupy  the  Tabernacle 
pulpit,  he  started  for  the  South  of  France  on  Monday, 
October  26,  accompanied  by  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  who 
after  years  of  illness  felt  able  to  undertake  the  journey, 
by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  James  Spurgeon,  and  the  devoted 
"  armour-bearer,"  Rev.  J.  W.  Harrald. 

They  reached  the  Hotel  Beau-Rivage,  Mentone, 
without  incident,  and  there  his  wife  and  he  had,  in 
spite  of  his  weakness,  three  months  of  earthly  paradise. 
To  his  son  in  New  Zealand  he  wrote  in  triumph, 
"  And  your  mother  is  here  !  "  On  the  last  evening 
of  the  year,  and  on  the  first  of  January,  he  gave  two 
addresses,  which  were  afterwards  published  under  the 
title  Breaking  the  Long  Silence.  On  Sunday  evenings, 
January  10  and  17,  he  conducted  a  brief  service  in 
his  room,  reading  some  of  his  own  writings,  and  at 
the  close  of  the  second  service,  he  announced  the 
hymn  "  The  sands  of  time  are  sinking  " — and  that  was 
the  end  of  all  service  for  him  on  earth.  A  fortnight 
more  he  waited;  people  at  home  were  anticipating 
his  return,  they  were  building  a  "  lift  "  at  the  rear  of 
the  Tabernacle  to  save  him  the  exertion  of  walking 
up  the  stairs,  but  they  were  waiting  for  him,  too,  in 
the  unclouded  country,  and  it  was  thither  he  went. 
What  a  welcome  he  must  have  received  from  the 
thousands  who  had  already  found  their  way  there 
through  his  ministry  ! 

In  the  first   of   his   last  two  addresses  occur  the 


334  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

sentences :  "  During  the  past  year  I  have  been  made 
to  see  that  there  is  more  love  and  unity  among  God's 
people  than  is  generally  believed.  I  feel  myself  a 
debtor  to  all  God's  people  upon  earth.  We  mistake 
our  divergencies  of  judgment  for  differences  of  heart; 
but  they  are  far  from  being  the  same  thing.  In  these 
days  of  infidel  criticism  believers  of  all  sorts  will  be 
driven  into  sincere  unity." 

The  news  of  his  home-going  flashed  round  the 
world.  On  Monday  the  newspapers  had  but  one 
thing  on  their  Contents  Bill — "  Death  of  Spurgeon." 
The  only  experience  at  all  resembling  it  was  the  day 
during  the  war  when  another  single  announcement 
sufficed — "  Death  of  Kitchener."  It  was  difficult  that 
day  to  secure  a  newspaper,  the  demand  was  so  great. 

In  spite  of  other  suggestions  it  was  arranged  that 
Spurgeon  must  be  buried  among  his  own  people.  So 
on  February  4,  at  the  Presbyterian  Church,  Mentone, 
Rev.  J.  E.  Somerville  conducted  a  memorial  service 
there,  and  then  the  coffin  was  conveyed  across 
France,  and  arrived  on  Monday,  February  9,  at 
Victoria  Station,  London;  it  was  met  by  a  little 
group  of  friends  and  brought  to  the  Pastor's  College, 
where  it  remained  that  afternoon.  At  night  it  was 
carried  into  the  Tabernacle,  and  there  the  next  day 
some  sixty  thousand  persons  passed  through  to  pay 
their  homage  to  the  dead. 

Memorial  services,  unexampled  in  their  wide  ex- 
pression of  sympathy,  were  held  four  times  on  the 
Wednesday,  great  interest  attaching  to  Mr.  Harrald's 
account  of  Spurgeon's  last  days,  and  to  the  presence 
of  Mr.  Sankey,  who  sang  twice.  The  culminating 
moment  of  the  day  was  when  Herber  Evans,  with 
almost  Welsh  "  hwyl,"  said  :  "  But  there  is  one  Charles 
Haddon  Spurgeon  whom  we  cannot  bury ;  there  is  not 


THE   TRIUMPHANT   END  335 

earth  enough  in  Norwood  to  bury  him— the  Spurgeon 
of  history.  The  good  works  that  he  has  done  will  hve. 
You  cannot  bury  them."  None  who  were  there  will 
ever  realise  more  concentrated  emotion  than  then. 

Dr.  Pierson  rose  with  combined  wisdom  and  grace 
to  the  occasion,  preaching  no  less  than  five  sermons 
during  the  eight  days.  The  funeral  was  on  the 
Thursday.  One  newspaper  said  that  you  might 
have  searched  London  and  not  have  found  three 
women  who  did  not  wear  black  on  the  street  on  that 
day.  Along  the  route  to  Norwood  Cemetery  there  were 
crowds  fronting  the  closed  shops.  At  the  Stockwell 
Orphanage  the  children  sat  on  a  raised  platform,  in 
deep  mourning.  At  the  grave,  Archibald  G.  Brown, 
the  most  distinguished  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  men,  and 
his  close  friend,  pronounced  a  eulogy  by  which  he 
will  be  remembered  for  ever.     Here  it  is  in  cold  type. 

"  Beloved  President,  Faithful  Pastor,  Prince  of 
Preachers,  Brother  Beloved,  Dear  Spurgeon — we  bid 
thee  not  '  Farewell,'  but  only  for  a  little  while  '  Good- 
night.' Thou  shalt  rise  soon  at  the  first  dawn  of  the 
Resurrection-day  of  the  redeemed.  Yet  is  the  good- 
night not  ours  to  bid,  but  thine;  it  is  we  who  linger 
in  the  darkness;  thou  art  in  God's  holy  light.  Our 
night  shall  soon  be  passed,  and  with  it  all  our  weeping. 
Then,  with  thine,  our  songs  shall  greet  the  morning 
of  a  day  that  knows  no  cloud  nor  close ;  for  there  is  no 
night  there. 

"  Hard  worker  in  the  field  !  thy  toil  is  ended. 
Straight  has  been  the  furrow  thou  hast  ploughed. 
No  looking  back  has  marred  thy  course.  Harvests 
have  followed  thy  patient  sowing,  and  heaven  is 
already  rich  with  thine  ingathered  sheaves,  and  shall 
still  be  enriched  through  the  years  yet  lying  in  eternity. 


336  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  Champion  of  God  !  thy  battle,  long  and  nobly 
fought,  is  over;  thy  sword,  which  clave  to  thy  hand, 
has  dropped  at  last :  a  palm  branch  takes  its  place. 
No  longer  does  the  helmet  press  thy  brow,  oft  weary 
with  its  surging  thoughts  of  battle ;  a  victor's  wreath 
from  the  great  Commander's  hand  has  already  proved 
thy  full  reward. 

"  Here,  for  a  little  while,  shall  rest  thy  precious 
dust.  Then  shall  thy  Well-Beloved  come;  and  at 
His  voice  thou  shalt  spring  from  thy  couch  of  earth, 
fashioned  like  unto  His  body,  into  glory.  Then 
spirit,  soul,  and  body  shall  magnify  the  Lord's 
redemption.  Until  then,  beloved,  sleep.  We  praise 
God  for  thee,  and  by  the  blood  of  the  everlasting 
covenant,  hope  and  expect  to  praise  God  with  thee. 
Amen." 

As  the  casket  was  lowered  into  the  grave  there  was 
nothing  to  be  seen  but  the  text  at  the  foot  of  it  about 
the  good  fight,  and  the  Bible  that  lay  on  the  top  of  it, 
open  at  the  text  that  led  Spurgeon  into  the  light — 
"  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the 
earth,  for  I  am  God  and  there  is  none  else." 

All  the  services  are  described  in  the  volume  which 
I  edited,  entitled,  From  the  Pulpit  to  the  Palm  Branch, 
and  I  may  be  permitted  to  quote  from  the  Preface 
my  own  words. 

"  Since  this  good  gift,  which  the  Giver  of  all  good 
bestowed  upon  the  Church,  and  upon  the  world,  was 
to  be  taken  from  us,  we  are  constrained  to  say  that 
he  could  have  gone  from  our  midst  in  no  better  way. 
This  is  not  only  a  matter  of  faith,  but,  having  tried 
to  imagine  other  methods  of  departure,  we  are  com- 
pelled to  fall  back  on  God's  way  as  the  wisest  and  the 
best. 


N^ 


■<m^ 


t 


C.    H.    SPURGEON    JUST   BEFORE    HIS    LAST    ILLNESS. 


THE   TRIUMPHANT   END  337 

"  Had  Mr.  Spurgeon  been  called  suddenly,  we  should 
have  been  so  stunned  by  the  blow  as  to  have  been 
scarcely  able  to  stand  upright  beneath  it;  a  waiting 
time  was,  therefore,  in  mercy,  granted  to  us,  during 
which  the  forces  at  command  were  organised  in  such 
a  way  that,  with  the  exactness  of  a  machine,  all 
worked  smoothly  when  the  terrible  tidings  at  last 
came. 

"  Had  Mr.  Spurgeon  been  taken  before  such 
marvellous  solicitude  was  shown  around  his  sick  bed, 
the  enemies  of  the  truth  would  have  blasphemed; 
now  they  are  fain  to  be  silent,  seeing  that,  even  in 
this  life,  fidelity  to  the  truth  and  faithfulness  to 
conviction  have  been  so  greatly  honoured. 

"  Had  Mr.  Spurgeon  passed  away  amid  the  fogs  of 
London,  we  should  have  imagined  that,  had  he  only 
been  permitted  to  live  beneath  bluer  skies,  his  life 
would  have  been  prolonged;  now  we  thank  God  that 
those  three  bright  months  were  added  to  it,  and  that 
he  was  able,  with  his  beloved  wife,  to  have  such 
uninterrupted  joy  on  earth,  ere  he  passed  to  his 
reward  in  heaven. 

"  Had  Mr.  Spurgeon  ended  his  course  in  England, 
for  a  few  days  only  would  people  have  paused  to  have 
asked  the  secret  of  his  marvellous  influence ;  whereas, 
under  the  actual  circumstances,  for  twelve  days  the 
attention  of  the  civilised  world  was  centred  in  the 
testimony  borne,  not  only  to  the  servant  of  God,  but 
to  the  Gospel  he  preached,  in  column  after  column 
of  almost  every  newspaper.  Truly,  the  Lord  hath 
done  all  things  well ! 

"  Many  years  ago,  in  one  of  his  sermons,  published 
at  the  time,  he  attempted  to  picture  the  scene  at  his 
own  funeral,  and  expressed  his  own  desire  concerning 
it. 


338  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

"  '  In  a  little  while,'  he  said,  *  there  will  be  a  con- 
course of  persons  in  the  streets.  Methinks  I  hear 
some  one  inquiring — 

"  '  "  What  are  all  these  people  waiting  for?  " 

" ' "  Do  you  not  know  ?  He  is  to  be  buried 
to-day." 

"'"And  who  is  that?" 

"  '  "  It  is  Spurgeon." 

"  '  "  What !  the  man  that  preached  at  the 
Tabernacle  ?  " 

"  '  "  Yes ;   he  is  to  be  buried  to-day." 

"  '  That  will  happen  very  soon.  And  when  you 
see  my  coffin  carried  to  the  silent  grave,  I  should  like 
every  one  of  you,  whether  converted  or  not,  to  be 
constrained  to  say,  "  He  did  earnestly  urge  us,  in  plain 
and  simple  language,  not  to  put  off  the  consideration 
of  eternal  things ;  he  did  entreat  us  to  look  to  Christ. 
Now  he  is  gone,  our  blood  is  not  at  his  door  if  we 
perish." ' 

"  Far  more  abundantly  than  he  dared  to  hope  have 
his  wishes  been  fulfilled,  and  only  in  the  day  when  all 
things  shall  be  revealed,  shall  it  be  known  how  many 
have  been  turned  to  the  Lord  by  the  death  of  the  man 
who  was  so  greatly  honoured  to  lead  people  to  the 
feet  of  Jesus  during  his  life." 

In  John  Ploughman'' s  Talk  there  is  a  sentence  ^ 
which  runs,  *'  Let  the  wind  blow  fresh  and  free  over 
my  grave,  and  if  there  must  be  a  line  about  me,  let 
it  be — 

Here  lies  the  body  of 

John  Ploughman, 

waiting  for  the  appearing  of  his 

Lord  and  Saviour 

Jesus  Christ." 


THE  TRIUMPHANT   END  839 

A  few  days  before  the  end,  at  Mentone,  he  said, 
"  Remember— a  plain  slab,  with  C.  H.  S.  upon  it : 
nothing  more."  But  love  denied  the  last  request, 
and  reverence  substituted  the  name  "  Charles  Haddon 
Spurgeon  "  for  that  of  John  Ploughman.  Then  on 
one  side  of  the  tomb  is  the  verse  of  the  hymn  he  was 
accustomed  to  write  in  albums,  and  the  verse  that 
follows  it. 

"  E'er  since  by  faith  I  saw  the  stream 
Thy  flowing  wounds  supply, 
Redeeming  love  has  been  my  theme, 
And  shall  be  till  I  die." 

There  is  little  more  to  add.  Mrs.  Spurgeon  lived 
for  some  years  afterwards  at  Westwood,  and  her  body 
now  lies  in  the  same  grave  as  her  husband.  The 
tomb  of  Thomas  Spurgeon  is  near  by.  The  Taber- 
nacle Church  still  continues;  the  College  is  still 
training  men  to  preach  the  Gospel;  the  Orphanage 
still  shelters  and  educates  five  hundred  girls  and  boys. 
But  a  new  era  has  dawned,  and  it  may  be  that  the 
Lord  who  called  and  equipped  Spurgeon  has  another 
prophet  somewhere  preparing  to  utter  His  message 
to  this  generation,  or  it  may  be  that  there  may  dawn 
on  the  earth  that  great  day  of  Epiphany  which  shall 
usher  in  the  golden  years. 

For  the  rest,  Spurgeon's  own  last  words  to  the  little 
Mentone  group  shall  also  be  his  last  words  to  the 
readers  of  his  biography  :  "  The  vista  of  a  praiseful 
life  will  never  close,  but  continue  throughout  eternity. 
From  psalm  to  psalm,  from  hallelujah  to  hallelujah, 
we  will  ascend  the  hill  of  the  Lord,  until  we  come 
into  the  Holiest  of  all,  where,  with  veiled  faces,  we 
will  bow  before  the  Divine  Majesty  in  the  bliss  of 
endless  adoration.  Throughout  this  year  may  the 
Lord  be  with  you  !     Amen."  ^ 


CHAPTER  XX 

SPURGEON   IN    HISTORY 

Greatness  needs  distance.  Close  at  hand  little 
things  sometimes  appear  great — "  the  black  fly  on  the 
window-pane  looks  like  the  black  ox  on  the  distant 
plain."  And  great  things  are  often  dwarfed  by 
nearness.  Mont  Blanc  cannot  be  properly  appreci- 
ated from  the  village  of  Chamonix;  to  crow^n  it  the 
monarch  of  the  mountains  you  must  either  climb  it, 
or  get  further  away.  Jerusalem  cannot  be  seen  in  its 
glory  by  the  easy  approach  from  the  west;  you  must 
get  across  the  Valley  of  the  Kedron  and  stand  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives  before  the  majestic  picture  bursts 
on  your  view. 

The  estimates  of  their  own  generation  generally 
exaggerate  or  depreciate  heroes,  the  calm  judgment 
of  history,  though  not  infallible,  is  fairer.  Some  of 
earth's  great  ones  have,  no  doubt,  sunk  into  oblivion, 
but  amongst  those  whom  history  remembers  only 
those  are  great  whom  history  greatens.  Spurgeon  is 
amongst  the  number. 

It  will  be  conceded  without  argument  that  he  was 
greater  than  any  of  his  pulpit  contemporaries.  In 
an  earlier  chapter  the  comparison  has  been  made, 
and  the  fact  is  so  evident  that  it  needs  no  insistence. 
There  is  perhaps  no  detail  in  which  he  was  not  excelled 
by  others  of  his  time,  but  none  approached  him  in  the 
sum  of  his  gifts.  He  himself  was  much  impressed  by 
the   oratory   of  Morley   Punshon,    and   once   after 

340 


SPURGEON   IN   HISTORY  341 

hearing  him  declared,  "  If  I  could  speak  like  that,  I 
would  turn  the  world  upside  down."  At  the  same 
time,  he  was  quite  aware  that  such  excessive  rhetoric 
was  apt  to  pall.  Rhetoric,  too,  was  the  chief  char- 
acteristic of  Canon  Liddon  in  the  pulpit.  "  When  he 
closed  his  manuscript,  the  congregation,  after  an 
hour's  rapture  and  breathless  attention,  appear  as  if 
a  weight  had  been  lifted  off  their  spirits."  It  has 
been  well  said  that  Liddon  was  the  Jeremiah  of  that 
age,  and  Spurgeon  its  Isaiah.  The  present  verdict 
as  to  these  three  pulpit  orators  is  clear.  Equally- 
clear  when  comparison  is  made  with  Henry  Ward 
Beecher,  who  in  his  time  was  judged  by  many  to  be 
a  greater  preacher  than  Spurgeon — "  a  man  who 
always  comes  out  of  the  front  door  when  he  wishes 
to  give  his  opinions  an  airing;  "  or  with  Thomas 
Guthrie,  that  other  polished  orator,  who  has  himself, 
in  speaking  of  Spurgeon,  unconsciously  described  the 
difference  between  them — "  one  man  is  a  Boanerges 
and  another  a  Barnabas." 

It  would  be  tedious  to  attempt  to  characterise  all 
the  eminent  preachers  of  the  Spurgeon  era.  Alex- 
ander Maclaren,  more  intense  but  less  human ;  R.  W. 
Dale,  a  deeper  thinker  with  a  much  smaller  orbit; 
Dean  Stanley,  more  influential  but  with  less  abiding 
influence;  Canon  Farrar,  more  florid  and  fugitive; 
Phillips  Brooks,  as  pictorial  but  not  as  popular; 
Joseph  Parker,  with  a  more  modern  accent,  but  with 
less  of  the  eternal  speech ;  Boyd  Carpenter,  beyond 
compare  the  great  preacher  of  his  own  Church  in  his 
own  time,  but  not  as  incessant  nor  as  far-reaching  as 
Spurgeon;  Alexander  Whyte,  a  greater  spiritual 
surgeon,  but  a  less  skilful  physician.  The  fact  that 
Cardinal  Manning  died  a  fortnight  before  Spurgeon 
suggested  a  comparison  of  their  respective  places  in 


342  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

the  life  of  their  epoch.  It  was  freely  said  that 
Manning  was  as  great  a  loss  to  the  Catholic  world  as 
Spurgeon  to  the  Protestant.  To-day  Manning  has 
less  influence  than  Newman,  but  the  savour  of 
Spurgeon's  life  and  ministry  abides. 

As  for  the  leaders  of  the  Church  in  other  ages, 
Spurgeon's  saying  has  been  already  quoted  :  "  You 
may  take  a  step  from  Paul  to  Augustine,  then  from 
Augustine  to  Calvin,  and  then — ^well,  you  may  keep 
your  foot  up  a  good  while  before  you  find  such 
another."  When  he  visited  the  Simplon  Hospice,  he 
said,  "  I  was  delighted  to  find  that  they  are  Augustine 
monks,  because,  next  to  Calvin,  I  love  Augustine.  I 
feel  that  Augustine  was  the  great  mine  out  of  which 
Calvin  digged  his  mental  wealth;  and  the  Augustine 
monks,  in  practising  their  holy  charity,  seemed  to  say  : 
'  Our  Master  was  a  teacher  of  grace,  and  we  will 
practise  it,  and  give  without  money  and  without 
price  to  all  comers  whatsoever  they  need.'  "  ^ 

This  seems  to  suggest  that  he  himself  would  have 
stepped  from  Augustine  to  John  Calvin,  and  the 
references  in  Chapter  VI  strengthen  that  conviction. 
But  he  would  first  have  stopped,  perhaps,  at  Martin 
Luther,  and  Gustav  Kaweran  has  told  us  that  "  his 
knowledge  of  Luther  was  much  more  accurate  than 
that  of  many  of  Luther's  fellow-countrymen."  The 
same  author  believes  that,  as  in  the  case  of  Luther,  one 
of  the  secrets  of  his  influence  was  "  the  violence  of  his 
preaching,  the  rock-like  conviction  of  the  power  of  the 
Word  to  save  souls.  He  was  unmatched  in  the  history 
of  preaching,  the  most  original  of  modern  preachers,  his 
style  a  bold  departure  from  traditional  usage,  uncon- 
scious unstudied  oratory,  not  the  rhetoric  of  the  schools ; 
his  art  concrete,  not  abstract,  it  is  given  content  and 
body ;  the  men  of  whom  he  speaks  are  men  of  flesh  and 


SPURGEON   IN   HISTORY  343 

blood,  not  shades  whom  no  man  has  ever  seen  evolved 
from  the  preacher's  inner  consciousness.  His  attrac- 
tion consists  in  the  force  with  which  he  witnesses  to 
the  power  of  the  Gospel  to  renew  personality  and  to 
create  cheerful  and  courageous  human  beings,  and 
that  witness  is  borne  with  all  the  spontaneity  of  one 
who  has  himself  lived  and  experienced  that  power,  and 
daily  realises  it  afresh."  ^  Words  from  the  land  of 
Luther,  equally  true  of  Luther  and  of  Spurgeon. 

Another  great  stride  brings  us  to  John  Wesley. 
We  pause  over  John  Knox,  who  was,  as  we  have  seen 
in  Chapter  IV,  one  of  Spurgeon's  heroes,  but  glorious 
as  he  was,  we  find  him  scarcely  big  enough  to  find  a 
place  amongst  the  worthiest.  The  name  of  John 
BuNYAN  is  amongst  those  of  the  immortals,  but  his 
influence  depends  altogether  on  his  books.  Spurgeon 
was  strongly  attracted  to  George  Whitefield,  as  is 
evident  in  Chapter  V,  but  Wesley  was  undoubtedly  the 
greater  man.  He  stands  in  the  apostolic  succession, 
and  influences  people  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  to-day. 
But  though  Spurgeon  steadfastly  refused  to  found  a 
new  denomination,  and  so  far  fails  to  perpetuate  his 
name,  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that  he  made  as 
great  a  mark  on  his  own  age  as  Wesley,  and  began  a 
movement  which  will  influence  all  future  time.  Both 
appealed  to  the  common  people. 

Our  steps  are  next  arrested  at  the  name  of  William 
Carey,  the  greatness  of  whose  contribution  to  the 
Kingdom  of  God  is  not  yet  appreciated  by  the  Church 
of  Christ.  Carey  and  Spurgeon  had  both  learned  of 
God,  both  appealed  to  the  whole  world,  both  were 
indefatigable  workers,  and  both  were  perfected  by 
suffering. 

While  Carey  in  India  gave  a  new  impulse  to  the 
Christi^^n  fajtb,  Thomas  Chaj^mers^  the  greatest  man 


344  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

that  Scotland  has  ever  produced,  fought  at  the  same 
time  for  the  freedom  of  faith  in  his  own  land.  "  If 
ever  a  halo  surrounded  a  saint  it  encompassed 
Chalmers,"  declared  Lord  Rosebery.  As  a  pulpit 
orator  he  was  unrivalled  in  his  own  day,  and  between 
his  life  and  Spurgeon's  there  are  other  points  of  con- 
tact— their  personal  experience  of  grace,  their  unceasing 
contest  for  the  Crown  Rights  of  Christ,  their  chivalrous 
care  for  the  poor,  and  their  realised  desire  for  the 
training  of  men  for  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel. 

Other  men  of  the  same  period  arrest  us  only  for 
the  moment  :   Robert  Hall,  the  greatest  preacher  in 
England   of  his   day,    of  whom   it   is   recorded   that 
sometimes  the  business  men  of  Leicester  who  heard 
him  on  Sunday  were  unable  to  attend  to  their  business 
on  Monday;    Spurgeon   no   doubt  being  greatly    in- 
fluenced by  him  when  he  joined  the  church  at  Cam- 
bridge of  which  he  had  been  the  pastor :    Edward 
Irving,    whose    meteoric    career    blazed    with    such 
brilliance,   compared  with  whom  Spurgeon  shone  as 
a  fixed  star :    F.  W.  Robertson,   one  of  the  great 
pulpit  names  of  the  Victorian  age,   as  Mr.  Asquith 
has  reminded  us   in   his   Romanes  Lecture,    "  Some 
Aspects  of  the  Victorian  Age,"  but  in  an  altogether 
different  category  from  Spurgeon,  more  nervous  and 
less  telling :    J.  B.  H.  Lacordaire,  who  invented  a 
new  form  of  religious  service,  the  "  Conference,"  and 
attracted    crowds    at    Notre    Dame,    Paris,    and    at 
Toulouse,  and,  speaking  of  his  own  unexpected  call  to 
preach,  says  :  "Moreover,  it  is  with  the  orator  as  with 
Mount  Horeb :   before  God  strikes  him  he  is  but  a 
barren  rock,   but   as  soon   as   the   divine   hand   has 
touched  him,  as   it  were  with  a   finger,  there  burst 
forth  streams  that  water  the  desert ;"   but  his  sermons 
were  only  occasional  as  contrasted  with  Spurgeon's 


SPURGEON   IN   HISTORY  345 

sustained  ministry :  Thomas  Binney,  who  before 
Spurgeon's  appearance  in  the  metropoHs  was  its  most 
popular  preacher,  and  from  a  critic  of  the  new  minister 
was  soon  transformed  into  his  ardent  defender. 

D.  L.  Moody  belongs  to  another  order,  is  to  be 
remembered  as  one  of  the  great  spiritual  forces  of 
the  world,  and  is,  I  suppose,  to  be  classed  with 
Chrysostom,  Savonarola,  and  Tauler,  who  in  a 
previous  chapter  have  been  ruled  out  of  com- 
parison with  Spurgeon.  Patrick,  Bernard,  Francis, 
Xavier,  and  William  Booth  are  of  the  same  noble 
company,  and  yet  do  not  rise  to  the  highest  in  the 
mountain  range  of  Church  history. 

It  may  be  difficult  to  determine  the  heights  of  the 
eight  majestic  peaks  our  dim  eyes  discern  above  the 
rest,  as,  white  and  glistening,  they  pierce  the  blue, 
but  there  they  stand,  a  series  of  mighty  summits, 
still  catching  earliest  the  morning  light,  and  still  at 
eventide  with  the  rosy  glow  upon  them  when  others 
are  in  the  shadow — Paul,  Augustine,  Luther, 
Calvin,  Wesley,  Carey,  Chalmers,  Spurgeon — 
and  the  last  is  not  the  least. 

It  is  not  for  us  to  apportion  greatness  to  them  :  the 
primacy  must,  of  course,  be  given  to  the  Apostle,  but 
it  may  be  affirmed  with  some  assurance  that  as  many 
troubled  souls  looked  to  Spurgeon  for  comfort  as  to 
any  man  that  ever  lived;  and  since  his  departure 
countless  others  have  been  influenced  by  his  words, 
and  blessed  through  the  agencies  he  set  in  motion. 
What  service  is  permitted  to  those  who  have  passed, 
we  may  not  know,  whether  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect  are  allowed  to  help  the  saints  on  earth 
or  not ;  but  if  that  is  possible,  his  ardent  desire  would 
be  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.  In  a  recent 
biography,  indeed,    it   is  recorded  that   one   of  the 


346  LIFE   OF   SPURGEON 

leaders  of  this  generation,  who  has  recently  gone  to 
his  reward,  was  on  his  dying  bed  persuaded  that 
Spurgeon  had  actually  visited  him.^  Whether  that 
is  true  to  fact,  it  is  certainly  true  to  nature :  in  any 
event  it  is  an  indication  of  the  place  he  holds  in  the 
hearts  of  others,  and  we  may  be  sure  that  in  some 
sphere  he  is  still  actively  witnessing  to  the  grace  of 
his  Lord,  that  was  ever  his  theme  while  he  was  here. 

To  me  he  is  master  and  friend.  I  have  neither 
known  nor  heard  of  any  other,  in  my  time,  so  many- 
sided,  so  commanding,  so  simple,  so  humble,  so 
selfless,  so  entirely  Christ's  man.  Proudly  I  stand  at 
the  salute ! 


NOTES 


CHAPTER  I 

1  Mr.  Britling  Sees  it  Through,  by  H.  G.  Wells,  p.  6. 

2  Autobiography,  Vol.  I.  p.  8. 

3  The  Spurgeon  Family,  by  W.  Miller  Higgs,  pp.  8,  21,  30,  2. 

*  Thomas  Spurgeon  :  a  Biography,  p.  269. 

^  James  Archer  Spurgeon,  by  G.  H.  Pike,  pp.  20,  23. 

^  Autobiography,  Vol.  III.  p.  43. 

'  South  London  Press,  Nov.  28,  1874. 

^  The  Crown  of  Wild  Olive,  by  John  Ruskin,  pp.  1,  2. 

CHAPTER  II 

^  The  Hound  of  Heaven,  by  Francis  Thompson. 
"  Autobiography,  Vol.  I.  p.  69. 

3  Wesley's   Journal,  Vol.    I.   p.   386-7.     Everyman's   Library 
Edition. 

*  Autobiography,  Vol.  I.  Chaps.  IX,  X  and  XI. 
5  Ezek.  i.  3. 

CHAPTER  III 

1  Richard  KnilVs  Biography. 

2  James  Archer  Spurgeon,  by  G.  H.  Pike,  p.  25. 

CHAPTER  IV 

^  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  by  James  Douglas,  p.  52. 

2  Review  of  Reviews,  Feb.  1892. 

3  T/ifi  /Z^ero  as  a  Priest,  p.  137.     Heroes  and  Hero  Worship. 

CHAPTER  V 

1  South  London  Press,  June  21,  1884. 

2  DaiZz/  Telegraph,  Feb.  1,  1892. 

3  Jewish  Chronicle,  Feb.  5,  1892. 
^  Record,  Feb.  5,  1892. 

5  Fan%  Fair,  Dec.  10,  1870. 

^  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  by  George  C.  Lorimer,  p.  23. 

'  The  Friend. 

8  The  Patriot, 

347 


348  NOTES 

^  The  Christian  Weekly  News,  March  4.  1856. 

10  The  Morning  Advertiser,  Feb.  19,  1855;  Feb.  18,  1856. 

11  Life  and  Work  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  by  G.  Holden 
Pike,  Vol.  II.  p.  223. 

12  English  Illustrated  Magazine,  IMarch  1892. 

13  The  British  Weekly,  June  27,  1890. 
1*  Daily  Telegraph,  Jan.  14,  1888. 

15  The  Evening  Star. 

1*^  British  Standard,  Jan.  9,  1857. 

1'  The  Surrey  Comet,  Oct.  1908. 

18  The  Greville  Memoirs  (Third  Part),  Vol.  II.  p.  83. 

19  Life  of  Principal  Tulloch,  by  Mrs.  Oliphant,  p.  132. 

20  The  World,  Feb.  4,  1892. 

CHAPTER  VI 

1  Personal  Recollections  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  by  W.  Williams, 
p.  237. 

2  Daily  Bulletin,  July  16,  1855. 

3  Christian  News,  July  28,  1855. 

^  Recollections  of  My  Life,  by  James  Morgan,  D.D.,  p.  314. 

5  L?/^  of  Calvin,  Rev.  A.  Mitchell  Hunter,  M.A.,  Cardross. 

6  Pall  Mall  Gazette,  Feb.  1,  1892. 

'  Thomas  Spurgeon  :  A  Biography,  p.  3. 

8  From  the  Usher's  Desk  to  the  T'abernacle  Pulpit,  R.  Shindler, 
p.  251. 

9  The  British  Standard,  Jan.  7,  1859. 
10  Autobiography,  Vol.  III.  p.  62. 

CHAPTER  VII 

1  Gerald  Massey. 

2  The  British  Standard,  Aug.  19,  1859. 

3  Autobiography,  Vol.  II.  p.  313. 

*  Thomas  Spurgeon  :  a  Biography,  pp.  3,  4,  5. 

5  Leef/5  Mercury,  Nov.  15,  1879. 

6  The  Hornet,  April  4,  1878. 
'  The  Globe,  March  4,  1889. 

8  Z>ai/?/  Chronicle,  Feb.  1,  1892. 

9  /m/i  Tmes,  Feb.  16,  1892. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

1  Autobiography,  Vol.  II.  p.  7. 

2  Proverbial  Philosophy,  seventeenth  edition,  p.  213. 

3  Personal  Recollections,  by  W.  Williams,  p.  68. 

4  Fwnc/i,  Oct.  30,  1880. 

5  Archibald  G,  Brown  in  his  Memorial  Sermon, 


NOTES  349 

^  Personal  Recollections,  by  W.  Williams,  p.  27. 
'  A  Garden  of  Nuts,  by  Sir  W.  Robertson  Nicoll,  pp.  54-55 ; 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  1886,  p.  217. 

CHAPTER  IX 

^  Life  and  Work  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  by  G.  Holden  Pike,  Vol.  I. 
pp.  82,  79. 
,  2  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  by  Dr.  George  C.  Lorimer,  p.  16. 
3  Christian  World,  Feb.  11,  1892. 

*  The  Prince  of  Preachers,  by  James  Douglas,  M.A.,  p.  77. 
^  Personal  Recollections,  by  W.  Williams,  p.  79. 

«  A.  B.  in  The  British  Weekly,  Feb.  4,  1892. 
'  Lamps  of  the  Temple,  by  E.  Paxton  Hood,  p.  545. 
^  The  Prince  of  Preachers,  by  James  Douglas,  M.A.,  pp.  82-4, 
86,  87. 

»  Western  Morning  News,  Feb.  1,  1892. 

^°  Life  and  Work  ofC.  H.  Spurgeon,  by  G.  Holden  Pike,  Vol.  I. 
p.  107. 

"  British  Weekly,  Feb.  4,  1892. 
^2  Richard  S.  Storrs. 

^^  Christian  Commoyiwealth,  Feb.  4,  1892. 
^^  Illustrated  London  News,  Oct.  5,  1856. 
15  Black  and  White,  Feb.  6,  1892. 

1^  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  by  One  Who  Knew  Him  Well,  p.  113. 
1'  Sir  W,  Robertson  Nicoll,  in  Preface  to  Nelson's  Volume  of 
Sermons. 

CHAPTER  X 

^  British   and   Foreign   Evangelical   Revietv,  April  1877,   and 
British  Weekly,  Feb.  17,  1888. 

2  Christian  World,  Feb.  4,  1892. 

3  Daily  News,  May  22,  1879. 

*  The  Times,  June  19,  1884. 

^  Autobiography,  Vol.  IV.  p.  264. 

«  /6fd,  Vol.  II.  p.  154. 

'  Preface  to  Dr.  Denny's  Life,  by  Sir  W.  Robertson  Nicoll. 

^  Stray  Leaves  from  My  Life  Story,  by  J.  Manton  Smith,  p.  177. 

^  Autobiography,  Vol.  IV.  pp.  33,  48. 
1°  The  Times,  Feb.  1,  1892. 
11  Christian  Globe,  June  1,  1879. 

CHAPTER  XI 

1  T/ie  Modern  Pulpit  Viewed  in  Relation  to  the  State  of  Society. 

2  Daily  Telegraph,  May  9,  1879. 

^  G.  Holden  Pike  in  Life  and  Work  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  Vol.  II. 
p.  232. 

^  Dr.  Reynolds  to  Holden  Pike,  Ibid.,  Vol.  V.  p.  99. 


350  NOTES 

CHAPTER  XII 


Daily  Telegraph,  May  6,  1880. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

*  George  C.  Lo rimer's  Biography,  pp.  11,  60. 
^  Christian  Cornmonwealth,  Feb.  4,  1892. 
3  Christian  World,  Feb.  4,  1892. 
^  Edinburgh  Evening  News,  Feb.  1,  1892. 

5  Church  Times,  Feb.  5,  1892. 

6  Morning  Post,  Feb.  1,  1892. 
'  Spectator,  Feb.  6,  1892. 
8  B/acA;  a/id  JF/ifte,  Feb.  6,  1892. 
^  Dr.  Richard  Glover  of  Bristol. 

^"  Daily  Telegraph. 

Rev.  W.  J.  Dawson  in  The  Young  Man. 

Dr.  John  Clifford  in  The  Review  of  the  Churches. 

The  Rock,  Feb.  5,  1892. 

The  Globe. 

Christian  World,  Feb.  4,  1892. 

Morning  Advertiser,  Feb.  11,  1892. 

Dr.  John  Watson. 
^8  T/ie  Times,  Feb.  1,  1892. 

Daily  Telegraph,  Dec.  24,  1880. 
^"  Fa;n7?/  Fair,  Dec.  10,  1870. 

21  Resolution  of  the  Baptist  Union  Council,  Feb.  16,  1892. 

22  Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter  in  Ripon  Cathedral,  Feb.  14,  1892. 

23  British  Weekly,  Feb.  4,  1892. 

2*  Rev.  Hugh  Price  Hughes  in  The  Methodist  Times,  Feb.  4, 
1892. 

25  Rev.  J.  H.  Shakespeare  in  The  East  Anglian  Daily  News, 
Feb.  10,  1892. 

2«  Dr.  Campbell  in  1861. 

2'  Dr.  J.  C.  Carlile  at  the  Berlin  Congress  of  Baptist  Churches. 

28  Life  and  Work  of  C.  II.  Spurgeon,  by  G.  Holden  Pike, 
Vol.  V.  p.  108. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

1  Autobiography,  Vol.  II.  p.  276. 

2  Life  and  Work  ofC.  H.  Spurgeon,  by  G.  Holden  Pike,  Vol.  III. 
p.  113. 

»  Daily  Telegraph,  June  6,  1868. 
«  Ibid.,  Sept.  23,  1874. 


NOTES  351 

CHAPTER  XVII 

1  British  Weekly,  Feb.  17,  1888. 

2  Sword  and  Trowel,  1887,  p.  515. 

2  Life   and   Work   of  C.   H.   Spurgeon,   by   G.   Holden   Pike, 
Vol.  III.  p.  140. 

*  Rev.  W.  J.  Avery  in  The  Baptist  Union  Magazine,  1892,  p.  61. 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

^  Life  and  Work  ofC.  H.  Spurgeon,  by  G.  Holden  Pike,  Vol.  II. 
p.  363. 

2  Figaro,  Nov.  7,  1887. 

^  George  Moore :  Merchant  and  Philanthropist,  by  Samuel  Smiles, 
p.  450. 

4  Sword  and  Trowel,  1887,  p.  560. 

^  Christian  Commonwealth,  Feb.  4,  1892. 
^  Review  of  the  Churches,  Vol.  I.  p.  349. 

'  Life  and  Work  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  by  G.  Holden  Pike,  Vol.  II. 
p.  206. 

8  Pictorial  World,  Feb.  6,  1892. 
»  Daihj  Telegraph,  Feb.  1,  1892. 
0  'The  Times,  Feb.  1,  1892. 
^  Daily  Chronicle,  Jan.  1,  1879. 

2  Christian  World,  Feb.  4,  1892. 

3  r/ie  Speaker,  Feb.  6,  1892. 
*  Autobiography,  Vol.  II.  p.  137. 

5  Baptist,  Feb.  12,  1892. 
«  Z)at7?/  iVem?,  Feb.  2,  1892. 
'  Referee,  Feb.  7,  1892. 

^  Reynolds''  Sunday  Newspaper,  Feb.  7,  1892. 
»  fin7w7i  Weekly,  Feb.  4,  1892. 

2°  y^ZZ  and  Sundry,  by  E.  T.  Raymond,  p.  27. 
21  British  Standard,  March  4,  1864. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

1  Review  of  the  Chtirches,  Vol.  I.  p.  41. 

2  Jo/iri  Ploughman' s  Talk,  p.  157. 
*  Sword  and  Trowel,  1892,  p.  55. 


CHAPTER  XX 

1  TAe  Times,  August  22,  1860. 

2  C.  H.  Spurgeon  ein  Prediger  von  Gottes  deaden,  pp.  23,  42-48. 
*  Evan  H.  Hopkins,  by  Alexander  Smellie,  D.D.,  p.  219. 


INDEX 


To  THE  Chief  References  to  Peesons,  Places  and  Books 
(Titles  of  books  and  other  periodicals  are  given  in  italics.) 


Abekcakne,  122 

Aberdeen,  125 

According  to  Promise,  283 

Adams,  Thomas,  235,  267 

Agricultural  Hall,  112 

Aldis,  J.,  66 

Alexander,  Bishop,  323 

All  of  Grace,  283 

Almanack,  Syurgeon^s,  285 

America,  127 

Anderson,  John,  of  Helensburgh,  85, 

175 
Angus,  Dr.  Joseph,  54,  263,  287 
Anti-Slavery  Controversy,  127 
Arnold,  Matthew,  131,  210 
Argyll,  Duke  of,  208 
Around  the  Wicket  Gate,  284 
Artillery  .Street    Chapel,  Colchester, 

29 
Art  of  Illustration,  The,  234 
Asquith,  Mr.,  344 
Auckland,  128 
Augustine,  120,  342 

Balfour.  Mx.  Alexander,  326 
Ballarat,  225 

Banks,  Rev.  C.  W.,  66,  289 
Baptismal  Regeneration  Controversy, 

293,  305 
Baptist  Magazine,  The,  212 
Baptist  Missionary  Society,  the.  114, 

315 
Baptist,  The,  309 
Baptist   Union,   the,  307,   309,  310, 

311,  312,  316,  318 
Barnum,  127 
Barnwell,  45 

Baxter,  Richard,  49,  235,  275 
Bedford,  233 
Beecher,  Henry  Ward.  96,  141,  188, 

257,  266,  267.  299,  341 
Belfast,  114,  247 
A  A 


Belgium,  117 

Bengal  Place,  London,  166 

Benmore,  175 

Bernard,  141,  345 

Berridge,  80 

Beza,  119 

Bible  and  the  Newspaper,  The,  283 

Bible  Society,  the,  211 

Bible  Translation  Society,  114 

Binney,  Dr.  Thomas,  140,  227,  344 

Bird,  Benwell,  Rev.,  202 

Birmingham,  124,  202 

Bishopsgate  Institute,  131 

Blacknotlye,  2 

Blaine,  James  G.,  157 

Blood,  Rev.  William,  115 

Blunson,  Misses,  65 

Bonner,  Rev.  Carey,  225 

Book  Fund,  173,  287 

Book  of  Common  Prayer,  306 

Booth,  Dr.,  311,  315  ' 

,  General  William,  345 

Bossuet,  266 

Boswell's  Johnson,  286 

Boxhill,  15 

Boyd- Carpenter,  Bishop,  341 

Bradford,  124 

Breaking  the  Long  Silence,  333 

Bright,  John,  131,  157,  186,  190,  293 

Brighton.  169 

Brimley.  Mr.,  Mayor  of  Cambridge,  50 

Bristol,  123 

British  Weekly.  The.  296,  301 

Brock,  Dr.,  66,  138,  179 

Brooks,  Bishop  Phillips,  341 

— ,  Thomas.  283 

Brown,  Rev.  Archibald  G.,  178,  307, 

335 
-^,  Rev.  Baldwin,  292 
- — ,  Rev.  Hugh  D.,  296 

,  Rev.  Hugh  Stowell,  202,  309 

,  John,  236 

353 


354 


INDEX 


Bunhill  Fields,  125 

Bunyan,  John,  31,  40,  120,  125,  187, 

207,  235,  266,  267,  275,  286,  343 
Burleigh,  Mrs.,  10 
Burnham  Thorpe,  3 
Burns,  Dr.  Jabez,  66 
,  Robert,  260,  277 

Caird,  Dr.  John,  113 

Cairns,  Earl,  172 

Calvin,  John,  117,  118,  121,  267,  330, 

342 
Calvinism,  289,  290 
Cambridge,  13,  43,  121 
Campbell,  Dr.,  91,  98,  129,  306 
Cantlow,  Mr.  W.  W.,  38 
Caracci,  329 

Carey,  William,  5,  315,  343 
Cariton,  123 

Carlyle,  Thomas,  70,  199,  228,  271 
Cassin,  Rev.  Burman,  237 
Castleton,  122 

Chalmers,  Dr.  Thomas,  194,  275,  343 
Chamonix,  340 

Charlesworth,  Rev.  V.  J.,  244,  245 
Chartism,  98 
Cheddar  Cliffs,  121 
Cheltenham,  124 
Cheque  Book  of  the  Bank  of  Faith, 

The,  282 
Cheshunt  College,  230 
Chicago,  225 

Chilvers,  Rev.  H.  Tydeman,  279 
Christian  Cabinet,  The,  291 
"  Christian  Classics,"  Hamilton's,  233 
Chrysostom,  140,  267.  345 
Clapham  Common,  125 
Clifford,  Dr.  John,  255.  311,  315,  332 
Clue  of  the  Maze,  The,  280 
Cobden,  270 
Coe,  Mr.  Robert,  59 
Colchester,  11,  12,  29 
Coleridge,  Lord,  158 
Cohgny,  Admiral,  118 
Colintrave,  177 

College  Conferences,  239, 259,  261,  314 
College  Lectures,  233 
Commenting  and  Commenlaries,  234 
Cook,  Mr.  John,  128 

Mrs.,  112 

Cookman,  Alfred,  202 
Correggio,  329 
Crimean  War,  223 
Cromwell.  276 
Crooks,  Mr.  Will,  186 


Crystal  Palace,  103,  112,  162 

Culross,  Dr.,  311,  315 

Cumming,  Dr.,  292 

Cuyler,  Dr.  Theodore,  179,  188,  284 

Daily  News,  The,  210 

Daihf  Telegraph,  The,  293,  295 

Dale,  Dr.  R.  W.,  158,  318,  341 

Damascus,  247 

Darling's  Cydopoidia,  212 

David,  136 

Davids,  Mr.,  43 

Davies,  Mr.  G.  H.,  67 

Declaratory  Statement,  312,  313 

Denney,  Dr.  James,  216 

Dickeiis,  287 

Divine  Life  in  Man,  The,  292 

Dore,  Gustave,  177 

Downgrade  Controversy,  the,  282,  310 

Drummond,  Henry,  285 

Dublin,  115 

Du  Chaillu,  130 

Dudley,  124 

Duncan,  Mr.  James,  175 

Dunnington,  122 

Dunoon,  175 

Dynes,  Manor  of,  2 

Earthen  Vessel,  The,  289 
Eastbourne,  333 
Eastwood,  2 
Edinburgh,  113,  124 
Edinburgh  Review,  The,  270 
Edwards,  Jonathan,  330 

of  Bala,  Principal,  193 

Eliot,  George,  222 

Epistle  to  the  Romans,  The,  235 

Epsom,  125 

Erasmus,  276 

Evangelical  Alliance,  307 

Evans,  Christmas,  267 

- — ,  Rev,  Herber,  334 

Evening  by  Evening,  282 

Everett,  Prof.  J.  D.,  42,  185,  193 

Exeter  Hall,  75,  83,  90,  292 

Exeter  Hall  Lectures,  128 

Facsimile  Pulpit  Notes,  282 
Farm  Sermons.  282 
Farrar,  Dean,  276,  341 
Felstead.  2 
F^nelon,  276 
Ferrier,  Professor,  101 
Fisherwick  Place,  Belfast,  114 
Fletcher,  Dr.  Alexander,  164 


INDEX 


355 


Flowers  from  a  Pur  Hail's  Garden,  283 

Foote,  98 

Foster,  William,  131 

Fox,  George,  131 

Francis,  St.,  141,  345 

Franklin,  270 

Free  St.  George's,  124 

Freeman,  The,  292,  308,  309 

French  Revolution,  286 

From  the  Pulpit  to  the  Palm  Branch, 

336 
Froude,  HurreU.  304 
Fuller,  Eunice,  39 

Garfield,  General,  157 

Garibaldi,  307 

General  Baptists,  290 

Geneva,  117 

GiU,  Dr.  John.  57 

Ginx's  Baby,  253 

Gladstone,  W.  E..  189,  223,  275,  331 

Golden  Alphabet,  The,  281 

Goldsmith,  Oliver,  14 

Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  The,  281 

Gough.  J.  B.,  98,  174 

Gould.  Rev.  George,  58,  309 

Grace  Triumphant,  282,  217 

Grand-Pierre,  Dr.,  116 

Grant,  Mr.  James,  80 

Greatest  Fight  in  the  World,  The,  281 

Great  Maplestead,  2 

Greville  Memoirs,  100 

Greyiriars,  Glasgow,  113 

Guiimess,  Dr.  Grattan,  115 

Guthrie,  Thomas,  341 

Halifax,  123 

HaU,  Dr.  Newman,  201.  255 

,  Robert,  44,  80,  343 

Halstead  2 

Harrald.'Mr.  Joseph  W.,    172,  255. 

330,  333.  334 
Haverhill,  7,  331 
Haweis,  Rev.  R.  H.,  207 
"  Helensburgh,"    Nightingale    Lane, 

166.  169 
Henry,  Matthew,  235 
Hervey,  80 

Higgs.  Mr.  William.  137,  177.  242 
"  High  Calvary ''  Preachers,  236 
Hill.  Rowland.  36.  47,  79 
Hillyard,  Mrs.,  241,  244 
Hindhead,  15 
Hinton,  Dr.  Howard,  66 
.  Edward-  2!»2 


Holland,  116 

Holy  War,  235 

Hood,  Edwin  Paxton,  79,  1 87 

Hooker,  266 

Houghton,  Lord,  84,  131 

Howe,  John,  267 

Hoyt,  Dr.  Wayland,  178 

"  Ian  Maclaren,"  226 
Ireland,  114.  260 
Irons,  Joseph.  212,  261 
Irving,  Edward,  96,  194,  344 
Isleham,  38,  52 

James  of  Birmingham,  321 

Jay,  William,  79,  80 

Jenkins,  Mr.  Edward,  253 

"  Job,"'  289 

"  John  Ploughman,"  15 

John  Plmighman^ s  Almanack,  283 

John,  Ploughman^ s  Pictures,  283 

John  Ploughman's  Talk,    270,    283, 

338 
Johnson.  Dr..  269 
Jowett,  Dr.  J.  H.,  264,  279,  281 
Jojmson,  Mr.  William,  136 

Kaweran,  Gustav,  342 
Keach.  Benjamin,  57 
Kelvedon,  5,  32 
Keys,  Mr.  J,  L.,  172,  283 
Kilmun,  177 
King,  Mary,  36 

,  Mr.,  of  Waterbeach,  50 

Kingsgate  Street  Chapel,  261 

Kingston-on-Thames,  229,  260 

Kitchener.  Lord,  334 

Knill.  Richard,  31,  34,  67 

Knowles,  Sheridan,  67 

Knox.    John,    69,     118,    121,    276, 

343 
Kruger,  Paul,  4 

Lacordaire,  266,  343 

Ladds,  Mr.  F.  G..  245 

Latimer,  Bishop  Hugh,  209,  210 

Layard,  Sir  Austin.  130 

Lectures  to  my  Students,  233 

Leechman.  Mr.,  66 

Leeding.  Mr.  E.  S.,  13,  43,  183 

Leeds,  121 

Leighton.  Robert,  276 

Leith  Hill,  15 

Lewis.  Dr.  W.  G.,  66 

,  Mr.  Henry,  12 


356 


INDEX 


Liddon,  Canon,  141,  267,  275,  276, 
323,  341 

Life  of  Irving,  287 

Liverpool,  124 

Livingstone.  Dr..  100,  221 

Lockhart,  Mr.  W.  P..  84,  325,  327 

Lockhart's  >ScoU,  287 

"  London  Baptist  Association,  The," 

308 
London  in  1853,  61 
Lorimer,  Dr.,  198 
Low,  Mr.  James,  59 
Lymington.  122 
Lynch,  T.  T.,  291,  292 
Lucian,  254 
Luther,  235,  276,  342 

Mac  Arthur,  Dr.,  126 
Macaulay,  Lord.  198,  275 
Macdonald,  Mr.  John,  of  Ferintosh, 

817 
Maclaren,  Dr.  Alexander,  266,  267, 

287,  315,  318,  341 
Macmillan,  Mi-.,  54 
Magee,  Ai-chbishop,  323 
Manning,  Cardinal,  341 
Manton,  Thomas,  283 
Marseilles,  254 
Martha's  Chape],  15 
Maurice,  F.  D.,  292 

,  Professor,  190 

Medhurst,    Rev.    T.    W.,    229,    232 

260 
Melbourne,  Cambs.,  122 
Melchizedek,  116 
Melrose  Abbey,  126 
Memories  of  Stamhourne,  285 
Mentone,  15,  175,  215,  253,  330 
Messages  to  the  Multitude,  215,  282 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  The, 

213 
Michael  Angelo.  329 
Minor,  The,  98 
Modern  Painters,  166 
Monod,  Dr.  Frederic,  116 
Moody,  D.  L.,   112,   140,   159,   196, 

225,  345 
Bloore,  IMr.  Geoige,  263 
Morgan,  Dr.  James,  114 
Morley,  Lord,  159 

,  Arthur,  27 

,  Samuel,  252 

Morning  by  Mormn.g,  282 

Much  Dunmow,  2 

Muller,  George,  135,  242.  268 


Napoleon,  326 

National  Review,  The,  99 

Naunton,  122 

Nelson,  Horatio,  3 

Newington  Butts,  136 

Newman,  Cardinal,  275,  304,  342 

Newmarket,  13,  36 

New  Park  Street  Chapel,  56,  139,  248 

New  Park  Street  Pulpit,  The,  212,  220 

Newton,  John,  120,  235 

NicoU,   Sir  W.   Robertson,   87,    181,, 

209,  215,  321 
Night  Thoughts,  233 
Niie,  128 
North,  Brownlow,  124 

O'Connell.  Daniel,  322 
Offord,  Ml-.,  261 
Oubourne  St.  George.  122 
"  Old  Roads,"  33 
Oliphant,  Mrs.,  101 
Oliver,  E.  L.,  287 
Olney.  Mr.  Thomas,  58 
Open  Baptists,  290 
Open  Letter,  The,  296,  302 
Orpington,  258 
Otton  Belchamp,  5 
Our  Own  Hi/mn-Book,  152,  284 
Oxford,  Bishop  Wilberforce  of,  116, 
293,  294 

Paris,  115,  164 

Parker.  Dr.  Joseph,  72,  188,  196,  267, 

296,  301,  318,  341 
Parker's  Piece,  Cambridge,  121 
Particular  Baptists,  290 
Passy,  116 

Pastor  in  Prayer,  The.  284 
Pastor's  CoUege,  166,  169,  227,  339 
Paternoster  Row,  236 
Patrick,  345 
Patridge,  IVIr.,  247 
Paul,  120,  141,  167,  273,  342 
Pen7iy  Pulpit,  The,  212 
Pentecost.  Dr.  G.  F.,  295 
Pepphard.  122 
Peto,  Sir  S.  Morton.  137 
Phillips,  Wendell.  199 
Pierson,  Dr.  A.  T.,  161,  333,  335 
Pilgrim's  Progress,  The.  207,  235 
Pioneering  in  New  Guinea,  209 
Pitt,  326 

Pocock,  Mr.  W.  W.,  136 
Pollockshaws.  259 
Present  Truth,  The,  282 


INDEX 


357 


Prevost-Paradol,  M.,  116 

Prince  Consort,  223 

"  Princess  Alice,"  the,  223 

Princess  Royal,  100 

Proverbial  Philosophy,  Tapper's,  163 

Pulpit  Library,  The,  164,  213,  282 

Punch,  174 

Punshon,  Moriey,  202,  340 

Puritans,  the,  194,  287,  324 

Pusey,  Dr.,  208 

Quakers,  129 

Queen  Alexandra,  132 

Queen  of  Holland,  the,  117 

Queen's  Square,  Bloomsbury,  60 

Radstock,  Lord,  252 

Raffles.  Dr.,  321 

Raphael,  329 

Reformed  Pastor,  The,  235 

Ripon,  Bishop  of,  210 

Rippon,  Dr.  John,  57 

Risca,  122 

Rivulet  Controversy,  291 

"  Roads,  Old,"  33 

Robertson,  Frederick  W.,  266,  275, 

344 
Robinson,  Robert,  44 
Rocky  Mountains,  281 
Rogers,  Rev.  George,  229 
Rosebery,  Lord,  264,  344 
Rothesay,  175 
Ruskin,  John,  166,  279 
"  Rutherford,  Mark."  279 
,  Samuel,  42,  208 

Saint  and  the  Saviour,  The,  282 
St.    Andrew's   Street   Church,   Cam- 
bridge, 44 
St.  Augustine's,  Maidstone,  12 
Sala,  George  Augustus,  283 
Salt  Cellars,  The,  282 
Sankey,  Mr.  Ira  D..  334 
Saturday  Review,  The,  84,  92,  199 
Saurin,  266 

Savonarola.  140.  267,  345 
Schiller,  268 
Scotland,  113.  124 
Scott,  Sir  Walter,  269,  287 
Scott,  Lockhart's  Life  of,  287 
Sermons,  209.  282 
Sermons,  A  Selection,  282 
Sermons  in  Candles,  130,  283 
Sewell,  Father,  48 
Shaftesbury,  Lord,  130 


Shakespeare,  Dr.  J.  H.,  314 

,  William,  269 

Sheffield,  314 

Short,  Rev.  A.  G.,  176 

Simpson,  Sir  James  Y..  169 

Smiles,  Dr.  Samuel,  263 

Smith,  J.  Manton,  159,  216,  260 

Smooth    Stones   taken  from    Ancient 

Brooks.  164 
Socrates,  210 

Some  Aspects  of  the  Victorian  Age,  344 
Somerville,  Rev.  J.  E.,  334 
South  Benfleet.  2 
Speaker,  The,  323 
Spicer,  Sir  Evan,  263 
Spurgeon  Birthday  Book,  The,  283 
Spurgeon,  Ann  (Aunt),  6,  33 

,  Charles  (Son),  165, 178,  244,  259 

,  Clement  (1718),  2 

,  Eliza  (Mother),  5,  8 

,  Ehzabeth  (1769),  3 

,  Harold,  178 

,  James  (Grandfather),  3,  6,  11 

— — ,  James  (Uncle),  65,  333 

,  James  Archer  (Brother),  5,  13, 

52,  160,  313 

,  Job,  2 

,  John. 2 

,  John  (Father),  5 

,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  104,  162,  170.  184, 

330,  339 

,  Richard  (1551),  2 

,  Samuel,  3 

,  Thomas  (1575),  2 

,  Pastor  Thomas  (Son),  5,   139, 

161,  178,  180,  244,  302,  307,  333, 

339 
Spurgeon  Library,  the,  286 
Spurgeon  Quadrille,  130 
Stalker,  Dr.  James,  283 
Stam bourne,  3,  5,  11,  124,  321 
Stambovrne,  Memories  of,  285 
Stanley,  Dean,  258,  341 
Stead,  W.  T.,  69 
Steane,  Dr.,  66 
Stepney  College.  54 
Stevenson,  R.  L.,  207 
Stockton-on-Tees,  124 
Stockwell  Orphanage,  241,  318,  335, 

339 
Storm  Signals,  282 
Stovel.  Dr.  Charles,  66 
Strict  Baptists,  290 
Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall,  90,  95, 

110,  114,  250 


358 


INDEX 


Surrey  Tabernacle,  290 
Sutton,  Mr.,  of  Cottenham,  51 
Swansea,  123 
Swindell,  Mr.  John,  36 
Switzerland,  117 

Sword  and  the  Trowel,  The,  203,  285, 
310,  313 

Tauler,  345 

Taylor,  Rev.  Robert,  265 

Ten  Years  Afkr,  174 

T'en  Years  of  My  Life,  174 

Teversham.  45 

Thiers,  M.,  326 

Things  New  and-  Old,  287 

Thirtle,  Dr.  J.  W.,  286 

Thomas,  Dr.  David,  201 

Thompson,  Miss  Lydia,  200 

Thomson,  Dr.  Andrew,  221 

Thome,  Miss,  174 

Thundersley.  2 

Till  He  Come,  282 

Times,  The,  105,  216.  286,  301 

Tinworth.  George,  244,  262 

"  Tirshatha,"  the,  165 

Toplady,  Augustus,  267 

Treasury  of  David,  The,  280 

Tring,  250 

Trowbridge,  122 

Trumpet   Calls  to  Christian  Energy, 

282 
Tulloch.  Principal.  100 
Tupper,  Martin.  163 
Turner,  J.  M.  W..  326 
"  Twelve  Sermon  Series,"  282 
Tymns,  Rev.  T.  Vincent,  310 
Tyndale,  321,  330 
Types  ami  Emblems,  282 

Uncle  Tom,  155 
Utrecht,  117 

Vaughan,  Dr.  0.  J.,  228 
Ventimiglia,  253 


Vinter,  Mr.  James,  45 

Waldenses,  221 
Walton,  Isaac,  293 
Wandsworth,  177 
Waterbeach,  13,  47,  52,  124,  186 
Watcrbeach  Tracts,  212 
Watts,  Isaac,  11 

,  Mr.,  of  Cambridge,  45,  55 

Wayland,  Dr.,  248 

Welldon,  Bishop,  221 

Wells,  Rev.  James,  289 

Welsh,  John,  235 

Wesley,  John,  82,   121,   141,  266-8, 

320,  343 

,  John  and  Charles,  19 

— — ,  Susamiah,  19 

"  Westwood,"  171 

Whale,  Mr.,  239 

What  tlie  Stones  Say,  283 

Whitefield,   George,   81,   86,   92,   96, 

98,  113,  124,  141,  235,  267,  268, 

320,  330,  343 
Whyte,  Dr.  Alexander,  341 
Wilberforce,  Canon,  252 
,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  Oxford,  116, 

252.  293 

,  William,  294 

Wilkinson,  Diana,  39 
William  Jewell  College,  286 
WilUams.  Rev.  Charles,  303,  313 
Wolverhampton,  124 
Woolman,  John,  268 
Wailfl  of  Cant,  The,  201 
Wotton-under-Edge,  36 
Wright,  Dr.  William,  198,  247,  328 

Xavier,  345 

Young  Men's  Christian  Association, 
128 

Zacchseus,  237 
Ziegenbalg,  18 


Pbihted  IX  Grkat  Bbitair  bt  Bicuard  Clat  k  Sons,  Liuiixd, 

aBDMlWIci    ST.,    STAJlfORi)    ST.,    8.X.  1,    ASD    BrHOAT,    SUrruLK. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


Das's  Xibcac^XtO., 

NEW  AND 
SECOND-HAND  BOOKSELLERS, 

96,   MOUNT   STREET, 
LONDON,  W.  1. 


