zCO 


■ih  an  TlntroMcixon  'imm 


ni>6<xle  S. 


-•■Hlf 


33ottng;. 


'- 

K 

^; 

mm 

;     • .' 

r> 

<>■ 

■^ 

'  'it 

■    ■     ^^^^B 

.^  . ' 

^^?« 

;.-; 

v'5 

gl^^H 

<*., 

.:;l. 

i^^^l 

•J^' 

^^^^^^H 

%  • 

C'*^ 

^^^^H 

-- "''  ■ 

i 

."_' 

^^^H 

. '  <■ 

■^- 

^^H^^^^^^l 

<■     '/• 

»^3 

^■l^^^l 

'   *    f 

^  - 

T>^    T 

^ ^^^^^^^H 

■j 

i 

9 

■j^^ 

1 

1 

1 

.V' 

■•- 

\-**-^i^> 

'i^- 

i:. 

''  JM 

'     4, 

;.;* . 

'v  ".-IH 

i.-:-; 


A  '<*  -f ' 


I'M    '\ 


•f-    >,    ,,*'.•" 


A.   >: 


,>»^  .^/  .r^ 


'-    .  •jr." 


'^  /    A/- 


C.    H.    SPURGEON'S    PRAYERS, 


^ 


C.  H.  SPURGEON'S 
PRAYERS. 


With 

An  Introduction  by 

DINSDALE  T.  YOUNG. 


LONDON : 

PASSMORE     AND     ALABASTER, 

PATKRNOSTKR  BUILDINGS,    E.G. 
1905. 


{All  rights  reserved.) 


PRINTED  BY 

ALABASTER,   PASSMORE  AND  SONS, 

39— 47i  WHITECROSS  STREET, 

LONDON,  E.C. 


DEC  6    1967 

i^S/rv  OF  TO^ 


Introduction* 


THE  day  on  which  a  volume  of  C.  H. 
Spurgeon's  Pulpit  Prayers  appears  is  a  day 
to  be  desired.  Many  will  now  rejoice  to  see 
that  day. 

Decidedly  this  selection  of  the  great  preacher's 
prayers  supplies  a  want.  Many  of  us  have  long 
hoped  for  such  a  volume;  and  now  we  welcome  it 
with  warm  gratitude. 

Lovers  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  will  delight  in  this 
treasury  of  devotion.  They  will  not  open  the  book 
without  keen  anticipation,  and  assuredly  they  will 
not  close  it  with  disappointment. 

It  was  memorable  to  hear  this  incomparable 
divine  when  he  preached^  It  was  often  even  more 
memorable  to  hear  him  pray.  Dr.  John  Cairns,  the 
golden-mouthed  preacher  and  scholar,  much  as  he 
rejoiced  in  C.  H.  Spurgeon 's  sermons,  rejoiced  yet 
more  in  his  prayers.  Many  can  bear  a  similar 
witness.  Who  talked  with  God  as  Spurgeon  did? 
His  congregational  prayers — and  I  heard  many — 
are  always  echoing  in  my  grateful  heart.  They 
are  sweet  and  luminous,  in  the  memory,  as  angel- 
presences.  Never  did  I  hear  him  pray  without 
adoringly  saying,  "  Lord,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be 
here."  How  naturally  prayer  fell  from  the  lips  of 
that  great  apostle  !     We  felt  that  he  was  only  doing 


VI. 

before  the  multitude  what  he  was  habituated  to  do 
in  private.  Prayer  was  the  instinct  of  his  soul,  and 
the  atmosphere  of  his  life.  It  was  his  "  vital 
breath  "  and  *'  native  air."  How  naturally  he 
inhaled  and  exhaled  it !  The  greatness  of  his 
prayers  more  and  more  impresses  and  delights  me. 
He  touched  every  note.  He  sped  as  on  eagle's 
wings,  into  the  Heaven  of  God. 

The  things  that  were  given  him  to  utter  in 
prayer  were  often  more  profound  and  beautiful 
than  the  sayings  that  left  his  lips  in  preaching. 
This  has  often  been  a  feature  of  the  greatest 
ministries.  A  noble  Intellect  shines  with  the  glory 
that  excelleth  when  it  is  turned  towards  God.  A 
man  of  God  is  frequently  at  his  intellectual  best  in 
prayer.  Assuredly  it  was  not  seldom  so  with  the 
beloved  Pastor.  I  once  heard  him  speak  thus  with 
God  :  "  O  Lord,  if  some  of  us  began  to  doubt  Thee 
we  should  begin  to  doubt  our  senses,  for  Thou  hast 
done  such  wonderful  things  for  us.,  Thou  hast 
done  more  for  us  than  Thou  didst  for  Thomas. 
Thou  didst  allow  Thomas  to  thrust  his  finger  into 
Thy  wounds ;  but  Thou  hast  often  thrust  Thy  finger 
into  our  wounds,  and  healed  them."  Did  he  not 
speak  by  the  Spirit  when  he  uttered  the  pathetic  and 
lovely  word? 

His  wonderful  knowledge  of  Scripture  made  his 
prayers  so  fresh  and  edifying.  No  man  can  pray 
with  high  effect  unless  he  is  steeped  In  Scripture. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  lived  and  moved  and  had  his  being 
in  the  Word  of  God.  He  knew  its  remoter  reaches, 
its  nooks  and  crannies.     Its  spirit  had  entered  into 


Vll. 

his  spirit;  and  when  he  prayed,  the  Spirit  of  God 
brought  all  manner  of  precious  oracles  to  his  mind. 

Then  he  lived  so  entirely  in  the  spiritual  world 
that  he  was  ever  ready  to  pray.  He  had  not  to 
school  himself  at  the  moment.  His  pulpit-prayers 
were  not  art,  but  nature.  Every  prayer  was  the 
effluence  of  a  consecrated  personality.  No  liturgy 
could  have  restrained  him.  One  could  not  imagine 
him  making  literary  preparation  for  public  prayer. 
The  flower  gave  out  its  perfume  without  effort.  The 
urn  was  ever  being  filled  where  the  pure  waters 
rise,  and  so  afforded  at  any  moment  abundant 
refreshment. 

The  quivering  sympathy  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
prayers  thrilled  all  who  heard  them.  You  felt  the 
throbbing  of  that  mighty  heart.  He  was  royal  in 
his  tendernesSij  Whom  did  he  forget  in  those 
powerful  pleadings?  The  faith  of  this  great  saint 
indeed  worked  by  love.  His  prayers  grandly 
evinced  this. 

How  ardent  were  those  incomparable  prayers ! 
No  hint  was  there  of  the  dull,  slumberous,  tedious 
quality  w^hich  too  often  has  vitiated  pulpit  prayer. 
C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  a  glowing-hearted  "  Remem- 
brancer "  of  God.  The  warmth  of  the  Baptism  of 
Fire  diffused  itself  throughout  his  supplications. 
The  prayers  at  the  Tabernacle  kindled  countless 
cold  hearts. 

And  the  English  was  so  delectable.  We  hesitate 
to  call  attention  to  the  intellectual  or  literary  aspect 
of  prayer.  Yet  why  should  we?  God's  honoured 
servant  thought  and  studied  so  incessantly  for  God's 


Vlll. 


glory  that  we  reaped  an  intellectual  harvest  as  well 
as  a  spiritual  harvest  from  his  devotions.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  loved  God  with  his  **  mind,"  and  our 
minds  were  stimulated  when  we  heard  him  pray. 

Let  the  holy  urgency  of  his  prayers  be  noted. 
He  never  lost  his  importunity.  He  pleaded  for  the 
immediate  moment.  "Now"  was  his  plea;  and 
verily  then  and  there  were  we  all  blessed  of  God. 

As  a  perusal  of  this  volume  will  reveal,  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  prayers  were  eminently  "  theological." 
It  is  a  warning,  well  worthy  to  be  heeded,  which  a 
devotional  master  gave,  *'  Beware  of  an  untheo- 
logical  devotion."  The  "theological"  quality  of 
C.  H.  Spurgeon 's  prayers  was  very  notable.  How 
he  knew  God — the  Holy  Trinity ;  Jesus,  the  Son 
of  God  and  Saviour  of  men;  the  blessed  Spirit. 
These  noble  prayers  will  be  seen  to  be  full  of 
theology.  They  were  the  utterances  of  one  who 
studied  God,  delighted  in  God,  and  walked  with 
God,  especially  with  the  God-man.  Precious  to 
him  beyond  compare  was  the  Divine  Redeemer. 
The  blood  of  our  redemption  was  his  glory.  The 
atoning  cross  was  all  in  all  to  him.  I  would 
specially  commend  the  "  theological  "  contents  of 
these  prayers,  for  they  are  rich  with  enduring 
wealth. 

The  sweet  and  holy  memories  of  the  prayers  we 
heard  no  man  taketh  from  us.  Many  such  memories 
will  be  aroused  in  many  of  the  readers  of  this  book. 

To  those  who  never  heard  C.  H.  Spurgeon 's 
glorious  voice,  these  printed  prayers  will  be  valuable 
as   suggesting   his   prophetic   power   at   the   Mercy 


IX. 


Seat.  We  covet  for  this  volume  a  great  con- 
stituency. Of  a  truth  these  prayers  are  ideals  of 
how  men  ought  to  pray..  They  are  calculated  to  be 
great  inspirations  to  ministers  as  they  contemplate 
their  congregational  prayers.  To  all  Christian 
workers  they  will  afford  real  enrichment.  For  quiet 
home  reading  they  will  be  invaluable.  I  am  glad 
that  the  publishers  have  associated  with  these 
prayers  one  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  delightful  and 
pungent  sermons  on  prayer — an  art,  of  all  arts  the 
greatest,  in  which  he  was  a  master  indeed.  Few 
could  use  *'  the  golden  key  of  prayer  "  as  he  so 
deftly  could.  May  many  be  enabled,  through  grace, 
by  the  study  of  these  prayers,  to  pray  more 
abundantly  and  more  effectually  ! 

DINSDALE  T.  YOUNG. 


Contents* 


PR.\YER   I.- 

)i 

II.- 

II 

III.- 

M 

IV. 

M 

V.- 

>l 

VI.- 

M 

VII.- 

M 

VIII.- 

If 

IX.- 

M 

X.- 

II 

XI.- 

II 

XII.- 

II 

XIII. 

)| 

XIV.- 

II 

XV.- 

II 

XVI.- 

II 

XVII.- 

II 

XVIII.- 

II 

XIX.- 

II 

XX. 

II 

XXI.- 

II 

XXII. 

II 

XXIII . 

II 

XXIV. 

•  1 

XXV. 

II 

XXVI. 

SERMON. 

-Help  from  on  High        

-Thanks  be  unto  God     

-The  Love  Without  Measure  or  End 
-The  All- Prevailing  Plea 

-To  the  King  Eternal 

-The  Wonders  of  Calvary 

-"Let  all  the  People  Praise  Thee". 

-A  Prayer  for  Holiness 

-Glorious  Liberty 

-The  Music  of  Praise 

-Under  the  Blood 

-On  Holy  Ground 

-The  Wings  of  Prayer 

-"  Bless  the  Lord.  O  my  Soul  ! " 

-The  Peace  of  God         

-He  Ever  Liveth 

-To  be  like  Christ  

-O,  for  More  Grace!     

-God's  Unspeakable  Gift 

-The  Great  Sacrifice 

-Boldness  at  the  Throne  of  Grace 

-The  Presence  of  God 

-The  Look  of  Faith        

-"Deliver  us  from  Evil" 
-The  Washing  of  Water  by  the  Word 
-Prayer  Answered  and  Unanswered 
-The  Golden  Key  of  Prayer 


PAGE 
I 

7 
13 

19 
25 
33 
39 
45 
51 
55 
61 

67 
73 
79 
S5 
91 
95 

lOI 

105 
III 
117 

123 
131 

135 
141 

147 
153 


Prayer  I. 

Help  from  on  High* 

OTHOU  who  art  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords,  we  worship  Thee. 

"Before   Jehovah's   awful    throne 
We  bow  w4th  sacred  joy." 

We  can  truly  say  that  we  delight  in  God.  There 
was  a  time  when  we  feared  Thee,  O  God,  with  the 
fear  of  bondage.  Now  we  reverence,  but  we  love 
as  much  as  we  reverence.  The  thought  of  Thine 
Omnipresence  was  once  horrible  to  us.  We  said ; 
"Whither  shall  we  flee  from  His  presence  ? "  and  it 
seemed  to  make  hell  itself  more  dreadful,  because 
we  heard  a  voice,  "  If  I  make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold, 
Thou  art  there."  But  now,  O  Lord,  we  desire  to 
find  Thee.  Our  longing  is  to  feel  Thy  presence, 
and  it  is  the  heaven  of  heavens  that  Thou  art  there. 
The  sick  bed  is  soft  when  Thou  art  there.  The 
furnace  of  affliction  grows  cool  when  Thou  ajrt 
there,  and  the  house  of  prayer  when  Thou  art  pre- 
sent is  none  other  than  the  house  of  God,  and  it  is 
the  very  gate  of  heaven. 

Come  near,  our  Father,  come  very  near  to  Thy 
children.  Some  of  us  are  very  weak  in  body  and 
faint  in  heart.  Soon,  O  God,  lay  Thy  right  hand 
upon  us  and  say  unto  us,  "Fear  not."  Peradven- 
ture,  some  of  us  are  alike,  and  the  world  is  attract- 
ing us.  Come  near  to  kill  the  influence  of  the 
world  with  Thy  superior  power. 


Even  to  worship  may  not  seem  easy  to  some. 
The  dragon  seems  to  pursue  them,  and  floods  out 
of  his  mouth  wash  away  their  devotion.  Give  to 
them  great  wings  as  of  an  eagle,  that  each  one  may 
fly  away  into  the  place  prepared  for  him,  and  rest 
in  the  presence  of  God  to-day. 

Our  Father,  come  and  rest  Thy  children  now. 
Take  the  helmet  from  our  brow,  remove  from  us 
the  weight  of  our  heavy  armour  for  awhile,  and 
may  we  just  have  peace,  perfect  peace,  and  be  at 
rest.  Oh !  help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  now.  As  Thou 
hast  already  washed  Thy  people  in  the  fountain 
filled  with  blood  and  they  are  clean,  now  this  morn- 
ing wash  us  from  defilement  in  the  water.  With 
the  basin  and  with  the  ewer,  O  Master,  wash  our 
feet  again.  It  will  greatly  refresh  ;  it  will  prepare 
us  for  innermost  fellowship  with  Thyself.  So  did 
the  priests  wash  ere  they  went  into  the  holy 
place. 

Lord  Jesus,  take  from  us  now  everything  that 
would  hinder  the  closest  communion  with  God. 
Any  wish  or  desire  that  might  hamper  us  in  prayer 
remove,  we  pray  Thee.  Any  memory  of  either 
sorrow  or  care  that  might  hinder  the  fixing  of  our 
affection  wholly  on  our  God,  take  it  away  now. 
What  have  we  to  do  with  idols  any  more?  Thou 
hast  seen  and  observed  us.  Thou  knowest  where 
the  difficulty  lies.  Help  us  against  it,  and  may  we 
now  come  boldly,  not  into  the  Holy  place  alone, 
but  into  the  Holiest  of  all,  where  we  should  not  dare 
to  come  if  our  great  Lord  had  not  rent  the  veil, 
sprinkled  the  mercy  seat  with  His  own  blood,  and 
bidden  us  enter. 


Now,  we  have  come  close  up  to  Thyself,  to  the 
light  that  shineth  between  the  wings  of  the  Cheru- 
bim, and  we  speak  with  Thee  now  as  a  man 
speaketh  with  his  friends.  Our  God,  we  are  Thine. 
Thou  art  ours.  We  are  now  concerned  in  one  busi- 
ness, we  are  leagued  together  for  one  battle.  Thy 
battle  is  our  battle,  and  our  fight  is  Thine,  Help 
us,  we  pray  Thee.  Thou  who  didst  strengthen 
Michael  and  his  angels  to  cast  out  the  dragon  and 
his  angels,  help  poor  flesh  and  blood  that  to  us  also 
the  word  may  be  fulfilled  :  "The  Lord  shall  bruise 
Satan  under  your  feet,  shortly." 

Our  Father,  we  are  very  weak.  Worst  of  all  we 
are  very  wicked  if  left  to  ourselves,  and  we  soon 
fall  a  prey  to  the  enemy.  Therefore  help  us,  W^e 
confess  that  sometimes  in  prayer  when  we  are 
nearest  to  Thee  at  that  very  time  some  evil  thought 
comes  in,  some  wicked  desire.  Oh !  what  poor 
simpletons  we  are.  Lord  help  us.  We  feel  as  if 
we  would  now  come  closer  to  Thee  still,  and  hide 
under  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings.  We  wish  to  be 
lost  in  God.  We  pray  that  Thou  mayest  live  in  us, 
and  not  we  live,  but  Christ  live  in  us  and  show  Him- 
self in  us  and  through  us. 

Lord  sanctify  us.  Oh!  that  Thy  spirit  might 
come  and  saturate  every  faculty,  subdue  every 
passion,  and  use  every  power  of  our  nature  for 
obedience  to  God. 

Come,  Holy  Spirit,  we  do  know  Thee ;  Thou 
hast  often  overshadowed  us.  Come,  more  fully 
take  possession  of  us.  Standing  now  as  we  feel 
we  are  right  up  at  the  mercy  seat  our  very 
highest  prayer  is  for  perfect  holiness,  complete  con- 


secration,  entire  cleansing  from  every  evil.  Take 
our  heart,  our  head,  our  hands,  our  feet,  and  use  us 
all  for  Thee.  Lord  take  our  substance,  let  us  not 
hoard  it  for  ourselves,  nor  spend  it  for  ourselves. 
Take  our  talent,  let  us  not  try  to  educate  ourselves 
that  we  may  have  the  repute  of  being  wise,  but  let 
every  gain  of  mental  attainment  be  still  that  we  may 
serve  Thee  better. 

May  every  breath  be  for  Thee ;  may  every 
minute  be  spent  for  Thee.  Help  us  to  live  while 
we  live  and  while  we  are  busy  in  the  world  as  we 
must  be,  for  we  are  called  to  it,  may  we  sanctify  the 
world  for  Thy  service.  May  we  be  lumps  of  salt 
in  the  midst  of  society.  May  our  spirit  and  temper 
as  well  as  our  conversation  be  heavenly;  may 
there  be  an  influence  about  us  that  shall  make  the 
world  the  better  before  we  leave  it  Lord  hear  us 
in  this  thing. 

And  now  that  we  have  Thine  ear  we  would  pray 
for  this  poor  world  in  which  we  live.  We 
are  often  horrified  by  it.  O,  Lord,  we  could 
wish  that  we  did  not  know  anything  about  it 
for  our  own  comfort.  We  have  said,  "  Oh !  for  a 
lodge  in  some  vast  wilderness."  We  hear  of 
oppression  and  robbery  and  murder,  and  men 
seem  let  loose  against  each  other.  Lord,  have 
mercy  upon  this  great  and  wicked  city.  What  is 
to  be  done  with  these  millions  ?  What  can  we  do  ? 
At  least  help  every  child  of  Thine  to  doi  his 
utmost.  May  none  of  us  contribute  to  the  evil 
directly  or  indirectly,  but  may  we  contribute  to  the 
good  that  is  in  it. 

We  feel  we  may  speak  with  Thee  now  about 


this,  for  when  Thy  servant  Abraham  stood  before 
Thee  and  spake  with  such  wonderful  famiharity  to 
Thee,  he  pleaded  for  Sodom ;  and  we  plead  for 
London.  We  would  follow  the  example  of  the 
Father  of  the  Faithful  and  pray  for  all  great  cities, 
and  indeed  for  all  the  nations.  Lord  let  Thy 
kingdom  come.  Send  forth  Thy  light  and  Thy 
truth.  Chase  the  old  dragon  from  his  throne,  with 
all  his  hellish  crew.  Oh !  that  the  day  might  come 
when  even  upon  earth  the  Son  of  the  woman,  the 
Man-child,  should  rule  the  nations,  not  with  a  broken 
staff  of  wood,  but  with  an  enduring  sceptre  of  iron, 
full  of  mercy,  but  full  of  power,  full  of  grace,  but 
yet  irresistible.  Oh!  that  that  might  soon  come, 
the  personal  advent  of  our  Lord !  We  long  for  the 
millennial  triumph  of  His  Word. 

Until  then,  O  Lord,  gird  us  for  the  fight,  and 
make  us  to  be  among  those  who  overcome  through 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and  through  the  word  of  our 
testimony,  because  we  "  love  not  our  lives  unto  the 
death." 

We  lift  our  voice  to  Thee  in  prayer ;  also,  for 
all  our  dear  ones.  Lord  bless  the  sick  and  make 
them  well  as  soon  as  it  is  right  they  should  be. 
Sanctify  to  them  all  they  have  to  bear.  There  are 
also  dear  friends  who  are  very  weak ;  some  that 
are  very  trembling.  God  bless  them.  While  the 
tent  is  being  taken  down  may  the  inhabitant  within 
look  on  with  calm  joy,  for  we  shall  by-and-by  "be 
clothed  upon  with  our  house  that  is  from  heaven." 
Lord  help  us  to  sit  very  loose  by  all  these  things 
here  below.  May  we  live  here  like  strangers  and 
make  the  world  not  a  house  but  an  inn,  in  which  we 


sup  and  lodge,  expecting  to  be  on  our  journey  to- 
morrow. 

Lord  save  the  unconverted,  and  bring  out,  we 
pray  Thee,  from  among  them  those  who  are  con- 
verted, but  who  have  not  confessed  Christ.  May 
the  Church  be  built  up  by  many  who,  having 
believed,  are  baptised  unto  the  sacred  name.  We 
pray  Thee  go  on  and  multiply  the  faithful  in  the 
land.  Oh!  that  Thou  wouldst  turn  the  hearts  of 
men  to  the  gospel  once  more.  Thy  servant  is  often 
very  heavy  in  heart  because  of  the  departures  from 
the  faith.  Oh!  bring  them  back;  let  not  Satan 
take  away  any  more  of  the  stars  with  his  tail,  but 
may  the  lamps  of  God  shine  bright.  Oh!  Thou 
that  walkest  amongst  the  seven  golden  candle- 
sticks trim  the  flame,  pour  forth  the  oil,  and  let  the 
light  shine  brightly  and  steadily.  Now,  Lord,  we 
cannot  pray  any  longer,  though  we  have  a  thousand 
things  to  ask  for.  Thy  servant  cannot,  so  he  begs 
to  leave  a  broken  prayer  at  the  mercy  seat  with  this 
at  the  foot  of  it :  We  ask  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  Thy  Son.     Amen. 


Prayer    II. 

Thanks  be  unto  God* 

OLORD  God,  help  us  now  really  to  worship 
Thee.  We  would  thank  Thee  for  this 
occasion.  We  bless  Thy  name  for  setting-  apart 
this  hallowed  season.  Lord,  wilt  Thou  shut  the 
door  upon  the  world  for  us  ?  Help  us  to  forget  our 
cares.  Enable  us  to  rise  clean  out  of  this  world. 
May  we  get  rid  of  all  its  down-dragging  tendencies. 
May  the  attractions  of  these  grosser  things  be  gone, 
and  do  Thou  catch  us  away  to  Thyself. 

We  do  not  ask  to  be  entranced  nor  to  see  an 
angel  in  shining-  apparel,  but  we  do  ask  that  by 
faith  we  may  see  Jesus,  and  may  His  presence  be 
so  evidently  realized  among  us  that  we  may  rejoice 
as  well  as  if  our  eyes  beheld  Him,  and  love  Him 
and  trust  Him  and  worship  Him  as  earnestly  as  we 
should  do  if  we  could  now  put  our  fingers  into  the 
print  of  the  nails. 

O,  Thou  precious  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  do  adore 
Thee  with  all  our  hearts.  Thou  art  Lord  of  all. 
We  bless  Thee  for  becoming  man  that  Thou 
mightest  be  our  next  of  kin,  and  being  next  of  kin 
we  bless  Thee  for  taking  us  into  marriage  union 
with  Thyself  and  for  redeeming  us  and  our  inherit- 
ance from  the  captivity  into  which  we  were  sold. 
Thou  hast  paid  Thy  life  for  Thy  people ;  Thou 
hast  ransomed  Thy  folk  with  Thy  heart's  blood. 
Be  Thou,  therefore,  for  ever  beloved  and  adored. 


8 

And  now  Thou  art  not  here  for  Thou  art  risen. 
Our  souls  would  track  the  shining  way  by  which 
Thou  hast  ascended  through  the  gate  of  pearl  up 
to  Thy  Father's  throne.  We  seem  to  see  Thee 
sitting  there,  man,  yet  God,  reigning  over  all  things 
for  Thy  people,  and  our  ears  almost  catch  the 
accents  of  the  everlasting  song  which  rolls  up  at 
Thy  feet:  "Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to 
receive  honour,  and  power,  and  glory,  and  dominion, 
and  might  for  ever  and  ever."  Lord,  we  say, 
"Amen."  From  the  outskirts  of  the  crowd  that 
surround  Thy  throne  we  lift  up  our  feeble  voices  in 
earnest  "Amens,"  for  Thou  wast  slain  and  hast  re- 
deemed us  to  God  by  Thy  blood  and  hast  made  us 
kings  and  priests  unto  God,  and  we  shall  reign  with 
Thee,  for  though  far  off  by  space,  we  know  that  we 
are  very  near  to  Thy  heart. 

Thou  lookest  over  the  heads  of  the  angelic 
squadrons  to  behold  us,  and  Thou  dost  hear  the 
praises — aye,  and  the  groans  of  Thy  well-beloved, 
for  are  not  we  most  near  Thee,  Thy  flesh  and  Thy 
bones?  We  know  we  are.  We  feel  the  ties  of 
kinship  within  us.  We  our  best  Beloved's  are,  and 
He  is  ours,  and  we  are  longing  to  get  through  the 
crowd  that  surround  Him,  and  tO'  get  to  the  fore- 
front, and  there  to  bow  prostrate  at  the  dear  feet 
that  were  nailed  to  the  tree  for  us,  and  worship  the 
Lamb  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  Who  has  pre- 
vailed to  take  the  book  and  loose  the  seven  seals 
thereof,  to  Whom  be  glory,  world  without  end. 
Hallelujah ! 

O,  Saviour,  accept  these  our  poor  praises.  They 
come  from  those  Thou  lovest,  and  as  we  prize  any 


little  things  that  come  from  those  we  love,  so  do 
we  feel  that  Thou  wilt  accept  the  thanksg-iving,  the 
reverential  homage  of  Thy  people,  redeemed  ones 
who  are  a  people  near  unto  Thee,  whose  names  are 
graven  on  the  palms  of  Thy  hands,  of  whom  Thou 
art  the  active  head  and  for  whom  Thy  heart  beats 
true  and  full  of  love  e'en  now. 

Oh,  we  can  say  we  love  Thee  ;  we  wish  we  loved 
Thee  more  ;  but  Thou  art  very  dear  to  us.  There 
is  nought  on  earth  like  Thee.  For  the  love  of  Thy 
name  we  would  live  and  die.  If  we  think  we  love 
Thee  more  than  we  do,  we  pray  that  we  may  yet 
love  Thee  more  than  we  think.  Oh,  take  these 
hearts  right  away  and  unite  them  with  Thine  own, 
and  be  Thou  heart  and  soul  and  life  and  everything 
to  us ;  for  whom  have  we  in  heaven  but  Thee,  and 
there  is  none  upon  earth  we  desire  beside  Thee. 

We  worship  the  Father,  we  worship  the  Son,  we 
worship  the  Holy  Ghost  with  all  the  powers  of  our 
being.  We  fall  prostrate  before  the  awful  yet 
glorious  throne  of  the  Infinite  Majesty  of  heaven. 
The  Lord  accept  us  since  we  offer  these  praises  in 
the  name  of  Jesus. 

And  now  most  blessed  Lord,  look  down  upon 
those  who  do  not  love  Thee.  O  Redeemer,  look 
upon  them  with  those  eyes  of  Thine  which  are  as 
flames  of  fire.  Let  them  see  how  ill  they  treat 
Thee.  May  they  consider  within  themselves  how 
dire  is  the  ingratitude  which  can  be  negligent  of  a 
Saviour's  blood,  indifferent  from  a  Saviour's  heart. 
Oh,  bring  the  careless  and  the  godless  to  seek  for 
mercy.  Let  those  that  are  postponing  serious 
things  begin  to  see  that  the  very  thought  of  post- 


lO 

ponement  of  the  claims  of  Christ  is  treason  against 
His  Majesty.  O  Saviour,  dart  Thine  arrows 
abroad  and  let  them  wound  many  that  they  may 
fall  down  before  thee  and  cry  out  for  mercy. 

But  there  are  some  who  are  wounded ;  broken 
hearts  that  seek  peace — men  and  women,  like 
Cornelius,  that  want  to  hear  the  words  which  God 
commands. 

Oh,  come  Divine  Physician,  and  bind  up  every 
broken  bone.  Come  with  Thy  sacred  nard  which 
Thou  hast  compounded  of  Thine  own  heart's  blood, 
and  lay  it  home  to  the  wounded  conscience,  and  let 
it  feel  its  power.  Oh !  give  peace  to  those  whose 
conscience  is  like  the  troubled  sea  which  cannot 
rest. 

O  God,  our  God,  let  not  the  teaching  of  the 
Sunday-school,  the  preaching  of  the  Evangelists, 
the  personal  visitations  of  individual  minds,  let  not 
any  of  these  efforts  be  in  vain.  Do  give  conver- 
sions. We  groan  out  this  prayer  from  our  very 
heart,  yet  can  we  also  sing  it,  for  Thou  hast  heard 
us  plenteously  already,  and  our  heart  doth  rejoice 
in  God  the  Saviour  who  worketh  so  graciously 
among  the  children  of  men. 

We  have  been  astonished  as  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
fallen  even  upon  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  men  afar 
off  from  God  have  been  brought  in.  But,  Lord,  do 
more  of  this  among  us.  Let  us  see  greater  things 
than  these.  Where  we  have  had  one  saved,  let  us 
have  an  hundred  to  the  praise  of  the  glorious  name 
and  the  Well-beloved. 

Lord  keep  us  all  from  sin ;  teach  us  how  to  walk 
circumspectly;     enable    us    to    guard    our   minds 


II 

against  error  of  doctrine,  our  hearts  against  wrong 
feelings,  and  our  lives  against  evil  actions.  Oh, 
may  we  never  speak  unadvisedly  with  our  lips,  nor 
give  way  to  anger.  Above  all,  keep  us  from  covet- 
ousness  which  is  idolatry,  and  from  malice  which  is 
of  the  devil.  Grant  unto  us  to  be  full  of  sweetness 
and  light.  May  love  dwell  in  us  and  reign  in  us. 
May  we  look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but 
every  man  on  the  things  of  others.  Give  us  to  live 
for  Jesus.  There  is  no  life  like  it.  Help  us  to  be 
Christly  men,  Christ's  men,  and  may  we  in  all 
things  reflect  the  light  which  we  receive  from  Him. 

Bless  our  beloved  Church  and  all  its  organiza- 
tions. O  God,  take  care  of  it.  Oh!  do  thou 
make  every  member  of  the  Church  a  pastor  over 
others.  Let  all  strive  together  for  the  good  of  all, 
and  so  may  Thy  kingdom  come  among  us. 

And  do  Thou  prosper  all  the  churches  of  Jesus 
Christ.  What  we  ask  for  ourselves  we  seek  for 
them.  Let  missionaries  especially  be  helped  by 
Thy  Spirit,  and  may  there  come  a  day  in  which  the 
minds  of  men  may  be  better  prepared  to  receive 
the  Gospel,  and  may  Messiah's  Kingdom  come  to 
the  overthrow  of  her  that  sitteth  on  the  Seven  Hills 
and  to  the  eternal  waning  of  Mohammed's  moon,  to 
the  overthrow  of  every  idol,  that  Christ  alone  may 
reign.  Our  whole  heart  comes  out  in  this.  Reign, 
Immanuel,  reign ;  sit  on  the  high  throne ;  ride  on 
Thy  White  Horse ;  and  let  the  armies  of  heaven 
follow  thee,  conquering  and  toi  conquer.  Come, 
Lord  Jesus ;  even  so,  come  quickly.  Amen  and 
amen. 


Prayer    III 

The   Love   Without   Measure 

or  End^ 

LORD,  we  would  come  to  Thee,  but  do  Thou 
come  to  us.  Draw  us  and  we  will  run  after 
Thee.  Blessed  Spirit,  help  our  infirmities,  for  we 
know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought. 
Come,  Holy  Spirit,  and  give  right  thoughts  and 
right  utterance  that  we  may  all  be  able  to  pray  in 
the  common  prayer,  the  whole  company  feeling  that 
for  each  one  there  is  a  portion.  We  are  grateful  as 
we  remember  that  if  the  minister  in  the  sanctuary 
should  not  be  able  to  pray  for  any  one  of  us  there 
is  One  who  bears  the  names  of  all  His  redeemed 
upon  His  breast,  and  upon  His  shoulder,  who  will 
take  care  with  the  love  of  His  heart  and  the  power 
of  His  arm  to  maintain  the  cause  of  all  His  own. 

Dear  Saviour,  we  put  ourselves  under  Thy  sacred 
patronage.  Advocate  with  the  Father,  plead  for 
us  this  day,  yea,  make  intercession  for  the  trans- 
gressors. We  desire  to  praise  the  name  of  the 
Lord  with  our  whole  heart,  so  many  of  us  as  have 
tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious.  Truly  Thou  hast 
delivered  us  from  the  gulf  of  dark  despair,  wherein 
we  wretched  sinners  lay.  Thou  hast  brought  us  up 
also  out  of  the  horrible  pit  and  out  of  the  miry  clay, 


14 

Thou  hast  set  our  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  the  new 
song  which  Thou  hast  put  into  our  mouths  we  would 
not  stifle,  but  we  would  bless  the  Lord  whose  mercy 
endureth  for  ever. 

We  thank  Thee,  Lord,  for  the  love  without 
beginning  which  chose  us  or  ever  the  earth  was, 
for  the  love  without  measure  which  entered  into 
covenant  for  our  redemption,  for  the  love 
without  failure  which  in  due  time  appeaxed 
in  the  person  of  Christ  and  wrought  out  our 
redemption,  for  that  love  which  has  never  changed, 
though  we  have  wandered  ;  that  love  which  abideth 
faithful  even  when  we  are  unfaithful. 

O  God,  we  praise  Thee  for  keeping  us  till  this 
day,  and  for  the  full  assurance  that  Thou  wilt  never 
let  us  go.  Some  can  say,  "He  restoreth  my  soul," 
they  had  wandered,  wandered  sadly,  but  Thou  hast 
brought  them  back  again.  Lord  keep  us  from 
wandering,  then  will  we  sing,  "Unto^  Him  that  is 
able  to  keep  us  from  stumbling  and  to  present  us 
faultless  before  His  presence  with  exceeding  joy." 
Bless  the  Lord,  our  inmost  soul  blesses  the  Lord. 
Blessed  be  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  Triune ;  blessed  be  the  Lord  for  every  office 
sustained  by  each  divine  person,  and  for  the  divine 
blessing  which  has  come  streaming  down  to  us 
through  each  one  of  those  condescending  titles 
worn  by  the  Father,  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 

We  feel  like  singing  all  the  time ;  we  would 
take  down  our  harp  from  the  willows,  if  we  had 
hung  it  there,  and  we  would  waken  every  string  to 
the  sweetest  melody  of  praise  unto  the  Lord  our 
God.     Yet,  Lord,  we  cannot  close  with  praise,  for 


we  are  obliged  to  come  before  Thee  with  humble 
confession  of  sin.  We  are  not  worthy  of  the  least 
of  all  these  favours  ;  we  cannot  say,  "  He  is  worthy 
for  whom  Thou  shouldst  do  this  thing,"  nay,  but 
we  are  altogether  unworthy,  and  Thy  gifts  are 
according  to  the  riches  of  Thy  grace,  for  which 
again  we  praise  Thee. 

Lord,  forgive  us  all  our  sin.  May  Thy  pardoned 
ones  have  a  renewed  sense  of  their  acceptance  in 
the  Beloved.  If  any  cloud  has  arisen  to  hide  Thee 
from  any  believing  eye,  take  that  cloud  away.  If 
in  our  march  through  this  world,  so  full  of  mire  as  it 
is,  we  have  any  spot  on  us,  dear  Saviour,  wash  our 
feet  with  that  blessed  foot-bath,  and  then  say  to-  us, 
"Ye  are  clean  every  whit."  May  we  know  it  so, 
that  there  is  no  condemnation,  no  separation  ;  sin 
is  removed  as  to  its  separating  as  well  as  its  destroy- 
ing power,  and  may  we  enter  into  full  fellow- 
ship with  God  May  we  walk  in  the  light  as  God 
is  in  the  light,  and  have  fellowship  with  Him,  while 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  His  Son,  cleanseth  us 
from  all  sin.  Let  no  child  of  Thine  have  any  dead 
work  upon  his  conscience,  and  may  our  conscience 
be  purged  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  and 
true  God. 

And  oh !  if  there  are  any  that  after  having  made 
the  profession  of  religion  have  gone  astray  by  any 
form  of  sin.  Lord,  restore  them.  If  they  have  fallen 
by  strong  drink,  if  they  have  fallen  by  unchastity,  if 
they  have  fallen  by  dishonesty,  if,  in  any  way,  they 
have  stained  their  garments,  Oh !  that  Thy  mighty 
grace  might  bring  them  back  and  put  them  yet 
among  the  children.      But  give    them  not  up,  set 


i6 

them  not  as  Admah,  make  them  not  as  Zeboim,  but 
let  Thy  repentings  be  kindled  and  Thy  bowels  of 
compassion  be  moved  for  them,  and  let  them  also 
be  moved,  and  may  they  return  with  weeping  and 
with  supplication,  and  find  Thee  a  God  ready  to 
pardon. 

Furthermore,  we  ask  of  Thee,  our  Father,  this 
day  to  perfect  Thy  work  within  our  hearts.  We 
are  saved,  but  we  would  be  saved  from  sin  of  every 
form  and  degree ;  from  sins  that  lie  within,  and  we 
are  scarcely  aware  that  they  are  there.  If  we  have 
any  pride  of  which  we  are  not  conscious,  any  un- 
belief of  which  we  are  not  aware,  if  there  is  a 
clinging  to  the  creature,  a  form  of  idolatry  which 
we  have  not  yet  perceived,  we  pray  Thee,  Lord,  to 
search  us  as  with  candles  till  Thou  dost  spy  out  the 
evil  and  then  put  it  away.  We  are  not  satisfied  with 
pardoned  sin,  "We  pray,  create  in  me  a  clean  heart, 
O  God,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  Help 
us  in  our  daily  life,  in  our  families,  in  our  relations 
as  husbands  or  wives,  parents  or  children,  masters 
or  servants,  in  our  business  transactions  with  our 
fellow  men,  in  our  dealings  with  the  Church  of  God, 
may  we  be  true,  upright,  pure ;  kept  from  the  great 
transgression  because  we  are  kept  from  the  minor 
ones. 

Oh !  that  we  may  be  such  as  glorify  Christ.  Save 
us,  we  pray  Thee,  from  the  common  religion ;  give 
us  the  peculiar  grace  of  a  peculiar  people.  May 
we  abide  in  Christ,  may  we  live  near  to  God.  Let 
not  the  frivolities  of  the  world  have  any  power  over 
us  whatever.  May  we  be  too  full  grown  in  grace 
to  be  bewitched  with  the  toys  which  are  only  be- 


17 

coming  in  children.  Oh!  give  us  to  serve  Thee, 
and  especially,  and  this  prayer  we  have  already 
prayed  but  we  pray  it  again,  make  us  useful  in  the 
salvation  of  our  fellow  man.  O  Lord,  have  we 
lived  so  long  in  the  world  and  yet  are  our  children 
unconverted?  May  we  never  rest  until  they  are 
truly  saved.  Have  we  been  going  up  and  down  in 
business,  and  are  those  round  about  us  as  yet  un- 
aware of  our  Christian  character  ?  Have  we  never 
spoken  to  them  the  Word  of  Life?  Lord,  arouse 
us  to  a  deep  concern  for  all  with  whom  we  come  in 
contact  from  day  to  day.  Make  us  all  missionaries 
at  home  or  in  the  street,  or  in  our  workshop,  wher- 
ever Providence  has  cast  our  lot,  may  we  there  shine 
as  lights  in  the  world. 

Lord,  keep  us  right,  true  in  doctrine,  true  in 
experience,  true  in  life,  true  in  word,  true  in  deed. 
Let  us  have  an  intense  agony  of  spirit  concerning 
the  many  who  are  going  down  to  the  everlasting 
fire  of  which  our  Master  spoke.  Lord^  save  them! 
LORD,  SAVE  THEM!  Stay,  we  pray  Thee, 
the  torrents  of  sin  that  run  down  the  streets  of 
London ;  purge  the  dead  sea  of  sin,  in  which  so 
many  of  the  heathen  are  lying  asoak.  Oh !  that 
the  day  were  come  when  the  name  of  Jesus  shall 
be  a  household  word,  when  everybody  knew  of  His 
love,  and  of  His  death,  and  of  His  blood,  and  of  its 
cleansing  power.  Lord,  save  men,  gather  out  the 
company  of  the  redeemed  people ;  let  those  whom 
the  Father  gave  to  Christ  be  brought  out  from 
among  the  ruins  of  the  fall  to  be  His  joy  and  crown. 
"Let  the  people  praise  Thee,  O  God,  yea,  let  all 
the  people  praise  Thee."     Let  the  ends  of  the  earth 


i8 

fear  Him  who  died  to  save  them.     Let  the  whole 
earth  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  God. 

This  is  our  great  prayer,  and  we  crown  it  with 
this  :  Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  Lord  and  tarry  not ! 
Come  in  the  fulness  of  Thy  power  and  the  splen- 
dour of  Thy  glory !  Come  quickly,  even  so  come 
quickly.  Lord  Jesus.     Amen. 


Prayer    IV. 

The  All^Prevailing  Plea^ 

OLORD  God!  the  Fountain  of  all  Fulness, 
we,  who  are  nothing  but  emptiness,  come 
unto  Thee  for  all  supplies,  nor  shall  we  come  in 
vain,  since  we  bear  with  us  a  plea  which  is  all  pre- 
valent. Since  we  come  commanded  by  Thy  Word, 
encouraged  by  Thy  promise,  and  preceded  by 
Christ  Jesus,  our  great  High  Priest,  we  know  that 
whatsoever  we  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  we  shall 
receive.  Only  do  Thou  help  us  now  to  ask  right 
things,  and  may  the  utterances  of  our  mouth  be 
acceptable  in  Thy  sight,  O  God  our  Strength  and 
our  Redeemer. 

We  would  first  adore  Thy  blessed  and  ever-to- 
be-beloved  Name.  "All  the  earth  doth  worship 
Thee,  the  Father  everlasting."  Heaven  is  full  of 
Thy  glory.  Oh!  that  men's  hearts  were  filled 
therewith,  that  the  noblest  creatures  Thou  hast 
made,  whom  Thou  didst  set  in  the  Paradise  of  God, 
for  whom  the  Saviour  shed  His  blood,  loved  Thee 
with  all  their  hearts. 

The  faithful,  chosen,  called,  and  separated,  join 
in  the  everlasting  song.  All  Thy  redeemed  praise 
Thee,  O  God !  As  the  God  of  our  election  we  extol 
Thee  for  Thine  everlasting  and  immutable  love. 
As  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 


20 


we  bless  Thee  for  that  unspeakable  gift,  the  offer- 
ing of  Thine  Only-begotten.  Words  are  but  air, 
and  tongues  but  clay,  and  Thy  compassion  is 
divine,  therefore  it  is  not  possible  that  any  words 
of  ours  should  "reach  the  height  of  this  great  argu- 
ment," or  sound  forth  Thy  worthy  praise  for  this 
superlative  deed  of  grace. 

We  bless  Thee,  also.  Divine  Son  of  God,  co-equal 
and  co-eternal  with  the  Father,  that  Thou  didst  not 
disdain  to  be  born  of  the  Virgin,  and  that,  being 
found  in  fashion  like  a  man^  thou  didst  not  refuse 
to  be  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
cross.  Let  Thy  brows  be  girt  with  something 
better  than  thorns ;  let  the  eternal  diadem  for  ever 
glitter  there.  Thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed 
us  to  God  by  Thy  blood  ;  unto  Thee  be  glory,  and 
honour,  and  power,  and  majesty,  and  dominion,  and 
might,  for  ever  and  ever ! 

And  equally,  most  blessed  Spirit,  Thou  who  didst 
brood  over  chaos  and  bring  it  into  order,  Thou  who 
didst  beget  the  Son  of  God's  body  of  flesh.  Thou 
who  didst  quicken  us  to  spiritual  life,  by  whose 
divine  energy  we  are  sanctified,  and  hope  to  be 
made  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light,  unto  Thee,  also,  be  hallelujahs,  world 
without  end! 

O  Lord !  our  soul  longeth  for  words  of  fire,  but 
we  cannot  reach  them !  Oh !  when  shall  we  drop 
this  clay  which  now  is  so  uncongenial  to  our  song  ? 
When  shall  we  be  able  with  wings  to  mount  upward 
to  Thy  throne,  and  having  learned  some  flaming 
sonnets  that  have  once  been  sung  by  cherubim 
above,  we  shall  praise  Thee  for  ever  ? 


21 


Yet  even  these  are  not  rich  enough  for  Thy  glory. 
We  would  sing  unto  Thee  a  new  song.  We  will, 
when  we  reach  the  heavenly  shore,  become  leaders 
of  the  eternal  music.  "  Day  without  night  "  will  we 
"circle  God's  throne  rejoicing,"  and  count  it  the  ful- 
ness of  our  glory,  our  bliss,  our  heaven,  to  wave  the 
palm  and  cast  our  crowns  with  our  songs  at  Thy 
feet  for  ever  and  ever ! 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven ;  next  to  this 
we  would  offer  prayer  for  those  who  never  think 
of  Thee ;  who,  though  created  by  Thee,  are 
strangers  to  Thee ;  who  are  fed  by  Thy  bounty, 
and  yet  never  lift  their  voices  to  Thee,  but  live  for 
self,  for  the  world,  for  Satan,  for  sin.  Father,  these 
cannot  pray  for  themselves  for  they  are  dead  ;  Thy 
quickened  children  pray  for  them.  These  will  not 
come  to  Thee,  for,  like  sheep,  they  are  lost ;  but  do 
Thou  seek  them,  Father,  and  bring  them  back. 

Oh !  our  glorious  Lord,  Thou  hast  taught  us  to 
pray  for  others,  for  the  grace  which  could  have  met 
with  such  undeserving  sinners  as  we  are  must  be 
able  to  meet  with  the  vilest  of  the  vile.  Oh!  we 
cannot  boast  of  what  we  are ;  we  cannot  boast  of 
what  we  have  been  by  nature.  Had  we  our  doom 
we  had  now  been  in  hell.  Had  we  this  day  our 
proper,  natural,  and  deserved  position,  we  should 
still  have  been  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  in  the 
bond  of  iniquity.  'Tis  Thy  rich,  free,  sovereign, 
distinguishing  grace  which  has  brought  us  up  out 
of  the  miry  clay,  and  set  our  feet  upon  a  rock.  And 
shall  we  even  refuse  to  pray  for  others  ?  Shall  we 
leave  a  stone  unturned  for  their  conversion  ?  Shall 
we  not  weep  for  those  who  have  no  tears  and  cry 


22 

for  those  who  have  no  prayers  ?     Father,  we  must 
and  we  will. 

"  Fain  our  pity  would  reclainij 
And  snatch  the  fire-brands  from  the  flame." 

There  are  those  who  are  utterly  careless  about 
Divine  Things.  Wilt  Thou  impress  them !  May 
some  stray  shot  reach  their  conscience !  Oh !  that 
they  may  be  led  solemnly  to  consider  their  position 
and  their  latter  end !  May  thoughts  of  death  and 
of  eternity  dash  like  some  mighty  waves,  irresistibly 
against  their  souls !  Oh !  may  heaven's  light  shine 
into  their  conscience !  May  they  begin  to  ask 
themselves  where  they  are,  and  what  they  are,  and 
may  they  be  turned  unto  the  Lord  with  full  purpose 
of  heart. 

There  are  others  who  are  concerned,  but  they  are 
halting  between  two  opinions.  There  are  some  that 
we  love  in  the  flesh  who  have  not  yet  decided  for 
God.  Behold  it  trembles  in  the  balance !  Cast  in 
Thy  cross,  O  Jesus,  and  turn  the  scale !  Oh !  Love 
irresistible,  come  forth,  and  carry  by  blessed  storm 
the  hearts  which  have  not  yet  yielded  to  all  the 
attacks  of  the  law !  Oh !  that  some  who  never 
could  be  melted,  even  by  the  furnace  of  Sinai,  may 
be  dissolved  by  the  beams  of  love  from  the  tearful 
eyes  of  Jesus ! 

Lord,  Lord,  if  there  be  a  heart  that  is  saying, 
"Now,  behold  I  yield;  lo !  at  Thy  feet  rebellion's 
weapons  I  lay  down,  and  cease  to  be  Thy  foe, 
Thou  King  of  kings  " — if  there  be  one  who  is  say- 
ing, "I  am  willing  to  be  espoused  unto  Christ,  to 
be  washed  in  His  blood,  to  be  called  in  His 
righteousness  " — bring  that  willing  sinner  in  now ! 


23 

May  there  be  no  longer  delay,  but  may  this  be  the 
time  when,  once  for  all,  the  great  transaction  shall 
be  done,  and  they  shall  be  their  Lord's,  and  He 
shall  be  theirs. 

Oh !  that  we  could  pour  out  our  soul  in  prayer  for 
the  unconverted!     Thou  knowest  where  they  will 
all  be  in  a  few  years !     Oh !  by  Thy  wrath,  we  pray 
Thee,  let  them  not  endure  it !     By  the  flames  of 
hell  be  pleased  to  ransom  them  from  going  down 
into  the  pit !     By  ever^'thing  that  is  dreadful  in  the 
wrath  to  come  we  do  argue  with  Thee  to  have  mercy 
upon  these  sons  of  men,  even  upon  those  who  have 
no  mercy  upon  themselves.     Father,  hast  Thou  not 
promised  Thy  Son  to  see  of  His  soul's  travail  ?    We 
point  Thee  to  the  ransom  paid ;    we  point  Thee 
once  again  to  the  groans  of  Thy  Son,  to  His  agony, 
and  bloody  sweat !     Turn,  turn  Thy  glorious  eyes 
thither,  and  then  look  on  sinners,  and  speak  the 
word,  and  bid  them  live.     Righteous  Father,  refresh 
every  corner  of  the  vineyard,  and  on  every  branch  of 
the  vine  let  the  dew  of  heaven  rest.       Oh  !  that  Thou 
wouldest  bless  Thy  church  throughout  the  world ! 
Let  visible  union  be  established,  or  if  not  that,  yet 
let  the  invisible  union  which  has  always  existed  be 
better  recognised  by  believers.     Wilt  Thou  repair 
our  schisms ;  wilt  Thou  repair  the  breaches  which 
have  been  made  in  the  walls  of  Zion?     Oh!  that 
Thou  w^ouldest  purge  us  of  everything  unscriptural, 
till  all  Christians  shall  come  to  the  law  and  to  the 
testimony,  and  still  keep  the  ordinances  and  the 
doctrines  as  they  were  committed  to  the  apostles 
by  Christ ! 

Remember  our  land  in  this  time  of  need.     Do 


24 

Thou  be  pleased  by  some  means  to  relieve  the  dis- 
tress prevalent.  Quicken  the  wheels  of  commerce 
that  the  many  who  are  out  of  employment  in  this 
city  may  no  longer  be  crying  for  work  and  bread. 
Oh !  that  Thou  wouldest  make  wars  to  cease,  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth,  or,  when  they  break  out  break 
Thou  the  slave's  fetters  thereby,  and  though 
desperate  be  the.  evil,  yet  grant  that  Satan  may  cast 
out  Satan,  and  may  his  kingdom  be  divided,  and 
so  fall. 

Above  all.  Thou  long-expected  Messiah,  doi  Thou 
come!  Thine  ancient  people  who  despised  Thee 
once  are  waiting  for  Thee  in  Thy  second  coming, 
and  we,  the  Gentiles,  who  knew  Thee  not,  neither 
regarded  Thee,  we,  too,  are  watching  for  Thine 
advent.  Make  no  tarrying,  O  Jesus !  May  Thy 
feet  soon  stand  again  on  Olivet !  Thou  shalt  not 
have  this  time  there  to  sweat  great  drops  of  blood, 
but  Thou  shalt  come  to  proclaim  the  year  of 
vengeance  for  Thy  foes,  and  the  year  of  acceptance 
for  Thy  people. 

"When  wilt  thou  the   heavens  rend, 
In  majesty  come  down  ? " 

Earth  travails  for  Thy  coming.  The  whole 
creation  groaneth  in  pain  together  until  now. 
Thine  own  expect  Thee  ;  we  are  longing  till  we  are 
weary  for  Thy  coming.  Come  quickly.  Lord  Jesus, 
come  quickly.     Amen  and  Amen. 


Prayer    V. 

To  the  King  EternaL 

OUR  God  and  Father,  draw  us  to  Thyself  by 
Thy  Spirit,  and  may  the  few  minutes  that 
we  spend  in  prayer  be  full  of  the  true  spirit  of 
supplication.  Grant  that  none  of  us  with  closed 
eyes  may  yet  be  looking  abroad  over  the  fields  of 
vanity,  but  may  our  eyes  be  really  shut  to  every- 
thing else  now  but  that  which  is  spiritual  and 
Divine.  May  we  have  communion  with  God  in  the 
secret  of  our  hearts,  and  find  Him  to  be  to  us  as 
a  little  sanctuary. 

O  Lord,  we  do  not  find  it  easy  to  get  rid  of  dis- 
tracting thoughts,  but  we  pray  Thee  help  us  to 
draw  the  sword  against  them  and  drive  them  away, 
and  as  when  the  birds  came  down  upon  his  sacrifice 
Abraham  drove  them  away,  so  may  we  chase  away 
all  cares,  all  thoughts  of  pleasure,  everything  else, 
whether  it  be  pleasing  or  painful,  that  would  keep 
us  away  from  real  fellowship  with  the  Father  and 
with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ. 

We  would  begin  with  adoration.  We  worship 
from  our  hearts  the  Three  in  One^  the  infinitely 
glorious  Jehovah,  the  only  living  and  true  God  We 
adore  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  We  are 
not  yet  ascended  to  the  place  where  pure  spirits 
behold  the  face  of  God,  but  we  shall  soon  be  there, 
perhaps  much  sooner  than  we  think,  and  we  would 


26 

be  there  in  spirit  now,  casting  our  crowns  upon  the 
glassy  sea  before  the  throne  of  the  Infinite  Majesty, 
and  ascribing  glory  and  honour,  and  power  and 
praise,  and  dominion  and  might  to  Him  that  sitteth 
upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and 
ever. 

All  the  Church  doth  worship  Thee,  O  God,  every 
heart  renewed  by  grace  takes  a  delight  in  adoring 
Thee,  and  we,  among  the  rest,  though  least  and 
meanest  of  them  all,  yet  would  bow  as  heartily  as 
any  worshipping,  loving,  praising,  in  our  soul,  being 
silent  unto  God  because  our  joy  in  Him  is  alto- 
gether inexpressible. 

Lord  help  us  to  worship  Thee  in  life  as  well  as 
lip.  May  our  whole  being  be  taken  up  with  Thee. 
As  when  the  fire  fell  down  on  Elijah's  sacrifice  of 
old  and  licked  up  even  the  water  that  was  in  the 
trenches,  so  may  the  consuming  fire  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  use  up  all  our  nature,  and  even  that  which 
might  seem  to  hinder,  even  out  of  that  may  God 
get  glory  by  the  removal  of  it.  Thus  would  we 
adore. 

But,  oh !  dear  Saviour,  we  come  to  Thee,  and  we 
remember  what  our  state  is,  and  the  condition  we 
are  in  encourages  us  to  come  to  Thee  now  as 
beggars,  as  dependents  upon  Thy  heavenly  charity. 
Thou  art  a  Saviour,  and  as  such  Thou  art  on  the 
outlook  for  those  that  need  saving,  and  here  we 
are,  here  we  come.  We  are  the  men  and  women 
Thou  art  looking  for,  needing  a  Saviour. 

Great  Physician,  we  bring  Thee  our  wounds  and 
bruises  and  putrifying  sores,  and  the  more  diseased 
we  are  and  the  more  conscious  we  are  to-day  of  the 


27 

depravity  of  our  nature,  of  the  deep-seated  corrup- 
tion of  our  hearts,  the  more  we  feel  that  we  are  the 
sort  of  beings  that  Thou  art  seeking  for,  for  the 
whole  have  no  need  of  a  physician  but  they  that 
are  sick. 

Glorious  Benefactor,  we  can  meet  Thee  on  good 
terms,  for  we  are  full  of  poverty,  we  are  just  as 
empty  as  we  can  be.  We  could  not  be  more 
abjectly  dependent  than  we  are.  Since  Thou 
wouldest  display  Thy  mercy  here  is  our  sin  ;  since 
Thou  wouldest  show  Thy  strength  here  is  our 
weakness ;  since  Thou  wouldest  manifest  Thy 
lovingkindness  here  are  our  needs ;  since  Thou 
wouldest  glorify  Thy  grace  here  are  we,  such 
persons  as  can  never  have  a  shadow  of  a  hope 
except  through  Thy  grace,  for  we  are  undeserving, 
ill-deserving,  hell-deserving,  and  if  Thou  do  not 
magnify  Thy  grace  in  us  we  must  perish  for  ever. 

And  somehow^  we  feel  it  sweet  to  come  to  Thee 
in  this  way.  If  we  had  to  tell  Thee  that  we  had 
some  good  thing  in  us  which  Thou  didst  require  of 
us,  we  should  be  questioning  whether  we  were  not 
flattering  ourselves  and  presumptuously  thinking 
that  we  were  better  than  we  are.  Lord  Jesus,  we 
come  just  as  we  are ;  this  is  how  we  came  at  first, 
and  this  is  how  we  come  still,  with  all  our  failures, 
with  all  our  transgressions,  Vv^ith  all  and  everything 
that  is  what  it  ought  not  to  be  we  come  to  Thee. 
We  do  bless  Thee  that  Thou  dost  receive  us  and 
our  wounds,  and  by  Thy  stripes  we  are  healed ; 
Thou  dost  receive  us  and  our  sins,  and  by  Thy  sin- 
bearing  we  are  set  clear  and  free  from  sin.  Thou 
dost  receive  us  and  our  death,  even  our  death,  for 


28 

Thou  art  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead,  and  art  alive 
for  evermore. 

We  just  come  and  lie  at  Thy  feet,  obedient  to 
that  call  of  Thine,  "Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that 
labour  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Let  us  feel  sweet 
rest,  since  we  do  come  at  Thy  call.  May  some 
come  that  have  never  come  till  this  day,  and  may 
others  who  have  been  coming-  these  many  years 
consciously  come  again,  coming  unto  Thee  as  unto 
a  living  stone,  chosen  of  God  and  precious,  to  build 
our  everlasting  hopes  upon. 

But,  Lord,  now  that  we  ajre  come  so  near  Thee, 
and  on  right  terms  with  Thee,  we  venture  to  ask 
Thee  this,  that  we  that  love  Thee  may  love  Thee 
very  much  more.  Oh!  since  Thou  hast  been 
precious,  Thy  very  name  has  music  in  it  tO'  our  ears, 
and  there  are  times  when  Thy  love  is  so  inexpres- 
sibly strong  upon  us  that  we  are  carried  away  with 
it.  We  have  felt  that  we  would  gladly  die  to  in- 
crease Thine  honour.  We  have  been  willing  to 
lose  our  name  and  our  repute  if  so  be  Thou  mightest 
be  glorified,  and  truly  we  often  feel  that  if  the 
crushing  of  us  would  lift  Thee  one  inch  the  higher, 
we  would  gladly  suffer  it. 

For  oh !  Thou  blessed  King,  we  would  set  the 
crown  on  Thy  head,  even  if  the  sword  should  smite 
our  arm  off  at  the  shoulder  blade.  Thou  must  be 
King  whatever  becomes  of  us ;  Thou  must  be  glori- 
fied whatever  becomes  of  us. 

But  yet  we  have  to  mourn  that  we  cannot  get 
always  to  feel  as  we  should  this  rapture  and  ardour 
of  love.  Oh !  at  times  Thou  dost  manifest  Thyself 
to  us  so  charmingly  that  heaven  itself  could  scarce 


29 

be  happier  than  the  world  becomes  when  Thou  art 
with  us  in  it.  But  when  Thou  art  gone  and  we  are 
in  the  dark,  oh !  give  us  the  love  that  loves  in  the 
dark,  that  loves  when  there  is  no  comfortable  sense 
of  Thy  presence.  Let  us  not  be  dependent  upon 
feeling-,  but  may  we  ever  love  Thee,  so  that  if  Thou 
didst  turn  Thy  back  on  us  by  the  year  together  we 
would  think  none  the  less  of  Thee,  for  Thou  art 
unspeakably  to  be  beloved  whatsoever  Thou  doest, 
and  if  Thou  dost  give  us  rough  words,  yet  still  we 
would  cling  to  Thee,  and  if  the  rod  be  used  till  we 
tingle  again,  yet  still  will  we  love  Thee,  for  Thou 
art  infinitely  to  be  beloved  of  all  men  and  angels, 
and  Thy  Father  loved  Thee.  Make  our  hearts  to 
love  Thee  evermore  the  same.  With  all  the 
capacity  for  love  that  there  is  in  us,  and  with  all 
the  more  that  Thou  canst  give  us,  may  we  love  our 
I-ord  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 

Help  us,  Lord,  to  conquer  sin  out  of  love  to  Thee. 
Help  some  dear  strugglers  that  have  been  mastered 
by  sin  sometimes,  and  they  are  struggling  against 
it ;  give  them  the  victory,  Lord,  and  when  the 
battle  gets  very  sharp,  and  they  are  tempted  to 
give  way  a  little,  help  them  to  be  very  firm  and  very 
strong,  never  giving  up  hope  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
resolving  that  if  they  perish  they  will  perish  at  His 
feet  and  nowhere  else  but  there. 

Lord  raise  up  in  our  churches  many  men  and 
women  that  are  all  on  fire  with  love  to  Christ  and 
His  Divine  Gospel.  Oh!  give  us  back  again  men 
like  Antipas,  Thy  faithful  martyr,  men  like  Paul, 
Thy  earnest  servant  who  proclaimed  Thy  truth  so 
boldly.     Give  us  Johns,  men  to  whom  the  Spirit 


30 

may  speak,  who  shall  bid  us  hear  what  the  Spirit 
saith  unto  the  churches.  Lord  revive  us!  Lord 
revive  us  ;  revive  Thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years 
in  all  the  churches.  Return  untO'  the  Church  of 
God  in  this  country,  return  unto  her.  Thine  adver- 
saries think  to  have  it  all  their  own  way,  but  they 
will  not,  for  the  Lord  liveth,  and  blessed  be  our 
Rock. 

Because  of  truth  and  righteousness,  we  beseech 
Thee  lay  bare  Thine  arm  in  these  last  days.  O 
Shepherd  of  Israel,  deal  a  heavy  blow  at  the  wolves 
and  keep  Thy  sheep  in  their  own  true  pastures,  free 
from  the  poisonous  pastures  of  error.  O  God  we 
would  stir  Thee  up.  We  know  Thou  sleepest  not, 
and  yet  sometimes  it  seems  as  if  Thou  didst  sleep 
awhile  and  leave  things  to  go  on  in  their  own  way. 

We  beseech  Thee  awake.  Plead  Thine  own 
cause.  We  know  Thine  answer,  "Awake!  awake! 
put  on  thy  strength,  O  Zion."  This  we  would  do, 
Lord,  but  we  cannot  do  it  unless  Thou  dost  put 
forth  Thy  strength  to  turn  our  weakness  into  might. 

Great  God,  save  this  nation !  O  God  of  heaven 
and  earth,  stay  the  floods  of  infidelity  and  of  filthi- 
ness  that  roll  over  this  land.  Would  God  we  might 
see  better  days !  Men  seem  entirely  indifferent 
now.  They  will  not  come  to  hear  the  Word  as 
once  they  did.  God  of  our  fathers  let  Thy  Spirit 
work  again  among  the  masses.  Turn  the  hearts  of 
the  people  to  the  hearing  of  the  Word,  and  convert 
them  when  they  hear  it.  May  it  be  preached  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven. 

Our  hearts  are  weary  for  Thee,  thou  King, 
Thou  King  forgotten  in  thine  own  land.  Thou  King 


31 

despised  among  Thine  own  people,  when  wilt  Thou 
yet  be  glorious  before  the  eyes  of  all  mankind? 
Come,  we  beseech  Thee,  come  quickly,  or  if  Thou 
comest  not  personally,  send  forth  the  Holy  Spirit 
with  a  greater  power  than  ever  that  our  hearts  may 
leap  within  us  as  they  see  miracles  of  mercy  re- 
peated in  our  midst. 

Father  glorify  Thy  Son.  Somehow  our  prayer 
always  comes  to  this  before  we  have  done.  "Father 
glorify  Thy  Son  that  Thy  Son  also  may  glorify 
Thee,"  and  let  the  days  come  when  He  shall  see 
of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  shall  be  satisfied. 
Bless  all  work  done  for  Thee,  whether  it  be  in  the 
barn  or  in  the  cathedral,  silently  and  quietly  at  the 
street  door,  or  in  the  Sunday-school  or  in  the 
classes,  O  Lord  bless  Thy  work.  Hear  also  prayers 
that  have  been  put  up  by  wives  for  their  husbands, 
children  for  their  parents,  parents  for  their  children. 
Let  the  holy  service  of  prayer  never  cease,  and  let 
the  intercession  be  accepted  of  God,  for  Jesus 
Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


n 


Prayer    VI. 

The  Wonders  of  Calvary* 

GREAT  God,  there  was  a  time  when  we 
dreaded  the  thought  of  coming  near  to 
Thee,  for  we  were  guilty  and  Thou  wast  angry  with 
us,  but  now  we  will  praise  Thee  because  Thine 
anger  is  turned  away,  and  Thou  comfortest  us. 
Ay,  and  the  very  throne  which  once  was  a  place  of 
dread  has  now  become  the  place  of  shelter.  I  flee 
unto  Thee  to  hide  me. 

We  long  now  to  get  right  away  from  the 
world,  even  from  the  remembrance  of  it,  and 
have  fellowship  with  the  world  to  come  by  speak- 
ing with  Him  that  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come, 
the  Almighty.  Lord  we  have  been  worried 
and  wearied  oftentimes  with  care,  but  with  Thee 
care  comes  to  an  end,  all  things  are  with  Thee,  and 
when  we  live  in  Thee  we  live  in  wealth,  in  sure 
repose,  in  constant  joy. 

We  have  to  battle  with  the  sons  of  men  against 
a  thousand  errors  and  unrighteousnesses,  but  when 
we  flee  to  Thee,  there  all  is  truth  and  purity  and 
holiness,  and  our  heart  finds  peace.  Above  all,  we 
have  to  battle  with  ourselves,  and  we  are  very  much 
ashamed  of  ourselves.  After  many  years  of  great 
mercy,  after  tasting  of  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come,  we  still  are  so  weak,  so  foolish ;  but,  oh ! 
when  we  get  away  from  self  to  God  there  all  is 


34 

truth  and  purity  and  holiness,  and  our  heart  finds 
peace,  wisdom,  completeness,  delight,  joy,  victory. 

Oh !  bring  us,  then,  we  pray  Thee,  now  near  to 
Thyself.  Let  us  bathe  ourselves  in  communion 
with  our  God.  Blessed  be  the  love  which  chose  us 
before  the  world  began.  We  can  never  sufficiently 
adore  Thee  for  Thy  sovereignty,  the  sovereignty  of 
love  which  saw  us  in  the  ruins  of  the  Fall,  yet  loved 
us  notwithstanding  all. 

We  praise  the  God  of  the  Eternal  Council 
Chamber  and  of  the  Everlasting  Covenant,  but 
where  shall  we  find  sufficiently  fit  words  with  which 
to  praise  Him  who  gave  us  grace  in  Christ  His  Son, 
before  He  spread  the  starry  sky. 

We  also  bless  Thee,  O  God,  as  the  God  of  our 
redemption,  for  Thou  hast  so  loved  us  as  to  give 
even  Thy  dear  Son  for  us.  He  gave  Himself,  His 
very  life  for  us  that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all 
iniquity  and  separate  us  unto  Himself  to  be  His 
peculiar  people,  zealous  for  good  works. 

Never  can  we  sufficiently  adore  free  grace  and 
dying  love.  The  wonders  of  Calvary  never  cease 
to  be  wonders,  they  are  growingly  marvellous  in 
our  esteem  as  we  think  of  Him  who  washed  'US 
from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood.  Nor  can  we  cease 
to  praise  the  God  of  our  regeneration  who  found  us 
dead  and  made  us  live,  found  us  at  enmity  and 
reconciled  us,  found  us  loving  the  things  of  .  this 
world  and  lifted  us  out  of  the  slough  and  mire  of 
selfishness  and  wordliness  into  the  love  of  divine 
everlasting  things. 

O  Spirit  of  God  we  love  Thee  this  day,  especi- 
ally for  dwelling  in  us.     How  canst  Thou  abide  in 


35 

so  rude  a  habitation.  How  canst  Thou  make  these 
bodies  to  be  Thy  temples,  and  yet  Thou  dost  so, 
for  which  let  Thy  name  be  had  in  reverence  so  long 
as  we  live. 

O  Lord  we  would  delight  ourselves  in  Thee  this 
day.  Give  us  faith  and  love  and  hope  that  with 
these  three  graces  we  may  draw  very  near  to  the 
Triune  God.  Thou  wilt  keep  us,  Thou  wilt  pre- 
serve us,  Thou  wilt  feed  us,  Thou  wilt  lead  us,  and 
Thou  wilt  bring  us  to  the  mind  of  God,  and  there 
wilt  Thou  show  us  Thy  love,  and  in  the  glory  ever- 
lasting and  boundless,  there  wilt  Thou  make  us 
know  and  taste  and  feel  the  joys  that  cannot  be 
expressed. 

But  a  Httle  longer  waiting  and  we  shall  come  to 
the  golden  shore ;  but  a  little  longer  fighting  and 
we  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life  that  fadeth  not 
away. 

Lord  get  us  up  above  the  world.  Come,  Holy 
Spirit,  heavenly  Dove,  and  mount  and  bear  us  on 
Thy  wings,  far  from  these  inferior  sorrows  and 
inferior  joys,  up  where  eternal  ages  roll.  May  we 
ascend  in  joyful  contemplation,  and  may  our  spirit 
come  back  again,  strong  for  all  its  service,  armed 
for  all  its  battles,  armoured  for  all  its  dangers,  and 
made  ready  to  live  heaven  on  earth,  until  by-and- 
bye  we  shall  live  heaven  in  heaven.  Great  Father, 
be  with  Thy  waiting  people,  any  in  great  trouble  do 
Thou  greatly  help ;  any  that  are  despondent  do 
Thou  sweetly  comfort  and  cheer ;  any  that  have 
erred,  and  are  smarting  under  their  own  sin,  do 
Thou  bring  them  back  and  heal  their  wounds  ;  any 
that  this  day  are  panting  after  holiness  do  Thou 


36 

give  them  the  desire  of  their  hearts ;  any  that  are 
longing  for  usefulness  do  Thou  lead  them  into  ways 
of  usefulness. 

Lord,  we  want  to  live  while  we  live.  We  do  pray 
that  we  may  not  merely  groan  out  an  existence  here 
below,  nor  live  as  earthworms  crawling  back  into 
our  holes  and  dragging  now  and  then  a  sere  lesif 
with  us  ;  but  oh !  give  us  to  live  as  we  ought  tO'  live, 
with  a  new  life  that  Thou  hast  put  into  us,  with  the 
divine  quickening  which  has  lifted  us  as  much  above 
common  men  as  men  are  lifted  above  the  beasts 
that  perish. 

Do  not  let  us  always  be  hampered  like  poor  half- 
hatched  birds  within  the  egg ;  may  we  chip  the 
shell  to-day  and  get  out  into  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  children  of  God.     Grant  us  this,  we  pray  Thee. 

Lord  visit  our  church.  We  have  heard  Thy 
message  to  the  churches  at  Ephesus ;  it  is  a 
message  to  us  also.  Oh !  do  not  let  any  of  us  lose 
our  first  love.  Let  not  our  church  grow  cold  and 
dead.  We  are  not,  we  fear,  what  once  we  were. 
Lord  revive  us!  All  our  help  must  come  from 
Thee.  Give  back  to  the  church  its  love,  its  confid- 
ence, its  holy  daring,  its  consecration,  its  liberality, 
its  holiness.  Give  back  all  it  ever  had  and  give  it 
much  more.  Take  every  member  and  wash  his  feet, 
Sweet  Lord,  most  tenderly,  and  set  us  with  clean 
feet  in  a  clean  road,  with  a  clean  heart  to  guide 
them,  and  do  Thou  bless  us  as  Thou  art  wont  to  do 
after  a  divine  fashion. 

Bless  us,  our  Father,  and  let  all  the  churches  of 
Jesus  Christ  partake  of  like  care  and  tenderness. 
Walking  among  the  golden  candlesticks  trim  every 


37 

lamp  and  make  every  light,  even  though  it  burneth 
but  feebly  now,  to  shine  out  gloriously  through  Thy 
care. 

Now  bless  the  sinners.  Lord  convert  them.  O 
God,  save  men,  save  this  great  city,  this  wicked  city, 
this  slumbering  dead  city.  Lord,  arouse  it,  arouse 
it  by  any  means,  that  it  may  turn  unto  its  God.  Lord 
save  sinners  all  the  world  over,  and  let  Thy  pre- 
cious Word  be  fulfilled.  "Behold  He  cometh  with 
clouds."  Why  dost  Thou  tarry?  Make  no  tarry- 
ing, O,  our  Lord.  And  now  unto  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


Prayer    VII. 

^^Let  all  the  People  Praise 
Thee/^ 

OUR  Father,  when  we  read  Thy  description 
of  human  nature  we  are  sure  it  is  true,  for 
Thou  hast  seen  man  ever  since  his  fall,  and  Thou 
hast  been  grieved  at  heart  concerning-  him.  More- 
over, Thou  hast  such  a  love  towards  him  that  Thou 
didst  not  judge  him  harshly ;  and  every  word  that 
Thou  hast  spoken  must  be  according  to  truth. 
Thou  hast  measured  and  computed  the  iniquity  of 
man,  for  Thou  hast  laid  it  on  the  Well-Beloved; 
and  we  know  Thou  hast  not  laid  upon  Him  more 
than  is  meet. 

O  God,  we  are  distressed,  we  are  bowed  down 
greatly  when  we  see  what  is  the  condition  to  which 
we  and  all  our  race  have  fallen.  "Where  is  boast- 
ing then  ?  "  And  yet  we  grieve  to  say  that  we  do 
boast,  and  have  boasted;  and  that  our 'fellow-men 
are  great  at  boasting ;  whereas  they  ought  rather 
to  lay  their  hands  upon  their  mouths  before  Thee. 

It  has  become  a  wonder  to  us  that  Thou  shouldst 
look  upon  man  at  all ;  the  most  hateful  object  in 
creation  must  be  a  man,  because  he  slew  Thy  Son, 
because  he  has  multiplied  rebellions  against  a  just 
and  holy  law.  And  yet  truly  there  is  no  sight  that 
gives  Thee  more  pleasure  than  man,  for  Jesus 
was  a  man  ;  and  the  brightness  of  His  glory  covers 
all  our  shame  ;  and  the  pureness  and  perfectness  of 


40 

His  obedience  shines  like  the  sun  in  the  midst  of  the 
thick  darkness.  For  His  sake  Thou  art  well 
pleased,  and  Thou  dost  dwell  with  us. 

Lord,  we  once  thoug-ht  that  those  descriptions  of 
our  heart  were  somewhat  strained,  but  we  think 
not  so  now,  for  verily  we  perceive  that  had  it  not 
been  for  restraint  which  held  us  like  fetters  we,  in 
our  unregenerate  state,  were  capable  of  anything ; 
for,  even  now,  when  we  are  regenerate,  the  old  sin 
that  abideth  in  us  is  capable  of  reaching  to  a  high 
degree  of  infamy ;  and  did  not  the  new  life  restrain 
the  old  death  we  know  not  what  we  might  yet 
become. 

We  thought  once  we  were  humble ;  but  we  soon 
found  that  our  pride  will  feed  on  any  current  flattery 
that  is  laid  at  our  door.  We  thought  we  were 
believers,  but  sometimes  we  are  so  doubting,  so  un- 
believing, so  vexed  with  scepticism  that  we  should 
not  certainly  choose  to  follow :  that  is  Thy  work 
in  us.  By  nature  we  are  such  liars  that  we  think 
Thee  a  liar  too  ;  the  surest  token  of  our  untruthful- 
ness, that  we  think  that  Thou  canst  be  untrue. 

Oh,  this  base  heart  of  ours !  hath  it  not  enough 
tinder  in  it  to  set  on  fire  the  course  of  nature  ?  If  a 
spark  do  but  fall  into  it,  any  one  of  our  members  left 
to  itself  would  dishonour  Christ,  deny  the  Lord  that 
bought  us,  and  turn  back  into  perdition. 

We  are  altogether  ashamed.  Truly  in  us  is 
fulfilled  Thine  own  Word :  "  Thou  shalt  be  a 
shame,  and  never  open  thy  mouth  any  more."  For 
Thy  love  to  us  hath  silenced  us,  that  great  love  hath 
hidden  boasting  from  us ;  Thy  great  love,  where- 
with Thou  lovedst  us  even  when  we  were  dead  in 


\ 


41 

trespasses  and  sins ;  Thy  great  love  wherewith 
Thou  hast  loved  us  still,  despite  our  ill  manners, 
our  wanderings,  our  shortcomings,  and  our 
excesses. 

Oh,  the  matchless  love  of  God !  Truly  if  there 
be  any  glory  it  must  be  all  the  Lord's ;  if  there  be 
any  virtue  it  is  the  result  of  grace ;  if  there  be  any- 
thing whatsoever  that  lifts  us  above  the  devil  him- 
self it  is  the  work  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  to  whom 
be  glory! 

And  now  at  the  remembrance  of  all  this,  and 
being  in  Thy  presence,  we  do  yet  rejoice  that 
covered  is  our  unrighteousness ;  from  condemna- 
tion we  are  free,  and  we  are  the  favoured  of  the 
Lord.  Thou  hast  given  us,  O  Lord,  to  taste  of  that 
love  which  is  not  merely  laid  up  for  us,  but  we  have 
enjoyed  it,  and  do  enjoy  it  still. 

Our  heart  knows  the  Father's  love,  for  we  have 
received  the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry, 
"Abba  Father."  And  we  joy  and  rejoice  in  the 
redemption  of  our  spirits,  and  we  expect  the 
redemption  of  our  bodies,  when,  at  the  coming  of 
the  Lord  they  too  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and 
we  shall  be  changed. 

O  Jesus,  Thou  wilt  bring  Thy  Israel  out  of 
Egypt,  and  not  a  hoof  shall  be  left  behind ;  no,  not 
a  bone,  nor  a  piece  of  Thine  elect  shall  be  left  in 
the  hands  of  the  adversary.  We  shall  come  out 
clean,  delivered  by  Him  Who  doeth  nothing  by 
halves,  but  Who  on  the  cross  said,  "It  is  finished." 
Who  much  more  will  say  it  on  His  throne  :  Glory 
be  unto  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  Who  hath 
lifted  us  up  from  our  ruin  and  condemnation,  and 


42 

made  us  new  creatures,  and  justified  us,  and 
guaranteed  us  eternal  life,  which  eternal  life  shall 
be  manifested  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  All  glory 
be  unto  His  ever  blessed  name  for  ever  and  ever ! 

And  now,  Lord,  during  the  few  days  that  remain 
to  us  here  below,  be  it  all  our  business  to  cry, 
"Behold  the  Lamb!"  Oh!  teach  these  hearts  to 
be  always  conscious  of  Thy  love  ;  and  then  these 
lips,  that  they  may  set  out  as  best  they  can  by  Thy 
divine  help  the  matchless  story  of  the  Cross.  Oh  I 
do  give  us  to  win  many  to  Jesus  let  us  not  be 
barren,  but  may  we  have  to  cry  that  we  are  the 
beloved  of  the  Lord,  and  our  offspring  with  us. 
May  we  have  many  spiritual  offspring  that  shall  go 
with  us  to  the  throne,  that  we  may  say  before  Him, 
*'I  and  the  children  that  Thou  hast  given  me." 

Lord  bless  the  work  of  the  Church  and  all  its 
branches ;  and  let  Thy  kingdom  come  into  the 
hearts  of  multitudes  by  its  means.  Remember  all 
churches  that  are  really  at  work  for  Jesus,  and  all 
private  individuals,  workers  alone,  workers  by 
themselves.  Let  the  Lord's  own  name  be  made 
known  by  tens  of  thousands.  Give  the  Word,  and 
great  may  be  the  multitude  of  them  that  publish  it. 
Let  all  this,  our  beloved  country,  know  Christ,  and 
come  to  His  feet ;  let  the  dark  places  of  this  huge 
city  be  enlightened  with  the  sweet  name  of  Jesus. 
And  then  let  the  heathen  know  Thee,  and  the  utter- 
most parts  of  the  earth  hear  of  Thee. 

Oh!  from  the  tree  declare  Thou  Thy  salvation, 
and  from  the  throne  let  it  be  published  in  proclama- 
tions of  a  king.  "Let  the  people  praise  Thee,  O 
God ;  yea,  let  all  the  people  praise  Thee." 


43 

Our  heart  seems  as  if  it  had  not  anything  else  to 
ask  for  when  it  reaches  to  this ;  yet  would  we  go 
back  a  moment  and  say  :  Lord,  forgive  us  our  sins  ; 
Lord,  sanctify  our  persons ;  Lord,  guide  us  in  diffi- 
culty ;  Lord,  supply  our  jieeds.  The  Lord  teach 
us  ;  the  Lord  perfect  us  ;  the  Lord  comfort  us  ;  the 
Lord  make  us  meet  for  the  appearing  of  His  Son 
from  heaven ! 

And  now  we  come  back  to  a  theme  that  still 
seems  to  engross  our  desires.  Oh !  that  Christ 
might  come.  Oh !  that  His  w^ord  might  be  made 
known  to  the  uttermost  ends  of  the  earth!  Lord, 
they  die,  they  perish,  they  pass  away  by  multitudes  ! 
Every  time  the  sun  rises  and  sets  they  pass  away ! 
Make  no  tarrying,  we  beseech  Thee.  Give  wings 
to  the  feet  of  Thy  messengers,  and  fire  to  their 
mouths,  that  they  may  proclaim  the  Word  with 
Pentecostal  swiftness  and  might.  Oh !  that  Thy 
kingdom  might  come,  and  Thy  will  be  done  on 
earth  as  it  is  in  heaven,  for  Thine  is  the  kingdom, 
the  power  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen. 


Prayer    VI 11. 

A  Prayer  for  Holiness* 

OUR  Father,  we  worship  and  love  Thee  ;  and 
it  is  one  point  of  our  worship  that  Thou 
art  holy.  Time  was  when  we  loved  Thee  for  Thy 
mercy ;  we  knew  no  more ;  but  now  Thou  hast 
changed  our  hearts  and  made  us  in  love  with  good- 
ness, purity,  justice,  true  holiness ;  and  we  under- 
stand now  why  "the  cherubim  and  seraphim  con- 
tinually do  cry.  Holy,  Holy,  Lord  God  of  hosts." 

We  adore  Thee  because  Thou  art  holy,  and  we 
love  Thee  for  Thine  infinite  perfection.  For  now 
we  sigh  and  cry  after  holiness  ourselves.  Sanctify 
us  wholly,  spirit,  soul  and  body.  Lord,  we  mourn 
over  the  sins  of  our  past  life  and  our  present  short- 
comings. We  bless  Thee  Thou  hast  forgiven  us ; 
we  are  reconciled  to  Thee  by  the  death  of  Thy 
Son.  There  are  many  who  know  that  they  have 
been  washed,  and  that  He  that  beareth  away  sin 
has  borne  their  sin  away.  These  are  they  who  now 
cry  to  Thee  to  be  delivered  from  the  power  of 
sin,  to  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  temptation 
without,  but  especially  from  indwelling  sin  within. 

Lord  purify  us  in  head,  heart  and  hand  ;  and  if  it 
be  needful  that  we  should  be  put  into  the  fire  to  be 
refined  as  silver  is  refined,  we  would  even  welcome 
the  fire  if  we  may  be  rid  of  the  dross.  Lord  save 
us  from  constitutional  sin,  from  sins  of  tempera- 


46 

ment,  from  sins  of  our  surroundings.  Save  us  from 
ourselves  in  every  shape,  and  grant  us  especially  to 
have  the  light  of  love  strong  within  us. 

May  we  love  God ;  may  we  love  Thee,  O 
Saviour ;  may  we  love  the  people  of  God  as  being 
members  of  one  body  in  connection  with  Thee. 
May  we  love  the  guilty  world  with  that  love  which 
desires  its  salvation  and  conversion ;  and  may  we 
love  not  in  word  only,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth. 
May  we  help  the  helpless,  comfort  the  mourner, 
sympathise  with  the  widow  and  fatherless,  and 
may  we  be  always  ready  to  put  up  with  wrong,  to 
be  long  suffering,  to  be  very  patient,  full  of  for- 
giveness, counting  it  a  small  thing  that  we  should 
forgive  our  fellow-men  since  we  have  been  for- 
given of  God.  Lord  tune  our  hearts  to  love,  and 
then  give  us  an  inward  peace,  a  restfulness  about 
everything. 

May  we  have  no  burden  to  carry,  because,  though 
we  have  a  burden,  we  have  rolled  it  upon  the  Lord 
May  we  take  up  our  cross,  and  because  Christ  has 
once  died  on  the  cross  may  our  cross  become  a 
comfort  to  us.  May  we  count  it  all  joy  when  we 
fall  into  divers  trials,  knowing  that  in  all  this  God 
will  be  glorified.  His  image  will  be  stamped  upon 
us,  and  the  eternal  purpose  will  be  fulfilled,  where- 
in He  has  predestinated  us  to  be  conformed  unto 
the  image  of  His  Son. 

Lord  look  upon  Thy  people.  We  might  pray 
about  our  troubles.  We  will  not ;  we  will  only  pray 
against  our  sins.  We  might  come  to  Thee  about 
our  weariness,  about  our  sickness,  about  our  dis- 
appointment, about  our  poverty ;  but  we  will  leave 


47 

all  that,  we  will  only  come  about  sin.  Lord  make 
us  holy,  and  then  do  what  Thou  wilt  with  us. 

We  pray  Thee  help  us  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of 
God  our  Saviour  in  all  things.  If  we  are 
fighting-  against  sin — "the  sin  which  doth  so  easily 
beset  us  " — Lord  lend  us  heavenly  weapons  and 
heavenly  strength  that  we  may  cut  the  giants  down, 
these  men  of  Anak  that  come  against  us.  We  feel 
very  feeble.  Oh !  make  us  strong  in  the  Lord,  in 
the  power  of  His  might.  May  we  never  let  sin 
have  any  rest  in  us,  may  we  chase  it,  drive  it  out, 
slay  it,  hang  it  on  a  tree,  abhor  it,  and  may  we 
"cleave  to  that  which  is  good." 

Some  of  us  are  trying,  striving  after  some  excel- 
lent virtue.  Lord  help  strugglers ;  enable  those 
that  contend  against  great  difficulties  only  to 
greater  grace,  more  faith,  and  so  to  bring  them 
nearer  to  God.  Lord  we  will  be  holy ;  by  Thy 
grace  we  will  never  rest  until  we  are.  Thou  hast 
begun  a  good  work  in  us  and  Thou  wilt  carry  it  on. 
Thou  wilt  work  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  Thine 
own  good  pleasure. 

Lord  help  the  converted  child  to  be  correct  in 
his  relation  to  his  parents  ;  help  the  Christian  father 
or  mother  to  be  right  in  dealing  with  children, 
"  may  they  not  provoke  their  children  to  anger  lest 
they  may  discourage."  Take  away  wilfulness  from 
the  young ;  take  away  impatience  from  the  old. 
Lord  help  Christian  men  of  business.  May  they 
act  uprightly  ;  may  Christian  masters  never  be  hard 
to  their  servants,  to  their  workpeople ;  and  may 
Christian  workpeople  give  to  their  masters  that 
which  is  just  and  equal  in  the  way  of  work  in  return 


48 

for  wage.  May  we  as  Christian  men  be  always 
standing  upon  our  rights,  but  always  be  willing 
each  one  to  minister  to  the  help  of  others. 

And,  oh  that  as  Christians  we  might  be  humble! 
Lord  take  away  that  stiff-necked,  that  proud  look ; 
take  away  from  us  the  spirit  of  "  stand  by,  for  I  am 
holier  than  Thou  ; "  make  us  condescend  to  men  of 
low  estate  ;  ay,  and  even  to  men  of  low  morals,  low 
character.  May  we  seek  them  out,  seek  their  good. 
Oh !  give  to  the  Church  of  Christ  an  intense  love 
for  the  souls  of  men.  May  it  make  our  hearts 
break  to  think  that  they  will  perish  in  their  sin. 
May  we  grieve  every  day  because  of  the  sin  of  this 
City.  Set  a  mark  upon  our  forehead  and  let  us  be 
known  to  Thyself  as  men  that  sigh  and  cry  for  all 
the  abominations  that  are  done  in  the  midst  of  the 
City. 

O  God  save  us  from  a  hard  heart,  an  unkind 
spirit,  that  is  insensible  to  the  woes  of  others.  Lord 
preserve  Thy  people  also  from  worldliness,  from 
rioting,  from  drunkenness,  from  chambering  and 
wantonness,  from  strife  and  envy,  from  everything 
that  would  dishonour  the  name  of  Christ  that  we 
bear.  Lord  make  us  holy.  Our  prayer  comes  back 
to  this.  Make  us  holy ;  cleanse  the  inside  and  let 
the  outside  be  clean  too.  Make  us  holy,  O  God : 
do  this  for  Christ's  sake.  Not  that  we  hope  to  be 
saved  by  our  own  holiness,  but  that  holiness  is  salva- 
tion.    Then  we  are  saved  from  sin. 

Lord  help  Thy  poor  children  to  be  holy.  Oh ! 
keep  us  so  if  we  are  so ;  keep  us  even  from 
stumbling,  and  present  us  faultless  before  Thy  pres- 
ence at  last.     We  pray  for  friends  that  are  ill,  for 


49 

many  that  are  troubled  because  of  the  illness  of 
others.  We  bring  before.  Thee  every  case  of 
trouble  and  trial  known  to  us,  and  ask  for  Thy 
gracious  intervention.  We  pray  for  Thy  ministers 
everpvhere ;  for  Thy  missionary  servants. 
Remember  brethren  that  are  making  great  sacrifice 
out  in  the  hot  sun  or  in  the  cold  and  frozen  north. 
Everywhere  preserve  those  who  for  Christ's  sake 
carry  their  lives  in  their  hands. 

And  our  brethren  at  home,  in  poverty  many  of 
them,  working  for  Christ,  Lord  accept  them  and 
help  us  to  help  them.  Sunday-school  teachers,  do 
Thou  remember  them  ;  and  the  tract  visitors  from 
door  to  door,  and  the  City  missionaries,  and  the 
Bible  women,  all  who  in  any  way  endeavour  to 
bring  Christ  under  the  notice  of  men.  O,  help 
them  all. 

We  will  offer  but  one  more  prayer,  and  it  is  this. 
Lord  look  in  pity  upon  any  who  are  not  in  Christ. 
May  they  be  converted.  May  they  pass  from  death 
to  life,  and  they  will  never  forget  it ;  may  they  see 
the  eternal  light  for  the  first  time,  and  they  will 
remember  it  even  in  Eternity.  Father  help  us ; 
bless  us  now  for  Jesu's  sake.     Amen. 


Prayer    IX. 

Glorious  Liberty* 

OUR  Father,  we  bless  Thy  name  that  we  can 
say  from  the  bottom  of  our  hearts,  "Abba, 
Father."  It  is  the  chief  joy  of  our  hves  that  we 
have  become  the  children  of  God  by  faith  which  is 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  we  can  in  the  deep  calm  of  our 
spirit  say,  "Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven, 
hallowed  be  Thy  name  ;  Thy  kingdom  come  ;  Thy 
will  be  done  in  earth  as  in  heaven." 

Lord,  we  thank  Thee  for  the  liberty  which  comes 
to  our  emancipated  spirit  through  the  adoption 
which  Thou  hast  made  us  to  enjoy.  When  we  were 
in  servitude  the  chains  were  heavy,  for  we  could 
not  keep  Thy  law ;  there  was  an  inward  spirit  of 
rebellion  ;  when  the  commandment  came  it  irritated 
our  corrupt  nature  and  sin  revived,  and  we  died 

Even  when  we  had  some  strivings  after  better 
things,  yet  the  power  that  was  in  us  lusted  into  evil, 
and  the  spirit  of  the  Hagarene  was  upon  us ;  we 
wanted  to  fly  from  the  Father's  house ;  we  were 
wild  men,  men  of  the  wilderness,  and  we  loved  not 
living  in  the  Father's  house. 

O  God,  we  thank  Thee  that  we  have  not  been 
cast  out.  Indeed,  if  Thou  hadst  then  cast  out  the 
child  of  the  bondwoman  Thou  hadst  cast  us  out, 
but  now  through  sovereign  grace  all  is  altered  with 
us.     Blessed  by  Thy  name.     It  is  a  work  of  divine 


52 

power  and  love  over  human  nature,  for  now  we  are 
the  children  of  the  promise,  certainly  not  born 
according  to  the  strength  of  the  human  will,  or  of 
blood,  or  of  birth,  but  born  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
through  the  power  of  the  Word,  begotten  again 
unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ  from  the  dead,  children  of  the  Great  Father 
who  is  in  heaven,  having  His  life  within  us.  Now, 
like  Isaac,  we  axe  heirs  according  to  promise  and 
heirs  of  the  promise,  and  we  dwell  at  home  in  the 
Father's  house,  and  our  soul  is  satisfied  as  with 
marrow  and  fatness,  and  our  mouth  shall  praise 
Thee  as  with  joyful  lips. 

O  God,  we  would  not  change  places  with  angels, 
much  less  with  kings  of  the  earth.  To  be  indeed 
Thy  sons  and  daughters — the  thought  of  it  doth 
bring  to  our  soul  a  present  heaven,  and  the  fruition 
of  it  shall  be  our  heaven,  to  dwell  for  ever  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  and  go  no  more  out,  but  to  be 
His  sons  and  His  heirs  for  ever  and  ever. 

Our  first  prayer  is  for  others  who  as  yet  are  in 
bondage.  We  thank  Thee,  Lord,  that  Thou  hast 
given  them  the  spirit  of  bondage  and  made  them 
to  fear.  We  are  glad  that  they  should  be  brought 
to  feel  the  evil  of  sin,  to  feel  the  perfection  of  Thy 
law,  to  know  something  of  the  fiery  nature  of  Thy 
justice,  and  so  to  be  shut  up  untoi  salvation  by  grace 
through  faith.  But,  Lord,  let  them  not  tarry  long 
under  the  pedagogue,  but  may  the  schoolmaster 
with  his  rod  bring  them  to  Christ. 

Lord,  cure  any  of  Thy  chosen  of  self-righteous- 
ness ;  deliver  them  from  any  hope  in  their  own 
abilities,  but  keep  them  low.      Bring  them  out  of 


53 

any  hope  of  salvation  by  their  own  prayers  or  their 
own  repentance.  Bring  them  to  cast  themselves 
upon  Thy  grace  to  be  saved  by  trusting  in  Christ. 
Emancipate  them  from  all  observance  of  days, 
weeks,  months,  years,  and  things  of  human  institu- 
tion, and  bring  them  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God  that  Thy  law  may  become  their 
delight,  Thyself  become  their  strength,  their  all, 
Thy  Son  become  their  joy  and  their  crown.  We  do 
pray  this  with  all  our  hearts. 

Lord,  deliver  any  of  Thy  children  from  quarrel- 
ling with  Thee.  Help  us  to  be  always  at  one  with 
our  God.  "It  is  the  Lord;  let  Him  do  what 
seemeth  Him  good,"  and  blessed  be  His  name  for 
ever  and  ever. 

God  bless  our  country,  and  the  sister  country 
across  the  flood,  and  all  lands  where  Thy  name  is 
known  and  reverenced,  and  heathen  lands  where  it 
is  unknown.  God  bless  the  outposts,  the  first 
heralds  of  mercy,  and  everywhere  may  the  Lord's 
kingdom  come  and  His  name  be  glorified.  Glory 
be  unto  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  as  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and 
ever  shall  be,  world  without  end.     Amen. 


Prayer    X. 

The  Music  of  Praise* 

OTHOU  blessed  God,  we  must  be  helped  of 
Thy  Spirit  or  we  cannot  worship  Thee 
aright.  Behold  the  holy  angels  adore  Thee,  and 
the  hosts  redeemed  by  blood  bring  everlasting 
Hallelujahs  to  Thy  feet.  What  are  we,  the 
creatures  of  a  day,  polluted  with  sin,  that  we  should 
think  that  we  can  praise  thee  ?  And  yet  the  music 
of  praise  were  not  complete  if  Thy  children  did  not 
join  in  it,  even  those  of  them  who  are  still  in  this 
world  below.  Help  us,  then ;  enable  us  to  tune  our 
harps  and  to  fetch  forth  music  from  our  spirit. 

Verily,  Lord,  if  there  are  any  creatures  in  the 
world  that  can  praise  Thee  we  ought  to  dO'  so. 
Each  one  among  us  feels  that  he  has  some  special 
reason  for  gratitude.  Lord,  it  is  an  unspeakable 
mercy  to  know  Thee — to  know  Thee  as  our  recon- 
ciled God,  to  know  Thee  as  our  Father  in  Christ 
Jesus,  who  has  forgiven  us  all  our  trespasses.  Oh ! 
it  is  unspeakably  sweet  to  come  and  rest  in  Thee, 
and  to  know  that  there  is  now  no  cause  of  quarrel 
between  us  and  Thee ;  on  the  contrary,  that  we 
are  bound  to  one  another  by  a  covenant  which  in 
infinite  tenderness  and  mercy  Thou  hast  made,  that 
Thy  people  might  have  strong  consolation,  and 
might  boldly  take  hold  on  Thee. 

Oh!  the  joy  of  knowing  that  we  are  Thine  for 


56 

ever,  thine  in  the  trials  of  Hfe,  and  thine  in  the  last 
dread  trial  of  death^  and  then  Thine  in  resurrection, 
thine  throughout  eternity.  We  do  therefore  wor- 
ship Thee,  O  God,  not  as  a  constraining-  nor  under 
terror  or  pressure,  but  cheerfully  and  gladly,  ascrib- 
ing unto  Thee  praise,  and  power,  and  dominion, 
and  glory,  and  honour,  world  without  end. 

We  wish  we  knew  how  to  do  something  for 
Thee.  We  pray  that  we  may  be  helped  to  do  so 
ere  we  die  ;  yea,  that  every  flying  hour  may  confess 
that  w^e  have  brought  Thy  Gospel  some  renown ; 
that  we  may  so  live  as  to  extend  the  Redeemer's 
kingdom  at  least  in  some  little  measure ;  that  ours 
may  not  be  a  fruitless,  wasted  life ;  that  no  faculty 
of  ours  may  lay  by  and  rust ;  but  to  the  utmost  of 
our  capacity  may  we  be  helped  of  the  Divine  Spirit 
to  spend  our  whole  life  in  real  adoration. 

We  know  that  he  prays  that  serves,  he  praises 
that  gives,  he  adores  that  obeys,  and  the  life  is  the 
best  music.  Oh!  set  it  to  good  music,  we  pray 
Thee,  and  help  us  all  through  to  keep  to  each  note, 
and  may  there  be  no  false  note  in  all  the  singing  of 
our  life,  but  all  be  according  to  that  sacred  score 
which  is  written  out  so  fully  in  the  life  music  of 
our  Lord. 

We  beseech  Thee  to  look  down  upon  Thy  chil- 
dren, and  cheer  us.  Lord,  Hft  us  up.  Come,  Holy 
Spirit,  like  a  fresh,  bracing  wind,  and  let  our  spirit, 
through  Thy  Spirit,  rise  upward  toward  God. 

We  would  with  much  shame-facedness  acknow- 
ledge our  transgressions  and  sins.  There  are  some 
that  never  felt  the  burden  of  sin  at  all.  Lord,  lay 
it  on  them  ;   press  them  with  it.     Almighty  God, 


57 

vex  their  souls  ;  let  them  find  no  rest  till  they  find 
rest  in  Thee.  May  they  never  be  content  to  live 
and  die  in  sin,  but  of  Thine  infinite  mercy  come  to 
them,  and  make  them  sorry  for  their  sin. 

As  for  Thy  people  we  are  grieved  to  think  that 
we  do  not  live  better  than  we  do.  Blessed  be  Thy 
name  for  every  fruit  of  holiness,  for  every  work  of 
faith,  but  oh!  for  more.  Thou  hast  changed  the 
tree ;  it  is  no  longer  a  bramble  ;  it  can  bring  forth 
figs,  but  now  we  want  to  bring  forth  more  of  these 
sweet  fruits. 

The  Lord  make  us  to  love  Christ  intensely,  to 
love  the  souls  of  men  most  heartily,  to  love  Thy 
truth  with  earnestness,  to  love  the  name  of  Jesus 
above  everything.  May  we  be  ravished  with  the 
sound  of  it.  The  Lord  give  us  to  have  every  grace, 
not  only  love,  but  faith,  and  hope,  and  holy  gentle- 
ness, meekness,  patience,  brotherly  love.  Build  us 
up,  we  pray  Thee,  Lord,  in  all  knowledge,  and  in 
all  experience,  and  give  us  with  this  submission  to 
Thy  will,  holy  resignation,  great  watchfulness,  much 
carefulness  in  our  speech,  that  we  may  rule  the 
tongue,  and  so  rule  the  whole  body. 

The  Lord  pour  out  His  Spirit  upon  us  that 
every  chamber  of  our  nature  may  be  sweetened  and 
perfumed  with  the  indwelling  of  God,  till  our 
imagination  shall  only  delight  in  things  chaste 
and  pure  ;  till  our  memory  shall  cast  out  the  vile 
stuff  from  the  dark  chambers ;  till  we  shall  expect 
and  long  for  heavenly  things,  and  our  treasure  shall 
all  be  in  heaven  and  our  heart  be  there.  Take  our 
highest  manhood,  Lord,  and  saturate  it  in  Thy 
love,  till  like  Gideon's  fleece  it  is  filled  with  dew, 


58 

every  lock  and  every  single  fleck  of  it,  not  a  single 
portion  of  it  left  unmoistened  by  the  dew  from 
heaven. 

How  we  do  bless  Thee  for  many  that  are  striv- 
ing to  walk  as  Christ  walked,  and  who  are  also 
trying  to  bring  others  to  Christ.  O  Lord  help  us 
in  this  struggle  after  holiness  and  usefulness ;  and 
as  Thou  hast  given  to  many  the  desire  of  their 
hearts  in  this  respect  up  to  a  certain  measure  ;  now 
enlarge  their  hearts,  and  give  them  more  both  of 
holiness  and  usefulness.  Oh !  give  us  to  be  like 
trees  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,  that  we  our- 
selves may  be  vigorous,  and  then  give  us  to  bring 
forth  abundant  fruit  according  to  our  season,  to  the 
praise  and  glory  of  God. 

Our  desire  is  that  we  may  be  quickened  in  our 
progress  toward  the  celestial  life.  Visit  us  with 
Thy  salvation.  Lord,  let  us  not  only  have  life,  but 
let  us  have  it  more  abundantly.  May  we  every  one 
of  us  quicken  His  pace,  and  may  we  run  more 
earnestly  than  ever  toward  the  mark  that  is  set 
before  us. 

Remember  all  Thy  Church  throughout  the  whole 
world.  Prosper  missionary  operations.  Be  with 
any  ministers  or  missionaries  that  are  depressed  for 
lack  of  success.  Be  with  any  that  are  rejoicing 
because  of  success.  May  each  heart  be  kept  in  a 
right  state,  so  that  Thou  mayest  uzq  Thy  servants 
to  the  utmost  of  possibility. 

O  God,  send  us  better  days  than  these,  we  pray 
Thee.  We  thank  Thee  for  all  the  light  there  is, 
but  send  us  more  light.  We  thank  Thee  for  what 
life  there  is  among  Christians,  but  send  more  of  it. 


59 

Bind  the  churches  together  in  unity,  and  then  give 
them  such  speed,  such  force,  such  power  that  they 
shall  break  intO'  the  ranks  of  the  adversary,  and  the 
victory  shall  be  unto  Christ  and  to  His  people. 

Remember  our  dear  country.  Bless  the 
Sovereign.  Remember  all  those  that  lead  our  legis- 
lature. Be  gracious  unto  all  ranks  and  conditions 
of  men.  Have  mercy  upon  all  that  are  poor  and 
needy,  all  that  are  sick  and  sorrowing,  and  that  are 
tossed  upon  the  sea.  Remember  the  prisoners  and 
such  as  have  no  helper.  Be  gracious  to  such  as  are 
in  the  article  of  death ;  and,  finally,  let  the  day 
come  when  the  Sun  shall  shine  forth  in  all  His 
brightness,  even  Christ  Jesus  shall  be  manifested, 
to  be  admired  in  them  that  believe,  and  to  make 
glad  the  whole  creation.  Make  no  tarrying,  O 
Thou  Sun  of  Righteousness,  but  come  forth  speedily. 
We  ask  it  for  Thy  name's  sake.     Amen. 


Prayer    XI. 

Under  the  Bloods 

JEHOVAH  our  God,  we  thank  Thee  for  leaving 
on  record  the  story  of  Thine  ancient  people. 
It  is  full  of  instruction  to  ourselves.  Help 
us  to  take  its  warning  to  avoid  the  faults  into  which 
they  fell!  Thou  art  a  covenant  God,  and  Thou 
keepest  Thy  promises  and  Thy  Word  never  faileth. 
We  have  proved  this  so  hitherto :  — 

"  Thus  far  we  find  that  promise  good, 
Which  Jesus  ratified  with  blood." 

But  as  for  ourselves  we  are  like  Israel  of  old,  a 
fickle  people,  and,  we  confess  it  wath  great  shame, 
there  are  days  when  we  take  the  timbrel  and  we 
sing  with  Miriam  "unto  the  Lord  who  triumphed 
gloriously,"  and  yet,  we  grieve  to  say  it,  not  many 
hours  after,  we  are  thirsty,  and  we  cry  for  water, 
and  we  murmur  in  our  tents ;  the  brackish  Marah 
turns  our  heart  and  we  are  grieved  with  our  God. 
Sometimes  we  bow  before  Thee  with  reverence  and 
awe  when  we  behold  Thy  Sinai  altogether  on  a 
smoke ;  but  there  have  been  times  when  we  have 
set  up  the  golden  calf  and  we  have  said  of  some 
earthly  things,  "These  be  Thy  gods,  O  Israel." 
We  believe  with  intensity  of  faith  and  then  doubt 
with  a  horribleness  of  doubt. 

Lord,  Thou  hast  been  very  patient  with  us.  Many 


62 

have  been  our  provocations,  many  have  been  Thy 
chastisements,  but :  — 

"  Thy  strokes  are  fewer  than  our  crimes. 
And  lighter  than  our  guilt." 

"Thou  hast  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins,  nor 
rewarded  us  according  tO'  our  iniquities."  Blessed 
be  Thy  name ! 

And  now  fulfil  that  part  of  the  covenant  wherein 
Thou  hast  said,  "  A  new  heart  also  will  I  give  thee 
and  a  right  spirit  will  I  put  within  thee.  I  will 
put  My  fear  in  their  hearts  and  they  shall  not 
depart  from  Me."  Hold  us  fast  and  then  we  shall 
hold  fast  to  Thee.  Turn  us  and  we  shall  be 
turned ;  keep  us  and  we  shall  keep  Thy  statutes. 

We  cry  to  Thee  that  we  may  no  more  provoke 
Thee.  We  beg  Thee  rather  to  send  the  serpents 
among  us  than  to  let  sin  come  among  us.  Oh! 
that  we  might  have  our  eye  always  on  the  brazen 
serpent  that  healeth  all  the  bites  of  evil,  but  may 
we  not  look  to  sin  nor  love  it.  Let  not  the  devices 
of  Balaam  and  of  Balak  prevail  against  us,  to  lead 
Thy  people  away  from  their  purity.  Let  us  not  be 
defiled  with  false  doctrine  or  with  unholy  living, 
but  may  we  walk  as  the  separated  people  of  God 
and  keep  ourselves  unspotted  from  the  world.  Lord, 
we  would  not  grieve  Thy  Spirit.  Oh!  may  we 
never  vex  Thee  so  as  to  lead  Thee  in  Thy  wrath 
to  say,  "  They  shall  not  enter  into  my  rest."  Bear 
with  us  still  for  His  dear  sake  whose  blood  is  upon 
us.  Bear  with  us  still  and  send  not  the  destroying 
angel  as  Thou  didst  to  Egypt,  but  again  fulfil  that 
promise  of  Thine,  "When  I  see  the  blood  I  will 
pass  over  you." 


63 

Just  now  may  we  be  consciously  passed  over  by 
the  Spirit  of  condemnation ;  may  we  know  in  our 
hearts  that  "there  is  therefore  now  no  condemna- 
tion to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  May  we 
feel  the  peace  giving  power  of  the  Divine  absolu- 
tion. May  we  come  into  Thy  holy  presence  with 
our  feet  washed  in  the  brazen  laver,  hearing  our 
great  High  Priest  say  to  us,  "Ye  are  clean  every 
whit."  Thus  made  clean  may  we  draw  near  to  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Further,  our  heavenly  Father,  we  come  before 
Thee  now  washed  in  the  blood,  wearing  the  snow 
white  robe  of  Christ's  righteousness,  and  we  ask 
Thee  to  remember  Thy  people.  Some  are  sore 
burdened ;  lighten  the  burden  or  strengthen  the 
shoulder.  Some  are  bowed  down  with  fear ;  per- 
adventure  they  mistrust ;  forgive  the  mistrust  and 
give  a  great  increase  of  faith  that  they  may  trust 
Thee  where  they  cannot  trace  Thee.  The  Lord 
remember  any  who  bear  the  burden  of  others. 
Some  cry  to  Thee  day  and  night  about  the  sins  of 
the  times,  about  the  wanderings  of  Thy  Church. 
Lord  hear  our  prayers !  We  would  bear  this  yoke 
for  Thee,  but  help  us  to  bear  it  without  fearing  so 
as  to  distrust  Thee.  May  we  know  that  Thou  wilt 
take  care  of  Thine  own  case  and  preserve  Thine 
own  truth,  and  may  we  therefore  be  restful  about 
it  all. 

Some  are  crying  to  Thee  for  the  conversion  of 
relatives  and  friends ;  this  burden  they  have  taken 
up  to  follow  after  Jesus  in  the  cross  bearing.  Grant 
them  to  see  the  desire  of  their  heart  fulfilled.  God 
save  our  children  and  children's  children,  and  if  we 


64 

have  unconverted  relatives  of  any  kind,  the  Lord 
have  mercy  upon  them  for  Christ's  sake.  Give  us 
joy  in  them — as  much  joy  in  them  as  Christians  as 
we  have  had  sorrow  about  them  as  unbehevers. 

Further,  be  pleased  to  visit  Thy  Church  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Renew  the  day  of  Pentecost  in  our 
midst,  and  in  the  midst  of  all  gatherings  of  Thy 
people  may  there  come  the  downfall  of  the  holy 
fire,  the  uprising  of  the  heavenly  wind.  May 
matters  that  are  now  slow  and  dead  become  quick 
and  full  of  life,  and  may  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be 
exalted  in  the  midst  of  His  Church  which  is  His 
fulness,  "the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all." 
May  multitudes  be  converted ;  may  they  come 
flocking  to  Christ  with  holy  eagerness  to  find  in 
Him  a  refuge  as  the  doves  fly  tO'  their  dovecotes. 

Oh !  for  salvation  work  throughout  these  islands 
and  across  the  sea  and  in  every  part  of  the  world, 
specially  in  heathen  lands.  Bring  many  to  Christ's 
feet,  we  pray  Thee,  everywhere  where  men  are 
ready  to  lay  down  their  lives  that  they  may  impart 
the  heavenly  life  of  Christ.  Work,  Lord,  work 
mightily!  Thy  Church  cries  to  Thee.  Oh,  leave 
us  not !  We  can  do  nothing  without  Thee !  Our 
strength  is  wholly  Thine !  Come  to  us  with  great 
power,  and  let  Thy  Word  have  free  course  and  be 
glorified. 

Remember  every  one  that  calls  Thee  Father. 
May  a  Father's  love  look  on  all  the  children.  May 
the  special  need  of  each  one  be  supplied,  the  special 
sorrow  of  each  one  be  assuaged.  May  we  be  grow- 
ing Christians,  may  we  be  working  Christians,  may 
we  be  perfected  Christians,  may  we  come  to  the 


65 

fulness  of  the  stature  of  men  in  Christ  Jesus.  Lord 
Jesus  Thou  art  a  great  pillar ;  in  Thee  doth  all 
fulness  dwell.  Thou  didst  begin  Thy  life  with  fill- 
ing the  waterpots  to  the  full ;  Thou  didst  fill  Simon 
Peter's  boat  until  it  began  to  sink ;  Thou  didst  fill 
the  house  where  Thy  people  were  met  together 
with  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  Thou  dost 
fill  heaven  ;  Thou  wilt  surely  fill  all  things  ;  fill  us, 
oh !  fill  us  to-day  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,  and 
make  Thy  people  thus  joyful  and  strong,  and 
gracious  and  heavenly ! 

But  we  cannot  leave  off  our  prayer  when  we  have 
prayed  for  Thy  people,  though  we  have  asked  large 
things ;  we  want  Thee  to  look  among  the  thou- 
sands and  millions  round  about  us  who  know  Thee 
not.  Lord,  look  on  the  masses  who  go  nowhere  to 
worship.  Have  pity  upon  them ;  Father  forgive 
them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do.  Give  a 
desire  to  hear  Thy  Word.  Send  upon  the  people 
some  desire  after  their  God.  O  Lord  take 
sinners  in  hand  Thyself.  Oh!  come  and  reach 
obstinate,  obdurate  minds  ;  let  the  careless  and  the 
frivolous  begin  to  think  upon  eternal  things.  May 
there  be  an  uneasiness  of  heart,  a  sticking  of  the 
arrows  of  God  in  their  loins,  and  may  they  seek  too 
the  great  Physician  and  find  healing  this  very  day. 
Ah!  Lord,  Thou  sayest  "To-day,  if  ye  will  hear 
His  voice,"  and  we  take  up  the  echo.  Save  men 
to-day,  even  to-day.  Bring  them  Thy  Spirit  in 
power  that  they  may  be  willing  to  rest  in  Christ. 
Lord  hear,  forgive,  accept  and  bless,  for  Jesu's 
sake.     Amea 


Prayer   XII. 

On  Holy  Grounds 

'*  /^'\  UR  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed 
V^^  be  Thy  name.  Thy  kingdom  come,  Thy 
will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."  We  fear 
that  we  often  begin  our  prayer  with  petitions  for 
ourselves,  and  put  our  daily  bread  before  Thy 
kingdom,  and  the  pardoning  of  our  sins  before  the 
hallowing  of  Thy  name.  We  would  not  do  so  to- 
day, but  guided  by  our  Lord's  model  of  prayer, 
we  would  first  pray  for  Thy  glory ;  and  here,  great 
God,  we  would  adore  Thee.  Thou  hast  made  us 
and  not  we  ourselves.  We  are  Thy  people,  and  the 
sheep  of  Thy  pasture.  All  glory  be  unto  Thee, 
Jehovah,  the  only  living  and  true  God. 

With  heart  and  mind,  and  memory  and  fear,  and 
hope  and  joy,  we  worship  the  Most  High.  It  well 
becomes  us  to  put  our  shoes  from  off  our  feet  when 
we  draw  near  to  God,  for  the  place  whereon  we 
stand  is  holy  ground.  If  God  in  the  bush 
demanded  the  unsandalled  foot  of  the  prophet,  how 
much  more  shall  God  in  Christ  Jesus  ? 

With  lowliest  reverence,  with  truest  love,  we 
worship  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  uniting  therein  with 
all  the  redeemed  host  above,  with  angels  and  princi- 
palities and  powers.  We  cannot  cast  crowns  at 
His  feet,  for  we  have  none  as  yet,  but  if 
there    be    any    virtue,   if    there    be   any    praise. 


68 

if  there  be  about  us  anything  of  grace 
and  good  repute,  we  ascribe  it  all  to  God.  We 
cannot  veil  our  faces  with  our  wings,  for  we  have 
none,  but  we  veil  them  with  something  better  than 
angelic  wings,  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Jesus 
Christ.  With  these  we  cover  our  faces,  with  these 
we  cover  our  feet,  and  with  these  we  fly  up  tO'  God 
in  holiest  fellowship  of  God  Glory,  and  honour, 
and  power,  and  dominion  be  unto  Him  that  sitteth 
upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and 
for  ever. 

Great  God,  we  long  that  Thou  mayest  be  known 
unto  the  ends  of  the  earth,  that  the  idols  may  be 
utterly  abolished.  We  long  that  false  doctrine  may 
fly  like  birds  of  darkness  before  the  light  and  Thy 
coming.  Reign  Thou  in  the  hearts  of  our  fellow- 
men.  Lord,  subdue  sin,  and  under  Thy  feet  let 
drunkenness,  and  unchastity,  and  oppression,  and 
every  form  of  wickedness  be  put  away  by  the 
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  and  His  Holy  Spirit. 

Oh  !  that  to-day,  even  to-day,  many  hearts  might 
be  won  to  God.  Convince  men  of  the  wrong  of 
being  alienated  from  God,  put  into  their  hearts 
sorrow  for  sin  and  dread  of  wrath  to  come,  and  lead 
and  drive  men  to  Christ.  Oh !  how  we  pray  for 
this,  the  salvation  of  our  fellow-men,  not  so  much 
for  their  sakes  as  for  the  sake  of  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  rewarding  of  Christ  for  His  pain. 

We  do  with  all  our  hearts  pray  "Thy  kingdom 
come,  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven." 
Lord,  help  us  to  do  Thy  will.  Take  the  crippled 
kingdom  of  our  manhood  and  reign  Thou  over  it. 
Let  spirit  and  body  be  consecrated  to  God.     May 


69 

there  be  no  reserves ;  may  everything  be  given  up 
to  Thee.  Reign  for  ever !  Pierced  King,  despised 
and  nailed  to  a  tree,  sit  Thou  on  the  glorious  high 
throne  in  our  hearts,  and  may  our  lives  prove  that 
Thou  art  Lord  over  us  ;  by  our  every  thought  and 
desire,  and  imagination,  and  word,  and  act,  in 
every  respect  being  under  Thy  divine  control. 

Thy  people  breathe  to  Thee  out  of  their  very 
hearts  the  prayer  that  Thou  mayest  reign  over  us 
without  a  rival.  O  Saviour,  use  for  Thyself 
what  Thou  hast  bought  with  blood,  and  drive  out 
the  enemy,  and  let  no  power  have  any  dominion 
over  us  except  the  power  of  Thy  good  Spirit  which 
w^orketh  righteousness  and  peace. 

We  pray  to-day  also  that  Thy  truth  m^ay  prevail 
against  the  many  anti-Christs  that  have  gone  forth 
against  it.  Our  Father,  restore  a  pure  language  to 
Thy  Zion  once  again.  Take  away,  we  pray  Thee, 
the  itching  for  new  doctrine,  the  longing  for  that 
which  is  thought  to  be  scientific  and  wise  above 
what  is  written,  and  may  Thy  Church  come  to  her 
moorings,  may  she  cast  anchor  in  the  truth  of  God 
and  there  abide ;  and  if  it  be  Thy  will  may  we  live 
to  see  brighter  and  better  times. 

If  it  might  be  so  we  would  pray  for  the  coming  of 
our  Lord  very  speedily  to  end  these  sluggish  years, 
these  long  delaying  days.  But,  if  He  come  not, 
yet  put  power  into  Thy  truth  and  quicken  Thy 
Church  that  she  may  become  energetic  for  the 
spread  of  it,  that  so  Thy  kingdom  may  come. 
This  do  we  seek  first  and  above  everything,  the 
glory  of  God.  We  ask  for  grace  that  we  may  live 
with  this  end  in  view.     May  we  lay  ourselves  out 


70 

to  it.  May  this  be  our  morning  thought,  the 
thought  that  we  have  in  our  minds  when  we  lay 
awake  at  nights.  What  shall  I  do,  my  Saviour,  to 
praise  ?  How  can  I  make  Him  illustrious  and  win 
another  heart  to  His  throne  ?  Now  bless  us ;  for- 
give us  our  trespasses  wherein  we  have  sinned 
against  Thee.  Seal  our  pardon  upon  our  con- 
sciences, and  make  us  feel  that  as  we  truly  forgive 
them  that  trespass  against  us,  so  hast  Thou  forgiven 
us  all  our  iniquities.  We  pray  Thee  lead  us  not 
into  temptation.  Do  not  try  us.  Lord,  nor  suffer 
the  devil  to  try  us.  If  we  must  be  tried  then  deliver 
us  from  evil,  and  especially  from  the  evil  one,  that 
he  may  get  no  dominion  over  us. 

Oh !  keep  us.  Lord.  This  life  is  full  of  trial 
There  are  many  that  are  perplexed  about 
temporary  things.  Let  not  the  enemy  lead  them 
to  do  or  think  aught  that  is  amiss,  because  of  the 
straitness  of  supply.  Others  are  blessed  with 
prosperity.  Lord,  let  it  not  be  a  curse  to  them. 
Let  them  know  how  to  abound  as  well  as  tO'  suffer 
loss.  In  all  things  may  they  be  instructed  to 
glorify  God,  not  only  with  all  they  are,  but  with  all 
they  have,  and  even  with  all  they  have  not,  by  a 
holy  contentment  to  do  without  that  which  it  doth 
not  please  Thee  to  bestow. 

And  then.  Lord,  give  us  day  by  day  our  daily 
bread  ;  provide  for  Thy  poor  people ;  let  them  not 
think  that  the  provision  for  themselves  rests  fully 
on  themselves  ;  but  may  they  cry  to  Thee,  for  Thou 
hast  said,  "Thy  bread  shall  be  given  thee.  Thy 
waters  shall  be  sure."  If  we  follow  Thee,  if  Thou 
lead  us  into  a  desert,  Thou  wilt  strew  our  path  with 


71 

manna.  May  Thy  people  believe  this,  and  let  them 
have  no  care,  but  like  the  birds  of  the  air  which 
neither  sow  nor  gather  into  barns,  and  yet  are  fed, 
so  may  Thy  people  be. 

-  But,  above  all,  give  us  spiritual  help.  Give  us 
wisdom,  which  is  profitable  to  get.  Give  us  the 
absence  of  all  self-seeking,  and  a  complete  yielding 
•up  of  our  desires  to  the  will  of  God.  Help  us  to 
be  as  Christ  was,  who  was  not  His  own,  but  gave 
Himself  to  His  Father  for  our  sins  ;  sO'  may  we  for 
His  sake  give  ourselves  up  to  do  or  suffer  the  will  of 
our  Father  v/ho  is  in  heaven. 

Remember  Thy  people  in  their  families  and  con- 
vert their  children ;  give  us  help  and  strength ; 
spare  precious  lives  that  are  in  danger  ;  be  gracious 
to  any  that  are  dying  ;  may  the  life  of  God  swallow 
up  the  death  of  the  body.  Prepare  us  all  for  Thy 
glorious  advent ;  keep  us  waiting  and  watching, 
and  do  Thou  come  quickly  to  our  heaxt's  desire, 
for  we  pray  "Thy  kingdom  come,  Thy  will  be 
done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven,  for  Thine  is  the 
kingdom,  and  the  power  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and 
ever."    Amea 


Prayer    XI H. 

The  Wings  of  Prayer^ 

OUR  Father,  Thy  children  who  know  Thee 
delight  themselves  in  Thy  presence.  We  are 
never  happier  than  when  we  are  near  Thee.  We 
have  found  a  little  heaven  in  prayer.  It  has  eased 
our  load  to  tell  Thee  of  its  weight ;  it  has  relieved 
our  wound  to  tell  Thee  of  its  smart ;  it  has 
restored  our  spirit  to  confess  to  Thee  its  wander- 
ings.    No  place  like  the  mercy  seat  for  us. 

W^e  thank  Thee,  Lord,  that  we  have  not  only 
found  benefit  in  prayer,  but  in  the  answers  to  it 
we  have  been  greatly  enriched.  Thou  hast 
opened  Thy  hid  treasures  to  the  voice  of  prayer ; 
Thou  hast  supplied  our  necessities  as  soon  as  ever 
we  have  cried  unto  Thee  ;  yea,  w^e  have  found  it 
true:  "Before  they  call  I  will  answer,  and  while 
they  are  yet  speaking  I  will  hear." 

We  do  bless  Thee,  Lord,  for  instituting  the 
blessed  ordinance  of  prayer.  What  could  we  do 
without  it,  and  we  take  great  shame  to  ourselves 
that  we  should  use  it  so  little.  We  pray  that  we 
may  be  men  of  prayer,  taken  up  with  it,  that  it  may 
take  us  up  and  bear  us  as  on  its  wings  towards 
heaven. 

And  now  at  this  hour  wilt  Thou  hear  the  voice 
of  our  suppHcation.  First,  we  ask  at  Thy  hands, 
great    Father,    complete    forgiveness    for    all    our 


74 

trespasses  and  shortcomings.  We  hope  we  can 
say  with  truthfulness  that  we  do  from  our  heart 
forgive  all  those  who  have  in  any  way  trespassed 
against  us.  There  lies  not  in  our  heart,  we  hope, 
a  thought  of  enmity  towards  any  man.  Hovv^ever 
we  have  been  slandered  or  wronged,  we  would, 
with  our  inmost  heart,  forgive  and  forget  it  all. 

We  come  to  Thee  and  pray  that,  for  Jesu's  sake, 
and  through  the  virtue  of  the  blood  once  shed  for 
many  for  the  remission  of  sins.  Thou  wouldest  give 
us  perfect  pardon  of  every  transgression  of  the 
past.  Blot  out,  O  God,  all  our  sins  like  a  cloud, 
and  let  them  never  be  seen  again.  Grant  us  also 
the  peace-speaking  word  of  promise  applied  by 
the  Holy  Spirit,  that  being  justified  by  faith  we 
may  have  peace  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  Let  us  be  forgiven  and  know  it,  and 
may  there  remain  no  lingering  question  in  our 
heart  about  our  reconciliation  with  God,  but  by  a 
firm,  full  assurance  based  upon  faith  in  the  finished 
work  of  Christ,  mi.ay  we  stand  as  forgiven  men  and 
women  against  whom  transgression  shall  be  men- 
tioned never  again  for  ever. 

And  then.  Lord,  we  have  another  mercy  to  ask 
which  shall  be  the  burden  of  our  prayer.  It  is  that 
Thou  wouldest  help  us  to  live  such  lives  as 
pardoned  men  should  live.  We  have  but  a  little 
time  to  tarry  here,  for  our  life  is  but  a  vapour ; 
soon  it  vanishes  away ;  but  we  are  most  anxious 
that  we  may  spend  the  time  of  our  sojourning  here 
in  holy  fear,  that  grace  may  be  upon  us  from  the 
commencement  of  our  Christian  life  even  to  the 
earthly  close  of  it. 


75 

Lord,  Thou  knowest  there  are  some  that  have 
not  yet  begun  to  hve  for  Thee,  and  the  prayer  is 
now  offered  that  they  may  to-day  be  born  again. 
Others  have  been  long  in  Thy  ways,  and  are  not 
weary  of  them.  We  sometimes  wonder  that  Thou 
art  not  weary  of  us,  but  assuredly  we  delight  our- 
selves in  the  ways  of  holiness  more  than  ever  we 
did.  Oh !  that  our  ways  were  directed  to  keep 
Thy  statutes  without  slip  or  flaw.  We  wish  we 
were  perfectly  obedient  in  thought,  and  word,  and 
deed,  entirely  sanctified.  We  shall  never  be  satis- 
fied till  we  wake  up  in  Christ's  likeness,  the  like- 
ness of  perfection  itself.  Oh!  work  us  to  this 
self  same  thing,  we  beseech  Thee.  May  experi- 
ence teach  us  more  and  more  how  to  avoid  occa- 
sions of  sin.  May  we  grow  more  watchful ;  may 
we  have  a  greater  supremacy  over  our  own  spirit ; 
may  we  be  able  to  control  ourselves  under  all 
circumstances,  and  so  act  that  if  the  Master  were 
to  come  at  any  moment  we  should  not  be  ashamed 
to  give  our  account  into  His  hands. 

Lord,  we  are  not  what  we  want  to  be.  This  is 
our  sorrow.  Oh!  that  Thou  wouldest,  by  Thy 
Spirit,  help  us  in  the  walks  of  life  to  adorn  the 
doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things.  As  men 
of  business,  as  work-people,  as  parents,  as  children, 
as  servants,  as  masters,  whatever  we  may  be,  may 
we  be  such  that  Christ  may  look  upon  us  with 
pleasure.  May  His  joy  be  in  us,  for  then  only  can 
our  joy  be  full. 

Dear  Saviour,  we  are  Thy  disciples,  and  Thou 
art  teaching  us  the  art  of  living ;  but  we  are  very 
dull  and  very  slow,  and  beside,   there  is  such  a 


76 

bias  in  our  corrupt  nature,  and  there  are  such 
examples  in  the  world,  and  the  influence  of  an 
ungodly  generation  tells  even  upon  those  that 
know  Thee.  O,  dear  Saviour,  be  not  impatient 
with  us,  but  still  school  us  at  Thy  feet,  till  at  last 
we  shall  have  learned  some  of  the  sublime  lessons 
of  self-sacrifice,  of  meekness,  humility,  fervour, 
boldness,  and  love  which  Thy  life  is  fit  to  teach  us. 
O  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee  mould  us  into  Thine 
own  image.  Let  us  live  in  Thee  and  live  like  Thee. 
Let  us  gaze  upon  Thy  glory  till  we  are  trans- 
formed by  the  sight,  and  become  Christ-like 
among  the  sons  of  men. 

Lord,  hear  the  confessions  of  any  that  have 
back-slidden,  who  are  rather  marring  Thine  image 
than  perfecting  it.  Hear  the  prayers  of  any  that 
are  conscious  of  great  defects  during  the  past. 
Give  them  peace  of  mind  by  pardon,  but  give  them 
strength  of  mind  also  to  keep  clear  of  such  mis- 
chief in  the  future.  O  Lord,  we  are  sighing  and 
crying  more  and  more  after  Thyself.  The  more 
we  have  of  Thee  the  more  we  want  Thee ;  the 
more  we  grow  like  Thee ;  the  more  we  perceive 
our  defects,  and  the  more  we  pine  after  a  higher 
standard,  to  reach  even  unto  perfection's  self. 

Oh !  help  us.  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  continue 
still  to  travail  in  us.  Let  the  groanings  that  can- 
not be  uttered  be  still  within  our  Spirit,  for  these 
are  growing  pains,  and  we  shall  grow  while  we  can 
sigh  and  cry,  while  we  can  confess  and  mourn ; 
yet  this  is  not  without  a  blessed  hopefulness  that 
He  that  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  us  will  perfect 
it  in  the  day  of  Christ. 


77 

Bless,  we  pray  Thee,  at  this  time,  the  entire 
Church  of  God  in  every  part  of  the  earth.  Prosper 
the  work  and  service  of  Christian  people,  however 
they  endeavour  to  spread  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
Convert  the  heathen ;  enlighten  those  that  are  in 
any  form  of  error.  Bring  the  entire  Church  back 
to  the  original  form  of  Christianity.  Make  her 
first  pure,  and  then  she  shall  be  united.  O, 
Saviour,  let  Thy  kingdom  come.  Oh!  that  Thou 
wouldest  reign,  and  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth,  as 
it  is  in  heaven. 

We  pray  Thee  use  every  one  of  us  according  as 
we  have  ability  to  be  used.  Take  us,  and  let  no 
talent  lie  to  canker  in  the  treasure  house,  but  may 
every  pound  of  Thine  be  put  out  in  trading  for 
Thee  in  the  blessed  market  of  soul-winning.  Oh ! 
give  us  success.  Increase  the  gifts  and  graces 
of  those  that  are  saved.  Bind  us  in  closer  unity 
to  one  another  than  ever.  Let  peace  reign ;  let 
holiness  adorn  us. 

Hear  us  as  we  pray  for  all  countries,  and  then 
for  all  sorts  of  men,  from  the  Sovereign  on  the 
throne  to  the  peasant  in  the  cottage.  Let  the 
benediction  of  heaven  descend  on  men,  through 
Jesus   Christ  our  Lord.     Amen. 


yet  tL 
He  that  i. 
it  in  the  da> 


Prayer    XIV. 

**  Bless   the   Lord,  O   my 
Soul ! '' 

LORD,  we  are  longing  to  draw  near ;  may 
Thy  Spirit  draw  us  near.  We  come  by  the 
way  of  Christ  our  Mediator.  We  could  not 
approach  Thee,  O  our  God,  if  it  were  not  for 
Him,  but  in  Him  we  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of 
heavenly  grace.  Nor  can  we  come  without  thanks- 
giving— thanksgiving  from  the  heart,  such  as  the 
tongue  can  never  express.  Thou  hast  chosen  us 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  this 
well-head  of  mercy  sends  forth  streams  of  loving- 
kindness  never  ceasing.  Because  we  were  chosen 
we  have  been  redeemed  with  precious  blood. 
Bless  the  Lord !  And  we  have  been  called  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  out  of  the  world,  and  we  have  been 
led  to  obey  that  wondrous  call  which  hath 
quickened  us  and  renewed  us,  and  made  us  the 
people  of  God,  given  us  adoption  into  the  Divine 
Family.     Bless  the  Lord! 

Our  hearts  would  pause  as  we  remember  the 
greatness  of  each  one  of  Thy  favours,  and  we 
would  say,  "Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul,  and  all 
that  is  within  me,  bless  His  holy  name."  When 
we  consider  our  utter  unworthiness  before  con- 
version, and  our  great  faultiness  since,  we  can  but 


8o 

admire  the  riches  of  abounding  grace  which  God 
has  manifested  to  us  unworthy  ones.  Bless  the 
Lord !  And  when  we  think  of  all  that  Thou  hast 
promised  to  give,  which  our  faith  embraces  as  being 
really  ours,  since  the  covenant  makes  it  sure,  we 
know  not  how  abundantly  enough  to  utter  the 
memory  of  Thy  great  goodness.  We  would  make 
our  praises  equal  to  our  expectations,  and  our 
expectations  equaJ  to  Thy  promises.  We  can  never 
rise  so  high.  We  give  to  Thee,  however,  the 
praise  of  our  entire  being ;  unto  Jehovah,  the  God 
of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of 
Jacob,  the  Creator  of  the  world,  the  redeemed  of 
men,  unto  Jehovah  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever,  and 
let  all  His  people  praise  Him.  Let  the  redeemed 
of  the  Lord  say  so,  whom  He  hath  redeemed  from 
the  hand  of  the  enemy. 

O  Lord,  Thy  works  praise  Thee,  but  Thy 
saints  bless  Thee ;  and  this  shall  be  our  heaven  ; 
yea,  our  heaven  of  heavens  eternally,  to  praise  and 
magnify  the  great  and  ever  blessed  God.  May 
many  a  maiden  this  day,  may  many  a  man  break 
forth  and  say,  with  the  virgin  of  old,  "My  soul 
doth  magnify  the  Lord  and  my  spirit  doth  rejoice 
in  God  my  Saviour."  May  there  be  going  up 
this  day  sweet  incense  of  praise  laid  by  holy 
hands,  privately  upon  the  altar  of  God.  May  the 
place  be  filled  with  the  smoke  thereof,  not  perhaps 
to  the  consciousness  of  every  one,  but  to  the 
acceptance  of  God  who  shall  smell  a  sweet  savour 
of  rest  in  Christ,  and  then  in  the  praises  of  His 
people  in  Him. 

But,  Lord,  when  we  have  praised  Thee  we  have 


8i 

to  foia  the  wmg ;  yea,  we  have  to  cover  the  face 
and  cover  the  feet  and  stand  before  Thee  to  wor- 
ship in  another  fashion,  for  we  confess  that  we  are 
evil,  evil  in  our  original,  and  though  renewed  by 
sovereign  grace  Thy  people  cannot  speak  of  being 
clean,  rid  of  sin.  There  is  sin  which  dwelleth  in 
us  which  is  our  daily  plague.  O  God,  we  humble 
ourselves  before  Thee.  We  ask  that  our  faith 
may  clearly  perceive  the  blood  of  the  atonement 
and  the  covering  of  the  perfect  righteousness  of 
Christ ;  and  may  we  come  afresh,  depending  alone 
on  Jesus.  "I,  the  chief  of  sinners  am,  but  Jesus 
died  for  me."  May  this  be  our  one  hope,  that 
Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  and  that  for  His  sake 
we  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved. 

May  every  child  of  Thine  have  his  conscience 
purged  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  true  and 
living  God  May  there  be  n  >  cloud  between  us 
and  our  Heavenly  Father ;  nay,  not  even  a  mist, 
not  even  the  morning  mist  that  soon  is  gone.  May 
we  walk  in  the  light  as  God  is  in  the  light.  May 
our  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son, 
Jesus  Christ,  be  unquestionable ;  may  it  be  fuel ; 
may  it  fill  us  with  joy ;  may  it  be  a  most  real  fact 
this  day ;  may  we  enjoy  it  to  the  full,  knowing 
whom  we  have  believed,  knowing  who  is  our 
Father,  knowing  who  it  is  that  dwells  in  us,  even 
the  Holy  Spirit. 

Take  away  from  us  every  thing  which  now  might 
hinder  our  delighting  ourselves  in  God.     May  we 
come    to    God    this    day    with    a    supreme    joy ; 
may  we  speak  of  Him  as  "God  my  exceeding  joy ; 
yea,   mine  own   God  is  He."     O   God   give   us   a 


82 

sense  of  property  in  Thyself.  May  we  come  near 
to  Thee,  having  no  doubt  and  nothing  whatsoever 
that  shall  spoil  the  beautiful  simplicity  of  a  child- 
like faith  which  looks  up  into  the  great  face  of 
God  and  saith,  "Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven." 

There  are  those  who  never  repented  of  sin  and 
never  believed  in  Christ,  and  consequently  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  them.  They  are  living 
without  God,  they  are  living  in  darkness.  O 
God  in  Thy  great  mercy  look  upon  them.  They 
do  not  look  at  Thee,  but  do  Thou  look  at  them. 
May  the  sinner  see  his  sin  and  mourn  it ;  see  His 
Saviour  and  accept  Him  ;  see  himself  saved,  and  go 
on  his  way  rejoicing.     Father,  do  grant  us  this. 

Once  more  we  pray  Thee  bless  Thy  Church. 
Lord  quicken  the  spiritual  life  of  believers.  Thou 
hast  given  to  Thy  Church  great  activity,  for  which 
we  thank  Thee.  May  that  activity  be  supported 
by  a  corresponding  inner  life.  Let  us  not  get  to 
be  busy  here  and  there  with  Martha,  and  forget  to 
sit  at  Thy  feet  with  Mary.  Lord,  restore  to  Thy 
Church  the  love  of  strong  doctrine.  May  Thy 
truth  yet  prevail.  Purge  out  from  among  Thy 
Church  these  who  would  lead  others  away  from 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  give  back  the  old 
power  and  something  more.  Give  us  Pentecost ; 
yea,  many  Pentecosts  in  one,  and  may  we  live  to 
see  Thy  Church  shine  forth  clear  as  the  sun  and 
fair  as  the  moon,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with 
banners. 

God  grant  that  we  may  live  to  see  better  days. 
But  if  perilous  times  should  come  in  these  last 
days  make  us  faithful.     Raise  up  in  England,  raise 


83 

up  in  Scotland,  men  that  shall  hold  the  truth  firmly 
as  their  fathers  did.  Raise  up  in  every  country 
where  there  has  been  a  faithful  church  men  that 
will  not  let  the  vessel  drift  upon  the  rocks.  O 
God  of  the  Judges,  Thou  who  didst  raise  up  first 
one  and  then  another  when  the  people  went  astray 
from  God ;  raise  up  for  us  still  (our  Joshuas  are 
dead)  our  Deborahs,  our  Baraks,  our  Gideons  and 
Jephthahs,  and  Samuels,  that  shall  maintain  for 
God  His  truth,  and  worst  the  enemies  of  Israel. 
Lord  look  upon  Thy  Church  in  these  days.  Lord 
revive  us.  Lord  restore  us.  Lord  give  power  to 
Thy  Word  again  that  Thy  name  may  be  glorified. 
Remember  the  Church  of  God  in  this  land  in  all 
its  various  phases  and  portions,  and  pour  out  Thy 
Spirit  upon  it.  Remember  the  multitude  of  Thy 
people  across  the  sea  in  America,  prosper  them, 
bless  them  with  the  increase  of  God.  And  wher- 
ever Thou  hast  a  people  may  Jesus  dwell  with 
them  and  reveal  Himself  to  His  own,  for  Christ's 
sake,  to  whom  be  glory  with  the  Father  and  with 
the  Holy  Ghost,  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


Prayer   XV. 

The  Peace  of  God* 

OUR  God,  we  stand  not  afar  off  as  Israel  did 
in  Sinai,  nor  does  a  veil  hang  dark 
between  Thy  face  and  ours  ;  but  the  veil  is  rent  by 
the  death  of  our  Divine  Lord  and  Mediator,  Jesus 
Christ,  and  in  His  name  we  come  up  to  the  mercy 
seat  all  blood  besprinkled,  and  here  we  present 
our  prayers  and  our  praises  accepted  in  Him.  We 
do  confess  that  we  are  guilty ;  we  bow  our  heads 
and  confess  that  we  have  broken  Thy  law  and  the 
covenant  of  which  it  is  a  part.  Didst  Thou  deal 
with  us  under  the  covenant  of  works  none  of  us 
could  stand.  We  must  confess  that  we  deserve 
Thy  wrath  and  to  be  banished  for  ever  from 
Thy  presence.  But  Thou  hast  made  a  new 
covenant,  and  we  come  under  its  divine  shadow ; 
we  come  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  He  is  our  High 
Priest ;  He  is  our  righteousness ;  He  is  the  well- 
beloved  in  whom  Thou  art  well  pleased. 

Holy  Spirit  teach  us  how  to  pray.  Let  us  know 
what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought.  Our  first 
prayer  is  :  Be  Thou  adored  ;  reign  Thou  over  the 
whole  earth  ;  hallowed  be  Thy  name.  We  desire 
to  see  all  men  submit  themselves  to  Thy  gracious 
government.  We  wish  especially  that  in  the 
hearts  of  Thine  own  there  may  be  an  intense  love 
for  Thee  and  a  perfect  obedience  to  Thee.    Grant 


86 

this  to  each  one  of  us.  We  would  each  one  pray, 
"  Lord,  sanctify  me ;  make  me  obedient ;  write 
Thy  law  upon  my  heart  and  upon  my  mind."  Make 
our  nature  so  clean  that  temptation  cannot  defile  it. 

"Lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us 
from  the  Evil  One."  May  our  course  be  very 
clean,  our  path  be  very  straight ;  may  we  keep  our 
garments  unspotted  from  the  world ;  and  in 
thought  and  desire  and  imagination,  in  will  and  in 
purpose,  may  we  be  holy  as  God  is  holy. 

O  God,  we  pray  again  fulfil  that  covenant 
promise,  "I  will  take  away  the  heart  of  stone  out 
of  your  flesh,  and  I  will  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh." 
May  we  be  very  tender  towards  Thee ;  may  we 
feel  Thy  faintest  monition ;  may  even  the  gentlest 
breath  of  Thy  Spirit  suffice  to  move  us ;  may  we 
not  be  "as  the  horse  or  as  the  mule  which  have  no 
understanding  ;  whose  mouth  must  be  held  in  with 
bit  and  bridle,  lest  they  come  near  unto  us,"  but 
may  we  be  as  children  obedient  to  a  father;  may 
we  yield  our  members  cheerfully  to  the  instru- 
ments of  righteousness ;  may  we  have  a  natural 
desire  wrought  in  the  new  nature  towards  every- 
thing that  is  pure  and  honest,  unselfish  and 
Christly. 

O,  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  us.  Is  not  this  also  a 
covenant  promise,  "I  will  put  My  Spirit  within 
thee,  and  I  will  make  thee  to  walk  in  My  ways." 
Dwell  with  us  Holy  Spirit ;  rule  over  us  Holy 
Spirit ;  transform  us  to  Thy  own  likeness,  O  Holy 
Spirit !  Then  shall  we  be  clean ;  then  shall  we 
keep  the  law.  We  would  ofl^er  a  prayer  to  Thee 
for  those  who  are  quite  strange  to  the  work  of 


87 

the  Spirit  of  God,  who  have  never  owned  their 
God,  who  have  hved  as  if  there  were  no  God. 
Open  their  eyes  that  they  may  see  God  even 
though  that  sight  should  make  them  tremble  and 
wish  to  die.  O !  let  none  of  us  live  without  our 
God  and  Father.  Take  away  the  heart  of  stone, 
take  away  the  frivolities,  the  levity,  the  giddiness 
of  our  youth,  and  give  us  in  downright  earnest  to 
seek  true  happiness  where  alone  it  can  be  found, 
in  reconciliation  to  God,  and  in  conformity  to  His 
will. 

Lord  save  the  careless,  save  the  sinful,  the 
drunkard,  take  away  from  him  his  cups.  The  un- 
holy and  unjust  men,  deliver  these  from  their 
filthiness ;  the  dishonest  and  false,  renew  them  in 
their  lives ;  and  any  that  are  lovers  of  pleasure, 
dead  while  they  live,  and  any  that  are  lovers  of 
self,  whose  life  is  bounded  by  the  narrowness  of 
their  own  being,  the  Lord  renew  them,  regenerate 
them,  make  them  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus. 
For  this  we  do  fervently  pray. 

Lord  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  may  faith  grow  in 
men ;  may  they  believe  in  Christ  to  the  saving  of 
their  souls.  May  their  little  faith  brighten  into 
strong  faith,  and  may  their  strong  faith  ripen  into  the 
full  assurance  of  faith.  May  we  all  have  this  last 
blessing ;  may  we  believe  God  fully ;  may  we 
never  waver.  Resting  in  the  Great  Surety  and 
High  Priest  of  the  New  Covenant  may  we  feel 
"the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understand- 
ing," and  may  we  enter  into  rest. 

Bless  Thy  people  that  are  at  rest,  and  deepen 
that  rest.      May  the   rest    that    Thou  givest    be 


88 

further  enhanced  by  the  rest  which  they  find  when 
they  take  Thy  yoke  upon  them  and  learn  of  Thee. 
May  Thy  Word  be  very  sweet  to  them.  May 
there  come  over  our  spirits  a  deep  calm,  as  when 
Christ  hushed  both  winds  and  waves.  May  we 
feel  not  only  resignation  to  Thy  will,  but  delight 
in  it,  feeling  pleased  with  all  the  Lord  provides. 
May  we  rest  in  our  God  and  be  quite  happy  in 
the  thought  that  our  sins  and  our  iniquities  He  will 
remember  no  more.  He  has  brought  us  into 
covenant  with  Him  by  a  covenant  which  can  never 
fail,  so  like  David  v/e  may  say  this  morning : 
"Although  my  house  be  not  so  with  God,  yet  He 
hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered 
in  all  things  and  sure." 

Lord,  bless  Thy  Word  throughout  the  world. 
Prosper  all  missions  amongst  the  heathen,  all  work 
among  the  Mohammedans ;  and,  oh !  send  Thy 
grace  to  the  churches  at  home.  Turn  the  current  of 
thought  which  sets  so  strong  in  the  wrong  direc- 
tion, and  bring  men  to  love  the  simplicities  of  the 
Gospel.  Remember  our  country  in  great  mercy, 
and  in  all  ranks  and  conditions  of  micn  do  Thou 
give  the  blessing.  May  there  be  multitudes  come 
to  Christ  from  among  the  poorest  of  the  poor,  and 
let  the  wealthy  be  led  away  from  their  sin,  and 
brought  to  Jesus'  feet.  Be  gracious  to  the 
Sovereign  and  Royal  Family,  and  to  all  that  are  in 
authority  over  us.  May  peace  and  order  be  main- 
tained, and  let  not  the  peace  of  the  world  be 
broken. 

But  what  of  all  this?  Our  heart  goes  far 
beyond  all  this :  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it 


89 

is  in  heaven  ;  for  Thine  is  the  kingdom,  cind  the 
power  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and  ever."  "Come, 
Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly."  All  things  are  in  Thy 
hand,  come  quickly ;  the  cries  of  Thy  people  per- 
suade Thee,  "the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  come," 
make  no  tarrying,  O,  our  Redeemer,  and  unto  the 
Father,  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
God  of  Abraham,  and  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


Prayer    XVI. 

He  Ever  Liveth* 

OUR  God,  we  come  to  Thee  by  Jesus  Christ 
who  has  gone  within  the  veil  on  our  behalf 
and  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  Our 
poor  prayers  could  never  reach  Thee  were  it  not 
for  Him,  but  His  hands  are  full  of  sweet  perfume 
which  makes  our  pleading  sweet  with  Thee.  His 
blood  is  sprinkled  on  the  mercy  seat,  and  now  we 
know  that  Thou  dost  always  hear  those  who 
approach  Thee  through  that   ever  blessed  name. 

We  have  deeply  felt  our  entire  unv/orthiness 
even  to  lift  up  our  eyes  to  the  place  where  Thine 
honour  dwelleth.  Thou  hast  made  us  to  die  to  our 
self-righteousness.  We  pray  now  because  we  have 
been  quickened  ;  we  have  received  a  new  life,  and 
the  breath  of  that  life  is  prayer.  We  have  risen 
from  the  dead,  and  we  also  make  intercession 
through  the  hfe  which  Christ  has  given  us.  We 
plead  with  the  living  God  \\ith  living  hearts  be- 
cause He  has  made  us  to  live. 

Our  first  prayer  shall  be  for  those  who  do  not 
pray.  There  is  an  ancient  promise  of  Thine,  "I 
am  found  of  them  that  sought  Me  not ;  I  said, 
Behold  Me,  behold  Me,  to  a  people  that  were  not 
a  people."  Prove  the  sovereignty  of  Thy  grace, 
the  priority  of  Thy  power,  which  runs  before  the 
will  of  man,  by  making  many  willing  in  this  the 
day  of  Thy  power,  and  calling  the  things  that  are 


92 

not  as  though  they  were.  May  the  day  come  in 
which  they  that  are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  the 
voice  of  God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live. 

How  very  often  Thou  shewest  Thy  mighty 
power.  O  Lord,  we  bless  Thee  that  the  voice  of 
God  has  called  many  to  Christ.  Those  that  are. 
hardened  have  felt  a  softness  stealing  over  their 
spirits ;  those  who  were  careless  have  been  com- 
pelled to  sit  down  and  think ;  those  that  were 
wrapped  up  in  earthly  things  have  been  compelled 
to  think  of  eternal  things  ;  and  thinking,  have  been 
disturbed,  and  driven  to  despair,  but  afterwards  led 
to  Thee,  even  to  Thee,  dear  Saviour,  who  wast  lifted 
high  upon  the  cross  that  by  Thy  death  sinners 
might  live. 

But,  Lord,  we  next  would  pray  that  Thine  own 
people  should  know  somewhat  of  the  quickening 
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Lord,  we  thank  Thee  for 
the  very  least  life  to  God,  for  the  feeblest  ray  of 
faith  and  glimmering  of  hope.  We  are  glad  tO'  see 
anything  of  Christ  in  any  man ;  but  Thou  hast 
come,  O  Saviour,  not  only  that  we  might  have 
life,  but  that  we  might  have  it  more  abundantly,  so 
our  prayer  is  that  there  may  be  abundance  of 
life. 

O  make  Thy  people  strong  in  the  Lord,  in  the 
power  of  His  might.  Lord,  we  find  when  we  walk 
close  with  God  that  we  have  no  desire  for  the 
world.  When  we  get  away  altogether  from  the 
things  that  are  seen  and  temporal,  and  live  upon 
the  invisible  and  eternal,  then  we  shall  have  angels' 
food  ;  nay,  better  than  that,  the  food  of  Christ 
Himself,  for  his  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  His  blood 
is  drink  indeed.     Then  have  we  meat  to  eat  that 


93 

the  world  knoweth  not  of.  We  pray  Thee  raise 
all  our  brothers  and  sisters  in  Christ  into  the  high 
and  heavenly  frame  of  mind  in  which  they  shall 
be  iit  the  world  and  not  be  of  it.  Whether  they 
have  little  or  much  of  temporal  things,  may  they 
be  rich  in  Thee  and  full  of  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  so  be  blessed  men  and  women. 

We  pray  for  some  of  Thine  own  people  who 
seem  to  be  doing  very  little  for  Thee,  Lord, 
have  mercy  upon  those  whose  strength  runs 
towards  the  world,  and  who  give  but  little  of  their 
strength  to  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  and  the 
winning  of  souls.  O  let  none  of  us  fritter  away 
our  existence ;  may  we  begin  to  live  since  Christ 
hath  died ;  may  we  reckon  that  because  He  died, 
w^e  died  to  all  the  world,  and  because  He  lives,  we 
live  in  newness  of  life.  Lord  we  thank  Thee  for 
that  newness  of  hfe. 

We  praise  Thy  name  for  a  new  heaven  and  a 
new  earth  ;  we  bless  Thee  that  we  now  see  what 
we  never  saw  before,  and  hear  what  we  never  heard 
before.  Oh !  that  we  might  enter  into  the  very 
secret  place  of  this  inner  life.  ^lay  we  have  as 
much  grace  as  can  be  obtained  ;  may  we  become 
perfect  after  the  manner  of  Thy  servant  Paul,  but 
still  press  forward,  seeking  still  to  be  more  and 
more  conformed  to  the  image  of  Christ. 

Lord,  make  us  useful.  Oh !  let  no  believer  live 
to  himself.  ^lay  we  be  trying  to  bring  others  to 
Christ.  May  our  servants,  and  work-people,  and 
neighbours  all  know  where  we  live ;  and  if  they 
do  not  understand  the  secret  of  that  life,  yet  may 
they  see  the  fruit  of  that  life,  and  may  they  ask, 
"What  is  this?"  and  enquire  their  way  to  Christ 


94 

that  they  may  be  sanctified  too.  O  Lord,  we  pray 
Thee  visit  Thy  Church.  May  none  of  us  imagine 
that  we  are  living  aright  unless  we  are  bringing 
others  to  the  cross.  Oh!  keep  us  from  worldli- 
ness ;  keep  us  much  in  prayer ;  keep  us  with  the 
light  of  God  shining  on  our  forehead.  May  we  be 
a  happy  people,  not  because  screened  from  afflic- 
tion, but  because  we  are  walking  in  the  light  of 
God. 

Again  we  offer  prayer  for  the  many  efforts  that 
are  scattered  abroad  to-day.  May  they  be  good 
wherever  they  are.  We  pray  for  all  churches  ;  Lord, 
revive  them  all.  Wherever  Christ  is  preached, 
may  it  be  proved  that  He  draws  all  men  unto  Him. 
May  the  preaching  of  Christ  to-day  be  peculiarly 
efficacious.  Oh !  that  Thou  wouldst  raise  up  many 
that  would  preach  Christ,  simply,  boldly,  and  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  Send 
us  better  days ;  send  us  days  of  refreshing  from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord. 

Lord,  shake  the  earth  with  the  power  of  God. 
Oh !  that  the  heathen  lands  may  hear  the  Word  of 
God  and  live.  But  first  convert  the  Church,  and 
then  Thou  wilt  convert  the  world.  Oh !  deal  with 
those  that  depart  from  the  faith  and  grieve  Thy 
Holy  Spirit.  Bring  them  back  again  to  their  first 
love,  and  may  Christ  be  fully  and  faithfully 
preached  everywhere  to  the  glory  of  His  name. 
Now  forgive  us  every  iniquity  ;  now  lift  us  beyond 
the  power  of  every  sin ;  now  lift  us  to  pray  and 
praise ;  now  make  the  home  full  of  sacred  power, 
and,  last  of  all,  come,  Lord  Jesus.  This  is  the 
great  wish  of  our  souls.  Even  so,  come  quickly, 
come  quickly,  Lord  Jesus.     Amen  and  Amen. 


Prayer    XVII. 

To  be  like  Christ* 

BLESSED  art  Thou,  O  God ;  teach  us  Thy 
statutes!  Because  Thou  art  the  infinitely 
blessed  One,  Thou  canst  impart  blessing,  and  Thou 
art  infinitely  willing  to  do  so,  and  therefore  do  we 
approach  Thee  with  great  confidence,  through 
Jesus  Christ  Thy  Son,  whom  Thou  hast  made 
blessed  for  evermore. 

Oh!  hear  Thou  the  voice  of  Thy  servants  this 
day,  and  according  to  Thine  infinite  love  and 
wisdom  answer  Thou  us ;  according  to  Thy  riches 
in  glory,  by  Christ  Jesus. 

First  we  would  confess  before  Thee,  O  God, 
the  sin  we  have  committed,  mourning  over  it. 
Touch  each  one's  heart  now  with  tenderness 
that  everyone  of  us  may  lament  that  Thou 
shouldst  even  have  a  few  things  against  us,  if  they 
be  but  few,  for  in  the  great  love  of  our  blessed 
Master  He  said  to  His  churches,  "Nevertheless,  I 
have  a  few  things  against  Thee."  O  Lord,  if  Thou 
hast  so  kept  us  by  Thy  grace  that  there  have  been 
but  a  few  things  against  us,  yet  help  us  to  bewail 
them  much.  O,  Infinite  Love,  can  we  sin  against 
Thee  at  all?  How  debased  is  our  nature  then! 
Forgive,  sweet  Saviour,  forgive  sins  against  Thy 
love  and  blood,  against  Thy  wounds  and  death, 
and  give  us  Thy  Spirit,  O  Saviour,  more  fully,  that 


96 

we  may  live  Thy  life  while  we  are  here  among  the 
sons  of  men,  for  as  Thou  art,  even  so  also  are  we 
in  this  world,  and  we  wish  the  parallel  to  become 
more  close  and  perfect  every  day! 

Forgive  those  who  have  never  felt  the  guilt  of 
sin,  who  are  living  in  it,  who  are  carnally  minded, 
who  are  therefore  dead.  O,  quicken  by  Thy  divine 
Spirit ;  take  away  the  pleasure  which  they  feel  in 
sin ;  deliver  them  from  being  the  bond  slaves  of  it. 
Alas !  we  know  the  sorrow  of  sometimes  being 
captured  by  it,  but  still  we  are  not  yet  slaves.  The 
Spirit,  the  life  of  God,  in  Jesus  Christ,  hath  made 
us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  O,  deliver 
others ;  bring  them  up  out  of  the  horrible  pit  of 
sin.  Deliver  them  from  the  death  of  their  natures 
and  save  them  by  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  and 
apply  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  to  their  hearts 
and  consciences. 

And,  Lord,  hear  us  who  are  Thy  children,  in 
whom  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit, 
that  we  are  the  children  of  God.  Hear  us  while 
we  bring  before  Thee  our  daily  struggles.  Blessed 
be  Thy  name ;  there  are  some  sins  which  Thou 
hast  helped  us  to  overcome,  and  now  they  are. 
trodden  beneath  our  feet  with  many  a  tear  that  we 
ever  should  have  been  in  bondage  to*  them.  And 
O  !  there  are  rebellions  within  our  nature  still.  We 
think  that  we  are  getting  holy,  and  behold  we  dis- 
cover that  we  are  under  the  power  of  pride,  that 
we  are  self-conceited  about  ourselves.  Lord  help 
us  to  master  pride. 

And  then  when  we  try  to  be  humble  before 
Thee  we  find  ourselves  falling  into  inaction  and 


97 

supineness.  Lord,  slay  sloth  within  us,  and  never 
let  us  find  a  pillow  in  the  doctrines  of  grace  for 
ease  while  yet  a  single  sin  remains.  Besides,  great 
God,  the  raging  lusts  of  the  flesh  will  sometimes 
pounce  upon  us  like  wild  beasts.  Help  us  to-  be 
very  watchful  lest  by  any  means  we  be  torn  and 
rent  by  them.  O  keep  us,  we  beseech  Thee, 
Lord,  for  without  Thy  keeping  we  cannot  keep 
ourselves. 

Alas!  we  are  even  sometimes  subject  to  un- 
belief. If  trials  come  which  we  expected  not,  or 
if  the  body  grows  faint,  how  liable  we  are  to  begin 
to  doubt  the  faithful  promise,  and  so  to  grieve  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Lord,  we  cannot  bear  this ;  we.  can- 
not bear  this ;  it  is  not  enough  for  us  that  our 
garments  are  clean,  and  that  we  walk  uprightly 
before  men ;  we  long  to  walk  before  Thee  in  such 
a  way  that  there  will  be  nothing  to  grieve  Thy 
Spirit,  nothing  to  vex  the  tender  love  of  our 
Beloved.  O,  come,  Divine  Spirit,  and  exercise 
Thy  cleansing  power  upon  it  according  to  Thy 
promise,  "I  will  cleanse  Thy  blood  which  I  have 
not  cleansed,  saith  the  Lord,  that  dwelleth  in 
Zion." 

O  that  everything  might  help  us  towards  purity, 
for  we  crave  after  it ;  we  mind  the  things  of  the 
Spirit,  and  there  is  groaning  within  us  to  be  utterly 
delivered  from  the  things  of  the  flesh,  that  we  may 
in  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  be  a  cleansed  temple  fit 
for  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  Lord 
help  us,  we  pray  Thee,  in  our  daily  life,  to  be  as 
Christ  was.  If  we  are  men  of  sorrows,  may  there 
be  that  lustre  about  our  sorrow  which  there  was 

8 


98 

about  His  in  patience  and  holy  submission  tc^  the 
Divine  law.  If  we  are  men  of  activity  may  our 
activity  be  like  His,  for  he  "went  about  doing 
good."  May  we  seek  in  all  ways  the  good  of  our 
fellow-men  and  the  glory  of  our  God. 

We  wish  that  the  zeal  of  Thine  house  would  eat 
us  up ;  that  we  should  be  full  of  sacred  warmth ; 
that  our  lips  were  touched  with  the  live  coal  so 
that  there  be  fire  in  us  perpetually  flaming  and 
burning,  and  ourselves  a  living  sacrifice  unto  God. 

Bless  us,  we  pray  Thee,  as  to  our  example  and 
influence.  May  it  always  be  of  a  salutary  kind ; 
may  there  be  sweetness  and  light  about  us  which 
all  must  be  obliged  tO'  perceive.  Not  for  our 
honour  would  we  crave  this,  but  that  our  light  may 
so  shine  before  men  that  they  may  "see  our  good 
works  and  glorify  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 
The  Lord  grant  us  this ! 

We  beseech  Thee,  bless  the  unconverted  among 
us ;  bring  them  in,  dear  Saviour,  bring  them  in. 
Help  the  living  among  us  to  compel  them  to  come 
in  that  Thy  house  may  be  filled ;  may  something 
of  a  sacred  compulsion  be  used  that  they  may  not 
be  left  outside  to  starve  in  the  highways  and 
hedges,  but  be  brought  in  to  the  Gospel  feast. 

The  Lord  bless  our  country  at  this  time.  Wilt 
Thou  be  gracious  unto  those  who  have  the  helm  of 
affairs  that  in  the  midst  of  great  difficulty  they  may 
be  wisely  and  graciously  directed.  God  bless  the 
Sovereign  with  every  mercy,  and  let  all  that  are 
in  authority  share  the  Divine  favour.  Bless  other 
countries,  too,  for  whom  we  do  most  earnestly 
pray,  especially  for  our  brethren  in  Christ  across 


99 

the  Atlantic,  blessing  and  praising  Thee  that  we 
have  so  many  there  that  are  not  only  of  our  own 
kin  by  nationality,  but  also  kin  in  Christ.  God 
bless  them  and  those  in  the  Southern  seas.  The 
Lord  bless  the  Church  of  Christ  there,  nor  do  Thou 
fail  to  remember  the  struggling  ones  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  and  all  the  missionaries  that 
are  labouring  in  the  foreign  field. 

O,  Saviour,  let  Thy  kingdom  come.  When  will 
this  earth  be  delivered  from  the  incubus  of  super- 
stition and  of  infidelity?  O  that  Thou  wouldst 
hear  creation's  groans  and  come  quickly.  O  Thou 
great  Deliverer,  joy  of  the  earth  art  Thou,  the 
expected  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  still ;  come,  we 
beseech  Thee,  Thou  absent  love,  Thou  dear  un- 
known. Thou  fairest  of  ten  thousand  fair ;  come 
a  second  time  to  earth  and  to  the  sons  of  men, 
and  specially  to  Thy  Bride,  the  Church.  Even  so 
come  quickly,  Lord  Jesus.     Amen. 


Prayer    XVIII. 

Of  for  more  Grace  I 

OUR  Father,   Thou  dost  hear  us  when  we 
pray.     Thou   hast    provided   an  advocate 
and  intercessor  in  heaven  now ;    we  cannot  come 
to  Thee   unless   Thy   Holy  Spirit   shall    suggest 
desire,   and  help  us  while  we  plead.     We  would 
ask  that  the  subject  which  caused  such  conflict  to 
Paul  may  be  beyond  conflict  with   us ;    may  we 
know  the  Christ  and  have  Him  to  be  our  all  in  all. 
We  would  have  the  conflict  about  others,  but  may 
we  be  past  it  for  ourselves.     He  is  everything  to 
us ;  more  than  all  in  Him  we  find.     We  do  accept 
Thee,   Lord  Jesus,  to  be  made  unto  us  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption.     We 
will  not  look  out  of  Thee  for  anything,  for  every- 
thing is  in  Thee.     Our  sin  is  pardoned,  our  sinful 
nature  is  subdued ;    we  have  a  perfect  righteous- 
ness ;   we  have  an  immortal  life ;   we  have  a  sure 
hope ;    we  have  an   immovable  foundation.     Why 
should  we  look  beyond  Thee?     Why  should  we 
look  within  to  ourselves,  knowing  that  Thou  shalt 
be  the  only  well  from  which  we  will  draw  the  living 
w^ater,  the  only  foundation  upon  which  we  will  be 
builded.     We  would  thrust  out  new  rootlets  this 
day,  cind  take  fresh  hold  on  the  blessed   soil  in 
which  grace  has  planted  us. 

O  Saviour,  reveal  Thyself  anew,  teach  us  a  Httle 


I02 


more,  help  us  to  go  a  little  deeper  into  the  divine 
mystery.  May  we.  grip  Thee  and  grasp  Thee ; 
may  we  suck  out  of  Thee  the  nutriment  of  our 
spirit ;  may  we  be  in  Thee  as  a  branch  is  in  the 
stem,  and  may  we  bear  fruit  from  Thee.  Without 
Thee  we  can  do-  nothing. 

Forgive,  we  pray  Thee,  Thy  servants,  any 
wandermgs  during  the  past.  If  we  have  forgotten 
Thee,  forget  not  us ;  if  we  have  acted  apart  from 
Thee,  forgive  the  act.  Blot  out  the  sin.  Help  us 
in  the  future  to  live  only  as  we  live  in  Thee,  to 
speak,  and  even  to  think,,  as  in  union  with  our 
living  Head.  Take  away  from  us  all  life  which  is 
contrary  to  the  life  of  Christ ;  bring  us  intO'  com- 
plete subjection  in  Him,  until  for  us  to  live  shall 
be  Christ  in  every  single  act  of  life.  May  we  walk 
humbly  with  God  in  joyful  faith  in  the  finished 
work  of  Christ. 

Saviour,  look  on  Thy  beloved  ones,  and  give 
blessings  according  to  our  necessities.  We  cannot 
pray  a  prayer  that  would  comprise  all,  but  Thou 
canst,  Great  Intercessor,  plead  for  each  one,  and 
get  for  each  one  of  us  the  blessing  wanted.  Are 
we  depressed  ?  Give  us  stronger  faith.  Have  we 
become  worldly?  Pardon  this  great  offence  and 
lead  us  more  into  spiritual  things.  Have  we  be- 
come joyous,  but  have  forgotten  the  Source  of 
Joy  ?  Lord,  sweeten  and  savour  that  joy  vv^ith  the 
sweet  perfume  of  Thine  own  presence.  Have  we 
to  preach,  and  do  we  feel  weak?  Oh!  be  our 
strength.  Are  we  engaged  in  the  Sunday-school, 
and  have  we  seen  Httle  success?  Lord,  teach  us 
how  to  teach ;    give  us  our  boys  and  girls  to  be 


103 

our  spiritual  reward.  Are  we  sickly?  Have  we 
those  that  vex  us  because  they  are  unholy  and  un- 
godly ?  This,  indeed,  is  a  terrible  trial  to  many ; 
Lord,  help  them,  both  in  their  personal  sickness 
and  in  this  great  spiritual  trouble.  Have  we  dear 
ones  whom  we  love  with  all  our  hearts,  who  pine 
before  our  eyes  ?  Lord,  have  pity  upon  them  and 
restore  them,  and  give  them  patience  to  bear 
pain ;  and  give  us  resignation  to  Thy  will  in  this 
matter.  Whatever  the  trial  of  Thy  servants,  make 
a  way  of  escape  that  we  may  be  able  to  bear  it. 
Our  great  concern,  however,  is  to  grow  in  grace 
and  to  become  like  our  Master.  We  struggle  and 
we  struggle,  but  how  small  our  progress!  Lord, 
help  us  in  any  matter  in  which  we  have  felt 
defeated.  If  we  have  been  betrayed  through  want 
of  watchfulness.  Lord  forgive  and  help  another 
time.  If  any  of  Thy  servants  have  lost  the  bright- 
ness of  their  evidence,  give  them  to  come  to  Christ 
as  sinners  if  they  cannot  come  as  saints.  And  if 
through  Satan's  temptation  any  are  sorely  put  to 
it  even  to  keep  their  feet,  hold  them  up  ;  and  if 
any  have  fallen,  help  them  to  say,  "Rejoice  not 
against  me,  O,  mine  enemy ;  when  I  fall  I  shall 
arise." 

Now  look  in  great  mercy  upon  those  who  are 
unconverted ;  Lord  save  them.  Some  are  quite 
careless ;  Lord,  they  are  dead ;  come  and  quicken 
them.  We  cannot  see,  but  Thou  canst.  Oh !  that 
some  of  the  most  obdurate  and  hardened  might 
be  softened  by  the  touch  of  Thy  Spirit  this  very 
day ;  and  may  others  who  are  not  careless,  but 
who  are  even  seeking  after  eternal  life,  but  w^ho 


I04 

are  going-  the  wrong  way  tO'  work,  may  they  be 
shown  their  error,  may  they  be  led  in  the  way  by 
Thee,  may  they  look,  and,  looking,  live.  We  know 
how  many  of  them  are  wanting  to  be  this  and  that 
before  they  take  Christ  to  be  all  in  all ;  may  they 
cease  their  seeking  by  finding  everything  in 
Christ.  As  Thou  art  a  prayer-hearing  God,  and 
a  God  of  pardon,  issue  many  a  pardon  from  Thy 
heavenly  court  to-day,  sealed  with  the  Redeemer's 
blood,  signed  with  the  Father's  name.  Oh!  to- 
day, Lord,  ere  men  grow  old  in  sin,  ere  they  die  in 
their  sins,  save  them  with  an  everlasting  salvation. 

God  bless  our  country  and  our  Sovereign  ;  God 
bless  this  city ;  may  there  be  no  disquietude 
between  the  different  orders  of  men — the 
employer  and  the  employed ;  but  may  there  be 
a  general  spirit  of  goodwill  given  to-  the  people  of 
this  city,  and  do  Thou  prosper  us. 

Remember  all  people,  especially  the  poor,  the 
widows  and  the  fatherless,  and  any  that  are 
depressed  in  spirit,  whose  depression  tends  to  the 
failure  of  reason  ;  the  Lord  restore  them,  and  such 
as  are  dying.  O  Lord,  let  them  not  die  without 
hope,  and  may  Thy  believing  people  learn  to  pass 
away  without  even  tasting  the  bitterness  of  death. 
May  they  enter  into  rest,  each  one  walking  in  his 
own  uprightness. 

Save  this  age  from  its  own  intellectual  pride ; 
give  back  the  spirit  of  simple  faith  in  Christ,  for 
we  desire  His  glory.  "  For  Thine  is  the  kingdom, 
and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen." 


Prayer    XIX. 

God^s  Unspeakable  Gift^ 

OLORD,  many  of  us  feel  like  the  lame  man 
at  the  Beautiful  Gate  of  the  temple.  Come 
by  this  way  and  make  the  lame  ones  perfectly 
sound.  O  Lord,  Thou  canst  do  by  Thy  servants 
to-day  what  Thou  didst  by  them  in  the  olden  time. 
Work  miracles  of  mercy  even  upon  outer  court  wor- 
shippers who  are  too  lame  to  get  into  the  holy 
place. 

But  there  are  many  who  feel  like  that  man  when 
he  was  restored.  We  would  follow  our  Restorer, 
the  Prince  of  Life,  into  the  temple,  leaping  and 
walking  and  praising  God.  He  has  gone  into  the 
temple  in  the  highest  sense,  up  to  the  throne  of 
God.  He  climbs,  and  we  would  follow,  up  the 
steps  of  the  temple  one  by  one,  made  meet.  We 
would  come  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  throne  of 
God. 

O  Lord,  Thou  hast  done  such  great  things  for 
us  that  we  feel  the  drawings  of  Thy  love.  "The 
Lord  hath  appeared  of  old  unto  me,  saying :  Yea, 
I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,  there- 
fore with  lovingkindness  have  I  drawn  thee." 

Draw  us  nearer,  Lord,  draw  us  into  the  inner 
Sanctuary ;  draw  us  within  the  place  which  once 
was  hidden  by  the  veil  which  Christ  has  rent ; 
bring  us  right  up  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  there 


io6 

beholding  the  glory  of  God  above  the  Mercy  Seat 
may  we  have  communion  with  the  Most  High. 
Heal  all  our  diseases  and  forgive  us  all  our 
trespasses. 

Still,  Lord,  though  healed  of  a  former  lameness 
so  that  now  we  have  strength,  we  need  a  further 
touch  from  Thee ;  we  are  so  apt  to  get  dull  and 
stupid  ;  come  and  help  us.  Lord  Jesus.  A  vision  of 
Thy  face  will  brighten  us ;  but  to  feel  Thy  Spirit 
touching  us  will  make  us  vigorous.  Oh!  for  the 
leaping  and  the  walking  of  the  man  born  lame. 
May  we  to-day  dance  with  holy  joy  like  David 
before  the  Ark  of  God.  May  a  holy  exhilaration 
take  possession  of  every  part  of  us ;  may  we  be 
glad  in  the  Lord ;  may  our  mouth  be  filled  with 
laughter,  and  our  tongue  with  singing,  "for  the 
Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us  whereof  we 
are  glad." 

To-day  help  Thy  people  to  put  on  Christ.  May 
we  live  as  those  who  are  alive  from  the  dead,  for 
He  is  the  quickening  Spirit ;  and  may  we  feel  Him 
to  be  so.  Is  any  part  of  us  still  dead.  Lord 
quicken  it.  May  the  life  which  has  taken  posses- 
sion of  our  heart  take  possession  of  our  head ; 
may  the  brain  be  active  in  holy  thought ;  may  our 
entire  being,  indeed,  respond  to  the  life  of  Christ, 
and  may  we  live  in  newness  of  life. 

We  would  fain  fall  down  on  our  faces  and  wor- 
ship the  Son  of  God  to-day.  It  is  such  a  wonder 
that  He  should  have  loved  us ;  and  He  has  done 
such  wonderful  things  for  us  and  in  us  that  we  may 
still  call  Him  God's  unspeakable  gift.  He  is  un- 
speakably precious  to  our  souls.     Thou  knowest 


I07 

all  things,  Lord ;  Thou  knowest  that  we  love  Thee. 
May  that  love  bubble  up  to-day  like  a  boiling 
cauldron,  may  our  hearts  overflow;  and  if  we 
cannot  speak  what  we  feel,  may  that  holy  silence 
be  eloquent  with  the  praise  of  God. 

Lord,  send  Thy  hfe  throughout  the  entire 
Church.  Lord,  visit  Thy  Church,  restore  sound 
doctrine,  restore  holy  and  earnest  living.  Take 
away  from  professors  their  apparent  love  for  frivoli- 
ties, their  attempts  to  meet  the  world  on  its  own 
ground,  and  give  back  the  old  love  to  the  doctrines 
of  the  cross^  the  doctrines  of  the  Christ  of  God ; 
and  once  more  may  free  grace  and  dying  love  be 
the  music  that  shall  refresh  the  Church,  and  make 
her  heart  exceeding  glad. 

Just  now  when  the  earth  is  waking  up  to  life, 
Lord,  wake  up  dead  hearts ;  and  if  there  are  seeds 
of  grace  lying  dormant  in  any  soul  may  they  begin 
to  bud,  may  the  bulb  down  at  the  heart  send  forth 
its  golden  cup  and  drink  in  of  the  light,  the  life  of 
God.  Oh!  save  to-day.  "Thy  King  in  the  midst 
of  Thee  is  mighty  :  He  will  save."  Our  very  heart 
is  speaking  now  much  more  loudly  and  sweetly 
than  our  lips  can  speak.  Lord  save  sinners ;  great 
High  Priest  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant  and 
such  as  are  out  of  the  way.  Great  Shepherd  of  the 
sheep  gather  the  lambs  within  Thine  arm  ;  find  out 
the  lost  sheep ;  throw  them  on  Thy  shoulders  and 
bring  them  home  rejoicing. 

We  ask  that  everywhere  there  may  be  great 
numbers  added  to  the  Church.  Thou  who  didst 
bring  in  five  thousand  so  soon,  bring  in  five  thou- 
sand in  many  and  many  a  place.     We  read  the 


io8 

statistics  of  Thy  Church  with  great  sorrow;  how 
small  an  increase !  Lord  multiply  us  with  men  as 
with  a  flock ;  increase  the  people,  and  increase  the 
joy.  Make  us  to  joy  before  Thee  as  the  joy  of 
harvest. 

Lord,  we  pray  for  our  country  with  all  our  heart ; 
and  as  Thou  biddest  us  we  pray  for  those  in 
authority,  for  the  Sovereign  as  supreme,  for  the 
Court  of  Parliament,  for  all  magistrates  and  rulers. 
We  pray  also  for  the  poorest  and  the  down-trodden. 
The  Lord  look  upon  the  poor  of  this  world,  and 
make  them  rich  in  faith,  and  comfort  them  in  heart 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Lord  save  the  nation. 
Let  Thy  light  and  Thy  truth  go  forth  to  the  most 
distant  parts  of  the  earth ;  "  let  the  people  praise 
Thee  ;  O  God  let  all  the  people  praise  Thee."  Give 
us  the  times  of  refreshing.  May  we  have  a  visit 
from  Christ  by  the  power  of  His  Spirit ;  and  until 
He  come  may  there  be  a  blessed  halcyon  time  of 
peace  and  salvation. 

"  Thy  kingdom  come,  Thy  will  be  done,  on  earth, 
as  it  is  in  heaven."  And  do  Thou  come  Thyself, 
great  King.  May  our  eyes,  if  it  please  Thee, 
behold  Thee  on  earth ;  but  if  not,  if  we  fall  asleep 
ere  that  blessed  array,  we  can  say,  "I  know  that 
my  Redeemer  liveth ;  and  though  after  my  skin 
worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I 
see  God." 

Bless  every  Sunday-school  teacher,  every  tract 
distributor,  every  open-air  preacher.  Bless,  we 
pray  Thee,  all  Bible-women  and  nurses,  deacons 
and  missionaries  of  the  City  Mission,  Bible  readers 
and  all  others  who  in  any  way  seek  to  bring  men  to 


I09 

Christ  O  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  work  mightily,  we 
pray  Thee ;  flood  the  world  with  a  baptism  of  Thy 
power,  and  "let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  a 
knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea." 
We  ask  all  in  that  dear  name  which  made  the 
lame  man  whole,  which  is  sweet  to  God  in  heaven 
and  dear  to  us  below ;  and  unto  Father,  Son  and 
Holy  Ghost  be  glory,  world  without  end.     Amen. 


Prayer    XX. 

The  Great  Sacrifice* 

OGOD  our  Father,  we  do  remember  well  when 
we  were  called  to  Thee ;  with  many  sweet 
and  wooing  voices  we  were  bidden  to  return.  Thou 
didst  Thyself  hang  out  the  lights  of  mercy  that  we 
might  know  the  way  home,  and  Thy  dear  Son 
himself  came  down  to  seek  us.  But  we  wandered 
still.  It  brings  the  tears  to  our  eyes  to  think  that 
we  should  have  been  so  foolish  and  so  wicked,  for 
we  often  extinguished  the  light  within  and  con- 
science we  tried  to  harden,  and  we  sinned  against 
light  and  knowledge  with  a  high  hajid  against  our 
God. 

Thou  hast  often  brought  us  very  low  even  to  our 
knees,  and  we  cried  for  mercy,  but  we  rose  to  sin 
again.  Blessed  was  that  day  when  Thou  didst 
strike  the  blow  of  grace — the  effectual  blow.  Then 
didst  Thou  wither  up  our  comeliness  and  all  our 
perfection  was  rolled  in  the  dust.  We  saw  our- 
selves to  be  slain  by  the  law,  to  be  lost,  ruined,  and 
undone,  and  then  we  rolled  to  and  fro  in  the 
tempests  of  our  thoughts  and  staggered  like 
drunken  men,  and  were  at  our  wits'  end — then  did 
we  cry  unto  Thee  in  our  trouble,  and  blessed  be 
Thy  name  for  ever,  Thou  didst  deliver  us. 

O  happy  day  that  sealed  our  pardon  with  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus  accepted  by  faith.      We 


112 


would  recall  the  memory  of  that  blessed  season  by- 
repeating  it.  We  come  again  now  to  the  cross 
whereon  the  Saviour  bled ;  we  give  another  look  of 
faith  to  Him.  We  trust  we  never  take  away  our 
eyes  off  Him,  but  if  we  have  done  so  we  would  look 
anew ;  we  would  gaze  into  the  body  of  the  Son  of 
God,  pierced  with  nails,  parched  with  thirst,  bleed- 
ing, dying,  because  "it  pleased  the  Father  to  bruise 
Him  ;  He  hath  put  Him  to  grief." 

Lord  God,  we  see  in  Thy  crucified  Son  a  sacrifice 
for  sin ;  we  see  how  Thou  hast  made  Him  to  be 
sin  for  us  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness 
of  God  in  Him ;  and  we  do  over  again  accept  Him 
to  be  everything  to  us.  This  is  the  victim  by 
whose  blood  the  covenant  is  made  through  faith ; 
this  is  that  Paschal  Lamb  by  the  sprinkling  of  whose 
blood  all  Israel  is  secured ;  for  Thou  hast  said, 
"When  I  see  the  blood  I  will  pass  over  you."  This 
is  the  blood  which  gives  us  access  into  that  which  is 
within  the  veil ;  this  is  the  blood  which  now  to  our 
souls  is  drink  indeed,  and  we  do  rejoice  in  the  joy 
which  this  new  wine  of  the  covenant  hath  given 
unto  our  spirits. 

We  would  take  afresh  the  cup  of  salvation  and 
call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  We  would  pay 
our  vows  now  in  the  midst  of  all  the  Lord's  people 
and  in  the  courts  of  His  house ;  and  this  is  a  part 
payment  of  our  vow  that  we  bless  the  Lord  Jesus 
who  hath  put  away  our  sin.  We  bless  Him  that 
He  hath  redeemed  us  unto  Himself  not  with  cor- 
ruptible things  as  silver  and  gold,  but  with  His  own 
precious  blood ;  and  we  do  avow  ourselves  to-day 
to  be  the  Lord's. 


"3 

We  are  not  our  own  ;  we  are  bought  with  a  price. 
Lord  Jesus,  renew  Thy  grasp  of  us,  take  us  over 
again,  for  we  do  even  with  greater  alacrity  than  ever 
before  surrender  ourselves  to  Thee,  and  so  "bind 
the  sacrifice  with  cords,  even  with  cords  to  the 
horns  of  the  altar."  O  Lord,  I  am  Thy  servant, 
and  the  son  of  Thine  handmaid.  Thou  hast  loosed 
my  bonds.  The  Lord  liveth^  and  blessed  be  my 
Rock.  Henceforth  within  that  Rock  I  hide  myself. 
For  Him  I  live.  The  Lord  enable  all  His  people 
with  sincere  hearts,  with  undivided  hearts,  thus 
again  to  give  themselves  up  to  Jesus,  and  do  Thou 
set  in  them  anew  the  marks  and  tokens  of  Thy 
possession  till  every  one  of  us  shall  say  as  many  of 
us  can  say,  "From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble 
me ;  for  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ." 

We  bless  Thee,  Lord,  for  that  mark  to  which 
some  of  us  can  look  back  with  much  joy.  It  is  not 
in  our  hand,  nor  in  our  forehead,  nor  on  our  foot, 
nor  on  our  heart  alone  ;  our  whole  body  has  been 
buried  with  Christ  in  baptism  unto  death,  and  now 
the  whole  body,  soul  and  spirit,  by  our  willing  con- 
secration, belong  unto  Christ  henceforth  and  for 
ever. 

Our  Father,  there  is  one  prayer  which  has  kept 
rising  to  our  lip  even  while  we  have  been  thus 
speaking  to  Thee.  It  comes  from  our  very  heart. 
It  is :  Bring  others  to  Thyself.  Hast  Thou  not 
said,  O  God  of  Jacob,  "Yet  will  I  gather  others  unto 
Him  that  have  not  been  gathered  ?  "  Hast  Thou 
not  given  to  Thy  Son  the  heathen  for  His  inherit- 
ance, and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  His 

9 


114 

possession?  Lord,  give  Thy  Son  the  reward  of 
His  travail ;  give  Him  a  part  of  that  reward  this 
day  wherever  He  is  preached.  Oh!  that  some 
might  be  moved  with  the  love  of  Christ. 

Lord,  some  know  not  who  Thou  art;  convince 
them  of  Thy  Deity  and  Thy  power  to  save.  Lord, 
many  of  them  do  not  think ;  they  live  as  if  they 
were  to  die,  and  there  would  be  an  end  of  them.  O 
Divine  Spirit,  convince  them  of  judgment  to  come. 
Set  before  each  careless  eye  that  day  of  terrible 
pomp  when  for  every  idle  word  that  men  shall 
speak  they  must  give  an  account.  O  Divine  Spirit, 
teach  unreasonable  men  true  reason ;  teach  the 
obdurate  sensitiveness  ;  look  upon  them,  Jesus,  just 
as  Thou  didst  on  those  of  the  synagogue,  not  with 
anger,  but  still  being  grieved  because  of  the  hard- 
ness of  their  hearts.  "Father,  forgive  them,  they 
know  not  what  they  do,"  and  bring  many,  many, 
many  this  very  day  to  the  dear  feet  that  were  nailed 
to  the  cross.  Oh !  how  we  long  for  it.  Deny  us 
what  Thou  wilt,  only  bring  sinners  to  Thyself. 

Lord  Jesus,  Thou  art  gone  from  us.  We  rejoice 
that  this  is  the  fact,  for  Thou  hast  taught  us  that  it 
is  expedient  for  us  that  Thou  shouldest  go,  and  that 
the  Comforter  should  be  with  us ;  but,  oh !  let  us 
not  miss  that  promised  presence  of  the  Comforter. 
May  He  be  here  to  help  and  succour  in  all  works  of 
faith  and  labours  of  love,  and  may  we  feel  that  He 
has  come  among  us  and  is  dwelling  with  us  because 
He  is  convincing  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness 
and  of  judgment  to  come. 

O  Spirit  of  God,  bring  men  to  accept  the  great 
propitiation,  to  see  their  sin  washed  away  in  the 


115 

purple  flood  whose  fount  was  opened  when  the 
heart  of  Christ  was  pierced,  and  may  blood-washed 
sinners  begin  to  sing  on  earth  that  everlasting 
anthem  which  shall  be  sung  by  all  the  redeemed  in 
heaven. 

We  beseech  Thee  now,  Lord,  to  look  upon  all 
Thy  people,  and  grant  every  one  a  blessing.  Some 
are  in  great  trouble.  Deliver  them,  we  pray  Thee. 
Others  may  be  in  great  peril,  though  they  have  no 
trouble.  The  Lord  save  His  people  from  the  evils 
of  prosperity.  It  may  be  some  of  Thine  own 
people  find  it  hard  to  worship  because  of  cares ; 
may  they  be  able,  like  Abraham,  when  the  birds 
came  down  upon  the  sacrifice,  to  drive  them  away. 

O  Spirit  of  God,  make  us  all  more  holy.  Work 
in  us  more  completely  the  image  of  Christ.  We  do 
long  to  be  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  spirit  and 
temper,  and  in  unselfishness  of  life.  Give  us  the 
character  of  Christ,  we  pray  Thee.  Redemption 
from  the  power  of  sin  is  purchased  with  His  blood, 
and  we  crave  for  it,  and  pray  that  we  may  daily 
receive  it.  Let  the  whole  militant  Church  of 
Christ  be  blessed ;  put  power  into  all  faithful 
ministries ;  convert  this  country ;  save  it  from 
abounding  sin  ;  let  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  know 
the  Lord,  but  especially  bless  those  nations  that 
speak  our  own  dear  mother  tongue,  where  our 
same  Lord  and  Christ  is  worshipped  this  day  after 
the  same  fashion. 

The  Lord  bless  His  people.  Bring  the  Church 
to  break  down  all  bonds  of  nationality,  all  limits  of 
sects,  and  may  we  feel  the  blessed  unity  which  is 
the  very  glory  of  the  Church  of  Christ ;  yea,  let  the 


ii6 

whole  earth  be  filled  with  His  glory.  Our  prayer 
can  never  cease  until  we  reach  this  point :  "  Thy 
Kingdom  come,  Thy  will  be  done,  on  earth  as  it  is 
in  heaven."  Nothing  less  than  this  can  we  ask  for. 
And  now  hear  us  as  we  pray  for  the  Sovereign  and 
all  in  authority,  and  ask  Thy  blessing  to  rest  upon 
this  land,  and  let  Thy  blessing  extend  over  all  the 
family  of  man.     We  ask  it  for  Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


Prayer  XXI. 

Boldness  at  the  Throne  of 
Grace* 

OGOD !  we  would  not  sp€ak  to  Thee  as  from 
a  distance,  nor  stand  like  trembling  Israel 
under  the  law  at  a  distance  from  the  burning 
mount,  for  we  have  not  come  unto  Mount  Sinai,  but 
unto  Mount  Sion,  and  that  is  a  place  for  holy  joy 
and  thankfulness,  and  not  for  terror  and  bondage. 
Blessed  be  Thy  name,  O  Lord!  We  have  learnt 
to  call  Thee  "Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven"; 
so  there  is  reverence,  for  Thou  art  in  heaven ;  but 
there  is  sweet  familiarity,  for  Thou  art  our  Father. 
We  would  draw  very  near  to  Thee  now  through 
Jesus  Christ  the  Mediator,  and  we  would  make  bold 
to  speak  to  Thee  as  a  man  speaketh  with  his  friend, 
for  hast  Thou  not  said  by  Thy  Spirit,  "  Let  us  come 
boldly  unto  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace."  We 
might  well  start  away  and  flee  from  Thy  face  if  we 
only  remembered  our  sinfulness.  Lord!  we  do 
remember  it  with  shame  and  sorrow ;  we  are 
grieved  to  think  we  should  have  offended  Thee, 
should  have  neglected  so  long  Thy  sweet  love  and 
tender  mercy ;  but  we  have  now  returned  unto  the 
"  shepherd  and  bishop  of  our  souls."  Led  by  such 
grace,  we  look  to  Him  whom  we  crucified,  and  we 
have  mourned  for  Him  and  then  have  mourned  for 
our  sin. 


ii8 

Now,  Lord,  we  confess  our  guilt  before  Thee  with 
tenderness  of  heart,  and  we  pray  Thee  seal  home  to 
every  believer  here  that  full  and  free,  that  perfect 
and  irreversible  charter  of  forgiveness  which  Thou 
gavest  to  all  them  that  put  their  trust  in  Jesus 
Christ.  Lord !  Thou  hast  said  it :  "  If  we  confess 
our  sins.  Thou  art  merciful  and  just  to  forgive  us 
our  sins  and  to  save  us  from  all  imrighteousness." 
There  is  the  sin  confessed :  there  is  the  ransom 
accepted :  we  therefore  know  we  have  peace  with 
God,  and  we  bless  that  glorious  one  who  hath  come 
"to  finish  transgression,  to  make  an  end  of  sin,"  to 
bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  which  righteous- 
ness by  faith  we  take  unto  ourselves  and  Thou  dost 
impute  unto  us. 

Now,  Lord,  wilt  Thou  be  pleased  to  cause  all 
Thy  children's  hearts  to  dance  within  them  for  joy  ? 
Oh !  help  Thy  people  to  come  to^  Jesus  again  to- 
day. May  we  be  looking  unto  Him  to-day  as  we 
did  at  the  first.  May  we  never  take  off  our  eyes 
from  His  Divine  person,  from  His  infinite  merit, 
from  His  finished  work,  from  His  living  power,  or 
from  the  expectancy  of  His  speedy  coming  to 
"judge  the  world  in  righteousness  and  the  people 
with  His  truth." 

Bless  all  Thy  people  with  some  special  gift,  and 
if  we  might  make  a  choice  of  one  it  would  be  this : 
"Quicken  us,  O  Lord,  according  to  Thy  Word." 
We  have  life-;  give  it  to  us  more  abundantly.  Oh, 
that  we  might  have  so  much  life  that  out  of  the 
midst  of  us  there  might  flow  rivers  of  living  water. 
The  Lord  make  us  useful.  Do,  dear  Saviour,  use 
the  very  least  among  us;  take  the  one  talent  and 


119 

let  it  be  put  out  to  interest  for  the  great  Father. 
May  it  please  Thee  to  show  each  one  of  us  what 
Thou  wouldest  have  us  to  do.  In  our  families,  in 
our  business,  in  the  walks  of  ordinajy  life  may  we 
be  serving-  the  Lord,  and  may  we  often  speak  a 
word  for  His  name,  and  help  in  some  way  to  scatter 
the  light  amongst  the  ever-growing  darkness  ;  and 
ere  we  go  hence  may  we  have  sown  some  seed 
which  we  shall  bring  with  us  on  our  shoulders  in  the 
form  of  sheaves  of  blessing. 

O  God!  bless  our  Sunday-schools,  and  give  a 
greater  interest  in  such  work,  that  there  may  be 
no  lack  of  men  and  women  who  shall  be  glad  and 
happy  in  the  work  of  teaching  the  young.  Do 
impress  this,  we  pray  Thee,  upon  Thy  people  just 
now.  Move  men  who  have  gifts  and  ability  also  to 
preach  the  Gospel.  There  are  many  that  live  in 
villages,  and  there  is  no  gospel  preaching  near 
them.  Lord !  set  them  preaching  themselves.  Wilt 
Thou  move  some  hearts  so  powerfully  that  their 
tongues  cannot  be  quiet  any  longer,  and  may  they 
attempt  in  some  way,  either  personally  or  by 
supporting  some  one,  to  bring  the  gospel  into  dark 
benighted  hamlets  that  the  people  may  know  the 
truth. 

O  Lord !  stir  up  the  dwellers  in  this  great,  great 
city.  Oh !  arouse  us  to  the  spiritual  destitution  of 
the  masses.  O  God,  help  us  all  by  some  means, 
by  any  means,  by  every  means  to  get  at  the  ears 
of  men  for  Christ's  sake  that  so  we  may  reach 
their  hearts.  We  would  send  up  an  exceeding 
great  and  bitter  cry  to  Thee  on  behalf  of  the 
millions  that  enter  no  place  of  worship,  but  rather 


120 


violate  its  sanctity  and  despise  its  blessed  message. 
Lord !  wake  up  London,  we  beseech  Thee.  Send 
us  another  Jonah ;  send  us  another  John  the 
Baptist.  Oh !  that  the  Christ  Himself  would  send 
forth  multitudes  of  labourers  amongst  this  thick 
steinding  corn,  for  the  harvest  truly  is  plenteous, 
but  the  labourers  are  few.  O  God !  save  this  city ; 
save  this  country ;  save  all  countries ;  and  let  Thy 
kingdom  come;  may  every  knee  bow  and  confess 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord. 

Our  most  earnest  prayers  go  up  to  heaven  to 
Thee  now  for  great  sinners,  for  men  cind  women 
that  are  polluted  and  depraved  by  the  filthiest  of 
sins.  With  sovereign  mercy  make  a  raid  amongst 
them.  Come  and  capture  some  of  these  that  they 
may  become  great  lovers  of  Him  that  shall  forgive 
them,  and  may  they  become  great  champions  for 
the  cross. 

Lord,  look  upon  the  multitudes  of  rich  people 
in  this  city  that  know  nothing  about  the  gospel  and 
do  not  wish  to  know.  Oh !  that  somehow  the  poor 
rich  might  be  rich  with  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 
And  then,  Lord,  look  upon  the  multitude  of  the 
poor  and  the  working  classes  that  think  religion  to 
be  a  perfectly  unnecessary  thing  for  them.  Do,  by 
some  means  we  pray  Thee,  get  them  tO'  think  and 
bring  them  to  listen  that  faith  may  come  by  hear- 
ing, and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God. 

Above  all,  O  Holy  Spirit,  descend  more 
mightily.  Would,  God,  Thou  wouldest  flood  the 
land  till  there  should  be  streams  of  righteousness ; 
for  is  there  not  a  promise,  "  I  will  pour  water  upon 
him    that    is    thirsty    and    floods    upon   the    dry 


121 

ground."     Lord,  set  Thy  people  praying;    stir  up 
the  Church  to  greater  prayerfulness. 

Now,  as  Thou  hast  bidden  us,  we  pray  for  the 
people  among  whom  we  dwell.  We  pray  for  those 
in  authority  in  the  land,  asking  every  blessing  for 
the  Sovereign,  and  Thy  guidance  and  direction  to 
the  Parliament,  Thy  benediction  to  all  judges  and 
rulers  as  also  upon  the  poorest  of  the  poor  and  the 
lowest  of  the  low.  Lord,  bless  the  people ;  let  the 
people  praise  Thee,  O  God !  yea,  let  all  the  people 
praise  Thee,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.  Amen  and 
Amen. 


Prayer  XXII. 

The  Presence  of  God^ 

QUR  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,  our  hearts 
are  full  of  gratitude  to  Thee  for  Thy 
We  bless  Thee  that  we  have  it  in  our 
houses,  that  Thou  hast  given  to  many  of  us  to 
understand  it  and  to  enjoy  it.  Although  as  yet  we 
know  not  what  we  shall  know,  yet  have  we  learned 
from  it  what  we  never  can  forget,  that  which  has 
changed  our  lives  has  removed  our  burdens,  has 
comforted  our  hearts,  has  set  our  faces  like  flints 
against  sin  and  made  us  eager  after  perfect 
holiness. 

We  thank  Thee,  Lord,  for  every  leaf  of  the  Book, 
not  only  for  its  promises  which  are  inexpressibly 
sweet,  but  for  its  precepts  in  which  our  soul 
delights,  and  especially  for  the  revelation  of  Thy 
Son,  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  O  God, 
we  thank  Thee  for  the  manifestation  of  Him  even 
in  the  types  and  shadows  of  the  Old  Testament. 
These  are  inexpressibly  glorious  to  us,  full  of 
wondrous  value,  inexpressibly  dear  because  in 
them  and  through  them  we  see  the  Lord.  But  we 
bless  Thee  much  more  for  the  clear  light  of  the 
New  Testament,  for  giving  us  the  key  to  all  the 
secrets  of  the  Old  Testament,  for  now,  reading  the 
scriptures  of  the  new  covenant,  we  understand  the 


124 

language:  of  the  old  covenant  and  are  made  to  joy 
and  to  rejoice  therein. 

Father,  we  thank  Thee  for  the  Book,  we  thank 
Thee  for  the  glorious  Man,  the  God  whom  the 
Book  reveals  as  our  Saviour ;  and  now  we  thank 
Thee  for  the  Blessed  Spirit,  for  without  His  light 
upon  the  understanding  we  should  have  learned 
nothing.  The  letter  killeth,  it  is  the  Spirit  that 
giveth  life.  Blessed  are  our  eyes  that  have  been 
touched  with  heavenly  eye-salve.  Blessed  are  the 
hearts  that  have  been  softened,  that  have  been 
made  ready  to  receive  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it ! 
Blessed  be  the  sovereign  grace  of  God  that  hath 
chosen  unto  Him  a  people  whO'  delight  in  His  Word 
and  who'  meditate  in  it  both  day  and  night ! 

Our  hearts  are  full  of  praises  to  God  for  this  Man 
of  Truth,  for  this  unmeasured  wealth  of  holy  know- 
ledge. Lord  make  us  to  enjoy  it  more  and  more. 
May  we  feed  upon  this  manna ;  may  we  drink  from 
this  well  of  life ;  may  we  be  satisfied  with  it,  and 
by  it  be  made  like  to  the  God  from  whom  it 
came. 

And  now,  Lord,  our  prayer  is  to  Thee  at  the 
mention  of  Thy  sacred  Book,  that  Thou  wouldst 
write  it  upon  the  fleshy  tablets  of  our  heart  more 
fully.  We  want  to  know  the  truth  that  the  truth 
may  make  us  free.  We  want  to  feel  the  truth  that 
we  may  be  sanctified  by  it.  Oh !  let  it  be  in  us  a 
living  seed  which  shall  produce  in  us  a  life  accept- 
able before  God,  a  life  which  shall  be  seen  in  every- 
thing that  we  do  unto  the  living  God,  for  we 
remember  that  Thou  art  not  the  God  of  the  dead 
but  of  the  living. 


125 

Lord,  we  ask  that  Thy  Word  may  chasten  us 
whenever  we  go  astray,  may  it  enhghten  us  when- 
ever for  a  mome;nt  we  get  into  darkness.  May  Thy 
Word  be  the  supreme  ruler  of  our  being.  3.iay  we 
give  ourselves  up  to  its  sacred  law  to  be  obedient 
to  its  every  hint,  wishing  in  all  things,  even  in  the 
least  things,  to  do  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart 
and  having  every  thought  brought  into  captivity  to 
the  mind  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Bless  Thy  people ;  bless  them  in  this  way  by 
saturating  them  with  the  Word  of  Thy  truth.  O 
Lord,  they  are  out  in  the  world  so  much.  Oh !  grant 
that  the  world  may  not  take  them  off  from  their 
God.  May  they  get  the  world  under  their  feet ; 
let  them  not  be  buried  in  it,  but  may  they  live  upon 
it,  treading  it  beneath  their  feet,  the  spiritual  get- 
ting the  mastery  always  over  the  material.  Oh !  that 
the  Word  of  God  might  be  with  us  when  we  are  in 
the  midst  of  an  ungodly  generation.  May  the 
Proverbs  often  furnish  us  with  wisdom,  the  Psalms 
furnish  us  with  comfort,  the  Gospels  teach  us  the 
way  of  holiness,  and  the  Epistles  instruct  us  in  the 
deep  things  of  the  kingdom  of  God. 

Lord  educate  us  for  a  higher  life,  and  let  that  life 
be  begun  here.  May  we  be  always  in  the  school, 
always  disciples,  and  when  we  are  out  in  the 
world  may  we  be  trying  to  put  in  practice  what  we 
have  learned  at  Jesu's  feet.  What  He  tells  us  in 
darkness  may  we  proclaim  in  the  light,  and  what 
He  whispers  in  our  ear  in  the  closets  may  we  sound 
forth  upon  the  housetops. 

Oh !  dear,  dear  Saviour,  what  could  we  do  with- 
out Thee.     We  are  as  yet  in  banishment,  we  have 


126 

not  come  into  the  land  of  light  and  glory ;  it  is  on 
the  other  side  the  river,  in  the  land  where  Thou 
dwellest,  Thy  land  of  Immanuel,  and  till  we  come 
thither  be  Thou  with  us.  We  have  said  unto  our- 
selves, How  shall  we  live  without  our  Lord ;  and 
then  we  have  said  unto  Thee,  "  If  Thy  Spirit  go  not 
with  us,  carry  us  not  up  hence."  Oh !  be  toi  us  this 
day  as  the  fiery  cloudy  pillar  that  covered  all  the 
camp  of  Israel.  May  we  dwell  in  God ;  may  we 
live  and  move  m  God  ;  may  we  be  conscious  of  the 
presence  of  God  to  a  greater  extent  than  we  are 
conscious  of  anything  else. 

Bless  the  churches.  Look  on  them,  Lord ; 
cast  an  eye  of  love  upon  the  little  companies  of  the 
faithful  wherever  they  may  be  and  help  them  and 
their  pastors,  and  may  the  churches  be  in  every 
place  a  light  in  the  midst  of  this  crooked  and  per- 
verse generation.  O  God,  we  are  waiting  and 
watching  for  a  display  of  Thy  great  power  among 
the  people. 

It  is  an  age  of  great  luxury  and  great  sin  and 
gross  departures  from  the  truth ;  we  beseech  Thee 
defend  Thine  own.  When  Thine  ark  was  carried 
captive  among  the  Philistines  and  set  up  in  the 
temple  of  Dagon,  Dagon  fell  before  it,  then  didst 
Thou  smite  Thine  adversaries  in  the  hinder  parts 
and  put  them  to  a  perpetual  reproach,  and  Thou 
canst  do  the  like  again,  and  we  pray  it  may  be  so. 
Oh !  for  the  stretched  out  hand  of  God.  We  are 
longing  to  see  it  in  the  conversion  of  great  multi- 
tudes by  the  gospel,  that  those  who  have  said,  "Aha, 
aha,  the  gospel  has  lost  its  power,"  may  be  made 
foolish  by  the  wisdom  of  the  Most  High,  even  as 


127 

Jannes  and  Jambres  were  made  foolish  when  they 
could  not  do  so  with  their  enchantments,  but  God 
was  with  His  servant. 

O,  Jehovali,  Thou  art  the  true  God,  God  of 
Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,  this  God  is  our 
God  for  ever  and  ever ;  He  shall  be  our  guide  even 
unto  death.  Thou  who  spakest  by  the  apostles 
speak  still  by  Thy  servants,  and  let  Thy  Word  be 
with  as  much  power  as  when  Thou  saidst,  "Let 
there  be  light,  and  there  was  light."  Oh !  for  the 
lifting  up  of  Thy  voice !  Let  confusion  and  dark- 
ness once  again  hear  the  voice  of  Him  that  makes 
order  and  that  giveth  life.  Oh !  how  we  would  stir 
Thee  up,  Thou  gracious  God.  Our  prayers  would 
take  the  form  of  that  ancient  one,  "Awake,  awake, 
put  on  Thy  strength."  Art  Thou  not  He  that  cut 
Egypt  and  wounded  the  crocodile  ?  Hast  Thou  not 
still  the  same  power  to  smite  and  to  vindicate 
Thine  own  truth  and  deliver  Thine  own  re- 
deemed ? 

O  Lamb,  slain  from  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world.  Thou  art  still  to  sit  upon  the  throne,  for 
He  that  is  on  the  throne  looks  like  a  Lamb  that 
has  been  newly  slain.  O  Jesus,  we  beseech  Thee 
take  to  Thyself  Thy  great  power ;  divide  the  spoil 
with  the  strong ;  take  the  purchase  of  Thy  precious 
blood  and  rule  from  the  river  even  unto  the  ends  of 
the  earth. 

Here  we  are  before  Thee ;  look  on  us  in  great 
pity.  Lord,  bless  Thine  own  people.  With  favour 
do  Thou  compass  them  as  with  a  shield.  Lord,  save 
the  unsaved.  In  great  compassion  draw  them  by 
the  attractive  magnet  of  the  cross,  draw  them  to 


128 

Thyself,  compel  them  to>  come  in  that  the  wedding 
may  be  furnished  with  guests. 

With  one  heart  we  put  up  our  prayer  on  the  behalf 
of  the  teachers  of  the  young.      We  thank  Thee, 
Lord,  that  so  many  men  and  women  are  ready  to 
give  their  Sabbath's  rest  to  this  important  service. 
Oh !  grant  that  zeal  for  teaching  the  young  may 
never  burn  low  in  the  church.     May  any  that  are 
taking  noi  part  in  it  and  who  ought  to  be,  be  aroused 
at  once  to  commence  the  holy  effort.     Bless  the 
teachers  of  the  senior  classes  ;  may  their  young  men 
and  women  pass  into  the  church ;  may  there  be  no 
gap  between  the  school  and  the  church.     Bridge 
that  distance  by  Thy  sovereign  grace.     But  equally 
bless  the  teachers  of  the  infants  and  of  the  younger 
children.     May  conversion  go-  on  among  the  young. 
May  there  be  multitudes  of  such  conversions.     In 
effect,  we  would  pray  that  no  child  may  leave  the 
schools  unsaved.     Oh !    save    the    children,  great 
Lover  of  the  little  ones.    Thou  who  wouldst  have 
them  suffered  to   come   to   Thee,   Thou  wilt  not 
forget  them,  but  Thou  wilt  draw  them  and  accept 
them.     Lord!    save    the    children.      Let    all    the 
schools  participate  in  the  blessing  which  we  seek, 
and  by  this  blessed  agency  may  this  nation  be  kept 
from  heathenism  ;   this  city  especially  be  preserved 
from  its  dogged  disregard  of  the  Sabbath,  and  its 
carelessness  about  the  things  of  God.     Oh !  bless 
the  Sabbath-school  to  London,  to  every  part  of  it, 
and  let  Jesus  Christ  be  glorified  among  the  little 
ones,  and  again  may  there  be  heard  loud  hosannas 
in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem    from    the    babes  and 
sucklings  out  of  whose  mouths  Thou  hast  ordained 


129 

strength.  The  Lord  be  with  these  dear  workers 
throughout  to-day  and  make  it  a  high  day,  a  festival 
of  prayer  and  faith,  a  time  when  Jesus  the  Lord 
shall  especially  meet  with  them  and  bless  them. 

God  bless  our  country!  God  save  our 
Sovereign!  Grant  guidance  at  this  time  to  all 
with  regard  to  the  political  affairs  of  this  nation. 
Grant  Thy  blessing  to  all  ranks  and  conditions  of 
men,  and  let  every  nation  call  Thee  "blessed."  Let 
all  tongues  speak  the  name  of  Jesus  and  all  men 
own  Him  as  Lord  and  King.  We  ask  it  in  His 
name.     Amen. 


10 


Prayer  XXIII. 

The  Look  of  Faiths 

OUR  Father,  we  have  listened  to  Thy  gracious 
words.  Truly  Thy  paths  drop  fatness. 
Wherever  Thou  art,  mercy  abounds.  Before  Thy 
feet  rivers  of  grace  spring  up.  When  Thou  comest 
to  man  it  is  with  the  fulness  of  pardoning  love. 
Thou  hast  bidden  us  come  to  Thee  and  seek  Thee 
while  Thou  mayest  be  found.  We  would  come 
now.  May  Thy  holy  Spirit  help  us !  May  Jesus 
lead  the  way  and  be  our  Mediator  now ! 

Blessed  be  Thy  name ;  there  are  many  who 
sought  Thy  face  many  years  ago.  We  have  since 
then  tasted  that  Thou  art  gracious,  and  we  know 
by  a  delightful  experience  that  Thou  dost  indeed 
give  milk  and  honey  to  such  as  trust  Thee.  Oh! 
we  wish  we  had  known  Thee  earlier. 

Lord,  Thou  hast  been  full  of  truth  and  faithful- 
ness to  us  throughout  every  step  of  our  journey, 
and  though  Thou  hast  not  withheld  the  rod  of  the 
covenant  from  us,  we  are  as  grateful  for  that  this 
morning  as  for  the  kisses  of  Thy  lips.  Thou  hast 
dealt  well  with  Thy  servants  according  to  Thy 
Word.    Blessed  be  Thy  name  for  ever  and  ever. 

But  there  are  some  who  have  never  come  to 
Thee ;  they  are  hearers,  but  hearers  only ;  they 
have  hstened  to  gracious  invitations  thousands  of 


132 

times,  but  they  have  never  accepted  them.  Say 
unto  them,  "  Thereto  hast  thou  gone,  but  noi  further 
shalt  thou  proceed  in  thy  carelessness  and  trifling. 
Here  shalt  thou  stay  and  turn  unto  Thy  God."  O 
Saviour,  Thou  hast  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth, 
therefore  Thou  canst  through  the  preaching  of  Thy 
Word  influence  the  hearts  of  men.  Turn  them, 
and  they  shall  be  turned.     Oh !  do  it  this  day. 

We  would  now  in  our  prayers  come  ;  as  we  came 
at  first  would  we  come  again  ;  we  would  renew  our 
vows,  we  would  again  repeat  our  repentance  and 
our  faith,  and  then  look  at  the  brazen  serpent  and 
touch  but  the  border  of  Thy  garment.  We 
would  begin  again.  O,  Lord,  help  us  to  do  it  in 
sincerity  and  truth.  And  first  we:  do  confess  that 
we  are  by  nature  lost  and  by  practice  ruined.  We 
are  altogether  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  right- 
eousnesses are  as  filthy  rags.  We  would  lie  at  those 
dear  pierced  feet  bleeding  at  heart  because  of  sin, 
wounded,  mangled,  crushed  by  the  fall  and  by  our 
own  transgression.  We  confess  that  if  Thou 
shouldst  number  our  sins  upon  us  and  deal  with  us 
accordingly  we  should  be  sent  to  the  lowest  hell. 

We  have  no  merit,  no  claim,  no^  righteousness  of 
our  own.  Oh!  now,  dear  Saviour,  we  look  up  to 
Thee.  Oh !  that  some  might  look  for  the  first  time, 
and  those  of  us  that  have  long  looked  would  fix  our 
happy  gaze  again  upon  that  blessed  substitutionary 
sacrifice  wherein  is  all  our  hope.  Dear  Saviour, 
we  do  take  Thee  to  be  everything  to  us,  our  sin- 
bearer  and  our  sin-destroyer.  We  have  not  a 
shadow  of  a  shade  of  a  hope  anywhere  but  in  Thy- 
self, Thy  life.  Thy  death,  Thy  resurrection,  Thine 


133 

ascension,  Thy  glory,  Thy  reign.  Thy  second 
advent ;  these  are  the  only  stars  in  our  sky. 

We  look  up  to  Thee  and  are  filled  with  light. 
But  O  Thou  dear,  dear  Saviour,  we  dare  not  turn 
to  ordinances,  we  dare  not  turn  to  our  own  prayers, 
and  tears,  and  almsgivings,  we  dare  not  look  to 
our  own  works,  we  only  look  to  Thee ;  Thy 
wounds,  Immanuel,  these  bleed  the  balm  that  heals 
our  wounds,  Thy  crowned  head  once  girt  with 
thorns,  Thy  body  once  laid  in  the  silent  tomb,  Thy 
Godhead  once  covered  and  concealed  from  man, 
but  now  resplendent  amidst  triumphant  hosts.  If 
we  can  perish  trusting  in  Thee  we  must  perish,  but 
we  know  we  cannot,  for  Thou  hast  bound  up  our 
salvation  with  Thy  glory,  and  because  Thou  art  a 
glorious  Saviour  for  ever,  none  that  trust  in  Thee 
shall  ever  be  confounded. 

But  we  do  trust  Thee  now.  If  all  our  past  experi- 
ence has  been  a  mistake,  yet  we  will  begin  at  the 
cross  to-day ;  or  if  we  have  never  had  any  experi- 
ence of  Thee  before  we  would  begin  to-day.  Oh ! 
hear  Thou,  hear  Thou  the  prayer :  — 

"  Dear  Saviour,  draw  reluctant  hearts, 
To  Thee  let  sinners  fly." 

By  His  agony  and  bloody  sweat,  by  His  cross  and 
passion,  by  His  precious  death  and  burial,  we  be- 
seech Thee  hear  us  now!  We  plead  with  Thee 
for  some  that  are  not  pleading  for  themselves.  O 
Spirit  of  God,  let  it  not  be  so  any  longer.  Now 
sweetly  use  Thy  key  to  open  the  fast-closed  door, 
and  come  into  men's  hearts  and  dwell  there  that 
they  may  live.     We  have  a  thousand  things  to  ask. 


134 

We  should  like  to  plead  for  our  country  and  for  all 
countries ;  we  shoud  like  to  plead  with  Thee  for 
the  sick  and  for  the.  dying,  for  the  poor  and  for  the 
fatherless.  We  have  innumerable  blessings  to  ask, 
but  somehow  they  all  go  away  from  our  prayer  just 
now,  and  this  is  our  one  cry :  Save,  Lord,  we  be- 
seech Thee,  even  now  send  salvation !  Come  Holy 
Spirit  to  open  blind  eyes  and  unstop  desif  ears  and 
quicken  dead  hearts. 

Father,  glorify  Thy  Son  that  Thy  Son  may 
glorify  Thee.  Holy  Spirit,  do  Thine  office  and  take 
of  these  things  of  Christ  and  reveal  them  unto  us. 
We  gather  up  all  our  prayers  in  that  salvation 
through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.     Amen. 


Prayer  XXIV. 

**  Deliver  us  from  Evil/' 

OGOD,  let  us  not  be  formalists  or  hypocrites 
at  this  time  in  prayer.  We  feel  how  easy 
it  is  to  bow  the  head  and  cover  the  face,  and  yet 
the  thoughts  may  be  all  astray,  and  the  mind  may 
be  wandering  hither  and  thither,  so  that  there  shall 
be  no  real  prayer  at  all.  Come,  Holy  Spirit,  help 
us  to  feel  that  we  are  in  the  immediate  presence 
of  God ;  and  may  this  thought  lead  us  to  sine  3re 
and  earnest  petitioning. 

There  are  some  who  know  not  God ;  God  is  not 
in  all  their  thoughts ;  they  make  no  reckoning  of 
Thee,  Thou  glorious  One,  but  do  their  business 
and  guide  their  lives  as  if  there  was  no  God  in 
heaven  or  in  earth.  Strike  them  now  with  a  sense 
of  Thy  presence.  Oh!  that  Thine  eternal  power 
might  come  before  their  thoughts,  and  now  may 
they  join  with  Thy  reverent  people  in  approaching 
Thy  mercy  seat. 

We  come  for  mercy,  great  God ;  it  must  always 
be  our  first  request,  for  we  have  sinned,  sinned 
against  a  just  and  holy  law  of  which  our  conscience 
approves.  We  are  evil,  but  Thy  law  is  holy  and 
just  and  good.  We  have  offended  knowingly ;  we 
have  offended  again  and  again ;  after  being 
chastened  we  have  still  offended,  and  even  those 


136 

of  us  who  are  forgiven,  who'  through  Thy  rich  love 
have  been  once  for  all  washed  from  every  stain,  yet 
have  we  sinned  grievously ;  and  we  confess  it  with 
much  shame  and  bitter  self-reproach  that  we  should 
sin  against  such  tender  love,  and  against  the  in- 
dwelling of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  in  His  people ; 
and  who  checks  them  and  quickens  their  con- 
sciences ;  so  that  they  sin  against  light  and  know- 
ledge when  they  sin. 

Wash  us  yet  again.  And  when  we  ask  for  this 
washing  it  is  not  because  we  doubt  the  efficacy  of 
former  cleansing.  Then  we  were  washed  in  blood. 
Now,  O  Saviour,  repeat  upon  us  what  Thou  didst 
to  the  twelve  when  Thou  didst  take  a  towel  and 
basin  and  wash  their  feet.  And  when  that  was 
done  Thou  didst  tell  them  that  he  who  had  been 
washed  had  no  need  save  but  to  wash  his  feet. 
After  that  was  done  he  was  clean  every  whit. 
Oh !  let  Thy  children  be  in  that  condition  this  morn- 
ing— clean  every  whit — and  may  they  know  it ; 
and  thus  being  clean  may  they  have  boldness  to 
enter  into  the  Holy  of  Holies  by  the  blood  of 
Christ ;  and  may  they  now  come  and  stand  where 
the  cherubim  once  were,  where  the  glory  still  shines 
forth.  And  may  we  before  a  blood-besprinkled 
mercy  seat,  ourselves  washed  and  cleansed,  pour  out 
our  prayers  and  praises. 

As  for  those  that  never  have  been  washed,  we 
repeat  our  prayer  for  them.  Bring  them,  oh !  bring 
them  at  once  to  a  sense  of  sin.  Oh !  that  we  might 
see  them  take  their  first  complete  washing,  and  may 
they  become  henceforth  the  blood  washed  and 
blood  redeemed  consecrated  ones,  belonging  for 


^Z7 

ever  unto  Him  who  has  made  them  white  through 
His  atoning  sacrifice. 

And,  blessed  Lord,  since  Thou  dost  permit  Thy 
washed  ones  to  come  close  to  Thyself  we  would 
approach  Thee  now  with  the  courage  which  comes 
of  faith  and  love,  and  ask  of  Thee  this  thing.  Help 
us  to  overcome  every  tendency  to  evil  which  is  still 
within  us,  and  enable  us  to  wear  armour  of  such 
proof  that  the  arrows  of  the  enemy  from  without 
may  not  penetrate  it,  that  we  may  not  be  woimded 
again  by  sin.  Deliver  us,  we  pray  Thee,  from 
doubts  within  and  fears  without,  from  depression  of 
spirit,  and  from  the  outward  assaults  of  the  world. 
Make  us  and  keep  us  pure  within,  and  then  let  our 
life  be  conducted  with  such  holy  jealousy  and 
watchfulness  that  there  may  be  nothing  about  us 
that  shall  bring  dishonour  to  Thy  name.  May 
those  who  most  carefully  watch  us  see  nothing  but 
what  shall  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour 
in  all  things. 

Lord  help  Thy  people  to  be  right  as  parents. 
May  none  of  us  spoil  our  children ;  may  there  be 
no  misconducted  famiHes  to  cry  out  against  us. 
Help  us  to  be  right  as  masters ;  may  there  be  no 
oppression,  no  hardness  and  unkindness.  Help  us 
to  be  right  as  servants ;  may  there  be  no  eye 
service,  no  purloining,  but  may  there  be  everything 
that  adorns  the  Christian  character.  Keep  us  right 
as  citizens ;  may  we  do  all  we  can  for  our  country, 
and  for  the  times  in  which  we  live.  Keep  us  right, 
we  pray  Thee,  as  citizens  of  the  higher  country ; 
may  we  be  living  for  it,  to  enjoy  its  privileges,  and 
to  bring  others  within  its  burgess-ship,  that  multi- 


138 

tudes  may  be  made  citizens  of  Christ  through  our 
means.  Lord  help  us  to  conduct  ourselves  aright 
as  Church  members ;  may  we  love  our  brethren ; 
may  we  seek  their  good,  their  edification,  their 
comfort,  their  health.  And  oh !  may  such  of  us  as 
are  called  to  preach  have  grace  equal  to  that 
responsibility.  Lord  make  every  Christian  to  be 
clear  of  the  blood  of  all  those  round  about  him.  We 
know  that  there  are  some  who  profess  to  be  Thy 
people,  who  do  not  seem  to  care  one  whit  about  the 
souls  of  their  fellow  men.  God  forgive  this  in- 
humanity to  men,  this  treason  to  the  King  of  kings. 
Rouse  the  Church,  we  pray  Thee,  to  a  tenderness 
of  heart  towards  those  among  whom  we  dwell. 

Let  all  the  churches  feel  that  they  are  ordained 
to  bless  their  neighbours.  Oh !  that  the  Christian 
Church  in  England  might  begin  to  take  upon  itself 
its  true  burden.  Let  the  Church  in  London 
especially,  with  its  mass  of  poverty  and  sin  round 
about  it,  care  for  the  people  and  love  the  people ; 
and  may  all  Christians  bestir  themselves  that  some- 
thing may  be  done  for  the  good  of  men,  and  for 
the  glory  of  God  Lord,  do  use  us  for  Thy  glory. 
Shine  upon  us,  O  Emmanuel,  that  we  may  reflect 
Thy  brightness  ;  dwell  in  us,  O  Jesus,  that  out  of  us 
may  come  the  power  of  Thy  hfe.  Make  Thy 
Church  to  work  miracles,  because  the  miracle- 
worker  is  in  the  midst  of  her.  Oh!  send  us  times 
of  revival,  seasons  of  great  refreshing ;  and  then 
times  of  aggression,  when  the  army  of  the  Lord  of 
Hosts  shall  push  its  way  into  the  very  centre  of  the 
adversary,  and  overthrow  the  foe  in  the  name  of 
the  King  of  kings. 


139 

Now  forgive  Thy  servants  all  that  has  been 
amiss,  and  strengthen  in  Thy  servants  all  that  is 
good  and  right.  Sanctify  us  to  Thy  service,  and 
hold  us  to  it.  Comfort  us  with  Thy  presence ; 
elevate  us  into  Thy  presence.  Make  us  like  Thy- 
self ;  bring  us  near  Thyself,  and  in  all  things 
glorify  Thyself  in  us,  whether  we  live  or  die. 

Bless  the  poor,  remember  the  needy  among 
Thine  own  people  ;  help  and  succour  them.  Bless 
the  sick,  and  be  very  near  the  dying.  The  Lord 
comfort  them. 

Bless  our  country.  Let  every  mercy  rest  upon 
the  Sovereign  ;  send  peace  to  disquieted  districts  ; 
give  wisdom  to  our  senators  in  the  making  and  in 
the  seeing  to  the  keeping  of  the  law.  And  may 
Thy  kingdom  come  not  here  only,  but  in  every  land 
and  nation.  Lands  across  the  flood  remember  with 
the  plenitude  of  Thy  grace.  Let  the  whole  earth 
be  filled  with  Thy  glory.  We  ask  it  for  Jesus' 
sake.     Amen, 


Prayer  XXV. 

The  Washing  of  Water  by 
the  Word. 

O  JEHOVAH,  our  God,  Thou  lovest  Thy 
people.  Thou  hast  placed  all  the  saints  in 
the  hand  of  Jesus,  and  Thou  hast  given  Jesus  to  be 
to  them  a  leader,  a  commander  and  a  husband  ;  and 
we  know  that  Thou  delightest  tO'  hear  us  cry  on  the 
behalf  of  Thy  Church  for  Thou  carest  for  Him, 
and  Thou  art  ready  to  grant  to  Him  according  to 
the  covenant  provisions  which  Thou  hast  laid  up 
in  store  for  Christ  Jesus.  Therefore  would  we 
begin  this  prayer  by  entreating  Thee  to  behold 
and  visit  the  vine  and  the  vineyard  which  Thy  right 
hand  hath  planted.  Look  upon  Zion  the  city  of 
our  solemnities  ;  look  upon  those  whom  Thou  hast 
chosen  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world, 
whom  Christ  hath  redeemed  with  blood,  whose 
hearts  He  has  won  and  holds,  and  who  are  His  own 
though  they  be  in  the  world. 

Holy  Father,  keep  Thy  people,  we  beseech  Thee, 
for  Jesus'  sake.  Though  they  are  in  the  world  let 
them  not  be  of  it,  but  may  there  be  a  marked  dis- 
tinction between  them  and  the  rest  of  mankind. 
Even  as  their  Lord  was  holy,  harmless  and  un- 
defiled,  and  separate  from  sinners,  so  may  it  be  with 
believers   in   Christ.     May   they   follow  Him   and 


142 

may  they  not  know  the  voice  of  strangers,  but  come 
out  from  the  rest  that  they  may  follow  Him  without 
the  camp. 

We  cry  to  Thee  for  the:  preservation  of  Thy 
Church  in  the  world,  and  esj>ecially  for  her  purity. 
O,  Father,  keep  us,  we  beseech  Thee  with  all  keep- 
ing, that  the  evil  one  touch  us  not.  We  shall  be 
tempted,  but  let  him  not  prevail  against  us.  In  a 
thousand  ways  he  will  lay  snares  for  our  feet ;  but, 
oh!  deliver  us  as  a  bird  from  the  snare  of  the 
fowler.  May  the  snare  be  broken  that  we  may 
escape.  Let  not  Thy  Church  suffer  dishonour  at 
any  time,  but  may  her  garments  be  always  white. 
Let  not  such  as  come  in  ajuong  her  that  are  not  of 
her  utterly  despoil  her.  O,  Christ,  as  Thou  didst 
groan  concerning  Judas,  so.  may  Thy  children  cry 
to  Thee  concerning  any  that  have  fallen  aside  into 
crooked  ways,  lest  the  cause  of  Christ  in  the  earth 
should  be  dishonoured.  O,  God,  cover,  we  be- 
seech Thee,  with  Thy  feathers,  all  the  people  of 
Christ,  and  keep  Thy  Church  even  until  He  shall 
come  Who,  having  loved  His  own  that  were  in  the 
world,  loveth  them  even  to  the  end. 

We  would  ask  just  now  that  we  may  be 
washed  as  to  our  feet ;  we  trust  Thou  hast  bathed 
us  once  for  all  in  the  sin-removing  fountain.  Thou 
hast  also  washed  us  in  the  waters  of  regeneration 
and  given  us  the;  renewing  of  our  minds,  through 
Jesus  Christ;  but  O  for  daily  cleansing.  Dost 
Thou  see  any  fault  in  us?  Ah!  we  know  that 
Thou  dost.  Wash  us  that  we  may  be  clean.  Are 
we  deficient  in  any  virtue  ?  Oh  !  supply  it  that  we 
may  exhibit  a  perfect  character  to  the  glory  of  Him 


143 

who  has  made  us  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  Or  is  there 
something  that  would  be  good  if  not  carried  to 
excess?  Be  pleased  to  modify  it  lest  one  virtue 
should  slaughter  another,  and  we  should  not  be  the 
image  of  Christ  completely. 

O  Lord  and  Master,  Thou  who  didst  wash  Thy 
disciples'  feet  of  old,  still  be  very  patient  toward 
us,  very  condescending  towards  our  provoking 
faults,  and  go  oh  with  us,  we  pray  Thee,  till  Thy 
great  work  shall  be  completed  and  we  shall  be 
brethren  of  the  First  Born,  like  unto  Him. 
Gracious  Master,  we  wish  to  conquer  self  in  every 
respect ;  we  desire  to  live  for  the  glory  of  God  and 
the  good  of  our  fellow  men  ;  we  would  have  it  true 
of  us  as  of  our  Master,  "  He  saved  others.  Himself 
He  cannot  save."  Wilt  Thou  enable  us  especially 
to  overcome  the  body  with  all  its  affections  and 
lusts ;  may  the  flesh  be  kept  under ;  let  no  appetite 
of  any  kind  of  the  grosser  sort  prevail  against  our 
manhood,  lest  we  be  dishonoured  and  unclean. 
And  let  not  even  the  most  refined  power  of  the 
natural  mind  be  permitted  to  come  so  forward  as  to 
mar  the  dominion  of  the  Spirit  of  God  within  us. 

Oh !  help  us  not  to  be  so  easily  moved  even  by 
pain,  may  we  have  much  patience,  and  let  not  the 
prospect  of  death  ever  cause  us  any  fear,  but  may 
the  spirit  get  so  much  the  mastery  of  the  body 
that  we  know  nothing  can  hurt  the  true  man.  The 
inner  new-bom  cannot  be  smitten,  nor  is  it  to  die ; 
it  is  holy,  incorruptible,  and  liveth  and  abideth  for 
ever  in  the  life  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Oh !  for  a  complete  conquest  of  self.  Especially 
render  us  insensible  to  praise,  lest  we  be  too  sensi- 


144 

tive  to  censure.  Let  us  reckon  that  to  have  the 
approbation  of  God  and  of  our  own  conscience  is 
quite  enough;  and  may  we  be  content,  gracious 
God,  to  bear  the  cavilHngs  of  unreasonable  men ; 
yea,  and  to  bear  the  misrepresentations  of  our  own 
brethren.  Those  that  we  love,  if  they  love  not  us, 
yet  may  we  love  them  none  the  less,  and  if  by  mis- 
take they  misjudge  us,  let  us  have  no  hard  feelings 
towards  them,  and  God  grant  we  may  never  mis- 
judge one  another.  Doth  not  our  Judge  stand  at 
the  bar  ?  Oh !  keep  us  like  little  children  who  do 
not  know,  but  expect  to  know  hereafter,  and  are 
content  to  believe  things  which  they  do  not  linder- 
stand.  Lord  keep  us  humble,  dependent,  yet 
serenely  joyful.  May  we  be  calm  and  quiet  even 
as  a  weaned  child,  yet  may  we  be  earnest  and 
active. 

O  Saviour,  make  us  like  Thyself.  We  wish  not 
so  much  to  do  as  to  be.  If  Thou  wilt  make  us  to 
be  right  we  shall  do  right.  We  find  how  often  we 
have  to  put  a  constraint  upon  ourselves  tO'  be  right, 
but,  oh !  that  we  were  like  Thee,  Jesus,  so  that  we 
had  but  to  act  out  ourselves,  to  act  out  perfect 
holiness.  We  shall  never  rest  till  this  is  the  case, 
till  Thou  hast  made  us  ourselves  to  be  inwardly 
holy,  and  then  words  and  actions  must  be  holy  as  a 
matter  of  course.  Now,  here  we  are,  Lord,  and  we 
belong  to  Thee.  Oh !  it  is  because  we  are  Thine 
own  that  we  have  hope.  Thou  wilt  make  us 
worthy  of  Thee.  Thy  possession  of  us  is  our 
hope  of  perfection.  Thou  dost  wash  our  feet  be- 
cause we  are  Thine  own.  Oh!  how  sweet  is  the 
mercy  which  first  took  us  to  its  heart  and  made  us 


145 

all  its  own  and  now  continues  to  deal  tenderly  with 
us,  that  being  Christ's  own  we  may  have  that  of 
Christ  within  us  which  all  may  see  proves  us  to  be 
Christ's  own ! 

Now  we  would  bring  before  Thee  all  Thy  saints 
and  ask  Thee  to  attend  to  their  trials  and  troubles. 
Some  we  know  are  afflicted  in  person,  others  are 
afflicted  in  their  dear  friends,  some  are  afflicted  in 
their  temporal  estate  and  are  brought  into  sore 
distress.  Lord,  we  do  not  know  the  trials  of  all 
Thy  people,  but  Thou  dost,  for  Thou  are  the  Head, 
and  the  pains  of  all  the  members  are  centred  in 
Thee.     Help  all  Thy  people  even  to  the  end. 

Now  we  pray  Thee  to  grant  us  the  blessing 
which  we  have  already  sought,  and  let  it  come  upon 
all  the  churches  of  our  beloved  country.  May  the 
Lord  revive  true  and  undefiled  religion  here  and  in 
all  the  other  lands  where  Christ  is  known  and 
preached,  and  let  the  day  come  when  heathendom 
shall  become  converted,  when  the  crescent  of 
Mohammed  shall  wane  into  eternal  night,  and  when 
she  that  sitteth  on  the  Seven  Hills  and  exalteth 
herself  in  the  place  of  God  shall  be  cast  down  to 
sink  like  a  mill-stone  in  the  flood- 
Let  the  blessed  Gospel  of  the  eternal  God  pre- 
vail, let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  His  glory. 
Oh !  that  we  may  live  to  see  that  day.  The  Lord 
bless  our  country ;  have  pity  upon  it.  God  bless 
the  Sovereign  with  every  mercy  and  blessing. 
Grant  that  there  may  be  in  Thine  infinite  wisdom 
a  change  in  the  state  of  trade  and  commerce,  that 
there  may  be  less  complaint  and  distress.  Oh !  let 
the  people  see  Thy  hand,  and  understand  why  it  is 

II 


146 

laid  upon  them,  that  they  may  turn  from  wrong- 
doing and  seek  righteousness  and  follow  after 
peace.  Then  shall  the  blessing  return.  The  Lord 
hear  us  as  in  secret  we  often  cry  to  Thee  on  behalf 
of  this  misled  land.  The  Lord  deliver  it,  and  lift 
up  the  light  of  His  countenance  upon  it  yet  again, 
for  Jesus'  sake.     Amen. 


Prayer  XXVI. 

Prayer   Answered   and 
Unanswered  ♦ 

GOD  of  Israel,  God  of  Jesus  Christ,  our  God  for 
ever  and  ever !  Help  us  now  by  the  sacred 
Spirit  to  approach  Thee  aright  with  deepest  rever- 
ence, but  not  with  servile  fear ;  with  holiest  bold- 
ness, but  not  with  presumption.  Teach  us  as 
children  to  speak  to  the  Father,  and  yet  as 
creatures  to  bow  before  our  Maker. 

Our  Father,  we  would  first  ask  Thee  whether 
Thou  hast  ought  against  us  as  Thy  children? 
Have  we  been  asking  somewhat  of  Thee  amiss, 
and  hast  Thou  given  us  that  which  we  have 
sought?  We  are  not  conscious  of  it,  but  it  may 
be  so,  and  now  we  are  brought  as  an  answer  to 
our  presumptuous  prayers  into  a  more  difficult  posi- 
tion than  the  one  we  occupied  before.  Now  it  may 
be  that  some  creature  comfort  is  nearer  to  us  than 
our  God ;  we  had  better  have  been  without  it  and 
have  dwelt  in  our  God  and  have  found  our  joy  in 
Him.  But  now.  Lord,  in  these  perilous  circum- 
stances give  us  grace  that  we  may  not  turn  away 
from  Thee. 

If  our  position  now  be  not  such  as  Thou  wouldst 
have  allotted  to  us  had  we  been  wiser,  yet  never- 
theless grant  that  we  may  be  taught  to  behave  our- 
selves aright  even  now  lest  the  mercies  Thou  hast 


14S 

given  should  become  a  cause  of  stumbling,  and  the 
obtaining  of  our  hearts'  desire  should  become  a 
temptation  to  us.  Rather  do  we  feel  inclined  to 
bless  Thee  for  the  many  occasions  in  which  Thou 
hast  not  answered  our  prayer,  for  Thou  hast  said 
that  we  did  ask  amiss  and  therefore  we  could  not 
have,  and  we  desire  to  register  this  prayer  with 
Thee  that  whensoever  we  do  ask  amiss,  Thou 
wouldst  in  great  wisdom  and  love  be  pleased  to 
refuse  us. 

O,  Lord,  if  we  at  any  time  press  our  suit  without 
a  sufficiency  of  resignation  do  not  regard  us,  we 
pray  Thee,  and  though  we,  cry  unto  Thee  day  and 
night  concerning  anything,  yet  if  Thou  seest  that 
herein  we  err  regard  not  the  voice  of  our  cry,  we 
pray  Thee.  It  is  our  hearts'  desire  now,  in  our 
coolest  moments,  that  this  prayer  of  ours  might 
stand  on  record  as  long  as  we  live,  not  as  I  will, 
but  as  Thou  wilt. 

But,  O  Lord,  in  looking  back  we  are  obliged  to 
remember  with  the  greatest  gratitude  the  many 
occasions  in  which  Thou  hast  heard  our  cry.  We 
have  been  brought  into  deep  distress,  and  our 
heart  has  sunk  within  us,  and  then  have  we  cried  to 
Thee  and  Thou  hast  never  refused  to  hear  us.  The 
prayers  of  our  lusts  Thou  hast  rejected,  but  the 
prayers  of  our  necessities  Thou  hast  granted  Not 
one  good  thing  hath  failed  of  all  that  Thou  hast 
promised. 

Thou  hast  given  to  us  exceeding  abundantly 
above  what  we  asked  or  even  thought,  for  there 
was  a  day  when  our  present  condition  would  have 
been  regarded  as  much  too  high  for  us  ever  to 


149 

reach,  and  in  looking  back  we  are  surprised  that 
those  who  did  he  among  the  pots  of  Egypt  should 
now  sit  every  man  under  his  vine  and  fig-tree,  that 
those  who  wandered  in  the  wilderness  in  a  solitary 
way  should  now  find  a  city  to  dwell  in,  that  we  who 
were  prodigals  in  rags  should  now  be  children  in 
the  Father's  bosom  ;  that  we  who  were  companions 
of  swine  should  now  be  made  heirs  of  God  and 
joint  heirs  with  Christ.  Oh !  what  encouragement 
we  have  to  pray  to  such  a  prayer-hearing  God  who 
far  exceeds  the  request  of  His  children. 

Blessed  be  the  najne  of  the  Lord  for  ever,  our 
inmost  heart  is  saying.  Amen,  blessed  be  His 
name.  If  it  were  only  for  answered  prayer  or  even 
for  some  unanswered  prayers  we  would  continue  to 
praise  and  bless  Thee  as  long  as  we  have  any 
being. 

And  now.  Lord,  hsten  to  the  voice  of  Thy 
children's  cry.  Wherever  there  is  a  sincere  heart 
seeking  for  greater  holiness  answer  Thou  that  re- 
quest, or  wherever  there  is  a  broken  spirit  seeking 
for  reconciliation  with  Thyself  be  pleased  to  answer 
it  now.  Thou  knowest  where  there  is  prayer, 
though  it  be  unuttered,  and  even  the  lips  do  not 
move.  Oh !  hear  the  publican  who  dares  not  lift 
his  eye  to  heaven.  Hear  him  while  he  cries,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  Hear  such  as  seem  to 
themselves  to  be  appointed  unto  death.  Let  the 
sighing  of  the  prisoner  come  before  Thee!  Oh! 
that  Thou  wouldst  grant  peace  and  rest  to  every 
troubled  spirit  all  over  the  world  who  now  desires 
to  turn  his  face  to  the  cross  and  to  see  God  in 
Christ  Jesus. 


O  Lord,  if  there  are  any  of  Thy  servants  exer- 
cised about  the  cases  of  others  we  would  thank 
Thee  for  them.  Raise  up  in  the  Church  many 
intercessors  who  shall  plead  for  the  prosperity  of 
Zion,  and  give  Thee  no  rest  till  Thou  establish  her 
and  make  her  a  joy  in  the  land. 

Oh!  there  are  some  of  us  that  cried  to^  Thee 
about  our  country.  Thou  knowest  how  in  secret 
we  groaned  and  sighed  over  evil  times,  and  Thou 
hast  begun  to  hear  us  already,  for  which  we  desire 
to  praise  and  bless  Thy  name.  But  we  would  not 
cease  to  pray  for  this  land  that  Thou  wouldst  roll 
away  from  it  all  its  sin,  that  Thou  wouldst  deliver 
it  from  the  curse  of  drunkenness,  rescue,  it  from 
infidelity,  from  popery,  from  ritualism,  from 
rationalism  and  every  form  of  evil,  that  this  land 
might  become  a  holy  land. 

O,  Lord,  bring  the  multitudes  of  the  working 
men  to  listen  to  the  gospel.  Break  in,  we  pray 
Thee,  upon  their  stolid  indifference.  Lord,  give 
them  a  love  of  Thy  house,  a  desire  to  hear  Thy 
gospel,  and  then  wilt  Thou  look  upon  the  poor  rich 
who  so  many  of  them  know  nothing  about  Thee 
and  are  worshipping  their  own  wealth.  The  Lord 
grant  that  the  many  for  whom  there  are  no  special 
gospel  services,  but  who  are  wrapped  up  in  self- 
righteousness,  may  be  brought  toi  hear  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  that  they  also,  as  well  as  the  poor,  may  be 
brought  to  Christ. 

God  bless  this  land  with  more  of  gospel  light,  and 
with  more  of  gospel  life  and  love.  Thou  wilt  hear 
us,  O  Lord. 

Then  would  we  pray  for  our  children,  that  they 


151 

might  be  saved.  Some  of  us  can  no  longer  pray 
for  our  children's  conversion,  our  prayers  are  heard 
already.  But  there  are  others  who  have  children 
who  vex  them  and  grieve  their  hearts.  O  God, 
save  sons  and  daughters  of  godly  people.  Let 
them  not  have  to  sigh  over  their  children  as  Eli  did 
and  as  Samuel  did,  and  may  they  see  their  sons 
and  daughters  become  the  children  of  the  living 
God.  We  would  pray  for  our  servants,  for  our 
neighbours,  for  our  kinsfolk  of  near  or  far  degree, 
that  all  might  be  brought  to  Jesus.  Do  Thou  this, 
O  God,  of  Thine  infinite  mercy. 

And  as  we  are  now  making  intercession  we  would, 
according  to  Thy  Word,  pray  for  all  kings,  such  as 
are  in  authority,  that  we  may  lead  quiet  and  peace- 
able lives.  We  pray  for  all  nations  also-.  O  Lord, 
bless  and  remember  the  lands  that  sit  in  darkness, 
and  let  them  see  a  great  light,  and  may  missionary 
enterprise  be  abundantly  successful.  And  let  the 
favoured  nations  where  our  God  is  known,  especi- 
ally this  land  and  the  land  across  the  mighty  ocean 
that  love  the  same  Saviour  and  speak  the  same 
tongue,  be  always  favoured  with  the  Divine 
presence  and  with  abundant  prosperity  and 
blessing. 

O  Lord,  Thou  hast  chosen  this  our  race  and 
favoured  it  and  multiplied  it  on  the  face  of  the 
earth,  and  whereas  with  this  staff  it  crossed  this 
Jordan  it  hath  now  become  two  great  nations.  Lord 
be  pleased  to  bless  the  whole  of  the  race  and  those 
absorbed  into  it,  and  then  all  other  races  that  in  us 
may  be  fulfilled  the  blessing  of  Abraham,  "I  will 
bless  you  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing." 


152 

And  now,  Father,  glorify  Thy  Son !  In  scatter- 
ing pardons  through  His  precious  blood  glorify  Thy 
Son !  In  sending  forth  the  Eternal  Spirit  to  con- 
vince men  and  bring  them  tO'  His  feet,  Father 
glorify  Thy  Son!  In  enriching  Thy  saints  with 
gifts  and  graces,  and  building,  them  up  intO'  His 
image,  Father  glorify  Thy  Son !  In  the  gathering 
together  of  the  whole  company  of  His  elect  and  in 
the  hastening  of  His  kingdom  and  His  coming. 
Father  glorify  Thy  Son!  Beyond  this  prayer  we 
cannot  go :  "  Glorify  Thy  Son  that  Thy  Son  also 
may  glorify  Thee,"  and  unto  Father,  Son  and  Holy 
Spirit  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen, 


The  Golden  Key  of  Prayer. 


"Call  unto  Me,  and  I  will  answer  thee,  and  shew  thee 
great  and  mighty  things,  which  thou  knowest  not."  — 
Jeremiah  xxxiii?.  3. 

SOI\IE  of  the  most  learned  works  in  the  world 
smell  of  the  midnight  oil ;  but  the  most 
spiritual,  and  most  comforting  books  and  sayings  of 
men  usually  have  a  savour  about  them  of  prison- 
damp.  I  might  quote  many  instances :  John 
Bunyan's  Pilgrim  may  sxiffice  instead  of  a  hundred 
others ;  and  this  good  text  of  ours,  all  mouldy  and 
cliill  with  the  prison  in  which  Jeremiah  lay,  hath 
nevertheless  a  brightness  and  a  beauty  about  it, 
which  it  might  never  have  had  if  it  had  not  come 
as  a  cheering  word  to  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord, 
shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  prison-house.  God's 
people  have  always  in  their  worst  condition  found 
out  the  best  of  their  God  He  is  good  at  all  times  ; 
but  he  seemeth  to  be  at  His  best  when  they  are  at 
their  worst.  "How  could  you  bear  your  long 
imprisonment  so  well  ?  "  said  one  to  the  Landgrave 
of  Hesse,  who  had  been  shut  up  for  his  attachment 
to  the  principles  of  the  Reformation.  He  replied, 
"  The  Divine  consolations  of  martyrs  were  with  me." 
Doubtless  there  is  a  consolation  more  deep,  more 
strong  than  any  other,  which  God  keeps  for  those 
who,  being  His  faithful  witnesses,  have  to  endure 


154 

exceeding  great  tribulation  from  the  enmity  of 
man.  There  is  a  glorious  aurora  for  the  frigid 
zone ;  and  stars  glisten  in  northern  skies  with  un- 
usual splendour.  Rutherford  had  a  quaint  saying, 
that  when  he  was  cast  into  the  cellars  of  affliction, 
he  remembered  that  the  great  King  always  kept 
His  wine  there,  and  he  began  to  seek  at  once  for 
the  wine-bottles,  and  to  drink  of  the  "wines  on  the 
lees  well  refined."  They  who  dive  in  the  sea  of 
affliction  bring  up  rare  pearls.  You  know,  my  com- 
panions in  affliction,  that  it  is  so.  You  whose  bones 
have  been  ready  to  come  through  the  skin  through 
long  lying  upon  the  weary  couch ;  you  who  have 
seen  your  earthly  goods  carried  away  from  you, 
and  have  been  reduced  well  nigh  to  penury ;  you 
who  have  gone  to  the  grave  yet  seven  times,  till 
you  have  feared  that  your  last  earthly  friend  would 
be  borne  away  by  unpitying  Death ;  you  have 
proved  that  He  is  a  faithful  God,  and  that  as  your 
tribulations  abound,  so  your  consolations  also 
abound  by  Christ  Jesus,  My  prayer  is,  in  taking 
this  text  this  morning,  that  some  other  prisoners  of 
the  Lord  may  have  its  joyous  promise  spoken  home 
to  them ;  that  you  who  are  straitly  shut  up  and 
cannot  come  forth  by  reason  of  present  heaviness 
of  spirit,  may  hear  Him  say,  as  with  a  soft  whisper 
in  your  ears,  and  in  your  hearts,  "Call  unto  Me, 
and  I  will  answer  thee,  and  shew  thee  great  and 
mighty  things  which  thou  knowest  not" 

The  text  naturally  splits  itself  up  into  three 
distinct  particles  of  truth.  Upon  these  let  us  speak 
as  we  are  enabled  by  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  First, 
prayer  commanded — "  Call  unto  Me  ; "  secondly,  an 


155 

answer  promised — "And  I  will  answer  thee;" 
thirdly,  faith  encouraged — "And  shew  thee  great 
and  mighty  things  which  thou  knowest  not." 

I.     The  first  head  is  PRAYER  COMMANDED. 

We  are  not  merely  counselled  and  recommended 
to  pray,  but  bidden  to  pray.  This  is  great  condes- 
cension. A  hospital  is  built :  it  is  considered 
sufficient  that  free  admission  shall  be  given  to  the 
sick  when  they  seek  it ;  but  no  order  in  council  is 
made  that  a  man  must  enter  its  gates.  A  soup 
kitchen  is  well  provided  for  in  the  depth  of  winter. 
Notice  is  promulgated  that  those  who  are  poor  may 
receive  food  on  application ;  but  no  one  thinks  of 
passing  an  Act  of  Parliament,  compelling  the  poor 
to  come  and  wait  at  the  door  to  take  the  charity. 
It  is  thought  tO'  be  enough  to  proffer  it  without 
issuing  any  sort  of  mandate  that  men  shall  accept  it. 
Yet  so  strange  is  the  infatuation  of  man  on  the  one 
hand,  which  makes  him  need  a  command  to  be 
merciful  to  his  own  soul,  and  so  marvellous  is  the 
condescension  of  our  gracious  God  on  the  other, 
that  He  issues  a  command  of  love  without  which 
not  a  man  of  Adam  bom  would  partake  of  the 
gospel  feast,  but  would  rather  starve  than  come.  In 
the  matter  of  prayer  it  is  even  so.  God's  own 
people  need,  or  else  they  would  not  receive  it,  a 
command  to  pray.  How  is  this?  Because,  dear 
friends,  we  are  very  subject  to  f.ts  of  worldliness, 
if  indeed  that  be  not  our  usual  state.  We  do  not 
forget  to  eat :  we  do  not  forget  to  take  the  shop 
shutters  down  :  we  do  not  forget  to  be  diligent  in 
business ;   we  do  not  forget  to  go  to  our  beds  to 


156 

rest :  but  we  often  do  forget  to  wrestle  with  God  in 
prayer,  and  to  spend,  as  we  ought  to  spend,  long 
periods  in  consecrated  fellowship  with  our  Father 
and  our  God.  With  too  many  professors  the  ledger 
is  so  bulky  that  you  cannot  move  it,  and  the  Bible, 
representing  their  devotion,  is  sO'  small  that  you 
might  almost  put  it  in  your  waistcoat  pocket. 
Hours  for  the  world !  Moments  for  Christ !  The 
world  has  the  best,  and  our  closet  the  parings  of  our 
time.  We  give  our  strength  and  freshness  to  the 
ways  of  mammon,  and  our  fatigue  and  languor  to 
the  ways  of  God.  Hence  it  is  that  we  need  to  be 
commanded  to  attend  tO'  that  very  act  which  it 
ought  to  be  our  greatest  happiness,  as  it  is  our 
highest  privilege  to  perform,  viz.,  to  meet  with  our 
God.  "Call  unto  Me,"  saith  He,  for  He  knows 
that  we  are  apt  to  forget  to  call  upon  God.  "What 
meajiest  thou,  oh,  sleeper  ?  arise  and  call  upon  thy 
God,"  is  dxi  exhortation  which  is  needed  by  us  as 
well  as  by  Jonah  in  the  storm. 

He  understands  what  heavy  hearts  we  have 
sometimes,  when  under  a  sense  of  sin.  Satan  says 
to  us,  "  Why  should  you  pray  ?  How  can  you  hope 
to  prevail?  In  vain  thou  sayest,  I  will  arise  and 
go  to  my  Father,  for  thou  art  not  worthy  to  be  one 
of  his  hired  servants.  How  canst  thou  see  the 
King's  face  after  thou  hast  played  the  traitor 
against  Him?  How  wilt  thou  dare  to  approach 
unto  the  altar  when  thou  hast  thyself  defiled  it,  and 
when  the  sacrifice  which  thou  wouldst  bring  there 
is  a  poor  polluted  one  ?  "  O  brethren,  it  is  well  for 
us  that  we  are  commanded  to  pray,  or  else  in  times 
of  heaviness  we  might  give  it  up.     If  God  command 


157 

me,  unfit  as  I  may  be,  I  will  creep  to  the  footstool 
of  grace ;  and  since  He  says,  "  Pray  without  ceas- 
ing," though  my  words  fail  me  and  my  heart  itself 
will  wander,  yet  I  will  stammer  out  the  wishes  of 
my  hungering  soul  and  say,  "  O  God,  at  least  teach 
me  to  pray  and  help  me  to  prevail  with  Thee."  Are 
we  not  commanded  to  pray  also  because  of  our 
frequent  unbelief?  Unbelief  whispers,  "What 
profit  is  there  if  thou  shouldst  seek  the  Lord  upon 
such  and  such  a  matter  ? "  This  is  a  case  quite 
out  of  the  list  of  those  things  wherein  God  hath 
interposed,  and,  therefore  (saith  the  devil),  if  you 
were  in  any  other  position  you  might  rest  upon  the 
mighty  arm  of  God ;  but  here  your  prayer  will  not 
avail  you.  Either  it  is  too  trivial  a  matter,  or  it  is 
too  connected  with  temporals,  or  else  it  is  a  matter 
in  which  you  have  sinned  too  much,  or  else  it  is  too 
high,  too  hard,  too  complicated  a  piece  of  business, 
you  have  no  right  tO'  take  that  before  God!  So 
suggests  the  foul  fiend  of  hell.  Therefore,  there 
stands  written  as  an  every-day  precept  suitable  to 
every  case  into  which  a  Christian  can  be  cast,  "Call 
unto  Me — call  unto  Me."  Art  thou  sick  ?  Wouldst 
thou  be  healed?  Cry  unto  Me,  for  I  am  a  Great 
Physician.  Does  providence  trouble  thee?  Art 
thou  fearful  that  thou  shalt  not  provide  things 
honest  in  the  sight  of  man  ?  Call  unto  Me !  Do 
Thy  children  vex  Thee?  Dost  Thou  feel  that 
which  is  sharper  than  an  adder's  tooth — a  thank- 
less child?  Call  unto  Me.  Are  thy  griefs  little 
yet  painful,  like  small  points  and  pricks  of  thorns  ? 
Call  unto  Me !  Is  thy  burden  heavy  as  though  it 
would  make  thy  back  break  beneath  its  load  ?    Call 


158 

unto  Me !  "  Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord,  and 
He  shall  sustain  thee;  He  shall  never  suffer  the 
righteous  to  be  moved."  In  the  valley — on  the 
mountain — on  the  barren  rock — in  the  briny  sea, 
submerged,  anon,  beneath  the  billows,  and  lifted 
up  by-and-by  upon  the  crest  of  the  waves — in  the 
furnace  when  the  coals  are  glowing — in  the  gates 
of  death  when  the  jaws  of  hell  would  shut  them- 
selves upon  thee — cease  thou  not,  for  the  command- 
ment evermore  addresses  thee  with  "  Call  unto  Me." 
Still  prayer  is  mighty  and  must  prevail  with  God 
to  bring  thee  thy  deliverance.  These  are  some 
of  the  reasons  why  the  privilege  of  supplica- 
tion is  also  in  Holy  Scripture  spoken  of  as  duty : 
there  are  many  more,  but  these  will  suffice  this 
morning. 

We  must  not  leave  our  first  part  till  we  have 
made  another  remark.  We  ought  tO'  be  very  glad 
that  God  hath  given  us  this  command  in  His  Word 
that  it  may  be  sure  and  abiding.  You  may  turn  to 
fifty  passages  where  the  same  precept  is  uttered. 
I  do  not  often  read  in  Scripture,  "Thou  shalt  not 
kill;"  "Thou  shalt  not  covet."  Twice  the  law  is 
given,  but  I  often  read  gospel  precepts,  for  if  the 
law  be  given  twice,  the  gospel  is  given  seventy 
times  seven.  For  every  precept  which  I  cannot 
keep,  by  reason  of  my  being  weak  through  the 
flesh,  I  find  a  thousand  precepts,  which  it-is  sweet 
and  pleasant  for  me  to  keep,  by  reason  of  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  dwelleth  in  the  children 
of  God  ;  and  this  command  to  pray  is  insisted  upon 
again  and  again.  It  may  be  a  seasonable  exercise 
for  some  of  you  to  find  out  how  often  in  scripture 


159 

you  are  told  to  pray.  You  will  be  surprised  to  find 
how  many  times  such  words  as  these  are  given: 
"Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  I  will 
deliver  thee" — "Ye  people,  pour  out  your  heart 
before  Him."  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  He  may  be 
found  ;  call  ye  upon  Him  while  He  is  near."  "  Ask, 
and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ; 
knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you" — "Watch 
and  pray  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation  " — "  Pray 
wdthout  ceasing  " — "  Come  boldly  unto  the  throne 
of  grace."  "  Draw  nigh  to  God  and  He  will  draw 
nigh  to  you."  "Continue  in  prayer."  I  need  not 
multiply  where  I  could  not  possibly  exhaust.  I 
pick  two  or  three  out  of  this  great  bag  of  pearls. 
Come,  Christian,  you  ought  never  to  question 
whether  you  have  a  right  to  pray  :  you  should  never 
ask,  "May  I  be  permitted  to  come  into  His 
presence  ?  "  When  you  have  so  many  commands, 
(and  God's  commands  are  all  promises,  and  all 
enablings,)  you  may  come  boldly  unto  the  throne 
of  heavenly  grace,  by  the  new  and  living  way 
through  the  rent  veil. 

But  there  are  times  when  God  not  only  com- 
mands His  people  to  pray  in  the  Bible,  but  He  also 
commands  them  to  pray  directly  by  the  monitions  of 
His  Holy  Spirit.  You  who  know  the  inner  life 
comprehend  me  at  once.  You  feel  on  a  sudden, 
possibly  in  the  midst  of  business,  the  pressing 
thought  that  you  jnust  retire  to  pray.  It  may  be, 
you  do  not  at  first  take  particular  notice  of  the 
inclination,  but  it  comes  again,  and  again,  and 
again—"  Retire  and  pray !  "  I  find  that  in  the 
m-atter  of  prayer,  I  am  myself  very  much  like  a 


i6o 

water-wheel  which  runs  well  when  there  is  plenty 
of  water,  but  which  turns  with  very  little  force  when 
the  brook  is  growing  shallow ;  or,  like  the  ship 
which  flies  over  the  waves,  putting  out  all  her 
canvas  when  the  wind  is  favourable,  but  which  has 
to  tack  about  most  laboriously  when  there  is  but 
little  of  the  favouring  breeze.  Now,  it  strikes  me 
that  whenever  our  Lord  gives  you  the  special  in- 
clination to  pray,  that  you  should  double  your 
diligence.  You  ought  always  to  pray  and  not  to 
faint ;  yet  when  He  gives  you  the  special  longing 
after  prayer,  and  you  feel  a  peculiar  aptness  and 
enjoyment  in  it,  you  have,  over  and  above  the  com- 
mand which  is  constantly  binding,  another  command 
which  should  compel  you  to  cheerful  obedience.  At 
such  tinies  I  think  we  may  stand  in  the  position  of 
David,  to  whom  the  Lord  said,  "  When  thou  hearest 
a  sound  of  a  going  in  the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees, 
then  shalt  thou  bestir  thyself."  That  going  in 
the  tops  of  the  mulberry  trees  may  have  been  the 
footfalls  of  angels  hastening  to  the  help  of  David, 
and  then  David  was  to  smite  the  Philistines,  and 
when  God's  mercies  are  coming,  their  footfalls  are 
our  desires  to'  pray ;  and  our  desires  tO'  pray  should 
be  at  once  an  indication  that  the  set  time  to  favour 
Zion  is  come.  Sow  plentifully  now,  for  thou 
canst  sow  in  hope ;  plough  joyously  now,  for  thy 
harvest  is  sure.  Wrestle  now,  Jacob,  for  thou  art 
about  to  be  made  a  prevailing  prince,  and  thy  name 
shall  be  called  Israel.  Now  is  thy  time,  spiritual 
merchantmen ;  the  market  is  high,  trade  much ; 
thy  profit  shall  be  large.  See  to  it  that  thou  usest 
right  well  the  golden  hour,  and  reap  thy  harvest 


i6i 

while  the  sun  shines.  When  we  enjoy  visitations 
from  on  high,  we  should  be  peculiarly  constant  in 
pra}-er  ;  and  if  some  other  duty  less  pressing  should 
have  the  go-by  for  a  season,  it  will  not  be  amiss 
and  we  shall  be  no  loser ;  for  when  God  bids  us 
specially  pray  by  the  monitions  of  His  Spirit,  then 
should  w'Q  bestir  ourselves  in  prayer. 

II.     Let    us   now    take    the    second    head — AN 
ANSWER  PROMISED. 

We  ought  not  to  tolerate  for  a  minute  the  ghastly 
and  grievous  thought  that  God  will  not  answer 
prayer.  His  nature,  as  manifested  in  Christ  Jesus, 
demands  it.  He  has  revealed  Himself  in  the 
gospel  as  a  God  of  love,  full  of  grace  and  truth; 
and  how  can  He  refuse  to  help  those  of  His 
creatures  v.'ho  humbly  in  His  own  appointed  way 
seek  His  face  and  favour?  W^hen  the  Athenian 
senate,  upon  one  occasion,  found  it  most  convenient 
to  meet  together  in  the  open  air,  as  they  were 
sitting  in  their  deliberations,  a  sparrow,  pursued 
by  a  hawk,  flew  in  the  direction  of  the  senate.  Being 
hard  pressed  by  the  bird  of  prey,  it  sought  shelter 
in  the  bosom  of  one  of  the  senators.  He,  being  a 
man  of  rough  and  vulgar  mould,  took  the  bird  from 
his  bosom,  dashed  it  on  the  ground  and  so  killed 
it.  Whereupon  the  whole  senate  rose  in  uproar^ 
and  without  one  single  dissenting  voice,  condemned 
him  to  die,  as  being  unworthy  of  a  seat  in  the  senate 
with  them,  or  to  be  called  an  Athenian,  if  he  did 
not  render  succour  to  a  creature  that  confided  in 
him.  Can  we  suppose  that  the  God  of  heaven,, 
whose  nature  is  love,  could  tear  out  of  His  bosom 
the  poor  fluttering  dove  that  flies  from  the  eagle  of 

12 


1 62 

justice  intO'  the  bosom  of  His  mercy  ?  Will  He  give 
the  invitation  to  us  to  seek  His  face,  and  when  we, 
as  He  knows,  with  so  much  trepidation  of  fear, 
yet  summon  courage  enough  to  fly  into  His  bosom, 
will  He  then  be  unjust  and  imgracious  enough  to 
forget  to  hear  our  cry  and  to  answer  us  ?  Let  us 
not  think  so  hardly  of  the  God  of  heaven.  Let  us 
recollect  next,  His  past  character  as  well  as  His 
nature.  I  mean  the  character  which  He  has  won 
for  Himself  by  His  past  deeds  of  grace.  Consider, 
my  brethren,  that  one  stupendous  display  of  bounty 
— if  I  were  to  mention  a  thousand  I  could  not  give 
a  better  illustration  of  the  character  of  God  than 
that  one  deed — "  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son, 
but  freely  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all " — and  it  is 
not  my  inference  only,  but  the  inspired  conclusion 
of  an  apostle — "how  shall  He  not  with  Him  also 
freely  give  us  all  things  ?  "  If  the  Lord  did  not 
refuse  tO'  listen  to  my  voice  when  I  was  a  guilty 
sinner  and  an  enemy,  how  can  He  disregard  my 
cry  now  that  I  am  justified  and  saved !  How  is  it 
that  He  heard  the  voice  of  my  misery  when  my 
heart  knew  it  not,  and  would  not  seek  relief,  if  after 
all  He  will  not  hear  me  now  that  I  am  His  child. 
His  friend  ?  The  streaming  wounds  of  Jesus  are  the 
sure  guarantees  for  answered  prayer.  George 
Herbert  represents  in  that  quaint  poem  of  his, 
^'Tke  Bag"  the  Saviour  saying — 

"If  ye  have  anything  to  send  or  write 
(I  have  no  bag,  but  here  is  room) 
Unto  my  Father's  hands  and  sight, 
(Believe  me)  it  shall  safely  come. 


i63 

That  I   shall  mind  what  you  impart 
Look,  you  may  put  it  very  near  my  heart, 
Or  if  hereafter  any  of  friends 
Will  use  me  in  this  kind,  the  door 
Shall  still  be  open  ;  what  he  sends 
I  will  present  and  somewhat  more 
Not  to  his  hurt." 

Surely,  George  Herbert's  thought  was  that  the 
atonement  was  in  itself  a  guarantee  that  prayer 
must  be  heard,  that  the  great  gash  made  near  the 
Saviour's  heart,  which  let  the  light  intO'  the  very 
depths  of  the  heart  of  Deity,  was  a  proof  that  He 
who  sits  in  heaven  would  hear  the  cry  of  his  people. 
You  misread  Calvary,  if  you  think  that  prayer  is 
useless.  But,  beloved,  we  have  the  Lord' s  own 
promise  for  it,  and  He  is  a  God  that  cannot  lie. 
"Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble  and  I  will 
answer  thee."  Has  He  not  said,  "Whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  in  prayer,  believe  that  ye  shall  have  it  and 
ye  shall  have  it."  We  cannot  pray,  indeed,  unless 
we  believe  this  doctrine ;  "for  he  that  cometh  to 
God  must  believe  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  the 
rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him ; "  and  if 
we  have  any  question  at  all  about  whether  our 
prayer  will  be  heard,  we  are  comparable  to  him 
that  wavereth  ;  "for  he  who  wavereth  is  like  a  wave 
of  the  sea,  driven  with  the  wind  and  tossed ;  let 
not  that  man  think  that  he  shall  receive  anything 
of  the  Lord" 

Furthermore,  it  is  not  necessary,  still  it  may 
strengthen  the  point,  if  we  add  that  our  own  experi- 
ence  leads  us  to  believe  that  God  will  answer  prayer. 
I  must  not  speak  for  you  ;  but  I  may  speak  for  my- 


164 

self.  If  there  be  anything  I  know,  anything  that  I 
am  quite  assured  of  beyond  all  question,  it  is  that 
praying  breath  is  never  spent  in  vain.  If  no  other 
man  here  can  say  it,  I  dare  to  say  it,  and  I  know 
that  I  can  prove  it.  My  own  conversion  is  the 
result  of  prayer,  long,  affectionate,  earnest,  impor- 
tunate. Parents  prayed  for  me ;  God  heard  their 
cries,  and  here  I  am  to  preach  the  gospel.  Since 
then  I  have  adventured  upon  some  things  that  were 
far  beyond  my  capacity  as  I  thought ;  but  I  have 
never  failed,  because  I  have  cast  myself  upon  the 
Lord.  You  know  as  a  church  that  I  have  not 
scrupled  to  indulge  large  ideas  of  what  we  might  do 
for  God ;  and  we  have  accomplished  all  that  we 
purposed.  I  have  sought  God's  aid,  and  assistance, 
and  help,  in  all  my  manifold  undertakings,  and 
though  I  cannot  tell  here  the  story  of  my  private 
life  in  God's  work,  yet  if  it  were  written  it  would  be 
a  standing  proof  that  there  is  a  God  that  answers 
prayer.  He  has  heard  my  prayers,  not  now  and 
then,  nor  once  nor  twice,  but  so  many  times,  that  it 
has  grown  into  a  habit  with  me  to  spread  my  case 
before  God  with  the  absolute  certainty  that  what- 
soever I  ask  of  God,  He  will  give  to  me.  It  is 
not  now  a  "  Perhaps  "  or  a  possibility.  I  know  that 
my  Lord  answers  me,  and  I  dare  not  doubt,  it 
were  indeed  folly  if  I  did.  As  I  am  sure  that  a 
certain  amount  of  leverage  will  lift  a  weight,  so  I 
know  that  a  certain  amount  of  prayer  will  get  any- 
thing from  God.  As  the  rain-cloud  brings  the 
shower,  so  prayer  brings  the  blessing.  As  spring 
scatters  flowers,  so  supplication  ensures  mercies.  In 
all  labour  there  is  profit,  but  most  of  all  in  the  v»'ork 


i65 

of  intercession  :  I  am  sure  of  this,  for  I  have  reaped 
it  As  I  put  trust  in  the  queen's  money,  and  have 
never  failed  yet  to  buy  what  I  want  when  I  produce 
the  cash,  so  put  I  trust  in  God's  promises,  and 
mean  to  do  so  till  I  find  that  He  shall  once  tell  me 
that  they  are  base  coin,  and  will  not  do  to  trade 
with  in  heaven's  market.  But  why  should  I  speak  ? 
O  brothers  and  sisters,  you  all  know  in  your  own 
selves  that  God  hears  prayer ;  if  you  do  not,  then 
where  is  your  Christianity  ?  where  is  your  religion  ? 
You  will  need  to  learn  what  are  the  first  elements 
of  the  truth  ;  for  all  saints,  young  or  old,  set  it  down 
as  certain  that  He  doth  hear  prayer. 

Still  remember  that  prayer  is  always  to  be  offered 
in  submission  to  God's  will ;  that  when  we  say, 
God  heareth  prayer,  we  do  not  intend  by  that,  that 
He  always  gives  us  literally  what  we  ask  for.  We 
do  mean,  however,  this,  that  He  gives  us  what  is 
best  for  us ;  and  that  if  He  does  not  give  us  the 
mercy  we  ask  for  in  silver,  He  bestows  it  upon  us 
in  gold.  If  He  doth  not  take  away  the  thorn  in 
the  flesh,  yet  He  saith,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for 
thee,"  and  that  comes  to  the  same  in  the  end. 
Lord  Bolingbroke  said  to  the  Countess  of  Hunting- 
don, "  I  cannot  understand,  your  ladyship,  how  you 
can  make  out  earnest  prayer  to  be  consistent  with 
submission  to  the  Divine  will."  "My  lord,"  she 
said,  "that  is  a  matter  of  no  difficulty.  If  I  were  a 
courtier  of  some  generous  king,  and  he  gave  me 
permission  to  ask  any  favour  I  pleased  of  him,  I 
should  be  sure  to  put  it  thus,  'Will  your  majesty 
be  graciously  pleased  to  grant  me  such-and-such  a 
favour ;  but  at  the  same  time  though  I  very  much 


i66 

desire  it,  if  it  would  in  any  way  detract  from  your 
majesty's  honour,  or  if  in  your  majesty's  judgment 
it  should  seem  better  that  I  did  not  have  this 
favour,  I  shall  be  quite  as  content  to  go  without 
it  as  to  receive  it.'  So  you  see  I  might  earnestly 
offer  a  petition,  and  yet  I  might  submissively  leave 
it  in  the  king's  hands."  So  with  God.  We  never 
offer  up  prayer  without  inserting  that  clause,  either 
in  spirit  or  in  words,  "Nevertheless,  not  as  I  will, 
but  as  Thou  wilt ;  not  my  will,  but  Thine  be 
done."  We  can  only  pray  without  an  "  if  "  when 
we  are  quite  sure  that  our  will  must  be  God's  will, 
because  God's  will  is  fully  our  will.  A  much- 
slandered  poet  has  well  said  :  — 

"Man,  regard  thy  prayers  as  a  purpose  of  love  to  thy 

soul, 
Esteem  the  providence  that  led  to  them  as  an  index 

of  God's  good  will  ; 
So  shalt  thou  pray  aright,   and  thy  words  shall  meet 

with  acceptance. 
Also,  in  pleading  for  others,  be  thankful  for  the  fulness 

of  thy  prayer  ; 
For  if  thou  art  ready  to  ask,  the  Lord  is  more  ready  to 

bestow. 
The  salt  preserveth  the  sea,  and  the  saints  uphold  the 

earth  ; 
Their  prayers  are  the  thousand  pillars  that  prop  the 

canopy  of  nature. 
Verily,  an  hour  without  prayer,  from  some  terrestrial 

mind, 
Were  a  curse  in  the  calendar  of  time,   a  spot  of  the 

blackness  of  darkness. 
Perchance  the  terrible  day,  when  the  world  must  rock 

into  ruins, 
Will  be  one  unwhitened  by  prayer — shall  He  find  faith 

on  the  earth  ? 
For  there  is  an  economy  of  mercy,  as  of  wisdom,  and 

power,  and  means  ; 
Neither  is  one  blessing  granted,  unbesought  from  the 

treasury  of  good : 


1 67 

And  the  charitable  heart  of  the  Being,  to  depend  upon 
whom  is  happiness, 

Never  v^^ithholdeth  a  bounty,  so  long  as  his  subject 
prayeth  ; 

Yea,  ask  what  thou  wilt,  to  the  second  throne  in 
heaven, 

It  is  thine  for  whom  it  was  appointed ;  there  is  no 
limit  unto  prayer : 

But  and  if  thou  cease  to  ask,  tremble,  thou  self- 
suspended  creature, 

For  thy  strength  is  cut  off  as  was  Samson's :  and  the 
hour  of  thy  doom  is  come." 

III.  I  come  to  our  third  point,  which  I  think 
is  full  of  encouragement  to  all  those  who  exercise 
the  hallowed  art  of  prayer :  ENCOURAGEMENT  TO 
FAITH,  "I  will  shew  thee  great  and  mighty  things 
which  thou  knowest  not." 

Let  us  just  remark  that  this  was  originally  spoken 
to  a  prophet  in  prison  ;  and,  therefore,  it  applies  in 
the  first  place  to  every  teacher ;  and,  indeed,  as 
every  teacher  must  be  a  learner,  it  has  a  bearing 
upon  every  learner  in  divine  truth.  The  best  way 
by  which  a  prophet  and  teacher  and  learner  can 
know  the  reserved  truths,  the  higher  and  more 
mysterious  truths  of  God,  is  by  waiting  upon  God 
in  prayer.  I  noticed  very  specially  yesterday  in 
reading  the  Book  of  the  Prophet  Daniel,  how 
Daniel  found  out  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream.  The 
soothsayers,  the  magicians,  the  astrologers  of  the 
Chaldees,  brought  out  their  curious  books  and  their 
strange-looking  instruments,  and  began  to  m^utter 
their  abracadabra  and  all  sorts  of  mysterious  incan- 
tations, but  they  all  failed.  What  did  Daniel  do  ? 
He  set  himself  to  prayer,  and  knowing  that  the 
prayer  of  a  united  body  of  men  has  more  prevalence 


i68 

than  the  prayer  of  one,  we  find  that  Daniel  called 
together  his  brethren,  and  bade  them  unite  with 
him  in  earnest  prayer  that  God  would  be  pleased 
of  His  infinite  mercy  to  open  up  the  vision.  "  Then 
Daniel  went  to  his  house  and  made  the  thing  Icnown 
to  Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azariah,  his  companions, 
that  they  would  desire  mercies  of  the  God  of 
heaven  concerning  this  secret,  that  Daniel  and  his 
fellows  should  not  perish  with  the  rest  of  the  wise 
men  of  Babylon."  And  in  the  case  of  John,  who 
was  the  Daniel  of  the  New  Testament,  you 
remember  he  saw  a  book  in  the  right  hand  of  Him 
that  sat  on  the  throne — a  book  sealed  with  seven 
seals  which  none  was  found  worthy  to  open  or  to 
look  thereon.  What  did  John  do  ?  The  book  was 
by-and-by  opened  by  the  Lion  of  the  Tribe  of 
Judah,  who  had  prevailed  to  open  the  book ;  but 
it  is  written  first  before  the  book  was  opened,  "I 
wept  much."  Yes,  and  the  tears  of  John  which 
were  his  liquid  prayers,  were,  as  far  as  he  was 
concerned,  the  sacred  keys  by  which  the  folded 
book  was  opened. 

Brethren  in  the  ministry,  you  who  are  teachers  in 
the  Sabbath- school,  and  all  of  you  who  are  learners 
in  the  college  of  Christ  Jesus,  I  pray  you  remember 
that  prayer  is  your  best  means  of  study  :  like  Daniel 
you  shall  understand  the  dream,  and  the  interpreta- 
tion thereof,  when  you  have  sought  unto  God  ;  and 
like  John  you  shall  see  the  seven  seals  of  precious 
truth  unloosed,  after  that  you  have  wept  much. 
^'Yea,  if  thou  criest  after  knowledge,  and  iiftest  up 
the  voice  for  understanding  ;  if  thou  seekest  her  as 
silver,  and  searchest  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures ; 


169 

then  shalt  thou  understand  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and 
find  the  knowledge  of  God."  Stones  are  not 
broken,  except  by  an  earnest  use  of  the  hammer ; 
and  the  stone-breaker  usually  goes  down  on  his 
knees.  Use  the  hammer  of  diligence,  and  let  the 
knee  of  prayer  be  exercised,  too,  and  there  is  not 
a  stony  doctrine  in  Revelation  which  is  useful  for 
you  to  understand,  which  will  not  fly  into  shivers 
under  the  exercise  of  prayer  and  faith.  "Bene 
orasse  est  bene  stiiduisse "  was  a  wise  sentence  of 
Luther,  which  has  been  so  often  quoted,  that  we 
hardly  venture  but  to  hint  at  it.  "  To  have  prayed 
well  is  to  have  studied  well."  You  may  force  your 
way  through  anything  with  the  leverage  of  prayers. 
Thoughts  and  reasonings  may  be  like  the  steel 
wedges  which  may  open  a  way  into  truth ;  but 
prayer  is  the  lever,  the  prise  which  forces  open  the 
iron  chest  of  sacred  mystery,  that  we  may  get  the 
treasure  that  is  hidden  therein  for  those  who  can 
force  their  way  to  reach  it.  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  still  suffereth  violence,  and  the  violent 
taketh  it  by  force.  Take  care  that  ye  work  away 
with  the  mighty  implement  of  prayer,  and  nothing 
can  stand  against  you. 

We  must  not,  however,  stop  there.  We  have 
applied  the  text  to  only  one  case ;  it  is  applicable 
to  a  hundred.  W^e  single  out  another.  T/ie  saint 
jnay  expect  to  discover  deeper  experience  and  to 
know  more  of  the  higher  life  and  scriptural  life,  by 
being  much  in  prayer.  There  are  different  transla- 
tions of  m.y  text.  One  version  renders  it,  "I  will 
shew  thee  great  and  fortified  things  which  thou 
knowest    not."      Another    reads    it,    "Great    and 


I70 

reserved  things  which  thou  knowest  not."  Now, 
all  the  developments  of  spiritual  life  are  not  alike 
easy  of  attainment.  There  are  the  common  frames 
and  feelings  of  repentance,  and  faith,  and  joy, 
and  hope,  which  are  enjoyed  by  the  entire  family : 
but  there  is  an  upper  realm  of  rapture,  of  com- 
munion, and  conscious  union  with  Christ,  which  is 
far  from  being  the  common  dwelling-place  of 
believers.  All  believers  see  Christ;  but  all 
believers  do'  not  put  their  fingers  into  the  prints  of 
the  nails,  nor  thrust  their  hand  into  His  side.  We 
have  not  all  the  high  privilege  of  John  to  lean  upon 
Jesus'  bosom,  nor  of  Paul,  to  be  caught  up  into  the 
third  heaven.  In  the  ark  of  salvation  we  find  a 
lower,  second,  and  third  storey ;  all  are  in  the  ark, 
but  all  are  not  in  the  same  storey.  Most  Christians, 
as  to  the  river  of  experience,  are  only  up  to  the 
ankles ;  some  others  have  waded  till  the  stream  is 
up  to  the  knees ;  a  few  find  it  breast-high  ;  and  but 
a  few — oh!  how  few! — find  it  a  river  to  swim  in^ 
the  bottom  of  which  they  cannot  touch.  My 
brethren,  there  are  heights  in  experimental  know- 
ledge of  the  things  of  God  which  the  eagle's  eye 
of  acumen  and  philosophic  thought  hath  never 
seen ;  and  there  are  secret  paths  which  the  lion's 
whelp  of  reason  and  judgment  hath  not  as  yet 
learned  to  travel.  God  alone  can  bear  us  there ; 
but  the  chariot  in  which  He  takes  us  up,  and  the 
fiery  steeds  with  which  that  chariot  is  dragged, 
are  prevailing  prayers.  Prevailing  prayer  is 
victorious  over  the  God  of  mercy,  "  By  his  strength 
he  had  power  with  God  :  yea,  he  had  power  over 
the   angel,    and    prevailed :    he    wept,    and   made 


171 

supplication  unto  him  :  he  found  Him  in  Beth-el, 
and  there  he  spake  with  us."  Prevaihng  prayer 
takes  the  Christian  to  Carmel,  and  enables  him  to 
cover  heaven  with  clouds  of  blessing,  and  earth 
with  floods  of  mercy.  Prevailing  prayer  bears  the 
Christian  aloft  to  Pisgah  and  shows  him  the  in- 
heritance reserved ;  ay,  and  it  elevates  him  to 
Tabor  and  transfigures  him,  till  in  the  likeness  of 
his  Lord,  as  he  is,  so  are  we  also  in  this  world.  If 
you  would  reach  to  something  higher  than  ordinary 
grovelling  experience,  look  to  the  Rock  that  is 
higher  than  you,  and  look  with  the  eye  of  faith 
through  the  windows  of  importunate  prayer.  To 
grow  in  experience  then,  there  must  be  much 
prayer. 

You  must  have  patience  with  me  while  I  apply 
this  text  to  two  or  three  more  cases.  It  is  certainly 
true  of  the  sufferer  under  trial :  if  he  waits  upon 
God  in  prayer  much  he  shall  receive  greater 
deliverances  than  he  has  ever  dreamed  of — "great 
and  mighty  things  which  thou  knowest  not."  Here 
is  Jeremiah's  testimony: — "Thou  drewest  near  in 
the  day  that  I  called  upon  Thee  :  Thou  saidst, 
Fear  not.  O  Lord,  Thou  hast  pleaded  the  causes 
of  my  soul ;  Thou  hast  redeemed  my  life."  And 
David's  is  the  same: — "I  called  upon  the  Lord 
in  distress  :  the  Lord  answered  me,  and  set  me  in 
a  large  place.  ...  I  will  praise  Thee  :  for  Thou 
hast  heard  me,  and  art  become  my  salvation."  And 
yet  again  :  — "  Then  they  cried  untO'  the  Lord  in 
their  trouble,  and  He  delivered  them  out  of  their 
distresses.  And  He  led  them  forth  by  the  right 
way,  that  they  might  go  to  a  city  of  habitation.'* 


172 

^'My  husband  is  dead,"  said  the  poor  woman,  "and 
my  creditor  is  come  to  take  my  two-  sons  as  bonds- 
men." She  hoped  that  EHjah  would  possibly  say, 
"What  are  your  debts?  I  will  pay  them."  Instead 
of  that,  he  multipHes  her  oil  till  it  is  written,  "  Go 
thou  and  pay  thy  debts,  and " — what  was  the 
"and?" — "live  thou  and  thy  children  upon  the 
rest."  So  often  it  will  happen  that  God  will  not 
only  help  His  people  through  the  miry  places  of 
the  way,  so*  that  they  may  just  stand  on  the  other 
side  of  the  slough,  but  He  will  bring  them  safely 
far  on  the  journey.  That  was  a  remarkable 
miracle,  when  in  the  midst  of  the  storm,  Jesus 
Christ  came  walking  upon  the  sea,  the  disciples 
received  Him  into  the  ship,  and  not  only  was  the 
sea  calm,  but  it  is  recorded,  "  Immediately  the  ship 
was  at  the  land  whither  they  went."  That  was  a 
mercy  over  and  above  what  they  asked.  I  some- 
times hear  you  pray  and  make  use  of  a  quotation 
which  is  not  in  the  Bible : — "He  is  able  to  do 
exceeding  abundantly  above  what  we  ca7i  ask  or 
even  think."  It  is  not  so  written  in  the  Bible.  I 
do  not  know  what  we  can  ask  or  what  we  can 
think.  But  it  is  said,  "He  is  able  to  do  exceed- 
ing abundantly  above  what  we  ask  or  even 
think."  Let  us  then,  dear  friends,  when  we  are 
in  great  trial  only  say,  "  Now  I  am  in  prison ;  like 
Jeremiah  I  will  pray  as  he  did,  for  I  have  God's 
command  to  do  it ;  and  I  will  look  out  as  he  did, 
expecting  that  he  will  show  me  reserved  mercies 
which  I  know  nothing  of  at  present."  He  will  not 
merely  bring  his  people  through  the  battle,  cover- 
ing their  heads  in  it,  but  he  will  bring  them  forth 


173 

with  banners  waving,  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the 
mighty,  and  to  claim  their  portion  with  the  strong. 
Expect  great  things  of  a  God  who  gives  such 
great  prom^ises  as  these. 

Again,  here  is  encotiragentent  for  the  worker. 
IMost  of  you  are  doing  something  for  Christ ;  I  am 
happy  to  be  able  to  say  this,  knowing  that  I  do 
not  flatter  you.  My  dear  friends,  wait  upon  God 
much  in  prayer,  and  you  have  the  promise  that  He 
will  do  greater  things  for  you  than  you  know  of. 
We  know  not  how  much  capacity  for  usefulness 
there  may  be  in  us.  That  ass's  jaw-bone  lying 
there  upon  the  earth,  what  can  it  do  ?  Nobody 
knows  what  it  can  do.  It  get's  into>  Samson's 
hands,  what  can  it  not  do  ?  No  one  knows  what 
it  cannot  do  nov/  that  a  Samson  wields  it.  And 
you,  friend,  have  often  thought  yourself  to  be  as 
contemptible  as  that  bone,  and  you  have  said, 
"What  can  I  do?"  Ay,  but  when  Christ  by  His 
Spirit  grips  you,  what  can  you  not  do  ?  Truly  you 
may  adopt  Paul's  language  and  say,  "I  can  do  all 
things  through  Christ  who  strengtheneth  me.'* 
However,  do  not  depend  upon  prayer  without 
effort.  In  a  certain  school  there  was  one  girl  who 
knew  the  Lord,  a  very  gracious,  simple-hearted, 
trustful  child.  As  usual,  grace  developed  itself  in 
the  child  according  to  the  child's  position.  Her 
lessons  were  always  best  said  of  any  in  the  class. 
Another  girl  said  to  her,  "How  is  it  that  your 
lessons  are  always  so  well  said  ?  "  I  pray  God  to 
help  me,"  she  said,  "to  learn  my  lesson."  Well, 
thought  the  other,  "  Then  I  will  do  the  same."  The 
next  mornnig  when  she  stood  up  in  the  class  she 


174 

knew  nothing ;   and  when  she  was  in  disgrace  she 
complained  to  the  other,  "Why  I  prayed  God  to 
help  me  learn  my  lesson  and  I  do  not  know  any- 
thing of  it.     What  is  the  use  of  prayer?"     "But 
did  you   sit  down  and  try   to   learn   it  ? "     "  Oh ! 
no,"  she  said,  "  I  never  looked  at  the  book."     "  Ah," 
then  said  the  other,  "I  asked  God  to  help  me  to 
learn    my    lesson ;     but    I    then    sat    down   to    it 
studiously,  and  I  kept  at  it  till  I  knew  it  well,  and 
I  learned  it  easily,  because  my  earnest  desire,  which 
I    had   expressed    tO'   God   was,   help    me   to    be 
diligent,  in  endeavouring  to  do  my  duty."     So  is  it 
with  some  who  come  up  to  prayer-meetings  and 
pray,  and  then  they  fold  their  arms  and  go  away 
hoping   that   God's   work  will    go    on.     Like    the 
negro  woman  singing,  "Fly  abroad,  thou  mighty 
gospel,"  but  not  putting  a  penny  in  the  plate ;   so 
that  her  friend  touched  her  and  said,   "But  how 
can  it  fiy  if  you  don't  give  it  wings  to  fly  with  ? " 
There  be  many  who  appear  to  be  very  mighty  in 
prayer,  wondrous  in  supplications ;    but  then  they 
require  God  to  do  what  they  can  do  themselves, 
and,  therefore,  God  does  nothing  at  all  for  them. 
"  I  shall  leave  my  camel  untied,"  said  an  Arab  once  to 
Mahomet,  "and  trust  to  providence."    "Tie  it  up 
tight,"  said  Mahomet,  "and  then  trust  to  providence." 
So  you  that  say,  "  I  shall  pray  and  trust  my  Church,  or 
my  class,   or  my  work  toi  God's   goodness,"   may 
rather  hear  the  voice  of  experience  and  wisdom 
which  says,  "  Do  thy  best ;    work  as  if  all  rested 
upon  thy  toil ;   as  if  thy  own  arm  would  bring  thy 
salvation ; "   "  and  when   thou  hast   done  all,   cast 
thyself  on  Him  without  whom  it  is  in  vain  to  rise 


/o 


up  early  and  to  sit  up  late,  and  to  eat  the  bread  of 
carefulness:  and  if  He  speed  thee  give  Him  the 
praise." 

I  shall  not  detain  you  many  minutes  longer,  but 
I  want  to  notice  that  this  promise  ought  to  prove 
useful  for  the  comforting  of  those  who  are  inter- 
cessors for  others.  You  who  are  calling  upon  God 
to  save  your  children,  to  bless  your  neighbours,  to 
remember  your  husbands  or  your  wives  in  mercy, 
may  take  comfort  from  this,  "  I  will  shew  thee  great 
and  mighty  things,  which  thou  knowest  not."  A 
celebrated  minister  in  the  last  century,  one  Mr. 
Bailey,  was  the  child  of  a  godly  mother.  This 
mother  had  almost  ceased  to  pray  for  her  husband, 
who  was  a  man  of  a  most  ungodly  stamp,  and  a 
bitter  persecutor.  The  mother  prayed  for  her 
boy,  and  while  he  was  yet  eleven  or  twelve  years 
of  age,  eternal  mercy  met  with  him.  So  sweetly 
instructed  was  the  child  in  the  things  of  the  kind- 
dom  of  God,  that  the  mother  requested  him — and 
for  some  time  he  always  did  so — to  conduct  family 
prayer  in  the  house.  Morning  and  evening  this 
little  one  laid  open  the  Bible ;  and  though  the 
father  would  not  deign  to  stop  for  the  family  prayer, 
yet  on  one  occasion  he  was  rather  curious  to  know 
"what  sort  of  an  out  the  boy  would  make  of  it,"  so 
he  stopped  on  the  other  side  of  the  door,  and  God 
blessed  the  prayer  of  his  own  child  under  thirteen 
years  of  age  to  his  conversion.  The  mother  might 
well  have  read  my  text  with  streaming  eyes,  and 
said,  "Yes,  Lord,  Thou  hast  shewn  me  great  and 
mighty  things  which  I  knew  not :  Thou  hast  not 
only  saved  my  boy,   but  through  my  boy   Thou 


176 

hast  brought  my  husband  to  the  truth."  You 
cannot  guess  how  greatly  God  will  bless  you.  Only 
go  and  stand  at  His  door,  you  cannot  tell  what  is 
in  reserve  for  you.  If  you  do'  not  beg  at  all,  you 
will  get  nothing ;  but  if  you  beg  He  may  not  only 
give  you,  as  it  were,  the  bones  and  broken  meat, 
but  He  may  say  to  the  servant  at  His  table,  "Take 
thou  that  dainty  meat,  and  set  that  before  the 
poor  man."  Ruth  went  to  glean  j  she  expected  to 
get  a  few  good  ears:  but  Boaz  said,  "Let  her 
glean  even  among  the  sheaves,  and  rebuke  her 
not ; "  he  said  moreover  toi  her,  "  At  meal-time 
come  thou  hither,  and  eat  of  the  bread,  and  dip 
thy  morsel  in  the  vinegar."  Nay,  she  found  a 
husband  where  she  only  expected  to  find  a  hand- 
ful of  barley.  So  in  prayer  for  others,  God  may 
give  us  such  mercies  that  we  shall  be  astounded  at 
them,  since  we  expected  but  little.  Hear  what  is 
said  of  Job,  and  learn  its  lesson,  "And  the  Lord 
said.  My  servant  Job  shall  pray  for  you :  for  him 
will  I  accept :  lest  I  deal  with  you  after  your  folly, 
in  that  ye  have  not  spoken  of  me  the  thing  which 
is  right,  like  my  servamt  Job.  .  .  .  And  the  Lord 
turned  the  captivity  of  Job,  when  he  prayed  for  his 
friends :  also  the  Lord  gave  Job  twice  as  much 
as  he  had  before." 

Now,  this  word  to  close  with.  Some  of  you  are 
seekers  for  your  own  conversion.  God  has 
quickened  you  to  solemn  prayer  about  your  own 
souls.  You  are  not  content  to  gO'  to  hell,  you  want 
heaven  ;  you  want  washing  in  the  precious  blood ; 
you  want  eternal  life.  Dear  friends,  I  pray  you 
take  this  text — God  Himself  speaks  it  to  you — 


177 

"Call  unto  Me,  and  I  will  answer  thee,  and  shew 
thee  great  and  mighty  things,  which  thou  knowest 
not."  At  once  take  God  at  His  word.  Get  home, 
go  into  your  chamber  and  shut  the  door,  and  try 
Him.  Young  man,  I  say,  try  the  Lord.  Young 
woman,  prove  Him,  see  whether  He  be  true  or 
not.  If  God  be  true,  you  cannot  seek  mercy  at 
His  hands  through  Jesus  Christ  and  get  a  negative 
reply.  He  must,  for  His  own  promise  and 
character  bind  Him  to  it,  open  mercy's  gate  to 
you  who  knock  with  all  your  heart.  God  help 
you,  believing  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  cry  aloud  unto 
God,  and  His  answer  of  peace  is  already  on  the 
way  to  meet  you.  You  shall  hear  Him  say,  "  Your 
sins  which  are  many  are  all  forgiven." 

The  Lord  bless  you  for  His  love's  sake.    Amen. 


»3 


Works  bg  C  %  Spttrgeott 

AND    OTHER    AUTHORS, 

Published  by  PASSMORE   &   ALABASTER, 
PATERNOSTER     BUILDINGS,     E.G. 

C.    H.    SPURQEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 

Compiled  by  His  Wife  and  Private  Secretary. 

Handsomely  bound  and  profusely  illustrated,  complete  In  four 
volumes,  published  at  10s.  6d.  each.  The  set  of  i  vols,  offered  a.t 
30s.,  carriage  paid.    Also  new  and  cheaper  edition,  i  vols.,  cloth, 

21s.  net. 

'*  Every  page  sparkles  with  good  things.  The  record  is  "worthy  of  the 
man." — The  Methodist  Times, 

"  The  Autobiography  is  full  of  characteristic  touches.  Almost  every 
page  contains  some  instance  of  Spurgeon's  ready  humour  and  his  faculty 
for  apt  illustration." — The  Review  of  Reviews. 

Sxpo«itoT2, 

The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  :  a  Popular  Exposition  of  the 
Gospel  according  to  Matthew.  By  C.  H.  SpuReBOK.  Preface  by  Mrs. 
Spvkokon.  Published  at  68.,  ofFered  at  3s.  6d. ;  half  oalf,  lOs. ; 
calf,  15  s. 

Treasury  of  David :  Containing  an  Original  Exposition  of  the 
Book  of  Psalms ;  a  ccllection  of  illustrative  Extracts  from  the  whole  ranee 
of  Literature ;  a  series  of  Homiletical  Hiuts  upon  ^most  every  verse ;  and 
list  of  Writers  upon  each  Psalm.  Oompltte  in  7  vols..  CJlcth,  8a.  each. 
The  set  of  7  vols.  ofFered  at  42e.,  carriage  paid.  May  also  be  had 
in  half-calf  and  calf  bindings.  Of  these  volumes  148  thousand  have 
been  sold. 

The  Interpreter;  or,  Scripture  for  Family  Worship:  being 
selected  passages  of  the  "Word  of  God  for  every  morning  and  evening 
throughout  the  year,  accompanied  by  a  running  comment  and  suitable 
Hymns.  By  0.  H.  Sfvbosok.  Oloth  2.5p.,  Persian  Morocco  82».  Turkey 
IS.0T0QGO  428.  Cheap  edition.  Cloth,  12s.  6d.  Imitation  Morocco,  gilt 
edges,  21b. 

The  Golden  Alphabet  of  the  Praises  of  Holy  Scripture, 

setUr-g  forth  the  Believer's  Delight  in  the  Word  of  the  Lord :  betsjr  a 
D«vouonal  Commentary  upon  the  One  Hundred  and  NineteMith  Pe&lm. 
By  C,  H.  8rxrKe>cir.  Crown  8yo.  Oloth.  Published  at  3s.  6d.,  ofFered 
at  28.  6d. 
Picturesfrom  Pilgrim's  Progress.  Drawn  by  C.  H.  Spuhgeon. 
lUustrated.    Cloth  Gilt.    Published  at  3s.  6d.,  ofFered  at  28.  6d. 

J^omilttfcal. 

The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  Containing  the  Ser* 

mens  of  C.  H.  Sptjrgeok ,  published  during  the  past  fifty  years.  Vols.  I. 
to  LI.,  published  at  7s.  each,  ofFered  at  58.  each  net.  Whole  calf, 
178.  6d.,  and  half-calf,  128.  per  vol.  I'he  Sermons  are  published  every 
Thursday  at  Id.;  and  will  be  sent  wefk'y  by  the  Publishers,  post  free,  to 
any  addrt^ss  in  the  United  Kingdom :-  Three  months,  la.  8d. ;  Six  months, 
Ss.  3d. ;  Twelve  months,  6a.  6d. 
A  full  Textual  Index  of  over  2,900  Sermons,  post  free  on  appb'cation. 


Cloth,  1b.  each.    Post  free  Is.  2d. 
Sermons  on  the  Prodigal  Son,  &c. 
SermonB  on  the  "Word  of  God. 
Sermons  on  Faith. 
Sermons  on  Unbelief. 
Sermons  on  Conversion. 
Sermons  on  Praise. 
Sermons  for  Christian  Workers, 
Memorable    Sermons   preached    on 

Remarkable  Occasions. 
Gospel  Sermons  fcir  Sinners. 
Ssrmons  on  Thanksgiving. 
Sermons  on  Ritualiim. 
Sermons  on  Our  Lord's  Cries  from 

the  Cross, 
Sermons  on  Death. 
Sermons  on  Heaven. 
Sermons  on  Backsliding. 
Sermons  on  Temptation. 
Sermons  on  Forgiveness. 
Sermons  on  Eepentance. 
Sermons  on  the  Christian  Warfare. 
Sermons  to  Yourg  Men. 
Sermons  on  Gx-ace  Abounding. 
Sermons  on  Obedience. 
Sermons  on  Precious  Promise-s. 
Sermons  on  Doctrines  of  Grace. 
Sermons  on  Humility. 
Messages  to  the  Multitude. 


"Twelve  Sermons"  Series. 

Christmas  Sermons. 

New  Year's  Sermons. 

Popular  Sermons. 

Sermons  on  the  Passion  and 

Death  of  Christ. 
Sermons  on  the  Resurrection. 
Sermons  on  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Sermons  on  the  Second  Coming 

of  Christ. 
Sermons  on  Prayer. 
Sermons  on  the  Plan  of  Salvation. 
Sermons  on  Various  Subjects. 
Sermons  on  Vital  Questions. 
Sermons  on  Hope. 
Sermons  on  Holiness. 
Sermons  on  Joy. 
Sermon  B  on  Peace. 
Sermons  with  Strange  Titles. 
Sermons  on  the  Love  of  Christ. 
Revival  Sermons.  [Tried. 

Sermons  for  the  Troubled  and 
Sfirmons  to  Seekers. 
Soul-winning  Sermons. 
SermoES  on  Decision. 
Sermons  on  the  Atonement. 
Sermons  on  Sanctification. 
Striking  Sermons. 
Missionary  Sermons. 

Types  and   Emblems  :  A  Collection  of   Sermons  preached  on 

Sunday   and    Thursday   Evenings    et    th«>    Metropolitan    Tabernacle. 

By  C.  H.  SpuaaEOM.    Published  at  3s.,  offered  at  2s.  6d. 
Trumpet  Calls  to  Christian    Energy:  A   Second  Saries  of 

Sunday   and    Thursday    Evening    Sermons.      Published   at    Ss.    6d,, 

ofFered  at  2s.  6d. 
The  Present  Truth  :  A  Third  Series  of  Sunday  and  Thnrsday 

Evening  Sermons.    Published  at  3s.  6d.,  offered  at  2s.  6d. 
Storm    Signals :    A    Fourth   Series  of  Sunday   and   Thursday 

Evening  Sermons  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.    Published  at  Is.  6d., 

offered  at  2s.  6d. 
Farm    Sermons.     By  0.  H.  Sphrgbon.      Illustrated  Volume. 

Crown  8vo.    328  pp.    Cloth  gilt.    Published  at  3s.  6d.,  offered  at 

2s.  6d. 
The    Royal    Wedding.     The  Banquet  and  the    Gtiesta.      By 

C.  H.  Spxjk&kon.    Paper  covers,  ed.    Cloth,  Is. 
Christ's  Relationship  to  His  People.     A  selection  of  Sermons 

by  C.  H.  Spuhgeon.    With  an  introduction  by  Rev.  Andkew  Mubbay. 

Cloth  Gilt.    Published  at  7s.,  offered  at  5s.  net. 
The  Most  Holy  Place.     Sermons  on  the  Song  of  Solomon.     By 

C.  H.  Spueqkoh.    Containing  52  Sermons.    Cloth  gilt.  Published  at  7s., 

offered  at  5s.  net. 
Our    Lord's  Parables.     By  C.  H.  Spukoeon.     Containing  65 

Sermons.    Cloth  gilt.    Published  at  7s.,  offered  at  5s.  net. 
Our   Lord's   Miracles.      By  C.  H.  Spuko«on.     Containing  107 

Sermons.    2  vo's.,  cloth  gilt.    Pub'd  at  7b.,  offered  at  5s.  each  net. 

The  Messiah:  Our  Lord's  Names,  Titles  and  Attributes. 

Sermons  by  C.  H.  Spuboeox.    Cloth  gilt.    Published  at  78.,  offered 
at  58.  net. 
Our   Lord's   Passion    and    Death.       By  C.  H.   Spuroeon. 

Cont.<in'Tig  63  Sfrmons.    Cloth,  5s.  net. 


The  Gospel   for  the   People.     Sixty  Short  Sermons,  'with  a 

Sketch  of  Mr,  Spargeon'e  Life,  and  Fourteen  Portraits  and  EnKrs.vings. 

Witii  preface  by  Pastor  Thomas   Spubgbok.    Cloth  gilt.     Published 

at  5s.,  offered  a,t  4s. 
These  Short  Sermons  have  been  selected  from  the  Series  with  a  Tie'w 

to  their  beiuf  used  in  Mission  Halls,  and  other  similar  places.    They 

are  about  half  the  length  of  the  ordinary  Sermons. 
An  All  Round  Ministry.     Addresses  to  Ministers  and  Students. 

Cloth  gilt.    Published  at  8s.  6d.,  ofFered  at  2s.  6d. 
Christ  in  the  Old  Testament.    Sermons  on  the  Foreshadow- 

ings  of  Our  Lcrd  in  Old  Teatament   History,  Ceremony  and  Pronhecy. 

By  0.  H.  SptrasEON.    Cloth  gilt.    Published  at  7s.,  offered  at  5s.  net. 

**Only  a  Prayer-meeting!"    40  Prayer-meeting  Addresses  b> 

C.  H.  SrtJRGEON.    Cloth.    Published  at  3s.  6d..  ofFered  at  29.  6d. 

The  Everlasting  Gospel  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 

Cloth,  3s.  6d. 

Good  Tidings  of  Great  Joy.    C.  H.  Spukgeon  on  Ohriat'g 

Incarnation  the  Foundation  of  Christianity.    Cloth  boards.    Published 
at  Is.  6d.,  offered  at  Is. 

lEIlustrstibe, 

Fac-simiie  Pulpit  Notes,  wiih  the  sermons  preached  from  them. 

Cloth  extra.     Published  at  23.  6d.,  offered  at  28.     This  volume 

contains  twelve  fac-aimile  reproductionb  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  written  notes 

used  by  him  when  preaching.    "With  two  portraits,  and  view  of  interior 

of  Tabernacle  with  congregation. 
lilustratione  and  Meditations;  or,  Flovrers  from  a  Puritan's 

Gaiden.    Distilled  and  "Dispensed  by  C.  H.  Spttsokj;-,      Published  at 

28.  6d.,  Offered  at  28. 
Barbed  Arrows,  from  the  Quiver  of  0.  H.  Sftjkqbon.    A  Col- 
lection of  Anecdotes,  Illustrations  and  Similes,  with  Preface  by  Pastor 

C.  Spuroeon.    a  companion  volume  to  ••  Feathers  for  Arrows."  Cloth. 

Published  at  28. 6d.,  offered  at  2s. 
Feathers   for    Arrows ;    or,   Illustrations    for    Preachers    and 

Teachers,  from  my  Note  Book     By  0.  H.  Spusobon.      Published  at 

2a  6d.,  offered  at  2s.    33rd  Thousand. 
Smooth  Stones  taken  from  Ancient  Brooks.    Being  a  col- 

lec'ion  of  Sentences,  Illustrations  and  Quaint  Sayings,  from  the  -works 

of  that  renowned  Puritan,  Thomas  Brooks.    By  C.H.  Spurgeon.    Cloth 

Gilt.    Published  at  2s.  6d.,  offered  at  2s. 
Teachings  of  Nature  in  the  Kingdom  of  Grace.     Uniform 

with   "Till  He  Come.w    Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  Ss.  6d.,  offered 

at  2s.  6d. 
"Till  HeOome":  Gommnnion  Meditations  and  Addresses.   By 

C.  H.  SptTKOBOK.    Cloth  gilt.     Published  at  3s.  6d.,  offered  at 

2s.   6d. ;  Morocco,  red  and  gilt  edges,  7b.  6d. 
The    Soul-Winner;   or,  How  to  Lead  Sinners  to  the  Saviour. 

By  0.  H.  Spttkobon.    Cloth  gilt.    Published  at  Ss.  6d.,  offered  at 

2s.  6d. 
The  Salt-Cellars ;  Being  a  Collection  of  Proverbs  and  Quaint 

Sayings,  with  Fomely  Note?  thereon.    By  C.  H.  BprRomoK.    Vol.  I.— 

A  to  L.   Twelfth  thousand.   Vol  II.— M  to  Z.  T^nth  Thousand.    Cloth. 

gilt.     Published  at  Ss.  6d.  each,  offered  at  2s.  6d.  each;  French 

morocco,  7s.  6d.  each. 
"We  Endeavour.*'    Uniform  with  ''Words  of  Wisdom  for  Daily 

Life."    Cloth  gilt.    Published  at  Ss.,  offered  at  Is.  6d. 


PASSMORE  k  ALABASTER,  4,  PaterDoster  Buildings,  Icndos,  E.C. 

29467 


^^■. 

,■■.<< 

■■;>7 

-  <*■  ., 

'a   ' 

■  V-i 

'  ..m 

i^ 

^ 

■■y;'% 

^1 

■ 

■  -^:  iri 

■ 

■ 

.ft:  ■  ■  ^.  -  s     '■        '  •  'v' 


Vj 


wi?: 


■'>* 
l^^ 

^v.^/ 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


H&SS 

A 

3480 


u-^  'f  ";  ■'■  --T^  A 


