C.H 


tn 


•(the  TQbrarg 

of  the 

of  Corcmtu 


Miss  Margaret  T.   Saer 


t 


C    H.   SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


0 


C.  Ji>.  Sturgeon's   $utobiogra;pl}g. 

COMPILED    FROM 

HIS    DIARY,    LETTERS,  AND   RECORDS, 


BY 


HIS     W  I  F  E, 

AM)     INS     1'KIYATK     SI'X'RKTARY. 


"The  law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth,  and  iniquity  was  not  found  in  his  lips  ;  he  walked 
with  Me  in  peace  and  equity,  and  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity."     Malacfri  \\.  6. 


VOL.     III. 
1856—1878. 


SEEN  BY 
PRESERVATION 

SERVICES 


DATE. 


LONDON : 
PASSMORE    AND    ALABASTER,     PATERNOSTER    BUILDINGS,    E.G. 


1899. 

{All  rights  reserved.)] 


CONTENTS    OF    VOL.    III. 


LX.  Tin:  TAP.ERNACEE    ()PI-:NI-:D...          ...          ...          ...  ...  i 

LXI.  DEACONS  AND   ELDERS;    PASTORS  AND  TEACHERS  ...  15 

LXI  I.  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,          (Continued)...          27 

LXI  1 1.  NOTAP-EE   LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES,    18^7 — 1878  ...  ...          ^9 

LXI\.             )>                    ,<               ,,               ,,                  ,<             ,,  (Continued)          51 

LXY.  MF.MORAI:LE  SERVICES  AT  TIII-:  TABERNACLE,    1861  — 1874  72 

LXYI.  SO.MI-:   REMINISCENCES  OF   FOREION  TRAVI-:L          ...  97 

LXYII.  Tin-:   AP.SEXT    PASTOR'S   CARI-:    LOR    HIS    FLOCK      ...  11^ 

LXYIII.  Tin-:    PASTORS'  COLLEGE,    1861-^1878       ...  12^ 

LXIX.             .,            ,,                   ,,              ,,            ,,      (Continued)  ...  137 

LXX.  Tin-:   MEN  THAT   "SELL  THE   BOOKS"       ...          ...  ...  160 

LXXI.  A    HOME   FOR  THE    FATHERLESS     ...          ...          ...  ...  167 

LXXIi.  Tin-:   NEW   "  HELENSISURGH    HOUSE,"   XIU-HTIXCAEE  LANE  181 

LXXI  1 1.  A   TRAVELLER'S    LETTERS    HOME    ...          ...          .  .  .  ...        203 

LXXI\  .                    ,,                       ,,               ,,       (Continued)      ...  ...  ...        224 

LXXY.  MUTUAL   LOVE   I;ET\YEEN   PASTOR  AND    PEOPLE    ...  ...        241 

LXXYI.  A    HOLIDAY    I)RIYE  TO  THE   XFAY    FOREST           ...  ...  ...        2^7 

LXXYII.  M  F.MORI  i-:s  OF   MY    FATHER...          ...          ...          ...  27^ 

AX  VI!!.  ,,  ,,  ,,          (Con  I  in  ued) 287 

LXXIX.  LATER    LITERARY   \\'ORKS     ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  .  .        ^05 

LXXX.  BLESSINO   ON   THE    PRINTI-.D   SI-.R.MONS         ...          ...  ...  -2"1 

LXXXI.  PURE   FUN     ...                                 ...  33S 

LXXX  I  I.  PRI:A(  HINC   IN  THI:   OPEN   AIR        ...          ...          ...  ->c)2 


/"'or  List  of  Illustrations  in   Vol.  III.,  sec  pages  373 — 6. 


C.    H.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER     LX 


lljc  d- 


I  WOULD  PRO  POSE  THAT  THE  SUBJECT  OFTHE  MINISTRY  IN  THIS  HOUSE.AS  LONG  ASTHIS 
PLATFORM  SHALL  STAND,*  AS  LONG  ASTHIS  HOUSE  SHALL  BE  FREQUENTED  BY  WORSHIPPERS, 
SHAH  BE  THE  PERSON  OF  JESUS  CHRIST.  I  AM  NEVER  ASHAMED  TO  AVOW  MYSELFA 
CALVINIST;  I  DO  NOT  HESITATE  TO  TAKE  THE  NAME  OF  BAPTIST;  BUT  IF  I  AM  ASKED  WHAT 
ISMYCREEDjREPLYJT  IS  JESUS  CHRIST."  MY  VENERATED  PREDECESSOR,  DR.GlLL, 
HAS  LEFT  A  BODY  OF  DIVINITY.  ADMIRABLE  &  EXCELLENT  IN  ITS  WAY;  BUT  THE  BODY 

OF  DIVINITY  TO  WHICH  I  WOULD  PIN  &  BIND  MYSELF  FOR  EVER,  GOD  HELPING  ME.IS  NOT 
HIS  SYSTEM,  OR  ANY  OTHER  HUMAN  TREATISE;  BUTCHRISTJESUS.WHOISTHE  SUM  <& 
SUBSTANCE  OFTHE  COSPEL.WHO  IS  IN  HIMSELF  ALL  THEOLOGY, THE  INCARNATION  OF  EVERY 
PRECIOUS  TRUTH, THE  ALL-GLORIOUS  PERSONAL  EMBODIMENT  OFTHE  WAY;THETRUTH,&THE  LIFE 


C.     II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

When  I  sometimes  have  such  statements  as  these  flung  in  my  teeth,  "This  man  was  never 
educated  at  College  ;  he  came  into  the  ministry  totally  unprepared  for  it  in  literary  attainments;  he  is 
only  fit  to  address  the  poor;  his  preaching  is  not  polite  and  polished;  he  has  had  but  little  classical 
instruction;  he  cannot  read  many  languages;"—!  say,  Precisely  so  ;  every  word  of  it  is  true,  and  a 
great  deal  more  to  the  same  effect  might  be  said.  If  you  go  on  to  say, — "This  man  takes  a  daring 
project  in  hand,  and  succeeds  in  it,"— 1  answer,  Just  so  ;  I  will  agree  to  all  you  say,  but  I  will  remind 
you  that  "God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise;  and  God  hath  chosen 
the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty  ;  and  base  things  of  the  world, 
and  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and  things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought 
things  tliat  are  :  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  His  presence."  On  this  wise  I  will  put  it,  and  with  the 
apostle  Paul  I  will  become  a  fool  in  glorying,— What  have  your  College  men  done  that  is  comparable  to 
this  work  ?  What  have  the  wisest  and  most  instructed  of  modern  ministers  accomplished  in  the 
conversion  of  souls  compared  with  the  blessing  which  has  rested  on  the  labours  of  the  unlettered  boy? 
It  was  God's  work,  and  God  chose  the  most  unlikely  instrument,  that  He  might  have  the  more  glory. 
And  He  shall  have  the  glory  ;— I  will  not  take  any  of  it  to  myself  by  pretending  to  an  education  I  have 
not  received,  or  an  attainment  I  do  not  possess,  or  an  eloquence  which  I  never  coveted.  I  speak  God's 
Word,  and  God,  I  know,  speaks  through  me,  and  works  through  me,  and  unto  Him  be  the  glory 
of  it  all!  ... 

1  frequently  hear  in  conversation  such  remarks  as  this,  "It  is  no  use  trying  to  raise  a  sell- 
supporting  cause  in  such  a  place  as  this  ;  there  are  none  but  poor  people  living  in  the  neighbourhood." 
If  there  is  a  site  to  be  chosen  for  a  chapel,  it  is  said,  "You  would  never  be  able  to  keep  a  minister 
there;  it  is  no  use  trying  to  do  so  in  such  a  district."  You  know  that,  in  the  City  of  London  itself, 
there  is  now  scarcely  one  Dissenting  place  of  worship.  The  reason  for  giving  up  most  of  the  chapels, 
or  transferring  the  church  to  the  suburbs,  is  that  all  the  respectable  people  live  out  of  town,  and,  of 
course,  they  are  the  folk  to  look  after.  They  will  not  stop  in  London,  they  will  go  out  a  few  miles,  and 
take  villas ;  and,  therefore,  the  best  thing  is  to  use  the  endowment,  which  belonged  to  the  old  chapel, 
in  building  a  new  place  of  worship  somewhere  in  the  suburbs  where  it  can  be  maintained.  "No 
doubt,"  it  is  said,  "the  poor  ought  to  be  looked  after;  but  we  had  better  leave  them  to  an  inferior  order 
of  workers,— the  city  missionaries  will  do  for  them,  or  we  can  send  them  a  few  street-preachers."  But  as 
to  the  idea  of  raising  a  prosperous  cause  where  all  the  people  are  poor,  there  is  hardly  a  minister  who 
would  attempt  it. 

Now,  my  experience  of  the  poor  of  Christ's  flock  teaches  me  that  all  this  kind  of  talk  is  folly. 
If  there  are  any  people  who  love  the  cause  of  God  better  than  others,  I  believe  it  is  the  poor,  when  the 
grace  of  God  takes  real  possession  of  their  heart.  In  this  place,  for  instance,  I  believe  that  we  have  but 
very  few  who  could  be  put  down  among  the  rich.  There  have  been  some  persons  of  position  who  have 
cast  in  their  lot  amongst  us ;  but,  still,  the  mass  who  did  the  work  of  building  this  house,  and  who  have 
stood  side  by  side  with  me  in  the  battle  of  the  last  seven  years,  must  be  reckoned  among  the  poor  of 
this  world.  They  have  been  a  peaceable  people,  a  happy  people,  a  working  people,  a  plain  people;  and 
I  say,  "God  bless  the  poor!"  I  would  have  no  fear  whatever  in  commencing  a  cause  of  Christ,  even 
though  the  mass  were  poor;  for  I  am  persuaded  that  the  rich,  who  are  truly  the  people  of  God,  love  to 
come  and  assist  in  such  a  case.  If  you  cast  out  the  poor,  you  cast  out  the  Church's  strength,  and  you 
give  up  that  which  is,  after  all,  the  backbone  of  the  Church  of  Christ. — C.  H.  S.,  in  sermon  preaclied  at 
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  shortly  after  the  opening. 

N  December  18,  1859,  we  commenced  our  third  series  of  services 
at  Exeter  Hall,  which  ended  on  March  31,  1861.  A  few  of  my 
remarks  upon  leaving-  that  place  may  fitly  be  quoted  here*  : — "  In 
the  providence  of  God,  we,  as  a  church  and  people,  have  had  to 
wander  often.  This  is  our  third  sojourn  within  these  walls.  It  is 
now  about  to  close.  We  have  had  at  all  times  and  seasons  a 
compulsion  for  moving  :  sometimes,  a  compulsion  of  conscience  ;  at  other  times,  a 
compulsion  of  pleasure,  as  on  this  occasion.  I  am  sure  that,  when  we  first  went  to 
the  Surrey  Music  Hall,  God  went  with  us.  Satan  went,  too,  but  he  fled  before  us. 


C.     II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  -> 

That  frightful  calamity,  the  impression  of  which  can  never  be  erased  from  my  mind, 
became,  in  the  providence  of  God,  one  of  the  most  wonderful  means  of  turnin<>- 
public  attention  to  special  services  ;  and  I  do  not  doubt  that— fearful  catastrophe 
though  it  was, — it  has  been  the  mother  of  multitudes  of  blessings.  The  Christian 
world  noted  the  example,  and  saw  its  after-success  ;  they  followed  it,  and  to  this 
day,  in  the  theatre  and  the  music-hall,  the  Word  of  Christ  is  preached  where  it  was 
never  preached  before.  Never  could  it  be  more  manifestly  seen  than  in  that  place, 
that  the  gospel,  when  proclaimed  simply  and  earnestly,  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth. 

"  In  each  of  our  movings  we  have  had  reason  to  see  the  hand  of  God,  and  here 
particularly  ;  for  many  residents  in  the  \Vest  Fnd  have  in  this  place  come  to  listen 
to  the  Word,  who  probably  might  not  have  taken  a  journey  beyond  the  river. 
Here,  God's  grace  has  broken  hard  hearts;  here  have  souls  been  renewed,  and 
wanderers  reclaimed.  '  Give  unto  the  Lord,  O  ye  mighty,  give  unto  the  Lord  glory 
and  strength.  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto  His  Name.'  And  now  we 
journey  to  the  house  which  God  has  in  so  special  a  manner  given  to  us,  and  this  day 
would  I  pray  as  Moses  did,  '  Rise  up,  Lord,  and  let  Thine  enemies  be  scattered  ; 
and  let  them  that  hate  Thee  ilee  before  Thee.' 

"'But  what  enemies  have  we?'  say  you.  We  have  multitudes.  We  shall 
have  to  do  battle  in  our  new  Tabernacle!  with  that  old  enemy  of  the  Church,  the 
scarlet  beast.  Rome  has  built  one  of  its  batteries  hard  by  our  place,  and  there 
is  one  who  styles  himself  'Archbishop  of  Southwark.'  Them  we  shall  have;  another 
enemy,  almost  as  our  next-door  neighbour, — infidelity.  There,  has  been  one  of  its 
special  places  for  display.  Yet,  comparatively  speaking,  infidelity  is  but  a  very 
puny  adversary  ;  it  is  not  half  so  cunning  as  Popery,  and  hath  nothing  like  its  might. 
But  worse  than  this,  we  shall  have  to  deal  with  the  indifference  of  the  masses  round 
about  us,  and  with  their  carelessness  concerning  gospel  truth,  and  with  the 
prevailing  sin  and  corruption  ;  how  shall  we  deal  with  all  this  ?  Shall  we  invent 
some  socialistic  system  of  reform  ?  Shall  we  preach  up  some  new  method  of  political 
economy?  No!  the  cross,  the  old  cross  is  enough;  this  is  the  true  Jerusalem 
blade,  that  divides  like  the  razor  of  old  with  which  Tarquin's  augur  cut  the  pebble. 
We  will  preach  Christ  as  the  sinner's  Saviour,  the  Spirit  of  God  as  applying  Christ's 
truth  to  the  soul,  and  God  the  Father  in  His  infinite  sovereignty  savin«  whom  He 

<"")  J  O 

wills,  and  in  the  bounty  of  His  mercy  willing  to  receive  the  vilest  of  the  vile  ;  and 
there  is  no  indifference  so  callous,  no  ignorance  so  blind,  no  iniquity  so  base, 
no  conscience  so  seared  as  not  to  be  made  to  yield,  when  God  wills  it,  before  the 
might  of  His  strength.  So  again  I  pray,  '  Rise  up,  Lord,  and  let  these  Thine; 
enemies  be  scattered  ;  and  let  them  that  hate  Thee  ilee  before  Thee.'  (  Rise  up, 
Lord!'  O  God  the  Father,  rise  up!  Pluck  Thy  right  hand  out  of  Thy  bosom, 


1 


ii.    SPURGEON'S 


anil  let  Thine  eternal  purposes  be  accomplished  !  C)  God  the  Son,  rise  up  ;  sho\v 
Thy  wounds,  and  plead  before  Thy  Father's  face,  and  let  Thy  blood-bought  ones  be 
saved!  Rise  up,  O  God  the  Holy  Ghost;  with  solemn  reverence,  we  do  invoke 
Thine  aid  !  Let  those;  who  have  hitherto  resisted  Thee,  no\v  give  way  !  Come  'I  hou, 
and  melt  the  ice  ;  dissolve,  the  granite  :  break  the  adamantine  heart  ;  cut  Thou  the 
iron  sinew,  and  bow  Thou  the  stiff  neck  !  Rise  up,  Lord, — Father,  Son,  and 
Spirit,-  we  can  do  nothing  without  Thee;  but  if  Thou  wilt  arise,  Thine  enemies 
shall  be  scattered,  and  they  that  hate  Thee  shall  ilee  before  Thee." 

Under  the  date,  January  6,  186  r,  there  stands  in  our  records  the  following 
solemn  declaration,  signed  by  the  Pastor,  and  officers,  and  leading  friends  : — "  This 
church  needs  rather  more  than  ,£4,000  to  enable  it  to  open  the:  New  Tabernacle  free 
of  all  debt.  It  humbly  asks  this  temporal  mercy  of  God,  and  believes  that,  for 
Jesus'  sake,  the  prayer  will  be  heard  and  the  boon  bestowed, — as  witness  our 
hands." 

At  the  end  of  February,  the  programme  of  the  opening  services  announced 
that  about  .£3,000  was  still  required,  and  contained  the  following  appeal  and 
intimation  : — "  The  Committee  beg  the  renewed  assistance  of  all  their  friends  in 
this  their  crowning  effort,  and  they  wish  it  to  be  distinctly  understood  that  no 
pen-suasion  will  prevail  upon  their  Pastor  to  use  the  building  for  public  worship  on 
the  Sabbath  until  the  whole  of  the  liabilities  are  discharged.  Shall  the  house  be 
closed  a  single  Sunday  ?  \Ve  believe  in  our  gracious  God,  and  trust  that  He  will  so 
influence  His  people  that,  by  the  end  of  the  second  week,  or  before  the  Good 
Friday  has  passed  away,  all  will  be  accomplished  ;  in  which  case,  we  shall  meet  there 
for  regular  worship  on  Lord's-day,  March  3i/:;:  The  proceeds  ol  collections,  alter 
payment,  of  contracted  liabilities,  will  be  needed  for  the  completion  ot  the  front 
boundaries,  the  fitting  up  of  the  schools,  furnishing  the  students'  class-rooms,  and 
other  works  which  the  Committee  have  not  as  yet  commenced.  Feeling  it  to  be 
highly  objectionable  to  run  into  debt,  they  have  left  many  matters  to  be  finished 
when  the  funds  shall  be  forthcoming,  and  they  are  sanguine  that,  before  these 
preliminary  meetings  are  over,  this  great  temple  of  the  Lord  will  have  been  finished 
in  every  department." 

It  was  most  appropriate  that  the  noble  building,  which  had  been  erected  for 
a  house  of  prayer,  should  be  opened  with  a  meeting  for  prayer.  Accordingly,  at 
seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  Monday,  March  18,  1861,  more  than  a  thousand 
persons  assembled  in  the  Tabernacle.  The  Pastor  presided,  and  among  those  who 


<J.      11.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


5 


took  part  in  the  proceedings  were  representatives  of  the  deacons  and  elders  of  the 
Church  and  students  of  the  College.  Fervency  and  intense  earnestness  marked 
every  petition. 

On  Monday,  March  25,  at  7  a.m.,  Rev.  George  Rogers  presided  over  the 
second  prayer-meeting,  and  addressed  the  brethren  in  a  sweet  and  savoury  manner 
upon  "The  House  of  God,  the  Gate  of  Heaven."  At  three  o'clock  the  same 
afternoon,  the  first  sermon  in  the  Tabernacle  was  preached  by  the  Pastor  from 
Acts  v.  42  :  "And  daily  in  the  temple,  and  in  every  house,  they  ceased  not  to  teach 
and  preach  Jesus  Christ;"  and  in  the  evening,  Rev.  \Y.  Brock,  of  Bloomsbury 
Chapel,  discoursed  upon  Philippians  i.  18  :  "  Christ  is  preached  ;  and  I  therein 
do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice."  It  was  remarked  at  the  time  how  well  the 
two  sermons  were  adapted  to  one  another,  although  the  ministers  were  quite 
unaware  what  text  each  had  selected. 

The  following  evening,  more  than  three  thousand  of  the  contributors  to  the 
Building  Fund  assembled  in  the  Tabernacle,  under  the  presidency  of  Sir  Henry 
Havelock.  The  Pastor  had  undertaken,  in  the  month  of  January,  to  bring  in 
,£1,000,  at  the  opening  of  the  building,  in  addition  to  all  that  he  had  previously 
raised;  and  in  the  course  of  the  meeting  he  announced  that  he  had  paid  in  ,£1,500, 
others  had  brought  the  total  up  to  ,£3,700,  so  that  the  building  was  free  from  debt, 
although  they  still  needed  about  ,£500  for  various  matters  which  could  wait  until  the 
money  was  in  hand.  The  architect  (Mr.  Pocock),  and  the  builder  (Mr.  W.  Iliggs), 
were  heartily  thanked  for  their  joint  skill  and  liberality,  and  both  gentlemen  expressed 
their  gratitude:  for  the  vote  of  appreciation. 

The  next  night,  the  ministers  and  members  of  neighbouring  churches,  to  the 
number  of  about  four  thousand,  gathered  under  the  chairmanship  ol  Dr.  Steane,  to 
express  their  congratulations  to  the  church  at  the  Tabernacle  on  the  completion  ol 
the  beautiful  and  spacious  structure.  In  the  course  of  his  address,  the  chairman  first 
asked  the  ministerial  brethren  present,  and  then  the  whole  congregation,  to  rise  and 
so  signify  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  how  much  they  loved  him,  and  how  devoutly  they  wished 
him  "  God  speed."  This  spontaneous  outburst  of  sympathy  was  gratefully  acknow 
ledged  by  the  Pastor,  who  said  that,  while  his  own  church  had  naturally  raised  most 
of  the  money  for  the  new  building,  there  was  hardly  any  church  in  London  which 
had  not  had  some  share  in  the  work. 

On  "Good  Friday,"  March  29,  the  Pastor  preached  in  the  morning  from 
Romans  iii.  24,  25  :  "  Christ  Jesus  :  whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation 
through  faith  in  His  blood,"  and  in  the  evening,  from  the  Song  of  Solomon,  ii.  16  : 
"My  Beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  His."  It  was  a  fitting  finale:  to  these  services  to  be: 
able  to  announce  that  the  whole  sum  required  had  been  given,  and  the  building,  free 
from  debt,  was  ready  for  Divine  worship  on  the  following  Lord's-day.  That  Sabbath 


o  C.      II.     Sl'UKCI'XJNS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

evening,  March  31,  the  Pastor  preached  from  2  Chron,  v.  13,  14;  and  vii.  i — 3  ;  and 
speaking  upon  the  glory  of  tin:  Lord  filling  the  house,  uttered  a  prophecy  which  ha.-; 
been  abundantly  fulfilled  in  every  particular: — "  Let  God  send  the  lire  of  His  Spirit 
here,  and  the  minister  will  be  more  and  more  lost  in  his  Master.  You  will  come  to 
think  less  of  the  speaker,  and  more  of  the  truth  spoken  ;  the  individual  will  be  swamped, 
the  words  uttered  will  rise  above  everything.  When  you  have  the  cloud,  the  man  is 
forgotten  ;  when  you  have  the  lire,  the  man  is  lost,  and  you  only  see  his  Master. 
Suppose  the  lire  should  come,  here,  and  the  Master  be  seen  more  than  the  minister, 
what  then?  Why,  this  church  will  become  two,  or  three,  or  four  thousand  strong! 
It  is  easy  enough  for  God  to  double  our  numbers,  vast  though  they  are  even  now. 
We  shall  have  the  lecture-hall  beneath  this  platform  crowded  at  each  prayer-meeting, 
and  we  shall  see  in  this  place  young  men  devoting  themselves  to  God  ;  we  shall  lind 
ministers  raised  up,  and  trained,  and  sent  forth  to  carry  the  sacred  lire  to  other  parts 
of  the  globe.  Japan,  China,  and  Hindustan  shall  have  heralds  of  the  cross,  who 
have  here  had  their  tongues  touched  with  the  Divine  llame.  Through  us,  the  whole 
earth  shall  receive  benedictions  ;  if  God  shall  bless  us,  lie  will  make  us  a  blessing  to 
multitudes  of  others.  Let  God  but  send  down  the  fire,  and  the  biggest  sinners  in 
the  neighbourhood  will  be  converted  ;  those  who  live  in  the  dens  of  infamy  will  be 
changed  ;  the  drunkard  will  forsake  his  cups,  the  swearer  will  repent  of  his 
blasphemy,  the  debauched  will  leave  their  lusts,— 

"  '  Dry  bones  be  raised,  and  clothed  afresh, 
And  hearts  of  stone  be  turned  to  flesh."' 

On  Monday  evening,  April  i,  Rev.  John  Graham,  of  Graven  Chapel,  preached 
from  2  Thess.  i.  12  ;  and  the  next  night,  the  great  building  was  crowded  by  London 
Baptist  brethren.  Sir  S.  Morton  Peto,  Bart.,  presided  ;  and  the  Pastor,  in  welcoming 
the  assembly  to  the  Tabernacle,  said  : — "  This  chapel  belongs  not  specially  to  me  or 
to  my  church,  but  to  the  whole  Baptist  denomination.  I  feel  to-night  as  if  I  were 
rendering  up  the  trust-deeds  to  the  proper  proprietors, — acknowledging  that  this 
house  belongs  not  to  any  man,  but,  first,  to  the  God  of  the  whole  world,  and,  next,  to 
those  who  hold  the  pure  primitive  ancient  apostolic  faith.  We  believe  that  the 
Baptists  are  the  original  Christians.  \Ye  did  not  commence  our  existence  at  the 
Reformation,  we  were  Reformers  before  Luther  and  Calvin  were  born  ;  we  never 
c  ime  out  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  for  we  were  never  in  it.  but  we  have  an  unbroken 
line  of  succession  up  to  the  apostles  themselves.  We  have  always  existed  from  the 
very  days  of  Christ  ;  and  our  principles,  though  sometimes  veiled  and  forgotten,  like 
a  river  which  may  travel  underground  for  a  little  season,  have  always  had  honest  and 
holy  adherents.  Persecuted  alike  by  Romanists  and  Protestants  of  almost  every 
sect,  yet  there  has  never  existed  a  Government  holding  Baptist  principles  which  has 
persecuted  others  ;  nor,  I  believe,  has  any  body  of  Baptists  ever  held  it  to  be 


C.      II.      Sl'UkGKox's     AUTOliKXiKAl'HV.  7 

ri^lit  to  put  the  consciences  ot  others  under  the  control  ot  m;m.  \Ye  have  ever  been 
ready  to  suffer,  as  our  martyrologies  will  prove  ;  hut  we  are  not  willing  to  accept 
any  help  from  the  State,  or  to  prostitute  the  purity  of  the  Bride  of  Christ  hy  any 
alliance  with  earthly  Governments." 

Later    in   the   evening,    the    Pastor,   in    urging    the    Baptist    brethren   present  to 
more    earnest    efforts    for    the    spread    of     their     principles,    said  :—  "  I    have    been 
the    means    of   commencing    two    new    churches   within    the    last   eighteen   months, 
and    I    hope    to   start    some   more.       I   wish  we  could,  as  a  body,    open  fresh  places, 
and  give  our  services  for  six    months,    taking  it   in   turn  until  we  worked  the  cause 
up.      I  clo  not  think  there  is   the   slightest    reason  why  we    should    not    double   our 
numbers   in  the  next   two  years  ;    it    seems    to    me    that    we    have    obtained   such    a 
hold   upon  the  public  mind   that  we  only  want  to  bring  our  principles    out,  and  we 
shall    greatly    increase.       I    know    they    will    say    that    we    are    getting    desperately 
Baptistical  ; — we  must  be  that,  we  shall    never  tell  upon   the  age  until  we  are.      We 
must  hold  inviolable  the  essential  unity  of  the  Church  of  Christ  ;  we  must  stand  to   it 
that  all  God's  people  are  one  in    Him  ;  but  why  should   we  lower  our  standard  any 
more  than  any  other  denomination  ?     What  is  there  about  believers'  baptism  that  we 
should  be  ashamed  ot  ?     What  is  there  about  the  history  of  our  church,  the  power  of 
our  ministers,  our  poets,   our  divines,  that  we   should    be    ashamed    of?     When    we 
know  that  we  have  borne  the  palm  in  poetry  with  John  Milton,  in  allegory  w:th  John 
Bunyan,  and  stand  second  to  none  in  the  ministry  with  Robert  Hall,  I  think  we  Have 
no  reason  whatever  to  be  ashamed.      Let  us  come  straight  out,  determined  that   we 
will  conceal  no  part  of  the  truth.      I  am  glad  that  we  have  here  brethren  representing 
different  views   amongst  us.      Here  am    I,   a   strict    Baptist  as   to   membership,   and 
believing  in  open  communion  ;  some  of  our  brethren  are  strict   in  membership  and 
also  in  communion  ;  others  are  neither  strict  in  membership   nor  in   communion, 
think   I  am  nearest  right  of  any,  but  you  all  think  the  same  of  yourselves,  and  may 
God  defend  the  right  !  " 

After  this  denominational  gathering,  it  was  most  fitting  that,  the  following 
evening,  an  equally  large  company  of  friends  should  meet  together  "  for  the  purpose 
of  hearing  addresses  on  Christian  unity,  and  testifying  to  the  essential  union  of  all 
believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  chairman  was  Edward  Ball,  Esq.,  M.P., 
one  of  the  Pastor's  Cambridgeshire  friends,  who  had  witnessed  his  early  efforts  to 
serve  the  Lord,  and  lovingly  watched  his  career  from  Waterbeach  and  onwards  to  the 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle. 

On  Thursday  evening,  April  4,  Dr.  Octavius  Winslow  preached  from  the  words, 
"  It  is  finished  ;"  on  Lorcl's-clay,  April  7,  the  Pastor  occupied  the  pulpit  both  morning 
and  evening,  and  presided  at  the  first  communion  service  held  in  the  Tabernacle  ; 
the  next  night,  a  family  gathering  of  our  own  church  was  held  under  the  presidency 


o 


C.      11.     Si'URGEOM  S     AIJTUJUUGKAI'liY. 

f  the  Pastor's  father,  Rev.  John  Spurgeon  ;  and  on  the  Tuesday  evening,  Rev.  Hugh 
Stowell  Brown,  of  Liverpool,  preached  on  "  Christian  Baptism,  "  and  the  Pastor  con 
ducted  the  first  baptismal  service,  concerning  which  Dr.  Campbell  wrote,  in  The 
J)i'ifisk  Standard,  April  I  2  :— 

"The  probable  effects  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  become  the  subject  of 
interesting  speculation.  While  these  effects  will  be  great  and  glorious,  they  will 
form  no  exception  to  the  course  of  human  affairs.  Imperfection  attaches  to  every 
thing  that  appertains  to  man.  The  building  will  inevitably  form  a  powerful  magnet, 
especially  to  young  people  in  all  quarters  of  the  city,  who  will  hardly  endure  the  old- 
fashioned  churches  and  chapels  of  their  fathers.  The  result  will  be  to  confer  on  it  a 
leviathan  monopoly.  This  monopoly  will  operate  in  two  ways  :  it  will  bring  multi 
tudes  from  the  world  to  Christ,  —  an  event  in  which  we  shall  most  sincerely 
rejoice.  It  will  also  draw  multitudes  from  the  churches  to  the  water,-  —  an  event  in 
which  we  do  not  rejoice.  This  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  we  believe,  will  do  more  to 
make  proselytes  than  all  the  other  Baptist  chapels  in  London  united.  It  will  lift  the 
thing  into  respectability,  and  even  dignity.  It  will  become  an  object  of  ambition 
with  sentimental  young  women  and  poetic  young  men  to  be  plunged  into  a  marble 
basin,  so  beautiful  that  it  might  adorn  a  palace,  and  so  spacious  that  dolphins  might 
play  in  it!  Then,  Mr.  Spurgeon  knows  well  how  to  go  about  this  matter;  his  noble 
catholicity  has  not  sufficed  wholly  to  eliminate  his  baptismal  bigotry.  His  manly 
eloquence  will  most  powerfully  minister  to  the  triumph  of  the  polished  marble.  He 
showed  last  Sabbath  evening  that,  while  prepared  to  die  for  the  gospel,  he  is  not  less 
prepared  to  fight  for  the  water.  .  .  . 

"On  the  evening  of  Tuesday,  the  ordinance  of  baptism,  by  immersion,  was 
administered  to  some  twenty  people.  It  was  eminently  fitted  to  produce  very 
serious  consequences  in  families  and  churches.  First  came  a  sermon  from  a 
man  of  great  mental  power  and  pulpit  efficiency,  —  Mr.  II.  S.  Brown,  of  Liverpool. 
The  argument  and  the  appeal  being  over,  then  followed  the  illustration  by  the  skilful 
hand  of  Mr.  Spurgeon.  What  can  stand  against  an  attack  so  formidable,  made  on  a 
congregated  mass  so  little  capable  of  self-defence  ?  Pity  the  poor  simple  souls  who 
eagerly  rushed  into  the  snares  of  the  fowlers  !  Such  was  the  anxiety  to  be  present, 
that  it  is  reported  that  actually  between  six  and  seven  thousand  tickets  were  issued  ! 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  indeed,  on  Sunday  evening  stated  that  no  more  tickets  would  be 
distributed,  since  more  had  received  them  already  than  could  be  accommodated,  and 
that  it  would  be  the  wisdom  of  many  to  keep  away.  The  night,  we  make  no  doubt, 
has  been  one  of  havoc  among  those  who  were,  not  only  not  'rooted  and  grounded,' 
but  not  even  taught  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Baptism. 

"  The  interest  of  the  thing  was  overpowering.  We  doubt  if  it  was  a  whit 
inferior  to  that  of  taking  the  veil  in  the  Church  of  Rome.  There  was  the  young 


('..      II.     STUROKOX'S     AUTOI5IOC.KAHIY. 

orator,  the  idol  of  the  assembly,  in  the  water,  with  a  countenance  radiant  as  the  lioht  ; 

and  there,  on  the  pathway,  was  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  a  most  prepossessing  young 

the  admiration  of  all   who  beheld  herewith  courtly  dignity  and  inimitabl 

kindly    leading   forward   the    trembling    sisters    in   succession   to    her   husband,    who 

gently    and    gracefully   took   and   immersed    them,    with   varied    remark   and 

phrase,  all  kind,  pertinent  to  the  occasion,  and  greatly  fitted  to  strengthen,  encoura; 

and  cheer.      Emerging  from  the  water,  there  were  two  portly   deacons,   in  boxes  at 


C.    II     SPUKGEON    BAPTIZING    AT    THE    METROPOLITAN    TABEKNACLE. 

the;  side  of  the  steps,  with  benignant  smile,  to  seize  their  hands,  and  bring  them  up, 
throwing  cloaks  over  them  ;  two  other  deacons  received  them  at  the  top  of  the  steps, 
and  other  two  politely  led  them  backward  to  the  vestry.  It  was  quite  an  ovation,  an 
era  in  the  history  of  the  neophytes.  It  had  really  not  been  wonderful  if  all  the 
ladies  in  the  place  had  been  candidates  for  such  distinction.  We  have  ourselves 
seen  several  who  were  there,  whose  heads  seem  completely  turned.  Pa-do-  Baptist 
ministers,  whatever  their  piety  or  ability,  have  no  chance  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  in 
multiplying  members.  They  operate  only  in  one  element,  he  in  two  :  to  him,  the 


io  c.    H.    STURGEON'S    AUTUIJIOCJKAPIIY. 

land  and  the  water  are  alike  productive.  We  shall  not  be  surprised  if,  in  seven 
more  years,  his  church  be  doubled/"'  and  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  prove  in 
sufficient  to  accommodate  even  the  members  and  their  families.  The  largest  chapel 
in  the  world,  it  will  have  the  largest  church.  What  then  ?  " 

o 

In  the  same  article,  Dr.  Campbell  thus  referred  to  one  of  the  many  misleading 
paragraphs  which  continued  to  be  inserted,  from  time  to  time,  in  various  news 
papers  : — 

"The  services  of  a  Christian  minister  may,  as  a  rule,  be  safely  estimated  by  the 
light  in  which  he  is  viewed  by  an  ungodly  world.  If  it  exalt  him,  there  is  something- 
wrong.  It  only  '  loves  its  own.'  But,  if  it  pour  out  upon  him  the  vials  of  its 
calumny,  falsehood,  and  scorn,  the  presumption  is,  that  he  is  faithful  to  his  God, 
and  the  friend  of  his  race.  The  most  splendid  illustration  of  the  last  century  was 
Whitefield.  ...  In  our  own  times,  the  counterpart  of  Whitefield  is  Mr.  Spurgeon. 
Regard  being  had  to  the  changed  and  softened  character  of  the  times,  he  has  been 
abused,  slandered,  libelled,  and  lied  against  quite  as  much.  The  London  corre 
spondent  of  a  very  able  Scottish  journal,  professedly  conducted  on  Christian  principles, 
had  the  audacity,  so  late  as  last  week,  to  write  as  follows  : — '  Sympathetic  Aberdonians 
need  not  trouble  themselves  to  make  up  any  more  money-boxes  for  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
Tabernacle.  All  the  debts  have  been  paid,  and  the  chapel  was  opened  on  Sunday 
evening.  As  the  Tabernacle  is  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  property,  pew-rents  and  all,  he 
will  probably  be  able  to  enjoy  his  "  privilege  "  of  riding  in  a  carriage  to  the  end  of  his 
clays.  This  being  the  case,  it  is  sincerely  to  be  hoped  that  he  will  now  finally 
dissociate  the  work  of  the  gospel  from  the  pursuit  of  mammon.' 

"  Now,  the  great  fact  alleged  in  the  foregoing  is  an  unmitigated  falsehood  ;  and, 
as  to  cupidity,  it  were  quite  as  just  and  true  to  charge  Mr.  Spurgeon  with  the 
guilt  of  murder  as  with  the  worship  of  mammon  !  No  man  in  this  great  metropolis 
preaches  one-third  so  much  for  all  Evangelical  sects,  on  behalf  of  all  sorts  of 
charitable  objects,  and  he  uniformly  preaches  for  nothing  ! 

'  Hut  the  carriage,'  says  the  correspondent.  Well,  the.  plain  one-horse  vehicle, 
—what  of  that  ?  Living  where  his  health  requires  him  to  live,  a  few  miles  in  the 
country,  in  a  very  plain  and  far  from  commodious  habitation,  some  conveyance  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  his  great  and  unceasing  toils.  Is  that  to  be  denied  him  ?  To 
economize  a  little  horse-power,  would  you  abridge  his  leviathan  labours  for  the  cause 
of  God  and  the  souls  of  men  ?  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  the  miserable  malignants  of  a 
former  day  brought  it  as  a  charge  against  Wesley  and  Whitefield,  and  in  our  own 
times  against  Collyer  and  Mill,  that  they  kept  a  carriage  !  This  suggests  the  economist 

*  In  much  less  than  seven  years  after  the  opening  service,  the  church-membership  had  been  more  than  doubled,  and  "  the 
members  and  their  families"  could  not  have  found  sitting  accommodation  in  the  building  if  they  had  all  tried  to  be  present  at  anv 
one  time. 


C.      11.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  11 

who  wished  the  ointment  to  have  been  sold  for  the  poor,  '  not  that  he  cared  lor  the 
poor  ;  but  because  he  was  a  thief,  and  had  the  bag-.'  But  enough  :  '  Wisdom  is 
justified  of  her  children.'  All  good  and  upright  men  '  glorify  God  '  in  Charles 
H addon  Spurgeon.  They  desire  for  him  life  and  length  of  days,  with  a  continuance 
of  all  his  gifts  and  all  his  graces,  and  an  increase  of  favour  with  God  and  man.  He 
is  still  in  the  morning  of  life  ;  and  we  trust  he  may  have  before  him  at  least  half- 
a-century  of  usefulness  and  honour  ere  he  be  called  to  the  Upper  World  to  take  his 
place — among  prophets,  apostles,  martyrs,  and  evangelists,  who  have  turned  many  to 
righteousness,— to  shine  as  a  star  for  ever  and  ever." 

*z> 

On  Wednesday,  April  10,  a  great  communion  service  was  held, — probably  the 
largest  since  the  clay  of  Pentecost, — in  order  to  set  forth  the  essential  oneness  of  the 
Church,  and  the  real  fellowship  in  the  body  of  Christ  which  is  the  privilege  of  all  her 
members.  The  following  afternoon  and  evening,  addresses  were  delivered  upon  the 
distinguishing  doctrines  of  Calvinism, — Election,  Human  Depravity,  Particular 
Redemption,  Effectual  Calling,  and  Final  Perseverance  ;  and  on  the  Eriday  evening, 
Henry  Vincent,  Esq.,  gave  a  brilliant  oration  on  "Nonconformity,"  Sir  John 
Burgoyne,  Bart.,  G.C.B.,  presiding. 

At  the  first  church-meeting  held  at  the  Tabernacle,  on  Monday  evening,  May  6, 
seventy-two  persons  were  proposed  for  membership,  and  the  Pastor  wrote  in  the 
church-book  as  follows  :— 

"I,  Charles  Iladdon  Spurgeon,  the  least  of  all  saints,  hereby  set  to  my  seal 
that  God  is  true,  since  He  has  this  day  fulfilled  my  hopes,  and  given  according  to  our 
faith.  O  Lord,  be  Thou  praised  world  without  end,  and  do  UK; LI  make  me  more 
faithful  and  more  mighty  than  ever  ! 

"C.     H.    Sl'UKGEON." 

The  following  inscription,  also  in  the  Pastor's  handwriting,  is  signed  by  himself, 
the  deacons,  the  elders,  and  a  large  number  of  the  church-members,  beginning 

<_>  O  "    O 

with   "  Susie  Spurgeon  ": — 

"  We,  the  undersigned  members  of  the  church  lately  worshipping  in  New 
Park  Street  Chapel,  but  now  assembling  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Newington, 
desire  with  overflowing  hearts  to  make  known  and  record  the  loving-kindness  of  our 
faithful  God.  We  asked  in  faith,  but  our  Lord  has  exceeded  our  desires,  for  not 
only  was  the  whole  sum  given  us,  but  far  sooner  than  we  had  looked  for  it.  Truly, 
the  Lord  is  good,  and  worthy  to  be  praised.  We  are  ashamed  of  ourselves  that  we 
have  ever  doubted  Him  ;  and  we  pray  that,  as  a  cluirch,  and  as  individuals,  we  may 
be  enabled  to  trust  in  the  Lord  at  all  times  with  confidence,  so  that  in  quietness  we 
may  possess  our  souls.  In  the  Name  of  our  God  we  set  up  our  banner.  Oh,  that 
Jehovah-jireh  may  also  be  unto  us  Jehovah-shammah  and  Jehovah-shalom  !  To 


12  C.      II.     Sl'URGIiON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  we  oiler  praise  and  thanksgiving,  and  we  set  to  our 
seal  that  God  is  true." 

This  entry  closes  the.  records  in  the  church-book  for  the  seven  years  from  i8y( 
to  1861.  It  is  worthy  of  note,  as  showing  the  unparalleled  growth  of  everything 
connected  with  the  work,  that  the  two  previous  church-books  had  respectively 
lasted  from  1757  to  1808,  and  from  1808  to  1854;  while  the  next  one,  commenced 
on  May  7,  1861,  ended  on  January  11,  1866,  and  the  following  volumes  were 
generally  filled  in  about  five  years.  All  are  large  thick  quartos,  uniform  in  size, 
and  the  complete  series  formed  one  of  the  most  precious  treasures  saved  from  the 
disastrous  lire  on  April  20,  1898. 

During  the  month  of  May,  1861,  four  more  church-meetings  were  held,  at 
which  seventy-seven  additional  members  were  proposed,  and  at  the  communion 
service  on  June  2,  a  hundred  and  twenty-one  persons  were  received  into  full 
fellowship.  This  large  increase  was  thus  gratefully  recorded  at  the  church-meeting 
on  June  18  : — "  It  was  unanimously  resolved  that  a  record  of  our  gratitude  to  God 
for  His  graciousness  toward  us  should  be  made  in  the  church-book.  With  our 
whole  hearts,  as  a  highly-favoured  church  and  people,  we  magnify  and  extol  the 
lovingkiiidness  of  our  God  in  so  singularly  owning  the  Word  proclaimed  among  us, 
by  giving  so  many  souls  to  be  added  to  our  number.  To  God  be  all  the  glory  ! 
Oh,  that  we  may  be  more  than  ever  devoted  to  His  honour  and  service  !  " 

The  Tabernacle  is  so  well  proportioned  that  many  persons  fail  to  realize  its 
vast  size.  The  building  is  a  rectangle,  measuring  outside  the  walls  174  feet  in 
length,  and  85  feet  in  width  ;  inside,  the  extreme  length,  including  the  vestries,  is 
168  ieet  ;  the  main  auditorium  being  146  feet  long,  81  feet  broad,  and  62  feet  high. 
Estimates  as  to  the  seating  accommodation  of  the  Tabernacle  have  varied 
considerably  ;  but  the  actual  number  of  sittings  that  could  be  let,  previous  to  the 
lire,  was  3,600,  and  about  1,000  persons  could  occupy  seats  on  the  flaps  in  the 
aisles  and  other  parts  of  the  building.  Many  hundreds  of  additional  hearers  could 
find — and  for  thirty  years  did  find — standing-room  in  the  great  house  of  prayer,  so 
that  the  preacher  had  regularly  before  him,  Sabbath  by  Sabbath,  between  five  and 
six  thousand  immortal  souls  listening  to  his  proclamation  of  the  Word  of  life. 

As  an  instance  of  the  misleading  notions  that  people  have  entertained 
concerning  the  capacity  of  large  public  buildings,  it  may  be  mentioned,  on  the 
authority  of  The  Builder*  May  4,  1861,  that  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall,  which 
was  supposed  to  hold  10,000  or  12,000  people,  had  a  sitting  area  of  19,723  feet, 
while  that  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  was  25,225  feet! 

At  the  annual  church-meeting,  on  January  22,  1862,  the  Building  Committee's 
audited  balance-sheet  was  presented  and  adopted.  It  showed  that  the  total 
expenditure  up  to  that  time  had  been  ,£31,332  45.  iod.,  all  of  which  had  been  met. 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  13 

The  two  largest  items  in  the  account  were— purchase  of  land,  ,£5,000  ;  and  contract 
for  the  main  building,  ,£20,000.      Among  the  receipts,  the  highest  amounts  were— 
collectors'  accounts,  ,£7,258   55.  2d.  ;  donations  and  subscriptions,  ,£9,034    19$.    2cl.  ; 
per  Pastor  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  ,£11,253    155.  6d. 


THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE. —  VIEW  FROM  THE  PULPIT. 

After  the  Tabernacle  was  built,  an  earnest  endeavour  was  made  to  retain  New- 
Park  Street  Chapel  for  the  Baptist  denomination,  and  to  make  it,  if  possible,  the 
abode  of  another  church.  For  some  years,  preaching  was  carried  on,  a  brother 
supported,  and  considerable  expenses  incurred  ;  but  it  was  clear  that  a  self-sustaining 
interest  was  not  to  be  gathered  in  the  neighbourhood.  Mr.  John  Collins,  now  of 
Lymington,  worked  very  hard,  and  enjoyed  much  of  the  Divine  blessing  ;  but  those 
who  were  converted  under  him  had  a  pardonable  tendency  to  gravitate  towards  the 
mother-church  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  it  became  evident  beyond  all  question  that  it 


14  C.     II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

was  useless  for  us  to  retain  so  large  a  building  in  such  a  situation,  and  so  near  our 
own.  The  property  consisted  of  the  chapel,  schools,  and  almsrooms  ;  and  it  was 
agreed,  and  arranged  with  the  Charity  Commissioners,  that  it  should  be  sold,  and  the 
proceeds  used  for  new  schools  and  almsrooms. 

In  the  Memorials  of  IVilliaui  lliggs,  there  is  an  interesting  paragraph  con 
cerning  this  transaction  : — "  When  the  date  of  the  auction  was  fixed,  Mr.  Higgs 
was  requested  to  attend  at  the  mart  for  the  protection  of  the  sale.  He  had  before 
valued  the  property  at  a  given  sum,  saying  that  he  did  not  think  it  likely  to  fetch 
very  much  more.  But,  to  the  surprise  of  those  friends  who  were  also  present,  when 
this  sum  was  reached,  he  himseli  put  in  a  bid  at  a  still  higher  figure,  and  ran  up  the 
amount  until  the  property  was  knocked  down  to  him  at  a  price  considerably  greater 
than  that  which  he  had  in  the  first  instance  named.  lie  was,  of  course,  joked  a  little 
about  his  bargain,  but  he  quietly  replied  that  no  doubt  it  would  prove  a  good  one. 
And  so  it  did  ;  lor,  not  very  long  afterwards,  he  went  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  with  the  news 
that  he  had  sold  the  place  at  a  proht  of  ^500,  adding  that  he  had  brought  the 
money  with  him,  as  he  could  not,  himseli,  think  of  keeping  it." 


i 


NEW    1'ARK   STREET   CHAPEL   AS   IT    IS   NOW    (,1899)- 


CHAPTER    LXI. 


Bracons  aitfo  deltas ;  ^iastars  anb  Quadjcr 


Deprive  the  Christian  Church  of  her  deacons,  and  she  would  be  bereaved  of  her  most  valiant 
sons;  their  loss  would  be  the  shaking  of  the  pillars  of  our  spiritual  house,  and  would  cause  a 
desolation  on  every  side.  Thanks  be  to  God,  such  a  calamity  is  not  likely  to  befall  us,  for  the  great 
Head  of  the  Church,  in  mercy  to  her,  will  always  raise  up  a  succession  of  faithful  men,  who  will  use 
the  office  well,  and  earn  unto  themselves  "a  good  degree,  and  great  boldness  in  the  faith." — C.  11.  S. 

HJINCE  I  came  to  London,  I  have  seen  the  last  of  a  former  race  of 
deacons, — fine,  gentlemanly  men,  rather  stiff  and  unmanageable, 
not  quite  according  to  my  mind,  but  respectable,  prudent  grandees 
of  Dissent,  in  semi  clerical  dress,  with  white  cravats.  The  past 
generation  of  deacons  is  to  be  spoken  of  with  reverence  in  all  places 
where  holy  memories  are  cherished  ;  but,  out  of  them  all,  my  friend, 
counsellor,  and  right  hand,  was  Thomas  Olney.  Never  did  a  minister  have  a  better 


j6  C.      H.      SrURGEON S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

deacon,  nor  a  church  a  better  servant.  Me  was  for  sixt)  years  a  member,  for  thirty  - 
one  years  a  deacon,  and  for  fourteen  years  treasurer  of  the  church.  He  was  ever 
remarkable  for  his  early  and  constant  attendance;  at  the  prayer-meeting-  and  other 
week  -  day  services.  He  had  a  childlike  faith  and  a  manly  constancy.  To 
believe  in  Jesus,  and  to  work  for  Him,  were  the  very  life  of  his  new  and  better 
nature.  He  was  eminently  a  Baptist,  but  he  was  also  a  lover  of  all  good  men.  The 
poor,  and  especially  the  poor  of  the  church,  always  found  in  him  sincere;  sympathy 
and  help.  His  name  will  be  had  in  lasting  remembrance. 

Among  my  first  London  deacons  was  one  very  worthy  man,  who  said  to  me, 
when  I  went  to  preach  in  Exeter  Hall  and  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall, 
"  I  am  an  old  man,  and  I  cannot  possibly  go  at  the  rate  you  young  people  are 
o-oino-  ;  but  I  don't  want  to  hang  on,  and  be  a  drag  to  you,  so  I  will  quietly  withdraw, 
and  o'o  and  see  how  I  can  get  on  with  Mr.  Brock."  I  think  that  was  the  kindest 

fc> 

thin<>-  that  the  good  man  could  have  clone,  and  that  it  was  probably  the  best  course; 
for  himself  as  well  as  for  us.  I  went  over  to  see  him,  some  time  afterwards, 
and  he  asked  me  to  take  my  two  boys  that  he  might  give;  them  his  blessing. 
He  said  to  me,  "Did  I  not  do  the  very  best  thing  I  could  have  done  by  getting 
out  of  the  way,  and  not  remaining  to  hinder  the  work  .J  I  always  read  your 
sermons,  and  I  sene!  in  my  subscriptiems  regularly."  Dear  good  man,  he  die;el  the; 

next  day. 

At  the  meeting  of  the  Tabernacle;  church,  in  connection  with  the  opening  oi  the 
new  building,  it  was  my  privilege  to  present  testimonials  to  two  of  the  deacons  who 
had  then  been  for  more  than  fifty  years  members  of  the  church.  The  resolutions 
had  been  unanimously  passed  at  the;  previous  annual  church-meeting,  and  they  were 
appropriately  illuminated  and  framed.  They  were  as  follows  :— 

"That  we;  desire  to  record  our  devout  gratitude;  to  our  Heavenly  Father 
for  His  continuing  to  us,  as  a  church,  the;  eminently  judicious  and  valuable  services  of 

our  esteemed  and  beloved  senior  deacon, 

JAMES    LOW, 

who  has  been  a  member  of  this  church   for  a  period  of  50  years, 

and  a  deacon  for  25  years. 

We  desire  also  to  express  to  our  beloved  brother  our  hearty  congratulations 
that  God  has  so  long  spared  his  valuable  and  useful  life, 

and  o-ranted  him  sracc  to  serve  the  Church  of  Christ  so  faithfully  and  so  well. 
<^5  i^> 

May  that  Master,  whom  he  has  so  long  served, 

graciously  continue  to  our  brother  His  special  and  comforting  presence, 
and  give  him  in  his  future  life  much  nearness  of  communion  with  Him,  and  at  a 
distant  period  an  abundant  entrance  into  His  Kingdom  and  glory  i 


C.      II.     SPURGEOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  ]/ 

"That  this  church  desires  to  record  its  devout  gratitude  to  Almighty  God 
for    that    abundant    grace    which    has    preserved  our    dear    and    honoured    brother, 

THOMAS    OLNEY, 

as  a  consistent,  useful,   and  beloved  member  of  this  church 

for  the  lengthened  period  of  5  i  years  ; 

and  while  to  the  grace  of  God  all  the  varied  excellences  of  our  brother  are  to 

be  ascribed,  the;  Pastor,  officers,  and  church-members  cannot  refrain   from   returning 

unfeigned  and  hearty  thanks  to  our  brother  for  his  indefatigable  labours  as 

deacon  for  22  years,  and  for  his  most  valuable  services  as  treasurer. 

No  man  can  be  more  truly  worthy  of  the  esteem  of  his  Christian 

brethren,   and   we   most  earnestly   invoke   a  blessing   upon   him,    upon   our  beloved 
sister  the  partner  of  his  life,  and  upon  his  godly  family,  which  is  by  so 

many  ties  united  with  us  as  a  people. 

We  trust  that,  in  that  great  house  of  prayer,  over  every  stone 

of  which  lie  has  watched  so  anxiously,  he  may  be  spared  to  see  the  largest 

wishes  of  his  heart  fulfilled  in  the  gathering  of  immense  assemblies, 

the  salvation  of  many  souls, 
and  the  daily  increase  of  our  numbers  as  a  church." 

(When  "Father  Olney  "  was  taken  home,  in  1869.  his  much-loved  Pastor  was 
just  recovering  from  an  attack  of  small-pox,  and  therefore  was  unable  to  visit  him  in 
his  last  illness,  or  to  conduct  his  funeral  service,  but  had  to  be  content  with  writing 
the  following  letter  to  his  son,  Mr.  Thomas  H.  Olney  :— 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

o  o 

"  Friday,  Nov.  26,  1869. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Olney, 

"  It  seems  so  strange  to  be  so  near  to  you,  and  yet  to  be  virtually  in 
another  land.  It  would  have  seemed  an  idle  tale  if  anyone  had  told  me  that  I 
should  not  be  at  your  father's  death-bed.  Nevertheless,  it  is  well, — well  especially 
for  him  to  whom  a  longer  sojourn  here  would  have  meant  pain,  weakness,  and 
failure  of  mind,  while  his  departure  means  a  glory  too  resplendent  for  us  to 


imagine  it. 


"  I  quite  think  that,  if  you  can  get  Mr.  Brock,  it  will  be  just  what  he  himself 
would  have  desired  in  my  absence.  I  have  sent  to  the  deacons  my  request  to  have 
the  pulpit  hung  with  black,  for  his  death  is  as  much  a  bereavement  to  us  all  as 
anything  could  be. 

"  My  dear  friend,  I  devoutly  pray  to  God  to  incline  your  heart  to  be  henceforth 
to  me  all  that  your  father  has  been  till  he  fell  asleep.  Not  that  you  have  not  ever 
been  the  soul  of  goodness  ;  but  now  he  is  gone,  you  must  undertake  more  publicly 


1 8  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

the  responsibilities  which  in  private  you  really  have  borne  ;  and  if  the  Lord  accounts 
me  worthy  to  have  in  Thomas  Gluey  the  same  tender  friend  that  I  have  had  in 
Thomas  Olney,  senr.,  my  pathway  in  life  will  be  smoothed,  and  my  labour  cheered. 
The  Lord  be  with  you  !  My  devoutest  wishes  are  for  your  best  happiness. 

"  Yours  most  truly, 

"C.   H.   SURGEON." 

Mr.  T.  H.  Olncy  accepted  the  position  of  treasurer  ;  year  by  year,  he  has  been 
re-elected  by  the  church  ;  and  the  following  letter  shows  how  faithfully  he  has  ful 
filled  the  dtitie.s  of  the.  office  :— 

"  Westwood, 

"Beulah  Hill, 

"  Upper  Norwood, 

"  June  26,  1883. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"The  cheque  reached  me  safely  this  morning.  Many  thanks  for  all  your 
care  of  the  finances,  and  for  your  extreme  punctuality  in  payment.  If  the  cheque 
did  not  come  at  the  exact  time,  I  should  think  the  Monument  had  walked  over  to 
Pountain  Court,  and  killed  the  Chancellor  of  my  Exchequer.  I  can  only  pray,  'God 
bless  Thomas  Olney  and  all  he  undertakes  !' 

"  Yours  most  lovingly, 

"C.    11.  STURGEON." 
Fountain  Court  was  Mr.  Olney's  City  address.) 

My  present  staff  of  deacons  consists  of  peculiarly  lovable?,  active,  energetic, 
warm-hearted,  generous  men,  every  one  of  whom  seems  specially  adapted  for  his 
own  particular  department  of  service.  I  am  very  thankful  that  I  have;  never  been 
the  pastor  of  a  dead  church,  controlled  by  dead  deacons.  1  have  seen  such  a  thing 
as  that  with  my  own  eyes,  and  the  sight  was  truly  awful.  I  recollect  very  well 
preaching  in  a  chapel  where  the  church  had  become  exceedingly  low,  and,  somehow, 
the  very  building  looked  like  a  sepulchre,  though  crowded  that  one  night  by  those 
who  came;  to  hear  the  preacher.  The  singers  drawled  out  a  dirge,  while  the? 
members  sat  like  mutes.  I  found  it  hard  preaching;  there  was  no  "go"  in  the 
sermon,  I  seemed  to  be  driving  dead  hearses. 

After  the  service,  I  saw  twe)  men,  who  I  supposed  were  the  deacons, — the 
pillars  e)f  the  church, — leaning  against  the  pe>sts  e)f  the  vestry  door  in  a  listless 
attitude,  and  I  said,  "  Are  you  the  deacons  of  this  church  ?  "  The}'  informed  me 
that  they  were  the  only  deacems,  and  I  remarked  that  I  thought  so.  To  myself  I 
added  that  1  understood,  as  I  looked  at  tJicui,  several  things  which  else  would  have 
been  a  riddle.  Here?  was  a  dead  church,  comparable?  to  the  ship  of  the?  ancient 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


AMD 

DEACONS 

OF    THE 

ETROPOLITAN 


2O  C.      II.      Si'UKGKuNS     AUTOBIOGRAril  Y. 

mariner   which    was   manned   by   the   dead.      Deacons,    teachers,  minister,  people,  all 
dead,  and  yet  wearing"  the  semblance  ol  lite;. 

"The  helmsman  steered  ^he  ship  moved  on, 

Yet  never  a  bree/e  up  blew  ; 
The  mariners  all  '^an  work  the  ropes, 

\Vhere  they  were  wont  to  do  ; 
They  raised  tlu-ir  limbs  like  lifeless  tools, — 

\Ve  were  a  sj;hastl\'  erew." 

All  my  church-officers  are  in  a  very  real  sense  my  brethren  in  Christ.  In  talking 
to  or  about  one:  another,  we  have  no  stately  modes  of  address.  I  am  called  "  the 
Governor," — I  suppose,  because  I  do  not  attempt  to  govern;  and  the  deacons  are 
known  among  us  as  "  Brother  William,"  "  Uncle  Tom,"  "  Dear  Old  Joe,"  "  Prince 
Charlie,"  "  Son  of  All,"  and  so  on.  These  brethren  are  some  of  them  esquires,  who 
ought  also  to  be;  M.P.'s  ;  but  wre  love  them  too  well  to  dignify  them.  One  day,  I 
spoke:  rather  sharply  to  one  oi  them,  and  I  think  lie  deserved  the  rebuke  I  gave  him  ; 
but  he  said  to  me,  "Well,  that  may  be  so  ;  but  I  tell  you  what,  sir,  /  would  die  for 
you  any  dav"  "  Oh  !  "  I  replied,  "  bless  your  heart,  I  am  sorry  I  was  so  sharp  ;  but, 
still,  you  did  deserve  it,  did  YOU  not  ?"  He  smiled,  and  said  he  thought  he  did,  and 

'    J  J  o 

there  the  matter  ended. 

One  of  my  deacons  made  a  remark  to  me,  one*  night,  which  would  have  mortally 
offended  a  more  sensitive  individual  than  1  am.  It  was  the  first  Sabbath  in  the 
month,  the  preaching  service  was  over,  and  we  were  just  going  down  to  the  great 
communion  in  the  Tabernacle.  I  enquired  how  many  new  members  there  were  to 
be  received,  and  the  answer  was,  "  Only  seven."  In  an  instant,  my  good  friend  said, 
"This  won't  pay,  Governor;  running  all  this  big  place  for  seven  new  members  in  a 
month  !  "  lie  was  quite  right,  although  a  Christian  church  is  not  "run"  on  exactly 
the  same  lines  as  a  business  undertaking  ;  but  I  could  not  help  thinking,  at  the  time, 
that  it  would  not  have  done  for  some  deacons  to  make  such  an  observation  to  certain 
ministers  of  my  acquaintance  ;  or  if  the  remark  had  been  made,  it  would  have  been 
attended  with  very  serious  consequences.  I  know  one  pastor  who  is  very  decidedly 
of  opinion  that  the  Lord  never  made  anyone  equal  in  importance  to  a  Baptist 
minister  (that  is,  himself]  ;  but  it  so  happened  that  one  of  his  church -officers  had 
the  notion  that  a  deacon  is  a  being  of  a  still  higher  order,  so  it  was  not  very 
surprising  that  the  time  came  when  they  could  no  longer  work  together  harmoniously. 

On  going  into  the  Tabernacle,  one  clay,  I  gave  directions  about  some  minor 
alterations  that  I  wished  to  have  made,  not  knowing  at  the  time  that  I  was  cancelling 
the  orders  given  by  the  deacon  who  had  the  main  care  of  the  building  resting  upon 
him.  When  he  arrived,  in  the  evening,  he  saw  what  had  been  done,  and  at  once 
asked  who  had  interfered  with  his  instructions.  The  reply  was,  "the  Governor,  sir." 
The  spirit  of  unquestioning  loyalty  at  once  asserted  itself  over  any  temporary 


C.      II.      Sl'URGEUN  S     AUTOBlUUKAi'IiY.  21 

annoyance  he  may  have  felt,  and  he  said,  "Quite  right  ;  there  must  be  only  one 
captain  in  a  ship  ;  "  and,  for  a  long  while,  that  saying-  became  one  of  our  most 
familiar  watchwords.  I  have  often  been  amazed  at  the  devotion  of  our  brethren  ;  I 
have  told  them,  many  a  time,  that,  if  they  would  follow  a  broomstick  as  they  have 
followed  me,  the  work  must  succeed.  To  which  Mr.  William  Gluey,  as  the 
spokesman  for  the  rest,  has  answered,  "  Yes,  dear  Pastor  ;  but  it  is  because  we  have 
such  absolute  confidence  in  your  leadership  that  we  are  ready  to  follow  you  anywhere. 
You  have  never  misled  us  yet,  and  we  do  not  believe  you  ever  will  do  so." 

After  one  long  illness,  which  kept  me  for  many  weeks  out  of  the  pulpit,  I  said 
to  the  deacons,  "  I  am  afraid  you  will  get  quite  tired  of  your  poor  crippled 
minister;"  but  one  of  the  least  demonstrative  of  the  brethren  replied,  "Why,  my 
dear  sir,  we  would  sooner  have  you  lor  one  month  in  the  year  than  anyone  else  in 
the  world  for  the  whole  twelve  months!"  I  believe  they  all  agreed  \\ith  what  he 
said,  for  they  have  often  urged  me  to  go  away  for  a  long  sea  voyage,  or  to  rest  for  a 
year,  or  for  several  months  at  the  least  ;  but  I  have  always  had  one  answer  for 
them  : — "  It  is  not  possible  for  me  to  leave  my  work  for  any  lengthened  period  until 
the  Lord  calls  me  home  ;  and,  besides,  there  is  a  Scriptural  reason  why  a  minister 
should  not  be  away  from  his  people  lor  more  than  six  weeks  at  a  time."  "  What  is 
that?"  they  asked.  "Why,  don't  you  remember  that,  when  Moses  was  up  in  the 
mount  with  God  for  forty  days,  Aaron  and  the  children  of  Israel  turned  aside  to  the 
worship  of  the  golden  calf?  " 

I  had  one  most  touching  proof  of  a  deacon's  loving  self-sacrifice  and  generosity. 
During  a  very  serious  illness,  I  had  an  unaccountable  fit  of  anxiety  about  money 
matters.  '1  here  was  no  real  ground  for  apprehension,  for  my  dear  wile  and  I  were 
scrupulously  careful  to  "owe  no  man  anything,"  and  there  was  no  pecuniar}-  liability 
in  connection  with  the  Lord's  work  under  my  charge  which  need  have  caused  me 
the  slightest  perplexity.  I  had  fallen  into  one  of  those  curious  mental  conditions  that 
are  often  the  result  of  extreme  pain  and  weakness,  in  which  the  mind  seems  to  lay 
hold  of  some  impalpable  object,  and  will  not  let  it  go.  One  of  the  brethren  came  to 
see  me  while  I  was  in  that  sacl  state,  and  after  trying  in  vain  to  comfort  me,  he  said, 
"Well,  good  bye,  sir,  I'll  see  what  I  can  do."  lie  went  straight  home,  and  before 
very  long  he  came  back  to  me  bringing  all  the  stocks  and  shares  and  deeds  and 
available  funds  that  he  had.  Putting  them  clown  on  the  bed  where  I  was  lyino-  in 
great  agony,  he  said,  "There,  my  clear  Pastor,  I  owe  everything  I  have  in  the  world 
to  you,  and  you  are  quite  welcome  to  all  I  possess.  Take  whatever  you  need,  and 
do  not  have  another  moment's  anxiety."  Gf  course,  as  soon  as  I  got  better,  I 
returned  to  my  dear  friend  all  that  he  had  brought  to  me  under  such  sino-ular 

*  <->  o 

circumstances.      Even  it  I  had  needed  it,  I    could  not  have  taken  a  penny  of  it,  for   it 
seemed    to    me   very    much    as   the   water   from    the   well   of   Bethlehem    must   have 


22  c.    11.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOI;IU(,KAI'IIV. 

appeared  to  David.  Happily,  I  did  not  require,  any  part  of  the  amount  so  freely- 
placed  at  my  disposal,  but  I  could  never  forget  the  threat  kindness  of  the  brother  who 
was  willing  to  give  all  that  he  had  in  order  to  allay  the  groundless  fears  of  his  sorely- 
alllicted  minister. 

When  I  came  to  New  Park  Street,  the  church  had  deacons,  but  no  elders  ;  and 
I  thought,  from  my  study  of  the  Xew  Testament,  that  there  should  be  both  orders  ol 
officers.  They  are  very  useful  when  we  can  get  them, — the  deacons  to  attend  to  all 
secular  matters,  and  the  elders  to  devote  themselves  to  the  spiritual  part  of  the  work  ; 
this  division  of  labour  supplies  an  outlet  for  two  different  sorts  of  talent,  and  allows 
two  kinds  of  men  to  be  serviceable  to  the  church  ;  and  I  am  sure  it  is  good  to  have 
two  sets  of  brethren  as  officers,  instead  of  one  set  who  have  to  do  everything,  and 
who  often  become  masters  of  the  church,  instead  of  the  servants,  as  both  deacons 
and  elders  should  be. 

As  there  were  no  elders  at  New  Park  Street,  when  I  read  and  expounded  the 
passages  in  the  New  Testament  referring  to  elders,  I  used  to  say,  "  This  is  an  order 
of  Christian  workers  which  appears  to  have  dropped  out  of  existence.  In  apostolic 
times,  they  had  both  deacons  and  elders  ;  but,  somehow,  the  church  has  departed 
from  this  early  custom.  We  have  one  preaching  elder, — that  is,  the  Pastor, — and  he 
is  expected  to  perform  all  the  duties  of  the  eldership."  One  and  another  of  the 
members  began  to  enquire  of  me,  "  Ought  not  we,  as  a  church,  to  have  elders  ? 
Cannot  we  elect  some  of  our  brethren  who  are  qualified  to  fill  the  office  ?  "  I 
answered  that  we  had  better  not  disturb  the  existing  state  of  affairs  ;  but  some 
enthusiastic  young  men  said  that  they  would  propose  at  the  church-meeting  that 
elders  should  be  appointed,  and  ultimately  we  did  appoint  them  with  the  unanimous 
consent  of  the  members.  I  did  not  force  the  question  upon  them  ;  I  only  showed 
them  that  it  was  Scriptural,  and  then  of  course  they  wanted  to  carry  it  into  effect. 

The   church-book,  in   its   records   of  the  annual  church-meeting  held  January   12, 
1859,  contains  the  following  entry: — 

"  Our  Pastor,  in  accordance  with  a  previous  notice,  then  stated  the  necessity 
that  had  long  been  felt  by  the  church  for  the  appointment  of  certain  brethren  to  the 
office  of  elders,  to  watch  over  the  spiritual  affairs  of  the  church.  Our  Pastor  pointed 
out  the  Scripture  warrant  for  such  an  office,  and  quoted  the  several  passages  relating 
to  the  ordaining  of  elders  :  Titus  i.  5,  and  Acts  xiv.  23  ; — the  qualifications  of  elders  : 
i  Timothy  iii.  i — 7,  and  Titus  i.  5 — 9  ;— the  duties  of  elders  :  Acts  xx.  28 — 35, 
i  Timothy  v.  17,  and  James  v.  14;  and  other  mention  made  of  elders:  Acts  xi.  30, 
xv.  4,  6,  23,  xvi.  4,  and  i  Timothy  iv.  14. 

"Whereupon,  it  was  resolved, — That  the  church,  having  heard  the  statement 
made  by  its  Pastor  respecting  the  office  of  the  eldership,  desires  to  elect  a  certain 


c.    11.    SPURGEON'S    AUToniocuArnv.  23 

number  of  brethren  to  starve  the  church  in  that  office  for  one  year,  it  being  under 
stood  that  they  are  to  attend  to  the  spiritual  affairs  of  the  church,  and  not  to  the 
temporal  matters,  which  appertain  to  the  deacons  only." 

I  have  always  made  it  a  rule  to  consult  the  existing  officers  of  the  church 
before  recommending  the  election  of  new  deacons  or  elders,  and  I  have  also  been 
on  the  look-out  for  those  who  have  proved  their  fitness  for  office  by  the  work  they 
have  accomplished  in  their  private  capacity.  In  our  case,  the  election  of  deacons 
is  a  permanent  one,  but  the  elders  are  chosen  year  by  year.  This  plan  has  worked 
admirably  with  us,  but  other  churches  have  adopted  different  methods  of  appointing 
their  officers.  In  my  opinion,  the  very  worst  mode  of  selection  is  to  print  the  names 
of  all  the  male  members,  and  then  vote  for  a  certain  number  by  ballot.  I  know  of 
one  case  in  which  a  very  old  man  was  within  two  or  three  votes  of  being-  elected 
simply  because  his  name  began  with  A,  and  therefore  was  put  at  the  top  of  the  list 
of  candidates. 

My  elders  have  been  a  great  blessing  to  me  ;  they  are  invaluable  in  looking 
alter  the  spiritual  interests  of  the  church.  The  deacons  have  charge  of  the  finance  ; 
but  if  the  elders  meet  with  cases  of  poverty  needing  relief,  we  tell  them  to  give 
some  small  sum,  and  then  bring  the  case  before  the  deacons.  I  was  once  the  unseen 
witness  of  a  little  incident  that  greatly  pleased  me.  I  heard  one  of  our  elders  say 
to  a  deacon,  "  I  gave  old  Mrs.  So-and-so  ten  shillings  the  other  night."  "That  was 
very  generous  on  your  part,"  said  the  deacon.  "Oh,  but!"  exclaimed  the  elder, 
"  I  want  the  money  from  the  deacons."  So  the  deacon  asked,  "What  office  do  you 
hold,  brother?"  "Oh!"  he  replied,  "I  see;  I  have  gone  beyond  my  duty  as  an 
elder,  so  I'll  pay  the  ten  shillings  myself;  I  should  not  like  'the  Governor'  to  hear 
that  I  had  overstepp  .-d  the  mark."  "No,  no,  my  brother,"  said  the  deacon;  "I'll 
give  you  the  money,  but  don't  make  such  a  mistake  another  time." 

Some  of  the  elders  have  rendered  great  service  to  our  own  church  by  con 
ducting  Bible-classes  and  taking  the  oversight  of  several  of  our  home-mission 
stations,  while  one  or  two  have  made  it  their  special  work  to  "watch  for  souls  "  in 
our  great  congregation,  and  to  seek  to  bring  to  immediate  decision  those  who 
appeared  to  be  impressed  under  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  One  brother  has 
earned  for  himself  the  title  of  my  hunting  clog,  for  he  is  always  ready  to  pick  up  the 
wounded  birds.  One  Monday  night,  at  the  prayer-meeting,  he  was  sitting  near  me 
on  the  platform  ;  all  at  once  I  missed  him,  and  presently  I  saw  him  right  at  the 
other  end  of  the  building.  After  the  meeting,  I  asked  him  why  he  went  off  so 
suddenly,  and  he  said  that  the  gas  just  shone  on  the  face  of  a  woman  in  the 
congregation,  and  she  looked  so  sad  that  he  walked  round,  and  sat  near  her,  in 
readiness  to  speak  to  her  about  the  Saviour  after  the  service. 


24  C.      11.     Sl'UKGKON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

That  same  brother  did  a  very  unusual  thing  on  another  occasion.  A  poor 
fallen  woman  accosted  him  in  the  street,  and  in  an  instant  he  began  to  plead  with 
her  to  leave  her  sinful  ways,  and  come  to  Christ.  Rain  came  on  while  he  was 
talking  to  her,  so  he  rapped  at  the  door  of  the  nearest  house,  and  asked  if  he  might 
stand  in  the  passage  while  he  spoke  and  prayed  with  a  poor  soul  under  conviction  of 
sin.  The  good  woman  invited  him  into  her  front  room,  and  when  he  thanked  her 
for  her  kindness,  he  took  the  opportunity  of  asking  her  also  if  she  knew  the  Lord. 
I  believe  he  had  the  joy  of  leading  both  of  them  to  the  Saviour,  and  bringing  them 
to  join  the  church  at  the  Tabernacle.  Eternity  alone  will  reveal  how  many  have 
thus  been  arrested  and  blessed  by  a  wise  and  winning  word  spoken  in  season,  and 
accompanied  by  earnest  prayer  and  clear  Scriptural  teaching  concerning  the:  way  of 

salvation.       Others   of    the   elders   have   also   exercised  a  most    <>Tacious   ministrv   in 

j~>  j 

various  parts  of  the  metropolis,  and  in  the  home  counties,  through  the  agency  of 
the  Tabernacle  Country  Mission  and  Evangelists'  Association.  Many  churches,  that 
are  now  sell-supporting  and  flourishing,  were  started  in  a  very  humble  fashion  by  the 
brethren  connected  with  one  or  other  of  these  two  useful  Societies.  The  labours  of 
the  elders  in  visiting  the  sick,  seeking  to  reclaim  the  wandering,  pointing  enquirers 
to  the  Saviour,  and  introducing  candidates  to  the-  fellowship  of  the  church,  are 
recorded  in  the  Lord's  Book  of  Remembrance,  and  are  gratefully  recollected  by  their 
Pastor  and  fellow-members. 

(One  of  the  ministers  who  took  part  in  the  services  in  connection  with  the 
opening  of  the  Tabernacle  was  Pastor  James  Smith,  whose  portrait  was  given  in 
Volume  II.,  page  3.  Not  many  months  afterwards,  he  was  laid  aside  by  serious 
illness.  A  letter  of  condolence  and  sympathy  was  sent  to  him  from  the  church,  in 
which  it  was  said  :—  ;'  Many  of  us  remember  your  useful  and  honoured  ministry 
when  you  went  in  and  out  before  us,  and  sought  to  feed  the  flock  ;  all  of  us  know 
you  by  your  valuable  writings,  and  to  this  day  we  hear  of  instances  of  conversion 
wrought  by  means  of  your  sermons  in  our  midst.  We  therefore  all  of  us  feel  a 
true  union  of  heart  towards  you,  and  devoutly  pray  that  every  covenant  mercy 
may  rest  upon  you  and  your  family  in  this  hour  of  affliction  and  sorrow." 

The  venerable:  minister  was  greatly  cheered  by  this  token  of  love  from  his 
former  church.  lie  lingered  for  more  than  a  year,  and  in  October,  1862, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  went  to  see  him,  and  on  the  following  Sabbath,  thus  reported 
to  the  friends  at  the  Tabernacle  how  he  found  him  :— "  I  saw,  this  week,  one 
whom  many  of  you  greatly  respect, — the  former  Pastor  of  this  church,  Mr.  James 
Smith,  of  Cheltenham, — a  name  well  known  by  his  innumerable  little  works  which 
are  .scattered  everywhere,  and  cannot  fail  to  do  good.  You  will  remember  that, 
about  a  year  ago,  he  was  struck  with  paralysis  ;  one  half  of  his  body  is  dead,  but  yet, 


C.      II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


METROPOLITAN 

TABERNACLE 

ELDERS. 


C.    CORNELL. 


S.     JOHNSON. 


J.   J.   CORSAN. 


0.   CROKKR. 


26  c.    i.'.    SPURGEONS    AIJTOIUO^KAI'IIY. 

when  I  saw  him  on  the  bed,  I  had  not  seen  ;i  more  cheerful  man  in  the  full  heyday 
of  strength.  I  had  been  told  that  he  was  the  subject  of  very  fearful  contlicts  at 
times  ;  so,  after  I  had  shaken  hands  with  him,  I  said,  '  Friend  Smith,  I  hear  that  you 
have  many  doubts  and  fears.'  '  \Yho  told  you  that?'  he  enquired,  'for  I  have 
none.'  '  Do  you  never  have  any?'  I  asked.  '  \\liy,  I  understood  that  you  had  many 
conflicts.'  'Yes,'  he  said,  '  I  have  many  conflicts,  but  I  have  no  doubts  ;  I  have  many 
wars  within,  but  I  have  no  fears.  Who  could  have  told  you  such  a  thing?  I  hope 
I  have  not  led  anyone  to  think  so.  It  is  a  hard  battle,  but  I  know  the  victory  is 
sure.  After  I  have  had  an  ill  night's  rest, — of  course,  through  physical  debility,— 
my  mind  is  troubled,  and  then  that  old  coward,  Satan,  who  would,  perhaps, 
not  meddle  with  me  if  I  were  strong,  attacks  me  when  I  am  weak.  But  I  am 
not  afraid  of  him  ;  don't  you  go  away  with  that  opinion;  he  does  throw  many  fiery 
darts  at  me,  but  I  have  no  doubt  as  to  my  final  victor}'.'  Then  he  said,  in  his  own 
quaint  way,  '  I  am  just  like:  a  packet  that  is  all  ready  to  go  by  train, — packed,  corded, 
labelled,  paid  for,  and  on  the  platform,  waiting  for  the  express  to  come  by,  and  take 
me  to  glory  ; '  and  he  added,  '  I  wish  I  could  hear  the  whistle  now  ;  I  had  hoped  I 
should  have  been  carried  to  I  leaven  long  ago  ;  but,  still,  it  is  all  right.'  He  also 
said  to  me,  '  I  have  been  telling  your  deacon,  George  Moore,  that  I  am  not  only 
on  the  rock,  but  that  I  am  cemented  to  the  rock,  and  that  the  cement  is  as  hard  as 
the  rock  itself,  so  there  is  no  fear  of  my  perishing  ;  unless  the  rock  falls,  I  cannot 
fall  ;  unless  the  gospel  perishes,  I  cannot  perish.'  ' 

He  had  not  to  wait  much  longer  for  the  home-call,  as  the  following  entry  in  our 
church-book,  under  the  date  of  December  15,  proves  :— 

"The  church  was  informed  that  our  late  Pastor  and  beloved  brother,  Rev. 
James  Smith,  of  Cheltenham,  had  fallen  asleep  in  Jesus  yesterday.  The  members, 
therefore,  joined  in  expressions  of  sympathy  with  the  bereaved  family,  and  they  were 
glad  to  hear  that,  a  few  days  previously,  the  sum  of  ^50  had  been  forwarded  to  him 
by  friends  in  connection  with  the  church  to  aid  him  in  his  time  of  affliction.") 


CHAPTER     LXII. 


Qracous  antr  <0lticvs;  pastors  anb  Ccadjcrs  (continued). 

I  do  not  think  that,  in  the  course  of  the  next  twenty  years,  you,  as  a  church,  will  have  such  a 
choice  of  pastors  as  you  have  had  during  the  last  twenty  years.  If  I  should  die,  it  may  be  so,  I 
suppose;  but  I  do  not  think  that  anything  but  death  would  get  me  to  go  away  from  this  spot.  I 
hardly  agree  with  ministers,  when  they  get  beaten,  showing  the  white  feather,  and  resigning  their 
charge.  I  feel  that  I  am  captain  of  a  vessel  ;  and  if  there  should  be  a  Jonah  in  the  ship,  I  shall,  as 
gently  and  in  as  Christian  a  spirit  as  possible,  pitch  him  out  ;  I  shall  not  think,  because  Jonah  is  there, 
that  therefore  I  ought  to  leave,  but  I  will  stand  by  the  ship  in  ill  weather  as  well  as  in  sunshine.  I 
know  that,  by  God's  grace,  I  was  called  to  this  place;  and  if  God's  grace  and  providence  shall  move  me, 
well  and  good;  but  nothing  else  ever  will.  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt  but  that,  as  our  numbers 
shall  increase  in  answer  to  earnest  prayer,  the  Spirit  of  God  will  be  poured  out  yet  more  abundantly 
upon  minister  and  people,  and  that  we,  being  bound  together  yet  more  c'osely  in  ties  of  affection  and 
oi  hearty  co-operation,  shall  go  from  strength  to  strength  in  glorifying  God  and  serving  one  another. 
Why  should  not  this  ancient  church  become  as  glorious  in  the  future  as  it  has  been  in  the  past?— C.  II.  S., 
in  address  at  niedin^  of  Tabernacle  church  shortly  after  the  opening  if  the  new  building. 

It  was  very  important  that,  during  the  short  active  lifetime  of  our  Saviour, — a  little  more  than 
three  years,  — lie  should  confine  His  operation  to  a  comparatively  small  district,  so  as  to  produce  a 
permanent  result  there  which  would  afterwards  radiate  over  the  whole  world.  He  knew  \\hat  was  best 
tor  men,  and  therefore  He  restru  led  Himself  to  a  very  narrow  area  ;  and,  my  brethren  and  sisters,  I  am 
not  sure  that  we  are  always  \visc  when  we  want  a  great  sphere.  I  have  myself  sometimes  envied  the 
man  with  about  five  hundred  people  to  watch  over,  who  could  see  them  all,  know  them  all,  and  enter 
into  sympathy  with  them  all,  and  so  could  do  his  work  well.  15ut.  with  so  large  a  number  as  1  have 
under  my  charge,  what  can  one  man  do  ?  —  C.  II.  S.,  in  exposition  of  iMallhew  xv.  21. 


SOFTER  the  Tabernacle  was  opened,  the  church  continued  to  grow 
so  rapidly  that  it  was  found  necessary,  from  time  to  time,  to 
provide  the  Pastor  with  suitable  helpers  in  his  many-sided  ser 
vice.  M  he  following  entries  in  the  church-book  show  the  different 
steps  that  were  taken  before  a  permanent  appointment  was 
made  :— 

November  24,  1862. — "Our  Pastor  stated  that  he  thought  it  desirable  that  we 
should  revive  the  office  of  TEACHER,  which  had  formerly  existed  in  this  church, 
but  had  fallen  into  disuse.  In  looking  over  our  church  history,  he  found  that, 
during-  the  pastorate  of  Mr.  William  Rider,  Mr.  Reach  had  laboured  in  the  church 
under  the  name  and  title-  of  Teacher,  so  that,  upon  the  decease  of  Mr.  Rider,  a 
Pastor  was  at  once  on  the  spot  in  the  person  of  the  mighty  man  of  God  who  had  for 
twenty  years  been  recognized  as  a  Teacher  among  us.  Again,  in  the  pastorate  of 
Benjamin  Keach,  the  church  elected  Mr.  Benjamin  Stinton  to  assist  the  Pastor  as  a 
Teacher,  and  it  again  happened  that,  on  the  removal  of  Mr.  Keach,  Benjamin 
Stinton  succeeded  to  the  pastorate,  and  the  church  was  spared  the  misery  of  long 


28 


C.      IT.      SI'UKOKOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


remaining'  without  a  Pastor,  or  seeking  some  unknown  person  from  abroad.  The 
Teacher,  without  dividing-  the  unity  of  the  pastorate,  would,  in  the  judgment  of  our 
Pastor,  be  a  valuable  aid  for  the  edification  of  the  saints  in  the  matter  of  word  and 
doctrine.  Our  Pastor  also  remarked  that,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  manifestly  made;  a 
man  useful  in  the  church,  and  bestowed  on  him  the  real  qualifications  for  an  office, 
it  seemed  but  fitting  and  seemlv  that  the  church  should  humbly  recoimi/e  the  in  ft  of 

-  /  o  o 

the  Lord,  and  accept  the  brother  in  the  Lord's  name. 


PASTOR   JOHN    COLLINS. 

"Our  Pastor  proceeded  to  remark  that  our  Brother  John  Collins  had  commended 

himself,  by  his  useful  labours  and  teaching  at  Xew  Park  Street,  to  the  love  and 
esteem  of  all  who  knew  him,  and  he  should  feel  exceedingly  happy  if  the  church 
would  acknowledge  our  excellent  brother  by  calling  him  officially  to  do  what  he  was 
already  actually  doing.  The  Pastor  thought  that,  in  this  way,  in  future  years,  the 
church  might  have  a  number  of  useful  preachers  in  her  midst,  and  it  might  please; 
the  Great  Head  of  the  Church  thus  to  provide  for  us  a  succession  of  Pastors  from 
among  our  own  brethren.  Of  course,  the  office  of  Teacher  did  not  involve,  of 
necessity,  that  the  person  holding  it  should  be  chosen  to  the  pastorate  ;  but,  since 
the  Lord  had  thus  provided  for  the  church  in  years  gone  by,  it  was  right  to  act  upon 
the  precedent,  and  to  expect  that  He  would  again  raise  up  a  Reach  or  a  Stinton 
from  our  midst. 

"  Several    brethren   having-  expressed   their  hearty    concurrence  in  the  remarks 
made   by  our  Pastor,  and  also  their  confidence   in   our    Brother  Collins    the    church 


C.     II.     SPURGKOXS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  29 

unanimously  agreed  to  appoint  John  Collins  to  the  office  of  Teacher.  Our  brother 
was  then  called  in,  and  informed  of  the  office  he  had  been  appointed  to  fill  by  the 
vote  of  the  church,  which  he  accepted  with  all  humility,  asking  our  prayers,  and 
pledging  himself  anew  to  serve  the  Lord  and  His  people." 

September  10,  1863. — "  A  letter  was  read  from  our  Brother  Collins,  on  behalf  of 
the  church  at  Southampton  of  which  he  had  been  chosen  Pastor,  requesting  his 
dismission  to  their  fellowship.  It  was  agreed  that  the  request  should  be  complied 
with,  and  that  he  should  be  released  from  the.  office  ot  Teacher,  with  best  wishes  tor 
his  tuture.  success." 

March  31,  1864.  —"Our  Pastor  stated  that  the  office  of  Teacher  had  not  been 
filled  up  since  Brother  Collins  had  been  chosen  Pastor  ot  the  church  at  Southampton, 
and  that  he  was  very  desirous  that  it  should  be  occupied  by  an  efficient  brother  who 
would  labour  with  him  in  the  gospel.  The  oversight  of  so  large  a  church  rendered 
some  assistance  necessary  to  the  Pastor,  and  he  therefore  proposed  that  our  Brother 


PASTOR   THOMAS   NESS. 


Thomas  Ness,  towards  whom  he  entertained  the  most  affectionate  regard,  be 
appointed  Teacher,  to  assist  the  Pastor  by  visitation  and  other  work  as  need  should 
arise.  Several  of  the  brethren  expressed  their  hearty  approval,  and  spoke  in  the 
warmest  terms  of  Mr.  Ness,  and  of  his  suitability  for  the  office.  It  was  therefore 
unanimously  agreed  to  by  the  church,  and  our  Brother  Ness  signified  his  acceptance 
of  the  office." 


3°  C.      II.      STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

October  19,  1865. — "Our  Pastor  having  alluded  to  the  personal  loss  he  would 
sustain  by  the  removal  of  our  Brother  Thomas  Xess  to  the  pastorate  of  the  church  at 
Stepney  Green  Tabernacle,  and  many  of  the  officers  and  brethren  connected  with 
various  departments  of  evangelistic  labour  in  the;  church  having-  also  testified  to 
the  faithfulness,  love,  and  zeal  of  our  beloved  brother,  it  was  agreed  that  a 
general  meeting  of  the  church  be  held  in  order  that  all  the  members  might,  as 
a  united  body,  join  in  a  testimonial  of  their  high  esteem  and  affection,  and  give 
public  expression  to  the  church's  warmest  prayers  for  the  Divine  blessing  on  his 
future  labours." 

These  experiments  having  failed,  in  each  instance  because  the  brother  was 
called  away  to  another  field  of  labour,  nearly  two  years  were  allowed  to  elapse 
before  any  further  effort  was  made  to  relieve  the  Pastor  from  part  at  least  of  his 
ever-increasing  burden  of  labour  and  responsibility.  On  October  16,  1867,  a 
special  church-meeting  was  held,  of  which  the  church-book  contains  the  following 
record  :— 

;'  For  nearly  fourteen  years,  we  have,  as  a  church,  enjoyed  a  most  wonderful 
and  uninterrupted  prosperity,  so  that  our  present  number  of  members  is  now  more 
than  3,500, — a  number  far  too  great  for  the  efficient  oversight  of  one  man. 
Although  our  deacons  and  elders  labour  abundantly,  yet  there  is  much  work  which 
no  one  can  do  but  the  Pastor,  and  which  one  Pastor  finds  himself  quite  unable  to 
perform.  The  mere  examination  of  candidates,  and  attending  to  discipline,  entail 
most  laborious  duties.  Moreover,  the  Pastor's  labours  in  Kxeter  Hall,  the  Surrey 
Gardens  Music  Hall,  our  own  large  Tabernacle,  and  the  Agricultural  I  hill,  have  been 
most  exhausting,  and  yet  he  has  taken  little  rest,  being  perpetually  occupied  in 
preaching  the  Word,  having  proclaimed  the  gospel  throughout  England,  Scotland, 
and  Wales,  and  having-  journeyed  for  the  same  purpose  to  Geneva,  Paris,  Holland, 
and  Germany. 

"  In  addition  to  all  this,  numerous  Institutions  have  grown  up  in  connection 
with  our  church,  of  which  the  chief  are  the  College  and  the  Orphanage,  both  of 
which  require  much  care  and  industry  in  their  right  management.  The  Pastor 
conducts  a  Magazine  which  greatly  aids  him  in  raising  funds,  but  which  involves 
much  writing.  He  publishes  a  sermon  every  week.  He  has  been  one  of  the 
foremost  in  founding  the  London  Baptist  Association,  and  serves  on  its  Committee, 
and  accepts  his  share  of  work  for  other  public  Societies.  Last  of  all,  he  has  been 
for  some  months  laid  prostrate  by  severe  illness,  and  will  probably  be  attacked  in 
the  same  manner  again  very  speedily  unless  some  little  respite  can  be  afforded  him. 
He  is  not  afraid  of  work,  but  he  does  not  wish  to  commit  suicide,  and  therefore 
asks  for  help. 


C,     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  31 

"  The  following  resolution  was  then  proposed  by  Deacon  William  Olncy, 
seconded  by  Elder  Dransfield,  supported  by  Brethren  Nisbet,  Miller,  and  Stringer, 
and  carried  unanimously  :— '  That,  in  the  opinion  of  this  church,  the  time  has  now 
arrived  when  some  permanent  help  should  be  obtained  to  assist  our  beloved  Pastor 
in  the  very  arduous  work  connected  with  the  pastorate  of  so  large  a  church  ;  also 
that  we  consider  the  most  likely  person  to  discharge  this  duty  to  the  comfort  of 
our  Pastor,  and  the  lasting  benefit  of  the  church,  is  our  Pastor's  brother,  the 
Rev.  J.  A.  Spurgeon.  It  is  therefore  resolved  that  an  invitation  be  given  to  the 


PASTOR  J.   A.   SPURGEON. 

Rev.  James  A.  Spurgeon  to  give  as  much  of  his  time  as  he  can  spare  from  his 
present  engagements  to  assist  our  Pastor  in  any  way  considered  by  him  most 
advisable  for  the  advantage  of  this  church,  for  a  period  of  three  months,  with  a  view 
to  his  being  permanently  engaged  afterwards,  if  it  is  thought  advisable  at  the 
expiration  of  that  period  ;  also  that  it  be  an  instruction  to  our  deacons  to  make  any 
imancial  arrangement  necessary  to  carry  out  this  resolution.' 

;'  It  was  also  proposed  by  Deacon  Thomas  Cook,  seconded  by  Elder  Hanks, 
and  carried  unanimously  :— '  That  we  desire  to  acknowledge  with  devout  gratitude 
the  goodness  of  our  Heavenly  Father  in  the  rapid  and  continuous  growth  of  our 
church,  numbering  now  3,500  members  ;  also  that  our  beloved  Pastor  has  been 
enabled  to  discharge  the  duties  of  the  pastorate  without  assistance  for  the  period  of 


J2  <J.      II.      Sl'UKGKON  S     AUTUlilOGKAl'llV. 

fourteen  years  with  ever-increasing  zeal  and  devotedness.  These,  matters  claim  at 
our  hands  adoring  gratitude  and  renewed  consecration  to  the  work  of  the  Lord.'  ' 

"At  the  adjourned  church-meeting,  held  on  October  22,  in  the  absence  of 
our  Pastor  in  consequence  of  a  return  of  his  illness,  the  chair  was  taken  by  Brother 
\Y.  Olney. 

"The  resolution  passed  at  the  last  meeting  was  read,  and  Mr.  J.  A.  Spurgeon, 
being  present,  expressed  his  willingness  to  undertake  the  duties,  as  defined  in  the 
resolution,  lor  the  next  three  months. 

"  Tiie  rest  of  the  evening  was  spent  in  prayer  for  God's  blessing  on  our  brother 
in  his  new  relation  to  the  church,  and  for  the  speedy  recovery  of  our  beloved  Pastor." 

The  probationary  period  having  proved  satisfactory,  another  special  church  - 
meeting  \vas  held  on  January  9,  1868,  of  which  the  church-book  contains  this 
record  :- 

"  On  behalf  of  the  deacons  and  elders,  the  Pastor  reported  that,  believing  the 
engagement  of  Mr.  j.  A.  Spurgeon  to  be  a  matter  of  the  utmost  weight,  the}'  had 
frequently  deliberated  upon  it,  and  had  forwarded  to  him  the  following  letter  :- 

"  To  the  Rev.  James  A.  Spurgeon, 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"When,  in  the  providence  of  God,  our  much-loved  Pastor  was  laid  aside 
from  his  incessant  toils  by  a  severe  illness,  we  were  all  convinced  that  assistance  was 
needed  in  conducting  the  pastorate  of  our  very  large  church.  Our  Pastor  not  only 
concurred  in  this  judgment,  but  pressed  it  upon  us  to  find  him  a  suitable  helper. 
Our  thoughts  were  at  once  directed  to  yourself  as  in  every  way  the  fittest  person  to 
render  the  necessary  aid  ;  we  mentioned  our  views  to  the  church,  and  with  remark 
able  unanimity  you  were  requested  to  render  to  your  brother  all  the  assistance  you 
could  for  three  months,  with  a  view  to  a  more  lengthened  engagement.  In  that 
unanimity  we  think  we  see  the  finger  of  God,  and  we  trust  that  to  you  it  may  be  a 
o-reat  encouragement,  and  a  full  assurance  that  you  will  be  heartily  welcomed  by 
a  loving  people. 

"As  we  have  now  every  reason  to  believe  that  you  will  be  elected  for  a 
permanence  with  even  greater  cordiality,  we,  the  officers  of  the  church,  are  anxious, 
before  the  election,  to  communicate  with  you  as  to  the  exact  position  which  you  are 
invited  to  occupy.  We  write  as  the  representatives  of  the  whole  church,  and  with 
the  full  concurrence  of  the  Pastor,  and  we  trust  that  no  expressions  which  we  may- 
use  will  be  regarded  by  you  as  for  a  moment  implying  the  slightest  distrust,  or  as 
meant  to  hamper  you  in  your  position  among  us  ;  we  write  with  the  utmost 
affection  and  respect  to  you  personally,  but  with  the  greatest  plainness,  in  order  to 
avoid  questions  in  the  future.  You  will,  we  are  sure,  as  a  wise  man,  understand  the 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  -,-, 

oo 

importance  of  the  step  we  are  taking,  and  the  need  that  everything  should  be  done 
to  secure  the  future  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  church.  We  will,  with  great  brevity, 
define  the  modifications  under  which  you  are  elected  as  Assistant-pastor  of  the  church 
in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle. 

"We  wish  you  to  have  and  enjoy  among  your  ministerial  brethren  all  the  status 
and  position  of  a  Co-pastor,  and  we  shall  regard  you  as  such,  understanding  the  term 
with  the  exceptions  hereafter  mentioned. 

"We  have  enjoyed,  through  the  Divine  blessing,  so  large  a  measure  of 
prosperity  under  your  beloved  brother's  presidency,  that  we  could  not,  under  any 
circumstances,  wish  to  interfere  with  the  precedence  which  we  all  most  cheerfully 
accord  to  him  in  our  councils  and  works.  We  wish  him  to  act  among  us  as  though 
he  were  the  sole  Pastor,  and  we  are  sure  that  you  will  not  find  it  irksome  to  consider 
yourself  as  rather  his  assistant  than  as  co-ordinate  with  him.  Next  to  him,  we  shall 
esteem  you  ;  and  in  his  absence,  we  shall  wish  you  to  preside  at  our  meetings  as  our 
Pastor,  and  we  shall  gladly  render  to  you  all  the  brotherly  respect  which  Is  due  to 
your  office  and  character. 

'  We  do  not  invite  you  to  become  the  preacher  of  the  church  ;  we  wish  to  leave 
the  pulpit  entirely  in  the  hands  of  our  beloved  Pastor,  who  feels  himself  fully  able  to 
discharge  all  the  duties  of  public  ministry  among  us,  and  to  whom  the  Lord  has 
given  such  acceptance  among  us  as  will  not  soon  fall  to  the  lot  of  any  other  man. 
If  you  will  relieve  him  in  that  matter,  from  time  to  time,  as  often  as  he  may  request 
you  so  to  do,  this  is  all  we  shall  expect  of  you.  In  order  that  no  legal  difficulty 
or  other  dispute  may  arise,  we  think  it  expedient  to  ask  of  you  a  brief  note  to 
the  effect  that  you  will  not  consider  yourself  as  having  any  claim  to  occupy  the 
pulpit,  or  any  rights  of  possession  such  as  are  supposed  to  belong  to  ministers  in 
ordinary  cases. 

"We  ask  your  aid  mainly  in  pastoral  work,  in  visiting  the  sick,  in  seeing 
enquirers,  in  attending  at  church-meetings,  and  in  such  other  works  as  naturally  fall 
to  the  lot  of  a  Pastor.  Your  brother  has  many  great  works  in  hand,  and  you  have 
already  so  efficiently  aided  him  in  our  College,  and  in  the  Orphanage,  that  we  are 
sure  that  you  will  in  all  other  things  afford  him  such  brotherly  assistance  as  he  may 
from  time  to  time  require.  Our  earnest  prayer  is  that  to  us  you  may  be  a  great 
blessing,  leading  on  the  entire  church,  both  by  your  example  and  precept 
m  the  path  of  earnest  labour  for  the  Lord,  who  has  redeemed  us  by  His  most 
precious  blood. 

"  Further,  we  affectionately  and  respectfully  request  you  to  agree  that,    should 
circumstances  arise  which,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Pastor  alone,  or  the  Pastor  and  the 
majority  of  the  deacons  and  elders,  or  a  majority  of  the  whole  of  the  church-officers 
should  render  u  desirable  for  you  to  cease  from  holding  office  among  us,  you  will 

O  '       J 


c 


' 


34  C.      II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

resign    upon    having    twelve     mouths'    notice,    or    the    immediate    payment    of    one, 
year's  stipend. 

"  In  the  lamentable  event  of  our  Pastor's  decease  during"  your  lifetime,  you  will 
consider  that  event  as  being,  ?/>so  jacto,  a  notice  of  your  own  removal  in  twelve 
months,  and  you  will  resign  in  that  time,  or  before  that  period  upon  the  payment  as 
before  mentioned,  unless  by  a  majority  of  the  deacons  and  elders  it  should  be 
thought  expedient  for  you  to  continue  in  your  office. 

"  Your  position  is  not  to  entitle  you  to  succeed  our  Pastor  in  his  office,  nor  are 
you  to  consider  yourself  as  having  any  status  in  preference  to  any  other  preacher 
who  may  become  a  candidate  for  the  pulpit.  We  trust  that  the  emergency  may  not 
arise  ;  but,  if  it  should,  you  will,  of  course,  be  as  eligible  as  anyone  else  to  be 
appointed  by  the  vote  of  the  church  to  the  full  pastorate  ;  but  \vc  shall  trust  to  your 
Christian  honour  and  discretion  that  you  will  make  no  undue  use  of  your  position  to 
compass  such  an  election,  but  will  leave  the  officers  of  the  church  entirely  free  to  use 
their  best  discretion  in  bringing  fitting  candidates  under  the  consideration  of  the 
church.  You  will,  we  trust,  excuse  our  being  so  express  upon  this  point  ;  for,  with 
the  fullest  confidence  in  yourself,  we  yet  feel  ourselves  as  put  in  trust  with  a  most 
weighty  business,  and  desire  to  discharge  that  trust  with  such  fidelity  that  none  may 
hereafter  call  us  to  account. 

"  The  deacons  of  the  church  are  requested  to  make  such  provision  for  you  from 
the  church  funds  as  shall  be  agreed  upon  between  our  Pastor  and  deacons  and 
yourself. 

"  Finally,  in  the  name  of  the  deacons  assembled  in  their  session  of  December 
2;th,  1867,  and  the  elders  gathered  together,  Dec.  3Oth,  we  offer  you  our  most  heart) 
brotherlv  love,  and  wish  you  abounding  grace  to  walk  among  us  in  all  holiness, 
fidelity,  zeal,  and  happiness,  to  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  the  building 
up  of  1 1  is  Church." 

1   (^  Signed  for  the:  deacons  and  elders.)  " 

"The  Pastor  then  read  the  following  reply,  which  had  been  received  iroin  Mr. 
J.  A.  Spurgeon  .  - 

"  33>  I^lgin  Crescent, 

"  Netting  Hill, 

"  January  6th,   1868. 

"  Dear   Brethren, 

"  1  heartily  concur  in  your  definitions  of  my  future  position,  and  accept 
them  with  the  earnest  prayer  that  I  may  in  that  post  be  greatly  blessed  to  the 
building  up  of  the  church,  and  to  the  salvation  of  souls.  Agreeable  to  your  request, 
I  expressly  state  that  I  shall  not  consider  myself  entitled  to  any  such  power  over  the 
pulpit  as  is  usually  connected  with  the  office  of  Pastor.  After  my  desire  to  glorify 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOKIOGKAI'IIV. 

00 

God,  my  sole  object  in  relinquishing  my  previous  independent  position  is  to  aid  my 
brother  as  he  may  desire  me,  and  certainly  in  no  wise  to  supersede  him  in  anythino-. 

"  I  think  it  is  in  my  heart  by  nature,  and  I  am  sure  it  is  by  grace,  most  cheer 
fully  to  give  him  that  precedence  which  by  birthright,  talents,  and  position  is  so  justly 
his  due.  I  can  yield  to  no  one  in  my  high  esteem  for  him,  and  I  feel  that  it  is  my 
privilege  to  be  first  in  love  to  him,  so  that  it  is  rather  a  joy  than  a  fetter  to  be  thus 
associated  with  him. 

"  It  is  with  trembling  as  well  as  rejoicing  tnat  I  100|-  forward  to  my  future  work 
with  you.  I  am,  however,  cheered  by  the  thought  that  I  shall  be  sustained  by  your 
prayers,  and  shall  find  in  your  counsels  and  brotherly  love  a  growing  strength  and 
comfort.  I  believe  that  our  aim  and  motive,  our  faith  and  Lord,  are  one  ;  so  may  out- 
action  and  spirit  ever  be,  is  the  prayer  of — 

'Yours,  to  serve  in  the  Lord, 

"  J AMKS  A.   STURGEON. " 

'To  the  Officers  of  the  Church  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle." 
"Proposed  by  Brother  Olney,  seconded  by  Brother  Cook,  and  unanimously 
agreed  :-  'That  the  church  hereby  endorses  and  adopts  the  first  letter  most  heartily, 
and  being  thoroughly  satisfied  with  the  re-ply,  elects  Mr.  James  A.  Spur-eon  to 
become  Co-pastor  upon  the  terms  and  modifications  laid  down  and  accepted"  in  the 
two  letters.' 

"Proposed  by  Brother  W.  Olney,  seconded  by  Brother  Hackett,  and  unani 
mously  agreed  :-  'That  we  desire  to  record  our  hearty  thanks  to  our  beloved  Pastor 
for  the  untiring  labour  and  service  which  he  has  given  us  so  many  years,  and  also 
that  there  is  embodied  in  the  letter  to  Mr.  J.  A.  Spurgeon  those  sentiments  which 
exactly  meet  the  views  and  wishes  of  us  all,  and  we  are  glad  to  know  that,  in  this 
important  step,  we  have  his  hearty  approval  and  sympathy.  We  gladly  welcome  our 
Brother  James  A.  Spurgeon  to  the  office  he  has  been  called  to,  praying  that  the 
increased  strength  given  to  the  pastorate  among  us  may  result  in  a  larger  and  richer 
blessing  than  we  have  hitherto  enjoyed." 

In  The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  its  History  and  }l7ork,  a  chapter,  written  bv 
Pastor  J.  A.  Spurgeon,  contains  the  following  paragraph  :—"  Amongst  the  officers 
of^the  church,  foremost  stands  the  Pastor,  who,  though  its  servant?  is  so  to  rule, 
guide,  and  discipline  it  as  God  shall  help  and  direct  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  In 
connection  with  the  church  at  the  Tabernacle,  two  such  officers  are  now  labouring. 
It  is  a  trite  remark  that,  if  two  men  ride  a  horse,  one  must  sit  behind,  and  he  who  Ts 
in  the  front  must  hold  the  reins  and  drive.  Co-pastorships  have  been  sources  of 
discomfort  or  blessing  as  this  principle  has  been  understood.  Wherever  it  may  have 
been  disregarded,  it  is  not  (by  the  grace  of  God)  likely  to  be  so  in  the  case  in' hand, 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Where  one  of  the  two  brothers  has  been  so  instrumental  in  creating  the  necessity 
for  additional  help,  from  the  very  fulness  of  blessing"  resulting  from  his  labours  ;  and 
is,  moreover,  so  superior  in  talent,  influence,  and  power,*  it  is  a  privilege  to  follow  in 
the  order  of  nature  and  birth  which  God,  from  the  first,  had  evidently  designed." 


MRS.  I;AKTU;TT. 


Mr.  Spurgeon  used  often  to  say  that  his  best  deacon  was  a  woman, — alluding  to 
Mrs.  Bartlett.  In  the  summer  of  1859,  one  of  the  teachers  of  New  Park  Street 
Sunday-school  was  going  away  for  a  month,  and  asked  Mrs.  Bartlett  to  take  charge 
of  her  class  during  her  absence  ;  but,  on  presenting  herself  at  the  school,  the  superin 
tendent  (Mr.  Thomas  Olney,  Junr.,  as  he  was  then  called,)  directed  her  to  the  senior 
class.  There  were  only  three  young  women  in  attendance  that  afternoon,  but  in  the 
course  of  the  month  the  number  had  so  increased  that  she  was  asked  to  continue  as 
teacher.  She  did  so,  and  before  long  the  class  had  outgrown  its  accommodation,  an 
experience  which  was  again  and  again  repeated  until  it  was  finally  settled  in  the 
lecture-hall  of  the  new  Tabernacle,  where  there  were  some  600  or  700  regularly 
present.  When  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  "called  home,"  in  1875,  'lt  was  estimated  that 
between  900  and  1000  members  of  her  class  had  joined  the  church  at  the 
Tabernacle,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  thus  wrote  concerning  his  esteemed  helper  :— 

"  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  a  choice  gift  from  God  to  the  church  at  the  Tabernacle,  and 
the  influence  of  her  life  was  far-reaching,  stimulating  many  others  besides  those  who 


"*  We  are  not  responsible  for  the  affectionate  prejudices  of  our  coadjutor.     We  think  he  over-estiniHtes  hi.-  brother,  but 
the  error  is  too  inveterate   with  him  for  us  to  hope  to  reason  him  out  of  it. — C.  H.  S. 


C.      11.      Sl'UKGKON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  37 

by  her  means  were  actually  led  to  the  Saviour.  \Ye  miss  her  sadly,  hut  her  spiritual 
children  are  with  us  still  ;  they  have  stood  the  test  of  years,  and  the  most  searching- 
test  of  all,  namely,  the  loss  of  her  motherly  counsel  and  inspiring-  words.  She  did 
not  build  with  wood,  hay,  and  stubble,  for  the  edifice  remains,  and  for  this  let  God 
be  glorified. 

"  She  was  a  woman  of  intense  force  of  character.  She  believed  with  all  her 
heart,  and  therefore  acted  with  decision  and  power.  Hence,  she  did  not  constantly 
look  to  the  Pastor  for  help  in  her  appointed  service  ;  but,  beginning  in  a  small  and 
quiet  way,  toiled  on  till  everything  grew  around  her  to  large  proportions.  She.  took 
small  account  of  difficulty  or  discouragement,  but  trusted  in  God,  and  went  on  as 
calmly  sure  of  success  as  if  she  saw  it  with  her  eyes.  When  anything  flagged,  she 
only  seemed  to  throw  out  more  energy,  waited  upon  God  with  more  fervency,  and 
pushed  forward  with  the  resolve  to  conquer.  Deborah  herself  could  not  have  been 
more  perfectly  God-reliant  than  Mrs.  Bartlett  \vas.  She  did  not  beat  the  air,  or  run 
at  an  uncertainty,  but  such  expressions  as  '  I  know  God  will  help  us.  It  must  be 
done;  ;  it  shall  be  done  ;  sisters,  you  will  do  it!  '  were  just  the  sort  of  speeches  that 
we  expected  of  her.  She  flamed  in  determined  earnestness  at  times  when  only  fire 
could  clear  a  path,  and  then  there  was  no  withstanding  her,  as  her  class  very  well 
knew, 

lo  her  resolute  will,  God  had  added  by  His  grace  an  untiring  perseverance. 
On,  and  on,  and  on,  year  by  year,  she  went  at  the  same  duty,  and  in  the  same  way. 
New  plans  of  usefulness  for  the  class  were  opened  up  by  her  as  she  saw  them 
possible  and  prudent,  but  the  former  things  were  never  dropped  for  fresh  ideas,  and 
novel  methods  were  not  devised  to  the  superseding  of  the  well-tried  plans.  Her  talk 
was  always  concerning  'the  old,  old  story/  and  never  of  new-fangled  doctrines  or 
imaginary  attainments.  She  kept  close  to  the  cross,  extolled  her  Saviour,  pleaded 
with  sinners  to  believe,  and  stirred  up  saints  to  holy  living.  Of  her  theme  she  never 
tired,  nor  would  she  allow  others  to  tire-.  She  looked  as  if  it  was  treason  to  grow 
cold  ;  her  glance  indicated  that,  to  be  indifferent  about  the  Redeemer's  Kingdom, 
was  a  shameful  crime.  From  first  to  last  of  her  long  leadership  of  her  class,  she 
appeared  to  be  almost  equally  energetic  and  intense. 

"It  pleased  God  to  make  our  sister  an  eminently  practical  woman.  She  was 
no  dreamer  of  dreams,  but  a  steady,  plodding  worker.  She  never  wasted  two 
minutes  of  her  Pastor's  time  with  marvellous  methods,  and  miraculous  plans  ;  she 
instinctively  saw  what  could  be  done,  and  what  should  be  clone,  and  she  did  it, 
looking  to  God  for  the  blessing.  Her  class  has  raised  large  sums  for  the  College, 
and  has  done  actual  service  in  more  ways  than  we  have;  space  to  tell,  for  she  trained 
her  disciples  into  a  band  of  labourers,  and  kept  them  all  at  it  to  the  utmost  of  their 
abilities.  Her  addresses  were  always  practical  ;  never  speculative,  or  merely 


30  c.    ii.    sruRdLox  s    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

entertaining.  She  aimed  at  soul  winning  every  time  she  met  the  class,  and  that  in 
the  most  direct  and  personal  manner.  In  pursuing  this  object,  she  was  very 
downright,  and  treated  things  in  a  matter-of-fact  style.  The  follies,  weaknesses,  and 
temptations  of  her  sex  were  dealt  with  very  pointedly  ;  and  the  griefs,  trials,  and  sins 
of  her  class  were  on  her  heart,  and  she  spoke  of  them  as  real  burdens.  Her  talk 
never  degenerated  into  story-telling,  or  quotations  of  poetry,  or  the  exhibition  of 
singularities  of  doctrine  ;  but  she  went  right  at  her  hearers  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
and  claimed  their  submission  to  Him. 

"Amid  all  her  abounding  labours,  Mrs.  Bartlett  was  the  subject  of  frequent 
pain  and  constant  weakness.  She  had  the  energy  of  vigorous  health,  and  yet  was 
almost  always  an  invalid.  It  cost  her  great  effort  to  appear  on  many  occasions,  but 
then  she.  would  often  succeed  best,  as  she  pleaded  with  her  hearers,  'as  a  dying 
woman  '  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  '  Out  of  weakness  .  .  .  made  strong,'  was  her 
continual  experience  ;  in  fact,  much  of  her  power  lay  in  her  weakness,  for  the 
observation  of  her  pains  and  feebleness  operated  upon  the  sympathetic  hearts  of  her 
young  friends,  and  made  them  the:  more  highly  appreciate  the  counsels  which  cost 
her  so  much  effort  and  self-denial.  She  has  met  many  of  her  spiritual  children 
above,  and  others  are  on  the  way  to  the  sweet  meeting-place.  \Ye  are  thankful  for 
the  loan  we  had  of  such  a  woman,  thankful  that  she  was  not  sooner  removed  as 
sometimes  we  feared  she  would  have  been,  thankful  that  she  has  left  a  son  to 
perpetuate  her  work,  and  thankful,  most  of  all,  that  there  is  such  a  work  to  be 
perpetuated." 

On  the  monument  over  her  grave  in  Nunheacl  Cemetery,  is  the  following 
inscription,  which  was  written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  : 

"  In  affectionate  memory  of 

LAVIXFA     STRICKLAND     I>ARTLLTT, 

Who  departed  to  her  blissful  home,  August   21,   1875,  in  her  69th  year. 

The  Pastors,  Deacons,  and  Elders  of  the  Church  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle 
unite:  with  her  Class  and  the  students  of  the  College  in  erecting  this  memorial  to  her 
surpassing  worth.  She  was  indeed  '  a  mother  in  Israel.'  Often  did  she  say,  '  Keep 

near  i!ic  cross,  my  sister^  ' 


CHAPTER    LXII1. 


JJotablc  iectuits  aub  SMttcsscs,  1357—1878. 

I  have  read  of  an  old  painter,  who  lived  in  that  district  of  London  which  was  called  Harp  Alley. 
lie  had  lieen  so  accustomed  to  paint  re  1  lions  on  sign-hoards  for  inns  that,  when  he  was  once  requested 
by  the  landlord  of  a  public-house  to  paint  an  angel  as  an  advertisement  for  his  establishment,  he 
asked,  "Wouldn't  a  red  lion  do  as  well?'  "No,"  replied  the  publican;  "  there  are  three  of  your  red  lions 
near  here  already,  and  I  don't  want  another;  1  must  have  an  angel,  I  have  fixed  on  that  as  my  sign." 
"Well,"  said  the  painter,  "I  will  do  the  best  I  can,  and  yon  shall  have  an  angel  if  you  like,  but  it\vil'l  be 
marvellously  like  a  lion  after  all.''  Now,  dear  friends,  1  have  been  so  long  preaching  sermons  here  that 
I  feel,  when  I  come  to  the  Surrey  Music  Hall,  that  I  cannot  do  anything  else  but  preach;  and  even 
though  I  may  essay  to  deliver  a  lecture,  or  a  speech,  it  will  have  to  be  wonderfully  like  a  sermon 
alter  all.  —  C.  H.  S..  in  introduction  to  lecture  on  "A  Christian's  Pleasures!' 


P  SHE    first  lecture  given  by  Mr.  Spur-eon,  of  which  a  full   report  has 

been  preserved,  although  it  has  not  yet  been  published,  was  the 
one  delivered  at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall,  on  Tuesday 
evening,  December  29,  1857,  under  the  title,  "A  Christian's 
Pleasures."  It  was  a  brio-lit,  lively  talk  specially  suited  to  the 
festive  season,  and  contained  much  earnest  warning  and  solid 
instruction.  After  speaking  upon  the  so-called  pleasures  which  are  absolutely  for 
bidden  to  a  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  others  which,  though  innocent, 
are  utterly  absurd  and  insipid,  the  lecturer  thus  referred  to  certain  amusements 
concerning  which  there  is  a  great  dispute  whether  Christians  ought  to  indulge 
in  them  :— 

"Some  persons  ask,  'What  do  you  think  about  dancing?'  Well,  I  never  hear 
the  subject  mentioned  without  having  an  uncomfortable  feeling  in  my  throat,  for  1 
remember  that  the  first  Baptist  minister  had  his  head  danced  off!  I  am  sure 
I  should  have  to  be  off  my  head  before  I  should  indulge  in  that  pastime.  The  usual 
associations  of  the  ball-room  and  dancing  parties  are  of  such  a  character  that  it  is 
marvellous  to  me  how  Christians  can  ever  be  found  taking  pleasure  in  them.  A  safe 
rule  to  apply  to  all  occupations  is,— '  Can  I  take  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  me  if  I 
go  there  ?  If  not,  it  is  no  place  for  me  as  one  of  His  followers.' 

"Then  I  may  be  asked,  'What  do  you  think  of  games  of  chance?'  Well,  I 
always  draw  a  distinction  between  games  that  require  the  exercise  of  skill  and  those 
that  largely  depend  upon  chance,  as  in  the  shuffling  of  cards  and  the  throw  of  the 
dice.  Some  games  are  to  be  heartily  recommended  because  they  tend  to  sharpen 


40 

the  mental  faculties  ;  I  do  not  think  the  most  precise  Christian  ought  to  object  to 
draughts  or  chess, — if  not  ul-iyed  for  money, — for  they  help  to  develop  and  improve 
our  powers  of  thought,  and  calculation,  and  judgment.  Sometimes,  when  1  am  weary 
with  my  work,  I  take  down  my  Euclid,  and  go  over  a  few  propositions  ;  or  I  work 
out  some  of  Eland's  equations,'^  just  l>v  way  of  amusement.  That  kind  of  exercise  is 
as  much  a  recreation  to  me  as  running  out  in  the  fields  would  be  to  a  boy  at  school. 

"  In  my  opinion,  games  of  skill  are  not  objectionable  ;  but  every  Christian 
should  object  to  games  of  chance.  Generally,  they  are  played  for  gain,  and  hence 
they  excite  covetous  desires,  and  so  break  the  tenth  commandment.  With  regard  to 
the  great  proportion  of  games  of  chance,  we  hardly  need  discuss  the  question. 
The  time  has  now  arrived  when  all  England  ought  to  be  heartily  sick  of  every  form 
of  gaming.  I:  used  to  be  a  comparatively  harmless  thing  for  ladies  and  gentle 
men  to  spend  all  the  evening  over  a  pack  of  cards,  or  a  box  of  dice;,  without  any 
money  being  at  stake  ;  but  we  have  had  such  practical  proof  that  the  worst 
crimes  have  sprung  from  this  apparently  inoffensive  practice,  that  every  Christian 
mind  must  revolt  from  it.  Besides,  I  have  always  felt  that  the  rattle;  of  the  dice  in 
the  box  would  remind  me  of  that  game  which  was  played  by  the  soldiers  at  the.  loot 
of  Christ's  cross,  when  they  cast  lots  for  Ilis  vesture,  and  parted  His  garments 
among  them.  lie  who  sees  Ilis  Saviour's  blood  splashed  on  the  dice  will  never 
wish  to  meddle  with  them. 

"The  mere-,  fact  that  there  is  any  question  about  a  certain  course  ought  to  be 
sufhcient  to  make  us  avoid  it.  Have  you  never  noticed  that,  when  people  come  to 
ask  you  whether  a  thing  is  right  or  not,  they  usually  mean  to  do  it  themselves? 
Frequently,  a  person  comes  to  me;  with  some  scruple  of  conscience  ;  but  the 
questioner  has  generally  made  up  his  mind  what  he  is  going  to  do  before  he  receives 
my  answer.  More  than  one;  young  person  has  said  to  me,  'Mr.  Spurgeon,  I  want  to 
ask  your  advice  about  a  very  important  matter.  You  are  my  minister,  and  I  want 
you  to  tell  me  whether  you  think  I  ought  to  marry  So-and-so  ;'  but,  whatever  counsel 
I  may  give  in  such  cases,  I  am  quite  certain  they  have;  usually  determined  what  they 
are  going  to  do,  so  often  I  give  no  advice  at  all.  Possibly  you  remember  the  case 
of  the  minister  who,  on  one  occasion,  was  asked  by  a  woman  whether  she  should 
marry  a  certain  man.  '  Well,'  said  he,  '  the  best  thing  you  can  do  is  to  go  out,  and 
listen  to  the  bells  as  you  walk  home.'  As  she  listened  to  their  tuneful  melody,  they 
seemed  to  say  to  her,— 

"  '  Make  haste  and  get  married, 
Mako  haste  and  get  married  ; '— 


C.      II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  41 

so  she  did,  and  her  husband  horsewhipped  her  three  weeks  afterwards  !  Then  she 
went  again  to  her  minister,  and  told  him  that  he  had  given  her  very  bad  advice. 
'  Why  !  '  said  he,  '  I  never  told  you  to  get  married  ;  I  told  you  to  listen  to  the  bells  ! ' 
'  So  I  did,'  replied  the  woman.  '  But,'  said  the  minister,  '  perhaps  you  did  not  hear 
their  message  aright  ;  go  and  listen  again.'  So  she  went  out,  and  hearkened  once 
more  to  the  bells; — remember,  this  was  after  the  horsewhipping; — and  this  is 
what  they  seemed  to  say  then,— 

"  '  Never  get  married, 
Never  get  married.' 

It  is  just  the  same  with  people  who  come  to  ask  you  about  debatable  amuse 
ments.  Whatever  you  tell  them,  you  may  be  sure  that  they  have  made  up  their 
minds  beforehand.  I  would  leave  all  such  questions  to  a  Christian's  own 
judgment  ;  but  let  him  always  remember  that,  although  a  thing  may  be  right  to 
other  people,  it  may  be  wrong  to  him  ;  and  it  is  wrong  to  him  if  he  has  any  doubts 
about  it.  The  apostle  Paul  said,  'Whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin;'  that  is, 
whatever  a  man  cannot  do,  believing  it  to  be  right,  is  sin  to  him.  If  I  have  any 
doubt  about  anything,  it  is  sin  to  me  ;  though  it  may  not  be  sinful  in  itself. 
Conscience  must  be  the  great  judge  on  those  points  that  do  not  involve  morality 
or  immorality  ;  and  we  thank  our  God  that  He  has  given  to  each  of  us  who  know 
His  Name  that  inward  Monitor,  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  infinitely  superior  to  our 
own  conscience;,  and  if  we  go  on  our  knees,  and  ask  Him  for  direction,  we  shall 
not  be  mislead  as  to  our  amusements  or  anything  else.  Our  Puritanical  fore 
fathers  may  have  been  a  little  too  strict  ;  but  many,  nowadays,  have  become  a  great 
deal  too  loose.  If  we  became  more  holy  by  being  more  Puritanic  and  precise,  both 
the  Church  of  Christ  and  the  world  at  large  would  have  good  reason  to  rejoice." 

The  remainder  of  the  lecture  was  devoted  to  a  consideration  of  the  pleasures 
which  true  godliness  gives,  to  make  up  for  those  it  takes  away,  and  an  earnest 
exhortation  to  all  Christians  to  endeavour  to  be  happy,  and  so  to  attract  others 
to  the  religion  which  had  brought  to  them  so  much  gladness  and  joy. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  appears  to  have  regarded  this  address  upon  "A  Christian's 
Pleasures "  as  an  informal  talk  among  his  own  friends  rather  than  a  lecture,  for 
when,  on  January  4,  1859,  he  took  his  place  at  Exeter  Hall  as  one  of  the  lecturers 
to  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association,  to  speak  upon  the  subject  announced,— 
De  Propaganda  Fide, — he  began  by  saying,  "I  do  not  feel  in  my  place  here 
to-night.  This  is  the  very  first  occasion  in  my  life  upon  which  I  have  ever  presented 
myself  before  the  public  as  a  lecturer, — at  least,  before  any  audience  worthy  of  being 
called  a  multitude.  I  have  long  been  in  the  habit  of  preaching,  and  one  cannot 
break  through  a  habit  that  has  been  acquired  by  years  of  constant  practice  ;  and  I 


42  f.      II.      SPiJkGEON's     AUTOmoCKAi'llV. 

feel  positively  certain  that,  do  whatever  I  may,  I  shall  have  to  preach  a  sermon 
to-night.  I  cannot  lecture,  1  told  your  secretary  so  ;  and  I  tell  vou  also  the  same, 
so  that,  when  you  retire  from  the  hall,  you  may  say,  '  Well,  I  am  disappointed, 
but  it  is  just  as  he  said  it  would  be.' 

"  With  regard  to  the  title  of  my  lecture,  it  is  a  very  strange  one,  and  some 
people  have  said,  'How  could  Mr.  Spurgeon  have,  selected  a  Latin  title  for  his 
lecture?  What  does  he  know  about  Latin?  He  knows  a  little  about  Saxon,  but 
he  certainly  does  not  understand  Latin.'  I  will  just  tell  you  the  secret  of  it  :  I  think 
there  is  wisdom  in  that  title.  Mr.  Shipton  asked  me,  a  long  time  ago,  what  my 
subject  would  be.  I  said,  '  I  am  sure  I  cannot  tell  you.'  I  very  seldom  know, 
twenty-four  hours  beforehand,  the  subject  of  any  sermon  I  am  going  to  preach.  I 
have  never  been  able  to  acquire  the  habit  of  elaborate  preparation.  I  usually  begin 
my  sermonizing  for  the  Sabbath-day  on  Saturday  evening.  I  cannot  think  long  upon 
any  one  subject  ;  and  I  always  feel  that,  if  I  do  not  see  through  it  quickly,  I  shall 
not  be  likely  to  see  through  it  at  all,  so  I  give  it  up,  and  try  another.  What  my 
theme  for  this  evening  was  to  be,  I  did  not  know,  so  1  thought  I  would  have  a  Latin 
title  ;  and  then,  supposing  I  did  not  keep  to  the  subject,  people  would  say  I  did  not 
understand  the  Latin,  and  had  made  a  mistake.  I  felt  sure  that,  with  the  title  I  have 
chosen,  I  should  have  a  wide  field,  because  I  could  either  translate  it  literally,  and 
keep  close  to  the  exact  words,  or  else  I  might  use  a  very  free  translation,  and  select 
almost  any  topic  I  pleased." 

Dealing  with  the  subject  first  negatively,  Mr.  Spurgeon  showed  that,  by  the 
propagation  of  the  faith,  he  did  not  mean  the  nominal  Christianization  of  nations, 
nor  the  bringing  of  large  numbers  to  make  a  profession  of  love:  to  Christ,  nor  the 
conversion  of  persons  from  one  sect  to  another.  Then,  turning  to  the  positive  side 
of  the.  subject,  the  lecturer  continued  :— 

"  What,  then,  is  the  propagation  of  the  faith  ?  I  suggest  another  question. 
IVJiat  is  the  faith  ?  Here,  a  hundred  isms  rise  up,  and  I  put  them  all  aside  ;  they 
may  be  phases  of  the  faith,  but  they  are  not  the  faith.  What,  then,  is  the  faith  ? 
Strange  to  say,  the  faith  of  Christians  is  a  Person.  You  may  ask  all  other  religions 
wherein  their  faith  lieth,  and  they  cannot  answer  on  this  wise.  Our  faith  is  a  Person  ; 
the  gospel  that  we  have  to  preach  is  a  Person  ;  and  go  wherever  we  may,  we  have 
something  solid  and  tangible  to  preach.  If  you  had  asked  the  twelve  apostles,  in 
their  day,  '  What  do  you  believe  in  ?  '  they  would  not  have  needed  to  go  round 
about  with  a  long  reply,  but  they  would  have  pointed  to  their  Master,  and  they 
would  have  said,  '  We  believe  Him.'  '  But  what  are  your  doctrines  ?  '  '  There  they 
stand  incarnate.'  '  But  what  is  your  practice  ?  '  '  There  stands  our  practice,  lie  is 
our  example.'  'What,  then,  do  you  believe  ?'  Hear  ye  the  glorious  answer  of  the 
apostle  Paul,  '  We  preach  Christ  crucified.'  Our  creed,  our  body  of  divinity,  our 


C.      II.      SPUKGKON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  43 

whole  theology  is  summed  up  in  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus.  The  apostle  preached 
doctrine  ;  but  the  doctrine  was  Christ.  He  preached  practice  ;  but  the  practice  was 
all  in  Christ.  There  is  no  summary  of  the  faith  of  a  Christian  that  can  compass  all 
he  believes,  except  that  word  Christ  ;  and  that  is  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  our 
creed,  that  is  the  first  and  the  last  rule  of  our  practice, — Christ,  and  Him  crucified. 
To  spread  the  faith,  then,  is  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  Christ  crucified.  It  is,  in 
fact,  to  bring  men,  through  the  agency  of  God's  Spirit,  to  feel  their  need  of  Christ, 
to  seek  Christ,  to  believe  in  Christ,  to  love  Christ,  and  then  to  live  for  Christ.'' 

After  mentioning'  some  of  the  encouraging  signs  of  the  times,  and  certain 
dangers  against  which  he  felt  it  needful  to  warn  his  hearers,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
continued  : — "We  must  confess  that,  just  now,  we  have  not  the  outpouring  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  that  we  could  wish.  Many  arc  being  converted  ;  I  hope  that  few  of  us 
are  labouring  unsuccessfully  ;  but  we  are  none  of  us  labouring  as  our  hearts  could 
desire.  Oh,  that  I  could  have  the  Spirit  of  God  in  me,  till  I  was  iillecl  with  it  to  the 
brim,  that  I  micrht  always  feel  as  Baxter  did  when  he  said,— 

O  ** 

"    I  preached  as  never  sure  to  prencli  again, 
And  as  a  dying  man  to  dying  men.' 

"  I  pant  tor  that  inward  agony  of  spirit  which  has  made  men  preach  the  gospel  as 
though  they  knew  they  would  be  wrapped  in  their  winding-sheets  when  they 
descended  from  the  pulpit,  and  that  they  should  stand  at  the  bar  of  God  as  soon  as 
they  had  finished  their  sermons.  And  I  feel  that,  as  we  want  an  agonizing  spirit  in 
the  pulpit,  our  hearers  need  it,  too.  Oh,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  should  come  upon 
those  assembled  to-night,  and  upon  all  the  assemblies  of  the  saints,  what  an  effect 
would  be  produced  !  We  seek  not  for  extraordinary  excitements,  those  spurious 
attendants  of  genuine  revivals,  but  we  do  seek  for  the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  There  is  a  secret  operation  which  we  do  not  understand  ;  it  is  like  the  wind, 
we  know  not  whence  it  cometh  nor  whither  it  goeth  ;  yet,  though  we  understand  it 
not,  we  can  and  do  perceive  its  Divine  effect.  It  is  this  breath  of  Heaven  which  we 
want.  The  Spirit  is  blowing  upon  our  churches  now  with  His  genial  breath,  but  it 
is  as  a  soft  evening  gale.  Oh,  that  there  would  come  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  that 
should  carry  everything  before  it,  so  that  even  the  dry  bones  of  the  Valley  of  Vision 
might  be  filled  with  life,  and  be  made  to  stand  up  before  the  Lord,  an  exceeding- 
great  army  !  This  is  the  lack  of  the  times,  the  great  want  of  our  country.  May 
this  come  as  a  blessing  from  the  Most  HiVh  !  " 

<->  o> 

Towards  the  close  of  the  lecture,  there  was  the  following  striking  passage 
concerning  war  and  its  influence  upon  heathen  nations  : — "  There  is  one  thing  I 
must  say, — I  often  hear  Christian  men  blessing  God  for  that  which  I  cannot  but 
reckon  as  a  curse.  They  will  say,  if  there  is  war  with  China,  'The  bars  of  iron  will 
be  cut.  in  sunder,  and  the  gates  of  brass  shall  be  opened  to  the  gospel.'  Whenever 


England   goes   to   \\';ir,    many  shout,   '  It  will   open  a  way  for  the  gospel.'      1  cannot 

understand   how   the   devil   is   to   make   a    way  lor    Christ  ;   and    what    is    war  but   an 

incarnate  fiend,   the   impersonation  of  all  that  is  hellish   in    fallen    humanity?  How, 
then,  shall  we  rouse  the  devilry  o!  man's  nature,— 

'''Cry,   liavoc.  and   let  slip  the  dons  of  war.'- - 

and  then  declare  it  is  to  make;  straight  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our  God, — 
A  n  rcii  WAN"  KNKK-DKKI'  i\  (JOKE?  I  )<>  \  ou  believe  it?  You  cannot.  God  does  over 
rule  evil  lor  good  ;  but  I  have  never  seen  yet— though  I  look  with  the  cautious  eye 
of  one  who  has  no  party  to  serve, — I  have  never  seen  the  rare  fruit  which  is  said  to 
grow  upon  this  vine  of  Gomorrah.  Let  any  other  nation  go  to  war,  and  it  is  all  well 
and  good  for  the:  English  to  send  missionaries  to  the  poor  inhabitants  of  the  ravaged 
countries.  In  such  a  case,  our  people  did  not  make  the  war,  they  did  not  create  the 
devastation,  so  they  may  go  there  to  preach  ;  but  for  English  cannon  to  make  a  way 
in  Canton  for  an  English  missionary,  is  a  lie  too  glaring  for  me  to  believe  for  a 
moment.  I  cannot  comprehend  the  Christianity  which  talks  thus  of  murder  and 
robbery.  If  other  nations  thus  choose  to  fight,  and  if  God  lets  them  open  the  door 
for  the  gospel,  1  will  bless  Him;  but  I  must  still  wee.p  for  the  slain,  and  exclaim 
against  the  murderers.  I  blush  for  my  country  when  1  see  it  committing  such 
terrible  crimes  in  China,  for  what  is  the  opium  traffic  but  an  enormous  crime?  \\  ar 
arises  out  of  it,  and  then  men  say  that  the  gospel  is  furthered  by  it:  can  you  see 
how  that  result  is  produced?  Then  your  eye  must  be  singularly  fashioned.  Eor 
my  part,  I  am  in  the  habit  of  looking  straight  at  a  thing,  I  endeavour  to  judge  it 
by  the  Word  of  God, — and  in  this  case  it  requires  but  little  deliberation  in  order  to 
arrive  at  a  verdict.  It  seems  to  me  that,  if  I  were  a  Chinaman,  and  I  saw  an 
Englishman  preaching  in  the  street  in  China,  I  should  say  to  him,  'What  have  you 
got  there?'  'I  am  sent  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you.'  'The  gospel  !  what  is  that? 
Is  it  anything  like  opium  ?  Does  it  intoxicate,  and  blast,  and  curse,  and  kill  ?'  '  Oh, 
no!'  he  would  say, ----but  I  do  not  know  how  he  would  continue  his  discourse  ;  he 
would  be  staggered  and  confounded,  he  could  say  nothing.  'I  here  is  a  very  good 
story  told  of  the  Chinese  that  is  quite  to  the  point.  A  missionary  lately  went  to 
them  with  some  tracts  containing  the  ten  commandments;  a  Mandarin  read  them, 
and  then  sent  back  a  very  polite  message  to  the  effect  that  those-  tracts  were  very 
good  indeed,  he  had  never  read  any  laws  so  good  as  those,  but  there  was  not  so 
much  need  of  them  in  China  as  among  the  English  and  the  Erench  ;  would  the 
missionary  have  the  goodness  to  distribute  them  where  they  were  most  wanted  ?" 

Mr.  Spurgeon  concluded  by  earnestly  appealing  to  the  unconverted  at  once  to 
believe  in  Jesus,  and  by  exhorting  Christians  to  put  into  practice  what  they  had 
heard  about  propagating  the  faith.  His  closing  words  were  : — "  I  wanted  to  make 
this  lecture  practical.  If  there  is  but  a  little  practical  result  from  it,  I  shall  rejoice 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUToiuocuAriiY.  45 

far  more  in  that  than  in  all  this  great  assembly  and  in  your  many  plaudits.  If  you 
will  remember  the  world's  dire  necessities, — if  you  will  ponder  the  tremendous 
value  of  a  soul, — -if  you  will  think  about  the  dread,  immeasurable  eternity,  to  which 
men  are  hastening-, — if  you  will  recollect  that  the  Name  of  Christ  is  every  day 
blasphemed, — if  you  will  bethink  you  that  false  gods  usurp  the  place  of  the  God  of 
the  whole  earth, — and  if,  with  these  thoughts  in  your  mind,  you  will  go  forth  into 
daily  life  to  propagate  the  faith  as  it  is  in  Jesus  Christ, — if,  with  prayer,  with  holy 
living,  with  a  godly  example,  and  with  earnest  walking,  you  shall  all  of  you  be 
missionaries  for  Christ,  then  I  will  be  well  content,  and  unto  God  shall  be  the  honour 
and  ""lory  for  ever.  Amen." 

O  J 

One  of  the  most  notable  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  early  lectures  was  delivered  at  the 
Camberwell  Institute  upon  "Seraphic  Zeal,  as  exhibited  in  the  life  of  George 
Whitefield."  Numbers  xxv.  13,  "he  was  zealous  for  his  God,"  was  the  lecturer's 
motto;  and  he  spoke,  first,  upon  the  nature  of  Whitefield's  zeal  ;  secondly,  upon  the 
effects  of  his  xeal  ;  and  then  gave  anecdotes  and  general  particulars  of  the  great 
evangelist's  life.  He  presented  the  manuscript  notes  of  the  lecture  to  his  son 
Thomas,  by  whose  kind  permission  the  following"  extract  is  inserted  here  : —  '  Years 
on  years,  Whitefield  continued  his  arduous  labours,  never  resting.  In  the  intervals 
of  preaching,  he  was  riding,  or  walking,  and  composing  sermons.  He  wrote  letters, 
conversed  with  enquirers,  visited  gaols  and  sick-beds, — attended  to  the  Orphan 
House,  published  various  works,  preached  during  his  voyages, — and  at  all  times, 
even  till  the  hour  of  death,  was  earnest  and  fervent.  He  was,  as  he  said,  tired  in  the 
work,  but  not  tired  of  it  ;  and  he  desired  to  preach  once  more,  and  then  to  die.  He 
had  his  wish,  for  he  preached  from  '  Examine  yourselves,  &c.,'  and  then  died  at  six, 
the  next  morning,  of  asthma,  at  fifty-six  years  of  age.  It  is  wrong  to  say,  '  Preaching- 
killed  him,'  for  fifty-six  is  as  good  an  age  as  the  average  of  men  may  expect  to 
live  to*  ;  and  if  he  had  never  preached,  he  might  have  died  quite  as  soon." 

On  December  26,  1860, — three  months  before  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle 
was  completed, — Mr.  Spurgeon  delivered  in  the  lecture-hall  a  lecture  upon  "  South- 
wark."  It  is  published  by  Messrs.  Passmore  and  Alabaster,  and  therefore  need  not 
be  described  in  detail  ;  but  the  following  extracts  appear  worthy  of  a  place  in  this 
volume  : — 

"In  1163,  a  certain  excellent  man,  named  Peter  of  Colechurch,  erected  a 
bridge  of  elm  across  the  River  Thames,  and  he,  in  1176,  commenced  that  edifice 
which  stood  for  six  and  a-quarter  centuries,  and  was  considered  to  be  the  wonder  of 
its  time,  -Old  London  P>ridge, — a  bridge  which  some  of  you  have  seen,  though  I 


46 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


did  not  ;  the  houses  were  taken  away  long  before  our  time.  Old  Peter  of  Cole- 
church  seems  to  have  dedicated  his  life  to  building  that  bridge  ;  and  then,  with  a 
sort  of  poetic  inspiration  on  his  mind,  he  desired  that  he  might  be  buried  in  the 
church  or  chapel  in  the  middle  arch  of  the  bridge,— the  right  place  for  a  good 
man  to  be  buried,  in  the  very  centre  of  his  work.  I  have  often  said,^Let  me  die; 
while  I  am  labouring  for  Christ  ;  and  I  should  not  desire  a  better  place  for  my 
burial  than  hard  by  the  spot  where  I  have  worked  for  my  Cod,  and  been  the  means 
of  doing  good  to  the  souls  of  men." 


01. 1)    LONDON    BRIDGE,    WITH    "  TKAIIOKS'"    HEADS    ON    TOWER. 

'  The  tower  on  the  Southuark  side  of  the  bridge  had  most  singular  garnishings 
upon  the  roof.  The  regular  school-book  historians  will  tell  you  that,  on  the  tower, 
the  heads  of  traitors  were  exposed.  Now,  it  so  happens,  that  men  who  are  traitors 
one  clay  become  heroes  by-and-by  ;  and  some  men,  who  were  execrated,  and  put  to 
death  for  attempts  which  were  only  blamed  because  they  were  not  successful,  need 
yet  to  have  their  true  histories  written.  Let  none  of  us  be  desirous  of  fame  while 
we  live.  If  fame  be  worth  having  at  all,  it  is  the  fame  of  an  Oliver  Cromwell,  who 


C.      II.     SPURGEOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  47 

comes  out  glorious  a  hundred  years  after  his  death.  That  thing  which  is  called 
fame  gets  all  the  better  for  keeping-  ;  and,  in  due  time,  people  respect  a  man  all  the 
more  for  the  calumny  through  which  he  has  passed. 

"  South wark  is  the  borough  of  Baptists.  In  Walter  Wilson's  History  of 
Dissenting  CliurcJics,  I  find  mention  of  eighteen  distinct  communities  ot  Baptists, 
and  there  is  scarcely  one  of  the  other  churches  which  was  not  'infested'  by  these 
troublesome  persons,  as  some;  people  considered  them.  In  1642,  there  was  a  famous 
disputation  in  Southwark  between  Dr.  Featley  and  four  Baptists.  The  Doctor 
published  his  own  version  of  the  case,  with  the  title  of  'The  Dippers  Dipt;  or,  the 
Anabaptists  ducked  and  plunged  over  head  and  ears  at  a  disputation  at  Southwark.' 
There  was  a  lane  called  Dipping  Alley,  Fair  Street,  Horsleydown,  because  there 
was  erected  there  a  baptistery,  which  was  used  by  several  congregations.  .  .  .  John 
Bunyan  preached  in  the  old  chapel  in  Zoar  Street  ;  with  a  day's  notice,  he  could  get 
1,200  people  early  in  the  morning,  or  3,000,  with  proper  intimation  to  the  public. 
Mr.  Wesley  preached  in  a  chapel  in  Snow's  Fields,  which  had  been  built  lor  a 
Unitarian  Baptist  ;  but  there  was  a  great  secession,  and  the  cause  does  not  seem  to 
have  ever  prospered.  The  members  of  the  church  in  Snow's  Fields  excluded  Wesley 
from  their  Society,  and  became  perfectionists  ;  he  was  succeeded  by  Thomas 
Charlton,  who  became  a  Baptist.  .  .  .  Near  here,  tolled  the  curlew-bell.  Here 
martyrs  for  baptism  were:  burned.  This  is  the  stronghold  of  religious  liberty,  and 
the  very  centre  of  our  denomination.  There  are  ten  Baptist  churches  within  the 
liberties  of  our  borough,  while  we-,  now  stand  upon  its  margin." 

The  week  before  the  Tabernacle  was  opened,  Mr.  Spurgeon  paid  a  visit  to 
Aberdeen,  in  connection  with  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association.  On  Tuesday 
afternoon  and  evening,  March  12,  1861,  he  preached  twice  in  the  Music  Hall 
to  crowded  congregations,  and  the  following  morning  he  met  between  150  and 
i  60  gentlemen  at  a  breakfast,  at  which  the  Karl  of  Kintore  presided. 

The  subject  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  address  was,  "  Success  in  Lite;"  and  he  spoke 
upon  it,  first,  as  it  concerned  secular  matters,  and,  then,  as  it  related  to  religious 
affairs.  There  were  several  autobiographical  passages,  such  as  the  following  :—  ll  We 
must  be  careful  as  to  the  line  of  life  we  select,  our  pursuit  must  be  in  keeping  with 
our  constitutional  tendencies.  A  man  born  to  be  a  mechanic  would  never  succeed  as 
a  poet  ;  and  the  man  with  the  poetical  afflatus  would  not  be  successful  as  a  financier. 
Kach  man  has  powers  that  adapt  him  to  certain  work  ;  and  he  ought  to  look  out  for 
that  occupation  which  will  be  most  congenial  with  his  own  disposition.  I  know 
that,  if  I  had  been  bred  a  collier  or  a  ploughman,  I  would  still  have  been  a 
preacher,  for  I  must  speak.  I  feel  something  like  Klihu,  when  he  said,  '  I  will 
speak,  that  I  may  be  refreshed.'  I  do  not  regard  preaching  or  speaking  as  a  task 


4  r.    ir.    sruRC.KONs    AUTOIJIOC.KAI'IIY. 

or  a  labour  ;   it  is   more   like;  a   cure   for  elulness.      I    feel   that   there   is   somethin<>-  I 

£3 

want  to  get  rid  of,  so   I    unburden   myself  by  telling  it  to  others. 

"When  you  have  chosen  your  pursuit  in  life,  stick  to  it.  Having  had  a  great 
many  young  men  under  training,  I  have  met  with  some  who  are— 

'• '  Everything  l>y  turns,  and  nothing  long.' 

Some  men  in  business  are  just  the:  same  ;  but  I  would  rather  be  a  cobbler,  and  stick 
to  my  last,  than  change  my  calling  often,  and  so  be  noted  for  nothing  in  particular. 
II  a  tree  is  transplanted  seven  times,  it  will  be  a  miraculous  tree  if  it  brings  forth 
fruit.  The  man  who  is  first  this  thing,  and  then  that,  is  like  a  elog  hunting  six  hares 
at  one  time,  he  is  certain  to  catch  none.  David  was  a  man  of  gre:at  influence,  and 
we  must  trace,  all  his  spiritual  power  to  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  but,  with  respect  to  what 
he;  accomplished,  we  may  learn  a  lesson  from  his  own  words,  'One-  tiling  have  I 
desired  ol  the  Lord,  that  will  I  seek  after.'  That  concentration  was  the  source  of 
much  of  his  power.  Now,  if  your  energies  are  allowed  to  run  out  in  many 
channels,  they  will  be  dissipated,  and  we  shall  see  no  result  in  the  stream  of  your  life  ; 
but  it  you  have  only  one  channel  for  all  your  powers,  it  will  be  deep  if  not  broad,  and 
there  may  go  the  galley  with  many  oars,  and  from  it  shall  proudly  float  the  banner  of 
success. 

"We  have  in  England  some  cart-rut  ministers.  They  have  got  into  grooves, 
and  there  they  remain  ;  they  think  the  ruts  should  never  be  filled  up,  and  that  the 
wheels  ol  the  waggon  should  always  keep  in  them.  I  do  believe,  if  the  manage 
ment  of  our  roads  had  been  left  to  some  of  these  good  men,  in  place  of  railways, 
we  should  not  even  have  got  the  length  of  the  four-horse  coach  yet.  These 
brethren  are  exceedingly  wise  ;  and  when  they  see  one  take  an  independent  course, 
they  say,  '  This  is  a  very  rash  and  a  very  hazardous  thing.'  \\C11,  I  have  been  very 
rash  in  my  time,  and  I  mean  to  be  so  again.  I  find  that  the:  best  method,  in  such 
cases,  is  to  act  as  David  did  when  his  brother  said  to  him,  '  I  know  thy  pride,  and  the 
naughtiness  of  thine  heart;  for  thou  art  come  down  that  thou  mightest  see  the: 
battle.'  David  went  forth  to  meet  Goliath,  taking  his  sling  and  his  live  smooth 
stones  from  the  brook,  and  when  the  youthful  shepherd  came  back,  bearing  in  his 
hand  the:  giant's  head  dripping  with  gore,  that  was  the  best  answer  to  his  brother's 
accusation.  If  you  have  work  to  ele>,  elo  not  stay  te)  vindicate  yourself;  the:  work 
itself  will  be  your  vindication.  Remember  how  it  was  with  Peter  and  John  ;  when 
they  were  brought  before  the  high  priest  and  the  rulers,  and  their  accusers  saw  the: 
man  who  was  healed  standing  with  them,  '  they  could  say  nothing  against  it;'  and  I 
find  that  our  brethren,  when  they  see  that  God's  blessing  is  resting  upon  us,  and 
that  God  is  with  us,  are  usually  willing  to  be  with  us,  too. 

"It  was  my  lot  to  go  through  two  or  three  years  of  the  most  virulent  abuse, 
and  I  thank  God  for  it.  I  felt  it  very  hard  to  bear,  but  I  fell  upon  my  knees  before 


C.      II.     Sl'UKGKON  S     AUTOBIOCiRAI'HV.  49 

God,  and  told  Iliin  that,  when  I  gave  Him  everything  else,  I  gave  Iliin  my 
character,  too.  If  I  had  known  that,  by  faithfully  serving  Christ,  1  must  ruin  my 
reputation,  I  think  I  should  not  have  paused  for  a  single  moment.  1  felt  quite  sure 
that,  if  my  reputation  should  be  lost  he. re  among  men,  it  would  be.  safe  with  my 
Lord  ;  for,  at  the  day  ot  judgment,  there  will  be  a  resurrection  of  reputations  as  well 
as  of  bodies.  Vet  it  is  very  hard  to  bear  up  under  constant  slanders  ;  only  one 
good  thing  comes  of  it,  you  can  find  out  your  weak  points,  ior  your  enemies  will 
discover  your  faults  if  your  friends  do  not.  But  if  I  have  God  with  me,  I  do  not 
care  who  may  be  against  me.  I  remember  that  once,  in  London,  a  man  took  oH  his 
hat,  bowed  to  me,  and  said,  'The  Rev.  Mr.  Spurgeon, — a  great  humbug!  I  took 
off  my  hat,  too,  and  said,  '  I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  sir,  for  the  compliment;  I  am 
glad  to  hear  that  I  am  a  great  anything.'  We  parted  very  amicably,  and  I  have  not 
had  the  pleasure  ot  meeting  him  since.  .  .  . 

"  Do  not  think  of  waiting  until  you  can  do  some  great  thing  for  God  ;  do  little 
things,  and  then  the  Master  will  bid  you  go  up  higher.  Eleven  years  ago,  I  was 
addressing  Sunday-school  children,  and  these  alone.  Ten, — nine  years  ago,  I  was 
preaching  in  little  insignificant  rooms  here  and  there,  generally  going  out  and  coming 
back  on  foot,  and  occasionally  getting  a  lift  in  a  cart.  It  has  often  happened  that,  when 
I  have  been  going  out  to  certain  villages,  the  brooks  would  be  so  swollen  that  they 
could  not  be  crossed  in  the  usual  way,  so  I  would  pull  oil  my  shoes  and  stockings, 
wade  through  up  to  my  knees,  then  try  to  make  myself  tidy  again  as  I  best  could, 
and  go  on  to  the  little  chape;!  to  preach,  and  return  home  in  the  same  way.  Now,  I 
am  perfectly  sure  that,  if  I  had  not  been  willing  to  preach  to  those  small  gatherings 
of  people  in  obscure:  country  places,  I  should  never  have  had  the  privilege  of 
preaching  to  thousands  of  men  and  women  in  large  buildings  all  over  the  land.  If 
one  wishes  to  be  a  steward  in  God's  house,  he-,  must  first  be  prepared  to  serve  as  a 
scullion  in  the  kitchen,  and  be  content  to  wash  out  the  pots  and  clean  the  boots. 
Remember  our  Lord's  rule,  '  \Vhosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased;  and  he 
that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted.'' 

An  interesting  reminiscence  of  this  visit  to  Aberdeen  is  preserved  in  Dr.  W.  G. 
Blaikie's  Memoir  ot  Dr.  David  Brown  (Ilodder  &  Stoughton,  1898).  Dr.  Brown 
found  Mr.  Spurgeon  in  an  anteroom,  surrounded  by  a  number  of  people  who  were 
full  of  high  expectation  of  the  treat  they  were  about  to  enjoy.  One  of  the  Pastor's 
London  friends,  who  had  accompanied  him,  told  Dr.  Brown  that,  if  he  could  not 
have  a  few  minutes'  quiet  meditation,  his  address  would  be  a  failure.  Accordingly, 
the  room  was  cleared  ;  but  the  great  preacher  seemed  in  sore  distress  of  mind,  as 
though  he  could  not  get  along  with  his  subject.  Even  in  the  hall,  he  was  manifestly 
out  of  sorts,  and  groaning  in  spirit.  Dr.  Brown  told  him  that  he  would  hold  up  his 


5O  C.      II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

hands  in  prayer.  "  Thank  you  for  that,"  was  the  prompt  and  cordial  answer  ;  and 
twice  he  repeated  the  words,  "  Thank  you  for  that  ;  thank  you  for  that."  The 
address  proved  to  lie  a  brilliant  one  ;  and  when,  at  the  close,  friends  came  to  express 
their  admiration  and  gratitude,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  turning  to  Dr.  l>ro\vn,  remarked, 
"  You  owe  it  all  to  him." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  lias  himself  recorded,  and  used  as  an  illustration  in  inviting 
sinners  to  the  Saviour,  an  incident  ol  quite  a  different  character,  which  occurred  on 
one  occasion  when  he  was  going  to  deliver  a  lecture  at  the  City  Hall,  Glasgow  :— 
"  1  went,  at  the.  hour  appointed,  to  keep  my  engagement,  and  the:  Provost  of 
Glasgow  went  to  the  hall  with  me;  hut  the  policeman  said  that  he  could  not  let  us 
in,  lor  we  had  no  tickets,  and  his  orders  were  to  admit  none  without  them.  That 
was  a  pretty  state  ot  things,  So  the  Lord  Provost  said,  '  But  you  must  let  us  in.' 
The  policeman  replied  that  he  could  not,  no  matter  who  we  were.  !  said,  'This  is 
the  Lord  Provost  ;  '  but  the  policeman  said  he  did  not  know  that,  neither  did  he  care 
who  he  was;  he  should  not  let  us  pass  against  rules.  He:  had  his  directions  from 
the  inspector  to  let  nobody  in,  and  he  was  sure  no  Lord  Provost  would  wish  him  to 
disobey  orders.  Then  the  Lord  Provost  said,  '  But  this  is  Mr.  Sptirgeon  ;  and  he 
has  to  deliver  the  lecture.'  Put  the  man  answered,  '  I  cannot  help  that.  I  have  un 
orders,  and  he  shall  not  come  in  without  a  ticket.'  \Yhat  do  you  think  we  did  ? 
Did  we  take  'No'  for  an  answer?  Xot  so;  we  meant  to  get  in,  so  we  talked  and 
parleyed  and  reasoned  ;  but  he,  like  a  good  policeman,  did  his  duty,  and  would  take 
no  pleas  from  us  which  were  contrary  to  his  instructions.  At  last,  he  was  con 
descending  enough  to  let  us  send  our  cards  in  to  the  inspector,  and  straightway  we 
were  admitted.  Xo\v,  if  we  had  taken  '  Xo  '  for  an  answer,  and  had  gone  away,  I 
should  have  had  to  this  day  the  repute  ol  having  gathered  the  people:  together  to 
disappoint  them.  I  knew  I  had  a  right  to  go  in,  and  I  meant  to  get  in  ;  and  you  must 
do  the  same.  Even  though  your  sin  should  proscribe;  you,  and  the  law  should 
denounce  you,  and  the  officer  of  justice:  should  refuse:  you,  and  say,  'You  cannot 
come:  in,  no  sinner  comes  this  way,'  yet  insist  upon  it  that  you  are  a  creature  and 
a  sinner,  that  the  gospel  is  sent  to  every  creature,  and  specially  invites  sinners,  and 
therefore  you  mean  to  go  in  to  the  feast  of  grace,  whoever  may  oppose.  Stand  to 
it  that  you  will  enter;  and,  as  surely  as  God  is  true-,  if  there:  be  this  resolve;  and 
perseverance  in  you,  you  shall  enter  in  to  the  banquet  of  love,  you  shall  inherit 
eternal  lite,  and  rejoice  lor  evermore." 


CHAPTER     LXIV. 


itttuits  anii  a&latssts,  1857—1878 


'    A    GORILLA    LECTURING    ON    MR.    SPURGEON." 

"\Ve  are  now  to  be  entertained  by  Mr.  Spnrgeon's  lecture  on  the  gorilla;  but,  in  after  ages, — 
according  to  the  development  theory,— we  shall  doubtless  have  a  gorilla  lecturing  on  Mr.  Spurgeon."— 
Extract  from  the  speech  of  the  Rt.  lion.  A.  H.  LayarJ,  M.P.,  a!  Mr.  Spurgeon' s  lecture  on  "The  Gorilla  and 
the  J.and  he  Inhabits  ' 

N  October  i,  1861,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave,  in  the  Tabernacle,  a  lecture 
which  was  destined  to  attract  more  public  attention  than  any  which 
he  had  previously  delivered.  It  was  entitled,  "The  Gorilla  and 
the  Land  he  Inhabits,"  and  was  largely  concerned  with  the  volume, 
then  recently  published,  and  severely  criticised, — Explorations  and 
Adventures  iu  Equatorial  Africa,  by  Paul  B.  Du  Chaillu  (John 

Murray).     A.  H.  Layard,  Esq.,  M.P.,  presided,  and  by  his  side  sat   M.  Du  Chaillu. 

In  introducing  his  subject,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  : — 

"  Mr.  Chairman,  and  my   very  good   friends,  I    am  very   glad  to   see  you   here, 

though  you  have  taken  me  very  much  by  surprise.      I   was  reckoning-  upon  a  quiet 


C.      H.      SI'URGEON'S     AUTOliHMJKAl'HV. 


evening  with  a  moderate  audience;,  hut  you  have  crowded  this  vast  house,  and  I 
re<>ret  to  say  there  have  been  great  multitudes  turned  away  irom  the  doors.  We 
are  doomed  to  disappointments,  hut  such  as  these  one  can  afford  to  endure  with  equa 
nimity.  Perhaps  the  question  will  be  asked,  Why  do  you  deliver  a  secular  lecture? 
I  answer  that  the  question  itself  is  rather  late,  since  it  is  a  time-honoured  custom  for 
our  ministers  occasionally  to  offer  instruction  to  their  congregations  in  this  pleasant 
and  friendly  form,  and  the  present  is  very  far  from  my  first  attempt  in  this  direction. 
Casting  aside  all  priestly  pretences  as  mere  superstition,  I  meet  you  as  my  friends 
and  fellow-labourers  every  Sabbath-day,  and  1  then  endeavour  to  stir  you  up  to 
holy  labour;  and  now  to-night,  on  a  common  week-evening,  we  meet  by  way  ol 
recreation  to  talk  cheerfully  upon  an  entertaining  subject.  We  want  common  things 
treated  religiously,  and  there  may  be  almost  as  much  good  achieved  by  books  and 
lectures  on  ordinary  topics,  thoroughly  imbued  with  a  religious  spirit,  as  by  sermons 
or  theological  treatises.  All  my  Heavenly  Father's  works  are  my  text-books,  and, 
as  a  preacher,  I  have  a  right  to  select  my  subject  Irom  either  of  the  great  books  of 
Creation  or  Revelation.  Hut  more  ;  it  is  the  growing  conviction  of  my  mind  that 
the  human  animal  will  have  some  sort  of  amusement  or  other  ;  and  that,  if  we  do 
not  give  him  the  right  sort,  he  will  certainly  seek  the:  wrong.  God  has  made:  nature 
not  only  for  our  necessities,  but  for  our  pleasures.  He  has  not  only  made  fields  of 
corn,  but  He  has  created  the  violet  and  the  cowslip.  Air  alone  would  be  sufficient 
for  us  to  breathe,  but  see  how  He  has  leaded  it  with  perfumes  ;  bread  alone  might 
sustain  life,  but  mark  the  sweet  fruits  with  which  nature's  lap  is  brimming.  'I  he 
colours  of  flowers,  the  beauties  of  scenery,  the  music  of  birds,  the  sparkling  of  gems, 
and  the  glories  of  the  rainbow  and  aurora,  all  show  how  the  great  Creator  has  cared 
for  the  lawful  gratification  of  every  sense  of  man.  Nor  is  it  a  sin  to  enjoy  these 
gifts  of  Heaven  ;  but  it  would  be  folly  to  close  one's  soul  to  their  charms.  Now,  in 
matters  of  truth,  there  is  an  analogy  with  nature.  Those  glorious  doctrines  which 
we  daily  preach  are  as  the  bread  of  Heaven,  the  needful  and  delicious  food  of  our 
souls  ;  but  other  truths,  great  facts  of  nature,  are  as  the  flowers  and  the  birds,  they 
may  not  feed  the  spirit,  but  they  are  not  therefore  to  be  neglected,  since  they  gratify 
ancl  gladden  the  mind.  Certain  is  it  that  the  masses  will  have  amusement  of  some 
sort  ;  everyone  can  see  that.  It  is  of  no  use  for  me  to  stand  up  in  the  pulpit 
constantly,  and  say  to  men  who  have  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes,  '  \  ou  must 
not  frequent  the  public-house  and  the  theatre,'  for  their  reply  will  be,  'We  want 
something  to  excite  us,  some  recreation  after  our  hard  day's  work,'—  -a  speech  not 
quite  so  unreasonable  as  the  censorious  may  imagine.  Well,  what  have  I  sought  to 
do  in  that  matter,  and  what  has  that  to  do  with  the  present  gathering? 

"My    esteemed   friend,    Mr.    Ilaynes,    a    member    of    our   congregation,    has   a 
considerable  number  of  dissolving-views  which  he  has   had   painted,  and   by  the  aid 


c.    n.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  53 

of  which  he  lectures  to  young  people  upon  different  interesting  subjects.  There  is 
a  College  in  connection  with  this  Church,  in  which  young  men  are  trained  for  the 
ministry,  and  others  are  enabled  to  get  a  gratuitous  education  to  tit  them  for  the 
battle  of  life.  In  connection  with  this  College  is  a  weekly  popular  lecture,  and 
every  Friday  night  we  allow  the  public  the  liberty  of  coming  in  at  the  small  fee  of 
twopence  each  ;  and  month  after  month  we  have  our  lecture-hall  full  of  people,  who 
are  willing  to  come  and  listen  to  lectures  upon  history,  science,  and  nature,  all  of 
them  having  an  eye  to  spiritual  good  as  well  as  to  secular  education.  I  have  been 
pleased  to  see  the  man  in  a  fustian  jacket  giving  us  his  company,  and  to  see  men, 
who  do  not  come  into  the  Tabernacle  to  hear  a  sermon,  yet  listening  to  my  lecture 
upon  'bats,  moles,  and  hedgehogs,'  or  whatever  else  may  have:  been  the  theme.  My 
audience  can  bear  witness  that  I  always  give  them  some  weight)'  gospel  matter  ; 
yes,  even  when  '  on  a  bat's  back  I  do  fly.'  I  know  that  some  of  them  have  found 
their  way  up  from  the  lecture-hall  into  the  Tabernacle,  there  to  hear  that  which  is 
necessary  for  the  conversion  of  men.  Mr.  Ilaynes  always  lends  me  his  views 
whenever  I  want  them,  and  I,  out  of  gratitude;  to  him,  said,  '  I  will  do  anything  I 
can  to  repay  you.'  He  said,  '  Let  me  paint  a  set  of  slides  on  the  gorilla,  and  you 
give  us  a  lecture.'  '  Very  well,'  I  replied,  '  I  will  do  it,  and  then,  afterwards,  I  shall 
have  the  gorilla  slides,  and  lecture  to  my  own  good  people  upon  them  at  a  small 
charge.'  'Certainly,'  said  he,  'anything  I  have  is  not  only  for  the  benefit  of  the 
Band  of  Hope,  but  for  the  general  good  of  the  cause  ;  help  me  to  pay  for  my  slides, 
then  you  can  use  any  ot  them.'  For  my  own  part,  I  have  a  good  conscience  towards 
God  in  this  matter,  for  my  only  object  in  life  is  to  benefit  my  fellow-men.  I  feel  that 
the  best  way  to  lift  up  the  lost  and  degraded  from  the  horrible  pit  and  the  miry  clay, 
in  a  spiritual  sense,  is  to  preach  to  them  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified;  but 
this  need  not  prevent  me  from  using  all  measures  possible  to  promote  social 
reform  ;  and  I  firmly  believe  that  lectures  upon  useful  and  scientific  subjects,  in 
which  a  lecturer  is  able  to  throw  out  hints  about  dress,  cookery,  children,  cleanliness, 
economy,  temperance,  and  the  duties  of  the  household,  or  to  exclaim  against  the 
tally  system,  the,  pot-house,  begging,  and  puffery,  may  be  very  useful." 

After  carefully  examining  the  volume  written   by  the  traveller,  and  considering- 
the  evidence;  pro  and  con,    Mr.  Spurgeon   thus  announced  his    decision    concerning 

O 

it  : — "  I  do  verily  believe,  in  spite:  of  all  that  has  been  said,  that  M.  Du  Chaillu's 
book  is  matter  of  fact.  It  is  not  written  so  carefully  as  a  scientific  man  might  write 
it,  nor  so  orderly  and  regularly  as  the  author  might  re-write  it,  if  he  had  another 
seven  years  to  elo  it  in  ;  yet  I  believe  that  it  is  true,  and  that  he  himself  is  worthy  of 
our  praise  as  one  of  the  greatest  modern  discoverers, — a  man  who  has  done  and 
dared  more  for  science,  and,  I  think  I  may  add,  more  for  the  future  spread  of 
religion,  than  most  men  of  his  time." 


54  c.    n.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Coming  to  the  gorilla, — a.  stuffed  specimen  of  which  was  on  the  platform,-  the 
lecturer  said:--  'He  is  an  enormous  ape,  which  claims  to  approach  the  nearest 
to  man  of  any  other  creature.  How  nearly  he  approaches,  I  leave-  you  to  judge. 
True,  his  claim  to  be  our  first  cousin  is  disputed,  on  behalf  of  the  koolo-kamba,  by 
several  very  learned  men.  If  we  should,  therefore,  admit  you  (addressing  the 
gorilla)  to  be  man's  first  cousin,  we  fear  that  the  koolo-kamba  might  institute  a  suit 
at  law  to  claim  equal  rights,  and  so  many  cousins  would  be  far  from  convenient. 
Besides,  I  have  heard  that,  if  we  should  admit  this  gentleman  to  be  our  cousin, 
there  is  Mr.  Darwin,  who  at  once  is  prepared  to  prove  that  our  great-grandfather's 
grandfather's  father — keep  on  for  about  a  millennium  or  two, — was  a  guinea-pig,  and 
that  we  were  ourselves  originally  descended  from  oysters,  or  seaweeds,  or  starfishes. 
Now,  I  demur  to  that  on  my  own  account.  Any  bearded  gentleman  here,  who 
chooses  to  do  so,  may  claim  relationship  with  the  oyster  ;  and  others  may  imagine 
that  they  are  only  developed  gorillas  ;  but  I,  for  my  own  part,  believe  there  is  a 
great  gull  fixed  between  us,  so  that  they  who  would  pass  from  us  to  you  (again 
turning  to  the  gorilla)  cannot  ;  neither  can  they  come  to  us  who  would  pass  from 
thence.  At  the  same  time,  I  do  not  wish  to  hold  an  argument  with  the  philosopher 
who  thinks  himself  related  to  a  gorilla;  I  do  not  care;  to  claim  the  honour  for 
myself,  but  anyone  else  is  perfectly  welcome  to  it. 

"Seriously,  let  us  see  to  what  depths  men  will  descend  in  order  to  cast  a  slur 
upon  the  Book  of  God.  It  is  too  hard  a  thing  to  believe  that  God  made  man  in  1 1  is 
own  image  ;  but,  forsooth,  it  is  philosophical  to  hold  that  man  is  made  in  the  image 
of  a  brute,  and  is  the  offspring  of  Maws  of  development.'  O  infidelity!  thou  art  a 
hard  master,  and  thy  taxes  on  our  faith  are  far  more  burdensome  than  those  which 
Revelation  has  ever  made.  When  we  have  more  incredulity  than  superstition  can 
employ,  we  may  leap  into  infidel  speculation,  and  find  a  fitting  sphere  for  the  largest 
powers  of  belief.  But  who  can  deny  that  there  is  a  likeness  between  this  animal 
and  our  own  race  ?  .  .  .  There  is,  we  must  confess,  a  wonderful  resemblance, — so 
near  that  it  is  humiliating  to  us,  and  therefore,  I  hope,  beneficial.  But  while  there  is 
such  a  humiliating  likeness,  what  a  difference  there  is  !  If  there  should  ever  be 
discovered  an  animal  even  more  like  man  than  this  gorilla  is  ;  in  fact,  if  there  should 
be  found  the  exact  facsimile  of  man,  but  destitute  of  the  living  soul,  the  immortal 
spirit,  we  must  still  say  that  the  distance  between  them  is  immeasurable." 

After  giving  an  account  of  the  country  which  the  gorilla  inhabits,  and  of  the 
manners  and  customs  of  the  natives  of  that  region,  Mr.  Spurgeon  concluded  : — "As 
for  sending  missionaries  among-  them,  they  are  ripe  and  ready  for  them.  They 
received  M.  Du  Chaillu  with  the  greatest  kindness  and  courtesy,  and  they 
even  prayed  the  traveller  to  tell  the  white  men  to  send  missionaries  to  them  ; 
and  where  they  have  teachers,  they  gladly  receive  them.  If  missionaries  can  be  sent 


C.     II.     SPURGEOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  55 

to  Africa  in  sufficient  numbers,  there  are  happy  clays  in  store  for  that  land.  What 
will  be  the  effect  upon  the  world  when  Ethiopia  shall  stretch  out  her  hands  to 
Christ  ?  .  .  .  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  my  friend,  M.  Du  Chaillu, — if  he  will  allow 
me  to  call  him  so, — wherever  he  has  been,  has  sought  to  open  the  way  for  missionary 
efforts,  and  has  been  the  missionaries'  friend  everywhere  ;  and  there  is  this  to  be  said 
of  him,  he  has  always  regarded  the  clay  of  rest  even  in  his  most  toilsome  journeys, 
insomuch  that  the  natives  could  not  make;  it  out,  and  when  they  had  some  very 
difficult  tasks  to  be  performed,  and  found  that  I\I.  Du  Chaillu  would  rest,  they 
proposed  that  he  should  put  it  off  for  three  weeks,  and  then  rest  three  days  instead 
of  one,  so  that  they  might  get  over  their  work  while;  there  was  a  necessity  lor  it.  He 
opened  his  Bible  on  Sunday,  and  read  to  them,  selecting  the  simple  words  ot  Christ, 
and  seeking  to  instil  into  their  ears,  if  he  could  not  into  their  hearts,  that  Divine 
teaching  which  has  made  glad  the  world." 

At  the  time  of  the  delivery  of  the  ''gorilla"  lecture,  INT.  Blonclin  was  performing 
at  the  Crystal  Palace,  and  some  wag  wrot(;  to  him  a  letter  purporting  to  come  from 
Mr.  Spurgeon.  lie  sent  it  on  to  the  Pastor,  who  endorsed  it  thus, — "This  was 
received  by  M.  Blonclin,  and  is  a  specimen  of  the  genus  'hoax  '," — and  then  put  it 
away  for  future  reference.  The.  envelope  contained  the  following  epistle  : — 

"  Metropolitan  Tabernacle, 

"  Newington, 

"Oct.  5,  1861. 
"  M.  Blonclin, 
"  Sir, 

"  In  consequence  of  the  overflowing  attendance  at  my  Tabernacle,  on 
Tuesday  evening  last,  when  I  gave  a  lecture  on  the  gorilla,  it  has  occurred  to 
myself,  and  to  my  brethren  the  Managers  of  the  Tabernacle,  that  to  engage  your 
services  for  an  evening  (say,  next  Wednesday)  for  the  following  programme,  would 
result  in  mutual  benefit.  You  must  meet  me  at  the  Tabernacle,  on  Tuesday  next,  at 
12  o'clock,  to  confirm  or  to  alter  the  proposed  order  of  entertainment,  which  I  Hatter 
myself  will  be  highly  gratifying  to  all  concerned. 

"  Programme. 

"At  6  o'clock  on  Wednesday  evening,  Oct.  Qth,  M.  Blonclin  to  ascend  from  the 
platform  in  the  Tabernacle,  by  an  easy  spiral  ascent,  five  times  round  the  interior,  to 
one  of  the  upper  windows,  opposite  to  '  The  Elephant  and  Castle,'  thence  by  an  easy 
incline  in  at  the  first-iloor  window  of  that  inn,  and  return  the  same  way  to  the 
platform.  The  admission  to  be,  as  at  the  'gorilla'  lecture,  6cl.,  is.,  and  2s.  6d. 

"Yours  sincerely, 

"  C.    H.    SPURGEON." 


II.     Sl'UKdEON's     AITTOUIOCJKAI'IIY. 


The.  lecturer  could  well  afford  to  laugh  at  this  clumsy  attempt  to  hoax 
M.  Blondin  ;  but  some  of  the:  ne-wspaper  attacks  upon  him,  with  reference  le>  the 
"gorilla"  and  other  lecture's,  were:  of  such  a  character  that  they  could  not  be 
re:proeluce-d  here;.  One  friend  was  sufficient]}'  influenced  by  them  to  write  an 
expostulatory  letter  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  anel  thus  evoked  the  following  re-ply  : 

"  Clapham, 

"  ( )ctober  22iul,    i  86  i . 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  have  been  elumb  under  the  cruel  re-bukes  of  my  enemiies,  and  the 
ungenerous  reproofs  of  pretended  friends.  I  have  proved  hitherto  the:  power  of 
silence,  and  although  most  bitte-rly  tempted,  I  shall  not  change:  my  custom,  or 
venture  a  syllable:  in  order  to  stay  these  mad  ravings.  But  your  brotherly  note 
eleserves  one:  e>r  two  words  of  answer. 

"(i.)  Have:  ;  well  weighe-d  what  I  have  clone  in  the  matter  of  these  lectures? 
Aye, — anel  so  weighed  it  that  neither  earth  nor  hell  can  now  move  me-  from  m\ 
course.  I  have:  a  life-work  to  perform,  and  towards  its  completion,  through  e:vil 
report  anel  good  report,  I  speed  my  way. 

"(2.)  \  on  imagine  that  my  aim  is  me;rely  to  amuse',  anel  you  then  spe-ak  very 
prope'rly  of  'stooping.1  Indee:d,  if  it  were  so,  if  I  hael  no  highe-r  or  nobler  aim  in 
view,  it  would  be:  stooping  with  sorrowful  e-mphasis  ;  but,  then,  think  you  that  the: 
devil  would  care:  to  roar  at  me?  Why,  surely,  it  would  be  his  best  policy  to 
encourage  me  in  forsaking  my  calling,  and  ele-graeling  my  ministry  ! 

"(3.)  'Is  the  Master's  eye  re:gareling  His  servant  with  pleasure?'  Yes, 
I  solemnly  fe-el  that  it  is  ;  nor  am  I  conscious  of  any  act,  or  motive,  the:  common 
infirmity  of  man  cxcepteel, — which  could  cause:  me  to  incur  Divine:  displeasure:  in 
connection  with  that  which  is,  to  me:,  the  work  e>f  my  life:. 

"(|.)  \\ith  re:garel  to  laughter, — you  and  I  may  differ  upon  this  matter,  anel 
neither  of  us  be  quite;  infallible  in  our  judgment.  To  me',  a  smile:  is  no  sin,  anel  a 
laugh  no  crime:.  The  Saviour,  the:  Man  of  sen-rows,  is  enir  example  of  morality,  but 
not  of  misery,  for  He  bore  our  griefs  that  we  might  not  bear  them  ;  and  I  am  ne>t 
John  the  Baptist,  nor  a  monk,  nor  he:rmit,  nor  an  asce-.tic,  e:ithe:r  in  theory  or  practice-. 
Unhallowed  mirth  I  h;ite,  but  I  can  and  do  enjoy  my  Father's  works,  anel  the' 
wonde:rs  of  Cre:ation,  none'  the  less,  but  all  the:  more:,  be:cause:  I  am  a  Christian.  At 
any  rate,  I  hold  my  own  views  upon  this  pe>int  ;  and,  during  ele:ven  years  of  ministry, 
have  seen  no  ill  e:ffe'ct,  but  ve:ry  much  gooel  from  my  pn-aching,  although  the: 
charge:  has  always  been  laiel  at  my  door  that  I  some;time;s  pmvoke:  the  risible:  faculties. 

"(5.)  Concerning  'sowing  to  the-  flesh,'  I  have:  not  done:  so  in  the-se:  le'cttires, 
but  have  re;nde;red  hone-st  and  he:arty  se:rvice:  to  my  Lord,  and  believe  that  spiritual 
fruit  has  already  been  reaped. 


C.      II.      Sl'URCKOX  S     AUTOIUOGRAPHY.  57 

"  (6.)  As  to  the  grief  of  friends,  let  them,  as  we'll  as  myself,  be  ready  to  bear  the 
cross  ;  and  let  them  not  attempt  to  evade  reproach  by  weeping  where,  no  tears  are 
needed.  I  have  give;n  no  cause;  to  the  enemy  to  blaspheme;,  e>r  only  such  ble;sseel 
cause  as  shall  be;  renewed  with  greater  vigour  than  ever. 

"  Ami  now  for  my  explanation  ; — I  have,  in  connection  with  my  Church,  a 
College  for  young  ministers,  which  is  a  work  ol  faith  as  te)  temporals,  and  a  labour  ot 
love  on  my  part  in  the  highest  se;nse  e)f  the;  term.  Then;  are;  about  150  young 
men,  who  are;  gelting  an  education  with  a  view,  in  most  cases,  to  preaching  the  Word 
in  the;  streets,  villages,  and  towns  of  this  land.  Their  studies  are  such  as  their 
capacities  can  receive;,  and  the;  ministering  brethren  are  mainly  given  to  the 
searching  of  the  Word  ;  while,  reading  it  in  the  original  is  the;  ambition  of  each. 
In  the  course;  of  instruction  the;re  are  lectures,  delivered  by  myself,  a  regular  lecturer, 
and  other  gentlemen.  We  have;  hael  about  twenty  lectures  em  English  History.  I 
have  given  lectures  on  Sabbath-school  teaching,  Preaching,  Church  Discipline, 
Ethnology,  tvc.,  ccc.  The;  Re;v.  George  Rogers  has  lectured  on  Books  and  Reading, 
Habit  ami  Instinct,  on  Ministerial  Prerequisites,  ami  on  e>ther  matters.  Various 
brethren  have  taken  up  other  topics  ;  ami,  having  attended  all  the  lectures,  I  can 
testify  that  the;  best  spirit  has  pervaded  all,  ami  each  lecturer  has  laboured,  not 
merely  to  instruct,  but  to  do  spiritual  good. 

'My  present  course;  is  upon  Natural  History.  Eor  the;  lectures  already 
delivered,  especially  the;  abused  ones,  I  have;  had  the  thanks  of  the  members  passed 
spontaneously  and  unanimously  ;  and  I  believe  the  lectures  have  been  as  acceptable 
to  the  audience  as  any  which  we're  ever  delivered.  We  who  have  seen  the  wonders 
of  wisdom  in  anatomy,  proviele;ntial  aelaptation,  and  creating  perfection,  have  gone 
home  praising  and  blessing  God.  We  have;  laughed,  doubtless  ;  and  we  have;  wept, 
too;  but,  with  an  audience  of  150  young  men,  and  a  considerable  company  of  men 
and  women  of  the  working-class,  what  would  be  the;  use  of  dull,  drowsy  formality? 
Last  Friday  week,  the  ''shrews'  lecture  came  in  clue  course,  and  I  thought  it  might 
be  useful  to  give  a  lew  words  as  to  the  value;  of  love  and  kindness  in  Christian 
families,  for  which  words  I  have  had  grateful  acknowledgment.  We;  went  home, 
and  I  have  not  heard  of  one,  of  the  audience  who  eliel  not  feel  that  it  was  an  evening 
well  and  profitably  spent.  Many  Christian  people,  gave  me  a  hearty  shake;  of  the. 
hand  ami  glowing  thanks. 

"  But,  lo  !  to  our  utter  ama/e;ment,  one.  morning  we'  discovered  that  the; 
lecture  was  considered  vulgar,  coarse;,  and  I  know  not  what.  The  gentlemen  of  the; 
press  had  nothing  else  just  then  to  elo,  so  they  said,  '  Let  us  abuse;  Spurge-on,  no 
matter  whether  he;  deserves  it  or  not.'  Since;  this  abuse;,  I  have  asked  scores  who 
were;  there  if  anything  had  been  said  for  which  OIK;  might  be  sorry,  and  all  have 
answered,  '  No,  nothing  was  said  at  all  de-serving  censure,  or  anything  but 


<  I 


58  C.      II.      SPURC.KOX'S     AtlTOlHOCRAl'IIV. 

approval.'  'I  hink  you  that  my  hetarers  arc-  all  so  degraded  as  to  tole-nite  conduct 
such  as  a  lying  press  imputes  to  me  ?  ()  my  brothetr,  you  do  ill  to  judge  a  servant 
of  the  Lord  Irom  the  li[)S  ol  his  foes,  and  one,  too,  who  has  had  abuse  enough  on 
lormer  occasions  without  having  given  cause  of  oflcnce,  which  renders  it  inexcusable, 
that  brethren  should  readily  believe  reports  concerning  him  ! 

"  Ihis  work  of  my  Institution  is  of  God  ;  lectures  are  a  part  of  the  necessary 
plan,  they  do  good,  I  have  a  call  to  this  work,  so  all  this  opposition  is  a  spur  to 
increased  zeal.  I  would  the.  Lord's  people  cared  more  than  they  do  for  these,  young 
preachers,  lor  I  ieel  sure,  that  (iod  the.  Iloly  Spirit  will  raise  up  Irom  our  midst  many 
who  shall  do  exploits  in  His  Name.  To  this  work  am  I  called,  and  the;  Lord  is  with 
met  in  it.  Void  of  offence;  towards  (ioel  and  man,  trusting  lor  acceptance  to  linn 
who  has  washed  away  my  sin,  shall  I  llee  betcause;  my  coneluct  is  misunderstood  ami 
my  \ve>rels  are  misconstrued?  Nay,  vetrily,  Jethovah-nissi  !  And  now  let  hell  roar,  and 
saints  themselves  forsake.  Time:  ami  ete;rnity  will  cle>ar  the;  character  of  one  wh 
has  give:n  up  even  his  gooel  name  to  his  Mastetr,  without  resetrve. 

"  \  ours  wearily, 

"  C.     11.     Sl'URC.KON." 

"  P.S. — Get  the  'gorilla'  lecture  ;  read  it,  and  see;  if  thetre  b(t  any  etvil  in  it  ;  yet 
it  is  the;  least  religious  e>f  them  all. — C.  IT  S." 

The  vote;  of  thanks  and  sympathy,  referred  to  in  the  abe>ve  lette.r,  te)ge;ther 
with  the  Pastor's  grateful  acknowledgment  of  it,  are:  thus  re:ce>rded  in  the  Tabernacle 
church -book  : — 

"At  the  church-meeting,  held  Octejber  14,  1861,  from  which  the  Pastor  was 
absent  through  illness,  the  following  resolution  was  proposed,  seconded,  and  carried 
unanimously  : — '  That  the  members  of  this  church,  constantly  refreshed  by  the 
gospel  ministry  of  their  beloved  Pastor,  and  deeply  obliged  to  him  for  the  letctures  he 
gives  upon  secular  and  social  subjects,  have  noticed,  with  sincere  regret,  and  heart 
felt  sympathy  with  him,  the  scandals  heaped  upon  his  name  by  the  public  press,  and 
beg  to  express  to  him  their  most  loving  cejnlidence,  their  strong  desire  to  endure 
with  him  a  full  share  of  his  reproach,  and  their  full  determination,  by  God's  help,  to 
bear  him  constantly  on  their  heart  in  prayer.' 

"Church-meeting,  October  28,  1861. — Our  Pastor  expressed  his  thanks  to  the 
church  for  the  vote  of  sympathy  with  him  passed  at  the  church-meeting  on  October 
14,  and  rejoiceel  in  the  fact  that  all  the  members  had  remained  steadfast  notwith 
standing  the  virulent  attacks  made  upon  him." 

In  November,  1861,  Mr.  Spurgeon  lectured  on  "Illustrious  Lord  Mayors." 
After  pointing  out  that  history  had  usually  been  written  "  from  the  terrace  of  the 


c.    Ji.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  59 

palace,  or  in  the  shadow  of  parliament,"  he  said  : — "  It  strikes  me;  that  the  Guildhall 
of  London  is,  perhaps,  the  best  spot  in  the  world  from  which  to  look  down  upon  the 
history  of  former  times.  Here,  kings  have  banqueted,  councils  have  assembled, 
bishops  have  held  their  courts,  and  the  crowds  have  rioted,  and  each  of  these  has 
left  behind  tracing's  upon  the  historic  roll.  Indeed,  London  of  old  was  England  in 
miniature,  just  as  Paris  is  France.  The  Lord  Mayor's  office  may  well  typify  the 
king  in  the  constitution  ;  the  aldermen  and  common-councillors  are  not  unlike  a 
parliament ;  at  the  same  time,  London,  as  a  city,  has  always  had  so  strong  an 
element  of  democracy,  that  the  masses  are  fairly  in  the  picture,  ;  and  our  ancient  City 
has  been  so  connected  with  religion,  that  even  a  bishop  might  be  content  to  view  the 
history  of  England  from  the  windows  of  the  Guildhall." 

J  o 

All  lovers  of  London  should  read  the  complete  lecture  if  they  can,  for  it  contains 
a  most  interesting  account  of  the  City  and  its  chief  magistrates  from  the  year  1189, 
when  Henry  Fitz-Alwyne  began  his  mayoralty,  which  lasted  twenty-four  years,  down 
to  John  Wilkes,  and  his  notorious  North  ttriton  newspaper,  the  publication  of  which 
the  Government  of  the  day  vainly  sought  to  stop.  Considerable  notice  is  taken  of 
Sir  William  Walworth,  who  was  Lord  Mayor  in  13/4,  and  whose  act  in  killing  Wat 
Tyler  is  said  (though  the  authority  is  doubtful,)  to  be;  the  origin  of  the  dagger  in  the 
City  arms.  Of  the  so-called  "  rebel  "  —whose  real  name  was  Walter  Milliard,  a  brick 
and  tile  maker  at  Dartford,  Mr.  Spurgeon  says  :  — "  I  believe  that  Wat  Tyler  has 
never  had  sufficient  honour  done  to  his  memory.  lie  was  a  patriot,  and  is  only 
infamous  because  he  was  unsuccessful.  The  Kentish  men  rallied  at  his  call,  they 
marched  to  Maidstone,  and  opened  the  prison  doors  in  order  to  set  free  their  friend, 
John  Ball,  a  priest,  fanatical  and  enthusiastic  enough,  but  not  half  so  bad  as  some 
paint  him.  History  will  yet  have  more  to  say  about  John  Ball.  This  man  had  been 
excommunicated  for  holding  the  doctrine  that  all  men  are  equal,  which  was  a  very 
horrible  heresy  in  the  judgment  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  He;  was  elected  chaplain  to 
the  Kentish  host,  and  a  warlike  chaplain  I  have  no  cloubt  he  made.  Taking  for  his 
text  the  couplet,— 

"  'When  Adam  delv'd,  and  Eve  span, 
Who  was  then  a  gentleman?' — 

he  inveighed  with  all  his  might  against  the  oppressions  of  the  lords,  and  the 
haughtiness  of  the  high  and  mighty  ones  who  taxed  and  insulted  the  people.  His 
teaching,  you  will  remember,  is  described  by  his  enemies  ;  and,  therefore,  although 
it  may  have  been  rather  extreme  in  its  Radicalism,  we  have  no  ground  to  suppose 
that  he  preached  anarchy.  He  believed  that  the  king-  was  put  down  by  the  council 
as  much  as  the  people  were  ;  and  if  they  could  but  deal  with  him  alone,  they  would 
no  doubt  find  him  a  noble-hearted  prince.  This  was  the  opinion  of  Tyler's  host, 
who,  being  armed  with  mattocks,  spades,  forks,  and  scythes,  made  up  in  courage  for 


6O  C.      II.     SI'URCJEON'S     Al'TOlilOCRArilV. 

the;  absence  of  belter  weapons.  Bishops  and  lazy  clergy  were  to  be  put  clown,  and 
the  hard-working  mendicant  iriars  were  to  be  the  only  religious  class.  Lawyers 
were  their  chief  abomination,  and  a  vow  was  made  to  cut  them  up  root  and  branch. 
So,  with  John  Ball  as  their  chaplain,  and  Wat  Tyler  at  their  head,  the.se  people 
marched  away  to  London.  They  made  a  league  with  one  another,—  first,  that  they 
would  be  free,  come  whatever  might  ;  that  they  would  make  their  landlords  charge 
them  reasonable;  rents  for  their  land  after  they  were  free  ;  and,  lastly,  they  swore 
never  to  obey  a  king  whose  name  was  John,  by  which  they  meant  that  John  of 
Gaunt,  whom  they  thought  to  be  really  king,  should  never  have  power  over  them. 
There  is  nothing  so  very  dangerous  in  that  compact,  nothing  so  desperately  wicked 
as  some  of  our  history  books  would  make  us  believe." 

Dick  Whittington,  of  course,  came;  in  for  a  good  share;  of  the  lecturer's  attention. 
He  had  to  assure  his  audience  that  the  nursery  tale,  about  the  poor  boy  coming  to 
London,  hoping  to  see  the  streets  paved  with  gold,  was  a  fiction, — lor  Dick  was  the 
son  of  Sir  William  Whittington,  a  wealthy  citixen, — and  it  was  very  doubtful  it  his 
wonderful  cat  ever  existed  ;  but  it  was  a  fact  that  he  was  thrice  Lord  Mayor,  and  on 
the  last  occasion,  "he  invited  King  llenry  V.,  to  a  banquet  of  the  most  marvellous 
kind  ;  indeed,  the  description  given,  reads  more,  like  a  fairy  tale  than  a  reality. 
Vessels  of  gold  and  silver  were,  heaped  upon  the  tables,  and  precious  stones  reflected 
the  light  of  the  chandeliers.  The.  fires  were:  fed  with  rich  spices,  so  that  the  most 
delicious  perfume  was  shed  over  the  banqueting  chamber.  The  choicest  meats,  the 
most  exquisite  birds,  and  dainties  of  the  rarest  kind  were  served  in  superabundance 
upon  the  table.  Music  gladdened  the  royal  ears,  so  that  every  sense  was  provided 
for;  while  rich  wine  flowed  from  a  conduit  in  the  hall.  As  they  were  sitting,  the 
queen  observed  that  '  even  the  tires  were  tilled  with  perfume.'  'Ah  !  '  said  Whittington, 
'by  your  leave,  your  Majesty,  I  will  make  these;  fires  still  more  agreeable;'  and, 
taking  out  a  packet  of  bonds,  to  the  amount  of  /, 60,000,  which  the  king  had  given  to 
the  different  Companies  for  loans,  he  threw  them  on  the  lire,  and  the  ruddy  blaze 
shone  into  the  face  of  the  astonished  monarch." 

The:  lecture:  included  several  references  to  religious  matters  with  which  Lord 
Mayors  had  been  me) re  or  less  associateel  ;  twe>  who  came  close:  together  were:  thus 
strikingly  contrasted: — "In  the:  year  1547,  that  glorious  martyr  for  Christ,  Anne 
Askew,  was  tried  in  the  Guildhall,  and  there:  witnessed  a  gooel  confession  for  hen- 
Lord.  Perhaps  you  will  remember  the  verse:  of  brave:  pen-try  in  which  she:  expresses! 
he:r  courage,  and  refused  the  e)fleir  of  pardon,  preferring  te>  hold  fast  her  integrity,— 

"  •  I  am  not  she  that  lyst 
My   anker  to  let  i'all 
For  every  dryslynge  myst  ; 
My  shippe's  substancyal.' 

She  was  burned    in    Smithfield,   and    the    Mayor   shouted,    '  Fiat  justitia !  '  as    the 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTonioGKAruv.  61 

signal  for  lighting  ihe  fire.      Let  his   name  perish, — we   will    not  even   mention   it  ;- 
lor  the  memory  ot  the  wicked  shall  rot. 

"In  1549,  occurs  the  honoured  name  of  Sir  Rowland  Hill.  This  Rowland  Hill 
was  the  first  Protestant  Lord  Mayor.  Me  sat  upon  the  civic  throne  in  the  reign  ot 
Edward  VI.,  just  when  the:  light  of  gospel  day  began  to  prevail  in  this  land.  He: 
was  an  ancestor  of  that  great  and  venerable  man  of  God  who,  in  the  lifetime  ot  many 
here  present,  was  a  mighty  leader  to  the  hosts  of  God.  Good  Rowland  Hill  was 
another  proof  that  the  promise  is  unto  us  and  to  our  descendants,  even  to  as  many 
as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call;  for  the  God  who  had  loved  Sir  Rowland  Hill  the 
ancestor,  continued  His  goodness  and  His  mercy  even  unto  these  later  generations. 

"  During  the  Commonwealth,  the  Puritan  Government  was  once  entertained  at 
a  banquet  by  the  City  at  Merchant  Taylors'  Hall.  The  record  is  curious,  and  I 
therefore  give  it  at  length  : — '  The  first  business  ot  the  day  was  to  hear  a  sermon  at 
Christ  Church,  Newgate  Street.  From  thence  the  procession  walked  to  the  hall, 
through  the  streets  lined  by  the  trained  bands,  marshalled  in  the  following  order, — First, 
the  court  of  Lord  Mayor  and  Aldermen  in  their  scarlet  robes,  followed  by  the 
Common  Council  ;  then  the  Earl  ot  Essex,  the  General  ;  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  Lord 
Admiral  ;  the  Earl  of  Manchester  ;  with  many  of  the  nobility,  attended  by  several 
colonels  and  other  officers  of  the  army;  then  the  members  ot  the  House  of 
Commons,  the  Scottish  Commissioners,  and  the  Assembly  ot  Divines,  who  closed 
the  procession.'  It  will  not  be  expected  that  Cheapside  exhibited  any  pageantry  on 
this  occasion  ;  but,  in  its  place,  we  are  told  that  the  visitors  were  diverted  by  a  great 
bontire  of  Popish  trumpery  and  superstitious  stult.  It  were  worth  while  to  have 
been  a  dog  in  Cheapside  to  have  seen  that  noble  army  of  divines,  the  glory  ot  their 
own  day,  and  the  wonder  of  ours.  To  my  mind,  London  never  had  so  high  an 
honour,  betore  or  since,  as  that  which  she  received  when  that  host  ot  learned, 
eloquent,  holy,  and  earnest  men  sat  at  her  table  as  respected  guests." 

On  December  0,  1861,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  a  lecture,  in  the  Tabernacle  lecture- 
hall,  on  "  The  Two  Wesleys."  As  it  has  been  recently  published  by  Messrs. 
Passmore  &  Alabaster,  it  need  not  be  referred  to  at  length.  Nor  is  a  detailed 
description  required  concerning  other  notable  lectures  which  have  appeared  in  print 
from  time  to  time:.  The  subjects  treated  comprised  "Counterfeits,"  delivered  to  the 
Young  Men's  Christian  Association  at  Exeter  1  lall,  and  printed  by  Messrs.  Nisbet 
and  Co.  in  the  series  for  iS6i — 2; — Miracles  of  Modern  Times;' — Poland; — and 
George  Fox; — all  published  by  Messrs.  Passmore  &  Alabaster.  The  lecture  on 
F"ox  was  given  in  Devonshire  House,  Bishops  gate  Street,  by  request  of  the  Society 
of  Friends,  on  November  6,  i  S66. 

Amonir  the  auditors  at   the    Friends'   Meeting-house  was  Matthew  Arnold,  who 


62 


C.      II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


afterwards  wrote  to  his  mother:  "Last  night,  Lord  Iloughton  went  with  me  and 
William  Lorstcr  to  Spurgeon's  lecture.  ...  It  was  we.ll  worth  hearing,  though  from 
William's  getting  us  places  ot  honour  on  the  bench  close  behind  Spurgeon  we  did 
not  sec:  or  hear  him  to  such  advantage  as  the  less-forward  public  in  the  body  of  the 
hall.  It  was  a  study  in  the  way  ot  speaking  and  management  of  the  voice  ;  though  his 
voice  is  not  beautiful  as  some  people  call  it,  nor  is  his  pronunciation  quite  pure. 
Still,  it  was  a  most  striking  performance,  and  reminded  me:  very  much  of  liright's. 
Occasionally,  there  were  bits  in  which  lie  showed  unction  and  real  feeling;  some- 
time's,  he  was  the  mere  Dissenting  Philistine;  but  he  kept  up  one's  interest  and 


attention  for  more  than    an    hour   and   a-halt,  and   that  is  the 
lad  I  have:  heard  him." 


at  thi 


n 


I 


am  ver 


The  mention  oi  the  title,  "Sermons  in  Candles,"  will  bring  to  the  recollection  ot 
hearers  in  various  parts  ot  the  country  the  delight  they  experienced  in  listening  to 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  lecture  upon  that  subject.  Alter  having  allowed  it  to  be  repeated, 
with  more  or  less  ot  alteration,  tor  a  quarter  ot  a  century,  he  thought  the  time  had 
come,  for  its  publication  in  a  volume;  and,  accordingly,  it  was  issued  in  1890,  the; 
front  cover  of  the  popular  edition  bearing  a  reproduction  of  several  ot  the  illustrations 
described  inside. 


The  origin  ot  the  lecture  is  thus  explained  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  : — "  In  addressing 
my  students  in  the  College,  long  ago,  I  was  urging  upon  them  the  duty  and  necessity 
of  using  plenty  ot  illustrations  in  their  preaching,  that  they  might  be  both  interesting 
and  instructive.  I  reminded  them  that  the  Saviour  had  many ///V.T  in  Ilis  discourses. 
lie  said,  over  and  over  again,  'The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  LIKI-;  ;'  '  The  Kingdom  of 


c.    n.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  63 

Heaven  is  LTKK.'  'Without  ;i  parable  spake  lie  not  unto  them.'  The,  common 
people  heard  Him  gladly,  because;  He  was  full  of  emblem  and  simile.  A  sermon 
without  illustrations  is  like  a  room  without  windows.  One  student  remarked  that 
the  difficulty  was  to  get  illustrations  in  any  threat  abundance!.  'Yes,'  I  said,  'it  you 
do  not  wake  up,  but  go  through  the:  world  asleep,  you  cannot  see  illustrations  ;  but 
it  your  minds  were  thoroughly  aroused,  and  yet  you  could  see:  nothing  else  in  the 
world  but  a  single  tallow  caudle,  you  might  tinel  enough  illustrations  in  that  luminary 
to  last  you  tor  six  months.'  \o\v,  the  young  brethren  m  the'  College  are  too  we;11 
behaved  to  say  'Oh!1  or  give  a  groan  ol  unbelief,  should  1  perchance:  say  a  strong 
tiling;  but  they  /<>(>/',  and  they  draw  their  breath,  and  they  wait  for  an  explanation. 
I  understand  what  they  mean,  and.  do  not  make-  too  heavy  a  draft  upon  their  faith  by 
tang  delays  in  explaining  myself.  The  men  who  were  around  me  at  that  particular 
moment  thought  that  I  had  made'  rather  a  sweeping  assertion,  and  their  countenances 
showed  it.  '  \\ell,'  I  said,  '  1  will  prove  my  words  ;'  and  my  atte-mpt  to  prove  them 
produced  the  rudiments  of"  this  lecture." 

'  Spurgeon's  Shilling  Series  "  contains  a  volume  entitled,  hlcccutric  firac/icrs. 
In  the  Preface,  the  author  thus  relates  how  his  lecture'  grew  into  a  book: — "  I  have 
published  this  little  volume  very  much,  in  self-defence.  Some  years  ago,  I  delivered 
a  lecture  on  '  Eccentric  Preachers,'  anel  a  rej)orter's  notes  of  it  were  published  in  one' 
of  the  newspapers.  The'se,  like  all  such  things,  were  mere:  pickings  and  cuttings, 
and  by  no  means  the  lecture  itself".  Gentlemen  of  the-  press  have  an  eye  to  the: 
amusement  of  their  readers,  and  make  selections  of  all  the-  remarkable  anecdotes, 
or  odel  sayings,  useel  by  a  speaker  ;  anel  when  these  are:  separated  from  their 
surroundings,  the  result  is  anything  but  satisfactory.  \o  man's  speeches  or  lectures 
should  be:  judged  of  by  an  ordinary  newspaper  summary  ;  which,  in  any  case,  is  a 
mere  ske-tch  ;  anel,  in  many  instance's,  is  a  vile  caricature:. 

I  thought  no  more  of  my  lecture:  till,  the  other  day,  I  found  the:  mere  rags 
anel  bones  of  the:  reporter  set  forth  in  America  as  an  address  by  myself,  worth}'  to  be: 
bound  up  with  my  book  upon  'Commenting  and  Commentaries.'  Those:  notes  we're: 
all  very  well  tor  a  newspaper,  but  I  altogether  disown  them  as  my  production.  It 
amaxe-s  me  that  the  American  editor  shoulel  not  have:  corrected  the  more  obvious 
mistakes  of  the:  reporter,  such  as  calling  Peter  Cartwright,  Peter  (/anr/t ;  and 
Lady  Anne  Askew,  Laelv  .-ls/c <.ivju\  Peter  Cartwright  was  an  American  backwoods 

--  o 

preacher,  and  his  name:  should  have  been  familiar  to  the  American  editor  ; 
but  some  publishers  are:  so  intent  upon  getting  out  their  books  that  they  cannot 
afford  time:  for  correction. 

'  Finding-  that  I  .had  by  me:  the:  whole  of  the:  mutilated  lecture,  I  thought  of 
printing  it,  to  show  what  I  had  really  spoken  ;  but,  upon  looking  it  over,  I  judged  it 


64 

to  be  better  to  expand   it  and  make  it  into  a  small  hook.      I  hope  the  reader  will  not 
be  a.  loser  by  my  resolution.' 

The  notes  used  by  Mr.  Spur^enn  in  delivering  the  lecture  were  written  on  the 
two  sides  of  a  single  half-sheet  of  notepaper  ;  the  facsimile,  here  reproduced,  will 
show  how  small  was  the  seed  from  which,  the  volume 


J-tJLt^a^      '*~"J>      ^     *£-"- 


Sl%Ji-<j<i-    ^  «^»      ^^ 


C.   II.  SI'URGKOX'S  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  65 


0^.*,^~-^-^f-  jL'C-f-rm*^?™'          a ot**j-+Tr*-.    ,    J+~~*  H-^e-fs  "r*jj  •*••    ****  "if-*  ^ 

. — -         .    .  Jv  s 


The  lecture  on  "Sermons  in  Stones,"  o-ivcn  ;it  the  Tabernacle  in  1870,  was 
published  in  1894  ^7  ^r-  J-  L.  Keys,  under  the  title,  "What  the  Stones  Say."  The  four 
volumes  of  Lectures  to  my  Students  are  so  well  known  and  so  highly  appreciated 
that  no  details  as  to  their  contents  need  be  inserted  here.  Few  works  in  the  whole 
range  of  theological  literature  have  been  so  helpful  to  aspirants  for  the  ministry  or 
to  those  who  have  already  begun  evangelistic,  pastoral,  or  missionary  work. 

Among  the  many  unpublished  lectures  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  are  three  very 
memorable  utterances  ;  —  one  delivered  in  1862  in  connection  with  the  celebration  of 


66  C.  II.  SI'UROKOX'S  AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

the  Bi-centenary  of  the  ejection  of  the;  two  thousand  ministers  in  1662  ;     anotlier,  on 
4  Bells   and   Bell-ringing,"  given  at  the  Tabernacle,  in    1869,   with   musical   illustra 
tions  ; — and  a  third,  on  "  Ignatius   Loyola  and  the  Jesuits." 

If  all  Mr.  Spurgeon's  notable  public  addresses  could  be  collected,  the}'  would 
fill  several  substantial  volumes,  and  would  furnish  a  large  constituency  with  a  mass 
of  interesting  reading"  on  a  great  variety  of  subjects.  In  i  878,  eighteen  "Speeches 
at  Home  and  Abroad"  were  published  by  Messrs.  Passmore  tv  Alabaster;  and, 
although  they  had  not  the  benefit  of  the  speaker's  revision,  they  afford  a  fairly 
accurate  idea  of  his  utterances  at  various  public  gatherings  between  the  years  i  86  i 
and  1878.  He  had  begun  revising  his  own  copy  of  the  book,  and  the  accompanying 
facsimile  will  show  the  extent  of  his  alterations,  and  also  his  loyalty  to  Baptist 
principles.  At  the  close  of  his  speech  at  Plymouth,  on  October  6,  1875,  in  seconding 
the  vote-,  of  thanks  to  Dr.  McLaren,  who  had  been  pleading  for  additional  help  for 
needy  Baptist  ministers,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said:-- 

"While  we,  as  a  denomination,  are  poor,  the  Baptists  in  England  who  are  not 
true  to  their  name  are,  I  suppose,  among  the  richest  people  in  the-  world.  I  believe 
the  best  Wesleyans,  certainly  the  best  Congregational ists,  very  many  of  the;  best 
Church  of  England  people,  and  all  the  best  Plymouth  Brethren,  have-  been  baptized. 
We  simply  stand  out,  while  the  other  Baptists,  for  reasons  best  known  to  themselves, 
slink  every  man  to  his  tent  in  the  rear,  and  thus  escape  the  reproach  which  we  have 
to  bear.  Baptists  who  arc:  members  of  'respectable'  churches,  I  do  not  respect  you 
for  having  left  your  brethren  and  deserted  your  colours  for  the  sake  of  being 
respectable!  \\'Te  are  not  'respectable  '  at  all  because  we  put  faith  and  baptism  into 
their  right  places.  A  man  says,  '  I  do  not  like  to  be  called  a  Baptist.'  Sir,  there  is 
no  Baptist  who  wants  you  to  be  so  called  ;  he  does  not  feel  so  proud  of  you  as  to 
think  it  an  honour  to  have  his  name  coupled  with  yours.  The  oldest  name  of  all 
the  denominations  now  extant  is  certainly  that  of  Baptist,  which  was  borne  by  him 
who  heralded  our  Master.  A  Baptist  existed,  as  our  Welsh  friend  said,  a  long  time 
before  there  was  any  Wesleyan,  or  Episcopalian.  Names  are  small  matters,  but  the 
principle  we  contend  for  is  precious.  We  speak  with  no  bated  breath  when  we 
maintain  the  Divine  ordinance  of  believer's  baptism  :  a  rite  they  call  it,  but  that  rite 
involves  a  thousand  other  matters,  for  the  view  you  take  of  that  rite  will  affect  your 
view  of  almost  every  other  truth.  A  gentleman  once  told  me  he  did  not  care 
twopence  for  baptism.  My  reply  was,  'Why  don't  you  give  up  your  twopenny 
baptism,  and  have  a  view  of  our  Lord's  teaching  which  it  would  be  worth  while  caring 
for?'  Let  others  do  as  they  will,  but  be  it  ours  to  be  faithful  to  our  Lord,  and 
obedient  to  His  commands,  for  'to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than 
the  fat  of  rams.'  May  the  best  of  blessings  attend  you  !  " 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Ak^ 


LOVE    IN    ACTION. 


107 


0 


baptized.  We  simply  stand  out, /THe  othcr#"  for  reasons  best 
kno\Vii  to  themselves,  slink  every  man  to  his  tent  in  the  rear, 
and/escape  gpmf>  nf  the  reproach  feksflve  IiaveTcTbear,  Baptists, 
r  t&at  are  members  of  respectable  churches,  I  do  not  respect  you^ 
having  left  your  brethren  and  deserted  your  colours  for  the  sake  of 
being  respectable:  We  are  not  "respectable*  at  all  because  we  put 
^^^baptism  e^-ef-tbe  foot  into  the.  right  placqf.  A  man  says,  "  I  do 
not  like  to  be  called  a  Baptist./  "  Sir,  there  is  no  Baptist 
wants  you  to  bcj;  he  does  not  feel  so  proud  of  youvysfcjhink  it 
honojui4oriiave  his  name  couiflcd  with  yours."  The  oldestltarae  of 
an  i*Jbbari±c&  Baptist/i£^  existed,  as  our  Welsh  friend  said,  a" 


as 

long  time  befote  there  was/any  Wesleyan,  or 

L  _  i  /  .1  i.   . 


~ao 


speak  wuh  no  bated  breath  when  we  »t»ju]  right  out  for  the 
»ako  of  tho  viudfea4f9«-d-f-arriief--ua  it  is~cJilli.'Ll,  but  which  rite  drawa 
w^tlt-it  onc^third  Wrtyof  thn  /fnrn  of  hcnvcn,  for  the  view  you  take 
of  that  rite^  afifedt^J  /your  y/ew  of  almost  every  other  truth.  A 
gentleman  once  tild  me  RQ  did  not  care  twopence  for  baptism. 

you  give  up  t>fe|&  twopenny  il*m£,  and 


o8  c.    n.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

One  more  extract  from  this  volume  may  be  given,  for  it  illustrates  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
readiness  to  turn  everything  to  account  ;  and  he  himself,  in  relating  the  incident  to 

J  O  <T~> 

his  students,  bade  them  learn  from  it  never  to  give  out  a  hymn  at  any  public 
gathering  without  being  sure  of  its  suitability  to  the  occasion.  At  the  annual 
meeting  of  the  Congregational  Home  Missionary  Society,  held  at  the  Memorial 
Hall,  on  May  7,  18/8,  at  which  Samuel  Morley,  Esq.,  M.P.,  presided,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
was  one  of  the  speakers.  Apparently,  the  hymn  sung  at  the  commencement  of  the 
proceedings  had  been  hurriedly  chosen,  for  it  was  one  of  those  in  the  Congregational 
Hymn  Book  intended  to  be  used  in  connection  with  the  "baptism"  of  infants  ! 
The  third  verse  was  as  follows,— 

"  Help  Thou  our  weak  endeavour 

To  make  Thy  gospel  known, 
And  seal,  0  Lord,  for  cz'crt 

These  li(llt:  ,>>i,-s  Thine  <>?i';/  / 
Thy  Church's  nurslings  gather 

Beneath  Thy  sheltering  wing  ; 
Be  Thou  their  Friend  and  Father, 

Their  Saviour,  Guide,  and  King." 

Many  persons  in  the  audience  noticed  the  inappropriateness  of  the.  hymn,  and 
doubtless  wondered  what  their  Baptist  visitor  would  have  to  say  concerning  it. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  privately  asked  Mr.  Morley  if  there  was  to  be  a  "  christening  "  that 
evening  ;  and  when  he  was  called  upon  to  speak, — after  the  cheers  which  greeted 
his  rising  had  subsided, — he  thus  referred  to  the  coulj-ctaups  :— 

"  I  am  not  conscious  of  having  done  anything  to  deserve  your  cheers,  but  I 
thank  you  for  them  all  the  same.  I  must  confess,  however,  to  a  good  deal  of 
disappointment.  When  you  were  singing  that  hymn,  I  thought  that  somebody  here 
had  had  an  increase  in  his  family,  and  that  a  ceremony  in  which  you  are  all  deeply 
interested  was  about  to  be  performed,  and  I  have  been  musing  and  meditating  to 
discover  why  that  hymn  was  given  out.  1  concluded  that  you  had  some  naughty 
children,  perhaps,  in  your  denomination,  who  had  been  crying  a  good  deal,  and  that 
we  were  offering  prayer  for  them.  I  am  sure  I  sincerely  join  in  the  supplication 
concerning  them,— 

"'Be  Thou  their  Friend  and  Father, 
Their  Saviour,  Guide,  and  King,' — 

and  I  recommend  any  one  of  them  who  may  be  present  to  sing  the  third  verse  of  the 
next  hymn,— 

"  '  Make  an  unguarded  youth 
The  object  of  Thy  care  ; 
Help  me  to  choose  the  way  of  truth, 
And  fly  from  every  snare.' 

"1  see  that  all  these  hymns  are  'for  the  young.'      I    remember  that  Cruclen, 
whenever  he   met   with  a  young  minister  who  did   not  believe  in  the  doctrines  of 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  69 

grace,  made  him  a  present  of  a  Westminster  Confession  or  Catechism,  which  had 
on  the  outside  of  it,  '  For  the  young-  and  ignorant ; '  and  the  next  time  you  want  to 
discuss  the  subject,  I  would  recommend  you  to  sing  the  verse  I  just  quoted.  I 
really  think,  brethren,  you  will  then  do  very  well  if,  as  Mr.  Hebditch  says,  you  are 
so  thoroughly  Evangelical.  I  am  happy  to  believe  that  you  are, — though  I  did  not 
believe  it  till  to-day.  I  have  grown  sorrowfully  suspicious  of  a  great  many  of  you, 
and  not  without  good  cause,  as  I  think.  I  am  an  impartial  onlooker  from  the 
outside, — although  I  am  wonderfully  partial  to  Evangelical  doctrine  ; — and,  there 
fore,  inasmuch  as  you  are  Evangelical,  and  are  able  truthfully  to  say  so,  I  ask  you  to 
say  it  whenever  you  have  the  opportunity.  I  always  like  to  act  according  to 
Cobbett's  rule  ;  he  said,  '  I  speak  not  only  so  that  I  can  be  understood,  but  so  that 
I  cannot  be  misunderstood  ;'  and  I  think  that,  if  ever  there  was  a  crisis  in  your 
history  when  you  should  boldly  declare  your  faith,  it  has  now  arrived;  and  I,  for 
one,  shall  heartily  rejoice  if  your  declaration  is  so  clear  that  nobody  in  this  world 
can  misunderstand  you,  but  all  shall  know  that  you  stand  by  the  grand  old  truths  of 
the  gospel  as  your  forefathers  stood  before  you. 

'  Well,  still  trying  to  find  some  mystical,  spiritual  reason  for  this  hymn  having 
been  sung,  I  afterwards  discovered  that  Mr.  \Vilson  wished  us  to  sing  it  on  behalf 
of  the  new  Committee.  The  light  dawned  upon  me  that  they  were  new-comers,  just 
taking  charge  of  the  new  Society  ;  and  I  felt  that  it  was  a  very  delightful  thing  that 
we  should  ask  the  Lord  to  'seal  for  ever'  'these  little  ones'  as  His  own.  I  hope 
that  the  new-born  Society  will  grow  up,  and  become  very  strong.  The  organization 
is,  as  Mr.  Morley  says,  perfect  and  complete,  and  I  wish  it  success  exceeding 
abundantly  above  what  you  ask  or  even  think." 

After  this  playful  introduction,  Mr.  Spurgeon  delivered  a  powerful  plea  on 
behalf  of  our  country  churches,  and  the  means  to  be  employed  to  maintain  their 
efficiency. 

Mention  must  be  made  here  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  visit  to  the  costermongers  of 
Golden  Lane,  on  Tuesday  evening,  March  12,  1867,  although  his  message  to  them 
was  neither  a  lecture  nor  an  address,  but  was  distinctly  a  sermon.  The  leader  of 
the  Mission,  Mr.  W.  J.  Orsman,  and  his  co-workers,  were  greatly  cheered  by  this 
memorable  service  ;  and  one  friend  who  was  present  thus  recorded  his  impressions 
concerning  the  gathering  : — "  On  the  previous  Sunday  morning,  tickets  of  admission 
were  distributed  among  the  street-dealers  of  Whitecross  Street  ;  and  the  result  was, 
that  by  far  the  majority  of  those  who  attended  were  of  this  class.  A  goodly  number 
of  the  regular  attendants  at  the  mission-hall  were  absent,  as  they  denied  themselves 
for  the  sake  of  others.  Some  of  the  dealers  came  with  unwashed  faces  and 
uncombed  hair,  but  most  of  the  congreoration  were  dressed  in  their  best  clothes  ; 


70  c.    n.    STURGEON'S    AVTOP.KKIKAI'IIY. 

and  those  who  could  not  recognize  them,  would  hardly  think  that  some  were 
costermong-ers'  wives.  .  .  .  At  seven  o'clock,  Mr.  Spurgeon  ascended  the  platform, 
and  opened  the,  service  with  prayer.  Then  a  hymn  was  heartily  sung,  and  a  chapter 
read  and  expounded.  The  preacher's  prayer  was  frequently  responded  to  ;  and 
when  reference  was  made,  to  the,  bodily  aches  and  pains  which  so  many  suffered, 
and  the  poverty  experienced  by  others,  there  were  many  deep  sighs.  Of  course, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  arrested  their  attention,  nor  did  lie  find  any  difficulty  in  making  his 
audience  understand  what  he  had  to  tell  them.  Street-vendors  are  very  much  like- 
other  people,  only  they  are.  more  acute  than  most  persons  give;  them  credit  tor. 
Our  honoured  friend's  easy  delivery,  rapid  flow  of  words,  masculine  thought,  and 
earnestness  and  directness,  wen;  thoroughly  appreciated  ;  and  the.  little  anecdotes, 
homely  illustrations,  and  forcible  'hits',  were  much  enjoyed.  The  te.xt  was, 
John  iv.  15  :  'The  woman  saith  unto  Him,  Sir,  give  me  this  water,  that  I  thirst  not, 
neither  come,  hither  to  draw  ;  '  and  having  briefly  and  plainly  stated  what  the  gospel 
was,  the  preacher  showed  how  it  might  be  compared  to  water.  Water  satisfied  the 
thirst  oi  man  ;  often  saved  his  life;  took  away  tilth  ;  put  out  fire, — the  fire  of 
temper,  and  lust  ;  it  softened  things,  cvc.  lie  then  encouraged  them  to  believe  that, 
if  they  desired  this  grace;,  they  could  have;  it;  and,  lastly,  concluded  by  showing- 
how  he  himself  had  found  this  'living  water.'  .  .  .  After  the  sermon  was  ended, 
over  two  hundred  remained  for  prayer.  For  an  hour  and  a-quarter,  earnest 
supplications  were  offered.  Some  begged  that  the  brethren  would  pray  especially 
for  them  ;  others,  who  had  never  made  supplication  in  their  lives  before;,  expressed 
their  wants  in  deep  sighs,  or  in  gentle;  solemn  responses.  It  is  believed  that  several 
were  convinced  of  sin  during  the  services  ;  and,  certainly,  Mr.  Spurgeon's  appeals 
will  never  be  forgotten  by  many  who  had  been  unaccustomed  to  sympathetic, 
earnest  entreaty. 

"  One  curious  bit  of  criticism  we  heard  from  several  costermongers.  A  coster's 
living  depends  largely  upon  his  '  woice.'  He;,  therefore,  knows  the  value  of  good 
lungs,  and  is  a  connoisseur  in  voice;s.  The  preacher's  voice  was  eulo<>'ixed  as 
'  wonderful  ' — '  stunning  '-— '  I  never  ' — and  other  equally  significant  phrases.  One 
center  had  lost  his  voice,  and  probably  he  envied  the  preacher's  gift." 

On  several  occasions,  Mr.  Spurgeon  addressed  large  companies  of  City  men  by 
request  of  those  who  were  interested  in  their  spiritual  welfare.  On  December  4, 
1876,  about  a  thousand  gentlemen  assembled  at  Cannon  Street  Hotel,  under  the; 
auspices  of  the  Stock  Exchange  Christian  Association,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  spoke  to 
them  upon  the  words  in  2  Cor.  xii.  2  :  "a  man  in  Christ."  On  January  11,  1877,  he 
met  the:  clerks  of  Messrs.  Peek,  Frean,  &  Co.,  at  the  Drummond  Road  Biscuit 
Works,  Bermondsey,  when  the;  subject  of  his  address  was,  "Our  Relationship  to  the 


C.     II.     STURGEON'S     AUTOinOGRAPIIY.  7l 

Kingdom  of  God  ;  "  but  lie  had  an  earnest  longing-  to  be  the  means  of  blessing-  to 
others,  and  therefore  wrote  the  following  letter  :— 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

"  Clapham, 

"I3/I/77- 
"To  the  me;mbers  of  The  Society  of  Friends  meeting  at  Devonshire  House, 

"  Brethren  in  Christ, 

"  I  have  for  some  years  felt  a  desire;  to  hold,  at  time?,  in  our  great  City, 
meetings  for  business  men  where  I  might  address  tJicni  upon  the  things  of  God. 
Convenient  places  are.  few,  and  the.  hire  of  those,  available  would  be  beyond  my 
personal  means. 

"  It  therefore  occurred  to  me  that  you  might  perhaps  allow  me  to  speak  in  your 
Meeting-house,  for  I  know  your  liberality  of  mind;  and,  although  personally  I  am 
not  agreed  with  you  in  all  points,  yet  in  the  greater  truths  we;  are  one,  and  even  in 
all  things  one  in  the  desire  to  be  led  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  live;  to  the.  glory  of  God. 

"Several  Friends  have;  encouraged  me  in  the  hope  that  you  would  freely  lend 
me  your  Meeting-house,  but  I  earnestly  entreat  that  those;  who  are  in  favour  of  so 
doing  will  not  imagine;  that  I  coulel  or  would  wish  for  this  favour  if  it  would  wound 
tlie  minds  of  any  Frie;nels. 

"  I,  your  brother  in  the;  Lord,  ask  you  the;  loan  e>f  your  Meeting-house  for  one> 
hour  about  mid-day  on  four  days  in  April  or  May  which  may  be  mutually  convenient. 
If  it  seem  gooel  to  you  to  decline;,  I  shall  not  need  to  be  assured  that  your  reasons 
will  be  kind,  for  I  shall  be  sure  of  it  ;  but  if  you  are  moved  to  grant  me  my  desire, 
I  can  assure  you  that  I  seek  not  to  make  converts  to  a  sect,  or  to  a  schoe>l  of 
thought,  much  le;ss  to  any  form  of  outward  ordinance.  ;  but  I  de;sire  to  bear  testimony, 
as  the  Spirit  enables  me,  for  the  gospel  of  Jesus,  with  the  one  aim  of  leading  souls 
to  the  Savie)ur. 

"As,  through  gre;at  we;ariness,  I  am  obliged  to  rest  for  a  while  in  the  South  of 
France;,  I  must  ask  your  patience  if  there  should  be  delay  in  replying  to  any 
enquiries  which  may  arise;  out  of  this  request.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  be  over  all 
in  your  assembly,  even  as  I  trust  He  moveth  me;  in  this  act  ! 

"Yours  in  Christ  Jesus,  in  brotherly  love, 

"  C.    H.    STURGEON." 

The  request  was  granted,  meetings  were  held  on  May  2  and  7,  the  subjects 
being  "The  Claims  of  God  "  and  "  Faith  in  Christ."  These  addresses,  like  all  those 
previously  mentioned,  were  published  by  Messrs.  Passmore  &  Alabaster  ;  but  a 
great  many  others  we;re  only  printed  in  cemtemporary  ne;wspapers,  or  are  preserved 
in  manuscript  ready  for  use  when  required. 


c^^^ 

I/ 


/  / 

^W<e.  />t^  O 


*        (J 


'<rdtJl  &.wL  (^^^ca^L^r^,  erie. 


-<>^'7^^ 


X^--Z^<£^i^C<r£^£v     (y  o^ir?^<7f    6-± 

/  y        •         x^  ^    I 

<^,   /<lj    //e^     U^^  //  T^*^-  • 


CHAPTER   LXV. 


JitworaMc  Scrfjicts  nt  the  ftabernnrlr,  1861—187*. 

At  this  moment,  China  is  open  to  Christian  enterprise;  and  I  honestly  avow,  if  this  Tabernacle 
had  not  been  built,  and  I  had  had  no  larger  house  of  prayer  than  the  place  in  which  I  have 
lately  preached,  I  should  have  felt  in  my  conscience  bound  to  go  to  learn  the  language  anil  preach  the 
Word  there  ;  but  I  now  know  what  to  do,  I  must  abide  here,  for  this  is  my  place. — C.  II.  S.,  in  sermon  at 
the  Tabernacle,  March  29,  1861. 

It  seems  to  me,  standing  here,  as  if  I  heard  a  voice  saying  tome,  '•  Go  thou,  therefore,  and  teach  all 
nations  ;''  and  my  soul  sometimes  pants  and  longs  for  the  liberty  to  preach  Christ  where  He  was  never 
preached  before;  not  to  build  upon  another  man's  foundation,  but  to  go  to  some  untrodden  land,  some 
waste  where  the  foot  of  Christ's  minister  was  never  seen,  that  there  the  solitary  place  might  be  made 
glad,  and  the  wilderness  might  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose.  I  have  made  it  a  solemn  question 
whether  I  might  not  testify  in  China  or  India  the  grace  of  Jesus,  and  in  the  sight  of  God  1  have 
answered  it.  I  solemnly  feel  that  my  position  in  England  will  not  permit  my  leaving  the  sphere  in 
which  I  now  am,  or  else  to-morrow  I  would  offer  myself  as  a  missionary. -C.  H.  S.,  in  sermon  at  the 
Tabernacle,  April  21,  1861. 

,4  MOXG  the  earliest  of  the  memorable  services  at  the  Tabernacle  was 
the  one  held  on  Lord's-day  morning,  December  15,  1861.  Late 
on  the  previous  night,  the  Prince  Consort  had  been  "called  home  ;" 
and  in  commencing  his  sermon,  Mr.  Spurgeon  read  a  few  sentences 
which  he  had  written  with  reference  to  that  solemn  event.  His 
manuscript  was  preserved,  and  is  reproduced  in  facsimile  on  the 
preceding  page.  He  did  not  feel  that  he  could  at  that  time  make  further  allusion  to 
the  Prince's  departure,  as  he  had  prepared  a  discourse  upon  quite  a  different  topic  ; 
but  the  following  Sabbath  morning-  he  preached,  from  Amos  iii.  6, — "  Shall  there  be 
evil  in  a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  ?  "• — a  sermon  which  was  published 
under  the  title,  "  The  Royal  Death-bed."  The  introduction  contained  the  following- 
noble  tribute  to  the  character  and  influence  of  Albert  the  Good  : — 

"  The  evil  mentioned  in  the  text  is  that  of  calamity,  and  we  might  read  the: 
verse, — '  Shall  there  be  a  calamity  in  the  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  ? ' 
—a  question  exceedingly  appropriate  at  the  present  time.  There  lias  been  evil 
in  this  city  ;  a  calamity  of  an  unusual  and  disastrous  nature  has  fallen  upon  this 
nation.  We  have  lost  one  who  will  to-day  find  a  thousand  tongues  to  eulogize  him  ; 
a  Prince  whose  praise  is  in  the  mouth  of  all,  and  who  is  in  such  repute  among  you 
that  it  is  needless  for  me  to  commend  his  memory  to  your  hearts.  \Ve  have  lost  a 
man  whom  it  was  the  habit  of  some  to  suspect  so  long  as  he  lived,  he  could  do  little 
without  arousing  their  mistrust  ;  they  were  always  alarmed  by  phantoms  of  intrusion 
and  unconstitutional  influence  ;  but  now  that  he  has  departed,  they  may  sincerely 


7-(.  C.      II.      Sl'URCKON  S     AUTOr.IOGKAl'lIY. 

regret  that  they  could  not  trust  where  confidence  \vns  so  well  deserved.  Xot  ol  lack 
ol  homage  to  his  rank,  his  talents,  or  his  house,  could  he  complain;  but  from  his 
tomb  there  might  well  conic  the  still  small  voice  of  memory,  reminding  us  of  many 
causeless  suspicions,  a  lew  harsh  judgments,  and  one  or  two  heartless  calumnies.  I 
was  pleased  by  a  remark  made  by  the  leading  journal  of  the  age,  to  the,  e fleet  that 
the  Prince  Consort's  removal  might  surest  deep  regrets  lor  our  thrift}'  homage  and 
measured  respect.  lie  has  deserved  nothing  but  good  at  our  hands.  Standing  in 
the  most  perilous  position,  his  loot  has  not  slipped;  dwelling  where;  the  slightest 
interference  might  have;  brought  down  a  storm  of  animosity  upon  his  head,  he  has 
prudently  withheld  himself,  and  let  public  allairs  alone  as  much  as  possible.  Looking 
upon  the  nature  of  our  government,  and  the  position  of  the  throne;  in  our  (-(insti 
tution,  1  can  but  say,  'Verily  it  is  a  heavy  calamity  for  such  a  Oueen  to  lose  such  a 
husband.' 

'  So  dire  is  this  evil,  that  our  troubled  hearts  are  shadowed  with  dark 
forebodings  of  other  ills  of  which  this  may  be.  the  mournful  herald  ;  an  earthquake 
has  commenced,  the  mountain  trembles,  one  great  rock  has  fallen,  what  may  come 
next  ?  \Ve  did  reckon  upon  war,  but  we  had  no  lore  warnings  of  a  roval  funeral  ; 
we  looked  forward  with  some  apprehension  to  strifes  abroad,  but  not  to  losses  at 
home.  And  now  we  feel  that  a  corner-stone,  in  the  royal  house,  has  been  taken 
away,  and  we  look  forward  with  sorrow  and  fear  to  what  may  come-  next,  and  next, 
and  next.  \Ve  have  great  faith  in  our  constitution,  but  had  we  not  even  greater 
faith  in  God,  we  might  fear  lest  the  removal  of  an  eminent  minister,  the  taking  away 
of  some  threat  men  who  have  stood  prominent  in  our  commonwealth,  should  leave  us 
desolate,  without  earthly  helpers.  'Tis  not  the  fall  of  yonder  stately  column  which 
alone  has  caused  us  sadness  ;  it  is  the  prophetic  linger  pointing  to  other  pails  of  the; 
o-oodly  pile:,  which  has  made  us  full  of  forebodings  of  the  time  when  many  a  noble 
pillar  must  lie  in  the  dust.  Nor  is  this  all,  or  the  deepest  sorrow.  \Ve  feel  this  to 
be  an  evil  upon  the  city,  because  of  the  taking  away  of  a  parent  from  his  children, 
and  such  children,  too, — princes,  whom  no  man  may  venture  to  instruct  as  could  a 
father,  princes  into  whose  ears  wise  words  will  scarcely  enter  save  through  a  father's 
voice, — princes  and  princesses,  who  needed  to  have  his  prudent  counsel  to  steer 
them  through  the  various  trials  of  their  minority,  and  to  cheer  them  when  they 
should  come  into  the  battles  of  life.  He  who,  in  concert  with  the  Queen,  has  so 
well  trained  them,  is  taken  away  ;  and  what  his  loss  may  be  to  their  future 
characters,  time  only  shall  reveal.  More  than  this, — and  here  we  touch  the 
tenderest  string,  and  come  nearest  to  the  heart  of  the  evil,  —  Her  Majesty  has  lost 
her  beloved  husband,  her  only  equal  friend,  her  only  confidant,  her  only  counsellor 
in  her  private  cares.  Save  her  children,  she  has  lost  all  at  a  blow,  and  she  is  this 
day  more  widowed  than  the  poorest  widow  in  the  land.  The  bereaved  wife  of  the 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  75 

peasant  is  too  often  afflicted  by  the  grasp  of  chill  penury,  but  she  has  some  equals 
and  friends  who  prevent  the  colder  hand  of  regal  isolation  from  freezing  the  very 
soul.  In  our  tenderly-beloved  Sovereign,  we  see  Majesty  in  misery,  and  what  if  1 
say,  we  behold  the  Empress  of  sorrow.  Just  as  the  mountain-peaks,  the  first  to 
catch  the  sunbeams  of  summer,  are  the  most  terribly  exposed  to  the  pitiless  blasts 
of  winter,  so  the  elevation  of  sovereignty,  with  all  its  advantages  in  prosperity, 
involves  the  maximum  of  sorrow  in  the  hour  of  tribulation.  What  rational  man 
among  us  would  be  willing  to  assume,  imperial  cares  in  ordinary  times  ;  but  what 
must  they  be  now,  when  household  bereavement  wrings  the  heart,  and  there,  is  no 
more  an  affectionate  husband  to  bear  his  portion  of  the  burden  ?  Brethren,  we  can 
only  sympathize  ;  we  cannot  console.  Ordinary  cases  are,  often  within  reach  of 
compassion  ;  but  the  proper  reverence  due  to  the:  highest  authority  in  the  land 
renders  it  impossible  for  the  clearest  friend  to  use:  that  familiarity  which  is  the  very 
life  of  comfort. 

"This  is  a  calamity  indeed!  ()  Lord,  the:  Comforter  of  all  those  whose 
hearts  are  bowed  down,  sustain  and  console  our  weeping  Monarch  !  Would 
that  Robert  Hall,  or  Chalmers,  could  arise  from  the:  grave,  to  depict  this  sorrow! 
As  for  me,  my  lips  are  so  unaccustomed  to  courtly  phrases,  and  I  understand  so 
little  of  those  depths  of  sorrow,  that  1  am  not  tutored  and  prepared  to  speak  on 
such  a  subject  as  this  ;  I  do  but  stammer  and  blunder  where  there  is  room  for  golden 
utterance  and  eloquent  discourse.  ()  God  of  Heaven,  Thou  knowest  that  there 
beats  nowhere  a  heart  that  feels  more  tenderly  than  ours,  or  an  eye  that  can  weep 
more  sincerely  for  the  sorrow  of  that  Royal  Lady  who  is  thus  left  alone  !  Alas!  for 
the  Prince  who  has  fallen  upon  the  high  places  !  From  the  council-chamber  he  is 
removed  ;  from  the  abode  of  all  the  graces  he  is  taken  away  ;  from  the  home  of 
loveliness,  from  the  throne  of  honour,  he  is  gone  ;  and  it  is  an  evil, — such  an  evil  as 
has  never  befallen  this  nation  in  the:  lifetime  of  any  one  of  us, — such  an  evil,  that 
there  is  but  one  death — and  may  that  be  far  removed  ! — which  could  cause  greater 
sorrow  in  the  land." 

Singularly  enough,  the  next  discourse  claiming  special  notice  also  related  to 
a  great  public  calamity,  namely,  the  Hartley  Colliery  explosion.  On  Thursday 
evening,  January  30,  1862,  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached,  from  Job  xiv.  14,—  ;'  If  a  man 
die,  shall  he  live  again  ?" — a  sermon  which  commenced  thus  : — "  Once  more  the  Lord 
has  spoken  ;  again  the  voice  of  Providence  has  proclaimed,  '  All  flesh  is  grass,  and 
all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field.'  O  sword  of  the  Lord,  when 
wilt  thou  rest  and  be  quiet  ?  Wherefore  these  repeated  warnings  ?  Why  cloth  the 
Lord  so  frequently  and  so  terribly  sound  an  alarm  ?  Is  it  ne>t  because  our  drowsy 
spirits  will  not  awaken  to  the  realities  of  death  ?  We  fondly  persuade  ourselves  that 


76  C.      II.      Sl'URGKON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

we  arc  immortal  ;  that,  though  a  thousand  may  fall  at  our  side,  and  ten  thousand  at 
our  right  hand,  yet  death  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  us.  We  Hatter  ourselves  that,  if 
we  must  die,  yet  the  evil  day  is  far  hence.  If  we  be  sixty,  we  presumptuously 
reckon  upon  another  twenty  years  of  life  ;  and  a  man  of  eighty,  tottering  upon  his 
staff,  remembering  that  some  few  have  survived  to  the  close  of  a  century,  sees  no 
reason  why  he  should  not  do  the  same.  If  man  cannot  kill  death,  he  tries  at  least 
to  bury  him  alive  ;  and  since  death  will  intrude  himself  in  our  pathway,  we 
endeavour  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the  ghastly  object.  God  in  Providence  is 
continually  filling  our  path  with  tombs.  With  kings  and  princes,  there  is  too 
much  forgetfulness  of  the  world  to  come  ;  God  has  therefore  spoken  to  them.  They 
are  but  few  in  number  ;  so  one  death  might  be  sufficient  in  their  case,  that  one 
death  of  a  beloved  and  illustrious  Prince  will  leave  its  mark  on  courts  and  palaces. 
As  for  the  workers,  they  also  are  wishful  to  put  far  from  them  the  thought  of  the 
coffin  and  the  shroud  :  God  has  spoken  to  them  also.  They  were  many,  so  one 
death  would  not  be  sufficient  ;  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  there  should  be  many 
victims,  or  we  should  have  disregarded  the  warning.  Two  hundred  witnesses  cry  to 
us  from  the  pit's  mouth, — a  solemn  fellowship  of  preachers  all  using  the  same  text, 
'  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  O  Israel  !  '  If  God  had  not  thus  spoken  by  the 
destruction  of  many,  we  should  have  said,  'Ah  !  it  is  a  common  occurrence;  there 
are  frequently  such  accidents  as  these.'  The  rod  would  have  failed  in  its  effect  had 
it  smitten  less  severely.  The  awful  calamity  at  the  Hartley  Colliery  has  at  least  had 
this  effect,  that  men  are  talking  of  death  in  all  our  streets.  O  Father  of  Thy  people, 
send  forth  Thy  Holy  Spirit  in  richer  abundance,  that  by  this  solemn  chastisement 
higher  ends  may  be  answered  than  merely  attracting  our  thoughts  to  our  latter  end  ! 
Oh,  may  hearts  be  broken,  may  eyes  be  made  to  weep  for  sin,  may  follies  be 
renounced,  may  Christ  be  accepted,  and  may  spiritual  life  be  given  to  many 
survivors  as  the  result  of  the  physical  death  of  those  who  now  sleep  in  their 
untimely  graves  in  Earsdon  churchyard  !  " 

In  closing  his  discourse,  the  preacher  pleaded  for  the  widows  and  orphans  who 
were  suffering  through  the  terrible  calamity  ;  and,  though  it  was  a  wet  week-night, 
and  many  who  were  present  had  already  contributed  to  the  Relief  Fund,  the 
congregation  generously  subscribed  ^120. 

When  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  at  Geneva,  in  1860,  he  preached  for  Dr.  Merle 
D'Aubicnie  as  well  as  in  the  cathedral.  It  was  therefore  fitting  that  the  Genevan 

o 

divine  should  speak  to  the  congregation  at  the  Tabernacle  when  the  opportunity 
occurred.  On  Lorcl's-clay  morning,  May  18,  1862,  the  Pastor  purposely  made  his 
discourse  somewhat  shorter  than  usual  ;  and,  in  closing  it,  said  : — "  My  dear  friend, 
Dr.  D'Aubigne,  is  here  this  morning,  having  been  called  by  the  Bishop  of  London, 


C.     II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


77 


according  to  the  order  of  our  beloved  Queen,  to  preach  in  the  Royal  Chapel  of  St. 
James.  In  a  kind  note  with  which  he  favoured  me,  last  week,  he  expressed  a 
desire  publicly  to  show  his  hearty  fellowship  with  his  brethren  of  the  Free  Churches 
of  England,  and  I  am  delighted  to  welcome  him  in  the  Tabernacle,  in  the  name  of 
this  church,  and  I  may  venture  to  add,  in  the  name  of  all  the  Free  Churches  of 
England.  May  the  historian  of  the  Reformation  continue  to  be  honoured  of  the 
Lord  his  God  ! 


DR.    MERLE 


Dr.  D'Aubigne  said  :  —  "When  I  heard  your  dear  Pastor  reading  to  us  the  i6th 
chapter  of  the  Romans,  I  remembered  those  words  which  we  find  very  often  in  the 
Epistles  of  Paul,  —  '  love  to  the  saints,'  and  '  faith  in  the  Lord.'  In  that  i6th 
chapter,  we  find  a  beautiful  exhibition  of  love  to  the  saints,  the  children  of  God. 
We  see  that  it  was  written  from  the  Church  of  Corinthus,  in  Greece,  to  the  Church 
in  Rome.  Observe  how  many  Christians  that  Church  of  Corinthus  and  the  apostle 
Paul  knew  at  Rome  !  We  have  a  long  catalogue  of  them,  —  Priscilla,  Aquila, 
Andronicus,  and  others.  I  must  confess,  my  dear  friends,  to  my  regret,  that  in  this 
great  assembly  I  know  only  two  or  three  people.  I  know  your  Pastor  and  my 
dear  friend,  Mr.  Spurgeon  ;  I  know  the  name,  but  not  the  person,  of  Mr.  North, 
upon  my  left  ;  and  I  know  the  friend  who  has  received  me  in  your  great  city,  Mr. 
Kinnaircl,  —  '  Gaius,  mine  host,'  as  the  apostle  says.  But  in  this  great  assembly  of  six 
thousand  men  and  women,  and  I  hope  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ,  I  do  not  know 
anyone  else.  Well,  my  clear  friends,  I  would  ask  you,  do  you  know  the  names  of 


7((s>  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOUIOGRATHY. 

many  Christians  in  Geneva?  Perhaps  you  do  not  know  three;  possibly,  not  two; 
perhaps,  only  one.  Now,  that  is  to  me  a  demonstration  that  fraternity,  or  brotherly 
love,  is  not  so  intense  in  our  time  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  apostles.  In  the  first 
century,  for  a  man  to  give  his  name  to  the  Lord  was  to  expose  himself  to  martyrdom; 
and  Christians  at  that  time  formed  only  one  household  in  the  whole  world,  in 
Lurope,  Asia,  and  Africa.  Let  us  remember  that,  and  may  we,  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
say  that  we,  who  have  been  bapti/ed  with  the  blood  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  have 
only  one  Father,  one  Saviour,  one  Spirit,  one  faith,  and  we  are  only  one  house,  the 
house  of  the  living  God,  the  house  of  Christ,  one  house  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
whole  world  ;  not  only  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  but  in  America,  in  Australia,  one 
house,  one  family.  O  my  dear  friends,  let  us  grow  in  love  to  the  brethren! 

'  Then  there  is  another  thing,  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  There  can  be  no  love  to 
the  saved  and  the:  redeemed,  if  there  is  no  true  living  faith  and  hope  in  the  Saviour 
and  the  Redeemer.  Well,  I  suppose  all  of  you  in  this  great  meeting  would  say,  '  \Ve 
believe  in  the  Lord,  we  have  faith  in  Him.'  Yes,  but  that  faith  must  be  sincere,  must 
be  living,  must  come  from  the  heart.  1  will  tell  you  one  word  from  Rome.  Prob 
ably  all  these  friends  sent  some  messages  by  the  apostle,  but  I  will  tell  you  one 
word  that  was  said  once  in  Rome,  not  in  the  days  of  Paul,  but  at  tin:  time  of  our 
blessed  Reformation.  There  was,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century,  a  man 
in  Italy,  who  was  a  child  of  God,  taught  by  the  Spirit.  His  name  was  Aonio 
Paleario.  I  le  had  written  a  book  called,  The  benefit  of  Christ's  Death.  That  book 
was  destroyed  in  Italy,  and  lor  three  centuries  it  was  not  possible  to  find  a  copy  ;  but 
two  or  three  years  ago,  an  Italian  copy  was  found,  I  believe,  in  one  of  your  libraries 
at  Cambridge  or  Oxford,  and  i.t  has  been  printed  again.  It  is  perhaps  singular,  but 
this  man  did  not  leave:  the  Romish  Church,  as  he  ought  to  have  done,  but  his  whole 
heart  was  given  to  Christ.  He  was  brought  before  the  judge  in  Rome,  by  order  of 
the  Pope.  The  judge  said,  '\Vewillput  to  him  three  questions;  we  will  ask  him 
what  is  the  first  cause  of  salvation,  then  what  is  the  second  cause  of  salvation,  then 
what  is  the  third  cause  of  salvation  ? '  They  thought  that,  in  putting  these  three 
questions,  he  would  at  last  be  made  to  say  something  which  should  be  to  the 
glory  of  the  Church  of  Rome  ;  so  they  asked  him,  '  What  is  the  first  cause  of 
salvation?'  and  he  answered,  '  Christ,'  Then  they  asked  him,  'What  is  the  second 
cause  of  salvation?  '  and  he  answered,  '  CHRIST.'  Then  they  asked  him,  '  WTiat 
is  the  third  cause  of  salvation?'  and  he  answered,  'CHRIST.'  They  thought 
he  would  have  said,  first,  Christ  ;  secondly,  the  Word  ;  thirdly,  the  Church  ;  but 
no,  he  said,  '  Christ.'  The  first  cause,  Christ ;  the  second,  Christ  ;  the  third,  Christ  ; 
and  for  that  confession,  which  he  made  in  Rome,  he  was  condemned  to  be  put 
to  death  as  a  martyr.  My  dear  friends,  let  us  think  and  speak  like  that  man  ; 
let  every  one  of  us  say,  '  The  first  cause  of  my  salvation  is  Christ  ;  the  second 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTUIUUGKAIMIV.  79 

is  Christ;  the  third  is  Christ.  Christ  and  His  atoning  blood,  Christ  and  His 
powerful  regenerating  Spirit,  Christ  and  His  eternal  electing  grace,  Christ  is  my 
only  salvation,  I  know  of  nothing  else.' 

"Dear  friends,  we  find  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  these  words,  'The 
whole  church  salute th  you.'  I  have  no  official  charge  ;  but  I  may,  in  a  Christian 
and  fraternal  spirit,  say  to  you,  the  Genevese  Church,  the  Church  in  Geneva  saluteth 
you  ;  and  I  would  say,  the  whole  Continental  Church  saluteth  you,  for  we  know  you, 
and  we  love  you,  and  the  dear  minister  God  has  given  you.  Now  we  ask  from  you 
love  towards  us  ;  we  are  doing  what  we  can  in  that  dark  Continent  to  spread 
abroad  the  light  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  Geneva,  we  have  an  Evangelical  Society 
which  has  that  object  before  it,  and  we  are  also  labouring  in  other  places  ;  we 
ask  an  interest  in  your  prayers,  for  the  work  is  hard  among  the  Roman  Catholics 
and  the  infidels  of  the  Continent.  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  \\ilh  you 
all  !  Amen." 

During  the  terrible  distress  caused  by  the  Lancashire  cotton  famine,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
preached,  on  Lord's-day  morning,  November  9,  1862,  a  sermon  on  "Christian 
Sympathy,"  from  Job  xxx.  25  :  "  Did  not  I  weep  for  him  that  was  in  trouble  ?  Was 
not  my  soul  grieved  for  the  poor?"  In  appealing  on  behalf  of  the  people  in  need, 
the  Pastor  urged  these  five  reasons  why  they  should  be  generously  helped: — (i) 
their  poverty  was  not  the  result  of  their  own  fault  ;  (2)  the  cause  of  their  suffering- 
was  the  national  sin  of  slavery  ;  (3)  their  heavy  trials  had  been  borne  most  patiently  ; 
(4)  the  distress  was  very  widely  spread  ;  and  (5)  gratitude  to  God  should  move  all 
who  were  able  to  give  liberally  to  those  who  were  in  want.  The  appeal  was  most 
effective,  for  the  congregation  contributed  //;6  us.  lid.  towards  the  Famine 
Fund, — probably  the  largest  amount  ever  given  from  the  Tabernacle  to  any  outside 
object,  and  exceeding  even  the  sum  (,£700)  realized  by  the  Fast-day  service  at  the 
Crystal  Palace  in  aid  of  the  Indian  Relief  Fund. 

March  15,  1863,  was  a  memorable  morning  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  for 
Mr.  Spurgeon  then  delivered  the  discourse  which,  when  published,  became  No.  500. 
The  text  of  it  was,  i  Samuel  vii.  12  :  "Then  Samuel  took  a  stone,  and  set  it  between 
Mizpeh  and  Shen,  and  called  the  name  of  it  Ebenezer,  saying,  Hitherto  hath  the  Lord 
helped  us;"  and  the  title  was  most  appropriate,  "Ebenezer."  It  was  both  auto 
biographical  and  historical,  and  contained  many  interesting  allusions  to  the  Lord's 
gracious  help  to  both  Pastor  and  people.  In  the  introduction,  the  preacher  said  :— 
"  Looking  at  God's  hand  in  my  own  life,  and  acknowledging  that  hand  with  some 
record  of  thankfulness,  I,  your  minister,  brought  by  Divine  grace  to  preach  this 
morning  the  five  hundredth  of  my  printed  sermons,  consecutively  published  week  by 


c.    11.    STURGEON'S    AU  TOKIOGKAI'HY. 


week,  set  up  my  stone  of  Lbenezer  to  God.  I  th;mk  Him,  thank  Him  humbly,  but 
yet  most  joyfully,  for  all  the  help  and  assistance  given  in  studying  and  preaching-  the 
Word  to  these  mighty  congregations  by  the  voice,  and  afterwards  to  so  many  nations 
through  the  press.  I  set  up  my  pillar  in  the  form  of  this  sermon.  My  motto  this 
day  shall  be  the  same  as  Samuel's,  '  Hitherto  hath  the  Lord  helped  me  ;  '  and  as  the 
stone  of  my  praise  is  much  too  heavy  for  me  to  set  it  upright  alone,  I  ask  you,  my 
comrades  in  the  clay  of  battle,  my  fellow-labourers  in  the  vineyard  of  Christ,  to  join 
with  me  in  expressing  gratitude  to  God,  while  together  we  set  up  the  stone  of 
memorial,  and  say,  '  Hitherto  hath  the  Lord  helped  us.'  " 

On  such  an  occasion,  it  was  most  natural  to  contrast  the  calm,  quiet  worship  at  the 
Tabernacle  with  the  awful  turmoil  of  the  tragedy  at  the  Surrey  Gardens  :  —  "  We  have 
had  our  sorrows  as  a  church.  Shall  I  remind  you  of  our  black  and  dark  day  ?  Death 
came  into  our  windows,  and  dismay  into  our  hearts.  Did  not  almost  all  men  speak  ill 
of  us  ?  Who  would  give  us  a  good  word  ?  The  Lord  Himself  afflicted  us,  and  broke 
us  as  in  the  day  of  1  1  is  anger  ;  —  so  it  seemed  to  us,  then.  Ah,  God  !  Thou  knowest 
how  great  have  been  the  results  which  llowed  from  that  terrible  calamity,  but  from 
our  souls  the  memory  never  can  be  taken,  not  even  in  Heaven  itself.  In  the 
recollection  of  that  night  of  confusion,  and  those  long  weeks  of  slander  and  abuse, 
let  us  roll  a  great  stone  before  the  Lord,  and  let  us  write  thereon,  'Hitherto  hath 
the  Lord  helped  us.'  Little,  I  ween,  did  the  devil  gain  by  that  master-stroke  ;  small 
was  the  triumph  which  he  won  by  that  piece  of  malice.  Greater  multitudes  than 
ever  Hocked  to  listen  to  the  Word  ;  and  some  here,  who  otherwise  might  never  have 
attended  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  remain  as  living  monuments  of  God's  power  to 
save.  Of  all  evil  things  out  of  which  good  has  arisen,  we  can  always  point  to  the 
Surrey  Music  LI  all  catastrophe  as  one  of  the  greatest  goods  which  ever  befell  this 
neighbourhood,  notwithstanding  the  sorrows  which  it  brought." 

Another  reminiscence  carried  the  thoughts  of  the  congregation  back  to  "the 
boy-preacher's  "  iirst  service  in  London:  —  "The  greatness  of  our  work  compels  us 
to  confess  that  it  must  be  of  God,  and  of  God  alone.  And,  clear  friends,  we  see 
that  it  must  be  so  if  we  consider  the  little  with  which  we  be^an.  Jacob  said,  as  he 

O  J 

came  back  to  his  own  land,  '  With  my  staff  I  passed  over  this  Jordan  ;  now  I  am 
become  two  bands.'  Surely,  his  becoming  two  bands  must  have  been  of  God,  for 
he  had  nothing  but  his  staff.  And  do  not  some  few  of  you,  here  present,  remember 
one  morning  when  we  crossed  this  Jordan  with  a  staff?  Were  we  a  hundred  when 
first  I  addressed  you  ?  What  hosts  of  empty  pews  !  What  a  miserable  handful  of 
hearers  !  But  God  has  multiplied  the  people,  and  increased  the  joy,  till  we  have 
become,  not  only  two  bands,  but  many  bands  ;  and  multitudes  this  day  are  gathering 
to  hear  the  gospel  preached  by  the  sons  of  this  church,  begotten  of  us,  and  sent 
forth  by  us  to  minister  the  Word  of  life  in  many  towns  and  villages  throughout 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S   AUToi;ioc,RArnv.  Si 

the  kingdom.  Glory  be  to  God,  this  cannot  be  man's  work  !  What  effort,  made  by 
the  unaided  strength  of  man,  will  equal  this  which  has  been  accomplished  by  God? 
Let  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  therefore,  be  inscribed  upon  the  pillar  of  our  memorial. 
I  am  always  very  jealous  about  this  matter  ;  if  we  do  not,  as  a  church  and  con 
gregation,  if  we  do  not,  as  individuals,  always  give  God  the  glory,  it  is  utterly 
impossible  that  lie  should  continue,  to  work  by  us.  Many  wonders  have.  I  seen,  but 
I  never  yet  saw  a  man  who  arrogated  the  honour  of  his  work  to  himself,  whom  God 
did  not  leave  sooner  or  later." 

The  same  note  of  humble  and  hearty  gratitude  to  God  was  very  prominent  in 
the  discourse  delivered  in  the  Tabernacle  on  Lord's-day  morning,  May  3,  1863, 
after  the  Pastor  had  returned  from  a  preaching  tour  in  Holland: — "I  ask  for 
myself,  this  morning,  as  your  minister,  your  thanksgivings  to  be  mingled  with  mine 
in  blessing  God  lor  the  help  which  1 1 e  has  vouchsafed  to  me;  in  the  very  arduous 
work  of  the  last  fortnight.  Praise  be  to  God  for  the  acceptance  which  lie.  gave  me 
among  all  ranks  of  the  people  in  that  country!  I  speak  to  His  praise,  and  not  to 
my  own  ;  for  this  has  been  a  vow  with  me,  that,  if  God  will  give  me  a  harvest,  I  will 
not  keep  even  an  ear  of  it  myself,  but  He  shall  have  it  all.  I  found,  in  all  the 
places  where;  I  went,  great  multitudes  of  people  ; — crowds  who  could  not  understand 
the  preacher,  but  who  wanted  to  see  his  face,  because  God  had  blessed  his  trans 
lated  sermons  to  their  souls  ; — multitudes  who  gave.  me.  the  grip  of  brotherly 
kindness,  and,  with  tears  in  their  eyes,  invoked,  in  the  Dutch  language,  every 
blessing  upon  my  head.  I  hoped  to  preach  to  some  fifties  and  hundreds  ;  but, 
instead  of  that,  there  were  so  many  that  the  great  cathedrals  were  not  too  large. 
This  surprised  me  and  made  me  glad,  and  caused  me  to  rejoice  in  God,  and  I  ask 
you  to  rejoice;  with  me.  I  thank  God  for  the  acceptance  which  lie  gave  me  among 
all  classes  of  the  people.  While  the  poor  crowded  to  shake  hands,  till  they  almost 
pulled  me.  in  pieces,  it  pleased  God  to  move  the  heart  of  the  Oueen  of  Holland  to 
send  for  me,  and  lor  an  hour  and  a-quarter  I  was  privileged  to  talk  with  her  con 
cerning  the  things  which  make  for  our  peace.  I  sought  no  interview  with  her,  but 
it  was  her  own  wish  ;  and  then  I  lifted  up  my  soul  to  God  that  I  might  talk  of 
nothing  but  Ghrist,  and  might  preach  to  her  of  nothing  but  Jesus  ;  and  it  pleased 
the  Master  to  help  me,  and  I  left  that  very  amiable  lady,  not  having  shunned  to 
declare  to  her  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  Gratified  indeed  was  I  to  find  myself 
received  cordially  by  all  denominations,  so  that,  on  the  Saturday,  at  Amsterdam,  I 
preached  in  the  Mennonite  Ghurch  in  the  morning,  and  at  the  Old  Dutch  Reformed 
Church  in  the  evening  ;  the  next  Sunday  morning,  in  the  English  Presbyterian 

O     '  J  <T>  O  J 

Church,  and  then  again,  in  the  evening,  in  the  Dutch  Free  Church;  sometimes  in 
the  great  cathedrals,  as  in  the  Dom  Kirk,  at  Utrecht,  and  in  Peter's  Kirk,  at 


8->  r.    n.    STURGEON'S    AUTOIUOHRATMIV. 

Leyden,  not  having  the  poor  only,  but  the;  nobility  and  the  gentry  of  the-  land,  who 
of  course-  could  understand  Lnglish  better  than  those,  who  have  had  little  or  no 
opportunity  of  learning  it.  While  going  from  to\va  to  town,  I  lelt  the-  Master  helping 
me  continually  to  preach.  I  never  knew  such  elasticity  ol  spirit,  such  bounding  ol 
heart  in  my  life  before  ;  and  I  come  back,  not  wearied  and  tired,  though  preaching 
twice  every  day,  but  fuller  of  strength  and  vigour  than  when  I  set  out.  I  give  God 
the  glory  for  the  many  souls  1  have  heard  of  who  have  been  converted  through  the 
reading  of  the  printed  sermons,  and  tor  the  loving  blessings  oi  those  who  followed 
us  to  the-  water's  ed'^e  with  many  tears,  saying  to  me,  '  I  )o  thy  diligence  to  come 
again  before  winter,'  and  urging  me  once  more  to  preach  the  \\  ord  in  that  land. 
There  may  be  mingled  with  this  some  touch  of  egotism  ;  the  Lord  knoweth  whether 
it  be  so  or  not,  but  I  am  not  conscious  oi  it.  I  do  praise  and  bless  His  Name  that, 
in  a  hind  where  there;  is  so  much  philosophy,  lie  has  helped  me  to  preach  the  truth 
so  simply  that  1  never  uttered  a  word  ;is  a  mere,  doctrinalist,  but  1  preached  C  hrisl, 
and  nothing  but  Christ.  Rejoice  with  me,  my  dear  brethren;  my  loal  ot  praise  is 
too  great  lor  me  to  eat  it  all." 

In  many  respects,  the  most  memorable  service;  ever  held  in  the;  Tabernacle 
was  the  one;  on  Lord's-elay  morning,  June  5,  1804,  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached 
his  notable  sermon  on  "Baptismal  Regeneration,"  which  is  now  in  its  23Oth  thousand, 
ami  is  still  in  constant  demand.  Concerning  that  discourse,  the  preacher  wrote, 
more;  than  ten  years  afterwards  :—  -"  It  was  delivered  with  the  lull  expectation  that 
the  sale  of  the  sermons  woulel  receive  very  serious  injury  ;  in  (act,  1  mentioned  to 
one;  of  the;  publishers  that  I  was  about  to  destroy  it  at  a  single  blow,  but  that  the 
blow  must  be  struck,  cost  what  it  might,  for  the  burelen  of  the  Lord  lay  heavy  upon 
me',  ami  1  must  deliver  my  soul.  I  deliberately  counted  the  cost,  and  reckoned  upon 
the  loss  of  man}-  an  arelent  friend  and  helper,  and  I  expected  the  assaults  of  clever 
and  angry  foes.  I  was  not  mistaken  in  other  respects  ;  but,  in  the  matter  of  the 
sermons,  1  was  altogether  out  of  my  reckoning,  tor  they  increased  greatly  in  sale;  at 
once.  That  fact  was  not  in  any  degreie  to  me;  a  test  of  my  action  being  right  or  wrong  ; 
I  should  have;  felt  as  well  content  in  heart  as  I  am  now  as  to  the  tightness  ol 
my  course  had  the  publication  ceased  in  consequence  ;  but,  still,  it  was  satisfactory 
to  find  that,  though  speaking  out  might  lose  a  man  some  friends,  it  secured  him 
many  others  ;  and  if  it  overturned  his  influence  in  one  direction,  it  was  fully 
compensated  elsewhere.  No  truth  is  more;  sure  than  this,  that  the;  path  of  duty  is  to 
be  followed  thoroughly  if  peace  of  mind  is  to  be  enjoyed.  Results  are  not  to  be; 
looked  at  ;  we  are  to  keep  our  conscience;  clear,  come  what  may  ;  and  all  con 
siderations  of  influence  and  public  estimation  are  to  be;  light  as  leathers  in  the  scale. 
In  minor  matters,  as  well  as  in  more  important  concerns,  I  have  spoken  my  mind 


C.      II.     SPURfJKON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


fearlessly,  and  brought  down  objurgations  and  anathemas  innumerable  ;  but  I  in 
nowise  regret  it,  and  shall  not  swerve  from  the  use  of  outspoken  speech  in  the 
future  any  more  than  in  the  past.  I  would  scorn  to  retain  a  single  adherent  by  such 
silence  as  would  leave  him  under  any  misapprehension.  After  all,  men  love 
plain  speech." 

A  student  who  was  in  the  Pastors'  College  in  1864 — Mr.  Samuel  Blow — has 
preserved  this  interesting  reminiscence  of  the  day  following  the  great  deliverance;  :— 
It  was  the  custom  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  revise  his  sermons  on  Monday  mornings, 
and  then,  in  the  afternoon,  to  come  to  the  class-room,  and  question  us  on  history 
and  other  subjects  in  a  homely  and  friendly  way.  Entering  the,  room,  and  taking 
his  seat,  on  this  particular  occasion,  he  told  us  that  he  had  just  been  revising  this 
special  sermon,  and  IK;  was  certain  it  would  cause  a  great  stir  and  raise;  tremendous 
opposition  when  it  appeared  in  print.  lie  suggested  that,  instead  of  going  through 
the  usual  course  of  instruction,  we  might  devote  the  time  to  prayer,  so  the  whole  of 
that  afternoon  was  spent  in  supplicating  a  blessing  on  the  issue;  and  circulation 
of  that  remarkable  discourse  showing  the  absurdity  of  the  Baptismal  Regeneration 
theory." 

Now  that  a  whole  generation  has  passed  away  since  the  sermon  was  delivered, 
it  is  difficult  to  realize  the  sensation  which  was  caused  when  it  appeared  m  print,  and 
became  general!)'  known.  A  hundred  thousand  copies  of  it  were  speedily  sold,  and 
the  circulation  was  still  further  increased  by  the  many  replies  to  it  which  were:  before 
long  preached  and  published.  Three  weeks  alter  its  delivery,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
preached  from  Hebrews  xiii.  13,  "  Let  us  Go  Forth  ;"  and  in  quick  succession 
followed  two  more  special  discourses  in  continuation  ol  the  controversy,--  "Children 
Brought  to  Christ,  not  to  the  Font  ;"  and  "  '  Thus  Saith  the  Lord  ;  '  or,  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  Weighed  in  the  Balances  of  the  Sanctuary.  '  All  of  them  had  an 
immense  sale;,  and  as  each  one  was  issued,  it  elicited  answers  from  the  Church  of 
England  side.  Mr.  Spurgeon  collected  a  hundred  and  thirty-five  sermons  and 
pamphlets,  and  had  them  bound  in  three  large;  octavo  volumes  ;  and,  doubtless, 
others  gathered  together  similar  signs  and  tokens  of  the  fray.  One  such  set  after 
wards  came  into  the  Pastor's  hands,  and  he  found  in  it  several  contributions  which 
were  not  contained  in  his  own  series.  They  were  bound  in  two  substantial  volumes, 
and  were  evidently  the  result  of  the  sympathetic  labours  of  an  ardent  admirer,  who 
recorded  his  opinions  concerning  the  controversy  in  the  following  Preface  :  — "  In 
1864,  the  Rev.  C.  II.  Spurgeon  threw7  down  the  gauntlet  of  defiance  to  the  Church 
of  England  upon  the  point  of  Infant  Baptism  and  Regeneration  ;  when,  presto  !  such 
a  theological  battle  ensued  as  was  never  before  seen  or  heard  of.  The  whole 
religious  world  of  London  flung  itselt  into  it  ; — the  press  groaned  under  the  infliction  ; 
—the  pamphlets  which  followed,  pro  and  con,  in  prose  and  verse,  serious  and 


C.      II.      SI'URGKON  S     AUTOIHOCRAPIIY. 


burlesque,  being  almost  innumerable.      ()l  these,  I  have  collected  about  a  hundred,— 
including  twenty-eight  in  another  volume  ;  and,  to  commemorate  this  great  baptismal 
war,  I  have  here,  lor  a  frontispiece  to  my  gathering,  by  a  slight  improvement,  adapted 
this    Gitllivcrian    illustration,    which,    I    submit,    represents   the  great   Nonconformist 


c.  ii.  SI'URGI^ON  AS  "GULLIVER." 


champion  in  repose  after  his  victory,  but  playfully  offering  his  Brobdingnagian 
person  to  the  collected  attack  of  his  Lilliputian  opponents,  smilingly  conscious  that 
the  slightest  further  movement  on  his  part — a  kick  out—  or  an  upraised  arm — would 
annihilate  them  !  " 

That  Mr.  Spurgeon's  clerical  critics  were  by  no  means  Lilliputians,  is  manifest 
from  a  glance  at  the:  documents  they  produced  in  reply  to  his  discourses.  The 
names  of  many  of  them  are  quite  unknown  to  the  present  generation,  btit  others 
are  remembered  as  among  the  doughtiest  defenders  of  the  Establishment,  including 
Dean  Goode  (of  Ripon),  the  Revs.  Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.  (Manchester),  Hugh  Allen, 
D.D.,  Joseph  Barclsley,  M.A.,  Charles  Bullock,  Francis  Cruse,  B.A.,  and  J.  H. 
Titcomb,  M.A.,  together  with  Psedobaptist  Nonconformists,  such  as  Rev.  A. 
McAuslane  and  many  others.  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  by  no  means  left  to  fight  the 
battle  alone,  for  ranged  side  by  side  with  him  were  Dr.  Brock  (of  Bloomsbury 


c.    11.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  85 

Chapel),  Dr.  Landels  (of  Regent's  Park  Chapel),  Dr.  Haycroft  (of  Broaclmead 
Chapel,  Bristol),  and  Revs.  \V.  Barker  (Hastings),  T.  \V.  Medhurst  (Glasgow), 
Arthur  Mursell  (Manchester),  A.  A.  Rees  (Sunderland),  Burlington  B.  Wale 
(Plymouth),  D.  Katterns  (Hackney),  J.  W.  Genders  (Wandsworth),  R.  A.  Bellman, 
Edward  Leach,  and  Henry  Varley,  and  many  others  whose  names  may  not  have 
been  so  well  known.  In  the  Free  Trade  Hall,  Manchester,  Mr.  Mursell  gave,  in 
most  incisive  language,  a  scathing  criticism  of  an  article  on  "  The  Anabaptist  Caliban," 
in  The  Saturday  Review.  That  paper  at  various  times  assailed  Mr.  Spurgeon  with 
such  virulence  that,  on  one  occasion,  he  made  the  following  significant  declaration  :— 
"  I  always  like  to  have  the  hatred  of  The  Saturday  Review  and  the  love  of  God.  No 
movement  can  ever  hope  to  be  established  until  it  has  had  both."  Remembering 
the  character  of  many  of  the  attacks  made  in  its  pages  upon  the  Tabernacle  Pastor 
in  his  early  days,  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  one  of  his  artist  Iriends  altered  the  word 
"  Saturday"  into  "  Satanic  "  in  the:  accompanying  cartoon. 


C.    II.    SI'UKGEUM    AS    "  UKiiAT-llEAKT," 


I1..      II.      SI'UKelKOX's     AUTejiaoc-KANlY. 

It  was   a   surprise   aiul    a   disappointment  to  many   friends   of    Mr.    Spurgeon    to 

find  that  liis  protest  against  the  doctrine  of  Baptismal  Regeneration  was,  to  some 
extent  at  least,  weakened  by  a  published  letter  from  the  lion,  and  Rev.  Baptist 
\\  riothesley  Xoel,  M.A.,  who  had  himself  left  the  Church  ot  Knglanel,  and  become 
Pastor  oi  the  Baptist  Church  meeting  in  ]ohn  Street  Chapel,  Bedford  Row,  and 
whose  7:\s\svn'  ou  llic  i'nioii  of  C/ntrc/i  and  Slate  contained  quite  as  vigorous  a 
condemnation  ol  the  clergy  as  appeared  in  the  sermon  to  which  he  objected.  It  is 
generally  supposed,  and  was  officially  stated,  on  the-  authority  of  Mr.  Arnold,  the 
late  Secretary  of  the  Kvangelical  Alliance,  that  Mr.  Spurgeon's  withdrawn]  from 
that  body  was  the  result  of  Mr.  Baptist  Xoel's  letter;  but  the  following  paragraph 
in  'J lie  Sword  and  tlic  Trowel >  March,  1870,  puts  the  matter  in  its  true  light  :- 

"Our  readers  may  have  observed  a  letter  written  by  us  to  an  American  paper 
explaining  the  reason  why  we  cannot  attend  the  meeting  of  the  Evangelical 
Alliance  at  New  York.  \Ye  had  to  make  the  same  explanation  to  the  Hutch 
brethren  \\hni  the  Alliance  met  at  Rotterdam  ;  hut,  as  we  have  no  wish  to  disturb 
the:  peace  of  the  Alliance,  we  have  not  agitated  the  question.  It  may,  however,  be 
as  well  to  state  that,  about  the  time  when  Mr.  Xoel's  letter  appeared,  objecting  to 
certain  expressions  used  by  us  in  our  notorious  Baptismal  Regeneration  sermon,  we 
received  a  letter  from  Mr.  James  I  )a\  is,  the  secretary  of  the  Alliance,  setting  forth 
very  strongly  that  our  only  alternative  was  either  to  retract  our  harsh  language,  or 
to  withdraw  from  the  Alliance.  Knowing  Mr.  Xoel's  gentle  spirit,  we  should  not 
have  taken  much  notice  of  his  letter  had  we  not  been  led  to  suppose,  from  the 
epistle  of  the  secretary,  that  the  Committee  of  the  Alliance  were  of  the  same  mind; 
and  then,  not  being  able  to  retract  a  syllable  of  our  utterances,  and  being  unwilling 
to  embroil  the  Alliance:  in  our  conflict,  we  withdrew  from  it.  \\  e  have  since:  learned 
that  the  letter  was  unauthorized,  and  several  members  of  the  Alliance  Committee 
have  expressed  regret  that  we  acted  upon  it.  \Ye  are  in  this  state  ol  the  case 
absolutely  passive  ;  we  do  not  wish  to  revive  any  personal  question,  or  cause 
altercation  ;  only  it  is  clear  to  everyone  that,  tinder  the  circumstances,  neither 
manliness  nor  Christian  truthfulness  will  allow  us  to  attend  Alliance  gatherings  while 
we  are  practically  tinder  its  ban." 

Happily,  some  few  years  afterwards,  Mr.  Spurgeon  saw  his  way  to  rejoin  the 
Alliance,  ami  he:  remained  a  member  of  its  Council  until  he:  was  "called  home'  in 
1892.  On  main  occasions,  he1  spoke'  at  meetings  arranged  in  connection  with  the: 
Alliance:,  the  most  memorable  being  the:  great  gatherings  at  Kxeter  I  ball  and  the 
Mildmay  Conference:  Hall,  in  1888,  for  united  testimony  in  regard  to  fundamental 
truth,  just  at  the:  time  whe:n  the:  "  I  )own-graele  "  Controversy  was  at  its  height,  and 
thousanels  of  lovers  of  Kvangelical  doctrine  felt  the  need  of  a  clear  and  emphatic 
"declaration  of  those  things  which  are  most  surely  believed  among  us."  It  is  also 


C.     11.     Sl'UKeiKONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  o/ 

noteworthy  that,  in  the  circular  concerning  the  formation  of  the  Pastors'  College 
Evangelical  Association,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  : — "As  a  convenient  summary  of  faith, 
we  have  adopted,  wijih  certain  alterations  and  additions,  the  basis  of  the  Evangelical 
Alliance,  accepting  it  with  the  more  readiness  because  so  many  believers  of  various 
churches  have  been  content  thus  to  set  forth  the  main  points  of  their  agreement." 

The  Baptismal  Regeneration  Controversy  afforded  Or.  Campbell  the  oppor 
tunity  of  publishing  in  77/6'  British  Standard  a  series  of  articles,  which  extended 
over  seventeen  weeks,  and  were  afterwards  republished  in  a  volume  consisting  of 
330  small  octavo  pages.  In  the  Introduction,  he  explained  why  he  had  not  earlier 
taken  part  in  the  conflict: — "  It  was  known  to  many  that,  between  Mr.  Spurgeon 
and  myself,  there  had  long  been  an  intimate  and  cordial  friendship,  proofs  and 
illustrations  of  which,  on  my  part,  had  from  time  to  time  appeared  in  the  columns  of 
77/6'  ]>nlish  Standard,  and  other  publications  under  my  control.  In  his  early  days, 
I  stood  by  him,  when  his  advocates  in  the  press  were  neither  numerous  nor, 
with  one  or  t\vo  honourable  exceptions,  efficient,  while  his  adversaries  were  both 
unscrupulous  and  powerful.  Some  surprise  accordingly  was  felt,  by  our  mutual 
friends,  that  I  was  not  among  the  first  to  place  myself  at  his  side.  'They  were  at  a 
loss  to  account  for  my  seeming  apathy  ;  but,  in  this,  they  were  guided  by  feeling 
rather  than  by  judgment  ;  they  did  not  reflect  that  the  state  of  things  was  entirely 
altered.  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  no  longer  a  tender  sapling  that  might  receive;  benefit 
from  the  friendly  shade  of  an  elder  tree,  but  an  oak  of  the  forest,  whose  roots  had 
struck  deep  in  the  earth,  and  whose  thick  and  spreading  boughs  bade  defiance  to 
the  hurricane.  They  forgot  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  alone  was  more  than  a  match  for 
all  his  adversaries.  Besides,  a  passing  newspaper  article,  however  strong  or  telling, 
although  it  might  have  gratified  our  mutual  friends,  would  have  been  of  small 
importance  to  the  cause  which  I  had  so  much  at  heart,-  the  correction  and  purilica- 
tion  of  the  Liturgy  of  the  Established  Church.  .  .  .  That  subject  is  vital,  not  only 
to  her  real  usefulness,  but  to  her  very  existence  as  a  Protestant  Institution!  1  he 
universality  of  the  doctrine  of  Baptismal  Regeneration  will  be  the.  sure;  prelude  to  her 
overthrow,  and  the  re-establishment  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  with  all  her  darkness 
and  bondage,  misery  and  wickedness." 

The  service  at  the  Tabernacle;,  on  Lorel's-day  evening,  July  31,  1864,  was  a 
memorable  one  tej  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  two  of  his  hearers,  and  afterwards  to  many 
more  when  he:  relateel  a  singular  circumstance  which  occurred  in  connection  with  his 
sermon  that  night.  A  man,  living  in  Newington,  had  been  converted  through  the 
Pastor's  preaching,  and  he  became  a  regular  worshipper  at  the  Tabernacle.  His 
wife,  a  very  staunch  member  e)f  the  Church  of  England,  strongly  objected  to  his 


55  C.     II.     STURGEONS     AUTOJilOGKATHV. 

going;  l)iit  he  continued  to  attend  notwithstanding-  all  that  she  said.  One  Sabbath 
night,  alter  her  husband  had  gone  to  the  service,  her  curiosity  overcame  her 
prejudice,  and  she  herself  determined  to  go  to  hear  Mr.  Spurgoon.  Xot  wishing  to 
be  known,  sin;  tried  to  disguise  herself  by  putting  on  a  thick  veil  and  a  heavy  shawl, 
and  sought  still  further  to  avoid  observation  by  ascending  to  the  upper  gallery.  She 
was  very  late  in  reaching-  the  building  ;  so,  just  as  she  entered,  the  preacher  was 
announcing  his  text,  and  the  first  words  that  sounded  in  her  ears  were  strikingly 
appropriate  to  her  case,  especially  as  she:  declared  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  pointed  directly 
at  her  as  he  said,  "Come  in,  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam  ;  why  feignest  thou  thyself  to  be 
another?"  This  singular  coincidence  further  impressed  her  when,  in  the  course  of 
his  sermon,  the  Pastor  said  : — "While  thus  speaking  about  the  occasional  hearer,  an 
idea  haunts  my  mind  that  I  have  been  drawing  somebody's  portrait.  I  think  there 
are  some  here  who  have  had  their  character  and  conduct  sketched  out  quite 
accurately  enough  for  them  to  know  who  is  meant.  Do  remember  that,  if  the 
description  lits  you,  it  is  intended  lor  you  ;  and  if  you  yourself  have  been  described, 
do  not  look  about  among  your  neighbours,  and  say,  '  I  think  this  refers  to  somebody 
else.'  li  it  applies  to  you,  take  it  home  to  \ourself;  and  may  (iod  impress  it  upon 
your  conscience,  so  that  you  cannot  get  rid  of  it  !  ...  I  do  not  suppose  there  -is 
anybody  here  disguised  as  to  dress  to-night,  though  such  a  thing  has  happened  before 
now;  but,  whoever  you  may  be,  disguised  or  not,  it  is  no  use  to  try  to  hide  your 
identity  where  God's  gospel  is  preached.  It  is  a  quick  discerner,  and  will  find  out 
tin-  thoughts  and  intents  ol  the  heart.  It  will  search  you  out,  and  unmask  your  true 
character,  disguise;  yourscll  as  \ou  may." 

\\  hen  the  husband  reached  home,  the  woman  revealed  her  secret,  and  said  that 
he  must,  somehow,  have  let  Mr.  Spurgeon  know  that  she  was  up  in  the  gallery  ol 
the  Tabernacle.  The  good  man  assured  her  that  he  was  quite  innocent,  but  she 
would  not  be  convinced.  The  next  dav,  when  he  saw  the  Pastor,  he  told  him  what 
a  hard  time  he  was  having'  through  his  wife's  singular  experience  the  previous 
evening,  and  then  added,  "  And  I  have  a  bone  to  pick  with  you  on  my  own  account  ; 
for  if  s/ic  was  the  wife  of  Jeroboam,  then  /  must  be  Jeroboam  himself,  and  that  is 
not  a  very  complimentary  name  to  be  given  to  me."  The  sermon  is  entitled,  "  A 
Hearer  in  Disguise." 

o 

At  the  Monday  evening  prayer-meeting  at  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  related  the 
foregoing  incident,  he  also  mentioned  the  sermon  at  Kxeter  Hall,  in  which  he 
suddenly  broke  off  from  his  subject,  and,  pointing  in  a  certain  direction,  said, 

*  It  is  remarkable  that  an  alna.st  exactly  similar  incident  occurred,  several  years  before,  \vhen  Mr.  Spurgeon  \vas 
preaching  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel.  On  that  occasion,  it  was  the  wife  of  a  very  eminent  London  doctor  who  wished  to 
hear  the  young  preacher  without  being  recognized;  so  she  also  had  disguised  herself,  as  she  thought,  effectually,  but  she  was 
greatly  surprised  when  she  heard  the  announcement  of  the  text  \\hi.ii  was  .->u  singularly  suitable  to  her:  "Come  in,  thou 
wife,  of  Jeroboam;  why  feignest  thou  thyself  to  be  another?" 


C.      11.     bl'UKUKUN  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  89 

"  Young  man,  those  gloves  you  are  wearing  have  not  been  paid  for  ;  you  have  stolen 
them  from  your  employer."  At  the  close  of  the  service,  a  young  man,  looking  very 
pale  and  greatly  agitated,  came  to  the  room  which  was  used  as  a  vestry,  and  begged 
for  a  private  interview  with  Mr.  Spurgeon.  On  being  admitted,  he  placed  a  pair  of 
gloves  upon  the  table,  and  tearfully  said,  "  It's  the  first  time  I  have  robbed  my 
master,  and  I  will  never  do  it  again.  You  won't  expose  me,  sir,  will  you  ?  It  would 
kill  my  mother  if  she  heard  that  I  had  become  a  thief."  The  preacher  had  drawn  the 
bow  at  a  venture,  but  the  arrow  struck  the  target  for  which  God  intended  it,  and  the 
startled  hearer  was,  in  that  singular  way,  probably  saved  from  committing  a 


greater  crime. 


A  service  which  became  more  memorable  after  several  years  had  elapsed  was 
the  one  held  on  Lord's-day  morning,  August  4,  1867,  when  the  Pastor  preached 
from  Job  xiv.  14  :  "All  the  days  of  my  appointed  time  will  I  wait,  till  my  change 
come."  After  the  murder  of  President  James  A.  Garfield,  in  September,  1881,  his 
widow  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  : — <"  It  is  choice  treasure  from  my  storehouse  of 
beautiful  memories,  that  I  sat  beside  General  Garfield  in  the  Metropolitan  Taber 
nacle,  one  bright  summer  Sunday  morning  (August  4,  1867),  and  listened  to  your 
voice.  I  have  this  morning  re-read  from  his  journal  his  account  of  that  day.  A 
sentence  from  it  may  interest  you.  After  describing  his  impressions  of  the  great 
audience,  of  the  preacher,  and  of  the  sermon,  he  adds  : — 'God  bless  Mr.  Spurgeon  ! 
He  is  helping  to  work  out  the  problem  of  religious  and  civil  freedom  for  England 
in  a  way  that  he  knows  not  of' 

One  passage  in  the  discourse  was  specially  appropriate  to  the:  hundreds  of 
Americans,  and  other  strangers  irom  across  the  seas,  who  were  present:--  '  I  he 
Christian  life:  should  be  one  of  waiting  ;  that  is,  holding  with  a  loose  hand  all  earthly 
tilings.  Many  travellers  are  among  us  this  morning  ;  they  are  passing  from  one 
place  to  another,  viewing  divers  countries  ;  but  as  they  are  only  travellers,  and  are 
soon  to  return  to  their  homes,  they  do  not  speculate  in  the  various  businesses  of 
Lombard  Street  or  Cheapside.  They  do  not  attempt  to  buy  large  estates,  and  lay 
them  out,  and  make  gold  and  silver  thereby  ;  they  know  that  they  are  only  strangers 
and  foreigners,  and  they  act  as  such.  They  take  such  interest  in  the  af lairs  of  the 
country  in  which  they  are  sojourning  as  may  be  becoming  in  those  who  are  not 
citizens  of  it  ;  they  wish  well  to  those  among  whom  they  tarry  for  a  while  ;  but  that 
is  all,  for  they  are  going  home,  therefore  they  do  not  intend  to  hamper  themselves 
with  an)  thing  that  might  make  it  difficult  for  them  to  depart  from  our  shores." 

On  Thursday  evening,  April  16,  1868,  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  at  the  Tabernacle 
the  annual  sermon  for  the  Young  Men's  Association  in  aid  of  the  Baptist  Missionary 


9^  C.      11.      Sl'UR(JEUJS:  S     AUTUIJIOGKAI'UV. 

Society.  Ilis  text  was,  Acts  ii.  17:  "Your  young  men  shall  see  visions."  As  a 
young  man,  speaking  to  young  men,  the  preacher  claimed  his  right  to  see  visions; 
and  amongst  the:  rest  was  this  one  of  a  very  practical  character  :—"  Suppose  that 
there:  should  be  a  number  of  young  men  here  who  know  each  other  very  well,  young 
men  who  have  been  trained  in  the  same  sanctuary,  nurtured  in  the  same  church, 
who  should  meet  together  to-morrow,  or  at  such  other  time  as  shall  be  convenient, 
and  say  to  one  another,  '  Now,  we  are  in  business,  we  have  just  commenced  in  life, 
and  Cod  is  prospering  us,  more  or  less  ;  we  are  taking  to  ourselves  wives  ;  our 
children  are  coming  around  us  ;  but,  still,  we  trust  we  arc:  never  going  to  permit 
ourselves  to  be  swallowed  up  in  a  mere  worldly  way  of  living;  now,  what  ou^ht  we 
to  do  for  missions?'  And  suppose  the  enquiry  should  be  put,  'Is  there  one: 
amongst  us  who  could  go  and  teach  the  heathen  lor  us?'  As  we,  most  of  us,  may 
not  have  the  ability,  or  do  not  Icel  called  to  the  work,  is  there  one  out  ol  twelve 
oi  us  young  men,  who  have  grown  side  by  side  in  the  Sunday-school,  who  has  the 
ability,  and  who  leels  called  to  go  ?  Let  us  make  it  a  matter  ol  prayer,  and  when 
the  Holy  Ghost  saith,  'Separate  So-and-so  to  the  work,'  then  we,  the  other  eleven 
who  remain,  will  do  this, — we  will  say  to  him,  '  Now,  brother,  you  cannot  stop  at 
home  to  make  your  fortune  or  to  earn  a  competence  ;  you  art:  now  giving  yoursell  up 
to  a  very  arduous  and  difficult  enterprise,  and  we  will  support  you  ;  we  know  you, 
and  we  have  confidence  in  you  ;  you  go  down  into  the  pit,  we  will  hold  the:  rope  ;  go 
forth  in  connection  with  our  own  denominational  Society,  but  we  will  bear  the 
expense  year  by  year  among  ourselves!  Have  you  faith  enough  to  go  trusting  that 
the:  Lord  will  provide?  Then,  we  will  have  laith  enough,  and  generosity  enough,  to 
say  that  your  wants  shall  be  our  care  ;  you  preach  for  Christ,  we  will  make  money 
lor  Christ  ;  when  you  open  the  Bible  lor  Christ,  \ve  will  be  taking  down  the  shop 
shutters  lor  Christ  ;  and  while  you  are  unfolding"  the  banner  ol  Christ's  love,  we  will 
be  unfolding  the  calicoes,  or  selling  the  groceries  ;  and  we  pledge  ourselves  always  to 
set  aside  your  portion,  because:,  as  our  brother,  you  are:  doing  our  work.'  1  wish 
we  had  such  godly  clubs  as  these,— holy  confederacies  of  earnest  young  men  who 
thus  would  love  their  missionary,  feel  lor  him,  he:ar  from  him  continually,  and 
undertake:  to  supply  the:  means  for  his  support.  \\  hy,  on  such  a  plan  as 
that,  1  should  think  they  would  give  fifty  times,  or  a  hundred  times,  as  much  as  ever 
they  are  likely  to  give  to  an  impersonal  Society,  or  to  a  man  whose  name  they  only 
know,  but  whose  lace:  the:y  never  sa\v.  I  wonder  whether  I  shall  ever  live:  te>  see'  a 
club  e>f  that  kinel  ;  I  wonder  whether  such  an  association  will  ever  be  formed  by 
members  of  this  church,  or  of  any  of  the  churches  in  London.  11  it  shall  be  so,  I 
shall  be  glad  te>  have  seen  a  vision  of  it." 

Happily,  the:  Pastor  did  live  to  see  something  closely  resembling  the  realization 
of    his    vision.        In     1875,    the    leader    oi     one    ol   the    Tabernacle    Bible-classes — 


c.    11.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY'.  91 

Mr.  Stephen  Wigney — undertook  the  responsibility  of  raising  ^50  a  year  towards 
the  support  of  Mr.  G.  F.  Easton,  in  connection  with  the  China  Inland  Mission  ;  and 
year  after  year,  down  to  the  present  time,  the  teacher  and  his  class  have  continued 
to  raise  that  amount.  More  recently,  by  the  introduction  of  the  system  of 
"  Missionary  circles"  and  "Carey's  penny",  the  number  of  Tabernacle  missionaries 
thus  maintained  has  been  considerably  increased. 

Many  who  are  no  longer  young  can  recall  a  notable  Tuesday  evening,— 
March  2,  1869, — when  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  in  the  Tabernacle  to  several 
thousands  of  children.  It  was  remarkable  as  being  one  ot  the  very  few  occasions 
on  which  the  young  people  of  the  congregation  and  ol  the  Sunday-schools  were 
assembled  specially  by  themselves.  The  text  was,  Psalm  Ixxi.  17:  "  O  God,  Thou 
hast  taught  me  from  mv  youth  ;  '  and  the  sermon  was  one  that  boys  and  girls  could 

<±>  J      J  s  <j 

easily  understand  and  remember.  It  contained  an  unusually  large  number  of 
anecdotes  and  illustrations,  and  in  the  course  of  it  Mr.  Spurgeon  put  several 
questions  to  his  youthful  auditors,  which  they  answered  promptly,  and  on  the  whole 
accurately.  A  brief  extract  will  show  the  style  of  the  sermon: — "Why  should  we 
go  to  God's  school  early  ?  I  think  we  ought  to  do  so,  first,  because  it  is  such  a 
lia/if>\  school.  Schools  used  to  be  very  miserable  places  ;  but,  nowadays,  I  really 
wish  I  could  go  to  school  again.  I  went  into  the  Borough  Road  School,  the  other 
day,  into  the  Repository,  where  they  sell  slates,  and  pencils,  and  books,  and  all  such 
things.  The  person  who  was  there  opened  a  box,  and  said  to  me,  '  I  )o  you  want 
to  buy  any  of  these  things?'  I  said,  'What  are  they  ?  Why,  they  are  toys,  are 
they  not?'  lie  answered,  'No,  they  are  not  toys:  they  are  used  for  the  lessons 
that  are  taught  in  the  kindergarten  school.'  I  said,  '  Why,  if  I  were  to  take  them 
home,  my  boys  would  have  a  game  with  them,  for  they  are  only  toys.'  'Just  so,' 
he  replied,  'but  they  are  what  are  used  in  the  kindergarten  school  to  make 
learning  the  same  as  playing,  so  that  little  children  should  play  while  they  are 
learning.'  Why,  I  thought,  if  that  were  so,  I  should  like  to  go  at  once!  Now, 
those  who  go  to  God's  school  are  made  much  more,  happy  than  any  toy  can 
make  chikli^i.  lie  gives  them  real  pleasure.  There  is  a  verse,  —  I  don't  know 
how  many  oi  you  can  repeat  it,  —I  will  say  the  hrst  line;  you  say  the  second, 
ii  you  can. 

"  Mr.  STURGEON  : — ' 'Tis  religion  that  can  give  '- 

"The  CHILDREN  : — 'Sweetest  pleasures  while  we  live  ;' — • 

"  Mr.  STURGEON  : — '  'Tis  religion  must  supply  '- 

"The  CHILDREN  : — '  Solid  comfort  when  we  die.' 

"  Mr.  STURGEON  : — Yes,  we  made  that  out  very  well  between  us.  Then,  let  us 
be  off  to  God's  school  early,  because  it  is  such  a  happy  school." 


Mr.  Spurgeon  delivered  a  similar  discourse,  to  a  congregation  of  children  on 
Lord's-clay  afternoon,  February  20,  1871,  only  on  that  occasion  his  subject  consisted 
ol  Dr.  lloratius  Bonar's  hymn,  beginning.— 

"I  lay  my  sins  on  Jesus, 
The  spotless  Lam!)  of  God." 

In  the-  course:  ol  his  remarks,  the:  Pastor  maele:  the:  following  refe.rence  to  an 
object-lesson  which  he  had  given  to  the:  chilelren  many  years  before;:  "  It  is  a  long 
while  ago  since;  I  gave  an  aeldress  on  a  Sunday  afternoon  ;  but  I  daresay  some  of 
you,  who  are  growing  into  young  men  and  voting  women,  recollect  that  I  brought  a 
large  piece:  ol  scarlet  cloth  to  show  to  you.  I  hael  askeel  my  dear  wife  to  have  it 
tested,  anel  it  had  been  boiled  ever  so  many  times  ;  anel  it  had  been  soaked  in  water 
ever  so  long  before  I  brought  it  here-.  I  could  hardly  tell  you  how  much  it  had  been 
rinsed,  and  rubbed,  anel  scrubbeel,  and  boiled.  It  was  reel  when  it  went  into  the 
coppe-r,  and  it  was  quite  as  red  when  it  came  out;  the:  colour  could  not  be  taken  out 
ol  it.  I  have  heard  that  red  rags  cannot  be:  made  into  any  sort  of  paper  except  that 
red  blotting-paper  that  we  use,  for  this  reason,  that  men  cannot  get  the  colour  out. 
'1  hat  is  just  like  our  sins;  they  are  upon  us  like  bright  reel  stains,  we  cannot  get 
them  out,  do  what  we:  may,  apart  from  the:  Lorel  Jesus  Christ  ;  but  if  we;  are:  washed 
in  His  precious  blood,  we  become  as  white:  as  snow.  Not  only  does  the:  crimson 
colour  go,  but  not  so  much  as  a  spot  remains." 

Towards  the  close:  ol  the:  sermon,  Mr.  Spurgeon  relateel  to  the:  children  this 
interesting  reminiscence:  ol  his  boyhood  :— "  Now  the:  last  wish  is,  - 

"  '  I  long  to  be  li'ith  Jesus.' 

I  hat  is  the  best  of  all.  But,  dear  boys  and  girls,  you  cannot  sing  that  in  your 
hearts  unless  you  carry  out  the:  first  part  of  the;  hymn,  for  we  cannot  be:  with  Jesus 
till  lirst  He  has  taken  upon  Himself  our  sins,  and  made;  us  like  Himself.  1  do  not 
think  man\-  of  you  go  to  a  boarding-school,  but  I  know  what  I  useel  to  do  when  1 
was  at  a  school  of  that  kinel.  I  wantexl  to  get  home:  for  the;  holidays  ;  anel  six  weeks 
before  breaking-up  time  came,  I  maele  a  little  almanack.  There  was  one  square  for 
every  day  ;  and,  as  the  days  passe-el,  I  used  to  mark  them  over  with  my  pern,  anel 
make  them  black.  Didn't  I  like:  to  se:e  them  getting  blotted!  First  I  said,  'There 
are  only  live  weeks  and  six  days  be: fore  the:  holidays  come:,'  then  it  was,  '  live  weeks 
anel  five  days,'  anel  then,  'live  weeks  anel  lour  days,'  anel  se>  on,  till  it  was  within  a 
fortnight  ol  the  vacation,  anel  then  I  began  to  feel  that  it  was  almost  time  to  go  home'. 
\em  see,  I  was  longing  to  go  home  ;  and  that  is  how  you  and  I  will  feel  when  we: 
become  like  Jesus,  we  shall  long  to  be  with  Jesus,  where  saints  anel  angels  sing  His 
i)raises  for  ever.  But,  in  order  to  be  able  to  look  at  death  in  that  light,  we  must  lirst 

1  O 

lay  our  sins  on  Jesus." 


C.      II.      STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


93 


Both  these  discourses  are  published  in  neat  booklets,  which  would  make  most 
useful  presents  to  children  and  you  no-  people,  many  of  whom  might,  throuo-h 
reading-  them,  be  led  to  trust  the  Saviour,  and  so  go— 

"  To  be  with  Jesus, 
Amid  the  Heavenly  throng." 

(How  vividly  this  incident  in  my  husband's  boyhood  recalls  a  similar  one  in 
much  later  clays.  He  had  been  working  at  high  pressure  for  a  long  time,  and  was 
greatly  needing  a  rest.  The  time  for  the  proposed  holiday  was  fixed  far  in  advance, 
and  he  looked  forward  to  it  with  feverish  impatience.  It  was  referred  to  at  all  meal 
times  ;  and  one  day  he  said  to  me,  "  Wifey,  I  wish  I  had  a  piece  of  string  marked, 
and  put  in  some  prominent  place,  so  that  I  could  cut  off  each  day  as  it  passes." 

I  immediately  prepared  a  length  of  tape,  with  all  the  dates  plainly  written  on 
it,  and  attached  it  to  the  chandelier  which  overhung  the  dining-table.  It  certainly 
was  not  an  ornament  to  the  room,  but  it  gave  him  exceeding  pleasure  to  clip  off  a 
piece  ot  it  day  by  clay  ;  so  nobody  cared  how  it  looked,  if  he  were  gratified.  It 
was  very  long  when  first  put  up,  and  he  took  as  much  delight  as  a  little  child  would 
have  done  in  watching  it  gradually  grow  shorter. 

Friends  would  stare  at  it  in  wonder  and  curiosity,  especially  if  they  happened 
to  be  there  at  dividing  time,  when  the  scissors  were  produced,  and  with  all  clue 
ceremony  the  symbol  of  the  flight  of  another  twenty-four  hours  was  snipped  off. 
Some  laughed,  some  joked,  some  criticised  ;  but  he  steadily  persevered  in  his  task 
until  only  an  inch  or  two  of  the  recording  line  was  left  hanging  in  its  place,  and  we 
began  to  make  preparations  for  the  long-clesired  journey. 

Alas,  for  those  plans  of  ours  which  do  not  run  parallel  with  God's  will  !  My 
beloved  became  seriously  ill  when  but  a  few  clays  remained  on  the  register,  and  that 
pathetic  morsel  of  tape  was  cut  clown  and  removed,  amidst  tears  of  disappointment 
and  sorrow  for  his  sake.  A  sad  period  of  suffering  ensued,  and  one  day  he  said, 
:<  Wifey,  we  will  never  clo  that  again  ;  it  will  be  better,  in  future,  patiently  to  wait 
for  the  unfolding  of  God's  purposes  concerning  us.") 

Many  other  memorable  services  were  held  in  the  Tabernacle  during  the  period 
covered  by  this  chapter,  some  of  which  may  be,  mentioned  subsequently  ;  but  space 
can  only  be  spared  here  for  a  brief  notice  of  the  discourse  which  was  delivered  by 
Mr.  Spurgeon  on  June  14,  1874, — the  Sabbath  before  his  fortieth  birthday.  Tin- 
text  was,  Deuteronomy  ii.  7  :  "  For  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee  in  all  the 
works  of  thy  hand  ;  He  knoweth  thy  walking  through  this  great  wilderness  :  these 
forty  years  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  been  with  thee,  thou  hast  lacked  nothing  ;  "  and 
the  sermon  was  largely  autobiographical.  One  of  the  most  characteristic  passages 
was  the  following  : — "The  work  of  some  of  us  has  been  to  preach  the  gospel  ;  and 


94  C.      II.      SPURGKON S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

if  the  Lord  had  given  us  a  few  scores  of  conversions,  we  would  have,  loved  Him  for 
ever  ;  but  inasmuch  as  He  has  given  us  thousands  upon  thousands  of  converts,  how 
shall  we.  find  language  with  which  to  praise  Him?  He.  has  blessed  the  work  of  our 
hands,  so  that  a  vast  church  has  been  gathered,  and  many  smaller  ones  have  sprung 
from  it  ;  one  enterprise  has  been  taken  up,  and  then  another  ;  one  labour  which 
seemed  beyond  our  power  has  been  achieved,  and  then  another,  and  yet  another; 
and  at  His  leet  we  la}'  the  crown.  1  must  confess  my  Lord's  special  favour  towards 
me,  the  very  stones  in  the  street  would  cry  out  against  me  if  1  did  not.  Brethren, 
you  have  had  a  share  in  the  blessing",— have  a  share  also  in  the  praising. 
Enemies  have  arisen,  and  they  have  been  exceedingly  violent,  only  to  fulfil  sonic 
special  purpose  ot  God,  and  increase  our  blessing  against  their  will.  Sickness  has 
come,  only  to  yield  discipline  ;  we  have  been  made  weak  that  we  might  become 
strong,  and  brought  to  death's  door  that  we  might  know  more  of  the  1  )ivine  life. 
Glory  be  to  God,  our  hie  has  been  all  blessing  from  beginning  to  end;  ever  since 
we  knew  Him,  lie  has  dealt  out  blessing,  and  blessing,  and  blessing,  and  never  a 
syllable  of  cursing.  lie  has  fulfilled  to  us  the  word,  'Surely  blessing  I  will  bless 
thee,  and  multiplying  1  will  multiply  thee.'  ' 


Of  all  the,  memorable  services  away  from  the  Tabernacle,  the.  most  notable- 
were  those:  held  on  the  five  Lord's-day  mornings,  March  24  to  April  21,  1867,  in  the 
Agricultural  Hall,  Islington.  It  is  difficult  to  tell  the  exact  number  of  persons 
present, — the  estimates  ranging  from  twelve  to  t\\ent\  five  thousand; — but  the: 
congregations  were  the  largest  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  ever  addressed  in  any  building 
\vith  the  exception  of  the  Fast-day  service  at  the  Crystal  Palace. 

Not  only  were  great  crowds  of  hearers  attracted,  but  the  Word  preached 
was  blessed  to  very  many  of  them,  some  of  whom  joined  the  neighbouring 
churches,  while  others  found  a  spiritual  home  at  the  Tabernacle.  The  text  on  the 
first  morning  was  Matthew  xxi.  28 — 32,  and  in  introducing  his  subject,  the  preacher 
said  : — "  The  sight  of  this  vast  arena,  and  of  this  crowded  assembly,  reminds  me  of 
other  spectacles  which,  in  days  happily  long  past,  were  seen  in  the  amphitheatres  of 
the  old  Roman  Empire.  Around,  tier  upon  tier,  were  the  assembled  multitude's, 
with  their  cruel  eyes  and  iron  hearts  ;  and  in  the  centre:  stood  a  solitary,  friendless 
man,  waiting  till  the  doors  of  the  lion's  de:n  should  be  uplifted,  that  he  might  yield 
himself  -up  a  witness  for  Christ  and  a  sacrifice  to  the  popular  fury.  There  would 
have  been  no  difficulty  then  to  have  divided  the  precious  from  the  vile  in  that 
audience.  The  most  thoughtless  wayfarer,  who  should  enter  the  amphitheatre, 
would  know  at  once  who  was  the  disciple  of  Christ  and  who  were  the  enemies  of 
the  Crucified  One.  There  stood  the  bravely-calm  disciple,  about  to  die,  but  all 


C.      II.     SPUJUJKON  S     AUTOmOr.RArilV. 


95 


around,  in  those  mighty  tiers  of  the  Colosseum,  or  of  the  amphitheatre  of  some 
provincial  to\vn,  as  the  case  might  l)e,  there  sat  matrons  and  nobles,  princes  and 
peasants,  plebeians  and  patricians,  senators  and  soldiers,  all  ga/ing  downward  with 
the  same  fierce:,  unpitying  look,  vociferous  in  the  joy  with  which  they  beheld  the 
agonies  of  a  disciple  of  the  hated  Galilean,  'butchered  to  make  a  Roman  holiday.' 

"  Another  sight  is  before  us  to-day,  with  much  more  happy  associations;  but, 
alas  !  it  is  a  far  more;  difficult  task  this  day  to  separate-  the  chall  Irom  the  wheat. 
Here,  in  this  spacious  arena,  I  hope  there  are  hundreds,  il  not  thousands,  who 
would  be  prepared  to  die  for  our  Lord  Jesus,  if  such  a  sacrifice  were  required  of 
them  ;  and  in  yonder  crowded  seats,  we  may  count  by  hundreds  those,  who  bear  the 
Name  and  accept  the  gospel  of  Jesus  of  Xaxareth  ;  and  yet,  I  (ear  me  that,  both  in 
these  living  hills  on  either  side,  and  upon  this  vast  lloor,  then!  are  many  enemies  oi 


C.    H.    SPURGKON    PREACHING    IN    TIIK    AGRICl'I.  IT  K  AL    HALL,    ISLINGTON. 

the  Son  of  God,  who  are  forgetful  oi   His  righteous  claims,  who  have  cast  from  them 

C3  «— > 

those  'cords  of  a  man'  which  should  bind  them  to  His  throne,  and  have  never 
submitted  to  the  mighty  love  which  showed  itself  in  His  cross  and  in  His  wounds. 
1  cannot  attempt  the  separation.  You  must  grow  together  until  the;  harvest.  To 
divide  you  were  a  task  which,  at  this  hour,  angels  could  not  perform  ;  but  which, 
one  day,  the-.y  will  easily  accomplish,  when,  at  their  Master's  bidding,  the  harvest 


()  )  C.      II.      SI'URCKON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

be:ing  conies,  they  shall  gather  together  first  the  tares  in  bundles  to  burn  them,  and 
afterwards  the  wheat  into  Jehovah's  barn.  I  shall  not  attempt  the  division,  but  I 
ask  each  man  to  make;  it  for  himself  in  his  own  case.  I  say  unto  you,  young  men 
and  maidens,  old  men  and  lathers,  this  day  examine  yourselves  whether  you  be 
in  the  faith. 

"Let  no  one  take  it  for  granted  that  he  is  a  Christian  because  he  has  helped 
to  swell  the:  numbers  of  a  worshipping  assembly.  Let  no  man  judge-  his  fellcnv, 
but  let  each  of  us  judge  himself.  To  every  one:  of  you  1  say,  with  deepest  earnest 
ness,  let  a  division  be  made  by  your  conscience,  and  let  your  understandings 
separate  between  him  that  feareth  Cod  and  him  that  leareth  Ilim  not.  Though  no 
man  clothed  in  linen,  with  a  writer's  inkhorn  by  his  side,  shall  go  through  the  midst 
of  you,  to  set  a  mark  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  men  that  sigh  and  cry  lor  all  the 
abominations  of  this  city,  let  conscience  take  the  inkhorn,  and  honestly  make  the 
mark,  or  le>ave  the  favoured  sis.ni  unmade,  and  let  each  man  question  himsell,  this 
morning,  'Am  I  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  Am  1  for  Christ,  or  lor  1  i  is  enemies?  Do  I 
gather  with  Him,  or  elo  1  scatter  abroad?'  'Divide!  divide!'  they  cry  in  the 
I  louse  of  Commons;  let  us  say  the  same  in  this  threat  congregation  this  day. 
Political  divisions  are  but  trilles  compared  with  the  all-important  distinction  which 
1  would  have  you  consider.  Divide  as  you  will  be  divided  to  the  right  and  to  the: 
left  in  the  great  day  when  Christ  shall  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  Divide:  as 
you  will  be  divided  when  the  bliss  of  1  leaven,  or  the  woes  ol  hell,  shall  be  ye>ur 
everlasting  poru<  >n." 


CHAPTER    LXVI. 


Hemintsctnrts  of  Jfowp 

BY   MRS.   C.   H.  SPURGEON. 


The  everlasting  hills,  "  buildings  of  God,  not  made  with  hands,"  transcend  the  noblest  works  of 
men,  not  only  in  their  natural  majesty,  but  in  their  power  to  stir  the  finest  feelings  of  our  manhood. 
One  hour  alone  on  some  flowery  steep,  with  the  snow-clad  summits  all  around,  the  glacier  below,  and 
the  world  of  care  far  away,  is  better  than  a  century  of  the  gaieties  of  fashion,  or  the  pomp  of  state; 
this  we  have  seen,  and  do  testify.—  C.  H.  S. 

Some  people  never  smile.  Dear  souls  !  They  pull  the  blinds  down  on  Sunday.  They  are  sorry 
that  the  flowers  are  so  beautiful,  and  think  that  they  ought  to  have  been  whitewashed  ;  they  almost  believe 
that,  it  the  garden  beds  were  of  a  little  more  sombre  colour,  it  would  be  an  improvement.  I  have 
known  some  persons,  whom  I  very  greatly  respect,  talk  in  this  fashion.  One  good  brother,  whose 
hoe-latchet  1  am  not  worthy  to  unloose,  said,  on  one  occasion,  that  when  he  went  up  the  Rhine,  he 

is  eyes,  and  never  looked  at  the  rocks,  or  the  old  castles,  or  the  flowing  river,  he  was  so  taken  up 
wiili  higher  things  !  lint,  to  me,  nature  is  a  looking-glass,  in  which  I  see  the  face  of  God.  I  delight  to 
gaze  abroad,  and  — 

"Look  through  nature  up  to  nature's  God." 

Yet  that  was  all  unholiness  to  him.     I  do  not  understand  that  kind  of  thing;  I  have  no  sympathy  with 
e  who  look  upon  this  material  world  as  though  it  were  a  very  wicked  place,  and  as  if  there  were 
lere  no  trace  whatever  of  the  Divine  hand,  no  proofs  of  the  Divine  wisdom,  and  no  manifestations  of 
the  Divine  care.     I  think  we  may  delight  ourselves  in  the  works  of  God,  and  find  much  pleasure  therein. 
2  really  brought  nearer  to  God  Himself  by  considering  His  wondrous  works.-C.  H.  S. 

N  "the  fifties  and  sixties,"  travelling-  was  not  so  universally  indulged 
in  as  it  is  now,  and  comparatively  few  tourists  crossed  our  path  as 
we  journeyed  over  mountain,  river,  or  valley.  We  took  our 
pleasures  easily,  though  not  sadly.  \Ve  did  not  rush  through  the 
Mont  Cenis  tunnel  in  a  train,  or  climb  the  Rigi  by  the  help  of  an 
aerial  railway,  for  such  triumphs  of  engineering  skill  were  not  then 
in  existence.  Those  were  the  days  of  rfi/igaiccs  and  carriages,  of  mule-riding  or 
the  use  of  one's  own  legs;  and  I  believe  that,  for  true  enjoyment  and  lasting 
impressions  of  magnificent  scenery,  either  of  these  modes  of  progression  is  to  be 
desired  above  the  present-clay  fashion  of  being  everywhere  whisked  along  in  a  train  ! 
I  have  crossed  most  of  the  great  Alpine  passes,  and  am  thankful  to  retain  an  indelible 
remembrance  of  their  sublime  and  solemn  grandeur,  because  I  preferred  to  toil  up 
the  well-made  roads  whenever  it  was  possible,  and  stand  silently  amidst  the  stupen 
dous  heights  and  depths. 

One  ten  minutes   of  time,  on   the  St.  Gothard  Pass,  will   never  be  forgotten.      I 

(-  3 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


had  walked  alone,  in  advance  of  the  carriage, — my  beloved  and  Mr.  Passmore  being 
too  comfortably  idle  to  leave  their  seats, — and,  at  a  turn  of  the  road,  I  came  in  sight 
of  the;  grandest  part  of  the  route,  the  Devil's  Bridge. 


THE  DEVIL'S  BRIDGE,  ST.  GOTIIAKD  TA.SS. 

Not  a  living  creature  was  visible;  the  mighty  masses  of  granite  rock  towered 
on  each  side  of  me,  with  the  deep  and  savage  gorge  between,  where  the  Reuss 
foamed  and  boiled,  and  there  in  the  near  distance  were  the  old  and  the  new  bridges 
spanning  the  awful  chasm.  I  had  so  often  seen  pictures  of  the  spot,  that  I 
recognized  it  at  once  ;  but  the  reality  overcame  me  with  awe.  I  leaned  against  the; 
side  of  the  rocky  pathway,  and  gave  way  for  a  moment  to  a  feeling  of  utter  terror 
and  loneliness.  What  if  the  carriage  should  never  appear  round  that  bend  of  the 
road?  What  if  I  were  really  alone  in  that  sublime  but  desolate  place?  Then  a 
sudden  reaction  took  place,  and  I  felt  so  safe,  so  near  to  the  very  heart  of  God  in 
the  midst  of  His  marvellous  works,  that,  to  this  day,  I  cherish  the  realization  I  there 
had  of  the  certainty  of  His  presence,  and  the  glory  of  His  power. 

Twice  we   visited  Venice,   together,  and   all   the  dreamy  delights  of  our  sojourn 


H.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


99 


there  return  with  their  old  fascination,  by  an  effort  of  the  will,  or  a  glance  at  the 
pages  of  Mr.  Ruskin's  Stones  of  Venice. 


THE    HOTEL    IN    VENICE    WHERE    WE    STAYED. 


The  glory  of  "  the  Queen  of  the  Adriatic "  was  even  then  beginning  to 
fade  away,  but  enough  remained  to  win  our  ardent  admiration,  and  fix  its  pathetic- 
beauty  on  our  hearts.  We  were  spared  the  sight  of  much  ol  that  poverty 
and  decay  which  has  overtaken  the  glorious  city  in  the  present  day,  and  "the 
Bride  of  the  Sea"  is  enshrined  in  my  memory  as  a  creation  of  exceeding  loveliness, 
glowing  with  the  prismatic  hues  of  a  gorgeous  sunset,  and  enwrapped  in  a  veil  of 


THE    GRAND    CANAL,    VF.NICF. 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOUIOGKAI'IIY. 

golden  mist,  just  as  1  last  saw  her  when  returning  from  a  trip  to  the  Island  of  Liddo, 
on  whose  shores  we  had  spent  a  most  enjoyable  day. 

IT  mention  of  this'island  suggests  to  me  a  memory  of  dear  Mr  Spurges 
nptncss  of  illustration,   and  fertility  of   thought.      He  was  accustomed  to  ,nak< 
',    st  unlikely  material  reveal  to  him  some  hidden  meaning,  or  yield  up  a   atent  le      m 
"seems' to  me.  he  rarely  forced  a  metaphor,  but  quite  naturally  drew   from 
,;„    ru:  "togs"  gentle  whisper  of  the  greatness,  and  goodness,  and  grac  ousnes 

1       d        t  wls  so8  in  the  instance  I   am  about  to  relate.      As  we  loitered  on  th.s 
sandy   isle,  which   serves  as  a  breakwater  between  Venice  and  the   sea,   we  were 
'entranced  by  the  charming  sound  of  the  city's  bells,  as  their  music  lloated  across 
,,,,,,ons,   and   mingled    with   the    gentle   wash   of    the   wavelets  ,  ;   they     apped  the 
sliuuno-  strand.      We  thought,  as  we  listened,  that  the  melody  was  almost  eel, 
but  when  we  returned,  and   found  ourselves  in  the  very  centre  of  the  tumultuous 
d:,n,,-in,,    we  altered  our  opinion,  for  the  sweet  sounds  were  changed  to  a  , 
lash  and  the  ravishing  music  had  become  a  maddening  din.     bach  bell  seemed  to 
have'its  own  discordant  note,  while  harmony  in  the  whole  company  of  no.scmal 
^s  out  of  the  question.      It  was  distance  which  had  lent  enchantment  to  the  sound. 
Afterwards,  Mr   Spurgeon  wrote  :-   <  The  words  of  poets  and  eloquent  writers  may, 
as  a  whole   and  heard  from  alar,  sound  charmingly  enough  ;  but  how  few  of  th; 
bear  a  near  and  minute  investigation  !     Their  belfry  rings  passably,  but  one  would 
soon  weary  of  each  separate  bell.     It  is  never  so  with  the   Divine  words  , 
You    hear   them    ringing    from    afar,    and    they    are   swcetnes 
sinner  you  roamed  like  a  traveller  at  midnight  lost  on  the  wilds,  how  tenderly  , 
they  call  you  home  !     And  now  you  have  reached  the  house  of  mercy,  you 
and  listen  to  each  distinct  note  of  loves  perfect  peal,  and  wonder,, 
angelic  harps  cannot  excel  it." 

There  was  a  most  interesting  voyage  to  Hamburg  and  Heligoland  (which 
Mr  Spurgeon  described  in  detail  in  the  Sword  and  Trowel  lor  18 
Irnorab  e  visit  to  Geneva,  where  we  saw  the  good  Merle  U 'Aub-gno  „>  his  own 
le,  and  my  beloved  preached  in  the  cathedral,  standing  in  Calvin's  pulpit,  robed 
m  the  black  Genevan  gown  (see  Vol.  II.,  page  37*)-  Oh,  there  was  at  least  one  wife 
who  was  proud  of  her  husband  that  day  ! 

In   after  years,    during   the   long  lonely   months    occasioned   by  my   ill-health, 
mem0ries  of  our  tours  were  always  fresh  and  fragrant,  and  one  of  the  compens; 
of  my  sickness  was  to  go  over  again   in   thought  all  the  difficulties    and  dangers 
and  delights  we  had  met  with  in  our  travels  ;  and  this  pleasure  would  be  double 
when   mv  husband  could  spend   a  little  time  by  my  couch,  and   the  talk 


C.     II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1OI 

ihcse  sunny  clays,  and  we  together  recalled  our  most  amusing  adventures,  and 
laughed  heartily  at  the  blunders  and  mistakes  we  either  made  or  mastered.  Ah  ! 
there  were  some  strange  tales  to  tell  ;  I  think  I  could  fill  a  volume  with  the  memories 

o 

of  those  delightful  journeys. 

The  first  incident  which  occurs  to  my  mind,  at  this  moment,  was  sufficiently 
embarrassing  when  it  happened,  but  it  furnished  us  with  material  for  much  amuse 
ment  afterward.  We  were  crossing  the  Col  di  Val  Dobbia,  from  Varallo  to 
Gressonay.  We  reached  the  summit  without  any  serious  mishap,  and  rested  for 
a  while  at  the  little  hospice  which  affords  shelter  to  travellers  all  the  year  round. 
When  we  left  this  friendly  refuge,  our  troubles  commenced.  The  path  descends 
precipitously,  traversing  a  snow-field  ;  on  our  left  was  a  steep  slope,  and  under  our 
feet  the  path  was  all  loose  stones,  which  made  the  walking  difficult  and  dangerous, 
to  us.  We  had  not  gone  very  far  before  a  baggage-mule  lost  its  footing,  and 
glissaded  down  the  slope, — to  its  certain  death,  we  thought;  but,  just  before 
reaching  the  awful  precipice,  something  caused  its  body  to  swerve,- — just  as  a 
"bowl"  will  turn  when  a  "bias"  has  been  given  to  it, — and  it  stopped  on  the  very- 
edge  of  the  chasm.  It  was  recovered  by  the  men,  and  brought  safely  back  a^ain  ; 
but  the  accident  so  alarmed  and  disconcerted  us  all  that  dear  Mr.  Spurgeon  sat 
down  in  the  snow,  and  refused  to  stir  a  step!  "Would  he  not  go  back  to  the 
hospice  on  the  summit?"  we  asked.  No  ;  he  would  stay  where  he  was!  "Would 
he  not  try  to  descend,  with  a  friend  on  either  side  of  him?"  No;  he  protested  that 
he  couldti  t  move  !  We  coaxed,  and  pleaded,  to  no  purpose;  so  we  sat  down  with 
him  in  the  snow,  and  tried  to  realize  our  position.  We  were  more  than  8,000  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea,  on  the  sharp  ridge  of  a  mountain,  with  only  just  sufficient 
time  to  get  down  to  Gressonay  before  nightfall.  It  was  a  very  perplexing  situation, 
and  we  looked  at  one  another,  and  then  at  our  well-nigh  fainting  leader,  with 
dismay.  It  was  such  a  novel  experience,  too,  for  he  always  enjoyed  the  mountain 
passes,  and  never  knew  any  fear.  At  last,  we  did  get  him  to  make  the  effort  to 
start,  and  we  reached  Gressonay  in  safety,  though  with  painful  toil  to  him.  I 
have  since  thought  that  the  awful  night  at  the  Surrey  Music  Hall  was  responsible 
for  this  strange  condition  of  mind  into  which  he  was  thrown,  and  that  the  delicate 
organism  of  his  wonderful  brain  had  then  sustained  so  much  pressure  in  some  part 
of  it,  that  any  sudden  fright,  such  as  the  swift  descent  of  the  mule  down  the 
mountain,  would  have  the  power,  for  a  moment  or  two,  to  disturb  its  balance. 
However  this  might  be,  no  evil  effects  ensued,  and  we  made  it  rather  a  matter  of 
merriment  than  of  misgiving. 

It  was  in  this  same  valley  of  Gressonay,  some  few  days  after  our   uncomfortable 


1O2  C.      11.     Si' Uiai  K<). \  S     AUTUJIIOC'.KAPIIY. 


entry  into  it,  that  a  singular  and  unique  testimony  to  the  beauty  of  Christian 
character,  as  seen  in  clear  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  his  travelling  companions,  was 
spontaneously  ollered  from  a  very  unexpected  quarter.  We  had  found  a  comfortable 
resting-place  in  an  hotel  at  the  foot  of  the  Col,  and  having  quite  recovered  from  our 
late  fatigue;,  we  made  an  excursion,  one  lovely  morning,  up  the  valley,  cii  route  to  the 
Lys  Glacier,  guided  by  our  host,  M.  Delapierre,  and  his  son  Ferdinand.  \\  e  were 
in  the  highest  possible  spirits,  delighted  \\ith  the  sale  and  easy  going  on  a  well-paved 
mule-path,  and  enjoying  to  the  full  the  glorious  scenery  and  the  fine,  bracing  air  of 
this  valley,  4,530  feet  above  the  sea.  My  husband,  Mr.  Passmore,  and  Mr.  Morgan, 
were  riding  on  in  front  ;  and,  if  I  remember  rightly,  Mr.  Spurgeon  began  to  praise 
God  for  all  the  loveliness  with  which  we  were  surrounded,  and  called  upon  us  to 
join  him  in  thanksgiving.  This  wet  did,  and  M.  Delapierre,  who  \\as  leading  my 
mule,  regarded  his  guests  with  wonder,  and  turning  to  me,  said,  "  Mais,  Madame, 
ces  Messieurs  ne  sont  pas  des  homines,  ce  sont  des  anges  !  "  ("  P>ut,  Madam, 
these  gentlemen  are  not  men,  they  are  angels  !  ")  I  asked  what  made  him  think 
so,  and  he  waxed  eloquent  in  praise  of  their  gentle  and  gracious  conduct,  so 
different,  he  said,  from  the  behaviour  of  all  the  other  travellers  he  had  seen. 
'I  hey  had  not  done  or  said  anything  particularly  heavenly,  but  their  consistent  and 
Christian  spirit  had  shone  out  so  clearly  and  brightly,  during  their  stay  at  the  hotel, 
that  this  man  could  not  refrain  from  speaking  of  the  impression  it  had  made  upon 
him.  I  believe  he  was  perfectly  honest  in  his  surprise  and  admiration,  for  we  were 
waited  upon  by  him  and  his  son  with  as  much  consideration  and  reverence,  as  if  we 
had  truly  been  celestial  visitants  in  the  guise  of  humanity.  \Ye  left  the  place  with 
great  reluctance  and  regret  on  both  sides,  promising  ourselves  to  return  some  day 
for  a  prolonged  sojourn  ;  but,  though  this  desire  was  never  fulfilled,  the  hotel  at 
St.  Jean  de  Gressonay  was  ever  alter  the  symbol  to  us  of  all  that  was  most  delightful 
and  enjoyable  in  foreign  travel. 

As  I  write,  the  striking  of  a  cuckoo  clock  reminds  me  of  its  faithful  service 
durino-  almost  die  whole  period  of  our  married  life,  for  we  bought  it  at  Schaffhausen 

o>  O 

on  our  first  trip  to  Switzerland,  and  it  has  sung  out  the  hours  ever  since  !  I  do  not 
know  that  "  Westwood"  contains  a  more  cherished  relic  of  the  blessed  days  that  are 
past  than  this  pretty  cuckoo  clock,  and  it  certainly  bears  testimony  to  somebody's 
good  workmanship  forty  years  ago. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  most  observant  traveller,  deeply  interested  in  all  he  saw, 
and  keenly  appreciative  of  Nature  in  all  her  moods  and  humours.  He  had,  too,  a 
great  gift  for  turning  to  account  everything  that  would  help  to  illustrate  or  interpret 
the  message  which  he,  as  an  ambassador  for  God,  had  to  deliver  to  sinful  men.  His 


C.      11.      STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


capacity  for  storing  incidents  and  experiences  was  marvellous  ;  we  used  jokingly  to 
tell  him  that  he  had  shelves  in  his  head,  where  he  laid  up  all  these  things,  assorted 
and  labelled,  and  ready  for  use  on  the  first  opportunity  !  And  we  were  not  far 
wrong  ;  "  there's  many  a  true  word  spoken  in  jest."  It  was  an  education  to  accom 
pany  him  in  any  of  his  wanderings,  and  a  perfect  delight  to  listen  to  his  conversation, 
whether  grave  or  gay. 

Then,  wherever  we  might  be,  the  sweet  devoutness  of  his  spirit  was  always 
manifest,  and  the  light  of  his  love  to  his  Saviour  shone  with  a  steady  radiance. 
It  was  never  put  out  of  sight,  or  hidden  under  the  bushel  of  "  inconvenient 
circumstances."  We  had  family  prayer,  whether  we  lodged  in  some  rough  inn  on 
the  mountains,  or  in  the  luxurious  rooms  of  a  palatial  hotel  in  a  city  ;  and  the  blessed 
"abiding  in  Christ,"  of  which  many  of  us  say,  "  It  is  high.,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it," 
was  to  him  the  natural  atmosphere  of  his  soul  ; — he  lived  and  breathed  in  the 
presence  of  God. 

In  some  future  chapters,  I  hope  to  let  him  tell,  in  his  own  sweet  words,  by 
his  letters  home,  how  his  heart  was  stirred,  and  his  spirit  refreshed,  and  his  mind 
invigorated  through  foreign  travel.  But,  in  the  meantime,  I  must  return  to  my 
theme,  and  keep  as  close  as  I  can  to  the  period  about  which  I  am  trying  to  write, 
—the  early  days  of  our  married  life.  I  am  apt — I  hope  I  may  be  pardoned, — to 
make  little  digressive  journeys  into  the  side  paths  and  meadows  of  memory,  tempted 
by  the  many  forget-me-nots  which  grow  there  ;  but  I  find  that  this  habit  does  not 
tacilitate  progress  along  the  straight  road  of  history. 

One  of  the  loveliest  pictures  which  I  keep  laid  away  in  my  heart  is  furnished 
by  the  remembrance  of  the  beautiful  lake  of  Orta,  and  what  we  saw  and  heard 
upon  its  placid  waters,  when  we  were  loitering  among  the  Alps  of  Piedmont  and 
Savoy.  We  were  on  our  way  to  Varallo,  to  see  the  extraordinary  Sacro  Monte 
there,  and  were  crossing  the  lake  to  Pella,  in  an  open  boat,  when  we  became  aware 
that  we  had,  unwittingly,  chosen  a  festa  day  for  our  journey,  and  should,  in  con 
sequence,  be  indulged  by  the  sight  of  a  remarkably  attractive  spectacle.  Between 
Orta  and  Pella,  the  rocky  eminence  of  the  Isola  di  San  Guilio  rises  sheer  out  of  the 
deep  blue  lake.  On  it  is  built  a  large  church,  and  a  village  nestles  under  the  shadow 
of  its  walls.  Purely  white  the  church  and  the  houses  are,  (or  were,)  and  they 
gleamed  in  the  morning  sunshine,  and  were  reflected  in  the  shimmering  water  in  a 
way  which  enhanced  the  singular  charm  of  their  position.  All  around  the  shores 
of  the  lake,  quaint  hamlets  clustered,  looking  their  loveliest,  with  a  background  of 
mountains,  and  a  rearguard  of  noble  trees,  while  the  lake  lay  like  a  looking-glass  of 
molten  silver  in  the  forefront.  This  was  very  delightful  ;  but,  as  we  gazed  on  the 
exquisite  scene,  it  developed  in  interest  and  grace,  for  we  perceived  that,  from  each 


104  c.    n.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

of  the  villages  which  dotted  the  shore,  large  boats,  covered  \vith  white  awnings,  and 
filled  with  people,  were  coming  across  the  lake,  and  all  converging  to  the  church  on 
the  rock. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  asked  our  boatman  to  lay  aside  his  oars,  that  we  might  take 
time  to  enjoy  the  full  beauty  of  the  picturesque  display.  Slowly  the  boats  with 
their  living  freight  came  along,  and  presently  we  caught  the  melody  of  tuneful  voices, 
rising  and  falling  in  measured  cadence  of  holy  song.  Then  we  understood  that  the 
occupants  of  the  boats  were  going  to  worship,  and  on  their  way  were:  chanting  hymns 
of  praise  to  God.  Such  "  music  across  the:  waters  "  not  only  fell  upon  listening  ears, 
but  dropped  tenderly  into  loving  hearts,  and  the  effect  of  the  whole  scene  was 
indescribably  solemn  and  beautiful. 

So  deep  an  impression  did  it  make  on  me  that,  even  at  this  distance  of  time,  I 
have  but  to  lean  back  in  my  chair,  and  close  my  eyes,  and  sec  it  all  over  again,  as  on 
that  long-ago  day,  so  faithfully  does  the  film  of  memory  reproduce  the  image  of 
those  lovely  objects,  and  reveal  them  to  my  inner  consciousness.  Plainly  I  sec  the 
sapphire  lake,  the  unclouded  sky,  the  surrounding  Alps,  the  vivid  green  of  the: 
wooded  shores,  the  white  church  on  the  rock  sparkling  in  the  clear,  pure  atmosphere. 
I  watch  the  procession  of  boats  with  their  graceful  canopies,  I  hear  the  sweet 
chanting  of  the  people,  as  they  draw  nearer  and  nearer  to  their  sanctuary, — I  can 
enjoy  all  this  over  again  ;-— but  not  without  many  a  heartache  can  I  recall  the 
enraptured  look  on  my  husband's  face,  as  the  meaning  and  pathos  of  this  sweet 
picture  moved  his  soul,  and  touched  his  tenderest  sympathy.  The  people,  poor, 
ignorant,  and  priest-ridden,  were  assembling  to  render  homage  to  (iod  ;  and,  though 
their  ritual  was  unscriptural  and  unspiritual,  they  knew  no  other,  and  his  heart  went 
out  to  them  in  compassionate  love  and  longing.  Suppose  some  among  them  were 
ready  to  "seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  Him,  and  find  Him  ;"  there 
was  no  one  to  lead  them  straight  to  the  Saviour  !  Think  how  this  soul-winner  must 
have  yearned  to  preach  to  them  the  gospel  of  a  free  and  full  salvation  !  No  wonder 
the  hot  tears  silently  chased  each  other  down  his  cheeks,  as  he  realized  their 
exceeding  need,  and  his  own  powerlessness  to  reach  and  teach  them.  How  tenderly 
he  would  have  told  them  of  Jesus,  the  "  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,"  and 
how  earnestly  would  he  have  besought  them  to  come  to  the  living  Christ  who  alone 
"  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  "  !  The  sight  of  priests  always  stirred  his 
righteous  anger  ;  but  for  the  poor  misled  people,  he  felt  the  utmost  pity  and 
kindness. 

After  this  incident,  we  arrived  safely  at  Varallo  for  the  Sabbath  ;  and,  as  usual, 
spent  a  quiet  and  restful  clay.      Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon  went  alone  to  the  Sacro   Monte  ; 


C.     II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  105 

and,  as  he  once,  when  preaching,  recalled  his  impressions  of  the  singular  place,  I 
insert  them  here  : — 

"  One  Sabbath-day,  I  was  staying  in  an  Italian  town  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Alps.  Of  course,  the  whole  population  was  Romish.  Two  or  three  of  us,  being 
Protestants,  therefore  held  a  little  service  for  the  worship  of  God  in  the  simple 
manner  which  is  our  wont.  After  this,  I  went  out  for  a  walk.  The;  weather  being 
hot  and  sultry,  I  sought  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  to  get  to  as  quiet  and  cool  a  spot 
as  possible.  Presently,  I  came  to  an  archway  at  the  foot  of  a  hill,  where  there  was 
an  announcement  that  any  person  who  would  climb  the  hill,  with  proper  intentions, 
should  receive  the  pardon  of  his  sins  and  five  days'  indulgence.  I  thought  I  might, 
as  well  as  anybody  else,  have  five  clays'  indulgence  ;  and  if  it  wrere  of  any  advantage, 
have  it  laid  by  in  store. 

"  I  cannot  tell  you  all  I  saw  as  I  went,  first  one  way  and  then  another,  up  that 
hill.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  there  was  a  series  of  little  chapels,  through  the  windows 
of  which  you  might  look,  as  one  in  his  boyish  days  looked  through  a  peep-show. 
The  whole  history  of  our  Lord's  life,  and  the  circumstances  surrounding  PI  is  passion 
and  death,  were  here  on  view  ;  the  groups  of  figures  being  modelled  in  terra-cotta, 
painted  and  clothed.  The  forty-six  chapels,  which  thus  tell  the  story  of  man's 
redemption,  are  dotted  all  over  the  hill, — often  half-hidden  by  the  beautiful  trees 
which  surround  them.  In  the  one  where  Christ's  agony  in  Gethsemane  is  repre 
sented,  the  figure  is  as  large  as  life,  with  the  drops  of  bloody  sweat  falling  to  the 
ground,  the  three  disciples  a  stone's-throw  off,  and  the  rest  of  the  apostles  outside 
the  garden  wall.  Every  feature  looked  as  real  as  if  one  had  been  standing  upon  the 
actual  spot.  I  scrutinized  each  group  narrowly,  and  carefully  read  the  Latin  text 
which  served  as  an  index,  till  I  reached  a  part  of  the  hill,  where  I  saw  a  o-arden, 
just  like  many  we  have  in  England,  and  as  I  pushed  open  the  door,  I  faced  these 
words,  '  Now  in  the  place  where  He  was  crucified  there  was  a  garden,  and  in  the 
garden  a  new  sepulchre.'  Walking  down  a  path,  I  came  to  a  sepulchre  ;  so  I 
stooped  down,  and  looked  in,  as  John  had  done  centuries  before  me.  There, 
instead  of  seeing  a  semblance  of  the  corpse  of  Christ,  I  read  in  gilded  letters  these 
words, — of  course,  in  the  Latin  tongue, — '  Pie  is  not  here  :  for  lie  is  risen,  as  He 
said.  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay.' 

"  Passing  on,  I  came  to  a  structure  where  our  Lord's  ascension  was  represented. 
On  the  summit  of  the  hill  was  a  large  church,  into  which  I  entered.  No  one  was 
there,  yet  the  place  had  for  me  a  marvellous  interest.  High  up  in  the  ceiling  there 
swung  a  roughly-hewn  figure  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  round  it  were  statues  of 
the  prophets,  all  with  their  fingers  pointing  up  to  Him.  There  was  Isaiah,  with  a 
scroll  in  his  left  hand,  on  which  was  written,  '  He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ; 
a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief.'  Further  on  stood  Jeremiah,  and  on 


IO6  C.      JI.     SI'UKGEON'S     AUTOKlUliUArilY. 

his  scroll  was  written,  '  Behold,  and  sec  if  there  he  any  sorrow  like:  unto  My  sorrow, 
which  is  done  unto  Me.'  All  round  the  church  I  read,  in  threat  letters  that  were 
large  enough  to  he;  seen,  though  they  were  painted  on  the  top  of  the  ceiling,  'Moses 
and  all  the  prophets  spoke  and  wrote  concerning  Him.'  It  was  a  remarkable  sight, 
one  which  I  shall  never  forget  ;  it  did  my  heart  good  to  see  all  these  witnesses  doing 
homage  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  ol  G<>d,  the  Saviour  of  men." 

There  comes  to  me,  also,  a  bright  and  pleasant  memory  of  a  short  sojourn  on 
the  l>el  Alp,  from  whence  several  interesting  excursions  can  be  made.  We  walked 
up  the  mountain  by  a  bridle-path  from  Brieg,  and  lound  a  most  comfortable  resting- 
place  in  the  excellent  hotel  there  provided  for  travellers.  The  view  was  sublime 
and  startling  ;  we  seemed  to  be  in  the  midst  of  a  vast  amphitheatre  of  Alpine  peaks 
and  glaciers,  and  from  the  plateau  before  the  inn  door  we  could  see  many  of  the 
notable  snow-clad  giants,  "whose  sunbright  summits  mingle  with  the  sky  !"  Here, 
Mr.  Passmore  and  I  had  a  lit  of  Alpine  fever,  and  were  consumed  by  a  desire  to 
climb  one  of  the  lesser  Alps  ;  but  we  could  not  prevail  on  my  dear  husband  to 
accompany  us  on  our  venturesome  journey.  We  decided  to  try  the  Sparrenhorn 
(9,889  ft.),  as  being  comparatively  easy  of  ascent,  and  therefore  suited  to  the 
unaccustomed  feet  of  timid  climbers.  A  guide  was  engaged,  and  we  set  off,  one  line 
morning,  in  the  highest  spirits,  leaving  dear  Mr.  Spurgeon  sitting  complacently 
outside  the  door  of  the  hotel  with  a  book  to  divert  his  mind,  and  a  telescope  where 
with  to  watch  our  progress.  We  accomplished  our  task,  not  without  difficulty,  and 
what  looked  to  us  like  clanger  ;  but  we  gained  the  summit,  and  from  thence  gazed 
on  so  sublime  a  panorama  of  snow-mountains,  and  great  ice-rivers,  that  the  scene 
can  never  be  forgotten  while  life  lasts.  A  great  awe  overcame  us,  and  we  trembled 
with  emotion, — marvelling  that  such  atoms,  as  we  felt  ourselves  to  be,  were  loved 
and  cared  for  by  the  Creator  of  these  colossal  witnesses  to  His  power  and  majesty. 
Then  the  call  came  to  descend,  and  we  turned  earthward,  losing  much  of  our 
humility,  I  fear,  as  we  regained  the  level.  Very  tired,  but  very  proud  of  our 
performance,  we  reached  the  hotel  ;  but  when  we  related  our  adventures,  and 
enlarged  upon  the  perils  of  the  way,  we  found  the  chief  of  the  party  quite  as 
gratified  with  himself  for  having  had  the  wisdom  to  remain  in  safety  below  !  When, 
on  leaving  the  inn,  my  dear  husband  inscribed  his  name  in  the  visitors'  book,  he 
added  these  words,  "Ascended  the  Sparrenhorn  by  deputy  /" 

After  a  few  days  of  great  enjoyment  in  this  place,  we  decided  to  go  on  further 
to  the  Eggischhorn.  To  carry  out  this  plan,  we  had  to  descend  to  the  Great 
Aletsch  Glacier,  traversing  its  frozen  waves,  and  crossing  its  huge  moraines, — those 
wonderful  accumulations  of  debris  and  dirt,  which  always  disfigure  the  surface  of  the 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S 


10' 


<>lacier    but    are    never    allowed    to    sink    into    its    spotless    substance,   or    soil    the 

& 

underlying  crystal  by  a  shadow  of  impurity. 


THE    GREAT    AI.ETSCH    GLACIER. 


Half-way  between  the  Bel  Alp  and  the  hotel  built  on  the  slope  of  the 
Kggischhorn,  we  reached  a  mountain  tarn,  and  sat  down  to  rest  a  while  by  its  cool 
waters.  We  were  very  hungry  as  well  as  tired,  and  seeing  a  peasant  without  any 
visible  occupation  but  the  ungraceful  one  of  staring  at  our  needy  selves,  we 
persuaded  him  to  descend  the  mountain  to  a.  chalet  he  knew  of,  and  bring  us  some 
bread  and  milk.  It  was  a  Marah  experience  to  us  when,  on  his  return  with  a 
basket  which  looked  as  if  it  might  contain  good  things,  he  offered  us  milk  too 
sour  to  drink,  and  bread  black  as  a  coal,  too  hard  to  bite,  and  quite  as  bitter  as 
the  curdled  milk  !  What  did  we  do  ?  Why,  we  longed  the  more  eagerly  to  arrive 
at  the  hotel  toward  which  we  were  travelling  !  We  resumed  our  journey,  and 
made  no  more  halts  till  we  reached  the  hospitable  table  where  our  hunger  was 
abundantly  satisfied.  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon  afterwards  commented  thus  on  the 

incident  : "  In  like  manner,  our  disappointments  on  the  roacl  to   Heaven  whet  our 

appetites   for    the   Better  Country,  and   quicken   the   pace  of  our  pilgrimage  to  the 
Celestial  City." 


io8 


C.     II.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


While   we  were  sojourning  on  the   Eggischhorn,  Mr.  Passmore  and   I   made  a 
pilgrimage  to  the  Marjelen  See, — a  remarkable  lake,  fed  and  surrounded  by  glaciers. 


THE    MARJELEN    SKK. 

Its  shores  were  strewn  with  huge  blocks  of  ice,  other  mighty  masses  were  floating 
on  its  calm  cold  surface  like  miniature  icebergs  ;  but  the  most  magical  effect  was 
produced  by  the  cliffs  on  one  side, — pure,  clear  walls  of  ice  rising  sheer  out  of  the 
dark  waters  to  a  height  of  fifty  feet !  It  was  an  Arctic  wonderland,  a  most  unearthly 
vision  ;  and  a  very  small  amount  of  imagination  would  have  transformed  those  cliffs 
into  the  Ice  King's  palace,  and  peopled  the  whole  region  with  snow  sprites  and  frost 
fairies.  I  was  very  sorry  my  beloved  did  not  see  the  strange  sight,  for  he  would 
have  found  treasures  of  illustration  where  I  could  only  see  a  unique  exhibition  of 
Alpine  marvels.  It  was  considered  a  very  easy  walk  of  two  hours  to  this  surprising 
lake,  yet  it  took  us  a  much  longer  time  than  that  to  reach  it,  for  we  were  but  poor 
mountaineers,  and  thought  it  a  long  and  difficult  way  ;  so,  as  the  day  was  dying  soon 
after  we  reached  our  goal,  we  had  to  hasten  back,  and  my  weary  feet  were  quickened 
by  the  desire  I  had  to  share  the  joy  of  the  journey  with  my  husband.  We  had, 
however,  a  very  humiliating  experience  at  the  end.  Footsore  and  exhausted,  we 
came  in  sight  of  our  resting-place.  Mr.  Spurgeon,  Mr.  Morgan,  and  other  visitors 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


109 


were  grouped  round  the  door  watching  for  our  return,  and  we  hoped  to  conceal  our 
extreme  fatigue,  and  appear  to  be  coming  back  with  flying  colours  ;  but,  alas  tor  us  ! 
there  was  a  short  and  sharp  descent  to  the  plateau  on  which  the  hotel  was  built,  and, 
essaying  to  run  down  it,  first  one,  and  then  the  other,  slipped  and  fell  prostrate 
almost  at  the  feet  of  the  amazed  spectators  !  What  sorry  and  crestfallen  creatures 
we  must  have  looked  for  about  a  minute  and  a-half  when  we  were  helped  to  our  feet ! 
But  when  it  was  found  that  no  bones  were  broken,  everybody  had  a  hearty  laugh, 
and  my  dear  husband  found  no  end  of  amusement  in  recalling  the  incident  for  many 
a  day  afterwards. 


, 


THE    STAUBBACH    AND    VALLEY    OF    LAUTKK13KUNNEN.       (See  next  page.} 

There  came  a  day,  however,  when  my  beloved  fully  shared  in  all  the  delights  of 
Alpine  travel.  We  had  a  memorable  journey  across  the  Wengern  Alp,  when  he 
seemed  to  bring  all  his  previously-gathered  strength  into  use,  and  to  exercise  all  the 
powers  of  mind  and  body  which  he  possessed.  He  walked  without  weariness,  and 
at  such  a  pace  that  we  could  scarcely  keep  up  with  him  ;  never  before  or  since  did  I 
see  him  so  active  and  full  of  physical  energy.  He  descended  the  Little  Scheicleck 
with  the  utmost  ease  and  pleasure,  using  his  alpenstock  as  a  vaulting-pole,  singing 
or  talking  all  the  way,  and  delighting  us  by  his  stores  of  knowledge,  and  his  keen 


IIO  C.      II.      SPUKGKOX  S     AUTOIHOCIKAI'HY. 

appreciation  of  the  wonders  by  which  we  were  surrounded.  Higher  up  the 
mountain,  we  had  sat  for  a  while  to  watch  the  ice-avalanches,  which  were  to  be  seen 
quite  plainly,  across  an  intervening  valley,  falling  every  now  and  then  from  the  great 
snow-ridges  of  a  mountain  opposite  to  us.  They  looked,  from  that  distance,  like 
harmless  cascades  of  snow,  but  their  true  character  was  revealed  by  the  thunderous 
noise  of  their  fall.  The  sight  greatly  impressed  him,  and  lifted  his  spirit  Heaven 
ward,  and  both  mind  and  body  answered  to  the  holy  influence  in  a  remarkable 
fashion.  lie  shall  tell,  in  his  own  words,  something  of  his  inner  experience  at 
that  ever-to-be-remembered  time  :— 

"The  day  in  which  I  saw  most  of  Creation's  grandeur  wras  spent  upon  the 
VVengern  Alp.  My  heart  was  near  her  God,  and  all  around  was  majestic  ;  the;  dread 
mountains,  like  pyramids  of  ice  ;  the  clouds,  like  fleecy  wool.  I  saw  the  avalanche, 
and  heard  the  thunder  of  its  fall  ;  I  marked  the  dashing  waterfalls  leaping  into  the 
vale  of  Lauterbrunnen  beneath  our  feet  ;  but  my  heart  felt  that  Creation  was  too 
scant  a  mirror  to  image  all  her  God, — His  lace  wns  more  terrible-  than  the  storm, 
His  robes  more  pure  than  the  virgin  snow,  His  voice  far  louder  than  the  thunder, 
His  love  far  higher  than  the  everlasting  hills.  I  took  out  my  pocket-book,  and 

wrote  these  lines  :— 

"Yet  in  all  these,  how  great  soe'er  they  be, 
We  see  not  Him.     The  glass  is  all  too  dense 
And  dark,  or  else  our  earthburn  eyes  too  dim. 

"Yon  Alps,  that  lift  their  heads  above  the  clouds, 
And  hold  familiar  converse  with  the  stars, 
Are  dust,  at  which  the  balance  trembleth  not, 
Compared  with  His  Divine  immensity. 
The  snow-crown'd  summits  fail  to  set  Him  forth, 
Who  dwelleth  in  eternity,  and  bears, 
Alone,  the  Name  of  High  and  Lofty  One. 
Depths  nnfathom'd  are  too  shallow  to  express 
The  wisdom  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord. 
The  mirror  of  the  creatures  has  no  space 
To  bear  the  image  of  the  Infinite. 
'Tis  true,  the  Lord  hath  fairly  writ  His  Name, 
And  set  His  seal  upon  Creation's  brow  ; 
But,  as  the  skilful  potter  much  excels 
The  vessel  which  he  fashions  on  the  wheel, 
E'en  so,  but  in  proportion  greater  far, 
Jehovah's  self  transcends  His  noblest  works. 
Earth's  ponderous  wheels  would  break,  her  axles  snap, 
If  freighted  with  the  load  of  Deity. 
Space  is  too  narrow  for  the  Eternal's  rest, 
And  time  too  short  a  iootstool  for  His  throne. 
E'en  avalanche  and  thunder  lack  a  voice 
To  utter  the  full  volume  of  His  praise. 
How  then  can  1  declare  Him?     Where  are  words 
With  which  my  glowing  tongue  may  speak  His  Name? 
Silent  1  bow,  and  humbly  I  adore." 

On  another  occasion,   Mr.   Spurgeon  thus  recorded  for  future  use  his  thoughts 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I  I  I 

when  admiring  some  remarkable  rainbows  which  typified  to  him  those  described  by 
the  apostle  John  in  the  Book  of  the  Revelation  :— 

"  Looking  from    the    little    wooden  bridge   which   passes  over  the  brow  of  the 

<_>  o  I 

beautiful  waterfall  ol  Handeck,  on  the  Grimsel,  one  will,  at  a  certain  hour  of  a 
bright  day,  be  surprised  to  see  a  rainbow  making  an  entire  circle,  surrounding  the 
fall  like  a  coronet  of  gems,  or  a  ring  set  with  all  the  brilliants  of  the  jeweller.  Every 
hue  is  there,— 

"'In  fair  proportion,  running  from  the  red 
To  where  the  violet  fads  s  into  the  sky.' 

We  saw  two  such  bows,  one  within  the  other,  and  we  fancied  that  we  discovered 
traces  of  a  third.  \Ye  had  looked  upon  such  a  sight  but  once  before,  and  were 
greatly  delighted  with  '  that  arch  of  light,  born  of  the  spray,  and  coloured  by  the 
sun.'  It  was  a  fair  vision  to  gaze  upon,  and  reminded  us  of  the  mystic  rainbow, 
which  the  seer  of  Patmos  beheld,  which  was  '  round  about  the  throne,'  for  it  strikes 
us  that  it  was  seen  by  John  as  a  complete  circle,  of  which  we  perceive  but  the  half 
on  earth.  The  upper  arc  of  manifest  glory  we  rejoice  to  behold  ;  but  the  lower 
arch  of  the  eternal  purpose,  upon  which  the  visible  display  of  grace  is  founded,  is 
reserved  for  our  contemplation  in  another  world. 

"When  we  read,  in  the  first  verse  of  the  tenth  chapter  of  Revelation,  '  I  saw 
another  mighty  angel  come  down  from  Heaven,  clothed  with  a  cloud  :  and  a  rainbow 
was  upon  his  head,'  it  greatly  assists  the  imagination  to  conceive  of  a  many-coloured 
circlet,  rather  than  a  semicircle.  We  lingered  long  watching  the  Hashing  crystal, 

o  o  o  o  j 

clashed  and  broken  upon  a  hundred  craggy  rocks,  and  tossed  into  the  air  in  sheets  of 
foam,  to  fall  in  wreaths  of  spray  ;  we  should  not  have  tired  if  we  could  have  tarried 
for  hours  to  admire  the  harmonious  hues  of  that  wheel  \\ithin  a  wheel,— 

"  '  Of  colours  changing  from  the  splendid  rose, 
To  the  pale  violet's  dejected  hue  ;'— 

but  we  were  on  a  journey,  and  were  summoned  to  advance." 

One  more  retrospect  may  well  conclude  these  mere  outline  sketches  from  the 
tablets  of  memory.  We  were  travelling  in  Italy,  and  when  driving  along  the  roads, 
in  a  certain  part  of  the  country,  were  continually  pained  by  the  sight  of  the  super 
stitious  aids  to  devotion  supplied  by  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  to  her  votaries. 
1 1  ere,  was  a  tiny  chapel  to  the  Virgin  ; — there,  a  shrine  for  an  idolatrous  image  ; — in 
many  cases,  a  niche  with  a  crucifix  and  a  lamp  burning  before  it,  where  prayers  might 
be  purchased  for  the  souls  supposed  to  be  enduring  purgatorial  fires.  Generally, 
there  were  accessories  of  the  coarsest  and  rudest  kind,  which  we  could  not  look  on 
without  repulsion;  they  all  seemed  such  a  dreadful  mockery  of  "our  most  holy 
faith  "  that  we  tried  not  to  see  them  as  we  passed  along.  lUit,  one  day,  we  came  to 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

a  place  whore  was  a  huge  cross  by  the  side  of  the  highway,  and  on  it  hung-  a 
life-sized  fearful  representation  of  the  Beloved  of  our  soul,  who  poured  out 
precious  blood  for  our  redemption.  No  harrowing  detail  of  the  mighty  Sacrif.ee  of 
I  ove  was  omitted,  no  item  of  agony  forgotten  ;-I  dare  not  describe  the  awful  sight, 
it  horrified  and  shocked  us,  and  we  turned  aside  from  the  revolting  spectacle,  but 
not  until  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  noticed  the  superscription,- 

Sl'KS    UXICA,— 

in  laro-e  letters  over  the  bowed  head  of  the  figure  on  "the  shameful  cross."  He 
caught  eao-erly  at  the  light  thus  gleaming  through  the  darkness. 
"is  truth  Emblazoned  on  an  idol!  Yes,  truly,  Jesus,  our  once  crucified,  but  now 
exalted  Lord,  is  the  sole  and  only  hope  of  man.  ()  blessed  Christ,  1  hou  art  <  Spes 
Unica'  to  our  soul  !  \Ye  have-  found  a  diamond  in  the  mire  of  superstition  ;  does  it 
sparkle  any  the  less  ?  "  So  we  went  on  our  way,  sorrowful,  yet  praising  God  for  the 
preciousness  of  those  two  words  ;  and,  soon,  one  might  have  heard  us  softly  singing, 
as  we  drove  along,— 

"  Other  refuge  have  I  none, 
Hangs  my  helpless  soul  on  Thee 


CHAPTER  LXVII. 


absent  Ipast0rrs  Cart  for  Ijts  flock. 

HEN  EVER  the  Pastor  had  to  be  away  from  his  people,  seeking 
necessary  rest  after  arduous  toil,  or  restoration  after  painful 
affliction,  he  gave  them  constant  proofs  that  he  still  bore  them 
upon  his  heart  as  much  as  when  he  was  labouring  in  their  midst. 
Some  of  the  choicest  letters  he  ever  wrote  to  the  church  and 
congregation  under  his  charge  were  sent  home  from  foreign  lands, 
whence  his  thoughts  flew  back  to  the  much-loved  house  of  prayer  where  he  was 
wont  to  keep  holy  day  with  the  great  assembly.  Many  of  these  pastoral  epistles 

have  been  preserved  ;  and  one  set  of  them — written  early  in  the  year  1874, may  be 

regarded  as  a  fair  specimen  of  the  way  in  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  continually 
manifested  his  earnest  desire  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  all  who  came  within  the 
sphere  of  his  influence. 

It  will  be  noted  that  most  of  the  letters  in  this  series  were  written  to  the  young- 
people  attending  the  Tabernacle  ;  and,  as  a  quarter  of  a  century  has  elapsed  since 
they  were  penned,  those  who  first  heard  them  read,  if  they  are  still  living,  are  now 
in  middle  life,  and  doubtless  many  of  them  are  among  the  officers  and  members  of 
the  church  who  are  helping  to  carry  on  the  many  departments  of  Christian  work  in 
which  their  fathers  and  mothers  were  engaged  before  them.  The  vital  matters  dealt 
with  in  these  letters  also  make  them  just  as  suited  to  the  lads  and  lasses,  or  the: 
young  men  and  maidens  of  to-day,  as  they  were  to  those  to  whom  they  were 
originally  addressed  ;  and  if  the  perusal  of  them,  in  these  pages,  shall  be  made, 
through  the  Holy  Spirit's  gracious  operation  upon  youthful  minds  and  hearts,  the 
means  of  blessing  to  present-day  readers,  the  glad  tidings  will  speedily  reach  the 
happy  dwellers  in  the  glory-land,  and  cause  increased  "joy  in  the  presence  of  the 
angels  of  God  ;  "  and,  surely,  no  one  will  rejoice  at  such  a  result  more  than 
the  beloved  Pastor  himself. 

Before  giving  the  special  series  of  communications  referred  to  above,  one  letter 
from  an  earlier  period  seems  worthy  of  insertion.  It  was  written  during  one  of  the 
journeys  described  in  the  preceding  chapter  ;  and,  though  undated,  the  heading 
of  it  indicates  where  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  were  staying  at  the  time,  and  conse 
quently  gives  the  clue  to  the  date, — June,  1865. 


"  Bel  Alp, 

"  Canton  Valais. 

"  My  Dear  Mrs.  Bartlett, 

"  With  constant  thanksgiving,  I  remember  your  work  of  faith  and  labour 
of  love  ;  and  I  pray  the  Lord  to  sustain  you,  and  make  you  still  a  joyful  '  mother  in 
Israel.'  Your  heart  yearns  most  for  the  souls  under  your  care  ;  and,  therefore,  when 
1  have  just  thanked  you  with  my  whole  heart  for  all  you  do  for  me  and  my  Master's 
cause,  and  have,  asked  your  continual  prayers  on  my  behalf,  I  will  rather  write  to  the 
class  than  to  you. 

"  To  those  of  them  who  arc  saved,  will  you  present  their  Pastor's  kindest 
remembrances,  and  say, —  I  beseech  you  to  walk  worthy  of  your  high  calling  ? 
Watchfulness  is  to  be  our  daily  spirit  ;  we  must  not  sleep  in  an  enemy's  land. 
Those  who  go  near  the  brink  of  precipices  may  one  day  fall  over  them,  and 
familiarity  with  sin  may,  sooner  or  later,  lead  to  the  commission  of  it  ;  and  our  God 
alone  knows  the  misery  which  a  fall  may  cause  to  you  and  to  those;  who  love  your 
souls.  Our  sisters  form  a  numerous  and  intluential  part  of  the  church  ;  and  when 
their  hearts  are  in  a  thoroughly  spiritual  condition,  they  have  a  wonderful  power  for 
good.  \Ve  want  no  better  band  of  missionaries  than  the  godly  daughters,  sisters, 
wives,  and  mothers  in  our  midst.  \Vlien  it  is  well  with  you,  pray  for  me,  and  let 
this  be  your  prayer,— that  1  may  return  to  you  '  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ.'  I  am  now  writing  far  up  in  the  mountains  ;  the  air  is  cold  and 
bracing,  the  view  is  wide  and  lovely  ;  the  high  hills,  with  their  snowy  heads,  seem 
just  on  a  level  with  me  ;  all  is  still  and  calm,  and  my  body  and  soul  are  both  growing- 
well  and  strong.  Now,  in  spiritual  matters,  1  want  you  who  belong  to  dear  Mrs. 
Harriett's  class  to  live  on  the  mountain,  high  up,  near  to  God,  far  from  the  world, 
where  your  view  of  Divine  truth  will  be  clear  and  wide  ;  and  I  want  you  there  to  grow 
strong  and  healthy  in  Heavenly  things,  that  you  may  do  wonders  in  Christ's  Name. 

"  To  those  who  arc  unsaved,  how  shall  I  write?  I  must  first  pray,— O  God, 
deliver  them  from  their  sins,  and  from  Thy  wrath  !  Last  night,  the  lightning 
seemed  to  set  the  mountains  on  a  blaze  ;  it  (lashed  from  peak  to  peak,  and  made  the 
clouds  appear  like  great  thrones  or  furnaces  of  fire  ;  the  terrible  God  was  abroad, 
and  we  were  awed  with  His  presence.  I  could  look  on  cheerfully,  and  say,  'My 
Father  does  it  all  ;  but  what  must  it  be  to  have  this  God  for  your  enemy  ?  Young- 
friends,  I  beseech  you  to  consider  your  condition  as  having  an  omnipotent  God  full 
of  anger  against  you  for  your  sins.  May  you  realize  your  danger,  and  seek  His 
face  before  you  feel  the  terror  of  His  hand  !  What  a  sweet  short  sentence  is  that, 
'  God  is  love  '  !  Think  it  over.  If  Satan  tempts  you  to  despair,  hold  it  up  before 
his  face.  If  sins  or  doubts  prevail,  remember  that  '  God  is  love.'  But  do  not  forget 
that  Uc  is  a  consuming  fire.  He  will  either  consume  you  or  your  sins, — you  or 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOTIOGRATIIV.  TI^ 

your  self-righteousness.  Jesus  felt  His  Father  to  be  a  consuming  fire  in  the  day 
when  the  Divine  wrath  fell  on  Him  to  the  uttermost  ;  if  He  had  to  endure  it, 
what  will  those  feel  who  live  and  die  in  sin  ?  May  you  be  led  to  trust  Jesus 
with  your  souls  now  !  May  you  all  be  saved  !  May  we  all  meet  in  glory  to 
part  no  more  !  Till  then,  I  am,— 

"  Your  earnest  minister, 

"  C.   1 1.   STURGEON." 

A  little  while  before  the  Pastor  left  home  for  his  holiday,  in  January,  1874,  he 
commenced  a  young-  people's  prayer-meeting-,  Jn  the  Tabernacle  lecture-hall,  for 
an  hour  before  the  usual  Monday  evening-  gathering.  The  effort  was  a  great 
success,  and  even  during-  his  absence  an  attendance  of  between  six  and  seven 
hundred  was  maintained.  It  was,  therefore,  only  natural  that  this  very  hopeful 
portion  of  the  congregation  should  receive  a  considerable  share  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
attention  while  he  was  away.  The  four  following  letters  were  all  addressed  to  the 
young  people  at  the  Monday  six  o'clock  prayer-meeting  :— 

"  Paris, 

"Jan.   1 6. 

"  Dear  Young  Friends, 

have  your  welfare  continually  upon  my  heart,  and  therefore  thought 
would  pen  a  lew  sentences  to  you.  I  was  much  encouraged  by  the  prayerful 
attention  and  deep  feeling  which  I  saw  last  Monday  in  many  of  you.  It  filled  me 
with  great  hope  concerning  you.  I  see  that  you  desire  to  have  your  sins  foroiven, 
and  to  escape  from  the  wrath  of  God,  and  I  am  therefore  rejoiced  ;  but  I  pray  God 
that  the  signs  of  grace  may  not  end  with  these  mere  beginnings  and  desires.  Buds 
are  beautiful,  but  we  cannot  be  satisfied  with  them  ;  they  are  only  good  because 
blossoms  often  become  fruit.  Mere  blooms  on  the  trees,  and  no  fruit,  would  be  a 
mockery  of  expectation.  May  it  not  be  so  with  you  ! 

;'  I  am  writing  in  my  chamber  in  Paris  at  midnight:  'I  could  not  sleep  till  1  had 
said  to  you, — Put  your  w/lo/c  trust  in  Jesus  at  once.  All  that  you  want  of  merit,  He 
will  give  you  ;  all  that  you  need  of  help  in  the  Heavenly  life,  He  will  bestow.  Only 
believe  Him.  You  who  are  saved,  be  sure  to  wrestle  wilh  God  for  the  salvation  of 
other  young  people,  and  try  to  make  our  new  meeting  a  great  means  for  good.  You 
who  are  unawakened,  we  pray  continually  for  you,  for  you  are  sleeping  over  hell's 
mouth  ;  I  can  see  your  danger,  though  you  do  not.  It  is  therefore  time  for  you  to 
awake  out  of  sleep.  I  send  my  earnest  love  to  you  all,  praying  that  we  may  meet 
on  earth  in  much  happiness,  and  then  at  last  in  Heaven  for  ever. 

"  Your  anxious  Iriend, 

"  C.    1 1.   STURGEON." 


116 


C.     II.     SPURGKONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


,  AS  SEEN  FROM  DR.  BE.VNETS  GARDEN. 

"  Mentone, 

"  Jan.  23. 
"  My  Dear  Young  Friends, 

"  I  am  delighted  to  hear  that  you  came  together  in  such  large  numbers 
last  Monday  in  my  absence,  for  I  hope  it  shows  a  real  and  deep  anxiety  among  the 
seekers  to  find  the  Saviour,  and  among  the  saved  ones  to  plead  for  others.  You  do 
not  need  the  voice  of  any  one  man  to  secure  your  attention  ;  the  Word  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  by  whomsoever  spoken,  is  life  and  power.  It  is  to  Him  that  you  must  turn 
all  your  thoughts.  Sin  has  separated  between  you  and  your  Gocl,  and  Christ  alone 
can  bring  you  back  to  your  Heavenly  Father.  Be  sure  that  you  remember  what  it 
cost  Him  to  prepare  the  way  of  reconciliation  ;  nothing  but  His  blood  could  have 
clone  it,  and  He  gave  it  freely,  bowing  His  head  to  death  upon  the  tree.  It  must 
have  been  no  light  matter  which  cost  the  Redeemer  such  a  sacrifice  ;  I  beseech  you, 


C.     II.     SPURGEON S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


117 


do  not  make  light  of  it.      Hate  the  sin  which  caused  Mini  so  much  agony,  and  yield 
to  the  love  which  sustained  Him  under  it. 

"  I  hear  that  in  London  you  have  had  fogs  and  rain,  here  it  is  all  flowers  and 
summer,  and  the  difference  reminds  me  of  the  change  which  faith  makes  in  the 
soul.  While  we  are  unbelievers,  we  dread  the  wrath  ol  God,  and  walk  in  gloom  ; 
but  when  we  believe,  we  have  peace  with  God,  and  enjoy  His  favour,  and  the  spring 
of  an  eternal  summer  has  commenced.  May  the  Spirit  of  God,  like  the  soft  South 
wind,  breathe  upon  you,  and  make  your  hearts  bloom  with  desires,  blossom  with 
hopes,  and  bring  forth  fruits  of  repentance  !  From  Jesus  He  proceeds,  and  to  Jesus 
He  leads  the  soul.  Look  to  Him,  Oh,  look  to  Him  ;  to  Him  alone  ;  to  Him 

simply  ;  to  Him  at  once  ! 

"  Your  anxious  friend, 

"  C.    H.   SPURGKON." 

"  Men  tone, 

"  Feb.  5. 
"  Dear  Youno-  Friends, 

o 

"  I  am  greatly  cheered  to  hear  that  you  gather  in  such  numbers,  and 
shall  be  yet  more  glad  when  1  hear  or  see  that  hearts  are  won  for  Jesus,  and  that 
with  your  mouths  you  make  confession  of  Him.  I  look  with  so  much  hope  upon 
you,  that  it  would  be  a  bitter  disappointment  if  I  did  not  hear  that  some  of  you  are 
saved  in  the  Lord. 


THE   CEMETERY,    MENTONE. 


"  I  have  just  limped  up  a  high  hill  into  the  cemetery  here,  and  there  I  saw  a 
text  which  struck  me.  '  But  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  her  foot,  and  she 
rcliu'ned  unto  him.'  Noah  was  her  rest,  as  Jesus  must  be  yours.  Just  notice  that 


nS 


C.      II.     Sl'URGKONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


it  is  added,  '  lie  put  forth  his  hand,  and  look  her,  and  pit/led  her  in  unto  him-  into 
the  ark.'  She  was  too  weak  to  get  in,  but  Noah's  kind  hand  '  pulled  her  in  unto 
him.'  Dear  young  friends,  I  pray  the  Lord  Jesus  to  grasp  those  of  you  who  are 
weary  and  weak,  and  pull  you  in.  His  promises  are  pulls,  His  invitations,  and  those 
of  the  kind  friends  who  address  you,  are  so  man)-  pulls.  Yield  yourselves  unto  them, 
and  be  pulled  in  unto  //////.  No  rest  is  there,  Fast,  West,  North,  or  South,  for 
your  soul's  foot,  save;  in  the  ark  of  sovereign  grace  ;  but  then;  is  rest  there.  As  the 
dove  turned  her  eye,  and  then  her  wing,  to  the  ark,  so  turn  your  desires  and  prayers 
to  Jesus  ;  and  as  she  dropped  into  Noah's  hand,  so  fall  into  the  hand  which  was 
pierced  that  sinners  might  live.  I  pray  for  each  one  of  you,  and  have  entreated  the 
great  High  Priest  to  bear  each  one  of  your  names  before  His  Father's  face  upon 
I  I  is  own  breastplate.  May  the  Lord  save,  sanctify,  and  preserve  every  one  of  us 
till  the  great  day  oi  His  appearing  ! 

"  Your  loving    Pastor, 

"  C.     11.     Sl'URGKOX." 

"  Mentone, 

"  Feb.    12. 
"  Dear  Young  Friends, 

I  am  lull  ol  delight  at  hearing  of  what  the.  Lord  is  doing  among  you 
in  saving  souls  ;  but  will  any  of  you  be  missed  by  the  gracious  visitation  ?  Will  the 
sacred  rain  leave  some  of  you  dry  as  the  mountains  of  Gilboa  ?  Is  Jesus  passing 
by,  and  will  you  not  cry  to  I  lim  ?  Is  I  I  is  grace  felt  by  your  brother,  your  sister,  and 
your  mother,  and  not  by  you  ?  Unhappy  soul,  which  shall  manage  to  elude  the 
blessed  influences  which  arc:  now  abroad  among  us  !  Surely,  such  an  one  must  be 
dexterous  in  resisting  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  desperately  resolved  to  perish!  What 
reason  can  be  urged  for  such  a  course  ?  What  excuse  for  such  suicide?  Let  those 
who  are  saved,  pray  much  for  others  who  remain  hardened. 

''  I  am  rejoiced  that  those  of  you  who  have  found  Jesus  are.  not  ashamed  to  own 
Him.  Why  should  you  be.?  Only  make  sure  that  you  are  really  converted;  do 
not  be  content  with  shams.  Seek  the  real  thing.  Lay  hold,  not  on  temporary 
hope,  but  on  eternal  life.  True  faith  always  has  repentance  for  its  twin-brother,  love 
for  its  child,  and  holiness  for  its  crown.  If  you  have  looked  to  Jesus  for  life,  be  sure 
that  you  next  look  to  Him  for  the  pattern  of  life,  so  that  you  may  walk  as  He 
also  walked.  As  young  Christians,  you  will  be  greatly  tempted  ;  pray,  then,  to  be 
securely  kept,  that  you  may  never  dishonour  your  Lord.  We  shall  soon  meet,  if 
the  Lord  will  ;  and  till  then,  my  love  be  with  you  all.  Amen. 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.   H.   SPURGKOX." 


C.      II.     STURGEONS     AUTOIJIOGRATIIY.  119 

While  the  young  people  in  general  were  thus  tenderly  and  affectionately 
remembered,  the  boys  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  had  the:  following  letter  specially 
written  to  them  :  - 

"  Mentonc, 
"Saturday  evening,  January  24th,   1874. 

"  Dear  Boys, 

"  I  have  been  much  impressed  by  hearing  that  death  has  been  to  the 
Orphanage.  Are  you  all  prepared,  if  he  should  shoot  another  arrow  into  one  of 
the  houses,  and  lay  another  low  ?  I  wonder  who  will  be  the  next !  Dear  boys, 
would  you  go  to  Heaven  if  you  were  now  at  once  to  die?  Wait  a  bit,  and  let  each 
one  answer  for  himself.  You  know,  you  must  be  born  again,  you  must  repent  of 
sin,  you  must  believe  in  Jesus.  I  low  is  it  with  you  ?  If  you  are  not  saved,  you  are 
in  great  danger,  in  fearful  peril  !  Be  warned,  I  pray  you  !  I  cannot  bear  to  think 
of  one  boy  going  from  the  Orphanage  to  hell  ;  that  would  be  terrible  indeed.  But 
to  rise  to  Heaven,  to  be  with  Jesus  for  ever  ;  why,  this  makes  it  worth  while  even  to 
die  a  hundred  deaths. 

"  I  hope  my  dear  friend,  Mr.  Charlesworth,  and  all  the  teachers,  and  matrons, 
and  nurses,  are  well  ;  I  send  them  all  my  kindest  regards.  I  often  think  about  you 
all.  I  want  to  see  you  all  happy  here  and  hereafter.  May  you  grow  up  to  be 
honourable  Christian  men  ;  and  if  God  should  take  any  of  you  away,  may  we  all 
meet  in  Heaven  !  Will  you  pray  a  special  prayer,  just  now,  that  the  death  of  one 
boy  may  bring  all  of  you  to  Jesus  to  find  eternal  life?  Be  diligent  in  school,  be 
very  kind  in  the  houses.  Do  not  cause  us  pain,  but  give  us  all  joy,  ior  we  all  love 
you,  and  desire  your  good. 

"  Mr.  Charlesworth  will,  on  my  behalf,  give  you  a  couple  of  oranges  all  round, 
and  I  will  pay  him  when  I  come  home. 

"Your  loving  friend, 

"  C.   II.   STURGEON." 

One  letter  was  addressed  to  the  Bible-classes  conducted  by  Elders  Perkins  and 
Bowker  :— 

"  Mentone, 

"  Feb.  5. 
"'  Beloved  Brethren, 

"  Peace  be  to  you  and  the  dear  friends  who  conduct  your  meetings  ! 
1  am  hoping  to  see  a  great  revival  of  religion  throughout  our  church  and  all  its 
agencies,  and  I  want  your  two  classes  not  only  to  partake  in  it,  but  to  lead  the  way 
in  promoting  it. 

"  '  I   have  written  unto  you,  young  men,  because  ye  are  strong.'     The  influence 


I2O  C.      II.      SI'UR(iKU\  S     AUTUl5IO(JK.\riIV. 

which  a  choice  hand  ol  young  believers  may  have  upon  our  own  church  and 
congregation,  and  the  outlying  neighbourhood,  is  exceedingly  great.  Being  your 
selves  soundly  instructed  in  the  iaith,  you  are  to  aid  in  building  up  others,  and 
especially  to  help  in  quarrying  new  stones  irom  the  pit  of  nature.  The  Spirit  of 
God  will  rest  upon  you  in  answer  to  prayer,  and  then  you  will  become  vessels  fit  for 
the  Master's  use.  This  you  cannot  be  without  personal  holiness  and  individual 
consecration  ;  let  not  these  be  lacking  among  you,  and  then  you  will  not  be  barren 
or  unprofitable. 

"  Begin  by  doubling  your  own  numbers,  which  I  believe  could  be  done  if 
you  laid  it  to  heart,  and  resolved  each  one  to  introduce,  at  the  least,  one  new 
comer.  Make,  each  meeting  full  of  life,  power,  prayer,  love,  and  xeal.  I  confess 
I  am  sorry  that  the  Catechism  is  not  still  your  text-book,  for  I  believe  it  is  a  good 
groundwork,  and  keeps  you  near  the  most  important  subjects.  Discussions  upon 
the  new  theories  of  the  day  drive  away  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  the:  old  wine  is  the  best. 

"  Your  leaders  are  men  of  experience:,  and  have  my  fullest  confidence,  and, 
what  is  more,  my  most  sincere  love.  Always  support  them,  and  back  them  up  ;  and 
then  let  your  motto  be,  'Advance.'1  Push  into  the  unconquercd  regions.  There 
ought  to  be  more  work  done:  close  at  home  around  the  Tabernacle.  The  time  for 
outdoor  services  will  soon  be  upon  us  ;  see  what  you  can  do  beyond  what  is  yet 
done.  Sunday-schools  in  many  places  are  pining  for  want  of  teachers,  and  Ragged- 
schools  still  more  so.  Where,  there  is  a  gap,  fill  it. 

"  The  Lord  be  with  you  !  Please  pray  lor  me,  that  I  may  return  strengthened 
in  spirit,  and  soul,  and  body. 

"  With  Christian  love, 

'  \  ours  very  heartily, 

"  C.     11.     Sl'URCEON." 

Another  letter  was  written  to  Mrs.  Bartlett's  class  :— 

"  Mentonc, 

"  Saturday  evening. 
"  Beloved  Friends, 

"  I    write  to   salute   you  all,    and   especially   your   beloved    mother   in  the 
gospel,  my  dear  friend,  Mrs.  Bartlett.      I  hope  you  are  enjoying  times  of  power  such 
as  have   been   so   usual   with    the   class.      The    Lord's   own    daughters   among  you— 
each   one  a  princess,   not   in   her  own   right,   but   by   marriage   to   King  Jesus, — are, 
I  trust,  living  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  high  privileges. 

"'Why  should  the  children  of  a  King 
C.o  mourning  all  their  days?' 

Yours  it  is  to  wear  a  girdle  of  joy  ;    '  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength.'      See 


c.    IT.    STURGEON'S    AUTOT.IOGRATIIY.  121 

to  it  that  your  lives  arc  consistent  with  your  high  callings,  for  it  ill  becomes  the 
daughters  of  Zion  to  demean  themselves  like  the  children  of  earth.  '  Let  your 
conversation  be  as  it  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ.'  Be  watchful  for  the  souls  of 
others,  and  support  by  your  prayers  the  earnest  eflorts  of  your  beloved  leader, 
Mrs.  Bartlett. 

"  For  those  of  you  who  are  unsaved,  I  have  this  word, — '  How  long  halt  yc 
between-  two  opinions?'  Years  roll  on  ;  and  each  one  spent  in  alienation  from  God 
swells  your  dreadful  account.  Have  you  not  sinned  enough  ?  Have  you  not  run 
risks  enough,  that  you  must  still  imperil  your  souls  ?  An  hour  even  of  the  toothache 
is  too  much  ;  but  what  is  that  compared  with  the  disease  of  sin  and  the  anger  of  God? 
Yet  these  you  bear  as  if  they  were  mere  trilles.  Will  the  time  of  decision  never 
come  ?  Or  will  you  linger  till  you  perish  in  your  sin  ?  '  Remember  Lot's  wife.' 
She  is  a  monument  of  salt  ;  take  a  little  of  that  salt,  and  season  your  thoughts  with 
it.  Your  graves  are  yawning  for  you,  hell  also  enlargeth  itself.  Flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come?  ;  start  up,  like  those  who  have  been  asleep  upon  the  brink  ot  death  ; 
and  'strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate.' 

"  Yours  lovingly,  for  Christ's  sake, 

"  C.   H.   STURGEON." 

The   students  of  the   College   had  this   choice  epistle  from   their   ever-beloved 

President  : 

"  Mentone, 

"  Saturday  evening. 

"  Beloved  Brethren, 

"In  my  absence,  I  never  cease  to  remember  you,  because  I  have  you  all 
in  my  heart,  as  the  hope  of  the  church,  and  the  future  benefactors  of  the  world.  I 
trust  every  man  is  conscientiously  labouring  at  his  studies,  never  wasting  an  hour. 
Your  time  for  study  is  so  short,  and  so  much  will  be  required  and  expected  of  you, 
that  I  beseech  you  to  quit  yourselves  like  men.  Every  moment  with  you  is  worth  a 
Jew's  eye,  and  its  profiting  will  be  a  hundred-fold  in  the  future.  We  have  to  cope 
with  no  mean  adversaries.  Our  antagonists  are  well  equipped  and  well  trained. 
Our  trust  is  in  the  Lord  alone,  and  we  go  forth  armed  only  with  a  sling  and  a  stone  ; 
but  we  must  practise  slinging  till  we  can  throw  to  a  hair's-breadth,  and  not  miss.  It 
was  no  unpractised  hand  which  smote  so  small  a  target  as  Goliath's  brow.  Do  not 
let  the  devil  make  fools  of  you  by  suggesting  that,  because  the  Lord  works,  you  may 
be  idle.  I  do  not  believe  it  of  the  least  among  you. 

"  Brethren,  for  our  Lord's  sake,  maintain  a  high  degree  of  spirituality  ;  may  the 
Holy  Spirit  enable  you  so  to  do  !  Live  in  God  that  you  may  live  for  God.  Let  the 
church  see  that  her  students  are  her  picked  men.  I  rely  upon  you,  in  my  absence, 


122  C.      II.      STURGEONS     AUTOIHOGRATILV. 

to  help  in  all  meetings  for  prayer  or  revival  to  the  utmost  of  your  ability.  Nothing- 
would  give  me  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that,  while  1  am  away,  the  Lord  was 
moving  some  of  you  to  make  up  for  my  lack  of  service. 

"i  am  much  better.  Here,  'everlasting  spring  abides;'  and  though  flowers 
wither,  there  are  always  fresh  ones  to  fill  their  places.  The  balmy  summer  air  is  as 
oil  to  my  bones. 

"  I  send  my  sincere  love  to  you  all,  and  especially  to  your  honoured  tutors,  and 
the  venerable  Principal,  to  whom  bet  long  hie,  and  the  same  to  you  all  !  My  dear 
brother  will  be  to  you  all  that  1  could  have  been,  and  you  will  pray  for  him,  and 

also  for— 

"  Your  loving  friend, 

"  C.     H.     STURGEON." 

Last,  but  not  least,  the  Pastor  wrote;  to  his  church  and  congregation  the  closing 
epistle  ol  the  special  series  in  1874  : 

"  Men  tone;, 

"  Feb.   12. 

"  Beloved  Friends, 

"  By  the  time  this  letter  is  read  to  you,  I  shall,  if  the  Lord  will,  be  on  my 
way  back  to  you  ;  and  my  prayer  is  that  I  may  return  'in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing 
of  the  gospel  of  Christ.'  Very  greatly  have  I  been  cheered  by  hearing  of  your  prayers 
for  me,  and  still  more  by  the  news  of  the  good  and  great  work  which  the  Lord  is 
doing  in  your  midst.  It  is  glad  tidings  indeed.  How  grateful  I  am  that  dear 
brethren  among  you  at  home  have  been  so  highly  honoured  that  Gocl  has  worked  by 
them  so  abundantly  !  1  rejoice  in  their  joy.  The;  report  of  conversions  in  the 
families  of  the  members  is  peculiarly  refreshing.  God  grant  that  not  one  family 
may  be  unblest ! 

"  I  am  myself  greatly  better,  and  very  thankful  that  it  is  so,  for  I  long  to  be  an 
eye-witness  and  a  partaker  in  the  revival  work.  Oh,  that  it  may  go  on  till  not  one 
hearer  shall  remain  unsaved  ! 

"  Beloved  friends,  join  all  of  you  heartily  in  the  work,  and  let  none  in  any  way 
damp  it  by  unloving,  unholy,  or  careless  walking.  The  clouds  of  blessing  will  blow 
away  from  us  if  worldliness  be  allowed  to  prevail.  Sin  in  the  church  will  be  the 
death  of  revival,  or  else  the  revival  will  be  the  death  of  sin.  Let  no  one  among  us 
besmear  himself  with  the  blood  of  souls  by  a  careless  conversation  in  such  solemn 
times  as  these.  May  the;  Holy  Ghost  quicken  us  all  into  newness  and  fulness  of 

life  !     God  bless  you  all  !      So  prays,— 

"  Yours  in  Jesus, 

"  C.    H.   STURGEON." 


C.     II.     SL'UKGEOX'S     AUTOliKXIRAl'IlV. 


As  the  last  letter  is  so  short,  and  scarcely  represents  adequately  the  Pastor's 
intense  love  and  care  specially  for  his  great  church  and  congregation  while  he  was 
necessarily  absent  for  a  while  from  their  midst,  another  of  his  communications, 
of  later  date,  is  appended,  to  make  the  series  more  fairly  representative  and 

complete  :  — 

"  Mentone, 

"  Feb.   13-   1877. 

11  Beloved  Friends, 

"  I  have  heard,  with  the  utmost  satisfaction,  of  the  enthusiasm  with 
which  the  special  services  have  been  taken  up  by  so  many  of  you.  It  is  a  token  lor 
good  which  encourages  my  largest  expectations.  The  anxiety  of  the  church  lor 
conversions  is,  in  a  very  distinct  manner,  connected  with  the  desired  result  ;  for  that 
desire  leads  to  increased  prayer,  and  so  secures  the  effectual  working  of  the  Holy- 
Spirit  ;  and  it  also  inspires  an  ardent  zeal  which  sets  believers  working  lor  the 
salvation  of  those  around  them,  and  this  also  is  sure  to  produce?  fruit.  I  look,  there 
fore,  for  the  conversion  of  many  with  as  much  confidence  as  1  look  lor  the  ships  to 
arrive  at  their  haven  when  a  fair  wind  is  blowing. 

"To  those  who  are  thus  earnest  for  the  Lord's  glory,  I  send  my  heart's 
gratitude,  and  for  those  who  are  not  as  yet  aroused  to  like  ardour,  I  put  up  my 
fervent  prayers  that  they  may  no  longer  lag  behind  their  brethren.  Our  children  are 
growing  up  around  us,  our  great  city  is  daily  adding  to  its  enormous  bulk,  and  our 
cemeteries  are  being  gorged  with  the  dead  ;  so  long  as  one  soul  remains  unsaved, 
and  in  danger  of  the  unquenchable  lire,  it  behoves  every  Christian  to  be  diligent  to 
spread  abroad  the  healing  savour  of  the  Redeemer's  Name.  Woe  unto  that  man 
who  conceals  the  Light  while  men  are  stumbling  in  the  darkness  !  \Yoe  unto  him 
who  keeps  back  the  Bread  of  life  in  the  season  of  famine  !  Beloved,  1  am  persuaded 
better  things  of  you,  though  I  thus  speak. 

"Persevering,  quiet  believers,  who  in  secret  implore  the  Divine  blessing,  and 
then  regularly  give  their  aid  to  the  continuous  worship,  service,  and  intercession  ol 
the  church,  are  the  strength  of  the  brotherhood,  the  main  body  of  the  hosts  ol  the 
Lord.  Let  all  such  rejoice  because  their  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  But  we 
need  also  dashing  spirits  who  will  lead  on  in  continually-renewed  efforts  ;  thoughtful, 
practical  men  and  women  who  will  suggest  and  commence  aggressive  movements. 
We  have  such  among  us,  but  others  need  to  be  pressed  into  the  service.  One 
should  canvass  for  the  Sabbath-school,  another  should  break  up  fresh  tract-districts, 
a  third  should  commence  a  cottage  service,  and  a  fourth  should  preach  in  a  court  or 
alley  which  has  not  as  yet  been  visited.  Brethren,  we  must  all  do  all  that  can  be 
done  for  Jesus,  for  the  time  is  approaching  when  we  must  give  in  our  account,  and 
our  Master  is  at  hand, 


[24  C.      II.      SPURGEON  S     ATT<  MilOGKAPII  Y. 

"  Beloved  in  the  Lord,  my  joy  and  crown,  walk  in  all  love  to  each  other,  in 
holiness  towards  God,  and  in  uprightness  and  kindness  towards  all  men.  Peace  be 
with  you  all  ! 

"  .May  those  who  have  heard  the;  gospel  among  us,  but  have  not  as  yet  felt  its 
power,  be  found  by  the  Lord  during  the  services  which  have  been  held  in  my 
absence  !  If  they  have  escaped  the;  net  when  I  have  thrown  it,  may  some  brother- 
fisher  of  souls  be  more  successful  with  them  !  It  is  very  hard  to  think  of  one  of  our 
hearers  being  lost  for  ever,  but  how  much  harder  will  it  be  for  them  to  endure,  in 
their  own  persons  denial  ruin  !  May  the  great  Lover  of  men's  souls  put  forth  His 
pierced  hand,  and  turn  the  disobedient  into  the.  way  of  peace  ! 

"  I  am  most  grateful  to  report  that  my  health  is  restored,  my  heart  is  no  longer 
heavy,  my  spirits  have  revived,  and  I  hope  to  return  to  you  greatly  refreshed. 
Loving  friends  in  Christ,  I  beg  to  be  continually  remembered  in  your  prayers. 
I  send  my  love  to  my  Co-pastor  and  true  helper,  to  the  deacons,  elders,  and  every 
one;  of  you  in  Christ  Jesus. 

"  Yours  heartily, 

"  C.   II.   SPURGEON.' 


CHAPTER     LXVIII. 


pastors'  CoUtgc,  1861—1878. 


It  is  a  grand  assistance  to  our  College  that  it  is  connected  with  an  active  and  vigorous  Christian 
church.  If  union  to  such  a  church  does  not  quicken  the  student's  spiritual  pulse,  it  is  his  own  lault.  It 
is  a  serious  strain  upon  a  man's  spirituality  to  be  dissociated,  during  his  student-life,  from  actual 
Christian  work,  and  from  fellowship  with  more  experienced  believers.  At  the  Pastors'  College,  our 
brethren  can  not  only  meet,  as  they  do  every  day,  for  prayer  by  themselves,  but  they  can  unite  daily  in 
the  prayer-meetings  of  the  church,  and  can  assist  in  earnest  efforts  of  all  sorts.  Through  living  in  the 
midst  of  a  rhurch  which,  despite  its  faults,  is  a  truly  living,  intensely  zealous,  working  organization,  they 
gain  enlarged  ideas,  and  form  practical  habits.  Even  to  see  church-management  and  church-work  upon 
an  extensive  scale,  and  to  share  in  the  prayers  and  sympathies  of  a  large  community  of  Christian  peop'e, 
must  be  a  stimulus  to  right-minded  men.  It  has  often  done  me  good  to  hear  the  students  say  that  they 
had  been  warned  against  losing  their  spirituality  during  their  College  course;  but  they  had,  on  the 
contrary,  proved  th:-t  their  piety  had  been  deepened  and  increased  through  association  with  their 
brethren  and  the  many  godly  men  and  women  with  whom  they  were  constantly  brought  into  contact. 
Our  circumstances  are  peculiarly  helpful  to  growth  in  grace,  and  we  are  grateful  to  have  our  Institution 
so  happily  surrounded  by  them.  The  College  is  recognized  by  the  church  at  the  Tabernacle  as  an  integral 
part  of  its  operations,  and  is  supported  and  loved  as  such. — C. 

f  HEN  the  Tabernacle  was  opened,  the  students  migrated  irom  Mr. 
Rogers'  house  to  the  class-rooms  in  the  new  sanctuary,  and  the 
Pastor  took  an  early  opportunity  of  bringing  the  work  of  the 
College  more  distinctly  before  his  church  and  congregation  than  he 
had  previously  done.  On  Lord's-day  morning,  May  19,  1861,  in 
reminding  his  hearers  of  the  object  for  which  the  collection  had 
been  announced,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  :— "  It  has  been  thought  desirable  that  I  should 
state  a  few  particulars  relative  to  our  Institution  for  training  young  men  lor  the 
ministry.  Some  five  or  six  years  ago,  one  of  the  young  men  of  our  church  gave 
promise  of  being  a  successful  minister  if  he  could  but  have  a  good  education.  With 
the  assistance  of  two  friends,  I  resolved  to  take  him  under  my  charge,  send  him  to 
a  suitable  tutor,  and  train  him  for  the  ministry.  So  useful  was  that  brother,  that 
I  was  induced  to  take  another,  and  another,  and  another.  Hitherto,  I  have  been 
myself  committee,  secretary,  treasurer,  and  subscriber.  I  have  not,  except  in  one  or 
two  instances,  even  mentioned  the  matter  to  anyone  ;  but  have  been  content  to 
spare  everything  that  I  could  out  of  my  own  income,  beyond  that  which  is  necessary 
for  the  support  of  my  household,  in  order  to  educate  any  suitable  young  men  who 
came  in  my  way,  that  they  might  become  ministers  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  1  here 
are  now  seven  settled  out,  all  of  whom  have  been  eminently  successful.  They  are 
probably  not  men  who  will  become  great  or  brilliant,  but  they  have  been  good 
and  useful  preachers.  I  think  there  are  not  other  seven  in  the  whole  Baptist 


126  C.     JI.     STURGEON S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

denomination  who  have  had  so  many  converts  during  the  years  that  they  have  been 
settled.  They  have  been  the  means,  most  of  them,  in  the  hands  of  God,  of  adding 
many  members  every  year  to  the  churches  of  which  they  are  pastors  ;  and 
most  of  those  churches  are  not  in  provincial  towns,  but  in  villages.  I  have  therefore 
been  led  still  further  to  increase  my  number  of  students,  and  I  have;  now  about 
sixteen  young  men  wholly  to  support  and  train.  Beside  these,  there  is  a  very 
considerable  number  of  brethren  who  receive  their  education  in  the  even i no-,  though 
they  still  remain  in  their  own  callings.  With  the  wider  sphere  we  now  occupy  as  a 
church,  I  propose  so  to  enlarge  my  scheme  that  all  the  members  of  this  church  and 
congregation,  who  happen  to  be  deficient  in  the  plain  rudiments  of  knowledge,  can 
get  an  education — a  common  English  education,  for  themselves.  Them,  if  they 
display  any  ability  for  speaking,  without  giving  up  their  daily  avocations,  they  shall 
have  classes  provided  for  higher  branches  of  instruction.  But  should  they  feel  that 
dod  has  called  them  to  the  ministry,  I  am  then  prepared — after  the  use  of  my  own 
judgment,  and  the  judgment  of  my  friends,  as  to  whether  they  are  fit  persons, — to 
give  them  two  years'  special  tutorship,  that  they  may  go  forth  to  preach  the  Word, 
thoroughly  trained  so  far  as  we  can  effect  it  in  so  short  a  time.  I  know  I  am- called 
to  this  work,  and  I  have  had  some  most  singular  interpositions  of  Providence  in 
furnishing  funds  for  it  hitherto.  At  the  day  of  judgment,  the  world  shall  know  that 
there  has  never  lived  a  man  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  who  has  less  deserved 
the  calumny  of  'seeking  to  enrich  himself  than  I  have,  I  shall  say  no  more  upon 
that  matter;  let  the  world  slander  me  if  it  will.  I  want  the  money  to-day,  not  lor 
myself  in  any  respect;—!  give  my  services  and  my  time  free!}-,  and  of  my  own 
income  all  that  I  can  spare..  I  only  want  my  friends,  who  feel  interested  in  this 
work,  to  assist  me,  that  we  may  provide  men  who  shall  preach  the  gospel  to  multi 
tudes  who  are  longing  to  hear  it  full)-  and  faithfully  proclaimed." 

In  addition  to  the  public  collection  for  the  College,  generous  gifts  wen- 
contributed  privately,  and  on  July  i,  a  church-meeting  was  held,  of  which  the 
church-book  contains  the  following  account  : 

"  Our   Pastor   having  told  the  members  of  his    Institution   for  educatino-  you  no- 

<">      J  <""> 

ministers,  and  having  stated  that  several  of  them  are  now  settled  in  country  charges, 
and  labouring  with  great  success,  it  was  unanimously  agreed, — That  this  church 
rejoices  very  greatly  in  the  labours  of  our  Pastor  in  training  young  men  for  the 
ministry,  and  desires  that  a  record  of  his  successful  and  laborious  efforts  should  be 
entered  in  our  church-books.  Hitherto,  this  good  work  has  been  rather  a  private 
service  for  the  Lord  than  one  in  which  the  members  have  had  a  share  ;  but  the 
church  hereby  adopts  it  as  part  of  its  own  system  of  Evangelical  labours,  promises 
its  pecuniary  aid,  and  its  constant  and  earnest  prayers." 


C.      II.     SL'UlfGEOXS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  127 

Not  long  afterwards,  Mr.  Spurgeon  brought  the  College  still  more  prominently 
before  the  notice  of  the  Christian  public  by  means  of  the  following  letter  : — 

"  To  Believers  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 

"  Dear  Friends, 

"  Not  in  vain  ostentation,  as  though  I  would  say,  '  Come  and  see  my 
zeal  for  the  Lord/  but  for  sundry  weighty  reasons,  1  feel  moved  to  place  before  you 
this  statement  concerning  a  most  important  department  of  Christian  labour  which 
the  Lord  has  committed  to  my  charge.  This  I  do  in  the  fear  of  God,  expecting 
His  blessing  in  the  deed,  since  I  have  a  single  eye  to  His  glory  and  the  benefit  of 
His  Church.  As  I  have  not  founded  this  Institution  for  training  young  men  for  the 
ministry  because  any  persuaded  me  to  do  so,  and  as  1  have  not  continued  to  labour 
in  it  because  many  have  favoured  the  design,  so  I  should  not  lay  the  work  aside  if, 
in  future,  I  should  meet  with  no  sympathy  in  regard  to  it.  If  it  be  of  men, 
may  it  come;  to  nought  ;  but  if  it  be  of  God,  lie  will  take  care  that  it  shall  stand. 
The  work  is  no  mere  experiment, — no  wild-goose  chase  after  an  imaginary  good  ; 
but  the  result  of  many  prayers,  and  a  deliberate  dedication  of  the  soul,  followed  up 
by  the  practical  experience  of  seven  years.  Solemnly  do  I  know  that  this  work  ol 
training  young  evangelists  has  been  laid  upon  me  by  the  Lord.  I  have  espoused  the 
service  as  my  life's  labour  and  delight, — a  labour  for  which  all  my  other  work  is  but  a 
platform, — a  delight  superior  even  to  that  afforded  by  my  ministerial  successes, 
(jive  it  up,  I  cannot  ;  and  so  long  as  the  Lord  enables  me,  I  hope  to  persevere,  even 
though  I  should  have  to  toil  alone,  unaided,  or  even  unapproved. 

"  This  remark  is  made  at  the  outset,  not  because  I  undervalue  the  sympathy  of 
my  brethren  in  Christ,  but  to  show  that  the  work  rests  on  a  firmer  foundation  than  the 
approbation  of  men,  and  is  carried  on  in  another  spirit  than  that  which  depends  upon 
an  arm  of  flesh.  Resolute  perseverance,  based  upon  a  conviction  of  special  call,  is 
not  to  be  overcome  unless  the  Divine  power  which  it  invokes  should  refuse  its  aid. 
Questions  about  the  necessity  or  the  propriety  of  the.  Institution  will,  of  course,  be 
asked,  and  the  writer  is  far  from  denying  that  liberty  to  any  man  ;  but,  meanwhile, 
that  enquiry  has  long  ago  been  so  abundantly  answered  in  the.  conscience  of  the 
person  most  concerned  therein,  that  the  work  continually  goes  on,  and  will 
increasingly  go  on,  whatever  may  be  the  decision  of  other  minds.  When  the  Lord 
withholds  His  aid,  the  work  will  cease  ;  but  not  till  then.  Faith  grows  daily,  and 
rests  more  and  more  confidently  upon  the  promise  and  providence  of  God  ;  and, 
therefore,  the  work  will  rather  increase;  than  come  to  a  pause.  I  do  not,  therefore, 
pen  these  lines  because  I  would  look  to  man,  or  feel  a  need  of  human  aid  to  buttress 
the  Divine.  The  Institution  was  never  so  flourishing  as  now,  and  it  is  no  necessity 
which  urges  me  to  tell  my  brethren  what  is  being  done.  Whether  men,  money,  or 


128  c.    ii.    SPUKCKON'S    AL'TOKIUCKAPIIY. 

churches,   be   required,   the.    Lord   will   surely  supply   them  ;  and   just  now  they  are 
brought  to  us  in  superabundance,  so  that  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  beg  ior  aid. 

"  But  it  would  be,  to  my  own  soul,  an  inexpressible  source  of  joy  if  believers 
would  allord  this  Institution  a  place  in  their  lervent  prayers.  All  of  us  engaged  in 
the  enterprise  feel  our  entire:  dependence  upon  the  Holy  Spirit;  and,  hence,  we 
value,  beyond  all  price',  the  prayers  of  the  saints.  \Ve  cannot  teach  efficiently,  our 
men  cannot  study  to  any  purpose,  and  their  labours  cannot  avail  to  win  souls,  except 
as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  pour  out  His  blessing  upon  us.  Oh,  that  we  could  win 
the  hearts  of  some  ot  the  King's  intercessors,  so  that  they  would  plead  with  our 
Lord  to  remember  us  in  mercy  !  Moreover,  il  the  Christian  Church  should  be 
moved  to  take  an  interest  in  our  ailairs,  m;my  of  Cod's  people  would  leel  stirred  up 
to  give  of  their  substance  for  the  support  ol  the:  Lord's  young  prophets.  \\  hile  we 
look  up  to  the  treasury  in  the  skies  for  the  supply  ol  every  need,  we  know  that  the 
means  must  come  through  the  channel  of  the  saints.  It  is  not  consistent  with  our 
plan  to  ask  anyone  personally,  or  to  request  regular  pledged  subscriptions  ;  yet  we 
think  it  meet  to  remind  believers  of  their  stewardship,  and  of  their  obligation  to 
extend  their  Master's  Kingdom  ;  and  we  do  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  no  work 
more  deserves  their  aid  than  that  which  the  Lord  has  laid  upon  us  ;  there  is  not  one 
more  likely  to  bless  the  Church,  and  to  gather  together  the  wandering  sheep.  Of 
this,  however,  each  one  must  judge  for  himself;  and,  according  to  the  verdict  of 
his  conscience,  each  one  must  act.  None  but  those  who  thoroughly  appreciate  our 
work  will  be  likely  to  send  assistance.  This  is  as  it  should  be,  and  as  we  believe  the 
Lord  would  have  it.  Of  what  value  can  unwilling  subscriptions  be  in  His  sight? 

"  Some  seven  years  ago,  one  youthful  brother  was  blessed  of  God  in  street- 
preaching.  Me  was  quite  uneducated,  but  had  a  ready  utterance  and  a  warm  heart. 
In  conjunction  with  my  beloved  friend,  Rev.  G.  Rogers,  the  task  of  training  the 
young  soldier  was  undertaken  ;  and,  by  Divine  grace,  the  brother  became  a  most 
useful  and  successful  minister  of  the  gospel.  From  this  small  beginning  has  arisen 
the  Pastors'  College  at  the  Tabernacle,  in  which,  at  present,  50  men  are  under  constant 
tuition,  and  more  than  150  receive  instruction  in  the  evening.  It  is  not  my  intention, 
just  now,  to  detail  the  various  stages  of  growth  ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  has  been  with  us  for  good,  and  the  encouragements  and  rejoicings  far 
exceed  the  difficulties  and  trials,  although  these  have  been  not  a  few.  Financial 
pinches  there  might  have  been  if  it  had  been  my  habit  to  look  only  at  visible 
resources  ;  but  when  I  have  fallen  for  an  hour  into  an  unbelieving  frame  of  mind,  I 
have  been  so  severely  chastened,  and  withal  so  tenderly  assisted,  that  I  am  compelled 
to  forego  all  complaint  or  fear.  I  write  it  to  the  honour  of  my  Master, — He  has 
made  my  cup  to  run  over,  and  has  supplied  all  my  need  '  according  to  His  riches  in 
glory  by  Christ  Jesus,'  so  that  I  have  had  no  real  financial  difficulties  at  all. 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 29 

Money  has  flowed  in  even  before  it  was  required.  As  to  finding  the  men,  they  have 
always  offered  themselves  in  larger  numbers  than  I  could  receive  ;  and  in  the 
business  of  the  settlement  of  the  students  in  pastorates,  there  has  been  no  difficulty, 
for  they  are  demanded  by  the  churches  even  before  the  brief  season  of  their  training- 
has  expired.  Some  eight  spheres  of  labour  are  at  the  present  moment  waiting  for  the 
young  reapers  to  go  forth.  When  openings  do  not  occur,  we  make  them  ;  and,  by 
planting  new  interests  in  the  vicinity  of  London,  we  hope  to  increase  the  number  and 
strength  of  the  churches  of  Christ.  In  every  other  matter,  a  straight  path  has  been 
opened,  and  direction  afforded.  God  has  been  with  us  of  a  truth. 

"At  first,  I  had  only  intended  to  send  out  some  one  or  two  brethren  ;  but  the 
increase;  has  been  thrust  upon  me,  so  that  the  number  of  students  is  not  fixed,  but 
may  be  increased  or  diminished,  as  means  are  given.  I  may  receive  a  hundred  if 
enabled  to  do  so  ;  or  I  may  lower  our  numbers  to  a  few  it  required.  Plans  also  have 
been  suggested,  not  by  forethought,  but  by  experience, — which,  after  all,  is  no  mean 
teacher, — and  new  methods  will  be  followed  whenever  they  commend  themselves  to 
my  judgment.  The  reasoning  which  has  formed  and  fashioned  my  purpose  and 
action  is  in  a  measure  as  follows  : — 

"It  seems  to  me  that  many  of  our  churches  need  a  class  of  ministers  who  will 
not  aim  at  lofty  scholarship,  but  at  the  winning  of  souls  ; — men  of  the  people,  feeling, 
sympathizing,  fraternizing  with  the  masses  of  working-men  ; — men  who  can  speak 
the  common  language,  the  plain  blunt  Saxon  of  the  crowd  ; — men  ready  to  visit  the 
sick  and  the,  poor,  and  able  to  make;  them  understand  the  reality  of  the  comforts  of 
religion.  There  are  many  such  men  among  the  humbler  ranks  of  society,  who  might 
become  master-workmen  in  the  Lord's  Church  if  they  could  get  an  education  to  pare 
away  their  roughness,  and  give  them  more  extended  information  ;  but,  in  most  of 
our  Colleges,  the  expenses  are  too  great  for  poor  men  ;  indeed,  to  meet  their  case, 
there  must  be  no  cost  at  all  to  them,  and  they  must  be  fed,  housed,  and  clothed 
while,  under  instruction.  Why  should  not  such  men  have  help  ?  Why  should  they 
be  compelled  to  enter  our  ministry  without  a  competent  knowledge  of  .Scripture;  and 
Biblical  literature  ?  Superior  in  some  respects  already,  let  them  be  educated,  and 
they  will  be  inferior  in  none.  It  was  the  primary  aim  of  this  Institution  to  help  such 
men,  and  this  is  still  its  chief  end  and  design  ;  although,  of  late,  we  have  been  glad 
to  receive  some  brethren  of  superior  station,  who  put  us  to  no  charges,  and  feeling 
the  education  to  be  of  the  precise  kind  they  require,  are  happy  to  accept  it,  and 
maintain  themselves.  This,  however,  does  not  alter  our  main  plan  and  purpose. 
Whether  the  student  be  rich  or  poor,  the  object  is  the  same, — not  scholarship, 
but  preaching  the  gospel, — not  the  production  of  fine  gentlemen,  but  of  hard 
working  men. 

"  C.   H.  SPURGEON." 
i  3 


130 


C>     II.     STURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


The  list  of  students  in  the  College',  at  about  the  time  this  letter  was  written, 
contained  the  names  of  men  of  God  who  have  left  their  mark  upon  the  age,  and 
whose  work  as  preachers  and  soul-winners,  or  as  teachers  of  others,  is  only  second 
to  that  of  the  beloved  President  himsc.lt'.  Four  of  those  names  stand  out  conspicu 
ously, David  Gracey,  who  was  "called  home"  one  year  after  Mr.  Spurgeon  ; 

Frank  II.  White,  (now  of  Talbot  Tabernacle,  Xotting  Hill);  Archibald  G.  Brown 
(now  of  West  Norwood)  ;  and  Charles  Burl  Sawday  (the  present  Assistant-pastor  at 
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle).  At  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Pastors'  College  in 
1898,  Mr.  Archibald  Hrown  thrilled  the  audience  with  his  graphic  description  of  a 
scene  of  which  he  was  one  of  the  eye-witnesses  six-and-thirty  years  before. 


THE  LADIES'  ROOM.  METROPOLITAN  TAUKRNACI.E. 


(The  chair  on  the  right  K>as  the  one  used  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  at  Monday  evening  prayer-meeting  in  the  Tabernacle.; 


"At  that  date,"  said  Mr.  Hrown,  "the  dear  Governor — he  was  always  'the  dear 
Governor  '  to  us, — held  his  Friday  afternoon  class  in  the  newly-completed  ladies' 
room  at  the  Tabernacle.  One  day,  as  he  entered,  we  noticed  that  he  had  brought 
with  him  a  tall,  pale  young  man  ;  and,  as  soon  as  the  cheering,  which  always  greeted  his 
arrival,  had  subsided,  he  said  to  us,  '  Here,  brethren,  is  a  student  who  knows  more 
than  the  whole  lot  of  us  put  together.  He  is  quite  able  to  teach  us  all,  yet  he  would 
not  let  me  rest  until  I  promised  to  take  him  into  the  College  ;  give  him  a  hearty 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  131 

welcome.'  That  pale  young  man,"  added  Mr.  Brown,  "was  dear  David  Gracey." 
This  gifted  and  gracious  brother  had  been  brought  up  as  a  Presbyterian  ;  but,  while 
yet  a  youth,  he  became  a  Baptist.  Having  received  a  good  education  in  his  boy 
hood,  he  passed  into  Glasgow  University  to  be  prepared,  unconsciously,  for  the 
great  work  which  God  had  in  store  for  him.  Brilliant  as  a  student,  he  would, 
doubtless,  have  distinguished  himself  in  the  scholastic  world,  had  not  higher 
aims  taken  possession  of  his  heart.  In  the  providence  of  God,  it  happened  that 


PASTOR    FRAM 


Mr.  Frank  \\  hile  was  sent  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  Glasgow,  just  about  that  time,  at  the 
request  of  Mr.  John  Anderson,  to  conduct  a  week's  special  evangelistic  services. 
Respecting  this  mission,  Mr.  White;  writes  : — "  I  preached  every  night  in  large  cold 
'  churches'  with  varied  success.  I  was  too  much  advertized,  and  the  people  expected 
too  much  from  me,  and  looked  for  a  sensation,  which  I  neither  could  nor  sought  to 
produce.  I  believe,  however,  that  souls  were,  saved.  It  was  then  that  I  met  and 
talked  long  with  our  dear  Mr.  Gracey,  who  was  greatly  exercised  in  mind  concerning 
his  position.  lie  enquired  much  about  the  Pastors'  College,  which  he  seemed 
desirous  to  enter,  and  I  strongly  urged  him  to  do  so." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  humorously  conferred  upon  Mr.  White,  while  in  College,  the 
title  of  "  Professor  of  Button-hole  Theology," — in  allusion  to  his  constant  endeavour 
to  "button-hole"  individuals,  and  lead  them  to  the  Saviour; — and  among  the 
hundreds  of  men  whom  the  beloved  President  helped  to  prepare  for  the  Christian 
ministry,  there  were  none  who  stood  higher  in  his  estimation  than  the  two  of  whom 


1T>2  c.    ir.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

he  always  spoke  as  "  Frank  White  and  Archibald  Brown."  It  is  noteworthy  that  the 
"  Fraternal  "  with  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  identified,  during  the  last  year  or  two  of 
his  earthly  service,  was  called  by  him  "the  Whitey-Brown  brotherhood"  because  of 
the  active  part  taken  by  these  two  brethren  in  its  initiation  and  development. 

Mr.  White  has  kindly  written,  for  this  volume,  the  following-  reminiscences  of 
his  student-days,  and  some  later  notable  experiences  :— "  Early  in  1862,  Mr.  Henry 
Hull— who  was  himself  a  master  in  the  blessed  art  of  soul-winning,— wrote  to  Mr. 
Spurgeon  with  a  view  .to  my  admission  to  the  Pastors'  College.  An  appointment  for 
an  interview  was  soon  made,  and  with  some  fear  and  trembling  (for  the  first  and  last 
time,— for  I  never  afterwards  trembled  in  his  presence,  except  with  delight,)  I  stood 
before  the  great  preacher  in  his  vestry  at  the  Tabernacle.  '  The  very  man  I  want/ 
was  his  hearty  exclamation  the  instant  I  entered  the  room.  I  clo  not  remember 
anything  else  he  said,  except,  'You  must  go  to  Paradise;  Chapel,  Chelsea,  next 
Sunday/  Accordingly,  to  Paradise  Chapel  I  went  ;  and  that  little  riverside 
sanctuary  became  a  very  Eden  to  me,  though  its  surroundings  were  often  quite 
the  reverse  of  paradisaical.  Only  eighteen  persons  were  present  at  the  first 
morning  service  at  Chelsea  ;  but,  by  the  grace  and  power  of  the  Lord  the  Spirit, 
some  eight  hundred  were  baptized  before  my  ministry  in  that  part  closed. 

"What  happy  days  were  those  we  spent  in  College,  and  with  what  eagerness 
did  we,  after  the  intense  strain  of  the  study  and  work  of  the  week,  look  forward  to 
those  delightful  Friday  afternoons  with  the  President  !  Being  fewer  in  number,  the 
intercourse  was  closer  than  was  possible  in  after  days.  How  favoured  we  were  even 
in  the  ordinary  course  of  things  ;  but  what  of  those-  special  opportunities,  such  as  a 
six-days'  driving  tour,  which  was  once  my  happy  lot?  The  letter  of  invitation 
is  before  me  now. 

"  '  Dear  Mr.  White, 

"  '  I  am  expecting  you  at  my  house,  at  8  a.m.  next  Monday,  to  go  for  a 
week's  drive.  I  have  reserved  a  seat  in  the  carriage  for  you,  which  I  could  have 
filled  with  some  other  friend,  so  that  you  must  not  feel  free  to  decline  under  any 
consideration  whatever.  Your  charges  will  all  be  paid,  and  your  company 
appreciated.  Not  to  have  you  with  me,  would  grievously  afflict— 

"  '  Your  loving  friend, 

"  '  C.  H.   SPURGEON.' 

"  '  Breakfast  at  Nio-htino-ale  Lane  at  8  ;— bound  to  me  till  Saturday  evening  ;— may 

o  *^> 

reach  home  by  6  on  that  evening.' ' 

"Think   whether  a  poor,   worn-out,   hard-worked   student— such   as   Archibald 
Brown,  or  myself,— would  be  glad  to  receive  such  a  command,  or  not.      I  must  leave 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


133 


it  to  an  abler  pen  than  mine  to  describe  those  drives  from  day  to  day  ;  but  to 
me,  they  were  indescribably  joyous.  The  very  trees  of  the  field  clapped  their 
hands  ;  and  we  were  closely  examined  as  to  their  nomenclature,  and  then  most 
delightfully  instructed  as  to  their  peculiarities  and  characteristics.  I  wish  I  could 
recall  some  of  the  dear  Governor's  conversations  as  we  rode  along  ;  but  I  do 
remember  one  thing  that  he  said.  We  were  close  by  the  spot  where  the  Bishop  of 
Winchester  fell  from  his  horse,  and  was  killed  ;  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  that  he  had 
just  received  a  letter  from  a  clergyman,  who  informed  him  that  his  bodily  sufferings 
were  a  judgment  from  God  upon  him  for  speaking  against  the  Church  of  England. 
In  replying  to  his  unfeeling  correspondent,  he  had  asked, — If  a  swollen  hand  or  foot 
was  to  be  regarded  as  a  mark  of  Divine  displeasure,  what  was  to  be  said  concerning 
a  broken  neck  ?  Needless  to  say,  that  question  remained  unanswered." 


I'ASTOR    ARCHIBALD    G.    BROWN. 


Mr.  Brown  has  preserved   the   following  letter  inviting  him  to  form  one  of  the 
party  on  another  of  those  memorable  driving  tours  :— 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

"  Clapham, 

"  May   23. 
"  Dear  Friend, 

"Will  you  go  out  with  me  and  others,  on  June  15,  for  a  week,  or  two 
weeks,  or  three  weeks,  or  a  few  days,  or  whatever  time  you  like  ?  We  feel  that 
we  should  like  your  company,  and  we  think  we  might  do  you  good.  You  are 


134  C.     II.     SPURGEON S     AUTOmOGKAPlIY. 

very  dear  to   us  ;   to  me  especially.      We  shall  be  very  quiet,   and  jog  along  with 
the  old  greys. 

"  I  pray  the  Lord  to  bless  and  comfort  you. 

"  Yours  so  heartily, 

"C.    H.   STURGEON." 

Two  other  letters  show  what  a  true  yoke-fellow  Mr.  Brown  was  to  his  beloved 
President,  and  with  what  intense  affection  and  esteem  Mr.  Spurgeon  regarded  his 

former  student  : — 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

"  Clapham. 
"  Loving  Brother, 

"  I  thank  you  much  for  preaching  for  me,  praying  for  me,  and  loving  me. 
I  am  better,  but  have;  had  a  sharp  nip.  Lucian  says,  '  I  thought  a  cobra  had  bitten 
me,  and  filled  my  veins  with  poison  ;  but  it  was  worse, — it  was  goul.'  TJiat  was 
written  from  experience,  I  know.  Yet  I  bless  God  for  this  sulk-ring  also,  and  believe 
that  your  prophetic  card  will  be  truer  than  Dr.  Cumming's  vaticinations. 

"  Yours  ever  lovingly, 

"C.   II.  S." 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

o  o 

"  Clapham, 

"  January  29th. 

"Three  cheers  for  you,  my  true-hearted  comrade!  The  story  of  your  Last 
London  gathering  of  the  clans  fills  me  with  delight.  The  Lord  be  with  thee,  thou 
mighty  man  of  valour!  Whether,  in  striking  the;  Spiritualists,  you  arc;  hitting  the 
devil  or  a  donkey,  does  not  matter  much  ;  you  have  evidently  hit  hard,  or  they  would 
not  be  so  fierce.  I  am  not  able  to  take  much  credit  for  bringing  you  up,  but  I  am 
about  as  proud  of  you  as  I  dare  be. 

"  I  hope  we  shall  have  a  good  meeting  on  Friday  week.      It  is  oil  to  my  bones 

to  see  you  all. 

"Yours  always  lovingly, 

"  C.     II.     Sl'UKGKON." 

The  fourth  of  the  notable  students  of  1862  —  Mr.  Sawday — has  kindly  forwarded 
the  following  letter,  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  to  his  father  when  the  question  of  a 
College  training  for  our  clear  friend  was  under  discussion  :— 

"  Clapham, 

"April  1 2th,  '62. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  scarcely  wonder  at  your  preference  of  Regent's  Park  College  for 
your  son,  but  I  think  you  labour  under  some  mistake,  for  it  so  happens  that 


C.      H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  135 

the    ground    of  your    choice    is   just    one    of    the    evils    which    my    Institute    seeks 
to  remedy. 

"The  residence  of  a  number  of  young  men  in  one  house  encourages  and 
necessarily  generates  levity  ;  their  separation  from  common  social  life  is  a  serious 
injury,  and  tends  to  unfit  them  for  the  wear  and  tear  of  future  work  among  ordinary- 
mortals.  When  a  young  man  resides  in  a  Christian  family,  not  only  is  he  under  the 
most  vigilant  oversight,  but  he  never  ceases  to  be  one  of  the  people.  \Ye  are  far 
from  putting  our  men  into  the  way  of  temptation  ;  on  the  other  hand,  we  think 
our  arrangement  is  the  most  effectual  method  of  preservation.  I  merely  write  this 
because  your  brief  acquaintance  with  our  systems  may  allow  me  to  suppose  that 
this  view  of  the  case  has  not  suggested  itself  to  you. 

"  Our  tutors  are  sound  scholars;  but,  as  we  do  not  aim  at  any  very  profound 
scholarship,  we  allot  but  two  years  to  the  course.  The  young  men  who  have  left  us 
have  been  very  useful,  and  the  class  now  in  hand  will  bear  comparison  with  any 
body  of  men  living. 

"  I  could  not,  while  possessing  any  self-respect,  prepare  your  son  for  Dr.  Angus  ; 
but  I  shall  be  delighted  to  be  of  any  other  service  to  him. 

"  Yours  most  truly, 

"  C.     11.     Sl'UKGKON." 


Mr.  Sawday  sends  this  explanation  of  the  letter,  and  also  mentions  how  the 
difficulty  was  happily  overcome  : — "  My  clear  father  was  prejudiced  against  Mr. 
Spurgeon  ;  and,  in  his  anxiety  tor  me  to  receive  an  efficient  training  for  the  Baptist 
ministry,  had  arranged  for  my  admission  to  Regent's  Park  College.  But  I  had 


136  c.    ii.    SPUKGEON'S 

heard  Mr.  Spurgeon  several  times  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  I  pleaded  with  my  father 
not  to  insist  on  my  going"  to  Regent's  Park,  and  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  admit  me  to 
the  Pastors'  College.  In  those  early  days,  it  was  no  wonder  that  my  father,  whose 
whole  religious  life  was  spent  among  the  Wesleyans,  should  have  been  unwilling  for  his 
son  to  be  associated  with  so  pronounced  aCalvinist  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  was,  and  he  had 
conscientious  objections  against  contributing  towards  my  support.  The  dear  Pastor 
met  us  both,  one  Sunday  morning,  after  the  service,  and  ended  the  matter  by  saving, 
'Well,  Mr.  Sawday,  your  son  is  set  on  entering  my  College,  and  he  shall  be  trained, 
if  necessary,  at  my  own  expense.'  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  I  feel  that  I 
have  mon^  cause  than  many  of  our  brethren  for  holding  in  grateful  love  the  memory 
of  our  now  glorified  President." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  could  scarcely  have  imagined  that,  by  this  generous  offer,  he  was 
preparing  the  way  into  the  ministry  for  a  brother  who  would,  for  a  third  of  a  century, 
he  greatly  owned  of  God  as  a  winner  of  souls,  and,  then,  alter  his  beloved  President's 
departure,  become  the  able  and  loyal  assistant  ol  /us  son  and  successor  in  the 
pastorate  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  Yet  so  it  has  proved  by  the  unerring 
wisdom  ol  Him  who  — 

"  Moves  in  a  mysterious  way, 
His  wonders  to  perform.'' 


CHAPTER    LXIX. 


$aSt0V5'    COUCSC,    1861--1878    (Continued). 

Ilonorat,  in  the  opening  years  of  the  fifth  century,  retired  to  the  little  island,  near  Cannes,  which 
still  bears  his  name;  and   attracted  around  him  a  number  of  students,  many  of  whom  becam. 
famous  missionaries  that  the  Romish  Church  has  enrolled  them  among  her  "saints, 
known  to  us  is  Patrick,  the  evangelizer  of  Ireland.     Christianity  was  then  almost  as  pure  as  at  the  first 
and  we  can  well  imagine  the  holy  quietude  in  which,  among  the   rocks  of  this  sunny  isle,  hundreds  ot 
good  men  spent  the  years  of  their  preparation   for  future  ministry.     With  constant  meditation   and 
prayer  it  must  have  been  a  Patmos  to  them  ;  and  when  they  left  its  shores,  they  went  forth,  full  of  zeal, 
to  cry  like  John  the  divine,  "  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come.     And  let  him  that  hcareth  say,  Come. 
And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.     And  whosoever  will,  -let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely." 
a^es  it  has  seemed  good  unto  the  Lord  to  gather  men  around  some  favoured  instructor,  and  enable 
them    under  his  guidance,  to  sharpen   their   swords    for   the   battle   of  life.     Thus  did   Honorat  and 
Columba,  in  the  olden  days,  and  so  did  Wydiffe  and  Luther  and  Calvin,  in  the  Reformation  times,  tram 
the  armies  of  the  Lord  for  their  mission.     Schools  of  the  prophets  are  a  prime  necessity  if  the  power  ot 
religion  is  to  be  kept  alive  and  propagated  in  the  land.     As  we  sat  under  the  umbrageous  pines  by  tl 
calm  sea,  and  gazed  upon  the  almost  more  than  earthly  scene  around,  our  heart  swelled  with  great 
desires,  and  our  prayer  went  up  to  Heaven  that  we  also  might  do  something  to  convert  the  nations  ere 
we  go  hence,  and  be  no  more.     If  God  wills  it,  we  may  yet  commence  new  missionary  operations,  and 
we  mean,  on  cur  return,  to  call  our  men  together  to  pray  about  it.-C.  II.  S.,  in  "Notes  from  Mentone"  1877. 

UK  following  account,  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  words,  was  always 
regarded  by  him  as  "  the  best  history  "  of  the  Pastors'  College  ;  and 
it  is,  for  that  reason,  the  most  suitable  record  to  appear  in  his 
"  Standard  Life."  With  the  particulars  and  portraits  published  in 
Vol.  II.,  Chapter  XLVI.,  and  the  further  reminiscences  supplied 
here  and  in  the  previous  chapter  by  former  students,  it  furnishes 
the  fullest  and  most  reliable  information  concerning  the  important  Institution  which 
the  peerless  President  often  called  "his  firstborn  and  best  beloved." 

The  Pastors'  College  (commenced  in  1856)  has  unceasingly  been  remembered 
of  the  God  of  Heaven,  to  whom  all  engaged  in  it  offer  reverent  thanksgiving. 
When  it  was  commenced,  I  had  not  even  a  remote  idea  of  whereunto  it  would  grow. 
There  were  springing  up  around  me,  as  my  own  spiritual  children,  many  earnest 
young  men  who  felt  an  irresistible  impulse  to  preach  the  gospel  ;  and  yet,  with  half 
;m  cy^  it  could  be  seen  that  their  want  of  education  would  be  a  sad  hindrance  to 
them.  It  was  not  in  my  heart  to  bid  them  cease  their  preaching  ;  and,  had  I  done 
so,  they  would,  in  all  probability,  have  ignored  my  recommendation.  As  it  seemed 
that  they  would  preach,  though  their  attainments  were  very  slender,  no  other  course 
was  open  but  to  give  them  an  opportunity  to  educate  themselves  for  the  work 

Two  friends,  Mr.  Winsor  and  Mr.  W.  Olney,  both  deacons  of  the  church, 
promised  aid,  which,  with  what  I  could  myself  give,  enabled  me  to  take  one  student 


138  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOISIOGKAI'HY. 

(Mr.  T.  \\r.  Medhurst),  for  whom  I  sought  to  find  a  tutor.  In  Mr.  George  Rogers,  then 
the  Pastor  of  the  Independent  Church,  Albany  Road.  Camberwell,  God  sent  us  the 
very  best  man.  He  had  been  preparing  for  such  work,  and  was  anxiously  waiting 
for  it.  This  gentleman,  who  remained  until  1881  our  principal  tutor,  is  a  man  of 
Puritanic  stamp,  deeply  learned,  orthodox  in  doctrine,  judicious,  witty,  devout, 
earnest,  liberal  in  spirit,  and  withal  juvenile  in  heart  to  an  extent  most  remarkable  in 
a  man  of  his  years.  My  connection  with  him  has  been  one  of  uninterrupted  comfort 
and  delight.  The  most  sincere  affection  exists  between  us,  we  are  ot  one  mind  and 
of  one  heart  ;  and  what  is  equally  important,  he  has  in  every  case  secured  not  merely 
the  respect  but  the  filial  love  of  every  student. 

Encouraged  by  the  readiness  with  which  the  first  students  found  spheres  of 
labour,  and  by  their  singular  success  in  soul-winning,  I  enlarged  the  number,  but 
the  whole  means  of  sustaining  them  came  from  my  own  purse.  The  large  sale  of 
my  sermons  in  America,  together  with  my  dear  wife's  economy,  enabled  me  to  spend 
from  ^600  to  ^800  a  year  in  my  own  favourite  work  ;  but,  on  a  sudden,  owing  to 
my  denunciations  of  the  then  existing  slavery  in  the  States,  my  entire  resources  from 
that  "  brook  Cherith  "  were  dried  up.  I  paid  as  large  sums  as  I  could  from  my  own 
income,  and  resolved  to  spend  all  I  had,  and  then  take  the  cessation  of  my  means  as 
a  voice  from  the  Lord  to  stay  the  effort,  as  I  am  firmly  persuaded  that  we  ought 
under  no  pretence  to  go  into  debt.  On  one  occasion,  I  proposed  the  sale  of  my 
horse  and  carriage,  although  these  were  almost  absolute  necessaries  to  me  on 
account  of  my  continual  journeys  in  preaching  the  \Yord.  This  my  friend  Mr. 
Rogers  would  not  hear  of,  and  actually  offered  to  be  the  loser  rather  than  this  should 
be  done.  Then  it  was  that  I  told  my  difficulties  to  my  people,  and  the  weekly 
offering  commenced  ;  but  the  incomings  from  that  source  were  so  meagre  as  to  be 
hardly  worth  calculating  upon.  I  was  brought  to  the  last  pound,  when  a  letter  came 
from  a  banker  in  the  City,  informing  me  that  a  lady,  whose  name  I  have:  never  been 
able  to  discover,  had  deposited  a  sum  of  ^200,  to  be  used  for  the  education  of 
young  men  for  the  ministry.  How  did  my  heart  leap  for  joy  !  I  threw  myself  then 
and  henceforth  upon  the  bounteous  care  of  the  Lord,  whom  I  desired  with  my  whole 
heart  to  glorify  by  this  effort.  Some  weeks  later,  another  /,  100  came  in  from  the 
same  bank  ;  as  I  was  informed,  from  another  hand.  Soon  afterwards,  a  beloved 
deacon  of  the  church  at  the  Tabernacle  began  to  provide  an  annual  supper  for 
the  friends  of  the  College,  at  which  considerable  sums  have  from  year  to  year  been 
contributed.  A  dinner  was  also  given  by  my  liberal  publishers,  Messrs.  Passmore 
and  Alabaster,  to  celebrate  the-  issue  of  my  five  hundredth  weekly  sermon,  at  which 
^500  were  raised  and  presented  to  the  funds.  The  College  grew  every  month,  and 
the  number  of  students  rapidly  advanced.  Friends  known  and  unknown,  from  far 
and  near,  were  moved  to  give  little  or  much  to  my  work,  and  so  the  supplies 


c.    n.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  [39 

increased  as  the  need  enlarged.  Then  another  earnest  deacon  of  the  church, 
espoused  as  his  special  work  the  weekly  offering-,  which  has  been,  for  many  years,  a 
steady  source  of  income.  There  have  been,  during-  this  period,  times  of  great  trial 
of  my  faith  ;  but,  after  a  season  of  straitness,  never  amounting  to  absolute  want,  the 
Lord  has  always  interposed,  and  sent  me  large  sums  (on  one  occasion,  ,£1,000)  from 
unknown  donors.  When  the  Orphanage  was  thrust  upon  me,  it  did  appear  likely 
that  this  second  work  would  drain  the  resources  of  the  first,  and  it  is  very  apparent 
that  it  does  attract  to  itseli  some  of  the  visible  sources  of  supply  ;  but  my  faith  was 
firm  that  the  Lord  could  as  readily  maintain  both  Institutions  as  one,  and  He  has 
clone  so. 

Pecuniary  needs,  however,  have  made  up  but  a  small  part  of  my  cares.  Many- 
have  been  my  personal  exercises  in  selecting  the  men.  Candidates  have  always 
been  plentiful,  and  the  choice  has  been  wide  ;  but  it  is  a  serious  responsibility  to 
reject  any,  and  yet  more,. so  to  accept  them  for  training.  When  mistakes  have  been 
made,  a  second  burden  has  been  laid  upon  me  in  the  dismissal  of  those  who 
appeared  to  be  unfit.  Even  with  the  most  careful  management,  and  all  the  assistance 
of  tutors  and  friends,  no  human  foresight  can  secure  that,  in  every  case,  a  man  shall 
be  what  we;  believed  and  hoped.  A  brother  may  be  exceedingly  useful  as  an 
occasional  preacher,  he  may  distinguish  himself  as  a  diligent  student,  he  may  succeed 
at  first  in  the  ministry,  and  yet,  when  trials  of  temper  and  character  occur  in  the 
pastorate,  he  may  be  found  wanting.  We  have  had  comparatively  few  causes 
for  regret  of  this  sort  ;  but  there  have  been  some  such,  and  these  have  pierced  us 
with  many  sorrows.  I  devoutly  bless  God  that  lie  has  sent  to  the  College  some  of 
the  holiest,  soundest,  and  most  self-denying  preachers  I  know,  and  I  pray  that  He 
may  continue  to  do  so  ;  but  it  would  be  more  than  a  miracle  if  all  should  excel. 
\\  hile  thus  speaking  of  trials  connected  with  the  me  MI  themselves,  it  is  due  to  our 
gracious  God  to  bear  testimony  that  these  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the 
great  joy  which  we  experience  in  seeing  so  many  hundreds  of  brethren  still  serving 
the  Lord  according  to  their  measure  of  gift,  and  all,  it  is  believed,  earnestly 
contending  for  the  faith  once  delivered  unto  the  saints  ;  nor  is  the  joy  less  in 
remembering  that  man)-  have  sweetly  fallen  asleep  after  having  fought  a  good  light. 
At  this  hour,  some  of  our  most  flourishing  Baptist  churches  are  presided  over  by 
pastors  trained  in  our  College  ;  and,  as  years  shall  add  ripeness  of  experience  and 
stability  of  character,  others  will  be  found  to  stand  in  the  front  rank  of  the 
Lord's  host. 

I  he  College  was  for  some  little  time  aided  by  the  zealous  services  of  Mr.  W. 
Cubitt,  of  1  hrapston,  who  died  among  us,  enjoying  our  highest  esteem.  Mr.  Gracey, 
the  classical  tutor,  a  most  able  brother,  is  one  of  ourselves,  and  was  in  former  years 
a  student,  though,  from  possessing  a  solid  education,  he  needed  little  instruction 


140 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


from  us  except  in  theology.  In  him  we  have  one  of  the  most  efficient  tutors 
living,  a  man  fitted  for  any  post  requiring  thorough  scholarship  and  aptness  in 
communicating  knowledge.  Mr.  Fergusson,  in  the  English  elementary  classes,  does 
the  first  work  upon  the  rough  stones  of  the  quarry,  and  we  have  heard  from  the  men 
whom  he  has  taught  in  the  evening  classes  speeches  and  addresses  which  would 
have  adorned  any  assembly,  proving  to  demonstration  his  ability  to  cope  with  the 
difficulties  of  uncultured  and  ignorant  minds.  Mr.  Johnson,  who  zealously  aids  in 
the  evening,  is  also  a  brother  precisely  suited  to  the  post  which  he  occupies.  These 
evening  classes  afford  an  opportunity  to  Christian  men  engaged  during  the  day 
to  obtain  an  education  for  nothing  during  their  leisure  time,  and  very  many  avail 
themselves  of  the  privilege.  Nor  must  I  forget  to  mention  Mr.  Selway,  who  takes 
the  department  of  physical  science,  and  by  his  interesting  experiments  and  lucid 
descriptions,  gives  to  his  listeners  an  introduction  to  those  departments  of  knowledge: 
which  most  abound  with  illustrations.  Last,  but  far  from  least,  I  adore  the  goodness 
of  God  which  sent  me  so  dear  and  efficient  a  fellow-helper  as  my  brother  in  the  llesh 
and  in  the  Lord,  }.  A.  Spurgeon.  His  work  has  greatly  relieved  me  of  anxiety,  and  his 
superior  educational  qualifications  have  tended  to  raise  the  tone  of  the  instruction  given. 

(Mr.  Spurgeon  does  not  here  mention  his  own  important  part  in  the  training 
of  his  students,  but  one  of  them — Pastor  \V.  I).  McKinney,  now  of  Ansonia, 
Connecticut,  U.S.A., — has  written  the  following  graphic  description  of  the  ever- 
memorable  Friday  afternoon  classes  :— 

" Friday  afternoon  came:  at  last.  The  old,  familiar  clock  pointed  to  three;  the 
door  opened  on  the  stroke  of  the  hour,  the  beloved  President  appeared,  and  walked 
up  to  the  desk, — Dr.  dill's  pulpit, — while  hands  clapped,  feet  stamped,  and  voices 


DR.    GILLS   PULPIT. 


C.     II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


VICE-PRESIDENT  J.    A.    SPURGKON, 


PROFESSOR   DAVID   GRACEY 


PROFESSOR  A.   FERGUSSOX. 


PROFESSOR   W.    R.   SELWAY. 


EARLY    TUTORS    OK    TIIK    PASTORS'    COLLKCK. 


142 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


cheered,  till  he  had  to  hold  up  his  hand,  and  say,  '  Now,  gentlemen,  do  you  not  think 
that  is  enough  ;>  The  iloor  is  weak,  the  ceiling  is  not  very  high,  and,  I  am  sure,  you 
need  all  the  strength  you  have  for  your  labours.' 

"In  those  days,  the  President  was  in  his  prime.  His  step  was  firm,  his  eyes 
bright,  his  hair  dark  and  abundant,  his  voice  full  of  sweetest  music  and  sacred 
merriment.  Before  him  were  gathered  a  hundred  men  from  all  parts  of  the  United 
Kingdom,  and  not  a  few  from  beyond  the  seas.  They  were  brought  together  by  the 
magic  of  his  name,  and  the  attraction  of  his  personal  inlluence.  His  fame  had  gone 
out  into  all  lands.  His  sermons  were  published  in  almost  all  languages.  Many  sittino- 
before  him  were  his  own  sons  in  the;  faith.  Among  his  students  he  was  at  his  ease,  as 
a  father  in  the  midst  of  his  own  family.  The  brethren  loved  him,  and  he.  loved  them. 

'Soon,  the  Hoods  of  his  pent-up  wisdom  poured  forth;  the  flashes  of  his 
inimitable  wit  lit  up  every  face;,  and  his  pathos  brought  tears  to  all  eyes.  It  was  an 
epoch  in  student-life:  to  hear  him  deliver  his  Lectures  lo  my  Students.  What  weighty 


THE   DESK  ROOM,.  PASTORS'  COLLEGE    (WHERE   THE    LATER    "LECTURES    TO    MY   STUDE.VTS  "    WERE    DELIVERED). 

and  wise  discourse  he  gave  us  on  the  subject  of  preaching!  How  gently  he 
corrected  faults,  and  encouraged  genuine  diffidence  !  What  withering-  sarcasm  for 
all  fops  and  pretenders!  Then  came  those  wonderful  imitations  of  the  dear 


C.     H.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  143 

brethren's  peculiar  mannerisms, — one  with  the  hot  dumpling'  in  his  mouth,  trying  to 
speak  ;  another,  sweeping  his  hand  up  and  down  from  nose  to  knee  ;  a  third,  with 
his  hands  under  his  coat-tails,  making  the  figure  of  a  water-wagtail.  Then  the  one 

o  <r>  o 

with  his  thumbs  in  the  armholes  of  his  waistcoat,  showing  the  'penguin'  style  of 
oratory.  By  this  means,  he  held  the  mirror  before  us  so  that  we  could  see  our  faults, 
yet  all  the  while  we  were  almost  convulsed  with  laughter.  He  administered  the 
medicine  in  effervescing  draughts. 

<z_>  o 

"  After  this,  came  the  wise  counsel,  so  kind,  so  grave,  so  gracious,  so  fatherly  ; 
then  the  prayer  that  lilted  us  to  the  mercy-seat,  where  we  caught  glimpses  of  glory, 
and  talked  face  to  face  with  the  Master  Himself.  Afterwards,  the  giving  out  of  the 
appointments  for  the  next  Lord's-day  took  place  ;  the  class  was  dismissed  lor  tea, 
and  then  came:  the  men  who  wanted  advice.  Some  were  in  trouble,  others  in  joy  ; 
and  the  President  listened  patiently  to  all  their  tales  ;  anon  he;  would  laugh,  and  then 
he  would  weep.  At  last,  he  is  through,  'weary  in  the  work,  but  not  weary  of  it.' 
His  cheery  voice  gradually  dies  away  as  he  ascends  the  stairs  to  his  'sanctum.'  \Ye 
did  not  grieve  as  we  parted  from  him  ;  for  we  knew  that,  God  willing,  on  the  next 
Friday  afternoon,  we  should  once  more  see  his  bright,  genial  face,  and  hear  his  wit 
and  wisdom  again.") 

In  dealing  with  aspirants  for  the  ministry,  I  have  constantly  to  fulfil  the  duty 
which  fell  to  the  lot  ot  Cromwell's  "Triers."  I  have  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  the 
advisability  of  aiding  certain  men  in  their  attempts  to  become  pastors.  This  is  a 
most  responsible  duty,  and  one  which  requires  no  ordinary  care.  Of  course,  I  do 
not  set  myself  up  to  judge  whether  a  man  shall  enter  the  ministry  or  not,  but  my 
examination  merely  aims  at  answering  the  question  whether  the  Pastors'  College 
shall  help  him  or  leave  him  to  his  own  resources.  Certain  ot  our  charitable 
neighbours  accuse  me  of  having  "a  parson  manufactory,"  but  the  charge  is  not  true 
at  all.  I  never  tried  to  make  a  minister,  and  should  fail  if  I  did  ;  I  receive  none 
into  the  College  but  those  who  profess  to  be  ministers  already.  It  would  be  nearer 
the  truth  if  they  called  me  "  a  parson-killer,"  for  a  goodly  number  of  beginners  have 
received  their  quietus  from  me  ;  and  I  have  the  fullest  ease  of  conscience  in 
reflecting  upon  what  I  have  so  done.  It  has  often  been  a  hard  task  for  me  to 
discourage  a  hopeful  young  brother  who  has  applied  for  admission  to  the  College. 
My  heart  has  always  leaned  to  the  kindest  side,  but  duty  to  the  churches  has 
compelled  me  to  judge  with  severe  discrimination.  After  hearing  what  the  candidate 
has  had  to  say,  having  read  his  testimonials  and  seen  his  replies  to  questions,  when 
I  have  felt  convinced  that  the  Lord  has  not  called  him,  I  have  been  obliged  to  tell 
him  so. 

I  had  a  curious   experience  with   one  applicant.      His  Pastor  had  given  him   an 


144  C.      H.      STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

open  letter,  warmly  commending  him  to  me  as  a  man  called  to  the  ministry  ;  but,  in 
another  communication,  sent  to  me  by  post,  the  minister  wrote  that  the  young  man 
was  not  at  all  likely  ever  to  become  a  preacher,  and  that  he  had  only  written  the: 
recommendation  because  the  candidate's  father  was  his  chief  deacon,  and  he  feared 
to  oflend  him  by  telling  him  the  truth.  I  felt  that  it  was  quite  unjust  to  put  upon 
me  the  onus  of  refusing  the  young  man  ;  so,  when  he  arrived,  I  gave  him  the  epistle 
I  had  received,  and  left  him  and  his  father  to  settle  the  matter  with  their  Pastor  in 
the  best  way  they  could. 

Physical  infirmities  raise  a  question  about  the  call  of  some  excellent  men.  I 
would  not,  like  Eusthenes,  judge  men  by  their  features  ;  but  their  general  physique 
is  no  small  criterion,  and  I  feel  assured  that,  when  a  man  has  a  contracted  chest, 
with  no  distance  between  his  shoulders,  the  all-wise  Creator  did  not  intend  him 
habitually  to  preach.  If  lie  had  meant  him  to  speak,  He  would  have  given  him,  in 
some  measure,  breadth  of  chest  sufficient  to  yield  a  reasonable  amount  of  lung  force. 
A  man  who  can  scarcely  get  through  a  sentence  without  pain,  can  hardly  be  called 
to  "cry  aloud,  and  spare  not."  Brethren  with  defective  mouths  and  imperfect 
articulation  are  not  usually  qualified  to  preach  the  gospel.  The  same  rule  applies  to 
brethren  with  no  palate,  or  an  imperfect  one.  I  once  had  an  application  for  admis 
sion  to  the  College  from  a  young  man  who  had  a  sort  of  rotary  action  ol  his  jaw,  of 
the  most  painful  sort  to  the  beholder.  His  Pastor  commended  him  as  a  very  holy 
man,  who  had  been  the  means  of  bringing  some  to  Christ,  and  he  expressed  the:  hope 
that  I  would  receive  him,  but  I  could  not  see  the  propriety  ot  it.  I  could  not  have 
looked  at  him,  \vhile  he  was  preaching,  without  laughter,  if  all  the  gold  of  Tarshisli 
had  been  my  reward,  and  in  all  probability  nine  out  of  ten  of  his  hearers  would  have 
been  more  sensitive  than  myself.  A  man  with  a  big  tongue  which  filled  up  his  mouth 
and  caused  indistinctness,  another  without  teeth,  another  who  stammered,  another  who 
could  not  pronounce  all  the  alphabet,  I  have  had  the  pain  of  declining  on  the  ground 
that  God  had  not  given  them  those  physical  appliances  which  are,  as  the  Prayer- 
book  would  put  it,  "  generally  necessary." 

One  brother  I  have  encountered — one  did  I  say  ? — I  have  met  ten,  twenty,  a 
hundred  brethren,  who  have  pleaded  that  they  were  quite  sure  that  they  were  called 
to  the  ministry — because  they  had  failed  in  everything  else  !  This  is  a  sort  of  model 
story: — ''Sir,  I  was  put  into  a  lawyer's  office,  but  I  never  could  bear  the  confine 
ment,  and  I  could  not  feel  at  home  in  studying  law.  Providence  clearly  stopped  up 
my  roacl,  for  I  lost  my  situation."  "And  what  did  you  do  then?"  "Why,  sir,  I 
was  induced  to  open  a  grocer's  shop."  "And  did  you  prosper?"  "Well,  I  do  not 
think,  sir,  I  was  ever  meant  for  trade  ;  and  the  Lord  seemed  quite  to  shut  up  my 
way  there,  for  I  failed,  and  was  in  great  difficulties.  Since  then,  I  have  done  a  little 
in  a  life-assurance  agency,  and  tried  to  get  up  a  school,  beside  selling  tea  ;  but  my 


c.    H.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

path  is  hedged  up,  and  something  within  me  makes  me  feel  that  I  ought  to  be  a 
minister."  My  answer  generally  is,  "Yes,  I  see  ;  you  have  failed  in  everything  else, 
and  therefore  you  think  the  Lord  has  especially  endowed  you  for  His  service  ;  but  I 
fear  you  have  forgotten  that  the  ministry  needs  the  very  best  of  men,  and  not  those 
who  cannot  do  anything-  else."  A  man  who  would  succeed  as  a  preacher  would 
probably  do  right  well  either  as  a  grocer,  or  a  lawyer,  or  anything  else.  A  really 
valuable  minister  would  have  excelled  in  any  occupation.  There  is  scarcely  anything 
impossible  to  a  man  who  can  keep  a  congregation  tog-ether  for  years,  and  be  the- 

*>  O  O  J 

means  of  edifying1  them  for  hundreds  of  consecutive  Sabbaths  ;  he  must  be  possessed 
ot  some  abilities,  and  be  by  no  means  a  fool  or  a  ne'er-do-well.  Jesus  Christ  deserves 
the  best  men  to  preach  His  gospel,  and  not  the  empty-headed  and  the  shiftless. 

I  do  believe  that  some  fellows  have  a  depression  in  their  craniums  where  there 
ought  to  be  a  bump.  I  know  one  young  man  who  tried  hard  to  get  into  the 
College!  ;  but  his  mind  had  so  strange  a  twist  that  he  never  could  see  how  it  was 
possible  to  join  thing's  together  unless  he  tied  them  by  their  tails.  lie  brought  out 
a  book  ;  and  when  I  read  it,  I  found  at  once  that  it  was  full  of  my  stories  and  illus 
trations  ;  that  is  to  say,  every  illustration  or  story  in  the;  book  was  one  that  I  had 
used,  but  there;  was  not  one  of  them  that  \vas  related  as  it  ought  to  have  been.  This 
man  had  so  told  the  story  that  it  was  not  there,  at  all  ;  the  very  point  which  I  had 
brought  out  he  had  carefully  omitted,  and  every  bit  of  it  was  told  correctly  except 
the  one  tiling"  that  was  the  essence  of  the  whole.  Ot  course,  I  was  glad  that  I  did 
not  have  that  brother  in  the  College  ;  he,  might  have  been  an  ornament  to  us  by  his 
deficiencies,  but  we  can  do  without  such  ornaments  ;  indeed,  we  have  had  enough  of 
them  already. 

One  young'  gentleman,  with  whose  presence  I  was  once  honoured,  has  left  on 
my  mind  the  photograph  of  his  exquisite  self.  That  face  of  his  looked  like  the  title- 
page  to  a  whole  volume  o{  conceit  and  deceit.  He  sent  word  into  my  vestry,  one 
Sabbath  morning-,  that  he  must  see  me  at  once.  1  lis  audacity  admitted  him  ;  and 
when  he  was  before  me,  he  said,  "  Sir,  I  want  to  enter  your  College,  and  should  like 
to  enter  it  at  once."  "Well,  sir,"  I  said,  "I  fear  we  have  no  room  for  you  at  present, 
but  your  case  shall  be  considered."  "  But  mine  is  a  very  remarkable  case,  sir  ;  you 
have  probably  never  received  such  an  application  as  mine  before."  "  Very  good, 
we'll  see  about  it  ;  the  secretary  will  give  you  one  of  the  application  papers,  and  you 
can  see  me  on  Monday."  lie  came  on  the  Monday,  bringing  with  him  the  questions, 
answered  in  a  most  extraordinary  manner.  As  to  books,  he  claimed  to  have  read  all 
ancient  and  modern  literature,  and  after  "ivin^  an  immense  list,  he  added,  "  This  is 

<">  <_> 

merely  a  selection  ;  I  have  read  most  extensively  in  all  departments."  As  to  his 
preaching,  he  could  produce  the  highest  testimonials,  but  hardly  thought  they  would 
be  needed,  as  a  personal  interview  would  convince  me  of  his  ability  at  once.  His 

K  3 


146  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOIUOGKAPIIY. 

surprise  was  great  when  I  said,  "Sir,  I  am  obliged  to  tell  you  that  I  cannot  receive 
you."  "Why  not,  sir?"  "  I  will  tell  you  plainly.  You  are  so  dreadfully  clever  that 
I  could  not  insult  you  by  receiving  you  into  our  College,  where  we  have  none  but 
rather  ordinary  men  ;  the  President,  tutors,  and  students,  are  all  men  of  moderate 
attainments,  and  you  would  have  to  condescend  too  much  in  coming  among  us." 
He  looked  at  me  very  severely,  and  said  with  dignity,  "  Do  you  mean  to  say  that, 
because  I  have  an  unusual  genius,  and  have  produced  in  myself  a  gigantic  mind 
such  as  is  rarely  seen,  I  am  refused  admittance  into  your  College  ?  "  "  Yes,"  I 
replied,  as  calmly  as  I  could,  considering  the  overpowering  awe  which  his  genius 
inspired,  "  for  that  very  reason."  "  Then,  sir,  you  ought  to  allow  me  a  trial  of  my 
preaching  abilities  ;  select  me  any  text  you  like,  or  suggest  any  subject  you  please, 
and  here,  in  this  very  room,  I  will  speak  upon  it,  or  preach  upon  it  without  delibera 
tion,  and  you  will  be  surprised."  "  No,  thank  you,  I  would  rather  not  have  the 
trouble  of  listening  to  you."  "Trouble,  sir!  I  assure  you  it  would  be  the  greatest 
possible  pleasure  you  could  have."  I  said  it  might  be,  but  I  felt  myself  unworthy  of 
the  privilege,  and  so  bade  him  a  long  farewell.  The  gentleman  was  unknown  to  me, 
at  the  time,  but  he  has  since  figured  in  the  police:  court  as  too  clever  by  half. 

Beside  those  brethren  who  apply  to  me  for  admission  to  the  College,  I  am  often 
consulted  by  others  who  wish  me  to  say  whether  I  think  they  ought  or  ought  not  to 
preach,  and  I  have  more  than  once  felt  myself  in  the  position  of  the  Delphic  oracle, 
—not  wishing  to  give  wrong  advice,  and  therefore  hardly  able  to  give  any.  I  had 
an  enquiry  from  a  brother  whose  minister  told  him  he  ought  not  to  preach,  and  yet 
he  felt  that  he  must  do  so.  I  thought  I  would  be  safe  in  the  reply  I  gave  him,  so  I 
simply  said  to  him,  "  My  brother,  if  God  has  opened  your  mouth,  the  devil  cannot 
shut  it;  but  if  the  devil  has  opened  it,  I  pray  the  Lord  to  shut  it  directly."  Some 
time  afterwards,  I  was  preaching  in  the  country,  and,  after  the  service,  a  young  man 
came  up  to  me,  and  thanked  me  for  encouraging  him  to  go  on  preaching.  For  the 
moment,  I  did  not  recall  the  circumstances,  so  he  reminded  me  of  the  first  part  of 
my  reply  to  his  enquiry.  "  Ikit,"  I  said,  "  I  also  told  you  that,  if  the  devil  had 
opened  your  mouth,  I  prayed  the  Lord  to  shut  it."  "  Ah  !  "  he  exclaimed,  "  but  that 
part  of  the  message  did  not  apply  to  me." 

From  quite  the  early  days  of  the  College,  I  arranged  for  a  regular  course  of 
lectures  on  physical  science  ;  and  many  of  the  brethren  have  thanked  me,  not  only 
for  the  knowledge  thus  imparted,  but  also  for  the  wide  field  of  illustration  which  was 
thereby  thrown  open  to  them.  The  study  of  astronomy,  as  illustrative  of  Scriptural 
truth,  proved  specially  interesting.  The  science  itself  was  very  helpful  to  many  of 
the  students.  I  remember  one  brother  who  seemed  to  be  a  dreadful  clolt  ;  we  really 
thought  he  never  would  learn  anything,  and  that  we  should  have  to  give  him  up  in 


c.    ii.    spUR(;i-:o\  s    AUTOI:I<H;KA]'IIV. 


147 


despair.  But  I  introduced  to  him  a  little  hook  called  The  }'onu^  Astronomer  ;  and 
he  afterwards  said  that,  as  he  read  it,  he  felt  just  as  if  something  had  cracked  inside 
his  head,  or  as  ii  some  string  had  been  snapped.  He  had  laid  hold  of  such  enlarged 
ideas  that  I  believe  his  cranium  did  actually  experience  an  expansion  which  it 
ought  to  have;  undergone  in  his  childhood,  and  which  it  did  undergo  by  the 
marvellous  force;  of  the  thoughts  suggested  by  the  study  of  even  the  elements  of 
astronomical  science.  Another  student,  who  evidently  had  not  paid  very  special 
attention  to  the  lecturer,  wondered  whether  that  star,  which  always  hung  just  over 
his  chapel,  was  Jupiter!  Of  course,  the  result  of  his  foolish  question  was  that 
"Jupiter"  became  his  nickname  ever  afterwards,  even  though  he  was  not  "a  bright 
particular"  star  in  our  College  constellations. 


MR.  SEIAVAY'S  I.KCIVKI-:-KO<>M  (ALSO  r.stn  M>K  MEN'S   BIBLE-CLASS),  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE. 

I  have  often  noticed  one  thing  in  some;  who  have  seemed  unable  to  understand 
even  the  elements  of  science  ;  the  I  Inly  Spirit  has  taught  them  the  Word  of  God,  and 
they  are  clear  enough  about  that.  When  we  have  been  reading  a  chapter  out  of 
some  old  Puritanic  book,  or  when  we  have  been  diving  into  the  depths  of  theology, 
those  brethren  have  given  me  the  smartest  and  sharpest  answers  of  the  whole  class. 
When  we  have  been  dealing  with  things  experimental  and  controversial,  I  find  tint 


i_j.S  c.    H.    SPURGP:ON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

those  men  have  been  able;  to  vanquish  their  opponents  at  once,  because  they  are 
deeply  read  in  the  Word  of  God.  The  Spirit  has  taught  them  the  things  of  Christ, 
if  lie  has  not  taught  them  anything  else. 

One  night,  Mr.  Selway,  in  the  course  of  the  experiments  with  which  he 
enlivened  his  lectures,  playfully  turned  a  little  jet  of  water  on  to  one  of  the 
students,  little  dreaming  what  would  be  the  consequences  of  the  harmless  pleasantry 
which  had  amused  successive  batches  of  the  men  who  had  listened  to  him  in  the 
room  just  at  the  back  of  the  lower  platform  in  the  Tabernacle.  In  an  instant,  the 
young  man,  who  was  sitting  near  the  table  on  which  stood  the  glass  tubes,  jars,  and 
other  apparatus  used  by  the  lecturer,  swept  the  whole  mass  to  the  floor  in  a 
terrific  crash  before  anyone  could  be  aware  of  his  intention,  much  less  prevent 
him  from  carrying  it  into  effect.  It  was  a  sad  exhibition  of  an  ungovernable  temper 
which,  I  greatly  fear,  in  after  years,  cost  the  student  far  more  than  the  price  of 
the  destroyed  apparatus  which  he  was  required  to  replace.  Mr.  Selway,  who 
was  a  singularly  calm,  self-possessed  individual,  simply  said,  "  That  young  gentleman 
will  some  day  be  sorry  for  what  he  has  done  ; "  and  then  proceeded  with  his 
lecture, — of  course,  without  any  more  experiments  that  evening  ! 

Bad  as  this  display  of  passion  was,  there  was  one  student  who  did  some 
thing  which,  in  certain  aspects,  was  worse,  for  there  was  an  element  of  delibera 
tion  about  it  which  was  absent  on  the  other  occasion.  It  has  long  been  our 
rule  that  each  brother  should  read  in  the  College  at  least  one  discourse  which 
he  has  himself  composed,  and  which  his  comrades  are  expected  to  criticise. 
Any  attempt  at  plagiarism  would,  therefore,  be  manifestly  unfair;  and,  if  detected, 
would  meet  with  well-merited  condemnation.  One  man,  when  it  came  to  his 
turn,  was  actually  reckless  and  foolish  enough  to  take  one  of  my  printed 
sermons, — I  suppose  condensed,  —  and  to  read  it  as  though  it  had  been  his  own 
composition  ;  and  he  had  to  thank  his  brethren  that  he  was  not  instantly  expelled 
from  the  Institution.  Several  of  them  at  once  recognized  the  discourse;  and,  as 
soon  as  the  time  for  criticism  arrived,  proceeded  to  pull  it  to  pieces  most 
mercilessly.  They  found  fault  with  the  introduction,  the  divisions,  the  sub 
divisions,  the  illustrations,  the  application, — with  everything,  in  fact,  except  the 
doctrine  ; — I  think  that  was  all  right  !  I  was  so  pleased  with  the  critical  acumen 
displayed  that  I  forgave  the  offender  ;  but  I  let  it  be  distinctly  understood  that,  for 
the  future,  any  student  repeating  the  offence,  whether  with  my  sermon  or  anyone 
else's,  would  be  forthwith  dismissed  in  disgrace. 

As  a  rule,  the  men  who  have  come  to  the  College  have  been  so  anxious  to 
make  the  best  use  of  their  time  while  with  us,  that  they  have  laboured  at  their 
studies  most  diligently  ;  but,  occasionally,  we  have  had  a  lazy  student  who  has 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  149 

tried  to  shirk  his  class  and  other  work.  One  who,  in  his  day,  was  a  conspicuous 
instance  of  this  lack  of  appreciation  of  the  privileges  placed  within  his  reach, 
had  an  experience  which  ought  to  have  made  him  both  a  sadder  and  a  wiser  man, 
though  I  am  not  sure  that  it  had  either  effect.  When  the  other  brethren,  who 
resided  in  the  same:  house,  were  preparing  their  lessons,  he  so  often  interrupted 
them  with  questions  about  the  translation  of  simple  words  with  which  he  ought  to 
have  been  perfectly  familiar,  that  one  of  them  determined  to  try  to  cure  him  of  the 
practice.  On  that  particular  occasion,  he  came  to  enquire  the  meaning-  of  the  Latin 
word  "omnibus."  "Oh!''  said  the  young  wag,  "that's  easy  enough;  onini— 
twenty-six,  and  bus — to  carry  ;  omnibus,  a  vehicle  to  carry  twenty-six  persons  !  You 
know  that  you  constantly  see  the  notice  in  the;  omnibus,  '  licensed  to  carry  twenty- 
six  persons.1'  The  next  morning,  it  so  happened  that  Mr.  Gracey  asked  the  lazy 
man  to  translate;  the  very  passage  which  contained  the  word  ''omnibus."  In  due 
course,  he  gave  the  rendering  which  had  been  supplied  to  him,  with  a  result 
that  can  be  better  imagined  than  described. 

If  he  was  not  diligent  in  one  respect,  he  was  certainly  industrious  in  another 
direction,  and  he  managed  to  get  engaged  to  three  ladies  at  once  !  As  soon  as  1 
knew  of  it,  I  sent  for  him,  and  told  him  that  he  must  make  his  choice,  and  I  hoped 
the  other  two  would  sue  him  for  breach  of  promise.  I  never  heard  that  they  did  so, 
and  probably  they  were  well  rid  of  a  man  who  could  trifle  with  them  in  such  a 
fashion.  He  appeared  to  do  well  for  a  time  in  the:  ministry,  but  he  afterwards  left 
the  Baptist  denomination,  and  therelejre  is  not  now  numbered  in  our  ranks. 

Occasionally,  1  have  given  the  students  a  little  exercise  in  extempore  speaking, 
in  order  to  develop  their  iacilitv  of  utterance  if  unexpectedly  called  upon  for  a 
sermon  or  address,  Various  topics  are  written  on  slips  of  paper,  these  are  placed  in 
a  hat,  and  each  brother  is  expected  in  turn  to  draw  one  out,  and  to  speak  straight  off 
on  the  subject  stated,  Oi  all  these  efforts,  the  most  successful  that  I  remember 
related  to  the  word  Zacchseus,  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  one  who,  as  soon  as  he  had 
glanced  at  it,  said  : — "  Mr.  President  and  brethren,  my  subject  is  Zacchaeus,  and  it  is 
therefore  most  appropriate  to  me  ;  for,  first,  Zacchaeus  was  little  of  stature,  so  am  I  ; 
secondly,  Zacchaeus  was  very  much  '  up  a  tree,'  so  am  I  ;  thirdly,  Zacchcuus  'made 
haste,  and  came  down,'  and  so  will  I  ;  "  and  thereupon  the  speaker  resumed  his  seat. 
The  students  called  to  him  to  go  on  ;  but  I  said,  "  No  ;  he  could  not  add  anything  to 
such  a  perfect  little  speech  without  spoiling  it."  Certainly,  he  was  a  better  judge  of 
the  suitability  of  a  subject  than  another  of  the  students,  who  went  to  preach  at 
Portsmouth  shortly  after  the  training  ship  Eurydicc  went  down  off  the  Isle  of  Wight 
with  over  three  hundred  souls  on  board.  Thinking  that  he  would  "  improve  the 
occasion,"  he  announced,  as  the  theme  of  his  discourse,  Psalm  cvii.  30:  "So  He 
bringeth  them  unto  their  desired  haven."  A  more  inappropriate  text,  under  the 


150  c.    11.    SPURCIKON'S    AUTOUIOCKAHIV. 

circumstances,  could  scarcely  have;  be-e-n  selected  ;   but  even   a   "ood   man,  with    rio-ht 

*  O  <*-> 

intentions,  may  make  blunders  which,  to  other  people,  are  utterly  unaccountable. 

At  one  ot  our  closing  meetings  at  the  College,  before  the  brethren  went  away 
lor  their  vacation,  I  said  that  I  was  a  poor  man,  or  I  would  give  every  student  a 
present,  and  I  told  them  what  I  would  have  selected  if  1  had  been  rich.  I 
remember  one  brother  to  whom  I  said  that  1  would  give:  him  a  corkscrew,  because 
he  had  a  getod  deal  in  him,  but  he  could  not  get  it  out.  "As  to  you,  my  brother,"  I 
said  to  another  student,  "  I  should  give  you  a  sausage-stuffer,  lor  you  need  to  have 
something  put  into  you."  There  was  OIK;  friend  to  whom  I  should  have  liked  to 
present  a  canister  of  Chapman  and  Hall's  gunpowder.  lie  was  to  have  two  pounds 
of  it,  and  someone'  was  to  set  it  alight  exactly  at  the  second  head  of  his  discourse. 
Ol  course,  the.  brethren  were  amused  at  the  idea,  but  I  advised  them  to  read  Foxe's 
Book  of  Martyrs,  where;  the  historian  records  that  Bishop  Hooper,  and  others  who 
were  burned,  had  friends  who  came  with  bags  of  gunpowder,  to  put  under  their  arms 
when  they  were  going  to  the  stake.  1  did  not  want  the  students  to  be  made  to  die, 
but  to  be  made  thoroughly  alive,  and  I  promised  to  talk  to  my  wile  about  supplying 
dynamite  as  well  as  books  to  poor  ministers,  so  that  the)'  might  be  stirred  up,  and 
made;  a  blessing  to  their  hearers. 

I  have  had  some;  amusing  experiences  with  deacons  in  search  of  a  minister. 
One  wrote;  to  ask  if  1  would  send  a  stuelent  who  could  "  fill  the  chapel."  I  replied 
that  I  had  not  one  big  enough,  and  aeleleel  that  I  thought  it  was  the;  business  of  the; 
people  to  try  te>  gather  the  congregation,  but  that  I  could  senel  a  brother  who  would 
do  his  best  to  fill  the;  pulpit,  and  preach  the;  ge>spel  faithfully.  In  his  next  le-tter,  the 
deacon  explained  that  this  was  just  what  he  ami  the;  church  wante-el,  only  he  had 
tailed  to  express  his  meaning  clearly. 

At  one  place,  where  a  student — a  brother  of  no  little'  ability,-  had  preached 
with  considerable-  acceptance-,  he;  was  informe-d  that,  if  he-  had  bee-n  a  bigger  man,  he; 
would  have  been  invited  te>  the  pastorate;  !  I  re-ally  could  not  blame;  him  when  I 
heard  that,  in  reply  to  this  very  foolish  e)bjection,  he;  said  to  the;  deacons,  "  If  Mr. 
Spurgeon  had  known  that  yem  wanted  bulk  instead  of  brains,  he;  would  have  sent 
you  a  bullock  !  "  He  might  have  told  them  that,  in  le>e)king  for  quantity,  instead  of 
quality,  they  might,  possibly,  find  themselves  burdened  with  the!  support  of  a  donkey! 

The  officers  of  a  small  church  in  the;  country  applied  to  me  for  a  minister  ;  but 
the  salary  they  were  prepared  to  pay  was  so  small  that,  in  reply  to  their  request,  I 
wrote: — "  The  only  individual  I  know,  who  could  exist  on  such  a  stipend,  is  the  angel 
Gabriel.  He  would  need  neither  cash  nor  clothes  ;  and  he  could  come  down  from 
Heaven  every  Sunday  morning,  and  go  back  at  night,  so  I  advise  you  to  invite  him." 
The  corresponding  deacon  of  another  church,  which  was  needing  a  Pastor,  sent  me 


C.      II.      Sl'l'RCKOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  151 

such  a  long  list  of  the  qualifications  that  must  be  possessed  by  the  man  whom  they 
could  look  up  to  as  their  leader,  that  I  recommended  him  to  take  a  largo  sheet  ot 
brown  paper,  and  cut  out  a  minister  of  the.  size  and  shape  desired,  or  else  to  seek  to 
secure,  the  sen-vices  of  the  eminent  Dr.  So-and-so,  who  had  been  for  a  good  many 
years  in  glory,  for  I  could  not  think  of  anyone  else  who  could  fulfil  the  conditions 
that  such  an  important  church  and  diaconate  seemed  to  regard  as  indispensable 
Like  OIK;  of  the  other  deacons,  he  also  wrote,  again  ;  and  his  second  letter  being 
more  reasonable  than  the  first,  I  was  able  to  recommend  a  brother  with  whom  the 
church  appeared  to  be  perfectly  satished. 

(Probably  every  member  of  the  Pastors'  College  brotherhood  could  supplement 
the  beloved  President's  store  of  stories  with  his  own  reminiscences  of  his  "Alma 
Mater."  Some,  brethren  have  kindly  done  so,  and  most  of  their  communications  will 
be  found  in  the  chapter  on  "Pure  Fun  "  in  the  latter  part  of  the  present  volume. 
But  there  is  just  one  series  of  Mr.  Spurgvon's  sayings  to  his  students  which  must 
find  a  place  here,  --namely,  the  farewell  words  spoken  to  them  on  leaving  College,  or 
on  removing  to  another  pastorate.  The  gracious  and  gifted  William  Anderson, 
when  he  was  going  from  Warkworth  to  Reading,  received  the  apostolic  injunction, 
with  a  new  meaning  attached  to  it,  "Give  attendance,  to  Reading."  Mr.  Dobson 
relates  that  the  parting  message,  to  him  was:  —"Go  to  Deal,  and  tight  the.  De.'il. 
1  lit  him  hard  ;  1  owe.  him  no  love."  To  I  larry  \Vood, — a  devoted  brother  whose  hair 
was  so  bright  that  his  fellow-students  used  playfully  to  gather  round  him  to  warm 
their  hands  at  tin;  fire,—- -the  dear  President  wrote;  from  Mentone  a  loving-  letter 
which  concluded  :  —"You  are  so  well  known  to  me  that  I  think  I  see  you, — especially 
your  distinguished  head  of  hair,  and  I  look  you  in  the  face  with  a  tear  of  love  in 
separation,  and  say,  '  God  b/css  you,  H'wct  f  (ft),  and  blaze  aivay  for  your  Lord" 

Mr.  \Yelton  has  thus  recorded  the,  remarkable,  message  given  to  him,  in  1867, 
when  he  accepted  his  first  pastorate  at  Thetlord  :-  — "  I  want  you  to  go  under  an 
operation  before,  you  leave.  I  am  going  to  put  out  one  of  your  eyes,  to  stop  -up  one  of 
vour  cars,  and  to  put  a  muzzle  on.  your  month..  Then  you  had  better  have  a  new  suit 
of  clothes  before,  you  go,  and  you  must  tell  the.  tailor  to  make  ui  the  coat  a  pocket 
\oitlioul  a  bottom.  You  understand  my  parable?"  "  I  think  so,  sir;  but  should  like 
your  interpretation."  "Well,  there  will  be  many  things  in  your  people  that  you  must 
look  at  with  the  blind  eye,  and  you  must  listen  to  much  with  the  deaf  ear,  while;  you 
will  often  be  tempted  to  say  things  which  had  better  be  left  unsaid  ;  then,  remember 
the  muzzle.  Then  all  the  gossip  you  may  hear,  when  doing  pastoral  work,  must  be; 
put  into  the  bottomless  pocket" 

Several  students,  at  different  periods  in  the;  history  of  the  College',  on  being 
sent  out  as  pioneers  to  start  now  churches,  received  this  singular  charge  :—  "  Cling 


I52  C.      II.    SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

tightly  with  both  your  hands  ;  when  they  fail,  catch  hold  with  your  teeth  ;  and  if  they 
give  way,  hang  on  by  your  eyelashes!"  Mr.  Saville  went  to  Carlisle  with  these 
words  ringing  in  his  ears,  and  he  obeyed  them  all  too  literally.  With  true  heroism, 
he  would  not  let  his  dear  President  know  the  hardships  he  was  enduring  for  Christ's 
sake  and  the  gospel's;  but  someone,  who  discovered  the  plight  he  was  in,  wrote 
about  his  trials  and  sulterings  ;  and  as  soon  as  the  tidings  reached  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
substantial  help  was  sent  to  him. 

Perhaps  the  most  pathetic  larewell  of  all  was  the  one  spoken  to  Mr.  E.  H. 
Kllis,  who  was  leaving  for  Australia,  in  March,  1891.  Referring  to  "The  'Down 
grade'  Controversy,"  Mr.  Spurgeon  said,  "Good  bye,  Kllis;  you  will  never  see  me 
again,  ///is  //;'///  is  killing  me."  si  month  later,  the  fatal  illness  commenced  ! 


For  about   fourteen    years   after    the    opening   of    the   Tabernacle,    the    College 
classes  were  held  in  various  rooms  below  the  great  sanctuary  ;   but  as  the  number  ol 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  153 

students  continued  to  grow,  the  accommodation  became  increasingly  inadequate  to 
the  requirements  of  the  work.  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  always  on  the  look-out  lor  a 
suitable  site  for  buildings  specially  adapted  for  the  put-pose;  and  years  belore  any 
ground  was  available,  he  began  putting  aside  such  amounts  as  he  could  spare,  ready 
for  the  time  when  they  would  be  needed.  Various  legacies,  left  to  him  personally, 
amounting  in  the  aggregate  to  some  thousands  of  pounds,  were  devoted  to  this 

<">  O O  <"> 

object;  so  that,  when  the  final  effort  was  at  hist  made,  it  was  accomplished  with 
comparative  ease.  The  total  cost  of  the  building  and  furnishing  was  /  15,000,  all  of 
which  was  paid  ;  and  when  the  property  was  put  in  trust,  only  a  sufficient  sum  was 
invested  to  pay  the  rates  and  keep  it  in  repair,  as  tin:  President  objected  on  principle 
to  any  larger  amount  being  left  as  an  endowment  ol  the  College.  Without  making 
mention  of  his  own  generous  gifts,  Mr.  Spurgeon  thus  relates  how  the  rest  of  the 
funds  came-  to  him,  and  tells  of  his  gratitude  at  the.  completion  ot  the  commodious 
and  greatly-needed  new  premises: — "The  way  in  which  the.  money  was  raised  was 
another  instance:  of  Divine  goodness.  /  3,000  was  given  as  a  memorial  to  a  dear 
and  lamented  husband.  ,£2,000  was  a  legacy  to  the  College  from  a  reader  of  the 
sermons.  The  ministers  who  had  been  formerly  students  came-  to  our  help  in  a 
princely  fashion.  Large  amounts  wen:  made  up  by  the  unanimous  offerings  of 
Tabernacle  friends,  on  days  when  the  Pastor  invited  the  members  and  adherents  to 
be  his  guests  at  the  College.  In  answer  to  prayer,  the  gold  and  the  silver  have  been 
ready  when  needed.  How  our  heart  exults,  and  blesses  the  Name,  of  the  Lord  ! 

The  freehold  of  the  ground  was  purchased  ol  the  Ecclesiastical  Commissioners, 
and  Mr.  Spurgeon  often  referred  to  the  courtesy  with  which  they  treated  him  during 
the  negotiations.  In  his  own  characteristic  fashion,  he  told  the  brethren,  at  one  ot 
the  annual  Conferences,  that  he  had  secured  the  parson's  garden,  behind  the 
Tabernacle,  as  the  site  lor  the  new  College,  and  he  was  going  to  cultivate  it  lor  him 
by  growing  Dissenters  on  it!  When  the  buildings  were  finished,  they  were  solemnly 
dedicated  to  the  holy  service  for  which  they  had  been  erected,  by  a  prayer-meeting 
in  every  room,  the  President  leading  the  devotions  in  each  separate  department,  and 
then  asking  one  of  the  tutors  or  students  to  lollow  him  in  pleading  lor  the  Lord's 
blessing  on  all  the  work  to  be  carried  on  within  those  walls.  The  full  answers  to 
those  fervent  supplications  will  only  be,  known  in  eternity.  In  addition  to  the  special 
purpose  for  which  the  College:  was  built,  it  is  also  the  place  where  the  annual 
Conferences  are  held,  the:  headquarters  of  the  Colportage  Association,  the  home  ot 
a  large  portion  of  the  Tabernacle  Sunday-school  and  Bible-classes  ;  and  alter  the 
disastrous  lire  in  April,  1898,  it  proved  a  most  welcome  and  providential  shelter  for 
the  burned-out  church  and  its  man}'  societies  and  agencies. 

Not  long  after  the  College  buildings  were  erected,  a  deputation  from  the  local 


154  c-    H-    si'UKCF.oxs    AUTOBIOGRAPIIV. 

authority  met  Mr.  Spurgeon  by  appointment  to  decide  the  amount  at  which  the  new 
premises  were  to  be  rated.  While  conducting  the  gentlemen  through  the  different 
rooms,  the  President  briefly  narrated  the.  history  of  the  Institution,  and  recounted 
various  instances  in  which  the  money  necessary  for  carrying  on  the  work  had  come 
directly  in  answer  to  prayer.  '1  'he  chairman  of  the  deputation,  who  evidently  did 
not  believe  that  the  funds  came  in  an}-  such  way,  said,  "  That  is  your  idea,  Mr. 
Spurg'eon  ;  but  the  fact  is,  certain  good  people  have,  confidence  in  you,  and  therefore 
they  send  you  contributions  for  your  College  and  Orphanage."  "  Yes,"  replied  the 
Pastor,  "there  may  be  some  truth  in  that  remark;  but  if  the  good  people  did  not 
think  of  me,  (Joel  would  send  the  devil  with  the  money  rather  than  let  His  cause 
suiter."  No  further  reference,  was  made,  to  the  matter  until  the  gentlemen  had 
finished  their  investigations,  and  consulted  as  to  the  value  to  be  fixed  for  rating 
purposes,  when  the  chairman,  speaking  for  his  colleagues,  said  to  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
"  We  havct  been  greatly  interested  in  all  that  we  have  seen  and  heard,  and  we  look 
upon  this  College  as  a  valuable"  addition  to  the  educational  advantages  of  the  parish. 
We  should  be  very  glad  if  we.  could  let  it  go  without  being  rated  at  all  ;  but  we  have 
a  duty  to  perform  to  the  public,  so  that  is  not  possible.  We  have?  agree-d  to  fix  the 
amount  at  -  — ,  which  we  think  you  will  consider  satisfactory;  anel,  personally,  I 
think  it  is  such  a  capital  Institution  that  I  shall  bet  glad  if  you  will  acce:pt  ten  pounds 
towards  its  maintenance'."  The  Presielent  thanked  him  very  heartily,  and  then 
added,  "  You  saiel  that  it  was  the  ^ood  people  who  gave  me  the',  money  ;  I  hope:  that 
adjective  applies  to  you?"  "Oh,  elear  no!"  replied  the  gentleman,  "certainly  not;" 
and  his  companions  appeared  very  surprised  at  the  whole:  transaction. 

Afterwards,  whenever  anyone  wanted  te>  raise  the  question  of  the  rating  of  the 
College,  he  always  saiel,  "  Well,  if  yem  like  to  go  to  see  Mr.  Spurgeon  about  it,  you 
may  ;  my  last  visit  cost  me  te:n  peninds,  anel  1  am  not  going  again,  anel  I  should 
advise  you  to  leave  the  good  man  alone.  Met  is  a  benefactor  to  the  whole  district, 
and  ought  to  be  encouraged,  anel  not  hinderetd." 

Until  the  year  1865,  no  statistics  were  collected  from  the  brethren  educated  in 
the  College  ;  and  even  since  that  time,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  get  all  the 
ministers  te)  send  in  returns  regularly,  so  that  the:  figures  tabulated  have  been  below 
instead  of  above  the  truth.  To  the:  end  of  1878,  over  five  hundred  students  had 
been  trained  in  the  Institution,  of  whom  twenty-five  had  been  "called  home."  Of 
the  four  hundred  anel  fifty  then  engaged  as  Baptist  pastors,  evangelists,  anel  mission 
aries,  less  than  three  hundred  filled  up  the  statistical  forms,  which  showed  that, 
during  the  year,  they  had  baptized  3,600  persons  ;  and  during  the  fourteen  years 
there  had  been  a  net  increase,  to  the.  churches  of  33,319  members.  The  sems  of  the 
College  had  already  found  their  way  into  all  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe,  and  the 


c.    ii.    si'UKCKON's    AUTOBiocKAPiiv.  155 

beloved  President's  prayer  that  the  missionary  spirit  should  be  increased  among-  the 
brethren  was  being  graciously  answered,  for  some  of  them  had  gone,  forth  to  India, 
China,  Japan,  Africa,  Spain,  Italy,  the-  West  Indies  and  South  America,  beside  a  con 
siderable  contingent  in  the  Australasian  and  Canadian  colonies  and  the.  United  States. 

This  chapter  would  scarcely  be  complete  without  specimens  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
letters  to  the.  students  while,  in  College  or  after  they  had  cute-red  the  ministry.  The 
first,  preserved  by  Pastor  C.  L.  Gordon,  exerted  a  powerful  influence  upon  the  men 

to  whom  it  was  written  :— 

"  Nightingale    Lane, 

"  Clapham, 

"  September    I  ith,    1865. 
"  Beloved    Brethren, 

"  I  am  called  away  from  you  this  afternoon  ,  and  I  should  much  regret 
this  if  it  were  not  that  it  has  comet  into  my  heart  to  suggest  to  you  to  spend  our 
usual  time  in  prayer,  instead  ot  in  teaching  and  learning.  My  heart  is  often  heavy 
with  trials,  arising  out  of  the  College  work,  which  is  so  dear  to  me  that  I  am  perhaps 
unduly  anxious  over  it.  1  am  bowed  to  the  very  dust  when  I  fear  that  any  brother 
is  erring  in  doctrine,  lacking  in  grace,  or  loose  in  behaviour.  I  have  as  little  to 
lament  as  it  is  possible  there,  should  be  where  we  are  all  such  imperfect  creatures. 
But,  my  brethren,  I  would  fain  have,  you  all  the.  best  men  living  ;  and  when  you  are 
not,  I  am  distressed  exceedingly.  Just  now,  one  brother,  by  his  general  self- 
indulgent  habits,  has  lost  the  respect  of  his  people,  and  must  move.  I  do  not  want 
to  inflict  a  curse  on  another  congregation,  and  I  do  not  want  to  cast  him  oft. 
Between  these  two  courses,  I  am  perplexed.  Pray  for  me,  for  him,  for  all  the 
brethren,  and  for  yourselves. 

"  In  your  society,  I  always  feel  so  much  at  home,  that  I  must  appear  to  you 
to  be  all  happiness  and  mirth.  Alas  !  it  is  not  so  ;  I  am  happy  in  the  Lord,  and 
blest  in  Him  ;  but  I  am  often  a  poor  cast-down  mortal,  groaning  under  the  burden 
of  excessive  labour,  and  sad  at  heart  because  of  the  follies  of  those  whom  I  hoped 
to  have,  seen  serving  the.  Lord  with  zeal  and  success.  Do  give  me  your  warmest 
consideration  in  your  supplications.  Believe  me  when  I  assure,  you  that  you  arc;, 
for  Christ's  sake,  very  dear  to  me.  Do  not  be  led  away  from  the  faith  which  you  all 
professed  when  you  entered  the  College.  Cling  to  the  two  great  collateral  truths 
of  Divine  Sovereignty  and  Human  Responsibility.  Live  near  to  God,  and  love  the 
souls  of  men.  1  make  some  sacrifices  for  your  sake;  but  I  count  them  gain,  and 
my  work  for  you  is  a  delight.  But  do  plead  for  more  grace  to  rest  on  us  all,  and 
upon  those  settled  in  the  ministry.  Levity  of  conduct  in  my  brethren  brings 
heaviness  of  heart  to  me.  ;  and  what  is  inconsistent  pleasure  to  them,  is  terrible 
agony  to  me.  Oh,  how  can  the  ministers  of  God  be  smoking-  and  drinking  when 


156  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

souls  are  dying,  and  talking"  lightness  and  wantonness  when  sinners  are  perishing? 
It  must  not  be  so  among  us.  May  the  Lord  prevent  it!  Seeking  ever  your  soul's 
best  interest,  and  desiring  your  fervent  prayers, 

"  1    am,   dearly-beloved  brethren, 

"  Your  affectionate  brother, 

'•  C.  1 1.  STURGEON." 

The  next  epistle  is  as  timely  and  important  now  as  when  it  was  penned,  during 

the  clear  President's  small-pox  illness  : 

"  Clapham, 

"  Dec.    2,    1869. 
"  My  Dear  Friend, 

"  Being    debarred    from    serving   the    Lord    bv   mv  own   public   ministry, 

O  v>  J  •* 

it  has  been  laid  upon  my  heart  to  endeavour  to  stir  up  my  brother-ministers  to  List; 
increased  diligence  while  they  are  permitted  the  great  pleasure;  and  privilege  of 
preaching  the  Word.  I  pray  that  every  word  I  write  may  be  approved  of  God, 
and  may  be,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  rendered  serviceable  to  you. 

"  It  has  struck  me  painfully  that,  for  some  little,  while,  a  somewhat  listless  spirit 
has  fallen  upon  many  of  the  churches,  and  perhaps  upon  the  ministers  also.  A 
short  time  ago,  we  heard  more  than  we  do  now  of  special  services,  revival  meetings, 
and  aggressive  efforts  upon  the  world  ;  perhaps  these;  ma}'  still  be  in  lull  and 
vigorous  operation  among  your  people,  but  in  many  places  it  is  not  so  ;  the  pace  of 
holy  work  has  slackened,  and  the  church  is  falling  back  into  that  dreary  routine 
which  is  easily  reached,  but  is  deadly  in  its  consequences.  Meanwhile,  our  direct 
enemies,  the:  Romanizing  Anglicans,  have  taken  up  the  weapons  which  we  have  laid 
aside,  and  are  making  most  ostentatious,  and  it  is  to  be  feared  most  successful,  use 

o 

of  them.  They  are  evidently  wise  in  their  generation,  for  they  not  only  borrow  from 
Rome,  but  they  copy  from  us.  Is  this  intended  by  our  Lord  to  irritate  us  to 
renewed  activity  ?  Does  He  thus  chide  us  by  causing  us  to  see  how  others  burn 
with  zeal,  and  in  their  ardour  compass  sea  and  land  to  make;  proselytes  ?  Does  He 
not  thereby  say  to  us,  '  Behold  how  these  men  are  quick  to  adopt  all  methods  ;  are 
ye,  My  servants,  dull  of  understanding  ?  ' 

"  Despite  the  mischief  clone  by  wild  excitement,  there  can  be  no  question  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  does  very  graciously  bless  means  prayerfully  adopted  by  His 
servants  for  arousing  the  churches  and  ingathering  sinners.  Many  pastors  can  bear 
witness  that  pen-sons,  who  have  remained  undecided  under  their  ordinary  services, 
have:  been  led  to  surrender  their  hearts  to  Jesus  at  some  special  meeting.  If  God 
had  but  blessed  such  efforts  in  the  smallest  degree,  we  ought  to  repeat  them  ;  but  as 
He  has,  in  many  cases,  eminently  smiled  upon  them,  our  duty  is  clear  as  the  sun. 


c.    H.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  157 

Will  you  not,  then,  if  you  have  hitherto  omitted  to  do  so,  give  serious  heed  to  the 
suggestion  that  you  should  hold  a  series  of  services  for  calling  in  the  careless 
population  around,  and  for  leading  to  decision,  under  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
those  who  have  heard  in  vain  ?  To  secure  the  ear  of  the  outside  world,  let  all 
proper  means  be  used.  If  the  people  will  not  come  into  our  chapels,  let  earnest 
services  be  held  out  of  doors,  or  in  halls,  barns,  or  theatres,  or  wherever  else  they  will 
come.  Let  our  members  be  exhorted  to  assist  us  in  drawing  in  the  outlying  masses. 
To  win  attention,  it  may  be,  in  some  cases,  best  to  call  in  other  labourers.  Certain 
individuals,  whose  gifts  are  of  a  special  character,  are  better  adapted  than  the  best 
of  pastors  may  be  for  evangelizing  and  exhortation  ;  we  ought  to  feel  no  difficulty  in 
accepting  the  aid  of  such  brethren.  A  new  voice  may  attract  ears  that  have  grown 
dull  of  hearing  under  us.  A  change  with  a  trusty  brother  may  be  good  for  both 
congregations,  and  for  both  preachers.  We  would  by  any  means  save  some,  and 
therefore  no  stone  should  be  left  unturned.  Perhaps,  if  you  are  within  easy  reach  of 
town,  the  most  acceptable  aid  might  be  rendered  to  you  by  some  of  our  London 
ministers  ;  if  such  be  your  desire,  a  letter  addressed  to  our  dear  friend,  Mr.  Frank 
White,  might  bring  you  into  contact  with  suitable  brethren. 

"  My  dear  brother,  how  soon  you  and  I  will  be  laid  asidc>  from  our  service  ! 
Our  grave  is  preparing;  is  our  work  done?  If  mine  be  accomplished,  I  tremble  as 
I  think  how  poverty-stricken  my  life:  has  been,  compared  with  my  opportunities  ;  and 
I  pray  to  have  my  years  lengthened,  that  I  may  render  a  better  account  of  my 
stewardship.  Your  own  feelings  are  probably  much  the  same.  Let  us  not  allow  the 
confession  to  evaporate  in  mere:  regret  ;  but  let  us,  in  the  fear  of  God,  seek  to  be 
more  diligent  in  the  future.  Meanwhile,  if  we  loiter,  death  does  not  ;  our  hearers 
arc;  perishing  before  our  eyes  ;  and  the  millions  arc:  passing  into  eternal  misery  as 
fast  as  time  can  bear  them.  Impelled  by  the  love  which  brought  our  Master  from 
His  throne,  and  made  Him  a  sacrifice:  for  men,  let  us  bestir  ourselves.  To  us  has 
He  committed  the  Word  of  reconciliation.  We  are  ambassadors  for  Christ.  Let 
us  not  bring  contempt  upon  our  office  and  the  gospel  by  a  want  of  zeal  ;  but,  by  the 
good  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  let  us  resolve  te^  be  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season. 

"  Our  private:  prayers,  my  brother,  must  be  more  frequent  and  fervent.  Could 
we  not,  as  members  of  the  same  College,  as  well  as  brethren  in  the  one  family  in 
Heaven  and  earth,  enter  into  a  brotherly  compact  to  mention  each  other  in  our 
prayers  at  least  once  every  day?  Could  not  the  months  of  January  and  February  be 
specially  marked  by  our  reminding  our  people  of  our  brethren  and  their  labours,  that 
they  may  join  their  prayers  with  ours?  The  next  three  months  would  be  a  season 
to  be  remembered  if  there  should  be  unusual  activity  in  all  our  churches,  and 
prevalent  intercession  from  all  our  members.  Brother,  what  doth  hinder  us  from 
receiving  a  crreat  blessing?  We  are  not  straitened  in  God  ;  let  us  not  be  straitened 


'5  c.    IF.    SPURGEON'S    ArT 

in  our  own  bowels.  For  the:  love  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  and  the  honour  of  His  Name, 
let  us  plead,  and  labour,  and  agoni/e;,  and  believe  ;  and  the  blessing  will  come,  it 
shall  not  tarry. 

'  Receive  assurances  of  my  purest  and  warmest  love,  and  believe  me  ever  to  be, 

"  Your  brother  and  servant  for  Jesus'  sake, 

"  C.    I  I.    SPURGKON." 

Tills  letter  was  written  to  the.  College  men  labouring  in  foreign  lands  :  - 

"  Clapham, 

"  Sept.   ^oth,  187  }. 
w  Beloved  brother, 

"  I  have  been  requested  to  salute;  you  in  the  name  of  the  Conference  of 
brethren  in  connection  with  the  Pastors'  College,  and  I  do  so  most  heartily.  Grace, 
mercy,  and  peace  be;  multiplied  unto  you  !  But  I  must  also  add  the  assurance:  of  my 
own  sincere:  love  to  you,  and  my  fervent  prayer  that  the  Lord  may  be',  with  you.  Oceans 
divide  us  in  body  ;  but  we  are  one  in  Christ,  and  by  His  Spirit  we:  are  knit  together 
in  one  fellowship.  \Ye  who  are:  at  home:  have-  enjoyed  a  considerable  measure  of  the 
Divine  blessing,  although  we  earnestly  desire  to  see  far  greater  things.  Our  prayer 
is,  that  you  who  are:  abroad  may  be:  far  more-  successful  than  we:  have  been  ;  may  you 
yet  do  great  things  ami  prevail  !  Your  trials  are  peculiar,  but  your  God  is  all- 
sufficient.  '1  he  minds  of  your  people  are'  tinged  with  the:  special  circumstances  e>f 
the:  land  where  you  labour,  but  the:  gospe:!  is  as  suitable  to  them  as  to  entr  e>wn 
countryme'ii.  Hearts  are:  harel  in  every  place',  but  the:  Spirit  weirks  effectually  with 
the  Word,  ami  subdues  wills  most  obdurate,  to  the  obe:elience  of  the  faith.  Be  of 
good  courage:  ;  your  God  and  ours  is  faithful  to  His  promise  ;  He  will  not  leave  you 
to  be  put  to  shame. 

"I  am  sure,  my  beloved  brother,  that  your  growing  experience  must  have 
endeared  te>  you  the  gospel  of  the:  grace:  of  God.  I  fee:l  more  ami  more  every  day 
that  nothing  but  salvation  by  grace  will  ever  bring  me:  to  Heaven,  and  therefore  I 
desire  more  and  more  explicitly  to  teach  the  grand  truths  e>f  electing  love,  covenant 
security,  justification  by  faith,  effectual  calling,  and  immutable:  faithfulness.  Love  to 
souls,  as  it  burns  in  our  hearts,  will  also  lead  us  to  preach  a  free  as  well  as  a  full 
salvation  ;  and  so  we  shall  be  saved  at  once  from  the  leanness  of  those  who  have  no 
doctrine,  ami  from  the  bitterness  of  those  to  whom  creed  is  everything.  We  have 
aimed  at  the  happy  via  media  of  a  balanced  ministry,  and  succeeding  years  confirm 
us  in  the  ce>rrectness  of  our  views. 

"  I  pray  you,  in  these  evil  clays,  be  firm,  clear,  and  decided  in  your  testimony  for 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  ;  nothing  else  will  keep  us  clear  of  the  blood  e)f  men's  souls. 
May  the  Holy  Ghe)st  anoint  you  anew  for  the  struggle  which  lies  before  you  !  By 
the  love  which  has  long  existed  between  us,  I  beseech  you,  be  faithful  unto  death. 


C.      II.      SPURGEOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  159 

I  reach  my  hand  across  the  llood,  and  lovingly  grasp  yours;  and  my  heart  goes  with 
the  word, — The  Lord  bless  thee,  my  brother,  and  keep  thee,  and  lilt  up  the  light  of 
His  countenance  upon  thee,  and  give  thee  peace! 

"  All  goes  well  at  the  Tabernacle.  Our  beloved  friend,  Mr.  Rogers,  is  still 
among  us,  enjoying  perennial  youth  in  his  advanced  age.  The  other  tutors  are 
strong  to  labour.  Our  brethren  are  multiplied,  and,  as  a  body  of  ministers,  they  are 
such  as  you  may  remember  with  satisfaction.  I  am  obliged  to  lithograph  this  letter, 
because  I  could  not  write  so  many  copies  ;  but,  in  each  case,  the  signature  is  with 
my  own  hand  ;  and  I  pray  you,  dear  brother,  do  not  look  upon  the  lines  as  mere 
official  writing.  I  love  you  in  my  heart  ;  accept  that  love,  and  the  hearty  greetings 
of  all  our  brotherhood  at  home.  Remember  us  in  your  prayers,  especially  remember 
me.  P>y  the  memory  of  happy  days  in  the  past,  when  we  looked  each  other  in  the  face, 
do  not  forget  us  ;  and,  far  more,  do  not  forget  your  allegiance  to  our  common  Lord. 
Blessed  be  His  Name  for  ever,  we  live  alone  for  His  glory  !  May  He  reign  gloriously 
in  your  congregation  !  The  blessing  of  the  Triune  God  be  with  you,  dear  brother  ! 

"  Yours  for  ever  heartily, 

"  C.    1 1.   STURGEON." 

The  students  in  the  College  in  1875  received  these  earnest  words  from  their 
suffering  President  :— 

"  Dear   Brethren, 

"I  fed  sure  that  you  have  all  stuck  to  your  studies  diligently;  and 
my  prayer  is,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  sanctify  your  human  acquirements  by  a 
double  measure  of  His  anointing.  Your  power  lies  in  His  grace  rather  than  in 
natural  gifts  or  scholastic  acquisitions.  Without  the  Spirit,  you  will  be  failures,  and 
worse  ;  therefore,  pray  much,  and  see  to  it  that  your  whole  selves  are  in  such  a 
condition  that  the  Spirit  of  God  can  dwell  in  you  ;  for  in  some  men  He  cannot 
reside,  and  with  some  men  He  cannot  work.  Let  the  channel  through  which  the 
living  water  is  to  flow  be  both  clear  and  clean. 

"  I  feel  in  an  agony  when  I  imagine  any  one  of  you  going  forth  to  preach 
unendowed  by  the  Spirit.  The  Lord  alone  knows  how  I  have  the  work  of  the 
College  on  my  heart,  and  what  exercises  it  has  cost  me  ;  and,  verily,  if  souls  are  not 
won,  churches  are  not  built  up,  and  Christ  is  not  glorified  by  you,  I  have  lived  in 
vain  as  to  the  master-work  of  my  life.  I  am  not  able  to  discover  any  motive  in  my 
heart  for  originating  and  carrying  on  the  College,  but  a  desire  to  glorify  God,  and  to 
bless  this  generation  by  the  promulgation  of  the  pure  gospel.  For  this  end  you 
came  into  the  College  ;  do  not  miss  it,  any  one  of  you  ;  and  yet  you  will  do  so,  it 
the  Spirit  rests  not  upon  you.  Be  not  content  till  Pentecost  is  repeated  among  you. 

"  Yours  very  heartily, 

"C.   H.   STURGEON.") 


;THE    KING    OF    THE    COLl'OKTEURS." 


The  title,  "the  king  of  the  colporteurs,"  was  playfully  given  by  Mr.  Spurgenn  to  Mr.  Samuel 
King,  of  Warminster,  one  of  the  first  six  men  engaged  in  this  service,  and  who  is  still  a  book-agent  in 
connection  with  the  Association,  although  he  has  resigned  the  Colportage  work  in  order  to  devote  all 
his  time  to  the  duties  of  his  pastorate. 


CHAPTER     LXX. 


flint  tfrat  "  Sell  tije  Books." 


Kvery  year,  in  the  month  of  May,  the  colporteurs  employed  by  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle 
Colportage  Association  assemble  at  headquarters,  to  report  progress  concerning  the  work  of  the 
previous  twelve  months,  to  consult  with  the  Committee  as  to  future  service,  to  praise  the  Lord  for  His 
blessing  upon  their  labours,  and  to  plead  with  Him  for  a  continuance  of  His  favour.  At  these  annual 
gatherings,  Mr.  Spurgeon's  address  to  the  men,  on  the  Monday  afternoon,  was  ahvays  eagerly 
anticipated,  enthusiastically  received,  and  joyfully  remembered  and  quoted  many  months,  or  even 
years,  afterwards.  On  one  of  these  occasions,  the  beloved  President  referred  in  detail  to  the  various 
branches  of  the  colporteurs'  work,—  preaching  the  gospel,  conducting  Sunday-schools  and  Bible-classes, 
visiting  the  sick,  distributing  tracts,  advocating  the  cause  of  temperance,  —  and  then,  as  a  refrain  to  each 
part  of  his  subject,  he  added,  "But,  whatever  you  do,  brethren,  mind  that  you  sell  the  looks"  This 
exhortation  so  impressed  both  speaker  and  hearers  that,  in  all  the  later  years  when  they  met,  the 
expression  became  a  kind  of  motto  briefly  describing  the  colporteurs'  main  business,  and  it  is  therefore 
perpetuated  in  the  title  of  the  present  chapter. 

N  August,  1866,  Mr.  Spurgeon  published,  in  The  Sword  and  the 
Trowel,  an  article  which  he  had  written,  entitled,  "  The  Holy  War 
of  the  Present  Hour."  That  paper  was  destined  to  be  more 
memorable  than  probably  even  the  writer  of  it  anticipated,  for  not 
only  did  it  become  the  means  of  the  formation  of  the  Colportage 
Association  and  the  Stockwell  Orphanage,  but  it  contained  such  a 
striking  forecast  of  his  position  in  "  The  '  Down-grade  '  Controversy  "  that,  after  he 
was  "called  home,"  it  was  reprinted  as  "A  Chapter  of  Autobiography."  In  the 
article,  after  describing  the  "  disguised  Romanism  "  which  was  even  then  making 
rapid  advances  in  the  country,  Mr.  Spurgeon  showed  how  he  had  clone  what  he 
could  to  combat  the  evil  by  means  of  the  preachers  trained  in  the  College,  for  whom 
he  asked  his  readers'  prayers  and  support,  and  then  added  :  —  "  Next  to  this,  we 
would  urge  the  propriety  of  a  very  large  distribution  of  religious  literature  bearing 
upon  the  Puseyite  controversy.  Very  little  has  been  done  in  this  respect.  Trac- 
tarianism  owed  its  origin  to  tracts,  as  its  name  implies  ;  why  may  not  its  downfall 
come  from  the  same  means,  if  well  used?  If  several  millions  of  copies  of  forcible, 
Scriptural  testimonies  could  be  scattered  over  the  land,  the  results  might  far  exceed 
all  expectation.  Of  course,  controversy  would  arise  out  of  such  a  distribution  ;  but 
this  is  most  desirable,  since  it  is  only  error  which  could  suffer  by  the  question  being 
everywhere  discussed.  We  should  like  to  see  the  country  Hooded,  and  even  the 
walls  placarded,  with  bold  exposures  of  error  and  plain  expositions  of  truth.  We 
will  take  our  own  share  in  the  effort  if  any  friends  should  be  moved  to  work  with 

L3 


102 

us  ;  at  the  same,  time,  we  shall  be  equally  glael  if  they  will  do  the  work  alone  ;  only 
let  it  be  done;,  and  done  \vell,  and  at  once.  If  the  expense  of  the  tracts  should 
involve  a  sacrifice,  it  will  be  sweet  to  the  true  heart  to  serve  the  Lord  with  his 
substance,  and  none  will  desire  to  offer  to  Him  that  which  costs  them  nothing.  .  .  . 
Brethren  in  Christ,  by  the  love  you  bear  to  the  gospel  of  Jesus,  be  up  and  doing  lor 
the  Lord's  cause  in  the  land.  If  not  in  these  ways,  yet  by  some,  other  methods  do 
meet  the:  enemv  of  souls,  and  seek  to  tear  the  prey  from  between  his  jaws.  If  every 
hair  of  our  head  were  a  man,  and.  every  man  had  a  thousand  tongues,  every  one 
should  cry  out  against  the  Anglican  Antichrist.  \o  greater  plague  can  break  forth 
among  our  people  than  the  plague  of  Puseyism.  If  there  be  any  human  means 
unused,  by  which  the  ilood  of  Popery  may  be  stemmed,  let  us  use  it  ;  and,  meanwhile, 
with  heart  and  soul  let  us  approach  the  throne  of  grace,  and  cry  unto  the  Lord  to 
maintain  His  own  truth,  and  put  His  enemies  to  confusion." 

The  following  number  of  the  Magazine  announced  that,  in  answer  to  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  appeal,  one  gentleman  had  written,  offering  generous  aid  in  establishing 
Colportage  work.  This  was  K.  Bejustead,  Esq.,  a  member  of  the  church  at  the 
Tabernacle,  who  had  become  acquainted  with  the:  successful  service  of  the  colporteurs 
employed  by  the  Religious  Tract  and  Book  Society  of  Scotland,  and  who  was  willing 
to  contribute  freely  touards  the  support  of  a  similar  agency  in  England.  Accordingly, 
on  September  3,  1866,  the  Pastor  invited  a  few  friends  to  meet  him,  to  consider  the 
advisability  of  forming  an  Association  having  for  its  object,  "  to  extend  the  circulation 
of  the:  Scriptures,  and  to  increase  the  diffusion  of  sound  religious  literature,  in  order  to 
counteract  the:  evils  arising  from  the  perusal  of  works  of  a  decided  Romish  tendency." 
At  that  meeting,  eight  gentlemen  were  requested  to  form  themselves  into  a 
Committee,  with  power  to  aelel  to  their  number,  and  they  at  once  set  to  work 
energetically  framing  the  needful  rules  and  regulations,  and  arranging  their  plans, 
in  which  they  were  materially  assisted  by  the  Scotch  Society. 

During  the   first    few   months,  or  perhaps  years,  the  work  was  necessarily  very 

much  of  an  experiment,  and  every  effort  was  made  to   find  out  the  best  methods  of 

procedure.      At  the  outset,  it  was   intended   to  conduct  the  Association  upon  Baptist 

ines     only  havin<>"   agents    whose    denominational  views  were  akin  to  those  of  the 

J  o  t^> 

Tabernacle  members.  It  was  soon  found,  however,  that  this  restriction  was  not  a  wise 
one  ;  and,  within  a  year,  it  was  decided  to  have  an  undenominational  basis,  with 
the  proviso  that  all  the  colporteurs  engaged  should  be  men  of  sterling  Christian 
character,  firmly  holding  the  great  Evangelical  doctrines.  In  the  beginning,  it  was 
proposed  to  carry  on  the  enterprise  with  honorary  officers  only,  the  responsibilities 
of  the  different  departments  being  shared  amongst  the  Committee  ;  but  it  was 
speedily  discovered  that  the  undertaking  was  too  heavy  to  be  properly  carried  out 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


163 


by  gentlemen  who  were  occupied  in  their  various  calling's  during-  the  day,  and, 
almost  within  the  first  twelve  months,  the  appointment  of  the  first  paid  officer  of  the 
Association  was  contemplated.  It  is  a  somewhat  remarkable  coincidence  that  the 
only  name  selected  for  nomination  at  that  period  was  that  of  the  present  secretary, 
Mr.  Stephen  Wigney,  who  was  unaware  of  the  fact  until  more  than  thirty  years  later 
when,  in  the  providence  of  God,  he  was  called  to  fill  that  important  position. 
Ultimately  in  1872,  Mr.  \Y.  Corden  Jones  was  elected,  and  he  remained  the 
secretary  until  he  resigned  in  1894.  On  the  completion  of  the  Pastors'  College,  the 
Colportage  depot  was  transferred  r.o  the  room  still  occupied  in  that  building. 


From  the  date  of  its  formation  until  the  death  of  Mr.  Boustead,  that  gentleman 
was  by  far  the  largest  contributor  to  the  work,  and  in  his  will  he  left  a  very  con 
siderable  amount  for  the  same  purpose'.  Through  his  generosity,  at  one  period  in  the 
history  of  the  Association,  colporteurs  were  sent  to  several  districts  which  could  only 


1 64  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

guarantee  £20  a  year  ;  but  this  was  merely  a  temporary  arrangement,  and  in  later 
years  it  has  been  found  needful  to  require  ^40  or  ^45  to  ensure  the  services  of  a 
colporteur.  That  amount,  of  course,  does  not  cover  the  cost  of  the  good  man's 
labour  ;  the  deficiency  is  met  by  the  profit  on  the  books  he  sells  and  by  contributions 
to  the  General  Fund  of  the  Association. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  was,  from  the  first,  a  liberal  supporter  of  the  Colportage 
movement,  and  by  voice  and  pen  he  advocated  its  claims  upon  the  Christian  Church. 
It  was  always  a  source  of  surprise  and  sorrow  to  him  that  the  work  was  not  more 
generally  adopted  and  maintained.  lie  wrote  concerning  it  :— "  1  believe  it  to  be 
one  of  the  most  efficient  and  economical  agencies  in  existence  ;  and,  as  education 
increases,  it  will  be  more  and  more  so.  The  sale  of  vicious  literature  can  only  be 
met  by  the  distribution  of  good  books  :  these  can  best  be  scattered,  in  rural  districts, 
by  carrying  them  to  the  houses  of  the  people  ;  and,  even  in  towns,  the  book-hawkers' 
work  greatly  stimulates  their  sale.  The  colporteur  not  only  endeavours  to  '  sell  the 
books,'  but  he  visits  from  door  to  door  ;  and,  in  so  doing,  converses  with  the  inmates 
about  their  souls,  prays  with  the  sick,  and  leaves  a  tract  at  each  cottage.  He  is 
frequently  able  to  hold  prayer-meetings,  open-air  services,  and  Bible-readings.  He 
gets  a  room,  if  possible,  and  preaches  ;  founds  Bands  of  Hope,  and  makes  himself 
generally  useful  in  the  cause  of  religion  and  temperance.  He  is,  in  fact,  at  first  a 
missionary,  then  a  preacher,  and  by-and-by  in  the  truest  sense  a  pastor.  We  have 
some  noble  men  in  this  work." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  always  took  the  deepest  interest  in  the  colporteurs,  and  their 
annual  Conferences  were  as  enjoyable  to  him  as  they  were  to  the  men  themselves.  It 
was  with  the  utmost  delight  that  he  listened  to  the  account  of  their  adventures  and 
experiences,  narrated  in  the  dialect  of  their  different  districts  ;  and  he  was  specially 
cheered  when  they  related  instances  of  conversion  through  the  reading  of  his 
sermons  and  other  published  works.  Probably,  not  one  of  their  yearly  gatherings 
was  held  without  many  such  testimonies  being  given  ;  and  every  agent  of  the 
Association  still  treasures  his  own  happy  recollections  of  those  who  were  led  to  the 
Saviour  by  the  beloved  President's  printed  words.  Out  of  the  scores — or,  perhaps, 
hundreds — of  such  stories  that  have  been  told  by  the  colporteurs,  one  specimen  may 
be  inserted  here. 

Describing  a  poor  fallen  woman,  who  had  been  brought  to  a  sense  of  her 
sinfulness  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  who  was  afterwards  in  a  despairing  condition, 
the.  brother  said  : — •"  I  drew  her  attention  to  many  of  the  promises  and  invitations 
of  the  gospel,  sold  her  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermon  on  'The  Gentleness  of  Jesus,' 
and  asked  the  Lord  to  bless  the  reading  of  it  to  her  soul.  If  I  could  find 
language  sufficiently  expressive,  I  would  describe  my  visit  to  her  on  the  following 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  165 

clay.  Holding-  the  sermon  (No.  1,147)  U1  hcr  hand,  her  voice  tremulous  with 
emotion,  and  her  face  radiant  with  happiness,  she  read  upon  page  703  the  following 
words  : — '  Hearts  are  won  to  Jesus  by  the  silent  conviction  which  irresistibly  subdues 
the  conscience  to  a  sense  of  guilt,  and  by  the  love  which  is  displayed  in  the 
Redeemer's  becoming  the  great  substitutionary  sacrifice  for  us,  that  our  sins  might  be 
removed.  In  this  way,  conversions  are  wrought  ; — not  by  displays  of  human  zeal, 
wisdom,  or  force  :  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  Then,  still  holding  the  sermon  in  her  hand,  she  said  to  me,  '  Blessed  be 
the  Lord  for  ever,  1  have  found  Him  ;  or,  rather,  lie  has  found  me  !  I  am  saved, 
pardoned,  forgiven,  accepted,  and  blessed,  for  Christ's  sake.  Now  I  know  what  the 
poet  means,— 

"  'Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring; 
Simply  to  Thy  cross  I  cling.' 

"  '  Yes,  yes  ;  Jesus  died  for  me,  and  I  live  through  Him.'  ' 

The  colporteur  has  to  be  a  man  who  has  all  his  wits  about  him,  and  to  be 
ready  of  resource  to  meet  every  emergency.  The  annual  public  meetings  of  the 
Association,  held  in  the  Tabernacle,  have  been  enlivened  by  the  recital  of  some  of 
the  strange  or  amusing  incidents  that  have  happened  to  the  men  on  their  rounds  ; 
but,  one  night,  there  was  a  practical  illustration  of  a  brother's  quickness  to  take 
advantage  of  an  opportunity  placed  within  his  reach  which,  at  least,  proved  his  fitness 
tor  the  position  he  was  called  to  occupy.  Mr.  Spurgeon  usually  asked  one  of  the 
selected  speakers  for  the  Monday  evening  to  come  on  the  platform,  with  his  pack  on 
his  back,  just  as  he  starts  out  for  his  daily  tramp.  On  this  occasion,  as  the  colporteur 
was  making  his  way  to  the  front,  the  President  said  to  him,  "  Let  the  people  see  how 
you  sell  the  books." 

The  words  were  hardly  uttered  before  the  pack  was  transferred  to  the  table, 
opened,  a  suitable  book  selected,  and  the  man  began  addressing  the  chairman  :— 
"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, — I  have  a  work  here  that  I  can  very  highly  recommend  you 
to  buy.  I  can  speak  well  of  it,  for  I  have  read  it,  and  derived  great  benefit  from  it. 
The  author  is  a  particular  friend  of  mine,  and  he  is  always  glad  to  hear  that  the 
colporteurs  sell  his  books,  for  he  knows  that  they  are  full  of  the  gospel.  The  title  of 
the  volume  is  Trujjipct  Calls  to  Christian  Energy,  the  author  is  C.  H.  Spurgeon, 
and  the  price  is  35.  6tl.  ;  will  you  buy  it  ?  " 

To    the    oreat    delight    of    the  laro'e    and    enthusiastic    audience,    the    beloved 

<  ^  O  O 

President  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the  situation,  paid  the  man  the  money,  took 
the  book,  and  then  said,  "  That's  the  way  to  show  how  it's  done  ;  a  colporteur 
who  can  sell  a  writer  one  of  his  own  works  can  surely  persuade  anybody  to  buy 
the  rest  of  the  books  he  has  in  his  pack." 


C.      II.      SI'UKGKOX's     AUTOHIOGRAI'IIV. 

Oil  November  i,  1866,  the  first  agent  was   appointed;  two   months   later,  three 
but,  for  a  while,  so  slow  was  the   rate  of  progress   that    another  year 
'apscd   before    three   more   men   were   engaged.      From    1873  to    1878,  the   date   at 
the  present  volume  of  Air.  Spurgeon's  "Standard  Life"  ends, -the  advance 
:1  continuous  :  in  the  latter  year,  94  colporteurs  were  engaged,  their  sales 
2  months  amounted  to  ,£8,276,  and  they   had,  during   that   period    paid 
I  he  accompanying  illustration  represents  about  one-third  of  the  men 
1    as  they  had  assembled   at   the    Stockwell    Orphanage    in   preparation 
tor  their  annual  Conference. 


TABEK.XACLE    COLPORTEURS    AND    SECRLTAUY. 


CHAPTER     LXX1. 


St  JJomc  for  tljc  Jf 


Never  let  it  bcforgotlcn  that,  in  the  mysterious  arrangements  of  Providence,  77/6'  Swon!  and  tlu 
Trowel  led  to  the  founding  of  THE  STOCKWELL  ORPHANAGE.  This  would  be  no  mean  result,  if  it  were 
all  that  the  Magazine  had  accomplished;  for  in  that  happy  home  we  hope  to  house  a  portion  ol 
England's  orphanhood  for  many  a  year  to  come,  receiving  the  fatherless  by  an  easier  door  than  that 
which  only  opens  to  clamorous  competition  and  laborious  canvassing.— C.  H.  S.,  in  Picface  to  "  Sword 
and  Trowel"  volume  for  1867. 

It  is  striking  to  see-as  you  and  I  did  see— a  woman  of  moderate  wealth  discarding  all  the 
comforts  of  life  in  order  to  save  sufiicient  funds  to  start  an  Orphanage  in  which  children  might  be 
cared  for  ;  not  merely,  as  she  said,  for  the  children's  sake,,  but  for  Christ's  sake,  that  He  might  be 
glorified.  'The  Stockwell  Orphanage  is  the  alabaster  box  which  a  devout  woman  presented  to  her  Lord. 
Her  memory  is  blessed.  Its  perfume  is  recognized  in  all  parts  of  the  earth  at  this  moment,  to  the  giory 
of  the  Lord  she  loved.— T.  II.  S.,  in  sermon  prtaclud  at  the  Tabernacle,  November  7,  1884,  from  the  text,  "  S/ie 
Ji'ttJi  wroiiglit  a  good  work  on  .Me.  ' 


T    is    very    generally    known    that     the    Stockwell     Orphanage    was 


originated  through  the  gift  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  of  / 20,000  by 
Mrs.  Ilillyard,  the  widow  of  a  Church  of  England  clergyman; 
but  the;  various  circumstances  which  preceded  that  noble  act  oi 
generosity  are  not  so  widely  known.  In  the  previous  chapter, 
mention  is  made  of  the  article  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  for 
August,  1866,  entitled,  "The  Holy  War  of  the  Present  Hour."  In  that  paper,  after 
the  paragraph  advocating  the  widespread  dissemination  of  religious  literature,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  wrote  :— "  Further,  it  is  laid  very  heavily  on  our  heart  to  stir  tip  our 
friends  to  rescue  some  of  the  scholastic  influence  of  our  adversaries  out  oi  then- 
hands.  In  the  common  schools  of  England,  Church  influence  is  out  of  all  proportion 
to  the  respective  numbers  of  the  Episcopal  body  and  the  Nonconforming  churches. 
We  have  too  much  given  up  our  children  to  the  enemy  ;  and  if  the  clergy  had 
possessed  the  skill  to  hold  them,  the  mischief  might  have  been  terrible  ;  as  it  is,  our 
Sabbath-schools  have  neutralized  the  evil  to  a  large  extent,  but  it  ought  not  to  be 
suffered  to  exist  any  longer.  A  great  effort  should  be  made  to  multiply  our  day- 
schools,  and  to  render  them  distinctly  religious,  by  teaching  the  gospel  in  them,  and 
by  labouring  to  bring  the  children,  as  children,  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  silly  cry  of 
'Nonsectarian'  is  duping  many  into  the  establishment  of  schools  in  which  the  most 
important  part  of  wisdom,  namely,  '  the  fear  of  the  Lord,'  is  altogether  ignored, 
trust  this  folly  will  soon  be  given  up,  and  that  we  shall  see  schools  in  which  all  that 
we  believe  and  hold  dear  shall  be  taught  to  the  children  of  our  poorer  adherents. 

When  Mrs.  Hillyard  read  these  words,  and  the  further  plea  lor  the  establishment 


1 68  c.    n.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

also  of  religious  schools  of  a  higher  order,  they  indicated  to  her  the  method  by 
which  she  might  realize  the  fulfilment  of  a  purpose  that  she  had  long  cherished  in  her 
heart.  She  had  felt  specially  drawn  out  in  sympathy  towards  fatherless  boys,  so  she 
wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  telling  him  of  her  desire,  and  asking  his  assistance  in  carrying 
it  into  eliect.  The  Pastor's  own  mind  had  been  prepared  by  the  Lord  for  such  a 
proposal  through  a  remarkable  experience  at  the  previous  Monday  evening  prayer- 
meeting  at  the  Tabernacle. 

Pastor  C.  Welton,  who  was  at  that  time  a  student  in  the  College,  has  preserved 
this  interesting  record  of  what  happened  on  that  occasion  : — "  Mr.  Spurgeon  said, 
'  Dear  friends,  we  are  a  huge  church,  and  should  be  doing  more  for  the  Lord  in  this 
great  city.  I  want  us,  to-night,  to  ask  Him  to  send  us  some  nciv  work  ;  and  if  we 
need  money  to  carry  it  on,  let  us  pray  that  the  means  may  a/so  be  sent.'  Several  of 
the  students  had  been  called  to  the  platform  to  join  with  deacons  and  elders  in  leading 
the  assembly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  to  plead  with  God  about  the  matter. 
While  that  mighty  man  of  prayer,  Mr.  William  Olney,  was  wrestling  with  the  Lord, 
the  beloved  President  knew  that  the  answer  had  come.  Llad  the  Holy  Spirit  told 
him  ?  It  seemed  so,  for,  walking  lightly  across  the  platform  to  where  I  was  sitting, 
he  said  to  me  softly,  '  It's  all  right,  Welton  ;  you  pray  for  the  conversion  of  sinners, 
will  you?'  A  few  days  after  this  Tabernacle  prayer-meeting,  Mrs.  Hillyard  wrote 
to  the  dear  Pastor  offering  to  entrust  him  with  ,£20,000  for  the  purpose  of  founding 
an  Orphanage  for  fatherless  children.  Here  was  the  new  work,  and  tJie  money  with 
which  to  begin  it.  It  was  my  conviction  thirty  years  ago,  as  it  is  to-day,  that  the 
Stockwell  Orphanage,  as  well  as  the  money  to  found  it,  came  from  the  Lord  in 
answer  to  the  petitions  offered  that  Monday  night.  Surely,  the  Orphanage  was 
born  of  prayer." 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  name  had  been  introduced  to  Mrs.  Hillyard  in  an  extraordinary 
way  ;  the  incident  does  not  appear  to  have  ever  come  to  his  knowledge,  and  it 
was  not  made  public  until  some  years  after  he  was  "  called  home."  Speaking 
at  the  Orphanage,  in  June,  1896,  Professor  Henderson,  of  Bristol  Baptist  College, 
said  : — "  Mrs.  Hillyard  and  two  friends  of  mine — a  husband  and  wife, — were 
sitting  together  here  in  London  ;  and,  in  the  course  of  their  conversation,  Mrs. 
Hillyard.  said  to  my  friend,  '  I  have  a  considerable  sum  of  money  that  I  want 
to  employ  for  beneficent  purposes,  but  I  am  not  competent  to  administer  it  myself ; 
I  wish  you  would  take  this  ,£20,000,  and  use  it  for  the  glory  of  God.'  My 
friend,  who  was  a  very  sensible  man,  replied,  '  I  am  quite  unfit  to  administer  that 
large  amount.'  It  was  pressed  upon  him,  but  he  resolutely  declined  to  accept  the 
charge  of  it;  whereupon  Mrs.  Hillyard  said  to  him,  'Well,  if  you  are  not  willing  to 
take  it,  will  you  advise  me  as  to  the  disposal  of  it  ? '  The  recommendation  he 


c.    H.    SPURGKON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  169 

gave  was,  that  the  money  should  he  put  into  the  hands  of  a  public  man,  all 
of  whose  acts  were  known  to  people  generally,  one  who  was  responsible  to  the 
public,  and  whose  reputation  depended  upon  the  proper  use  of  any  funds  entrusted 
to  his  keeping.  This  counsel  was  approved  by  Mrs.  Hill  yard  ;  and  now  comes  the 
remarkable  part  of  the  story.  You  know  that  she  did  not  hold  quite  the  same 
views  that  we  clo,  and  the  gentleman  to  whom  she  was  speaking  did  not  share  our 
intense  admiration  for  Mr.  Spurgeon,  though  he  had  a  kindly  lading  towards  him, 
and  a  high  regard  for  his  integrity  and  uprightness.  When  Mrs.  Hillyard  said  to 
him,  'Will  you  name  somebody  who  fulfils  the  conditions  you  have  mentioned?'  he 
told  me  that  the  name  of  SPURGEON  leaped  from  his  lips  almost  to  his  own  surprise. 
Mrs.  Hillyard  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  about  the  matter,  and  you  all  know  what 
followed  from  their  correspondence." 

In  reply  to  the  first  letter  from  Mrs.  Hillyard,  Mr.  Spurgeon  asked  for  further 
particulars  of  her  proposed  plan,  and  offered  to  go  to  see  her  concerning  it ;  she 
then  wrote  again,  as  follows  : — 

"4,  Warwick  Villas, 

"  Spencer  Street, 

"  Canonbury  Square, 
"  Islington, 

"Sept.  3rd,  1866. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  beg  to  thank  you  for  responding  so  kindly  to  my  very  anxious  and 
humble  desire  to  be  used  by  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  in  some  small  measure  of 
service.  He  has  said,  '  Occupy  till  I  come,'  and  He  has  graciously  given  me  an 
unceasing  longing  to  do  His  will  in  this  particular  matter.  My  oft-repeatecl  enquiry 
has  been,  'What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  the  inestimable  benefits  He  has 
conferred  upon  me?'  Truly,  we  can  but  offer  to  Him  of  His  own  ;  yet  has  He 
graciously  promised  to  accept  this  at  our  hands.  That  which  the  Lord  has  laid 
upon  my  heart,  at  present,  is  the  great  need  there  is  of  an  Orphan  House,  requiring 
neither  votes  nor  patronage,  and  especially  one  conducted  upon  simple  gospel 
principles,  just  such  an  one  as  might  be  a  kind  of  stepping-stone  to  your  suggested 
higher  school,  and  your  College  ;  for  I  think  education,  to  be  effectual,  should  begin 
at  a  very  early  age. 

"  I  have  now  about  ,£20,000,  which  I  should  like  (God  willing)  to  devote  to  the 
training  and  education  of  a  few  orphan  boys.  Of  course,  bringing  the  little  ones 
to  Jesus  is  my  first  and  chief  desire.  I  doubt  not  that  many  clear  Christians  would 
like  to  help  in  a  work  of  this  kind,  under  your  direction  and  control  ;  and  should 
such  an  Institution  grow  to  any  large  extent,  I  feel  sure  there  would  be  no  cause  to 


17°  C.    u.    STURGEON'S    ArTonror.KAPiiv. 

fear  the  want  of  means  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  clear  orphans,  for  have  they  not 
a  rich  Father  ?  I  shall  esteem  it  a  great  favour  if  you  can  call  and  talk  the 
matter  over  with  me  on  Thursday  next,  between  the  hours  of  1 2  and  4,  as  you 
kindly  propose  ;  and- 

*'  I  remain,  dear  sir, 

"  Yours  truly  obliged, 

"Ax\K     HlLLYARD." 

"  P.S. —  I  would  leave  this  matter  entirely  in  the  Lord's  hand  ;  not  desiring-  to 
go  before,  but  to  follow  His  guidance." 

A  stained-glass  windo\v  in  the  Board-room  of  the  Orphanage  represents  the 
interview  between  Mrs.  Ilillyard,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  Mr.  Iliggs,  whom  the  Pastor 
took  with  him  for  consultation  with  regard  to  the  details  of  the  suggested  scheme. 
As  they  approached  the  address  given  in  the  lady's  letter,  the  very  modest  style  of 
the:  "villas"  made  them  ask  one  another  whether  they  were  being  hoaxed,  for  it 
did  not  seem  likely  that  anyone  living  in  such  a  humble  style  would  have  £20,000 
to  give  away.  They  discovered,  afterwards,  that  it  was  only  by  the  exercise  of  the 
most  rigid  economy  that  the  good  woman  had  been  able  to  save  that  large  sum. 
On  being  admitted  to  the  plainly-furnished  room  where  Mrs.  Ilillyard  received 
them,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  to  her,  "We  have  called,  Madam,  about  the  £200  you 
mentioned  in  your  letter."  "£200!  did  I  write?  I  meant  to  have  said  ,£20,000." 
"Oh,  yes!"  replied  the  Pastor,  "you  did  put  £20,000;  but  I  was  not  sure  whether 
a  nought  or  two  had  slipped  in  by  mistake,  and  thought  I  would  be  on  the  sale 
side."  1  hey  then  discussed  the  whole  question  from  various  points  of  view,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  being  specially  anxious  to  ascertain  whether  the  money  ought  to  go  to 
any  relatives,  and  even  suggesting  that  it  might  be  handed  over  to  Mr.  M  tiller  for 
his  Orphan  Homes.  The  lady,  however,  adhered  to  her  determination  to  entrust 
the  £20,000  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  to  him  alone. 

The  next  letter  shows  that  the  project  was  assuming  a  definite  shape,  and  thai 
the  Pastor  and  his  friends  had  undertaken  the  great  charge  thus  providentially 
committed  to  them  :— 

"  4,  Warwick  Villas, 

"  Spencer  Street, 

"  Canonbury  Square, 
"  Islington, 

o  ' 

"  Sept.  i;th,  1866. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

11  I    return   you    many   sincere    thanks    for    your  great    kindness    in    the 
prayerful  and  persevering  attention  you  have  given  to  the  matter  next  my  heart,  that 


C.      H.     SPURGEON S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


172  <'.   ll.  Sl'UKGEOM  S  AUtOBtOGRAPHY. 

is,  the  making"  provision,  as  the  Lord  enables  us,  for  the  necessities,  both  temporal  and 
spiritual,  of  some  of  His  own  dear  little  ones.  I  cannot  but  trace  the  hand  of  God 
in  so  marvellously  guiding  me  to  one  who  has  not  only  the  will,  but  the  ability,  to 
carry  out  the  plan  ;  and  thus  my  poor  petitions  have  already  in  a  measure  been 
answered.  Truly,  you  have  much  blessed  work  already  on  your  hands  ;  yet  I  ieel 
sure  that  you  will  not  shrink  from  this  new  enterprise.  It  is  the  Lord's  own  cause, 
and  He  will  give  health,  and  strength,  and  every  other  requisite  for  carrying  it  on  ; 
and  thus  may  He  be  pleased  greatly  to  extend  it  under  your  influence  !  I  am  aware 
that  we  have  undertaken  a  great  responsibility  ;  yet  we  will  not  fear,  but  exercise 
entire  dependence  upon  Him  who  is  indeed  the  Father  of  the  fatherless,  and  able 
to  do  far  more  than  we  either  ask  or  think  ;  and  I  have  not  the  shadow  of  a 
doubt  but,  with  His  smile  and  blessing,  it  must  and  will  assuredly  prosper. 

"  I  am  much  pleased  to  hear  that  the  lady  you  mentioned  will  give  her  willing 
co-operation.  How  kind  of  your  good  deacons  also  !  Their  aid  will  be  most 
valuable  ;  I  had  not  thought  of  any  other  Trustees.  I  am  so  glad  you  think  many 
dear  friends  will  be  found  to  help  in  this  work.  I  am  much  encouraged  by  precious 
Scriptures  :  '  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it  ;'  and  'According  to  your  faith, 
be  it  unto  you  ; '  with  many  others.  The  choice  of  a  competent  master  is  a  very 
important  matter ;  if  you  have  an  interview  with  the  person  you  mentioned,  you 
will  be  able  in  some  measure  to  judge  whether  he  would  be  likely  to  suit  your 
purpose.  You  will,  no  doubt,  decide  that  there  must  be  discipline  exercised, — great 
firmness,  united  with  much  patience  and  forbearance,  the  law  of  love  only. 
Whenever  you  wish  to  have  an  interview  with  me,  if  you  will  kindly  send  me  a  line 
previously,  I  shall  be  sure  to  be  at  home,  and— 

"  I  remain,  dear  sir, 

"  Most  truly  yours  in  our  Lord, 

"ANNE     HlLLYARD." 

A  preliminary  notice  was  inserted  in  l^ke  Sivont  and  the  Troivel  for  October, 
1866;  in  the  following  January,  the  site  at  Stockwell  was  purchased;  funds  com 
menced  to  come  in,  one  of  the  first  large  contributors  being  Mr.  George  Moore,  of 
Bow  Churchyard,  who  gave  £250.  The  sum  of  ^500  was  given  by  Mrs.  Tyson, 
of  Upper  Norwood, — a  lady  who  long  and  generously  aided  both  College  and 
Orphanage,  and  who,  in  her  will,  left  .£25,00010  the  latter  Institution,  and  so  became 
its  greatest  helper.  As  the  ^500  was  a  present  from  Mr.  Tyson  to  his  wife  on  the 
twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  their  marriage,  the  house  built  with  it  was  called  "  Silver- 
wedding  House  ;  "  the  next  one,  given  by  Mr.  James  Harvey,  was  named  "  The 
Merchant's  House  ;"  the  third,  presented  by  Mr.  W.  Higgs  and  his  workmen,  was 
entitled  "  The  Workmen's  House  ;"  then  came  "  Unity  House,"  the  gift  of  "  Father 


C.     II.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


173 


Olney  "  and  his  sons,  in  memory  of  Mrs.  Unity  Olney  ;  "The  Testimonial  Houses," 
erected  with  funds  contributed  by  the  Baptist  churches  of  the  United  Kingdom  as  a 
proof  of  the  high  esteem  in  which  they  held  the  President;  "The  Sunday-school 
House,"  given  by  the  Tabernacle  Sunday-school  ;  and  "  The  College  House,"  a 
token  of  love  from  brethren  educated  in  the  Pastors'  College.  The  head-master's 
house,  dining-hall,  play-hall,  and  infirmary,  completed  the  boys'  side  of  the  Institu 
tion  ;  and,  at  a  later  period,  a  corresponding  portion  was  erected  for  girls,  of  which 
an  account  may  more  properly  appear  in  the  concluding  volume  of  this  work. 


THE    BOYS     HOrsFS,    S T(  (CKU'KI.L    ORPHANAGE. 


Very  early  in  the  history  of  the  Institution,  Mr.  Spurgeon  announced  the 
method  he  intended  to  adopt  in  raising  the  necessary  funds.  Preaching  in  the 
Tabernacle,  in  1867,  on  "  Believing  to  See,"  he  said  : — "  I  hope  the  day  may  soon 
come  when  the  noble  example  which  has  been  set  by  our  esteemed  brother,  Mr. 
M  tiller,  of  Bristol,  will  be  more  constantly  followed  in  all  the  Lord's  work  ;  for,  rest 
assured  that,  if  we  will  but  '  believe  to  see,'  we  shall  see  great  things.  I  cannot  forbear 
mentioning  to  you,  to-night,  what  Gocl  has  enabled  us  to  see  of  late  as  a  church. 
We  met  together,  one  Monday  night,  as  you  will  remember,  for  prayer  concerning  the 
Orphanage  ;  and  it  was  not  a  little  remarkable  that,  on  the  Saturday  of  that  week, 
the  Lord  should  have  moved  some:  friend,  who  knew  nothing  of  our  prayers,  to  give 
five  hundred  pounds  to  that  object.  It  astonished  some  of  you  that,  on  the  following 


174 


C.     II.     SPUUr.KOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Monday,  God  should  have  influenced  another  to  give  six  hundred  pounds!  When  I 
told  you  of  that,  at  the  next  prayer- meeting,  you  did  not  think,  perhaps,  that  the 
Lord  had  something  else  in  store,  and  that,  the  following  Tuesday,  another  friend 
would  come  with  five  hundred  pounds  !  It  was  just  the  same  in  the  building  of  this 
Tabernacle.  We  were  a  few  and  poor  people  when  we  commenced  ;  but,  still,  we 
moved  on  by  faith,  and  never  went  into  debt.  \\  a  trusted  in  God,  and  the  house 
was  built,  to  the  eternal  honour  ol  Him  who  hears  and  answers  prayer.  And,  m;irk 


TIII;  INFIR.MAKY,  STOCKWKLL   ORPHANAGE. 


you,  it  will  be  so  in  the  erection  of  this  Orphan  Home.  We  shall  see  greater 
things  than  these  if  only  our  iaith  will  precede  our  sight.  But  if  we  go  upon  the 
old  custom  of  our  general  Societies,  and  lirst  look  out  for  a  regular  income,  and  get 
our  subscribers,  and  send  round  our  collectors,  and  pay  our  percentages, — that  is,  do 
not  trust  (iod,  but  trust  our  subscribers, — if  we  go  by  that  rule,  we  shall  see  very 
little,  and  have  no  room  for  believing.  But  if  we  shall  just  trust  God,  and  believe 
that  He  never  did  leave  a  work  that  He  put  upon  us,  and  never  sets  us  to  do  a  thing 
without  meaning  to  help  us  through  with  it,  we  shall  soon  see  that  the  God  of  Israel 
still  lives,  and  that  His  arm  is  not  shortened." 


C.      II.     SITRGKONS     AUTU1HOGRAPIIV.  1/5 

Many  notable  interpositions  of  Providence  have  occurred  in  connection  with  the 
building  and  maintenance  of  the  Institution.  One  of  the  earliest  and  most  memor 
able  took  place  on  November  20,  1867,  concerning  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote, 
several  years  afterwards,  among  his  other  personal  recollections  of  Ur.  Brock  : — "  \\  e 
remember  when,  being  somewhat  indisposed,  as  is,  alas  !  too  often  our  lot,  we  went 
to  spend  a  quiet  day  or  two  at  a  beloved  friend's  mansion  in  Regent's  Park.  \Ve 
were  dining,  and  Dr.  Brock  was  one  ol  our  little  company.  Mention  was  made, 
that  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  was  being  built,  and  that  cash  for  the  builder  would 
be  needed  in  a  day  or  two,  but  was  not  yet  in  hand.  \Ye  declared  our  confidence 
in  God  that  the  need  would  be  supplied,  and  that  we  should  never  owe  any  man  a 
pound  for  the  Lord's  work.  Our  friend  agreed  that,  in  the  review  of  the  past, 
such  confidence  was  natural,  and  was  due  to  our  ever-faithful  Lord.  As  we  closed 
the  meal,  a  servant  entered,  with  a  telegram  from  our  secretary,  to  the  effect  that 
A.  B.,  an  unknown  donor,  had  sent  /"i,rco  for  the  Orphanage.  No  sooner  had 
we  read  the  words  than  the  Doctor  rose  from  the  table,  and  poured  out  his 
utterances  of  gratitude  in  the  most  joyful  manner,  closing  with  the  suggestion 
that  the  very  least  thing  we  could  do  was  to  fall  upon  our  knees  at  once,  and 
magnify  the  Lord.  The  prayer  and  praise  which  he  then  poured  out,  we  shall 
never  fort/et  ;  he  seemed  a  psalmist  while,  with  full  heart  and  o-rancleur  both  of 

C">  i  O 

words  and  sound,  singularly  suitable  to  the  occasion,  he  addressed  the  ever- 
faithful  One.  He  knew  our  feebleness  at  the  time,  and  while  he  looked  upon 
the  gilt  of  God  as  a  great  tenderness  to  us  in  our  infirmity,  he  also  seemed  to 
feel  such  perfect  oneness  with  us  in  our  delight  that  he  took  the  duty  of  expressing 
it  quite  out  of  our  hands,  and  spoke  in  our  name  as  well  as  his  own.  If  a  fortune 
had  been  left  him,  he  could  not  have  been  more  delighted  than  he  was  at  the 
liberal  supply  of  our  needs  in  the  Lord's  work.  We  sat  around  the  fire,  and 
talked  together  of  the  goodness  of  God,  and  our  heart  was  lifted  up  in  the  ways 
of  the  Lord.  Among  the  very  latest  things  we  spoke  of,  when  we  last  met  on 
earth,  was  that  evening  at  our  friend's  house,  and  the  great  goodness  of  the  Lord 
in  response  to  our  faith.  While  we  write  the  record,  our  heart  wells  up  with 
new  gratitude  for  the  choice  benefit.  Surely,  if  in  Heaven  the  saints  shall  converse 
together  of  the  things  of  earth,  this  will  be  one  of  the  subjects  upon  which  two 
comrades  of  twenty  years  may  be  expected  to  commune." 

A  few  weeks  later,  the  same  anonymous  donor  dropped  into  the  President's 
letter-box  two  bank-notes  for  ,£1,000  each, — one  for  the  College,  and  the  other 
for  the  Orphanage, — with  a  letter  in  which  the  generous  giver  said,  "  The  latter 
led  me  to  contribute  to  the  former."  This  intimation  was  specially  cheering  to 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  for  he  had  feared,  perhaps  naturally,  that  the  new  Institution  would 
be  likely  to  impoverish  the  older  one. 


176  C.     II.     SPURGEON S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

In  November,  1869,  when  the  President  was  suddenly  laid  aside  by  an  attack 
of  small-pox,  a  friend,  who  knew  nothing  of  his  illness,  called  and  left  ^500  for  the 
Orphanage  ;  and,  a  few  days  later,  an  anonymous  donor,  who  also  was  unaware 
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  affliction,  sent  £1,000  for  the  same  purpose.  At  one  meeting 
of  the  Trustees,  the  financial  report  was,  "all  bills  paid,  but  only  ^3  left  in  hand." 
Prayer  was  offered,  and  the  stream  of  liberality  soon  began  to  flow  again.  On 
another  occasion,  the  funds  were  completely  exhausted,  and  the  Managers  were 
driven  to  special  supplication  on  behalf  of  the  work.  That  very  da}',  nearly  ^"400 
was  poured  into  the  treasury,  and  the  hearts  of  the  pleaders  were  gladdened  and 
encouraged. 


TRL'STKLS   AND    IIl-JAU-MAS  1  KK   OK   T1IK   ORPHANAGE. 


The  President's  usual  plan,  when  supplies  ran  short,  was  first  to  give  all  he 
could,  and  ask  his  fellow-Trustees  to  do  the  same,  and  then  to  lay  the  case  before 
the  Lord  in  the  full  belief  that  He  would  incline  His  stewards  to  send  in  all  that 
was  required.  As  long  as  he  was  able  to  do  so,  Mr.  Spurgeon  presided  at  the 
meetings  of  the  Trustees  ;  and,  afterwards,  he  was  kept  informed  of  their  proceedings 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  177 

by  copies  of  the  Minutes,  while  the  most  important  items  of  business  were  decided 
"subject  to  the  approval  of  the  President."  In  the  earlier  days,  he  used  personally 
to  see  the  applicants, — an  experience  which  often  proved  expensive,  for  he  could  not 
listen  to  the  sad  stories  ot  the  poor  widows  without  temporarily  relieving  their 
necessities,  whatever  might  be  the  decision  concerning  the  admission  of  their 
children.  Sometimes,  there  was  a  humorous  side  to  the  situation,  and  he  was 
quick  to  notice  it.  One  day,  a  woman  came  with  quite  a  little  tribe  of  boys  and 
girls  ;  and,  in  reply  to  the  enquiries  put  to  her,  said  that  she  had  been  twice  left  a 
widow,  and  her  second  husband,  whom  she  had  recently  lost,  had  been  previously 
married  ;  and  then,  separating  the  children  into  three  groups,  she  said,  "  These  are 
his,  those  are  mine,  and  these  are  ours."  In  relating  the  story  afterwards,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  used  to  say  that  he  did  not  remember  any  other  instance  in  which 
possessive  pronouns  had  proved  so  useful  ! 

In  January,  1869,  the  President  wrote,  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel : — "At  the 
Orphanage,  we  are  still  set  last  for  want  of  a  master.  The  Lord  will,  we  trust,  guide 
us  to  the  right  man  ;  but,  out  of  many  applicants,  not  one  has  seemed  to  us  to  be 
suitable."  Two  months  later,  however,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  able  to  report  : — "  Mr. 
Charlesworth,  assistant-minister  to  Mr.  Newman  Hall,  of  Surrey  Chapel,  has 
accepted  the  post  of  master  to  the  Orphanage.  He  called  in — as  we  are  wont  to 
say — by  accident,  at  the  very  moment  when  a  letter  was  handed  to  us  from  the 
previously-elected  master  declining  to  fulfil  his  engagement.  Our  disappointment 
was  considerable  at  the  loss  of  the  man  of  our  choice  ;  but  when  we  found  that  this 
dear  friend  had  been  thinking  of  the  work,  and  was  ready  to  undertake  it,  we  were 
filled  with  gratitude  to  the  over-ruling  hand  of  God." 

The  election  of  a  Poedo- Baptist  to  such  an  important  position  was  another 
instance  of  the  catholicity  of  spirit  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  manifested  in  appointing 
a  Congregational ist  (Mr.  Rogers)  to  the  post  of  Principal  of  the  Pastors'  College, 
and  choosing  another  member  of  the  same  denomination  (Mr.  Selway)  to  be  the 
Scientific  Lecturer  to  that  Institution.  The  undenominational  character  of  the 
Orphanage  is  apparent  from  a  glance  at  the  table  showing  the  religious  views  of 
the  parents  of  the  children  received.  Up  to  the  date  covered  by  the  present  volume, 
out  of  the  527  orphans  who  had  found  a  happy  home  at  Stock  well,  no  less  than 
166  had  come  from  Church  of  England  families,  while  Baptists  were  only  represented 
by  121,  Congregationalists  by  64,  Wesleyans  by  58,  and  other  bodies  by  still  smaller 
numbers. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  never  had  occasion  to  regret  the  choice  of  Mr.  Charlesworth 
for  the  position  which  he  still  holds  ;  and  he  might  have  saicl,  at  any  later  period 
of  his  lite,  what  he  wrote  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  for  March,  1873  : — "Our 

M  3 


g  c.   H.   SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

dear  brother   Mr.  Charlesworth,  fills  the  place  of  master  to  our  great  joy,  and  to  the 
evident  benefit  of  all  the  boys."     That  number  of  the  Magazine  also  contained  the 
following  interesting  announcement :-"  On  Monday,  February  24,  five  of  the  youtt 
educated   at   the   Orphanage   were  baptized  at  the   Tabernacle,   together  with   our 
friend    Mr    V    J.    Charlesworth,   the   master,   who  gave  an   address   explaining   I 
reasons  for  being   baptized    as    a    believer."       Many   others    of    the    orphans 
followed  this  example,  or  united  with  other  branches  of  the  Church  oi   . 
are  actively  engaged  in  Christian  service.      Of  those  who  have  entered  the  ministry 
three-Messrs    R.   S.   Latimer,   C.  W.  Townsend,   and  John   Maynard,-wer 
further  indebted   to  Mr.   Spurgeon   for  the  training  they  received  m   the 
College      The  last-named  of  the  three-the  "  little  Jack  "  of  the  Orphanage-we: 
from  the  College  to  the  Congo,  and  so  took  the  short  route  to  Heaven 
to  his  memory,  on  the  house  in  which   he  lived  while  in  the  Institution   must  be, 
to    the    boys    who    read    it,   a  continual    reminder   of   one   of   their    number   wh 
influence,  even  as  a  lad,  was  of  a  most  gracious  character.     It  is  a  fact  also  worthy 
of  mention   that   another   of  the    inmates   of  the  Orphanage  m  Us  early  days- 
F.  G.  Ladds-after  serving  for  a  time  as  a  teacher,  has  been  for  twenty  ye, 
esteemed  and  efficient  secretary  of  the  Institution. 

On  one  occasion,  when  there  had  been  an  addition  to  Mr.  Charlesworth  s  family, 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  a  tone  of  apparent  seriousness,  told  the  Trustees  that  he  ha< 
call  their  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  head-master  had  introduced  a  child  into  the 
Orphana-e  without  the  permission  of  the  Managers,  and  he  added  that  this  was  no. 
the  first  "time  such  a  thing  had  happened  !     One  of  the  brethren,  not  noticing 
merry  twinkle  in  the    President's   eye,    proposed   that   Mr.  Charlesworth  should 
called  in,  and  questioned    concerning   the   matter,  and  also  that  he  should  be  very 
distinctly  informed  that  such  a  proceeding  must  not  be  repeated 
was  probably  not  put  to  the  meeting,  and  a  truthful  historian  must  re 
were  several  similar  occurrences  in  alter  years. 

Everyone  at  all  acquainted   with    the   inner  working  of  the  Orphanage  knows 
with    what   affection,   mingled    with    reverence,   the  children   at   Stockwell 
regarded  Mr.   Spurgeon.       He  was  indeed  a  father  to  the   fatherles 
no  boy   ever   presumed   upon  the  tender  familiarity  which  the   beloved   President 
permitted,  every  one  of  them  fully  prized  the  privilege  of  his  friendship.     The, 
no  mistaking  the  ringing  cheer  which  greeted  his  arrival  ;  everybody  on  the  premises 
instantly   knew  what  that  shout   meant,   and  passed  round   the   cheermg  message, 
"  Mr   Spurgeon  has  come."     In  the  "  In  Memoriam  "  Stockwell  Orphanage  Tract, 
issued  in  ,8°9,,  after  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  "called  home,"  Mr  Charlesworth  wrote  con 
cerning  the  "  promoted  "  President :-"  The  children  loved  him  ;  and  his  visit 


C.     II.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


called  forth  the  most  boisterous  demonstrations  of  delight.  His  appearance  was  the 
signal  for  a  general  movement  towards  the  centre  of  attraction,  and  he  often  said, 
'  They  compassed  me  about  like  bees  !  '  The  eagerness  with  which  they  sought 
to  grasp  his  hand,  often  involved  the  younger  children  in  the  risk  of  being  trampled 
upon  by  others  ;  but,  with  ready  tact  and  condescension,  he  singled  out  those  who 
were  at  a  disadvantage,  and  extended  to  them  his  hand.  At  the  Memorial  Service, 
conducted  by  the  head-master,  it  was  ascertained  that  every  boy  present  had  shaken 
hands  with  the  dear  President,  —  a  fact  of  no  small  significance  !  Every  visit  cost 
him  as  many  pennies  as  there  were  children  in  the  Orphanage.  Proud  as  they  were 
to  possess  the  coin  for  its  spending  power,  it  was  regarded  as  having  an  augmented 
value  from  the  fact  that  it  was  the  gift  of  Mr.  Spurgeon." 

Many  years  ago,  a  simple  incident  was  related  in   The  Sword  and  the  Trowel, 

which  showed  how   even   the  most  friendless  of  the  orphans  felt  that  he  mio-ht  tell 

& 

his  troubles  into  the  sympathetic  ear  of  the  great  preacher  :  _ 

'Sitting  down  upon  one  of  the  seats  in  the  Orphanage  grounds,  we  were 
talking  with  one  of  our  brother-Trustees,  when  a  little  fellow,  we  should  think  about 
eight  years  of  age,  left  the  other  boys  who  were  playing  around  us,  and  came 
deliberately  up  to  us.  He  opened  fire  upon  us  thus,  '  Please,  Mister  Spurgeon,  I 
want  to  come  and  sit  clown  on  that  seat  between  you  two  gentlemen.'  'Come  aloncr 
Bob,  and  tell  us  what  you  want.'  '  Please,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  suppose  there  was  a  little 
boy  who  had  no  father,  who  lived  in  a  Orphanage  with  a  lot  of  other  little  boys  who 
had  no  fathers;  and  suppose  those  little  boys  had  mothers  and  aunts  who  corned 
once  a  month,  and  brought  them  apples  and  oranges,  and  gave  them  pennies  ;  and 
suppose  this  little  boy  had  no  mother,  and  no  aunt,  and  so  nobody  never  came  to 
bring  him  nice  things,  don't  you  think  somebody  ought  to  give  him  a  penny? 
'Cause,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  that's  me.'  'Somebody'  felt  something  wet  in  his  eye,  and 
Bob  got  a  sixpence,  and  went  off  in  a  great  state  of  delight.  Poor  little  soul,  he 
had  sei/ed  the  opportunity  to  pour  out  a  bitterness  which  had  rankled  in  his  little 
heart,  and  made  him  miserable  when  the  monthly  visiting  day  came  round,  and,  as 
he  said,  '  Nobody  never  came  to  bring  him  nice  things.'  " 

The  narrative,  of  course,  brought  "  little  Bob  "  a  plentiful  supply  of  pocket- 
money,  and  was  the  means  of  helping  others  of  the  orphans  who,  like  him,  were 
motherless  and  fatherless  ;  and  it  also  served  Mr.  Spurgeon  many  a  time  as  an 
illustration  of  the  way  in  which  a  personal  appeal  might  be  made  effectual.  One  of 
the  best  pleas  for  the  Institution  that  the  beloved  President  ever  issued  was  dictated 
to  his  secretary  under  the  olives  at  Mentone.  It  was  addressed,  "To  those  who  are 
happily  married,  or  hope  to  be  ;  "  and  after  allusion  to  the  bliss  of  a  true  marriage 
union,  and  the  consequent  sorrow  when  one  of  the  twain  should  be  removed  by 
death,  the  writer  showed  how,  often,  poverty  made  the  bereavement  even  more 


c.    ii.    SPURGKON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

I  oO 

,,inful  and  then  pointed  out  the  blessing  that  a  home  for  the  fatherless  became  to 
the  poor  struggHng  widow  suddenly  left  with  a  large  family  The  article  contained 
eciaT  etenL  to  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  ;  and  it  was,  in  due  tune,  published  in 
T^S^  and  ike  Tro^l.  As  soon  as  it  appeared,  one  gentleman  sent  £  ,00  as 
a  thaifferiTg  from  himself  and  his  wife  for  their  many  years  Chappy  married 
life,  and  other  donors  sent  smaller  amounts.  ^ 


r  :r 


to  those  who  have  the,  happiness  of  being  joined  together  by  wedd 

by  wedlock"      It  was  a  source  of  much  amusement  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  to 

Lug  the  other  contributions   for  the  Orphanage    as  the  result  of  his  appea     a 
donation  "from  Mr.  and   Mrs.   Naggleton,"   who  chd  not,  however,  give  their  teal 


reprinted  in  the  series  of  Stockwell   Orphanage  Tracts,  and  in 
that  form  has  continued  to  benefit  the  Institution.      When  it  was  ready  to  be.  issued 
w       discovered  that  the  "imp"  who  is  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  P^ng-hou* 
had     hanged  one  word  in  the  title,  and  made  it  read,   ••  lo  those  who  are  happ 
„  rred    or  o^t  to  be  ;"   so  a  new  edition  had  to  be  prepared       As  soon  as  the 
o  Wet     mad,!  their  appearance  in   the  booksellers'  wind,,,,    they  proved  to  be 

rrkllv  to  ladies  !     Mr.  Spurgeon  heard,  with  great  glee, 
source  of  intense  interest,  especially  t  « 

how  one  or  another  would  go  into  the  shop,  point  to   No.  4,  and  say, 
trait!"     H     was  afraid  they  would  be  disappointed  with  the  contents;  but,  at  any 
rate   he  felt  that,  if    hey  did  not  find  in  it  exactly  what  they  expect,,!,  they  would  at 
le^t  learn  something  concerning  the   Institution  which  was  so  clear  to  his  hear, 

Had  Mr  Spurgeon  been  spared  to  complete  this  portion  of  his  "Standard 
Life  "he  wouid  hLTincluUed  a  grateful  tribute  to  the  help  he  had  received  from  his 
b  other  and  the  other  Trustees,  and  the  masters,  matrons,  and  teachers  responsible 
re  differ  It  departments  of  the  work  at  the  Orphanage,  as  well  as  to  all  those 
whose  generous  gifts  had  enabled  it  to  be  carried  on  so  long  and  so  success  u  y^ 
This  he  has  already  done,  year  by  year,  in  the  pages  of  h,s  Magazine,  and 
annual  and  quarterly  gatherings  ;  it  is  only  mentioned  here  lest  anyone  should 
imaoine  that  it  had  been  forgotten, 


CHAPTER     LXXII. 


louse/'  fH 


HILE  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  so  diligently,  and  in  such  self-denying 
fashion,  caring  for  students  and  colporteurs,  widows  and  orphans, 
some  of  his  friends  thought  it  was  time  for  a  little  more  comfort 
to  be  provided  for  himself  and  his  household.  Many  hallowed 
associations  had  endeared  the  old  house  at  Nightingale  Lane  to  its 
happy  inmates  ;  but  they  were  not  blind  to  the  disadvantages  of 
their  ancient  dwelling,  and  all  greatly  rejoiced  when,  in  1869,  it  was  pulled  clown, 
and  the  new  "  Helensburgh  House  "  was  erected  in  its  place.  The  large  amount 
expended  by  the  dear  owner  in  his  many  departments  of  service  for  the  Lord  would 


jj.,  C.     II.     Sl'UKGEON'S     AUTOllIOGRArllV. 

have  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  meet  the  necessary  outlay,  so  a  few  of  his  most 
liberal  and  devoted  helpers  determined  to  defray  the  principal  part  ol  the  cost  as  a 
token  of  their  loving  appreciation  of  his  public  ministry  and  private 
The  work  was  entrusted  to  the  charge  of  Mr.  William  Higgs  and  the  plans  were 
drawn  by  his  eldest  son,  the  present  Deacon  William  Higgs  who  greatly  pri.es  the 
volumes  given  to  him  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  in  recognition  of  his  1; 

Before  the  new  house  was  ready  for  occupation,  Mr.  Spurgeon  met  the  generous 
donors;  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  who  had  been  for  some  time  staying  in  Brighton,  can,, 
up  to  London  in  order  to  be  present  at  that  memorable  gathering.      In  a  tiny  : 
book  which  has  been  preserved,  the  dear  Pastor  wrote  the  introduction  and  out  ine 
the  speech  in  which  he  expressed  his  gratitude  for  the  gift  he  had  received, 
a  most   exceptional   thing   for  him    to    make,   for   any   occasion,    more  than   : 
skeleton  of  the  address  or   sermon  he  was  about  to  deliver,  so  the  high  value 
set  upon  the  presentation  is  manifest  from  the   fact  that  he  was  moved  to       mpo 
this  most  charming  prose-poem  of  thanksgiving  ior  it  :- 

"  It  was  a  law  of  Abdul  the  Merciful  that  no  man  should  be  compelled 
when  overwhelmed  by  kindness.      Doth  a  man  sing  when   his  mouth   ,s   I 
sherbet  of  Shiraz,  or  a  prince  dance  when  he  wears  on  his  head  the  crown  < 
with  its  hundredweight  of  jewels  ?     Or,  as  Job  saith,  •  Doth  the  w,ld  ass  bray  when 
he  hath  grass?     Or  loweth  the  ox  over  his  fodder?'     As  he  that  marrieth  a  virgin  is 
excused  from  war,  so  he  that  receive*  a  great  gilt  is  exempted  from  a  public  spee 
My  heart  is  as  lull  of  thanks  as  Paradise  was  full  of  peace.     As  the  banks  of  I 
ring  with  the   songs  of  nightingales,  so  my  whole  being  reverberates  with  graUU, 
and  there  is  another,  for  whom  1  may  also  speak,  who  echoes  all  I  utter,  as  the 
of  Meringen  prolong  with  manifold  sweetness  the  music  ol  the  horn. 

«  fZm y^-it  comes  with  double  pleasure,  like  the  nuts  and  the  almonds  that 
were  carried  to  Joseph  fresh  from  his  father's  tents.     From  my  brethren- 
flower  dripping  with  the  dew  of  Hermon,   and    perfumed  with    the    fragrance 
affection.      From  my  fellow-soldiers,-it  comes  as  a  cup  of  generous  wine  in  wh 
we  pledge  each  other  for  future  battles.      From  my  children  in  the  faith.-as  a  1 
token   such    as   a  tender   father  treasures.       From   the   Church,-it   is   < 
sacrifice  of  sweet  smell,  acceptable  unto  God. 

"A  /^-founded  in  love,  walled  with  sincerity,  roofed  in  with   genero 
Its  windows  are  agates,  its  gates  carbuncles.     The  beam  out  of  the  wall  shall  talk 
with  me,  and  the  stones  shall  give  me  sermons.      I  shall  see  your  names  engraven  on 
every  room  ;  and  I  shall  read,  in  a  mystic  handwriting,  the  record  that  your  love  wa: 
weio-hed  in  the  balances,  and  was  not  found  wanting. 

••  The  lime  of  your  love.     During  my  life  ;-not  like  the  poor  philosopher,  who 
was  starved  to  death,  but  who  afterwards  had  a  pillar  erected  in  his  honour. 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  183 

house  will  be  a  monument  of  your  generosity,  and  so  it  will  be  a  double  memorial. 
Your  own  presents  made  it  needful.  I  am  like  the  man  who  received  a  white 
elephant  as  a  gift  from  his  prince,  and,  with  it,  a  sufficient  sum  of  money  to  enable 
him  to  keep  it.  The  damp  and  decay  in  the  old  house  rendered  a  new  one 
necessary  ;  the  other  was  '  a  pleasant  place  to  live  out  of.' 

"  77/6'  difficulty  of  my  position.  My  dear  wife  and  I  have  firmly  resolved  that 
we  will  never  go  into  debt  for  anything,  yet  you  know  something  of  the  continual 
claims  upon  us  in  connection  with  the  work  of  the  Lord.  You  are  also  aware  that, 
for  the  sake  of  my  service  for  the  Master  here,  I  have  refused  to  avail  myself  of 
many  opportunities  that  I  have  had  of  acquiring  wealth.  You  have  all  heard  that  I 
might  have  gone  to  America,  and,  in  a  few  weeks,  have  obtained  more  than  I  am 
likely  to  receive  in  connection  with  my  ministry  for  many  years.  Yet  I  feel  that  I 
acted  rightly,  in  the  sight  of  God,  in  declining  all  such  offers  that  had  been  made 
to  me. 

"  The  fear  of  making  too  much  of  a  minister.  There  is  no  intent  on  my  part 
to  rest  now  that  I  have  a  new  house.  If  possible,  I  shall  work  harder  than  betore, 
and  preach  better  than  ever." 

The  latter  portion  of  the  notes  conveys  only  a  very  slight  idea  of  the  line  of 
thought  that  the  beloved  speaker  took  ;  but  it  may  well  be  imagined  how,  with  such 
a  theme,  and  such  a  sympathetic  audience,  he  would  "  fight  his  battles  o'er  again," 
recounting  the  great  victories  which  the  Lord  had  already  given  to  him  and  those 
whom  he  addressed  as  his  fellow-soldiers,  and  pointing  out  to  them  other  fields  in 
which  they  might,  together,  win  fresh  renown  for  their  glorious  King  and  Leader. 

There  is  a  very  memorable  incident,  which  is  so  intimately  associated  with  the 
history  of  both  husband  and  wife  during  this  period,  that  it  must  be  included  in  "The 
Standard  Life,"  although  an  account  of  it  has  once  before  been  published.  In  her 
volume,  Ten  Years  After!  Mrs.  Spurgeon  thus  wrote  concerning  the  story  of  the 
opal  ring  and  the  piping  bullfinch  :— "  This  incident  got  into  print  somehow,  and  has 
been  told,  with  varying1  incorrectness  and  sundry  brilliant  embellishments,  in  many 
papers,  both  in  England  and  America.  I  think  it  must  have  been  because  my 
beloved  so  often  spoke  of  it,  and  delighted  to  tell  of  the  tender  providence  which,  in 
so  remarkable  a  way,  gratified  his  sick  wife's  lightest  wishes.  As  this  book  is  as 
much  of  an  autobiography  as  will  ever  be  written  by  me,  it  seems  well  to  give  a 
correct  version  of  the  sweet  true  story  in  these  pages.  It  was  during  a  time  of  long 
and  painful  suffering  that  it  occurred.  Dark  days  those  were,  both  for  husband  and 
wife,  for  a  serious  disease  had  invaded  my  frame,  and  little  alleviation  could  be  found 
from  the  constant,  wearying  pain  it  caused.  My  beloved  husband,  always  so  fully 


STURGEON'S     AUTOlJlUUKAl'liV. 


engaged  about  his  Master's  business,  yet  managed  to  secure  many  precious  moments 
by  my  side,  when  lie  would  tell  me  how  the  work  of  the  Lord  was  prospering  jn  his 
hands,  and  we  would  exchange  sympathies,  he  comforting  me  in  my  suflerino-,  and  I 
cheering  him  on  in  his  labour. 

"  One  ever-recurring  question  when  he  had  to  leave  me  was,  '  What  can  I  brino- 
you,  wifey?'  I  seldom  answered  him  by  a  request,  lor  I  had  all  things  richly  to 
enjoy,  except  health.  But,  one  clay,  when  he  put  the  usual  query,  I  said,  playfully, 
'/  should  like  an  opal  ring,  and  a  piping  bullfinch  /'  Me  looked  surprised,  and 
rather  amused  ;  but  simply  replied,  '  Ah,  you  know  I  cannot  get  those  for  you  !  ' 
Two  or  three  days  we  made  merry  over  my  singular  choice  of  desirable  articles  ; 
but,  one  Thursday  evening,  on  his  return  from  the  Tabernacle,  he  came  into  my 
room  with  such  a  beaming  face,  and  such  love-lighted  eyes,  that  I  knew  something 
had  delighted  him  very  much.  In  his  hand  he  held  a  tiny  box,  and  I  am  sure  his 
pleasure  exceeded  mine  as  he  took  from  it  a  beautiful  little  ring,  and  placed  it  on  my 
finger.  'There  is  your  opal  ring,  my  darling,'  he  said,  and  then  he  told  me  of  the 
strange  way  in  which  it  had  come.  An  old  lady,  whom  he  had  once  seen  when  she 
was  ill,  sent  a  note  to  the  Tabernacle  to  say  she  desired  to  give  Mrs.  Spurgeon 
a  small  present,  and  could  someone  be  sent  to  her  to  receive  it  ?  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
private  secretary  went,  accordingly,  and  brought  the  little  parcel,  which,  when 
opened,  was  found  to  contain  this  opal  ring  !  How  we  talked  of  the  Lord's  tender 
love  lor  His  stricken  child,  and  of  His  condescension  in  thus  stooping  to  supply  an 
unnecessary  gratification  to  His  clear  servant's  sick  one,  —  I  must  leave  my  readers  to 
imagine  ;  but  I  can  remember  feeling  that  the  Lord  was  very  near  to  us. 

"  Not  long  after  that,  I  was  moved  to  Brighton,  there  to  pass  a  crisis  in  my  life, 
the  result  of  which  would  be  a  restoration  to  better  health,'  —  or  death.  One  evening, 
when  my  clear  husband  came  from  London,  he  brought  a  large  package  with  him, 
and,  uncovering  it,  disclosed  a  cage  containing  a  lovely  piping  bullfinch  !  My 
astonishment  was  great,  my  joy  unbounded,  and  these  emotions  were  intensified  as 
he  related  the  way  in  which  he  became  possessed  of  the  coveted  treasure.  He  had 
been  to  see  a  dear  friend  of  ours,  whose  husband  was  sick  unto  death  ;  and,  after 
commending  the  sufferer  to  God  in  prayer,  Mrs.  T-  -  said  to  him,  '  I  want  you 
to  take  my  pet  bird  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  I  would  give  him  to  none  but  her  ;  his  songs 
are  too  much  for  my  poor  husband  in  his  weak  state,  and  I  know  that  '  Bully'  will 
interest  and  amuse  Mrs.  Spurgeon  in  her  loneliness  while  you  are  so  much  away  from 
her.'  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon  then  told  her  of  my  desire  for  such  a  companion,  and 
together  they  rejoiced  over  the  care  of  the  loving  Heavenly  Father,  who  had  so 
wondrously  provided  the  very  gift  His  child  had  longed  for.  With  that  cage  beside 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  18^ 

him,  the  journey  to  Brighton  was  a  very  short  one;  and  when  'Bully'  piped  his 
pretty  song-,  and  took  a  hemp  seed  as  a  reward  from  the  lips  of  his  new  mistress, 
there  were  eyes  with  joyful  tears  in  them,  and  hearts  overflowing  with  praise  to  God, 
in  the  little  room  by  the  sea  that  night  ;  and  the  dear  Pastor's  comment  was,  '  I  think 
you  are  one  of  your  Heavenly  Father's  spoiled  children,  and  He  just  gives  you 
whatever  you  ask  for.' 

"  Does  anyone  doubt  that  this  bird  was  a  direct  love-gift  from  the  pitiful  Father? 
Do  I  hear  someone  say,  'Oh  !  it  was  all  "chance"  that  brought  about  such  coinci 
dences  as  these'  ?  Ah,  dear  friends  !  those  of  you  who  have  been  similarly  indulged 
by  Him  know,  of  a  certainty,  that  it  is  not  so.  He  who  cares  for  all  the  works  of 
His  hand,  cares  with  infinite  tenderness  for  the  children  of  His  love,  and  thinks 
nothing  which  concerns  them  too  small  or  too  trivial  to  notice.  It  our  faith  were 
stronger,  and  our  love  more  perfect,  we  should  see  far  greater  marvels  than  these  in 
our  daily  lives. 

"  There  is  not  much  more  to  tell.  '  Bully's  '  sweet  little  life  and  ministry  ended 
at  Brighton  ;  but  the  memory  of  the  Lord's  tenderness  in  giving  him  to  me,  is  a  lile- 
long  treasure  ;  and  the  opal  ring  glistens  on  my  finger  as  I  write  this  paragraph." 

The  experiences  of  that  trying  time  need  not  be  described,  but  mention  must  be 
made  of  the  great  kindness  of  Sir  James  Y.  Simpson,  who  travelled  twice  from 
Edinburgh  to  Brighton  to  render  all  the  aid  that  the  highest  surgical  skill  could 
suggest.  When  the  operation  was  over,  Mr.  Spurgeon  asked  Sir  James  about  his 
fee,  and  he  replied,  "Well,  I  suppose  it  should  be  a  thousand  guineas  ;  and  when  you 
are  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  I  shall  expect  you  to  pay  it.  Till  then,  let  us  consider 
it  settled  by  love." 

After  the  meeting  of  donors,  mentioned  on  page  182,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  went  back 
to  Brighton  until  the  house  was  ready  to  receive  its  long-absent  mistress.  The 
thought  and  care  which  her  dear  husband  bestowed  upon  its  furnishing,  would 
surprise  even  those  who  think  they  knew  him  :  nobody  but  herself  ever  saw  half  his 
grace  and  goodness.  How  lovingly  and  tenderly  he  "reported  progress"  as  the 
various  articles  of  furniture  were  being  purchased,  the  following  letter  will  show  : — 

"  My  Own  Dear  Sufferer, 

"  I  am  pained  indeed  to  learn,  from  T-     -'s  kind  note,  that  you  are  still 
in  so  sad  a  condition  !     Oh,  may  the  ever-merciful  God  be  pleased  to  give  you  ease  ! 

"  I  have  been  quite  a  long  round  to-day, — if  a  'round  '  can  be  'long.'  First,  to 
Finsbury,  to  buy  the  wardrobe, — a  beauty.  I  hope  you  will  live  long  to  hang  your 


<.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOIJIOGKAI'HY. 


garments  in  it,  every  thread  of  them  precious  to  me  for  your  dear  sake.  Next,  to 
Hewlett's,  for  a  chandelier  for  the  dining-room.  Found  one  quite  to  my  taste  and 
yours.  Then,  to  Negretti  &  Zambra's,  to  buy  a  barometer  for  my  very  own  fancy, 
for  I  have  long  promised  to  treat  myself  to  one.  On  the  road,  I  obtained  the 
Preshurg  biscuits,  and  within  their  box  I  send  this  note,  hoping-  it  may  reach  you  the 
more  quickly.  They  are  sweetened  with  my  love  and  prayers. 

"The  bedroom  will  look  well  with  the  wardrobe  in  it  ;  at  least,  so  1  hope.  It  is 
well  made  ;  and,  I  believe,  as  nearly  as  I  could  tell,  precisely  all  you  wished  lor. 
Joe  (Mr.  Passmore  gave  this  handsome  present)  is  very  good,  and  should  have  a  wee 
note  whenever  darling  feels  she  could  write  it  without  too  much  fatigue:  ;—  but  not  yet. 
I  bought  also  a  table  for  you  in  case  you  should  have  to  keep  your  bed/"5  It  rises 
or  falls  by  a  screw,  and  also  winds  sideways,  so  as  to  go  over  the  bed,  and  then  it 
has  a  llap  for  a  book  or  paper,  so  that  my  dear  one  may  read  or  write  in  comfort 
while  lying  down.  I  could  not  resist  the  pleasure  of  making  this  little  gift  to  my 
poor  suffering  wifey,  only  hoping  it  might  not  often  be  in  requisition,  but  might  be  a 
help  when  there  was  a  needs-be  for  it.  Remember,  all  I  buy,  I  pay  for.  I  have 
paid  for  everything  as  yet  with  the  earnings  of  my  pen,  graciously  sent  me  in  time 
of  need.  It  is  my  ambition  to  leave  nothing  for  you  to  be  anxious  about.  I  shall 
find  the  money  for  the  curtains,  etc.,  and  you  will  amuse  yourself  by  giving  orders 
For  them  after  your  own  delightful  taste. 

"  I  must  not  write  more  ;  and,  indeed,  matter  runs  short,  except  the  old,  old 
story  of  a  love  which  grieves  over  you,  and  would  fain  work  a  miracle,  and  raise  you 
up  to  perfect  health.  I  fear  the  heat  afflicts  you.  Well  did  the  elder  say  to  John  in 
Patmos,  concerning  those  who  are  before  the  throne  of  God,  'neither  shall  the  sun 

light  on  them,  nor  any  heat.' 

"Yours  to  love  in  life,  and  death,  and  eternally, 

"C.  II.  S." 

There  was  a  very  small  room,  by  the  side  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  study,  which  was 
specially  fitted  up  for  his  dear  wife's  use  ;  and  nothing  had  been  forgotten  which 
could  in  any  way  conduce  to  the  comfort  of  an  invalid  almost  entirely  confined  to 
her  couch.  Never  will  the  rapture  with  which  he  welcomed  her  home  be  forgotten, 
nor  the  joyful  pride  with  which  he  pointed  out  all  the  arrangements  he  had  made  so 
that  her  captivity  should  have  every  possible  compensation  and  alleviation.  '1  here 
was  a  cunningly-contrived  cupboard  in  one  corner  of  the  room,  into  which  he  had 
gathered  all  the  details  of  his  loving  care  for  her.  When  the  doors  were  opened, 
a  dainty  washing  apparatus  was  disclosed,  with  hot  and  cold  water  laid  on,  so  that 
no  fatigue  in  ascending-  and  descending  the  stairways  should  be  necessary,  and^ven 

*  This  table  was  in  constant  use  for  dear  Mr,  Spurgeon  himself  during  his  long  and  painful  illness  in  1891 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  187 

the  towels  were  embroidered  with  her  name.  lie  had  thought  of  ci'cr\lhing  ;  and 
there  were  such  tender  touches  of  devoted  love  upon  all  the  surroundings  of  the 
little  room  that  no  words  can  describe  her  emotions  when  first  she  gazed  upon  them, 
and  afterwards  when  she  proved,  by  practical  experience,  their  exceeding  usefulness 
and  value. 

Even  when  the  new  house  was  finished,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  still  detained  at 
Brighton,  and  her  dear  husband  had,  for  a  while,  to  occupy  it  without  her.  lie  used 
often  to  say,  during  that  time  of  loneliness,  that  he  and  the  cat  (old  "  Dick"-— whose 
portrait  was  given  in  Vol.  II.,  page  294,)  went  up  and  down  the  stairs  mewing  for 
the  mistress.  One  day,  during  that  period  of  waiting,  the  muse  took  another  form, 
and  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  this  merry  effusion,  which  he  called,— 

"A  RIGMAROLE,   FOR  A  DEAR  OLD  SOUL. 

"  Sweetest  and  best  of  the  daughters  of  Eve, — 

o 

"  To  meet  you  is  bliss,  and  'tis  sorrow  to  leave  ;  to 

thy  nest  by  the  sea,  comes  a  message  from  me  ;  the  words  may  be  tew,  but  they're 
faithful  and  true  ;  their  tune  and  their  substance  is,  How  I  love  you  !  I  reach'd 
London  all  right,  found  the  folks  all  at  tea,  talk'd  to  them  at  night,  and  went  home 
to  C-  — .  T.  Olney  was  pleased  to  give  me  a  ride  ;  not  far  on  the  road  our 

trap  I  espied  ;  we  failed  to  detain  it,  so  turned,  and  gave  chase,  and  for  sev'ral 
minutes  we  kept  up  the  race.  At  last,  by  our  making  a  horrible  noise,-,  in  which  we 
were  joined  by  women  and  boys,  we  brought  it  to  bay,  and  found  that  inside,  a  line 
English  worthy  was  having  a  ride.  It  was  your  dear  old  Dad,  who  a  pilgrimage  had, 
very  foolishly  made  to  this  dwelling  so  sad  ;  where  I  mourn  like  an  owl,  and  grumble 
and  scowl,  and,  like  a  hyena,  am  ready  to  howl,  because  left  alone,  without  mate 
or  bone. 

"  It's  a  very  fine  day  ;  at  least,  it  has  tried,  but  the  rain  has  said,  '  Nay,'  and  the 
clouds  have  denied.  Mr.  Passmore  has  been  up  in  the  study,  his  eyes  are  not 
bright,  and  his  cheeks  are  not  ruddy.  He  seems  pleased  to  be  asked  to  stay  with 
the  Queen,  and  on  Tuesday,  at  Brighton,  we  hope  to  be  seen.  I  rode  up  to  London, 
with  our  Mr.  Hood  ;  he  shortened  the  journey,  and  so  did  me  good.  I  am  sound  as 
a  bell,  right  hearty  and  well,  and  I'm  off  to  my  place,  the  gospel  to  tell. 

"  Pull  both  the  boys'  ears,  and  give  them  a  kiss  ;  as  they  grow  up  in  years,  may 
they  ripen  for  bliss  !  And  now,  my  sweet  wife,  the  joy  of  my  life,  waggon-loads  of 
sweet  love,  and  ton  weights  of  affection,  all  language  above,  for  I  love  to  perfection. 
May  you  mend  every  hour  till,  in  fulness  of  power,  you  climb  up  the  hills,  forgetting 
all  ills  ;  with  a  clean  bill  of  health,  more  precious  than  wealth,  live  loni>-  to  delight 

J-  '  c>  o 

my  heart  and  my  sight  !  So  earnestly  prays  your  lonely  old  man,  who  is  counting 
the  days,  until  see  you  he  can." 

This   rhyming   epistle   was    evidently  written   in  great   haste,  and   without   any 


1  88 


c.    ii.    STURGEONS    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


premeditation,  just  to  while  away  a  few  minutes,  and  amuse  her  whom  he  "  loved  to 
perfection."  It  may  be  fittingly  followed  by  a  facsimile  ot  the  first  post  card  used 
by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  which  has  a  double  interest  ;  first,  from  the  up-and-down  way  in 
which  it  had  to  be  read  ;  and,  next,  because  it  is  a  little  love-letter  intended  pro 

bono  publico. 


WM  A&jd//L  #4-  «^«. 


Anothc-r  humorous  communication  related  to  the  table  used  in  the  study  of  the 
old  house,  which  was  not  nearly  large  enough  for  the  spacious  new  room  required 
for  the  ever-growing  library.  It  was  given  to  one  of  the  Tabernacle  elders,  with  this 
characteristic  commendation  : — 

"WARRANTY  OF  TABLE. 

"  Clapham, 

"  November    16. 

"This  is  to  certify  that  the  table,  sent  this  day  to  Mr.  Goldston,  has  never 
been  known  to  turn,  twist,  dance,  fly  up  into  the  air,  or  otherwise  misbehave.  It 
has  not  been  addicted  to  convivial  habits,  and  has  never  been  known  to  be  '  on  a 
roar.'  As  a  most  studious  piece  of  furniture,  it  is  sent  to  a  studious  man,  with  the 


kind   regards  of 


"  C.   H.   STURGEON." 


The  new   "  Helensburgh  House"  was,  of  course,  dedicated  to  God  with  much 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


189 


prayer  and  praise.  Mr.  Spurgeon  always  felt  that  it  was  a  gift  from  the  Lord, 
through  His  faithful  stewards;  and,  therefore,  all  its  charms  and  comforts  were 
accepted  as  a  sacred  trust  to  be  employed  for  his  Master's  glory.  The  claims  of 
the  dear  Pastor's  many  forms  of  Christian  service  were  so  many,  and  so  constant,  that 
his  home  could  hardly  at  any  period  have  been  called  a  private  house  ;  but  there 
were  "high  days  and  holidays"  when  the  students  would  gather  in  the  garden, 
at  the  commencement  of  the  Autumn  session,  or  on  some  other  special  occasion 
when  they  were  invited  to  meet  with  their  tutors  and  brethren,  and  to  listen  to  the 
wit  and  wisdom  of  their  beloved  President.  At  such  times,  there  were  always  many 
loving  enquiries  for  "the  Mother  of  the  College  ;"  though,  for  some  years,  she  had 
to  be*  content  with  quietly  peeping,  from  a  corner  of  her  bedroom  window,  at  the 
merry  throng  down  below.  On  one  memorable  day,  she  was  carried  down,  in  a 
chair,  to  the  dining-room,  and  the  students  sang  for  her  especial  benefit  some  ot  their 


sweet  songs  of  Zion. 

o 


The  garden  was  rearranged  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Shirley  Ilibberd,  who  very 
ingeniously  made  the  most  of  a  comparatively  small  area,  so  that  it  formed  a  still 
more  delightful  retreat  for  the  oft-weary  preacher  and  toiler  when  he  could  steal 
away  for  a  brief  respite  from  his  almost  incessant  service.  Among  other  alterations, 
a  new  lawn  was  specially  prepared,  where  father  and  sons,  and  a  few  favoured 
visitors,  might  play  at  the  old  Puritan  game  of  "bowls."  It  was  a  healthy  and  not 
too  tiring  exercise  ;  but  the  chief  attraction  of  it  probably  was  that  it  had  been  the 
favourite  amusement  of  the  great  uncrowned  king  of  England,  Oliver  Cromwell,  and 


190 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


some  of  the  mightiest  masters  of  theology  that  the  world  has  ever  seen.  Mr. 
Spurgeon  used  frequently  to  say  that  the  expression  "  the  bias  of  the  will  "  must 
have  been  connected  in  their  minds  with  "the  bias  of  the  bowl,"  and  that  he 
would  have  greatly  prized  the  privilege  of  witnessing  the  game  as  it  was  played  by 
the  Lord  Protector  and  such  notable  divines  as  Thomas  Goodwin,  John  Howe, 
Thomas  Manton,  John  Owen,  and  other  eminent  preachers  of  that  golden  age  of 
England's  civil  and  religious  history. 


HUSBAND   AND   WIFE    IN    THE   NIGHTINGALE   LANE   GARDEN. 


Some  time  after  that  part  of  the  garden  was  newly  turfed,  it  furnished  an 
interesting  instance  of  the  latent  power  of  vegetable  life.  In  digging  up  the  ground 
ready  for  the  levelling  process,  the  men  had  evidently  disturbed  certain  roots  which 
had  been  deeply  buried  beneath  the  earth  ;  so  it  came  to  pass,  before  long,  that 
horseradish  forced  its  way  up  in  various  places,  to  the  manifest  disfigurement  of  the 
lawn.  It  was  a  very  troublesome  task  to  eradicate  the  old  tenant  of  the  soil  ;  but 
the  clear  preacher  saw  in  it  a  striking  simile  of  the  development  of  long-hidden  evil 
in  the  human  heart,  and  of  the  difficulty  of  getting  rid  of  it. 


c.    ii,    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


191 


Mr.  Spurgeon  knew  how  to  turn  everything  to  account  in  his  great  life-work  of 
preaching  the  gospel.  A  simple  incident,  associated  with  the  new  house  and  garden, 
furnished  him  with  a  most  effective  illustration  for  a  sermon  in  the  Tabernacle.  Long- 
after  he  had  left  Nightingale  Lane,  he  recalled  the  circumstances  ;  and,  in  urging  his 
hearers,  who  had  found  the  Saviour,  to  seek  to  bring  others  to  Him,  he  said  :- 


C.    H.    SPUKGEON    ON    THE    BALCONY    OF   Til  1C    NEW    "  1 1  EI.ENSBUKGH    HOUSE 

"  In  the  depth  of  winter,  at  a  time  when  I  had  a  balcony  to  my  study,  I  put 
some  crumbs  out  upon  it,  and  there  came  a  robin  redbreast  first,  who  pecked 
and  ate  all  he  could.  I  do  not  know  his  language,  but  I  fancy  I  can  tell  what  he 
said,  for  he  went  away,  and  presently  returned  with  ever  so  many  sparrows  and 
other  birds.  He  had  no  doubt  said  to  them,  'There  are  crumbs  up  there;  come 
with  me,  and  get  them.'  So  they  followed  him,  and  they  came  in  greater  numbers 
every  day,  and  I  do  not  know  how  it  was  except  that  they  told  one  another. 
One  day,  whether  it  was  the  robin  or  the  sparrows,  I  cannot  say,  but  some  of 
them  told  a  blackbird,  and  he  was  a  bigger  fellow  than  any  of  them  ;  when  he 
came,  he  stood  near,  for  I  should  think,  a  minute,  and  then  he  spied  me  inside, 
and  he  flew  away,  for  he  thought,  '  That  good  man  does  not  like  blackbirds.' 
But  he  did  not  know  me;  for  I  was  pleased  to  see  him,  and  I  should  have  liked 


1 92  c.    H.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

to  sec  a  lot  of  such  birds.  So  the  robin  went  up  to  him,  and  told  him  that  he 
had  been  there  for  the  last  three  or  four  clays,  and  I  had  never  even  threatened 
him  ;  and  then,  after  being-  persuaded  a  little,  the  blackbird  came  back,  and  the 
robin  seemed  to  me  to  be  quite  pleased  to  think  that  he  had  converted  his  big 
companion,  and  brought  him  back,  for  they  dropped  down  together  on  the  crumbs, 
and  they  had  such  a  joyful  feast  that  they  returned  to  the  balcony  again  and  again 
is  long  as  the  wintry  weather  lasted. 

"  There  are  some  of  you,  clear  robin  redbreasts,  who  have  been  here  ever  sc 
lono-  eatino-  mv  Master's  crumbs,  and  you  have  brought  some  sparrows  to  the  least  ; 

& "  &  J  * 

now  try  to  entice  a  blackbird,  and  if  there  is  one  blackbird  bigger  and  blacker 
than  the  rest,  go  and  bring  him,  for  Jesus  says  that  He  will  cast  out  HOIK;  that 
come  to  Him  by  faith;  and  you  may  be  sure  that  it  is  true,  for  He  is  'a  Friend 
of  publicans  and  sinners.' 

The  loving  relationship  existing  between  the  dear  father  and  his  twin-sons  is 
not  specially  referred  to  here,  as  it  will  be  fully  described  in  later  chapters  written 
for  the  present  volume  by  Pastor  Charles  Spurgeon,  and  in  another,  or  others,  by 
Pastor  Thomas  Spurgeon,  which  will  (D.V.)  appear  in  Vol.  IV.  The  accompanying 
illustration  will,  however,  show  how  one  of  the  boys  employed  some  of  his  time, 
while  the  facsimile  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  handwriting  will  let  all  see  how  pleased  he 
was  with  "  Son  Tom's  "  early  display  of  the  artistic  talent  which  was  afterwards  to  be 
turned  to  such  good  account  for  the  benefit  of  readers  of  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel. 

If  all  the  notable  events  that  happened  in  the  new  "  Helcnsburgh  House  "  were 
chronicled,  a  volume,  instead  of  a  chapter,  would  be  needed  to  contain  them  ;  so 
only  a  small  selection  can  be  inserted  here.  One  of  the  most  striking-  incidents  in 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  whole  life  was  thus  described  by  him  to  the  students  of  the  Pastors 
College  gathered  under  "The  Question  Oak"  at  "  Westwood  "  in  the  year  1890  :- 

"There  is  a  Divine  discipline  always  going-  on  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  ol 
which,  sometimes,  we  are  not  fully  aware.  I  remember  one  terrible  instance,  which 
occurred  many  years  ago,  of  a  man  who  often  tried  to  annoy  and  offend  me  ;  but 
that  is  not  a  thing  that  can  be  clone  so  easily  as  some  suppose.  The  individual  to 
whom  I  refer  had  long  attempted  it,  and  failed.  At  last,  one  Sabbath,  when  he  had 
been  peculiarly  troublesome,  I  said  to  him,  '  Brother  So-and-so,  will  you  come  and 
see  me  to-morrow  morning?'  In  a  very  surly  tone,  he  replied,  'I  have  got  my 
living  to  earn,  and  I  can't  see  you  after  five  o'clock  in  the  morning.'  ( Oh  !  I 
answered,  '  that  will  suit  me  very  well,  and  I  will  be  at  your  service,  and  have  a  cup 
of  coffee  ready  for  you  to-morrow  morning  at  five  o'clock.'  I  was  at  the  door  at  the 
appointed  time,  ready  to  let  him  in  ;  his  temper  had  led  him  to  walk  all  those  miles 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOmOGRAl'IIY. 


193 


^t^— *•£, 


c.    ii.    SPUKGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


out  to  my  house  that  he  might  tell  me  of  his  latest  grievance.     It  appeared  that  he 
had  lost/25   for  something  or  other  that  he  had  done,  he  said  for  the  church, 
we  all  felt  that  it  was  his  own   private  speculation,  and  we  were    not   respons.b 
However,  he  told  me  that  he  could  not  afford  to  lose  such  a  large  amount,  so  I  count* 
out  five  £5  -tes,   and  gave  them  to  Inn,      He  looked  at  me,  and  asked  me  this 
question,    'Do  you  give   me  this   money  out  of  any  of  the  church   funds? 
I  replied    'I  feel  that  yon  cannot  afford  such  a  loss,  and  though  it  ,s  no  concern 
of  mine,  I   willingly   give  you   the  money.'      I  noticed  a  strange  look  come  over  1 
face   but  he  said  very  little  more,  and  1  prayed  with  him,  and  he  went  away. 
"At  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  man  sent  round  for  my  brother  i 
see  him      When  he  returned,  he  said  to  me,  '  Brother,  you  have  killed  that  man  by 
your  kindness;    he  cannot  live   much    longer.       He  confessed   to  me   that  he   ha. 
broken  up  two  churches  before,  and  that  he  had  come  into  the  Tabernacle  church 
purpose  to  act  in   the  same   way,    and  he   had   specially   sought  to  put  you   out 
temper  with   him.-which   he  never  could  do,-and  he  told  me  that  he  was  a  c 
and  not  a  Christian.       1   said  to  him,  "  My  brother  once  proposed  to  have  you  as 
an  elder  of  the  church."      1  le  seemed  very  surprised,  and  asked  me,  ' 
think  so  much  of  me  as  that?"      1  answered,  "Yes,  but  the  other  elders  said 
you  had  such  a   dreadful    temper   that   then:   would   be  no  peace  m 
you  were  brought  in  among  them." 

••  About  the  middle  of  the  prayer-meeting,  a  note  was  passed  to  me  saymg  that 
the  poor  fellow  had  cut  his  throat.      I  felt  his  death  terribly,  and  the  effect  of  ,t  upo 
the  people  generally  was  much  the  same  as  win,,  Ananias  and  Sapphira  were  sla 
because    of  'their    lying   unto   the    Holy    Ghost:    'Great    fear    came    upon    all    the 
church,  and  upon  as  many  as  heard  these  things.'      I  had  often  spoken  of 
people  by  kindness,'   but    1    never  wished   to    have    another  instanc, 
own  experience." 

On  another  occasion,  the  students  assembled   under  the  oak   heard  from  their 
beloved  President  the  details  of  a  discussion  which  he  once  had  at  Nightingale 
with  Mr  Ruskin  under  very  different  circumstances  from  those  described  in  Vol.  1 
page  288.      One  of  the  brethren  asked  Mr.  Spurgeon  the  question,  "  What 
vie&w  about  the  term  '  eternal  life.  '  ?  "      In  reply,  he  said  :- 

-I  do  not  think  that   'eternal  life'  means  merely  eternal   existence;  i 
believe  that  existence  and  life  are  the  same  thing,  any  more  than  I  believe  that  death 
and  annihilation  are  the  same  thing.      I  believe  that  a  person  may  exist  in  perpetual 
death   and  that  he  may  not  really  be  living  at  all  and  yet  be  continually  existing. 
that  familiar  passage  in  John  iii.  36,  <  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  e  erlastmg 
life  •    and  he  that  believeth  not  the   Son  shall  not  see  lite  ;   but  the  wrath   of  God 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


195 


abideth  on  him,'  there  is  no  notion  of  mere  existence  in  the  word  life,  otherwise  the 
whole  passage  would  become  meaningless.  I  never  confuse  the  idea  of  existence 
with  that  ot  lite  ;  but  many  do,  even  among  those  whom  one  might  expect  to  know 
better.  A  tree  has  a  measure  ol  life,  an  animal  has  another  measure  of  life,  a  man 
has  a  still  higher  measure  of  life,  and  God  has  a  yet  higher  measure  of  life,  even 
that  eternal  life  which  He  has  given  to  all  who  believe  on  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ. 


Mr.  Ruskin  came  to  see  me  one  day,  many  years  ago,  and  amongst  other 
things  he  said  that  the  apostle  Paul  was  a  liar,  and  that  I  was  a  fool  !  '  Well,'  I 
replied,  '  let  us  keep  the-  two  things  separate  ;  so,  first  of  all,  tell  me  how  you  can 
prove  that  the  apostle  Paul  was  a  liar.'  '  He  was  no  gentleman,  and  he  was  a  liar, 
too,'  answered  Mr.  Ruskin.  'Oh,  indeed  !  '  I  rejoined,  '  how  do  you  make  that  out?' 
'Well,'  he  said,  '  there  was  a  Jewish  gentleman  came  to  him,  one  clay,  and  asked  him 
a  polite  question,  "  How  are  the  dead  raised  up,  and  with  what  body  do  they 
come?"  (i  Corinthians  xv.  35.)  Paul  began  by  saying  to  him,  "Thou  fool," — which 
proved  that  the  apostle  was  no  gentleman;  and  then  he  continued,  "That  which 
thou  sowest  is  not  quickened,  except  it  die," — which  was  a  lie.'  '  No,'  I  answered, 
'  it  was  not  a  lie  ;  Paul  was  speaking  the  truth.'  '  How  do  you  prove  that  ?  '  asked 
Mr.  Ruskin.  '  Why/  I  replied,  '  very  easily.  What  is  death  ?  Death  is  the 
resolution  into  its  original  elements  of  any  compound  substance  which  possessed 
life.'  Mr.  Ruskin  said,  '  That  is  the  most  extraordinary  definition  of  death  that  I 
ever  heard,  but  it  is  true.'  '  Yes,'  I  replied,  '  it  is  true  ;  and  that  is  what  happens  to 
the  seed  when  it  dies,  it  is  resolved  into  its  original  elements,  and  the  living  germ 


Kj6  C.      H.      SrtJRGEON's     Al'ToniOOkArilV. 

which  is  within  it  becomes  tlie  centre  and  source  of  the  new  life  that  springs  from  it.' 
'  Then,'  asked  Mr.  Ruskin,  '  what  do  you  mean  when  you  talk  of  the  death  of  the 
soul  ?'  '  I  mean,'  I  replied,  '  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  (iod  ;  it  was  originallv 
with  God,  and  when  it  is  separated  from  Him,  it  dies  to  (iod,  that  is  its  death,  but 
that  death  is  not  non-existence.  The  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body  is  the 
separation  from  itself  of  that  which  quickened  it,  and  it  falls  back  into  its  original 
condition.'  'Well,'  said  Mr.  Ruskin,  'you  have  proved  that  Paul  spoke  the  truth, 
but  you  have  not  proved  him  to  be  a  gentleman.'  '  At  all  events,'  I  answered,  '  the 
apostle  was  as  much  a  gentleman  as  you  were  just  now  when  you  called  me  a  fool.' 
'  So  you  are,'  said  Mr.  Ruskin,  '  for  devoting  your  time  and  talents  to  that  mob  of 
people  down  at  Xcwington  when  you  might  employ  them  so  much  more  profitably 
upon  the  intellectual  and  cultured  few,  like  that  Jewish  gentleman  who  came  to 
Paul,  and  others  whom  I  might  name.'  I  replied,  '  I  always  like  to  be  the  means 
oi  saving  people  whose  souls  are  worth  saving,  and  I  am  quite  content  to  be  the 
minister  of  that  "mob"  down  at  Xewington,  and  let  those  who  wish  to  do  so 
look  alter  the  cultured  and  refined.'  ' 

One  visitor  who  came  to  "  Helensburgh  House"  was  certainly  not  at  all 
welcome:,  and  his  coming  might  have  had  very  serious  consequences  if  the  beloved 
master  of  the  house  had  not  been  graciously  guided  in  his  mode  of  dealing  with  the 
madman.  Mr.  Spurgeon  happened  to  be  passing  the  entrance-hall  just  as  someone 
rapped  rather  loudly  at  the  door  ;  and,  without  considering  who  might  be  seeking 
admission  in  that  unceremonious  fashion,  he  opened  it.  In  an  instant,  a  wild-looking 
man,  armed  with  a  huge  stick,  sprang  in,  slammed  the  door,  stood  with  his  back 
against  it,  and,  in  a  most  menacing  manner,  announced  that  he  had  come  to  kill 
Mr.  Spurgeon  !  The  situation  was  extremely  critical,  for  there  was  no  way  either  to 
escape  from  the  maniac  or  to  summon  assistance  to  get  rid  of  him  ;  so  Mr.  Spurgeon 
said,  "You  must  mean  my  brother,  his  name  is  Spurgeon  ;  "-—knowing,  of  course, 
that  he  could  give  him  timely  warning  if  there  was  any  fear  of  the  man  going  to 
Croydon.  "Ah!"  said  the  crazy  fellow,  "it  is  the  man  that  makes  jokes  that  I 
mean  to  kill."  "  Oh,  then,  you  must  go  to  my  brother,  for  he  makes  jokes  ! " 
"  No,"  he  said,  "  I  believe  you  are  the  man,"  and  then  suddenly  he  exclaimed,  "  Do 
you  know  the  asylum  at  -  -  ?  That's  where  I  live,  and  it  takes  ten  men  to  hold 
me."  Then  Mr.  Spurgeon  saw  his  opportunity,  and  drawing  himself  up  to  his  full 
height,  he  said,  in  his  most  impressive  tones,  "  Ten  men  !  that  is  nothing ;  you 
don't  know  how  strong-  I  am.  Give  me  that  stick."  The  poor  creature,  thoroughly 
cowed,  handed  over  the  formidable  weapon.  Seizing  it,  and  opening  the  door, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  almost  shouted,  "If  you  are  not  out  of  the  house  this  very  moment, 
I'll  break  every  bone  in  your  body."  The  man  quickly  fled,  someone  was  at  once 


c.    n.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  197 

sent  to  give  information  to  the  police,  and  it  was  a  great  relief  to  hear  that,  before 
long,  the  escaped  madman  was  again  under  restraint. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  used  often  to  describe  the  encounter  he  had  with  one  of  his 
neighbours  at  Nightingale  Lane.  After  a  long  and  painful  illness  from  gout,  he 
was  starting  for  a  short  drive,  in  the  hope  of  gaining  a  little  strength,  when  this 
gentleman  came  up  to  the  carriage,  and  pointing  to  the  dear  sufferer's  bandaged 
hand  and  foot,  said,  with  all  the  scorn  and  contempt  he  could  compress  into  the 
words,  "  'Whom  the  Lord  loveth,  He  chasteneth.'  I  would  not  have  such  a  God  as 
that."  In  relating  the  story,  Mr.  Spurgeon  always  said,  "  I  felt  my  blood  boil  with 
indignation,  and  I  answered,  '  I  rejoice  that  I  have  such  a  God  as  that ;  and  if  He 
were  to  chasten  me  a  thousand  times  worse  than  this,  I  would  still  love  Him  ;  yea, 
though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him.'  ' 

Another  time,  the  same  gentleman  was  in  rather  a  different  mood,  and  he  then 
said  to  the  dear  Pastor,  "  I  don't  believe  in  shutting  myself  up  with  a  lot  of  people 
in  a  stuffy  building  ;  I  like  plenty  of  fresh  air,  and  I  worship  the  God  of  nature." 
'Yes,"  replied  Mr.  Spurgeon,  who  knew  that  his  neighbour  had  a  skittle-alley, 
"your  god  is  made  of  wood,  is  he  not  ;  and  his  worship  is  carried  on  with  a  great 
deal  of  noise,  isn't  it  ?  I  hear  you  at  your  little  game  before  I  start  for  the 
Tabernacle  on  a  Sunday  morning." 

Nightingale  Lane  seems  to  have  been  a  favourite  route  for  other  so-called 
"worshippers  of  the  God  of  nature,"  for,  in  one  of  his  discourses,  the  Pastor  thus 
referred  to  them  : — "  Those  men  who  talk  about  natural  religion,  as  far  as  I  know 

o 

them,  have  no  religion  at  all.  I  have  noticed  that  the  people  who  say,  '  We  can 
worship  God  without  attending  any  religious  service,  or  believing  in  Jesus,'  do  not 
really  do  so.  I  have  sometimes  had  an  opportunity,  on  a  Sunday,  of  seeing  many 
'  worshippers  of  the  God  of  nature  '  come  down  the  lane  where  I  reside.  They 
consist,  tor  the  most  part,  of  men  who  carry  cages  in  which  they  try  to  catch  birds 
on  the  common.  There  is  another  very  respectable  confraternity  of  men,  who 
go  to  a  place  somewhere  in  that  region,  where  they  spend  the  Sabbath  in  the 
bowling-alley,  and  in  pugilistic  encounters.  These  might  adopt  the  cry  of  our 
genteel  sinners,  '  We  clon't  need  to  go  into  a  church  or  chapel  ;  we  spend  our 
Sunday  in  the  worship  of  the  God  of  nature.'  And  very  fine  worship  it  is  !  I 
usually  find  that  those  people  who  say  that  they  worship  '  the  God  of  nature  '  really 
worship  the  god  of  fallen  nature,— that  is,  the  devil  ;  not  the  God  of  the  glorious 
nature  which  is  spread  before  us  in  the  roaring  sea,  the  rolling-  flood,  and  the  verdant 

o  o 

meads  ; — no,  for  the  most  part,  the  men  who  talk  in  that  fashion  know,  in  their  own 
conscience,  that  the  god  they  worship  is  their  belly,  their  own  lusts  ;  and  they  glory 
in  their  shame.  Do  not  believe  the  nonsense  you  hear  from  the  Sunday  League 


198  C.     If.      SI'UKGKOX'S     AUTOHIOGRAI'HY. 

advocates,  when  they  talk  about  '  worshipping  the  God  of  nature.'  Do  they  do  it  ? 
Follow  any  of  them  into  their  privacy,  and  see  whether  any  of  this  line  devotion  of 
theirs  has  any  existence  whatever." 

At  another  service,  Mr.  Spurgeon  thus  turned  to  practical  account  the  wiles  of 
the  bird-catchers  who  carried  on  their  operations  not  far  from  his  home  :— "There  is 
a  common  hard  by  the  place  where  I  live  ;  and,  on  Sundays,  Londoners  come  down 
by  scores,  and  occupy  themselves  in  this  way  upon  it.  They  bring  with  them  little 
birds  in  cages,  and  use  them  to  lure  other  birds  from  the  sky,  that  they  may  entrap 
them.  Only  the  other  Sabbath,  as  I  was  going  to  the  house  of  God,  I  saw  a  little 
robin  sitting  on  hjs  perch  in  a  wire  cage,  and  he  was  diligently  whistling  so  as  to 
attract  other  birds  to  the  fowlers'  snare.  I  assure  you  that  it  was  a  good  lesson  to 
me  ;  for  I  said  to  myself,  '  These  men  know  that  it  is  no  use  for  them  to  frighten 
the  birds  ;  but  if  they  want  to  catch  them,  they  must  put  one  of  their  own  kind  into 
a  cage,  and  the  little  captive,  by  its  song,  attracts  its  fellows.'  Suppose  one  of 
those  fowlers  should  be  stupid  enough  to  put  a  cat  into  the  cage,  it  would  not  allure 
any  robins  ;  or  suppose  he  was  to  put  in  an  owl,  that  sleepy  creature  would  not 
attract  any  larks.  The  arts  of  the  bird-catcher  teach  us  that,  when  God  would  save 
a  sinner,  He  usually  takes  one  of  the  same  sort,  first  converts  Him  by  His  grace, 
and  then  sets  him  to  preach,  or  teach,  or  sing,  or  to  do  something  which  attracts  and 
allures  others." 

That  same  common  also  furnished  the  beloved  President  with  an  illustration 
which  he  thus  related  to  his  students  :— "  I  shall  never  forget  the  manner  in  which  a 
thirsty  individual  once  begged  of  me  upon  Clapham  Common.  I  saw  him  with  a 
very  large  truck,  in  which  he  was  carrying  an  extremely  small  parcel  and  I  wondered 
why  he  had  not  put  the  parcel  into  his  pocket,  and  left  the  machine  at  home.  I  said 
to  him,  '  It  looks  odd  to  see  so  large  a  truck  for  such  a  small  load.'  He  stopped, 
and  looking  me  seriously  in  the  face,  he  said,  'Yes,  sir,  it  is  a  very  odd  thing  ;  but, 
do  you  know,  I  have  met  with  an  odder  thing  than  that  this  very  day.  I've  been 
about,  working  and  sweating  all  this  'ere  blessed  day,  and  till  now  I  haven't  met  a 
single  gentleman  that  looked  as  if  he'd  give  me  a  pint  of  beer,  till  I  saw  you.'  I 
considered  that  turn  of  the  conversation  very  neatly  managed  ;  and  we,  with  a  far 
better  subject  upon  our  minds,  ought  to  be  equally  able  to  introduce  the  theme  upon 
which  our  heart  is  set.  There  was  an  ease  in  the  man's  manner  which  I  envied,  for 
I  did  not  find  it  quite  so  simple  a  matter  to  introduce  my  own  topic  to  his  notice  ; 
yet,  if  I  had  been  thinking  as  much  about  how  I  could  do  him  good  as  he  had  upon 
how  to  obtain  a  drink,  I  feel  sure  I  should  have  succeeded  in  reaching  my  point." 

There     still    stands,    on     Clapham     Common,     an    ancient    tree    under     which 


C.     II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


199 


Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  to  ten  thousand  persons  on  Lord's-day  afternoon,  July  10, 
1859.  The  accompanying  view  is  reproduced  from  a  photograph  recently  taken 
specially  for  the  present  volume. 


TREE    ON    CLAl'JIAM    COMMON,    WHERE    C.    II.    SPTRGEON    PREACHED    IN    1859. 

A  fortnight  before  the  above-mentioned  date,  a  violent  storm  passed  over  the 
South  of  London.  The  tree  here  represented  was  struck  by  lightning,  and  a  man, 
who  had  sought  shelter  beneath  it,  was  killed.  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  greatly  impressed 
by  the  solemn  event,  and  resolved  to  preach  on  the  fatal  spot,  and  to  make  a  collec 
tion  for  the  widow  of  the  man  who  had  been  killed.  This  arrangement  was  duly 
carried  out,  a  waggon  beneath  the  tree  serving  for  a  pulpit,  and  the  congregation 
contributing  £27  IDS.  4d.  for  the  poor  bereaved  woman.  The  sermon  appears  in 
full  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  for  May,  1897.  The  text  was  taken  from 
Luke  xii.  40,  "  Be  ye  therefore  ready  also  ;"  and  in  commencing  his  discourse,  the 
preacher  said  :— 

"  Happily    for    us,    it    is    not    often    that    men   are    struck    dead    by  lightning. 


2OO  C.      II.      STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Remember  all  the  multitudes  of  men  existing  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  then 
calculate  the  number  of  thunderstorms,  and  you  will  sec;  that,  after  all,  many  of  the 
fears  which  disturb  our  minds  in  time  of  tempest  and  of  storm  are  far  more  groundless 
than  we  are  apt  to  imagine.  It  is  but  here  and  there,  and  now  and  then,  that  the 
scathing  blast  smites  the  earth,  and  one  of  our  iellow-creatures  is  launched  into 
eternity.  When,  however,  such  a  solemn  event  occurs,  we  ought  to  hear  in  it  the 
voice  of  God,  and  listen  to  what  lie  says  to  us.  I  thought,  as  I  passed  this  tree  a 
short  time  since,  what  a  sermon  it  might  preach  if  it  could  speak  i  I  low  the  rustle 
of  its  leaves  would  forewarn  us  of  the  stealth}'  footsteps  of  death  ;  and,  as  it  towers 
upward  to  the  skies,  how  it  might  be  regarded  as  a  linger  directing  us  to  look 
toward  Heaven,  and  seek  the  Lord  of  grace  and  mercy  !" 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  closing  words  were  : — "  May  the  Lord  now  add  His  blessing! 
May  He  grant,  moreover,  that  a  more  solemn  impression  than  I  can  hope  to  make 
may  be  made;  upon  you,  as  once  again  you  gaxe  upon  this  spot  !  There  is,  in 
St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  a  little  chisel-mark  still  visible,  which  you  may  never  have 
noticed,  but  which  some;  time  may  be  shown  to  you.  It  is  the;  memorial  of  the 
death  of  a  man  who,  being  employed  at  work  on  the  dome,  fell  down,  and  was 
dashed  to  pieces.  What  a  solemn  spot  is  tliat ;  and  what  a  solemn  spot  is  this! 
My  dear  hearers,  ere  you  go  away,  breathe  a  prayer  for  pardon  ;  and,  as  often  as  you 
pass  this  place,  think  of  your  past  lives,  and  of  the  world  to  come.  It  is  said  that  we 
often  walk  over  our  own  graves  without  knowing  it,  and  that  we  often  come  to 
other  men's  graves  and  death-places  without  being  aware  of  it  ;  but  I  here  ^  in  that 
tree,  stands  the  monument  of  the  awfully-sudden  death  of  a  fellow-creature  ;  and  let 
it  be  so  remembered.  May  God  bless  the  widow  ;  may  He  bless  the  orphans  ;  and 
may  He  bless  all  of  you  !  But,  my  dear  friends,  ere  we  go  away  this  afternoon,  will 
not  each  one  of  you  pray  for  himself  that  his  sins  may  be  pardoned?  Will  you  all 
separate,  having  come  together  in  vain?  I  do  beseech  and  pray  you  to  lift  up  your 
hearts  to  God,  and  everyone  of  you  to  cry,  'God  be  merciful  to  me;  a  sinner!' 
Look  this  very  instant  to  Christ  Jesus,  who  died  upon  the  cross.  We  cannot  all 
hope  ever  to  meet  again  until  the  last  tremendous  day  ;  oh,  may  we,  without  one 
exception,  meet  then  at  the  right  hand  of  God  !  Amen." 

One  of  the  inmates  of  the  study  in  the  new  "  Helensburgh  House,"  on  certain 
days  of  the  week,  was  Mr.  John  Lewis  Keys,  who  was  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  secretary  and  literary  assistant,  and  concerning  whom  the  dear  Pastor 
wrote,  in  the  Preface  to  Vol.  I.  of  J^hc  Treasury  of  David: — "The;  research 
expended  on  this  volume  would  have  occupied  far  too  much  of  my  time,  had  not  my 
friend  and  amanuensis,  Mr.  John  L.  Keys,  most  diligently  aided  me  in  investigations 
at  the  British  Museum,  Dr.  Williams'  Library,  and  other  treasuries  of  theological  lore. 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


2OI 


With  his  help,  I  have  ransacked  books  by  the  hundred  ;  often,  without  finding-  a 
memorable  line  as  a  reward  ;  but,  at  other  times,  with  the  most  satisfactory  result." 
In  succeeding  volumes,  Mr.  Spurgeon  repeated  his  testimony  to  the  value  of  Mr. 
Keys'  help  in  the  great  task  happily  completed  in  1885  ;  and  he  also  mentioned  the 
many  courtesies  shown  to  himself,  through  his  secretary,  while  searching  for  extracts 
in  Church  of  England  anc^  other  libraries. 


MR.  J.    L.  KEYS. 

All  Mr.  Spurgeon's  publications,  from  1867  to  1891,  passed  through  the  hands 
of  Mr.  Keys  ;  and  he  not  only  read  the  proofs  of  the  sermons,  Sword  and  Troivel, 
Almanacks,  and  many  books  issued  during  that  period,  but  he  also  contributed 
several  interesting  articles  to  the  Magazine  ;  and  he  was,  for  a  great  part  of  the  time, 
engaged  in  evangelistic  and  pastoral  labours  at  Wimbledon,  Whitstable,  and 
Streatham.  By  Mr.  Spurgeon's  "  promotion  to  glory,"  on  January  3ist,  1892,  Mr. 
Keys  lost  his  best  earthly  friend  ;  but,  for  seven  years  more,  he  struggled  on,  amid 
failing  health  and  many  difficulties,  till,  on  January  7,  1899,  he  entered  into  rest. 

"  Old  George,"  as  he  was  loni>-  called,  would  have  been  kindly  mentioned  if  his 

G>      '  <—>  * 

dear  master  had  been  spared  to  complete  the  present  record,  and  this  chapter  may 
fitly  be  concluded  with  some  particulars  concerning  Mr.  Spurgeon's  faithful  servant 
for  so  many  years.  After  the  funeral  of  Mr.  Thorne  (father  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  com 
panion),  his  butler  said  to  the  Pastor,  "  Ah,  sir  !  I  closed  my  old  master's  eyes,  and 
now  Pil-garlic's  occupation  is  gone."  "  Well,  George,  what  do  you  say  to  coming 
to  take  care  of  me  ?  "  "  Do  you  really  mean  it,  sir  ?  "  "  Yes,  of  course  I  do."  ,  "  Oh  ! 


2O2 


C.     II.      SriJRGKONS     AUTOHIOGRAI'IIV. 


then  I'll  dance  for  joy,  for  nothing  would  please  me  more,  and  I'll  serve  you  faithfully 
as  long  as  you  will  let  me  stay  with  you." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  often  said  that  George  reminded  him  of  Mr.  Pickwick's  Sam 
\Yeller,  and  he  certainly  had  many  quaint  sayings  which  that  worthy  might  have 
littered.  If  anyone  asked  him  his  name,  he  answered,  "  George  Lovejoy.  Don't 
you  know  what  the  apostle  says,  'The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy  '  ?  "  "  You're  a 
rum  'mi,  George/'  his  dear  master  often  said  to  him  ;  and  he  would  reply,  "Yes,  sir  ; 
there  were  only  two  of  us  came,  over  in  three  ships,  and  the  other  one  was  drowned." 
"  Well,  George,  how  are  you  this  morning?"  was  often  Mr.  Spurgeon's  enquiry  ;  and 
the  invariable  answer  was,  "  First-rate,  sir  ;  as  fresh  as  a  salt  fish."  A  glance  at  the 


GEORGE    LOVKIOY. 


accompanying  portrait  will  show  that  George's  hair  was  much  darker  than  his  beard 
and  moustache;,  which  his  master  playfully  suggested  was  the  result  of  having  used 
his  jaws  more  than  his  brains  ;  and,  on  one  occasion  at  least,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  that 
his  name  could  be  properly  spelt  without  using  one  of  the  right  letters, — thus,  Jawj. 
"  No  man  is  a  hero  to  his  valet,"  was  never  true  concerning  Mr.  Spurgeon. 
Everyone  who  came  under  his  influence  felt  the  power  of  his  gracious  character  ; 
and,  while  there  was  never  in  him  any  affectation  of  pride  or  superiority,  all  felt 
instinctively  that  they  were  in  the  presence  of  a  truly  noble  and  kingly  man.  There 
was  no  more  sincere  mourner,  among  the  tens  of  thousands  at  Newington  and 
Norwood  in  February,  1892,  than  the  faithful  "Old  George,"  who  had  been  super 
annuated  through  increasing  infirmities  which  he  was  unwilling  to  confess  ;  and,  after 
continuing  to  the  bereaved  mistress  such  service  as  he  was  able,  occasionally  to 
render,  he  also  was  "  called  home"  on  January  6,  1898. 


CHAPTER     LXXIII. 


letters 

Standing  whore  Satan's  seat  is,  in  the  midst  of  ten  thousand  idols.  I  beseech  those  who  worship 
God  in  the  spirit  to  wrestle  in  prayer  for  times  of  refreshing,  that  all  lands  may  know  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  Lord.  How  long  shall  the  Name  of  Jesus  be  blasphemed  by  the  idolatries  of  Antichrist?  It  may  be 
that  the  times  of  darkness  will  last  till  the  children  of  light  cry  out  bitterly,  day  and  night,  by  reason  of 
soul-anguish.  Then  will  God  avenge  His  own  elect,  and  that  speedily.  As  I  have  trodden  the  Appian 
Way,  I  have  rejoiced  that  Jesus,  whom  1'aul  preached,  is  yet  alive,  and  is  certain,  in  due  season,  to  put 
down  His  enemies.  Already  He  has  desolated  the  Colosseum,  where  His  faithful  martyrs  poured  forth 
their  blood;  the  pagan  power  has  fallen,  and  so  also  shall  the  papal,  and  all  other  which  opposes  Mis 
Kingdom.  Let  us  proclaim  a  spiritual  crusade,  and  set  up  our  banners  by  redoubled  prayer.  It  is 
certain  that  supplication  produces  marvellous  results  in  Heaven  and  earth;  its  power  is  proven  in  our 
own  personal  experience,  and  throughout  the  history  of  the  Church.  Brethren,  LET  us  TKAY.— C.  H.  S., 
in  lettei  jroni  A\>ine,  lo  Tabernacle  church  and  friends  in  general 

INTRODUCTION,   in*   MRS.   C.   H.   SPUROKON. 

1868,  my  travelling  days  were  done.  Henceforth,  for  many  years, 
I  was  a  prisoner  in  a  sick-chamber,  and  my  beloved  had  to  leave  me 
when  the  strain  of  his  many  labours  and  responsibilities  compelled 
him  to  seek  rest  far  away  from  home.  These  separations  were  very 
painful  to  hearts  so  tenderly  united  as  were  ours,  but  we  each  bore 
our  share  of  the  sorrow  as  heroically  as  we  could,  and  softened  it  as 
far  as  possible  by  constant  correspondence.  "God  bless  you,"  he  wrote  once,  "and 
help  you  to  bear  my  absence.  Better  that  I  should  be  away  well,  than  at  home 
suffering, — better  to  your  loving  heart,  I  know.  Do  not  fancy,  even  for  a  moment, 
that  absence  could  make  our  hearts  colder  to  each  other  ;  our  attachment  is  now  a 
perfect  union,  indissoluble  for  ever.  My  sense  of  your  value,  and  experience  of  your 
goodness,  are  now  united  to  the  deep  passion  of  love  which  was  there  at  the  first 
alone.  livery  year  casts  out  another  anchor  to  hold  me  even  more  firmly  to  you, 
though  none  was  needed  even  from  the  first.  May  my  own  Lord,  whose  chastening 
hand  has  necessitated  this  absence,  give  you  a  secret  inward  recompense  in  soul,  and 
also  another  recompense  in  the  healing  of  the  body  !  All  my  heart  remains  in  your 
keeping:" 

It  is  marvellous  to  me,,  as  I  survey  the  yearly  packets  of  letters  which  are  now 
such  precious  treasures,  how  my  husband  could  have  managed,  amidst  the  bustle  and 
excitement  of  foreign  travel,  to  have  written  so  much  and  so  often.  I  many  times 
begged  him  to  spare  himself  in  this  matter,  but  he  constantly  assured  me  that  it 
delighted  him  to  do  it  ;  he  said,  "  Every  word  I  write  is  a  pleasure  to  me,  as  much 


2O4  c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

as  ever  it  can  be  to  you  ;  it  is  only  a  lot  of  odds  and  ends  I  send  you,  but  I  put  them 
down  as  they  come,  so  that  you  may  see  it  costs  me  no  labour,  but  is  just  a  happy 
scribble.  Don't  fret  because  I  write  you  so  many  letters,  it  is  such  a  pleasure  to 
tell  out  my  joy."  Every  day  his  dear  messages  came  to  me,  except,  of  course, 
when  a  long-  railway  journey  intervened  ; — and,  sometimes,  as  an  unexpected  glad 
ness,  he  would  post  two  in  one  clay,  that  I  might  be  comforted  concerning  him. 
On  an  important  tour,  like  the  one  recorded  in  the  following  chapters,  the 
letters  would  be  illustrated  by  many  amusing  pen-and-ink  sketches,  of  people, 
costumes,  landscapes,  trees,  wells,  or  anything  which  particularly  struck  him.  Plans 
of  the  rooms  he  occupied  in  the  various  hotels  were  very  frequent,  nnd  enabled 
me  better  to  imagine  the  comfort  or  otherwise  of  his  surroundings.  At  one  house 
at  Nice,  there  was  a  delightful  little  platform  or  terrace  opening  out  of  his  bedroom, 
and  of  this  he  sent  a  most  elaborate  sketch,  so  that  I  might  share  his  pleasure 
in  such  an  unusual  addition  to  a  sleeping  apartment.  ;<  I  am  like  Peter  on  the 
housetop,"  he  wrote,  "  and  though  no  sheet  is  let  down  to  me,  yet  have  I  learned 
much  that  the  sheet  taught  the  apostle,  and  I  count  nothing  common  or  unclean, 
no  view  unhallowed,  no  scenery  to  be  avoided  lest  it  should  turn  me  away  from 
communion  with  God.  He  has  sanctified  sea  and  mountain,  housetop  and  street 
to  me  ;  and  when  my  heart  is  devout,  all  these  are  helps  and  not  hindrances  to 
fellowship  with  Himself.  I  can  little  sympathize  with  those  ultra  -  spiritually- 
minded  people,  who  are  so  unspiritual  that  only  the  closed  eye  can  enable  them 
to  think  of  their  God." 

I  have  said  that  the  letters  were  "illustrated",  but  I  think  ilium  incited  would 
be  a  better  word  to  use  ;  for,  looking  at  them  after  these  many  years,  with  over 
flowing  eyes,  the  little  sketches  seem  to  bear  a  rainbow  light  within  them,  and  to 
sparkle  with  colours  which  only  a  devoted  love  could  have  blended.  They  remind 
me  of  the  patient  care  bestowed  upon  the  Psalters  and  Missals  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  when  the  hand  of  some  pious  man  toiled  day  after  day  to  decorate  the 
vellum  pages, — simply  to  prove  the  love  of  his  heart,  and  witness  to  the  truth  of 
his  devotion.  My  beloved  himself  must  have  entertained  some  such  feeling  ;  for, 
at  the  end  of  a  series  of  droll  representations  of  women's  head-gear  which  he 
had  noticed  in  the  streets  of  Botzen,  he  thus  writes,  "  Now,  sweetheart,  may 
these  trifles  amuse  you  ;  /  count  it  a  holy  work  to  draw  them,  if  they  cause  you  but 
one  happy  smile."  That  I  smiled  on  them  then,  and  weep  over  them  now,  is  but  a 
natural  consequence  of  the  more  complete  separation  which  God  has  willed  for  us,— 
he,  dwelling  in  the  land  of  glory,— I,  still  tarrying  amid  the  shadows  of  earth  ;— but 
I  verily  believe  that,  when  I  join  him,  "  beyond  the  smiling  and  the  weeping,"  there 
will  be  tender  remembrances  of  all  these  details  of  earthly  love,  and  of  the  plenitude 
of  blessing  which  it  garnered  in  our  united  lives.  Surely  we  shall  talk  of  all  these 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  205 

things,  in  the  pauses  of  adoring  worship  and  of  joyful  service.  There  must  be  sweet 
converse  in  Heaven  between  those  who  loved,  and  suffered,  and  served  together  here 
below.  Next  to  the  rapture  of  seeing  the  King  in  His  beauty,  and  beholding  the 
face  of  Him  who  redeemed  us  to  God  by  His  blood,  must  be  the  happiness  of  the 
communion  of  saints,  in  that  place  of  inconceivable  blessedness  which  God  has 
prepared  for  them  that  love  Him.  As  Bishop  Bickersteth  finely  puts  it,  in  his 
description  of  Heaven,— 

•"  Every  sight  and  sound 

Ravished  tin:  sense:    and  every  loving  heart 
Reflected  joy  to  joy,  and  light  to  light, 
Like  crystals  in  a  cave  flashing  with  lire, 
And  multiplied  our  bliss  a  million-fold." 

The  two  following  chapters  consist  of  extracts  from  the  daily  letters  of  my 
husband  during  his  holiday  journey  to  Rome,  Naples,  and  Pompeii.  I  have  given  them 
verbatim,  only  withholding  allusions  to  domestic  concerns  and  personal  matters,  and 
condensing  to  a  minimum  the  sweet  love-talk  which  in  great  measure  helped  me  to 
bear  the  pain  of  these  separations.  I  have  almost  grudged  to  do  this  ;  it  has  been 
a  grief  to  fold  up  his  precious  words  and  hide  their  rare  beauty  from  other  eyes,  for 
they  shed  so  lovely  a  light  upon  his  character  ;  but,  in  many  instances,  they  were 
too  sacred  to  be  reproduced.  Every  here  and  there,  I  have  allowed  a  sentence  or 
two  to  reveal  a  glimpse  of  his  great,  tender,  and  true  heart,  as  nothing  else  could 
have  done;  but  the  rest  I  have  locked  up  again  in  the  secret  chambers  of  my  memory. 

The  letters  themselves  are  not  set  forth  as  examples  of  elegant  style  or  well- 
rounded  periods,  or  even  ot  graceful  phraseology;  they  are  simply  a  loving  husband's 
daily  notes  to  his  sick  wife,  a  record  ot  his  journeyings  gladly  and  faithfully  persevered 
in  with  the  sole  object  of  pleasing  her,  and  relieving  her  sorrowful  loneliness. 

I  hope  they  may  interest  many,  and  even  instruct  some.  Recent  tourists  in 
Italy's  classic  clime  will  be  pleasantly  reminded  of  their  own  travels,  and  be  able  to 
trace  the  progress  that  has  been  made  during  the  past  twenty-five  years  in  the  great 
work  of  excavating  old  Rome,  and  the  buried  cities  on  the  Mediterranean  shore  ;  and 
all  who  read  them  will,  I  trust,  feel  with  me  that  they  are  worthily  enshrined  in 
these  pages,  which  will  bear  witness  to  his  spotless,  beautiful  life  "till  the  day  dawn, 
and  the  shadows  ilee  away." 


EXTRACTS  FROM  MY   HUSBAND'S   LETTERS. 

Our  party  met  punctually  at  Victoria,  and  our  journey  to  Dover  consisted  of 
parentheses  of  sunshine  and  paragraphs  of  mist.  The  woods  look  as  if  they  were 
expiring-  amid  the  tears  of  nature.  The  sea  was  not  like  either  sort  of  the  prophet's 
figs,  but  was  inclined  to  be  irritable  without  having  vigour  enough  to  work  itself  into 


206  c.    ii.    SPUKC;KON'S   AUTor,ior,RArnv. 

actual  passion.  Many  suffered  much  from  the  marine  malady  ;  and,  though  we 
escaped  it,  yet  we  were  glad  to  he  again  on  the  land  which  was  meant  for  man  ;  the 
sea  is  evidently  only  designed  for  fishes  and  sailors.  We  were  asked  our  names  at 
Calais;  and,  having  answered  to  that  first  question  of  the  Catechism,  we  were 
allowed  to  tread  the  soil  of  Republican  France.  \Ve  were  soon  satisfactorily 
"  restaurated  ",  and  cu  route  for  Brussels,  -i'id  Lille,  Tournay,  etc.  The  whole  land  is 
like  a  neatly-kept  garden,  from  which  the  tillers  derive  all  the.  produce,  possible.  \\  e 
had  a  good  journey,  reached  our  hotel  at  six  o'clock,  dined,  them  walked  down  to  the 
Arcade;  which  you  will  remember,  and  an-  now  in  our  rooms,  cosy  and  comfortable. 
The  weather  is  delicious  ; — bright,  clear,  and  balmy  ;— -  no  tires  needed  ;  in  tact,  I  am 
too  warmly  clad.  The  atmosphere  is  dry  and  light,  and  gives  me:  new  life.  It. 
seems  very  selfish  to  be  writing  thus  to  my  dear  prisoner  at  home,  yet  she  loves  me 
so  much  that  the  surest  way  to  make,  her  happy  is  to  prove  that  I  am  enjoying  my 
holiday.  All  my  love  I  send  thee,  ;  may  the  everlasting  arms  encompass  thee,  even 
the  arms  of  my  God  and  thine  ! 

We  were  up  early,  and  walked  to  the  Botanical  Gardens,  and  then  on  to  the 
Church  of  St.  Gudule,  with  its  wonderful  painted  windows,  some  ot  them  most 
ancient,  others  modern,  but  exquisite.  These;  last  represent  a  Jew  stealing  conse 
crates!  wafers,  while-  other  Jews  are:  sticking  daggers  into  the:m  lor  the:  purpose:  ot 
making  them  bleed.  To  me,  it  does  not  seem  worse:  to  carve:  waters  than  to  eat 
them  ;  but  the  difference  between  tweedledum  and  tweedledee  is  sometimes 
immense.  We  then  drove  to  the:  Jl/nscc  }Vicrtz,  which  I  have  before  described  to 
you.  It  is  certainly  a  very  wonderful  display  of  one:  man's  penvers,  and  a  singular 
combination  of  the  playful  and  the  terrible.  We  saw  all,  and  then  went  to  the 
Luxembourg  Station  te:>  continue;  our  journey,  by  Waterloo,  to  Namur.  O  "days  of 
auld  king  syne,"  how  ye  (lashed  before  me,  especially  when  we  mde  along  by  the 
Meuse  and  Buy  to  Liege;,  and  thence  to  Chaudfontaine,  Verviers,  and  Aix-la- 
Chapelle  !  Alas!  my  dearest  bides  at  home.;  and  I,  like:  a  lone:  knight,  can  but 
remember  the  ladye  of  my  love,  for  she  rides  not  at  my  side  as  aforetime  !  The 
journey  was  exquisite  for  weather,  temperature,  and  scenery  ;  but  it  was  long,  and 
we  were  very  hungry  ;  so,  when  we:  sat  down  to  table:  at  7.30,  it  was  with  the:  serious 
resolution  to  be  avenged  for  our  longr  fast. 

O  O 

This  morning,  I  was  up  at  six  o'clock,  revising  a  sermon.  It  is  now  raining 
for  the  first  time  since  we  left  home  ;  and  this  is  convenient,  for  it  makes  it  easier  to 
remain  indoors  at  work.  Thus  far,  all  has  gone  well,  and  we  are;  grateful.  To  love 
God  when  all  is  smooth  and  sweet,  is  but  the:  love  of  swine  who  know  their  feeder. 
The  true  test  is  to  be  able  to  bless  His  smiting  hand,  and  cry,  "Though  He  slay 


C.      II.     SPURCiEOXS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  2O/ 

me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him."  You,  my  darling,  have  been  enabled  to  do  this;  and 
though  the  weary,  weary  pain  bows  you  down,  you  will  be  able  to  possess  your  soul 
in  patience  even  unto  the  end.  The  Lord  will  comfort  you  with  His  choice 
consolations  in  the  day  of  your  afflictions.  Some  of  those  well-ripened  apples  which 
housewives  bring  forth  amid  the  chill,  leafless  days  of  winter,  God  hath  in  reserve 
for  thee  ;  wherefore,  be  of  good  courage,  my  sweetheart  ! 

It  rained  till  we  left  Cologne  yesterday,  when  we  travelled  to  Mayence  along 
the  banks  of  the  Rhine.  The  li<dn  was  o-one  bv  >  iO.  so  that  we  saw  nothing 

*z>  <^>  J         \j    \J       *  ^j 

beyond  Andernach  ;  the  sky  was  leaden,  and  the;  atmosphere  hazy.  The  woods, 
however,  were  ablaze  with  autumn  fires,  and  the  tints  were?  inexpressibly  lovely  ;— 
alas  !  the  loveliness  of  decay.  \Ye  reached  here  at  8.30,  had  tea,  then  crossed  the 
bridge  of  boats,  and  returning,  went  up  into  the  skies  to  bed  (alluding  to  the  height 
of  the  hotel). 

Munich. — Yesterday,  we  were  on  the  railroad  all  day  long.  We  left  Mayence  at 
10.20,  and  did  not  reach  this  city  till  9.30.  The  first  part  of  the  road  was  tame,  then 
followed  a  chapter  of  forests  with  their  matchless  pomp  of  autumnal  glory.  Anon, 
we  mounted  uphill  into  glens  and  mountain-valleys,  which  were  presently  succeeded 
by  a  river,  with  towns  growing  like  osiers  on  its  banks.  This  must  be  a  superb 
city,  and  I  want  to  spend  to-day  in  seeing  it  ;  but  we  are  in  a  fix.  The  only  train 
over  the  Brenner  leaves  here  at  eleven  at  night.  Innsbruck  is  the:  town  at  the  foot 
of  the  pass  on  this  side,  and  the;  train  reaches  and  leaves  there  at  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning.  So,  you  see,  if  we  go  on  a  bit,  we  shall  be  no  better  off.  To  think  of 
going  over  a  pass  in  the  dark,  seems  to  me  to  be  a  wilful  blasphemy  of  nature,  if  not 
of  nature's  God  !  \Ye  must  find  out  if  it  cannot  be  managed  otherwise  than  as  a 
deed  of  darkness.  We  must  have  a  carriage;,  if  possible;  ;  and  see  the  marvels  of 
the  mountains. 

i  his  is  an  artistic  city  in  all  ways,  a  certain  Greek-art  appearance  strikes  one 
everywhere  ;  not  a  sham,  but  a  real  reproduction  of  antiquity.  We  have  been  to 
the  Glyptothek,  a  fine:  museum  of  statuary  ;  but,  really,  after  one  has  seen  a  few 
thousand  nude  figures,  one  fee;ls  cemtent  without  any  more  anatomical  models  in 
stone.  I  hence,  we  visited  a  large  picture-gallery, — which  I  think  almost  equal  to 
the  Louvre, — full  e)f  masterpieces  of  most  e)f  the:  ancient  schools.  We  have 
been  into  a  marvellous  basilica,  with  pillars  of  the  richest  marble,  and  a  ceiling  of 
golden  mosaic  ;  also  to  the  cathedral,  to  see  the  tomb  of  a  German  Emperor,  a 
boy  of  the  olden  time,  who  has  a  bronze  memorial  of  the  noblest  fashion.  Then 
we  entered  the  studio  of  a  renowned  sculptor,  and  saw  the  plaster  casts,  the  stone 
being  chiselled,  and  the  finished  statues, — very  interesting  this.  There  is  enough 


C.      II.      SITRCKOX's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

left  for  two  or  three  days'  enjoyment,  but  we  must  leave  it;  and  I  scarcely  reoret 
this,  for  the  weather  is  very  damp  and  depressing.  After  all  enquiries,  I  find  we 
are  compelled  to  go  to-night  at  ir  o'clock,  and  pursue  our  weary  way  over  the 
pass  in  the  dark.  Horses  would  require  two  days,  and  the  roads  are  said  to  be 
in  bad  condition.  "  What  can't  be  cured,  must  be  endured  ;  "  so  I  say,  "  Southward 
Ho!  at  any  price."  My  heart  Hies  to  my  wifey  ;  I  have  just  kissed  my  hand  to 
her.  God  bless  her  !  Loads  of  love  I  telegraph  by  the  soul-wire. 

1  he  Brenner  is  passed.  We  had  some  very  uncomfortable  experiences;  the 
first  part  of  the  way,  the  guard  wanted  a  coupon  from  us  about  every  hour,  and  at 
Kuffstein  we  were  hauled  out  of  our  nest,  marched  into  the  Austrian  custom-house, 
made  to  wait,  shivering,  about  thirty  minutes,  and  then  packed  into  a  poor  seedy 
carriage,  cold  and  miserable,  to  continue  our  journey.  Botzen  was  reached  at  last, 
but  we  were  all  so  weary  that  we  went  glad  to  go  into  our  rooms  to  rest  till  dinner. 
Since  then,  we  have  walked  round  the  old-fashioned  town,  and  under  its  long-arched 
lines  of  shops.  We  have;  also  heard  service  in  the  cathedral  opposite  to  our  hotel  ; 
and  very  line  was  the  music,  and  very  quaint  the  sight  of  a  great  crowd  in  the 
dark,  except  where  a  few  had  candles  to  see  to  read  their  mass-books.  Do  you 
remember  this  old  inn  (Kaiser  Krone),  where  Emperors  and  Popes  have  lodged  ? 
It  is  a  singular  building  ;  our  rooms  are  on  the  same  floor  as  the  sallc,  but  we  have 
to  go  up,  and  then  down  to  them.  I  am  weary,  and  am  looking  forward  to 
to-morrow's  rest. 

Sabbath  eve. — This  has  been  a  very  gracious,  happy,  restful  day.  Did  I  but 
know  that  you  are  better,  I  don't  think  I  should  have  more  to  wish,  except  your 
company.  We  had  a  delicious  morning  service  together  ; — read  Psalm  xxii.,  and 
sang,  "Come,  let  us  sing  the  song  of  songs,"  and  "Where  God  doth  dwell."  It  was 
indeed  a  season  of  refreshing.  Then  we:  saw  a  service  at  the  cathedral.  Large  and 
devout  congregations  assemble  here:  at  each  hour  from  five  a.m.  to  five  p.m.  I  have 
never  seen  any  Romish  place  so  well  attended.  Every  person  in  the  town  seemed 
to  go  to  one  of  the  hourly  services,  and  very  attentive  and  earnest  they  appeared  to 
be.  We  looked  in  several  times,  and  twice  heard  a  kind  of  litany,  in  German,  by  the 
whole  congregation,  led  by  a  layman  in  common  dress.  It  reminded  me  of  a  prayer- 
meeting  after  service,  for  mass  was  over,  and  the  altar-lights  were  put  out,  and  then 
prayer  broke  out  among  all  the  people.  After  dinner,  we  walked  up  a  mountain's 
side  in  the  bright  sun's  genial  warmth,  and  what  a  view  we  had  !  Snowy  Alps,  and 
dark  forests,  and  then,  lower  down,  the  meadows  and  the  terraced  vines,  and  lower 
yet,  the  plain  of  the  Adige  and  its  villages.  Our  path  led  us  by  a  series  of  shrines, 
similar  to  those  at  Varallo,  but  smaller,  and  at  the  end  of  the  path  was  a  "  Calvary." 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


209 


We  had  sweet  communion  tog-ether  here,  and  great  enjoyment  of  God's  presence.  I 
am  so  much  better  in  mind ;  I  feel  more  elastic,  light,  and  clear  of  forebodings.  I  now 
expect  good  news  from  my  darling,  whereas  before  I  have  Jelt  sure  of  gloomy  tidings. 

Hotel  Barbesi,  Venice.— God  be  thanked  for  even  the  twinkling  stars  of  better 
news  in  the  letter  I  have  just  received  from  your  dear  self!  It  has  poured  with  rain 
all  day  ;  indeed,  they  say  it  has  rained  for  three  whole  weeks  in  these  parts.  We 
left  Botzen  at  six  o'clock,  driving  through  mist,  cloud,  and  deluges  above,  and 
through  wide,  far-reaching  floods  upon  either  side.  We  only  stayed  two  hours  at 
Verona,  but  I  had  the  joy  of  receiving  your  letter  there.  On  to  Venice,  found  it 
better,  but  still  very  bad  and  wet.  Mad  a  gondola.  Our  rooms  are  very  good,  but 
an  evil  smell  pervades  the  place  ;  whether  it  is  the  canals  in  general,  or  these  rooms 
in  particular,  we  cannot  tell.  A  waiter,  who  has  just  come  up,  says  it  is  the  tapis, 
which  is  new  ;  this  is  possible,  but  the  nuisance  is  none  the  better  for  that.  Alas  ! 
the  rain  changes  all  things,  and  Venice  looks  sad  in  her  sodden  state.  We  must 
hope  for  improvement. 

After  a  splendid  night's  rest,  I   awoke  at   six   o'clock,  full  of  good  spirits,  and 
revised  a  sermon.      After  breakfast,  we  had  a  gondola,  and  went  along  the  Grand  Canal. 


IX    A    GONDOLA    ON    THE    GRAND    CANAL. 


Glorious  !  About  eleven,  the  tide  turned,  and  rain  began  again,  so  we  went  to  St. 
Mark's,  and  saw  the  grand  old  cathedral,  which  is  the  same  as  ever,  but  needs 
sunshine  to  perfect  it.  Thence  to  the  Doge's  Palace,— you  know  all  the  details  of 
these  places.  The  rain  poured  down  when  we  got  under  the  black  cover  of  the 


2  IO 


C.      II.   STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


gondola;  but  it  was  a  delightful  experience  to  be  so  sheltered,  and  yet  to  be  moving 
through  the  Hoods.  \Ve  went  to  the  Jesuits'  Church,  that  fine  marble  one  in  the 
poorer  part  of  the  city  ; — you  remember  the  curtains  and  carpet  all  reproduced  in 
marble.  Then  we  explored  a  glass  manufactory,  this  was  very  interesting  ;  they 
make  mosaics,  and  mirrors,  and  chandeliers  of  the;  line.  Venice  glass,  very  wonderful 
to  look  upon.  Still  it  rained,  and  the  water  was  over  St.  Mark's  Square  in  front  of 


ST.   MARK'S  c.\ TIIKDRAI.,  VKXICI:. 

the  cathedral.  Nevertheless,  we  visited  Santa  Maria  Gloriosa,  where  is  Canova's 
pyramidical  tomb,  and  marble  enough  to  stock  a  city  ;  and  then  to  Santa  Maria  del 
Salute,  opposite  to  our  hotel.  I  have  seen  all  these  before,  yet  was  still  very  much 
interested. 

It  is  pitiable  to  see  the  poor  people  look  soaked  and  only  half-  alive. 
Only  the  pigeons  of  St.  Mark's  are  gay  ;  they  lly  as  a  cloud,  and  swarm  on  the 
windows,  and  even  enter  the  rooms  of  the  houses  all  round  the  square  ;  one  might 
almost  tread  on  them,  they  are  so  tame.  The  unhappy  vendors  of  shells  and 
miniature  gondolas  will,  I  fear,  be  half-starved,  and  the  flower-girls  look  very 
downhearted.  The  water  now  is  over  the  paths,  and  up  to  the  doors  ;  yet  Venice  is 
not  a  bad  place  in  wet  weather,  since  you  can  keep  dry  in  your  gondola,  and  can  look 
out  through  the  windows. 


c.    H.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


I   awake  grateful  for  another  night's  peaceful  rest,  only  to  find  myself 
very  badly  bitten  by  mosquitoes.      A    mosquito   is  the    most  terrible  of  beasts      A 
lion  delights   in   blood,  but  he   does   not  suck  it  from   living  animals;   he  does  not 
carefully  prolong  their  tortures.      A  viper  poisons,  but  he  is  generally  content  with 
one  use  of  his  fangs  ;  but  these  small-winged   serpents   bite  in  scores  of  places  in 
succession.      My  hands   are   a  series  of  burning  mountains.      The  creatures  are  as 
nearly   omnipresent   as   Satan,    which    means    that,    though    a    mosquito    cannot    be 
everywhere,  yet  no  mortal  can   be  sure  that  he  is  not  near  him,  or  tell  where  he  is 
Curtains  are  a  delusion,  pastilles  are  a  snare  ;  the  little  enemies  are  irritated  by 
such  attempts  to  escape  their  malice,  and  give  you  double  punishment.     O  Italy  !    I 
have  shed  my  blood  lor  thy  sake,  and  feel  a  love  of  thee  (or  something  else)  burnina 
I  he  sooner  I  am  away  from   thee,  O  fair  Venice,  the  better,  for  thou 
dost    deluge    me    by    day,    and    devour    me    by    night  !       I    wonder    how    my    two 
companions  have  fared  ;    I  shall  go,    by-and-by,  and  look  for  their  remains  !      1  have 
opened  my  windows,  and  the  pests  are  pouring  in,  eager  and  hungry  ;  but   as  I  am 
up  and  dressed,  there  will  be  no  more  of  me  available  for  them  at  present. 

To-day  has  been  charming,  and  we  have  been  in  the  gondola  most  of  its  lovely 
1  he  sights  we  saw  were  nothing  compared  with  the  delicious  rowim.-  in  the 
Could  you  but  have  been  there,  it  would  have  been  as  much  of  Paradise 
us  earth  can  ever  yield.      Venice  decays,  but  her  autumn  is  fair.      The  fear   is 
"  restorers  "  should  come  and  deface  her.      We  went  to  the  Arsenal    but 
models  of  ships  and  guns  would  not  interest  you.     Then  to  the  Greek  Church,'  and 
Carmelites',    and    the    Academy   of    Arts  ;-saw    hosts    of    Madonnas    and    St 
am   quite   weary  of  them.      The  outside  of  Venice  is   the  treat,    the 
beauty,  the  enjoyment. 

We    are    off    to-morrow    very    early    for     Florence;  the    air    is    loaded  with 

mosquitoes,   and   my   hands   are    "a    mask    of  sores,"    as  Mrs.    Gamp    would  say 

both    Mr.    Passmore    and    I    suffer   much.     Venice  cannot    be  endured  with 

these   torments. 

We  left  Venice  at  7.50,  and  proceeded  to  Bologna,  which  was  reached  by  12  10 

ter   an   uninteresting   ride  among  perpetual    trees   festooned    with    vines,— muddy 

earth,_flooded  fields,-and  disconsolate  maize-stalks.      From    1.20  to  5   o'clock    we 

traversing  the  mountains  between  Bologna  and  Pistoia,  and  a  more  marvellous 

road  it  has  never  been  my  lot  to  see.      It  was  up,  up,  up,  by  the  side  of  a  torrent, 

the  rail  crossed  and  recrossed,  with  rugged  scenery  of  a  sublime,  character  on 

either  hand.      Ihen,  in  commencing  the  descent,  we  saw  Pistoia,  and  the  great  plain 

=  Arno  far  below,  like  a  raised  map.      It  was  a  truly  wonderful  view,  but  was 

n  gone  ;  and  we  rushed  down  zigzags,  and   saw   it   again,  and  lost  it  every  few 


212 


C.      II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


minutes.  It  is  almost  miraculous  that  a  train  can  keep  to  the;  rails  upon  such 
descents.  Down  below  at  Pistoia.  we  found  that  the  iloods  had  done  <>Teat  damage  ; 

<  ~  o 

but  the  railway  was  all  right,  so  we  reached  Florence  about  seven  o'clock.  All 
this  is  very  uninteresting  to  read,  but  it  was  pleasant  to  experience,  while  good 
companionship  and  the  sunshine  made  the  whole  journey  enjoyable.  Though 
wearied  by  the  long  hours  ol  travelling,  1  am  in  every  way  more  fresh  and  free 
from  depression.  May  the  Lord  enrich  me  also  in  spiritual  blessings,  and  send  me 
back  more  capable  of  serving  Him  than  I  have  ever  been  !  We  are  off  early 
to-morrow,  so  now-,  my  darling,  may  God  watch  over  thee,  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee, 
and  restore  me  to  thee  in  joy  and  peace;  !  Oceans  of  love,  and  as  many  kisses  for 
you  as  the  sand  on  the  sea-shore.  My  next  letter  will  be  from  "  the  city  of  the 
seven  hills,"  if  all  is  well. 


/r^x7'j/> 

"THE  CITY  OK  TIIK  SKVKX  HILLS." 


\Ve  are  in  Rome.  Let  a  man  say  what  he  will,  there  is  a  thrill  passes  through 
his  soul,  at  the  thought  of  being  in  Rome,  that  he  cannot  experience  anywhere  else, 
except  in  the  city  of  our  Lord, — Jerusalem.  There  are  interests  and  associations 
that  cluster  about  "the  eternal  city"  that  a  man  must  feel,  if  he  has  any  soul  at 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


213 


all.  You  remember  that,  last  year,  we  started  off  for  our  first  clay's  sight-seeing 
without  a  guide,  and  wandered  about  without  knowing  whither  we  went ;  this  time, 
I  can  act  as  guide  and  interpreter,  and  am  able  to  observe  much  which,  on  a  former 
occasion,  I  had  not  noticed.  To-day,  we  went  clown  the  Corso,  and  up  the  Capitol. 


THE   CAPITOL,   ROME. 


I  here  are  new  excavations  at  its  toot.  We  passed  down  the  other  side  to  the  Forum, 
where  they  are  still  digging.  Rome  of  the  olden  time  is  buried  beneath  itself,  under 
its  own  ruins,  and  the  Forum  lies  some  ten,  fifteen,  and  in  some  places  thirty  feet 
of  earth  below  the  present  level.  I  soon  found  myself  on  what  I  knew  to  be  the 
Via  Sacra,  along  which  the  triumphal  processions  passed  when  the  great  generals 
returned  from  war,  and  climbed  the  Capitol  in  state  ;  and  it  was  a  memorable 
thing  to  stand  before  the  Arch  of  Titus,  and  gaze  upon  its  bas-reliefs.  There  is 


BAS-RELIEF   ON   THE   ARCH   OF  TITUS,    ROME. 


214 


c.    H.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Titus  returning  from  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  with  the  seven-branched  golden 
candlestick,  and  the  silver  trumpets  ;  and,  while  these  things  stand  there,  it  is  idle 
for  infidels  to  say  that  the  Bible  is  not  true.  It  is  good  history.  Nobody  doubts 
what  is  written  in  stone  upon  the  Arch  of  Titus,  but  the  same  story  is  found  in 
the  Book  ;  and  the  more  discoveries  that  are  made  of  ancient  cities,  especially  in 
Palestine,  the  more  will  the  truth  of  the  Book  be  confirmed,  and  the  record  upon 
stone  will  be  found  to  tally  with  what  is  written  on  the  tablets  of  God's  Word. 


INIKKIOR    OF    TIIK    COLOSSEUM,    KOMK. 

Then  we  came  to  the  Colosseum.  What  a  place  it  is  !  Two-thirds  of  it  are  gone, 
and  yet  enough  remains  wherewith  to  build  a  great  city  !  I  climbed  to  the  very 
lop.  Under  an  arch  of  one  of  the  great  corridors  we  sat  down,  and  sang,  "Am  I 
a  soldier  of  the  cross?"  "I'm  not  ashamed  to  own  my  Lord,"  and  "Jesu's 
tremendous  name;"  and  then  I  preached  a  little  sermon  from  the  text,  "Come, 
behold  the  works  of  the  Lord,  what  desolations  He  hath  made  in  the  earth  ;"  then 
we  prayed,  and  sang,  "Ashamed  of  Jesus?"  Just  then,  two  persons  went  by,  and 
said,  in  broad  American,  "  Don't  let  us  disturb  you."  To  which  I  answered,  "  Come 
and  join,"  but  they  replied,  "  Our  time  is  too  short,"  so  we  sang  the  Doxology,  and 
went  on.  Pretty  bold  this,  in  such  a  public  place,  but  very  sweet  to  be  remembered. 
"  Boylston  "  rolled  along  the  vaulted  tunnels  like  a  battle-song. 

We  went  down  to  the  Appian  Way,  and  on  to  the  baths  of  Titus.  By  a 
mistake,  I  took  the  party  up  a  lane,  and  through  the  wrong  gate  ;  but,  after  all, 
this  was  fortunate,  for  it  brought  us  to  the  top  of  the  immense  structure  ;  and, 
looking  clown,  we  saw  the  rooms  which  before  I  had  only  seen  from  below,  and 
this  view  gave  us  a  better  idea  of  their  vastness  and  mystery.  The  building  is  a 
huo-e  ruin,  built  upon  a  ruin.  Nero  had  a  golden  palace  here,  but  when  Titus  came 
into  power,  he  buried  it.  Its  roof  was  made  of  great  arches,  massive  and  strong,  so 


c.    H.    STURGEON'S    AUTOHIOGKAI'IIY.  215 

he  bored  holes  through  them,  and  poured  in  rubbish  till  the  place  was  filled  up,  and 
then  he  built  his  baths  on  the  top  of  all.  His  work  is  ruined  ;  but  now,  part  of 
the  palace  below  has  been  dug  out,  and  they  have  found  gems  of  art,  enough  to 
fill  hundreds  of  museums.  Getting  to  the  right  entrance,  we  came  across  the 
custodian,  an  old  wounded  soldier,  who  showed  us  over  the  whole  place,  as  far  as 
practicable,  telling  us  all  he  knew,  pointing  out  every  fresco,  and  putting  a  delightful 
zest  into  it  for  us  all.  It  is  a  place  of  marvels  !  Its  passages  and  rooms  are  count 
less,  vast,  weird,  and  most  impressive  ;  one  could  spend  a  week  there,  and  then 
begin  again.  The  excavations  have  brought  to  light  treasures  of  porphyry,  marble, 
and  statues  ;  and  the  paintings  and  frescoes  of  eighteen  hundred  years  ago  are  as 
fresh  as  if  they  were  painted  yesterday.  Your  guide  has  a  long  pole,  into  which  he 
screws  another  long  pole  with  a  lighted  candle  at  the  end,  this  he  holds  up  as  high 
as  possible,  and  you  see  the  paintings  on  the  roof  of  Nero's  palace.  There  are  said 
to  be  two  hundred  rooms  still  unexcavated,  and  no  one  knows  what  treasures  of 
art  they  may  conceal.  Strange  to  say,  there  is  yet  another  house  beneath  this  golden 
palace,  for  Nero  built  over  the  house  of  Meca^nas,  the  friend  of  Horace  ;  and,  after 
digging  deep  down,  they  have  come  to  the  mosaic  pavements  of  the  first  structure 
erected  on  this  extraordinary  spot.  I  want  a  bigger  head,  to  take  all  these  wonders 
in,  and  hold  my  thoughts  ! 

After  all  this,  we  went  a  little  further,  to  the  Palace  of  the  Caesars,  which  is  a 
mile  and  a-half  round,  and  is  being  excavated.  All  is  ruined,  but  it  is  so  far  opened 
up  as  to  show  the  lower  rooms,  and  the  first,  or  Imperial  lloor.  It  consisted  of  many 
palaces,  and  would  take  a  month  to  explore.  In  one  part,  I  saw  rooms  just  dug  out, 
as  fresh  as  when  originally  decorated,  and  remarkably  like  the  Pompeian  house  in 
the  Crystal  Palace.  There  was  Cesar's  great  hall,  the  place  of  his  throne,  the  bath 
of  the  harem,  the  library,  the  academy  or  residence  for  philosophers,  and  the  rooms 
for  the  Pretorian  guard.  In  fact,  the  whole  Palatine  Hill  is  a  palace  ;  and  as  they 
dig  clown,  they  come  to  vast  chambers  and  corridors  which  seem  endless.  One  of 
these,  quite  as  long  as  our  Nightingale  Lane,  has  its  mosaic  pavement  all  complete  ; 
we  looked  down  from  a  great  height  upon  it,  and  there  were  opened  places  far  below 
that.  The  walls  are  usually  seven  to  ten  feet  thick,  so  the  work  must  be  very  heavy. 
I  should  think  all  kinds  of  marble  in  the  world  can  be  picked  up  here  ;  it  is  just  a 
vast  quarry  !  What  heaps  of  broken  wine-jars, — the  champagne  bottles  of  the 
Csesars  !  It  is  a  mountain  of  ruins  of  porphyry,  alabaster,  and  all  precious  things! 
From  its  top  you  see  other  great  ruins  of  temples,  basilicas,  palaces,  and  theatres  ! 

Then  the  guide  said,  "Now  you  must  come  and  see  the  baths  of  Caracalla."  I 
was  bewildered,  lost,  confounded  ;  but  I  went,  and  found  a  building  more  than  «-i 
mile  in  length,  which  beat  all  we  had  seen  before,  and  made  me  feel  as  if  my  senses 
would  give  way.  These  enormous  baths  could  accommodate  1,600  persons  at  a 


2l6 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


time  ;  tlicy  were  in  tiers,  one  for  men,  another  for  women,  the  third  for  slaves. 
There  were  hot  baths,  cold  baths,  steam  baths,  swimming  baths  ;  and  all  these  were 
floored  with  mosaics  which  we  saw  uncovered  as  we  stood  there.  The  roof  was 
destroyed  by  the  Goths  ;  and  when  it  fell  in,  it  smashed  the  floor  ;  but  here  and  there 
oreat  portions — as  big-  as  our  lawn — are  left  intact,  and  one  could  see  the  lovely 
patterns  of  the  mosaic, — each  room  different.  The  huge  brick  walls  still  stand,  but 
the  marble  facing  is  almost  all  gone.  I  think  no  living  man  can  conceive  what  the 
place  must  have  been  in  its  glory.  I  needed  to  go  to  bed,  to  sleep  oft  my  stupor  of 
wonder  !  I  am  foolish  to  try  to  write  about  it.  It  is  like  a  tadpole  describing  a  sea  ! 
The  Farnese  family  have  taken  the  fine  statues  and  other  treasures  to  Naples;  but 
there  are  acres  yet  to  be  dug  out,  in  which,  doubtless,  many  more  are  buried,  but  it 
is  too  great  an  expense  to  dig  away  very  fast. 


ST.    PETERS,    ROME. 


I  had  one  delicious  half-hour  during  the  day.  I  sat  down  alone  opposite  to  St. 
Peter's,  and  felt  as  if  in  Elysium.  The  snow  gone,  the  sun  shining,  and  on  the  great 
obelisk  I  saw  words  which  cheered  my  soul  ;  they  were  these,  "  Christ  conquers, 
Christ  reigns,  Christ  rules,  Christ  defends  His  people  from  all  evil."  The  Lord  be 
praised  ;  this  is  true,  and  the  Pope  and  all  the  world  shall  know  it  !  I  love  my  love 


C.     II.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  217 

amidst  all  these  great  thoughts.  She  is  my  palace,  my  throne,  my  empress,  my 
Rome,  my  world  ;  yet  I  have  more,  my  Saviour,  my  Heaven  !  Bless  you,  my  own  ! 

To-day  is  the  Sabbath,  and  has  been  up  till  now  most  sweetly  calm  and  happy. 
We  had  our  little  service,  with  breaking  of  bread,  and  the  Lord  was  with  us.  I  read 
a  sermon,  and  our  song  and  prayer  were  "  in  the  spirit."  May  it  please  the  Lord  of 
peace  to  give  the  like  holy  rest  to  my  beloved  !  We  then  walked  on  the  Pincian, 
where  there  are  few  people  during  the  day,  but  lovely  groves,  and  beds  of  roses,  with 
seats  in  every  corner,  and  all  Rome  at  one's  feet.  It  was  truly  Sabbatic.  All  that 
nature  and  art  can  do,  is  to  be  seen  in  these  gardens,  where  the  loveliest  statues 
look  clown  upon  you,  and  fountains  ripple  to  tunes  of  peace,  and  aromatic  trees 
breathe  perfume.  A  statue  of  Jochebed  laying  Moses  in  his  ark  of  bulrushes  among 
the  reeds,  struck  me  as  charming  to  the  last  degree.  It  stood  as  the  centre  of  a 

O 

fountain,  reeds  and  water-lilies  grew  at  the  rocky  base,  and  the  ripples  of  the  little 
hidden  jets  made  wavelets  round  the  ark.  Can  you  imagine  it?  Nothing  in  modern 
art  has  pleased  me  more,— perhaps  nothing  so  much.  This  has  been  a  blessed  clay 
to  me,  and  I  have  been  feeling  so  well  ;  I  almost  tremble  lest  it  should  be  too  good 
to  continue. 

Another  day  of  wonders  !  This  morning,  we  drove  to  the  great  amphitheatre  ol 
Marcellus,  which  once  held  20,000  persons,  and  is  far  older  than  the  Colosseum.  It 
is  buried  for  fourteen  feet,  and  much  built  over  and  hidden  ;  around  it  is  a  market  for 
the  poor,  where  I  saw  baskets  full  of  cigar-ends  which  had  no  doubt  been  picked  up 
in  the  street,  and  were  being  sold  to  be  smoked  in  pipes.  What  would  Marcellus 
have  thought  of  this  ?  Then  we  saw  the  long  covered  way  which  led  from  the 
theatre  to  the  baths  of  Agrippa, — a  great  colonnade,  of  which  some  pillars  are 
visible,  and  others  are.  built  into  the  houses  of  the  street  which  occupies  its  place. 
Prom  thence  to  the  Jews'  quarter,  where  the  same  use  of  old  stones  is  apparent; 
capitals,  friezes,  cornices,  and  all  sorts  of  marbles  are  let  into  the  walls  of  the  dwellings. 
Ah  !  the  cruelties  the  Jews  have  suffered  in  that  Ghetto,  the  barbarities  which 
have  there  been  indicted  upon  God's  ancient  people  !  Their  district  is  often  flooded  by 
the.  Tiber  ;  and,  on  one  occasion,  when  they  made  an  appeal  to  the  papal  authorities, 
because  their  houses  were  ten  or  twelve  feet  under  water,  the  only  answer  they 
received  was  that  the.  water  would  do  the  Jews  good  !  There  was  a  law  in  Rome, 
only  lately  repealed,  that  a  hundred  men  and  fifty  women  from  the  Jewish  quarter 
must  go  to  the  Church  of  St.  Angelo  every  Sunday,  and  they  were  driven  there 
with  whips  ;  and  if  one  of  them  went  to  sleep,  there  was  a  whip  to  wake  him  up, 
that  he  might  hear  himself  and  his  forefathers  bitterly  abused.  On  certain  days 
of  the  Carnival,  the  Jews  were  obliged  to  run  races  in  the  Corso,  stripped  of  almost 


2Ig  c,    n.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

all  their  clothing,  and  then  the  people  showered  execrations  and  curses  upon  them. 
Time  would  fail  to  tell  of  their  sufferings  and  privations,  besides  which  they  were 
forced  to  pay  large'  sums  of  money  to  their  oppressors.  Matters  have  mended 
somewhat  lately,  'and  they  are  relieved  from  many  of  the  most  cruel  persecutions 
of  former  days  ;  but  they  are  oppressed  still,  and  I  was  greatly  moved  when,  in 
the  Church  in  the  Ghetto,  I  saw  this  message  from  the  Lord  plainly  set  forth 
before  them,  "All  day  long  I  have  stretched  forth  My  hands  unto  a  disobedient 
and  gainsaying  people.' 

To-day  we  went  several  miles  along  the  Appian  Way.  What  bliss  ever  to  see 
it  !  On  both  sides,  for  many  miles,  it  is  skirted  by  tombs,  temples,  columbaria,  and 
ruins  of  villas  in  continuous  lines.  It  is  a  British  Museum  ten  miles  long  !  I  felt  a 
strange  joy  in  walking  along  the  same  road  which  Paul  trod,  when  the  brethren  from 
Rome  came  to  meet  him.  From  it  can  be  seen  Tusculum  and  Tivoli,  and  the  long 
line  of  the  Claudian  aqueduct,  on  arches  all  the  way  from  the  mountains  into  Rome, 
as  also  the  temple  of  Romulus,  and  the  great  circus  of  Maxentius.  What  a  wor 
wonders  !  We  went  as  far  as  the  Casale  Rotunclo,  a  round  tomb  so  large  that,  being 
full  of  rubbish,  there  is  a  house,  and  stables,  and  an  olive  garden  on  the  top.  We 
wanted  to  investigate,  so  climbed  up,  and  were  rewarded  by  the  sight  ot  a  family  of 
very  scantily-clothed  children  ;  their  mother  and  an  old  woman  were  baking  mai/.t 
bread  in  a  hole  in  the  wall  of  the  tomb.  They  had  kneaded  it  in  a  wheelbarrow, 
and  the  children  looked  as  if  they  needed  it,  too.  Bono  joko  ! 

On  our  way  back,  when  nearly  as  far  as  the  old  walls,  we  turned  down  a  lane 
visit  the  catacombs  of  Calixtus.      Candles  were  provided,  and  we  went  down  to  the 
second  tier  ;   there  are  five  of  these,  one  below  another.      I   do   not  know  how  far  we 
went,  but  it  seemed  miles  —passages  just  wide  enough   for   me   to    pass   through, 
opening  into  rooms  every  now  and  then,  and  with  many  cross-roads  where  one  co 
soon    be   lost.       Here    were   countless   graves,    here    and   there   skeletons,    emblems, 
places  for  lamps,  frescoes  of  ancient  date,   and  many  interesting  memorials, 
a  new  scene  to  me,   but  deeply  solemn   and   touching.     Think  of  it,— that  this  was 
only  one  set  of  chambers  and    passages,    and   that  there  was  one   above,  and  thre. 
deeper    down  !     There  are   from    five   to   six   graves,   one  above  the  other,  in  each 
passage,    and   the  whole  place  is  full  right  along.     These  tombs  are  open  in  most 
cases,  for  the  doors  or  stones  which  closed  them  are  taken  away  to  museums, 
is  the  best  and  most  convenient  catacomb  for  tourists  to  see  ;  but  there  are,  I  believe, 
sixty  others.     They  have  no   Popery  in  them,  and   I   would  sooner  live  and  die  in 
them  than  live  in  this  city  of  Babylon.      It  is  nothing  less  than  what  the  Bible  calls 
it  ;  it  is  full  of  idols,  filthy  rag,  bone,   and  rubbish  worship  of  the  most  abominabl 
kind.      I  have  cursed  it  all,  as  Paul  did  those  who  preach  "another  gospel" 


C.     II.     SPUKGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Then  we  drove  to  St.  John  Lateran,  "  the  mother  of  all  churches,"  and  I  shall 
here  only  dare  to  write  of  one  thing  which,  to  my  dying  day,  I  shall  never  forget.  I 
do  not  know  that  I  ever  felt  my  blood  boil  so  with  indignation  or  my  heart  melt  so 
much  with  pity  as  when  I  saw  the  Santa  Scala,  down  which  our  blessed  Lord  is  said 
to  have  come  from  Pilate's  hall.  It  was  a  pitiable  sight  to  see  old  people,  grey 
headed  men,  young  women,  and  little  children  with  their  mothers,  crawling  up  and 


SANTA   SCALA,    ROME. 


down  this  staircase  on  their  knees,  kissing  the  bottom  step,  and  touching  it  with  their 
forehead,  and  doing  likewise  to  the  middle  and  top  steps,  because  they  say  our 
Saviour  fainted  at  those  places.  As  I  stood  there,  I  could  only  pray  that  another 
Luther  might  arise,  and  thunder  forth  the  fact  that  men  are  not  justified  by  works, 
but  by  faith  alone.  It  was  an  awful  thought  to  me  that  all  these  poor  creatures 
should  believe  that  they  gained  a  hundred  days'  indulgence  and  the  pardon  of  their 
sins  every  time  they  crawled  up  that  staircase,  and  that  every  step  their  knees 
kneeled  on  meant  so  many  days  less  of  purgatory  for  them.  The  stairs  are  covered 
with  wood,  which  has  been  three  times  renewed,  having  been  worn  away  by  the 


22o  c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTomor.RAmy. 

knees    of    the    votaries  !       My    heart    feels    all    on    a    blaze    with    righteous    anger. 

0  miserable  world,  thus  to  dishonour  the  ever-blessed   Lamb  !      O   infinite   mercy, 
which  permits  such  insulters  to  live  !      I  have  seen  them  adoring-  thigh-bones,  skulls, 
arms,  and  hands  ;— yes,  actually  adoring  these  things  as  if  they  were  Divine  !     Pagan 
Rome  never  went  this  length. 

\Ye  went  to  St.  Peter's  to  finish  the  day  with  music,  and  it  was  fine  indeed  ;  but 

1  was  jostled  in  a  crowd  of  people  so  highly  perfumed   with   garlic,  that  I  soon  made 
my  escape  to  the  outskirts  to  have  another  look  round  the  great  joss-house.      Here  I 
learned  some  English  history,  for  I  saw  Canova's  tomb  to  the  memory  of  James  III., 
Charles  III.,  and  Henry  IX.,  Kings  of  England  !      Ask  the  boys  if  they  ever  read  of 
them.      They  were  the  last  of  the  Stuarts  ;— the  Pretender,— his  son,  Charles  Edward, 
or  "  bonnie   Prince  Charlie,"— and  his  son.      \Yhat  hundreds  of  other  things    I   have 
seen  this  day,  cannot  now,  and  perhaps   never  will  be  told.      I  have  stayed  up  late  to 
put  this  down   for  fear  of  forgetting   it,  and  also  because  it  may  be  I  shall   have  less- 
time  to-morrow  when   preparing  to    preach.      God  bless   thee,  dearest,  and  be  thou 
glad,   with    me,   that   no    "  strong    delusion   to   believe   a  lie  "    has   fallen    upon    us. 
To-day  has  taught  me  a  year's  learning.      The   Lord  make  it  useful  to  1 1  is  Church  ! 

I 'send  a  picture  of  the  Pope's  coachman.  What  a  swell  he  is  !  I  think  you  will 
like  the  portrait  of  a  brigand's  wife.  It  is  very  well  executed,  and  if  you  like  it  too 
much  to  part  with  it,  be  sure  to  keep  it.  The  fellow  in  red  is  awful  ;  these  confratclli 
are  in  all  colours  according  to  the  degree  of  the  buried  person.  They  are  good 
fellows,  who  bury  the  dead  "pour  r amour  dc  Dicu"  and  they  belong  to  all  ranks  in 
Rome.  They  cover  themselves  up  in  this  manner  to  avoid  recognition,  and  escape: 
praise.  They  are  universally  respected,  but  look  horribly  ugly.  I  think  they  will 
make  a  sensation  in  the  magic-lantern. 

Yesterday  morning,  when  I  preached  in  the  Presbyterian  Chapel,  all  was  quiet 
and  delightful  ;  but  at  night,  in  Rome,  while  my  words  were  being  translated 
by  Mr.  Wall,  we  were  stopped  by  questioners.  It  was  requested  that  they  would 
reserve  their  enquiries  till  the  end  of  the  service,  but  the  opponents  were  impatient. 
A  paper  was  passed  up  from  a  Catholic  lady,  to  say  that  a  secular  priest  was  present, 
a  man  of  great  ability,  and  a  personal  friend  of  the  Pope,  and  that  he  was  sent  on 
purpose  to  discuss.  So,  presently,  a  man  of  unprepossessing  appearance  began  to 
assail  us  with  arguments  from  a  sceptical  standpoint,  upon  which  he  received  such  an 
answer  that  he  shifted  his  ground,  and  declared  that  none  had  any  right  to  teach  save 
"the  Church."  Mr.  Wall  replied  to  this,  and  the  man  changed  his  tactics  again. 
Then,  up  rose  a  Walclensian  minister,  who  spoke  so  well  that  the  people  broke  out 
in  cheers  and  clapping.  This  was  suppressed,  and  again  the  enemy  thundered  forth 
his  threats.  He  was  answered  by  several,  and  told  that  he  had  shifted  his  ground, 


C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


221 


and  was  a  priest  ;  and  Mr.  Wall  challenged  him  to  a  public  dispute  at  any  place  he 
chose  to  name.  This  he  declined,  and  seeing-  that  the  people  grew  warm,  he  wisely 
withdrew.  One  word  from  us,  and  he  would  have  been  put  out  of  the  window.  The 
incident  pleased  Mr.  Wall,  for  it  created  excitement,  and  will  bring  more  to  hear  ;  but 
I  was  far  from  happy  about  it,  and  would  gladly  have  been  spared  such  a  scene. 
Glory  be  to  God,  there  is  a  living  church  in  Rome,  and  the  way  in  which  they 
have  gained  converts  has  been  by  opposition  ;  the  notoriety  which  it  has  given 
them  has  brought  many  to  hear  the  gospel.  Bravely  the  work  goes  on,  and  the 
baptized  lead  the  way.  The  leaders  are  two  good  fellows,  pronounced  Baptists, 
believing  firmly  that  their  church  is  that  of  the;  catacombs,  and  the  only  true 
Church  of  Christ  in  Rome  ;  the  others,  they  say,  are  the  churches  ot  Luther, 
and  Knox,  and  Wesley,  and  Waldo, — theirs  is  the  only  old  original.  I  gently 
combat  their  restrictiveness,  but  do  not  wonder  at  it. 


BAPTISTERY     IN     CATACOMB     OF     ST.     PONZIANO     ROME. 


We  have  been  to  another  catacomb,  one  not  often  visited.      It  is  named   after 


222  C.      IT.     STURGEON'S     AUTOP.lor.RAl'II  Y. 

St.  Pon/iano,  and  is  situated  outside  Rome,  in  a  vineyard,  a  good  way  irom  the 
walls,  and  though  truly  ancient,  it  is  not  very  far  opened  up,  but  you  have  to  go  down 
very  deep.  A  man,  who  calls  himself  "the  dove  of  the  catacombs"  (he  must  mean 
"bat"),  took  us  down.  \Ye  went  a  long,  long  way,  each  of  us  carrying  a  taper, 
and  at  last  we  came  to  a  place  where  some  eight  roads  meet  underground.  Seven 
of  these  were  closed,  but  we  found  what  we  had  specially  come  to  see.  '1  his 
was  a  baptistery.  It  was  full  of  sweet,  clear,  running  water,  about  four  feet  deep, 
and  above-  it  was  a  painting  in  fresco  of  our  Lord  standing  up  to  his  waist  in  the 
water,  and  John  putting  his  hand  on  the.  sacred  head,  that  it,  too,  might  be 
immersed  ; — he  was  not  pouring  the  water  on  him.  Here  we  stood,  and  prayed  to 
the,  blessed  OIK-  into  whose  Name,  we  had  been  buried  by  baptism.  It  was  a  solemn 
moment.  Here  also  were  two  other  frescoes  of  our  Lord, — very  beautiful  faces; 
and  the.  Alpha  and  Omega,  and  Christian  monogram  symbols,  which  are  so  plain 
and  natural  that  they  do  not  come  under  the  head  of  superstition.  '1  here  were, 
however,  bones  in  plenty,  and  the  place  was  very  hot  and  close,  so  we  were  glad 
soon  to  escape  into  the  open  air,  for  even  holy  dust  is  not  the  best  purifier,  or  the 
best  provender  for  living  lungs. 


A      C  (  >1  I'Mli. XKll'.M,     ROMK. 

You    would    have    liked    to    have;    been    with    us    when    we    went    to    see    the 


C.     II.     SPUROEOX  S     AUTORIOGRArilY.  223 

columbaria,  near  the  St.  Sebastian  gate.  We  visited  two  of  them  ;  they  are  singular 
places,  like  vast  dovecots,  but  they  are  not  for  doves.  It  is  strange  to  look  upon 
the  spot  where  thousands  upon  thousands  of  Rome's  wealthy  citizens  have:  for  many 
ages  lain  in  little  heaps  of  ashes.  The  bodies  of  the  dead  were  burned,  and  the 
dust  was  preserved  in  small  urns  which  were  kept  in  these  curious  places.  Some 
persons  had  a  family  columbarium  ;  in  other  cases,  companies  were  formed  for 
their  construction,  and  they  were  then  let  out  in  portions  as  required.  The  niches 
are  like  small  vaulted  chambers,  and  there  will  be  in  them,  sometimes  an  urn,  some 
times  a  lamp,  or  a  small  bust,  while  frequently  the  name  and  age  of  the  deceased 
will  be  found  on  a  slab  of  marble  over  the  recess.  In  each  of  these  small  spaces, 
there  are  two  holes  sunk  to  receive  the  ashes  if  an  urn  is  not  used,  and  these  have 
lids  to  cover  the  remains.  These  great  square  buildings  contained  many  hundreds 
of  these  "  nests  "  for  the  dead,  and  a  visit  to  them  leaves  a  strangely-solemn 
impression  on  the  mind. 

I  had  two  such  precious  letters  from  you  this  morning,  worth  to  me  far  more 
than  all  the  gems  of  ancient  or  modern  art.  The  material  of  which  they  are 
composed  is  their  main  value,  though  there  is  also  no  mean  skill  revealed  in  its 
manipulation.  They  are  pure  as  alabaster,  far  more  precious  than  porphyry  or  vcrd 
antique  ;  no  mention  shall  be  made  of  malachite  or  onyx,  for  love  surpasses  them  all. 

\Ve  are  off  to   Naples  to-day. 


1 


CHAPTER   LXXIV. 


CraMlcr's  betters  Iciw  (Continued). 

| HIS   morning,  we  drove  through    Naples   for,  I   should  think,  six  or 
seven    miles   or   more.      It    is   a   crowded   city,    full    of  stirs    full   of 
business,  and  full  of  pleasure.      Horses  seem  innumerable   they  are 
decorated  profusely,  and   the  carriages  are  very  comfortable  ;  but 
am   sorry   to   say,   the    men   drive  furiously,  and   make  me  very 
Jld  women  are  numerous  and  hideous,  beggars  pestif- 
dealers    intensely  persevering.       But  what   a   bay !       What   a    sea    and 
one  ought  to  be  ill  here. 


We  have  been  over  the  museum.-full  of  frescoes  from  Pompeii,  gleanings  from 
the  catacombs,  pickings  from  the  Appian  Way,  stealings  from  the  baths  of  Caracalla 
•ther  places.     Naples  has  taken  away  from  Rome  the  best  of  the  ancient  statuary 
Measures,  and  prepared  a  vast  museum  for  the  spoils.     We  saw  thousands  of 
things,    enough   for  a   year's   inspection  ;   but   the  Pompeian  remains  were 
most    .mportant.       There    were    surgical    instruments    exactly    like    those    of 
present   day  ;-cottage-loaveS   of   bread,   stewpans,   colanders,    ladles,    and    all 
:ery  things  just  like  our  own.      The  safes  for  money  were  just  like  old  plate- 
There  were  cotton,  silk,  and  thread,  in  skeins  and  hanks,  and  large  knittino 
and  netting  needles.      Indeed,  the  people  then  had  all  we  have  now  ;  even  earthe'i 
money-boxes  w,th  a  slit  in  the  top,  such  as  the  children  have  in  our  country  villages 
'.  were  plenty  of  proofs  that  the  people  were  sinners,  and  of  a  scarlet  dye  too 
:  was  curious  to  see  the  colours  in  a  painter's  shop,  the   bottles  and  drugs'  of  a 
emist,  and   the  tools   of  other  traders.      We  saw  also  a   splendid   collection   of 
t  gems  and  cameos,  most  costly  and  lovely.      I  never  saw  so  many  o-athered 
together  before. 

We  drove  from  the  museum   to  the  site  of  a  new  field  of  lava,  which  (lowed 

own  from  Vesuvius  last  April.      It  is  just  beyond  the  houses  of  suburban  Naples 

1  was  very  different  from  what   I   had  expected.      It  had  crossed  our  road,   and 

•d   on  through  a  vineyard,-this  was  one  tongue  of   the  stream.      Then    we 

:•  a  second  by  a  road  made  near  it,  and  came  to  a  village  throu-h  which  the 

est  stream  had  burned  its  way.      It  is  a  huge  incandescent  sea  of  the  out/low  of 

the  volcano  ;  men  were  blasting  and  using  pickaxes  to  open   up  the  road  which  the 

had  completely  blocked.      We  were  soon  upon  the  lava  ;  it  has  a  surface  like  a 


226  c.    H.    STURGEON'S    AUTOIHUCIUAI'IIV. 

heap  of  ashes,  supposing  that  every  ash  should  weigh  a  ton  or  two.  It  is  still  hot, 
and  in  some  places  smoking.  I  should  have  investigated  it  carefully,  and  with  interest, 
only  a  horde  of  children,  beggars,  and  women  with  babies  gave  us  no  rest,  but 
continued  crying,  and  imploring  alms,  and  offering  us  pieces  picked  out  of  the  mass. 
Much  of  the  strange  material  is  far  too  hot  to  hold,  and  our  feet  felt  the  heat  as  we 
walked  across  the  surface.  The  stream  has  partly  destroyed  several  houses,  and 
cut  the  village;  in  two  ;  people  are  living  in  the  half  of  a  house  which  stands, 
the  other  hall'  being  burned  and  filled  up  with  the  molten  substance.  Vesuvius, 
high  above  us,  is  only  giving  out  a  little  smoke,  and  seems  quiet  enough.  As  I 
could  never  climb  up  to  the  crater,  I  think  we  shall  be  content  to  have  seen  this 
lava  torrent. 

Our  hotel  here  is  vast  and  empty  ;  we  have  excellent  rooms,  and  are  thoroughly 
comfortable.  There  is  music  continually,  and  very  fair  music,  too,  though  not  so 
sweet  as  silence.  Everybody  makes  all  the  noise  possible,  and  quiet  dwells  beyond 
the  sea.  Rome  is  a  sepulchre,—  this  city  teems  with  life.  You  are  not  out  ot  the 
door  a  moment  before  you  are  entreated  to  have  a  carriage,  buy  fruit,  fish,  pictures, 
papers,  or  something.  The  side-streets  swarm  with  people,  who  appear  to  live  in 
them  ;  there  they  eat,  cook,  work,  catch  fleas,  hunt  over  each  other's  heads  like  so 
many  monkeys,  etc.,  etc.  It  is  like  living  in  a  museum;  Jmt  as  to  the  beauty  and 
•n-acefulness  of  which  we  read  so  much,  I  cannot  detect  it,  though  really  looking  for 

£5 

it.  Persons  over  forty  look  worn  out,  and  females  at  that  age  are  haggard  ;  over 
that  period,  they  are  ghastly  and  mummified.  Macaroni  hangs  out,  in  some  quarters, 
before  the  doors  on  lines  to  dry  ;  and  the  flies,  which  are  numerous  upon  it,  give  it 
anything  but  an  attractive  appearance.  To-morrow,  we  hope  to  go  to  Pompeii. 
I  am  now-  thinking  about  next  month's  Magazine,  and  devoutly  wish  I  could  light 
upon  a  subject  for  an  article, — but  my  brain  is  dull. 

We  have  seen  Pompeii.  We  drove;  there,  and  it  took  us  three;  hours,  almost 
all  of  it  between  long  lines  of  houses,  like  one  continuous  street.  At  the  town  of 
Resina,  we  passed  1  lerculaneum,  but  did  not  enter  it,  as  Pompeii  is  more  worth 
seein<>-.  Then  we  went  through  a  town  which  has,  I  think,  been  seven  times 
destroyed  by  Vesuvius,  and  is  now  crowded  with  people.  There  we  saw  the  lava 
by  the  side  of,  and  under  the  houses,  hard  as  a  rock  ;  and  the  roads  are  generally 

naved  with   <>Teat  ila^s  of  the  same  material.      Though  driving  by  the  shore  of  the 

' 
bay,    we  seldom    saw    the    water,   for   even    where    there    was   no    town,    there    were 

high  walls,  and,  worst  of  all,  off  the  stones  the  white  dust  was  suffocating,  and 
made  us  all  look  like  millers.  However,  we  reached  Pompeii  at  last,  and  I  can 
only  say,  in  a  sentence,  it  exceeds  in  interest  all  I  have  seen  before,  even  in  Rome. 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTODIOC.KAI'IIY.  227 

I  walked  on,  on,  on,  from  twelve  to  four  o'clock,  lost  in  wonder  amid  the  miles  of 
streets  of  this  buried  city,  now  silent  and  open  to  the  gazer's  eye.  To  convey  a 
worthy  idea  of  it  to  you,  would  be  impossible,  even  in  a  ream  of  paper. 

We  entered  at  the  Street  of  Tombs,  which  was  outside  the  gate.  In  it  were 
houses,  shops,  taverns,  a  fountain,  and  several  tombs.  The  house  of  Diomed  greatly 
interested  us.  We  went  upstairs  and  downstairs,  and  then  into  the  cellars  where 
were  still  the  amphorae,  or  wine-bottles,  leaning  against  the  wall  in  rows,  the  pointed 
end  being  stuck  into  the  ground,  and  the  rows  set  together  in  dry  dust,  in  exactly 
the  same  way  as  we  place  articles  in  sawdust.  In  the  cellars  were  found  eighteen 
skeletons  of  women  who  had  lied  there  for  shelter  The  photograph  I  send  shows 


?i;  mm 


TIIK  imrsi:  AND  GARDEN  OF  DIOMEP,  POMPEII. 

the  garden,  with  covered   walk  round  it,  and  tank  for  live  fish.      In  this  street  were 
several   places   for  seats   in  the   shade,  made   in  great  semicircles,  so  that  a  score  of 
persons   could   rest  at  once.      Near  the    gate    was   the    niche    where   the   soldier   was 
iound   who   kept  his   watch   while  others  lied.      We  could  not  think  of  going  up  and 
down  all  the  streets  ;   it  would  need  many  days   to  see  all.      The   city  was,    I  should 
think,    a  watering-place   for    the    wealthy.       No  poor   class  of  houses    has  yet  been 
discovered.      It   was  paved  with  great    slabs   of  stone,   which   are  worn   deeply   with 
cart   or  chariot  wheels.       Across   the   streets   wen;    huge    stepping-stones,  just   wide 
enough  to  allow  wheels  to  go  on  each   side;   but  either  they  had    no   horses  to  the; 
cars  in   these  streets,  or  else   they   must   have  been  trained  to  step  over,      In   some 
places  were  horsing-blocks,  in   others  there   were  holes   in   the  kerbstone   to   pass  a 
rope    through    to    tie    up    a    horse.       The   houses   are    many  of    them     palaces,    and 
contained  great  treasures  of  art,  which  are   now  in  museums,    but  enough  is  left  in 
each   case    to  show   what    they   were.      Frescoes  remain  in  abundance;,  and  grottoes, 
and  garden    fountains,    and    marble    terraces   for  cascades    of  water.      It   is   a  world 
of  wonders. 


228 


C.     II. 


SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


In  one  part  of  the  city,  a  noble  owner  had  let  the  corner  of  his  house  to  a 
vendor  of  warm  wines,  and  there  is  his  marble  counter,  with  the  holes  therein  for  his 
warming-pots.  Stains  of  wine  were  on  the  counter  when  it  was  first  uncovered. 


THE    HOUSE   OF   SAI.I.UST,    POMPKII. 

We  saw  the  back  parlour  of  a  clrinking-shop,  with  pictures  on  the  wall  of  a 
decidedly  non-teetotal  character.  There  were  several  bakers'  shops  with  hand-mills, 
the  tops  of  which  turned  round  on  a  stone,  and  ground  well,  no  doubt.  In  one, 
we  saw  the  oven,  with  a  water-jar  near  it,— in  this  place  were  found  183  loaves  of 

bread. 

In  the  doctors'  and  chemists'  shops,  when  opened,  they  saw  the  medicines 
as  they  were  when  entombed,  and  even  pills  left  in  the  process  of  rolling  !  In  the 
custom-house  were  standard  weights  and  measures.  Soap  factories  have  their 
evaporating-pans  remaining.  Oil  vessels  abound  ;  and  in  one,  made  of  glass,  some 
of  the  oil  may  still  be  seen.  Cookshops  had  in  them  all  the  stewpans,  gridirons, 
and  other  necessities  of  the  trade.  We  saw  jewellers'  shops,  artists'  studios,  and 
streets  of  grocers'  and  drapers'  shops,  many  with  signs  over  their  doors. 

The  baths  impressed  me  much,  for  they  had  been  newly  built  when  the  awful 
tragedy  took  place,  and  look  as  if  they  were  opened  yesterday  ;— a  fine  cold  plunge- 
bath,  with  water  carried  high  for  a  "shower",  a  dressing-room  with  niches  for 
brushes,  combs,  and  pomades,— all  of  which  were  there,  but  have  been  removed 
to  museums  ;— and  a  great  brazier  in  green  bronze,  with  seats  round  it  for  the 
bathers  to  dry  themselves  ;— a  warm  bath,  and  a  vapour  bath  all  perfect,  and  looking 
ready  for  use  to-morrow. 

The  Forum  was  vast,  and  had  in  it  the  facades  of  several  magnificent  temples, 
the  remains  of  which  reveal  their  former  glory.  The  pedestals  of  the  statues  of 
the  eminent  men  of  the  town  remain  with  their  names  upon  them.  We  saw  the 
tragic  and  comic  theatres,  and  the  amphitheatre  which  held  20,000  persons,  in  which 


c.    H,    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


229 


the  people   were  assembled  when  the  eruption  came,  and  from  which  they  escaped, 
but  had  to  llee  to  the  fields,  and  leave  their  houses  lor  ever. 


THE   AMPHITHEATRE,    POMI'EII. 


In  the  Temple  of  I  sis,  we  saw  the  places  where  the  priests  were  concealed 
when  they  made;  the  goddess  deliver  her  oracles  !  We  saw  the  lady  herself  in  the 
museum,  with  a  pipe  at  the  back  of  her  head,  which  was  fixed  in  the  wall,  and 
served  as  the  secret  speaking-tube.  The  priests  of  I  sis  were  found  dead  at  her 
shrine  ;  one  of  them  with  an  axe  had  cut  through  two  walls  to  o-et  out,  but  had  not 
succeeded.  Poor  creature  ! 


THE    I'HJKUM,    rOMl'LTI. 


In    a   money-changer's   house,     we    saw    his    skeleton,   lying-   on    its    face,    with 
outstretched  arms  and   hands  ;   much  money  was  found  near  him.      In   the  barracks 


*"*  \J 


C.     Jl.     Sl'URGKON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


were  sixty-three  persons,  soldiers'  and  officers'  wives.     Here  were  the  stocks  which 
had  been  used  for  the  punishment  of  refractory  soldiers. 


T11K   STKKICT    01-    MICUCURY,    I'OMl'Etl. 

ln  the  Street  of  Mercury  is  a  triumphal  arch,  on  which  stood  a  sum,  of ^  Nero 
found    earl    perfect.      I  lere,  too,  we  noted  a  drinking-founta  in,  and  a  ho,  se  wit    it 
(,u,ior  richl     ad,,,™,!  with  red  frescoes.      In  a  vast  I  [all  of  J  ustice  vvc.e  cd      u,    u 
the  magistrates'  Lend,  ;  and  in  these,  three  prisoners  were  found,  ins  de 
wllit:h  ;,,lt   round   their    waists.      They    were,   perhaps,   waiting   to  be   bro 
before    the    aldermen    for   so,™    misdemeanour,   and   expecting    to 
shillings  and  costs,"  but  they  perished  like  their  betters,  and  were  summoned  bcio.e 

a  higher  tribunal. 

Out  of  so   great  a  city,    1  suppose  comparatively  few  were  destroy 
the  bodies  of  these  are  found,  they  are  preserved,  especially  if  anything  r 
is  to  be  seen   in  connection  with  them. 

"   We  saw   the  digging  still   going   on,  and  the  mounds  of  removed  rubbish  we, 
like  high  railway  embankments.     No  roofs  remain,  but  spouts  lor  the  ram-wa 

ere  m  grea    abundance  ;  they  are  in   the  form  of  dogs'  and  lions   heads  and  other 
,int  devTes       No  stables  have  yet  been  uncovered  ;  but  the  carts,  which  stood    t 
.    ,  n  (1oors,  have  left  their  iron  tires,  the  skeletons  of  the  horses,  and  the  r  bus,  to 
L.,r  witness  to  their  former  existence.      Skeletons  of  dogs  and  cats  were  the,,,  and 
h   a  pan  was  a  sucking  pig  prepared  and  just  ready  for  roasting  !      1  saw  a  so  a  po 
on    a   tripod,   or   trivet,   which,  when  discovered,  actually  had   water   in   ,t 
ashamed   to   write  so   badly  on  such  a  theme,  but    1    cannot   do   better.      It   is    oo 
vast  a  task  for  me,  and  I  fail  to  recollect  a  tithe  of  it.      I  must  cease  writing  , 
but  1  continue  t.)  breathe  loving  assurances  to  my  sweet  Wiley. 


C.      11.     SPUKGKUX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  23! 

We  have  been  in  a  steamer  to  the  Island  of  Capri,  calling  at  Sorrento  on  the 
way  ;— a  glorious  excursion,  but  we  failed  in  our  great  object,  which  was,  to  see  the 
Blue  Grotto.  The  sea  was  too  rough  to  permit  entrance,  as  the  opening  is  only 
three  feet  high,  and  no  one  can  get  in  except  during  smooth  water,  and  when  the: 
wind  is  from  a  certain  quarter.  However,  we  stayed  a  couple  of  hours  on  the 
island,  which  is  precipitous,  so  I  did  not  climb,  but  sat  on  a  balcony,  enjoying  the 
marvellous  scene.  We  readied  Naples  late,  for  the  boat  was  slow  ;  but  first  the 
sunset,  and  then  the  moonlight,  gave  us  two  charming  effects,  to  which  Vesuvius 
added  by  smoking  almost  continuously.  This  little  trip  served  as  a  pleasant  rest  and 
refreshment  after  the  toil  and  the  dust  of  Pompeii. 

To-day,  we:  have  had  a  long  and  splendid  drive  to  the  other  side  ol  the  bay. 
First  along  the  quay,  then  through  a  tunnel  almost  hall  a  mile  long,  and  then 
skirting  the:  bay,  by  road  to  Puteoli,  where  Paul  landed  ; — we  saw  the  spot  (as  is 
supposed),  and  the  commencement  of  the  Appian  Way  which  he  followed  till  he 
reached  Rome.  At  Puteoli,  we  first  went  into  the  crater  of  the  Solfatara,  a  semi- 
extinct  volcano,  which  has  not  been  in  eruption  since  1198,  when  it  destroyed 
ancient  Puteoli.  It  is  grown  over  with  shrubs  and  small  trees.  A  man  throws  down 
a  big  stone,  which  makes  it  all  sound,  and  shows  you  that  the  whole  vast  area  is 
hollow.  You  are  led  to  a  great  hole  in  the  side  of  the  hill,  whence  pours  out,  with 
the  roar  of  an  engine  blowing  olf  steam,  a  great  quantity  of  sulphureous  vapour. 
All  around  is  brimstone,  and  with  a  long  kind  of  hoe  a  man  rakes  out  bits  from  the 
mouth  of  the  huge  oven.  The  ground  is  very  hot,  and  an  odour,  which  is  anything 
but  dainty,  prevails.  You  can  go  right  up  to  it  with  perfect  ease  and  safety.  The 
vapour  is  said  to  cure  gout,  but  one  must  stand  in  it  some  time  everyday  for  a  month  ! 
When  Vesuvius  is  furious,  Solfatara  subsides,  so  there:  seems  good  evidence  that  the 
two,  though  twelve  miles  apart,  are  vents  ol  the  same  fires.  We  looked  down  on 
the  Temple  of  Serapis  ;  it  has  been  up  and  down,  and  in  and  out  of  the  sea  several 
times,  as  the  restless  coast  has  risen  or  fallen.  It  is  now  out  ot  water,  but  is 
remarkable  rather  for  its  history  than  lor  its  present  beauty. 

We  drove  on  by  the  crater  of  Monte  Barbaro  and  that  of  Monte:  Xuovo.  This 
last  volcano  sprang  up  in  a  night  in  I53S,  covered  a  village,  stopped  a  great  canal, 
and  did  no  end  of  mischief;  but  since  then  it  has  been  quiet,  and  allowed  itself  to 
furnish  soil  enough  for  brushwood,  which  makes  it  look  like  a  green  pyramid.  On 
the  other  side  of  this  hill  is  the  famous  lake  of  Avernus,  of  which  Virgil  wrote,  and 
by  the  side  of  which  he  placeel  the  entrance  to  Hades.  The  dense  woods  which 
smothered  it  have  been  cut  down,  and  it  has  by  no  means  a  repulsive  appearance 
now  ;  but  it  is  a  channel  for  the  escape  of  noxious  gases,  and  is,  no  doubt,  the  crater 
of  a  volcano.  \Ye  did  not  enter  the  Sybil's  Cave,  or  otherwise:  enquire  of  Pluto  and 


232 


ii.    SPURGKON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


I  roserpme  ;  but  drove  on,  through  the  ruined  city  of  Cumae,  to  the  lake  of  Fusaro 
Acheron,  another  circular  basin.       Here  oysters  were  cultivated  till  the  lake  crave 
out  mephitic  vapours,  and  killed  the  bivalves.     The  water  has  become  pure  a'ain 
s  industry  has  recommenced      Passing  by  Virgil's  Elysian  fields,  and  manifold 
wonders,  we  came  to  Misenum,  and  the  village  of  Bacoli.      Here  we  left  the  camao-e 
ascended  the  hill  to  see  what  is  called  the  Piscina  Mirabilis.-a  vast  underground 
^rvoir,  which  once  contained  water  brought  by  the  Julian  aqueduct  from  some  fifty 
It  is  dry  now,  and  we  descended  a  long  flight  of  steps  to  the  bottom 
supported  by  forty-eight  huge  columns  ;   it  is  220  feet  long,  and  8-  feet 
there  are  traces  of  water  having  filled  it  up  to  the  spring  of  the  arches    and 
where   the   water   entered    is    very   plainly  to    be   seen.      There  are  great 
gs  in   the  roof,  down  which  hang  festoons  of  creeping  plants.      The  place" was 
lly,  and  coming  up  forty  steps  out  of  it  seemed  like  leaving  a  sepulchre.     Yet 
vas  a  sight  to  be  remembered   to  one's  dying  day.      We  descended  through   the 
loathsome  village  street,  where  cholera   may  well    rage   in    summer!     We 
Duld   not  explore  villas  of  Julius  Caesar,  prisons  of  Nero,  villa  of  Agrippina    and 
-  places,  for  we  were  tired,  and   I    felt  afraid   of  more  vaults  and  their  horrible 
mps       So  we  went  into   Baice,  and  entered  a  queer  little  osteria,  or  inn,  and  had 
I  poor  would-be  oysters,   bread  and  butter,  and  green  lemons,  freshly  gathered 
The  view  was  glorious  indeed,  nothing  could  excel  it  ;  great  ruined 
temples  and  villas  were  everywhere,  and  made  a  picture  of  exceeding  beauty. 

The  drive  home  was  by  the  sea,  and  we  could  perceive  buildings  clown  at  the 
m,  under  the  clear  blue  water.  These  have  been  brought  down  by  the 
:ssion  of  the  land  upon  which  they  stood,  owing  to  earthquakes.  We 

rossed   a   lava   torrent   which    had   come   from    Monte    Nuova,   and   then  we  went 
on  by  our  former  road  through  Puteoli,  till  we  left  it  to  return  to  Naples  without 

•aversing  the   tunnel.      This  road  took  us   up   on   one  side  of  the  promontory  of 
Posilippo,  whence  we  saw   Ischia,   Puteoli,  Baice,  and   Misenum;   and  then  we  went 
clown   the  other  side,  with   Capri,    Sorrento,  Vesuvius,  and   Naples,  all   in  full  view. 
We  were  quickly  down  among  the  grand  equipages  which  fill  the  Riviera  di  Chiaia  • 
and,   dashing  along  as  fast  as  any  of  them,  we  were  soon  at  the  hotel  door;  and,' 
since  table  d'hote,  I   have  been  writing  this  long  narration  for  you.      The  air  here  is 
balmy,   the  atmosphere  dry,   the  heat  great  in  the  sun,  but  bearable  in  the  shade 
Mosquitoes  are  fewer  and  less  voracious  than  in  Venice.       Everything  is  restorative 
to  the  system,  and  exhilarating.      Even  the  beggars  seem  to  be  happy.      None  are 
miserable  but  the  old  women  and   the  priests.      Organs  are  far  too  plentiful    and 
music  of  all  sorts  is  ad  nauseam.      Of  religion,   I   have  only  seen  one  trace   namely 
the  bowing  down  of  everyone  when  "the  host"  was  being  carried  under  an  umbrella 


C.     11.     Sl'URGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  2T>\ 

\J  \_/ 

to  some  sick  person.  Beggars  swarm,  and  dealers  in  little  wares  assail  you  at  all 
points,  and  will  not  cease  their  importunities.  To-morrow  will  be  the  Sabbath, 
and  in  this  I  rejoice,  for  rest  is  sweet,  and  sweetest  when  made  "holiness  to 
the  Lord."  I  send  tons  of  love  to  you,  hot  as  fresh  lava.  God  bless  you  with 
His  best  blessings  ! 


PANORAMA    OF    NAPLES. 


It  is  the  Sabbath,  quiet  and  restful.  We  have  had  a  delightful  service,  and  I 
have  written  for  my  note-book  and  the  Magazine  ;  so  there  will  be  a  little  less  ior 
my  dear  one,  but  there  is  nothing  new  to  tell.  I  have  been  so  grandly  well  all  this 
time  that  I  do  not  know  how  to  be  grateful  enough,  and  my  heart  is  light  because 
you  are  better  ;  my  soul  is  at  rest,  my  spirit  leaps.  I  am  indeed  a  debtor  to  Him 
who  restoreth  my  soul.  Blessed  be  His  holy  Name  for  ever  and  ever!  We  are 
very  quiet,  lor  there  are  no  other  visitors  in  the  house  ;  we  have  the  best  rooms,  nice 
beds,  well-curtained  from  mosquitoes.  There  is  a  house  between  us  and  the  sea, 
but  we  can  see  the  bay  on  each  side  of  it,  and  Vesuvius  if  we  go  out  on  the  balcony. 
The  climate  is  like  Heaven  below,  and  cannot  but  be  a  medicine  to  the  sick.  I  send 
you  a  photograph  of  a  slave  who  was  found  in  Pompeii  close  behind  his  master,  and 
carrying  a  bag  of  money,  both  of  them  endeavouring  to  escape.  It  is  a  perfect 
model,  covered  with  incrustations. 


234 


C.      II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


I    have    also   sent   the    photograph    of   a   grotto,   or   rather,   ancient    fountain   in 
mosaic,    which    is    in    one    of   the    houses.       They    used    to    put    a   lamp    inside    the 


ANCIK.N  i   KUU.NTAI 


grotesque  heads.      Water  lei!  in  a  little   cascade   down    the   steps.      It  seems   in  odd 
taste,  but  there  are  several  such  in  the  gardens  of  the  buried  villas. 

To-morrow  we  hope  to  be  travelling;  God  be  with  thee,  mine  own,  and  give 
thee  peace  and  healing  !  My  heart  is  everywhere  and  ever  thine. 

Again  in  Rome.  Waking  somewhat  early  this  morning,  I  have  risen  to  write  to 
mine  own  darling  wife.  The  fact  is,  I  am  afraid  there  will  be  a  gap  in  the 
correspondence,  and  I  shall  be  very  sorry  if  it  turns  out  to  be  so.  Just  as  we  left 
Naples,  the  rain  began  to  descend,  the  warmth  was  gone,  and  we  had  a  cool,  if  not 
a  cold  journey  here.  The  fall  in  the  temperature  seemed  to  affect  me,  and  I  had  a 
very  disturbed  and  uncomfortable  night.  I  am,  however,  so  grateful  for  my  long- 
spell  of  rest,  night  by  night,  that  this  does  not  depress  me,  although  I  hoped  that  I 
was  getting  beyond  the  reach  of  such  restless  hours. 

Yesterday  was  wet  every  now  and  then,  but  I  had  to  devote  the  day  to  the 
Magazine,  and  therefore  it  mattered  not.  I  stole  out  to  the  Pantheon,  and  the 
Lateran,  and  then  in  again.  Not  being  in  harness,  I  worked  slowly,  and  the  matter 
came  not  until  the  mind  had  been  much  squeezed.  How  much  more  pleasant  is  the 
outbursting  juice  of  the  grape  when  it  yields  its  streams  to  the  lightest  pressure  of 


C.      11.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


the  vintner's  hand  !  Yet  duty  had  to  be  done,  and  I  did  it;  but  have  more  yd  to  do. 
Ihree  dear  letters  awaited  me  here.  "Not  worth  sixpence,"  did  you  say?  They 
are  worth  a  mint  to  me  ;  they  are  mosaics  of  which  every  little  bit  is  a  gem.  Naples 
has  been  a  great  treat  ;  how  I  wish  you  could  have  been  there,  but  I  should  not  like 
you  to  see  how  horses  are  treated,  it  would  make  you  quite  unhappy.  The 
Neapolitans  load  up  their  carriages  most  cruelly.  I  never  saw  so  many  horses, 
mules,  and  donkeys  in  my  life  before  in  proportion  to  the  people.  Everybody  drives 
or  rides,  and  they  are  all  in  a  great  hurry,  too.  Now,  my  wiiey,  this  brings  great 
galleons  of  love  to  you,  and  a  cargo  of  kisses  lies  under  the  hatches.  Just  pull  them 
up,  and  let  the  creatures  lly  in  the  air  ;  innumerable  they  will  be  as  the  clouds  of 
doves  which  llew  over  the  olive  gardens  oi  Judaja  in  the  olden  time,  and  every  one 
has  its  own  tender  voice.  God  give  thee  still  thy  daily  patience  while  lie  sees  lit 
to  send  thee  pain  ;  but,  oh  !  ma}-  He  remove  the  aflliction,  and  send  healing  to  thee, 
and  brighter  days  to  us  both  !  Nevertheless,  His  will  be  done! 

Florence.  —  By  an  unfortunate  mistake  as  to  train,  we  were  prevented  from 
leaving  Rome  early  this  morning,  so  we  have  done  a  little  more  sight-seeing.  One 
oi  our  party  is  of  the  Mark  Tapley  school,  and  always  persuades  us  that  any  hitch 
in  our  plans  is  a  capital  thing,  and  could  not  have  happened  better.  \Ve  went  off  to 
Santa  Maria  Maggiore,  and  there  saw  the  various  chapels,  and  precious  stones,  and 
rare  marbles,  and  bronzes,  etc.,  etc.  The  old  verger  was  so  eloquent  in  Italian  that 
I  made  out  nearly  all  he  said.  Then  we  went  to  the  Borghese  Palace,  and  saw  long- 
rooms  of  pictures,  mostly  saints  and  virgins.  In  these  rooms  were  two  sweet  little 
fountains  of  water,  and  glasses  for  the  visitors  to  drink  from.  This  is  a  private 
palace,  but  the  public  are  always  welcome.  Then  we  found  our  way  to  the  Jesuits' 
Church,  where  there  was  uncovered  a  silver  statue  of  Loyola,  of  priceless  value  for 
the  gems  set  in  it,  and  the  masses  of  ta/>is  lazuli.  Afterwards,  we  sat  on  the 
Pincian  till  the  rain  came,  and  it  has  poured  down  ever  since,  making  our  journey  to 
this  place  a  more  weary  one  than  usual.  Everything  is  shrouded  in  mist,  mildewed 
and  funereal,  except  the  young  waterfalls,  which  leap  like  lions'  whelps  from  Bashan, 
and  laugh,  and  iling  themselves  about  in  their  glee. 

Genoa. — We  left  Florence  on  Friday,  and  the  day  was  fine,  so  that  we  greatly 
enjoyed  the  journey  over  the  mountains  to  Bologna.  Then  it  is  a  dull  road  to 
Alessandria,  which  we  reached  about  six  o'clock.  Thence  to  Genoa  should  take  two 
hours  and  a-half;  but,  in  ascending  the  Maritime  Alps,  there  was  snow,  and  the 
engine  crawled  along,  and  at  last  stopped  altogether.  Think  of  it,— going  up  hill, 
and  stopping!  The  steam  was  put  on,  and  the  wheels  revolved,  sending  out  a 
shower  of  sparks,  but  the  train  did  not  stir.  Then  came  men  with  spades  to  clear 


236  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

away  some  snow,  and  after  a  while  the  carriages  moved,  we  gained  the  top  of  the 
hill,  and  ran  down  all  right,  getting  into  Genoa  about  10  p.m.  A  Ion"",  tiresome  day. 

O  '     O  O  1  O  '  * 

Here,  where  we  were  so  comfortable  last  year,  we  were  marched  up  four  sets  of 
stairs,  and  then  shown  into  rooms  which  had  a  most  offensive  smell.  The  house 
was  full,  the  waiter  said,  and  they  could  give  us  no  other  rooms.  We  replied,  "Very 
well,  then,  we  will  go  somewhere  else  ;  "  and  when  we  had  carried  all  our  luggage 
to  the  door,  apartments  were  found  for  us  on  the  first  floor  ! 

This  morning,  expecting  to  leave  for  Mentone  at  twelve  o'clock,  we  hear  that 
the  line  is  broken  in  four  places,  and  no  train  goes  except  at  eight  a.m.,  so  we  are 
here  till  Monday.  It  rains,  and  has  rained  all  night  in  torrents.  We  must  wait,  and 
then  O-Q  on  in  oreat  uncertainty  and  sure  discomfort.  Never  mind  !  it  will  serve  me 

O  O  J 

for  illustration,  no  doubt.  Dr.  Jobson,  a  Wesleyan  minister,  has  had  an  hour's 
happy  chat  with  me,  and  very  much  interested  me.  He  is  a  holy,  liberal-hearted 
soul,  and  we  enjoy  a  conversation  together,  so  it  is  not  all  clulness.  It  is  beginning 
to  clear  up  while  I  am  writing,  so  perhaps  we  may  get  a  walk.  I  have  had  restful 
nights  this  week,  and  am  still  really  much  better,  but  the  damp  and  cold  try  me  a 
irood  deal. 

o 

Sabbath. — This  day,  which  we  have  been  forced  to  spend  here,  has  not  been  an 
unhappy  one,  but  a  sweet  day,  most  calm  and  bright.  The  rain  cleared  off  yesterday 
about  lour  o'clock,  enabling  us  to  wander  through  the  narrow  streets  of  Genoa  la 
Superba,  and  to  enter  several  of  the  churches.  My  indignation  was  stirred  beyond 
measure  when,  upon  looking  into  the  confessional  boxes,  I  read  the  directions  to  the 
priest  as  to  the  questions  he  should  ask  the  penitents.  These  were  printed  in  Latin, 
and  referred  to  those  unmentionable  crimes  which  brought  fire  upon  Sodom,  and  are 
the  curse  of  heathendom.  To  see  young  maidens  kneel  clown  to  be  asked  such 
questions  as  these,  made  me  wish  that  every  priest  could  be  cut  off  from  the  face  of 
the  earth  as  unfit  to  live,  and  I  most  deliberately  invoked  upon  them  all  the 
righteous  vengeance  of  an  insulted  God  !  Since  I  came  away,  my  more  sober 
reflections  fully  endorse  my  indignant  wrath.  How  can  the  Lord  endure  all  this  ? 
Truly,  His  patience  is  great. 

To-day  we  had  our  breaking  of  bread,  and  Dr.  Jobson  and  his  wife  joined  us. 
The  good  old  man  spoke  most  sweetly,  and  prayed  for  you  with  great  pathos,  and 
much  faith  that  the  Lord  would  yet  heal  you.  He  shamed  me  by  his  faith,  and  I 
blessed  him  for  his  tender  affection.  The  Lord  was  with  us,  and  the  season  will  be 
memorable  to  us  all.  Then  I  revised  a  sermon,  which  is  not  quite  finished  yet ;  but 
the  table  d'hote  bell  is  ringing,  so  I  must  needs  pause  a  while,  and  allow  the  body  to 
feed  in  its  turn.  To-day  is  fine  and  bright,  and  has  been  warm  in  the  sun.  We  have 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOTUOGRAPITY.  237 

large  leads  to  walk  on,  and  I  have  had  a  little  turn  there  while  the  others  have 
gone  up  on  the  heights  for  a  walk.  To-morrow,  I  hope,  will  be  equally  clear,  and 
then  we  shall  not  mind  the  getting  out  and  in  where  the  railway  is  broken. 

Table  d'hote  is  now  over,  and  I  have  had  the  old  Doctor  in  for  a  talk,  though  I 
wanted  to  be  alone,  and  go  on  with  my  sermon  and  letters.  However,  the  good  soul 
is  gone  now,  and  I  can  get  to  my  dear  work  of  communing  with  my  darling  by  the 
pen.  Every  memory  of  you  is  full  of  joy,  except  your  illness;  and  that  makes  me 
love  you  all  the  more,  by  adding  sympathy.  I  am  afraid  I  am  still  a  rough,  forgetful 
being,  so  apt  to  get  absorbed  in  my  work,  and  to  think  too  little  of  you  ;  but  this  is 
not  in  my  heart,  but  is  in  my  nature  ;  and  I  suppose,  if  it  were  not  there,  I  could  not 
do  my  work  so  successfully.  You  know  and  love  me  too  well  to  judge  as  others 
would.  We  have  to  be  off  early  in  the  morning,  so  I  must  close  this  note. 

Mentone. — We  came  here  yesterday  from  Genoa,  and  a  very  interesting  journey 
it  was.  We  left  Genoa  at  eight  o'clock,  and  went  on  all  right  till  ten,  when  we  all 
had  to  get  out,  for  the  road  was  destroyed.  We  walked  down  a  lane,  then  over  a 
bridge,  then  down  on  the  other  side,  and  up  the  embankment,  and  got  into  another 
train.  In  this  case,  the  bridge  of  the  railway  was  broken  by  a  torrent,  and  a  break 
indeed  it  was.  In  due  time,  we  went  on  ;  but,  in  an  hour  or  so,  came  to  a  dead  halt, 
and  had  to  get  out  again.  This  time  the  walk  was  long,  and  the  way  went  through 
a  vineyard,  and  up  a  steep  bank.  Crowds  of  men  and  boys  clamoured  lor  our 
luggage,  and  followed  us  all  the  half-mile  we  had  to  trudge.  We  had  to  wait  forty 
minutes  till  another  train  came ;  and  then,  when  we  scrambled  in,  they  quietly 
shoved  us  out  of  the  way,  and  made  us  sit  still  for  forty  minutes  more.  We  went 
on  a  little,  only  to  stop  again  ;  and,  at  last,  at  Porto  Mauri/io,  we  had  the  carriages 
pushed  by  men  over  a  dangerous  place,  and  then  hooked  on  to  another  train. 
However,  we  reached  Ventimiglia  safely  at  about  seven  o'clock,  and  then  had  an 
hour  to  wait  to  have  dinner.  We  left  there  at  8  p.m.,  and  arrived  here  at  7.20  p.m., 
this  last  being  the  greatest  feat  I  ever  performed!  To  travel  for  twenty  minutes, 
and  then  to  find  the  clock  forty  minutes  behind  the  time  at  which  you  started,  is  a 
gain  not  to  be  despised  ; — the  explanation  is  that  Roman  time  is  used  at  Ventimiglia, 
and  Paris  time  at  Mentone.  The  day  was  fine,  and  though  the  way  was  long,  the 
adventures  made  the  hours  pass  away  merrily,  and  our  Mark  Tapley  friend  was 
quite  in  his  element.  We  are  at  a  most  comfortable  hotel,  and  everyone  tries  to 
please  us.  The  landlord  knew  me  at  once,  and  shook  hands  heartily,  saying,  "  How 
do  you  do,  reverend  ?  I  am  very  glad  to  see  you  !  " 

To-day,  while  I  was  lying  on  the  beach,  and  Mark  Tapley  was  slyly  filling  our 
pockets  with  stones,  and  rolling  Mr.  Passmore  over,  who  should  walk  up  but 


238  c.    ir.    SI-URGKON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Mr.  McLaren,  of  Manchester,  with  whom  I  had  a  long  and  pleasant  chat.  We  are 
to  go  to  Monaco  to-morrow  together.  He  has  three  months'  holiday.  I  am  glad  I 
have  not  ;  hut  I  should  wish  I  had,  if  I  had  my  dear  wife  with  me  to  enjoy  it. 
Poor  little  soul  !  she  must  suffer  while  I  ramble.  Two  clergymen  have  had  a  long 
talk  with  me  this  evening.  It  began  by  one  saying  aloud  to  the  other,  "I  hear 
Mr.  Spurgeon  has  been  here."  This  caused  a  titter  round  the  table,  for  I  was 
sitting  opposite  to  him.  Mentone  is  charming,  but  not  very  warm.  It  is  as  I 
like  it,  and  is  calculated  to  make  a  sick  man  leap  with  health.  I  low  I  wish  you 
could  be  here  ! 

We  have;  had  another  day  here  of  the  sweetest  rest.  We  drove;  to  Monaco  and 
back,  and  saw  to  perfection  the  little  rocky  Principality.  Its  lovely  gardens  and 
promenades  are  kept  up  by  the  profits  of  the  gaming-tables,  which  are  in  a  far  more 
sumptuous  palace  than  those  at  Baden-Baden,  which  we  saw  together  years  ago. 
We  had  Mr.  McLaren  with  us,  and  went  in  and  watched  the  players.  One  gentle 
man  monopolized  our  attention  ;  he  was  a  line-looking  Englishman,  like  an  officer. 
1  le  lost  a  pile  of  money,  and  went  out  apparently  most  wretched  and  excited.  Soon, 
he  came  in  again,  and  changed  bills  for  3,000  francs,  and  began  playing  heavily. 
1  fe  won,  and  got  back  his  bills  ;  and  when  we  left,  we  saw  him  come  out  ;  I  could 
only  hope  that  God  had  delivered  him,  and  that  he  would  be  wise,  and  never  go  to 
the  table!  again.  It  is  a  vortex  which  sucks  in  a  vast  number  of  victims  day  by  day. 
What  moths  men  are  if  the  candle  be  but  bright  enough  ! 

The  two  parsons  here  are  1  ligh  Church  and  Low  Church,  and  I  have  had  a  talk 
with  both.  Just  before  dinner,  who  should  go  by  but  the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  with 
whom  I  had  half-an-hour's  converse.  He  was  very  low  in  spirit,  and  talked  as  if  all 
things  in  the  world  were  going  wrong  ;  but.  I  reminded  him  that  our  God  was  yet 
alive,  and  that  dark  days  were  only  the  signs  of  better  times  coming.  He  is  a  real 
nobleman,  and  man  of  God.  Everybody  in  the  hotel  is  courteous  and  kind,  and  I 
have  quite  a  circle  of  acquaintances  already.  I  have  enjoyed  the  rest  very  much  ; 
but  young  married  couples  remind  me  of  our  early  days,  and  the  cloud  which 
covers  us  now.  Still,  He  who  sent  both  sun  and  shade  is  our  ever-tender  Father, 
and  knows  best;  and  if  it  be  good  for  us,  He.  can  restore  all  that  He  has  with 
drawn,  and  more;  and  if  not,  lie  designs  our  vet  <>Teater  i/ood.  There  is  nothin<>- 

O  J  *>  *>  £} 

more  to  write,  except  the  ever  true  and  never  tiresome  message, — my  perfect  love 
be  with  thee,  and  the  Lord's  love  be  over  thee  for  ever  !  In  a  few  more  days  I 
shall  see  thee,  and  it  will  be  a  fairer  sight  than  any  my  eyes  have  rested  on  during 
my  absence. 

Yesterday,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  M tiller  went  with   me  to    Dr.  Bennet's  garden,  and    I 


c.    ii.    SPUKGEON'S    Airror-ioGRAriiv.  239 

had  a  most  profitable  conversation  with  him,  one  to  be  remembered  for  many  a  day 
with  delight.  Dr.  Bennet  came  up,  and  I  was  amused  to  hear  Miiller  teaching  him 
the  power  of  prayer,  and  recommending  him  to  pray  about  one  of  the  terraces  which 
he  wants  to  buy,  but  the  owner  asks  a  hundred  times  its  value.  Dr.  B.  thought  it 
too  trilling  a  matter  to  take  to  the  Lord  ;  he  said  that  Air.  Miiller  might  very 
properly  pray  about  the  Orphanage,  but  as  to  this  terrace,  to  complete  his  garden, - 
he  thought  he  could  not  make  out  a  good  case  about  it.  Mr.  M.  said  it  encouraged 
people  in  sin  if  we  yielded  to  covetous  demands,  so  he  thought  the  Dr.  might  pray 
that  the  owners  should  be;  kept  from  exorbitant  claims  ;  but  Dr.  B.  said  that,  as 
ignorant  peasants,  they  were  very  excusable  for  trying  either  to  keep  their  land,  or 
to  get  all  they  could  from  an  Englishman  whom  they  imagined  to  be  a  living  gold 
mine  !  The  spirit  of  both  was  good  ;  but,  of  course,  the  simple,  child-like  holy 
trust  of  Miiller  was  overpowering.  lie  is  not  a  sanctimonious  person;  but  full  of 
real  joy,  and  sweet  peace,  and  innocent  pleasure. 

Nice. — In  this  place  we  have  been  put  up  four  flights  of  stairs,  and,  alas  !  into 
very  cold  rooms.  I  woke  in  the  night,  and  ielt  as  it  I  were  freezing  in  a  vault,  and 
my  ankles  were  in  great  pain.  I  was  much  cast  down  ;  and,  on  getting  out  of  bed, 
found  the  carpet  and  floor  both  very  damp.  I  had  a  very  bad  night,  and  am  now 
in  much,  pain  in  the  leit  foot.  Yet  I  believe  I  shall  get  over  it  soon,  and  I  mean  to 
have  no  more  of  these  climbings  up  stairs,  and  sleeping  in  horrid  cells.  Nice  is  a 
very  grand  place,  and  I  am  sorry  we.  left  Mentone  to  come  to  it.  But  I  must  not 
write  in  a  grumbling  vein.  Mere  have  I  had  nearly  five  weeks  of  good  health,  and 
have  grown  stronger  every  day  ;  why  should  I  care  for  one  little  relapse  ?  \Ye  will 
be  off  to  Cannes  and  Hyeres,  and  sec:  what  God  has  in  store  for  us.  He  will  deal 
graciously  with  me  as  He  has  ever  done. 

Cannes. — I  was  too  ill  yesterday  to  write.  After  the  deadly  chill  of  Thursday 
night  at  Nice,  I  felt  the  gout  coming  on,  but  resolved  to  escape  from  that  inhos 
pitable  hotel.  An  hour  brought  us  here,  but  it  rained  mercilessly,  and  all  around 
was  damp  and  chill.  I  got  upstairs  into  beautiful  rooms,  but  had  to  go  to  bed,  which 
I  have  only  left  for  a  moment  or  two  since,  while:  it  was  being  arranged.  My  left  foot 
is  badly  swollen,  and  the  knee-joint  is  following  suit.  I  have  had  very  little  sleep, 
and  am  very  low  ;  but,  oh,  the  kindness  of  these  friends  !  They  sit  up  with  me  all 
night  by  turns,  and  cheer  me  with  promises.  I  hope  I  shall  get  home  in  time  for 
Sunday,  but  have  some  fears  of  it.  Do  not  fret  about  me,  I  may  be  well  before  this 
reaches  you  ;  and  if  I  am,  I  will  telegraph  and  say  so.  I  have  every  comfort  here 
but  home,  and  my  dear  wifey's  sweet  words.  I  am  sad  that  my  journey  should  end 
so,  but  the  Lord's  will  be:  done  ! 


24°  c.    H.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Two  days  later.--!  have-  had  a  heavy  time  of  pain,  my  dearest,  but  am  now 
better  God  has  changed  the  weather  ;— yesterday  was  warm,  to-day  is  hot,  so  we 
think  it  best  to  hurry  on,  and,  if  possible,  have  a  conpt-lit  right  through  to  Paris.  I 
feel  well  in  myself,  but  the  knee  will  not  bear  me,  though  I  think  I  should  be  as 
strong  as  a  horse  after  a  day  or  two  of  this  weather.  How  much  I  have  to  thank 
the  Lord  for!  Such  kind  friends  !  They  have  proved  their  love  beyond  all  praise-. 
I  was  never  alone.  Even  the  femmc  dc  chambre  pitied  '*  pauvr-:  monsieur,"  and  did 
her  best  for  me.  I  hope  now  to  get  home  in  time-  for  Sunday.  My  soul  loves  you, 
and  longs  to  see  you. 

Paris.— In    the    hope    that    one    more    letter    may    reach    you    before    I    come 
personally,    I    give   myself  the  delight  of  writing  it.       The   telegram   will   have  told 
you   that,  at   the  very  prudent  advice  of  the  doctor,  I  left  Cannes  at  3.15  on  Tuesday 
in  a  coupt-lit  to  travel  direct  to  Paris.      It  has  proved  a  very  wise  step.      A  lady  lent 
her   Bath-chair  to   take  me   to   the  station,   and  porters  lifted  me  into  the  carriage;. 
There  I  had  a  nice  sofa-bed  and  every  convenience.      I  lay  there  with  great  comfort 
till    we  reached    Marseilles;    then   came  the  night,  and  I  had  hoped  to  sleep,  but  the 
extreme  oscillation   of   the  train   quite    prevented    that.      Once  only   I   dozed  for  a 
few  minutes,  yet   I  was  kept  restful  till  six  o'clock,  when  my  dear  friends  got  me 
some  warm  soup,  and  I  had  a  refreshing  wash.      Then,   all  day  long,  I  was  at*  peace 
till  6  p.m.      From    Lyons,  the  country  is  Hooded  all  along  the  road  ;  we  seemed  to 
ride  through  a  vast  river.      I  naturally  felt  the  chill  of  this,  and  my  knees  complained. 
Near  Paris  it  rained  hard,  and  at  Paris  heavily.     After  much   stress  and   difficulty,  I 
was  put  into  a  cab,  and  we  drove  to  this  hotel.     I  went  to  bed  immediately,  and  slept 
on,  on,  on,  till  eight  o'clock  the-  next  morning,  awaking  then  refreshed,  and,  happily, 
none  the  worse  for  the  long  journey.      I   meant  to  stay  in  bed  all  day,  and  sent  my 
friends  out,  so  that  I  might  not  always  be  a  drag  upon  them  ;  but,  at  about  noon,  I 
rose  and  dressed,  and  when  they  came  in,  I  had  flown, — to  a  sitting-room  and  a  sofa 
by  a  cosy  fire  !      I  can  walk  now  a  little,  and  hope  to  be  all  right  for  Sunday.      Bless 
the  Lord,  O  my  soul  ;  and  may  He  bless  thee,  too,  my  dear  heart  of  love!     I   hope 
to  have  a  couptf,  and  to-morrow  lie  clown  again  while  travelling,  and  so  home  to  my 
tender  wifey.      Who  could  hope  to  escape  rheumatic  pains  when  all  the  world  is  wet 
through  to  the  centre  ?     It  must  not  grieve  you  that   I   suffer,  but  you  must  rejoice 
that  I  escaped  so  long.     Why,  even  rocks  might  feel  this  marvellous,  long-continued 
wetting  !      I  am  indeed  grateful  to  God  for  His  goodness  ;  still,  "  there's   no  place 
like  home.'      This  brings  great  loads  of  love  all  flaming.      God  bless  thce  ever  ! 
Carnage  at  Victoria  at  5.45,  Friday  ! 


THE     POPES     COACHMAN. 


.OF. 

ILLUSTRATIONS 
SENT     HOME     FROM 
.-'.<.  ROME 

BY  .  . 

MR.     SPURGEON 


i  Sec  /  ' 


A      FUNERAL     ATTENDANT 


FUNERAL      IN      ROME. 


CHAPTER    LXXV. 


fHutual  Io6t  brtfocm  pastor  anb  jjtoplr. 

nci  set  (lt'::'  'f  the  preachers  of  the  past  age  thought  themselves  to  be!    I  trust 

•      II  gone  to   Heaven,  but  a  lew  linger  am.  ng   us  who  use 
The  proud  divines  never  shook  hands  with  anybody,  except,  indeed,  with 
t  of  e\          'A- superior  persons.     Amongst  Dissenters  it  was  almost  as  bad 
:<-'  >""»  te  -  in,  by  his  is  always 

-"'  ,vwho   1   am.  sir;  I  am  the  rector  of  the  parish.       Xow,  all  that  kind  of  stuck- 

:          '  lat  way;    and  no  benefit  at  all  comes  of 
'ou"s-     1  otten  regret  that  I  have  so  large  a  congregation.     Perhaps  you 
w'  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  there  were 

i,  yet  I  did  get  ..  i  every  member  sometimes  ;  but  now  there  are 

:   '  I  mei  .and  I  seldom  have 

.   it   mud;  more  frequently,     h   there  is  anybody  in 
-    t(l  proir.  .etorel  want   to  be  at  h.ome  \vith  you 

:   a  great  d  set  myself  up  above  von  all.  and  by  proud 

e  Lord  wi  y  take  me  down,  and  make  me 

C.  II.  S.,  ill  .         :  :  .':-.   M.iy    ;.    i>-  s. 

the  pe  •    e  Lord's-day  or  on  a  week-night ;  I  often  say  that,  as  1 

-  l"  '•  "    i  tell  the  i  s  of  mv  .  m,   for  they  have  a  way  of 

:nt   from  those  who  are  g<  ing  to  some  places  of  worship  that   1 

f  were  going  to  an  execution.     They 

;  were  ai  .  serve  God,  as  bad  as  going  to  ]         n  to  attend  a  service, 

ry  -  '  stan  :   up  and  Mess  the   Lord.     Put   I   notice  that  you  come  here 

.      :  were  pleased  ..:  d  as  if  you  came  to  enjoy  yourselves, 

•  '•  ;  Ci   d  would  iKive  you  worship  Him,  in  the  spirit  of  freedom,  and  not 

ry.     1'   es  He  want  slaves  to  grace  11  .       free  men.  should  be 

i    '  God  will  rule  over  s]  irits  that  love   1 1. m.  that  delight  in  Him,  that  are 

('.U.S., 


••  ot   my  old  members.      I  went  to  comfort  her.  for  I  heard  that 

t,  instead  of  doing  so,  she  set  about  comforting  me,  and   I   came  away  rejoicing.     Slu- 
'•!v     '    11   Past.  :-.  I  shall   :  ever  be  able  to  tell  to  any  soul  what    I 

VVL'  to  >'  "  V  ••'  d  :'     itively."    1  said.  "Now,  my  dear  sister,  do  not  talk  about  that."    She 

er  Pastor,  Joseph  Irons,  once  preached  a  sermon  upon  the  words, ' Thou, 
have  a  thousand,  and  .;  keep  the  fruit  thereof  two  hundred,'  and  that  dear 

i'd,  'Giv.    S  s  thousand;  t!:. a  is.  render  to  the  Lord  all  the  glory  that  is  due  unto 

sters.  who    ire  the  keepers  ol  the  v     eyard,  have  their  two  hundred  ; 

vc  them  a!1  '•-<•  encouragement  you  can.'      Xow,"  said  she,  "that  sermon  did  me  great  good, 
r  ministers,   by   telling   them  what  God  had   done   lor    me    through    their 

ling;  1  teared  that   1  might  make  them  proud;  but,  from  that  sermon,  I  learned  that  it  was  God's 
|    them  humble,  and  my  business  to  encourage  them  all  I  could."     I  bless  the  Lord  that. 
vhile   I    have  had  many  who  have  tried  to  discourage  me.  I  have  always  had  many  more  who  have  been 
ready  ai    1  pleasi   1  to  give  me  words  of  encom  ind  cheer.-    ('.U.S. 

pa-vs  17,  156,  and  176,  mention  has  been  made  ot  the  attack  of 
small-pox  from  which  Mr.  Spur-con  suflered  in  November,  1869. 
On  the  9th  of  that  month,  he  went,  tor  the  first  and  only  time,  to  the 
Lord  Mayor's  banquet,  and  immediately  afterwards  he  was  attacked 
by  that  trying  complaint,  though  happily  not  in  its  worst  form. 
In  later  years,  whenever  he  was  invited  to  the  ijreat  City  feast,  he 
"•lys  playfully  replied  that  he  had  only  once:  been  in  such  hi<di  society,  and  then 


242  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

he  had  caught  tin-,  small-pox,  so  he  had  determined  never  again  to  form  one  of  that 
company.  When  his  very  special  friend,  Sir  William  McArthur,  became  London's 
chief  magistrate,  he  tried  hard  to  induce  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  join  the  festive  throng-, 
but  his  pleading  was  all  in  vain  ;  and,  a  few  months  afterwards,  when  the  Lord 
Mayor  took  the  chair  at  the  annual  supper  in  connection  with  the  Pastors'  College 
Conference,  the  President  humorously  repeated  the  story  of  the  banquet  of  1869,  to 
the  great  delight  both  of  the  assembled  guests  and  the  genial  chairman. 

During  the  Pastor's  illness,  his  church-officers  sent  the  following  letter  to 
cheer  him  ;  the  manuscript  shows  that  it  was  composed  by  Llder  W.  Dransfiekl, 
concerning  whom  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote,  when  he  was  "called  home,"  in  1872,  "he 
was  one  of  the  holiest  and  happiest  Christians  it  was  ever  our  privilege  to  know  :  "- 

"  Metropolitan  Tabernacle, 

"  Nov.  2 2nd,  1869. 

"Beloved  Pastor, 

"With  more  than  usual  pleasure,  by  desire  of  the  elders  and  deacons,  I 
sit  down  to  write  you  a  few  lines,  in  concurrence  with  which,  I  have  no  doubt,  they 
will  cordially  sign  their  names.  When  we  first  heard  the  serious  nature  of  your 
affliction,  and  especially  when  we  considered  clear  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  very  delicate  state 
of  health,  a  deep  gloom  seemed  to  fall  upon  our  spirits,  and  we  did  indeed  very 
sincerely  sympathize  with  you  both  under  the  heavy  trial.  But  when  we  were  told 
that  the  attack  was  not  of  a  virulent  nature,  and  that  the  Lord  was  dealing  very 
gently  with  you,  the  gloom  was  dispersed,  the  heavy  load  was  removed  from  our 
minds,  and  gave  place  to  a  holy  confidence  that  God,  being  very  merciful,  would 
restore  you  to  us  again  with  renewed  health  and  vigour. 

"  Beloved  Pastor,  the  very  striking  providences  which  have  taken  place,  in 
connection  with  the  Orphanage  (see  page  176),  within  the  last  few  days,  have  made 
a  deep  impression  upon  our  minds,  and  have  afforded  us  a  double  pleasure,  knowing 
the  cheering  and  exhilarating  influence  they  will  have  upon  your  spirits  in  your 
sick-room.  Truly  may  you  say,  with  the  psalmist,  '  I  will  praise  Thee  for  ever, 
because  Thou  hast  done  it.' 

"And  now  for  the  College,  which  is  so  clear  to  you,  be  assured  that  we  will 
rally  round  it,  and  support  it  by  our  prayers,  by  our  influence,  and  with  all  the  help 
that  is  in  our  power.  May  the  Divine  blessing  continue  to  rest  upon  its  President, 
its  tutors,  and  the  dear  young  men  who  are  training  in  it  for  the  Christian  ministry  ! 

"Our  Co-pastor,  your  beloved  brother,  is  labouring  among  us,  during  your 
absence,  with  indefatigable  zeal  and  increasing-  success.  He  is  daily  growing  in  our 
affection  and  esteem  ;  and  we  bless  God  for  providing  you  with  such  a  faithful 
coadjutor  in  the  work  lie  has  given  you  to  do.  You  will  be  pleased  to  hear  that  all 


c.    11.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOHIOGKAI'IIY.  243 

the  services  at  the  Tabernacle  continue  to  be  well  attended,  that  our  'supplies'  lor 
the  last  two  Sabbaths  were  very  acceptable  and  profitable,  that  the  spirit  of  pniyer 
is  in  no  way  diminished,  but  is  in  as  full  efficiency  as  ever,  and  that  God  is  in  the 
midst  of  us  indeed  and  of  a  truth.  If  the  laving  aside  of  Pastors,  for  a  time,  be 

j  «_> 

sent  to  test  their  people's  love,  then  we  are  sure  there  never  was  a  period  in  your 
ministry  when  you  were  more  cordially  and  universally  loved  than  you  are  at  the 
present  moment. 

"And  now,  beloved  Pastor,  we  leave  you,  with  many  prayers,  in  the  hands  ol 
your  Father  and  our  Father.  May  lie  have  you  in  His  safe  keeping,  preserve  you 
from  lowness  and  depression  of  spirits,  cheer  you  with  the  light  of  His  countenance, 
strengthen  and  sustain  you  by  His  gracious  Spirit,  and,  in  His  own  good  time,  bring 
you  again  to  your  beloved  Tabernacle  'in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  <>X)spel 

e5  <~5  L 

of  Christ.'      This  is  our  fervent  prayer." 

(Signed  by  the  deacon:,  and  elders.) 

In  the  year  iS;r,  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  a  long  and  painful  illness,  the  course  of 
which  can  be,  traced  in  the  following  letters  to  the  congregation  at  the  Tabernacle  :  — 

"  Clapham. 
"  I  )ear  I"  riends, 

I  he  furnace  still  glows  around  me.  Since  I  last  preached  to  you,  I 
have  been  brought  very  low  ;  my  llesh  has  been  tortured  with  pain,  and  my  spirit 
has  been  prostrate  with  depression.  Yet,  in  all  this,  I  see  and  submit  to  my 
Father's  hand;  yea,  more,  I  bless  Him  that  His  paternal  love  has  been  more  than 
ever  clear  to  me.  With  some  difficulty,  I  write  these  lines  in  my  bed,  min<ding 
them  with  the  groans  of  pain  and  the  songs  of  hope. 

'  The  peace  ot  God  be  with  every  one  of  you,  my  beloved  !  My  love  in  Christ 
Jesus  be  with  you  all!  I  rejoice  that  my  very  dear  friend,  Mr.  Hugh  Stowell 
Brown,  is  with  you  to-day.  May  his  words  be  marrow  and  fatness  to  your  souls  ! 

"  It  must,  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  be  long  before  you  see  me 
again,  for  the  highest  medical  authorities  are  agreed  that  only  long  rest  can  restore 
me.  I  wish  it  were  otherwise.  My  heart  is  in  my  work,  and  with  you  ;  but  God's  will 
must  be  done.  When  I  am  able  to  move,  1  must  go  away.  I  try  to  cast  all  my  cares 
on  God  ;  but,  sometimes,  I  fear  that  you  may  get  scattered.  O  my  clear  brethren, 
do  not  wander,  tor  this  would  break  my  heart  !  I  might  also  feel  deep  anxiety  for 
my  great  works,  but  I  am  sure  my  Lord  will  carry  them  on.  It  is,  however,  my 
duty  to  tell  you  what  you  can  do,  and  what  is  needed.  The  Orphanage  funds  are 
lower  just  now  than  they  have  been  these  two  years.  God  will  provide,  but  you 
know  that  you  are  His  stewards. 


2_|4  c-      1L     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRATIIY. 

"You  do  pray  for  me,  I  know  ;  but  I  entreat  you  not  to  cease  your  supplications. 
I  am  as  a  potter's  vessel  when  it  is  utterly  broken,  useless,  and  laid  aside.  Nights 
of  watching,  and  days  of  weeping  have  been  mine,  but  I  hope  the  cloud  is  passing. 
Alas  !  I  can  only  say  this  for  my  own  personal  and  light  affliction  ;  there  is  one  who 
lies  nearest  my  heart  whose  sorrows  are  not  relieved  by  such  a  hope.  In  this 
relative  trial,  a  very  keen  one,  I  again  ask  your  prayers.  The  Lord  be  with  you 
evermore  !  Amen.  So  prays,— 

"  Your  suffering  Pastor, 

"C.  II.  S." 

"  May  1 3th,  1871. 

"  Dear  Friends, 

"  Yesterday  finished  a  long  six  weeks  of  pain  and  weakness.  1  made 
a  desperate  push  for  the  sea-side,  and  reached  it  ;  but  I  am  in  great  doubt  whether 
I  shall  not  be  obliged  to  go  home  again,  for  I  am  so  very  weak.  Please  pray  for 
me,  that  the  Lord  would  restore  to  me  my  strength. 

"  I  beg  to  thank  the  Lord,  in  your  assembly,  for  graciously  permitting  me 
to  live,  and  for  giving  me  some  hope  that  I  shall  yet  again  be:  among  you  in  vigour. 
It  must  be  long  first  ;  but  you  will  have  much  patience,  and  your  loving  prayers  will 
greatly  help  me  to  mend. 

"  Dear  friends,  be  sure  to  carry  on  every  part  of  the  Lord's  work  with 
earnestness.  If  there  has  ever  been  any  neglect,  let  there  be  none  now  ;  but  all 
of  you  combine  to  make  up  for  the  lack  of  my  service.  Let  the  prayer-meetings  be 
better  attended  than  ever,  and  may  the  petitions  be  still  more  intense  !  May  God 
bless  the  brethren  who  minister  among  you  in  my  place  !  I  send  my  love  to  the 
deacons,  elders,  and  all  friends. 

"  During  last  week,  very  large  help  came  in  for  the  Orphanage,  for  which 
I  bless  the  Lord. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.   H.  STURGEON." 

"  Clapham, 

"  June  4th,  1871. 
"  Beloved   Friends, 

"  I  write  you  these  little  notes  because  I  am  told  that  you  are  pleased  to 
hear  from  myself  the  state  of  my  health,  and  certainly  it  would  be  very  wrong  if  I 
did  not  write  now  ;  for  I  was  not  silent  in  my  mourning,  and  therefore  I  dare  not 
refrain  now  that  I  am  able  to  rejoice.  Thank  God,  the  healing  One,  with  me,  for, 
during  this  week,  I  have  each  morning  awakened  refreshed,  feeling  that  I  was  better 


c.    ii.    si'UKGEox  s    AUToniociRAi'iiv.  245 

than  on  the  preceding  day.  The  pain  is  gone,  but  extreme  weakness  remains.  I 
am  as  feeble,  as  a  child  ;  but  each  day  I  gather  a  little  strength,  and  I  hope:  I  shall 
be  able  to  preach  to  you  on  the  25th  of  this  month.  I  cannot  be  sure,  but  this  is 
my  hope  and  prayer  ;  and,  moreover,  I  desire  to  come  among  you  with  a  sevenfold 
blessing,  that  we  may  all  love  Jesus  more,  do  more  for  His  glory,  and  see  greater 
things  than  even-  done  for  His  Kingdom.  Shall  Satan  triumph  over  my  twelve  silent 
Sabbaths  ?  \VilI  not  the  Lord  bring  good  out  ot  evil  by  leading  us  on  to  some 
higher  service  and  greater  work?  The  Lord  be  richly  with  you  to-day!  May  He 
smile  on  the  Sabbath-school,  send  the  dew  of  blessing  on  Mrs.  Bartlett's  class,  and 
bid  the  Heavenly  wind  breathe  upon  all  the  Bible-classes  !  May  the  saints  be;  fed 
with  manna,  and  have  the  appetite;  to  enjoy  it  !  May  the  unconverted  among  you 
be  visited  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  renewed  in  heart,  and  that  speedily  ! 

"Accept  my  loving  thanks  to  those  especially  who  have  remembered  me  and 
my  work  by  their  deeds.  Do  not  think  that  I  am  unmindful  of  your  weekly 
liberality.  I  know  you  give  as  unto  the  Lord  ;  but  to  me  also  you  say,  in  lano-uao-e 
more  powerful  than  words,  '  I  )o  not  iet:l  any  anxiety  ;  w7e  will  not  forget  your  work  ; 
and  when  you  are  not  with  us,  we  will  be  as  faithful  as  when  we  hear  your  voice.' 
The  Lord  reward  you  !  Let  not  your  prayers  cease  or  be  diminished.  Prayer  can 
have  anything  of  God.  With  the  utmost  love,— 

"  Yours   until   death, 

"  C.     1  I.     Sl'URGKON." 

"  Clapham, 

"  June    i  ith,    1871. 

"  Beloved  Friends,-— whom  I  have  in  constant  and  affectionate  remembrance,— 
"  I  am  obliged  again  to  take  up  the  note  of  mourning,  for  I  have 
been  all  the  week  suffering,  and  the  most  of  it  confined  to  my  bed.  The  severe 
weather  has  driven  me  back,  and  caused  a  repetition  of  all  my  pains.  Neverthe 
less,  the  Lord's  will  be  done!  Let  Him  have  His  way  with  me,  for  He  is  love. 
I  have  been  wearying  to  preach  again  ;  but  it  may  be  that  my  dumb  Sabbaths 
are  appointed  lor  my  chastisement,  and  their  number  is  not  yet  fulfilled.  We 
must  work  for  God  while  we  can,  for  not  one  of  us  knows  how  soon  he  may  be 
unable  to  take  a  share  in  the  sacred  service.  At  the  same  time,  how7  unimportant  we 
are  !  God's  cause  goes  on  without  us.  \Ve  all  need  Him,  but  He  needs  no  one 
of  us. 

"  Beloved,  hitherto  I  have  had  much  solace  in  hearing  that  the  Lord's  work 
among  you  goes  on.  I  pray  you,  make  earnest  intercession  that  this  may  continue. 
I  hope  the  week-night  services  will  not  droop.  If  you  stay  away,  let  it  be  when 
I  am  there,  but  not  now.  May  the  deacons  and  elders  find  themselves  surrounded 


24()  C.      )I.      Sl'UKCiKO.Vs     AU'TOJIKKJKAl'llV. 

by  an  untiring  band    of  helpers   at   every  meeting  for  worship!       May  abundance  of 
grace  rest  on  you  all,  especially  on  the  sick,  the:  poor,  and  the  bereaved  ! 

IVay  ior  me,  I    entreat   you.      Perhaps,  if  the  church   met   for  prayer,  I  should 

be   speedily  restored.      I    know  thousands   do   pray,  but  should  not  the  church    do  so 

I  must  give  up  all   hope  of  preaching  on  the   251)1  ;  but    I    trust  the 

Lord  will   be  merciful  to   me,  and   send  me  among  you  on  the   first  Sabbath    of  July. 

"\\ith    deep   ('hristian    love   from -- 

'  \  our  suffering   Pastor, 

"C.   11.  S." 

The  Pastor's  suggestion,  that   the  church  should  meet   for  prayer,  was  speedily 
earned  into  effect,  and  the  result  was  thus  chronicled  in  the  next  letter:— 

"  Clapham, 

"June    iSth,    1871. 
An    beloved    rnends, 

As  soon  as  the  church  had  resolved  to  meet  for  special  prayer  for  me, 
I  began  rapidly  to  recover.  It  pleased  God  to  turn  the  wind  at  the  beginning  of  this 
week,  and  the  change  in  the  temperature  has  worked  wonders.  \Ve  may  truthfully 
say  of  the  Wednesday  meeting  for  prayer,  that  the  Lord  fulfilled  His  Word: 
'Before  they  call,  I  will  answer;  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will  hear.' 
Tor  all  this  great  goodness,  I  pray  you  to  unite  with  me  in  sincere  and  intense 
gratitude  to  the  Lord  our  God. 

"I  feel  bound  publicly  to  express  my  happiness  of  heart.  This  week  lias 
furnished  me  with  the  liveliest  proofs  of  your  true  love.  I  have  been  deeply 
touched  with  the  various  ways  in  which  the  affection  of  so  many  of  you  has 
sought  to  find  expression.  I  value  this,  not  only  for  my  own  sake,  though  it  is 
very  sweet  to  be  the  object  of  such  hearty  love,  but  because  I  see  in  it  the 
evidence  that  our  union  has  been  cemented  by  years,  and  the  earnest  of  future 
years  of  united  effort,  if  God  spares  us.  The  absence  of  unity  is  weakness  ;  its 
indisputable  presence  is  strength. 

<l()n  the  closing  day  of  my  thirty-seventh  year,  1  find  myself  the;  Pastor  of  a 
beloved  Hock,  who  have  borne  the  test  of  twelve  Sabbaths  of  their  minister's 
absence,  and  the  severer  test  of  more  than  seventeen  years  of  the  same  ministry,  and 
are  now  exhibiting  more  love  to  him  than  ever.  I  bless  God,  but  I  also  thank'you, 
and  assure  you  that  I  never  felt  happier  in  the  midst  of  my  people  than  I  do  now  iii 
the  prospect  of  returning  to  you.  I  am  still  weak,  but  the  improvement  in  strength 
this  week  has  been  very  surprising.  I  hardly  dare  speak  of  the  future;  but  I 
earnestly  hope  we  shall  look  each  other  in  the  face  on  the  first  Sabbath  of  July. 

"  Peace   be  with   you,  and   the  Lord's  own  anointing  !      May  those  who  speak  to 


c.    it.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  247 

you  to-cl;iy  he    filled  with    the  Spirit  !      May  the    soft  South  \vind    of  the  Spirit's  love 
he  among  you,  and  may  you  pour  forth  praise  as  (lowers  breathe  perfume  ! 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  C.    II.   STURGEON." 

The  dear  sufferer's  expectation  was  reali/ed,  for  he  was  ahle  to  preach  at  the 
Tabernacle  on  the  morning  of  July  2.  Mis  subject  was  Psalm  Ixxi.  14  :  '  P>ut  I 
will  hope  continually,  and  will  yet  praise  Thee  more  and  more."  In  the  course  of 
his  sermon,  he  thus  referred  to  his  illness  and  restoration  :—  "  I  know  one,  who  has 
been  long  privileged  to  lift  up  his  voice,  in  the  choir  of  the  great  King.  In  that 
delightful  labour,  none  were  more  happy  than  he  was  ;  the  longer  he  was  engaged 
in  the  work,  the  more  he  loved  it.  Now,  it  came  to  pass  that,  on  a  certain  day, 
this  songster  found  himself  shut  out  of  the  choir;  he  would  have  entered  to  take  his 
part,  but  he  was  not  permitted.  Perhaps  the  King  was  angry  ;  perhaps  the  songster 
had  sung  carelessly  ;  perhaps  he  had  acted  unworthily  in  some  other  matter  ;  or 
possibly  his  Master  knew  that  his  song  would  grow  more  sweet  if  he  were  silenced 
for  a  while.  Mow  it  was,  I  know  not  ;  but  this  I  know,  it  caused  great  searching  of 
heart.  Often,  this  chorister  begged  to  be  restored  ;  but  he  was  as  often  repulsed, 
and  somewhat  roughly,  too.  I  think  it  was  for  nearly  three;  months  that  this 
unhappy  songster  was  kept  in  enforced  silence,  with  lire  in  his  bones,  and  no  vent 
for  it.  The  royal  music  went  on  without  him  ;  there;  was  no  lack  ot  song,  and  in 
this  he  rejoiced,  but  he  longed  to  take;  his  place  again, —  I  cannot  tell  you  how 
eagerly  he  longed.  At  last,  the  happy  hour  arrived  ;  the  King  gave  His  permit,  he 
might  sing  again.  The  songster  was  full  of  gratitude,  and  I  heard  him  say, — -you 
shall  hear  him  say  it,  '  My  Lord,  since  I  am  again  restored,  I  will  hope,  continually, 
and  will  yet  praise  Thee  more  and  more.' ' 

Preaching  at  the  Tabernacle,  later  in  the  same,  year,  Mr.  Spurgeon  thus 
described  how  he  wrestled  in  prayer,  and  prevailed  with  the  Lord,  in  what  proved  to 
be  the  crisis  of  that  season  of  suffering  : — "  I  have;  found  it  a  blessed  thing,  in  my 
own  experience,  to  plead  before  God  that  I  am  His  child.  When,  some;  months  ago, 
I  was  racked  with  pain  to  an  extreme  degree,  so  that  I  could  no  longer  bear  it 
without  crying  out,  I  asked  all  to  go  from  the  room,  and  leave;  me;  alone;  ;  and  then  I 
had  nothing  I  could  say  to  God  but  this,  'Thou  art  my  Father,  and  I  am  Thy  child  ; 
and  Thou,  as  a  Father,  art  tender  and  full  of  mercy.  I  could  not  bear  to  se;e:  my 
chilel  suffer  as  Thou  makest  me:  suffer  ;  and  if  I  saw  him  tormented  as  I  am  now,  I 
would  do  what  I  could  to  help  him,  and  put  my  arms  under  him  te>  sustain  him. 
Wilt  Thou  hide;  Thy  face:  from  me,  my  Father?  Wilt  Thou  still  lay  on  me  Thy  heavy 
hand,  and  not  give:  me  a  smile  from  Thy  countenance  ?'  I  talked  to  the  Lore!  as 
Luther  would  have  done,  and  pleaded  His  Fatherhood  in  real  earnest.  '  Like  as  a 


)e  a 


i    i  S 

'URGEON  S     AQTOmOGRArilY. 

father  piticth   his   children,  so   the  Lord   pifieth  them  that  fear   Him.'      If  lie     e 
1'ather'let  Him  sh°w  Himself  a  Father,-  -so  I  pleaded  ;  and  I  ventured  to  say  when 
they  came  back  who  watched  me,  «  I    shall    never  have   such  agony  again   from   this 
>ment,  for  God  has  heard  my  prayer.'     I  bless  God  that  ease  came,  and  the  racking- 
Faith    mastered    it    by   laying   hold   upon    God   in    His   own 
J  character,— that  character  in  which,  in  our  darkest  hour,  we  are  best  able  to 
appreciate   ;Jim.      I  think  this  is  why  that  prayer,  '  Our  Fa/her  which  art  in  Heaven,' 
because,  when  we  are  lowest,  we  can  still  say,  '  Our  Father/ and  when 
is  very  dark,  and  we  are  very  weak,  our  childlike  appeal  can    go    up,  -  Father   he] 
m<:  !      rather,  rescue  me.  !  ' 

This  experience  made  so  deep  an  impression  upon   Mr.   Spur-eon's  mind  and 

that  he   never  forgot   it.      Those  who  are.  familiar  with  his  writings  must  have 

how  often  he  referred  to  it,  and  how  he  urged  other  tried  believers   to  do  as 

On    one    occasion,    when   he   was   speaking   at   the   Mildmay    Park 

Hall,  he  narrated  this  incident  with  very  telling  effect. 

The  Tabernacle  church  made  a  special  record  of  this   trying   period   and   of  the 
gracious  answer  to  the  united  supplications  of  His  people.     At  the  church- 
meeting-   on  July    24,   1871,  it  was  resolved  that   the   following  statement  should   be 
entered  on  the  Minutes  :— 

"It  having  pleased  our  Heavenly  Father   to   lay    His   afflicting   hand    upon  our 
istor,  he  was  compelled  to   cease  his  public  labours  in  our  midst  on   the 
April,  and  for  a  period  of  twelve  Sabbaths  we  were  deprived  of  his  faithful 
listrations.      During  this  time,  he:  addressed  to  us  several  letters,  which   we   insert 
>ur  records  as  a  proof  of  the  close  mutual  love  and  esteem  which  link  us  together 
stor  and  people.      Our  public  prayers  have  been  many,  and  our  private-   suppli- 
ions  have  been  unceasing.      On  June  i4th,  we  met  as  a  church  for  special  prayer 
1  was  pleased  to  hear  our  cry,  and  once:  more  to  restore  His  servant  to  some 
part  of  his  wonted  strength,  so  that  he  preached  on   the   morning  of  July   2nd       We 
lerefore    met    to    give    thanks    to    God    on    Wednesday,    July     5th,    when    it    was 
resolved  :— 

'That    this    church    desires    to    leave    upon    record    its   sense   of    gratitude    to 

Inughty  Cod,  our  Heavenly  Father,  for  having  restored  our  beloved    Pastor  to  so 

lealth  as  permits  him  again  to  minister  in  our  midst,  and  we   pray  that  he 

nay  speedily  regain  his  accustomed  vigour,  and  enjoy  still  more  of  the  comfort  and 

iousness  of  the  truth  he  so  eloquently  and  faithfully  preaches.     We  implore  for 

him  a  yet  fuller  measure  of  the    Holy  Spirit,  and  enlarged  success  in  all    the  many 

labours  to  which   he  has  set  his  hand  ;  and   whilst  thus   recording  our  thanks  and 


C.     II.     SPUKGEON  S     ALJTOBIOGRAI'IIV.  249 

petitions,  we  also  desire  to  convey  to  our  beloved  Pastor  our  expressions  of  sincerest 
sympathy  with  him  in  his  severe  and  protracted  illness.  \Ye  have  learned  to  prize 
more  highly  than  ever  those  loving  ministrations  under  which  so  many  of  us  have 
been  savingly  Messed,  and  all  of  us  have  been  greatly  helped.  \Ye  rejoice 
exceedingly  that  he  can  again  occupy  his  accustomed  place;,  to  which  he  is  welcomed 
by  a  people  more  than  ever  prepared  to  co-operate  with  him  in  all  his  labours,  and 
to  love  him  ever  with  a  pure  heart  fervently.  Our  prayers  shall  still  mingle  at  the 
private  and  public  altar  that  himself,  his  dear  wife,  and  their  sons  may  be  long- 
spared  to  enjoy  that  blessing  which  our  covenant  God  alone  can  bestow." 

The  next  special  manifestation  of  the  Jove  of  the  people  for  their  Pastor 
commemorated  three  notable  events  in  his  history.  The  Minutes  of  the  annual 
church-meeting,  held  at  the  Tabernacle  on  January  8,  1875,  contain  the  following 
entry  :— 

;<  Proposed  by  Brother  William  Olney,  seconded  by  Brother  John  Ward,  and 
carried  unanimously  : — That  we  desire,  as  a  church,  to  record  our  devout  gratitude 
to  our  Heavenly  Father  on  the  completion  of  the  2ist  year  of  our  Pastor's  ministry 
amongst  us.  We  also  desire  to  present  our  hearty  congratulations  to  him  that  he 
has  been  privileged  to  complete  the  2Oth  volume  of  his  printed  sermons,  and  also, 
during  the  past  year,  to  accomplish  the  erection  of  the  New  College  Buildings.  We 
feel  it  desirable  that  a  permanent  record  should  be  made  of  these  important  events, 
and  therefore  agree  that  it  shall  be  entered  in  our  church-book,  and  that  a 
suitable  address,  handsomely  framed  and  beautifully  illuminated,  shall  be  presented 
to  our  Pastor  as  an  expression  of  our  loving  sympathy  with  him,  which  was 
never  felt  by  us  to  a  greater  degree  than  at  the  present  time." 

At  the  church-meeting,  on  April  i,  1875,  Pastor  J.  A.  Spurgeon  reported  that  a 
meeting  of  the  church  and  congregation  had  been  held,  on  Tuesday,  March  30,  to 
welcome  the  senior  Pastor,  on  his  return  from  the  Continent,  after  an  absence  from 
the  pulpit  for  eleven  Sabbaths,  and  at  that  gathering  the  testimonial  authorized  by 
the  church  had  been  duly  presented.  A  reduced  facsimile  of  it  is  reproduced  on 
the  following  page. 

A  reference  to  the  letter  of  Mr.  William  Olney,  in  Volume  I.,  page  346,  will 
show  that  one  of  the  reasons  he  mentioned  in  urging  "the  boy-preacher"  at  Water- 
beach  to  accept  the  invitation  to  the  pastorate  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel  was,  that 
he  hoped  his  brother  Henry  would  be  converted  through  the  young  minister's 
preaching,  which  had  even  then  greatly  impressed  him.  This  result  happily  came 
to  pass,  and  dear  old  "  Father  Olney"  had  die  joy  of  seeing  all  his  sons  members 
ot  the  church  of  which  he  had  so  long  been  a  deacon.  In  October,  1875, 


i-fniDii  itan  <@>HiiT-iuiiw. 


.;          C 


Rv     *  fr* 

«s* 

*&  f      fe 


<••      .     ;'.;..;,.         ' 


REDUCED    FACSIMILE    OF    ILLUMINATED    ADDRESS    PRESENTED    TO    THE    PASTOR,    MARCH    30,    1875. 


C.      II.      SPURCiKOX  S     AUTOP.IOGRAPIIV.  2^1 

Mr.    Henry    P.    Olncy    was    "called    home;"    and,    as    soon    as    the    news    reached 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  he  wrote  the  following"  letter  to  Mr.  Thomas  II.  Olney  : — 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

"  Clapham. 

"  (October       ,   1075.) 
11  Dear  Friend, 

"  I    could  n  >t   say   much    to    Mr.    Macgregor,    for    I    felt   stunned   by    the 
tidings  of  your  brother's  death,  and  could  not  realize  it  ;   indeed,  I  cannot  now. 

"God  bless  you,  beloved  brother;  and  as  He  comes  so  very  near  in  solemn 
deeds,  may  lie  come  just  as  near  in  love!  Peace  be;  to  you  in  the  hour  of  sore; 
amazement  ! 

"  I  send  my  deepest  sympathies  to  the  bereaved  wife.  I  can  do  no  bettor  than 
pray  that  she  may  now  be  very  graciously  sustained.  It  she  can  calmly  bo\v  before 
the  Lord,  it  will  be  for  her  own  good.  Grief  so  natural,  and  so  likely  to  prove 
excessive,  must  be  restrained  lor  the  sake  of  herself  and  babes.  God  help  her,  poor 

soul  i     What  a  loss  is  hers  ! 

"  Yours  lovingly, 

"  C.   II.  SPURGEON," 

When  Mrs.  IJarllett  was  "called  home,"  in  August,  1875,  the  members  of  her 
class  desired  her  son  Edward  to  take  his  mother's  place.  This  arrangement  met 
with  Mr.  Spurgeon's  lull  approval,  and  was  accordingly  carried  out.  The.  annual 
meeting  of  the  class  was,  for  many  years,  the  occasion  for  presenting  to  the  beloved 
President  of  the  College  the  contributions  and  collections  of  the  members  in  aid  of 
his  much-loved  work.  In  the  course  of  twelve  years,  no  less  than  ,£1,346  was  thus 
received.  The  Pastor  was  particularly  anxious  to  be;  present  at  the  first  anniversary 
under  the;  new  leadership,  but  he  was  unable  to  be:  there;,  and  hael  to  be  content  with 
writing  the  following  characteristic  epistle  :— 

"  Nightingale  Lane, 

"  Clapham, 

"  Leb.  22,   1876. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Bartlett,  and  Class, 

"  If  it  were  not  that  it  is  the  Lord  who  has  put  me-,  out  of  the;  way  le>r  a 
day  or  two,  1  should  be  very  rebellious.  All  yesterday,  I  was  weeping  and  sneezing, 
till  I  could  not  see  out  of  my  eyes.  To-day,  I  feel  that  the;  turning-point  has  come, 
and  that  I  shall  soon  be  better  ;  but  it  would  be;  the.  utmost  folly  to  leave;  my  bed 
chamber  as  I  now  am. 


252  C.      II.      Sl'UK(iKONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  This  is  a  terrible  disappointment  to  me  as  well  as  to  your  young  friends,  and 
I  want  you  to  tell  them  how  sorry  their  Pastor  is.  I  am  glael  they  cannot  see  him, 
for  he  has  an  awful  nose,  and  such  eyes  !  Also  let  them  know  that  he  is  very  fond 
of  Jl/rs.  Bartlett's  class,  and  would  sooner  have  disappointed  the  Queen  than  have 
been  absent  from  the  meeting  to-night.  Besides,  he  wanted  to  thank  Air.  Bartlett, 
and  to  say  some  kind  things  which  are  due  all  round. 

"  I  am  anxious  to  do  all  I  can  to  mitigate  this  trouble-,  and  therefore  I  propose, 
(i)  that  you  enjoy  yourselves  all  you  can  to-night;  (2)  that  1  invite  you  all  to  tea 
another  evening  as  soon  as  possible  ;  or,  (3)  that  I  come  to  the  class  some  Sunday 
afternoon  ;  or,  (4)  that  we  do  all  the  three  things. 

"  May  God  bless  you  all  !  You  are  so  good  to  keep  together,  and  work  on,  and 
pray  on.  I  hope  we  shall  have  hundreds  of  souls  saved  this  year  ;  let  us  aim  at 
such  a  result.  Dear  Mr.  Bartlett  has  my  unbounded  confidence  and  esteem.  May 
every  blessing  abound  towards  him  and  you  ! 

"  Don't  be  alarmed  about  me.  I  have:  about  49  colds  all  at  once,  and  lumbago 
into  the  bargain  ;  but  all  will  go  in  a  day  or  two,  I  hope.  I  cannot  tell  how  I  could 
have  got  into  such  a  snee/y,  Iree/y,  droppy,  shivery,  watery,  coughy,  fever)'  state  : 

I  hope  1  shall  soon  get  out  ol    it. 

"  \  ours  ever  lovingly, 

"  C.     I  I.     Sl'URCKON." 

In  the  earlier  days,  when  the  dear  Pastor  was  able  more  frequently  to  preside  at 
the  Tabernacle  church-meetings  than  he  could  in  his  later  years,  he  used  to  make 
brief  but  very  interesting  entries  in  the  church-book.  Sometimes,  they  would  be 
humorous,  as  when  he  wrote  concerning  the:  quality  of  the  penis  an  el  ink  supplied  (or 
use:  in  the  lecture-hall  ;  occasional!}',  they  were  ve:ry  sael  notes,  when  some  turned 
aside  to  sin  or  to  error,  and  so  pierced  his  heart  through  with  many  sorrows  ;  but, 
more  often,  the  comments  were  of  a  grateful  and  jubilant  character,  like  the  following, 
which  was  written  at  the  first  meeting  of  the  members  after  the  communion  service 

o 

on  Lorel's-day  evening,  March  5,  18/6:— 

"  It  is  worthy  of  special  note  that  four  children  e>f  our  beloved  deacon,  William 
lliggs,  were  aeldeel  to  the  church  on  one  evening,  while  e>thers  of  his  family  have: 
preceded  them.  As  he  was  the  buileler  of  the  Tabernacle  in  which  we  meet,  we 
rejoice  that  the:  Lord  there  blesses  his  household." 

XVhile  Mr.  Spurgeon  never  neglected  the  comparatively  few  wealthier  members 
of  the  church  and  congregation,  he  was  always  accessible  to  their  poorer  sisters  and 
brethren,  and  he  constantly  proved,  in  a  most  practical  way,  his  sympathy  with  them, 
and  his  personal  interest  in  their  temporal  and  spiritual  welfare.  A  conspicuous 


C.      II.      SL'UKGI^ONS     AUTOIJIOr.KAl'IlY.  253 

instance  of  this  manifestation  of  kindly  feeling  is  thus  recorded  in  the  report  of  the 
annual  church-meeting-  at  the  Tabernacle  on  January  10,  1877  : — 

"  Before  proceeding  to  the  business  ot  the  evening,  the  Pastor  stated  that,  in  his 
own  name,  and  on  behalf  of  the  church,  lie  desired  that  some  note  should  be  taken 
of  the  fact  that  the  Lord  had  spared  to  the  church,  for  a  period  of  70  years,  our 
aged  sister,  Miss  Fanny  Gay,  during  the  whole  of  which  time  she  had  been  a  useful 
and  consistent  member.  The  Pastor  then  handed  to  her  a  copy  of  The  Interpreter, 
containing  the  following  inscription  : — 

"  Presented  to  Miss  Fanny  Gay,  upon  completing  hen"  seventieth  year  of  mem 
bership  with  the  church  which  now  worships  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  with 
the  love  of  the  Pastors  and  members.  The  Lord  bless  thee  and  keep  thee  ! 

"  C.     II.     Sl'URClKOX. 

"January  10,  for  February,   1877." 

The  good  sister  lived  until  early  in  iSS6;  and  when  she  was  "called  home," 
Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  concerning  her: — "The  church  at  the  Tabernacle  has  recently 
lost  Miss  Fanny  Gay,  who  has  for  many  years  been  the  first  on  the  roll  of  member 
ship.  She  joined  the  church  in  the  year  1807,  and  had  thus  been  a  member  nearly 
eighty  years,  and  was  within  a  tew  hours  of  ninety-seven  years  of  age-  when  she  was 
called  home.  She  was  a  great  sufferer  for  most  of  her  long  life,  but  her  afflictions 
were  patiently,  and  even  cheerfully,  borne  ;  and  for  many  years  she  had  been  one  of 
the  happiest  inmates  of  the  Almshouses  connected  with  the  Tabernacle." 

1  he  1  abernacle  church  has  long  been  a  mother  of  churches  ;  and,  usually,  when 
the  brethren  and  sisters  have  been  drafted  off  to  found  a  new  cause;,  the  Pastor  has 
written  a  special  letter  to  accompany  the  formal  transfers.  When  the  church  at 
James'  Grove,  Peckham,  was  about  to  be  constituted,  no  less  than  75  members 
received  their  dismission  from  the  Tabernacle,  and  the  Pastor  gave  them  his  parting- 
blessing  and  his  wise  and  loving  counsel  in  as  hearty  and  genial  a  fashion  as  if  he 
had  been  receiving  that  large  contingent  of  adherents  instead  of  losing  them. 

"  Metropolitan  Tabernacle, 

"  September  Qth,   1878. 
"  Beloved   Brethren, 

'  The  Church  of  Christ  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  has  heard  with 
pleasure  of  your  wish  to  be  formed  into  a  separate  community,  and  we  hereby 
grant  an  honourable  dismission  to  you  all  with  that  view.  You  are  such  beloved 
and  uselul  members  that  we  should  have  been  grieved  to  part  with  you  under  any 
other  circumstances  ;  but  now  we  send  you  out  as  a  father  sends  out  his  full-grown 


254  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOIJKXJKAI'HY. 

son  to  fouiul  another  house,  and  to  become  himself  the  centre  of  a  family.  We  wish 
you  every  blessing.  h  js  our  joy  to  see  our  Lord's  Kingdom  increased  ;  and,  as  we 
believe  that  your  being  gathered  into  a  new  church  will  tend  to  that  grand  design, 
we  gladly  part  with  you,  wishing  you  the  power  and  presence  of  the  Lo*rd  henceforth 
and  for  ever. 

"Brethren,  be  of  one  heart  and  one  mind.  Suffer  no  '  root  of  bitterness'  to 
spring  up  among  you.  Sustain  your  excellent  Pastor-elect  ;  and,  by  your  prayers, 
gird  him  with  the  power  uf  the  Highest.  Watch  over  your  own  personal  walk,  and 
let  the  world  see  what  grace  can  do  in  you  and  by  you.  Do  not  forget  to  pray  for 
the  mother-church  and  its  officers.  We  wish  you  the:  like  blessing  with  us;  what 
more  could  we  desire  for  you  ?  May  the  ministry  among  you  be  full  of  Divine 
power,  and  may  thousands  be  thereby  called  out  of  darkness  into  light  !  Abound  in 
confidence  in  God,  and  in  His  gospel.  He  is  able  to  surpass  your  loftiest  thoughts. 
Believe  great  things  of  God,  and  expect  great  things  from  God.  To  the  Eternal 
'I  rinity  we  commend  you  by  Christ  Jesus. 

'\ours,  on  behalf  of  the  whole  church, 

"  G.     I  I.    Sl'UKGKON." 

This  chapter  may  be  appropriately  closed  with  Mr.  Spurgeon's  testimony  to  the 
piety  and  the  unity  of  the  Tabernacle   church,  together  with  a  solemn  warning  as   to 
what  would  happen  if  such  a  highly-favoured  company  of  people  should  ever"  prove 
"  I    thank  God   that  we  have  a  great  many  very  warm-hearted,  earnest 
Christians   in    connection    with    this  church,— I   will    make  bold    to    say,   such   true 
and  lovely  saints  as   I    never  expected   to   live  to  see.      I  have  beheld  in  this  church 
apostolical    piety  revived  ;   I  will   say  it,  to    the   glory  of   God,  that    I    have   seen   as 
earnest  and  as  true  piety  as  Paul  or  Peter  ever  witnessed.      I   have  marked,  in  some 
here  present,   such  godly  zeal,   such   holiness,   such  devotion  to  the   Master's  busi 
ness,  as   Christ   Himself  must  look   upon  with  joy  and  satisfaction.      God  has  been 
pleased  to  favour  us  with  profound  peace  in   the  church.      We  have  been  disturbed 
by  no  word  of  false  doctrine,  by  no  uprising  of  heretics   in  our  midst,  or  any  separa 
tions  or  divisions.     This  is  a  blessed  thing  ;  but,  still,  Satan  may  make  it  a  dangerous 
matter.      We  may  begin  to  think  that  there  is  no  need  for  us  to  watch,  that  we  shall 
always  be  as  we  are  ;  and  deacons,  and  elders,  and  Pastor,  and  church-members,  may 
all  cease  their  vigilance,  and   then   the    'root  of  bitterness'   may  spring    up    in    the 
neglected  corner  till   it  gets  too  deeply  rooted  for  us  to  tear  it  up  again.      Though 
we  are  not  free    from    ten  thousand    faults,  yet  I  have  often  admired  the  goodness  "of 
God  which  has   enabled  us,  with   a   hearty  grip,  to   hold  each   other   by  the    hand, 
and  say,     '  We  love  each  other  for  Christ's  sake,  and  for  the  truth's  sake,  and  we  hope 
to  live  in  each  other's  love  till  we  die,  wishing,  if  it  were  possible,  to  be  buried  side 


C.      II.      SI'UiUiEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  255 

by  side.'  I  do  thank  God  for  this,  because  I  know  there  is  more,  than  enough  ol 
evil  among  us  to  cause  dissensions  in  our  midst.  \Ye  who  bear  ofhce  in  the 
church  have  the  same  nature  as  others  ;  and  therefore,  naturally,  would  seek  to  have 
the  supremacy,  and  every  man,  if  left  to  himself,  would  indulge  an  angry  temper, 
and  find  many  reasons  for  differing  trom  his  brother.  \Ye  have  all  been  offended 
often,  and  have  as  often  offended  others.  \Ve  are  as  imperfect  a  band  oi  men  as 
might  be  found,  but  we  are  one  in  Christ.  \Ye  have  each  had  to  put  up  with  the 
other,  and  to  bear  and  forbear  ;  and  it  does  appear  to  me  a  wonder  that  so  many 
imperfect  people  should  get  on  so  well  together  tor  so  long.  By  faith,  1  read  over 
the  door  of  our  Tabernacle  this  text,  '\Yhen  lie  giveth  quietness,  who  then  can 
make  trouble?'  When  some  oi  our  members  were  first  taken  into  the  church,  I 
received  a  very  suspicious  character  with  them.  It  was  said,  '\\  ell  it  Mr  Spurgeon 
accepts  such-and-such  a  man,  he  has  been  so  great  a  trouble  in  our  church,  that  he 
will  be  the  beginning  of  wars  at  the  Tabernacle.'  But  those  very  persons,  who  came 
with  that  doubtful  character,  have  become  the  most  zealous  of  our  working 
community  ;  and,  instead  of  differing  and  disagreeing,  they  have  felt  that  there  was 
so  much  to  do  that  it  would  be  a  pity  to  spend  one  grain  of  strength  in  quarrelling 
with  other  children  of  God.  II  a  man  thinks  himself  to  be  SOUK;  great  one,  his 
importance  vanishes  as  soon  as  he  joins  our  vast  host.  I  have  been  warned,  some 
times,  by  fellow-ministers  who  have  had  a  member  who  has  proved  troublesome  to 
them,  and  who  wished  to  come  into  our  midst.  I  have  been  told  that  I  must  watch 
him  very  carefully,  for  he  would  be  sure  to  be  a  cause  of  anxiety  to  me  ,  but  I  have 
answered,  '  No  one  ever  troubles  me  ;  I  do  not  let  him.'  Many  of  these  people,  who 
are  supposed  to  be  so  dangerous,  only  want  something  to  do  ;  they  have  too  much 
energy  to  be  unemployed.  I  set  them  to  work,  and  they  are  no  longer  troublesome  ; 
if  that  does  not  cure  them,  I  give  them  still  more  work  to  do.  They  have  too 
much  vigour  for  small  places,  and  need  to  be  where  their  powers  can  have  full  scope, 
for  then  they  have  less  time  to  notice  things  with  which  they  do  not  wholly  agree. 
Possibly,  my  brethren,  many  of  you  do  not  sufficiently  pri/e  the  peace  which  reigns 
in  our  church.  Ah  !  you  would  value  it  if  you  lost  it.  Oh,  how  highly  you  would 
esteem  it  if  strife  and  schism  should  ever  come  into  our  midst  !  You  would  look  back 
upon  these  happy  days  we  have  had  together  with  intense  regret,  and  pray,  '  Lord, 
knit  us  together  in  unity  again  ;  send  us  love  to  each  other  once  more  ; '  for,  in  a 
church,  love  is  the  essential  element  of  happiness. 

"  If  we,  as  a  church,  prove  unfaithful  ;  ii  we  leave  our  first  love  ;  if  we  do  not 
plead  in  prayer,  and  seek  the  conversion  ot  souls,  God  may  take  away  His  presence 
from  us  as  He  has  done  from  churches  that  we're,  once  His,  but  which  are  not  so  now. 
The  traveller  tells  you  that,  as  he  journeys  through  Asia  Minor,  he  sees  the  ruins  of 
those  cities  which  once  were  the  seven  golden  candlesticks,  wherein  the  light  of 


256  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOMIOGKAI'HY. 

truth  shone  brightly.  What  will  he  now  s;iy  of  Thyatira  ?  Where  will  he  find 
Laodicea  ?  These  have  passed  away,  and  why  may  not  this  church?  Look  at 
Rome,  once  the  glory  of  the  Christian  Church,  her  ministers  many,  and  her  power 
over  the  world  enormous  for  good  ;  and  now  she  is  the  place  where  Satan's  seat  is, 
and  her  synagogue  is  a  synagogue  of  hell.  How  is  this?  Because  she  departed 
from  her  integrity,  she  left  her  first  love,  and  the  Lord  cast  her  away.  Thus  will  He 
deal  with  us  also  if  we  sin  against  Him.  You  know  that  terrible  passage:  'Go  ye 
now  unto  My  place  which  was  in  Shiloh,  where  I  set  My  Name  at  the  first,  and  see 
what  I  did  to  it  for  the  wickedness  of  My  people  Israel.'  God  first  of  all  had  the 
tabernacle  pitched  at  Shiloh,  but  it  was  defiled  by  the  sin  of  Eli's  sons,  so  the 
tabernacle  was  taken  away,  and  Shiloh  became  a  wilderness.  So  may  this  ilourishing 
church  become.  If  justice  should  thus  visit  you,  you  may  hold  your  prayer- 
meetings, — probably  those  will  soon  cease, — but  of  what  avail  will  your  formal 
prayers  be  ?  You  may  get  whom  you  will  to  preach,  but  what  of  that  ?  I  know 
what  you  would  do,  if  some;  of  us  were  fallen  asleep,  and  the  faithful  ones  buried, - 
if  the  Spirit  of  God  were  gone,  you  would  say,  'Well,  we  are  still  a  large  and 
influential  congregation  ;  we  can  afford  to  pay  a  talented  minister,  money  will  do 
anything;'  and  you  would  get  the  man  of  talents,  and  then  you  would  want  an 
organ  and  a  choir,  and  many  other  pretty  things  which  we  now  count  it  our  joy  to 
do  without.  Then,  if  such  were  the  case,  all  these  vain  attempts  at  grandeur  would 
be  unsuccessful,  and  the  church  would  ere  long  become  a  scorn  and  a  hissing,  or 
else  a  mere  log  upon  the  water.  Then  it  would  be  said,  'We  must  change  the 
management,'  and  there  would  be  this  alteration  and  that  ;  but  if  the  Lord  were 
gone,  what  could  you  do  ?  By  what  means  could  you  ever  make  this  church,  or  any 
other  church,  revive  again  ?  Alas  !  for  the  carnal,  spasmodic  efforts  we  have  seen 
made  in  some  churches  !  Prayer-meetings  badly  attended,  no  conversions,  but  still 
the  people  have  said,  '  It  is  imperative  upon  us  to  keep  up  a  respectable  appearance  ; 
we  must  collect  a  congregation  by  our  singing,  by  our  organ,  or  some  other  outward 
attraction  ;  '  and  angels  might  have  wept  as  they  saw  the  folly  of  men  who  sought 
almost  anything  except  the  Lord,  who  alone  can  make  a  house  His  temple,  who 
alone  can  make  a  ministry  to  be  a  ministration  of  mercy,  without  whose  presence  the 
most  solemn  congregation  is  but  as  the  herding  of  men  in  the  market,  and  the  most 
melodious  songs  but  as  the  shoutings  of  those  who  make  merry  at  a  marriage. 
Without  the  Lord,  our  solemn  days,  our  new  moons,  and  our  appointed  feasts,  are  an 
abomination  such  as  His  soul  hateth.  May  this  church  ever  feel  her  utter,  entire, 
absolute  dependence  upon  the  presence  of  her  God,  and  may  she  never  cease 
humbly  to  implore  Him  to  forgive  her  many  sins,  but  still  to  command  LI  is 
blessing  to  abide  upon  her!  Amen." 


CHAPTER    LXXVI. 


§  lolttog  Dri&e  to  tljt  £cfo  Jfaitst. 

On  our  public  rests  for  porters  in  the  City  of  London,  you  may  read  the  words,  ''  Rest,  but  do  no) 
loiter;"  and  they  contain  advice  worthy  of  our  attention.  I  do  not  call  the  dolcc  far  mettle  la/.iness  ; 
there  is  "a  sweet  doing  of  nothing"  which  is  just  the  finest  medicine  in  the  world  for  a  jaded  worker. 
When  the  mind  gets  fatigued,  and  out  of  order,  to  rest  it  is  no  more  idleness  than  sleep  is  idleness  ;  and 
no  man  is  called  lazy  for  sleeping  the  proper  time.  It  is  far  better  to  be  industriously  asleep  than  lazily 
awake.  Be  always  ready,  however,  to  do  good  even  in  your  resting-times,  and  in  your  leisure  hours; 
and  so  be  really  a  minister,  and  there  will  be  no  need  for  you  to  proclaim  that  you  are  one.  —  C.  II.  S.,  in 
"  LeUures  to  my  ' 


I  went,  the  other  day,  to  St.  Cross  Hospital,  near  Winchester,  which  some  of  you  may  know. 
lliere  they  give  away  a  piece  of  bread  to  everybody  who  knocks  at  the  door;  so  I  knocked,  as  bold  as 
brass.  \\  hy  should  I  not?  If  they  gave  the  do:e  away  to  everyone,  why  should  not  I  have  my  share? 
In  due  course,  the  hatch  was  opened,  and  I  and  the  friends  who  were  with  me  received  our  portion.  It 
was  a  dole  to  be  given  to  everybody  wlio  came,  so  I  did  not  humble  myself,  and  make  anything  special 
oi  it  ;  it  was  meant  for  all,  and  I  therefore,  as  one  of  the  people  who  were  willing  to  knock,  was  not 
refused.  Now,  even  so,  if  the  gospel  is  to  be  preached  to  every  creature,  why  do  you  stand  higgling 
and  haggling  when  you  want  the  Bread  of  life?  \Vliy  should  you  waste  time  in  raising  question  after 
question  when  you  only  need  to  take  what  Jesus  freely  gives?  I  will  warrant  that  you  do  not  raise 
such  quibbles  against  yourselves  in  money  matters.  If  an  estate  is  bequeathed  to  you,  I  am  sure  that 
you  do  not  employ  a  solicitor  to  hunt  for  Haws  in  the  title,  or  to  invent  objections  to  the  will.  Why  do 
men  raise  difficulties  against  their  own  salvation,  instead  of  cheerfully  accepting  what  the  infinite  mercy 
oi  God  so  graciously  provides  for  all  who,  with  broken  hearts,  and  willing  minds,  are  ready  to  take  what 
God  the  Ever-bountiful  is  so  pleased  to  give  ?—  C.  II.  S.,  in  a  sermon  at  the  Tabernacle. 

A  minister  should  be  like  a  certain  chamber  winch  1  saw  at  Beaulieu,  in  the  New  Forest,  in  which 
a  cobweb  is  never  seen.  It  is  a  large  lumber-room,  and  is  never  swept;  yet  no  spider  ever  defiles  it 
with  the  emblems  of  neglect.  It  is  rooted  with  chestnut  ;  and,  for  some  reason,  I  know  not  what, 
srAiei  s  will  not  come  near  that  wood  by  the  year  together.  The  same  thing  was  mentioned  to  me  in  the 
corridors  ot  Winchester  School.  I  was  told,  "No  spiders  ever  come  here."  Our  minds  should  be 
equally  clear  of  idle  habits.—  C.  H.  S.,  in  "Lectures  to  my  Students" 

I  was  sitting,  one  day,  in  the  New  Forest,  under  a  beech  tree.  I  like  to  look  at  the  beech,  and 
study  it,  as  I  do  many  other  trees,  for  every  one  has  its  own  peculiarities  and  habits,  its  special  ways  of 
twisting  its  boughs,  and  growing  its  bark,  and  opening  its  leaves,  and  so  forth.  As  I  looked  up  at  that 
beech,  and  admired  the  wisdom  of  God  in  making  it,  I  saw  a  squirrel  running  round  and  round  the 
trunk,  and  up  the  branches,  and  I  thought  to  myself,  "Ah  !  this  beech  tree  is  a  great  deal  more  to  you 
than  it  is  to  me,  for  it  is  your  home,  your  living,  your  all."  Its  big  branches  were  the  main  streets  of  "his 
city,  and  its  little  boughs  were  the  lanes;  somewhere  in  that  tree  he  had  his  house,  and  the  beech-mast 
was  his  daily  food,  he  lived  on  it.  Well,  now,  the  way  to  deal  with  God's  Word  is  not  merely  to 
contemplate  it,  or  to  study  it,  as  a  student  does;  but  to  live  on  it,  as  that  squirrel  lives  on  his  beech  tree. 
Let  it  be  to  you,  spiritually,  your  house,  your  home,  your  food,  your  medicine,  your  clothing,  the  one 
essential  element  of  your  soul's  life  and  growth.—  C.  II.  S.,  in  a  sermon  at  the.  Tabernacle. 

:|NR  ot  my  dear  husband's  most  congenial  recreations  consisted  in 
spending  a  long  day  in  the  country  ;  —  driving  over  hill  and  dale, 
and  through  the  lanes  and  pretty  villages  of  our  charming  county 
of  Surrey.  Many  sweet  days  of  rest  have  thus  been  snatched 
from  weeks  of  heavy  toil,  and  a  furlough  of  a  few  hours  has 
helped  to  restore  and  refresh  the  overworked  brain  and  heart.  He 
would  go  out  in  good  time,  taking  with  him  some  choice  companion,  or,  perchance, 


25  C.      II.      STURGEON'S     AUTOiaoGKATliY. 

another  \vc;iry  worker  ;  and,  driving  slowly,  they  \vould  jog  along'  till  noon,  when, 
at  a  pleasant  wayside  inn,  they  would  rest  the  horse;,  and  have  their  luncheon, 
returning  in  the  cool  of  the  evening  lor  high  tea  at  home  at  six  or  seven  o'clock. 

Such  rest  Mr.  Spurgeon  found  very  delightful  ;  but  this  was  surpassed  and 
completed  when  a  fortnight  of  similar  days  could  be  linked  together  to  form  a 
perfect  holiday.  Then,  instead  of  driving  back  in  the  sunset,  he  would  go  forward  ; 
and  the  trip  would  extend  itself  to  many  towns,  and  bring  him  into  pleasant 
acquaintance  with  new  objects  of  interest,  and  novel  impressions  of  places  and 
people.  It  was  amusing,  at  these  times,  to  note  that  his  ideas  of  comfort,  and  his 
disregard  of  external  appearances,  were  equally  conspicuous.  He  liked  a  cosy  seat, 
and  easy  travelling  ;  but  he  cared  nothing  for  the  style  of  his  equipage  ; — an  old 
horse  —  most  inappropriately  named  "  Peacock  "•- and  a  shabby  carriage  were 
matters  of  perfect  indifference  to  him,  so  long  as  they  were  safe  and  trustworthy, 
and  carried,  him  out  of  the  noise  of  the  crowded  world;  into  the  stillness  and  beauty 
of  nature's  quiet  resting-places. 

I  well  remember — aye,  and  with  a  present  thrill  of  regret  that  I  ever  laughed 
at  it, — his  purchasing,  for  these  jaunts,  a  vehicle  of  so  antiquated  a  pattern,  and  of 
such  unfashionable  proportions,  that  it  was  immediately  dubbed  "  Punch's  coach," 
and  ever  alter  bore  that  name.  Its  mirth-provoking  aspect  was  increased  when  it 
was  packed  and  prepared  for  a  journey,  for  there  was  an  arrangement  behind,  which 
supported  a  board  for  luggage,  and  added  exceedingly  to  its  grotesque  and  inelegant 
appearance.  However,  this  convenient  provision  was,  in  the  dear  owner's  estima 
tion,  one  of  its  chief  advantages,  if  not  the  very  climax  of  its  beauty  ,  and  though 
I  laughed  airesh  at  every  glimpse  of  it,  I  loved  him  so  dearly  that  I  even  learned 
to  appreciate  "  Punch's  coach  "  for  his  sweet  sake.  As  I  write,  and  the  memories 
of  the  old  days  surge  over  my  mind  like  the  billows  from  a  distant  shore,  I  rejoice 
to  know  that  his  slightest  wishes  were  tenderly  indulged,  and  that  his  beaming, 
loving,  satisfied  face,  as  he  started  off  on  one  of  these  country  tours,  is  far  more 
deeply  impressed  on  my  heart  than  the  remembrance  of  his  unsightly  holiday 
caravan  !  Never  was  he  more  happy  and  exultant  than  when  making  excursions 
of  this  kind  ;  and  those  who  were  privileged  to  accompany  him,  saw  him  at  his 
social  best,  and  with  one  accord  they  have  testified  to  the  grace  and  charm  of 
his  companionship. 

From  the  pages  of  his  daily  letters  to  me,  on  one  of  these  notable  occasions,  I 
have  woven  the  story  of  his  holiday  drive  into  this  single  bright  chapter;  which,  in 
consequence,  possesses  all  the  attractiveness  of  a  personal  narrative,  and  I  think 
it  well  sets  forth  some  traits  in  his  lovely  character  which  could  in  no  other  way 
have  been  so  naturally  revealed  ; — his  intense  delight  in  the  works  of  Gocl, — his 
fine  appreciation  of  the  minute  or  half-concealed  lovelinesses  of  nature, — his  care 


c.    H.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOIHOGRAPHV. 


259 


for  all  living  creatures, — his  calm  and  contented  spirit, — his  devotion  under  all 
circumstances  to  his  Master  and  His  work ;— all  these  are  brought  into  distinct 
relief  by  the  lively  touches  of  his  own  vigorous  pen  and  pencil. 

Perhaps,  out  of  respect  for  the  "old  horse"  previously  mentioned,— and  which 
made  so  many  delightful  journeys  for  my  beloved,— I  ought  to  explain  that  the 
"noble  greys  "  referred  to  in  the  opening  sentences  of  the  letters  were  owned  and 
driven,  in  this  particular  instance,  by  a  member  of  the  party  ;— but  they  had  to 
draw  "  Punch's  coach  "  for  all  that  ! 


Alton.  June,  1873. — I  ^ni  having  a  grand  time.  The  horses  are  noble  greys  ; 
the  carriage,  with  my  luggage-basket  behind,  most  comfortable.  \Ve  go  along  with, 
an  ease  and  dignity  seldom  equalled,  and  never  surpassed.  From  Guildford, 
we^drove  to  the  foot  of  Martha's  Chapel,  and  climbed  to  the  very  summit.  What 
a  view!  Then  down,  and  back  to  Guildford,  and  up  the  Hog's  Back.  Mistaking 
the  route,  we  went  up  an  old  deserted  Roman  road,  immensely  broad,  and  all 
green.  What  a  piece  of  country  !  The  road  itself  was  a  sight,  and  the  views  on 
either  side  were  sublime.  So  on  to  Farnham,  where  we  dined,  and  went  into  the 
Bishop's  park,  which  you  will  remember,  with  its  deer,  and  avenue  of  elms.  From 
Farnham  to  Alton  is  pretty  and  fruitful,  but  there  were  no  incidents.  I  revised  part 
of  a  sermon  last  night,  and  went  to  bed  at  11.30  ;  fell  asleep  at  once,  and  neither 
stirred  nor  dreamed.  I  awoke  at  6,  then  got  up,  and  finished  the  sermon.  Already, 
I  am  so  much  better  that  I  feel  able  to  go  to  work  again,— quite.  We  go  to  Selborne 
tins  afternoon.  How  I  wish  you  were  with  me  !  But  you  shall  know  anything  I  see 
which  can  help  you  to  realize  where  I  am,  and  what  I  am  doing.  By  the  way,  this 
morning  we  went  into  the  church  here,  and  saw  an  old  cloor  which  was  riddled  by 
the  Parliamentarians  ;  we  were  also  regaled  with  a  superabundance  of  organ  music 
which  a  young  gentleman  volunteered.  The  church  is  restored  very  beautifully,  and 
in  good  taste. 

Same  clay,  later.— The  drive  was  delicious,  and  I  feel  so  well.  Selborne  is  a 
little  heaven  of  delights.  It  is  Switzerland  in  miniature,  where  every  turn  changes 
the  scene.  If  it  were  in  a  foreign  land,  all  the  world  would  crowd  to  it.  We  were  all 
charmed  ;  who  could  be  otherwise  ?  Well  might  White  write  so  prettily  upon  so 
choice  a  subject.  Hill,  dell,  bourne,  hanger,  clown,  lane,  and  wood,— one  has  them 
all  within  a  very  small  compass,  and  with  endless  variety.  We  have  returned  to 
Alton  to  send  off  some  of  our  party;  and  now,  at  a  council  of  war,  we  have 
decided  to  visit  Selborne  again  to-morrow,  and  see  more  of  that  gem  of  a  village. 


260 


C.      Ji.      Sl'UKGEOiN  S     AU'TUlilOGKAl'llY. 


Sclbornc. — What  a  grand  morning'  we  have  had!  Up  the  Hanger  above  the 
villao-e  we  climbed  by  a  zigzag  path,  and  had  a  very  extensive  view.  It  was  delicious 

£5  J  o        o    i  J 

to  ramble  among  the  tall  beeches,  and  peep  down  upon  the  village,  and  then  to 
descend  into  the  place  itself  by  winding  paths.  We  went  to  White's  house,  and 
were  received  very  kindly  by  Professor  Bell  and  his  wife,  both  very  aged  persons. 
We  were  soon  known,  and  had  in  honour.  The  poor  complain  of  the  parson's 
neglect  of  them,  and  their  lack  of  anything  to  hear  which  they  can  understand.  We 
rambled  about  as  in  a  paradise,  and  then  were  off  to  Alresforcl.  What  enjoyment  1 
have  had,  and  what  health  is  upon  me  !  I  never  felt  better  in  my  life.  We  are  all 
so  happy  with  the  scenery,  that  we  do  not  know  how  to  be  grateful  enough.  Oh, 
that  you  were  here  !  One  of  these  days,  I  hope  and  pray  you  may  be  able  to  come. 

From  Alresforcl,  we  have  driven  here  (Winchester),  along  the  beautiful  valley 
of  the  Itchen,  and  your  dear  note  was  all  I  wanted  to  make  me  full  of  joy.  Letters 
had  accumulated  here  up  to  Wednesday.  I  have  already  answered  twenty-five,  and 
Mr.  B—  -  many  others  ;  so  we  are  keeping  the  work  under. 

Winchester  is  a  rare  old  place.  We  went  first  to  the  Hospital  of  St.  Cross,  and 
had  a  piece  of  bread,  and  a  cup  of  beer.  The  cups  are  of  horn,  with  five  silver 
crosses  on  them  ;  and  my  trio  of  friends  bought  one  for  me  as  a  souvenir,  and  present 
for  my  coming  birthday. 


THE   DOLE   AT  ST.   CRO.5S   HOSPITAL,   WINCHESTER. 


I  noticed  that  poor  men  took  a  hunch  of  bread,  while  gentlemen  were  satisfied 
to  receive  a  mere  mouthful  ;  and  I  thought, — Ah  !  none  feed  on  Christ  so  fully  as 
the  poor  and  hungry.  The  dole  is  exhausted  about  noon,  but  the  mercy  of  God 
continues  to  the  eleventh  hour. 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTomor.KAriiv. 


261 


BEAUFORT  TOWKR  AND  HALL  OF  ST.  CROSS. 


Having  tasted  of  the  hospitality  of  St.  Cross,  we  passed  into  its  rectangle,  under 
the  arch  of  the  Beaufort  Tower.  It  is  here  that  the  dole  is  given,  and  here  we  saw 
some  of  the  old  brethren  in  their  gowns  with  crosses  ;  there  are  thirteen  of  these  old 
pensioners,  and  they  get  two  quarts  of  beer  to  drink  every  day,  and  on  "gaudy 


BRETHREN    OF    ST.    CROSS. 

days"  gin  and  beer  hot!  Indeed,  these  old  Saxon  institutions  appear  to  have 
regarded  beer  as  the  grand  necessary  of  life  i  We  walked  and  talked,  and  then  sat 
down  on  the  steps  leading  up  into  the  dining-hall,  and  quietly  looked  on  the  curious 
scene.  In  the  days  when  the  place  was  built,  chimneys  were  a  new  invention, 
and  therefore  they  are.  all  external,  and  have  a  grotesque  appearance.  On  one  side 
are  the  cloisters,  and  at  the  further  end  is  a  noble  church,  in  which  service  is 
performed  twice  a  clay. 

Our  next  visit  was  to  St.  Catherine's  Hill,  but  as  I  could  not  pretend  to  climb  it, 
we  kept  along  the  river-bank  till  we  reached  the  cathedral.      Mere,  a  most  intelligent 


262 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


guide  made  a  couple  of  hours  pass  away  as  if  they  had  only  been  so  many  minutes. 
I  know  more  about  architecture  now  than  I  had  ever  imagined  I  could  learn,  and 

o  J 

am  able  to  talk  quite  fluently  about  Early  English,  Decorated,  Norman,  etc.,  etc.  It 
was  strange  to  see  the  chests  in  which  were  the  bones  of  Edgar,  Ethelwulf,  and  all 
those  old  Saxon  kings,  and  the  sarcophagus  of  William  Rufus.  There  is  a  kaleido 
scopic  window,  all  of  the  true  old  material,  but  no  design,  order,  or  arrangement  ;  it 
reminded  me  of  some  men's  theological  knowledge, — their  system  is  of  the  "anyhow" 
character.  The  thing  which  pleased  us  most  was  a  pulpit,  into  which  I  ascended. 
The  whole  place  was  full  of  interest,  even  down  to  the  crypt,  into  which  we 
ventured. 


After  the  cathedral,  we  visited  the  famous  school  of  William  Wykeham,  where 
the  "tunding"  took  place.  It  is  like  one  of  the  Cambridge  Colleges,  and  very 
quaint  are  its  ways.  The  photograph  I  send  you  shows  the  tower  of  the  school - 
chapel,  and  the  Quakers'-meeting-looking  place  in  front  is  the  French  school.  We 
saw  the  dining-hall,  and  the  great  buttery  hatches  through  which  the  meat  and  beer 
are  passed,  of  which  the  boys  have  as  much  as  they  choose  ; — Saxon  again  !  Near 
the  kitchen,  is  the  ancient  painting  of  "  the  faithful  servant,"  which  seems  to  be  held 
in  hio-h  repute  at  Winchester,  but  I  think  it  a  very  poor  thing.*  I  have  also  been  up 

*  "  The  figure  is  compounded  of  a  man,  a  hog,  a  deer,  and  an  ass.     The  inscription  runs, — 
"  '  A  trusty  servant's  portrait  would  you  see, 
This  emblematic  figure  well  survey. 
The  porker's  snout,  not  nice  in  diet  shows; 
The  padlock  shut,  no  secret  he'll  disclose  ; 
Patient  the  ass,  his  master's  rage  will  bear ; 
Swiftness  in  errand,  the  stag's  feet  declare. 
Leaden  his  left  hand,  apt  to  labour  saith ; 
The  vest,  his  neatness  ;    open  hand,  his  faith  ; 
Girt  with  the  sword,  his  shield  upon  his  arm, 
Himself  and  master  he'll  protect  from  harm.'" 


C.     II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


263 


St.  Giles'  Hill,  above  Winchester,  and  watched  the  setting  sun,  and  have  seen  the 
lamps  lit  one  after  another  all  along  the  hill.  It  was  very  beautiful  indeed,  and  the 
evening  was  so  cool  and  calm  it  did  me  a  world  of  good. 

Salisbury. — To-day  has  been  very  dull  and  wet.  Our  drive  through  Hursley 
to  Romsey  was  all  very  well  ;  but  from  Romsey  here,  there  was  a  constant  downpour, 
and  it  got  to  be  rather  wearisome.  It  rains  still,  and  I  feel  very  tired  ;  but  a  sunny 
clay  to-morrow  will  set  me  up  again.  I  don't  like  big  hotels  in  towns  like  dear  old 
"  Hatches  "  and  the  blessed  trees. 


Amesbury.  Sabbath. — Last  evening,  we  went  into  the  grounds  of  the  Abbey 
Park,  the  property  of  Sir  Edward  Antrobus.  The  river  Avon  runs  through  the 
domain,  in  many  windings,  branchings,  and  twistings.  The  grounds  are  thickly 
wooded,  but  so  little  frequented  that  we  heard  the  hoarse  crow  of  the  pheasant,  the 
coo  of  pigeons,  the  cry  of  waterfowl,  the  song  of  countless  birds,  and  the  plash  of 
leaping  fish,  but  no  sound  of  man's  profaning  footsteps.  We  sat  on  an  ornamental 
bridge,  and  listened  to  the  eloquence  of  nature,  while  the  river  hastened  along 
beneath  us.  The  family  being  away,  we  had  leave  to  wander  anywhere,  and  we 
enjoyed  the  liberty  very  much.  I  was  up  this  morning  at  six  o'clock,  dressing  slowly, 
and  meditating  ;  then  I  came  down,  and  had  an  hour's  work  at  The  Interpreter.  I 
do  not  mean  to  preach  to-day,  except  with  my  pen  ;  and  it  is  a  great  pleasure  to  me 
to  use  that  instrument  when  thought  Hows  freely.  May  you  also  have  a  quiet  day, 


264  c.    H.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

and  gather  strength  !     May  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  bless  my  own  best-beloved,  and 
cause  His  face  to  shine  upon  her ! 

We  had  a  nice  little  service  yesterday  morning,  and  after  dinner,  we  went  into 
the  woods  again.  How  I  wished  you  could  have  been  with  me  !  Imagine  a  series 
of  cathedrals  of  beech  trees  ;  the  pillars  all  of  silver,  and  the  roof  of  emerald  lace- 
work  and  twinkling  stars  of  sunlight  ;  the  walls  of  dense  yew  trees,  and  the  floor 
ankle-deep  of  red  and  brown  leaves,  softer  than  a  velvet  carpet.  Rain  fell  ;  but, 
under  the  yews,  we  only  heard  it  patter  ;  and  as  we  lay  still,  we  could  hear  the  wild 
ducks  on  the  stream,  far  down  below,  making  love, — and  war.  Presently,  the  sun 
came  out,  and  we  walked  through  the  grand  avenues  up  to  a  hill,  which  stood  as  a 
cliff  above  the  Avon,  with  the  Abbey  House  full  in  view,  and  Beacon  Hill  and  the 
Wiltshire  range  of  Downs  with  plentiful  twnuli.  Here  again  wTe  saw  pheasants  in 
the  mead  on  the  other  side,  one  white  one  among  them,  and  wild  ducks  and  coots  on 
the  river,  diving,  swimming,  and  flying  after  one  another.  Swallows  were  all  around 
us.  Wood-pigeons  came  every  now  and  then,  and  some  wrere  in  the  trees  cooing 
constantly.  Hawks  poised  themselves  in  the  air,  flocks  of  starlings  flew  overhead, 
like  November  meteors,  thrushes  and  blackbirds  sang  ;  and,  last  of  all,  there  came;, 
on  downy  yellow  pinions,  white-breasted  and  round-faced,  your  friend  the  owl,  who 
sped  into  the  wood,  and  wras  soon  followed  by  another,  whose  soft  course,  on  noise 
less  broad-sailing  wings,  would  have  made  you  nestle  up  to  me  for  joy,  and  whisper, 
"  Oh,  husband,  how  lovely  !  "  All  the  while,  the  fish  leaped  as  if  they  were  quite  at 
home,  for  we  were  as  high  above  them  and  all  the  other  things  as  if  we  were  on  a 
church  spire.  We  then  walked  down  green  alleys,  and  started  the  rabbits  in  families; 
and,  as  we  stood  still,  we  saw  their  gambols,  and  marked  the  hares  sitting  upright, 
so  that,  seeing  only  their  backs,  they  might  have  been  mistaken  for  stumps  of  trees, 
if  it  had  not  been  for  their  ears.  I  send  you  a  sketch  of  them.  A  sneeze  made 
them  run,  or  rather,  leap  away.  Then  we  came  on  young  partridges  and  hen-coops, 
which  we  left  at  once,  for  fear  of  offending  ;  and  so  came  in  to  tea,  walking  along 
the  river-bank,  and  smelling  the  new-mown  hay.  It  was  a  sweet  Sabbath.  To-clay 
and  yesterday,  I  have  clone  twenty-four  pages  of  Tlie  Interpreter,  and  have  sixteen 
more  to  do  when  I  can.  Love  as  deep  as  the  sea  and  as  broad,  I  send  thee, 
my  dear  one. 

Lyndhurst. — Three  dainty  notes  have  I  devoured  ;  real  delicacies,  flavoured  with 
the  love  I  prize  above  all  earthly  things.  This  place  is  so  beautiful  that,  to  linger 
here  for  a  week  or  two,  will  be  delightful,  and  better  than  going  elsewhere.  On  the 
way  here,  we  drove  to  Broadlands,  and  had  a  good  view  of  the  interior.  There  is 
as  fine  a  collection  of  pictures  as  I  ever  saw,  distributed  over  a  house  replete  with 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  265 

comforts  and  conveniences.  The  Temples  and  Palmerstons  were  set  forth  in  noble 
portraits,  but  there  were  many  works  of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Sir  Peter  Lely, 
Wouvverman,  and  other  great  masters  ;  many  Dutch  pictures,  and  a  large,  number 
full  of  interest,  and  truly  instructive  works  of  art.  A  mile  further,  we  saw  Emly 
Park,  where  Miss  Nightingale  was  born,  and  another  four  or  five  miles  brought  us 
into  the  forest  amid  the  wildest  scenery,  and  boundless  wildernesses  of  shade.  Here 
we  came  upon  Rufus  Stone,  of  which  I  send  you  all  three  sides.  I  bought  them  of  a 
poor  boy  in  a  smock-frock,  on  the  spot.  "  Mother  paints  'em,  Sor,"  was  the  answer 
of  this  youth  to  my  question,  "  Where  do  you  buy  them  ?  "  What  are  the  Selbornians 
after  to  have  no  photographs  of  their  sweet  village?  Evidently,  this  "  Mrs.  Hodge" 
of  the  New  Forest  is  an  advanced  woman!  How  vivid  history  becomes  when  such 
memorials  are  before  one's  eyes  !  The  top  of  the  iron  pillar  is  grated,  so  that  we 
could  look  in,  and  see  the  stone  which  it  encases.  Here  it  began  to  rain,  but  we  had 
only  about  four  miles  to  drive  to  Lyndhurst,  so  we  went  along  very  gently  in 
alternate  sho\ver  and  shine. 

So  ends  this  week's  chronicle.  I  do  not  think  more  could  well  have  been  seen  ; 
certainly,  more  could  not  be  enjoyed  b)  any  living  man  in  the  absence  of  a  dear  wife 
to  share  his  pleasure.  How  I  should  have  loved  you  to  have  seen  the  partridges, 
and  rabbits,  and  birds  of  all  kinds,  and  forest  trees  and  cedars,  and  roses  and  honey 
suckles  !  It  may  yet  be.  The  Lord  cheer  thy  heart,  thou  dearest  among  women  ! 
Accept  my  most  fervent  love,  hot  from  my  inmost  heart  ! 

Yesterday  morning,  we  went  for  a  ride  through  "  The  Manor,"  and  there  we 
came  upon  a  very  Atlantic  of  rhododendrons  !  Huge  billows  of  these  flowers  dashed 
up  into  the  trees,  or  sank  into  deep  hollows,  and  that  for  a  mile  or  so  in  length,  and 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  depth.  The  azaleas  and  rarer  rhododendrons  are  past,  but 
enough  remained  to  make  a  matchless  sea  of  colour  and  beauty.  How  I  wished 
you  were  there  !  Thence  we  drove  to  Castle  Malwood,  where  Rufus  slept  the  night 
before  he  was  shot.  It  stands  on  a  round  hill,  and  the  owner  has  cut  out  openings 
in  the  wood,  so  as  to  give  a  series  of  glorious  views.  It  is  like  a  circular  picture- 
gallery  ;  for,  looking  through  a  frame  of  green,  you  see  the  towns  and  villages  far 
away.  None  but  a  man  of  taste  would  have  thought  of  such  a  thine,  and  carried  it 

o  o ' 

out  so  well.  Some  of  the  views  are  wonderful  ;  no  artist  could  copy  them,  they  are 
so  far  away,  yet  so  large  and  so  full  of  detail.  In  the  afternoon,  clouds  hung  low, 
there  was  no  air,  all  was  close  and  thundery  ;  our  heads  ached,  and  though  we  went 
out  for  a  walk,  we  could  scarcely  breathe. 

Sabbath. — I  have  been  to  the  little  Baptist  Chapel,  and  have  been  much 
refreshed  with  a  plain  sermon  from  "Master,  carest  Thou  not  that  we  perish?" 


266 


C      II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


We  then  walked  in  the  wood,  and  talked  and  meditated.      It  is  a  grand  thing  to  be 
lost  in  the  forest  within  five  minutes  of  coming  out  of  a  meeting-house  ! 


IN    THE    KORESr 


Monday. — This  morning,  we  have  been  in  the  forest  again  from  ten  till  twelve. 
There  are  great  masses  of  beech  in  one  place,  then  oak,  then  underwood  and  small 
trees.  Amid  these  are  green  lawns,  and  verdant  valleys,  glades,  clells,  hills,  and 
vales.  Sometimes,  trees  disappear,  and  all  is  common,  with  gorse,  heather,  and 
low  bushes.  Cottages  surprise  you  everywhere,  in  nooks  as  secret  as  the  haunts 
of  fairies.  Cattle  with  bells  create  an  Alpine  tinkling,  horses  and  hogs  go  in  troops. 
Everything  is  picturesque,  and  the  space  seems  boundless.  One  might  soon  be 
lost,  for  the  roads,  and  tracks,  and  mere  trails,  are  countless.  Birds  and  insects 
abound,  and  wild  flowers  and  mosses.  It  is  a  world  of  beauty,  I  can  say  no  less. 
The  trunks  of  the  stately  trees,  all  aglow  with  lichen  and  moss,  are  loveliness  itself ; 
and  the  weird  oaks  are  sometimes  grotesque,  and  at  other  times  solemn.  Lyndhurst 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  267 

is  only  a  village,  but  it  is  in  the  forest,  and  that  is  its  charm.  You  can  ramble  where 
you  will,  and  no  man  can  threaten  you  for  trespassing-.  We  hoped  to  see  some  of  the 
fallow  deer,  and  the  squirrels  ;  but  have  not  succeeded  as  yet.  We  tracked  a  little 
brawling  brook  this  morning  ;  and  if  ever  perfect  beauty  has  existed  on  earth  since 
the  Fall,  we  saw  it.  What  with  foxgloves  on  the  banks,  and  rare  ferns  at  the  river's 
brim,  and  the  rippling-  waters  among  mossy  mole-mounds,  and  thyme-bearing  knolls, 
and  the  red  floor  beneath  the  temple  of  beech  shade, — it  was  matchless  !  I  am  as 
happy  as  half  a  being  can  be  without  the  other  half!  It  would  be  bliss  indeed  if  you 
were  here  to  share  my  joys. 

Tuesday. — An  evening  drive  has  been  supremely  delightful  from  its  coolness, 
and  from  the  shadows  and  the  gleams  of  glory  from  the  setting  sun,  which  here  and 
there  lit  up  the  tree-tops,  blazed  among  the  old  roots,  and  gilded  the  lofty  forest 
columns.  I  feel  as  peaceful  as  serenity  itself.  No  place  upon  earth  could  so  fitly 
minister  to  a  wearied  brain  by  giving  such  perfect  rest.  It  is  better  than  cities, 
pictures,  or  even  mountains,  for  all  is  peace,  and  there  is  not  even  sublimity  to  excite 
the  emotions  of  the  mind.  One  rests,  and  gazes  on  a  spider's  web  all  silvered  o'er, 
and  set  with  diamonds  of  dew  ;  a  beetle  Hying  heavily  ;  a  dragon-fly  dashing  forward 
like  a  cavalier  charging  the  foe,  then  hesitating  and  irresolute  until  another  fit  of 
energy  seizes  him  ;  a  foal  (risking  with  delight  at  its  mother's  side  ;  a  snake;  rustling 
hurriedly  away  among  the  red  leaves,  or  a  partridge  scurrying  across  the  heather  ! 
Thank  God  for  such  peaceful  scenes  ! 

We  have  been  through  Bolder  Wood  and  Mark  Ash,  and  seen  the  most 
wonderful  forest  scenery  I  have  ever  beheld  or  even  dreamed  of.  The  huge  beeches 
and  oaks  are  so  fantastic  as  to  seem  grotesque  and  wizard-like.  They  are  beyond 
measure  marvellous,  and  one  could  visit  them  twelve  times  a  day,  and  yet  not  see 
half  their  beauties.  The  most  singular  thing  of  all  is  the  flying  buttress  of  the 
beech  trees,  which  I  never  observed  before.  A  long  bough  will  be  supported  by 
another  which  joins  it  from  lower  down,  and  grows  into  it,  so  as  to  hold  it  up.  This 
habit  in  the  beech  leads  to  great  curiosities  of  growth,  for  there  are  sometimes 
threefold  bracings,  and  great  branches  will  be  thus  locked  together,  while,  in  other 
instance's,  one  bough  will  curl  under  another  in  order,  apparently,  to  hold  it  up. 
There  are  shapes  most  unshapely,  and  twistings  most  queer  and  unexpected,  but  the 
one!  object  appears  to  be  to  buttress  one  another,  and  contribute  to  each  other's 
strength  by  this  strange  interlacing.  Just  so  should  believers  aid  one  another;  are 
they  not  all  branches  of  one  tree  ? 

Another  place  we  have  visited  during  the  week  is  Beaulieu  Abbey,  which  is  all 
in  ruins,  but  some  remarkable  parts  remain,  and  the  foundations  of  the  buildings  are 


268  c.    H.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

marked  out  on  the  turf  by  a  sort  of  stone  edging,  so  that  one  can,  in  imagination, 
restore  the  whole  structure.  We  amused  ourselves  by  trying  to  decipher  the  inscrip 
tion  on  a  broken  memorial  stone,  but  could  not  succeed.  What  a  blessing  to  have  a 
complete  Revelation,  or  we  should  be  spelling  out  the  meaning  of  what  we  could  see, 
and  losing  ourselves  in  endless  speculation  as  to  what  might  have  been  written  on 
the  lost  fragment !  I  am  better  and  better,  and  all  the  ocean  of  my  love  is  yours. 

J-une  19,  1873. — This  is  my  thirty-ninth  birthday,  and  I  desire  to  bless  God  for 
sparing  and  blessing  me,  and  for  giving  me,  as  one  of  His  choicest  gifts,  my  own 
dear,  precious  wife.  May  we  be  spared  to  one  another  for  many  a  day,  and  dwell 
together  for  ever  hereafter  !  Thank  you  for  your  dear  fond  letter.  Truly,  it  is  sweet  to 
be  so  dearly  loved,  and  to  love  in  return  with  an  eagerness  which  could  understand 
limping  expressions,  much  more  the  tender  words  which  you  employ.  God  bless  thee  ! 
It  has  rained  all  day,  so  we  have  all  been  to  be  photographed,  gratifying  our  vanity, 
since  we  could  not  indulge  our  observation.  I  am  promised  a  copy  of  the  group 
to-night  before  this  is  posted,  thouo-h  it  will  not  have  been  long  enough  in  water 

o  JT  o  o  o 

to  prevent  its  fading  ;  but  if  it  pleases  you  for  a  moment,  it  will  answer  my  purpose. 

What  do  you  think  of  your  old  "  hub  "  in  the  forest  ?  Does  he  not  look  calm 
and  happy  ? 


c.    n.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  269 

I  think  the  old  log  just  suits  him,  and  the  shabby  old  coat,  too  !  I  like  the 
photograph  better  than  any  portrait  ever  taken  of  me  ;  I  wonder  if  you  will  ? 

After  I  wrote  to  you  yesterday,  I  worked  a  little  while  at  The  Interpreter, 
but  soon  felt  one  of  my  old  attacks  coming-  On,  so  we  set  off  for  a  long  walk,  and  at 
some  time  past  ten  o'clock  at  night  we  lost  our  way  in  the  thick  of  the  forest,  only 
we  knew  the  direction  of  Lyndhurst  by  the  chimes.  Alter  breaking  through  the 
long  grass,  brambles,  bracken,  and  underwood,  we  came  to  the  edge  of  the  dense 
enclosed  wood  in  which  we  had  been  wandering,  but  a  ditch  and  a  pond  barred  our 
way.  However,  there  were  some  rails  of  fencing  across,  and  over  this  we  climbed, 
and  went  along  it  above  the  water.  We  landed  in  a  field  of  high  grass,  and  made 
tracks  for  a  cottage,  got  into  the  garden,  down  the  path,  and  out  at  the  front  gate, 
nobody  challenging  us.  This  adventure  did  me  good,  and  procured  me  a  fair 
night's  sleep. 

To-day,  we  have  been  to  look  at  the  scene  of  our  night  wandering,  and  to  find 
out  where  we  missed  our  way.  We  have  roamed  in  the  wood  for  two  hours,  and 
have  never  seen  a  soul.  Birds,  rabbits,  (lies,  ants,  and  spielers  have  been  our  only 
company,  save  the  ONE  with  whom  we  have  held  sweet  converse,  and  of  whose 
Word  we  have  spoken  to  each  other. 

We  have  been  for  a  drive  to  Lymington.  It  was  charming  to  pass  through  the 
forest.  Each  road  has  its  own  character,  and  there  is  no  sameness.  I  had  a  fine 
supply  of  tracts,  and  sowed  the  region  well.  Lymington  is  quite  a  considerable 
place,  but  I  could  not  get  a  good  photograph  of  it  for  you.  We  went  down  to  the 
quay,  and  took  the  steamboat  to  Yarmouth  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.  It  was  about 
thirty  minutes'  steaming,  and  we  saw  Hurst  Castle  and  the  Needles  to  the  right  of 
us.  Yarmouth  is  a  poor  little  place,  but  we  walked  along  the  beach,  and  sat  down 
for  a  while,  and  enjoyed  the  lovely  view.  Fine  yachts  went  sailing  by,  and  porpoises 
were  in  great  plenty.  After  being  kept  in  by  the;  wet,  the  lovely  weather  of  to-day 
is  doubly  pleasing.  Returning  to  Lymington  at  seven  o'clock,  we  then  drove  back 
to  Lyndhurst,  where  I  found  a  very  specially  sweet  note  from  my  beloved  awaiting 
me.  I  am  so  glad  you  like  the  photo.  It  gives  me  real  delight  to  afford  you 
pleasure.  I  feel  wonderfully  well.  My  precious  one,  may  the  Lord  give  thee 
restoration  also,  and  make  thee  happy  with  me  in  journeys  yet  to  be  planned  ! 
How  I  should  rejoice  to  show  you  about  this  grand  forest,  the  noblest  in  all 
England  ! 

Yesterday  afternoon  was  spent  most  deliciously.  We  drove  alono-  the 
Christchurch  Road,  and  took  the  photographer  and  his  apparatus  with  us,  hopin<>- 


270 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


to  secure  some  charming  pictures.  Our  purpose  was,  however,  thwarted  l>y  the 
absence  of  the  sun,  lor  he  kept  behind  a  cloud.  We  then  sent  back  the  carriage,  and 
followed  on  foot  the  little  brook  called  the  Millifont,  in  all  its  winding  ways.  Ah  ! 
my  darling,  what  choice  bits  we  came  across  !  Here,  the  water  had  worn  out  the 
earth  from  under  the  trees,  and  left  bare  a  wattling  of  roots  ;  there,  in  another  place, 
clustered  the  water-lilies,  and  the  green  leaves  with  which  they  paved  the  brook. 
At  one  moment,  we  were  on  a  sand  island  in  the  middle  of  the  rivulet  ;  at  another, 
the  bank  was  high  above  the  water,  like  the  Rhine  hills,  in  miniature,  above  that 
mighty  flood.  Strange  moths  and  dragon-flies  frequented  the  pools  and  lakelets, 
and  here  and  there  a  fish  leaped  out,  while  shoals  of  minnows  flashed  away  when 
our  shadows  fell  upon  them.  We  crossed  the  current  upon  a  single  fir  tree,  rough 
and  unsquared  ;  if  we  had  tumbled  into  the  water,  it  would  not  have  mattered  much, 
except  that  we  could  not  quickly  have  changed  our  clothes.  All  this  walk  was  in 
solitude,  among  great  trees.  It  was  so  singular  to  sit  down  in  the  silence,  broken 
only  by  the  warble  of  the  brook's  liquid  notes,  or  by  the  noise  of  a  moving  bird,  or 
the  scream  of  a  water-fowl,  or  the  surprise  of  hearing  a  great  crack,  such  as  furniture 
will  give  in  certain  weathers.  A  dog  saluted  us  with  pertinacious  barking,  and  we 
found  his  mistress,  an  artist,  sitting  down  on  a  sandbank  in  the  stream,  sketching. 
The  clog  evidently  felt  that  he  was  her  protector,  but  I  do  not  think  we  should 
have  seen  the  lady  it  he  had  not  called  our  attention  to  her  presence.  Oh  !  it  was 
delicious  to  lie  on  a  bed  of  moss,  beneath  a  shady  beech,  with  ferns  and  foxgloves 
all  around,  and  the  water  rippling  at  one's  feet  !  It  was  balm  and  cordial  to  me. 

Bishop's  \Valtham. — We  left  delightful  Lyndhurst  at  about  nine  o'clock  this 
morning,  and  drove  along  a  charming  road  till  we  reached  Southampton,  and  crossed 
by  the  horse-ferry  to  go  to  Netley,  and  explore  the  ruins  of  its  Abbey.  Certainly,  no 


NETLEY   A13UEY.— TI1K   CLOISTER   COURT. 


C.      11.     STURGEONS     AUTOlJlUCiUAi'liY.  2/1 

place  could  be  more  congenial  for  an  hour  or  so  of  rest.  One  can  clamber  up  to  the 
top  in  some  places,  especially  in  the  South  transept,  where  there  is  a  walk  on  a  sort 
of  narrow  ledge  under  the  arches  below  the  window.  I  was  greatly  interested,  but 
could  only  keep  on  saying  to  myself,  "  How  I  wish  my  dear  wifey  were  here  !  " 
From  there  we  went  to  see  the  Victoria  Hospital,  driving  along  by  the  edge  of 
Southampton  Water, — such  a  fine  drive  !  The  Hospital  is  the  longest  building 
in  England  ;  I  should  think  it  is  nearly  half  a  mile  long.  Then  we  went  over  the 
hills  to  Botley,  where  the  views  are  boundless,  and  so  on  to  this  queer  old  town. 
We  have  been  wandering  among  the  ruins  of  a  castle-palace,  where  Henry  II.  and 
Coeur-de-Lion  have  feasted  in  the  days  gone  by.  It  has  been  a  cool,  lovely  clay,  and 
the  way  splendid. 

Liphook. — We  left  Waltham  this  morning,  and  drove  along  a  ridge  which  gave 
us  glorious  views.  We  turned  off  the  good  roads,  and  made  for  Winchester  Hill,— 
a  great  Roman  or  British  earthwork  upon  an  eminence.  The  tradition  is  that 
Winchester  once  stood  here,  but  I  cannot  believe  it.  On  the  vast  Down  there 
are  several  tumuli ;  indeed,  in  the  region  we  traversed  to-day,  tnmuli  are  as  plentiful 
as  blackberries.  What  air  we  breathed!  I  low  fresh  it  blew  up  from  the  sea!  It 
was  a  fair  requital  for  the  puffing  which  it  cost  me  to  climb  the  hill!  Then  we 
came  down  to  East  Meon,  where  is  an  ancient  church,  and  then  we  traversed  a  long 
valley  between  two  great  ranges  of  Downs.  Such  exquisite  views  !  Nobody  need 
go  to  Switzerland  for  the  sublime  !  At  Petersfield,  I  found  a  sweet  note  from  my 
darling.  May  all  God's  blessings  be  heaped  upon  her  !  As  the  way  had  been  too 
short  for  a  day's  journey,  we  came  on  to  Liphook  this  evening,  and  saw  gems  of 
views,  which  tilled  us  with  admiration.  Here  is  a  great  inn,  of  ancient  date,  stately 
and  roomy.  It  is  mentioned  by  old  Pepys  ;  but  since  the  coaching  days,  its  glories 
have  departed,  though  it  still  remains  comfortable  and  vast.  I  am  now  lookin"- 

x  o 

forward  to  my  work,  and  hope  to  keep  on  for  a  long  time. 

Ockley. — We  strolled  into  the  park,  and  sat  on  a  fallen  tree.  Presently,  a 
squirrel  came  and  peeped  at  us,  and  not  knowing  our  faces,  he  scudded  away,  and 
went  up  a  beech.  Anon  he  came  down  again,  waving  his  tail  on  high,  and  passed 
us  to  another  tree.  Then  came;  a  doe  and  fawn,  and  stood  and  stared  ;  and  others 
followed,  and  in  Indian  file  went  slowly  off.  It  became  cold,  so  we  trotted  in  to  tea; 
and  this  clone,  I  pen  a  line  to  my  darling,  almost  the  last  she  will  get  before  my 
return. 

A  clear  little  note  has  just  come  from  you,  and  rejoiced  my  heart.  What  joy  to 
meet  my  beloved  again,  and  find  her  better  !  On  Sunday,  we  went  and  sat  with 
the  Quakers,  and  created  an  event.  A  portly  female  was  moved  to  speak,  and  also 


272 


C.     II.     Sl'UKGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


to  admonish  us  against  water-baptism  !  She  was  one.  of  the  old  school,  and 
evidently  relieved  her  soul  by  her  exhortation.  In  the  afternoon,  we  had  a  fine 
storm  and  refreshing  rain,  and  I  revised  a  sermon,  and  wrote  on  a  Psalm.  Receive 
a  great  flood-tide  of  love  from  my  heart  to  yours.  Ma)-  God  bless  us  in  returning' 
to  each  other's  beloved  society,  and  spare  us  for  many  years  to  one  another  ! 


THE  KICI)  LION"  INN,  AT  OCKL1CY,  WHICH  1C  MR.  KPURGKON  WAS  A  KHICOUICNT  VISITOR.  AND  WIHCR1C  Ml'CII  (>!• 

"JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALK''  WAS  WRITTEN. 


CHAPTER    LXXVII 


s  of  mg  fatljct 


BY    PASTOR    CHARLES    STURGEON 


'1  hat  is  a  very  precious  Name  which  Christ  puts  into  our  mouths  when  He  bids  us  say  to  God, 
"O.ir  Father,  which  art  in  Heaven  ;"  and  there  is  a  wonderful  sweetness  when  we  come  to  know  that 
we  may  call  Him  our  Husband.  I  do  not  like  to  compare  the  two,  and  say  which  title  is  to  be 
preferred.— whether  Husband  or  Father  ;— they  are  both  unutterably  sweet  when  they  are  enjoyed  to 
the  lull. — C.  H.  S  ,  in  sermon  prcachtJ  at  the  Tabernacle,  March  I,  1883. 

ss»-,,Y    dear    mother    has    told,    and    is    telling,   in    the    sweetest    manner 

^Tra  ' ; 

possible,  much  of  tender  interest  concerning  her  beloved  husband. 
She  records,  in  her  own  inimitable  fashion,  many  touching  incidents 
in  the  life  of  him  who  is  so  dear  to  her  heart;  and  her  charming 
writing  proves  how  "unutterably  sweet,"  because  "enjoyed  to  the 
full,"  the  title  "my  husband1'  is  to  her.  There  is  only  one  other 
who  can  write  the  words  "my  father  ''  alter  the  illustrious  name  of  Charles  Iladdon 

S  3 


274  c.    a.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Spurgeon  ; — and  such  a  father  !  Blessed  be  his  dear  memory  !  Oh,  for  "the  tongue 
of  the  learned,"  and  "  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer,"  for  then  could  I  hope  to  speak  and 
write  love's  eulogy  on  one  whose  like  we  cannot  hope  to  see  again.  Never  had 
any  son  a  kinder,  wiser,  happier,  holier,  or  more  generous  sire  ;  and  I  count  it  one  of 
the  highest  honours  of  my  life  to  be  permitted  to  place  within  the;  already  well- 
stored  casket,  a  few  gems  which  memory  has  preserved  through  that  sweet 
relationship,  which,  in  God's  great  goodness,  I,  as  one  of  my  father's  sons,  was 
privileged  to  enjoy. 

There  was  one  trait  in  his  noble  and  godly  character,  which,  among  many 
others,  always  shone  with  a  lustre  peculiarly  its  own.  His  humility  was  of  a 
Christlike  character,  and  it  demands  heartiest  commendation  from  those  who  speak 
or  write  about  him.  Words  of  eulogy  concerning  himself  were  ever  painful  to  him, 
his  motto  in  this,  as  in  all  other  matters,  being,  "not  I,  but  Christ;"  yet,  from  his 
own  loving  child  some  meed  of  praise  may  surely  come,  and  the  son  would  fain 
render  all  due  honour  to  the  best  of  fathers.  His  blameless  example,  his  holy 
consistency,  his  genial  love,  his  generous  liberality,  his  wise  counsel,  and  his  fearless 
fidelity  to  God  and  His  truth,  are  all  on  a  par  with  his  fatherliness  ;  and  in  my 
heart,  as  in  all  those  with  whom  he  came  into  contact,  these  qualities  have  been 
enshrined,  'i  he  matchless  grace  and  goodness,  manifested  in  the  home,  found  their 
counterpart  in  his  public  career,  and  proved  how  completely  the  spirit  of  the 
Master  permeated  the  whole  life  of  His  servant.  \Yhat  my  father  was  to  me, 
to  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  to  the  world  at  large,  none  can  ever  fully  estimate  ; 
but  those  who  knew  him  best  understood  the  secret  of  his  magic  power,  for  they 
felt  that  he  "  had  been  with  Jesus,"  and  that  Jesus  lived  in  him. 

The  earliest  recollections  of  my  dear  father,  which  I  have  retained,  are,  naturally, 
those  associated  with  my  childhood;  and  my  heart  is  filled  anew  with  joyful  pleasures 
as  I  think  again  and  again  of  the  doings  of  the  days  gone  by.  I  must  have  been  a 
very  small  boy  when  I  capered  about,  with  great  delight,  because  my  father  had 
provided,  for  the  entertainment  of  the  natives  of  Walton-on-the-Naze,  a  firework 
display  on  the  sands  ;  and,  among  the  visitors  for  a  season,  at  the  then  slightly- 
known  and  out-of-the-way  watering-place,  little  Charlie  was  made  glad  by  looking  at 
sky-rockets,  and  listening  to  the  bang  of  squibs.  This  may  seem  a  small  matter  to 
report,  but  it  is  indicative  of  a  prominent  feature  in  my  father's  character,  inasmuch 
as  he  constantly  rejoiced  in  giving  pleasant  surprises  wherever  he  could  ;  nor  was 
this  the  only  time  when,  to  give  his  children  some  fun,  he  made  the  fifth  of  November 
an  excuse  for  indulging  in  works  of  fire. 

I  well  remember,  too,  how  an  improvised  swing  had  been  hung  between  two 
trees  for  the  amusement  of  the  boys  ;  but  an  untimely  fall  of  one  of  the  twins 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


275 


precluded  all  further  use  of  this  out-door  gymnasium.  Father  felt,  however,  that 
athletic  exercises  were  conducive  to  the  health  of  growing  lads,  so  he  arranged  for 
the  erection  of  a  substantial  horizontal  bar  and  swing  for  their  use,  thus  giving 
evidence  of  his  thoughtful  love  and  sympathetic  consideration  for  their  we] 


THE   TWIX-SOXS   AT   THE    AGE    OF   9. 

I  can  seem  to  see,  as  if  it  were  but  yesterday,  his  bright  face  beaming  with 
smiles,  as  he  gave  his  would-be  carpenter-sons  a  present,  in  the  form  of  a  basket  of 
tools  and  a  box  of  nails.  All  the  implements  needed  for  the  full  equipment  of  a 
master  in  the  trade  were  to  be  found  within  that  workman's  basket  ;  and  I  shall 
never  forget  how  father  watched  and  waited  for  us  to  discover,  among  the  tools,  a 
neat  roll  of  rag  !  While  we  were  puzzling  our  brains  to  find  out  why  this  was 
included,  he  laughingly  explained  that,  in  all  probability,  when  we  had  cut  our 


276 


C,   H.   SL'UUr.KOXS  AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


lingers,  we  should  fnul  out  the  use  of  it.  The  providing  of  the  bandage  for  wounded 
amateurs,  exemplified  his  power  of  forethought,  and  also  his  profound  common  sense. 

I  still  have  in  my  possession  a  silver  medal,  bearing  the  following  inscription  :  — 

"  Presented   to 
MASTKK   CIIARLKS   SPURCI-ON 

by   the 
United    Kingdom    Band   of    Hope    Union, 

January,    1865." 

It  calls  to  mind  a  notable  occasion  when  the  Tabernacle  was  crowded  with  a  vast 
audience  gathered  to  hear  the;  famous  lecture  on  ''Sermons  in  Candles  '  delivered  by 
my  dear  father  ;  and  well  do  I  remember  coming  forward  to  receive,  from  Mr. 
\Y.  R.  Selway,  a  broad  band  of  blue  ribbon,  to  which  was  attached  this  medallion 
of  membership  ;  and  how,  after  he  had  placed  it  around  my  neck,  with  trembling 


I'KOFKSSUK    SELXVAV,    AM)    C.    AM)    T.    Sl'UKGEON. 


C.      II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


277 


voice   I   acknowledged  the  kind  gift,   and  expressed  the  hope   that    I    might  be   a 
teetotaller  all  my  life. 

What  a  wonderful  light  the  lecturer  threw  upon  his  subject  !  It  can  well  be 
imagined  with  what  interest  the  little  lads,  in  their  ninth  year,  looked  and  listened, 
as  the  different  candles  were  lighted,  and  the  sermonettes  sparkled.  Most  vividly 
do  I  recollect  how  daintily  my  dear  father  walked  across  the  platform, — as  if  to  avoid 
the  pools  of  water  and  heaps  of  refuse  to  be  found  in  the  streets  of  an  Oriental 
city, — bearing  in  his  hand  a  small  cane,  at  the  end  of  which  hung  a  coloured  paper 
lantern,  thus  illustrating  Psalm  cxix.  105:  "Thy  Word  is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet, 
and  a  light  unto  my  path  "  I  must  confess  that  1  had,  even  then,  a  wish  to  do  the 


"A    LIGHT   UNTO    MY    PATH." 

self-same  thing,  little  dreaming  that,  in  after-life,  the  dear  father,  whom  I  was 
watching  with  such  intense  delight,  would  make  over  to  me,  as  a  love-gift,  the 
whole  of  the  apparatus  he  had  used,  with  a  bound  copy  of  the  lecture,  saying, 
"There,  Charlie,  my  boy,  you  can  go  on  giving  it." 


THE  BELLOWS  AND  THE  BROKEN  LANTERN 


Two  other  illustrations  fastened  themselves  upon  my  youthful  mind  ;    the  first 
being  the  one  in  which  the  lecturer's  assistant  represented  the  tempter  discovering 


278 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


the  weak  place  in  the  Christian's  character.      Watching-   for   the   defective   spot   in 
the  lantern,  the  helper,  by  the  use  of  a  pair  of  bellows,  soon  put  the  candle  out. 


THE   CANDELABRUM. 


The  other  emblem  which  I  specially  noted  was  the  one  described  by  dear  father 
as  "the  greatest  display  of  our  fireworks."  Suspended  from  the  roof  of  the 
Tabernacle  was  a  massive  candelabrum  which,  to  the  young  onlooker,  was  most 
attractive  for  its  brightness  and  beauty  ;  and,  though  one  of  such  tender  years 
could  hardly  appreciate  all  that  was  then  said  concerning  "the  Church  of  Christ 
in  its  multiplicity,  variety,  and  unity,"  he  cannot  forget  the  harmless  mirth,  expressed 
in  guileless  laughter,  which  followed  the  lecturer's  remark  that  one  strong  old 
Baptist  had  assured  him  that  the  "  Dips"  gave  the  best  light! 

These  are  only  a  few  of  my  happy  memories  of  that  memorable   Band  of  Hope 


meeting. 


I  prize  immensely  the  first  letter  I  ever  received  from  my  beloved  lather.  It 
is  written  to  a  little  boy,  and  has,  therefore,  on  the  top  of  the  note-paper,  a  coloured 
view  of  Heligoland.  I  feel  constrained  to  treat  the  publication  of  the  letter  in  the 

£3 

same  manner  as   age   has   treated    the    original,  and   to   give    it   in   pieces.      It  runs 
thus  :— 

"  My  Dear  Charlie, 

"  I  am  very  glad  that  you  wrote  a  nice  little  note  to  your  dear  mother, 
and  I  hope  it  is  a  sign  that  you  are  always  going  to  be  diligent  and  thoughtful, 
and  this  will  be  a  glad  thing  indeed.  ...  I  am  delighted  to  hear  that  you  are 


c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


279 


doing  so  well  at  College.      Give  my  love  to  all   the  students,  and   tell    Mr.   Rogers 
that  it  always  cheers  me  to  know  that  the  brethren  bear  me  up   in  their  prayers, 


HELIGOLAND. 


"On  this  little  island,  there  is  a  lighthouse  ;  you  see  it  at  the  top,  on  trie  left 
of  the  picture.  It  is  much  needed,  for  many  vessels  are  wrecked  here.  We  live 
down  below,  on  the  beach,  near  the  square  tower  with  a  Hag  on  it ;  that  is  a  bath 
house.  Steamers  come  every  two  days,  and  then  we  can  send  letters  ;  at  other 
times,  we  are  far  off  from  everybody,  alone  in  the  wide,  wide  sea.  \Ve  have  sheep's 
milk,  for  there  is  no  room  for  cows.  Fish  is  very  plentiful,  and  very  good. 

"  My  clear  boy,  I  trust  that  you  will  prove,  by  the  whole  of  your  future  life, 
that  you  are  truly  converted  to  God.  Your  actions  must  be  the  chief  proof. 
Remember,  trees  are  known  by  their  fruit,  and  Christians  by  their  deeds.  God 
bless  you  for  ever  and  ever  !  Mother  sends  her  kindest  love,  and  so  does— 

"Your  loving  father, 

"  C.    II.   STURGEON." 

The  reference  to  "doing  so  well  at  College,"  needs  just  this  explanation.  One 
of  the  students  was,  for  a  time,  our  tutor  ;  and,  naturally,  dear  father  took  a  deep 
interest  in  our  educational  progress.  Pastor  Harry  R\ -lands  P>rown,  now  of 
Darjeelmg,  was  the  good  brother  who  had  us  in  training  ;  and,  from  that  day  to 
this,  teacher  and  pupil  have  been  close  friends.  This  first  letter  to  his  firstborn 
exhibits  the  tender  love  that  the  President  always  had  for  the  College,  which  he 
often  termed,  among  his  many  works  for  the  Lord,  "  his  firstborn  and  best  beloved." 

Among  the  many  gifts  we  received  from  father,  I  recall  one  occasion,  when  a 
piece  of  gold  was  bestowed,  as  a  birthday  present,  upon  his  two  boys,  who  thereby 


2  SO 


C.      II.     SPURHKOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


became  the  proud  possessors  of  a  magic-lantern  and  a  few  comic  slides.  When  the 
toy  was  brought  home,  the  kind  donor  gave  instructions  to  the  cook  to  allow 
the  boys  to  show  their  pictures,  as  often  as  they  liked,  in  that  portion  of  the  kitchen 
which  would  not  interfere  with  culinary  arrangements,  saying-,  at  the  same  time,  "  It 
won't  last  long,  they'll  soon  be  tired  of  it."  This  prophecy  was  quite  sufficient  to 
set  up,  within  the  minds  of  the  purchasers  of  "  this  very  pretty  thing,"  a  strong- 
determination  that  they  would  not  get  tired  of  it.  By  the  combined  efforts  of  the; 
two  brothers,  further  pictures  were  produced  upon  glass,  which  necessitated  the 
constant  use  of  the  lantern  to  test  their  artistic  qualities  ;  and,  secretly,  it  was 
resolved  that  a  special  series  should  be  prepared  so  that,  during  the  coming- 
Christmas,  the  services  of  Messrs.  C.  and  T.  Spurgeon  might  be  requisitioned  for 
the  entertainment  of  the  children  who  would  frequent  Yule-tide  parties.  Several 
engagements  of  this  nature  having  been  secured,  and  professional  fees  attending  the 


lecturing    exhibition   having   been    received,    they    were   able    to   hand    over   to    the 


TIIK  VOTM;  EECHKEKS  AJNIJ  THEIR  DEAR  .UUIIIER. 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  281 

President  of  the  Pastors'  College  the  sum  of  ten  guineas  ;  and,  in  doing  so,  perhaps 
somewhat  saucily  reminded  their  beloved  father  that  "  they  weren't  tired  ol  the 
magic-lantern  yet."  This  little  episode  greatly  charmed  the  heart  of  the  original 
donor  of  the  ten  shillings,  and  proved  the  possibility  of  making  a  small  capital  bring 
in  large  interest. 

When  I  was  about  twelve  years  of  age,  I  was  riding  home  with  my  dear  father, 
in  the  brougham,  alter  an  evening  service  at  the  Tabernacle.  It  was  "  blowing 

o  <_>  o 

great  guns,"  there  was  a  heavy  downpour  of  rain,  and  a  keen  East  wind,  with  a 
cutting  edge,  was  driving  it  upon  the  pavement.  It  was  a  dark,  dreary  night  ;  and, 
as  we  came  to  a  point  where  cross-roads  met,  father's  quick  eye  discerned  a  person, 
whom  he  judged  to  be  a  poor  woman,  hurriedly  rushing  across  the  stones  through 
the  storm.  With  her  skirt  gathered  over  her  head,  she  looked  a  weird  spectacle  ; 
and,  in  a  moment,  his  heart  was  moved  with  compassion  toward  her.  lie  cried  out, 
"Charlie,  stop  the  coachman;  jump  out,  and  see  if  there  is  anything  wrong  with 
that  poor  creature,  and  find  out  whether  you  can  help  her."  Of  course,  I  sprang 
out  of  the  carriage  at  once  ;  but  I  wondered  what  I  was  going  to  say  to  the  woman. 
I  overtook  her,  and  said,  "Excuse  me,  but  is  there  anything  the  matter?  Are  you 
in  trouble?"  She  replied,  "Oh,  dear,  no!  I  have  been  to  see  a  friend,  and  have 
been  caught  in  the  storm.  I  came  out  without  an  umbrella,  so  I  am  running  home 
as  fast  as  I  can."  On  repeating  to  dear  father  what  she  had  said,  he  exclaimed, 
"That  is  a  relief  to  me!  But  what  would  he  have  done  if  she  had  been  in 
distress  ?  He  was  glad  that  she  was  all  right  ;  but  I  remember  thinking,  as  I  sat 
there  by  his  side,  "  Dear  me  !  That  woman  is  nothing  to  him,  yet  his  heart  went 
out  towards  her  in  pity  and  sympathy."  It  went  out  after  everyone  who  was  in  need 
and  distress  ;  and  if  his  hand  could  help,  its  bounty  speedily  followed  the  leadings  of 
his  great  heart  of  love. 

While  my  brother  and  I  were  at  Air.  Olding's  school  at  Brighton,  I  wrote  to  tell 
my  lather  that  we  had  started  a  little  prayer-meeting',  in  the  master's  drawing-room, 
among  our  school-fellows.  In  reply,  he  wrote  : — "  Dear  boy, — One  of  my  sweetest 
joys  is  to  hear  that  a  spirit  of  prayer  is  in  your  school,  and  that  you  participate  in  it. 
To  know  that  you  love  the  Lord,  and  are  mighty  in  prayer,  would  be  my  crowning 
joy  ;  the  hope  that  you  do  so  already,  is  a  happy  one  to  me.  I  should  like  you  to 
preach  ;  but  it  is  best  that  you  pray  ;  many  a  preacher  has  proved  a  castaway  ;  but 
never  one  who  has  truly  learned  to  pray." 

I  understand  that,  in  the  first  chapter  on  "A  Traveller's  Letters  Home;,"  father 
describes  the  very  tour  concerning  which  he  wrote  to  me  in  this  interesting 


282 


C.     II.     SrURGEOX  S     AUTOmoCRAPIIY. 


fashion  :-  ;<  I  have  had  a  very  happy  journey,  and  am  very  much  better.  You  can 
trace  my  trip  thus,— I  have  been  in  stately  Brussels,  sniffed  in  odoriferous  Cologne, 
slept  in  Rhine-washed  Mayence,  inspected  regal  Munich,  rested  in  rustic  Botzen, 
floated  in  palatial  Venice,  eaten  sausage  in  Bologna,  tarried  in  flowery  Florence,  and 
roamed  in  imperial  Rome." 

This  reference  to  various  places  on  the  Continent  reminds  me  of  the  great 
enjoyment  dear  father  gave  his  two  sons,  in  August,  1871,  when  he  took  us  to 
Antwerp.  As  we  went  through  the-  different  churches  there,  he  seemed  to  know  all 
about  every  picture,  each  pulpit,  and  even  the  tombs  ;  and  he  could  tell  us  about 
the  famous  artists,  sculptors,  and  carvers,  upon  whose  works  we  were  gazing  jn 
boyish  wonderment.  Ii  was  a  treat  to  hear  him  describe,  the  "  Calvary  "  outside* St. 


"CALVARY"  OUTSIDE  ST.  PAUL'S  CHURCH,  ANTWERP. 


Paul's  Church.  Some  persons,  unacquainted  with  my  father,  have  said  that  he  was 
no  artist ;  but  if  they  had  known  more  of  him,  and  heard  him  dilate  upon  the  noblest 
works  by  the  best  Flemish  masters,  they  would  have  thought  otherwise.  Me  found 
sermons  while  he  looked  upon  "  The  Elevation  of  the  Cross  "  and  "  The  Descent  " 
from  it,  by  Rubens  ;  and  with  equal  facility  drew  lessons  from  the  masterpieces  of 
Vandyck  and  Snyders.  It  needs  a  true  connoisseur  to  discover  the  hidden  meaning 
of  the  artist's  mind,  as  portrayed  upon  the  canvas,  and  thus  to  revel  in  the  spirit 
of  the  picture  ;  such  a  gift  was  his.  Standing  before  the  magnificent  pulpit  in 
St.  Andrew's  Church,  he  pointed  out  the  cross  which  bears  the  apostle's  name,  and 
then  gave  us  an  exquisite  sermonette  upon  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes 
illustrated  by  the  carved  figures  of  Christ  and  His  two  disciples,  with^heir  fishing- 
boat  and  the  nets  containing  the  unprecedented  "take."  I  well  remember,  too,  how 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


28 


father's  righteous  indignation  was  kindled  as  we  stood  in  the  famous  cathedral,*  and 
witnessed  the  absurdities  connected  with  the  funeral  obsequies  of  some  great 
personage.  No  sooner  had  the  gloomy  cortege  quitted  the  building,  to  a  slow  and 
solemn  dirge  rendered  by  the  chorister  monks,  than  a  gorgeous  wedding  procession, 
with  all  the  joyous  accompaniments  of  marriage  festivities,  took  its  place  ;  and  thus 
the  whole  scene  was  quickly  changed,  and  the  mournful  "miserere"  was  succeeded 
by  the  nuptial  "'jubilate!'  The  experienced  preacher  extemporized  a  brief  discourse 
upon  the  ever-varying  vicissitudes  of  human  life,  as  set  forth  by  the  two  events  ;  and 
the  truths  he  thus  inculcated,  still  abide,  as  we  remember  that  our  joys  and  sorrows 
are  not  so  far  apart  as  WTC  are  apt  to  think,  for  sunbeams  and  shadows  are  closely 
allied,  after  all.  Sic  cst  vita. 


PULPIT  IN"  ST.  ANDREW'S  CHURCH,  ANTWERP 


*  The  mention  of  Antwerp  cathedral  always  recalled  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  a  memorable  encounter  that  he  once  had  with  Rev. 
Edward  White  in  that  grand  edifice.  It  took  place  some  time  after  Mr.  White  had  left  the  Baptist  denomination,  and  joined  (or, 
rather,  returned  to)  the  Congregationalists,  with  whom,  apparently,  he  did  not  find  himself  much  more  at  home  than  he  had  been 
with  those  he  had  left. 

The  dialogue  that  ensued,  was  thus  reported  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  :  — 

Spurgeon. — Well,  Mr.  White,  you  don't  seem  to  get  on  with  your  new  friends  any  better  than  you  did  with  your  old  ones. 

White. — "  New  friends  "  ?     Why,  I  was  a  Congregationalist  before  I  became  a  Baptist ! 

S. — Then  it  hath  happened  unto  him  according  to  the  true  proverb  :  "  The  dog  is  —  — ."  I  need  not  finish  the  quotation 
(2  Peter  ii.  22). 

W. — Oh,  you  wretch,  Spurgeon  !     What  do  you  think  would  be  the  consequences  if  I  were  to  kill  you  on  the  spot  ? 

S. — I  don't  know  ;  you  are  a  greater  authority  on  future-life  questions  than  I  profess  to  be  ;  perhaps,  for  such  a  crime  as 
that,  you  would  be  sent  to  purgatory  for  ten  minutes  ! 

W. — Ah !  you  may  make  fun  of  my  teaching,  but  dear  Samuel  Martin  has  embraced  my  views  of  the  future. 

S.— Oh  !  has  he  ?     I  don't  care  what  views  he  has  embraced ;  he  is  a  gracious,  holy  man,  and  1  shall  continue  to  love  him. 

There  was  a  pause  in  the  discussion  here,  and  the  two  ministers  walked  together  round  the  cathedral,  pointing  out  to  one 
another  what  each  specially  admired.  Presently,  in  an  unguarded  moment,  Mr.  White  said: — "You  would  be  grieved  if  you 
could  see  poor  Samuel  Martin;  his  mind  has  completely  gone,  and  he  has  become  quite  childish."  In  an  instant,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
replied,  "  That  explains  how  it  is  that  he  has  embraced  your  views  !"  After  that  retort,  Mr.  White  judged  it  expedient  to  give 
up  the  contest. 


284  c.    ii. 

It  has  been  my  privilege  to  accompany  dear  father,  on  man}"  occasions,  to  "  the 
land  o'  cakes  "  and  the,  county  oi  lakes  ;  and  never  had  any  tourist  a  more;  excellent 
guide.  He  was  a  veritable  walking  Encyclopaedia  ;  so  full  of  information,  ami  so 
gracious  in  imparting  it,  that  a  holiday  spe;nt  with  him  was  as  instructive  as  a  term 
at  school,  and  to  me;,  far  preferable.  It  sometimes  became  amusing  to  see  how 
eager  folks  were  te)  show  any  little;  kindness  to  him.  On  one  occasion,  we  were 
passengers  on  Mr.  Duncan's  yacht,  I'arhia,  an  el  had  maele  the;  passage;  of  the 
Caledonian  ("anal,  as  far  as  Loch  Ktive,  whe:re,  in  one  of  the;  sheltered  and 
picturesque  bays,  we  had  anchored  for  the;  night.  Next  morning,  when  breakfast 
was  being  prepared,  the  stewarel  discovered  that  the  supply  of  milk  had  run  short, 
and  that  he  must  needs  visit  the  shore  to  replenish  the;  store.  Standing  on  deck, 
I  watched  the  progress  of  our  caterer  as  he  climbed  the  hillside,  and  made 
application  at  a  small  cottage;  on  the  border  of  the  wood  which  covered  the;  slope. 
Presently,  a  woman  made  her  appearance,  and  then  it  soon  became  evident  that 
she;  and  the:  steward  were  having  a  somewhat  lively  conversation.  In  a  few  minutes, 
the  man  returned  ;  but,  alas  !  minus  the  milk. 

He  told  us,  when  he  came  back,  that  the:  lady  of  the  house  would  only 
supply  it  on  conelition  that  he  would  let  her  see  Mr.  Spurgeon,  whose  name  he 
had  used  as  his  last  argument.  Upon  my  dear  father  learning  that  his  appear 
ance  was  required  for  this  purpose,  with  his  usual  readine;ss  to  supply  "  the  milk 
of  human  kindness,"  he  came  up  on  deck,  and  waved  his  hand  in  the  direction 
of  the  cottage.  The  woman  at  once  recognized  him,  and  commenced  a  "  Scotch 
ree'l  "  of  delight.  The  steward  had,  meanwhile,  again  pulled  to  the:  shore  ;  he  soon 
disappeared  within  the  house,  and,  in  a  few  seconds,  he  came  out,  bearing  a  huge 
jug,  brimful  of  pure  milk,  for  which  the  worthy  dame  would  not  accept  even 
twopence  a  quart  ! 

At  another  time,  I  was  staying  with  my  father  in  a  much-loved,  and  oft- 
frequented  spot,  in  dear  old  Surrey,  where  his  presence  was  always  looked  upon  as  a 
high  honour.  The  villagers  had  been  successful  in  securing  a  fine  large  carp  from 
the  pond  which  skirted  the  green,  and  they  thought  that  such  a  good  catch  should 
at  once  be  sent  to  their  notable  visitor  ;  so,  with  great  ceremony,  a  deputation  of 
rustics  was  appointed  to  wait  upon  him.  The  best  that  any  could  give  to  him,  was 
never  reckoned  too  good  for  the  man  they  loved  ;  and  though,  in  both  these 
instances,  the  gifts  were  small,  they  were  sufficient  to  prove  the  affectionate  regard 
in  which  he  was  held  by  multitudes  of  people  of  all  classes.  Testimonials, 
amounting  to  thousands  of  pounds,  have  been  presented  to  him  by  admiring 
adherents  ;  and  while  the  plaudits  of  enthusiastic  crowds  have  greeted  him  as  the 
hero  of  the  hour,  he  has,  in  grateful  terms,  acknowledged  the  favours  showered 


upon  him,  and,  while  passing  on  the  praises  to  the  Lord,  he  has  handed  over  the 
purses  and  their  contents  to  the  service  of  his  Master.  Never  did  a  more  liberal 
soul,  nor  a  more  grateful  man,  breathe,  than  my  lather, 

It  \vas  a  memorable  period  in  my  history  when,  upon  leaving  school,  in  18/4,  I 
decided  to  enter  upon  a  commercial  career.  It  every  son,  upon  commencing  his 
life's  battle,  received  such  a  letter  as  the  following,  there  would  probably  be  fewer 
defeats  sustained,  and  more  victories  gained  : --- 

"  Winchester, 

"  1  une  26th,   I  874. 

"My  Dear  Charlie, 

"  \our  kind  letter  was  very  pleasant  to  me,  and  made  my  birthday  much 
happier.  I  am  right  glad  to  see  that  you  intend  putting  on  the  armour  in  earnest 
for  the  battle  of  liie,  into  which  you  must  now  enter.  \\  e  have  to  carry  babies  ;  but 
it  is  always  a  glad  occasion  when  they  run  alone:.  After  that,  conies  another  period 
of  carrying  on  a  larger  scale  ;  and  then  comes  (as  now7,)  the  time  for  another  running 
alone,  as  to  manly,  serious,  earnest,  industrious  life-work.  We  do  not  expect  you  to 
run,  in  this  sense,  all  at  once  ;  and  we  shall  not  be  surprised  if  there  are  some 
stumbles  and  failures  ;  but  we  shall  hope  to  see  you  an  upright  man,  capable  of  any 
honest  achievement,  and  bending  all  your  strength  to  accomplish  an  honourable  life- 
work.  I  am  lull  of  hope  about  you  ;  and  if  I  feel  any  anxiety,  it  is  because  I  love 
you  so  well  that  1  want  you  to  be  a  greater  success  than  other  young  men. 
I  believe  you  love  the  Lord,  and  that  is  the  main  thing  ;  the  next  is,  slick  lo  it. 
Leave  childish  things  once  for  all,  and  buckle  to  the  work.  It  will  not  be  pleasant, 
and  it  may  even  become  irksome  ;  but  the  harder  you  work,  at  first,  the  less  you  will 
have  to  do  in  later  life.  The  times  are  so  pushing  that  you  must  put  out  all  your 
energies  ;  and,  above  all,  you  must  be  careful,  and  very  persevering  ;  and  then,  with 
God's  blessing,  you  will  soon  take  a  position  to  which  your  father  and  mother  can 
point  with  pleasure.  If  you  do  not  preach  the  gospel,  you  must  help  me  to  do  it, 
and  make  money  for  Jesus.  With  my  two  sons  at  my  side,  I  shall  be  able  to  do 
marvels,  if  the  Lord  be  with  us. 

"  Letters  from  your  dear  mother  are  encouraging.  Do  not  write  to  me  here, 
as  I  am  flitting. 

"  Your  loving  father, 

"  C.    II.   STURGEON." 


CHAPTER     LXXVIII 


Jitcmorics  of  mg  jfatljti*  (Continued). 

BY  PASTOR  CHARLES  STURGEON. 

NE  of  the  most  notable  events,  of  which  I  still  have  vivid  recollec 
tions,  was  the  occasion  of  my  baptism.  An  entry  in  the  Tabernacle 
church -book,  dated  September  14,  1874,  reads  as  follows  : — 
"Charles  and  Thomas  Spurgeon,  of  Nightingale  Lane,  Clapham, 
were  proposed  for  church-membership,  and  Brother  Payne  was 
appointed  messenger. 

"Charles  and  Thomas  Spurgeon  came  before  the  church,  and  gave  a  satisfactory 
statement  of  the;  work  of  grace  in  their  souls,  and  the  messenger  reporting  favourably, 
it  was  agreed  that,  after  baptism,  they  should  be  received  into  communion  with  the 
church." 

On  the  following  Lord's-clay  morning,  clear  father  preached  at  the  Tabernacle, 
from  Isaiah  viii.  18,  a  sermon  to  which  he  gave  the  title,  "  I  and  the  Children."  The 
next  evening,  September  21,  he  baptized  his  twin-sons,  who  had,  on  the  previous 
day,  celebrated  their  eighteenth  birthday.  As  the  beloved  Pastor  had  not,  for  a  long 
time,  been  able  to  baptize,  and  also,  perhaps,  because  the  candidates  were  his  own 
sons,  the  great  edifice  was  crowded  with  an  interested  concourse  of  people  who 
had  come  to  witness  the  solemn  ceremony.  Dr.  Brock,  of  Bloomsbury  Chapel, 
was  present,  according  to  promise,  and  delivered  a  forcible  address,  which  was 
emphasized  by  some  of  father's  telling  utterances.  In  connection  with  this 
joyful  occurrence,  an  illuminated  address  (of  which  a  facsimile  appears  on 
pages  288  and  289,)  was  presented  to  my  clear  mother,  who  had  also  been  an  eye 
witness  of  her  sons'  confession  of  faith  in  the  Scriptural  fashion.  We  received  the 
right  hand  of  fellowship,  at  the  Lord's  table,  on  the  night  of  October  4  ;  the  motto- 
text  my  father  then  gave  me  was,  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,  for  ye  are  bought  with  a 
price  ; "  and  many  a  time  since  has  it  been  a  source  of  spiritual  inspiration  to  me. 

When  it  was  put  into  my  heart  to  serve  the  Lord,  and  to  begin  to  speak  for 
Him,  I  of  course  sought  my  father's  counsel.  He  was  then  laid  aside  with  a 
painful  illness  at  Brighton,  but  he  wrote  to  me  thus  :— 

"  My  Own  Dear  Son, 

"  I  think  it  very  kind  and  thoughtful  of  you  to  write  to  your  father,  and 


C,      II.      STURGEONS     AUTOUIOGKA  I'l  I V. 


"f 

'"  tV  .5  1  U'/  '  l^  i  t\V  t  ^    1  1  7     I  .VM  1  1  J 


t      ,  ,*,  t,       1 

^  ll.v  iJU/av^t^   .'I-    U.v  ^ 


cUutb  ll.v   lav  <sVu.i  k'K*u 

1  .•» 


FACSIMILE   OF    ILLUMINATED   ADDRESS 


C.      II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


289 


I  uvUvMU  U-via    auvl    <»v»i;lilij    * 't  \ 
*  aa^   pia-i    lh\l   |!«-     MI    ut     -       -» 
Lvij    nuuj    iv   J»patvV    Uv  ^ArbtLnl 
ta   julU^l    Hu\v^utv*   il.v;v  otavV.^ 

\          ,•  /'  •    <1        /   'H  v.i      t 

,;uv  iaUttL-    irbu-l?    ^.\i!l   Iv  f^t 
>v   Iwu^ut    .'|'   CK)    aa3    Hi'      ^N    ,L    4' 

^iMr^,,  ^  .£ 


U'tU.^    l?int  .  ta     Ln."1 

v^j-  j'atlb,    aa3  .Ltlvu;^  t'(-  Lnv.aa^uv 

jtsil  hi  him  ai.iun   iuvu:>  ^Jtvt.^iit^iu^i 


*  4. 

tvVj.vctlu  iu  ,v:nuvluMi   will?  ll.vat  ati\ 


j. 

-J 

lll 

1  1  L  * 


ll  uv  !lvat^  ItuH.vt  i.nat.v  /tu  Hca^unt^ 

L  *  t  i 

^:3  i/iil  il  .-r.vnt>  ikitv  tflirt^Xiut 


ll.v   .-u 


L1  ll.v  JutcUv'juiui  au)  |vvU'cutki  .')  ll.v  X%u«iiu' 

\   f      •         ,    1        ^  v'        i     i  i     1  , 

Uv*   ia  II»V  l.varlj  v^-  l.vi   luuu  cVu^.   att3  uv 


.1tij|Ja'!U'j.\   ."/.v  nuitj  jtvt   Iv  vViuvUi'  U'ill.ntil  . 

•    ,       ^^          t         *-   i    1       1  t 

^piutiutt  vVntL'cl,  AIIS  iui  Ibt'  knvu«uui  X'tvuiju'.v 

'if  '  1  t  '   ^  ^  4.'     1  , 

/(*  IKv.v  ti'i.v  kitJ  U?tt^  lit'uv  .iuva  L1  l.v;  tu  U.v 


PRESENTED    TO    MRS.    C'.    II.    SI'UKGEON,    SLPTEJK.EK,     1874. 


290  c.    it.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

the  more  so  because  the  time  you  have  to  yourself  is  not  very  long.  I  am  glad  you 
desire  to  do  something-  for  the  Lord,  and  shall  be  still  more  pleased  when  you 
actually  set  about  it.  Time  Hies  ;  and  the  opportunity  for  doing-  good  Hies  with  it. 
However  diligent  you  may  be  in  the  future,  you  can  only  do  the  work  of  1875  in 
1875  ;  and  if  you  leave  it  undone  now,  it  will  be  undone  to  all  eternity.  The 
diligent  attention  which  you  give  to  business,  the  careful  purity  of  your  daily  life, 
and  your  concern  to  do  common  things  in  a  right  spirit,  are  all  real  service  for 
the  Lord.  The  hours  in  which  your  earthly  calling  is  industriously  followed  for 
Christ's  sake,  are  really  hours  of  work  for  Jesus  ;  but,  still,  this  cannot  satisfy  you, 
or,  at  least,  I  hope  it  cannot.  As  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus,  you 
feel  that  you  belong  to  Him,  and  you  long  to  show  your  love  to  Him  by  actions 
directly  meant  to  extend  His  Kingdom,  and  gather  in  sinners  whom  He  loves  to 
bless.  When  once  such  efforts  are  commenced,  they  become  easier,  and  a  kind  of 
hunger  to  do  more  seizes  upon  the  heart.  It  is  not  toil,  but  pleasure;  and  if  God 
blesses  what  we  do,  it  rises  from  being  a  common  pleasure  to  become  a  sacred 
delight.  'Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might.'  It  is  not  for 
me  to  suggest  what  form  your  service  shall  take,  that  must  be  left  to  yourself;  and 
half  the  pleasure  of  it  will  lie  in  the  exercise  of  a  sacred  ingenuity  in  discovering 
the  work  for  which  you  are  best  adapted. 

"  I  was  very  thankful  to  read  that  you  rejoiced  in  prayer  ;  may  it  always  be  so, 
and  yet  more  and  more  ;  for  nothing  gives  us  such  strength,  or  affords  us  such 
guidance.  The  Lord  bless  you  there,  and  all  must  be  well.  I  have  always  hoped 
to  see  you  a  leader  in  the  host  of  God.  How  it  will  be,  I  know  not ;  but  that  so  it 
may  be,  is  one  of  my  increasing  prayers.  Dear  son,  may  all  blessings  abound 
towards  you  ;  you  know  I  love  you  very  dearly.  It  is  a  very  dull  Sabbath  here, 
as  to  weather  ;  I  hope  you  are  having  a  bright  and  happy  day  at  home. 

"Your  loving  father, 

"  C.   H.  STURGEON." 

This  admonition  well  sets  forth  what  kind  of  father  "  my  father"  was.  With 
such  words  as  these  to  encourage  and  direct  me,  it  was  not  long  before  I  decided 
to  begin  work  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  feeling  sure  also  that  he,  who  had  written 
thus  to  his  son,  would  pray  even  more  earnestly  than  before  that  the  humble 
worker  might  be  richly  blessed.  The  special  service  which  was  laid  upon  my 
heart  ultimately  resulted  in  the  building  of  a  small  chapel  in  Chatham  Road, 
Wands  worth  Common  ;  and  I  sought  there  to  glorify  God  in  the  faithful  discharge 
of  "my  Father's  business,"  while  I  was  also  not  slothful  in  the  business  of  my 
earthly  master,  the  late  John  Sands,  Esq.,  of  50,  Old  Broad  Street,  City.  The 
following  note  will  show  the  interest  my  father  took  in  both  enterprises  : — 


C.     11.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  29 1 

"  Mentone. 
"  My   Dear  Charlie, 

'Your  conduct  gives  me  the  greatest  pleasure  when  I  think  of  it,  for 
you  have  stuck  to  work  right  heartily,  and  I  am  sure  God  will  open  up  your  way. 
Live  near  to  Him,  and  for  Him;  and  He  will  give  you,  of  His  grace,  happiness 
here  and  hereafter.  May  your  good  endeavours  at  Bolingbroke  be:  crowned  with 
success,  and  may  you  ere  long  see  some  souls  led  to  Jesus  !  I  must  give  you 
some  substantial  help  for  the  new  chapel.  Receive  your  father's  fondest  love,  and 
remember  me  very  heartily  to  Mr.  Sands. 

"Your  affectionate  father, 

"C.    H.   S." 

On  one  occasion,  when  dear  father  was  pre;iching  in  the  Tabernacle,  he  thus 
joyfully  referred  to  several  stages  in  the  spiritual  experience  of  his  twin-sons  :— 
'  Did  not  our  hearts  overflow,  as  parents,  when  we  first  discovered  that  our 
children  had  sought  the  Lord  ?  That  was  a  happy  night,  a  time  to  be  remembered, 
when  we  were  -called  up  to  hear  their  tearful  story,  and  to  give  them  a  word  of 
comfort.  \Ye  were  not  half  so  glad  at  their  birth  as  we  were  when  they  were  born 
again.  Have  we  not,  since  then,  often  rejoiced  as  we  have  seen  them  useful  in  the 
service  of  the  Saviour?  It  was  an  exquisite  pleasure  to  hear  them  speak  for  the 
first  time  in  the  Redeemer's  Name  ;  and  it  has  been  a  greater  pleasure  to  know 
that  God  has  owned  their  ministry  in  the  conversion  of  souls.  All  parents  have 
not  that  particular  form  of  joy  ;  but  it  has  been  mine  to  a  high  degree,  and  for 
this  I  bless  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  All  of  you  have  had  great  delight  in  your 

j  o  o  y 

converted  children,  when  your  boy  has  stood  out  against  temptation,  or  your  girl 
has  remained  faithful  when  thrown  among  worldlings.  No  one  can  recount  the 
mutual  joys  of  the  various  members  of  a  believing  household;  they  rejoice  in  each 
other,  and  then  they  all  rejoice  in  God.  I  low  cheering  it  is  for  you  as  a  parent  to 
live  again  in  your  children,  and  to  march  once  more  to  the  holy  war  in  the  vigorous 
zeal  of  one  whom  you  still  call  '  My  boy  '  !  O  friends,  I  feel,  at  this  time,  in  my  own 
case,  that  my  joy  is  up  to  the  brim  of  my  life-cup.  Pardon  me  if  I  pause  to  magnify 
the  Lord.  I  have  seldom  been  long  without  affliction  ;  but  no  man  who  has 
ever  lived  could  have  been  more  highly  favoured  in  domestic  happiness  than  I 
have  been." 

On    June    27,     1878,    when    nine    persons    from    Chatham    Road    Chapel    were 

admitted  to  membership  at  the  Tabernacle,  their  names  were  entered  in  the  usual 

way  in  the  Tabernacle  church-book,  and  then  the  following  resolution  was  added  : — 

'  The  church,    having  received    the  foregoing-   persons   into   fellowship,    desires 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

to  record  its  gratitude  to  our  Heavenly  Father  for  this  evident  blessing  resting  upon 
the  labours  of  our  Pastor's  two  sons,  Messrs.  Charles  and  Thomas  Spurgeon.  As 
these  are  the  firsttruits  of  their  ministry,  since  the  erection  of  the  new  chapel,  we 
earnestly  and  heartily  pray  that  abundant  prosperity  may  continue  to  rest  on  the 
work  carried  on  at  Chatham  Road." 


C.    AMD    T.    SPURGEON    AT   THE   AGE    OF    21. 


During  the  period  I  spent  as  a  student  in  the  Pastors'  College,  my  dear  father 
was  always  interested,  not  only  in  my  own  welfare,  but  in  that  of  all  the  brethren. 
Perhaps,  at  no  time  in  the  history  of  the  Institution  was  he  better  acquainted  than 
he  was  then  with  the  whole  of  the  men,  and  the  internal  work  and  hidden  life  of  our 
"Alma  Mater."  It  was  not  looked  upon  as  "telling  tales  out  of  school  "  when  the 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  293 

son  answered  the  enquiries  of  the  sire.  On  two  occasions,  I  was  privileged  to 
receive  from  him  letters  containing-  sermon-notes,  which  he  desired  me  to  read  to  all 
the  brethren.  No  less  than  eleven  outlines  of  discourses  were  given  in  the  following 
letter ;  but  space  can  only  be  spared  here  for  one  or  two  specimens  :— 

"  Mentone. 
"  Beloved  Brethren, 

"  Always  make  hay  while  the  sun  shines,  and  store  up  notes  of  sermons 
when  your  mind  is  fertile,  for  there  are  seasons  of  famine  as  well  as  of  plenty,  and 
every  Joseph  should  lay  up  a  store  against  the  time  of  need.  I  fear  I  am  not  just 
now  in  the  right  order  for  sermonizing  ;  but,  if  'silver  and  gold  have  I  none/  '  such 
as  I  have  give  I  you.'  By  the  way,  that  would  not  be  a  bad  subject,  —  What  we 
would  give  if  ive  could,  not  half  so  valuable  as  what  we  can  bestoiv  if  we  will.  Or, 
(I.)  Talents  we  do  not  possess  are  not  to  be  the  source  of  repining,  of  sloth,  or  of 
indifference  to  men's  wants  ;  (II.)  Talents  we  do  possess  are  to  be  used  for  the  good 
of  men,  in  faith,  in  the  Name  of  Jesus,  to  the  glory  of  God. 

"  Turn  to  Acts  xix.,  which  is  rich  in  texts.  Verse  8.  (I.)  The  characteristic  of 
a  useful  ministry:  'he  spake  boldly.'  (II.)  The  subject  of  such  a  ministry: 
'persuading  the  things  concerning  the  Kingdom  of  God.' 

"  (i)  The  consistency  of  it  with  the  Old  Testament. 

"  (2)  The  binding  character  of  its  claims. 

"(3)   Its  blessedness. 

"  (4)   Its  immediate  requirements." 

At  the  end  of  the  eleven  skeletons  of  sermons,  dear  father  wrote  :— 
'This  is  all   I  can  do  to-day.      I  am  much  better,  and  send  my  love  to  you  all, 
and  thanks  for  capital  letters,  all  of  which  are  beyond  criticism. 

"  Yours  ever  heartily, 

"  C.       H.      SrURGEON." 

Those  ever-memorable  Friday  afternoons  produced  many  rich  seasons  for 
storing  up  homiletic  hints  and  outlines.  This  exercise  seemed  to  be  a  recreation  to 
the  President,  for  if  ever  there  was  a  brief  interval  that  needed  filling  in  between 

o 

a  bracing  talk  and  a  brilliant  exposition,  he  would   quietly  make  some  such  remark- 
as  this  : — "  Here's  a  good  text  :   '  HE  restoreth  my  soul,' — 

"  (I.)  To  life,  by  regeneration. 

"  (II.)  To  hope,  by  the  revelation  of  His  Son. 

"  (III.)  To  strength,  by  being  my  food. 

"  (IV.)   To  wealth,  by  being  my  Father. 

"  (V.)   To  a  Kingdom  in  Christ. 

"  (VI.)  To  Paradise  with  Christ." 


294 


C.     II      SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


As  my  College  course  was  drawing  to  a  close,  my  father  wrote  to  me  : — "Your 
time  will  soon  be  up,  and  I  should  like  you  to  begin  in  some  sphere,  not  too  large, 
nor  too  small,  from  which  you  may  step  into  a  life-long  position.  I  think  you  will 
maintain  a  good  congregation  ;  and,  by  God's  blessing,  will  be  useful.  We  must 
not  push  or  strive  to  get  you  a  position,  but  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  He  will  do  better 
for  you  than  I  can.  When  Bishops  look  out  for  livings  for  their  sons  or  nephews, 
we  condemn  their  nepotism,  so  we  must  not  fall  into  the  same  evil  ourselves.  You 
will  be  paiicnt  and  believing,  and  the.  right  door  will  open." 


SOUTH    STREET    RAPMST    CIIAPKL,    HREICNWICH. 


When  the  time  came  for  me  to  settle  in  the  ministry,  my  father's  counsel  was  a 
great  factor  in  helping  me  to  decide  to  accept  the  "call"  from  the  members  of 
South  Street  Baptist  Church,  Greenwich,  and  it  afforded  me  no  little  joy  to  have 
him  as  the  preacher  on  the  occasion  of  my  recognition  as  Pastor.  A  striking 
injunction,  from  the  discourse  he  then  delivered,  stands  out  vividly  in  my  memory, 
and  has  been  a  constant  inspiration  to  me.  Leaning  over  the  pulpit  rail,  and 
looking  down  upon  me,  as  I  sat  on  the  lower  platform,  he  said,  in  tender,  yet 
thrilling  tones,  "  Preach  up  Christ,  my  boy  !  Preach  HIM  up  !  !  " 

Among  my  father's  letters  that  I  treasure  beyond  the  price  ot  gold,  are  those 
which  relate  to  the  help  rendered  to  him  in  times  of  sickness.  Some  of  them  look 
almost  like  hieroglyphics,  because  they  were  hurriedly  scribbled,  when  his  poor 
hands  were  swollen  with  gout,  on  a  Sunday  morning,  and  sent  to  Greenwich  by  a 
special  messenger,  asking  me  to  take  his  service.  Here  is  one  : — "  I  am  too  full  of 


c.    H.    SPURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  295 

pain  to  preach  this  morning  ;  will  you  go  to  Tabernacle  ?  I  telegraphed  Dunn  to 
go  to  you,  but  if  you  have  anyone  else  available,  let  him  be  ready.  Your  poor 
father,— C.  H.  S." 

The  first  time  that  ever  it  was  my  honour  to  stand  in  his  place,  and  thus  occupy 
the  pulpit  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  on  the  Lord's-day,  called  forth  from  him 
the  following-  loving  letter  : — 

"Nightingale  Lane, 

"  Balham, 

"  Surrey, 

"  December  14,  '78. 
"My  Dear  Son, 

"  I  pray  earnestly  for  you  under  the  solemn  responsibility  of  to-morrow. 
May  your  father's  God  lift  you  out  of  yourself,  giving  you  lowly  dependence  on  His 
Spirit,  and  pleading  earnestness  that  men  may  come  to  Christ  !  I  am  very  ill,  or  I 
would  be  in  my  pulpit.  I  am  ready  to  weep  on  being  still  away  ;  but,  dear  son,  the 
Lord  is  so  good  in  giving  me  you,  that  I  dare  not  think  of  repining.  Only  lean 
thou  wholly  on  Him,  and  be  nothing  before  Him.  He  has  been  my  stay  these 
many  years. 

'  Tell  the  people  that,  night  and  day,  I  am  full  of  pain  ;  and  as  these  three 
times  I  have  promised  to  be  with  them,  and  have  failed,  I  fear  to  hope  any  more. 
Only  they  will  be  all  sure  that  it  will  be  my  highest  joy  to  be  back  among  them,  to 
see  their  loving  faces,  and  to  speak  to  them  the  good  Word  of  God.  I  am  an  exiled 
prisoner,  and  the  iron  enters  into  my  soul  ;  but  the  Lord  is  good,  and  in  His  Name 
do  I  hope. 

"With  best  love  from  your  clear  mother,  and— 

"  Your  poor  lather, 

"C.   H.  SPURGEON." 

The  deep  interest  he  ever  took  in  my  work  at  Greenwich,  and  his  ardent 
affection  for  my  beloved  mother,  are  set  forth  in  many  of  his  letters,  such  as  the 
following  : — 

"  Mentone. 
"  My  Dear  Son, 

"  May  you,  some  quarter  of  a  century  hence,  enjoy  the  pleasure  of 
having  your  son  Charles  to  preach  for  you  !  It  is  a  great  delight  to  me  to  receive 
such  loving  letters  from  the  Bishop  of  Greenwich,  who  is  also  my  son  and  heir  ; 
and  it  is  even  more  joy  to  see  that  God  is  prospering  you,  and  making  your  work 
successful.  I  think  you  have  made  specially  good  progress  in  the  time,  Stick  to 


c.    n.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

your  studies.  Read  I\lallhcw  Henry  right  through,  if  you  can,  before  you  are 
married  ;  for,  after  that  event,  I  fear  that  Jacob  may  supplant  him.  Remember  me 
to  Mr.  Iluntley,  and  all  the  good  people. 

"  I  have  not  yet  had  this  week's  letter  from  the  Tabernacle,  and  therefore  have 
not  read  the  eulogiums  on  your  sermons.  I  am  better  and  better.  It  is  forty-two 
days  since  we  had  any  rain  ;  and,  all  along,  the  line  weather  has  been  unbroken. 
I  am  so  grieved  about  your  dear  mother,  and  my  impulse,  is  to  come  home  at  once  ; 
but  then  I  reflect  that  I  can  do  her  no  good,  and  should  do  her  harm  by  becoming 
the  second  invalid  to  be  waited  on.  Dear  Charlie,  do  not  get  the  rheums  or  the 
gouts  ;  but  spin  away  on  your  skates  or  your  cycles.  Don't  go  too  much  over  the 
bridge  ;  but  you  may  give  my  love  to  Sis.  The  sermon  was  capital  ;  thank  you 
much. 

;'  With  heartiest  love  and  all  good  wishes  from- 

"  YOUR  OWN  DAD." 

I  he  gentle  hint,  towards  the  close  of  this  letter,  shows  that  it  was  penned 
during  the  period  of  my  courtship.  At  my  marriage,  on  April  u,  iSSi,  both  my 
dear  parents  were  present  ;  the  happy  ceremony  was  performed  by  my  father,  and 
I  can  even  now  recall  some  of  his  words  after  the  legal  portion  of  the  service  had 
been  completed  : — "As  this  ring  is  round,  so  may  your  love  be  endless!  As  it  is 
made  of  pure  gold,  so  may  your  affection  be  pure."  Continuing  to  say  all  manner 
of  nice,  kind  things,  he  added  :— "  It  is  exceedingly  necessary  that  a  minister, 
especially  a  young  minister,  should  have  a  wife.  The  duties  a  minister's  wile  has 
to  fulfil  are  very  important,  for  she  is  expected  to  be  a  combination  of  all 
impossible  virtues  ;  in  fact,  altogether  a  wonder."  Glancing  lovingly  at  clear 
mother,  he  said  : — "  I  know  one  minister's  wife  who  has  oreatly  stren<>-thened  her 

*"»  J  o 

husband  in  the  Lord."  Never  shall  I  forget  the  beautiful  prayer  in  which  he 
commended  "  the  happy  couple  "  to  God  ;  the  answers  to  those  petitions  we 
continue  to  receive  even  to  this  day. 

He  was  again  in  the  sunny  South  when  he  wrote  the  following  letter:  — 

"Grand  Hotel, 

"  Mentonc. 
"  My  Dear  Son, 

'  Your  note  was  a  real  joy  to  me.  What  a  good  fellow  you  are  !  I  live 
twice  in  seeing  you  so  firm  in  the  faith  of  God's  elect.  I  do  not  wonder  that  the 
chickens  flock  around  the  man  who  gives  them  real  corn,  and  not  mere  chaff.  The 
Lord  keep  you  evermore  true  to  the  truth,  and  you  will  see  His  hand  with  you  more 
and  more  ! 

'Your  little  notices  of  books  are  first-rate  ;— short  and  pithy,  better  than  half  a 


C.     IJ.     SrUKGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  2Q7 

pag-e  of  long-winded  nothings.  You  may  do  as  many  as  ever  you  like,  for  nobody 
can  do  them  better,  nor  as  well.  You  charm  me  as  I  think  of  your  interesting-  your 
dear  mother  with  your  lantern  and  views.  It  is  most  sad  to  have  her  at  home  when 
I  am  here  enjoying  myself.  What  can  we  do  but  try  to  cheer  her  up,  and  pray  the 
Lord  to  give  her  journeying  strength  ? 

"  I  am  right  glad  to  hear  of  the  growth  and  advancement  of  the  little  girl.  God 
bless  her,  and  her  mother,  too  !  I  am  having  a  true  holiday  ;  not  idle,  but  restful. 
Love  evermore  to  you  and  yours,  from  — 

"  Your  happy  father, 

"C.   H.  S." 

There  arc  one  or  two  matters  of  interest  alluded  to  in  the  above  correspondence, 
which  recall  happy  memories  of  my  father.  The  reference  to  my  "  notices  of  books  " 
recalls  a  slight  service  which  I  sought  to  render  to  the  overtaxed  Editor  of  The 
Sword  and  the  Trowel,  by  reading  some  of  the  lighter  literature  sent  to  him  for 
review,  and  giving  him  my  opinion  of  the  books.  One  day,  at  dinner,  a  friend 
thanked  my  father  for  his  racy  review  of  an  interesting  little  work  ;  whereupon,  with 
evident  delight,  he  drew  the  speaker  on  to  say  more  about  the  criticism,  and  then, 
with  that  merry  twinkle  in  his  eye,  which  always  told  how  he  relished  harmless  fun, 
he  said,  "  Well  now,  it  so  happens  that  I  did  not  write  that  notice  in  the  Magazine  ; 
there  is  the  dear  boy  opposite  who  wrote  it." 

Father  paid  many  visits  to  my  flock  at  Greenwich,  for  it  has  ever  been  my 
delight — a  delight  fully  shared  by  my  people, — to  help  him  in  the  many  good  works 
to  which  the  Lord  had  moved  him  to  set  his  hand.  As  these  visits  were  paid  upon 
my  birthday,  we  used  the  occasion  to  make  him  a  present  on  behalf  of  either 
College,  Orphanage,  or  Colportage.  His  appreciation  of  my  filial  affection  is 
expressed  in  the  following  letter:  — 

"  Dear  Son, 

'  You  arc  ever  a  well  of  joy  to  your  father.  On  this  occasion,  you 
greatly  refresh  me  by  helping  the  orphans.  Cheques  for  ^58  153.  6cl.  do  not  come 
in  so  very  often  ;  but  when  they  do,  I  praise  God  with  all  my  heart.  Will  you  thank 
all  those  good  people  for  me  ?  I  am  very  grateful  to  them.  God  bless  them  ! 

"Chiefly,  may  a  blessing  rest  on  the  church  of  God  over  which  He  has  made 
you  overseer!  To  that  church  I  render  grateful  thanks  for  furnishing  the  occasion 

o  o 

for  this  love-token, — this  sacrifice  of  sweet  smell. 

"All  the  blessings  that  God  can  give  be  yours  evermore  !     So  prays— 

"Your  loving  father, 

"  C.   H.  STURGEON." 


29^  c.    ii.    STURGEON'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

In  acknowledging  some  pecuniary  help,  sent  on  behalf  of  the  College,  in 
connection  with  the  Annual  Conference,  he  wrote  : — 

"  Dear   Son, 

"You  are  always  helping  me  and  my  work.      May  the   Lord  bless  you; 
and,  one  day,  give  you  such  joy  in  your  family  as  I  have  in  you  ! 

"  I  met,  last  week,  with  another  soul  converted  under  your  last  Tabernacle 
sermon. 

"  Your  lovino-  father, 

o 

"C.   II.  STURGEON." 

I  low  he  delighted  in  recounting  cases  ot  conversion  !  He  liked  me  to  go  out 
driving  with  him  ;  and,  as  I  sat  silently  listening,  he  would  tell  of  recent  instances 
of  blessing  which  he  had  been  permitted  to  see  as  the  result  of  his  own  preaching. 
In  this  way,  I  learned  much  of  tin:  holy  art  of  dealing  with  anxious  enquirers,  an  art 
of  which  he  was  indeed  a  master. 

I  must  relate  an  incident  which,  at  the  time,  afforded  my  father  a  large  amount 
of  pleasure  ;  and  which  is,  I  should  think,  unique  in  ministerial  life.  lie  had  been 
announced  to  preach  on  behalf  of  a  small  Baptist  church  in  the  Kast  Lnd  of  London, 
and  the  Congregationalists  had  kindly  lent  their  large  place  of  worship  for  the 
occasion.  Long  before  the  appointed  hour  of  service,  a  great  crowd  had  gathered 
both  within  and  around  the  building,  so  that,  when  the  preacher  entered  the  pulpit, 
many  hundreds  were  still  seeking  admission.  Turning  to  me,  as  I  sat  just  behind 
him,  he  asked  me  whether  I  would  take  an  overflow  meeting  in  the  sanctuary 
opposite,  I  readily  assented  ;  whereupon  he  rose,  and  told  the  people  to  pass  word 
on  to  those  outside,  "  that  his  dear  son  Charles  would  preach  just  over  the  way,  in 
the  Baptist  Chapel."  He  continued  his  own  service,  and  I  retired  to  fulfil  my 
promise,  and  had  a  crowded  audience  in  the  smaller  building.  It  had  been  arranged 
that  I  should  preach,  in  the  evening,  in  the  Baptist  Chapel  ;  and  it  turned  out  that  the 
experience  of  the  father  was  to  be  repeated  with  the  son,  for  the  place  was  filled 
in  every  part,  and  a  large  number  in  vain  sought  admission,  so  I  despatched  a 
pencilled  note  to  the  great  preacher  of  the  afternoon,  asking  him  if  he  would  kindly 
come  and  take  my  overflow  in  the  schoolroom  opposite  !  As  we  journeyed  home 
together,  he  said,  "  Well,  Charlie,  I  do  not  suppose  it  has  ever  happened  before, 
that  father  and  son  should  be  preaching  opposite  to  one  another  at  the  same  time  ; 
but,  thank  God,  dear  boy,  not  in  opposition." 

I  remember,  too,  in  connection  with  this  visit,  that,  as  we  passed  through  the 
great  meat-market  at  Smithfield,  he  called  my  attention  to  the  immense  quantities  of 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  299 

provisions,  remarking,  as  he  did  so,  "  Whatever  will  become  of  it  all  ?"  But  we  had 
not  gone  far  down  the  Mile  End  Road,  before  the  ever-moving  mass  of  humanity 
caused  another  enquiry  to  rise  to  mind  and  lip,  which  was  expressed  in  the  Scriptural 
question,  "  From  whence  can  a  man  satisfy  these  ?"  The  conversation,  which  might 
very  naturally  have  taken  the  form  of  a  discussion  upon  the  law  of  supply  and 
demand,  and  such  kindred  themes  as  social  and  political  economy,  was,  ho\vever, 
diverted  into  the  higher  channel  of  talk  about  the  gospel  amply  meeting  the 
spiritual  needs  of  the  masses, — a  truth  which  was  shortly  after  to  receive  its 
exemplification  through  the  ministry  of  lather  and  son. 

On  another  occasion,  it  was  my  high  privilege  to  preach  to  some  three  or  four 
thousand  people,  who  were  the  residue  of  a  cono-reo-ation  numbering  one  thousand, 

ti!>  O  *—> 

gathered  to  hear  my  father  in  a  church  at  Pollockshaws.  The  intense  joy,  which 
seemed  to  ripple  over  his  face,  and  sparkle  in  his  eyes,  when  he  learned  that  his  son 
had  the  larger  audience,  increased  the  already  large  measure  of  happiness  which 
delighted  my  heart.  The  crowds  surged  round  him,  blocking  the  thoroughfare,  and 
rendering  it  impassable,  until  "the  glide  man"  had  shaken  hands  with  his  Scotch 
friends;  and  joyous  cheers  rang  out  again  and  again  as  the  carriage  conveyed  the 
two  preachers  away  from  the  place  of  their  joint  ministry. 

It  was  a  very  memorable  day  to  me  when  I  had  to  take  my  father's  place 
in  Exeter  Hall, — the  building  which  is  inseparably  associated  with  some  of  the 
greatest  triumphs  of  "  the  boy-preacher's  "  history.  The  letter  summoning  me  to 
this  service  was  as  follows  :— 

"  Dear  Son, 

"Alas  !  I  may  be  unable  to  preach  on  Sunday  at  Exeter  Hall.  Can  you 
serve  me  yet  again?  All  would  be  content.  I  am  better;  but  can  barely  hold  a 
pen,  and  have  two  rheumatic  arms.  Ah,  me  ! 

"  Love  to  my  dear  son  and  his, — my  comfort  and  joy. 

"C.   H.  SPURGEON." 

Birthday  billets  doux  and  New  Year's  notes  are  among  my  special  treasures.  A 
specimen  of  each  may  serve  as  a  pattern  for  those;  who  would  fain  express  their 
loving  wishes  to  dear  ones.  Here  is  the  birthday  epistle  :— 

"  West  wood, 

"  September  20,  1888. 
"  My  Dear  Son, 

"  The  Lord,  Himself,  bless  you  !      Long  may  your  useful  life  be  continued. 


3OO  C.      II.     SPURGKOX S     AUTOniOC.RAl'HY. 

and  growing  blessings  be  given  to  you,  and  be  scattered  by  you  !  It  is  always  a  joy, 
to  me,  even  to  think  of  you.  In  all  things  you  cause  me  comfort  and  delight, 
specially  for  the  grace  manifested  in  you.  The  Lord  remember,  in  His  infinite  love, 
your  clear  wife  and  children,  and  make  them  ever  your  joy  ! 

"  I  could  not  tell  what  birthday  gift  to  send  you  ;  so  I  thought  I  would  ask  you 
to  serve  me  by  taking  upon  yourself  the  trouble  of  laying  out  the  enclosed  little 
cheque  for  something  which  would  give  you  pleasure. 

"  I  have  been  to  Wotton,  to  see  Mr.  Evelyn,  and  have  rested  finely.  I  feel  that 
my  candle  has  been  snulied. 

"  Your  loving  father, 

"C.   II.  SPURGEON." 

The  New  Year's  greeting  runs  as  follows  : — 

o  <j 

"  Mentone. 
"  Dear  Son, 

"  I  wish  to  you  and  yours,  one  and  all,  a  happy  new  year.  The  Lord 
bless  you  in  your  person,  your  household,  your  ministry,  and  your  church  !  Peace 
be  to  you  within,  and  prosperity  without  !  The  blessing  on  your  father  has  been 
great,  and  long  may  it  rest  upon  you  to  a  still  larger  degree  !  I  breathe  a  joyful 
prayer  lor  you  and  your  beloved,  to  whom,  remember  me. 

"  Your  own  loving  father, 

t_3  * 

"  C.   LI.  SPURGEON." 

A  large  book  could  be  written  concerning  the  experiences  of  persons  who  had 
the  honour  and  delight  of  meeting  with  my  clear  father  during  his  visits  to  different 

<->  o  J  & 

parts  of  the  country.  I  often  wish  that  I  had  had  it  in  my  power  to  preserve,  more 
securely  than  in  mere  mental  jottings,  many  of  the  wise  sayings  reported  to  me  by 
those  who  remember  their  interviews  with  him. 

To  a  friend,  who  had  called  upon  him,  he  said,  "  I  was  looking  at  myself  in  the 
glass,  this  morning,  when  the  words  of  the  psalmist  came  to  my  mind  :  '  Who  is  the 
health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God.'  I  saw  no  signs  of  health  upon  my 
countenance,  and  thought  that  they  were  far  away  ;  but  my  heart  was  comforted  by 
the  latter  portion  of  the  text,  for  none  can  rob  me  of  '  my  God.'  " 

To  the  same  friend,  he  said,  "I  am  going  to  preach,  one  clay,  upon  'bad 
lodgers.'  You  get  them  here,  for  they  come  into  your  house  to  eat  the  food  that 
you  provide,  and  spoil  the  furniture  in  your  home,  and  then  leave  without  paying.  I 
am  not  going  to  talk  about  this  class  of  lodgers  ;  but  shall  try  to  answer  the 
question,  '  How  long  shall  thy  vain  thoughts  lodge  within  thee  ?'  "  He  was  as  good 
as  his  word,  for  he  preached  in  the  Tabernacle  from  Jeremiah  iv.  14,  and  the  sermon 
is  published  under  the  title,  "  Bad  Lodgers,  and  How  to  Treat  them." 


C.     H.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  30! 

On  one  occasion,  it  was  my  lot  to  have  to  go  some  distance,  from  a  countryside 
station  to  the  village  where  I  was  to  conduct  some  special  services.  A  horse  and 
cart  were  in  waiting  to  convey  me  to  my  destination,  the  driver  being  a  local  farmer. 
We  had  not  gone  very  far  upon  the  road  before  his  rustic  voice  broke  the  silence. 
"  So  you  be  Mr.  Spurgeon,  be  you,  the  son  of  the  great  man  in  Lunnon  ?  I  bin 
once  in  Lunnon,  and  'card  him.  I  was  up  at  the  cattle  show,  and  went  over  to  his 
big  chapel,  and  he  preached  about  sheep.  Bless  you,  he  knew  more  about  sheep 
than  I  do  ;  and  yet  I've  bin  a  farmer  all  my  life  !  "  The  conversation  did  not  lack  in 
vivacity  for  the  rest  of  the  journey,  as  my  newly-found  acquaintance  gave  his  town 
friend  some  agricultural  education,  second-hand,  his  tutor  having  been  the  worthy 
Pastor  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  !  Dear  father  was  a  living  "  Enquire  Within 
upon  Everything."  All  who  ever  heard  him  can  well  understand  how  his  almost 
universal  knowledge  furnished  him  with  striking  simile,  matchless  metaphor,  forceful 
Im'ure,  and  instructive  illustration. 

Cj  ' 

Entering,  only  the  other  day,  an  establishment  which,  in  years  long  gone  by, 
was  frequented  by  both  father  and  son, — as  the  former  sought  after  some  old  Puritan, 
to  add  to  his  library,  and  the  latter  interested  himself  in  conning  picture-books, 
which  were  lying  all  around, — I  fancied  I  could  see  the  form  of  my  father,  sitting,  as 
was  his  wont,  in  a  particular  corner  of  the  shop,  (and  he  would  sit  in  no  other 
place,)  and  I  could  hear  him  say,  "  Well,  friend  Smith,  have  you  any  new  old  books, 
—something  rich  and  rare  ?  "  And  the  proprietor  of  the  store  would  speedily  bring 
forth  from  his  treasures  "  things  new  and  old." 

Following  in  my  father's  footsteps,  I  had  betaken  myself  to  this  market  of 
material  for  the  mind  ;  and,  naturally,  memories  of  former  visits  made  me  desirous 
to  have  a  little  talk  with  the  worthy  proprietor,  who  is  now  well  on  in  years.  Writh 
thoughtful  mien,  and  moist  eye,  he  recounted  to  an  attentive  listener  several 
personal  reminiscences  of  his  dear  friend.  He  told  me  that  he  once  journeyed  to 
London,  to  see  the  great  preacher,  and  upon  entering  the  precincts  of  the 
Tabernacle,  my  clear  father  turned  to  the  caretaker  of  what  is  now  the  Jubilee 
House,  and  gave  the  following  instructions,  "Please  get  dinner  for  tw^o  at  one." 
In  due  course,  the  bookseller  and  the  bookreader  returned  to  partake  of  the  ordered 
meal,  when,  to  their  dismay,  they  found  the  table  bare.  Summoning  the  good 
woman  into  his  presence,  the  following  explanation  was  forthcoming,  "Why,  sir!" 
said  she,  "  you  ordered  dinner  for  one  at  two."  The  mistake  caused  great  merri 
ment  to  the  would-be  host  and  his  guest  ;  and,  while  waiting  for  the  repast  to  be 
prepared,  the  dear  Pastor  discovered  others  whose  expectations  had  not  been 
realized.  A  number  of  old  women  had  gathered  in  one  of  the  rooms  at  the 
Tabernacle,  in  the  hope  of  receiving  gifts  from  the  Benevolent  Society  ;  but  the 


3O2  C.     II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

ladies  in  charge  of  that  agency  were  not  present,  as  some  mistake  had  been  made  in 
the  day  and  hour.  The  "fellow-feeling"  that  always  made  him  "wondrous  kind," 
moved  him  to  thrust  his  hand  into  his  pocket,  to  bring  forth  a  number  of  shillings, 
and  to  bestow  one  upon  each  of  the  erstwhile  disappointed  applicants,  saying  as  he 
did  so,  "There's  a  trifle  for  you,  so  you  haven't  had  quite  a  lost  journey."  His 
benevolence  was  one  of  the  best  and  brightest  traits  in  his  beautiful  character. 
There  are  secrets,  concerning  his  generous  gifts,  and  the  self-sacrifice  they  often 
entailed,  which  will  never  be  revealed  on  earth  ;  I  do  not  know  whether  they  will  be 
unveiled  even  in  Heaven. 

When  the  Good  Shepherd  was  pleased  to  take  a  little  lamb  from  my  household, 
the  hearts  of  the  sorrow-stricken  parents  were  greatly  comforted  by  the  following 
letter  :— 

"  Westwood, 

"September  n,  1890. 
"My  Dear  Children, 

"The  Lord  Himself  comfort  you!  Think  of  that  dear  little  creature 
being  taken  away  ;  yet  it  must  be  right,  it  must  be  good  !  Our  Father  is  never 
mistaken,  nor  unkind.  You  are  acting  wisely  in  not  bringing  the  little  one  from  the 
place.*  You  will  be  setting  an  example  of  common  sense,  which  is  greatly  needed 
in  an  age  which  is  as  sentimental  as  it  is  false-hearted.  If  you  would  like  a  wreath 
from  me,  kindly  order  it  in  II—  -  B—  — ,  and  send  the  bill  to  me  ;  but,  if  you  are 
not  going  to  have  any,  I  should  be  setting  an  ill  example  by  sending  one. 

"  I  feel  sure  you  will  both  find  a  secret  strength  poured  into  your  souls,  and  in 
this  also  faith  shall  have  the  victory.  I  shall  never  forget  this  day.  Your  dear 
mother,  to  our  intense  delight,  was  able  to  go  with  me  to  the  Orphanage,  and  she 
greatly  enjoyed  the  visit.  As  soon  as  we  reached  home,  we  received  your 
telegram,— the  bitter  herbs  with  our  feast.  To  you,  it  must  be  a  sharp  cut  ;  but 
the  Great  Physician  will  apply  the  healing  balm. 

"  Your  loving  father, 

"  C.   H.  SPURGEON." 

I  know  of  no  one  who  could,  more  sweetly  than  my  clear  father,  impart  comfort 
to  bleeding  hearts  and  sad  spirits.  As  the  crushing  of  the  flower  causes  it  to  yield 
its  aroma,  so  he,  having  endured  so  much  in  the  long-continued  illness  of  my  beloved 
mother,  and  also  constant  pain  in  himself,  was  able  to  sympathize  most  tenderly  with 
all  sufferers. 

It  was  my  unspeakable  pleasure   frequently   to   see  him,   during    the   last   few 

*  The  child  died  while  the  whole  family  were  resting  at  the  seaside. 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  303 

years  of  his  earthly  service,  hardly  a  week  passing  without  a  drive  being  enjoyed 
together  ;  and  during-  the  critical  period  of  his  last  long  illness,  when  the  prayers 
of  God's  people  undoubtedly  brought  him  back  to  life,  it  was  my  sad  pleasure  to 
visit  him  every  day,  Sundays  only  excepted.  Those  seasons  will  ever  remain  fixed 
upon  my  memory.  The  secrets  of  the  chamber  of  "  the  shadow  of  death  "  lie 
deeply  hidden  in  a  fondly-loving-  heart  ;  and,  especially,  the  emotions  experienced 
when,  with  my  dear  mother,  we  stood  at  his  bedside,  and  listened,  as  we  thought, 
to  his  parting  blessing. 

The  last  kiss  I  ever  received  from  his  dear  lips  was  bestowed  upon  me  ere 
he  left  the  waiting-room  at  Ilerne  Hill  station,  and  the  last  look  I  had  at  him 
was  from  the  furthest  extremity  of  that  platform,  as  the  train  bore  him  away,  and 
he,  with  waving  hand,  bade  me  adieu.  It  was  with  great  joy  (for  his  sake,)  that 
I  hailed  the  day  when  he  started  for  the  sunny  South.  After  so  many  weeks, 
which  told  up  to  months  in  the  class-room  of  suffering,  he  went  forth,  like  a  scholar 
freed  from  his  lessons  for  a  while,  out  into  the  sunshine  and  sea  breezes.  We 
were  all  pleased  that  there  was  such  a  beautiful  retreat,  a  spot  on  earth  which  he 
so  clearly  loved,  where  he  could  tarry,  for  a  few  bright  weeks,  as  in  veritable  Beulah 
Land,  ere  he  crossed  the  river,  and  entered  the  Celestial  City,  to  go  no  more 
out  for  ever. 

Pages  could  be  filled  by  my  pen  in  writing  of  my  beloved  father  ;  but  I  must 
close  with  a  brief  tribute  of  love.  If  ever  a  man  was  sent  of  God,  he  was  ;  a  true 
apostle  and  a  faithful  ambassador  of  Jesus  Christ.  Although  my  judgment  may  be 
deemed  very  partial,  I  venture  to  express  the  opinion  that,  since  the  clays  of  Paul, 
there  has  not  lived  a  greater  or  more  powerful  exponent  of  the  doctrines  of  grace, 
or  a  more  able  and  successful  preacher  of  the  "  saying  "  which  is  "  worthy  of  all 
acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  There  was  no 
one  who  could  preach  like  my  father.  In  inexhaustible  variety,  witty  wisdom, 
vigorous  proclamation,  loving  entreaty,  and  lucid  teaching,  with  a  multitude  of  other 
qualities,  he  must,  at  least  in  my  opinion,  ever  be  regarded  as  the  prince  of 
preachers.  From  the  days  when,  as  a  little  boy,  I  sat  behind  the  platform,  in  the 
high-backed  and  well-cushioned  seat  in  the  dear  old  Tabernacle,  with  silver  pencil- 
case  and  neat  pocket-book,  to  take  notes  of  my  beloved  father's  sermons,  until  this 
present  time,  I  have  looked  upon  him  as  "  the  prime  minister  of  England."  Those 
who  believe  eloquence  lies  in  reaching  hearts,  rather  than  in  tickling  ears,  will  not 
hesitate  to  place  him  amongst  orators  of  the  highest  order.  It  was  his  delight  to 

J>  O  O  O 

travel  on  foot,  rather  than  to  soar  like  the  eagle  ;    but  this  did   not  hinder  him   from 

o          ' 

reaching  altitudes  loftier  than   Pisgah  ;    and  while  he  could  always  feel  something 


c.    H.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

solid  under  his  feet,  he  was,  like  a  brave  mountaineer,  leading  his  listeners   to   peaks 
which  glistened  with  the  glory  of  Patmos. 

Both  for  quantity  and  quality,  and  each  was  of  the  best,  there  never  has  been 
one  to  equal  him;  and,  for  forty  years,  he  preached  the  same  old  gospel.  lie 
never  turned  aside  to  the  foolish  vagaries  of  ''modern  thought",  or  ran  after  the 
will-o'-the-wisp  of  "the  new  theology";  the  ancient  covenant  of  grace,  and  the 
inspired  Word  of  God,  were  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  his  preaching.  The  ease 
and  grace  of  his  delivery  were  noteworthy;  his  preaching  was  a  very  kaleidoscope 
of  ever-changing  beauty,  for  each  part  of  his  speech  fell  into  its  right  place  with 
perfect  aptness,  and  made  a  complete  and  charming  pattern.  When  once  he  be^an 
to  speak,  you  lelt  sure  that  each  succeeding  wave  of  expression  would  wash  up 
some  new  and  hitherto-hidden  truth,  or  make  the  common  facts  of  every-day  life 
glisten  afresh,  like  the  silver  sand  lately  laved  by  the  ocean's  wave  ;  and  while 
listening  to  the  matchless  voice,  there  seemed  to  steal  over  you  the  low  murmur  of 
another,  which  told  you  that  he  was  declaring  the  very  oracles  of  God.  None  can 
exaggerate  the  boundless  generosity,  tender  sympathy,  practical  sagacity,  and 
Christlike  zeal  displayed  in  the  manifold  agencies  of  which  he  was  both  head 
and  heart.  His  "  works  do  follow  "  him,  and  are  living  monuments  to  the  memory 
of  a  great  man; — great,  because  the  grace  of  God  made  him  good.  As  a  teacher 
and  author,  his  works  speak  volumes  ;  and  while  the  wonderful  voice  is  silenced  by 
death,  one  cannot  but  rejoice  that  thousands  of  his  discourses  are  preserved  in  the 
printed  sermons,  and  these  shall,  for  many  a  year  to  come,  still  continue  to  bring- 
forth  fruit.  Shall  we  not  all  humbly  pray  that  the  memory  of  his  gracious  and 
noble  life  may  be  a  daily  incentive  and  inspiration  to  us,  and  that  grace  may  be 
given  to  us  to  follow  him  as  fully  as  he  followed  the  Lord  ? 


CHAPTER    LXXIX. 


later  iittrarg  SKSorfc 


Beloved,  when  you  and  I  have  seen  or  heard  anything  which  God  has  revealed  to  us,  let  us  go 
and  write  it,  or  make  it  known  by  some  other  means.  God  has  not  put  the  treasure  into  the  earthen 
vessel  merely  for  the  vessel's  own  sake,  but  that  the  treasure  may  afterwards  be  poured  out  from  it,  that 
others  may  thereby  be  enriched.  You  have  not  been  privileged  to  see,  merely  to  make  glad  your  eyes, 
and  to  charm  your  soul;  you  have  been  permitted  to  see  in  order  that  you  may  make  others  see,  that 
you  may  go  forth  and  report  what  the  Lord  has  allowed  you  to  perceive.  John  no  sooner  became  the 
seer  ol  Patmos  than  he  heard  a  voice  that  said  to  him,  "Write."  He  could  not  speak  to  others,  for  he 
was  on  an  island  where  he  was  exiled  from  his  fellows,  but  he  could  write,  and  he  did  ;  and,  often,  he 
who  writes,  addresses  a  larger  audience  than  the  man  who  merely  uses  his  tongue.  It  is  a  happy  thing 
when  the  tongue  is  aided  by  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer,  and  so  gets  a  wider  sphere,  and  a  more 
permanent  influence  than  if  it  merely  uttered  certain  sounds,  and  the  words  died  away  when  the  ear 
had  heard  them. — C.  H.  S.,  in  a  sermon  at  the  Tabernacle  on  the  words,  "Write  the  vision." 

ESUMING  the  record  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  publications  from  the 
point  reached  in  Volume  II.,  Chapter  XLVII.,  the  first  to  be 
mentioned  here  is  Spurgeon's  Illustrated  Almanack.  This  little  book 
began  to  be  issued  in  1857  ;  the  first  one  was  entitled,  The  New 
Park  Street  Almanack,  and  the  Editor  thus  explained  his  object 
and  hope  in  preparing  it  : — "  It  may  appear,  to  some  persons, 
degrading  and  unseemly  for  a  minister  to  edit  a  penny  Almanack  ;  but  I  am  not 
burdened  with  any  notions  of  false  dignity,  and  I  think  nothing  degrading  which 
may  be  useful.  It  is  quite  certain  that,  by  this  little  Annual,  I  shall  reach  many 
readers  who  might  not  have  purchased  a  larger  volume  ;  and  I  hope,  by  God's  grace, 
some  of  them  will  be  impressed  with  thoughts  which  may  result  in  conversion,  or  in 
other  cases  afford  consolation  and  edification." 

In  his  Prefatory  Note,  "  To  the  Reader,"  in  the  following  issue,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
wrote  : — "  Last  year,  this  little  Almanack  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  speaking  to 
many  thousands  ;  and  as  I  believe  it  to  be  my  duty  to  avail  myself  of  every  means 
of  proclaiming  the  gospel,  I  again  address  myself  to  you  through  this  humble 
medium.  If  one  sinner  shall  be  led  to  Jesus  by  this  little  book,  or  one  saint  be 
assisted  in  his  spiritual  warfare,  my  object  will  be  abundantly  answered,  and  unto 
God  shall  be  the  glory.  The  thousands  of  this  Almanack,  which  will  be  scattered 
over  our  land,  may  be  compared  to  a  discharge  of  grapeshot,  which  is  often  far  more 
effective  than  the  larger  cannon-ball." 

In  1860,  the  Editor  had  the  joy  of  being  able  to  report  that  his  desire  had 
been  at  least  in  part  realized  : — "  From  one  of  the  remote  corners  of  the  earth,  I 
have  received  the  good  news  of  a  sinner  saved  through  the  Almanack  of  last  year. 

u  3 


•••0 6  c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOIHOCRAI'HY. 

O 

This  has  been  ;i  most  sweet  and  precious  reward  for  the  past,  and  is  a  most  stimu 
lating  encouragement  for  the  future.  This  little  David  will  yet  smite  another 
Goliath,  and  to  God  shall  be  the  glory"  Happily,  this  was  by  no  means  a  solitary 
instance  of  blessing  ;  and,  year  by  year,  as  the  booklet  became  still  more  widely 
known,  the  Lord  signified  Mis  approval  of  it  by  using  its  printed  messages  to  the 
salvation  of  sinners  and  the  strengthening  of  saints.  Everything  that  the  beloved 
Pastor  originated  had  some  practical  purpose  in  view  ;  and,  therefore,  this  small 
book  was  employed  as  the  advocate  of  the  College,  and  the  other  Institutions  as 
they  were  founded,  and  became  the  means  of  materially  increasing  the  funds  needed 
for  their  support  and  development. 

The  publication  of  the  Book  Almanack  has  been  continued,  without  inter 
mission,  from  1857  until  1899;  and,  for  a  great  part  of  that  long  period,  the  texts 
for  daily  meditation  have  been  chosen  by  Mrs.  C.  II.  Spurgeon,  who  has  also, 
during  the,  last  seven  years,  written  many  of  the  articles,  most  of  which  have  been 
illustrated  parables  from  the  garden  at  "  Westwood."  Since  1894,  quite  a  new 
interest  has  been  imparted  to  the.  passages  of  Scripture  selected  tor  reading  and 
thought  from  day  to  day,  for  the,  "Text  Union"  was  then  formed,  and  all  who 
joined  it  agreed  to  learn  the.  Almanack  motto,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  repeat  it  when 
challenged  by  a  fellow-member  asking  for  "  the  text  for  to-day,  please."  Many 
thousands  of  Christians,  in  our  own  and  other  lands,  have  thus  been  banded 
together,  in  a  holy  fellowship,  which  great  numbers  of  them  have  found  to  be 
exceedingly  helpful  ;  and  some;  very  remarkable  instances  of  the  appropriateness  of 
the  Scriptural  quotations  to  the  cases  of  different  individuals  have  been  reported  to 
Mrs.  Spuro-eon,  or  her  son  Charles,  who  has  undertaken  the  onerous  task  of 

c> 
superintending  this  department  of  service  for  the  Saviour.      He  will  be  glacl  to  enrol 

any  readers  of  these  lines  who  have  not  yet  enjoyed  the  blessings  which  others  have 
derived  from  the  "  Text  Bond." 

In  1872,  the  large  penny  broadsheet— entitled,  John  Ploughman*  Almanack  — 
was  first  issued.      Instead  of  a  verse  from   the   Bible,  the   motto   for  each  clay  was  a 
proverb,   or  proverbial  saying,   either  composed  or  selected  by   "  John   Ploughman." 
The    task    of    arrano-ing    -6=;    suitable     maxims,     with    the    other    contents    of    the 

«z>          O         *•*       *J 

Almanack,  was  by  no  means  a  light  one  ;  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  evidently  had,  at 
first,  no  intention  of  repeating  the  process,  and  so  making-  a  permanent  addition 
to  his  ever-increasing  literary  labours  ;  but  when  1873  arrived  without  the  sheet  to 
correspond  with  the  one  for  the  previous  year,  so  many  friends  expressed  their 
disappointment  at  its  non-appearance,  that  the  publication  of  its  homely  messages 
was  resumed;  and,  from  1874  to  1899,  John  Ploughman's  Almanack  has  been  a 
welcome  visitor  in  tens  of  thousands  of  homes,  and  has  exerted  a  very  considerable 


c.    ir.    SPURCEON'S   AUTOIIIOCRAPIIY.  307 

influence  on  behalf  of  religion,  temperance,  thrift,  and  charity.  The  one  for  the 
year  1893  was  pathetically  interesting  from  the  fact  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been 
preparing  the  proverbs  for  it  until  within  a  few  days  of  receiving  the  home-call  ;  and 
so  long  and  so  diligently  had  he  been  gathering  materials  for  future  use,  that,  since 
his  promotion  to  glory,  the  Almanack  has  been  very  largely  composed  of  his  own 
wise  and  witty  sayings,  and,  in  consequence,  it  has  met  with  almost  as  much 
acceptance  as  when  it  had  the  great  advantage  of  his  own  unequalled  master-touch. 
Probably,  not  less  than  five  million  copies  of  the  two  Almanacks  have  been  already 
sold  ;  and  the  cessation  of  either  of  them  would  be  mourned  as  a  personal  loss  by 
vast  numbers  of  friends,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  The  full  extent  of  the  blessing 
they  have  been  the.  means  of  producing  will  only  be;  known  on  the  day  when  all 
secrets  are  revealed  ;  but  testimonies  to  their  usefulness  are  constantly  coming  to 
hand  to  encourage  those  upon  whom  has  devolved  the  responsible  duty  and 
privilege,  of  continuing  their  compilation. 

In  January,  1865,  a  notable  "new  departure"  was  inaugurated  by  the 
publication  of  the  first  number  of  the  monthly  magazine, —  The  Sword  and  the 
Trowel,— which  was  destined  to  play  such  an  important  part  in  the  after-history 
of  its  beloved  Editor.  The  facsimile  (on  page  309)  of  the  cover  in  which  it  then 
appeared  shows  its  connection  with  the  memorable  and  perilous  period  when 
Nehemiah  was  the  Tirshatha,  or  Governor,  of  God's  ancient  people.  The  motto- 
text,  which  has  appeared  on  everyone  of  the  volumes,  was:  "They  which  builded 
on  the  wall,  and  they  that  bare  burdens,  with  those  that  laded,  every  one  with  one 
of  his  hands  wrought  in  the  work,  and  with  the  other  hand  held  a  weapon.  For  the 
builders,  every  one  had  his  sword  girded  by  his  side,  and  so  builded.  And  he  that 
sounded  the  trumpet  was  by  me."  Although  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  such  a  lover  of 
peace,  it  is  significant  that  he  put  the  battling  before  the  building,  not  only  in  the 
title,  but  also  in  the  sub-title  of  the  magazine, — "A  Record  of  Combat  with  Sin 
and  Labour  for  the  Lord."  His  purpose  in  issuing  it  was  clearly  set  forth  in  his 
opening  article,  which  was  headed,  "Our  Aims  and  Intentions  :  "- 

"  Our  magazine  is  intended  to  report  the  efforts  of  those  churches  and 
Associations  which  are  more  or  less  intimately  connected  with  the  Lord's  work  at 
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  and  to  advocate  those  views  of  doctrine  and  church- 
order  which  are  most  certainly  received  among  us.  It  will  address  itself  to  those 
faithful  friends,  scattered  everywhere,  who  are  our  well-wishers  and  supporters  in 
our  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love.  We  feel  the  want  of  some  organ  of 
communication,  in  which  our  many  plans  for  God's  glory  may  be  brought  before 
believers,  and  commended  to  their  aid.  Our  friends  are  so  numerous  as  to  be  able 


:>o8  c.    ir.    SITKCKON'S    AUToiuor.RArnv. 

to  maintain  a  magazine,  and  so  earnest  as  to  require  one.  Our  monthly  message 
will  be  a  supplement  to  our  weekly  sermon,  and  will  enable  us  to  say  many  things 
which  would  be  out  of  place  in  a  discourse.  It  will  inform  the  general  Christian 
public  of  our  movements,  and  show  our  sympathy  with  all  that  is  good  throughout 
the  entire  Church  of  Cod.  It  will  give  us  an  opportunity  of  urging  the  claims  of 
Christ's  cause,  of  advocating  the  revival  of  godliness,  of  denouncing  error,  of  bearing- 
witness  for  truth,  and  of  encouraging  the,  labourers  in  the  Lord's  vineyard. 

"  \Ve  do  not  pretend  to  be  unsectarian,  if  by  this  term  be  meant  the  absence 
of  all  distinctive  principles,  and  a  desire  to  please,  parties  of  all  shades  of  opinion. 
We  believe,  and  therefore  speak.  \Ye  speak  in  love;  but  not  in  soft  words  and 
trimming  sentences.  We  shall  not  court  controversy,  but  we  shall  not  shun  it  when 
the  cause  of  God  demands  it. 

"The  many  ministers  who  were;  students  in  our  College  will  be  our  helpers  in 
maintaining  a  variety  and  freshness  of  matter;  and  their  Hocks,  we  trust,  will  receive 
a  blessing  through  their  stirring  words.  It  is  our  lirst  and  last  object  to  do  practical 
service,  and  to  excite  others  to  active  exertion. 

"We  shall  supply  interesting  reading  upon  general  topics;  but  our  chief  aim 
will  be  to  arouse  believers  to  action,  and  to  suggest  to  them  plans  by  which  the 
Kingdom  of  Jesus  may  be  extended.  To  widen  the  bounds  of  Zion,  and  gather 
together  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  is  our  heart's  desire.  \Ye  would  sound  the  trumpet, 
and  lead  our  comrades  to  the  fight.  We  would  ply  the  trowel  with  untiring  hand 
for  the  building  up  of  Jerusalem's  dilapidated  walls,  and  wield  the  sword  with 
vigour  and  valour  against  the  enemies  of  the  truth." 

The  Sword  and  f/ic  Trowel  has  had,  from  the  beginning,  quite  a  unique 
constituency,  for  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  always  endeavoured  to  provide  suitable  literary 
and  spiritual  fare.  The  complete  history  of  the  magazine  could  not  be  condensed 
even  into  a  chapter  in  the.  present  volume,  so  only  a  very  partial  record  of  its 
usefulness  can  be  embodied  in  the  space  available.  In  addition  to  being  the  direct 
cause  of  the  origin  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Colportage  Association  and  the 
Stockwell  Orphanage,  it  has  been,  from  the  first,  under  Cod's  blessing  upon  its 
advocacy,  the  chief  medium  of  their  maintenance  ;  while  all  the  dear  Pastor's  larger 
and  lesser  Institutions  have-  been  either  started  or  supported  in  response;  to  the 
appeals  appearing  in  its  pages.  The  College,  the  Society  of  Evangelists,  the 
Almshouses,  and  the  many  smaller,  yet  important,  works  which  are  or  have  been 
more  or  less  intimately  associated  with  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  have  derived 
incalculable  benefit  from  the  powerful  pleas  penned  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  published 
in  his  magazine  ;  while  various  religious  and  philanthropic  movements,  with  which 
he  was  only  indirectly  connected,  have  been  very  substantially  aided  in  the  same 


C.     II.     SPURdKONS     AUTOmOGKAl'IIY. 


309 


OJCOMMTWHSlMABOUflFORTHEjORB 


EDITED  BY  C.H.SPURCEOH; 


LONDON 


PATERNOSTER.  ROW 


FACSIMILE    OF    FIRST   COVER    OF    "THE   SWORD   AND   THE    TROWEL." 


yo  C.     H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 

way.      The  total  amount  of  money  thus  contributed  for  the  Lord's  work  would  need 
to  be  represented  by  almost  fabulous  figures. 

Those  who  are  the  privileged  possessors  of  a  complete  set  of  the  annual 
volumes  find  them  to  be  a  wonderful  storehouse  of  interesting'  information  on  all 
manner  of  subjects  ;  and  much  of  the  material  is  just  as  valuable  now  as  when  it 
first  appeared.  Questions  concerning  Scriptural  doctrine,  church  -  government, 
education,  the  Ritualistic  controversy,  Disestablishment,  and  other  matters  ol 
present-day  importance,  are  discussed  in  such  a  fashion  that,  with  very  slight 
modifications,  the  articles  in  the  magazine  can  be  adapted  to  the  circumstances  of 
these  later  times,  and  still  be  as  effective  as  ever.  For  instance,  an  early  series 
of  Illustrated  Tracts  on  Ritualism  set  forth  the  Protestant  position  in  such  a  popular 
style  that  they  are  most  suitable  for  circulation  during  the-  present  crisis  ;  some  of 
them  have  never  been  excelled,  or  even  equalled,  by  anything  that  has  been 
published  since. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  had  a  number  of  assistants,  some;  paid  and  others  who  delighted 
to  aid  him  voluntarily,  from  the  commencement  of  the  magazine  ;  but,  with  the 
exception  of  very  occasional  articles,  he  made:  himself  personally  responsible  for  all 
that  appeared  in  irs  pages,  and  he  often  declared  that  most  of  the  manuscripts  and 
all  the  proofs  passed  directly  under  his  own  hand  and  eye,  so  that  it  was,  in  a  very 
special  sense,  "  his  own  magazine."  It  was  also,  by  the  generally-expressed  desire 
of  its  readers,  largely  autobiographical  ; — a  fact  that  has  been  recognized  by  the 
many  writers  who  have  given  to  the  public  more  or  less  reliable  versions  of  the 
history  of  the  Editor  and  of  the  various  Institutions  which  were  for  so  long  committed 
to  his  charge. 

On  one  occasion,  at  least,  the  magazine  was  mentioned  in  the  House  of  Lords  ; 
and  the  phrase  used  concerning  it,  in  that  august  assembly,  furnished  its  ever-ready 
Editor  with  the  title  of  a  short  article  in  its  next  number: — "  A  Lively  Newspaper, 
called,  '  The  Sword  and  Trowel."  The  opening  paragraph  was  as  follows  : — "The 
good  Bishop  of  Rochester  has  described  TJic  Sword  and  Trowel  to  the  House  of 
Lords  as  '  a  lively  newspaper.'  We  are  afraid  our  friend  is  not  so  well  acquainted 
with  his  Sword  and  Trowel  as  we  could  wish  him  to  be,  for  it  can  hardly  be  called  a 
newspaper  ;  its  shape,  form,  and  monthly  period  of  issue  most  distinctly  place  it 
among-  magazines.  Still,  that  is  near  enough  for  recognition  ;  and  the  adjective 

o  <_>  o  o  •* 

appended  is  so  complimentary  that  we  accept  it  with  pleasure,  and  consider  it  rather 
a  feather  in  our  cap.  What  good  can  a  magazine  or  any  other  publication  effect, 
if  it  is  not  lively  ?  Our  trying  state  of  health  often  makes  us  fear  that  we  shall  grow 
dull,  and  we  accept  the  Bishop's  kindly  criticism  as  a  doctor's  certificate  that  the 
magazine  is  up  to  the  mark,  and  is,  in  fact,  'a  lively  paper.'  It  is  all  that  we  can 
hope  if  our  readers  will  add,  '  and  so  say  all  of  us.'  ' 


C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  311 

The  position  taken  by  those  who  have  been  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the 
magazine  since  its  Founder  and  first  Editor  was  "  called  home,"  has  been  thus 
described  by  Mrs.  Spurgeon  :— 

"It  is  a  source  of  much  satisfaction  to  me  that  the  readers  of  T/ic  Sword  and 
the  Trowel  so  thoroughly  appreciate  the  efforts  made  to  keep  the  dear  old  magazine 
up  to  its  past  standard  of  interest  and  integrity.  Letter  after  letter  of  warm  approval 
reaches  me,  from  those  to  whom  it  is  at  once  a  storehouse  of  blessed  memories,  a 
rallying-point  for  faith's  most  loyal  forces,  and,  in  some  strange,  sweet  way,  a  heart- 
link  between  the  loved  one  in  Heaven  and  the  loving  ones  on  earth.  In  it,  Jns 
writings  still  charm  us,— bright  gleams  of  his  wit  and  wisdom  sparkle  among  the 
paragraphs, — his  ways  and  methods  are  carefully  followed, — he  is  still  the  chief 
contributor, — and  the  sunshine  of  his  name  lingers  lovingly  on  every  page. 

"  But  above  and  beyond  all  this,  the  same  jealousy  for  God's  honour,  faithfulness 
to  Pi  is  truth,  and  fearless  denunciation  of  false  doctrine  and  error,  are  maintained 
by  those  into  whose  hands  dear  Mr.  Spurgeon  committed  the  '  sword  '  and  the  '  trowel' 
when  he  laid  them  aside  for  the  crown  and  the  glory.  He  never  let  the  sword  rust 
in  its  scabbard,  or  the  trowel  lie  idle  on  the  mortar-board  ;  and  his  splendid  courage 
in  wielding  both  the  weapon  of  war  and  the  implement  of  toil  is  an  unfailing 
incentive  to  those  who  follow  him  in  the  'combat  with  sin,  and  labour  for 
the  Lord.'" 

The  early  volumes  of  The  Sword  and  tJie  Trowel  soon  became  specially 
valuable  to  ministers  and  students,  because  in  them  the  Editor  gave  his  expositions 
of  the  Psalms,  which  were  afterwards  incorporated  in  his  greatest  literary  work, 
The  Treasury  of  David.  Those  seven  substantial  volumes  contain,  in  addition  to 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  Commentary,  the  choicest  extracts  which  he  and  his  helpers 
could  find  in  ancient  and  modern  literature  upon  the  whole  Psalter  ;  and,  together, 
they  constitute  an  indispensable  portion  of  the  library  of  any  servant  of  the  Lord 
who  would  be  fully  furnished  for  his  Saviour's  service.  The  Prefaces  to  the  various 
volumes  give  just  a  glimpse  of  the  delight  with  which  this  real  labour  of  love  pro 
ceeded  during  all  the  twenty  years  of  the  busy  author's  life  in  which  it  was  in  course 
of  preparation  ;  and  his  final  words,  written  when  the  great  task  was  accomplished, 
indicate  how  deeply  the  beloved  commentator  and  compiler  had  been  himself 
profited  by  his  study  of  this  part  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and  how  real  was  his 
regret  when  the  last  Psalm  was  reached,  and  he  had  to  turn  to  other  and  less 
congenial  forms  of  toil  for  his  Master  : — 

"At  the  end  of  all  these  years,  the  last  page  of  this  Commentary  is  printed,  and 
the  seventh  Preface  is  requested.  The  demand  sounds  strangely  in  my  ears.  A 


312  C.      II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Preface  when  the  work  is  done:  ?  It  can  he  only  nominally  a  Preface,  lor  it  is  really 
a  farewell.  I  beg  to  introduce;  my  closing  volume,  and  then  to  retire  with  many 
apologies  for  having  trespassed  so  much  upon  my  reader's  patience. 

"  A  tinge  of  sadness  is  on  my  spirit  as  I  quit  The  Treasury  of  David,  never  to 
find  on  this  earth  a  richer  storehouse,  though  the  whole  palace  of  Revelation  is  open 
to  me.  Blessed  have  been  the  days  spent  in  meditating,  mourning,  hoping,  believing, 
and  exulting  with  David  !  Can  1  hope,  to  spend  hours  more:  joyous  on  this  side  of 
the  golden  gate  ?  Perhaps  not  ;  for  the  seasons  have  been  very  choice  in  which 
the  harp  of  the  great  poet  of  the  sanctuary  has  charmed  my  ears.  Yet  the  training 
which  has  come  of  these  heavenly  contemplations  may,  haply,  go  far  to  create  and 
sustain  a  peaceful  spirit  which  will  never  be  without  its  own  happy  psalmody,  and 
never  without  aspirations  after  something  higher  than  it  has  yet  known.  The  Book 
of  Psalms  instructs  us  in  the  use  of  wings  as  well  as  words  :  it  sets  us  both  mounting 
and  singing.  Often  have  I  ceased  my  commenting  upon  the  text,  that  I  might  rise 
with  the  Psalm,  and  gaze  upon  visions  of  God.  If  I  may  only  hope  that  these 
volumes  will  be  as  useful  to  other  hearts  in  the  reading  as  to  mine  in  the  writing, 

o  o 

I  shall  be  well  rewarded  by  the  prospect. 

"The  former  volumes  have  enjoyed  a  singular  popularity.  It  may  be. 
questioned  if,  in  any  age,  a  Commentary  so  large,  upon  a  single  Book  of  the  Bible, 
has  enjoyed  a  circulation  within  measurable  distance  of  that  which  has  been  obtained 
by  this  work." 

Shortly  after  Vol.  I.  of  Tlic  Treasury  was  issued,  Mr.  Spurgeon  met  one  of  the 
most  eminent  of  the  London  publishers  ;  and,  in  the  course  of  their  conversation, 
his  new  book  was  mentioned.  As  the  gentleman  had  such  a  wide  experience  of  the 
success  or  failure  of  the  works  of  various  authors,  the  dear  Pastor  asked  him  what 
he  would  consider  a  satisfactory  sale  of  T/ic  Treasiiry.  lie  replied,  "Well,  Mr. 
Spurgeon,  in  the  first  place,  you  have  fixed  the  price  very  much  lower  than  I  should 
have  done  if  I  had  brought  out  a  valuable  theological  work  of  that  kind.  Fifteen  or 
sixteen  shillings  would  not,  in  my  judgment,  have  been  at  all  too  much  to  charge  for 
it  ;  but,  as  you  have  issued  it  at  eight  shillings,  and,  with  the  prestige  of  your  name, 
I  should  say  that  you  have  clone  very  well  if  you  have  sold  as  many  as  two  thousand 
copies  by  this  time."  "  Oh  !  "  said  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "  that  number  was  far  exceeded 
directly  it  was  published,  and  we  have  already  run  into  several  thousands  more. 
I  purposely  put  the  price  as  low  as  possible,  because  I  wanted  to  place  the  volumes 
within  the  reach  of  as  large  a  number  of  students  of  the  Word. as  I  could."  The 
publisher  was  surprised,  yet  gratified,  to  hear  of  the  successful  commencement  of 

the  series,  and  the  author  felt  that  he  had  oreat  cause  for  oratitude  to  God  for  o-ivin<r 

<->  &        t> 

such  a  gracious  token  of  approval  to  this  important  part  of  his  literary  labours. 


C.      II.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  313 

Before  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  "  called  home,"  no  less  than  a  hundred  and  twenty 
thousand  volumes  of  77^  Treasury  had  been  sold;  twenty  thousand  more  have  been 
disposed  of  since  his  departure  ;  and  it  is  still  in  constant  demand.  Messrs. 
Passmore  and  Alabaster  have  just  finished  the  re-issue  of  the  whole  work  in  shilling 
monthly  parts,  thus  bringing  it  within  the  means  of  local  preachers  and  others  who 
could  not  buy  the  volumes.  The  complete  set  was  republished  in  the  United  States; 
Mr.  Spurg'eon's  own  comments  are  being  translated  into  German  with  a  view  to 
publication  ;  and  his  exposition  of  Psalm  cxix.  has  been  issued,  by  Messrs.  Passmore 
and  Alabaster,  in  a  handy  3s.  6d.  volume,  entitled,  77^  Golden  Alphabet  of  the 
Praises  of  Holy  Scripture.  It  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  blessing  that  has  been 
conferred  upon  the  whole  Christian  Church  by  The  Treasury  of  David.  If  its 
author  had  never  written  anything  else,  it  would  have  been  a  permanent  literary 
memorial  of  no  small  value  ;  and  among  the  hundred  and  fifty  volumes  (or 
thereabouts),  which  bear  his  name  on  their  title-pages,  this  series  is  unquestionably 
his  magnum  opus. 

The  most  popular  of  all  Mr.  Spurgeon's  publications — fohu  Ploughman's  Talk 
—first  saw  the  light  in  the  pages  of  his  magazine,  and  probably  helped  largely  to 
increase  the  circle  of  his  readers.  Even  some  of  the  Editor's  most  intimate  friends 
did  not  recognize  their  beloved  Pastor's  voice  when  he  addressed  them  in  the 
language  of  such  godly  ploughmen  as  his  old  Stambourne  friend,  Will  Richardson; 
and  he  has  himself  left  on  record  this  interesting  reminiscence  of  what  one  of  the 
Tabernacle  deacons  thought  of  the  writings  of  the  (supposed)  man  in  the 
smock-frock  : — 

"  Many  years  ago,  it  came  into  the  head  of  the  Editor  of  TJie  Sword  and  the 
l^rowel  to  write  a  set  of  plain  papers  for  the  people,  in  pure  Saxon,  and  in  the  style 
of  homely  proverbs.  He  produced,  one  after  another,  the  chapters  which  now  make 
up  John  Ploughman's  Talk.  As  no  one  knew  who  wrote  them,  amusing  things 
occurred.  An  attached  friend  said  to  their  author,  'Why  do  you  put  those  papers  of 
that  ploughman  into  the  magazine  ? '  The  answer  was,  '  Well,  they  are  lively,  and 
they  have  a  good  moral;  what  is  the  matter  with  them?'  'Yes,'  replied  the 
unsuspecting  critic,  'they  are  rather  good  for  a  poor  uneducated  person  like  the 
writer,  but  they  are  too  coarse  for  your  magazine.'  'Think  so?'  said  the  Editor, 
and  with  a  smile  on  his  face,  he  went  his  way.  When  that  good  brother  found  out 
who  the  actual  writer  was,  he  felt  all  sorts  of  ways  ;  but  never  a  word  was  said  about 
his  criticism." 

One  of  the  ministers  trained  in  the  College,  Pastor  W.  D.  McKinney,  in  writing 
to  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  concerning  her  dear  husband,  after  he  was  "called  home,"  proved 


C.      H.     SrURHKONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


that  ;i  student  nenetrated  the  disguise  through  which  the  deacon  could  not  sec. 
Referring  to  his  beloved  President,  he  wrote  :  --"  The  first  gilt  of  books  I  ever 
received  was  two  volumes  of  his  sermons,  which  were  presented  to  me  at  the  close 


C.    11.    SPUKGEON    AS    "JOHN    I'LOUCillMAN." 


of  my  first  public  discourse.  Afterwards,  I  entered  the  College,  and  was  one  of 
those  upon  whom  he  tried  the  effect  of  John  Ploughman  s  Talk  ;  and  I  think  I  was 
the  first  who  found  '  John  '  out.  Being  one  of  the  senior  students,  who  were  dubbed 


C.     II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  3  1 5 

'  the  twelve  apostles,'  I  sat  on  his  right  hand  on  Fridays  when  he  read  the  '  Papers 
from  a  Ploughman.'  He  evidently  wanted  to  know  what  we  thought  of  them,  yet 
decided  that  our  verdict  should  be  unbiassed.  '  Well,'  said  he,  with  that  merry 
twinkle  of  his  eye  which  we  knew  so  well,  'Well,  McKinney,  who  do  you  think  this 
ploughman  is?'  'I  think  he  is  not  very  far  away,'  I  replied,  'and  that  he  has 
enjoyed  his  own  talk  !  '  '  Aha  !  '  said  he,  '  you  know  too  much  !  ' 

As  soon  as  the  volume  was  published,  it  attained  an  immense  circulation.  At 
first,  the  book  was  issued  in  stiff  covers  at  a  shilling,  and  in  cloth  at  two  shillings, 

o '  o     ' 

without  illustrations  ;  but,  after  the  publication  of  John  Ploiighuians  Pictures ;  or, 
More  of  his  Plain  Talk  for  Plain  People  ;  the  former  work  was  also  illustrated, 
and.  both  books  are  now  sold,  in  cloth,  at  a  shilling.  Nearly  six  hundred  thousand 
copies  of  the  two  volumes  have  been  already  purchased,  and  the  demand  for  them 
still  continues.  Several  translations  into  other  languages  have  been  made,  but  the 
one  that  specially  pleased  "John  Ploughman"  was  the  Dutch  version,  published  at 
Amsterdam,  by  Mr.  C.  S.  Adama  van  Scheltema,  under  the  title,  Praatjes  van  Jan 
Ploeger.  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote,  in  the  Sword  and  Trowel,  a  very  amusing  article 
upon  "  John  Ploughman  as  a  Dutchman,"  in  which  he  used  and  applied  proverbs 
specially  suitable  to  Holland  and  the  Hollanders. 

Another  contribution  to  the  proverbial  literature  of  his  day  consisted  of  the  two 
handsome  volumes  to  which  he  gave  the  title  of  The  Salt-Cellars,  in  allusion  to  the 
definition  of  a  proverb  which  says  that  it  should  comprise  "  shortness,  sense,  and 
salt."  It  is  a  vast  collection  of  Proverbs  of  all  Nations,  with  Homely  Notes  thereon, 
concerning  which  The  Church  Review  said  : — "  The  proverbs  are  excellent  ;  but 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  comments  are  perfect." 

While  the  dear  Pastor  was  travelling,  either  at  home  or  abroad,  he  always  had 
his  note-book  close  at  hand,  and  jotted  down  everything  that  was  likely  to  be  of 
service  afterwards,  incidents  that  could  be  used  as  illustrations  being  specially 
preserved.  Many  of  these  were  first  published  in  the  Sword  and  Troivel,  and  then 
gathered,  with  other  material  of  a  similar  kind,  into  a  half-crown  volume,  entitled, 
Feathers  for  Arrows  ;  or,  Illustrations  for  Preachers  and  Teachers;  which  has  had 
a  very  large  sale.  In  one  of  the  Lectiwes  to  my  Students,  Mr.  Spurgeon  related  the 
following  incident  concerning  the  book  : — "  I  once  met  with  a  High  Churchman,  who 
told  me  that  he  had  purchased  Feathers  for  Arrows;  '  and,' said  he,  'some  of  the 
illustrations  are  very  telling  ;  but  they  have  to  be  used  with  great  discretion.'  His 
words  seemed  to  imply  that  my  expressions  were  possibly  a  little  too  strong,  and 
perhaps  somewhat  rough  and  unpolished  here  and  there  ;  so  he  said,  '  They  must  be 


C.     H.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


used  with  great  discretion.'  '  Well,'  I  replied,  '  that  is  how  I  wrote  them.'  He 
looked  at  me,  but  he  said  nothing  ;  probably  it  had  never  occurred  to  him  that  the 
same  kind  of  discretion  was  necessary  in  making  the  illustrations  as  in  using  them." 

At  the  close  of  the  year  in  which  the  magaxine  was  commenced,  another 
valuable  literary  work  was  completed.  This  was  Mr.  Spurgeon's  first  volume  of 
daily  readings, — published  under  the  title  of  Morning  by  Morning, — and  concerning 
which  he  wrote  in  the  Preface  :— 

"In  penning  these  short  reflections  upon  certain  passages  of  Holy  Writ, 
the  author  has  had  in  view  the  assistance  of  the  private  meditations  of  believers. 
A  child  may  sometimes  suggest  a  consolation  which  might  not  otherwise  have 
cheered  a  desolate  heart ;  and  even  a  flower,  smiling  upward  from  the  sod,  may 
turn  the  thoughts  heavenward  :  may  we  not  hope  that,  by  the  Holy  Spirit's  grace,  as 
the  reader  turns  '  morning  by  morning  '  to  our  simple  page,  he  will  hear  in  it  'a 
still  small  voice  '  whose  speech  shall  be  the  message  of  God  to  his  soul  ?  The  mind 
wearies  of  one  thing,  and  we  have  therefore  studied  variety,  changing  our  method 
constantly  ;  sometimes  exhorting,  then  soliloquizing,  then  conversing  ;  using  the 
first,  second,  and  third  persons,  and  speaking  both  in  the  singular  and  plural,  and 
all  with  the  desire  of  avoiding  sameness  and  dulness.  Our  matter  also,  we  venture 
to  hope,  is  wide  in  its  range,  and  not  altogether  without  a  dash  of  freshness  ;  readers 
of  our  sermons  will  recognixe  many  thoughts  and  expressions  which  they  may  have- 
met  with  in  our  discourses  ;  but  much  is,  to  the  author  at  least,  new  ;  and,  as  far  as 
anything  can  be  which  treats  of  the  common  salvation,  it  is  original.  We  have 
written  out  of  our  own  heart,  and  most  of  the  portions  are  remembrances  of  words 
which  were  refreshing  in  our  own  experience  ;  and,  therefore,  we  trust  the  daily 
meditations  will  not  be  without  savour  to  our  brethren  ;  in  fact,  we  know  they  will 
not,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  rest  upon  them. 

"  Our  ambition  has  led  us  to  hope  that  our  little  volume  may  also  aid  the 
worship  of  families  where  God's  altar  is  honoured  in  the  morning.  We  know  that  it 
has  been  the  custom  in  some  households  to  read  Mason,  Hawker,  BoQ-atsky,  Smith, 

o  y  ' 

or  Jay  ;  and  without  wishing  to  usurp  the  place  of  any  of  these,  our  Morning 
by  Morning  aspires  to  a  position  among  them.  Our  happiness  will  overflow  should 
we  be  made  a  blessing  to  Christian  households.  Family  worship  is  beyond  measure 
important,  both  for  the  present  and  succeeding  generations  ;  and  to  be  in  part  a 
chaplain  in  the  houses  of  our  friends,  we  shall  esteem  to  be  a  very  great  honour." 

The  work  so  admirably  answered  all  the  ends  designed  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  that, 
in  a  little  over  two  years,  he  issued  the  sequel,  Evening  by  Evening,  and  wrote  in 
the  Preface  : — "  Having  had  the  seal  of  our  Master's  approval  set  upon  our  former 


C.      11.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  317 

volume,  entitled,  Morning  by  Morning,  we  hnve  felt  encouraged  to  give  our  best 
attention  to  the  present  series  of  brief  meditations,  and  we  send  them  forth  with 
importunate  prayer  for  a  blessing  to  rest  upon  every  reader.  Already,  more  than 
twenty  thousand  readers  are  among  our  morning  fellow-worshippers.  Oh,  that  all 
may  receive  grace  from  the  Lord  by  means  of  the  portion  read  ;  and  when  a  similar 
number  shall  be  gathered  to  read  the  evening  selection,  may  the  Father's  smile  be 
their  benison  ! 

"We  have  striven  to  keep  out  of  the  common  track;  and,  hence,  we  have 
selected  unusual  texts,  and  have  brought  forward  neglected  subjects.  The  vice  of 
many  religious  works  is  their  dulness  ; — from  this  fault  we  have  striven  to  be  free, 
our  friends  must  judge  how  far  we  have  succeeded.  If  we  may  lead  upward  one 
heart  which  otherwise  would  have  drooped,  or  sow  in  a  single  mind  a  holy  purpose 
which  else  had  never  been  conceived,  we  shall  be  grateful.  The  Lord  send  us  such 
results  in  thousands  of  instances,  and  His  shall  be  all  the  praise  !  The  longer  we 
live,  the  more  deeply  are  we  conscious  that  the  Holy  Spirit  alone  can  make  truth 
profitable  to  the  heart  ;  and,  therefore,  in  earnest  prayer,  we  commit  this  volume  and 
its  companion  to  His  care." 

Both  the  books  have  had  a  remarkable  circulation,  —  over  two  hundred  and 
twenty  thousand  having  been  sold, — and  their  ministry  is  by  no  means  ended.  Since 
the  dear  author's  home-going,  the  publishers  have  carried  out  an  idea  that  he  had 
long  cherished,  and  issued  the  two  sets  of  meditations,  printed  on  India  paper,  in  a 
dainty  little  volume  that  can  be  carried  in  the  pocket,  and  used  for  private  meditation, 
or  for  the  visitation  of  the  sick. 

A  singular  instance  of  the  appropriateness  of  one  of  the  readings  in  Evening  by 
Evening  has  often  been  described  by  Mr.  Spurgeon.  Lady  Burgoyne  (wife  of 
Sir  John  F.  Burgoyne,  Constable  of  the  Tower,  and  mother  of  the  first  Mrs.  J.  A. 
Spurgeon,)  was  a  member  of  the  church  at  the  Tabernacle.  The  Pastor  gave,  in 
his  sermon  entitled,  "  Speak  for  yourself. — A  Challenge  !  "  the  following  testimony 
concerning  her  Christian  character  and  witness-bearing  for  her  Lord  : — "You,  your 
ladyship,  say,  '  I  love  the  Lord,  but  I  do  not  think  I  could  possibly  say  anything  for 
Him  in  my  circle  and  walk  of  life.'  Could  you  not  ?  You  will  easily  surmount  this 
little  difficulty  if  you  attain  a  greater  growth  in  grace.  We  had  one  among  us, 
whose  rank  entitled  her  to  move  in  an  upper  sphere  of  '  society  '  ;  but  her  choice 
enabled  her  to  prefer  the  humble  companionship  of  the  church  to  which  she 
belonged.  Some  of  you  well  remember  her  silvery  locks.  She  has  left  us  now,  and 
gone  home  to  glory.  Her  lot  was  cast  amongst  the  aristocracy  ;  yet,  with  gentle, 
quiet,  bland  simplicity,  she  introduced  the  gospel  wherever  she  went.  Many  and 


^  1 8  c.    ii.    SPUKC;KON'S    AU TOHKMIKAPIIY. 

many  have  conic1  to  these  pews,  to  listen  to  your  minister,  who  would  never  have 
been  hen-  but  for  her  calm,  beautiful,  unobtrusive,  holy  lift;,  and  the.  nerve,  with 
which,  anywhere,  and  at  any  time,  she  could  say,  '  Yes,  I  am  a  Christian  ;  what  is 
more,  I  am  a  Nonconformist  ;  and  what  you  will  consider  worse,  I  am  a  Baptist  ;  and 
what  you  will  think  worst  of  all,  I  am  a  member  of  the  church  at  the  Tabernacle.' 
She  never  blushed  to  own  our  dear  Redeemer's  Name,  nor  yet  to  acknowledge  and 
befriend  the  lowliest  of  His  disciples  ;  and  you  will  do  well  to  imitate  her  faith,  and 
follow  her  example." 

On  September  7,  1870,  Lady  Burgoyne  took  up  her  copy  of  Evening  by 
Eveniuo-  and  be«-<m  to  read  the  text  and  exposition  for  that  date  :  — "  '  There  is 

<*>  '  o 

sorrow  on  the  sea;  it  cam/of  be  quiet' — Jeremiah  xlix.  23.  Little  know  we  what 
sorrow  may  be.  upon  the  sea  at  this  moment.  \Ve  are  safe  in  our  quiet  chamber  ; 
but,  far  away  on  the  salt  sea,  the  hurricane  may  be  cruelly  seeking  for  the  lives  of 
men.  Hear  ho\v  the  death-fiends  howl  among  the  cordage;  how  every  timber 
starts  as  the  waves  beat  like  battering-rams  upon  the  vessel  !  God  help  you,  poor 
drenched  and  wearied  ones  !"  —when  she  exclaimed,  "Something  dreadful  has 
happened  to  poor  Hugh  ;"  and  so  it  proved,  for  her  son,  Captain  Hugh  Burgoyne, 
commander  of  II. M.S.  Captain,  an  ironclad  turret-ship,  had,  that  very  morning, 
been  lost  off  Cape  Finisterre  with  his  vessel  and  over  five  hundred  of  his  officers  and 
crew,  as  well  as  Captain  Cowper  Coles,  the  designer  of  the  ship,  who  was  on  board 
as  a  visitor.  The  providential  arrangement  of  the  message  in  Evening  by  Evening 
somewhat  prepared  the  bereaved  family  for  the  terrible  tidings  that  soon  after 
reached  them. 

A  double  coincidence,  with  brighter  associations,  but  connected  with  the  same 
volume,  was  thus  reported  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  in  1898  by  Pastor  W.  Usher,  M.D., 
of  Tunbriclge  Wells  :— 

"  In  the  course  of  conversation  with  a  friend  in  the  train,  yesterday,  he  narrated 
the  following  incident,  which  I  thought  you  would  like  to  know.  He  had  been 
telling  me  of  the  profit  he  derived  from  reading  Morning  by  Morning,  and  then  he 
added,  '  There  is  a  story  connected  with  another  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  books,  which  he 
would  have  been  pleased  to  hear.  About  thirteen  years  since,  a  friend  of  mine,  a 
Christian  farmer,  resided  in  Devonshire.  He  had  a  desire  to  remove  ;  and,  having 
heard  of  an  available  farm  in  Essex,  he  visited  a  gentleman  in  London  to  make 
enquiries  about  it.  During-  his  visit,  he  opened  a  copy  of  Evening  by  Evening, 
remarking,  as  he  did  so,  "  I  wonder  what  the  Lord  will  say  to  me  through  Mr. 
Spurgeon?"  The  text  for  May  12  caught  his  eye:  "Fear  not  to  go  down  into 
Egypt  ;  for  I  will  there  make  of  thee  a  great  nation  :  I  will  go  down  with  thee  into 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOMIOCK. \riiv.  319 

Egypt  ;  and  I  will  also  surely  bring  thee  up  again."  This  seemed  suited  to  his 
circumstances,  but  he  could  not  at  once  decide  to  take  the  farm.  Some  weeks 
later,  he  was  pressed  to  decide  one  way  or  the  other  ;  and  again  visiting  the  house 
of  his  friend  in  London,  he  once  more  consulted  livening  by  livening,  and  the  text 
was  that  for  June  8:  "Thou  shalt  see  now  whether  My  Word  shall  come  to  pass 
unto  thee  or  not."  lie  took  the  farm,  found  the  village  in  a  state  of  spiritual 
desolation  ;  opened  his  barn,  and  preached  in  it,  and,  when  it  became  too  small, 
erected  a  meeting-house;  capable  of  seating  400  persons.  There  were  recently  in 
fellowship  there  160  baptized  believers,  and  a  Sunday-school  of  200  children!  The 
farmer  evidently  connects  his  success  with  the  two  messages  he  found  in  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  book.'  ' 

In  the  chapter  on  "A  Holiday  Drive  to  the  New  Forest,"  mention  is  made;  ol 
another  book  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  preparing  as  an  aid  to  family  devotion.  This 
was  duly  published  under  the  title  of  The  Interpreter ;  and  consisted  of  selected 
passages  of  the  Word  of  dod  for  reading  every  morning  and  evening  throughout 
the  year,  together  with  brief  comments  and  suitable  hymns.  It  was  issued  first  in 
monthly  parts,  and  afterwards  as  a  very  substantial  volume,  in  various  styles  of 
binding.  It  has  been  a  great  help  in  the  private  worship  of  thousands  of 
households  ;  such  men  of  mark  as  Karl  Cairns  and  Karl  Shaftesbury  have  been 
among  the  many  who  have;  borne,  testimony  to  its  value.  Mr.  Spurgeon  always  felt 
that  he  might  have  added  largely  to  its  circulation  if  he  had  in  one  respect  changed 
the  character  of  the  work  ;  but  IK;  explained,  in  the  Preface,  the  reason  for  his 
decision  upon  that  matter:—"!  have  been  earnestly  urged  to  add  prayers,  but  my 
conscience  will  not  allow  me  to  do  so,  although  it  would  greatly  increase  the  sale  of 
the  work.  Let  every  Christian  parent  tiy  to  pray  from  his  heart  ;  and,  though  at 
first  it  may  be  difficult,  it  will  soon  become  a  delight,  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
to  pour  out  the  desires  of  his  soul  in  the  midst  of  his  family.  To  some  persons,  the 
use  of  forms  of  prayer  appears  to  be  lawful  ;  but,  as  I  cannot  coincide  with  that 
opinion,  it  would  be  the  height  of  hypocrisy  for  me  to  compose  prayers  for  the  use  of 
others." 

In  1866,  another  formidable  yet  happy  task  was  accomplished  in  the 
compilation  of  Our  Own  Hymn-Book.  The  worshippers  at  the  Tabernacle  mio-ht 
have  continued  longer  to  employ  in  their  service  of  praise  the  selections  of  Dr.  Watts 
and  Dr.  Rippon,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  complicated  arrangement  of  the  various 
books  and  parts,  which  proved  so  puzzling  to  strangers.  So,  taking  pity  upon  them, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  commenced  this  new  undertaking  ;  and  when  he  had  completed  it,  he 
wrote  this  explanation  of  the  motive  which  had  actuated  him,  and  the  methods  he 


320  c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

had  followed  to  make  the  new  book  as  perfect  as  possible  : — "  None  of  the  collections 
already  published  are  exactly  what  our  congregation  needs,  or  we  would  have 
cheerfully  adopted  one  of  them.  They  are  good  in  their  way,  but  we  need  some 
thing-  more.  Our  congregation  has  distinctive  features  which  are  not  suited  by 
every  compilation  ; — not,  indeed,  by  any  known  to  us.  We  thought  it  best  to  issue 
a  selection  which  would  contain  the  cream  of  the  books  already  in  use  among'  us, 
together  with  the  best  of  all  others  extant  up  to  the  hour  of  going  to  press  ;  and 
having  sought  a  blessing  upon  the  project,  we  set  about  it  with  all  our  might,  and  at 
last  have  brought  it  to  a  conclusion.  Our  best  diligence  has  been  given  to  the.  work, 

*I5  «— *  O 

and  we  have  spared  no  expense  :  may  God's  richest  benediction  rest  upon  the  result 
of  our  arduous  labours  !  Unto  His  glory  we  dedicate  Our  Own  Hymn-Book, 

"  The  area  of  our  researches  has  been  as  wide  as  the  bounds  of  existing 
religious  literature, — American  and  British,  Protestant  and  Romish,  ancient  and 
modern.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  our  taste,  we  have  exercised  it  without 
prejudice  ;  and  a  good  hymn  has  not  been  rejected  because  of  the  character  ot  its 
author,  or  the  heresies  of  the  church  in  whose  hymnal  it  first  appeared  ;  so  long  as 
the  language  and  the  spirit  of  it  commended  the  hymn  to  our  heart,  we  included  it, 
and  we  believe  that  we  have  thereby  enriched  our  collection.  The  range  ot  subjects 
is  very  extensive,  comprising  not  only  direct  praise,  but  doctrine,  experience,  and 
exhortation  ;  thus  enabling  the  saints,  according  to  apostolical  command,  to  ecliiy 
one  another  in  their  spiritual  songs. 

"  If  any  object  that  some  of  the  hymns  are  penitential  or  doctrinal,  and  therefore 
unfit  to  be  sung,  we  reply  that  we  find  examples  of  such  in  the  Book  of  Psalms, 
which  we  have  made  our  model  in  compiling  our  work  ;  there  we  have  Maschils  as 
well  as  Hosannahs,  and  penitential  odes  as  well  as  Hallelujahs.  We  have  not 
been  able  to  fall  in  with  modern  scruples,  but  have  rested  content  with  ancient 
precedents. 

"  We  hope  that,  in  some  few  churches  of  the  land,  we  may  be  helpful  to  their 
service  of  sacred  song,  and  aid  them  in  praising  the  Lord.  The  Editor  has  inserted, 
with  great  diffidence,  a  very  few  of  his  own  compositions, — chiefly  among  the 
Psalms  ; — and  his  only  apology  for  so  doing  is  the  fact  that,  of  certain  difficult 
Psalms,  he  could  find  no  version  at  all  fitted  for  singing,  and  was  therefore  driven  to 
turn  them  into  verse  himself.  As  these  original  hymns  are  but  few,  it  is 
hoped  that  they  will  not  prejudice  the  ordinary  reader  against  the  rest  of  the 
collection  ;  and,  possibly,  one  or  two  of  them  may  gratify  the  generous  judgment  of 
our  friends." 

The  hope,  so  modestly  expressed,  that  Our  Own  Hymn-Book  might  be  adopted 
by  other  congregations  beside  that  at  the  Tabernacle,  has  been  fully  realized  ;  and 


C.      II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOIUOGRAl'IIY. 


the  Editor's  own  compositions  have  been  prized  as  much  as  any  in  the  whole  work. 
Three  oi  them  especially — the  one  written  for  an  early  morning  prayer-meeting— 

"Sweetly  the  holy  hymn 

Breaks  on  the  morning  air  ; 
Before  the  world  with  smoke  is  dim, 
We  meet  to  offer  prayer ;  "- 

another,  intended  lor  singing  at  the  communion,— 

"Amidst  us  our  Beloved  stands, 
And  bids  us  view  His  pierced  hands. 
Points  to  His  wounded  feet  and  side, 
Blest  emblems  of  the  Crucified  ; 

and  a  third,  commencing— 

"The  Holy  Ghost  is  here 

\Yhere  saints  in  prayer  agree, 
As  Jesu's  parting  gift  He's  near 
Each  pleading  company  ;  "- 

have  been  incorporated  into  many  modern  hymnals. 

Air.  Spurgeon  often  spoke  of  the  compilation  of  Our  Own  Hymn-Book  as 
having  been  a  great  means  of  grace  to  his  own  soul,  especially  when  he  was 
selecting  the  hymns  in  praise  of  the:  Lord  Jesus  ;  and,  once,  when  preaching  at 
Surrey  Chapel,  he  thus  explained  why  he  had  omitted  one  hymn  that  he  found  in 
other  collections  : — "  It  really  is  lamentable  to  see  how  common,  in  certain  quarters, 
misery  is  among  the  people  of  God.  In  many  places  they  are  a  feeble  folk. 
Mr.  Ready-to- Halt,  of  whom  John  lUinyan  writes,  must  have  been  the  father  of  a 
very  large  family.  I  am  afraid  that  the  manufacture  of  crutches  will  never  die  out 
altogether  ;  and  really,  in  some  parts,  it  must  be  a  most  lucrative  business,  for  many 
of  the  Lord's  people  never  get  beyond,  '  I  hope  so,'  or,  '  I  trust  so,'  and  no  hymn  in 
the  hymn-book  is  so  sweet  to  them  as— 

"  '  'Tis  a  point  I  long  to  know. 

4 

"  I  did  not  put  that  hymn  in  Our  Own  Hymn-Hook.  I  had  a  debate  in  my  own 
mind  about  it.  I  said  to  myself,  '  Ah,  well  !  they  will  know  all  about  that  hymn 
without  my  putting  it  into  the  book  ;  '  and  I  thought  that,  if  you  wanted  to  sing  it, 
you  could  sing  it  alone  at  home  ;  but  it  did  not  seem  to  me  to  be  a  hymn  that  a 
whole  congregation  should  use'.  I  have  to  sing  it  myself  sometimes,  I  am  sorry  to 
say.  It  is  an  excellent  hymn,  as  expressing  the  feelings  of  some  of  God's  people, 
but  it  will  not  do  for  all  of  you  to  get  into  that  state.  It  is  very  well  for  the  good 
wife  to  have  a  little  black  draught  at  hand  when  the  child  needs  it  sometimes  ;  but 
to  give  the  whole  family  the  same  medicine,  might  be  a  great  deal  more  injurious 
than  beneficial.  And  so  it  is  with  regard  to  that  class  of  hymns  ;  it  is  suitable  to  a 
certain  case  of  diseased  spiritual  condition,  but  it  would  be  wrong  to  suppose  or  to 
insinuate  that  all  the  people  of  God,  at  any  one  time  in  a  congregation,  could  be 
found  in  exactly  the  same  condition  of  sad  decrepitude  of  faith." 

w  3 


-22  C.     11.      SlTRr.KOX'S     ArTOmOGRAl'I  I  Y. 

o 

After  being  in  use  for  a  third  of  a  century,  it  was  felt  that  there  was  need  to  add 
to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  compilation  ;  so,  in  the  year  1898,  a  Supplement  was  issued, 
containing  300  additional  hymns  ;  and,  providentially,  it  was  ready  for  use  just  when 
the  Tabernacle  congregation  had  need  of  new  hymn-books  to  replace:  the  many 
that  had  been  burned  in  the  fire  which  wrought  such  terrible  destruction  in  their 
great  house  of  prayer.  The  new  selection  closely  follows  the  lines  laid  down  for  the 
former  one,  and  includes  many  of  the  best  "psalms,  and  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs" 
that  have  been  composed  during  the  last  thirty  years. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  refer,  in  detail,  to  the  notable  series  of  volumes,  entitled, 
Lectures  to  my  Students,  which  have  attained  world-wide  fame,  and  have  been  a 
source  of  incalculable  blessing  to  thousands  of  ministers  of  the  gospel  and  Christian 
workers  generally.  Nor  is  there  need  for  more  than  a  passing  mention  of  the 
volumes  composed  entirely  of  extracts  from  the  Pastor's  published  works,— 
Gleanings  among  the  Sheaves,  Spurgeons  Gems,  Flashes  of  Thought,  The.  Spurgeon 
Birthday  Hook  and  Autographic  Register,  Barbed  Arrows  from  the  Quiver  oj 
C.  //.  Sturgeon,  and  Jlverybodys  Book, — all  of  which  prove  the  abundance  and 
preciousness  of  the  stores  from  which  so  many  specimens  could  be  selected,  while 
leaving  the  vast  bulk  almost  untouched.  In  addition  to  the.  discourses  regularly 
published,  week  by  week,  in  TJie  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  five  volumes  of 
Thursday  and  Lord's-day  evening  sermons  have  been  issued  under  the  titles, 
Types  and  Jimblcms,  Trumpet  Calls  to  Christian  Jtnergy,  The  Present  Truth, 
Storm  Signals,  and  Farm  Sermons  ;  while,  among  the  smaller  books,  which  have 
been  the  means  of  great  usefulness  to  various  classes  of  readers,  may  be  named, 
ChrisCs  Glorious  Achievements,  Seven  Wonders  of  Grace,  The  JMourncrs  Comforter, 
The  Spare  Half-hour,  The  Bible  and  the  Newspaper,  Fccenlric  1'rcachers,  "  J>e  of 
Good  Cheer"  The  Royal  Wedding,  The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle, — its  Hi : story  and 
Work,  All  of  Grace,  According  to  Promise,  and  Around  the  Wicket  Gate. 

Anyone  who  had  the  opportunity,  for  the  first  time,  of  examining  a  complete 
set  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  publications  might  imagine  that  he  had  never  done  anything 
but  write  all  the  days  of  his  life  ;  yet  the  present  volume  alone  proves  that,  after 
all,  his  literary  labours  employed  only  a  part  of  that  busy  forty  years'  ministry 
which  was  all  spent  to  the  honour  and  glory  of  the.  Lord  he  loved  so  dearly  and 
served  so  faithfully. 


CHAPTER    LXXX. 


Blessing  on  t\)t  -jPrintcb  Sermons 

Seldom  does  a  day  pass,  and  certainly  never  a  week,  without  letters  from  all  sorts  of  places, 
even  at  the  utmost  ends  of  the  earth,  bringing  the  glad  tidings  of  the  salvation  of  souls,  by  means 
of  one  or  other  of  the  printed  sermons. — C.  H.  S. 

I  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  blessed  results  arising  trom  the 
publication  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons,  can  be  given  in  this  chapter. 
Records  of  so  many  have  been  preserved,  that,  to  chronicle  all, 
would  go  lar  towards  tilling  a  volume  the  size  of  the  present  one. 

An  early  and  interesting  instance  is  mentioned  in  the  church- 
book  for  the  year  in  which  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  was  opened. 
Under  the  date,  November  20,  1861,  is  this  entry  : — "A  very  cheering  communication 
was  read  from  our  Brother  Wilson,  giving  some  extracts  from  a  letter  he  had  received 
from  his  lather  in  Auckland,  New  Zealand.      The  following  is  a  brief  summary  of  its 


THE   TARFRXACT.F,    AUCKT.AXTl.    \EW   ZFALAND. 


contents.  Our  Pastor's  sermons  are  regularly  read  by  Mr.  Wilson  and  some 
Christian  friends,  and  God  has  been  pleased  to  own  this  instrumentality  in  the 
conversion  of  eleven  persons, — four  natives  and  seven  Europeans, — the  sermon 


•>2A  C.     II.     SrURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

O     *  r 

entitled,  '  None  but  Jesus,'  being  particularly  useful.  Five  thousand  copies  of  that 
discourse  have  been  distributed  amongst  the  natives  in  their  own  language.  An 
effort  is  being  made  to  build  a  Baptist  Chapel  in  the  town.  The  prayers  of  the; 
church  are  earnestly  requested  on  behalf  of  our  friends  in  New  Zealand." 

Mow  little  could  the  dear  Pastor  at  that  time  have  anticipated  that  one  of  his 
own  sons — then  just  seven  years  old, — would  preach  the  Word  in  Auckland,  be  the 
means  of  building  a  large  Tabernacle  there,  (represented  on  the.  preceding  page,) 
and  afterwards  be  chosen  as  his  father's  successor  at  the  Tabernacle  !  Yet,  in  that 
very  building,  less  than  a  month  after  the.  church-meeting  at  which  the  letter  from 
New  Zealand  was  read,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  preaching  on  "The  True  Apostolical 
Succession,"  said:-— "I  low  many  there  are,  in  our  midst,  who  have  been  raised  up 
by  God  to  fill  similar  positions  in  the  church  to  those  which  their  forefathers 
occupied!  I  hope,  there  will  always  be  a  family  succession  in  the.  eldership  and  in 
the  deaconship  ;  and  what  if  1  were  egotistical  enough  to  say  so,  in  the  ministry,  too? 
1  would  to  God  there  might  be,  in  every  single  position  in  this  church,  as  soon  as 
one  dies,  another  allied  to  and  descended  from  the  departed  to  take  his  place! 

Mr.  Spurgeon  never  ceased  to  remember,  with  deep  gratitude,  the.  great  service 
rendered  to  the  cause  of  Christ  by  a  generous  gentleman  at  the  Antipodes  who,  lor 
years,  paid  for  the  insertion  of  the  sermons,  as  advertisements,  in  The  Australasian 
and  other  colonial  newspapers.  The  following  letter  will  show  the  spirit  in  which 
this  noble  enterprise  was  undertaken,  and  the  blessing  that  rested  upon  it  ;  but  the 
writer's  name  and  address  are  omitted  in  accordance  with  his  own  wish  :— 

'  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, 

"  Having  been  brought,  through  grace,  to  feel  somewhat  of  the  power 
and  love  of  Jesus,  and  the  blessings  of  the  glorious  gospel,  and  knowing  the  wants 
of  the  great  mass  of  our  widely-scattered  population,  and  seeing  that  your  sermons 
so  fully  set  forth  the  way  of  salvation,  I  was  induced  to  publish  them  in  the  news 
papers  here.  The  Australasian  being  a  sporting  paper,  the  manager  seemed 
indisposed  to  help  in  carrying  out  my  idea,  so  he  gave  orders  that  I  was  to  be 
charged  the  full  price,  as  advertisements,  for  the  sermons  ;  but,  feeling  the 
importance  of  the  step,  I  resolved  to  pay  what  he  demanded  until  his  readers  were 
interested  in  them,  and  then  I  thought  better  terms  might  be  obtained.  After  the 
publication  had  continued  for  some  six  or  nine  months,  I  waited  on  the  manager, 
who  did  not  even  then  appear  willing  to  grant  me  the  reduction  I  wanted  ;  and  not 
being  able  to  convince  him  of  the  appreciation  his  readers  had  for  the  sermons,  I 
suggested  that  we  should  ask  for  an  expression  of  their  opinion  with  regard  to  them. 
The  result  was,  that  about  four  hundred  letters  were  received  ;  and  I  send  the 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOIUUGKAI'HY.  --2^ 

•-J  ~~  \J 

enclosed  specimens  of  them  for  your  good  cheer.  I  should  be  sorry  that  any  name 
should  be  made  public,  and  I  have  withheld  my  own  from  the  papers  here,  fearing 
that  the  enemy  might  say  that  I  am  seeking  the  approbation  of  men.  The  reason 
of  my  sending  these  letters  to  you  is,  that  .Mr.  -  -  called  on  me,  and  1  showed 

them  to  him,  and  he  said  that  I  ought  to  let  you  see  them. 

I  have  sent  a  few  of  the  papers  containing  the  sermons  to  Mr.  Samuel  Morley, 
Mr.  Peabody,  Earl  Shaitesbury,  and  others,  in  the  hope  that  they  might  be  induced 
to  do  likewise,  as  a  newspaper  often  falls  into  the  hands  of  men  and  women  who 
would  not  take  a  tract.  May  I  ask  you  for  any  suggestion  that  will  help  to 
further  the  cause  and  advance  the  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ? 

;<  In  conclusion,  I  would  beg  your  prayers  for  myself.  I  am  seeking  to  grow  in 
grace,  and  in  knowledge  of  the  love  of  God.  Also  please  pray  that  this  work  of 
publishing  the  sermons  here  may  abundantly  prosper.  Wishing  you  every  success 
and  happiness  in  your  noble  work, 

"  I  am, 

"  Yours  truly, 


The  four  hundred  replies,  mentioned  in  the  letter,  came  from  all  parts  of 
Australia  and  New  Zealand.  Many  of  them  were  from  far-off  dwellers  in  the  bush, 
who  looked  for  the  weekly  sermons  as  regularly  as  for  their  daily  meals.  In  some 
cases,  lonely  believers  were  encouraged  and  helped  by  the  preacher's  message  ;  and, 
in  other  instances,  little  companies  gathered  together  while  one  of  their  number  read 
to  them  the  discourse  which  had  been  delivered  so  many  thousands  of  miles  away,  but 
which,  when  repeated  to  them,  was  as  fresh  and  fragrant  as  ever.  Quite  a  large 
number  of  the  letters  contained  the  glad  tidings  that  the  unusual  advertisements  in 
the  papers  had  been  blessed  to  the  salvation  of  souls  ;  among  these  were  some 
striking  trophies  of  the  grace  of  God,  of  which  just  two  specimens  may  be  included 
here.  One  man,  who  wrote  from  an  outlying  district  in  Victoria,  said  : — 

"  Sir, 

:'  Having  seen  an  advertisement  lately,  at  the  head  of  one  of  the 
sermons  published  weekly  in  The  Australasian,  asking  for  an  expression  of  opinion 
as  to  their  usefulness,  I  venture  respectfully  to  offer  the  following  plain  and  brief 
statement  in  reply. 

'  I  have  been,  for  some  five  years  or  more,  one  of  those  unfortunates  who  are 
commonly  called  '  swagmen.'  Travelling  about,  a  few  months  since,  looking  for 
employment,  I  came  to  a  public-house,  by  the  roadside,  into  which  I  went  for  a 
drink,  and  an  hour's  rest,  as  I  was  very  tired.  A  newspaper  was  lying  on  the 


-<2()  C.      II.      STURGEONS     AUTOBIOC.KAril  Y. 

3  ~~ 

counter,  containing  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermon  on  the  text,  'Turn,  O  backsliding  children, 
saith  the  Lord  ;  tor  I  am  married  unto  you.'  I  read  it  through,  with  increasing 
interest  as  I  went  along  ;  and  it  exactly  met  my  case:.  It  aroused  me  to  a  sense  of 
my  utterly  lost  condition  as  a  sinner  of  the  deepest  dye,  and,  at  the  same  time,  so 
encouraged  me  to  seek  lor  mercy  and  peace  at  the  loot  ot  the  cross  that  I  could  not 
resist  doing  so  ;  and  I  humbly  hope  and  believe  that  I  did  not  seek  in  vain. 

"  I  left  that  public-house  resolved  never  to  enter  one  again  unless  absolutely 
compelled  by  circumstances  to  do  so.  Since  then,  1  have  enjoyed  a  peace  to  which 
I  had  been  long  a  stranger.  1  now  make:  God's  Word  my  daily  study,  and  attend 
Divine  service:  whenever  I  can.  Although  nominally  a  Church  of  England  man, 
previous  to  reading  the.  sermon  alluded  to,  I  had  only  been  once  to  church  since  my 
arrival  in  the  Colony,  now  nearly  seven  years  ago. 

"  To  my  personal  knowledge,  these:  sermons  are:  extensively  read  in  the  country 
districts  ;  and,  lor  my  own  part,  1  look  to  the  arrival  oi  the  weekly  paper — which  my 
employer  always  lenels  me, — as  the  messemger  of  joy  ami  comfort  to  myself;  and 
I  pray  that  it  may  prove  to  be  the  same  to  hunelreds  of  others  also.  I  would  just,  in 
conclusion,  ask  you  to  offer  the  expression  of  my  humble  and  heartfelt  thanks  to  the 
friend  who  pays  for  the  advertisements  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons. 

"  1    am,   sir, 

"  Your  obedient   servant, 


Another  correspondent,  in  a  different  part  of   Victoria,  wrote  :-— 

"  Sir, 

"  Reading,  in  Tlic  Australasian,  a  request  that  parties  approving  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons  would  communicate  with  you,  I  place  the  following  tacts 
before  your  notice.  I  have  been  in  the  Colony  about  sixteen  years  ;  and,  during 
that  period,  have  been  into  a  place  of  worship  about  three  times,  and  then  more 
from  accident  than  design.  During  my  abode  in  this  Colony,  I  am  sorry  to  say  that 
I  have  contracted  the  horrible  habit  of  drunkenness,  occasionally  getting  what  some 
people  call  '  on  the  spree  '  for  a  fortnight  or  three  weeks  at  a  stretch.  The  summer 
before  last,  I  had  '  the  horrors  '  twice  ;  and  last  summer,  I  had  delirium  tremens  just 
coming  on.  Unable  to  either  sit,  stand,  lie  down,  or  walk  about,  1  casually  picked 
up  The  Australasian,  and  what  should  catch  my  eye  but  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermon  on 
'  The  Approachableness  of  Jesus.'  I  commenced  reading  it  ;  and  before  I  had  gone 
far,  tears  came  into  my  eyes  ;  and  I  had  not  got  through  it  before  I  had  to  hold  my 
hand  before  my  face  for  very  shame.  By  the  time  I  had  read  it  all,  I  found  myself 
looking  to  Christ  to  be  relieved  from  my  hideous  burden  e>f  sin  ;  and,  to  my 
astonishment,  the  delirium  tremens  vanished  like  a  heavy  dew  on  a  summer's 


C.      II.      Sl'URGEON  S     AUTOi;iU(.K.\ril  Y  327 

morning.  I  was  weak  in  consequence  of  the  long  drinking-bout,  but  felt  quite 
happy  in  my  mind  ;  and,  since,  am  glad  to  say  that  I  never  enjoyed  such  peace  of 
mind  in  my  life  before. 

"  Yours   respectfully, 

"  A  subscriber  to  77/6  Australasian." 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  many  years  afterwards,  when  Pastor  Thomas 
Spurgeon  was  in  Geelong,  the  writer  of  the  above  letter  went  to  see  him,  and 
produced  from  his  pocket  the  torn  and  discoloured  copy  of  the  newspaper  containing 
the  sermon  which  was  used  by  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  means  of  his  conversion. 

In  one  case,  a  portion  of  one  of  the  Australian  papers  was  blessed  to  the; 
salvation  of  a  reader  under  the  singular  circumstances  thus  related  :— 

"I  was  preaching,"  says  the  writer  of  the  narrative,  "in  the  Baptist  Chapel, 
Aberdeen  Street,  Geelong,  a  few  years  ago,  when,  at  the  close  of  an  evening  service, 
an  elderly  man  came  to  the  platform  to  bid  me  '  good-night.'  As  he  was  a  stranger, 
I  asked  him  where  he  came  from,  and  how  long  he  had  known  the  Lord  ;  he  then 
told  me  the  story  of  his  conversion,  and  the  strange  way  by  which  he  was  led  to  the 
Saviour.  About  five  years  before,  while  keeping  sheep  some  miles  beyond  Ballarat, 
he  picked  up  a  sheet  of  a  weekly  newspaper,  which  the  wind  had  blown  over  the 
plains.  He  glanced  at  a  few  sentences,  and  these  drew  him  on  to  read  more,  and 
then  he  found  he  was  eagerly  perusing  a  sermon  by  Mr.  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  '  If  I  had 
known  it  was  a  sermon,'  he  said,  'before  I  had  begun  to  read  it,  I  should  have  tossed 
it  away  ;  '  but  having  commenced  the  discourse,  he  wanted  to  see  how  it  finished. 
It  set  him  thinking  ;  he  carefully  preserved  it,  reading  it  over  and  over  again  in  deep 
concern,  until  finally  it  became  the  means  of  leading  him  to  the  cross.  For  many 
years  he  had  not  entered  a  place  of  worship,  and  he  was  utterly  careless  about  his 
soul  till  this  paper  was  blown  to  his  feet.  Now,  when  he  has  the  opportunity,  he 
always  attends  some  Baptist  service  ;  but  this  is  a  rare  pleasure,  owing  to  his  lonely 
life  and  employment  in  the  bush.  He  does,  however,  get  the  weekly  sermons, 
which  cheer  and  comfort  him  with  spiritual  nourishment." 

A  still  more  remarkable  instance  of  blessing  upon  one  of  the  sermons  published 
in  the  papers  was  once  reported  to  Mr.  Spurgeon.  A  parcel,  sent  from  Australia,  to 
the  wife  of  a  publican  in  England,  was  wrapped  up  in  a  newspaper  containing  one 
of  the  discourses  delivered  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  The  woman  read  it, 
and  so  was  led  to  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  her  Saviour.  Surely,  that  was 
another  proof  of  the  truth  of  Cowper's  lines,— 

"God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way, 
His  wonders  to  perlorm." 


328  c.    ii.    SPUKGKON'S    AUTomockArnv. 

Copies  of  the  Australian  papers  containing  the  sermons  were  regularly  sent  to  a 
gentleman  in  Jersey  who,  at  that  time,  did  not  know  how  to  obtain  the  original 
English  edition  of  them.  Long  afterwards,  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  :— 

have  been  a  reader  of  your  sermons  these  seventeen  years  or  more,  and 
God  has  been  graciously  pleased  to  bless  them  to  the  salvation  of  my  soul.  I  had 
almost  begun  to  think  my  Saviour  had  forgotten  me  ;  1  knew  I  had  long  ignored 
Him.  I  have  lately  found  out  the  way  to  procure  the  sermons  in  any  number,  and 
have  gladly  availed  myself  of  it.  I  think  I  have  now  nearly  six  hundred  of  them  ;  I 
lend  them  out  in  books  of  fifty.  I  prize  them  above  every  other  means  of  grace 
save  the  Book.  As  you  so  frequently  want  money  for  the  good  works  in  which  vou 
are  always  engaged,  I  thought  you  would  not  despise  my  trille.  I  wish  it  were  fifty 
times  as  much.  Receive  my  sincere  and  heartfelt  thanks  for  the  unspeakable  help 
your  sermons  have  afforded,  and  still  afiord  me." 

A  Wesleyan  minister,  in  New  South  Wales,  reported  the  following  cases  of 
conversion  through  the  published  sermons  :— 

"  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, — At  an  evangelistic  service,  held  here  recently,  a  well- 
known  saw-mill  proprietor,  who  is  an  esteemed  local  preacher  in  this  circuit,  made  a 
brief  reference  to  his  own  history  to  this  effect  : — '  For  twenty-five  years  of  my  life,  I 
lived  in  the  darkness  of  sin.  I  had  never  been  inside;  a  Protestant  place  of  worship. 
/  had  never,  in  all  that  time,  met  a  Christian  man.  I  knew  nothing  of  the  dis 
tinction  between  Methodist,  Presbyterian,  Baptist,  etc,  ;  they  were  all  alike  despised 
in  my  eyes  as  being  all  in  gross  error.  About  that  time,  five  of  my  companions  were 
drowned  together  at  Port  Stevens.  The  occurrence  made  a  deep  impression  upon 
my  heart.  The  thought  would  force  itself  upon  me,  "  What  if  you  had  been  among 
the  number?  Would  you  not  now  have  been  weeping  and  wailing  among  the  lost 
souls  in  hell  ?  " 

'  I  was  greatly  troubled,  and  did  what  alone  I  could  do, — prayed  to  God  ;  but 
not  knowing  anything  of  the  way  of  salvation  through  faith  in  Christ,  and  having 
no  one  to  guide  me,  I  lived  for  two  years  in  the  most  awful  agony.  I  would 
rather  die  than  live  those  two  years  over  again.  I  knew  nothing  of  the  great 
preachers  of  the  day,  until  I  happened  to  hear  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  ;  and  a  friend  being 
about  to  visit  Sydney,  I  asked  him  to  get  me  a  volume  of  Spurgeon's  sermons. 
I  read  them  eagerly,  and  received  much  light  and  comfort  from  them.  At  length,  I 
came  to  one  bearing  the  title,  "Seeking  for  Jesus"  (No.  947),  and  as  I  read,  God 
spoke  peace  to  my  troubled  heart.  I  felt  that  my  sin  was  pardoned,  and  I  could 
sing  aloud  lor  joy.  It  was  about  noon  on  a  glorious  Sabbath-day  when  the  great 
change  took  place,  and  I  well  remember  the  spot  on  which  it  occurred.  Since  then, 
ten  years  ago  now,  I  have  been  telling  the  story  of  the  cross  wherever  1  can.' 


C.      II.     SrUKtiKONS     AUTOIUOGRAl'lIV.  329 

"  I  was  much  impressed  by  the  incident,  and  resolved  to  let  you  know  about  it, 
as  I  thought  it  would  both  afford  matter  for  praise  to  God,  and  prove  an  encourage 
ment  to  trust  in,  and  labour  for,  Him,  '  knowing  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in 
the  Lord.' 

"  P.S. — At  our  meeting,  last  night,  an  old  gentleman  stated  that,  twenty-one 
years  ago,  in  this  district,  he  was  led  to  decision  through  reading  a  sermon  of  yours, 
entitled  'Now '(No.  603).  lie  is  to-day  a  consistent  Christian.  To  God  be  the 
praise  and  glory  !  " 

Mr.  Spurgeon  once  related  to  his  congregation  at  the  Tabernacle  a  notable 
instance  which  illustrated  both  the  power  of  the  prayer  of  iaith  and  the  usefulness 
of  one  of  his  printed  sermons: — "At  the  close  of  one  of  our  services,  a  poor 
woman,  accompanied  by  two  of  her  neighbours,  came  to  my  vestry  in  deep  distress. 
Her  husband  had  fled  the  country  ;  and,  in  her  sorrow,  she  had  gone  to  the  house  of 
God,  and  something  I  said  in  the  sermon  made  her  think  that  I  was  personally 
familiar  with  her  case.  Of  course,  I  had  really  known  nothing  about  her  ;  I  had 
made  use  of  a  general  illustration  which  just  fitted  her  particular  case.  She  told  me 
her  story,  and  a  very  sad  one  it  was.  I  said,  'There  is  nothing  that  we  can  do  but 
kneel  down,  and  cry  to  the:  Lord  for  the  immediate  conversion  of  your  husband.' 
We  knelt  down,  and  I  prayed  that  the  Lord  would  touch  the  heart  of  the  deserter, 
convert  his  soul,  and  bring  him  back  to  his  home.  When  we  rose  from  our  knees,  I 
said  to  the  poor  woman,  '  Do  not  fret  about  the  matter.  I  feel  sure  your  husband 
will  come  home  ;  and  that  he  will  yet  become  connected  with  our  church.' 

"  She  went  away,  and  I  forgot  all  about  her.  Some  months  afterwards,  she 
re-appeared,  with  her  neighbours,  and  a  man,  whom  she  introduced  to  me  as  her 
husband.  He  had  indeed  come  back,  and  he  had  returned  a  converted  man.  On 
making  enquiry,  and  comparing  notes,  we  found  that,  the  very  day  on  which  we  had 
prayed  tor  his  conversion,  he,  being  at  that  time  on  board  a  ship  far  away  on  the  sea, 
stumbled  most  unexpectedly  upon  a  stray  copy  of  one  of  my  sermons.  He  read  it  ; 
the  truth  went  to  his  heart ;  he  repented,  and  sought  the  Lord  ;  and,  as  soon  as 
possible,  he  came  back  to  his  wife  and  to  his  daily  calling.  He  was  admitted  as  a 
member  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  his  wife,  who  up  to  that  time  had  not  joined  the 
church,  was  also  received  into  fellowship  with  us. 

"  That  woman  does  not  doubt  the  power  of  prayer.  All  the  infidels  in  the  world 
could  not  shake  her  conviction  that  there  is  a  God  that  heareth  and  answereth  the 
supplications  of  His  people.  I  should  be  the  most  irrational  creature  in  the  world 
if,  with  a  life  every  day  of  which  is  full  of  experiences  so  remarkable,  I  entertained 
the  slightest  doubt  on  the  subject.  I  do  not  regard  it  as  miraculous  ;  it  is  part  and 
parcel  of  the  established  order  of  the  universe  that  the  shadow  of  a  coming  event 


^O  C.      II.      SI'UUGKONS      AUTOIMOGKAl'lIV. 

should  fall  in  advance  upon  some  believing  soul  in  the  shape  of  prayer  for  its  realiza 
tion.      The  prayer  of  faith  is  a  Divine  decree  commencing  its  operation. 

"Perhaps  someone  says,  '  That  was  merely  a  coincidence.'  Well,  that  woman 
did  not  think  so,  nor  did  her  husband,  nor  did  I  at  the  time  ;  and  I  do  not  think  so 
now.  You  may  call  it  a  coincidence,  if  you  like;  but  I  call  it  an  answer  to  prayer; 
and  as  long  as  I  get  such  coincidences,  I  shall  IK;  perfectly  satisfied  to  go  on  praying. 
'A  rose  by  any  other  name!  would  smell  as  sweet.'  I  do  not  believe:  I  should  have 
had  such  coincidences  if  I  had  not  asked  for  them  ;  and  as  I  get  them  daily,  I  shall 
stand  to  it,  nor  shall  anything  stop  me  from  this  glorying,  that  there  is  a  God  who 
heareth  prayer  ;  and  I  challenge  all  men  to  try  for  themselves  whether  it  is  not  so. 
If  they  come  humbly  to  Him,  by  Christ  Jesus,  and  seek  His  lace,  the)'  shall  not  seek 
in  vain  ;  and,  by-and-by,  if  they  continue  to  wait  upon  Him  in  prayer,  He;  will  gird 
them  with  power,  so  that  they  shall  ask  and  receive  both  for  themselves  and  lor 
others." 

In  the  same:  sermon  in  which  he  narrated  the  above  incide-nt,  Mr.  Spurgeon 
mentioned  another  case  of  conversion  which  had  occurred  only  a  lew  days  before  the 
delivery  of  the  discourse  : — 

"About  a  fortnight  ago,  there  stood  in  Cheapsiele  a  young  man  reading  one  of 
my  sermons  which  had  attracted  his  attention.  As  he  was  reading  it,  he  came 
across  this  passage  : — '  If  you  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  are  saved  now. 
But  I  want  you  to  project  your  faith  further,  and  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  for  the 
whole  of  your  life  ;  for  if  you  do  so,  you  shall  not  only  be  saved  now,  but  you  shall 
infallibly  be  saved  for  ever.'  Then  followed  the  text,  '  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,' 
and  this  comment  upon  it: — 'Now,  eternal  life  cannot  come  te;  an  end.  "He  that 
believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life."  Everlasting  life  cannot  come  to  an  end  ; 
it  is  a  thing  that  lasts  for  ever.  Believe  for  everlasting  life,  and  you  have  it ;  you 
are  saved  for  ever.'  The  young  man  saiel,  '  Standing  there,  I  diel  believe  just  as  I 
was  told.  I  trusted  Christ,  and  I  believed  then  that  in  Him  I  had  everlasting  life. 
The  next  minute  I  felt,  "Oh,  what  a  glorious  thing-  this  is  I  How  I  love  Christ  who 
has  done  this  great  thing  for  me  I  What  is  the:re  that  I  can  do  to  serve  Him  ? 
What  sin  is  there  that  I  would  not  give  up?"  Then,'  he  added,  'I  said  to  myself, 
as  I  walked  on,  "  Why,  I  am  saved  I  I  am  sure  I  am,  because  now  I  love  Christ ; 
now  I  want  to  give  up  sin,  and  now  1  want  to  serve  Him."  And  was  not  that  a 
sure  proof  of  his  being  saved,  because  he  saw  the  greatness  of  Divine  love  to  him, 
and  this  made  him  grateful  ;  and  that  gratitude  turned  him  right  round,  and  made 
a  new  man  of  him  ?  This  is  how  Christ  can  save  you,  also.  Suppose  you  have 
been  addicted  to  drunkenness,  and  that  you  are  convinced  of  the  evil  of  it.  You  go 
to  Christ,  and  He  forgives  you  ;  then  you  say,  '  Now  I  am  forgiven,  oh,  how  I  love 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  331 

my  Saviour  !  I  will  never  go  back  to  my  cups  again  ;  I  have  done  with  my  old 
companions  ;  I  will  go  and  seek  out  other  people  who  love  Christ,  and  I  will  join 
with  them  if  they  will  have  me  ;  and  I  will  see  what  Christ  expects  me  to  do,  and  I 
will  clo  it,  for  I  want  in  everything-  to  please  Him  who  has  done  so  much  for  me.' 
That  is  salvation, — a  change  of  character, — a  deliverance  from  that  which  held  you 
in  bondage,  an  entrance  into  the  blessed  liberty  ot  loving  God  and  longing  to  be 
holy.  Oh,  that  we  might  each  one  of  us  know  that  blessedness  !  " 

The  welcome  news,  in  the  case  mentioned  above,  reached  the  dear  Pastor  very 
quickly  ;  but,  in  some  instances,  many  months  or  even  years  were  allowed  to  elapse 
between  the  reception  ot  the  blessing  through  the  printed  page  and  the  glad  tidings 
concerning  it  being  conveyed  to  the  one  who  had  delivered  the  message.  Thus,  the 
secretary  of  a  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  in  the  country  once  wrote  to 
Mr.  Spurgeon  :— 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  met  with  a  young  man,  a  few  days  ago,  whose  case  will  interest  you, 
as  you  have  had  much  to  do  with  guiding  him  to  his  present  position.  W.  T- 
was  converted  seven  years  ago.  He  was  manager  of  a  large  brewery.  As  he  was 
not  happy,  he  commenced  to  read  your  sermons  week  by  week.  These  made  him 
more  wretched,  because  they  showed  him  that  he  had  not  made  a  full  surrender  to 
the  Lord,  and  he  felt  that  he  could  not  continue  in  his  business  and  serve  the 
Saviour  i Lilly.  The  time  came  when  he  saw  that  one  or  the  other  must  go,  and  he 
told  his  uncle,  who  is  the  principal  partner  in  the  firm,  that  he  must  leave,  giving  his 
reasons  for  so  doing.  His  father  and  uncle  tried  to  persuade  him  not  to  be  so 
foolish  as  to  throw  away  what  they  considered  his  only  chance  in  life  ;  but  his 
answer  was,  '  1  must  throw  away  this,  or  Christ  :  the  one  I  cannot,  the  business  I 
must.'  His  uncle  then  offered  to  give  him  as  many  shares  in  the  firm  as  he  liked 
to  name  ;  but  still  his  answer  was,  '  No,  I  must  wash  my  hands  of  the  trade  ;  '  and 
he  left,  not  knowing  where  he  would  go,  or  what  he  would  do  ;  but  confident  that 
the  Lord,  who  had  given  him  grace  to  take  this  stand,  would  help  him  to  realize 
his  one  desire  to  please  his  Lord  and  Master.  The  way  was  opened  for  him  to 
enter  the  City  Mission,  where  he  has  been  working  for  the  last  eighteen  months 
with  much  success.  I  asked  if  he  had  told  you  the  benefit  your  sermons  had  been 
to  him  ;  and  finding  that  he  had  not  clone  so,  suggested  that  he  should  write, 
knowing  that  you  are  encouraged  by  every  fresh  case  of  blessing." 

An  even  longer  period  passed  before  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  the  following  good 
news  from  a  far  country  : — "  Five-and-twenty  years  ago,  I  heard  from  a  Christian 
lady  the  following  story  : — '  My  brother  and  his  Christian  wife  had  three  grown-up 


332  C.     II.     SrURCJKONS     AUTOr.IOCRAl'IlV. 

sons,  all  unconverted.  After  a  while,  they  agreed  to  leave:  home,  and  try  their 
iorLiines  in  New  Zealand.  When  they  left,  the  parents  conferred  with  one  another 
as  to  what  could  be  done  for  their  souls'  salvation,  now  they  had  gone  from  their 
influence  and  prayers.  They  agreed  to  send  your  sermons  out  to  them  every 
month.  They  did  so.  God  owned  the  effort,  and  all  three  of  them  were  converted 
by  reading  them.'  ' 

Sometimes,  a  paragraph  in  a  newspaper  was  used  as  the  means  of  cheering 
the  dear  preacher,  as  in  the  case  of  a  Baptist  paper,  published  in  the  United  States, 
which  contained  the  following  notice,  headed— 

"  FOR   BROTIIKR  Sri;R< IKON'S   EVK." 

"  At  our  prayer-meeting,  the  other  Sunday  evening,  a  brother,  to  show  the 
different  ways  there  are  of  doing  good,  mentioned  an  incident  that  occurred  on  board 
a  steamer  in  which,  some  time  beiorc,  he  was  a  passenger  up  the  Pacific  Coast  to 
Oregon.  It  was  Sunday  ;  and  a  passenger,  who  had  with  him  a  volume  of 
Spurgeon's  sermons,  went  round  asking  one  and  another  to  read  one  of  them  aloud. 
The  passengers  declined,  till  he  came:  to  our  brother,  who  consented  to  act  as 
reader.  Quite  a  company  gathered  round  him,  which  gradually  increased,  as  he 
went  on  with  the  discourse,  until,  looking  up,  after  a  little  time,  he  saw  that,  not  only 
the  passengers,  but  all  the  crew  who  could  possibly  be  at  liberty,  were  among  his 
audience,  and  that  all  were  very  attentive. 

"  The  informal  service  was  soon  over.  But  not  so  the  effect  of  the  sermon  ;  lor, 
some  months  after,  being  in  San  Francisco,  he  was  abruptly  saluted  in  the  street,  one 
day,  by  a  stranger — a  sailor — who  seemed  overjoyed  at  meeting  him.  '  How  do  you 
do  ?  '  said  he.  '  Don't  you  know  me  ?  Why,  I  heard  you  preach  !  '  'I  am  not  a 
preacher,  my  friend  ;  so  you  must  have  made  a  mistake.'  '  Oh,  no  !  I  have  not  ;  1 
heard  you  preach.  Don't  you  remember  the  steamer  that  was  going  to  Oregon?' 
'  Oh,  yes  !  '  replied  the  gentleman  ;  '  I  recollect,  and  I  read  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
sermons.'  '  Well,'  said  the  sailor,  '  I  never  forgot  that  sermon  ;  it  made  me  feel  that 
I  was  a  sinner,  and  I  have  found  Christ,  and  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you  again.'  ' 

The  publication  of  that  paragraph  led  a  friend  in  England  to  write  to  Mr. 
Spurgeon  this  story  of  the  connection  of  the  sermons  with  another  company  of  those 
"  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships  "  : — 

"  One  of  the  most  earnest  and  devoted  of  the  Christian  brotherhood  at 
Dover  had  been  '  before  the  mast '  in  a  small  schooner,  the  master  of  which,  a 
godly  man,  going  for  a  cruise  of  some  months,  and  being  anxious  about  the  spiritual 
welfare  of  his  crew,  resolved  to  take  with  him  some  Bibles,  in  order  that  none  on 


C.     II.     HPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  333 

board  should  be  without,  at  least,  the  letter  of  the  Word.  He,  however,  from 
some  cause  or  other  (probably  forgetfulness),  sailed  without  the  Bibles  ;  but  had 
to  put  back  to  harbour  through  stress  of  weather.  Again  he  essayed  to  go  to  sea, 
but  with  a  similar  result.  As  he  lay  in  port,  weatherbound,  it  Hashed  across  his 
mind  that  it  might  be  the  hand  of  the  Lord  which  had  detained  his  vessel  ;  and, 
believing  it  to  be  so,  he  added  to  his  freight  some  of  the  incorruptible  seed  of  the 
Word,  in  the  form  of  Bibles,  for  his  crew  ;  and  with  them  some  of  your  own 
sermons,  one  of  which  latter  he  read  to  the  assembled  ship's  company  each  Lord's- 
day  morning, 

"  Our  brother  informed  me  that  his  spiritual  birth  was  the  fruit  of  one  of  these 
sermons  read  by  the  illiterate  captain,  who  had  adopted  this  simple  method  of 
echoing  your  exposition  of  God's  truth.  The  sermon  read  upon  the  momentous 
morning  in  question  was  from  the  text,  '  Against  Thee,  Thee  only,  have  I  sinned, 
and  done  this  evil  in  Thy  sight.'  The  arrow,  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  went 
home  to  the  hearer's  heart,  and  David's  conviction  and  confession  were  repeated  in 
the  case  of  our  brother,  who  gratefully  recognizes  the  sovereign  o-race  of  the  Lord 

*  o  o        <"> 

in  His  repeated  interference  with  man's  purpose,  and  the  saving  efficacy  of  God's 
truth  in  the  unpretending  service  on  the  schooner's  deck." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  once;  made  use  of  an  instance  of  blessing  upon  his  published 
sermons  to  enforce  the  stirring  appeal  which  he  addressed  to  his  hearers  in  the 
Tabernacle.  Preaching,  on  Lord's-day  morning,  July  7,  1867,  on  "Jesus  putting 
away  sin,"  he  closed  his  discourse  in  this  striking  and  solemn  fashion  :— 

"  I  heard,  the  day  before  yesterday,  something  which  greatly  cheered  me.  It 
was  that,  at  the  late  meeting  of  believers  in  Chicago,  one  came  from  the  far  West, 
who  asked  for  a  missionary  to  preach  in  a  newly-formed  district  ;  and  the  reason  he 
gave  for  wishing  for  the  missionary  was,  that  the  people  in  that  region  had  read  my 
sermons  on  the  Sabbath,  and  that  no  less  than  two  hundred  souls  had  been 
converted  to  God  through  reading  them.  When  I  heard  that  good  news,  I  rejoiced 
exceedingly,  but  then  I  thought,  '  Alas  !  there  are  many  who  have  those  sermons 
first-hand,  and  yet  get  no  blessing  from  them  ; '  and  I  remembered  some  of  you  who 
have  heard  me  these  many  years,  and  I  have  been  faithful  to  you, — I  trust  I  have,— 
God  knows  I  desire  to  be, — and  yet  you  are  still  '  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in 
the  bond  of  iniquity.'  While  across  the  blue  Atlantic,  the  echo  of  my  words  has 
called  men  from  the  grave  of  sin  to  life  in  Christ,  you,  though  you  love  to  listen  to 
me,  have  not  heard  my  voice  in  the  depths  of  your  soul.  Shall  it  always  be  so?  It 
will  be,  I  fear,  with  some  of  you,  for  I  foresee  your  ruin.  You  will  go  clown  to  hell 
with  the  gospel  sounding  in  your  ears,  and  wake  up  in  the  pit  with  this  sad  truth  to 
aggravate  your  woe,  that  you  knew  the  gospel,  and  yet  refused  it.  How  shall  you 


354  c-    n-    STURGEON'S    AUTOI:IOGKAPIIY. 

escape  if  you  neglect  so  great  salvation, — so  great  that  angels  cannot  tell  its  great- 
ness,  and  human  tongues  arc  dumb  at  best  when  they  attempt  to  speak  of  the 
excellent  glory  of  it?  Why  will  you  reject  it  when  it  is  so  close  to  your  hand, 
when,  if  you  with  your  hearts  believe  and  with  your  mouths  confess  Christ,  you 
shall  be  saved?  Why  those  hard  hearts?  Why  those  silent  mouths?  May  the 
Eternal  Spirit  bring  you  to  Jesus  this  very  hour,  and  His  shall  be  the  praise,  world 
without  end  !  Amen." 

It  was  a  happy  day  for  the  dear  Pastor  when  a  Ritualistic  "  priest"  came  to  tell 
him  of  the  blessing  he  had  received  through  the  printed  sermons.  Mr.  Spurgeon 
thus  narrated  the  story  :— - 

"  lie  told  me  that  he:  owed  everything  to  me,  because  1  had  been  the  means  of 
leading  him  to  Jesus.  lie  said  he  was  'only  a  humble  vicar  of  the  Church  of  England,' 
so  I  asked  what  his  line  of  teaching  had  formerly  been.  '  Very  high,'  he  replied. 
'Hut,'  I  asked,  'did  you  pretend  to  forgive  people's  sins?'  'Yes,'  he  answered. 
'Then,'  I  enquired,  'how  did  you  get  rid  of  the  idea  that  you  were  a  priest  ?' 
'  Well,'  he  said,  '  1  sincerely  believed  myself  to  be  a  priest  until  I  read  one  of  your 
sermons.  That  convinced  mil  of  my  own  state  as  a  sinner,  and  the  priesthood  oozed 
out  of  me  directly.  Now  1  am  trusting  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  salvation,  and  I 
point  my  congregation  to  Him  alone.'  ' 

Scarcely  less  striking  was  the  conversion  concerning  which  the  following 
testimony  was  given  : — 

"A  woman  in  Scotland,  who  was  determined,  as  far  as  possible,  not  to  have 
anything  to  do  with  religion,  threw  her  Hible,  and  all  the  tracts  she  could  Imd  in  her 
house,  into  the  fire.  One  of  the  tracts  fell  down  out  of  the  flames,  so  she  picked  it 
up,  and  thrust  it  in  again.  A  second  time  it  slipped  down,  and  once  more  she  put  it 
back.  Again  the  evil  'ntention  was  frustrated,  but  the  next  time  she  was  more 
successful,  though  even  then  only  half  of  it  was  consumed.  Taking  up  the  portion 
that  fell  out  of  the  fire,  she  exclaimed,  '  Surely  the  devil  is  in  that  tract,  for  it  won't 
burn.'  Her  curiosity  was  excited  ;  she  be<>~an  to  read  it,  and  it  was  the  means  of  her 

s  O 

conversion.  The  'tract'  was  one  of  the  sermons  published  in  77ic  Metropolitan 
Tabernacle  Pulpit.  Verily,  that  sermon,  and  the  woman  too,  were  '  saved,  yet  so  as 
by  fire.' " 

A  minister  in  Tennessee  bore  the  following  pleasing  personal  testimony : — 
"  Nine  years  ago,  I  was  a  wild  young  man  ;  but  1  was  converted  through  reading- 
one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons,  and  1  am  now  the  Pastor  of  a  large  and  influential 
church.  The  Lord's  name  be  magnified  !  " 


c.    IT.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  335 

The  following  letter  from  California  was  specially  welcome,  for  it  recorded  the 
somewhat  unusual  circumstance  that  a  former  slanderer  had  become;  converted 
through  reading  the  sermons  of  the  preacher  whom  he  had  aforetime  reviled  :— 

"  Dear  Sir, 

14  I  consider  it  but  justice  to  yourself,  and  my  duty  as  one  who  is 
striving  to  follow  the  example  set  by  our  Lord  and  Master,  to  seek  your  pardon 
for  the  manner  in  which  I  have  spoken  and  thought  of  you  in  former  years.  Too 
much  prejudiced  to  hear  and  see  for  myself,  although  the  opportunity  lay  daily 
within  my  reach,  I  accepted  and  repeated  all  I  heard  to  your  reproach,  not 
remembering  the  injunction  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  to  'prove  all  things.'  And 
you  have  had  a  noble  revenge,  for  it  was  your  words,  as  read  by  me  in  your 
published  sermons,  that  have  shown  me  to  myself  as  I  really  was,  and  have  been 
the  means,  through  the  grace  of  God,  of  awakening  a  desire  within  me  to  seek  to 
lead  a  pure  and  holy  life  ;  and  not  only  this,  but  they  have  likewise  awakened  a 
great  desire  in  me  to  be  the  means,  God  willing,  of  bringing  others  to  see  the 
danger  of  their  sinful  state,  and  to  lead  them  also  to  the  Saviour." 

A  grateful  convert  wrote  from  Quebec  to  the  dear  Pastor  :— 

"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  Since  reading  a  sermon,  delivered  by  you  a  long  time  ago,  on  the  text, 
'  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,'  (No.  293,)  and  in  which 
you  set  forth  the;  great  sin  of  unbelief,  I  have  felt  a  strong  desire  to  write  to 
strengthen  your  hands  by  letting  you  know  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain,  as  I,  for 
one,  can  testify  to  the  great  good  derived  from  that  and  other  sermons  of  yours. 
My  father,  before  we  left  Scotland,  seven  years  ago,  always  got  your  sermons,  as 
well  as  your  Sword  and  Trowel,  and  having  derived  great  benefit  from  them,  he 
carefully  put  them  away.  About  a  year  ago,  my  brother  sent  me  a  few  of  those  old 
sermons,  which  I  read,  and — glory  be  to  God  ! — Lie  opened  my  eyes  while  I  was 
reading  the  sermon  I  have  mentioned,  and  I  found  peace  in  believing." 

1'or  a  long  time,  the  sermons,  or  portions  of  them,  have  been,  by  special  arrange 
ment,  allowed  to  appear  in  The  Christian  Herald.  Among  the  instances  of  blessing 
on  their  publication  in  that  form,  a  friend  in  Glasgow,  who  signed  himself,  "Your 
loving  son  in  Jesus,"  wrote  thus  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  :— 

"About  two  years  ago,  a  sermon  of  yours,  entitled,  'The  Search  Warrant,' 
appeared  in  The  Christian  Herald.  I  had  been  anxious  long  before  ;  but  the 
Wednesday  evening  that  this  sermon  came;,  I  went  away  into  the  country  to  read  it. 
Oh,  I  was  in  earnest  that  night  !  When  I  was  sure  I  was  alone,  I  stood  and  cried  to 
God  in  praye;r,  and  I  was  led  to  ask  just  one  thing, — namely,  that  Spurgeon's  sermon 


m 


C.     IT.     SPUROEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

ight  be  the:  means  of  saving  my  soul  that  night.  I  opened  the  paper,  and  read 
it  with  great  attention.  The  Spirit  was  with  me;  and  when  I  got  half-way  through, 
brought  home  to  me  the  words,  'the  very  simplicity  of  faith  makes  the  difficulty.'  I 
had  always  been  searching  tor  some  dark,  mysterious,  hidden  thing.  Back  I  went 
to  the  beginning,  with  a  firm  resolve  to  read  it  simply.  Then  I  saw  how  one  thing- 
alter  another  was  cast  down,  and  taith  itself  was  made  a  standing-ground  on 
which  to  place  the  only  thing  that  I  could  see  left  in  the  whole;  sermon,  —  the 
beautiful,  glorious,  ;  altogether  lovely'  form  of  our  wounded  Emmanuel.  Christ 
was  everywhere,  and  even  myself  had  vanished,  for  I  was  a  new  creature.  Thank 
God  for  a  Spurgeon  to  preach  '  The  Search  Warrant  '  !  " 

Greatly  as  the  sermons  have  been  used  in  leading  sinners  to  the  Saviour,  they 
have  been  almost  equally  blessed  in  reclaiming  backsliders,  and  in  comforting  and 
cheering  those  who  have  been  in  mental  or  spiritual  distress,  brom  Victoria,  a  lady 
wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  the  following  grateful  letter  :— 

"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  have  often  felt  inclined  to  write  to  you.  Twelve  years  ago,  I  lost  a 
darling  boy  ;  everything  seemed  dark,  and  nothing  brought  me-  any  comfort.  The 
Word  of  God,  which  had  been  my  stay  through  many  previous  trials,  was  all  darkness 
to  me.  A  friend  brought  me  one.  of  your  sermons,  and  asked  me  to  allow  her  to 
read  it.  At  first,  I  refused  ;  but,  at  last,  I  consented.  I  forget  the  title,  but  it  was 
to  the  effect  that  everything  is  ordered  by  God,  and  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
chance.  I  felt,  all  the  time  my  friend  was  reading,  almost  afraid  even  to  breathe  ;  I 
could  only  say,  '  Go  on,  go  on.'  When  she  had  finished  it,  I  leapt  from  my  couch, 
and  said,  'All  is  right;  thank  God,  my  dark  mind  is  all  light  again!'  I  have  had 
similar  sorrows  since,  and  many  other  trials  ;  but  I  could,  from  my  heart,  say  to  the 
Lord,  'Thy  will  be  done;  it  is  all  right.'  At  that  time,  my  husband  ordered  your 
sermons  monthly,  and  we  still  continue  to  have  them.  Every  Sunday  evening,  we 
read  one  of  them  aloud,  for  all  to  hear,  and  afterwards  I  send  them  into  the  bush. 

"  My  clear  sir,  go  on  and  preach  what  you  feel  ;  it  has  often  been  a  great 
comfort  to  us  that  you  seemed  to  feel  just  as  we  felt." 

This  letter  may  be  appropriately  followed  by  a  touching  epistle  which  came  to 
Mr.  Spurgeon  from  Florida  :— 

"  My  Dear  Brother  in  Christ, 

"Once  upon  a  time,  a  wealthy  man,  who  owned  many  gardens,  sent  one 
of  his  gardeners  to  water  the  plants.  The  gardener  went  and  adjusted  the  hose, 
turned  the  tap,  and  watered  them  far  and  near.  Many  of  them  were  near  him  ;  but, 
away  in  a  corner  of  the  garden  farthest  from  the  gardener,  was  a  frail  flower  that 


c.    ir.    SPURCEON'S    AUTOIUOCIRAPIIV. 

had  long  been  pining  for  the  refreshing  showers.  The  gardener,  not  knowing  its 
need,  nevertheless  turned  the  hose:  in  that  direction,  and  the:  drooping  plant  revived, 
and  bloomed  afresh,  to  delight  all  who  happened  to  come  near  it;  and  it  loved  the 
master,  and  the  instrument,  though  the  latter  was  unknown. 

Several  weeks  ago,  I  lay  ill,  far  away  from  Knglanel,  in  the  wilds  of  Florida. 
Weak  and  faint-hearted,  I  lay  pondering  on  the  strange  providence  of  the  Master, 
when  one  of  your  sermons  was  placed  in  my  hands.  The.  refreshing  shower  revived 
me,  and  gave  me  fresh  hope  and  courage  ;  and  I  rose  from  my  sick  couch  to  strive 
still  more  earnestly  to  gain  access  to  the  hearts  of  those  by  whom  I  am  surrounded  ; 
and,  to-day,  in  a  small  class  that  I  have  formed  out  hen-  in  the  wilderness,  the  Lord 
made  His  presence  felt,  and  blessed  us  with  an  awakening  that  1  have  never  seen 
here  before,  and  tears  of  repentance  were  shed  by  many.  I  was  so  full  of  joy  and 
gratitude  to  God  that  I  longed  to  let  you  know  that  your  influence,  as  an  instrument, 
had  reached  even  this  far-away  spot." 

It  was  but  fitting  that,  as  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons  had  been  the:  means  of 
blessing  to  so  many  readers,  he  should,  himself,  receive  a  special  message  throu<>h 
one  of  his  own  discourses.  lie  thus  describes  how  the  "waiter"  became,  on  at 
least  one  occasion,  "a  guest  at  the  gospel  feast  :  " 

'  I  once  learnt  something  in   a  way  one  does   not  often   get  a  lesson.      I    felt  at 
that  time  very  weary,  and  very  sad,  and  very  heavy  at   heart  ;   and    I    began  to  doubt 
in  my  own  mind  whether  I  really  enjoyed  the  things  which    I  preached  to  others.       It 
seemed  to  be  a  dreadful   thing  for  me   to  be  only  a  waiter,  and   not  a  guest,  at   the 
gospel  feast.      I  went   to  a  certain   country  town,  and   on    the:  Sabbath    day  entered   a 
Methodist  Chapel.      The  man  who  conducted   the   service  was  an  engineer;   he   read 
the   Scriptures,  and  prayed,  and   preached.      The   tears    flowed    freely  from  my  eyes  ; 
I  was  moved  to  the  deepest  emotion  by  every  sentence  of  the  sermon,  and    I    felt  all 
my    difficulty   removed,    for    the    gospel,    I    saw,    was    very   dear    to   me,    and    had   a 
wonderful   effect  upon   my  own   heart.      I   went  to   the:   preacher,    and  said,  '  I    thank 
you  very  much  for  that  sermon.'      lie  asked  me  who  I  was,  and  when  I  told   him,  he 
looked   as    red   as  possible,   and   he  said,  'Why,    it  was  one:  of  your  sermons  that    I 
preached    this   morning!'      'Yes,'    I    said,    'I    know    it  was;    but    that    was    the    very 
message  that  I  wanted  to  hear,  because    I    then   saw  that    I    eliel  enjoy  the  very  Word 
I  myself  preached.'      It  was   happily   so    arranged    in   the   good    providence  of  God. 
I  lael  it  been  his  own  sermon,  it  would  not   have  answered  the  purpose  nearly  so  well 
as  when  it  turned  out  to  be:  one  of  mine." 


— - 
. 

- 


CHAPTER     LXXXI. 


t  Jfuu. 


J  he  whole  Church  \vill  l,e  indebted  to  Dr.  Stanford  for  having  protested  against  the  superstition 
egards  wit  and  humour  as  deadly  sins.     He  has   not  only  set   forth  the  propriety  of  simple, 
natural  mirth,  but  has  well-nigh  shown  the  duty  of  it.     We  knew  that  our  beloved  friend  had  a  sly 
>  in  his  eye,  and  said  things  which  sparkled  with  a  subdued  and  chastened  fun;  but  we  hardly 
that  he  would  become  the  defender  of  our  faith  in  wit,  and  the  avenger  of  those  lierce  assaults 
•ch  have  been  made  on  humour.     This  book  ought  to  shut  the  months  of  those  melancholy  critics 
nk  tnat  everything  solemn  should  be  sad,  and  that  anything  approaching  to  pleasantry  must  be 
u.cked.      1  he  chapter  upon  "  V\  hat  have  Christians  to  do  with  Wit  and   Humour?"  gives  us  the  utmost 
ie  argument  is  as  irresistible  as  the  laughter  winch  it  provokes;  and  both  the  argument  and 
e  as  wholesome  and  as  holy  as  anything  we  have  ever  read.     We  are  tempted  to  make 
s  quotations,  but  we  had  rather  our  friends  should  get  the  book  for  themselves  ;  in  fact   they  will 
so,  for  everybody  will  be  forced  to  read   it.     We  hope  these  wise  and  genial  pages  will  work- 
tin-  ideas  ol  thousands  who  now  blush   when   they  smile,  and  put  down  an  honest  laugh 
:i  the  category  of  things  to  be  repented  of.-C  II.  S.,  ,'„  review  of  Dr.  Charles  Stanford's  volume,  "  The  U'it 
and  lliinioiir  of  Li/];" 

It  is  a  sort  of  tradition  of  the  fathers  that  it  is  wrong  to  laugh  on  Sundays.     The  eleventh  corn- 
is,  that   we  are  to   love  one  another;    and  then,  according  to  some  people,   the  twelfth  is, 
shall  pull  a  long  lace  on  Sunday."     1  must  confess  that    I   would  rather  hear  people  lan-h  than  I 
mid  see  them  asleep  in   the  house  of  God  ;  and   I  would  rather  get  the  truth  into  them  through  the 
medium  of  ridicule  than    I    would   have   it   neglected,   or    leave    the   people  to  perish  through   lack  of 
reception  ol  the  message.     I  do  believe   in  my  heart,  that  there  may  be  as  much   holiness  in  a  laugh  as 
cry  ;  and  that,  sometimes,  to  laugh  is  the  better  thing  of  the  two,  for  I  may  weep,  and  be  murmuring 
ng,  and  thinking  all  sorts  of  hitter  thoughts  against  God  ;  while,  at  another  time,  I  may  laugh 
sarcasm  against  sin.  and  so  evince  a  holy  earnestness  in  the  defence  of  the  truth.      I  do  nol 
-  to  be  given  up  to  Satan  as  a  weapon  to  be  used  against  us,  and  not  to  be  employed 
a  weapon  against  hnn.     I  will  venture  to  affirm  that  the  Reformation  owed  almost  as  mu-li  to 
the  ridiculous  in  human  nature  as  to  anything  else,  and  that  those  humorous  squibs  and 
that  were  ,ssued  by  the  friends  of  Luther,  did  more  to  open  the  eyes  of  Germany  to  the 
inations  of  the  priesthood   than  the  more  solid  and  ponderous  arguments  against   Romanism      1 
know  no  reason  why  we  should   not,  on  suitable  occasions,  try  the  same  style  of  reasoning      "It  is  a 
jerous  weapon,'  it  will  be  said,  "and  many  men  will  cut  their  lingers  with  it."     Well,  that  is  their 
:out;  but  I  do   not  know  why  we   should  be   so  particular  about  their  cutting  their  fingers  if 
.ey  can.  at  the   same  time,  cut  the  throat   of  sin,  and   do  serious  damage  to   the  great  adversary  of 
souls.  — C.  H.  S.,  in  "  Lectures  to  my  Students." 

jLEAMS    of    Mr.    Spuro-eon's    ready    humour    have  been    visible  at 
intervals  all   through    this  and   the   preceding  volumes,   but    it   was 
felt  that  the  record  of  his  happy  life   would    not  be  complete  unless 
at    least   one   chapter   was   filled    with    specimens    of  that    pure;    fun 
which    was   as    characteristic   of  him    as   was   his    "  precious   faith." 
Ml  who  were  brought   into  the   closest  contact  with  him  know  that 
'  Wit  Was   as  ab"ndant  as   his   wisdom  ;    indeed,  full   often,  the   wisdom   found   its 
most  effective  utterance  by  means  of  the  witty  words  which   o-ained  an   entrance   for 
the  message  which  mio-nt  otherwise   have  been   rejected.      His   fun  was  always  pure 


-,  iO 

with  an  emphasis;  and  he:  showed  how  it  was  possible  for  the  highest  spirituality  to 
find  a  fitting  exemplification  in  the  brightest  and  cheeriest  character.  Some,  o!  his 
most  intimate  friends  have  often  said  that  there  was  not  the  slightest  incongruity, 
after  one  of  his  brilliant  witticisms  which  had  set  the:  whole  company  laughing,  in 
hearing  him  say,  "Let  us  pray,"  for  both  the  merriment  and  the  devotion  were 
sanctified.  Me  had  no  sympathy  with  the  hymn-tinkerer  who  altered  even  the 
glorious  hundredth  Psalm  by  [jutting  "  (ear"  instead  of  "  mirth  "  in  the,  third  line,  oi 
the  first  verse;  and  he  always  sang  it  according  to  the.  authorized  version,  as  it 
appears  in  Our  Own  Hymn-Book,— 

"All  people  that  on  earth  do  dwell, 

Sing  to  the  Lord  with  cheerful  voice;  ; 
Him  serve,  with  mirth,   His   praise   forth   tell; 
Come  ye  before  Him.  and  rejoice.'' 

In  making  a  rather  rough  classification  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  pure;  fun,  as  mani 
fested  under  various  aspects  throughout  his  long  public  career,  lirst  may  be  placed 
a  few  incidents  associated  with  a  matter  which  he  always  regarded  as  oi  great 
importance,  — 

PUNCTUALITY. 

Lveryone  who  was  acquainted  with  him  knows  how  scrupulously  punctual  he 
was  at  all  services  and  meetings,  and  that,  unless  something  very  unusual  had 
detained  him,  he  was  ready  to  commence  either  the.  worship  or  the.  business 
proceedings  at  the  exact  minute  fixed.  In  the  New  Park  Street  days,  he  was 
unavoidably  late  on  one  occasion  when  lie  was  to  meet  the  venerable  deacons 
represented  on  page  15.  One  of  them,  the  most  pompous  oi  the;  whole;  company, 
who  was  himself  noted  for  his  punctuality,  pulled  out  his  watch,  and  held  it  up 
reproachfully  before  the  young  minister.  Looking  at  it  in  a  critical  fashion,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  said,  "Yes;  it's  a  very  good  watch,  I  have-  no  doubt,  but  it  is  rather 
old-fashioned,  isn't  it?" 

lie  had  often  to  suffer  inconvenience  and  loss  of  time  because  those  who  had 
asked  for  interviews  with  him  were  not  at  the  place:  arranged  at  the  appointed  hour. 
Frequently,  after  allowing  a  few  minutc-s'  grace,  he  would  go  away  to  attend  to 
other  service,  leaving  word  that,  as  those  he  expected  had  not  come  according  to 
the  arrangement  made,  they  must  wait  until  he:  could  find  some:  other  convenient 
opportunity  of  meeting  them.  This  was  to  him  an  amusing  method  oi  giving  a 
lesson  which  many  greatly  needed.  ''Punctuality  is  the  politeness  ot  kings  ;"  yet 
some  who  are  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God  "  are  sadly  deficient  in  that  particular 
virtue:.  Sometimes,  the  Pastor  would  laughingly  say  that  perhaps  those  who  came 
so  late  were  qualifying  to  act  as  lawyers,  whose  motto  would  be,  "  Procrastination 
is  the  hinge  of  business  ;  punctuality  is  the  thief  oi  time." 


C.      II.     STURGEONS     AUTOmOGRAHIY.  ^  j 

"  General  "  Booth  once  sent  an  "  aide-de-camp  "  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  ask  for  an 
interview  for  himself.  The  hour  for  him  to  come  was  named,  but  it  was  several 
minutes  past  the  time  when  he  arrived.  Mr.  Spurgeem,  though  sympathising  with 
the  efforts  of  the;  Salvation  Army,  never  approved  of  what  he  called  their  "  playing 
at  soldiers,"  so  he  said,  in  a  tone:  of  gentle  irony,  "  Oh,  General  !  militarv  men 
should  be  punctual!  It  appeared  that  the  object  of  "General"  Booth  was  to 
ascertain  if  the  Tabernacle  could  be:  lent  to  the  Arm}-  for  some  great  gathering; 
but  he  would  not  ask  for  the:  loan  of  the  building  until  the  Pastor  gave  him 
some  sign  that,  if  he  did  make  such  a  request,  it  would  be  granted.  There  the 
matter  rested. 

Tile  Pastor  once  had  occasion  to  see  Mr.  Gladstone  at  Downing  Street. 
Having  asked  for  an  interview  of  ten  minutes,  he  arrived  punctually,  and,  havin"- 
transacted  the  business  about  which  he  had  called,  rose  to  leave  directly  the  allotted 
time  had  expired.  "  '1  he  grand  old  man  "  was  not  willing  to  allow  his  visitor  to  go 
away  so  quickly  ; — though  he  said  he  wished  others  who  called  upon  him  would  be 
as  prompt  both  in  arriving  and  departing  ;  — and  "  the  two  prime  ministers,"  as  they 
were  often  designated,  continued  chatting  for  a  good  while;  longe-r.  It  was  during 
the:  conversation  which  ensue-d  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  sugge:ste-el  to  the  great  Liberal 
leader  a  grander  measure  of  reform  than  any  he:  had  ever  introduced  ;— his  proposal 
was,  that  all  the  servants  of  the  State,  whether  in  the:  Church,  the:  Army,  the:  Navy, 
or  the  Civil  Service,  should  be:  excluded  from  Parliament,  just  as  the  servants  in  a 
private  family  are  not  allowed  to  make  the  rules  and  regulations  under  which  the: 
household  is  governed.  Possibly,  archbishops,  bishops,  generals,  admirals,  noble: 
lords,  and  right  honourable:  gentlemen  might  imagine:  that  this  suggestion  was  a 
sample:  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  pure:  fun,  but  he  introduced  it  to  Mr.  Gladstone:  with  the: 
utmost  seriousness,  and  he'  often  referred  to  it  as  a  plan  which  would  greatly  and 
permanently  benefit  the:  whole:  nation,  and  which  he  believed  his  fellow-countrymen 
would  aelopt  it  it  were  laiel  before  them  by  the  great  statesman  to  whom  he- 
submitted  it. 

1  he  caricature  on  page  343,  reproduced  from  Figaros  phrenological  cartoons, 
shows  one  of  the  many  instance's  in  which  Mr.  Gladstone  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  were: 
pictorially  and  amusingly  associated,  anel  it  may  therefore:  appropriately  introduce 
a  brief  series  of— 

POLITICAL   PLKASANTKIKS. 

On  e)ne  of   Mr.  Spurgeon's  visits   to   Mentone,  a  lady,  whe)  was  a  great  admirei 
of  Mr.   Gladstone,   asked   the    Pastor   to  guess    the   word    which    would    explain   the 


^2  C.      IF.     SI'URC.KOX'S     ATTOniOC-R. \riIV. 

following  riddle:— (i)  \Vh;it  Mr.  Gladstone  likes;  (2)  what  he-  does  not  like  ; 
(3)  what  he  would  like  to  do  ;  and  (4)  where  his  enemies  would  like;  to  put  him. 
When  Mr.  Spurgeon  learned  the  solution  of  the  puzzle,  he  was  so  pleased  with  it 
that  he  passed  it  on  to  other  friends.  The  answers  were,— (l)  Reform  ;  (2)  a  Tory  ; 
(3)  to  reform  a  Tor)'  ;  and  (4)  in  a  reformatory  ! 

During  a  General  Klection,  it  was  discovered,  one  Monday  morning,  that  the 
front  gates  and  walls  of  "  I  lelensburgh  House"  had  been,  in  the  course  of  the  night, 
very  plentifully  daubed  over  with  paint  to  correspond  with  the  colours  ol  the  Con 
servative  candidates  for  that  division  ol"  Surrey.  In  speaking,  at  the  Tabernacle,  the-, 
same,  evening,  concerning  the  disfigurement  ol  his  premises,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said, 
is  notorious  that  1  am  no  Tory,  so  1  shall  not  trouble  to  remove,  the  paint  ;  perhaps 
those;  who  put  it  on  will  take  it  off  when  it  has  been  there;  long  enough  to  please, 
them  ;"  and,  in  due  time,  they  did  so. 

The  mention  of  a  General  Election  recalls  a  characteristic  anecdote  which  Mr. 
Spurgeon  delighted  to  tell.  He  had  "'one  to  preach  for  his  friend,  Mr.  John  Ollord, 
and,  contrary  to  his  almost  universal  practice;,  was  a  little;  late;  in  arriving.  He 
explained  that  there  had  been  a  block  on  the-  road,  which  had  delayed  him  ;  and, 
in  aeldition,  he  had  stopped  on  the  way  to  vote.  "To  vote'!"  exclaimed  the  good 
man  ;  "but,  my  dear  brother,  I  thought  you  were  a  citi/en  of  the  New  Jerusalem  ! 
"So  I  am,"  replied  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "  but  my  'old  man'  is  a  citi/en  of  this  world." 
"Ah!  but  you  should  mortify  your  'old  man."  "  That  is  exactly  what  I  diel  ;  for 
my  'old  man'  is  a  Tory,  and  1  made  him  vote  lor  the  Liberals  ! 

At  another  General  Klection,  it  was  widely  reported  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  had 
declared  that  he  would  vote  for  the;  devil  himself  if  he  were  a  Liberal  ;  and  so  many 
enquiries  with  regard  to  the,  statement  came  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  that  a 
large  number  of  post  cards  had  to  be  printed  and  sent  in  reply.  Those  who  had 
started  or  circulated  the  falsehood  were  probably  somewhat  ashamed  when  they  read 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  emphatic  denial  :— "  I  certainly  should  not  vote;  for  the  devil  under 
any  circumstances,  nor  am  I  able;  to  conceive;  of  him  as  so  restored  as  to  become  a 
Liberal.  1  think  he  has  had  a  considerable  band  in  the  invention  of  many  a  story 
which  has  of  late  been  published  concerning  me." 

CRITICISM   AND  WITTICISM. 

When  the  Tabernacle  was  about  to  be  opened,  tickets  of  admission  to  the 
various  gatherings  were  printed.  The  one  intended  as  a  pass  to  the  first  service 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOHIOGRAPHY. 


343 


FIGAROS      PHRENOLOG  Y.— No.    2. 


C.      II.      SrUKClKOX's     AUTOr.IOr.KAI'HY. 


se-emed    to    Mr.    Spur^eon    so    unsuitable    to    the   occasion    that   be,    turned   it   into  a 
sweep's  advertisement  by  annotating  the  front  of  it  in  this  humorous  style  :— 


He:     also     wrote     on     the     back    the    comments    and    queries    here    reproduced    in 
facsimile, — 


and    sent    the   card   to    Mr.    Passmore,    who    preserved    it   with    the:   other  epistolary 
curiositie-s  that  were  published  in  Vol.  II.,  Chapter  XLV1I. 

One  matter  that  always  afforde:el  Mr.  Spur^eon  the  opportunity  of  poking  a 
little-  good-natured  fun  at  his  esteemexl  publishers  was  the  non-arrival  e)f  proofs  for 
which  he  was  looking.  Frequently,  at  Mentone,  or  at  some  other  place:  where  the 
beloved  author  was  combining  rest  and  work,  Mr.  Passmore  or  Mr.  Alabaster  would 
be  asked  about  the  "  Cock  Robin  shop  "  that  he  had  left  for  a  while.  (A  "  Cock 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S    AUTOIUOCK. \PIIV.  ^^ 

Robin  shop  "  is  the  trade  designation  of  a  small  printing-office  where  cheap  booklets, 
such  as  7 he  Heath  of  Cock  Robin,  are  issued.)  It  was  a  theme  for  perennial 
merriment,  and  no  protestations  of  the  publishers  availed  to  put  an  end  to  it.  If 
sermon  or  magazine  proofs  were  delayed,  the  invariable  explanation  was,  "  Perhaps 
they  have  had  another  order  lor  Cock  Robins,  so  my  work  has  had  to  wait." 

On  one  occasion,  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  his  secretary  had  gone,  to  Bournemouth  for 
a  week  ;  and,  not  knowing  beforehand  where  they  would  be  staying,  the  printers 
were  instructed  to  send  proofs  to  the  Post  Office,  to  be  left  till  called  for.  On 
enquiry,  the  officials  declared  that  they  had  nothing  for  Mr.  Spurgeon,  so  the 
following  telegram  was  despatched  to  London: — "When  you  have  finished  Cock 
Robins,  please  forward  proofs  of  sermon  and  maga/ine."  It  turned  out  that  the:  fault 
was  with  the  postal  authorities,  for  they  had  only  looked  for  letters,  whereas  the 
printed  matter  was  in  the  office  all  the  while  in  the  compartment  allotted  to  book- 
post  packets. 

At  one  of  the  meetings  when  contributions  lor  the  new  Tabernacle  were 
brought  in,  the  names  of  Knight  and  Duke  were  read  out  from  the  list  of  sub 
scribers,  whereupon  Mr.  Spurgeon  said,  "  Really,  we  are  in  grand  company  with  a 
knight  and  a  duke  !  Presently,  "  Mr.  King,  five  shillings,"  was  reported,  when 
the  Pastor  exclaimed,  "Why,  the;  king  has  actually  given  his  crown!  What  a 
liberal  monarch!"  Directly  afterwards,  it  was  announced  that  Mr.  Pig  had  con 
tributed  a  guinea.  "That,"  said  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "is  a  guinea-pig." 

The  propensity  of  punning  upon  people's  names  was  often  indulged  by  the  dear 
Pastor  ;  and,  doubtless,  many  readers  of  this  chapter  will  recollect  instances  that 
have  come  to  their  own  knowledge.  Mr.  Spurgeon  could  remember,  in  a  very 
remarkable  lash  ion,  the  faces  and  names  of  those  whom  he  had  once  met  ;  and  if 
he  made  any  mistake  in  addressing  them,  he  would  speedily  and  felicitously  rectify 
it.  A  gentleman,  who  had  been  at  one  of  the  annual  College  suppers,  was  again 
present  the  following  year.  The  President  saluted  him  with  the  hearty  greeting, 
"Glad  to  see  you,  Mr.  Partridge."  The:  visitor  was  surprised  to  lincl  himself 
recogni/ed,  but  he  replied,  "  My  name  is  Patridge,  sir,  not  Partridge."  "Ah,  yes!'' 
was  the  instant  rejoinder;  "  1  won't  make  game  of  you  any  more." 

A  lady  in  \\  orcestershire,  writing  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon  concerning  a  service  at 
Dunnington,  near  Evesham,  says: — "Mr.  Spurgeon  shook  hands  with  seventy 
members  of  one  family,  named  Bomford,  who  had  gone  to  hear  him.  One  of  our 
deacons,  a  Mr.  Alway,  was  at  the  same  time  introduced  to  him  ;  and,  in  his  own 
inimitable  and  ready  way,  he  exclaimed,  '  Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  .Alway  !  ' 

Dr.  John  Campbell  was  once  in  a  second-hand  bookseller's  shop  with  Mr. 
Spurgeon,  and,  pointing  to  Thorn  on  Infant  Baptism,  he  said,  "  There  is  'a  thorn  in 


C.      H.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

the    flesh  '   for   you."       Mr.    Spurgeon    at   once   replied,    "  Finish    the    quotation,    my 
hrother, — 'the  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  me." 

During  the  Baptismal  Regeneration  Controversy,  a  friend  said  to  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
"I  hear  that  you  are  in  hot  water."  "Oh,  dear  no!"  he.  replied  ;  "it  is  the  other 
fellows  who  are  in  the  hot  water  ;  I  am  the  stoker,  the  man  who  makes  the  water 
boil  !  " 

MIXISTI.KIAL     MIRTH. 

Mr.  Spurgeon  made  a  very  sparing  use  of  his  wit  in  the  pulpit,  though  all 
his  wits  were  always  utili/.ed  thereto  the  utmost.  To  one  who  objected  to  some 
humorous  expression  to  which  he  had  given  utterance;  while  preaching,  he  replied, 
"  If  you  had  known  how  many  others  I  kept  back,  you  would  not  have  found 
fault  with  that  one,  but  you  would  have  commended  me  lor  the  restraint  I  had 
exercised."  He  often  said  that  he  never  went  out  of  his  way  to  make,  a  joke, —  or  to 
avoid  one  ;  and  only  the  last  great  day  will  reveal  how  many  were  first  attracted  by 
some  playful  reference  or  amusing  anecdote,  which  was  like.'  the  bait  to  the:  lish,  and 
concealed  the  hook  on  which  they  were  soon  happily  caught. 

At  the  last  service  in  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  the  Pastor  reminded  his  hearers 
that  the  new  Tabernacle,  which  they  were  about  to  enter,  was  close  to  '  1  he 
Elephant  and  Castle,"  and  then,  urging  them  all  to  take  their  own  share  of  the 
enlarged  responsibilities  resting  upon  them  as  a  church  and  people,  he  said,  "  Let 
every  elephant  bear  his  castle  when  we  get  there."  This  was  simply  translating,  into 
the  dialect  of  Newington,  Paul's  words,  "  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden,"  and, 
doubtless,  the  form  of  the  injunction  helped  to  impress  it  upon  the  memory  of  all  who 
heard  it. 

No  student  of  the  Pastors'  College,  who  listened  to  the  notable  sermon  delivered 
in  the  desk-room  by  the  beloved  President,  would  be  likely  ever  to  forget  the  text  of 
the  discourse  after  it  had  been  thus  emphasized  : — "  Brethren,  take  care  that  this  is 
always  one  of  the  Newington  Butts, — 'But  we  preach  Christ  crucified.'  Eet  others 
hold  up  Jesus  simply  as  an  Example,  if  they  will  ;  'but  we  preach  Christ  crucified' 
Eet  any,  who  like  to  do  so,  proclaim  'another  gospel,  which  is  not  another;'  'but 
we'  preach  Christ  crucified?  ' 

Among  the  most  memorable  sermons  ever  preached  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  was 
the  one  on  behalf  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society,  in  Exeter  Hall,  on  April  27, 
1881,  from  Isaiah  li.  2,  3.  After  setting  forth  the  noble  personality  of  Abraham, 
concerning  whom  the  Lord  said,  "  I  called  him  alone,"  the  preacher,  by  using  a  word 
in  two  senses,  revealed  the  contrast  between  the  father  of  the  faithful  and  his  time 
serving  nephew, — "  Lot, — a  poor  miserable  lot  he  was, — costing  his  noble  uncle 
more  trouble  than  he  ever  brought  him  profit." 


C.      II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  347 

On  one  occasion,  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  to  preach  in  a  Nonconformist 
"church"  where  the  service  was  of  a  very  elaborate  character,  someone  else  had 
been  asked  to  conduct  "  the  preliminaries."  The  preacher  remained  in  the  vestry 
until  the  voluntary,  the  lessons,  the  prayers,  and  the  anthem  were  finished,  then 
entering  the  pulpit,  he  said,  "Now,  brethren,  let  us  />my;"  and  the  tone:  in  which 
the  last  word  was  uttered  indicated  plainly  enough  what  he  thought  of  all  that  had 
gone  before. 

When  Mr.  Gulf  was  minister  at  Providence  Chapel,  1  lackney,  one  of  the  College 
Conference'  meetings  was  held  there.  The  President  presided,  and  in  the  course  of 
his  speech,  he  pointed  to  the:  origan,  and  said,  "  I  look  upon  that  as  an  innovation  ; 
and  if  1  were  here,  I  should  want  it  to  be  an  outovation,  and  then  we  would  have  an 
ovation  over  its  departure.  I  was  once  asked  to  open  an  organ, — I  suppose:  the 
pe:ople  wanted  me:  to  preach  in  conne-ction  with  the  introduction  ol  the:  new  instru 
ment.  1  saiel  that  I  was  quite  willing  to  open  it  as  Simple  Simon  opened  his  mother's 
bellows,  to  see  where  the  winel  came:  from,  but  1  could  not  take  any  other  part  in  the 
ceremony." 

Preaching  at  a  chape-1  in  the:  country,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  enit  Dr.  Watts's 
version  of  the  ejist  Psalm,— 

"  He  that  hath  made  his  refuge  God, 
Shall  find  a  most  secure  abode  ;"- 

and  them  added,  "  We'll  sing  it  to  the  tune  '  Refuge.'  '  The  organist  leaned  ewer 
Irom  the  gallery,  and  whispered  to  the  preacher,  "  It  is  not  in  our  tune-book,  sir." 
"Then  it  ought  to  be,"  answered  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "no  tune-book  is  complete  unless 
'Refuge'  is  in  it;"  and,  turning  to  the  congregation,  he  said,  "The  last  time:  I 
was  here,  you  people  praised  God  for  yourselves,  but  now  you  have  a  machine 
to  do  the  praising  for  you.  If  it  can't  play  '  Refuge,'  we'll  have  it  all  the  same, 
and  I'll  start  it  myself." 

Relating  te>  his  students  some  of  his  experiences  in  his  early  ministerial  days, 
the  President  said  : — "  I  remember  going  to  a  little  village  to  preach  ;  the  forms  had 
no  backs  to  them,  and  on  the  front  bench  were  seated  some  ancient  dames,  each 
wearing  a  cloak  and  hood,  like:  Little:  Reel  Riding  I  food's,  which  made  me  feel 
that  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these.  After  the  service 
had  commenced,  the  front  seat  gave  way  with  a  crash,  and  down  came  all  its 
occupants.  This  was  too  much  for  my  gravity,  and  it  was  no  use  to  go  e>n  with  the 
sermon  from  the.  selected  text,  so  I  made  the  enquiry,  'Where  did  that  form  come 
from?  Was  it  borrowed  from  the  Established  Church?'  '  No,  sir,'  replied  some 
one;  'it  came  from  the  Wesleyan  Chapel.'  'Well  then,  you  see,  dear  friends,' 
I  said,  '  Dissenting  forms  are  no  safer  than  those  used  by  the  Church  of  England,  so 
I  would  advise  you  not  to  trust  to  any  forms  or  ceremonies,  but  to  the  Eord  Jesus 


34S  C       II.      SI'UUCIKONS 

Christ,  for  He:  alone  can  save  you.'  That  accident  gave  me:  a  subject  on  which  I 
was  able  to  speak  with  freedom,  and  I  hope'  with  profit  also,  to  my  rustic  hearers, 
who  would  probably  long  recollect  my  warning  against  borrowing  any  mere:  formal 
religion  from  either  the:  Church  or  Dissent." 

MATRIMONY    AND    MKRRIMENT. 

Mr.  Spurge-on  was,  even  on  ordinary  occasions,  so  happy  and  joyous,  and  the: 
means  of  communicating  so  much  pleasure:  to  others,  that  it  is  not  surprising  that  his 
services  were  in  great  demand  when  his  frienels  were  about  to  be:  married.  Some'  ol 
the:  sweetest  reminiscences  of  the  loving  couples  who  have  survived  him  are 
associateel  with  the:  brightness  that  his  presence  and  counse-1  imparted  to  their 
wedding-dav.  Naturally,  the:  addresses  given  on  such  occasions  bore:  considerable 
resemblance  to  one  another,  although  there  was  always  something  special  in  each 
case:.  The  earliest  marriage:  service  conducted  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  ol  which  the 
re-Corel  has  been  preserved,  was  that  of  Pastor  T.  \V.  Medhurst  and  his  lirst  wile-, 
Miss  M.  A.  Cranfield.  The  wedding  took  place  on  May  26,  1859,  at  Kingston-on- 
Thames,  where  the  first  student  of  the  Pastors'  College  had  been  ministering  lot- 
more  than  two  years.  Mr.  Spurgeon  announced,  at  the  commene-e-ment  ol  the: 
proceedings,  that  he  was  not  going  to  perform  the  ceremony  as  it  he-  were  reading 
the  burial  service,  nor  as  if  he  were  about  to  thrust  his  two  young  Iriends  into  prison, 
and  make:  their  feel  last  in  the:  stocks.  I  le  also  said  that  he-  hoped  their  wedded  lite- 
would  not  be  like:  the'  Church  of  Kngland  marriage  service:,  which  begins  with 
"Dearly-beloved"  and  ends  with  "amazement."  He-  trusted  that  they  would  both 
be  "dearly-beloved"  not  only  at  the-  beginning  of  their  united  career,  but  all  through 
to  the-  end,  and  then  for  ever  and  ever;  and  that,  while-  their  sorrows  would  be 
mutually  shared,  their  joys  would  all  be  multiplied.  In  expounding  Kphesians  v.  23, 
the  Pastor,  addressing  the:  bride,  said,  "According  to  the  teaching  ol  the:  apostle-, 
'The  husbanel  is  [he:  head  of  the:  wife.'  Don't  you  try  to  be  the:  he-ael;  but  you  be 
the  neck,  them  you  can  turn  the:  he:ael  whichever  way  you  like-." 

At  another  marriage:  service,  main  years  afterwards,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  commenting 
on  the  same:  passage:,  said  to  the  bridegroom,  anothe-r  ol  "our  own  mem,"  '  My  dear 
friend,  don't  you  begin  to  feel  proud  because  Paul  says  that  the  husbanel  is  the-  head 
of  the  wile.  Solomon  says  that  'a  virtuous  woman  is  a  eTetwn  to  her  husbanel  ;  and 
the:  crown  is  the-  top  of  the:  head.  Still,  the-  governing  faculty  should  rest  with  the- 
heael  ;  and  the  family  will  ne:ve-r  be-  e>rdcreel  aright  unless  we:  each  ke:e:p  euir  proper 
place."  On  the:  same  occasion,  he  thus  humorously  elescribe-d  the:  difficulties  and 
privileges  e>f  a  paster's  wife  : — "  If  I  was  a  young  woman,  and  was  thinking  ol  being 
married,  I  wemlel  not  marry  a  minister,  because  the  position  ot  minister's  wile  is  a 
verv  difficult  one  for  anvone  to  fill.  Churches  do  not  mve  a  married  minister  two 


C.      H.      SI'UKGKON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

salaries,  one  for  the  husband  and  the  other  lor  the  wife  ;  but,  in  many  cases,  they 
look  for  the  services  of  the  wife,  whether  they  pay  lor  them  or  not.  1  he;  Pastor's 
wile  is  expected  to  know  everything"  about  the  church,  and  in  another  sense  she  is  to 
know  nothing"  ot  it;  and  she  is  equally  blamed  by  some  people  whether  she;  knows 
everything"  or  nothing".  I  ler  duties  consist  in  being  a /ways  at  home  to  attend  to  her 
husband  and  her  family,  and  being  always  out,  visiting  other  people,  and  doing  all 
sorts  ol  things  for  the  whole,  church  !  Well,  ol  course;,  that  is  impossible;  ;  she;  cannot 
be  at  everybody's  beck  and  call,  and  she  cannot  e;\pect  to  please;  everybody.  Her 
husband  cannot  elo  thai,  ami  I  think  he  is  very  foolish  it  he  tries  to  elo  it;  ami  I  am 
e:ertain  that,  as  the  husband  cannot  please;  everybody,  neither  can  the;  wile:.  There 
will  be  sure  to  be  somebody  or  other  who  will  be  displeased,  especially  if  that 
somebody  had  herself  hall  hoped  to  be  the:  minister's  wife:!  Difficulties  arise: 
continually  in  the  best-regulated  churches  ;  and  the  position  e)f  the:  minister's  wife 
is  always  a  ve;ry  trying  one.  Still,  1  think  that,  if  I  was  a  Christian  young  woman, 
1  would  marry  a  Christian  minister  if  I  could,  be:cause;  there  is  an  opportunity  of 
eloing  so  much  gooel  in  helping  him  in  his  service  for  Christ.  It  is  a  great  assistance 
to  the  cause  ol  Goel  to  keep  the  minister  himself  in  gooel  order  le>r  his  work.  It  is 
his  wile's  eluty  to  se:e  that  he  is  not  uncomfortable  at  home  ;  for,  it  everything  there 
is  happy,  ami  free  Irom  care,  he:  can  give  all  his  thoughts  to  his  preparation  for  the 
pulpit  ;  and  the  godly  woman,  who  thus  helps  her  husbanel  to  preach  better,  is  herself 
a  preacher  though  she:  never  speaks  in  public,  ami  she:  becomes  to  the:  highest 
degree  useful  to  that  portion  of  the  Church  of  Christ  which  is  committed  to  her 
husband's  charge." 

Wedding  breakfasts  naturally  altorded  Mr.  Spurgeon  the  opportunity  ol  making 
many  kind  and  witty  remarks.  1  le:  was  ve:ry  loml  ol  saying  to  the  bridegroom, 
1  really  cannot  compliment  you  upon  your  gre:at  discrimination  in  choosing  your 
bride;"  and  then,  when  the  poor  fellow  was  blushing  to  the  roots  of  his  hair,  and 
the  guests  all  round  the:  table  (if  they  had  not  previously  heard  the  je>ke,)  were 
saying  to  one  another,  "What  can  Mr.  Spurgeon  mean?"  he  quietly  added,  "Any 
stupid,  with  hall  an  eye,  coulel  se:e;  that  she:  woulel  make  a  man  a  gooel  wile:,  so  ne> 
discrimination  was  needed  in  your  case,  ami  I  very  heartily  congratulate  you  upon 
your  choice."  The  m:at  turn  of  the:  spee:ch  not  only  set  the  whole:  company  at  their 
ease,  but  proveel  a  notable  aelelition  to  the:  harmless  merriment  that  always  prevailed 
on  such  occasions  until  the  time:  came;  lor  the:  closing  devotional  service;  before  the 
happy  couple  starteel  le>r  the:ir  honeymoon. 

At  one  wedding"  bre:ak!ast,  Mr.  Spurgeon  maele;  an  amusing  allusion  to  the  fact 
that  the:  bridegroom,  a  missionary  brother  fre)in  Japan,  hael  been  previously  married. 
Speaking"  to  the  bride,  he  said,  "  You  must  not  be  too  proud  ol  ye>ur  husband, 


35° 


C.     II.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Mrs.  -         — ,  for  he  is  on!}"  second-hand  ;  yet  he  is  as  good  as  ne\v,  for  lie  lias  been 
Japanned  !  " 


Anyone  acquainted  with  Oueen  Square  Baptist  Chapel,  Brighton,  or  who  looks 
at  the  position  oi  that  building  as  represented  in  the  above  view,  will  reali/e  how 
appropriate  was  Mr.  Spurgeon's  reference  to  it  alter  lie  had  conducted  a  marriage 
service  there.  In  the  course  of  a  charming  address  at  the  breakfast  which  followed 
the  ceremony,  he  turned  to  the  bridegroom,  and  said,  "  I  tell  my  friend  -  -  that, 

whatever  he  says  about  his  wedding,   he  will  never  be   able   to   say,  '  This   thing  was 
not  done  in  a  corner  /  ' 

Even  when  he  had  not  been  present  at  the  marriage1,  of  his  friends, 
Mr.  Spurgeon  often  managed  to  make  merriment  for  them  out  of  something  which 
he  heard  or  knew  concerning  the  happy  event.  A  notable  instance  of  this  occurred 
when  "one  of  our  own  men"  and  his  bride  went  to  Mentone  for  their  honeymoon, 
and  someone  sent  to  the  beloved  President  a  newspaper  containing  a  full  report  of 
the  service,  and  the  details  generally  published  on  such  occasions.  In  the  course  of 


C.      II.      SPURGEON  S     AUTOTilOr.KAl'IIY.  351 

conversation,  after  the  happy  couple  arrived,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  to  the  bride, 
"  Mrs.  -  — ,  if  I  was  a  young'  lady,  going  to  be  married,  I  should  wear  so-and-so 
and  so-and-so."  Turning  to  her  husband,  she  exclaimed,  "Oh,  -  -!  Isn't  it 

funny?  That's  just  how  I  was  dressed."  "Then,"  said  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "I  should 
have  so  many  bridesmaids,  and  they  should  wear  such-and-such  dresses  and  such- 
and-such  hats."  "  Oh,  -!  Why,  that  is  just  how  many  bridesmaids  I  had,  and 
they  were  dressed  exactly  like  that."  "Then,  for  presents,"  said  the  Pastor,  "I 
should  like  so-and-so  and  so-and-so."  "  Oh,  -  -  !  Isn't  it  funny?  That  is  just 
what  we  had."  It  is  not  certain  that  the  good  lady  knows  even  to  this  day  how  it 
came  to  pass  that  the  great  preacher's  wishes  and  her  own  coincided  so  singularly  ! 
(  (-Plainly,  he  extracted  a  considerable  quantity  of  pure  fun  out  of  her  amazement  as 
he  proceeded  with  his  recital  of  things  to  be  desired  at  a  wedding. 

On  one  of  his  visits  to  Mentone,  a  friend  asked  him,  "  I  n  what  coloured  ink  should 
a  promise;  of  marriage  be  written  ?"  He  guessed  all  the  colours  he  could  think  of, 
and  then  was  informed  that  the  right  answer  was,  "in  violet"  (inviolate).  He  was  so 
delighted  with  the  conundrum,  both  for  its  wit,  and  for  its  confirmation  of  tin; 
solemnity  of  an  engagement  with  a  view  to  marriage,—  that  he  often  tried  the  effect 
ol  it  upon  his  friends,  and  seldom  found  OIK;  who  was  more  successful  in  seeing 
through  ii  than  he  himself  had  been,  though  all  thought  the  answer  to  it  was 
admirable. 

"  LKARNKD     IN     TDK     LAW." 

Mr.  Spurgeon  once;  spent  an  evening,  with  a  few  of  Her  Majesty's  judges,  at 
the  house  of  Mr.  Justice;  Lush,  who  was  a  very  dear  personal  friend  of  his.  After 
dinner,  with  an  air  of  apparent  seriousness,  the  Pastor  said  that  he  had  a  point  of 
law  that  he  should  like  to  submit  to  the  eminent  authorities  present.  There  was  a 
man  who  had  been  lying  in  Camberwell  for  the  last  fortnight,  and  yet  nobody  would 
bury  him  ;  his  friends  would  not  arrange  for  his  funeral,  and  neither  the  police  nor 
the  parish  officials  had  been  able  to  get  him  interred.  The  learned  judges  began  con 
sulting  with  one  another,  and  quoting  various  Acts  of  Parliament  that  applied  to  such 
a  case,  and  said  that,  if  the  relatives  persistently  refused  to  bury  the  man,  the 
requisite  power  remained  with  certain  local  authorities  whom  they  named.  They 
were,  however,  considerably  nonplussed  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  very  quietly  said, 
'  There  was  one  little  item  in  the  case  that  I  omitted  to  mention,  the  man  is  not 
dead  yet  /'  "  Are  you  not  afraid  of  the  consequences  of  taking  in  Her  Majesty's 
judges  like  that?"  enquired  Mr.  Justice  Lush;  adding,  "You  really  ought  to  be 
committed  for  contempt  of  court  ;  but  as  you  seem  to  be  well  up  in  legal  matters, 
tell  me, — Ought  a  man  to  be  allowed  to  marry  his  widow's  sister  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes  !  " 
exclaimed  the  Pastor,  not  suspecting  the  trap  that  had  been  laid  for  him,  and  in  the 


^-2  c.    IT.    STURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

excitement  of  the  moment  thinking  that  the-  question  had  been,  "Ought  a  man 
to  he  allowed  to  marry  his  deceased  wile's  sister?"  'Then,"  said  the  judge, 
"we  will  cry  quits,  for  even  your  friend  in  Camberwell  could  not  marry  his  7i'/c/(w'.s 
sister  !  " 

Later  in  the  evening,  Mr.  Spurgeon  told  a  story  that  invariably  elicited  the 
wrong  reply,  and  that  occasion  was  no  exception  to  the  rule.  "A  lady  and 
gentleman  were  engaged  to  be:  married  ;  they  were,  walking  along  the  sea-shore, 
when  some  dispute  arose,  and  the  lady,  in  a  tit  ol  temper,  snatched  the  engagement 
ring  from  her  linger,  and  threw  it  into  the  water.  Alter  a  while,  she  found  another 
lover,  to  whom  she  was  married,  and  they  went  down  to  Scarborough  to  spend  the 
honeymoon.  On  the  first  morning,  they  had  tish  lor  breakfast;  and,  as  the 
bridegroom  was  dividing  it,  he  felt  something  hard  ;  what  do  you  suppose  the  kniie 
had  cut  against?"  Of  course,  the  judges,  like  everybody  else,  exclaimed,  "The 
ring."  "  No,"  said  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "  it  was  only  a  bone! 

Pastor  Charles  Spurgeon  mentions  (on  page  299)  a  service  conducted  by  his 
dear  father  at  Pollockshaws.  During  that  visit  to  Scotland,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was 
introduced  to  the  Dean  of  Guild.  "The  Dean  of  Guild  ;  oh,  you  are  the  gentleman 
who  can  go  through  every  tollgate  in  Kngland  without  paying!  "  "  I  was  not  aware 
that  any  such  privilege  was  attached  to  my  office."  "  It  is  quite  true,  sir,"  replied  the 
dear  Pastor;  "  von,  can  go  through  every  tollgate  without  paying,  but  the  gatekeeper 
will  charge  for  your  horse  and  carriage  ! 

STI;I>V     AND     S  MILKS. 

All  the  students  of  the.  Pastors'  College,  who  have,  recorded  their  reminiscences 
of  the:  time  spent  in  connection  with  that  Institution,  have:  testified  to  the  bright 
and  joyous  atmosphere  which  pervaded  all  the  classes,  and  which  has  made  that 
period  in  their  history  ever-memorable  to  them.  From  the  very  beginning  of  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  work  of  training  young  men  for  the  Christian  ministry,  hard  stud}'  and  a 
happy  spirit  have  been  delightfully  combined.  Kven  before  there  was  any  College, 
when  a  solitary  student  was  under  the  charge  of  Mr.  Rogers,  coming  events  cast 
their  sunshine  before,  as  the  two  following  paragraphs,  supplied  by  Mr.  Medhurst, 
clearly  prove  : — 

"  Soon  after  I  went  to  live  with  Mr.  Rogers,  one  Saturday  morning  Mr. 
Spurgeon  called  to  see  what  progress  we  were  making,  when  the  following  conversa 
tion  took  place  : — 'Well,  friend  Rogers,'  enquired  the  clear  Governor,  'how  are  you 
getting  on  with  this  zealous  young  Baptist?'  '  Oh  !'  replied  the:  tutor,  'we  get  along 
very  nicely  ;  but  we:  don't  say  much  about  baptism.  You  know,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  that 
when  the  Samaritan  woman  found  the  Saviour,  she  left  her  waterpot.'  '  Yes, 


c.    ii.    STURGEON'S   AUTomoGkAriiv.  ^r^ 

v  '  \J  \J 

friend    Rogers,1   was   the   prompt  answer,    'she   left   her  sprinkling   machine,    for  the 
Lord  Jesus  had  shown  her  the    "much  water"   that  there;  was  in  the;  eleep  well.' 

"On  another  occasion,  there;  had  been  a  snowstorm  during  the;  night  ;  so,  in  the 
morning,  I  joined  Mr.  Rogers'  sons  in  a  game  of  snowballing  in  front  of  the-  house. 
I  his,  dear  precise  Mrs.  Rogers  considered  very  unbecoming  on  the  part  of  a 
ministerial  student  !  Mr.  Spurgeon  called  shortly  afterwards,  on  the;  same  day,  and 
the'  good  old  lady  (she  was  a  dear  kind  soul)  asked  him  what  he;  thought  of  me;  for 
so  far  forgetting  what  was  due  to  my  position  as  a  candidate  for  the;  Christian 
ministry.  Mr.  Spurgeon  replie;el,  'Well,  Mrs.  Rogers,  I  greatly  admire;  the 
prevenient  grace;  of  God  that  did  not  allow  me  to  come;  earlier  this  morning;  for  had 
I  been  here;,  I  fear  I  should  have;  been  tempted  to  join  in  the  snowballing.'  Then, 
turning  to  me,  he  said,  in  a  tone  of  assumed  solemnity,  '  Young  man,  you  are 
forgiven  this  time  ;  but  see  that  you  transgress  no  more-,— until  the  next  fall  of  snow!'" 

Mr.  Spurgeon  evidently  had  great  confidence,  both  in  Mr.  Rogers   and    in  those 
who  were  trained    by  him,  or  he;  would  not    have;  committed  to  his  care  the  hundreds 
of ^ students  who  passed  through   the  College  during  the  long  term  of  his  principal- 
ship.     It  is  to  the;  credit  of  both  tutor  and  taught  that,  although  some  few  of  the  men 
have,  become    I'a.-do- Baptists,    no    one    of    them   has  ever  been   known   to    attribute 
his   change   of  sentiments   to    the   inlluence     of    the;   Congregational    Principal.      Yet 
the    subject    of   believers'    baptism   versus  infant    sprinkling  was    very   often    under 
discussion  ;  and   probably    all    the  students,   at  some;   time,   or  other,   sought   to  lead 
Mr.  Rogers   into  what  they  regarded   as  the  light  upon   this  important  matter.      The 
President  used  to  say  that  the;  brethren  treated  their  tutor  as  a  kind  of  hone  on  which 
they    tried    to    sharpen     their    Baptistic   arguments,    and    he    himself   had    many   an 
encounter  with    the   sturdy  old  Independent.      A  very  favourite   simile  with    him  was 
that  the  Pomelo-Baptist  tutor  of  Baptist  students  resembled    a    hen    sitting   on  ducks' 
eggs,   and   he  humorously  described   the  agitation    of    the;   poor    bird   as    she   stood 
tremblmg  on  the  edge  of  the  pond  while;  the;  ducklings  took  to  the  water  according 
to  their  nature  !      This  comparison  was   greatly  enjoyed  by  the  merry  audience-,  and 
they  were  not  less  pleased  with   Mr.    Rogers'  ready    reply,     "  If  I   am   as  silly  as  an 
old  hen,  I  have  always  managed  up  to  the  present  to  keep  my  head  above  water!  " 

Pastor  Harry  Abraham  has  written,  for  this  volume,  the  following  description 
of  a  lively  scene:  which  may  be  regarded  as  fairly  representative  of  many  similar 
occurrences  in  the  history  of  the  College  :— 

"  WHEN   ESSEX  MEETS  ESSEX." 
'  Ihe   summer  holidays  had   ended.      The  opening  day  of  a   new   session  was 

V     -? 


^_j.  C.      II.     SI'URC.KOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

ever  a  time  of  glad  greetings,  and  of  pleasant  preparations  for  the  tasks  which  lay 
before  us.  Old  friends  were  speaking  mutual  welcomes,  and  new  students  were 
regarded  with  kindly  curiosity.  The  tutors  were,  heartily  received,  as  being  at  once, 
our  lathers  and  our  brothers  ;  for  so  was  it  ever  in  the  days  of  Messrs.  George 
Rogers,  David  Gracey,  and  Archibald  Fergusson  ;  while  the  dear  President,  C.  II. 
Spurgeon,  was  still  the  best-loved, — most  paternal  and  most  fraternal  of  all. 

"  On  the.  m.)rning  to  which  I  now  refer,  the  three  tutors  wen;  in  their  places  on 
the,  platform  in  the  College,  lecture-hall,  and  nearly  a  hundred  of  us  occupied  the 
benches.  The.  venerable,  and  venerated  George  Rogers  was  telling,  in  characteristic 
fashion,  how  he  had  spent  the  vacation  :  attending  recognition  services,  delivering 
charges,  preaching  sermons,  and  speaking  at  various  meetings  in  place's  where;  '  our 
own  men'  were  doing  the  Great  Master's  work.  The;  dear  old  man  could  never 
resist  an  opportunity  of  making  some  playful  allusion  to  his  own  Pa;do-Baptist 
views,  in  contrast  with  those;  which  his  hearers  held,— always  to  the;  advantage  of  his 
own  position,  of  course.  An  obse;rvation  of  this  kinel,  which  had  just  fallen  from 
his  lips,  leel  Professor  Gracey  to  interje;ct  the:  sentence,  '  But  yon  won't  be  baptized! 
'  Yes,  I  will,'  re:plie;el  the;  nimble-witted  sage',  '  if  you'll  let  me'  stand  up  to  be  done  /  ' 
But  the  Irish  wit  of  the;  classical  tutor  was  equally  quick,  and  he;  answered,  'We're 
quite;  willing  to  let  you  stanel  up  //  only  l/ic  water  is  deep  enough  /  ' — a  retort  which 
the;  stude-nts  emphasized  with  a  nu;rry  pe;al  of  laughte:r  anel  ringing  cheers.  '  Ah  !  ' 
saiel  the  olel  man,  in  the:  familiar  tone:  which  always  se:eme:el  gravest  when  his  spirit 
was  gaye'st,  'you  can't  imel  anything  deep  enough  for  J\Ir.  (iracey  / 

"  In  the:  ve:ry  midst  of  the;  applause;  which  followeel  this  smart  rejoinder,  in  came 
the:  Presielent  !  Only  those  who  kne-w  henv  much  he-  was  beloveel,  and  what  a  glad 
some:  spirit  of  lre:e'dom  was  always  associateel  with  his  coming  upon  such  a  scene, 
could  have  understood,  or  pe;rhaps  excuse:el,  the:  bensterous  burst  of  welcome — 
laughter,  che-ers,  and  a  gene:ral  elin  of  delight, — which  sent  the:  echoes  flying  about 
the:  lecture-room  for  a  while.  Fre  the  noise  subside:d,  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  reached 
the:  platform  steps,  where  he  paused, — lifted  his  right  hand, — and  exclaimed, 
Brethren  !  brethren  !  I  fe-e;l  like:  Mose:s  coming  elown  from  the:  mount  ;  true,  there 
isn't  much  music,  you  are:  not  exactly  dancing,  but  yem  are:  making  a  great  row;  and, 
lo  !  I  see:  that  you  are  worshipping — an  Jtsscx  calf !  '  In  an  instant,  Mr.  Rogers  had 
seized  the  sharp  shaft  ot  good-tempered  humour,  and,  with  exquisite  grace  anel  skill, 
had  se'iit  it  flying  back,  by  simply  anel  swiftly  dropping  into  his.  chair,  with  a  profound 
anel  courtly  bow,  leaving  the  J^resident  standing  alone  upon  the  platform,  himself  the 
Jisse.v  calf  lo  whom  the  homage  was  being  rendered  !  A  more  perfect  in  qnoquc  in 
action  could  nen  be  conceived,  anel  no  we)rds  can  indicate  the  wonderful  way  in  which 
it  was  done.  It  was  the  wittiest  thing  I  ever  saw,  even  from  the:  most  witty  of  octo 
genarians  whom  I  have  ever  met.  But  the  merry  scene  was  not  quite  at  an  end 


<"'.    n.    STURGEON'S    ArToiunr.KAiMiv. 

even  then.  'Well,  friend  Rogers,  what  does  all  the  noise  mean?'  asked  the  genial 
'Governor.'  'Oh,  sir!  Mr.  Gracey  has  been  trying  to  put  me  down.'  Like  a  flash 
came  the  Roland  for  the  Oliver.  'Why,  that's  what  I  have  been  trying  to  do  ior 
the  last  twenty  years,  you  old  sinner,  and  yon  woii  t  go  down  !  ' 

"  All  the  sparkling  fun  lingers  in  the  memory, — pun;  as  the;  holy  joy  of  angels  ;— 
for  there  strangely  mingles  with  it  the.  recollection  of  the  hallowed  moments  spent  at 
the  throne  of  grace,  before,  that  meeting  ended  ;  and  between  the  playfulness  and  the 
prayer  there  seemed  to  be  no  abrupt  transition,  no  discord,  no  incongruitv, — but  all 
was  perfect  harmony  and  happiness." 


THK    LIBRARY    OK    TIIK    PASTORS'    COI.LEdE. 


Many  other  amusing  reminiscences  of  College  days  have  been  preserved,  but 
space  can  be  spared  for  only  one  more,  which  relates  to  a  certain  period  when  the 
library  had  been  closed  for  a  while,  mainlv  because  SOUK;  of  the  choice  volumes, 


-,-fi  r     n.    SPURGKON'S    ATTOIMOCR. \IMIV. 

on0 

which  it  ought  to  have;  contained,  were  missing-.  It  seemed  ;i  long  time  to  the 
students  before  they  were  able  again  to  avail  themselves  of  the  privilege  of  consult 
ing  the  many  valuable  books  collected  in  that  spacious  room  at  the  top  of  the 
buildin<>-.  One;  Friday  afternoon,  when  the;  President  took  his  place;  on  the 
platform  of  the  desk-room,  he  looked  up  at  the  clock,  and  seeing  that  it  had  stopped, 
said,  "I  cannot  understand  what  is  wrong  with  that  clock;  we  have,  had  it  repaired 
several  times,  yet  it  won't  go."  ( )ne  of  the  students  thought  he  saw  an  opportunity  of 
calling  attention  to  another  matter  in  which  he  and  all  the  brethren  were  interested, 
so  he  said,  "  It's  like  the  library,  sir,  it  is  shut  up."  "  Yes,"  replied  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "  and 
very  probably  for  the  same  reason,  because  some  of  the  'works'  have  been  taken 
away  !  " 

At  the,  close  of  the  annual  Conferences,  it  was  the.  President's  custom  to  invite 
from  a  do/en  to  a  score  of  the  ministers  to  spend  tint  Friday  afternoon  and  evening 
at  his  house  ;  not  only  for  their  own  enjoyment,  but  also  in  order  that  they  might 
re-peat  for  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  benefit  as  many  as  possible  of  the  notable  sayings  durmg 
the  week,  or  recall  any  incident  in  which  she  would  be  specially  interested.  It  was 
a  very  delightful  winding-up  of  the  meetings  ;  and  with  prayer,  and  speech,  and  song, 
the  time  swiftly  passed.  On  one  of  those  occasions,  the  whole  company  started  to 
march  round  the,  garden,  singing,  "  Hold  the  fort."  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  walking  in 
front  of  his  little  band  of  picked  soldiers  of  the  cross;  but,  as  soon  as  the  first 
verse  of  the  hymn  was  finished,  he  cried,  "  1  lalt  !  Right  about  face  !  Ouick  march  ! 
Now  you  may  sing,— 

'•'Sec  the  inl»hty  host  advamini;. 
Satan  leading  on.'" 

One  year,  Mr.  \V.  V.  Fullerton  was,  with  his  beloved  Pastor,  the,  guest  of  Mr. 
Duncan  at  "  Benmore."  On  the  Sabbath,  the  evangelist  preached  at  Kilmun  ;  and, 
the  following  morning,  when  driving  past  the.  building  where  the  service  had  been 
held,  Mr.  Spurgeon  pointed  to  the  house,  adjoining,  where  there  was  a  notice, 
"  Mangling  done  here,"  and  amused  the  other  visitors  by  trying  to  connect  that 
announcement  with  the  sermon  of  the  preceding  day. 

Pastor  \V.  Williams,  of  Upton  Chapel,  narrated,  in  his  I'crsonal  Reminiscences  of 
Charles  lladdou  Spnrgcon,  an  amusing  experience;  which  he  had  when  it  was  his 
privilege  to  accompany  his  President  to  Mr.  Duncan's.  In  connection  with  the  illus 
tration  on  the  opposite  page,  he  wrote  :— 

"  In  the  foreground  of  the  picture  is  a  stag,  lying  majestically,  with  head 
erect,  in  the  meadow  (as  though  '  Benmore '  belonged  to  him).  There  is  a  little 
incident  connected  with  this  stag-  which  I  think  is  worth  relating.  It  may  tell  a 
'wee'  bit  against  the  writer,  but  it  illustrates  Mr.  Spurgeon's  love  of  fun.  Soon 


C.      II.     SI'UKGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


357 


after  we  were  settled  down  at  '  Benmore,'  Mr.  Duncan  said  to  me,  'Can  you  shoot, 
Mr.  Williams  ?'  'Yes,'  I  replied,  'I  was  almost  born  with  a  gun  in  my  hand.' 
'Well,  then,'  said  he,  'I  will  send  to  Glasgow  for  a  gun  licence:  for  you  to-morrow.' 
I  had  not  specially  noticed  the  stag  in  the  meadow,  for  there  were  plenty  of  deer 
close,  too.  The  next  evening,  just  as  it  was  getting  a  little  dusk,  as  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
Mr.  Duncan,  and  I  were  sitting  outside  the  house,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said,  'Oh,  Mr. 
Williams,  I  have;  asked  and  obtained  permission  from  Mr.  Duncan  tor  you  to  shoot 


THK    KKONZE   STAG   AT    '' BENMORE. " 

that  tine  stag  in  the  meadow  ;  see,  he  is  lying  there  now.  But  you  are  to  shoot  him 
as  he  lies  ;  for,  if  you  get  him  to  move,  you  won't  hit  him  ;  and  Mr.  Duncan  savs,  it 
you  kill  him,  you  can  have  a  haunch  of  the  venison  to  take  home  with  you.  Now,  there 
is  a  chance  for  you.'  I  expostulated,  and  said  it  was  not  fair  to  shoot  at  the  animal 
sitting;  if  I  were  allowed  first  to  make  him  rise,  I  would  tire.  'No,  no,'  said  Mr. 
Spurgeon  ;  '  if  you  don't  shoot  him  sitting,  Mr.  Duncan  is  sure  you  won't  shoot 
him  at  all.  He  is  a  very  unusual  sort  of  stag.'  I  yielded,  and  crept  quietly  behind 
the  trees  in  front  of  him  until  I  got  within  forty  yards  of  the  animal,  when,  dusk  as  it 
was,  I  began  to  be  suspicious,  and  soon  discovered  that  the  stag  was  bronze.  I  did 
not  fire,  or  the  reader  might  be  now  looking  at  the  singular  phenomenon  of  a  lively- 
looking  stag's  body  without  a  head.  I  turned  round  to  find  Mr.  Spurgeon  laughing 
with  all  his  might.  A  tougher  piece  ot  venison  than  I  should  have  liked  to  bring  to 
London,  was  that  stately  monarch  of  the  meadow.'' 

For  many  years,   Mr.    Spurgeon's  portrait    occupied    a    prominent    position   in 


org  c.    ii.  SITKCKON'S    AUTOI;IO(;K.\I'IIV. 

most  of  the  cartoons  and  caricatures  in  which  representative  public  men  were  grouped 
together.  In  some  of  them,  he  was  depicted  in  company  that  he  never  kept,  and 
at&scenes  he  never  frequented  ;  but  the  artists  usually  intended,  even  in  such 
cases,  to  pay  a  well-deserved  tribute  to  his  popularity.  Mr.  Spur-eon  regarded 
these  productions  only  as  so  many  more  specimens  of  harmless  pleasantry  to  be 
added  to  the  large  collection  of  pictures  in  his  portfolios.  In  a  few  instances,  there- 
was  no  fun  in  the-  pictorial  representations  of  the  dear  Pastor;  but  only  coarse 
blasphemy,  which  made-  him  shudder  at  the  awful  condition  of  heart  of  the  human 
being  who  thus  not  merely  ridiculed  him,  but  also  poured  out  his  scorn  upon  all 
that  he  held  sacred  and  precious.  Still,  these  were  the  exceptions,  lew  and  far 
between  which  saved  him  from  the  "woe"  of  having  all  men  speaking  well  of  him. 


Among  the:  ecclesiastical  cartoons,  one  that  interested  and  amused  Mr.  Spurgeon 
very  much  is  here  reproduced.  It  formed  part  of  a  shilling  booklet,  published  by 
Mr.  James  Wade,  of  iS,  Tavistock  Street,  Covent  (iarden,  under  the  title, 
"The  Dream  of  Paul,  the  Parish  Clerk."  The  Pastor  had  no  cause  to  find  fault  with 


C.   II.   SI'UROKOXS  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  359 

the:  directions  inscribed   on    the  sign-post  above-  which  bis  portrait  appeared,  and  lie 
regarded  others  in  the  group  as  being  ingeniously  pictured  with  remarkable  accuracy. 

\\  ben  The  (treat  l^aslcni  \\-as  launched,  main-  suggestions  were  made  as  to 
the  best  way  of  utilizing  the  huge  vessel  ;  the  cartoon  on  page  338  humorously 
contains  several  of  them,  including  the  proposal  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  should  preach 
on  board  every  three:  hours! 

This  chapter  cannot  be  better  concluded  than  by  inserting  a  selection  ol 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL    ANKCDOTKS, 
related   in  Mr.  Spurgeon's   own  words. 

Soon  alter  I  came  to  London,  an  eccentric  individual  called  to  set;  me,  with  the 
view  of  setting  me  right  on  various  points  in  which  he  did  not  agree  with  tin- 
doctrine  I  [(reached.  When  In:  failed  to  convince  me  that  my  teaching  was  unscrip- 
tural,  he  rose  and  said,  "Then  I  will  shake  off  the  dust  of  my  feet  against  you." 
'  Please  don't  do  that,"  I  answered,  "  you  might  make  the  carpet  dirty  ;  you  will  find  a 
scraper  and  a  mat  at  the  front  door,  they  will  answer  the  purpose  quite  as  well  !  " 

A  man  who  had  made  a  special  stud}'  of  "  the  number  of  the  beast"  mentioned 
in  tin-  Book  of  Revelation,  wrote:  to  me:  ami  saiel  that  he  coulel  make  the:  names  of 
Mr.  Gladstone  ami  the:  Emperor  Xapoleon  III.  agree  with  the  mystic  number,  666; 
but  he  could  not  make:  the  numerical  value  of  the  letters  in  my  name  fit  in  with  it, 
and  he  wanted  me  to  explain  how  I  accounted  for  that  fact.  "Why,"  I  re-plied,  "  I 
suppose  it  must  be:  because:  I  am  not  the:  beast,  and  that,  therefore,  666  is  not  the 
number  of  my  name  !  " 

Dean  Stanley  once  invited  me  to  dine  with  him  ;  ami  whe:n  1  arrived,  I  fouml 
Mr.  Rogers,  ol  Bishopsgate  ("Hang  Theology"  Rogers),  was  also  a  guest.  \Ye: 
had  a  merry  time,  especially  when  the:  question  of  Disestablishment  was  under 
discussion.  J  he:  Dean  jocularly  said  to  me,  "  \Vhe:n  that  time  comes,  would  you  like 
to  have  the  Abbey  ?"  "No,  thank  you,''  I  replied,  "I  have  not  horses  enough  to 
fill  it."  "Well,"  saiel  the  genial  ecclesiastic,  "  I  eliel  not  think  you  would  have:  made 
that  objection,  but  really  the  place  is  more  adapted  for  stables  than  for  preaching  the 
gospel  to  such  crowels  as  gather  around  you.  But,  seriously,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  if  the: 
Church  is  disestablished,  what  will  become:  of  trie-mi  Rogers  ami  myself?"  "Why, 
I  answered,  "  you  will  have  to  do  as  I  do,  live  upon  what  your  people  give:  you." 
"  Oh,  clear  !  Oh,  dear  !  "  crie:el  both  ge-ntlemen  at  once-,  "  if  we  only  hael  wh.it  our  people 
gave  us,  it  would  be  a  poor  living."  I  encouraged  them  to  do  all  the}-  could  to 


vV>»  C.      I!.      SI'UKCI'.ON  S     AUTOniOr.KAPIIV. 

educate-  their  congregations  in  the  Scriptural  system  of  giving  be-fore  the  day  of 
their  emancipation  arrived. 

A  young  man,  who  had  been  "in  fellowship  with  the  brethren,"  wished  to  join 
the  church  at  the  Tabernacle.  I  knew  that  they  would  not  tyrant  him  a  transfer  to 
us,  so  I  wrote  to  ask  if  there  was  anything  in  his  moral  character  which  should 
prevent  us  from  receiving  him.  The  reply  they  sent  was  laconic,  but  not  particularly 
lucid  : — "The:  man  -  -  has  too  much  of  the  flesh."  When  he  called  to  hear  the 

re-suit  of  his  application,  I  sent  for  a  yard  or  two  of  string,  and  asked  one  of  our 
friends  to  take  my  measure',  and  then  to  take  his.  As  I  found  that  1  had  much  more 
"flesh"  than  he  had,  and  as  his  former  associates  had  nothing  else  to  allege  against 
him,  I  proposed  him  for  church-membership,  and  he:  was  in  due  course  accepted. 

I  went,  on  several  occasions,  to  The  Cottage,  Virginia  Water,  to  visit  Captain 
Welch,  R.N.,  the  former  commander  of  the  Oueen's  yacht.  lie  was  on  board  the 
Alberta  when  the  Mistletoe  was  run  down,  but  I  believe  he  was  free:  from  all 
responsibility  for  the  sad  disaster.  As  we:  were  walking  towards  his  house-,  I  notice-el 
that  he  had  a  number  of  dragons  all  along  the:  eaves.  Pointing  to  one  of  them,  I 
said,  'Ah,  captain!  that  is  what  you  ought  to  have-  had  when  the:  Mistletoe  was 
sunk  by  the  royal  yacht."  "What  do  you  mean,  Mr.  Spurgeon  ? "  he:  enquired. 
"Oh  !  '  I  replied,  "only  that  you  ought  to  have:  had  the:  drag  on  !  " 

Once  when  I  was  going  through  a  gentleman's  garden,  in  company  with  the 
owner,  we:  suddenly  came-  to  a  rosemary  bush,  and  I  playfully  said  to  him,— not 
dreaming  that  my  words  coulel  have  any  pe-rsonal  application, — "Oh,  rosemary  !  you 
know  what  people  say  about  it,  I  suppose?  '  Whe:re  the  rosemary  grows,  the  missus 
is  the:  master.'  '  The  next  time  I  went  there,  I  saw  that  the  bush  had  been  cut 
down  !  Then  I  knew  who  was  the  master  ! 

A  gentleman  said  to  me,  one  day,  "Ah  !  Mr.  Spurgeon,  I  don't  agree  with  you 
about  religion;  I  am  an  agnostic."  "Yes  !  "  I  replied,  "that  is  a  Greek  word,  and 
the  exact  equivalent  is  ignoramus  ;  if  you  like  to  claim  that  title,  you  are  quite 
welcome  to  it."  I  do  not  think  he  cared  to  accept  that  designation,  for  he  thought 

O  G5 

himself  anything  but  an  ignoramus  ! 

•>  <~  O 

I  have  greatly  admired  Mr.  George  Tinworth's  work,  and  have  been  much 
pleased  with  many  of  his  original  interpretations  of  Scripture.  On  one  occasion, 
when  I  called  at  Messrs.  Doulton's,  he  said  to  me,  "  I  wanted  your  help,  the  other 
day,  Mr.  Spurgeon.  Someone  was  here,  looking  at  this  panel, — 'The  enemy  sowing 


C,      II.      SriJKCF.ON  S     AUTOUtOCKAI'IIV.  ^6 1 

«J 

tares.'  You  see  that  I  liave  depicted  'the  enemy  '  sowing  with  his  left  hand;  the 
gentleman  said  that  was  not  correct,  and  I  did  not  know  what  reply  to  give  to  him." 
'  \\  hy,  you  should  have  told  him  that  he  never  saw  Satan  sowing  tares  with  his 
right  hand  !  Mr.  Tinworth  thought  that  would  have  been  a  most  conclusive 
answer,  and  was  sorry  it  had  not  occurred  to  him  at  the'  time. 

(After  that  particular  panel  was  sold,  the  artist  made;  another  upon  the  same 
subject  ;  but  in  that  one  he  reversed  the  position  of  the  sower's  hands,  so  that  his 
critic  would  be  satisfied — at  least  upon  that  point, — if  he  could  see  the  quaint  yet 
suggestive  work  here  represented.) 


The  compilers  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  "  Life"  are  regretfully  aware  that  the  chapter  on  "  P.ire  Fun"  does  not  adequately  set 
forth  the  vivacity  of  his  wit,  or  the  geniality  of  his  humour.  They  cannot  reproduce  the  soft  rich  toius  of  his  voice,  the  men  y 
twinkle  in  his  eye,  or  the  grace  of  gesture  which  accompanied  all  his  utterances.  1  lis  fun  was  so  natural,  so  spontaneous,  and  so 
he  irty,  that  any  cljscription  of  U  fails  to  do  justice  to  the  effu-.t  it  produced  at  the  time.  The  esprit  of  his  jests  and  repartee  cannot 
be  written  down;  it  was  as  fugitive  as  the  colours  of  those  iridescent  fish  of  which  we  read  that,  tlu  moment  they  are  drawn  up 
in  the  nets,  the  rainbow  hues  vanish,  and  their  singular  beauty  has  faded  away. 

Perhaps  it  is  bettor  so.  \Ve  prefer  to  recill  Mr.  Spurgeon's  solidity  of  thought,  steadfastness  of  purpose,  and  unfaltering 
faith  in  (iod  as  the  chief  characteristic.;  of  his  life,— the  firmament  across  which  the  flashes  of  his  wit  would  sometimes  play,  like 
the  harmless  lightning  of  a  summer's  eve. 


CHAPTER     LXXXII. 


g  in  tljt  €>pnt  Sir. 


It  can  be  argued,  with  small  fear  of  refutation,  that  open-air  preaching  is  as  old  as  preaching 
itself.  We  are  at  full  liberty  to  believe  that  Enoch,  "  the  seventh  from  Adam,'  when  he  prophesied, 
asked  for  no  better  pulpit  than  the  hillside,  and  that  Noah,  as  a  preacher  of  righteousness,  was  willing 
to  reason  with  his  cotemporaries  in  the  ship-yard  wherein  his  marvellous  ark  was  built.  Certainly, 
Moses  and  Joshua  found  their  most  convenient  place  for  addressing  vast  assemblies  beneath  the 
unpillared  arch  of  heaven.  Samuel  closed  a  sermon  in  the  field  at  Gilgal  amid  thunder  and  rain,  by 
which  the  Lord  rebuked  the  people,  and  drove  them  to  their  knees.  Elijah  stood  on  Carniel,  and 
challenged  the  vacillating  nation  with  the  question,  "  ]  low  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?"  Jonah, 
whose  spirit  was  somewhat  similar,  lifted  up  his  cry  of  warning  in  the  streets  of  Nineveh,  and  in  all  her 
places  of  concourse-  gave-  forth  the  warning  utterance,  "Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown!" 
To  hear  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  "all  the  people  gathered  themselves  together  as  one  man  into  the  street 
that  was  before  the  water  gate.''  Indeed,  we  liud  examples  of  open-air  preaching  everywhere  around 
us  in  the  records  of  the  Old  Testament. 

It  may  suffice  us.  however,  to  go  back  as  far  as  the  origin  of  our  own  holy  faith,  and  there  we 
hear  the  lorerunner  of  the  Saviour  crying  in  the  wilderness,  and  lilting  up  his  voice  from  the  rivers 
bank.  Our  Lord  Himself,  who  is  yet  more  our  Pattern,  delivered  the  larger  proportion  of  His  sermons 
on  the  mountain's  side,  or  by  the  sea-shore,  or  in  the  streets.  He  was,  to  all  intents  anil  purposes, 
an  open-air  preacher.  He  did  not  remain  silent  in  the  synagogue,  but  He  was  equally  at  home  in  the 
Held.  We  have  no  discourse  ol  His  on  record  delivered  in  the  Chapel  Royal,  but  we  have  the  sermon 
on  the  mount,  and  the  sermon  in  the  plain  ;  so  that  the  very  earliest  and  most  Divine  kind  of  preaching 
was  practised  out  ol  doors  by  Him  who  "spake  as  never  man  spake."  There  were  gatherings  of  His 
disciples,  alter  His  decease,  within  walls,  especially  that  in  the  upper  room;  but  the  j  reaching  was 
even  then  most  frequently  in  the  court  of  the  temple,  or  in  such  other  open  spaces  as  were  available. 
— C.  II.  S.,  in  {t  Lectures  to  my  StnJcnts." 

I"  I  had  my  choice  of  a  place  for  preaching  out  of  doors,  1  should 
prefer  to  front  a  rising  ground,  or  an  open  spot  bounded  at  some 
little  distance  by  a  wall.  Of  course:,  there  must  be  sufficient  space 
to  allow  of  the  congregation  assembling  between  the  pulpit  and 
the  limiting  object  in  front  ;  but  I  like  to  see  an  end,  and  not 
to  shout  into  boundless  space.  I  do  not  know  a  prettier  site  for 
a  sermon  than  the  one  which  I  have  many  times  occupied  in  the  grounds  of  my 
friend,  Mr.  Duncan,  at  "  Benmore."  It  was  a  level  sweep  of  lawn,  backed  by  rising- 
terraces  covered  with  fir  trees.  The  people  could  either  occupy  the  seats  below,  or 
drop  down  upon  the  grassy  banks,  as  best  comported  with  their  comfort  ;  and  thus 
I  had  part  of  my  congregation  in  rising  galleries  above  me,  and  the  rest  in  the  area 
around  me.  My  voice  readily  ascended,  and  I  conceive  that,  if  the  people  had  been 
seated  up  the  hill  for  half-a-mile,  they  would  have  been  able  to  hear  me  with  ease. 
I  should  suppose  that  Wesley's  favourite  spot  at  (iwennap  Pit  must  be  somewhat 
after  the  same  order.  Amphitheatres  and  hillsides  are  always  favourite  spots  with 
preachers  in  the  fields,  and  their  advantages  will  be  at  once  evident. 


o0_|  c.    ii.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Fresh  iiir,  and  plenty  ot  it,  is  a  grand  tiling  for  every  mortal  man,  woman,  and 
child.  I  have  preached  twice,  on  a  Sabbath  day,  at  "  Blairmore,"  not  tar  from 
"  Benmore, "  on  a  little  height  by  the  side  of  the  sea;  and,  after  discoursing  with 
all  my  might  to  large  congregations,  to  be  counted  by  thousands,  I  have  not  felt 
one-half  so  much  exhausted  as  I  often  am  when  addressing  a  few  hundreds  in  some 
horrible  "black  hole  of  Calcutta,"  called  a  chapel.  I  trace  my  freshness  and 
freedom  from  lassitude  at  "  Blairmore"  to  the  fact  that  the  windows  could  not  be  shut 
down  by  persons  afraid  of  draughts,  and  that  the  roof  was  as  high  as  the  heavens 
are  above  the  earth.  My  conviction  is,  that  a  man  could  preach  three  or  tour  times 
on  a  Sabbath,  out  of  doors,  with  less  fatigue  than  would  be  occasioned  by  one 
discourse  delivered  in  an  impure  atmosphere,  heated  and  poisoned  by  human  breath, 
ami  carefully  preserved  from  every  refreshing  infusion  ot  natural  air. 

I  am  persuaded  that,  the  more  of  open-air  preaching  there  is  in  London,  the 
better.  If  it  should  become  a  nuisance  to  some  people,  it  will  be  a  blessing  to 
others,  if  properly  conducted.  If  it  be  the  gospel  which  is  spoken,  and  if  the  spirit 
of  the  preacher  be  one  of  love  and  truth,  the  results  cannot  be  doubted  :  the  bread 
cast  upon  the  waters  will  be.  found  again  after  many  days.  The  truth  must, 
however.be  preached  in  a  manner  worth  the  hearing,  for  mere  noise-making  is  an 
evil  rather  than  a  benefit.  I  know  a  family  almost  driven  out  of  their  senses  by  the 
hideous  shouting  of  monotonous  exhortations,  and  the  howling  of  "  Sate  in  the  arms 
of  Jesus,"  near  their  door  every  Sabbath  afternoon  by  the  year  together.  They  are 
zealous  Christians,  and  would  willingly  help  their  tormentors  if  they  saw  the 
slightest  probability  of  usefulness  from  the  violent  bawling;  but,  as  they  seldom  see 
a  hearer,  and  do  not  think  that  what  is  spoken  would  do  any  good  it  it  were  heard, 
they  complain  that  they  are,  compelled  to  lose  their  few  hours  of  quiet  because  two 
good  men  think  it  their  duty  to  perform  a  noisy  but  perfectly  useless  service.  I 
once  saw  a  man  preaching  with  no  hearer  but  a  dog,  which  sat  upon  its  tail,  and 
looked  up  very  reverently  while  its  master  orated.  There-  were  no  people-  at  the 
windows,  nor  passing  by  ;  but  the.  brother  and  his  dog  were  at  their  post,  whether 
the  people  would  hear  or  whether  they  would  forbear.  Once,  also,  I  passed  an 
earnest  declaimer,  whose  hat  was  on  the  ground  before  him,  filled  with  papers,  and 
there  was  not  even  a  dog  for  an  audience,  nor  anyone  within  hearing,  yet  did  he 
"  waste  his  sweetness  on  the  desert  air."  I  hope  it  relieved  his  own  mind. 
Really,  it  must  be  viewed  as  an  essential  part  of  a  sermon  that  somebody  should 
hear  it  ;  it  cannot  be  a  great  benefit  to  the  world  to  have  sermons  preached  in  vacno. 

Many  years  ago,  I  preached  to  enormous  assemblies  in  King  Edward's  Road, 
Hackney  (see  Vol.  II.,  page  92),  which  was  then  open  fields.  On  those  occasions, 
the  rush  was  perilous  to  life  and  limb,  and  there  seemed  no  limit  to  the  throngs. 


C.      H.      STURGEON'S     AUTOmOCRAl'IIV.  365 

Hall  the:  number  would  have  been  safer.  That  open  space  lias  vanished,  and  it  is 
the  same  with  fields  at  Brixton,  where,  in  years  gone  by.  it  was  delightful  to  see 
the  assembled  crowds  listening  to  the  \Yord.  Burdened  with  the  rare  trouble  ot 
drawing  too  many  together,  I  have  been  compelled  to  abstain  from  these  exercises 
in  London,  but  not  from  any  lessened  sense  of  their  importance.  With  the 
Tabernacle  always  full,  I  have  as  large  a  congregation  as  I  desire  at  home,  and 
therefore  do  not  preach  outside  except  in  the  country  ;  but  for  those  ministers  whose 
area  under  cover  is  but  small,  and  whose  congregations  are  thin,  the  open  air  is  the 
remedy,  whether  in  London  or  in  the  provinces. 

My  friend,  Mr.  Abraham,  once  produced  for  me  a  grand  cathedral  in  Oxford 
shire.  The  remains  of  it  are  still  called  "  Spurgeon's  Tabernacle,"  and  may  be  seen 
near  Minster  Lovell,  in  the  form  of  a  quadrilateral  of  oaks.  Originally,  it  was  the 
bean  ideal  of  a  preaching-place,  for  it  was  a  cleared  spot  in  the  thick  forest  of 
\Vych\vood,  and  was  reached  by  roads  cut  through  the  dense  underwood.  I  shall 
never  forget  those  ''  alleys  green  "  and  the  verdant  walls  which  shut  them  in.  When 
you  reached  the  inner  temple,  it  consisted  of  a  large:  square,  out  of  which  the  under 
wood  and  smaller  trees  h  id  been  cut  away,  while  a  sufficient  number  of  young  oaks 
had  been  left  to  rise  to  a  considerable  height,  and  then  overshadow  us  with  their 
branches.  Here  was  a  really  magnificent  cathedral,  with  pillars  and  arches  :  a  temple 
not  made  with  hands,  of  which  we  might  truly  say,— 

"  Father,  Thy  hand 

Hath  reared  these  venerable  columns,  Thou 
Didst  weave  this  verdant  roof." 

I  have  never,  either  at  home  or  on  the  Continent,  seen  architecture  which  could  rival 
my  cathedral.  "  Lo,  we  heard  of  it  at  Lphratah  :  we  found  it  in  the:  fields  of  the 
wood."  1  he  blue  sky  was  visible  through  our  clerestory,  and  from  the  great  window 
at  the  further  end,  the  sun  smiled  upon  us  toward  evening.  It  was  grand,  indeed, 
to  worship  thus  beneath  the  vaulted  firmament,  beyond  the  sound  of  city  hum, 
where  everything  around  us  ministered  to  quiet  fellowship  with  God.  That  spot  is 
now  cleared,  and  the  place  of  our  assembly  has  been  selected  at  a  little  distance 
from  it.  It  is  of  much  the  same  character,  only  that  my  boundary  walls  of  forest 
growth  have  disappeared,  to  give  place  to  an  open  expanse  of  ploughed  fields. 
Only  the  pillars  and  the  roof  of  my  temple  remain  ;  but  I  am  still  glad,  like  the 
Druids,  to  worship  among  the  oak  trees.  One  year,  a  dove  had  built  her  nest  just 
above  my  head  ;  and  she  continued  flying  to  and  fro,  to  feed  her  young,  while  the 
sermon  proceeded.  \Vrhy  not  ?  Where  should  she  be  more  at  home  than  where  the 
Lord  of  love  and  Prince  of  peace  was  adored  ?  It  is  true,  my  arched  cathedral  is 
not  waterproof,  and  other  showers  besides  those  of  grace  have  sometimes  descended 
upon  the  congregation  ;  but  this  has  its  advantages,  for  it  makes  us  the  more  grateful 


3  06 


C.      II.      SITKCKON  S     Al'TOr.IOr.KAI'HY. 


in 


when   the   day  is   propitious,    and  the   very  precariousness   ol    the   weather  excites 
large  amount  of  earnest  prayer. 

I  once  preached  a  sermon,  in  the  open  air,  in  haying  time,  during  a  violent  stor 
of  rain.  The  text  was,  "  lie  shall  come  down  like  rain  upon  the  mown  grass:  as 
showers  that  water  the  earth,"  and  surely  we.  had  the  blessing  as  well  as  the  incon 
venience.  I  was  sufficiently  wet,  and  my  congregation  must  have  been  drenched  : 
but  they  stood  it  out,  and  I  never  heard  that  anybody  was  the  worse  in  health, 
though,  I  thank  God,  1  have  heard  of  souls  brought  to  Jesus  under  that  discourse. 
Once  in  a  while,  and  under  strong  excitement,  such  things  do  no  one  any  harm  ;  but 
we  are.  not  to  expect  miracles,  nor  wantonly  venture  upon  a  course  of  procedure 
which  mi'dit  kill  the  sieklv,  and  lav  the  foundations  of  disease  in  the  strong. 


CHEDDAR    CLIFFS. 


I  well  remember  preaching  between  the  Cheddar  Cliffs.  What  a  noble  position  ! 
What  beauty  and  sublimity  !  But  there  was  great  danger  from  falling  pieces  of 
stone,  moved  by  the  people  who  sat  upon  the  higher  portions  of  the  cliff,  and  hence 
I  would  not  choose  such  a  spot  again.  Concluding  a  discourse  in  that  place,  I  called 


C.      II.      SITRtJKOX  S      AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Upon  those  mighty  rocks  to  bear  witness  that  I  had  preached  the  gospel  to  the 
people,  and  to  be  a  testimony  against  them  at  the  last  great  day,  if  they  rejected  the 
message.  Many  years  afterwards,  I  heard  of  a  person  to  whom  that  appeal  was 
made  useful  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

(Pastor  T.  1).  Field,  now  of  Crewe,  has  kindly  furnished  the  following  particulars 
relating  to  that  memorable;  visit  to  Cheddar,  on  September  10,  1862.  The.  spot 
chosen  for  the  afternoon  service  was  a  natural  amphitheatre  at  the  entrance;  to  the 
cliffs,  and  it  was  estimated  that  at  least  ten  thousand  persons  were,  present.  A 
temporary  platform  had  been  erected  for  the  preacher,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  commenced 
the  sen-vice  by  saying,  "  Le:t  us  make  these;  old  rocks  resound  te>  the;  praise  of  God." 
The  first  hymn  was,— 

"All   people  that    on   earth   do  dwell:" 

and  another  that  was  sung  was,— 

•'Rock  ol  at^es,  cleft  for  inc.'' 

The;  text — John  xiv.  6,  "  I  am  the;  way,  the;  truth,  and  the;  life;  :  no  man  cemieth 
unto  the;  Father,  but  by  Me;  ;  "  —  was  written  on  a  gre;at  scroll,  and  fastened  to  the- 
side  of  a  house;,  so  that  the  whole;  congregation  could  se:e:  it.  About  fifteen  hundred 
pe;rsons  remained  to  tea  in  the;  Baptist  Chape-1  and  burial-ground  ;  and,  at  the;  evening 
service,  held  in  a  tent  on  Bridge  Hill  just  above;  the:  cliffs,  the:re;  was  again  an 
enormous  crowd.  The;  se:rmon  was  upon  "  The;  lifting  up  of  the;  benved  down," 
the;  text  being  taken  fre>m  Luke;  xiii.  11-— 13.  One;  sentence  in  the:  discourse  has 
been  remembered  even  to  the:  present  day:  -"All  the  devils  in  he:ll  could  not  make: 
the:  woman  crookeel  again  after  the  Lorel  had  made  her  straight." 

Mr.  Held  closes  his  account  of  the:  notable:  day  by  saying,  "Such  cmwds  have: 
never  been  see:n  in  Cheddar  since  ;  and  the  good  folks  of  that  little  town  consider 
that  they  have  bee:n  favoured  abeive:  main',  for  the:  prince:  e>f  preachers  has  been  then;. 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  visit  has  hael  great  influence:  upon  the:  place:  ;  and  fmm  that  time:  the: 
Baptist  community  there  has  bee-n  and  still  is  the:  most  influential  church  for 
miles  round.") 

It  would  be  ve:ry  easy  to  prove:  that  revivals  of  religion  have:  usually  been 
accompanied,  if  ne>t  caused,  by  a  considerable  amount  of  preaching  emt  e>f  doors,  or 
in  unusual  places.  The:  first  avowexl  proclamation  of  Prote-stant  de>ctrine:  was  almexst 
necessarily  in  the  open  air,  e>r  in  buildings  which  were:  ne>t  dedicated  to  worship,  lor 
these  were  in  the:  hands  of  the;  Papacy.  True,  Wycliffe  for  a  while  preached  the 
gospel  in  the:  church  e>f  Lutterworth  ;  and  IIuss,  and  Jemme,  and  Savonarola  fe>r  a 
time  delivered  semi-gospel  addresses  in  connection  with  the  ecclesiastical  arrange 
ments  around  them  ;  but  when  the:y  began  more  fully  te>  know  the  gospel,  and  to 
publish  it  abroad,  they  were:  driven  to  find  other  platforms.  The  Reformation,  when 


C.      IT.     RPURGEON S 

yet  a  babe,  was  like  the  newborn  Christ,  and  had  not  where  to  lay  its  head  ;  but  a 
company  of  men,  comparable  to  the  heavenly  host,  proclaimed  it  under  the  open 
heavens,  where  shepherds  and  common  people  heard  them  gladly.  Throughout 
England,  we  have  several  trees  still  remaining,  which  are  called  "gospel  oaks." 
I  have-  myself  preached  at  Addlestone,  in  Surrey,  under  the  far-spreading  boughs  of 
an  ancient  oak,  beneath  which  John  Knox  is  said  to  have  proclaimed  the  gospel 
during  his  sojourn  in  England. 


(Concerning  the  proceedings  on  the  occasion  oi  Mr.  Spurgeon's  visit  to 
Addlestone,  Pastor  R.  Shindler  writes:  -"It  was  on  July  12,  1872.  Mr.  Edward 
Leach  was  then  Pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church  there,  and  a  larger  chapel  was  needed 
for  his  increasing  congregation.  In  the  afternoon,  Mr.  Spurgeon  laid  the  memorial 
stone,  and  gave  an  address  upon  '  The  Romewarcl  tendency  of  the  Established 
Church,  and  the  duty  of  Nonconformists  in  relation  thereto.'  The  force,  point,  and 
pungency  of  his  remarks  on  this  important  theme  can  well  be  conceived  by  those 
who  knew  him,  and  they  would  be  even  more  pertinent  at  the  present  time.  In  the 


C.      II.      STURGEON'S     AUTOmor.KAPMY.  369 

evening,  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached,  under  the;  Crouch  ();ik,  from  Matt,  ix.  36,  his 
theme  being,  'The  tenderness  of  the  Lord  Jesus.'  The  old  oak  had  not  then, 
we  believe,  been  enclosed.  It  now  stands  within  the  grounds  of  Crouch  Oak  Mouse, 
the  residence  of  Mr.  V.  J.  Marnham,  J.P.,  who  kindly  supplied  the  photograph  from 
which  the  illustration  on  page  368  has  been  made;.  The  tree  was  once  within  the 
bounds  ol  \\  indsor  Forest,  and  various  traditions  and  legends  associate  with  it 
the  names  of  \VyclilTe,  \Vhitefield,  and  Wesley,  who  are  all  said  to  have;  preached 
beneath  its  wide-spreading  branches.  Mr,  Spurgeon's  audience;  was  gathered  from 
many  miles  around,  and  his  visit  marks  an  era  in  the  history  of  this  growing  suburb 
ol  the  town  of  Chertsey.") 

I  preached  at  Bristol,  many  years  ago,  in  the  open  air  ;  and  the  service  was 
specially  interesting  to  me  from  the  fact  that  I  had  a  repetition  in  my  own  experience 
of  the  scene  which  Air.  \Yhilefield  had  there,  witnessed  long  before.  He  said,  con 
cerning  one.  of  his  sermons  to  the  colliers  at  Kingswood  : — "The  first  discovery  of 
their  being  aliected  was,  seeing  the  white  gutters  made  by  their  tears,  which  plenti 
fully  fell  down  their  black  cheeks,  for  they  had  come,  to  the  service  straight  from  the 
coal-pits."  I  also  had  a  crowd  of  sailors  and  colliers — men  with  black  faces — to 
listen  to  me,  and  when  I  began  to  talk  to  them  about  Christ's  redeeming  work,  I  saw 
the  tears  streaming  down  their  cheeks  ;  they  put  up  their  hands,  as  if  to  brush 
away  something  from  their  laces,  but  really  it  was  in  order  to  hide  their  tears. 
It  was  an  affecting  sight  to  behold  those  rough  men  broken  down  under  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel,  and  I  could  fully  sympathize  with  what  Air.  \Yhiteficld  wrote,  con 
cerning  similar  services:—  'The  open  firmament  above  me,  the  prospect  of  the 
adjacent  fields,  with  the  sight  of  thousands  and  thousands  of  people,  some  in  coaches, 
some  on  horseback,  and  some  in  the  trees,  and,  often,  all  melted  to  tears, — to  which 
sometimes  was  added  the  solemnity  of  the  approaching  evening, — this  was  almost 
too  much  lor  me  to  bear  ;  and,  occasionally,  it  quite  overcame  me." 


Supplementing  Mr  Spurgeon's  own  records  of  preaching  in  the  open  air,  many 
friends,  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  have  supplied  reminiscences  of  services 
which  they  are  never  likely  to  forget  ;  but  only  a  few  of  these  can  be  inserted  here. 
One  enthusiastic  Welsh  brother  has  compiled  a  list  of  the  outdoor  gatherings  in 
Wales  addressed  by  the  clear  Pastor.  Many  of  them  must  have  been  very  notable 
occasions  ;  the  congregations  were  so  large  that  there  was  great  difficulty  in 
reckoning,  with  exactness,  the  number  of  hearers.  Of  one  assembly,  it  is  said  that 
'Mr.  Spurgeon  calculated  that  28,000  persons  were  present;"  and  of  another, 
"the  people  estimated  the  crowd  at  30,000  to  35,000;  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  25,000." 

/    T, 


-,~0  c.    ir.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPIIV. 

A  memorable  incident,  connected  with  an  open-air  service  at  Rowland's  Castle, 
near  liavant,  has  only  recently  been  reported  by  Rev.  1).  A.  Doudney,  the  Editor  of 
The  Gospel  Magazine,  although  it  occurred  forty  years  ago.  On  July  12,  1859,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  preached  twice,  in  a  beautiful  valley,  to  large  congregations  ;  and,  towards 
the  end  of  the  evening  sermon,  he  made  a  powerful  appeal  to  his  hearers  in  the 
manner  that  Mr.  Doudney  thus  describes  :—"  The  valley  in  which  we  were 
assembled  was  a  lovely  one.  It  was  surrounded  by  hills  clothed  with  woods  and 
verdure,  and  on  that  evening  the  atmosphere  was  perfectly  calm  and  still.  The  sun, 
which  had  been  shining  brightly  all  day,  was  sinking  in  the  West  ;  and  the  large 
concourse  of  people,  listening  with  fixed  attention  to  the  earnest  pleadings  of  the 
younq-  preacher,  made  altogether  a  scene  which  one  could  not  easily  forget  ;  but 
although  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  spoken  with  considerable,  force  and  energy  during  the 
day,  and  used  his  noble  voice  so  that  every  one  of  his  auditors  must  have  heard  him 
distinctly,  I,  for  one,  had  not  noticed  that  there  was  a  remarkable  echo  at  the  spot. 
The  preacher,  however,  had  evidently  observed  it,  and  he  used  the  fact  in  a  most 
effective  way.  When  he  came  to  the  close  of  his  last  appeal,  he  exclaimed,  with 
great  deliberation  and  impressiveness,  '  Yea,  even  Nature  herself  confirms  and 
repeats  these  gracious  invitations,  for  she.  too  says,  again  and  again,' — here-  he  raised 
his  voice  to  its  highest  pitch,  and  shouted  with  wonderful  power  the  words — 'Come, 
—  Come, — COMK.'  And,  instantly,  amidst  the  breathless  silence;  of  the  congregation, 
the  words  were  echoed  from  the  hills  around,  again  and  again,  until  they  softly  died 
away  in  the  distance, — Come, — Come, — Come, — Come, — Come.'  A  thrill,  like  an 
electric  shock,  passed  through  the  audience,  and  probably  most  oi  those  who  were 
present  will  remember  the  circumstance  as  long  as  they  live." 

Pastor  W.  Cuff  writes,  as  follows,  concerning  a  service  in  a  meadow  at 
Naunton,  on  the  Cots\vold  Hills  : — "  I  rode  from  Cheltenham,  on  horseback,  to  hear 
dear  Mr.  Spurgeon.  I  had  not  then  long  been  converted,  and  had  only  just 
begun  to— 

o 

"'Tell  to  sinners  round 
What  a  dear  Saviour  I  had  found.' 

"It  was  in  1864,  in  the  midst  of  his  abounding  labours  and  unparalleled  popularity. 
There  were  thousands  of  people  present,  inside  and  outside  the  huge  tent.  A  farm- 
wao-o-on  was  his  rustic  pulpit,  and  his  text  was,  Acts  xiv.  9,  10.  The  dear  man  was 

**>  c> 

in  one  of  his  happiest  moods,  and  all  the  wheels  of  his  mind  and  heart  were  oiled. 
Oh,  how  he  did  preach!  His  rich,  melodious  voice  seemed  more  mellow  and 
musical  than  ever  as  it  sounded  and  swelled  over  the  audience  in  sweetest  cadences, 
rising  and  falling  in  rousing  and  melting  tones.  It  swayed  and  moved  the  mass  of 
people,  and  rang  round  the  meadow,  and  echoed  back  from  the  little  hills  above  the 


C.      II.      SPURGEON  S     AUTOlilOCRAl'IIV.  3/1 

valley  with  majesty  and  power  both  human  and  Divine,  for  the  Lord  was  there-, 
speaking  through  1 1  is  beloved  servant.  It  was  Heaven  on  earth  to  be  there.  Ah,  me  ! 
It  is  only  a  memory  now  ;  but  it  is  very  vivid,  and  it  abides  amongst  the  most 
precious  treasures  oi  my  life.  It  stirred  my  soul  to  its  very  depths,  and  I  there  and 
then  vowed  that  I  would  preach  Jesus  Christ  as  he  did  it  that  could  be  possible 
to  me.  Sinners  must  have  been  converted  on  the  spot,  and  I  know  that  saints  were 
blessed. 

"  Mr.  Harrald  will  remember  the  truly  wonderful  open-air  service  at  Stow- 
market,  in  Suffolk.  It  was  held  in  the  garden  grounds  of  Mr.  Manning  Prentice. 
The  trees  were  full  of  people  ;  and  they  looked  like  big  birds  roosting  on  the 
branches.  I  think  it  was  in  1868,  and  I  know  the;  text  was,  'With  1 1  is  stripes  we 
arc:  healed.'  It  was  a  marvellous  sermon. 

"  I  could  not  help  writing  this  letter,  as  my  heart  is  lull.  I  loved  our  glorified 
President  from  the  first  time  I  met  him,  and  I  have  always  said  that,  under  God,  I 
owe  to  him  everything  I  have  done  in  the:  Lord's  work.  The  Shoreditch  Tabernacle: 
is  his  far  more  than  it  is  mine,  for  it  would  never  have  been  built  but  tor 
C.  II.  Spurgeon.  What  could  I  have  been,  or  done,  but  for  the  Pastors'  College? 
Those  who  knew  me  in  my  early  days  know  best  what  the  College:  eliel  tor  me.  I 
can  only  lovingly  and  gratefully  revere  the  memory  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  bless  the 
Lord  that  I  ever  knew  him." 

One  other  notable  open-air  service  just  comes  within  the  period  covered  by  the: 
present  volume  ;  it  is  specially  memorable  because  of  the  very  tender  way  in  which 
Mr.  Spurgeon's  large  Scotch  congregation  bade  him  farewell.  The  illustration 
on  page  372  is  reproduced  from  the  photograph  presented  by  the  dear  Pastor  to 
his  private  secretary  on  his  return  from  Scotland,  and  the  incident  is  described 
by  Pastor  A.  G.  Short,  now  of  Ilerne  Hill,  who  writes: — "I  was  at  Rothesay, 
spending  a  brief  holiday,  when  our  ever-beloved  President  preached  there  in  18/8. 
The  mere  fact  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  announced  to  preach,  created  great  interest 
all  along  the  Clyde  ;  and  in  Rothesay,  as  the  day  fixed  on  (Sunday,  July  28,)  drew 
near,  every  scrap  of  information  concerning  the  proposed  service  was  greedily 
devoured.  On  the  Saturday,  Bute's  bright  little  capital  received  a  large  temporary 
addition  to  its  summer  population.  Many  yachts,  too,  came  and  anchored  in  the 
bay.  Mr.  Duncan's  yacht,  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  on  board,  arrived  about  3  p.m.  ;  and 
in  a  few  minutes  the  word  had  gone  all  over  Rothesay,  '  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  in  the 
bay.'  Directly  on  his  arrival,  our  dear  Brother  Crabb  (who  is  still  the  respected 
Pastor  of  the  Rothesay  Baptist  Church)  and  I  went  off  in  a  boat  to  greet  our 
President,  and  to  tell  him  what  preparations  had  been  made  for  the  morrow. 

"The    next    evening,    Mr.    Spurgeon    preached,    with    marvellous    power,    to    a 


^2  C.      II.     bPURGKONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

cono-reo-ation    supposed    to    number   from    fifteen    to   twenty   thousand    persons.       1 

<"">         <""> 

need  hardly  say  that  the  service  was  greatly  enjoyed  by  the  great  company  of 
worshippers.  When  it  was  over,  the  dear  preacher  rested  for  a  while  in  the  Provost's 
garden,  to  allow  the  crowds  to  disperse  ;  but  they  evidently  did  not  intend  to  leave 
him  quite  in  that  fashion.  As  they  knew  that  he  would  have  to  go  in  a  boat  to 
reach  the  yacht,  they  gathered  in  thousands  along  the  sea-wall.  When  Mr.  Spurgeon 
stepped  into  the  boat,  and  the  sailors  began  to  ply  their  oars,  as  one  looked  along 
the  crescent-shaped  front,  it  seemed  as  if  every  person  in  that  vast  gathering  had 


brought  a  white  handkerchief  for  the  special  purpose:  ol   waving  it  in   his  honour.      I 
have  witnessed   many  touching  scenes  in    my  day,  but    1    do    not   think   I    ever  saw 
anything  more  impressive  than  the  sight  of  those  thousands  oi   true-hearted  Scotch 
people  saying,  by  their  silent  action,  better  than  they  could  have  said  it  in  words,— 
'  Accept  our  heartiest  thanks  for  your  sermon,  and  may  God  bless  you  at  all  times  ! 
That  was  Scotland's  way  of  bidding  a  Sabbath  adieu  to  the  great  and  good  man  she 
loved    so  well  ;   and  not  until  he  was   on  board  the    yacht   did    the    farewell   signals 
cease  to  flutter  in  the  evening  breeze." 


ILLUSTRATIONS    IN    VOL.    III. 


FACMMILK  OK   M  KM  OKI. \  L  CARD   ISSUED   IN    1892 

C.    II.  STURGEON   BAPTI/ING  AT  THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE                               9 

THE   METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE.     VIEW   FROM   THE  PULPIT...                                   '3 

NEW   PARK   STREET  CHAPEL  AS   IT  is  NOW   (1899)  14 

C.     II.     Sl'l'RGKON    AM)     HIS     DEACONS,     1856             ...  '5 

PASTORS  AND   DEACONS  OK  THE   METROPOLITAN  TAUKRNACLK,    1878  ...  19 

METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE   FLDKRS        ...          ...  ...                                                25 

PASTOR  JOHN  COLLINS 

PASTOR  THOMAS   NESS        .........  2() 

PASTOR  J.   A.   SPURGEON    ...  31 

MRS.    P>ARTLKTT       .........  3° 

OLD   LONDON    BRIDGE,   WITH    "TRAITOR:-'      HEADS  ON   TOWI-:R  \() 

"A  GORILLA   LECTURING  ON   MR.   SPURGEON"  ...  51 
FACSIMILE  OK  COYER  OK   "SERMONS   IN   CANDLES 

DR.    MERLE   D'AuuiGNi;     

C.    II.  SPURGEON  AS  "GULLIVER"  >S4 
C.    II.   SPURGEON  AS   "  GREAT-HEART  " 

C.    II.   SPURGEON   PREACHING   IN  THE  AGRICULTURAL  HALL,    ISLINGTON                     95 

THE    DKAIL'S    BRIDGE,   ST.   GOTHAKD   PASS  9lS 

THE    HOTEL  IN  VENICE  WHERE  WE  STAYED  99 

THE  GRAND  CANAL,   VENICE          ...  99 

THE  GREAT  ALETSCH   GLACIER     ...  IO7 

THE   MARJKKKN   SEE           ...  IO<S 

THE  STAUBBACH  AND  VALLEY  OK   LAUTERBRUNNEN  109 

MENTONE,  AS  SEEN  FROM   DR.    BENNKT'S  GARDEN  116 

THE  CEMETERY,   MENTONE            ...  IJ7 

THE   LADIES'   ROOM,    METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  ...          ...                                  13° 


^4  ILLUSTRATIONS     IN    VOL.     III. 

PAGE 

PASTOR   FRANK    II.   WHITE             ...          ...          ...  '31 

PASTOR  ARCHIBALD  G.    BRO\YN     ... 
PASTOR  C.    B.   SAWDAY       ...... 

DR.  GILL'S  PULPIT 

FARLY  TUTORS  OF  TIII-:   PASTORS'  COLLEGE  : 

VICE-PRESIDENT  J.  A.  SPUKGEON  '41 

PROFESSOR   DAVID  GRACEY             ...  '41 

PROFESSOR  A.   FERGUSSON             ...  '41 

PROFESSOR  W.   R.   SELWAV            ...  '4' 
THE   DESK-ROOM,   PASTORS'  COLLEGE  (WHERE  THE   LATER   "LECTURES  TO  MY 

STUDENTS"  WERE   DELIVERED)      ...  '42 

MR.   SELWAV'S   LECTURE-ROOM       ...  '47 

Tiii'    PASTORS'  COLLEGE,  TEMPLE  STREET,  SOUTIIWARK  '5- 

"  THE   Kix<;  OF  TIII-:  COLPORTEI:RS  J^0 

METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  COLPORTAGE   Di  r<Yr,  COLLEGE    BUILDINGS  163 

METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  COLPORTEURS  AND  SECRETARY    ...  166 

MEMORIAL    WINDOW    IN    ORPHANAGE     BOARD-ROOM,    COMMEMORATING  THE 

FOUNDING   OF  TIII-:    INSTITUTION     ...          ...  !/* 

THE   BOYS'   HOUSES,   STOCKAYELL  ORPHANAGE    ...  i73 

THE   INFIRMARY,   STOCKWELL  ()RriiANA(;i-:  ]  74 

TRUSTEES  AND   HEAD-MASTER  OF  THE  ORPHANAGE  J/6 

THE   Xi-w  "  HELENSBURGH    HOUSE"  (FRONT  \'n:\v)  1^1 

A  PEEP  AT  THE   NEW  GARDEN uS9 

HUSBAND  AND  WIFE  IN  THE   NIGHTINGALE   LANE  GARDEN      ...  19° 

C.     H.    SrURGEON    ON    THE    BALCONY    OF     THE    NEW    "  HELENSBURGII      HOUSE  '  191 

FACSIMILE  OF   DRAWING  BY  T.    STURGEON,    1872  193 

"Tin-:  QUESTION   OAK"  AT   "  WESTWOOD  "  ]  95 

TREE    ON    CLAPHAM    COMMON,   WHERE   C.    II.   SPURGEON    PREACHED  IN  1859        199 

MR.   J.   L.   KEYS      ...                                   201 

GEORGE   LOVEJOY    ...          ....          ...          ...                                   •••          •••  •••        2O2 

IN  A  GONDOLA  ON  THE  GRAND  CANAL   ...          ...  •••        2°9 

ST.    MARK'S  CATHEDRAL,   VENICE              ...  2Io 


ILLUSTRATIONS     IN    VOL.  III.  3/5 

PAGE 

"Tin-:  CITY  OF  THE  SEVEN   HILLS"       ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  212 

THE  CAPITOL,   ROME          ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  213 

BAS-RELIEF  ox  THE  ARCH  OF  Trrrs,    ROME      ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  213 

INTERIOR  OF  THE   COLOSSEUM.    ROME       ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  214 

ST.    PETER'S,    ROME             ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  216 

SANTA  SCALA,    ROME           ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  219 

BAITISTERV  IN  CATACOMB  OF  ST.   PON/IANO,    ROME  ...  ...  ...  ...  221 

A    COLUMBARIUM,     RoME       ...              ...              ...              ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  222 

Tm-:    BAY  OK   NAPLES, — PAINTED   I:Y   DR.   JOP.SOX  ...  ...  ...  ...  224 

THE   HOUSE  AND  GARDEN  OF   DIOMED,    POMPEII  ...  ...  ...  ...  227 

THE   HOUSE  OF  SALLUST,    POMPEII           ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  228 

THE  AMPHITHEATRE,    POMPEII       ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  229 

THE   FORUM,    POMPEII         ...          ...          ... .          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  229 

THE  STREET  or    MERCURY,    POMPEII         ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  230 

PANORAMA  OF   NAPLES         ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  233 

ANCIENT   FOUNTAIN,    POMPEII         ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  •••  234 

COLOURED   FACSIMILES  OF    ILLUSTRATIONS    Si-: NT    HOME    FROM    ROME    I:Y    MR. 

SPURGE ON  :— 

Tin-:   POPE'S  COACHMAN, 

A   BRIGAND'S  WIFE, 

A   FUNERAL  ATTENDANT. 

A   FUNERAL   IN   ROME             ...          ...  ...              (to  face  fwgf)  24° 

REDUCED   FACSIMILE  OF   ILLUMINATED  ADDRESS    PRESENTED  TO  THE    PASTOR, 

MARCH   30,    1875      ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  250 

THE   DOLE  AT  ST.   CROSS   HOSPITAL,   WINCHESTER  ...  ...  ...  ...  260 

BEAUFORT  TOWER  AND   HALL  OF  ST.   CROSS      ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  261 

BRETHREN  OF  ST.   CROSS   ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  261 

WINCHESTER  COLLEGE         ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  262 

"  WOTTON   HATCH"-— A   FAVOURITE    RESTING-PLACE  OK    MR.   SPUKGEON  ...  263 

IN  THE   FOREST       ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  266 

C.    II.   SPURGEON  ON   HIS  THIRTY-NINTH    BIRTHDAY  ...  ...  ...  ...  268 

NETLEY  ABBEY. — THE  CLOISTER  COURT              ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  270 


ILLUSTRATIONS    IN    VOL.    III. 

PAGE 

"Tin-:   Ri:n   LION"   INN,   AT  OCKLEY 
C.   AND  T.    SPUROFON   AT  TIM:   AOK   01    ~... 
Till':   TWIN-SONS   AT  TIIK   A<;K   or   9 
PROFESSOR  SELWAY,   AND  C.   AND  T.   SPURGKON 
"  A    LIGHT   I'NTo   MY    PATH 

Till',     BELLOWS     AND    Till:     P>ROKF.N      L\NTKRN 

- 1  -         ,  * 
1  III-;    C  ANDKLAMRUM  ••• 

I  I  KLIGOLAND  ...... 

Tin-:   YOUNG    Li-:cTrki-:ks  AND  TIIKIR   DKAR    MOTIII-.R 
"CALVARY"  OUTSIDE  ST.    PACK'S  Ciu'Rcn,   ANTNYKRI-   ... 
PULPIT   IN   ST.   AXDRKNY'S  CIITRCII,   AXTXYKRP    ... 

FACSIMIKK  OF   I  LLI  \HNATKD  ADDRKS     PRKSKNTKU  TO   MRS.  ('.    11,   SPTRCKOX, 
SKPTKMP.KR,    iS;.| (P;i-<-s  288  and 

C.     AND    T.     Sl'KKCl'.oN     AT    Till'.     AOK    OF     21  ... 

SOUTH   STREET   BAPTIST  CHAPEL,   GREENWICH    ... 

FACSIMILE  OF    FIRST  COVER  01-    "Tin    SWORD  AND  Tin    TROWEL' 

C.\     11.     Sl'lkM'.oN     As     "JoiLN     Pl.ol  -(.IIMAN  " 

Tin;  TAIM-.RNACKI:,   AUCKLAXD,    Xi:\\    ZEALAND  ... 

"Tin:  GREAT   EASTERN"  (Cdr/oou)  33^ 

IMCARO'S   PHRENOLOGY   (Caricature]  343 

Tin-:  CHAPEL  "IN   A  CORNER,"  OUEEN   SMI  ARK,    BRIGHTON  35° 

Till-,     Lll'.RARY    OF    THE     PASTORS*     COLLEGE 

Tin-:   BRON/.F  STAC,  AT   "  BENMORE  ' 

"  THE   DREAM   OF   PAUL,  THE   PARISH   CLERK"  (Caricature)   ...  358 

MR.   GEORGE   TINWORTH'S   PANEL.    "Tin-:    FNKMY   SOWING   TARES  361 

"  1)KNM()RF  "...  ...  ...  3^)2 

CHEDDAR  CLIFFS     ...          ...          ..  36^ 

THE  CROUCH   OAK,  ADDKKSTONF  ...  36^ 

RoTIIESAY     P)AY 


J 


\ 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


EX 
6A95 
37A2 
v.3 


Spurgeon,  Charles,  iiaddon 

C.H.  Spurgeon1  s 
nutobiocraphy 


>r 

i  <*. 


