WT 


1  <c*  ;:~  r. ;  v-  r:v.  r>  --  N  o>. 

I  O       v,..y  I-  i.  A  .;  A   d  i  I  V->  M> 


Oi    \ 


m 


Mm 


m 


P 


Mm 


m 


H 


HiKfi 


THE  LIBRARY 

of 
VICTORIA  UNIVERSITY 

Toronto 


CARDIPHONIA: 

OR, 

THE    UTTERANCE    OF   THE    HEART 


CARDIPHONIA: 

OR, 

THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEARTj; 

IN    THE    COURSE    OF 

A   REAL   CORRESPONDENCE 

BY 

THE    REV.    JOHN    NEWTON 

RECTOR   OF   ST.    MARY    WOOLNOTH,   LONDON 


WITH    AN    APPRECIATION    BY 

REV.   DR.   ALEXANDER   WHYTE 

PRINCIPAL   OF   NEW   COLLEGE,    EDINBURGH 
AUTHOR   OF   •  BIBLE    CHARACTERS,"   u  BUNYAN    CHARACTERS,"    ETC 


Haec  rei  et  jungit,  juncto*  et  lervat  imicoi. 

Hor.  Lib.  i.  Sat.  3. 

Ai  in  water  face  aniwereth  to  face,  to  th« 

bcart  of  man  to  man.  Prov.  xxvii.   19. 


LONDON 

MORGAN    &    SCOTT   LD. 

12,    PATERNOSTER    BUILDINGS,    E.G. 

MCMXI 


91 


DEC    I  7  1965 


APPRECIATION 
<REV.    T)R.    ALEXANDER    WHYTE 

"  «5V/y  Cardiphonia"  as  William  Copper  bap 
tized  this  bookj  is  an  English  classic  of  rare 
excellence  and  of  very  high  value.  Very  much 
what  Cowpers  own  tetters  are  in  pure  literature, 
that  bis  friend's  letters  are  in  the  literature  of 
personal  and  evangelical  religion. 

"  $fewton*3  most  distinctive  office  in  the  great 
Evangelical  ReViVal  was  to  be  a  writer  of  spiritual 
letters."  And  "  the  letters  are  full  of  passages 
hardly  surpassed  for  their  genuine  beauty."  The 
truth  is  the  whole  Cardiphonia  is  a  volume  of  the 
purest  apostolical  and  evangelical  truth,  written 
in  a  strong,  clear,  level,  and  idiomatic  English 
style.  For  myself,  I  keep  John  ^(ewton  on  my 
se lee  test  shelf  of  spiritual  books  :  by  far  the 
best  kind  of  books  in  the  whole  world  of  books. 
In  my  opinion  you  are  doing  your  publishing 


8  AUTHOR'S  INTRODUCTION 

what  appears  under  his  name,  that  circumstance  has  some 
times  given  occasion  to  an  indiscriminate  and  injudicious 
publication  of  letters  collected  from  all  quarters,  in  which 
more  attention  is  paid  to  the  bulk  than  the  value.  For 
amongst  a  number  of  letters  written  to  intimate  friends, 
some  will  be  too  trivial  to  deserve  notice,  and  others  may  be 
so  intermingled  with  details  of  private  or  domestic  concerns, 
as  perhaps  to  give  pain  to  those  who  are  interested  in  them, 
when  they  see  them  in  print.  The  writer  of  the  following 
Letters  thought  himself  more  competent  to  decide  at  present, 
which  and  how  much  of  the  papers  before  him  might  be  not 
utterly  unworthy  of  being  preserved,  than  a  stranger  could 
be  after  his  decease. 

Farther,  he  finds,  that  between  an  increase  of  engagements 
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  unavoidable  effects  of  advancing 
years  on  the  other,  he  can  expect  but  little  leisure  or  ability 
for  writing  letters  in  future,  except  upon  necessary  business. 
By  this  method  of  sending  to  each  of  his  correspondents 
many  letters  at  once,  he  takes  leave  of  them  with  the  less 
regret,  persuaded  that  he  thus  communicates  the  substance 
of  all  he  could  offer,  if  he  was  able  to  write  to  them  severally 
as  often  and  as  much  at  large  as  in  times  past. 

Though  some  attention  has  been  paid  to  variety,  it  was 
not  practicable  wholly  to  avoid  what  may  be  thought 
repetition,  without  destroying  the  texture  and  connexion 
of  many  letters  ;  particularly  in  those  which  treat  of  afflic 
tion.  But  where  the  same  subject  recurs,  it  is  usually 
placed  in  something  of  a  different  point  of  view,  or  illustrated 
in  a  different  manner. 


AUTHOR'S   INTRODUCTION  9 

Thus  much  to  bespeak  the  reader's  favourable  and  candid 
perusal  of  what  is  now  put  into  his  hands.  But  the  writer 
stands  before  a  higher  tribunal,  and  would  be  much  to  be 
pitied  if  he  were  not  conscious,  that  in  this  publication  he 
has  no  allowed  aims,  but  to  be  subservient  to  the  gracious 
designs  of  God  by  the  Gospel,  and  to  promote  the  good  of  his 
fellow-creatures. 

Nov.  19,  1780. 


LETTERS  TO  A  NOBLEMAN 


LETTER   I 

MY  LORD,  March  —  1765. 

I  REMEMBER,  when  I  once  had  the  pleasure  of  waiting 
on  you,  you  were  pleased  to  begin  an  interesting  con 
versation,  which,  to  my  concern,  was  soon  interrupted. 
The  subject  was  concerning  the  causes,  nature,  and  marks 
of  a  decline  in  grace  ;  how  it  happens  that  we  lose  that 
warm  impression  of  divine  things,  which  in  some  favoured 
moments  we  think  it  almost  impossible  to  forget ;  how  far 
this  change  of  frame  is  consistent  with  a  spiritual  growth  in 
other  respects  ;  how  to  form  a  comparative  judgment  of 
our  proficiency  upon  the  whole  ;  and  by  what  steps  the 
losses  we  sustain  from  our  necessary  connexions  with  a 
sinful  nature  and  a  sinful  world  may  be  retrieved  from  time 
to  time.  I  beg  your  Lordship's  permission  to  fill  up  the 
paper  with  a  view  to  these  inquiries.  I  do  not  mean  to 
offer  a  'aboured  essay  on  them,  but  such  thoughts  as  shall 
occur  while  the  pen  is  in  my  hand. 

The  awakened  soul  (especially  when,  after  a  season  of 
distress  and  terror,  it  begins  to  taste  that  the  Lord  is  gracious) 
finds  itself  as  in  a  new  world.  No  change  in  outward  life 
can  be  so  sensible,  so  affecting.  No  wonder,  then,  that  at 
such  a  time  little  else  can  be  thought  of ;  the  transition  from 
darkness  to  light,  from  a  sense  of  wrath  to  a  hope  of  glory, 
is  the  greatest  that  can  be  imagined,  and  is  oftentimes  as 
sudden  as  wonderful.  Hence  the  general  characteristics 
of  young  converts  are  zeal  and  love.  Like  Israel  at  the 
Red  Sea,  they  have  just  seen  the  wonderful  works  of  the 
Lord,  and  they  cannot  but  sing  His  praise  ;  they  are  deeply 


12  CARD1PHONIA  : 

affected  with  the  danger  they  have  lately  escaped,  and  with 
the  case  of  multitudes  around  them,  who  are  secure  and 
careless  in  the  same  alarming  situation  ;  and  a  sense  of 
their  own  mercies,  and  a  compassion  for  the  souls  of  others, 
is  so  transporting,  that  they  can  hardly  forbear  preaching 
to  every  one  they  meet. 

This  emotion  is  highly  just  and  reasonable,  with  respect 
to  the  causes  from  whence  it  springs  ;  and  it  is  doubtless 
a  proof,  not  only  of  the  imperfection,  but  the  depravity  of  our 
nature,  that  we  are  not  always  thus  affected  ; — yet  it  is  not 
entirely  genuine.  If  we  examine  this  character  closely, 
which  seems  at  first  sight  a  pattern  and  a  reproof  to  Christians 
of  longer  standing,  we  shall  for  the  most  part  find  it 
attended  with  considerable  defects. 

1.  Such  persons  are  very  weak  in  faith.     Their  confidence 
arises  rather  from  the  lively  impressions  of  joy  within,  than 
from  a  distinct  and  clear  apprehension  of  the  work  of  God  in 
Christ.     The  comforts  which  are  intended  as  cordials  to 
animate   them   against   the   opposition   of   an   unbelieving 
world,  they  mistake  and  rest  in  as  the  proper  evidences  of 
their  hope.     And  hence  it  conies  to  pass,  that  when  the 
Lord  varies  His  dispensations,  and  hides  His  face,  they  are 
soon  troubled  and  at  their  wits'  end. 

2.  They  who  are  in  this  state  of  their  first  love  are  seldom 
free  from  something  of  a  censorious  spirit.     They  have  not 
yet  felt  all  the  deceitfulness  of  their  own  hearts  ;    they  are 
not  well  acquainted  with  the  devices  or  temptations  of 
Satan  ;   and  therefore  know  not  how  to  sympathize  or  make 
allowances,  where  allowances  are  necessary  and  due,  and 
can  hardly  bear  with  any  who  do  not  discover  the  same 
earnestness  as  themselves. 

3.  They  are  likewise  more  or  less  under  the  influence  of 
self-righteousness  and  self-will.     They  mean  well  ;    but  not 
being  as  yet  well  acquainted  with  the  spiritual  meaning 
and  proper  use  of  the  law,  nor  established  in  the  life  of  faith, 
a  part  (oftentimes  a  very  considerable  part)  of  their  zeal 
spends  itself  in  externals  and  non-essentials,  prompts  them 
to  practise  what  is  not  commanded,  to  refrain  from  what  is 
lawful,  and  to  observe  various  and  needless  austerities  and 
singularities,  as  their  tempers  and  circumstances  differ. 

However,  with  all  their  faults,  methinks  there  is  some- 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    13 

thing  very  beautiful  and  engaging  in  the  honest  vehemence 
of  a  young  convert.  Some  cold  and  rigid  judges  are  ready 
to  reject  these  promising  appearances,  on  account  of  inci 
dental  blemishes.  But  would  a  gardener  throw  away  a  fine 
nectarine,  because  it  is  green,  and  has  not  yet  attained  all 
that  beauty  and  flavour  which  a  few  more  showers  and  suns 
will  impart  ?  Perhaps  it  will  hold  for  the  most  part  in  grace 
as  in  nature  (some  exceptions  there  are),  if  there  is  not  some 
fire  in  youth,  we  can  hardly  expect  a  proper  warmth  in  old 
age. 

But  the  great  and  good  Husbandman  watches  over  what 
His  own  hand  has  planted,  and  carries  on  His  work  by  a 
variety  of  different,  and  even  contrary  dispensations. 
While  their  mountain  stands  thus  strong,  they  think  they 
shall  never  be  moved  ;  but  at  length  they  find  a  change. 
Sometimes  it  comes  on  by  insensible  degrees.  That  part  of 
their  affection  which  was  purely  natural,  will  abate  of  course 
when  the  power  of  novelty  ceases  ;  they  will  begin,  in  some 
instances,  to  perceive  their  own  indiscretions,  and  an  en 
deavour  to  correct  the  excesses  of  imprudent  zeal  will  often 
draw  them  towards  the  contrary  extreme  of  remissness  ; 
the  evils  of  their  hearts,  which,  though  overpowered,  were 
not  eradicated,  will  revive  again  :  the  enemy  will  watch  his 
occasions  to  meet  them  with  suitable  temptations  ;  and  as 
it  is  the  Lord's  design  that  they  should  experimentally  learn 
and  feel  their  own  weakness,  he  will,  in  some  instances,  be 
permitted  to  succeed.  When  guilt  is  thus  brought  upon 
the  conscience,  the  heart  grows  hard,  the  hands  feeble,  and 
the  knees  weak  ;  then  confidence  is  shaken,  the  spirit  of 
prayer  interrupted,  the  armour  gone,  and  thus  things  grow 
worse  and  worse,  till  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  interpose  :  for 
though  we  can  fall  of  ourselves,  we  cannot  rise  without  His 
help.  Indeed,  every  sin,  in  its  own  nature,  has  a  tendency 
towards  a  final  apostacy  ;  but  there  is  a  provision  in  the 
covenant  of  grace,  and  the  Lord,  in  His  own  time,  returns  to 
convince,  humble,  pardon,  comfort,  and  renew  the  soul. 
He  touches  the  rock,  and  the  waters  flow.  By  repeated 
experiments  and  exercises  of  this  sort  (for  this  wisdom  is 
seldom  acquired  by  one  or  a  few  lessons),  we  begin  at  length 
to  learn  that  we  are  nothing,  have  nothing,  can  do  nothing, 
but  sin.  And  thus  we  are  gradually  prepared  to  live  more 


I4  CARDIPHONIA  : 

out  of  ourselves,  and  to  derive  all  our  sufficiency  of  every 
kind  from  Jesus,  the  fountain  of  grace.  We  learn  to  tread 
more  warily,  to  trust  less  to  our  own  strength,  to  have  lower 
thoughts  of  ourselves,  and  higher  thoughts  of  Him ;  in 
which  two  last  particulars  I  apprehend  what  the  Scripture 
means  by  a  growth  of  grace  does  properly  consist.  Both  are 
increasing  in  the  lively  Christian  : — every  day  shows  him 
more  of  his  own  heart,  and  more  of  the  power,  sufficiency, 
compassion,  and  grace  of  his  adorable  Redeemer ;  but 
neither  will  be  complete  till  we  get  to  Heaven. 

I  apprehend,  therefore,  that  though  we  find  an  abatement 
of  that  sensible  warmth  of  affection  which  we  felt  at  first 
setting  out ; — yet  if  our  views  are  more  evangelical,  our 
judgment  more  ripened,  our  hearts  more  habitually  humbled 
under  a  sense  of  inward  depravity,  our  tempers  more  softened 
into  sympathy  and  tenderness  ;  if  our  prevailing  desires 
are  spiritual,  and  we  practically  esteem  the  precepts, 
ordinances,  and  people  of  God  ;  we  may  warrantably  con 
clude,  that  His  good  work  of  grace  in  us  is,  upon  the  whole, 
on  an  increase. 

But  still  it  is  to  be  lamented,  that  an  increase  of  know 
ledge  and  experience  should  be  so  generally  attended  with 
a  decline  of  fervour.  If  it  was  not  for  what  has  passed  in 
my  own  heart,  I  should  be  ready  to  think  it  impossible. 
But  this  very  circumstance  gives  me  a  still  more  emphatical 
conviction  of  my  own  vileness  and  depravity.  The  want  of 
humiliation  humbles  me,  and  my  very  indifference  rouses 
and  awakens  me  to  earnestness.  There  are,  however,  sea 
sons  of  refreshment,  ineffable  glances  of  light  and  power  upon 
the  soul,  which,  as  they  are  derived  from  clearer  displays 
of  divine  grace,  if  not  so  tumultuous  as  the  first  joys,  are  more 
penetrating,  transforming,  and  animating.  A  glance  of 
these,  when  compared  with  our  sluggish  stupidity  when  they 
are  withheld,  weans  the  heart  from  this  wretched  state  of 
sin  and  temptation,  and  makes  the  thoughts  of  death  and 
eternity  desirable.  Then  this  conflict  shall  cease  ; — I  shall 
sin  and  wander  no  more,  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  be  like  Him 
for  ever. 

If  the  question  is,  How  are  these  bright  moments  to  be 
prolonged,  renewed,  or  retrieved  ?  we  are  directed  to  faith 
and  diligence.  A  careful  use  of  the  appointed  means  of 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    15 

grace,  a  watchful  endeavour  to  avoid  the  occasions  and 
appearances  of  evil,  and  especially  assiduity  in  secret  prayer, 
will  bring  us  as  much  of  them  as  the  Lord  sees  good  for  us. 
He  knows  best  why  we  are  not  to  be  trusted  with  them 
continually.  Here  we  are  to  walk  by  faith,  to  be  exercised 
and  tried  ;  by  and  by  we  shall  be  crowned,  and  the  desires 
He  has  given  shall  be  abundantly  satisfied. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   II 

MY  LORD,  April  —  1766. 

I  SHALL  embrace  your  permission  to  fill  my  paper. — 
As  to  subject,  that  which  has  been  a  frequent  theme  of 
my  heart  of  late,  I  shall  venture  to  lay  before  your  Lordship. 
— I  mean  the  remarkable  and  humbling  difference,  which 
I  suppose  all  who  know  themselves  may  observe,  between 
their  acquired  and  their  experimental  knowledge,  or,  in 
other  words,  between  their  judgment  and  their  practice. 
To  hear  a  believer  speak  his  apprehensions  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
the  vanity  of  the  world,  the  love  of  Christ,  the  beauty  of 
holiness,  or  the  importance  of  eternity,  who  would  not 
suppose  him  proof  against  temptation  ?  To  hear  with 
what  strong  arguments  he  can  recommend  watchfulness, 
prayer,  forbearance,  and  submission,  when  he  is  teaching 
or  advising  others,  who  would  not  suppose  but  he  could 
also  teach  himself,  and  influence  his  own  conduct  ?  Yet, 
alas  !  Quam  disfiar  sibi  !  The  person  who  rose  from  his 
knees,  before  he  left  his  chamber,  a  poor  indigent,  fallible, 
dependent  creature,  who  saw  and  acknowledged  that  he 
was  unworthy  to  breathe  the  air  or  to  see  the  light,  may  meet 
with  many  occasions,  before  the  day  is  closed,  to  discover  the 
corruptions  of  his  heart,  and  to  show  how  weak  and  faint 
his  best  principles  and  clearest  convictions  are  in  their  actual 
exercise.  And  in  this  view,  how  vain  is  man !  what  a 
contradiction  is  a  believer  to  himself !  He  is  called  a  be 
liever  emphatically,  because  he  cordially  assents  to  the  word 
of  God  ;  but,  alas  !  how  often  unworthy  of  the  name  ! 


16  CARDIPHONIA  : 

If  I  was  to  describe  him  from  the  Scripture-character,  T 
should  say,  he  is  one  whose  heart  is  athirst  for  God,  for  His 
glory,  His  image,  His  presence  :  his  affections  are  fixed 
upon  an  unseen  Saviour  :  his  treasures,  and  consequently 
his  thoughts,  are  on  high,  beyond  the  bounds  of  sense. 
Having  experienced  much  forgiveness,  he  is  full  of  bowels 
of  mercy  to  all  around  ;  and  having  been  often  deceived  by 
his  own  heart,  he  dares  trust  it  no  more,  but  alive  by  faith  in 
the  Son  of  God,  for  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  sanctification, 
and  derives  from  Him  grace  for  grace  ;  sensible  that  without 
Him  he  has  not  sufficiency  even  to  think  a  good  thought. 
In  short,  he  is  dead  to  the  world,  to  sin,  to  self,  but  alive  to 
God,  and  lively  in  His  service.  Prayer  is  his  breath,  the 
word  of  God  his  food,  and  the  ordinances  more  precious  to 
him  than  the  light  of  the  sun.  Such  is  a  believer — in  his 
judgment  and  prevailing  desires. 

But  was  I  to  describe  him  from  experience,  especially 
at  some  times,  how  different  would  the  picture  be  !  Though 
he  knows  that  communion  with  God  is  his  highest  privilege, 
he  too  seldom  finds  it  so  ;  on  the  contrary,  if  duty,  con 
science,  and  necessity  did  not  compel,  he  would  leave  the 
throne  of  grace  unvisited  from  day  to  day.  He  takes  up 
the  Bible,  conscious  that  it  is  the  fountain  of  life  and  true 
comfort  ;  yet,  perhaps,  while  he  is  making  the  reflection,  he 
feels  a  secret  distaste  which  prompts  him  to  lay  it  down,  and 
give  his  preference  to  a  newspaper.  He  needs  not  to  be 
told  of  the  vanity  and  uncertainty  of  all  beneath  the  sun  ; 
and  yet  is  almost  as  much  elated  or  cast  down  by  a  trifle, 
as  those  who  have  their  portion  in  this  world.  He  believes 
that  all  things  shall  work  together  for  his  good,  and  that 
the  most  high  God  appoints,  adjusts,  and  over-rules  all  his 
concerns  ;  yet  he  feels  the  risings  of  fear,  anxiety,  and 
displeasure,  as  though  the  contrary  was  true.  He  owns 
himself  ignorant,  and  liable  to  be  deceived  by  a  thousand 
fallacies ;  yet  is  easily  betrayed  into  positiveness  and  self- 
conceit.  He  feels  himself  an  unprofitable,  unfaithful,  un 
thankful  servant,  and  therefore  blushes  to  harbour  a  thought 
of  desiring  the  esteem  and  commendations  of  men,  yet  he 
cannot  suppress  it.  Finally,  (for  I  must  observe  some 
bounds,)  on  account  of  these  and  many  other  inconsist 
encies,  he  is  struck  dumb  before  the  Lord,  stripped  of  every 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    17 

hope  and  plea,  but  what  is  provided  in  the  free  grace  of 
God,  and  yet  his  heart  is  continually  leaning  and  returning 
to  a  covenant  of  works. 

Two  questions  naturally  arise  from  such  a  view  of  our 
selves.  First, — How  can  these  things  be,  or  why  are  they 
permitted  ?  Since  the  Lord  hates  sin,  teaches  His  people 
to  hate  it  and  cry  against  it,  and  has  promised  to  hear  their 
prayers,  how  is  it  that  they  go  thus  burthened  ?  Surely  if 
He  could  not  or  would  not  overrule  evil  for  good,  He  would 
not  permit  it  to  continue.  By  these  exercises  He  teaches  us 
more  truly  to  know  and  feel  the  utter  depravity  and  corrup 
tion  of  our  whole  nature,  that  we  are  indeed  denied  in  every 
part.  His  method  of  salvation  is  likewise  hereby  exceeding 
ly  endeared  to  us  ;  we  see  that  it  is  and  must  be  of  grace, 
wholly  of  grace  ;  and  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  His 
perfect  righteousness,  is  and  must  be  our  all  in  all.  His 
power  likewise  in  maintaining  His  own  work,  notwith 
standing  our  infirmities,  temptations,  and  enemies,  is  hereby 
displayed  in  the  clearest  light, — his  strength  is  manifested 
in  our  weakness.  Satan  likewise  is  more  remarkably  dis 
appointed  and  put  to  shame,  when  he  finds  bounds  set  to 
his  rage  and  policy,  beyond  which  he  cannot  pass  ;  and  that 
those  in  whom  he  finds  so  much  to  work  upon,  and  over  whom 
he  so  often  prevails  for  a  season,  escape  at  last  out  of  his 
hands.  He  casts  them  down,  but  they  are  raised  again  ; 
he  wounds  them,  but  they  are  healed  ;  he  obtains  his  desire 
to  sift  them  as  wheat,  but  the  prayer  of  their  great  Advocate 
prevails  for  the  maintenance  of  their  faith.  Farther,  by 
what  believers  feel  in  themselves,  they  learn  by  degrees  how 
to  warn,  pity,  and  bear  with  others.  A  soft,  patient,  and 
compassionate  spirit,  and  a  readiness  and  skill  in  com 
forting  those  who  are  cast  down,  is  not  perhaps  attainable  in 
any  other  way.  And  lastly,  I  believe  nothing  more  habitu 
ally  reconciles  a  child  of  God  to  the  thought  of  death,  than 
the  wearisomeness  of  this  warfare.  Death  is  unwelcome  to 
nature  ; — but  then,  and  not  till  then,  the  conflict  will  cease. 
Then  we  shall  sin  no  more.  The  flesh,  with  all  its  attendant 
evils,  will  be  laid  in  the  grave  ; — then  the  soul,  which  has 
been  partaker  of  a  new  and  heavenly  birth,  shall  be  freed 
from  every  incumbrance,  and  stand  perfect  in  the  Re 
deemer's  righteousness  before  God  in  glory. 

C.  B 


18  CARDIPHONIA  : 

But  though  these  evils  cannot  be  wholly  removed,  it  is 
worth  while  to  inquire,  Secondly,  How  they  may  be  miti 
gated  ?  This  we  are  encouraged  to  hope  for.  The  word  of 
God  directs  and  animates  to  a  growth  in  grace.  And  though 
we  can  do  nothing  spiritually  of  ourselves,  yet  there  is  a 
part  assigned  us.  We  cannot  conquer  the  obstacles  in  our 
way  by  our  own  strength  ;  yet  we  can  give  way  to  them  ; 
and  if  we  do,  it  is  our  sin,  and  will  be  our  sorrow.  The  dis 
putes  concerning  inherent  power  in  the  creature,  have 
been  carried  to  inconvenient  lengths  :  for  my  own  part, 
I  think  it  safe  to  use  Scriptural  language. — The  apostles 
exhort  us  to  give  all  diligence  to  resist  the  devil,  to  purge 
ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit,  to  give  our 
selves  to  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer,  to  watch,  to 
put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  and  to  abstain  from  all 
appearance  of  evil.  Faithfulness  to  light  received,  and  a 
sincere  endeavour  to  conform  to  the  means  prescribed  in 
the  word  of  God,  with  a  humble  application  to  the  blood 
of  sprinkling,  and  the  promised  Spirit,  will  undoubtedly  be 
answered  by  increasing  measures  of  light,  faith,  strength,  and 
comfort ;  and  we  shall  know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the 
Lord. 

I  need  not  tell  your  Lordship  that  I  am  an  extempore 
writer.  I  dropt  the  consideration  of  whom  I  was  addressing 
from  the  first  paragraph  :  but  I  now  return,  and  subscribe 
myself  with  the  greatest  deference,  &c. 


LETTER   III 

MY  LORD,  April  —  1770. 

I  HAVE  a  desire  to  fill  the  paper,  and  must  therefore 
betake  myself  to  the  expedient  I  lately  mentioned.  Glori 
ous  things  are  spoken  of  the  city  of  God,  or  (as  I  suppose) 
the  state  of  glory,  in  Rev.  xxi.  from  verse  10  ad  finem. 
The  description  is  doubtless  mystical,  and  perhaps  nothing 
short  of  a  happy  experience  and  participation  will  furnish 
an  adequate  exposition.  One  expression,  in  particular, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    19 

has,  I  believe,  puzzled  wiser  heads  than  mine  to  explain. 
The  street  of  the  city  was  pure  gold,  as  it  were  transparent 
glass.  The  construction  likewise  in  the  Greek  is  difficult. 
Some  render  it  pure  gold  transparent  as  glass  :  this  is  the 
sense,  but  then  it  should  be  neuter  liatyavts  to  agree  with 
xpwrtov.  If  our  reading  is  right,  we  must  understand  it 
either  of  gold,  pure,  bright,  and  perspicuous  as  the  finest 
transparent  glass,  (for  all  glass  is  not  transparent,)  or  else, 
as  two  distinct  comparisons,  splendid  and  durable  as  the 
purest  gold,  clear  and  transparent  as  the  finest  glass.  In 
that  happy  world,  the  beauties  and  advantages  which  here 
are  divided  and  incompatible,  will  unite  and  agree.  Our 
glass  is  clear,  but  brittle  ;  our  gold  is  shining  and  solid, 
but  it  is  opaque,  and  discovers  only  a  surface.  And  thus  it 
is  with  our  minds.  The  powers  of  the  imagination  are 
lively  and  extensive,  but  transient  and  uncertain.  The 
powers  of  the  understanding  are  more  solid  and  regular, 
but  at  the  same  time  more  slow  and  limited,  and  confined 
to  the  outside  properties  of  the  few  objects  around  us.  But 
when  we  arrive  within  the  vail,  the  perfections  of  the  glass 
and  the  gold  will  be  combined,  and  the  imperfections  of 
each  will  entirely  cease.  Then  we  shall  know  more  than 
we  can  imagine.  The  glass  will  be  all  gold.  And  then  we 
shall  apprehend  truth  in  its  relations  and  consequences  ; 
not  (as  at  present)  by  that  tedious  and  fallible  process  which 
we  call  reasoning,  but  by  a  single  glance  of  thought,  as 
the  sight  pierces  in  an  instant  through  the  largest  transpar 
ent  body.  The  gold  will  be  all  glass. 

I  do  not  offer  this  as  the  sense  of  the  passage,  but  as 
a  thought  which  once  occurred  to  me  while  reading  it. 
I  daily  groan  under  a  desultory  ungovernable  imagina 
tion,  and  a  palpable  darkness  of  understanding,  which 
greatly  impede  me  in  my  attempts  to  contemplate  the 
truths  of  God.  Perhaps  these  complaints,  in  a  greater 
or  less  degree,  are  common  to  all  our  fallen  race,  and  ex 
hibit  mournful  proofs  that  our  nature  is  essentially  depraved. 
The  grace  of  God  affords  some  assistance  for  correcting 
the  wildness  of  the  fancy,  and  enlarging  the  capacity  of  the 
mind  :  yet  the  cure  at  present  is  but  palliative  ;  but  ere 
long  it  shall  be  perfect,  and  our  complaints  shall  cease  for 
ever.  Now  it  costs  us  much  pains  to  acquire  a  pittance  of 

B2 


20  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

solid  and  useful  knowledge  ;  and  the  ideas  we  have  collected 
are  far  from  being  at  the  disposal  of  judgment,  and,  like  men 
in  a  crowd,  are  perpetually  clashing  and  interfering  with 
each  other.  But  it  will  not  be  so  when  we  are  completely 
freed  from  the  effects  of  sin.  Confusion  and  darkness  will 
not  follow  us  into  the  world  where  light  and  order  reign. 
Then,  and  not  till  then,  our  knowledge  will  be  perfect,  and 
our  possession  of  it  uninterrupted  and  secure. 

Since  the  radical  powers  of  the  soul  are  thus  enfeebled 
and  disordered,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  best 
of  men,  and  under  their  highest  attainments,  have  found 
cause  to  make  the  acknowledgment  of  the  apostle,  "  When  I 
would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me."  But,  blessed  be 
God,  though  we  must  feel  hourly  cause  for  shame  and 
humiliation  for  what  we  are  in  ourselves,  we  have  cause  to 
rejoice  continually  in  Christ  Jesus,  who,  as  He  is  revealed 
unto  us  under  the  various  names,  characters,  relations,  and 
offices,  which  He  bears  in  the  Scripture,  holds  out  to  our  faith 
a  balm  for  every  wound,  a  cordial  for  every  discouragement, 
and  a  sufficient  answer  to  every  objection  which  sin  or  Satan 
can  suggest  against  our  peace.  If  we  are  guilty,  He  is 
our  righteousness  ;  if  we  are  sick,  He  is  our  infallible  Physi 
cian  ;  if  we  are  weak,  helpless,  and  defenceless,  He  is  the 
compassionate  and  faithful  Shepherd  who  has  taken  charge 
of  us,  and  will  not  suffer  any  thing  to  disappoint  our  hopes, 
or  to  separate  us  from  His  love.  He  knows  our  frame,  He 
remembers  that  we  are  but  dust,  and  has  engaged  to  guide 
us  by  His  counsel,  support  us  by  His  power,  and  at  length 
to  receive  us  to  His  glory,  that  we  may  be  with  Him  for 
ever. 

I  am,  with  the  greatest  deference,  &c. 


LETTER   IV 

MY  LORD,  February  —  1772. 

I  HAVE  been  sitting  perhaps  a  quarter  of  an  hour  with 
my  pen  in  my  hand,  and  my  finger  upon  my  upper  lip, 
contriving  how  I  should  begin  my  letter. — A  detail  of 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    21 

the  confused,  incoherent  thoughts  which  have  succes 
sively  passed  through  my  mind,  would  have  more  than 
filled  the  sheet ;  but  your  Lordship's  patience,  and  even 
your  charity  for  the  writer,  would  have  been  tried  to  the 
uttermost  if  I  could  have  penned  them  all  down.  At  length 
my  suspense  reminded  me  of  the  apostle's  words,  Gal.  v. 
17  :  "  Ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would."  This  is  an 
humbling  but  a  just  account  of  a  Christian's  attainments  in 
the  present  life,  and  is  equally  applicable  to  the  strongest 
and  to  the  weakest.  The  weakest  need  not  say  less,  the 
strongest  will  hardly  venture  to  say  more.  The  Lord  has 
given  His  people  a  desire  and  will,  aiming  at  great  things  ; 
without  this  they  would  be  unworthy  the  name  of  Chris 
tians  ;  but  they  cannot  do  as  they  would  :  their  best  desires 
are  weak  and  ineffectual,  not  absolutely  so,  (for  He  who 
works  in  them  to  will,  enables  them  in  a  measure  to  do 
likewise,)  but  in  comparison  with  the  mark  at  which  they 
aim.  So  that  while  they  have  great  cause  to  be  thankful 
for  the  desire  He  has  given  them,  and  for  the  degree  in  which 
it  is  answered,  they  have  equal  reason  to  be  ashamed  and 
abased  under  a  sense  of  their  continual  defects,  and  the  evil 
mixtures  which  taint  and  debase  their  best  endeavours. 
It  would  be  easy  to  make  out  a  long  list  of  particulars 
which  a  believer  would  do  if  he  could,  but  in  which,  from 
first  to  last,  he  finds  a  mortifying  inability.  Permit  me  to 
mention  a  few,  which  I  need  not  to  transcribe  from  books, 
for  they  are  always  present  to  my  mind. 

He  would  willingly  enjoy  God  in  prayer  : — he  knows 
that  prayer  is  his  duty  ;  but  in  his  judgment  he  considers 
it  likewise  as  his  greatest  honour  and  privilege.  In  this 
light  he  can  recommend  it  to  others,  and  can  tell  them  of 
the  wonderful  condescension  of  the  great  God,  who  humbles 
Himself  to  behold  the  things  that  are  in  heaven,  that  He 
should  stoop  so  much  lower,  to  afford  His  gracious  ear  to  the 
supplications  of  sinful  worms  upon  earth.  He  can  bid  them 
expect  a  pleasure  in  waiting  upon  the  Lord,  different 
in  kind,  and  greater  in  degree  than  all  that  the  world  can 
afford.  By  prayer,  he  can  say,  You  have  liberty  to  cast  all 
your  cares  upon  Him  that  careth  for  you.  By  one  hour's 
intimate  access  to  the  Throne  of  Grace,  where  the  Lord 
causes  His  glory  to  pass  before  the  soul  that  seeks  Him,  you 


22  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

may  acquire  more  true  spiritual  knowledge  and  comfort 
than  by  a  day  or  a  week's  converse  with  the  best  of  men, 
or  the  most  studious  perusal  of  many  folios  :  and  in  this 
light  he  would  consider  it  and  improve  it  for  himself.  But 
alas  !  how  seldom  can  he  do  as  he  would  ?  how  often 
does  he  find  this  privilege  a  mere  task,  which  he  would  be 
glad  of  a  just  excuse  to  omit ;  and  the  chief  pleasure  he 
derives  from  the  performance  is  to  think  that  his  task  is 
finished  : — he  has  been  drawing  near  to  God  with  his  lips, 
while  his  heart  was  far  from  Him.  Surely  this  is  not  doing 
as  he  would,  when  (to  borrow  the  expression  of  an  old 
woman  here)  he  is  dragged  before  God  like  a  slave,  and 
comes  away  like  a  thief. 

The  like  may  be  said  of  reading  the  Scripture.  He  be 
lieves  it  to  be  the  word  of  God  :  he  admires  the  wisdom  and 
grace  of  the  doctrines,  the  beauty  of  the  precepts,  the  rich 
ness  and  suitableness  of  the  promises  ;  and  therefore,  with 
David,  he  accounts  it  preferable  to  thousands  of  gold  and 
silver,  and  sweeter  than  honey  or  the  honey  comb.  Yet 
while  he  thus  thinks  of  it,  and  desires  that  it  may  dwell  in 
him  richly,  and  be  his  meditation  night  and  day,  he  cannot 
do  as  he  would.  It  will  require  some  resolution  to  persist 
in  reading  a  portion  of  it  every  day  ;  and  even  then  his 
heart  is  often  less  engaged  than  when  reading  a  pamphlet. 
Here  again  his  privilege  frequently  dwindles  into  a  task. 
His  appetite  is  vitiated,  so  that  he  has  but  little  relish  for 
the  food  of  his  soul. 

He  would  willingly  have  abiding,  admiring  thoughts 
of  the  person  and  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Glad  he 
is,  indeed,  of  those  occasions  which  recall  the  Saviour  to 
his  mind  ;  and  with  this  view,  notwithstanding  all  dis 
couragements,  he  perseveres  in  attempting  to  pray  and 
read,  and  waits  upon  the  ordinances.  Yet  he  cannot 
do  as  he  would.  Whatever  claims  he  may  have  to  the 
exercise  of  gratitude  and  sensibility  towards  his  fellow- 
creatures,  he  must  confess  himself  mournfully  ungrateful 
and  insensible  towards  his  best  friend  and  benefactor.  Ah  ! 
what'trifles  are  capable  of  shutting  Him  out  of  our  thoughts, 
of  whom  we  say,  He  is  the  beloved  of  our  souls,  who  loved 
us,  and  gave  Himself  for  us,  and  whom  we  have  deliberately 
chosen  as  our  chief  good  and  portion.  What  can  make  us 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    23 

amends  for  the  loss  we  suffer  here  ?  Yet,  surely  if  we 
could  we  would  set  Him  always  before  us  ;  His  love  should 
be  the  delightful  theme  of  our  hearts, 

From  morn  to  noon,  from  noon  to  dewy  eve. 

But  though  we  aim  at  this  good,  evil  is  present  with  us  ; 
we  find  we  are  renewed  but  in  part,  and  have  still  cause  to 
plead  the  Lord's  promise,  To  take  away  the  heart  of  stone, 
and  give  us  a  heart  of  flesh. 

He  would  willingly  acquiesce  in  all  the  dispensations  of 
divine  Providence.  He  believes  that  all  events  are  under 
the  direction  of  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness,  and  shall 
surely  issue  in  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  those  who 
fear  Him.  He  doubts  not  but  the  hairs  of  his  head  are  all 
numbered,  that  the  blessings  of  every  kind  which  he  possesses 
were  bestowed  upon  him,  and  are  preserved  to  him,  by  the 
bounty  and  special  favour  of  the  Lord  whom  he  serves  ; 
that  afflictions  spring  not  out  of  the  ground,  but  are  fruits 
and  tokens  of  Divine  love,  no  less  than  His  comforts  ; — that 
there  is  a  need-be,  whenever  for  a  season  he  is  in  heaviness. 
Of  these  principles  he  can  no  more  doubt  than  of  what  he 
sees  with  his  eyes,  and  there  are  seasons  when  he  thinks  they 
will  prove  sufficient  to  reconcile  him  to  the  sharpest  trials. 
But  often  when  he  aims  to  apply  them  in  an  hour  of  present 
distress,  he  cannot  do  what  he  would.  He  feels  a  law  in  his 
members  warring  against  the  law  in  his  mind  ;  so  that,  in 
defiance  of  the  clearest  conviction,  seeing  as  though  he  per 
ceived  not,  he  is  ready  to  complain,  murmur,  and  despond. 
Alas  !  how  vain  is  man  in  his  best  estate  !  How  much 
weakness  and  inconsistency,  even  in  those  whose  hearts  are 
right  with  the  Lord  !  and  what  reason  have  we  to  confess  that 
we  are  unworthy,  unprofitable  servants  ! 

It  were  easy  to  enlarge  in  this  way,  would  paper  and  time 
permit.  But,  blessed  be  God,  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but 
under  grace.  And  even  these  distressing  effects  of  the  rem 
nants  of  indwelling  sin  are  over-ruled  for  good.  By  these 
experiences,  the  believer  is  weaned  more  from  self,  and 
taught  more  highly  to  prize  and  more  absolutely  to  rely  on 
Him  who  is  appointed  unto  us  of  God,  wisdom,  righteous 
ness,  sanctification,  and  redemption.  The  more  vile  we  are 
in  our  own  eyes,  the  more  precious  He  will  be  to  us  ;  and  a 


24  CARDIPHONIA  : 

deep-rooted  sense  of  the  evil  of  our  hearts  is  necessary  to 
preclude  all  boasting,  and  to  make  us  willing  to  give  the  whole 
glory  of  our  salvation  where  it  is  due.  Again,  a  sense  of  these 
evils  will  (when  hardly  any  thing  else  can  do  it)  reconcile 
us  to  the  thoughts  of  death  ;  yea,  make  us  desirous  to  de 
part  that  we  may  sin  no  more,  since  we  find  depravity  so 
deep  rooted  in  our  nature,  that  (like  the  leprous  house)  the 
whole  fabric  must  be  taken  down  before  we  can  be  freed  from 
its  defilement.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  we  shall  be  able 
to  do  the  thing  that  we  would  :  when  we  see  Jesus,  we  shall 
be  transformed  into  His  image,  and  have  done  with  sin  and 
sorrow  for  ever. 

I  am,  with  great  deference,  &c. 


LETTER   V 

MY  LORD,  March  —  1772. 

I  THINK  my  last  letter  turned  upon  the  Apostle's 
thought,  Gal.  v.  17  :  "  Ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye 
would."  In  the  parallel  place,  Rom.  vii.  19,  there  is  another 
clause  subjoined,  "  The  evil  \vhich  I  would  not,  that  I  do." 
This,  added  to  the  former,  would  complete  the  dark  side 
of  my  experience.  Permit  me  to  tell  your  Lordship  a  little 
part,  (for  some  things  must  not,  cannot  be  told,)  not  of 
what  I  have  read,  but  of  what  I  have  felt,  in  illustration  of 
this  passage. 

I  would  not  be  the  sport  and  prey  of  wild,  vain,  foolish, 
and  worse  imaginations  ;  but  this  evil  is  present  with  me  ; 
my  heart  is  like  a  highway,  like  a  city  without  walls  or 
gates.  Nothing  so  false,  so  frivolous,  so  absurd,  so  impossible, 
or  so  horrid,  but  it  can  obtain  access,  and  that  at  any 
time,  or  in  any  place  :  neither  the  study,  the  pulpit,  nor  even 
the  Lord's  table,  exempt  me  from  their  intrusion.  I  some 
times  compare  my  words  to  the  treble  of  an  instrument,  which 
my  thoughts  accompany  with  a  kind  of  bass,  or  rather  anti- 
bass,  in  which  every  rule  of  harmony  is  broken,  every 
possible  combination  of  discord  and  confusion  is  introduced, 
utterly  inconsistent  with,  and  contradictory  to,  the  intended 
melody.  Ah  !  what  music  would  my  praying  and  preaching 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    25 

often  make  in  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  if  He  listened  to 
them  as  they  are  mine  only  !  By  men,  the  upper  part  only 
(if  I  may  so  speak)  is  heard  ;  and  small  cause  there  is  for 
self-gratulation,  if  they  should  happen  to  commend,  when 
conscience  tells  me  they  would  be  struck  with  astonishment 
and  abhorrence  could  they  hear  the  whole. 

But  if  this  awful  effect  of  heart-depravity  cannot  be 
wholly  avoided  in  the  present  state  of  human  nature,  yet 
at  least  I  would  not  allow  and  indulge  it ;  yet  this  I  find  I  do. 
In  defiance  of  my  best  judgment  and  best  wishes,  I  find 
something  within  me  which  cherishes  and  cleaves  to  those 
evils,  from  which  I  ought  to  start  and  flee,  as  I  should  if  a 
toad  or  a  serpent  was  put  in  my  food  or  in  my  bed.  Ah  ! 
how  vile  must  the  heart  (at  least  my  heart)  be,  that  can 
hold  a  parley  with  such  abominations,  when  I  so  well  know 
their  nature  and  their  tendency !  Surely  he  who  finds 
himself  capable  of  this,  may,  without  the  least  affectation 
of  humility,  (however  fair  his  outward  conduct  appears,) 
subscribe  himself  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  and  of 
sinners  the  very  chief. 

I  would  not  be  influenced  by  a  principle  of  self  on  any 
occasion  ;  yet  this  evil  I  often  do.  I  see  the  baseness  and 
absurdity  of  such  a  conduct  as  clearly  as  I  see  the  light  of 
the  day.  I  do  not  affect  to  be  thought  ten  feet  high,  and  I 
know  that  a  desire  of  being  thought  wise  or  good,  is  equally 
contrary  to  reason  and  truth.  I  should  be  grieved  or  angry 
if  my  fellow-creatures  supposed  I  had  such  a  desire  ;  and 
therefore  I  fear  the  very  principle  of  self,  of  which  I  com 
plain,  has  a  considerable  share  in  prompting  my  desires 
to  conceal  it.  The  pride  of  others  often  offends  me,  and 
makes  me  studious  to  hide  my  own  ;  because  their  good 
opinion  of  me  depends  much  upon  their  not  perceiving  it. 
But  the  Lord  knows  how  this  dead  fly  taints  and  spoils  my 
best  services,  and  makes  them  no  better  than  specious  sins. 

I  would  not  indulge  vain  reasonings  concerning  the 
counsels,  ways,  and  providences  of  God  ;  yet  I  am  prone 
to  do  it.  That  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right  is  to 
me  as  evident  and  necessary  as  that  two  and  two  make 
four.  I  believe  that  He  has  a  sovereign  right  to  do  what 
He  will  with  His  own,  and  that  this  sovereignty  is  but 
another  name  for  the  unlimited  exercise  of  wisdom  and 


26  CARDIPH0^7IA  : 

goodness.  But  my  reasonings  are  often  such,  as  if  I  had 
never  heard  of  these  principles,  or  had  formally  renounced 
them.  I  feel  the  workings  of  a  presumptuous  spirit,  that 
would  account  for  every  thing,  and  venture  to  dispute 
whatever  it  cannot  comprehend.  What  an  evil  is  this, 
for  a  potsherd  of  the  earth  to  contend  with  its  Maker  !  I 
do  not  act  thus  towards  my  fellow-creatures  ;  I  do  not 
find  fault  with  the  decisions  of  a  judge,  or  the  dispositions  of 
a  general,  because,  though  I  know  they  are  fallible,  yet  I 
suppose  they  are  wiser  in  their  respective  departments  than 
myself.  But  I  am  often  ready  to  take  this  liberty  when 
it  is  most  unreasonable  and  inexcusable. 

I  would  not  cleave  to  a  covenant  of  works  :  it  should  seem 
from  the  foregoing  particulars,  and  many  others  which  I 
could  mention,  that  I  have  reasons  enough  to  deter  me  from 
this.  Yet  even  this  I  do.  Not  but  that  I  say,  and  I  hope 
from  my  heart,  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  Thy  servant, 
O  Lord.  I  embrace  it  as  a  faithful  saying  and  worthy  of  all 
acceptation,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners  ;  and  it  is  the  main  pleasure  and  business  of  my  life, 
to  set  forth  the  necessity  and  all-sufficiency  of  the  Mediator 
between  God  and  man,  and  to  make  mention  of  His  right 
eousness,  even  of  His  only.  But  here,  as  in  every  thing 
else,  I  find  a  vast  difference  between  my  judgment  and  my 
experience.  I  am  invited  to  take  the  water  of  life  freely, 
yet  often  discouraged,  because  I  have  nothing  wherewith  to 
pay  for  it.  If  I  am  at  times  favoured  with  some  liberty  from 
the  above-mentioned  evils,  it  rather  gives  me  a  more  favour 
able  opinion  of  myself  than  increases  my  admiration  of  the 
Lord's  goodness  to  so  unworthy  a  creature  ;  and  when  the 
returning  tide  of  my  corruptions  convinces  me  that  /  am 
still  the  same,  an  unbelieving  legal  spirit  would  urge  me  to 
conclude  that  the  Lord  is  changed  :  at  least,  I  feel  a  weari 
ness  of  being  beholden  to  Him  for  such  continued  multiplied 
forgiveness  ;  and  I  fear  that  some  part  of  my  striving  against 
sin,  and  my  desires  after  an  increase  of  sanctification,  arise 
from  a  secret  wish  that  I  might  not  be  so  absolutely  and 
entirely  indebted  to  Him. 

This,  my  Lord,  is  only  a  faint  sketch  of  my  heart ;  but  it 
is  taken  from  the  life  :  it  would  require  a  volume  rather 
than  a  letter  to  fill  up  the  outlines.  But  I  believe  you  will 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    27 

not  regret  that  I  choose  to  say  no  more  upon  such  a  sub 
ject.  But  though  my  disease  is  grievous,  it  is  not  desperate  ; 
I  have  a  gracious  and  infallible  Physician.  I  shall  not 
die,  but  live,  and  declare  the  works  of  the  Lord. 

I  remain,  my  Lord,  &c. 


LETTER   VI 

MY  LORD,  April —  1772. 

MY  two  last  letters  turned  upon  a  mournful  subject, 
the  depravity  of  the  heart,  which  impedes  us  when  we 
would  do  good,  and  pollutes  our  best  intended  services  with 
evil.  We  have  cause,  upon  this  account,  to  go  softly  all  our 
days  ;  yet  we  need  not  sorrow  as  they  who  have  no  hope. 
The  Lord  has  provided  His  people  relief  under  those  com 
plaints,  and  teaches  us  to  draw  improvment  from  them. 
If  the  evils  we  feel  were  not  capable  of  being  overruled  for 
good,  He  would  not  permit  them  to  remain  in  us.  This 
we  may  infer  from  His  hatred  to  sin,  and  the  love  which 
He  bears  to  His  people. 

As  to  the  remedy,  neither  our  state  nor  His  honour  are 
affected  by  the  workings  of  indwelling  sin,  in  the  hearts  of 
those  whom  He  has  taught  to  wrestle,  strive,  and  mourn, 
on  account  of  what  they  feel.  Though  sin  wars,  it  shall  not 
reign  ;  and  though  it  breaks  our  peace,  it  cannot  separate 
from  His  love.  Nor  is  it  inconsistent  with  His  holiness  and 
perfection  to  manifest  His  favour  to  such  poor  denied  crea 
tures,  or  to  admit  them  to  communion  with  Himself ;  for 
they  are  not  considered  as  in  themselves,  but  as  one  with 
Jesus,  to  whom  they  have  fled  for  refuge,  and  by  whom 
they  live  a  life  of  faith.  They  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved, 
they  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  who  once  made 
an  atonement  for  their  sins,  and  ever  lives  to  make  inter 
cession  for  their  persons.  Though  they  cannot  fulfil  the  law, 
He  has  fulfilled  it  for  them  ;  though  the  obedience  of  the 
members  is  defiled  and  imperfect,  the  obedience  of  the  head 
is  spotless  and  complete ;  and  though  there  is  much  evil  in 
them,  there  is  something  good,  the  fruit  of  His  own  gracious 


28  CARDIPHONIA  : 

Spirit.  They  act  from  a  principle  of  love,  they  aim  at  no  less 
than  His  glory,  and  their  habitual  desires  are  supremely 
fixed  upon  Himself.  There  is  a  difference  in  kind  between 
the  feeblest  efforts  of  faith  in  a  real  believer,  while  he  is 
covered  with  shame  at  the  thoughts  of  his  miscarriages,  and 
the  highest  and  most  specious  attainments  of  those  who  are 
wise  in  their  own  eyes,  and  prudent  in  their  own  sight. 
Nor  shall  this  conflict  remain  long,  or  the  enemy  finally 
prevail  over  them.  They  are  supported  by  Almighty 
Power,  and  led  on  to  certain  victory.  They  shall  not 
always  be  as  they  are  now  ;  yet  a  little  while,  and  they  shall 
be  freed  from  this  vile  body,  which,  like  the  leprous  house, 
is  incurably  contaminated,  and  must  be  entirely  taken 
down.  They  shall  see  Jesus  as  He  is,  and  be  like  Him, 
and  with  Him  for  ever. 

The  gracious  purposes  to  which  the  Lord  makes  the  sense 
and  feeling  of  our  depravity  subservient  are  manifold. 
Hereby  His  own  power,  wisdom,  faithfulness,  and  love,  are 
more  signally  displayed  ;  His  power,  in  maintaining  His 
own  work  in  the  midst  of  much  opposition,  like  a  spark 
burning  in  the  water,  or  a  bush  unconsumed  in  the  flames ; 
His  wisdom,  in  defeating  and  controlling  all  the  devices  which 
Satan,  from  his  knowledge  of  evil  of  our  nature,  is  encouraged 
to  practise  against  us.  He  has  overthrown  many  a  fair 
professor,  and,  like  Goliath,  he  challenges  the  whole  army  of 
Israel ;  yet  he  finds  there  are  some  against  whom,  though 
he  thrusts  sorely,  he  cannot  prevail ;  notwithstanding  any 
seeming  advantage  he  gains  at  some  seasons,  they  are  still 
delivered,  for  the  Lord  is  on  their  side.  The  unchangeable- 
ness  of  the  Lord's  love  and  the  riches  of  His  mercy  are  like 
wise  more  illustrated  by  the  multiplied  pardons  He  bestows 
upon  His  people  than  if  they  needed  no  forgiveness  at  all. 

Hereby  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  more  endeared  to  the  soul ; 
all  boasting  is  effectually  excluded,  and  the  glory  of  a.  full 
and  free  salvation  is  ascribed  to  Him  alone.  If  a  mariner 
is  surprised  by  a  storm,  and  after  one  night  spent  in  jeopardy 
is  presently  brought  safe  into  port ;  though  he  may  rejoice 
in  his  deliverance,  it  will  not  affect  him  so  sensibly  as  if, 
after  being  tempest-tossed  for  a  long  season,  and  experienc 
ing  a  great  number  and  variety  of  hair-breadth  escapes,  he 
at  last  gains  the  desired  haven.  The  righteous  are  said  to 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    29 

be  scarcely  saved,  not  with  respect  to  the  certainty  of  the 
event,  for  the  purpose  of  God  in  their  favour  cannot  be  dis 
appointed,  but  in  respect  of  their  own  apprehensions,  and 
the  great  difficulties  they  are  brought  through.  But  when, 
after  a  long  experience  of  their  own  deceitful  hearts,  after 
repeated  proofs  of  their  weakness,  wilfulness,  ingratitude, 
and  insensibility,  they  find  that  none  of  these  things  can 
separate  them  from  the  love  of  God  in  Christ,  Jesus  becomes 
more  and  more  precious  to  their  souls.  They  love  much, 
because  much  has  been  forgiven  them.  They  dare  not, 
they  will  not  ascribe  any  thing  to  themselves,  but  are  glad  to 
acknowledge,  that  they  must  have  perished  (if  possible) 
a  thousand  times  over,  if  Jesus  had  not  been  their  Saviour, 
their  Shepherd,  and  their  Shield.  When  they  were  wander 
ing  He  brought  them  back,  when  fallen  He  raised  them, 
when  wounded  He  healed  them,  when  fainting  He  revived 
them.  By  Him,  out  of  weakness  they  have  been  made 
strong  ;  He  has  taught  their  hands  to  war,  and  covered 
their  heads  in  the  day  of  battle.  In  a  word,  some  of  the 
clearest  proofs  they  have  had  of  His  excellence  have  been 
occasioned  by  the  mortifying  proofs  they  have  had  of  their 
own  vileness.  They  would  not  have  known  so  much  of  Him, 
if  they  had  not  known  so  much  of  themselves. 

Farther,  a  spirit  of  humiliation,  which  is  both  the  decus 
et  tutamen,  the  strength  and  beauty  of  our  profession, 
is  greatly  promoted  by  our  feeling,  as  well  as  reading, 
that  when  we  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  us.  A 
broken  and  contrite  spirit  is  pleasing  to  the  Lord — He  has  pro 
mised  to  dwell  with  those  who  have  it ;  and  experience 
shows,  that  the  exercise  of  all  our  graces  is  in  proportion 
to  the  humbling  sense  we  have  of  the  depravity  of  our  na 
ture.  But  that  we  are  so  totally  depraved  is  a  truth  which 
no  one  ever  truly  learned  by  being  only  told  it.  Indeed,  if 
we  could  receive,  and  habitually  maintain  a  right  judgment 
of  ourselves,  by  what  is  plainly  declared  in  Scripture,  it 
would  probably  save  us  many  a  mournful  hour  ;  but  ex 
perience  is  the  Lord's  school,  and  they  who  are  taught  by 
Him  usually  learn  that  they  have  no  wisdom  by  the  mistakes 
they  make,  and  that  they  have  no  strength  by  the  slips  and 
falls  they  meet  with.  Every  day  draws  forth  some  new 
corruption  which  before  was  little  observed,  or  at  least 


30  CARD1PHONIA  : 

discovers  it  in  a  stronger  light  than  before.  Thus  by 
degrees  they  are  weaned  from  leaning  to  any  supposed 
wisdom,  power,  or  goodness  in  themselves  ;  they  feel  the 
truth  of  our  Lord's  words  :  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  no 
thing  ;  "  and  the  necessity  of  crying  with  David  :  "  O  lead 
me  and  guide  me  for  Thy  name's  sake."  It  is  chiefly  by 
this  frame  of  mind  that  one  Christian  is  differenced  from 
another  ;  for  though  it  is  an  inward  feeling,  it  has  very 
observable  outward  effects,  which  are  expressively  inti 
mated,  Ezek.  xvi.  63  :  "  Thou  shalt  be  dumb  and  not  open 
thy  mouth,  in  the  day  when  I  am  pacified  towards  thee, 
saith  the  Lord  God."  The  knowledge  of  My  full  and  free 
forgiveness,  of  thy  innumerable  backslidings  and  transgres 
sions,  shall  make  thee  ashamed,  and  silence  the  unruly 
workings  of  thine  heart.  Thou  shalt  open  thy  mouth  in 
praise  ;  but  thou  shalt  no  more  boast  in  thyself,  or  censure 
others,  or  repine  at  My  dispensations.  In  these  respects 
we  are  exceedingly  prone  to  speak  unadvisedly  with  our 
lips.  But  a  sense  of  great  unworthiness  and  much  forgive 
ness  checks  these  evils.  Whoever  is  truly  humbled  will  not 
be  easily  angry,  will  not  be  positive  and  rash,  will  be  com 
passionate  and  tender  to  the  infirmities  of  his  fellow-sinners, 
knowing,  that  if  there  be  a  difference,  it  is  grace  that  has 
made  it,  and  that  he  has  the  seeds  of  every  evil  in  his  own 
heart ;  and  under  all  trials  and  afflictions,  he  will  look  to 
the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  lay  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  acknow 
ledging  that  he  suffers  much  less  than  his  iniquities  have 
deserved.  These  are  some  of  the  advantages  and  good  fruits 
which  the  Lord  enables  us  to  obtain  from  that  bitter  root, 
indwelling  sin. 

I  am,  with  great  deference,  &c. 


LETTER   VII 

MY  LORD,  September  —  1772. 

WEAK,  unskilful,  and  unfaithful  as  I  am  in  practice, 
the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  give  me  some  idea  of  what  a 
Christian  ought  to  be,  and  of  what  is  actually  attainable 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    31 

in  the  present  life,  by  those  whom  He  enables  earnestly 
to  aspire  towards  the  prize  of  their  high  calling.  They 
who  are  versed  in  mechanics  can,  from  a  knowledge  of  the 
combined  powers  of  a  complicated  machine,  make  an  exact 
calculation  of  what  it  is  able  to  perform,  and  what  resistance 
it  can  counteract  ;  but  who  can  compute  the  possible 
effects  of  that  combination  of  principles  and  motives  re 
vealed  in  the  Gospel  upon  a  heart  duly  impressed  with  a 
sense  of  their  importance  and  glory  ?  When  I  was  lately  at 
Mr.  Coxe's  museum,  while  I  was  fixing  my  attention  upon 
some  curious  movements,  imagining  that  I  saw  the  whole 
of  the  artist's  design,  the  person  who  showed  it  touched  a  little 
spring,  and  suddenly  a  thousand  new  and  unexpected  motions 
took  place,  and  the  whole  piece  seemed  animated  from  the 
top  to  the  bottom.  I  should  have  formed  but  a  very  im 
perfect  judgment  of  it,  had  I  seen  no  more  than  what  I  saw 
at  first.  I  thought  I  might  in  some  measure  illustrate  the 
vast  difference  that  is  observable  amongst  professors,  even 
amongst  those  who  are,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  sincere.  There 
are  persons  who  appear  to  have  a  true  knowledge  (in  part) 
of  the  nature  of  the  Gospel  religion,  but  seem  not  to  be 
apprised  of  its  properties,  in  their  comprehension  and  extent. 
If  they  have  attained  to  some  hope  of  their  acceptance,  if 
they  find  at  seasons  some  communion  with  God  in  the  means 
of  grace,  if  they  are  in  a  measure  delivered  from  the  pre 
vailing  and  corrupt  customs  of  the  world,  they  seem  to  be 
satisfied,  as  if  they  were  possessed  of  all.  These  are  indeed 
great  things ;  sed  meliora  latent.  The  profession  of  too 
many,  whose  sincerity  charity  would  be  unwilling  to  impeach, 
is  greatly  blemished,  notwithstanding  their  hopes  and  their 
occasional  comforts,  by  the  breakings  forth  of  unsanctified 
tempers,  and  the  indulgence  of  vain  hopes,  anxious  cares, 
and  selfish  pursuits.  Far,  very  far,  am  I  from  that  un- 
scriptural  sentiment  of  sinless  perfection  in  fallen  man. 
To  those  who  have  a  due  sense  of  the  spirituality  and  ground 
of  the  divine  precepts,  and  of  what  passes  in  their  own 
hearts,  there  will  never  be  wanting  causes  of  humiliation 
and  self-abasement  on  the  account  of  sin  ;  yet  still  there  is 
a  liberty  and  privilege  attainable  by  the  Gospel  beyond  what 
is  ordinarily  thought  of.  Permit  me  to  mention  two  or 
three  particulars  in  which  those  who  have  a  holy 


32  CARDIPHONIA  : 

ambition   of   aspiring   to    them    shall    not    be    altogether 
disappointed. 

A  delight  in  the  Lord's  all-sufficiency,  to  be  satisfied  in 
Him  as  our  present  and  eternal  portion.  This,  in  the  sense 
in  which  I  understand  it,  is  not  the  effect  of  a  present  warm 
frame,  but  of  a  deeply-rooted  and  abiding  principle  ;  the 
habitual  exercise  of  which  is  to  be  estimated  by  the  com 
parative  indifference  with  which  other  things  are  regarded. 
The  soul  thus  principled  is  not  at  leisure  to  take  or  to  seek 
satisfaction  in  any  thing  but  what  has  a  known  subserviency 
to  this  leading  taste.  Either  the  Lord  is  present,  and  then 
He  is  to  be  rejoiced  in  ;  or  else  He  is  absent,  and  then  He 
is  to  be  sought  and  waited  for.  They  are  to  be  pitied,  who, 
if  they  are  at  some  times  happy  in  the  Lord,  can  at  other 
times  be  happy  without  Him,  and  rejoice  in  broken  cisterns, 
when  their  spirits  are  at  a  distance  from  the  fountain  of 
living  waters.  I  do  not  plead  for  an  absolute  indifference  to 
temporal  blessings  ;  He  gives  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy  ; 
and  a  capacity  of  relishing  them  is  His  gift  likewise  ;  but 
then  the  consideration  of  His  love  in  bestowing  should 
exceedingly  enhance  their  value,  and  a  regard  to  His  will 
should  regulate  their  use.  Nor  can  they  all  supply  the 
want  of  that  which  we  can  only  receive  immediately  from 
Himself.  This  principle  likewise  moderates  that  inordinate 
fear  and  sorrow  to  which  we  are  liable  upon  the  prospect  or 
the  occurrence  of  great  trials,  for  which  there  is  a  sure  sup 
port  and  resource  provided  in  the  all-sufficiency  of  infinite 
goodness  and  grace.  What  a  privilege  is  this,  to  possess 
God  in  all  things  while  we  have  them,  and  all  things  in  God 
when  they  are  taken  from  us  ! 

An  acquiescence  in  the  Lord's  will,  founded  in  a  per 
suasion  of  His  wisdom,  holiness,  sovereignty,  and  good 
ness  :  this  is  one  of  the  greatest  privileges  and  brightest 
ornaments  of  our  profession.  So  far  as  we  attain  to  this, 
we  are  secure  from  disappointment.  Our  own  limited  views 
and  short-sighted  purposes  and  desires  may  be,  and  will  be 
often  overruled  ;  but  then  our  main  and  leading  desire, 
that  the  will  of  the  Lord  may  be  done,  must  be  accomplished. 
How  highly  does  it  become  us,  both  as  creatures  and  as 
sinners,  to  submit  to  the  appointments  of  our  Maker  !  and 
how  necessary  is  it  to  our  peace  !  This  great  attainment  is 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    33 

too  often  unthought  of,  and  overlooked  ;  we  are  prone  to 
fix  our  attention  upon  the  second  causes  and  immediate 
instruments  of  events  ;  forgetting  that  whatever  befals  us 
is  according  to  His  purpose,  and  therefore  must  be  right  and 
seasonable  in  itself,  and  shall  in  the  issue  be  productive  of 
good.  From  hence  arise  impatience,  resentment,  and  secret 
repinings,  which  are  not  only  sinful,  but  tormenting : 
whereas,  if  all  things  are  in  His  hand,  if  the  very  hairs  of 
our  head  are  numbered  ;  if  every  event,  great  and  small, 
is  under  the  direction  of  His  providence  and  purpose  ;  and 
if  He  has  a  wise,  holy,  and  gracious  end  in  view,  to  which 
every  thing  that  happens  is  subordinate  and  subservient ; — 
then  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  with  patience  and  humility 
to  follow  as  He  leads  and  cheerfully  to  expect  a  happy  issue. 
The  path  of  present  duty  is  marked  out  ;  and  the  concerns 
of  the  next  and  every  succeeding  hour  are  in  His  hands. 
How  happy  are  they  who  can  resign  all  to  Him,  see  His  hand 
in  every  dispensation,  and  believe  that  He  chooses  better 
for  them  than  they  possibly  could  for  themselves  ! 

A  single  eye  to  His  glory,  as  the  ultimate  scope  of  all  our 
undertakings.  The  Lord  can  design  nothing  short  of  His 
own  glory ;  nor  should  we.  The  constraining  love  of 
Christ  has  a  direct  and  marvellous  tendency,  in  proportion 
to  the  measure  of  faith,  to  mortify  the  corrupt  principle — 
self,  which  for  a  season  is  the  grand  spring  of  our  conduct, 
and  by  which  we  are  too  much  biassed  after  we  know  the 
Lord.  But  as  grace  prevails,  self  is  renounced.  We  feel 
that  we  are  not  our  own,  that  we  are  bought  with  a  price  ; 
and  that  it  is  our  duty,  our  honour,  and  our  happiness,  to  be 
the  servants  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  To 
devote  soul  and  body,  every  talent,  power,  and  faculty,  to 
the  service  of  His  cause  and  will ;  to  let  our  light  shine  (in 
our  several  situations)  to  the  praise  of  His  grace  ;  to  place 
our  highest  joy  in  the  contemplation  of  His  adorable  per 
fections  ;  to  rejoice  even  in  tribulations  and  distresses,  in 
reproaches  and  infirmities,  if  thereby  the  power  of  Christ 
may  rest  upon  us,  and  be  magnified  in  us  ;  to  be  content, 
yea,  glad  to  be  nothing,  that  He  may  be  all  in  all ; — to  obey 
Him  in  opposition  to  the  threats  or  solicitations  of  men  ; 
to  trust  Him,  though  all  outward  appearances  seem  against 
us  ;  to  rejoice  in  Him,  though  we  should  (as  will  sooner  or 
c  c 


34  CARD1PHONIA  I 

later  be  the  case)  have  nothing  else  to  rejoice  in, — to  live 
above  the  world,  and  to  have  our  conversation  in  Heaven, 
to  be  like  the  angels,  finding  our  own  pleasure  in  performing 
His  : — this,  my  Lord,  is  the  prize,  the  mark  of  our  high 
calling,  to  which  we  are  encouraged  with  a  holy  ambition 
continually  to  aspire.  It  is  true,  we  shall  still  fall  short ; 
we  shall  find,  that  when  we  would  do  good,  evil  will  be 
present  with  us  ;  but  the  attempt  is  glorious,  and  shall  not 
be  wholly  in  vain.  He  that  gives  us  thus  to  will,  will 
enable  us  to  perform  with  growing  success,  and  teach  us  to 
profit  even  by  our  mistakes  and  imperfections. 

0  blessed  man  !    that  thus  fears  the  Lord,  that  delights 
in  His  word,  and  derives  his  principles,  motives,  maxims, 
and  consolations,  from  that  unfailing  source  of  light  and 
strength.     He  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers 
of  water,  whose  leaf  is  always  green,  and  fruit  abundant. 
The  wisdom  that  is  above  shall  direct  his  plans,  inspire  his 
counsels  ;    and  the  power  of  God  shall  guard  him  on  every 
side,  and  prepare  his  way  through  every  difficulty  ;   he  shall 
see  mountains  sink  into  plains,  and  streams  spring  up  in  the 
dry  wilderness.     The  Lord's  enemies  will  be  his  ;   and  they 
may  be  permitted  to  fight  against  him,  but  they  shall  not 
prevail,  for  the  Lord  is  with  him  to  deliver  him.     The  con 
duct  of  such  a  one,  though  in  a  narrow  and  retired  sphere  of 
life,  is  of  more  real  excellence  and  importance  than  the  most 
splendid  actions  of  kings  and  conquerors  which  fill  the  annals 
of  history,  Prov.  xvi.  32.     And  if  the  God  whom  he  serves 
is  pleased  to  place  him  in  a  more  public  light,  his  labours  and 
cares  will  be  amply  compensated  by  the  superior  opportunities 
afforded  him  of  manifesting  the  power  and  reality  of  true 
religion,  and  promoting  the  good  of  mankind. 

1  hope  I  may  say,  that  I  desire  to  be  thus  entirely  given  up 
to  the  Lord  ;   I  am  sure  I  must  say,  that  what  I  have  written 
is  far  from  being  my  actual  experience.     Alas  !    I  might  be 
condemned  out  of  my  own  mouth,  were  the  Lord  strict  to 
mark  what  is  amiss.     But,  O  the  comfort !  we  are  not  under 
the  law,  but  under  grace.     The  Gospel  is  a  dispensation  of 
sinners,  and  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father.     There 
is  the  unshaken  ground  of  hope  :    a  reconciled  Father,  a 
prevailing  Advocate,  a  powerful  Shepherd,  a  compassionate 
Friend,  a  Saviour  who  is  able  and  willing  to  save  to  the 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    35 

uttermost.  He  knows  our  frame  ;  He  remembers  that  we 
are  but  dust ;  and  has  opened  for  us  a  new  and  blood- 
besprinkled  way  of  access  to  the  Throne  of  Grace,  that  we 
may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  every  time  of 
need.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   VIII 

MY  LORD,  April  —  1773. 

FOR  five  or  six  weeks  past,  I  have  been  a  good  deal  in 
disposed.  The  ground  of  my  complaint  was  a  cold,  attended 
with  a  slight  fever,  and  for  some  time  with  a  cough,  which 
made  me  feel  some  inconvenience  in  preaching  ;  to  this 
succeeded  a  deafness,  so  great  as  to  cut  me  off  from  con 
versation  :  for  I  could  not  hear  the  sound  of  a  voice,  unless 
it  was  spoken  loud  in  my  ear.  But  the  Lord  has  mercifully 
removed  the  fever  and  cough,  opened  my  ears,  and  I  am  now 
nearly  as  well  as  usual.  I  had  cause  to  be  thankful,  especially 
for  two  things,  under  this  dispensation  :  First,  that  I  was 
enabled,  though  sometimes  with  a  little  difficulty,  to  go  on 
with  my  public  work.  It  is  a  singular  favour  I  have  to 
acknowledge,  that  for  the  space  of  almost  nine  years  since 
I  have  been  in  the  ministry,  our  Sabbath  and  weekly 
opportunities  have  not  been  once  suspended  :  whereas  I 
have  seen  many  of  the  Lord's  servants  laid  by  for  a  con 
siderable  space  within  that  time.  My  other  great  mercy 
was,  that  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  preserve  me  in  a  peaceful 
resigned  frame  ;  so  that  when  I  was  deaf,  and  could  not  be 
certain  that  I  should  recover  my  hearing  any  more,  I  was 
in  general  as  cheerful  and  easy  as  at  other  times.  This 
was  the  effect  of  His  goodness  ;  for  though  I  know  enough 
of  His  sovereignty,  wisdom,  and  faithfulness,  of  His  right  to 
do  what  He  pleases,  and  the  certainty  that  He  does  all  things 
well,  to  furnish  me  with  arguments  enough  to  prove  that  sub 
mission  to  His  will  is  our  absolute  duty  ;  yet  I  am  sensible, 
that  when  the  trial  actually  comes,  notwithstanding  all 
the  advice  I  may  have  offered  to  others,  I  should  myself 
toss  like  a  wild  bull  in  a  net ;  rebel  and  repine  ;  forget  that 

C2 


36  CARDIPHONIA  : 

I  am" a  sinner,  and  that  He  is  a  sovereign  :  this  I  say  would 
always  and  invariably  be  the  case,  unless  He  was  graciously 
pleased  to  fulfil  His  words,  that  strength  shall  be  according 
to  the  day.  I  hope  my  deafness  has  been  instructive  to  me. 
The  exercise  of  our  senses  is  so  easily  and  constantly  per 
formed,  that  it  seems  a  thing  of  course  ;  but  I  was  then 
reminded  how  precarious  the  tenure  is  by  which  we  hold 
those  blessings  which  seem  most  our  own,  and  which  are 
most  immediately  necessary  to  the  comfortable  enjoyment  of 
life.  Outward  senses,  mental  faculties,  health  of  body,  and 
peace  of  mind,  are  extremely  valuable  ;  but  the  continuance 
of  them  for  a  single  moment  depends  upon  Him,  who,  if  He 
opens,  none  can  shut,  and  when  He  shuts,  none  can  open. 
A  minute  is  more  than  sufficient  to  deprive  us  of  what  we 
hold  most  dear,  or  to  prevent  us  from  deriving  the  least 
comfort  from  it,  if  it  is  not  taken  away.  I  am  not 
presuming  to  give  your  Lordship  information  ;  but  only 
mentioning  the  thoughts  that  were  much  upon  my  mind  while 
I  was  incapable  of  conversation.  These  are  indeed  plain 
and  obvious  truths,  which  I  have  long  acknowledged  as 
indisputable  ;  but  I  have  reason  to  be  thankful  when  the 
Lord  impresses  them  with  fresh  power  upon  my  heart,  even 
though  He  sees  fit  to  do  it  by  the  medium  of  afflictions.  I 
have  seen  of  late  something  of  the  weight  and  importance  of 
that  admonition,  Jer.  ix.  23,  24.  A  passage  which,  though 
addressed  to  the  wise,  the  mighty,  and  the  rich,  is  of  universal 
application  ; — for  self,  unless  corrected  and  mortified  by 
grace,  will  find  something  whereof  to  glory,  in  the  meanest 
characters  and  the  lowest  situation.  And,  indeed,  when 
things  come  to  be  weighed  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary, 
the  lunatics  in  bedlam,  some  of  whom  glory  in  their  straw  or 
their  chains,  as  marks  of  splendour,  or  ensigns  of  royalty, 
have  as  much  reason  on  their  side,  as  any  persons  upon  earth 
who  glory  in  themselves.  This  alone  is  the  proper  ground  of 
glory  and  joy,  if  we  know  the  Lord.  Then  all  is  safe  at 
present,  and  all  will  be  happy  for  ever.  Then  whatever 
changes  may  affect  our  temporal  concernments,  our  best 
interests  and  hopes  are  secured  beyond  the  reach  of  change  : 
and  whatever  we  may  lose  or  suffer  during  this  little  span  of 
time  will  be  abundantly  compensated  in  that  glorious  state 
of  eternity  which  is  just  at  hand.  I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF   THE   HEART         37 

LETTER    IX 

MY  LORD,  December  —  1772. 

I  LATELY  employed  some  of  my  leisure  hours  (which, 
when  I  am  not  indolent,  are  but  few)  in  reading  the  Memoirs 
of  the  Duke  of  Sully,  which  occasionally  came  in  my  way. 
It  afforded  me  matter  for  variety  of  reflections.  I  pity  the 
Duke  of  Sully,  whose  attachment  to  the  name  of  a  Protestant 
seems  to  have  been  little  more  than  a  point  of  honour, 
who  drew  all  his  resources  from  himself,  and  whose  chief 
aim  seems  to  have  been  to  approve  himself  faithful  to  an 
earthly  master.  He  acted  as  well  as  could  be  expected 
from  natural  principles  ;  and  the  Lord,  who  employed  him 
as  an  instrument  of  His  providence,  rewarded  his  fidelity 
with  success,  honour,  and  riches  :  a  reward  which,  though  in 
itself  a  poor  one,  is  suited  to  the  desires  of  men  who  place 
their  happiness  in  worldly  things,  and  is  so  far  a  compensa 
tion  of  their  services.  It  is  given  to  your  Lordship  to  act 
from  nobler  principles,  and  with  more  enlarged  views. 
You  serve  a  Master,  of  whose  favour,  protection,  and 
assistance  you  cannot  be  deprived,  who  will  not  overlook  or 
misconstrue  the  smallest  service  you  attempt  for  Him, 
who  will  listen  to  no  insinuations  against  you,  who  is 
always  near  to  comfort,  direct,  and  strengthen  you,  and  who 
is  preparing  for  you  such  honours  and  blessings  as  He  only 
can  give,  an  inheritance  (the  reverse  of  all  earthly 

good)    u^>0aprov,   KOI  apiavrov  KO.I   a^apavrov.*       Thus    animated 

and  thus  supported,  assisted  likewise  by  the  prayers  of 
thousands,  may  we  not  warrantably  hope  that  your  Lordship 
will  be  an  instrument  of  great  good,  and  that  both  church 
and  state  will  be  benefited  by  your  example,  counsel,  and 
care  ? 

In  another  view,  the  Duke  of  Sully's  History  exhibits  a 
comment  upon  the  Psalmist's  words,  "  Surely  man  in  his 
best  estate  is  altogether  vanity."  View  him  in  one  light, 
he  seems  to  have  possessed  all  that  the  most  aspiring  mind 
could  aim  at — the  favour  and  confidence  of  his  prince, 
accumulated  wealth,  great  honours,  and  such  power  by  his 

*  Incorruptible,  undefiled,  unfading. 


38  CARDIPHONIA  : 

offices  and  influence  with  the  king,  that  he  could  almost  do 
what  he  pleased.  Yet  he  had  so  much  to  suffer  from  the 
fatigues  and  difficulties  of  his  station,  and  the  cabals  and 
malice  of  his  enemies,  that  in  the  midst  of  all  his  grandeur, 
a  dispassionate  mind  would  rather  pity  than  envy  him. 
And  how  suddenly  were  his  schemes  broken  by  the  death 
of  the  king  !  Then  he  lost  his  friend,  his  protector,  his 
influence.  The  remainder  of  his  days  were  embittered  by 
many  inquietudes  ;  he  lived  indeed  (if  that  could  afford  any 
consolation)  in  much  state  and  pageantry  afterwards ; 
but  after  having  toiled  through  more  than  fourscore  years, 
died  at  last  almost  of  a  broken  heart  from  domestic  uneasi 
ness.  And  is  this  all  that  the  world  can  do  for  those  who  are 
accounted  most  successful  ?  Alas  ! 

Too  low  they  build,  who  build  below  the  skies. 

And  what  a  picture  of  the  instability  of  human  things 
have  we  in  his  master,  Henry  !  Admired,  beloved,  dreaded, 
full  of  vast  designs,  fondly  supposing  himself  born  to  be  the 
arbiter  of  Europe,  in  an  awful  moment,  and  in  the  midst  of 
his  friends,  suddenly  struck  from  the  height  of  his  grandeur, 
and  snatched  into  the  invisible,  unchangeable  world.  In 
that  moment  all  his  thoughts  perished. 

How  unspeakably  awful  such  a  transition  !  How  re 
markable  were  his  own  forebodings  of  the  approaching  hour  ! 
O  Lord,  how  dost  Thou  pour  contempt  upon  princes  and 
teach  us  that  the  great  and  the  mean  are  equally  in  Thy 
hands,  and  at  Thy  disposal,  as  clay  in  the  hands  of  the 
potter  !  Poor  king  !  while  he  expected  obedience  to  his 
own  commands,  he  lived  in  habitual  defiance  of  the 
commands  of  God.  Men  may  respect  his  memory,  for  his 
sincerity,  benevolence,  and  other  amiable  qualities ;  but 
besides  that  he  was  engrossed  by  a  round  of  sensual 
pleasures,  (when  business  of  State  did  not  interfere,)  his  life 
was  stained  with  adultery.  Happy  if,  in  the  hours  he  spent 
in  retirement,  when  the  pre-intimation  of  his  death  hung 
heavy  upon  his  mind,  the  Lord  humbled  and  softened  his 
heart,  and  gave  him  repentance  unto  life  !  I  wish  the 
history  afforded  a  proof  of  this.  However,  in  his  death, 
we  see  an  affecting  proof,  that  no  human  dignity  or  power 
ran  ward  off  the  stroke  of  the  Almightv,  who,  by  such 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    39 

sudden  and  unexpected  dispensations,  often  shows  Himself 
terrible  to  the  princes  and  great  men  of  the  earth.  O  !  that 
they  could  see  His  hand,  and  wisely  consider  His  doing  in 
them  ! 

But  happy  is  the  man  who  fears  the  Lord,  and  delights 
in  His  commandments  ;  who  sets  God  always  before  him, 
and  acts  under  the  constraining  influence  of  redeeming  love. 
He  is  the  real  friend  and  the  best  champion  of  his  country, 
who  makes  not  the  vague  notions  of  human  wisdom  and 
honour,  but  the  precepts  and  examples  of  the  blessed  Jesus, 
the  model  and  the  motive  of  his  conduct.  He  inculcates 
(as  occasion  offers)  the  great  truths  of  religion  in  his  con 
versation,  and  demonstrates  them  by  his  practice  ;  yet 
the  best  part  of  his  life  is  known  only  to  God  and  him 
self.  His  time  is  divided  between  serving  his  country  in 
public,  and  wrestling  for  it  in  private.  Nor  shall  his  labours 
or  his  prayers  be  lost.  Either  he  shall  have  the  desire  of 
his  heart,  and  shall  see  the  religion  and  the  liberty  he 
so  highly  values  transmitted  to  posterity ;  or,  if  he 
should  live  when  wrath  is  decreed,  and  there  is  no  remedy, 
the  promise  and  the  providence  of  God  shall  seal  him  as  the 
peculiar  charge  of  angels,  in  the  midst  of  public  calamity. 
And  when  all  things  are  involved  in  confusion,  when  the 
hearts  of  the  wicked  shall  shake  like  the  leaves  of  the  forest, 
he  shall  be  kept  in  perfect  peace,  trusting  in  the  Lord. 

I  am,  with  the  greatest  deference,  &c. 


LETTER   X 

MY  LORD,  March  —  1773. 

USUALLY  for  some  days  before  I  purpose  writing  to 
your  Lordship,  my  thoughts  are  upon  the  stretch  for  a 
subject  ;  I  do  not  mean  all  day  long,  but  it  is  so  more 
or  less  ;  but  I  might  as  well  spare  my  inquiries,  I  can 
come  to  no  determination,  and  for  the  most  part  begin  to 
write  at  an  absolute  uncertainty  how  I  am  to  proceed. 
Since  I  cannot  premeditate,  my  heart  prays  that  it  may 
be  given  me  in  the  same  hour  what  I  shall  offer.  A  simple 


40  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

dependence  upon  the  teaching  and  influence  of  the  good 
Spirit  of  God,  so  as  not  to  supersede  the  use  of  appointed 
means,  would,  if  it  could  be  uniformly  maintained,  make 
every  part  of  duty  easy  and  successful.  It  would  free  us 
from-  much  solicitude,  and  prevent  many  mistakes. — Me- 
thinks  I  have  a  subject  in  view  already,  a  subject  of  great 
importance  to  myself,  and  which  perhaps  will  not  be  dis 
pleasing  to  your  Lordship  :  How  to  walk  with  God  in  the 
daily  occurrences  of  life,  so  as  to  do  every  thing  for  His  sake 
and  by  His  strength. 

When  we  are  justified  by  faith,  and  accepted  in  the 
Beloved,  we  become  heirs  of  everlasting  life :  but  we 
cannot  know  the  full  value  of  our  privileges  till  we  enter 
upon  the  state  of  glory.  For  this,  most  who  are  converted 
have  to  wait  some  time  after  they  are  partakers  of  grace. 
Though  the  Lord  loves  them,  hates  sin,  and  teaches  them 
to  hate  it,  He  appoints  them  to  remain  a  while  in  a  sinful 
world,  and  to  groan  under  the  burden  of  a  depraved  nature. 
He  could  put  them  in  immediate  possession  of  the  Heaven 
for  which  He  hath  given  them  a  meetness,  but  He  does  not. 
He  has  a  service  for  them  here,  an  honour  which  is  worthy 
all  they  can  suffer,  and  for  which  eternity  will  not  afford 
an  opportunity,  namely,  to  be  instruments  of  promoting 
His  designs,  and  manifesting  His  grace  in  the  world.  Strictly 
speaking,  this  is  the  whole  of  our  business  here,  the  only 
reason  why  life  is  prolonged,  or  for  which  it  is  truly  desir 
able,  that  we  may  fill  up  our  connexions  and  situations, 
improve  our  comforts  and  our  crosses,  in  such  a  manner 
as  that  God  may  be  glorified  in  us  and  by  us.  As  He  is  a 
bountiful  Master  and  a  kind  Father,  He  is  pleased  to  afford 
a  variety  of  temporal  blessings,  which  sweeten  our  service, 
and,  as  coming  from  His]  hand,  are  very  valuable,  but  are 
by  no  means  worth  living  for,  considered  in  themselves,  as 
they  can  neither  satisfy  our  desires,  nor  preserve  us  from 
trouble,  or  support  us  under  it.  That  light  of  God's  coun 
tenance,  which  can  pervade  the  walls  and  dissipate  the 
gloom  of  a  dungeon,  is  unspeakably  preferable  to  all 
that  can  be  enjoyed  in  a  palace  without  it.  The  true  end 
of  life  is,  to  live  not  to  ourselves,  but  to  Him  who  died  for 
us  ;  and  while  we  devote  ourselves  to  His  service  upon 
earth,  to  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  being  happy  with  Him  for 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    41 

ever  in  Heaven.  These  things  are  generally  known  and 
acknowledged  by  professors  ;  but  they  are  a  favoured  few 
who  act  consistently  with  their  avowed  principles;  who 
honestly,  diligently,  and  without  reserve,  endeavour  to 
make  the  most  of  their  talents  and  strength  in  promoting 
the  Lord's  service,  and  allow  themselves  in  no  views  or 
designs  but  what  are  plainly  subordinate  and  subservient 
to  it.  Yea,  I  believe  the  best  of  the  Lord's  servants  see  cause 
enough  to  confess,  that  they  are  not  only  unprofitable  in 
comparison  of  what  they  wish  to  be,  but  in  many  instances 
unfaithful  likewise.  They  find  so  many  snares,  hindrances, 
and  temptations  arising  from  without,  and  so  much  em 
barrassment  from  sin  which  dwells  within,  that  they  have 
more  cause  for  humiliation  than  self-complacence,  when 
they  seem  most  earnest  and  most  useful.  However,  we  have 
no  Scriptural  evidence  that  we  serve  the  Lord  at  all,  any 
farther  than  we  find  an  habitual  desire  and  aim  to  serve 
Him  wholly.  He  is  gracious  to  our  imperfections  and 
weakness  ;  yet  He  requires  all  the  heart,  and  will  not  be 
served  by  halves,  nor  accept  what  is  performed  by  a  divided 
spirit.  I  lately  met  with  some  profane  scoffs  of  Voltaire 
upon  the  sentiment  of  doing  all  to  the  glory  of  God,  (such  as 
might  be  expected  from  such  a  man  ;)  however,  this  is  the 
true  alchymy  which  turns  every  thing  to  gold,  and  ennobles 
the  common  actions  of  life  into  acts  of  religion,  i  Cor.  x.  31. 
Nor  is  there  a  grain  of  real  goodness  in  the  most  specious 
actions  which  are  performed  without  a  reference  to  God's 
glory.  This  the  world  cannot  understand ;  but  it  will 
appear  highly  reasonable  to  those  who  take  their  ideas 
of  God  from  the  Scripture,  and  who  have  felt  the  necessity, 
and  found  the  benefits  of  redemption. — We  are  debtors  many 
ways.  The  Lord  has  a  right  to  us  by  creation,  by  redemption, 
by  conquest,  when  He  freed  us  from  Satan's  power,  and  took 
possession  of  our  hearts  by  His  grace,  and,  lastly,  by  our 
own  voluntary  surrender  in  the  day  when  He  enabled  us  to 
fix  our  choice  on  Himself  as  our  Lord  and  our  portion. 
Then  we  felt  the  force  of  our  obligations,  we  saw  the  beauty 
and  honour  of  His  service,  and  that  nothing  was  worthy  to 
stand  in  the  least  degree  of  competition  with  it.  This  is 
always  equally  true,  though  our  perceptions  of  it  are  not 
always  equally  strong.  But  where  it  has  been  once  really 


42  CARDIPHONIA  : 

known,  it  cannot  be  wholly  forgotten,  or  cease  to  be  the 
governing  principle  of  life  :  and  the  Lord  has  promised  to 
revive  the  impression  in  those  who  wait  upon  Him,  and 
thereby  to  renew  their  strength.  For  in  proportion  as  we 
feel  by  what  ties  we  are  His,  we  shall  embrace  His  service  as 
perfect  freedom. 

Again,  when  the  eye  is  thus  single,  the  whole  body  will 
be  full  of  light.  The  principle  of  acting  simply  for  God 
will,  in  general,  make  the  path  of  duty  plain,  solve  a  thousand 
otherwise  dubious  questions,  lead  to  the  most  proper  and 
obvious  means,  and  preclude  that  painful  anxiety  about 
events,  which  upon  no  other  plan  can  be  avoided.  The  love 
of  God  is  the  best  casuist ;  especially  as  it  leads  us  to  a 
careful  attendance  to  His  precepts,  a  reliance  on  His  pro 
mises,  and  submission  to  His  will.  Most  of  our  perplexities 
arise  from  an  undue,  though  perhaps  an  unperceived,  attach 
ment  to  self.  Either  we  have  some  scheme  of  our  own  too 
closely  connected  with  our  general  view  of  serving  the  Lord, 
or  lay  some  stress  upon  our  own  management,  which,  though 
we  suspect  it  may  possibly  fail  us,  we  cannot  entirely  help 
trusting  to.  In  these  respects  the  Lord  permits  His  servants 
occasionally  to  feel  their  own  weakness  ;  but  if  they  are 
sincerely  devoted  to  Him,  He  will  teach  them  to  profit  by  it, 
and  bring  them  by  degrees  to  a  simplicity  of  dependence, 
as  well  as  of  intention.  Then  all  things  are  easy.  Acting 
from  love,  and  walking  by  faith,  they  can  neither  be  dis 
appointed  nor  discouraged.  Duty  is  their  part,  care  is 
His,  and  they  are  enabled  to  cast  it  upon  Him.  They  know 
that,  when  their  expedients  seem  to  fail,  He  is  still  all- 
sufficient.  They  know  that,  being  engaged  in  His  cause, 
they  cannot  miscarry  ;  and  that,  though  in  some  things  they 
may  seem  to  fall  short  of  success,  they  are  sure  of  meeting 
acceptance,  and  that  He  will  estimate  their  services,  not  by 
their  actual  effects,  but  according  to  the  gracious  principle 
and  desire  He  has  put  into  their  hearts,  2  Chron.  vi.  7,  8. 
I  am,  with  the  greatest  respect,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF   THE    HEART         43 

LETTER   XI 

MY  LORD,  June  —  1773. 

MY  old  cast-off  acquaintance,  Horace,  occasionally 
came  in  my  way  this  morning — I  opened  it  upon  lib.  3. 
od.  29.  Did  I  not  know  the  proposal  to  be  utterly  im 
practicable,  how  gladly  should  I  imitate  it,  and  send  your 
Lordship,  in  honest  prose,  if  not  in  elegant  verse,  an  invita 
tion  !  But  I  must  content  myself  with  the  idea  of  the 
pleasure  it  would  give  me  to  sit  with  you  half  a  day  under 
my  favourite  great  tree,  and  converse  with  you,  not  con 
cerning  the  comparatively  petty  affairs  of  human  govern 
ments,  but  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God. 
How  many  delightful  subjects  would  suggest  themselves  in 
a  free  and  retired  conversation  !  The  excellency  of  our 
King,  the  permanency  and  glory  of  His  kingdom,  the  beauty 
of  His  administration,  the  privileges  of  His  subjects,  the 
review  of  what  He  has  done  for  us,  and  the  prospect  of  what 
He  has  prepared  for  us  in  future  ; — and  if,  while  we  were 
conversing,  He  should  be  pleased  to  join  us,  (as  He  did 
the  disciples  when  walking  to  Emmaus,)  how  would  our 
hearts  burn  within  us  !  Indeed,  whether  we  are  alone,  or 
in  company,  the  most  interesting  topics  strike  us  but  faintly, 
unless  He  is  pleased  to  afford  His  gracious  influence  ;  but 
when  He  is  present,  light,  love,  liberty,  and  joy,  spring  up 
in  the  hearts  that  know  Him.  This  reminds  me  (as  I  have 
mentioned  Horace)  to  restore  some  beautiful  lines  to  their 
proper  application.  They  are  impious  and  idolatrous  as  he 
uses  them,  but  have  an  expressive  propriety  in  the  mouth 
of  a  believer  : — 

Lucem  redde  tuae,  dux  bone,  patrire 
Instar  veris  enim  vultus  ubi  tuus 
Affulsit  populo,  gratior  it  dies 
Et  soles  melius  nitent. 

But  we  cannot  meet.  All  that  is  left  for  me  is  to  use 
the  liberty  you  allow  me  of  offering  a  few  hints  upon  these 
subjects  by  letter,  not  because  you  know  them  not,  but 
because  you  love  them.  The  hour  is  coming,  when  all 
impediments  shall  be  removed.  All  distinctions  shall 


44  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

cease  that  are  founded  upon  sublunary  things,  and  the  earth 
and  all  its  works  shall  be  burnt  up.  Glorious  day  !  May 
our  souls  be  filled  with  the  thought,  and  learn  to  estimate 
all  things  around  us  now,  by  the  view  in  which  they  will 
appear  to  us  then.  Then  it  will  be  of  small  moment  who 
was' the  prince,  and  who  was  the  beggar  in  this  life  ; — but 
who  in  their  several  situations  sought,  and  loved,  and 
feared,  and  honoured  the  Lord.  Alas  !  how  many  of  the 
kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  rich  men,  and  the  chief  captains, 
and  the  mighty  men,  will  then  say  (in  vain)  to  the  moun 
tains  and  the  rocks,  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  !  In  this  world 
they  are,  for  the  most  part,  too  busy  to  regard  the  com 
mands  of  God,  or  too  happy  to  seek  His  favour  ;  they  have 
their  good  things  here  ;  they  please  themselves  for  a  while, 
and  in  a  moment  they  go  down  to  the  grave  :  in  that  moment 
their  thoughts  perish,  their  schemes  are  left  unfinished,  they 
are  torn  from  their  possessions,  and  enter  upon  a  new, 
an  untried,  an  unchangeable,  a  never-ending  state  of  exist 
ence.  Alas,  is  this  all  the  world  can  afford  !  I  congratulate 
you,  my  Lord,  not  because  God  has  appointed  you  to  appear 
in  an  elevated  rank,  (this,  abstracted  from  the  opportunity 
it  affords  you  of  greater  usefulness,  would  perhaps  be  a 
more  proper  subject  for  condolence  ; )  but  that  He  has 
admitted  you  to  those  honours  and  privileges  which  come 
from  Him  only,  and  which  so  few  in  the  superior  ranks  of 
life  think  worthy  of  their  attention.  I  doubt  not  but  you 
are  often  affected  with  a  sense  of  this  distinguishing  mercy. 
But  though  we  know  that  we  are  debtors,  great  debtors  to 
the  grace  of  God,  which  alone  has  made  us  to  differ,  we  know 
it  but  imperfectly  at  present.  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what 
we  shall  be,  nor  can  we  form  a  just  conception  of  the  misery 
from  which  we  are  redeemed,  much  less  of  the  price  paid  for 
our  redemption.  How  little  do  we  know  of  the  Redeemer's 
dignity  and  of  the  unutterable  distress  He  endured  when 
His  Soul  was  made  an  offering  for  sin,  and  it  pleased  the 
Father  to  bruise  Him,  that  by  His  stripes  we  might  be 
healed.  These  things  will  strike  us  quite  in  another  manner 
when  we  view  them  in  the  light  of  eternity.  Then,  to  return 
to  the  thought  from  which  I  have  rambled,  then  and  there 
I  trust  we  shall  meet  to  the  highest  advantage,  and  spend 
an  everlasting  day  together  in  happiness  and  praise.  With 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    45 

this  thought  I  endeavour  to  comfort  myself  under  the 
regret  I  sometimes  feel  that  I  can  have  so  little  intercourse 
with  you  in  this  life. 

May  the  cheering  contemplation  of  the  hope  set  before  us, 
support  and  animate  us  to  improve  the  interval,  and  fill  us 
with  a  holy  ambition  of  shining  as  lights  in  the  world,  to  the 
praise  and  glory  of  His  grace,  who  has  called  us  out  of 
darkness  !  Encompassed  as  we  are  with  snares,  temptations, 
and  infirmities,  it  is  possible  (by  His  promised  assistance) 
to  live  in  some  good  measure  above  the  world  while  we  are 
in  it  ;  above  the  influence  of  its  cares,  its  smiles,  or  its 
frowns.  Our  conversation,  TroXirev/m,  our  citizenship,  is  in 
Heaven.  We  are  not  at  home,  but  only  resident  here 
for  a  season,  to  fulfil  an  appointed  service  ;  and  the  Lord, 
whom  we  serve,  has  encouraged  us  to  hope,  that  He  will 
guide  us  by  His  wisdom,  strengthen  us  by  His  power,  and 
comfort  us  with  the  light  of  His  countenance,  which  is  better 
than  life.  Every  blessing  we  receive  from  Him  is  a  token  of 
His  favour,  and  a  pledge  of  that  far  more  exceeding  and 
eternal  weight  of  glory  which  He  has  reserved  for  us.  O  ! 
to  hear  Him  say  at  last,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful 
servant,  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord  !  "  will  be  a 
rich  amends  for  all  that  we  can  lose,  suffer,  or  forbear,  for 
His  sake. 

I  subscribe  myself,  with  great  sincerity,  &c. 


LETTER   XII 

MY  LORD,  February  —  1774. 

THE  first  line  of  Horace's  epistle  to  Augustus,  when 
rightly  applied,  suggests  a  grand  and  cheering  idea.  As 
addressed  by  the  poet,  nothing  can  be  more  blasphemous, 
idolatrous,  and  absurd  ;  but  with  what  comfort  and  pro 
priety  may  a  Christian  look  up  to  Him  to  whom  all  power 
is  committed  in  Heaven  and  earth,  and  say,  Cum  tot 
sustineas  et  tanta  negotia  solus  /  .  .  .  Surely  a  more 
weighty  and  comprehensive  sentence  never  dropped  from 
an  uninspired  pen.  And  how  beautifully  and  expressively 


46  CARDIPHONIA  : 

is  it  closed  by  the  word  solus  !  The  government  is  upon 
His  shoulders  :  and  though  He  is  concealed  by  a  veil  of 
second  causes  from  common  eyes,  so  that  they  can  perceive 
only  the  means,  instruments,  and  contingencies,  by  which 
He  works,  and  therefore  think  He  does  nothing  ;  yet,  in 
reality,  He  does  all,  according  to  His  own  counsel  and 
pleasure,  in  the  armies  of  Heaven,  and  among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth. 

Who  can  enumerate  the  tot  et  tanta  negotia,  which  are  in 
cessantly  before  His  eye,  adjusted  by  His  wisdom,  dependent 
on  His  will,  and  regulated  by  His  power  in  His  kingdoms 
of  providence  and  grace  ?  If  we  consider  the  heavens, 
the  works  of  His  fingers,  the  moon  and  the  stars  which  He 
has  ordained  ;  if  we  call  in  the  assistance  of  astronomers 
and  glasses  to  help  us  in  forming  a  conception  of  the  number, 
distances,  magnitude,  and  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  ; 
the  more  we  search,  the  more  we  shall  be  confirmed,  that 
these  are  but  a  portion  of  His  ways. — But  He  calls  them  all 
by  their  names,  upholds  them  by  His  power,  and  without 
His  continual  energy  they  would  rush  into  confusion,  or 
sink  into  nothing.  If  we  speak  of  intelligences,  He  is  the 
life,  the  joy,  the  sun  of  all  that  are  capable  of  happiness. 
Whatever  may  be  signified  by  the  thrones,  principalities, 
and  powers  in  the  world  of  light,  they  are  all  dependent 
upon  His  power,  and  obedient  to  His  command  ;  it  is 
equally  true  of  angels  as  of  men,  that  without  Him  they  can 
do  nothing.  The  powers  of  darkness  are  likewise  under 
His  subjection  and  control.  Though  but  little  is  said  of 
them  in  Scripture,  we  read  enough  to  assure  us  that  their 
number  must  be  immensely  great,  and  that  their  strength, 
subtilty,  and  malice,  are  such  as  we  may  tremble  to  think 
of  them  as  our  enemies,  and  probably  should,  but  for  our 
strange  insensibility  to  whatever  does  not  fall  under  the 
cognizance  of  our  outward  senses.  But  He  holds  them  all  in 
a  chain,  so  that  they  can  do  or  attempt  nothing  but  by  His 
permission  ;  and  whatever  He  permits  them  to  do  (though 
they  mean  nothing  less)  has  its  appointed  subserviency  in 
accomplishing  His  designs. 

But  to  come  nearer  home,  and  to  speak  of  what  seems  more 
suited  to  our  scanty  apprehensions, — still  we  may  be  lost 
in  wonder.  Before  this  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  all  the 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    47 

nations  of  the  earth  are  but  as  the  dust  upon  the  balance, 
and  the  small  drop  of  a  bucket,  and  might  be  thought  (if 
compared  with  the  immensity  of  His  works)  scarcely  worthy 
of  His  notice  :  yet  here  He  resides,  pervades,  provides, 
protects,  and  rules.  In  Him  His  creatures  live,  move, 
and  have  their  being  :  from  Him  is  their  food  and  preserva 
tion.  The  eyes  of  all  are  upon  Him  ;  what  He  gives  they 
gather,  and  can  gather  no  more  ;  and  at  His  word  they 
sink  into  the  dust. — There  is  not  a  worm  that  crawls  upon 
the  ground,  nor  a  flower  that  grows  in  the  pathless  wilder 
ness,  or  a  shell  upon  the  sea  shore,  but  bears  the  impress  of 
His  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness.  With  respect  to  men,  He 
reigns  with  uncontrolled  dominion  over  every  kingdom, 
family,  and  individual.  Here  we  may  be  astonished  at  His 
wisdom,  in  employing  free  agents,  the  greater  part  of  whom 
are  His  enemies,  to  accomplish  His  purposes.  But  however 
reluctant,  they  all  serve  Him.  His  patience  likewise  is 
wonderful.  Multitudes,  yea,  nearly  our  whole  species, 
spend  the  life  and  strength  which  He  affords  them,  and 
abuse  all  the  bounties  He  heaps  upon  them,  in  the  ways  of 
sin.  His  commands  are  disregarded,  His  name  blasphemed, 
His  mercy  disdained,  His  power  defied  ;  yet  still  He  spares. 
It  is  an  eminent  part  of  His  government  to  restrain  the 
depravity  of  human  nature,  and  in  various  ways  to  check  its 
effects,  which,  if  left  to  itself,  without  His  providential 
control,  would  presently  make  earth  the  very  image  of  hell. 
For  the  vilest  of  men  are  not  suffered  to  perpetrate  a 
thousandth  part  of  the  evil  which  their  hearts  would  prompt 
them  to.  The  earth,  though  lying  in  the  wicked  one,  is 
filled  with  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.  He  preserveth  man  and 
beast,  sustains  the  young  lion  in  the  forest,  feeds  the  birds 
of  the  air,  which  have  neither  store-house  nor  barn,  and 
adorns  the  insects  and  the  flowers  of  the  field  with  a  beauty 
and  elegance  beyond  all  that  can  be  found  in  the  courts  of 
kings. 

Still  more  wonderful  is  His  administration  in  His  kingdom 
of  grace.  He  is  present  with  all  His  creatures,  but  in  a 
peculiar  manner  with  His  own  people.  Each  of  these  are 
monuments  of  a  more  illustrious  display  of  power,  than  that 
which  spread  abroad  the  heavens  like  a  curtain,  and  laid 
the  foundations  of  the  earth  :  for  He  finds  them  all  in  a  state 


48  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

of  rebellion  and  enmity,  and  makes  them  a  willing  people  ; 
and  from  the  moment  He  reveals  His  love  to  them,  He 
espouses  their  cause,  and  takes  all  their  concerns  into  His 
own  hands.  He  is  near  and  attentive  to  every  one  of  them, 
as  if  there  was  only  that  one.  This  high  and  lofty  One, 
who  inhabits  eternity,  before  whom  the  angels  veil  their 
faces,  condescends  to  hold  communion  with  those  whom 
men  despise.  He  sees  not  as  man  seeth — rides  on  a  cloud 
disdainful  by  a  Sultan  or  a  Czar,  to  manifest  Himself  to  a 
humble  soul  in  a  mud-walled  cottage.  He  comforts  them 
when  in  trouble,  strengthens  them  when  weak,  makes  their 
beds  in  sickness,  revives  them  when  fainting,  upholds  them 
when  falling,  and  so  seasonably  and  effectually  manages  for 
them,  that  though  they  are  persecuted  and  tempted,  though 
their  enemies  are  many  and  mighty,  nothing  that  they  feel 
or  fear  is  able  to  separate  them  from  His  love. 

And  all  thus  He  does  solus.  All  the  abilities,  powers,  and 
instincts,  that  are  found  amongst  creatures,  are  emanations 
from  His  fulness.  All  changes,  successes,  disappointments, 
— all  that  is  memorable  in  the  annals  of  hi  story,  all  the 
risings  and  falls  of  empires,  all  the  turns  in  human  life,  take 
place  according  to  His  plan.  In  vain  men  contrive  and 
combine  to  accomplish  their  own  counsels,  unless  they  are 
parts  of  His  counsel  likewise  ;  the  efforts  of  their  utmost 
strength  and  wisdom  are  crossed  and  reversed  by  the  feeblest 
and  most  unthought-of  circumstances.  But  when  He 
has  a  work  to  accomplish,  and  His  time  is  come,  however 
inadequate  and  weak  the  means  He  employs  may  seem  to  a 
carnal  eye,  the  success  is  infallibly  secured  :  for  all  things 
serve  Him,  and  are  in  His  hands  as  clay  in  the  hands  of  the 
potter.  Great  and  marvellous  are  Thy  works,  Lord  God 
Almighty  !  just  and  true  are  Thy  ways,  Thou  King  of 
Saints  ! 

This  is  the  God  whom  we  adore.  This  is  He  who  invites 
us  to  lean  upon  His  almighty  arm,  and  promises  to  guide  us 
with  His  unerring  eye.  He  says  to  you,  my  Lord,  and  even 
to  me,  Fear  not,  I  am  with  thee  ;  be  not  dismayed,  I  am  Thy 
God  ;  I  will  strengthen  thee,  yea,  I  will  help  thee  ;  yea, 
I  will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  My  righteousness. 
Therefore,  while  in  the  path  of  duty,  and  following  His  call, 
we  may  cheerfully  pass  on,  regardless  of  apparent  difficulties  ; 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    49 

for  the  Lord,  whose  we  are,  and  who  has  taught  us  to  make 
His  glory  our  highest  end,  will  go  before  us  ;  and  at  His  word, 
crooked  things  become  straight,  light  shines  out  of  darkness, 
and  mountains  sink  into  plains.  Faith  may  and  must  be 
exercised,  experience  must  and  will  confirm  what  His  word 
declares,  that  the  heart  is  deceitful,  and  that  man  in  his  best 
estate  is  vanity.  But  His  promises  to  them  that  fear  Him 
shall  be  confirmed  likewise,  and  they  shall  find  Him,  in  all 
situations,  a  sun,  a  shield,  and  an  exceeding  great  reward. 

I  have  lost  another  of  my  people,  a  mother  in  our  Israel ; 
a  person  of  much  experience,  eminent  grace,  wisdom,  and 
usefulness.  She  walked  with  God  forty  years  :  she  was  one 
of  the  Lord's  poor  ;  but  her  poverty  was  decent,  sanctified, 
and  honourable  :  she  lived  respected,  and  her  death  is 
considered  as  a  public  loss.  It  is  a  great  loss  to  me  ;  I  shall 
miss  her  advice  and  example,  by  which  I  have  been  often 
edified  and  animated.  But  Jesus  still  lives.  Almost  her 
last  words  were,  The  Lord  is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   XIII 

MY  LORD,  March  10,  1774. 

FOR  about  six  weeks  past  I  have  had  occasion  to  spend 
several  hours  of  almost  every  day  with  the  sick  and  the 
dying.  These  scenes  are  to  a  minister  like  walking  the 
hospitals  to  a  young  surgeon.  The  various  cases  which 
occur,  exemplify,  illustrate,  and  explain,  with  a  commanding 
energy,  many  truths  which  may  be  learned  indeed  at  home 
but  cannot  be  so  well  understood,  or  their  force  so  sensibly 
felt,  without  the  advantage  of  experience  and  observation. 
As  physicians,  besides  that  competent  general  knowledge  of 
their  profession,  which  should  be  common  to  them  all,  have 
usually  their  several  favourite  branches  of  study,  some 
applying  themselves  more  to  botany,  others  to  chemistry, 
others  to  anatomy  ;  so  ministers,  as  their  inclinations  and 
gifts  differ,  are  led  more  closely  to  consider  some  particular 
branch  of  the  system  of  divine  truth.  Some  are  directed 

c  D 


50  CARDIPHONIA  : 

to  state  and  defend  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel ;  some  have 
a  talent  for  elucidating  difficult  texts  of  Scripture  ;  some 
have  a  turn  for  explaining  the  prophetical  parts,  and  so  of 
the  rest.  For  myself  if  it  be  lawful  to  speak  of  myself,  and 
so  far  as  I  can  judge,  anatomy  is  my  favourite  branch  ;  I 
mean  the  study  of  the  human  heart,  with  its  workings  and 
counter-workings,  as  it  is  differently  affected  in  a  state  of 
nature  or  of  grace,  in  the  different  seasons  of  prosperity, 
adversity,  conviction,  temptation,  sickness,  and  the  ap 
proach  of  death.  The  Lord,  by  sending  me  hither,  provided 
me  a  good  school  for  these  purposes.  I  know  not  where  I 
could  have  had  a  better,  or  affording  a  greater  variety  of 
characters,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  people  ;  and  as 
they  are  mostly  a  poor  people,  and  strangers  to  that  address 
which  is  the  result  of  education  and  converse  with  the  world, 
there  is  a  simplicity  in  what  they  say  or  do,  which  gives  me 
a  peculiar  advantage  in  judging  of  their  cases. 

But  I  was  about  to  speak  of  death.  Though  the  grand 
evidence  of  those  truths  upon  which  our  hopes  are  built, 
arises  from  the  authority  of  God  speaking  them  in  His  word, 
and  revealing  them  by  His  Spirit,  to  the  awakened  heart, 
(for  till  the  heart  is  awakened,  it  is  incapable  of  receiving 
this  evidence  ;)  yet  some  of  these  truths  are  so  mysterious, 
so  utterly  repugnant  to  the  judgment  of  depraved  nature, 
that  through  the  remaining  influence  of  unbelief  and  vain 
reasoning,  the  temptations  of  Satan,  and  the  subtile  argu 
ments  with  which  some  men,  reputed  wise,  attack  the 
foundations  of  our  faith,  the  minds  even  of  believers  are 
sometimes  capable  of  being  shaken.  I  know  no  better 
corroborating  evidence  for  the  relief  of  the  mind  under  such 
assaults  than  the  testimony  of  dying  persons,  especially 
of  such  as  have  lived  out  of  the  noise  of  controversy,  and 
who,  perhaps,  never  heard  a  syllable  of  what  has  been 
started  in  these  evil  days  against  the  Deity  of  Christ,  His 
atonement,  and  other  important  articles.  Permit  me,  my 
Lord,  to  relate,  upon  this  occasion  some  things  which 
exceedingly  struck  me  in  the  conversation  I  had  with  a 
young  woman  whom  I  visited  in  her  last  illness,  about 
two  years  ago.  She  was  a  sober,  prudent  person,  of  plain 
sense,  could  read  her  Bible,  but  had  read  little  beside  :  her 
knowledge  of  the  world  was  nearly  confined  to  the  parish  ; 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    51 

for  I  suppose  she  was  seldom,  if  ever,  twelve  miles  from  home 
in  her  life.  She  had  known  the  Gospel  about  seven  years 
before  the  Lord  visited  her  with  a  lingering  consumption, 
which  at  length  removed  her  to  a  better  world.  A  few  days 
before  her  death,  I  had  been  praying  by  her  bedside,  and 
in  my  prayer  I  thanked  the  Lord,  that  He  gave  her  now  to 
see  that  she  had  not  followed  cunningly-devised  fables. 
When  I  had  finished,  she  repeated  that  word,  "  No  (she 
said),  not  cunningly-devised  fables ;  these  are  realities 
indeed  ;  I  feel  their  truth,  I  feel  their  comfort.  O  tell 
my  friends,  tell  my  acquaintance,  tell  inquiring  souls,  tell 
poor  sinners,  tell  all  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem,  (alluding 
to  Solomon's  Song,  v.  16,  from  which  she  had  just  before 
desired  me  to  preach  at  her  funeral),  what  Jesus  has  done 
for  my  soul.  Tell  them,  that  now,  in  the  time  of  need,  I 
find  Him  my  Beloved  and  my  Friend,  and  as  such  I  commend 
Him  to  them."  She  then  fixed  her  eyes  steadfastly  upon  me, 
and  proceeded,  as  well  as  I  can  recollect,  as  follows  :  "  Sir, 
you  are  highly  favoured  in  being  called  to  preach  the  Gospel. 
I  have  often  heard  you  with  pleasure  ;  but  give  me  leave 
to  tell  you,  that  I  now  see  all  you  have  said,  or  can  say,  is 
comparatively  but  little.  Nor  till  you  come  into  my 
situation,  and  have  death  and  eternity  full  in  your  view, 
will  it  be  possible  for  you  to  conceive  the  vast  weight  and 
importance  of  the  truths  you  declare.  Oh  !  Sir,  it  is  a 
serious  thing  to  die  ;  no  words  can  express  what  is  needful 
to  support  the  soul  in  the  solemnity  of  a  dying  hour." 

I  believe  it  was  the  next  day  when  I  visited  her  again. 
After  some  discourse  as  usual,  she  said,  with  a  remarkable 
vehemence  of  speech,  "  Are  you  sure  I  cannot  be  mistaken  ?  " 
I  answered  without  hesitation,  "  Yes,  I  am  sure  ;  I  am  not 
afraid  to  say,  My  soul  for  yours,  that  you  are  right."  She 
paused  a  little,  and  then  replied,  "  You  say  true  ;  I  know  I 
am  right.  I  feel  that  my  hope  is  fixed  upon  the  Rock  of 
Ages  ;  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed.  Yet,  if  you  could 
see  with  my  eyes,  you  would  not  wonder  at  my  question. 
But  the  approach  of  death  presents  a  prospect,  which  is  till 
then  hidden  from  us,  and  which  cannot  be  described."  She 
said  much  more  to  the  same  purpose  ;  and  in  all  she  spoke 
there  was  a  dignity,  weight,  and  evidence,  which  I  suppose 
few  professors  of  divinity,  when  lecturing  from  the  chair, 

D  2 


52  CARD1PHONIA  : 

have  at  any  time  equalled.  We  may  well  say  with  Elihu, 
who  teacheth  like  Him  ?  Many  instances  of  the  like  kind  I 
have  met  with  here.  I  have  a  poor  girl  near  me  who  looks 
like  an  idiot,  and  her  natural  capacity  is  indeed  very  small ; 
but  the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  make  her  acquainted  altern 
ately  with  great  temptations,  and  proportionably  great  dis 
coveries  of  His  love  and  truth.  Sometimes,  when  her  heart 
is  enlarged,  I  listen  to  her  with  astonishment.  I  think  no 
books  or  ministers  I  ever  met  with  have  given  me  such  an 
impression  and  understanding  of  what  the  apostle  styles 
TO.  ftadrj  TOV  9tov,  as  I  have  upon  some  occasions  received 
from  her  conversation. 

But  I  am  rambling  again.  My  attendance  upon  the  sick 
is  not  always  equally  comfortable  ;  but  could  I  learn  aright, 
it  might  be  equally  instructive.  Some  confirm  the  precious- 
ness  of  a  Saviour  to  me,  by  the  cheerfulness  with  which, 
through  faith  in  His  name,  they  meet  the  king  of  terrors. 
Others  no  less  confirm  it,  by  the  terror  and  reluctance  they 
discover  when  they  find  they  must  die  ;  for  though  there 
are  too  many  who  sadly  slight  the  blessed  Gospel  while  they 
are  in  health,  yet  in  this  place  most  are  too  far  enlightened 
to  be  quite  thoughtless  about  their  souls,  if  they  retain  their 
senses,  in  their  last  illness.  Then,  like  the  foolish  virgins, 
they  say,  Give  us  of  your  oil :  then  they  are  willing  that 
ministers  and  professors  should  pray  with  them  and  speak  to 
them.  Through  the  Lord's  goodness,  several  whom  I  have 
visited  in  these  circumstances  have  afforded  me  good  hope  ; 
they  have  been  savingly  changed  by  His  blessing  upon  what 
has  passed  at  the  eleventh  hour.  I  have  seen  a  marvellous 
and  blessed  change  take  place  in  their  language,  views,  and 
tempers,  in  a  few  days.  I  now  visit  a  young  person,  who  is 
cut  short  in  her  nineteenth  year  by  a  consumption,  and  I 
think  cannot  live  many  days.  I  found  her  very  ignorant 
and  insensible,  and  she  remained  so  a  good  while  ;  but  of  late 
I  hope  her  heart  is  touched.  She  feels  her  lost  state,  she 
seems  to  have  some  right  desires,  she  begins  to  pray,  and  in 
such  a  manner  as  I  cannot  but  hope  the  Lord  is  teaching 
her,  and  will  reveal  Himself  to  her  before  she  departs.  But 
it  is  sometimes  otherwise.  I  saw  a  young  woman  die  last 
week  ;  I  had  been  often  with  her  ;  but  the  night  she  was 
removed  she  could  only  say,  O,  I  cannot  live,  I  cannot  live  ! 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    53 

She  repeated  this  mournful  complaint  as  long  as  she  could 
speak  ;  for  as  the  vital  powers  were  more  oppressed,  her  voice 
was  changed  into  groans  ;  her  groans  grew  fainter  and 
fainter,  and  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  she  had 
done  speaking  she  expired.  Poor  thing  !  I  thought,  as  I 
stood  by  her  bedside,  if  you  were  a  duchess,  in  this  situation, 
what  could  the  world  do  for  you  now  !  I  thought  likewise 
how  many  things  are  there  that  now  give  us  pleasure  or 
pain,  and  assume  a  mighty  importance  in  our  view,  which,  in 
a  dying  hour,  will  be  no  more  to  us  than  the  clouds  which 
fly  unnoticed  over  our  heads.  Then  the  truth  of  our  Lord's 
aphorism  will  be  seen,  felt,  and  acknowledged,  "  One  thing  is 
needful  ".;  and  we  shall  be  ready  to  apply  Grotius'  dying 
confession  to  (alas  !)  a  great  part  of  our  lives,  Ah  !  vitam 
perdidi,  nihil  agenda  laboriose. 

Your  Lordship  allows  me  to  send  unpremeditated  letters. 
I  need  not  assure  you  this  is  one. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   XIV 

MY  LORD,  March  24,  1774. 

WHAT  a  mercy  is  it  to  be  separated  in  spirit,  conversa 
tion,  and  interest,  from  the  world  that  knows  not  God,  where 
all  are  alike  by  nature  !  Grace  makes  a  happy  and  un 
speakable  difference.  Believers  were  once  under  the  same 
influence  of  that  spirit  who  still  worketh  in  the  children  of 
disobedience,  pursuing  different  paths,  but  all  equally  remote 
from  truth  and  peace  ;  some  hatching  cockatrice'  eggs,  others 
weaving  spiders'  webs.  These  two  general  heads  of  mischief 
and  vanity  include  all  the  schemes,  aims,  and  achievements 
of  which  man  is  capable,  till  God  is  pleased  to  visit  the  heart 
with  His  grace.  The  busy  part  of  mankind  are  employed  in 
multiplying  evils  and  miseries  ;  the  more  retired,  speculative, 
and  curious,  are  amusing  themselves  with  what  will  here 
after  appear  as  unsubstantial,  unstable,  and  useless  as  a  cob 
web.  Death  will  soon  sweep  away  all  that  the  philosophers, 
the  virtuosi,  the  mathematicians,  the  antiquarians,  and 


54  CARDIPHONIA  : 

other  learned  triflers,  are  now  weaving  with  so  much  self- 
applauded  address.  Nor  will  the  fine-spun  dresses,  in  which 
the  moralist  and  the  self-righteous  clothe  themselves,  be  of 
more  advantage  to  them,  either  for  ornament  or  defence 
than  the  produce  of  a  spider.  But  it  is  given  to  a  few  to 
know  their  present  state  and  future  destination. — These 
build  upon  the  immovable  Rock  of  Ages  for  eternity  :  these 
are  trees  springing  from  a  living  root,  and  bear  the  fruits 
of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  glory  and 
praise  of  God  :  these  only  are  awake,  while  the  rest  of  the 
world  are  in  a  sleep,  indulging  in  vain  dreams  from  which 
likewise  they  will  shortly  awake  ;  but,  O  with  what  con 
sternation,  when  they  shall  find  themselves  irrecoverably 
divorced  from  all  their  delusive  attachments,  and  compelled 
to  appear  before  that  God  to  whom  they  have  lived  strangers, 
and  to  whom  they  must  give  an  account  !  O  for  a  thousand 
tongues  to  proclaim  in  the  ears  of  thoughtless  mortals  that 
important  aphorism  of  our  Lord,  "  One  thing  is  needful  !  " 
Yet  a  thousand  tongues  would  be,  and  are  employed  in 
vain,  unless  so  far  as  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  send  the  watch 
man's  warning,  by  the  power  and  agency  of  His  own  Spirit. 
I  think  the  poet  tells  us,  that  Cassandra  had  the  gift  of  truly 
foretelling  future  events  ;  but  she  was  afterwards  laid  under 
a  painful  embarrassment,  that  nobody  should  believe  her 
words.  Such,  with  respect  to  the  bulk  of  their  auditories, 
is  the  lot  of  Gospel-ministers  :  they  are  enlightened  to  see, 
and  sent  forth  to  declare,  the  awful  consequences  of  sin  ;  but, 
alas !  how  few  believe  their  report  1  To  illustrate  our  grief 
and  disappointment,  I  sometimes  suppose  there  is  dangerous 
water  in  the  way  of  travellers,  over  which  there  is  a  bridge 
which  those  who  can  be  prevailed  upon  may  pass  with  safety. 
By  the  side  of  this  bridge  watchmen  are  placed,  to  warn 
passengers  of  the  danger  of  the  waters  ;  to  assure  them, 
that  all  who  attempt  to  go  through  them  inevitably  perish  ; 
to  invite,  entreat,  and  beseech  them,  if  they  value  their 
lives,  to  cross  the  bridge.  Methinks  this  should  be  an  easy 
task  :  yet  if  we  should  see  in  fact  the  greater  part  stopping 
their  ears  to  the  friendly  importunity  ;  many  so  much 
offended  by  it  as  to  account  the  watchman's  care  impertinent, 
and  only  deserving  of  scorn  and  ill-treatment ;  hardly  one 
in  fifty  betaking  themselves  to  the  friendlv  bridge,  the  rest 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    55 

eagerly  plunging  into  the  waters,  from  which  none  return,  as 
if  they  were  determined  to  try  who  should  be  drowned  first : 
this  spectacle  would  be  no  unfit  emblem  of  the  reception 
the  Gospel  meets  with  from  a  blinded  world.  The  ministers 
are  rejected,  opposed,  vilified  ;  they  are  accounted  troublers 
of  the  world,  because  they  dare  not,  cannot  stand  silent, 
while  sinners  are  perishing  before  their  eyes  ;  and  if,  in  the 
course  of  many  sermons,  they  can  prevail  but  on  one  soul  to 
take  timely  warning,  and  to  seek  to  Jesus,  who  is  the  way, 
the  truth,  and  the  life,  they  may  account  it  a  mercy  and  an 
honour,  sufficient  to  overbalance  all  the  labour  and 
reproaches  they  are  called  to  endure.  From  the  most  they 
must  expect  no  better  reception  than  the  Jews  gave  to 
Jeremiah,  who  told  the  prophet  to  his  face,  As  to  the  word 
thou  hast  spoken  to  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  we  will  not 
hearken  to  thee  at  all,  but  we  will  certainly  do  whatsoever 
thing  goeth  forth  out  of  our  own  mouth.  Surely,  if  the  Lord 
has  given  us  any  sense  of  the  worth  of  our  souls,  any  com 
passion  towards  them,  this  must  be  a  painful  exercise  ; 
and  experience  must  teach  us  something  of  the  meaning 
of  Jeremiah's  pathetic  exclamation,  "  O  that  my  head  were 
waters,  and  mine  eyes  fountains  of  tears,  that  I  might  weep 
day  and  night  for  the  slain  of  the  daughters  of  my  people  !  " 
It  is  our  duty  to  be  thus  affected.  Our  relief  lies  in  the 
wisdom  and  sovereignty  of  God.  He  reveals  His  salvation  to 
whom  He  pleases, — for  the  most  part  to  babes  ;  from  the 
bulk  of  the  wise  and  the  prudent  it  is  hidden.  Thus  it  has 
pleased  Him,  and  therefore  it  must  be  right.  Yea,  He  will 
one  day  condescend  to  justify  the  propriety  and  equity  of 
His  proceedings  to  His  creatures  :  then  every  mouth  will 
be  stopped,  and  none  will  be  able  to  reply  against  their 
Judge.  Light  is  come  into  the  world,  but  men  prefer  dark 
ness.  They  hate  the  light,  resist  it,  and  rebel  against  it. 
It  is  true  all  do  so  ;  and  therefore,  if  all  were  to  perish  under 
the  condemnation,  their  ruin  would  be  their  own  act.  It  is 
of  grace  that  any  are  saved,  and  in  the  distribution  of  that 
grace,  He  does  what  He  will  with  His  own  :  a  right  which 
most  are  ready  enough  to  claim  in  their  own  concerns, 
though  they  are  so  unwilling  to  allow  it  to  the  Lord  of  all. 
Many  perplexing  and  acrimonious  disputes  have  been 
started  upon  this  subject ;  but  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord 


56  CARDIPHONIA  : 

are  called,  not  to  dispute,  but  to  admire  and  rejoice  ;  to 
love,  adore,  and  obey.  To  know  that  He  loved  us,  and  gave 
Himself  for  us,  is  the  constraining  argument  and  motive  to 
love  Him,  and  surrender  ourselves  to  Him  ;  to  consider 
ourselves  as  no  longer  our  own,  but  to  devote  ourselves  with 
every  faculty,  power,  and  talent  to  His  service  and  glory. 
He  deserves  our  all,  for  He  parted  with  all  for  us.  He 
made  Himself  poor, — He  endured  shame,  torture,  death, 
and  the  curse  for  us,  that  we  through  Him  might  inherit 
everlasting  life.  Ah  !  the  hardness  of  my  heart,  that  I  am 
no  more  affected,  astonished,  overpowered  with  this  thought. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   XV 

MY  LORD,  April  20,  1774. 

I  HAVE  been  pondering  a  good  while  for  a  subject, 
and  at  last  begin  without  one,  hoping  that  (as  it  has  often 
happened)  while  I  am  writing  one  line,  something  will 
occur  to  fill  up  another.  Indeed  I  have  an  inexhaustible 
fund  at  hand ;  but  it  is  to  me  often  like  a  prize  in  the  hand 
of  a  fool,  I  want  skill  to  improve  it.  O  for  a  warm,  a  suitable, 
a  seasonable  train  of  thought  that  might  enliven  my  own 
heart,  and  not  be  unworthy  your  Lordship's  perusal ! 
Methinks  the  poets  can  have  but  cold  comfort,  when  they 
invocate  a  fabled  Muse  ;  but  we  have  a  warrant,  a  right, 
to  look  up  for  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  ordains 
strength  for  us,  and  has  promised  to  work  in  us.  What  a 
comfort,  what  an  honour  is  this,  that  worms  have  liberty  to 
look  up  to  God  !  and  that  He,  the  high  and  holy  One  who 
inhabiteth  eternity,  is  pleased  to  look  down  upon  us,  to 
maintain  our  peace,  to  supply  our  wants,  to  guide  us  with 
His  eye,  and  to  inspire  us  with  wisdom  and  grace  suitable  to 
our  occasions  !  They  who  profess  to  know  something  of 
this  intercourse,  and  to  depend  upon  it,  are  by  the  world 
accounted  enthusiasts,  who  know  not  what  they  mean,  or 
perhaps  hypocrites,  who  pretend  to  what  they  have  not,  in 
order  to  cover  some  base  designs. — But  we  have  reason 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    57 

to  bear  their  reproaches  with  patience.     Could  the  miser 

say, 

Populus  me  sibilat,  at  mihi  plaudo 

Ipse  domi,  simul  ac  nummos  contemplor  in  area  : 

Well  then  may  the  believer  say,  Let  them  laugh,  let  them 
rage,  let  them,  if  they  please,  point  at  me  for  a  fool  as  I 
walk  the  streets  ;  if  I  do  but  take  up  the  Bible,  or  run  over 
in  my  mind  the  inventory  of  the  blessings  with  which  the 
Lord  has  enriched  me,  I  have  sufficient  amends.  Jesus  is 
mine  ;  in  Him  I  have  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification 
and  redemption,  an  interest  in  all  the  promises  and  in  all 
the  perfections  of  God  ;  He  will  guide  me  by  His  counsel, 
support  me  by  His  power,  comfort  me  with  His  presence 
while  I  am  here,  and  afterwards,  when  flesh  and  heart  fail, 
He  will  receive  me  to  His  glory. 

Let  them  say  what  they  will,  they  shall  not  dispute  or 
laugh  us  out  of  our  spiritual  senses.  If  all  the  blind  men  in 
the  kingdom  should  endeavour  to  bear  me  down,  that  the 
sun  is  not  bright,  or  that  the  rainbow  has  no  colours,  I  would 
still  believe  my  own  eyes.  I  have  seen  them  both  ;  they 
have  not.  I  cannot  prove  to  their  satisfaction  what  I 
assert,  because  they  are  destitute  of  sight,  the  necessary 
medium  ;  yet  their  exceptions  produce  no  uncertainty  in 
my  mind  :  they  would  not,  they  could  not  hesitate  a  moment 
if  they  were  not  blind.  Just  so,  they  who  have  been  taught 
of  God,  who  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  have  an 
experimental  perception  of  the  truth,  which  renders  them 
proof  against  all  the  sophistry  of  infidels.  I  am  persuaded 
we  have  many  plain  people  here,  who,  if  a  wise  man  of  the 
world  was  to  suggest  that  the  Bible  is  a  human  invention, 
would  be  quite  at  a  loss  how  to  answer  him  by  arguments 
drawn  from  external  evidences  ;  yet  they  have  found  such 
effects  from  this  blessed  book,  that  they  would  be  no  more 
moved  by  the  insinuation,  than  if  they  were  told,  that 
a  cunning  man,  or  set  of  men,  invented  the  sun,  and  placed 
it  in  the  firmament.  So,  if  a  wise  Socinian  was  to  tell 
them,  that  the  Saviour  was  only  a  man,  like  themselves, 
they  would  conceive  just  such  an  opinion  of  his  skill  in 
divinity,  as  a  philosopher  would  do  of  a  clown's  skill  in 
astronomy,  who  should  affirm  that  the  sun  was  no  bigger 
than  a  cart-wheel. 


58  CARDIPHONIA  : 

It  remains  therefore  a  truth,  in  defiance  of  all  the  cavils 
of  the  ignorant,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  does  influence  the  hearts 
of  all  the  children  of  God,  or,  in  other  words,  they  are  in 
spired,  not  with  new  revelations,  but  with  grace  and  wisdom 
to  understand,  apply,  and  feed  upon  the  great  things  already 
revealed  in  the  Scriptures,  without  which  the  Scriptures  are 
as  useless  as  spectacles  to  the  blind.  Were  it  not  so,  when  we 
become  acquainted  with  the  poverty,  ignorance,  and  wicked 
ness  of  our  hearts,  we  must  sit  down  in  utter  despair  of  being 
ever  able  to  think  a  good  thought,  to  offer  a  single  petition 
aright  in  prayer,  or  to  take  one  safe  step  in  the  path  of  life. 
But  now  we  may  be  content  with  our  proper  weakness, 
since  the  power  and  Spirit  of  Christ  are  engaged  to  rest  upon 
us ;  and  wliile  we  are  preserved  in  a  simple  dependence 
upon  this  help,  though  unable  of  ourselves  to  do  any 
thing,  we  shall  find  an  ability  to  do  every  thing  that  our 
circumstances  and  duty  call  for.  What  is  weaker  than  a 
worm  ?  Yet  the  Lord's  worms  shall  in  His  strength  thresh 
the  mountains,  and  make  the  hills  as  chaff.  But  this  life 
of  faith,  tliis  living  and  acting  by  a  power  above  our  own, 
is  an  inexplicable  mystery,  till  experience  makes  it  plain. 
I  have  often  wondered  that  St.  Paul  has  obtained  so  much 
quarter  at  the  hands  of  some  people,  as  to  pass  with  them  for 
a  man  of  sense  ;  for  surely  the  greatest  part  of  his  writings 
must  be  to  the  last  degree  absurd  and  unintelligible  upon 
their  principles.  How  many  contradictions  must  they  find, 
for  instance,  if  they  give  any  attention  to  what  they  read  in 
that  one  passage,  Gal.  ii.  20 :  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ : 
Nevertheless  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  :  and 
the  life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  faith  in  the 
Son  of  God,  who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me." 

And  as  believers  are  thus  inspired  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
who  furnishes  them  with  desires,  motives,  and  abilities,  to 
perform  what  is  agreeable  to  His  will  ;  so  I  apprehend,  that 
they  who  live  without  God  in  the  world,  whom  the  apostle 
styles  sensual,  not  having  the  Spirit,  are  in  a  greater  or  less 
degree  ad  captum  recipientis,  under  what  I  may  calFa  black 
inspiration.  After  making  the^best  allowances  I  can,  both 
for  the  extent  of  human  genius  and  the  deplorable  evil  of 
the  human  heart,  I  cannot  suppose  that  one-half  of  the 
wicked  wit,  of  which  some  persons  are  so  proud,  is  properly 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    59 

their  own.  Perhaps  such  a  one  as  Voltaire  would  neither 
have  written,  nor  have  been  read  or  admired  so  much,  if  he 
had  not  been  the  amanuensis  of  an  abler  hand  in  his  own  way. 
Satan  is  always  near  when  the  heart  is  disposed  to  receive 
him  ;  and  the  Lord  withdraws  His  restraints  to  heighten  the 
sinner's  ability  of  sinning  with  an  eclat,  and  assisting  him  with 
such  strokes  of  blasphemy,  malice,  and  falsehood,  as  perhaps 
he  could  not  otherwise  have  attained.  Therefore  I  do  not 
wonder  that  they  are  clever  and  smart,  that  they  raise  a 
laugh,  and  are  received  with  applause  among  those  who  are 
like-minded  with  themselves.  But  unless  the  Lord  is 
pleased  to  grant  them  repentance,  (though  it  is  rather  to  be 
feared  some  of  them  are  given  up  to  judicial  hardness  of 
heart)  how  much  better  would  it  have  been  for  them  had 
they  been  born  idiots  or  lunatics,  than  to  be  distinguished 
as  the  willing,  industrious,  and  successful  instruments  of 
the  powers  of  darkness,  in  beguiling,  perverting,  and  ruining 
the  souls  of  men  !  Alas  !  what  are  parts  and  talents,  or 
any  distinctions  which  give  pre-eminence  in  life,  unless  they 
are  sanctified  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  directed  to  the 
accomplishment  of  His  will  and  glory !  From  the  expression, 
Bind  them  in  bundles  and  burn  them,  I  have  been  led  to 
think,  that  the  deceivers  and  the  deceived,  they  who  have 
prostituted  their  gifts  or  influence  to  encourage  others  in 
sin,  and  they  who  have  perished  by  their  means,  may  in 
another  world  have  some  peculiar  and  inseparable  con 
nexion,  and  spend  an  eternity  in  fruitless  lamentations,  that 
ever  they  were  connected  here. 

Your  Lordship,  I  doubt  not,  feels  the  force  of  that  line, 

O  to  grace  how  great  a  debtor  ! 

Had  not  the  Lord  separated  you  for  Himself,  your  rank, 
your  abilities,  your  influence,  which  now  you  chiefly 
value  as  enlarging  your  opportunities  of  usefulness,  might, 
nay,  certainly  would,  have  been  diverted  into  the  opposite 
channel.  I  am,  &c. 


60  CARDIPHOXIA  : 


LETTER   XVI 

MY  LORD,  Nov.  5,  1774. 

I  HAVE  not  till  very  lately  had  recourse  to  the  expe 
dient  of  descanting  upon  a  text ;  but  I  believe  it  the  best 
method  I  can  take  to  avoid  ringing  changes  upon  a  few 
obvious  topics,  which  I  suppose  uniformly  present  them 
selves  to  my  mind  when  I  am  about  to  write  to  your 
Lordship.  Just  now,  that  sweet  expression  of  David 
occurred  to  my  thoughts,  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd  /  .  .  . 
Permit  me,  without  plan  or  premeditation,  to  make  a  few 
observations  upon  it ;  and  may  your  Lordship  feel  the  peace, 
the  confidence,  the  blessedness,  which  a  believing  applica 
tion  of  the  words  is  suited  to  inspire. 

The  Socinians  and  others,  in  their  unhappy  laboured 
attempts  to  darken  the  principal  glory  and  foundation- 
comfort  of  the  Gospel,  employ  their  critical  sophistry  against 
those  texts  which  expressly  and  doctrinally  declare  the 
Redeemer's  character  ;  and  affect  to  triumph,  if  in  any 
manuscript  or  ancient  version  they  can  find  a  variation  from 
the  received  copies  which  seems  to  favour  their  cause. 
But  we  may  venture  to  wave  the  authority  of  every  disputed 
or  disputable  text,  and  maintain  the  truth  against  their 
cavils,  from  the  current  language  and  tenor  of  the  whole 
Scripture.  David's  words  in  Psa.  xxiii.  are  alone  a  decisive 
proof  that  Jesus  is  Jehovah,  if  they  will  but  allow  two  things, 
which  I  think  they  cannot  deny  : — I.  That  our  Saviour 
assumes  to  Himself  the  character  of  the  Shepherd  of  His 
people  ; — and,  2.  That  He  did  not  come  into  the  world  to 
abridge  those  advantages  which  the  servants  of  God  en 
joyed  before  His  incarnation.  Upon  these  premises,  which 
cannot  be  gainsayed  without  setting  aside  the  whole  New 
Testament,  the  conclusion  is  undeniable  ;  for  if  Jehovah 
was  David's  Shepherd,  unless  Jesus  be  Jehovah,  we  who  live 
under  the  Gospel  have  an  unspeakable  disadvantage  in  being 
intrusted  to  the  care  of  one  who,  according  to  the  Socinians, 
is  a  mere  man  ;  and  upon  the  Arian  scheme,  is  at  the  most 
a  creature,  and  infinitely  short  of  possessing  those 
perfections  which  David  contemplated  in  his  Shepherd.  He 
had  a  Shepherd  whose  wisdom  and  power  were  infinite,  and 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    61 

might  therefore  warrantably  conclude  he  should  not  want, 
and  need  not  fear.  And  we  also  may  conclude  the  same, 
if  our  Shepherd  be  the  Lord  or  Jehovah,  but  not  otherwise. 
Besides,  the  very  nature  of  the  Shepherd's  office  respecting 
the  state  of  such  frail  creatures  as  we  are,  requires  those 
attributes  for  the  due  discharge  of  it  which  are  incommunic- 
ably  divine.  He  must  intimately  know  every  individual 
of  the  flock.  His  eye  must  be  upon  them  every  one,  and  His 
ear  open  to  their  prayers,  and  His  arm  stretched  out  for  their 
relief,  in  all  places,  and  in  all  ages.  Every  thought  of 
every  heart  must  be  open  to  His  view,  and  His  wisdom 
must  penetrate,  and  His  arm  control  and  overrule  all  the 
hidden  and  complicated  machinations  of  the  powers  of  dark 
ness.  He  must  have  the  administration  of  universal  Provi 
dence  over  all  the  nations,  families,  and  persons  upon  earth, 
or  He  could  not  effectually  manage  for  those  who  put  their 
trust  in  Him,  in  that  immense  variety  of  cases  and  circum 
stances  in  which  they  are  found.  Reason,  as  well  as  Scrip 
ture,  may  convince  us,  that  He  who  gathereth  the  outcasts 
of  Israel,  who  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  who  upholdeth 
all  that  fall,  raiseth  up  all  that  are  bowed  down,  and  upon 
whom  the  eyes  of  all  wait  for  their  support,  can  be  no  other 
than  He  who  telleth  the  number  of  the  stars,  and  calleth 
them  all  by  their  names,  who  is  great  in  power,  and  whose 
understanding  is  infinite.  To  this  purpose  likewise  the 
prophet  Isaiah  describes  this  mighty  Shepherd,  chap.  xl. 
9-17,  both  as  to  His  person  and  office. 

But  is  not  this  indeed  the  great  mystery  of  godliness  ? 
How  just  is  the  apostle's  observation,  that  no  man  can  say 
Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost  !  How  astonish 
ing  the  thought, — that  the  Maker  of  Heaven  and  earth, 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  before  whose  presence  the  earth 
shook,  the  Heavens  dropped,  when  He  displayed  a  fa.nt 
emblem  of  His  majesty  upon  Sinai,  should  afterwards  appear 
in  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  hang  upon  a  cross,  the  sport 
and  scorn  of  wicked  men  !  I  cannot  wonder  that  to  the  wise 
men  of  the  world  this  appears  absurd,  unreasonable,  and 
impossible  ;  yet  to  right  reason,  to  reason  enlightened  and 
sanctified,  however  amazing  the  proposition  be,  yet  it 
appears  true  and  necessary,  upon  a  supposition,  that  a 
holy  God  is  pleased  to  pardon  sinners  in  a  way  suited  to 


62      v<  CARDIPHONIA  : 

display  the  awful  glories  of  His  justice.  The  same  argu 
ments  which  prove  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  insufficient  to 
take  away  sin,  will  conclude  against  the  utmost  doings  or 
sufferings  of  men  or  angels.  The  Redeemer  of  sinners  must 
be  mighty  ;  He  must  have  a  personal  dignity  to  stamp  such 
a  value  upon  His  undertakings,  as  that  thereby  God  may 
appear  just,  as  well  as  merciful,  in  justifying  the  ungodly  for 
His  sake  ;  and  He  must  be  all-sufficient  to  bless  and  almighty 
to  protect  those  who  come  unto  Him  for  safety  and  life. 

Such  a  one  is  our  Shepherd.  This  is  He  of  whom  we, 
through  grace,  are  enabled  to  say,  we  are  His  people,  and 
the  sheep  of  His  pasture.  We  are  His  by  every  tie  and 
right  ;  He  made  us,  He  redeemed  us,  He  reclaimed  us  from 
the  hand  of  our  enemies,  and  we  are  His  by  our  own  volun 
tary  surrender  of  ourselves  ;  for  though  we  once  slighted, 
despised,  and  opposed  Him,  He  made  us  willing  in  the  day 
of  His  power  :  He  knocked  at  the  door  of  our  hearts  ;  but 
we  (at  least  I)  barred  and  fastened  it  against  Him  as  much 
and  as  long  as  possible.  But  when  He  revealed  His  love, 
we  could  stand  out  no  longer.  Like  sheep,  we  are  weak, 
destitute,  defenceless,  prone  to  wander,  unable  to  return, 
and  always  surrounded  with  wolves.  But  all  is  made  up 
in  the  fulness,  ability,  wisdom,  compassion,  care,  and  faith 
fulness  of  our  great  Shepherd.  He  guides,  protects,  feeds, 
heals,  and  restores,  and  will  be  our  Guide  and  our  God 
even  until  death.  Then  He  will  meet  us,  receive  us,  and 
present  us  unto  Himself,  and  we  shall  be  near  Him,  and  like 
Him,  and  with  Him  for  ever. 

Ah,  my  Lord,  what  a  subject  is  this  !  I  trust  it  is  the 
joy  of  your  heart.  Placed  as  you  are  by  His  hand  in  a 
superior  rank,  you  see  and  feel  that  the  highest  honours,  and 
the  most  important  concernments  that  terminate  with  the 
present  life,  are  trivial  as  the  sports  of  children,  in  com 
parison  with  the  views  and  the  privileges  you  derive  from 
the  glorious  Gospel ;  and  your  situation  in  life  renders  the 
grace  bestowed  upon  you  the  more  conspicuous  and  dis 
tinguishing.  I  have  somewhere  met  with  a  similar  reflection 
of  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France,  to  this  purpose,  that  though 
many  came  into  the  world  the  same  day  with  him,  he  was 
probably  the  only  one  among  them  that  was  born  to  be  a 
king.  Your  Lordship  is  acquainted  with  many,  who,  if  not 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    63 

born  on  the  same  day  with  you,  were  born  to  titles,  estates, 
and  honours  ;  but  how  few  of  them  were  born  to  the  honour 
of  making  a  public  and  consistent  profession  of  the  glorious 
Gospel !  The  hour  is  coming,  when  all  honours  and  posses 
sions,  but  this  which  cometh  of  God  only,  will  be  eclipsed 
and  vanish  ;  and,  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  vision,  leave 
not  a  wreck  behind.  How  miserable  will  they  then  be 
who  must  leave  their  all !  What  a  mortifying  thought  does 
Horace  put  in  the  way  of  those  who  disdain  to  read  the 
Scripture— 

Linquenda  tellus,  et  domus,  et  placens 

Uxor  :   neque  harum,  quas  colis,  arborum 

Te,  prater  invisas  cupressos, 

Ulla  brevem  dominum  sequetur. 

But  grace  and  faith  can  make  the  lowest  state  of  life 
supportable,  and  make  a  dismission  from  the  highest 
desirable.  Of  the  former,  I  have  many  living  proofs  and 
witnesses  around  me.  Your  Lordship,  I  trust,  will  have 
s\veet  experience  of  the  latter,  when,  after  having  fulfilled 
the  will  of  God  in  your  generation,  you  shall  be  called  (I  hope 
in  some  yet  distant  day)  to  enter  into  your  Master's  joy.  In 
the  meantime,  how  valuable  are  life,  talents,  influence,  and 
opportunities  of  every  kind,  if  we  are  enabled  to  improve  and 
lay  out  all  for  Him  who  has  thus  loved  us,  thus  provided 
for  us  !  As  to  myself,  I  would  hope  there  are  few  who  have 
so  clear  a  sense  of  their  obligations  to  Him,  who  make  such 
unsuitable  and  languid  returns  as  I  do.  I  think  I  have  a 
desire  to  serve  Him  better  :  but,  alas  !  evil  is  present  with 
me.  Surely  I  shall  feel  something  like  shame  and  regret  for 
my  coldness,  even  in  Heaven ; — for  I  find  I  am  never  happier 
than  when  I  am  most  ashamed  of  myself  upon  this  account 
here.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    XVII 

MY  LORD,  December  8,  1774. 

How  wonderful  is  the  patience  of  God  towards  sinful 
men  !     In  Him  they  live,  and  move,  and  have  their  being  ; 


64  CARDIPHON1A  : 

and  if  He  were  to  withdraw  His  support  for  a  single 
moment  they  must  perish.  He  maintains  their  hVes,  guards 
their  persons,  supplies  their  wants,  while  they  employ  the 
powers  and  faculties  they  receive  from  Him  in  a  settled 
course  of  opposition  to  His  will.  They  trample  upon  His 
laws,  affront  His  government,  and  despise  His  grace  ;  yet 
still  He  spares.  To  silence  all  His  adversaries  in  a  moment, 
would  require  no  extraordinary  exertion  of  His  power ; 
but  His  forbearance  towards  them  manifests  His  glory,  and 
gives  us  cause  to  say,  who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee  ? 

Sometimes,  however,  there  are  striking  instances  of  His 
displeasure  against  sin.  When  such  events  take  place, 
immediately  upon  a  public  and  premeditated  contempt 
offered  to  Him  that  sitteth  in  the  Heavens,  I  own  they  re 
mind  me  of  the  danger  of  standing,  if  I  may  so  speak,  in  the 
Lord's  way  :  for  though  His  long-suffering  is  astonishing, 
and  many  dare  Him  to  His  face  daily  with  seeming  impunity, 
yet  He  sometimes  strikes  an  awful  and  unexpected  blow, 
and  gives  an  illustration  of  that  solemn  word,  "  Whoever 
hardened  himself  against  the  Lord  and  prospered  ?  "  But 
who  am  I  to  make  this  observation  ?  I  ought  to  do  it  with 
the  deepest  humiliation,  remembering  that  I  once  stood 
(according  to  my  years  and  ability)  in  the  foremost  rank  of 
His  avowed  opposers ;  and  with  a  determined  and  unwearied 
enmity,  renounced,  defied,  and  blasphemed  Him.  "  But 
He  will  have  mercy  on  whom  He  will  have  mercy  ;  "  and 
therefore  I  was  spared,  and  reserved  to  speak  of  His  goodness. 

Josephus,  when  speaking  of  the  death  of  Herod  Agrippa, 
ascribes  it  to  a  natural  cause,  and  says,  he  was  seized  with 
excruciating  pains  in  his  bowels.  But  Luke  informs  us  of 
the  true  cause  :  an  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him.  Had 
we  a  modern  liistory,  written  by  an  inspired  pen,  we  should 
probably  often  be  reminded  of  such  an  interposition  where 
we  are  not  ordinarily  aware  of  it.  For  though  the  springs 
of  actions  and  events  are  concealed  from  us  for  the  most  part, 
and  vain  men  carry  on  their  schemes  with  confidence,  as 
though  the  Lord  had  forsaken  the  earth  ;  yet  they  are  under 
His  eye  and  control  ;  and  faith,  in  some  measure,  instructed 
by  the  specimens  of  His  government  recorded  in  the  Scrip 
tures,  can  trace  and  admire  His  hand,  and  can  see  how  He 
takes  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness,  stains  the  pride  of 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    65 

human  glory  ;  and  that,  when  sinners  speak  proudly,  He 
is  above  them,  and  makes  everything  bend  or  break  before 
Him. 

While  we  lament  the  growth  and  pernicious  effects  of 
infidelity,  and  see  how  wicked  men  and  seducers  wax  worse 
and  worse,  deceiving,  and  being  deceived  ;  what  gratitude 
should  fill  our  hearts  to  Him  who  has  been  pleased  to  call 
us  out  of  the  horrid  darkness  in  which  multitudes  are 
bewildered  and  lost,  into  the  glorious  light  of  His  Gospel ! 
Faint  are  our  warmest  conceptions  of  this  mercy.  In  order 
to  understand  it  fully,  we  should  have  a  full  and  adequate 
sense  of  the  evil  from  which  we  are  delivered  ;  the  glory  to 
which  we  are  called  ;  and  especially  of  the  astonishing 
means  to  which  we  owe  our  life  and  hope, — the  humiliation, 
sufferings,  and  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  But  our  views  of 
these  points,  while  in  our  present  state,  are,  and  must  be, 
exceedingly  weak  and  disproportionate.  We  know  them 
but  in  part,  we  see  them  ?i*  tooTrrpov,  by  reflection,  rather 
the  images  than  the  things  themselves  ;  and  though  they 
are  faithfully  represented  in  the  mirror  of  God's  word,  to  us 
they  appear  indistinct,  because  we  see  them  through  a  gross 
medium  of  ignorance  and  unbelief.  Hereafter  every  veil 
shall  be  removed  ;  we  shall  know,  in  another  manner  than 
we  do  now,  the  unspeakable  evil  of  sin,  and  the  unsupportable 
dreadfulness  of  God's  displeasure  against  it,  when  we  see  the 
world  in  flames,  and  hear  the  final  sentence  denounced  upon 
the  ungodly.  We  shall  have  far  other  thoughts  of  Jesus 
when  we  see  Him  as  He  is  ;  and  shall  then  be  able  to  make 
a  more  affecting  estimate  of  the  love  which  moved  Him  to 
be  made  a  substitute  and  a  curse  for  us  ;  and  we  shall  then 
know  what  great  things  God  has  prepared  for  them  that  love 
Him.  Then  with  transport  we  shall  adopt  the  Queen  of 
Sheba's  language,  It  was  a  true  report  we  heard  in  yonder 
dark  world  ;  but  behold,  the  half,  the  thousandth  part,  was 
not  told  us  !  In  the  mean  time,  may  such  conceptions  as 
we  are  enabled  to  form  of  these  great  truths  fill  our  hearts, 
and  be  mingled  with  all  our  thoughts,  and  all  our  concerns  ; 
may  the  Lord,  by  faith,  give  us  an  abiding  evidence  of  the 
reality  and  importance  of  the  things  which  cannot  yet  be 
seen  :  so  shall  we  be  enabled  to  live  above  the  world  while 
we  are  in  it,  uninfluenced  either  by  its  blandishments  or  its 
c  E 


66  CARDIPHONIA  : 

frowns  ;  and,  with  a  noble  simplicity  and  singularity,  avow 
and  maintain  the  cause  of  God  in  truth,  in  the  midst  of  a 
crooked  and  perverse  generation.  He  whom  we  serve  is 
able  to  support  and  protect  us  ;  and  He  well  deserves  at 
our  hands  that  we  should  be  willing  to  endure,  for  His 
sake,  much  more  than  He  will  ever  permit  us  to  be  exercised 
with.  The  believer's  call,  duty,  and  privilege,  is  beautifully 
and  forcibly  set  forth  in  Milton's  character  of  Abdiel,  at 
the  end  of  the  fifth  book  : 

....  Faithful  found 

Among  the  faithless,  faithful  only  he 

Among  innumerable  false,  unmov'd, 

Unshaken,  unseduc'd,  unterrify'd, 

His  loyalty  he  kept,  his  love,  his  zeal ; 

Nor  number,  nor  example,  with  him  wrought 

To  swerve  from  truth,  or  change  his  constant  mind 

Though  single  .... 

Methinks  your  Lordship's  situation  particularly  re 
sembles  that  in  which  the  poet  has  placed  Abdiel.  You 
are  not  indeed  called  to  serve  God  quite  alone  ;  but  amongst 
those  of  your  own  rank,  and  with  whom  the  station  in  which 
He  has  placed  you  necessitates  you  to  converse,  how  few 
are  there  who  can  understand,  second,  or  approve,  the 
principles  upon  which  you  act,  or  easily  bear  a  conduct 
which  must  impress  conviction  or  reflect  dishonour  upon 
themselves  !  But  you  are  not  alone  ;  the  Lord's  people 
(many  of  whom  you  will  not  know  till  you  meet  them  in 
glory)  are  helping  you  here  with  their  prayers  ;  His  angels 
are  commissioned  to  guard  and  guide  your  steps  ;  yea,  the 
Lord  Himself  fixes  His  eye  of  mercy  upon  your  private 
and  your  public  path,  and  is  near  you  at  your  right  hand, 
that  you  may  not  be  moved  !  That  He  may  comfort  you 
with  the  light  of  His  countenance,  and  uphold  you  with  the 
arm  of  His  power,  is  my  frequent  prayer. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART         67 


LETTER    XVIII 

MY  LORD,  January  20,  1775. 

WE  have  entered  upon  another  year  !  So  have  thou 
sands,  perhaps  millions,  who  will  not  see  it  close !  An 
alarming  thought  to  the  worldling  !  at  least  it  should  be  so. 
I  have  an  imperfect  remembrance  of  an  account  I  read,  when 
I  was  a  boy,  of  an  ice-palace,  built  one  winter  at  Peters- 
burgh.  The  walls,  the  roofs,  the  floors,  the  furniture,  were 
all  of  ice,  but  finished  with  taste  ;  and  every  thing  that 
might  be  expected  in  a  royal  palace  was  to  be  found  there  ; 
the  ice,  while  in  the  state  of  water,  being  previously  coloured, 
so  that  to  the  eye  all  seemed  formed  of  proper  materials  : 
but  all  was  cold,  useless,  and  transient.  Had  the  frost 
continued  till  now,  the  palace  might  have  been  standing  ; 
but  with  the  returning  spring  it  melted  away  like  the  baseless 
fabric  of  a  vision.  Methinks  there  should  have  been  one 
stone  in  the  building,  to  have  retained  the  inscription, 
Sic  transit  gloria  mundi '!  for  no  contrivance  could  exhibit 
a  fitter  illustration  of  the  vanity  of  human  life.  Men  build 
and  plan  as  if  their  work  were  to  endure  for  ever  !  but  the 
wind  passes  over  them,  and  they  are  gone.  In  the  midst  of 
all  their  preparations,  or,  at  farthest,  when  they  think  they 
have  just  completed  their  designs,  their  breath  goeth  forth, 
they  return  to  their  earth  ;  in  that  very  day  their  thoughts 
perish. 

How  many  sleep  who  kept  the  world  awake  ! 

Yet  this  ice-house  had  something  of  a  leisurely  dissolution, 
though,  when  it  began  to  decay,  all  the  art  of  man  was 
unable  to  prop  it  ;  but  often  death  comes  hastily,  and, 
like  the  springing  of  a  mine,  destroys  to  the  very  foundations 
without  previous  notice.  Then  all  we  have  been  concerned 
in  here  (all  but  the  consequences  of  our  conduct,  which  will 
abide  to  eternity)  will  be  no  more  to  us  than  the  remembrance 
of  a  dream.  This  truth  is  too  plain  to  be  denied  ;  but  the 
greater  part  of  mankind  act  as  if  they  were  convinced  it  was 
false  :  they  spend  their  days  in  vanity,  and  in  a  moment 
they  go  down  to  the  grave.  What  cause  of  thankfulness  have 
they  who  are  delivered  from  this  delusion,  and  who,  by  the 

E  2 


68  CARDIPHONIA  : 

knowledge  of  the  glorious  Gospel,  have  learned  their  true 
state  and  end,  are  saved  from  the  love  of  the  present  world, 
from  the  heart-distressing  fear  of  death  ;  and  know,  that 
if  their  earthly  house  were  dissolved,  like  the  ice-palace, 
they  have  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the 
heavens  ! 

Yet  even  these  are  much  concerned  to  realize  the  brevity 
and  uncertainty  of  their  present  state,  that  they  may  be 
stimulated  to  make  the  most  and  the  best  of  it ;  to  redeem 
their  time,  and  manage  their  precarious  opportunities,  so 
as  may  most  tend  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  Him  who  has 
called  them  out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light.  Why 
should  any  that  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  wish 
to  live  another  day,  but  that  they  may  have  the  honour  to 
be  fellow-workers  with  Him,  instrumental  in  promoting 
His  designs,  and  of  laying  themselves  out  to  the  utmost 
of  their  abilities  and  influence  in  His  service  !  To  enjoy 
a  sense  of  His  loving-kindness,  and  to  have  the  light  of  His 
countenance  lifted  up  upon  our  souls,  is  indeed,  respecting 
ourselves,  the  best  part  of  life,  yea,  better  than  life  itself ; 
but  this  we  shall  have  to  unspeakably  greater  advantage, 
when  we  have  finished  our  course,  and  shall  be  wholly  freed 
from  the  body  of  sin.  And  therefore  the  great  desirable 
while  here  seems  to  be — grace,  that  we  may  serve  Him  and 
suffer  for  Him  in  the  world.  Though  our  first  wish  immedi 
ately  upon  our  own  accounts  might  be,  to  depart  and  be 
with  Jesus,  which  is  iro\\u  paXXov  Kptmoov,  yet  a  lively 
thought  of  our  immense  obligations  to  His  redeeming  love, 
may  reconcile  us  to  a  much  longer  continuance  here,  if  we 
may  by  any  means  be  subservient  to  diffuse  the  glory  of  His 
name,  and  the  blessings  of  His  salvation,  which  is  God's 
great  and  principal  end  in  preserving  the  world  itself. 
When  historians  and  politicians  descant  upon  the  rise  and 
fall  of  empires,  with  all  their  professed  sagacity  in  tracing 
the  connexion  between  causes  and  effects,  they  are  totally 
unacquainted  with  the  great  master-wheel  which  manages 
the  whole  movement — that  is,  the  Lord's  design  in  favour 
of  His  Church  and  kingdom.  To  this  every  event  is  sub 
ordinate  ;  to  this  every  interfering  interest  must  stoop. 
How  easily  might  this  position  be  proved,  by  reviewing  the 
history  of  the  period  about  the  Reformation.  Whether 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    69 

Dr.  Robertson  considers  things  in  this  light,  in  his  history  of 
Charles  V.,  I  know  not,  as  I  have  not  seen  his  books  ;  but  if 
not,  however  elaborate  his  performance  may  be  in  other 
respects,  I  must  venture  to  say,  it  is  essentially  defective, 
and  cannot  give  that  light  and  pleasure  to  a  spiritual  reader 
of  which  the  subject  is  capable.  And  I  doubt  not  but  some 
who  are  yet  unborn,  will  hereafter  clearly  see  and  remark 
that  the  present  unhappy  disputes  between  Great  Britain 
and  America,  with  their  consequences,  whatever  they  may 
be,  are  part  of  a  series  of  events,  of  which  the  extension  and 
interests  of  the  Church  of  Christ  were  the  principal  final 
causes.  In  a  word,  that  Jesus  may  be  known,  trusted, 
and  adored,  and  sinners,  by  the  power  of  His  Gospel,  be 
rescued  from  sin  and  Satan,  is  comparatively  the  To  iv — 
the  one  great  business  for  the  sake  of  which  the  succession 
of  day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,  is  still  maintained  ; 
and  when  the  plan  of  redemption  is  consummated,  sin, 
which  now  almost  fills  the  earth,  will  then  set  it  on  fire  ; 
and  the  united  interest  of  all  the  rest  of  mankind,  when 
detached  from  that  of  the  people  of  God,  will  not  plead  for 
its  preservation  a  single  day.  In  this  view  I  congratulate 
your  Lordship,  that  however  your  best  endeavours  to  serve 
the  temporal  interests  of  the  nation  may  fall  short  of  your 
wishes  ;  yet  so  far  as  your  situation  gives  you  opportunity 
of  supporting  the  Gospel  cause,  and  facilitating  its  progress, 
you  have  a  prospect  both  of  a  more  certain  and  more  im 
portant  success.  For  instance,  it  was,  under  God,  your 
Lordship's  favour  and  influence  that  brought  me  into  the 
ministry.  And  though  I  be  nothing,  yet  He  who  put  it 
in  your  heart  to  patronise  me,  has  been  pleased  not  to  suffer 
what  you  then  did  for  His  sake  to  be  wholly  in  vain.  He 
has  been  pleased  in  a  course  of  years,  by  so  unworthy  an 
instrument  as  I  am,  to  awaken  a  number  of  persons  who 
were  at  that  time  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  ;  but  now 
some  of  them  are  pressing  on  to  the  prize  of  their  high  calling 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus ;  and  some  of  them  are  already  before 
the  throne.  Should  I  suggest  in  some  companies  that  the 
conversion  of  a  hundred  sinners  (more  or  less)  to  God,  is  an 
event  of  more  real  importance  than  the  temporal  prosperity 
of  the  greatest  nation  upon  earth,  I  should  be  charged  with 
ignorance  and  arrogance  ;  but  your  Lordship  is  skilled  in 


70     ^  CARDIPHONIA  : 

Scriptural  arithmetic,  which  alone  can  teach  us  to  estimate 
the  value  of  souls,  and  will  agree  with  me,  that  one  soul 
is  worth  more  than  the  whole  world,  on  account  of  its  re 
demption-price,  its  vast  capacities,  and  its  duration.  Should 
we  suppose  a  nation  to  consist  of  forty  millions,  the  whole 
and  each  individual  to  enjoy  as  much  good  as  this  life  can 
afford,  without  abatement,  for  a  term  of  fifty  years  each  ; — 
all  this  good,  or  an  equal  quantity,  might  be  exhausted  by  a 
single  person  in  two  thousand  million  of  years,  which  would 
be  but  a  moment  in  comparison  with  the  eternity  which 
would  still  follow.  And  if  this  good  were  merely  temporal 
good,  the  whole  aggregate  of  it  would  be  evil  and  misery, 
if  compared  with  that  happiness  in  God,  of  which  only  they 
who  are  made  partakers  of  a  divine  life  are  capable.  On 
the  other  hand,  were  a  whole  nation  to  be  destroyed  by  such 
accumulated  miseries  as  attended  the  siege  of  Jerusalem, 
the  sum  total  of  these  calamities  would  be  but  trifling,  if 
set  in  competition  with  what  every  single  person  that  dies 
in  sin  has  to  expect,  when  the  sentence  of  everlasting 
destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  the  glory  of 
His  power,  shall  be  executed. 

What  an  unexpected  round  have  my  thoughts  taken  since 
I  set  out  from  the  ice-palace  !  It  is  time  to  relieve  your 
Lordship,  and  to  subscribe  myself,  &c. 


LETTER   XIX 

MY  LORD,  February  23,  1775. 

I  ASSENT  to  our  Lord's  declaration,  "  Without  Me 
ye  can  do  nothing,"  not  only  upon  the  authority  of  the 
Speaker,  but  from  the  same  irresistible  and  experimental 
evidence,  as  if  He  had  told  me,  that  I  cannot  make  the  sun 
to  shine,  or  change  the  course  of  the  seasons.  Though  my 
pen  and  my  tongue  sometimes  move  freely,  yet  the  total 
incapacity  and  stagnation  of  thought  I  labour  under  at  other 
times,  convinces  me,  that  in  myself  I  have  not  sufficiency 
to  think  a  good  thought ;  and  I  believe  the  case  would  be 
the  same,  if  that  little  measure  of  knowledge  and  abilities, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    71 

which  I  am  too  prone  to  look  upon  as  my  own,  were  a 
thousand  times  greater  than  it  is.  For  every  new  service 
I  stand  in  need  of  a  new  supply,  and  can  bring  forth  nothing 
of  my  supposed  store  into  actual  exercise,  but  by  His  im 
mediate  assistance.  His  gracious  influence  is  that,  to  those 
who  are  best  furnished  with  gifts,  which  the  water  is  to  the 
mill,  or  the  wind  to  the  ship,  without  which  the  whole 
apparatus  is  motionless  and  useless.  I  apprehend  that  we  lose 
much  of  the  comfort  which  might  arise  from  a  sense  of  our 
continual  dependence  upon  Him,  and  of  course  fall  short  of 
acknowledging  as  we  ought  what  we  receive  from  Him,  by 
mistaking  the  manner  of  His  operation.  Perhaps  we  take 
it  too  much  for  granted,  that  communications  from  Himself 
must  bear  some  kind  of  sensible  impression  that  they  are 
His,  and,  therefore,  are  ready  to  give  our  own  industry  or 
ingenuity  credit  for  those  performances  in  which  we  can 
perceive  no  such  impression  ;  yet  it  is  very  possible  that  we 
may  be  under  His  influence  when  we  are  least  aware  :  and 
though  what  we  say,  or  write,  or  do,  may  seem  no  way 
extraordinary  ;  yet  that  we  should  be  led  to  such  a  parti 
cular  turn  of  thought  at  one  time  rather  than  at  another, 
has,  in  my  own  concerns,  often  appeared  to  me  remarkable, 
from  the  circumstances  which  have  attended,  or  the  con 
sequences  which  have  followed.  How  often,  in  the  choice 
of  a  text,  or  in  the  course  of  a  sermon,  or  in  a  letter  to  a 
friend,  have  I  been  led  to  speak  a  word  in  season  !  and  what 
I  have  expressed  at  large,  and  in  general,  has  been  so  exactly 
suited  to  some  case  which  I  was  utterly  unacquainted  with, 
that  I  could  hardly  have  hit  it  so  well,  had  I  been  previously 
informed  of  it.  Some  instances  of  this  kind  have  been  so 
striking,  as  hardly  to  admit  a  doubt  of  superior  agency. 
And,  indeed,  if  believers  in  Jesus,  however  unworthy  in 
themselves,  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  if  the  Lord 
lives,  dwells,  and  walks  in  them  ;  if  He  is  their  life  and 
their  light  ;  if  He  has  promised  to  guide  them  with  His 
eye,  and  to  work  in  them  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  own  good 
pleasure, — methinks  what  I  have  mentioned,  and  more, 
may  be  reasonably  expected.  That  line  in  the  hymn, 

Help  I  every  moment  need, 
is  not  a  hyperbolical  expression,  but  strictly  and  literally 


72  CARDIPHONIA  : 

true,  not  only  in  great  emergencies,  but  in  our  smoother 
hours,  and  most  familiar  paths.  This  gracious  assistance 
is  afforded  in  a  way  imperceptible  to  ourselves,  to  hide  pride 
from  us,  and  to  prevent  us  from  being  indolent  and  careless 
with  respect  to  the  use  of  appointed  means  :  and  it  would  be 
likewise  more  abundantly,  and  perhaps  more  sensibly 
afforded,  were  our  spirits  more  simple  in  waiting  upon  the 
Lord.  But,  alas  !  a  divided  heart,  an  undue  attachment  to 
some  temporal  object,  sadly  deadens  our  spirits,  (I  speak  for 
myself,)  and  grieves  the  Lord's  Spirit ;  so  that  we  walk  in 
darkness,  and  at  a  distance,  and,  though  called  to  great 
privileges,  live  far  below  them.  But  methinks  the  thought 
of  Him  who  is  always  near,  and  upon  whom  we  do,  and 
most  incessantly,  depend,  should  suggest  a  powerful  motive 
for  the  closest  attention  to  His  revealed  will,  and  the  most 
punctual  compliance  with  it ;  for  so  far  as  the  Lord  with 
draws  we  become  as  blind  men,  and  with  the  clearest  light, 
and  upon  the  plainest  ground,  we  are  liable,  or  rather,  sure 
to  stumble  at  every  step. 

Though  there  is  a  principle  of  consciousness,  and  a  de 
termination  of  the  will,  sufficient  to  denominate  our  thoughts 
and  performances  our  own,  yet  I  believe  mankind  in  general 
are  more  under  an  invisible  agency  than  they  apprehend. 
The  Lord,  immediately  from  Himself,  and  perhaps  by  the 
ministry  of  His  holy  angels,  guides,  prompts,  restrains,  or 
warns  His  people.  So  there  undoubtedly  is  what  I  may  call 
a  black  inspiration,  the  influence  of  the  evil  spirits  who  work 
in  the  hearts  of  the  disobedient,  and  not  only  excite  their 
wills,  but  assist  their  faculties  and  qualify  as  well  as  incline 
them  to  be  more  assiduously  wicked,  and  more  extensively 
mischievous,  than  they  could  be  of  themselves.  I  consider 
Voltaire,  for  instance,  and  many  writers  of  the  same  stamp, 
to  be  little  more  than  secretaries  and  amanuenses  of  one 
who  has  unspeakably  more  wit  and  adroitness  in  promoting 
infidelity  and  immorality  than  they  of  themselves  can  justly 
pretend  to.  They  have  for  a  while  the  credit  (if  I  may  so 
call  it)  of  the  fund  from  whence  they  draw ;  but  the  world 
little  imagines  who  is  the  real  and  original  author  of  that 
philosophy  and  poetry,  of  those  fine  turns  and  sprightly 
inventions,  which  are  so  generally  admired.  Perhaps 
many,  now  applauded  for  their  genius,  would  have  been 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    73 

comparatively  dolts,  had  they  not  been  engaged  in  a  cause 
which  Satan  has  so  much  interest  in  supporting. 

But  to  return  to  the  more  pleasing  subject. — How  great 
and  honourable  is  the  privilege  of  a  true  believer  !  That  he 
has  neither  wisdom  nor  strength  in  himself  is  no  disadvantage, 
for  he  is  connected  with  infinite  wisdom  and  almighty  power. 
Though  weak  as  a  worm,  his  arms  are  strengthened  by  the 
mighty  God  of  Jacob,  and  all  things  become  possible,  yea, 
easy  to  him,  that  occur  within  the  compass  of  his  proper 
duty  and  calling.  The  Lord,  whom  he  serves,  engages  to 
proportion  his  strength  to  his  day,  whether  it  be  a  day  of 
service  or  of  suffering  ;  and,  though  he  be  fallible  and  short 
sighted,  exceedingly  liable  to  mistake  and  imposition, 
yet,  while  he  retains  a  sense  that  he  is  so,  and  with  the 
simplicity  of  a  child  asks  counsel  and  direction  of  the  Lord, 
he  seldom  takes  a  wrong  step,  at  least  not  in  matters  of 
consequence  ;  and  even  his  inadvertencies  are  overruled  for 
good.  If  he  forgets  his  true  state,  and  thinks  himself  to  be 
something,  he  presently  finds  he  is  indeed  nothing  ;  but  if 
he  is  content  to  be  nothing,  and  to  have  nothing,  he  is  sure 
to  find  a  seasonable  and  abundant  communication  of  all 
that  he  wants.  Thus  he  lives,  like  Israel  in  the  wilderness, 
upon  mere  bounty  ;  but  then  it  is  a  bounty  unchangeable, 
unwearied,  inexhaustible,  and  all-sufficient.  Moses,  when 
speaking  of  the  methods  the  Lord  took  to  humble  Israel, 
mentions  His  feeding  them  with  manna  as  one  method.  I 
could  not  understand  this  for  a  time.  I  thought  they  were 
rather  in  danger  of  being  proud,  when  they  saw  themselves 
provided  for  in  such  an  extraordinary  way.  But  the  manna 
would  not  keep  ;  they  could  not  hoard  it  up,  and  were 
therefore  in  a  state  of  absolute  dependence  from  day  to 
day  :  this  appointment  was  well  suited  to  humble  them. 
Thus  it  is  with  us  in  spirituals.  We  should  be  better 
pleased,  perhaps,  to  be  set  up  with  a  stock  or  sufficiency  at 
once, — such  an  inherent  portion  of  wisdom  and  power  as 
we  might  depend  upon,  at  least  for  common  occasions, 
without  being  constrained,  by  a  sense  of  indigence,  to  have 
continual  recourse  to  the  Lord  for  every  thing  we  want. 
But  His  way  is  best.  His  own  glory  is  most  displayed,  and 
our  safety  most  secured,  by  keeping  us  quite  poor  and  empty 
in  ourselves,  and  supplying  us  from  one  minute  to  another, 


74  CARDIPHONIA  : 

according  to  our  need.  This,  if  anything,  will  prevent 
boasting,  and  keep  a  sense  of  gratitude  awake  in  our  hearts. 
This  is  well  adapted  to  quicken  us  to  prayer,  and  furnishes 
us  with  a  thousand  occasions  for  praise,  which  would  other 
wise  -escape  our  notice. 

But  who  or  what  are  we  that  the  Most  High  should  thus 
notice  us  ?  should  visit  us  every  morning,  and  water  us 
every  moment  ?  It  is  an  astonishing  thought,  that  God 
should  thus  dwell  with  men  !  That  He,  before  whom  the 
mightiest  earthly  potentates  are  less  than  nothing,  and 
vanity,  should  thus  stoop  and  accommodate  Himself  to  the 
situation,  wants,  and  capacities  of  the  weakest,  meanest, 
and  poorest  of  His  children.  But  so  it  hath  pleased  Him. 
He  seeth  not  as  a  man  seeth. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    XX 

MY  LORD,  August  —  1775- 

I  HAVE  no  apt  preface  or  introduction  at  hand,  and,  as 
I  have  made  it  almost  a  rule  not  to  study  for  what  I  should 
offer  your  Lordship,  I  therefore  beg  leave  to  begin  abruptly. 
It  is  the  future  promised  privilege  of  believers  in  Jesus, 
that  they  shall  be  as  the  angels  ;  and  there  is  a  sense  in  which 
we  should  endeavour  to  be  as  the  angels  now.  This  is  in 
timated  to  us  where  we  are  taught  to  pray,  Thy  will  be  done 
on  earth,  as  it  is  in  Heaven.  I  have  sometimes  amused 
myself  with  supposing  an  angel  should  be  appointed  to  reside 
a  while  upon  earth  in  a  human  body  ;  not  in  sinful  flesh 
like  ours,  but  in  a  body  free  from  infirmity,  and  still  pre 
serving  an  unabated  sense  of  His  own  happiness  in  the 
favour  of  God,  and  of  His  unspeakable  obligation  to  His 
goodness  ; — and  then  I  have  tried  to  judge,  as  well  as  I 
could,  how  such  an  angel  would  comport  himself  in  such  a 
situation.  I  know  not  that  I  ever  enlarged  upon  the  thought, 
either  in  preaching  or  writing ;  permit  me  to  follow  it  a  little 
in  this  paper. 

Were   I   acquainted  with   this  heavenly  visitant,   I   am 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    75 

willing  to  hope  I  should  greatly  reverence  him,  and,  if 
permitted,  be  glad  in  some  cases  to  consult  him  :  in  some,  but 
not  in  all ;  for  I  think  my  fear  would  be  equal  to  my  love. 
Methinks  I  could  never  venture  to  open  my  heart  freely  to 
him,  and  unfold  to  him  my  numberless  complaints  and 
infirmities  ;  for,  as  he  could  have  no  experience  of  the  like 
things  himself,  I  should  suppose  he  would  not  know  how 
fully  to  pity  me,  indeed  hardly  how  to  bear  with  me,  if  I 
told  him  all.  Alas  !  what  a  preposterous,  strange,  vile 
creature  should  I  appear  to  an  angel,  if  he  knew  me  as  I  am  ! 
It  is  well  for  me  that  Jesus  was  made  lower  than  the  angels, 
and  that  the  human  nature  He  assumed  was  not  distinct 
from  the  common  nature  of  mankind,  though  secured  from 
the  common  depravity  ;  and  because  He  submitted  to  be 
under  the  law  in  our  name  and  stead,  though  He  was  free 
from  sin  Himself,  yet,  sin  and  its  consequences  being  (for 
our  sakes)  charged  upon  Him,  He  acquired,  in  the  days  of 
His  humiliation,  an  experimental  sympathy  with  His  poor 
people.  He  knows  the  effects  of  sin  and  temptation  upon 
us,  by  that  knowledge  whereby  He  knows  all  things  ;  but 
He  knows  them  likewise  in  a  way  more  suitable  for  our 
comfort  and  relief,  by  the  sufferings  and  exercises  He  passed 
through  for  us.  Hence  arises  encouragement.  We  have 
not  an  high-priest  who  cannot  be  touched  with  a  feeling  of 
our  infirmities,  but  was  in  all  points  tempted  even  as  we  are. 
When  I  add  to  this  the  consideration  of  His  power,  promises, 
and  grace,  and  that  He  is  exalted  on  purpose  to  pity,  relieve, 
and  save,  I  gather  courage.  With  Him  I  dare  be  free,  and 
am  not  sorry,  but  glad,  that  He  knows  me  perfectly,  that 
not  a  thought  of  my  heart  is  hidden  from  Him.  For  without 
this  infinite  and  exact  knowledge  of  my  disease,  how  could 
He  effectually  administer  to  my  cure  ?  But  whither  am  I 
rambling  ?  I  seem  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  angel  already. 
I  am  now  coming  back,  that,  if  he  cannot  effectually  pity 
me,  he  may  at  least  animate  and  teach  me. 

In  the  first  place,  I  take  it  for  granted  this  angel  would 
think  himself  a  stranger  and  pilgrim  upon  earth.  He  would 
not  forget  that  his  TroXcreu/m  was  in  heaven.  Surely 
he  would  look  upon  all  the  bustle  of  human  life  (farther  than 
the  design  of  his  mission  might  connect  him  with  it)  with 
more  indifference  than  we  look  upon  the  sports  of  children, 


76  CARDIPHONIA  : 

or  the  amusements  of  idiots  and  lunatics,  which  give  us 
an  uneasiness,  rather  than  excite  a  desire  of  joining  in  them. 
He  would  judge  of  everything  around  him,  by  the  reference 
and  tendency  it  had  to  promote  the  will  of  Him  that  sent 
him  ;  and  the  most  specious  or  splendid  appearances,  con 
sidered  in  any  other  view,  would  make  no  impression  upon 
him. 

Consequently,  as  to  his  own  concernment,  all  his  aim  and 
desire  would  be  to  fulfil  the  will  of  God.  All  situations 
would  be  alike  to  him  ;  whether  he  was  commanded,  as  in 
the  case  of  Sennacherib,  to  destroy  a  mighty  army  with  a 
stroke  ;  or,  as  in  the  case  of  Hagar,  to  attend  upon  a  woman, 
a  servant,  a  slave ;  both  services  would  be  to  him  equally 
honourable  and  important,  because  he  was  in  both  equally 
pleasing  his  Lord,  which  would  be  his  element  and  his  joy, 
whether  he  was  appointed  to  guide  the  reins  of  empire,  or  to 
sweep  the  streets. 

Again,  the  angel  would  doubtless  exhibit  a  striking 
example  of  benevolence  ;  for,  being  free  from  selfish  bias, 
filled  with  a  sense  of  the  love  of  God,  and  a  knowledge  of 
His  adorable  perfections,  his  whole  heart,  and  soul,  and 
strength,  would  be  engaged  and  exerted,  both  from  duty 
and  inclination,  to  relieve  the  miseries,  and  advance  the 
happiness  of  all  around  him  ;  and  in  this  he  would  follow  the 
pattern  of  Him  who  doth  good  to  all,  commanding  His  sun 
to  rise,  and  His  rain  to  fall,  upon  the  just  and  the  unjust ; — 
though,  from  the  same  pattern,  He  would  show  an  especial 
regard  to  the  household  of  faith.  An  angel  would  take  but 
little  part  in  the  controversies,  contentions,  and  broils, 
which  might  happen  in  the  time  of  his  sojourning  here,  but 
would  be  a  friend  to  all,  so  far  as  consistent  with  the  general 
good. 

The  will  and  glory  of  God  being  the  angel's  great  view 
and  having  a  more  lively  sense  of  the  realities  of  an  unseen 
world  than  we  can  at  present  conceive,  he  would  certainly, 
in  the  first  and  chief  place,  have  the  success  and  spread  of  the 
glorious  Gospel  at  heart.  Angels,  though  not  redeemed  with 
blood,  yet  feel  themselves  nearly  concerned  in  the  work  of 
redemption.  They  admire  its  mysteries.  We  may  suppose 
them  well  informed  in  the  works  of  creation  and  providence. 
But  (unlike  too  many  men  who  are  satisfied  with  the  know- 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    77 

ledge  of  astronomy,  mathematics,  or  history)  they  search 
and  pry  into  the  counsels  of  redeeming  love,  rejoice  at  the 
conversion  of  a  sinner,  and  think  themselves  well  employed 
to  be  ministering  spirits,  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation. 
It  would  therefore  be  his  chief  delight  to  espouse  and  pro 
mote  their  cause,  and  to  employ  all  his  talents  and  influence 
in  spreading  the  savour  and  knowledge  of  the  name  of  Jesus, 
which  is  the  only  and  effectual  means  of  bringing  sinners  out 
of  bondage  and  darkness  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons 
of  God. 

Lastly,  though  his  zeal  for  the  glory  of  his  Lord  would 
make  him  willing  to  continue  here  till  he  had  finished  the 
work  given  him  to  do,  he  would,  I  am  persuaded,  look  for 
ward  with  desire  to  the  appointed  moment  of  his  recall,  that 
he  might  be  freed  from  beholding  and  mixing  with  the  sin 
and  vanity  of  those  who  know  not  God,  render  his  account 
with  joy,  and  be  welcomed  to  Heaven  with  a  "  Well  done, 
good  and  faithful  servant."  Surely  he  would  long  for  this, 
as  a  labourer  for  the  setting  sun  ;  and  would  not  form 
any  connexion  with  the  things  of  time,  which  should  prompt 
him  to  wish  his  removal  protracted  for  a  single  hour  beyond 
the  period  of  his  prescribed  service. 

Alas,  why  am  I  not  more  like  an  angel !  My  views  in 
my  better  judgment  are  the  same  :  my  motives  and  obliga 
tions  are  even  stronger ;  an  angel  is  not  so  deeply  indebted 
to  the  grace  of  God  as  a  believing  sinner,  who  was  once  upon 
the  brink  of  destruction,  has  been  redeemed  with  blood, 
and  might  justly  have  been,  before  now,  shut  up  with  the 
powers  of  darkness,  without  hope  !  Yet  the  merest  trifles 
are  sufficient  to  debase  my  views,  damp  my  activity,  and 
impede  my  endeavours  in  the  Lord's  service,  though  I  profess 
to  have  no  other  end  or  desire  which  can  make  a  continuance 
in  life  worthy  my  wish.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   XXI 

MY  LORD,  Nov.  —  1775. 

Dum  loquimur  tempus  fugit.     In  the  midst  of  the  hurries 
and  changes  of  this  unsettled  state,  we  glide  along  swiftly 


78  CARDIPHONIA  : 

towards  an  unchangeable  world,  and  shall  soon  have  as 
little  connexion  with  the  scenes  we  are  now  passing  through, 
as  we  have  with  what  happened  before  the  flood.  All  that 
appears  great  and  interesting  in  the  present  life,  abstracted 
from  its  influence  upon  our  internal  character,  and  our  ever 
lasting  allotment,  will  soon  be  as  unreal  as  the  visions  of  the 
night.  This  we  know  and  confess  ;  but,  though  our  judg 
ments  are  convinced,  it  is  seldom  our  hearts  are  duly  affected 
by  the  thought.  And,  while  I  find  it  easy  to  write  in  this 
moralizing  strain,  I  feel  myself  disposed  to  be  seriously 
engaged  about  trifles,  and  trifling  in  the  most  serious  con 
cerns,  as  if  I  believed  the  very  contrary.  It  is  with  good 
reason  the  Lord  challenges,  as  His  own  prerogative,  the  full 
knowledge  of  the  deceitfulness,  desperate  wickedness,  and 
latent  depths  of  the  human  heart,  which  is  capable  of 
making  even  His  own  people  so  shamefully  inconsistent 
with  themselves,  and  with  their  acknowledged  principles. 

I  find  that,  when  I  have  something  agreeable  in 
expectation,  (suppose,  for  instance,  it  were  a  few  hours' 
conversation  with  your  Lordship,)  my  imagination  paints 
and  prepares  the  scene  beforehand  ;  hurries  me  over  the 
intervening  space  of  time,  as  though  it  were  a  useless 
blank,  and  anticipates  the  pleasure  I  propose.  Many  of  my 
thoughts  of  tlu's  kind  are  mere  waking  dreams  ;  for,  perhaps, 
the  opportunity  I  am  eagerly  waiting  for  never  happens, 
but  is  swallowed  up  by  some  unforeseen  disappointment ; 
or,  if  not,  something  from  within  or  without  prevents  its 
answering  the  idea  I  had  formed  of  it.  Nor  does  my  fancy 
confine  itself  within  the  narrow  limits  of  probabilities  ;  it 
can  busy  itself  as  eagerly  in  ranging  after  chimeras  and 
impossibilities,  and  engage  my  attention  to  the  ideal  pursuit 
of  things  which  are  never  likely  to  happen.  In  these  respects 
my  imagination  travels  with  wings  ;  so  that  if  the  wilderness, 
the  multiplicity,  the  variety  of  the  phantoms  which  pass 
through  my  mind  in  the  space  of  a  winter's  day  were  known 
to  my  fellow-creatures,  they  would  probably  deem  me,  as 
I  am  so  often  ready  to  deem  myself,  but  a  more  sober  and 
harmless  kind  of  lunatic.  But  if  I  endeavour  to  put  this 
active  roving  power  in  a  right  track,  and  to  represent  to 
myself  those  scenes  which,  though  not  yet  present,  I  know 
will  soon  be  realized,  and  have  a  greatness  which  the  most 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    79 

enlarged  exercise  of  my  powers  cannot  comprehend  ;  if  I 
would  fix  my  thoughts  upon  the  hour  of  death,  the  end  of 
the  world,  the  coming  of  the  Judge,  or  similar  subjects  ; 
then  my  imagination  is  presently  tame,  cold,  and  jaded, 
travels  very  slowly,  and  is  soon  wearied  in  the  road  of  truth  ; 
though  in  the  fairy  fields  of  uncertainty  and  folly  it  can  skip 
from  mountain  to  mountain.  Mr.  Addison  supposes  that 
the  imagination  alone,  as  it  can  be  differently  affected,  is 
capable  of  making  us  either  inconceivably  happy  or  miserable. 
I  am  sure  it  is  capable  of  making  us  miserable,  though  I 
believe  it  seldom  gives  us  much  pleasure,  but  such  as  is  to 
be  found  in  a  fool's  paradise.  But,  I  am  sure,  were  my 
outward  life  and  conduct  perfectly  free  from  blame,  the 
disorders  and  defilement  of  my  imagination  are  sufficient 
to  constitute  me  a  chief  sinner,  in  the  sight  of  Him  to  whom 
the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart  are  continually  open, 
and  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity. 

Upon  this  head  I  cannot  but  lament  how  universally, 
almost,  education  is  suited,  and  as  it  were  designed,  to  add 
to  the  stimulus  of  depraved  nature.  A  cultivated  imagina 
tion  is  commended  and  sought  after  as  a  very  desirable 
talent,  though  it  seldom  means  more  than  the  possession  of 
a  large  stock  of  other  people's  dreams  and  fables,  with  a 
certain  quickness  in  compounding  them,  enlarging  upon 
them,  and  exceeding  them  by  inventions  of  our  own.  Poets, 
painters,  and  even  historians,  are  employed  to  assist  us, 
from  our  early  years,  in  forming  an  habitual  relish  for  sha 
dows  and  colourings,  which  both  indispose  for  the  search  of 
truth,  and  even  unfit  us  for  its  reception,  unless  proposed 
just  in  our  own  way.  The  best  effect  of  the  Belles  Lettres 
upon  the  imaginations,  seems  generally  expressed  by  the 
word  taste.  And  what  is  this  taste,  but  a  certain  disposition 
which  loves  to  be  humoured,  smoothed,  and  flattered,  and 
which  can  hardly  receive  or  bear  the  most  important  truths, 
if  they  be  not  decorated  and  set  off  with  such  a  delicacy 
and  address  as  taste  requires  ?  I  say  the  most  important 
truths,  because  truths  of  a  secular  importance  strike  so 
closely  upon  the  senses,  that  the  decision  of  taste  perhaps  is 
not  waited  for.  Thus,  if  a  man  be  informed  of  the  birth  of 
his  child,  or  that  his  house  is  on  fire,  the  message  takes  up 
his  thoughts,  and  he  is  seldom  much  disgusted  with  the 


8o       ^  CARDIPHONIA  : 

manner  in  which  it  is  delivered.  But  what  an  insuperable 
bar  is  the  refined  taste  of  many  to  their  profiting  by  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  or'even  to  their  hearing  it !  Though 
the  subject  of  a  discourse tbe  weighty,  and  some  just  repre 
sentation  given  of  the  evil  of  sin,  the  worth  of  the  soul,  and 
the  love  of  Christ ;  yet,  if  there  be  something  amiss  in  the 
elocution,  language,  or  manner  of  the  preacher,  people  of 
taste  must  be  possessed,  in  a  good  measure,  of  grace  like 
wise,  if  they  can  hear  him  with  tolerable  patience.  And, 
perhaps,  three-fourths  of  those  who  are  accounted  the  most 
sensible  and  judicious  in  the  auditory,  will  remember  little 
about  the  sermon,  but  the  tone  of  the  voice,  the  awkwardness 
of  the  attitude,  the  obsolete  expressions,  and  the  like  ; 
while  the  poor  and  simple  not  being  encumbered  with  this 
hurtful  accomplishment,  receive  the  messenger  as  the  Lord's 
servant,  and  the  truth  as  the  Lord's  word,  and  are  comforted 
and  edified.  But  I  stop.  Some  people  would  say,  that  I 
must  suppose  your  Lordship  to  have  but  little  taste,  or  else 
much  grace,  or  I  should  not  venture  to  trouble  you  with 
such  letters  as  mine. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   XXII 

MY  LORD, 

THE  apostle  speaks  of  a  blessedness,  which  it  is  the 
design  of  the  Gospel  to  impart  to  those  who  receive  it.  The 
Galatians  once  had  it,  and  spoke  of  it.  The  apostle  reminds 
them  of  their  loss,  which  is  left  upon  record  as  a  warning 
to  us.  His  expression  has  led  me  sometimes  to  consider 
wherein  a  Christian's  present  blessedness  consists. — I 
mean  that  which  is  attainable  in  this  state  of  trial,  and  the 
sense  and  exercise  of  which  may  be,  and  too  often  is,  sus 
pended  and  taken  from  us.  It  is  a  blessedness  which,  if 
we  speak  of  man  in  a  natural  state,  his  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  his  ear  heard,  so  as  to  understand  it,  nor  can  the  idea  of 
it  arise  in  his  heart.  It  is  no  way  dependent  upon  outward 
circumstances.  Prosperity  cannot  impart  it,  preserve, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART     81 

or  supply  the  want  of  it ;  nor  can  adversity  put  it  out  of 
our  reach.  The  wise  cannot  acquire  it  by  dint  of  superior 
abilities  ;  nor  shall  the  simple  miss  it  for  want  of  capacity. 

The  state  of  true  believers,  compared  with  that  of  others, 
is  always  blessed.  If  they  are  born  from  above,  and  united 
to  Jesus,  they  are  delivered  from  condemnation,  and  are 
heirs  of  eternal  life,  and  may  therefore  well  be  accounted 
happy.  But  I  consider  now,  not  their  harvest,  but  their 
first  fruits  ;  not  their  portion  in  reversion,  but  the  earnest 
attainable  in  this  life  ;  not  what  they  shall  be  in  Heaven, 
but  what,  in  an  humble  attendance  upon  the  Lord,  they 
may  be  while  upon  earth.  There  is  even  at  present  a  prize 
of  our  high  calling  set  before  us.  It  is  much  to  be  desired, 
that  we  had  such  a  sense  of  its  value  as  might  prompt  us  to 
run  that  we  might  obtain.  I  have  thought  this  blessedness 
may  be  comprised  in  five  particulars,  though,  in  order  to 
take  a  succinct  view  of  the  subject,  some  of  these  might  be 
branched  out  into  several  others  ;  but  I  would  not,  by  too 
many  subdivisions,  give  my  letter  the  air  of  a  sermon. 

In  the  first  place,  a  clear,  well-grounded,  habitual  per 
suasion  of  our  acceptance  in  the  Beloved  is  attainable  ; 
and,  though  we  may  be  safe,  we  cannot  be  said  to  enjoy 
blessedness  without  it.  To  be  in  a  state  of  suspense  and 
uncertainty  in  a  point  of  so  great  importance  is  painful,  and 
the  Lord  has  accordingly  provided  that  His  people  may  have 
strong  consolation  on  this  head.  They  are  blessed,  therefore, 
who  have  such  views  of  the  power,  grace,  and  suitableness  of 
Jesus,  and  the  certainty  and  security  of  redemption  in  Him, 
together  with  such  a  consciousness  that  they  have  anchored 
their  hopes,  and  ventured  their  all  upon  His  person,  work, 
and  promise,  as  furnishes  them  with  a  ready  answer  to  all 
the  cavils  of  unbelief  and  Satan,  in  the  apostle's  manner, 
Rom.  viii.  31-37.  That  Paul  could  thus  challenge  and 
triumph  over  all  charges  and  enemies  was  not  an  appendage 
of  his  office  as  an  apostle,  but  a  part  of  his  experience  as  a 
believer  ;  and  it  lies  equally  open  to  us  ;  for  we  have  the 
same  Gospel  and  the  same  promises  as  he  had  ;  nor  is  the 
efficacy  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  teaching  a  whit  weakened  by 
length  of  time.  But  many  stop  short  of  this.  They  have  a 
hope,  but  it  rather  springs  from  their  frames  and  feelings  than 
from  a  spiritual  apprehension  of  the  Redeemer's  engagements 


8a  CARDIPBONIA  : 

and  fullness,  and  therefore  fluctuates  and  changes  like  the 
weather.  Could  they  be  persuaded  to  pray  with  earnestness 
and  importunity,  as  the  apostle  prays  for  them,  Eph.  i. 
17,  18,  and  iii.  16,  19,  they  would  find  a  blessedness  which 
they  have  not  yet  known  ;  for  it  is  said,  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall 
receive." — And  it  is  said  likewise,  "  Ye  receive  not  because 
ye  ask  not." 

Could  this  privilege  be  enjoyed  singly,  the  natural  man 
would  have  no  objection  to  it.  He  would  (as  he  thinks)  be 
pleased  to  know  he  should  be  saved  at  last,  provided  that 
while  here  he  might  live  in  his  sins.  But  the  believer  will 
not,  cannot  think  himself  blessed,  unless  he  has  likewise  a 
conscience  void  of  offence.  This  was  the  apostle's  daily 
exercise,  though  no  one  was  farther  from  a  legal  spirit,  or 
more  dependent  upon  Jesus  for  acceptance.  But  if  we  live 
in  any  known  sin,  or  allow  ourselves  in  the  customary  omis 
sion  of  any  known  duty,  supposing  it  possible,  in  such  a  case, 
to  preserve  a  sense  of  our  acceptance,  (which  can  hardly  be 
supposed  ;  for  if  the  Spirit  be  grieved,  our  evidences  decline 
of  course,)  yet  we  could  not  be  easy.  If  a  traveller  was 
absolutely  sure  of  reaching  his  journey's  end  in  safety,  yet, 
it  he  walked  with  a  thorn  in  his  foot,  he  must  take  every  step 
in  pain.  Such  a  thorn  will  be  felt  in  the  conscience,  till  we 
are  favoured  with  a  simplicity  of  heart,  and  made  willing  in 
all  things,  great  or  small,  to  yield  obedience  to  the  authority 
of  the  Lord's  precepts,  and  make  them  the  standing  rule  of 
our  conduct,  without  wilfully  admitting  a  single  exception. 
At  the  best,  we  shall  be  conscious  of  innumerable  short 
comings,  and  shameful  defilement  ;  but  these  things  will 
not  break  our  peace,  if  our  hearts  are  upright.  But  if  we 
trifle  with  light,  and  connive  at  what  we  know  to  be  wrong, 
we  shall  be  weak,  restless,  and  uncomfortable.  How  many, 
who  we  would  hope  are  the  children  of  the  King,  are  lean 
from  day  to  day,  because  some  right-hand  or  right-eye  evil, 
which  they  cannot  persuade  themselves  to  part  with,  keeps 
them  halting  between  two  opinions  ;  and  they  are  as  distant 
from  happiness,  as  they  are  from  the  possibility  of  reconciling 
the  incompatible  services  of  God  and  the  world  !  But  happy 
indeed  is  he  who  condemneth  not  himself  in  that  thing  which 
he  alloweth. 

Real  communion  with  the  Lord,  in  His  appointed  means 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    83 

of  grace,  is  likewise  an  important  branch  of  this  blessedness. 
They  were  instituted  for  this  end,  and  are  sufficient,  by  virtue 
of  His  power  and  Spirit,  to  answer  it.  I  do  not  believe  this 
enjoyment  will  be  always  equal.  But  I  believe  a  comfortable 
sense  of  it,  in  some  measure,  is  generally  attainable.  To 
read  the  Scriptures,  not  as  an  attorney  may  read  a  will, 
merely  to  know  the  sense,  but  as  the  heir  reads  it,  as  a  descrip 
tion  and  proof  of  his  interest  :  to  hear  the  Gospel,  as  the  voice 
of  our  Beloved,  so  as  to  have  little  leisure  either  for  admiring 
the  abilities,  or  censuring  the  defects  of  the  preacher  ;  and, 
in  prayer,  to  feel  a  liberty  of  pouring  out  our  hearts  before 
the  Lord,  to  behold  some  glances  of  His  goodness  passing 
before  us,  and  to  breathe  forth  before  Him  the  tempers  of  a 
child,  the  spirit  of  adoption  :  and  thus,  by  beholding  His 
glory,  to  be  conformed  more  and  more  to  His  image,  and  to 
renew  our  strength,  by  drawing  water  out  of  the  wells  of 
salvation  :  herein  is  blessedness.  They  who  have  tasted 
it  can  say,  It  is  good  for  me  to  draw  nigh  to  God.  The  soul, 
thus  refreshed  by  the  water  of  life,  is  preserved  from  thirsting 
after  the  vanities  of  the  world, — thus  instructed  in  the 
sanctuary,  comes  down  from  the  mount  filled  with  heavenly 
wisdom,  anointed  with  a  holy  unction,  and  thereby  qualified 
to  judge,  speak,  and  act  in  character,  in  all  the  relations  and 
occasions  of  secular  life.  In  this  way,  besides  the  pleasure,  a 
spiritual  taste  is  acquired,  something  analogous  to  the  mean 
ing  of  the  word  taste  when  applied  to  music  or  good  breeding, 
by  which  discords  and  improprieties  are  observed  and 
avoided,  as  it  were  by  instinct,  and  what  is  right  is  felt  and 
followed,  not  so  much  by  the  force  of  rules,  as  by  a  habit 
insensibly  acquired,  and  in  which  the  substance  of  all 
necessary  rules  are,  if  I  may  so  say,  digested.  O  that 
I  knew  more  of  this  blessedness,  and  more  of  its  effects  ! 

Another  branch  of  blessedness  is  a  power  of  reposing 
ourselves  and  our  concerns  upon  the  Lord's  faithfulness 
and  care  ;  and  may  be  considered  in  two  respects.  A 
reliance  upon  Him  that  He  will  surely  provide  for  us,  guide 
us,  protect  us,  be  our  help  in  trouble,  our  shield  in  danger  ; 
so  that,  however  poor,  weak,  and  defenceless  in  ourselves,  we 
may  rejoice  in  His  all-sufficiency  as  our  own  ; — and  farther, 
in  consequence  of  this,  a  peaceful,  humble  submission  to  His 
will,  under  all  events,  which,  upon  their  first  impression,  are 

F2 


84  CARDIPHONIA  : 

contrary  to  our  own  views  and  desires.  Surely,  in  a  world 
like  this,  where  everything  is  uncertain,  where  we  are  exposed 
to  trials  on  every  hand,  and  know  not  but  a  single  hour 
may  bring  forth  something  painful,  yea,  dreadful  to  our 
natural  sensations,  there  can  be  no  blessedness,  but  so  far  as 
we  are  thus  enabled  to  entrust  and  resign  all  to  the  direction 
and  faithfulness  of  the  Lord  our  Shepherd.  For  want  of  more 
of  this  spirit,  multitudes  of  professing  Christians  perplex 
and  wound  themselves,  and  dishonour  their  high  calling,  by 
continual  anxieties,  alarms,  and  complaints.  They  think 
nothing  safe  under  the  Lord's  keeping,  unless  their  own  eye 
is  likewise  upon  it ;  and  are  seldom  satisfied  with  any  of  His 
dispensations  ;  for,  though  He  gratify  their  desires  in  nine 
instances,  a  refusal  in  the  tenth  spoils  the  relish  of  all,  and 
they  show  the  truths  of  the  Gospel  can  afford  them  little 
comfort  if  self  is  crossed.  But  blessed  is  the  man  who 
trusteth  in  the  Lord,  and  whose  hope  the  Lord  is.  He  shall 
not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings :  he  shall  be  kept  in  perfect  peace, 
though  the  earth  be  moved,  and  the  mountains  cast  into  the 
midst  of  the  sea. 

The  paper  admonishes  me  it  is  time  to  relieve  your  Lord 
ship.  And  I  have  not  room  to  detain  you  long  upon  the 
fifth  particular.  It  belongs  to  a  believer's  blessedness  to 
feel  his  spirit  cheerful  and  active  for  the  Lord's  service  in 
the  world.  For  to  what  other  end  should  he  wish  to  live  ? 
If  he  thought  of  himself  only,  it  would  be  better  to  depart 
and  be  with  Jesus  immediately.  But  he  is  a  debtor  to  His 
grace  and  love  ;  and,  though  strictly  he  can  make  no  returns, 
yet  he  longs  to  show  his  thankfulness  :  and  if  the  Lord  gives 
him  a  heart  to  redeem  his  time,  to  devote  his  strength  and 
influence,  and  lay  himself  out  for  His  service, — that  he  may 
be  instrumental  in  promoting  His  cause,  in  comforting  His 
people, — or  enable  him  to  let  his  light  shine  before  men, 
that  his  God  and  Father  may  be  honoured, — He  will  account 
it  blessedness.  This  is  indeed  the  great  end  of  life,  and  he 
knows  it  will  evidently  appear  so  at  the  approach  of  death  ; 
and,  therefore,  while  others  are  encumbered  about  many 
things,  he  esteems  this  the  one  thing  needful. 

I  remain,  my  Lord,  &c. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART          85 


LETTER   XXIII 

MY  LORD,  July — 1776. 

THAT  I  may  not  weary  you  by  a  preamble,  I  oblige 
myself  to  take  the  turn  of  my  letter  from  some  passage  of 
Scripture  :  and  I  fix  upon  that  which  just  now  occurred  to 
my  thoughts,  a  clause  in  that  pattern  of  prayer  which  He 
who  best  knows  our  state  has  been  pleased  to  leave  for  the 
instruction  of  His  people,  in  their  great  concerns  of  waiting 
at  His  throne  of  grace,  Matt.  vi.  13, — •"  And  lead  us  not 
into  temptation."  This  petition  is  seasonable  at  all  times, 
and  to  all  persons  who  have  any  right  knowledge  of  them 
selves  or  their  spiritual  calling. 

The  word  temptation,  taken  at  large,  includes  every 
kind  of  trial.  To  tempt,  is  to  try  or  prove.  In  this  sense, 
it  is  said,  the  Lord  tempted  Abraham,  that  is,  He  tried 
him  ;  for  God  cannot  tempt  to  evil.  He  proposed  such 
an  act  of  obedience  to  him,  as  was  a  test  of  his  faith,  love, 
dependence,  and  integrity.  Thus,  all  our  afflictions,  under 
His  gracious  management,  are  appointed  to  prove,  manifest, 
exercise,  and  purify  the  graces  of  His  children.  And  not 
afflictions  only  ;  prosperity  likewise  is  a  state  of  temptation  : 
and  many  who  have  endured  sharp  sufferings,  and  come 
off  honourably,  have  been  afterwards  greatly  hurt  and  en 
snared  by  prosperity.  To  this  purpose  the  histories  of 
David  and  Hezekiah  are  in  point.  But  by  temptation 
we  more  frequently  understand  the  wiles  and  force  which 
Satan  employs  in  assaulting  our  peace,  or  spreading  snares 
for  our  feet.  He  is  always  practising  against  us,  either 
directly  and  from  himself,  by  the  access  he  has  to  our  hearts, 
or  mediately,  by  the  influence  he  has  over  the  men  and  the 
things  of  this  world.  The  words  which  follow  confirm 
this  sense, — "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation  ;  but  deliver 
us  from  evil,"  OTTO  TOV  vovtipov,  from  the  evil  one,  as  it 
might  be  properly  rendered  here,  and  in  I  John  v.  19.  The 
subtility  and  power  of  this  adversary  are  very  great  ;  he  is 
an  over-match  for  us  ;  and  we  have  no  hope  of  safety  but  in 
the  Lord's  protection.  Satan's  action  upon  the  heart  may 
be  illustrated  by  the  action  of  the  wind  upon  the  sea.  The 
sea  sometimes  appears  smooth  ;  but  it  is  always  disposed  to 


86    ^  CARDIPHONIA  : 

swell  and  rage,  and  to  obey  the  impulse  of  every  storm. 
Thus,  the  heart  may  be  sometimes  quiet  ;  but  the  wind  of 
temptation  will  awaken  and  rouse  it  in  a  moment  :  for  it  is 
essential  to  our  depraved  nature  to  be  unstable  and  yielding 
as  the  water  ;  and,  when  it  is  under  the  impression  of  the 
enemy,  its  violence  can  only  be  controlled  by  Him  who 
says  to  the  raging  sea,  "  Be  still,  and  here  shall  thy  proud 
waves  be  stayed."  The  branches  of  temptation  are  almost 
innumerable  ;  but  the  principal  may  be  reduced  to  the 
several  faculties  of  the  soul,  (as  we  commonly  speak,)  to 
which  they  are  more  directly  suited. 

He  has  temptations  for  the  understanding.  He  can 
blind  the  mind  with  prejudices  and  false  reasonings,  and 
ply  it  with  arguments  for  infidelity,  till  the  most  obvious 
truths  become  questionable.  Even  where  the  Gospel  has 
been  received,  he  can  insinuate  error,  which  for  the 
suddenness  and  malignity  of  its  effects  may  be  properly 
compared  to  poison.  A  healthy  man  may  be  poisoned  in  a 
moment ;  and,  if  he  be,  the  baneful  drug  is  usually  mixed 
with  his  food.  Many  who  for  a  while  seemed  to  be  sound  in 
the  faith  have  had  their  judgments  strongly  and  strangely 
perverted,  and  prevailed  upon  to  renounce  and  oppose  the 
truths  they  once  prized  and  defended.  Such  instances  are 
striking  proofs  of  human  weakness,  and  loud  calls  to  watch 
fulness  and  dependence,  and  to  beware  of  leaning  to  our  own 
understandings.  For  these  purposes  he  employs  both 
preachers  and  authors,  who,  by  fine  words  and  fair  speeches, 
beguile  the  hearts  of  the  unwary.  And,  by  his  immediate 
influence  upon  the  mind,  he  is  able  (if  the  Lord  permits 
him)  to  entangle  those  who  are  providentially  placed  out 
of  the  reach  of  corrupt  and  designing  men. 

He  tempts  the  conscience.  By  working  upon  the  unbelief 
of  our  hearts,  and  darkening  the  glory  of  the  Gospel,  he 
can  hold  down  the  soul  to  the  number,  weight,  and  aggrava 
tion  of  its  sins,  so  that  it  shall  not  be  able  to  look  up  to 
Jesus,  nor  draw  any  comfort  from  His  blood,  promises,  and 
grace.  How  many  go  burdened  in  this  manner,  seeking 
relief  from  duties,  and  perhaps  spending  their  strength  in 
things  not  commanded,  though  they  hear,  and  perhaps 
acknowledge  the  Gospel !  Nor  are  the  wisest  and  most 
established  able  to  withstand  his  assaults,  if  the  Lord  with- 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    87 

draw,  and  give  him  leave  to  employ  his  power  and  subtility 
unrestrained.  The  Gospel  affords  sufficient  ground  for 
an  abiding  assurance  of  hope  ;  nor  should  we  rest  satisfied 
without  it.  However,  the  possession  and  preservation  of 
this  privilege  depend  upon  the  Lord's  presence  with  the  soul, 
and  His  shielding  us  from  Satan's  attacks  ;  for  I  am  per 
suaded  he  is  able  to  sift  and  shake  the  strongest  believer 
upon  earth. 

He  has  likewise  temptations  suited  to  the  will.  Jesus 
makes  His  people  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power  ;  yet 
there  is  a  contrary  principle  remaining  within  them,  of  which 
Satan  knows  how  to  avail  himself.  There  are  occasions 
in  which  he  almost  prevails  to  set  self  again  upon  the  throne, 
as  Dagon  was  raised  after  he  had  fallen  before  the  ark.  How 
else  should  any,  who  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious, 
give  way  to  a  repining  spirit,  account  His  dispensations  hard, 
or  His  precepts  too  strict,  so  as  to  shrink  from  their  observ 
ance  through  the  fear  of  men,  or  a  regard  to  their  worldly 
interest  ? 

Farther,  he  has  snares  for  the  affections.  In  managing 
these,  he  gains  a  great  advantage  from  our  situation  in  a 
world  that  knows  not  God.  The  Scripture  gives  Satan  the 
title  of  God  of  this  world  ;  and  believers  learn,  by  painful  ex 
perience,  how  great  his  power  is  in  and  over  the  persons  and 
things  of  it.  So  that  to  be  steadfast  in  wisdom's  ways 
requires  unremitted  efforts,  like  pressing  through  a  crowd, 
or  swimming  against  a  stream.  How  hard  is  it  to  live  in  the 
midst  of  pitch  and  not  be  defiled  !  The  air  of  the  world  is 
infectious.  Our  business  and  unavoidable  connexions  are  so 
interwoven  with  occasions  of  sin,  and  there  is  so  much  in 
our  hearts  suited  to  them,  that,  unless  we  are  incessantly 
upheld  by  almighty  strength,  we  cannot  stand  a  day  or 
an  hour.  Past  victories  afford  us  no  greater  security  than 
they  did  Samson,  who  was  shamefully  surprised  by  enemies 
whom  he  had  formerly  conquered.  Nor  are  we  only  tempted 
by  compliances  that  are  evil  in  themselves.  With  respect 
to  these,  perhaps,  conscience  may  be  awake,  and  we  stand 
upon  our  guard  ;  but  we  are  still  upon  Satan's  ground  ; 
and,  while  he  may  seem  to  allow  himself  defeated,  he  can 
dexterously  change  his  method,  and  come  upon  us  where  we 
do  not  suspect  him.  For,  Perimus  in  licitis.  Perhaps  our 


88  CARDIPffONIA  : 

greatest  danger  arises  from  things  in  themselves  lawful. 
He  can  tempt  us  by  our  nearest  and  dearest  friends,  and  per 
vert  every  blessing  of  a  kind  Providence  into  an  occasion  of 
drawing  our  hearts  from  the  Giver  ;  yea,  spiritual  blessings, 
gifts,  comforts,  and  even  graces,  are  sometimes  the  engines 
by  which  he  practises  against  us,  to  fill  us  with  vain 
confidence  and  self-sufficiency,  or  to  lull  us  into  formality 
and  indolence. 

That  wonderful  power  wliich  we  call  the  imagination  is, 
I  suppose,  rather  the  medium  of  the  soul's  perceptions, 
during  its  present  state  of  union  with  the  body,  than  a  spiri 
tual  faculty,  strictly  speaking  ;  but  it  partakes  largely  of 
that  depravity  which  sin  has  brought  upon  our  whole  frame, 
and  affords  Satan  an  avenue  for  assaulting  us  with  the  most 
terrifying,  if  not  the  most  dangerous,  of  his  temptations.  At 
the  best,  we  have  but  an  indifferent  command  over  it.  We 
cannot,  by  an  act  of  our  own  will,  exclude,  a  thousand  painful, 
wild,  inconsistent,  and  hurtful  ideas,  which  are  ever  ready  to 
obtrude  themselves  upon  our  minds  ;  and  a  slight  alteration 
in  the  animal  system,  in  the  motion  of  the  blood,  or  nervous 
spirits,  is  sufficient  to  withdraw  it  wholly  from  our  dominion, 
and  to  leave  us,  like  a  city  without  walls  or  gates,  exposed 
to  the  incursion  of  our  enemy.  We  are  fearfully  and 
wonderfully  made  ;  and,  with  all  our  boasted  knowledge  of 
other  things,  can  form  no  conception  of  what  is  so  vastly 
interesting  to  us,  the  mysterious  connexion  between  soul  and 
body,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  mutually  affected  by 
each  other.  The  effects  we  too  sensibly  feel.  The  wisest 
of  men  would  be  accounted  fools  or  mad  were  they  to 
express  in  words  a  small  part  of  what  passes  within  them  ; 
and  it  would  appear  that  much  of  the  soberest  life  is  little 
better  than  a  waking  dream  :  but  how  direful  are  the  con 
sequences  when  the  Lord  permits  some  hidden  pin  in  the 
human  machine  to  be  altered  !  Immediately  a  door  flies 
open  which  no  hand  but  His  can  shut,  and  the  enemy  pours  in 
like  a  flood,  falsehood  and  horror,  and  the  blackness  of 
darkness  ;  the  judgment  is  borne  down  and  disabled,  and 
the  most  distressing  illusions  seize  us  with  all  the  apparent 
force  of  evidence  and  demonstration.  When  this  is  the 
case  in  a  certain  degree,  we  call  it  distraction  ;  but  there  are 
various  degrees  of  it,  which  leave  a  person  in  the  possession 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    89 

of  his  senses  as  to  the  things  of  common  life,  and  yet  are 
sufficient,  with  respect  to  his  spiritual  concerns,  to  shake  the 
very  foundations  of  his  hope,  and  deprive  him  of  all  peace 
and  comfort,  and  make  him  a  terror  to  himself.  All  the 
Lord's  people  are  not  called  to  navigate  in  these  deep  waters 
of  soul-distress  ;  but  all  are  liable.  Ah  !  if  we  knew  what 
some  suffer,  the  horribilia  de  Deo,  ct  terribilia  de  fide,  which 
excruciate  the  minds  of  those  over  whom  Satan  is  permitted 
to  tyrannize  in  this  way,  surely  we  should  be  more  earnest 
and  frequent  in  praying,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation." 
From  some  little  sense  I  have  of  the  malice  and  subtility  of 
our  spiritual  enemies,  and  the  weakness  of  those  barriers 
which  we  have  to  prevent  their  assaults,  I  am  fully  per 
suaded  that  nothing  less  than  the  continual  exertion  of  that 
almighty  power  which  preserves  the  stars  in  their  orbits,  can 
maintain  our  peace  of  mind  for  an  hour  or  a  minute.  In  this 
view,  all  comparative  difference  in  external  situations  seems 
to  be  annihilated  ;  for  as  the  Lord's  presence  can  make  His 
people  happy  in  a  dungeon,  so  there  are  temptations  which, 
if  we  felt  them,  would  instantly  render  us  incapable  of 
receiving  a  moment's  satisfaction  from  an  assemblage  of  all 
earthly  blessings,  and  make  the  company  of  our  dearest 
friends  tasteless,  if  not  insupportable. 

Ah  !  how  little  do  the  gay  and  the  busy  think  of  these 
things  !  How  little,  indeed,  do  they  think  of  them  who 
profess  to  believe  them  !  How  faint  is  the  sense  of  our 
obligations  to  Him,  Who  freely  submitted  to  the  fiercest 
onsets  of  the  powers  of  darkness,  to  free  us  from  the  punish 
ment  due  to  our  sins  ;  otherwise  we  must  have  been  for  ever 
shut  up  with  those  miserable  and  merciless  spirits,  who 
delight  in  our  torment,  and  who,  even  in  the  present  state, 
if  they  get  access  to  our  minds,  can  make  our  existence  a 
burden  ! 

But  our  Lord,  who  knows  and  considers  our  weakness, 
of  which  we  are  so  little  aware,  allows  and  directs  us  to  pray, 
"  Lead  us  not  into  temptation."  We  are  not  to  expect  an 
absolute  freedom  from  temptation  ;  we  are  called  to  be 
soldiers,  and  must  sometimes  meet  with  enemies,  and  per 
haps  with  wounds  ;  yet,  considering  this  prayer  as  provided 
by  Him  who  knows  what  we  are,  and  where  we  are,  it  may 
afford  us  both  instruction  and  consolation. 


90  CARDIPHONIA  : 

It  calls  at  a  constant  reflection  upon  our  own  weakness. 
Believers,  especially  young  ones,  are  prone  to  rest  too  much 
in  grace  received.  They  feel  their  hearts  warm  ;  and,  like 
Peter,  are  ready  to  please  themselves  with  thinking  how  they 
would  act  in  such  or  such  a  state  of  trial.  It  is  as  if  the  Lord 
had  said,  Poor  worms,  be  not  high-minded,  but  fear  and  pray, 
that,  if  it  may  be,  you  may  be  kept  from  learning,  by  bitter 
experience,  how  weak  your  supposed  strength  is.  It  sweetly 
intimates,  that  all  our  ways,  and  all  our  enemies,  are  in  the 
hands  of  our  great  Shepherd.  He  knows  our  path.  We  are 
short-sighted,  and  cannot  tell  what  an  hour  may  bring  forth  : 
but  we  are  under  His  protection  ;  and,  if  we  depend  upon 
Him,  we  need  not  be  anxiously  afraid.  He  will  be  faithful 
to  the  trust  we  repose  in  Him,  and  will  suffer  no  temptation 
to  overtake  us,  but  what  He  will  support  us  under  and 
bring  us  through.  But  it  becomes  us  to  beware  of  security 
and  presumption,  to  keep  our  eyes  upon  Him,  and  not  to 
think  ourselves  safe  a  moment  longer  than  our  spirits 
feel  and  breathe  the  meaning  of  this  petition. 

It  implies,  likewise,  the  duty  of  watchfulness  on  our 
part,  as  our  Lord  enjoins  them  elsewhere,  "  Watch  and  pray." 
If  we  desire  not  to  be  led  into  temptation,  surely  we  are  not 
to  run  into  it.  If  we  wish  to  be  preserved  from  error,  we 
are  to  guard  against  a  curious  and  reasoning  spirit.  If  we 
would  preserve  peace  of  conscience,  we  must  beware  of 
trifling  with  the  light  and  motions  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  for 
without  His  assistance  we  cannot  maintain  faith  in  exercise. 
If  we  would  not  be  ensnared  by  the  men  of  the  world,  we  are 
to  keep  at  a  proper  distance  from  them.  The  less  we  have  to 
do  with  them  the  better,  excepting  so  far  as  the  providence 
of  God  makes  it  our  duty,  in  the  discharge  of  our  callings 
and  relations,  and  taking  opportunities  of  doing  them  good. 
And,  though  we  cannot  wholly  shut  Satan  out  of  our  imagina 
tions,  we  should  be  cautious  that  we  do  not  wilfully  provide 
fuel  for  his  flame  ;  but  entreat  the  Lord  to  set  a  watch  upon 
our  eyes  and  our  ears,  and  to  teach  us  to  reject  the  first 
motions  and  the  smallest  appearances  of  evil. 

I  have  been  so  intent  upon  my  subject,  that  I  have  once 
and  again  forgot  I  was  writing  to  your  Lordship,  otherwise 
I  should  not  have  let  my  lucubration  run  to  so  great  a  length, 
which  I  certainly  did  not  intend  when  I  began.  I  shall  not 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    91 

add  to  this  fault  by  making  an  apology.  I  have  touched 
upon  a  topic  of  great  importance  to  myself.  I  am  one 
among  many  who  have  suffered  greatly  for  want  of  paying 
more  attention  to  my  need  of  this  prayer.  O  that  I  could  be 
wiser  hereafter,  and  always  act  and  speak  as  knowing  that 
I  am  always  upon  a  field  of  battle,  and  beset  by  legions  ! 

I  am,  with  great  respect,  &c. 


LETTER    XXIV 

MY  LORD,  September  —  1776. 

WITHOUT  any  preamble,  I  purpose  now  to  wait  on  your 
Lordship,  with  a  few  thoughts  on  the  meaning  of  that  name 
which  first  obtained  at  Antioch  ;  in  other  words,  what  it  is 
to  be  a  Christian  ?  What  are  the  effects  which  (making 
allowance  for  the  unavoidable  infirmities  attending  upon 
the  present  state  of  mortality)  may  be  expected  from  a  real 
experimental  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  ?  I  would  not  in 
sinuate  that  none  are  Christians  who  do  not  come  up  to  the 
character  I  would  describe  ;  for  then  I  fear  I  should  un- 
Christian  myself :  but  only  to  consider  what  the  Scripture 
encourages  us  to  aim  at  as  the  prize  of  our  high  calling  in 
this  life.  It  is  generally  allowed  and  lamented,  that  we  are 
too  apt  to  live  below  our  privileges,  and  to  stop  short  of 
what  the  spirit  and  the  promises  of  the  Gospel  point  out  to 
us  as  attainable. 

Mr.  Pope's  admired  line,  "  An  honest  man's  the  noblest 
work  of  God."  may  be  admitted  as  a  truth  when  rightly  ex 
plained.  A  Christian  is  the  noblest  work  of  God  in  this 
visible  world,  and  bears  a  much  brighter  impression  of  His 
glory  and  goodness  than  the  sun  in  the  firmament  :  and 
none  but  a  Christian  can  be  strictly  and  properly  honest  : 
all  others  are  too  much  under  the  power  of  self,  to  do  uni 
versally  to  others  as  they  would  others  should  do  unto  them  : 
and  nothing  but  a  uniform  conduct  upon  this  principle 
deserves  the  name  of  honesty. 

The  Christian  is  a  new  creature,  born  and  taught  from 
above.  He  has  been  convinced  of  his  guilt  and  misery  as 


92  CARDIPHONIA  : 

a  sinner,  has  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  him,  has 
seen  the  Son  and  believed  on  Him  :  his  natural  prejudices 
against  the  glory  and  grace  of  God's  salvation  have  been 
subdued  and  silenced  by  almighty  power  ;  he  has  accepted 
the  Beloved,  and  is  made  acceptable  in  Him  :  he  now 
knows  the  Lord  ;  has  renounced  the  confused,  distant,  un 
comfortable  notions  he  once  formed  of  God  ;  and  beholds 
Him  in  Christ,  who  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the 
life,  the  only  door  by  which  we  can  enter  to  any  true 
satisfying  knowledge  of  God,  or  communion  with  Him. 
But  he  sees  God  in  Christ  reconciled,  a  Father,  a  Saviour, 
and  a  Friend,  who  has  freely  forgiven  him  all  his  sins, 
and  given  him  the  spirit  of  adoption  :  he  is  now  no  longer 
a  servant,  much  less  a  stranger,  but  a  son  ;  and,  because  a 
son,  an  heir  already  interested  in  all  the  promises,  ad 
mitted  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  an  assured  expectant  of 
eternal  glory.  The  Gospel  is  designed  to  give  us  not  only  a 
peradventure  or  a  probability,  but  a  certainty  both  of  our 
acceptance  and  our  perseverance,  till  death  shall  be  swal 
lowed  up  in  life.  And  though  many  are  sadly  fluctuating 
and  perplexed  upon  this  head,  and  perhaps  all  are  so  for  a 
season,  yet  there  are  those  who  can  say,  We  know  that  we  are 
of  God  ;  and  therefore  they  are  steadfast  and  unmoveable 
in  His  way  ;  because  they  are  confident  that  their  labour 
shall  not  be  in  vain,  but  that,  when  they  shall  be  absent  from 
the  body,  they  shall  be  present  with  the  Lord.  This  is 
the  state  of  the  advanced,  experienced  Christian,  who,  being 
enabled  to  make  his  profession  the  chief  business  of  his  life, 
is  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might.  Every 
one  who  has  this  hope  in  Christ,  purifieth  himself  even  as  He 
is  pure.  I  would  now  attempt  a  sketch  of  the  Christian's 
temper,  formed  upon  these  principles  and  hopes,  under 
the  leading  branches  of  its  exercise,  respecting  God  Himself, 
and  His  fellow-creatures. 

The  Christian's  temper  God-ward  is  evidenced  by  humility. 
He  has  received  from  Gethsemane  and  Golgotha  such  a  sense 
of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  of  the  holiness  of  God,  combined  with 
His  matchless  love  to  sinners,  as  has  deeply  penetrated 
his  heart  ;  he  has  an  affecting  remembrance  of  the  state  of 
rebellion  and  enmity  in  which  he  once  lived  against  this 
holy  and  good  God  ;  and  he  has  a  quick  perception  of  the 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    93 

defilements  and  defects  which  still  debase  his  best  services. 
His  mouth  is  therefore  stopped  as  to  boasting  ;  he  is  vile  in 
his  own  eyes,  and  is  filled  with  wonder  that  the  Lord  should 
visit  such  a  sinner  with  such  a  salvation.  He  sees  so  vast  a 
disproportion  between  the  obligations  he  is  under  to  grace, 
and  the  returns  he  makes,  that  he  is  disposed,  yea,  con 
strained,  to  adopt  the  apostle's  words  without  affectation, 
and  to  account  himself  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints  ; 
and  knowing  his  own  heart,  while  he  sees  only  the  outside  of 
others,  he  is  not  easily  persuaded  there  can  be  a  believer 
upon  earth  so  faint,  so  unfruitful,  so  unworthy  as  himself. 
Yet,  though  abased,  he  is  not  discouraged,  for  he  enjoys 
peace.  The  dignity,  offices,  blood,  righteousness,  faithful 
ness,  and  compassion  of  the  Redeemer,  in  whom  he  rests, 
trusts,  and  lives,  for  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification, 
and  redemption,  are  adequate  to  all  his  wants  and  wishes, 
provide  him  with  an  answer  to  every  objection,  and  give 
him  no  less  confidence  in  God,  than  if  he  were  sinless  as  an 
angel.  For  he  sees,  that  though  sin  has  abounded  in  him, 
grace  has  much  more  abounded  in  Jesus.  With  respect 
to  the  past,  all  things  are  become  new  ;  with  respect  to  the 
present  and  future,  he  leans  upon  an  almighty  arm,  and 
relies  upon  the  word  and  power  which  made  and  uphold  the 
Heavens  and  the  earth.  Though  he  feels  himself  unworthy  of 
the  smallest  mercies,  he  claims  and  expects  the  greatest 
blessings  that  God  can  bestow  ;  and  being  rooted  and 
grounded  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  Christ,  his  peace 
abides,  and  is  not  greatly  affected,  either  by  the  variation  of 
his  own  frame,  or  the  changes  of  God's  dispensations  towards 
him  while  here.  With  such  a  sense  of  himself,  such  a 
heartfelt  peace  and  heavenly  hope,  how  can  his  spirit 
but  breathe  love  to  his  God  and  Saviour  ?  It  is  indeed  the 
perfection  of  his  character  and  happiness,  that  his  soul  is 
united  by  love  to  the  chief  good.  The  love  of  Christ  is  the 
joy  of  his  heart,  and  the  spring  of  his  obedience.  With  his 
Saviour's  presence,  he  finds  a  Heaven  begun  upon  earth  ; 
and  without  it  all  the  other  glories  of  the  heavenly  state 
would  not  content  him.  The  excellence  of  Christ,  His  love 
to  sinners,  especially  His  dying  love  ;  His  love  to  himself, 
in  seeking  and  saving  him  when  lost,  saving  him  to  the  utter 
most — but  I  must  stop. — Your  Lordship  can  better  conceive 


94  CARDIPHONIA  : 

than  I  can  describe,  how  and  why  Jesus  is  dear  to  the  heart 
that  knows  Him.  That  part  of  the  Christian's  life  which  is 
not  employed  in  the  active  service  of  his  Lord,  is  chiefly 
spent  in  seeking  and  maintaining  communion  with  Him. 
For  this  he  plies  the  throne,  and  studies  the  word  of  grace, 
and  frequents  the  ordinances,  where  the  Lord  has  promised 
to  meet  with  His  people.  These  are  his  golden  hours  ; 
and  when  thus  employed,  how  poor  and  trivial  does  all  that 
the  world  calls  great  and  important  appear  in  his  eyes  ! 
Yea,  he  is  solicitous  to  keep  up  an  intercourse  of  heart  with 
his  Beloved,  in  his  busiest  scenes  ;  and  so  far  as  he  can 
succeed,  it  alleviates  all  his  labours,  and  sweetens  all  his 
troubles.  And  when  he  is  neither  communing  with  his  Lord, 
nor  acting  for  Him,  he  accounts  his  time  lost,  and  is  ashamed 
and  grieved.  The  truth  of  his  love  is  manifested  by  sub 
mission.  This  is  twofold,  and  absolute  and  without  reserve 
in  each.  He  submits  to  His  revealed  will,  as  made  known  to 
him  by  precept,  and  by  His  own  example.  He  aims  to  tread 
in  his  Saviour's  footsteps,  and  makes  conscience  of  all  His 
commandments,  without  exception  and  without  hesitation. 
Again,  he  submits  to  His  providential  will ;  he  yields  to 
His  sovereignty,  acquiesces  in  His  wisdom  ;  he  knows  he 
has  no  right  to  complain  of  any  thing,  because  he  is  a  sinner  ; 
and  he  has  no  reason,  because  he  is  sure  the  Lord  does  all 
things  well.  Therefore,  his  submission  is  not  forced,  but  is  an 
act  of  trust.  He  knows  he  is  not  more  unworthy  than 
he  is  unable  to  choose  for  himself,  and  therefore  rejoices  that 
the  Lord  has  undertaken  to  manage  for  him  ;  and  were  he 
compelled  to  make  his  own  choice,  he  could  only  choose, 
that  all  his  concerns  should  remain  in  that  hand  to  which  he 
has  already  committed  them.  And  thus  he  judges  of  public, 
as  well  as  of  his  personal  affairs.  He  cannot  be  an  unaffected 
spectator  of  national  sins,  nor  without  apprehension  of  their 
deserved  consequences  ;  he  feels,  and  almost  trembles  for 
others  ;  but  he  himself  dwells  under  the  shadow  of  the 
Almighty,  in  a  sanctuary  that  cannot  be  forced  ;  and, 
therefore,  should  he  see  the  earth  shaken,  and  the  mountains 
cast  into  the  midst  of  the  sea,  his  heart  would  not  be  greatly 
moved,  for  God  is  his  refuge.  The  Lord  reigns.  He  sees 
his  Saviour's  hands  directing  every  dark  appearance,  and 
overruling  all  to  the  accomplishment  of  His  own  great 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    95 

purposes  :  this  satisfies  him  ;  and  though  the  winds  and 
waves  should  be  high,  he  can  venture  his  own  little  bark  in 
the  storm,  for  he  has  an  infallible  and  almighty  Pilot  on  board 
with  him.  And,  indeed,  why  should  he  fear  when  he  has 
nothing  to  lose  ?  His  best  concerns  are  safe  ;  and  other 
things  he  holds  as  gifts  from  his  Lord,  to  whose  call  he  is 
ready  to  resign  them  in  whatever  way  He  pleases,  well 
knowing  that  creatures  and  instruments  cannot  of  them 
selves  touch  a  hair  of  his  head,  without  the  Lord's 
permission,  and  that  He  does  permit  them,  it  must  be  for 
the  best. 

I  might  enlarge  farther. — But  I  shall  proceed  to  consider 
the  Christian's  temper  respecting  himself.  He  lives  godly 
and  soberly.  By  sobriety  we  mean  more  than  that  he  is 
not  a  drunkard  ;  his  tempers  toward  God,  of  course,  form 
him  to  a  moderation  in  all  temporal  things.  He  is  not 
scrupulous  or  superstitious  :  he  understands  the  liberty  of 
the  Gospel,  that  every  creature  of  God  is  good  if  it  be  received 
with  thanksgiving  :  he  does  not  aim  at  being  needlessly 
singular,  nor  practice  self-devised  austerities.  The  Christian 
is  neither  a  stoic  nor  a  cynic  ;  yet  he  finds  daily  cause  for 
watchfulness  and  restraint.  Satan  will  not  often  tempt  a 
believer  to  gross  crimes  ;  our  greatest  snares  and  sorest 
conflicts  are  usually  found  in  things  lawful  in  themselves, 
but  hurtful  to  us  by  their  abuse,  engrossing  too  much  of  our 
time,  or  of  our  hearts,  or  somehow  indisposing  us  for  com 
munion  with  the  Lord.  The  Christian  will  be  jealous  of 
any  thing  that  might  entangle  his  affections,  damp  his  zeal, 
or  straiten  him  in  his  opportunities  of  serving  his  Saviour. 
He  is  likewise  content  with  his  situation,  because  the  Lord 
chooses  it  for  him  ;  his  spirit  is  not  eager  for  additions  and 
alterations  in  his  circumstances.  If  divine  Providence 
points  out  and  leads  to  a  change,  he  is  ready  to  follow,  though 
it  should  be  what  the  world  would  call  from  a  better  to  a 
worse  ;  for  he  is  a  pilgrim  and  a  stranger  here,  and  a  citizen 
of  Heaven.  As  people  of  fortune  sometimes,  in  travelling, 
submit  cheerfully  to  inconvenient  accommodations,  very 
different  from  their  homes,  and  comfort  themselves  with 
thinking  they  are  not  always  to  live  so  ;  so  the  Christian  is 
not  greatly  solicitous  about  externals.  If  he  has  them,  he 
will  use  them  moderately.  If  he  has  but  little  of  them,  he 


96  CARDIPHONIA  : 

can  make  a  good  shift  without  them  ;  he  is  but  upon  a 
journey,  and  will  soon  be  at  home.  If  he  be  rich,  experience 
confirms  our  Lord's  words,  Luke  xii.  15  ;  and  satisfies 
him,  that  a  large  room,  a  crowd  of  servants,  and  twenty 
dishes  upon  his  table,  add  nothing  to  the  real  happiness 
of  life.  Therefore  he  will  not  have  his  heart  set  upon 
such  things.  If  he  be  in  an  humbler  state,  he  is  more 
disposed  to  pity,  than  to  envy  those  above  him  ;  for  he 
judges  they  must  have  many  incumbrances  from  which 
he  is  freed.  However,  the  will  of  God,  and  the  light  of 
His  countenance,  are  the  chief  things  the  Christian,  whether 
rich  or  poor,  regards  ;  and,  therefore,  his  moderation  is 
made  known  unto  all  men. 

A  third  branch  of  the  Christian's  temper  respects  his 
fellow-creatures.  And  here,  methinks,  if  I  had  not  filled 
a  sheet  already,  I  could  enlarge  with  pleasure.  We  have, 
in  this  degenerate  day,  among  those  who  claim  and  are 
allowed  the  name  of  Christian,  too  many  of  a  narrow,  selfish, 
mercenary  spirit  ;  but  in  the  beginning  it  was  not  so.  The 
Gospel  is  designed  to  cure  such  a  spirit,  but  gives  no  indul 
gence  to  it.  A  Christian  has  the  mind  of  Christ,  who  went 
about  doing  good,  who  makes  His  sun  to  shine  upon  the  good 
and  the  evil,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  the  unjust. 
His  Lord's  example  forms  him  to  the  habit  of  diffusive 
benevolence  ;  he  breathes  a  spirit  of  goodwill  to  mankind, 
and  rejoices  in  every  opportunity  of  being  useful  to  the 
souls  and  bodies  of  others,  without  respect  to  parties  or 
interests.  He  commiserates,  and  would,  if  possible,  alleviate 
the  miseries  of  all  around  him  ;  and  if  his  actual  services  are 
restrained  by  want  of  ability,  yet  all  share  in  his  sympathy 
and  prayers.  Acting  in  the  spirit  of  his  Master  he  frequently 
meets  with  a  measure  of  the  like  treatment  ;  but,  if  his  good 
is  requited  with  evil,  he  labours  to  overcome  evil  with  good. 
He  feels  himself  a  sinner,  and  needs  much  forgiveness  : 
this  makes  him  ready  to  forgive.  He  is  not  haughty, 
captious,  easily  offended,  or  hard  to  be  reconciled  ;  for  at 
the  feet  of  Jesus  he  has  learned  meekness  ;  and  when  he 
meets  with  unkindness  or  injustice,  he  considers,  that, 
though  he  has  not  deserved  such  things  from  men,  they  are 
instruments  employed  by  his  heavenly  Father  (from  whom 
he  has  deserved  to  suffer  much  more)  for  his  humiliation 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    97 

and  chastisement  ;  and  is,  therefore,  more  concerned  for 
their  sins  than  for  his  own  sufferings,  and  prays,  after  the 
pattern  of  his  Saviour,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do."  He  knows  he  is  fallible,  therefore  cannot 
be  positive.  He  knows  he  is  frail,  and  therefore  dares  not 
be  censorious.  As  a  member  of  society,  he  is  just,  punctual 
in  the  discharge  of  every  relative  duty,  faithful  to  his  engage 
ments  and  promises,  rendering  to  all  their  dues,  obedient 
to  lawful  authority,  and  acting  to  all  men  according  to  the 
golden  rule,  of  doing  as  he  would  be  done  by.  His  conduct 
is  simple,  devoid  of  artifice,  and  consistent,  attending  to 
every  branch  of  duty  ;  and  in  the  closet,  the  family,  the 
church,  and  in  the  transactions  of  common  life,  he  is  the  same 
man  ;  for  in  every  circumstance  he  serves  the  Lord,  and  aims 
to  maintain  a  conscience  void  of  offence  in  His  sight.  No 
small  part  of  the  beauty  of  his  profession  in  the  sight  of  men, 
consists  in  the  due  government  of  his  tongue.  The  law  of 
truth,  and  kindness,  and  purity,  is  upon  his  lips.  He  abhors 
lying  ;  and  is  so  far  from  inventing  a  slander,  that  he  will 
not  repeat  a  report  to  the  disadvantage  of  his  neighbour, 
however  true,  without  a  proper  call.  His  converse  is  cheer 
ful,  but  inoffensive  ;  and  he  will  no  more  wound  another 
with  his  wit  (if  he  has  a  talent  that  way)  than  with  a  knife. 
His  speech  is  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt,  and  suited  to 
promote  the  peace  and  edification  of  all  around  him. 

Such  is  the  Christian  in  civil  life  ;  but  though  he  loves 
all  mankind,  he  stands  in  a  nearer  relation,  and  bears  an 
especial  brotherly  love  to  all  who  are  partakers  of  the  faith 
and  hope  of  the  Gospel.  This  regard  is  not  confined  within 
the  pale  of  a  denomination,  but  extended  to  all  who  love 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity.  He  calls  no  man  master 
himself ;  nor  does  he  wish  to  impose  a  Shibboleth  of  his  own 
upon  others.  He  rejoices  in  the  image  of  God  wherever  he 
sees  it,  and  in  the  work  of  God  wherever  it  is  carried  on. 
Though  tenacious  of  the  truths  which  the  Lord  has  taught 
him,  his  heart  is  open  to  those  who  differ  from  him  in  less 
essential  points,  and  allows  to  others  that  right  of  private 
judgment  which  he  claims  for  himself,  and  is  disposed  to 
hold  communion  in  love  with  all  who  hold  the  Head.  He 
cannot,  indeed,  countenance  those  who  set  aside  the  one 
foundation  which  God  has  laid  in  Zion,  and  maintain  errors 

C.  G 


98  CARDIPHON1A  : 

derogator}*  to  the  honour  of  his  Saviour,  or  subversive  of  the 
faith  and  experience  of  His  people  ;  yet  he  wishes  well  to 
their  persons,  pities,  and  prays  for  them,  and  is  ready  in 
meekness  to  instruct  them  that  oppose  ;  but  there  is  no 
bitterness  in  his  zeal,  being  sensible  that  raillery  and  invec 
tive  are  dishonourable  to  the  cause  of  truth,  and  quite 
unsuitable  in  the  mouth  of  a  sinner,  who  owes  all  that  dis 
tinguishes  him  from  the  vilest  of  men  to  the  free  grace  of 
God.  In  a  word,  he  is  influenced  by  the  wisdom  from 
above,  which,  as  it  is  pure,  is  likewise  peaceable,  gentle, 
and  eas)r  to  be  entreated,  full  of  mercy  and  good  works, 
without  partiality,  and  without  hypocrisy. 

I  must  just  recur  to  my  first  head,  and  observe,  that  with 
this  spirit  and  deportment,  the  Christian,  while  he  is  enabled 
to  maintain  a  conscience  void  of  offence  towards  God  and 
man,  is  still  sensible  and  mindful  of  indwelling  sin  :  he  has 
his  eye  more  upon  his  rule  than  upon  his  attainments  ; 
and  therefore  finds  and  confesses,  that  in  every  thing  he  comes 
exceedingly  short,  and  that  his  best  services  are  not  only 
defective,  but  defiled  ;  he  accounts  himself  an  unprofitable 
sen-ant,  is  abased  in  his  own  eyes,  and  derives  all  his  hope 
and  comfort,  as  well  as  his  strength,  from  Jesus,  whom 
he  has  known,  received,  and  trusted,  to  whom  he  has 
committed  his  soul,  in  whom  he  rejoices,  and  worships  God 
in  the  spirit,  renouncing  all  confidence  in  the  flesh,  and 
esteeming  all  things  as  loss,  for  the  excellency  of  the  know 
ledge  of  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord. 

If  I  have  lately  been  rather  tardy  in  making  my  payments 
to  your  Lordship,  I  have  proportionably  increased  the 
quantity.  It  is  high  time  I  should  now  relieve  your  patience. 
I  hope — I  long  to  be  a  Christian  indeed  ;  and  I  hope  this 
hasty  exemplification  of  my  wishes  will  answer  to  your 
Lordship's  experience,  better  than  I  fear  it  does  to  my  own. 
May  I  beg  a  remembrance  in  your  prayers,  that  He  Who 
has  given  me  to  will  and  desire,  may  work  in  me  to  be  and  to 
do  according  to  His  own  good  pleasure. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART         99 

LETTER   XXV 

MY  LORD,  Nov.  —  1776. 

MY  London  journey,  which  prevented  my  writing  in 
October,  made  me  amends  by  an  opportunity  of  waiting 
upon  your  Lordship  in  person.  Some  seasons  are  not  only 
pleasant  at  the  time,  but  afford  me  pleasure  in  the  review.— 
I  could  have  wished  the  half-hour  we  were  together  by  our 
selves  prolonged  to  half  a  day.  The  subject  your  Lordship 
was  pleased  to  suggest  has  been  often  upon  my  mind  ;  and 
glad  should  I  be,  were  I  able  to  offer  you  any  thing  satisfac 
tory  upon  it.  There  is  no  doubt  but  first  religious  im 
pressions  are  usually  mingled  with  much  of  a  legal  spirit ; 
and  that  conscience,  at  such  a  time,  is  not  only  tender,  but 
misinformed  and  scrupulous  :  and  I  believe,  as  your  Lord 
ship  intimated,  that  when  the  mind  is  more  enlightened,  and 
we  feel  a  liberty  from  many  fetters  we  had  imposed  upon 
ourselves,  we  are  in  danger  of  verging  too  far  towards  the 
other  extreme.  It  seems  to  me  that  no  one  person  can 
adjust  the  medium,  and  draw  the  line  exactly  for  another. 
There  are  so  many  particulars  in  every  situation,  of  which 
a  stranger  cannot  be  a  competent  judge,  and  the  best 
human  advices  and  models  are  mixed  with  such  defects,  that 
it  is  not  right  to  expect  others  to  be  absolutely  guided  by  our 
rules,  nor  is  it  safe  for  us  implicitly  to  adopt  the  decisions 
or  practices  of  others.  But  the  Scripture  undoubtedly 
furnishes  sufficient  and  infallible  rules  for  every  person, 
however  circumstanced  ;  and  the  throne  of  grace  is  ap 
pointed  for  us  to  wait  upon  the  Lord  for  the  best  exposition 
of  His  precepts.  Thus,  David  often  prays  to  be  led  in  the 
right  way,  in  the  path  of  judgment.  By  frequent  prayer, 
and  close  acquaintance  with  the  Scripture,  and  an  habitual 
attention  to  the  frame  of  our  hearts,  there  is  a  certain  deli 
cacy  of  spiritual  taste  and  discernment  to  be  acquired,  which 
renders  a  nice  disquisition  concerning  the  nature  and  limits 
of  the  Adiaphora,  as  they  are  called,  or  how  near  we  may  go 
to  the  utmost  bounds  of  what  is  right,  without  being  wrong, 
quite  unnecessary.  Love  is  the  clearest  and  most  persuasive 
casuist  ;  and  when  our  love  to  the  Lord  is  in  lively  exercise, 
and  the  rule  of  His  word  is  in  our  eye,  we  seldom  make 

c  2 


ioo  CARDIPHON1A 

great  mistakes.  And,  I  believe,  the  overdoings  of  a  young 
convert,  proceeding  from  an  honest  simplicity  of  heart, 
and  a  desire  of  pleasing  the  Lord,  are  more  acceptable  in  His 
sight,  than  a  certain  coolness  of  conduct  which  frequently 
takes  place  afterward,  when  we  are  apt  to  look  back  with 
pity  upon  our  former  weakness,  and  secretly  to  applaud 
ourselves  for  our  present  greater  attainments  in  knowledge, 
though,  perhaps  (alas,  that  it  should  ever  be  so  !)  we  may 
have  lost  as  much  in  warmth  as  we  have  gained  in  light. 

From  the  time  we  know  the  Lord,  and  are  bound  to  Him 
by  the  cords  of  love  and  gratitude,  the  two  chief  points 
we  should  have  in  our  view,  I  apprehend,  are,  to  maintain 
communion  with  Him  in  our  own  souls,  and  to  glorify  Him 
in  the  sight  of  men.  Agreeably  to  these  views,  though  the 
Scripture  does  not  enumerate  or  decide,  totidem  verbis, 
for  or  against  many  things  which  some  plead  for,  and 
others  condemn  ;  yet  it  furnishes  us  with  some  general 
canons,  which,  if  rightly  applied,  will,  perhaps,  go  a  good 
way  towards  settling  the  debate,  at  least  to  the  satisfaction 
of  those  who  would  rather  please  God  than  man.  Some  of 
these  canons  I  will  just  remark  to  your  Lordship  : — Rom. 
xii.  1,2;  i  Cor.  viii.  13,  and  x.  31 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  17  ;  Ephes. 
iv.  30,  and  v.  n,  15,  16  ;  I  Thess.  v.  22;  Ephes.  vi.  18  ; 
to  which  I  may  add,  as  suitable  to  the  present  times,  Isa. 
xxii.  12  ;  Luke  xxi.  34.  I  apprehend  the  spirit  of  these 
and  similar  passages  of  Scripture  (for  it  would  be  easy 
to  adduce  a  larger  number)  will  bring  a  Christian  under 
such  restrictions  as  follow  : — 

To  avoid  and  forbear,  for  his  own  sake,  whatever  has  a 
tendency  to  damp  and  indispose  his  spirit  in  attendance 
upon  the  means  of  grace  ;  for  such  things,  if  they  be  not 
condemned  as  sinful  per  se,  if  they  be  not  absolutely  unlaw 
ful,  yea,  though  they  be,  when  duly  regulated,  lawful  and 
right,  (for  often  our  chief  snares  are  entwined  with  our 
blessings,)  yet,  if  they  have  a  repeated  and  evident  tendency 
to  deaden  our  hearts  to  divine  things,  of  which  each  person's 
experience  must  determine,  there  must  be  something  in 
them,  either  in  season,  measure,  or  circumstance,  wrong  to 
us  ;  and  let  them  promise  what  they  will,  they  do  but  rob 
us  of  our  gold  to  pay  us  with  counters.  For  the  light  of 
God's  countenance,  and  an  open  cheerfulness  of  spirit  in 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    101 

walking  with  Him  in  private,  is  our  chief  joy  ;  and  we  must 
be  already  greatly  hurt,  if  any  thing  can  be  pursued,  allowed, 
or  rested  in,  as  a  tolerable  substitute  for  it. 

For  the  sake  of  the  church,  and  the  influence  example 
may  have  upon  his  fellow-Christians,  the  law  of  charity 
and  prudence  will  often  require  a  believer  to  abstain  from 
some  things,  not  because  they  are  unlawful,  but  inexpedient. 
Thus  the  apostle,  though  strenuous  for  the  right  of  his 
Christian  liberty,  would  have  abridged  himself  of  the  use, 
so  as  to  eat  no  meat,  rather  than  offend  a  weak  brother, 
rather  than  mislead  him  to  act  against  the  present  light  of 
his  conscience.  Upon  this  principle,  if  I  could,  without  hurt 
to  myself,  attend  some  public  amusements,  as  a  concert  or 
oratorio,  and  return  from  thence  with  a  warm  heart  to  my 
closet,  (the  possibility  of  which,  in  my  own  case,  I  greatly 
question,)  yet  I  should  think  it  my  duty  to  forbear,  lest 
some  weaker  than  myself  should  be  encouraged  by  me  to 
make  the  like  experiment,  though,  in  their  own  minds,  they 
might  fear  it  was  wrong,  and  have  no  other  reason  to  think 
it  lawful  but  because  I  did  it  :  in  which  case  I  should  sus 
pect,  that  though  I  received  no  harm,  they  would.  And  I 
have  known  and  conversed  with  some  who,  I  fear,  have  made 
shipwreck  of  their  profession,  who  have  dated  their  first 
decline  from  imitating  others,  whom  they  thought  wiser 
and  better  than  themselves,  in  such  kind  of  compliances. 
And  it  seems  that  an  obligation  to  this  sort  of  self-denial, 
rises,  and  is  strengthened,  in  proportion  to  the  weight 
and  influence  of  our  characters.  Were  I  in  private  life,  I 
do  not  know  that  I  should  think  it  sinful  to  kill  a  partridge 
or  a  hare  ;  but,  as  a  minister,  I  no  more  dare  do  it  than  I 
dare  join  in  a  drunken  frolic,  because  I  know  it  would  give 
offence  to  some,  and  be  pleaded  for  as  a  licence  by  others. 

There  is  a  duty,  and  a  charity  likewise,  which  we  owe 
to  the  world  at  large,  as  well  as  a  faithfulness  to  God  and 
His  grace,  in  our  necessary  converse  among  them.  This 
seems  to  require,  that  though  we  should  not  be  needlessly 
singular,  yet,  for  their  instruction,  and  for  the  honour  of 
our  Lord  and  Master,  we  should  keep  up  a  certain  kind  of 
singularity,  and  show  ourselves  called  to  be  a  separated 
people  :  that  though  the  providence  of  God  has  given  us 
callings  and  relations  to  fill  up  (in  which  we  cannot  be  too 


102  CARDIPHON1A  : 

exact),  yet  we  are  not  of  the  world,  but  belong  to  another 
community,  and  act  from  other  principles,  by  other  rules, 
and  to  other  ends,  than  the  generality  of  those  about  us.  I 
have  observed,  that  the  world  will  often  leave  professors 
in  quiet  possession  of  their  notions  and  sentiments,  and 
places  of  worship,  provided  they  will  not  be  too  stiff  in  the 
matter  of  conformity  with  their  more  general  customs  and 
amusements. — But  I  fear  many  of  them  have  had  their 
prejudices  strengthened  against  our  holy  religion  by  such 
compliances,  and  have  thought,  that  if  there  were  such 
joy  and  comfort  to  be  found  in  the  ways  of  God,  as  they  hear 
from  our  pulpits,  professors  would  not,  in  such  numbers, 
and  so  often,  run  amongst  them,  to  beg  a  relief  from  the 
burden  of  time  hanging  upon  their  hands.  As  our  Lord 
Jesus  is  the  great  representative  of  His  people  in  Heaven, 
He  does  them  the  honour  to  continue  a  succession  of  them 
as  His  representatives  upon  earth.  Happy  are  they  who  are 
favoured  with  most  of  the  holy  unction,  and  best  enabled 
to  manifest  to  all  around  them,  by  their  spirit,  tempers, 
and  conversation,  what  are  the  proper  design  and  genuine 
effect  of  His  Gospel  upon  the  hearts  of  sinners. 

In  our  way  of  little  life  in  the  country,  serious  people 
often  complain  of  the  snares  they  meet  with  from  worldly 
people,  and  yet  they  must  mix  with  them  to  get  a  livelihood. 
I  advise  them,  if  they  can,  to  do  their  business  with  the  world 
as  they  do  it  in  the  rain.  If  their  business  calls  them  abroad, 
they  will  not  leave  it  undone  for  fear  of  being  a  little  wet ; 
but  then,  when  it  is  done,  they  presently  seek  shelter,  and 
will  not  stand  in  the  rain  for  pleasure.  So  providential  and 
necessary  calls  of  duty  that  lead  us  into  the  world,  will  not 
hurt  us,  if  we  find  the  spirit  of  the  world  unpleasant,  and 
are  glad  to  retire  from  it,  and  keep  out  of  it  as  much  as  our 
relative  duties  will  permit.  That  which  is  our  cross  is  not 
so  likely  to  be  our  snare  ;  but  if  that  spirit  which  we  should 
always  watch  and  pray  against,  infects  and  assimilates  our 
minds  to  itself,  then  we  are  sure  to  suffer  loss,  and  act  below 
the  dignity  of  our  profession. 

The  value  of  time  is  likewise  to  be  taken  into  the  account. 
— It  is  a  precious  talent,  and  our  Christian  profession  opens 
a  wide  field  for  the  due  improvement  of  it.  Much  of  it 
has  been  alreadv  lost,  and  therefore  we  are  exhorted  to 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   103 

redeem  it.  I  think  many  things  which  custom  pleads  for  will 
be  excluded  from  a  suitableness  to  a  Christian,  for  this  one 
reason,  that  they  are  not  consistent  with  the  simple  notion  of 
the  redemption  of  time.  It  is  generally  said  we  need 
relaxation  ;  I  allow  it  in  a  sense  ;  the  Lord  Himself  has 
provided  it  ;  and,  because  our  spirits  are  too  weak  to  be 
always  upon  the  wing  in  meditation  and  prayer,  He  has 
appointed  to  all  men,  from  the  king  downwards,  something 
to  do  in  a  secular  way.  The  poor  are  to  labour  ;  the  rich 
are  not  exempted  from  something  equivalent.  And  when 
every  thing  of  this  sort  in  each  person's  situation  is  properly 
attended  to,  I  apprehend,  if  the  heart  be  alive,  and  in  a  right 
state,  spiritual  concernments  will  present  themselves,  as 
affording  the  noblest,  sweetest,  and  most  interesting  relaxa 
tion  from  the  cares  and  business  of  life  ;  as,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  business  will  be  the  best  relaxation,  and  unbending  of 
the  mind  from  religious  exercises,  and,  between  the  two, 
perhaps,  there  ought  to  be  but  little  mere  leisure  time. 
A  life  in  this  sense,  divided  between  God  and  the  world, 
is  desirable  ; — when  one  part  of  it  is  spent  in  retirement, 
seeking  after,  and  conversing  with  Him  whom  our  souls 
love  ;  and  the  other  part  of  it  employed  in  active  services, 
for  the  good  of  our  family,  friends,  the  church,  and  society, 
for  His  sake.  Every  hour  which  does  not  fall  in  with  one  or 
other  of  these  views,  I  apprehend,  is  lost  time. 

The  day  in  which  we  live  seems  likewise  to  call  for  some 
thing  of  a  peculiar  spirit  in  the  Lord's  people.  It  is  a  day  of 
abounding  sin,  and  I  fear  a  day  of  impending  judgment. 
The  world,  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot,  is  secure. 
We  are  soon  to  have  a  day  of  apparent  humiliation  ;  but  the 
just  causes  for  it  are  not  confined  to  one  day,  but  will  subsist, 
and  too  probably  increase,  every  day.  If  I  am  not  mistaken 
in  the  signs  of  the  times,  there  never  was,  within  the  annals 
of  English  history,  a  period  in  which  the  spirit  and  employ 
ment  described,  Ezek.  ix.  4,  could  be  more  suitable  than  the 
present.  The  Lord  calls  for  mourning  and  weeping,  but  the 
words  of  many  are  stout  against  Him  ;  new  species  of  dissi 
pation  are  invented  almost  daily,  and  the  language  of  those 
who  bear  the  greatest  sway  in  what  is  called  the  polite  circle, 
I  mean  the  interpretative  language  of  their  hearts,  is  like  that 
of  the  rebellious  Jews,  Jer.  xliv.  16,  &c. :  "  As  for  the  word 


io4  CARDIPHONIA  : 

that  thou  hast  spoken  unto  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
we  will  not  hearken  unto  thee."  In  short,  things  are  coming 
to  a  point,  and  it  seems  to  be  almost  putting  to  the  vote, 
whether  the  Lord  or  Baal  be  God.  In  this  state  of  affairs, 
methinks,  we  cannot  be  too  explicit  in  avowing  our  attach 
ment  to  the  Lord,  nor  too  careful  in  avoiding  an  improper 
correspondence  with  those  who  are  in  confederacy  against 
Him.  We  know  not  how  soon  we  may  greatly  need  that 
mark  of  providential  protection  which  is  restrained  to  those 
who  sigh  and  cry  for  our  abominations.  Upon  the  whole, 
it  appears  to  me,  that  it  is  more  honourable,  comfortable, 
and  safe,  (if  we  cannot  exactly  hit  the  golden  mean,)  to  be 
thought  by  some  too  scrupulous  and  precise,  than  actually 
to  be  found  too  compliant  with  those  things  which,  if  not 
absolutely  contrary  to  a  divine  commandment,  are  hardly 
compatible  with  the  genius  of  the  Gospel,  or  conformable  to 
the  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  which  ought  also  to  be 
in  His  people.  The  places  and  amusements  which  the  world 
frequent  and  admire,  where  occasions  and  temptations  to 
sin  are  cultivated,  where  the  law  of  what  is  called  good-breed 
ing  is  the  only  law  which  may  not  be  violated  with  impunity, 
where  sinful  passions  are  provoked  and  indulged,  where  the 
fear  of  God  is  so  little  known  or  regarded,  that  those  who  do 
fear  Him  must  hold  their  tongues,  though  they  should  hear 
His  name  blasphemed,  can  hardly  be  a  Christian's  voluntarily 
chosen  ground.  Yet,  I  fear,  these  characters  will  apply  to 
every  kind  of  polite  amusement  or  assembly  in  the  kingdom. 

As  to  family  connexions,  I  cannot  think  we  are  bound  to 
break  or  slight  them.  But  as  believers  and  their  friends 
often  live,  as  it  were,  in  two  elements,  there  is  a  mutual 
awkwardness,  which  makes  their  interviews  rather  dry  and 
tedious.  But  upon  that  account  they  are  less  frequent  than 
they  would  otherwise  be,  which  seems  an  advantage.  Both 
sides  keep  up  returns  of  civility  and  affection  ;  but  as  they 
cannot  unite  in  sentiment  and  leading  inclination,  they  will 
not  contrive  to  be  very  often  together,  except  there  is  some 
thing  considerable  given  up  by  one  or  the  other  ;  and  I 
think  Christians  ought  to  be  very  cautious  what  concessions 
they  make  upon  this  account.  But,  as  I  said  at  the  begin 
ning,  no  general  positive  rules  can  be  laid  down. 

I   have  simply  given   your  Lordship  such   thoughts  as 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE   HEART        105 

have  occurred  to  me  while  writing,  without  study,  and 
without  coherence.  I  dare  not  be  dogmatical ;  but  I 
think  what  I  have  written  is  agreeable  both  to  particular 
texts,  and  to  the  general  tenour  of  Scripture.  I  submit  it 
to  your  judgment. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   XXVI 

MY  LORD,  July  —  1777. 

I  OWE  your  Lordship  a  quire  of  letters  for  the  favour 
and  pleasure  of  your  late  visit  :  and,  therefore,  I  must 
begin  and  write  away. 

I  have  lately  read  Robertson's  History  of  Charles  V., 
which,  like  most  other  histories,  I  consider  as  a  comment  upon 
those  passages  of  Scripture  which  teach  us  the  depravity 
of  man,  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  the  ruinous  effects 
of  sin,  and  the  powerful,  though  secret,  rule  of  divine  provi 
dence,  moving,  directing,  controlling  the  designs  and 
actions  of  men,  with  an  unerring  hand,  to  the  accomplish 
ment  of  His  own  purposes,  both  of  mercy  and  judgment. 
Without  the  clew  and  the  light  which  the  word  of  God 
affords,  the  history  of  mankind,  of  any,  of  every  age,  only 
presents  to  view  a  labyrinth  and  a  chaos  ;  a  detail  of  wicked 
ness  and  misery  to  make  us  tremble,  and  a  confused  jumble 
of  interfering  incidents,  as  destitute  of  stability,  connexion, 
or  order,  as  the  clouds  which  fly  over  our  heads.  In  this 
view,  Delirant  reges,  plectuntur  Achivi,  may  serve  as  a  motto 
to  all  the  histories  I  have  seen.  But,  with  the  Scripture 
key,  all  is  plain,  all  is  instructive.  Then  I  see,  verily  there 
is  a  God  who  governs  the  earth,  who  pours  contempt  upon 
princes,  takes  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness,  overrules 
the  wrath  and  pride  of  man,  to  bring  His  own  designs  to  pass, 
and  restrains  all  that  is  not  necessary  to  that  end  ;  blasting 
the  best-concerted  enterprises  at  one  time,  by  means  appar 
ently  slight,  and  altogether  unexpected,  and,  at  other  times, 
producing  the  most  important  events,  from  instruments 
and  circumstances  which  are  at  first  thought  too  feeble  and 


io6  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

trivial  to  deserve  notice.  I  should  like  to  see  a  writer  of 
Dr.  Robertson's  abilities  give  us  a  history  upon  this  plan  ; 
but  I  think  his  reflections  of  this  sort  are  too  general,  too 
cold,  and  too  few.  What  an  empty  phantom  do  the  great 
men  of  the  world  pursue,  while  they  wage  war  with  the  peace 
of  mankind,  and  butcher  (in  the  course  of  their  lives)  perhaps 
hundreds  of  thousands,  to  maintain  the  shadow  of  authority 
over  distant  nations,  whom  they  can  reach  with  no  other 
influence  than  that  of  oppression  and  devastation  !  But 
when  we  consider  those  who  are  sacrificed  to  their  ambition, 
as  justly  suffering  for  their  sins,  then  heroes  and  conquerors 
appear  in  their  proper  light,  and  worthy  to  be  classed  with 
earthquakes  and  pestilences,  as  instruments  of  divine 
vengeance.  So  many  cares,  so  much  pains,  so  many  mis 
chiefs, — merely  to  support  the  idea  a  worm  has  formed  of 
his  own  grandeur,  is  a  proof  that  man,  by  nature,  is  not 
only  depraved,  but  infatuated.  Permit  me  to  present  my 
thoughts  to  more  advantage  in  the  words  of  M.  Nicole : 

"  Un  Grand  dans  son  ide"e  n'est  pas  un  seul  homme  ; 
c'est  un  homme  environne  de  tons  ceux  qui  sont  a  lui,  et 
qui  s'imagine  avoir  autant  de  bras  qu'ils  en  ont  tous  ensemble, 
parce  qu'il  en  dispose  et  qu'il  les  remue.  Un  Ge'ne'ral 
d'arme'e  se  repre"sente  toujours  a  lui-me'me  au  milieu  de  tous 
ses  soldats.  Ainsi  chacun  tache  d'occuper  le  plus  de  place 
qu'il  peut  dans  son  imagination,  et  Ton  ne  se  pousse,  et  ne 
s'agrandit  dans  le  monde,  que  pour  augmenter  1'idee  que 
chacun  se  forme  de  soi-mfeme.  Voila  le  but  de  tous  les 
desseins  ambitieux  des  homines  !  Alexandre  et  Caesar 
n'ont  point  eu  d'autre  vue  dans  toutes  leurs  batailles  que 
celle-la.  Et  si  Ton  demande  pourquoi  le  Grand  Seigneur  a 
fait  depuis  peu  pe"rir  cent  mille  hommes  devant  Candie,  on 
peut  repondre  sflrement,  que  ce  n'est  que  pour  attacher 
encore  a  cette  image  interieure  qu'il  a  de  lui-mfeme,  le  titre 
de  Conqu£rant."* 

How  awful  is  the  case  of  those  who  live  and  die  in  such 
a  spirit,  and  who  have  multiplied  miseries  upon  their  fellow- 
creatures,  in  order  to  support  and  feed  it  !  Perhaps  they 
may,  upon  their  entrance  on  another' state,  be  accosted  by 
multitudes,  to  the  purport  of  that  sarcastical  language  in  the 


*  Essais  de  Morale,  vol.  i. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   107 

prophet's  sublime  ode  of  triumph  over  the  king  of  Babylon, 
Isa.  xiv.  5-17. 

Hie  est,  quern  fuga,  quern  pavor 
Praecessit  ?  hie,  quern  terricolis  gravem 
Strages  secuta  est,  vastitasque  ?  hie 

Attoniti  spoliator  orbis  ? 

But  though  the  effects  of  this  principle  of  self  are  more 
extensive  and  calamitous,  in  proportion  as  those  who  are 
governed  by  it  are  more  elevated,  the  principle  itself  is 
deep-rooted  in  every  heart,  and  is  the  spring  of  every  action, 
till  grace  infuses  a  new  principle,  and  self,  like  Dagon,  falls 
before  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  Great  and  small  are  but  relative 
terms  ;  and  the  passions  of  discontent,  pride,  and  envy, 
which,  in  the  breast  of  a  potentate,  are  severely  felt  by  one- 
half  of  Europe,  exert  themselves  with  equal  strength  in  the 
heart  of  a  peasant,  though,  for  want  of  materials  and  oppor 
tunities,  their  operations  are  confined  within  narrow  bounds. 
We  are  fallen  into  a  state  of  gross  idolatry,  and  self  is  the 
idol  we  worship.  I  am,  &c. 


EIGHT     LETTERS 

TO    THE 

REV.    MR.    S- 

LETTER   I 

DEAR  SIR,  June  23,  1775. 

I  HAVE  met  with  interruptions  till  now,  or  you  would 
have  heard  from  me  sooner.  My  thoughts  have  run  much 
upon  the  subject  of  your  last,  because  I  perceive  it  has  a  near 
connexion  with  your  peace.  Your  integrity  greatly  pleases 
me  ;  far  be  it  from  me  to  shake  the  principle  of  your  conduct ; 
yet,  in  the  application,  I  think  there  is  a  possibility  of  carry 
ing  your  exceptions  too  far. 

From  the  account  you  give  me  of  your  sentiments,  I 
cannot  but  wonder  you  find  it  so  difficult  to  accede  to  the 
Athanasian  Creed,  when  it  seems  to  me  you  believe  and 
avow  what  the  Creed  chiefly  sets  forth.  The  doctrine  of 
the  Trinity,  some  explication  of  the  terms  being  subjoined, 
is  the  Catholic  faith,  without  the  belief  of  which  a  man  cannot 
be  saved.  This  damnatory  clause  seems  to  me  proved  by 
Mark  xvi.  16  :  "  He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved,"  &c. 
The  object  of  faith  must  be  truth .  The  doctrine  of  the  Deity 
of  Christ,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  union  with  the  Father, 
so  that  they  are  not  three  Gods,  but  one  God,  is  not  merely  a 
proposition  expressed  in  words,  to  which  our  assent  is  re 
quired,  but  is  absolutely  necessary  to  be  known  ;  since, 
without  it,  no  one  truth  respecting  salvation  can  be  rightly 
understood,  no  one  promise  duly  believed,  no  one  duty 
spiritually  performed.  I  take  it  for  granted,  that  this 
doctrine  must  appear  irrational  and  absurd  in  the  eye  of 
reason,  if  by  reason  we  mean  the  reason  of  man  in  his  fallen 
state,  before  it  is  corrected  and  enlightened  by  a  heavenly 

108 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   109 

Teacher.  No  man  can  say  Jesus  is  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  I  believe  with  you,  that  a  man  may  be  saved 
who  never  heard  of  the  Creed,  who  never  read  any  book  but 
the  New  Testament,  or,  perhaps,  a  single  Evangelist ;  but 
he  must  be  taught  of  God  the  things  that  accompany 
salvation,  or  I  do  not  think  he  can  be  saved.  The  mercies 
of  God  in  Christ  will  not  save  any,  (as  I  apprehend,)  but 
according  to  the  method  revealed  in  His  word,  that  is,  those 
who  are  truly  partakers  of  faith  and  holiness.  For,  as  the 
religion  of  the  New  Testament  ascribes  all  power  to  God, 
and  considers  all  goodness  in  us  as  the  effect  of  His  com 
munication,  we  being  by  nature  destitute  of  spiritual  life  or 
light ;  so  those  whom  God  Himself  is  pleased  to  teach  will 
infallibly  attain  the  knowledge  of  all  that  they  are  concerned 
to  know.  This  teaching  you  are  waiting  for,  and  it  shall 
be  given  you  ;  yea,  the  Lord,  I  trust,  has  begun  to  teach  you 
already  ;  but  if  you  consider  yourself  as  a  learner,  and  that 
it  is  possible,  under  the  Spirit's  increasing  illumination,  you 
may  hereafter  adopt  some  things  which,  at  present,  you 
cannot  approve,  I  should  think  it  too  early,  as  yet,  to  prescribe 
to  yourself  rules  and  determinations  for  the  government  of 
your  future  life.  Should  the  will  of  God  appoint  you  a 
new  path  for  service,  He  may,  sooner  than  you  are  aware, 
quiet  your  mind,  and  enable  you  to  subscribe  with  as  full  a 
persuasion  of  mind,  as  you  now  object  to  subscription.  If  it 
depended  upon  me,  I  could  be  content  that  the  Creed  should 
rest  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  rather  than  embarrass  a  single 
person  of  your  disposition.  Nor  am  I  a  warm  stickler  for 
subscription  in  itself  ;  but  something  of  this  kind  seems 
necessary,  upon  the  supposition  of  an  Establishment. 

When  I  think  of  an  inclosure,  some  hedge,  wall,  bank, 
ditch,  &c.,  is,  of  course,  included  in  my  idea  ;  for  who  can 
conceive  of  an  inclosure  without  a  boundary  ?  So,  in  a 
National  Church,  there  must  be,  I  apprehend,  something 
marked  out,  the  approbation  or  refusal  of  which  will  deter 
mine  who  do  or  do  not  belong  to  it  :  and  for  this  purpose 
Articles  of  some  kind  seem  not  improper.  You  think  it 
would  be  better  to  have  these  articles  in  Scriptural  expres 
sions.  But  if  it  be  lawful  to  endeavour  to  exclude  from 
our  pulpits  men  who  hold  sentiments  the  most  repugnant  to 
the  truth,  I  wish  you  to  consider,  whether  this  can  be  in  any 


I io  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

measure  secured  by  Articles  in  which  the  Scripture  doctrines 
are  not  explained  and  stated,  as  well  as  expressed.  This 
proposal  is  strenuously  pleaded  for  by  many  in  our  day, 
upon  views  very  different  from  yours.  The  Socinians,  for 
instance,  would  readily  subscribe  a  Scriptural  declaration 
of  the  high  priesthood,  atonement,  and  intercession  of  Christ 
(while  they  are  allowed  to  put  their  own  sense  upon  the 
terms),  though  the  sense  they  maintain  be  utterly  incon 
sistent  with  what  those  who  are  enlightened  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  learn  from  the  same  expressions. 

I  acknowledge,  indeed,  that  the  end  is  not  answered  by 
the  present  method  ;  since  there  are  too  many  like  the  person 
you  mention,  who  would  easily  subscribe  900  Articles  rather 
than  baulk  his  preferment  :  yet  the  profligacy  of  some 
seems  to  be  no  just  reason  why  the  Church,  why  any  Church, 
should  not  be  at  liberty  to  define  the  terms  upon  which  they 
will  accept  members  or  teachers,  or  why  conscientious  persons 
should  object  to  these  terms,  (if  they  think  them  agreeable  to 
the  truth,)  merely  because  they  are  not  expressed  in  the 
precise  words  of  Scripture.  If  allowance  may  be  made  for 
human  infirmity  in  the  Liturgy,  I  see  not  why  the  Articles 
may  not  be  entitled  to  the  same  privilege.  For  it  seems 
requisite  that  we  should  be  as  well  satisfied  with  the  expres 
sions  we  use  with  our  lips,  in  frequent  solemn  prayer  to  God, 
as  in  what  we  subscribe  with  our  hands.  I  am  persuaded 
that  the  leaders  of  the  Association  at  the  Feathers  Tavern, 
some  of  them  at  least,  though  they  begin  with  the  affair 
of  subscription,  would  not  (if  they  might  have  their  wish) 
stop  there,  but  would  go  on  with  their  projected  reform  till 
they  had  overturned  the  Liturgy  also,  or,  at  least,  weeded 
it  from  every  expression  that  bears  testimony  to  the  Deity 
of  the  Saviour,  and  the  efficacious  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  I  bless  God  that  you  are.  far  otherwise  minded. 

I  hope,  however,  though  you  should  not  think  yourself 
at  liberty  to  repeat  your  subscription,  the  Lord  will  make  you 
comfortable  and  useful  in  your  present  rank  as  a  curate. 
Preferment  is  not  necessary,  either  to  our  peace  or  usefulness. 
We  may  live  and  die  contentedly,  without  the  honours  and 
emoluments  which  aspiring  men  thirst  after,  if  He  be  pleased 
to  honour  us  with  a  dispensation  to  preach  His  Gospel, 
and  to  crown  our  endeavours  with  a  blessing.  He  that 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   in 

winneth  souls  is  wise  ;  wise  in  the  choice  of  the  highest 
end  he  can  propose  to  himself  in  this  life  ;  wise  in  the 
improvement  of  the  only  means  by  which  this  desirable  end 
can  be  attained.  \Vherever  we  cast  our  eyes,  the  bulk 
of  the  people  are  ignorant,  immoral,  careless.  They  live 
without  God  in  the  world ;  they  are  neither  awed  by  His 
authority,  nor  affected  by  His  goodness,  nor  enabled  to  trust 
to  His  promises,  nor  disposed  to  aim  at  His  glory.  If, 
perhaps,  they  have  a  serious  interval,  or  some  comparative 
sobriety  of  character,  they  ground  their  hopes  upon  their 
own  doings,  endeavours,  or  purposes  ;  and  treat  the  in 
expressible  love  of  God  revealed  in  Christ,  and  the  Gospel- 
method  of  salvation  by  faith  in  His  name,  with  neglect, 
often  with  contempt.  They  have  preachers  whom,  perhaps, 
they  hear  with  some  pleasure,  because  they  neither  alarm 
their  consciences  by  insisting  on  the  spirituality  and  sanction 
of  the  divine  law,  nor  offend  their  pride  by  publishing  the 
humiliating  doctrines  of  that  Gospel  which  is  the  poMrer  of 
God  through  faith  unto  salvation.  Therefore,  what  they  do 
speak,  they  speak  in  vain  ;  the  world  grows  worse  and  worse 
under  their  instructions ;  infidelity  and  profligacy  abound 
more  and  more  ;  for  God  will  own  no  other  doctrine  but  what 
the  apostle  calls  the  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  "  ;  that  doctrine 
which  drives  the  sinner  from  all  his  vain  pleas,  and  points 
out  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  only  ground  of  hope,  the 
supreme  object  of  desire,  as  appointed  of  God  to  be  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctincation,  and  redemption  to  all  who 
believe  in  His  name.  When  ministers  themselves  are  con 
vinced  of  sin,  and  feel  the  necessity  of  an  almighty  Saviour, 
they  presently  account  their  former  gain  but  loss,  and  de 
termine,  with  the  apostle,  to  know  nothing  but  Jesus  Christ, 
and  Him  crucified.  In  proportion  as  they  do  this,  they  are 
sure  to  be  wondered  at,  laughed  at,  and  railed  at,  if  the 
providence  of  God,  and  the  constitution  of  their  country, 
secure  them  from  severer  treatment.  But  they  have  this 
invaluable  compensation,  that  they  no  longer  speak  without 
effect.  In  a  greater  or  less  degree  a  change  takes  place  in 
their  auditories  : — the  blind  receive  their  sight,  the  deaf  hear, 
the  lepers  are  cleansed  ;  sinners  are  turned  from  darkness 
to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  to  God  ;  sinful  prac 
tices  are  forsaken  ;  and  a  new  course  of  life  in  the  converts 


H2  CARDIPHONIA  : 

evidences  that  they  have  not  followed  cunningly-devised 
fables,  or  taken  up  with  uncertain  notions  ;  but  that  God 
has  indeed  quickened  them  by  His  Spirit,  and  given  them  an 
understanding  to  know  Him  that  is  true.  The  preachers, 
likewise,  while  they  attempt  to  teach  others,  are  taught 
themselves  ;  a  blessing  descends  upon  their  studies  and 
labours,  upon  their  perusal  of  the  Scripture,  upon  their 
attention  to  what  passes  within  them  and  around  them. 
The  events  of  every  day  contribute  to  throw  light  upon  the 
word  of  God  ;  their  views  of  divine  truth  grow  more  enlarged, 
connected,  and  comprehensive  ;  many  difficulties  which 
perplexed  them  at  their  first  setting  out,  trouble  them  no 
more  ;  the  God  whom  they  serve,  and  on  whom  they  wait, 
reveals  to  them  those  great  things,  which,  though  plainly 
expressed  in  the  letter  of  the  Scripture,  cannot  be  understood 
and  realised  without  divine  teaching  (i  Cor.  ii.  9-15). 
Thus  they  go  on  from  strength  to  strength,  hard  things 
become  easy,  and  a  divine  light  shines  upon  their  paths. 
Opposition  from  men,  perhaps,  may  increase  ;  they  may  ex 
pect  to  be  represented  as  those  who  turn  the  world  upside 
down  :  the  cry,  /wyaXq  »/  Aprt/xtc*,  will  be  raised  against  them, 
the  gates  of  the  temple  of  preferment  will  be  seldom  open 
to  them  ;  but  they  will  have  the  unspeakable  consolation 
of  applying  to  themselves  those  lively  words  of  the  apostle, 

ur   yviTHfjtit'oi,   ott    (i    j£mpo>T£c°  *C   Trrw^ot,   TroXXnc  Ct   Tr\nri£ovTtr'  fl/r 


Kttl    TOITtt 


It  is  the  strain  of  evident  sincerity  which  runs  through 
your  letters,  that  gives  me  a  pleasing  confidence  the  Lord 
is  with  you.  A  disinterested  desire  of  knowing  the  truth, 
with  a  willingness  to  follow  it  through  all  disadvantages, 
is  a  preparation  of  the  heart  which  only  God  can  give.  He 
has  directed  you  to  the  right  method  —  searching  the  Scrip 
ture,  with  prayer.  Go  on,  and  may  His  blessing  attend  you. 
You  may  see,  from  what  I  have  written  above,  what  is  the 
desire  of  my  heart  for  you.  But  I  am  not  impatient.  Follow 
your  heavenly  Leader,  and,  in  His  own  time  and  manner,  He 
will  make  your  way  plain.  I  have  travelled  the  path  before 
you  ;  I  see  what  you  yet  want  ;  I  cannot  impart  it  to  you, 
but  He  can,  and  I  trust  He  will.  It  will  rejoice  my  soul  to 

*  Great  is  Diana.  f  2  Cor.  vi.   10. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   113 

be  in  any  way  assistant  to  you  ;  but  I  am  afraid  I  should 
not  afford  you  much,  either  profit  or  satisfaction,  by  entering 
upon  a  dry  defence  of  Creeds  and  Articles. 

The  truths  of  Scripture  are  not  like  mathematical  theorems 
which  present  exactly  the  same  ideas  to  every  person  who 
understands  the  terms.  The  word  of  God  is  compared  to 
a  mirror  (2  Cor.  iii.  18) ;  but  it  is  a  mirror  in  which  the  longer 
we  look,  the  more  we  see  ;  the  view  will  be  still  growing 
upon  us,  and  still  we  shall  see  but  in  part  while  on  this  side 
eternity.  When  our  Lord  pronounced  Peter  blessed,  declar 
ing  he  had  learnt  that  which  flesh  and  blood  could  not  have 
taught  him,  yet  Peter  was  at  that  time  much  in  the  dark. 
The  sufferings  and  death  of  Jesus,  though  the  only  and 
necessary  means  of  his  salvation,  were  an  offence  to  him. 
But  he  lived  to  glory  in  what  he  once  could  not  bear  to  hear 
of.  Peter  had  received  grace  to  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  to 
follow  Him,  to  venture  all,  and  to  forsake  all,  for  Him  : 
these  first  good  dispositions  were  of  God,  and  they  led  to 
further  advances.  So  it  is  still.  By  nature,  self  rules  in 
the  heart ;  when  this  idol  is  brought  low,  and  we  are  truly 
willing  to  be  the  Lord's,  and  to  apply  to  Him  for  strength 
and  direction  that  we  may  serve  Him,  the  good  work  is 
begun  ;  for  it  is  a  truth  that  holds  universally,  and  without 
exception,  a  man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  given 
him  from  heaven.  The  Lord  first  finds  us  when  we  are 
thinking  of  something  else  (Isaiah  Ixv.  i) ;  and  then  we  begin 
to  seek  Him  in  good  earnest,  and  He  has  promised  to  be 
found  of  us.  People  may,  by  industry  and  natural  abilities, 
make  themselves  masters  of  the  external  evidences  of 
Christianity,  and  have  much  to  say  for  and  against  different 
schemes  and  systems  of  sentiment  ;  but  all  this  while  the 
heart  remains  untouched.  True  religion  is  not  a  science 
of  the  head,  so  much  as  an  inward  and  heartfelt  perception, 
which  casts  down  imaginations,  and  every  v^w^a  that 
exalteth  itself  in  the  mind,  and  brings  every  thought  into  a 
sweet  and  willing  subjection  to  Christ  by  faith.  Here  the 
learned  have  no  real  advantage  above  the  ignorant  ;  both 
see  when  the  eyes  of  the  understanding  are  enlightened  ; 
till  then,  both  are  equally  blind.  And  the  first  lesson  in  the 
school  of  Christ  is  to  become  a  little  child,  sitting  simply  at 
His  feet,  that  we  may  be  made  wise  unto  salvation. 

c  H 


n4  CARDIPHONIA  : 

I  was  not  only  prevented  beginning  my  letter  so  soon 
as  I  wished,  but  have  been  unusually  interrupted  since  I 
began  it.  Often,  as  soon  as  I  could  well  take  the  pen  in 
hand,  I  have  been  called  away  to  attend  company  and 
intervening  business.  Though  I  persuade  myself,  after 
what  I  have  formerly  said,  you  will  put  a  favourable  con 
struction  upon  my  delay,  yet  it  has  given  me  some  pain.  I 
set  a  great  value  upon  your  offer  of  friendship,  which  I  trust 
will  not  be  interrupted  on  either  side,  by  the  freedom  with 
which  we  mutually  express  our  difference  of  sentiments, 
when  we  are  constrained  to  differ.  You  please  me  with 
intrusting  me  with  the  first  rough  draught  of  your  thoughts  ; 
and  you  may  easily  perceive,  by  my  manner  of  writing, 
that  I  place  equal  confidence  in  your  candour.  I  shall  be  glad 
to  exchange  letters  as  often  as  it  suits  us,  without  constraint, 
ceremony,  or  apology  ;  and  may'He,  who'is  always  present 
with  our  hearts,  make  our  correspondence  useful.  I  pray 
God  to  be  your  sun  and  shield,  your  light  and  strength,  to 
guide  you  with  His  eye,  to  comfort  you  with  His  gracious 
presence  in  your  own  soul,  and  to  make  you  a  happy  instru 
ment  of  comforting  many.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  July  14,  1775. 

I  GLADLY  adopt  your  address,  and  can  assure  you  that 
the  interchange  of  every  letter  unites  my  heart  more  closely 
to  you.  I  am  glad  to  find  that  your  views  of  Articles  and 
Creeds  are  not  likely  to  hinder  you  from  going  forward  in 
your  present  situation  ;  and  if,  without  contracting  your 
usefulness,  they  only  prove  a  bar  to  your  preferment,  I  am 
sure  it  will  be  no  grief  of  mind  to  you  at  the  hour  of  death, 
or  at  the  day  of  judgment,  that  you  were  enabled  to  follow 
the  dictates  of  conscience,  in  opposition  to  all  the  pleas  of 
custom  or  interest.  Since,  therefore,  I  have  no  desire  of 
shaking  your  resolves,  may  we  not  drop  this  subject  entirely  ? 
For,  indeed,  I  act  but  an  awkward  part  in  it,  being  by  no 
means  myself  an  admirer  of  Articles  and  Creeds,  or  disposed 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   115 

to  be  a  warm  advocate  for  Church-power.  The  propriety  of 
our  National  Establishment,  or  of  any  other,  is  what  I  have 
not  much  to  do  with  ;  I  found  it  as  it  is,  nor  have  I  influence 
to  alter  it,  were  I  willing.  The  question  in  which  I  was 
concerned  was  simply,  Whether  I,  rebus  sic  stantibus,  could 
submit  to  it,  so  as  conscientiously  to  take  a  designationTto 
the  ministry  under  it  ?  I  thought  I  could  ;  I  accordingly  did, 
and  I  am  thankful  that  I  never  have  seen  cause  to  repent  it. 

You  seem  gently  to  charge  me  with  a  want  of  candour  in 
what  I  observed,  or  apprehended,  concerning  the  gentlemen 
of  the  Feathers  Tavern.  If  I  mistake  not  (for  I  retain  no 
copies  of  my  letters),  1  expressed  myself  with  a  double  re 
striction,  by  first  saying,  the  leaders  of  that  society,  and  then 
adding,  or  some  of  them  at  least.  I  apprehend  your  candour 
will  hardly  lead  you  to  suppose,  that  there  are  none  amongst 
them  who  would  pull  down  the  whole  fabric  (that  is,  I  mean 
so  far  as  it  crosses  the  Socinian  scheme),  if  it  was  left  to  their 
choice.  I  apprehend  I  may,  without  the  least  breach  of 
candour,  suppose  that  the  exceptions  which  Mr.  Lindsay  has 
made  to  the  Liturgy,  are  not  peculiar  to  himself.  It  seems 
plain  in  his  case,  and  from  his  own  writings,  that  the  mere 
removal  of  subscriptions,  which  is  the  immediate  and 
ostensible  object  of  the  clerical  petition,  could  not  have 
satisfied  him  ;  and  it  is  past  a  doubt  with  me,  that  there 
are  others  of  the  clergy  like-minded  with  him.  Indeed,  I 
could  wish  to  be  thought  candid  by  you  ;  though,  I  confess, 
I  am  not  a  friend  to  that  lukewarmness  and  indifference  for 
truth,  which  bears  the  name  of  candour  among  many  in  the 
present  day.  I  desire  to  maintain  a  spirit  of  candour  and 
benevolence  to  all  men,  to  wish  them  well,  to  do  them  every 
good  office  in  my  power,  and  to  commend  what  appears  to  me 
commendable  in  a  Socinian,  as  readily  as  in  a  Calvinist. 
But,  with  some  people,  I  can  only  go  usque  ad  aras.  I  must 
judge  of  principles  by  the  word  of  God,  and  of  the  tree  by 
its  fruit.  I  meddle  with  no  man's  final  state,  because  I 
know  that  He  who  is  exalted  to  give  repentance  and  re 
mission  of  sins,  can  do  it  whenever,  and  to  whomsoever,  He 
is  pleased  :  yet  I  firmly  believe,  and  I  make  no  scruple  of 
proclaiming  it,  that  swearers,  drunkards,  adulterers,  con 
tinuing  such,  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  :  and  I 
look  with  no  less  compassion  upon  some  persons,  whose 

H2 


u6  CARDIPHONIA  : 

characters  in  common  life  may  be  respectable,  when  I  see 
them  unhappily  blinded  by  their  own  wisdom  ;  and  while 
they  account  themselves,  and  are  accounted  by  many  others, 
master-builders  in  Zion,  rejecting  the  only  foundation  upon 
which  a  sinner's  hope  can  be  safely  built. 

I  am  far  from  thinking  the  Socinians  all  hypocrites,  but 
I  think  they  are  all  in  a  most  dangerous  error  ;  nor  do  their 
principles  exhibit  to  my  view  a  whit  more  of  the  genuine 
fruits  of  Christianity  than  Deism  itself.  You  say,  "  If  they 
be  sincere,  and  fail  not  for  want  of  diligence  in  searching,  I 
cannot  help  thinking  that  God  will  not  condemn  them  for 
an  inevitable  defect  in  their  understandings."  Indeed,  my 
friend,  I  have  such  a  low  opinion  of  man  in  his  depraved  state, 
that  I  believe  no  one  has  real  sincerity  in  religious  matters, 
till  God  bestows  it :  and  when  He  makes  a  person  sincere 
in  his  desires  after  truth,  He  will  assuredly  guide  him  to  the 
possession  of  it  in  due  time,  as  our  Lord  speaks,  John  vi.  44, 
45.  To  suppose  that  any  persons  can  sincerely  seek  the 
way  of  salvation,  and  yet  miss  it  through  an  inevitable 
defect  of  their  understandings,  would  contradict  the  plain 
promises  of  the  Gospel,  such  as  Matt.  vii.  7,  8  ;  John  vii. 
16,  17  ;  but  to  suppose  that  things  are  not  necessary  to  be 
known,  because  some  persons,  who  profess  sincerity,  cannot 
receive  them,  would  be,  in  effect,  to  make  the  Scripture  a 
nose  of  wax,  and  open  a  wide  door  for  scepticism.  I  am  not 
a  judge  of  the  heart :  but  I  may  be  sure,  that  whoever  makes 
the  foundation-stone  a  rock  of  offence,  cannot  be  sincere  in 
his  inquiries.  He  may  study  the  Scripture  accurately, 
but  he  brings  liis  own  preconceived  sentiments  with  him,  and, 
instead  of  submitting  them  to  the  touchstone  of  truth,  he 
makes  them  a  rule  by  which  he  interprets.  That  they  who 
lean  to  their  own  understandings  should  stumble  and  mis 
carry,  I  cannot  wonder  ;  for  the  same  God  who  has  promised 
to  fill  the  hungry  with  good  things,  has  threatened  to  send 
the  rich  empty  away.  So  Matt.  xi.  25.  It  is  not  through 
defect  of  understanding,  but  a  want  of  simplicity  and  humil 
ity,  that  so  many  stumble,  like  the  blind  at  noon-day,  and 
can  see  nothing  of  those  great  truths  which  are  written  in 
the  Gospel  as  with  a  sunbeam. 

You  wish  me  to  explain  myself  concerning  the  doctrine  of 
the  Trinity.  I  will  try  ;  yet  I  know  I  cannot,  any  farther 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   117 

than  as  He  who  taught  me  shall  be  pleased  to  bear  witness 
in  your  heart  to  what  I  say.  My  first  principle  in  religion  is 
what  the  Scripture  teaches  me  of  the  utter  depravity  of 
human  nature,  in  connexion  with  the  spirituality  and  sanc 
tion  of  the  law  of  God.  I  believe  we  are  by  nature  sinners, 
by  practice  universally  transgressors  ;  that  we  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins  ;  and  that  the  bent  of  our  natural  spirit 
is  enmity  against  the  holiness,  government,  and  grace  of 
God.  Upon  this  ground,  I  see,  feel,  and  acknowledge  the 
necessity  of  such  a  salvation  as  the  Gospel  proposes,  which, 
at  the  same  time  that  it  precludes  boasting,  and  stains  the 
pride  of  all  human  glory,  affords  encouragement  to  those 
who  may  be  thought,  or  who  may  think  themselves,  the 
weakest  or  the  vilest  of  mankind.  I  believe,  that  whatever 
notions  a  person  may  take  up  from  education  or  system,  no 
one  ever  did,  or  ever  will,  feel  himself,  and  own  himself, 
to  be  such  a  lost,  miserable,  hateful  sinner,  unless  he  be 
powerfully  and  supernaturally  convinced  by  the  Spirit 
of  God.  There  is,  when  God  pleases,  a  certain  light  thrown 
into  the  soul,  which  differs  not  merely  in  degree,  but  in 
kind,  toto  genere,  from  any  thing  that  can  be  effected  or 
produced  by  moral  suasion  or  argument.  But  (to  take  in 
another  of  your  queries)  the  Holy  Spirit  teaches  or  reveals 
no  new  truths,  either  of  doctrine  or  precept,  but  only 
enables  us  to  understand  what  is  already  revealed  in  the 
Scripture.  Here  a  change  takes  place,  the  person  who  was 
spiritually  blind  begins  to  see.  The  sinner's  character,  as 
described  in  the  word  of  God,  he  finds  to  be  a  description  of 
himself ;  that  he  is  afar  off  ;  a  stranger,  a  rebel ;  that  he  has 
hitherto  lived  in  vain.  Now  he  begins  to  see  the  necessity 
of  an  atonement,  an  advocate,  a  shepherd,  a  comforter  : 
he  can  no  more  trust  to  his  own  wisdom,  strength,  and  good 
ness  ;  but  accounting  all  his  former  gain  but  loss,  for  the 
excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  he  renounces  every 
other  refuge,  and  ventures  his  all  upon  the  person,  work,  and 
promise  of  the  Redeemer.  In  this  way,  I  say,  he  will  find 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  not  only  a  proposition,  but  a 
principle  ;  that  is,  from  his  own  wants  and  situation,  he  will 
have  an  abiding  conviction  that  the  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  are 
God,  and  must  be  possessed  of  the  attributes  and  powers  of 
Deity,  to  support  the  offices  the  Scriptures  assign  them,  and 


n8  CARDIPHONIA  : 

to  deserve  the  confidence  and  worship  the  Scriptures  require 
to  be  placed  in  them,  and  paid  to  them.  Without  this 
awakened  state  of  mind,  a  divine,  reputed  orthodox,  will 
blunder  wretchedly,  even  in  defending  his  own  opinions  I 
have  seen  laboured  defences  of  the  Trinity,  which  have  given 
me  not  much  more  satisfaction  than  I  should  probably  re 
ceive  from  a  dissertation  upon  the  rainbow,  composed  by  a 
man  blind  from  his  birth.  In  effect,  the  knowledge  of 
God  cannot  be  attained  by  studious  discussion  on  our  parts  ; 
it  must  be  by  revelation  on  His  part,  Matt.  xi.  27,  and  xvi. 
17  ;  a  revelation,  not  objectively  of  new  truth,  but  subjec 
tively  of  new  light  in  us.  Then  he  that  runs  may  read.  Per 
haps  you  may  not  quite  understand  my  meaning,  or  not  ac 
cede  to  my  sentiments  at  present  ;  I  have  little  doubt, 
however,  but  the  time  is  coming  when  you  will.  I  believe 
the  Lord  God  has  given  you  that  sincerity  which  He  never 
disappoints. 

Far  be  it  from  me  to  arrogate  infallibility  to  myself,  or  to 
any  writer  or  preacher  ;  yet,  blessed  be  God,  I  am  not 
left  to  float  up  and  down  the  uncertain  tide  of  opinion,  in 
those  points  wherein  the  peace  of  my  soul  is  nearly  con 
cerned.  I  know,  yea,  I  infallibly  know,  whom  I  have  be 
lieved.  I  am  under  no  more  doubt  about  the  way  of  sal 
vation  than  of  the  way  to  London.  I  cannot  be  deceived, 
because  the  word  of  God  cannot  deceive  me.  It  is  im 
possible,  however,  for  me  to  give  you  or  any  person  full 
satisfaction  concerning  my  evidence,  because  it  is  of  an 
experimental  nature  (Rev.  ii.  17).  In  general,  it  arises 
from  the  views  I  have  received  of  the  power,  compassion,  and 
grace  of  Jesus,  and  a  consciousness  that  I,  from  a  conviction 
of  my  sin  and  misery,  have  fled  to  Him  for  refuge,  intrusted 
and  devoted  myself  and  my  all  to  Him.  Since  my  mind  has 
been  enlightened,  every  thing  within  me,  and  every  thing 
around  me,  confirm  and  explain  to  me  what  I  read  in  Scrip 
ture  ;  and  though  I  have  reason  enough  to  distrust  my  own 
judgment  every  hour,  yet  I  have  no  reason  to  question  the 
great  essentials  which  the  Lord  Himself  hath  taught  me. 

Besides  a  long  letter,  I  send  you  a  great  book.  A  part  of 
it  (for  I  do  not  ask  you  to  read  the  whole)  may,  perhaps, 
explain  my  meaning  better  than  I  have  leisure  to  do  myself. 
I  set  a  high  value  upon  this  book  of  Mr.  Halyburton's ; 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   119 

so  that,  unless  I  could  replace  it  with  another,  I  know  not  if 
I  would  part  with  it  for  its  weight  in  gold.  The  first  and 
longest  treatise  is,  in  my  judgment,  a  masterpiece  ;  but  I 
would  chiefly  wish  you  to  peruse  the  Essay  concerning  Faith, 
towards  the  close  of  the  book.  I  need  not  beg  you  to  read  it 
carefully,  and  to  read  it  all.  The  importance  of  the  subject, 
its  immediate  connexion  with  your  inquiries,  and  the  accu 
racy  of  the  reasoning,  will  render  the  motive  of  my  request 
unnecessary.  I  cannot  style  him  a  very  elegant  writer  ; 
and  being  a  Scotsman,  he  abounds  with  the  Scottish  idiom. 
But  you  will  prefer  truth  to  ornament.  I  long  to  hear  your 
opinion  of  it.  It  seems  to  me  as  much  adapted  to  some  things 
that  have  passed  between  us  as  if  written  on  purpose. 

The  Inquiry  concerning  Regeneration  and  Justification, 
which  stands  last  in  the  book,  I  do  not  desire  or  even  wish 
you  to  read  ;  but  if  you  should,  and  then  think  that  you  have 
read  a  speculation  more  curious  than  useful,  I  shall  not 
contradict  you.  I  think  it  must  appear  to  you  in  that  light ; 
but  it  was  bound  up  with  the  rest,  and  therefore  could  not 
stay  behind  ;  but  I  hope  the  Essay  on  Faith  will  please  you. 

I  take  great  pleasure  in  your  correspondence,  and  still 
more  in  the  thought  of  your  friendship,  which  I  hope  to 
cultivate  to  the  utmost,  and  to  approve  myself  sincerely 
and  affectionately  yours. 


LETTER    III 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  August  n,  1775. 

NEXT  week  I  go  to  London,  where  I  purpose  (if  nothing 
unforeseen  prevents)  to  say  a  month.  Many  things,  which 
must  necessarily  be  attended  to  before  my  departure,  abridge 
me  of  that  leisure  which  I  could  wish  to  employ  in  answering 
your  last.  However,  I  will  spare  you  what  I  can.  I  thank 
you  for  yours.  Your  objections  neither  displease  nor 
weary  me.  While  truth  is  the  object  of  your  inquiry,  the 
more  freedom  you  use  with  me  the  better.  Nor  do  they 
surprise  me ;  for  I  have  formerly  made  the  like  objections 
myself.  I  have  stood  upon  your  ground,  and  I  continue  to 


120  CARDIPHONIA  : 

hope  you  will  one  day  stand  upon  mine.  As  I  have  told  you 
more  than  once,  I  do  not  mean  to  dictate  to  you,  or  to 
wish  you  to  receive  any  thing  upon  my  ipse  dixit ;  but,  in 
the  simplicity  of  friendship,  I  will  give  you  my  thoughts 
from  time  to  time  upon  the  points  you  propose,  and  leave 
the  event  to  the  divine  blessing. 

I  am  glad  you  do  not  account  the  Socinians  master- 
builders.  However,  they  esteem  themselves  so,  and  arc 
so  esteemed,  not  only  by  a  few,  (as  you  think,)  but  by  many. 
I  fear  Socinianism  spreads  rapidly  amongst  us,  and  bids 
fair  to  be  the  prevailing  scheme  in  this  land,  especially 
with  those  who  profess  to  be  the  thinking  part.  The  term 
Arminian,  as  at  present  applied,  is  very  indiscriminate, 
and  takes  in  a  great  variety  of  persons  and  sentiments, 
amongst  whom,  I  believe,  there  are  many  who  hold  the  funda 
mental  truths  of  the  Gospel,  and  live  a  life  of  faith  in  the 
Son  of  God.  I  am  far  from  supposing  that  God  will  guide 
every  sincere  person  exactly  to  adopt  all  my  sentiments. 
But  there  are  some  sentiments  which  I  believe  essential  to 
the  very  state  and  character  of  a  true  Christian.  And  these 
make  him  a  Christian,  not  merely  by  being  his  acknowledged 
sentiments,  but  by  a  certain  peculiar  manner  in  which  he 
possesses  them.  There  is  a  certain  important  change 
takes  place  in  the  heart,  by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  before  the  soundest  and  most  orthodox  sentiments  can 
have  their  proper  influence  upon  us.  This  work  or  change 
the  Scripture  describes  by  various  names,  each  of  which  is 
designed  to  teach  us  the  marvellous  effects  it  produces,  and 
the  almighty  power  by  which  it  is  produced.  It  is  sometimes 
called  a  new  birth,  John  iii.  3  ;  sometimes  a  new  creature  or 
new  creation,  as  2  Cor.  v.  17  ;  sometimes  the  causing  light 
to  shine  out  of  darkness,  2  Cor.  iv.  6  ;  sometimes  the  opening 
the  eyes  of  the  blind,  Acts  xxvi.  18  ;  sometimes  the  raising 
the  dead  to  life,  Eph.  ii.  5.  Till  a  person  has  experienced 
this  change,  he  will  be  at  a  loss  to  form  a  right  conception  of 
it  :  but  it  means,  not  being  proselyted  to  an  opinion,  but 
receiving  a  principle  of  divine  life  and  light  in  the  soul. 
And  till  this  is  received,  the  things  of  God,  the  truths  of 
the  Gospel,  cannot  be  rightly  discerned  or  understood  by 
the  utmost  powers  of  fallen  man,  who,  with  all  his  wisdom, 
reason,  and  talents,  is  still  but  what  the  apostle  calls  the 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   121 

natural  man,  till  the  power  of  God  visits  his  heart,  i  Cor.  ii. 
14.  This  work  is  sometimes  wrought  suddenly,  as  in  the 
case  of  Lydia,  Acts  xvi.  14  ;  at  other  times  very  gradually. 
A  person  who  before  was  a  stranger  even  to  the  form  of 
godliness,  or  at  best  content  with  a  mere  form — finds  new 
thoughts  arising  in  his  mind,  feels  some  concern  about  his 
sins,  some  desire  to  please  God,  some  suspicions  that  all  is 
not  right. — He  examines  his  views  of  religion,  hopes  the 
best  of  them,  and  yet  cannot  rest  satisfied  in  them.  To-day, 
perhaps,  he  thinks  himself  fixed  ;  to-morrow  he  will  be  all 
uncertainty.  He  inquires  of  others,  weighs,  measures, 
considers,  meets  with  sentiments  which  he  had  not  attended 
to,  thinks  them  plausible  ;  but  is  presently  shocked  with 
objections  or  supposed  consequences,  which  he  finds  himself 
unable  to  remove.  As  he  goes  on  in  his  inquiry,  his  difficulties 
increase.  New  doubts  arise  in  his  mind  ;  even  the  Scriptures 
perplex  him,  and  appear  to  assert  contrary  things.  He 
would  sound  the  depths  of  truth  by  the  plummet  of  his 
reason  ;  but  he  finds  his  line  is  too -short.  Yet  even  now  the 
man  is  under  a  guidance,  which  will  at  length  lead  him  right. 
The  importance  of  the  subject  takes  up  his  thoughts,  and 
takes  off  the  relish  he  once  had  for  the  things  of  the  world. 
He  reads,  he  prays,  he  strives,  he  resolves  ;  sometimes  in 
ward  embarrassments  and  outward  temptations  bring  him 
to  his  wits'  end.  He  almost  wishes  to  stand  where  he  is, 
and  inquire  no  more  ;  but  he  cannot  stop. — At  length  he 
begins  to  feel  the  inward  depravity,  which  he  had  before 
owned  as  an  opinion  ;  a  sense  of  sin  and  guilt  cuts  him  out 
new  work.  Here  reasoning  will  stand  him  in  no  stead. 
This  is  a  painful  change  of  mind  ;  but  it  prepares  the  way 
for  a  blessing.  It  silences  some  objections  better  than  a 
thousand  arguments,  it  cuts  the  comb  of  his  own  wisdom  and 
attainments,  it  makes  him  weary  of  working  for  life,  and 
teaches  him,  in  God's  due  time,  the  meaning  of  that  text, 
'  To  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  in  Him  who  justi- 
fieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness." 
Then  he  learns,  that  Scriptural  faith  is  a  very  different  thing 
from  a  rational  assent  to  the  Gospel, — that  it  is  the  immediate 
gift  of  God,  Ephes.  ii.  8  ;  the  operation  of  God,  Col.  ii.  12  ; 
that  Christ  is  not  only  the  object,  but  the  author  and  finisher 
of  faith,  Heb.  xii.  2  ;  and  that  faith  is  not  so  properly  a  part 


122  CARDIPHONIA  : 

of  that  obedience  we  owe  to  God,  as  an  inestimable  benefit 
we  receive  from  Him  for  Christ's  sake  ;  Phil.  i.  29,  which  is 
the  medium  of  our  justification,  Rom.  v.  i,  and  the  principles 
by  which  we  are  united  to  Christ  (as  the  branch  to  the  vine) 
John  xvii.  21.  I  am  well  aware  of  the  pains  taken  to  put  a 
different  sense  upon  these  and  other  seemingly  mysterious 
passages  of  Scripture  ;  but  thus  far  we  speak  that  which  we 
know,  and  testify  that  which  we  have  seen.  I  have  des 
cribed  a  path  in  which  I  have  known  many  led,  and  in  which 
I  have  walked  myself. 

The  Gospel,  my  dear  Sir,  is  a  salvation  appointed  for  those 
who  are  ready  to  perish,  and  is  not  designed  to  put  them  in  a 
way  to  save  themselves  by  their  own  works.  It  speaks  to  us 
as  condemned  already,  and  calls  upon  us  to  believe  in  a 
crucified  Saviour,  that  we  may  receive  redemption  through 
His  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins.  And  the  Spirit 
of  God,  by  the  Gospel,  first  convinces  us  of  unbelief,  sin,  and 
misery  ;  and  then,  by  revealing  the  things  of  Jesus  to  our 
minds,  enables  us,  as  helpless  sinners,  to  come  to  Christ, 
to  receive  Him,  and  to  behold  Him,  or,  in  other  words,  to 
believe  in  Him,  and  expect  pardon,  life,  and  grace  from  Him  ; 
renouncing  every  hope  and  aim  in  which  we  once  rested, 
"  and  accounting  all  things  loss  and  dung  for  the  excellency 
of  the  knowledge  of  Christ,"  John  vi.  35  ;  Is.  xlv.  22,  with 
John  vi.  40  ;  Col.  ii.  6.  In  some  of  Omicron's  letters,  you 
will  find  my  thoughts  more  at  large  upon  these  subjects  than 
I  have  now  time  to  write  them.  For  a  farther  illustration, 
I  refer  you  to  the  MSS.  sent  herewith.  The  first  part, 
written  in  shorthand,  does  not  so  immediately  concern  our 
present  point  as  the  second,  which  you  may  read  without  a 
key.  It  relates  to  a  matter  of  indisputable  fact,  concerning  a 
person  with  whom  (as  you  will  perceive)  I  was  well  ac 
quainted.  You  may  depend  upon  the  truth  of  every  tittle. 
I  intrust  it  to  you  in  the  confidence  of  friendship,  and  beg 
that  it  may  not  go  out  of  your  hands,  and  that  when  you 
have  perused  it,  you  will  return  it,  sealed  up,  by  a  safe  con 
veyance  to  my  house.  You  will  see  in  it  the  sentiments  of  a 
man  of  great  learning,  sound  reasoning,  an  amiable  and 
irreproachable  character,  and  how  little  he  accounted  of  all 
these  advantages,  when  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  enlighten  his 
mind. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   123 

Though  we  have  not  exactly  the  same  view  of  human 
depravity,  yet  as  we  both  agree  to  take  our  measure  of  it 
from  the  Word  of  God,  I  trust  we  shall  not  always  differ 
about  it.  Adam  was  created  in  the  image  of  God,  in 
righteousness  and  true  holiness  (Ephes.  iv.  24).  This  moral 
image,  I  believe,  was  totally  lost  by  sin.  In  that  sense  he 
died  the  day,  the  moment,  he  ate  the  forbidden  fruit.  God 
was  no  longer  his  joy  and  delight ;  he  was  averse  from  the 
thoughts  of  His  presence,  and  would  (if  possible)  have  hid 
himself  from  Him.  His  natural  powers,  though  doubtless  im 
paired,  were  not  destroyed.  Man,  by  nature,  is  still  capable 
of  great  things.  His  understanding,  reason,  memory, 
imagination,  &c.,  sufficiently  proclaim  that  the  hand  that 
made  him  is  divine.  He  is,  as  Milton  says  of  Beelzebub, 
"  majestic,  though  in  ruins."  He  can  reason,  invent,  and, 
by  application,  attain  a  considerable  knowledge  in  natural 
things.  The  exertions  of  human  genius,  as  specified  in  the 
characters  of  some  philosophers,  poets,  orators,  &c.,  are 
wonderful.  But  man  cannot  know,  love,  trust,  or  serve  his 
Maker,  unless  he  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind.  God 
has  preserved  in  him,  likewise,  some  feelings  of  benevolence, 
pity,  some  sense  of  natural  justice  and  truth,  &c.,  without 
which  there  could  be  no  society  :  but  these,  I  apprehend,  are 
little  more  than  instincts,  by  which  the  world  is  kept  in  some 
small  degree  of  order ;  but,  being  under  the  direction  of 
pride  and  self,  they  do  not  deserve  the  name  of  virtue  and 
goodness  ;  because  the  exercise  of  them  does  not  spring  from 
a  principle  of  love  to  God,  nor  is  directed  to  His  glory,  or 
regulated  by  the  rule  of  His  Word,  till  a  principle  of  grace  is 
super-added.  You  think,  I  will  not  say,  "  that  God  judicially, 
in  punishment  of  one  man's  sin,  added  these  corruptions 
to  all  his  posterity."  Let  us  suppose  that  the  punishment 
annexed  to  eating  the  forbidden  fruit  had  been  the  loss 
of  Adam's  rational  powers,  and  that  he  should  be  degraded 
to  the  state  and  capacity  of  a  brute.  In  this  condition, 
had  he  begotten  children  after  the  Fall  in  his  own  likeness, 
his  nature  being  previously  changed,  they  must  have  been 
of  course  brutes  like  himself ;  for  he  could  not  convey  to 
them  those  original  powers  which  he  had  lost.  Will  this 
illustrate  my  meaning  ?  Sin  did  not  deprive  him  of  ration 
ality,  but  of  spirituality.  His  nature  became  earthly,  sensual, 


124  CARDIPHONIA  : 

yea,  devilish  ;  and  this  fallen  nature,  this  carnal  mind, 
which  is  enmity  against  God,  which  is  not  subject  to  His 
law,  neither,  indeed,  can  be  (Rom.  viii.  7),  we  universally 
derive  from  him.  Look  upon'children ;  they  presently  show 
themselves  averse  from  good,  but  exceedingly  propense  to 
evil.  This  they  can  learn  even  without  a  master  ;  but  ten 
thousand  instructors  and  instructions  cannot  instil  good 
into  them,  so  as  to  teach  them  to  love  their  Creator,  unless 
a  divine  power  co-operates.  Just  as  it  is  with  the  earth, 
which  produces  weeds  spontaneously  ;  but  if  you  only  see  a 
cabbage  or  an  apple-tree,  you  are  sure  it  was  planted  or 
sown  there,  and  did  not  spring  from  the  soil.  I  know  many 
hard  questions  may  be  started  upon  this  subject,  but  the 
Lord,  in  due  time,  will  clear  His  own  cause,  and  vindicate 
His  own  ways.  I  leave  all  difficulties  with  Him.  It  is 
sufficient  for  me  that  Scripture  asserts,  and  experience  proves 
that  it  is  thus  in  fact,  Rom.  iii.  9-21,  Job  xiv.  4.  Thus, 
we  have  not  only  forfeited  our  happiness  by  transgression, 
but  are,  by  our  depravity,  incapable  of  it,  and  have  no 
more  desire  or  taste  for  such  a  state  as  the  Scripture  describes 
Heaven  to  be,  than  a  man,  born  deaf,  can  have  for  a  concert 
of  music.  And,  therefore,  our  Lord  declares,  that  except 
a  man  be  born  again,  he  not  only  shall  not,  but  cannot, 
see  the  kingdom  of  God.  Hence  a  twofold  necessity  of  a 
Saviour — His  blood  for  the  pardon  of  our  sins — His  life, 
spirit,  and  grace  to  quicken  our  souls,  and  form  us  anew  for 
Himself,  that  we  may  feel  His  love,  and  show  forth  His 
praise. 

St.  Paul,  before  his  conversion,  was  not  sincere  in  the 
sense  I  hope  you  to  be  :  he  thought  himself  in  the  right, 
without  doubt,  as  many  have  done  when  they  killed  God's 
servants,  John  xvi.  2.  He  was  blindly  and  obstinately 
zealous  :  I  think  he  did  not  enter  into  the  merits  of  the 
cause,  or  inquire  into  facts  with  that  attention  which 
sincerity  would  have  put  upon  him.  You  think  that  his 
sincerity  and  zeal  were  the  very  things  that  made  him  a 
chosen  instrument ;  he  himself  speaks  of  them  as  the  very 
things  that  made  him  peculiarly  unworthy  of  that  honour, 
i  Cor.  xv.  9  :  and  he  tells  us,  that  he  was  set  forth  as  a 
pattern  of  the  Lord's  long-suffering  and  mercy,  that  the 
very  chief  of  sinners  might  be  encouraged,  I  Tim.  i.  15,  16. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   125 

Had  he  been  sincerely  desirous  to  know  whether  Jesus  was 
the  Messiah,  there  was  enough  in  his  character,  doctrines, 
miracles,  and  the  prophecies  concerning  Him,  to  have  cleared 
up  the  point ;  but  he  took  it  for  granted  he  was  right  in  his 
opinion,  and  hurried  blindly  on,  and  was  (as  he  said  himself) 
exceedingly  mad  against  them.  Such  a  kind  of  sincerity  is 
common  enough.  People  believe  themselves  right,  and, 
therefore,  treat  others  with  scorn  or  rage  ;  appeal  to  the 
Scriptures,  but  first  lay  down  their  own  pre-conceived  senti 
ments  for  truths,  and  then  examine  what  Scriptures  they 
can  find  to  countenance  them.  Surely  a  person's  thinking 
himself  right  will  not  give  a  sanction  to  all  that  he  does  under 
that  persuasion. 

Ignorance  and  obstinacy  are,  in  themselves,  sinful,  and 
no  plea  of  sincerity  will  exempt  from  the  danger  of  being 
under  their  influence,  Is.  xxvii.  n,  Luke  vi.  39.  It  appears 
to  me,  that  though  you  will  not  follow  any  man  implicitly, 
you  are  desirous  of  discovering  your  mistakes,  supposing 
you  are  mistaken  in  any  point  of  importance.  You  read  and 
examine  the  word  of  God,  not  to  find  arms  wherewith  to 
defend  your  sentiments,  at  all  events,  but  to  know  whether 
they  are  defensible  or  not.  You  pray  for  God's  light  and 
teaching,  and,  in  this  search,  you  are  willing  to  risk  what 
men  are  commonly  much  afraid  of  hazarding — character, 
interest,  preferment,  favour,  &c.  A  sincerity  of  this  kind 
I  too  seldom  meet  with  ;  when  I  do,  I  account  it  a  token  for 
good,  and  am  ready  to  say,  "  No  man  can  do  this,  except 
God  be  with  him."  However,  sincerity  is  not  conversion  ; 
but,  I  believe,  it  is  always  a  fore-runner  of  it. 

I  would  not  be  uncharitable  and  censorious,  hasty  and 
peremptory,  in  judging  my  fellow-creatures.  But  if  I 
acknowledge  the  word  of  God,  I  cannot  avoid  forming  my 
judgment  upon  it.  It  is  true,  I  cannot  look  into  people's 
hearts  ;  but  hearts  and  principles  are  delineated  to  my 
hand  in  the  Scripture.  I  read,  that  no  murderer  has  eternal 
life  in  him  ;  I  read  likewise,  "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  anathema  "  ;  and,  therefore,  I  con 
clude,  that  there  are  speculative  errors,  as  heinous  in  their 
guilt,  as  destructive  in  their  effects,  as  murder  ;  and  that  the 
most  moral  regular  man  as  to  social  life,  if  he  loves  not  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is,  in  the  sight  of  God,  the  Judge  of  all, 


126  CARDIPHONIA  : 

as  displeasing  as  a  murderer.     It  has  pleased  God,  for  the 
peace  and  support  of  society,  to  put  a  black  mark  upon  those 
sins  which  affect  the  peace  and  welfare  of  our  neighbour, 
such  as  adultery  and  murder.     But,  undoubtedly,  the  sins 
committed   immediately   against   Himself,  must   be   more 
heinous  than  any  which  offend  our  fellow-creatures.     The 
second  commandment,   Matt.   xxii.   39,   is  like  the  first ; 
but  it  depends  upon  it,  and  is,  therefore,  inferior  to  it. 
Men  ordinarily  judge  otherwise.     To  live  regardless  of  God 
and  the  Gospel  is  looked  upon  as  a  peccadillo,  in  com 
parison  with  offences  against  society.     But  sooner  or  later 
it  will  appear  otherwise  to  all.     A  parcel  of  robbers  may 
pique  themselves  upon  the  justice,  honour,  and  truth  they 
observe  towards''one  another ;    but  because  they  set  up  a 
petty  interest,  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  public  good,  they 
are   deservedly  accounted  villains,   and   treated   as  such, 
notwithstanding  their  petty  morality  among  themselves. 
Now,  such  a  company  of  robbers  bears  a  much  greater  pro 
portion  to  a  whole  nation,  than  a  nation,  or  all  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  bears  to  the  great  God.     Our  dependence 
upon  Him  is  absolute,  our  obligations  to  Him  infinite.     In 
vain"^  shall   men   plead   their  moral   discharge   of  relative 
duties  to  eacrTother,  if  they  fail  in  the  unspeakably  greater 
relation  under  which  they  stand  to  God  :    and,  therefore, 
when  I  see  people  living  without  God,  in  the  world,  as  all 
do  till  they  are  converted,  I  cannot  but  judge  them  in  a 
dangerous  state  ; — not  because  I  take  pleasure  in  censuring, 
or  think  myself  authorized  to  pass  sentence  upon  my  fellow- 
creature,  but  because  the  Scripture  decides  expressly  on  the 
case,  and  I  am  bound  to  take  my  sentiments  from  thence. 
The  jailer  was  certainly  a  Christian  when  baptized,  as 
you  observe.     He  trembled  ;   he  cried  out,  "  What  must  I 
do  to  be  saved  ?  "     Paul  did  not  bid  him  amend  his  life, 
but  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus.     He  believed  and  rejoiced. 
But  the  Lord  blessed  the  apostle's  words,  to  produce  in 
him  that  saving  faith,  which  filled  him  with  joy  and  peace. 
It  was,  as  I  observed  before,  something  more  than  assent  to 
the  proposition,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ ;  a  resting  in  Him  for 
forgiveness  and  acceptance,  and  a  cleaving  to  Him  in  love. 
No  other  faith  will   purify  the  heart,  work  by  love,  and 
overcome  the  world. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF   THE   HEART       127 

I  need  not  have  pleaded  want  of  leisure  as  an  excuse  for  a 
short  letter,  for  I  have  written  a  long  one.  I  feel  myself 
much  interested  in  your  concerns  ; — and  your  unexpected 
frank  application  to  me  (though  you  well  know  the  light 
in  which  I  appear  to  some  people),  I  consider  as  a  providen 
tial  call,  which  binds  me  to  your  service.  I  hope  our 
correspondence  will  be  productive  of  happy  effects,  and  that 
we  shall  both  one  day  rejoice  in  it. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    IV 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  September  6,  1775. 

I  BEGIN  to  fear  I  shall  fall  under  a  suspicion  of  unkindness 
and  forgetfulness  towards  you, — and,  therefore,  I  am 
willing  to  write  a  line  by  way  of  prevention,  though  I  have 
not  leisure  to  attempt  any  thing  like  an  answer  to  the  letter 

you  put  into  my  hand  the  evening  before  I  left  O ; 

I  must,  therefore,  content  myself  with  a  tender  of  affection 
and  respect,  and  an  inquiry  after  your  welfare. 

Your  letter  will  give  me  an  opportunity  of  saying  some 
thing  farther,  when  time  shall  admit :  but  an  endeavour  to 
answer  all  the  objections  that  may  be  started  between  us, 
in  a  way  of  reasoning,  would  require  a  volume,  and  would, 
likewise,  interfere  with  the  leading  principle  upon  which  my 
hope  of  giving  you  satisfaction,  in  due  time,  is  grounded. 
You  seem  to  expect  that  I  should  remove  your  difficulties  ; 
but  it  is  my  part  only  to  throw  in  a  word  occasionally,  as  a 
witness  of  what  the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  teach  me 
from  the  Scriptures,  and  to  wait  for  the  rest,  till  He  (who 
alone  is  able)  shall  be  pleased  to  communicate  the  same  views 
to  you.  For  till  we  see  and  judge  by  the  same  medium,  and 
are  agreed  in  the  fundamental  point,  that  faith  is  not  the  effect 
of  reasoning,  but  a  special  gift  of  God,  which  He  bestows 
when,  and  to  whom,  He  pleases,  it  will  not  be  possible 
for  me  to  convince  you  by  dint  of  argument.  I  believe,  as 
I  have  observed  before,  that  He  has  already  given  you  a 
desire  to  know  His  will  ;  and,  therefore,  I  trust  He  will  not 


128  CARDIPHONIA  : 

disappoint  your  search.  At  present,  I  think  you  want  one 
thing,  which  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  impart.  I  mean,  such 
a  sense  of  the  depravity  of  human  nature,  and  the  state  of  all 
mankind  considered  as  sinners,  as  may  make  you  feel  the 
utter  impossibility  of  attaining  to  the  peace  and  hope  of  the 
Gospel  in  any  other  way,  than  by  renouncing  all  hope  of 
succeeding  by  any  endeavours  of  your  own,  further  than  by 
humbly  waiting  at  the  throne  of  grace  for  power  to  cast 
yourself,  without  terms  and  conditions,  upon  Him  who  is 
able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  We  must  feel  ourselves  sick 
before  we  can  duly  prize  the  great  Physician,  and  feel  a 
sentence  of  death  in  ourselves,  before  we  can  effectually 
trust  in  God,  who  raiseth  the  dead. 

I  have  not  brought  your  sermons  with  me,  for  I  thought 
I  should  not  have  time  to  read  them  attentively,  while  in 
this  hurrying  place.  I  purpose  to  consider  them  with  care, 
and  to  give  you  my  thoughts  with  frankness,  when  I  return. 
However,  if  they  are  upon  the  plan  intimated  in  your  letter, 
I  will  venture  to  say  one  thing  beforehand — that  they  will 
not  answer  your  desired  end.  I  am  persuaded  you  wish  to 
be  useful — to  reclaim  sinners  from  their  evil  ways,  to  inspire 
them  with  a  love  to  God,  and  a  sincere  aim  to  walk  in  obedi 
ence  to  His  will.  May  I  not  venture  to  appeal  to  yourself, 
that  you  meet  with  little  success  ;  that  the  people  to  whom 
you  preach,  though  they,  perhaps,  give  you  a  patient  hearing, 
yet  remain  as  they  were,  unchanged,  and  unholy  ?  It 
must  be  so  ; — there  is  but  one  sort  of  preaching  which  God 
blesses  to  these  purposes — that  which  makes  all  the  world 
guilty  before  God,  and  sets  forth  Jesus  Christ  (as  the  brazen 
serpent  was  proposed  by  Moses),  that  guilty  and  condemned 
sinners,  by  looking  to  Him,  and  believing  on  His  name,  may 
be  healed  and  saved.  The  most  pressing  exhortations  to 
repentance  and  amendment  of  life,  unless  they  are  enforced 
in  a  certain  way,  which  only  God  can  teach,  will  leave  our 
hearers  much  as  they  find  them.  When  we  meet,  or  when  I 
have  leisure  to  write  from  home,  I  will  trouble  you  with  my 
thoughts  more  at  large.  Till  then,  permit  me  to  assure  you 
of  my  sincere  regard,  and  best  wishes,  and  that  I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART        129 


LETTER   V 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  October  21,  1775. 

THE  calls  and  engagements  which  I  told  you  engrossed 
and  anticipated  my  time  when  I  wrote  last,  have  continued 
without  any  intermission  hitherto,  and  I  am  still  far  behind 
hand  with  my  business.  I  am  willing  to  hope,  that  the  case 
has  been  much  the  same  with  you,  and  that  want  of  leisure 
has  been  the  only  cause  of  my  not  having  been  pleasured 
with  so  much  as  a  note  from  you  since  my  return  from 
London. 

I  am  loath,  for  my  own  sake,  to  charge  your  silence  to  an 
unwillingness  of  continuing  that  intercourse  which  I  have 
been,  and  still  find  myself,  desirous  to  improve  on  my  part. 
For  though  we  are  not  agreed  in  our  views,  yet  while  our 
preliminary  agreement,  to  allow  mutual  freedom,  and  to 
exercise  mutual  candour,  in  expressing  our  sentiments,  sub 
sists,  we  may,  and  I  hope  shall,  be  glad  to  hear  from  each 
other.  It  may  seem  to  intimate  I  have  a  better  opinion  of 
myself  than  of  you,  that  while  I  seem  confident  your  freedom 
will  not  offend  me,  I  feel  now  and  then  a  fear,  lest  mine 
should  prove  displeasing  to  you.  But  friendship  is  a  little 
suspicious  when  exercised  with  long  silence,  and  a  plain 
declaration  of  my  sentiments  has  more  than  once  put  amiable 
and  respectable  persons  to  the  full  trial  of  their  patience. 

I  now  return  your  sermons  :  I  thank  you  for  the  perusal ; 
I  see  much  in  them  that  I  approve,  and  nothing  in  them  but 
what  I  formerly  espoused.  But  in  a  course  of  years,  a 
considerable  alteration  has  taken  place  in  my  judgment  and 
experience.  I  hope,  yea,  I  may  boldly  say  I  am  sure,  not 
for  the  worse.  Then  I  was  seeking,  and  now  through  mercy, 
I  have  found  the  pearl  of  great  price.  It  is  both  the  prayer 
and  the  hope  of  my  heart,  that  a  day  is  coming  when  you 
shall  make  the  same  acknowledgment.  From  your  letters 
and  sermons,  I  am  encouraged  to  address  you  in  our  Lord's 
words,  "  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God."  I 
am  persuaded  the  views  you  have  received  will  not  suffer  you 
to  remain  where  you  are.  But  fidelity  obliges  me  to  add, 
'  Yet  one  thing  thou  lackest."  "  That  one  thing,"  I  trust  the 
Lord  will  both  show  you,  and  bestow  upon  you,  in  His  due 
c.  i 


130  CARDJPHONIA  : 

time.  You  speak  somewhere  of  "  atoning  for  disobedience 
by  repentance."  Ah  !  my  dear  sir,  when  we  are  brought  to 
estimate  our  disobedience,  by  comparing  it  with  such  a 
sense  of  the  majesty,  holiness,  and  authority  of  God,  and  the 
spirituality,  extent,  and  sanction  of  His  holy  law,  as  He, 
and  He  only,  can  impress  upon  the  heart  of  a  sinner,  we 
shall  be  convinced,  that  nothing  but  the  blood  of  the  Son  of 
God  can  atone  for  the  smallest  instance  of  disobedience. 

I  intimated,  in  my  letter  from  London,  one  defect  of 
your  scheme,  which  will  probably  be  the  first  to  engage  your 
notice.  I  am  sure  you  have  a  desire  to  be  useful  to  the  souls 
of  men,  to  be  an  instrument  of  reclaiming  them  from  that 
course  of  open  wickedness,  or  lifeless  formality,  in  which 
you  see  them  enslaved  ;  and,  in  a  word,  to  prevail  with  them 
to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly,  according  to  the  just 
and  comprehensive  sense  you  have  given  of  those  words,  in 
your  sermon  on  Tit.  ii.  n,  12.  Now,  inward  experience,  and 
a  pretty  extensive  observation  of  what  passes  abroad,  have 
so  perfectly  convinced  me  there  is  but  one  mode  of  preaching 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  owns  to  the  producing  these  effects, 
that  I  am  not  afraid  to  pronounce  confidently,  you  will  not 
have  the  desires  of  your  heart  gratified  upon  your  present 
plan  :  the  people  will  give  you  a  hearing,  and  remain  just  as 
they  are,  till  the  Lord  leads  you  to  speak  to  them  as  criminals 
condemned  already,  and  whose  first  essential  step  it  is,  to 
seek  forgiveness  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  a  change  of  heart 
and  state  by  His  grace,  before  they  can  bring  forth  any  fniit 
acceptable  to  God. 

As  I  have  little  time  for  writing,  and  little  hope  of  succeed 
ing  in  a  way  of  argumentation,  I  have  substituted,  instead  of 
a  longer  letter,  the  heads  of  some  sermons  I  preached 
nine  or  ten  years  ago,  on  our  Lord's  discourse  with  Nico- 
demus.  However,  when  I  have  heard  that  you  are  well, 
and  that  you  are  still  disposed  to  correspond  with  me,  I 
shall  be  ready  to  give  a  more  particular  answer  to  the  sub 
jects  you  pointed  out  to  me  in  the  letter  you  favoured  me 
with  the  day  before  I  left  London.  I  pray  God  to  bless  you 
in  all  your  ways,  and  beg  you  to  believe,  that  I  am  with 
sincerity,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE   HEART       13! 


LETTER    VI 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  October  28,  1775. 

IT  never  entered  my  pericranium,  that  you  expected 
I  should  fully  and  directly  answer  your  letter  while  I  was  in 
London  ;  and  yet  you  reasonably  might,  as  you  knew  nothing 
of  my  engagements  :  but,  indeed,  it  was  impracticable  ;  I 
could  only  send  you  a  hasty  line,  as  a  token  that  I  remem 
bered  you.  I  informed  you,  when  I  returned,  that  I  was 
just  going  out  again.  Since  I  came  home  the  second  time, 
I  have  been  engrossed  by  things  that  would  admit  of  no 
delay  ;  and,  at  length,  not  having  so  much  as  a  note  from 
you,  I  thought  I  would  wait  till  I  heard  farther.  But  from 
first  to  last  it  was  my  intention,  and  I  think  my  promise,  to 
answer  in  the  manner  you  proposed,  as  soon  as  I  could.  And 
even  now  I  must  beg  a  little  longer  time.  Believe  me,  that 
as  the  wise  and  good  providence  of  God  brought  us  together, 
without  any  expectation  of  mine,  I  will  do  all  in  my  power 
to  preserve  the  connexion,  and  particularly  by  giving  my 
thoughts  on  such  questions  as  you  propose.  And  though, 
to  consider  your  questions  in  the  manner  you  wish,  and  to 
point  out  the  agreement  of  detached  texts  (as  they  occur) 
with  my  views,  seems  in  prospect  to  require  a  volume  rather 
than  a  sheet,  yet  I  am  not  discouraged  ;  only  I  beg  you  to 
make  allowances  for  other  things,  and  to  be  assured,  that 
before  I  had  the  pleasure  of  corresponding  with  you,  I  had 
very  little  spare  time.  Expect,  then,  the  best  satisfaction 
I  am  able  to  give  you,  as  soon  as  possible.  To  prepare  the 
way,  I  will  try  hard  for  a  little  leisure,  to  give  you  a  few 
thoughts  upon  yours,  which  came  last  night. 

You  complain  that  I  have  hitherto  disappointed  your 
expectations.  If  you  have  preserved  my  first  papers,  I 
believe  you  will  find,  that  I  apprised  you  this  might  probably 
be  the  event,  and  certainly  must,  unless  it  should  please  God 
to  make  what  I  should  write  a  means  of  giving  you  the  same 
views  with  myself.  I  only  proposed,  as  a  witness,  to  bear 
a  simple  testimony  to  what  I  have  seen  and  known.  So  far 
as  you  believed  me  sincere,  and  unwilling  to  impose  upon 
you,  I  thought  you  might  admit,  there  was  perhaps  some 
weight  in  what  I  had  advanced,  though  for  the  present  you 

I  2 


132  CARDIPHON1A  : 

could  not  see  things  in  the  same  light.  And  if  you  allowed  a 
possibility,  that  my  changing  the  sentiments  which  I  once 
held  in  common  with  yourself,  might  be  upon  sufficient 
grounds,  you  would,  as  I  trust  you  do,  wait  upon  the  Great 
Teacher  for  His  instruction  ;  otherwise  I  did  not  expect  to 
convince  you,  nor  do  I  yet ;  only  I  am  glad  to  put  myself 
in  His  hands  as  an  instrument. 

You  quite  misunderstood  what  I  spoke  of  the  light  and 
influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  reveals  to  me  no  new' 
truths,  but  has  only  shown  me  the  meaning  of  His  own 
written  Word ;  nor  is  this  light  a  particular  revelation, 
it  is  common  to  all  who  are  born  again.  And  thus,  though 
you  and  I  cannot  fully  agree  about  it,  yet  I  almost  daily  meet 
with  persons  from  the  east,  west,  north,  and  south,  who, 
though  I  never  saw  them  before,  I  find  understand  me  at 
once.  This  (as  you  bid  me  be  explicit)  is  the  one  thing  which 
I  think  you  at  present  lack.  And  I  limited  my  expression 
to  one  thing,  because  it  is  our  Lord's  expression,  and  because 
that  one  thing  includes  many.  As  I  said  before,  I  cannot 
give  it  you  ;  but  the  Lord  can  ;  and  from  the  desire  He  has 
raised  in  your  heart,  I  have  a  warm  hope  that  He  will. 
You  place  the  whole  stress  of  your  inquiries  upon  reason  ; 
I  am  far  from  discarding  reason,  when  it  is  enlightened  and 
sanctified  ;  but  spiritual  things  must  be  spiritually  dis 
cerned,  and  can  be  received  and  discerned  no  other  way  ; 
for  to  our  natural  reason  they  are  foolishness,  i  Cor.  ii.  14, 
15  ;  Matt.  xi.  25.  This  certain  something  I  can  no  more 
describe  to  those  who  have  not  experienced  it,  than  I  could 
describe  the  taste  of  a  pine-apple  to  a  person  who  had  never 
seen  one.  But  Scriptural  proofs  might  be  adduced  in 
abundance,  yet  not  so  as  to  give  a  solid  conviction  of  it, 
till  we  actually  experience  it.  Thus  it  was  with  my  friend— 
whose  case  I  sent  you.  When  God  gave  him  the  key, 
(as  he  expressed  it,)  then  the  Scriptures  were  unlocked. 
His  wishing  himself  a  Deist,  some  time  before,  was  not  from 
any  libertine  exceptions  he  made  to  the  precepts  of  the 
Gospel,  but  from  the  perplexing  embarrassments  he  had 
found,  by  endeavouring  to  understand  the  doctrines  by  dint 
of  reason,  though  reason  in  him  was  as  strong  and  penetrating 
as  in  most  men  I  ever  met  with.  Upon  your  present  plan, 
how  can  I  hope  to  satisfy  you,  though  2ven  St.  Paul  asserts 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    133 

it,  that  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God  ?  you  will 
readily  agree  with  me  to  the  proposition  as  it  stands  in 
St.  Paul's  words,  but  I  think  will  not  so  readily  assent  to 
what  I  have  no  more  doubt  than  of  my  own  existence,  is 
the  sense  of  it :  that  the  heart  of  man,  of  any  man,  every 
man,  however  apparently  amiable  in  his  outward  conduct, 
however  benevolent  to  his  fellow-creatures,  however  abund 
ant  and  zealous  in  his  devotions,  is  by  nature  enmity  against 
God  :  not,  indeed,  against  the  idea  he  himself  forms  of  God, 
but  against  the  character  which  God  has  revealed  of  Himself 
in  the  Scripture.  Man  is  an  enemy  to  the  justice,  sovereign 
ty,  and  law  of  God,  and  to  the  one  method  of  salvation  He 
has  appointed  in  the  Gospel  by  faith  only,  by  such  a  faith,  as 
it  is  no  more  in  his  power  to  contribute  to  the  production  of 
in  himself,  than  he  can  contribute  to  raising  the  dead,  or 
making  a  world.  Whatever  is  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and 
can  rise  no  higher  than  its  principle  ;  but  the  Lord  could 
convince  you  of  this  by  a  glance  of  thought. 

But  I  must  break  off,  for  want  both  of  room  and  time. 
Let  me  remind  you  of  our  agreement,  to  use  and  to  allow 
the  greatest  freedom,  and  not  to  be  offended  with  what  is 
meant  well  on  either  side.  Something  in  your  last  letter 
made  me  apprehensive  you  were  a  little  displeased  with  me. 
He  that  knows  my  heart,  knows  that  I  wish  you  well  as 
my  own  soul. 

The  expression,  of  atoning  for  disobedience  by  repentance, 
was  in  one  of  your  sermons.  I  considered  it  as  unguarded ; 
but,  on  my  view  of  things,  it  were  in  a  manner  impossible 
I  could  use  that  expression,  though  perhaps  too  often 
unguarded  myself.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  VII 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  November  17,  1775. 

AT  length  I  take  up  your  favour  of  August  14,  with 
design  to  give  a  more  explicit  answer.  My  delaying  hitherto 
has  been  unavoidable.  I  am  sorry  to  have  your  patience 
put  to  so  long  a  trial,  and  should  be  more  sorry,  but  that  I 


134  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

consider,  that  in  my  former  papers,  sermons,  Omicron's 
letters,  &c.,  you  already  possess  the  whole  (in  substance)  of 
what  I  have  to  offer.  My  present  part  is  but  actuni  agere, 
to  repeat  what  I  have  elsewhere  expressed,  only  with  some 
variety  and  enlargement. — You  yourself  well  state  the  situa 
tion  of  our  debate,  when  you  say,  "  Nor  in  truth  do  you  offer 
any  arguments  to  convince  me,  nor  does  it  seem  very  consistent 
on  your  grounds  so  to  do.  And  if  this  important  change  is 
to  be  brought  about  by  the  intervention  of  some  extraordin 
ary  impulse  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  cannot  be  brought  about 
without  it,  I  do  not  see  any  thing  farther  that  I  have  to  do, 
than  to  keep  my  mind  as  much  unbiassed  as  I  can,  and  to 
wait  and  pray  for  it."  I  think  my  letter  from  London  was 
to  the  purport  of  these  your  own  words,  though  you  seem 
dissatisfied  with  it.  While  we  see  through  a  different 
medium,  it  will  be  easy  for  you  to  answer  every  text  I 
might  adduce  in  support  of  my  sentiments,  as  you  have 
those  I  have  already  brought,  "  That  you  understand  them 
otherwise."  In  order  to  support  my  sense  of  one  text,  I 
should  perhaps  quote  and  argue  from  twenty  more,  and  still 
"  You  would  understand  them  otherwise."  The  life  of  man, 
yea,  of  Methuselah,  would  hardly  suffice  to  prove,  object, 
and  defend  all  that  might  be  alleged  on  both  sides  in  this 
way  ;  and  at  last  we  should  leave  off  as  we  began,  more 
fully  confirmed  in  our  own  opinions,  unless  the  Lord  by  His 
Holy  Spirit  should  be  pleased  to  show  the  person  who  main 
tained  the  wrong  side  of  the  argument  where  his  mistake  lay. 
However,  I  mean  to  take  some  notice  of  your  queries  as  they 
offer  themselves. 

The  first  which  occurs  is  complicated. — The  substance, 
I  think,  is,  whether  such  belief  and  aims  as  you  possess  will 
stand  you  in  no  stead,  unless  you,  likewise,  believe  grace 
irresistible,  predestination  absolute,  faith  in  supernatural 
impulses,  &c.  ?  You  may  have  observed,  I  have  several 
times  waived  speaking  about  predestination  or  election,—- 
not  that  I  am  ashamed  of  the  doctrine  ;  because,  if  it  be 
indeed  absurd,  shocking,  and  unjust,  the  blame  will  not 
deservedly  fall  upon  me,  for  I  did  not  invent  it,  but  upon  the 
Scriptures,  where  I  am  sure,  it  is  laid  down  in  as  plain  terms 
as  that  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  I  own  I 
cannot  but  wonder,  that  persons  professing  any  reverence 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   135 

for  the  Bible,  should  so  openly  and  strongly  declare  their 
abhorrence  of  what  the  Bible  so  expressly  teaches,  namely, 
that  there  is  a  discrimination  of  persons  by  the  grace  and 
good  pleasure  of  God,  where  by  nature  there  is  no  difference  ; 
and  that  all  things  respecting  the  salvation  of  these  persons, 
is  infallibly  secured  by  a  Divine  predestination. 

I  do  not  offer  this  as  a  rational  doctrine,  (though  it  be 
highly  so  to  me,)  but  it  is  Scriptural,  or  else  the  Scripture  is 
a  mere  nose  of  wax,  and  without  a  determinate  meaning. 
What  ingenuity  is  needful  to  interpret  many  passages  in  a 
sense  more  favourable  to  our  natural  prejudices  against 
God's  sovereignty !  Matt.  xi.  25,  26,  and  xiii.  10-17  ; 
Mark  xiii.  20,  22  ;  John  xvii.  passim  ;  John  x.  26  ;  Rom. 
viii.  28-30,  and  ix.  13-24,  and  xi.  7 ;  Eph.  i.  4,  5  ;  I  Pet. 
i.  2.  Were  I  fond  of  disputing,  as  I  am  not,  I  think  I  could 
put  a  close  reasoner  hard  to  it,  to  maintain  the  truth  of 
Scripture-prophecies,  or  the  belief  of  a  particular  Providence, 
unless  he  would  admit  a  Divine  predestination  of  causes 
and  events  as  the  ground  of  his  arguments.  However,  as  I 
said,  I  have  chosen  to  waive  the  point  ;  because,  however 
true  and  necessary  in  itself,  the  knowledge  and  compre 
hension  of  it  is  not  necessary  to  the  being  of  a  true  Christian, 
though  I  can  hardly  conceive  he  can  be  an  established  con 
sistent  believer  without  it.  This  doctrine  is  not  the  turning 
point  between  you  and  me  ;  the  nature  of  justification,  and 
the  method  of  a  sinner's  acceptance  with  God,  are  of 
much  more  immediate  importance ;  and,  therefore,  if  I 
am  to  speak  plainly,  I  must  say,  that  I  look  upon  your  pre 
sent  sentiments,  attainments,  and  advances,  as  you  describe 
them,  to  constitute  that  kind  of  gain  the  apostle  speaks  of, 
and  concerning  which  I  hope  you  will  one  day  be  of  his 
mind,  and  be  glad  to  account  it  all  loss,  that  you  may  win 
Christ,  and  be  found  in  Him,  "  not  having  your  own  righteous 
ness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  the  righteousness  which  is  of 
God  by  faith,"  Phil.  Hi.  4,  7-10.  For,  as  you  tell  me,  you 
never  remember  a  time  when  you  were  not  conscious,  before 
God,  of  great  unworthiness,  and  intervals  of  earnest  en 
deavours  to  serve  Him,  though  not  with  the  same  success, 
yet  something  in  the  same  way  as  at  present  :  this  is  but 
saying,  in  other  words,  you  never  remember  a  time  when 
old  things  passed  away,  and  all  things  became  new  ;  and  yet 


136  CARDIPHONIA  : 

the  apostle  insists  much  upon  this,  2  Cor.  iv.  6,  and  v.  17. 
The  convictions  of  natural  conscience,  and  those  which  are 
wrought  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  are  different,  not 
only  in  degree,  but  in  kind  ;  the  light  of  a  glowworm  and  of 
the  sun  do  not  more  essentially  differ.  The  former  are 
partial  and  superficial,  leave  us  in  possession  of  a  supposed 
power  of  our  own,  are  pacified  by  some  appearances  of  an 
outward  change,  and  make  us  no  farther  sensible  of  the 
necessity  of  a  Saviour,  than  to  make  our  doings  and  duties 
(if  I  may  so  express  myself)  full  weight,  which,  perhaps, 
might  otherwise  be  a  little  deficient,  when  brought  to  the 
balances  of  the  sanctuary.  But  truly  spiritual  convictions 
give  us  far  other  views  of  sin  ;  they  lead  us  to  a  deep  and 
awful  consideration  of  the  root,  our  total  absolute  depravity, 
and  our  utter  apostacy  from  God,  by  which  we  are  incapable 
of  doing  good,  as  a  dead  man  is  of  performing  the  functions 
of  life.  They  lead  us  to  the  rule  and  standard,  the  strict, 
holy,  inflexible  law  of  God,  which  reaches  to  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart  ;  requires  perfect,  universal,  per 
severing,  obedience  ;  denounces  a  curse  upon  every  failure, 
Gal.  iii.  10  ;  and  affords  neither  place  nor  strength  for  re 
pentance.  Thus  they  sweep  away  every  hope  and  refuge 
we  had  before,  and  fix  upon  us  a  sense  of  guilt  and  con 
demnation,  from  which  there  is  no  relief,  till  we  can  look  to 
Jesus,  as  the  wounded  Israelite  did  to  the  brazen  serpent  ; 
which  was  not  to  give  efficacy  to  medicines  and  plasters  of 
their  own  application,  but  to  heal  them  completely  of  itself, 
by  looking  at  it,  John  iii.  14,  15,  and  vi.  40  ;  Isaiah  xliii.  22. 
You  wish  me  to  explain  my  distinction  between  faith  and 
rational  assent ;  and  though  I  know  no  two  things  in  the 
world  more  clearly  distinct  in  themselves,  or  more  expressly 
distinguished  in  Scripture,  yet,  I  fear,  I  may  not  easily 
make  it  appear  to  you.  You  allow  faith,  in  your  sense,  to 
be  the  gift  of  God  ;  but,  in  my  sense,  it  is,  likewise,  wrought 
by  the  operation  of  God,  Col.  ii.  12,  TO  virfpGaX 

<  ci  up (iir    avrov — *:oro   rr\v    u-tpytHtv  TOV  kptirovf  r>jc 

that  same  energy  of  the  power  of  His  strength,  by  which  the 
dead  body  of  Jesus  was  raised  from  the  dead.  Can  these 
strong  expressions  intend  no  more  than  a  rational  assent, 

*  Ephes.  i.  19. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   137 

such  as  we  give  to  a  proposition  in  Euclid  ?  I  believe  fallen 
reason  is,  of  itself,  utterly  incapable  even  of  assenting  to  the 
great  truths  of  revelation  ;  it  may  assent  to  the  terms  in 
which  they  are  proposed,  but  it  must  put  its  own  inter 
pretation  upon  them,  or  it  would  despise  them.  The  natural 
man  can  neither  receive  nor  discern  the  things  of  God  : 
and  if  any  one  would  be  wise,  the  apostle's  first  advice  to 
him  is,  Let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be  wise  ;  for  the 
wisdom  of  the  world  is  foolislmess  with  God. 

Indeed,  when  the  heart  is  changed,  and  the  mind  enlight 
ened,  then  reason  is  sanctified,  and,  if  I  may  so  say,  bap 
tized,  renounces  its  curious  disquisitions,  and  is  content 
humbly  to  tread  in  the  path  of  revelation.  This  is  one 
difference  ;  assent  may  be  the  act  of  our  natural  reason  ; 
faith  is  the  effect  of  immediate  almighty  power.  Another 
difference  is,  faith  is  always  efficacious, "  it  worketh  by  love  "  ; 
whereas  assent  is  often  given  where  it  has  little  or  no  influ 
ence  upon  the  conduct.  Thus,  for  instance,  every  one  will 
assent  to  this  truth,  all  men  are  mortal.  Yet  the  greatest 
part  of  mankind,  though  they  readily  assent  to  the  proposi 
tion,  and  it  would  be  higlily  irrational  to  do  otherwise,  yet 
live  as  they  might  do  if  the  reverse  were  true.  But  they 
who  have  Divine  faith,  feel,  as  well  as  say,  they  are  pilgrims 
and  sojourners  upon  earth.  Again,  faith  gives  peace  of 
conscience,  access  to  God,  and  a  sure  evidence  and  subsistence 
of  things  not  seen,  Rom.  v.  I,  2  ;  Heb.  xi.  I  ;  whereas,  a 
calm,  dispassionate  reasoner  may  be  compelled  to  assent  to 
the  external  arguments  in  favour  of  Christianity,  and  yet 
remain  a  total  stranger  to  that  communion  with  God,  that 
spirit  of  adoption,  that  foretaste  of  glory,  which  is  the 
privilege  and  portion  of  believers.  So,  likewise,  faith  over 
comes  the  world,  which  rational  assent  will  not  do.  Witness 
the  lives  and  tempers  of  thousands,  who  yet  would  be 
affronted  if  their  assent  to  the  Gospel  should  be  questioned. 
To  sum  up  all  in  a  word,  "  He  that  believes  shall  be  saved." 
But  surely  many,  who  give  a  rational  assent  to  the  Gospel, 
live  and  die  in  those  sins  which  exclude  from  the  kingdom  of 
God,  Gal.  v.  19 — 21.  Faith  is  the  effect  of  a  principle  of 
new  life  implanted  in  the  soul  that  was  before  dead  in  tres 
passes  and  sins  ;  and  it  qualifies  not  only  for  obeying  the 
Saviour's  precepts,  but  chiefly  and  primarily  for  receiving 


I38  CARDIPHONIA  : 

from,  and  rejoicing  in,  His  fullness,  admiring  His  love,  His 
work,  His  person,  His  glory,  His  advocacy.  It  makes 
Christ  precious,  enthrones  Him  in  the  heart,  presents  Him 
as  the  most  delightful  object  to  our  meditations  ;  as  our 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  strength  ;  our 
Root,  Head,  Life,  Shepherd,  and  Husband.  These  are  all 
Scriptural  expressions  and  images,  setting  forth,  so  far  as 
words  can  declare,  what  Jesus  is  in  Himself  and  to  His  be- 
ieving  people.  But  how  cold  is  the  comment  which  rational 
assent  puts  upon  very  many  passages  wherein  the  apostle 
Paul  endeavours  (but  in  vain)  to  express  the  fullness  of  his 
heart  upon  this  subject  !  A  most  valued  friend  of  mine, 
a  clergyman,  now  living,  had,  for  many  years,  given  a  rational 
assent  to  the  Gospel.  He  laboured  with  much  earnestness 
upon  your  plan,  was  very  exemplary  in  his  whole  conduct, 
preached  almost  incessantly,  (two  or  three  times  every  day 
in  the  week,  for  years,)  having  a  parish  in  the  remote  parts 
of  Yorkshire,  of  great  extent,  and  containing  five  or  six 
different  hamlets  at  some  distance  from  each  other.  He 
succeeded,  likewise,  with  his  people,  so  far  as  to  break  them 
off  from  outward  irregularities  ;  and  was  mentioned  in  a 
letter  to  the  Society  for  Propagating  the  Gospel  (which  I  have 
seen  in  print)  as  the  most  perfect  example  of  a  parish-priest 
which  this  nation,  or,  perhaps,  this  age,  has  produced. 
Thus  he  went  on,  for  many  years,  teaching  his  people  what 
he  knew,  for  he  could  teach  them  no  more.  He  lived  in 
such  retirement  and  recess,  that  he  was  unacquainted  with 
the  persons  and  principles  of  any  who  are  now  branded  as 
enthusiasts  and  Methodists.  One  day,  reading  Eph.  iii. 
in  his  Greek  Testament,  his  thoughts  were  stopped  by 
the  word  avtl^viaaTov,  in  verse  8.  He  was  struck,  and 
led  to  think  with  himself  to  this  purpose  ;  "  The  apostle, 
when  speaking  of  the  love  and  riches  of  Christ,  uses  re 
markable  expressions  ;  he  speaks  of  heights,  depths,  and 
lengths,  and  breadths,  and  unsearchables,  where  I  seem  to 
find  every  thing  plain,  easy,  and  rational.  He  finds  myster 
ies  where  I  can  perceive  none.  Surely,  though  I  use  the 
words  Gospel,  faith,  and  grace  with  him,  my  ideas  of  them 
must  be  different  from  his."  This  led  him  to  a  close  exami 
nation  of  all  his  epistles,  and,  by  the  blessing  of  God, 
brought  on  a  total  change  in  his  views  and  preaching.  He 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   139 

no  longer  set  his  people  to  keep  a  law  of  faith,  to  trust  in 
their  sincerity  and  endeavours,  upon  some  general  hope  that 
Christ  would  help  them  out  where  they  came  short  ;  but  he 
preached  Christ  Himself,  as  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteous 
ness  to  every  one  that  believeth.  He  felt  himself,  and 
laboured  to  convince  others,  that  there  is  no  hope  for  a  sinner, 
but  merely  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  no  possibility  of  his 
doing  any  works  acceptable  to  God,  till  he  himself  be  first 
made  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Nor  did  he  labour  in  vain. 
Now  his  preaching  effected  not  only  an  outward  reformation, 
but  a  real  change  of  heart  in  very  many  of  his  hearers.  The 
word  was  received,  as  Paul  expresses  it,  not  with  a  rational 
assent  only,  but  with  demonstration,  and  power  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance  ;  and  their  endeavours  to 
observe  the  Gospel-precepts  were  abundantly  more  exten 
sive,  uniform,  and  successful,  when  they  were  brought  to 
say  with  the  apostle,  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ :  never 
theless  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  ;  and  the 
life  I  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God." 

Such  a  change  of  views  and  sentiments  I  pray  God  my 
friend  may  experience.  These  things  may  appear  uncouth 
to  you  at  present,  as  they  have  done  to  many,  who  now  bless 
God  for  showing  them  what  their  reason  could  never  have 
taught  them.  My  divinity  is  unfashionable  enough  at 
present,  but  it  was  not  so  always ;  you  will  find  few 
books  written  from  the  era  of  the  Reformation,  till  a  little 
before  Laud's  time,  that  set  forth  any  other.  There  were 
few  pulpits,  till  after  the  Restoration,  from  which  any  other 
was  heard.  A  lamentable  change  has,  indeed,  since  taken 
place ;  but  God  has  not  left  himself  without  witnesses.  You 
think,  though  I  disclaim  infallibility,  I  arrogate  too  much  in 
speaking  with  so  much  certainty.  I  am  fallible  indeed  ; 
but  I  am  sure  of  the  main  points  of  doctrine  I  hold.  I  am 
not  in  the  least  doubt,  whether  salvation  be  of  faith  or  of 
works  ;  whether  faith  be  of  our  own  power,  or  of  God's 
operation  ;  whether  Christ's  obedience,  or  our  own,  be  the 
just  ground  of  our  hope  ;  whether  a  man  can  truly  call 
Jesus  Lord,  but  by  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  have 
no  more  hesitation  about  these  points  than  I  should  have, 
were  I  asked,  Whether  it  was  God  or  man  who  created  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  ?  Besides,  ns  T  hove  more  than  once 


140  CARDIPHONIA  : 

observed,  your  sentiments  were  once  my  own  ;  so  that  I, 
who  have  travelled  both  roads,  may  have,  perhaps,  some 
stronger  reasons  to  determine  me  which  is  the  right,  than 
you  can  have  who  have  only  travelled  one. 

Your  two  sheets  may  lead  me  to  write  as  many  quires, 
if  I  do  not  check  myself.  I  now  come  to  the  two  queries 
you  propose,  the  solution  of  which,  you  think,  will  clearly 
mark  the  difference  of  our  sentiments.  The  substance  of 
them  is,  is/,  Whether  I  think  any  sinner  ever  perished  in 
his  shis,  (to  whom  the  Gospel  has  been  preached,)  because 
God  refused  to  supply  him  with  such  a  proportion  of  His 
assistance  as  was  absolutely  necessary  to  his  believing  and 
repenting,  or  without  his  having  previously  rejected  the  in 
citements  of  his  Holy  Spirit  ?  A  full  answer  to  this  would 
require  a  sheet.  But  briefly,  I  believe  that  all  mankind 
being  corrupt  and  guilty  before  God,  He  might,  without 
impeachment  to  His  justice,  have  left  them  all  to  perish, 
as  we  are  assured  He  did  the  fallen  angels.  But  He  was 
pleased  to  show  mercy,  and  mercy  must  be  free.  If  the 
sinner  has  any  claim  to  it,  so  far  it  is  justice,  not  mercy.  He 
who  is  to  be  our  Judge  assures  us,  that  few  find  the  gate 
that  leadeth  to  life,  while  many  throng  the  road  to  destruc 
tion.  Your  question  seems  to  imply,  that  you  think  God 
either  did  make  salvation  equally  open  to  all,  or  that  it  would 
have  been  more  becoming  His  goodness  to  have  done  so. 

But  He  is  the  potter,  we  are  the  clay  :  His  ways  and 
thoughts  are  above  ours,  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the 
earth.  The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right.  He  has 
appointed  a  day  when  He  will  manifest,  to  the  conviction 
of  all,  that  he  has  done  right.  Till  then,  I  hold  it  best  to  take 
things  upon  His  word,  and  not  too  harshly  determine  what 
it  becomes  Jehovah  to  do.  Instead  of  saying  what  I  think, 
let  it  suffice  to  remind  you  of  what  St.  Paul  thought,  Rom. 
ix.  15-21.  But  farther,  I  say,  that  unless  mercy  were 
afforded  to  those  who  are  saved,  in  a  way  peculiar  to  them 
selves,  and  which  is  not  afforded  to  those  who  perish,  I 
believe  no  one  soul  could  be  saved.  For  I  believe  fallen 
man,  universally  considered  as  such,  is  as  incapable  of 
doing  the  least  thing  towards  his  salvation,  till  prevented 
by  the  grace  of  God,  (as  our  Article  speaks,)  as  a  dead  body 
is  of  restoring  itself  to  life.  Whatever  difference  takes 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   141 

place  between  men,  in  this  respect,  is  of  grace,  that  is  of 
God,  undeserved.  Yea,  His  first  approaches  to  our  hearts 
are  undesired  too  ;  for,  till  He  seeks  us,  we  cannot,  we  will 
not,  seek  Him,  Psalm  ex.  3.  It  is  in  the  day  of  His  power, 
and  not  before,  His  people  are  made  willing.  But,  I  believe, 
where  the  Gospel  is  preached,  they  who  do  perish  do  wil 
fully  resist  the  light,  and  choose  and  cleave  to  darkness, 
and  stifle  the  convictions  which  the  truths  of  God,  when 
His  true  Gospel  is,  indeed,  preached,  will,  in  one  degree  or 
other,  force  upon  their  minds.  The  cares  of  this  world,  the 
deceitfulness  of  riches,  the  love  of  other  things,  the  violence 
of  sinful  appetites,  their  prejudices,  pride,  and  self-righteous 
ness,  either  prevent  the  reception  or  choke  the  growth  of  the 
good  seed  :  thus  their  own  sin  and  obstinacy  is  the  proper 
cause  of  their  destruction  :  they  will  not  come  to  Christ 
that  they  may  have  life.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  true  that 
they  cannot,  unless  they  are  supernaturally  drawn  of  God, 
John  v.  40  ;  vi.  44.  They  will  not,  and  they  cannot,  come. 
Both  are  equally  true,  and  they  are  consistent.  For  a 
man's  cannot  is  not  a  natural,  but  a  moral  inability  ;  not  an 
impossibility  in  the  nature  of  things,  as  it  is  for  me  to  walk 
upon  the  water,  or  to  fly  in  the  air ;  but  such  an  inability, 
as,  instead  of  extenuating,  does  exceedingly  enhance  and 
aggravate  his  guilt.  He  is  so  blinded  by  Satan,  so  alienated 
from  God  by  nature  and  wicked  works,  so  given  up  to  sin,  so 
averse  from  that  way  of  salvation,  which  is  contrary  to 
his  pride  and  natural  wisdom,  that  he  will  not  embrace  it,  or 
seek  after  it ;  and,  therefore,  he  cannot,  till  the  grace  of 
God  powerfully  enlightens  his  mind,  and  overcomes  his 
obstacles.  But  this  brings  me  to  your  second  query. 

Do  I  think  that  God,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  His 
providence,  grants  this  assistance  in  an  irresistible  manner, 
or  effects  faith  and  conversion  without  the  sinner's  own 
hearty  consent  and  concurrence  ?  I  rather  choose  to  term 
grace  invincible  than  irresistible :  For  it  is  too  often  re 
sisted  even  by  those  who  believe  ;  but  because  it  is  invincible, 
it  triumphs  over  all  resistance,  when  He  is  pleased  to  bestow 
it.  For  the  rest,  I  believe  no  sinner  is  converted  without  his 
own  hearty  will  and  concurrence.  But  he  is  not  willing  till 
he  is  made  so.  Why  does  he  at  all  refuse  ?  Because  he  is 
insensible  of  his  state  ;  because  he  knows  not  the  evil  of 


I42  CARDIPHON1A  : 

sin,  the  strictness  of  the  law,  the  majesty  of  God  whom  he 
has  offended,  nor  the  total  apostacy  of  his  heart ;  because  he 
is  blind  to  eternity,  and  ignorant  of  the  excellency  of 
Christ  ;  because  he  is  comparatively  whole,  and  sees  not  his 
need  of  tliis  great  Physician  ;  because  he  relies  upon  his  own 
wisdom,  power,  and  supposed  righteousness.  Now,  in  this 
state  of  things,  when  God  comes  with  a  purpose  of  mercy,  he 
begins  by  convincing  the  person  of  sin,  judgment,  and 
righteousness  ;  causes  him  to  feel  and  know  that  he  is  a 
lost,  condemned,  helpless  creature,  and  then  discovers  to 
him  the  necessity,  sufficiency,  and  willingness  of  Christ  to 
save  them  that  are  ready  to  perish,  without  money  or  price, 
without  doings  or  deservings.  Then  he  sees  faith  to  be  very 
different  from  a  rational  assent,  finds  that  nothing  but  the 
power  of  God  can  produce  a  well-grounded  hope  in  the  heart 
of  a  convinced  sinner  ;  therefore  looks  to  Jesus,  who  is  the 
author  and  finisher  of  faith,  to  enable  him  to  believe.  For 
this  he  waits  in  what  we  call  the  means  of  grace  ;  he  prays, 
he  reads  the  word,  he  thirsts  for  God,  as  the  hart  pants  for 
the  water-brooks  ;  and  though  perhaps  for  a  while  he  is 
distressed  with  many  doubts  and  fears,  he  is  encouraged 
to  wait  on,  because  Jesus  has  said,  "  Him  that  cometh  unto 
Me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  The  obstinacy  of  the  will 
remains  while  the  understanding  is  dark,  and  ceases  when 
that  is  enlightened.  Suppose  a  man  walking  in  the  dark, 
where  there  are  pits  and  precipices  of  which  he  is  not  aware  : 
you  are  sensible  of  his  danger,  and  call  after  him  ;  but  he 
thinks  he  knows  better  than  you,  refuses  your  advice,  and 
is  perhaps  angry  with  you  for  your  importunity.  He  sees 
no  danger,  therefore  will  not  be  persuaded  there  is  any  : 
but  if  you  go  with  a  light,  get  before  him,  and  show  him 
plainly,  that  if  he  takes  another  step  he  falls  beyond  the 
power  of  recovery  ; — then  he  will  stop  of  his  own  accord, 
blame  himself  for  not  minding  you  before,  and  be  ready  to 
comply  with  your  farther  directions.  In  either  case  man's 
will  acts  with  equal  freedom  ;  the  difference  of  his  conduct 
arises  from  conviction.  Something  like  this  is  the  case  of 
our  spiritual  concerns.  Sinners  are  called  and  warned  by 
the  Word ;  but  they  are  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  and  take 
but  little  notice  till  the  Lord  gives  them  light,  which  He  is 
not  bound  to  give  to  any,  and  therefore  cannot  be  bound  to 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   143 

give  to  all.  They  who  have  it,  have  reason  to  be  thankful, 
and  subscribe  to  the  apostle's  words,  "  By  grace  are  ye 
saved,  through  faith  ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the 
gift  of  God." 

I  have  not  yet  half  done  with  the  first  sheet ;  shall 
consider  the  rest  at  leisure,  but  send  this  as  a  specimen  of 
my  willingness  to  clear  my  sentiments  to  you  as  far  as  I  can. 
Unless  it  should  please  God  to  make  what  I  offer  satisfactory, 
I  well  know  beforehand  what  objections  and  answers  will 
occur  to  you ;  for  these  points  have  been  often  debated  ; 
and  after  a  course  of  twenty-seven  years,  in  which  religion 
has  been  the  chief  object  of  my  thoughts  and  inquiries,  I 
am  not  entirely  a  stranger  to  what  can  be  offered  on  either 
side.  What  I  write,  I  write  simply  and  in  love  ;  beseeching 
Him,  who  alone  can  set  a  seal  to  His  own  truth,  to  guide 
you  and  bless  you.  This  letter  has  been  more  than  a  week 
in  hand  ;  I  have  been  called  from  it  I  suppose  ten  times, 
frequently  in  the  middle  of  a  period  or  a  line.  My  leisure, 
which  before  was  small,  is  now  reduced  almost  to  a  nothing. 
But  I  am  desirous  to  keep  up  my  correspondence  with  you, 
because  I  feel  an  affectionate  interest  in  you,  and  because  it 
pleased  God  to  put  it  into  your  heart  to  apply  to  me.  You 
cannot  think  how  your  first  letter  struck  me  :  it  was  so  un 
expected,  and  seemed  so  improbable  that  you  should  open 
your  mind  to  me,  I  immediately  conceived  a  hope  that  it 
would  prove  for  good.  Nor  am  I  yet  discouraged. 

When  you  have  leisure  and  inclination,  write  ;  I  shall 
always  be  glad  to  hear  from  you,  and  I  will  proceed  in 
answering  what  I  have  already  by  me,  as  fast  as  I  can.  But 
I  have  many  letters  now  waiting  for  answers,  which  must 
be  attended  to. 

I  recommend  you  to  the  blessing  and  care  of  the  great 
Shepherd  ;  and  remain,  &c. 


144  CARDIPHONIA  : 

LETTER    VIII 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  December  8,  1775. 

ARE  you  willing  I  should  still  call  you  so,  or  are  you 
quite  weary  of  me  ?  Your  silence  makes  me  suspect  thr 
latter.  However,  it  is  my  part  to  fulfil  my  promise,  and 
then  leave  the  event  to  God.  As  I  have  but  an  imperfect 
remembrance  of  what  I  have  already  written,  I  may  be 
liable  to  some  repetitions.  I  cannot  stay  to  comment  upon 
every  line  in  your  letter,  but  I  proceed  to  notice  such  passages 
as  seem  most  to  affect  the  subject  in  debate.  When  you 
speak  of  the  Scriptures  maintaining  one  consistent  sense, 
which,  if  the  Word  of  God,  it  certainly  must  do,  you  say  you 
read  and  understand  it  in  this  one  consistent  sense  ;  nay, 
you  cannot  remember  the  time  when  you  did  not.  It  is 
otherwise  with  me  and  with  multitudes  ;  we  remember  when 
it  was  a  sealed  book,  and  we  are  sure  it  would  have  been  so 
still,  had  not  the  Holy  Spirit  opened  our  understandings. 
But  when  you  add,  though  I  pretend  not  to  understand  the 
whole,  yet  what  I  do  understand  appears  perfectly  consistent, 
I  know  not  how  far  this  exception  may  extend  ;  for  perhaps 
the  reason  why  you  allow  you  do  not  understand  some  parts, 
is  because  you  cannot  make  them  consistent  with  the  sense 
you  put  upon  other  parts.  You  quote  my  words,  "  That 
when  we  are  conscious  of  our  depravity,  reasoning  stands 
us  in  no  stead."  Undoubtedly  reason  always  will  stand 
rational  creatures  in  some  stead  ;  but  my  meaning  is,  that 
when  we  are  deeply  convinced  of  sin,  all  our  former  reasonings 
upon  the  ways  of  God,  while  we  make  our  conceptions 
the  standard  by  which  we  judge  what  is  befitting  Him 
to  do,  as  if  He  were  altogether  such  an  one  as  ourselves— 
all  those  cobweb  reasonings  are  swept  away,  and  we  submit 
to  His  avrof  t<f>t)  without  reasoning,  though  not  without 
reason.  For  we  have  the  strongest  reason  imaginable  to 
acknowledge  ourselves  vile  and  lost,  without  righteousness 
and  strength,  when  we  actually  feel  ourselves  to  be  so. — 
You  speak  of  the  Gospel  term  of  justification.  This  term  is 
faith,  Mark  xvi.  16  ;  Acts  xiii.  39.  The  Gospel  propounds, 
admits  no  other  term.  But  this  faith,  as  I  endeavoured  to 
show  in  my  former  letter,  is  very  different  from  rational 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   145 

assent.  You  speak  likewise  of  the  law  of  faith,  by  which, 
if  you  mean  what  some  call  the  remedial  law,  which  we  are 
to  obey  as  well  as  we  can,  and  such  obedience,  together 
with  our  faith,  will  entitle  us  to  acceptance  with  God, 
I  am  persuaded  the  Scripture  speaks  of  no  such  thing.  Grace 
and  works  of  any  kind,  in  the  point  of  acceptance  with  God, 
are  mentioned  by  the  apostle  not  only  as  opposites  or  con 
traries,  but  as  absolutely  contradictory  to  each  other, 
like  fire  and  water,  light  and  darkness  ;  so  that  the  affirma 
tion  of  one  is  the  denial  of  the  other,  Rom.  iv.  5,  and  xi.  6. 
God  justifies  freely,  justifies  the  ungodly,  and  him  that 
worketh  not.  Though  justifying  faith  be  indeed  an  active 
principle,  it  worketh  by  love,  yet  not  for  acceptance.  Those 
whom  the  apostle  exhorts  to  work  out  their  own  salvation 
with  "  fear  and  trembling,"  he  considers  as  justified  already  ; 
for  he  considers  them  as  believers,  in  whom  he  supposed  God 
had  already  begun  a  good  work  ;  and  if  so,  was  confident 
he  would  accomplish  it  (Phil.  i.  6).  To  them,  the  con 
sideration  that  God  (who  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  believers) 
wrought  in  them  to  will  and  to  do,  was  a  powerful  motive  and 
encouragement  to  them  to  work,  that  is,  to  give  all  diligence 
to  His  appointed  means ;  as  a  right  sense  of  the  sin  that 
dwelleth  in  us,  and  the  snares  and  temptations  around  us, 
will  teach  us  still  to  work  with  fear  and  trembling.  You 
suppose  a  difference  between  Christians  (so  called)  who  are 
devoted  to  God  in  baptism,  and  those  who  in  the  first  ages 
were  converted  from  abominable  superstitions  and  idolatrous 
vices. — It  is  true,  in  Christian  countries  we  do  not  worship 
heathen  divinities  eo  nomine.  And  this  is  the  principal 
difference  I  can  find.  Neither  reason  nor  observation  will 
allow  me  to  think,  that  human  nature  is  a  whit  better 
now  than  it  was  in  the  apostle's  time.  I  know  no  kinds  or 
degrees  of  wickedness  which  prevailed  among  heathens, 
which  are  not  prevalent  among  nominal  Christians,  who  have 
perhaps  been  baptized  in  their  infancy  ;  and,  therefore,  as 
the  streams  in  the  life  are  equally  worldly,  sensual,  devilish, 
I  doubt  not  but  the  fountain  of  the  heart  is  equally  polluted 
and  poisonous  ;  and  that  it  is  as  true  as  it  was  in  the  days  of 
Christ  and  His  apostles,  that  unless  a  man  be  born  again,  he 
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  You  sent  me  a  sermon 
upon  the  new  birth,  or  regeneration,  and  you  have  several  of 
c.  K 


146  CARDIPHONIA  : 

mine  on  the  same  subject.  I  wish  you  to  compare  them  with 
each  other,  and  with  the  Scripture  ;  and  I  pray  God  to  show 
you  wherein  the  difference  consists,  and  on  which  side  the 
truth  lies. 

When  you  desire  me  to  reconcile  God's  being  the  author 
of  sin  with  His  justice,  you  show  that  you  misunderstand 
the  whole  strain  of  my  sentiments  ;  for  I  am  persuaded  you 
would  not  misrepresent  them.  It  is  easy  to  charge  harsh 
consequences,  which  I  neither  allow,  nor,  indeed,  do  they 
follow  from  my  sentiments.  God  cannot  be  the  author  of 
sin  in  that  sense  you  would  fix  upon  me  :  but  is  it  possible 
that,  upon  your  plan,  you  find  no  difficulty  in  what  the 
Scripture  teaches  us  upon  this  subject  ?  I  conceive  that 
those  who  were  concerned  in  the  death  of  Christ  were  very 
great  sinners  ;  and  that,  in  nailing  Him  to  the  cross,  they 
committed  atrocious  wickedness  :  yet,  if  the  apostle  may  be 
believed,  all  this  was  according  to  the  determinate  counsel 
and  foreknowledge  of  God,  Acts  ii.  28  ;  and  they  did  no 
more  than  what  His  hand  and  purpose  had  determined 
should  be  done,  chap.  iv.  28.  And,  you  will  observe,  that 
this  wicked  act  (wicked  with  respect  to  the  perpetrators) 
was  not  only  permitted,  but  foreordained  in  the  strongest 
and  most  absolute  sense  of  the  word  :  the  glory  of  God,  and 
the  salvation  of  men  depended  upon  its  being  done,  and 
just  in  that  manner,  and  with  all  those  circumstances,  which 
actually  took  place  ;  and  yet  Judas  and  the  rest  acted 
freely,  and  their  wickedness  was  properly  their  own.  Now, 
my  friend,  the  arguments  which  satisfy  you,  that  the  Scrip 
ture  does  not  present  God  as  the  author  of  this  sin,  in  this 
appointment,  will  plead  for  me  at  the  same  time  ;  and  when 
you  think  you  easily  overcome  me  by  asking,  "  Can  God 
be  the  author  of  sin  ?  "  your  imputation  falls  as  directly  upon 
the  Word  of  God  Himself.  God  is  no  more  the  author  of 
sin,  than  the  sun  is  the  cause  of  ice  ;  but  it  is  in  the  nature 
of  water  to  congeal  into  ice,  when  the  sun's  influence  is 
suspended  to  a  certain  degree.  So  there  is  sin  enough  in 
the  hearts  of  men  to  make  the  earth  the  very  image  of  hell, 
and  to  prove  that  men  are  no  better  than  incarnate  devils 
were  He  to  suspend  His  influence  and  restraint.  Sometimes, 
and,  in  some  instances,  He  is  pleased  to  suspend  it  consider 
ably  ;  and,  so  far  as  He  does,  human  nature  quickly  appears 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   147 

in  its  true  colours.  Objections  of  this  kind  have  been  re 
peated  and  refuted  before  either  you  or  I  were  born  ;  and 
the  apostle  evidently  supposes  they  would  be  urged  against 
His  doctrine,  when  he  obviates  the  question,  Why  doth  He 
yet  find  fault  ?  who  hath  resisted  His  will  ?  To  which  he 
gives  no  other  answer  than  by  referring  it  to  God's  sover 
eignty  and  the  power  which  a  potter  has  over  the  clay.  I 
think  I  have,  in  a  former  letter,  made  some  reply  to  the 
charge  of  positiveness  in  my  own  opinion.  I  acknowledge 
that  I  am  fallible  ;  yet  I  must  again  lay  claim  to  a  certainty 
about  the  way  of  salvation.  I  am  as  sure  of  some  things  as 
of  my  own  existence  ;  I  should  be  so,  if  there  was  no  human 
creature  upon  earth  but  myself.  However,  my  sentiments 
are  confirmed  by  the  suffrages  of  thousands  who  have  lived 
before  me,  of  many  with  whom  I  have  personally  conversed 
in  different  places  and  circumstances,  unknown  to  each 
other  ;  yet  all  have  received  the  same  views,  because  taught 
by  the  same  Spirit.  And  I  have,  likewise,  been  greatly 
confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  many  with  whom  I  have 
conversed  in  their  dying  hours.  I  have  seen  them  rejoicing 
in  the  prospect  of  death,  free  from  fears,  breathing  the  air 
of  immortality  :  heartily  disclaiming  their  duties  and 'per 
formances  ;  acknowledging  that  their  best  actions  were 
attended  with  evil  sufficient  to  condemn  them  :  renouncing 
every  shadow  of  hope,  but  what  they  derived  from  the  blood 
of  Christ,  as  the  sole  cause  of  their  acceptance  ;  yet  triumph 
ing  in  Him  over  every  enemy  and  fear,  and  as  sure  of  Heaven 
as  if  they  were  already  there.  And  such  were  the  apostle's 
hopes,  wholly  founded  on  knowing  whom  He  had  believed, 
and  his  persuasion  of  His  ability  to  keep  that  which  he  had 
committed  unto  Him.  This  is  faith ;  a  renouncing  of  every 
thing  we  are  apt  to  call  our  own,  and  relying  wholly  upon  the 
blood,  righteousness,  and  intercession  of  Jesus.  However, 
I  cannot  communicate  this  my  certainty  to  you  ;  I  only  tell 
you  there  is  such  a  thing,  in  hopes,  if  you  do  not  think  I 
wilfully  lie  both  to  God  and  man,  you  will  be  earnest  to  seek 
it  from  Him,  who  bestowed  it  on  me,  and  who  will  bestow 
it  upon  all  who  will  sincerely  apply  to  Him,  and  patiently 
wait  upon  Him  for  it. 

I  cannot  but  wonder,  that  while  you  profess  to  believe 
the  depravity  of  human  nature,  you  should  speak  of  good 

K  2 


148  CARDIPHONIA  : 

qualities  inherent  in  it.  The  word  of  God  describes  it  as 
evil,  only  evil,  and  that  continually.  That  there  are  such 
qualities  as  stoics  and  infidels  call  virtue,  I  allow.  God  has 
not  left  man  destitute  of  such  dispositions  as  are  necessary 
to  the  peace  of  society  ;  but  I  deny  there  is  any  moral 
goodness  in  them,  unless  they  are  founded  in  a  supreme 
love  to  God,  have  His  glory  for  their  aim,  and  are  produced 
by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  A  man  may  give  all  his  goods  to 
feed  the  poor,  and  his  body  to  be  burned,  in  zeal  for  the  truth, 
and  yet  be  a  mere  nothing,  a  tinkling  cymbal,  in  the  sight  of 
Him  who  seeth,  not  as  man  seeth,  but  judgeth  the  heart. 
Many  infidels  and  avowed  enemies  to  the  grace  and  Gospel 
of  Christ,  have  made  a  fair  show  of  what  the  world  calls 
virtue,  but  Christian  virtue  is  grace ,  the  effect  of  a  new  nature 
and  new  life  ;  and  works  thus  wrought  in  God,  are  as  differ 
ent  from  the  faint  partial  imitations  of  them  which  fallen 
nature  is  capable  of  producing,  as  a  living  man  is  from  a 
statue.  A  statue  may  express  the  features  and  lineaments 
of  the  person  whom  it  represents,  but  there  is  no  life. 

Your  comment  on  the  seventh  to  the  Romans,  latter  part, 
contradicts  my  feelings.  You  are  either  of  a  different 
make  and  nature  from  me,  or  else  you  are  not  rightly  ap 
prised  of  your  own  state,  if  you  do  not  find  the  apostle's 
complaint  very  suitable  to  yourself.  I  believe  it  applicable 
to  the  most  holy  Christian  upon  earth.  But  controversies 
of  this  kind  are  worn  thread-bare.  When  you  speak  of  the 
spiritual  part  of  a  natural  man,  it  sounds  to  me  like  the  living 
part  of  a  dead  man,  or  the  seeing  part  of  a  blind  man.  Paul 
tells  me,  that  the  natural  man  (whatever  his  spiritual  part 
may  be)  can  neither  receive  nor  discern  the  things  of  God. 
What  the  apostle  speaks  of  himself,  Rom.  vii.  is  no  more, 
when  rightly  understood,  than  what  he  affirms  of  all  who  are 
partakers  of  a  spiritual  life,  or  who  are  true  believers,  Gal. 
v.  17.  The  carnal  natural  mind  is  enmity  against  God,  not 
subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.  When 
you  subjoin,  "  Till  it  be  set  at  liberty  from  the  law  of  sin," 
you  do  not  comment  upon  the  text,  but  make  an  addition 
of  your  own,  which  the  text  will  by  no  means  bear.  The 
carnal  mind  is  enmity.  An  enemy  may  be  reconciled  :  but 
enmity  itself  is  incurable.  This  carnal  mind,  natural  man, 
old  man,  flesh,  for  the  expressions  are  all  equivalent,  and 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE   HEART       149 

denote,  and  include,  the  heart  of  man  as  he  is  by  nature,  may 
be  crucified,  must  be  mortified,  but  cannot  be  sanctified. 
All  that  is  good  or  gracious  is  the  effect  of  a  new  creation, 
a  supernatural  principle,  wrought  in  the  heart  by  the 
Gospel  of  Christ,  and  the  agency  of  His  Spirit  ;  and  till 
that  is  effected,  the  TO  v^ijXor,  the  highest  attainment,  the 
finest  qualifications  in  man,  however  they  may  exalt  him 
in  his  own  eyes,  or  recommend  him  to  the  notice  of  his 
fellow-worms,  are  but  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God,  Luke 
xvi.  15.  The  Gospel  is  calculated  and  designed  to  stain  the 
pride  of  human  glory.  It  is  provided,  not  for  the  wise  and 
the  righteous,  for  those  who  think  they  have  good  disposi 
tions  and  good  works,  to  plead,  but  for  the  guilty,  the  help 
less,  the  wretched,  for  those  who  are  ready  to  perish  ;  it 
fills  the  hungry  with  good  things,  but  it  sends  the  rich  empty 
away.  See  Rev.  iii.  17,  18. 

You  ask,  If  man  can  do  nothing  without  an  extraordinary 
impulse  from  on  high,  is  he  to  sit  still  and  careless  ?  By 
no  means :  I  am  far  from  saying,  Man  can  do  nothing, 
though  I  believe  he  cannot  open  his  own  eyes,  or  give  himself 
faith.  I  wish  every  man  to  abstain  carefully  from  sinful 
company  and  sinful  actions,  to  read  the  Bible,  to  pray  to 
God  for  His  heavenly  teaching.  For  this  waiting  upon  God 
he  has  a  moral  ability  ;  and,  if  he  persevere  thus  in  seeking, 
the  promise  is  sure,  that  he  shall  not  seek  in  vain.  But  I 
would  not  have  him  mistake  the  means  for  the  end  ;  think 
himself  good  because  he  is  preserved  from  gross  vices  and 
follies,  or  trust  to  his  religious  course  of  duties  for  acceptance, 
nor  be  satisfied  till  Christ  be  revealed  in  him,  formed  within 
him,  dwell  in  his  heart  by  faith,  and  till  he  can  say,  upon 
good  grounds,  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ :  nevertheless  I 
live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  I  need  not  tell  you 
these  are  Scriptural  expressions  ;  I  am  persuaded,  if  they 
were  not,  they  would  be  exploded  by  many  as  unintelligible 
jargon.  True  faith,  my  dear  Sir,  unites  the  soul  to  Christ, 
and  thereby  gives  access  to  God,  and  fills  it  with  a  peace 
passing  understanding,  a  hope,  a  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of 
glory  ;  teaches  us  that  we  are  weak  in  ourselves,  but  enables 
us  to  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might 
To  those  who  thus  believe,  Christ  is  precious — their  beloved ', 
they  hear  and  know  His  voice  ;  the  very  sound  of  His  name 


150  CARDIPHONIA  : 

gladdens  their  hearts,  and  He  manifests  Himself  to  them  as  He 
does  not  to  the  world.  Thus  the  Scriptures  speak,  thus  the  first 
Christians  experienced  ;  and  this  is  precisely  the  language 
which,  in  our  days,  is  despised  as  enthusiasm  and  folly. 
For  it  is  now  as  it  was  then  ;  though  these  things  are  revealed 
to  babes,  and  they  are  as  sure  of  them  as  that  they  see  the 
noon-day  sun,  they  are  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent, 
till  the  Lord  makes  them  willing  to  renounce  their  own  wis 
dom,  and  to  become  fools,  that  they  may  be  truly  wise,  i 
Cor.  i.  18,  19  ;  iii.  8  ;  viii.  2.  Attention  to  the  education  of 
children  is  an  undoubted  duty ;  and  it  is  a  mercy  when  it 
so  far  succeeds  as  to  preserve  them  from  gross  wickedness  ; 
but  it  will  not  change  the  heart.  They  who  receive  Christ 
are  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of 
the  will  of  man,  but  of  God,  John  i.  13. 

If  a  man  professes  to  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  I  am  willing  to 
believe  him,  if  he  does  not  give  me  proof  to  the  contrary  ; 
but  I  am  sure,  at  the  same  time,  no  one  can  love  Him  in  the 
Scriptural  sense,  who  does  not  know  the  need  and  the  worth 
of  a  Saviour ;  in  other  words,  who  is  not  brought,  as  a 
ruined,  helpless  sinner,  to  live  upon  Him  for  wisdom,  right 
eousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption.  They  who  love 
Him  thus,  will  speak  highly  of  Him,  and  acknowledge  that 
He  is  their  all  in  all.  And  they  who  thus  love  Him,  and 
speak  of  Him,  will  get  little  thanks  for  their  pains  in  such  a 
world  as  this  : — "  All  that  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  must 
suffer  persecution :  the  world  that  hated  Him  will  hate 
them."  And  though  it  is  possible,  by  His  grace,  to  put  to 
silence,  in  some  measure,  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men  ; 
and  though  His  providence  can  protect  His  people,  so  that 
not  a  hair  of  their  heads  can  be  hurt,  without  His  permission ; 
yet  the  world  will  show  their  teeth,  if  they  are  not  suffered  to 
bite.  The  apostles  were  accounted  babblers,  we  irepiKaOappara 

TOV     KOfffJLOV     KCLt     TrtlVTWV     TTf  pt\l/t)^(l ,         I      nCCd      not      pOUlt       OUt       tO 

you  the  force  of  these  expressions.  We  are  no  better  than 
the  apostles  ;  nor  have  we  reason  to  expect  much  better 
treatment,  so  far  as  we  walk  in  their  steps.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  is  a  sober  decent  way  of  speaking  of  God,  and 
goodness,  and  benevolence,  and  sobriety,  which  the  world 
will  bear  well  enough  ; — nay,  we  may  say  a  little  about 
Jesus  Christ,  as  ready  to  make  up  the  deficiencies  of  our 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   151 

honest  and  good  endeavours,  and  this  will  not  displease 
them.  But  if  we  preach  Him  as  the  only  foundation,  lay 
open  the  horrid  evils  of  the  human  heart,  tell  our  hearers 
that  they  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  have  no  better 
ground  of  hope  in  themselves  than  the  vilest  malefactors, 
in  order  to  exalt  the  glory  of  Jesus,  as  saving  those  who  are 
saved  wholly  and  freely  for  His  own  name's  sake  ;  if  we 
tell  the  virtuous  and  decent,  as  well  as  the  profligate,  that 
unless  they  are  born  again,  and  made  partakers  of  living 
faith,  and  count  all  things  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  know 
ledge  of  Christ,  they  cannot  be  saved  ;  this  the  world  cannot 
bear.  We  shall  be  called  knaves  or  fools,  uncharitable 
bigots,  and  twenty  hard  names.  If  you  have  met  with 
nothing  like  this,  I  wish  it  may  lead  you  to  suspect  whether 
you  have  yet  received  the  right  key  to  the  doctrines  of 
Christ ;  for,  depend  upon  it,  the  offence  of  the  cross  is  not 
ceased. 

I  am  grieved  and  surprised  that  you  seem  to  take  little 
notice  of  any  thing  in  the  account  of  my  deceased  friend, 
but  his  wishing  himself  to  be  a  Deist,  and  his  having  play- 
books  about  him  in  his  illness.  As  to  the  plays,  they  were 
Shakespeare's,  which,  as  a  man  of  taste,  it  is  no  great  wonder 
he  should  sometimes  look  into.  Your  remark  on  the  other 
point  shows,  that  you  are  not  much  acquainted  with  the 
exercises  of  the  human  mind,  under  certain  circumstances. 
I  believe  I  observed  formerly,  that  it  was  not  a  libertine 
wish.  Had  you  known  him,  you  would  have  known  one  of 
the  most  amiable  and  unblemished  characters.  Few  were 
more  beloved  and  admired  for  an  uniform  course  of  integ 
rity,  moderation,  and  benevolence  ;  but  he  was  discouraged. 
He  studied  the  Bible,  believed  it  in  general  to  be  the  word 
of  God  ;  but  his  wisdom,  his  strong  turn  for  reasoning,  stood 
so  in  his  way,  that  he  could  get  no  solid  comfort  from  it. 
He  felt  the  vanity  of  the  schemes  proposed  by  many  men 
admired  in  the  world  as  teachers  of  divinity ;  and  he  felt 
the  vanity  likewise  of  his  own.  He  was  also  a  minister,  and 
had  a  sincere  design  of  doing  good.  He  wished  to  reform 
the  profligate,  and  comfort  the  afflicted  by  his  preaching  ; 
but  as  he  was  not  acquainted  with  that  one  kind  of  preaching 
which  God  owns  to  the  edification  of  the  hearers,  he  found 
he  could  do  neither.  A  sense  of  disappointments  of  this 


152  CARDIPHONIA  : 

kind  distressed  him.  Finding  in  himself  none  of  that  peace 
which  the  Scripture  speaks  of,  and  none  of  the  influence  he 
hoped  for  attending  his  ministry,  he  was  led  sometimes  to 
question  the  truth  of  the  Scripture.  We  have  a  spiritual 
enemy  always  near,  to  press  upon  a  mind  in  this  desponding 
situation  :  nor  am  I  surprised  that  he  should  then  wish 
himself  a  Deist ;  since,  if  there  were  any  hope  for  a  sinner 
but  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  he  had  as  much  of  his 
own  goodness  to  depend  upon  as  most  I  have  known.  As 
for  the  rest,  if  you  could  see  nothing  admirable  and  wonder 
ful  in  the  clearness,  the  dignity,  the  spirituality  of  his  expres 
sions,  after  the  Lord  revealed  the  Gospel  to  him,  I  can  only 
say  I  am  sorry  for  it.  This  I  know,  that  some  persons 
of  sense,  taste,  learning,  and  reason,  and  far  enough  from 
my  setitiments,  have  been  greatly  struck  with  them.  You 
say,  a  death-bed  repentance  is  what  you  would  be  sorry 
to  give  any  hope  of.  My  dear  friend,  it  is  well  for  poor 
sinners  that  God's  thoughts  and  ways  are  as  much  above 
men's  as  the  Heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth.  We  agreed 
to  communicate  our  sentiments  freely,  and  promised  not 
to  be  offended  with  each  other's  freedom  if  we  could  help  it. 
I  am  afraid  of  offending  you  by  a  thought  just  now  upon 
my  mind,  and  yet  I  dare  not  in  conscience  suppress  it : 
I  must,  therefore,  venture  to  say,  that  I  hope  they  who 
depend  upon  such  a  repentance  as  your  scheme  points  out, 
will  repent  of  their  repentance  itself  upon  their  death-bed 
at  least,  if  not  sooner.  You  and  I,  perhaps,  should  have 
encouraged  the  fair-spoken  young  man,  who  said  he  had 
kept  all  the  commandments  from  his  youth,  and  rather 
have  left  the  thief  upon  the  cross  to  perish  like  a  villain  as 
he  lived.  But  Jesus  thought  differently.  I  do  not  encour 
age  sinners  to  defer  their  repentance  to  their  death-beds — 
I  press  the  necessity  of  a  repentance  this  moment.  But 
then  I  take  care  to  tell  them,  that  repentance  is  the  gift  of 
God  ;  that  Jesus  is  exalted  to  bestow  it ;  and  that  all  their 
endeavours  that  way,  unless  they  seek  to  Him  for  grace,  will 
be  vain  as  washing  a  blackmoor,  and  transient  as  washing 
a  swine,  which  will  soon  return  to  the  mire  again.  I  know 
the  evil  heart  will  abuse  the  grace  of  God  ;  the  apostle 
knew  this  likewise,  Rom.  iii.  8,  andjvi.  3.  But  this  did  not 
tempt  him  to  suppress  the  glorious  grace  of  the  Gospel, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   153 

the  power  of  Jesus  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  and  His  merci 
ful  promise  that  whosoever  cometh  unto  Him,  He  will  in 
no  wise  cast  out.  The  repentance  of  a  natural  heart  pro 
ceeding  wholly  from  fear,  like  that  of  some  malefactors, 
who  are  sorry,  not  that  they  have  committed  robbery  or 
murder,  but  that  they  must  be  hanged  for  it ;  this  undoubt 
edly  is  nothing  worth,  whether  in  time  of  health  or  in  a 
dying  hour.  But  that  /utravom,  that  gracious  change  of  heart, 
views,  and  dispositions,  which  always  takes  place  when 
Jesus  is  made  known  to  the  soul  as  having  died  that  the 
sinner  might  live,  and  been  wounded  that  he  might  be 
healed  ;  this,  at  whatever  period  God  is  pleased  to  afford 
and  effect  it  by  His  Spirit,  brings  a  sure  and  everlasting 
salvation  with  it. 

Still  I  find  I  have  not  done  ;  you  ask  my  exposition  of 
the  parables  of  the  talents  and  pounds  ;  but  at  present  I 
can  write  no  more.  I  have  only  just  time  to  tell  you,  that 
when  I  begged  your  acceptance  of  Omicron,  nothing  was 
farther  from  my  expectation  than  a  correspondence  with 
you.  The  frank  and  kind  manner  in  which  you  wrote, 
presently  won  upon  my  heart.  In  the  course  of  our  letters 
upon  Subscription,  I  observed  an  integrity  and  disinterest 
edness  in  you,  which  endeared  you  to,  me  still  more.  Since 
that  our  debates  have  taken  a  much  more  interesting  turn  ; 
I  have  considered  it  as  a  call,  and  an  opportunity  put  in 
my  hand,  by  the  especial  providence  of  Him  who  ruleth 
over  all.  I  have  embraced  the  occasion  to  lay  before  you 
simply,  and  rather  in  a  way  of  testimony  than  argumenta 
tion,  what  (in  the  main)  I  am  sure  is  truth.  I  have  done 
enough  to  discharge  my  conscience,  but  shall  never  think 
I  do  enough  to  answer  the  affection  I  bear  you.  I  have  done 
enough  likewise  to  make  you  weary  of  my  correspondence, 
unless  it  should  please  God  to  fix  the  subject  deeply  upon 
your  mind,  and  make  you  attentive  to  the  possibility  and 
vast  importance  of  a  mistake  in  matters  of  everlasting 
concernment.  I  pray  that  the  good  Spirit  of  God  may  guide 
you  into  all  truth.  He  only  is  the  effectual  Teacher.  I  still 
retain  a  cheerful  hope,  that  some  things  you  cannot  at 
present  receive,  will  hereafter  be  the  joy  and  comfort  of  your 
heart ;  but  I  know  it  cannot  be  till  the  Lord's  own  time. 
I  cannot  promise  to  give  such  long  answers  as  your  letters 


154  CARDIPHONIA  : 

require,  to  clear  up  every  text  that  may  be  proposed,  and 
to  answer  every  objection  that  may  be  started  ;  yet  I  shall 
be  glad  to  exchange  a  letter  now  and  then.  At  present  it 
remains  with  you  whether  our  correspondence  continues 
or  not,  as  this  is  the  third  letter  I  have  written  since  I  heard 
from  you,  and  therefore  must  be  the  last  till  I  do.  I 
should  think  what  remains  might  be  better  settled  vivA 
voce  ;  for  which  purpose  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  you,  or  ready 
to  wait  on  you  when  leisure  will  permit,  and  when  I  know  it 
will  be  agreeable  ;  but  if  (as  life  and  all  its  affairs  are 
precarious)  we  should  never  meet  in  this  world,  I  pray 
God  we  may  meet  at  the  right  hand  of  Jesus,  in  the  great 
day  when  He  shall  come  to  gather  up  His  jewels,  and  to 
judge  the  world.  There  is  an  endless  diversity  of  opinions 
in  matters  of  religion  ;  which  of  them  are  right  and  safe, 
and  will  lead  to  eternal  glory,  Dies  isle  indicabit.  I  am  still 
in  a  manner  lost  amidst  more  engagements  than  I  have 
time  to  comply  with  ;  but  I  feel  and  know  that  I  am,  &c. 


ELEVEN     LETTERS 

TO 

MR.    B ,   &c. 

LETTER   I 

MY  DEAREST  SIR,  September  28,  1774. 

I  SEE  the  necessity  of  having,  if  possible,  my  principles 
at  my  fingers'  ends,  that  I  may  apply  them  as  occasions 
arise  every  hour.  Certainly,  if  my  ability  was  equal  to  my 
inclination,  I  would  remove  your  tumour  with  a  word  or 
a  touch  ;  I  would  exempt  you  instantly  and  constantly 
from  every  inconvenience  and  pain  ;  but  you  are  in  the 
hands  of  One  who  could  do  all  this  and  more,  and  who  loves 
you  infinitely  better  than  I  can  do,  and  yet  He  is  pleased 
to  permit  you  to  suffer.  What  is  the  plain  inference  ? 
Certainly,  that  at  the  present  juncture,  He  to  whom  all  the 
concatenations  and  consequences  of  events  are  present  in 
one  view,  sees  it  better  for  you  to  have  this  tumour  than  to 
be  without  it ;  for  I  have  no  more  idea  of  a  tumour  arising, 
(or  any  other  incidental  trial  befalling  you,)  without  a 
cause,  without  a  need-be,  without  a  designed  advantage  to 
result  from  it,  than  I  have  of  a  mountain  or  pyramid  rising 
up  of  its  own  accord  in  the  middle  of  Salisbury  Plain.  The 
promise  is  express  and  literally  true,  that  all  things,  uni 
versally  and  without  exception,  shall  work  together  for  good 
to  them  that  love  God.  But  they  work  together ; — the 
smallest  as  well  as  the  greatest  events  have  their  place  and 
use  ;  like  the  several  stones  in  the  arch  of  a  bridge,  where 
no  one  would  singly  be  useful,  but  every  one  in  its  place  is 
necessary  to  the  structure  and  support  of  the  arch ;  or 
rather  like  the  movement  of  a  watch,  where,  though  there 
is  an  evident  subordination  of  parts,  and  some  pieces  have 


156  CARDIPHONIA  : 

a  greater  comparative  importance  than  others,  yet  the 
smallest  pieces  have  their  place  and  use,  and  are  so  far 
equally  important,  that  the  whole  design  of  the  machine 
would  be  obstructed  for  want  of  them.  Some  dispensations 
and  turns  of  divine  Providence  may  be  compared  to  the 
main  spring  or  capital  wheels,  which  have  a  more  visible, 
sensible,  and  determining  influence  upon  the  whole  tenour 
of  our  lives  ;  but  the  more  ordinary  occurrences  of  every 
day  are  at  least  pins  and  pivots,  adjusted,  timed,  and  suited 
with  equal  accuracy,  by  the  hand  of  the  same  great  Artist 
who  planned  and  executes  the  whole  ;  and  we  are  some 
times  surprised  to  see  how  much  more  depends  and  turns 
upon  them  than  we  were  aware  of.  Then  we  admire  His 
skill,  and  say  He  has  done  all  things  well.  Indeed,  with 
respect  to  His  works  of  providence,  as  well  as  of  creation, 
He  well  deserves  the  title  of  Maximus  in  minimis.  Such 
thoughts  as  these,  when  I  am  enabled  to  realise  them,  in 
some  measure  reconcile  me  to  what  He  allots  for  myself 
or  my  friends,  and  convince  me  of  the  propriety  of  that 
expostulation,  which  speaks  the  language  of  love  as  well  as 
authority,  "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God."  I  sym 
pathize  with  you  in  your  trial,  and  pray  and  trust  that  your 
Shepherd  will  be  your  Physician  ;  will  superintend  and 
bless  the  use  of  means  ;  will  give  you  in  His  good  time 
health  and  cure,  and  at  all  times  reveal  unto  you  abund 
ance  of  peace.  His  promises  and  power  are  necessary  for 
our  preservation  in  the  smoother  scenes  He  has  allotted  for 
us,  and  they  are  likewise  sufficient  for  the  roughest.  We 
are  always  equally  in  danger  in  ourselves,  and  always 
equally  safe  under  the  shadow  of  His  wings.  No  storms, 
assaults,  sieges,  or  pestilence  can  hurt  us,  till  we  have  filled 
up  His  appointed  measure  of  service  ;  and  when  our  work  is 
done,  and  He  has  ripened  us  for  glory,  it  is  no  great  matter 
by  what  means  He  is  pleased  to  call  us  home  to  Himself. 

I  have  only  room   to  present  our  joint  and  sincerest 
respects.     The  Lord  bless  you  all. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF   THE    HEART       157 


LETTER    II 

MY  DEAREST  SIR,  October  15,  1774. 

I  THINK  the  greatness  of  trials  is  to  be  estimated  rather 
by  the  impression  they  make  upon  our  spirits,  than  by  their 
outward  appearance.  The  smallest  will  be  too  heavy  for  us 
if  we  are  left  to  grapple  with  it  in  our  own  strength,  or, 
rather,  weakness  ;  and  if  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  put  forth  His 
power  in  us,  He  can  make  the  heaviest  light.  A  lively 
impression  of  His  love,  or  of  His  sufferings  for  us,  or  of  the 
glories  within  the  vail,  accompanied  with  a  due  sense  of 
the  misery  from  which  we  are  redeemed  ;  these  thoughts 
will  enable  us  to  be  not  only  submissive  but  even  joyful 
in  tribulations.  When  faith  is  in  exercise,  though  the 
flesh  will  have  its  feelings,  the  spirit  will  triumph  over  them. 
But  it  is  needful  we  should  know  that  we  have  no  sufficiency 
in  ourselves,  and,  in  order  to  know  it,  we  must  feel  it ; 
and,  therefore,  the  Lord  sometimes  withdraws  His  sensible 
influence,  and  then  the  buzzing  of  a  fly  will  be  an  overmatch 
for  our  patience  :  at  other  times,  He  will  show  us  what  He 
can  do  in  us,  and  for  us  :  then  we  can  adopt  the  apostle's 
words,  and  say,  I  can  do  and  suffer  all  things  through  Christ 
strengthening  me.  He  has  said,  My  grace  is  sufficient  for 
thee.  It  is  observable,  that  the  children  of  God  seldom 
disappoint  our  expectations  under  great  trials  ;  if  they  show 
a  wrongness  of  spirit,  it  is  usually  in  such  little  incidents 
that  we  are  ready  to  wonder  at  them.  For  which,  two 
reasons  may  be  principally  assigned.  When  great  trials 
are  in  view,  we  run  simply  and  immediately  to  our  all- 
sufficient  Friend,  feel  our  dependence,  and  cry  in  good  earnest 
for  help  ;  but,  if  the  occasion  seems  small,  we  are  too  apt 
secretly  to  lean  to  our  own  wisdom  and  strength,  as  if,  in 
such  slight  matters,  we  could  make  shift  without  Him. 
Therefore,  in  these  we  often  fail.  Again,  the  Lord  deals 
with  us  as  we  sometimes  see  mothers  with  their  children. 
— When  a  child  begins  to  walk,  he  is  often  very  self-import 
ant  :  he  thinks  he  needs  no  help,  and  can  hardly  bear  to  be 
supported  by  the  finger  of  another.  Now,  in  such  a  case, 
if  there  is  no  danger  or  harm  from  a  fall,  as  if  he  is  on  a 
plain  carpet,  the  mother  will  let  him  alone  to  try  how  he 


158  CARDIPHONIA  : 

can  walk.  He  is  pleased  at  first,  but,  presently,  down  he 
comes  ;  and  a  few  experiments  of  this  kind  convince  him 
he  is  not  so  strong  and  able  as  he  thought,  and  make  him 
willing  to  be  led.  But  was  he  upon  the  brink  of  a  river  or 
a  precipice,  from  whence  a  fall  might  be  fatal,  the  tender 
mother  would  not  trust  him  to  himself,  no,  not  for  one 
moment.  I  have  not  room  to  make  the  application,  nor  is  it 
needful.  It  requires  the  same  grace  to  bear,  with  a  right 
spirit,  a  cross  word,  as  a  cross  injury  ;  or  the  breaking  of  a 
china  plate,  as  the  death  of  an  only  son. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   III 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  November  23,  1774. 

I  HOPE  to  be  informed,  in  due  time,  that  the  Lord  has 
given  you  full  health  and  cure.  He  has  preserved  me 
hitherto  from  the  hands  of  surgeons  ;  but  I  feel  as  if  my 
flesh  would  prove,  as  you  say,  a  very  coward,  were  it  needful 
to  submit  to  a  painful  operation.  Yet  I  observe,  when 
such  operations  are  necessary,  if  people  are  satisfied  of  the 
surgeon's  skill  and  prudence,  they  will  not  only  yield  to  be 
cut  at  his  pleasure,  without  pretending  to  direct  him  where, 
or  how  long,  he  shall  make  the  incision,  but  will  thank  and 
pay  him  for  putting  them  to  pain,  because  they  believe 
it  for  their  advantage.  I  wish  I  could  be  more  like  them 
in  my  concerns.  My  body,  as  I  said,  is  through  mercy  free 
from  considerable  ailments,  but  I  have  a  soul  that  requires 
surgeon's  work  continually — there  is  some  tumour  to  be 
discussed  or  laid  open,  some  dislocation  to  be  reduced,  some 
fracture  to  be  healed,  almost  daily.  It  is  my  great  mercy, 
that  One  who  is  infallible  in  skill,  who  exercises  incessant 
care  and  boundless  compassion  towards  all  His  patients, 
has  undertaken  my  case  :  and,  complicated  as  it  is,  I  dare 
not  doubt  His  making  a  perfect  cure.  Yet,  alas  !  I  too 
often  discover  such  impatience,  distrust,  and  complaining 
when  under  His  hand  ;  am  so  apt  to  find  fault  with  the 
instruments  He  is  pleased  to  make  use  of  ;  so  ready  to  think 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   159 

the  saluatary  wounds  He  makes  unnecessary,  or  too  large  ; 
in  a  word,  I  show  such  a  promptness  to  control,  were  I  able, 
or  to  direct  His  operations,  that,  were  not  His  patience  beyond 
expression,  He  would  before  now  have  given  me  up.  I  am 

persuaded  no  money  would  induce  Mr.  to  attend  upon 

a  patient  who  should  act  towards  him  as  I  have  towards 
my  best  Physician.  Sometimes  I  indulge  a  hope  that  I  am 
growing  wiser,  and  think  surely,  after  such  innumerable 
proofs  as  I  have  had,  that  He  does  all  things  well,  I  shall  now 
be  satisfied  to  leave  myself  quietly  and  without  reserve 
to  His  disposal.  A  thousand  such  surrenders  I  have  made, 
and  a  thousand  times  I  have  interpretatively  retracted 
them.  Yet  still  He  is  gracious.  O,  how  shall  I  praise  Him 
at  last  ! 

I  thank  you  for  your  letter ;  I  never  receive  one  from 
you  without  pleasure,  and,  I  believe,  seldom  without  profit, 
at  least  for  the  time.  I  believe  with  you,  that  there  is  much 
of  the  proper  and  designed  efficacy  of  the  Gospel  mystery, 
which  I  have  not  yet  experienced.  And  I  suppose  they 
who  are  advanced  far  beyond  me  in  the  divine  life,  judge  the 
same  of  their  utmost  present  attainments.  Yet  I  have  no 
idea  of  any  permanent  state  in  this  life,  that  shall  make  my 
experience  cease  to  be  a  state  of  warfare  and  humiliation. 
At  my  first  setting  out,  indeed,  I  thought  to  be  better,  and 
to  feel  myself  better,  from  year  to  year ;  I  expected,  by 
degrees,  to  attain  everything  which  I  then  comprised  in 
my  idea  of  a  saint.  I  thought  my  grain  of  grace,  by  much 
diligence  and  careful  improvement,  would,  in  time,  amount 
to  a  pound  :  that  pound,  in  a  farther  space  of  time,  to  a 
talent,  and  then  I  hoped  to  increase  from  one  talent  to  many  ; 
so  that  supposing  the  Lord  should  spare  me  a  competent 
number  of  years,  I  pleased  myself  with  the  thoughts  of  dying 
rich.  But,  alas  !  these,  my  golden  expectations,  have  been 
like  South  Sea  dreams  ;  I  have  lived  hitherto  a  poor  sinner, 
and  I  believe  I  shall  die  one.  Have  I  then  gained  nothing 
by  waiting  upon  the  Lord  ?  Yes,  I  have  gained  that  which 
I  once  would  rather  have  been  without,  such  accumulated 
proofs  of  the  deceitfulness  and  desperate  wickedness  of  my 
heart,  as  I  hope,  by  the  Lord's  blessing,  have,  in  some 
measure,  taught  me  to  know  what  I  mean,  when  I  say, 
Behold,  I  am  vile  !  And,  in  connection  with  this,  I  have 


160  CARDIPHONIA  : 

gained  such  experience  of  the  wisdom,  power,  and  compas 
sion  of  my  Redeemer,  the  need,  the  worth  of  His  blood, 
righteousness,  ascension,  and  intercession,  the  glory  that 
He  displays  in  pardoning  iniquity  and  sin,  and  passing  by 
the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  His  heritage,  that  my 
soul  cannot  but  cry  out,  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee  ? 
Thus,  if  I  have  any  meaner  thoughts  of  myself,  Ezek. 
xvi.  63,  and  any  higher  thoughts  of  Him  than  I  had  twenty 
years  ago,  I  have  reason  to  be  thankful ;  every  grain  of  this 
experience  is  worth  mountains  of  gold.  And  if,  by  His 
mercy,  I  shall  yet  sink  more  in  my  own  esteem,  and  He  will 
be  pleased  to  rise  still  more  glorious  to  my  eyes,  and  more 
precious  to  my  heart — I  expect  it  will  be  much  in  the  same 
way.  I  was  ashamed  when  I  began  to  seek  Him  ;  I  am 
more  ashamed  now  ;  and  I  expect  to  be  most  of  all  ashamed 
when  He  shall  appear  to  destroy  my  last  enemy.  But,  oh  ! 
I  may  rejoice  in  Him,  to  think  that  He  will  not  be  ashamed 
of  me.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    IV 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  May  19,  1775. 

I  HOPE  you  will  find  the  Lord  present  at  all  times, 
and  in  all  places.  When  it  is  so,  we  are  at  home  every 
where  ;  when  it  is  otherwise,  home  is  a  prison,  and  abroad 
a  wilderness.  I  know  what  I  ought  to  desire,  and  what  I 
do  desire.  I  point  Him  out  to  others  as  the  all  in  all ;  I 
esteem  Him  as  such  in  my  own  judgment ;  but,  alas  ! 
my  experience  abounds  with  complaints.  He  is  my  sun  ; 
but  clouds,  and  sometimes  walls,  intercept  Him  from  my 
view.  He  is  my  strength  ;  yet  I  am  prone  to  lean  upon 
reeds  ;  He  is  my  friend  ;  but,  on  my  part,  there  is  such 
coldness  and  ingratitude,  as  no  other  friend  could  bear. 
But  still  He  is  gracious,  and  shames  me  with  His  repeated 
multiplied  goodness.  O  for  a  warmer  heart,  a  more  simple 
dependence,  a  more  active  zeal,  a  more  sensible  deliverance 
from  the  effects  of  this  body  of  sin  and  death  !  He  helps 
me  in  my  endeavours  to  keep  the  vineyards  of  others  ;  but, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   161 

alas  !  My  own  does  not  seem  to  flourish  as  some  do  around 
me.  However,  though  I  cannot  say  I  labour  more  abund 
antly  than  they  all,  I  have  reason  to  say  with  thankfulness, 
by  the  Grace  of  God,  I  am  what  I  am.  My  poor  story  would 
soon  be  much  worse,  did  not  He  support,  restrain,  and  watch 
over  me  every  minute.  Let  me  entreat  your  praises  and 
prayers,  on  the  behalf  of  me  and  mine  ;  and  may  the  Lord 
bless  you  and  yours  with  an  increase  in  every  good. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  V 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  September  2,  1776. 

THE  young  woman  I  spoke  of  is  still  living,  and  not 
much  weaker  than  when  I  left  her.  The  Lord  was  pleased 
to  relieve  her  on  Tuesday  evening,  and  she  was  comfortable 
the  remainder  of  the  week.  But  yesterday  her  conflicts 
returned,  and  she  was  in  great  distress.  The  enemy,  who 
always  fights  against  the  peace  of  the  Lord's  children,  finds 
great  advantage  against  them  when  their  spirits  are  weak 
ened  and  worn  down  by  long  illness,  and  is  often  permitted 
to  assault  them.  The  reasons  are  hidden  from  us,  but  they 
are  doubtless  worthy  of  His  wisdom  and  love,  and  they 
terminate  in  victory,  to  the  praise  of  His  glorious  grace, 
which  is  more  signally  manifested  by  His  leading  them 
safely  through  fire  and  water,  than  if  their  path  was  always 
smooth.  He  is  sovereign  in  His  dispensations,  and  appoints 
some  of  His  people  to  trials  and  exercises,  to  which  others, 
perhaps,  are  strangers  all  their  days.  Believers  are  sol 
diers  :  all  soldiers,  by  their  profession,  are  engaged  to  fight, 
if  called  upon  ;  but  who  shall  be  called  to  sustain  the  hottest 
service,  and  be  most  frequently  exposed  upon  the  field  of 
battle,  depends  upon  the  will  of  the  general  or  king.  Some 
of  our  soldiers  are  now  upon  hard  service  in  America,  while 
others  are  stationed  round  the  palace,  see  the  King's  face 
daily,  and  have  no  dangers  or  hardships  to  encounter. 
These,  however,  are  as  liable  to  a  call  as  the  others ;  but, 
if  not  called  upon,  they  may  enjoy,  with  thankfulness,  the 
c.  L 


162  CARDIPHOKIA  : 

more  easy  post  assigned  them.  Thus,  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation  allots  to  His  soldiers  such  stations  as  He  thinks 
proper.  He  has  a  right  to  employ  whom  He  will,  and 
where  He  will.  Some  are  comparatively  at  ease  ;  they  are 
not  exposed  to  the  fiercest  onsets,  but  live  near  His  presence  ; 
others  are,  to  appearance,  pressed  above  measure,  beyond 
strength,  so  that  they  despair  even  of  life  ;  yet  they  are 
supported,  and,  in  the  end,  made  more  than  conquerors 
through  Him  who  hath  loved  them.  Long  observation 
convinces  me,  that  the  temptations  which  some  endure, 
are  not  chastisements  brought  upon  them  by  unfaithfulness, 
or  for  anything  remarkably  wrong  in  their  spirit  or  walk ; 
I  often  rather  consider,  that  in  His  warfare  as  in  worldly 
wars,  the  post  of  danger  and  difficulty  is  the  post  of  honour, 
and,  as  such,  assigned  to  those  whom  He  has  favoured 
with  a  peculiar  measure  of  His  grace.  This  young  woman, 
in  particular,  was  always,  from  her  first  awakening,  remark 
ably  humble  and  spiritual,  and  possessed  of  a  broken  and 
contrite  spirit.  I  never  saw  her  in  a  wrong  spirit,  or  heard 
her  speak  an  unadvised  word.  Yet,  I  believe,  it  is  impossible 
to  express  the  agonies  she  had  endured.  The  effect  of  them 
is  visible.  Her  animal  frame  was  unable  to  sustain  the 
burden.  I  believe  they  were  the  immediate  cause  of  that 
illness  which  is  now  bringing  her  down  to  the  grave.  I  doubt 
not  but  these  cases  depend,  in  a  great  measure,  upon  con 
stitution  ;  but  then  the  temperament  of  our  bodies  depends 
upon  His  pleasure  ;  for  if  the  very  hairs  of  our  head  are 
numbered,  it  is  impossible  that  those  circumstances  of  our 
frame,  which,  by  the  near  connexion  between  body  and 
soul,  have  a  powerful  influence  upon  the  state  of  our  minds, 
can  escape  His  notice.  He  could  cure  such  bodily  disorders 
as  affect  the  peace  of  His  people  in  a  moment ;  yet  He  does 
not,  though  He  loves  them.  There  must  be,  therefore, 
wise  reasons  why  He  does  not  ;  and  though  we  know  them 
not  now,  we  shall  know  them  hereafter.  Possibly  some  suffer 
for  the  instruction  of  the  rest,  that  we  may  learn  to  be  more 
thankful  to  Him  for  the  peace  we  enjoy,  and  to  be  more 
humbly  dependent  upon  Him  for  the  continuance  of  it.  The 
Lord's  way  is  in  the  deep,  and  His  path  in  the  great  waters, 
untraceable  by  our  feeble  reasonings  ;  but  faith  brings  in 
a  good  report.  We  need  not  doubt  but  He  does  all  things 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   163 

well,  and,  in  due  time,  we  shall  see  it.  In  the  mean  while 
He  checks  our  vain  inquiries,  and  calls  upon  us  to  be  still 
and  know  that  He  is  God. 

I  brought  home  with  me  a  thankful  sense  of  the  kindness 
and  friendship  I  am  favoured  with  from  you  and  all  yours. 
I  account  tlu's  connexion  one  of  the  great  comforts  of  my 
life  ;  and  I  hope  it  has  been,  and  will  be,  not  only  pleasant, 
but  profitable  to  me.  Though  I  am  but  an  unapt  scholar, 
I  hope  I  am  not  unwilling  to  learn  ;  and  the  Lord,  in  His 
merciful  providence,  appoints  me  many  teachers.  There 
is  little  praise  due  to  us,  if  we  either  communicate  or  receive 
benefit  in  our  intercourse  with  our  fellow-disciples.  In  both 
we  are  but  instruments  under  the  influence  of  a  higher 
hand.  Were  Christians  to  meet  together  without  their 
Lord,  they  would  either  trifle  or  quarrel  their  time  away. 
But,  as  He  has  said,  "  Where  two  or  three  are  met,  there 
am  I  in  the  midst  of  them,"  we  may  well  be  glad  of  oppor 
tunities  of  coming  together.  And  though,  for  my  own  part, 
I  am  so  poor  an  improver  of  such  seasons,  that  the  recollec 
tion  of  them,  when  past,  is  generally  accompanied  with 
shame  and  regret,  yet  He  is  gracious  and  merciful,  and  sel 
dom  leaves  me  to  complain  that  they  were  wholly  in  vain. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   VI 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  July  22,  1777. 


THE  complaints  you  make  of  what  passes  within,  encour 
age  me  under  what  I  feel  myself.  Indeed,  if  those  whom 
I  have  reason  to  believe  are  more  spiritual  and  humble  than 
I  am,  did  not  give  some  testimony  that  they  find  their 
hearts  made  of  the  same  materials  as  mine  is,  I  should  be 
sometimes  hard  put  to  it  to  believe  that  I  have  any  part  or 
lot  in  the  matter,  or  any  real  knowledge  of  the  life  of  faith. 
But  this  concurrent  testimony  of  many  witnesses,  confirms 
me  in  what  I  think  the  Scripture  plainly  teaches,  that  the 

L  2 


1 64  CARDIPHONIA  : 

soil  of  human  nature,  though  many  spots  are  certainly  bettei 
weeded,  planted,  and  manured  than  others,  is  everywhere 
the  same — universally  bad  ;  so  bad  that  it  cannot  be  worse, 
and,  of  itself,  is  only  capable  of  producing  noxious  weeds, 
and  nourishing  venomous  creatures.  We  often  see  the 
effects  of  culture,  skill,  and  expense  will  make  a  garden 
where  all  was  desert  before.  When  Jesus,  the  good  Hus 
bandman,  encloses  a  soil,  and  separates  it  from  the  waste  of 
the  world,  to  make  it  a  residence  for  Himself,  a  change  pre 
sently  takes  place  ;  it  is  planted  and  watered  from  above, 
and  visited  with  beams  infinitely  more  cheering  and  fertiliz 
ing  than  those  of  the  material  sun. 

But  its  natural  propensity  to  bring  forth  weeds  still 
continues  ;  and  one  half  of  His  dispensations  may  be  com 
pared  to  a  company  of  weeders,  whom  He  sends  forth  into 
His  garden  to  pluck  up  all  which  He  has  not  planted  \vith  His 
own  hand,  and  which,  if  left  to  grow,  would  quickly  over 
power  and  overtop  the  rest.  But,  alas  !  the  ground  is  so 
impregnated  with  evil  seeds,  and  they  shoot  in  such  quick 
succession,  that,  if  this  weeding  work  were  not  constantly 
repeated,  all  former  labour  would  be  lost.  Hinc  illce  lachrymce  • 
Hence  arises  the  necessity  of  daily  crosses  and  disappoint 
ments,  daily  changes  of  frame,  and  such  multiplied  convic 
tions  that  we  are  nothing,  and  can  do  nothing  of  ourselves  ; 
all  are  needful,  and  barely  sufficient  to  prevent  our  hearts 
from  being  overrun  with  pride,  self-dependence,  and 
security.  Yours,  &c. 


LETTER   VII 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  November  6,  1777. 

You  say  you  are  more  disposed  to  cry  miserere  than 
hallelujah — Why  not  both  together  ?  When  the  treble 
is  praise,  and  heart-humiliation  for  the  bass,  the  melody 
is  pleasant,  and  the  harmony  good.  However,  if  not 
together,  we  must  have  them  alternately  ;  not  all  singing, 
not  all  sighing,  but  an  interchange  and  balance,  that  we 
may  be  neither  lifted  too  high,  nor  cast  down  too  low, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   165 

which  would  be  the  case  if  we  were  very  comfortable,  or 
very  sorrowful  for  a  long  continuance.  But  though  we 
change,  the  Saviour  changes  not.  All  our  concerns  are  in 
His  hands,  and,  therefore,  safe.  His  path  is  in  the  deep 
waters,  His  thoughts  and  methods  of  conduct  are  as  high 
above  ours,  at  the  heavens  are  high  above  the  earth  ;  and 
He  often  takes  a  course  for  accomplishing  His  purposes, 
directly  contrary  to  what  our  narrow  views  would  prescribe. 
He  wounds  in  order  to  heal,  kills  that  He  may  make  alive, 
casts  down  when  He  designs  to  raise,  brings  a  death  upon 
our  feelings,  wishes,  and  prospects,  when  He  is  about  to  give 
us  the  desire  of  our  hearts.  These  things  He  does  to  prove 
us ;  but  He  Himself  knows,  and  has  determined  before 
hand,  what  He  will  do.  The  proof,  indeed,  usually  turns 
out  to  our  shame.  Impatience  and  unbelief  show  their 
heads,  and  prompt  us  to  suppose  this  and  the  other  thing, 
yea,  perhaps,  all  things  are  against  us  ;  to  question  whether 
He  be  with  us,  and  for  us,  or  not.  But  it  issues,  likewise, 
in  the  praise  of  His  goodness,  when  we  find  that,  maugre 
all  our  unkind  complaints  and  suspicions,  He  is  still  working 
wonderfully  for  us,  causing  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness, 
and  doing  us  good  in  defiance  of  ourselves. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   VIII 
To  Mr.  B jun. 

DEAR  SIR,  August  24,  1774. 

THE  lowness  of  your  voice,  and  a  blameable  absence  of 
mind  on  my  part,  prevented  me  from  understanding  what 
you  said,  when  you  took  your  leave  of  me ;  nor  did  I, 
just  at  that  instant,  recollect  that  you  were  so  soon  going 
away.  I  could  not  othenvise  have  parted  with  you,  without 
a  particular  expression  of  my  warmest  wishes  for  your 
welfare,  and  commending  you,  with  an  emotion  which  my 
heart  always  feels  for  you,  to  our  God,  and  the  word  of  His 
grace.  Permit  me,  therefore,  by  writing,  to  assure  you,  so 
far  as  I  can  answer  for  myself,  that  the  request  you  were 


166  CARDIPHONIA  : 

pleased  to  make  for  my  remembrance,  will  not  be  forgotten 
by  me. 

You  are  going  abroad  ;  you  will  carry  with  you,  I  doubt 
not,  the  best  advice,  strengthened  by  the  authority  and 
affection  of  parents  whom  you  greatly  love,  and  greatly 
reverence.  This  may  seem  to  make  anything  a  stranger 
can  offer  unnecessary,  if  not  impertinent ;  yet,  confiding  in 
your  candour,  and  in  your  good  opinion  of  my  intention,  I 
shall  venture  to  let  my  pen  run  on  a  little  longer.  Not 
only  my  wishes,  but  my  hopes,  are  strong  in  your  behalf. 
Perhaps  there  is  hardly  a  young  man  in  the  kingdom,  born 
to  a  fortune,  who  is  setting  out  in  life  upon  equal  advantages 
with  yourself.  How  many  at  your  years,  who  have  been 
brought  up  in  affluence,  are  unprincipled,  uninstructed, 
and  have  already  entered  upon  a  course  of  dissipation  and 
folly,  in  which  it  is  impossible  they  themselves  can  find 
satisfaction,  and  which,  (unless  they  are  reclaimed  from  it 
by  an  Almighty  arm,)  will  infallibly  preclude  them  from 
usefulness  or  esteem  !  whereas,  your  early  years  have  been 
successfully  employed  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge,  and  your 
education  formed  under  the  most  animating  and  endearing 
influence  ;  and  the  Lord  has  furnished  you  with  every  natural 
ability  of  body  and  mind,  which  may  qualify  you  to  serve 
Him  in  that  situation  of  life  which  His  providence  has 
allotted  you. 

What  may  I  not,  then,  farther  hope  from  these  beginnings, 
especially  as  it  is  easy  to  observe,  that  He  has  given  you  an 
amiable  and  promising  disposition  of  spirit,  and  has  not  only 
preserved  you  from  being  hurried  down  the  stream  of  a 
giddy  world,  but  enabled  you  to  account  the  tender  restraint 
under  which  you  have  been  educated,  not  a  yoke,  but  a 
privilege. 

I  sympathise  with  you  at  what  you  will  feel  when  you  are 
first  separated  from  your  happy  family.  But  the  Lord  God, 
who  is  the  sun  and  shield  of  those  who  fear  Him,  will  be 
always  near  you  !  His  favour  is  the  one  thing  needful,  which 
no  outward  advantages  can  compensate  the  want  of ;  and 
the  right  knowledge  of  Him  is  the  one  thing  needful,  which 
no  human  teaching  can  communicate. 

Were  I  more  intimate  with  you,  I  could  have  asked  the 
question,  and,  perhaps  received  the  satisfaction  to  know,  that 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   167 

you  have  already  begun  to  consider  Him  in  this  light ; 
that  you  feel  a  vanity  in  science,  an  emptiness  in  creatures, 
and  find  that  you  have  desires,  which  only  He  who  gave  them 
can  satisfy.  I  trust  it  either  is,  or  will  be,  thus.  As  to 
learning,  though  it  is  useful  when  we  know  how  to  make  a 
right  use  of  it,  yet,  considered  as  in  our  own  power,  and  to 
those  who  trust  to  it,  without  seeking  a  superior  guidance, 
it  is  usually  the  source  of  perplexity,  strife,  scepticism,  and 
infidelity.  It  is,  indeed,  like  a  sword  in  a  madman's  hands, 
which  gives  him  the  more  opportunity  of  hurting  himself 
and  others.  As  to  what  the  world  calls  pleasure,  there  is 
so  little  in  it,  that  even  the  philosophers  of  old,  or  many  of 
them,  though  they  had  little  of  value  to  substitute  in  its 
room,  could  despise  it.  You  will,  perhaps,  meet  with  some 
who  will  talk  another  language,  who  will  pretend  to  be  too 
wise  to  submit  to  the  Bible,  and  too  happy  in  worldly 
things  to  expect  or  desire  any  happiness  beside ;  but,  I 
trust,  you  have  seen  enough  to  enable  you  to  treat  such 
persons  with  the  pity,  and  such  pretensions  with  the 
contempt,  they  deserve. 

Should  we  set  our  concerns  with  an  eternal  world  aside  for 
a  moment,  it  would  be  easy  to  demonstrate  that  religion  is 
necessary,  in  order  to  make  the  most  of  this  life,  and  to 
enjoy  temporal  good  with  the  highest  relish.  In  such  a 
world  as  this,  where  we  are  every  moment  liable  to  so  many 
unforeseen  and  unavoidable  contingencies,  a  man  without 
religion  may  be  compared  to  a  ship  in  a  storm,  without  either 
rudder,  anchor,  or  pilot.  But  then,  the  religion  which  only 
deserves  the  name,  must  come  from  above  ;  it  must  be 
suited  to  the  state  and  wants  of  a  sinner,  it  must  be  capable 
of  comforting  the  heart,  it  must  take  away  the  sting  and 
dread  of  death,  and  fix  our  confidence  upon  One  who  is 
always  able  to  help  us.  Such  is  the  religion  of  Jesus,  such 
are  its  effects,  and  such  are  the  criteria  whereby  we  are  to 
judge  of  the  various  forms  and  schemes  under  which  it  is 
proposed  to  us.  But  I  forbear  ;  I  am  only  reminding  you 
of  what  you  know,  and  what  you  have  known  to  be  verified 
by  living  and  dying  examples.  This  happiness,  my  dear  Sir, 
is  open  to  you,  to  all  who  seek.  He  is  enthroned  in  Heaven, 
but  prayer  will  bring  Him  down  to  the  heart.  Indeed,  He 
is  alwavs  beforehand  with  us  ;  and  if  we  feel  one  desire 


168  CARDIPHONIA  : 

towards  Him,  we  may  accept  it  as  a  token  that  He  gave  it 
us  to  encourage  us  to  ask  for  more. 

May  He  be  your  guide  and  guard,  be  with  you  at  all  times, 
and  in  all  places,  and  bring  you  back  to  your  father's  house 
in  peace  !  Should  I  live  to  see  that  day,  you  have  few  friends 
whose  congratulations  would  be  wanner,  or  more  sincere, 
than  mine  ;  and  if,  when  you  are  settled,  and  at  leisure,  you 
will  afford  me  a  letter  it  will  be  both  a  pleasure  and  a  favour, 
to,  dear  Sir,  Yours,  &c. 


LETTER   IX 
To  Miss  M B- 


MY  DEAR  Miss  M Nov.  n,  1775. 

OUR  late  visit  to  was  very  pleasant  to  myself ; 

if  anytliing  passed  that  was  of  service  to  you,  we  know  to 
whom  the  thanks  are  due  ;  for  we  can  neither  communicate 
nor  receive  anything  but  so  far  as  He  is  pleased  to  enable  us. 
One  reason  why  He  often  disappoints  us  is,  that  we  may 
learn  to  depend  on  Him  alone.  We  are  prone,  as  you  observe, 
to  rest  too  much  upon  sensible  comforts,  yet  they  are  very 
desirable  ;  only,  as  to  the  measure  and  seasons,  it  is  well 
to  be  submissive  to  His  will,  to  be  thankful  for  them  when 
we  have  them,  and  humbly  waiting  for  them  when  we  have 
them  not.  They  are  not,  however,  the  proper  ground  of 
our  hope  ;  a  good  hope  springs  from  such  a  sense  of  our 
wants,  and  such  a  persuasion  of  His  power  and  grace,  as 
engages  the  heart  to  venture,  upon  the  warrant  of  His  pro 
mises,  to  trust  in  Him  for  salvation.  In  a  sense,  we  are  often 
liindering  Him  by  our  impatience  and  unbelief ;  but, 
strictly  speaking,  when  He  really  begins  the  good  work,  and 
gives  us  a  desire  which  will  be  satisfied  with  nothing  short  of 
Himself,  He  will  not  be  hindered  from  carrying  it  on  ;  for  He 
has  said,  I  will  work,  and  none  shall  let  it.  Ah  !  had  it 
depended  upon  myself,  upon  my  wisdom  or  faithfulness,  I 
should  have  hindered  Him  to  purpose,  and  ruined  myself 
long  ago.  How  often  have  I  grieved  and  resisted  His 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   169 

Spirit !  but  hereby  I  have  learned  more  of  His  patience  and 
tenderness  than  I  could  otherwise  have  known.  He  knows 
our  frame,  and  what  effects  our  evil  nature,  fomented  by  the 
artifices  of  Satan,  will  have  ;  He  sees  us  from  first  to  last. 
A  thousand  evils  arise  in  our  hearts,  a  thousand  wrongnesses 
in  our  conduct,  which,  as  they  do  arise,  are  new  to  ourselves, 
and,  perhaps,  at  some  times  we  were  ready  to  think  we  were 
incapable  of  such  things  ;  but  none  of  them  are  new  to  Him, 
to  whom  past,  present,  and  future  are  the  same.  The 
foresight  of  them  did  not  prevent  His  calling  us  by  His  grace. 
— Though  He  knew  we  were  vile,  and  should  prove  un 
grateful  and  unfaithful,  yet  He  would  be  found  of  us ;  He 
would  knock  at  the  door  of  our  hearts,  and  gain  Himself 
an  entrance.  Nor  shall  they  prevent  His  accomplishing 
His  gracious  purpose.  It  is  our  part  to  be  abased  before 
Him,  and  quietly  to  hope  and  wait  for  His  salvation  in  the 
use  of  His  appointed  means.  The  power,  success,  and 
blessing,  are  wholly  from  Himself.  To  make  us  more 
sensible  of  this,  He  often  withdraws  from  our  perception  : 
and  as,  in  the  absence  of  the  sun,  the  wild  beasts  of  the  forest 
roam  abroad  ;  so  when  Jesus  hides  Himself,  we  presently 
perceive  what  is  in  our  hearts,  and  what  a  poor  shift  we  can 
make  without  Him  ;  when  He  returns,  His  light  chases  the 
evils  away,  and  we  are  well  again.  However,  they  are  not 
dead,  when  most  controlled  by  His  presence. 

It  is  your  great  and  singular  mercy,  my  dear  Miss,  that 
He  has  taught  you  to  seek  Him  so  early  in  life.  You  are 
entered  in  the  way  of  salvation,  but  you  must  not  expect 
all  at  once.  The  work  of  grace  is  compared  to  the  corn,  and 
to  a  building  ;  the  growth  of  the  one,  and  the  carrying 
forward  of  the  other,  are  gradual.  In  a  building,  for  in 
stance,  if  it  be  large,  there  is  much  to  be  done  in  preparing 
and  laying  the  foundation,  before  the  walls  appear  above 
ground  ;  much  is  doing  within,  when  the  work  does  not  seem, 
perhaps,  to  advance  without ;  and  when  it  is  considerably 
forward,  yet  being  encumbered  with  scaffolds  and  rubbish 
a  by-stander  sees  it  at  a  great  disadvantage,  and  can  form 
but  an  imperfect  judgment  of  it.  But  all  this  while  the  archi 
tect  himself,  even  from  the  laying  of  the  first  stone,  conceives 
of  it  according  to  the  plan  and  design  he  has  formed  ;  he 
prepares  and  adjusts  the  materials,  disposing  each  in  its 


170  CARDIPHONIA  : 

proper  time  and  place,  and  views  it,  in  idea,  as  already 
finished.  In  due  season  it  is  completed,  but  not  in  a  day. 
The  top-stone  is  fixed,  and  then  the  scaffolds  and  rubbish 
being  removed,  it  appears  to  others  as  he  intended  it  should 
be.  Men,  indeed,  often  plan  what,  for  want  of  skill  or 
ability,  or  from  unforeseen  disappointments,  they  are  unable 
to  execute.  But  nothing  can  disappoint  the  heavenly 
Builder  ;  nor  will  He  ever  be  reproached  with  forsaking  the 
work  of  His  own  hands,  or  beginning  that  which  He  could 
not,  or  would  not,  accomplish,  Phil.  i.  6.  Let  us,  therefore, 
be  thankful  for  beginnings,  and  patiently  wait  the  event. 
His  enemies  strive  to  retard  the  work,  as  they  did  when  the 
Jews,  by  His  order,  set  about  rebuilding  the  temple.  Yet 
it  was  finished,  in  defiance  of  them  all. 

Believe  me  to  be,  &c. 


LETTER   X 

MY  DEAR  Miss  M April  29,  1776. 

I  THANK  you  for  your  last ;  and  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord's 
goodness  to  you.  To  be  drawn  by  love,  exempted  from 
those  distressing  terrors  and  temptations  which  some  are 
beset  with  ;  to  be  favoured  with  the  ordinances  and  means  of 
grace,  and  connected  with  those,  and  with  those  only,  who 
are  disposed  and  qualified  to  assist  and  encourage  you  in 
seeking  the  Saviour — these  are  peculiar  advantages,  which 
all  concur  in  your  case  ;  He  loves  you,  He  deals  gently  with 
you,  He  provides  well  for  you,  and  accompanies  every  out 
ward  privilege  with  His  special  blessing  ;  and  I  trust  He 
will  lead  you  on  from  strength  to  strength,  and  show  you 
still  greater  things  than  you  have  yet  seen.  They  whom  He 
teaches  are  always  increasing  in  knowledge,  both  of  them 
selves  and  of  Him.  The  heart  is  deep,  and,  like  Ezekiel's 
vision,  presents  so  many  chambers  of  imagery,  one  within 
another,  that  it  requires  time  to  get  a  considerable  ac 
quaintance  with  it,  and  we  shall  never  know  it  thoroughly. 
It  is  now  more  than  twenty-eight  years  since  the  Lord  began 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   171 

to  open  mine  to  my  own  view  ;  and,  from  that  time  to  this, 
almost  every  day  has  discovered  to  me  something  which, 
till  then,  was  unobserved  ;  and  the  farther  I  go,  the  more 
I  seem  convinced  that  I  have  entered  but  a  little  way.  A 
person  that  travels  in  some  parts  of  Derbyshire  may  easily 
be  satisfied  that  the  country  is  cavernous  ;  but  how  large, 
how  deep,  how  numerous  the  caverns  may  be,  which  are 
hidden  from  us  by  the  surface  of  the  ground,  and  what  is 
contained  in  them,  are  questions  which  our  nicest  inquirers 
cannot  fully  answer.  Thus  I  judge  of  my  heart  that  it  is 
very  deep  and  dark,  and  full  of  evil ;  but  as  to  particulars, 
I  know  not  one  of  a  thousand. 

And  if  our  own  hearts  are  beyond  our  comprehension,  how 
much  more  incomprehensible  is  the  heart  of  Jesus  !  If  sin 
abounds  in  us,  grace  and  love  superabound  in  Him  :  His 
ways  and  thoughts  are  higher  than  ours,  as  the  heavens  are 
higher  than  the  earth ;  His  love  has  a  height,  and  depth, 
and  length,  and  breadth,  that  passeth  all  knowledge  ;  and 
His  riches  of  grace  are  unsearchable  riches,  Eph.  iii.  8,  18,  19. 
All  that  we  have  received,  or  can  receive,  from  Him,  or  know 
of  Him  in  this  life,  compared  with  what  He  is  in  Himself,  or 
what  He  has  for  us,  is  but  as  the  drop  of  a  bucket  compared 
with  the  ocean,  or  a  single  ray  of  light  in  respect  of  the  sun. 
The  waters  of  the  sanctuary  flow  to  us,  at  first,  almost  upon 
a  level,  ankle  deep,  so  graciously  does  the  Lord  condescend 
to  our  weakness  ;  but  they  rise  as  we  advance,  and  constrain 
us  to  cry  out  with  the  apostle,  O  the  depth  !  We  find  before 
us,  as  Dr.  Watts  beautifully  expresses  it, 

A  sea  of  love  and  grace  unknown, 
Without  a  bottom  or  a  shore. 

O  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  !  It  will  be 
growing  upon  us  through  time,  yea,  I  believe,  through 
eternity.  What  an  astonishing  and  what  a  cheering  thought, 
that  this  high  and  lofty  One  should  unite  Himself  to  our 
nature,  that  so,  in  a  way  worthy  of  His  adorable  perfections, 
He  might,  by  His  Spirit,  unite  us  to  Himself  !  Could  such  a 
thought  have  arisen  in  our  hearts,  without  the  warrant  of 
His  word  (but  it  is  a  thought  which  no  created  mind  was 
capable  of  conceiving  till  He  revealed  it)  it  would  have  been 
presumption  and  blasphemy  ;  but  now  He  has  made  it 


172  CARDIPHONIA  : 

known,  it  is  the  foundation  of  our  hope,  and  an  inexhaus 
tible  spring  of  life  and  joy.  Well  may  we  say,  Lord,  what 
is  man,  that  Thou  shouldst  thus  visit  him  ? 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   XI 

MY  DEAR  Miss  M September  3,  1776. 

WE  saw  no  danger  upon  the  road  homeward  ;  but  my 
judgment  tells  me  we  are  always  upon  the  brink  of  danger, 
though  we  see  it  not ;  and  that,  without  the  immediate 
protection  and  care  of  Him  who  preserveth  the  stars  in  their 
courses,  there  could  be  no  travelling  safely  a  few  miles,  nor 
even  sitting  in  safety  by  the  fire-side.  But  with  Him  we 
are  safe  in  all  places  and  circumstances,  till  our  race  is  done, 
and  His  gracious  purposes  concerning  us  in  the  present  life 
are  completely  answered  ;  then  He  will  call  us  home,  that 
we  may  see  His  face,  and  be  with  Him  for  ever,  and  then  it 
will  not  much  signify  what  messenger  He  shall  be  pleased 
to  send  for  us. 

While  He  took  care  of  us  abroad,  He  watched  over  our 
concerns  at  home,  likewise  ;  so  that  we  found  all  well  upon 
our  return,  and  met  with  nothing  to  grieve  us.  Many  go  out 
and  return  home  no  more,  and  many  find  distressing  things 
have  happened  in  their  absence  ;  but  we  have  to  set  up  our 
Ebenezer,  and  to  say,  Hitherto  He  has  helped  us.  Assist 
me  to  praise  Him.  The  Lord  is  leading  you  in  the  good  old 
way,  in  which  you  may  perceive  the  footsteps  of  His  flock 
who  have  gone  before  you.  They  had,  in  their  day,  the 
same  difficulties,  fears,  and  complaints  as  we  have,  and, 
through  mercy,  we  partake  of  the  same  consolation  which 
supported  and  refreshed  them  ;  and  the  promises  which  they 
trusted,  and  found  faithful,  are  equally  sure  to  us.  It  is 
still  true,  that  they  who  believe  shall  never  be  confounded. 
If  left  to  ourselves,  we  should  have  built  upon  sand  ;  but  He 
has  provided  and  revealed  a  sure  foundation,  removed  our 
natural  prejudices  against  it  ;  and  now,  though  rains,  and 
floods,  and  storms  assault  our  building,  it  cannot  fall,  for  it  is 
founded  upon  a  Rock.  The  suspicions  and  fears  which  arise 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   173 

in  an  awakened  mind,  proceed,  in  a  good  measure,  from 
remaining  unbelief  :  but  not  wholly  so  ;  for  there  is  a  jeal 
ousy  and  diffidence  of  ourselves,  a  wariness,  owing  to  a  sense 
of  the  deceitfulness  of  our  hearts,  which  is  a  grace  and 
a  gift  of  the  Lord.  Some  people  who  have  much  zeal,  but 
are  destitute  of  this  jealous  fear,  may  be  compared  to  a  ship 
that  spreads  a  great  deal  of  sail,  but  is  not  properly  ballasted, 
and  is,  therefore,  in  danger  of  being  overset  whenever  a  storm 
comes.  A  sincere  person  has  many  reasons  for  distrusting 
his  own  judgment ;  is  sensible  of  the  vast  importance  of  the 
case,  and  afraid  of  too  hastily  concluding  in  his  own  favour, 
and,  therefore,  not  easily  satisfied.  However,  this  fear, 
though  useful,  especially  to  young  beginners,  is  not  com 
fortable  ;  and  they  who  simply  wait  upon  Jesus,  are  gradu 
ally  freed  from  it,  in  proportion  as  their  knowledge  of  Him, 
and  their  experience  of  His  goodness,  increases.  He  has  a 
time  for  settling  and  establishing  them  in  Himself,  and  His 
time  is  best.  We  are  hasty,  and  would  be  satisfied  at  once, 
but  His  word  is,  Tarry  thou  the  Lord's  leisure.  The  work  of 
grace  is  not  like  Jonah's  gourd,  which  sprang  up  and  flour 
ished  in  a  night,  and  as  quickly  withered,  but  rather  like  the 
oak,  which,  from  a  little  acorn,  and  a  tender  plant,  advances, 
with  an  almost  imperceptible  growth,  from  year  to  year, 
till  it  becomes  a  broad,  spreading,  and  deep-rooted  tree,  and 
then  it  stands  for  ages.  The  Christian  oak  shall  grow  and 
flourish  for  ever.  When  I  see  any,  soon  after  they  appear  to 
be  awakened,  making  a  speedy  profession  of  great  joy,  be 
fore  they  have  a  due  acquaintance  with  their  own  hearts,  I 
am  in  pain  for  them.  I  am  not  sorry  to  hear  them  after 
wards  complain  that  their  joys  are  gone,  and  they  are 
almost  at  their  wits'  end  ;  for  without  some  such  check, 
to  make  them  feel  their  weakness  and  dependence,  I  seldom 
find  them  turn  out  well :  either  their  fervour  insensibly 
abates  till  they  become  quite  cold,  and  sink  into  the  world 
again  (of  which  I  have  seen  many  instances)  or,  if  they  do 
not  give  up  all,  their  walk  is  uneven,  and  their  spirit  has 
not  that  savour  of  brokenness  and  true  humility,  which 
is  a  chief  ornament  of  our  holy  profession.  If  they  do  not 
feel  the  plagues  of  their  hearts  at  first,  they  find  it  out 
afterwards,  and  too  often  manifest  it  to  others.  Therefore, 
though  I  know  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  free,  and  will  not  be 


174  CARDIPHONIA 

confined  to  our  rules,  and  there  may  be  excepted  cases  ; 
yet,  in  general,  I  believe  the  old  proverb,  "  Soft  and  fair 
goes  far,"  will  hold  good  in  Christian  experience.  Let  us 
be  thankful  for  the  beginnings  of  grace,  and  wait  upon  our 
Saviour  patiently  for  the  increase.  And,  as  we  have  chosen 
Him  for  our  physician,  let  us  commit  ourselves  to  His  manage 
ment  and  not  prescribe  to  Him  what  He  shall  prescribe  for 
us.  He  knows  us,  and  He  loves  us  better  than  we  do 
ourselves,  and  will  do  all  things  well. 

You  say,  "  It  never  came  with  power  and  life  to  my  soul, 
that  He  died  for  me."  If  you  mean,  you  never  had  any 
extraordinary,  sudden  manifestation,  something  like  a  vision 
or  a  voice  from  Heaven,  confirming  it  to  you,  I  can  say  the 
same.  But  I  know  He  died  for  sinners  ;  I  know  I  am  a 
sinner ;  I  know  He  invites  them  that  are  ready  to  perish  ; 
I  am  such  a  one  ;  I  know,  upon  His  own  invitation,  I  have 
committed  myself  to  Him  :  and  I  know  by  the  effects,  that 
He  has  been  with  me  hitherto,  otherwise  I  should  have  been 
an  apostate  long  ago  ;  and,  therefore,  I  know  that  He  died 
for  me  ;  for  had  He  been  pleased  to  kill  me  (as  He  justly 
might  have  done)  He  would  not  have  shown  me  such 
things  as  these. 

If  I  must  i>erish,  would  the  Lord 
Have  taught  my  heart  to  love  His  word  ? 
Would  He  have  given  me  eyes  to  see 
My  danger  and  my  remedy  ? 
Reveal'd  His  name,  and  bid  me  pray, 
Had  He  resolv'd  to  say  me  nay  ? 

I  know  that  I  am  a  child,  because  He  teaches  me  to  say, 
Abba,  Father.  I  know  that  I  am  His,  because  He  has 
enabled  me  to  choose  Him  for  mine.  For  such  a  choice  and 
desire  could  never  have  taken  place  in  my  heart,  if  He  had 
not  placed  it  there  Himself.  By  nature  I  was  too  blind  to 
know  Him,  too  proud  to  trust  Him,  too  obstinate  to  serve 
Him,  too  base-minded  to  love  Him.  The  enmity  I  was 
filled  with  against  His  government,  righteousness,  and  grace, 
was  too  strong  to  be  subdued  by  any  power  but  His  own. 
The  love  I  bear  Him  is  but  a  faint  and  feeble  spark,  but  it  is 
an  emanation  from  Himself :  He  kindled  it,  and  He  keeps  it 
alive  ;  and,  because  it  is  His  work,  I  trust  many  waters  shall 
not  quench  it. 

I  have  only  room  to  assure  you  that  I  am,  &c. 


FOUR     LETTERS 

TO    THE 

REV.   MR.   R 

LETTER   I 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  April  15,  1776. 

******* 

I  OFTEN  rejoice  on  your  behalf.  Your  call  out  of  the 
world  was  a  singularly  comfortable  instance  of  the  power  of 
grace.  And  when  I  consider  the  difficulties  and  snares  of 
your  situation,  and  that  you  have  been  kept  in  the  middle 
path,  preserved  from  undue  compliances  on  the  one  hand 
and  unnecessary  singularities  on  the  other,  I  cannot  doubt 
but  the  Lord  has  hitherto  helped  and  guided  you.  Indeed, 
you  have  need  of  His  guidance.  At  your  years,  and  with 
your  expectations  in  life,  your  health  firm,  and  your 
natural  spirits  lively,  you  are  exposed  to  many  snares : 
yet,  if  the  Lord  keeps  you  sensible  of  your  danger,  and  de 
pendent  upon  Him,  you  will  walk  safely.  Your  security, 
succcsc,  and  comfort,  depend  upon  Him  ;  and  in  the  way 
of  means,  'chiefly  upon  your  being  preserved  in  a  humble 
sense  of  v;  ^ir  own  weakness.  It  is  written,  "  Fear  not,  I 
am  with  thee."  It  is  written  again,  "  Blessed  is  the  man 
who  feareth  always."  There  is  a  perfect  harmony  in  those 
seemingly  different  texts.  May  the  wisdom  that  cometh 
from  above  teac/  you  and  me  to  keep  them  both  united  in 
our  view.  If  the  Lord  be  with  us,  we  have  no  cause  of  fear. 
His  eye  is  upon  us,  His  arm  over  us,  His  ear  open  to  our  prayer 
—His  grace  sufficient,  His  promise  unchangeable.  Under 
His  protection,  though  the  path  of  duty  should  lie  through 
fire  and  water,  we  may  cheerfully  and  confidently  pursue  it. 
On  the  other  hand,  our  hearts  are  so  deceitful,  fallible, 

175 


176  CARDIPHONIA  : 

and  frail ;  our  spiritual  enemies  so  subtle,  watchful,  and 
powerful ;  and  they  derive  so  many  advantages  from  the 
occasions  of  every  day,  in  which  we  are  unavoidably  and 
unexpectedly  concerned ;  there  is  so  much  combustible 
within,  and  so  many  temptations  arising  from  without, 
capable  of  setting  all  in  a  flame,  that  we  cannot  be  too 
jealous  of  ourselves  and  our  circumstances.  The  Duke  of 
Devonshire's  motto  (if  I  mistake  not)  well  suits  the  Christian, 
Cavendo  tutus.  When  we  can  say  in  the  Psalmist's  spirit, 
Hold  thou  me  up,  we  may  warrantably  draw  his  conclusion — 
and  I  shall  be  safe  ;  but  the  moment  we  lean  to  our  own 
understanding,  we  are  in  imminent  danger  of  falling.  The 
enemy  who  wars  against  our  souls  is  a  consummate  master 
in  his  way,  fertile  in  stratagems,  and  equally  skilful  in  carry 
ing  on  his  assaults  by  sap  or  by  storm.  He  studies  us,  if  I 
may  so  say,  all  around,  to  discover  our  weak  sides  ;  and 
he  is  a  very  Proteus  for  changing  his  appearances,  and  can 
appear  as  a  sly  serpent,  a  roaring  lion,  or  an  angel  of  light,  as 
best  suits  his  purpose.  It  is  a  great  mercy  to  be  in  some 
measure  acquainted  with  his  devices,  and  aware  of  them. 
They  who  wait  humbly  upon  the  Lord,  and  consult  care 
fully  at  His  word  and  throne  of  grace,  are  made  wiser  than 
their  enemy,  and  enabled  to  escape  and  withstand  his  wiles. 
I  know  you  will  not  expect  me  to  apologize  for  putting  you 
in  mind  of  these  things,  though  you  know  them.  I  have  a 
double  warrant :  the  love  I  bear  you,  and  the  Lord's  com 
mand,  Heb.  iii.  13.  Use  the  like  freedom  with  me  ;  I 
need  it,  and  hope  to  be  thankful  for  it,  and  accept  it  as  one 
of  the  best  proofs  of  friendship. 

The  Lord  bless  and  keep  you.     Pray  for  us,  and  believe 
me  to  be  sincerely  yours.  /  « 


LETTER   II 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  Jtdy  13,  1776. 

THE  Lord,  who  mercifully  called  you  out  of  a  state  of 
thoughtless  dissipation,  and  has  hitherto  been  with  you,  will, 
I  trust,  sweeten  all  your  trials,  and  cause  His  light  to  shine 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   177 

upon  your  paths.  It  seems  probable,  that  if  you  pay  a  just 
regard  to  your  father's  negative,  which,  I  really  think,  He 
has  a  right  to  expect  from  you,  and,  at  the  same  time,  make 
a  steady  and  conscientious  use  of  that  negative,  which  he 
generously  allows  you  to  put  upon  his  proposals,  to  which,  I 
think,  you  have  an  equal  right — I  say,  while  things  remain 
in  this  situation,  and  you  continue  to  think  differently,  it 
seems  probable  that  the  hour  of  your  exchanging  a  single 
for  the  married  state  is  yet  at  some  distance.  But  let  not 
this  grieve  you.  The  Lord  is  all-sufficient.  A  lively  sense 
of  His  love,  a  deep  impression  of  eternity,  a  heart  filled  with 
zeal  for  His  cause,  and  a  thirst  for  the  good  of  souls,  will, 
I  hope,  enable  you  to  make  a  cheerful  sacrifice  of  whatever 
has  no  necessary  connection  with  your  peace  and  His  service. 
And  you  may  rest  assured,  that  whenever  He  who  loves 
you  better  than  you  do  yourself,  sees  it  best  for  you,  upon  the 
whole,  to  change  your  condition,  He  will  bring  it  about,  He 
will  point  out  the  person,  prepare  the  means,  and  secure  the 
success,  by  His  providence,  and  the  power  He  has  over 
every  heart.  And  you  shall  see  that  all  previous  difficulties 
were  either  gracious  preventions,  which  He  threw  in  the 
way  to  prevent  your  taking  a  wrong  step,  or  temporary 
bars,  which,  by  His  removing  them  afterwards,  should  give 
you  opportunity  of  more  clearly  perceiving  His  care  and 
interposition  in  your  favour.  In  the  meantime,  remember 
your  high  calling — you  are  a  minister  and  ambassador  of 
Christ :  you  are  entrusted  with  the  most  honourable  and 
important  employment  that  can  engage  and  animate  the 

heart  Of  man.       Tadra  ^tXtra,  iv  rwroie  t<70t'  nri^ivt  avroi^.* 

*Fiil<jd  and  fired  with  a  constraining  sense  of  the  love 
of  Je*-^,  and  the  worth  of  souls  ;  impressed  with  an  ardour 
to  -ia..^s.,var  into  Satan's  kingdom,  to  storm  his  strongholds, 
and  rescue  his  captives — you  will  have  little  leisure  to  think 
of  anything  eise.  How  does  the  love  of  glory  stimulate  the 
soldier,  make  him  forget  and  forego  a  thousand  personal 
tendernesses,  and  prompt  him  to  cross  oceans,  to  traverse 
deserts,  to  scale  mountains,  and  plunge  into  the  greatest 
hardships  and  the  thickest  dangers  !  They  do  it  for  a 
corruptible  crown,  a  puff  of  breath,  an  empty  fame  ;  their 

*  i  Tim.  iv.  15,  16. 

C.  M 


178  CARDIPHONIA  : 

highest  prospect  is  the  applause  and  favour  of  their  prince. 
We,  likewise,  are  soldiers  ;  we  have  a  Prince  and  Captain 
who  deserves  our  all.  They  who  know  Him,  and  have 
hearts  to  conceive  of  His  excellence,  and  to  feel  their  obliga 
tions  to  Him,  cannot  indeed  seek  their  own  glory,  but  His 
glory  is  dearer  to  them  than  a  thousand  lives.  They  owe 
Him  their  souls,  for  He  redeemed  them  with  blood,  His  own 
blood  :  and,  by  His  grace,  He  subdued  and  pardoned  them 
when  they  were  rebels,  and  in  arms  against  Him.  There 
fore  they  are  not  their  own,  they  would  not  be  their  own. 
When  His  standard  is  raised,  when  His  enemies  are  in 
motion,  when  His  people  are  to  be  rescued,  they  go  forth 
clothed  with  His  panoply,  they  fight  under  His  eye,  they  are 
sure  of  His  support,  and  He  shows  them  the  conqueror's 
crown.  O  when  they  think  of  that  '.v  c*\i  ayafa*  with 
which  He  has  promised  to  welcome  them  home  when  the 
campaign  is  over,  hard  things  seem  easy,  and  bitter  things 
sweet ;  they  count  nothing,  not  even  their  own  lives,  dear, 
so  that  they  may  finish  their  course  with  joy.  May  the 
Lord  make  us  thus  minded  ;  give  us  a  hearty  concern  for 
His  business,  and  He  has  engaged  to  take  care  of  ours  ; 
and  nothing  that  can  conduce  to  our  real  comfort  and 
usefulness  shall  be  withheld. 

Believe  me  to  be  sincerely  yours. 


LETTER   III 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  December  21, 

YOUR  letter  brought  me  tidings  of  joy,  <tyd  then 
furnished  me  with  materials  for  a  bonfire  upo*1  the  occasion. 
It  was  an  act  of  passive  obedience  to  burn  it,  but  I  did  obey. 
I  congratulate  you  upon  the  happy  issue  to  which  the  Lord 
has  brought  your  affairs.  I  see  that  His  good  Spirit  and 
good  providence  have  been,  and  are,  with  you.  I  doubt  not 

but  your  union  with  Miss—  will  be  a  mutual  blessing, 

and,  on  your  part,  heightened  by  being  connected  with  such 


*  Well  done,  good  servant. 


THE    UTTERANCE    OF    THE    HEART        170. 

a  family.  I  could  enlarge  upon  this  head,  if  my  letter, 
likewise,  was  to  be  burnt  as  soon  as  you  have  read  it.  I 
look  upon  the  friendship  the  Lord  has  given  me  there,  as 
one  of  my  prime  privileges  ;  and  I  hope  I  shall  always 
be  thankful  that  it  proved  a  means  of  introducing  you 
into  it. 

I  congratulate  you,  likewise,  upon  your  accession  to 
,  not  because  it  is  a  good  living,  in  a  genteel  neighbour 
hood,  and  a  fine  country  ;  but  because  I  believe  the  Lord 
sends  you  there  for  fulfilling  the  desires  He  has  given  you, 
of  being  useful  to  souls.  Church  preferment,  in  any  other 
view,  is  dreadful :  and  I  would  as  soon  congratulate  a  man 
upon  seeing  a  millstone  tied  about  his  neck,  to  sink  him  into 
the  depths  of  the  sea,  as  upon  his  obtaining  what  is  called 
a  good  living,  except  I  thought  him  determined  to  spend  and 
be  spent  in  the  cause  of  the  Gospel.  A  parish  is  an  awful 
millstone,  indeed,  to  those  who  see  nothing  valuable  in  the 
flock  but  the  fleece  ;  but  the  Lord  has  impressed  your 
heart  with  a  sense  of  the  glory  and  importance  of  His 
truth,  and  the  worth  of  souls,  and  animated  your  zeal  by 
the  most  powerful  motive,  the  knowledge  of  His  constraining 
love.  Your  case  is  extraordinary.  Perhaps,  when  you 
review  in  your  mind  the  circle  of  your  former  gay  acquaint- 
tance,  you  may  say  with  Job's  servant,  "  I  only  am  escaped 
alive  "  :  the  rest  are  either  removed  into  an  eternal  state, 
or  are  still  hurrying  down  the  stream  of  dissipation,  and 
living  without  God  in  the  world.  Yet  there  was  a  time 
when  there  seemed  no  more  probability  on  your  side  than 
on  theirs,  that  you  should  obtain  mercy,  and  be  called  to 
the  honour  of  preaching  the  glorious  Gospel.  You  are 
settcv,'  out  with  every  possible  advantage — in  early  life, 
with  ^  cheerful  flow  of  spirits,  affluent  circumstances ;  and 
now,  td  crown  all,  the  Lord  gives  you  the  very  choice  of 
your  heart  in  a  partner ;  one  who,  besides  deserving  and 
meeting  your  affection,  will,  I  am  persuaded,  be  a  real  help 
mate  to  you  in  your  spiritual  walk.  How  much  is  here  to  be 
thankful  for  ! 

I  trust  the  Lord  has  given  you,  and  will  maintain  in  you, 
a  right  spirit,  so  as  not  to  rest  in  His  gifts,  but  to  hold  them 
in  connection  with  the  love  and  favour  of  the  Giver.  It  is  a 
low  time  with  us  when  the  greatest  assemblage  of  earthly 

M  2 


i8o  CARDIPHONIA  : 

blessings  can  seem  to  satisfy  us  without  a  real  communion 
with  Him.  His  grace  is  sufficient  for  you  ;  but,  undoubt 
edly,  such  a  scene  of  prosperity  as  seems  to  lie  before  you, 
is  full  of  snares,  and  calls  for  a  double  effort  of  watchfulness 
and  prayer.  Your  situation  will  fix  many  eyes  upon  you, 
and  Satan  will,  doubtless,  watch  you,  and  examine  every 
corner  of  the  hedge  around  you,  to  see  if  he  can  find  a  gap 
by  which  to  enter.  We  have  but  few  rich  Gospel-Ministers  ; 
but  it  is  too  evident  that  he  has  found  a  way  to  damp  the 
zeal,  and  hurt  the  spirits,  of  some  of  those  few,  who,  for  a 
time,  acted  nobly,  and  seemed  to  walk  out  of  the  reach  of 
the  allurements  of  the  world.  I  am  not  jealous  of  you  ;  I 
feel  a  comfortable  persuasion  that  the  Lord  has  taken  a 
fast  hold  of  your  heart,  and  given  you  a  fast  hold  of  His 
almighty  arm  :  yet  I  believe  you  will  not  be  displeased  with 
me  for  dropping  a  hint  of  this  kind,  and  at  this  time. 

You  have  heard  of  the  trial  with  which  the  Lord  has 
been  pleased  to  visit  us  ;  it  still  continues,  though  con 
siderably  alleviated.  It  is  tempered  with  many  mercies, 
and,  I  hope,  He  disposes  us,  in  a  measure,  to  submission.  I 
trust  it  will  be  for  good.  My  dear  friend,  you  are  now  com 
ing  into  my  school,  where  you  will  learn,  as  occasions  offer, 
to  feel  more  in  the  person  of  another  than  in  your  own. 
But  be  not  discouraged  ;  the  Lord  only  afflicts  for  our 
good.  It  is  necessary  that  our  sharpest  trials  should  some 
times  spring  from  our  dearest  comforts,  else  we  should  be  in 
danger  of  forgetting  ourselves,  and  setting  up  our  rest 
here.  In  such  a  world,  and  with  such  hearts  as  we  have, 
we  shall  often  need  something  to  prevent  our  cleaving 
to  the  dust,  to  quicken  us  to  prayer,  and  to  make  us  feel 
that  our  dependence  for  one  hour's  peace  is  upon  tj^?,  i,ord 
alone.  I  am  ready  to  think  I  have  known  as  mucj^of  die 
good  and  happiness  which  this  world  can  afford,  as  most 
people  who  live  in  it.  I  never  saw  the  person  with  whom 
I  wished  to  exchange  in  temporals.  And,  for  many  years 
past,  I  have  thought  my  trials  have  been  light  and  few, 
compared  with  what  many,  or  most,  of  the  Lord's  people 
have  endured.  And  yet,  though  in  the  main  possessed  of 
my  own  wishes,  when  I  look  back  upon  the  twenty-seven 
years  past,  I  am  ready  to  style  them,  with  Jacob,  few  and 
evil  ;  and  to  give  the  sum-total  of  their  contents  in  Solomon's 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   181 

words — All  is  vanity.  If  I  take  these  years  to  pieces,  I  see 
a  great  part  of  them  was  filled  up  with  sins,  sorrows,  and 
inquietudes.  The  pleasures  too  are  gone,  and  have  no  more 
real  existence  than  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  dream.  The 
shadows  of  the  evening  will  soon  begin  to  come  over  us  ; 
and,  if  our  lives  are  prolonged,  a  thousand  pains  and  infirmi 
ties,  from  which  the  Lord  has,  in  a  remarkable  measure, 
exempted  us  hitherto,  will  probably  overtake  us  ;  and,  at 
last,  we  must  feel  the  parting  pang.  Sic  transit  gloria  mundi. 
Sin  has  so  envenomed  the  soil  of  this  earth,  that  the  amaranth 
will  not  grow  upon  it.  But  we  are  hastening  to  a  better 
world,  and  bright  unclouded  skies,  where  our  sun  will  go 
down  no  more,  and  all  tears  shall  be  wiped  from  our  eyes. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   IV 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  September  27,  1777. 

MR.  called  on  us  Thursday  evening,  and,  from 

that  hour,  my  thoughts,  when  awake,  have  seldom  been 

absent  from  .     Few  people  are  better  qualified  to 

feel  for  you,  yourself  and  the  family  excepted  ;  perhaps, 
there  is  no  person  living  more  nearly  interested  in  what 
concerns  Mrs.  -  -  than  myself.  I  could  not,  therefore,  at 
such  a  time  as  this,  refrain  from  writing  ;  and  glad  should  I 
be,  if  the  Lord  may  help  me  to  drop  a  suitable  word,  and 
accompany  it  with  a  blessing  to  you  in  the  reading. 

I  .£1  glad  to  be  assured  (though  I  expected  no  less)  that 
Mrs.  -\ —  happily  feels  herself  safe  in  the  Lord's  hand, 
and  undo,  the  care  of  the  good  Shepherd  and  Saviour,  to 
whom  she  has  often  committed  herself ;  and  finds  Him  faithful 
to  His  promise,  giving  her  strength  in  her  soul  according  to 
her  day,  and  enabling  her  quietly  to  submit  to  His  holy, 
wise,  and  gracious  will.  And  it  is  my  prayer,  that  He  may 
strengthen  you  likewise,  and  reveal  His  own  all-sufficiency 
so  clearly  and  powerfully  to  your  heart,  that  you  may  not 
be  afraid  of  any  event,  but  cheerfully  rely  upon  Him,  to  be 


r82  CARDIPHONIA  .' 

all  that  to  you,  in  every  circumstance  and  change,  which 
His  promise  warrants  you  to  expect. 

I  am  willing  to  hope  that  this  is  but  a  short  season  of 
anxiety,  appointed  for  the  exercise  of  your  faith  and  patience, 
and  to  give  you,  in  his  good  time,  a  signal  proof  of  His  power 
and  goodness  in  answering  prayer.  He  sometimes  brings 
us  into  such  a  situation,  that  the  help  of  creatures  is  utterly 
unavailing,  that  we  may  afterwards  be  more  clearly  sensible 
of  His  interposition.  Then  we  experimentally  learn  the 
vanity  of  all  things  here  below,  and  are  brought  to  a  more 
immediate  and  absolute  dependence  upon  Himself.  We 
have  need  of  having  these  lessons  frequently  inculcated  upon 
us  ;  but  when  His  end  is  answered,  how  often,  after  He  has 
caused  grief,  does  He  show  His  great  compassions,  and 
save  us  from  our  fears  by  an  outstretched  arm,  and  such  a 
seasonable  and  almost  unexpected  relief,  as  constrains  us 
to  cry  out,  What  has  God  wrought ;  and  who  is  a  God  like 
unto  Thee  ?  Such,  I  hope,  will  be  the  issue  of  your  present 
trial,  and  that  He,  who  gave  her  to  you  at  first,  will  restore 
her  to  you  again.  I  see  you  in  the  furnace  ;  but  the  Lord 
is  sitting  by  it  as  a  refiner  of  silver,  to  moderate  the  fire, 
and  manage  the  process,  so  that  you  shall  lose  nothing  but 
dross,  and  be  brought  forth  refined  as  gold,  to  praise  His 
name.  Apparent  difficulties,  however  great,  are  nothing 
to  Him.  If  He  speaks,  it  is  done  ;  for  to  God  the  Lord 
belong  the  issues  from  death.  Should  His  pleasure  be  other 
wise,  and  should  He  call  your  dear  partner  to  a  state  of  glory 
before  you,  still  I  know  He  is  able  to  support  you.  What 
He  does,  however  painful  to  the  flesh,  must  be  right,  because 
He  does  it.  Having  bought  us  with  His  blood,  and  saved 
our  souls  from  hell,  He  has  every  kind  of  right  to.  dispose  i<of 
us  and  ours  as  He  pleases  ;  and  this  we  are  sure  of,  rlv  will 
not  lay  so  much  upon  us  as  He  freely  endured  for  uc.;  and 
He  can  make  us  amends  for  all  we  suffer,  and  for  .iivve  lose, 
by  the  light  of  His  countenance.  A  few  years  will  set  all 
to  rights  ;  and  they  who  love  Him,  and  are  beloved  by  Him, 
though  they  may  suffer  as  others,  shall  not  sorrow  as  others  ; 
for  the  Lord  will  be  with  them  here,  and  He  will  soon 
have  them  with  Him  :  there  all  tears  shall  be  wiped  from 
their  eyes. 

Perhaps  I  know  as  well  how  to  calculate  the  pain  of  such 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   183 

a  separation,  as  any  one  who  has  not  actually  experienced 
it.  Many  a  time  the  desire  of  my  eyes  has  been  threatened, 
many  a  time  my  heart  has  been  brought  low  ;  but,  from  what 
I  have  known  at  such  seasons,  I  have  reason  to  hope,  that 
had  it  been  His  pleasure  to  bring  upon  me  the  thing  that  I 
feared,  His  everlasting  arm  would  have  upheld  me  from 
sinking  under  the  stroke.  As  ministers,  we  are  called  to 
comfort  the  Lord's  afflicted  people,  and  to  tell  them  the 
knowledge  of  His  love  is  a  cordial  able  to  keep  the  soul 
alive  under  the  sharpest  trials.  We  must  not  wonder 
that  He  sometimes  puts  us  in  a  way  of  showing  that  we  do 
not  deal  in  unfelt  truths,  but  that  we  find  ourselves  that 
solid  consolation  in  the  Gospel  which  we  encourage  others 
to  expect  from  it.  You  have  now  such  an  occasion  of  glori 
fying  the  Lord  ;  I  pray  He  may  enable  you  to  improve  it, 
and  that  all  around  you  may  see  that  He  is  with  you,  and 
that  His  good  word  is  the  support  and  anchor  of  your  soul. 
Then  I  am  sure,  if  it,  upon  the  whole,  is  best  for  you,  He 
will  give  you  the  desire  of  your  heart,  and  you  shall  yet  live 
to  praise  Him  together.  I  am,  &c. 


A     LETTER 

TO    THE 

REV.   MR.  O- 

LETTER   I 

MY  DEAREST  SIR,  April  3,  1759. 

You  see  I  have  prevented  you  in  your  promise  of 
writing  first  ;  and  having  found  a  pretext  for  troubling  Mr. 

— ,  I  was  willing  to  venture  upon  you  without  any, 
unless  you  would  let  me  plead  a  desire  of  showing  you,  how 
welcome  your  correspondence  would  be  to  me.  I  know  not 
if  my  heart  was  ever  more  united  to  any  person,  in  so  short 
a  space  of  time,  than  to  you  ;  and  what  engaged  me  so  much 
was,  the  spirit  of  meekness  and  of  love  (that  peculiar  and 
inimitable  mark  of  true  Christianity)  which  I  observed  in 
you.  I  mean  it  not  to  your  praise.  May  all  the  praise  be 
to  Him  from  whom  every  good  and  perfect  gift  cometh, 
who  alone  maketh  the  best  to  differ  from  the  worst :  but 
I  think  I  may  well  mention,  to  your  encouragement,  that  all 
who  conversed  with  you  greatly  regret  your  speedy  depar 
ture  ;  and  I  am  persuaded,  the  same  temper,  the  same 
candour,  will  make  you  acceptable,  honourable,  and  useful, 
wherever  you  go.  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  the, meek, 
the  merciful,  and  the  peace-makers  ;  they  shall  oK/.in  the 
mercy  they  want,  and  possess  the  peace  they  lovt«,  They 
shall  inherit  the  earth.  The  earth,  sinful  and  miserable 
as  it  is,  shall  be  worthy  to  be  called  an  inheritance  to  them, 
for  they  shall  enjoy  a  comparative  heaven  in  it.  They  shall 
be  called  the  children  of  God,  though  dignified  with  no  title 
among  men.  Alas  !  how  much  are  these  things  overlooked, 
even  by  many  who,  I  would  hope,  are  real  believers.  Me- 
thinks,  a  very  different  spirit  from  that  of  the  church  of 

184 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    185 

Laodicea  is  to  be  seen  amongst  us,  though,  perhaps,  it  is 
not  easy  to  say  which  is  the  best  of  the  two.  That  was 
neither  cold  nor  hot ;  this  (mirabile  dictu]  is  both  cold  and  hot 
at  once,  and  both  to  the  extreme — hot,  hasty,  and  arbit 
rary  in  those  few  things  where  mediocrity  is  a  virtue ; 
but  cool  and  remiss  in  those  great  points,  where  the  applica 
tion  of  the  whole  heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength  is 
so  absolutely  necessary,  and  so  positively  enjoined.  Surely 
there  is  too  much  room  for  this  observation,  and  I,  perhaps, 
stand  self-condemned  in  making  it. 

I  hope  you  will  take  opportunity  to  improve  your  interest 
in  Mr.  -  -  by  letter.  He  expressed  much  satisfaction 
in  the  hour  he  spent  with  you  before  you  sailed,  and  a  great 
regard  for  you  ;  therefore  would,  I  doubt  not,  give  you  a 
fair  hearing  ;  and  the  phrase  litera  scripta  manet  is  true  in 
more  senses  than  one.  He  makes  such  large  concessions 
sometimes,  that  I  am  apt  to  think  he  is  conscious  of  the 
weakness  of  his  own  argument ;  and  then  he  is  so  soon  angry 
with  himself  for  complying  as  far,  and  flies  off  to  the  other 
extreme.  Yet,  for  the  most  part,  when  he  speaks  plain,  and 
is  not  restrained  by  complaisance  for  particular  persons,  he 
appears  not  only  a  stranger  to  experimental  religion,  but 
averse  to  the  notion,  and  generally  inclined  to  treat  it  with 
levity.  His  obstacles  are  very  many  and  very  great ;  his 
reputation  as  a  learned  man,  his  years,  his  regular  life,  and, 
perhaps,  above  all,  his  performances  in  print,  especially  his 
last  book,  are  so  many  barriers  that  must  be  broke  through 
before  conviction  can  reach  him.  But  the  grace  of  God 
can  do  all  this  and  more  ;  and,  indeed,  when  I  think  of  the 
many  truly  valuable  parts  of  his  character,  and  the  indefatig 
able  pains  he  has  taken  in  his  researches  after  truth,  I  am 
willing  to  hope,  that  the  Lord  will,  at  length,  teach  him  the 
true  w '  sdom,  and  enable  him  (however  hard  it  may  seem)  to 
give  upv/iis  own  attainments,  and  sit  down,  like  a  little 
child,  a»  tue  feet  of  Jesus. 

I  hope  to  hear  soon  and  often  from  you.  I  number  my 
Christian  correspondents  among  my  principal  blessings,  a 
few  judicious  pious  friends,  to  whom,  when  I  can  get  leisure 
to  write,  I  send  my  heart  by  turns.  I  can  trust  them  with 
my  inmost  sentiments,  and  can  write  with  no  more  disguise 
than  I  think.  I  shall  rejoice  to  add  you  to  the  number,  if 


i86  CARDIPHONIA  : 

you  can  agree  to  take  me  as  I  am  (as  I  think  you  will)  and 
suffer  me  to  commit  my  whole  self  to  paper,  without  respect 
to  names,  parties,  and  sentiments.  I  endeavour  to  observe 
my  Lord's  commands,  to  call  no  man  master  upon  earth  : 
yet  I  desire  to  own  and  honour  the  image  of  God,  wherever 
I  find  it.  I  dare  not  say  I  have  no  bigotry,  for  I  know  not 
myself  ;  and  remember,  to  my  shame,  that  formerly,  when  I 
ignorantly  professed  myself  free  from  it,  I  was,  indeed, 
overrun  with  it  :  but  this  I  can  say,  I  allow  it  not ;  I  strive 
and  pray  against  it ;  and  thus  far,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  have 
attained,  that  I  find  my  heart  as  much  united  to  many  who 
differ  from  me  in  some  points,  as  to  any  who  agree  with  me 
in  all.  I  set  no  value  upon  any  doctrinal  truth,  farther  than 
as  it  has  a  tendency  to  promote  practical  holiness.  If  others 
should  think  those  things  hindrances,  which  I  judge  to  be 
helps,  in  this  respect,  I  am  content  they  should  go  on  in  their 
own  way,  according  to  the  light  God  has  given  them,  pro 
vided  they  will  agree  with  me  it>  ry  Eiraraywc.  If  it  should 
be  asked,  Which  are  the  necessary  things  ?  I  answer, 
Those  in  which  the  spiritual  worshippers  of  all  ages  and 
countries  have  been  agreed.  Those,  on  the  contrary,  are 
mere  subordinate  matters,  in  which  the  best  men,  those  who 
have  been  the  most  eminent  for  faith,  prayer,  humility,  and 
nearness  to  God,  always  have  been,  and  still  are,  divided 
in  their  judgments.  Upon  this  plan  I  should  think  it  no 
hard  matter  to  draw  up  a  form  of  sound  words  (whether 
dignified  with  the  name  of  a  creed  or  not,  I  care  not)  to  which 
true  believers  of  all  sort  and  sizes  would  unanimously  sub 
scribe.  Suppose  it  ran  something  in  the  following  manner  : 
I  believe  that  sin  is  the  most  hateful  thing  in  the  world  ; 
that  I  and  all  men  are,  by  nature,  in  a  state  of  wrath  and 
depravity,  utterly  unable  to  sustain  the  penalty  or  to  fulfil 
the  commands,  of  God's  holy  law;  and  that  wetljj-*re  no 
sufficiency  of  ourselves  to  think  a  good  thought.  '>  believe 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  chief  among  ten  thousands^  ^hat  He 
came  into  the  world  to  save  the  chief  of  sinners,  by  making 
a  propitiation  for  sin  by  His  death,  by  paying  a  perfect 
obedience  to  the  law,  in  our  behalf ;  and  that  He  is  now 
exalted  on  high,  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins 
to  all  that  believe  ;  and  that  He  ever  liveth  to  make  inter 
cession  for  us.  I  believe  that  the  Holy  Spirit  (the  gift  of 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   187 

God  through  Jesus  Christ)  is  the  sure  and  only  guide  into 
all  truth,  and  the  common  privilege  of  all  believers  ;  and, 
under  His  influence,  I  believe  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  able 
to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation,  and  to  furnish  us  thoroughly 
for  every  good  work.  I  believe  that  love  to  God,  and  to 
man  for  God's  sake,  is  the  essence  of  religion,  and  the 
fulfilling  of  the  law  ;  that  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see 
the  Lord  ;  that  those  who,  by  a  patient  course  in  well-doing, 
seek  glory,  honour,  and  immortality,  shall  receive  eternal 
life  ;  and  I  believe  that  this  reward  is  not  of  debt,  but  of 
grace,  even  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  that  grace,  whereby 
He  has  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Amen. 

I  pretend  not  to  accuracy  in  this  hasty  draught ;  they  are 
only  outlines,  which,  if  you  please  to  retouch,  and  fill  up  at 
your  leisure,  I  hope  you  will  favour  me  with  a  sight  of.  I 
fear  I  have  tired  you — shall  only  add  my  prayers,  that  the 
Lord  may  be  with  you,  and  crown  your  labours  of  love  with 
success,  that  you  may  hereafter  shine  among  those  who  have 
been  instrumental  in  turning  many  to  righteousness. 

I  am,  &c. 


SEVEN     LETTERS 

TO    THE 

REV.  MR.  P 


LETTER   I 
DEAR  SIR, 

THE  account  which  I  received  by  Mr.  C-  — ,  and  by 
the  letter  which  he  brought  from  you,  of  your  welfare,  and 
the  welfare  of  your  people,  was  very  pleasing,  though,  indeed, 
no  more  than  I  expected.  I  believed,  from  the  first  of  your 

going  to  S ,  that  you  would  like  the  people,  and  I  believed 

the  Lord  had  given  you  that  frame  of  spirit  which  He  has 
promised  to  bless.  What  reason  have  we  to  praise  Him  for 
the  knowledge  of  His  Gospel,  and  for  the  honour  of  being 
called  to  preach  it  to  others  ;  and,  likewise,  that  He  has  been 
pleased  to  cast  your  lot  and  mine  amongst  a  people  who 
value  it,  and  to  crown  our  poor  labours  with  some  measure 
of  acceptance  and  usefulness  !  How  little  did  we  think, 
in  the  unawakened  part  of  our  life,  to  what  it  was  His  good 
pleasure  to  reserve  us  ! 

The  Lord  is  pleased,  in  a  measure,  to  show  me  the  suitable 
ness  and  necessity  of  a  humble,  dependent  frame  of  heart, 
a  ceasing  from  self,  and  a  reliance  upon  Him  in  the  due  use 
of  appointed  means  ;  I  am  far  from  having  attained,  but  I 
hope  I  am  pressing,  at  least  seeking,  after  it.  I  wish  to 
speak  the  word  simply  and  experimentally,  an<i;to  be  so 
engaged  with  the  importance  of  the  subject,  the  worth  of 
souls,  and  the  thought  that  I  am  speaking  in  the  name  and 
presence  of  the  Most  High  God,  as  that  I  might,  if  possible, 
forget  everything  else.  This  would  be  an  attainment, 
indeed  !  More  good  might  be  expected  from  a  broken  dis 
course,  delivered  in  such  a  frame,  than  from  the  most 
advantageous  display  of  knowledge  and  gifts  without  it. 

188 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   189 

Not  that  I  would  undervalue  propriety  and  pertinence  of 
expression  :  it  is  our  duty  to  study  to  find  out  acceptable 
words,  and  to  endeavour  to  appear  as  workmen  that  need 
not  be  ashamed  ;  but  those  who  have  most  ability  in  this 
way,  have  need  of  a  double  guard  of  grace  and  wisdom,  lest 
they  be  tempted  to  trust  in  it,  or  to  value  themselves  upon  it. 
They  that  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  never  be  moved  ;  and  they 
that  abase  themselves  before  Him,  He  will  exalt.  I  am 
well  persuaded  that  your  conduct  and  view  have  been  agree 
able  to  these  sentiments  ;  and,  therefore,  the  Lord  has  sup 
ported,  encouraged,  and  owned  you  ;  and,  I  trust,  He  will 
still  bless  you,  and  make  you  a  blessing  to  many.  He  that 
walketh  humbly,  walketh  surely. 

Believe  me  to  be,  &c. 


LETTER   II 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  August  14,  1770. 

YOUR  letter  did  me  good  when  I  received  it,  at  least, 
gave  me  much  pleasure  ;  and  I  think  it  has  given  me  a  lift 
while  I  have  been  just  now  reading  it.  I  know  not  that  I 
ever  had  those  awful  views  of  sin  which  you  speak  of  ;  and 
though,  I  believe,  I  should  be  better  for  them,  I  dare  not 
seriously  wish  for  them.  There  is  a  petition  which  I  have 
heard  in  public  prayer — Lord,  show  us  the  evil  of  our  hearts. 
To  this  petition  I  cannot  venture  to  set  my  Amen,  at  least, 
not  without  a  qualification.  Show  me  enough  of  Thyself 
to  balance  the  view,  and  then  show  me  what  Thou  pleasest. 
I  think  I  have  a  very  clear  and  strong  conviction,  in  my 
judgment,  that  I  am  vile  and  worthless,  that  my  heart  is 
full  of  evil,  only  evil,  and  that  continually.  I  know  some 
thing  of  it,,  too,  experimentally  ;  and,  therefore,  judging  of 
the  whole  by  the  sample,  though  I  am  not  suitably  affected 
with  what  I  do  see,  I  tremble  at  the  thought  of  seeing  more. 
A  man  may  look  with  some  pleasure  upon  the  sea  in  a  storm, 
provided  he  stands  safe  upon  the  land  himself  ;  but  to  be 
upon  the  sea  in  a  storm  is  quite  another  thing.  And  yet, 
surely,  the  coldness,  worldliness,  pride,  and  twenty  other 


K)o  CARDIPHONIA  : 

evils  under  which  I  groan,  owe  much  of  their  strength  to  the 
want  of  that  feeling  sense  of  my  own  abominations  with 
which  you  have  been  favoured  :  I  say,  favoured  ;  for  I 
doubt  not  but  the  Lord  gave  it  you  in  mercy,  and  that  it 
has  proved,  and  will  prove,  a  mercy  to  you,  to  make  you  more 
humble,  spiritual,  and  dependent,  as  well  as  to  increase 
your  ability  for  preaching  the  Gospel  of  His  grace.  Upon 
these  accounts,  I  can  assure  you  that,  upon  a  first  reading, 
and  till  I  stopped  a  moment  to  count  the  cost,  I  was  ready 
to  envy  you  all  that  you  had  felt.  I  often  seem  to  know 
what  the  Scripture  teaches,  both  of  sin  and  grace,  as  if  I  knew 
them  not ;  so  faint  and  languid  are  my  perceptions,  I  often 
seem  to  think  and  talk  of  sin  without  any  sorrow,  and  of 
grace  without  any  joy. 

I  have  had  some  people  awakened  by  dreams,  as  you  had 
by  streamers  :  but,  for  aught  I  know,  we  are  no  less  in 
strumental  to  the  good  of  these,  than  to  any  other  person, 
upon  whom,  when  we  look,  our  hearts  are  ready  to  exult, 
and  say,  See  what  the  Lord  has  done  by  me.  I  do  not  think 
that,  strictly  speaking,  all  the  streamers  of  the  north  are 
able  to  awaken  a  dead  soul.  I  suppose  people  may  be 
terrified  by  them,  and  made  thoughtful,  but  awakened  only 
by  the  word.  The  streamers  either  sent  them  to  hear  the 
Gospel,  or  roused  them  to  attend  to  it  ;  but  it  was  the  know 
ledge  of  the  truth  brought  home  to  the  heart  that  did  the 
business.  Perhaps  the  streamers  reminded  them  of  what 
they  had  heard  from  you  before.  Two  persons  here,  who 
lived  like  heathens,  and  never  came  to  church,  were  alarmed 
by  some  terrifying  dreams,  and  came  out  to  hearing  forth 
with.  There  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  meet  witli  them.  One 
of  them  died  triumphing  ;  the  other,  I  hope,  will  do  so  when 
her  time  comes.  Whatever  rneans,  instruments,  or  occasions 
He  is  pleased  to  employ,  the  work  is  all  His  own  ;  and,  I 
trust,  you  and  I  are  made  willing  to  give  Him  all, the  glory, 
and  to  sink  into  the  dust  at  the  thought  that  He  should 
ever  permit  us  to  take  His  holy  name  upon  our  polluted  lips. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART        191 

LETTER    111 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  June  13,  1772. 

You  say  that  your  experience  agrees  with  mine.  It 
must  be  so,  because  our  hearts  are  alike.  The  heart  is 
deceitful  and  desperately  wicked,  destitute  of  good,  and  prone 
to  evil.  This  is  the  character  of  mankind  universally,  and 
those  who  are  made  partakers  of  grace  are  renewed  but  in 
part ;  the  evil  nature  still  cleaves  to  them,  and  the  root  of 
sin,  though  mortified,  is  far  from  being  dead. — While  the 
cause  remains,  it  will  have  effects  ;  and  while  we  are  bur 
dened  with  the  body  of  this  death,  we  must  groan  under  it. 
But  we  need  not  be  swallowed  up  with  overmuch  sorrow, 
since  we  have  in  Jesus  a  Saviour,  a  Righteousness,  an  Advo 
cate,  a  Shepherd.  "  He  knows  our  frame,  and  remembers 
that  we  are  but  dust."  If  sin  abounds  in  us,  grace  abounds 
much  more  in  Him  ;  nor  would  He  suffer  sin  to  remain  in 
His  people,  if  He  did  not  know  how  to  overrule  it,  and  make 
it  an  occasion  of  endearing  His  love  and  grace  so  much  the 
more  to  their  souls.  The  Lord  forbid  that  we  should  plead 
His  goodness  as  an  encouragement  to  sloth  and  indifference. 
Humiliation,  godly  sorrow,  and  self-abasement  become 
us  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  we  may  rejoice  in  the  Lord. 
Though  sin  remains,  it  shall  not  have  dominion  over  us  ; 
though  it  wars  in  us,  it  shall  not  prevail  against  us.  We 
have  a  mercy-seat  sprinkled  with  blood,  we  have  an  Advo 
cate  with  the  Father,  we  are  called  to  this  warfare,  and 
we  fight  under  the  eye  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation, 
who  is  always  near  to  renew  our  strength,  to  heal  our 
wounds,  and  to  cover  our  heads  in  the  heat  of  battle.  As 
ministers,  we  preach  to  those  who  have  like  passions  and 
infirmities  with  ourselves,  and  by  our  own  feelings,  fears, 
and  changes,  we  learn  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  them 
that  are  weary,  to  warn  those  who  stand,  and  to  stretch  out 
a  hand  of  compassion  towards  them  that  are  fallen  ;  and  to 
commend  it  to  others  from  our  own  experience,  as  a  faithful 
saying.  Besides,  if  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  give  us  some 
liberty,  acceptance,  and  success  in  preaching  the  Gospel, 
we  should  be  in  great  danger  of  running  mad  with  spiritual 
pride,  if  the  Lord  did  net  permit  us  to  feel  the  depravity  and 


IQ2  CARDIPHONIA  : 

vileness  of  our  hearts,  and  thereby  keep  us  from  forgetting 
what  we  are  in  ourselves. 

With  regard  to  your  young  people,  you  must  expect  to 
meet  with  some  disappointment.  Perhaps,  not  every 
one  of  whom  you  have  conceived  hopes  will  stand,  and 
some  who  do  belong  to  the  Lord  are  permitted  to  make 
sad  mistakes  for  their  future  humiliation.  It  is  our  part 
to  watch,  warn,  and  admonish,  and  we  ought,  likewise, 
to  be  ^concerned  for  those  slips  and  miscarriages  which  we 
cannot  prevent.  A  minister,  if  faithful,  and  of  a  right 
spirit,  can  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  see  his  people  walking 
honourably  and  steadily  in  the  truth  ;  and  hardly  anything 
will  give  him  more  sensible  grief,  than  to  see  any  of  them 
taken  in  Satan's  wiles.  Yet  still  the  Gospel  brings  relief 
here.  He  is  wiser  than  we  are,  and  knows  how  to  make 
those  tilings  subservient  to  promote  his  work,  which  we 
ought  to  guard  against  as  evils  and  hindrances.  We  are 
to  use  the  means — He  is  to  rule  the  whole.  If  the  faults 
of  some  are  made  warnings  to  others,  and  prove,  in  the 
end,  occasions  of  illustrating  the  riches  of  divine  grace, 
this  should  reconcile  us  to  what  we  cannot  help,  though 
such  considerations  should  not  slacken  our  diligence  in 
sounding  an  alarm,  and  reminding  our  hearers  of  their 
continual  danger.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    IV 

DEAR  SIR,  January  26,  1775. 

I  LATELY  read  a  sermon  of  Mr.  Baxter's  (in  the  fifth 
volume  of  the  Morning  Exercises)  on  Matt.  v.  16.  My 
mind  is  somewhat  impressed  with  the  subject,  and  with 
his  manner  of  treating  it.  Some  of  Mr.  Baxter's  senti 
ments  in  divinity  are  rather  cloudy  ;  and  he  sometimes, 
upon  that  account,  met  with  but  poor  quarter  from  the 
staunch  Calvinists  of  his  day.  But,  by  what  I  have  read 
of  him,  where  he  is  quiet,  and  not  ruffled  by  controversy, 
he  appears  to  me,  notwithstanding  some  mistakes,  to  have 
been  one  of  the  greatest  men  of  hii,  age,  and,  perhaps,  in 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   193 

fervour,  spirituality,  and  success,  more  than  equal,  both 
as  a  minister  and  a  Christian,  to  some  twenty  taken  to 
gether,  of  those  who  affect  to  undervalue  him  in  this 
present  da}\  There  is  a  spirit  in  some  passages  of  his 
Saint's  Rest,  his  Dying  Thoughts,  and  others  of  his  practical 
treatises,  compared  with  which,  many  modern  compositions, 
though  well  written  and  well  meant,  appear  to  me  to  a 
great  disadvantage.  But  I  was  speaking  of  his  sermon. 
He  points  out  the  way  at  which  we  should  aim  to  let  our 
light  shine  in  the  world,  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  con 
viction  and  edification  of  men.  I  have  mentioned  where  it 
is  to  be  found,  that,  if  you  have  the  Moining  Exercises,  or 
they  should  come  in  your  way,  you  may  look  at  it.  I  think 
you  would  like  it.  The  perusal  suggested  to  me  some 
instruction,  and  much  reproof.  Alas  !  my  friend,  are  we 
not  too  often  chargeable  with  a  sad,  shameful  selfishness 
and  narrowness  of  spirit,  far,  very  far  different  from  that 
activity,  enlargement,  and  generosity  of  soul,  which  such  a 
Gospel  as  we  have  received  might  be  expected  to  produce  ? 
For  myself,  I  must  plead  guilty.  It  seems  as  if  my  heart 
was  always  awake,  and  keenly  sensible  to  my  own  concern 
ments,  while  those  of  my  Lord  and  Master  affect  me  much 
less  forcibly,  at  least,  only  by  intervals.  Were  a  stranger 
to  judge  of  me  by  what  I  sometimes  say  in  the  pulpit,  he 
might  think  that,  like  the  angels,  I  had  but  two  things  in 
view,  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  to  behold  His  face.  But, 
alas  !  would  he  not  be  almost  as  much  mistaken,  as  if, 
seeing  Mr.  G—  -  in  the  character  of  a  tragedy-hero,  he 
should  suppose  him  to  be  the  very  person  whom  he  only 
represents  ?  I  hope  Satan  will  never  be  able  to  persuade 
me  that  I  am  a  mere  hypocrite  and  stage-player  ;  but  sure  I 
am  that  there  is  so  much  hypocrisy  in  me,  so  many  little 
nesses  and  self-seekings  insinuating  into  my  plan  of  conduct, 
that  I  have  humbling  cause  to  account  myself  unworthy 
and  unprofitable,  and  to  say,  "  Enter  not  into  judgment 
with  Thy  servant,  O  Lord."  I  have  some  tolerable  idea 
of  what  a  Christian  ought  to  be,  and  it  is,  I  hope,  what  I 
desire  to  be.  A  Christian  should  be  conformable  to  Christ 
in  his  spirit  and  in  his  practice  ;  that  is,  he  should  be 
spiritually  minded,  dead  to  the  world,  filled  with  zeal  for 
the  glory  of  God,  the  spread  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  good  of 
c.  N 


194  CARDIPHONIA  : 

souls.  He  should  be  humble,  patient,  meek,  cheerful, 
thankful  under  all  events  and  changes.  He  should  account 
it  the  business  and  honour  of  his  life  to  imitate  Him  who 
pleased  not  Himself,  Who  went  about  doing  good,  and  has 
expressed  to  us  the  very  feelings  of  His  heart,  in  that  divine 
aphorism,  which  surpasses  all  the  fine  admired  sayings 
of  the  philosophers,  as  much  as  the  sun  outshines  a  candle, 
"  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  The  whole 
deportment  of  a  Christian  should  show,  that  the  knowledge 
of  Jesus,  which  he  has  received  from  the  Gospel,  affords  him 
all  he  could  expect  from  it :  a  balm  for  every  grief,  an  amend 
for  every  loss,  a  motive  for  every  duty,  a  restraint  from  every 
evil,  a  pattern  for  everything  which  he  is  called  to  do  or 
suffer,  and  a  principle  sufficient  to  constitute  the  actions  of 
every  day,  even  in  common  life,  acts  of  religion.  He  should 
(as  the  children  of  this  world  are  wise  to  do  in  their  genera 
tion)  make  every  occurrence  through  which  he  passes, 
subservient  and  subordinate  to  his  main  design.  Gold  is 
the  worldly  man's  god,  and  his  worship  and  service  are 
uniform  and  consistent,  not  by  fits  and  starts,  but  from 
morning  to  night ;  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the 
year,  he  is  the  same  man.  He  will  not  slip  an  opportunity 
of  adding  to  his  pelf  to-day,  because  he  may  have  another 
to-morrow,  but  he  heartily  and  eagerly  embraces  both  ; 
and,  so  far  as  he  carries  his  point,  though  his  perseverance 
may  expose  him  to  the  ridicule  or  reproach  of  his  neigh 
bours,  he  thinks  himself  well  paid,  and  says, 

Populus  me  sibilat ;  at  mini  plaudo 

Ipse  domi,  simul  ac  nummos  contemplor  area. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  V 

DEAR  SIR,  Jan. —  1776. 

I  MAY  learn  (only  I  am  a  sad  dunce)  by  small  and  com 
mon  incidents,  as  well  as  by  some  more  striking  and  import 
ant  turns  in  life,  that  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE   HEART        195 

his  steps.  It  is  not  for  me  to  say,  to-day  or  to-morrow, 
I  will  do  this  or  that.  I  cannot  write  a  letter  to  a  friend 
without  leave  or  without  help  ;  for  neither  opportunity 
nor  ability  are  at  my  own  disposal.  It  is  not  needful  that 
the  Lord  should  raise  a  mountain  in  my  way,  to  stop  my 
purpose  ;  if  He  only  withdraw  a  certain  kind  of  impercept 
ible  support,  which  in  general  I  have  and  use  without  duly 
considering  whose  it  is,  then  in  a  moment  I  feel  myself 
unstrung  and  disabled,  like  a  ship  that  has  lost  her  masts, 
and  cannot  proceed  till  He  is  pleased  to  refit  me  and  renew 
my  strength.  My  pride  and  propensity  to  self-independence 
render  frequent  changes  of  this  kind  necessary  to  me,  or  I 
should  soon  forget  what  I  am,  and  sacrifice  to  my  own 
drag.  Therefore,  upon  the  whole,  I  am  satisfied,  and  see  it 
best,  that  I  should  be  absolutely  poor  and  penniless  in 
myself,  and  forced  to  depend  upon  the  Lord  for  the  smallest 
things  as  well  as  the  greatest.  And  if,  by  His  blessing,  my 
experience  should  at  length  tally  with  my  judgment  in 
this  point,  that  without  Him  I  can  do  nothing,  then  I 
know  I  shall  find  it  easy,  through  Him,  to  do  all  tlu'ngs  ; 
for  the  door  of  His  mercy  is  always  open,  and  it  is  but  ask 
and  have.  But,  alas  !  a  secret  persuasion  (though  contrary 
to  repeated  convictions)  that  I  have  something  at  home, 
too  often  prevents  me  going  to  Him  for  it,  and  then  no 
wonder  I  am  disappointed.  The  life  of  faith  seems  so 
simple  and  easy  in  theory,  that  I  can  point  it  out  to  others 
in  few  words  ;  but  in  practice  it  is  very  difficult,  and  my 
advances  are  so  slow,  that  I  hardly  dare  say  I  get  forward  at 
all.  It  is  a  great  thing  indeed  to  have  the  spirit  of  a  little 
child,  so  as  to  be  habitually  afraid  of  taking  a  single  step 
without  leading. 

I  have  heard  of  you  more  than  once  since  I  heard  from 
you,  and  am  glad  to  know  the  Lord  is  still  with  you  ;  I 
trust  He  has  not  withdrawn  wholly  from  us.  We  have  much 
call  for  thankfulness,  and  much  for  humiliation.  Some 
have  been  removed,  some  are  evidently  ripening  for  glory, 
and  now  and  then  we  have  a  new  inquirer.  But  the  progress 
of  wickedness  amongst  the  unconverted  here  is  awful. 
Convictions  repeatedly  stifled  in  many,  have  issued  in  a 
hardiness  and  boldness  in  sinning  which,  I  believe,  is 
seldom  found  but  in  those  places  where  the  light  of  the 

N  2 


196  CARDIPHOX1A  : 

Gospel  has  been  long  resisted  and  abused.  If  my  eyes 
suitably  affected  my  heart,  I  should  weep  day  and  night 
upon  this  account ;  but  alas  !  I  am  too  indifferent.  I  feel 
a  woful  defect  in  my  zeal  for  God  and  compassion  for  souls  ; 
and  when  Satan  and  conscience  charge  me  with  cowardice, 
treachery,  and  stupidity,  I  know  not  what  to  reply.  I  am 
generally  carried  through  my  public  work  with  some 
liberty  ;  and  because  I  am  not  put  to  shame  before  the 
people.  I  seem  content  and  satisfied.  I  wish  to  be  more 
thankful  for  what  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  do  amongst  us,  but, 
at  the  same  time,  to  be  more  earnest  with  Him  for  a  further 
outpouring  of  His  Spirit.  Assist  me  therein  with  your 
prayers. 

As  to  my  own  private  experience,  the  enemy  is  not 
suffered  to  touch  the  foundation  of  my  faith  and  hope  ; 
thus  far  I  have  peace.  But  my  conflicts  and  exercises, 
with  the  effects  of  indwelling  sin,  are  very  distressing. 
I  cannot  doubt  of  my  state  and  acceptance  ;  and  yet  it 
seems  no  one  can  have  more  cause  for  doubts  and  fears 
than  myself,  if  such  doubtings  were  at  all  encouraged  by 
the  Gospel ;  but  I  see  they  are  not ;  I  see  that  what  I 
want  and  hope  for,  the  Lord  promises  to  do,  for  His  own 
name's  sake,  and  with  a  non  obstante  to  all  my  vileness  and 
perverseness  ;  and  I  cannot  question  but  He  has  given  me 
(for  how  else  could  I  have  it  ?)  a  thirst  for  that  communion 
with  Him  in  love,  and  conformity  to  His  image,  of  which, 
as  yet,  I  have  experienced  but  very  faint  and  imperfect 
beginnings.  But  if  He  has  begun,  I  venture,  upon  His 
word,  that  He  will  not  forsake  the  work  of  His  own  hands. 

On  public  affairs  I  say  but  little.  Many  are  censuring 
men  and  measures  ;  but  I  would  lay  all  the  blame  upon  sin. 
It  appears  plain  to  me  that  the  Lord  has  a  controversy  with 
us  ;  and,  therefore,  I  fear  what  we  have  yet  seen  is  but  the 
beginning  of  sorrows.  I  am  ready  to  dread  the  event  of 
this  summer  ;  but  I  remember  the  Lord  reigns.  He  has 
His  own  glory  and  the  good  of  His  church  in  view,  and  will 
not  be  disappointed.  He  knows  how  likewise  to  take  care 
of  those  who  fear  Him.  I  wish  there  were  more  sighing  and 
mourning  amongst  professors,  for  the  sins  of  the  nation  and 
the  churches.  But  I  must  conclude,  and  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE   HEART        197 

LETTER  VI 
DEAR  SIR, 

No  very  considerable  alteration  has  taken  place  since 

I  wrote,  except  the  death  of  Mrs.  L ,  who  was  removed 

to  a  better  world  in  September  last.  The  latter  part  of  her 
course  was  very  painful ;  but  the  Lord  made  her  more 
than  conqueror,  and  she  had  good  cause  to  apply  the 
apostle's  words,  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  She  repeated  that  passage 
in  her  last  illness,  and  chose  it  for  her  funeral-text.  She 
was  a  Christian  indeed.  Her  faith  was  great,  and  so  were 
her  trials.  Now  she  is  above  them  all,  now  she  is  before 
the  throne.  The  good  Lord  help  us  to  be  followers  of  those 
who  through  faith  and  patience  have  attained  to  the  hope 
set  before  them. 

The  number  of  professors  still  increases  with  us,  and  a 
greater  number  of  persons  affords  a  greater  variety  of  cases, 
and  gives  greater  scope  to  observe  the  workings  of  the  heart 
and  Satan.  For  seven  years  I  had  to  say  that  I  had  not 
seen  a  person  of  whom  I  had  conceived  a  good  hope  go  back, 
but  I  have  met  with  a  few  disappointments  since.  However, 
upon  the  whole,  I  trust  the  Lord  is  still  with  us.  The 
enemy  tries  to  disturb  and  defile  us,  and  if  the  Lord  did  not 
keep  the  city,  the  poor  watchman  would  wake  in  vain.  But 
the  eye  that  never  slumbereth  nor  sleepeth  has  been  upon 
us  for  good  ;  and  though  we  have  cause  of  humiliation  and 
complaint,  we  have  likewise  much  cause  of  thankfulness. 
My  health  is  still  preserved  ;  and  I  hope  that  the  Lord  does 
not  suffer  my  desires  of  personal  communion  with  Him, 
and  of  usefulness  in  the  ministry,  to  decline.  He  supplies 
me  with  fresh  strength  and  matter  in  my  public  work  ; 
I  hear  now  and  then  of  one  brought  to  inquire  the  way  :  and 
His  presence  is  at  times  made  known  to  many  in  the 
ordinances. 

To  combine  zeal  with  prudence  is  indeed  difficult.  There 
is  often  too  much  self  in  our  zeal,  and  too  much  of  the  fear 
of  man  in  our  prudence.  However,  what  we  cannot  attain 
by  any  skill  or  resolution  of  our  own,  we  may  hope  in 
measure  to  receive  from  Him  who  giveth  liberally  to  those 
who  seek  Him,  and  desire  to  serve  Him.  Prudence  is  a 
word  much  abused  ;  but  there  is  a  Heavenly  wisdom,  which 


io8  CARDIPHONIA  : 

the  Lord  has  promised  to  give  to  those  who  humbly  wait 
upon  Him  for  it.  It  does  not  consist  in  forming  a  bundle 
of  rules  and  maxims,  but  in  a  spiritual  taste  and  discern 
ment,  derived  from  an  experimental  knowledge  of  the  truth, 
and  of  the  heart  of  man,  as  described  in  the  word  of  God  ; 
and  its  exercise  consists  much  in  a  simple  dependence  upon 
the  Lord,  to  guide  and  prompt  us  in  every  action.  We 
seldom  act  wrong,  when  we  truly  depend  upon  Him,  and 
can  caase  from  leaning  to  our  own  understanding.  When 
the  heart  is  thus  in  a  right  tune  and  frame,  and  His  word 
dwells  richly  in  us,  there  is  a  kind  of  immediate  perception  of 
what  is  proper  for  us  to  do  in  present  circumstances,  without 
much  painful  inquiry  ;  a  light  shines  before  us  upon  the 
path  of  duty  ;  and  if  He  permits  us  in  such  a  spirit  to  make 
some  mistakes,  He  will  likewise  teach  us  to  profit  by  them  ; 
and  our  reflections  upon  what  was  wrong  one  day,  will 
make  us  to  act  more  wisely  the  next.  At  the  best,  we  must 
always  expect  to  meet  with  new  proofs  of  our  own  weakness 
and  insufficiency  ;  otherwise  how  should  we  be  kept  humble, 
or  know  how  to  prize  the  liberty  He  allows  us  of  coming  to 
the  throne  of  grace,  for  fresh  forgiveness  and  direction  every 
day  ?  But  if  He  enables  us  to  walk  before  Him  with  a 
single  eye,  He  will  graciously  accept  our  desire  of  serving 
Him  better  if  we  could,  and  His  blessing  will  make  our  feeble 
endeavours  in  some  degree  successful,  at  the  same  time  that 
we  see  defects  and  evils  attending  our  best  services,  sufficient 
to  make  us  ashamed  of  them.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   VII 

DEAR  SIR,  January  u,  1777. 

WE  all  need,  and  at  the  seasons  the  Lord  sees  best, 
we  all  receive  chastisement.  I  hope  you  likewise  have 
reason  to  praise  Him,  for  supporting,  sanctifying,  and 
delivering  mercy.  The  coward  flesh  presently  sinks  under 
the  rod,  but  Faith  need  not  fear  it,  for  it  is  in  the  hand  of 
One  who  loves  us  better  than  we  do  ourselves,  and  who 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   199 

knows  our  frame,  that  we  are  but  dust,  and  therefore  will 
not  suffer  us  to  be  overdone  and  overwhelmed. 

I  feel  as  a  friend  should  feel  for  Mr.  B—  -  ;  were 
I  able,  I  would  soon  send  him  health.  If  the  Lord,  who  is 
able  to  remove  his  illness  in  a  minute,  permits  it  to  continue, 
we  may  be  sure,  upon  the  whole,  it  will  be  better  for  him. 
It  is,  however,  very  lawful  to  pray  that  his  health  may  be 
restored,  and  his  usefulness  prolonged.  I  beg  you  to  give 
my  love  to  him,  and  tell  him  that  my  heart  bears  him  an 
affectionate  remembrance  ;  and  I  know  the  God  whom  he 
serves  will  make  every  dispensation  supportable  and  profit 
able  to  him. 

If,  as  you  observe,  the  Song  of  Solomon  describes  the 
experience  of  his  church,  it  shows  the  dark  as  well  as  the 
bright  side.  No  one  part  of  it  is  the  experience  of  every 
individual  at  any  particular  time.  Some  are  in  his  banquet- 
ing-house,  others  upon  their  beds.  Some  sit  under  His 
banner,  supported  by  His  arm  ;  while  others  have  a  faint 
perception  of  Him  at  a  distance,  with  many  a  hill  and  moun 
tain  between.  In  one  thing,  however,  they  all  agree,  that 
He  is  the  leading  object  of  their  desires,  and  that  they  have 
had  such  a  discovery  of  His  person,  work,  and  love,  as 
makes  Him  precious  to  their  hearts.  Their  judgment  of  Him 
is  always  the  same,  but  their  sensibility  varies.  The  love 
they  bear  Him,  though  rooted  and  grounded  in  their  hearts, 
is  not  always  equally  in  exercise,  nor  can  it  be  so.  We  are 
like  trees,  which,  though  alive,  cannot  put  forth  their 
leaves  and  fruit  without  the  influence  of  the  sun.  They 
are  alive  in  winter  as  well  as  in  summer  ;  but  how  different 
is  their  appearance  in  these  different  seasons  !  Were  we 
always  alike,  could  we  always  believe,  love,  and  rejoice, 
we  should  think  the  power  inherent  and  our  own ;  but  it  ii 
more  for  the  Lord's  glory,  and  more  suited  to  form  us  to  a 
temper  becoming  the  Gospel,  that  we  should  be  made  deeply 
sensible  of  our  own  inability  and  dependence,  than  that  we 
should  be  always  in  a  lively  frame.  I  am  persuaded,  a 
broken  and  a  contrite  spirit,  a  conviction  of  our  vileness 
and  nothingness,  connected  with  a  cordial  acceptance  of 
Jesus  as  revealed  in  the  Gospel,  is  the  highest  attainment  we 
can  reach  in  this  life.  Sensible  comforts  are  desirable, 
and  we  must  be  sadlv  declined  when  they  do  not  appear  to 


200  CARDIPHONIA. 

us ;  but  I  believe  there  may  be  a  real  exercise  of  faith  and 
growth  in  grace  when  our  sensible  feelings  are  faint  and  low. 
A  soul  may  be  in  as  thriving  a  state  when  thirsting,  seeking, 
and  mourning  after  the  Lord,  as  when  actually  rejoicing  in 
Him  ;  as  much  in  earnest  when  fighting  in  the  valley,  as 
when  singing  upon  the  mount  ;  nay,  dark  seasons  afford  the 
surest  and  strongest  manifestations  of  the  power  of  faith. 
To  hold  fast  the  word  of  promise,  to  maintain  a  hatred  of 
sin,  togo  on  steadfastly  in  the  path  of  duty,  in  defiance  both 
of  the  frowns  and  the  smiles  of  the  world,  when  we  have  but 
little  comfort,  is  a  more  certain  evidence  of  grace,  than  a 
thousand  things  which  we  may  do  or  forbear  when  our 
spirits  are  warm  and  lively.  I  have  seen  many  who  have 
been  upon  the  whole  but  uneven  walkers,  though  at  times 
they  have  seemed  to  enjoy,  at  least  have  talked  of,  great 
comforts.  I  have  seen  others,  for  the  most  part,  complain  of 
much  darkness  and  coldness,  who  have  been  remarkably 
humble,  tender,  and  exemplary  in  their  spirit  and  conduct. 
Surely  were  I  to  choose  my  lot,  it  should  be  with  the  latter. 

I  am,  &c. 


THREE     LETTERS 

TO 

MRS.  G 

LETTER    I 

MADAM,  June  20,  1776. 

IT  would  be  both  unkind  and  ungrateful  in  me,  to  avail 
myself  of  any  plea  of  business,  for  delaying  the  acknowledg 
ment  I  owe  you  for  your  acceptable  favour  from , 

which,  though  dated  the  6th  instant,  I  did  not  receive  till 
the  loth. 

Could  I  have  known  in  time  that  you  were  at  Mr. 's, 

I  should  have  endeavoured  to  have  called  upon  you  while 
there  ;  and  very  glad  should  I  have  been  to  have  seen  you 
with  us.  But  they  who  fear  the  Lord  may  be  sure,  that 
whatever  is  not  practicable  is  not  necessary.  He  could 
have  overruled  every  difficulty  in  your  way,  had  He  seen  it 
expedient ;  but  He  is  pleased  to  show  you,  that  you  depend 
not  upon  them,  but  upon  Himself ;  and  that,  notwith 
standing  your  connections  may  exclude  you  from  some 
advantages  in  point  of  outward  means,  He  who  has  begun  a 
good  work  in  you,  is  able  to  carry  it  on,  in  defiance  of  all 
seeming  hindrances,  and  make  all  things  (even  those  which 
have  the  most  unfavourable  appearances)  work  together 
for  your  good. 

A  sure  effect  of  His  grace,  is  a  desire  and  longing  for 
Gospel  ordinances ;  and  when  they  are  afforded,  they 
cannot  be  neglected  without  loss.  But  the  Lord  sees  many 
souls  who  are  dear  to  Him,  and  whom  He  is  training  up  in 
a  growing  meetness  for  His  kingdom,  who  are,  by  His 
providence,  so  situated,  that  it  is  not  in  their  power  to  attend 
upon  Gospel  preaching  ;  and,  perhaps,  they  have  seldom 

201 


202  CARDIPHONIA  : 

either  Christian  minister  or  Christian  friend  to  assist  or 
comfort  them.  Such  a  situation  is  a  state  of  trial ;  but  Jesus 
is  all-sufficient,  and  He  is  always  near.  They  cannot  be 
debarred  from  His  word  of  grace,  which  is  everywhere  at 
hand,  nor  from  His  throne  of  grace  ;  for  they  who  feel  their 
need  of  Him,  and  whose  hearts  are  drawn  towards  Him, 
are  always  at  the  foot  of  it.  Every  room  in  the  house,  yea, 
every  spot  they  stand  on,  fields,  lanes,  and  hedge-rows, 
all  is  Jioly  ground  to  them  ;  for  the  Lord  is  there.  The 
chief  difference  between  us  and  the  disciples,  when  our 
Saviour  was  upon  earth,  is  in  this  :  they  then  walked  by 
sight,  and  we  are  called  to  walk  by  faith.  They  could  see 
Him  with  their  bodily  eyes,  we  cannot ;  but  He  said,  before 
He  left  them,  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away." 
How  could  this  be,  unless  that  spiritual  communion,  which 
He  promised  to  maintain  with  His  people  after  his  ascension, 
were  preferable  to  that  intercourse  He  allowed  them  whilst 
He  was  visibly  with  them  ?  But  we  are  sure  it  is  pre 
ferable,  and  they  who  had  tried  both  were  well  satisfied 
He  had  made  good  His  promise  ;  so  that  though  they  had 
known  Him  after  the  flesh,  they  were  content  not  to  know 
Him  so  any  more.  Yes,  Madam,  though  we  cannot  see 
Him,  he  sees  us  ;  He  is  nearer  to  us  than  we  are  to  ourselves. 
In  a  natural  state,  we  have  very  dark,  and  indeed,  dishon 
ourable  thoughts  of  God  ;  we  conceive  of  Him  as  at  a  dis 
tance.  But  when  the  heart  is  awakened,  we  begin  to  make 
Jacob's  reflection,  "  Surely  the  Lord  is  in  this  place,  and  I 
knew  it  not."  And  when  we  receive  faith,  we  begin  to 
know  that  this  ever-present  God  is  in  Christ ;  that  the 
government  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  dispensations  of  the 
kingdom  of  nature,  providence,  and  grace,  are  in  the  hands 
of  Jesus  :  that  it  is  He  with  whom  we  have  to  do,  who  once 
suffered  agony  and  death  for  our  redemption,  and  whose  com 
passion  and  tenderness  are  the  same,  now  He  reigns  over  all 
blessed  for  ever,  as  when  He  conversed  amongst  men  in  the 
days  of  His  humiliation.  Thus  God  is  made  known  to  us 
by  the  Gospel,  in  the  endearing  views  of  a  Saviour,  a  Shep 
herd,  a  Husband,  a  Friend ;  and  a  way  of  access  is  opened 
for  us  through  the  vail,  that  is,  the  human  nature  of  our 
Redeemer,  to  enter,  with  humble  confidence,  into  the  holiest 
of  all,  and  to  repose  all  our  cares  and  concerns  upon  the 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   203 

strength  of  that  everlasting  arm  which  upholds  Heaven 
and  earth,  and  upon  that  infinite  love  which  submitted  to 
the  shame,  pain,  and  death  of  the  cross,  to  redeem  sinners 
from  wrath  and  misery. 

Though  there  is  a  height,  a  breadth,  a  length,  and  a  depth, 
in  this  mystery  of  redeeming  love,  exceeding  the  compre 
hension  of  all  finite  minds ;  yet  the  great  and  leading 
principles  which  are  necessary  for  the  support  and  comfort 
of  our  souls,  may  be  summed  up  in  a  very  few  words.  Such 
a  summary  we  are  favoured  with  in  Titus  ii.  11-14,  where 
the  whole  of  salvation,  all  that  is  needful  to  be  known, 
experienced,  practised,  and  hoped  for,  is  comprised  within 
the  compass  of  four  verses.  If  many  books,  much  study, 
and  great  discernment,  were  necessary,  in  order  to  be  happy, 
what  must  the  poor  and  simple  do  ?  Yet  for  them  especially 
is  the  Gospel  designed  ;  and  few  but  such  as  these  attain 
the  knowledge  and  comfort  of  it.  The  Bible  is  a  sealed 
book  till  the  heart  be  awakened  ;  and  then  he  that  runs  may 
read.  The  propositions  are  few.  I  am  a  sinner,  therefore, 
I  need  a  Saviour,  one  who  is  able  and  willing  to  save  to  the 
uttermost ;  such  a  one  is  Jesus ;  He  is  all  that  I  want- 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption.  But 
will  He  receive  me  ?  Can  I  answer  a  previous  question  ? 
Am  I  willing  to  receive  Him  ?  If  so,  and  if  His  word  may 
be  taken,  if  He  meant  what  He  said,  and  promised  no  more 
than  He  can  perform,  I  may  be  sure  of  a  welcome  ;  He  knew, 
long  before,  the  doubts,  fears,  and  suspicions,  which  would 
arise  in  my  mind  when  I  should  come  to  know  what  I  am, 
what  I  have  done,  and  what  I  have  deserved  ;  and,  therefore, 
He  declared,  before  He  left  the  earth,  "  Him  that  cometh 
to  Me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  I  have  no  money  or 
price  in  my  hand,  no  worthiness  to  recommend  me  ;  and  I 
need  none,  for  He  saveth  freely  for  His  own  name's  sake. 
I  have  only  to  be  thankful  for  what  He  has  already  shown 
me,  and  to  wait  upon  Him  for  more.  It  is  my  part  to  com 
mit  myself  to  Him  as  the  physician  of  sin-sick  souls,  not 
to  prescribe  to  Him  how  He  shall  treat  me.  To  begin,  carry 
on,  and  perfect  the  cure,  is  His  part. 

The  doubts  and  fears  you  speak  of,  are  in  a  greater  or 
lesser  degree,  the  common  experience  of  all  the  Lord's  people, 
at  least  for  a  time  ;  whilst  any  unbelief  remains  in  the 


204  CARDIPHONIA  : 

heart,  and  Satan  is  permitted  to  tempt,  we  shall  feel  these 
things.  In  themselves  they  are  groundless  and  evil ;  yet 
the  Lord  permits  and  overrules  them  for  good.  They  tend 
to  make  us  know  more  of  the  plague  of  our  own  hearts,  and 
feel  more  sensibly  the  need  of  a  Saviour,  and  make  His  rest 
(when  we  attain  it)  doubly  sweet  and  sure.  And  they 
likewise  qualify  us  for  pitying  and  comforting  others. 
Fear  not ;  only  believe,  wait,  and  pray.  Expect  not  all  at 
once.  A  Christian  is  not  of  hasty  growth,  like  a  mushroom, 
but  rather  like  the  oak,  the  progress  of  which  is  hardly 
perceptible,  but,  in  time,  becomes  a  great  deep-rooted  tree. 
If  my  writings  have  been  useful  to  you,  may  the  Lord  have 
the  praise.  To  administer  any  comfort  to  His  children  is 
the  greatest  honour  and  pleasure  I  can  receive  in  this  life. 
I  cannot  promise  to  be  a  very  punctual  correspondent, 
having  many  engagements  ;  but  I  hope  to  do  all  in  my  power 
to  show  myself,  Madam,  Yours,  &c. 


LETTER   II 

MADAM,  August  20,  1776. 

THOUGH,  in  general,  I  think  myself  tolerably  punctual 
when  I  can  answer  a  letter  in  six  or  seven  weeks  after  the 
receipt,  yet  I  feel  some  pain  for  not  having  acknowledged 
yours  sooner.  A  case  like  that  which  you  have  favoured 
with  an  account  of,  deserved  an  immediate  attention,  and 
when  I  read  it,  I  proposed  writing  within  a  post  or  two  ;  and 
I  can  hardly  allow  any  plea  of  business  to  be  sufficient 
excuse  for  delaying  it  so  long  ;  but  our  times  are  in  the  Lord's 
hands :  may  He  now  enable  me  to  send  you  what  may 
prove  a  word  in  season. 

Your  exercises  have  been  by  no  means  singular,  though 
they  may  appear  so  to  yourself ;  because,  in  your  retired 
situation,  you  have  not  (as  you  observe)  had  much  oppor 
tunity  of  knowing  the  experience  of  other  Christians  ;  nor 
has  the  guilt  with  which  your  mind  has  been  so  greatly 
burdened  been  properly  your  own.  It  was  a  temptation 
forced  upon  you  by  the  enemy,  and  he  shall  answer  for  it. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART       205 

Undoubtedly  it  is  a  mournful  proof  of  the  depravity  of  our 
nature,  that  there  is  that  within  us  which  renders  us  so 
easily  susceptive  of  his  suggestions  ;  a  proof  of  our  extreme 
weakness,  that  after  the  clearest  and  most  satisfying  evi 
dences  of  the  truth,  we  are  not  able  to  hold  fast  our  confidence, 
if  the  Lord  permits  Satan  to  sift  and  shake  us.  But  I  can 
assure  you  these  changes  are  not  uncommon.  I  have  known 
persons,  who,  after  walking  with  God  comfortably,  in  the 
main,  for  forty  years,  have  been  at  their  wits'  end  from  such 
assaults  as  you  mention,  and  been  brought  to  doubt,  not 
only  of  the  reality  of  their  own  hopes,  but  of  the  very  ground 
and  foundation  upon  which  their  hopes  were  built.  Had 
you  remained,  as  it  seems  you  once  were,  attached  to 
the  vanities  of  a  gay  and  dissipated  life,  or  could  you  have 
been  contented  with  a  form  of  godliness,  destitute  of  the 
power,  it  is  probable  you  would  have  remained  a  stranger  to 
these  troubles.  Satan  would  have  employed  his  arts  in  a 
different  and  less  perceptible  way,  to  have  soothed  you  into 
a  false  peace,  and  prevented  any  thought  or  suspicion  of 
danger  from  arising  in  your  mind.  But  when  he  could  no 
longer  detain  you  in  his  bondage,  or  seduce  you  back  again 
into  the  world,  then,  of  course,  he  would  change  his  method, 
and  declare  open  war  against  you.  A  specimen  of  his  power 
and  malice  you  have  experienced  :  and  the  Lord  whom  you 
loved,  because  He  first  loved  you,  permitted  it,  not  to  gratify 
Satan,  but  for  your  benefit — to  humble  and  prove  you,  to 
show  you  what  is  in  your  heart,  and  to  do  you  good  in  the 
issue.  These  things,  for  the  present,  are  not  joyous,  but 
grievous  ;  yet,  in  the  end,  they  yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of 
righteousness.  In  the  mean  time  His  eye  is  upon  you  ; 
He  has  appointed  bounds  both  to  the  degree  and  the  duration 
of  the  trial ;  and  He  does  and  will  afford  you  such  support 
that  you  shall  not  be  tried  beyond  what  you  are  enabled  to 
bear.  I  doubt  not  but  your  conflicts  and  sorrows  will,  in 
due  time,  terminate  in  praise  and  victory,  and  be  sanctified 
to  your  fuller  establishment  in  the  truth. 

I  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord's  goodness  to  your  dying 
parent.  How  wisely  timed,  and  how  exactly  suited,  was 
that  affecting  dispensation,  to  break  the  force  of  those 
suggestions  with  which  the  enemy  was  aiming  to  overwhelm 
your  spirit  !  He  could  not  stand  against  such  an  illustrious 


206  CARDIPHONIA  : 

demonstrative  attestation,  that  the  doctrines  you  had 
embraced  were  not  cunningly-devised  fables.  He  could 
proreed  no  farther  in  that  way  ;  but  He  is  fruitful  in  re 
sources.  His  next  attempt,  of  course,  was  to  fix  guilt  upon 
your  conscience,  as  if  you  had  yourself  formed,  and  willingly 
entertained,  those  thoughts,  which,  indeed,  you  suffered 
with  extreme  reluctance  and  pain.  Here,  likewise,  I 
find  he  succeeded  for  a  time  ;  but  He  who  broke  the  former 
snare,  will  deliver  you  from  this  likewise. 

The'  dark  and  dishonourable  thoughts  of  God,  which  I 
hinted  at  as  belonging  to  a  natural  state,  are  very  different 
from  the  thoughts  of  your  heart  concerning  Him.  You  do 
not  conceive  of  Him  as  a  hard  Master,  or  think  you  could  be 
more  happy  in  the  breach  than  in  the  observance  of  His 
precepts.  You  do  not  prefer  the  world  to  His  favour,  or 
think  you  can  please  Him,  and  make  amends  for  your  sins, 
by  an  obedience  of  your  own.  These,  and  such  as  these,  are 
the  thoughts  of  the  natural  heart — the  very  reverse  of  yours. 
One  thought,  however,  I  confess  you  have  indulged,  which  is 
no  less  dishononrable  to  the  Lord  than  uncomfortable  to 
yourself.  You  say,  "  I  dare  not  believe  that  God  will  not 
impute  to  me  as  sin,  the  admission  of  thoughts  which  my 
soul  ever  abhorred,  and  to  which  my  will  never  consented." 
Nay,  you  fear  lest  they  should  not  only  be  imputed,  but 
unpardonable.  But  how  can  this  be  possible  ?  Indeed 
I  will  not  call  it  your  ttwught,  it  is  your  temptation.  You 
tell  me  you  have  children.  Then  you  will  easily  feel  a  plain 
illustration,  wliich  just  now  occurs  to  me.  Let  me  suppose 
a  case  which  has  sometimes  happened  :  a  child  three  or 
four  years  of  age,  we  will  say,  while  playing  incautiously 
at  a  little  distance  from  home,  should  be  suddenly  seized  and 
carried  away  by  a  gipsy.  Poor  thing  !  how  terrified,  how 
distressed  must  it  be  !  Methinks  I  hear  its  cries.  The 
sight  and  violence  of  the  stranger,  the  recollection  of  its  dear 
parents,  the  loss  of  its  pleasing  home,  the  dread  and  uncer 
tainty  of  what  is  yet  to  befal  it.  Is  it  not  a  wonder  that  it 
does  not  die  in  agonies  ?  But  see,  help  is  at  hand  !  the  gipsy 
is  pursued,  and  the  child  recovered.  Now,  my  dear  Madam, 
permit  me  to  ask  you,  if  this  were  your  child,  how  would  you 
receive  it  ?  Perhaps,  when  the  first  transports  of  your  joy 
for  its  safety  would  permit  you,  you  might  gently  chide  it 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   207 

for  leaving  your  door.  But  would  you  disinherit  it  ? 
Would  you  disown  it  ?  Would  you  deliver  it  up  again  to  the 
gipsy  with  your  own  hands,  because  it  had  suffered  a  violence 
which  it  could  not  withstand,  which  it  abhorred,  and  to  which 
its  witt  never  consented  ?  And  yet  what  is  the  tenderness  of 
a  mother,  of  ten  thousand  mothers,  to  that  which  our 
compassionate  Saviour  bears  to  every  poor  soul  that  has 
been  enabled  to  flee  to  Him  for  salvation  ?  Let  us  be  far 
from  charging  that  to  Him,  of  which  we  think  we  are  utterly 
incapable  ourselves.  Take  courage,  Madam ;  resist  the 
devil  and  he  will  flee  from  you.  If  he  were  to  tempt  you  to 
anything  criminal  you  would  start  at  the  thought,  and  re 
nounce  it  with  abhorrence.  Do  the  same  when  he  tempts 
you  to  question  the  Lord's  compassion  and  goodness.  But 
there  he  imposes  upon  us  with  a  show  of  humility,  and 
persuades  us  that  we  do  well  to  oppose  our  unworthiness 
as  a  sufficient  exception  to  the  many  express  promises  of 
the  word.  It  is  said,  the  blood  of  Jesus  cleanse th  from  all 
sin  ;  that  all  manner  of  sin  shall  be  forgiven  for  its  sake  ;  that 
whoever  cometh  He  will  in  no  wise  cast  out  ;  and  that 
He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  Believe  His  word, 
and  Satan  shall  be  found  a  liar.  If  the  child  had  deliberately 
gone  away  with  the  gipsy,  had  preferred  that  wretched  way 
of  life,  had  refused  to  return,  though  frequently  and  tenderly 
invited  home ;  perhaps  its  parent's  love  might,  in  time,  be 
too  weak  for  the  pardon  of  such  continued  obstinacy.  But, 
indeed,  in  this  manner  we  have  all  dealt  with  the  Lord  ; 
and  yet,  whenever  we  are  willing  to  return,  He  is  willing 
to  receive  us  with  open  arms,  and  without  an  upbraiding 
word,  Luke  xv.  20-22.  Though  our  sins  have  been  deep- 
dyed  with  scarlet  and  crimson,  enormous  as  mountains, 
and  countless  as  the  sands,  the  sum  total  is,  sin  has  abounded  ; 
but  where  sin  hath  abounded,  grace  has  much  more  abounded. 
After  all,  I  know  the  Lord  keeps  the  key  of  comfort  in  His 
own  hands,  yet  He  has  commanded  us  to  attempt  comforting 
one  another.  I  should  rejoice  to  be  His  instrument  of  ad 
ministering  comfort  to  you.  I  shall  hope  to  hear  from  you 
soon  ;  and  that  you  will  then  be  able  to  inform  me  He  has 
restored  to  you  the  joys  of  His  salvation.  But  if  not,  yet 
wait  for  Him,  and  you  shall  not  wait  in  vain. 

I  am,  &c., 


CARD1PHONIA  : 


LETTER    III 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  June  —  1777. 

TEMPTATIONS  may  be  compared  to  the  wind,  which, 
when  it  has  ceased  raging  from  one  point,  after  a  short  calm, 
frequently  renews  its  violence  from  another  quarter.  The 
Lord  silenced  Satan's  former  assaults  against  you,  but  he  is 
permitted  to  try  you  again  in  another  way.  Be  of  good 
courage,  Madam  :  wait  upon  the  Lord,  and  the  present  storm 
shall  likewise  subside  in  good  time.  You  have  an  infallible 
Pilot,  and  are  embarked  in  a  bottom  against  which  the  winds 
and  waves  cannot  prevail ;  you  may  be  tossed  about,  and 
think  yourself  in  apparent  jeopardy,  but  sink  you  shall  not, 
except  the  promises  and  faithfulness  of  God  can  fail.  Upon 
an  attentive  consideration  of  your  complaint,  it  seems  to  me 
to  amount  only  to  this,  that  though  the  Lord  has  done  great 
things  for  you,  He  has  not  yet  brought  you  to  a  state  of 
dependence  on  Himself,  nor  released  you  from  that  impossi 
bility,  which  all  His  people  feel,  of  doing  anything  without 
Him.  And  is  this  indeed  a  matter  of  complaint  ?  Is  it  not 
every  way  better,  more  for  His  glory,  and  more  suited  to 
keep  us  mindful  of  our  obligations  to  Him,  and  in  the  event 
more  for  our  safety,  that  we  should  be  reduced  to  a  happy 
necessity  of  receiving  daily  out  of  His  fulness  (as  the  Israel 
ites  received  the  manna)  than  to  be  set  up  with  something 
of  a  stock  of  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  of  our  own  ? 
Adam  was  thus  furnished  at  the  beginning  with  strength  to 
stand  ;  yet,  mutability  being  essential  to  a  creature,  he 
quickly  fell  and  lost  all.  We,  who  are  by  nature  sinners,  are 
not  left  to  so  hazardous  an  experiment.  He  has  Himself 
engaged  to  keep  us,  and  treasured  up  all  fulness  of  grace  for 
our  support,  in  a  Head  who  cannot  fail.  Our  gracious 
Saviour  will  communicate  all  needful  supplies  to  His  mem 
bers,  yet  in  such  a  manner  that  they  shall  feel  their  need  and 
weakness,  and  have  nothing  to  boast  of  from  first  to  last, 
but  His  wisdom,  compassion,  and  care.  \Ve  are  in  no  worse 
circumstances  than  the  apostle  Paul,  who,  though  eminent 
and  exemplary  in  the  Christian  life,  found,  and  freely  con 
fessed,  that  he  had  no  sufficiency  in  himself  to  think  a  good 
thought.  Nor  did  he  wish  it  otherwise  ;  he  even  gloried  in 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   209 

his  infirmities,  that  the  power  of  Christ  might  rest  upon 
him.  Unbelief,  and  a  thousand  evils,  are  still  in  our  hearts  : 
though  their  reign  and  dominion  is  at  an  end,  they  are  not 
slain  or  eradicated  ;  their  effects  will  be  felt  more  or  less 
sensibly,  as  the  Lord  is  pleased  more  or  less  to  afford  or 
abate  His  gracious  influence.  When  they  are  kept  down, 
we  are  no  better  in  ourselves,  for  they  are  not  kept  down  by 
us ;  but  we  are  very  prone  to  think  better  of  ourselves  at 
such  a  time,  and  therefore  He  is  pleased  to  permit  us  at 
seasons  to  feel  a  difference,  that  we  may  never  forget  how 
weak  and  how  vile  we  are.  We  cannot  absolutely  conquer 
these  evils,  but  it  becomes  us  to  be  humbled  for  them  ; 
and  we  are  to  fight,  and  strive,  and  pray  against  them.  Our 
great  duty  is  to  be  at  His  footstool,  and  to  cry  to  Him  who 
has  promised  to  perform  all  things  for  us.  Why  are  we  called 
soldiers,  but  because  we  are  called  to  a  warfare  ?  And 
how  could  we  fight,  if  there  were  no  enemies  to  resist  ? 
The  Lord's  soldiers  are  not  merely  for  show,  to  make  an  empty 
parade  in  a  uniform,  and  to  brandish  their  arms  when  none 
but  friends  and  spectators  are  around  them.  No,  we 
must  stand  upon  the  field  of  battle  ;  we  must  face  the  fiery 
darts ;  we  must  wrestle  (which  is  the  closest  and  most 
arduous  kind  of  fighting)  with  our  foes  ;  nor  can  we  well 
expect  wholly  to  escape  wounds  :  but  the  leaves  of  the  tree 
of  life  are  provided  for  their  healing.  The  Captain  of  our 
salvation  is  at  hand,  and  leads  us  on  with  an  assurance,  which 
might  make  even  a  coward  bold — that  in  the  end  we  shall 
be  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  who  has  loved  us. 

I  am  ready  to  think,  that  some  of  the  sentiments  in  your 
letters  are  not  properly  yours,  such  as  you  yourself  have  de 
rived  from  the  Scriptures,  but  rather  borrowed  from  authors 
or  preachers,  whose  judgments  your  humility  has  led  you  to 
prefer  to  your  own.  At  least  I  am  sure  the  Scripture  does 
not  authorize  the  conclusion  which  distresses  you,  that  if 
you  were  a  child  of  God  you  should  not  feel  such  changes 
and  oppositions.  Were  I  to  define  a  Christian,  or  rather  to 
describe  him  at  large,  I  know  no  text  I  would  choose  sooner 
as  a  ground  for  the  subject,  than  Gal.  v.  17.  A  Christian 
has  noble  aims,  which  distinguish  him  from  the  bulk"' of 
mankind.  His  leading  principles,  motives,  and  desires,  are 
all  supernatural  and  divine.  Could  he  do  as  he  would,  there 
c.  o 


210  CARDIPHONIA  : 

is  not  a  spirit  before  the  throne  should  excel  him  in  holiness, 
love,  and  obedience.  He  would  tread  in  the  very  footsteps 
of  his  Saviour,  fill  up  every  moment  in  His  service,  and 
employ  every  breath  in  His  praise.  This  he  would  do,  but, 
alas  !  he  cannot.  Against  this  desire  of  the  spirit,  there 
is  a  contrary  desire  and  working  of  a  corrupt  nature,  which 
meets  him  at  every  turn.  He  has  a  beautiful  copy  set  before 
him  :  he  is  enamoured  with  it,  and  though  he  does  not  ex 
pect  to  equal  it,  he  writes  carefully  after  it,  and  longs  to  at 
tain  to  the  nearest  possible  imitation.  But  indwelling  sin 
and  Satan  continually  jog  his  hand,  and  spoil  his  strokes. 
You  cannot,  Madam,  form  a  right  judgment  of  yourself, 
except  you  make  due  allowance  for  those  things  which  are 
not  peculiar  to  yourself,  but  common  to  all  who  have  spiritual 
perception,  and  are  indeed  the  inseparable  appendages  of 
this  mortal  state.  If  it  were  not  so,  why  should  the  most 
spiritual  and  gracious  people  be  so  ready  to  confess  them 
selves  vile  and  worthless  ?  One  eminent  branch  of  our 
holiness  is  a  sense  of  shame  and  humiliation  for  those  evils 
which  are  only  known  to  ourselves,  and  to  Him  who  searches 
our  hearts,  joined  with  an  acquiescence  in  Jesus,  who  is 
appointed  of  God — wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification, 
and  redemption.  I  will  venture  to  assure  you,  that  thougli 
you  will  possess  a  more  stable  peace,  in  proportion  as  the 
Lord  enables  you  to  live  more  simply  upon  the  blood,  right 
eousness,  and  grace  of  the  Mediator,  you  will  never  grow 
into  a  better  opinion  of  yourself  than  you  have  at  present. 
The  nearer  you  are  brought  to  Him,  the  quicker  sense  you 
will  have  of  your  continual  need  of  Him,  and  thereby  your 
admiration  of  His  power,  love,  and  compassion,  will  increase 
likewise  from  year  to  year. 

I  would  observe  farther,  that  our  spiritual  exercises 
are  not  a  little  influenced  by  our  constitutional  temperament. 
As  you  are  only  an  ideal  correspondent,  I  can  but  conjecture 
about  you  upon  this  head.  If  your  frame  is  delicate,  and 
your  nervous  system  very  sensible  and  tender,  I  should 
probably  ascribe  some  of  your  apprehensions  to  this  cause. 
It  is  an  abstruse  subject,  and  I  will  not  enter  into  it ;  but 
according  to  the  observations  I  have  made,  persons  of  this 
habit  seem  to  live  more  upon  the  confines  of  the  invisible 
world,  if  I  may  so  speak,  and  to  be  more  susceptive  of 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   211 

impressions  from  it,  than  others.  That  complaint  which, 
for  want  of  a  better  name,  we  call  lowness  of  spirits,  may 
probably  afford  the  enemy  some  peculiar  advantages  and 
occasions  of  distressing  you.  The  mind  then  perceives 
objects  as  through  a  tinctured  medium,  which  gives  them  a 
dark  and  discouraging  appearance  ;  and  I  believe  Satan  has 
more  influence  and  address  than  we  are  aware  of  in  managing 
the  glass.  And  when  this  is  not  the  case  at  all  times,  it  may 
be  so  occasionally,  from  sickness,  or  other  circumstances. 
You  tell  me  that  you  have  lately  been  ill,  which,  together 
with  your  present  situation,  and  the  prospect  of  your  ap 
proaching  hour,  may  probably  have  such  an  effect  as  I  have 
hinted.  You  may  be  charging  yourself  with  guilt,  for  what 
springs  from  indisposition,  in  which  you  are  merely  passive, 
and  which  may  be  no  more  properly  sinful,  than  the  headache 
or  any  of  the  thousand  natural  shocks  the  flesh  is  heir  to. 
The  enemy  can  take  no  advantage  but  what  the  Lord  per 
mits  him  ;  and  He  will  permit  him  none  but  what  He 
designs  to  overrule  for  your  greater  advantage  in  the  end. 
He  delights  in  your  prosperity ;  and  you  should  not  be  in 
heaviness  for  an  hour,  were  there  not  a  need-be  for  it. 
Notwithstanding  your  fears,  I  have  a  good  hope,  that  He 
who  you  say  has  helped  you  in  six  troubles,  will  appear  for 
you  in  the  seventh  ;  that  you  will  not  die,  but  live  and 
declare  the  works  of  the  Lord,  and  come  forth  to  testify  to 
His  praise,  that  He  has  turned  your  mourning  into  joy. 

I  am,  &c. 


TWO     LETTERS 

TO 

MISS   F 

LETTER    I 

DEAR  MADAM,  October  3,  1778. 

You  would  have  me  tell  you  what  are  the  best  means 
to  be  used  by  a  young  person,  to  prevent  the  world,  with  all 
its  opening  and  ensnaring  scenes,  from  drawing  the  heart 
aside  from  God.  It  is  an  important  question  :  but  I  appre 
hend  your  own  heart  will  tell  you,  that  you  are  already 
possessed  of  all  the  information  concerning  it  which  you  can 
well  expect  from  me.  I  could  only  attempt  to  answer  it 
from  the  Bible,  which  lies  open  to  you  likewise.  If  your 
heart  is  like  mine,  it  must  confess,  that  when  it  turns  aside 
from  God,  it  is  seldom  through  ignorance  of  the  proper  means 
or  motives  which  should  have  kept  us  near  Him,  but  rather 
from  an  evil  principle  within,  which  prevails  against  our 
better  judgment,  and  renders  us  unfaithful  to  light  already 
received. 

I  could  offer  you  rules,  cautions,  and  advices  in  abundance  ; 
for  I  find  it  comparatively  easy  to  preach  to  others.  But 
if  you  should  further  ask  me,  how  you  shall  effectually 
reduce  them  to  practice,  I  feel  that  I  am  so  deficient,  and 
so  much  at  a  loss  in  this  matter  myself,  that  I  know  not  well 
what  to  say  to  you.  Yet  something  must  be  said. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  I  would  observe,  that  though  it 
be  our  bounden  duty,  and  the  highest  privilege  we  can 
propose  to  ourselves,  to  have  our  hearts  kept  close  to  the 
Lord  ;  yet  we  must  not  expect  it  absolutely  or  perfectly, 
much  less  all  at  once  ;  we  shall  keep  close  to  Him,  in  pro 
portion  as  we  are  solidly  convinced  of  the  infinite  disparity 

212 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE   HEART       213 

between  Him  and  the  things  which  would  presume  to  stand  in 
competition  with  Him,  and  the  folly,  as  well  as  ingratitude, 
of  departing  from  Him.  But  these  points  are  only  to  be 
learned  by  experience,  and  by  smarting  under  a  series  of 
painful  disappointments  in  our  expectations  from  creatures. 
Our  judgments  may  be  quickly  satisfied  that  His  favour  is 
better  than  life,  while  yet  it  is  in  the  power  of  a  mere  trifle 
to  turn  us  aside.  The  Lord  permits  us  to  feel  our  weakness, 
that  we  may  be  sensible  of  it ;  for  though  we  are  ready  in 
words  to  confess  that  we  are  weak,  we  do  not  properly  know 
it,  till  that  secret,  though  unallowed,  dependence  we  have 
upon  some  strength  in  ourselves,  is  brought  to  the  trial  and 
fails  us.  To  be  humble,  and  like  a  little  child,  afraid  of 
taking  a  step  alone,  and  so  conscious  of  snares  and  dangers 
around  us  as  to  cry  to  Him  continually  to  hold  us  up  that 
we  may  be  safe,  is  the  sure,  the  infallible,  the  only  secret  of 
walking  closely  with  Him. 

But  how  shall  we  attain  this  humble  frame  of  spirit  ?  It 
must  be,  as  I  said,  from  a  real  and  sensible  conviction  of  our 
weakness  and  vileness,  which  we  cannot  learn  (at  least  I  have 
not  been  able  to  learn  it)  merely  from  books  or  preachers. 
The  providence  of  God  concurs  with  His  Holy  Spirit,  in  His 
merciful  design  of  making  us  acquainted  with  ourselves. 
It  is,  indeed,  a  great  mercy  to  be  preserved  from  such  de 
clensions  as  might  fall  under  the  notice  of  our  fellow-crea 
tures  ;  but  when  they  can  observe  nothing  of  consequence  to 
object  to  us,  things  may  be  far  from  right  with  us  in  the  sight 
of  Him  who  judges  not  only  actions,  but  the  thoughts  and 
first  motions  of  the  heart.  And  indeed  could  we  for  a  season 
so  cleave  to  God  as  to  find  little  or  nothing  in  ourselves  to 
be  ashamed  of,  we  are  such  poor  creatures,  that  we  should 
presently  grow  vain  and  self-sufficient,  and  expose  ourselves 
to  the  greatest  danger  of  falling. 

There  are,  however,  means  to  be  observed  on  our  part ; 
and  though  you  know  them,  I  will  repeat  the  principal, 
because  you  desire  me.  The  first  is  prayer :  and  here, 
above  all  things,  we  should  pray  for  humility.  It  may 
be  called  both  the  guard  of  all  other  graces,  and  the  soil  in 
which  they  grow.  The  second,  attention  to  the  Scripture. 
Your  question  is  directly  answered  in  Psalm  cxix.  9.  The 
precepts  are  our  rule  and  delight,  the  promises  our  strength 


214  CARDIPHONIA  : 

and  encouragement ;  the  good  recorded  of  the  saints  is 
proposed  for  our  encouragement ;  their  miscarriages  are  as 
landmarks  set  up  to  warn  us  of  the  rocks  and  shoals  which 
lie  in  the  way  of  our  passage.  The  study  of  the  whole 
scheme  of  Gospel-salvation,  respecting  the  person,  life, 
doctrine,  death,  and  glory  of  our  Redeemer,  is  appointed  to 
form  our  souls  to  a  spiritual  and  divine  taste  ;  and  so  far  as 
this  prevails  and  grows  in  us,  the  trifles  that  would  draw  us 
from  the  Lord  will  lose  their  influence,  and  appear  divested 
of  the  glare  with  which  they  strike  the  senses,  mere  vanity 
and  nothing.  The  third  grand  means  is,  consideration  of 
recollection,  a  careful  regard  to  those  temptations  and  snares 
to  which,  from  our  tempers,  situations,  or  connexions,  we  are 
more  immediately  exposed,  and  by  which  we  have  been  for 
merly  hindered.  It  may  be  well  in  the  morning,  ere  we  leave 
our  chambers,  to  forecast,  as  far  as  we  are  able,  the  probable 
circumstances  of  the  day  before  us.  Yet  the  observance  of 
this,  as  well  as  of  every  rule  that  can  be  offered,  may  dwindle 
into  a  mere  form.  However,  I  trust  the  Lord,  who  has 
given  you  a  desire  to  live  to  Him,  will  be  your  Guard  and 
Teacher.  There  is  none  that  teacheth  like  Him. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    11 

DEAR  MADAM,  March  —  1779- 

OUR  experiences  pretty  much  tally  ;  they  may  be  drawn 
out  into  sheets  and  quires,  but  the  sum  total  may  be  com 
prised  in  a  short  sentence,  "  Our  life  is  a  warfare."  For  our 
encouragement  the  apostle  calls  it  a  good  warfare.  We  are 
engaged  in  a  good  cause,  fight  under  a  good  Captain,  the 
victory  is  sure  beforehand,  and  the  prize  is  a  crown,  a 
crown  of  life.  Such  considerations  might  make  even  a 
coward  bold.  But  then  we  must  be  content  to  fight ;  and 
considering  the  nature,  number,  situation,  and  subtlety  of 
our  enemies,  we  may  expect  sometimes  to  receive  a  wound  ; 
but  there  is  a  medicinal  tree,  the  leaves  of  which  are  always 
at  hand  to  heal  us.  We  cannot  be  too  attentive  to  the  evil 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   215 

which  is  always  working  in  us,  or  to  the  stratagems  which 
are  employed  against  us  ;    yet  our  attention  should  not  be 
wholly  confined  to  these  things.     We  are  to  look  upwards 
likewise  to  Him,  who  is  our  Head,  our  Life,  our  Strength. 
One  glance  of  Jesus  will  convey  more  effectual  assistance 
than  poring  upon  our  own  hearts  for  a  month.     The  one  is 
to  be  done,  but  the  other  should  upon  no  account  be  omitted. 
It  was  not  by  counting  their  wounds,  but  by  beholding  the 
brazen  serpent,  the  Lord's  instituted  means  of  cure,  that  the 
Israelites  were  healed.     That  was  an  emblem  for  our  instruc 
tion.     One  great  cause  of  our  frequent  conflicts  is,  that  we 
have  a  secret  desire  to  be  rich,  and  it  is  the  Lord's  design  to 
make  us  poor.     We  want  to  gain  an  ability  of  doing  some 
thing  ;   and  He  suits  His  dispensations,  to  convince  us  that 
we  can  do  nothing.     We  want  a  stock  in  ourselves,  and  He 
would  have  us  absolutely  dependent  upon  Him.     So  far  as 
we  are  content  to  be  weak,  that  His  power  may  be  magnified 
in  us,  so  far  we  shall  make  our  enemies  know  that  we  are 
strong,  though  we  ourselves  shall  never  be  directly  sensible 
that  we  are  so ;  only  by  comparing  what  we  are,  with  the 
opposition  we  stand  against,  we  may  come  to  a  comfortable 
conclusion,  that  the  Lord  worketh  mightily  in  us  (Psa.  xli.  n). 
If  our  views  are  simple,  and  our  desires  towards  the  Lord, 
it  may  be  of  use  to  consider  some  of  your  faults  and  mine, 
not  as  the  faults  of  you  and  me  in  particular,  but  as  the  fault 
of  that  depraved  nature,  which  is  common  with  us  to  all  the 
Lord's  people,  and  which  made  Paul  groan  as  feelingly  and 
as  heartily  as  we  can  do.     But  this  consideration,  though 
true  and  Scriptural,  can  only  be  safely  applied  when  the  mind 
is  sincerely,  and  in  good  earnest,  devoted  to  the  Lord. 
There  are  too  many  unsound  and  half  professors,  who  eagerly 
catch  at  it,  as  an  excuse  for  those  evils  they  are  unwilling  to 
part  with.     But  I  trust  I  may  safely  recommend  it  to  you. 
This  evil  nature,  this  indwelling  sin,  is  a  living  principle, 
an  active,  powerful  cause  ;    and  a  cause  that  is  active  will 
necessarily  produce  an  effect.     Sin  is  the  same  thing  in 
believers  as  in  the  unregenerate  ;   they  have,  indeed,  a  con 
trary  principle  of  grace,  which  counteracts  and  resists  it, 
which  can  prevent  its  outbreakings,  but  will  not  suppress 
its  risings.     As  grace  resists  sin,  so  sin  resists  grace,  Gal.  v.  17. 
The  proper  tendency  of  each  is  mutually  weakened  on  both 


216  CAKDIPHONIA  : 

sides  ;  and,  between  the  two,  the  poor  believer,  however 
blameless  and  exemplary  in  the  sight  of  men,  appears,  in 
his  own  view,  the  most  inconsistent  character  under  the  sun. 
He  can  hardly  think  it  is  so  with  others ;  and,  judging  of 
them  by  what  he  sees,  and  of  himself  by  what  he  feels,  in 
lowliness  of  heart,  he  esteems  others  better  than  himself. 
This  proves  him  to  be  right ;  for  it  is  the  will  of  God  concern 
ing  him,  Phil.  ii.  3.  This  is  the  warfare.  But  it  shall  not 
always  be  so.  Grace  shall  prevail.  The  evil  nature  is 
already  enervated,  and  ere  long  it  shall  die  the  death.  Jesus 
will  make  us  more  than  conquerors. 

I  am,  &c. 


TWO     LETTERS 

TO 

MR.    A B- 


LETTER    I 

DEAR  SIR,  1758. 

I  SUPPOSE  you  will  receive  many  congratulations  on 
your  recovery  from  your  late  dangerous  illness  ;  most  of 
them,  perhaps,  more  sprightly  and  better  turned,  but  none, 
I  persuade  myself,  more  sincere  and  affectionate  than  mine. 
I  beg  you  would  prepare  yourself  by  this  good  opinion  of 
me,  before  you  read  further  ;  and  let  the  reality  of  my  regard 
excuse  what  you  may  dislike  in  my  manner  of  expressing  it. 

When  a  person  is  returned  from  a  doubtful  distant  voy 
age,  we  are  naturally  led  to  inquire  into  the  incidents  he  has 
met  with,  and  the  discoveries  he  has  made.  Indulge  me  in 
a  curiosity  of  this  kind,  especially  as  my  affection  gives  me 
an  interest  and  concern  in  the  event.  You  have  been,  my 
friend,  upon  the  brink,  the  very  edge,  of  an  eternal  state  ; 
but  God  has  restored  you  back  to  the  world  again.  Did  you 
meet  with,  or  have  you  brought  back,  nothing  new  ?  Did 
nothing  occur  to  stop  or  turn  your  usual  train  of  thought  ? 
Were  your  apprehensions  of  invisible  things  exactly  the  same 
in  the  height  of  your  disorder,  when  you  were  cut  off  from 
the  world  and  all  its  engagements,  as  when  you  were  in  perfect 
health,  and  in  the  highest  enjoyment  of  your  own  inclina 
tions  ?  If  you  answer  me,  "  Yes,  all  things  are  just  the  same 
as  formerly,  the  difference  between  sickness  and  health 
only  excepted,"  I  am  at  a  loss  how  to  reply.  I  can  only 
sigh  and  wonder  ;  sigh,  that  it  should  be  thus  with  any,  that 
it  should  be  thus  with  you,  whom  I  dearly  love  ;  and 
wonder,  since  this  unhappy  case,  strange  as  it  seems  in  one 
view,  is  yet  so  frequent,  why  it  was  not  always  thus  with 

217 


2i8  CARDIPHONIA  : 

myself :  for  long  and  often  it  was  just  so.  Many  a  time, 
when  sickness  had  brought  me,  as  we  say,  to  death's  door, 
I  was  as  easy  and  insensible  as  the  sailor,  who,  in  the  height 
of  a  storm,  should  presume  to  sleep  upon  the  top  of  the  mast, 
quite  regardless  that  the  next  tossing  wave  might  plunge 
him  into  the  raging  ocean,  beyond  all  possibility  of  relief. 
But,  at  length,  a  day  came,  which,  though  the  most  terrible 
day  I  ever  saw,  I  can  now  look  back  upon  with  thankfulness 
and  pleasure  :  I  say  the  time  came,  when,  in  such  a  helpless 
extremity,  and  under  the  expectation  of  immediate  death, 
it  pleased  God  to  command  the  veil  from  my  eyes,  and  I  saw 
things,  in  some  measure,  as  they  really  were.  Imagine, 
with  yourself,  a  person  trembling  upon  the  point  of  a  dreadful 
precipice,  a  powerful  and  inexorable  enemy  eager  to  push 
him  down,  and  an  assemblage  of  all  that  is  horrible  waiting 
at  the  bottom  for  his  fall  ;  even  this  will  give  you  but  a 
faint  representation  of  the  state  of  my  mind  at  that  time. 
Believe  me,  it  was  not  a  whim  or  a  dream  which  changed 
my  sentiments  and  conduct,  but  a  powerful  conviction  which 
will  not  admit  the  least  doubt,  an  evidence  which,  like  that 
I  have  of  my  own  existence,  I  cannot  call  in  question  with 
out  contradicting  all  my  senses.  And  though  my  case  was, 
in  some  respects,  uncommon,  yet  something  like  it  is  known 
by  one  and  another  every  day  ;  and  I  have  myself  con 
versed  with  many,  who,  after  a  course  of  years  spent  in 
defending  Deistical  principles,  or  indulging  libertine  practices, 
when  they  have  thought  themselves  confirmed  in  their 
schemes  by  the  cool  assent  of  what  they  then  deemed 
impartial  reason,  have  been,  like  me,  brought  to  glory  in  the 
Cross  of  Christ,  and  to  live  by  that  faith  which  they  had 
before  slighted  and  opposed.  By  these  instances,  I  know 
that  nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Almighty.  The  same  power 
which  humbled  me,  can,  undoubtedly,  bring  down  the  most 
haughty  infidel  upon  earth  ;  and  as  I  likewise  know  that, 
to  show  His  power,  He  is  often  pleased  to  make  use  of  weak 
instruments,  I  am  encouraged,  notwithstanding  the  appar 
ent  difficulty  of  succeeding,  to  warn  those  over  whom 
friendship  or  affection  gives  me  any  influence,  of  the  evil  and 
the  danger  of  a  course  of  life  formed  upon  the  prevailing 
maxims  of  the  world.  So  far  as  I  neglect  this,  I  am  unfaith 
ful  in  my  professions  both  to  God  and  man. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   219 

I  shall  not,  at  present,  trouble  you  in  an  argumentative  way. 
If,  by  dint  of  reasoning,  I  could  effect  some  change  in  your 
notions,  my  arguments,  unless  applied  by  a  superior  power, 
would  still  leave  your  heart  unchanged  and  untouched. 
A  man  may  give  his  assent  to  the  Gospel,  and  be  able  to  defend 
it  against  others,  and  yet  not  have  his  own  spirit  truly 
influenced  by  it.  This  thought  I  shall  leave  with  you,  that 
if  your  scheme  be  not  true  to  a  demonstration,  it  must 
necessarily  be  false  ;  for  the  issue  is  too  important  to  make 
a  doubt  on  the  dangerous  side  tolerable.  If  the  Christian 
could  possibly  be  mistaken,  he  is  still  upon  equal  terms 
with  those  who  pronounce  him  to  be  so ;  but  if  the  Deist  be 
wrong  (that  is,  if  we  are  in  the  right)  the  consequence  to 
him  must  be  unavoidable  and  intolerable.  This,  you  will 
say,  is  a  trite  argument :  I  own  it ;  but,  beaten  as  it  is, 
it  will  never  be  worn  out  or  answered. 

Permit  me  to  remind  you,  that  the  points  in  debate 
between  us  are  already  settled  in  themselves,  and  that 
our  talking  cannot  alter  or  affect  the  nature  of  things  ; 
for  they  will  be  as  they  are,  whatever  apprehensions  we  may 
form  of  them  :  and  remember,  likewise,  that  we  must  all, 
each  one  for  himself,  experience  on  which  side  the  truth  lies. 
I  used  a  wrong  word  when  I  spoke  of  your  recovery  :  my  dear 
friend,  look  upon  it  only  as  a  reprieve  ;  for  you  carry  the 
sentence  of  death  about  with  you  still ;  and  unless  you  should 
be  cut  off  (which  God  of  His  mercy  forbid  !)  by  a  sudden 
stroke,  you  will  as  surely  lie  upon  a  death-bed,  as  you  have 
been  now  raised  from  a  bed  of  sickness.  And  remember, 
likewise  (how  can  I  bear  to  write  it !)  that,  should  you 
neglect  my  admonitions,  they  will,  notwithstanding,  have 
an  effect  upon  you,  though  not  such  an  effect  as  I  could  wish : 
they  will  render  you  more  inexcusable.  I  have  delivered 
my  own  soul,  by  faithfully  warning  you  :  but  if  you  will  not 
examine  the  matter  with  that  seriousness  it  calls  for  ;  if 
you  will  not  look  up  to  God,  the  former  of  your  body,  and 
the  preserver  of  your  Spirit,  for  direction  and  assistance 
how  to  please  Him  ;  if  you  will  have  your  reading  and 
conversation  only  on  one  side  of  the  question  ;  if  you  deter 
mine  to  let  afflictions  and  dangers,  mercies  and  deliverances, 
all  pass  without  reflection  and  improvement ;  if  you  will 
spend  your  life  as  though  you  thought  you  were  sent  into 


220  CARDIPHONIA  : 

the  world  only  to  eat,  sleep,  and  play,  and,  after  a  course  of 
years,  be  extinguished  like  the  snuff  of  a  candle — why, 
then,  you  must  abide  the  consequences.  But  assuredly, 
sooner  or  later,  God  will  meet  you.  My  hearty  daily  prayer 
is,  that  it  may  be  in  a  way  of  mercy,  and  that  you  may  be 
added  to  the  number  of  the  trophies  of  His  invincible  grace. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    II 
DEAR  SIR,  1760. 

THOUGH  I  truly  love  you,  and  have  no  reason  to  doubt 
of  the  reality  of  your  friendship  to  me,  yet  I  cannot  but 
apprehend  that,  notwithstanding  our  mutual  regard,  and 
my  frequent  attempts  to  be  witty  (if  I  could)  for  your 
diversion,  there  is  something  in  most  of  my  letters  (which 
I  cannot,  dare  not,  wholly  suppress)  that  disgusts  and 
wearies  you,  and  makes  you  less  inclined  to  keep  up  a 
frequent  intercourse  than  you  would  otherwise  be.  Rather 
than  lose  you  quite,  I  will  in  general  spare  you  as  much  as 
I  can  ;  but  at  present  you  must  bear  with  me,  and  allow  me 
full  scope.  You  have  given  me  a  challenge,  which  I  know 
not  how  to  pass  over  ;  and  since  you  so  far  justify  my 
preaching  as  to  condescend  to  preach  (in  your  way)  yourself, 
permit  me  for  this  time  to  preach  again,  and  to  take  some 
passages  in  your  letter  for  my  text. 

In  the  present  debate  I  will  accept  your  compliment, 
and  suppose  myself  to  be,  as  you  say,  a  man  of  sense.  You 
allow,  then,  that  all  the  sense  is  not  on  your  side.  This, 
indeed,  you  cannot  deny  ;  for,  whatever  becomes  of  me, 
it  is  needless  to  tell  you,  that  Hale,  Boyle,  and  other  great 
names  I  could  mention,  were  men  of  as  great  penetration  and 
judgment,  had  as  good  opportunities,  and  took  as  much 
pains  to  be  informed  of  the  truth,  as  any  of  the  advocates 
for  infidelity  can  pretend  to.  And  you  cannot,  with  any 
modesty  or  conscience,  absolutely  determine,  that  they  had 
not  as  good  grounds  for  thinking  themselves  right  as  you 
can  have  for  concluding  they  are  wrong. 

But,  declining  the  advantage  of  human  authority,  I  am 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   221 

content  the  point  shall  rest  between  you  and  me.  And  here 
I  beg  you  to  observe,  that  I  have  one  evident  advantage 
over  you  in  judging,  namely,  that  I  have  experienced  the 
good  and  evil  on  both  sides,  and  you  only  on  one.  If  you 
were  to  send  me  an  inventory  of  your  pleasures,  how  charm 
ingly  your  time  runs  on,  and  how  dexterously  it  is  divided 
between  the  coffee-houses,  play-house,  the  card-table,  and 
tavern,  with  intervals  of  balls,  concerts,  &c. ,  I  could  answer, 
that  most  of  these  I  have  tried  and  tried  again,  and  know 
the  utmost  they  can  yield,  and  have  seen  enough  of  the 
rest  most  heartily  to  despise  them  all.  Setting  religion 
entirely  out  of  the  question,  I  profess  I  had  rather  be  a 
worm  to  crawl  upon  the  ground,  than  to  bear  the  name 
of  MAN  upon  the  poor  terms  of  whiling  away  my  life  in  an 
insipid  round  of  such  insignificant  and  unmanly  trifles.  I 
will  return  your  own  expression — I  believe  you  to  be  a 
person  of  sense ;  but,  alas  !  how  do  you  prostitute  your 
talents  and  capacity,  how  far  do  you  act  below  yourself, 
if  you  know  no  higher  purpose  of  life  than  these  childish 
dissipations,  together  with  the  more  serious  business  of 
rising  early  and  sitting  up  late,  to  amass  money  that  you 
may  be  able  to  enlarge  your  expenses  !  I  am  sure,  while 
I  lived  in  these  things,  I  found  them  unsatisfying  and  empty 
to  the  last  degree ;  and  the  only  advantage  they  afforded 
(miserable  are  they  who  are  forced  to  deem  it  an  advantage) 
was,  that  they  only  relieved  me  from  the  trouble  and  burden 
of  thinking.  If  you  have  any  other  pleasures  than  these, 
they  are  such  as  must  be  evil  and  inconvenient  even  upon 
your  own  plan  ;  and  therefore  my  friendship  will  not  allow 
me  to  bring  them  into  the  account.  I  am  willing  to  hope 
you  do  not  stoop  still  lower  in  pursuit  of  satisfaction.  Thus 
far  we  stand  upon  even  ground.  You  know  all  that  a  life 
of  pleasure  can  give,  and  I  know  it  likewise. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  I  should  attempt  to  explain  to  you 
the  source  and  streams  of  my  best  pleasures,  such  as  a 
comfortable  assurance  of  the  pardon  of  my  sins,  an  habitual 
communion  with  the  God  who  made  Heaven  and  earth, 
a  calm  reliance  on  the  Divine  providence,  the  cheering  pros 
pect  of  a  better  life  in  a  better  world,  with  the  pleasing 
foretastes  of  Heaven  in  my  own  soul ;  should  I,  or  could  I, 
tell  you  the  pleasure  I  often  find  in  reading  the  Scripture, 


222  CARDIPHONIA  : 

in  the  exercise  of  prayer,  and  in  that  sort  of  preaching  and 
conversation  which  you  despise  ;  I  doubt  not  but  you  would 
think  as  meanly  of  my  happiness  as  I  do  of  yours.  But  here 
lies  the  difference,  my  dear  friend  ;  you  condemn  that 
which  you  have  never  tried.  You  know  no  more  of  these 
things  than  a  blind  man  does  of  colours ;  and,  notwithstand 
ing  all  your  flourishes,  I  defy  you  to  be  at  all  times  able  to 
satisfy  yourself  that  things  may  not  possibly  be  as  I  have 
represented  them. 

Besides,  what  do  I  lose  upon  my  plan  that  should  make 
me  so  worthy  of  your  pity  ?  Have  you  a  quicker  relish  in 
the  prudent  use  of  temporal  comforts  ?  Do  you  think  I 
do  not  eat  my  food  with  as  much  pleasure  as  you  can  do, 
though,  perhaps,  with  less  cost  and  variety  ?  Is  your  sleep 
sounder  than  mine  ?  Have  not  I  as  much  satisfaction  in 
social  life  ?  It  is  true,  to  join  much  with  the  gay  fluttering 
tribe,  who  spend  their  days  in  laugh  and  sing-song,  is  equally 
contrary  to  my  duty  and  inclination.  But  I  have  friends 
and  acquaintance  as  well  as  you.  Among  the  many  who 
favour  me  with  their  esteem  and  friendship,  there  are  some 
who  are  persons  of  sense,  learning,  wit,  and  (what  perhaps 
may  weigh  as  much  with  you)  of  fortune  and  distinction. 
And  if  you  should  say,  "  Aye,  but  they  are  all  enthusiasts 
like  yourself,"  you  would  say  nothing  to  the  purpose,  since, 
upon  your  maxim,  that  "  happiness  is  according  to  opinion," 
it  cannot  be  an  objection,  but  the  contrary,  to  have  my 
acquaintance  to  my  own  taste.  Thus  much  for  the  brighter 
side  of  your  situation — or  let  me  add  one  thing  more. 
I  know  you  have  thoughts  of  marriage ;  do  you  think,  if 
you  should  enter  into  this  relation,  your  principles  are 
calculated  to  make  you  more  happy  in  it  than  I  am  ?  You 
are  well  acquainted  with  our  family  life.  Do  you  propose 
to  know  more  of  the  peace  and  heart-felt  joy  of  domestic 
union  than  I  have  known,  and  continue  to  know  to  this 
hour  ?  I  wish  you  may  equal  us  ;  and,  if  you  do,  we  shall 
still  be  as  before,  but  upon  even  ground.  I  need  not  turn 
Deist,  to  enjoy  the  best  and  the  most  that  this  life  can  afford. 

But  I  need  not  tell  you  that  the  present  life  is  not  made 
up  of  pleasurable  incidents  only.  Pain,  sickness,  losses, 
disappointments,  injuries,  and  affronts,  will,  more  or  less, 
at  one  time  or  other,  be  our  lot.  And  can  you  bear  these 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   223 

trials  better  than  I  ?  You  will  not  pretend  to  it.  Let  me 
appeal  to  yourself :  how  often  do  you  toss  and  disquiet 
yourself,  like  a  wild  bull  in  a  net,  when  things  cross  your 
expectations  ?  As  your  thoughts  are  more  engrossed  by 
what  you  see,  you  must  be  more  keenly  sensible  of  what 
you  feel.  You  cannot  view  these  trials  as  appointed  by  a 
wise  and  Heavenly  Father,  in  subservience  to  your  good  ; 
you  cannot  taste  the  sweetness  of  His  promises,  nor  feel  the 
secret  supports  of  His  strength  in  an  hour  of  affliction  ; 
you  cannot  so  cast  your  burden  and  care  upon  Him,  as  to 
find  a  sensible  relief  to  your  spirit  thereby,  nor  can  you  see 
His  hand  engaged  and  employed  in  effecting  your  deliver 
ance.  Of  these  things  you  know  no  more  than  of  the  art 
of  flying  ;  but  I  seriously  assure  you,  and  I  believe  my  testi 
mony  will  go  farther  with  you  than  my  judgment,  that  they 
are  realities,  and  that  I  have  found  them  to  be  so.  When 
my  worldly  concerns  have  been  most  thorny  and  discourag 
ing,  I  have  once  and  again  felt  the  most  of  that  peace  which 
the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  However,  I  may 
state  the  case  still  lower.  You  do  pretty  well  among  your 
friends  ;  but  how  do  you  like  being  alone  ?  Would  you  not 
give  something  for  that  happy  secret,  which  could  enable 
you  to  pass  a  rainy  day  pleasantly,  without  the  assistance 
of  business,  company,  or  amusement  ?  Would  it  not  mortify 
you  greatly  to  travel  for  a  week  on  an  unfrequented  road, 
where  you  shall  meet  with  no  lively  incidents  to  recruit  and 
raise  your  spirits  ?  Alas  !  what  a  poor  scheme  of  pleasure 
is  yours,  that  will  not  support  an  interval  of  reflection  ! 

What  you  have  heard  is  true ;  I  have  a  few  friends 
who  meet  at  my  house  once  a  fortnight,  and  we  spend 
an  hour  or  two  in  worshipping  the  God  who  made  us.  And 
can  this  move  your  indignation,  or  your  compassion  ?  Does 
it  show  a  much  nobler  spirit,  a  more  refined  way  of  thinking, 
to  live  altogether  without  God  in  the  world  ?  If  I  kept 
a  card-assembly  at  those  times,  it  would  not  displease  you. 
How  can  you,  as  a  person  of  sense,  avoid  being  shocked 
at  your  own  unhappy  prejudice  ?  But  I  remember  how  it 
was  once  with  myself,  and  forbear  to  wonder.  May  He 
who  has  opened  my  eyes,  open  yours  !  He  only  can  do  it ! 
I  do  not  expect  to  convince  you  by  anything  I  can  say  as  of 
myself ;  but,  if  He  be  pleased  to  make  use  of  me  as  His 


224  CARDIPHONIA  : 

instrument,  then  you  will  be  convinced.  How  should  I 
then  rejoice  !  I  should  rejoice  to  be  useful  to  any  one  ; 
but  especially  to  you,  whom  I  dearly  love.  May  God 
show  you  your  true  self,  and  your  true  state  ;  then  you  will 
attentively  listen  to  what  you  now  disdain  to  hear  of,  His 
goodness  in  providing  redemption  and  pardon  for  the  chief 
of  sinners,  through  Him  who  died  upon  the  Cross  for  sins 
not  His  own  !  Keep  this  letter  by  you  at  my  request ;  and, 
when  you  write,  tell  me  that  you  receive  it  in  good  part,  and 
that  you  still  believe  me  to  be 

Your  sincere  and  affectionate  friend. 


FOUR     LETTERS 

TO    THE 

REV.   DR. 

LETTER   I 

DEAR  SIR,  April  17,  1776. 

BY  this  time  I  hope  you  are  both  returned  in  peace, 
and  happy  together  in  your  stated,  favoured  tract :  rejoicing 
in  the  name  of  Jesus  yourselves,  and  rejoicing  to  see  the 
savour  of  it  spreading  like  a  precious  perfume  among  the 
people.  Every  day  I  hope  you  find  prejudices  wearing 
off,  and  more  disposed  to  hear  the  words  of  Life.  The 
Lord  has  given  you  a  fine  first  fruits,  which  I  trust  will 
prove  the  earnest  of  a  plentiful  harvest.  In  the  meantime, 
He  will  enable  you  to  sow  the  seed  in  patience,  leaving  the 
event  in  His  hands.  Though  it  does  not  spring  up  visibly 
at  once,  it  will  not  be  lost.  I  think  He  would  not  have  sent 
you,  if  He  had  not  a  people  there  to  call ;  but  they  can  only 
come  forth  to  view  as  He  is  pleased  to  bring  them.  Satan 
will  try  to  hinder  and  disturb  you,  but  he  is  in  a  chain  which 
he  cannot  break,  nor  go  a  step  further  than  he  is  permitted. 
And,  if  you  have  been  instrumental  to  the  conversion  of 
but  a  few,  in  those  few  you  have  an  ample  reward  already 
for  all  the  difficulties  you  have  or  can  meet  with.  It  is 
more  honourable  and  important  to  be  an  instrument  of 
saving  one  soul,  than  to  rescue  a  whole  kingdom  from  tem 
poral  ruin.  Let  us,  therefore,  while  we  earnestly  desire 
to  be  more  useful,  not  forget  to  be  thankful  for  what  the 
Lord  has  been  pleased  already  to  do  for  us  ;  and  let  us 
expect,  knowing  whose  servants  we  are,  and  what  a  Gospel 
we  preach,  to  see  some  new  miracles  wrought  from  day  to 
day  ;  for,  indeed,  every  real  conversion  may  be  accounted 

c.  225  p 


226  CARDIPttOVIA  : 

miraculous,  being  no  less  than  an  immediate  exertion  of  that 
power  which  made  the  heavens,  and  commanded  the 
light  to  shine  out  of  darkness.  Your  little  telescope  is 
safe.  I  wish  I  had  more  of  that  clear  air  and  sunshine  you 
speak  of,  that  with  you  I  might  have  more  distinct  views 
of  the  land  of  promise.  I  cannot  say  my  prospect  is  greatly 
clouded  by  doubts  of  my  reaching  it  at  last  ;  but  then  there 
is  such  a  languor  and  deadness  hangs  upon  my  mind, 
that  it  is  almost  amazing  to  me  how  I  can  entertain  any 
hopes  at  all.  It  seems,  if  doubting  could  ever  be  reasonable, 
there  is  no  one  who  has  greater  reason  for  doubting  than 
myself.  But  I  know  not  how  to  doubt,  when  I  consider 
the  faithfulness,  grace,  and  compassion  of  Him  who  has 
promised.  If  it  could  be  proved  that  Christ  had  not  died, 
or  that  He  did  not  speak  the  words  which  are  ascribed  to 
Him  in  the  Gospel,  or  that  He  is  not  able  to  make  them 
good,  or  that  His  word  cannot  safely  be  taken  ;  in  any  of 
these  cases  I  should  not  doubt  to  purpose,  and  lie  down  in 
despair.  I  am,  etc. 


LETTER    II 

MY  DEAR  SIK,  July  15,  1777. 

I  BEGIN  with  congratulations  first  to  you  and  Mrs. , 

on  your  safe  journey  and  good  passage  over  the  formidable 
Humber.  Mrs.  -  -  has  another  river  to  cross  (may  it 
be  many  years  before  she  approaches  the  bank)  over  which 
there  is  no  bridge.  Perhaps,  at  seasons,  she  may  think  of  it 
with  that  reluctance  which  she  felt  before  she  saw  the 
Humber  ;  but,  as  her  fears  were  then  agreeably  disappointed, 
and  she  found  the  experiment,  when  called  to  make  it, 
neither  terrifying  nor  dangerous,  so  I  trust  she  will  find 
it  in  the  other  case.  Did  not  she  think,  The  Lord  knows 
where  I  shall  be,  and  He  will  meet  me  there  with  a  storm, 
because  I  am  such  a  sinner  ?  Then  how  the  billows  will 
foam  and  rage  at  me,  and  what  a  long  passage  I  shall  have, 
and  perhaps  I  shall  sink  in  the  middle,  and  never  set  my 
foot  in  Hull !  It  is  true,  I  am  not  so  much  afraid  of  the 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   227 

journey  I  go  by  land,  though  I  know  that  every  step  of 
the  way,  the  horses  or  the  chaise  may  fall,  and  I  be  killed  ; 
but  how  do  I  know  but  He  may  preserve  me  on  the  road, 
on  purpose  to  drown  me  in  the  river  !  But,  behold,  when 
she  came  to  it,  all  was  calm  ;  or,  what  was  better,  a  gentle, 
fair  breeze,  to  waft  her  pleasantly  over  before  she  was 
aware.  Thus  we  are  apt  perversely  to  reason  :  He  guides 
and  guards  me  through  life  ;  He  gives  me  new  mercies, 
and  new  proofs  of  His  power  and  care  every  day  ;  and, 
therefore,  when  I  come  to  die,  He  will  forsake  me,  and 
let  me  be  the  sport  of  winds  and  waves.  Indeed,  the 
Lord  does  not  deserve  such  hard  thoughts  at  our  hands 
as  we  are  prone  to  form  of  Him.  But,  notwithstanding 
we  make  such  returns,  He  is  and  will  be  gracious,  and 
shame  us  out  of  our  unkind,  ungrateful,  unbelieving  fears 
at  last.  If,  after  my  repeated  kind  reception  at  your 

house,  I  should  always  be  teasing  Mrs. with  suspicions 

of  her  good  will,  and  should  tell  everybody  I  saw,  that 
I  verily  believed  the  next  time  I  went  to  see  her  she  would 
shut  the  door  in  my  face,  and  refuse  me  admittance,  would 
she  not  be  grieved,  offended,  and  affronted  ?  Would 
she  not  think,  What  reason  can  he  assign  for  this  treatment  ? 
He  knows  I  did  everything  in  my  power  to  assure  him 
of  a  welcome,  and  told  him  so  over  and  over  again.  Does 
he  count  me  a  deceiver  ?  Yes,  he  does  :  I  see  his  friendship 
is  not  worth  preserving;  so  farewell.  I  will  seek  friends 
among  such  as  believe  my  words  and  actions.  Well,  my 
dear  Madam,  I  am  clear  I  always  believed  you  ;  I  make 
no  doubt  but  you  will  treat  me  kindly  next  time,  as  you 
did  the  last.  But  pray,  is  not  the  Lord  as  worthy  of  being 
trusted  as  yourself ;  and  are  not  His  invitations  and  pro 
mises  as  hearty  and  as  honest  as  yours  ?  Let  us,  therefore, 
beware  of  giving  way  to  such  thoughts  of  Him,  as  we  could 
hardly  forgive  in  our  dearest  friends  if  they  should  harbour 
the  like  of  us. 

I  have  heard  nothing  of  Mr.  P yet,  but  that  he  is  in 

town,  very  busy  about  that  precious  piece  of  furniture  called 
a  wife.  May  the  Lord  direct  and  bless  His  choice  !  In 
Captain  Cook's  voyage  to  the  South  Sea,  some  fish  were 
caught  which  looked  as  well  as  others,  but  those  who  ate  of 
them  were  poisoned  :  alas  !  for  the  poor  man  who  catches  a 

P2 


228  CARDIPHON1A  : 

poisonous  wife  !  There  are  such  to  be  met  with  in  the 
matrimonial  seas,  that  look  passing  well  to  the  eye,  but  a 
connexion  with  them  proves  baneful  to  domestic  peace,  and 
hurtful  to  the  life  of  grace.  I  know  two  or  three  people, 
perhaps  a  few  more,  who  have  great  reason  to  be  thankful  to 
Him  who  sent  the  fish  with  the  money  in  its  mouth  to 
Peter's  hook.  He  secretly  instructed  and  guided  us  where 
to  angle  ;  and  if  we  have  caught  prizes,  we  owe  it  not  to  our 
own  skill,  much  less  to  our  deserts,  but  to  His  goodness. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    III 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  September  4,  1777. 

-  Poor  little  boy  !  it  is  mercy  indeed  that  he  re 
covered  from  such  a  formidable  hurt.  The  Lord  wounded, 
and  the  Lord  healed.  I  ascribe,  with  you,  what  the  world 
calls  accident,  to  Him,  and  believe,  that  without  His  per 
mission,  for  wise  and  good  ends,  a  child  can  no  more  pull  a 
bowl  of  boiling  water  on  itself,  than  it  could  pull  the  moon 
out  of  its  orbit.  And  why  does  He  permit  such  things  ? 
One  reason  or  two  is  sufficient  for  us  :  it  is  to  remind  us  of 
the  uncertainty  of  life  and  all  creature-comforts  ;  to  make 
us  afraid  of  cleaving  too  closely  to  pretty  toys,  which  are  so 
precarious,  that  often  while  we  look  at  them  they  vanish  ; 
and  to  lead  us  to  a  more  entire  dependence  upon  Himself ; 
that  we  might  never  judge  ourselves  or  our  concerns  safe 
from  outward  appearances  only,  but  that  the  Lord  is  our 
keeper,  and  were  not  His  eye  upon  us,  a  thousand  dangers 
and  painful  changes,  which  we  can  neither  foresee  nor 
prevent,  are  lurking  about  us  at  every  step,  ready  to  break 
in  upon  us  every  hour.  Men  are  but  children  of  a  larger 
growth.  How  many  are  labouring  and  planning  in  the 
pursuit  of  things,  the  event  of  which,  if  they  obtain  them,  will 
be  but  like  pulling  scalding  water  upon  their  own  heads  ! 
They  must  have  the  bowl  by  all  means,  but  they  are  not 
aware  what  is  in  it  till  they  feel  it. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART       229 


LETTER    IV 

SIR,  July  7,  1777. 

I  HAVE  had  a  letter  from  your  minister  since  his  arrival 

at .     I  hope  he  will  be  restored  to  you  again  before  long, 

and  that  he  and  many  of  your  place  will  rejoice  long  in  each 
other.  Those  are  favoured  places  which  are  blessed  with  a 
sound  and  faithful  Gospel  ministry,  if  the  people  know  and 
consider  the  value  of  their  privileges,  and  are  really  desirous 
of  profiting  by  them  :  but  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in 
word,  but  in  power.  I  hope  those  who  profess  the  Gospel 
with  you  will  wrestle  in  prayer  for  grace  to  walk  worthy  of  it. 
A  minister's  hands  are  strengthened,  when  he  can  point  to 
his  people  as  so  many  living  proofs  that  the  doctrines  he 
preaches  are  doctrines  according  to  godliness  ;  when  they 
walk  in  mutual  love  ;  when  each  one,  in  their  several  places, 
manifests  a  humble,  spiritual,  upright  conduct ;  when  they 
are  Christians,  not  only  at  church,  but  in  the  family,  the  shop, 
and  the  field  ;  when  they  fill  up  their  relations  in  life,  as 
husbands  or  wives,  masters  or  servants,  parents  or  children, 
according  to  the  rule  of  the  word  ;  when  they  are  evidently  a 
people  separated  from  the  world  while  conversant  in  it,  and 
are  careful  to  let  their  light  shine  before  men,  not  only  by 
talking,  but  by  acting  as  the  disciples  of  Christ :  when  they 
go  on  steadily,  not  by  fits  and  starts,  prizing  the  means  of 
grace  without  resting  in  them  :  when  it  is  thus,  we  can  say, 
Now  we  live,  if  you  stand  fast  in  the  Lord.  Then  we  come 
forth  with  pleasure,  and  our  service  is  our  delight,  and  we  are 
encouraged  to  hope  for  an  increasing  blessing.  But  if  the 
people  in  whom  we  have  rejoiced  sink  into  formality  or  a 
worldly  spirit ;  if  they  have  dissensions  and  jealousies 
among  themselves  ;  if  they  act  improperly,  and  give  the 
enemies  occasion  to  say,  There,  there,  so  would  we  have  it ; 
then  our  hearts  are  wounded  and  our  zeal  damped,  and  we 
know  not  how  to  speak  with  liberty.  It  is  my  heart's  desire 
and  prayer  for  you,  that  whether  I  see  you,  or  else  be  absent 
from  you,  I  may  know  that  you  stand  fast  in  one  spirit  and 
one  mind  striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the  Gospel. 

J  am,  &r, 


SEVEN     LETTERS 

TO 

9 

MRS.   

LETTER   I 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  Nov.  —  1775. 

Too  much  of  that  impatience  which  you  speak  of,  to 
wards  those  who  differ  from  us  in  some  religious  sentiments, 
is  observable  on  all  sides.  I  do  not  consider  it  as  the  fault 
of  a  few  individuals,  or  of  this  or  that  party,  so  much  as 
the  effect  of  that  inherent  imperfection  which  is  common 
to  our  whole  race.  Anger  and  scorn  are  equally  unbecom 
ing  in  those  who  profess  to  be  followers  of  the  meek  and 
lowly  Jesus,  and  who  acknowledge  themselves  to  be  both 
sinful  and  fallible  ;  but  too  often  something  of  this  leaven 
will  be  found  cleaving  to  the  best  characters,  and  mixed 
with  honest  endeavours  to  serve  the  best  cause.  But 
thus  it  was  from  the  beginning  ;  and  we  have  reason  to 
confess  that  we  are  no  better  than  the  apostles  were,  who, 
though  they  meant  well,  manifested  once  and  again  a 
wrong  spirit  in  the  zeal,  Luke  ix.  54.  Observation  and 
experience  contribute,  by  the  grace  of  God,  gradually  to 
soften  and  sweeten  our  spirits  ;  but  then  there  will  always 
be  ground  for  mutual  forbearance  and  mutual  forgiveness  on 
this  head.  However,  so  far  as  I  may  judge  of  myself,  I 
think  this  hastiness  is  not  my  most  easy  besetting  sin. 
I  am  not,  indeed,  an  advocate  for  that  indifference  and  luke- 
warmness  to  the  truths  of  God,  which  seem  to  constitute 
the  candour  many  plead  for  in  the  present  day.  But 
while  I  desire  to  hold  fast  the  sound  doctrines  of  the  Gospel 
towards  the  persons  of  my  fellow-creatures,  T  wish  to 

230 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    231 

exercise  all  moderation  and  benevolence  :  Protestants  or 
Papists,  Socinians  or  Deists,  Jews,  Samaritans,  or  Mahome 
tans,  all  are  my  neighbours,  they  have  all  a  claim  upon  me 
for  the  common  offices  of  humanity.  As  to  religion,  they 
cannot  all  be  right ;  nor  may  I  compliment  them,  by 
allowing  that  differences  between  us  are  but  trivial  when  I 
believe,  and  know  they  are  important ;  but  I  am  not  to 
expect  them  to  see  with  my  eyes.  I  am  deeply  convinced 
of  the  truth  of  John  Baptist's  aphorism,  John  iii.  27,  "  A 
man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  given  him  from 
Heaven."  I  well  know,  that  the  little  measure  of  know 
ledge  I  have  obtained  in  the  things  of  God,  has  not  been 
owing  to  my  own  wisdom  and  docility,  but  to  His  goodness. 
Nor  did  I  get  it  all  at  once :  He  has  been  pleased  to  exercise 
much  patience  and  long-suffering  towards  me  for  about 
twenty-seven  years  past,  since  He  first  gave  me  a  desire  of 
learning  from  Himself.  He  has  graciously  accommodated 
Himself  to  my  weakness,  borne  with  my  mistakes,  and 
helped  me  through  innumerable  prejudices,  which,  but  for 
His  mercy,  would  have  been  insuperable  hindrances : 
I  have  therefore  no  right  to  be  angry,  impatient,  or  censori 
ous,  especially  as  I  have  still  much  to  learn,  and  am  so  poorly 
influenced  by  what  I  seem  to  know.  I  am  weary  of  con 
troversies  and  disputes,  and  desire  to  choose  for  myself,  and 
to  point  out  to  others  Mary's  part — to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet, 
and  to  hear  His  words.  And,  blessed  be  His  name  !  so  far 
as  I  have  learned  from  Him,  I  am  favoured  with  a  comfort 
able  certainty  ;  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  no 
longer  tossed  about  by  the  various  winds  and  tides  of 
opinions,  by  which  I  see  many  are  dashed  one  against  the 
other.  But  I  cannot,  I  must  not,  I  dare  not  contend  ; 
only  as  a  witness  for  God,  I  am  ready  to  bear  my  simple 
testimony  to  what  I  have  known  of  His  truth,  whenever  I 
am  properly  called  to  it. 

I  agree  with  you,  that  some,  accounted  evangelical 
teachers,  have  too  much  confined  themselves  to  a  few 
leading  and  favourite  topics  ;  I  think  this  a  fault :  and 
believe,  when  it  is  constantly  so,  the  auditories  are  deprived 
of  much  edification  and  pleasure,  which  they  might  receive 
from  a  more  judicious  and  comprehensive  plan.  The  whole 
Scripture,  as  it  consists  of  histories,  prophecies,  doctrines, 


232  CARDIPHONIA  : 

precepts,  promises,  exhortations,  admonitions,  encourage 
ments,  and  reproofs,  is  the  proper  subject  of  the  Gospel- 
ministry  :  and  every  part  should  in  its  place  and  course  be 
attended  to  ;  yet  so  as  that,  in  every  compartment  \\v 
exhibit,  Jesus  should  be  the  capital  figure,  in  whom  the 
prophecies  are  fulfilled,  the  promises  established :  to 
whom,  in  a  way  of  type  and  emblem,  the  most  important 
parts  of  Scripture-history  have  an  express  reference  ;  and 
from,  whom  alone  'we  can  receive  that  life,  strength,  and 
encouragement,  which  are  necessary  to  make  obedience 
either  pleasing  or  practicable.  And  where  there  is  true 
spiritual  faith  in  the  heart,  and  in  exercise,  I  believe  a  person 
will  not  so  much  need  a  detail  of  what  he  is  to  practise, 
as  to  be  often  greatly  at  a  loss  without  it.  Our  Saviour's 
commandments  are  plain  and  clear  in  themselves  ;  and 
that  love  which  springs  from  faith  is  the  best  casuist  and 
commentator  to  apply  and  enforce  them. 

You  are  pleased  to  say,  "  Forgive  me  if  I  transgress  : 
I  know  the  place  whereon  I  stand  is  holy  ground."  Permit 
me  to  assure  you,  my  dear  Madam,  that  were  I  a  person 
of  some  importance,  which  I  am  not,  you  would  run  no 
hazard  of  offending  me  by  the  controverting  any  of  my 
sentiments :  I  hold  none  (knowingly)  which  I  am  not 
willing  to  submit  to  examination  ;  nor  am  I  afraid  of  offend 
ing  you  by  speaking  freely,  when  you  point  out  my  way. 
I  should  wrong  you,  if  I  thought  to  please  you  by  palliating 
or  disguising  the  sentiments  of  my  heart ;  and  if  I  attempted 
to  do  so,  you  would  see  through  the  design,  and  despise  it. 
There  may  perhaps  be  an  improper  manner  of  chiming  upon 
the  name  of  Jesus,  and  I  am  not  for  vindicating  any  impro 
priety  ;  yet  could  I  feel  what  I  ought  to  mean  when  I  pro 
nounce  that  name,  I  should  not  fear  mentioning  it  too  often. 
I  am  afraid  of  no  excess  in  thinking  highly  of  it,  because  I 
read  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  all  men  should  honour  the  Son 
as  they  honour  the  Father.  Laboured  explications  of  the 
Trinity  I  always  avoid.  I  am  afraid  of  darkening  counsel 
by  words  without  knowledge.  Scripture,  and  even  reason, 
assures  me,  there  is  but  one  God,  whose  name  alone  is 
Jehovah.  Scripture  likewise  assures  me,  that  Christ  is  God, 
that  Jesus  is  Jehovah.  I  cannot  say  that  reason  assents 
with  equal  readiness  to  this  proposition  as  to  the  former. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    233 

But,  admitting  what  the  Scripture  teaches  concerning  the 
evil  of  sin,  the  depravity  of  human  nature,  the  method  of 
salvation,  and  the  offices  of  the  Saviour  ;  admitting  that 
God  has  purposed  to  glorify,  not  His  mercy  only  but  His 
justice,  in  the  work  of  redemption ;  that  the  blood 
upon  the  cross  is  a  proper,  adequate  satisfaction  for  sin  ; 
and  that  the  Redeemer  is  at  present  the  Shepherd  of  those 
who  believe  in  Him,  and  will  hereafter  be  the  Judge  of  the 
world  ;  that,  in  order  to  give  the  effectual  help  which  we 
need,  it  is  necessary  that  He  be  always  intimately  with  those 
who  depend  upon  Him,  in  every  age,  in  every  place  ;  must 
know  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  every  heart ;  must  have 
His  eye  always  upon  them,  His  ear  always  open  to  them  ; 
His  arm  ever  stretched  out  for  their  relief ;  that  they  can 
receive  nothing  but  what  He  bestows  ;  can  do  nothing  but 
as  He  enables  them,  nor  stand  a  moment  but  as  He  upholds 
them  ;  admitting  these  and  the  like  promises  with  which 
the  word  of  God  abounds,  reason  must  allow,  whatever 
difficulties  may  attend  the  thought,  that  only  He  who  is 
God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,  is  able  or  worthy  to  execute 
this  complicated  plan,  every  part  of  which  requires  the 
exertion  of  infinite  wisdom  and  almighty  power  ;  nor  am  I 
able  to  form  any  clear,  satisfactory,  comfortable  thoughts  of 
God,  suited  to  awaken  my  love,  or  engage  my  trust,  but 
as  He  has  been  pleased  to  reveal  Himself  in  the  person  of 
Jesus  Christ.  I  believe  with  the  apostle,  that  God  was  once 
manifested  in  the  flesh  upon  earth  ;  and  that  He  is  now 
manifested  in  the  flesh  in  Heaven  ;  and  that  the  worship, 
not  only  of  redeemed  sinners,  but  of  the  holy  angels,  is 
addressed  to  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  and  who,  in  that 
nature  in  which  He  suffered,  now  exercises  universal  do 
minion,  and  has  the  government  of  Heaven,  earth,  and  hell 
upon  His  shoulders.  This  truth  is  the  foundation  upon 
which  my  hope  is  built,  the  fountain  from  whence  I  derive 
all  my  strength  and  consolation,  and  my  only  encouragement 
for  venturing  to  the  throne  of  grace,  for  grace  to  help  in  time 
of  need. 

Till  God  in  human  flesh  I  see, 

My  thoughts  no  comfort  find  ; 
The  holy,  just,  and  sacred  Three 

Are  terrors  to  mv  mind. 


234  CAKDIPHOXIA  : 

But  if  Immanuel's  face  appear, 

My  hope,  my  joy  begins  ; 
His  name  forbids  my  slavish  fear, 

His  grace  removes  my  sins. 

I  am,  however,  free  to  confess  to  you,  that,  through 
the  pride  and  unbelief  remaining  in  my  heart,  and  the  power 
of  Satan's  temptations,  there  are  seasons  when  I  find  no 
small  perplexity  and  evil  reasonings  upon  this  high  point ; 
but  it  is  so  absolutely  essential  to  my  peace,  that  I  cannot 
part  with  it ;  for  I  cannot  give  it  up,  without  giving  up  all 
hope  of  salvation  on  the  one  hand,  and  giving  up  the  Bible, 
as  an  unmeaning,  contradictory  fable,  on  the  other  ;  and 
through  mercy,  for  the  most  part,  when  I  am  in  my  right 
mind,  I  am  as  fully  persuaded  of  this  truth  as  I  am  of  my 
own  existence  ;  but  from  the  exercises  I  have  had  about  it, 
I  have  learned  to  subscribe  to  the  apostle's  declaration, 
that  "  no  man  can  say  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  but  by  the 
Holy  Ghost."  I  am  well  satisfied,  it  will  not  be  a  burden 
to  me  at  the  hour  of  death,  nor  be  laid  to  my  charge  at  the 
day  of  judgment,  that  I  have  thought  too  highly  of  Jesus, 
expected  too  much  from  Him  myself,  or  laboured  too  much 
in  commending  and  setting  Him  forth  to  others,  as  the 
Alpha  and  Omega,  the  true  God  and  eternal  life.  On  the 
contrary,  alas  !  alas  !  my  guilt  and  grief  are,  that  my 
thoughts  of  Him  are  so  faint,  so  infrequent,  and  my  com 
mendations  of  Him  so  lamentably  cold  and  disproportionate 
to  what  they  ought  to  be. 

I  know  not  whose  letters  are  rapturous,  but  I  wish  mine 
were  more  so ;  not  that  I  am  a  friend  to  ungrounded 
sallies  of  imagination,  flights  of  animal  passions,  or  heat 
without  light.  But  it  would  be  amazing  to  me,  were  I  not 
aware  of  human  depravity,  (of  which  I  consider  this  as 
one  of  the  most  striking  proofs,)  that  they  who  have  any 
good  hope  of  an  interest  in  the  Gospel-salvation,  do  not  find 
their  hearts  (as  Dr.  Watts  expresses  it)  all  on  fire  ;  and  that 
their  very  looks  do  not  express  a  transport  of  admiration, 
gratitude,  and  love,  when  they  consider  from  what  misery 
they  are  redeemed,  to  what  happiness  they  are  called,  and 
what  a  price  was  paid  for  their  souls.  I  wish  to  be  more 
like  the  apostle  Paul  in  this  respect,  who,  though  he  often 
forms  and  compounds  new  words,  seems  at  a  loss  for  any 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    235 

that  could  suitably  describe  the  emotions  of  his  heart.  But 
I  am  persuaded  you  would  not  object  to  the  just  fervour  of 
Scriptural  devotion.  But  this  holy  flame  can  seldom  be 
found  unsullied  in  the  present  life.  The  temper,  constitu 
tion,  and  infirmities  of  individuals,  will  mix  more  or  less 
with  what  they  say  or  do.  Allowances  must  be  made  for 
such  things  in  the  present  state  of  infirmity  ;  for  who  can 
hope  to  be  perfectly  free  from  them  ?  If  the  heart  is  right 
with  God,  and  sincerely  affected  with  the  wonders  of  redeem 
ing  love,  our  gracious  High  Priest,  who  knows  our  weakness, 
pities  and  pardons  what  is  amiss,  accepts  our  poor  efforts, 
and  gradually  teaches  us  to  discern  and  avoid  what  is 
blameable.  The  work  of  grace,  in  its  first  stages,  I  sometimes 
compare  to  the  lighting  of  a  fire,  where  for  a  while,  there  is 
abundance  of  smoke,  but  it  burns  clearer  and  clearer.  There 
is  often,  both  in  letters  and  books,  what  might  be  very  well 
omitted  ;  but  if  a  love  to  God  and  souls  be  the  leading 
principle,  I  pass  as  gentle  censure  upon  the  rest  as  I  can, 
and  apply  to  some  eccentric  expressions,  what  Mr.  Prior 
somewhere  says  of  our  civil  dissensions  in  this  land  of 
liberty, 

A  bad  effect,  but  from  a  noble  cause. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  February  16,  1776. 

IT  gave  me  great  comfort  to  find,  that  what  I  wrote 
concerning  the  divine  character  of  Jesus  as  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh,  met  with  your  approbation.  This  doctrine  is, 
in  my  view,  the  great  foundation-stone  upon  which  all  true 
religion  is  built ;  but  alas  !  in  the  present  day,  it  is  the 
stumbling-stone  and  rock  of  offence,  upon  which  too  many, 
fondly  presuming  upon  their  own  wisdom,  fall  and  are 
broken.  I  am  so  far  from  wondering  that  any  should 
doubt  of  it,  that  I  am  firmly  persuaded  none  can  truly  believe 
it,  however  plainly  set  forth  in  Scripture,  unless  it  be 
revealed  to  them  from  Heaven  ;  or,  in  the  apostle's  words, 


236  CARDIPHONIA  : 

that  "  no  one  can  call  Jesus  Christ  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy 
Ghost."  I  believe  there  are  many  who  think  they  believe 
it,  because  they  have  taken  it  for  granted,  and  never  atten 
tively  consider  the  difficulties  with  which  it  is  attended  in 
the  eye  of  fallen  reason.  Judging  by  natural  light,  it  seems 
impossible  to  believe  that  the  title  of  the  true  God  and 
eternal  life  should  properly  belong  to  that  despised  Man  who 
hung  dead  upon  the  cross,  exposed  to  the  insults  of  His 
cruej  enemies.  I  know  nothing  that  can  obviate  the  objec 
tions  the  reasoning  mind  is  ready  to  form  against  it,  but  a 
real  conviction  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  the  state  of  a 
sinner  as  exposed  to  the  curse  of  the  holy  law,  and  destitute 
of  every  plea  and  hope  in  himself.  Then  the  necessity  of  a 
Redeemer,  and  the  necessity  of  this  Redeemer's  being 
almighty,  is  seen  and  felt,  with  an  evidence  which  bears 
down  all  opposition  ;  for  neither  the  efficacy  of  His  atone 
ment  and  intercession,  nor  His  sufficiency  to  guide,  save, 
protect,  and  feed  those  who  trust  in  Him,  can  be  conceived 
of  without  it.  When  the  eyes  of  the  understanding  are 
opened,  and  the  soul  made  acquainted  with  and  attentive 
to  its  own  state  and  wants,  he  that  runs  may  read  this 
truth,  not  in  a  few  detached  texts  of  a  dubious  import,  and 
liable  to  be  twisted  and  tortured  by  the  arts  of  criticism, 
but  as  interwoven  in  the  very  frame  and  texture  of  the 
Bible,  and  written,  as  with  a  sun-beam,  throughout  the 
principal  parts  both  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  If 
Christ  be  the  Shepherd  and  the  Husband  of  His  people 
under  the  Gospel,  and  if  His  coming  into  the  world  did  not 
abridge  those  who  feared  God  of  the  privileges  they  were 
entitled  to  before  His  appearance,  it  follows  by  undeniable 
consequence,  "  that  He  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever." 
For  David  tells  us,  that  his  Shepherd  was  Jehovah ;  and 
the  Husband  of  the  Old  Testament  Church  was  the  Maker 
and  God  over  the  whole  earth,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  whose 
name  is  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  Psa/xxiii.  i.,  Is.  liv.  8,  with 
xlvii.  4.  I  agree  with  you,  Madam,  that  among  the  many 
attempts  which  have  been  made  to  prove  and  illustrate  the 
Scripture  doctrine,  that  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit,  are  one  God,  there  have  been  many  injudicious, 
unwarrantable  things  advanced,  which  have  perplexed 
instead  of  instructing,  and  of  which  the  enemies  of  the 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   237 

truth  have  known  how  to  make  their  advantage.  How 
ever,  there  have  been  tracts  upon  these  sublime  subjects 
which  have  been  written  with  judgment  and  an  unction,  and 
I  believe  attended  with  a  blessing.  I  seem  to  prefer  Mr. 
Jones's  book  on  the  Trinity  to  any  I  have  seen,  because 
he  does  little  more  than  state  some  of  the  Scripture  evidence 
for  it,  and  draws  his  inferences  briefly  and  plainly  ;  though 
even  he  has  admitted  a  few  texts,  which  may  perhaps  be 
thought  not  quite  full  to  the  point ;  and  he  has  certainly 
omitted  several  of  the  most  express  and  strongest  testimonies. 
The  best  and  happiest  proof  of  all,  that  this  doctrine  is  true 
in  itself,  and  true  to  us,  is  the  experience  of  its  effects. 
They  who  know  His  name  will  put  their  trust  in  Him  :  they 
who  are  right  impressed  with  His  astonishing  condescension 
and  love,  in  emptying  Himself,  and  submitting  to  the  death 
of  the  cross  for  our  sakes,  will  find  themselves  under  a  sweet 
constraint  to  love  Him  again,  and  will  feel  a  little  of  that 
emotion  of  heart  which  the  Apostle  expresses  in  that  lively 
passage,  Gal.  vi.  14.  The  knowledge  of  Christ  crucified 
(like  Ithuriel's  spear)  removes  the  false  appearances  by  which 
we  have  been  too  long  cheated,  and  shows  us  the  men  and 
the  things,  the  spirit,  customs,  and  maxims  of  the  world, 
in  their  just  light.  Were  I  perfectly  master  of  myself  and 
my  subject,  I  would  never  adduce  any  text  in  proof  of  a 
doctrine  or  assertion  from  the  pulpit,  which  was  not  direct 
and  conclusive  ;  because,  if  a  text  is  pressed  into  an  argu 
ment,  to  which  it  has  no  proper  relation,  it  rather  encumbers 
than  supports  it,  and  raises  a  suspicion  that  the  cause  is 
weak,  and  better  testimonies  in  its  favour  cannot  be  obtained. 
Some  misapplications  of  this  kind  have  been  so  long  in  use, 
that  they  pass  pretty  current,  though,  if  brought  to  the 
assay,  they  would  be  found  not  quite  sterling  :  but  I 
endeavour  to  avoid  them  to  the  best  of  my  judgment.  Thus, 
for  instance,  I  have  often  heard  Rom.  xiv.  23,  "  Whatever 
is  not  of  faith  is  sin,"  quoted  to  prove,  that  without  a 
principle  of  saving  faith,  we  can  perform  nothing  acceptable 
to  God  ;  whereas  it  seems  clear  from  the  context,  that  faith 
is  there  used  in  another  sense,  and  signifies  a  firm  persuasion 
of  mind  respecting  the  lawfulness  of  the  action.  How 
ever,  I  doubt  not  but  the  proposition  in  itself  is  strictly 
true  in  the  other  sense,  if  considered  detached  from  the 


238  CARDIPHOMA  : 

connexion  in  which  it  stands  ;  but  I  should  rather  choose 
to  prove  it  from  other  passages,  where  it  is  directly  affirmed, 
as  Heb.  xi.  6 ;  Matt.  xii.  33.  In  such  cases,  I  think  hearers 
should  be  careful  not  to  be  prejudiced  against  a  doctrine 
merely  because  it  is  not  well  supported  :  for,  perhaps, 
it  is  capable  of  solid  proof,  though  the  preacher  was  not 
so  happy  as  to  hit  upon  that  which  was  most  suitable  ; 
and  extempore  preachers  may  sometimes  hope  for  a  little 
allowance  upon  his  head,  from  the  more  candid  part  of  their 
auditory,  and  not  be  made  offenders  for  an  inadvertence, 
which  they  cannot  perhaps  always  avoid  in  the  hurry  of 
speaking.  With  respect  to  the  application  of  some  passages 
in  the  Old  Testament  to  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  I  hold  it 
safest  to  keep  close  to  the  specimens  the  Apostles  have 
given  us,  and  I  would  venture  with  caution,  if  I  go  beyond 
their  line  ;  yet  it  is  probable  they  have  only  given  us  a 
specimen,  and  that  there  are  a  great  number  of  passages 
which  have  a  direct  reference  to  Gospel-truths,  though  we 
may  run  some  hazard  in  making  out  the  allusion.  If  St. 
Paul  had  not  gone  before  me,  I  should  have  hesitated  to 
assert,  that  the  prohibition,  "  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the 
ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn,"  was  given,  not  upon  the 
account  of  oxen,  but  altogether,  for  our  sakes  ;  nor  should  I, 
without  his  assistance,  have  found  out,  that  the  history  of 
Sarah  and  Hagar  was  a  designed  allegory,  to  set  forth  the 
difference  between  the  law  and  Gospel  covenants.  There 
fore,  when  I  hear  ministers  tracing  some  other  allusions 
I  cannot  be  always  sure  that  they  push  them  too  far,  though 
perhaps  they  are  not  quite  satisfactory  to  my  judgment ; 
for  it  may  be,  they  have  a  farther  insight  into  the  meaning 
of  the  places  than  myself.  And  I  think  Scriptures  may  be 
sometimes  used  to  advantage,  by  way  of  accommodation  in 
popular  discourses,  and  in  something  of  a  different  sense 
from  what  they  bear  in  the  place  where  they  stand,  pro 
vided  they  are  not  alleged  as  proofs,  but  only  to  illustrate 
a  truth  already  proved  or  acknowledged.  Though  Job's 
friends  and  Job  himself  were  mistaken,  there  are  many 
great  truths  in  their  speeches,  which,  as  such,  may,  I  think, 
stand  as  the  foundation  of  a  discourse.  Nay,  I  either  have, 
or  have  often  intended,  to  borrow  a  truth  from  the  mouth 
even  of  Satan,  "  Hast  Thou  not  set  a  hedge  about  him  ?  " 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   239 

such  a  confession  extorted  from  our  grand  adversary  placing 
the  safety  of  the  Lord's  people  under  His  providential  care 
in  a  very  striking  light. 

I  perfectly  agree  with  you,  Madam,  that  our  religious 
sensations  and  exercises  are  much  influenced  and  tinctured 
by  natural  constitution  ;  and  that,  therefore,  tears  and 
warm  emotions  on  the  one  hand,  or  a  comparative  dryness 
of  spirit  on  the  other,  are  no  sure  indications  of  the  real  state 
of  the  heart.  Appearances  may  agree  in  different  persons 
or  vary  in  the  same  person,  from  causes  merely  natural : 
even  a  change  of  weather  may  have  some  influence  in  raising 
or  depressing  the  spirits,  where  the  nerves  are  very  delicate, 
and  I  think  such  persons  are  more  susceptive  of  impressions 
from  the  agency  of  invisible  powers,  both  good  and  evil ; 
an  agency  which,  though  we  cannot  explain,  experience  will 
not  permit  us  to  deny.  However,  though  circumstantials 
rise  and  fall,  the  real  difference  between  nature  and  grace 
remains  unalterable.  That  work  of  God  upon  the  heart, 
which  is  sometimes  called  a  new  birth,  at  others  a  new 
creation,  is  as  distant  from  the  highest  effects  of 
principles,  or  the  most  specious  imitations  which  education 
or  resolutions  can  produce,  as  light  is  from  darkness,  or  life 
from  death.  Only  He  who  made  the  world  can  either  make 
a  Christian,  or  support  and  carry  on  His  own  work.  A 
thirst  after  God  as  our  portion  ;  a  delight  in  Jesus  as  the 
only  way  and  door  ;  a  renunciation  of  self  and  of  the  world, 
so  far  as  it  is  opposite  to  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel ;  these 
and  the  like  fruits  of  that  grace  which  bringeth  salvation, 
are  not  only  beyond  the  power  of  our  fallen  nature,  but 
contrary  to  its  tendency  ;  so  that  we  can  have  no  desires  of 
this  kind  till  they  are  given  us  from  above,  and  can  for  a 
season  hardly  bear  to  hear  them  spoken  of,  either  as  excellent 
or  necessary. 

I  am,  &c. 


240  CAKDIPHONIA  : 

LETTER    III 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  September  17,  1776. 

WE  arc  much  indebted  to  you  for  your  kind  thoughts 
of  us.  Hitherto  I  feel  no  uneasiness  about  what  is  before 
me  ;  but  I  am  afraid  my  tranquillity  does  not  wholly  spring 
from  trust  in  the  Lord  and  submission  to  His  will,  but  that 
a  pa/t  of  it  at  least  is  derived  from  the  assurances  Mr.  W. 
gave  me,  that  the  operation  would  be  neither  difficult  nor 
dangerous.  I  have  not  much  of  the  hero  in  my  constitu 
tion  ;  if  in  great  pains  or  sharp  trials  I  should  ever  show  a 
becoming  fortitude,  it  must  be  given  me  from  above.  I 
desire  to  leave  all  with  Him  in  whose  hands  my  ways  are, 
and  who  has  promised  me  strength  according  to  my  day. 

I  rejoice  that  the  Lord  has  not  only  made  you  desirous 
of  being  useful  to  others  in  their  spiritual  concerns,  but  has 
given  you,  in  some  instances,  to  see  that  your  desires  and 
attempts  have  not  been  in  vain.  I  shall  thankfully  accept 
of  the  commission  you  are  pleased  to  offer  me,  and  take  a 
pleasure  in  perusing  any  papers  you  may  think  proper  to  put 
into  my  hands,  and  offer  you  my  sentiments  with  that 
simplicity  which  I  am  persuaded  will  be  much  more  agreeable 
to  you  than  compliments.  Though  I  know  there  is  in  general 
a  delicacy  and  difficulty  in  services  of  this  kind,  yet  with 
respect  to  yourself  I  seem  to  have  nothing  to  fear. 

I  have  often  wished  we  had  more  female  pens  employed 
in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  Though  few  ladies  encumber 
themselves  with  the  apparatus  of  Latin  or  Greek,  or  engage 
in  voluminous  performances  ;  yet,  in  the  article  of  essay 
writing,  I  think  many  are  qualified  to  succeed  better  than 
most  men,  having  a  peculiar  easiness  of  style,  which  few  of 
us  can  imitate.  I  remember  you  once  showed  me  a  paper, 
together  with  the  corrections  and  alterations  proposed  by 
a  gentleman  whose  opinion  you  had  asked.  I  thought  his 
corrections  had  injured  it,  and  given  it  an  air  of  stiffness, 
wh.-h  is  often  observable  when  learned  men  write  in  English. 
Granmatical  rules,  as  they  are  called,  are  wholly  derived 
from  'he  mode  of  speaking  or  writing  which  obtains  amongst 
those  who  best  understand  the  language  ;  for  the  language 
must  be  supposed  established  before  any  grammar  can  be 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   241 

made  for  it ;  and  therefore  women  who,  from  the  course  of 
their  education  and  life,  have  had  an  opportunity  of  reading 
the  best  written  books,  and  conversing  with  those  who  speak 
well,  though  they  do  not  burden  themselves  with  the  formal 
ity  of  grammar,  have  often  more  skill  in  the  English  language 
than  the  men  who  can  call  every  figure  of  speech  by  a  Latin 
or  a  Greek  name.  You  may  be  sure,  Madam,  I  shall  not 
wish  your  papers  suppressed,  merely  because  they  were  not 
written  by  a  learned  man.  Language  and  style,  however,  are 
but  the  dress.  Trifles,  however  adorned,  are  trifles  still. 
A  person  of  spiritual  discernment  would  rather  be  the 
author  of  one  page,  written  in  the  humble  garb  of  Bunyan, 
upon  a  serious  subject,  than  be  able  to  rival  the  sprightliness 
and  elegance  of  Lady  M.  W.  Montague,  unless  it  could  be 
with  a  view  to  edification.  The  subjects  you  propose  are 
important ;  and  with  respect  to  sacramental  meditations, 
and  all  devotional  exercises  so  called,  I  perfectly  agree  with 
you,  that  to  be  affecting  and  useful,  they  must  be  dictated 
rather  by  the  heart  than  by  the  head  ;  and  are  most  likely 
to  influence  others  when  they  are  the  fruits  and  transcripts 
of  our  own  experience.  So  far  as  I  know,  we  are  but  scantily 
provided  with  specimens  of  this  sort  in  print,  and  therefore 
I  shall  be  glad  to  see  an  accession  to  the  public  stock.  Your 
other  thought,  of  helps  to  recollection  on  Saturday  evenings, 
is,  I  think,  an  attempt  in  which  none  have  been  beforehand 
with  you.  So  that,  according  to  the  general  appearance, 
I  feel  myself  disposed  to  encourage  you  to  do  as  you  have 
purposed.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I  meet  with  anything  on 
the  perusal  of  the  papers  which,  in  my  view,  may  seem  to 
need  alteration,  I  will  freely  and  faithfully  point  it  out. 

I  can  almost  smile  now  to  think  you  once  classed  me 
among  the  Stoics.  If  I  dare  speak  with  confidence  of  myself 
in  anything,  I  think  I  may  lay  claim  to  a  little  of  that  pleas 
ing,  painful  thing,  sensibility.  I  need  not  boast  of  it,  for 
it  has  too  often  been  my  snare,  my  sin,  and  my  punishment. 
Yet  I  would  be  thankful  for  a  spice  of  it,  as  the  Lord's  gift, 
and,  when  rightly  exercised,  it  is  valuable  ;  and  I  think  I 
should  make  but  an  awkward  minister  without  it,  especially 
here.  Where  there  is  this  sensibility  in  the  natural  temper, 
it  will  give  a  tincture  or  cast  to  our  religious  expression. 
Indeed  I  often  find  this  sensibility  weakest  where  it  should 
c.  Q 


242  CAKDIPHOXIA  : 

be  strongest,  and  have  reason  to  reproach  myself  that  I 
am  not  more  affected  by  the  character,  love,  and  sufferings 
of  my  Lord  and  Saviour,  and  my  own  peculiar  personal 
obligations  to  Him.  However,  my  views  of  religion  have 
been,  for  many  years,  such  as  I  supposed  more  likely  to  make 
me  deemed  to  be  an  enthusiast  than  a  Stoic.  A  moon-light 
head-knowledge,  derived  from  a  system  of  sentiments, 
however  true  in  themselves,  is  in  my  judgment  a  poor  thing  : 
nor,  on  the  other  hand,  am  I  an  admirer  of  those  rapturous 
sallies,  which  are  more  owing  to  a  warm  imagination  than 
to  a  just  perception  of  the  power  and  importance  of  Gospel 
truth.  The  Gospel  addresses  both  head  and  heart ;  and 
where  it  has  its  proper  effect,  where  it  is  received  as  the 
word  of  God,  and  is  clothed  with  the  authority  and  energy 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  understanding  is  enlightened,  the 
affections  awakened  and  engaged,  the  will  brought  into 
subjection,  and  the  whole  soul  delivered  to  its  impression, 
as  wax  to  the  seal — when  this  is  the  case,  when  the  affec 
tions  do  not  take  the  lead,  and  push  forward  with  a  blind 
impulse,  but  arise  from  the  principles  of  Scripture,  and  are 
governed  by  them,  the  more  warmth  the  better.  Yet  in 
this  state  of  infirmity  nothing  is  perfect  ;  and  our  natural 
temperament  and  disposition  will  have  more  influence  upon 
our  religious  sensations  than  we  are  ordinarily  aware.  It  is 
well  to  know  how  to  make  proper  allowances  and  abatements 
upon  this  head,  in  the  judgment  we  form  both  of  ourselves 
and  of  others.  Many  good  people  are  distressed,  and  alter 
nately  elated  by  frames  and  feelings  which  perhaps  are  more 
constitutional  than  properly  religious  experiences.  I  dare 
not  tell  you,  Madam,  what  I  am,  but  I  can  tell  you  what  I 
wish  to  be.  The  love  of  God,  as  manifested  in  Jesus  Christ, 
is  what  I  would  wish  to  be  the  abiding  object  of  my  contem 
plation  ;  not  merely  to  speculate  upon  it  as  a  doctrine,  but  so 
to  feel  it,  and  my  own  interest  in  it,  as  to  have  my  heart  filled 
with  its  effects,  and  transformed  into  its  resemblance ; 
that  with  this  glorious  exemplar  in  my  view,  I  may  be  ani 
mated  to  a  spirit  of  benevolence,  love,  and  compassion, 
to  all  around  me  ;  that  my  love  may  be  primarily  fixed 
upon  Him  who  has  so  loved  me,  and  then  for  His  sake, 
diffused  to  all  His  children,  and  to  all  His  creatures.  Then, 
knowing  that  much  is  forgiven  to  me,  I  should  be  prompted 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   243 

to  the  ready  exercise  of  forgiveness,  if  I  have  aught  against 
any.  Then  I  should  be  humble,  patient,  and  submissive 
under  all  His  dispensations ;  meek,  gentle,  forbearing, 
and  kind  to  my  fellow- worms.  Then  I  should  be  active  and 
diligent  in  improving  all  my  talents  and  powers  in  His 
service,  and  for  His  glory  ;  and  live  not  to  myself,  but  to  Him 
who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    IV 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  Nov.  29,  1776. 

I  AM  persuaded  you  need  not  be  told,  that  though 
there  are  perhaps  supposable  extremities,  in  which  self 
would  prevail  over  all  considerations,  yet  in  general  it  is 
more  easy  to  suffer  in  our  own  persons,  than  in  the  persons 
of  those  whom  we  dearly  love  ;  for  through  such  a  medium 
our  apprehensions  possibly  receive  the  idea  of  the  trouble 
enlarged  beyond  its  just  dimensions  ;  and  it  would  sit  lighter 
upon  us,  if  it  were  properly  our  own  case,  for  then  we 
should  feel  it  all,  and  there  would  be  no  room  for  imagination 
to  exaggerate. 

But  though  I  feel  grief,  I  trust  the  Lord  has  mercifully 
preserved  me  from  impatience  and  murmuring,  and  that, 
in  the  midst  of  all  the  pleadings  of  flesh  and  blood,  there  is 
exception,  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done." 

It  is  a  comfortable  consideration,  that  He  with  whom 
we  have  to  do,  our  great  High  Priest  who  once  put  away 
our  sins  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  and  now  for  ever  appears 
in  the  presence  of  God  for  us,  is  not  only  possessed  of  sover 
eign  authority  and  infinite  power,  but  wears  our  very  nature, 
and  feels  and  exercises  in  the  highest  degree  those  tender 
nesses  and  commiserations,  which  I  conceive  are  essential  to 
humanity  in  its  perfect  state.  The  whole  history  of  His 
wonderful  life  is  full  of  inimitable  instances  of  this  kind. 
His  bowels  were  moved  before  His  arm  was  exerted  ;  He 
condescended  to  mingle  tears  with  mourners,  and  wept  over 
distresses  which  He  intended  to  relieve.  He  is  still  the  same 

Q2 


244  CARDIPHONIA  : 

in  His  exalted  state  ;  compassions  dwell  within  His  heart. 
In  a  way  inconceivable  to  us,  but  consistent  with  His  su 
preme  dignity  and  perfection  of  happiness  and  glory,  He 
still  feels  for  His  people.  When  Saul  persecuted  the  members 
upon  earth,  the  Head  complained  from  Heaven  ;  and  sooner 
shall  the  most  tender  mother  sit  insensible  and  inattentive 
to  the  cries  and  wants  of  her  infant,  than  the  Lord  Jesus 
be  an  unconcerned  spectator  of  His  suffering  children.  No  ; 
witri  the  eye,  and  the  ear,  and  the  heart  of  a  friend,  He  at 
tends  to  their  sorrows ;  He  counts  their  sighs,  puts  their 
tears  in  His  bottle  ;  and  when  our  spirits  are  overwhelmed 
within  us,  He  knows  our  path,  and  adjusts  the  time,  the 
measure  of  our  trials,  and  everything  that  is  necessary  for 
our  present  support  and  seasonable  deliverance,  with  the 
same  unerring  wisdom  and  accuracy  as  He  weighed  the 
mountains  in  scales,  and  the  hills  in  a  balance,  and  meted  out 
the  heavens  with  a  span.  Still  more,  besides  His  bene 
volent,  He  has  an  experimental,  sympathy.  He  knows 
our  sorrows,  not  merely  as  He  knows  all  things,  but  as  one 
who  has  been  in  our  situation,  and  who,  though  without  sin 
Himself,  endured,  when  upon  earth,  inexpressibly  more  for 
us  than  He  will  ever  lay  upon  us.  He  has  sanctified  poverty, 
pain,  disgrace,  temptation,  and  death,  by  passing  through 
these  states  ;  and  in  whatever  states  His  people  are,  they 
may  by  faith  have  fellowship  with  Him  in  their  sufferings, 
and  He  will,  by  sympathy  and  love,  have  fellowship  and 
interest  with  them  in  theirs.  What  then,  shall  we  fear,  or  of 
what  shall  we  complain,  when  all  our  concerns  are  written 
upon  His  heart,  and  their  management,  to  the  very  hairs  of 
our  head,  are  under  His  care  and  Providence ;  when  He 
pities  us  more  than  we  can  do  ourselves,  and  has  engaged 
His  almighty  power  to  sustain  and  relieve  us  ?  However, 
as  He  is  tender,  He  is  wise  also  ;  He  loves  us,  but  especially 
with  regard  to  our  best  interests.  If  there  were  not  some 
thing  in  our  hearts  and  our  situation  that  required  disci 
pline  and  medicine,  He  so  delights  in  our  prosperity,  that 
we  should  never  be  in  heaviness.  The  innumerable  com 
forts  and  mercies  with  which  He  enriches  even  those  we  call 
our  darker  days,  are  sufficient  proofs  that  He  does  not 
willingly  grieve  us  ;  but  when  He  sees  a  need-be  for  chastise 
ment,  He  will  not  withhold  it,  because  He  loves  us  ;  on  the 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE   HEART        245 

contrary,  that  is  the  very  reason  why  He  afflicts.  He  will 
put  His  silver  into  the  fire  to  purify  it ;  but  He  sits  by  the 
furnace  as  a  refiner,  to  direct  the  process,  and  to  secure  the 
end  He  has  in  view,  that  we  may  neither  suffer  too  much, 
nor  suffer  in  vain. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   V 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  Dec.  —  1776. 

I  HAVE  often  preached  to  others  of  the  benefit  of 
affliction  ;  but  my  own  path  for  many  years  has  been  so 
smooth,  and  my  trials,  though  I  have  not  been  without 
trials,  comparatively  so  light  and  few,  that  I  have  seemed 
to  myself  to  speak  by  rote  upon  a  subject  of  which  I  had 
not  a  proper  feeling.  Yet  the  many  exercises  of  my  poor 
afflicted  people,  and  the  sympathy  the  Lord  has  given  me 
with  them  in  their  troubles,  has  made  this  a  frequent  and 
favourite  topic  of  my  ministry  among  them.  The  advan 
tages  of  afflictions,  when  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  employ  them 
for  the  good  of  His  people,  are  many  and  great.  Permit 
me  to  mention  a  few  of  them  ;  and  the  Lord  grant,  that  we 
may  all  find  those  blessed  ends  answered  to  ourselves,  by 
the  trials  He  is  pleased  to  appoint  us. 

Afflictions  quicken  us  to  prayer.  It  is  a  pity  it  should  be 
so  ;  but  experience  testifies,  that  a  long  course  of  ease  and 
prosperity  without  painful  changes,  has  an  unhappy  ten 
dency  to  make  us  cold  and  formal  in  our  secret  worship  ; 
but  troubles  rouse  our  spirits,  and  constrain  us  to  call  upon 
the  Lord  in  good  earnest,  when  we  feel  a  need  of  that  help 
which  we  only  can  have  from  Him. 

They  are  useful,  and  in  a  degree  necessary,  to  keep  alive 
in  us  a  conviction  of  the  vanity  and  unsatisfying  nature  of 
the  present  world,  and  all  its  enjoyments  ;  to  remind  us  that 
this  is  not  our  rest,  and  to  call  our  thoughts  upwards,  where  our 
true  treasure  is,  and  where  our  conversation  ought  to  be. 
When  things  go  on  much  to  our  wish,  our  hearts  are  too 
prone  to  say,  "  It  is  good  to  be  here."  It  is  probable,  that 


246  CARDIPHONIA  : 

had  Moses,  when  he  came  to  invite  Israel  to  Canaan,  found 
them  in  prosperity,  as  in  the  days  of  Joseph,  they  would 
have  been  very  unwilling  to  remove  ;  but  the  afflictions  they 
were  previously  brought  into  made  his  message  welcome. 
Thus  the  Lord,  by  pain,  sickness,  and  disappointments,  by 
breaking  our  cisterns,  and  withering  our  gourds,  weakens 
our  attachment  to  this  world,  and  makes  the  thought  of 
quitting  it  more  familiar  and  more  desirable. 

A  child  of  God  cannot  but  greatly  desire  a  more  enlarged 
and  experimental  acquaintance  with  His  Holy  Word ;  and 
this  attainment  is  greatly  promoted  by  our  trials.  The  far 
greater  part  of  the  promises  in  Scripture  are  made  and  suited 
to  a  state  of  affliction ;  and  though  we  may  believe  they  are 
true,  we  cannot  so  well  know  their  sweetness,  power,  and 
suitableness,  unless  we  ourselves  are  in  a  state  to  which  they 
refer.  The  Lord  says,  "  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble, 
and  I  will  deliver. ' '  Now,  till  the  day  of  trouble  comes,  such  a 
promise  is  like  a  city  of  refuge  to  an  Israelite,  who,  not  having 
slain  a  man,  was  in  no  danger  of  the  avenger  of  blood.  He 
had  a  privilege  near  him,  of  which  he  knew  not  the  use  and 
value,  because  he  was  not  in  the  case  for  which  it  was  pro 
vided.  But  some  can  say,  I  not  only  believe  this  promise 
upon  the  authority  of  the  speaker,  but  I  can  set  my  seal  to 
it ;  I  have  been  in  trouble,  I  took  this  course  for  relief,  and 
I  was  not  disappointed.  The  Lord  verily  heard  and  de 
livered  me.  Thus  afflictions  likewise  give  occasion  of  our 
knowing  and  noticing  more  of  the  Lord's  wisdom,  power, 
and  goodness,  in  supporting  and  relieving,  than  we  should 
otherwise  have  known. 

I  have  not  time  to  take  another  sheet ;  must,  therefore, 
contract  my  homily.  Afflictions  evidence  to  ourselves, 
and  manifest  to  others,  the  reality  of  grace.  And  when 
we  suffer  as  Christians,  exercise  some  measure  of  that 
patience  and  submission,  and  receive  some  measure  of 
these  supports  and  supplies,  which  the  Gospel  requires  and 
promises  to  believers,  we  are  more  confirmed  that  we  have 
not  taken  up  with  mere  notions  ;  and  others  may  be  con 
vinced,  that  we  do  not  follow  cunningly-devised  fables. 
They  likewise  strengthen,  by  exercise,  our  graces  :  as  our 
limbs  and  natural  powers  would  be  feeble  if  not  called  to 
daily  exertion  ;  so  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  would  languish, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   247 

unless  something  were  provided  to  draw  them  out  to  use. 
And,  to  say  no  more,  they  are  honourable,  as  they  advance 
our  conformity  to  Jesus  our  Lord,  who  was  a  man  of  sorrows 
for  our  sake.  Methinks,  if  we  might  go  to  Heaven  without 
suffering,  we  should  be  unwilling  to  desire  it.  Why  should 
we  ever  wish  to  go  by  any  other  path  than  that  which  He  has 
consecrated  and  endeared  by  His  own  example  ?  especially 
as  His  people's  sufferings  are  not  penal ;  there  is  no  wrath 
in  them  ;  the  cup  He  puts  in  their  hands  is  very  different 
from  that  which  He  drank  for  their  sakes,  and  is  only 
medicinal  to  promote  their  chief  good.  Here  I  must  stop  ; 
but  the  subject  is  fruitful,  and  might  be  pursued  through  a 
quire  of  paper. 

I  am,r&c. 


LETTER    VI 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  August,  --  1768. 

YOUR  obliging  favour  of  the  22nd  from  B  -  — ,  which 
I  received  last  night,  demands  an  immediate  acknowledg 
ment.  Many  things  which  would  have  offered  by  way  of 
answer,  must,  for  the  present,  be  postponed  ;  for  the  same 
post  brought  information  which  turns  my  thoughts  to  one 
subject.  What  shall  I  say  ?  Topics  of  consolation  are  at 
hand  in  abundance  ;  they  are  familiar  to  your  mind  ;  and 
were  I  to  fill  the  sheet  with  them,  I  could  suggest  nothing 
but  what  you  already  know.  Then  are  they  consolatory 
indeed,  when  the  Lord  Himself  is  pleased  to  apply  them  to 
the  heart.  This  He  has  promised,  and  therefore  we  are  en 
couraged  to  expect  it.  This  is  my  prayer  for  you  ;  I  sin 
cerely  sympathise  with  you  :  I  cannot  comfort  you  ;  but 
He  can,  and  I  trust  He  will.  How  impertinent  would  it 
be  to  advise  you  to  forget  or  suspend  the  feelings  which 
such  a  stroke  must  excite  !  who  can  help  feeling  ?  nor  is 
sensibility  in  itself  sinful.  Christian  resignation  is  very 
different  from  that  stoical  stubbornness,  which  is  most 
easily  practised  by  those  unamiable  characters,  whose  regards 
centre  wholly  in  self  :  nor  could  we,  in  a  proper  manner, 


248  CARDIPHONIA  : 

exercise  submission  to  the  will  of  God  under  our  trials,  if  we 
did  not  feel  them.  He  who  knows  our  frame,  is  pleased  to 
allow  that  afflictions  for  the  present  are  not  joyous,  but 
grievous.  But  to  them  that  fear  Him,  He  is  near  at  hand, 
to  support  their  spirits,  to  moderate  their  grief,  and  in  the 
issue  to  sanctify  it ;  so  that  they  shall  come  out  of  the 
furnace  refined,  more  humble,  and  more  spiritual.  There 
is,  however,  a  part  assigned  us  :  we  are  to  pray  for  the  help 
in  need ;  and  we  are  not  wilfully  to  give  way  to  the  im 
pression  of  overwhelming  sorrow.  We  are  to  endeavour  to 
turn  our  thoughts  to  such  considerations  as  are  suited  to 
alleviate  it :  our  deserts  as  sinners,  the  many  mercies  we 
are  still  indulged  with,  the  still  greater  afflictions  which 
many  of  our  fellow-creatures  endure,  and,  above  all,  the 
sufferings  of  Jesus,  that  man  of  sorrows,  who  made  Himself 
intimately  acquainted  with  grief  for  our  sakes. 

When  the  will  of  the  Lord  is  manifested  to  us  by  the 
event,  we  are  to  look  to  Him  for  grace  and  strength,  and 
be  still  to  know  that  He  is  God,  that  He  has  a  right  to 
dispose  of  us  and  ours  as  He  pleases,  and  that  in  the  exercise 
of  this  right  He  is  most  certainly  good  and  wise.  We  often 
complain  of  losses  ;  but  this  expression  is  rather  improper. 
Strictly  speaking,  we  can  lose  nothing,  because  we  have 
no  real  property  in  anything.  Our  earthly  comforts  are 
lent  us  ;  and  when  recalled,  we  ought  to  return  and  resign 
them  with  thankfulness  to  Him  who  has  let  them  remain 
so  long  in  our  hands.  But,  as  I  said  above,  I  do  not  mean  to 
enlarge  in  this  strain  :  I  hope  the  Lord,  the  only  Com 
forter,  will  bring  such  thoughts  with  warmth  and  efficacy 
to  your  mind.  Your  wound,  while  fresh,  is  painful ;  but 
faith,  prayer,  and  time,  will,  I  trust,  gradually  render  it 
tolerable.  There  is  something  fascinating  in  grief ;  pain 
ful  as  it  is,  we  are  prone  to  indulge  it,  and  to  brood  over 
the  thoughts  and  circumstances  which  are  suited  (like  fuel 
to  fire)  to  heighten  and  prolong  it.  When  the  Lord  afflicts, 
it  is  His  design  that  we  should  grieve  :  but  in  this,  as  in  all 
other  things,  there  is  a  certain  moderation  which  becomes 
a  Christian,  and  which  only  grace  can  teach  ;  and  grace 
teaches  us,  not  by  books  or  by  hearsay,  but  by  experimental 
lessons  :  all  beyond  this  should  be  avoided,  and  guarded 
against  as  sinful  and  hurtful.  Grief,  when  indulged  and 


THE    UTTERANCE    OF    THE    HEART       249 

excessive,  preys  upon  the  spirits,  injures  health,  indisposes 
us  for  duty,  and  causes  us  to  shed  tears,  which  deserve 
more  tears.  This  is  a  weeping  world.  Sin  has  filled  it 
with  thorns  and  briers,  with  crosses  and  calamities.  It 
is  a  great  hospital,  resounding  with  groans  in  every  quarter. 
It  is  as  a  field  of  battle,  where  many  are  falling  around  us 
continually  ;  and  it  is  more  wonderful  that  we  escape  so  well, 
than  that  we  are  sometimes  wounded.  We  must  have  some 
share  ;  it  is  the  unavoidable  lot  of  our  nature  and  state  ; 
it  is  likewise  needful,  in  point  of  discipline.  The  Lord 
will  certainly  chasten  those  whom  He  loves,  though  others 
may  seem  to  pass  for  a  time  with  impunity.  That  is  a 
sweet,  instructive,  and  important  passage,  Heb.  xii.  5,  n. 
It  is  so  plain,  that  it  needs  no  comment ;  so  full,  that  a 
comment  would  but  weaken  it.  May  the  Lord  inscribe  it 
upon  your  heart,  my  dear  Madam,  and  upon  mine  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    VII 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  Nov.  --  1778. 

YOUR  obliging  favour  raised  in  me  a  variety  of  emo 
tions  when  I  first  received  it,  and  has  revived  them  this 
morning  while  perusing  it  again.  I  have  mourned  and 
rejoiced  with  you,  and  felt  pain  and  pleasure  in  succes 
sion,  as  you  diversified  the  subject.  However,  the  weight 
of  your  grief  I  was  willing  to  consider  as  a  thing  that  is 
past ;  and  the  thought  that  you  had  been  mercifully  sup 
ported  under  it,  and  brought  through  it,  that  you  were 
restored  home  in  safety,  and  that  at  the  time  of  writing 
you  were  tolerably  well  and  composed,  made  joy  upon 
the  whole  preponderate  ;  and  I  am  more  disposed  to  con 
gratulate  you,  and  join  you  in  praising  the  Lord  for  the 
mercies  you  enumerate,  than  to  prolong  my  condolence 
upon  the  mournful  parts  orf  your  letter.  Repeated  trying 
occasions  have  made  me  well  acquainted  with  the  anxious 
inquiries  with  which  the  busy  poring  mind  is  apt  to  pursue 
departed  friends  :  it  can  hardly  be  otherwise  under  some 


250  CARD1PHONIA  : 

circumstances.  I  have  found  prayer  the  best  relief.  I 
have  thought  it  very  allowable  to  avail  myself  to  the  utmost 
of  every  favourable  consideration  ;  but  I  have  had  the  most 
comfort,  when  I  have  been  enabled  to  resign  the  whole 
concern  into  His  hands,  whose  thoughts  and  ways,  whose 
power  and  goodness,  are  infinitely  superior  to  our  con 
ceptions.  I  consider  in  such  cases,  that  the  great  Redeemer 
can  save  to  the  uttermost,  and  the  great  Teacher  can 
communicate  light,  and  impress  truth,  when  and  how  He 
pleases.  I  trust  the  power  of  His  grace  and  compassion 
will  hereafter  triumphantly  appear  in  many  instances  of 
persons,  who,  on  their  dying  beds,  and  in  the  last  moments, 
have  been  by  His  mercy  constrained  to  feel  the  importance 
and  reality  of  truths  which  they  did  not  properly  under 
stand  and  attend  to  in  the  hour  of  health  and  prosperity. 
Such  a  salutary  change  I  have  frequently,  or  at  least  more 
than  once,  twice,  or  thrice,  been  an  eye-witness  to,  accom 
panied  with  such  evidence  as  I  think  has  been  quite  satis 
factory.  And  who  can  say  such  a  change  may  not  often 
take  place,  when  the  person  who  is  the  subject  of  it  is  too 
much  enfeebled  to  give  an  account  to  bystanders  of  what  is 
transacting  in  his  mind  ?  Thus  I  have  encouraged  my 
hope.  But  the  best  satisfaction  of  all  is,  to  be  duly  impressed 
with  the  voice  that  says,  "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God." 
These  words  direct  us  not  only  to  His  sovereignty,  His 
undoubted  right  to  do  what  He  will,  with  His  own,  but  to  all 
His  adorable  and  amiable  perfections,  by  wluch  He  has 
manifested  Himself  to  us  in  the  Son  of  His  love. 

As  I  am  not  a  Sadducee,  the  account  you  give  of  the 
music  which  entertained  you  on  the  road  does  not  put  my 
dependence  upon  your  veracity  or  your  judgment  to  any 
trial.  We  live  upon  the  confines  of  the  invisible  world,  or 
rather,  perhaps,  in  the  midst  of  it.  That  unseen  agents 
have  a  power  of  operating  upon  our  minds,  at  least,  upon 
that  mysterious  faculty  we  call  the  imagination,  is  with 
me  not  merely  a  point  of  opinion,  or  even  of  faith,  but  of 
experience.  That  evil  spirits  can,  when  permitted,  dis 
turb,  distress,  and  defile  us,  I  kpow,  as  well  as  I  know  that 
the  fire  can  burn  me  ;  and  though  their  interposition  is 
perhaps  more  easily  and  certainly  distinguishable,  yet,  from 
analogy,  I  conclude  that  good  spirits  are  equally  willing, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   251 

and  equally  able,  to  employ  their  kind  offices  for  our  relief 
and  comfort.  I  have  formed  in  my  mind  a  kind  of  system 
upon  this  subject,  which,  for  the  most  part,  I  keep  pretty 
much  to  myself ;  but  I  can  entrust  my  thoughts  to  you 
as  they  occasionally  offer.  I  apprehend  that  some  persons 
(those  particularly  who  rank  under  the  class  of  nervous) 
are  more  open  and  accessible  to  these  impressions  than 
others,  and  probably  the  same  persons  more  so  at  some 
times  than  at  others.  And  though  we  frequently  dis 
tinguish  between  imaginary  and  real  (which  is  one  reason 
why  nervous  people  are  so  seldom  pitied)  yet  an  impression 
upon  the  imagination  may,  as  to  the  agent  that  produces  it, 
and  to  the  person  that  receives  it,  be  as  much  a  reality  as 
any  of  the  sensible  objects  around  him  ;  though  a  by-stander, 
not  being  able  to  share  in  the  perception,  may  account  it  a 
mere  whim,  and  suppose  it  might  be  avoided  or  removed  by 
an  act  of  the  will.  Nor  have  any  a  right  to  withhold  their 
assent  to  what  the  Scriptures  teach,  and  many  sober  persons 
declare,  of  this  invisible  agency,  merely  because  we  cannot 
answer  the  questions,  How  ?  or  Why  ?  The  thing  may  be 
certain  though  we  cannot  easily  explain  it ;  and  there  may 
be  just  and  important  reasons  for  it,  though  we  should  not 
be  able  to  assign  them.  If  what  you  heard,  or  (which  in  my 
view  is  much  the  same)  what  you  thought  you  heard,  had 
a  tendency  to  compose  your  spirit,  and  to  encourage  your 
application  to  the  Lord  for  help,  at  the  time  when  you  were 
about  to  stand  in  need  of  especial  assistance,  then  there  is 
a  sufficient  and  suitable  reason  assigned  for  it  at  once,  with 
out  looking  further.  It  would  be  dangerous  to  make 
impressions  a  rule  of  duty  ;  but  if  they  strengthen  us,  and 
assist  us  in  the  performance  of  what  we  know  to  be  our  duty, 
me  way  be  thankful  for  them. 

You  have  taken  leave  of  your  favourite  trees,  and  the 
scenes  of  your  younger  life,  but  a  few  years  sooner  than  you 
must  have  done,  if  the  late  dispensation  had  not  taken  place. 
All  must  be  left  soon  ;  for  all  below  is  polluted,  and  in  its 
best  state  is  too  scanty  to  afford  us  happiness.  If  we  are 
believers  in  Jesus,  all  we  can  quit  is  a  mere  nothing,  com 
pared  with  what  we  shall  obtain.  To  exchange  a  dungeon 
for  a  palace,  earth  for  Heaven,  will  call  for  no  self-denial 
when  we  stand  upon  the  threshold  of  eternity,  and  shall  have 


252 


CARDIPHONIA 


a  clearer  view  than  we  have  now  of  the  vanity  of  what  is 
passing  from  us,  and  the  glory  of  what  is  before  us.  The 
partial  changes  we  meet  with  in  our  way  through  life  are 
designed  to  remind  us  of,  and  prepare  us  for,  the  great  change 
which  awaits  us  at  the  end  of  it.  The  Lord  grant  that  we 
may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  solemn  hour  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


FOUR  LETTERS 

TO 

MRS.   T 

LETTER   I 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  March  12,  1774. 

MY  heart  is  full,  yet  I  must  restrain  it.  Many  thoughts 
which  crowd  my  mind,  and  would  have  vent  were  I  writing 
to  another  person,  would  to  you  be  unseasonable.  I  write 
not  to  remind  you  of  what  you  have  lost,  but  of  what  you 
have  which  you  cannot  lose.  May  the  Lord  put  a  word  into 
my  heart  that  may  be  acceptable  ;  and  may  His  good  Spirit 
accompany  the  perusal,  and  enable  you  to  say  with  the 
apostle,  that  as  sufferings  abound,  consolations  also  abound 
by  Jesus  Christ !  Indeed  I  can  sympathise  with  you.  I 
remember,  too,  the  delicacy  of  your  frame,  and  the  tender 
ness  of  your  natural  spirits  ;  so  that,  were  you  not  interested 
in  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  of  the  Gospel, 
I  should  be  ready  to  fear  you  must  sink  under  your  trial. 
But  I  have  some  faint  conceptions  of  the  all-sufficiency  and 
faithfulness  of  the  Lord,  and  may  address  you  in  the  king's 
words  to  Daniel,  "  Thy  God,  whom  thou  servest  continually, 
He  will  deliver  thee."  Motives  for  resignation  to  His  will 
abound  in  His  word  ;  but  it  is  an  additional  and  crowning 
mercy,  that  He  has  promised  to  apply  and  enforce  them 
in  time  of  need.  He  has  said,  "  My  grace  shall  be  sufficient 
for  thee  :  and  as  thy  day  is,  so  shall  thy  strength  be." 
This  I  trust  you  have  already  experienced.  The  Lord  is 
so  rich  and  so  good,  that  He  can  by  a  glance  of  thought 
compensate  His  children  for  whatever  His  wisdom  sees  fit 
to  deprive  them  of.  If  He  gives  them  a  lively  sense  of  what 
He  has  delivered  them  from,  and  prepared  for  them,  or  of 

253 


254  CARDJPHONIA  : 

what  He  Himself  submitted  to  endure  for  their  sakes,  they 
find  at  once  light  springing  up  out  of  darkness  ;  hard  things 
become  easy,  and  bitter  sweet.  I  remember  to  have  read 
of  a  good  man  in  the  last  century  (probably  you  may 
have  met  with  the  story)  who,  when  his  beloved  and  only 
son  lay  ill,  was  for  some  time  greatly  anxious  about  the 
event.  One  morning  he  stayed  longer  than  usual  in  his 
closet ;  while  he  was  there  his  son  died.  When  he  came 
out,  his  family  were  afraid  to  tell  him,  but,  like  David,  he 
perceived  it  by  their  looks  ;  and  when  upon  inquiry  they 
said  it  was  so,  he  received  the  news  with  a  composure  that 
surprised  them.  But  he  soon  explained  the  reason,  by 
telling  them,  that  for  such  discoveries  of  the  Lord's  goodness 
as  he  had  been  favoured  with  that  morning,  he  could  be 
content  to  lose  a  son  every  day.  Yes,  Madam,  though  every 
stream  must  fail,  the  fountain  is  still  full  and  still  flowing. 
All  the  comfort  you  ever  received  in  your  dear  friend  was 
from  the  Lord,  who  is  abundantly  able  to  comfort  you 
still ;  and  He  is  gone  but  a  little  before  you.  May  your 
faith  anticipate  the  joyful  and  glorious  meeting  you  will 
shortly  have  in  a  better  world  !  Then  your  worship  and 
converse  together  will  be  to  unspeakable  advantage,  with 
out  imperfecting,  interruption,  abatement  or  end.  Then 
all  tears  shall  be  wiped  away,  and  every  cloud  removed  ; 
and  then  you  will  see  that  all  your  concernments  here 
below  (the  late  afflicting  dispensation  not  excepted) 
were  appointed  and  adjusted  by  infinite  wisdom  and  in 
finite  love. 

The  Lord,  who  knows  our  frame,  does  not  expect  or 
require  that  we  should  aim  at  a  stoical  indifference  under 
His  visitations.  He  allows,  that  afflictions  are  at  present 
not  joyous,  but  grievous  ;  yea,  He  was  pleased  when  upon 
earth  to  weep  with  His  mourning  friends  when  Lazarus  died. 
But  He  has  graciously  provided  for  the  prevention  of  that 
anguish  and  bitterness  of  sorrow,  which  is,  upon  such  occa 
sions,  the  portion  of  such  as  live  without  God  in  the  world, 
and  has  engaged  that  all  shall  work  together  for  good,  and 
yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.  May  He  bless  you 
with  a  sweet  serenity  of  spirit,  and  a  cheerful  hope  of  the 
glory  that  shall  be  shortly  revealed  ! 

I  intimated  that  I  would  not  trouble  you  with  my  own  sense 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   255 

and  share  of  this  loss.     If  you  remember  the  great  kindness 

I  always  received  from  Mr.  T. and  yourself,  as  often 

as[opportunity  afforded,  and  if  you  will  believe  me  possessed 
of  any  sensibility  or  gratitude,  you  will  conclude  that 
my  concern  is  not  small.  I  feel  likewise  for  the  public. 
Will  it  be  a  consolation  to  you,  Madam,  to  know  that  you 
do  not  mourn  alone  ?  A  character  so  exemplary,  as  a  friend, 
a  counsellor,  a  Christian,  and  a  minister,  will  be  long  and 
deeply  regretted  ;  and  many  will  join  with  me  in  praying, 
that  you  who  are  most  nearly  interested  may  be  signally 
supported,  and  feel  the  propriety  of  Mrs.  Rowe's  acknow 
ledgment, 

Thou  dost  but  take  the  dying  lamp  away 
To  bless  me  with  Thine  own  unclouded  day. 

We  join  in  most  affectionate  respects  and  condolence. 
May  the  Lord  bless  you  and  keep  you,  lift  up  the  light  of 
His  countenance  upon  you,  and  give  you  peace  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   II 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  April  8,  1775. 

I  HAVE  long  and  often  purposed  waiting  upon  you  with 
a  second  letter,  though  one  thing  or  other  still  caused  delay  ; 
for  though  I  could  not  but  wish  to  hear  from  you,  I  was 
far  from  making  that  a  condition  of  my  writing.  If  you  have 
leisure  and  spirits  to  favour  me  with  a  line  now  and  then, 
it  will  give  us  much  pleasure  ;  but  if  not,  it  will  be  a  suffi 
cient  inducement  with  me  to  write,  to  know  that  you  give 
me  liberty,  and  that  you  will  receive  my  letters  in  good 
part.  At  the  same  time  I  must  add,  that  my  various 
engagements  will  not  permit  me  to  break  in  upon  you  so  often 
as  my  sincere  affection  would  otherwise  prompt  me  to  do. 

I  heartily  thank  you  for  yours,  and  hope  my  soul  desires 
to  praise  the  Lord  on  your  behalf.  I  am  persuaded  that 
His  goodness  to  you,  in  supporting  you  under  a  trial  so 
sharp  in  itself,  and  in  the  circumstances  that  attended  it, 


256  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

has  been  an  encouragement  and  comfort  to  many.  It  is 
in  such  apparently  severe  times  that  the  all-sufficiency  and 
faithfulness  of  the  Lord,  and  the  power  and  proper  effects 
of  His  precious  Gospel,  are  most  eminently  displayed.  I 
would  hope,  and  I  do  believe,  that  the  knowledge  of  your 
case  has  animated  some  of  the  Lord's  people  against  those 
anxious  fears  which  they  sometimes  feel  when  they  look 
upon  their  earthly  comforts  with  too  careful  an  eye,  and  their 
hearts  are  ready  to  sink  at  the  thought.  What  should  I 
do,  and  how  should  I  behave,  were  the  Lord  pleased  to 
take  away  my  desire  with  a  stroke  ?  But  we  see  He  can 
supply  their  absence,  and  afford  us  superior  comforts 
without  them.  The  Gospel  reveals  one  thing  needful,  the 
pearl  of  great  price  ;  and  supposes  that  they  who  possess 
this  are  provided  for  against  all  events,  and  have  ground 
of  unshaken  hope,  and  a  source  of  never-failing  consolation 
under  every  change  they  can  meet  with  during  their  pil 
grimage  state.  When  His  people  are  enabled  to  set  their 
seal  to  this,  not  only  in  theory  when  all  things  go  smooth, 
but  practically  when  called  upon  to  pass  through  the 
fire  and  water,  then  His  grace  is  glorified  in  them  and  by 
them  ;  then  it  appears  both  to  themselves  and  to  others, 
that  they  have  neither  followed  cunningly  devised  fables, 
nor  amused  themselves  with  empty  notions  ;  then  they  know 
in  themselves,  and  it  is  evidenced  to  others,  that  God  is 
with  them  of  a  truth.  In  this  view  a  believer,  when  in  some 
good  measure  divested  from  that  narrow  selfish  disposi 
tion  which  cleaves  so  closely  to  us  by  nature,  will  not  only 
submit  to  trials,  but  rejoice  in  them,  notwithstanding  the 
feelings  and  reluctance  of  the  flesh.  For  if  I  am  redeemed 
from  misery  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  if  He  is  now  prepar 
ing  me  a  mansion  near  Himself,  that  I  may  drink  of  the 
rivers  of  pleasure  at  His  right  hand  for  evermore,  the  ques 
tion  is  not  (at  least  ought  not  to  be) — How  may  I  pass 
through  life  with  the  least  inconvenience — How  may  my 
little  span  of  life  be  made  most  subservient  to  the  praise  and 
glory  of  Him  Who  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me  ? 
Where  the  Lord  gives  this  desire,  He  will  gratify  it :  and  as 
afflictions  for  the  most  part  afford  the  fairest  opportunities 
of  this  kind,  therefore  it  is,  that  those  whom  He  is  pleased 
eminently  to  honour  are  usually  called,  at  one  time  or 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   257 

another,  to  the  heaviest  trials  ;  not  because  He  loves  to 
grieve  them,  but  because  He  hears  their  prayers,  and 
accepts  their  desires  of  doing  Him  service  in  the  world. 
The  post  of  honour  in  war  is  so  called,  because  attended 
with  difficulties  and  dangers  which  but  few  are  supposed 
equal  to  ;  yet  generals  usually  allot  these  hard  services  to 
their  favourites  and  friends,  who,  on  their  parts,  eagerly 
accept  them  as  tokens  of  favour,  and  marks  of  confidence. 
Should  we,  therefore,  not  account  it  an  honour  and  a 
privilege,  when  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  assigns  us  a 
difficult  post  since  He  can  and  does  (which  no  earthly 
commander  can)  inspire  His  soldiers  with  wisdom,  courage 
and  strength,  suitable  to  their  situation  (2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10)  ? 
I  am  acquainted  with  a  few  who  have  been  led  thus  into  the 
fore-front  of  the  battle  :  they  suffered  much  ;  but  I  have 
never  heard  them  say  they  suffered  too  much  ;  for  the 
Lord  stood  by  them  and  strengthened  them.  Go  on,  my 
dear  Madam  :  yet  a  little  while  and  Jesus  will  wipe  away 
all  tears  from  your  eyes  ;  you  will  see  your  beloved  friend 
again,  and  he  and  you  will  rejoice  together  for  ever. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   III 

MY   DEAR   MADAM,  October  24,  1775. 

THE  manner  in  which  you  mention  "  Omicron's  Letters," 
I  hope,  will  rather  humble  me  than  puff  me  up.  Your 
favourable  acceptance  of  them,  if  alone,  might  have  the 
latter  effect  ;  but,  alas  !  I  feel  myself  so  very  defective 
in  those  things,  the  importance  of  wliich  I  endeavour  to 
point  out  to  others,  that  I  almost  appear  to  myself  to  be 
one  of  those  who  say,  but  do  not.  I  find  it  much  easier 
to  speak  to  the  hearts  of  others  than  to  my  own.  Yet  I 
have  cause,  beyond  many,  to  bless  God,  that  He  has  given 
me  some  idea  of  what  a  Christian  ought  to  be,  and  I  hope 
a  real  desire  of  being  one  myself ;  but  verily  I  have  at 
tained  but  a  very  little  way.  A  friend  hinted  to  me,  that 
the  character  I  have  given  of  C.  or  grace  in  the  full  ear, 

c.  R 


CARDIPHONIA  : 

must  be  from  my  own  experience,  or  I  could  not  have  written 
it.  To  myself,  however,  it  appears  otherwise  ;  but  I  am 
well  convinced,  that  the  state  of  C.  is  attainable,  and  more 
to  be  desired  than  mountains  of  gold  and  silver.  But  I 
find  you  complain  likewise  ;  though  it  appears  to  me,  and 
I  believe  to  all  who  know  you,  that  the  Lord  lias  been 
peculiarly  gracious  to  you,  in  giving  you  much  of  the  spirit 
in  which  He  delights,  and  by  which  His  name  and  the  power 
of  Hjs  Gospel  are  glorified.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  we 
are  hot  competent  judges  either  of  ourselves  or  of  others. 
I  take  it  for  granted,  that  they  are  the  most  excellent 
Christians  who  are  most  abased  in  their  own  eyes  ;  but 
lest  you  should  think  upon  this  ground  that  I  am  something, 
because  I  can  say  so  many  humiliating  things  of  myself, 
I  must  prevent  your  over-rating  me,  by  assuring  you,  that 
my  confessions  rather  express  what  I  know  I  ought  to  think 
of  myself,  than  what  I  actually  do.  Naturalists  suppose, 
that  if  the  matter  of  which  the  earth  is  formed  were  con 
densed  as  much  as  it  is  capable  of,  it  would  occupy  but  a 
very  small  space  ;  in  proof  of  which  they  observe,  that  a 
cubical  pane  of  glass,  which  appears  smooth  and  impervious 
to  us,  must  be  exceedingly  porous  in  itself ;  since  in  every 
assignable  point  it  receives  and  transmits  the  rays  of  light ; 
and  yet  gold,  which  is  the  most  solid  substance  we  are 
acquainted  with,  is  about  eight  times  heavier  than  glass, 
which  is  made  up  (if  I  may  say  so)  of  nothing  but  pores. 
In  like  manner,  I  conceive  that  inherent  grace,  when  it  is 
dilated,  and  appears  to  the  greatest  advantage  in  a  sinner, 
would  be  found  to  be  very  small  and  inconsiderable,  if  it 
was  condensed,  and  absolutely  separated  from  every  mix 
ture.  The  highest  attainments  in  this  life  are  very  incon 
siderable,  compared  with  what  should  properly  result  from 
our  relation  and  obligations  to  a  God  of  infinite  holiness. 
The  nearer  we  approach  to  Him,  the  more  we  are  sensible 
of  this.  While  we  only  hear  of  God  as  it  were  by  the  ear,  we 
seem  to  be  something  ;  but  when,  as  in  the  case  of  Job,  He 
discovers  Himself  more  sensibly  to  us,  Job's  language 
becomes  ours,  and  the  height  of  our  attainment  is,  to  abhor 
ourselves  in  dust  and  ashes. 

I  hope  I  do  not  write  too  late  to  meet  you  at  Bath.     I 
pray  that   your  health  may  be   benefited  by  the  waters, 


THE    UTTERANCE    OF    THE    HEART       259 

and  your  soul  comforted  by  the  Lord's  blessing  upon  His 
ordinances,  and  the  converse  of  His  children.  If  any  of  the 
friends  you  expected  to  see  are  still  there,  to  whom  we  are 
known,  and  my  name  should  be  mentioned,  I  beg  you  to 
say,  we  desire  to  be  respectfully  remembered  to  them. 
Had  I  wings  I  would  fly  to  Bath  while  you  are  there.  As  it 
is,  I  endeavour  to  be  with  you  in  spirit.  There  certainly  is 
a  real,  though  secret,  a  sweet,  though  mysterious,  com 
munion  of  saints,  by  virtue  of  their  common  union  with 
Jesus.  Feeding  upon  the  same  bread,  drinking  of  the  same 
fountain,  waiting  at  the  same  mercy-seat,  and  aiming  at  the 
same  ends,  they  have  fellowship  one  with  another,  though 
at  a  distance.  Who  can  tell  how  often  the  Holy  Spirit, 
who  is  equally  present  with  them  all,  touches  the  hearts  of 
two  or  more  of  His  children  at  the  same  instant,  so  as  to 
excite  a  sympathy  of  pleasure,  prayer,  or  praise,  on  each 
other's  account  ?  It  revives  me/sometimes  in  a  dull  and 
dark  hour  to  reflect,  that  the  Lord  has  in  mercy  given  me  a 
place  in  the  hearts  of  many  of  His  people  ;  and  perhaps 
some  of  them  may  be  speaking  to  Him  on  my  behalf,  when 
I  have  hardly  power  to  utter  a  word  for  myself.  For  kind 
services  of  this  sort,  I  persuade  myself,  I  am  often  indebted 
to  you.  O  that  I  were  enabled  more  fervently  to  repay  you 
in  the  same  way  !  I  can  say  that  I  attempt  it :  I  love  and 
honour  you  greatly,  and  your  concernments  are  often  upon 
my  mind. 

We  spent  most  of  a  week  with  Mr.  B since  we  re 
turned  from  London,  and  he  has  been  once  here.  We 
have  reason  to  be  very  thankful  for  his  connexion  ;  I  find 
but  few  like-minded  with  him,  and  his  family  is  filled  with 
the  grace  and  peace  of  the  Gospel.  I  never  visit  them 
but  I  meet  with  something  to  humble,  quicken,  and  edify 
me.  O  !  what  will  Heaven  be,  where  there  shall  be  all 
who  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  they  only  ;  where  all  imper 
fection,  and  whatever  now  abates  or  interrupts  their  joy  in 
their  Lord,  and  in  each  other,  shall  cease  for  ever  ?  There 
at  last  I  hope  to  meet  you,  and  spend  an  eternity  with  you, 
in  admiring  the  riches  and  glory  of  redeeming  love. 

We  join  in  a  tender  of  the  most  affectionate  respects. 

I  am,  &c. 


R2 


260  CARDIPHON1A  : 


LETTER    IV 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  October  28,  1777. 

WHAT  can  I  say  for  myself,  to  let  your  obliging  letter 
remain  so  long  unanswered,  when  your  kind  solicitude  for 
us  induced  you  to  write  ?  I  am  ashamed  of  the  delay. 
You  would  have  heard  from  me  immediately,  had  I  been 
at  home.  But  I  have  reason  to  be  thankful  that  we  were 
providentially  called  to  London  a  few  days  before  the  fire ; 
so  that  Mrs.  -  -  was  mercifully  preserved  from  the  alarm 
and  shock  she  must  have  felt,  had  she  been  upon  the  spot. 
Your  letter  followed  me  hither,  and  was  in  my  possession 
more  than  a  week  before  my  return.  I  purposed  writing 
every  day,  but  indeed  I  was  much  hurried  and  engaged. 
Yet  I  am  not  excused  ;  I  ought  to  have  saved  time  from 
my  meals  or  my  sleep,  rather  than  appear  negligent  or 
ungrateful.  I  now  seize  the  first  post  I  could  write  by 
since  I  came  home.  The  fire  devoured  twelve  houses  ;  and 
it  was  a  mercy,  and  almost  a  miracle,  that  the  whole 
town  was  not  destroyed  ;  wliich  must,  humanly  speaking, 
have  been  the  case,  had  not  the  night  been  calm,  as  two-thirds 
of  the  buildings  were  thatched.  No  lives  were  lost,  no 
person  considerably  hurt ;  and  I  believe  the  contributions 
of  the  benevolent  will  prevent  the  loss  from  being  greatly 
felt.  It  was  at  the  distance  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  my 
house. 

Your  command  limits  my  attention,  at  present,  to  a 
part  of  your  letter,  and  points  me  out  a  subject.  Yet, 
at  the  same  time,  you  lay  me  under  a  difficulty.  I  would  not 
willingly  offend  you,  and  I  hope  the  Lord  has  taught  me 
not  to  aim  at  saying  handsome  things.  I  deal  not  in  com 
pliments,  and  religious  compliments  are  the  most  unseemly 
of  any.  But  why  might  I  not  express  my  sense  of  the 
grace  of  God  manifested  in  you  as  well  as  in  another  ?  I  be 
lieve  our  hearts  are  all  alike  destitute  of  every  good,  and 
prone  to  every  evil.  Like  money  from  the  same  mint,  they 
bear  the  same  impression  of  total  depravity ;  but  grace 
makes  a  difference,  and  grace  deserves  the  praise.  Perhaps 
it  ought  not  greatly  to  displease  you,  that  others  do,  and 
must,  and  will,  think  better  of  you  than  you  do  of  yourself. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   261 

If  I  do,  how  can  I  help  it,  when  I  form  my  judgment  entirely 
from  what  you  say  and  write  ?  I  cannot  consent  that  you 
should  seriously  appoint  me  to  examine  and  judge  of  your 
state.  I  thought  you  knew,  beyond  the  shadow  of  a  doubt, 
what  your  views  and  desires  are  ;  yea,  you  express  them 
in  your  letter,  in  full  agreement  with  what  the  Scripture 
declares  of  the  principles,  desires,  and  feelings  of  a  Christian. 
It  is  true  that  you  feel  contrary  principles,  that  you  are 
conscious  of  defects  and  defilements  ;  but  it  is  equally 
true  that  you  could  not  be  right  if  you  did  not  feel  these 
things.  To  be  conscious  of  them,  and  humbled  for  them, 
is  one  of  the  surest  marks  of  grace  ;  and  to  be  more  deeply 
sensible  of  them  than  formerly,  is  the  best  evidence  of  growth 
in  grace.  But  when  the  enemy  would  tempt  us  to  doubt 
and  distrust,  because  we  are  not  perfect,  then  he  fights, 
not  only  against  our  peace,  but  against  the  honour  and  faith 
fulness  of  our  dear  Lord.  Our  righteousness  is  in  Him,  and 
our  hope  depends,  not  upon  the  exercise  of  grace  in  us, 
but  upon  the  fulness  of  grace  and  love  in  Him,  and  upon 
His  obedience  unto  death. 

There  is,  my  dear  Madam,  a  difference  between  the 
holiness  of  a  sinner  and  that  of  an  angel.  The  angels  have 
never  sinned,  nor  have  they  tasted  of  redeeming  love ; 
they  have  no  inward  conflicts,  no  law  of  sin  warring  in  their 
members  ;  their  obedience  is  perfect ;  their  happiness  is 
complete.  Yet  if  I  be  found  among  redeemed  sinners,  I 
need  not  wish  to  be  an  angel.  Perhaps  God  is  not  less 
glorified  by  your  obedience,  and,  not  to  shock  you,  I  will 
add,  by  mine,  than  by  Gabriel's.  It  is  a  mighty  manifesta 
tion  of  His  grace  indeed,  when  it  can  live,  and  act,  and  con 
quer,  in  such  hearts  as  ours  ;  when,  in  defiance  of  an  evil 
nature  and  an  evil  world,  and  all  the  force  and  subtlety  of 
Satan,  a  weak  worm  is  still  upheld,  and  enabled  not  only  to 
climb,  but  to  thresh  the  mountains  ;  when  a  small  spark 
is  preserved  through  storms  and  floods.  In  these  circum 
stances,  the  work  of  grace  is  to  be  estimated,  not  merely 
from  its  imperfect  appearance,  but  from  the  difficulties  it 
has  to  struggle  with  and  overcome  ;  and,  therefore,  our 
holiness  does  not  consist  in  great  attainments,  but  in 
spiritual  desires,  in  hungerings,  thirsting*,  and  mournings  ; 
in  humiliation  of  heart,  poverty  of  spirit,  submission, 


262  CARDIPBONIA  : 

meekness ;  in  cordial  admiring  thoughts  of  Jesus,  and 
dependence  upon  Him  alone  for  all  we  want.  Indeed  these 
may  be  said  to  be  great  attainments  ;  but  they  who  have 
most  of  them  are  most  sensible  that  they,  in  and  of  them 
selves,  are  nothing,  have  nothing,  can  do  nothing,  and  see 
daily  cause  for  abhorring  themselves,  and  repenting  in  dust 
and  ashes. 

Our  view  of  death  will  not  always  be  alike,  but  in  pro 
portion  to  the  degree  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  is  pleased 
to  communicate  His  sensible  influence.  We  may  anticipate 
the  moment  of  dissolution  with  pleasure  and  desire  in  the 
morning,  and  be  ready  to  shrink  from  the  thought  of  it 
before  night.  But  though  our  frames  and  perceptions  vary, 
the  report  of  faith  concerning  it  is  the  same.  The  Lord 
usually  reserves  dying  strength  for  a  dying  hour.  When 
Israel  was  to  pass  Jordan,  the  ark  was  in  the  river ;  and 
though  the  rear  of  the  host  could  not  see  it,  yet  as  they 
successively  came  forward  and  approached  the  banks,  they 
all  beheld  the  ark,  and  all  went  safely  over.  As  you  are  not 
weary  of  living,  if  it  be  the  Lord's  pleasure,  so  I  hope,  for  the 
sake  of  your  friends  and  the  people  whom  you  love,  He  will 
spare  you  amongst  us  a  little  longer  ;  but  when  the  time 
shall  arrive  which  He  has  appointed  for  your  dismission, 
I  make  no  doubt  but  He  will  overpower  all  your  fears,  silence 
all  your  enemies,  and  give  you  a  comfortable,  triumphant 
entrance  into  His  kingdom.  You  have  nothing  to  fear  from 
death  ;  for  Jesus,  by  dying,  has  disarmed  it  of  its  sting, 
has  perfumed  the  grave,  and  opened  the  gates  of  glory  for 
His  believing  people.  Satan,  so  far  as  He  is  permitted,  will 
assault  our  peace,  but  He  is  a  vanquished  enemy  :  our  Lord 
holds  him  in  a  chain,  and  sets  him  bounds  which  he  cannot 
pass.  He  provides  for  us  likewise  the  whole  armour  of 
God,  and  has  promised  to  cover  our  heads  Himself  in  the 
days  of  battle,  to  bring  us  honourably  through  every  skirm 
ish,  and  to  make  us  more  than  conquerors  at  last.  If  you 

think    my    short    unexpected    interview    with    Mr.    C 

may  justify  my  wishing  he  should  know  that  I  respect  his 
character,  love  his  person,  and  rejoice  in  what  the  Lord 
has  done  and  is  doing  for  him  and  by  him,  I  beg  you  to 
tell  him  so  ;  but  I  leave  it  entirely  to  you. 

We  join  in  most  affectionate  respects.  I  am,  &c. 


FIVE     LETTERS 

TO 

MR.   

LETTER   1 

DEAR  SIR,  March  7,  1765. 

YOUR  favour  of  the  igth  February  came  to  my  hand 
yesterday.  I  have  read  it  with  attention,  and  very  wil 
lingly  sit  down  to  offer  you  my  thoughts.  Your  case 
reminds  me  of  my  own  :  my  first  desires  towards  the 
ministry  were  attended  with  great  uncertainties  and  diffi 
culties,  and  the  perplexity  of  my  own  mind  was  heightened 
by  the  various  and  opposite  judgments  of  my  friends.  The 
advice  I  have  to  offer  is  the  result  of  painful  experience  and 
exercise,  and  for  this  reason,  perhaps,  may  not  be  unaccept 
able  to  you.  I  pray  our  gracious  Lord  to  make  it  useful. 

I  was  long  distressed,  as  you  are,  about  what  was  or  was 
not  a  proper  call  to  the  ministry  ;  it  now  seems  to  me  an 
easy  point  to  solve,  but  perhaps  will  not  be  so  to  you,  till 
the  Lord  shall  make  it  clear  to  yourself  in  your  own  case. 
I  have  not  room  to  say  as  much  as  I  could  :  in  brief,  I  think 
it  principally  includes  three  things  : 

i.  A  warm  and  earnest  desire  to  be  employed  in  this 
service.  I  apprehend,  the  man  who  is  once  moved  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  this  work,  will  prefer  it,  if  attainable,  to 
thousands  of  gold  and  silver  ;  so  that  though  he  is  at  times 
intimidated  by  a  sense  of  its  importance  and  difficulty,  com 
pared  with  his  own  great  insufficiency,  (for  it  is  to  be  pre 
sumed  a  call  of  this  sort,  if  indeed  from  God,  will  be  accom 
panied  with  humility  and  self-abasement,)  yet  he  cannot  give 
it  up.  I  hold  it  a  good  rule  to  inquire  on  this  point,  whether 
the  desire  to  preach  is  most  fervent  in  our  most  lively  and 

263 


264  CARDIPFIOyiA  : 

spiritual  frames,  and  when  we  are  most  laid  in  the  dust 
before  the  Lord  ?  If  so,  it  is  a  good  sign.  But  if,  as  is 
sometimes  the  case,  a  person  is  very  earnest  to  be  a  preacher 
to  others,  when  he  finds  but  little  hungerings  and  thirsting* 
after  grace  in  his  own  soul,  it  is  then  to  be  feared,  his  zeal 
springs  rather  from  a  selfish  principle,  than  from  the  Spirit 
of  God. 

2.  Besides  this  affectionate  desire  and  readiness  to  preach, 
there^must  in  due  season  appear  some  competent  sufficiency, 
as  to  gifts,  knowledge  and  utterance.     Surely  if  the  Lord 
sends  a  man  to  teach  others,  He  will  furnish  him  with  the 
means.     I  believe  many  have  intended  well  in  setting  up  for 
preachers,  who  yet  went  beyond  or  before  their  call  in  so 
doing.     The  main  difference  between  a  minister  and  a  private 
Christian  seems  to  consist  in  these  ministerial  gifts,  which 
are  imparted  to  him,  not  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  the 
edification  of  others.     But  then  I  say,  these  are  to  appear 
in  due  season  :   they  are  not  to  be  expected  instantaneously, 
but   gradually,    in    the   use   of  proper   means.     They   are 
necessary  for  the  discharge  of  the  ministry  ;   but  not  neces 
sary  as  pre-requisites  to  warrant  our  desires  after  it.     In 
your  case,  you  are  young,  and  have  time  before  you  ;  there 
fore,   I   think  you  need  not  as  yet  perplex  yourself  with 
inquiring  if  you  have  these  gifts  already  :    it  is  sufficient 
if  your  desire  is  fixed,  and  you  are  willing,  in  the  way  of 
prayer  and  diligence,   to  wait  upon   the   Lord   for   them, 
as  yet  you  need  them  not. 

3.  That  which  finally  evidences  a  proper  call,  is  a  corre 
spondent   opening   in   providence,    by   a  gradual   train   of 
circumstances,  pointing  out  the  means,  the  time,  the  place, 
of  actually  entering  upon  the  work.     And  till  this  coinci 
dence  arrives,  you  must  not  expect  to  be  always  clear  from 
hesitation  in  your  own  mind.     The  principal  caution  on  this 
head,  is  not  to  be  too  hasty  in  catching  at  first  appearances. 
If  it  be  the  Lord's  will  to  bring  you  into  His  ministry',  He  has 
already  appointed  your  place  and  service  ;   and  though  you 
know  it  not  at  present,  you  shall  at  a  proper  time.     If  you 
had  the  talents  of  an  angel,  you  could  do  no  good  \vith  them 
till  His  hour  is  come,  and  till  He  leads  you  to  the  people 
whom  He  has  determined  to  bless  by  your  means.     It  is 
very  difficult   to  restrain  ourselves  within  the  bounds  of 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   265 

prudence  here  ;  when  our  zeal  is  warm,  a  sense  of  the  love 
of  Christ  upon  our  hearts,  and  a  tender  compassion  for 
poor  sinners,  are  ready  to  prompt  us  to  break  out  too  soon  ; 
—but  he  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste.  I  was  about 
five  years  under  this  constraint :  sometimes  I  thought  I 
must  preach,  though  it  was  in  the  streets.  I  listened  to 
every  thing  that  seemed  plausible,  and  to  many  things  which 
were  not  so.  But  the  Lord  graciously,  and  as  it  were 
insensibly,  hedged  up  my  way  with  thorns  ;  otherwise,  if  I 
had  been  left  to  my  own  spirit,  I  should  have  put  it  quite  out 
of  my  power  to  have  been  brought  into  such  a  sphere  of 
usefulness,  as  He  in  His  good  time  has  been  pleased  to  lead 
me  to.  And  I  can  now  see  clearly,  that  at  the  time  I  would 
first  have  gone  out,  though  my  intention  was,  I  hope,  good 
in  the  main,  yet  I  overrated  myself,  and  had  not  that 
spiritual  judgment  and  experience  which  are  requisite  for 
so  great  a  service.  I  wish  you,  therefore,  to  take  time  ; 
and  if  you  have  a  desire  to  enter  into  the  Established  Church, 
endeavour  to  keep  your  zeal  within  moderate  bounds, 
and  avoid  every  thing  that  might  unnecessarily  clog  your 
admission  with  difficulties.  I  would  not  have  you  hide  your 
profession,  or  to  be  backward  to  speak  for  God  ;  but  avoid 
what  looks  like  preaching,  and  be  content  with  being  a 
learner  in  the  school  of  Christ  for  some  years.  The  delay 
will  not  be  lost  time  ;  you  will  be  so  much  the  more 

1       •/ 

acquainted  with  the  Gospel,  with  your  own  heart,  and  with 
human  nature  ;  the  last  is  a  necessary  branch  of  a  minister's 
knowledge,  and  can  only  be  acquired  by  comparing  what 
passes  within  us,  and  around  us,  with  what  we  read  in  the 
word  of  God. 

I  am  glad  to  find  you  have  a  distaste  both  for  Arminian 
and  Antinomian  doctrines  ;  but  let  not  the  mistakes  of 
others  sit  too  heavy  upon  you.  Be  thankful  for  the  grace 
that  has  made  you  to  differ  :  be  ready  to  give  a  reason  of 
the  hope  that  is  in  you,  with  meekness  and  fear  ;  but  beware 
of  engaging  in  disputes,  without  evident  necessity,  and 
some  probable  hope  of  usefulness.  They  tend  to  eat  out 
the  life  and  savour  of  religion,  and  to  make  the  soul  lean  and 
dry.  Where  God  has  begun  a  real  work  of  grace,  incidental 
mistakes  will  be  lessened  by  time  and  experience  ;  where 
He  has  not,  it  is  of  little  signification  what  sentiments 


266  CARDIPHONIA  : 

people  hold,  or  whether  they  call  themselves  Arminians  or 
Calvinists. 

I  agree  with  you,  it  is  time  enough  for  you  to  think  of 
Oxford  yet ;  and  that  if  your  purpose  is  fixed,  and  all 
circumstances  render  it  prudent  and  proper  to  devote  your 
self  to  the  ministry,  you  will  do  well  to  spend  a  year  or 
two  in  private  studies.  It  would  be  further  helpful,  in  this 
view,  to  place  yourself  where  there  is  Gospel  preaching, 
and  a  lively  people.  If  your  favourable  opinion  of  this 
place  should  induce  you  to  come  here,  I  shall  be  very  ready 
to  give  you  every  assistance  in  my  power.  As  I  have  trod 
exactly  the  path  you  seem  to  be  setting  out  in,  I  might  so  far 
perhaps,  be  more  serviceable  than  those  who  are  in  other 
respects  much  better  qualified  to  assist  you.  I  doubt  not 
but  in  this,  and  every  other  step,  you  will  intreat  the  Lord's 
direction  ;  and  I  hope  you  will  not  forget  to  pray  for, 

Sir,  your  affectionate  friend,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

DEAR  SIR,  January  7,  1767. 

I  MUST  beg  you  (once  for  all)  to  release  me  from  any 
constraint  about  the  length  or  frequency  of  my  letters. 
Believe  that  I  think  of  you,  and  pray  for  you,  when  you  do 
not  hear  me.  Your  correspondence  is  not  quite  so  large  as 
mine,  therefore  you  may  write  the  oftener  :  your  letters 
will  be  always  welcome  ;  and  I  will  write  to  you  when  I 
find  a  leisure  hour,  and  have  any  thing  upon  my  mind  to 
offer. 

You  seem  insensible  where  your  most  observable  failing 
lies,  and  to  take  reproof  and  admonition  concerning  it  in 
good  part  ;  I  therefore  hope  and  believe  the  Lord  will  give 
you  a  growing  victory  over  it.  You  must  not  expect 
habits  and  tempers  will  be  eradicated  instantaneously ; 
but  by  perseverance  and  prayer,  and  observation  upon  the 
experience  of  every  day,  much  may  be  done  in  time.  Now 
and  then  you  will  (as  is  usual  in  the  course  of  war)  lose  a 
battle  ;  but  be  not  discouraged,  but  rally  your  forces,  and 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   267 

return  to  the  fight.  There  is  a  comfortable  word,  a  leaf  of 
the  tree  of  life,  for  healing  the  wounds  we  receive,  in  I  John 
ii.  i.  If  the  enemy  surprises  you,  and  your  heart  smites 
you,  do  not  stand  astonished  as  if  there  was  no  help,  nor  give 
way  to  sorrow  as  if  there  was  no  hope,  nor  attempt  to  heal 
yourself ;  but  away  immediately  to  the  throne  of  grace, 
to  the  Great  Physician,  to  the  compassionate  High  Priest, 
and  tell  Him  all.  Satan  knows,  that  if  he  can  keep 
us  from  confession,  our  wounds  will  rankle  ;  but  do 
you  profit  by  David's  experience,  Psa.  xxxii.  3-5.  When 
we  are  simple  and  open  hearted  in  abasing  ourselves  before 
the  Lord,  though  we  have  acted  foolishly  and  ungratefully, 
He  will  seldom  let  us  remain  long,  without  affording  us  a 
sense  of  His  compassion  ;  for  He  is  gracious  ;  He  knows  our 
frame,  and  how  to  bear  with  us  though  we  can  hardly  bear 
with  ourselves,  or  with  one  another. 

The  main  thing  is  to  have  the  heart  right  with  God  : 
this  will  bring  us  in  the  end  safely  through  many  mistakes 
and  blunders  :  but  a  double  mind,  a  selfish  spirit,  that 
would  halve  tilings  between  God  and  the  world,  the  Lord 
abhors.  Though  I  have  not  yet  had  many  opportunities 
of  commending  your  prudence,  I  have  always  had  a  good 
opinion  of  your  sincerity  and  integrity  ;  if  I  am  not  mistaken 
in  this,  I  make  no  doubt  of  your  doing  well.  If  the  Lord  is 
pleased  to  bless  you,  He  will  undoubtedly  make  you  hum 
ble  ;  for  you  cannot  be  either  happy  or  safe,  or  have  any 
probable  hope  of  abiding  usefulness,  without  it.  I  do  not 
know  that  I  have  had  any  thing  so  much  at  heart  in  my 
connexions  with  you,  as  to  impress  you  with  a  sense  of  the 
necessity  and  advantages  of  an  humble  frame  of  spirit : 
I  hope  it  has  not  been  in  vain.  O  !  to  be  little  in  our 
own  eyes  ! — this  is  the  groundwork  of  every  grace  ;  this 
leads  to  a  continual  dependence  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  ; 
this  is  the  spirit  which  He  has  promised  to  bless  ;  this 
conciliates  us  good-will  and  acceptance  amongst  men ; 
for  he  that  abaseth  himself  is  sure  to  be  honoured.  And 
that  this  temper  is  so  hard  to  attain  and  preserve,  is  a 
striking  proof  of  our  depravity.  For  are  we  not  sinners  ? 
Were  we  not  rebels  and  enemies  before  we  knew  the  Gospel  ? 
and  have  we  not  been  unfaithful,  backsliding,  and  unprofit 
able  ever  since  ?  Are  we  not  redeemed  bv  the  blood  of 


268  CARDIPHONIA  : 

Jesus — and  can  we  stand  a  single  moment  except  He 
upholds  us  ?  Have  we  any  thing  which  we  have  not 
received — or  have  we  received  any  thing  which  we  have  not 
abused  ?  Why  then  is  dust  and  ashes  proud  ? 

I  am  glad  you  have  found  some  spiritual  acquaintance 
in  your  barren  land.  I  hope  you  will  be  helpful  to  them, 
and  they  to  you.  You  do  well  to  guard  against  every  appear 
ance  of  evil.  If  you  are  heartily  for  Jesus,  Satan  owes  you 
a  grudge.  One  way  or  other  he  will  try  to  cut  you  out 
work,  and  the  Lord  may  suffer  him  to  go  to  the  length  of 
lus  chain.  But  though  you  are  to  keep  your  eye  upon  him, 
and  expect  to  hear  from  him  at  every  step,  you  need  not  be 
slavishly  afraid  of  him  ;  for  Jesus  is  stronger  and  wiser  than 
he,  and  there  is  a  complete  suit  of  armour  provided  for  all 
who  are  engaged  on  the  Lord's  side. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   III 

DEAR  SIR,  October  20,  1767. 

A  CONCERN  for  the  perplexity  you  have  met  with,  from 
objections  which  have  been  made  against  some  expressions 
in  my  printed  sermons,  and,  in  general,  against  exhorting 
sinners  to  believe  in  Jesus,  engages  me  to  write  immediately  ; 
otherwise  I  should  have  waited  a  little  longer  ;  for  we  are 
now  upon  the  point  of  removing  to  the  vicarage,  and  I 
believe  this  will  be  the  last  letter  I  shall  write  from  the  old 
house.  I  shall  chiefly  confine  myself  at  present  to  the  subject 
you  propose. 

In  the  first  place,  I  beg  you  to  be  upon  your  guard 
against  a  reasoning  spirit.  Search  the  Scriptures;  and 
where  you  can  find  a  plain  rule  or  warrant  for  any  practice, 
go  boldly  on  ;  and  be  not  discouraged  because  you  may  not 
be  clearly  able  to  answer  or  reconcile  every  difficulty  that 
may  either  occur  to  your  own  mind,  or  be  put  in  your 
way  by  others.  Our  hearts  are  very  dark  and  narrow,  and 
the  very  root  of  all  apostacy  is  a  proud  disposition  to 
question  the  necessity  or  propriety  of  Divine  appointments. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   269 

But  the  child-like  simplicity  of  faith  is  to  follow  God  without 
reasoning  ;  taking  it  for  granted  a  tiling  must  be  right  if 
He  directs  it,  and  charging  all  seeming  inconsistencies  to 
the  account  of  our  own  ignorance. 

I  suppose  the  people  that  trouble  you  upon  this  head  are 
of  two  sorts  :  ist,  Those  that  preach  upon  Arminian  princi 
ples  and  suppose  a  free  will  in  man,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree, 
to  turn  to  God  when  the  Gospel  is  proposed.  These,  if 
you  speak  to  sinners  at  large,  though  they  will  approve  of 
your  doing  so,  will  take  occasion  perhaps  to  charge  you  with 
acting  in  contradiction  to  our  own  principles.  So  it  seems 

Mr. has  said.  I  love  and  honour  that  man  greatly, 

and  I  beg  you  will  tell  him  so  from  me  ;  and  tell  him  farther, 
that  the  reason  why  he  is  not  a  Calvinist,  is  because  he 
misapprehends  our  principles.  If  I  had  a  proper  call,  I 
would  undertake  to  prove  the  direct  contrary ;  namely 
that  to  exhort  and  deal  plainly  with  sinners,  to  stir  them 
up  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  to  lay  hold  of  eternal 
life,  is  an  attempt  not  reconcileable  to  sober  reason  upon  any 
other  grounds  than  those  doctrines  which  we  are  called 
Calvinists  for  holding  ;  and  that  all  the  absurdities  which 
are  charged  upon  us,  as  consequences  of  what  we  teach, 
are  indeed  truly  chargeable  upon  those  who  differ  from  us 
in  these  points.  I  think  this  unanswerably  proved  by  Mr. 
Edwards,  in  his  discourse  on  the  freedom  of  the  will  ;  though 
the  chain  of  reasoning  is  so  close,  that  few  will  give  atten 
tion  and  pains  to  pursue  it.  As  to  myself,  if  I  were  not  a 
Calvinist,  I  think  I  should  have  no  more  hope  of  success  in 
preaching  to  men,  than  to  horses  or  cows. 

But  these  objections  are  more  frequently  urged  by 
Calvinists  themselves  ;  many  of  them,  I  doubt  not,  good 
men,  but  betrayed  into  a  curiosity  of  spirit  which  often 
makes  their  ministry  (if  ministers)  dry  and  inefficacious, 
and  their  conversation  sour  and  unsavoury.  Such  a  spirit 
is  too  prevalent  in  many  professors,  that  if  a  man  discovers 
a  warm  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God,  arid  is  enabled  to  bear  a 
faithful  testimony  to  the  Gospel  truths  ;  yea,  though  the 
Lord  evidently  blesses  him,  they  overlook  all,  and  will 
undervalue  a  sermon,  which  upon  the  whole  they  cannot  but 
acknowledge  to  be  Scriptural,  if  they  meet  with  a  single 
sentence  contrary  to  the  opinion  they  have  taken  up.  I 


270  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

am  sorry  to  see  such  a  spirit  prevailing.  But  this  I  observe, 
that  the  ministers  who  give  in  to  this  way,  though  good  men 
and  good  preachers  in  other  respects,  are  seldom  very  useful 
or  very  zealous  ;  and  those  who  are  in  private  life,  are 
more  ready  for  dry  points  of  disputation,  at  least  harping 
upon  a  string  of  doctrines,  than  for  experimental  and  heart- 
searching  converse,  whereby  one  may  warm  and  edify 
another.  Blessed  be  God,  who  has  kept  me  and  my  people 
from  this  turn  :  if  it  should  ever  creep  in  or  spread  amongst 
us,  I  should  be  ready  to  write  Ichabod  upon  our  assemblies. 
I  advise  you,  therefore,  to  keep  close  to  the  Bible  and 
prayer ;  bring  your  difficulties  to  the  Lord,  and  entreat  Him 
to  give  you,  and  maintain  in  you,  a  simple  spirit.  Search 
the  Scriptures.  How  did  Peter  deal  with  Simon  Magus  ? 
We  have  no  right  to  think  worse  of  any  who  can  hear  us  than 
the  apostle  did  of  him.  He  seemed  almost  to  tliink  his  case 
desperate,  and  yet  he  advised  him  to  repentance  and  prayer. 
Examine  the  same  apostle's  discourse,  Acts  hi.,  and  the 
close  of  St.  Paul's  sermon,  Acts  xiii.  The  power  is  all  of 
God  ;  the  means  are  likewise  of  His  appointment ;  and  He 
always  is  pleased  to  work  by  such  means  as  may  show  that 
the  power  is  His.  What  was  Moses's  rod  in  itself ;  or  the 
trumpets  that  threw  down  Jericho  ?  What  influence 
could  the  pool  of  Siloam  have,  that  the  eyes  of  the  blind 
man  by  washing  in  it  should  be  opened ;  or  what  could 
Ezekiel's  feeble  breath  contribute  to  the  making  dry  bones 
live  ?  All  these  means  were  exceedingly  disproportionate 
to  the  effect  ;  but  He  who  ordered  them  to  be  used,  accom 
panied  them  with  His  power.  Yet  if  Moses  had  gone  without 
his  rod,  if  Joshua  had  slighted  the  rams'  horns,  if  the 
prophet  had  thought  it  foolishness  to  speak  to  dry  bones, 
or  the  blind  man  refused  to  wash  his  eyes,  nothing  could  have 
been  done.  The  same  holds  good  on  the  present  subject :  I 
do  not  reason,  expostulate,  and  persuade  sinners,  because 
I  think  I  can  prevail  with  them,  but  because  the  Lord 
hath  commanded  it.  He  directs  me  to  address  them  as 
reasonable  creatures  ;  to  take  them  by  every  handle  ;  to 
speak  to  their  consciences  ;  to  tell  them  of  the  terrors  of 
the  Lord,  and  of  His  tender  mercies  ;  to  argue  with  them 
what  good  they  find  in  sin  ;  whether  they  do  not  need  a 
Saviour  ;  to  put  them  in  mind  of  death,  judgment,  and 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   271 

eternity,  &c.  When  I  have  done  all,  I  know  it  is  to  little 
purpose,  except  the  Lord  speaks  to  their  hearts  ;  and  this 
to  His  own,  and  at  His  own  time,  I  am  sure  He  will,  because 
He  has  promised  it.  See  Isaiah  Iv.  10,  n  ;  Matt,  xxviii. 
20.  Indeed  I  have  heard  expressions  in  the  warmth  of 
delivery,  which  I  could  not  wholly  approve,  and  therefore 
do  not  imitate.  But,  in  general,  I  see  no  preaching  made 
very  useful  for  the  gathering  of  souls,  where  poor  sinners 
are  shut  out  of  the  discourse.  I  think  one  of  the  closest  and 
most  moving  addresses  to  sinners  I  ever  met  with  is  in  Dr. 
Owen's  Exposition  of  the  i3oth  Psalm  (in  my  edition, 
from  p.  243  to  276).  If  you  get  it  and  examine  it,  I  think 
you  will  find  it  all  agreeable  to  Scripture  ;  and  he  was  a 
steady,  deep-sighted  Calvinist.  I  wish  you  to  study  it 
well,  and  make  it  your  pattern.  He  handles  the  same 
point  likewise  in  other  places,  and  shows  the  weakness  of 
the  exceptions  taken  somewhere  at  large,  but  I  cannot  just 
now  find  the  passage.  Many  thnik  themselves  quite  right, 
because  they  have  not  had  their  thoughts  exercised  at 
large,  but  have  confined  themselves  to  one  track.  There  are 
extremes  in  everything.  I  pray  God  to  show  you  the  golden 
mean. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    IV 
DEAR  SIR,  August  30,  1770. 

I  WOULD  steal  a  few  minutes  here  to  write,  lest  I  should 
not  have  leisure  at  home.  I  have  not  your  letter  with  me, 
and  therefore  can  only  answer  so  far  as  I  retain  a  general 
remembrance  of  the  contents. 

You  will  doubtless  find  rather  perplexity  than  advantage 
from  the  multiplicity  of  advice  you  may  receive,  if  you 
endeavour  to  reconcile  and  adopt  the  very  different  senti 
ments  of  your  friends.  I  think  it  will  be  best  to  make  use  of 
them  in  a  full  latitude,  that  is,  to  correct  and  qualify  them 
one  by  another,  and  to  borrow  a  little  from  each,  without 
confining  yourself  entirely  to  any.  You  will  probably  be 


272  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

advised  to  different  extremes,  it  will  then  be  impossible 
to  follow  both  ;  but  it  may  be  practicable  to  find  a  middle 
path  between  them  :  and  I  believe  this  will  generally  prove 
the  best  and  safest  method.  Only  consult  your  own  temper, 
and  endeavour  to  incline  rather  to  that  side  to  which  you 
are  the  least  disposed  by  the  ordinary  strain  of  your  own 
inclination  ;  for  on  that  side  you  will  be  in  the  least  danger 
of  erring.  Warm  and  hasty  dispositions  will  seldom  move 
too-' slowly,  and  those  who  are  naturally  languid  and  cool 
are  as  little  liable  to  over-act  their  part. 

With  respect  to  the  particulars  you  instance,  I  have 
generally  thought  you  warm  and  enterprising  enough, 
and  therefore  thought  it  best  to  restrain  you  ;  but  I  meant 
only  to  hold  you  in,  till  you  had  acquired  some  farther 
knowledge  and  observation  both  of  yourself  and  of  others. 
I  have  the  pleasure  to  hope  (especially  of  late)  that  you  are 
become  more  self-diffident  and  wary  than  you  were  some 
time  ago.  And,  therefore,  as  your  years  and  time  are  advanc 
ing,  and  you  have  been  for  a  tolerable  space  under  a  proba 
tion  of  silence,  I  can  make  no  objection  to  your  attempting 
sometimes  to  speak  in  select  societies  ;  but  let  your  attempts 
be  confined  to  such,  I  mean  where  you  are  acquainted  with 
the  people,  or  the  leading  part  of  them,  and  be  upon  your 
guard  against  opening  yourself  too  much  among  strangers  ; 
and  again,  I  earnestly  desire  you  would  not  attempt  any 
thing  of  this  sort  in  a  very  public  way,  which  may,  perhaps, 
bring  you  under  inconveniences,  and  will  be  inconsistent 
with  the  part  you  ought  to  act  (in  my  judgment)  from  the 
time  you  receive  episcopal  ordination.  You  may  remember 
a  simile  I  have  sometimes  used  of  green  fruit :  children  are 
impatient  to  have  it  while  it  is  green,  but  persons  of  more 
judgment  will  wait  till  it  is  ripe.  Therefore,  I  would  wish 
your  exhortations  to  be  brief,  private,  and  not  very  frequent. 
Rather  give  yourself  to  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer. 

As  to  speaking  without  notes,  in  order  to  do  it  successfully, 
a  fund  of  knowledge  should  be  first  possessed.  Indeed, 
in  such  societies  as  I  hope  you  will  confine  your  attempts 
to,  it  would  not  be  practicable  to  use  notes  ;  but  I  mean, 
that  if  you  design  to  come  out  as  a  preacher  without  notes 
from  the  first,  you  must  use  double  diligence  in  study  : 
your  reading  must  not  be  confined  to  the  Scriptures  :  you 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   273 

should  be  acquainted  with  church-history,  have  a  general 
view  of  divinity  as  a  system,  know  something  of  the  state 
of  controversies  in  past  times  and  at  present,  and,  indeed, 
of  the  general  history  of  mankind.  I  do  not  mean  that  you 
should  enter  deeply  into  these  things  ;  but  you  will  need  to 
have  your  mind  enlarged,  your  ideas  increased,  your  style 
and  manner  formed  ;  you  should  read,  think,  write,  com 
pose,  and  use  all  diligence  to  exercise  and  strengthen  your 
faculties.  If  you  would  speak  extempore  as  a  clergyman 
you  must  be  able  to  come  off  roundly,  and  to  fill  up  your 
hour  with  various  matter,  in  tolerable  coherence,  or  else 
you  will  not  be  able  to  overcome  the  prejudice  which  usually 
prevails  among  the  people.  Perhaps  it  may  be  as  well  to 
use  some  little  scheme  in  the  note  way,  especially  at  the 
beginning  ;  but  a  little  trial  will  best  inform  you  what  is 
the  most  expedient. 

Let  your  backwardness  to  prayer  and  reading  the  Scripture 
be  ever  so  great,  you  must  strive  against  it.  The  back 
wardness,  and  the  doubts  you  speak  of,  are  partly  from  your 
own  evil  heart,  but  perhaps  chiefly  temptations  of  Satan  : 
he  knows  it,  if  he  can  keep  you  from  drawing  water  out  of 
the  wells  of  salvation,  he  will  have  much  advantage.  My 
soul  goes  often  mourning  under  the  same  complaints,  but 
at  times  the  Lord  gives  me  a  little  victory.  I  hope  He  will 
overrule  all  our  trials  to  make  us  more  humble,  and  depend 
ent,  and  to  give  us  tenderness  of  spirit  towards  the  distressed. 
The  exercised  and  experienced  Christian,  by  the  knowledge 
he  has  gained  of  his  own  heart,  and  the  many  difficulties 
he  has  had  to  struggle  with,  acquires  a  skill  and  compassion 
in  dealing  with  others  ;  and  without  such  exercise,  all  our 
study,  diligence,  and  gifts  in  other  ways,  would  leave  us 
much  at  a  loss  in  some  of  the  most  important  parts  of  our 
calling. 

You  have  given  yourself  to  the  Lord  for  the  ministry  ; 
His  providence  has  thus  far  favoured  your  views  ;  therefore 
harbour  not  a  thought  of  flinching  from  the  battle,  because 
the  enemy  appears  in  view,  but  resolve  to  endure  hardships 
as  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.  Lift  up  your  banner  in 
His  name  ;  trust  in  Him,  and  He  will  support  you  ;  but, 
above  all  things,  be  sure  not  to  be  either  enticed  or  terrified 
from  the  privilege  of  a  throne  of  grace. 

c.  s 


274  CARDIPHONIA  : 

Who  your  enemies  are,  or  what  they  say,  I  know  not  ; 
for  I  never  conversed  with  them.  Your  friends  here  have 
thought  you  at  times  harsh  and  hasty  in  your  manner,  and 
rather  inclining  to  self-confidence.  These  things  I  have 
often  reminded  you  of ;  but  I  considered  them  as  blemishes 
usually  attendant  upon  youth,  and  which  experience, 
temptation,  and  prayer  would  correct.  I  hope  and  believe 
you  will  do  well.  You  will  have  a  share  in  my  prayers  and 
best  advice  ;  and  when  I  see  occasion  to  offer  a  word  of 
reproof,  I  shall  not  use  any  reserve. 

Yours,  &c. 


LETTER   V 

DEAR  SIR,  July  25,  1772. 

I  AM  glad  to  hear  you  are  accommodated  at  D- 


where  I  hope  your  best  endeavours  will  not  be  wanting  to 
make  yourself  agreeable,  by  a  humble,  inoffensive,  and 
circumspect  behaviour. 

I  greatly  approve  of  your  speaking  from  one  of  the 
lessons  in  the  afternoon  :  you  will  find  it  a  great  help  to 
bring  you  gradually  to  that  habit  and  readiness  of  expres 
sion  which  you  desire  ;  and  you  will,  perhaps,  find  it  make 
more  impression  upon  your  hearers,  than  what  you  read  to 
them  from  the  pulpit.  However,  I  would  not  discourage 
or  dissuade  you  from  reading  your  sermons  for  a  time. 
The  chief  inconvenience  respecting  yourself  is  that  which 
you  mention.  A  written  sermon  is  something  to  lean  upon  ; 
but  it  is  best  for  a  preacher  to  lean  wholly  upon  the  Lord. 
But  set  off  gradually  ;  the  Lord  will  not  despise  the  day  of 
small  things  :  pray  heartily,  that  your  spirit  may  be  right 
with  Him,  and  then  all  the  rest  will  be  well.  And  keep 
on  writing  :  if  you  compose  one  sermon,  and  should  find 
your  heart  enlarged  to  preach  another,  still  your  labour 
in  writing  will  not  be  lost.  If  your  conscience  bears  you 
witness,  that  you  desire  to  serve  the  Lord,  His  promise 
(now  He  has  brought  you  into  the  ministry)  of  a  sufficiency 
and  ability  for  the  work,  belongs  to  you  as  much  as  to 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   275 

another.  Your  borrowing  help  from  others  may  arise  from 
a  diffidence  of  yourself,  which  is  not  blameable  ;  but  it 
may  arise,  in  part,  likewise  from  a  diffidence  of  the  Lord, 
which  is  hurtful.  I  wish  you  may  get  encouragement  from 
that  word,  Exodus  iv.  n,  12.  It  was  a  great  encourage 
ment  to  me.  While  I  would  press  you  to  diligence  in  every 
rational  means  for  the  improvement  of  your  stock  in  know 
ledge,  and  your  ability  of  utterance,  I  would  have  you 
remember,  that  preaching  is  a  gift.  It  cannot  be  learned 
by  industry  and  imitation  only,  as  a  man  may  learn  to  make 
a  chair  or  a  table  :  it  comes  from  above  ;  and  if  you  patiently 
wait  upon  God,  He  will  bestow  this  gift  upon  you,  and 
increase  it  in  you.  It  will  grow  by  exercise.  '  To  him 
that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more  abundantly." 
And  be  chiefly  solicitous  to  obtain  an  unction  upon  what 
you  do  say.  Perhaps  those  sermons  in  which  you  feel 
yourself  most  deficient,  may  be  made  most  useful  to  others. 
I  hope  you  will  endeavour  likewise  to  be  plain  and  familiar 
in  your  language  and  manner,  though  not  low  or  vulgar,  so 
as  to  suit  yourself  as  much  as  possible  to  the  apprehensions 
of  the  most  ignorant  people.  There  are  in  all  congregations 
some  persons  exceedingly  ignorant :  yet  they  have  precious 
souls,  and  the  Lord  often  calls  such.  I  pray  the  Lord  to 
make  you  wise  to  win  souls.  I  hope  He  will.  You  cannot 
be  too  jealous  of  your  own  heart ;  but  let  no  such  instances 
as  Mr.  -  -  discourage  you.  Cry  to  Him  who  is  able  to 
hold  you  up,  that  you  may  be  safe,  and  you  shall  not  cry  in 
vain.  It  is  indeed  an  alarming  thought,  that  a  man  may 
pray  and  preach,  be  useful  and  acceptable  for  a  time,  and 
yet  be  nothing.  But  still  the  foundation  of  God  standeth 
sure.  I  have  a  good  hope,  that  I  shall  never  have  cause  to 
repent  the  part  I  have  taken  in  your  concerns.  While  you 
keep  in  the  path  of  duty,  you  will  find  it  the  path  of  safety. 
Be  punctual  in  waiting  upon  God  in  secret.  This  is  the  life 
of  everything,  the  only  way,  and  the  sure  way,  of  maintaining 
and  renewing  your  strength. 

I  am,  &c. 


S  2 


EIGHT     LETTERS 

TO   THE 

» 

REV.    MR. 

LETTER   I 

DEAR  SIR,  June  29,  1757. 

I  ENDEAVOUR  to  be  mindful  of  you  in  my  prayers, 
that  you  may  find  both  satisfaction  and  success,  and  that 
the  Lord  Himself  may  be  your  Light  to  discover  to  you 
every  part  of  your  duty.  I  would  earnestly  press  you  and 
myself  to  be  followers  of  those  who  have  been  followers  of 
Christ ;  to  aim  at  a  life  of  self-denial ;  to  renounce  self- 
will,  and  to  guard  against  self-wisdom.  The  less  we  have 
to  do  with  the  world  the  better  ;  and  even  in  conversing 
with  our  brethren,  we  have  been,  and,  unless  we  watch  and 
pray,  shall  often  be,  ensnared.  Time  is  precious,  and 
opportunities  once  gone  are  gone  for  ever.  Even  by  reading, 
and  what  we  call  studying,  we  may  be  comparatively  losers. 
The  shorter  way  is  to  be  closely  waiting  upon  God  in  humble, 
secret,  fervent  prayer.  The  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge  are  in  His  hands  ;  and  He  gives  bountifully, 
without  upbraiding.  On  the  other  hand,  whatever  we  may 
undertake  with  a  sincere  desire  to  promote  His  glory,  we 
may  comfortably  pursue  :  nothing  is  trivial  that  is  done  for 
Him.  In  this  view,  I  would  have  you,  at  proper  intervals, 
pursue  your  studies,  especially  at  those  times  when  you  are 
unfit  for  better  work.  Pray  for  me  that  I  may  be  enabled 
to  break  through  the  snares  of  vanity  that  lie  in  my  way  ; 
that  I  may  be  crucified  with  Christ,  and  live  a  hidden  life 
by  faith  in  Him  who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me. 
.  .  .  .  Adieu. 

276 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART        277 


LETTER    II 

DEAR  SIR,  August  31,  1757. 

I  WISH  you  much  of  that  spirit  which  was  in  the  apostle, 
which  made  him  content  to  become  all  things  to  all  men, 
that  he  might  gain  some.  I  am  persuaded  that  love  and 
humility  are  the  highest  attainments  in  the  school  of  Christ, 
and  the  brightest  evidences  that  He  is  indeed  our  Master. 
If  any  should  seem  inclined  to  treat  you  with  less  regard, 
because  you  are  or  have  been  a  Methodist  teacher,  you  will 
find  forbearance,  meekness,  and  long  suffering,  the  most 
prevailing  means  to  conquer  their  prejudices.  Our  Lord 
has  not  only  taught  us  to  expect  persecution  from  the  world 
(though  this  alone  is  a  trial  too  hard  to  flesh  and  blood) 
but  we  must  look  for  what  is  much  more  grievous  to  a 
renewed  mind,  to  be  in  some  respects  slighted,  censured, 
and  misunderstood,  even  by  our  Christian  brethren,  and 
that,  perhaps,  in  cases  where  we  are  really  striving  to 
promote  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  souls,  and  cannot, 
without  the  reproach  of  our  consciences,  alter  our  conduct, 
however  glad  we  should  be  to  have  their  approbation. 
Therefore  we  are  required,  not  only  to  resist  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil,  but  likewise  to  bear  one  another's 
burdens  :  which  plainly  intimates  there  will  be  something 
to  be  borne  with  on  all  hands  ;  and  happy  indeed  is  he  that 
is  not  offended.  You  may  observe  what  unjust  reports  and 
surmises  were  received,  even  at  Jerusalem,  concerning  the 
apostle  Paul  ;  and  it  seems  he  was  condemned  unheard,  and 
that  by  many  thousands  too,  Acts  xxi.  20,  21  ;  but  we  do 
not  find  he  was  at  all  ruffled,  or  that  he  sought  to  retort 
anything  upon  them,  though,  doubtless,  had  he  been  so 
disposed,  he  might  have  found  something  to  have  charged 
them  with  in  his  turn  ;  but  he  calmly  and  willingly  complied 
with  everything  in  his  power  to  soften  and  convince  them. 
Let  us  be  followers  of  this  pattern,  so  far  as  he  was  a  follower 
of  Christ  ;  for  even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself.  How  did 
He  bear  with  the  mistakes,  weakness,  intemperate  zeal, 
and  imprudent  proposals,  of  His  disciples  while  on  earth ; 
and  how  does  He  bear  with  the  same  things  from  you  and 
me,  and  every  one  of  His  followers  now  !  and  do  we,  can 


278  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

we,  think  much  to  bear  with  each  other  for  His  sake  ?  Have 
we  all  a  full  remission  of  ten  thousand  talents,  which  we 
owed  him,  and  were  utterly  unable  to  pay,  and  do  we 
wrangle  amongst  ourselves  for  a  few  pence  ?  Good  forbid  ! 
If  you  should  be  numbered  among  the  regular  Independ 
ents,  I  advise  you  not  to  offend  any  of  them  by  unnecessary 
singularities.  I  wish  you  not  to  part  with  any  truth,  or 
with  anything  really  expedient ;  but  if  the  omitting  anything 
of  an.  indifferent  nature  will  obviate  prejudices,  and  increase 
a  mutual  confidence,  why  should  not  so  easy  a  sacrifice  be 
made  ?  Above  all,  my  dear  friend,  let  us  keep  close  to  the 
Lord  in  a  way  of  prayer :  He  giveth  wisdom  that  is  profitable 
to  direct  ;  He  is  the  Wonderful  Counsellor  ;  there  is  no 
teacher  like  Him.  Why  do  the  living  seek  the  dead  ? 
Why  do  we  weary  our  friends,  and  our  selves,  in  running  up 
and  down,  and  turning  over  books  for  advice  ?  If  we  shut 
our  eyes  upon  the  world  and  worldly  things,  and  raise  our 
thoughts  upwards  in  humility  and  silence,  should  we  not 
often  hear  the  secret  voice  of  the  Spirit  of  God  whispering 
to  our  hearts,  and  pointing  out  to  us  the  way  of  truth  and 
peace  ?  Have  we  not  often  gone  astray,  and  hurt  either 
ourselves  or  our  brethren,  for  want  of  attending  to  this 
divine  instruction  ?  Have  we  not  sometimes  mocked  God, 
by  pretending  to  ask  direction  from  Him  when  we  had  fixed 
our  determination  beforehand  ?  It  is  a  great  blessing  to 
know  that  we  are  sincere  ;  and,  next  to  this,  to  be  convinced 
of  our  insincerity,  and  to  pray  against  it. 

I  am,  &c., 


LETTER    III 

DEAR  SIR,  November  21,  1757. 

CAN  you  forgive  so  negligent  a  correspondent  ?  I 
am  indeed  ashamed  ;  but  (if  that  is  any  good  excuse) 
I  use  you  no  worse  than  my  other  friends.  Whatever 
I  write,  I  am  obliged  to  begin  with  an  apology  ;  for,  what 
with  business  and  the  incidental  duties  of  every  day,  my 
time  is  always  mortgaged  before  it  comes  into  my  hands, 


THE    UTTERANCE    OF    THE   HEART       279 

especially  as  I  have  so  little  skill  in  redeeming  and  improving 
it.  I  long  to  hear  from  you,  and  I  long  to  see  you  ;  and, 
indeed,  from  the  terms  of  yours,  I  expected  you  here  before 
this,  which  has  been  partly  a  cause  of  my  delay.  I  have 
mislaid  your  letter,  and  cannot  remember  the  particulars  ; 
in  general,  I  remember  you  were  well,  and  going  on  com 
fortably  in  your  work,  which  was  matter  of  joy  to  me  ; 
and  my  poor  prayers  are  for  you,  that  the  Lord  may  own 
and  prosper  you  more  and  more.  The  two  great  points  we 
are  called  to  pursue  in  this  sinful  divided  world,  are  peace 
and  holiness  :  I  hope  you  are  much  in  the  study  of  them. 
These  are  the  peculiar  characteristics  of  a  disciple  of  Jesus  ; 
they  are  the  richest  part  of  the  enjoyments  of  Heaven  ; 
and  so  far  as  they  are  received  into  the  heart,  they  bring 
down  Heaven  upon  earth  ;  and  they  are  more  inseparably 
connected  between  themselves  than  some  of  us  are  aware. 
The  longer  I  live,  the  more  I  see  of  the  vanity  and  the 
sinfulness  of  our  unchristian  disputes  :  they  eat  up  the 
very  vitals  of  religion.  I  grieve  to  think  how  often  I  have 
lost  my  time  and  my  temper  in  that  way,  in  presuming  to 
regulate  the  vineyards  of  others,  when  I  have  neglected  my 
own  ;  when  the  beam  in  my  own  eye  has  so  contracted 
my  sight,  that  I  could  discern  nothing  but  the  mote  in 
my  neighbour's.  I  am  now  desirous  to  choose  a  better 
part.  Could  I  speak  the  publican's  words  with  a  proper 
feeling,  I  wish  not  for  the  tongue  of  men  or  angels  to  fight 
about  notions  or  sentiments.  I  allow  that  every  branch  of 
Gospel  truth  is  precious,  that  errors  are  abounding,  and  that 
it  is  our  duty  to  bear  an  honest  testimony  to  what  the  Lord 
has  enabled  us  to  find  comfort  in,  and  to  instruct  with 
meekness  such  as  are  willing  to  be  instructed  ;  but  I  cannot 
see  it  my  duty,  nay,  I  believe  it  would  be  my  sin,  to  attempt 
to  beat  my  notions  into  other  people's  heads.  Too  often 
I  have  attempted  it  in  time  past ;  but  now  I  judge,  that  both 
my  zeal  and  my  weapons  were  carnal.  When  our  dear 
Lord  questioned  Peter,  after  his  fall  and  recovery,  He  said 
not,  Art  thou  wise,  learned,  and  eloquent  ?  nay,  he  said 
not,  Art  thou  clear,  and  sound,  and  orthodox  ?  But  this 
only,  "  Lovest  thou  Me  ?  "  An  answer  to  this  was  sufficient 
then  ;  why  not  now  ?  Any  other  answer,  we  may  believe, 
would  have  been  insufficient  then.  If  Peter  had  made  the 


280  CARDIPHONIA  : 

most  pompous  confession  of  his  faith  and  sentiments,  still 
the  first  question  would  have  recurred,  "  Lovest  thou 
Me  ?  "  This  is  a  Scripture  precedent.  Happy  the  preacher, 
whoever  he  be,  my  heart  and  my  prayers  are  with  him,  who 
can  honestly  and  steadily  appropriate  Peter's  answer !  Such 
a  man,  I  say,  I  am  ready  to  hear,  though  he  should  be  as 
much  mistaken  in  some  points  as  Peter  afterwards  appears 
to  have  been  in  others.  What  a  pity  it  is,  that  Christians 
in  succeeding  ages  should  think  the  constraining  force 
of  th'e  love  of  Christ  too  weak,  and  suppose  the  end  better 
answered  by  forms,  subscriptions,  and  questions  of  their 
own  devising  !  I  cannot  acquit  even  those  churches  who 
judge  themselves  nearest  the  primitive  rule  in  this  respect. 
Alas  !  will-worship  and  presumption  may  creep  into  the 
best  external  forms.  But  the  misfortune  both  in  churches 
and  private  Christians  is,  that  we  are  too  prone  rather  to 
compare  ourselves  with  others,  than  to  judge  by  the  Scrip 
tures  ;  and  while  each  can  see  that  they  give  not  in  to  the 
errors  and  mistakes  of  the  opposite  party,  both  are  ready 
to  conclude  that  they  are  right  :  and  thus  it  happens,  that 
an  attachment  to  a  supposed  Gospel  order  will  recommend 
a  man  sooner  and  farther  to  some  churches,  than  an  eminency 
of  Gospel  practice.  I  hope  you  will  beware  of  such  a 
spirit,  whenever  you  publicly  assume  the  independent  char 
acter  ;  this,  like  the  worm  at  the  root,  has  nipt  the  grace 
and  hindered  the  usefulness,  of  many  a  valuable  man  ; 
and  those  who  change  sides  and  opinions  are  the  most  liable 
to  it.  For  the  pride  of  our  heart  insensibly  prompts  us  to 
cast  about,  far  and  near,  for  arguments  to  justify  our  own 
behaviour,  and  makes  us  too  ready  to  hold  the  opinions  we 
have  taken  up  to  the  very  extreme,  that  those  amongst 
whom  we  are  newly  come  may  not  suspect  our  sincerity. 
In  a  word,  let  us  endeavour  to  keep  close  to  God,  to  be  much 
in  prayer,  to  watch  carefully  over  our  hearts,  and  leave  the 
busy  warm  spirits  to  make  the  best  of  their  work.  The 
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him,  and  that  wait 
on  Him  continually  ;  to  these  He  will  show  His  covenant, 
not  notionally,  but  experimentally.  A  few  minutes  of 
the  Spirit's  teaching  will  furnish  us  with  more  real  useful 
knowledge,  than  toiling  through  whole  folios  of  commen 
tators  and  expositors  ;  they  are  useful  in  their  places,  and 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   281 

are  not  to  be  undervalued  by  those  who  can  perhaps,  in 
general,  do  better  without  them  ;  but  it  will  be  our  wisdom 
to  deal  less  with  the  streams,  and  be  more  close  in  applying 
to  the  fountain-head.  The  Scripture  itself,  and  the  Spirit 
of  God,  are  the  best  and  the  only  sufficient  expositors  of 
Scripture.  Whatever  men  have  valuable  in  their  writings, 
they  got  it  from  hence ;  and  the  way  is  as  open  to  us  as  to 
any  of  them.  There  is  nothing  required  but  a  teachable 
humble  spirit ;  and  learning,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  is  not 
necessary  in  order  to  this.  I  commend  you  to  the  grace  of 
God,  and  remain, 

Yours,  £c. 


LETTER   IV 

DEAR  SIR,  January  10,  1760. 

I  HAVE  procured  Cennick's  sermons  ;  they  are  in  my 
judgment  sound  and  sweet.  O  that  you  and  I  had  a  double 
portion  of  that  spirit  and  unction  which  is  in  them  !  Come, 
let  us  not  despair  ;  the  fountain  is  as  full  and  as  free  as 
ever — precious  fountain,  ever  flowing  with  blood  and  water, 
milk  and  wine.  This  is  the  stream  that  heals  the  wounded, 
refreshes  the  weary,  satisfies  the  hungry,  strengthens  the 
weak,  and  confirms  the  strong  ;  it  opens  the  eyes  of  the 
blind,  softens  the  heart  of  stone,  teaches  the  dumb  to  speak, 
and  enables  the  lame  and  paralytic  to  walk,  to  leap,  to  run, 
to  fly,  to  mount  up  with  eagle's  wings  :  a  taste  of  this 
stream  raises  earth  to  Heaven,  and  brings  down  Heaven 
upon  earth.  Nor  is  it  a  fountain  only  ;  it  is  a  universal 
blessing,  and  assumes  a  variety  of  shapes  to  suit  itself  to 
our  wants.  It  is  a  sun,  a  shield,  a  garment,  a  shade,  a 
banner,  a  refuge  ;  it  is  bread,  the  true  bread,  the  very  staff 
of  life  ;  it  is  life  itself,  immortal,  eternal  life  ! 

The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord, 

Is  food  and  med'cine,  shield  and  sword. 

Take  that  for  your  motto  ;   wear  it  in  your  heart ;   keep  it 
in  your  eye  ;   have  it  often  in  your  mouth,  till  you  can  find 


282  CARDIPHONIA  : 

something  better.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  the  tree  of  life 
and  the  tree  of  knowledge  combined.  Blessed  be  God,  there 
is  neither  prohibition  nor  flaming  sword  to  keep  us  back, 
but  it  stands  like  a  tree  by  the  highway-side,  which  affords 
its  shade  to  every  passenger  without  distinction.  Watch 
and  pray.  We  live  in  sifting  times  :  error  gains  ground 
every  day.  May  the  name  and  love  of  our  Saviour  Jesus 
keep  us  and  all  His  people  !  Either  write  or  come  very  soon 
to 

Yours,  &c. 


LETTER   V 

DEAR  SIR,  November  15,   1760. 

IF  your  visit  should  be  delayed  let  me  have  a  letter. 
I  want  either  good  news  or  good  advice  :  to  hear  that 
your  soul  prospers,  or  to  receive  something  that  may  quicken 
my  own.  The  apostle  says,  "  Ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  "  ;  alas  !  we  know  how  to  say  something  about 
it,  but  how  faint  and  feeble  are  our  real  perceptions  of  it. 
Our  love  to  Him  is  the  proof  and  measure  of  what  we  know 
of  His  love  to  us.  Surely,  then,  we  are  mere  children  in  this 
kind  of  knowledge,  and  every  other  kind  is  vain.  What 
should  we  think  of  a  man  who  would  neglect  his  business, 
family,  and  all  the  comforts  of  life,  that  he  might  study 
the  Chinese  language,  though  he  knows  beforehand  he 
would  never  be  able  to  attain  it,  nor  ever  find  occasion  or 
opportunity  to  use  it  ?  The  pursuit  of  every  branch  of 
knowledge  that  is  not  closely  connected  with  the  one  thing 
needful,  is  no  less  ridiculous. 

You  know  something  of  our  friend  Mrs.  B  -  — .  She 
has  been  more  than  a  month  confined  to  her  bed,  and  I 
believe  her  next  remove  will  be  to  her  coffin.  The  Lord  has 
done  great  things  for  her.  Though  she  has  been  a  serious, 
exemplary  person  all  her  life,  when  the  prospect  of  death 
presented  itself,  she  began  to  cry  out  earnestly,  "  What  shall 
I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  But  her  solicitude  is  at  an  end  ;  she 
has  seen  the  salvation  of  God,  and  now  for  the  most  part 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   283 

rejoices  in  something  more  than  hope.  This  you  will  account 
good  news,  I  am  sure.  Let  it  be  your  encouragement  and 
mine.  The  Lord's  arm  is  not  shortened,  nor  is  His  presence 
removed  ;  He  is  near  us  still,  though  we  perceive  Him  not. 
May  He  guide  you  with  His  eye  in  all  your  public  and  private 
concerns,  and  may  He  in  particular  bless  our  communications 
to  our  mutual  advantage  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    VI 

DEAR  SIR,  July  29,  1761. 

ARE  the  quarrels  made  up  ?  Tell  those  who  know 
what  communion  with  Jesus  is  worth,  that  they  will  never 
be  able  to  maintain  it  if  they  give  way  to  the  workings  of 
pride,  jealousy,  and  anger.  This  will  provoke  the  Lord  to 
leave  them  dry,  to  command  the  clouds  of  His  grace  that 
they  rain  no  rain  upon  them.  These  things  are  sure  signs 
of  a  low  frame,  and  a  sure  way  to  keep  it  so.  Could  they  be 
prevailed  upon,  from  a  sense  of  the  pardoning  love  of  God 
to  their  own  souls,  to  forgive  each  other  as  the  Lord  forgives 
us,  freely,  fully,  without  condition,  and  without  reserve, 
they  would  find  this  like  breaking  down  a  stone  wall,  which 
has  hitherto  shut  up  their  prayers  from  the  Lord's  ears,  and 
shut  out  His  blessing  from  filling  their  hearts.  Tell  them, 
I  hope  to  hear  that  all  animosities,  little  and  big,  are  buried 
by  mutual  consent  in  the  Redeemer's  grave.  Alas  !  the 
people  of  God  have  enemies  enough.  Why,  then,  will  they 
weaken  their  own  hands  ?  Why  will  they  help  their  enemies 
to  pull  down  the  Lord's  work  ?  Why  will  they  grieve  those 
that  wish  them  well,  cause  the  weak  to  stumble,  the  wicked 
to  rejoice,  and  bring  a  reproach  upon  their  holy  profession  ? 
Indeed,  this  is  no  light  matter  :  I  wish  it  may  not  lead  them 
to  something  worse  ;  I  wish  they  may  be  wise  in  time,  lest 
Satan  gain  further  advantage  over  them,  and  draw  them  to 
something  that  shall  make  them  (as  David  did)  roar  under 
the  pains  of  broken  bones.  But  I  must  break  off.  May 
God  give  you  wisdom,  faithfulness,  and  patience  !  Take 


284  CARDIPHONIA  : 

care  that  you  do  not  catch  an  angry  spirit  yourself,  while 
you  aim  to  suppress  it  in  others  :  this  will  spoil  all,  and  you 
will  exhort,  advise,  and  weep  in  vain.  May  you  rather  be 
an  example  and  pattern  to  the  flock  :  and  in  this  view,  be 
not  surprised  if  you  yourself  meet  some  hard  usage  ;  rather 
rejoice,  that  you  will  thereby  have  an  opportunity  to 
exemplify  your  own  rules,  and  to  convince  your  people, 
that  what  you  recommend  to  them  you  do  not  speak  by 
rote^  but  from  the  experience  of  your  heart.  One  end  why 
our  Lord  was  tempted  for  the  encouragement  of  His  poor 
followers,  that  they  might  know  Him  to  be  a  High  Priest 
suited  to  them,  having  had  a  fellow-feeling  in  their  distresses. 
For  the  like  reason  he  appoints  His  ministers  to  be  sorely 
exercised,  both  from  without  and  within,  that  they  may 
sympathize  with  their  flock,  and  know  in  their  own  hearts 
the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  the  infirmities  of  the  flesh,  and  the 
way  in  which  the  Lord  supports  and  bears  with  all  that  trust 
Him.  Therefore  be  not  discouraged  ;  usefulness  and  trials, 
comforts  and  crosses,  strength  and  exercise,  go  together. 
But  remember  He  has  said,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee  ;  be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give 
thee  a  crown  of  life."  When  you  get  to  Heaven,  you  will 
not  complain  of  the  way  by  which  the  Lord  brought  you. 
Farewell.  Pray  for  us. 

Yours,  &c. 


LETTER   VII 

DEAR  SIR,  December  14,  1761. 

I  PRAY  the  Lord  to  accompany  you  ;  but  cannot  help 
fearing  you  go  on  too  fast.  If  you  have  not  (as  I  am  sure 
you  ought  not)  made  an  absolute  promise,  but  only  a 
conditional  one,  you  need  not  be  so  solicitous  ;  depend  upon 
it,  when  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  remove  you,  He  will  send 
one  to  supply  your  place.  I  am  grieved  that  your  mind 
is  so  set  upon  a  step  which,  I  fear,  will  occasion  many 
inconveniences  to  a  people  who  have  deserved  your  best 
regard.  Others  may  speak  you  fairer,  but  none  wishes  you 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   285 

better,  than  myself  ;  therefore  I  hope  you  allow  me  to  speak 
my  mind  plainly,  and  believe  that  it  is  no  pleasure  to  me 
to  oppose  your  inclinations.  As  to  your  saying  they 
will  take  no  denial,  it  has  no  weight  with  me.  Had  they 
asked  what  you  were  exceedingly  averse  to,  you  would  soon 
have  expressed  yourself  so  as  to  convince  them  it  was  to  no 
purpose  to  urge  you  ;  but  they  saw  something  in  your 
manner  or  language  that  encouraged  them  ;  they  saw  the 
proposal  was  agreeable  to  you,  that  you  were  not  at  all 
unwilling  to  exchange  your  old  friends  for  new  ones  ;  and 
this  is  the  reason  they  would  take  no  denial.  If  you  should 
live  to  see  those  who  are  most  forward  in  pressing  you 
become  the  first  to  discourage  you,  you  will  think  seriously 
of  my  words. 

If  I  thought  my  advice  would  prevail,  it  should  be  this  : 
Call  the  people  together,  and  desire  them  (if  possible)  to 
forget  you  ever  intended  to  depart  from  them  ;  and  promise 
not  to  think  of  a  removal,  till  the  Lord  shall  make  your  way 
so  clear,  that  even  they  shall  have  nothing  reasonable  to 
object  against  it.  You  may  keep  your  word  with  your 
other  friends  too  ;  for  when  a  proper  person  shall  offer,  as. 
likely  to  please  and  satisfy  the  people  as  yourself,  I  will 
give  my  hearty  consent  to  your  removal. 

Consider  what  it  is  you  would  have  in  your  office,  but 
maintenance,  acceptance,  and  success.  Have  you  not 
those  where  you  are  ?  Are  you  sure  of  having  them  where 
you  are  going  ?  Are  you  sure  the  Spirit  of  God  (without 
which  you  will  do  nothing)  will  be  with  you  there,  as  He  has 
been  with  you  hitherto  ?  Perhaps,  if  you  act  in  your  own 
spirit,  you  may  find  as  great  a  change  as  Samson.  I  am 
ready  to  weep  when  I  think  what  difficulties  were  surmounted 
to  accomplish  your  ordination  ;  and  now,  when  the  people 
thought  themselves  fixed,  that  you  should  so  soon  disappoint 
them. 

Yours,  &c. 


286  CARDIPHONIA  : 

LETTER    VIII 

DEAR  SIR,  February  15,  1762. 

I  HAVE  been  often  thinking  of  you  since  your  removal, 
and  was  glad  to  receive  your  letter  to-day.  I  hope  you 
will  still  go  on  to  find  more  and  more  encouragement  to 
believe,  that  the  Lord  has  disposed  and  led  you  to  the 
step^ou  have  taken.  For  though  I  wrote  with  the  greatest 
plainness  and  earnestness,  and  would,  if  in  my  power,  have 
prevented  it  while  under  deliberation,  yet,  now  it  is  done 
and  past  recall,  I  would  rather  help  than  dishearten  you. 
Indeed,  I  cannot  say  that  my  view  of  the  affair  is  yet 
altered.  The  best  way  not  to  be  cast  down  hereafter,  is 
not  to  be  too  sanguine  at  first.  You  know  there  is  something 
pleasing  in  novelty  ;  as  yet  you  are  new  to  them,  and  they 
to  you  :  I  pray  God  that  you  may  find  as  cordial  a  regard 
from  them  as  at  present,  when  you  have  been  with  them 
as  many  years  as  in  the  place  you  came  from.  And  if  you 
have  grace  to  be  watchful  and  prayerful,  all  will  be  well ; 
for  we  serve  a  gracious  Master,  who  knows  how  to  over 
rule  even  our  mistakes  to  His  glory  and  our  own  advantage. 
Yet  I  observe,  that  when  we  do  wrong,  sooner  or  later  we 
smart  for  our  indiscretion  ;  perhaps  many  years  afterwards. 
After  we  have  seen  and  confessed  our  fault,  and  received 
repeated  proofs  of  pardoning  love,  as  to  the  guilt  ;  yet 
chastisement,  to  remind  us  more  sensibly  of  our  having 
done  amiss,  will  generally  find  us  out.  So  it  was  with 
David  in  the  matter  of  Uriah ;  the  Lord  put  away  his  sin, 
healed  his  broken  bones,  and  restored  unto  him  the  light  of 
His  countenance  ;  yet  many  troubles,  in  consequence  of 
this  affair,  followed  one  upon  another,  till  at  length  (many 
years  afterwards)  he  was  driven  from  Jerusalem  by  his  own 
son.  So  it  was  with  Jacob  :  he  dealt  deceitfully  with  his 
brother  Esau  ;  notwithstanding  this,  the  Lord  appeared 
to  him  and  blessed  him,  gave  him  comfortable  promises, 
and  revealed  Himself  to  him  from  time  to  time  ;  yet,  after 
an  interval  of  twenty  years,  his  fault  was  brought  afresh 
to  his  remembrance,  and  his  heart  trembled  within  him 
when  he  heard  his  brother  was  coming  with  armed  men  to 
meet  him.  And  thus  I  have  found  it  in  my  own  experience  : 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   287 

things  which  I  had  forgotten  a  long  while  have  been 
brought  to  my  mind  by  providential  dispensations  which 
I  little  expected,  but  the  first  rise  of  which  I  have  been 
able  to  trace  far  back,  and  forced  to  confess,  that  the  Lord 
is  indeed  He  that  judgeth  the  heart  and  trieth  the  reins. 
I  hint  this  for  your  caution  :  you  know  best  upon  what 
grounds  you  have  proceeded  ;  but  if,  (though  I  do  not  affirm 
it,  I  hope  otherwise,)  I  say,  if  you  have  acted  too  much  in 
your  own  spirit,  been  too  hasty  and  precipitate  ;  if  you 
have  not  been  sufficiently  tender  of  your  people,  nor 
thoughtful  of  the  consequences  which  your  departure  will 
probably  involve  them  in  ;  if  you  have  been  impatient  under 
the  Lord's  hand,  and  instead  of  waiting  His  time  and  way 
of  removing  the  trials  and  difficulties  you  found,  have 
ventured  upon  an  attempt  to  free  and  mend  yourself: 
I  say,  if  any  of  these  things  have  mixed  with  your  deter 
minations,  something  will  fall  out  to  show  you  your  fault : 
either  you  will  not  find  the  success  you  hope  for,  or  friends 
will  grow  cold,  or  enemies  and  difficulties  you  dream  not 
of  will  present  themselves,  or  your  own  mind  will  alter, 
so  that  what  seems  now  most  pleasant  will  afford  you 
little  pleasure.  Yet  though  I  write  thus,  I  do  not  mean 
(as  I  said  before)  to  discourage  you,  but  that  you  may  be 
fore-warned,  humble,  and  watchful.  If  you  should  at  any 
time  have  a  different  view  of  things,  you  may  take  comfort 
from  the  instances  I  have  mentioned.  The  trials  of  David 
and  Jacob  were  sharp  ;  but  they  were  short,  and  they  proved 
to  their  advantage,  put  them  upon  acts  of  humiliation  and 
prayer,  and  ended  in  a  double  blessing.  Nothing  can  harm 
us  that  quickens  our  earnestness  and  frequency  in  applying 
to  a  throne  of  grace  :  only  trust  the  Lord  and  keep  close 
to  Him,  and  all  that  befalls  you  shall  be  for  good.  Tempta 
tions  end  in  victory  ;  troubles  prove  an  increase  of  consola 
tion  ;  yea,  our  very  falls  and  failings  tend  to  increase 
our  spiritual  wisdom,  to  give  us  a  greater  knowledge  of 
Satan's  devices,  and  make  us  more  habitually  upon  our 
guard  against  them.  Happy  case  of  the  believer  in  Jesus  ! 
when  bitten  by  the  fiery  serpent  he  needs  not  go  far  for 
a  remedy  ;  he  has  only  to  look  to  a  bleeding  Saviour,  and 
be  healed. 

I    think   one  great   advantage   that   attends   a   removal 


288  CARDIPHON1A  : 

into  a  new  place  is,  that  it  gives  an  easy  opportunity  of 
forming  a  new  plan,  and  breaking  off  any  little  habits 
which  we  have  found  inconvenient,  and  yet  perhaps  could 
not  so  readily  lay  aside  where  our  customs  and  acquaintance 
had  been  long  formed.  I  earnestly  recommend  to  you  to 
reflect,  if  you  cannot  recollect  some  things  which  you  have 
hitherto  omitted,  which  may  properly  be  now  taken  up  ; 
some  things  formerly  allowed,  which  may  now  with  ease 
and  convenience  be  laid  aside.  I  only  give  the  hint  in 
geneYal ;  for  I  have  nothing  in  particular  to  charge  you  with. 
I  recommend  to  you  to  be  very  choice  of  your  time,  especially 
the  fore  part  of  the  day  ;  let  your  morning  hours  be  devoted 
to  prayer,  reading,  and  study  ;  and  suffer  not  the  impor 
tunity  of  friends  to  rob  you  of  the  hours  before  noon,  without 
a  just  necessity  :  and  if  you  accustom  yourself  to  rise  early 
in  the  morning,  you  will  find  a  great  advantage.  Be 
careful  to  avoid  losing  your  thoughts,  whether  in  books  or 
otherwise,  upon  any  subjects  which  are  not  directly  sub 
servient  to  your  great  design,  till  towards  dinner  time  ; 
the  afternoon  is  not  so  favourable  to  study  ;  this  is  a  proper 
time  for  paying  and  receiving  visits,  conversing  among 
your  friends,  or  unbending  with  a  book  of  instructive 
entertainment,  such  as  history,  &c.,  which  may  increase 
your  general  knowledge,  without  a  great  confinement  of 
your  attention  ;  but  let  the  morning  hours  be  sacred.  I 
think  you  would  likewise  find  advantage  in  using  your 
pen  more  ;  write  short  notes  upon  the  Scriptures  you  read, 
or  transcribe  the  labours  of  others  ;  make  extracts  from 
your  favourite  authors,  especially  those  who,  besides  a 
fund  of  spiritual  and  evangelical  matter,  have  a  happy 
talent  of  expressing  their  thoughts  in  a  clear  and  lively, 
or  pathetic  manner  ;  you  would  find  a  continued  exercise 
in  this  way  would  be  greatly  useful  to  form  your  own  style, 
and  help  your  delivery  and  memory  ;  you  would  become 
insensibly  master  of  their  thoughts,  and  find  it  more  easy 
to  express  yourself  justly  and  clearly  :  what  we  only  read 
we  easily  lose,  but  what  we  commit  to  paper  is  not  so  soon 
forgotten.  Especially  remember,  (what  you  well  know, 
but  we  cannot  too  often  remind  each  other,)  that  frequent 
secret  prayer  is  the  life  of  all  we  do.  If  any  man  lack  wisdom 
let  him  ask  of  God,  and  it  shall  be  given  ;  but  all  our  diligence 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF   THE   HEART        289 

will  fail  if  we  are  remiss  in  this  particular.  I  am  glad  it 
is  not  thought  necessary  for  you  to  go  to  London  on  this 
occasion.  I  hope  you  will  not  think  it  necessary  upon  any 
other  account.  Rather  keep  close  to  the  work  you  have 
undertaken,  and  endeavour  to  avoid  anything  that  looks 
like  ostentation,  or  a  desire  to  be  taken  notice  of.  You 
see  I  advise  you  with  the  freedom  of  a  friend  who  loves 
you,  and  longs  to  see  your  work  and  your  soul  prosper. 

You  will,  I  doubt  not,  endeavour  to  promote  the  practice 
of  frequent  prayer  in  the  houses  that  receive  you.  I  look 
upon  prayer-meetings  as  the  most  profitable  exercises 
(excepting  the  public  preaching)  in  which  Christians  can 
engage  ;  they  have  a  direct  tendency  to  kill  a  worldly, 
trifling  spirit,  to  draw  down  a  Divine  blessing  upon  all  our 
concerns,  compose  differences,  and  enkindle  (at  least  to 
maintain)  the  flame  of  Divine  love  amongst  brethren.  But 
I  need  not  tell  you  the  advantages  ;  you  know  them  :  I 
only  would  exhort  you  ;  and  the  rather,  as  I  find  in  my  own 
case  the  principal  cause  of  my  leanness  and  unfruitfulness 
is  owing  to  an  unaccountable  backwardness  to  pray.  I 
can  write,  or  read,  or  converse,  or  hear,  with  a  ready  will ; 
but  prayer  is  more  spiritual  and  inward  than  any  of  these  ; 
and  the  more  spiritual  any  duty  is,  the  more  my  carnal 
heart  is  apt  to  start  from  it.  May  the  Lord  pour  forth  His 
precious  spirit  of  prayer  and  supplication  in  both  our  hearts  ! 

I  am  not  so  well  pleased  with  the  account  you  give  of 
so  many  dry  bones.  It  increases  my  wonder  that  you 
could  so  readily  exchange  so  much  plump  flesh  and  blood 
as  you  had  about  you,  for  a  parcel  of  skeletons.  I  wish  they 
may  not  haunt  you,  and  disturb  your  peace.  I  wish  these 
same  dry  bones  do  not  prove  thorns  in  your  sides  and  in 
your  eyes.  You  say,  now  you  have  to  pray  and  prophesy, 
and  wait  for  the  four  winds  to  come  and  put  life  into  those 
bones.  God  grant  that  your  prayers  may  be  answered  ; 
but  if  I  knew  a  man  who  possessed  a  field  in  a  tolerable 
soil,  which  had  afforded  him  some  increase  every  year ; 
and  if  this  man,  after  having  bestowed  seven  years'  labour 
in  cultivating, .weeding,  manuring,  fencing,  &c.,  just  when  he 
has  brought  his  ground  (in  his  neighbour's  judgment)  into 
good  order,  and  might  reasonably  hope  for  larger  crops 
than  he  had  ever  yet  seen,  should  suddenly  forego  all  his 
c.  T 


290  CARDIPHONIA  : 

advantages,  leave  his  good  seed  for  the  birds  to  eat,  pull  up 
the  young  fences  which  cost  him  so  much  pains  to  plant, 
and  all  this  for  the  sake  of  making  a  new  experiment  upon 
the  top  of  a  mountain,  though  I  might  heartily  wish  him 
great  success,  I  could  not  honestly  give  him  great  encourage 
ment.  You  have  parted  with  that  for  a  trifle,  which  in 
my  eyes  seems  an  inestimable  jewel ;  I  mean  the  hearts 
and  affections  of  an  enlightened  people.  This  appears  to 
me,  one  of  the  greatest  honours  and  greatest  pleasures  a 
faithful  minister  can  possess,  and  which  many  faithful 
and  eminent  ministers  have  never  been  able  to  obtain. 
This  gave  you  a  vast  advantage  ;  your  gift  was  more  accept 
able  there  than  that  of  any  other  person,  and  more  than 
you  will  probably  find  elsewhere.  For  I  cannot  make  a 
comparison  between  the  hasty  approbation  of  a  few,  whose 
eyes  are  but  beginning  to  open,  and  their  affections  and 
passions  warm,  so  that  they  must,  if  possible,  have  the  man 
that  first  catches  their  attention ;  I  say  I  cannot  think  this 
worthy  to  be  compared  to  the  regard  of  a  people  who  under 
stood  the  Gospel,  were  able  to  judge  of  men  and  doctrines, 
and  had  trial  of  you  for  so  many  years.  It  is,  indeed,  much 
to  your  honour,  (it  proves  that  you  were  faithful,  diligent, 
and  exemplary,)  that  the  people  proved  so  attached  to  you  ; 
but  that  you  should  force  yourself  from  them,  when  they 
so  dearly  loved  you,  and  so  much  needed  you,  this  has  made 
all  your  friends  in  these  parts  to  wonder,  and  your  enemies 
to  rejoice  ;  and  I,  alas  !  know  not  what  to  answer  in  your 
behalf  to  either.  Say  not,  "  I  hate  this  Micaiah,  for  he 
prophesies  not  good  of  me,  but  evil  "  ;  but  allow  me  the 
privilege  of  a  friend.  My  heart  is  full  when  I  think  of  what 
has  happened,  and  what  will  probably  be  the  consequence. 
In  a  few  words,  I  am  strongly  persuaded  you  have  taken 
an  unadvised  step,  and  would  therefore  prepare  you  for 
the  inconvenience  and  uneasiness  you  may  probably  meet 
with.  And  if  I  am  (as  I  desire  I  may  prove)  mistaken,  my 
advice  will  do  no  harm  ;  you  will  want  something  to  balance 
the  caresses  and  success  you  meet  with. 

We  should  be  very  glad  to  see  you,  and  hope  you  will 
take  your  measures,  when  you  do  come,  to  lengthen  your 
usual  stay,  in  proportion  to  the  difference  of  the  distance. 
Pray  for  us.  I  am,  &c. 


FOUR     LETTERS 

TO 

MRS.    P 

LETTER    1 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  May  —  1774. 

I  HAVE  had  sudden  notice,  that  I  may  send  you  a  hasty 
line,  to  express  our  satisfaction  in  hearing  that  you  had 
a  safe  though  perilous  journey  :  I  hope  I  shall  be  always 
mindful  to  pray  that  the  Lord  may  guide,  bless,  and 
comfort  you,  and  give  you  such  a  manifestation  of  His 
person,  power,  and  grace,  as  may  set  you  at  liberty  from 
all  fear,  and  fill  you  with  abiding  peace  and  joy  in  believing. 
Remember  that  Jesus  has  all  power,  the  fulness  of  com 
passion,  and  embraces  with  open  arms  all  that  come  to  Him 
for  life  and  salvation. 

I  know  not  whether  Mrs. 's  illness  was  before  or  since 

my  last.  Through  mercy  she  is  better  again  ;  and  I  remain 
so,  though  death  and  illness  are  still  walking  about  the 
town.  O  for  grace  to  take  warning  by  the  sufferings  of 
others,  and  sit  loose  to  the  world,  and  so  number  our  days 
as  to  incline  our  hearts  to  the  one  thing  needful !  Indeed, 
that  one  thing  includes  many  things,  sufficient  to  engage  the 
best  of  our  thoughts  and  the  most  of  our  time,  if  we  were  duly 
sensible  of  their  importance  :  but  I  may  adopt  the  Psalmist's 
expression,  "  My  soul  cleaveth  to  the  dust."  How  is  it 
that  the  truths  of  which  I  have  the  most  undoubted  convic 
tion,  and  which  are  of  all  others  the  most  weighty,  should 
make  so  little  impression  upon  me  ?  Oh  !  I  know  the  cause  ; 
it  is  deeply  rooted.  An  evil  nature  cleaves  to  me  ;  so  that 
when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me.  It  is,  how 
ever,  a  mercy  to  be  made  sensible  of  it,  and  in  any  measure 

291  T2 


292  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

humble  for  it.  Ere  long  it  will  be  dropped  in  the  grave  ; 
then  all  compliments  shall  cease.  That  thought  gives 
relief.  I  shall  not  always  live  this  poor  dying  life  ;  I  hope 
one  day  to  be  all  ear,  all  heart,  all  tongue  ;  when  I  shall  see 
the  Redeemer  as  He  is,  I  shall  be  like  Him.  This  will  be  a 
Heaven  indeed,  to  behold  His  glory  without  a  veil,  to  rejoice 
in  His  love  without  a  cloud,  and  to  sing  His  praises,  without 
one  jarring  or  wandering  note,  for  ever.  In  the  mean  time, 
may  He  enable  us  to  serve  Him  with  our  best.  O  that  every 
power,  faculty,  and  talent,  were  devoted  to  Him  !  He 
deserves  all  we  have,  and  ten  thousand  times  more  if  we 
had  it  ;  for  He  has  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins 
in  His  own  blood.  He  gave  Himself  for  us.  In  one  sense, 
we  are  well  suited  to  answer  His  purpose  ;  for  if  we  were 
not  vile  and  worthless  beyond  expression,  the  exceeding 
riches  of  His  grace  would  not  have  been  so  gloriously  dis 
played.  His  glory  shines  more  in  redeeming  one  sinner, 
than  in  preserving  a  thousand  angels.  Poor  Mr.  -  -  is 
still  in  the  dark  valley,  but  we  trust  prayer  shall  yet  bring 
him  out.  Mighty  things  have  been  done  in  answer  to  prayer, 
and  the  Lord's  arm  is  not  shortened,  neither  is  His  ear  heavy. 
It  is  our  part  to  wait  till  we  have  an  answer.  One  of  His 
own  hymns  says, 

The  promise  may  be  long  deferr'd, 
But  never  comes  too  late. 

I  suppose  you  have  heard  of  the  death  of  Mr.  T , 

of   R .     This   is   apparently   a   heavy   blow.     He   was 

an  amiable,  judicious,  candid  man,  and  an  excellent  preacher, 
in  a  great  sphere  of  usefulness  ;  and  his  age  and  constitution 
gave  hopes  that  he  might  have  been  eminently  serviceable 
for  many  years.  How  often  does  the  Lord  write  "vanity" 
upon  all  our  expectations  from  men.  He  visited  a  person 
ill  of  a  putrid  fever,  and  carried  the  seeds  of  infection  with 

him  to  London,  where  he  died.     Mrs. is  a  very  excellent 

and  accomplished  woman,  but  exceedingly  delicate  in  her 
frame  and  spirits.  How  can  she  bear  so  sudden  and  severe 
a  stroke  !  But  yet  I  hope  she  will  afford  a  proof  of  the  Lord's 
all-sufficiency  and  faithfulness.  Oh,  Madam,  the  Lord  our 
God  is  a  great  God  !  If  He  frowns,  the  smiles  of  the  whole 
creation  can  afford  no  comfort ;  and  if  He  is  pleased  to 


THE   UTTERANCE   OF   THE   HEART        293 

smile,  He  can  enable  the  soul  under  the  darkest  dispensations 
to  say,  "  All  is  well."  Yet  the  flesh  will  feel,  and  it  ought ; 
otherwise  the  exercise  of  faith,  patience,  and  resignation, 
would  be  impracticable.  I  have  lost  in  him  one  of  my  most 
valued  and  valuable  friends  ;  but  what  is  my  loss  to  that 
of  his  people  ? 

The  Lord  bless  you  and  keep  you.  The  Lord  increase 
you  more  and  more,  you  and  your  children.  The  Lord  lift 
up  the  light  of  His  countenance  upon  you,  and  give  you  His 
peace.  I  thank  Him  for  leading  you  to  us,  but  especially 
for  making  your  visit  there  in  any  measure  agreeable  and 
profitable  to  yourself.  If  I  have  been  an  instrument  in  His 
hand  for  your  comfort,  I  have  reason  to  remember  it  among 
the  greatest  favours  He  has  conferred  upon  me.  And  now, 
dear  Madam,  once  more,  farewell.  If  the  Lord  spares 
our  lives,  I  hope  we  shall  see  each  other  again  upon  earth. 
But  above  all,  let  us  rejoice  in  the  blessed  Gospel,  by  which 
immortality  is  brought  to  light,  and  a  glorious  prospect 
opened  beyond  the  grave. 

There  sits  our  Saviour  thron'd  in  light, 
Clothed  with  a  body  like  our  own. 

There  at  last,  after  all  the  changes  and  trials  of  this  state, 
we  shall  meet  to  part  no  more. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  i?75- 

I  SHOULD  have  been  more  uneasy  at  being  prevented 
writing  immediately,  had  I  any  reason  to  apprehend  my 
advice  necessary  upon  the  point  you  propose,  which  by  this 
time  I  suppose  is  settled  as  it  should  be  without  me.  I 
smiled  at  Miss  M—  — 's  disappointment.  However,  if  the 
Lord  favours  her  with  a  taste  for  the  library  of  my  proposing, 
she  will  be  like  the  merchant  man  seeking  goodly  pearls, 
and  will  count  all  other  books  but  pebbles  in  comparison  of 
those  four  volumes,  which  present  us  with  something  new 


294  CARDIPHONIA  : 

and  important  whenever  we  look  into  them.  I  shall  be  much 
obliged  to  her,  if  she  will  commit  the  third  chapter  of  Proverbs 
to  her  memory,  and  I  shall  pray  the  Lord  to  write  it  in  her 
heart. 

You  surprise  me  when  you  tell  me  that  the  incident  of 
my  birthday  was  noticed  by  those  I  never  saw.  Be  so  good 
as  to  return  my  thanks  to  my  unknown  friends,  and  tell 
them  that  I  pray  our  common  Lord  and  Saviour  to  bless 
them  abundantly.  His  people,  while  here,  are  scattered 
abroad,  separated  by  hills  and  rivers,  and  too  often  by  names 
and  prejudices  ;  but,  by  and  bye,  we  shall  all  meet  where 
we  shall  all  know  and  acknowledge  each  other,  and  rejoice 
together  for  evermore.  I  have  lately  read  with  much 
pleasure,  and  I  hope  with  some  profit,  the  history  of  the 
Greenland  Mission.  Upon  the  whole,  it  is  a  glorious  work. 
None  who  love  the  Lord  will  refuse  to  say,  it  is  the  finger  of 
God  indeed.  For  my  own  part,  my  soul  rejoices  in  it  ; 
and  I  honour  the  instruments,  as  men  who  have  hazarded 
their  lives  in  an  extraordinary  manner  for  the  sake  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Sure  I  am,  that  none  could  have  sustained 
such  discouragements  at  first,  or  have  obtained  such  success 
afterwards,  unless  the  Lord  had  sent,  supported,  and  owned 
them. 

I  hope  we  shall  have  an  interest  in  your  prayers.  I  trust 
the  Lord  is  yet  with  us.  We  have  some  ripe  for  the  sickle, 
and  some  just  springing  up  ;  some  tokens  of  His  gracious 
presence  amongst  us  ;  but  sin  and  Satan  cut  us  out  abund 
ance  of  work  as  individuals,  though,  through  mercy,  as  a 
society  we  walk  in  peace. 

The  "  toad  and  spider  "  is  an  exhibition  of  my  daily 
experience.  I  am  often  wounded,  but  the  Lord  is  my 
health.  Still  I  am  a  living  monument  of  mercy  ;  and  I 
trust  that  word,  "  Because  I  live,  you  shall  live  also,"  will 
carry  me  to  the  end.  I  am  poor,  weak,  and  foolish  ;  but 
Jesus  is  wise,  strong,  and  abounding  in  grace.  He  has  given 
me  a  desire  to  trust  my  all  in  His  hands,  and  He  will  not 
disappoint  the  expectation  which  He  Himself  has  raised. 
At  present  I  have  but  little  to  say,  and  but  little  time  to  say 
it  in.  When  you  think  of  this  place,  I  hope  you  will  think 
and  believe,  that  you  have  friends  here  most  cordially 
interested  in  your  welfare,  and  often  remembering  you  in 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART    295 

prayer.  May  the  Lord  be  your  guide  and  shield,  and  give 
you  the  best  desires  of  your  heart  !  I  pray  Him  to  establish 
and  settle  you  in  the  great  truths  of  His  word.  I  trust  He 
will.  We  learn  more,  and  more  effectually,  by  one  minute's 
communication  with  Him  through  the  medium  of  His 
wiitten  word,  than  we  could  from  an  assembly  of  divines,  or 
a  library  of  books. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    III 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  August  17,  1775. 

IT  is  not  owing  to  forgetfulness  that  your  letter  has  been 
thus  long  unanswered.  It  has  lain  within  my  view  this 
fortnight,  demanding  my  first  leisure  hour ;  but  affairs  of 
daily  occurrence  have  been  so  many  and  so  pressing,  that 
I  have  been  constrained  to  put  it  off  till  now.  I  trust  the 
Lord,  by  His  Spirit  and  providence,  will  direct  and  prosper 
the  settlement  of  your  children.  I  desire  my  love  to  Miss 

M .     My   idea   of   her   enlarges.     Methinks    I    see   her 

aspiring  to  be  as  tall  as  her  mamma.  I  hope,  likewise,  that 
she  increases  in  grace  and  wisdom,  as  in  years  and  stature  ; 
and  that  hearing  our  Lord's  flock  is  a  little  flock,  she  feels 
an  earnest  thirst  to  be  one  of  the  happy  number  which 
constitutes  His  fold. 

There  the  Lord  dwells  amongst  them  upon  His  own  hill, 
With  the  flocks  all  around  Him,  awaiting  His  will. 

If  she  has  such  a  desire,  I  can  tell  who  gave  it  her,  for  I  am 
persuaded  it  was  not  born  with  her  :  and  where  the  good 
Husbandman  sows,  there  will  He  also  reap.  Therefore, 

dear  Miss  M ,  press  forward  :    knock,  and  it  shall  be 

opened  unto  you,  for  yet  there  is  room.  O  what  a  fold  ! 
O  what  a  pasture  !  O  what  a  Shepherd  !  Let  us  love, 
and  sing,  and  wonder. 

I  hope  the  good  people  at  Bristol,  and  everywhere  else, 
are  praying  for  our  sinful  distracted  land,  in  this  dark  day. 
The  Lord  is  angry,  the  sword  is  drawn,  and  I  am  afraid 


296  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

nothing  but  the  spirit  of  wrestling  prayer  can  prevail  for  the 
returning  it  into  the  scabbard.  Could  things  have  proceeded 
to  these  extremities  except  the  Lord  had  withdrawn  his 
salutary  blessing  from  both  sides  ?  It  is  a  time  of  prayer. 
We  see  the  beginning  of  trouble,  but  who  can  foresee  the 
possible  consequences  ?  The  fire  is  kindled,  but  how  far 
it  may  spread,  those  who  are  above  may,  perhaps,  know 
better  than  we.  I  meddle  not  with  the  disputes  of  party, 
nor  concern  myself  about  any  political  maxims,  but  such  as 
are  laid  down  in  Scripture.  There  I  read  that  righteousness 
exalteth  a  nation,  and  that  sin  is  the  reproach,  and  if  per 
sisted  in,  the  ruin,  of  any  people.  Some  people  are  startled 
af  the  enormous  sum  of  our  national  debt :  they  who  under 
stand  spiritual  arithmetic,  may  be  well  startled  if  they  sit 
down  and  compute  the  debt  of  national  sin.  Imprimis, 
Infidelity :  Item,  Contempt  of  the  Gospel :  Item,  The 
profligacy  of  manners  :  Item,  Perjury  :  Item,  The  cry  of 
blood,  the  blood  of  thousands,  perhaps  millions,  from  the 
East  Indies.  It  would  take  sheets,  yea,  quires,  to  draw 
out  the  particulars  under  each  of  these  heads,  and  then  much 
would  remain  untold.  What  can  we  answer,  when  the 
Lord  saith,  "  Shall  not  I  visit  for  these  things  ?  Shall 
not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  nation  as  this  ?  "  Since 
we  received  the  news  of  the  first  hostilities  in  America,  we 
have  had  an  additional  prayer-meeting.  Could  I  hear  that 
professors  in  general,  instead  of  wasting  their  breath  in 
censuring  men  and  measures,  were  plying  the  throne  of  grace 
I  should  still  hope  for  a  respite.  Poor  New  England  !  once 
the  glory  of  the  earth,  now  likely  to  be  visited  with  fire 
and  sword.  They  have  left  their  first  love,  and  the  Lord 
is  sorely  contending  with  them.  Yet  surely  their  sins  as  a 
people  are  not  to  be  compared  with  ours.  I  am  just  so 
much  affected  with  these  things  as  to  know  that  I  am  not 
affected  enough.  Oh  !  my  spirit  is  sadly  cold  and  insensible, 
or  I  should  lay  them  to  heart  in  a  different  manner : 
yet  I  endeavour  to  give  the  alarm  as  far  as  I  can.  There 
is  one  political  maxim  which  comforts  me,  "  The  Lord 
reigns."  His  hand  guides  the  storm ;  and  He  knows  them 
that  are  His,  how  to  protect,  support,  and  deliver  them. 
He  will  take  care  of  His  own  cause,  yea,  he  will  extend  His 
kingdom,  even  by  these  formidable  methods.  Men  have 


THE    UTTERANCE    OF    THE    HEART        297 

one  thing  in  view,  He  has  another ;  and  His  counsel  shall 
stand. 

The  chief  piece  of  news  since  my  last  is  concerning  B.  A. 
She  has  finished  her  course,  and  is  now  with  the  great 
multitude  who  have  overcome  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb, 
and  by  the  word  of  His  testimony.  Tuesday,  the  ist  of 
February,  she  was  in  our  assembly,  was  taken  ill  the  next 
day,  and  died  while  we  were  assembled  the  Tuesday  following. 
She  had  an  easy  dissolution,  retained  her  senses  and  her 
speech  till  the  last  minute,  and  went  without  a  struggle  or 
a  sigh.  She  was  not  in  raptures  during  her  illness,  but  was 
composed,  and  maintained  a  strong  and  lively  faith.  She 
had  a  numerous  levee  about  her  bed  daily,  who  were  all 
witnesses  to  the  power  of  faith,  and  to  the  faithfulness  of 
the  Lord,  enabling  her  to  triumph  over  the  approaches  of 
death  ;  for  she  was  well  known  and  well  respected.  She 
will  be  much  missed  ;  but  I  hope  He  will  answer  the  many 
prayers  she  put  up  for  us,  and  raise  up  others  in  her  room. 
"  Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord."  Blessed  are 
they  who  know  whom  they  have  believed,  and  when  death 
comes,  can  cheerfully  rest  their  hopes  on  Him  who  died  that 
we  might  live.  B —  -  had  been  long  a  precious  and  honour 
able  woman  ;  but  her  hope  in  the  trying  hour  rested  not 
on  what  she  had  done  for  the  Lord,  but  upon  what  He  had 
done  for  her  ;  not  upon  the  change  His  grace  had  wrought 
in  her,  but  upon  the  righteousness  He  had  wrought 
out  for  her  by  His  obedience  unto  death.  This  supported 
her,  for  she  saw  nothing  in  herself  but  what  she  was  ashamed 
of.  She  saw  reason  to  renounce  her  own  goodness,  as  well 
as  her  own  sins,  as  to  the  point  of  acceptance  with  God, 
and  died,  as  St.  Paul  lived,  "  determined  to  know  nothing 
but  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified." 

The  time  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C remove  to  Scotland 

drawing  near,  Mrs.  is  gone  to  spend  a  week  or  two 

with  them,  and  take  her  leave.  She  feels  something  at 
parting  with  a  sister,  who  is  indeed  a  valuable  person  ;  and 
from  children  with  whom  they  have  always  lived  in  the 
most  tender  intimacy  and  uninterrupted  friendship.  But 
all  beneath  the  moon  (like  the  moon  itself)  is  subject  to 
incessant  change.  Alterations  and  separations  are  graciously 
appointed  of  the  Lord,  to  remind  us  that  this  is  not  our  rest, 


298  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

and  to  prepare  our  thoughts  for  that  approaching  change 
which  shall  fix  us  for  ever  in  an  unchangeable  state.  O, 
Madam  !  what  shall  we  poor  worms  render  to  Him  who 
has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the  Gospel, 
taken  away  the  sting  of  death,  revealed  a  glorious  prospect 
beyond  the  grave,  and  given  us  eyes  to  see  it  ?  Now  the 
reflection,  that  we  must  ere  long  take  a  final  farewell  of 
what  is  most  capable  of  pleasing  us  upon  earth,  is  not  only 
tolerable,  but  pleasant.  For  we  know  we  cannot  fully  possess 
our  best  Friend,  our  chief  Treasure,  till  we  have  done  with 
all  below  :  nay,  we  cannot  till  then  properly  see  each  other. 
We  are  cased  up  in  vehicles  of  clay,  and  converse  together, 
as  if  we  were  in  different  coaches,  with  the  blinds  close 
drawn  round.  We  see  the  carriage,  and  the  voice  tells  us 
that  we  have  a  Friend  within  ;  but  we  shall  know  each 
other  better,  when  death  shall  open  the  coach  doors,  and 
hand  out  the  company  successively,  and  lead  them  into  the 
glorious  apartments  which  the  Lord  has  appointed  to  be 
the  common  residence  of  them  that  love  Him.  What  an 
assembly  will  there  be  !  What  a  constellation  of  glory, 
when  each  individual  shall  shine  like  the  sun  in  the  kingdom 
of  their  Father  !  No  sins,  sorrows,  temptations  ;  no  veils, 
clouds,  or  prejudices,  shall  interrupt  us  then.  All  names 
of  idle  distinction  (the  fruits  of  present  remaining  darkness, 
the  channels  of  bigotry,  and  the  stumbling-block  of  the 
world)  will  be  at  an  end. 

The  description  you  give  of  your  present  residence  pleases 
me  much,  and  chiefly  because  it  describes  and  manifests  to 
me  something  still  more  interesting,  I  mean  the  peaceable 
situation  of  your  mind.  Had  He  placed  you  in  an  Eden 
some  months  ago  it  would  hardly  have  awakened  your 
descriptive  talent.  But  He  whom  the  winds  and  seas 
obey  has  calmed  your  mind,  and  I  trust  will  go  on  to  fill 
you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  It  is  no  great 
matter  where  we  are,  provided  we  see  that  the  Lord  has 
placed  us  there,  and  that  He  is  with  us. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART       299 

LETTER    IV 

1766. 

So,  my  dear  Madam,  I  hope  we  have  found  you  out, 
and  that  this  letter  will  reach  you  in  good  time  to  welcome 
you  in  our  names  to  London.  We  are  ready  to  take  it  for 
granted,  that  you  will  now  most  certainly  make  us  a  visit. 
Do  come  as  soon,  and  stay  as  long  as  you  possibly  can. 
Methinks  you  will  be  glad  to  get  out  of  the  smell  and  noise 
as  soon  as  possible.  If  we  did  not  go  to  London  now  and 
then,  we  should  perhaps  forget  how  people  live  there. 
Especially  I  pity  professors  ;  they  are  exposed  to  as  many 
dangers  as  people  who  live  in  mines ;  chilling  damps, 
scorching  blasts,  epidemical  disorders,  owing  to  the  impure 
air.  Such  are  the  winds  of  false  doctrines,  the  explosions 
of  controversy,  the  blights  of  worldly  conversation,  the 
contagion  of  evil  custom.  In  short,  a  person  had  need 
have  a  good  constitution  of  grace,  and  likewise  to  be  well 
supplied  with  antidotes,  to  preserve  a  tolerable  share  of 
spiritual  health  in  such  a  situation. 

And  now,  how  shall  I  fill  up  the  rest  of  the  paper  ?  It 
is  a  shame  for  a  Christian  and  a  minister  to  say  he  has  no 
subject  at  hand,  when  the  inexhaustible  theme  of  redeeming 
love  is  ever  pressing  upon  our  attention.  I  will  tell  you, 
then,  though  you  know  it,  that  the  Lord  reigns.  He  who 
once  bore  our  sins,  and  carried  our  sorrows,  is  seated  upon 
a  throne  of  glory,  and  exercises  all  power  in  Heaven,  and  on 
earth.  Thrones,  principalities,  and  powers,  bow  before 
Him.  Every  event  in  the  kingdoms  of  providence  and  of 
grace  is  under  His  rule.  His  providence  pervades  and 
manages  the  whole,  and  is  as  minutely  attentive  to  every 
part,  as  if  there  were  only  that  single  object  in  His  view. 
From  the  tallest  archangel  to  the  meanest  ant  or  fly,  all 
depend  on  Him  for  their  being,  their  preservation,  and  their 
powers.  He  directs  the  sparrows  where  to  build  their 
nests,  and  to  find  their  food.  He  overrules  the  rise  and  fall 
of  nations,  and  bends  with  an  invincible  energy  and  unerring 
wisdom,  all  events  ;  so  that,  while  many  intend  nothing 
less,  in  the  issue  their  designs  all  concur  and  coincide  in  the 
accomplishment  of  His  holy  will.  He  restrains,  with  a 
mighty  hand  the  still  more  formidable  efforts  of  the  powers 


300  CARDIPHONJA  : 

of  darkness  ;  and  Satan,  and  all  his  hosts,  cannot  exert  their 
malice  a  hair's  breadth  beyond  the  limits  of  His  permission. 
This  is  He  who  is  the  Head  and  Husband  of  His  believing 
people.  How  happy  are  they  whom  it  is  His  good  pleasure 
to  bless  !  How  safe  are  they  whom  He  has  engaged  to 
protect  !  How  honoured  and  privileged  are  they  to  whom 
He  is  pleased  to  manifest  Himself,  and  whom  He  enables 
and  warrants  to  claim  Him  as  their  friend  and  their  portion  ! 
Having  redeemed  them  by  His  own  blood,  he  sets  a  high 
value  upon  them  ;  He  esteems  them  His  treasure,  His  jewels, 
and  keeps  them  as  the  apple  of  His  eye.  They  shall  not 
want  ;  they  need  not  fear  ;  His  eye  is  upon  them  in  every 
situation,  His  ear  is  open  to  their  prayers,  and  His  ever 
lasting  arms  are  under  them  for  their  sure  support.  On 
earth,  He  guides  their  steps,  controls  their  enemies,  and 
directs  all  His  dispensations  for  their  good  ;  while  in  Heaven, 
He  is  pleading  their  cause,  preparing  them  a  place,  and 
communicating  down  to  them  reviving  foretastes  of  the 
glory  that  shall  be  shortly  revealed.  O  how  is  this  mystery 
hidden  from  an  unbelieving  world  !  Who  can  believe,  till 
it  is  made  known  by  experience,  what  an  intercourse  is 
maintained  in  this  land  of  shadows  between  the  Lord  of 
glory  and  sinful  worms  ?  How  should  we  praise  Him  that 
He  has  visited  us  ;  for  we  were  once  blind  to  His  beauty 
and  insensible  to  His  love,  and  should  have  remained  so  to 
the  last,  had  He  not  prevented  us  with  His  goodness,  and 
been  found  of  us  when  we  sought  Him  not. 

Mrs. presents  her  love     The  bite  of  the  leech,  which 

I  mentioned  to  you,  has  confined  her  to  the  house  ever  since  ; 
but  I  hope  she  will  be  able  to  go  out  to-morrow.  We  were 
for  a  while  apprehensive  of  worse  consequences  ;  but  the 
Lord  is  gracious  ;  He  shows  us,  in  a  variety  of  instances, 
what  dependent  creatures  we  are  ;  how  blind  to  events, 
and  how  easily  the  method  which  we  take  to  relieve  ourselves 
from  a  small  inconvenience  may  plunge  us  into  a  greater. 
Thus  we  learn  (happy,  indeed,  if  we  can  effectually  learn 
it)  that  there  is  no  safety  but  in  His  protection,  and  that 
nothing  can  do  us  good  but  by  His  blessing.  As  for  myself, 
I  see  so  many  reasons  why  He  might  contend  with  me,  that 
I  am  amazed  He  affords  me  and  mine  so  much  peace,  and 
appoints  us  so  few  trials.  We  live  as  upon  a  field  of  battle  ; 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   301 

many  are  hourly  suffering  and  falling  around  us,  and  I  can 
give  no  reason  why  we  are  preserved,  but  that  He  is  God,  and 
not  man.  What  a  mercy  that  we  are  only  truly  known  to 
Him  who  is  alone  able  to  bear  us  ! 

May  the  Lord  bless  you  and  yours  ;  may  He  comfort  you, 
guide  you,  and  guard  you  !     Come  quickly  to 

Yours,  &c. 


SIX     LETTERS 

TO    THE 

REV.   MR.   B- 

LETTER    I 

REV.  AND  DEAR  SIR,  Sept.  14,  1765. 

WHEN  I  was  at  London  in  June  last,  your  name  first 
reached  me,  and  from  that  time  I  have  been  desirous  to 
wish  you  success  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  A  few  weeks 
ago  I  received  a  further  account  from  Mrs.  -  — ,  with  a 
volume  of  your  sermons  :  she  likewise  gave  me  a  direction 
where  to  write,  and  an  encouragement  that  a  letter  would 
not  be  unacceptable.  The  latter,  indeed,  I  did  not  much 
need  when  I  had  read  your  book.  Though  we  have  no 
acquaintance,  we  are  already  united  in  the  strictest  ties  of 
friendship,  partakers  of  the  same  hope,  servants  of  the  same 
Lord,  and  in  the  same  part  of  His  vineyard  :  I,  therefore, 
hold  all  apologies  needless.  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord's  goodness 
to  you  ;  I  pray  for  His  abundant  blessing  upon  your  labours  ; 
I  need  an  interest  in  your  prayers  ;  I  have  an  affectionate 
desire  to  know  more  concerning  you  :  these  are  my  motives 
for  writing. 

Mrs.  -  -  tells  me  that  you  have  read  my  Narrative  ; 
I  need  not  tell  you,  therefore,  that  I  am  one  of  the  most 
astonishing  instances  of  the  forbearance  and  mercy  of  God 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  In  the  close  of  it,  I  mention  a 
warm  desire  I  had  to  the  ministry  :  this  the  Lord  was  pleased 
to  keep  alive  for  several  years,  through  a  succession  of  views 
and  disappointments.  At  length  His  hour  came,  and  my 
way  was  made  easy.  I  have  been  here  about  fifteen  months. 
The  Lord  has  led  me  by  a  way  that  I  little  expected,  to  a 
pleasant  lot,  where  the  Gospel  has  been  many  years  known, 

302 


THE    UTTER  AX  CE   OF    THE   HEART       303 

and  is  highly  valued  by  many.  We  have  a  large  Church 
and  congregation,  and  a  considerable  number  of  lively, 
thriving  believers  ;  and  in  general,  go  on  with  great  comfort 
and  harmony.  I  meet  with  less  opposition  from  the  world 
than  is  usual  where  the  Gospel  is  preached.  This  burden 
was  borne  by  Mr.  B—  -  for  ten  years,  and  in  that  course  of 
time,  some  of  the  fiercest  opposers  were  removed,  some 
wearied,  and  some  softened  ;  so  that  we  are  now  remarkably 
quiet  in  that  respect.  May  the  Lord  teach  us  to  improve 
the  privilege,  and  preserve  us  from  indifference  !  How  un 
speakable  are  our  obligations  to  the  grace  of  God  !  What 
a  privilege  is  it  to  be  a  believer  !  They  are  comparatively 
few,  and  we  by  nature  were  no  nearer  than  others  ;  it  was 
grace,  free  grace,  that  made  the  difference.  What  an  honour 
to  be  a  minister  of  the  everlasting  Gospel  !  These  upon 
comparison  are  perhaps  fewer  still.  How  wonderful  that 
one  of  these  few  should  be  sought  for  among  the  wilds  of 
Africa,  reclaimed  from  the  lowest  state  of  impiety  and 
misery,  and  brought  to  assure  other  sinners,  from  His 
own  experience  that  "  there  is,  there  is  forgiveness  with 
Him,  that  He  may  be  feared  !  "  And  you,  Sir,  though 
not  left  to  give  such  flagrant  proofs  of  the  wickedness  of  the 
heart  and  the  power  of  Satan,  yet  owe  your  present  views 
to  the  same  almighty  grace.  If  the  Lord  had  not  dis 
tinguished  you  from  your  brethren,  you  would  have  been 
now  in  the  character  of  a  minister  misleading  the  people, 
and  opposing  those  precious  truths  you  are  now  labouring 
to  establish.  Not  unto  us,  O  Lord  !  but  unto  Thy  name, 
be  the  glory.  I  shall  be  thankful  to  hear  from  you  at  your 
leisure.  Be  pleased  to  inform  me,  whether  you  received 
the  knowledge  of  the  truth  before  or  since  you  were  in  orders  ; 
how  long  you  have  preached  the  joyful  sound  of  salvation 
by  Jesus,  and  what  is  the  state  of  things  in  your  parts. 

We  are  called  to  an  honourable  service,  but  it  is  arduous. 
What  wisdom  does  it  require  to  keep  the  middle  path  in 
doctrines,  avoiding  the  equally  dangerous  errors  on  the 
right  hand  and  on  the  left  !  What  steadiness,  to  speak  the 
truth  boldly  and  faithfully  in  the  midst  of  a  gainsaying 
world  !  What  humility,  to  stand  against  the  tide  of 
popularity  !  What  meekness,  to  endure  all  things  for  the 
elect's  sake,  that  they  may  be  saved  !  "  Who  is  sufficient 


304  CARDIPHONIA  : 

for  these  things  ?  "  We  are  not  in  ourselves,  but  there  is 
an  all-sufficiency  in  Jesus.  Our  enemy  watches  us  close  ; 
he  challenges  and  desires  to  have  us,  that  he  may  sift  us  as 
wheat ;  he  knows  he  can  easily  shake  us  if  we  are  left  to 
ourselves;  but  we  have  a  Shepherd,  a  Keeper,  who  never 
slumbers  nor  sleeps.  If  He  permits  us  to  be  exercised,  it 
is  for  our  good  ;  He  is  at  hand  to  direct,  moderate,  and 
sanctify  every  dispensation  ;  He  has  prayed  for  us  that  our 
faith,  may  not  fail  and  He  has  promised  to  maintain  His 
fear  in  our  hearts,  that  we  may  not  depart  from  Him. 
When  we  are  prone  to  wander,  He  calls  us  back  ;  when  we 
say,  "  My  feet  slip,"  His  mercy  holds  us  up  ;  when  we 
are  wounded,  He  heals  ;  when  we  are  ready  to  faint,  He 
revives.  The  people  of  God  are  sure  to  meet  with  enemies, 
but  especially  the  ministers  :  Satan  bears  them  a  double 
grudge  :  the  world  watches  for  their  halting,  and  the  Lord 
will  suffer  them  to  be  afflicted,  that  they  may  be  kept 
humble,  that  they  may  acquire  a  sympathy  with  the 
sufferings  of  others,  that  they  may  be  experimentally  quali 
fied  to  advise  and  help  them,  and  to  comfort  them  with  the 
comforts  with  which  they  themselves  have  been  comforted 
of  God.  But  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  is  with  us  ;  His 
eye  is  upon  us,  His  everlasting  arm  beneath  us  ;  in  His 
name,  therefore,  may  we  go  on,  lift  up  our  banners,  and  say, 
"If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  Nay,  in  all 
these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors,  through  Him 
that  has  loved  us."  The  time  is  short  :  yet  a  little  while, 
and  He  will  wipe  all  tears  from  our  eyes,  and  put  a  crown 
of  life  upon  our  heads  with  His  own  gracious  hand.  In 
this  sense,  how  beautiful  are  those  lines  :— 

Temporis  illius 
Me  consoler  imagine 
Festis  quum  populus  me  reducet  choris, 
Faustisque  excipiet  vocibus,  et  Dei 
Pompa  cum  celebri,  me  comitabitur 
Augusta  ad  penetralia. 

BUCH,  in  Ps.  32. 

If  any  occasions  should  call  you  into  these  parts,  my  house 
and  pulpit  will  be  glad  to  receive  you.  Pray  for  us,  dear 
Sir,  and  believe  me  to  be 

Yours,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART       305 


LETTER    II 

VERY  DEAR  SIR,  Nov.  2,  1765. 

YOUR  letter  of  the  4th  ult.  gave  me  great  pleasure. 
I  thank  you  for  the  particular  account  you  have  favoured 
me  with.  I  rejoice  with  you,  sympathize  with  you,  and 
find  my  heart  opened  to  correspond  with  unreserved  freedom. 
May  the  Lord  direct  our  pens,  and  help  us  to  help  each  other 
The  work  you  are  engaged  in  is  great,  and  your  difficulties 
many  ;  but  faithful  is  He  that  hath  called  you,  who  also 
will  do  it.  The  weapons  which  He  has  now  put  into  your 
hands  are  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God  to  the 
pulling  down  of  strongholds.  Men  may  fight,  but  they 
shall  not  prevail  against  us,  if  we  are  but  enabled  to  put 
our  cause  simply  into  the  Lord's  hands,  and  keep  steadily 
on  in  the  path  of  duty.  He  will  plead  our  cause  and  fight 
our  battles  ;  He  will  pardon  our  mistakes,  and  teach  us  to 
do  better.  My  experience  as  a  minister  is  but  small,  having 
been  but  about  eighteen  months  in  the  vineyard  ;  but  for 
about  twelve  years  I  have  been  favoured  with  an  increasing 
acquaintance  among  the  people  of  God,  of  various  ranks 
and  denominations,  which,  together  with  the  painful  exer 
cises  of  my  own  heart,  gave  me  opportunity  of  making  obser 
vations  which  were  of  great  use  to  me  when  I  entered  upon 
the  work  myself  :  and  ever  since,  I  have  found  the  Lord 
graciously  supplying  new  lights  and  new  strength  as  new 
occurrences  arise.  So  I  trust  it  will  be  with  you.  I  endeavour 
to  avail  myself  of  the  examples,  advice,  and  sentiments  of 
my  brethren  ;  yet  at  the  same  time  to  guard  against  calling 
any  man  master.  This  is  the  prerogative  of  Christ.  The 
best  are  but  men  ;  the  wisest  may  be  mistaken  ;  and  that 
which  may  be  right  in  another  might  be  wrong  in  me, 
through  a  difference  of  circumstances.  The  Spirit  of  God 
distributes  variously,  both  in  gifts  and  dispensations  ;  and 
I  would  no  more  be  tied  to  act  strictly  by  others'  rules, 
than  to  walk  in  shoes  of  the  same  size.  My  shoes  must  fit 
my  own  feet. 

I  endeavour  to  guard  against  extremes  :    our  nature  is 
prone  to  them  ;    and  we  are  liable  likewise,  when  we  have 
found  the  inconvenience  of  one  extreme,  to  revert  insensibly 
c.  u 


306  CARDIPHONIA  : 

(sometimes  to  fly  suddenly)  to  the  other.  I  pray  to  be  led 
in  the  midst  of  the  path.  I  am  what  they  call  a  Calvinist ; 
yet  there  are  flights,  niceties,  and  hard  sayings,  to  be  found 
among  some  of  that  system,  which  I  do  not  choose  to  imitate. 
I  dislike  those  sentiments  against  which  you  have  borne 
your  testimony  in  the  note  at  the  end  of  your  preface  ; 
but  having  known  many  precious  souls  in  that  party,  I 
have  been  taught,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  names 
and  sentiments,  but  in  righteousness,  faith,  love,  peace, 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  should,  however,  upon  some 
occasions,  oppose  those  tenets,  if  they  had  any  prevalence 
in  my  neighbourhood  ;  but  they  have  not ;  and  in  general, 
I  believe,  the  surest  way  to  refute  or  prevent  error  is  to 
preach  the  truth.  I  am  glad  to  find  you  are  aware  of  that 
spirit  of  enthusiasm  which  has  so  often  broken  loose  and 
blemished  hopeful  beginnings,  and  that  the  foundation  you 
build  upon  is  solid  and  Scriptural :  this  will,  I  hope,  save  you 
much  trouble,  and  prevent  many  offences.  Let  us  endeavour 
to  make  our  people  acquainted  with  the  Scripture,  and  to 
impress  them  with  a  high  sense  of  its  authority,  excellence, 
and  sufficiency.  Satan  seldom  remarkably  imposes  on 
ministers  or  people,  except  where  the  Word  of  God  is  too 
little  consulted  or  regarded.  Another  point  in  which  I  aim 
at  a  medium,  is  in  what  is  called  prudence.  There  is  cer 
tainly  such  a  thing  as  Christian  prudence,  and  a  remarkable 
deficiency  of  it  is  highly  inconvenient.  But  caution  too  often 
degenerates  into  cowardice  ;  and  if  the  fear  of  man,  under 
the  name  of  prudence,  gets  within  our  guard,  like  a  chilling 
frost  it  nips  everything  in  the  bud.  Those  who  trust  the 
Lord,  and  act  openly,  with  an  honest  freedom  and  consistence, 
I  observe  He  generally  bears  out,  smooths  their  way,  and 
makes  their  enemies  their  friends,  or  at  least  restrains 
their  rage  ;  while  such  as  halve  things,  temporize,  and  aim 
to  please  God  and  men  together,  meet  with  double  dis 
appointment,  and  are  neither  useful  nor  respected.  If  we  trust 
to  Him,  He  will  stand  by  us  ;  if  we  regard  men,  He  will 
leave  us  to  make  the  best  we  can  of  them. 

I  have  set  down  hastily  what  occurred  to  my  pen,  not 
to  dictate  to  you,  but  to  tell  you  how  I  have  been  led,  and 
because  some  expressions  in  your  letter  seemed  to  imply 
that  you  would  not  be  displeased  with  me  for  so  doing.  As 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART       307 

to  books,  I  think  there  is  a  medium  here  likewise.  I  have 
read  too  much  in  time  past  ;  yet  I  do  not  wholly  join  with 
some  of  our  brethren,  who  would  restrain  us  entirely  to  the 
Word  of  God.  Undoubtedly  this  is  the  fountain  ;  here  we 
should  dwell  :  but  a  moderate  and  judicious  perusal  of 
other  authors  may  have  its  use  ;  and  I  am  glad  to  be 
beholden  to  such  helps,  either  to  explain  what  I  do  not 
understand,  or  to  confirm  me  in  what  I  do.  Of  these,  the 
writings  of  the  last  age  afford  an  immense  variety. 

But,  above  all,  may  we,  dear  Sir,  live  and  feed  upon  the 
precious  promises,  John  xiv.  16,  17,  26  ;  and  xvi.  13 — 15. 
There  is  no  teacher  like  Jesus,  who,  by  His  Holy  Spirit, 
reveals  Himself  in  His  word  to  the  understanding  and  affec 
tions  of  His  children.  When  we  thus  behold  His  glory  in 
the  Gospel  glass,  we  are  changed  into  the  same  image.  Then 
our  hearts  melt,  our  eyes  flow,  our  stammering  tongues  are 
unloosed.  That  this  may  be  your  increasing  experience 
is  the  prayer  of,  dear  Sir, 

Yours,  &c. 


LETTER   III 

DEAR  SIR,  Jan.  21,  1766. 

YOUR  letters  gave  me  the  sincerest  pleasure.  Let  us 
believe  that  we  are  daily  thinking  of  and  praying  for  each 
other,  and  write  when  opportunity  offers,  without  apologies. 
I  praise  the  Lord,  that  He  has  led  so  soon  to  a  settled 
judgment  in  the  leading  truths  of  the  Gospel.  For  want  of 
this,  many  have  been  necessitated,  with  their  own  hands, 
to  pull  down  what,  in  the  first  warm  emotions  of  their  zeal, 
they  had  laboured  hard  to  build.  It  is  a  mercy  likewise, 
to  be  enabled  to  acknowledge  what  is  excellent  in  the  writings 
or  conduct  of  others,  without  adopting  their  singularities, 
or  discarding  the  whole  on  account  of  a  few  blemishes.  We 
should  be  glad  to  receive  instruction  from  all,  and  avoid 
being  led  by  the  ipse  dixit  of  any.  Nullus  jurare  in  verbum, 
is  a  fit  motto  for  those  who  have  one  Master,  even  Christ. 
We  may  grow  wise  apace  in  opinions,  by  books  and  men ; 

u  2 


308  CARDIPHONIA  : 

but  vital  experimental  knowledge  can  only  be  received  from 
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  great  Instructor  and  Comforter  of  His 
people.  And  there  are  two  things  observable  in  His 
teaching :  i.  That  He  honours  the  means  of  His  own 
appointment,  so  that  we  cannot  expect  to  make  any  great 
progress  without  diligence  on  our  parts  :  2.  That  He  does  not 
teach  all  at  once,  but  by  degrees.  Experience  is  His  school ; 
and  by  this  I  mean  the  observation  and  improvement  of 
what,  passeth  between  us  and  around  us  in  the  course  of 
every  day.  The  Word  of  God  affords  a  history  in  miniature 
of  the  heart  of  man,  the  devices  of  Satan,  the  state  of  the 
world,  and  the  method  of  grace.  And  the  most  instructing 
and  affecting  commentary  on  it,  to  an  enlightened  mind 
may  be  gathered  from  what  we  see,  feel,  and  hear,  from  day 
to  day.  Res,  cetas,  usus  semper  aliquid  apportent  novi;  and  no 
knowledge  in  spiritual  things  but  what  we  acquire  in  this 
way  is  properly  our  own,  or  will  abide  the  time  of  trial. 
This  is  not  always  sufficiently  considered  :  we  are  ready  to 
expect  that  others  should  receive  upon  our  word,  in  half  an 
hour's  time,  those  views  of  things  which  have  cost  us  years 
to  attain.  But  none  can  be  brought  forward  faster  than 
the  Lord  is  pleased  to  communicate  inward  light.  Upon 
this  ground,  controversies  have  been  multiplied  among 
Christians  to  little  purpose  ;  for  plants  of  different  standings 
will  be  (cateris  paribus)  in  different  degrees  of  forwardness. 
A  young  Christian  is  like  a  green  fruit  :  it  has  perhaps  a 
disagreeable  austerity,  which  cannot  be  corrected  out  of  its 
proper  course  ;  it  wants  time  and  growth  ;  wait  a  while, 
and  by  the  nourishment  it  receives  from  the  root,  together 
with  the  action  of  the  sun,  wind,  and  rain,  in  succession  from 
without,  it  will  insensibly  acquire  that  flavour  and  maturity, 
for  the  want  of  which  an  unskilful  judge  would  be  ready 
to  reject  it  as  nothing  worth.  We  are  favoured  with  many 
excellent  books  in  our  tongue,  but  I  with  you  agree  in 
assigning  one  of  the  first  places  (as  a  teacher)  to  Dr.  Owen. 
I  have  just  finished  his  discourse  on  the  Holy  Spirit,  which 
is  an  epitome,  if  not  the  masterpiece,  of  his  writings.  I 
should  be  glad  to  see  the  republication  you  speak  of ;  but 
I  question  if  the  booksellers  will  venture  upon  it.  I  shall 
perhaps  mention  it  to  my  London  friends.  As  to  Archbishop 
Leighton,  besides  his  select  works,  there  are  two  octavo 


THE    UTTERANCE    OF    THE    HEART       309 

volumes  published  at  Edinburgh,  in  the  year  1748,  and  since 
reprinted  at  London.  They  contain  a  valuable  commentary 
on  St.  Peter's  First  Epistle,  and  lectures  on  Isa.  vi.  Psal.  xxxix. 
cxxx.  iv.  and  a  part  of  Rom.  xii.  I  have  likewise  a  small 
quarto  in  Latin  of  his  Divinity  Lectures,  when  Professor  at 
Edinburgh  :  the  short  title  is  Prcelectiones  Theologies. 
Mine  was  printed  in  London,  1698.  I  believe  this  book  is 
scarce  ;  I  set  the  highest  value  upon  it.  He  has  wonder- 
full}'  united  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel  with  all  the  captivat 
ing  beauties  of  style  and  language.  Bishop  Burnet  says, 
he  was  the  greatest  master  of  the  Latin  tongue  he  ever  knew, 
of  which  together  with  his  compass  of  learning  he  has  given 
proof  in  his  Lectures  ;  yet  in  his  gayer  dress,  his  eminent 
humility  and  spirituality  appear  to  no  less  advantage  than 
when  clad  in  plain  English.  I  think  it  may  be  said  to  be  a 
diamond  set  in  gold.  I  could  wish  it  translated,  if  it  was 
possible  (which  I  almost  question)  to  preserve  the  beauty 
and  spirit  of  the  original. 

Edwards  on  Free-will  I  have  read  with  pleasure,  as  a  good 
answer  to  the  proud  reasoners  in  their  own  way  ;  but  a  book 
of  that  sort  cannot  be  generally  read  where  the  subject- 
mn+'-.er  is  unpleusmg,  and  the  method  of  treating  it  requires 
more  attention  than  the  Athenian  spirit  of  the  times  will 
bear.  I  wonder  not  if  it  is  uncalled  for;  and  am  afraid  we 
shall  not  see  him  upon  Original  Sin,  if  it  depends  upon  the 
sale  of  the  other.  This  answer  to  Dr.  Taylor,  which  you 
speak  of,  is  not  a  MS.,  but  has  been  already  printed  at 
Boston. 

You  send  us  good  news,  indeed,  that  two  more  of  your 
brethren  are  declaring  on  the  Gospel  side.  The  Lord  confirm 
and  strengthen  them,  and  yet  to  your  numbers,  and  make  you 
helps  and  comforts  to  each  other  !  Surely  He  is  about  to 
spread  His  work.  Happy  those  whom  He  honours  to  be 
fellow- workers  with  Him.  Let  us  account  the  disgrace  we 
suffer  for  His  name's  sake  to  be  our  great  honour.  Many  will 
be  against  us  ;  but  there  are  more  for  us.  All  the  praying 
souls  on  earth,  all  the  glorified  saints  in  heaven,  all  the  angels 
of  God,  yea,  the  God  of  angels  Himself,  are  all  on  our  side. 
Satan  may  rage,  but  he  is  a  chained  enemy.  Men  may 
contradict  and  fight,  but  they  cannot  prevail.  Two  things 
we  shall  especially  need,  courage  and  patience,  that  we 


3io  CARDIPHONIA  : 

neither  faint  before  them,  nor  upon  any  provocation  act 
in  their  spirit.  If  we  can  pity  and  pray  for  them,  return 
good  for  evil,  make  them  sensible  that  we  bear  them  a  hearty 
good-will,  and  act  as  the  disciples  of  Him  who  wept  for  His 
enemies,  and  prayed  for  His  murderers  ;  in  this  way  we  shall 
find  the  Lord  will  plead  our  cause,  soften  opposers,  and  by 
degrees  give  us  a  measure  of  outward  peace.  Warmth  and 
imprudence  have  often  added  to  the  necessary  burden  of 
the  £ross.  I  rejoice  that  the  Lord  has  led  you  in  a  different 
way  ;  and  I  hope  your  doctrine  and  example  will  make  your 
path  smoother  every  day  ;  you  find  it  so  in  part  already.  As 
the  Lord  brings  you  out  a  people,  witnesses  for  you  to  the  truth 
of  His  word,  you  will  find  advantage  in  bringing  them  often 
together.  The  interval  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  is  a  good 
while,  and  affords  time  for  the  world  and  Satan  to  creep 
in.  Intermediate  meetings  for  prayer,  &c.,  when  properly 
conducted,  are  greatly  useful.  I  could  wish  for  larger 
sheets  and  longer  leisure  ;  but  I  am  constrained  to  say 
adieu,  in  our  dear  Lord  and  Saviour, 

Yours,  &c. 


LETTER    IV 

DEAR  SIR,  Dec.  12,  1767. 

THIS  is  not  intended  as  an  answer  to  your  last  acceptable 
letter,  but  an  occasional  line  in  consequence  of  the  account 
Mr.  T—  -  has  given  me  of  your  late  illness.  I  trust  this 
dispensation  will  be  useful  to  you  ;  and  I  wish  the  knowledge 
of  it  may  be  so  to  me.  I  am  favoured  with  an  unusual 
share  of  health,  and  an  equal  flow  of  spirits  If  the  blow 
you  have  received  should  be  a  warning  to  me,  I  shall  have 
cause  to  be  thankful.  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  are  better ; 
I  hope  the  Lord  has  no  design  to  disable  you  from  service, 
but  rather  (as  He  did  Jacob)  to  strengthen  you  by  wounding 
you  ;  to  maintain  and  increase  in  you  that  conviction  which, 
through  grace,  you  have  received  of  the  vanity  and  uncer 
tainty  of  everything  below ;  to  give  you  a  lively  sense  of 
the  value  of  health  and  opportunities,  and  to  add  to  the 


THE    UTTERANCE    OF    THE    HEART       311 

treasury  of  your  experience  new  proofs  of  His  power  and 
goodness,  in  supporting,  comforting,  and  healing  you  ;  and 
likewise  to  quicken  the  prayers  of  your  people  for  you,  and 
to  stir  them  up  to  use  double  diligence  in  the  present  improve 
ment  of  the  means  of  grace,  while  by  this  late  instance  they 
see  how  soon  and  suddenly  you  might  have  been  removed 
from  them. 

I  understand  you  did  not  feel  that  lively  exercise  of  faith 
and  joy  which  you  would  have  hoped  to  have  found  at  such 
a  season  :    but  let  not  this  discourage  you  from  a  firm 
confidence,  that  when  the  hour  of  dismission  shall  come, 
the  Lord  will  be  faithful  to  His  gracious  promise,  and  give 
you  strength  sufficient  to  encounter  and  vanquish  your  last 
enemy.     You  had  not  this  strength  lately  because  you  needed 
it  not :   for  though  you  might  think  yourself  near  to  death, 
the  Lord  intended  to  restore  you  ;    and  He  permitted  you 
to  feel  weakness,  that  you  might  know  your  strength  does 
not  consist  in  grace  received,  but  in  His  fulness,  and  His 
promise  to  communicate  from  Himself  as  your  occasions 
require.     O  it  is  a  great  thing  to  be  strong  in  the  grace  that 
is  in  Christ  Jesus  !    but  it  is  a  hard  lesson  ;    it  is  not  easy 
to  understand  it  in  theory  ;   but  when  the  Lord  has  taught 
us  so  far,  it  is  still  more  difficult  to  reduce  our  knowledge 
to  practice.     But  this  is  one  end  He  has  in  view,  permitting 
us  to  pass  through  such  a  variety  of  inward  and  outward 
exercises,  that  we  may  cease  from  trusting  in  ourselves,  or 
in  any  creature,  or  frame,    or  experiences,  and  be  brought 
to  a  state  of  submission  and  dependence  upon  Him  alone. 
I  was  once  visited  somewhat  in  the  same  way,  seized  with  a 
nt  of  the  apoplectic  kind,  which  held  me  nearly  an  hour 
and  left  a  disorder  in  my  head,  wrhich  quite  bmke  the  scheme 
of  life  I  was  then  in,  and  was  consequently  one  of  the 
means  the  Lord  appointed  to  bring  me  into  the  ministry  ; 
but   I   soon  perfectly  recovered.     From  the  remembrance 
Mrs.  -     -  has  of  what  she  then  suffered,  she  knows  how  to 
sympathize  with  Mrs.   B—    -  in  her  share  of  your  trial. 
And  I  think  dear  Mr.  -     -  some  years  since  had  a  sudden 
stroke  on  a  Christmas  day,  which  disabled  him  from  duty 
for  a  time.     To  him  and  to  me  these  turns  were  only  like 
the  caution  which  Philip  of  Macedon  ordered  to  be  repeated 
to   him   every   morning,    "  Remember   thou   art   a   man." 


3I2  CARDIPHONIA  : 

I  hope  it  will  be  no  more  to  you,  but  that  you  shall  live  to 
praise  Him,  and  to  give  many  cause  to  praise  Him  on  your 
behalf.  Blessed  be  God,  we  are  in  safe  hands  ;  the  Lord 
Himself  is  our  keeper  ;  nothing  befals  us  but  what  is  adjusted 
by  His  wisdom  and  love.  Health  is  His  gift  ;  and  sickness, 
when  sanctified,  is  a  token  of  love  likewise.  Here  we  may 
meet  with  many  things  which  are  not  joyous,  but  grievous 
to  the  flesh  ;  but  He  will,  in  one  way  or  other,  sweeten  every 
bitter  cup,  and  ere  long  He  will  wipe  away  all  tears  from 
our  eyes.  O  that  joy,  that  crown,  that  glory  which  awaits 
the  believer  !  Let  us  keep  the  prize  of  our  high  calling  in 
view,  and  press  forward  in  the  name  of  Jesus  the  Redeemer, 
and  He  wifl  not  disappoint  our  hopes. 

I  am  but  just  come  oft  from  a  journey,  am  weary,  and  it 
grows  late  ;  must  therefore  break  off.  When  you  have 
leisure  and  strength  to  write,  oblige  me  with  a  confirmation 
of  your  recovery,  for  I  shall  be  somewhat  anxious  about 
you. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   V 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  March  14,  1775. 

I  THOUGHT  you  long  in  writing,  but  am  afraid  I  have 
been  longer.  A  heavy  family  affliction  called  me  from 
home  in  December,  which  put  me  out  of  my  usual  course, 
and  threw  me  behind-hand  in  my  correspondence  ;  yet  I 
did  not  suspect  the  date  of  your  last  letter  was  so  old  by  two 
months  as  I  find  it.  Whether  I  write  more  frequently,  or 
more  seldom,  the  love  of  my  heart  to  you  is  the  same,  and  I 
shall  believe  the  like  of  you ;  yet,  if  it  can  be  helped,  I  hope 
the  interval  will  not  be  so  long  again  on  either  side.  I  am 
glad  that  the  Lord's  work  still  flourishes  in  your  parts,  and 
that  you  have  a  more  comfortable  prospect  at  home  than 
formerly ;  and  I  was  pleased  with  the  acceptance  you 
found  at  S —  -  ;  which  I  hope  will  be  an  earnest  of  greater 
things.  I  think  affairs  in  general,  with  respect  to  this  land, 
have  a  dark  appearance  ;  but  it  is  comfortable  to  observe, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   313 

that  amidst  the  aboundings  of  iniquity,  the  Lord  is  spreading 
His  Gospel ;  and  that,  though  many  oppose,  yet  in  most 
places  whither  the  word  is  sent,  great  numbers  seem  disposed 
to  hear.  I  am  going  (if  the  Lord  please)  into  Leicestershire 
on  Friday.  This  was  lately  such  a  dark  place  as  you  describe 
your  country  to  be,  and  much  of  it  is  so  still ;  but  the  Lord 
has  visited  three  of  the  principal  towns  with  Gospel-light. 
I  have  a  desire  of  visiting  these  brethren  in  the  vineyard, 
to  bear  my  poor  testimony  to  the  truths  they  preach,  and 
to  catch,  if  I  may,  a  little  fire  and  fervour  among  them.  I 
do  not  often  go  abroad  ;  but  I  have  found  a  little  excursion 
now  and  then  (when  the  way  is  made  plain)  has  its  advan 
tages,  to  quicken  the  spirits,  and  enlarge  the  sphere  of  obser 
vation.  On  these  accounts,  the  recollection  of  my  N— 
journey  gives  me  pleasure  to  this  day  ;  and  very  glad  should 
I  be  to  repeat  it  ;  but  the  distance  is  so  great,  that  I  consider 
it  rather  as  desirable  than  practicable. 

My  experiences  vary  as  well  as  yours  :  but  possibly  your 
sensations,  both  of  the  sweet  and  of  the  bitter,  may  be 
stronger  than  mine.  The  enemy  assaults  me  more  by  sap 
than  storm  !  and  I  am  ready  to  think  I  suffer  more  by 
languor  than  some  of  my  friends  do  by  the  sharper  conflicts 
to  which  they  are  called.  So  likewise  in  these  seasons, 
which  comparatively  I  call  my  best  hours,  my  sensible 
comforts  are  far  from  lively.  But  I  am  in  general  enabled 
to  hold  fast  my  confidence,  and  to  venture  myself  upon  the 
power,  faithfulness,  and  compassion  of  that  adorable  Saviour 
to  whom  my  soul  has  been  directed  and  encouraged  to  flee 
for  refuge.  I  am  a  poor,  changeable,  inconsistent  creature  ; 
but  He  deals  graciously  with  me  ;  He  does  not  leave  me 
wholly  to  myself ;  but  I  have  such  daily  proofs  of  the 
malignity  of  the  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me,  as  ought  to  cover 
me  with  shame  and  confusion  of  face,  and  make  me  thankful 
if  I  am  permitted  to  rank  with  the  meanest  of  those  who  sit 
at  His  feet.  That  I  was  ever  called  to  the  knowledge  of  His 
salvation,  was  a  singular  instance  of  His  sovereign  grace  ; 
and  that  I  am  still  preserved  in  the  way  in  defiance  of  all 
that  has  arisen  from  within  and  from  without  to  turn  me 
aside,  must  be  wholly  ascribed  to  the  same  sovereignty  ; 
and  if,  as  I  trust,  He  shall  be  pleased  to  make  me  a  conqueror 
at  last,  I  shall  have  peculiar  reason  to  say,  "Not  unto  me, 


314  CAKDIPHONIA  : 

not  unto  me,  but  unto  Thy  name,  O  Lord,  be  the  glory  and 
the  praise  !  " 

How  oft  have  sin  and  Satan  strove 
To  rend  my  soul  from  Thee,  my  God  ! 

But  everlasting  is  Thy  love, 
And  Jesus  seals  it  with  His  blood. 

The  Lord  leads  me  in  the  course  of  my  preaching  to  insist 
much  on  a  life  of  communion  with  Himself,  and  of  the  great 
design  of  the  Gospel  to  render  us  conformable  to  Him  in 
love ;  and  as  by  His  mercy  nothing  appears  in  my  outward 
conduct  remarkably  to  contradict  what  I  say,  many  who 
only  can  judge  by  what  they  see,  suppose  I  live  a  very  happy 
life.  But,  alas  !  if  they  knew  what  passes  in  my  heart,  how 
dull  my  spirit  is  in  secret,  and  how  little  I  am  myself  affected 
by  the  glorious  truths  I  propose  to  others,  they  would  form 
a  different  judgment.  Could  I  be  myself  what  I  recommend 
to  them,  I  should  be  happy  indeed.  Pray  for  me,  my  dear 
friend,  that  now  the  Lord  is  bringing  forward  the  pleasing 
spring,  He  may  favour  me  with  a  spring  season  in  my  soul  ; 
for  indeed  I  mourn  under  a  long  winter. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    VI 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  April  16,  1772. 

I  HOPE  the  Lord  has  contracted  my  desires  and  aims 
almost  to  the  one  point  of  study,  the  knowledge  of  His 
truth.  All  other  acquisitions  are  transient,  and  compara 
tively  vain.  And  yet,  alas  !  I  am  a  slow  scholar  ;  nor  can 
I  see  in  what  respect  I  get  forward,  unless  that  every  day 
I  am  more  confirmed  in  the  conviction  of  my  own  emptiness 
and  inability  to  all  spiritual  good.  And  as  notwithstanding 
this,  I  am  still  enabled  to  stand  my  ground,  I  would  hope, 
since  no  effect  can  be  without  an  adequate  cause,  that  I 
have  made  some  advance,  though  in  a  manner  imperceptible 
to  myself,  towards  a  more  simple  dependence  upon  Jesus  as 
my  all  in  all.  It  is  given  me  to  thirst  and  to  taste,  if  it  is  not 
given  me  to  drink  abundantly  ;  and  I  would  be  thankful  for 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   315 

the  desire.  I  see  and  approve  the  wisdom,  grace,  suit 
ableness,  and  sufficiency  of  the  Gospel-salvation ;  and 
since  it  is  for  sinners,  and  I  am  a  sinner,  and  the  promises 
are  open,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  call  it  mine.  I  am  a  weary, 
laden  soul ;  Jesus  has  invited  me  to  come,  and  has  enabled 
me  to  put  my  trust  in  Him.  I  seldom  have  an  uneasy  doubt, 
at  least  not  of  any  continuance,  respecting  my  pardon, 
acceptance,  and  interest  in  all  the  blessings  of  the  New 
Testament.  And,  amidst  a  thousand  infirmities  and  evils 
under  which  I  groan,  I  have  the  testimony  of  my  conscience 
when  under  the  trial  of  His  word,  that  my  desire  is  sincerely 
towards  Him,  that  I  choose  no  other  portion,  that  I  allowedly 
serve  no  other  master.  When  I  told  our  friend  -  -  lately 
to  this  purpose,  he  wondered,  and  asked,  "  How  is  it  possible 
that,  if  you  can  say  these  things,  you  should  not  be  always 
rejoicing  ?  "  Undoubtedly  I  derive  from  the  Gospel  a  peace 
at  bottom  which  is  worth  more  than  a  thousand  worlds  : 
but  so  it  is,  I  can  only  speak  for  myself  though  I  rest  and 
live  upon  the  truths  of  the  Gospel,  they  seldom  impress  me 
with  a  warm  and  lively  joy.  In  public,  indeed,  I  sometimes 
seem  in  earnest,  and  much  affected  ;  but  even  then  it  appears 
to  me  rather  as  a  part  of  the  gift  intrusted  to  me  for  the 
edification  of  others,  than  as  a  sensation  which  is  properly 
my  own.  For  when  I  am  in  private,  I  am  usually  dull  and 
stupid  to  a  strange  degree,  or  the  prey  to  a  wild  and  ungov- 
erned  imagination  ;  so  that  I  may  truly  say,  when  I  would 
do  good,  evil,  horrid  evil,  is  present  with  me.  Ah,  how 
different  is  this  from  sensible  comfort !  and  if  I  were  to 
compare  myself  to  others,  to  make  their  experience  my 
standard,  and  were  not  helped  to  retreat  to  the  sure  Word  of 
God  as  my  refuge,  how  hard  should  I  find  it  to  maintain  a 
hope,  that  I  had  either  part  or  lot  in  the  matter  !  \Vhat  I 
call  my  good  times  are,  when  I  can  find  my  attention  in 
some  little  measure  fixed  to  what  I  am  about,  which  indeed 
is  not  always  nor  frequently  my  case  in  prayer,  and  still 
seldomer  in  reading  the  Scripture.  My  judgment  embraces 
these  means  as  blessed  privileges,  and  Satan  has  not  prevailed 
to  drive  me  from  them  ;  but  in  the  performance,  I  too  often 
find  them  tasks, — feel  a  reluctance  when  the  seasons  return, 
— and  am  glad  when  they  are  finished.  O  what  a  mystery 
is  the  heart  of  man !  What  a  warfare  is  the  life  of  faith  (at 


316  CARDIPHONIA  : 

least  in  the  path  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  lead  me) !  What 
reason  have  I  to  lie  in  the  dust  as  the  chief  of  sinners  !  and 
what  cause  for  thankfulness  that  salvation  is  wholly  of  grace  ! 
Notwithstanding  all  my  complaints,  it  is  still  tnie  that  Jesus 
died  and  rose  again,  that  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession, 
and  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  to  think  of  that  joy  of  heart  in  which  some  of  His 
people  live,  and  to  compare  it  with  that  apparent  deadness 
and  want  of  spirituality  which  I  feel,  this  makes  me  mourn. 
Ho\wver,  I  think  there  is  a  Scriptural  distinction  between 
faith  and  feeling,  grace  and  comfort  ;  they  are  not  insepar 
able,  and  perhaps  when  together,  the  degree  of  the  one  is  not 
often  the  just  measure  of  the  other.  But  though  I  pray  that 
I  may  be  ever  longing  and  panting  for  the  light  of  His 
countenance,  yet  I  would  be  so  far  satisfied,  as  to  believe 
the  Lord  has  \vise  and  merciful  reasons  for  keeping  me  so 
short  of  the  comforts  which  He  has  taught  me  to  desire  and 
value  more  than  the  light  of  the  sun. 

I  am,  &c. 


NINE     LETTERS 

TO    THE 

REV.    MR.   R 

LETTER    I 

DEAR  SIR,  Jan.  16,  1772. 

IT  is  true,  I  was  apprehensive,  from  your  silence,  that 
I  had  offended  you  ;  but  when  your  letter  came,  it  made 
me  full  amends  ;  and  now  I  am  glad  I  wrote  as  I  did,  though 
I  am  persuaded  I  shall  never  write  to  you  again  in  the  same 
strain.  I  am  pleased  with  the  spirit  you  discover  ;  and  your 
bearing  so  well  to  be  told  of  the  mistakes  I  pointed  out  to 
you,  endears  you  more  to  me  than  if  you  had  not  made  them. 
Henceforward  I  can  converse  freely  with  you,  and  shall  be 
glad  when  I  have  the  opportunity. 

As  to  your  view  of  justification,  I  did  not  oppose  it ; 
I  judge  for  myself,  and  I  am  willing  others  should  have  the 
same  liberty,  If  we  hold  the  head,  and  love  the  Lord,  we 
agree  in  Him  ;  and  I  should  think  my  time  ill  employed  in 
disputing  the  point  with  you.  I  only  meant  to  except 
against  the  positive  manner  in  which  you  had  expressed 
yourself.  My  end  is  answered,  and  I  am  satisfied.  Indeed, 
I  believe  the  difference  between  a  judicious  Supra-lapsarian, 
and  a  sound  Sub-la psarian,  lies  more  in  a  different  way  of 
expressing  their  sentiments  than  is  generally  thought. 
At  the  close  of  Halyburton's  Insufficiency  of  Natural 
Religion,  he  has  an  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Regeneration 
and  Justification,  wherein  he  proposes  a  scheme,  in  which, 
if  I  mistake  not,  the  moderate  of  both  parties  might  safely 
unite.  I  have  used  the  epithets  judicious  and  sound, 
because,  as  I  acknowledge  some  of  the  one  side  are  not 
quite  sound,  so  I  think  some  on  the  other  side  are  not  so 


3i8  CARDIPHONIA  : 

judicious  as  I  could  wish  ;  that  is,  I  think  they  do  not 
sufficiently  advert  to  the  present  state  of  human  nature, 
and  the  danger  which  may  arise  from  leading  those  who  are 
weak  in  faith  and  judgment,  into  inquiries  and  distinctions 
evidently  beyond  the  line  of  their  experience,  and  which 
may  be  hurtful ;  because,  admitting  them  to  be  true 
when  properly  explained,  they  are  very  liable  to  be  mis 
understood.  To  say  nothing  of  Mr.  Hussey  (in  whose 
provisions  I  have  frequently  found  more  bones  than  meat, 
and'  the  whole  seasoned  with  much  of  an  angry  and  self- 
important  spirit),  I  have  observed  passages  in  other  writers, 
for  whom  I  have  a  higher  esteem,  which,  to  say  the  least, 
appear  to  me  paradoxical,  and  hard  to  be  understood  ; 
though  perhaps  I  can  give  my  consent  to  them,  if  I  had  such 
restrictions  and  limitations  as  the  authors  would  not  refuse. 
But  plain  people  are  easily  puzzled.  And  though  I  know 
several  in  the  Supra-lapsarian  scheme,  at  whose  feet  I  am 
willing  to  sit  and  learn,  and  have  found  their  preaching  and 
conversation  savoury  and  edifying,  yet  I  must  say  I  have 
met  with  many  who  have  appeared  to  be  rather  wise  than 
warm,  rather  positive  than  humble,  rather  captious  than 
lively,  and  more  disposed  to  talk  of  speculations  than 
experience.  However,  let  us  give  ourselves  to  the  study 
of  the  Word  and  to  prayer ;  and  may  the  great  Teacher 
make  every  Scriptural  truth  food  to  our  souls.  I  desire 
to  grow  in  knowledge,  but  I  want  nothing  which  bears  that 
name,  that  has  not  a  direct  tendency  to  make  sin  more 
hateful,  Jesus  more  precious  to  my  soul,  and  at  the  same 
time  to  animate  me  to  a  diligent  use  of  every  appointed 
means,  and  an  unreserved  regard  to  every  branch  of  duty. 
I  think  the  Lord  has  shown  me  in  a  measure,  there  is  a 
consistent  sense  running  through  the  whole  Scripture,  and 
I  desire  to  be  governed  and  influenced  by  it  all :  doctrines, 
precepts,  promises,  warnings,  all  have  their  proper  place 
and  use  ;  and  I  think  many  of  the  inconveniences  which 
obtain  in  the  present  day,  spring  from  separating  those 
things  which  God  hath  joined  together,  and  insisting  on 
some  pzj-ts  of  the  word  of  God,  almost  to  the  exclusion  of 
the  rest. 

I  have  fried  my  paper  with  what  I  did  not  intend  to  say 
a  word  of  \vh\r\  I  began,  and  I  must  leave  other  tlu'ngs  which 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   319 

were  more  upon  my  mind  for  another  season.  I  thank  you 
for  saying  you  pray  for  me.  Continue  that  kindness  ;  I 
both  need  it  and  prize  it. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

DEAR  SIR,  July  31,  1773. 

I  RECEIVED  your  sorrowing  epistle  yesterday,  and,  in 
order  to  encourage  you  to  write,  I  answer  it  to-day. 

The  ship  was  safe  when  Christ  was  in  her,  though  He  was 
really  asleep.  At  present  I  can  tell  you  good  news,  though 
you  know  it ;  He  is  wide  awake,  and  His  eyes  are  in  every 
place.  You  and  I,  if  we  could  be  pounded  together,  might 
perhaps  make  two  tolerable  ones.  You  are  too  anxious, 
and  I  am  too  easy  in  some  respects.  Indeed  I  cannot  be  too 
easy,  when  I  have  a  right  thought  that  all  is  safe  in  His 
hands  ;  but  if  your  anxiety  makes  you  pray,  and  my  com 
posure  makes  me  careless,  you  have  certainly  the  best  of  it. 
However,  the  ark  is  fixed  upon  an  immovable  foundation  ; 
and  if  we  think  we  see  it  totter,  it  is  owing  to  a  swimming 
in  our  heads.  Seriously,  the  times  look  dark  and  stormy, 
and  call  for  much  circumspection  and  prayer ;  but  let  us 
not  forget  that  we  have  an  infallible  Pilot,  and  that  the 
power,  and  wisdom,  and  honour  of  God  are  embarked  with 
us.  At  Venice  they  have  a  fine  vessel  called  the  Bucentaur, 
in  which,  on  a  certain  day  of  the  year,  the  doge  and  nobles 
embark,  and  go  a  little  way  to  sea,  to  repeat  the  foolish 
ceremony  of  marriage  between  the  Republic  and  the  Adriatic 
(in  consequence  of  some  flying,  antiquated  Pope's  bull,  by 
which  the  banns  of  matrimony  between  Venice  and  the 
Gulf  were  published  in  the  dark  ages),  when,  they  say,  a 
gold  ring  is  very  gravely  thrown  overboard.  Upon  this 
occasion,  I  have  been  told,  when  the  honour  and  govern 
ment  of  Venice  are  shipped  on  board  the  Bucentaur,  the  pilot 
is  obliged  by  his  office  to  take  an  oath  that  he  will  bring  the 
vessel  safely  back  again  in  defiance  of  wind  and  weather. 
Vain  mortals  I  If  this  be  true,  what  an  instance  of  God's 


320  CAKDIPHOXrA  : 

long-suffering  is  it,  that  they  have  never  yet  sunk  as  lead  in 
the  mighty  waters  !  But  my  story  will  probably  remind 
you,  that  Jesus  has  actually  entered  into  such  an  engagement 
in  behalf  of  His  Church.  And  well  He  may,  for  both  wind 
and  weather  are  at  His  command  ;  and  He  can  turn  the 
storm  into  a  calm  in  a  moment.  We  may,  therefore,  safely 
and  confidently  leave  the  government  upon  His  shoulders. 
Duty  is  our  part,  the  care  is  His. 

A  revival  is  wanted  with  us  as  well  as  with  you,  and  I 
trust  some  of  us  are  longing  for  it.  We  are  praying  and 
singing  for  one  ;  and  I  send  you,  on  the  other  side,  a  hymn 
that  you  (if  you  like  it)  may  sing  with  us.  Let  us  take 
courage  ;  though  it  may  seem  marvellous  in  our  eyes, 
it  is  not  so  in  the  Lord's.  He  changed  the  desert  into  a 
fruitful  field,  and  bade  dry  bones  live.  And  if  we  prepare 
our  hearts  to  pray,  he  will  surely  incline  His  ear  to  hear. 

The  miscarriages  of  professors  are  grievous ;  yet  such 
things  must  be  ;  how  else  could  the  Scriptures  be  fulfilled  ? 
But  there  is  One  who  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling.  Some 
who  have  distressed  us,  perhaps  never  were  truly  changed  ; 
how  then  could  they  stand  ?  We  see  only  the  outside. 
Others  who  are  sincere  are  permitted  to  fall  for  our  instruc 
tion,  that  we  may  not  be  high-minded,  but  fear.  However, 
he  that  walketh  humbly,  walketh  surely. 

Believe  me,  &c. 


LETTER    III 
DEAR  SIR,  Feb.  22,  1774. 

YOUR  letter  by  last  post  surprised  and  grieved  me. 
We  knew  nothing  of  the  subject,  though  Mrs.  -  —  remembers 
when  W—  -  was  here,  a  hint  or  two  were  dropped  which 
she  did  not  understand  ;  but  no  name  was  mentioned. 

This  instance  shows  the  danger  of  leaning  to  impressions. 
Texts  of  Scripture,  brought  powerfully  to  the  heart,  are 
very  desirable  and  pleasant,  if  their  tendency  is  to  humble 
us,  to  give  us  a  more  feeling  sense  of  the  preciousness  of 
Christ,  or  of  the  doctrines  of  grace  ;  if  they  make  sin  more 
hateful,  enliven  our  reeard  to  the  means,  or  increase  our 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   321 

confidence  in  the  power  and  faithfulness  of  God.  But  if 
they  are  understood  as  intimating  our  path  of  duty  in  par 
ticular  circumstances,  or  confirming  us  in  purposes  we  may 
have  already  formed,  not  otherwise  clearly  warranted  by 
the  general  strain  of  the  Word,  or  by  the  leadings  of  Provi 
dence,  they  are  for  the  most  part  ensnaring,  and  always  to 
be  suspected.  Nor  does  their  coming  into  the  mind  at  the 
time  of  prayer  give  them  more  authority  in  this  respect. 
When  the  mind  is  intent  upon  any  subject,  the  imagination 
is  often  watchful  to  catch  at  anything  which  may  seem  to 
countenance  the  favourite  pursuit.  It  is  too  common  to 
ask  counsel  of  the  Lord  when  we  have  already  secretly 
determined  for  ourselves  ;  and  in  this  disposition  we 
may  easily  be  deceived  by  the  sound  of  a  text  of  Scripture, 
which,  detached  from  the  passage  in  which  it  stands,  may 
seem  remarkably  to  tally  with  our  wishes.  Many  have  been 
deceived  in  this  way  ;  and  sometimes,  when  the  event  has 
shown  them  they  were  mistaken,  it  has  opened  a  door  for 
great  distress,  and  Satan  has  found  occasion  to  make  them 
doubt  even  of  their  most  solid  experiences. 

I  have  sometimes  talked  to  -  -  upon  this  subject, 
though  without  the  least  suspicion  of  anything  like  what 
has  happened.  As  to  the  present  case,  it  may  remind 
us  all  of  our  weakness.  I  would  recommend  prayer,  patience, 
much  tenderness  towards  her,  joined  with  faithful  expostula 
tion.  Wait  a  little  while,  and  I  trust  the  Lord  who  loves 
her  will  break  the  snare.  I  am  persuaded,  in  her  better 
judgment,  she  would  dread  the  thoughts  of  doing  wrong; 
and  I  hope  and  believe  the  good  Shepherd,  to  whom  she 
has  often  committed  her  soul  and  her  ways,  will  interpose 
to  restore  and  set  her  to  rights.  ***** 

********** 

*  *  I  am  sorry  you  think  any  of  whom  you  have 
hoped  well  are  going  back  ;  but  be  not  discouraged.  I  say 
again,  pray  and  wait,  and  hope  the  best.  It  is  common  for 
young  professors  to  have  a  slack  time  ;  it  is  almost  necessary, 
that  they  may  be  more  sensible  of  the  weakness  and  deceit- 
fulness  of  their  hearts,  and  be  more  humbled  in  future 
when  the  Lord  shall  have  healed  their  breaches,  and  restored 
their  souls.  We  join  love  to  you  and  yours.  Pray  for  us, 

I  am,  &c. 
c.  x 


322  CARDIPHONTA 


LETTER    IV 

DEAR  SIR,  Feb.  3,  1775. 

Tr  would  be  wrong  to  make  you  wait  long  for  an  answer 
to  the  point  you  propose  in  your  last.  It  is  an  important 
one.  I  am  not  a  casuist  by  profession,  but  I  will  do  my 
best.  Suppose  I  imitate  your  laconic  manner  of  stating  the 
question  and  circumstances. 

I  doubt  not  but  it  is  very  lawful  at  your  age  to  think  of 
marriage,  and,  in  the  situation  you  describe,  to  think  of 
money  likewise.  I  am  glad  you  have  no  persons,  as  you 
say,  fixedly  in  view  ;  in  that  case,  advice  comes  a  post  or 
two  too  late.  But  your  expression  seems  to  intimate,  that 
there  is  one  transiently  in  view.  If  so,  since  you  have  no 
settlement,  if  she  has  no  money,  I  cannot  but  wish  she  may 
pass  on  till  she  is  out  of  sight  and  out  of  mind.  I  see  this 
will  not  do  ;  I  must  get  into  my  own  grave  way  about  this 
grave  business.  I  take  it  for  granted,  that  my  friend  is  free 
from  the  love  of  filthy  lucre  ;  and  that  money  will  never  be 
the  turning  point  with  you  in  the  choice  of  a  wife.  Methinks 
I  hear  you  say,  if  I  wanted  money,  I  would  either  dig  or 
beg  for  it  ;  but  to  preach  or  marry  for  money,  that  be  far 
from  me.  I  commend  you.  However,  though  the  love  of 
money  be  a  great  evil,  money  itself,  obtained  in  a  fair  and 
honourable  way,  is  desirable  upon  many  accounts,  though 
not  for  its  own  sake.  Meat,  clothes,  fire  and  books,  cannot 
easily  be  had  without  it ;  therefore,  if  these  be  necessary, 
mono}',  which  procures  them,  must  be  a  necessary  likewise. 
If  things  were  otherwise  than  you  represent  them,  if  you 
were  able  to  provide  for  a  wife  yourself,  then  I  would  say, 
Find  a  gracious  girl  (if  she  be  not  found  already),  whose 
person  you  like,  whose  temper  you  think  will  suit  ;  and  then, 
with  your  father  and  mother's  consent  (without  which  I 
think  you  would  be  unwilling  to  move),  thank  the  Lord  for 
her,  marry  her,  and  account  her  a  valuable  portion,  though 
she  should  not  have  a  shilling.  But  while  you  are  without 
income  or  settlement,  if  you  have  thoughts  of  marriage,  I 
hope  they  will  be  regulated  by  a  due  regard  to  consequences. 
They  who  set  the  least  value  upon  money,  have  in  some 
respects  the  most  need  of  it.  A  generous  mind  will  feel  a 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   323 

thousand  pangs  in  strait  circumstances,  which  some  unfeeling 
hearts  would  not  be  sensible  of.  You  could  perhaps  endure 
hardships  alone,  yet  it  might  pinch  you  to  the  very  bone  to 
see  the  person  you  love  exposed  to  them.  Besides,  you 
might  have  a  John,  a  Thomas,  and  a  William,  and  a  half 
dozen  more  to  feed  (for  they  must  all  eat)  ;  and  how  this 
could  be  done  without  a  competency  on  one  side  or  the 
other,  or  so  much  on  both  sides  as  will  make  a  competency 
when  united,  I  see  not.  Besides,  you  would  be  grieved  not 
to  find  an  occasional  shilling  in  your  pocket  to  bestow  upon 
one  or  other  of  the  Lord's  poor,  though  you  should  be  able 
to  make  some  sort  of  a  shift  for  those  of  your  own  house. 

But  is  it  not  written,  "  The  Lord  will  provide  "  ?  It  is  : 
but  it  is  written  again,  "  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy 
God."  Hastily  to  plunge  ourselves  into  difficulties  upon  a 
persuasion  that  He  will  find  some  way  to  extricate  us,  seems 
to  me  a  species  of  tempting  Him. 

Therefore,  I  judge  it  so  far  lawful  for  you  to  have  a  regard 
to  money  in  looking  out  for  a  wife,  that  it  would  be  wrong, 
that  is,  in  other  words,  unlawful  for  you  to  omit  it,  supposing 
you  have  a  purpose  of  marrying  in  your  present  situation. 

Many  serious  young  women  have  a  predilection  in  favour 
of  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  :  and  I  believe  among  such,  one 
or  more  may  be  found  as  spiritual,  as  amiable,  as  suitable 
to  make  you  a  good  wife,  with  a  tolerable  fortune  to  boot, 
as  another  who  has  not  a  penny.  If  you  are  not  willing  to 
trust  your  own  judgment  in  the  search,  intreat  the  Lord  to 
find  her  for  you.  He  chose  well  for  Isaac  and  Jacob  ; 
and  you,  as  a  believer,  have  warrant  to  commit  your  way 
to  Him,  and  many  more  express  promises  than  they  had  for 
your  encouragement.  He  knows  your  state,  your  wants, 
what  you  are  at  present,  and  what  use  He  designs  to  make 
of  you.  Trust  in  Him,  and  wait  for  Him  :  prayer,  and  faith, 
and  patience,  are  never  disappointed.  I  commend  you  to 
His  blessing  and  guidance.  Remember  us  to  all  in  your 
house. 

I  am,  &c. 


X2 


324  CARDIPHONIA  : 

LETTER    V 

DEAR  SIR,  May  28,  1775. 

********** 

*  *  *  You  must  not  expect  a  long 
letter  this  morning  ;  we  are  just  going  to  Court,  in  hopes 
of  seeing  the  King,  for  He  has  promised  to  meet  us.  We 
can  say  He  is  mindful  of  his  promise  ;  and  yet  it  is  not 
strange  that  though  we  are  all  in  the  same  place,  and  the 
King  in  the  midst  of  us,  it  is  but  here  and  there  one  (even  of 
those  who  love  Him)  can  see  Him  at  once  !  However,  in  our 
turns,  we  are  all  favoured  with  a  glimpse  of  Him,  and  have 
had  cause  to  say,  How  great  is  His  goodness  !  How  great 
is  His  beauty  !  We  have  the  advantage  of  the  Queen  of 
Sheba,  a  more  glorious  object  to  behold,  and  not  so  far  to 
go  for  the  sight  of  it.  If  a  transient  glance  exceed  all  that 
the  world  can  afford  for  a  long  continuance,  what  must  it  be 
to  dwell  with  Him  !  If  a  day  in  His  courts  be  better  than 
a  thousand,  what  will  eternity  be  in  His  presence  !  I  hope 
the  more  you  see,  the  more  you  love  ;  the  more  you  drink, 
the  more  you  thirst ;  the  more  you  do  for  Him,  the  more 
you  are  ashamed  you  can  do  so  little  ;  and  that  the  nearer 
you  approach  to  your  journey's  end,  the  more  your  pace  is 
quickened.  Surely,  the  power  of  spiritual  attraction  should 
increase  as  the  distance  lessens.  O  that  heavenly  load-stone  ! 
May  it  so  draw  us,  that  we  may  not  creep,  but  run.  In 
common  travelling,  the  strongest  become  weary  if  the 
journey  be  very  long  ;  but  in  the  spiritual  journey  we  are 
encouraged  with  the  hope  of  going  on  from  strength  to 
strength  ;  instaurabit  iter  vires,  as  Johnson  expresses  it. 
No  road  but  the  road  to  Heaven  can  thus  communicate 
refreshment  to  those  who  walk  in  it,  and  make  them  more 
fresh  and  lively  when  they  are  just  finishing  their  courses 
than  when  they  first  set  out. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE   HEART       325 


LETTER    VI 

DEAR  SIR,  April  18,  1776. 

ARE  you  sick,  or  lame  of  your  right  hand,  or  are  you 
busy  in  preparing  a  folio  for  the  press,  that  I  hear  nothing 
from  you  ?  You  see,  by  the  excuses  I  would  contrive,  I  am 
not  willing  to  suppose  you  have  forgotten  me,  but  that 
your  silence  is  rather  owing  to  a  cannot  than  a  will  not. 

I  hope  your  soul  prospers.  I  do  not  ask  you,  if  you  are 
always  filled  with  sensible  comfort ;  but,  do  you  find  your 
spirit  more  bowed  down  to  the  feet  and  will  of  Jesus,  so  as 
to  be  willing  to  serve  Him  for  the  sake  of  serving  Him,  and 
to  follow  Him,  as  we  say,  through  thick  and  thin,  to  be 
willing  to  be  anything  or  nothing,  so  that  He  may  be  glorified. 
I  could  give  you  plenty  of  good  advice  upon  this  head  ; 
but  I  am  ashamed  to  do  it,  because  I  so  poorly  follow 
myself.  I  want  to  live  with  Him  by  the  day,  to  do  all  for 
Him,  to  receive  all  from  Him,  to  possess  all  in  Him,  to  live 
all  to  Him,  to  make  Him  my  hiding-place  and  my  resting- 
place.  I  want  to  deliver  up  that  rebel  Self  to  him  in  chains  ; 
but  the  rogue,  like  Proteus,  puts  on  so  many  forms,  that 
he  slips  through  my  fingers  :  but  I  think  I  know  what  I  would 
do  if  I  could  fairly  catch  him. 

My  soul  is  like  a  besieged  city  :  a  legion  of  enemies  without 
the  gates,  and  a  nest  of  restless  traitors  within,  that  hold  a 
correspondence  with  them  without ;  so  that  I  am  deceived 
and  counteracted  continually.  It  is  a  mercy  that  I  have 
not  been  surprised  and  overwhelmed  long  ago  :  without  help 
from  on  high,  it  would  soon  be  over  with  me.  How  often 
have  I  been  forced  to  cry  out,  O  God,  the  heathen  are  got 
into  thine  inheritance  ;  thy  holy  temple  have  they  defiled, 
and  defaced  all  thy  work  !  Indeed,  it  is  a  miracle  that  I 
still  hold  out.  I  trust,  however,  I  shall  be  supported  to  the 
end,  and  that  the  Lord  will  at  length  raise  the  siege,  and  cause 
me  to  shout  deliverance  and  victory. 

Pray  for  me,  that  my  walls  may  be  strengthened,  and 
wounds  healed.  We  are  all  pretty  well  as  to  the  outward 
man,  and  join  in  love  to  all  friends. 

I  am,  &c. 


326  CARDIPHONIA  : 

LETTER   VII 

DEAR  SIR,  July  6,  1776. 

I  WAS  abroad  when  your  letter  came,  but  employ  the 
first  post  to  thank  you  for  your  confidence.  My  prayers 
(when  I  can  pray)  you  may  be  sure  of ;  as  to  advice,  I  see 
not  that  the  case  requires  much.  Only  be  a  quiet  child, 
and  lie  patiently  at  the  Lord's  feet.  He  is  the  best  Friend 
and  Manager  in  these  matters,  for  He  has  a  key  to  open  every 
heart  ********** 
********!  should  not  have 
taken  Mr.  Z—  -'s  letter  for  a  denial,  as  it  seems  you  did. 
Considering  the  years  of  the  parties,  and  other  circumstances, 
a  prudent  parent  could  hardly  say  more,  if  he  were  inclined 
to  favour  your  views.  To  me  you  seem  to  be  in  a  tolerable 
fair  way  ;  but  I  know,  in  affairs  of  this  kind,  Mr.  Self  does 
not  like  suspense,  but  would  willingly  come  to  the  point  at 
once  :  but  Mr.  Faith  (when  he  gets  liberty  to  hold  up  his 
head)  will  own  that,  in  order  to  make  our  temporal  mercies 
wear  well,  and  to  give  us  a  clearer  sense  of  the  hand  that 
bestows  them,  a  waiting  and  a  praying  time  are  very  season 
able.  Worldly  people  expect  their  schemes  to  run  upon  all- 
fours,  as  we  say,  and  the  objects  of  their  wishes  to  drop 
into  their  mouths  without  difficulty  ;  and  if  they  succeed, 
they  of  course  burn  incense  to  their  own  drag,  and  say, 
This  was  my  doing  :  but  believers  meet  with  rubs  and 
disappointments,  which  convince  them,  that  if  they  obtain 
any  thing,  it  is  the  Lord  who  must  do  it  for  them.  For 
this  reason  I  observe  that  He  usually  brings  a  death  upon 
our  prospects,  even  when  it  is  His  purpose  to  give  us  success 
in  the  issue.  Thus  we  become  more  assured  that  we  did  not 
act  in  our  own  spirits,  and  have  a  more  satisfactory  view  that 
His  providence  has  been  concerned  in  filling  up  the  rivers 
and  removing  the  mountains  that  were  in  our  way.  Then 
when  He  has  given  us  our  desire,  how  pleasant  is  it  to  look 
at  it,  and  say,  This  I  got  not  by  my  own  sword,  and  my  own 
bow,  but  I  wrestled  for  it  in  prayer,  I  waited  for  it  in 
faith,  I  put  it  into  the  Lord's  hand,  and  from  His  hand  I 
received  it ! 

YOU  have  met  with  the  story  of  one  of   our  kings  (if  I 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   327 

mistake  not)  who  wanted  to  send  a  nobleman  abroad  as 
his  ambassador,  and  he  desired  to  be  excused  on  account 
of  some  affairs  which  required  his  presence  at  home  :  the 
king  answered,  "  Do  you  take  care  of  my  business,  and  I 
will  take  care  of  yours."  I  would  have  you  think  the  Lord 
says  thus  to  you.  You  were  sent  into  the  world  for  a  nobler 
end  than  to  be  pinned  to  a  girl's  apron-string  ;  and  yet  if 
the  Lord  sees  it  not  good  for  you  to  be  alone,  He  will  provide 
you  a  helpmeet.  I  say,  if  He  sees  the  marriage  state  best 
for  you,  He  has  the  proper  person  already  in  His  eye  ;  and 
though  she  were  in  Peru  or  Nova-Zembla,  He  knows  how 
to  bring  you  together.  In  the  mean  time,  go  thou  and 
preach  the  Gospel.  Watch  in  all  things  ;  endure  afflictions  ; 
do  the  work  of  an  evangelist ;  make  full  proof  of  your 
ministry  ;  and  when  other  thoughts  rise  in  your  mind 
(for  you  have  no  door  to  shut  them  quite  out),  run  with 
them  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  commit  them  to  the  Lord. 
Satan  will,  perhaps,  try  to  force  them  upon  you  unseason 
ably  and  inordinately  ;  but  if  he  sees  they  drive  you  to 
prayer,  he  will  probably  desist,  rather  than  be  the  occasion 
of  doing  you  so  much  good.  Believe,  likewise,  that  as  the 
Lord  has  the  appointment  of  the  person,  so  He  fixes  the 
time.  His  time  is  like  the  time  of  the  tide  ;  all  the  art  and 
power  of  man  can  neither  hasten  nor  retard  it  a  moment  : 
it  must  be  waited  for  ;  nothing  can  be  done  without  it,  and 
when  it  comes,  nothing  can  resist  it.  It  is  unbelief  that 
talks  of  delays  :  faith  knows  that  properly  there  can  be  no 
such  thing.  The  only  reason  why  the  Lord  seems  to 
delay  what  He  afterwards  grants,  is  that  the  best  hour 
is  not  yet  come.  I  know  you  have  been  enabled  to  commit 
and  resign  your  all  to  His  disposal.  You  did  well.  May 
He  help  you  to  stand  to  the  surrender  !  Sometimes  He 
will  put  us  to  the  trial,  whether  we  mean  what  we  say.  He 
takes  His  course  in  a  way  we  did  not  expect  ;  and  then, 
alas  !  how  often  does  the  trial  put  us  to  shame  !  Presently 
there  is  an  outer}'  raised  in  the  soul  against  His  manage 
ment  ;  this  is  wrong,  that  unnecessary,  the  other  has  spoiled 
the  whole  plan  ;  in  short,  all  these  things  are  against  us. 
And  when  we  go  into  the  pulpit,  and  gravely  tell  the  people 
how  wise  and  how  good  He  is  ;  and  preach  submission  to 
His  will,  not  only  as  a  duty,  but  a  privilege  ;  alas  !  how 


328  CARDIPHO\IA  : 

deceitful  is  the  heart !  Yet,  since  it  is  and  will  be  so,  it  is 
necessary  we  should  know  it  by  experience.  We  have 
reason,  however,  to  say,  He  is  good  and  wise  ;  for  He  bears 
with  our  perverseness,  and  in  the  event  shows  us,  that 
if  He  had  listened  to  our  murmurings,  and  taken  the  methods 
we  would  have  prescribed  to  Him,  we  should  have  been  mined 
indeed,  and  that  He  has  been  all  the  while  doing  us  good  in 
spite  of  ourselves. 

If  I  judge  right,  you  will  find  your  way  providentially 
opened  more  and  more  ;  and  yet  it  is  possible,  that  when 
you  begin  to  think  yourself  sure,  something  may  happen  to 
put  you  in  a  panic  again.  But  a  believer,  like  a  sailor,  is 
not  to  be  surprised  if  the  wind  changes,  but  to  learn  the  art 
of  suiting  himself  to  all  winds  for  the  time  ;  and  though 
many  a  poor  sailor  is  shipwrecked,  the  poor  believer  shall 
gain  his  port.  O,  it  is  good  sailing  with  an  infallible  Pilot  at 
the  helm,  who  has  the  wind  and  weather  at  His  command  ! 

I  have  been  much  abroad,  which  of  course  puts  things  at 
sixes  and  sevens  at  home.  If  I  did  not  love  you  well,  I 
could  not  have  spared  so  much  of  the  only  day  I  have  had 
to  myself  for  this  fortnight  past.  But  I  was  willing  you 
should  know  that  I  think  of  you,  and  feel  for  you,  if  I  cannot 
help  you. 

I    have   read    Mr.     's   book.     Some   things    I    think 

strongly  argued  ;  in  some  he  has  laid  himself  open  to  a 
blow,  and  I  doubt  not  but  he  will  have  it.  I  expect  answers, 
replies,  rejoinders,  &c.  &c.  and  say,  with  Leah,  Gad — a 
troop  cometh.  How  the  wolf  will  grin  to  see  the  sheep  and 
the  shepherds  biting  and  worrying  one  another  !  And  well 
he  may.  He  knows  that  contentions  are  a  surer  way  to 
weaken  the  spirit  of  love,  and  stop  the  progress  of  the 
Gospel,  than  his  old  stale  method  of  fire  and  sword.  Well, 
I  trust  we  shall  be  of  one  heart  and  one  mind  when  we  get 
to  Heaven  at  least. 

Let  who  will  fight,  I  trust  neither  water  nor  fire  shall  set 
you  and  me  at  variance.  We  unite  in  love  to  you.  The 
Lord  is  gracious  to  us,  &c. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART        320 


LETTER   VIII 

DEAR  SIR,  1776. 

I  DO  not  often  serve  your  letters  so,  but  this  last  I 
burnt,  believing  you  would  like  to  have  it  out  of  danger 
of  falling  into  improper  hands.  When  I  saw  how  eagerly 
the  flames  devoured  the  paper,  how  quickly  and  entirely 
every  trace  of  the  writing  was  consumed,  I  wished  that  the 
fire  of  the  love  of  Jesus  might  as  completely  obliterate  from 
your  heart  every  uneasy  impression  which  your  disappoint 
ment  has  given  you.  *  *  *  * 

********** 

Surely  when  He  crosses  our  wishes,  it  is  always  in  mercy, 
and  because  we  short-sighted  creatures  often  know  not  what 
we  ask,  nor  what  would  be  the  consequences  if  our  desires 
were  granted. 

Your  pride,  it  seems,  has  received  a  fall,  by  meeting  a 
repulse.  I  know  Self  does  not  like  to  be  mortified  in  these 
affairs  ;  but  if  you  are  made  successful  in  wooing  souls  for 
Christ,  I  hope  that  will  console  you  for  meeting  a  rebuff 
when  only  wooing  for  yourself.  Besides,  I  would  have  you 
pluck  up  your  spirits.  I  have  two  good  old  proverbs  at  your 
service  :  "  There  are  as  good  fish  in  the  sea  as  any  that  are 
brought  out  of  it ;  "  and,  "  If  one  won't,  another  will,  or 
wherefore  serves  the  market  ?  "  Perhaps  all  your  difficulties 
have  arisen  from  this,  that  you  have  not  yet  seen  the  right 
person  ;  if  so,  you  have  reason  to  be  thankful  that  the 
Lord  would  not  let  you  take  the  wrong,  though  you  unwit 
tingly  would  have  done  it  if  you  could.  Where  the  right 
one  lies  hid  I  know  not,  but  upon  a  supposition  that  it  will 
be  good  for  you  to  marry,  I  may  venture  to  say, 

Ubi,  ubi  est,  diu  celari  non  potest, 

The  Lord  in  His  providence  will  disclose  her,  put  her  in  your 
way,  and  give  you  to  understand,  This  is  she.  Then  you 
will  find  your  business  go  forward  with  wheels  and  wings, 
and  have  cause  to  say,  His  choice  and  time  were  better  than 
your  own. 

Did  I  not  tell  you  formerly,  that  if  you  would  take  care 
of  His  business  He  will  take  care  of  yours  ?  I  am  of  the 


330  CARDIPHONIA  : 

same  mind  still.  He  will  not  suffer  them  who  fear  Him 
and  depend  upon  Him  to  want  anything  that  is  truly  good 
for  them.  In  the  mean  while,  I  advise  you  to  take  a  lodging 
as  near  as  you  can  to  Gethsemane,  and  to  walk  daily  to 
mount  Golgotha,  and  borrow  (which  may  be  had  for  asking) 
that  telescope  which  gives  a  prospect  into  the  unseen  world. 
A  view  of  what  is  passing  within  the  veil  has  a  marvellous 
effect  to  compose  our  spirits,  with  regard  to  the  little  things 
that  are  daily  passing  here.  Praise  the  Lord,  who  has 
enabled  you  to  fix  your  supreme  affection  upon  Him,  who 
is  alone  the  proper  and  suitable  object  of  it,  and  from 
whom  you  cannot  meet  a  denial,  or  fear  a  change.  He 
loved  you  first,  and  He  will  love  you  for  ever  ;  and  if  He  be 
pleased  to  arise  and  smile  upon  you,  you  are  in  no  more 
necessity  of  begging  for  happiness  to  the  prettiest  creature 
upon  earth,  than  of  the  light  of  a  candle  on  midsummer 
noon. 

Upon  the  whole,  I  pray  and  hope  the  Lord  will  sweeten 
your  cross,  and  either  in  kind  or  in  kindness  make  you  good 
amends.  Wait,  pray,  and  believe,  and  all  shall  be  well. 
A  cross  we  must  have  somewhere  ;  and  they  who  are 
favoured  with  health,  plenty,  peace,  and  a  conscience 
sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  Jesus,  must  have  more  causes 
for  thankfulness  than  grief.  Look  round  you,  and  take 
notice  of  the  very  severe  afflictions  which  many  of  the  Lord's 
own  people  are  groaning  under,  and  your  trials  will  appear 
comparatively  light.  Our  love  to  all  friends. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    IX 

DEAR  SIR,  June  3,  1777. 

IT  seems  I  must  write  something  about  the  smallpox, 
but  I  know  not  well  what  :  not  having  had  it  myself, 
I  cannot  judge  how  I  should  feel  if  I  were  actually  exposed 
to  it.  I  am  not  a  professed  advocate  for  inoculation  ;  but 
if  a  person  who  fears  the  Lord  should  tell  me,  "  I  think  I  can 
do  it  in  faith,  looking  upon  it  as  a  salutary  expedient,  which 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   331 

He  in  His  providence  has  discovered,  and  which,  therefore, 
it  appears  my  duty  to  have  recourse  to,  so  that  my  mind 
does  not  hesitate  with  respect  to  the  lawfulness,  nor  am  I 
anxious  about  the  event  ;  being  satisfied,  that  whether  I 
live  or  die,  I  am  in  that  path  in  which  I  can  cheerfully  expect 
His  blessing," — I  do  not  know  that  I  could  offer  a  word  by 
way  of  dissuasion. 

If  another  person  should  say,  "  My  times  are  in  the  Lord's 
hands  ;  I  am  now  in  health,  and  am  not  willing  to  bring 
upon  myself  a  disorder,  the  consequences  of  which  I  cannot 
possibly  foresee  :  If  I  am  to  have  the  small-pox,  I  believe 
He  is  the  best  Judge  of  the  season  and  manner  in  which  I 
shall  be  visited,  so  as  may  be  most  for  His  glory  and  my 
own  good  ;  and  therefore  I  choose  to  wait  His  appointment, 
and  not  to  rush  upon  even  the  possibility  of  danger  without 
a  call.  If  the  very  hairs  of  my  head  are  numbered,  I  have 
no  reason  to  fear  that,  supposing  I  receive  the  small-pox  in 
a  natural  way,  I  shall  have  a  single  pimple  more  than  He 
sees  expedient  ;  and  why  should  I  wish  to  have  one  less  ? 
Nay,  admitting,  which  however  is  not  always  the  case,  that 
inoculation  might  exempt  me  from  some  pain  and  incon 
venience,  and  lessen  the  apparent  danger,  might  it  not 
likewise,  upon  that  very  account,  prevent  my  receiving 
some  of  those  sweet  consolations,  which  I  humbly  hope 
my  gracious  Lord  would  afford  me,  if  it  were  His  pleasure 
to  call  me  to  a  sharp  trial  ?  Perhaps  the  chief  design  of  this 
trying  hour,  if  it  comes,  may  be  to  show  me  more  of  His 
wisdom,  power,  and  love,  than  I  have  ever  yet  experienced. 
If  I  could  devise  a  mean  to  avoid  the  trouble,  I  know  not 
how  great  a  loser  I  may  be  in  point  of  grace  and  comfort. 
Nor  am  I  afraid  of  my  face  ;  it  is  now  as  the  Lord  has  made 
it,  and  it  will  be  so  after  the  small-pox.  If  it  pleases  Him, 
I  hope  it  will  please  me.  In  short,  though  I  do  not  censure 
others,  yet,  as  to  myself,  inoculation  is  what  I  dare  not 
venture  upon.  If  I  did  venture,  and  the  issue  should  not 
be  favourable,  I  should  blame  myself  for  having  attempted 
to  take  the  management  out  of  the  Lord's  hand  into  my 
own,  which  I  never  did  yet  in  other  matters  without 
finding  I  am  no  more  able  than  I  am  worthy  to  choose 
for  myself.  Besides,  at  the  best,  inoculation  would  only 
secure  me  from  one  of  the  innumerable  natural  evils  the 


332  CARDIPHONIA  : 

flesh  is  heir  to  ;  I  should  still  be  as  liable  as  I  am  at  present 
to  a  putrid  fever,  a  bilious  cholic,  an  inflammation  in  the 
bowels  or  in  the  brain,  and  a  thousand  formidable  diseases 
which  are  hovering  round  me,  and  only  wait  His  permission 
to  cut  me  off  in  a  few  days  or  hours  :  and  therefore  I  am 
determined,  by  His  grace,  to  resign  myself  to  His  disposal. 
Let  me  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord  (for  His  mercies  are 
great)  and  not  into  the  hands  of  men." 

If  a  person  should  talk  to  me  in  this  strain,  most  certainly 
I  could  not  say,  "  Notwithstanding  all  this,  your  safest  way 
is  to  be  inoculated." 

We  preach  and  hear,  and  I  hope  we  know  something 
of  faith,  as  enabling  us  to  intrust  the  Lord  with  our  souls  :  I 
wish  we  had  all  more  faith,  to  intrust  Him  with  our  bodies, 
our  health,  our  provision,  and  our  temporal  comforts  like 
wise.  The  former  should  seem  to  require  the  strongest 
faith  of  the  two.  How  strange  is  it,  that  when  we  think  we 
can  do  the  greater,  we  should  be  so  awkward  and  unskilful 
when  we  aim  at  the  less  !  Give  my  love  to  your  friend.  I 
dare  not  advise  ;  but  if  she  can  quietly  return  at  the  usual 
time,  and  neither  run  intentionally  into  the  way  of  the 
small-pox,  nor  run  out  of  the  way,  but  leave  it  simply  with 
the  Lord,  I  shall  not  blame  her.  And  if  you  will  mind  your 
praying  and  preaching,  and  believe  that  the  Lord  can  take 
care  of  her  without  any  of  your  contrivances,  I  shall  not 
blame  you  ;  nay,  I  shall  praise  Him  for  you  both.  My 
prescription  is,  to  read  Dr.  Watts,  Psal.  cxxi.  every  morning 
before  breakfast,  and  pray  it  over  till  the  cure  is  effected. 
Probatum  est. 

Hast  Thou  not  given  Thy  word 

To  save  my  soul  from  death  ? 
And  I  can  trust  my  Lord, 

To  keep  my  mortal  breath. 
I'll  go  and  come 

Nor  fear  to  die, 

Till  from  on  high 
Thou  call  me  home. 

Adieu.     Pray  for  yours. 


THREE     LETTERS 

TO 

MISS   TH 

LETTER    I 

MY  DEAR  MADAM, 

LET  what  has  been  said  on  the  subject  of  acquaintance, 
&c.,  suffice.  It  was  well  meant  on  my  side,  and  well  taken 
on  yours.  You  may,  perhaps,  see  that  my  hints  were 
not  wholly  unnecessary,  and  I  ought  to  be  satisfied  with  your 
apology,  and  am  so.  The  circumstance  of  your  being  seen 
at  the  play-house  has  nothing  at  all  mysterious  in  it  :  as 
you  say  you  have  not  been  there  these  six  or  seven  years, 
it  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  mistake.  I  heard  you 
had  been  there  within  these  two  years  :  I  am  glad  to  find 
I  was  misinformed.  I  think  there  is  no  harm  in  your 
supposing,  that  of  the  many  thousands  who  frequent  public 
diversions,  some  may  in  other  respects  be  better  than  your 
self  ;  but  I  hope  your  humble  and  charitable  construction 
of  their  mistake  will  not  lead  you  to  extenuate  the  evil  of 
those  diversions  in  themselves.  For  though  I  am  persuaded, 
that  a  few,  who  know  better  what  to  do  with  themselves, 
are,  for  want  of  consideration,  drawn  in  to  expose  themselves 
in  such  places  ;  yet  I  am  well  satisfied,  that  if  there  is  any 
practice  in  this  land  sinful,  attendance  on  the  play-house  is 
properly  and  eminently  so.  The  theatres  are  fountains  and 
means  of  vice  :  I  had  almost  said,  in  the  same  manner  and 
degree  as  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  are  the  means  of  grace  ; 
and  I  can  hardly  think  there  is  a  Christian  upon  earth  who 
would  dare  to  be  seen  there,  if  the  nature  and  effects  of 
the  theatre  were  properly  set  before  them.  Dr.  Witherspoon 
of  Scotland  has  written  an  excellent  piece  upon  the  stage, 

333 


334  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

or  rather  against  it,  which  I  wish  every  person  who  makes 
the  least  pretence  to  fear  God  had  an  opportunity  of  perusing. 
I  cannot  judge  much  more  favourably  of  Ranelagh,  Vauxhall, 
and  all  the  innumerable  train  of  dissipations,  by  which  the 
god  of  this  world  blinds  the  eyes  of  multitudes,  lest  the  light 
of  the  glorious  Gospel  should  shine  in  upon  them.  What 
an  awful  aspect  upon  the  present  times  have  such  texts 
as  Isaiah  xxii.  12 — 14,  iii.  12  ;  Amos  vi.  3,  6  ;  James  iv.  4  ! 
I  wish  you,  therefore,  not  to  plead  for  any  of  them,  but  to 
use  ,your  influence  to  make  them  shunned  as  pest-houses, 
and  dangerous  nuisances  to  precious  souls  ;  especially,  if 
you  know  any  who  you  hope,  in  the  main,  are  seriously 
disposed,  who  yet  venture  themselves  in  those  purlieus  of 
Satan,  endeavour  earnestly  and  faithfully  to  undeceive 
them. 

The  time  is  short  ;  eternity  at  the  door  :  were  there 
no  other  evil  in  these  vain  amusements  than  the  loss  of 
precious  time,  (but,  alas  !  their  name  is  Legion,)  we  have 
not  leisure  in  our  circumstances  to  regard  them.  And, 
blessed  be  God  !  we  need  them  not.  The  Gospel  opens  a 
source  of  purer,  sweeter,  and  more  substantial  pleasures  : 
we  are  invited  to  communion  with  God  ;  we  are  called 
to  share  in  the  theme  of  angels,  the  songs  of  Heaven  ;  and 
the  wonders  of  redeeming  love  are  laid  open  to  our  view. 
The  Lord  Himself  is  waiting  to  be  gracious,  waiting  with 
promises  and  pardons  in  His  hands.  Well,  then,  may  we  bid 
adieu  to  the  perishing  pleasures  of  sin  ;  well  may  we  pity 
those  who  can  find  pleasure  in  those  places  and  parties 
where  He  is  shut  out ;  where  His  name  is  only  mentioned 
to  be  profaned  ;  where  His  commandments  are  not  only 
broken,  but  insulted  ;  where  sinners  proclaim  their  shame, 
as  in  Sodom,  and  attempt  not  to  hide  it  ;  where  at  best 
wickedness  is  wrapt  up  in  a  disguise  of  delicacy,  to  make  it 
more  insinuating  ;  and  nothing  is  offensive  that  is  not 
grossly  and  impolitely  indecent. 

I  sympathise  with  all  your  complaints  ;  but  if  the  Lord 
is  pleased  to  make  them  subservient  to  the  increase  of  your 
sanctification,  to  wean  you  more  and  more  from  this  world, 
and  to  draw  you  nearer  to  Himself,  you  will  one  day  see 
cause  to  be  thankful  for  them,  and  to  number  them  amongst 
your  choicest  mercies.  A  hundred  years  hence  it  will 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   335 

signify  little  to  you  whether  you  were  sick  or  well  the  day 
I  wrote  this  letter. 

We  thank  you  for  your  kind  condolence.  There  is  a 
pleasure  in  the  pity  of  a  friend  ;  but  the  Lord  alone  can  give 
true  comfort.  I  hope  He  will  sanctify  the  breach,  and  do 
us  good.  Mrs.  -  —  exchanges  forgiveness  with  you  about 
your  not  meeting  in  London  ;  that  is,  you  forgive  her  not 
coming  to  you,  and  she  forgives  your  entertaining  a  suspicious 
thought  of  her  friendship  (though  but  for  a  minute)  on 
account  of  what  she  was  really  unable  to  do. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  Sept.  i,  1767. 

I  SHALL  not  study  for  expressions  to  tell  my  dear 
friend  how  much  we  were  affected  by  the  news  that  came 
last  post.  We  had,  howrever,  the  pleasure  to  hear  that 
your  family  was  safe.  I  hope  this  will  find  you  recovered 
from  the  hurry  of  spirits  you  must  have  been  thrown  into, 
and  that  both  you  and  your  papa  are  composed  under  the 
appointment  of  Him  who  has  a  right  to  dispose  of  His  own 
as  He  pleases  ;  for  we  know  that  whatever  may  be  the 
second  causes  and  occasions,  nothing  can  happen  to  us  but 
according  to  the  will  of  our  Heavenly  Father.  Since  what 
is  past  cannot  be  recalled,  my  part  is  now  to  pray,  that  this 
and  every  dispensation  you  meet  with  may  be  sanctified 
to  your  soul's  good  ;  that  you  may  be  more  devoted  to  the 
God  of  your  life,  and  have  a  clearer  sense  of  your  interest 
in  that  Kingdom  which  cannot  be  shaken,  that  treasure 
which  neither  thieves  nor  flames  can  touch,  that  better 
and  more  enduring  substance  which  is  laid  up  for  believers, 
where  Jesus  their  Head  and  Saviour  is.  With  this  view 
you  may  take  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  your  goods. 

I  think  I  can  feel  for  my  friends ;  but  for  such  as  I  hope  have 
a  right  to  that  promise,  that  all  things  shall  work  together 
for  their  good,  I  soon  check  my  solicitude,  and  ask  myself, 
Do  I  love  them  better,  or  could  I  manage  more  wisely  for 


336  CARDIPHONIA  : 

them,  than  the  Lord  does  ?  Can  I  wish  them  to  be  in  safer 
or  more  compassionate  hands  than  in  His  ?  Will  He  who 
delights  in  the  prosperity  of  His  servants  afflict  them  with 
sickness,  losses,  and  alarms,  except  He  sees  there  is  need  of 
these  things  ?  Such  thoughts  calm  the  emotions  of  my  mind. 
I  sincerely  condole  with  you  ;  but  the  command  is  to  rejoice 
always  in  the  Lord.  The  visitation  was  accompanied  with 
mercy.  Not  such  a  case  as  that  of  the  late  Lady  Moles- 
worth's,  which  made  every  one's  ears  to  tingle  that  heard  it. 
Nor  is  yours  such  a  case  as  of  some,  who  in  almost  every  great 
fire  lose  their  all,  and,  perhaps,  have  no  knowledge  of  God 
to  support  them. 

Though  our  first  apprehensions  were  for  you,  we  almost 
forgot  you  for  a  moment,  when  we  thought  of  your  next- 
door  neighbour,  and  the  circumstances  she  was  in,  so  unfit 
to  bear  either  a  fright  or  a  removal.  We  shall  be  in  much 
suspense  till  we  hear  from  you.  God  grant  that  you  may 
be  able  to  send  us  good  news,  that  you  are  all  well,  at  least 
as  well  as  can  be  expected  after  such  a  distressing  scene.  If 
what  has  happened  should  give  you  more  leisure  or  more 
inclination  to  spend  a  little  time  with  us,  I  think  I  need  not 
say  we  shall  rejoice  to  receive  you. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    III 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  Sept.  3,  1767. 

THE  vanity  of  all  tilings  below  is  confirmed  to  us  by 
daily  experience.  Amongst  other  proofs,  one  is  the  pre- 
cariousness  of  our  intimacies,  and  what  little  things,  or 
rather  what  nothings,  will  sometimes  produce  a  coolness, 
or  at  least  a  strangeness,  between  the  dearest  friends.  How 
is  it  tliat  our  correspondence  has  been  dropped,  and  that, 
after  having  written  two  letters  since  the  fire  which  removed 
you  from  your  former  residence,  I  should  be  still  disappointed 
in  my  hopes  of  an  answer  ?  On  our  parts  I  hope  there  has 
been  no  abatement  of  regard  ;  nor  can  I  charge  you  with 
anything  but  remissness.  Therefore,  waiving  the  past, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   337 

and  all  apologies  on  either  side,  let  me  beg  you  to  write  soon, 
to  tell  us  how  it  is  with  you,  and  how  you  have  been  sup 
ported  under  the  various  changes  you  have  met  with  since 
we  saw  you  last.  I  doubt  not  but  you  have  met  with 
many  exercises.  I  pray  that  they  may  have  been  sanctified 
to  lead  you  nearer  to  the  Lord,  the  Fountain  of  all  consola 
tion,  who  is  the  only  refuge  in  time  of  trouble,  and  whose 
gracious  presence  is  abundantly  able  to  make  up  every 
deficiency  and  every  loss.  Perhaps  the  reading  of  this  may 
recall  to  your  mind  our  past  conversations,  and  the  subjects 
of  the  many  letters  we  have  exchanged.  I  know  not  in 
what  manner  to  write  after  so  long  an  interval.  I  would 
hope  your  silence  to  us  has  not  been  owing  to  any  change 
of  sentiments,  which  might  make  such  letters  as  mine  less 
welcome  to  you.  Yet  when  you  had  a  friend,  who  I  think 
you  believed  very  nearly  interested  himself  in  your  welfare, 
it  seems  strange,  that  in  a  course  of  two  years  you  should 
have  nothing  to  communicate.  I  cannot  suppose  you  have 
forgotten  me  ;  I  am  sure  I  have  not  forgotten  you  ;  and 
therefore,  I  long  to  hear  from  you  soon,  that  I  may  know 
how  to  write  :  and  should  this  likewise  pass  unanswered,  I 
must  sit  down  and  mourn  over  my  loss. 

As  to  our  affairs,  I  can  tell  you  the  Lord  has  been  and  is 
exceedingly  gracious  to  us  ;  our  lives  are  preserved,  our 
healths  continued,  an  abundance  of  mercies  and  blessings 
on  every  side  ;  but  especially  we  have  to  praise  Him  that 
He  is  pleased  to  crown  the  means  and  ordinances  of  His 
grace  with  tokens  of  His  presence.  It  is  my  happiness  to 
be  fixed  amongst  an  affectionate  people,  who  make  an  open 
profession  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  are  enabled  in 
some  measure  to  show  forth  its  power  in  their  lives  and 
conversation.  We  walk  in  peace  and  harmony.  I  have 
reason  to  say  the  Lord  Jesus  is  a  good  Master,  and  that 
the  doctrine  of  free  salvation,  by  faith  in  His  name,  is  a 
doctrine  according  to  godliness  ;  for  through  mercy  I  find 
it  daily  effectual  to  the  breaking  down  of  the  strongholds  of 
sin,  and  turning  the  hearts  of  sinners  from  dead  works  to 
serve  the  living  God.  May  the  Lord  give  my  dear  friend  to 
live  in  the  power  and  consolation  of  His  precious  truth  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


c. 


SEVEN     LETTERS 

TO 


LETTER   I 

March  18,  1767. 

I  CAN  truly  say,  that  I  bear  you  upon  my  heart  and 
in  my  prayers.  I  have  rejoiced  to  see  the  beginning  of  a 
good  and  gracious  work  in  you  ;  and  I  have  confidence  in 
the  Lord  Jesus,  that  He  will  carry  it  on  and  complete  it ; 
and  that  you  will  be  amongst  the  number  of  those  who  shall 
sing  redeeming  love  to  eternity.  Therefore  fear  none  of 
the  things  appointed  for  you  to  suffer  by  the  way  ;  but  gird 
up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  and  hope  to  the  end.  Be  not 
impatient,  but  wait  humbly  upon  the  Lord.  You  have  one 
hard  lesson  to  learn,  that  is,  the  evil  of  your  own  heart : 
you  know  something  of  it,  but  it  is  needful  that  you  should 
know  more  ;  for  the  more  we  know  of  ourselves,  the  more  we 
shall  prize  and  love  Jesus  and  His  salvation.  I  hope  what 
you  find  in  yourself  by  daily  experience  will  humble  you, 
but  not  discourage  you  ;  humble  you  it  should,  and  I  believe 
it  does.  Are  not  you  amazed  sometimes  that  you  should 
have  so  much  as  a  hope  that,  poor  and  needy  as  you  are,  the 
Lord  thinketh  of  you  ?  But  let  not  all  you  feel  discourage 
you  ;  for  if  our  Physician  is  almighty,  our  disease  cannot  be 
desperate  ;  and  if  He  casts  none  out  that  come  to  Him,  why 
should  you  fear  ?  Our  sins  are  many,  but  His  mercies 
are  more :  our  sins  are  great,  but  His  righteousness  is 
greater  :  we  are  weak,  but  He  is  power.  Most  of  our 
complaints  are  owing  to  unbelief,  and  the  remainder  of  a 
legal  spirit ;  and  these  evils  are  not  removed  in  a  day.  Wait 
on  the  Lord,  and  He  will  enable  you  to  see  more  and  more 

338 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   339 

of  the  power  and  grace  of  our  High  Priest.  The  more  you 
know  Him,  the  better  you  will  trust  Him  ;  the  more  you 
trust  Him,  the  better  you  will  love  Him  ;  the  more  you  love 
Him,  the  better  you  will  serve  Him.  This  is  God's  way  : 
you  are  not  called  to  buy,  but  to  beg ;  not  to  be  strong  in 
yourself,  but  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  is 
teaching  you  these  things,  and  I  trust  He  will  teach  you  to 
the  end.  Remember  the  growth  of  a  believer  is  not  like 
a  mushroom,  but  like  an  oak,  which  increases  slowly  indeed, 
but  surely.  Many  suns,  showers,  and  frosts  pass  upon  it 
before  it  comes  to  perfection  ;  and  in  winter,  when  it  seems 
dead,  it  is  gathering  strength  at  the  root.  Be  humble, 
watchful,  and  diligent  in  the  means,  and  endeavour  to  look 
through  all,  and  fix  your  eye  upon  Jesus,  and  all  shall  be 
well.  I  commend  you  to  the  care  of  the  good  Shepherd, 
and  remain,  for  His  sake, 

Yours,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

May  31,  1769. 

I  WAS  sorry  I  did  not  write  as  you  expected,  but  I 
hope  it  will  do  now.  Indeed  I  have  not  forgotten  you  ; 
you  are  often  in  my  thoughts,  and  seldom  omitted  in  my 
prayers.  I  hope  the  Lord  will  make  what  you  see  and  hear 
while  abroad  profitable  to  you,  to  increase  your  knowledge, 
to  strengthen  your  faith,  and  to  make  you  from  henceforth 
well  satisfied  with  your  situation.  If  I  am  not  mistaken, 
you  will  be  sensible,  that  though  there  are  some  desirable 
things  to  be  met  with  in  London  preferable  to  any  other 
place,  yet,  upon  the  whole,  a  quiet  situation  in  the  country, 
under  one  stated  ministry,  and  in  connexion  with  one 
people,  has  the  advantage.  It  is  pleasant  now  and  then  to 
have  opportunity  of  hearing  a  variety  of  preachers,  but  the 
best  and  greatest  of  them  are  no  more  than  instruments  ; 
some  can  please  the  ear  better  than  others ;  but  none  can 
reach  the  heart  any  farther  than  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  open 
it.  This  He  showed  you  upon  your  first  going  up,  and  I 

Y  2 


340  CARDIPHONIA  : 

doubt  not  but  your  disappointment  did  you  more  good 
than  if  you  had  heard  with  all  the  pleasure  you  expected. 

The  Lord  was  pleased  to  visit  me  with  a  slight  illness 
in  my  late  journey.  I  was  far  from  well  on  the  Tuesday, 
but  supposed  it  owing  to  the  fatigue  of  riding,  and  the  heat 
of  the  weather  ;  but  the  next  day  I  was  taken  with  a 
shivering,  to  which  a  fever  succeeded.  I  was  then  near  sixty 
miles  from  home.  The  Lord  gave  me  much  peace  in  my 
soul,  ?and  I  was  enabled  to  hope  He  would  bring  me  safe 
home,  in  which  I  was  not  disappointed  ;  and  though  I  had 
the  fever  most  part  of  the  way,  my  journey  was  not  unpleas 
ant.  He  likewise  strengthened  me  to  preach  twiceTon 
Sunday  ;  and  at  night  I  found  myself  well,  only  very  weary, 
and  I  have  continued  well  ever  since.  I  have  reason  to 
speak  much  of  His  goodness,  and  to  kiss  the  rod,  for  it  was 
sweetened  with  abundant  mercies.  I  thought  that  had  it 
been  His  pleasure  I  should  have  continued  sick  at  Oxford, 
or  even  have  died  there,  I  had  no  objection.  Though  I 
had  not  that  joy  and  sensible  comfort  which  some  are 
favoured  with,  yet  I  was  quite  free  from  pain,  fear,  and 
care,  and  felt  mysell  sweetly  composed  to  His  will,  whatever 
it  might  be.  Thus  He  fulfils  His  promise  in  making  our 
strengthen  equal  to  our  day  ;  and  every  new  trial  gives  us 
a  new  proof  how  happy  it  is  to  be  enabled  to  put  our  trust 
in  Him. 

I  hope,  in  the  midst  of  all  your  engagements,  you  find  a 
little  time  to  read  His  good  Word,  and  to  wait  at  His  mercy- 
seat.  It  is  good  for  us  to  draw  nigh  to  Him.  It  is  an  honour 
that  He  permits  us  to  pray  ;  and  we  shall  surely  find  He  is 
a  God  hearing  prayer.  Endeavour  to  be  diligent  in  the 
means  ;  yet  watch  and  strive  against  a  legal  spirit,  which 
is  always  aiming  to  represent  Him  as  a  hard  master,  watching 
as  it  were  to  take  advantage  of  us.  But  it  is  far  otherwise. 
His  name  is  Love  !  He  looks  upon  us  with  compassion  ; 
He  knows  our  frame,  and  remembers  that  we  are  but  dust  ; 
and  when  our  infirmities  prevail,  He  does  not  bid  us  despond, 
but  reminds  us  that  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father, 
who  is  able  to  pity,  to  pardon,  and  to  save  to  the  uttermost. 
Think  of  the  names  and  relations  He  bears.  Does  He  not 
call  Himself  a  Saviour,  a  Shepherd,  a  Friend,  and  a  Husband  ? 
Has  He  not  made  known  unto  us  His  love,  His  blood,  His 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   341 

righteousness,  His  promises,  His  power,  and  His  grace, 
and  all  for  our  encouragement  ?  Away,  then,  with  all 
doubting,  unbelieving  thoughts  ;  they  will  not  only  distress 
your  heart,  but  weaken  your  hands.  Take  it  for  granted 
upon  the  warrant  of  His  word,  that  you  are  His,  and  He  is 
yours  ;  that  He  has  loved  you  with  an  everlasting  love,  and 
therefore  in  loving-kindness  has  drawn  you  to  Himself  ; 
that  He  will  surely  accomplish  that  which  He  has  begun, 
and  that  nothing  which  can  be  named  or  thought  of  shall 
ever  be  able  to  separate  you  from  Him.  This  persuasion 
will  give  you  strength  for  the  battle  ;  this  is  the  shield  which 
will  quench  the  fiery  darts  of  Satan  ;  this  is  the  helmet 
which  the  enemy  cannot  pierce.  Whereas,  if  we  go  forth 
doubting  and  fearing,  and  are  afraid  to  trust  any  farther 
than  we  can  feel,  we  are  weak  as  water,  and  easily  overcome. 
Be  strong,  therefore,  not  in  yourself,  but  in  the  grace  that 
is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Pray  for  me,  and  believe  me  to  be 

Yours,  &c. 


LETTER   III 

March   14. 

I  THINK  you  would  hardly  expect  me  to  write  if  you 
knew  how  I  am  forced  to  live  at  London.  However,  I 
would  have  you  believe  I  am  as  willing  to  write  to  you 
as  you  are  to  receive  my  letters.  As  a  proof,  I  try  to 
send  you  a  few  lines  now,  though  I  am  writing  to  you, 

and  talking  to  Mrs.  ,  both  at  once  !    and  this  is  the 

only  season  I  can  have  to  exchange  a  few  words  with  her. 
She  is  a  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit ;  she  talks  and  weeps. 
I  believe  she  would  think  herself  happy  to  be  situated  as 
you  are,  notwithstanding  the  many  advantages  she  has  at 
London.  I  see  daily,  and  I  hope  you  have  likewise  learned, 
that  places  and  outward  circumstances  cannot  of  themselves 
either  hinder  or  help  us  in  walking  with  God.  So  far  as  He 
is  pleased  to  be  with  us,  and  to  teach  us  by  His  Spirit, 
wherever  we  are  we  shall  get  forward  ;  and  if  He  does  not 
bless  us  and  water  us  every  moment,  the  more  we  have  of 


342  CARDIPHONIA  : 

our  own  wishes  and  wills,  the  more  uneasy  we  shall  make 
ourselves. 

One  thing  is  needful ;  an  humble,  dependent  spirit,  to 
renounce  our  own  wills,  and  give  up  ourselves  to  His  disposal 
without  reserve.  This  is  the  path  of  peace  ;  and  it  is  the 
path  of  safety  ;  for  He  has  said,  the  meek  He  will  teach 
His  way,  and  those  who  yield  up  themselves  to  Him  He 
will  guide  with  His  eye.  I  hope  you  will  fight  and  pray 
against  every  rising  of  a  murmuring  spirit,  and  be  thankful 
for  the  great  things  which  He  has  already  done  for  you. 
It  is  good  to  be  humbled  for  sin,  but  not  to  be  discouraged  : 
for  though  we  are  poor  creatures,  Jesus  is  a  complete  Saviour ; 
and  we  bring  more  honour  to  God  by  believing  in  His  name, 
and  trusting  His  word  of  promise,  than  we  could  do  by  a 
thousand  outward  works. 

I  pray  the  Lord  to  shine  upon  your  soul,  and  to  fill  you 
with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  Remember  to  pray 
for  us,  that  we  may  be  brought  home  to  you  in  peace. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    IV 

London,  Aug.  19,  1775. 

You  see  I  am  mindful  of  my  promise  ;  and  glad 
should  I  be  to  write  something  that  the  Lord  may  be 
pleased  to  make  a  word  in  season.  I  went  yesterday 
into  the  pulpit  very  dry  and  heartless.  I  seemed  to  have 
fixed  upon  a  text,  but  when  I  came  to  the  pinch,  it  was  so 
shut  up  that  I  could  not  preach  from  it.  I  had  hardly  a 
minute  to  choose,  and  therefore  was  forced  to  snatch  at 
that  which  came  first  upon  my  mind,  which  proved  2  Tim. 
i.  12.  Thus  I  set  off  at  a  venture,  having  no  resource  but 
in  the  Lord's  mercy  and  faithfulness  ;  and,  indeed,  what 
other  can  we  wish  for  ?  Presently  my  subject  opened  ; 
and  I  know  not  when  I  have  been  favoured  with  more  liberty. 
Why  do  I  tell  you  this  ?  Only  as  an  instance  of  His  good 
ness,  to  encourage  you  to  put  your  strength  in  Him,  and  not 
to  be  afraid  even  when  you  feel  your  own  weakness  and 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   343 

insufficiency  most  sensibly.  We  are  never  more  safe,  never 
have  more  reason  to  expect  the  Lord's  help,  than  when  we 
are  most  sensible  that  we  can  do  nothing  without  Him. 
This  was  the  lesson  Paul  learnt,  to  rejoice  in  His  own  poverty 
and  emptiness,  that  the  power  of  Christ  might  rest  upon 
Him.  Could  Paul  have  done  anything,  Jesus  would  not 
have  had  the  honour  of  doing  all.  This  way  of  being  saved 
entirely  by  grace,  from  first  to  last,  is  contrary  to  our 
natural  wills  ;  it  mortifies  self,  leaving  it  nothing  to  boast 
of,  and  through  the  remains  of  an  unbelieving,  legal  spirit, 
it  often  seems  discouraging.  When  we  think  ourselves  so 
utterly  helpless  and  worthless,  we  are  too  ready  to  fear 
that  the  Lord  will  therefore  reject  us  ;  whereas,  in  truth, 
such  a  poverty  of  spirit  is  the  best  mark  we  can  have  of 
an  interest  in  His  promises  and  care. 

How  often  have  I  longed  to  be  an  instrument  of  estab 
lishing  you  in  the  peace  and  hope  of  the  Gospel  !  and  I 
have  but  one  way  of  attempting  it,  by  telling  you  over 
and  over  of  the  power  and  grace  of  Jesus.  You  want 
nothing  to  make  you  happy,  but  to  have  the  eyes  of  your 
understanding  more  fixed  upon  the  Redeemer,  and  more 
enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  behold  His  glory.  O  ! 
He  is  a  suitable  Saviour  !  He  has  power,  authority,  and 
compassion,  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  He  has  given  His 
word  of  promise,  to  engage  our  confidence,  and  He  is  able 
and  faithful  to  make  good  the  expectations  and  desires 
He  has  raised  in  us.  Put  your  trust  in  Him  ;  believe  (as 
we  say)  through  thick  and  thin,  in  defiance  of  all  objections 
from  within  and  without.  For  this,  Abraham  is  recom 
mended  as  a  pattern  to  us.  He  overlooked  all  difficulties  ; 
he  ventured  and  hoped  even  against  hope,  in  a  case  which 
to  appearance  was  desperate  ;  because  he  knew  that  He 
who  had  promised  was  also  able  to  perform. 

Your  sister  is  much  upon  my  mind.  Her  illness  grieves 
me  ;  were  it  in  my  power,  I  would  quickly  remove  it. 
The  Lord  can,  and  I  hope  will,  when  it  has  answered  the 
end  for  which  He  sent  it.  I  trust  He  has  brought  her  to 
us  for  good,  and  that  she  is  chastised  by  Him  that  she  may 
not  be  condemned  with  the  world.  I  hope,  though  she  says 
little,  she  lifts  up  her  heart  to  Him  for  a  blessing.  I  wish 
you  may  be  enabled  to  leave  her  and  yourself,  and  all 


344  CARDIPHON1A  : 

your  concerns,  in  His  hands.  He  has  a  sovereign  right  to 
do  with  us  as  He  pleases  ;  and  if  we  consider  what  we 
are,  surely  we  shall  confess  we  have  no  reason  to  complain  ; 
and  to  those  who  seek  Him,  His  sovereignty  is  exercised 
in  a  way  of  grace.  All  shall  work  together  for  good  ; 
everything  is  needful  that  He  sends ;  nothing  can  be  needful 
that  He  withholds.  Be  content  to  bear  the  cross  ;  others 
have  borne  it  before  you.  You  have  need  of  patience  ; 
and  if  you  ask,  the  Lord  will  give  it  :  but  there  can  be 
no  settled  peace  till  our  will  is  in  a  measure  subdued.  Hide 
yourself  under  the  shadow  of  His  wings  ;  rely  upon  His 
care  and  power  ;  look  upon  Him  as  a  physician  who  has 
graciously  undertaken  to  heal  your  soul  of  the  worst  of 
sicknesses,  sin.  Yield  to  His  prescriptions,  and  fight 
against  every  thought  that  would  represent  it  as  desirable 
to  be  permitted  to  choose  for  yourself.  When  you  cannot 
see  your  way,  be  satisfied  that  He  is  your  leader.  When 
your  spirit  is  overwhelmed  within  you,  He  knows  your 
path  ;  He  will  not  leave  you  to  sink.  He  has  appointed 
seasons  of  refreshment,  and  you  shall  find  He  does  not  forget 
you.  Above  all,  keep  close  to  the  throne  of  g.ace.  If  we 
seem  to  get  no  good  by  attempting  to  draw  near  Him 
we  may  be  sure  we  shall  get  none  by  keeping  away  from 
Him. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   V 

I  PROMISED  you  another  letter  ;  and  now  for  the  per 
formance.  If  I  had  said,  it  may  be,  or  perhaps  I  will, 
you  would  be  in  suspense  ;  but  if  I  promise,  then  you 
expect  that  I  will  not  disappoint  you  unless  something 
should  render  it  impossible  for  me  to  make  my  word  good. 
I  thank  you  for  your  good  opinion  of  me,  and  for  thinking 
I  mean  what  I  say  ;  and  I  pray  that  you  may  be  enabled 
more  and  more  to  honour  the  Lord  by  believing  His  promise  : 
for  He  is  not  like  a  man  that  should  fail  or  change,  or  be 
prevented  by  anything  unforeseen  from  doing  what  He  has 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   345 

said.  And  yet  we  find  it  easier  to  trust  to  worms  than  to 
the  God  of  truth.  Is  it  not  so  with  you  ?  And  I  can  assure 
you  it  is  often  so  with  me.  But  here  is  the  mercy,  that  His 
ways  are  above  ours,  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the 
earth.  Though  we  are  foolish  and  unbelieving,  He  remains 
faithful ;  He  will  not  deny  Himself.  I  recommend  to  you 
especially  that  promise  of  God,  which  is  so  comprehensive 
that  it  takes  in  all  our  concernments,  I  mean,  that  all  things 
shall  work  together  for  good.  How  hard  is  it  to  believe, 
that  not  only  those  things  which  are  grievous  to  the  flesh, 
but  even  those  things  which  draw  forth  our  corruptions, 
and  discover  to  us  what  is  in  our  hearts,  and  fill  us  with 
guilt  and  shame,  should  in  the  issue  work  for  our  good  ! 
Yet  the  Lord  has  said  it.  All  your  pains  and  trials,  all 
that  befals  you  in  your  own  person,  or  that  affects  you 
upon  the  account  of  others,  shall  in  the  end  prove  to  your 
advantage.  And  your  peace  does  not  depend  upon  any 
change  of  circumstance  which  may  appear  desirable,  but 
in  having  your  will  bowed  to  the  Lord's  will,  and  made 
willing  to  submit  all  to  His  disposal  and  management. 
Pray  for  this,  and  wait  patiently  for  Him,  and  He  will  do 
it.  Be  not  surprised  to  find  yourself  poor,  helpless,  and 
vile  ;  all  whom  He  favours  and  teaches  will  find  themselves 
so.  The  more  grace  increases,  the  more  we  shall  see  to 
abase  us  in  our  own  eyes  ;  and  this  will  make  the  Saviour 
and  His  salvation  more  precious  to  us.  He  takes  His  own 
wise  methods  to  humble  you,  and  to  prove  you,  and  I  am 
sure  He  will  do  you  good  in  the  end. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    VI 

September  16,  1775. 

WHEN  you  receive  this,  I  hope  it  will  give  you  pleasure 
to  think  that,  if  the  Lord  be  pleased  to  favour  us  with 
health,  we  shall  all  meet  again^in  a  few  days.  I  have 
met  with  much  kindness  at  London,  and  many  comforts 
and  mercies  :  however,  1  shall  be  glad  to  return  home. 


346  CARDIPHONIA  : 

There  my  heart  lives,  let  my  body  be  where  it  will.  I  long 
to  see  all  my  dear  people,  and  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  you. 
I  steal  a  little  time  to  write  another  line  or  two,  more  to 
satisfy  you,  than  for  anything  particular  I  have  to  say.  I 
thank  you  for  your  letter.  I  doubt  not  but  the  Lord 
is  bringing  you  forward,  and  that  you  have  a  good  right 
to  say  to  your  soul,  Why  art  thou  cast  down  and  disquieted  ? 
Hope  thou  in  God ;  for  I  shall  yet  praise  Him.  An  evil 
hear^,  an  evil  temper,  and  the  many  crosses  we  meet  with 
in  passing  through  an  evil  world,  will  cut  us  out  trouble  : 
but  the  Lord  has  provided  a  balm  for  every  wound,  a 
cordial  for  every  care  ;  the  fruit  of  all  is  to  take  away 
sin,  and  the  end  o(.  all  will  be  eternal  life  in  glory.  Think 
of  these  words ;  put  them  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary ; 
and  then  throw  all  your  trials  into  the  opposite  scale, 
and  you  will  find  there  is  no  proportion  between  them. 
Say  then,  "  Though  He  slay  me,  I  will  trust  in  Him  ;  " 
for  when  He  has  fully  tried  me,  I  shall  come  forth  like 
gold.  You  would  have  liked  to  have  been  with  me  last 
Wednesday.  I  preached  at  Westminster  Bridewell.  It 
is  a  prison  and  house  of  correction.  The  bulk  of  my  congre 
gation  were  housebreakers,  highwaymen,  pickpockets,  and 
poor  unhappy  women,  such  as  infest  the  streets  of  the  city, 
sunk  in  sin  and  lost  to  shame.  I  had  a  hundred  or  more 
of  these  before  me.  I  preached  from  i  Tim.  i.  15,  and  began 
with  telling  them  my  own  story  :  this  gained  their  attention 
more  than  I  expected.  I  spoke  to  them  near  an  hour 
and  a  half.  I  shed  many  tears  myself,  and  saw  some 
of  them  shed  tears  likewise.  Ah  !  had  you  seen  their 
present  condition,  and  could  you  hear  the  history  of  some 
of  them,  it  would  make  you  sing,  "  O  to  grace  how  great  a 
debtor  !  "  By  nature  they  were  no  worse  than  the  most 
sober  and  modest  people.  And  there  was  doubtless  a  time 
when  many  of  them  little  thought  what  they  should  live  to 
do  and  suffer.  I  might  have  been,  like  them,  in  chains, 
and  one  of  them  have  come  to  preach  to  me,  had  the  Lord 
so  pleased. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART       347 

LETTER    VII 

October  10,  1777. 

I   AM  just   come  from  seeing  A  N   .     The 

people  told  me  she  is  much  better  than  she  was,  but  she 
is  far  from  being  well.  She  was  brought  to  me  into  a 
parlour,  which  saved  me  the  painful  task  of  going  to  inquire 
and  seek  for  her  among  the  patients.  My  spirits  always 
sink  when  I  am  within  these  mournful  walls,  and  I  think 
no  money  could  prevail  on  me  to  spend  an  hour  there  every 
day.  Yet  surely  no  sight  upon  earth  is  more  suited  to 
teach  one  thankfulness  and  resignation.  Surely  I  have 
reason,  in  my  worst  times,  to  be  thankful  that  I  am  out  of 
hell,  out  of  Bedlam,  out  of  Newgate.  If  my  eyes  were  as 
bad  as  yours,  and  my  back  worse,  still  I  hope  I  should  set  a 
great  value  upon  this  mercy,  that  my  senses  are  preserved. 
I  hope  you  will  think  so  too.  The  Lord  afflicts  us  at 
times  ;  but  it  is  always  a  thousand  times  less  than  we 
deserve,  and  much  less  than  many  of  our  fellow-creatures 
are  suffering  around  us.  Let  us  therefore  pray  for  grace 
to  be  humble,  thankful,  and  patient. 

This  day  twelvemonth  I  was  under  Mr.  W 's  knife  ; 

there  is  another  cause  for  thankfulness,  that  the  Lord 
inclined  me  to  submit  to  the  operation,  and  brought  me 
happily  through  it.  In  short,  I  have  so  many  reasons 
for  thankfulness,  that  I  cannot  count  them.  I  may  truly 
say,  they  are  more  in  number  than  the  hairs  of  my  head. 
And,  yet,  alas !  how  cold,  insensible,  and  ungrateful ! 
I  could  make  as  many  complaints  as  you  ;  but  I  find  no 
good  by  complaining,  except  to  Him  who  is  able  to  help  me. 
It  is  better  for  you  and  me  to  be  admiring  the  compassion 
and  fulness  of  grace  that  is  in  our  Saviour,  than  to  dwell 
and  pore  too  much  upon  our  own  poverty  and  vileness. 
He  is  able  to  help  and  save  to  the  uttermost ;  there  I  desire 
to  cast  anchor,  and  wish  you  to  do  so  likewise.  Hope  in 
God,  for  you  shall  yet  praise  Him. 

I  am,  &c. 


FIVE     LETTERS 

TO 

MR.    C 

LETTER    I 

DEAR  SIR,  Jan.  16,  1775. 

THE  death  of  a  near  relative  called  me  from  home  in 
December,  and  a  fortnight's  absence  threw  me  so  far  behind 
hand  in  my  course,  that  I  deferred  acknowledging  your  letter 
much  longer  than  I  intended.  I  now  thank  you  for  it.  I 
can  sympathize  with  you  in  your  troubles  :  yet  knowing 
the  nature  of  our  calling,  that  by  an  unalterable  appoint 
ment  the  way  to  the  Kingdom  lies  through  many  tribulations, 
I  ought  to  rejoice  rather  than  otherwise,  that  to  you  it  is 
given,  not  only  to  believe,  but  also  to  suffer.  If  you  escaped 
these  things,  whereof  all  the  Lord's  children  are  partakers, 
might  you  not  question  your  adoption  into  His  family  ? 
How  could  the  power  of  grace  be  manifest,  either  to  you,  in 
you,  or  by  you,  without  afflictions  ?  How  could  the  corrup 
tions  and  devastations  of  the  heart  be  checked  without  a 
cross  ?  How  could  you  acquire  a  tenderness  and  skill  in 
speaking  to  them  that  are  weary,  without  a  taste  of  such 
trials  as  they  also  meet  with  ?  You  could  only  be  a  hearsay 
witness  to  the  truth,  power,  and  sweetness  of  the  precious 
promises,  unless  you  have  been  in  such  a  situation  as  to 
need  them,  and  to  find  their  suitableness  and  sufficiency. 
The  Lord  has  given  you  a  good  desire  to  serve  Him  in  the 
Gospel,  and  He  is  now  training  you  for  that  service.  Many 
things,  yea,  the  most  important  things  belonging  to  the 
Gospel  ministry,  are  not  to  be  learned  by  books  and  study, 
but  by  painful  experience.  You  must  expect  a  variety  of 
exercises  :  but  two  things  He  has  promised  you,  that  you 

348 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   349 

shall  not  be  tried  above  what  He  will  enable  you  to  bear, 
and  that  all  shall  work  together  for  your  good.  We  read 
somewhere  of  a  conceited  orator,  who  declaimed  upon  the 
management  of  war  in  the  presence  of  Hannibal,  and  of  the 
contempt  with  which  Hannibal  treated  his  performance. 
He  deserved  it ;  for  how  should  a  man  who  had  never  seen 
a  field  of  battle  be  a  competent  judge  of  such  a  subject  ? 
Just  so,  were  we  to  acquire  no  other  knowledge  of  the  Christ 
ian  warfare  than  what  we  could  derive  from  cool  and 
undisturbed  study,  instead  of  coming  forth  as  able  ministers 
of  the  New  Testament,  and  competently  acquainted  with 
the  ra  yoj^ara,  with  the  devices,  the  deep-laid  counsels  and 
stratagems  of  Satan,  we  should  prove  but  mere  declaimers. 
But  the  Lord  will  take  better  care  of  those  whom  He  loves 
and  designs  to  honour.  He  will  try,  and  permit  them  to  be 
tried,  in  various  ways.  He  will  make  them  feel  much  in 
themselves,  that  they  may  know  how  to  feel  much  for  others  ; 
according  to  that  beautiful  and  expressive  line, 

Hand  ignara  mali,  miseris  succurrere  disco. 

And  as  this  previous  discipline  is  necessary  to  enable  us 
to  take  the  field,  in  a  public  capacity,  with  courage,  wisdom, 
and  success,  that  we  may  lead  and  animate  others  in  the 
fight,  it  is  equally  necessary,  for  our  own  sakes,  that  we  may 
obtain  and  preserve  the  grace  of  humility,  which  I  perceive 
with  pleasure  he  has  taught  you  to  set  a  high  value  upon. 
Indeed,  we  cannot  value  it  too  highly  ;  for  we  can  be 
neither  comfortable,  safe,  nor  habitually  useful,  without  it. 
The  root  of  pride  lies  deep  in  our  fallen  nature,  and  where 
the  Lord  has  given  natural  and  acquired  abilities,  it  would 
grow  apace,  if  He  did  not  mercifully  watch  over  us  and  suit 
His  dispensations  to  keep  it  down.  Therefore,  I  trust  He 
will  make  you  willing  to  endure  hardships,  as  a  good  soldier 
of  Jesus  Christ.  May  He  enable  you  to  behold  Him  with 
faith,  holding  out  the  prize,  and  saying  to  you,  Fear  none 
of  these  things  that  thou  shalt  suffer  :  "  Be  thou  faithful 
unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life." 

We  sail  upon  a  turbulent  and  tumultuous  sea  ;  but  we  are 
embarked  on  a  good  bottom,  and  in  a  good  cause,  and  we 
have  an  infallible  and  almighty  Pilot,  who  has  the  winds 
and  weather  at  His  command,  and  can  silence  the  storm  into 


350  CARDIPHONIA  : 

a  calm  with  a  word  whenever  He  pleases.  We  may  be 
persecuted,  but  we  shall  not  be  forsaken  ;  we  may  be  cast 
down,  but  we  cannot  be  destroyed.  Many  will  thrust  sore 
at  us  that  we  may  fall,  but  the  Lord  will  be  our  stay. 

I  am  sorry  to  find  you  are  quite  alone  at  Cambridge,  for 
I  hoped  there  would  be  a  succession  of  serious  students, 
to  supply  the  place  of  those  who  are  transplanted  to  shine 
as  lights  in  the  world.  Yet  you  are  not  alone  ;  for  the  Lord 
is  with  you,  the  best  Counsellor  and  the  best  Friend.  There 
is  a  strange  backwardness  in  us  (at  least  in  me)  fully  to 
improve  that  gracious  intimacy  to  which  He  invites  us. 
Alas  !  that  we  so  easily  wander  from  the  fountain  of  life, 
to  hew  out  cisterns  for  ourselves,  and  that  we  seem  more 
attached  to  a  few  drops  of  His  grace  in  our  fellow-creatures, 
than  to  the  fulness  of  grace  that  is  in  Himself !  I  think 
nothing  gives  me  a  more  striking  sense  of  my  depravity, 
than  my  perverseness  and  folly  in  this  respect  ;  yet  He 
bears  with  me,  and  does  me  good  continually. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   II 

DEAR  SIR,  March,  1776. 

I  KNOW  not  the  length  of  your  college  terms,  but  hope 
this  may  come  time  enough  to  find  you  still  resident.  I  shall 
not  apologize  for  writing  no  sooner,  because  I  leave  other 
letters  of  much  longer  date  unanswered,  that  I  may  write 
so  soon.  It  gave  me  particular  pleasure  to  hear  that  the  Lord 
helped  you  through  your  difficulties,  and  succeeded  your 
desires  ;  and  I  have  sympathized  with  you  in  the  complaints 
you  make  of  a  dark  and  mournful  frame  of  spirits  afterwards. 
But  is  not  this,  upon  the  whole,  right  and  salutary,  that  if 
the  Lord  is  pleased  at  one  time  to  strengthen  us  remarkably 
in  answer  to  prayer,  He  should  leave  us  at  another  time, 
so  far  as  to  give  us  a  real  sensibility  that  we  were  supported 
by  His  power,  and  not  our  own  ?  Besides,  as  you  feel 
a  danger  of  being  elated  by  the  respect  paid  you,  was  it  not 
a  merciful  and  seasonable  dispensation  that  made  you  feel 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   351 

your  own  weakness,  to  prevent  your  being  exalted  above 
measure  ?  The  Lord,  by  withdrawing  His  smiles  from  you, 
reminded  you  that  the  smiles  of  men  are  of  little  value, 
otherwise,  perhaps,  you  might  have  esteemed  them  too 
highly.  Indeed,  you  scholars  that  know  the  Lord,  are 
singular  instances  of  the  power  of  His  grace  ;  for  (like  the 
young  men  in  Dan.  iii.)  you  live  in  the  very  midst  of  the 
fire.  Mathematical  studies,  in  particular,  have  such  a 
tendency  to  engross  and  fix  the  mind  to  the  contemplation 
of  cold  and  uninteresting  truth,  and  you  are  surrounded 
with  so  much  intoxicating  applause  if  you  succeed  in  your 
researches,  that  for  a  soul  to  be  kept  humble  and  alive 
in  such  a  situation,  is  such  a  proof  of  the  Lord's  presence  and 
power,  as  Moses  had  when  he  saw  the  bush  unconsumed  in 
the  midst  of  the  flames.  I  believe  I  had  naturally  a  turn 
for  the  mathematics  myself,  and  dabbled  in  them  a  little 
way  ;  and  though  I  did  not  go  far,  my  head,  sleeping  and 
waking,  was  stuffed  with  diagrams  and  calculations.  Every 
thing  I  looked  at,  that  exhibited  either  a  right  line,  or  a 
curve,  set  my  wits  a  wool-gathering.  What,  then,  must  have 
been  the  case,  had  I  proceeded  to  the  interior  arcana,  of 
speculative  geometry  ?  I  bought  my  namesake's  Principia, 
but  I  have  reason  to  be  thankful  that  I  left  it  as  I  found  it, 
a  sealed  book,  and  that  the  bent  of  my  mind  was  drawn 
to  something  of  more  real  importance  before  I  understood  it. 
I  say  not  this  to  discourage  you  in  your  pursuits  :  they  lie 
in  your  line  and  path  of  duty  ;  in  mine  they  did  not.  As 
to  your  academies,  I  am  glad  that  the  Lord  enables  you  to 
show  those  among  whom  you  live,  that  the  knowledge  of  His 
Gospel  does  not  despoil  you  either  of  diligence  or  acumen. 
However,  as  I  said,  you  need  a  double  guard  of  grace,  to 
preserve  you  from  being  either  puffed  up  or  deadened  by  those 
things  which,  considered  in  any  other  view  than  quo  ad  hoc, 
to  preserve  your  rank  and  character  in  the  University  while 
you  remain  there,  are,  if  taken  in  the  aggregate,  little  better 
than  a  splendidum  nihil.  If  my  poor  people  at  -  -  could 
form  the  least  conception  of  what  the  learned  at  Cambridge 
chiefly  admire  in  each  other,  and  what  is  the  intrinsic  reward 
of  all  their  toil,  they  would  say  (supposing  they  could  speak 
Latin),  Quam  suave  istis  suavitatibus  car  ere  \  How  gladly 
would  some  of  them,  if  such  mathematical  and  metaphysical 


352  CARDIPHONIA  : 

lumber  could  by  any  means  get  into  their  heads,  how  gladly 
would  they  drink  at  Lethe's  stream  to  get  it  out  again  ! 
How  many  perplexities  are  they  freed  from  by  their  happy 
ignorance,  which  often  pester  those  to  their  life's  end 
who  have  had  their  natural  proneness  to  vain  reasoning 
sharpened  by  academical  studies  ! 


LETTER    III 

DEAR  SIR,  May  18,  1776. 

THOUGH  I  wished  to  hear  from  you  sooner,  I  put  a  candid 
interpretation  upon  your  silence,  was  somewhat  apprehensive 
for  your  health,  but  felt  no  disposition  to  anger.  Let  your 
correspondence  be  free  from  fetters.  Write  when  you 
please,  and  when  you  can  :  I  will  do  the  like.  Apologies 
may  be  spared  on  both  sides.  I  am  not  a  very  punctual 
correspondent  myself,  having  so  many  letters  to  write,  and 
therefore  have  no  right  to  stand  upon  punctilios  with  you. 

I  sympathize  with  you  in  your  sorrow  for  your  friend's 
death.  Such  cases  are  very  distressing.  But  such  a  case 
might  have  been  our  own.  Let  us  pray  for  grace  to  be 
thankful  for  ourselves,  and  submit  everything  in  humble 
silence  to  the  sovereign  Lord,  who  has  a  right  to  do  as  He 
pleases  with  His  own.  Wejfeel  what  happens  in  our  own 
little  connexions  ;  but  Ojthe  dreadful  mischief  of  sin  ! 
Instances  of  this  kind  are  as  frequent  as  the  hours,  the 
minutes,  perhaps  the  moments,  of  every  day  :  and  though 
we  know  but  one  in  a  million,  the  souls  of  others  have  an 
equal  capacity  for  endless  happiness  or  misery.  In  this 
situation  the  Lord  has  honoured  us  with  a  call  to  warn  our 
fellow-sinners  of  their  danger,  and  to  set  before  them  His 
free  and  sure  salvation  ;  and  if  He  is  pleased  to  make  us 
instrumental  in  snatching  but  one  as  a  brand  out  of  the  fire, 
it  is  a  service  of  more  importance  than  to  be  the  means  of 
preserving  a  whole  nation  from  temporal  ruin.  I  congratu 
late  you  upon  your  admission  into  the  ministry,  and  pray 
Him  to  favour  you  with  a  single  eye  to  His  glory,  and  a 
fresh  anointing  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  that  you  may  come 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   353 

forth  as  a  scribe  well  instructed  in  the  mysteries  of  His 
Kingdom,  and  that  His  word  in  your  mouth  may  abundantly 
prosper. 

I  truly  pity  those  who  rise  early  and  take  late  rest, 
and  eat  the  bread  of  carefulness  with  no  higher  prize  and 
prospect  in  view  than  the  obtaining  of  academical  honours. 
Such  pursuits  will  ere  long  appear  (as  they  really  are)  vain 
as  the  sports  of  children.  May  the  Lord  impress  them  with 
a  noble  ambition  of  living  to  and  for  Him  !  If  these  adven 
turers,  who  are  labouring  for  pebbles  under  the  semblance 
of  goodly  pearls,  had  a  discovery  of  the  pearl  of  great  price, 
how  quickly  and  gladly  would  they  lay  down  their  admired 
attainments,  and  become  fools  that  they  might  be  truly 
wise  !  What  a  snare  have  you  escaped  !  You  would  have 
been  poorly  content  with  the  name  of  a  mathematician  or 
a  poet,  and  looked  no  further,  had  not  He  visited  your 
heart,  and  enlightened  you  by  His  grace.  Now  I  trust  you 
account  your  former  gain  but  loss,  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord.  \Yhat  you  have 
attained  in  a  way  of  literature  will  be  useful  lo  you  if 
sanctified,  and  chiefly  so  by  the  knowledge  you  have  of  its 
insufficiency  to  any  valuable  purpose  in  the  great  concerns 
of  walking  with  God,  and  winning  souls. 

I  am  pleased  with  your  fears,  lest  you  should  not  be  under 
stood  in  your  preaching.  Indeed,  there  is  a  danger  of  it. 
It  is  not  easy  for  persons  of  quick  parts  duly  to  conceive 
how  amazingly  ignorant  and  slow  of  apprehension  the  bulk 
of  our  congregations  generally  are.  When  our  own  ideas 
are  clear,  and  our  expressions  proper,  we  are  ready  to  think 
we  have  sufficiently  explained  ourselves  ;  and  yet,  perhaps, 
nine  out  of  ten  (especially  of  those  who  are  destitute  of 
spiritual  light)  know  little  more  of  what  we  say  than  if  we 
were  speaking  Greek.  A  degree  of  this  inconvenience  is 
always  inseparable  from  written  discourses.  They  cast  our 
thoughts  into  a  style  which,  though  familiar  to  ourselves, 
is  too  remote  from  common  conversation  to  be  compre 
hended  by  narrow  capacities  ;  which  is  one  chief  reason 
of  the  preference  I  give,  c&teris  paribus,  to  extempore 
preaching.  When  we  read  to  the  people,  they  think  them 
selves  less  concerned  in  what  is  offered,  than  when  we  speak 
to  them  point  blank.  It  seems  a  good  rule,  which  I  have 
c.  z 


354  CARniPHONlA  : 

met  with  somewhere,  and  which  perhaps  I  have  mentioned 
to  you,  to  fix  your  eyes  upon  some  one  of  the  auditory  whom 
we  judge  of  the  least  capacity  ;  if  we  can  make  him  under 
stand,  we  may  hope  to  be  understood  by  the  rest.  Let 
those  who  seek  to  be  admired  for  the  exactness  of  their 
composition,  enjoy  the  poor  reward  they  aim  at.  It  is  best 
for  Gospel  preachers  to  speak  plain  language.  If  we  thus 
singly  aim  at  the  glory  of  our  Master  and  the  good  of  souls, 
we  -may  hope  for  the  accompanying  power  of  His  Spirit, 
which  will  give  our  discourses  a  weight  and  energy  that 
Demosthenes  had  no  conception  of. 

I  can  give  you  no  information  of  a  curacy  in  a  better  situa 
tion.  But  either  the  Lord  will  provide  you  one,  or  I  trust 
He  will  give  you  usefulness  and  a  competency  of  health  and 
spirits  where  you  are.  He  who  caused  Daniel  to  thrive 
upon  pulse,  can  make  you  strong  and  cheerful  even  in  the 
Fens,  if  He  sees  that  best  for  you.  All  things  obey  Him, 
and  you  need  not  fear  but  He  will  enable  you  for  whatever 
service  He  has  appointed  you  to  perform. 

This  letter  has  been  a  week  in  hand  ;  many  interruptions 
from  without,  and  indispositions  within.  I  seem  to  while 
away  my  life,  and  shall  be  glad  to  be  saved  upon  the  footing 
of  the  thief  upon  the  cross,  without  any  hope  or  plea  but 
the  power  and  grace  of  Jesus,  who  has  said,  "  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  out."  Adieu. 

Pray  for  yours,  &c. 


LETTER    IV 

DEAR  SIR,  Sept.  10,  1777. 

I  WAS  glad  to  hear  from  you  at  last,  not  being  willing 
to  think  myself  forgotten.  I  supposed  you  were  ill.  It  seems, 
by  your  account,  that  you  are  far  from  well  :  but  I  hope 
you  are  as  well  as  you  ought  to  be  ;  that  is,  as  well  as  the  Lord 
sees  it  good  for  you  to  be.  I  say,  I  hope  so  :  for  I  am  not 
sure  that  the  length  and  vehemence  of  your  sermons,  which 
you  tell  me  astonish  many  people,  may  not  be  rather 
improper  and  imprudent,  considering  the  weakness  of  your 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   355 

constitution  ;  at  least,  if  this  expression  of  yours  be  justly 
expounded  by  a  report  which  has  reached  me,  that  the 
length  of  your  sermons  is  frequently  two  hours,  and  the 
vehemence  of  your  voice  so  great,  that  you  may  be  heard 
far  beyond  the  church-walls.  Unwilling  should  I  be  to 
damp  your  zeal ;  but  I  feel  unwilling,  likewise,  that,  by 
excessive  unnecessary  exertions,  you  should  wear  away  at 
once,  and  preclude  your  own  usefulness.  This  concern  is 
so  much  upon  my  mind,  that  I  begin  with  it,  though  it 
makes  me  skip  over  the  former  part  of  your  letter ;  but 
when  I  have  relieved  myself  upon  this  point,  I  can  easily 
skip  back  again.  I  am  perhaps  the  more  ready  to  credit 
the  report,  because  I  know  the  spirits  of  you  nervous 
people  are  highly  volatile.  I  consider  you  as  mounted  upon 
a  fiery  steed  ;  and  provided  you  use  due  management  and 
circumspection,  you  travel  more  pleasantly  than  we  plodding 
folks  upon  our  sober  phlegmatic  nags  ;  but  then,  if  instead 
of  pulling  the  rein  you  plunge  in  the  spurs,  and  add  wings 
to  the  wind,  I  cannot  but  be  in  pain  for  the  consequences. 
Permit  me  to  remind  you  of  the  Terentian  adage,  Ne  quid 
nimis.  The  end  of  speaking  is  to  be  heard,  and  if  the 
persons  farthest  from  the  preacher  can  hear,  he  speaks  loud 
enough.  Upon  some  occasions,  a  few  sentences  of  a  discourse 
may  be  enforced  with  a  voice  still  more  elevated  ;  but  to  be 
uncommonly  loud  from  beginning  to  end,  is  hurtful  to  the 
speaker,  and,  I  apprehend,  no  way  useful  to  the  hearer. 
It  is  a  fault  which  many  inadvertently  give  in  to  at  first, 
and  which  many  have  repented  of  too  late  ;  when  practice 
has  rendered  it  habitual,  it  is  not  easily  corrected.  I  know 
some  think,  that  preaching  very  loudly,  and  preaching  with 
power,  are  synonymous  expressions  ;  but  your  judgment 
is  too  good  to  fall  in  with  that  prejudice.  If  I  were  a  good 
Grecian,  I  would  send  you  a  quotation  from  Homer,  where 
he  describes  the  eloquence  of  Nestor,  and  compares  it,  if  I 
remember  right,  not  to  a  thunder-storm  or  a  hurricane, 
but  to  a  fall  of  snow,  which,  though  pressing,  insinuating, 
and  penetrating,  is  soft  and  gentle.  You  know  the  passage  : 
I  think  the  simile  is  beautiful  and  expressive. 

Secondly  (as  we  say),  as  to  long  preaching.  There  is  still 
in  being  an  old-fashioned  instrument  called  an  hour-glass, 
which,  in  days  of  yore,  before  clocks  and  watches  abounded, 

Z2 


356  CARD1PHONIA  : 

used  to  be  the  measure  of  many  a  good  sermon,  and  I  think 
it  a  tolerable  stint.  I  cannot  wind  up  my  ends  to  my  own 
satisfaction  in  a  much  shorter  time,  nor  am  I  pleased  with 
myself  if  I  greatly  exceed  it.  If  an  angel  were  to  preach  for 
two  hours,  unless  his  hearers  were  angels  likewise,  I  believe 
the  greater  part  of  them  would  wish  he  had  done.  It  is  a 
shame  it  should  be  so  ;  but  so  it  is,  partly  through  the  weak- 
nes?,  and  partly  through  the  wickedness,  of  the  flesh  ; 
we  can  seldom  stretch  our  attention  to  spiritual  things  for 
two  hours  together,  without  cracking  it,  and  hurting  its 
spring ;  and  when  weariness  begins,  edification  ends. 
Perhaps  it  is  better  to  feed  our  people  like  chickens,  a  little 
and  often,  than  to  cram  them  like  turkeys,  till  they  cannot 
hold  one  gobbet  more.  Besides,  overlong  sermons  break 
in  upon  family  concerns,  and  often  call  off  the  thoughts 
from  the  sermon  to  the  pudding  at  home,  which  is  in  danger 
of  being  overboiled.  They  leave  likewise  but  little  time 
for  secret  or  family  religion,  which  are  both  very  good  in 
their  place,  and  are  entitled  to  a  share  in  the  Lord's  Day. 
Upon  the  preacher  they  must  have  a  bad  effect,  and  tend 
to  wear  lu'm  down  before  his  time  :  and  I  have  known  some, 
by  overacting  at  first,  have  been  constrained  to  sit  still, 
and  do  little  or  nothing  for  months  or  years  afterwards.  I 
rather  recommend  to  you  the  advice  of  your  brother  Cantab, 
Hobson  the  carrier,  so  to  set  out,  that  you  may  hold  out  to 
your  journey's  end. 

Now,  if  Fame,  with  her  hundred  mouths,  has  brought  me 
a  false  report  of  you,  and  you  are  not  guilty  of  preaching 
either  too  long  or  too  loud,  still  I  am  not  willing  my  remon 
strance  may  stand  for  nothing.  I  desire  you  will  accept  it, 
and  thank  me  for  it,  as  a  proof  of  my  love  to  you,  and  likewise 
of  the  sincerity  of  my  friendship  ;  for  if  I  had  wished  to 
flatter  you,  I  could  easily  have  culled  another  subject. 

I  have  one  more  report  to  trouble  you  with,  because  it 
troubles  me  ;  and,  therefore,  you  must  bear  a  part  of  my 
burden.  Assure  me  it  is  false,  and  I  will  send  you  one  of 
the  handsomest  letters  I  can  devise,  by  way  of  thanks.  It 
is  reported,  then  (but  I  will  not  believe  it  till  you  say  I  must) 
that  you  stand  upon  your  tiptoes,  upon  the  point  of  being 
whirled  out  of  our  vortex,  and  hurried  away,  comet-like, 
into  the  regions  of  eccentricity  :  in  plain  English,  that  you 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   357 

have  a  hankering  to  be  an  itinerant.  If  this  be  true,  I  will 
not  be  the  first  to  tell  it  in  St.  John's  College  or  to  publish  it 
on  the  banks  of  Cam,  lest  the  mathematicians  rejoice,  and 
the  poets  triumph.  But  to  be  serious,  for  it  is  a  serious 
subject,  let  me  beg  you  to  deliberate  well,  and  to  pray 
earnestly  before  you  take  this  step.  Be  afraid  of  acting 
in  your  own  spirit,  or  under  a  wrong  impression  ;  however 
honestly  you  mean,  you  may  be  mistaken.  The  Lord  has 
given  you  a  little  charge  :  be  faithful  in  it,  and  in  His  good 
time  He  will  advance  you  to  a  greater  ;  but  let  His  providence 
evidently  open  the  door  for  you,  and  be  afraid  of  moving 
one  step  before  the  cloud  and  pillar.  I  have  had  my  warm 
fits  and  desires  of  this  sort  in  my  time  ;  but  I  have  reason 
to  be  thankful,  that  I  was  held  in  with  a  strong  hand.  I 
wish  there  were  more  itinerant  preachers.  If  a  man  has 
grace  and  zeal,  and  but  little  funds,  let  him  go  and  diffuse 
the  substance  of  a  dozen  sermons  over  as  many  counties  ; 
but  you  have  natural  and  acquired  abilities,  which  qualify 
you  for  the  more  difficult,  and  in  my  judgment,  not  less 
important,  station  of  a  parochial  minister.  I  wish  you  to 
be  a  burning,  shining,  steady  light.  You  may  perhaps 
have  less  popularity,  that  is,  you  will  be  less  exposed  to 
the  workings  of  self  and  the  snares  of  Satan,  if  you  stay 
with  us  ;  but  I  think  you  may  live  in  the  full  exercise  of 
your  gifts  and  graces,  be  more  consistent  with  your  voluntary 
engagements,  and  have  more  peace  of  mind,  and  humble 
intercourse  with  God,  in  watching  over  a  flock  which  He 
has  committed  to  you,  than,  by  forsaking  them,  to  wander 
up  and  down  the  earth  without  a  determined  scope. 

Thus  far  I  have  been  more  attentive  to  the  utile  than 
the  duke.  I  should  now  return  to  join  you  in  celebrating 
the  praises  of  poetry,  and  the  other  subjects  of  your  letter  ; 
but  time  and  paper  fail  together.  Let  me  hear  from  you 
soon,  or  I  shall  fear  I  have  displeased  you,  which,  fond  as  I 
am  of  poetry,  would  give  me  more  pain  than  I  ever  found 
pleasure  in  reading  Alexander's  Feast.  Indeed  I  love  you  ; 
I  often  measure  over  the  walks  we  have  taken  together ; 
and  when  I  come  to  a  favourite  stile,  or  such  a  favourite 
spot  upon  the  hill  top,  I  am  reminded  of  something  that 
passed,  and  say,  or  at  least  think,  Hie  stetit  C-  — . 

Yours,  &c. 


358  CARDIPHONIA  : 

LETTER   V 

DEAR  SIR, 

BY  your  flying  letter  from  London,  as  well  as  by 
your  more  particular  answer  to  my  last,  I  judge  that  what 
I  formerly  wrote  will  answer  no  other  end  than  to  be  a 
testimony  of  my  fidelity  and  friendship.  I  am  ready  to 
thirik  you  were  so  far  determined  before  you  applied  to  the 
Bishop,  as  to  be  rather  pleased  than  disappointed  by  a 
refusal,  which  seemed  to  afford  you  liberty  to  preach  at 
large.  As  your  testimonium  was  not  countersigned,  the 
consequence  was  no  other  than  might  have  been  expected  ; 
yet  I  have  been  told  (how  true  I  know  not),  that  the  Bishop 
would  have  passed  over  the  informality,  if  you  had  not, 
unasked  by  him,  avowed  yourself  a  Methodist.  I  think,  if 
you  had  been  unwilling  to  throw  hindrances  in  your  own 
way,  the  most  perfect  simplicity  would  have  required  no 
more  of  you  than  to  have  given  a  plain  and  honest  answer 
to  such  questions  as  he  might  think  proper  to  propose.  You 

might  have  assisted  Mr.  for  a  season  without  being 

in  full  orders  ;  and  you  may  still,  if  you  are  not  resolved  at 
all  events  to  push  out.  He  wrote  to  me  about  you,  and  you 
may  easily  judge  what  answer  I  gave.  I  have  heard  from 
him  a  second  time,  and  he  laments  that  he  cannot  have  you. 
I  likewise  lament  that  you  cannot  be  with  him.  I  think 
you  would  have  loved  him  ;  and  I  hoped  his  acquaintance 
might  not  have  proved  unuseful  to  you. 

If  you  have  not  actually  passed  the  Rubicon,  if  there  be 
yet  room  for  deliberation,  I  once  more  intreat  you  to  pause 
and  consider.  In  many  respects  I  ought  to  be  willing  to 
learn  from  you  ;  but  in  one  point  I  have  a  little  advantage 
of  you  :  I  am  some  years  older,  both  in  life  and  in  profes 
sion  ;  and  in  this  difference  of  time  perhaps  I  have  learned 
something  more  of  the  heart,  the  world,  and  the  devices  of 
Satan  than  you  have  had  opportunity  for.  I  hope  I  would 
not  damp  your  zeal,  but  I  will  pray  the  Lord  to  direct  it  into 
the  best  channel  for  permanent  usefulness  ;  I  say  permanent ; 
I  doubt  not  that  you  would  be  useful  in  the  itinerant  way  ; 
but  I  more  and  more  observe  great  inconveniences  follow  in 
the  way.  Where  you  make  a  gathering  of  people,  others 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   359 

will  follow  you  ;  and  if  they  all  possessed  your  spirit, 
and  had  your  disinterested  views,  it  might  be  well.  But 
generally  an  able  preacher  only  so  far  awakens  people  to 
a  desire  to  hear,  as  exposes  them  to  the  incursions  of  various 
winds  of  doctrine,  and  the  attempts  of  injudicious  pretenders, 
who  will  resemble  you  in  nothing  but  your  eagerness  to  post 
from  place  to  place.  From  such  measures  in  time  proceed 
errors,  parties,  contentions,  offences,  enthusiasm,  spiritual 
pride,  and  a  noisy  ostentatious  form  of  godliness,  but  little 
of  that  power  and  life  of  faith  which  shows  itself  by  humility, 
meekness,  and  love. 

A  parochial  minister,  who  lives  among  his  people,  who 
sees  and  converses  with  them  frequently,  and  exemplifies 
his  doctrine  in  their  view  by  his  practice,  having  knowledge 
of  their  states,  trials,  growth,  and  dangers,  suits  himself 
to  their  various  occasions,  and,  by  the  blessing  of  God, 
builds  them  up,  and  brings  them  forward  in  faith  and 
holiness.  He  is  instrumental  in  forming  their  experience  ; 
he  leads  them  to  a  solid,  orderly,  Scriptural  knowledge  of 
Divine  things.  If  his  name  is  not  in  so  many  mouths  as  that 
of  the  itinerant,  it  is  upon  the  hearts  of  the  people  of  his 
charge.  He  lives  with  them  as  a  father  with  his  children. 
His  steady,  consistent  behaviour  silences  in  some  measure 
the  clamours  of  his  enemies ;  and  the  Lord  opens  him  doors  of 
occasional  usefulness  in  many  places,  without  provoking 
our  superiors  to  discountenance  other  young  men  who 
are  seeking  Orders. 

I  now  wish  I  had  taken  larger  paper,  for  I  have  not  room 
for  all  I  would  say.  I  have  no  end  to  serve.  I  am  of  no 
party.  I  wish  well  to  irregulars  and  itinerants,  who  love 
and  preach  the  Gospel.  I  am  content  that  they  should 
labour  that  way  who  have  not  talents  nor  funds  to  support 
the  character  and  fill  up  the  office  of  a  parochial  minister. 
But  I  think  you  are  qualified  for  more  important  service. 
If  you  had  patient  faith  to  wait  awhile  for  the  Lord's 
opening,  I  doubt  not  but  you  might  yet  obtain  Priest's 
Orders.  We  are  hasty,  like  children  ;  but  God  often  appoints 
us  a  waiting  time.  Perhaps  it  requires  as  much  or  more 
grace  to  wait  than  to  be  active  ;  for  it  is  more  trying  to 
self.  After  all,  whatever  course  you  take,  I  shall  love  you, 
pray  for  you,  and  be  glad  to  see  you,  I  am,  &c. 


EIGHT     LETTERS 

TO 

MRS.   

LETTER    I 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  July  —  1764. 

THE  complaints  you  make  are  inseparable  from  a 
spiritual  acquaintance  with  our  own  hearts :  I  would 
not  wish  you  to  be  less  affected  with  a  sense  of  indwelling 
sin.  It  becomes  us  to  be  humbled  in  the  dust ;  yet  our 
grief,  though  it  cannot  be  too  great,  may  be  under  a  wrong 
direction  ;  and  if  it  leads  us  to  impatience  or  distrust,  it 
certainly  is  so. 

Sin  is  the  sickness  of  the  soul,  in  itself  mortal  and  incurable 
as  to  any  power  in  Heaven  or  earth,  but  that  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  only.  But  He  is  the  great,  the  infallible  Physician. 
Have  we  the  privilege  to  know  His  name  ?  Have  we  been 
enabled  to  put  ourselves  into  His  hand  ?  We  have  then 
no  more  to  do  but  to  attend  to  His  prescriptions,  to  be  satis 
fied  with  His  methods,  and  to  wait  His  time.  It  is  lawful 
to  wish  we  were  well ;  it  is  natural  to  groan,  being  burdened  ; 
but  still  He  must  and  will  take  His  own  course  with  us  ; 
and,  however  dissatisfied  with  ourselves,  we  ought  still  to  be 
thankful  that  He  has  begun  His  work  in  us,  and  to  believe 
that  He  will  also  make  an  end.  Therefore  while  we  mourn, 
we  should  likewise  rejoice  ;  we  should  encourage  ourselves 
to  expect  all  that  He  has  promised  ;  and  we  should  limit 
our  expectations  by  His  promises.  We  are  sure,  that  when 
the  Lord  delivers  us  from  the  guilt  and  dominion  of  sin, 
He  could  with  equal  ease  free  us  entirely  from  sin  if  He 
pleased.  The  doctrine  of  sinless  perfection  is  not  to  be 
rejected  as  though  it  were  a  thing  simply  impossible  in 

360 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   361 

itself,  for  nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord,  but  because  it  is 
contrary  to  that  method  which  He  has  chosen  to  proceed 
by.  He  has  appointed  that  sanctification  should  be  effected, 
and  sin  mortified,  not  at  once  completely,  but  by  little  and 
little  ;  and  doubtless  He  has  wise  reasons  for  it.  Therefore, 
though  we  are  to  desire  a  growth  in  grace,  we  should  at  the 
same  time  acquiesce  in  His  appointment,  and  not  be  dis 
couraged  or  despond,  because  we  feel  that  conflict  which 
His  word  informs  us  will  only  terminate  with  our  lives. 

Again,  some  of  the  first  prayers  which  the  Spirit  of  God 
teaches  us  to  put  up,  are  for  a  clearer  sense  of  the  sinfulness 
of  sin,  and  our  vileness  on  account  of  it.  Now,  if  the  Lord 
is  pleased  to  answer  your  prayers  in  this  respect,  though  it 
will  afford  you  cause  enough  for  humiliation,  yet  it  should 
be  received  likewise  with  thankfulness,  as  a  token  for  good. 
Your  heart  is  not  worse  than  it  was  formerly,  only  your 
spiritual  knowledge  is  increased ;  and  this  is  no  small 
part  of  the  growth  in  grace  which  you  are  thirsting  after 
to  be  truly  humbled,  and  emptied,  and  made  little  in  your 
own  eyes. 

Further,  the  examples  of  the  saints  recorded  in  Scripture 
prove  (and  indeed  of  the  saints  in  general),  that  the  greater 
measure  they  have  had  of  the  grace  of  God  in  truth,  the  more 
conscientious  and  lively  they  have  been  ;  and  the  more  they 
have  been  favoured  with  assurances  of  the  Divine  favour, 
so  much  the  more  deep  and  sensible  their  perception  of 
indwelling  sin  and  infirmity  has  always  been  :  so  it  was 
with  Job,  Isaiah,  Daniel,  and  Paul.  It  is  likewise  common 
to  overcharge  ourselves.  Indeed,  we  cannot  think  ourselves 
worse  than  we  really  are  ;  yet  some  things  which  abate  the 
comfort  and  alacrity  of  our  Christian  profession,  are  rather 
impediments  than  properly  sinful,  and  will  not  be  imputed 
to  us  by  Him  who  knows  our  frame,  and  remembers  that 
we  are  but  dust.  Thus,  to  have  an  infirm  memory,  to  be 
subject  to  disordered,  irregular,  or  low  spirits,  are  faults  of 
the  constitution,  in  which  the  will  has  no  share,  though  they 
are  all  burdensome  and  oppressive,  and  sometimes  needlessly 
so,  by  our  charging  ourselves  with  guilt  on  their  account. 
The  same  may  be  observed  of  the  unspeakable  and  fierce 
suggestions  of  Satan,  with  which  some  persons  are  pestered, 
but  which  shall  be  laid  to  him  from  whom  they  proceed, 


362  CARDIPHONIA  : 

and  not  to  them  who  are  troubled  and  terrified,  because 
they  are  forced  to  feel  them.  Lastly,  it  is  by  the  experience 
of  these  evils  within  ourselves,  and  by  feeling  our  utter 
insufficiency  either  to  perform  duty,  or  to  withstand  our 
enemies,  that  the  Lord  takes  occasion  to  show  us  the  suit 
ableness,  the  sufficiency,  the  freeness,  the  unchangeableness, 
of  His  power  and  grace.  This  is  the  inference  St.  Paul 
draws  from  his  complaints,  Rom.  vii.  25  ;  and  he  learnt 
it  upon  a  trying  occasion  from  the  Lord's  own  mouth, 
2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9. 

Let  us  then,  dear  Madam,  be  thankful  and  cheerful,  and 
while  we  take  shame  to  ourselves,  let  us  glorify  God,  by 
giving  Jesus  the  honour  due  to  His  name.  Though  we  are 
poor,  He  is  rich  ;  though  we  are  weak,  He  is  strong  ;  though 
we  have  nothing,  He  possesses  all  things.  He  suffered  for 
us  ;  He  calls  us  to  be  conformed  to  Him  in  sufferings.  He 
conquered  in  His  own  person,  and  He  will  make  each  of  His 
members  more  than  conquerors  in  due  season.  It  is  good 
to  have  one  eye  upon  ourselves,  but  the  other  should  ever 
be  fixed  on  Him  who  stands  in  the  relation  of  Saviour, 
Husband,  Head,  and  Shepherd.  In  Him  we  have,  righteous 
ness,  peace,  and  powe  :  He  can  control  all  that  we  fear ; 
so  that  if  our  path  should  be  through  the  fire  or  through 
the  water,  neither  the  flood  shall  drown  us,  nor  the  flame 
kindle  upon  us,  and  ere  long  He  will  cut  short  our  conflicts, 
and  say,  Come  up  hither.  "  Then  shall  our  grateful  songs 
abound,  and  every  tear  be  wiped  away."  Having  such 
promises  and  assurances,  let  us  lift  up  our  banner  in  His 
name,  and  press  on  through  every  discouragement. 

With  regard  to  company  that  has  not  a  savour  of  the  best 
tilings,  as  it  is  not  your  choice,  I  would  advise  you  (when 
necessary)  to  bear  it  as  a  cross  :  we  cannot  suffer  by  being 
where  we  ought  to  be,  except  through  our  own  impatience  ; 
and  I  have  an  idea,  that  when  we  are  providentially  called 
amongst  such  (for  something  is  due  to  friends  and  relations, 
whether  they  walk  with  us  or  no),  that  the  hours  need  not 
be  wholly  lost  ;  nothing  can  pass  but  may  be  improved  ;  the 
most  trivial  conversation  may  afford  us  new  views  of  the 
heart,  new  confirmation  of  Scripture,  and  renew  a  sense  of 
our  obligations  to  distinguishing  grace,  which  has  made 
us  in  any  degree  to  differ.  I  would  wish,  when  you  go  among 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   363 

your  friends,  that  you  do  not  confine  your  views  to  getting 
safe  away  from  them  without  loss,  but  entertain  a  hope  that 
you  may  be  sent  to  do  some  of  them  good.  You  cannot 
tell  what  effect  a  word  or  a  look  may  have,  if  the  Lord  is 
pleased  to  bless  it.  I  think  we  may  humbly  hope,  that  while 
we  sincerely  desire  to  please  the  Lord,  and  to  be  guided  by 
Him  in  all  things,  He  will  not  suffer  us  to  take  a  journey,  or 
hardly  to  make  a  short  visit,  which  shall  not  answer  some 
good  purpose  to  ourselves  or  others,  or  both.  While  our 
gay  friends  affect  an  air  of  raillery,  the  Lord  may  give  you 
a  secret  witness  in  their  consciences  ;  and  something  they 
observe  in  you,  or  hear  from  you,  may  set  them  on  thinking, 
perhaps  after  you  are  gone,  or  after  the  first  occasion  has 
entirely  slipped  your  memory,  Eccles.  xi.  i.  For  my  own 
part,  when  I  consider  the  power,  the  freedom  of  Divine 
grace,  and  how  sovereign  the  Lord  is  in  the  choice  of  the 
instruments  and  means  by  which  He  is  pleased  to  work, 
I  live  in  hopes  from  day  to  day  of  hearing  wonders  of  this 
sort.  I  despair  of  nobody  ;  and  if  I  sometimes  am  ready 
to  think  such  or  such  a  person  seems  more  unlikely  than 
others  to  be  brought  in,  I  relieve  myself  by  a  possibility 
that  that  very  person,  and  for  that  very  reason,  may  be  the 
first  instance.  The  Lord's  thoughts  are  not  like  ours  ; 
in  His  love  and  in  His  ways  there  are  heights  which  we  cannot 
reach,  depths  which  we  cannot  fathom,  lengths  and  breadths 
beyond  the  ken  of  our  feeble  sight.  Let  us  then  simply 
depend  upon  Him  and  do  our  little  best,  leaving  the  event 
in  His  hand. 

I  cannot  tell  if  you  know  anything  of  Mrs.  -  — .  In 
a  letter  I  received  yesterday,  she  writes  thus  :— "  I  am  at 
present  very  ill  with  some  disorder  in  my  throat,  which 
seems  to  threaten  my  life  ;  but  death  or  life,  things  present 
or  things  to  come,  all  things  are  mine,  and  I  am  Christ's, 
and  Christ  is  God's.  O  glorious  privilege  !  precious  founda 
tion  of  soul-rest  and  peace,  when  all  things  about  us  are  most 
troublous  !  Soon  we  shall  be  at  home  with  Christ,  where 
sin,  sorrow,  and  death,  have  no  place  ;  and,  in  the  mean  time, 
our  Beloved  will  lead  us  through  the  wilderness.  How 
safe,  how  joyous  are  we,  may  we  be,  in  the  most  evil  case  !  " 
—If  these  should  be  some  of  the  last  notes  of  this  swan, 
I  think  them  worth  preserving.  May  we  not  with  good 


364  CARDJPHONIA  : 

reason  say,  who  would  not  be  a  Christian  ?  The  Lord 
grant  that  you  and  I,  Madam,  and  yours  and  mine,  may 
be  happy  in  the  same  assurance,  when  we  shall  have  death 
and  eternity  near  in  view. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

MY  DEAR  MADAM,  Sept.,  1764. 

YOUR  welfare  I  rejoice  in  ;  your  warfare  I  understand 
something  of.  St.  Paul  describes  his  own  case  in  few  words  : 
"  Without  were  fightings,  within  were  fears."  Does  not 
this  comprehend  all  you  would  say  ?  And  how  are  you  to 
know  experimentally,  either  your  own  weakness,  or  the 
power,  wisdom,  and  grace  of  God,  seasonably  and  sufficiently 
afforded  but  by  frequent  and  various  trials  ?  How  are  the 
graces  of  patience,  resignation,  meekness,  and  faith,  to  be 
discovered  and  increased,  but  by  exercise  ?  The  Lord  has 
chosen,  called,  and  armed  us  for  the  fight  ;  and  shall  we 
wish  to  be  excused  ?  Shall  not  we  rather  rejoice  that  we 
have  the  honour  to  appear  in  such  a  cause,  under  such 
a  Captain,  such  a  banner,  and  in  such  a  company  ?  A 
complete  suit  of  armour  is  provided,  weapons  not  to  be 
resisted,  and  precious  balm  to  heal  us,  if  haply  we  receive 
a  wound,  and  precious  ointment  to  revive  us  when  we  are 
in  danger  of  fainting.  Further,  we  are  assured  of  the 
victory  beforehand  ;  and  O  what  a  crown  is  prepared  for 
every  conqueror,  which  Jesus  the  righteous  Judge,  the 
gracious  Saviour,  shall  place  upon  every  faithful  head  with 
His  own  hand  !  Then  let  us  not  be  weary  and  faint,  for  in 
due  season  we  shall  reap.  The  time  is  short ;  yet  a  little 
while,  and  the  struggle  of  indwelling  sin,  and  the  contradic 
tion  of  surrounding  sinners,  shall  be  known  no  more.  You 
are  blessed,  because  you  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteous 
ness  ;  He  whose  name  is  Amen  has  said  you  shall  be  filled. 
To  claim  the  promise,  is  to  make  it  our  own  ;  yet  it  is  be 
coming  us  to  practise  submission  and  patience,  not  in 
temporals  only,  but  also  in  spirituals.  We  should  be 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   365 

ashamed  and  grieved  at  our  slow  progress,  so  far  as  it  is 
properly  chargeable  to  our  remissness  and  miscarriage  ; 
yet  we  must  not  expect  to  receive  everything  at  once,  but 
wait  for  a  gradual  increase  ;  nor  should  we  forget  to  be 
thankful  for  what  we  may  account  a  littlo,  in  comparison 
of  the  much  we  suppose  others  have  received.  A  little  grace, 
a  spark  of  true  love  to  God,  a  grain  of  living  faith,  though 
small  as  mustard  seed,  is  worth  a  thousand  worlds.  One 
draught  of  the  water  of  life  gives  interest  in  and  earnest  of 
the  whole  fountain.  It  becometh  the  Lord's  people  to  be 
thankful  ;  and  to  acknowledge  His  goodness  in  what  we 
have  received,  is  the  surest  as  well  as  the  pleasantest  method 
of  obtaining  more.  Nor  should  the  grief  arising  from  what 
we  know  and  feel  of  our  own  hearts,  rob  us  of  the  honour, 
comfort,  and  joy,  which  the  word  of  God  designs  us,  in 
what  is  there  recorded  of  the  person,  offices  and  grace  of 
Jesus,  and  the  relations  He  is  pleased  to  stand  in  to  His 
people,  Psalm  xxiii.  I  ;  Isa.  liv.  5  ;  Cant.  v.  16 ;  John  xv. 
15  ;  i  John  ii.  i  ;  John  xv.  i  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5  ;  i  Cor.  i.  30  ; 
Matt.  i.  21-23.  Give  me  leave  to  recommend  to  your  con 
sideration  Psa.  Ixxxix.  15-18.  These  verses  may  be  called 
the  Believers'  Triumph  :  though  they  are  nothing  in  them 
selves,  yet  having  all  in  Jesus,  they  may  rejoice  in  His 
name  all  the  day.  The  Lord  enable  us  so  to  do  !  The  joy 
of  the  Lord  is  the  strength  of  His  people  ;  whereas  unbelief 
makes  our  hands  hang  down,  and  our  knees  feeble,  dispirits 
ourselves,  and  discourages  others  ;  and  though  it  steals 
upon  us  under  a  semblance  of  humility,  it  is  indeed  the  very 
essence  of  pride.  By  inward  and  outward  exercises  the 
Lord  is  promoting  the  best  desire  of  your  heart,  and  answer 
ing  your  daily  prayers.  Would  you  have  assurance  ?  The 
true  solid  assurance  is  to  be  obtained  no  other  way.  When 
young  Christians  are  greatly  comforted  with  the  Lord's 
love  and  presence,  their  doubts  and  fears  are  for  that  season 
at  an  end.  But  this  is  not  assurance  ;  so  soon  as  the  Lord 
hides  His  face,  they  are  troubled,  and  ready  to  question  the 
very  foundation  of  hope.  Assurance  grows  by  repeated 
conflict,  by  our  repeated  experimental  proof  of  the  Lord's 
power  and  goodness  to  save  ;  when  we  have  been  brought 
very  low  and  helped,  sorely  wounded  and  healed,  cast  down 
and  raised  again,  have  given  up  all  hope,  and  been  suddenly 


366  CARD1PHONIA  : 

snatched  from  danger,  and  placed  in  safety  ;  and  when  these 
things  have  been  repeated  to  us  and  in  us  a  thousand  times 
over,  'we  begin  to  learn  to  trust  simply  to  the  word  and 
l>ower  of  God,  beyond  and  against  appearances  ;  and  this 
trust,  when  habitual  and  strong,  bears  the  name  of  assur 
ance  ; — for  even  assurance  has  degrees. 

You  have  good  reason,  Madam,  to  suppose,  that  the  love 
of  the.  best  Christians  to  an  unseen  Saviour  is  far  short  of 
what  it  ought  to  be.  If  your  heart  be  like  mine,  and  you 
examine  your  love  to  Christ  by  the  warmth  and  frequency 
of  your  emotions  towards  Him,  you  will  often  be  in  a  sad 
suspense,  whether  or  no  you  love  Him  at  all.  The  best  mark 
to  judge,  and  which  He  has  given  us  for  that  purpose,  is  to 
inquire  if  His  word  and  will  have  a  prevailing,  governing 
influence  upon  our  lives  and  temper.  If  we  love  Him,  we 
do  endeavour  to  keep  His  commandments  ;  and  it  will 
hold  the  other  way  ;  if  we  have  a  desire  to  please  Him,  we 
undoubtedly  love  Him.  Obedience  is  the  best  test ;  and 
when  amidst  all  our  imperfections,  we  can  humbly  appeal 
concerning  the  sincerity  of  our  views,  this  is  a  mercy  for 
which  we  ought  to  be  greatly  thankful.  He  that  has  brought 
us  to  will,  will  likewise  enable  us  to  do  according  to  His  good 
pleasure.  I  doubt  not  but  the  Lord  whom  you  love,  and 
on  whom  you  depend,  will  lead  you  in  a  sure  way,  and  estab 
lish  and  strengthen  and  settle  you  in  His  love  and  grace. 
Indeed  He  has  done  great  things  for  you  already.  The  Lord 
is  your  Shepherd  ; — a  comprehensive  word  !  The  sheep  can 
do  nothing  for  themselves ;  the  Shepherd  must  guide, 
guard,  feed,  heal,  recover.  Well  for  us  that  our  Shepherd 
is  the  Lord  Almighty.  If  His  power,  care,  compassion, 
fulness,  were  not  infinite,  the  poor  sheep  would  be  forsaken, 
starved  and  worried.  But  we  have  a  Shepherd  full  of  care, 
full  of  kindness,  full  of  power,  who  has  said,  I  will  seek  that 
which  was  lost,  and  bind  up  that  which  was  broken,  and 
bring  again  that  which  was  driven  away,  and  will  strengthen 
that  which  was  sick.  How  tender  are  these  expressions, 
and  how  well  fulfilled  !  His  sheep  fed  in  the  midst  of 
wolves,  yet  are  preserved  safe  ;  for  though  they  see  Him  not, 
His  eyes  and  His  heart  are  upon  them.  Do  we  wonder  that 
Daniel  was  preserved  in  the  lions'  den  ?  Why  it  is  a  common 
case.  Which  of  God's  children  have  not  cause  to  say,  "  My 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   367 

soul  is  among  lions  "  ?  But  the  angel  of  the'covenant  stops 
their  mouths,  or  only  permits  them  to  gape  and  roar,  to 
show  their  teeth,  and  what  they  would  do,  if  they  might ; 
but  they  may  not,  they  shall  not  bite  and  tear  us  at  their 
own  will.  Let  us  trust  Him,  and  all  shall  be  well. 

As  to  daily  occurrences,  it  is  best  to  believe  that  a  daily 
portion  of  comforts  and  crosses,  each  one  the  most  suitable 
to  our  case,  is  adjusted  and  appointed  by  the  Hand  which 
was  once  nailed  to  the  cross  for  us  ;  that  where  the  path  of 
duty  and  prudence  leads,  there  is  the  best  situation  we  could 
possibly  be  in  at  that  juncture.  We  are  not  required  to 
afflict  ourselves  immoderately  for  what  it  is  not  in  our  power 
to  prevent,  nor  should  anything  that  affords  occasions  for 
mortifying  the  spirit  of  self  be  accounted  unnecessary. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    III 

1768. 

I  HAVE  been  some  time  hoping  to  hear  from  you,  but 
Mr.  -  -  was  here  last  Saturday,  and  informed  me  that  you 
were  ill,  or  had  been  so  very  lately.  This  intelligence 
prompted  me  to  write  as  soon  as  I  could  find  leisure.  I  think 
the  Lord  has  seen  fit  to  visit  you  with  much  indisposition  of 
late  ;  I  say  He  has  seen  fit,  for  all  our  trials  are  under  His 
immediate  direction,  and  we  are  never  in  heaviness  without 
a  need-be.  I  trust  He  does  and  will  give  you  strength  equal 
to  your  day,  and  sweeten  what  would  be  otherwise  bitter, 
with  the  essence  of  His  precious  love.  I  hope  soon  to  hear 
that  you  are  restored  to  health,  and  that  you  have  found 
cause  to  praise  Him  for  the  rod. 

How  happy  is  the  state  of  a  believer,  to  have  a  sure 
promise  that  all  shall  work  together  for  good  in  the  end, 
and  in  the  mean  time  a  sure  refuge  where  to  find  present 
relief,  support,  and  protection  !  How  comfortable  it  is, 
when  trouble  is  near,  to  know  that  the  Lord  is  near  likewise, 
and  to  commit  ourselves  and  all  our  cares  simply  to  Him, 
believing  that  His  eye  is  upon  us,  and  His  ear  open  to  our 


368  CARDIPHONIA  : 

prayers.  Under  the  conduct  of  such  a  Shepherd  we  need 
not  fear  ;  though  we  are  called  to  pass  through  fire  and 
water,  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  He  will 
be  with  us,  and  will  show  Himself  mighty  on  our  behalf. 
It  seems  almost  needless  to  say,  that  we  were  very  happy  in 
the  company  of  -  -  :  the  only  inconvenience  was,  that  it 
renewed  the  pain  it  always  gives  me  to  part  with  them. 
Though  the  visit  was  full  as  long  as  I  could  possibly  expect, 
it  seamed  very  short.  This  must  be  the  case  while  we  are 
here  :  our  pleasures  are  short,  interrupted,  and  mixed  with 
troubles  :  this  is  not,  cannot  be  our  rest.  But  it  will  not  be 
always  the  case  ;  we  are  travelling  to  a  better  world,  where 
every  evil  and  imperfection  shall  cease  ;  then  we  shall  be 
for  ever  with  the  Lord,  and  with  each  other.  May  the 
prospect  of  this  blessed  hope  set  before  us,  revive  our  fainting 
spirits,  and  make  us  willing  to  endure  hardships  as  good 
soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ  !  Here  we  must  often  sow  in  tears, 
but  there  we  shall  reap  in  joy,  and  all  tears  shall  be  wiped 
from  our  eyes  for  ever.  I  hope  the  conversation  of  friends 
whom  I  so  greatly  love  and  honour,  afforded  me  not  only 
pleasure  but  profit  ;  it  left  a  savour  upon  my  mind,  and 
stirred  up  my  languid  desires  after  the  Lord.  I  wish  I 
could  say  the  good  effect  has  remained  with  me  to  this 
hour  :  but,  alas  !  I  am  a  poor  creature,  and  have  had  many 
causes  of  humiliation  since.  But,  blessed  be  God  !  amidst 
all  my  changes  I  find  the  foundation  stands  sure,  and  I  am 
seldom  or  never  left  to  doubt  either  of  the  Lord's  love  to 
me,  or  the  reality  of  the  desires  He  has  given  me  towards 
Himself ;  though  when  I  measure  my  love  by  the  degrees 
of  its  exercise,  or  the  fruits  it  produceth,  I  have  reason 
to  sit  down  ashamed,  as  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  the  least  of 
all  saints.  But  in  Him  I  have  righteousness  and  peace,  and 
in  Him  I  must  and  will  rejoice. 

I  would  willingly  fill  up  my  sheet,  but  feel  a  straitness  in 
my  spirit,  and  know  not  what  further  to  say.  O  for  a  ray 
of  Divine  light  to  set  me  at  liberty,  that  I  might  write  a  few 
lines  worth  reading,  something  that  might  warm  my  heart 
and  comfort  yours  !  Then  the  subject  must  be  Jesus  ; 
but  of  Him  what  can  I  say  that  you  do  not  know  ?  Well, 
though  you  know  Him,  you  are  glad  to  hear  of  Him  again 
and  again.  Come,  then,  magnify  the  Lord  with  me,  and 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART        360, 

let  us  exalt  His  name  together.  Let  us  adore  Him  for  His 
love,  that  love  which  has  a  height,  and  depth,  and  length, 
and  breadth,  beyond  the  grasp  of  our  poor  conceptions  ; 
a  love  that  moved  Him  to  empty  Himself,  to  take  on  Him 
the  form  of  a  servant,  and  to  be  obedient  unto  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  cross  ;  a  love  that  pitied  us  in  our  lost 
estate,  that  found  us  when  we  sought  Him  not,  that  spoke 
peace  to  our  souls  in  the  day  of  our  distress  ;  a  love  that 
bears  with  all  our  present  weakness,  mistakes,  backslidings, 
and  shortcomings  ;  a  love  that  is  always  watchful,  always 
ready  to  guide,  to  comfort,  and  to  heal ;  a  love  that  will  not 
be  wearied,  cannot  be  conquered,  and  is  incapable  of  changes ; 
a  love  that  will  in  the  end  prevail  over  all  opposition,  will 
perfect  that  which  concerns  us,  and  will  not  leave  us  till  it 
has  brought  us  perfect  in  holiness  and  happiness,  to  rejoice 
in  His  presence  in  glory.  The  love  of  Christ  !  it  is  the 
wonder,  the  joy,  the  song  of  angels  ;  and  the  sense  of  it 
shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  makes  life  pleasant,  and  death 
welcome.  Alas  !  what  a  heart  have  I,  that  I  love  Him 
no  better  !  But  I  hope  He  has  given  me  a  desire  to  make 
Him  my  all  in  all,  and  to  account  everything  loss  and  dross 
that  dares  to  stand  in  competition  with  Him. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    IV 

1769. 

I  FOUND  this  morning  among  my  unanswered  letters 
one  from  you,  but  I  hope  I  left  it  among  them  by  mistake. 
I  am  willing,  however,  to  be  on  the  sure  side,  and  would 
rather  write  twice  than  be  too  long  silent.  I  heard  of  your 
being  laid  on  the  bed  of  affliction,  and  of  the  Lord's  goodness 
to  you  there,  and  of  His  raising  you  up  again.  Blessed  be 
His  name  !  He  is  all-sufficient  and  faithful  ;  and  though  He 
cause  grief,  He  is  sure  to  show  compassion  in  supporting 
and  delivering.  Ah  !  the  evil  of  our  nature  is  deeply  rooted 
and  very  powerful,  or  such  repeated,  continual  corrections 
and  chastisements  would  not  be  necessary  ;  and  were  they 

c.  2  A 


370  CARDIPHONIA  : 

not  necessary,  we  should  not  have  them.  But  such  we 
are,  and  therefore  such  must  be  our  treatment  ;  for 
though  the  Lord  loves  us  with  a  tenderness  beyond  what 
the  mother  feels  for  her  sucking  child,  yet  it  is  a  tenderness 
directed  by  Infinite  Wisdom,  and  very  different  from  that 
weak  indulgence  which  in  parents  we  call  fondness,  which 
leads  them  to  comply  with  their  children's  desires  and 
inclinations,  rather  than  to  act  with  a  steady  view  to  their 
true  welfare.  The  Lord  loves  His  children,  and  is  very 
indulgent  to  them,  so  far  as  they  can  safely  bear  it,  but  He 
will  not  spoil  them.  Their  sin-sickness  requires  medicines, 
some  of  which  are  very  unpalatable  ;  but  when  the  case  calls 
for  such,  no  short-sighted  entreaties  of  ours  can  excuse  us 
from  taking  what  He  prepares  for  our  good.  But  every  dose 
is  prepared  by  His  own  hand,  and  not  one  is  administered 
in  vain,  nor  is  repeated  any  oftener  than  is  needful  to  answer 
the  purposed  end.  Till  then,  no  other  hand  can  remove 
what  He  lays  upon  us  ;  but  when  His  merciful  design  is 
answered,  He  will  relieve  us  Himself,  and  in  the  meantime 
He  will  so  moderate  the  operation,  or  increase  our  ability 
to  bear,  that  we  shall  not  be  overpowered.  It  is  true,  without 
a  single  exception,  that  all  His  paths  are  mercy  and  truth  to 
them  that  fear  Him.  His  love  is  the  same  when  He  wounds 
as  when  He  heals,  when  He  takes  away,  as  when  He  gives  : 
we  have  reason  to  thank  Him  for  all,  but  most  for  the  severe. 

I  received  a  letter  from  you,  which  mentions  dear  Mrs. 

's  case,  a  very  trying  one  ;  but  in  this  likewise  we  see 

the  Lord's  faithfulness.  Our  own  experience,  and  all  that 
we  observe  of  His  dealings  with  others,  may  convince  us 
that  we  need  not  be  afraid  to  entrust  ourselves  and  our 
dearest  concerns  in  His  hands  ;  for  He  can  and  will  make 
everything  work  for  good. 

How  little  does  the  world  know  of  that  intercourse  which 
is  carried  on  between  Heaven  and  earth,  what  petitions 
are  daily  presented,  and  what  answers  are  received,  at  the 
throne  of  grace  !  O  the  blessed  privilege  of  prayer  !  O  the 
wonderful  love,  care,  attention,  and  power  of  our  great 
Shepherd  !  His  eye  is  always  upon  us  ;  when  our  spirits 
are  almost  overwhelmed  within  us,  He  knoweth  our  path. 
His  ear  is  always  open  to  us  ;  let  who  will  overlook  and  dis 
appoint  us,  He  will  not.  When  means  and  hope  fail,  when 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   371 

everything  looks  dark  upon  us,  when  we  seem  shut  up  on 
every  side,  when  we  are  brought  to  the  lowest  ebb,  still  our 
help  is  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  who  made  Heaven  and  earth. 
To  Him  all  things  are  possible  ;  and  before  the  exertion  of 
His  power,  when  He  is  pleased  to  arise  and  work,  all  hin 
drances  give  way  and  vanish  like  a  mist  before  the  sun.  And 
He  can  so  manifest  Himself  to  the  soul,  and  cause  His  good 
ness  to  pass  before  it,  that  the  hour  of  affliction  shall  be 
the  golden  hour  of  the  greatest  consolation.  He  is  the 
fountain  of  life,  strength,  grace,  and  comfort,  and  of  His 
fulness  His  children  receive  according  to  their  occasions  : 
but  this  is  all  hidden  from  the  world  :  they  have  no  guide 
in  prosperity,  but  hurry  on  as  they  are  instigated  by  their 
blinded  passions,  and  are  perpetually  multiplying  mischiefs 
and  miseries  to  themselves  ;  and  in  adversity  they  have 
no  resource,  but  must  feel  all  the  evil  of  affliction,  without 
inward  support,  and  without  deriving  any  advantage  from  it. 
We  have  therefore  cause  for  continual  praise.  The  Lord  has 
given  us  to  know  His  name,  as  a  resting-place  and  a  hiding- 
place,  a  sun  and  a  shield.  Circumstances  and  creatures  may 
change  ;  but  He  will  be  an  unchangeable  Friend.  The  way 
is  rough,  but  He  trod  it  before  us,  and  is  now  with  us  in  every 
step  we  take  ;  and  every  step  brings  us  nearer  to  our 
Heavenly  Home.  Our  inheritance  is  surely  reserved  for  us, 
and  we  shall  be  kept  for  it  by  His  power  through  faith. 
Our  present  strength  is  small,  and  without  a  fresh  supply 
would  be  quickly  exhausted  ;  but  He  has  engaged  to  renew 
it  from  day  to  day  ;  and  He  will  soon  appear  to  wipe  all 
tears  from  our  eyes  ;  and  then  we  shall  appear  with  Him  in 
giory. 

I  am  very  sorry  if  our  friend  Mr. appears  to  be  aiming 

to  reconcile  things  that  are  incompatible.  I  am,  indeed, 
afraid  that  he  has  been  for  some  time  under  a  decline  ; 
and,  as  you  justly  observe,  we  meet  with  too  many  instances 
to  teach  us,  that  they  who  express  the  warmest  zeal  at  their 
first  setting  out,  do  not  always  prove  the  most  steady  and 
thriving  afterwards  ;  yet  I  am  willing  to  hope  in  this  case 
that  he  will  revive  and  flourish  again.  Sometimes  the 
Lord  permits  those  whom  He  loves  to  wander  from  Him 
for  a  season  ;  and  when  His  time  comes  to  heal  their  back- 
slidings,  they  walk  more  humbly,  thankfully  and  fruitfully 

2A  2 


372  CARDIPHONIA  ! 

afterwards,  from  a  sense  of  His  abounding  mercy,  and  the 
knowledge  they  have  by  experience  acquired  of  the  deceit- 
fulness  and  ingratitude  of  their  hearts.  I  hope  and  pray 
it  will  be  so  with  him.  However,  these  things  for  the 
present  are  grievous  ;  and  usually  before  the  Lord  heals 
such  breaches,  He  makes  His  people  sensible,  that  it  is  an 
evil  and  bitter  thing  to  forsake  Him  when  He  led  them  by- 
the  way. 

Indeed  London  is  a  dangerous  and  ensnaring  place  to 
professors.  I  account  myself  happy  that  my  lot  is  cast  at 
a  distance  from  it.  It  appears  to  me  like  a  sea,  wherein 
most  are  tossed  by  storms,  and  many  suffer  shipwreck. 
In  this  retired  situation,  I  seem  to  stand  upon  a  cliff  ;  and 
while  I  pity  those  whom  I  cannot  help,  I  hug  myself  in  the 
thoughts  of  being  safe  upon  the  shore.  Not  that  we  are 
without  our  trials  here  ;  the  evil  of  our  own  hearts,  and  the 
devices  of  Satan,  cut  us  out  work  enough  :  but  we  are 
happily  screened  from  many  things  which  must  be  either 
burdensome  or  hurtful  to  those  who  live  in  the  way  of 
them  ;  such  as  political  disputes,  winds  of  doctrine,  scandals 
of  false  professors,  parties  for  and  against  particular  minis 
ters,  and  fashionable  amusements,  in  some  measure 
countenanced  by  the  presence  of  persons  in  other  respects 
exemplary.  In  this  view,  I  often  think  of  our  dear  friend's 
expression,  upon  a  certain  occasion,  of  the  difference  between 
London  and  country  grace.  I  hold  it  in  a  twofold  sense. 
By  London  grace,  when  genuine,  I  understand  grace  in  a 
very  advanced  degree.  The  favoured  few  who  are  kept 
alive  to  God,  simple-hearted,  and  spiritually-minded  (I 
mean  especially  in  genteel  life),  in  the  midst  of  such  snares 
and  temptations,  appear  to  me  to  be  the  first-rate  Christians 
of  the  land  :  I  adore  the  power  of  the  Lord  in  them,  and 
compare  them  to  the  young  men  who  walked  unhurt  in  the 
midst  of  the  fire.  In  another  sense,  the  phrase  London  grace 
conveys  no  great  idea  to  me.  I  think  there  is  no  place  in 
the  kingdom  where  a  person  may  set  up  for  a  professor  upon 
a  smaller  stock.  If  people  can  abstain  from  open  immor 
alities,  if  they  will  fly  to  all  parts  of  the  town  to  hear 
sermons,  if  they  can  talk  about  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel, 
if  they  have  something  to  say  upon  that  useless  question, 
Who  is  the  best  preacher  ?  if  they  can  attain  to  a  speaking 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   373 

acquaintance  with  some  of  an  acknowledged  character, 
then  they  expect  to  pass  muster.  I  am  afraid  there  are 
many  who,  upon  no  better  evidences  than  these,  deceive 
both  themselves  and  others  for  a  course  of  years.  Though 
I  feel  not  in  a  writing  cut  to-day,  I  have  almost  filled  the 
sheet  somehow  ;  and  if  a  line  or  a  word  may  be  a  means  of 
suggesting  a  seasonable  and  comfortable  thought  to  you, 
I  have  my  end.  Through  mercy  we  are  all  pretty  well. 
My  soul  is  kept  alive,  as  it  were,  by  miracle.  I  feel  much 
inward  warfare  ;  the  enemy  thrusts  sore  at  me,  that  I  may 
fall ;  and  I  have  abundant  experience  of  the  evil  and 
deceitfulness  of  my  heart ;  but  the  Lord  is  gracious,  and, 
in  the  midst  of  all  conflicts,  I  have  a  peace  springing  from 
the  knowledge  of  His  power  and  grace,  and  the  consideration 
that  I  have  been  helped  to  commit  myself  to  Him. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   V 

1769. 

WE  are  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  late  visit ;  and 
I  am  glad  to  find  that  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  give  you  some 
tokens  of  His  presence  when  you  are  with  us,  because  I  hope 
it  will  encourage  you  to  come  again.  I  ought  to  be  very 
thankful  that  our  Christian  friends,  in  general,  are  not 
wholly  disappointed  of  a  blessing  when  they  visit  us. 

I  hope  the  Lord  will  give  me  an  humble  sense  of  what  I 
am,  and  that  broken  and  contrite  frame  of  heart  in  which 
He  delights.  This  is  to  me  the  chief  thing.  I  had  rather 
have  more  of  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ,  more  of  a  meek, 
quiet,  resigned,  peaceful,  and  loving  disposition,  than  to 
enjoy  the  greatest  measure  of  sensible  comforts,  if  the 
consequence  should  be  (as  perhaps  it  would)  spiritual 
pride,  self-sufficiency,  and  a  want  of  that  tenderness  to 
others  which  becomes  one  who  has  reason  to  style  himself 
the  chief  of  sinners.  I  know,  indeed,  that  the  proper 
tendency  of  sensible  consolations  is  to  humble  ;  but  I  can 
see  that,  through  the  depravity  of  human  nature,  they  have 


374  CARDIPHONIA  : 

not  always  that  effect.  And  I  have  been  sometimes  dis 
gusted  with  an  apparent  want  of  humility,  an  air  of  self- 
will  and  self-importance,  in  persons  of  whose  sincerity  I 
could  not  at  all  doubt.  It  has  kept  me  from  envying  them 
those  pleasant  frames  with  which  they  have  sometimes  been 
favoured  ;  for  I  believe  Satan  is  never  nearer  us  than  at 
some  times  when  we  think  ourselves  nearest  the  Lord. 

Wljat  reason  have  we  to  charge  our  souls  in  David's 
words,  "  My  soul,  wait  thou  only  upon  God  "  !  A  great 
stress  should  be  laid  upon  that  word  only.  We  dare  not 
entirely  shut  Him  out  of  our  regards,  but  we  are  too  apt 
to  suffer  something  to  share  with  Him.  This  evil  disposition 
is  deeply  fixed  in  our  hearts  ;  and  the  Lord  orders  all  His 
dispensations  towards  us  with  a  view  to  rooting  it  out ; 
that,  being  wearied  with  repeated  disappointments,  we  may 
at  length  be  compelled  to  betake  ourselves  to  Him  alone. 
Why  else  do  we  experience  so  many  changes  and  crosses  ? 
Why  are  we  so  often  in  heaviness  ?  We  know  that  He  delights 
in  the  pleasure  and  prosperity  of  His  servants  ;  that  He 
does  not  willingly  afflict  or  grieve  His  children  ;  but  there 
is  a  necessity  on  our  parts,  in  order  to  teach  us  that  we  have 
no  stability  in  ourselves,  and  that  no  creature  can  do  us 
good  but  by  His  appointment.  While  the  people  of  Israel 
depended  upon  Him  for  food,  they  gathered  up  the  manna 
every  morning  in  the  field  ;  but  when  they  would  hoard  it 
up  in  their  houses,  that  they  might  have  a  stock  within 
themselves,  they  had  it  without  His  blessing,  and  it  proved 
good  for  nothing  ;  it  soon  bred  worms,  and  grew  offensive. 
We  may  often  observe  something  like  this  occur,  both  in 
our  temporal  and  spiritual  concerns.  The  Lord  gives  us  a 
dear  friend  to  our  comfort ;  but  ere  long  we  forget  that  the 
friend  is  only  the  channel  of  conveyance,  and  that  all  the 
comfort  is  from  Himself.  To  remind  us  of  this,  the  stream 
is  dried  up,  the  friend  torn  away  by  death,  or  removed  far 
from  us,  or  perhaps  the  friendship  ceases,  and  a  coolness 
insensibly  takes  place,  we  know  not  how  or  why  :  the  true 
reason  is,  that  when  we  rejoiced  amiss  in  our  gourd,  the  Lord 
for  our  good  sent  a  worm  to  the  root  of  it.  Instances  of 
this  kind  are  innumerable  ;  and  the  great  inference  from 
them  all,  Cease  from  man,  cease  from  creatures,  for  wherein 
are  they  to  be  accounted  of  ?  My  soul,  wait  thou  only,  only 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   375 

upon  the  Lord,  who  is  (according  to  the  expressive  phrase 
Heb.  iv.  13)  He  with  whom  we  have  to  do  for  soul  and  body, 
for  time  and  eternity.  What  thanks  do  we  owe,  that  though 
we  have  not  yet  attained  perfectly  this  great  lesson,  yet  we 
are  admitted  into  that  school  where  alone  it  can  be  learnt, 
and  though  we  are  poor,  slow  scholars,  the  great  and  effectual 
Teacher  to  whom  we  have  been  encouraged  and  enabled  to 
apply,  can  and  will  bring  us  forward  !  He  communicates, 
not  only  instructions,  but  capacities  and  powers.  There 
is  none  like  Him  :  He  can  make  the  blind  to  see,  the  deaf 
to  hear,  and  the  dumb  to  speak  ;  and  how  great  is  His 
condescension  and  patience  !  How  does  He  accommodate 
Himself  to  our  weakness,  and  teach  us  as  we  are  able  to 
bear  !  Though  all  are  very  dunces  when  He  first  receives 
them,  not  one  was  ever  turned  out  as  incapable,  for  He  makes 
them  what  He  would  have  them  to  be.  O  that  we  may  set 
Him  always  before  us,  and  consider  every  dispensation, 
person,  thing,  we  meet  in  the  course  of  every  day,  as  mes 
sengers  from  Him,  each  bringing  us  some  line  of  instruction 
for  us  to  copy  into  that  day's  experience !  Whatever 
passes  within  us  or  around  us,  may  be  improved  (when  He 
teaches  us  how)  as  a  perpetual  commentary  upon  His  good 
Word.  If  we  converse  and  observe  with  this  view,  we  may 
learn  something  every  moment,  wherever  the  path  of  duty 
leads  us,  in  the  streets  as  well  as  in  the  closet,  and  from 
the  conversation  of  those  who  know  not  God  (when  we 
cannot  avoid  being  present  at  it),  as  well  as  from  those 
who  do. 

Separation  of  dear  friends  is,  as  you  observed,  hard  to 
flesh  and  blood  ;  but  grace  can  make  it  tolerable.  I  have 
an  abiding  persuasion,  that  the  Lord  can  easily  give  more 
than  ever  He  will  take  away.  Which  part  of  the  alternative 
must  be  my  lot,  or  when,  He  only  knows  ;  but,  in  general, 
I  can  rely  on  Him  to  appoint  the  time,  the  manner  ;  and  I 
trust  His  promise  of  strength  suited  to  the  day,  shall  be 
made  good.  Therefore,  I  can  for  the  most  part  rejoice,  that 
all  things  are  in  the  hand  and  under  the  direction  of  Him 
who  knows  our  frame,  and  has  Himself  borne  our  griefs, 
and  carried  our  sorrows  in  His  own  body.  A  time  of 
weeping  must  come,  but  the  morning  of  joy  will  make 
amends  for  all.  Who  can  expound  the  meaning  of  that 


376  CARD1PHONIA  : 

one  expression,  "  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  "  ? 
The  case  of  unconverted  friends  is  still  more  burdensome 
to  think  of  ;  but  we  have  encouragement  and  warrant  to 
pray  and  to  hope.  He  who  called  MS,  can  easily  call  others  : 
and  He  seldom  lays  a  desire  of  this  sort  very  closely  and 
warmly  upon  the  hearts  of  His  people,  but  when  it  is  His 
gracious  design,  sooner  or  later,  to  give  an  answer  of  peace. 
However,  it  becomes  us  to  be  thankful  for  ourselves,  and 
to  bow  our  anxieties  and  reasonings  before  His  sovereign 
will,  who  doth  as  He  pleases  with  His  own. 

Methinks  winter  is  your  summer.  You  have  been,  like 
the  bee,  collecting  from  many  flowers  ;  I  hope  you  will 
carry  good  store  of  honey  home  with  you.  May  you  find 
the  Lord  there,  and  He  can  easily  supply  the  failure  of  means 
and  creatures  !  \Ve  cannot  be  in  any  place  to  so  much 
advantage  as  where  the  call  of  duty  leads.  \Yhat  we  cannot 
avoid,  may  we  cheerfully  submit  to,  and  not  indulge  a  vain 
thought  that  we  should  choose  a  better  situation  for  our 
selves  (all  things  considered)  than  He  has  chosen  for  us. 

\\hen  we  have  opportunity  of  enjoying  many  ordinances, 
it  is  a  mercy  to  be  able  to  prize  and  improve  them  ;  but 
when  He  cuts  us  short  for  a  season,  if  we  wait  upon  Him 
we  shall  do  well  without  them.  Secret  prayer,  and  the 
good  Word,  are  the  chief  wells  from  whence  we  draw  the 
water  of  salvation.  These  will  keep  the  soul  alive  when 
creature  streams  are  cut  off ;  but  the  richest  variety  of 
public  means,  and  the  closest  attendance  upon  them,  will 
leave  us  lean  and  pining  in  the  midst  of  plenty,  if  we  are 
remiss  and  formal  in  the  other  two.  I  think  David  never 
appears  in  a  more  lively  frame  of  mind  than  when  he  wrote 
the  42nd,  63rd,  and  84th  Psalms,  which  were  all  penned  in 
a  dry  land,  and  at  a  distance  from  the  public  ordinances. 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF    THE    HEART        377 

LETTER    VI 

1772. 

I  HAD  been  wishing  to  hear  from  you,  that  I  might 
know  where  to  write.  I  hope  I  can  assure  you  of  a  friendly 
sympathy  with  you  in  your  trials.  I  can,  in  some  measure, 
guess  at  what  you  feel,  from  what  I  have  seen  and  felt 
myself  in  cases  where  I  have  been  nearly  concerned.  But 
my  compassion,  though  sincere,  is  ineffectual :  if  I  can 
pity,  I  cannot  relieve.  All  I  can  do  is,  as  the  Lord  enables 
me,  to  remember  you  both  before  Him.  But  there  is  One 
whose  compassion  is  infinite.  The  love  and  tenderness  of 
ten  thousand  earthly  friends,  of  ten  thousand  mothers 
towards  their  sucklings,  if  compared  with  His,  are  less  than 
a  drop  of  water  to  the  ocean  ;  and  His  power  is  infinite 
too.  Why,  then,  do  our  sufferings  continue,  when  He  is  so 
compassionate,  and  could  remove  them  with  a  word  ?  Surely, 
if  we  cannot  give  the  particular  reasons  (which  yet  He  will 
acquaint  us  with  hereafter,  John  xiii.  7),  the  general  reason 
is  at  hand;  He  afflicts  not  for  His  own  pleasure,  but  for 
our  profit ;  to  make  us  partakers  of  His  holiness  ;  and 
because  He  loves  us. 

Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense, 

But  trust  Him  for  His  grace  ; 
Behind  a  frowning  providence 

He  hides  a  smiling  face. 

I  wish  you  much  comfort  from  David's  thought,  Psa. 
cxlii.  3  :  "  When  my  spirit  was  overwhelmed  within  me, 
Thou  knewest  my  path."  The  Lord  is  not  withdrawn  to  a 
great  distance,  but  His  eye  is  upon  you,  and  He  sees  you  not 
with  the  indifference  of  a  mere  spectator,  but  He  observes 
with  attention  :  He  knows,  He  considers  your  path  ;  yea, 
He  appoints  it,  and  every  circumstance  about  it  is  under 
His  direction.  Your  trouble  began  at  the  hour  He  saw  best ; 
it  could  not  come  before,  and  He  has  marked  the  degree  of 
it  to  a  hair's  breadth  and  the  duration  to  a  minute.  He 
knows  likewise  how  your  spirit  is  affected  ;  and  such  supplies 
of  grace ^and  strength,  and  in  such  seasons  as  He  sees  needful, 
He  will  afford.  So  that  when  things  appear  darkest,  you 


378  CAKDIPHONIA  : 

shall  still  be  able  to  say,  "  Though  chastened,  not  killed." 
Therefore  hope  in  God,  for  you  shall  yet  praise  Him. 

I  shall  pray  that  the  Bath  waters  may  be  beneficial  ; 
and  that  the  waters  of  the  sanctuary  there  may  be  healing 
and  enlivening  to  you  all.  Our  all-sufficient  God  can  give 
seasons  of  refreshment  in  the  darkest  hours,  and  break 
through  the  thickest  clouds  of  outward  affliction  or  distress. 
To  you  it  is  given,  not  only  to  believe  in  Jesus,  but  to  suffer 
for  Mis  sake  :  for  so  we  do,  not  only  when  we  are  called  to 
follow  Him  to  imprisonment  or  death,  but  when  He  enables 
us  to  bear  afflictive  dispensations  with  due  submission  and 
patience.  Then  He  is  glorified  ;  then  His  grace  and  power 
are  manifested  in  us.  The  world,  so  far  as  they  know  our 
case,  have  a  proof  before  them,  that  our  religion  is  not 
merely  notional,  but  that  there  is  a  power  and  reality  in  it. 
And  the  Lord's  people  are  encouraged  by  what  they  see  of 
His  faithfulness  to  ourselves.  And  there  are  more  eyes 
upon  us  still.  We  are  a  spectacle,  to  the  universe,  to  angels 
as  well  as  to  men.  Cheer  up  :  the  Lord  hath  put  you  in 
your  present  trying  situation,  that  you  may  have  the  fairer 
opportunity  of  adorning  your  profession  of  the  Gospel  ; 
and  though  you  suffer  much,  He  is  able  to  make  you  abund 
ant  amends.  Nor  need  I  remind  you,  that  He  has  suffered 
unspeakably  more  for  you  :  He  drank  for  your  sake  a  cup  of 
unmixed  wrath,  and  only  puts  in  your  hand  a  cup  of  affliction 
mixed  with  many  mercies. 

The  account  you  gave  of  the  poor  man  detained  in  the 
inn  was  very  affecting.  Such  scenes  are  or  should  be 
instructive,  to  teach  us  resignation  under  the  trials  we  must 
meet  with  every  day.  For  not  only  are  we  visited  less  than 
our  iniquities  have  deserved,  but  much  less  than  many  of 
our  fellow-creatures'  daily  experience.  \Vc  need  not  look 
about  far  or  long  to  find  others  in  a  worse  situation  than 
ourselves.  If  a  fit  of  the  gout  or  cholic  is  so  grievous  and 
so  hard  to  bear,  what  do  we  owe  to  Him  who  delivered 
us  from  that  place  of  unutterable  torment,  where  there  is 
weeping,  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth  for  ever,  without 
hope  or  respite  !  And  if  we  cannot  help  interesting  ourselves 
in  the  groans  of  a  stranger,  how  ought  the  groans  of  Jesus 
to  be,  as  it  were,  continually  sounding  in  our  ears  !  \\  hat 
are  all  other  sufferings  compared  to  His  ?  And  yet  He 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   379 

endured  them  freely.  He  needed  not  to  have  borne  them 
if  He  would  have  left  us  to  perish  ;  but  such  was  His  love, 
He  died  that  we  might  live,  and  endured  the  fiercest  agonies, 
that  He  might  open  to  us  the  gate  of  everlasting  peace  and 
happiness.  How  amazingly  perverse  is  my  heart,  that  I 
can  be  more  affected  with  a  melancholy  story  in  a  news 
paper,  concerning  persons  I  never  saw,  than  with  all  that  I 
read  of  His  bitter  passion  in  the  garden  and  on  the  cross, 
though  I  profess  to  believe  He  endured  it  all  for  me.  O  ! 
if  we  could  always  behold  Him  by  faith,  as  evidently 
crucified  before  our  eyes,  how  would  it  compose  our  spirits 
as  to  all  the  sweets  and  bitters  of  this  poor  life  !  What  a 
banner  would  it  prove  against  all  the  snares  and  temptations 
whereby  Satan  would  draw  us  into  evil :  and  what  a  firm 
ground  of  confidence  would  it  afford  us  amidst  the  conflicts 
we  sustain  from  the  working  of  unbelief  and  indwelling 
sin  !  I  long  for  more  of  that  faith  which  is  the  substance  of 
things  hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,  that 
I  may  be  preserved  humble,  thankful,  watchful,  and  depend 
ent.  To  behold  the  glory  and  the  love  of  Jesus,  is  the  only 
effectual  way  to  participate  in  His  image. 

We  are  to  set  out  to-night  from  the  Interpreter's  house 
towards  the  hill  Difficulty,  and  hope  to  be  favoured  with  a 
sight  of  the  cross  by  the  way.  To  stand  at  the  foot  of  it 
with  a  softened  heart  and  melting  eyes  ;  to  forget  our  sins, 
sorrows,  and  burdens,  while  we  are  wholly  swallowed  up 
in  the  contemplation  of  Him  who  bore  our  sins  in  His  own 
body  upon  the  tree,  is  certainly  the  most  desirable  situation 
on  this  side  the  grave.  To  speak  of  it,  and  to  see  it  by  the 
light  of  the  Spirit,  are  widely  different  things  ;  and  though 
we  cannot  always  enjoy  this  view,  yet  the  remembrance  of 
what  we  have  been,  is  an  excellent  means  of  encouragement 
to  mount  the  hill  and  face  the  lions. 

I  believe  I  shall  hardly  find  leisure  to  fill  my  paper  this 
time.  It  is  now  Saturday  evening,  and  growing  late.  I 
am  just  returned  from  a  serious  walk,  which  is  my  usual 
manner  of  closing  the  week  when  the  weather  is  fine.  I 
endeavour  to  join  in  heart  with  the  Lord's  ministers  and 
people,  who  are  seeking  a  blessing  on  to-morrow's  ordin 
ances.  At  such  times  I  especially  remember  those  friends 
with  whom  I  have  gone  to  the  House  of  the  Lord  in  company, 


380  CARDIPHONIA  : 

consequently  you  are  not  forgot.  I  can  venture  to  assure 
you,  that  if  you  have  a  value  for  our  prayers  you  have  a 
frequent  share  in  them  ;  yea,  are  loved  and  remembered 
by  many  here  :  but  as  we  are  forgetful  creatures,  I  hope 
you  will  always  refresh  our  memory,  and  quicken  our 
prayers  by  a  yearly  visit.  In  the  morning  I  shall  think  of 
you  again.  What  a  multitude  of  eyes  and  hearts  will  be 
directed  to  our  Redeemer  to-morrow  !  He  has  a  numerous 
and  necessitous  family  ;  but  He  is  rich  enough  to  supply 
them  all,  and  His  tender  compassion  extends  to  the  meanest 
and  most  unworthy.  Like  the  sun,  He  can  cheer  and 
enlighten  thousands  and  millions  at  once,  and  give  to  each 
one  as  bountifully  as  if  there  were  no  more  to  partake  of 
His  favour.  His  best  blessings  are  not  diminished  by  being 
shared  among  many.  The  greatest  earthly  monarch  would 
soon  be  poor  if  he  was  to  give  a  little  (though  but  a  little) 
to  all  his  subjects :  but  Jesus  has  unsearchable,  inexhaustible 
riches  of  grace  to  bestow.  The  innumerable  assembly  before 
the  throne  have  been  all  supplied  from  His  fulness,  and  yet 
there  is  enough  and  to  spare  for  us  also,  and  for  all  that  shall 
come  after  us.  May  He  give  us  an  eager  appetite,  an  hunger 
and  thirst  that  will  not  be  put  off  with  anything  short  of  the 
bread  of  life  ;  and  then  we  may  confidently  open  our 
mouths  wide,  for  He  has  promised  to  fill  them. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   VII 

1773- 

SINCE  I  wrote  last,  the  Lord  has  been  gracious  to  us 
here.  He  crowned  the  last  year  with  His  goodness,  and 
renews  His  benefits  to  us  every  day.  He  has  been  pleased 
to  bless  the  preaching  of  His  Gospel  amongst  us,  both  to 
consolation  and  conviction ;  and  several  are,  I  hope,  earnestly 
seeking  Him,  who  were  lately  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins. 

Dear  Mr.  was  released  from  all  his  complaints  the 

25th  of  November.     A  few  days  before  his  death,  he  was 
enabled  to  speak  more  intelligibly  than  usual  for  about  a 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   381 

quarter  of  an  hour,  and  expressed  a  comfortable  hope,  which 
was  a  great  satisfaction  to  us ;  for  though  we  had  not  the 
least  doubt  of  his  being  built  upon  the  Rock,  it  was  to  us  an 
answer  to  prayer  that  he  could  again  speak  the  language  of 
faith  ;  and  much  prayer  had  been  made  on  this  account, 
especially  that  very  evening.  After  that  night  he  spoke 
little,  and  hardly  took  any  notice,  but  continued  chiefly 
drowsy  till  he  died.  I  preached  his  funeral  sermon,  from 

Lam.  iii.  31,  32,  33.     Mrs.  L 's  complaint  grows  worse 

and  worse  :  she  suffers  much  in  her  body,  and  has  much 
more  perhaps  to  suffer  ;  but  her  consolations  in  the  Lord 
abound.  He  enables  her  to  maintain  faith,  patience,  and 
submission,  in  an  exemplary  manner,  and  shows  us  in  His 
dealings  with  her,  that  He  is  all-sufficient  and  faithful  to 
those  who  put  their  trust  in  Him.  I  am  glad  to  hear  that 
you  had  comfortable  seasons  while  at  Bath.  It  is  indeed 
a  great  mercy  that  God's  ordinances  are  established  in  that 
place  of  dissipation  ;  and  I  hope  many  who  go  there  with 
no  higher  view  than  to  drink  the  Bath  waters,  will  be  brought 
to  draw  with  joy  the  waters  of  life  from  the  wells  of  salvation. 
He  does  nothing  in  vain,  and  when  He  affords  the  means, 
we  may  confidently  hope  He  will  bestow  the  blessing.  The 
dissipation  of  spirit  you  complain  of  when  you  are  in  a 
strange  place  is,  I  suppose,  felt  by  most,  if  not  by  all,  who 
can  be  satisfied  in  no  place  without  some  token  of  the  Lord's 
presence.  I  consider  it  rather  as  an  infirmity  than  a  sin, 
strictly  speaking  ;  though  all  our  infirmities  are  sinful, 
being  the  effects  of  a  depraved  nature.  In  our  present  cir 
cumstances,  new  things  excite  new  ideas ;  and  when  our 
usual  course  of  life  is  broken  in  upon,  it  disjoints  and 
unsettles  our  thoughts.  It  is  a  proof  of  our  weakness  ; 
it  may  and  ought  to  be  lamented  ;  but  I  believe  we  shall  not 
get  the  better  of  it,  till  we  leave  the  mortal  body  to  moulder 
into  dust.  Perhaps  few  suffer  more  inconvenience  from 
this  article  than  myself,  which  is  one  reason  why  I  love  home, 
and  seldom  leave  it  without  some  reluctance  ;  and  it  is  one 
reason  why  we  should  love  Heaven,  and  long  for  the  hour 
when,  at  liberty  from  all  incumbrance,  we  shall  see  the  Lord 
without  a  veil,  and  serve  Him  without  distraction.  The 
Lord,  by  His  providence,  seconds  and  confirms  the  declara 
tions  of  His  word  and  ministry.  Much  we  read,  and  much 


382  CARDIPHONIA  : 

we  hear,  concerning  the  emptiness,  vanity,  and  uncertainty 
of  the  present  state.  When  our  minds  are  enlightened  by 
His  Holy  Spirit,  we  receive  and  acknowledge  what  His  word 
declares  to  be  truth  ;  yet  if  we  remain  long  without  changes, 
and  our  path  is  very  smooth,  we  are  for  the  most  part  but 
faintly  affected  with  what  we  profess  to  believe.  But  when 
some  of  our  dearest  friends  are  taken  from  us,  the  lives  of 
others  threatened,  and  we  ourselves  are  brought  low  with 
pain  and  sickness,  then  we  not  only  say,  but  feel,  that  this 
must  not,  cannot  be  our  rest.  You  have  had  several 
exercises  of  this  kind  of  late  in  your  family,  and  I  trust  you 
will  be  able  to  set  your  seal  to  that  gracious  word,  that 
though  afflictions  in  themselves  are  not  joyous,  but  grievous, 
yet  in  due  season  they  yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of  right 
eousness.  Various  and  blessed  are  the  fruits  they  produce. 
By  affliction,  prayer  is  quickened  ;  for  our  prayers  are  very 
apt  to  grow  languid  and  formal  in  a  time  of  ease.  Affliction 
greatly  helps  us  to  understand  the  Scriptures,  especially 
the  promises,  most  of  which  being  made  to  times  of  trouble, 
we  cannot  so  well  know  their  fulness,  sweetness,  and  cer 
tainty,  as  when  we  have  been  in  the  situation  to  which  they 
are  suited,  have  been  enabled  to  trust  and  plead  them,  and 
have  found  them  fulfilled  in  our  own  case.  We  are  usually 
indebted  to  affliction  as  the  means  or  occasion  of  the  most 
signal  discoveries  we  are  favoured  with,  of  the  wisdom, 
power,  and  faithfulness  of  the  Lord.  These  are  best 
observed  by  the  evident  proofs  we  have  that  He  is  near  to 
support  us  under  trouble,  and  that  He  can  and  does  deliver 
us  out  of  it.  Israel  would  not  have  seen  so  much  of  the 
Lord's  arm  outstretched  in  their  behalf,  had  not  Pharaoh 
oppressed,  opposed,  and  pursued  them.  Afflictions  are 
designed  likewise  for  the  manifestation  of  our  sincerity, 
to  ourselves  and  to  others.  When  faith  endures  the  fire,  we 
kno«'  it  to  be  of  the  right  kind  ;  and  others  who  see  we  are 
brought'safe  out,  and  lose  nothing  but  the  dross,  will  confess 
that  God  is>with  us  of  a  truth  (Dan.  iii.  27,  28).  Surely  this 
thought  should  reconcile  us  to  surfer,  not  only  with  patience, 
but  with  cheer^umess>  if  God  may  be  glorified  in  us.  This 
made  the  aposti-e  rejoice  in  tribulation,  that  the  power  of 
Christ  might  be  tfpticed,  as  resting  upon  him,  and  working 
mightily  in  him.  Many  of  our  graces,  likewise,  cannot  thrive 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   383 

or  show  themselves  to  advantage  without  trials,  such  as 
resignation,  patience,  meekness,  long-suffering.  I  observe 
some  of  the  London  porters  do  not  appear  to  be  very  strong 
men  ;  yet  they  will  trudge  along  under  a  burden  which  some 
stouter  people  could  not  carry  so  well ;  the  reason  is, 
that  they  are  accustomed  to  carry  burdens,  and  by  continual 
exercise  their  shoulders  acquire  a  strength  suited  to  their 
work.  It  is  so  in  the  Christian  life  ;  activity  and  strength 
of  grace  is  not  ordinarily  acquired  by  those  who  sit  still  and 
live  at  ease,  but  by  those  who  frequently  meet  with  something 
which  requires  a  full  exertion  of  what  power  the  Lord  has 
given  them.  So,  again,  it  is  by  our  own  sufferings  we  learn 
to  pity  and  sympathize  with  others  in  their  sufferings  ; 
such  a  compassionate  disposition,  which  excites  our  feelings 
for  the  afflicted,  is  an  eminent  branch  of  the  mind  which  was 
in  Christ.  But  these  feelings  would  be  very  faint  if  we  did 
not  in  our  experience  know  what  sorrows  and  temptations 
mean.  Afflictions  do  us  good  likewise,  as  they  make  us 
more  acquainted  with  what  is  in  our  own  hearts,  and  thereby 
promote  humiliation  and  self-abasement.  There  are  abomi 
nations  which,  like  nests  of  vipers,  lie  so  quietly  within, 
that  we  hardly  suspect  they  are  there  till  the  rod  of  affliction 
rouses  them  ;  then  they  hiss  and  show  their  venom.  This 
discovery  is  indeed  very  distressing  ;  yet,  till  it  is  made,  we 
are  prone  to  think  ourselves  much  less  vile  than  we  really 
are,  and  cannot  so  heartily  abhor  ourselves,  and  repent  in 
dust  and  ashes. 

But  I  must  write  a  sermon  rather  than  a  letter,  if  I  would 
enumerate  all  the  good  fruits  which,  by  the  power  of 
sanctifying  grace,  are  produced  from  this  bitter  tree.  May 
we,  under  our  several  trials,  find  them  all  revealed  in  our 
selves,  that  we  may  not  complain  of  having  suffered  in 
vain  !  While  we  have  such  a  depraved  nature,  and  live  in 
such  a  polluted  world  ;  while  the  roots  of  pride,  vanity, 
self-dependence,  self-seeking,  are  so  strong  within  us,  we 
need  a  variety  of  sharp  dispensations  to  keep  us  from 
forgetting  ourselves,  and  from  cleaving  to  the  dust. 


384  CARDIPHONIA  : 

LETTER   VIII 

1774- 

-THE  very  painful  illness  wliich  Mrs. so  long 

endured,  had  doubtless  not  only  prepared  you  to  expect  the 
news  of  her  dismission,  but  made  you  more  willing  to  resign 
her.  You  are  bereaved  of  a  valuable  friend  ;  but  life, 
in  her  circumstances,  was  burdensome  :  and  who  can  be 
sorry  to  consider  her  now  as  freed  from  all  suffering,  and 
possessed  of  all  happiness  ?  But  besides  this,  I  trust  the 
Lord  has  favoured  you  with  an  habitual  sense  of  the  wisdom 
and  propriety  of  all  his  appointments  ;  so  that,  when  His 
will  is  manifested  by  the  event,  you  are  enabled  to  say, 
"  All  is  well."  "  I  was  dumb,  and  opened  not  my  mouth, 
because  Thou  didst  it."  She  is  gone  a  little  before  you  ; 
and  after  a  few  more  changes,  you  will  meet  her  again  to 
unspeakable  advantage,  and  rejoice  together  before  the 
throne  for  ever.  There  every  tear  will  be  wiped  away, 
and  you  shall  weep  no  more.  The  Lord  could  have  prevented 
the  cause  of  her  great  sufferings  ;  but  I  doubt  not  He 
afflicted  her  in  wisdom  and  mercy  :  He  could  easily  have 
restored  her  to  health  ;  but  the  time  was  hastening  when 
He  purposed  to  have  her  with  Him  where  He  is,  that  she 
might  behold  His  glory,  and  have  all  the  desires  He  put  into 
her  heart  abundantly  satisfied.  Precious  in  His  sight  is  the 
death  of  His  saints,  and  every  circumstance  is  under  the 
direction  of  infinite  wisdom.  His  sovereignty  forbids  us 
to  say,  Why  hast  Thou  done  this  ?  And  His  love  assures 
us  that  He  does  all  things  well.  I  have  lost  a  friend  likewise  ; 
I  believe  I  may  say,  few  persons  not  immediately  related  to 
her  could  value  her  more  highly  than  myself :  and  though 
of  late  years  I  could  not  have  the  pleasure  of  her  company, 
it  was  a  constant  satisfaction  to  me  to  know  I  had  such  a 
friend. 

Mr.  T.  -  — 's  sickness  and  death  followed  immediately 
upon  this  stroke.  I  doubt  not  but  you  have  been  much 
affected  with  this  dispensation  likewise.  But  here  again  we 
have  the  same  stronghold  to  retreat  to  :  the  Lord  has  done 
it.  What  a  pleasing  prospect  of  increasing  usefulness  is 
now  interrupted  !  How  many  will  mourn  his  loss  !  Yet  we 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   385 

are  sure  the  work  which  the  Lord  had  appointed  him  was 
finished.  They  who  loved  his  ministry,  and  were  profited 
by  it,  are  left  apparently  destitute  ;  but  Jesus,  the  good 
Shepherd,  is  able  to  take  care  of  His  own,  and  will  fulfil  His 
promise  to  them  all.  He  has  said,  Verily  they  shall  be  fed. 

We  have  had  trying  and  dying  times  here  ;  half  my 
time  almost  has  been  taken  up  with  visiting  the  sick.  I  have 
seen  death  in  a  variety  of  forms,  and  have  had  frequent 
occasion  of  observing  how  insignificant  many  things,  which 
are  now  capable  of  giving  us  pain  or  pleasure,  will  appear, 
when  the  soul  is  brought  near  to  the  borders  of  eternity. 
All  the  concerns  which  relate  solely  to  this  life  will  then  be 
found  as  trivial  as  the  traces  of  a  dream  from  which  we  are 
awakened.  Nothing  will  then  comfort  us  but  the  knowledge 
of  Jesus  and  His  love  ;  nothing  grieve  us  but  the  remem 
brance  of  our  unfaithful  carriage  to  Him,  and  what  poor 
returns  we  made  to  His  abundant  goodness.  The  Lord 
forbid  that  this  thought  should  break  our  peace  !  No,  faith 
in  His  name  may  forbid  our  fear,  though  we  shall  see  and 
confess  we  have  been  unprofitable  servants.  There  shall  be 
no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Him  ;  but  surely 
shame  and  humiliation  will  accompany  us  to  the  very 
threshold  of  Heaven,  and  ought  to  do  so.  I  surely  shall 
then  be  more  affected  than  I  am  now,  with  the  coolness  of 
my  love,  the  faintness  of  my  zeal,  the  vanity  of  my  heart, 
and  my  undue  attachment  to  the  things  of  time.  O  these 
clogs,  fetters,  vales,  and  mountains,  which  obstruct  my 
course,  darken  my  views,  slacken  my  pace,  and  disable  me 
in  service  !  Well  it  is  for  me  that  I  am  not  under  the  law, 
but  under  grace. 

To-morrow  is  the  Sabbath.  I  am  usually  glad  when  it 
returns,  though  it  seldom  finds  me  in  that  frame  of  mind 
which  I  would  desire.  But  it  is  my  happiness  to  live 
amongst  many  who  count  the  hours  from  one  ordinance  to 
another.  I  know  they  pray  that  I  may  be  a  messenger  of 
peace,  and  an  instrument  of  good  to  their  souls  ;  and  I  have 
cause  to  hope  their  prayers  are  in  a  measure  answered. 
For  their  sakes,  as  much  as  my  own,  I  am  glad  to  go  up  to  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  O  that  in  watering  others,  I  may  be  also 
watered  myself !  I  have  been  praying  that  to-morrow 
may  be  a  day  of  power  with  you  and  with  us,  and  with  all 
c.  2B 


386 

that  love  Jesus  in  sincerity  ;  that  we  may  see  His  glory, 
and  taste  His  love  in  the  sanctuary.  When  it  is  thus  the 
Sabbath  is  a  blessed  day  indeed,  an  earnest  of  Heaven. 
There  they  keep  an  everlasting  Sabbath,  and  cease  not 
night  or  day  admiring  the  riches  of  redeeming  love,  and 
adoring  Him  who  washed  His  people  from  their  sins  in  His 
own  blood.  To  have  such  imperfect  communion  with  them 
as  is  in  this  state  attainable  in  this  pleasing  exercise,  is  what 
alone  can  make  life  worth  the  name.  For  this  I  sigh  and 
long,  and  cry  to  the  Lord  to  rend  the  veil  of  unbelief,  scatter 
the  clouds  of  ignorance,  and  break  down  the  walls  which  sin 
is  daily  building  up  to  hide  Him  from  my  eyes.  I  hope  I 
can  say,  My  soul  is  athirst  for  God,  and  nothing  less  than  the 
light  of  His  countenance  can  satisfy  me.  Blessed  be  His 
name  for  the  desire  ;  it  is  His  own  gift,  and  He  never  gives 
it  in  vain.  He  will  afford  us  a  taste  of  the  water  of  life  by  the 
way  ;  and  ere  long  we  shall  drink  abundantly  at  the  fountain- 
head,  and  have  done  with  the  complaint  for  ever.  May  we 
be  thankful  for  what  we  receive,  and  still  earnestly  desirous 
of  more  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


FIVE     LETTERS 

TO 

MISS   D 

LETTER   I 

MY  DEAR  Miss,  Aug.  —  1772. 

THE  Lord  brought  us  home  in  peace.     My  visit  to 


was  agreeable,  and  I  shall  often  think  of  it  with  pleasure  ; 
though  the  deadness  and  dryness  of  my  own  spirit,  a  good 
part  of  the  time  I  was  there,  proved  a  considerable  abate 
ment.  I  am  eager  enough  to  converse  with  the  Lord's 
people,  when  at  the  same  time  I  am  backward  and  indisposed 
to  communion  with  the  Lord  Himself.  The  two  evils 
charged  upon  Israel  of  old,  a  proneness  to  forsake  the 
fountain  of  living  waters,  and  to  trust  to  broken  cisterns 
(which  can  do  me  no  good  unless  He  supplies  them),  run 
through  the  whole  of  my  experience  abroad  and  at  home. 
A  few  drops  of  grace  in  my  fellow-worms  endear  them  to  me 
exceedingly.  If  I  expect  to  see  any  Christian  friends,  I 
count  the  hours  till  we  meet ;  I  promise  myself  great 
benefit  ;  but  if  the  Lord  withdraws  His  influence,  the  best 
of  them  prove  to  me  but  clouds  without  water.  It  was  not, 
however,  wholly  so  with  me  all  the  time  I  stayed  with  my 
friends  ;  but  I  suffer  much  in  learning  to  depend  upon  the 
Lord  alone  :  I  have  been  at  this  lesson  many  a  long  year  ; 
but  am  so  poor  and  dull  a  scholar,  that  I  have  not  yet  made 
any  tolerable  progress  in  it.  I  think  I  received  some 
instruction  and  advantage,  where  I  little  expected  it ; 
I  mean  at  Mr.  Cox's  museum.  The  efforts  of  his  ingenuity 
amazed  me,  while,  at  the  same  time,  I  was  struck  with  their 
insignificance.  His  fine  things  were  beyond  all  I  had  any  idea 

387  2  B  2 


38$  CARDIPHON1A  : 

of  ;  and  yet,  what  are  they  better  than  toys  and  amuse 
ments  suited  to  the  taste  of  children !  And  notwith 
standing  the  variety  of  their  motions,  they  were  all  destitute 
of  life.  There  is  unspeakably  more  wisdom  and  contrivance 
in  the  mechanism  of  a  butterfly  or  a  bee  that  flies  unnoticed 
in  the  fields,  than  in  all  his  apparatus  put  together.  But  the 
works  of  God  are  disregarded,  while  the  feeble  imitations  of 
them  which  men  can  produce  gain  universal  applause. 

If  you  and  I  could  make  self-moving  dragons  and  elephants 
what  would  it  profit  us  ?  Blessed  be  God,  that  He  has 
given  us  some  glimpse  of  his  wisdom  and  love  !  by  which  our 
hearts,  more  hard  and  lifeless  by  nature  than  the  stones  in 
the  street,  are  constrained  and  enabled  to  move  upwards, 
and  to  seek  after  the  Lord.  He  has  given  us  in  His  Word 
a  greater  treasure  than  all  that  we  ever  beheld  with  our  eyes, 
and  a  hope  which  shall  flourish  when  the  earth  and  all  its 
works  shall  be  burnt  up.  What  will  all  the  fine  things  of 
men's  device  be  worth  in  that  day  ! 

I  think  the  passage  you  refer  to  in  Mr.  justly 

exceptionable.  His  intention  is  good,  and  the  mistake 
he  would  censure  very  dangerous  ;  but  he  might  have 
explained  himself  more  clearly.  I  apprehend  he  and  you 
do  not  mean  the  same  thing  by  being  in  the  dark.  It  is  not 
an  uncomfortable,  but  a  careless,  frame  which  he  would 
censure.  They  who  walk  in  darkness  and  see  no  light,  and 
yet  are  exhorted  to  stay  themselves  upon  God  (Isa.  1.  10), 
are  said  to  hearken  to  the  voice  of  His  servant.  Though 
they  cannot  see  the  Lord,  they  are  seeking  and  mourning 
after  Him,  and  waiting  in  the  use  of  means,  and  warring 
against  sin.  Mr.  -  -  had  another  set  of  people  in  view, 
who  trust  in  the  notion  of  Gospel-truth,  or  some  past 
convictions  and  comforts  ;  though  at  present  they  give 
no  evidence  of  spiritual  desires,  but  are  worldly  in  their 
spirit  and  conversation  ;  talk  of  trusting  in  the  Lord  ; 
account  it  a  weakness  to  doubt  of  their  state,  and  think  all 
is  well  because  they  profess  to  believe  the  doctrines  of  grace. 
In  a  word,  it  is  the  darkness  of  sin  and  sloth,  against  which 
his  observation  is  pointed.  Or  if,  indeed,  he  meant  more 
than  this,  we  are  not  obliged  to  believe  him.  Remember 
your  privilege  ;  you  have  the  Bible  in  your  hands,  and  are 
not  bound  to  follow  books  or  preachers  any  farther  than 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   389 

what  they  deliver  agrees  with  the  oracles  of  truth.  We  have 
great  reason  to  be  thankful  for  the  instructions  and  writings 
of  spiritual  men,  but  they  are  all  fallible  even  as  ourselves. 
One  is  our  Master,  even  Christ ;  what  He  says,  we  are  to 
receive  implicitly  ;  but  we  do  not  owe  implicit  subjection 
to  the  best  of  our  fellow-creatures.  The  Bereans  were 
commended  that  they  would  not  take  even  the  apostle  Paul 
upon  trust,  but  searched  the  Scriptures  to  see  whether  these 
things  were  so.  May  the  Lord  give  us  a  spirit  of  humility 
and  discernment  in  all  things  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   II 

May  4,  1773. 

METHINKS  it  is  high  time  to  ask  how  you  do,  to  thank 
you  for  your  last  letter,  and  to  let  you  know,  that  though 
necessity  makes  me  slack  in  writing,  yet  I  can  and  do  often 
think  of  you.  My  silence  has  sometimes  been  owing  to  want 
of  leisure  ;  and  sometimes,  when  I  could  have  found  leisure, 
my  harp  has  been  out  of  tune,  and  I  had  no  heart  to  write. 
Perhaps  you  are  ready  to  infer,  by  my  sitting  down  to  write 
at  last,  that  my  harp  is  now  well  tuned,  and  I  have  something 
extraordinary  to  offer  ;  beware  of  thinking  so,  lest  you  should 
be  sadly  disappointed.  Should  I  make  myself  the  subject, 
I  could  give  you  at  present  but  a  mournful  ditty.  I  suppose 
you  have  heard  I  have  been  ill ;  through  mercy  I  am  now 
well.  But,  indeed,  I  must  farther  tell  you,  that  when  I  was 
sick  I  was  well  :  and  since  the^Lord  has  removed  my  illness 
I  have  been  much  worse.  My  illness  was  far  from  violent 
in  itself,  and  was  greatly  sweetened  by  a  calm  submissive 
frame  the  Lord  gave  me  under  it.  My  heart  seemed  more 
alive  to  Him  then  than  it  has  done  since  my  cough,  fever, 
and  deafness  have  been  removed.  Shall  I  give  you  another 
bit  of  a  riddle,  that  notwithstanding  the  many  changes 
I  pass  through,  I  am  always  the  same  ?  This  is  the  very 
truth  :  "  In  me,  that  is,  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good 
thing  "  ;  so  that,  if  sometimes  my  spirit  is  in  a  measure 


390  CARDIPHONIA  : 

humble,  lively,  and  dependent,  it  is  not  that  I  am  grown 
better  than  I  was,  but  that  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  put  forth 
His  gracious  power  in  my  weakness :  and  when  my  heart 
is  dry  and  stupid,  when  I  can  find  no  pleasure  in  waiting 
upon  God,  it  is  not  because  I  am  worse  than  I  was  before, 
but  only  the  Lord  sees  it  best  that  I  should  feel  as  well 
as  say  what  a  poor  creature  I  am.  My  heart  was  once 
like  a  dungeon,  out  of  the  reach  of  day,  and  always  dark  ; 
the  Lord,  by  His  grace,  has  been  pleased  to  make  this 
dungeon  a  room,  by  putting  windows  in  it ;  but  I  need  not 
tell  you,  that  though  windows  will  transmit  the  daylight 
into  a  room,  they  cannot  supply  the  want  of  it.  When  the 
day  is  gone,  windows  are  of  little  use  ;  when  the  day  returns, 
the  room  is  enlightened  by  them  again.  Thus,  unless  the 
Lord  shines,  I  cannot  retain  to-day  the  light  I  had  yesterday  ; 
and  though  His  presence  makes  a  delightful  difference, 
I  have  no  more  to  boast  of  in  myself  at  one  time  than 
another  ;  yet  when  it  is  dark,  I  am  warranted  to  expect 
the  return  of  light  again.  When  He  is  with  me,  all  goes 
on  pleasantly  ;  when  He  withdraws,  I  find  I  can  do  nothing 
without  Him.  I  need  not  wonder  that  I  find  it  so,  for  it 
must  be  so,  of  course,  if  I  am  what  I  confess  myself  to  be, 
a  poor,  helpless,  sinful  creature  in  myself.  Nor  need  I  be 
overmuch  discouraged,  since  the  Lord  has  promised  to  help 
those  who  can  do  nothing  without  Him,  not  those  who  can 
make  a  tolerable  shift  to  help  themselves.  Through  mercy 
He  does  not  so  totally  withdraw,  as  to  leave  me  without 
any  power  or  will  to  cry'for  His  return.  I  hope  He  maintains 
in  me  at  all  times  a  desire  of  His  presence ;  yet  it  becomes 
me  to  wait  for  Him  with  patience,  and  to  live  upon  His 
faithfulness,  when  I  can  feel  nothing  but  evil  in  myself. 

In  your  letter,  after  having  complained  of  your  inability, 
you  say,  you  converse  with  many  who  find  it  otherwise, 
who  can  go  whenever  they  will  to  the  Father  of  mercies  with 
a  child-like  confidence,  and  never  return  without  an  answer 
— an  answer  of  peace.  If  they  only  mean  that  they  are 
favoured  with  an  established  faith,  and  can  see  that  the 
Lord  is  always  the  same,  and  that  their  right  to  the  blessings 
of  the  covenant  is  not  at  all  affected  by  their  unworthiness, 
I  wish  you  and  I  had  more  experience  of  the  same  privilege. 
In  general,  the  Lord  helps  me  to  aim  at  it,  though  I  find  it 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   391 

sometimes  difficult  to  hold  fast  my  confidence.  But  if  they 
speak  absolutely  with  respect  to  their  frames,  that  they  not 
only  have  something  to  support  them  under  their  changes, 
but  meet  with  no  changes  that  require  such  support,  I  must 
say  it  is  well  that  they  do  not  live  here  ;  if  they  did,  they 
would  not  know  how  to  pity  us,  and  we  should  not  know  how 
to  understand  them.  We  have  an  enemy  at  -  -  that  fights 
against  our  peace,  and  I  know  not  one  amongst  us  but  often 
groans  under  the  warfare.  I  advise  you  not  to  be  troubled 
by  what  you  hear  of  other  folks'  experience,  but  keep  close 
to  the  written  word,  where  you  will  meet  with  much  to 
encourage  you,  though  you  often  feel  yourself  weary  and 
heavy  laden.  For  my  own  part,  I  like  that  path  best  which 
is  well  beaten  by  the  footsteps  of  the  flock,  though  it  is  not 
always  pleasant  and  strewed  with  flowers.  In  our  way, 
we  find  some  hills,  from  whence  we  can  cheerfully  look  about 
us  ;  but  we  meet  with  deep  valleys  likewise,  and  seldom 
travel  long  upon  even  ground. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    III 

1775- 

I  AM  satisfied  with  your  answer  to  my  question  :  we 
are  not  proper  judges  of  each  other's  circumstances,  and  I 
am  in  some  measure  weaned  from  judging  hastily,  that  what 
would  not  be  convenient  for  me  must  therefore  necessarily 
be  wrong  for  another.  However,  my  solicitude  for  your 
welfare  made  me  venture  to  drop  a  hint,  as  I  was  persuaded 
you  would  take  it  in  good  part.  Indeed,  all  situations 
and  circumstances  (supposing  them  not  sinful  in  themselves, 
and  that  we  are  lawfully  placed  in  them)  are  nearly  alike. 
In  London  I  am  in  a  crowd,  in  the  country  I  am  sure  there 
is  a  crowd  in  me.  To  what  purpose  do  I  boast  of  retirement, 
when  I  am  pestered  by  a  legion  in  every  place  ?  How  often, 
when  I  am  what  I  call  alone,  may  my  mind  be  compared 
to  a  puppet-show,  a  fair,  a  Newgate,  or  any  of  those  scenes 
where  folly,  noise,  and  wickedness  most  abound  !  On  the 


3Q2  CARDIPHONIA  : 

contrary,  sometimes  I  have  enjoyed  sweet  recollection  and 
composure  where  I  could  have  hardly  expected  it.  But 
still,  though  the  power  be  all  of  the  Lord,  and  we  of  ourselves 
can  do  nothing,  it  is  both  our  duty  and  our  wisdom  to  be 
attentive  to  the  use  of  appointed  means  on  the  one  hand, 
and  on  the  other,  watchful  against  those  things  which  we 
find  by  experience  have  a  tendency  to  damp  our  fervour 
or  to  dissipate  our  spirits.  A  comfortable  intimacy  with  a 
fellow-worm  cannot  be  maintained  without  a  certain  delicacy 
and  .circumspection,  a  studiousness  in  improving  oppor 
tunities  of  pleasing,  and  in  avoiding  what  is  known  to  be 
offensive.  For  though  love  will  make  large  allowances 
for  involuntary  mistakes,  it  cannot  easily  brook  a  slight. 
We  act  thus  as  it  were  by  instinct  towards  those  whom  we 
dearly  love,  and  to  whom  we  feel  ourselves  greatly  obliged  : 
and  happy  are  they  who  are  most  influenced  by  this  senti 
ment  in  their  walk  before  the  Lord.  But,  alas  !  here  we  are 
chargeable  with  such  inconsistencies  as  we  should  be  greatly 
ashamed  of  in  a  common  life.  And  well  it  is  for  us  that  the 
Lord's  thoughts  and  ways  are  above  ours,  and  that  He  is 
infinite  in  mercy  as  well  as  in  power  ;  for  surely  our  dearest 
friends  would  have  been  weary  of  us,  and  have  renounced 
us  long  ago,  had  we  behaved  to  them  as  we  have  too  often 
done  to  Him.  He  is  God,  and  not  man,  and  therefore  He 
still  waits  to  be  gracious,  though  we  have  so  often  trifled  with 
Him.  Surely  we  may  well  say  with  the  prophet,  "  Who  is 
a  God  like  unto  Thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity  ?  "  His 
tenderness  and  forbearance  towards  His  own  people  (whose 
sins  being  committed  against  love,  and  light,  and  experience, 
are  more  aggravated  than  others)  is  astonishing  indeed. 
But,  oh  !  may  the  times  past  suffice  to  have  grieved  His 
Spirit,  and  may  we  be  enabled  from  henceforth  to  serve 
Him  with  a  single  eye  and  a  simple  heart,  to  be  faithful 
to  every  intimation  of  His  will,  and  to  make  Him  our  all 
in  all! 

Mr.  -    -  has  been  here,  and  I  have  been  with  him  at 

since  his  return.  We  seem  glad  to  be  together  when  we 
can.  When  I  am  with  him  I  feel  quite  at  home  and  at  ease, 
and  can  tell  him  (so  far  as  I  dare  tell  a  creature)  all  that 
is  in  my  heart  :  a  plain  proof  that  union  of  spirit  depends 
no  more  upon  an  exact  uniformity  of  sentiment  than  on  a 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   393 

uniformity  of  prayers  ;  for  in  some  points  of  doctrine  we 
differ  considerably  ;  but  I  trust  I  agree  with  him  in  the  views 
I  have  of  the  excellency,  suitableness,  and  sufficiency  of 
the  Saviour,  and  of  His  right  to  reign  without  a  rival  in  the 
hearts  of  His  redeemed  people.  An  experimental  knowledge 
of  Jesus  as  the  deliverer  from  sin  and  wrath,  and  the  author 
of  eternal  life  and  salvation  to  all  who  are  enabled  to  believe, 
is  sufficient  ground  for  a  union  of  heart ;  in  this  point  all 
who  are  taught  of  God  are  of  one  mind.  But  an  eager 
fighting  for  or  against  those  points  which  are  usually  made 
the  subjects  of  controversy,  tends  to  nourish  pride  and  evil 
tempers  in  ourselves,  and  to  alienate  our  hearts  from  those 
we  hope  to  spend  an  eternity  with.  In  Heaven  we  shall 
neither  be  Dissenters,  Moravians,  nor  Methodists;  neither 
Calvinists  nor  Arminians  ;  but  followers  of  the  Lamb,  and 
children  of  the  kingdom.  There  we  shall  hear  the  voice  of 
war  no  more. 

We  are  still  favoured  with  health  and  many  temporal 
blessings.  My  spiritual  walk  is  not  so  smooth  as  my  outward 
path  ;  in  public  I  am  mercifully  supported,  in  secret  I  most 
sensibly  feel  my  own  vileness  and  weakness  ;  but  through 
all  the  Lord  is  gracious. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   IV 

Jan.  10,  1775. 

THERE  is  hardly  anything  in  which  the  Lord  permits 
me  to  meet  with  more  disappointment  than  in  the  ad 
vantage  I  am  ready  to  promise  myself  from  creature  con 
verse.  When  I  expect  to  meet  any  of  my  Christian  friends, 
my  thoughts  usually  travel  much  faster  than  my  body.  I 
anticipate  the  hour  of  meeting,  and  my  imagination  is 
warmed  with  expectation  of  what  I  shall  say  and  what  I 
shall  hear  :  and  sometimes  I  have  had  seasons  for  which 
I  ought  to  be  more  thankful  than  I  am.  It  is  pleasant 
indeed  when  the  Lord  favours  us  with  a  happy  hour,  and  is 
pleased  to  cause  our  hearts  to  burn  within  us  while  we  are 


394  CARDIPHONIA  : 

speaking  of  His  goodness.  But  often  it  is  far  otherwise 
with  me  :  I  carry  with  me  a  dissipation  of  spirit,  and  find 
that  I  can  neither  impart  nor  receive.  Something  from 
within  or  from  without  crosses  my  schemes  ;  and  when  I 
retire,  I  seem  to  have  gained  nothing  but  a  fresh  conviction, 
that  we  can  neither  help  nor  be  helped,  unless  the  Lord 
Himself  is  pleased  to  help  us.  With  His  presence  in  our 
hearts  we  might  be  comfortable  and  happy  if  shut  up  in  one 
of  the  cells  of  Newgate  ;  without  it,  the  most  select  company, 
the  most  desirable  opportunities,  prove  but  clouds  without 
water. 

I  have  sometimes  thought  of  asking  you  whether  you  find 
that  difference  between  being  abroad  and  at  home  that  I 
do  ?  But  I  take  it  for  granted  that  you  do  not  ;  your  con 
nexions  and  intimacies  are,  I  believe,  chiefly  with  those  who 
are  highly  favoured  of  the  Lord,  and  if  you  can  break  through 
or  be  upon  your  guard  against  the  inconveniences  which 
attend  frequent  changes  and  much  company,  you  must  be 
very  happy  in  them.  But,  I  believe,  considering  my  weak 
ness,  the  Lord  has  chosen  wisely  and  well  for  me,  in  placing 
me  in  a  state  of  retirement,  and  not  putting  it  in  my  power 
were  it  ever  so  much  my  inclination,  to  be  often  abroad.  As 
I  stir  so  seldom,  I  believe  when  I  do,  it  is  not  upon  the  whole 
to  my  disadvantage  ;  for  I  meet  with  more  or  less  upon 
which  my  reflections  afterwards  may,  by  His  blessing,  be 
useful  to  me,  though  at  the  time  my  visits  most  frequently 
convince  me  how  little  wisdom  or  skill  I  have  in  improving 
time  and  opportunities.  But  were  I  to  live  in  London,  I 
know  not  what  might  be  the  consequence.  Indeed,  I  need 
not  puzzle  myself  about  it,  as  my  call  does  not  lie  there  ; 
but  I  pity  and  pray  for  those  who  do  live  there,  and  I  admire 
such  of  them  as,  in  those  circumstances  which  appear  so 
formidable  to  me,  are  enabled  to  walk  simply,  humbly,  and 
closely  with  the  Lord.  They  remind  me  of  Daniel,  unhurt 
in  the  midst  of  lions,  or  of  the  bush  which  Moses  saw, 
surrounded  with  flames,  yet  not  consumed,  because  the  Lord 
was  there.  Some  such  I  do  know,  and  I  hope  you  are  one 
of  the  number. 

This  is  certain,  that  if  the  light  of  God's  countenance, 
and  communion  with  Him  in  love,  afford  the  greatest  happi 
ness  we  are  capable  of,  then  whatever  tends  to  indispose 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   395 

us  for  this  pursuit,  or  to  draw  a  veil  between  Him  and 
our  souls,  must  be  our  great  loss.  If  we  walk  with  Him,  it 
must  be  in  the  path  of  duty,  which  lies  plain  before  us  when 
our  eye  is  single,  and  we  are  waiting  with  attention  upon 
His  word,  Spirit,  and  providence.  Now,  wherever  the  path 
of  duty  leads  we  are  safe  ;  and  it  often  does  lead  and  place 
us  in  such  circumstances  as  no  other  consideration  would 
make  us  choose.  We  were  not  designed  to  be  mere  recluses, 
but  have  all  a  part  to  act  in  life.  Now,  if  I  find  myself  in 
the  midst  of  things  disagreeable  enough  in  themselves 
to  the  spiritual  life ;  yet  if,  when  the  question  occurs, 
"  What  dost  thou  here  ?  "  my  heart  can  answer,  "  I  am  here 
by  the  will  of  God  ;  I  believe  it  to  be,  all  things  considered, 
my  duty  to  be  here  at  this  time  rather  than  elsewhere  "  :  If 
I  say  I  am  tolerably  satisfied  of  this,  then  I  would  not  burden 
and  grieve  myself  about  what  I  cannot  avoid  or  alter,  but 
endeavour  to  take  all  such  things  up  with  cheerfulness,  as  a 
part  of  my  daily  cross  ;  since  I  am  called,  not  only  to  do  the 
will  of  God,  but  to  suffer  it  :  but  if  I  am  doing  my  own  will 
rather  than  His,  then  I  have  reason  to  fear,  lest  I  should 
meet  with  either  a  snare  or  a  sting  at  every  step.  May  the 
Lord  Jesus  be  with  you  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    V 

DEAR  MADAM,  April  13,  1776. 

I  AM  rather  of  the  latest  to  present  my  congratulations 
to  you  and  Mr.  -  -  on  your  marriage,  but  I  have  not  been 
unmindful  of  you.  My  heart  has  repeatedly  wished  you  all 
that  my  pen  can  express,  that  the  new  relation  in  which  the 
providence  of  God  has  placed  you,  may  be  blessed  to  you  in 
every  respect,  may  afford  you  much  temporal  comfort, 
promote  your  spiritual  progress,  and  enlarge  your  sphere  of 
usefulness  in  the  world  and  in  the  Church. 

By  this  time  I  suppose  visits  and  ceremonies  are  pretty 
well  over,  and  you  are  beginning  to  be  settled  in  your  new 
situation,  What  an  important  period  is  a  wedding-day  ! 


3Q6  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

What  an  entire  change  of  circumstances  does  it  produce  ! 
What  an  influence  it  has  upon  every  day  of  future  life  ! 
How  many  cares,  inquietudes,  and  trials,  does  it  expose  us  to, 
which  we  might  otherwise  have  avoided  !  But  they  who 
love  the  Lord,  and  are  guided  by  His  Word  and  providence, 
have  nothing  to  fear ;  for  in  every  state,  relation,  and 
circumstance  in  life,  He  will  be  with  them,  and  will  surely 
do  them  good.  His  grace,  which  is  needful  in  a  single,  is 

sufficient  for  a  married  life.     I  sincerely  wish  Mr. and 

you  much  happiness  together ;  that  you  may  be  mutually 
helpmeets,  and  assist  each  other  in  walking  as  fellow  heirs 
of  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  Your  cares  and  trials,  I  know, 
must  be  increased ;  may  your  comforts  be  increased 
proportionally  !  They  will  be  so,  if  you  are  enabled  heartily 
and  simply  to  entreat  the  Lord  to  keep  your  heart  fixed  near 
to  Himself.  All  the  temporal  blessings  and  accommodations 
He  provides  to  sweeten  life,  and  make  our  passage  through 
this  wilderness  more  agreeable,  will  fail  and  disappoint  us, 
and  produce  us  more  thorns  than  roses,  unless  we  can  keep 
sight  of  His  hand  in  bestowing  them,  and  hold  and  use  the 
gifts  in  some  due  subserviency  to  what  we  owe  to  the  Giver. 
But,  alas !  we  are  poor  creatures,  prone  to  wander,  prone 
to  admire  our  gourds,  cleave  to  our  cisterns,  and  think  of 
building  tabernacles,  and  taking  our  rest  in  this  polluted 
world.  Hence  the  Lord  often  sees  it  necessary,  in  mercy  to 
His  children,  to  embitter  their  sweets,  to  break  their  cisterns, 
send  a  worm  to  their  gourds,  and  draw  a  dark  cloud  over  their 
pleasing  prospects.  His  Word  tells  us,  that  all  here  is  vanity 
compared  with  the  light  of  His  countenance  ;  and  if  we 
cannot  or  will  not  believe  it  upon  the  authority  of  His  Word, 
we  must  learn  it  by  experience.  May  He  enable  you  to 
settle  it  in  your  hearts,  that  creature-comforts  are  precarious, 
insufficient,  and  ensnaring  ;  that  all  good  comes  from  His 
hand,  and  that  nothing  can  do  us  good,  but  so  far  as  He  is 
pleased  to  make  it  the  instrument  of  communicating,  as 
a  stream,  that  goodness  which  is  in  Him  as  a  fountain  ! 
Even  the  bread  which  we  eat,  without  the  influence  of  His 
promise  and  blessing,  would  no  more  support  us  than  a 
stone  ;  but  His  blessing  makes  every  thing  good,  gives  a 
tenfold  value  to  our  comforts,  and  greatly  diminishes  the 
weight  of  every  cross,  The  ring  upon  your  finger  is  of  some 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   397 

value  as  gold,  but  this  is  not  much  ;  what  makes  it  chiefly 
valuable  to  you  is,  that  you  consider  it  as  a  pledge  and 
token  of  the  relation  you  bear  to  him  who  gave  it  you. 
I  know  no  fitter  emblem  of  the  light  in  which  we  should 
consider  all  those  good  things  which  the  Lord  gives  us  richly 
to  enjoy.  When  everything  we  receive  from  Him  is  received 
and  prized  as  a  fruit  and  pledge  of  His  covenant-love,  then 
His  bounties,  instead  of  being  set  up  as  rivals  and  idols  to 
draw  our  heart  from  Him,  awaken  us  to  fresh  exercises  of 
gratitude,  and  furnish  us  with  fresh  motives  of  cheerful 
obedience  every  hour. 

Time  is  short,  and  we  live  in  a  dark  and  cloudy  day. 
When  iniquity  abounds,  the  love  of  many  waxes  cold  :  and 
we  have  reason  to  fear  the  Lord's  hand  is  lifted  up  in  dis 
pleasure  at  our  provocations.  May  He  help  us  to  sit  loose 
to  all  below,  and  to  be  found  watching  unto  prayer,  for 
grace  to  keep  our  garments  undefiled,  and  to  be  faithful 
witnesses  for  Him  in  our  places  !  O  !  it  is  my  desire  for 
myself  and  for  all  my  dear  friends,  that  whilst  too  many 
seem  content  with  a  half  profession,  a  name  to  live,  an 
outward  attachment  to  ordinances,  and  sentiments,  and 
parties,  we  may  be  ambitious  to  experience  what  the 
glorious  Gospel  is  capable  of  effecting,  both  as  to  sanctifica- 
tion  and  consolation,  in  this  state  of  infirmity  ;  that  we  may 
have  our  loins  girded  up,  our  lamps  burning,  and,  by  our 
simplicity  and  spirituality,  constrain  those  who  know  us,  to 
acknowledge  that  we  have  been  with  Jesus,  have  sat  at  His 
feet,  and  drunk  of  His  Spirit. 

I  am,  &c. 


THREE    LETTERS 

TO 

MRS.  H- 

LETTER    I 

LONG  and  often  I  have  thought  of  writing  to  you  ;  now 
the  time  is  come.  May  the  Lord  help  me  to  send  a  word  in 
season  !  I  know  not  how  it  may  be  with  you,  but  He  does, 
and  to  Him  I  look  to  direct  my  thoughts  accordingly.  I 
suppose  you  are  still  in  the  school  of  the  cross,  learning  the 
happy  art  of  extracting  real  good  out  of  seeming  evil,  and  to 
grow  tall  by  stooping.  The  flesh  is  a  sad  untoward  dunce 
in  this  school ;  but  grace  makes  the  spirit  willing  to  learn  by 
suffering  ;  yea,  it  cares  not  what  it  endures,  so  sin  may 
be  mortified,  and  a  conformity  to  the  image  of  Jesus  be 
increased.  Surely,  when  we  see  the  most  and  the  best  of 
the  Lord's  children  so  often  in  heaviness,  and  when  we 
consider  how  much  He  loves  them,  and  what  He  has  done 
and  prepared  for  them,  we  may  take  it  for  granted  that 
there  is  a  need-be  for  their  sufferings.  For  it  would  be 
easy  to  His  power,  and  not  a  thousandth  part  of  what 
His  love  intends  to  do  for  them,  should  He  make  their  whole 
life  here,  from  the  hour  of  their  conversion  to  their  death, 
a  continued  course  of  satisfaction  and  comfort,  without 
anything  to  distress  them  from  within  or  without.  But 
were  it  so,  should  we  not  miss  many  advantages  ?  In  the 
first  place,  we  should  not  then  be  very  conformable  to  our 
Head,  nor  be  able  to  say,  "  As  He  was,  so  are  we  in  this 
world."  Methinks  a  believer  would  be  ashamed  to  be  so 
utterly  unlike  his  Lord.  What !  the  master  always  a  man 
of  sorrow  and  acquainted  with  grief,  and  the  servant  always 
happy  and  full  of  comfort  !  Jesus  despised,  reproached, 

398 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   399 

neglected,  opposed,  and  betrayed,  and  His  people  admired 
and  caressed  ;  He  living  in  the  want  of  all  things,  and  they 
filled  with  abundance  ;  He  sweating  blood  for  anguish,  and 
they  strangers  to  distress  !  How  unsuitable  would  these 
things  be  !  How  much  better  to  be  called  to  the  honour  of 
experiencing  a  measure  of  His  sufferings  !  A  cup  was  put 
into  His  hand  on  our  account,  and  His  love  engaged  Him  to 
drink  it  for  us.  The  wrath  which  it  contained  He  drank 
wholly  Himself ;  but  He  left  us  a  little  affliction  to  taste, 
that  we  might  pledge  Him,  and  remember  how  He  loved  us, 
and  how  much  more  He  endured  for  us  than  He  will  ever  call 
us  to  endure  for  Him.  Again,  how  could  we,  without 
sufferings,  manifest  the  nature  and  truth  of  Gospel-grace  ! 
What  place  should  we  then  have  for  patience,  submission, 
meekness,  forbearance,  and  a  readiness  to  forgive,  if  we 
had  nothing  to  try  us,  either  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  or 
from  the  hand  of  men  !  A  Christian  without  trials  would  be 
like  a  mill  without  wind  or  water  ;  the  contrivance  and  design 
of  the  wheel-work  within-side  would  be  unnoticed  and 
unknown,  without  something  to  put  it  in  motion  from 
without.  Nor  would  our  graces  grow,  unless  they  were 
called  out  to  exercise  ;  the  difficulties  we  meet  with  not 
only  prove,  but  strengthen,  the  graces  of  the  spirit.  If  a 
person  were  always  to  sit  still,  without  making  use  of  legs 
or  arms,  he  would  probably  wholly  lose  the  power  of  moving 
his  limbs  at  last ;  but  by  walking  and  working  he  becomes 
strong  and  active.  So,  in  a  long  course  of  ease,  the  powers 
of  the  new  man  would  certainly  languish  ;  the  soul  would 
grow  soft,  indolent,  cowardly,  and  faint ;  and  therefore  the 
Lord  appoints  His  children  such  dispensations  as  make 
them  strive  and  struggle,  and  pant ;  they  must  press  through 
a  crowd,  swim  against  a  stream,  endure  hardships,  run, 
wrestle,  and  fight ;  and  thus  their  strength  grows  in  the 
using. 

By  these  things,  likewise,  they  are  made  more  willing  to 
leave  the  present  world,  to  which  we  are  prone  to  cleave 
too  closely  in  our  hearts  when  our  path  is  very  smooth. 
Had  Israel  enjoyed  their  former  peace  and  prosperity  in 
Egypt,  when  Moses  came  to  invite  them  to  Canaan,  I  think 
they  would  hardly  have  listened  to  him.  But  the  Lord 
suffered  them  to  be  brought  into  great  trouble  and  bondage, 


400  CAPDIPHONIA  : 

and  then  the  news  of  deJiverance  was  more  welcome  ;  yet 
still  they  were  but  half  willing,  and  they  carried  a  love  to 
the  flesh-pots  of  Egypt  with  them  into  the  wilderness.  We 
are  like  them  :  though  we  say  this  world  is  vain  and  sinful, 
we  are  too  fond  of  it ;  and  though  we  hope  for  true  happiness 
only  in  Heaven,  we  are  often  well  content  to  stay  longer 
here.  But  the  Lord  sends  afflictions  one  after  another  to 
quicken  our  desires,  and  to  convince  us  that  this  cannot  be 
our  rest.  Sometimes  if  you  drive  a  bird  from  one  branch 
of  a  tree  he  will  hop  to  another  a  little  higher,  and  from 
thence  to  a  third  ;  but  if  you  continue  to  disturb  him,  he 
will  at  last  take  wing,  and  fly  quite  away.  Thus  we,  when 
forced  from  one  creature-comfort,  perch  upon  another,  and 
so  on  ;  but  the  Lord  mercifully  follows  us  with  trials,  and 
will  not  let  us  rest  upon  any  ;  by  degrees  our  desires  take 
a  nobler  flight,  and  can  be  satisfied  with  nothing  short  of 
Himself ;  and  we  say,  "  To  depart  and  be  with  Jesus  is  best 
of  all!" 

I  trust  you  find  the  name  and  grace  of  Jesus  more  and  more 
precious  to  you  ;  His  promises  more  sweet,  and  your  hope 
in  them  more  abiding  ;  your  sense  of  your  own  weakness 
and  unworthiness  daily  increasing  ;  your  persuasion  of  his 
all-sufficiency,  to  guide,  support,  and  comfort  you,  more 
confirmed.  You  owe  your  growth  in  these  respects  in  a 
great  measure  to  His  blessing  upon  those  afflictions  which 
He  has  prepared  for  you,  and  sanctified  to  you.  May 
you  praise  Him  for  all  that  is  past,  and  trust  Him  for  all 
that  is  to  come  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  II 

THOUGH  I  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  of  you,  and 
sending  a  remembrance  from  time  to  time,  I  am  willing, 
by  this  opportunity,  to  direct  a  few  lines  to  you,  as  a  more 
express  testimony  of  my  sincere  regard. 

I  think  your  experience  is  generally  of  the  fearful  doubting 
cast.     Such  souls,  however,  the  Lord  has  given  particular 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   401 

charge  to  his  ministers  to  comfort.  He  knows  our  infirmities, 
and  what  temptations  mean,  and  as  a  good  Shepherd  He 
expresses  a  peculiar  care  and  tenderness  for  the  weak  of 
the  flock  (Isa.  xl.  4).  But  how  must  I  attempt'your  comfort  ? 
Surely  not  by  strengthening  a  mistake  to  which  we  are  all  too 
liable,  by  leading  you  to  look  into  your  own  heart  for  (what 
you  will  never  find  there)  something  in  yourself  whereon 
to  ground  your  hopes,  if  not  wholly,  yet  at  least  in  part. 
Rather  let  me  endeavour  to  lead  you  out  of  yourself ;  let 
me  invite  you  to  look  unto  Jesus.  Should  we  look  for  light 
in  our  own  eyes,  or  in  the  sun  ?  Is  it  indwelling  sin  distresses 
you  ?  Then  I  can  tell  you  (though  you  know  it)  that  Jesus 
died  for  sin  and  sinners.  I  can  tell  you  that  His  blood  and 
righteousness  are  of  infinite  value  ;  that  His  arm  is  almighty 
and  His  compassions  infinite  ;  yea,  you  yourself  read  His 
promises  every  day,  and  why  should  you  doubt  their  being 
fulfilled  ?  If  you  say  you  do  not  question  their  truth,  or 
that  they  are  accomplished  to  many,  but  that  you  can 
hardly  believe  they  belong  to  you,  I  would  ask,  what  evidence 
you  would  require  ?  A  voice  or  an  angel  from  Heaven 
you  do  not  expect.  Consider,  if  many  of  the  promises  are 
not  expressly  directed  to  those  to  whom  they  belong. 
When  you  read  your  name  on  the  superscription  of  this 
letter  you  make  no  scruple  to  open  it  :  why,  then,  do  you 
hesitate  at  embracing  the  promises  of  the  Gospel,  where 
you  read  that  they  are  addressed  to  those  who  mourn, 
who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  who  are  poor  in 
spirit,  &c.,  and  cannot  but  be  sensible  that  a  gracious  God 
has  begun  to  work  these  dispositions  in  your  heart  ?  If 
you  say,  that  though  you  do  at  times  mourn,  hunger,  &c., 
you  are  afraid  you  do  it  not  enough,  or  not  aright,  consider 
that  this  sort  of  reasoning  is  very  far  from  the  spirit  and 
language  of  the  Gospel ;  for  it  is  grounded  on  a  secret 
supposition,  that  in  the  forgiveness  of  sin  God  has  a  respect 
to  something  more  than  the  atonement  and  mediation  of 
Jesus  ;  namely,  to  some  previous  good  qualifications  in  a 
sinner's  heart,  which  are  to  share  with  the  blood  of  Christ 
in  the  honour  of  salvation.  The  enemy  deceives  us  in  this 
matter  the  more  easily,  because  a  propensity  to  the  covenant 
of  works  is  a  part  of  our  natural  depravity.  Depend 
upon  it  you  will  never  have  a  suitable  and  sufficient  sense  of 

C.  2C 


402  CARDIPHOXIA  : 

the  evil  of  sin,  and  of  your  share  in  it,  so  long  as  you  have 
any  sin  remaining  in  you.  We  must  see  Jesus  as  He  is 
before  our  apprehension  of  any  spiritual  truth  will  be 
complete.  But  if  we  know  that  we  must  perish  without 
Christ,  and  that  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  we 
know  enough  to  warrant  us  to  cast  our  souls  upon  Him,  and 
we  dishonour  Him  by  fearing  that  when  we  do  so  He  will 
disappoint  our  hope.  But  if  you  are  still  perplexed  about 
the  high  points  of  election,  &c.,  I  would  advise  you  to  leave 
the  disposal  of  others  to  the  great  Judge  ;  and  as  to  yourself, 
I  think  I  need  not  say  much  to  persuade  you,  that  if  ever 
you  are  saved  at  all,  it  must  be  in  a  way  of  free  and  absolute 
grace.  Leave  disputes  to  others  ;  wait  upon  the  Lord,  and 
He  will  teach  you  all  things  in  such  degree  and  time  as  He 
sees  best.  Perhaps  you  have  suffered  for  taking  things  too 
much  upon  trust  from  men.  Cease  from  man,  whose  breath 
is  in  his  nostrils.  One  is  your  master,  even  Christ.  Study 
and  pray  over  the  Bible  ;  and  you  may  take  it  as  a  sure 
rule,  that  whatever  sentiment  makes  any  part  of  the  Word  of 
God  unwelcome  to  you,  is  justly  to  be  suspected.  Aim  at  a 
cheerful  spirit.  The  more  you  trust  God,  the  better  you 
will  serve  Him.  While  you  indulge  unbelief  and  suspicion, 
you  weaken  your  own  hands,  and  discourage  others.  Be 
thankful  for  what  He  has  shown  you,  and  wait  upon  Him  for 
more  :  you  shall  find  He  has  not  said,  "  Seek  ye  My  face  " 
in  vain.  I  heartily  commend  you  to  His  grace  and  care, 

And  am,  &c. 


LETTER   III 

AT  length,  and  without  farther  apology  for  my  silence, 
I  sit  down  to  ask  you  how  you  fare.'  Afflictions  I  hear  have 
been  your  lot  ;  and  if  I  had  not  heard  so,  I  should  have  taken 
it  for  granted  :  for  I  believe  the  Lord  loves  you  ;  and  as 
many  as  He  loves  He  chastens.  I  think  you  can  say, 
afflictions  have  been  good  for  you,  and  I  doubt  not  but 
you  have  found  strength  according  to  your  day  ;  so  that, 
though  you  may  have  been  sharply  tried,  you  have  not  been 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   403 

overpowered.  For  the  Lord  has  engaged  His  faithfulness 
for  this  to  all  His  children,  that  He  will  support  them  in  all 
their  trials  :  so  that  the  fire  shall  not  consume  them,  nor  the 
floods  drown  them  (i  Cor.  x.  13  ;  Isa.  xliii.  2). 

If  you  can  say  thus  much,  cannot  you  go  a  little  further, 
and  add,  in  the  apostle's  words,  "  None  of  these  things  move 
me,  neither  count  I  my  life  dear.  I  rather  glory  in  my 
infirmities,  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  me  : 
yea,  doubtless,  I  count  all  things  loss  and  of  no  regard,  for 
the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord  ; 
for  when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong  "  ?  Methinks  I 
hear  you  say,  "  God,  who  comforteth  those  who  are  cast 
down,  has  comforted  my  soul ;  and  as  my  troubles  have 
abounded,  my  consolations  in  Christ  have  abounded  also. 
He  has  delivered,  He  does  deliver,  and  in  Him  I  trust  that 
He  will  yet  deliver  me."  Surely  you  can  set  your  seal  to 
these  words.  The  Lord  help  you  then  to  live  more  and  more 
a  life  of  faith,  to  feed  upon  the  promises,  and  to  rejoice  in 
the  assurance  that  all  things  are  yours,  and  shall  surely 
work  for  your  good. 

If  I  guess  right  at  what  passes  in  your  heart,  the  name  of 
Jesus  is  precious  to  you,  and  this  is  a  sure  token  of  salvation, 
and  that  of  God.  You  could  not  have  loved  Him,  if  He  had 
not  loved  you  first.  He  spoke  to  you,  and  said,  "  Seek 
My  face,"  before  your  heart  cried  to  Him,  "  Thy  face,  O 
Lord,  will  I  seek."  But  you  complain,  "  Alas  !  I  love  Him 
so  little."  That  very  complaint  proves  that  you  love  Him 
a  great  deal ;  for  if  you  loved  Him  but  a  little,  you  would 
think  you  loved  Him  enough.  A  mother  loves  her  child  a 
great  deal,  yet  does  not  complain  for  not  loving  it  more  ; 
nay,  perhaps  she  hardly  thinks  it  possible.  But  such  an 
infinite  object  is  Jesus,  that  they  who  love  Him  better  than 
parents  or  child,  or  any  earthly  relation  or  comfort,  will  still 
think  they  hardly  love  Him  at  all ;  because  they  see  such  a 
vast  disproportion  between  the  utmost  they  can  give  Him, 
and  what  in  Himself  He  deserves  from  them.  But  I  can 
give  you  good  advice  and  good  news  :  love  Him  as  well  as 
you  can  now,  and  ere  long  you  shall  love  Him  better.  O 
when  you  see  Him  as  He  is,  then  I  am  sure  you  will  love  Him 
indeed  !  If  you  want  to  love  Him  better  now  while  you  are 
here,  I  believe  I  can  tell  you  the  secret  how  this  is  to  be 

2C2 


404  CARDIPHONIA  : 

attained  :  Trust  Him.  The  more  you  trust  Him,  the  better 
you  will  love  Him.  If  you  ask,  farther,  How  shall  I  do  to 
trust  Him  ?  I  answer,  Try  Him  :  the  more  you  make 
trial  of  Him,  the  more  your  trust  in  Him  will  be  strengthened. 
Venture  upon  His  promises  ;  carry  them  to  Him,  and  see 
if  He  will  not  be  as  good  as  His  word.  But,  alas  !  Satan 
and  unbelief  work  the  contrary  way.  We  are  unwilling  to 
try  Him,  and  therefore  unable  to  trust  Him  ;  and  what 
wonder,  then,  that  our  love  is  faint,  for  who  can  love  at 
uncertainties  ? 

If  you  are  in  some  measure  thankful  for  what  you  have 
received,  and  hungering  and  thirsting  for  more,  you  are 
in  the  frame  I  would  wish  for  myself ;  and  I  desire  to  praise 
the  Lord  on  your  behalf.  Pray  for  us.  We  join  in  love 
to  you. 

I  am,  &c. 


TWO    LETTERS 

TO 

MISS   P 

LETTER    I 

August  17,  1767. 

IT  is  indeed  natural  to  us  to  wish  and  to  plan,  and  it 
is  merciful  in  the  Lord  to  disappoint  our  plans,  and  to 
cross  our  wishes.  For  we  cannot  be  safe,  much  less  happy, 
but  in  proportion  as  we  are  weaned  from  our  own  wills, 
and  made  simply  desirous  of  being  directed  by  His  guidance. 
This  truth  (when  we  are  enlightened  by  His  Word)  is  suffi 
ciently  familiar  to  the  judgment ;  but  we  seldom  learn  to 
reduce  it  to  practice,  without  being  trained  awhile  in  the 
school  of  disappointment.  The  schemes  we  form  look  so 
plausible  and  convenient,  that  when  they  are  broken,  we 
are  ready  to  say,  What  a  pity  !  We  try  again,  and  with 
no  better  success  ;  we  are  grieved,  and  perhaps  angry,  and 
plan  out  another,  and  so  on  ;  at  length,  in  a  course  of  time, 
experience  and  observation  begin  to  convince  us,  that  we 
are  not  more  able  than  we  are  worthy  to  choose  aright  for 
ourselves.  Then  the  Lord's  invitation  to  cast  our  cares 
upon  Him,  and  His  promise  to  take  care  of  us,  appear 
valuable  ;  and  when  we  have  done  planning,  His  plan  in 
our  favour  gradually  opens,  and  he  does  more  and  better 
for  us  than  we  either  ask  or  think.  I  can  hardly  recollect 
a  single  plan  of  mine,  of  which  I  have  not  since  seen 
reason  to  be  satisfied,  that  had  it  taken  place  in  season  and 
circumstance  just  as  I  proposed,  it  would,  humanly  speaking, 
have  proved  my  ruin  ;  or  at  least  it  would  have  deprived 
me  of  the  greater  good  the  Lord  had  designed  for  me.  We 
judge  of  things  by  their  present  appearances,  but  the  Lord 


406  CARDIPHONIA  : 

sees  them  in  their  consequences  ;  if  we  could  do  so  likewise, 
we  should  be  perfectly  of  His  mind  ;  but  as  we  cannot,  it 
is  an  unspeakable  mercy  that  He  will  manage  for  us,  whether 
we  are  pleased  with  His  management  or  not ;  and  it  is 
spoken  of  as  one  of  his  heaviest  judgments,  when  He  gives 
any  person  or  people  up  to  the  way  of  their  own  hearts, 
and  to  walk  after  their  own  counsels. 

Indeed  we  may  admire  His  patience  towards  us.  If  we 
were  blind,  and  reduced  to  desire  a  person  to  lead  us,  and 
shouM  yet  pretend  to  dispute  with  him,  and  direct  him  at 
every  step,  we  should  probably  soon  weary  him,  and  provoke 
him  to  leave  us  to  find  the  way  by  ourselves  if  we  could. 
But  our  gracious  Lord  is  long-suffering  and  full  of  compas 
sion  ;  He  bears  with  our  forwardness,  yet  He  will  take 
methods  to  both  shame  and  to  humble  us,  and  to  bring  us 
to  a  confession  that  He  is  wiser  than  we.  The  great  and 
unexpected  benefits  He  intends  us,  by  all  the  discipline  we 
meet  with,  is  to  tread  down  our  wills,  and  bring  them  into 
subjection  to  His.  So  far  as  we  attain  to  this,  we  are  out  of 
the  reach  of  disappointment  ;  for  when  the  will  of  God  can 
please  us,  we  shall  be  pleased  every  day,  and  from  morning 
to  night ;  I  mean  with  respect  to  His  dispensations.  O 
the  happiness  of  such  a  life  !  I  have  an  idea  of  it  ;  I  hope 
I  am  aiming  at  it,  but  surely  I  have  not  attained  it.  Self 
is  active  in  my  heart,  if  it  does  not  absolutely  reign  there.  I 
profess  to  believe  that  one  thing  is  needful  and  sufficient, 
and  yet  my  thoughts  are  prone  to  wander  after  a  hundred 
more.  If  it  be  true  that  the  light  of  His  countenance  is 
better  than  life,  why  am  I  solicitous  about  anything  else  ? 
If  He  be  all-sufficient,  and  gives  me  liberty  to  call  Him  mine, 
why  do  I  go  a-begging  to  creatures  for  help  ?  If  He  be  about 
my  path  and  bed  ;  if  the  smallest,  as  well  as  the  greatest, 
events  in  which  I  am  concerned,  are  under  His  immediate 
direction  ;  if  the  very  hairs  of  my  head  are  numbered  ; 
then  my  care  (any  farther  than  a  care  to  walk  in  the  paths 
of  His  precepts,  and  to  follow  the  openings  of  His  providence) 
must  be  useless  and  needless,  yea,  indeed,  sinful  and  heathen 
ish,  burdensome  to  myself,  and  dishonourable  to  my  profes 
sion.  Let  us  cast  down  the  load  we  are  unable  to  carry,  and 
if  the  Lord  be  our  Shepherd,  refer  all  and  trust  all  to  Him. 
Let  us  endeavour  to  live  to  Him  and  for  Him  to-day,  and 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   407 

be  glad  that  to-morrow,  with  all  that  is  behind  it,  is  in  His 
hands. 

It  is  storied  of  Pompey,  that  when  his  friends  would  have 
dissuaded  him  from  putting  to  sea  in  a  storm,  he  answered, 
It  is  necessary  for  me  to  sail,  but  it  is  not  necessary  for  me 
to  live.  A  pompous  speech,  in  Pompey 's  sense  !  He  was 
full  of  the  idea  of  his  own  importance,  and  would  rather  have 
died  than  have  taken  a  step  beneath  his  supposed  dignity. 
But  it  may  be  accommodated  with  propriety  to  a  believer's 
case.  It  becomes  us  to  say,  It  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  be 
rich,  or  what  the  world  accounts  wise  ;  to  be  healthy,  or 
admired  by  my  fellow-worms  ;  to  pass  through  life  in  a 
state  of  prosperity  and  outward  comfort  ; — these  things 
may  be,  or  they  may  be  otherwise,  as  the  Lord  in  His 
wisdom  shall  appoint ; — but  it  is  necessary  for  me  to  be 
humble  and  spiritual,  to  seek  communion  with  God,  to  adorn 
my  profession  of  the  Gospel,  and  to  yield  submissively  to 
His  disposal,  in  whatever  way,  whether  of  service  or  suffering, 
He  shall  be  pleased  to  call  me  to  glorify  Him  in  the  world. 
It  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  live  long,  but  highly  expedient 
that  whilst  I  do  live  I  should  live  to  Him.  Here,  then,  I 
would  bound  my  desires  ;  and  here,  having  His  word  both 
for  my  rule  and  my  warrant,  I  am  secured  from  asking  amiss. 
Let  me  have  His  presence  and  His  Spirit,  wisdom  to  know 
my  calling,  and  opportunities  and  faithfulness  to  improve 
them  ;  and  as  to  the  rest,  Lord,  help  me  to  say,  "  What 
Thou  wilt,  when  Thou  wilt,  and  how  Thou  wilt." 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

DEAR  MADAM, 

WHAT  a  poor,  uncertain,  dying  world  is  this  !  What 
a  wilderness  in  itself !  How  dark,  how  desolate,  without 
the  light  of  the  Gospel  and  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  !  It 
does  not  appear  so  to  us  in  a  state  of  nature,  because  we 
are  then  in  a  state  of  enchantment,  the  magical  lantern 
blinding  us  with  a  splendid  delusion. 


408  CARDIPHONIA  : 

Thus  in  the  desert's  dreary  waste, 
By  magic  power  produc'd  in  haste, 

As  old  romances  say, 
Castles  and  groves,  and  music  sweet, 

The  senses  of  the  trav'ller  cheat, 

And  stop  him  in  his  way. 

But  while  he  gazes  with  surprise, 
The  charm  dissolves,  the  vision  dies  ; 

Twas  but  enchanted  ground  ; 
Thus,  if  the  Lord  our  spirit  touch, 
The  world,  which  promis'd  us  so  much, 

A  wilderness  is  found. 

It  is  a  great  mercy  to  be  undeceived  in  time  ;  and  though 
our  gay  dreams  are  at  an  end,  and  we  awake  to  everything 
that  is  disgustful  and  dismaying,  yet  we  see  a  highway 
through  the  wilderness;]  a  powerful  guard,  an  infallible 
Guide  at  hand  to  conduct  us  through  ;  and  we  can  discern, 
beyond  the  limits  of  the  wilderness,  a  better  land,  where  we 
shall  be  at  rest  and  at  home.  What  will  the  difficulties 
we  meet  by  the  way  then  signify  ?  The  remembrance  of 
them  will  only  remain  to  heighten  our  sense  of  the  love, 
care,  and  power  of  our  Saviour  and  Leader.  O  how  shall 
we  then  admire,  adore,  and  praise  Him,  when  He  shall 
condescend  to  unfold  to  us  the  beauty,  propriety,  and 
harmony  of  the  whole  train  of  His  dispensations  towards 
us,  and  give  us  a  clear  retrospect  of  all  the  way,  and  all  the 
turns  of  our  pilgrimage  ! 

In  the  mean  while,  the  best  method  of  adorning  our 
profession,  and  of  enjoying  peace  in  our  souls,  is  simply 
to  trust  Him,  and  absolutely  to  commit  ourselves  and  our 
all  to  His  management.  By  casting  our  burdens  upon 
Him,  our  spirits  become  light  and  cheerful  ;  we  are  freed 
from  a  thousand  anxieties  and  inquietudes,  wliich  are  weari 
some  to  our  minds,  and  which,  with  respect  to  events,  are 
needless  for  us,  yea  useless.  But  though  it  may  be  easy  to 
speak  of  this  trust,  and  it  appears  to  our  judgment  perfectly 
right  and  reasonable,  the  actual  attainment  is  a  great 
thing  ;  and  especially  so,  to  trust  the  Lord,  not  by  fits  and 
starts,  surrendering  one  day  and  retracting  the  next,  but  to 
abide  by  our  surrender,  and  go  habitually  trusting  through 
all  the  changes  we  meet,  knowing  that  His  love,  purpose, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   409 

and  promise  are  unchangeable.  Some  little  faintings,  per 
haps,  none  are  freed  from  ;  but  I  believe  a  power  of  trusting 
the  Lord  in  good  measure  at  all  times,  and  living  quietly 
under  the  shadow  of  His  wing,  is  what  the  promise  warrants 
us  to  expect,  if  we  seek  it  by  diligent  prayer  ;  if  not  all  at 
once,  yet  by  a  gradual  increase.  May  it  be  your  experience 
and  mine  ! 

I  am,  &c. 


FOURTEEN    LETTERS 

TO    THE 

REV.   MR.   B 

> 

LETTER   I 

DEAR  AND  REV.  SIR  Jan.  27,  1778. 

I  CALL  you  dear  because  I  love  you,  and  I  shall  continue 
to  style  you  Reverend  as  long  as  you  dignify  me  with  that  title. 
It  is  indeed  a  pretty  sounding  epithet,  and  forms  a  striking 
contrast  in  the  usual  application.  The  inhabitants  of  the 
moon  (if  there  be  any)  have  perhaps  no  idea  how  many 
Reverend,  Right  Reverend,  and  Most  Reverend  sinners 
we  have  in  Europe.  And  yet  you  are  reverend,  and  I  revere 
you,  because  I  believe  the  Lord  liveth  in  you,  and  has 
chosen  you  to  be  a  temple  of  His  presence,  and  an  instru 
ment  of  His  grace. 

I  hope  the  two  sermons  you  preached  in  London  were 
made  useful  to  others,  and  the  medicines  you  took  there 
were  useful  to  yourself.  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  are  safe  at 
home,  and  something  better.  Cheerful  spring  is  approaching, 
then  I  hope  the  barometer  of  your  spirits  will  rise.  But  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  can  bring  a  pleasanter  spring  than 
April,  and  even  in  the  depth  of  winter. 

At  present  it  is  January  with  me,  both  within  and  without. 
The  outward  sun  shines  and  looks  pleasant,  but  his  beams 
are  faint,  and  too  feeble  to  dissolve  the  frost.  So  is  it  in 
my  heart !  I  have  many  bright  and  pleasant  beams  of  truth 
in  my  view,  but  cold  predominates  in  my  frost-bound  spirit, 
and  they  have  but  little  power  to  warm  me.  I  could  tell  a 
stranger  something  about  Jesus  that  would  perhaps  astonish 
him;  such  a  glorious  Person!  such  wonderful  love!  such 
humiliation  !  such  a  death  !  and  then  what  He  is  now 

410 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   411 

in  Himself,  and  what  He  is  to  His  people.  What  a  sun  ! 
What  a  shield  !  What  a  root!  What  a  life!  What  a  Friend  ! 
My  tongue  can  run  on  upon  these  subjects  sometimes  ; 
and  could  my  heart  keep  pace  with  it,  I  should  be  the 
happiest  fellow  in  the  country.  Stupid  creature  !  to  know 
these  things  so  well,  and  yet  be  no  more  affected  with  them  ! 
Indeed  I  have  reason  to  be  upon  ill  terms  with  myself.  It 
is  strange  that  pride  should  ever  find  anything  in  my  experi 
ence  to  feed  upon  ;  but  this  completes  my  character  for 
folly,  vileness,  and  inconsistence,  that  I  am  not  only  poor, 
but  proud  ;  and  though  I  am  convinced  I  am  a  very 
wretch,  a  nothing  before  the  Lord,  I  am  prone  to  go  forth 
among  my  fellow-creatures  as  though  I  were  wise  and 
good. 

You  wonder  what  I  am  doing  ;  and  well  you  may ; 
I  am  sure  you  would,  if  you  lived  with  me.  Too  much  of 
my  time  passes  in  busy  idleness,  too  much  in  waking  dreams. 
I  aim  at  something  ;  but  hindrances  from  within  and  without 
make  it  difficult  for  me  to  accomplish  anything.  I  dare  not 
say  I  am  absolutely  idle,  or  that  I  wilfully  waste  much  of 
my  time.  I  have  seldom  one  hour  free  from  interruption. 
Letters  come  that  must  be  answered,  visitants  that  must 
be  received,  business  that  must  be  attended  to.  I  have 
a  good  many  sheep  and  lambs  to  look  after,  sick  and  afflicted 
souls  dear  to  the  Lord  ;  and,  therefore,  whatever  stands 
still,  these  must  not  be  neglected.  Amongst  these  various 
avocations,  night  comes  before  I  am  ready  for  noon  ;  and 
the  week  closes,  when,  according  to  the  state  of  my  business, 
it  should  not  be  more  than  Tuesday.  O  precious,  irrecover 
able  time  !  O  that  I  had  more  wisdom  in  redeeming  and 
improving  thee  !  Pray  for  me,  that  the  Lord  may  teach  me 
to  serve  Him  better.  I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    II 

DEAR  SIR,  April  28,  1778. 

I   was  not  much  disappointed  at  not  meeting  you  at 
home.     I  knew  how  difficult  it  is  to  get  away  from  -       — , 


412  CARDIPHONIA  : 

if  you  are  seen  in  the  street  after  breakfast.  The  horse 
leech  has  three  daughters,  saying,  Give,  give  :  the  cry  there 
is,  Preach,  preach.  When  you  have  told  them  all,  you 
must  tell  them  more,  or  tell  it  them  over  again.  Whoever 
will  find  tongue,  they  will  engage  to  find  ears.  Yet  I  do 
not  blame  this  importunity  ;  I  wish  you  were  teased  more 
with  it  in  your  own  town  :  for  though,  undoubtedly,  there 
are  too  many  both  at  N—  -  and  here,  whose  religion 
lies  too  much  in  hearing,  yet  in  many  it  proceeds  from  a  love 
to  the  truth,  and  to  the  ministers,  who  dispense  it.  And  I 
generally  observe,  that  they  who  are  not  willing  to  hear 
a  stranger  (if  his  character  is  known)  are  indifferent  enough 
about  hearing  their  own  minister. 

I  beg  you  to  pray  for  me.  I  am  a  poor  creature  full  of 
wants.  I  seem  to  need  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  the  meek 
ness  of  Moses,  and  the  zeal  of  Paul  to  enable  me  to  make  full 
proof  of  my  ministry.  But,  alas  !  you  may  guess  the  rest. 

Send  me  "  The  Way  to  Christ."  I  am  willing  to  be  a  debtor 
to  the  wise  and  unwise,  to  doctors  and  shoemakers,  if  I  can 
get  a  hint,  or  a  nota  bene,  from  any  one,  without  respect  to 
parties.  When  a  house  is  on  fire,  Churchmen,  Dissenters, 
Methodists,  Papists,  Moravians,  and  Mystics,  are  all  welcome 
to  bring  water.  At  such  times  nobody  asks,  Pray,  friend, 
whom  do  hear  ?  or,  What  do  you  think  of  the  five  points  ? 
&c.,  &c. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    III 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  July  17,  1778. 

I  KNOW  not  that  I  have  anything  to  say  worth  postage, 
though,  perhaps,  had  I  seen  you  before  you  set  off,  something 
might  have  occurred  which  will  not  be  found  in  my  letter. 
Yet  I  write  a  line  because  you  bid  me,  and  are  now  in 

a  far,  foreign  country.     You  will  find  Mr.  a  man 

to  your  tooth,  but  he  is  in  Mr.  W 's  connexion.     So  I 

remember  Venerable  Rede,  after  giving  a  high  character 
of  some  contemporary,  kicks  his  full  pail  of  milk  down, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   413 

and  reduces  him  almost  to  nothing,  by  adding,  in  the  close, 
to  this  purpose  :  "  But,  unhappy  man,  he  did  not  keep 
Easter  our  way  !  "  A  fig  for  all  connexions,  say  I,  and  say 
you,  but  that  which  is  formed  by  the  bands,  joints,  and 
ligaments,  the  apostle  speaks  of,  Eph.  iv.  16,  et  alibi.  There 
fore  I  venture  to  repeat  it,  that  Mr.  -  — ,  though  he  often 
sees  and  hears  Mr.  W—  — ,  and  I  believe  loves  him  well, 
is  a  good  man  ;  and  you  will  see  the  invisible  mark  upon  his 
forehead,  if  you  examine  him  with  your  spiritual  spectacles. 

Now,  methinks,  I  do  pity  you  :  I  see  you  melted  with 
heat,  stifled  with  smoke,  stunned  with  noise.  Ah  !  what 
a  change  from  the  brooks,  and  bushes,  and  birds,  and  green 
fields,  to  which  you  had  lately  access  !  Of  old  they  used  to 
retire  into  the  deserts  for  mortification.  If  I  were  to  set 
myself  a  moderate  penance,  it  might  be  to  spend  a  fortnight 
in  London  in  the  height  of  summer.  But  I  forget  myself : 
I  hope  the  Lord  is  with  you,  and  then  all  places  are  alike. 
He  makes  the  dungeon  and  the  stocks  comfortable,  Acts  xvi. ; 
yea,  a  fiery  furnace  and  a  lion's  den.  A  child  of  God  in 
London  seems  to  be  in  all  these  trying  situations  :  but  Jesus 
can  preserve  His  own.  I  honour  the  grace  of  God  in  those 
few  (comparatively  few,  I  fear)  who  preserve  their  garments 
undefiled  in  that  Sardis.  The  air  is  filled  with  infection, 
and  it  is  by  special  power  and  miraculous  preservation 
they  enjoy  spiritual  health,  when  so  many  sicken  and  fall 
around  them  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left.  May  the 
Lord  preserve  you  from  the  various  epidemical  soul-diseases 
which  abound  where  you  are,  and  be  your  comfort  and 
defence  from  day  to  day  ! 

Last  week  we  had  a  lion  in  town.  I  went  to  see  him. 
He  was  wonderfully  tame  ;  as  familiar  with  his  keeper,  as 
docile  and  obedient  as  a  spaniel.  Yet  the  man  told  me  he 
had  his  surly  fits,  when  they  durst  not  touch  him.  No 
looking-glass  could  express  my  face  more  justly  than  tlu's 
lion  did  my  heart.  I  could  trace  every  feature,  as  wild  and 
fierce  by  nature,  yea,  much  more  so,  but  grace  has  in  some 
measure  tamed  me,  I  know  and  love  my  Keeper,  and 
sometimes  watch  His  looks  that  I  may  learn  His  will.  But, 
oh  !  I  havejny  surly  fits  too  ;  seasons  when  I  relapse  into 
the  savage  again,  as  though  I  had  forgotten  all. 

I  am,  &c. 


4M  CARDIPHONIA 


LETTER    IV 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  July  13,  1778. 

As  we  are  so  soon  to  meet,  and  as  I  have  nothing 
very  important  to  communicate,  and  many  things  occur 
which  might  demand  my  time,  I  have  no  other  plea  to  offer, 
either  to  you  or  myself,  for  writing  again,  but  because  I  love 
you. 

I7  pity  the  unknown  considerable  minister,  with  whom 
you  smoked  your  morning  pipe.  But  we  must  take  men 
and  things  as  we  find  them  ;  and  when  we  fall  in  company 
with  those  from  whom  we  can  get  little  other  good,  it  is 
likely  we  shall  at  least  find  occasion  for  the  exercise  of 
patience  and  charity  towards  them,  and  of  thankfulness 
to  Him  who  hath  made  us  to  differ.  And  these  are  good 
things,  though  perhaps  the  occasion  may  not  be  pleasant. 
Indeed,  a  Christian,  if  in  a  right  spirit,  is  alway  in  his  Lord's 
school,  and  may  learn  either  a  new  lesson,  or  how  to  practise 
an  old  one,  by  everything  he  sees  or  hears,  provided  he 
does  not  wilfully  tread  upon  forbidden  ground.  If  he  were 
constrained  to  spend  a  day  with  the  poor  creatures  in  the 
common  side  of  Newgate,  though  he  could  not  talk  with 
them  of  what  God  has  done  for  his  soul,  he  might  be  more 
sensible  of  His  mercy  by  the  contrast  he  would  observe 
around  him.  He  might  rejoice  for  himself,  and  mourn 
over  them,  and  thus  perhaps  get  as  much  benefit  as  from 
the  best  sermon  be  ever  heard. 

It  is  necessary,  all  things  taken  together,  to  have  con 
nection  more  or  less  with  narrow-minded  people.  If  they 
are,  notwithstanding  their  prejudices,  civil  to  us,  they  have 
a  right  to  some  civility  from  us.  We  may  love  them 
though  we  cannot  admire  them  ;  and  pick  something  good 
from  them,  notwithstanding  we  see  much  to  blame.  It 
is  perhaps  the  highest  triumph  we  can  obtain  over  bigotry, 
when  we  are  able  to  bear  with  bigots  themselves.  For  they 
are  a  set  of  troublesome  folks,  whom  Mr.  Self  is  often  very 
forward  to  exclude  from  the  comprehensive  candour  and 
tenderness  which  he  professes  to  exercise  towards  those  who 
differ  from  him. 

I  am  glad  your  present  home  (a  believer  should  be  always 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   415 

at  home)  is  pleasant ;  the  rooms  large  and  airy  ;  your  host 
and  hostess  kind  and  spiritual ;  and,  upon  the  whole,  all 
things  as  well  as  you  could  expect  to  find  them,  considering 
where  you  are.  I  could  give  you  much  such  an  account 
of  my  usual  head-quarters  in  the  city  ;  but  still  London 
is  London.  I  do  not  wish  you  to  live  there,  for  my  own 
sake  as  well  as  yours  ;  but  if  the  Lord  should  so  appoint,  I 
believe  He  can  make  you  easy  there,  and  enable  me  to 
make  a  tolerable  shift  without  you.  Yet  I  certainly  should 
miss  you  ;  for  I  have  no  person  in  this  neighbourhood  with 
whom  my  heart  so  thoroughly  unites  in  spirituals,  though 
there  are  many  whom  I  love.  But  conversation  with  most 
Christians  is  something  like  going  to  court  ;  where,  except 
you  are  dressed  exactly  according  to  a  prescribed  standard, 
you  will  either  not  be  admitted,  or  must  expect  to  be  heartily 
stared  at.  But  you  and  I  can  meet  and  converse,  sans 
contrainte,  in  an  undress,  without  fear  of  offending,  or  being 
accounted  offenders,  for  a  word  out  of  place,  and  not  exactly 
in  the  pink  of  the  mode. 

I  know  not  how  it  is  :  I  think  my  sentiments  and  experience 
are  as  orthodox  and  Calvinistical  as  need  be  ;  and  yet  I  am 
a  sort  of  speckled  bird  among  my  Calvinist  brethren.  I  am 
a  mighty  good  Churchman,  but  pass  amongst  such  as  a 
Dissenter  in  prunello.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Dissenters 
(many  of  them  I  mean)  think  me  defective,  either  in 
understanding  or  in  conscience,  for  staying  where  I  am. 
Well,  there  is  a  middle  party  called  Methodist,  but  neither 
do  my  dimensions  exactly  fit  with  them.  I  am  somehow 
disqualified  for  claiming  a  full  brotherhood  with  any  party. 
But  there  are  a  few  among  all  parties  who  bear  with  me  and 
love  me,  and  with  this  I  must  be  content  at  present.  But  so 
far  as  they  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  I  desire,  and  by  His  grace  I 
determine  (with  or  without  their  leave)  to  love  them  all. 
Party-walls,  though  stronger  than  the  wall  of  Babylon,  must 
come  down  in  the  general  ruin,  when  the  earth  and  all  its 
works  shall  be  burnt  up,  if  not  sooner. 

I  am,  &c. 


4i6  CARDIPHONIA 


LETTER  V 

MY  DEAR  SIR,  July,  1778. 

-I  WAS  glad  to  hear  that  you  were  again  within  a  few 
miles  of  me  ;  and  I  would  praise  the  Lord,  who  led  you 
out  and  brought  you  home  in  safety,  and  preserved  all  in 
peace  while  you  were  abroad,  so  that  you  find  nothing  very 
painful  to  embitter  your  return.  Many  go  abroad  well,  but 
return  no  more.  The  affectionate  wife,  the  prattling  children 
listen  for  the  well-known  sound  of  papa's  foot  at  the  door  ; 
but  they  listen  in  vain  :  a  fall  or  a  fever  has  intercepted  him, 
and  hejs  gone  far,  far  away.  Some  leave  all  well  when  they 
go  from  home  ;  but  how  changed,  how  trying  the  scene, 
when  they  come  back  !  In  their  absence  the  Lord  has  taken 
away  the  desire  of  their  eyes  with  a  stroke  ;  or,  perhaps, 
ruffians  have  plundered  and  murdered  their  family  in  the 
dead  of  the  night,  or  the  fire  has  devoured  their  habitation. 

Ah  !  how  large  and  various  is  the  list  of  evils  and  calamities 
with  which  sin  has  filled  the  world  !  You  and  I  and  ours 
escape  them  ;  we  stand,  though  in  a  field  of  battle  where 
thousands  fall  around  us,  because  the  Lord  is  pleased  to 
keep  us.  May  He  have  the  praise,  and  may  we  only  live 
to  love  and  serve  Him ! 

Mrs.  -  -  has  been  very  ill,  and  my  heart  often  much 
pained  while  you  have  been  absent.  But  the  Lord  has 
removed  His  hand  ;  she  is  much  better,  and  I  hope  she  will 
be  seen  in  His  house  to-morrow.  I  have  few  trials  in  my 
own  person  ;  but  when  the  Lord  afflicts  her,  I  feel  it.  It  is 
a  mercy  that  He  has  made  us  one ;  but  it  exposes  us  to  many 
a  pain,  which  we  might  have  missed  if  we  cared  but  little 
for  each  other.  Alas  !  there  is  usually  an  ounce  of  the 
golden  calf  of  idolatry  and  dependence,  in  all  the  warm 
regard  we  bear  to  creatures.  Hinc  illce  lacrymce  !  For  this 
reason,  our  sharpest  trials  usually  spring  from  our  most 
valued  comforts. 

I  cannot  come  to  you,  therefore  you  must  come  hither 
speedily.  Be  sure  to  bring  Mr.  B—  -  with  you.  I  shall  be 
very  glad  to  see  him  ;  and  I  long  to  thank  him  for  clothing 
my  book.  It  looks  well  on  the  outside,  and  I  hope  to  find  it 
sound  and  savoury.  I  love  the  author,  and  that  is  a  step 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   417 

towards  liking  the  book.  For  where  we  love,  we  are  gener 
ally  tender,  and  favourably  take  everything  by  the  best 
handle,  and  are  vastly  full  of  candour  :  but  if  we  are  pre 
judiced  against  the  man,  the  poor  book  is  half  condemned 
before  we  open  it.  It  had  need  be.  written  well,  for  it  will 
be  read  with  a  suspicious  eye,  as  if  we  wished  to  find  treason 
in  every  page.  I  am  glad  I  diverted  and  profited  you  by 
calling  myself  a  speckled  bird.  I  can  tell  you,  such  a  bird 
in  this  day,  that  wears  the  full  colour  of  no  sect  or  party,  is 
rara  avis  ;  if  not  quite  so  scarce  as  the  phoenix,  yet  to  be  met 
with  but  here  and  there.  It  is  impossible  I  should  be  all  of 
a  colour,  when  I  have  been  a  debtor  to  all  sorts  ;  and,  like 
the  jay  in  the  fable,  have  been  beholden  to  most  of  the 
birds  in  the  air  for  a  feather  or  two.  Church  and  Meeting, 
Methodist  and  Moravian,  may  all  perceive  something  in 
my  coat  taken  from  them.  None  of  them  are  angry  with 
me  for  borrowing  from  them  ;  but  then,  why  could  I  not  be 
content  with  their  colour,  without  going  amongst  other 
flocks  and  coveys,  to  make  myself  such  a  motley  figure  ? 
Let  them  be  angry  :  if  I  have  culled  the  best  feathers  from 
all,  then  surely  I  am  finer  than  any. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER  VI 

DEAR  SIR,  Aug.,  1778. 

IF  the  Lord  affords  health  ;  if  the  weather  be  tolerable  ; 
if  no  unforeseen  change  takes  place  ;  if  no  company  comes 
in  upon  me  to-night  (which  sometimes  unexpectedly  hap 
pens)  ;  with  these  provisos,  Mr.  S. and  I  have  engaged  to 

travel  to  -    -  on  Monday  next,  and  hope  to  be  with  you  by 
or  before  eleven  o'clock. 

In  such  a  precarious  world,  it  is  needful  to  form  our 
plans  at  two  days'  distance,  with  precaution  and  exceptions 
James  iv.  13.)  However,  if  it  be  the  Lord's  will  to  bring  us 
together,  and  if  the  proposed  interview  be  for  His  glory  and 
our  good,  then  I  am  sure  nothing  shall  prevent  it.  And  who 
in  his  right  wits  would  wish  either  to  visit  or  be  visited  upon 

C.  2D 


4i8  CARDIPHONIA  : 

any  other  terms  ?  O  !  if  we  could  but  be  pleased  with  His 
will,  we  might  be  pleased  from  morning  to  night,  and  every 
day  in  the  year  ! 

Pray  for  a  blessing  upon  our  coming  together.  It  would 
be  a' pity  to  walk  ten  miles  to  pick  straws,  or  to  come  with 
our  empty  vessels  upon  our  heads,  saying,  "  We  have  found 
no  water." 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER    VII 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Oct.,  1778. 

YOUR  letters  are  always  welcome  ;  the  last  doubly  so, 
for  being  unexpected.  If  you  never  heard  before  of  a  line 
of  yours  being  useful,  I  will  tell  you  for  once,  that  I  get  some 
pleasure  and  instruction  whenever  you  write  to  me.  And  I 
see  not  but  your  call  to  letter-writing  is  as  clear  as  mine, 
at  least  when  you  are  able  to  put  pen  to  paper. 

I  must  say  something  to  your  queries  about  2  Sam. 
xiv.  I  do  not  approve  of  the  scholastic  distinctions  about 
inspiration,  which  seem  to  have  a  tendency  to  explain  away 
the  authority  and  certainty  of  one-half  of  the  Bible  at  least. 
Though  the  penmen  of  Scripture  were  ever  so  well  informed 
of  some  facts,  they  would,  as  you  observe,  need  express,  full, 
and  infallible  inspiration,  to  teach  them  which  the  Lord 
would  have  selected  and  recorded  for  the  use  of  the  Church, 
amongst  many  others  which  to  themselves  might  appear 
equally  important. 

However,  with  respect  to  historical  passages,  I  dare  not 
pronounce  positively  that  any  of  them  are,  even  in  the  literal 
sense,  unworthy  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the 
dignity  of  inspiration.  Some,  yea,  many  of  them,  have  often 
appeared  trivial  to  me  ;  but  I  check  the  thought,  and  charge  it 
to  my  own  ignorance  and  temerity.  It  must  have  some 
importance,  because  I  read  it  in  God's  Book.  On  the  other 
hand,  though  I  will  not  deny  that  they  may  all  have  a 
spiritual  and  mystical  sense  (for  I  am  no  more  qualified  to 
judge  of  the  deep  things  of  the  Spirit,  than  to  tell  you  what 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   419 

is  passing  this  morning  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea),  yet  if, 
with  my  present  modicum  of  light,  I  should  undertake  to 
expound  many  passages  in  a  mystical  sense,  I  fear  such  a 
judge  as  you  would  think  my  interpretations  fanciful  and 
not  well  supported.  I  suppose  I  should  have  thought  the 
Bible  complete,  though  it  had  not  informed  me  of  the 
death  of  Rebekah's  nurse,  or  where  she  was  buried.  But 
some  tell  me  that  Deborah  is  the  law,  and  that  by  the  oak  I 
am  to  understand  the  cross  of  Christ :  and  I  remember  to 
have  heard  of  a  preacher  who  discovered  a  type  of  Christ 
crucified  in  Absalom  hanging  by  the  hair  on  another  oak. 
I  am  quite  a  mole  when  compared  with  these  eagle-eyed 
divines  ;  and  must  often  content  myself  with  plodding  upon 
the  lower  ground  of  accommodation  and  allusion ;  except 
when  the  New  Testament  writers  assure  me  what  the  mind  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  was.  I  can  find  the  Gospel  with  more  con 
fidence  in  the  history  of  Sarah  and  Hagar,  than  in  that  of 
Leah  and  Rachael ;  though  without  Paul's  help,  I  should 
have  considered  them  both  as  family-squabbles,  recorded 
chiefly  to  illustrate  the  general  truth,  that  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit  are  incident  to  the  best  men,  in  the  most 
favoured  situations.  And  I  think  there  is  no  part  of  Old 
Testament  history  from  which  I  could  not  (the  Lord  helping 
me)  draw  observations,  that  might  be  suitable  to  the  pulpit, 
and  profitable  to  His  people  :  so  I  might  perhaps  from 
Livy  or  Tacitus.  But  then,  with  the  Bible  in  my  hands, 
I  go  upon  sure  grounds  :  I  am  certain  of  the  facts  I  speak 
from,  that  they  really  did  happen.  I  may  likewise  depend 
upon  the  springs  and  motives  of  actions,  and  not  amuse 
myself  and  my  hearers  with  speeches  which  were  never 
spoken,  and  motives  which  were  never  thought  of,  till 
the  historian  rummaged  his  pericranium  for  something  to 
embellish  his  work.  I  doubt  not  but  were  you  to  consider 
Joab's  courtly  conduct  only  in  a  literal  sense,  how  it  tallied 
with  David's  desire,  and  how  gravely  and  graciously  he 
granted  himself  a  favour,  while  he  professed  to  oblige  Joab  ; 
I  say,  in  this  view  you  would  be  able  to  illustrate  many 
important  scriptural  doctrines,  and  to  show  that  the  passage 
is  important  to  those  who  are  engaged  in  studying  the 
anatomy  of  the  human  heart. 

I  am,  &c. 

2D  2 


420  CARDIPHONIA  : 

LETTER    VIII 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Oct.  27,  1778. 

I  HAVE  been  witness  to  a  great  and  important  revolution 
this  morning,  which  took  place  while  the  greatest  part  of  the 
world  was  asleep.  Like  many  state-revolutions,  its  first 
beginnings  were  almost  undiscernible  ;  but  the  progress, 
though  gradual,  was  steady,  and  the  event  decisive.  A 
white  ago  darkness  reigned.  Had  a  man  then  dropped,  for 
the  first  time,  into  our  world,  lie  might  have  thought  himself 
banished  into  a  hopeless  dungeon.  How  could  he  expect 
light  to  rise  out  of  such  a  state  ?  And  when  he  saw  the  first 
glimmering  of  dawn  in  the  east,  how  could  he  promise  himself 
that  it  was  the  forerunner  of  such  a  glorious  sun  as  has 
since  arisen  ?  With  what  wonder  would  such  a  newcomer 
observe  the  bounds  of  his  view  enlarging,  and  the  distinctness 
of  objects  increasing,  from  one  minute  to  another  ;  and  how 
well  content  would  he  be  to  part  with  the  twinklings  of  the 
stars,  when  he  had  the  broad  day  all  around  him  in  exchange  ! 
I  cannot  say  this  revolution  is  extraordinary,  because  it 
happens  every  morning  ;  but  surely  it  is  astonislu'ng,  or 
rather  it  would  be  so,  if  man  was  not  astonishingly  stupid. 

Such  strangers  once  were  we.  Darkness,  gross  darkness, 
covered  us.  How  confined  were  our  views  !  And  even  the 
things  which  were  within  our  reach  we  could  not  distinguish. 
Little  did  we  then  think  what  a  glorious  day  we  were  ap 
pointed  to  see  ;  what  an  unbounded  prospect  would  ere  long 
open  before  us  !  We  knew  not  that  there  was  a  Sun  of 
Righteousness,  and  that  He  would  dawn,  and  rise,  and  shine 
upon  our  hearts.  And  as  the  idea  of  what  we  see  now  was 
then  hidden  from  us,  so  at  present  we  are  almost  equally 
at  a  loss  how  to  form  any  conception  of  the  stronger  light 
and  brighter  prospects  which  we  wait  and  hope  for.  Com 
paratively  we  are  in  the  dark  still ;  at  the  most,  we  have 
but  a  dim  twilight,  and  see  nothing  clearly  ;  but  it  is  the 
dawn  of  immortality,  and  a  sure  presage  and  earnest  of 
glory. 

Thus,  at  times,  it  seems,  a  darkness  that  may  be  felt 
broods  over  your  natural  spirits  ;  but  when  the  Day-star 
rises  upon  your  heart,  you  see  and  rejoice  in  His  light. 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   421 

You  have  days  as  well  as  nights  ;  and  after  a  few  more 
vicissitudes,  you  will  take  your  flight  to  the  regions  of 
everlasting  light,  where  your  sun  will  go  down  no  more. 
Happy  you,  and  happy  I,  if  I  shall  meet  you  there,  as  I 
trust  I  shall.  How  shall  we  love,  and  sing,  and  wonder, 
and  praise  the  Saviour's  name  ! 

Last  Sunday  a  young  man  died  here  of  extreme  old  age, 
at  twenty-five.  He  laboured  hard  to  ruin  a  good  constitu 
tion,  and  unhappily  succeeded  ;  yet  amused  himself  with 
the  hopes  of  recovery  almost  to  the  last.  We  have  a  sad 
knot  of  such  poor  creatures  in  this  place,  who  labour  to 
stifle  each  other's  convictions,  and  to  ruin  themselves  and 
associates,  soul  and  body.  How  industriously  is  Satan 
served  !  I  was  formerly  one  of  his  most  active  under- 
tempters.  Not  content  with  running  the  broad  way  myself, 
I  was  indefatigable  in  enticing  others  ;  and  had  my  influence 
been  equal  to  my  wishes,  I  would  have  carried  all  the 
human  race  with  me.  And  doubtless  some  have  perished, 
to  whose  destruction  I  was  greatly  instrumental,  by  tempting 
them  to  sin,  and  by  poisoning  and  hardening  them  with 
principles  of  infidelity  ;  and  yet  I  was  spared.  When  I 
think  of  the  most  with  whom  I  spent  my  unhappy  days  of 
ignorance,  I  am  ready  to  say,  "  I  only  am  escaped  alive  to 
tell  thee."  Surely  I  have  not  half  the  activity  and  zeal  in 
the  service  of  Him  who  snatched  me  as  a  brand  out  of  the 
burning,  as  I  had  in  the  service  of  His  enemy.  Then  the 
whole  stream  of  my  endeavours  and  affections  went  one 
way  ;  now  my  best  desires  are  continually  crossed,  counter 
acted,  and  spoiled,  by  the  sin  which  dwelleth  in  me  :  then 
the  tide  of  a  corrupt  nature  bore  me  along  ;  now  I  have  to 
strive  and  swim  against  it.  The  Lord  cut  me  short  of  oppor 
tunities,  and  placed  me  where  I  could  do  but  little  mischief ; 
had  my  abilities  and  occasions  been  equal  to  my  heart,  I 
should  have  been  a  Voltaire  and  a  Tiberius  in  one  character, 
a  monster  of  profaneness  and  licentiousness.  "  O  to  grace 
how  great  a  debtor  !  "  A  common  drunkard  or  profligate 
is  a  petty  sinner  to  what  I  was.  I  had  the  ambition  of  a 
Caesar  or  an  Alexander,  and  wanted  to  rank  in  wickedness 
among  the  foremost  of  the  human  race.  When  you  have 
read  this,  praise  the  Lord  for  His  mercy  to  the  chief  of 
sinners,  and  pray  that  I  may  have  grace  to  be  faithful.  But 


422  CARDIPHONIA  : 

I  have  rambled.  I  meant  to  tell  you,  that  on  Sunday  after 
noon  I  preached  from  Why  will  ye  die?  Ezek.  xxxiii.  10,  n. 
I  endeavoured  to  show  poor  sinners,  that  if  they  died,  it  was 
because  they  would,  and  if  they  would,  they  must.  I  was 
much  affected  for  a  time  :  I  could  hardly  speak  for  weeping, 
and  some  wept  with  me.  From  some,  alas !  I  can  no  more 
draw  a  tear  or  a  relenting  thought,  than  from  a  millstone. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   IX 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Nov.  27.1778. 

You  are  a  better  expositor  of  Scripture  than  of  my 
speeches,  if  you  really  inferred  from  my  last  that  I  think 
you  shall  die  soon.  I  cannot  say  positively  you  will  not 
idie  soon,  because  life  at  all  times  is  uncertain  ;  however, 
according  to  the  doctrine  of  probabilities,  I  think,  and  always 
thought,  you  bid  fair  enough  to  outlive  me.  The  gloomy 
tinge  of  your  weak  spirits  led  you  to  consider  yourself  much 
worse  in  point  of  health  than  you  appear  to  me  to  be. 

In  the  other  point  I  dare  be  more  positive,  that,  die  when 
you  will,  you  will  die  in  the  Lord.  Of  this  I  have  not  the 
least  doubt  ;  and  I  believe  you  doubt  of  it  less,  if  possible, 
than  I,  except  in  those  darker  moments  when  the  atrabilious 
humour  prevails. 

I  heartily  sympathize  with  you  in  your  complaints  ; 
but  I  see  you  in  safe  hands.  The  Lord  loves  you,  and  will 
take  care  of  you.  He  who  raises  the  dead,  can  revive  your 
spirits  when  you  are  cast  down.  He  who  sets  bounds  to 
the  sea,  and  says,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come  and  no 
further,"  can  limit  and  moderate  that  gloom  which  some 
times  distresses  you.  He  knows  why  He  permits  you  to  be 
thus  exercised.  I  cannot  assign  the  reasons,  but  I  am  sure 
they  are  worthy  of  His  wisdom  and  love,  and  that  you  will 
hereafter  see,  and  say,  He  has  done  all  things  well.  If  I 
were  as  wise  as  your  philosopher,  I  might  say  a  great  deal 
about  a  melancholy  complexion  ;  but  I  love  not  to  puzzle 
mvself  with  second  causes,  while  the  first  cause  is  at  hand, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART   423 

which  sufficiently  accounts  for  every  phenomenon  in  a 
believer's  experience.  Your  constitution,  your  situation, 
your  temper,  your  distemper,  all  that  is  either  comfortable 
or  painful  in  your  lot,  is  of  His  appointment.  The  hairs 
of  your  head  are  all  numbered  :  the  same  power  which 
produced  the  planet  Jupiter  is  necessary  to  the  production 
of  a  single  hair,  nor  can  one  of  them  fall  to  the  ground  without 
His  notice,  any  more  than  the  stars  can  fall  from  their 
orbits.  In  providence,  no  less  than  in  creation,  He  is 
Maximus  in  minimis.  Therefore  fear  not ;  only  believe. 
Our  sea  may  sometimes  be  stormy,  but  we  have  an  infallible 
Pilot,  and  shall  infallibly  gain  our  port. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER   X 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Feb.  23,  1779. 

ON  Saturday,  and  not  before,  I  heard  you  had  been 
ill.  Had  the  news  reached  me  sooner,  I  should  have  sent 
you  a  line  sooner.  I  hope  you  will  be  able  to  inform  me 
that  you  are  now  better,  and  that  the  Lord  continues  to  do 
you  good  by  every  dispensation  He  allots  you.  Healing  and 
wounding  are  equally  from  His  hand,  and  equally  tokens  of 
His  love  and  care  over  us.  I  have  but  little  affliction  in 
my  own  person,  but  I  have  been  often  chastened  of  late  by 
proxy.  The  Lord,  for  His  people's  sake,  is  still  pleased  to 
give  me  health  and  strength  for  public  service  ;  but  when 
I  need  the  rod,  He  lays  it  upon  Mrs.  -  — .  In  this  way  I 
have  felt  much  without  being  disabled  or  laid  aside.  But  He 
has  heard  prayer  for  her  likewise,  and  for  more  than  a  fort 
night  past  she  has  been  comfortably  well.  I  lay  at  least 
one  half  of  her  sickness  to  my  own  account.  She  suffers  for 
me,  and  I  through  her.  It  is,  indeed,  touching  me  in  a 
tender  part.  Perhaps,  if  I  could  be  more  wise,  watchful, 
and  humble,  it  might  contribute  more  to  the  re-establish 
ment  of  her  health,  than  all  the  medicines  she  takes. 

I  somehow  neglected  to  confer  with  you  about  the  business 
of  the  fast-day.     The  last  of  my  three  sermons,  when  I  had, 


424  CARDIPHONIA  : 

as  I  expected,  the  largest  congregation,  was  a  sort  of  histori 
cal  discourse  from  Deut.  xxxii.  15,  in  which,  running  over 
the  leading  national  events  from  the  time  of  Wickliff,  I 
endeavoured  to  trace  the  steps  and  turns  by  which  the 
Lord  has  made  us  a  fat  and  thriving  people,  and  in  the 
event  blessed  us  beyond  His  favourite  Jeshunm  of  old, 
with  civil  and  religious  liberty,  peace,  honour,  and  prosperity, 
and  Gospel  privileges.  How  fat  we  were  when  the  war 
terminated  in  the  year  1763,  and  how  we  have  kicked  and 
forsaken  the  Rock  of  our  salvation  of  late  years  !  Then 
followed  a  sketch  of  our  present  state  and  spirit  as  a  people, 
both  in  a  religious  and  political  view.  I  started  at  the 
picture  while  I  drew  it,  though  it  was  a  very  inadequate 
representation.  We  seemed  willing  to  afflict  our  souls  for 
one  day,  as  Dr.  Lowth  reads  Isa.  Iviii.  5.  But  the  next  day 
things  returned  into  their  former  channel  ;  the  fast  and  the 
occasion  seemed  presently  forgotten,  except  by  a  few  simple 
souls,  who  are  despised  and  hated  by  the  rest  for  their 
preciseness,  because  they  think  sin  ought  to  be  lamented 
every  day  in  the  year. 

Who  would  envy  Cassandra  her  gift  of  prophecy  upon  the 
terms  she  had  it,  that  her  declarations,  however  true,  should 
meet  with  no  belief  or  regard  ?  It  is  the  lot  of  Gospel 
ministers,  with  respect  to  the  bulk  of  their  hearers.  But 
blessed  be  the  grace  which  makes  a  few  exceptions  !  Here 
and  there,  one  will  hear,  believe,  and  be  saved.  Every  one 
of  these  is  worth  a  world  ;  and  our  success  with  a  few  should 
console  us  for  all  our  trials. 

Come  and  see  us  as  soon  as  you  can,  only  not  to-morrow, 

for  I  am  then  to  go  to  T .  My  Lord,  the  Great  Shepherd, 

has  one  sheep  there,  related  to  the  fold  under  my  care.  I 
can  seldom  see  her,  and  she  is  very  ill :  I  expect  she  will  be 

soon  removed  to  the  pasture  above.  Our  love  to  Mrs.  B . 

Believe  me  yours,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF   THE   HEART       425 


LETTER  XI 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  April  23, 

MAY  I  not  style  myself  a  friend,  when  I  remember  you 
after  the  interval  of  several  weeks  since  I  saw  you,  and 
through  a  distance  of  three-score  miles  ?  But  the  truth  is, 
you  have  been  neither  absent  nor  distant  from  my  heart 
a  day.  Your  idea  has  travelled  with  me  ;  you  are  a  kind 
of  familiar,  very  often  before  the  eye  of  my  mind.  This, 
I  hope,  may  be  admitted  as  a  proof  of  friendship. 

I  know  the  Lord  loves  you,  and  you  know  it  likewise  : 
every  affliction  affords  you  a  fresh  proof  of  it.  How  wise 
His  management  in  our  trials  !  How  wisely  adjusted  in 
season,  weight,  continuance,  to  answer  His  gracious  purposes 
in  sending  them  !  How  unspeakably  better  to  be  at  His 
disposal  than  at  your  own  !  So  you  say  ;  so  you  think  ; 
so  you  find.  You  trust  in  Him,  and  shall  not  be  disappointed. 
Help  me  with  your  prayers,  that  I  may  trust  Him  too,  and 
be  at  length  enabled  to  say  without  reserve,  "  What  Thou 
wilt,  when  Thou  wilt,  how  Thou  wilt."  I  had  rather  speak 
these  three  sentences  from  my  heart,  in  my  mother-tongue, 
than  be  master  of  all  the  languages  in  Europe. 

I  am,  &c. 


LETTER     XII 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  Aug.  19,  1779. 

AMONG  the  rest  of  temporal  mercies,  I  would  be  thank 
ful  for  pen,  ink,  and  paper,  and  the  convenience  of  the 
post,  by  which  means  we  can  waft  a  thought  to  a  friend 
when  we  cannot  get  at  him.  My  will  has  been  good  to  see 
you  ;  but  you  must  accept  the  will  for  the  deed.  The  Lord 
has  not  permitted  me. 

I  have  been  troubled  of  late  with  the  rheumatism  in  my 
left  arm.  Mine  is  a  sinful,  vile  body,  and  it  is  a  mercy  that 
any  part  of  it  is  free  from  pain.  It  is  virtually  the  seat  and 
subject  of  all  diseases  ;  but  the  Lord  holds  them  like  wild 


426  CARDIPHONIA  : 

beasts  in  a  chain,  under  a  strong  restraint ;  were  that 
restraint  taken  off,  they  would  rush  upon  their  prey  from 
every  quarter,  and  seize  upon  every  limb,  member,  joint, 
andjierve,  at  once.  Yet,  though  I  am  a  sinner,  and  though 
my  whole  texture  is  so  frail  and  exposed,  I  have  enjoyed  for 
a  number  of  years  an  almost  perfect  exemption  both  from 
pain  and  sickness.  This  is  wonderful  indeed,  even  in  my 
own  eyes. 

But  my  soul  is  far  from  being  in  a  healthy  state.  There 
I  hdve  laboured,  and  still  labour,  under  a  complication  of 
diseases  ;  and,  but  for  the  care  and  skill  of  an  infallible 
Physician,  I  must  have  died  the  death  long  ago.  At  this 
very  moment  my  soul  is  feverish,  dropsical,  paralytic.  I 
feel  a  loss  of  appetite,  a  disinclination  both  to  food  and  to 
medicine  :  so  that  I  am  alive  by  miracle  ;  yet  I  trust  I  shall 
not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the  works  of  the  Lord.  When 
I  faint  He  revives  me  again.  I  am  sure  He  is  able,  and  I 
trust  He  has  promised,  to  heal  me  ;  but  how  inveterate  must 
my  disease  be,  that  is  not  yet  subdued,  even  under  His 
management  ! 

Well,  my  friend,  there  is  a  land  where  the  inhabitants 
shall  no  more  say,  "  I  am  sick."  Then  my  eyes  will  not  be 
dim,  nor  my  ear  heavy,  nor  my  heart  hard. 

One  sight  of  Jesus  as  he  is 
Will  strike  all  sin  for  ever  dead. 

Blessed  be  His  name  for  this  glorious  hope  !  May  it 
cheer  us  under  all  our  present  uneasy  feelings,  and  reconcile 
us  to  every  cross  !  The  way  must  be  right,  however  rough, 
that  leads  to  such  a  glorious  end. 

O  for  more  of  that  gracious  influence,  which  in  a  moment 
can  make  the  wilderness-soul  rejoice  and  blossom  like  the 
rose  !  I  want  something  which  neither  critics  nor  com 
mentators  can  help  me  to.  The  Scripture  itself,  whether  I 
read  it  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  French,  or  English,  is  a  sealed 
book  in  all  languages  unless  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  present 
to  expound  and  apply.  Pray  for  me.  No  prayer  seems  more 
suitable  to  me  than  that  of  the  Psalmist  :  "  Bring  my  soul 
out  of  prison,  that  I  may  praise  Thy  name." 

I  am,  &c. 


THE    UTTERANCE   OF   THE    HEART       427 

LETTER    XIII 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  August  28,  1779. 

I  WANT  to  hear  how  you  are.  I  hope  your  complaint 
is  not  worse  than  when  I  saw  you.  I  hope  you  are  easier, 
and  will  soon  find  yourself  able  to  move  about  again.  I 
should  be  sorry,  if  to  the  symptoms  of  the  stone  you  should 
have  the  gout  superadded  in  your  right  hand  ;  for  then  you 
will  not  be  able  to  write  to  me. 

We  go  on  much  as  usual ;  sometimes  very  poorly, 
sometimes  a  little  better ;  the  latter  is  the  case  to-day. 
My  rheumatism  continues  ;  but  it  is  very  moderate  and 
tolerable.  The  Lord  deals  gently  with  us,  and  gives  us 
many  proofs  that  He  does  not  afflict  willingly. 

The  days  speed  away  apace ;  each  one  bears  away 
its  own  burden  with  it,  to  return  no  more.  Both  pleasures 
and  pains  that  are  past  are  gone  for  ever.  What  is  yet 
future  will  likewise  be  soon  past.  The  end  is  coming.  O  to 
realize  the  thought,  and  to  judge  of  things  now  in  some 
measure  suitable  to  the  judgment  we  shall  form  of  them, 
when  we  are  about  to  leave  them  all  !  Many  things  which 
now  either  elate  or  depress  us,  will  then  appear  to  be  trifles 
light  as  air. 

One  thing  is  needful  :  to  have  our  hearts  united  to  the 
Lord  in  humble  faith  ;  to  set  Him  always  before  us  ;  to 
rejoice  in  Him  as  our  Shepherd  and  our  portion  ;  to  submit 
to  all  His  appointments,  not  of  necessity,  because  He  is 
stronger  than  we,  but  with  a  cheerful  acquiescence,  because 
He  is  wise  and  good,  and  loves  us  better  than  we  do  our 
selves  ;  to  feed  upon  His  truth  ;  to  have  our  understandings, 
wills,  affections,  imaginations,  memory,  all  filled  and 
impressed  with  the  great  mysteries  of  redeeming  love  ;  to 
do  all  for  Him,  to  receive  all  from  Him,  to  find  all  in  Him. 
I  have  mentioned  many  things,  but  they  are  all  comprised  in 
one,  a  life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God.  We  are  empty  vessels 
in  ourselves,  but  we  cannot  remain  empty.  Except  Jesus 
dwells  in  our  hearts,  and  fills  them  with  His  power  and 
presence,  they  will  be  filled  with  folly,  vanity,  and  vexation. 

I  am,  &c. 


428  CARDIPHONIA  : 

LETTER  XIV 
MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  October  26,  1779. 

BEING  to  go  out  of  town  to-day,  I  started  up  before 
light  to  write  to  you,  and  hoped  to  have  sent  you  a  long 
letter  ;  when,  behold  !  I  could  not  get  at  any  paper.  I  am 

now  waiting  for  a  peep  at  Mr.  B at  his  lodgings,  who 

came  to  town  last  night  ;  and  I  shall  write  as  fast  as  I  can 
till  I  see  him. 

I  feel  for  you  a  little  in  the  same  way  as  you  feel  for 
yourself.  I  bear  a  friendly  sympathy  in  your  late  sharp 
and  sudden  trial.  I  mourn  with  that  part  of  you  which 
mourns  :  but,  at  the  same  time,  I  rejoice  in  the  proof  you 
have,  and  which  you  give,  that  the  Lord  is  with  you  of  a 
truth.  I  rejoice  on  your  account,  to  see  you  supported  and 
comforted,  and  enabled  to  say,  "  He  has  done  all  things 
well."  I  rejoice  on  my  own  account.  Such  instances  of  His 
faithfulness  and  all-sufficiency  are  very  encouraging.  We 
must  all  expect  hours  of  trouble  in  our  turn.  We  must  all 
feel  in  our  concernments  the  vanity  and  uncertainty  of 
creature-comforts.  What  a  mercy  is  it  to  know  from  our 
own  past  experience,  and  to  have  it  confirmed  to  us  by  the 
experience  of  others,  that  the  Lord  is  good,  a  strong  hold  in 
the  day  of  trouble,  and  that  He  knoweth  them  that  trust 
in  Him  !  Creatures  are  like  candles,  they  waste  while  they 
afford  us  a  little  light,  and  we  see  them  extinguished  in  their 
sockets  one  after  another.  But  the  light  of  the  sun  makes 
amends  for  them  all.  The  Lord  is  so  rich  that  He  easily 
can,  so  good  that  He  certainly  will,  give  His  children  more 
than  He  ever  will  take  away.  When  His  gracious  voice 
reaches  the  heart,  "  It  is  I,  be  not  afraid  ;  be  still,  and  know 
that  I  am  God  ;  "  when  He  gives  us  an  impression  of  His 
wisdom,  power,  love,  and  care,  then  the  storm  which 
attempts  to  rise  in  our  natural  passions  is  hushed  into  a 
calm  ;  the  flesh  continues  to  feel,  but  the  spirit  is  made 
willing.  And  something  more  than  submission  takes  place, 
— a  sweet  resignation  and  acquiescence,  and  even  a  joy  that 
we  have  anything  which  we  value,  to  surrender  to  His  call. 

Yours,  &c. 


MORGAN    AND    SCOTT,    LD.,    LONDON,    ENGLAND 


ONE  PENNY,        EVERY  THURSDAY 


Christian, 


Established    1859. 

Expository  and  Devotional  Articles  ;  News  of 
Evangelistic  and  Missionary  Enterprise,  with 
Sketches  and  Portraits  of  Eminent  Christian 
Workers  ;  also  a  Young  People's  Page,  with 
Bible  Searching  Exercises  and  periodical 
Competitions,  in  which  thousands  of  young 
people  in  all  parts  of  the  world  take  part. 

Ube  Cbrlatlan  is  essentially 

THE  PAPER  FOR  THE  HOME. 


A  Specimen  Copy  sent  Post  Free  on  Request, 


TEbe  Christian  may  be  ordered  in  advance  at   Is,  8d, 

for  three  months,  3s,  3d.  for  six  months,  or  at  6s,  6d, 

per  annum,  at  home  or  abroad. 


MORGAN    &    SCOTT    LD., 
12,  Paternoster  Buildings,  London,  B.C. 

OR   OF   ANY    NEWSAGENT. 
429 


From  Morgan  &  Scott's  List. 

REVIVALS    OF    RELIGION. 

By  CHARLES  G.  FINNEY.  With  the  Author's  Revisions 
mid  Corrections.  Edited,  with  Introductory  and  Original 
Notes,  by  W.  H.  HARDING.  Printed  in  bold,  readable  type. 
Cloth,  2s.  6d. 

OLD-WORLD    STORIES: 

Retold  for  To-day.  By  GEORGE  E.  MORGAN,  M.A. 
Vivid  and  practical  studies,  calculated  to  stimulate  interest 
in  somewhat  less  familiar  portions  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Beautifully  Illustrated.  3s.  6d. 

WHILE    WE'RE    YOUNG: 

Talks  with  Young  People.  By  the  same  Author.  Written 
in  a  friondly  and  sympathetic  style,  it  readily  wins  the 
confidence  of  boys  and  girls.  Is.  6d.  net. 

GLIMPSES    OF    FOUR    CONTINENTS: 

The  Travels  of  R.  C.  Morgan,  Founder  of  "The 
Christian."  By  MRS.  R.  C.  MORGAN.  With  Four 
Photogravures  and  Sixteen  Half -Tone  Illustrations.  Cloth, 
2s.  6d.  net. 

OVERWEIGHTS    OF    JOY: 

Mission  Work  in  Southern  India.  By  AMY  WILSON- 
CARMICHAEL,  Keswick  Missionary,  C.E.Z.M.S.,  Author  of 
"  Things  as  They  Are,"  Preface  by  Rev.  T.  WALKER,  C.M.S. 
Thirty-four  beautiful  Illustrations.  Cloth  Boards,  2s.  6d. 
net  (post  free,  2/10). 

THINGS    AS    THEY    ARE: 

Mission  Work  in  Southern  India.     By  AMY  WILSON 
CARMICHAEL.      (Companion  Volume  to  "  Overweights  of 
Joy.")     With  Preface  by  Dr.  EUGENE  STOCK.     Admirably 
Illustrated.     Ninth  Edition.     Paper,  Is.  6d.  net  (post  free, 
1/9)  ;  Cloth  Boards,  2s.  6d.  net  (post  free,  2/10). 

MORGAN  6  SCOTT  LD.,  12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  LONDON,  E.G. 

43° 


From  Morgan  &  Scott's  List. 


OUR    GRAND    OLD    BIBLE. 

By  REV.  WILLIAM  MU1R,  M.A.,  B.D.,  B.L.  The  story  of 
the  Authorised  Version  has  been  welcomed  everywhere 
with  unqualified  cordiality.  New  tributes  to  its  value  are 
still  coming  to  hand.  The  FIRST  EDITION  was  bought  up 
within  eight  weeks  of  Publication.  Cloth,  3s.  6d.  net. 

ISLAM    IN    CHINA. 

By  MARSHALL  BROOMHALL,  B.A.,  Editorial  Secretary, 
China  Inland  Mission.  Twenty-four  Half-Tone  Full-page 
Illustrations,  Three  Line  Drawings,  and  Map  of  China. 
Royal  8vo,  Cloth,  7s.  6d.  net  (post  free,  7/11). 


TWO  USEFUL  BOOKS  BY  ADA  R.  HABERSHON. 

THE  BIBLE  AND  THE  BRITISH  MUSEUM. 

With  a  Preface  by  SIR  ROBERT  ANDERSON,  K.C.B.  LL.D. 
Illustrated.  Attractively  bound  in  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net  (post 
free,  2/9). 

THE    STUDY    OF    THE    MIRACLES. 

An  Examination  of  the  Miracles  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments.  Cloth,  6s. 

BY  THE  LATE  DR.  A.  T.  PIERSON. 
THE    BELIEVER'S    LIFE: 

Its  Past,  Present,  and  Future  Tenses.  SPECIAL  CHEAP 
EDITION  :  Paper  Covers,  6d.  net  (post  free,  7$d.)  ;  Cloth,  Is. 
net  (post  free,  l/2£). 

"MANY    INFALLIBLE    PROOFS.'* 

THE  EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY  ;  or,  The 
Written  and  Living  Word  of  Ood.  Cloth  Boards,  2s.  6d. 

THE    ACTS    OF    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT. 

The  Active  Mission  and  Ministry  of  the  Spirit  of  (Jod, 
the  Divine  Paraclete,  as  set  forth  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles.  Cloth  Boards,  2s.  6d. 


MORGAN  8  SCOTT  LD.,  12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  LONDON,  E.C. 

431 


THE  PUBLICATIONS  OF 

MORGAN  &  SCOTT  LD. 

Comprise — 

BIBLES  in  various  sizes  and  styles  of  Binding. 
SACRED  SONGS  AND  SOLOS,  By  Ira  D.  Sankey. 

THE    SONG  COMPANION   TO   THE   SCRIP 
TURES,  Compiled  by  Dr.  Campbell  Morgan. 

HELPS  FOR  CHRISTIAN  WORKERS. 

AIDS  TO  BIBLE  STUDY. 

WORKS  ON  CHRISTIAN  EVIDENCES. 

MY  COUNSELLOR  :    Daily  Readings  for  Morning 
and  Evening. 

BIBLE  CHARACTERS  AND  EXPOSITIONS. 

DEVOTIONAL  VOLUMES. 

BOOKS  ON  MISSIONARY  ENTERPRISE. 

CHRISTIAN  BIOGRAPHIES. 

HYMN  AND  TUNE  BOOKS. 

FINE  ART  PUBLICATIONS : 

Scripture  Text  Cards,  Wall  Mottoes,  Sunday 
School  Reward  Sheets,  etc.  New  and  Artistic 
Designs,  Specially  Selected  Texts  and  Verses. 


%*  A  Complete  List  of  the  Publications  of  MORGAN 
AND  SCOTT  LD.  will  be  sent  post  free  to  any  address 
on  application  to  12,  Paternoster  Buildings,  London,  E.G. 

432 


