I 


Hi 


Cc 


^y. 


Logical  8^^ 


BX  6333  .M365  C3 
Maclaren,  Alexander,  1826 

1910. 
Christ ' s  musts 


CHRIST'S    MUSTS 


AND    OTHER    SER3I0NS<; 


rc/W^^        ^"'^^ 


0  o  :r 


o  1930 


7 


ALEXANDER    MACLAREN    D.D. 


London 

ALEXANDER    &    SHEPHEARD 

21   FURNIYAL  STREET   HOLBORN 

1804 


LOXDOX 

ALEXANDER  AND   SHEPHEARD,    PRINTERS 

27,    CHANCERY   LANE,    \V.C. 


("] 


\0 


CONTENTS. 


^  PAGK 

)     Christ's  Musts       .  , 1 

•'  Even  so  must  the  Son  of  Man  be  lifted  up." — John  iii.  14, 

II. 

"  He  IS  BESIDE  Himself  "  11 

"And  when  His  friends  heard  of  it  they  went  out  to 
**tt.^  lay  hold  on  Him  ;  for  they  said,  He  is  beside  Him- 

self."—Maek  iii.  21. 

III. 

An'  Attempt  to  Account  for  Jesus 22 

"  But  when  the  Pharisees  heard  it,  they  said,  This  man 
doth  not  cast  out  demons,  but  by  Beelzebub,  the 
prince  of  the  demons." — Matt.  xii.  24. 

IV. 

A  G-luttonous  Man  and  a  Winebibbeb     33 

"  The  Son  of  Man  is  come  eating  and  drinking,  and  ye  say, 
Behold  a  gluttonous  man  and  a  winebibber,  a  friend 
of  publicans  and  sinners." — Luke  vii.  34. 

V. 

Jesus  Charged  with  Blasphemy      44, 

"  Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  saying,  He  hath 
spoken  blasphemy  ;  what  further  need  have  we  of 
witnesses  ?  " — Matt.  xxvi.  65. 


CONTENTS. 


VI. 

PAGE 

The  Servant-Loed  and  His  Servants        55 

"  Even  as  the  Son  of  Man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto, 
but  to  minister." — Matt.  xx.  28. 

VII. 

What  the  Historic  Christ  Taught  about  His  Death  .      65 

"  The  Son  of  Man  came  ...  to  give  His  life  a  ransom 
for  many."— Matt.  xx.  28. 

VIII. 

•' Concerning  the  Crown"       75 

"  They  do  it  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown  ;  but  we  an 
incorruptible." — 1  COR.  ix.  25. 

IX. 

The  Lord's  Supper  a  Declaratory  Rite 87-- 

''.     .     .     .     Ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come." 
—1  CoE.  xi.  26. 

X. 

The  Soul's  Thirst  and  Satisfaction  9< 

"  My  soul  thirsteth  for  Thee     .     .     . 

"  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied     .     .     . 

"  My  soul  followeth  hard  after  Thee."— PsALM  Ixiii.  1,  5,  8. 

XI. 

Waiting  for  Power        108 

•'  Tarry  ye  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem  until  ye  be  endued 
with  power  from  on  high." — Luke  xxiv.  49. 

XIL 

Memory,  Hope,  and  Effort      ...    1J8 

*'  That  they  might  set  their  hope  in  God,  and  not  forget 
the  works  of  God,  but  keep  His  commandments." — 
Psalm  Ixxviii.  7. 


CONTENTS. 


XIII. 

PAGE 

Unpossessed  Possessions 1-7 

"  And  the  King  of  Israel  said  unto  his  servants,  Know  ye 
that  Ramoth  in  Gilead  is  ours,  and  we  be  still  and 
,     take  it  not  out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Syria  ?  " 
—1  Kings  xxii.  3. 

XIV. 

Cheist  our  Lesson  and  our  Teacher        137^ 

'•  But  ye  have  not  so  learned  Christ ;  if  so  be  that  ye  have 
heard  Him,  and  have  been  taught  in  Him."— Eph.  iv. 
20.  21. 

XV. 

Unclothed  and  Clothed  Upon  ^^^ 

"  That  ye  put  off  concerning  the  former  conversation  the 
old  man,  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful 
lusts.  .  .  .  And  that  ye  put  on  the  new  man, 
which  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness." — Eph.  iv.  22,  24. 

XVI. 

How  to  Own  Oorselves 1^^ 

"  They  that  believe  to  the  saving  of  the  soul." — Heb.  x. 
39. 

XVII. 

Salted  with  Fire 169 

"  Everyone  shall  be  salted  with  fire." — Mark  ix.  49. 

XVIII. 

Copies  of  Christ's  Manner      179 

"  And  Peter  said  unto  him,  ^neas,  Jesus  Christ  maketh 
thee  whole  :  arise,  and  make  thy  bed.  .  .  .  But 
Peter  put  them  all  forth,  and  knelt  down  and  prayed  ; 
and,  turning  to  the  body,  said,  Tabitha,  arise  !  " — 
Acts  ix.  34,  40. 


vi  CONTENTS. 


,7 
V 


XIX. 

Me  A  Cheistian  ! "        ^{1} 

"  Then  Agrippa  said  unto  Paul,  Almost  thou  persuades 
me  to  be  a  Christian." — Acts  xxvi.  28. 


XX. 

The  Cheistian  Saceifice 

"  By  Him  therefore  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to 
God  continually,  that  is,  the  fruit  of  our  lips  giving 
thanks  to  His  name.  But  to  do  good  and  to  com- 
municate forget  not :  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is 
well  pleased."— Heb.  xiii.  15,  16. 


XXI. 

The  Psalmist's  Remoxstrancb  with  his  Soul    ...  210' 

"  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul  ?  and  why  art  thou 
disquieted  within  me  .'  Hope  in  God  ;  for  I  shall  yet 
praise  Him,  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my 
God."— Psalm  xliii.  5. 

XXII. 

A  Good  Man's  Estimate  of  Himself 21" 

"  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am  ;  and  the  grace 
which  was  bestowed  upon  me  was  not  in  vain."— 
1  Cor.  XV.  10. 

XXIII. 

"  That  Which  WAS  Lost  " 228 

'^  "A  hundred  sheep    ...     ten  pieces  of  silver     .     .    . 

two  sons." — Luke  xv.  4.  8,  11. 


XXIV. 

The  Feuit  of  the  Light  

"  The  fruit  of  the  light  is  in  all  goodness  and  righteous- 
ness and  truth."— Eph.  v.  9  (Revised  Version). 


I  CONTENTS.  vii 

XXV. 

PAGE 

Pleasing  Christ 249 

"  Proving  what  is  acceptable  unto  the  Lord." — Eph.  v.  10. 

XXVI. 

The  Christian  Attitude  to  Social  Sins 259 

"  And  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of 
darkness,  but  rather  reprove  them." — Eph.  v.  11. 

XXVII. 

Sylvanus       270 

••By  Sylvanus,  our  faithful  brother,  as  I  account  him,  I 
have  written  unto  you  briefly."—!  Peter  v.  12 
(Revised  Version). 

XXVIII. 

An  Apostolic  Testimony  and  Exhortation         279 

"  I  have  written  briefly,  exhorting,  and  testifying  that 
this  is  the  true  grace  of  G-od,  wherein  ye  stand." — 
1  Peter  v.  12. 

XXIX. 

The  Church  in  Babylon  289 

"  The  Church  that  is  at  Babylon,  elected  together  with 
you,  saluteth  you."— 1  Peter  v.  13. 

XXX. 

"  Marcus,  MY  Son  "  297 

"  So  doth  Marcus,  my  son."— 1  Peter  v.  13. 


I. 


Cbriet'6  flDuete^ 


EvE^'  so  must  the  Son  of  Man  be  lifted  up."— John  iii.  li. 


HAVE  chosen  this  text  for  the  sake  of 
one  word  in  it,  that  solemn  ''•  must " 
which  was  so  often  on  our  Lord's  hps. 
I  have  no  purpose  of  deahng  with  the 
remainder  of  this  clause,  nor,  indeed, 
with  it  at  all,  except  as  one  instance  of  His  use  of  the 
expression.  But  I  felt  it  might  be  interesting,  and 
might  set  old  truths  in  a  brighter  light,  if  we  gather 
together  the  instances  in  which  Christ  speaks  of  the 
great  necessity  which  dominated  His  life,  and  shaped 
even  small  acts. 

The  expression  is  most  frequently  used  in  reference 
to  the  Passion  and  Resurrection.  There  are  many 
instances  in  the  other  Gospels,  in  which  He  speaks 
of  that  must.  The  first  of  these  is  that  of  my  text. 
Then  there  is  another  class,  of  which  His  word 
to  His  mother  when  a  twelve-year-old  child  may  be 
taken  as  a  type,  '•' AVist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about 
My  Father's  business  ? "  where  the  mysterious  con- 
sciousness of  a  special  relation  to  God  in  the  child's 
heart  drew  Him  to  the  Temple,  and  to  His  Father's 


CHRIST'S  MUSTS. 


work.  Other  similar  instances  are  those  in  which 
He  responded  to  the  multitude  when  they  wanted 
to  keep  Him  to  themselves :  "  I  must  preach  in  other 
cities  also '' ;  or,  as  when  He  said,  "  I  must  work  the 
works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  it  is  day/' 

Yet  another  aspect  of  the  same  necessity  is  pre- 
sented when,  looking  far  be^^ond  the  earthly  work 
and  suffering,  He  discerned  the  future  triumph  which 
was  to  be  the  issue  of  these,  and  said,  "  Other  sheep 
I  have     .     .     .     them  also  I  must  bring." 

And  yet  another  is  in  reference  to  a  very  small 
matter :  His  selection  of  a  place  for  a  few  hours'  rest 
on  His  last  fateful  journey  to  Jerusalem,  when  He 
said,  "  Zaccheus,  .  .  .  to-day  I  must  abide  at  thy 
Jiouse." 

Now,  if  we  put  these  instances  together,  we  shall 
get  some  precious  glimpses  into  our  Lord's  heart,  and 
His  view  of  life. 

I. — Here  we  see  Christ  recognizing  and  accepting 
the  necessity  for  His  death. 

M}^  text,  -if  we  accept  John's  Gospel,  contributes 
iin  altogether  new  element  to  our  conception  of  our 
Lord  as  announcinsr  His  death.  For  the  other  three 
•Oospeis  lay  emphasis  on  it  as  being  part  of  His 
teaching,  especially  during  the  latter  stage  of  His 
ministry.  But  it  does  not  folio vf  that  He  began  to 
think  about  it  or  to  see  it,  when  He  began  to  speak 
about  it.  There  are  reasons  for  the  earlier  com- 
parative reticence,  and  there  is  no  ground  for  the 
conclusion  that  then  first  began  to  dawn  upon  a 
disappointed  enthusiast  the  grim  reality  that  His 
work  was  not  going  to  prosper,  and  that  martyrdom 


CHRIST'S  MUSTS.  3 


was  necessary.  That  is  a  notion  that  has  been 
frequently  upheld  of  late  years,  but  to  me  it  seems 
altogether  incongruous  Avith  the  facts  of  the  case. 
And,  if  John's  Gospel  is  a  true  record,  that  theory 
is  shivered  against  this  text,  which  represents  Him 
at  the  very  beginning  of  His  career — the  time  when, 
according  to  that  other  theory.  He  was  full  of 
the  usual  buoyant  and  baseless  anticipations  of  a 
reformer  commencing  His  course — as  tehing  Nico- 
demus,  "Even  so  must  the  Son  of  Man  be  lifted 
up."  In  like  manner,  in  the  previous  chapter  of 
this  same  Gospel,  we  have  the  significant  though 
enigmatical  utterance  :  "  Destroy  this  Temple,  and  in 
three  days  I  will  raise  it  up  " ;  with  the  Evangelist's 
iiuthoritative  comment :  ''  He  spake  of  the  Temple  of 
His  body."  So,  from  the  beginning  of  His  career,  the 
end  was  clear  before  Him. 

And  why  must  He  go  to  the  Cross  ?  Not  merely, 
as  the  other  evangelists  put  it,  in  order  that  "  it  might 
bj  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  of  the  prophets."  It 
was  not  that  Jesus  must  die  because  the  prophets  had 
said  that  Messiah  should,  but  that  the  prophets  had 
said  that  Messiah  should  because  Jesus  must.  There 
was  a  far  deeper  necessity  than  the  fulfilment  of  any 
prophetic  utterance,  even  the  necessity  which  shaped 
that  utterance.  The  work  of  Jesus  Christ  could  not 
be  done  unless  He  died.  He  could  not  be  the  Saviour 
of  the  world  unless  He  was  the  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of 
the  world. 

We  cannot  see  all  the  grounds  of  that  solemn 
imperative,  but  this  we  can  see,  that  it  was  because 
of  the  requirements  of  the  Divine  righteousness,  and 

1* 


CHRIST'S  MUSTS. 


because  of  the  necessities  of  sinful  men.  And  so' 
Christ's  was  no  martyr's  death,  who  had  to  die  as  the 
penalty  of  the  faithful  discharge  of  his  duty.  It  was- 
not  the  penalty  that  He  paid  for  doing  His  work,  but 
it  was  the  work  itself.  Not  that  gracious  life,  nor  "  the 
loveliness  of  perfect  deeds,"  nor  His  words  of  sweet 
wisdom,  nor  His  acts  of  transcendent  power,  equalled 
only  by  the  pity  that  moved  the  power,  completed 
His  task,  but  He  "  came  to  give  His  life  a  ransom 
for  many." 

"Must"  is  a  hard  word.  It  may  express  an  un- 
welcome necessity.  AVas  this  necessity  unwelcome  ? 
When  He  said :  "  The  Son  of  Man  must  be  lifted  up,''' 
was  He  shrinking,  or  reluctantly  submitting?  Ah, 
no  !  He  must  die  because  He  woidd  save,  and  He 
tvould  save  because  He  did  love.  His  filial  obedience 
to  God  coincided  with  His  pity  for  men:  and  not 
merely  in  obedience  to  the  requirements  of  the  Divine 
righteousness,  but  in  compassion  for  the  necessities  of 
sinners  necessity  was  laid  upon  Him. 

Oh,  brethren,  nothing  held  Christ  to  the  Cross  but 
His  own  desire  to  save  us.  Neither  priests  nor 
Romans  carried  Him  thither.  What  fastened  Him 
to  it  was  not  the  nails  driven  by  rude  hands.  And 
the  reason  why  He  did  not,  as  the  taunters  bade 
Him  do,  come  down  from  it,  was  neither  a  physical 
nor  a  moral  necessity  unwelcome  to  Himself,  but  the 
yielding  of  His  own  will  to  do  all  which  was  needed 
for  man's  salvation. 

This  Sacrifice  was  bound  to  the  altar  by  the  cords- 
of  love.  We  have  heard  of  martyrs  who  have  refused 
to  be  tied  to  the  stake,  and  have  kept  themselves 


CHRISrS  MUSTS, 


motionless  in  the  centre  of  the  fierce  flames  by  the 
force  of  their  wills.  Jesus  Christ  fastened  Himself  to 
the  Cross  and  died  because  He  would. 

And,  oh  !  if  Ave  think  of  that  sweet,  serene  life  as 
having  clear  before  it  from  the  very  first  steps  that 
grim  end,  how  infinitely  it  gains  in  pathetic  beauty 
And  in  heart-touchingness !  What  wonderful  self- 
-abnesration !  How  he  was  at  leisure  from  Himself, 
with  a  heart  of  pity  for  every  sorrow,  and  loins  girt 
for  all  service,  thousfh  for  all  His  life  the  Cross  closed 
•the  vista !  Think !  human  shrinking  was  felt  by 
Him.  Think  !  it  was  so  held  back  that  His  purpose 
never  faltered.  Think  !  each  of  us  may  say,  "  He 
must  die  because  He  would  save  me  "  ;  and  then  ask, 
"  What  shall  I  render  to  the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits 
toward  me  ? " 

II. — In  a  second  class  of  these  utterances,  we  see 
Christ  impelled  by  filial  obedience  and  the  conscious- 
ness of  His  mission. 

"Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's 
business  ?  "  That  was  a  strange  utterance  for  a  boy 
-of  twelve.  It  seems  to  negative  the  supposition 
that  what  is  called  the  "Messianic  consciousness" 
dawned  upon  Jesus  Christ  first  after  His  baptism 
iind  the  descent  of  the  Spirit.  But  however  that 
may  be,  it  and  the  similar  passages  to  which  I  have 
a,lready  referred,  bearing  upon  His  discharge  of  His 
work  prior  to  His  death,  teach  that  the  necessity  was 
iin  inward  necessity  springing  from  His  consciousness 
of  Sonship,  and  His  recognition  of  the  work  that 
He  had  to  do.  And  so  He  is  our  great  Example  of 
spontaneous  obedience,  which  does  violence  to  itself 


CHRIST'S  MUSTS. 


if  it  does  not  obey.  It  was  instinct  that  sent  the 
boy  into  the  Temple.  Where  should  a  son  be  but  in 
His  Father's  house  ?  How  could  He  not  be  doing 
His  Father's  business  ? 

Thus  He  stands  before  us,  the  pattern  for  the  onl}^ 
obedience  that  is  worth  calHng  so,  the  obedience 
which  would  be  pained  and  ill  at  ease  unless  it 
were  doino:  the  work  of  God.  Relio^ion  is  meant 
to  make  it  a  second  nature,  or,  as  I  have  ven- 
tured to  call  it,  an  instinct  —  a  spontaneous, 
uncalculating,  irrepressible  desire — to  be  hi  fellow- 
ship with  God,  and  to  be  doing  His  will.  That 
is  the  meaning  of  our  Christianity.  There  is  no 
obedience  in  reluctant  obedience  ;  forced  service  is 
slavery,  not  service.  Christianity  is  given  for  the 
specific  purpose  that  it  may  bring  us  so  into  touch 
with  Jesus  Christ  as  that  the  mind  which  was  in 
Him  may  be  in  us ;  and  we  too  may  be  able  to 
say,  with  a  kind  of  wonder  that  people  should  have 
expected  to  find  us  in  any  other  place,  or  doing  any- 
thing else,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  because  I  am  a  son,  / 
must  be  about  my  Father's  business  ?  "  As  certainly 
as  the  sunflower  follows  the  sun,  so  certainly  will  a 
man,  animated  by  the  mind  that  was  in  Jesus  Christ, 
like  Him  find  his  ver}^  life's  breath  in  doing  the 
Father's  will. 

So  then,  brethren,  what  about  our  grudging 
service  ?  What  about  our  reluctant  obedience  ? 
What  about  the  widespread  mistake  that  religion 
prohibits  wished-for  things  and  enforces  unwelcome 
duties  ?  If  my  Christianity  does  not  make  me  re- 
coil from  what  it  forbids,  and  spring  eagerly  to  what 


CHRIST'S  MUSTS. 


it  commends,  my  Christianity  is  of  very  little  use. 
If  when  in  the  temple  we  are  like  idle  boys  in 
school,  always  casting  glances  at  the  clock  and  the 
door,  and  wishing  ourselves  outside,  we  may  just 
as  well  be  out  as  in.  Glad  obedience  is  true  obedi- 
ence. Only  he  who  can  say,  "  Thy  law  is  within  my 
heart,  and  I  do  Thy  will  because  I  love  Thee,  and 
cannot  but  do  as  Thou  desirest,"  has  found  the  joy 
possible  to  a  Christian  life.  It  is  not  "harsh  and 
crabbed,"  as  those  that  look  upon  it  from  the  out- 
side may  suppose,  but  musical  and  full  of  sweetness. 
There  is  nothing  more  blessed  than  when  '^  I  choose  " 
covers  exactly  the  same  ground  as  "  I  ought."  And 
when  duty  is  delight,  delight  will  never  become 
disgust,  nor  joy  pass  away. 

III. —  We  see,  in  yet  another  use  of  this  great 
*■'  must,"  Christ  anticipating  His  future  triumph. 

"  Other  sheep  I  have  which  are  not  of  this  fold ; 
them  also  I  must  bring,  and  there  shall  be  one  flock 
and  one  Shepherd."  Striking  as  these  words  are  in 
themselves,  they  are  still  more  striking  when  we 
notice  their  connection  ;  for  they  follow  immediately 
upon  His  utterance  about  laying  down  His  life  for  the 
sheep.  So,  then,  this  work  was  beyond  the  Cross. 
And  whatever  it  was,  it  was  to  be  done  after  He 
had  died. 

I  need  not  point  out  to  you  how  far  afield  Christ's 
vision  goes  out  into  the  dim,  waste  places,  where  on 
the  dark  mountains  the  straying  sheep  are  torn  and 
frightened  and  starving.  I  need  not  dwell  upon  how 
far  ahead  in  the  future  His  glance  travels,  or  how 
magnificent  and  how  rebuking  to  our  petty  narrowness 


CBIUST'S  MUSTS. 


the  great  word  is.  "  There  shall  be  one  Jlock  "  (not 
fold);  and  they  shall  be  one,  not  because  they  are 
within  the  bounds  of  any  visible  "  fold,"  but  because 
they  are  gathered  round  the  one  Shepherd,  and  in 
their  common  relation  to  Him  are  knit  together  in 
unity. 

But  what  sort  of  a  Man  is  this  who  considers  that 
His  widest  work  is  to  be  done  by  Him  after  He  is 
dead?  '-'Them  also  I  must  bring."  Thou!  How? 
When  ?  Surely  such  words  as  these,  side  by  side 
with  the  clear  prevision  of  the  death  that  was  so  soon 
to  come,  are  either  meaningless  or  the  utterance  of 
an  arrogance  bordering  on  insanity;  or  they  antici- 
pate what  an  evangelist  declares  did  take  place— that 
the  Lord  was  taken  up  into  heaven  and  sat  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  whilst  His  servants  went  every- 
where preaching  the  AVord,  "  the  Lord  also  working 
with  them  and  confirming  the  word  "  with  the  signs 
He  wrought. 

"  Them  also  I  must  bring."  That  is  not  merely  a 
necessity  rooted  in  the  nature  of  God  and  the 
wants  of  men.  It  is  not  merely  a  necessity  springing 
from  Christ's  filial  obedience  and  sense  of  a  mission ; 
but  it  is  a  ''  must "  of  destiny,  a  "  must  "  which  recog- 
nizes the  sure  results  of  His  passion ;  a  "  must " 
which  implies  the  power  of  the  Cross  to  be  the  re- 
conciliation of  the  world.  And  so  for  all  pessimistic 
thoughts  to-day,  or  at  any  time,  and  -when  Chris- 
tian mens  hearts  may  be  trembling  for  the  Ark  of 
God — although,  perhaps,  there  may  be  little  reason 
for  the  tremor — and  in  the  face  of  all  blatant  an- 
tagonisms   and    of    proud    Goliaths    despising    the 


CHRIST'S  MUSTS. 


"  foolishness  of  preaching,"  we  fall  back  upon  Christ's 
great  "  must."  It  is  written  in  the  councils  of  Heaven 
more  unchangeably  than  the  heavens;  it  is  guaran- 
teed by  the  power  of  the  Cross ;  it  is  certain,  by  the 
eternal  life  of  the  crucified  Saviour,  that  He  will  one 
day  be  the  King  of  humanity,  and  must  bring  His 
wandering  sheep  to  couch  in  peace,  one  flock  round 
one  Shepherd. 

IV. — Lastly,  wc  have  Christ  applying  the  greatest 
principle  to  the  smallest  duty. 

"  Zaccheus  !  make  haste  and  come  down ;  to-day  I 
iniLst  abide  in  thy  house."    Why  must  He?     Because 
Zaccheus    was  to  be  saved,  and    was  worth   saving^. 
What  was  the  "  must  "  ?     To  stop  for  an  hour  or  two 
on  His  road  to  the  Cross.      So  He  teaches  us  that  in 
a  life  penetrated  by  the  thought  of  the  Divine  will, 
which  we  gladly  obey,  there  are  no  things  too  great, 
and  none  too  trivial,  to  be  brought  under  the  dominion 
of  that   law,   and   to   be   regulated   by   that   Divine 
necessity.     Obedience  is  obedience,  whether  in  large 
thino^s  or  in  small.     There  is  no  scale  of  mao-nitude 
applicable  to  the  distinction  between  God's  will  and 
that  which  is  not  God's  will.     Gravitation  rules  the 
motes  that  dance  in  the  sunshine  as  well  as  the  mass 
of  Jupiter.     A  triangle  with  its  apex  in  the  sun,  and 
its  base  beyond  the  solar  S3'stem,  has  the  same  pro- 
perties and  comes  under  the  same  laws  as  one  that 
a  schoolboy  scrawls  upon  his  slate.     God's  truth  is  not 
too  great  to  rule  the  smallest  duties.     The  star  in  the 
east  was  a  guide  to  the  humble  house  at  Bethlehem, 
and  there  are  starry  truths  high  in  the  heavens  that 
aval  for  our  guidance  in  the  smallest  acts  of  life. 


1^  CHRIST'S  MUSTS. 


So,  brethren,  bring  your  doing  under  that  all- 
embracing  law  of  duty — duty,  which  is  the  heathen 
expression  for  the  will  of  God.  There  are  great 
regions  of  life  in  which  lower  necessities  have  play. 
Circumstances,  our  past,  bias  and  temper,  relationship, 
friendship,  civic  duty,  and  the  like — all  these  bring  their 
necessities  ;  but  let  us  think  of  them  all  as  being,  Avhat 
indeed  they  are,  manifestations  to  us  of  the  will  of  our 
Father.  There  are  great  tracts  of  life  in  which  either 
of  two  courses  may  be  right,  and  we  are  left  to  the 
decision  of  choice  rather  than  of  duty;  but  high 
above  all  these,  let  us  see  towering  that  Divine 
necessity.  It  is  a  daily  struggle  to  bring  '•  I  will  "  to 
coincide  with  "  I  ought " ;  and  there  is  only  one 
adequate  and  always  powerful  way  of  securing  that 
coincidence,  and  it  is  to  keep  close  to  Jesus  Christ 
and  to  drink  in  His  spirit.  Then,  when  duty  and 
delight  are  conterminous,  the  rough  places  will  be 
plain,  and  the  crooked  things  straight,  and  every 
mountain  shall  be  brought  low,  and  every  valley  shall 
be  exalted,  and  life  will  be  blessed,  and  service  will  be 
freedom.  Joy  and  liberty  and  power  and  peace  will 
fill  our  hearts  when  this  is  the  law  of  our  being :  '•  All 
that  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  that  must  I  do." 


IT. 

''  ibc  10  bceibe  Ibimeclf.'' 

"  And  when  Ilis  friends  heard  of  it  they  went  out  to  lay  hold  on 
Ilim  ;  for  they  said,  He  is  beside  Himself." — Mabk  iii.  21. 

HERE  had  been  great  excitement  in 
the  Kttle  town  of  Capernaum  in  con- 
sequence of  Christ's  teachings  and 
miracles.  It  had  been  intensified  by 
His  infractions  of  tlie  rabbinical  Sab- 
bath law,  and  by  His  appointment  of  the  twelve 
Apostles.  The  sacerdotal  party  in  Capernaum  appa- 
rentl}^  communicated  with  Jerusalem,  vritli  the  result 
of  bringing  a  deputation  from  the  Sanhedrim  to  look 
into  things,  and  see  what  this  new  rabbi  was  about. 
A  plot  for  His  assassination  was  secretly  on  foot. 
And  at  this  juncture  the  incident  of  my  text,  which 
Ave  owe  to  Mark  alone  of  the  evangelists,  occurs. 
Christ's  friends,  apparently  the  members  of  His  o^vn 
family — sad  to  say,  as  would  apjoear  from  the  context, 
including  His  mother — came  with  a  kindly  design  to 
rescue  their  misguided  kinsman  from  danger,  and, 
laying  hands  upon  Him,  to  carry  Him  oft*  to  some  safe 
restraint  in  Nazareth,  where  He  mii^ht  indulge  His 
delusions  without  doing  any  harm  to  Himself.     They 


12  'HE  IS  BESIDE  HIMSELF. " 

want  to  excuse  His  eccentricities  on  the  ground  that 
He  is  not  quite  responsible — scarcely  Himself ;  and  so 
to  blunt  the  point  of  the  more  hostile  explanation  of 
the  Pharisees  that  He  is  in  league  with  Beelzebub. 

Conceive  of  that !  The  Incarnate  Wisdom  shielded 
by  friends  from  the  accusation  that  He  is  a  demoniac 
by  the  apology  that  He  is  a  lunatic !  AVhat  do  you 
think  of  popular  judgment  ? 

But  this  half- pitying,  half  -  contemptuous,  and 
wholly  benevolent  excuse  for  Jesus,  though  it  be  the 
^vords  of  friends,  is  like  the  words  of  His  enemies,  in 
that  it  contains  a  distorted  reflection  of  His  true 
character.  And  if  we  w411  think  about  it,  I  fancy  that 
we  may  gather  from  it  some  lessons  not  altogether 
unprofitable. 

I. — The  first  point,  then,  that  I  make,  is  just  this — • 
there  was  something  in  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ 
which  could  be  plausibly  explained  to  commonplace 
people  as  madness. 

A  w^ell-known  modern  author  has  talked  a  great 
deal  about  '-'the  sweet  reasonableness  of  Jesus 
Christ."  His  contemporaries  called  it  simple  insanity ; 
if  they  did  not  say  "  He  hath  a  devil,"  as  Avell  as  "  He 
is  mad." 

Now,  if  we  try  to  throw  ourselves  back  to  the  life 
of  Jesus  Christ,  as  it  was  unfolded  day  by  day,  and 
think  nothing  about  either  what  preceded  in  the 
revelation  of  the  Old  Covenant,  or  what  followed  in 
the  history  of  Christianity,  we  shall  not  be  so  much 
at  a  loss  to  account  for  such  explanations  of  it  as 
these  of  my  text.  Remember  that  charges  like  these, 
in  all  various  keys  of  contempt  or  of  pity,  or  of  fierce 


''HE  IS  BESIDE  HIMSELF.  '  IS 

hostility,  have  been  cast  against  all  innovators,  against 
every  man  that  has  broken  a  new  path ;  against  all 
teachers  that  have  cut  themselves  apart  from  tradi- 
tion and  encrusted  formulas ;  against  every  man  that 
has  waged  war  with  the  conventionalisms  of  society ; 
against  all  idealists  who  have  dreamed  dreams  and 
seen  visions ;  against  every  man  that  has  been  touched 
with  a  lofty  enthusiasm  of  any  sort ;  and,  most  of  all, 
against  all  to  whom  God  and  their  relations  to  Him, 
the  spiritual  world  and  their  relations  to  it,  the  future 
life  and  their  relations  to  that,  have  become  dominant 
forces  and  motives  in  their  lives. 

The  short  and  easy  way  with  which  the  world 
excuses  itself  from  the  poignant  lessons  and  rebukes 
which  come  from  such  lives  is  something  like  that  of 
my  text,  "  He  is  beside  himself."  And  the  proof  that 
he  is  beside  himself  is  that  he  does  not  act  in  the_same. 
fashion  as  these  incomparably  wise  people  that  make 
up  the  majority  in  every  age.  There  is  nothing  that 
commonplace  men  hate  like  anything  fresh  and 
original.  There  is  nothing  that  men  of  low_aims  are- 
so  utterly  bewildered  to  understand,  and  which  sa 
completely  passes  all  the  calculus  of  which  they  are- 
masters,  as  lofty  self-abnegation.  And  wherever  you 
get  men  smitten  with  such,  or  with  anything  like  it, 
you  will  find  all  the  low-aimed  people  gathering  round 
them  like  bats  round  a  torch  in  a  cavern,  flapping 
their  obscene  wings  and  uttering  their  harsh  croaks, 
and  only  desiring  to  quench  the  light. 

One  of  our  cynical  authors  says  that  it  is  the  mark 
of  a  genius  that  all  the  dullards  are  against  him. 
It  is  the  mark  of  the  man  who  dwells  with  God  that 


14  ''HE  IS  BESIDE  IIBISELI. " 

all  the  people  Avhose  portion  is  in  this  life  with  one 
consent  say,  "  He  is  beside  himself." 

And  so  the  Leader  of  them  all  was  served  in  His 
day ;  and  that  purest,  perfectest,  noblest,  loftiest,  most 
utterly  self- oblivious,  and  God-and-man-devoted  life 
that  ever  was  lived  upon  earth,  was  disposed  of  in  this 
extremely  simple  method,  so  comforting  to  the  com- 
placency of  the  critics — either  "  He  is  beside  Himself," 
or  "  He  hath  a  devil." 

And  yet,  is  not  the  saying  a  witness  to  the  presence 
in  that  wondrous  and  gentle  career  of  an  element 
entirely  unlike  the  most  of  mankind  ?  Here  was  a 
new  star  in  the  heavens,  and  the  law  of  its  orbit  was 
manifestly  different  from  that  of  all  the  rest.  That  is 
what  "  eccentric  "  means — that  the  life  to  which  it  ap- 
plies does  not  go  round  the  same  centre  as  all  the  other 
satellites,  but  has  a  path  of  its  own.  Away  out  yonder 
somewhere,  in  the  infinite  depths,  lay  the  hidden  point 
which  drew  it  to  itself  and  determined  its  magnificent 
and  overwhelmingly  vast  orbit.  These  men  witness 
to  Jesus  Christ,  even  by  their  half  excuse,  half 
reproach,  that  His  was  a  life  unique  and  inexplicable 
by  the  ordinary  motives  which  shape  the  little  lives  of 
the  masses  of  mankind.  They  witness  to  His  entire 
neglect  of  ordinary  and  low  aims;  to  His  complete 
absorption  in  lofty  purposes,  which  to  His  purblind 
would-be  critics  seem  to  be  delusions  and  fond  imaQ;i- 
nations  that  could  never  be  realized.  They  witness  to 
Avhat  His  disciples  remembered  had  been  Avritten  of 
Him,  "  The  zeal  of  Thy  house  hath  eaten  Me  up  ;  "  to 
His  perfect  devotion  to  man  and  to  God.  They  witness 
to    His    consciousness   of  a   mission;   and    there   is 


'•  HE  IS  BESIDE  HIMSELF. "  1 5 

nothing  that  men  are  so  ready  to  resent  as  that.  To 
tell  a  world,  engrossed  in  self  and  low  aims,  that  1  am 
sent  from  God  to  do  His  will,  and  to  spread  it  among 
men,  is  the  sure  way  to  have  all  the  heavy  artillery 
iind  the  lighter  weapons  of  the  world  turned  against  one. 

These  characteristics  of  Jesus  seem,  then,  to  be 
plainl}'  implied  in  that  allegation  of  insanity — lofty 
aims,  absolute  originality,  utter  self-abnegation,  the 
continual  consciousness  of  communion  with  God,  de- 
votion to  the  service  of  man,  and  the  sense  of  being 
sent  by  God  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.  It  was 
because  of  these  that  His  friends  said,  "  He  is  beside 
Himself." 

These  men  judged  themselves  by  judging  Jesus 
Christ.  And  all  men  do.  There  are  as  many  different 
estimates  of  a  great  man  as  there  are  people  to  esti- 
mate, and  hence  the  diversity  of  opinion  about  all 
the  characters  that  fill  history  and  the  galleries  of  the 
past.  The  eye  sees  what  it  brings  and  no  more.  To 
discern  the  greatness  of  a  great  man,  or  the  goodness 
of  a  good  one,  is  to  possess,  in  lower  measure,  some 
portion  of  that  which  we  discern.  Sympathy  is  the 
condition  of  insight  into  character.  And  so  our  Lord 
said  once,  "  He  that  receiveth  a  prophet  in  the  name 
of  a  prophet  shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward,"  because 
he  is  a  dumb  prophet  himself,  and  has  a  lower  power 
of  the  same  gift  in  him,  which  is  eloquent  on  the 
prophet's  lips. 

In  like  manner,  to  discern  what  is  in  Christ  is  the 
test  of  whether  there  is  any  of  it  in  myself  And  thus 
it  is  no  mere  arbitrary  appointment  which  suspends 
your    salvation    and    mine    on    our   answer    to    this 


16  ''HE  IS  BESIDE  H IMS  ELF." 

question,  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ? "  The  answer 
will  be — I  was  going  to  say,  the  elixir  of  our  whole 
moral  and  spiritual  nature.  It  will  be  the  outcome 
of  our  inmost  selves.  This  ploughshare  turns  up  the 
depths  of  the  soil.  That  is  eternally  true  which  the 
grey- bearded  Simeon,  the  representative  of  the  Old, 
said  when  he  took  the  infant  in  his  arms  and  looked 
down  upon  the  unconscious,  placid,  smooth  face. 
"  This  child  is  set  for  the  rise  and  fall  of  many  in. 
Israel,  that  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  may  be 
revealed."  Your  answer  to  that  question  discloses- 
your  whole  spiritual  condition  and  capacities.  And 
so  to  judge  Christ  is  to  be  judged  by  Him ;  and  what 
we  think  Him  to  be,  that  we  make  Him  to  ourselves. 
The  question  which  tests  us  is  not  merely,  "  Whom 
do  men  say  that  I  am  ? "  It  is  easy  to  answer  that ;. 
but  this  is  the  all-important  interrogation,  "Whom 
do  ye  say  that  I  am  ? "  I  pray  that  we  may  each 
answer  as  he  to  whom  it  was  first  put  answered  it, 
"  Rabbi !  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God  1  Thou  art  the 
King  of  Israel." 

II. — Secondly,  mark  the  similarity  of  the  estimate 
which  will  be  passed  by  the  world  on  all  Christ's  true 
followers. 

The  same  elements  exist  to-day,  the  same  intoler- 
ance of  anything  higher  than  the  low  level,  the  same 
incapacity  to  comprehend  simple  devotion  and  lofty 
aims,  the  same  dislike  of  a  man  that  comes  and 
rebukes  by  his  silent  presence  the  vices  in  which  he 
takes  no  part.  And  it  is  a  great  deal  easier  to  say, 
"  Poor  fool !  enthusiastic  fanatic  ! "  than  it  is  to  lay  to 
heart  the  lesson  that  lies  in  such  a  life. 


"  HE  IS  BESIDE  HIMSELF r  17 


The  one  thing,  or  at  least  the  principal  thing,  which 
the  Christianity  of  this  generation  wants  is  a  little 
more  of  this  madness.  It  would  bo  a  great  deal  better 
for  us  Avho  call  ourselves  Christians  if  we  had  earned 
and  deserved  the  world's  sneer,  "  He  is  beside  himself." 
But  our  modern  Christianity,  like  an  epicure's  rare 
wines,  is  preferred  iced.  And  the  last  thing  that 
anj^body  would  think  of  suggesting  in  connection 
with  the  demeanour — either  the  conduct  or  the  words 
— of  the  average  Christian  irian  of  this  day  is  that  his 
religion  had  touched  his  brain  a  little. 

But,  dear  friends,  go  in  Christ's  footsteps  and 
you  will  get  the  same  missiles  flung  at  you.  If  a 
church  or  an  individual  has  earned  the  praise  of  the 
outside  ring  of  godless  people  because  its  or  his  religion 
is  "  reasonable  and  moderate ;  and  kept  in  its  proper 
place;  and  not  allowed  to  interfere  with  social  enjoy- 
ments, and  politico!  and  municipal  corruptions,"  and 
the  like,  then  there  is  much  reason  to  ask  whether 
that  church  or  man  is  Christian  after  Christ's  pattern. 
Oh,  I  pray  that  there  may  come  down  on  the  pro- 
fessing Church  of  this  generation  a  baptism  of  the 
Spirit ;  and  I  am  quite  sure  that  when  that  comes  the 
people  that  admire  moderation  and  approve  of  religion, 
but  like  it  to  bo  "  kept  in  its  own  place,"  will  be  all 
ready  to  say,  when  they  hear  the  sons  and  the 
daughters  prophesying,  and  the  old  men  seeing 
visions,  and  the  young  men  dreaming  dreams, 
and  the  fiery  tongues  uttering  their  praises  of  God, 
*'  These  men  are  full  of  new  wine  1 "  AVould  we  were 
full  of  the  new  wine  of  the  Spirit !  Do  you  think 
anybody  would  say  of  your  religion   that  you  wero 


9 


18  ''HE  IS  BESIDE  H IMS  EL  F. ' ' 

beside  yourself,  because  you  made  so  much,  of  it  ? 
They  said  it  about  your  Master,  and  if  you  were  Hke 
Him  it  would  be  said,  in  one  tone  or  another,  about 
you.  We  are  all  desperately  afraid  of  enthusiasm 
to-day.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  the  want  of  the 
Christian  Church,  and  that  we  are  not  enthusiastic 
because  we  don't  half  believe  the  things  that  we  say 
are  our  creed. 

One  more  word.  Christian  men  and  women  have 
to  make  up  their  minds  to  go  on  the  path  of  devotion, 
conformity  to  Christ's  pattern,  self-sacrificing  sur- 
render, without  minding  one  bit  what  is  said  about 
them.  Brethren,  T  do  not  think  Christian  people  are 
in  half  as  much  danger  of  dropping  the  standard  of 
the  Christian  life  by  reason  of  the  sarcasms  of  the 
world,  as  they  are  by  reason  of  the  low  tone  of  the 
Church.  Don't  you  take  your  ideas  of  what  a  reason- 
able Christian  life  is  from  the  men  round  you,  howso- 
ever they  may  profess  to  be  Christ's  followers.  And 
let  us  keep  so  near  the  Master  that  we  may  be  able  to 
say,  "  With  me  it  is  a  very  small  matter  to  be  judged 
of  you,  or  of  man's  judgment.  He  that  judge th  me 
is  the  Lord."  Never  mind,  though  they  say,  "Be- 
side himself !  "  Never  mind,  though  they  say,  "  Oh  ! 
utterly  extravagant  and  impracticable."  Better  that 
than  to  be  patted  on  the  back  by  a  world  that  likes 
nothing  so  well  as  a  Church  with  its  teeth  drawn,  and 
its  claws  cut ;  which  may  be  made  a  plaything  and 
an  ornament  by  the  world.  And  that  is  what  much 
of  our  modern  Christianity  has  come  to  be. 

III. — Lastly,  notice  the  sanity  of  the  insane. 

I   have  only   time  to  put  before  you  three   little 


"  HE  IS  BESIDE  HIMSELF:'  19 


pictures,  and  ask  you  what  you  think  of  them.  I 
daresay  the  originals  might  bo  found  in  these  pews 
without  much  search. 

Here  is  one.  Here  is  a  man  who,  hke  the  most  ot 
us,  behoves  that  there  is  a  God,  beheves  that  he  has 
somethino'  to  do  with  Him,  beheves  that  he  is  o-oino- 
to  die,  beheves  that  the  future  state  is,  in  some  way 
or  other,  and  in  some  degree,  one  of  retribution;  and 
from  ^Monday  morning  to  Saturday  night  he  ignores 
all  these  facts,  -and  never  allows  them  to  influence  one 
of  his  actions.  May  I  venture  to  speak  direct  to  this 
hypothetical  person,  whose  originals  are  dotted  about 
this  chapel  ?  It  would  be  the  very  same  to  you  if  you 
said  "  No  "  instead  of  "  Yes  "  to  all  these  affirmations. 
The  fact  that  there  is  a  God  does  not  make  a  bit  of 
dift'erence  to  what  you  do,  or  w^hat  you  think,  or  what 
you  feel.  The  fact  that  there  is  a  future  life  makes 
just  as  little  dift'erence.  You  are  going  on  a  voyage 
next  week,  and  you  never  dream  of  getting  your 
outfit.  You  believe  all  these  things,  you  are  an 
intelligent  man — you  are  very  likely,  in  a  great  many 
w\ays,  a  very  amiable  and  pleasant  one  ;  you  do  a 
great  many  things  very  well ;  you  cultivate  congenial 
virtues,  and  you  abhor  a  great  many  vices ;  but  you 
never  think  about  God ;  and  you  have  absolutely  no 
preparation  whatever  for  stepping  into  the  scene  in 
which  you  know  that  you  are  to  live. 

Well,  you  may  be  a  very  wise  man,  a  student  with 
high  aims,  cultivated  understanding,  and  all  the  rest 
of  it.  I  want  to  know  whether,  taking  into  account 
all  that  you  are,  and  your  inevitable  connection  with 
God,  and  your  certain  death  and  certain  life  in  a  state 

2* 


20  ♦'  ///;  IS  BESIDE  HIMSEIF. ' 

of  retribution — I  want  to  know  whether  we  should  call 
your  conduct  sanity  or  insanity  ?     AVhich  ? 

Take  another  picture.  Here  is  a  man  that  believes 
— really  believes — the  articles  of  the  Christian  creed, 
and  in  some  measure  has  received  them  into  his  heart 
and  life.  Ho  believes  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God,  died  for  him  upon  the  Cross,  and  yet  his  heart  has 
but  the  feeblest  tick  of  pulsating  love  in  ansAver.  He 
believes  that  pra^r  will  help  a  man  in  all  circum- 
stances, and  3^et  he  hardly  ever  prays.  He  believes- 
that  self-denial  is  the  law  of  the  Christian  life,  and 
3^et  he  lives  lor  himself.  He  believes  that  he  is  here 
as  a  pilgrim  and  as  a  sojourner,  and  yet  his  heart 
clings  to  the  world,  and  his  hand  would  fain  cling  to 
it,  like  that  of  a  drowning  man  swept  over  Niagara^ 
and  catching  at  anything  on  the  banks.  He  believes 
that  he  is  sent  into  the  world  to  be  a  lidit  of  the 
world,  and  yet  from  out  of  his  self-absorbealife  there 
has  hardl}^  ever  come  one  sparkle  of  light  into  any 
dark  heart.  And  that  is  a  picture,  not  exaggerated, 
of  the  enormous  majority  of  professing  Christians  in 
so-called  Christian  lands.  And  I  want  to  know  whether 
■  we  shall  call  that  sanity  or  insanity  ? 

The  last  of  my  little  miniatures  is  that  of  a  man 
who  keeps  in  close  touch  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  so, 
like  Him,  can  say,  "  Lo !  I  come ;  I  delight  to  do  Thy 
will,  0  Lord.  Thy  law  is  Avithin  my  heart.'"'  He 
yields  to  the  strong  motives  and  principles  that  flow 
from  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ,  and,  drawn  by  the 
mercies  of  God,  oives  himself  a  livino'  sacrifice  to  be 
used  as  God  will.  Aims  as  lofty  as  the  Throne  which 
Christ  his  Brother  fills ;    sacrifice  as  entire  as  that  on 


HE  IS  BESIDE  HIMSEIFr  21 


which  his  trembling  hope  reUes ;  reahsation  of  the 
unseen  future  as  vivid  and  clear  as  His  who  could  say 
that  He  was  in  Heaven  whilst  He  walked  the  earth ; 
subjugation  of  self  as  complete  as  that  of  the  Lord's, 
Who  pleased  not  Himself,  and  came  not  to  do  His 
own  will — these  are  some  of  the  characteristics  which 
mark  the  true  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  I  want 
to  know  whether  the  conduct  of  the  man  who  believes 
in  the  love  that  God  hath  to  him,  as  manifested  in  the 
Cross,  and  surrenders  his  whole  self  thereto,  despising 
the  world  and  livino'  for  God,  for  Christ,  for  men,  for 
eternity — whether  his  conduct  is  insanity  or  sanity  ? 
''  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  becj'innin.!-  of  wisdom." 

o  o 


III. 
Sn  attempt  to  account  for  Jeaiie. 

"But  when  the  Pharisees  hcaid  it,  they  said,  Ihis  man  doth  not 
cast  out  dtmons,  but  by  Beelzebub,  the  prince  of  the  demons." 
— Matt.  xii.  24. 

ARK'S  Gospel  tells  us  that  this  astonish- 
ing explanation  of  Christ  and  His 
work  was  due  to  the  ingenious  malice 
of  an  ecclesiastical  deputation,  sent 
down  from  Jerusalem  to  prevent  the 
simjDle  folk  in  Galilee  from  being  led  awa}^  by  this 
new  Teacher.  They  must  have  been  very  hard  put 
to  it  to  explain  undeniable  but  unwelcome  facts,  when 
they  hazarded  such  a  preposterous  theor}^ 

Formal  relio'ionists  never  know  what  to  make  of  a 

o 

man  who  is  in  manifest  touch  with  the  unseen.  These 
scribes,  like  Christ's  other  critics,  judged  themselves 
in  judging  Him,  and  bore  witness  to  the  very  truths 
that  they  were  eager  to  deny.  For  this  ridiculous 
explanation  admits  the  miraculous,  recognises  the 
impossibility  of  accounting  for  Christ  on  any  natural- 
istic hypothesis,  and  by  its  very  outrageous  absurdity 
indicates  that  the  only  reasonable  explanation  of  the 
facts  is  the  admission  of  His  Divine  messao^e  and 
authority.     So  we  may  learn,  even  from  such  words 


jy  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUNT  FOR  JESUS.  23 

as  these,  how  the  glory  of  Jesus  Christ  shines,  though 
distorted  and  bhirred,  through  the  fogs  of  prejudice 
and  mahce. 

I. — I  would  have  you  note,  then,  first,  the  unwel- 
come and  undeniable  facts  that  insist  upon  explana- 
tion. 

I  have  said  that  these  hostile  critics  attest  the  reality 
of  the  miracles.  I  know  that  it  is  not  fashionable  at 
present  to  attach  much  weight  to  the  fact  that  none 
of  all  the  enemies  that  saw  them  ever  had  a  doubt 
about  the  reality  of  Christ's  miracles.  I  know  quite 
well  that  in  an  age  that  believed  in  the  possibility  of 
the  supernatural,  as  this  age  does  not,  credence 
would  be  more  easy,  and  testimony  is  less  valuable 
than  if  it  had  come  from  a  jury  of  scientific  nineteenth 
century  sceptics.  But  I  know,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  for  long  generations  the  expectation  of  the 
miraculous  had  died  out  when  Christ  came ;  that  His 
predecessor,  John  the  Baptist,  made  no  such  claims ; 
and  that,  at  first,  at  all  events,  there  was  no  expecta- 
tion of  Jesus'  working  miracles,  to  lead  to  any  initial 
ease  of  acceptance  of  His  claims.  And  I  know  that 
there  were  never  sharper  and  more  hostile  eyes 
brought  to  bear  upon  any  man  and  his  work  than  the 
eyes  of  these  ecclesiastical  triers.  It  would  have  been 
so  easy  and  so  triumphant  a  way  of  ending  the  whole 
business  if  they  could  have  shown,  what  they  were 
anxious  to  be  able  to  show,  that  the  miracle  was  a 
trick.  And  so  I  venture  to  think  that  not  without 
some  weight  is  the  attestation  from  the  camp  of  the 
enemy,  "  This  man  casteth  out  demons." 

But  you  have  to  remember  that  amongst  the  facts 


24  AN  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUNT  FOE  JESUS. 

to  be  explained  is  not  only  this  one  of  Christ's  works 
having  passed  muster  with  His  enemies,  but  the  other 
of  His  own  reiterated  and  solemn  claim  to  have  the 
power  of  working  what  we  call  miracles. 

Now,  I  want  to  dwell  on  that,  for  one  sentence, 
because  it  is  fashionable  to  put  one's  thumb  upon  it 
nowadays.  It  is  not  unusual  to  eliminate  from  the 
Gospel  narrative  all  that  side  of  it,  and  then  to  run 
over  in  eulogiums  about  the  rest.  But  what  we 
have  to  deal  with  is  this  fact,  that  the  Man  whom 
the  world  admits  to  be  the  consummate  flower  ot 
humanity,  meek,  sane,  humble,  who  has  given  all 
generations  lessons  in  self-abnegation  and  devotion, 
claimed  to  be  able  to  raise  the  dead,  to  cast  out 
demons,  and  to  do  many  wonderful  works.  And  though 
we  should  be  misrepresenting  the  facts  if  we  said 
that  He  did  what  His  followers  have  too  often  been 
inclined  to  do,  i.e.,  rested  the  stress  of  evidence 
upon  that  side  of  His  work,  yet  it  is  an  equal  ex- 
aggeration in  the  other  direction  to  do  as  so  many 
are  inclined  to  do  to-day,  i.e.,  disparage  the  miraculous 
evidence  as  no  evidence  at  all.  "  Go  and  tell  John  the 
things  that  ye  see  and  hear."  That  is  His  own  answer 
to  the  question,  "  Art  Thou  He  that  should  come  ? " 
And  though  I  rejoice  to  believe  that  there  are  far 
loftier  and  more  blessed  answers  to  it  than  these 
outward  signs  and  tokens ;  they  are  signs  and  tokens ; 
and  they  are  part  of  the  whole  facts  that  have  to  be 
accounted  for. 

I  would  venture  to  widen  the  reference  of  my  text 
for  a  moment,  and  include,  not  only  the  actual 
miracles  of  our  Lord's  earthly  life,  but  all  the  benefi- 


AN  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUNT  FOR  JESUS.  25 

cent,  hallowing,  elevating,  ennobling,  refining  results 
which  have  followed  upon  the  proclamation  of  His 
truth  in  the  w^orld  ever  since.  I  believe,  as  I  think 
Scripture  teaches  me  to  believe,  that  in  the  world  to- 
day Christ  is  working ;  and  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  talk 
about  the  results  of  "  Christianity/'  meaning  thereby 
some  abstract  system  divorced  from  Him.  It  is  the 
working  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  world  that  has  brought 
"  nobler  manners,  purer  laws  "  ;  that  has  given  a  new 
impulse  and  elevation  to  art  and  literature ;  that  has 
lifted  the  whole  tone  of  society ;  that  has  suppressed 
ancient  evils  ;  that  has  barred  the  doors  of  old  temples 
of  devildom,  of  lust,  and  cruelty,  and  vice ;  and  that 
is  still  working  in  the  world  for  the  elevation  and  the 
deifying  of  humanity.  And  I  claim  the  whole  difter- 
ence  between  "B.C."  and '' a.d."— the  wdiole  difference 
between  Christendom  and  Heathendom — as  being  the 
measure  of  the  continuous  power  with  which  Jesus 
Christ  has  grappled  w^idi  and  throttled  the  snakes 
that  have  fastened  on  men.  That  continuous  opera- 
tion of  His  in  delivering  from  the  powers  of  evil  has, 
indeed,  not  yielded  such  results  as  might  have  been 
expected.  But  just  as  on  earth  He  was  hindered  in 
the  exercise  of  His  supernatural  power  by  men's  un- 
belief, so  that  ''  He  could  do  no  mighty  works,  save 
that  He  laid  His  hands  on  a  few  sick  folk,"  here  and 
there,  "  and  healed  them,"  so  He  has  been  thwarted 
by  His  Church,  and  hindered  in  the  world,  from  mani- 
festing the  fulness  of  His  power.  But  yet,  sorrowfully 
admittinof  that,  and  takinof  as  deserved  the  scoffs  of 
the  men  that  say,  "  Your  Christianity  does  not  seem 
to  do  so  very  much  after  all,"  I  still  venture  to  allege 


26  AN  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUNT  FOR  JESUS. 

that  its  record  is  unique ;  and  that  these  are  facts 
which  wise  men  ought  to  take  into  account,  and  have 
some  fairly  plausible  way  of  explaining. 

II. — Secondly,  note  the  preposterous  explanation. 

"  This  man  doth  not  cast  out  demons,  but  by  Beel- 
zebub, the  prince  of  the  demons."  That  is  the  last 
resort  of  prejudice  so  deep  that  it  will  father  an 
absurdity  rather  than  yield  to  evidence.  And  Christ 
has  no  difficulty  in  putting  it  aside,  as  you  may 
remember,  by  a  piece  of  common  sense :  "  If  Satan 
cast  out  Satan,  he  is  divided  against  himself,  and  his 
kingdom  cannot  stand."  There  is  an  old  play  which 
has  for  its  title  "  The  Devil  is  an  Ass."  He  is  not 
such  an  ass  as  that,  to  build  up  with  one  hand  and 
cast  down  with  the  other.  As  the  proverb  has  it, 
"  Hawks  do  not  pick  out  hawks'  eyes."  But  this 
plainly  hopeless  attempt  to  account  for  Christ  and  His 
work  may  be  turned  into  a  witness  for  both,  and  yield 
not  unimportant  lessons. 

This  explanation  witnesses  to  the  insufficiency  of 
all  explanations  which  omit  the  supernatural.  These 
men  felt  that  they  had  to  do  with  a  Man  who  was  in 
touch  with  a  whole  world  of  unseen  powers  ;  and  that 
they  had  here  to  deal  Avith  something  to  which 
ordinary  measuring  lines  Avere  palpably  inapplicable. 
And  so  they  fell  back  upon  "  by  Beelzebub  " ;  and 
they  thereby  admitted  that  humanity  Avithout  some- 
thing more  at  the  back  of  it  never  made  such  a  man 
as  that.  And  I  beg  you  to  lay  that  to  heart.  It  is 
very  easy  to  solve  an  insoluble  problem  if  you  begin 
by  taking  all  the  insoluble  elements  out  of  it.  And 
that  is  how  a  great  deal  of  modern  thinking  does  with 


AN  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUST  FOR  JESUS.  '21 


Christianit}^     Knock  out  all  the  miracles  ;  pooh-pooli 
all  Christ's  claims;   say  nothing  about  Incarnation; 
declare  Eesurrection  to  be  entirely  unhistorical,  and 
you  will  not  have  much  difficulty  in  accounting  for 
the  rest ;  and  it  will  not  be  worth  the  accounting  for. 
But  here  is  the  thing  to  be  dealt  with,  that  v:hole  life, 
the  Christ  of  the  Gospels.     And  T  venture  to  say  that 
any  explanation  professing  to  account  for  Him  which 
leaves  out  His  coming  from  an  unseen  world,  and 
possession  of  powers  above  this  world  of  sense  and 
nature,  is  ludicrously  inadequate.     Suppose  you  had 
a  chain  which  for  thousands  of  years  had  been  wind- 
ing on  to  a  drum,  and  link  after  link  had  been  rough 
iron,  and  all  at  once  there  comes  one  of  pure  gold, 
would  it  be  reasonable  to  say  that  it  had  been  dug 
from  the  same  mine,  and  forged  in  the  same  fires,  as 
its   black   and   ponderous    companions  ?     Generation 
after  generation  has  passed   across  the   earth,   each 
beofettinof  sons  after  its  own  likeness ;  and  lo  !  in  the 
midst  of  them  starts  up  one  sinless  Man.    Is  it  reason- 
able to  say  that  He  is  the  product  of  the  same  causes 
which   have   produced  all    the    millions,  and    never 
another  like  Him  ?     Surely  to  account  for  Jesus  with- 
out the  supernatural  is  hopeless. 

Further,  this  explanation  may  be  taken  as  an 
instance  showing  the  inadequacy  of  all  theories  and 
explanations  of  Christ  and  Christianity  from  an  un- 
believing point  of  view.  It  Avas  the  first  attempt  of 
unbehevers  to  explain  where  Christ's  power  came 
from.  Like  all  first  attempts,  it  was  crude,  and  it  has 
been  amended  and  refined  since.  Earlier  generations 
did  not  hesitate  to  call  the  apostles  liars,  and  Christ's 


28  A^'  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUNT  FOE  JESUS. 

contemporaries  did  not  hesitate  to  call  Him  "  tins 
deceiver."  We  have  got  beyond  that ;  but  we  still 
are  met  by  explanations  of  the  power  of  the  Gospel 
and  of  Christ,  its  subject  and  Author,  which  trace 
these  to  io^noble  elements,  and  do  not  shrink  from 
asserting  that  a  blunder  or  a  hallucination  lies  at  the 
foundation. 

Now,  I  am  not  going  to  enter  upon  these  subjects 
at  any  length,  but  I  would  just  recall  to  you  our 
Lord's  broad,  simple  principle :  "  A  corrupt  tree  cannot 
bring  forth  good  fruit :  neither  doth  a  good  tree  bring 
forth  evil  fruit."  And  I  would  apply  that  all  round. 
Christian  teachers  have  often  made  great  mistakes,  as 
it  seems  to  me,  by  tracing  the  prevalence  of  the  power 
of  some  heathen  relictions  to  their  vices  and  lies.  No 
system  has  ever  had  great  moral  power  in  this  world 
but  by  reason  of  its  excellences  and  truths.  Moham- 
medanism, for  instance,  swept  away,  and  rightly,  a 
mere  formal  superstition  which  called  itself  Chris- 
tianity because  it  grasped  the  one  truth :  "  There  is 
no  God  but  God ; "  and  it  had  faith  of  a  sort.  Monas- 
ticism  held  the  field  in  Europe,  with  all  its  faults,  for 
centuries,  because  it  enshrined  the  great  Christian 
truth  of  self-sacrifice  and  absolute  obedience.  And 
you  may  take  it  as  a  fixed  rule,  that  howsoever  some 
"mixture  of  falsehood  doth  ever  please,"  as  Bacon 
says,  in  his  cynical  way,  the  reason  for  the  power  of 
any  great  movement  has  been  the  truth  that  was  in 
it,  and  not  the  lie ;  and  the  reason  why  great  men 
have  exercised  influence  has  been  their  greatness  and 
their  goodness,  and  not  their  smallnesses  and  their 
vices. 


AN  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUNT  FOR  JESUS.  21) 

I  apply  that  all  round,  and  I  ask  you  to  apply  it  to 
Christianity  ;  and  in  the  light  of  such  plain  principles 
to  answer  the  question  :  Where  did  this  ^lan,  so  fair, 
so  radiant,  so  human  and  yet  so  superhuman,  so 
universal  and  yet  so  individual — where  did  He  come 
from  ?  and  where  did  the  Gospel,  which  flows  from 
Him,  and  which  has  done  such  things  in  the  world  as 
it  has  done — where  did  it  come  from  ?  "  Do  men 
gather  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thistles  ? "  If  it  is 
true  that  Jesus  Christ  is  either  mistakenly  represented 
in  the  Gospels,  or  that  He  made  enthusiastic  claims 
which  cannot  be  verified ;  and  it  it  is  true  that  the 
faith  in  a  Resurrection  on  which  Christianity  is  sus- 
pended, and  which  produced  such  fruits  as  we  know 
have  been  produced,  is  a  delusion  ;  then  all  I  can  say  is 
that  the  noblest  lives  that  ever  were  lived  in  the  world 
have  found  their  impulse  in  a  falsehood  or  a  dream  ; 
and  that  the  richest  clusters  that  ever  have  yielded 
Avine  for  the  cup  have  grown  upon  a  thorn.  If  like 
produces  like,  you  cannot  account  for  Christ  and 
Christianity  by  anything  short  of  the  belief  in  His 
Divine  mission.  Serpents'  eggs  do  not  hatch  out  into 
doves.  This  :\[an,  when  He  claimed  to  be  God's  Son 
and  the  world's  Saviour,  was  no  brain-sick  enthu- 
siast ;  and  the  results  show  that  the  Gospel  which  His 
followers  proclaim  rests  upon  no  lie. 

Again,  this  explanation  is  an  instance  of  the  cre- 
dulity of  unbelief  Think  of  the  mental  condition 
which  could  swallow  such  an  explanation  of  such  a 
Worker  and  such  work.  It  is  more  difficult  to  believe 
the  explanation  than  the  alternative  which  it  is 
framed  to  escape.     So  it  is  always.     The  difficulties 


30  AN  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUNT  FOR  JESUS. 

of  faith  are  small  by  comparison  with,  those  of  un- 
belief, gnats  beside  camels,  and  that  that  is  so  is  plain 
from  the  short  duration  of  each.  One  can  remember 
m  the  compass  of  one's  own  life  more  than  one 
assailant  taking  the  field  with  much  trumpeting  and 
flag-waving,  whose  attack  failed  and  is  forgotten. 

The  old  story  tells  of  a  giant  that  determined  to 
slay  his  enemy,  and  belaboured  an  empty  bed  with 
his  club  all  night,  and  found  his  foe  untouched  and 
fresh  in  the  morning.  The  Gospel  is  here ;  what  has 
become  of  its  assailants  ?  They  are  all  gone,  and  the 
limbo  into  which  the  scribes'  theory  has  passed  will 
receive  all  the  others.  So  we  may  be  quite  patient, 
and  sure  that  the  sieve  of  time,  which  is  slowly  and 
constantly  working,  will  riddle  out  all  the  rubbish, 
and  cast  it  on  the  dunghill,  where  so  many  exploded 
theories  rot  forg^otten. 

III. — And  now,  one  word  about  the  last  point ;  and 
that  is — the  true  explanation. 

Now,  at  this  stage  of  my  sermon,  I  must  not  be 
tempted  to  say  a  word  about  the  light  which  our  Lord 
throws,  in  these  declarations  in  the  context,  into  that 
dim  unseen  world.  His  words  seem  to  me  to  be  too 
solemn  and  didactic  to  be  taken  as  accommodations 
to  popular  prejudice,  and  a  great  deal  too  grave  to  be 
taken  as  mere  metaphor.  And  I,  for  my  part,  am  not 
so  sure  that,  apart  from  Him,  I  know  all  things  in 
heaven  and  earth,  as  to  venture  to  put  aside  these 
solemn  words  of  His — which  lift  a  corner  of  the  veil 
wdiich  hides  the  unseen — and  to  dismiss  them  as  un- 
Avorthy  of  notice.  Is  it  not  a  strange  thing  that  a 
world  which  is  so  ready  to  believe  in  spiritual  com- 


AN  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUNT  FOR  JESUS.  31 

munications  when  they  are  vouched  for  by  a  news- 
paper editor,  is  so  unwilUng  to  beUeve  them  when 
thoy  are  in  the  Bible  ?  And  is  it  not  a  strange 
thing  that  scientists,  who  are  always  taunting  Chris- 
tians with  the  importance  they  attach  to  man  in  the 
plan  of  the  universe,  and  ask  if  all  these  starry  orbs 
were  built  for  him,  should  be  so  incredulous  of  teach- 
ings which  fill  the  waste  places  with  loftier  beings  ? 
But  that  is  by  the  way. 

What  docs  Christ  say  in  the  context  ?  He  tells 
the  secret  of  His  power.  "  I,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  cast 
out  demons."  And  then  He  goes  on  to  speak  about  a 
contlict  that  He  wages  with  a  strong  man ;  and  about 
His  binding  the  strong  man,  and  spoiling  his  house. 
All  which,  being  turned  into  modern  language,  is  just 
this,  that  the  Lord,  by  His  incarnation,  life,  death, 
resurrection,  ascension,  and  ofovernment  at  the  riofht 
hand  of  God,  has  broken  the  powers  of  evil  in  their 
central  hold;  He  has  crushed  the  serpent's  head;  and 
though  He  may  still,  as  Milton  puts  it,  "  swinge  the 
scaly  horror  of  his  folded  tail,"  it  is  but  the  flurries  of 
the  dying  brute.  The  conquering  heel  is  firm  on  his 
head. 

And  so,  brethren,  evil  is  conquered,  and  Christ  is 
the  Conqueror  ;  and  by  His  work  in  life  and  death  He 
has  delivered  them  that  were  held  captive  of  the  devil. 
And  you  and  I  may,  if  we  will,  pass  into  "  the  liberty 
wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free." 

That  is  the  only  explanation  of  Him — in  His 
person,  in  His  character,  in  His  work,  and  in  the 
effects  of  that  work  in  the  world — that  covers  all  the 
facts,  and  will  hold  water.     All  others  fail,  and  they 


32  AN  ATTEMPT  TO  ACCOUNT  FOR  JESUS. 

mostly  fail  by  boldly  eliminating  the  very  facts  that 
need  to  be  accounted  for.  Let  us  rather  look  to  Him, 
thankful  that  our  Brother  has  conquered ;  and  let  us 
put  our  trust  in  that  Saviour. 

For,  if  His  explanation  is  true,  then  a  very  solemn 
personal  consideration  arises  for  each  of  us :  "  If  I,  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  cast  out  demons,  then  the  Kingdom 
of  God  is  come  unto  you."  It  stands  beside  us ;  it 
calls  for  our  obedience.  Jesus  Christ,  and  Jesus  Christ 
alone,  can  cast  the  evils  out  of  our  natures.  It  is  the 
Incarnate  Christ,  the  Divine  Christ,  the  crucified 
Christ,  the  ascended  Christ,  the  indwelling  Christ,  who 
will  so  fill  our  hearts  that  there  shall  be  no  aching 
voids  there  to  invite  the  return  of  the  expelled 
tyrants.  If  any  other  reformation  pass  upon  us  than 
the  thorough  one  of  receiving  Him  by  faith  into  our 
hearts,  then,  though  they  may  be  swept  and  garnished, 
they  will  be  empty ;  and  the  demons  will  come  back. 
With  Jesus  inside  —they  will  ba  outside. 


IV, 

H  (5luttonou6  flDaii  anb  a  Mincbibber. 

'•  The  Son  of  Man  is  come  eating  and  drinking-,  and  ye  say,  Behold 
a  gluttonous  man  and  a  winebibber,  a  friend  of  publicans  and 
hianers." — Luke  vii.  31. 

ESU8  CHRIST  very  seldom  took  any 
notice  of  the  mists  of  calumny  that 
drifted  round  Him.  '•'  When  He  was 
reviled  He  reviled  not  again."  If  ever 
He  did  allude  to  them  it  was  for  the- 
sake  of  the  people  who  were  harming  themselves  by 
utterincf  them.  So  here,  without  the  slic^htest  trace 
of  irritation,  He  quotes  a  malignant  charge  which  was 
evidently  in  the  popular  mouth,  and  of  which  we 
should  never  have  known  if  He  had  not  repeated  it ; 
not  with  anger,  but  simply  in  order  that  He  might 
point  to  the  capricious  inconsistency  of  finding  fault 
with  John  and  Himself  on  precisely  opposite  grounds. 
The  former  did  not  suit  because  he  came  neither 
eating  nor  drinking.  Well,  if  His  asceticism  did  not 
please,  surely  the  geniality  of  a  Christ  who  comes 
doing  both  will  be  hailed.  But  He  is  rejected  like 
the  other.  What  is  the  cause  of  this  dislike  that 
can  look  two  diti'erent  ways  at  once  ?  Not  the 
traits  that   it   alleges,    but   something   far   deeper,  a 

3 


34         A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A    WINEBIBBER. 

dislike  to  the  heavenly  wisdom  of  which  John  and 
Jesus  were  messeng^ers.  The  children  of  wisdom 
would  see  that  there  was  right  in  both  courses ;  the 
children  of  folly  would  condemn  them  both.  If  the 
message  is  imwelcome,  nothing  that  the  messenger 
can  say  or  do  will  be  right. 

The  same  kind  of  thing  is  common  to-day.  Never 
mind  consistency,  find  fault  with  Christianity  on  all 
its  sides,  and  with  all  its  preachers,  though  you  have 
to  contradict  yourself  in  doing  so.  Object  to  this 
man  that  he  is  too  learned  and  doctrinal ;  to  that  one 
that  he  is  too  illiterate,  and  gives  no  food  for  thought ; 
to  this  one  that  he  is  always  thundering  condemna- 
tion ;  to  that  one  that  he  is  always  running  over  with 
love ;  to  this  one  that  he  is  perpetually  harping  upon 
duties ;  to  that  other  one  that  he  is  up  in  the  clouds, 
and  forgets  the  tasks  of  daily  life ;  to  this  one  that  he 
is  sensational ;  to  that  one  that  he  is  dull ;  and  so  on, 
and  so  on.  The  generation  that  liked  neither  piping 
nor  mourning  has  its  representatives  still. 

But  my  business  now  is  not  with  the  inconsistency 
of  the  objectors  to  John  and  Jesus,  but  simply 
^vith  this  caricature  which  He  quotes  from  them  of 
some  of  His  characteristics.  It  is  a  distorted  refrac- 
tion of  the  beam  of  light  that  comes  from  his  face, 
through  the  muddy,  thick  medium  of  their  prejudice. 
And  if  we  can — I  was  going  to  say — pull  it  straight 
again,  we  shall  see  something  of  His  glories.  I  take 
the  two  clauses  of  my  text  separately  because  they 
are  closely  connected  with  our  design,  and  cover 
different  ground. 

I.— I   adv   you   to   note,  first,   the  enemies'  attes- 


A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A    WINEBIBBER.         35 

tation  to  Christ's  genial  participation  in  the  jo3^s  and 
necessities  of  common  life. 

"  The  Son  of  Man  came  eating  and  drinking." 
There  is  nothing  that  calumny,  if  it  be  malignant 
enough,  cannot  twist  into  an  accusation ;  and  out  of 
glorious  and  significant  facts,  full  of  lessons  and 
containinof  strong  buttresses  of  the  central  truth  of 
the  Gospel,  these  people  made  this  charge,  '•'  a  wine- 
bibber  and  gluttonous."  The  facts  were  facts;  the 
inferences  were  slanders. 

Notice  how  precious,  how  demonstrative  of  the 
very  central  truth  of  Christianity,  is  that  plain  fact, 
''  The  Son  of  Man  came  eating^  and  drinkini*-."     Then 

o  o 

that  pillar  of  all  our  hope,  the  Incarnation  of  the 
Word  of  God,  stands  irrefragable.  Sitting  at  tables, 
liunoferinGf  in  the  wilderness,  faint  by  the  well, 
be""2rin2:  a  drauo^ht  of  w\ater  from  a  woman,  and  sayincf 
on  His  Cross  "  I  thirst !  " — He  is  the  Incarnation  of 
Deity,  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  flesh.  Awe  and 
mystery  and  reverence  and  hope  and  trust  clasp  that 
fact,  in  which  prejudice  and  dislike  could  only  fmd 
occasion  for  a  calumny. 

By  eating  and  drinking  He  declared  that  "  foras- 
much as  the  children  were  partakers  of  flesh  and 
blood,  He  Himself  likewise  took  part  in  the  same." 
If  it  is  true  that  "  every  spirit  that  confesseth  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  of  God,"  then  it 
is  true  that  no  miracle  in  His  life,  nor  any  of  the  super- 
natural (^dories  which  we  are  accustomed  to  recrard  as 
evidences  of  His  majesty,  are  more  blessed,  or  more 
important  as  revelations  of  His  nature,  than  the  fact 
that  the  "  Son  of  Man  came  eating  and  drinking." 

3-^ 


36         A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A  WINEBIBBER. 

But,  still  further,  mark  how  the  truth  which  gave 
colour  to  the  slander  attests  that  Jesus  Christ  pre- 
sents to  the  world  the  highest  type  of  manhood.  The 
ideal  for  life  is  not  the  suppression,  but  the  consecra- 
tion, of  material  satisfactions  and  pleasures  of  appetite. 
And  they  are  likest  to  the  Master  who,  like  the 
Master,  come  eating  and  drinking,  and  yet  ever  hold 
all  appetites  and  desires  rigidly  under  control,  and 
subordinate  them  all  to  loftier  purposes.  John  the 
Baptist  could  be  an  ascetic;  the  Pattern  Man  must 
not  be. 

The  highest  type  of  religion,  as  it  is  shown  to  us  in 
His  perfect  life,  includes  the  acceptance  of  all  pure 
material  blessings.  Asceticism  is  second  best;  the 
religion  that  can  take  and  keep  secondary  all  outward 
and  transitory  sources  of  enjoyment,  and  can  hallow 
common  life,  is  loftier  than  all  pale  hermits  and 
emaciated  types  of  sanctity,  who  preserve  their  purity 
only  by  avoiding  things  which  it  were  nobler  to  enjoy 
and  to  subdue. 

There  is  nothing  more  striking  about  the  Old 
Testament  than  the  fact  that  its  heroes  and  saints 
were  kindly  with  their  kind,  and  took  part  in  common 
life,  accepting,  enjoying  its  blessings.  They  were  war- 
riors, statesmen, shepherds, vinedressers;  "  they  bought, 
they  sold,  they  planted,  they  builded ;  they  married 
and  were  given  in  marriage."  And  all  the  while  they 
were  the  saints  of  God.  That  was  a  nobler  type  of 
religion  than  the  one  that  came  after  it,  into  which 
Jesus  Christ  was  born.  When  devotion  cools  it 
crusts ;  and  the  crust  is  superstition  and  formalism 
and  punctilious  attention  to  the  proprieties  of  worship 


A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A   WINEBIBBER.         37 

and  casuistry,  instead  of  joyful  obedience  to  a  law, 
and  abstinence  from,  instead  of  san3tification  of, 
earthly  delights  and  supplies. 

So,  protesting  against  all  that,  and  showing  the 
more  excellent  way,  and  hallowing  the  way  because 
He  trod  it,  "  the  Son  of  Man  came  eating  and  drink- 
ing." Henceforward  every  table  may  be  a  communion 
table,  and  every  meal  may  be  a  sacrament,  eaten  in 
obedience  to  His  dying  injunction :  "  This  do  in 
remembrance  of  Me."  If  we  can  feel  that  Christ  sits 
with  us  at  the  feast,  the  feast  will  be  pure  and  good. 
If  it  is  of  such  a  sort  as  that  we  dare  not  fancy  Him 
keeping  us  company  there,  it  is  no  place  for  us. 
Wherever  Jesus  Christ  went  the  consecration  of  His 
presence  Hngers  still ;  whatever  Jesus  Christ  did  His 
servants  may  do,  if  in  the  same  spirit  and  in  the  same 
manner. 

He  hallowed  infancy  when  He  lay  an  infant  in  His 
mother's  arms  ;  He  hallowed  childhood  when,  as  a 
boy,  He  was  obedient  to  His  parents ;  He  hallowed 
youth  during  all  those  years  of  quiet  seclusion  and 
unnoticed  service  in  Xazareth  ;  He  hallowed  every 
part  of  human  life  and  experience  by  bearing  it. 
Love  is  consecrated  because  He  loved ;  tears  are 
sacred  because  He  wept ;  life  is  worship,  or  may  be 
made  so,  because  He  passed  through  it ;  and  death 
itself  is  ennobled  and  sanctified  because  He  has  died. 

Only  let  us  remember  that,  if  we  are  to  exercise 
this  blessed  hallowing  of  common  things,  of  which 
He  has  set  us  the  example,  Ave  must  use  them  as  He 
did  ;  that  is,  in  such  sort  as  that  our  communion 
with    God   shall  not    be   broken    thereby,   and   that 


38  A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A    WINEBIBBER. 

nothing  in  them  shall  darken  the  vision  and  clip  the 
Avings  of  the  aspiring  and  heavenward-gazing  spirit. 
Brethren,  the  tendency  of  this  day — and  one  rejoices,  in 
many  respects,  that  it  is  so — is  to  revolt  against  the 
extreme  of  narrowness  in  the  past  that  prescribed  and 
proscribed  a  great  many  arbitrary  and  unnecessary 
abstinences  and  practices  as  the  sign  of  a  Christian  pro- 
fession. But  whilst  I  would  yield  to  no  man  in  my  joy- 
ful application  of  the  principle  that  underlies  that  great 
fact  that  "  He  came  eatino^  and  drinkins^,"  I  do  wish 
at  this  point  to  put  in  a  caveat  which  perhaps  may 
not  be  so  welcome  to  some  of  you  as  the  line  of 
thought  that  I  have  been  pursuing.  It  is  this  :  it  is 
an  error  to  quote  Christ's  example  as  a  cover  for 
luxury  and  excess,  and  grasping  at  material  enjoy- 
ments which  are  not  innocent  in  themselves,  or  are 
mixed  up  with  much  that  is  not  innocent.  There  is 
many  a  table  spread  by  so-called  Christian  people 
where  Jesus  Christ  will  not  sit.  Many  a  man  darkens 
his  spirit,  enfeebles  his  best  part,  blinds  himself  to  the 
things  beyond,  by  reason  of  his  taking  the  liberty,  as 
he  says,  which  Christianity,  broadly  and  generously 
interpreted,  gives,  of  participating  in  all  outward  de- 
lig^hts.  I  have  said  asceticism  is  not  the  hio-hest,  but 
it  is  sometimes  necessary.  It  is  better  to  enjoy  and  to 
subdue  than  to  abstain  and  to  suppress,  but  abstinence 
and  suppression  are  often  essential  to  faithfulness  and 
noble  living.  If  I  find  that  my  enjoyment  of  innocent 
things  harms  me,  or  is  tending  to  stimulate  cravings 
beyond  my  control ;  or  if  I  find  that  abstinence  from 
innocent  things  increases  my  power  to  help  a  brother, 
and  to  fight  against  a  desolating  sin ;  or  if  things  good 


A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A    WINEBIBBER.  39 

and  innocent  in  themselves,  and  in  some  respects 
desirable  and  admirable,  like  the  theatre,  for  instance, 
are  irretrievably  intertwisted  with  evil  things,  then 
Christ's  example  is  no  plea  for  our  sharing  in  such. 
It  is  better  for  us  to  cut  off  the  offendinof  hand,  and 
so,  though  maimed,  to  enter  into  life,  than  to  keep 
two  hands  and  go  into  the  darkness  of  death.  Jesus 
Christ  "  came  eating  and  drinking,"  and  therefore  the 
highest  and  the  best  thing  is  that  Christian  people 
should  innocently,  and  wdth  due  control,  and  always 
keeping  themselves  in  touch  with  God,  enjoy  all  out- 
ward blessings,  only  subject  to  this  law,  "  whether  ye 
eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  we  do,  to  do  all  to  the 
glory  of  God,"  and  remembering  this  w^arning,  "  He 
that  soweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap 
corruption." 

II. — Xow,  second^,  notice  the  enemies'  witness  that 
Christ  is  the  Friend  of  outcasts. 

As  I  said  about  the  other  charge,  so  I  say  of  this, 
the  facts  were  facts,  the  inferences  were  errors.  The 
slanderers  saw,  as  nobody  could  help  seeing,  that  there 
Avas  a  strange  kind  of  mutual  attraction  between  Jesus 
and  publicans  and  sinners ;  that  harlots  as  w^ell  as 
little  children  seemed  to  be  drawn  to  Him ;  and  that 
He  obviously  delighted  in  the  company  of  those  at 
whose  presence,  partly  from  pride,  partly  from  national 
enmity,  partly  from  heartless  self-righteousness, 
Pharisaism  gathered  its  dainty  skirts  aroiuid  itself  in 
abhorrence,  lest  a  speck  should  fall  upon  their  purity. 
That  being  the  fact,  low  natures,  who  always  mis- 
understand lofty  ones,  because  they  can  only  believe 
in  motives  as  low  as  their  owai,  said  of  Jesus,  "  Ah  • 


40         A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A   WINEBIBBER, 

you  can  tell  what  sort  of  a  man  He  is  by  the  company 
He  keeps.  He  is  the  friend  of  publicans  because  He 
is  a  bad  Jew  ;  the  friend  of  sinners  because  He  likes 
their  wicked  ways." 

There  was  a  mysterious  sense  of  sympathy  which 
drew  Jesus  Christ  to  these  poor  people  and  drew  them 
to  Him.  It  would  have  been  a  long  while  before  any 
penitent  woman  would  have  come  in  and  Avept  over 
the  feet  of  Gamaliel  and  his  like.  It  would  have 
been  a  long  while  before  any  sinful  men  would  have 
found  their  way,  with  tears  and  yet  with  trust,  to 
these  self-righteous  h3^pocrites.  But  perfect  purity 
somehow  draws  the  impure,  though  assumed  sanctity 
always  repels  them.  And  it  is  a  sign,  not  that  a  man 
is  bad,  but  that  he  is  good  in  a  Christlike  fashion,  if 
the  outcasts  that  durst  not  come  near  your  respectable 
people  find  themselves  drawn  to  him.  Oh !  if  there 
Avere  more  of  us  liker  Jesus  Christ  in  our  purity,  there 
would  be  more  of  us  Avho  would  deserve  the  calumny 
which  is  praise — "  the  friend  of  sinners." 

It  was  an  attestation  of  His  love,  as  I  need  not 
remind  3^ou.  I  suppose  there  is  nothing  more  striking 
in  the  Avhole  wonderful  and  unique  picture  of  Jesus 
Christ  drawn  in  the  Gospels  than  the  way  in  which 
two  things,  Avhich  Ave  so  often  fancy  to  be  contra- 
dictorj^  blend  in  the  most  beautiful  harmony  in  Him 
— viz.,  infinite  tenderness  and  absolute  condemnation 
of  transgression.  To  me  the  fact  that  these  two  char- 
iicteristics  are  displayed  in  perfect  harmony,  in  the 
life  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  Avritten  in  these  Gospels,  is  no 
small  argument  for  belieA'ing  in  the  historical  veracity 
cf  the  picture  there  drawn.     For  I  do  not  know  a 


A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A    WINEBIBBER.  41 


harder  thing  for  a  dramatist,  or  a  romancer,  or  a 
legend-monger  to  eft'ect  than  to  combine,  in  one  picture 
— without     makinGf    the    combination     monstrous — 

o 

these  two  things,  perfect  purity  and  perfect  love  for 
the  impure. 

But,  dear  brethren,  remember  that  if,  we  are  to 
believe  Jesus  Christ's  own  words,  that  strange  love  of 
His,  which  embraced  in  its  pure  clasp  the  outcasts,  was 
not  only  the  love  of  a  perfect  Man,  but.it  was  the  love 
of  God  Himself  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen 
the  Father."  When  we  see  Jesus  Christ  looking 
across  the  valley  to  the  city,  with  tears  in  His  sad  and 
gentle  eyes ;  and  when  we  see  harlots  and  sinners 
coming  near  Him  with  new  hope,  and  a  strange  con- 
sciousness of  a  fascination  which  He  wields  ;  and  when 
we  see  Him  opening  His  heart  to  all  the  impure,  just 
as  He  laid  His  clean  hand  on  the  leper's  ulcers,  let  us 
rejoice  to  beheve  that  the  Friend  of  publicans  and 
sinners  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh. 

Then,  still  further,  this  wondrous,  seeking  love  of 
His  for  all  the  outcasts  is  the  sign  to  us  of  His 
boundless  hopefulness  concerning  the  most  degraded. 

The  world  talks  of  races  too  low  to  be  elevated,  of 
men  too  hardened  to  be  softened.  Jesus  Christ  walks 
through  the  hospitals  of  this  world,  and  sees  nowhere 
incurables.  His  hope  is  boundless,  because,  first  of 
all.  He  sees  the  dormant  possibilities  that  slumber  in 
the  most  degraded ;  and  because,  still  more,  He 
knows  that  He  bears  in  Himself  a  power  that  will 
cleanse  the  foulest  and  raise  the  most  fallen.  There 
are  some  metals  that  resist  all  attempts  to  volatiUze 
them  by  the  highest  temperature  producible  in  our 


42  A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A    WINEBIBBER. 

furnaces.  Carry  them  up  into  tlie  sun  and  tliey  will 
all  pass  into  vapour.  Xo  man  or  woman  that  ever 
lived,  or  will  live,  is  so  absolutely  besotted,  and  held 
by  the  chains  of  his  or  her  sins,  as  that  Jesus  cannot 
set  them  free.  His  hope  for  outcasts  is  boundless, 
because  He  knows  that  every  sin  can  be  cleansed  by 
His  precious  blood. 

Therefore,  Christianity  should  know  nothing  of 
desperate  cases.  There  should  be  no  incurables  in  our 
estimate  of  the  world  ;  but  hope  as  boundless  as  the 
^klaster's,  Who  drew  to  Himself  the  publicans  and 
sinners,  and  made  them  saints. 

I  need  not  remind  you  how  this  is  the  unique  glory 
of  Christ  and  of  Christianity.  Men  have  been  asking 
the  question  whether  Christianity  is  pla3^ed  out  or 
not.  AVhat  has  been  the  motive  power  of  all  the 
great  movements  for  the  elevation  of  mankind  that 
have  occurred  for  the  last  nineteen  centuries  ?  What 
was  it  that  struck  the  fetters  oft"  the  slaves  ?  What  is 
it  that  sends  men  out  amongst  savage  tribes  ?  Has 
there  ever  been  found  a  race  of  men  so  degraded  that 
the  message  of  Christ's  love  could  not  find  its  way 
into  their  hearts  ?  Did  not  Mr.  Darwin  subscribe  to 
the  Pataofonian  Mission — a  mission  which  takes  in 
hand  perhaps  the  lowest  types  of  humanity  in  the 
world — and  did  he  not  do  it  because  his  own  eyes 
had  taught  him  that  in  this  strange  superstition  that 
we  call  the  Gospel  there  is  a  power  that,  somehow  or 
other,  nothing  else  can  wield  ?  Brethren,  if  the 
Church  begins  to  lose  its  care  for,  and  its  powder  of 
drawing,  outcasts  and  sinners,  it  has  begun  to  lose  its 
hold  on  Christ.     The  sooner  such  a  Church  dies  the 


A  GLUTTONOUS  MAN  AND  A    WISEBIBBER.  43 

better,  and  there  will  be  few  mourners  at  its 
funeral. 

The  Friend  of  publicans  and  sinners  has  set  the 
example  to  all  of  us  His  followers.  God  be  thanked 
that  there  are  signs  to-da}^  that  Christian  people  are 
more  and  more  w^aking  up  to  the  consciousness  of 
their  oblisfations  in  reo^ard  to  the  outcasts  in  their 
own  and  other  lands.  Let  them  go  to  them,  as  Jesus 
Christ  did,  with  no  false  flatteries,  but  with  plain 
rebukes  of  sin,  and  yet  with  manifest  outgoing  of  the 
heart,  and  they  will  find  that  the  same  thing  which 
drew  these  poor  creatures  to  the  Master  will  draw 
others  to  the  feeblest,  faintest  reflection  of  Him  in  His 
servants. 

And,  last  of  all,  dear  friends,  let  each  think  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  my  Friend,  and  your  Friend,  because 
He  is  the  Friend  of  sinners,  and  we  are  sinners.  If 
He  did  not  love  sinners  there  would  be  nobody  for 
Him  to  love.  The  universality  of  sin,  however  various 
in  its  degrees  and  manifestations,  make  more  w^onder- 
ful  the  universal  sweep  of  His  friendship. 

How  do  I  know  He  is  my  Friend  ?  "  Greater  love 
hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life 
for  his  friends."  And  when  we  Avere  yet  enemies  He 
was  our  Friend,  and  died  for  us.  How  shall  we 
requite  that  love  ?  "  Ye  are  My  friends  if  ye  do  what- 
soever I  command  you  to  do."  All  over  the  Eastern 
world  to  this  day  the  name  by  which  the  Patriarch 
Abraham  is  known  is  the  ''  Friend "  or  the  "  Com- 
panion." Well  for  us,  for  time  and  for  eternit}-,  if, 
knowing  that  Jesus  is  our  friend,  we  yield  ourselves, 
in  faith  and  love,  to  become  His  friends. 


Y. 

3cBi\e  Cbarge&  vvitb  Blaapbem^. 

•■Thex  the  high,  priest  rent  his  clobhe?,  saying-,  He  hath  spoken 
blasphemy  ;  what  further  need  have  we  of  witnesses  ?  " — 
Matt.  xxvi.  65. 

PESUS  was  tried  and  condemned  by  two 
tribunals,  the  Jewish  ecclesiastical  and 
the  Roman  civil.  In  each  case  the 
charge  corresponded  to  the  court 
The  Sanhedrim  took  no  cognisance  of, 
and  had  no  concern  with,  rebellion  against  Csesar ; 
though  for  the  time  they  pretended  loyalty.  Pilate 
had  still  less  concern  about  Jewish  superstitions. 
And  so  the  investigation  in  each  case  turned  on  a 
different  question.  In  the  one  it  was,  "  Art  Thou  the 
Son  of  God  ? "  in  the  other,  "  Art  Thou  the  King  of 
Israel  ?  "  The  ansv/er  to  both  was  a  simj)le  "  Yes  !  " 
but  with  very  significant  differences.  Pilate  received 
an  explanation  ;  the  Sanhedrim  none.  The  Roman 
governor  was  taught  that  Christ's  title  of  King  belonged 
to  another  region  altogether  than  that  of  Emperor, 
and  did  not  in  the  slitrhtest  deofree  infring^e  uroon  the 
dominion  that  he  represented.  But  "  Son  of  God " 
was    capable   of  no  explanation  that    could  make  it 


JESUS  CHARGED  WITH  BLASPHEMY.  45 

any   less  offensive;   and  the  only  thing  to  bo  done 
was  to  accept  it  or  to  condemn  Him. 

So  this  saying  of  the  high  priest  differs  from  other 
words  of  our  Lord's  antagonists,  which  we  have  been 
considering  in  recent  sermons,  in  that  it  is  no  distor- 
tion of  our  Lord's  characteristics  or  meaning.  It 
correctly  understands,  but  it  fatally  rejects,  His 
claims ;  and  does  not  hesitate  to  take  the  further 
step  of,  on  the  ground  of  these,  branding  Him  as  a 
blasphemer. 

We  may  turn  the  high  priest's  question  in  another 
direction  : "  What  further  need  have  we  of  witnesses  ? " 
These  horror-stricken  judges,  rending  their  garments 
in  simulated  grief  and  zeal,  and  that  silent  Prisoner, 
knowing  that  His  life  was  the  forfeit  of  His  claims, 
yet  saying  no  word  of  softening  or  explanation  of 
them,  may  teach  us  much.  They  are  witnesses  to 
some  of  the  central  facts  of  the  revelation  of  God  in 
Christ.     Let  us  turn  to  these  for  a  few  moments. 

L— First,  then,  they  witness  to  Christ's  claims. 

The  question  that  was  proposed  to  Jesus,  "Art 
Thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God  ? "  was 
suggested  by  the  facts  of  His  ministry,  and  not  by 
anything  that  had  come  out  in  the  course  of  this 
investigation.  It  was  the  summing  up  of  the  impres- 
sion made  on  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  of  Judaism 
by  His  whole  attitude  and  demeanour.  And  if  we 
look  back  to  His  life  we  shall  see  that  there  were 
instances,  long  before  this,  on  which,  on  the  same 
ground,  the  same  charge  was  flung  at  Him.  For 
example,  when  He  would  heal  the  paralytic,  and, 
before   He    dealt   with   bodily   disease,    attended   to 


4Q  JESUS  CHARGED   WITH  BLASPHEMY. 

spiritual  weakness,  and  said,  "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven 
thee,"  ere  He  said,  "  Take  up  thy  bed  and  walk,"  there 
was  a  group  of  keen-eyed  hunters  after  heresy  sitting 
eagerly  on  the  watch,  who  snatched  at  the  words  in  a 
moment,  and  said,  "  Who  is  this  that  forgiveth  sins  ? 
No  man  forgiveth  sins,  but  God  only  !  This  man 
speaketh  blasphemies."  And  they  were  right.  He 
did  claim  a  Divine  prerogative ;  and  either  the  claim 
must  be  admitted  or  the  charge  of  blasphemy  urged. 

Again,  when  Ho  broke  rabbinical  Sabbath  law  by  a 
cure,  and  they  said,  "This  man  has  broken  the 
Sabbath  day,"  His  vindication  was  worse  than  His 
offence,  for  He  answered,  "My  Father  worketh 
hitherto,  and  I  work."  And  then  they  sought  the 
more  to  kill  Him,  because  He  not  only  brake  the 
Sabbath,  but  also  called  God  His  own  Father,  makino- 
Himself  equal  with  God."  And,  again,  when  He 
declared  that  the  safety  of  His  sheep  in  His  hands 
was  identical  Avith  their  safety  in  His  Father's  hands, 
and  vindicated  the  audacious  paralleHsm  by  the  tre- 
mendous assertion,  "  I  and  My  Father  are  One,"  the 
charge  of  blasphemy  rang  out;  and  was  inevitable, 
unless  the  claim  was  true. 

These  outstanding  instances  are  but,  as  it  were, 
summits  that  rise  above  the  general  level.  But  the 
general  level  is  that  of  One  who  takes  an  altogether 
unique  position.  No  one  else,  professing  to  lead  men 
in  paths  of  righteousness,  has  so  constantly  put  the 
stress  of  His  teaching,  not  upon  morality,  nor  religion, 
nor  obedience  to  God,  but  upon  this,  "Believe  in 
Me";  or  ever  pushed  forward  His  own  personality  into 
the  foreground,  and   made  the  whole  nobleness  and 


JESUS  CHARGED   WITH  BLASPHEMY.  47 

blessedness  and  security  and  devoutncss  of  a  life  to 
hinge  upon  that  one  thing,  its  personal  relation  to 
Him. 

People  talk  about  the  sweet  and  gentle  wisdom  that 
flowed  from  Christ's  lips,  and  so  on ;  about  the  lofty 
morality,  about  the  beauty  of  pity  and  tenderness, 
and  all  the  other  commonplaces  so  familiar  to  us,  and 
>ve  gladly  admit  them  all.  But  I  venture  to  go  a  step 
further  than  all  these,  and  to  say  that  the  outstanding 
differentia,  the  characteristic  which  marks  off  Christ's 
teaching  as  something  new,  peculiar,  and  altogether 
per  se,  is  not  its  morality,  not  its  philanthropy,  not  its 
meek  wisdom,  not  its  sweet  reasonableness,  but  its 
tremendous  assertions  of  the  importance  of  Himself. 

And  if  I  ask  you  to  look  to  the  ground  upon  which 
such  an  assertion  ma}^  be  vindicated,  I  would  point 
you  to  such  things  as  this,  that  this  Man  took  up  a 
position  of  equality  with,  and  of  superiority  to,  the 
legislation  which  He  and  the  people  to  whom  He  was 
speaking  regarded  as  being  Divinely  sent,  and  said, 
"  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said  to  them  of  old 
time "  so  and  so ;  "  but  I  say  unto  you  " :  that  this 
man  declared  that  to  build  upon  His  words  was  to 
build  upon  a  rock  ;  that  this  Man  declared  that  He — 
He — was  the  legitimate  Object  of  absolute  trust,  of 
utter  submission  and  obedience ;  that  He  claimed 
from  His  followers  affiance,  love,  reverence  Avhich 
cannot  be  distinguished  from  worship,  and  that  He 
did  not  therein  conceive  that  He  was  intercepting 
anything  that  belonged  to  the  Father.  This  Man 
professed  to  be  able  to  satisfy  the  desires  of  every 
human    heart    when   He   said,   "If  any   man   thirst 


48  JESUS  CHARGED  WITH  BLASPHEMY. 

let  him  come  to  Me  and  drink."  This  Man  claimed 
to  he  able  to  breathe  the  sanctity  of  repose  in  the 
blessedness  of  obedience  over  all  the  weary  and  the 
heavy  laden ;  and  assured  them  that  He  Himself, 
through  all  the  ages,  and  in  all  lands  and  for  all 
troubles,  would  give  them  rest.  This  Man  declared 
that  He  who  stood  there,  in  the  quiet  homes  of 
Galilee,  and  went  about  its  acres  with  those  blessed 
leet  for  our  advantage,  was  to  be  the  Judge  of  the 
whole  world.  This  Man  said  that  His  name  was  "Son 
of  God  " ;  and  this  Man  declared,  "  He  that  hath  seen 
Me  hath  seen  the  Father." 

And  then  people  say  to  us,  "  Oh !  your  Gospel 
narratives,  even  if  they  be  the  work  of  men  in  good 
faith,  telling  what  they  suppose  He  said,  mistook  the 
Teacher ;  and  if  we  could  strip  away  the  accretion  of 
mistaken  reverence,  and  come  to  the  historical  person, 
Ave  should  find  no  claims  like  these." 

Well,  this  is  not  the  time  to  enter  into  the  large 
questions  which  that  contention  involves,  but  I  point 
you  to  the  incident  which  makes  my  text,  and  I  say, 
"  What  need  we  any  further  witnesses  ? "  Nobody 
denies  that  Jesus  Christ  was  crucified  as  the  result  of 
a  combination  of  Sanhedrim  and  Pilate.  AVhat  set 
the  Jewish  rulers  against  Him  with  such  virulent  and 
murderous  determination  ?  Is  there  anything  in  the 
life  of  Jesus  Christ,  if  it  is  watered  down  as  the 
people  who  want  to  knock  out  all  the  supernatural 
desire  to  water  it  down — is  there  anything  in  the  life 
that  will  account  for  the  inveterate  acrimony  and 
hostility  which  pursued  Him  to  the  death  ?  The 
fact  remains  that,  whether  evangelists  and  apostles 


JESUS  CHARGED   WITH  BLASPHEMY.  49 

misconceived  His  teaching  when  they  gave  such  pro- 
minence to  His  personality  and  His  loft}'-  claims,  His 
enemies  were  under  the  same  delusion,  if  it  were  a 
delusion ;  and  the  reason  why  the  whole  orthodox 
religionism  of  Judaism  rejoiced  when  He  was  nailed 
to  the  Cross  was  summed  up  in  the  taunt  which  they 
flunof  at  Him  as  He  huno^  there,  "  If  He  be  the  Son  of 
God,  let  Him  come  down,  and  we  will  believe  Him." 

So,  brethren,  I  put  into  the  witness-box  Annas  and 
Caiaphas  and  all  their  satellites,  and  I  say,  "  AYhat  need 
we  any  further  witnesses  ? "  He  died  because  He 
declared  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God. 

And  I  beseech  you  ask  yourselves  whether  we  are 
not  being  put  off  with  a  maimed  version  of  His 
teaching,  if  there  is  struck  out  of  it  this  its  central 
characteristic,  that  He, "the  sage  and  humble,"  declared 
that  He  was  "  likewise  One  with  the  Creator." 

II. — Secondly,  note  how  we  have  here  the  witness 
that  Jesus  Christ  assented  always  to  the  loftiest 
meaniuG^  that  men  attached  to  His  claims. 

I  have  already  pointed  out  the  remarkable  differ- 
ence between  the  explanations  which  He  conde- 
scended to  give  to  the  Eoman  governor  as  to  the 
perfectly  innocent  meaning  of  His  claim  to  be  the 
King  of  Israel,  and  His  silence  before  the  Sanhedrim. 
That  silence  is  only  explicable  because  they  rightly 
understood  the  meaning  of  the  claim  which  they  con- 
temptuously and  perversely  rejected.  Jesus  Christ 
knew  that  His  death  was  the  forfeit,  as  I  have  said, 
and  yet  He  locked  His  lips  and  said  not  a  word. 

In  like  manner  when,  on  the  other  occasion  to 
which  I  have  already  referred,  the  Pharisees  stumbled 

4 


50  JESUS  CHARGED   JFITH  BLASPHEMY. 

at   His  claims  to  forgive   sins,  He  said   nothing   to 
soften  down  that  claim.     If  He  had  meant  then  only 
what  some  people  would  desire  to  make  Him  mean 
when  He  said, "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee  " — viz.,  that 
He  was  simply  acting  as   a  minister  of  the   Divine 
forgiveness,  and  assuring  a  poor  sinner  that  God  had 
pardoned  him — why,  in  common  honesty,  in  discharge 
of  His  plain  obligations  of  a  teacher,  did  He  not  say 
so — not  for  His  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  pre- 
ventino'  such  a  tremendous  misunderstandinof  of  His 
meaning  ?     But  He  let  them  go  away  with  the  con- 
viction that  He  intended  to  assert  the  Divme  pre- 
rogative, and  vindicated  the  assertion  by  doing  Avhat 
only  the  Divine  power  could  do  :  "  That  ye  may  know 
that  the  Son  of  Man  hath  powder  on  earth  to  forgive 
sins,  He  saith  unto  the  sick  of  the  palsy,  Take  up  thy 
bed  and  walk."     There  was  no  need  for  Him  to  have 
wrought  a  miracle  to  establish  His  right  to  tell  a  poor 
soul  that  God  forgave  sin.     And   the  fact  that  the 
miracle  was  supposed  to  be  the  demonstration  and  the 
vindication  of  His  right  to  declare  forgiveness  shows 
that  He  was  exercising  that  prerogative  which  belongs, 
as  they  rightly  said,  to  God  only. 

And  in  precisely  the  same  manner,  the  commonest 
obligations  of  honesty,  the  plain  duty  of  a  misunder- 
stood Teacher,  to  say  nothing  of  the  duty  of  self- 
preservation,  ought  to  have  opened  His  lips  in  the 
presence  of  the  Jewish  authorities,  if  they  understood 
wrongly  and  set  too  high  their  estimate  of  the  mean- 
ino'  of  His  claims.  His  silence  establishes  the  fact 
that  they  understood  them  aright. 

And  so,  all  through  His  life,  we  have  this  peculiarity 


JESUS  CHARGED  WITH  BLASPHEMY,  51 

that  He  never  puts  aside  as  too  lofty  for  truth  men's 
highest  interpretations  of  His  claims,  nor  as  too  lowly 
for  their  mutual  relation  the  lowest  reverence  which 
bowed  before  Him.  Peter,  in  the  house  of  Cornelius, 
said,  "  Stand  up,  for  I  myself  also  am  a  man."  Paul 
and  Barnabas,  when  the  priests  brought  out  the  oxen 
and  garlands  to  the  gates  of  Lystra,  could  say,  "  We 
also  are  men  of  like  passions  with  yourselves."  But 
this  meek  Jesus  let  men  fall  at  His  feet ;  and  women 
wash  them  with  their  tears  and  wipe  them  with  the 
hairs  of  their  head ;  and  souls  stretch  out  maimed 
hands  of  faith,  and  grasp  Him  as  their  only  hope. 
AVhen  His  apostle  said,  "Thou  art  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  the  living  God,"  His  answer  was,  "  Blessed  art 
thou,  .  .  .  for  flesh  and  blood  have  not  revealed 
it  unto  thee,"  and  when  another  exclaimed,  "  My 
Lord  and  my  God,"  this  Pattern  of  all  meekness 
accepted  and  endorsed  the  title,  and  pronounced  a 
benediction  on  all  who,  not  havinof  seen  Him,  should 
hereafter  attain  a  like  faith. 

Now  I  want  to  kno^v  whether  that  characteristic, 
which  runs  through  all  His  life,  and  is  inseparable 
from  it,  can  be  vindicated  on  any  ground  except  the 
ground  that  He  was  God  manifest  in  the  flesh. 
Either  Jesus  Christ  had  a  greedy  appetite  for  excessive 
adoration,  was  a  victim  to  diseased  vanity  and  ever- 
present  self-regard — the  most  damning  charge  that 
you  can  bring  against  a  religious  teacher — or  He 
accepted  love  and  reverence  and  trust,  because  the 
love  and  the  reverence  and  the  trust  knit  souls  to 
the  Incarnate  God  their  Saviour. 

in. — And    so,   lastly,   we   have    here    witness    to 

4* 


o2  JESUS  CHARGED   WITH  BLASPHEMY, 

the    only    alternative    to    the    acceptance    of     His 
claims. 

He  hath  spoken  "blasphemy."  Not  that  He  had 
derogated  from  the  dignity  of  Divinity,  but  that  He 
had  presumed  to  participate  in  it.  And  it  seems  to 
me,  with  all  deference,  that  this  rough  alternative  is 
the  only  legitimate  one.  If  Jesus  Christ  did  make 
such  claims,  and  His  relation  to  the  Jewish  hierarchy 
and  His  death  are,  as  I  have  shown  you,  apart 
..even  from  the  testimony  of  the  evangelists,  strong 
.confirmation  of  the  fact  that  He  did  —  if  Jesus 
•Christ  did  make  such  claims,  and  they  were  not  valid, 
one  of  two  things  follows.  Either  He  believed  them, 
and  then,  what  about  His  sanity?  or  He  did  not  be- 
lieve them,  and  then,  what  about  His  honesty  ?  In 
either  case,  what  about  His  claims  to  be  a  Teacher  of 
reliofion  ?  What  about  His  claims  to  be  the  Pattern 
of  humanity  ?  That  part  of  His  teaching  and  charac- 
ter is  either  the  manifestation  of  His  glory  or  it  is  like 
some  of  those  fatal  black  seams  that  run  down  and 
penetrate  into  the  substance  of  a  fair  white  marble 
statue,  marring  all  the  rest  of  its  pale  and  celestial 
beauty.  Brethren,  it  seems  to  me  that,  when  all  is 
said  and  done,  we  come  to  one  of  three  things  about 
Jesus  Christ.  Either  "  He  blasphemeth  "  if  He  said 
these  things,  and  they  were  not  true,  or  "  He  is  beside 
Himself  "  if  He  said  these  things  and  believed  them,  or 

Thou  art  the  King  of  Glory,  0  Christ ; 
Thou  art  the  everlasting  Son  of  the  Father. 

Now  I  know  that  there  are  many  men  who,  I 
ventu  re  to  say,  are  far  better  than  their  creed,  and 
who,  believing  it  impossible  to  accept,  in  their  plain 


JESUS  CHARGED  WITH  BLASPHEMY.  53 

meaning,  the  plain  claims  of  Jesus  Christ  to  Divinity, 
do  yet  cleave  to  Him  with  a  love  and  a  reverence  and 
an  obedience  which  more  orthodox  men  might  well 
copy.  And  far  be  it  from  me  to  say  one  word  which 
might  seem  even  to  quench  the  faintest  beam  of  light 
that,  shining  from  His  perfect  character,  draws  any 
heart,  however  imperfectly,  to  Himself.  Only,  if  I 
speak  to  any  such  at  this  time,  I  beseech  them  to 
follow  the  light  which  draws  them,  and  to  see  whether 
their  reverence  for  that  fair  character  should  not  lead 
them  to  accept  implicitly  the  claims  that  came  from 
His  own  lips.  I  humbly  venture  to  say  that  if  we 
know  anything  at  all  about  Jesus  Christ,  we  know 
that  He  lived  declaring  Himself  to  be  the  everlasting 
Son  of  the  Father,  and  that  He  died  because  He  did 
so  declare  Himself.  And  I  beseech  you  to  ponder 
the  question  whether  reverence  for  Him  and  admira- 
tion of  His  character  can  be  logically  and  reasonably 
retained,  side  by  side  with  the  repudiation  of  that 
w^hich  is  the  most  distinctive  part  of  His  message  to 
men. 

Oh,  Ijrethren,  if  it  is  true  that  God  has  come  in  the 
flesh,  and  that  that  sweet,  gracious,  infinitely  beautiful 
life  is  really  the  revelation  of  the  heart  of  God,  then 
what  a  beam  of  sunshine  falls  upon  all  the  darkness  of 
this  world  !  Then  God  is  love  ;  then  that  love  holds 
us  all ;  does  not  shrink  from  dying  for  us,  and  lives 
for  ever  to  bless  us.  If  these  claims  are  true,  what 
should  our  attitude  be  but  that  of  infinite  trust,  love, 
submission,  obedience,  and  the  shaping  of  our  lives 
after  the  pattern  of  His  life  ? 

These   rejectors,   when  they   said,   "He    speaketh 


5i  JESUS  CHARGED   WITH  BLASPHEMY. 

blasphemies,"  were  sealing  their  own  doom,  and  the 
ruined  temple  and  nineteen  centuries  of  wandering 
misery  show  what  comes  to  men  who  hear  Christ 
declaring  that  He  is  the  Son  of  the  living  God  and 
the  Judge  of  the  world,  and  who  find  nothing  in  the 
words  but  blasphemy. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  will  answer  His  question, 
"AVhom  say  ye  that  I  am?"  as  the  apostle  answered 
it,  we  shall,  like  the  apostle,  receive  a  benediction 
from  His  lips,  and  be  set  on  that  faith  as  on  a  rock 
against  which  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail. 


J 


v1 


^\  J'^ 


1 

^  VI. 

^be  Scrvant^Xorb  an^  Ibis  Servants. 

**  Even  as  the  Son  of  Man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to 
minister." — Matt.  xx.  2.^. 

T  seems  at  first  sight  strangely  unsym- 
pathetic and  irrelevant  that  the  ambi- 
tious request  of  James  and  John  and 
their  foolish  mother,  that  they  should 
sit  at  Christ's  right  hand  and  His  left 
in  His  kingdom,  should  have  been  occasioned  by,  and 
have  followed  immediately  upon,  our  Lord's  solemn  and 
pathetic  announcement  of  His  sufferings.  But  the 
connection  is  not  difficult  to  trace.  The  disciples 
believed  that,  in  some  inexplicable  way,  the  sufferings 
which  our  Lord  was  shadowing  forth  were  to  be  the 
immediate  precursors  of  His  assuming  His  regal 
dignity.  And  so  they  took  time  by  the  forelock,  as 
they  thought,  and  made  haste  to  ensure  their  places 
in  the  kingdom,  which  they  believed  was  now  ready 
to  burst  upon  them.  Other  occasions  in  the  Gospels 
in  which  we  find  similar  quarrelling  among  the  dis- 
ciples as  to  pre-eminence  are  similarly  associated  with 
references  made  by  our  Lord  to  His  approaching 
Crucitixion.     On  a  former  occasion  He  cured  these 


fiG  TEE  SERVANT-LORD  AND  HIS  SERVANTS. 

misplaced  ambitions  by  setting  a  child  in  the  midst 
of  them.  On  this  He  cures  them  by  a  still  more 
pathetic  and  wonderful  example,  His  own  ;  and  He 
says,  "  I,  in  My  lowliness  and  service,  am  to  be  your 
Pattern.  In  Me  see  the  basis  of  all  true  greatness, 
and  the  right  use  of  all  influence  and  authority.  The 
Son  of  Man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to 
minister." 

I. — So,  then,  let  us  look  first  at  the  perfect  life  of 
service  of  the  Servant-Lord. 

Now,  in  order  to  appreciate  the  significance  of 
that  life  of  service,  we  must  take  into  account 
the  introductory  words,  "The  Son  of  Man  came." 
They  declare  His  pre-existence,  His  voluntary  en- 
trance into  the  conditions  of  humanity,  and  His 
denuding  Himself  of  "  the  glory  which  He  had  with 
the  Father  before  the  world  ^vas."  We  shall  never 
understand  the  Servant-Christ  until  we  understand 
that  he  is  the  Eternal  Son  of  the  Father.  His 
service  began  long  before  any  of  His  acts  of 
sympathetic  and  self- forgetting  low^liness  rendered 
help  to  the  miserable  here  upon  earth.  His  service 
beo'an  when  He  laid  aside,  not  the  crarments  of  earth, 
but  the  vesture  of  the  heavens,  and  girded  Himself, 
not  with  the  cincture  woven  in  man's  looms,  but  with 
the  flesh  of  our  humanity,  "  and  being  found  in  fashion 
as  a  man,"  bowed  Himself  to  enter  into  the  conditions 
of  earth.  This  was  the  first,  the  chiefest  of  all  His 
acts  of  service,  and  the  sanctity  and  awfulness  of  it 
run  through  the  list  of  all  His  deeds  and  make  them 
unspeakably  great.  It  was  much  that  His  hands 
should  heal,  that  His  lips  should  comfort,  that  His 


THE  SERVANT-LORD  AND  HIS  SERVANTS.  57 

heart  should  bleed  with  sympathy  for  sorrow.  But, 
oh !  it  was  more  that  He  Jtad  hands  to  touch,  lips  to 
speak  to  human  hearts,  and  the  heart  of  a  man  and  a 
brother  to  feel  vAtJi  as  well  as  for  us.  "  The  Son  of 
Man  came."  There  is  the  transcendent  example  of 
the  true  use  of  greatness ;  there  is  the  conspicuous 
instance  of  the  true  basis  of  authority  and  rule.  For 
it  was  because  He  was  found  in  fashion  as  a  Man  that 
He  has  won  a  name  that  is  above  every  name,  and 
that  there  have  accrued  to  Him  the  "  many  crowns  " 
which  He  wears  at  the  Father's  side. 

But  then,  passing  beyond  this,  we  may  dwell,  though 
all  imperfectly,  upon  the  features,  familiar  as  they  are, 
of  that  wonderful  life  of  self-oblivious  and  self-sacrific- 
ing ministration  to  others.  Think  of  the  purity  of  the 
source  from  all  which  these  wonders  and  blessednesses 
of  service  for  man  flowed.  The  life  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
self-foro'ettinof  love  made  visible.  Scientists  tell  us 
that,  by  the  arrangement  of  particles  of  sand  upon 
plates  of  glass,  there  can  be  made,  as  it  were,  per- 
ceptible to  the  eye,  the  sweetness  of  musical  sounds ; 
and  each  note  when  struck  will  fling  the  particles  into 
varying  forms  of  beauty.  The  life  of  Jesus  Christ 
presents  in  shapes  of  loveliness  and  symmetry  the  else 
invisible  music  of  a  Divine  love.  He  lets  us  see  the 
rhythm  of  the  Father's  heart.  The  source  from  which 
His  ministrations  have  flowed  is  the  pure  source  of  a 
perfect  love.  Ancient  legends  consolidated  the  sun- 
beams into  the  bright  figure  of  the  far- darting  god  of 
light.  And  so  the  sunbeams  of  the  Divine  love  have, 
as  it  were,  drawn  themselves  together  and  shaped 
themselves    into    the    human   form   of   the   Son    of 


53  THE  SERVANT-LORD  AND  HIS  SERVANTS. 

Man  who  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to 
minister. 

No  taint  of  b^^e-ends  was  in  that  service ;  no  side- 
long glances  at  possible  advantages  of  influence,  or 
reputation,  or  the  like,  which  so  often  deform  men's 
philanthropies  and  services  to  one  another.  No  more 
than  the  sunbeam  shines  for  the  sake  of  collateral 
issues  which  may  benefit  itself,  did  Jesus  Christ  seek 
His  own  advantag^e  in  ministerino-  to  men.  There  was 
no  speck  of  black  in  that  lustrous  white  robe,  but  all 
was  perfectly  unselfish  love.  Like  the  clear  sea,  weed- 
less  and  stainless,  that  laves  the  marble  steps  of  the 
palaces  of  Venice,  the  deep  ocean  of  Christ's  service  to 
man  was  pure  to  the  depths  throughout. 

That  perfect  ministry  of  the  Servant -Lord  was 
rendered  with  strange  spontaneity  and  cheerfulness. 
One  of  the  evangelists  says,  in  a  very  striking  and 
beautiful  phrase,  that  '•  He  healed  them  that  had  need 
of  healing,"  as  if  the  presence  of  the  necessity  evoked 
the  supply  by  the  instinctive  action  of  a  perfect  love. 
There  was  never  in  Him  one  trace  of  reluctance  to 
have  leisure  broken  in  upon,  repose  disturbed,  or  even 
communion  with  God  abbreviated.  All  could  come 
always ;  they  never  came  inopportunely.  AVe  often 
cheerfully  take  up  a  burden  of  service,  but  find  it  very 
hard  to  continue  bearing^  it.  But  He  was  willinof  to 
come  down  from  the  mountain  of  Transfiguration 
because  there  was  a  demoniac  boy  in  the  plain ;  and 
therefore  He  put  aside  the  temptation — "  Let  us  build 
here  three  tabernacles."  He  was  willing^  to  aban- 
don  His  desert  seclusion  because  the  multitude 
sought  Him.     Interru23ted  in  His  communion  with  the 


THE  SERVANT-LORD  AND  HIS  SERVANTS.  59 

Father  by  His  disciples,  He  had  no  impatient  word  to 
say,  but  "  Let  us  go  unto  other  cities  also,  for  there- 
fore am  I  sent."  When  He  stepped  from  the  fishing 
boat  on  the  other  side  of  the  lake  to  which  he  had 
fled  for  a  moment  of  repose,  He  was  glad  when  He 
saw  the  multitude  who  had  pertinaciously  outrun 
Him,  and  were  waiting  for  Him  on  the  beach.  On 
His  Cross  He  had  leisure  to  turn  from  His  own 
physical  sufferings  and  the  weight  of  a  world's  sin, 
which  lay  upon  Him,  to  look  at  that  penitent  by  His 
side,  and  He  ended  His  life  in  the  ministry  of  mercy 
to  a  brigand.  And  thus  cheerfully,  and  always  Avith- 
'^out  a  thousfht  of  self,  "  He  came  to  minister." 

Think,  too,  of  the  sweep  of  His  ministrations.  They 
took  in  all  men ;  they  were  equally  open  to  enemies 
and  to  friends,  to  mockers  and  to  sympathizers.  Think 
of  the  variety  of  the  gifts  which  He  brought  in  His 
ministry — caring  for  body  and  for  soul ;  alleviating 
sorrow,  binding  up  wounds,  purifying  hearts  ;  dealing 
with  sin,  the  fountain,  and  with  miseries,  its  waters, 
wdth  equal  helpfulness  and  equal  love. 

And  think  of  how  that  ministering  was  alwa3'S 
ministration  by  a  Lord.  For  there  is  nothing  to  me 
more  remarkable  in  the  Gospel  narrative  than  the 
way  in  which,  side  by  side,  there  lie  in  Christ's  life 
the  two  elements,  so  difficult  to  harmonize  in  fact,  and 
so  impossible  to  have  been  harmonized  in  a  legend, 
the  consciousness  of  authority  and  the  humility  of  a 
servant.  The  paradox  with  which  John  introduces 
his  sweet  pathetic  story  of  our  Lord's  washing  the 
disciples'  feet  is  true  of,  and  is  illustrated  hy,  every 
instance  of  more  than  ordinary   lowliness   and  self- 


60  TEE  SERVANT-LORD  AND  HIS  SERVANTS. 

oblivion  which  the  Gospel  contains.  "  Jesus,  knowing 
that  He  had  come  from  God,  and  went  to  God,  and 
that  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  His  hand  " 
— did  what  ?  "  Laid  aside  His  garments  and  took  a 
towel  and  girded  Himself."  The  two  things  ever  go 
together.  And  thus,  in  His  lowliest  abasement,  as  in 
a  star  entangled  in  a  cloud,  there  shine  out,  all  the 
more  broad  and  conspicuous  for  the  environment 
Avhich  Avraps  them,  the  beams  of  His  uncreated  lustre. 

That  ministration  was  a  service  that  never  shrank 
from  stern  rebuke.  His  service  was  no  mere  soft  and 
pliant,  sympathetic  helpfulness,  but  it  could  smite 
and  stab,  and  be  severe,  and  knit  its  brow,  and  speak 
stern  words,  as  all  true  service  must.  For  it  is  not 
service  but  cruelty  to  sympathize  Avith  the  sinner,  and 
say  nothing  in  condemnation  of  his  sin.  And  yet  no 
sternness  is  blessed  which  is  not  plainly  prompted  by 
desire  to  help. 

Now,  I  know  far  better  than  you  do  how  wretchedly 
inadequate  all  these  poor  words  of  mine  have  been  to 
the  great  theme  that  I  have  been  trying  to  talk  about, 
but  they  may  at  least — like  a  little  water  poured  into 
a  puaip — have  set  your  minds  working  upon  the 
theme,  and,  I  hope,  to  better  purpose.  "  The  Son  of 
Man  came     ...     to  minister." 

II. — Now,  secondly,  note  the  service  that  should  be 
modelled  on  His. 

Oh  !  brethren,  if  we,  however  imperfectly,  have  taken 
into  mind  and  heart  that  picture  of  Him  who  was  and 
is  amongst  us  as  One  that  serveth,  how  sharp  a  test, 
and  how  stringent,  and,  as  it  seems  to  us  sometimes, 
impossible,  a  commandment  are  involved  in  the  "  even 


THE  SERVANT-LORD  AND  HIS  SERVANTS.  61 


as"  of  my  text.  When  we  think  of  our  grudging 
services ;  when  we  think  of  how  much  more  apt  we 
are  to  insist  upon  what  men  owe  to  us  than  of  what 
we  owe  to  them ;  how  ready  we  are  to  demand,  how 
slow  we  are  to  give  ;  how  we  flame  up  in  what  we 
think  is  warranted  indignation  if  we  do  not  get  the 
observance,  or  the  sympathy,  or  the  attention  that  we 
require,  and  yet  how  little  we  give  of  these,  we  may 
well  say, ''  Thou  hast  set  a  pattern  that  can  only  drive 
us  to  despair."  If  we  would  read  our  Gospels  more 
than  we  do  with  the  feeling,  as  we  trace  that  Master 
through  each  of  His  phases  of  sympathy  and  self- 
oblivion  and  self-sacrifice  and  service,  "  that  is  what  I 
should  be,"  what  a  different  book  the  New  Testament 
would  be  to  us,  and  what  different  people  you  and  I 
would  be. 

There  is  no  ground  on  which  we  can  rest  greatness 
or  superiority  in  Christ's  Kingdom  except  this  ground 
of  service.  And  there  is  no  use  that  we  can  make 
either  of  money  or  of  talents,  of  acquirements  or 
opportunities,  except  the  use  of  helping  our  fellows 
with  them,  which  will  stand  the  test  of  this  model 
and  example :  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to 
receive."  The  servant  who  serves  for  love  is  highest 
in  the  hierarchy  of  Heaven.  God,  who  is  supreme, 
has  stooped  lower  than  any  that  are  beneath  Him, 
and  His  true  rule  follows,  not  because  He  is  infinite,  ^«^— ^ 
omnipotent,  omniscient,  omnipresent,  or  any  of  those 
other  pompous  Latin  words  which  describe  what  men 
call  His  attributes,  but  because  He  loves  best,  and  ^  -^^-^^ 
does  most  for  the  most. 

And  that  is  what  you  and  I  ought  to  be.     We  may 


62  THE  SERVAKT-LOED  AXD  HIS  SERVANTS. 

well  take  the  lesson  to  ourselves.  I  have  no  space 
nor  time,  and,  I  hope,  no  need  to  enlarge  upon  it ;  but 
be  sure  of  this,  if  we  are  ever  to  be  near  the  right 
and  the  left  of  the  Master  in  His  Kinoxlom,  there  is' 
one  way,  and  only  one  way,  to  get  it,  and  that  is  to 
make  self  abdicate  its  authority  as  the  centre  of 
our  lives,  and  to  enthrone  there  Christ,  and  for  His 
sake  all  our  brethren.  Be  ambitious  to  be  first,  but, 
reme:nber,  Xohlesse  oblige.  He  that  is  first  must  be 
last. 

He  that  is  Servant  of  all  is  Master  of  all.  That  fs 
the  only  mastery  that  is  worth  anything,  the  devotion 
of  hearts  that  circle  round  the  source  from  which  they 
draw  light  and  warmth.  AVhat  is  it  that  makes  a 
mother  the  queen  of  her  children  ?  Simply  that  all 
her  life  she  has  been  their  servant,  and  never  thought 
about  herself,  but  always  about  them. 

Now,  I  intended  to  have  said  a  word  or  two  about 
the  application  of  these  threadbare  principles  in  the 
Church  and  in  society,  but  I  have  no  time  to  do  that, 
only  let  me  say  in  a  word — here  is  the  one  law  on 
which  pre-eminence  in  the  Church  is  to  be  allocated. 

What  becomes  of  sacerdotal  hierarchies,  what  be- 
comes of  the  "  lords  over  God's  heritage,"  if  the  one 
ground  of  pre-eminence  is  service  ?  I  know,  of  course, 
that  there  may  be  different  forms  embodying  one 
principle,  but  it  seems  to  me  that  that  form  of  Church 
polity  is  nearest  the  mind  of  Christ  in  which  the  only 
dignity  is  dignity  of  service,  and  the  only  use  of  place 
is  the  privilege  of  stooping  and  helping. 

This  fruitful  principle  shall  one  day  shape  civil  as 
well  as  ecclesiastical  societies.     For  the  present,  our 


THE  SERVANT-  LORD  AND  HIS  SERVANTS.  63 

Lord  draws  a  contrast  between  the  world's  and  the 
Christian  notions  of  rank  and  dignity.  "  It  shall  not 
be  so  among  you,"  says  He.  And  the  nobler  concep- 
tion of  cuiinence  and  service  set  forth  in  His  disciples, 
if  they  are  true  to  their  Lord  and  their  dut}^  will 
leaven,  and  avc  may  hope  finally  transform,  society, 
sweeping  away  all  vulgar  notions  of  greatness  as 
depending  on  birth,  or  wealth,  or  ruder  forms  of 
powers,  and  marshalling  men  according  to  Christ's 
order  of  precedence,  in  which  helpfulness  is  pre- 
eminence and  service  is  supremacy,  while  conversely 
pre-eminence  is  used  to  help  and  superiority  stoops 
to  serve. 

One  remark  will  close  my  sermon.  You  have  to 
take  the  last  words  of  this  verse  if  you  are  ever 
going  to  put  in  practice  its  first  words.  ''•  Even  as  the 
Son  of  Man  came,  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to 
minister" : — if  Jesus  Christ  had  stopped  there  He 
would  only  have  been  one  more  of  the  long  roll  of 
ineftectual  preachers  and  prophets  Avho  show  men  the 
better  way,  and  leave  them  struggling  in  the  mire. 
But  He  did  not  stop  there : — "  Even  as  the  Son  of 
Man  came  ...  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for 
many." 

Ah !  the  Cross,  with  its  burden  of  the  sacrifice  for 
the  world's  sin,  is  the  only  power  which  will  supply 
us  with  a  sufficient  motive  for  the  loftiness  of 
Christlike  service.  I  know  that  there  is  plenty  of 
entirely  irreligious  and  Christless  beneficence  in  the 
world.  And  God  forbid  that  1  should  say  a  word  to 
seem  to  depreciate  that.  But  sure  I  am  that  for  the 
noblest,  purest,  most   widely   diffused  and  blessedly 


64  THE  SERVANT-LORD  AND  HIS  SERVANTS. 

operative  kinds  of  service  of  man,  there  is  no  motive 
and  spring  anywhere  except  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave 
Himself  for  me."  And,  bought  by  that  service  and 
that  blood,  it  will  be  possible,  and  it  is  obligatory  upon 
all  of  us,  to  "  do  unto  others,"  as  He  Himself  said, 
"  as  I  have  done  to  you."  "  The  servant  is  not  greater 
than  his  Lord." 


vu. 


Mbat  the  1bi0toric  Cbrist  ^augbt  about 
1bi6  2)eatb. 

*'  The  Son  of  Man  came     ...     to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for 
many;* — Matt.  xx.  28. 

E  hear  a  great  deal  at  present  about 
going  back  to  the  Christ  of  the 
Gospels.  In  so  far  as  that  phrase  and 
the  movement  of  thought  which  it 
describes  are  a  protest  against  the 
substitution  of  doctrines  for  the  Person  whom  the 
doctrines  represent,  I,  for  one,  rejoice  in  it.  But  I 
believe  that  the  antithesis  suggested  by  the  phrase, 
and  by  some  of  its  advocates  avowed,  between  the 
Christ  of  the  Gospels  and  the  Christ  of  the  Epistles, 
is  false.  The  Christ  of  the  Gospels  is  the  Christ  of 
the  Epistles,  as  I  humbly  venture  to  beheve.  And  I 
cannot  but  see  that  there  is  a  possibility  of  a  move- 
ment which,  carried  out  legitimately,  should  command 
the  fullest  sympathy  of  every  Christian  heart,  degene- 
rating into  the  rejection  of  all  the  supernatural 
elements  in  the  nature  and  work  of  our  Lord,  and 
leavinsf  us  with  a  meao-re  human  Christ,  shrunken 
and  impotent.  The  Christ  of  the  Gospels,  by  all 
means ;    but   let    it    bo    the    whole  Christ  of  all  the 


6Q  IF  HAT  THE  HISTORIC   CHRIST 

Gospels,  the  Christ  over  whose  cradle  angels  sang, 
by  whose  empty  grave  angels  watched,  whose  as- 
cending form  angels  beheld  and  proclaimed  that  He 
should  come  again  to  be  our  Judge.  Go  back  to  that 
Christ,  and  all  will  be  well. 

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  one  direction  in  which 
there  is  a  possibility  of  such  movement  as  I  have 
referred  to  being  one-sided  and  harmful  is  in  reference 
to  the  conception  which  we  form  of  the  death  of  Jesus 
Christ.  And  therefore  I  want  you  to  listen  for  a  few 
moments  to  me  at  this  time  whilst  I  try  to  bring  out 
Avhat  is  plain  in  the  words  before  us ;  and  is,  as  I 
humbly  believe,  interwoven  in  the  whole  texture  of 
all  the  Gospels — viz.,  the  conception  which  Jesus 
Christ  Himself  formed  of  the  meaning  of  His  death. 

I. — The  first  thing  that  I  notice  is  that  the  Christ 
of  the  Gospels  thought  and  taught  that  His  death  w^as 
to  be  His  own  act. 

I  do  not  think  that  it  is  an  undue  or  pedantic 
pressing  of  the  significance  of  the  words  before  us  if  I 
ask  you  to  notice  two  of  the  significant  expressions  in 
this  text.  "  The  Son  of  Man  came,"  and  that  '•  to  give 
His  life."  The  one  word  refers  to  the  act  of  entrance 
into,  the  other  to  the  act  of  departure  from,  this 
earthly  life.  They  correspond  in  so  far  as  that  both 
bring  into  prominence  Christ's  own  consent,  volition, 
and  action  in  the  very  two  things  about  which  men 
are  least  consulted,  their  being  born  and  their  dying. 

"  The  Son  of  Man  came."  Now  if  that  expression 
occurred  but  once  it  miofht  be  minimized  as  beinof 
only  a  synonym  for  birth,  having  no  special  force.  But 
if  you  will  notice  that  it  is  our  Lord's  habitual  word 


TA  UGIIT  A  BO  UT  HIS  BE  A  TIL  67 


about  HiinseU*   only  varied   occasionally  by  another 
one  equally  significant  when  He  says  that  He  "  was 
sent  "  ;  and  if  you  will  further  notice  that  all  through 
the  Gospels  He  never  but  once  speaks  of  Himself  as 
being  "  born,"  I  think  you  will  admit  that  I  am  not 
making  too  much  of  a  word  when  I  say  that  when 
Christ,  out  of  the  depths  of  His  consciousness,  said 
'•'the   Son  of  Man  came,"    He  was  teaching  us  that 
He  lived  before  He  was    born,  and  that  behind   the 
natural  foct  of  birth  there  lay  the  supernatural  fact  of 
His  choosing  to  be  incarnated  for  man's  redemption. 
The  one  instance  in  which  He  does  speak  of  Himself 
as  "  being  born  "  is  most  instructive  in  this  connection. 
For   it   was   before    the    Koman   governor;  and   He 
accompanied  the  clause  in  which  He  said,  "  to  thi-j 
end  was  I  born  " — which  was  adapted  to  Pilate's  level 
of  intelligence — with  another  one  which  seemed  to  be 
inserted  to  satisfy  His  own  sense  of  fitness,   rather 
than  for  any  light  that    it  would  give    to   its   first 
hearer,  "  And  for  this  cause  came  I  into  the  world." 
The  two  things  were  not  synonymous ;  but  before  the 
birth  there  was  the  coming,  and  Jesus  Christ   was 
born  because  He  willed  to  come.     So  says  the  Christ 
of  the  Gospels ;  and    the    Christ   of   the  Epistles    is 
represented   as   '•'  taking    upon   Him    the    form  of  a 
servant,  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man."     Do 
you  accept  that  as  true  of  "  the  historic  Christ "  ? 

With  precise  correspondence,  if  we  turn  to  the 
other  end  of  His  life,  we  find  the  equally  significant 
expression  in  my  text  which  asserts  for  it,  too,  that 
the  other  necessity  to  which  humanity  necessarily 
and  without  their  own  volition  bow  was  to  Christ  a 


6S  WHAT  THE  HISTORIC  CHRIST 

matter  of  clioice.  "  The  Son  of  Man  came  to  give!' 
"  Xo  man  taketh  it  from  Me,"  as  He  said  on  another 
occasion.  '^I  lay  it  down  of  Myself."  ''The  good 
Shepherd  giveth  His  hfe  for  the  sheep."  "My 
flesh  ...  I  give  for  the  world's  life."  Now, 
brethren,  we  are  not  to  regard  these  words  as  mere 
vague  expressions  for  a  willing  surrender  to  the 
necessity  of  death,  but  as  expressing  what  I  believe 
is  taught  us  all  through  Scripture,  and  is  funda- 
mental to  any  real  grasp  of  the  real  Christ,  that  He 
died  because  He  chose,  and  He  chose  because  He 
loved.  What  meant  that  "  loud  voice,"  witnessing, 
with  which  He  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  but  that  there 
was  no  physical  exhaustion,  which  was  the  immediate 
occasion  of  death  by  crucifixion  ?  What  meant  that 
surprising  rapidity  with  which  the  last  moment  came 
in  His  case,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  stolid  by- 
standers ?  They  meant  the  same  thing  as  I  believe 
that  the  Evangelists  meant  when  they,  with  one 
consent,  employed  expressions  to  describe  Christ's 
death,  which  may  indeed  be  only  euphemisms,  but 
are  apparently  declarations  of  its  voluntary  character. 
'•'  He  gave  up  the  ghost."  "  He  yielded  His  Spirit." 
He  breathed  forth  His  life,  and  so  He  died. 

As  one  of  the  old  fathers  said,  "  Who  is  this  that 
thus  falls  asleep  when  He  will  ?  To  die  is  weakness, 
but  thus  to  die  is  power."  "  The  weakness  of  God  is 
stronger  than  man."  The  desperate  king  of  Israel 
bade  his  slave  kill  him,  and  when  the  menial  shrunk 
from  such  sacrilege  he  fell  upon  his  own  sword. 
Christ  bade  His  servant  Death,  "  Do  this,"  and  he  did 
it ;  and  dying,  our  Lord  and  Master  declared  Himself 


TAUGHT  ABOUT  HIS  DEATH.  69 

the  Lord  and  Master  of  Death.     This  is  a  part  of  the 
history  of  the  historic  Christ.     Do  you  believe  it  ? 

II. — Then,  secondly,  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels 
thought  and  taught  that  His  death  was  one  chief  aim 
of  His  coming. 

I  have  omitted  words  from  my  text  which  intervene 
between  its  first  and  its  last  ones;  not  because  I 
regard  them  as  unimportant,  but  because  they  would 
lead  us  into  too  wide  a  field  to  cover  in  one  sermon. 
But  I  would  pray  you  to  observe  how  the  re-insertion 
of  them  throws  immense  light  upon  the  significance 
of  the  words  which  I  have  chosen.  "  The  Son  of  Man 
came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister." 
That  covers  the  whole  2fround  of  His  cjracious  and 
s^entle  dealino-s  here  on  earth,  His  tenderness,  self- 
abnegation,  sympathy,  healing,  and  helpfulness.  Then, 
side  by  side  with  that,  and  as  the  crowning  mani- 
festation of  His  work  of  service,  Avithout  which  His 
life — gracious,  radiant,  sweet  as  it  is — would  still  want 
something  of  its  power,  He  sets  His  death. 

Surely  that  is  an  altogether  unexampled  pheno- 
menon; altogether  a  unique  and  unparalleled  thing, 
that  a  man  should  recrard  that  which  for  all  workers, 
thinkers,  speakers,  poets,  philanthropists,  is  the  sad 
term  of  their  activity,  as  being  a  part  of  His  work  ; 
and  not  only  a  part,  but  so  conspicuous  a  part  that 
it  was  a  purpose  which  He  had  in  view  from  the  very 
beginning,  and  before  the  beginning,  of  His  earthly 
life.  So  Calvary  was  to  Jesus  Christ  no  interruption, 
tragic  and  premature,  of  His  life's  activities.  His 
death  was  no  mere  alternative  set  before  Him,  which 
He  chose  rather  than  to  be  unfaithful  or  dumb.     He 


70  JFHAT  THE  HISTORIC  CHRIST 

did  not  die  because  He  was  hounded  by  hostile 
priests,  but  He  came  on  purpose  that  He  might  so 
end  His  career. 

I  need  not  remind  you  of,  and  the  time  would  not 
permit  me  to  dwell  upon,  other  instances  in  the 
Gospels  in  which  our  Lord  speaks  the  same  language. 
At  the  very  beginning  of  His  public  ministry  He 
told  the  inquiring  rabbi — who  came  to  Him  with  the 
notion  that  He  would  be  somewhat  flattered  by  His 
recognition  by  one  of  the  authoritative  and  wise 
pundits  of  the  nation — that  "  the  Son  of  Man  must 
be  lifted  up."  The  necessity  was  before  Him,  but  it 
was  no  unwelcome  necessity,  for  it  sprung  from  His 
own  love.  It  was  the  very  aim  of  His  coming,  to  live 
a  Servant  and  to  die  a  Ransom. 

Dear  brethren,  let  me  press  upon  you  this  plain 
truth,  that  no  conception  of  Christ's  death  which  looks 
upon  it  merely  as  the  close,  by  pathetic  sufferings,  of 
a  life  to  the  activities  of  which  it  adds  nothing  but 
pathos,  approaches  the  signification  of  it  which  in- 
heres in  the  thought  that  this  was  the  aim  and  purpose 
with  which  Jesus  Christ  was  incarnate,  that  He  should 
live  indeed  the  pure  and  sweet  life  that  He  hved,  but 
equally  that  He  should  die  the  painful  and  bitter 
death  that  He  died.  He  was  not  merely  a  martyr, 
though  the  first  of  them,  but  something  far  more, 
which  we  shall  see  presently.  If  to  you  the  death  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  in  kind,  however  superior  in 
degree,  as  those  of  patriots,  and  reformers,  and  wit- 
nesses for  the  truth,  and  martyrs  for  righteousness, 
then  I  humbly  venture  to  represent  that,  instead  of 
going  back  to,  you  have  gone  away  from,  the  Christ 


TA  UGIIT  A  BOUT  HIS  DEA  TIL  7 1 

of  the  Gospels,  who  said,  "  The  Son  of  Man  came 
.  .  .  to  give  His  life  "  ;  and  that  such  a  Christ  is 
not  a  historic  but  an  imaginary  one. 

III. — So,  thirdly,  notice  that  the  Christ  of  the 
Gospels  thought  and  taught  that  His  death  was  a 
ransom. 

A  ransom  is  a  price  paid  in  exchange  for  captives, 
that  they  may  be  liberated ;  or  for  culprits,  that  they 
may  be  set  free.  And  that  was  Christ's  thought  of 
what  He  had  to  die  for.     There  lay  the  "  must." 

I  do  not  dwell  upon  the  conception  of  our  condition 
involved  in  that  word.  We  are  all  bound  and  held 
by  the  chain  of  our  sins.  We  all  stand  guilty  before 
God,  and,  as  I  believe,  there  is  a  necessity  in  that 
loving  Divine  nature  whereby  it  is  impossible  that 
without  a  ransom  there  can  be,  in  the  interests  of 
mankind  and  in  the  interests  of  righteousness,  for- 
giveness of  sins.  I  do  not  mean  that  in  the  words 
before  us  there  is  a  developed  theory  of  atonement, 
but  I  do  mean  that  no  man,  dealing  with  them  fairly, 
can  strike  out  of  them  the  notion  of  vicarious  suffer- 
ing in  exchange  for,  or  instead  of,  many.  This  is  no 
occasion  for  theological  discussion,  nor  am  I  careful 
now  to  set  forth  a  fully-developed  doctrine ;  but  I  am 
declaring,  as  God  helps  me,  what  is  to  me,  and  I  pray 
may  be  to  you,  the  central  thought  about  that  Cross 
of  Calvary,  that  on  it  there  is  made  the  sacrifice  for 
the  world's  sins. 

And,  dear  brethren,  I  beseech  you  to  consider,  how 
can  Ave  save  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ,  accepting 
these  Gospels,  which  on  the  hypothesis  about  which  I 
am   now  speaking    are   valid  sources  of  knowledge, 


72  WHAT  THE  HISTORIC  CHRIST 

without  recognizing  that  He  deliberately  led  His  dis- 
ciples to  believe  that  He  died  for — that  is,  instead  of 
— them  that  put  their  trust  in  Him  ?  For  remember 
that  not  only  such  words  as  these  of  my  text  are  to 
be  taken  into  account.  Remember  that  it  was  the 
Christ  of  the  Gospels  Avho  established  that  last  rite  of 
the  Lord's  Supper,  in  which  the  broken  bread,  and 
the  separation  between  the  bread  and  the  wine^ 
both  indicated  a  violent  death,  and  who  said  about 
both  the  one  and  the  other  of  the  double  symbols, 
"  For  you."  1  do  not  understand  how  any  body  of 
profes-ing  believers,  rejecting  Christ's  death  as  the 
sacrifice  for  sin,  can  find  a  place  in  their  beliefs  or  in 
their  practice  for  that  institution  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  or  can  rightly  interpret  the  sacred  words 
spoken  then. 

This  is  why  the  Cross  was  Christ's  aim.  This  is 
wdiy  He  said,  with  His  dying  breath,  "  It  is  finished." 
This  truth  is  the  explanation  of  His  words,  "The  Good 
Shepherd  giveth  His  life  for  the  sheep." 

And  this  truth  of  a  ransom-price  lies  at  the  basis  of 
all  vigorous  Christianit}^  A  Christianity  without  a. 
dying  Christ  is  a  dying  Christianity.  And  history 
shows  us  that  the  expansiveness  and  elevating  power 
of  the  Gospel  depend  on  the  prominence  given  to  the 
sacrifice  on  the  Cross.  An  old  fable  says  that  the- 
only  thing  that  melts  adamant  is  the  blood  of  a  lamk 
The  Gospel  reveals  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ, 
His  death  for  us  as  a  ransom,  as  the  one  power  which 
melts  hostility  and  binds  hearts  to  Him.  The  Christ 
of  the  Gospels  is  the  Christ  who  taught  that  He  died 
for  us. 


TA  UGHT  ABOUT  niS  DEA  TIL  7 a 

IV. — Lastly,  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels  thought  and 
taught  that  His  death  had  world-wide  power. 

He  says  here  "a  ransom  for  manijj'  Now  that 
word  is  not  used  here  in  contradistinction  to  "  all,'' 
nor  in  contradistinction  to  "  few."  It  is  distinctly 
employed  as  emphasizing  the  contrast  between  the 
single  death  and  the  wide  extent  of  its  benefits  ;  and 
in  terms  which,  rigidly  taken,  simply  express  in- 
detiniteness,  it  expresses  universalit}^  That  that  is 
so  seems  to  me  to  be  plain  enough,  if  we  notice  other 
places  of  Scripture  to  which,  at  this  stage  of  my 
sermon,  I  can  but  allude.  For  instance,  in  Romans  y. 
the  two  expressions,  "  the  many  "  and  the  "  all,"  alter- 
nate in  reference  to  the  extent  of  the  power  of  Christ's 
sacrifice  for  men.  And  the  Apostle  in  another  place, 
where  probably  there  may  be  an  allusion  to  these 
words  before  us,  so  varies  them  as  that  He  declares 
that  Jesus  Christ  in  His  death  was  the  ransom  "  in- 
stead of  all."  But  I  do  not  need  to  dwell  upon  these, 
"Many"  is  a  vague  word,  and  in  it  we  see  the  dim 
crowds  stretching  away  beyond  vision,  for  whom  that 
death  was  to  be  the  means  of  salvation.  I  take  it 
that  the  words  of  our  text  have  an  allusion  to  words 
in  the  great  prophecy  in  the  53rd  chapter  of  Isaiah, 
in  which  we  read,  "By  My  knowledge  shall  My 
righteous  Servant "  (mark  the  allusion  in  our  text, 
"Who  came  to  minister")  "justify  many,  for  He  shall 
bear  their  iniquities." 

So,  brethren,  I  believe  that  I  am  not  guilty  of 
unduly  widening  out  our  Lord's  thought  when  I  say 
that  the  indefinite  "  many  "  is  practically  "  all."  And, 
brother,  if  "  all,"  then  ijou;  if  all,  then  me ;  if  all,  then 


74        irHAT  CUEIST  TAUGHT  ABOUT  THE  GOSPELS. 

each.  Think  of  a  man,  nineteen  centuries  ago,  away 
in  a  little  insicrnificant  corner  of  tlie  world,  standinsf 
up  and  saying,  "  My  death  is  the  price  paid  in 
exchange  for  the  world "  !  That  is  meekness  and 
lowliness  of  heart,  is  it  ?  That  is  humility,  so  beauti- 
ful in  a  teacher,  is  it  ?  How  any  man  can  accept  the 
veracity  of  these  narratives,  believe  that  Jesus  Christ 
said  anything  the  least  like  that,  not  believe  that  He 
was  the  Divine  Son  of  the  Father,  the  Sacrifice  for 
the  world's  sin,  yet  profess — and  honestly  profess,  I 
doubt  not,  in  many  cases — to  retain  reverence  and 
admiration,  all  but  adoration,  for  Him,  I  confess,  for 
my  poor  part,  that  I  cannot  understand. 

But  I  ask  you,  what  you  are  going  to  do  with  these 
thoughts  and  teachings  of  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels  ? 
Are  you  going  to  take  them  for  true  ?  Are  you  going 
to  trust  your  salvation  to  Him  ?  Are  you  going  to 
accept  the  ransom  and  say,  "  0  Lord,  truly  I  am  Thy 
servant :  Thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds  "  ?  Brethren, 
the  Christ  of  the  Gospels,  by  all  means;  but  the 
Christ  that  said,  "  The  Son  of  Man  came  to  .  .  . 
give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many."  My  Christ,  and 
your  Christ,  and  the  world's  Christ  is  ''the  Christ 
that  died  :  yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again :  who  is 
even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh 
intercession  for  us." 


f( 


VIII. 

Concerning  tbe  Crown/' 


They  do   it  to   obtain  a  corruptible  crown  ;  but  we  an  incoi- 
ruptible." — 1  COE.  ix.  25. 

NE  of  tlie  most  famous  of  the  Greek 
athletic  festivals  was  held  close  by 
Corinth.  Its  prize  was  a  pine-wreath 
from  the  neighbouring  sacred  grove. 
The  painful  abstinence  and  training  of 
ten  months,  and  the  fierce  struggle  of  ten  minutes,  had 
for  their  result  a  twist  of  green  leaves^  that  withered 
in  a  week,  and  a  little  fading  fame  that  was  worth 
scarcely  more,  and  lasted  scarcely  longer.  The  struggle 
and  the  discipline  were  noble ;  the  end  was  con- 
temptible. And  so  it  is  with  all  lives  whose  aims  are 
lower  than  the  highest.  They  are  greater  in  the 
powers  they  put  forth  than  in  the  objects  they  com- 
pass, and  the  question,  "What  is  it  for?"  is  like  a 
douche  of  cold  water  from  the  cart  that  lays  the  clouds 
of  dust  in  the  ways. 

So,  says  Paul,  praising  the  effort  and  contemning 
the  prize,  "  they  do  it  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown." 
And  yet  there  was  a  soul  of  goodness  in  this  evil 
thing.  Though  these  festivals  were  indissolubly  inter- 
twined  with  idolatry,   and   besmirched    with    much 


7G  ''CONCERMNG  THE  CROW Nr 

sensuous  evil,  yet  he  deals  with  them  as  he  does  with 
war  and  with  slavery ;  points  to  the  disguised  nobility 
that  lay  beneath  the  hideousness,  and  holds  up  even 
these  low  things  as  a  pattern  for  Christian  men. 

But  I  do  not  mean  here  to  talk  so  much  about 
the  general  bearing  of  this  text  as  rather  to  deal 
with  its  designation  of  the  aim  and  reward  of  Christian 
energy,  that  "  incorruptible  crown  "  of  which  my  text 
speaks.  And  in  doing  so  I  desire  to  take  into  account 
likewise  other  places  in  Scripture  in  which  the  same 
metaphor  occurs. 

I. — The  crown. 

Let  me  recall  the  other  places  where  the  same 
metaphor  is  employed.  We  find  the  Apostle,  in  the 
immediate  prospect  of  death,  rising  into  a  calm 
rapture  in  which  imprisonment  and  martyrdom  lose 
their  terrors,  as  he  thinks  of  the  "  crown  of  righteous- 
ness  "  which  the  Lord  will  give  to  him.  The  Epistle 
of  James,  again,  assures  the  man  who  endures  tempta- 
tion that  "  the  Lord  will  o^ive  him  the  crown  of  life 
which  He  has  promised  to  all  them  that  love  Him.''^ 
The  Lord  Himself  from  heaven  repeats  that  promise 
to  the  persecuted  Church  at  Smyrna :  "  Be  thou 
faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of 
life."  The  elders  cast  their  crowns  before  the  feet  of 
Him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne.  The  Apostle 
Peter,  in  his  letter,  stimulates  the  elders  upon  earth 
to  faithful  discharge  of  their  duty,  by  the  hope  that 
thereby  they  shall  "  receive  a  crown  of  righteousness 
that  fadeth  not  away."  So  all  these  instances  taken 
together  with  this  of  ni}^  text  enable  us  to  gather  two 
or  three  lessons. 


COSCERNING  THE  CROWN.''  77 


It  is  extremely  unlikely  that  all  these  instances  of 
the  occurrence  of  the  emblem  carry  Avith  them  refer- 
once,  such  as  that  in  my  text,  to  the  prize  at  the 
athletic  festivals.  For  Peter  and  James,  intense  Jews 
as  they  were,  had  probably  never  seen,  and  possibly 
never  heard  of,  the  struggles  at  the  Isthmus  and  at 
Olympus  and  elsewhere.  The  Book  of  the  Revelation 
draws  its  metaphors  almost  exclusively  from  the  circle 
of  Jewish  practices  and  things.  So  that  we  have  to 
look  in  other  directions  than  the  arena  or  the  race- 
course to  explain  these  other  uses  of  the  image.  It  is 
also  extremely  unlikely  that  in  these  other  passages 
the  reference  is  to  a  crown  as  the  emblem  of  sove- 
reignty, for  that  idea  is  expressed,  as  a  rule,  by  another 
word  in  Scripture,  which  w^e  have  Anglicised  as  "  dia- 
dem." The  ''  crown  "  in  all  these  passages  is  a  garlond 
twisted  out  of  some  growth  of  the  field.  In  ancient 
usage  roses  were  twined  for  revellers ;  pine-shoots  or 
olive  branches  for  the  victors  in  the  games ;  while  the 
laurel  w\as  "  the  meed  of  mighty  conquerors " ;  and 
plaited  oak  leaves  were  laid  upon  the  browns  of  citizens 
who  had  deserved  well  of  their  country,  and  myrtle 
sprays  crowned  the  fair  locks  of  the  bride. 

And  thus  in  these  directions,  and  not  towards  the 
wrestlino-  oTound  or  the  throne  of  the  monarch,  must 
\so  look  for  the  ideas  suggested  by  the  emblem. 

Now,  if  we  gather  together  all  these  various  uses  of 
the  w^ord,  there  emerge  two  broad  ideas,  that  the 
'•  crown  "  which  is  the  Christian's  aim  is  a  state  of 
trium]3hant  repose  and  of  festal  enjoyment.  There 
are  other  aspects  of  that  great  and  dim  future  which 
correspond  to  other  necessities  of  our  nature,  and  I 


78  ''CONCERNING  THE  CROWN:' 


suppose  some  harm  has  been  done  and  some  mis- 
conceptions have  been  induced,  and  some  unreality 
imported  into  the  idea  of  the  Christian  future  by  the 
too  exclusive  prominence  given  to  these  two  ideas  : 
victorious  rest  after  the  struggle,  and  abundant  satis- 
faction of  all  desires.  That  future  is  other  and  more 
than  a  festival;  it  is  other  and  more  than  repose. 
There  are  larger  fields  there  for  the  operation  of 
jDowers  that  have  been  trained  and  evolved  here.  The 
faithfulness  of  the  steward  is  exchanged,  according  to 
Christ's  great  Avords,  for  the  authority  of  the  ruler 
over  many  cities.  But  still,  do  we  not  all  know 
enough  of  the  w^orry  and  turbulence  and  strained 
effort  of  tbe  conflict  here  below  to  feel  that  to  some 
of  our  deepest  and  not  ignoble  needs  and  desires  that 
image  appeals  ?  The  helmet  that  pressed  upon  the 
brow  even  whilst  it  protected  tbe  brain,  and  wore 
away  the  hair  even  whilst  it  was  a  defence,  is  lifted 
off,  and  on  unruffled  locks  the  garland  is  intertwined 
that  speaks  victory  and  befits  a  festival.  One  of  the 
old  prophets  puts  the  same  metaphor  in  words  imper- 
fectly represented  by  the  English  translation,  when  he 
promises  "  a  crown  "  or  a  garland  "  for  ashes  " — instead 
of  the  symbol  of  mourning,  strewed  grey  and  gritty 
upon  the  dishevelled  hair  of  the  w^eepers,  flowers 
twined  into  a  Avreath — "  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning," 
and  the  festival  "  garment  of  praise "  to  dress  the 
once  heavy  spirit.  So  the  satisfaction  of  all  desires, 
the  accompaniments  of  a  feast,  in  abundance,  rejoicing 
and  companionship,  and  conclusive  conquest  over 
all  foes,  are  promised  us  in  this  great  symbol. 

But  let  us  look  at  the  passages  separately,  and  we 


CONCERNING  THE  CROWNS 


shall  find  that  they  present  the  one  thought  with 
difterences,  and  that  if  we  combine  these,  as  in  a 
stereoscope,  the  picture  gains  sohdity. 

The  crown  is  described  in  three  ways.  It  is  the  crown 
of  "  hfe,"  of  "  glory,"  and  of  "  righteousness."  And 
I  venture  to  think  that  these  three  epithets  describe 
the  material,  so  to  speak,  of  which  the  wreath  is 
composed.  The  everlasting  flower  of  life,  the  radiant 
blossoms  of  glory,  the  white  flower  of  righteousness ; 
these  are  its  components. 

I  need  not  enlarge  upon  them,  nor  will  your  time 
allow  that  I  should.  Here  we  have  the  promise  of 
life,  that  fuller  life  which  men  want, ''  the  life  of  which 
our  veins  are  scant,"  even  in  the  fullest  tide  and  hey- 
day of  earthly  existencp.  The  promise  sets  that 
future  over  against  the  present,  as  if  then  first  should 
men  know  what  it  means  to  live :  so  buoyant,  elastic, 
unwearied  shall  be  their  energies,  so  manifold  the 
new  outlets  for  activity,  and  the  new  inlets  for  the 
surrounding  glory  and  beauty;  so  incorruptible  and 
glorious  shall  be  their  new  being.  Here  we  live  a 
living  death;  there  Ave  shall  live  indeed;  and  that  will 
be  the  crown,  not  only  in  regard  of  physical,  but  in 
regard  of  spiritual,  powers  and  consciousness. 

But  remember  that  all  this  full  tide  of  life  is  Clirist's 
gift.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  natural  immortality  ; 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  independent  life.  All  Being, 
from  the  lowest  creature  up  to  the  loftiest  created 
spirit,  exists  by  one  law,  the  continual  impartation  to 
it  of  life  from  the  fountain  of  life,  according  to  its 
capacities.  And  unless  Jesus  Christ,  all  through  the 
eternal   ages   of  the  future,  imparted  to  the  happ}- 


60  ''CONCERNING  THE  CROWNS 

souls  that  sit  garlanded  at  His  board  the  life  b}^ 
which  they  live,  the  wreaths  would  wither  on  their 
brows,  and  the  brows  w^ould  melt  away,  and  dissolve 
from  beneath  the  Avreaths.  "  I  will  give  him  a  crown 
of  life." 

It  is  a  crown  of  "  glory,"  and  that  means  a  lustrous- 
ness  of  character  imparted  by  radiation  and  reflection 
from  the  central  light  of  the  glory  of  God.  "  Then 
shall  the  righteous  blaze  out  like  the  sun  in  the 
Kino-dom  of  My  I'ather."  Our  eves  are  dim,  but  we 
can  at  least  divine  the  far-off  flashing  of  that  great 
light,  and  may  ponder  upon  what  hidden  depths  and 
miracles  of  transformed  perfectness  and  unimagined 
lustre  wait  for  us,  dark  and  limited  as  we  are  here, 
in  the  assurance  that  we  all  shall  be  changed  into  the 
''•  likeness  of  the  body  of  His  glory." 

It  is  a  crown  of  "righteousness."  Though  that 
phrase  may  mean  the  wreath  that  rewards  righteous- 
ness, it  seems  more  in  accordance  with  the  other 
simihu'  expressions  to  which  I  have  referred  to  regard 
it,  too,  as  the  material  of  which  the  crown  is  composed. 
It  is  not  enough  that  there  should  be  festal  gladness, 
not  enough  that  there  should  be  calm  repose,  not 
enough  that  there  should  be  flashing  glory,  not 
enough  that  there  should  be  fulness  of  life.  To 
accord  with  the  intense  moral  earnestness  of  the 
Christian  system  there  must  be,  emphatically,  in  the 
Christian  hope,  cessation  of  all  sin  and  investiture  with 
all  purity.  The  word  means  the  same  thing  as  the 
ancient  promise,  "  Thy  people  shall  be  all  righteous." 
It  means  the  same  thing  as  the  latest  promise  of  the 
ti^cended  Christ,  "  They  shall  walk  with  Me  in  white." 


''  COXCERNIXG  THE  CnOlVN."  81 

And  it  sets,  I  was  going  to  say,  the  very  climax  and 
culmination  on  the  other  hopes,  declaring  that 
absolute,  stainless,  infallible  righteousness  which  one 
day  shall  belong  to  our  weak  and  sinful  spirits. 

These,  then,  are  the  elements,  and  on  them  all  is 
stamped  the  signature  of  perpetuit}^  The  victor's 
wreath  is  tossed  on  the  ashen  heap,  the  reveller's 
flowers  droop  as  he  sits  in  the  heat  of  the  banqueting- 
hall ;  the  bride's  myrtle  blossom  fades  though  she  lay 
it  away  in  a  safe  place.  The  crown  of  life  is  incor- 
ruptible. It  is  twined  of  amaranth,  ever  blossoming 
into  new  beauty  and  never  fading. 

11. — Now  look,  secondly,  at  the  discipline  by  which 
the  crown  is  won. 

Observe,  first  of  all,  that  in  more  than  one  of  the 
passages  to  which  we  have  already  referred  great 
emphasis  is  laid  upon  Christ  as  (jiving  the  crown. 
That  is  to  sa}^  that  blessed  future  is  not  won  by 
ettbrt,  but  is  bestowed  as  a  free  gift.  It  is  given  from 
the  hands  which  have  procured  it,  and,  as  I  may  sa}^ 
twined  it  for  us.  Unless  His  brows  had  been  pierced 
with  the  crown  of  thorns,  ours  would  never  have  v/orn 
the  garland  of  victory.  Jesus  provides  the  sole  means, 
by  His  work,  by  which  any  man  can  enter  into  that 
inheritance  ;  and  Jesus,  as  the  righteous  Judge  who 
bestows  the  rewards,  which  are  likewise  the  results,  of 
their  life  here,  gives  the  crown.  It  remains  for  ever 
the  gift  of  His  love.  ''  The  wages  of  sin  is  death." 
Bat  we  rise  above  the  rec;ion  of  retribution  and  desert 

o 

when  we  pass  to  the  next  clause — "  the  gift  of  God  is 
eternal  life,"  and  that  "  through  Jesus  Christ." 

Whilst,  then,  this  must  be  laid  as  the  basis  of  all, 

G 


82  ''CONCERNING  THE  CROWN:' 

there  must  also,  with  equal  earnestness  and  clearness, 
be  set  forth  the  other  thought  that  Christ's  gift  has 
conditions,  which  conditions  these  passages  plainly 
set  forth.  In  the  one  which  I  have  read  as  a  text  we 
have  these  conditions  declared  as  being  twofold — pro- 
tracted discipline  and  continuous  effort.  The  same 
metaphor  employed  by  the  same  Apostle,  in  his  last 
dying  utterance,  associates  his  consciousness  that  he 
had  fought  the  good  fight  and  run  his  race,  like  the 
pugilists  and  runners  of  the  arena,  with  the  hope  that 
he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  righteousness.  James 
declares  that  it  is  given  to  the  man  who  endures 
temptation,  not  only  in  the  sense  of  bearing,  but  of  so 
bearing  as  not  thereby  to  be  injured  in  Christian 
character  and  growth  in  Christian  life.  Peter  asserts 
that  it  is  the  reward  of  self-denying  discharge  of 
duty.  And  the  Lord  from  heaven  lays  down  the  con- 
dition of  faithfulness  unto  death  as  the  necessary 
pre-requisite  of  His  gift  of  the  crown  of  life.  In  two 
of  the  passages  there  is  included,  though  not  precisely 
on  the  level  of  these  other  requirements,  the  love  of 
Him  and  the  love  of ''  His  appearing,"  as  the  neces- 
sary qualifications  for  the  gift  of  the  crown. 

So,  to  begin  with,  unless  a  man  has  such  a  love  to 
Jesus  Christ  as  that  he  is  happy  in  His  presence,  and 
longs  to  have  Him  near,  as  parted  loving  souls  do  ; 
and,  especially,  is  looking  forward  to  that  great  judicial 
coming,  and  feeling  that  there  is  no  tremor  in  his 
heart  at  the  prospect  of  meeting  the  Judge,  but  an 
outgoing  of  desire  and  love  at  the  hope  of  seeing  his 
Saviour  and  his  Friend,  what  right  has  he  to  expect 
the  crown  ?     None  1     And  he  will  never  get  it.     There 


' '  CO NCERNING  THE  CRO  WN. "  &  3 

is  a  test  for  us  which  may  well  make  some  of  us  ask 
ourselves,  Are  we  Christians,  then,  at  all  ? 

And  then,  beyond  that,  there  are  all  these  other 
conditions  which  I  have  pointed  out,  which  may  bo 
gathered  into  one — strenuous  discharge  of  daily  duty 
and  continual  effort  after  folio winof  in  Christ's  foot- 
steps. 

This  needs  to  be  as  fully  and  emphatically  preached 
as  the  other  doctrine  that  eternal  life  is  the  mft  of 

o 

God.  All  manner  of  mischiefs  may  come,  and  have 
come,  from  either  of  these  twin  thoughts,  w^renched 
apart.  But  let  us  weave  them  as  closely  together 
as  the  stems  of  the  flowers  that  make  the  cj'arlands 

o 

are  twined,  and  feel  that  there  is  a  perfect  consistency 
of  both  in  theory,  and  that  there  must  be  a  continual 
union  of  both,  in  our  belief  and  in  our  practice. 
Eternal  life  is  the  sfift  of  God,  on  condition  of  our 
diligence  and  earnestness.  It  is  not  all  the  same 
whether  you  are  a  lazy  Christian  or  not.  It  does 
make  an  eternal  difference  in  our  condition  whether 
here  we  "  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is  set  before 
us,  looking^  unto  Jesus."  We  have  to  receive  the 
crown  as  a  gift ;  we  have  to  wrestle  and  run,  as  con- 
tending for  a  prize. 

III. — And  now,  lastly,  note  the  power  of  the  reward 
as  motive  for  life. 

Paul  says  roundly  in  our  text,  that  the  desire  to 
obtain  the  incorruptible  crown  is  a  legitimate  spring 
of  Christian  action.  Xow,  I  do  not  need  to  waste  your 
time  and  my  own  in  defending  Christian  morality 
from  the  fantastic  objection  that  it  is  low  and  selfish, 
because  it  encourages  itself  to  efforts  by  the  prospect 


Si  ''CONCERNING  THE  CllOWN." 

of  the  crown.  If  there  are  any  men  who  are  Chris- 
tians— if  such  a  contradiction  can  be  even  stated 
in  words — only  because  of  what  they  hope  to  gain 
thereby  in  another  world,  they  will  not  get  what  they 
hope  for  ;  and  they  would  not  like  it  if  they  did.  I 
do  not  believe  that  there  are  any  such;  and  sure  I 
am,  if  there  are,  that  it  is  not  Christianity  that  has- 
made  them  so.  But  a  thing  that  we  must  not 
set  as  the  supreme  motive,  we  may  rightly  accept 
as  a  subsidiary  encouragement.  We  are  not  Chris- 
tians unless  the  dominant  motive  of  our  lives  be  the 
love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  and  unless  we  feel 
a  necessity,  because  of  loving  Him,  to  aim  to  be  like 
Him.  But,  that  being  so,  who  shall  hinder  me  from 
quickening  my  flagging  energies,  and  stimulating  my 
torpid  faith  and  encouraging  my  cowardice,  by  the 
thought  that  yonder  there  remain  rest,  victory,  the 
fulness  of  life,  the  flashing  of  glory,  and  the  purity  of 
perfect  righteousness  ?  If  such  hopes  are  low  and 
selfish  as  motives,  would  God  that  more  of  us  Avere 
obedient  to  such  low  and  selfish  motives  1 

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  this  spring  of  action  is  not 
as  strong  in  the  Christians  of  this  day  as  it  used  to 
be,  and  as  it  should  be.  You  do  not  hear  much  about 
heaven  in  ordinary  preaching.  I  do  not  think  it 
occupies  a  very  large  place  in  the  average  Christian 
man's  mind.  We  have  all  got  such  a  notion  nowa- 
days of  the  great  good  that  the  Gospel  does  in  society 
and  in  the  present,  and  some  of  us  have  been  so 
frightened  by  the  nonsense  that  has  been  talked  about 
the  "  other-worldliness  "  of  Christianity — as  if  that 
was  a  disoTace  to  it — that  it  seems  to  me  that  the 


''COXCEUMNG  THE  CllOirN.' 


future  of  glory  and  blessedness  has  very  largely  faded 
away,  as  a  motive  for  Christian  men's  energies,  like 
the  fresco  off  a  neglected  convent  wall. 

And  I  want  to  say,  dear  brethren,  that  I  believe, 
for  my  part,  that  we  suffer  terribly  by  the  com- 
parative neglect  into  which  this  side  of  Christian 
truth  has  fallen.  Do  you  not  think  that  it  would 
make  a  difference  to  you  if  you  really  believed, 
iind  carried  always  with  you  in  your  thoughts,  the 
thrilling  consciousness  that  every  act  of  the  present 
was  registered,  and  would  tell  on  the  fiir  side 
yonder  ? 

We  do  not  know  much  of  that  future,  and  these 
days  are  intolerant  of  mere  unverifiable  hypotheses. 
Eut  accuracy  of  knowledge  and  detiniteness  of  im- 
pression do  not  always  go  together,  nor  is  there 
the  fulness  of  the  one  wanted  for  the  clearness  and 
force  of  the  other.  Though  the  thread  which  we 
throw  across  the  abyss  is  very  slender,  it  is  strong 
enough,  like  the  string  of  a  boy's  kite,  to  bear  the 
messengers  of  hope  and  desire  that  we  may  send  up  it, 
and  strong  enough  to  bear  the  gilts  of  grace  that  will 
surely  come  down  along  it. 

We  cannot  understand  to-day  unless  we  look  at  it 
with  eternity  for  a  background.  The  landscape  lacks 
its  explanation,  until  the  mists  lift  and  we  see  the 
white  summits  of  the  Himalayas  lying  behind  and 
glorifying  the  low  sandy  plain.  Would  your  life  not 
be  different;  would  not  the  things  in  it  that  look  great 
be  wholesomely  dwindled  and  yet  be  magnitied;  would 
not  sorrow  be  calmed,  and  life  become  "  a  solemn 
scorn  of  ills,"  and  energies  be  stimulated,  and  all  be 


86  ''COKCEBNIKG  THE  CROWNS 

different,  if  you  really  ''  did  it  to  obtain  an  incorrup- 
tible crown  ? " 

Brethren,  let  us  try  to  keep  more  clearl}'  before  us, 
as  solemn  and  blessed  encouragement  in  our  lives, 
these  great  thoughts.  The  garland  hangs  on  the 
goal,  but  "a  man  is  not  crowned  unless  he  strive 
accordino:  to  the  lav/s  "of  the  arena.  The  laws  are 
two :  No  man  can  enter  for  the  conflict  but  by  faitli 
in  Christ ;  no  man  can  win  in  the  struggle  but  by 
faithful  eftbrt.  So  the  first  law  is,  "  Believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and  the  second  is,  ''  Hold  fast  that 
thou  hast ;  let  no  man  take  thy  crown." 


IX. 


Zbc  %ovVb  Supper  a  iDcclarator^  1Rite, 


Ye  do  sliow  th.e  Lord's  death  till  He  come." 
1  CoK.  xi.  26. 

HESE  words  occur  in  the  course  of  the 
oldest  narrative  of  the  institution  of 
the  Lord's  Supper.  The  Apostle 
declares  that  he  received  his  infor- 
mation directly  from  Jesus  Christ. 
So  that  we  have  here  an  independent  Avitness  to  the 
facts.  The  testimony  carries  us  back  beyond  the 
date  of  the  earliest  of  our  existing  gospels,  and  brings 
us  within  five-and-twenty  years  of  the  Crucitixion. 
By  that  early  period,  then,  the  Lord's  Supper  was 
universally  observed ;  and  not  only  so,  but  it  had 
been  in  existence  long  enough  to  have  been  corrupted. 
The  corruptions  are  instructive,  as  is  also  the  apostolic 
method  of  dealing  with  them. 

The  abuses  to  which  the  Apostle  refers,  and  which 
are  his  sole  reason  for  mentioning  the  Lord's  Supper 
at  all,  are  mainly  two,  both  of  which  cast  great  light 
on  the  earliest  form  of  the  ordinance.  Some 
Corinthians  were  accustomed  to  make  it  an  occasion 
for  gluttony  and  intoxication,  and  some  vrere 
accustomed  to  eat,  as  the  Apostle   says,  "  their   own 


88        THE  LOBD'S  SUPPER  A  DECLAPATOPY  PIPE. 

supper,"  SO  breaking  the  unity  which  the  rite  was  in 
part  intended  to  express. 

How  would  it  have  been  possible  for  abuses  of  that 
sort  to  arise,  unless  the  first  form  of  the  observance  of 
the  Lord's  Supper  had  been  associated  with  a  common 
meab  and  the  domestic  aspect  been  prominent  in  it  ? 
And  how  would  individual  hurry  in  partaking  each 
one  of  his  own  supper  have  been  possible,  if  there  had 
been  present  an  officiating  priest  to  do  his  magic  ere 
the  rite  could  be  observed  ?  It  is  a  strange  picture, 
to  our  eyes,  which  necessarily  arises  from  the  con- 
sideration of  these  two  abuses.  And  it  is  a  long  road 
from  the  upper  room  where  the  Corinthian  Church 
met  to  the  "  tremendous  sacrifice  of  the  Mass." 

The  Apostle's  way  of  dealing  with  the  abuses  is 
quite  as  remarkable  as  they  are,  and  quite  as 
ilhiminative,  as  I  think,  as  to  the  true  sio-nificance 
and  sacredness  of  this  ordinance.  I  simply  take  the 
words  before  us  as  they  lie,  noting  the  three  points 
which  he  emphasizes  in  order  to  enforce  his  doctrine  of 
the  sanctity  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  It  is  a  proclamation. 
It  is  a  proclamation  of  the  death  of  Christ.  It  is  a 
proclamation  perpetually  "  till  He  come."  That  is  all, 
and  he  thinks  it  is  enough. 

Now,  then,  let  us  deal  with  these  three  things. 

I. — First,  then,  this  great  thought  that  the  essential 
characteristic  of  this  ordinance  is  that  it  is  a  declara- 
tion. 

What  it  declares  we  shall  have  to  speak  about 
presently.  It  is  its  nature,  not  its  theme,  that  I  first 
note.  The  worl^,  rendered  "  show  forth  "  means  fully 
to  proclaim  aloud  by  word  of  mouth,  and  it  is  generally 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER  A  DECLARATORY  RITE.         83 

employed  in  reference  to  the  preacliing  of  the  Gospel, 
or  of  the  Word  of  God.  Plainly,  then,  the  Apostle 
wishes  to  parallel  the  two  things,  the  oral  declaration 
of  the  Gospel,  and  the  symbolical  declaration  of  the 
same  verities,  as  standing  on  precisely  the  same 
ground,  and  differing  only  in  regard  of  the  method 
which  is  adopted  for  their  proclamation,  and  the 
senses  to  which  they  are  directed.  A  parable  is  a 
spoken  symbol ;  a  symbol  is  an  acted  parable.  The 
one  and  the  other  lay  hold  upon  the  Material,  and 
bend  it,  flexible  as  it  is,  to  become  the  illustration  and 
partial  embodiment  of  the  Spiritual.  Such  is,  as  the 
Apostle  says,  the  nature  of  this  rite.  It  stands  on  the 
same  level  as  any  other  method  of  declaring  the 
truths  which  it  declares,  and  its  only  distinction  lies 
in  the  peculiarity  of  the  method  adopted,  which  is  a 
symbolical  presentation,  to  the  eye,  of  the  facts  which 
are  given  to  the  ear  in  what  we  ordinarily  call  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel. 

Xow,  it  is  clear  that  I  am  not  forcing  too  much 
meaning  into  a  single  expression,  because,  throughout 
this  whole  context,  there  is  not  a  single  word  that 
goes  beyond  such  a  conception  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 
It  is  a  memorial,  and,  as  the  Apostle  says  in  my  text, 
the  reason  Avhy  it  is  a  memorial  is  because  it  is  a 
proclamation.  Or,  to  put  it  into  other  words,  by  the 
rite  we  declare  to  ourselves  and  to  others  the  Christian 
facts,  and  the  declaration  helps  us  to  bring  them  to 
mind,  and  to  feed  upon  Him  whom  they  reveal  to  us. 

Nothing  beyond  that  lies  in  this  context.  And  the 
omission  of  any  reference  to  anything  unique,  mystical 
— still  more,  supernatural — in  the  rite,  is  all  the  more 


90         THE  LORD'S  SUPPER  A  BE  CLARA  TORY  RITE. 

remarkable  if  jou  remember  the  purpose  that  induced 
the  Apostle  to  speak  about  it  at  all — viz.,  to  rebuke 
irreverence,  and  to  elevate  the  notions  of  the  Corinthian 
Christians  as  to  the  sanctity  of  the  ordinance.  If  he 
had  shared  the  ideas  of  the  people  who  call  themselves 
his  "  successors,"  how  could  he  have  refrained  from 
using  that  conclusive  argument,  w^hen  his  purpose  was 
to  enforce  the  sacredness  of  the  rite  ?  The  only  reason 
why  he  did  not  use  it  w^as  because  he  never  dreamt  of 
it,  nor  had  it  ever  entered  into  the  horizon  of  the 
Christian  consciousness  of  his  day.  The  sacredness 
lies  in  the  proclamation  which  it  makes,  and  that  is 
sacredness  enough. 

But  then,  brethren,  as  every  king's  crovvu  and  every 
wedding  ring  bear  witness,  all  symbols  ai-e  apt  to  run 
to  seed,  and  there  gathers  round  them,  by  swift  accre- 
tion, almost  necessarily,  at  all  events  generally,  some- 
thing that  is  far  more  than  symbolical,  even  a  super- 
stitious use  of  them.  Therefore  our  Lord,  recognizing 
the  needs  of  sense,  has  made  concession  to  sense,  in 
the  two  ordinances  of  His  Church ;  and  recoonisino: 
the  dangers  of  symbol,  has  rigidly  limited  the  symbols 
to  the  two  appointed  by  Himself.  But  men  have  not 
lived  at  that  lofty  elevation.  And  paganism,"  when  it 
came  into  the  Church,  grasped  at  the  symbols,  and 
translated  them  as  it  had  translated  those  belonging 
to  the  system  of  idolatrous  worship  Vvhich  in  name 
was  rejected  and  in  spirit  too  often  retained.  All 
that  is  vulgar,  and  all  that  is  sensuous,  and  all  that  is 
weak  in  humanity,  cling  to  the  outward  rite,  and 
transform  it  into  a  power.  And  so  we  find  that  the 
baleful  shadow  of  priestcraft  is  creeping  over  England 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER  A  DECLARATORY  RITE.        91 

again  to-day,  and  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  Christi- 
anity is  being  shifted  from  personal  union  by  faith 
with  Jesus  Christ  to  participation  in  an  outward  form 
which  brinofs  the  benefits  of  union  with  Him. 

o 

And  I  for  my  part  believe,  though  it  may  sound  in 
these  days  of  a3sthetic  worship  and  growing  regard 
for  ceremonial,  extremely  and  archaically  Puritan  and 
narrow — I  believe  that  there  is  no  logical  standing 
ground  between  these  two  conceptions  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  "  Ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death,"  and  on  the 
other  hand  the  extreme  Eoman  Catholic  view,  to 
which  so  many  people  to-day  seem  to  be  so  rapidly 
drifting.  Nonconformists  used  to  understand  the 
limits  of  ritual  and  the  place  of  ordinances.  Some 
of  us,  I  am  afraid,  are  beginning  to  falter  in  our  repe- 
tition of  the  ancient  witness  wdiich  our  fathers  have 
borne. 

IL — Notice  hero  the  theme  of  the  proclamation. 

"  Ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death."  Now  I  need  not 
remind  you,  I  suppose,  that  there  is  perhaps  no  better 
evidence  of  an  historical  fact  than  the  almost  con- 
temporaneous origin,  and  continuous  duration,  of  some 
commemorative  symbolical  act,  as  the  history  of  all 
nations  may  tell  us.  And  it  should  be  taken  fairty 
into  account,  in  estimating  the  historical  evidence  for 
the  veracity  of  the  Gospel  narratives,  that  almost 
simultaneously  with  the  events  which  they  profess  to 
record  there  sprang  up,  and  there  has  continued  to 
exist  ever  since,  this  rite.  The  book  of  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles  shows  us  that  immediately  after  Pente- 
cost the  disciples  "  continued  steadfastly  in  the 
breaking  of  bread  " ;  and  that  at  a  later  period  they 


02         THE  LORD\S  SUPPER  A  DECLARATORY  RITE. 

were  in  the  habit  of  assembhng  on  the  first  day  of 
the  week  for  the  same  purpose.  So  I  claim  this  long- 
practised  rite,  which  can  be  traced  up  almost  to  the 
open  grave  of  the  Master,  as  a  very  strong  attestation 
of  the  historical  veracity  of  the  Gospel  narratives. 
Thus,  in  the  lowest  sense,  Ave  do  proclaim  the  Lord's 
death. 

But  the  force  of  the  words  goes  far  beyond  that. 
Note,  then,  and  give  to  it  due  importance  in  your 
conception  of  what  the  Gospel  truth  and  Christ's 
teachings  are,  the  fact  that  He  Himself  lihose  out 
from  all  His  history  His  death  as  the  thing  which  day 
by  day  loving  hearts  were  to  remember,  and  hungry 
souls  were  to  feed  on.  Why  was  that  ?  Why  was  it 
that  He  passed  by  all  the  rest  and  fixed  on  that  ?  It 
seems  to  me  that  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  Supper 
ought  to  exercise  the  influence  of  a  barrier  against  all 
attempts  to  minimize  or  to  diminish  the  significance 
and  the  importance  of  Christ's  death.  What  do 
churches  which  have  ceased  to  proclaim  the  full 
doctrine  that  the  death  of  Christ  is  the  life  of  the 
world  do  with  that  rite  ?  They  neglect  it  or  let  it 
drop  into  desuetude  or  explain  it  away  by  all  sorts  of 
obviously  insufficient  explanations.  But  there  it 
stands.  Xot  His  words  of  gentleness  ;  not  His  deeds 
of  power  ;  not  His  teachings  of  wisdom  and  of  truth  ; 
not  His  revelation  of  God  by  the  beauty  of  a  perfected 
humanity  and  the  patience  of  inexhaustible  tender- 
ness, are  what  He  desires  to  be  remembered  by ;  but 
that  death  upon  the  Cross.  Surely,  surely,  that 
indicates  a  unique  influence  and  power  as  residing 
there. 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER  A  DECLARATORY  RITE.         93 

And  that  same  conviction  is  enforced  if  we  remember 
that  the  showing  of  the  Lord's  death,  which  is  accom- 
plished in  this  rite,  shows  it  under  very  distinct  con- 
ditions, explanatory  of  its  meaning  and  power.  For 
the  duplication'oTthe  memorials  into  the  bread  and  the 
wine  taken  separately  indicates  a  death  by  violence  ; 
and  the  language  of  the  institution  points  us  to  deep 
mysteries — the  body  "  broken  "  or  given  "  for  you  " — 
and  the  "  blood  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins."  The 
same  idea  is  conveyed  by  the  associations  which  our 
Lord  was  careful  to  establish  between  this  feast  of  the 
\  Christian  Church  and  the  Passover  feast  of  the  Jewish, 
He  swept  aside  ^he  sacrifice  that  was  made  for  the 
redemption  of  Israel  from  the  captivity  of  Egypt,  and 
He  said  "  Forget  the  shadow  and  remember  the 
substance,  forget  the  sacrifice  that  was  made  of  the 
Lamb,  unbroken  in  bone,  and  remember  the  other  of 
Him  wdiose  body  w^as  given  for  you,  the  Lamb  of  God^ 
the  Passover  for  the  sins  of  the  w^orld." 

The  same  declaration  of  redeeming  power,  as  lyings 
in  the  death  of  Christ,  is  enforced  by  the  other  refer- 
ence, which  our  Lord  Himself  has  bid  us  see,  to  the 
new  covenant  in  His  blood,  the  covenant  of  wdiich  the 
articles  are  remission  of  sins,  the  mutual  possession  of 
God  by  the  redeemed  soul  and  of  that  soul  by  God, 
the  direct  knowledge  of  Him,  and  the  continual 
inscribing  of  His  law  upon  the  heart. 

And  so,  brethren,  we  have  not  to  look  back  to  that 
death  as  simply  the  touching  martyrdom  of  the  purest 
soul  that  ever  lived.  AVe  have  not  to  look  back  to 
Christ's  work  as  having  been  done  as  they  who  re- 
ject  His  propitiatory  death  are  forced  to   regard  it. 


9i        THE  LOBUS  SUPPER  A  DECLARATORY  RITE. 

chiefly  in  His  life  of  gentleness,  in  His  words  of  teach- 
ing, in  His  deeds  of  power  and  of  pity ;  but  we  have 
to  recognise  this  unique  fact,  that  His  death  is  the 
centre  of  His  work,  and  in  a  peculiar  sense  the 
foundation  of  salvation  for  us  all.  "  Ye  do  show  the 
Lord's  death." 

And  "  ye  do  show,"  too,  the  conditions  of  our 
partaking  of  it — viz.,  that  we  should  feed  upon  Him  ; 
the  heart  on  His  love,  the  will  on  His  commandments, 
the  understanding  on  His  word,  and  the  whole  sinful 
man  upon  His  atoning  death.  "  He  that  eatetli  My 
flesh  and  drinketh  My  blood  hath  eternal  life." 

III. — Lastly,  note  the  perpetual  duration  and  pro- 
phetic aspect  of  the  proclamation. 

"  Ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come."  Now 
I  suppose  I  do  need  to  dwell  upon  the  thought  that 
that  distinctly  implies  that  all  through  the  ages  of  the 
Church  the  Apostle  contemplated  the  continuance  of 
this  rite  of  witnessing,  but  I  rather  desire  to  suggest 
to  you  how,  in  the  very  rite  itself,  there  can  be 
distinguished,  not  only  a  commemorative  aspect  or  a 
backward  look,  but  a  prophetic  aspect,  and  a  symbol 
of  that  which  is  to  come. 

'•'  Till  He  come."  All  symbolical  worshijD  carries  in 
itself  the  w^itness  of  its  own  cessation,  and  points 
onward  to  the  time  when  it  shall  not  be  needed.  It 
is,  as  I  said,  a  concession  to  sense ;  it  is  a  confession  of 
weakness.  It  is,  if  not  inconsistent  with,  at  least  in 
some  measure  incongruous  with,  the  highest  genius  o^ 
the  Christian  dispensation.  That  is  no  reason  for 
precipitate  dispensing  with  external  form.  No  man 
can  judge  another  in  regard  of  that  matter.     There  is 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER  A  DECLARATORY  RITE.         9^ 

need  for  a  great  deal  more  charity,  both  on  the  side  of 
those  who  inchne  to  the  Quaker  freedom  from  all  ritual, 
and  of  those  who  incline,  by  natural  disposition,  to  the 
other  side,  than  is  usually  practised.  It  is  no  proof  of 
spiritual  maturity  to  try  to  do  without  the  help  of 
external  rites.  It  is  no  proof  of  spiritual  immaturity 
to  cleave  to  them,  if  only  it  be  distinctly  understood 
that  the  whole  value  of  them  lies,  not  in  what  they 
are,  but  in  what  tlicy  signify.  But  still  the  existence 
of  symbolical  worship  is  a  prophecy  of  its  own  cessa- 
tion. It  digs  its  own  grave,  as  it  were;  and  just 
because  here  we  need  the  bread  and  wine  to  help  us 
to  remember  the  death,  the  taking  of  these,  in  com- 
pliance with  that  temporary  necessity,  itself  carries  our 
thoughts,  or  ought  to  carry  them,  onward  to  the  time 
when,  Christ  Himself  being  present  with  His  Church, 
and  we  sitting  at  His  table  in  His  kingdom,  the 
symbols  shall  be  no  more  needed.  "  I  saw  no  temple 
therein."     "  Ye  do  show     .     .     .     till  He  come." 

Again,  the  memory  of  His  death  is  fitted,  and 
intended,  to  quicken  the  hopes  of  His  return.  For 
the  two  belong  to  one  another,  and  are  bolted  together, 
if  I  might  so  say,  like  two  stars  revolving  round  a 
common  centre.  He  being  what  He  is,  the  Cross  and 
the  open  sepulchre  cannot  be  the  last  that  the  world 
is  to  see  of  Him.  The  Death  demands  the  Throne,  and 
the  Throne  certifies  the  Return.  So  the  memory  of  the 
past  is  brightened  into  hopes  for  the  future  ;  and  the 
radiance  behind  us  flings  the  reflection  forward  on  to 
the  darkness  before,  and  illumines  that  with  a  sister 
lustre.  He  has  come  and  died,  therefore  He  will  come 
and  reici'n. 


96        THE  LORD'S  SUPPER  A  DECLARATORY  RITE. 

And  then,  still  further,  hope  is  inextricably  inter- 
twined with  memory ;  because,  in  this  domestic  rite, 
we  see  the  symbol  that  the  Master  Himself  has  given 
us  of  the  calm  felicities  of  that  life  beyond.  He 
Himself  said,  on  that  last  night  Avhen  He  sat  at  the 
table,  "  I  appoint  unto  you  a  Kingdom  that  ye  may  sit 
at  My  table  in  My  Kingdom";  feeding  on  Christ  then 
in  realit}^  as  we  now  do  in  symbol  and  imperfectly  by 
faith;  companioned  by  Christ  according  to  His  gracious 
promise,  "  I  will  sup  with  Him  and  He  with  Me,"  as 
in  the  depths  of  spiritual  communion  we  now  partially 
do ;  reknit  to  those  whose  empty  places  at  this  board 
below  make  some  of  us  always  solitary  and  often  sad  ; 
and  having  the  Master  Himself  to  bless  the  feast  and 
to  part  the  viands. 

"  They  shall  go  out  no  more."  From  the  supper 
room  Christ  went  to  His  Cross ;  the  traitor  to  his 
gibbet ;  the  beloved  Apostle  to  his  denial ;  the  rest  to 
forsake  and  to  fly.  But  from  that  feast  there  will  be 
no  going  forth,  and  the  loftier  service  of  heaven  shall 
not  interrupt  participation  in  Jesus,  for  His  servants- 
shall  serve  Him  and  see  His  face. 

Brethren,  the  one  question  for  us  all  is,  "  Do  I  feed 
upon  Jesus  Christ  ?  Do  I  discern  that  body  as  broken 
for  and  given  to  me  ?  Do  I  know  that  my  sins  are 
remitted  by  the  shedding  of  His  blood  ?  No 
participation  in  outward  rites  will  bring  or  sustain  the 
spiritual  life.  Partaking  of  Jesus  Christ  alone  can  do 
that,  and  rites  help  us  to  partake  of  Him  in  the  measure 
in  which  they  bring  His  death  to  heart  and  mind,  and 
so  help  faith  to  grasp  it  as  the  means  of  our  salvation. 
His   solemn   words,   "  Whoso    eateth    My  flesh   and 


THE  LORD'S  SUPPER  A  DECLARATORY  RITE.        97 

drinketli  ^ly  blood  liath  eternal  life,"  are  degraded 
when  they  are  understood  as  referrmg  to  the  external 
ordinance.  In  the  same  conversation  He  Himself 
interpreted  them  when  He  said,  •'  He  that  believeth  on 
Me  hath  everlasting  life." 

"  Believe,   and   thou   hast   eaten,"  said   Augustine. 
"  Eat,  and  ye  shall  live  for  ever,"  says  Jesus  Christ. 


A^' 


X. 


^be  Sour6  ^biret  an&  Satief action. 

"  My  soul  thirsteth  for  Thee.     .    .     . 

"My  soul  shall  be  satisfied.     .     .     . 

'•'  My  soul  followeth  hard  after  Thee." — Psalm  Ixiii.  1,  5,  8. 

F  we  let  this  psalm  speak  for  itself  it 
tells  us  a  good  deal  about  the  singer's 
circumstances.  He  was  in  a  dry  and 
waterless  land,  excluded  from  his 
wonted  worship  in  the  sanctuary,  sur- 
rounded by  enemies  who  sought  his  life,  apparently  a 
king  whose  ^throne  was  in  danger,  conscious  of  many 
times  of  deliverance  and  help  in  past  trials,  and  an- 
ticipating an  impending  fight  in  which  his  foes  should 
be  delivered  to  the  power  of  the  sword,  and  their 
corpses  be  torn  by  beasts  of  prey.  All  these  things 
are  in  the  psalm.  They  all  seem  to  me  to  converge 
on  David,  and  to  make  it  far  more  probable  that  he 
is  the  author  than  that  anyone  else  is. 

Whoever  ~\vrote  it  has  given  immortal  expression  to 
the  experiences  of  a  soul  in  communion  with  God. 
The  three  clauses  which  I  have  ventured  to  isolate 
from  their  connection  are  the  j)ivots  on  which  the 
psalm  turns,  and  they^give,  ver}^  strikingly  and  beauti- 
fully, the  stages  of  seeking  and  finding  God. 


THE  SOUL'S  THIRST  AND  SATISFACTION.  99 


We  have,  first,  the  soul  thirstincr,  or  loncfine  for 
God ;  then  the  longing  soul  satisfied  m  God ;  and, 
last,  the  satisfied  soul  pressing  still  closer  to  God. 
Happy  are  they  who  can  take  these  words  as  the 
transcripts  of  their  own  experiences.  If  we  begin 
with  the  first,  we  shall  attain  to  the  second  and  the 
third.  Let  me  ask  you,  then,  to  look  at  them  in  suc- 
cession. 

I.— First,  we  have  the  soul  thirsting  for  God. 
Now,    the    Psalmist    is   a   poet,  and   has   a   poet's 
sensitiveness  to  the  external  aspects  of  nature,  and 
the  imagination  that  delights  in  seeing  in  these  the 
reflections   of  his  own  moods.     So,  very  beautifully, 
he  looks  upon  the  dreary  scene  around,  and  sees  in  it 
symbols  of  the  yet  drearier  experience  within.     He 
beholds  the  grey  monotony  of  the  waterless  wilderness, 
where  the  earth  is  cracked  with  clefts  that  look  like 
mouths  gaping  for  the  rain  that  does  not  come,  and 
he  recognizes  the  likeness  of  his  own  yearning  spirit. 
llsi  feels  the  pangs  of  bodily  weariness  and  thirst,  and 
these  seem  to  him  to  be  but  feeble  S3mibols   of  the 
deeper-seated  pains  of  desire  which  touch  his  soul. 
Of  course,  the  occasion  of  his  longing  was  his  seclusion 
from  the  outward  worship    of  the   sanctuary.     The 
stage  of  revelation  and  of  religion  at  which  he  stood 
made  the  connection  between  form  and  spirit  more 
intimate  than  it  ought  to  be  with  us,  who  know  that 
neither  in  Gerizim  nor  in  Jerusalem  is  God's  throne. 
But  whilst  thus  the  occasion  of  his  lonofinGf  belonofed 
to  the  era  in  which  he  lived,  the  substance  of  it  is 
permanent.     All  men  thirst  after  God.     The  unrest, 
the  deep  yearnings,  the  longings  and  desires  of  our 


\ 


100  TEE  SOUL'S  THIRST  AND  SATISFACTION. 

natures — what  are  they  all  except  cries  for  the  living 
God,  tendrils  which  are  put  forth,  seeking  after 
the  great  prop  which  alone  is  lit  to  lift  us  from  the 
mud  of  this  louver  Avorld  ?  But  the  misery  is  that  we 
do  not  know  what  Ave  want,  that  we  misinterpret  the 
meaning  of  our  desires,  that  we  go  to  the  wrong 
sources  for  our  need  ;  that  when  our  souls  are  crying 
out  for  God,  we  fling  them  worldly  good  and  say, 
"  There,  satisfy  yourselves  on  that ! "  A  man  that 
has  a  wild  thing  in  a  cage,  and  does  not  know  what 
its  food  is,  when  he  hears  it  yelping,  will  cast  to  it 
what  he  thinks  may  suit  it,  on  which  it  eagerly  springs, 
and  then  turns  from  it  in  disgust.  So,  men  seek  to 
feed  their  souls  on  the  things  of  earth,  and,  all  the 
while,  what  they  are  crying  for  is,  not  earth,  but  God. 
Hence,  desire  is  misery ;  and  longing,  instead  of  being 
the  prophecy  of  blessedness,  is  pain.  We  resort  to 
muddy  pools  and  broken  cisterns,  and  try  there  to 
slake  our  thirst,  in  vain.  Oh,  brethren,  if  w^e  would 
give  heed  to  the  deepest  voices  within,  Ave  should 
make  fewer  mistakes  in  the  ordering  of  our  lives,  and 
in  the  selection  of  our  aims ;  and  should,  therefore, 
save  ourselves  from  many  an  ache,  and  from  the  fever 
of  many  a  thirst,  that  Ave  never,  ncA^er  shall  satisfy, 
apart  from  God.  ShipAvrecked  sailors  drink  salt-Avater 
in  their  Avild  thirst,  and  it  makes  them  mad, 
Travellers  in  the  desert  are  draAvn  by  the  mirage  to 
seemingly  shimmering  lakes,  fringed  Avith  palm  trees  ; 
and  it  is  nothing  but  sand.  "My  soul  thirsteth  for 
Thee."     Let  us  interpret  the  desire  aright. 

Let  us  see  to  it,  too,  that  since  Ave  belicA^e,  or  say  aa^o 
believe,  that  God  is  our  chiefest  good,  the  intensity 


THE  SOUL'S  THIRST  AND  SATISFACTION.         101 

of  the  longing  bear  some  proportion  to  the  worth 
of  the  thing  desired.  Can  there  be  anything  more 
preposterous,  anything  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the 
word  more  utterly  irrational,  than  tepid  wishes  for 
the  greatest  good  ?  Can  it  be  anything  but  lunacy 
for  men  to  let  the  whole  swift,  strong  current  of 
their  atiections  run  towards  Avorldly  things,  and  only 
a  little  dribble  be  led  off  to  flow  towards  that  which 
is  their  true  good  ?  What  Avould  you  think  of  a 
man  that  had  some  feeble  wish  after  health  or  life, 
or  for  the  beloved  of  his  heart  to  be  his  own  ?  And 
what  shall  we  say  of  men  whose  very  profession 
declares  that  their  estimate  of  God  is  that  He  is 
the  best  and  only  home  and  strength  of  their  hearts, 
and  who  yet,  if  they  were  honest  with  themselves, 
would  acknowledge  that  they  do  not  wish  for  Him 
one-tenth  part  as  much  as  they  do  for  prosperity  in 
business,  the  gratification  of  their  ambitions,  the 
satisfaction  of  their  affections,  the  success  of  their 
purposes,  or  the  attainment  of  their  fleeting  desires  ? 

This  Psalmist  was  making  no  exaggerated  state- 
ment when  he  said,  "  My  soul  thirsteth,"  and  my  flesh 
pines.  Jjoes  not  his  eagerness  shame  our  lack  of 
earnestness  ?  Cold  wishes  for  God  are  as  flagrant  an 
absurdity  as  cold  sunshine.  Religion  is  nothing  if 
it  not  fervour. 

11. — We  have  here  the  seekinof  soul  satisfied. 

"  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied,  as  with  marrow  and 
fatness."  Of  course,  the  imagery  of  a  feast  naturally 
follows  upon  the  previous  metaphor  of  the  soul's 
thirst. 

Now,  it  is  to  be  observed  here  with  what  beautiful 


102  THE  sours  THIRST  AND  SATISFACTION. 

and  yet  singular  swiftness  the  whole  mood  of  the 
Psalmist  changes.  People  may  say  that  that  is  un- 
natural, but  it  is  true  to  the  deepest  experiences ;  and 
it  unveils  for  us  one  of  the  surest  and  most  precious 
blessinofs  of  a  true  Christian  life — viz.,  that  fruition  is 
ever  attendant  upon  desire.  The  Psalmist  may  have 
long  been  musing  before  the  fire  burned,  and  he  spake 
with  his  tongue.  We  know  not  how  that  may  be, 
but  this  we  know,  that  the  lips  which  were  parted  to 
say,  "  My  soul  thirsteth,"  had  scarcely  uttered  it  when 
again  they  opened  to  say,  "  My  soul  is  satisfied."  It 
is  no  wonder.  God's  gifts  are  never  delayed,  in  the 
hiofhest  of  all  reoions.  In  the  lower  there  often  are 
long  delays — the  lingerings  of  love  for  our  good — but 
in  the  loftiest,  fruition  grows  side  by  side  with  long- 
ing. The  same  moment  witnesses  the  petition  flashed 
to  Heaven,  as  with  the  speed  of  lightning,  and  the 
answer  coming  back  to  the  waiting  heart ;  as  in  tro- 
pical lands  when  the  rain  comes,  what  was  barren, 
baked  earth  in  a  day  or  two  is  rich  meadow,  all  ablaze 
with  flowers,  and  the  dry  torrent  beds,  where  the 
stones  lay  white  and  glistening  ghastly  in  the  hot 
sunshine,  are  foaming  Avith  rushing  streams  and 
fringed  with  budding  oleanders.  Spring  comes  at  a 
bound  on  the  back  of  Winter  in  the  Arctic  regions. 
In  the  realm  of  communion  Avith  God,  to  desire  is  to 
have ;  and  the  soul  that  thirsts  has  no  sooner  opened 
the  mouth  wide  than  the  desired  blessing  pours  in 
and  fills  it.  So,  brethren,  there  need  be  no  long 
interval  between  these  two  phases  of  experience  in 
our  cases,  and  if  the  former  be  genuine  and  deep,  the 
latter  will  be  swift  and  immediate. 


THE  SOUL'S  THIRST  AND  SATISFACTION.         103 

Not  only  does  this  second  text  of  ours  give  us  that 
thought  of  the  simultaneousness,  in  regard  of  the 
highest  of  all  gifts,  of  wish  and  enjoyment,  but  it 
also  tells  us  that  the  soul  thus  answered  will  be  satis- 
fied. If  it  be  true,  as  we  have  been  trying  to  say,  that 
God  is  the  real  object  of  all  human  desire,  then  the 
contact  of  the  seeking  soul  with  that  perfect  aim  of 
all  its  seeking  will  bring  rest  to  every  appetite,  its 
desired  food  to  every  wish,  strength  for  every  weak- 
ness, fulness  for  all  emptiness.  Like  two  of  the  notched 
sticks  that  were  formerly  used  as  tallies,  the  seeking 
soul  and  the  giving  God  fit  into  one  another,  and  there 
is  nothing  that  we  need  that  Ave  cannot  get  in  Him. 
So  the  answer  is  the  satisfying  of  the  soul. 

And,  still  further,  as  our  psalm  tells  us,  the  satisfied 
souls  breaks  into  music.  For  it  goes  on  to  say,  after 
the  words,  "  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  with  marrow 

and  fatness,"  "  my  mouth  shall  praise  Him  with 

joyful  lips." 

Of  course,  the  Psalmist  had  still  many  occasions  for 
sorrow  and  doubt  and  fear.  Nothing  had  changed  in 
his  outward  circumstances.  The  desert  was  still  round 
him.  Jerusalem  was  still  far  away,  on  the  other  side 
of  the  river.  The  foe  was  still  pursuing,  murderous 
in  heart  as  before.  The  little  camp  was  still  shelter- 
less in  the  open.  But  this  had  changed — God  was 
felt  to  be  as  close  as  ever  He  had  been  in  the 
sanctuary.  And  that  consciousness  altered  every- 
thing, and  turned  all  the  Psalmist's  lamentations  into 
jubilant  anthems.  It  transposed  his  music  from  the 
minor  key,  and  his  lips  broke  into  songs  of  gladness. 
There   is,  perhaps,  a  very  beautiful  allusion   to   his 


]  04  THE  SO  UrS  THIRST  A  ND  SA  TISFA  CTIO  N. 

circumstances  in  the  verse  that  follows  our  second 
text,  where  he  speaks  about  meditating  on  God  in  the 
alight  watches.  The  unprotected  encampment  had  to 
keep  vigilant  guard  lest  the  nightly  silence  should  be 
broken  by  the  shout  of  surprising  foes.  But  even 
in  such  circumstances  this  man  had  a  song  in  the 
night,  and  could  meditate  upon  God. 

Translate  these  particulars  into  general  thoughts, 
and  they  are  just  this  : — No  sorrow,  nor  anxiety,  nor 
care,  nor  need  for  vigilance  against  danger  ought  to 
check  the  praise  that  may  come,  and  should  come, 
from  a  heart  in  touch  with  God,  and  a  soul  satisfied 
in  Him.  It  is  a  hard  lesson  for  some  of  us  to  learn ; 
but  it  is  a  lesson,  the  learning  of  which  will  be  full  of 
blessedness.  There  is  a  bird  common  in  our  northern 
districts  which  people  call  the  storm-cock,  because  his 
note  always  rings  out  cheeriest  in  tempestuous  weather. 
That  is  the  kind  of  music  that  the  Christian's  heart 
should  make,  responding,  like  an  ^Eolian  harp,  to  the 
tempest's  breath  by  song,  and  filling  the  night  with 
praise.  It  is  possible  for  us,  even  before  sorrow  and 
sighing  have  fled  away,  to  be  pilgrims  on  the  road, 
"  with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon  our  heads." 
The  Psalmist  felt  that  he  was  sitting  at  a  feast,  "  satis- 
fied as  with  marrow  and  fatness,"  and  he  felt  that  the 
festival  was  incomplete  without  melody. 

III. — And  so,  lastly,  notice  how  the  satisfied  soul 
presses  closer  to  God. 

"  My  soul  followeth  hard  after  Thee,"  says  the  last 
of  our  texts.  The  language  in  the  original  is  ex- 
tremely condensed  and  significant.  Literally  trans- 
lated, though,  of  course,  much  too  clumsily  for  an 


THE  SOUL'S  TEIIiST  AND  SATISFACTION.  105 

English  version,  the  words  run  :  "  My  soul  cleaveth 
after  Thee,"  expressing,  in  one  pregnant  phrase,  two 
attitudes  usually  felt  to  be  incompatible,  that  of  calm 
repose  and  that  of  eager  pursuit.  But  these  two,  un- 
like each  other  as  they  are,  may  be,  and  should  be, 
harmoniously  blended  in  the  experience  of  a  Christian 
life.  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  the  clinging  of  satis- 
faction, and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  ever-satisfied 
stimulus  to  a  closer  approach. 

The  soul  that  is  satisfied  will,  and  ought  to,  adhere 
with  tenacity  to  the  source  that  satisfies  it.  The 
word  that  is  used  here  is  the  same  which  is  employed 
in  statino'  the  o'reat  law  of  the  sacredest  of  human 
affections  :  "  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his 
father  and  mother  and  cleave  unto  his  wife."  It  is 
the  same  word  that  is  emplo3^ed  to  describe  how  Ruth 
clung  to  Naomi,  and  for  her  sake  abandoned  country 
and  friends.  With  such  absorbed,  all-sacrificing  de- 
votion and  clinging  tenacity  ought  our  souls  to 
grapple  and  hold  fast  to  God,  as  the  ivy  to  the  tree, 
as  the  limpet  to  its  rock — clinging  to  Him  with  will, 
affections,  thought,  and  by  the  direction  of  the  prac- 
tical life,  and  the  recognition  of  Him  as  present  in  all 
our  distracting  work  and  circumstances. 

From  Him,  and  from  Him  only,  comes  the  true 
satisfaction  for  our  souls,  and  if  thus  our  hearts  are 
fed  on  God,  will  not  the  very  blessedness  of  that  frui- 
tion be  such  as  to  ensure  our  cleaving  to  Him  ?  There 
will  be  no  temptation  for  a  man  to  wander  away  from 
that  source  of  all  good.  I  have  found  all  that  I  need. 
Why  should  I  search  any  further  ?  The  dove  folds 
its   pinions  when  it  reaches  the  ark,  and  needs  no 


106  THE  sours  THIRST  AND  SATISFACTION. 

more  to  wing  its  weary  way  over  sullen  waters,  vainly 
searching  for  a  resting-place.  Nomad  tribes,  when 
they  find  themselves  in  some  rich  valley,  unload  their 
camels,  and  pitch  their  tents,  and  say,  "  Here  will  we 
dwell,  for  the  land  is  good."  And  so  we,  if  we  have 
made  ex^Dcrience,  as  we  may,  of  God  and  His  sweet 
sufficiency,  and  sufficient  sweetness,  should  be  de- 
livered from  temptation  to  go  further  and  fare  worse. 
And  then  this  clinoino-  resultinof  from  satisfaction,  is 
accompanied  with  earnest  seeking  after  still  more  of 
the  infinite  Good.  In  other  regions,  and  when  directed 
to  other  objects,  satisfaction  is  apt  to  pass  into  satiety, 
because  the  creature  that  satisfies  us  is  limited.  But 
when  we  turn  ourselves  to  God,  and  seek  for  all  that 
we  need  there,  there  can  be  no  satiety  in  us, 
because  there  can  be  no  exhaustion  of  that  Avhich  is 
in  Him.  The  cup  that  He  gives  us  to  drink  when 
our  souls  thirst  has  nothing  cloying  in  its  sweetness, 
but  rather  a  taste  that  stimulates  to  deeper  draughts 
of  the  same.  So,  the  two  opposing  blessednesses, 
the  blessedness  of  search  that  is  sure  of  finding,  and 
the  blessedness  of  finding  which  is  calm  repose,  are 
united  in  the  Christian  experience.  And  we  may,  at 
every  moment,  have  all  that  we  want  given  to  us,  and 
by  the  very  gift  our  capacity,  and  therefore  our  long- 
ings, be  increased.  Thus,  in  wondrous  alternation, 
satisfaction  and  thirst  beget  each  other,  and  each 
possesses  some  of  the  other's  sweetness. 

And  when  we  thus  press  on  to  know  and  to  possess 
more  of  God,  as  the  Psalmist  tell  us  in  the  context, 
"Thy  right  hand  upholdeth  me."  They  who  thus 
long,  and  possess,  and  long  again,  receive  the  support 


THE  SOUL'S  THIRST  AND  SATISFACTION.  107 

of  that  Divine  hand  in  their  lonpfinG^s  and  in  all  their 
lives. 

So,  dear  friends,  let  us  learn  the  meaning  of  our 
unrest.  Let  us  listen  to  Him  who  says,  "  If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  to  Me,  and  drink."  Then  "  we 
shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more  "  with 
pain,  though  always  with  hapjoy  desire.  Then,  "  satis- 
fied with  goodness,  and  full  of  the  favour  of  the 
Lord,"  we  shall  not  seek  elsewhere  for  our  delights. 
Then,  clasping  and  clasped  by  that  strong  and  gentle 
hand,  we  shall  stand  steadfast  against  all  storms,  and 
lie  in  His  palm,  protected  and  safe  against  all  dangers. 
"  My  sheep  hear  My  voice,  and  I  know  them ;  and 
they  follow  AEe,  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,  and 
they  shall  never  perish ;  and  no  man  shall  pluck 
them  out  of  Mv  hand." 


XL 

IKIlaiting  for  power. 

*'Taery  ye  ia  the  city  of  Jerusalem  until  ye  be  endued  with  power 
from  on  high." — Luke  xxiv.  49. 

UKE  goes  twice  over  the  same  ground — 
the  narrative  of  our  Lord's  forty  days 
after  the  Resurrection,  and  of  the  As- 
cension— in  the  end  of  His  Gospel,  and 
in  the  beginning  of  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles.  The  double  narrative  binds  the  two  books 
together,  and  shows  the  importance  to  be  attached  to 
the  incidents  it  narrates,  and  is  also  interestino-  be- 
cause  it  looks  at  them  from  two  different  points  of 
view.  In  the  Gospel  they  are  regarded  as  the  end  of 
the  earthly  life  ;  in  the  Acts,  as  the  beginning  of  the 
heavenly.  And  so,  in  the  latter  narrative,  wo  have  a 
fuller  explanation  of  the  power  that  the  disciples  were 
to  w^ait  for,  and  a  clear  statement  of  the  great  tasks 
which  they  were  to  do,  when  they  were  equipped  with 
it,  as  well  as  the  promise  of  the  return  of  the  Lord  in 
the  far- oft'  future. 

We  have  to  bring  the  two  narratives  together  in 
order  to  see  the  full  significance  of  either. 

Another  point  to  be  noticed  is  that,  if  we  had  only 
this  Gospel  before  us,  we  might  suppose   that  this 


WAITING  FOR  FOWER  109 


injunction  and  promise  were  given  by  our  Lord  on  the 
day  of  His  resurrection,  but,  with  the  further  hght 
thrown  upon  them  b}^  the  Acts,  w^e  learn  that  the 
interval  of  waiting  was  very  brief,  since  the  words 
that  prescribe  it  were  spoken,  if  not  on  the  very  day  I 
of  the  ascension  itself,  at  least  very  near  it.  xind  so 
there  were  about  ten  days  of  expectancy,  and  then 
came  the  rush  of  the  promised  spirit. 

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  both  the  promise  and  the 
commandment  of  our  text  have  a  bearing,  though  in 
a  modified  way,  upon  us,  as  well  as  upon  the  original 
recipients.  And  whilst  the  greater  part  of  Christendom 
is  to-day  thinking  of  that  past  gift  of  Pentecost,  I  in  this 
sermon  deal  with  its  bearings  on  our  present.  I  think 
I  shall  best  reach  my  end  if  I  simply  ask  you  to  look 
at  the  two  things  in  our  text,  the  promise  and  the 
instruction  ;  the  equipment  for  service,  and  the  wait-  I 
ing  for  it.  "  Tarry  ye  in  the  city  till  ye  be  endued 
with  power  from  on  high." 

I. — Note  then,  first,  the  equipment  for  sei'vice. 

Now  the  metaphor  that  is  concealed  to  an  ordinary 
En  owlish  reader  under  that  archaic  word  "  endued,  " 
is  a  very  simple  and  beautiful  one.  The  word  means 
"  clothed. "  As  we  read  in  other  places  of  being 
"  clothed  with  shame, "  or  "  clothed  Avith  zeal "  ;  and 
of  God  as  being  ''■  clothed  with  majesty  "  ;  in  like  man- 
ner the  apostles  speak  to  us  of  "  putting  on  Christ," 
and  beinof  "  clothed  with  Him,"  and  of  beini;-  "  clothed 
upon  "  with  the  house  that  is  from  heaven.  The  ideas 
of  abundant  fulness  of  qualities,  of  a  gift  that  is 
visible  on  the  outside,  and  of  something  that  wraps 
and  veils  and  dignifies  the  naked  humanity,   lie  in 


110  WAITING  FOR  POWER. 

that  great  word  '•  clothed  with  power  from  on 
high." 

Now,  I  need  not  remind  you  that,  although  in  our 
text  there  is  no  distinct  explanation  of  what  this 
power  consists  in,  the  other  narrative  in  the  Acts 
supplies  what  is  wanted  in  the  interpretation  of  the 
metaphor,  and  identities  it  with  the  gift  of  a  Divine 
Spirit  to  the  Church,  and  to  the  Church  because  to 
each  individual  member  thereof. 

The  gift  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  world — that  is  to 
say,  to  those  in  the  world  who  believe  on  Him — is  the 
gift  of  a  new  life,  communicated  by  the  actual  indwell- 
ing of  the  Divine  Spirit.  I  believe  that  truth  has 
been  far  too  much  neglected  by  modern  Christendom, 
and  that  in  the  neglect  is  to  be  found  a  large  part  of 
the  reason  why  the  neglected  promise  has  been  but 
partially  realized,  and  wh}^  the  Church  of  to-day  is  the 
poor  thing  that  it  so  largely  is.  And  there  is  little, 
as  it  seems  to  me,  that  is  more  needed  by  the  con- 
sciousness of  Christendom  at  large  than  to  go  back, 
with  a  clear  understanding  and  with  an  unfaltering 
faith,  to  that  ancient  promise  of  the  gift  of  a  Divine 
Spirit,  to  dwell  in  every  believing  spirit. 

Brethren,  whether  we  believe  that  such  a  promise 
is  a  phantasm  or  a  Divine  revelation,  vfhether  we 
accept  Christ's  words  or  not,  it  seems  to  me  that  we 
cannot  read  them  without  seeing  that  He  meant  us  to 
believe  that  He  would  give  to  them  that  love  Him 
this  greatest  of  all  gifts.  You  may  accept  the  words, 
or  you  may  reject  them,  but  you  cannot  twist  them  so 
as  to  exclude  the  meaning  of  a  personal  bestowment 
of  a  Divine  Spirit,  without  doing  violence  to  them. 


WAITING  FOR  POJVER.  ill 


We  are  not  to  weaken  that  great  thouglit  into 
metaphor  or  rhetoric,  or  a  strong  way  of  saj'ing  that 
the  influence  of  Christ's  teaching:  will  last  throuo'h  the 
ages.  It  means  a  great  deal  more  than  that.  It 
means  the  gift  of  a  Divine  Spirit  to  dwell  with  us  and 
in  us. 

If  we  think  of  how  much  is  tauglit  us  by  the 
metaphors  and  epithets  under  which  that  gift  is 
described  to  us,  we  shall  still  more  clearly  see,  and  I 
hope  deeply  feel,  its  importance  and  its  blessedness. 
It  is  described  as  wind  or  breath,  the  source  of  life,  the 
immaterial,  invisible  energy  that  sweeps  through  the 
world  and  brings  freshness  where  it  comes ;  that 
varies  in  intensity  from  the  whispering  zeph3TS  of 
some  calm  evening  to  the  gale  that  destroys  cities  and 
lashes  the  ocean  into  tempest.  It  is  fire  that  melts, 
that  Avarms,  that  cleanses  by  consuming  ;  it  is  oil  that 
invigorates  and  supples,  that  drops  upon  the  head  as 
the  designation  to  and  the  bestowment  of  fitness  for 
office.  It  is  water  that  refreshes,  that  fertilizes,  that 
stimulates  all  growth,  that  is  indispensable  to  life  ; 
and  this  stream  flows  from  the  throne  of  God  and  of 
the  Lamb.  It  is  the  Dove,  gentle,  meek,  heaven-sent, 
peace-bringing,  calmly  settling  where  it  lights,  and 
blessing  where  it  settles.  These  are  the  emblems 
under  which  Scripture  sets  forth  this  great  gift.  And 
higher  than  all  is  the  unfigurative  fact,  "  I  will  send 
you  My  Spirit." 

Then  let  us  remember  that  this  gift,  the  character- 
istic blessing  Avhich  Jesus  Christ  has  to  bestow,  with 
its  manifold  blessings,  is  by  the  pledge  and  prophecy 
of  Pentecost  a  perennial  gift.     It  is  not  correct,  in- 


112  WAITING  FOR  POWER. 

deed,  to  say  that  the  Sph'it  of  God  was  given  then  to 
the  Church  once  for  all.  There  is  only  one  thing  that 
is  once  for  all,  and  that  is  the  Sacrifice  for  the  sins  of 
the  whole  world  that  was  made  on  Calvary.  All  else 
is  the  continuation  of  the  consequences  of  that  deed 
once  for  all  done  for  men.  Christ's  work  was  once 
for  all ;  Christ's  workings  are  the  uninterrupted  com- 
munication of  its  results.  The  ofift  is  not  inalienable, 
in  the  sense  that  when  bestowed  it  abides  whatever  the 
demeanour  of  the  recipients,  but  it  is  permanent  in 
the  sense  that  it  is  ever  available,  and  that  if  there  are 
variations,  the  variations  are  due  to  us.  The  fire  was 
lit  on  Pentecost,  and  it  blazes  still.  The  wind  that 
begun  to  blow  on  that  day  has  not  sunk  to  a  sickly 
stagnation  of  calm.  The  river  has  not,  like  the  rivers 
of  Asiatic  plateaux,  been  sucked  up  and  lost  in  the 
thirsty  sand.  The  gift  that  began  to  be  given  when 
these  disciples  were  "  clothed  with  power  "  is  available 
to-day.  It  was  no  prerogative  of  an  official  aristoc- 
racy ;  no  exclusive  bestowment  upon  primitive  Chris- 
tianity. Christendom  should  be  a  democracy,  because 
each  individual  contained  in  it  has  equal  access  to  the 
fountain  of  heavenly  radiance,  and,  apart  from  all  in- 
strumentalities of  priests,  sacraments,  services,  cere- 
monial, every  man  may  and  must  for  himself  draw 
near  to  the  Giver,  and  by  himself  become  the  recipient 
of  the  gifts.  "  On  your  servants  and  on  your  hand- 
maidens will  I  pour  forth  of  My  Spirit." 

Then  there  is  a  second  thought  to  be  considered, 
and  that  is  that  this  Divine  gift  is  the  source  of  all 
poAver  for  Christian  living  and  service.  The  Church 
has  ever   been  tempted,  and  we  as  individuals  are 


WAITING  FOR  POWER.  113 

tempted,  to  fall  back  upon  other  things.  There  is  no 
antagonism  between  the  lower  forms  of  Divine  gifts, 
by  which  men  are  adapted  for  various  types  of 
Christian  service,  and  these  hic^her,  without  which  all 
the  other  are,  as  I  believe,  of  no  avail.  Our  natural 
gifts  are  heightened  into  spiritual  gifts  when  there 
dwells  in  our  hearts  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  anything 
that  we  can  bring  of  eloquence,  of  genius,  of  perse- 
verance, of  diligence,  of  scholarship,  or  anything  else 
is,  by  that  gift,  kindled  into  tenfold  brightness,  and 
exalted  to  an  unreckonably  higher  power  and  efficacy. 
Plunge  a  candle  into  oxygen  and  it  will  flame  the 
brighter.  Our  natural  gifts  and  opportunities  of 
whatever  kind  they  may  be,  being  reinforced  and 
''  clothed  " — to  take  the  metaphor  of  my  text — with 
this  Divine  Spirit,  are  a  thousandfold  more  than  ever 
they  were  before. 

And  without  it  what  are  they  all  worth  for  Chris- 
tian work  ?  There  have  been  churches  that  have 
relied  upon  creeds.  There  have  been  churches  that 
have  relied  upon  secularities,  w^ealth.  State  recogni- 
tion, position,  and  the  like.  There  is  a  tendency  in 
this  day  to  rely  on  organizations,  and  the  multiplica- 
tion of  effort  and  advertising,  and  drum- beating  and 
trumpet-blowing,  and  general  fussiness.  They  tried 
in  America  some  little  time  ago  to  bring  down  rain 
by  exploding  gunpowder,  and  it  did  not  answer.  And 
it  w^ill  not  answer  to  try  to  bring  down  the  success 
which  is  real  success  by  any  such  noisy  reverberations 
as  these  to  which  I  am  referring. 

There  is  one  thing  by  which  all  men  that  ever  have 
done  much  for  God  and  men  have  been  marked.  There 

8 


114  WAITIXG  FOR  POWER. 

have  been  infinite  diversities  in  tliem,  differences  of 
creed,  differences  of  idiosyncrasies  and  cast  of  char- 
acter, different  ways  of  working,  different  grades  of 
capacity.  Some  of  them  have  been  eloquent,  hive 
Isaiah ;  some  of  them  have  been  of  stammering- 
tongue,  hke  Moses ;  some  of  them  have  been  wise, 
and  some  of  them  have  been  foohsh.  It  does  not 
matter.  One  thing  tliey  all  have  had,  v/hich  the 
world  calls  personal  magnetism,  which  the  New  Testa- 
ment calls  being  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Why  is 
it  that  two  men  shall  stand  up  and  say  the  same 
thing;  and  from  the  lips  of  the  one  the  words  will 
drop  cold  and  impotent,  and  from  the  other  they  will 
come  flaming  with  power  ?  There  may  be  subordinate 
reasons  for  the  difference ;  the  reason  lies  in  this,  that 
the  one  man  is  speaking  from  personal  contact  with 
Jesus  Christ  and  His  Spirit,  and  the  other  man  is 
chattering  what  he  has  learnt  from  men,  or  what  he 
thinks  it  is  the  proper  thing  to  say.  The  power  that 
touches  the  world  is  the  power  of  an  indwelling 
Divine  Spirit. 

And  now,  brethren,  one  more  word.  If  all  this  is 
true,  what  about  the  present  condition  of  Christen- 
dom ?  There  is  no  need  to  be  pessimistic,  or  to  in- 
dulge in  exaggeration.  I  joyfully  recognize  a  great 
deal  that  is  good,  a  quickened  sense  of  responsibility, 
a  wider  application  of  the  conception  of  Christian 
duty,  and  Gospel  preaching  to  civic  and  social  and 
political  questions,  as  well  as  to  the  salvation  of  the 
individual  soul.  I  see  and  I  rejoice  in  all  that.  And 
then  I  turn  the  page,  and  I  see  the  other  side. 
Churclies    with    an    enormous    proportion   of    their 


WAITING  FOR  POWEIl.  n; 


members  sunk  in  gross  worldliness  ;  churches  of  which 
thousands  of  their  adherents  Hve  exactly  Hke  the  men 
who  do  not  pretend  to  have  any  rehgion  at  all.  What 
about  the  enormous  amount  of  work  and  the  com- 
paratively small  results?  What  about  the  Kves  of 
those  wdio  thus  say  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in 
them  ?  "  Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ?  Are 
these  His  doings?"  Surely  not.  If  it  be  true  that 
that  Divine  Spirit  has  been  given,  how  has  all  this 
come  upon  us  ?  and  why  this  torpid,  lagging,  often 
recreant,  and  often  futile  Christianity?  Christianity 
is  not  "played  out/'  but  it  sometimes  seems  as  if  a 
good  many  of  the  organizations  that  profess  to  embody 
it  are  very  nearly  so. 

So,  dear  friends,  we  all  have  need  to  ask  ourselves 
whether  the  facts  of  the  churches  to  which  we  beloni? 
correspond  with  the  promise  of  Christ,  and  to  set  our 
hearts  on  this  assurance,  that  that  promise  is  of 
perpetual  validity.  The  tongues  of  fire  flickered  into 
extinction,  the  miracle  of  speech  ceased  in  a  few 
moments,  and  the  rushing  mighty  wind  was  hushed. 
But  the  gift  remained  after  the  fiery  tongues  that  sat 
upon  the  heads  of  the  disciples  had  disappeared,  and 
the  heads  on  which  they  sat  had  mouldered  into 
dust. 

11. — And  now  I  have  only  time  for  a  word  or  two 
about  the  second  point  of  this  text,  and  that  is  the 
waiting  for  equipment  which  our  Lord  here  prescribes. 

I  have  already  said  that  the  perpetuity  of  that 
Divine  gift  is  not  the  perpetuity  of  a  thing  given  once 
for  all,  but  of  a  bestowment  continually  repeated. 
The  river   flows.     There  are  variations  in   the   cur- 

8* 


116  WAITING  FOR  lOlVER. 

rent  and  in  tlie  depth,  but  they  are  not  due  to 
intermittent  pulsations  coming  from  the  source, 
but  to  obstacles  that  men  place  in  the  channel. 
Travellers  tell  us  that  at  certain  seasons  of  the  year 
there  form  up  on  the  main  tributary  of  the  Nile  great 
banks  of  tropical  weed  which  stop  the  flow,  and  that 
when  these  break  the  inundation  comes  that  brings 
fertility  away  down  in  the  Delta,  thousands  of  miles 
off.  And  so  Christian  men  may  pile  up  dams  between 
themselves  and  the  continuous  flow  of  the  river  ;  and 
whilst  its  waters  are  sparkling  on  the  one  side,  there 
may  lie  a  dreary  expanse  of  parched  and  barren  clay 
upon  the  other. 

Think  of  these  people  in  Jerusalem,  for  the  ten 
days  of  waiting.  It  was  no  indolent  waiting.  How 
they  must  have  felt  solitary  and  helpless  without 
their  Master !  How  tremendous  they  must  have 
felt  the  task  that  He  had  left  them  as  a  legacy !  How 
.keenly  they  must  have  felt  their  own  impotence ! 
How  eagerly  they  must  have  desired  that  yet  un- 
known equipment  which  He  had  promised  them ! 
And  so  they  filled  the  days,  not  with  mere  passive 
waitino'  but  with  a  waitincf  screwed  to  the  hio-hest 
tension  of  expectation  and  yearning  in  the  fulness  of 
desire. 

That  is  the  sort  of  waiting  that  you  and  I  have  to 
exercise,  brethren.  We  hear  to-day  of  perpetual  calls 
for  work;  this  scheme  here,  that  other  one  there, 
pressed  upon  all  of  us.  I  would  not  have  less  work, 
but  I  Avould  have  far  more  quiet  waiting.  We  must 
''feed  our  minds  by  a  wise  passiveness."  Silence  is 
fruitful,  like  the  calm  autumn  days  when  the  year's 


WAITING  FOR  POJVEIt.  117 

work  is  done,  nnci  the  earth  rests  for  next  spring's 
and  next  summer's  promise  and  fertint}^  AVe  need 
far  more  habitual,  quiet  expectance.  Time  spent  in 
waiting  is  not  wasted.  Such  waiting  has  nothing  in 
common  with  indolent  repose. 

We  need  for  eii'ectual  Christian  work  more  solitude 
on  the  part  of  the  workers,  and  for  depth  of  Christian 
life  more  solitude  on  the  part  of  the  livers.  Solitude 
is  the  mother  country  of  the  strong.  No  man  has 
ever  done  much  worth  doino-  in  this  world  who  has 

o 

not  lived  very  much  apart.  And  no  Christian  has 
ever  done  much  who  has  not  lived  very  much  apart 
with  God.  "  I  was  left  alone,  and  I  saw  this  great 
vision."  "  Come  ye  apart  and  rest  awhile."  Brother, 
if  we  are  to  be  fit  for  service,  we  must  be  familiar  with 
the  "  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,"  where  He  will 
whisper  in  our  ears  that  which  afterwards  may  be 
sounded  from  the  housetops. 

Solitude,  silence,  meditation,  expectation,  desire — 
all  these  have  to  be  united  if  we  do  not  want  to  stop 
the  flow  to  us  of  the  gift  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Leave 
some  of  your  Avork  undone.  It  is  better  to  he  than  ta 
do.  Leave  some  of  your  work  undone,  that  you  may 
hold  converse  with  your  Christ,  and  you  Avill  after- 
wards do  your  work  all  the  better. 

The  days  of  waiting  were  brief  If  you  and  I  will 
fill  them  as  these  men  filled  them,  with  supplication, 
with  desire,  with  expectancy,  then  He  will  not  forget 
His  promise.  A  waiting  Church  or  a  waiting  soul 
will,  in  a  little  time,  be  a  Church  or  a  soul  filled  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  therefore  mighty  for  Christian 
work. 


/iv/  Iv'^.V    4  .^^^.        H 


XIL 

flDcntorv\  H^opc,  anb  Effort. 

■'•  That  they  might  set  their  hope  in  God.  and  not  forget  the  works 
of  G-od,  bat  keep  His  commandments."' — Psalm  Ixxviii.  7. 

X  its  original  application  this  verse  is 
simply  a  statement  of  God's  purpose 
in  mvino'  to  Israel  the  Law,  and  such 
a  history  of  deliverance.  The  inten- 
tion was  that  all  future  generations 
might  remember  what  He  had  done,  and  be  encour- 
aged by  the  remembrance  to  hope  in  Him  for  the 
future :  and,  by  both  memory  and  hope,  be  impelled 
to  the  discharge  of  present  duty. 

So,  then,  the  words  may  permissibly  bear  the  appli- 
cation which  I  purpose  to  make  of  them  in  this  sermon, 
re-echoing  only  (and  aspiring  to  nothing  more)  the 
thoughts  which  the  season  has  alread}^,  I  suppose, 
more  or  less,  suggested  to  most  of  us.  Smooth  motion 
is  imperceptible;  it  is  the  jolts  that  tell  us  that  we  are 
advancing.  Though  everj^  da}^  be  a  New  Year's  Day, 
still  the  alteration  in  our  dates  and  our  calendars 
should  set  us  all  thinking  of  that  continual  lapse  of 
the  mvsterious  thino; — the  creature  of  our  own  minds 
— which  we  call  Time,  and  which  is  bearing  us  all  so 
steadily  and  silently  onwards. 


MEMonV,  HOPE,  AND  EFFORT.  119 


My  text  tells  us  how  past,  present,  and  future — 
memory,  hope,  and  effort  may  be  ennobled  and  blessed. 
In  brief,  it  is  by  associating  tlicm  all  with  God.  It  is 
as  the  field  of  His  working  that  our  past  is  best 
remembered.  It  is  on  Him  that  our  hopes  may  most 
wisely  be  set.  It  is  keeping  His  commandments 
which  is  the  consecration  of  the  present.  Let  us, 
then,  take  the  three  thoughts  of  our  text  and  cast 
them  into  New  Year's  recommendations. 

I. — First,  then,  let  us  associate  God  with  memory 
by  thankful  remembrance. 

Xow  I  suppose  that  there  are  very  few  of  the  facul- 
ties of  our  nature  which  we  more  seldom  try  to 
regulate  by  Christian  principles  than  that  great  power 
which  we  have  of  looking  backwards.  Did  you  ever 
reflect  that  you  are  responsible  for  what  you  re- 
member, and  for  how  you  remember  it,  and  that  you 
are  bound  to  train  and  educate  your  memory,  not 
merely  in  the  sense  of  cultivating  it  as  a  means  of 
carrying  intellectual  treasures,  but  for  a  religious 
purpose  ?  The  one  thing  that  all  parts  of  our  nature 
need  is  God,  and  that  is  as  true  about  our  power  of 
remembrance  as  it  is  about  any  other  part  of  our 
being.  The  past  is  then  hallowed,  noble,  and  yields 
its  highest  results  and  most  blessed  fruits  for  us  when 
we  link  it  closely  with  Him,  and  see  in  it  not  only, 
nor  so  much,  the  play  of  our  own  faculties,  whether 
we  blame  or  approve  ourselves,  as  rather  see  in  it  the 
<»Teat  field  in  which  God  has  brought  Himself  near  to 
our  experience,  and  has  been  regulating  and  shaping 
all  that  has  befallen  us.  The  one  thing  which  will 
consecrate   memory,  deliver  it   from   its   errors   and 


120  MEMORY,  HOPE,  AND  EFFORT. 

abuses,  raise  it  to  its  highest  and  noblest  power,  is 
that  it  should  be  in  touch  with  God,  and  that  the 
past  should  be  regarded  by  each  of  us  as  it  is,  in 
deed  and  in  truth,  one  long  record  of  what  God  has 
done  for  us. 

We  can  see  His  presence  more  clearly  Avhen  we  look 
back  over  a  long  connected  stretch  of  days,  and  when 
the  excitement  of  feeling  the  agony  or  rapture  have 
passed,  than  we  could  vv^hilst  they  Avere  hot,  and  life 
was  all  hurry  and  bustle.  The  men  on  the  deck  of  a 
ship  see  the  beauty  of  the  city  that  they  have  left 
behind,  better  than  when  they  were  pressing  through 
its  narrow  streets.  And  though  the  view  from  the 
far-off  waters  of  the  receding  houses  may  be  an  illu- 
sion, our  view  of  the  past,  if  we  see  God  brooding  over 
it  all,  and  working  in  it  all,  is  no  illusion.  The  mean- 
nesses are  hidden,  the  narrow  places  are  invisible,  all 
the  pain  and  suftering  is  quieted,  and  we  are  able  to 
behold  more  truly  than  when  we  were  in  the  midst  of 
it,  the  bearing,  the  purpose,  and  the  blessedness  alike 
of  our  sorrows  and  of  our  joys. 

Many  of  us  are  old  enough  to  have  had  a  great 
many  mysteries  of  our  early  days  cleared  up.  We 
have  seen  at  least  the  beginnings  of  the  harvest  which 
the  ploughshare  of  sorrow  and  the  winter  Avinds  Avere 
preparing  for  us,  and  for  the  rest  Ave  can  trust. 
Brethren,  remember  your  mercies;  remember  your 
losses ;  and  "  for  all  the  Avay  by  AA^hich  the  Lord  our 
God  has  led  us  these  many  3^ears  in  the  Avilderness," 
let  us  try  to  be  thankful,  including  in  our  praises  the 
darkness  and  the  storm  as  well  as  the  light  and  the 
calm.     Some  of  us  are  like  people  Avho,  when  they  get 


MEMORY,  ROTE,  AND  EFFORT.  121 

better  of  their  sicknesses,  grudge  the  doctor's  bill. 
We  forget  the  mercies  as  soon  as  they  are  past,  be- 
cause we  only  enjoyed  the  sensuous  sweetness  of  them 
whilst  it  tickled  our  palate,  and  did  not  think,  in  the 
enjoyment  of  them,  whose  love  it  was  that  they  spoke 
of  to  us.  Sorrows  and  joys,  bring  them  all  in  your 
thanksgivings,  and  "  forget  not  the  works  of  God." 

Such  a  habit  of  cultivating  the  remembrance  of 
God's  hand,  moving  in  all  our  past,  will  not,  in  the 
slightest  degree,  interfere  with  lower  and  yet  precious 
exercises  of  that  same  faculty,  We  shall  still  be  able 
to  look  back,  and  learn  our  limitations,  mark  our 
weaknesses,  gather  counsels  of  prudence  from  our 
failures,  tame  our  ambitions  by  remembering  Avhere 
we  broke  down.  And  such  an  exercise  of  grateful 
God-recoofnizins'  remembrance  will  deliver  us  from 
the  abuses  of  that  great  power,  by  which  so  many  of 
us  turn  our  memories  into  a  cause  of  weakness,  if  not 
of  sin.  There  are  people,  and  we  are  all  tempted  to 
be  of  the  number,  who  look  back  upon  the  past  and 
see  nothinsf  there  but  themselves,  their  own  cleverness, 
their  own  success  ;  burninof  incense  to  their  own  net, 
and  sacriticino'  to  their  own  drao'.  Another  mood  leads 
us  to  look  back  into  the  past  dolefully  and  disappoint- 
edly, to  say,  "  I  have  broken  down  so  often ;  my  reso- 
lutions have  all  gone  to  water  so  quickly ;  I  have  tried 
and  failed  over  and  over  again.  I  may  as  well  give  it 
all  up,  and  accept  the  inevitable,  and  grope  on  as 
well  as  I  can  Avithout  hope  of  self-advancement  or 
of  victory."  Never!  If  only  we  will  look  back  to 
God  we  shall  be  able  to  look  forward  to  a  perfect 
self.     To-morrow  need  never  be  determined  by  the 


122  MEMORY,  HOPE,  AND  EFFORT. 

failures  that  have  been.  We  may  still  conquer  where 
we  have  often  been  defeated.  There  is  no  worse  use 
of  the  power  of  remembrance  than  when  we  use  it  to 
bind  upon  ourselves,  as  the  permanent  limitations  of 
our  progress,  the  failures  and  faults  of  the  past. 
"  Forget  the  things  that  are  behind."  Your  old  frag- 
mentary goodness,  your  old  foiled  aspirations,  your 
old  frequent  failures — cast  them  all  behind  you. 

And  there  are  others  to  whom  remembrance  is 
mainly  a  gloating  over  old  sins,  and  a  doing  again  of 
these — ruminating  upon  them;  bringing  up  the  chewed 
food  once  again  to  be  masticated.  Some  of  us  gather 
only  poisonous  weeds,  and  carry  them  about  in  the 
hovtiis  siccus  of  our  memories.  Alas  1  for  the  man 
whose  memory  is  but  the  paler  portraiture  of  past 
sins.  Some  of  us,  I  am  sure,  have  our  former  evils 
holdinof  us  so  tio'ht  in  their  cords  that  when  we  look 
back  memory  is  defiled  by  the  things  which  defiled 
the  unforgettable  past.  Brethren,  3'ou  may  find  a 
refuge  from  that  curse  of  remembrance  in  remembering 
God. 

And  some  of  us,  unwisely  and  ungratefully,  live  in 
the  light  of  departed  blessings,  so  as  to  have  no  hearts 
either  for  present  mercies  or  for  present  duties.  There 
is  no  more  weakening^  and  foolish  misdirection  of  that 
great  gift  of  remembrance  than  when  we  employ  it  to 
tear  down  the  tender  greenery  with  which  healing- 
time  has  draped  the  ruins ;  or  to  turn  again  in  the 
wound  which  is  beginning  to  heal  the  sharp  and 
poisoned  point  of  the  sorrow  which  once  pierced  it. 
For  all  these  abuses — the  memory  that  gloats  upon 
sin ;    the   memory   that    is    proud    of    success ;    the 


MEMORY,  HOPE,  AND  EFFORT.  123 

memory  that  is  despondent  because  of  failures ;  the 
memory  that  is  tearful  and  broken-hearted  over  losses 
— for  all  these  the  remedy  is  that  we  should  not 
forget  the  works  of  God,  but  see  Him  everywhere 
filling  the  past. 

II. — Again,  let  us  live  in  the  future  by  hope  in 
Him. 

Our  remembrances  and  our  hopes  are  closely  con- 
nected ;  one  might  almost  even  say  that  the  power  by 
which  we  look  backwards  and  that  by  which  we  look 
forwards  are  one  and  the  same.  At  all  events,  Hope 
owes  to  Memory  the  pigments  with  which  it  paints, 
the  canvas  on  which  it  paints,  and  the  objects  w^hich 
it  portrays  there.  But  in  all  our  earthly  hopes  there 
is  a  feehng  of  uncertainty  which  brings  alarm  as  well 
as  expectation.  And  he  whose  forward  vision  runs 
only  along  the  low  levels  of  earth,  and  is  fed  only 
by  experience  and  remembrance,  will  never  be  able 
to  say,  "  I  hope  with  certitude,  and  I  know  that  my 
hope  shall  be  fulfilled."  For  him  "  hopes,  and  fears 
that  kindle  hopes,"  will  be  "  an  indistinguishable 
throng "  ;  and  there  will  be  as  much  of  pain  as  of 
pleasure  in  his  forward  glance. 

But  if,  according  to  my  text,  we  set  our  hopes  on 
God,  then  we  shall  have  a  certainty  absolute.  What 
a  blessinof  it  is  to  be  able  to  look  forward  to  a  future 
as  fixed  and  sure,  as  solid  and  as  real,  as  much  our 
possession  as  the  irrevocable  past!  The  Christian 
man's  hope,  if  it  be  set  on  God,  is  not  a  "  may  be," 
but  a  "  will  be  "  ;  and  he  can  be  as  sure  of  to-morrow 
as  he  is  of  yesterday. 

They  whose  hopes  are  set  on  God  have  a  certain 


124  MEMORY,  HOPE,  AND  EFFORT. 

hope,  a  sufficient  one,  and  one  that  fills  all  the  future. 
All  other  expectations  are  fulfilled,  or  disappointed, 
as  the  case  may  be,  but  are  left  behind  and  outgrown. 
This  one  only  never  palls,  and  is  never  accomplished, 
and  yet  is  never  disappointed.  So  if  we  set  our  hopes 
on  Him,  we  can  face  very  quietly  the  darkness  that 
lies  ahead  of  us.  Earthly  hopes  are  only  the  mirrors 
in  which  the  past  reflects  itself,  as  m  some  king's 
palace  you  will  find  a  lighted  chamber,  with  a  great 
sheet  of  glass  at  each  end,  which  perpetuates  in 
shining  rows  the  lights  behind  the  spectator.  A 
curtain  veils  the  future,  and  earthly  hope  can  only 
put  a  mirror  in  front  of  it  that  reflects  what 
has  been.  But  the  hope  that  is  set  on  God  draws 
back  the  curtain,  and  lets  us  see  enouo-h  of  a  fixed, 
eternal  future  to  make  our  lives  bright  and  our  hearts 
calm.  The  darkness  remains ;  what  of  that,  if  "  I 
know  I  shall  not  drift  beyond  His  love  and  care "  ? 
Set  your  hopes  on  God,  and  they  will  not  be  ashamed. 

III. — Lastly,  let  us  live  in  the  present  by  strenuous 
obedience. 

After  all,  memory  and  hope  are  meant  to  fit  us  for 
work  in  the  flying  moment.  Both  should  impel  us  to 
this  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God ;  for  both 
yield  motives  which  should  incline  us  thereto.  A 
past  full  of  blessing  demands  the  sacrifice  of  loving 
hearts  and  of  earnest  hands.  A  future  so  fair,  so  far, 
so  certain,  so  sovereign,  and  a  hope  that  grasps  it,  and 
brings  some  of  its  sweet  fragrance  into  the  else  scent- 
less air  of  the  poor  present,  ought  to  impel  to  service, 
vigorous  and  continual.  Both  should  yield  motives 
which  make  such  service  a  deliofht. 


MEMORY,  HOPE,  AND  EFFORT.  125 

If  my  memory  weakens  me  for  present  work,  either 
because  it  depresses  my  hope  of  success,  or  because  it 
saddens  me  with  the  remembrance  of  departed  bless- 
ings, then  it  is  a  curse  and  not  a  good.  And  if  I 
dream  myself  away  in  any  future,  and  forget  the 
exigencies  of  the  imperative  and  swiftly-passing 
moment,  then  the  faculty  of  hope,  too,  is  a  curse  and 
a  weakening.  But  both  are  delivered  from  their  pos- 
sible abuses,  if  both  are  made  into  means  of  helping 
us  to  fill  the  present  with  loving  obedience.  These 
two  faculties  are  like  the  two  wings  that  may  lift  us 
to  God,  like  the  two  paddles,  one  on  either  side  of  the 
ship,  that  may  drive  on  steadily  forward,  through  all 
the  surges  and  the  tempest.  These  find  their  highest 
field  in  fitting  us  for  the  grinding  tasks  and  the  heavy 
burdens  that  the  moment  lays  upon  us. 

So,  dear  friends,  Ave  are  very  different  in  our  cir- 
cumstances and  positions.  For  some  of  us  Hope's 
basket  is  nearly  empty,  and  Memory's  sack  is  very 
full.  For  us  older  men  the  past  is  long,  the  earthly 
future  is  short.  For  you  younger  people  the  converse 
is  the  case.  It  is  Hope  whose  hands  are  laden  with 
treasures  for  you.  Memory  carries  but  a  little  store. 
Your  past  is  brief ;  your  future  is  probably  long.  The 
grains  of  sand  in  some  of  our  hour-glasses  are  very 
heaped  and  high  in  the  lower  half,  and  running  very 
low  in  the  upper.  But  whichever  category  we  stand 
in,  one  thins:  remains  the  same  for  us  all,  and  that  is 
duty,  keeping  God's  commandments.  That  is  per- 
manent, and  that  is  the  one  thing  worth  living  for. 
'"Whether  we  live  Ave  liA^e  unto  the  Lord;  or  Avhether 
w^e  die  Ave  die  unto  the  Lord." 


126  MEJTORY,  HOPE,  AND  EFFORT. 

So  let  US  front  this  New  Year,  with  all  its  hidden 
possibilities,  with  quiet,  brave  hearts,  resolved  on 
present  duty,  as  those  ought  who  have  such  a  past  to 
remember  and  such  a  future  to  hope  for.  It  will 
probably  be  the  last  on  earth  for  some  of  us.  It  will 
probably  contain  great  sorrows  for  some  of  us,  and 
great  joys  for  others.  It  will  probably  be  compara- 
tively uneventful  for  others.  It  may  make  great  out- 
ward changes  for  us,  or  it  may  leave  us  much  as  it 
found  us.  But,  at  all  events,  God  will  be  in  it,  and 
work  for  Him  should  be  in  it.  Well  for  us  ii,  when 
its  hours  have  slidden  away  into  the  grey  past,  they 
continue  to  witness  to  us  of  His  love,  even  as,  while 
they  were  wrapped  in  the  mists  of  the  future,  they 
called  on  us  to  hope  in  Him  1  Well  for  us  if  we  fill 
the  passing  moment  with  deeds  of  loving  obedience ! 
Then  a  present  of  keeping  His  commandments  will 
glide  into  a  past  to  be  thankfully  remembered,  and 
will  bring  us  nearer  to  a  future  in  which  hope  shall 
not  be  put  to  shame.  To  him  who  sees  God  in  all  the 
divisions  and  particles  of  his  days,  and  makes  Him 
the  object  of  memory,  hope,  and  effort,  past,  present, 
and  future  are  but  successive  calm  ripples  of  that 
mighty  river  of  Time  which  bears  him  on  the  great 
ocean  of  Eternity,  from  which  the  drops  that  make  its 
waters  rose,  and  to  which  its  ceaseless  flow  returns. 


XIII. 

tlnpo56C66eb  lpo65C60ion0. 

A"ND  the  King  of  Israel  said  unto  his  servants,  Know  ye  that 
Ramoth  in  Gilead  is  ours,  and  we  be  still,  and  take  it  not  out 
of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Syria  .'  "—1  Kings  xxii.  3. 

HIS  city  of  Ramoth  in  Gilead  was  an 
important  fortified  place  on  the  eastern 
side  of  the  Jordan,  and  had,  many 
years  before  our  text,  been  captured 
by  the  northern  neighbours  in  the 
kingdom  of  Syria.  A  treaty  had  subsequently  been 
concluded  and  broken,  a  war  followed  thereafter,  in 
which  Benhadad,  King  of  Syria,  had  bound  himself  to 
restore  all  his  conquests.  He  had  not  observed  that 
article  of  peace,  and  the  people  of  Israel  had  not 
been  strong'  enouofh  to  enforce  it  until  the  date  of  our 
text ;  but  then,  backed  up  by  a  powerful  alliance  with 
Jehoshaphat  of  Judah,  they  determined  to  make  a 
dash  to  get  back  what  was  theirs,  but  whilst  theirs 
was  also  not  theirs. 

Now,  I  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  Ahab  and 
Jehoshaphat,  but  I  want  to  turn  the  words  of  my 
text,  and  the  thoughts  that  may  come  from  them, 
into  a  direction   profitable  to  ourselves.     ''Know  ye 


128  UNPOSSESSED    POSSESSIONS. 

that  Ramotli  in  Gileacl  is  ours  ? "  and  yet  it  had  to  be 
got  out  of  the  hands  of  the  King  of  Syria. 

I. — What  is  ours  and  not  ours. 

Every  Christian  man  has  large  tracts  of  unannexed 
territory,  unattained  possibihties,  unenjoyed  blessings, 
things  that  are  his  and  yet  not  his.  How  much  more 
of  God  you  and  I  have  a  right  to  than  we  have  the 
possession  of !  The  ocean  is  ours,  but  only  the  little 
pailful  that  we  carry  away  home  to  our  own  houses  is 
of  use  to  us.  The  whole  of  God  is  mine  if  I  am 
Christ's,  and  a  dribble  of  God  is  all  that  comes  into 
the  lives  of  most  of  us. 

How  much  inward  peace  is  ours  !  It  is  meant  that 
there  should  never  pass  across  a  Christian's  soul  more 
than  a  ripple  of  agitation,  which  may  indeed  ruffle 
and  curl  the  surface ;  but  deep  down  there  should  be 
the  tranquillity  of  the  fathomless  ocean,  unbroken  by 
any  tempests,  and  yet  not  stagnant,  because  there  is  a 
vital  current  that  runs  through  it,  and  every  drop  is 
being  drawn  upward  to  the  surface  and  the  sunlight. 
There  may  be  a  peace  in  our  hearts  deep  as  life; 
a  tranquillity  which  may  be  superficially  disturbed, 
but  is  never  thoroughly,  and  down  to  the  depths, 
broken.  And  yet,  let  some  little  petty  annoyance 
come  into  my  daily  life,  and  what  a  pucker  I  am  in  ! 
Then  we  forget  all  about  the  still  depths  that  we 
ought  to  be  living  in ;  and  fears  and  hopes  and  loves 
and  ambitions  disturb  our  souls,  just  as  they  do  the 
spirits  of  the  men  that  do  not  profess  to  have  any 
holdfast  in  God.  The  peace  of  God  is  ours  ;  but,  ah  ! 
in  how  sad  a  sense  it  is  true  that  the  peace  of  God  is 
not  ours  ! 


UNPOSSESSED  POSSESSIONS.  129 


AYhat  "  heights  " — for  Ramoth  means  "high  places  "  ^ 
— what  heights  of  consecration  there  are  which  are 
ours  according  to  the  Divine  purpose  and  according 
to  the  fulness  of  God's  gift !  It  is  meant,  and  it  is 
possible,  and  well  within  the  reach  of  every  Christian 
soul,  that  he  or  she  should  live,  day  by  day,  in  the 
continual  and  utter  surrender  of  himself  or  herself  to 
the  will  of  God,  and  should  say,  "  I  do  the  little  I  can 
do,  And  leave  the  rest  with  Thee  "  ;  and  should  say 
again, "  All  is  right  that  seems  most  wrong  if  it  be  His 
sweet  will."  But  instead  of  this  absolute  submission 
and  completeness  and  joyfulness  of  surrender  of  our- 
selves to  Him,  what  do  we  find  ?  Reluctance  to  obey, 
regret  at  providences,  Self  dominant  or  struggling  \ 
hard  against  the  partial  domination  of  the  will  of  God  ' 
in  our  hearts.  The  mind  which  was  in  Jesus  Christ, 
who  was  able  to  say,  "  It  is  written  of  Me,  lo !  I  come 
to  do  Thy  will,  0  Lord!"  is  ours  by  virtue  of  our 
being  Christians ;  but,  alas  !  in  practical  realization 
how  sadty  it  is  not  ours  ! 

What  noble  possibilities  of  service,  what  power  in 
the  world  are  bestowed  on  Christ's  people  !  "  All  power 
is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  earth,"  says  He. 
"  And  He  breathed  on  them,  and  said,  As  My  Father 
hath  sent  Me,  even  so  send  I  you."  The  Divine 
gift  to  the  Christian  community,  and  to  the  in- 
dividuals that  compose  it — for  there  are  no  gifts  given 
to  the  community,  but  to  the  individuals  that  make 
it  up — is  of  fulness  of  power  for  all  their  work.  And 
yet  look  how,  all  through  the  ages,  the  Church  has  | 
been  beaten  by  the  corruption  of  the  world ;  and  who  ' 
to-day  many  of  us  are  standing,  either  utterly  care- 

9 


130  UNPOSSESSED  POSSESSIONS. 

less  and  callous  about  the  things  that  we  have  the 
medicine  to  cure,  or  in  desperation  looking  about  for 
other  healing  for  the  social  and  moral  condition  of 
the  community  than  that  which  is  granted  to  us  in 
Jesus  Christ.  "  Know  ye  that  Ramoth  in  Gilead  is 
ours,  and  we  be  still,  and  take  it  not  out  of  the  hands 
of  the  King  of  Syria  ? " 

There  is  ever  so  much  in  the  world  Avhich  belongs 
to  our  Master,  and  therefore  belongs  to  us,  and  which 
the  Church  is  bound  to  lay  its  hand  upon  and  claim 
for  its  own  and  for  its  Lord's.  For  remember,  brethren, 
that  all  the  things  at  which  I  have  been  glancing — 
and  I  might  have  largely  increased  the  catalogue — 
all  these  things — spiritual  endowments  of  peace,  and 
safety,  and  purity,  and  joy,  of  religious  elevation,  and 
consecration,  and  power  for  service,  and  the  like — are 
ours  by  a  threefold  title  and  charter.  God's  purpose, 
which  is  nothing  less  for  every  one  of  us  than  that 
we  should  be  "filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God," 
and  that  He  should  supply  all  our  need,  accord- 
ing to  His  riches  in  glory," — that  is  the  first  of 
the  parchments  on  which  our  title  depends.  And 
the  second  title-deed  is  Christ's  purchase ;  for  the 
efficacy  of  His  death  and  the  power  of  His  trium- 
phant life  have  secured  for  all  that  trust  Him  the 
whole  fulness  of  this  Divine  gift.  And  the  third 
of  our  claims  and  titles  is  the  influence  of  that 
Holy  Spirit  that  Jesus  Christ  gives  to  every  one 
of  His  children  to  dwell  in  Him.  There  is  in  you, 
working  in  you,  if  you  have  any  faith  in  that  Lord, 
a  power  that  is  capable  of  making  you  perfectly  pure, 
perfectly  blessed,  strong  with  an  immortal  strength. 


UNPOSSESSED  POSSESSIONS.  131 

and  glad  with  a  "joy  that  is  unspeakable  and  full 
of  glory." 

Oh,  then,  let  us  think  of  the  awful  contrast  between 
what  is  ours  and  what  we  have.  It  is  ours  by  the 
Divine  intention,  by  the  Divine  gift  in  its  fulness 
and  all-suthciency,  and  yet  think  of  the  poor,  partial 
realization  of  it  that  has  passed  into  our  experience. 
Be  sure  that  you  have  what  you  have,  and  that  you 
make  your  own  what  God  has  made  yours. 

IL— Then,  let   me   suggest,   again,   how   our   text 
hints  for  us,  not  only  thedifference between  possession 
and  realization,  but  also  our  strange  contentment  in 
mperfect  possession. 

Ahab's  remonstrances  with  his  servants,  which 
make  the  starting-point  of  my  remarks,  seem  to  sug- 
gest that  there  were  two  reasons  for  their  acquiescence 
in  the  domination  of  a  foFeign  power  on  a  bit  of  their 
soil.  They  had  not  reahzed  that  Ramoth  was  theirs, 
and  they  were  too  lazy  and  cowardly  to  go  and  take 
it.  Ignorance  of  the  fulness  of  the  gift,  and  slothful 
timidity  in  daring  everything  in  the  effort  to  make  it 
ours,  explain  a  great  deal  of  the  present  condition  of 
Christian  people. 

Is  not  that  condition  of  passive  acquiescence  in 
their  small  present  attainments,  and  of  careless  indif- 
ference to  the  great  stretch  of  the  unattained,  the 
characteristic  of  the  mass  of  professing  Christians  ? 
They  have  got  a  foothold  on  a  new  continent,  and 
their  possession  of  it  is  liive  the  world's  knowledge  of 
the  map  of  Africa  when  we  Avere  children,  which  had 
a  settlement  dotted  here  and  there  along  the  coast, 
and  all  the  broad  regions  of  the  interior  were  blank. 

9-^ 


132  UNPOSSESSED  POSSESSIONS. 

The  settlers  huddle  together  upon  the  frmge  of 
barren  sand  by  the  salt  water,  and  never  dream  of 
pressing  forAvard  into  the  heart  of  the  land.  And  so, 
too,  many  of  us  are  content  with  what  we  have  got,  a 
little  bit  of  God,  when  we  might  have  Him  all ;  a 
settlement  on  the  fringe  and  edge  of  the  land,  when 
we  might  traverse  the  whole  length  of  it ;  and  behold ! 
it  is  all  ours. 

That  unfamiharity  with  the  thought  of  unattained 
possibilities  in  thB  Christian  life  is  a  damning  curse  of 
thousands  of  people  who  call  themselves  Christians. 
They  do  not  think,  they  never  realize — and  some  of 
us  are  guilty  in  this  respect — they  never  realize 
that  it  is  possible  for  them  to  be  all  unlike  what  they 
are  now,  and  that,  instead  of  the  miserable  partial 
hallowing  of  their  nature,  and  the  poor,  weak — I  was 
going  to  say  strength,  but  it  is  not  worth  calling 
strength,  that  they  possess,  they  might  be  as  the 
ano^els  of  God :  "  the  weakest  as  David  "  and  David  as 
the  very  messenger  of  heaven  itself  Why  is  it, 
why  is  it  that  there  is  this  unfamiharity  ? 

And  then,  another  reason  for  the  wOeful  dispro- 
portion between  what  we  have  and  what  we  utilize  is 
the  love  of  ease,  such  as  kept  these  Israelites  from 
going  up  to  Ramoth-Gilead.  It  was  a  Lng  way  off; 
there  was  a  river  to  be  forded  ;  there  Avere  heights  to 
be  climbed ;  there  Avere  AA^eary  marches  to  be  taken ; 
there  AA^ere  hard  knocks  going  in  front  of  the  Avails  of 
Ramoth  before  they  got  inside  it ;  and  on  the  whole 
it  Avas  more  comfortable  to  sit  at  home,  or  look  after 
their  farms  and  their  merchandise,  than  to  embark  on 
the  quixotic  attempt  to  Avin  back  a  city  that  had  not 


UNPOSSESSED  POSSESSIONS.  133 


been  theirs  for  ever  so  long,  and  that  they  had  got  on 
very  well  without. 

And  so  it  is  with  hosts  of  us  Christian  people ;  we 
do  not  realize  how  much  we  have  that  we  never  get 
any  good  out  of.  And,  in  the  second  place,  we  heid 
rather  just  stay  where  we  are,  and  make  the  best  of 
the  Avorld  as  it  is,  and  the  desires  of  our  hearts  go  in 
another  direction  than  for  our  increase  in  the  grace 
and  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  Ah, 
brethren,  if  we  had  a  claim  to  some  great  property,  , 
or  anything  else  that  we  really  cared  about,  should  / 
we  be  so  very  indifferent  as  to  asserting  our  rights  ?  c 
Should  we  not  %ht  to  the  death,  some  of  us,  for  the 
last  inch  of  soil,  for  the  last  ounce  of  treasure  that 
belonged  to  us  ?  When  you  really  value  a  thing,  you 
secure  the  greatest  possible  amount  of  it;  and  there 
is  very  little  margin  between  what  you  own  and  what 
you  use. 

And  if  there  is  such  a  tremendous  difference  between 
the  breadth  of  the  one  and  the  narrowness  of  the 
other  in  our  Christian  life,  there  can  be  no  reason  for 
it  except  this,  that  we  do  not  care  enough  about 
spiritual  blessings  and  forces  to  make  the  effort  that  is  ' 
needed  to  win  and  keep,  and  get  the  good  of  aJl  that 
is  ours. 

And  is  not  that  something  like  despising  the  birth- 
right ?  Is  it  not  a  criminal  thing  for  Christian  people 
thus  to  neglect,  and  to  put  aside,  and  never  to  seek  to 
obtain,  all  these  great  gifts  of  God  ?  There  they  lie 
at  our  doors,  and  they  are  ours  for  the  taking.  Sup- 
pose a  carrier  brought  you  a  whole  wagon  full  of 
precious  goods,  and  put  them  down  at  your  door,  and 


134  UNPOSSESSED  POSSESSIONS. 

you  were  not  at  the  trouble  to  open  your  doors,  or  to 
carry  the  goods  into  your  cellars.  That  would  not 
look  as  if  you  cared  much  either  for  the  goods  or  for 
the  giver.  And  I  wonder  how  many  of  us  are  charge- 
able with  that  criminal  despising  of  God's  gifts,  Avhich 
is  clearly  the  explanation  of  our  letting  them  lie  rot- 
ting, as  it  were,  at  our  "gates.  We  are  starving;  paupers 
in  the  midst  of  plenty. 

"  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need  according  to 
His  riches  in  glory,  by  Christ  Jesus,"  saj^s  Paul.  You 
have  the  right  to  them  all.  Draw  cheques  against 
the  capital  that  is  lodged  in  your  name  in  that  great 
bank. 

III. — And  so,  lastly,  m}^  text  suggests  the  effort 
that  is  needed  to  make  our  ovv^n  ours. 

"  AVe  be  still,  and  take  it  not  out  of  the  hands  of 
the  King  of  Syria."  Then  these  things  that  are  ours, 
by  God's  gift,  by  Christ's  purchase,  by  the  Spirit's  in- 
fluence, will  need  our  eflbrt  to  secure  them.  And  that 
is  no  contradiction,  nor  any  paradox.  God  does 
exactly  in  the  same  way  with  regard  to  a  great  many 
of  His  natural  gifts  as  He  does  with  regard  to  His 
spiritual  ones.  He  gives  them  to  us,  but  we  hold 
them  on  this  tenure,  that  we  put  forth  our  best  efforts 
to  get  and  to  keep  them.  His  giving  them  does  not 
set  aside  our  taking.  However  much  we  tried  we 
could  not  take  them  out  of  His  hand  if  it  were 
clenched.  Open  as  His  hand  is,  and  stretched  out  to 
us  as  it  is,  the  gifts  that  sparkle  in  it  are  not  trans- 
ferred to  our  hands  unless  we  ourselves  put  forth  an 
effort.  So  let  me  say  that  one  large  part  of  the  dis- 
cipline by  which  men  make  their  own  their  own  is  by 


UNPOSSESSED  POSSESSIONS.  135 

familiarizing  themselves  with  the  thought  of  the 
larger  possibilities  of  unattained  possessions  which 
God  has  given  them.  That  is  true  in  everything.  To 
recognize  our  present  imperfection,  and  to  see  stretch- 
ing before  us  glorious  and  immense  possibilities, 
opening  out  into  a  vista  where  our  eyesight  fails  us  to 
travel  to  its  end,  is  the  very  salt  of  life  in  every  region. 
Artist,  student,  all  of  us  "  are  saved  by  hope,"  in  a  very 
much  wider  sense  than  the  Apostle  meant  by  that  great 
saying.  And  whosoever  has  oncr?.  lost,  or  found  be- 
coming dim,  the  vision  before  him  of  a  possible  better 
than  his  present  best,  in  any  region,  is  in  that  region 
condemned  to  grovv'  no  more.  If  we  desire  to  have 
any  kind  of  advancement,  it  is  only  possible  for  us, 
when  there  gleams  ever  before  us  the  untravelled 
road,  and  we  see  at  the  end  of  it  unattained  bright- 
nesses and  blessings. 

And  we  Christian  people  have  an  endless  prospect 
of  that  sort  stretching  before  us.  Oh,  if  we  looked  at 
it  oftener, "  having  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the 
reward,"  we  should  find  it  easier  to  dash  at  any 
Ramoth-Gilead,  and  get  it  out  of  the  hands  of  the 
strongest  of  the  enemies  that  may  bar  our  way  to  it. 
Let  us  familiarize  ourselves  with  the  thought  of  our 
present  imperfection,  and  of  our  future,  and  of  the 
possibilities  which  may  become  actualities,  even  here 
and  now ;  and  let  us  not  fitfully  use  what  power  we 
have,  but  make  the  best  of  what  graces  are  ours,  and 
enjoy  and  expatiate  in  the  spiritual  blessings  of  peace 
and  rest  wdiicli  Christ  has  already  given  to  us.  "  To 
him  that  hath  shall  be  given."  And  the  surest  way 
to  lose  what  we  have  is  to  neo-lect  the  increasino-  of  it. 


X 


136  UNPOSSESSED   POSSESSIONS. 

And,  above  all,  let  us  keep  nearer  to  our  Master, 
will  and  live  more  in  fellowship  with  our  Lord,  and  that 
help  us  to  deny  ourselves  to  ungodliness  and  worldly 
lusts.  It  is  the  prevalence  of  these,  and  the  absence 
of  self-denial,  that  ruins  most  of  the  Christian  lives 
that  are  ruined  in  this  world.  If  a  man  wants  to  be 
what  he  is  not,  he  must  cease  to  be  what  he  is. 

Self-sacrifice,  and  the  emptying  of  our  hearts  of 
trash  and  trifles,  is  the  only  way  to  get  our  hearts 
tilled  with  God  and  with  His  blessing.  Let  us  keep 
near  Jesus  Christ.  If  we  have  Him  for  ours  we  have 
peace,  we  have  power,  we  have  purity.  "  He  of  God 
is  made  unto  us  "  all  in  all.  And  every  gift  that  may 
adorn  humanity,  and  make  our  lives  joyous  and  our- 
selves noble,  is  given  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ.  Let  us 
put  away  from  ourselves,  then,  this  slothful  indiffer- 
ence to  our  unattained  possessions.  "  Know  jq  that 
Ramoth  is  ours  ? "  "  Let  us  be  still "  no  longer. 
"  All  things  are  yours,  whether  the  world,  or  life,  or 
death,  or  things  present,  or  things  to  come:  all  are 
yours  if  ye  are  Christ's." 


XIV. 

Cbriet  our  Xeeeon  an&  cur  Zcacbcw 

But  jo  have  not  so  learned  Christ ;  if  so  be  that  ye  have  heard  Him, 
and  have  been  taught  in  Him." — Eph.  iv.  20,  21. 

HE  Apostle  has  been  describing  in  very 
severe  terms  the  godlessness  and  cor- 
ruption of  heathenism.  He  reckons 
on  the  assent  of  the  Ephesian  Chris- 
tians when  he  paints  the  society  in 
which  they  hved  as  aUenated  from  God,  insensible  to 
the  restraints  of  conscience,  and  foul  with  all  unclean- 
ness.  That  was  a  picture  of  heathenism  drawn  from 
the  life  and  submitted  to  the  judgment  of  those  who 
knew  the  original  only  too  well.  It  has  been  reserved 
for  modern  eulogists  to  regard  such  statements  as 
exaggerations.  Those  who  knew  heathenism  from 
the  inside  knew  that  they  were  sober  truth.  The 
colonnades  of  the  stately  temple  of  Ephesus  stank 
with  proofs  of  their  correctness. 

Out  of  that  mass  of  moral  putridity  these  Ephesian 
Christians  had  been  dragged.  But  its  effects  still 
lingered  in  them,  and  it  was  all  about  them  with  its 
pestilential  miasma.  So  the  lirst  thing  that  they 
needed  was  to  be  guarded  against  it.  The  Apostle,  m 
the  subsequent  context,  with  great  earnestness,  gives 


138  CHRIST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUR  TEACHER. 

a  series  of  moral  injunctions  of  the  most  elementary 
kind.  Their  very  simplicity  is  eloquent.  What  sort 
of  people  must  they  have  formerly  been  who  needed 
to  be  bade  not  to  steal  and  not  to  lie  ? 

But  before  he  comes  to  the  specific  duties,  he  lays 
down  the  broad  general  principle  of  which  all  these 
are  to  be  but  manifestations — viz.,  that  they  and  we 
need,  as  the  foundation  of  all  noble  conduct  and  of  all 
theoretical  ethics,  the  suppression  and  crucifixion  of 
the  old  self  and  the  investiture  with  a  new  self.  And 
this  double  necessity,  says  the  Apostle  in  my  text,  is 
the  plain  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  to  all  His  disciples. 

Xow  the  Avords  which  I  have  selected  as  my  text 
are  but  a  fragment  of  a  closely  concatenated  whole, 
but  I  may  deal  with  them  separately  at  this  time. 
They  are  very  remarkable.  They  lay,  as  it  seems  to 
me,  the  basis  for  all  Christian  conduct  ;  and  they 
teach  us  how  there  is  no  real  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ  which  does  not  effloresce  into  the  practice  of 
these  virtues  and  graces  which  the  Apostle  goes  on 
to  describe. 

I. — First,  Christ  our  Lesson  and  Christ  our  Teacher. 

Mark  the  singular  expression  with  which  this  text 
begins.  "  Ye  have  not  so  learned  Christ.''  Now,  we 
generally  talk  about  learning  a  subject,  a  language, 
a  science,  or  an  art ;  but  we  do  not  talk  about  learning 
people.  But  Paul  says  we  are  Christ's  disciples,  not 
only  in  the  sense  that  we  learn  of  Him  as  Teacher — 
Avhich  follows  in  the  next  clause — but  that  we  learn 
Him  as  the  theme  of  our  study. 

That  is  to  say,  the  relation  of  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  all  that  He  has  to  teach  and  reveal  to  the 


CUR  I  ST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUR  TEACUER.  139 


world  is  altogether  different  from  that  of  all  other 
teachers  of  all  sorts  of  truth,  to  the  truth  which  they 
proclaim.  You  can  accept  the  truths  and  dismiss 
into  oblivion  the  men  from  whom  you  got  them. 
But  you  cannot  reject  Christ  and  take  Christianity. 
The  two  are  inseparably  united.  For,  in  regard  of 
all  spiritual  and  of  all  moral  truth — truth  about 
conduct  and  character — Jesus  Christ  is  what  He 
teaches.  So  we  may  say,  turning  well-known  Avords  of 
a  poet  m  another  direction :  ''•  My  lesson  is  in  Thee." 

But  that  is  not  all.  My  text  goes  on  to  speak 
about  another  thing:  "Ye  have  learned  Christ 
if  so  be  that  ye  have  lieaixl  Him  and  been  taught." 
Now  that  "if  so  be"  is  not  the  "if"  of  uncertainty 
or  doubt,  but  it  is  equivalent  to  "  if,  as  I  know  to  be 
the  case,"  or  ''since  ye  have  heard  Him."  Away 
there  in  Ephesus,  years  and  years  after  the  cruci- 
fixion, these  people  who  had  never  seen  Christ  in  the 
flesh,  nor  heard  a  Avord  from  the  lips  "into  which 
grace  Avas  poured,"  are  yet  addressed  by  the  Apostle 
as  those  who  had  listened  to  Him  and  heard  Him 
speak.  They  had  "heard  Him  and  been  taught." 
So  He  was  Lesson  and  He  Avas  Teacher.  And  that 
is  as  true  about  us  as  it  Avas  about  them.  Let  me 
say  only  a  Avord  or  two  about  each  of  these  two 
thoughts. 

I  have  already  suggested  that  the  underlying  truth 
Avhich  Avarrants  the  first  of  them,  is  that  Jesus  Christ's 
relation  to  His  message  and  revelation  is  altogether 
different  from  that  of  other  teachers  to  what  they 
have  to  communicate  to  the  Avorld.  Of  course  Ave  all 
knoAv  that,  in  regard  of  the  Avider  sphere  of  religious 


140  CHRIST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUR  TEACHER. 


and  Christian  truth,  it  is  not  only  what  Christ  said, 
but  even  more  what  He  did  and  Avas,  that  makes  His 
revelation  of  the  Father's  heart.  Precious  as  are  the 
words  w-hich  dro^o  from  His  lips,  which  are  spirit  and 
are  life,  His  life  itself  is  more  than  all  His  teachings  ; 
and  it  is  when  we  learn,  not  froiii  Him,  but  when 
we  learn  Him,  that  we  see  the  Father.  But  my  text 
has  solely  reference  to  conduct,  and  in  that  aspect 
it  just  impKes  this  thought,  that  the  sum  of  all  duty, 
the  height  of  all  moral  perfectness,  the  realised  ideal 
of  humanit}^,  is  in  Christ,  and  that  the  true  way  to 
know  what  a  man  or  a  nation  ought  to  do  is  to 
study  Him. 

How  strange  it  is,  when  one  comes  to  consider  it, 
that  the  impression  of  absolute  perfection,  free  from 
all  limitations  of  race  or  country  or  epoch  or  indi- 
dividual  character— and  yet  not  a  vague  abstraction 
but  a  true  living  Person— has  been  printed  upon  the 
minds  and  hearts  of  the  world  by  these  four  little 
pamphlets  which  we  call  gospels!  I  do  not  think 
that  there  is  anything  in  the  whole  history  of  litera- 
ture to  compare  with  the  impression  of  veracity  and 
historical  reality  and  individual  personality  which  is 
made  by  these  fragmentary  narratives.  And  although 
It  has  nothing  to  do  with  my  present  subject,  I  may 
just  say  in  a  sentence  that  it  seems  to  me  that  the 
character  of  Jesus  Christ  as  painted  in  the  gospels, 
in  its  incomparable  vividness  and  vitality,  is  one  of 
the  strongest  evidences  for  the  simple  faithfulness  as 
biographies,  of  these  books.  Nothing  else  but  the 
Man  seen  could  have  resulted  in  such  compositions. 

But  apart  altogether  from  that,  how  blessed  it  is 


CHRIST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUR  TEACHER.  141 


that  we  have  not  to  enter  upon  any  lengthened 
investigations,  far  beyond  the  power  of  average  minds, 
hi  order  to  get  hold  of  the  fundamental  laws  of  moral 
conduct !  How  blessed  it  is  that  all  the  harshness  of 
"  Obey  this  law  or  die  "  is  by  His  life  changed  into 
"  Look  at  Me,  and,  for  My  love's  sake,  study  Me  and 
be  like  Me  ! "  This  is  the  blessed  peculiarity  which 
gives  all  its  power  and  distinctive  characteristic  to  the 
morality  of  the  Gospel,  that  law  is  changed  from  a 
statuesque  white  ideal,  pure  as  marble  and  cold  and 
lifeless  as  it,  into  a  living  Person  with  a  throbbing 
heart  of  love,  and  an  outstretched  hand  of  help, 
whose  word  is,  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  command- 
ments, and  be  like  Me." 

Christian  men  and  women !  study  Jesus  Christ. 
That  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  all  right  knowledge 
of  duty  and  of  all  right  practice  of  it.  Learn  Him, 
His  self-suppression,  His  self-command.  His  untroubled 
calmness,  His  immovable  patience.  His  continual 
gentleness.  His  constant  reference  of  all  things  to  the 
Father's  will.  Study  these.  To  imitate  Him  is 
blessedness ;  to  resemble  Him  is  perfection.  "  Ye 
have  learned  Christ  "  if  you  are  Christians  at  all.  You 
have  at  least  begun  the  alphabet,  but  oh  1  in  Him  "  are 
hid  all  the  treasures,"  not  only  '•'  of  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge," but  of  "  whatsoever  things  are  lovely  and  of 
good  report "  ;  and  "  if  there  is  any  virtue,  and  if  there 
is  any  praise,"  we  shall  find  them  in  Him  who  is  our 
Lesson,  our  perfect  Lesson. 

But  that  is  not  all.  Lessons  are  very  well,  but — 
dear  me  ! — the  world  wants  something  besides  lessons. 
It  has  had  plenty  of  teaching.     The  trouble  is  not  that 


142  CEIIIST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUR  TEACHER. 

we  are  not  instructed,  but  that  we  do  not  take  tlie 
lessons  that  are  laid  before  us.  And  so  my  text 
suggests  another  thing  besides  the  wholly  inadequate 
conception,  as  it  would  be  if  it  stood  alone,  of  a  mere 
exhibition  of  what  we  ought  to  be. 

"If  so  be  that  we  have  lieard  Him."  As  I  said, 
these  Ephesian  Christians,  far  away  in  Asia  Minor, 
with  seas  and  3^ears  between  them  and  the  plains  of 
Galilee  and  the  Cross  of  Calvary,  are  yet  regarded  by  the 
Apostle  as  having  listened  to  Jesus  Christ.  We,  far  away 
down  the  ages,  and  in  another  corner  of  the  world,  as 
really,  without  metaphor,  in  plain  fact,  may  have  Jesus 
Christ  speaking  to  us,  and  may  hear  His  voice.  These 
Ephesians  had  heard  Him,  not  only  because  they  had 
heard  about  Him,  nor  because  they  had  heard  Him 
speaking  through  His  servant  Paul  and  others,  but 
because,  as  Paul  believed,  that  Lord,  who  had  spoken 
with  human  lips  words  which  it  was  possible  for  a 
man  to  utter  when  He  was  here  on  earth,  when  caught 
up  into  the  third  heaven  was  still  speaking  to  men, 
even  according  to  His  own  promise,  which  He  gave, 
at  the  very  close  of  His  career,  "  I  have  declared  Thy 
name  unto  My  brethren,  and  ivill  declare  it.'!  So, 
though  "  He  began  both  to  do  and  to  teach  "  before 
He  was  taken  up,  after  His  ascension  He  continues 
both  the  doing  and  the  tuition.  And,  in  verity,  we 
all  may  hear  His  voice  speaking  in  the  depths  of  our 
hearts ;  speaking  through  the  renewed  conscience ; 
speaking  by  that  Spirit  who  will  guide  us  into  all  the 
truth  that  we  need  ;  speaking  through  the  ages  to  all 
who  will  listen  to  His  voice. 

The  conception  of  Christ  as  a  Teacher  which  is 


CHRIST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUR  TEACHER.  143 

held  by  many  who  deny  His  redeemmg  work  and 
dismiss  as  incredible  His  divinity  seems  to  me  alto- 
gether inadequate,  unless  it  be  supplemented  by  the 
belief  that  He  now  has  and  exercises  the  power  of 
communicating  wisdom  and  knowledge  and  warning 
and  stimulus  to  waiting  hearts ;  and  that  when  we 
hear  within  the  depths  of  our  souls  the  voice  saying 
to  us,  "  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,"  or  saying  to 
us,  "  Pass  not  by,  enter  not  into  it,"  if  we  have  waited 
for  Him,  and  studied  His  example  and  character,  and 
sought,  not  to  please  ourselves,  but  to  be  led  by  His 
wisdom,  we  may  be  sure  that  it  is  Christ  Himself 
who  speaks.  Reverence  the  inward  monitor,  and 
when  He  within  thy  heart,  by  His  spirit,  calls  thee, 
do  thou  answer,  "  Speak,  Lord  !  Thy  servant  heareth." 
"  Ye  have  learned  Christ  if  so  be  that  ye  have 
hearkened  to  Him." 

II. — Secondly,  mark  the  condition  of  learning  the 
Lesson  and  hearing  the  Teacher. 

Our  Authorized  Version,  in  accordance  with  its 
very  frequent  practice,  has  evacuated  the  last  words 
of  my  text  of  their  true  force  by  the  substitution  of 
the  more  intelligible  "  hy  Him  "  for  what  the  Apostle 
writes — "  in  Him."  The  true  rendering  gives  us  the 
condition  on  which  we  learn  our  Lesson  and  hear  our 
Teacher.  "  In  Him  "  is  no  mere  surplusage,  and  is 
not  to  be  weakened  down,  as  this  translation  of  ours 
does,  into  a  mere  "  hy  Him,"  but  it  declares  that, 
unless  we  keep  ourselves  in  union  with  Jesus  Christ, 
His  voice  will  not  be  heard  in  our  hearts,  and  the 
lesson  will  pass  unlearned. 

You   know,  dear  brother,  how   emphatically  and 


144  CHRIST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUR  TEACHER. 

continually  in  the  New  Testament  this  doctrine  of 
the  dwellinof  of  the  believinsc  soul  in  Christ,  and  the 
reciprocal  dwelling  of  Christ  in  the  believing  soul,  is 
insisted  upon.  And  I,  for  my  part,  believe  that  one 
great  cause  of  the  unsatisfactory  condition  of  the 
average  Christianity  of  this  day  is  the  slurring  over 
and  minimizing  of  these  twin  great  and  solemn  truths. 
I  w^ould  fain  bring  you  back  to  the  Master's  words,  as 
declaring  the  deepest  truths  in  relation  to  the  con- 
nection between  the  believing  soul  and  the  Christ  in 
whom  it  believes  : — "  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in  you."  I 
wish  you  would  go  home  and  take  this  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians,  and  read  it  over,  putting  a  pencil  mark 
below  each  place  in  which  occur  the  words  "  in  Christ 
Jesus."  I  think  you  would  learn  something  if  you 
would  do  it. 

But  all  that  I  have  to  say  at  present  is  that,  if  we 
would  keep  ourselves,  by  faith,  by  love,  by  meditation, 
by  aspiration,  by  the  submission  of  the  will,  and  by 
practical  obedience,  in  Jesus  Christ,  enclosed  in  Him 
as  it  were — then,  and  then  only,  shall  we  learn  His 
lesson,  and  then,  and  then  only,  shall  we  hear  Him 
speak.  Why  !  if  you  never  think  about  Him,  how 
can  you  learn  Him  ?  If  you  seldom,  or  sleepily, 
take  up  your  Bibles  and  read  the  gospels,  of  what 
good  is  His  example  to  you  ?  If  you  wander  away 
into  all  manner  of  regions  of  thought  and  enjoy- 
ment instead  of  keeping  near  to  Him,  how  can 
you  expect  that  He  shall  communicate  Himself  to 
you  ?  If  we  keep  ourselves  in  touch  with  that 
Lord,  if  we  bring  all  our  actions  to  Him,  and 
measure  our  conduct  by  His  pattern,  then  we  shall 


CUFdST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUR  TEACHER.  145 


learn  His  lesson.  What  does  a  student  in  a  school 
of  design  do  ?  He  puts  his  feeble  copy  of  some 
great  picture  beside  the  original,  and  compares  it 
touch  for  touch,  line  for  line,  shade  for  shade, 
and  so  corrects  its  errors.  Take  your  lives  to  the 
Exemplar  in  that  fashion,  and  go  over  them  bit 
by  bit.  Is  this  like  Jesus  Christ ;  is  tltat  what  He 
would  have  done  ?  Then  "  in  Him,"  thus  in  con- 
tact with  Him,  thus  correcting  our  daubs  by  the 
perfect  picture,  we  shall  learn  our  lesson  and  listen 
to  our  Teacher. 

Still  your  passions,  muzzle  your  inclinations,  clap  a 
bridle  on  your  will,  and,  as  some  tumultuous  crowd 
would  be  hushed  into  silence  that  they  might  listen 
to  the  king  speaking  to  them,  make  a  great  silence  in 
your  hearts,  and  you  will  "  hear  Him  "  and  be  taught 
"in  Him." 

in.— Lastly,  the  test  and  result  of  having  learned 
the  Lesson  and  listened  to  the  Teacher  is  unlikeness 
to  surrounding  corruption. 

"  Ye  have  not  so  learned  Christ."  Of  course  the 
hideous  immoralities  of  Ephesus  are  largely,  but  by 
no  means  altogether,  gone  from  Manchester.  Of 
course,  nineteen  centuries  of  Christianity  have  to  a 
very  large  extent  changed  the  tone  of  society  and 
influenced  the  moral  judgments  and  practices  even  of 
persons  who  are  not  Christians.  But  there  still 
remains  a  ivorld,  and  there  still  remains  unfilled  up 
the  gulf  between  the  worldly  and  the  godly  life.  And 
I  believe  it  is  just  as  needful  as  ever  it  was,  though 
in  different  ways,  for  Christians  to  exhibit  unlikeness 
to  the  world.     "  Not  so,"  must  be  our  motto ;  or,  as 

10 


UQ  CUEIST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUll  TEACHER. 

the  Jewisli  patriot  said,  "  So  did  not  I,  because  of  tlie 
fear  of  the  Lord." 

I  do  not  want  you  to  make  j^ourselves  singular ;  I 
do  not  want  you  to  wear  conventional  badges  of 
unlikeness  to  certain  selected  evil  habits.  A  Christian 
man's  unlikeness  to  the  world  consists  a  great  deal 
more  in  doino;  or  beino-  what  it  does  not  do  and  is 
not  than  in  not  doing  or  being  what  it  does  and 
is.  It  is  easy  to  abstain  from  conventional  things ; 
it  is  a  great  deal  harder  to  put  in  practice  the 
unworldly  virtues  of  the  Christian  character. 

There  are  wide  regions  of  life  in  which  all  men 
must  act  alike,  be  they  saints  or  sinners,  be  they 
believers.  Agnostics,  Mohammedans,  Turks,  Jews,  or 
anything  else.  There  are  two  ways  of  doing  the  same 
thing.  If  two  women  were  sitting  at  a  grindstone,  one 
of  them  a  Christian  and  the  other  not,  the  one  that 
pushed  her  handle  half  round  the  circle  for  Christ's 
sake  would  do  it  in  a  different  fashion  from  the 
other  one  Avho  took  it  from  her  hand  and  brought 
it  round  to  the  other  side  of  the  stone,  and  did  it 
without  reference  to  God. 

Brethren,  be  sure  of  this,  that  if  you  and  I  do  not 
find  in  ourselves  the  impulse  to  abstain  from  coarse 
enjoyments,  to  put  our  feet  upon  passions  and  desires, 
appetites  and  aims,  which  godless  men  recognize  and 
obey  without  qualm  or  restraint,  we  need  to  ask  our- 
selves :  "  In  what  sense  am  I  a  Christian,  or  in  what 
sense  have  I  heard  Christ  ?"  It  is  a  poor  affair  to 
fhng  away  our  faithful  protest  against  the  world's 
evils  for  the  sake  of  receivinof  the  world's  smile. 
Modern  Christianity  is  often  not  vital  enough  to  be 


OHRIST  OUR  LESSON  AND  OUR  TEACHER.  147 

hated  by  a  godless  world ;  and  it  is  not  hated  because  it 
only  deserves  to  be  scorned.  Keep  near  Jesus  Christ, 
live  in  the  light  of  His  face,  drink  in  the  inspiration 
and  instruction  of  His  example,  and  the  unlikeness 
will  come,  and  no  mistake.  Dwell  near  Him,  keep 
in  Him,  and  the  likeness  will  come,  as  it  always  comes 
to  lovers,  who  grow  to  resemble  that  or  those  whom 
they  love.  "  It  is  enough  for  the  disciple  to  be  as 
his  Teacher,  and  for  the  slave  that  he  be  like  his 
Lord." 


10^ 


XV. 

TUnclotbcl)  m\i>  Clotbcb  Tllpon. 

That  ye  put  off  concerning  the  former  conversation  the  old  man, 
which  is  conaipt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,  .  .  .  And 
that  ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in 
righteousness  and  true  holiness." — Ephes.  iv.  22,  24. 


'JE  saw  in  the  last  sermon,  in  consider- 
ing the  previous  context,  that  the 
Apostle  there  sets  forth  Christ  as  being 
both  the  Lesson  and  the  Teacher  of 
the  Christian  man.  In  the  words  of 
our  present  text  we  have  the  sum  and  substance  of 
the  lesson  which  in  Christ  we  receive.  I  have 
ventured  to  take  these  words,  omitting  some  others 
which  are  difficult  and  important,  because  by  bring- 
insf  them  into  immediate  connection  with  the  thoug-hts 
in  the  preceding  verses  we  get  a  clear  view  of  the 
general  trend  of  the  Apostle's  thought. 

The  great  lesson  for  Christian  people,  which  tests 
the  reality  of  their  discipleship,  is  this  double  ex- 
hortation: "  put  off  the  old,  .  .  .  put  on  the  new." 
The  sum  and  substance  of  all  Christian  duty  and 
conduct  may  be  set  forth  as  being  that  we  denude 
ourselves  of  ourselves,  and  invest  ourselves  with  new 
selves.  It  is  a  paradox,  but  it  is  the  meaning  of  the 
Christian  life. 


VN CLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UPON.  149 

I. — AVe  have  here,  first,  the  actual  self  which  must 
be  got  rid  of. 

The  picture  which  the  Apostle  draws  is  a  ver}^ 
dark  one.  He  does  not  mean  it  to  be  a  complete 
statement  of  what  human  nature  is,  apart  from  Christ. 
But  he  does  mean  it  to  be  a  description  of  w^hat 
exists  in  every  man,  however  it  may  be  restrained  by 
better  influences. 

I  need  not  remind  you  that  his  venturesome 
anatomy  is  only  in  accordance  with  ordinary  usage, 
by  which  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  '■'  our  better  " 
and  "  our  worse  selves,"  of  '•  our  old "  and  "  of  our 
present  selves  "  ;  and  so  on.  The  Apostle  simply 
carries  a  familiar  division  a  step  further. 

Now,  note,  that  this  old  self  has  for  its  characteristic 
that  it  is  governed  and  shaped  by  lust.  That  word, 
in  apostolic  and  Scriptural  meaning — and  I  suppose 
in  English  at  the  date  of  our  translation — had  not 
shrunk  to  the  narrow  and  foul  sense  which  it  now 
carries.  It  is  a  singularly  eloquent  testimony  to  the 
tremendous  power  and  widespread  extent  of  these 
sensual  appetites  that  the}'  have  monopolized  a  word 
which  originally  had  a  much  wider  meaning.  Flt 
the  Greek  and  the  English  alike  mean,  not  merely 
animal  appetites  or  passions  connected  with  our 
physical  organization,  but  they  mean  desires  of  all 
sorts :  the  goings  out  of  the  mind  and  will  after 
anything  apart  from  God,  conceived  of  as  good. 
Paul's  notion  of  "  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  "  includes  not 
only  gluttony  and  drunkenness  and  uncleanness  of 
other  sorts,  but  also  the  most  purely  mental  desires, 
such  as  ambition  and  love  of  fame,  and  all  the  other 


150  UNCLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UPON. 

more  refined  forms,  by  wliicli  men  let  themselves  go 
out  in  longing  after  created  things  lower  than  God 
Himself  This  is  what  he  means  by  lusts  :  strong 
desires  set  upon  creatures. 

And  is  it  not  true  that,  whilst  there  are  other 
elements  in  all  men,  yet,  speaking  broadly  and  on  the 
whole,  men  are  governed  b}^  their  desires  far  more 
than  by  their  consciences  or  their  judgments  ?  Clearly 
enousfh,  if  we  will  think  of  it  for  a  moment,  these 
apj)etites,  which  are  excited  by  external  things  con- 
ceived to  be  good,  were  never  meant  to  be  on  the 
quarter-deck,  and  to  have  command  of  the  ship. 
Clearly  they  bear  upon  their  very  fronts,  like  the 
Hindoos  with  their  caste-mark  on  their  foreheads, 
the  tokens  of  their  destination  for  service.  They  are 
meant  to  stimulate  to  action,  but  they  are  meant  to 
take  their  orders  from  another  part  of  our  nature. 
And  if  a  man  is  ruled  by  his  desires,  then  he  has 
failed  to  be  what  he  should  be. 

And  I  maintain  that,  speaking  broadly  and 
generally,  and  not  for  a  moment  denying  the  fact 
that  in  men  there  are  motions  towards  good,  and 
strong  recalcitrations  of  conscience  and  of  judgment 
against  the  slavery  to  the  worse  part,  still,  on  the 
whole,  it  remains  true  that,  apart  from  Jesus  Christ, 
desires  fashion  men.  There  has  been  rebellion  in  the 
Httle  kingdom  within,  and  the  mob  has  got  command, 
and  the  rulers  are  in  prison. 

Then  the  Apostle's  next  thought  is  :  these  desires 
are  liars.  "  Deceitful  lusts  "  our  translation  represents 
him  as  saying,  but  that  is  scarcely  the  full  rendering 
of  his  word.     "Lusts  of  deceit"  is  the  literal  and  the 


UNCLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UPON,  151 


more  forcible  translation.  But,  substantially,  the 
meaning  is  that  the  desires  to  which  we  submit  tell  us 
lies,  and  so  they  govern  us. 

And  is  not  that  true  ?  What  does  it  mean  that 
men  have  got  two  names  for  almost  all  sorts  of  vices; 
one  of  which  they  apply  to  their  own  sins,  one  which 
they  keep  for  other  people's  ?  Why  is  licentiousness 
called  "sow^ing  wild  oats"?  Why  is  miserliness  called 
"  prudence  "  ?  Why  is  what  in  the  one  is  "  flat 
blasphemy  "  in  the  other  but  "  a  choleric  word  "  ? 
Why  has  everj^  sin  a  pet  name — a  euphemism,  as 
the}^  say — but  because~our  desires  are  liars  ?  When 
they  would  coax  us  into  the  toils  they  say,  "  Come,  is 
it  not  a  little  one  ?  "  and  when  they  have  got  us,  they 
turn  round  and  say,  "  It  is  too  great  a  one  for  you 
ever  to  get  rid  of  it."  They  lie  to  us  in  describing  the 
essential  nature  of  the  acts  to  which  they  tempt  us. 

And  they  lie  to  us  in  another  way,  b}^  holding  out 
to  us  a  promise  that  will  never  be  fulfilled.  They  are 
all  "juggling  fiends,  that  palter  with  us  in  a  double 
sense."  Kemember  the  old  story,  out  of  Koman 
history,  of  the  woman  that  was  tempted  to  betray  her 
country  by  the  promise  of  receiving  from  the  in- 
vaders "  that  which  they  wore  on  their  left  arms." 
She  meant  the  golden  bracelets.  They  promised,  and 
when  the  treason  was  consummated  they  crushed  her 
below  their  shields. 

So  it  is  with  every  evil  thing  that  appeals  to  our 
quickly  stimulated  desires.  It  promises  satisfaction 
of  the  desire,  and  that  promise  may  be  kept,  but  the 
satisfied  desire  leaves  the  man  unsatisfied.  Children 
think  that  there  is  a  pot  of  gold  at  the  foot  of  the 


152  UNCLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UPON. 

rainbow,  and  Avlien  they  get  to  it  they  find  only  wet 
vapour,  with  a  deceitful  glister  of  the  sunshine  on  it 
for  a  moment. 

And  then,  saj^s  the  Apostle,  these  desires  which  lie 
make  the  man  that  obej^s  them  steadily  progressive  in 
corruption.  For  the  word  which  is  rendered  in  my 
text  "  corrupt "  fully  means  "  being  corrupted."  And 
it  points  to  that  solemn  thought,  that  if  once  we  take 
wishes  or  inclinations  of  the  coarser  or  of  the  more 
refined  kind  for  our  guides,  in  the  exact  proportion  in 
v/hich  we  let  them  have  the  control  they  drive  us 
into  steadily  increasing  deterioration,  and  we  get  more 
and  more  scurfed  over  with  foul  leprosy.  There  is 
nothing  more  certain  than  that  tragic  necessity  of  a 
downward  course  with  accelerated  rapidity,  if  once  we 
put  our  feet  on  the  fatal  slope.  And  so.  dear  brethren, 
all  surface  refinements  are  vain  and  futile,  and  lives 
that  are  yielded  as  some  of  ours  are,  if  not  uncon- 
ditionally and  exclusively,  at  least  predominantly,  to 
the  sway  of  inclinations,  are  like  some  stagnant  ponds 
with  an  iridescent  scum  on  the  top,  which  shows 
prismatic  colours,  but  is  the  outcome  of  putrefaction. 
So,  many  a  life,  ver}^  fair  in  external  appearance,  is 
really  in  its  depths  rotting  away  by  self-indulgence, 
corrupting  with  "  lusts  of  deceit." 

Kow,  I  do  not  say  that  that  is  the  whole  of  you. 
I  do  not  say  that  that  is  all  of  any  man  ;  but  I  do  say 
that  is  a  part  of  every  man.  And  so  this  exhortation 
comes  in,  reiteratino-  the  teachinof  of  all  the  morahsts 
that  ever  were  ;  and  if  we  separate  it  from  its  context 
it  is  as  vain  as  all  their  morahties.  "  Put  off  the  old 
man."     The  image,  of  course,  is  taken  from  a  oarment 


USCLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UPON.  153 

Bid  Hercules  put  oft'  the  shirt  of  Nessus  that  is  on 
him  !  It  was  kiUing  him  ;  and  the  old  myth  tells  us 
that  extrication  from  it  was  hopeless ;  and  that  there 
was  no  remedy  but  the  funeral  pyre,  which  would 
burn  Hercules  and  his  shirt  together.  How  can  I 
separate  myself  from  myself  ?  Are  not  my  desires  as 
much  me  as  my  conscience  and  my  will  ?  The 
problem  is  insoluble  within  human  limits.  And  yet 
Paul,  without  seeming  to  think  that  he  is  requiring 
anything  at  all  difticult,  calmly  says,  "  Put  oft'  the  old 
man.  Denude  yourself  of  yourself."  He  has  made  an 
impossible  requirement ;  until  we  go  a  step  further, 
and  hear  what  else  he  has  to  say. 

II. — So  that  brings  me  to  the  next  point  in  m}^ 
text — the  new  self  wdiich  may  be  put  on. 

I  have  omitted  the  intervening  clause,  not  because 
I  consider  it  of  little  importance,  but  because  I  Avish 
to  bring  together  the  main  line  of  the  Apostle's 
thoughts.  "We  have  here  the  new  man  set  in  direct 
antithesis  to  the  old.  The  antitheses  are  still  more 
complete  if  we  adhere  a  little  more  closely  to  the 
original.  Note  how,  in  point  of  fact,  he  contrasts  the 
actual  self  and  the  possible  one  in  every  point.  The 
one  is  "  the  old,"  the  other  is  "  the  new."  The  one 
is  "  tending  to  corruption,"  the  other  is,  b}^  a  Divine 
act  of  power,  "  created."  The  one  is  "  after  lusts," 
fashioned  in  their  likeness  ;  the  other  is  "  after  God," 
fashioned  in  His.  The  one  obeys  'lusts  of  deceit," 
the  other  is  "  created  in  righteousness  and  holiness  of 
truth."  As  deceit  is  the  characteristic  of  the  one,  so 
truth  is  the  origin  and  source  of  the  other.  And 
thus   the    contrast    is    made   out,   and   the   Apostle 


154  Uy CLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UPOX. 

suggests  b}'  these  characteristics  the  motives  for,  and 
the  possibiHty  of,  reahzing  this  magnificent  ideal,  and 
being  renewed  in  ourselves  by  a  new  self,  which  has 
no  affinity  with  corruption,  but  is  a  creation  of  God's, 
which  is  made  in  His  own  likeness,  which  is  fed  by 
His  Divine  Spirit,  which  is  moulded  by  the  truth  that 
will  produce  righteousness  and  holiness. 

So,  then,  here  are  the  thoughts  which  he  thus 
packs  together.  First  of  all,  a  Divine  creative  act  in 
Jesus  Christ  is  ready  to  give  to  every  one  of  us  a  real 
new  self,  and  a  new  life  straight  from  God.  Brethren, 
that  is  the  very  central  message  of  the  Gospel  that 
I  haA^e  to  bring.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  life,  and  He  will 
be  your  life  and  mine  if  we  will  let  Him.  What  is 
the  meaning  of  the  Christian  word  "  regeneration "  ? 
What  is  it  to  be  born  aq-ain,  but  to  receive  into  our 
hearts  a  new  source  and  fountain  of  being,  which  will 
not,  indeed,  make  new  persons  of  us,  but  which  will 
give  a  new  power  for  obedience,  new  tastes,  a  new 
direction  to  our  desires,  new  enermes,  new  thouoiits. 
"  Behold  !  If  any  man  is  in  Christ  Jesus  he  is  a  new 
creation.  Old  things  are  passed  away.  All  things  are 
become  new."  Oh  !  would  that  I  could  get  you  to 
believe  and  to  feel  far  more  than  you  do  that  that  is 
the^imple  truth,  that  it  is  no  mere  exaggeration, 
nor  any  loft}^  metaphorical  way  of  saying  something 
very  much  smaller  than  it  sounds  at  first,  but  that 
really  the  very  central  idea  of  Christ's  gift  is  that 
it'' is  the  2'ift  of  a  new  nature.  This  Prometheus 
has  come  down  from  heaven  with  a  spark  in  the 
reed  of  His  weak  humanity,  and  the  reed  being 
broken  by  His  death  upon  the  cross.  His  longing  is 


UNCLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UPON.  155 

being  fultilled,  and  the  fire  of  a  new  life  is  kindled 
upon  earth. 

It  is  no  use  to  say  to  any  one,  "Pat  on  the  new  man," 
as  if  he  were  to  make  a  new  character  for  himself. 
But  the  injunction  assumes  an  altogether  different 
aspect  when  we  bid  him  put  on  what  has  been 
created,  and  take  for  his  own  the  new  self  which  God 
is  ready  to  give. 

Then,  further,  our  text  declares  that  this  possible 
new  life  will  be  fashioned  after  the  Divine  likeness. 
It  is  created  "  after  God  "  instead  of  being  moulded 
by  the  pressure  of  these  earth-born  and  earth- desiring 
lusts.  It  is  made  like  that  Divine  nature.  The  true 
likeness  of  man  to  God,  which  is  lost  in  man's  sin,  lies 
in  his  moral  nature,  his  love  of  good,  his  hatred  of 
evil.  There  is  a  likeness  of  God  inseparable  from 
humanity,  which  consists  in  a  man's  being  able  to 
say,  "  I,"  and  consequently  to  turn  to  Him  and  say, 
"  Thou  " ;  the  likeness  which  consists  in  personality, 
in  spiritual  being,  in  volition,  and  the  like.  But  the 
quintessence  of  the  likeness  of  man  to  God  lies  here, 
"  Thou  hast  loved  righteousness  and  hated  iniquity." 
And  this  life  of  likeness — S3^mpathy  with  God  in  good, 
and  sympathy  with  God  in  antipathy  to  evil — may 
be  ours.  It  is  quickened  by  the  Divine  Spirit ;  it  is 
nourished  and  strengthened  by  the  truth  in  Jesus 
Christ. 

The  problem  does  not  look  so  insoluble  now,  does 
it  ?  It  is  not  such  a  heartless  piece  of  irony  to  say  to 
the  poor,  broken  man,  "  Get  up  and  walk  !  put  off  the 
old  self,"  when  3'ou  can  sho^v  him  a  Divine  creation 
of  a  new  self  ditterin^'  in  its  likeness  to  God  ;  or,  in 


156  UNCLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UPON. 

another  image,  a  robe  of  righteousness  waiting  for 
him  if  he  will  put  it  on.  The  actual  self  is  corrupt ; 
the  possible  self  is  pure  and  Gocl-created. 

III. — So,    lastly,   note   our   double   task — put  off, 
put  on. 

Now,  I  suppose  that  in  the  very  initial  and  most 
faltering  steps  by  which  any  of  us  become  Christians 
these  two  commandments  begin  to  be  fulfilled.  Because, 
whensoever  a  man  thoroughly  hates  and  repents  of 
his  sin  he  has  put  off"  the  old  man,  and  whensoever 
he  opens  his  heart  to  the  reception  of  Christ's  saving 
power  and  quickening  love  he  has  put  on — though  it 
be  but  in  germ  or  in  infancy — the  better  self.  But 
then  there  must  follow  all  through  the  life  the 
repetition  and  increase  of  these  two  acts.  We  must 
daily,  not  only  be  thwarting  our  inclinations,  for  that 
is  a  poor  affair,  but  be  getting  rid  of  the  inclinations 
themselves,  which  is  the  only  real  conquest  over 
them. 

And  we  must  be  growing,  by  daily  efforts,  more  and 
more  into  the  likeness  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Now,  notice  that  these  commands,  "  put  off'/'  "  put 
on,"  are  realty  but  diverse  aspects  of  the  same  thing. 
The  surest  way  to  put  off'  the  old  is  to  put  on  the 
new.  There  have  been  great  blunders  about  that. 
The  great  fault  of  the  mystical  writers  in  Christianity, 
which  goes  a  long  w^ay  to  counterbalance  their  great 
excellences,  is  that  so  largely  they  preach  self-sup- 
pression and  self-denial  as  a  preparation  for  the 
receiving  of  the  better  nature  and  the  higher  life.  It 
is  a  mistake.  The  same  blunder  besets  the  salvation- 
by-works  people,  and  the  same  blunder  besets  a  great 


UNCLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UPON.  157 

many  modern  social  reformers.  "  Get  rid  of  the  evil 
and  then  assimilate  the  good."  That  is  putting  the 
cart  before  the  horse.  The  withered  leaves  hang  on 
the  beech  trees  all  through  the  winter,  but  tliey  drop 
off  Avhen  the  new  life  begins  to  force  its  way  up,  and 
drives  them  from  their  precarious  foothold.  You 
cannot  destroy  the  desires,  but  you  can  divert  them. 
Make  a  new  bed  for  the  river  and  the  old  bed  will 
soon  be  left  dry.  Which,  being  translated  into  plain 
English,  is  just  this — the  more  we  fill  our  hearts  with 
Jesus  Christ,  the  less  room  will  there  be  for  the  "lusts 
of  deceit."  The  cup  brimming  with  the  new  wine  of 
the  kingdom  has  no  room  for  baser  liquors  ;  and  the 
man  Avhose  desires  and  the  whole  current  of  whose 
being  set  towards  Jesus  Christ  will  not  be  the  slave  of 
lying  lusts  which  lead  to  corruption. 

Brethren !  since  this  new  life  is  to  be  found  in  Him, 
the  truest  way  to  secure  it  is  to  keep  close  to  Him  in 
whom  it  is  found.  Since  it  is  nourished  and  sustained 
by  the  Divine  Spirit,  the  truest  way  to  possess  it  is  to 
open  our  hearts  to  the  entrance  of  that  Spirit.  Since 
it  is  nourished  and  fed  by  the  truth  which  is  in  the 
word  of  the  Gospel,  the  way  to  increase  it  is  to  be 
familiar  in  heart  and  mind  with  the  motives  and 
promises  and  commandments  of  that  Gospel.  "  Walk 
in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh." 

So,  dear  friends,  it  is  not  hopeless  to  say  to  any 
one,  "  Put  off  the  old  self,"  if  we  can  say  to  him  at 
the  same  time,  "  Take  on  the  new,  the  creation  of 
God."  The  world,  and  our  own  weak  hearts,  may 
well  ask  in  despair, "  Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out 


158  IW CLOTHED  AND  CLOTHED  UFON. 

of  an  unclean  ? "  and  have  to  answer  in  sadness,  "  Not 
one  "  !  It  is  hopeless.  If  we  continue  to  be  ourselves 
we  have  got  bacteria  enough  in  us  to  kill  us,  and  we 
cannot  but  continue  ourselves,  unless  w^e  listen  to 
Him,  who  said  "  Behold !  I  make  all  things  new/'  and 
will  let  Him  '•'  create  in  us  clean  hearts,  and  renew 
right  spirits  within  us." 


XVI. 

1bo\v  to  ®w)ii  ©ur^elvee^ 

They  that  believe  to  the  saving  of  the  soul." — Heb.  x.  39. 

HE  writer  uses  a  somewhat  uncoramon 
word  in  this  clause,  which  is  not  alto- 
gether adequately  represented  by  the 
translation  "  saving."  Its  true  force 
will  be  apparent  by  comparing  one  or 
two  of  the  few  instances  in  Avhich  it  occurs  in  the 
Xew  Testament.  For  example,  it  is  twice  employed 
in  the  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians ;  in  one  case 
being  rendered,  "  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath, 
but  to  obtain"  (or,  more  correctly,  to  the  obtaining  of) 
"  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  ;  and  in  another, 
"called  to  the  obtaining  of  glory  through  Jesus 
Christ."  It  is  employed  twice  besides,  in  two  other 
places  of  Scripture,  and  in  both  of  these  it  means 
"  possession."  So  that,  though  practically  equivalent 
to  the  idea  of  salvation,  there  is  a  very  beautiful  shade 
of  difference  which  is  well  worth  noticing'. 

o 

The  thought  of  the  text  is  substantially  this — 
those  who  believe  luin  their  souls ;  they  acquire  them 
for  their  possession.  We  talk  colloquially  about 
''  people  that  cannot  call  their  souls  their  own."   That 


160  HOW  TO  0 IVN  0 URSEL VES. 

is  a  very  true  description  of  all  men  who  are  not  lords 
of  themselves  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  ''  They 
who  believe  to  the  gaining  of  their  own  souls  "  is  the 
meaning  of  the  writer  here. 

And  I  almost  think  that  we  may  trace  in  this 
peculiar  expression  an  allusion,  somewhat  veiled  but 
real,  to  similar  words  of  our  Lord's.  For  He  said, 
when,  like  the  writer  in  the  present  context,  He  was 
encouraging  His  disciples  to  steadfastness  in  the  face 
of  difficulties  and  persecutions,  "  In  your  patience  " — 
in  your  persistent  adherence  to  Me,  whatever  might 
draAv  you  away — "  ye  shall  win  " — not  merely  possess, 
as  our  Bible  has  it,  and  not  a  commandment,  but 
a  promise  — "  in  your  patience  ye  shall  win  3^our 
souls."  Whether  that  allusion  be  sustainable  or  no 
matters  comparatively  little  ;  it  is  the  significant  and 
beautiful  thought  which  underlies  the  word  to  which 
I  wish  to  turn,  and  to  present  you  with  some  illus- 
trations of  it. 

I. — First,  then,  if  w^e  lose  ourselves  we  ivin  ourselves. 

All  men  admit  in  theory  that  a  self-centred  life  is 
a  blunder.  Jesus  Christ  has  all  moralists  and  all 
thoughtful  men  whoU}^  with  Him  when  He  says,  "  He 
that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it ;  and  he  that  loseth  his 
life  shall  find  it."  There  is  no  such  way  of  filling  a 
soul  with  enlargement  and  blessedness  and  of  evolving 
new  powers  and  capacities  as  self-oblivion  for  some 
great  cause,  for  some  great  love,  for  some  great 
enthusiasm.  Many  a  woman  has  found  herself  when 
she  held  her  child  in  her  arms,  and  in  the  self-oblivion 
which  comes  from  maternal  affections  and  cares  has 
sprung   into   a   loftier  new   life.     Many   a   heart,   of 


HO  W  TO  0  WN  OURSEL VES.  1 61 


husband  and  wife,  can  set  its  seal  to  this  truth,  that 
the  l)lessedness  of  love  is  that  it  decentrahzes  the  soul, 
and  substitutes  another  aim  for  the  wretched  and 
narrow  one  that  is  involved  in  self-seeking.  And 
even  if  we  do  not  refer  to  these  sacred  heio^hts  of 
maternal  or  of  wedded  love,  there  are  many  other 
noble  counterpoises  to  the  degrading  influence  of  self- 
absorption,  which  all  men  recognize  and  some  men 
practise.  Whoever  has  once  tasted  the  joy  and 
rapture  of  flinging  himself  into  some  great  enthusiasm, 
and  has  known  how  much  fuller  life  is  Avhen  so 
inspired  than  in  its  ordinary  forms,  needs  no  words  to 
convince  him  that  the  secret  of  blessedness,  elevation, 
and  power,  if  it  is  to  be  put  into  one  great  word,  must 
be  put  into  this  one,  "  self-oblivion." 

But  whilst  all  these  counterpoises  to  the  love  of 
self  are,  in  their  measure  and  degree,  great  and  noble 
and  blessed,  not  one  of  them,  nor  all  of  them  put. 
together,  will  so  break  the  fetters  from  off'  a  prisoned 
soul  and  let  it  out  into  the  large  place  of  utter  and 
glad  self-oblivion  as  the  course  which  our  text  enjoins 
upon  us  when  it  says :  If  you  wish  to  forget  your- 
selves, to  abandon  and  lose  yourselves,  fling  yourselves 
into  Christ's  arms,  and  by  faith  yield  3'our  whole 
being,  will,  trust,  purposes,  aims,  everything— yield 
them  all  to  Him  ;  and  when  you  can  sa}-,  "  We  are- 
not  our  own,"  then  first  will  you  belong  to  youj'selves. 
and  have  won  your  own  souls. 

There  is  nothing  except  that  absolute  departure 
from  all  reliance  upon  our  own  poor  powers,  and  from 
all  making  of  ourselves  our  centre  and  aim  in  life,  which 
gives  us  true  possession  of  ourselves.     Nothing  else  is 

"11 


1 62  HO  W  TO  0  WN  0  URSEL  VES. 

comparable  to  the  talismanic  power  of  trust  in  Jesus 
Christ.  When  thus  we  lose  ourselves  in  Him  we  find 
ourselves,  and  find  Him  in  ourselves. 

I  believe  that,  at  bottom,  a  life  must  either  spin 
round  on  its  own  axis,  self-centred  and  self-moved,  or 
else  it  must  be  drawn  by  the  mass  and  w^eight  and 
mystical  attractiveness  of  the  great  central  sun,  and 
swept  clean  out  of  its  own  little  path  to  become  a 
satellite  round  Him.  Then  only  will  it  move  in  music 
and  beaut}',  and  flash  back  the  lustre  of  an  unfading 
light.  Self  or  God — one  or  other  will  be  the  centre  of 
every  human  life. 

It  is  Tv'ell  to  be  touched  with  lofty  enthusiasms  ;  it  is 
well  to  conquer  self  in  the  eager  pursuit  of  some  great 
thought  or  large  subject  of  study ;  it  is  well  to  conquer 
self  in  the  sweetness  of  domestic  love;  but  through 
all  these  there  may  run  a  perverting  and  polluting 
reference  to  myself.  Affection  may  become  but  a 
subtle  prolongation  of  myself,  and  study  and  thought 
may  likewise  be  tainted,  and  even  in  the  enthusiasm 
for  a  great  cause  there  may  mingle  much  of  self- 
reo'ard ;  and  on  the  whole  there  is  nothinof  that  will 
jsweep  out,  and  keep  out,  the  seven  devils  of  selfishness 
except  to  yield  yourselves  to  God,  drawn  by  His 
mercies,  and  say,  "  I  am  not  my  own ;  I  am  bought 
with  a  price."  Then,  and  only  then,  will  you  belong- 
to  yourselves. 

II. — Secondly,  if  we  will  take  Christ  for  our  Lord 
we  shall  be  lords  of  our  own  souls. 

I  have  said  that  self-surrender  is  self-possession. 
It  is  equally  true  that  self-control  is  self-possession  ; 
and  it  is  as  true  about  this  application  of  ni}'  text  as 


HO  IV  TO  0  WN  0  URSEL  FES.  1 63 

it  was  about  the  former,  that  Christianity  only  says 
more  emphatically  what  all  moralists  say,  and  suggests 
and  supplies  a  more  efficient  means  of  accomplishing 
the  end  which  they  all  recognize  as  good.  For 
everybody  knows  that  the  man  who  is  a  slave  to  his 
own  passions,  lusts,  or  desire  is  not  his  own  master. 
And  everybody  knows  that  the  man  who  is  the  sport 
of  circumstance,  and  yields  to  every  temptation  that 
comes  sweeping  round  him,  as  bamboos  bend  before 
every  blast ;  or  the  man  who  is  guided  by  fashion, 
conventionality,  custom,  and  the  influence  of  the  men 
amongst  whom  he  lives,  and  whom  he  calls  "  the 
world,"  is  not  his  own  master.  He  "  dare  not  call  his 
soul  his  own." 

What  do  we  mean  by  being  self-possessed,  except 
this,  that  we  can  so  rule  our  more  fluctuatinsf  and 
sensitive  parts  as  that,  notwithstanding  appeals  made 
to  them  by  external  circumstances,  they  do  not 
necessarily  yield  to  these  ?  He  possesses  himself  who, 
in  the  face  of  antagonism,  can  do  what  is  right ;  who, 
in  the  face  of  temptation,  will  not  do  what  is  wrong ; 
who  can  dare  to  be  in  the  right  with  one  or  two  ;  and 
who  is  not  moulded  by  circumstances,  howsoever  they 
may  influence  him,  but  reacts  upon  them  as  a  hammer, 
and  is  not  as  an  anvil.  And  this  superiority  over  the 
parts  of  my  nature  wdiich  are  meant  to  be  kept  down ; 
and  this  assertion  of  independent  power  in  the  face 
of  circumstances  and  this  freedom  from  the  dominion 
of  cliques  and  parties  and  organs  of  opinion  and 
loud  voices  round  us,  this  is  best  secured  in  its 
fulness  and  completeness  by  the  path  which  m}^  text 


suggests. 


11* 


1  d  i  no  IV  TO  0 IV N  0  uns  e l  yes. 

Trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  let  Him  be  your  Com- 
mander-in-Chief, and  you  have  won  your  souls.  Let 
Him  dominate  them,  and  you  can  dominate  them. 
If  you  will  give  your  wills  into  His  hands,  He  will 
give  them  back  to  you  and  make  you  able  to  subdue- 
your  passions  and  desires.  Put  the  reins  into  Christ's 
hands  and  say,  "  Here,  0  Lord,  guide  Thou  the  horses- 
and  the  chariot,  for  I  cannot  coerce  them,  but  Thou 
canst."  Then  He  will  come  and  bring  a  new  ally  in 
the  field,  and  cast  a  new  weiofht  into  the  scale,  and 
you  will  no  longer  be  the  slave  of  the  servile  and 
inferior  parts  of  your  nature ;  nor  be  kicked  about, 
the  football  of  circumstances ;  nor  be  the  echo  of 
some  other  body's  views,  but  you  will  have  a  voice  of 
your  own,  and  a  will  of  your  OAvn,  and  a  soul  of  your 
own,  because  you  have  given  it  to  Christ,  and  He  will 
help  you  to  control  it.  Such  a  man — and  I  verily 
believe,  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,  such  a  man 
only — in  the  fullest  sense,  is 

"  Free  from  slavish  bands 
Of  hope  to  rise  or  fear  to  fall  ; 
Lord  of  himself,  though  not  of  lands, 
And,  having-  nothing-,  yet  has  all." 

What  does  some  little  rajah,  on  the  edge  of  our 
great  Indian  Empire,  do  when  troubled  with  rebels 
that  he  cannot  subdue  ?  He  goes  and  makes  himself 
a  feudatory  of  the  great  central  Power  at  Calcutta, 
and  then  down  comes  a  regiment  or  two,  and  makes 
very  short  w^ork  of  the  rebellion  that  the  little  kinoflet 
could  do  nothing  with.  If  you  go  to  Christ  and  say 
to  Him,  "  Dear  Lord,  I  take  my  crown  from  my  head 
and  lay  it  at  Thy  feet,     Come  Thou  to  help  me  to 


HOW  TO  OWN  OURSELVES.  16: 


Tule  this  anarchic  realm  of  my  own  soul,"  you  will 
win  yourself. 

III. — Thirdl}',  if  we  have  faith  in  Christ  we  acquire 
ii  better  self. 

The  thing  that  most  thoughtful  men  and  women 
feel  after  they  have  gone  a  little  way  into  life  is  not 
so  much  that  they  want  to  possess  themselves,  as 
that  they  want  to  get  rid  of  themselves — of  all  the 
failures  and  shame  and  disappointment  and  futility  of 
their  lives ;  and  that  desire  may  be  accomplished.  We 
€annot  strip  ourselves  of  ourselves  by  any  effort. 
The  bitter  old  past  keeps  living  on,  and  leaves  with 
us  seeds  of  weakness  and  memories  that  sometimes 
•corrupt,  and  always  enfeeble  :  inemories  that  seem  to 
limit  the  possibilities  of  the  future  in  a  tragic  fashion. 
Ah,  brethren,  we  can  get  rid  of  ourselves  ;  and,  instead 
of  continuing  the  poor,  shi-laden,  feeble  creatures  that 
we  are,  we  can  have  pouring  into  our  souls  the  gift 
most  real — though  people  now^-a-days,  in  their  shallow 
religion,  call  it  mystical — of  a  new  impulse  and  a  new 
life.  The  old  individuality  w^ill  remain,  but  new 
tastes,  new  aspirations,  aversions,  hojDCs,  and  capaci- 
ties to  realize  them  may  all  be  ours,  so  that  "  if  any 
man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature  " ;  and  in  barter 
for  the  old  Grarment  he  receives  the  robe  of  rio^hteous- 
ness.  You  can  lose  yourselves,  in  a  very  deep  and 
earnest  sense,  if,  trusting  in  Jesus  Christ,  you  open 
the  door  of  the  heart  to  the  influx  of  that  new  life 
which  is  His  best  gift.  Faith  wins  a  better  self,  and 
we  may  each  experience,  in  all  its  fulness  and  blessed- 
ness, the  paradox  of  the  Apostle  when  he  said,  "  I 
live "  now,  at  last,  in   triumphant  possession  of  this 


1C6  HO JF  TO  on ^N  0 UliSEL VES. 

better  life:  "I  live"  nov: — I  only  existed  before — "yet 
not  I;  but  Christ  livetli  in  me."  And  witli  Christ  in 
me  1  first  find  mj-self 

lY. — Lastly,  if  by  faith  we  win  our  souls  here,  we 
save  them  from  destruction  hereafter. 

I  have  said  that  the  word  of  my  text  is  sub- 
stantially equivalent  to  the  more  frequent  and  com- 
mon expression  "  salvation  "  ;  though  Avith  a  shade 
of  difference,  which  I  have  been  trying  to  bring  out. 
And  this  substantial  equivalence  is  more  obvious  if 
3'ou  will  note  that  the  text  is  the  second  member  of 
an  antithesis,  of  which  the  first  is,  "  we  are  not  of 
them  which  draw  back  into  perdition." 

So,  then,  the  writer  sets  up,  as  exact  opposites  of 
one  another,  these  two  ideas — perdition  or  destruc- 
tion on  the  one  hand,  and  the  saving  or  winning  of 
the  soul  on  the  other.  Therefore,  whilst  we  must 
give  due  weight  to  the  considerations  which  I  have 
already  been  suggesting,  we  shall  not  grasp  the  whole 
of  the  writer's  meaning  unless  we  admit  also  the 
thought  of  the  future.  And  that  the  same  blending 
of  the  two  ideas,  of  possession  and  salvation  in  the 
more  usual  sense  of  the  v/ord,  was  implied  in  the 
Lord's  saying,  of  which  I  have  suggested  there  may  be 
an  echo  here,  is  plain  if  you  observe  that  the  version 
in  St.  Luke  give3  the  text  which  I  have  already 
quoted  :  "  In  jowv  patience  ye  shall  win  your  souls  "  ; 
and  that  of  St.  Matthew,  in  the  same  connection, 
gives,  instead,  the  saying,  "he  that  endiireth" — which 
corresponds  with  patience — "  he  that  endureth  to  the 
end,  the  same  shall  be  saved." 

So,  then,  brethren,  3^011  cannot  bo  said  to  have  won 


HOW  TO  OWN  OURSELVES.  167 


your  souls  if  you  are  only  keeping  them  for  destruc- 
tion. And  such  destruction  is  clearly  laid  down  here 
as  the  fiite  of  those  who  turn  aw\ay  from  Jesus  Christ. 

Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  no  fair  interpretation  can 
eject  from  that  word  "perdition,"  or  "destruction," 
an  element  of  avy-e  and  terror.  However  you  may 
interpret  the  ruin,  it  is  ruin  utter  of  which  it  speaks. 
And  I  am  very  much  afraid  that  in  this  generation 
eager  discussions  about  the  duration  of  punishment, 
and  the  final  condition  of  those  who  die  impenitent, 
have  had  a  disastrous  influence  on  a  great  many 
mhids  and  consciences  in  reference  to  this  whole 
subject,  by  making  it  rather  a  subject  of  controversy 
than  a  solemn  truth  to  be  pondered.  However  the 
controversies  be  settled,  there  is  terror  enough  left  in 
that  Avord  to  make  us  all  bethink  ourselves. 

I  lay  it  on  your  hearts,  dear  friends — it  is  no 
business  of  mine  to  say  much  about  it,  but  I  lay  it  on 
your  hearts — and  on  my  own ;  and  I  beseech  you  to 
ponder  it.  Do  not  mix  it  up  with  wholly  independent 
questions  about  Avhat  is  to  become  of  people  that 
never  heard  about  Jesus  Christ.  "  The  Judc-'e  of  all 
the  earth  will  do  right."  What  this  verse  says  applies 
to  people  that  have  heard  about  Him — that  is,  to  you 
and  me — and  to  people  that  do  not  accept  Him — and 
that  is  some  of  us ;  and  about  them  it  sa3-s  that  they 
"  draw  back  unto  perdition." 

Now,  remember,  the  alternative  applies  to  each  of 
us.  It  is  a  case  of  "  either — or  "  in  reofard  to  us  all. 
If  we  have  taken  Christ  for  our  Saviour,  and,  as  I 
said,  put  the  reins  into  His  hands  and  given  ourselves 
to  Him  by  love  and  submission  and  confidence,  then 


168  HOW  TO  OWX  OURSELVES. 

we  own  our  souls,  because  we  have  given  them  to 
Him  to  keep,  "and  He  is  able  to  keep  tbat  which  is 
committed  to  Him  against  that  day." 

But  I  am  bound  to  tell  3'ou,  in  the  plainest  words 
I  can  command,  that  if  you  have  not  thus  surrendered 
yourself  to  Jesus  Clirist,  His  sacrifice,  His  interces- 
sion. His  quickening  Spirit,  then  I  know  not  where 
you  are  to  find  one  foothold  of  hope  that  upon  you 
there  will  not  come  down  the  overwhelrnino'  fate  that 
is  darkly  portrayed  in  that  one  solemn  word. 

Oh,  brethren,  let  us  all  ponder  the  question,  "  What 
shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and 
lose  his  own  soul  ?  " 


XVII. 

SaltcJ)  witb  3firc, 

*'EVERY0>'E  eliall  be  salted  wi>li  fire." — Maek  ix.  49. 

UR  Lord  has  just  been  uttering  some  of 
the  most  solemn  words  that  ever  came 
from  His  gracious  Hps.  He  has  been 
enjoining  the  severest  self-suppression, 
extending  even  to  mutilation  and 
excision  of  the  eye,  the  hand,  or  the  foot  that  might 
cause  us  to  stumble.  He  has  been  giving  that  sharp 
lesson  on  the  ground  of  plain  common  sense,  and 
enlightened  self-regard.  It  is  better,  obviously, 
to  live  maimed  than  to  die  whole.  The  man  who 
elects  to  keep  a  mortified  limb,  and  thereby  to  lose 
life,  is  a  suicide  and  a  fool.  It  is  a  solemn  thought 
that  a  similar  mad  choice  is  possible  in  the  moral  and 
spiritual  region. 

To  these  stern  hijunctions,  accompanied  b}^  the 
awful  sanctions  of  that  consideration,  our  Lord  ap- 
pends the  words  of  my  text.  They  are  obscure,  and 
have  often  been  misunderstood.  This  is  not  the  place 
to  enter  on  a  discussion  of  the  various  explanations 
that  have  been  proposed  of  them.  A  word  or  two  is 
all  that  is  needful  to  put  you  in  possession  of  the 


170  SALTED   WITH  FIRE. 


point  of  view  from  which  I  wish  to  lay  them  on  your 
hearts  at  this  time. 

I  take  the  "everyone"  of  my  text  to  mean  not 
mankind  generally,  but  every  individual  of  the  class 
whom  our  Lord  is  addressing— that  is  to  say,  His  dis- 
ciples. He  is  laying  down  the  law  for  all  Christians. 
I  take  the  paradox  which  brings  together  "  salting  " 
and  "  fire "  to  refer,  not  to  salt  as  a  means  of  com- 
municating savour  to  food,  but  as  means  of  preserving 
from  putrefaction.  And  I  take  the  "fire"  here  to 
refer,  not  to  the  same  process  which  is  hinted  at  in 
the  awful  preceding  words, "'the  fire  is  not  quenched,'' 
but  to  be  set  in  opposition  to  that  fire,  and  to  mean 
something  entirely  different.  There  is  a  fire  that 
destroys  and  there  is  a  lire  that  preserves ;  and  the 
alternative  for  every  man  is  to  choose  between  the 
destructive  and  the  conserving  influences.  Christian 
disciples  have  to  submit  to  be  "  salted  with  fire  "  lest 
a  worse  thing  befall  them. 

I.— And  so  the  first  point  that  I  would  ask  you  to 
notice  here  is— that  fiery  cleansing  to  which  every 
Christian  must  yield. 

Now  I  have  already  referred  to  the  relation  between 
the  words  of  my  text  and  those  immediately  preceding, 
as  being  in  some  sense  one  of  opposition  and  contrast. 
I  think  we  are  put  on  the  right  track  for  understand- 
ing the  solemn  words  of  this  text  if  we  remember  the 
great  sayings  of  John  the  Baptist,  where,  in  jDrecisely 
similar  fashion,  there  are  set  side  by  side  the  two  con- 
ceptions of  the  chaff  being  cast  into  the  unquenchable 
fire  (the  same  expression  as  in  our  text),  and  "  He 
shall  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire." 


SjiLTED   WITH  FIRE.  171 

The  salting  fire,  then,  Avhich  cleanses  and  preserves, 
and  to  which  every  Christian  soul  must  submit  itself, 
to  be  purged  thereby,  is,  as  I  take  it,  primarily  and 
fundamentally  the  fire  of  that  Divine  Spirit  which 
Christ  Himself  told  us  that  He  had  come  to  cast  upon 
the  earth,  and  yearned,  in  a  passion  of  desire,  to  see 
kindled.  The  very  frequent  use  of  the  emblem  in 
this  same  signification  throughout  Scripture,  I  sup- 
pose I  need  not  recall  to  you.  It  seems  to  me  that 
the  only  worthy  interpretation  of  the  words  before  us, 
which  goes  down  into  their  depths,  and  harmonizes 
with  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  teaching  of  Scripture, 
is  that  which  recognizes  these  words  of  my  text  as  no 
unwelcome  threat,  as  no  bitter  necessity,  but  as  a  joy- 
ful promise  bringing  to  men,  laden  and  burdened  with 
their  sins,  the  good  news  that  it  is  possible  for  them 
to  be  purged  from  them  entirely  by  the  fiery  ministra- 
tion of  that  Divine  Spirit.  Just  as  you  take  a  piece 
of  foul  clay  and  put  it  into  the  furnace,  and  can  see, 
as  it  gets  red  hot,  the  stains  melt  away,  as  a  cloud  in 
the  blue,  from  its  surface,  so  if  we  will  plunge  our- 
selves into  the  influences  of  that  Divine  power  Avliich 
Christ  has  come  to  communicate  to  the  world,  our  sin 
and  all  our  impurities  will  melt  from  off  us,  and  we 
shall  be  clean.  No  amount  of  scrubbing  with  soap 
and  water  will  do  it.  The  stain  is  a  great  deal  too 
deep  for  that,  and  a  mightier  solvent  than  any  we  can 
apply,  unaided  and  unsupplied  from  above,  is  needed 
to  make  us  clean.  "  Who  can  brinof  a  clean  thinc;  out 
of  an  unclean,"  especially  when  the  would-be  bringer 
is  the  unclean  thing  himself  ?  Surely  not  one.  Un- 
less there  be  a  power  ah  extra,  unparticipant  of  man's 


SALTED   WITH  FIRE. 


evils,  and  yet  capable  of  mingling  with  the  evil  man's 
inmost  nature,  and  dealing  with  it,  then  I  believe  that 
universal  experience  and  our  individual  experience 
tell  us  that  there  is  no  hope  that  we  shall  ever  get  rid 
of  our  transgression. 

Brethren,  for  a  man  by  his  own  unaided  effort, 
hoAvever  powerful,  continuous,  and  wisely  directed  it 
may  be,  to  cleanse  himself  utterly  from  his  iniquity, 
is  as  hopeless  as  it  would  be  for  him  to  sit  down  with 
a  hammer  and  a  chisel  and  try  by  mechanical  means 
to  get  all  the  iron  out  of  a  piece  of  ironstone.  The 
union  is  chemical,  not  mechanical.  And  so  hammers 
and  chisels  will  only  get  a  very  little  of  the  metal  out. 
The  one  solvent  is  fire.  Put  the  obstinate  crude 
ore  into  your  furnace,  and  get  the  temperature  up, 
and  it  will  run  clear.  There  should  be  mountains  of 
scoria?,  the  dross  and  relics  of  our  abandoned  sins, 
around  us  all. 

If  we  want  to  be  delivered,  let  us  go  into  the  fire. 
It  will  burn  up  all  our  evil,  and  it  will  burn  up  nothing 
else.  Keep  close  to  Christ.  Lay  your  hearts  open 
to  the  hallowing  influences  of  the  motives  and  the 
examples  that  lie  in  the  story  of  His  hfe  and  death. 
Seek  for  the  fiery  touch  of  that  transforming  spirit, 
and  be  sure  that  you  quench  it  not,  nor  grieve  it! 
And  then  thy  weakness  will  be  reinvigorated  by 
celestial  powers,  and  the  live  coal  upon  thy  lips  will 
burn  up  all  thine  iniquity. 

But,  subordinately  to  this  deepest  meaning,  as  I 
take  it,  of  the  great  symbol  of  our  text,  let  me  remind 
you  of  another  possible  apphcation  of  it,  which  follows 
from  i\iQ  preceding.    God's  Spirit  cleanses  men  mainly 


S'A  L  TED   WITH  FIR  E.  1  /  ;5 

by  raising  their  spirits  to  a  higher  temperature.  For 
coldness  is  akin  to  sin,  and  heavenly  warmth  is 
akin  to  righteousness.  Enthusiasm  ennobles  always, 
delivers  men,  even  on  the  lower  reaches  of  life  and 
conduct,  from  many  a  meanness  and  many  a  sin. 
And  when  it  becomes  a  warmth  of  spirit  kindled  by 
the  reception  of  the  fire  of  God,  then  it  becomes  the 
solvent  which  breaks  the  connection  between  me  and 
my  evil.  It  is  the  cold  Christian  who  makes  no 
progress  in  conquering  his  sin.  The  one  who  is  filled 
with  the  love  of  God,  and  has  the  ardent  convictions 
and  the  burning  enthusiasm  which  that  love  ought  to 
produce  in  our  hearts,  is  the  man  who  will  conquer 
and  eject  his  evils. 

Xor  must  we  forget  that  there  is  still  another  pos- 
sible application  of  the  words.  For  whilst,  on  the 
one  hand,  the  Divine  Spirit's  method  of  delivering  us 
is  very  largely  that  of  imparting  to  us  the  warmth  of 
ardent,  devout  emotion ;  on  the  other  hand,  a  part 
of  this  method  is  the  passing  of  us  through  the  fiery 
trials  and  outward  disciplines  of  life.  "Everyone 
shall  be  salted  with  fire "  in  that  sense.  And  we 
have  learned,  dear  brethren,  but  little  of  the  loving 
kindness  of  the  Lord  if  we  are  not  able  to  say,  "  I 
have  grown  more  in  likeness  to  Jesus  Christ  by 
rightly  accepted  sorrows  than  by  anything  besides." 
Be  not  afraid  of  calamities ;  be  not  stumbled  by 
disaster.  Take  the  fiery  trial  which  is  sent  to  you  as 
beincr  intended  to  brini]^  about,  at  the  last,  the  dis- 
covery  unto  praise  and  honour  and  glory  "  of  your 
faith,  that  is  much  more  precious  than  gold  that 
perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire.'     " Everyone 


\n  SALTED   WITH  FIRE. 

shall  be  salted  with  fire."  The  Christian  law  of  life 
is,  submit  to  the  fiery  cleansing.  Alas  !  alas  !  for  the 
many  thousands  of  professing  Christians  who  are 
wrapping  themselves  in  such  thick  folds  of  non- 
conducting material  that  that  fiery  energy  can  only 
play  on  the  surface  of  their  lives,  instead  of  searching 
them  to  the  depths.  Do  you  see  to  it,  dear  brethren, 
that  you  lay  open  your  whole  natures,  down  to  the 
very  inmost  roots,  to  the  penetrating,  searching, 
cleansing  power  of  that  Spirit.  And  let  us  all  go  and 
say  to  Him,  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and  try  me,  and  see 
if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me." 

II.—  Notice  the  painfulness  of  this  fiery  cleansing. 

The  same  ideas  substantially  are  conveyed  in  my 
text  as  are  expressed,  in  different  imagery,  by  the 
solemn  words  that  precede  it.  The  "salting  with 
fire  "  comes  substantially  to  the  same  thing  as  the 
amputation  of  the  hand  and  foot,  and  the  plucking 
out  of  the  eye  that  cause  to  stumble.  The  metaphor 
expresses  a  painful  process.  It  is  no  pleasant  thing 
to  submit  the  bleeding  stump  to  the  actual  cautery, 
and  to  press  it,  all  sensitive,  upon  the  hot  plate  that 
will  stop  the  flow  of  the  blood.  But  such  pain  of 
shrinking  nerves  is  to  be  borne,  and  to  be  courted,  if 
we  are  wise,  rather  than  to  carry  the  hand  or  the  eye 
that  led  astray  unmutilated  into  total  destruction. 
Surely  that  is  common  sense. 

The  process  is  painful  because  we  are  weak.  The 
highest  ideal  of  Christian  progress  would  be  realized 
if  one  of  the  metaphors  with  which  our  Lord  expresses 
it  were  adequate  to  cover  the  whole  ground,  and  we 
grew  as  the  wheat  grows,  "  first  the  blade,  then  the 


SALTED  WITH  FIRE.  I7i 


ear,  after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  ear."  But  the 
tranquillity  of  vegetable  growth,  and  the  peaceful 
progress  which  it  symbolizes,  are  not  all  that  you  and 
T  have  to  expect.  Emblems  of  a  very  different  kind 
have  to  be  associated  with  the  quiet  serenity  of  the 
growing  corn,  in  order  to  describe  all  that  a  Christian 
man  has  to  experience  in  the  work  of  becoming  like 
his  Master.  It  is  a  fight  as  w^ell  as  a  growth ;  it  is  a 
building  requiring  our  continuity  of  effort,  as  well  as 
a  growth.  There  is  something  to  be  got  rid  of  as  well 
as  much  to  be  appropriated.  We  do  not  only  need  to 
become  better,  we  need  to  become  less  bad.  Squatters 
have  got  upon  the  land,  and  cling  to  it  and  hold  it  vi 
et  arinis ;  and  these  have  to  be  ejected  before  peace- 
ful settlement  is  possible. 

One  might  go  on  multiplying  metaphors  ad  libitum, 
in  order  to  bring  out  the  one  thought  that  it  needs 
huge  courage  to  bear  being  sanctified,  or  if  you  do  not 
like  the  theological  word,  to  bear  being  made  better. 
It  is  no  holiday  task,  and  unless  w^e  are  willing  to 
have  a  great  deal  that  is  against  the  grain  done  to  us, 
and  in  us,  and  by  us,  we  shall  never  achieve  it.  We 
have  to  accept  the  pain.  Desires  have  to  be  thwarted, 
and  that  is  not  pleasant.  Self  has  to  be  suppressed, 
and  that  is  not  delightsome.  A  growing  conviction 
of  the  depth  of  one's  own  evil  has  to  be  cherished, 
and  that  is  not  a  grateful  thought  for  any  of  us. 
Pains  external,  which  are  felt  by  reason  of  dis- 
ciplinary sorrows,  are  not  worthy  to  be  named  in 
the  same  day  as  those  more  recondite  and  inward 
agonies.  But,  brother,  they  are  all  light,  as  compared 
wdtli  the  exceeding  weight  of  glory    in   conformity 


176  SALTED   WITH  FIRE. 

to  the  example  of  our  Master,  which  they  prepare 
for  us. 

And  so  I  brhig  you  Christ's  message :  He  will  have 
no  man  to  enlist  in  His  army  under  false  pretences. 
He  will  not  deceive  any  of  us  by  telling  us  that  it  is 
all  easy  work  and  plain  sailing.  Salting  by  fire  can 
never  be  other  than  to  the  worse  self  an  agonj^,  just 
because  it  is  to  the  better  self  a  rapture.  And  so  let 
us  make  up  our  minds  that  no  man  is  taken  to  heaven 
in  his  sleep,  and  that  the  road  is  a  rough  one,  judging 
from  the  point  of  view  of  flesh  and  sense ;  but  rough, 
narroAV,  often  studded  with  sharp  edges,  like  the  plough 
coulters  that  they  used  to  lay  in  the  path  in  the  old 
rude  ordeals,  it  still  leads  straight  to  the  goal,  and 
bleeding  feet  are  little  to  pay  for  a  seat  at  Christ's 
right  hand. 

III. — Lastly,  notice  the  preservative  result  of  this 
painful  cleansing.    , 

Our  Lord  brings  together,  in  our  text,  as  is  often  His 
wont,  two  apparently  contradictory  ideas,  in  order, 
by  the  paradox,  to  fix  our  attention  the  more  vividly 
upon  His  words.  Fire  destroys  ;  salt  preserves.  They 
are  opposites.  But  yet  the  opposites  may  be  united 
in  one  mighty  thing,  a  fire  which  preserves  and  does 
not  destroy.  The  deepest  truth  is  that  the  cleansing 
fire  which  the  Christ  will  give  us  preserves  us,  because 
it  destroys  that  which  is  destroying  us.  If  you  kill 
the  germs  of  putrefaction  in  a  bit  of  dead  flesh,  you 
preserve  the  flesh.  And  if  you  bring  to  bear  upon  a 
man  the  power  which  will  kill  the  thing  that  is 
killing  him,  its  destructive  influence  is  the  condition 
of  its  conserving:  one. 


SALTED   WITH  FIRE.  177 


And  SO  it  is,  in  regard  of  that  great  spiritual  influ- 
ence which  Jesus  Christ  is  ready  to  give  to  every  one 
of  us.  It  slays  that  which  is  shiying  us.  For  our 
sins  destroy  in  us  the  true  hfe  of  a  man,  and  make  us 
but  parables  of  waliving  death.  When  the  three 
Hebrews  were  cast  into  the  tiery  furnace  in  Babylon, 
the  flames  burned  nothing  but  their  bonds,  and  they 
walked  at  liberty  in  the  tire.  And  so  it  will  be  with 
us.  We  shall  be  preserved  by  that  which  slays  the 
things  that  would  otherwise  slay  us. 

Let  me  lay  on  your  hearts  before  I  close  the  solemn 
iilternative  to  Avhicli  I  have  ah-eady  referred,  and 
wdiicli  is  suggested  by  the  connection  of  my  text  with 
the  preceding  words.  There  is  a  fire  that  destroys 
and  is  not  quenched.  Christ's  previous  words  are 
much  too  metaphorical  for  us  to  build  dogmatic 
definitions  upon.  But  Jesus  Christ  did  not  ex- 
ao^orerate.  If  here  and  now  sin  has  so  destructive 
<an  effect  upon  a  man,  oh,  who  will  venture  to  say 
that  he  knows  the  limits  of  its  murderous  power  in 
that  future  life,  when  retribution  shall  begin  with 
new  energy  and  under  new  conditions  ? 

Brethren,  whilst  I  dare  not  enlarge,  I  still  less  dare 
to  suppress :  and  I  ask  you  to  remember  that  not  I, 
or  any  man,  but  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  has  put  before 
each  of  us  this  alternative  :  either  the  fire  unquench- 
able, which  destroys  a  man,  or  the  merciful  fire,  which 
slays  his  sins  and  saves  him  alive. 

Social  reformers,  philanthropists,  you  that  have 
tried  and  failed  to  overcome  your  evil  and  who  feel 
the  loathly  thing  so  intertwisted  with  your  being  that 
to  pluck  it  from  your  heart  is  to  tear  away  the  very 

12 


SALTED   WITH  FIRE. 


heart's  walls  themselves,  here  is  a  hope  for  you. 
Closely  as  our  evil  is  twisted  in  with  the  fibres  of  our 
character,  there  is  a  hand  that  can  untwine  the  coils, 
and  cast  away  the  sin,  and  preserve  the  soul.  And 
although  we  sometimes  feel  as  if  our  sinfulness  and 
our  sin  were  so  incorporated  with  ourselves  that  it 
made  one's  self,  with  a  man's  head  and  a  serpent's  tail, 
let  us  take  the  joyful  assurance  that  if  we  trust  our- 
selves to  Christ,  and  open  our  hearts  to  His  power, 
we  can  shake  off  the  venomous  beast  into  the  fire  and 
live  a  fuller  life,  because  the  fire  has  consumed  that 
which  would  otherwise  have  consumed  us. 


XVI I  r. 
(Topice  of  Cbi'isfs  flDanner. 

"  A^'D  Peter  said  unto  him,  ^lilneas,  Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee  whole  : 
arise,  and  make  thy  bed.  .  .  .  Bnt  Peter  put  them  all 
forth,  and  knelt  down  and  prayed;  and,  turning?  to  the  b:dy. 
said,  Tabitha,  arisa  !  " — Acts  ix.  31,  iO. 

HAVE  put  these  two  miracles  together, 
not  only  because  they  were  closely 
connected  m  time  and  place,  but 
because  they  have  a  very  remarkable 
and  instructive  feature  in  common. 
They  are  both  evidently  moulded  upon  Christ's 
miracles ;  are  distinct  imitations  of  what  Peter  had 
seen  Him  do.  And  their  likenesses  to  and  diti'erences- 
from  our  Lord's  manner  of  working  are  equally  note- 
worthy. It  is  to  the  lessons  from  these  two  aspects, 
common  to  both  miracles,  that  I  desire  to  turn  novr. 

I. — First,  notice  the  similarities  and  the  lesson 
they  teach. 

The  two  cases  before  us  are  alike,  in  that  both  oF 
them  find  parallels  in  our  Lord's  miracles.  The  one 
is  the  cure  of  a  paralytic,  Avhich  pairs  off  with  the 
well-known  story  in  the  Gospels  concerning  the  man 
that  was  borne  by  four,  and  let  down  through  the 
roof  into  Christ's  presence.     The  other  of  them,  the 

12* 


180  COPIES   OF  CHRIST S  MANNER. 


raising  of  Dorcas,  or  Tabitlia,  of  course  corresponds 
with  the  three  resurrections  of  dead  people  which  are 
recorded  in  the  Gospels. 

And  now,  note  the  likenesses.  Jesus  Christ  said  to 
the  paralyzed  man,  "  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed."  Peter 
says  to  ^Eneas,  '•  Arise,  and  make  thy  bed."  The  one 
command  was  appropriate  to  the  circumstances  of  a 
man  w^ho  was  not  in  his  own  house,  and  whose  com- 
mand over  his  long-disused  muscles  in  obeying  Christ's 
w^ord  was  a  confirmation  to  himself  of  the  reality  and 
completeness  of  his  cure.  The  other  was  appropriate 
to  a  man  bedridden  in  his  own  house ;  and  it  had  pre- 
cisely the  same  purpose  as  the  analogous  injunction 
from  our  Lord,  "  Take  up  thy  bed  and  walk."  ^Eneas 
was  lying  at  home,  and  so  Peter,  remembering  how 
J  esus  Christ  had  demonstrated  to  others,  and  affirmed 
to  the  man  himself,  the  reahty  of  the  miraculous 
blessing  given  to  him,  copies  his  Master's  method, 
''  Jj]neas,  make  thy  bed."  It  is  an  echo  and  resem- 
blance of  the  former  incident,  and  is  a  distinct  piece 
of  imitation  of  it. 

And  then,  if  w^e  turn  to  the  other  narrative,  the 
intentional  moulding  of  the  manner  of  the  miracle, 
consecrated  in  the  eyes  of  the  loving  disciple,  because 
it  was  Christ's  manner,  is  still  more  obvious.  When 
Jesus  Christ  w^ent  into  the  house  of  Jairus  there  w^as 
the  usual  hubbub,  the  noise  of  the  loud  Eastern 
mourning,  and  He  put  them  all  forth,  taking  w^ith 
Him  only  the  father  and  mother  of  the  damsel,  and 
Peter,  wdtli  James  and  John.  AVhen  Peter  goes  into 
the  upper  room,  where  Tabitha  is  lying,  there  is  the 
usual  noise   of  lamentation  and  the  clack  of  many 


COPIES  OF  CHRIST S  MANNER.  181 

t)n<^ues,  extollins:  tlio  virtues  of  the  dead  woman. 
He  remembers  how  Christ  had  gone  about  His 
miracle,  and  ho,  in  his  turn,  "put  them  all  forth."- 
]\[ark,  who  was  Peter's  mouthpiece,  in  his  Gospel 
oives  us  the  very  Aramaic  words  which  our  Lord 
employed  when  He  raised  the  little  girl,  Talitka,  the 
Aramaic  Avord  for  "a  damsel,"  or  young  girl;  ciimi^ 
Avhich  means  in  that  language  "  arise."  Is  it  not 
singular  and  beautiful  that  Peter's  word  by  the  bed- 
side of  the  dead  Dorcas  is,  wdth  the  exception  of  one 
letter,  absolutely  identical  ?  Christ  says,  Talitlia 
cnmi.  Peter  remembered  the  formula  by  which  the 
blessing  Avas  conveyed,  and  he  copies  it.  "  Tabitha 
cumi "  ;  arise  !  Is  it  not  clear  that  he  is  posing  after 
the  Master's  attitude ;  that  ho  is,  consciously  or  un- 
consciously, doing  what  he  remembered  so  well  had 
been  done  in  that  other  upper  room,  and  that  the 
miracles  are  both  of  them  shaped  after  the  pattern  of 
the  miraculous  working  of  Jesus  Christ  ? 

Well  now,  although  w^e  are  no  miracle  workers,  the 
very  same  principle  which  underlay  these  two  works^ 
of  supernatural  powder  is  to  be  applied  to  all  our  work, 
and  to  our  lives  as  Christian  people.  I  do  not  know 
whether  Peter  meant  to  do  like  Jesus  Christ  or  not ; 
I  rather  think  that  he  was  rather  unconsciously  and 
instinctively  droppinc^  into  the  fashion  that  to  him 
was  so  sacred.  Love  alwaj^s  delights  in  imitation; 
and  the  disciples  of  a  great  teacher  will  unconsciously 
catch  the  trick  of  his  intonation,  even  the  awkward- 
ness of  his  attitudes,  the  peculiarities  of  his  way  of 
looking  at  things — only,  unfjrtunately,  outsides  are  a 
good  deal  more  easily  imitated  than  insidcs.      And 


182  COPIES  OF  CHEISrS  MANNER. 

many  a  man  copies  such  external  trifles,  and  talks 
in  the  tones  that  have,  first  of  all,  brought  blessed 
truths  to  him,  whose  resemblance  to  his  teacher  goes 
Tcry  little  further.  The  principle  that  underlies  these 
miracles  is  just  this.  Get  near  Jesus  Christ,  and  you 
will  catch  His  manner.  Dwell  in  fellowship  with 
Him,  and  whether  you  are  thinking  about  it  or  not, 
there  will  come  some  faint  resemblance  to  that  Lord 
into  your  characters,  and  your  way  of  doing  things, 
so  that  men  "  will  take  knowledge  of  you  that  you 
have  been  with  Jesus."  The  poor  bit  of  cloth  which 
has  held  some  precious  piece  of  solid  perfume  will 
Tetain  fragrance  for  many  a  day  afterwards,  and  will 
bless  the  scentless  air  by  giving  it  forth.  The  man 
that  keeps  close  to  Christ,  and  has  folded  Him  in 
his  heart,  will,  like  the  poor  cloth,  give  forth  a  sweet- 
ness not  his  own  that  will  gladden  and  refresh  many 
nostrils.  Lie  in  the  light,  and  you  will  become  light. 
Keep  near  Christ,  and  you  will  be  Christlike.  Love 
Him,  and  love  will  do  to  you  what  it  does  to  many  a 
wedded  pair,  and  to  many  kindred  hearts :  it  will 
transfuse  into  you  something  of  the  characteristics  of 
the  object  of  your  love.  It  is  impossible  to  trust  Christ, 
to  obey  Christ,  to  hold  communion  with  Him,  and  to 
live  beside  Him,  without  becomincc  like  Him.  And 
if  such  be  our  inward  experience,  so  will  be  our 
outward  appearance. 

But  there  may  be  a  specific  point  given  to  this 
lesson  in  regard  of  Christian  people's  ways  of  doing 
their  work  in  the  world  and  helping  and  blessing  other 
foliv.  Although,  as  I  say,  vre  have  no  miraculous 
power  at  our  disposal,  we  do  not  need  it  in  order  to 


COPIES  OF  CHRIST S  MANNER.  183 


manifest  Jesus  Christ  and  His  way  of  working  in  our 
work.  And  if  we  dwell  beside  Him,  then,  depend 
upon  it,  all  the  characteristics,  far  more  precious  than 
the  accidents  of  manner,  or  tone,  or  attitude  in  work- 
ing a  miracle — all  the  characteristics  so  deeply  and 
blessedly  stamped  upon  His  life  of  self-sacritice  and 
man-helping  devotion  will  be  reproduced  in  us.  Jesus 
Christ,  when  He  went  through  the  wards  of  the 
hospital  of  the  world,  was  overflowing  with  quick 
sympathy  for  every  sorrow  that  met  His  eye.  If  you 
and  I  are  living  near  Him,  we  shall  never  steel  our 
hearts  nor  lock  up  our  sensibilities  against  any  sufter- 
ing  that  it  is  within  our  power  to  staunch  or  to 
alleviate.  Jesus  Christ  never  o'rudo'ed  trouble,  never 
thought  of  Himself,  never  was  impatient  of  inter- 
ruption, never  repelled  importunity,  never  sent  away 
empty  any  outstretched  hand.  And  if  we  live  near 
Him,  self-oblivious  willingness  to  spend  and  be  spent 
will  mark  our  lives,  and  we  shall  not  consider  that  we 
have  a  right  of  possession  or  of  sole  enjoyment  of  any  of 
the  blessings  that  are  given  to  us.  Jesus  Christ,  accord- 
inL>'  to  the  beautiful  and  sio'niticant  words  of  one  of  one 

o  o 

of  the  Gospels,  "healed  them  that  had  need  of  healing." 
AVhy  that  singular  designation  for  the  people  that 
were  standing  around  Him  but  to  teach  us  that  wide 
as  men's  necessity  was  His  sympathy,  and  that  broad 
as  the  sympathy  of  Christ  Avere  the  help  and  healing 
w^hich  He  brought  ?  And  so,  with  like  width  of  com- 
passion, with  like  perfectness  of  self-oblivion,  wdtli 
equal  remoteness  from  consciousness  of  superiority  or 
display  of  condescension,  Christian  men  should  go 
amon^-st  the  sorrowful  and  the  sad  and  the  outcast 


1S4  COPIES   OF  CHRIST S  MANNER. 

and  do  tlieir  miracles — greater  works  than  those 
which  Christ  did,  as  He  Himself  has  told  us,  after  the 
manner  in  which  He  did  His.  If  they  did,  the  world 
would  be  a  different  ]Dlace,  and  the  Church  would  be 
a  different  Church,  and  you  would  not  have  people 
writing  in  the  newspapers  to  demonstrate  that 
Christianity  was  "  played  out." 

II. — Further,  note  the  differences  and  the  lessons 
from  them. 

Take  the  first  of  the  two  miracles.  ".Eneas,  Jesus 
Christ  maketh  thee  whole  :  arise,  and  make  thy 
bed."  That  first  clause  points  to  the  great  difference. 
Take  the  second  of  the  two,  ''■  Jesus  Christ  put  theni 
all  forth,  and  stretched  out  His  hand,  and  said^ 
Damsel,  arise  1 "  "Peter  put  them  all  forth,  .  .  . 
and  said,  Tabitha,  arise ! "  But  between  the  put- 
tinsr  forth  and  the  miracle  he  did  somethino^  which 
Christ  did  not  do,  and  he  did  not  do  somethinof  which 
Christ  did  do.  "  He  kneeled  down  and  prayed." 
Jesus  Christ  did  not  do  that.  "  And  Jesus  put 
forth  His  hand,  and  said.  Arise!"  Peter  did  not 
do  that.  But  he  put  forth  his  hand  after  the  miracle 
was  Avrought;  not  to  communicate  life,  but  to  help  the 
living  woman  to  get  to  her  feet ;  and  so,  both  by  what 
he  did  in  his  prayer  and  by  what  he  did  not  do  after 
Christ's  pattern,  the  extension  of  the  hand  that  was 
the  channel  of  the  vitality,  he  drew  a  broad  distinction 
between  the  servant's  copy  and  the  Master's  original. 

The  lessons  from  the  differences  are  such  as  the 
following^. 

Christ  works  miracles  by  His  inherent  power ;  His 
servants  do  their  works  only  as  His  instruments  and 


COPIES   OF  CHRIST'S  MAN.\ER.  18 i> 

organs.  I  need  not  dwell  upon  the  former  thouglit  \ 
but  it  is  the  latter  to  which  I  wish  to  look  for  a 
moment.  The  lesson,  then,  of  the  ditt'erence  is  that 
Christian  men,  in  all  their  work  for  the  Master  and 
for  the  world,  are  ever  to  keep  clear  before  themselves, 
and  to  make  very  obvious  to  other  people,  that  they 
are  nothino:  more  than  channels  and  instruments. 
The  less  the  preacher,  the  teacher,  the  Christian 
benefactor  of  any  sort  puts  himself  in  the  foreground, 
or  in  evidence  at  all,  the  more  likely  are  his  Avords 
and  works  to  be  successful.  If  you  hear  a  man,  for 
instance,  preaching  a  sermon,  and  you  see  that  he  is- 
thinking  about  himself,  he  may  talk  Avith  the  tongues 
of  men  and  of  angels,  but  he  will  do  no  good  to 
anybody.  The  first  condition  of  work  for  the  Lord  is 
—hide  yourself  behind  your  message,  behind  your 
Master,  and  make  it  very  plain  that  His  is  the  power, 
and  that  you  are  but  a  tool  in  the  Workman's  hand. 

And  then,  further,  another  lesson  is.  Be  very  sure  of 
the  power  that  will  work  in  you.  AVhat  a  piece  of 
audacity  it  was  for  Peter  to  go  and  stand  by  the 
paralytic  man's  couch  and  say,  "  .Eneas,  Jesus  Christ 
maketli  thee  whole."  Yes,  audacity ;  unless  he  had 
been  in  such  constant  and  close  touch  with  his- 
Master  that  he  was  sure  that  the  Master  was  Avorking 
throudi  Him.  And  is  it  not  beautiful  to  see  how 
absolutely  confident  he  is  that  Jesus  Christ's  Avork 
Avas  not  done  Avhen  He  A\^ent  up  into  lieaA^en;  but 
that  there,  in  that  little  stuffy  room,  where  the  man 
had  lain  motionless  for  eight  long  years,  Jesus  Christ 
Avas  present,  and  Avorking  ?  Oh,  brethren,  the  Christian 
Church  does  not  half  cnoudi  believe  in  the  actual 


186  COPIES  OF  CHRIST S  MANNER. 

presence  and  operation  of  Jesus  Christ,  here  and  now, 
in  and  through  all  His  serv^ants !  We  are  ready 
enough  to  believe  that  He  worked  when  He  was  in 
the  world  long  ago,  that  He  "is  going  to  work  when 
He  comes  back  to  the  world,  at  some  far-off  future 
period.  But  do  w^e  believe  that  He  is  verily  putting 
forth  His  power,  in  no  metaphor,  but  in  simple 
reality,  at  present  and  here,  and,  if  we  will,  through 
us? 

''  Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee  whole."  Be  sure  that 
if  you  keep  near  Christ,  if  you  will  try  to  mould  your- 
selves after  His  likeness,  if  you  expect  Him  to  work 
through  you,  and  do  not  hinder  His  work  by  self- 
conceit  and  self-consciousness  of  any  sort,  then  it 
will  be  no  presumption,  but  simple  faith,  that  He 
delights  in  and  will  vindicate,  if  you,  too,  go  and 
stand  by  paralytics  and  say,  "  Jesus  Christ  maketh 
theo  whole,"  or  go  aud  stand  by  people  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins  and  say,  after  you  have  prayed, 
'•'  Arise." 

AYe  are  here  for  the  very  purpose  for  which  Peter 
was  in  Lydda  and  Joppa — to  carry  on  and  copy  the 
healing  and  the  quickening  work  of  Christ  by  His 
present  power,  and  after  His  blessed  example. 


XIX. 

•'  HDe  a  Cbristian ! " 


Then  Agrijipa  said  unto  Paul,  Almcst  thou  piesuadest  mc  to  be  a 
Christian." — Acts  xxvi.  28. 


^i  HIS  Agrippa  was  son  of  the  otlier  Herod 
*  of  whom    we   hear  in  the  Acts  as   a 


persecutor.  This  one  appears,  from 
other  sources,  to  have  had  the  vices, 
but  not  the  force  of  character,  of  his 
bad  race.  He  was  weak  and  indolent,  a  mere  hanger- 
on  of  Piome,  to  which  he  owed  his  kincrdom,  and  to 
which  he  stoutly  stuck  during  all  the  tragedy  of  the 
fall  of-  Jerusalem.  In  position  and  in  character 
(largely  resulting  from  the  position)  he  was  uncom- 
monly like  those  semi-independent  rajahs  in  India, 
who  are  allowed  to  keep  up  a  kind  of  shadow  of 
iiuthority  on  condition  of  doing  what  Calcutta  bids 
them.  Of  course  frivolity  and  debauchery  become 
the  business  of  such  men.  AVhat  sort  of  a  man  this 
was  may  be  sufficiently  inferred  from  the  fact  that 
Bernice  was  his  sister. 

But  he  knew  a  good  deal  about  the  JeY\'s,  about 
their  opinions,  their  religion,  and  about  what  had 
been  going  on  during  the  last  half  century  amongst 


183  "  ME  A  CHRISTIAN 


them.  On  grounds  of  policy  he  professed  to  accept 
the  Jewish  faith— of  which  an  edifying  example  is- 
Q'iven  in  the  fact  that,  on  one  occasion,  Bernice  was- 
prevented  from  accompanying  him  to  Rome,  because 
she  was  fidfilling  a  Nazarite  vow  in  the  Temple  at 
Jerusalem. 

So  the  Apostle  was  fully  warranted  in  appealing  to 
Agrippa's  knowledge,  not  only  of  Judaism,  but  of  the 
history  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  his  further  assertion, 
"  I  know  that  thou  believest."  But  the  home-thrust 
was  too  much  for  the  king.  His  answer  is  given  in 
the  words  of  our  text. 

They  are  ver}^  familiar  words,  and  they  have  been 
made  the  basis  of  a  great  many  sermons  upon  being 
all  but  persuaded  to  accept  of  Christ  as  Saviour.  But, 
edifying  as  such  a  use  of  them  is,  it  can  scarcely  be 
sustained  by  their  actual  meaning.  Most  commenta- 
tors are  agreed  that  our  Authorised  Version  does  not 
represent  either  Agrippa's  words  or  his  tone.  He  was 
not  speaking  in  earnest.  His  v/ords  are  sarcasm,  not 
half  melting  into  conviction.  And  the  Revised 
Version  gives  what  may,  on  the  whole,  be  accepted 
as  being  a  truer  representation  of  their  intention  when 
it  reads,  "with  but  little  persuasion  thou  wouldst  fain 
make  me  a  Christian." 

He  is  half  amused  and  half  angry  at  the  Apostle's 
presumption  in  supposing  that  so  easily,  or  so  quickly, 
he  was  going  to  land  his  fish.  "  It  is  a  more  difficult 
task  than  you  fancy,  Paul,  to  make  a  Christian  of  a 
man  like  me."  That  is  the  real  meaning  of  his  words. 
And  I  think  that,  rightly  understood,  they  yield 
lessons  of  no  less  value  than  those  that  have  been 


ME  A  CHRISTIAN. 


SO  often  drawn  from  tliem,  as  tlicy  appear  in  our 
Authorised  Version.  So  I  wish  to  try  and  draAv  out 
and  urge  upon  my  friends  here  at  this  time  these 
lessons : — 

I. — First,  then,  I  see  here  an  example  of  the  danger 
of  a  superficial  familiarity  with  Christian  truth. 

As  I  said,  Agrippa  knew,  in  a  general  way,  a  good 
deal  not  only  about  the  prophets,  and  the  Jewish 
religion,  but  the  outstanding  facts  of  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  Paul's  assumption  that 
he  knew  w^ould  have  been  ver}^  quickly  repudiated  if 
it  had  not  been  based  upon  fact.  And  the  inference 
from  his  acceptance  without  contradiction  of  the 
Apostle's  statement  is  confirmed  by  his  use  of  the 
word  "  Christian,"  which  had  by  no  means  come  into 
general  employment  when  he  spoke;  and  in  itself 
indicates  that  he  knew  a  good  deal  about  the  people 
that  were  so  named.  Mark  the  contrast,  for  instance, 
between  him  and  the  bluff  Roman  official  at  his 
side.  To  Festus,  Paul's  talking  about  a  dead  man's 
having  risen,  and  a  risen  Jew  becoming  a  light  to  all 
nations,  was  such  utter  nonsense  that,  wdth  charac- 
teristic Roman  contempt  for  men  with  ideas,  he 
breaks  in,  with  his  rough,  strident  voice,  ''  Much 
learning'  has  made  thee  mad."  There  w^as  not  much 
chance  of  that  cause  producing  that  effect  on  Festus. 
But  he  was,  apparently,  utterly  bewildered  at  this 
entirely  novel  and  unintelligible  sort  of  talk.  Agrippa, 
on  the  other  hand,  knows  all  about  it ;  has  heard  that 
there  was  such  a  thing:,  and  has  a  creneral  roucjli 
notion  of  what  Paul  believed  as  a  Christian. 

And  w\as  he  any  better  for  it  ?     Xo  !     He  was  a 


II 


190  '•'  ^lE  A  CHRIST  I  AX!  " 

great  deal  worse.  It  took  the  edge  off  a  good  deal  ot 
liis  curiosity.  It  made  him  fancy  that  he  Jviiew 
beforehand  all  that  the  Apostle  had  to  say.  It  stood 
in  the  way  of  his  apprehending  the  truths  which  he 
thought  that  he  understood. 

And  although  the  world  knows  a  great  deal  more 
about  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Gospel  than  he  did,  the 
very  same  thing  is  true  about  hundreds  and  thousands 
of  people  who  have  all  their  lives  long  been  brought 
into  contact  with  Christianity.  Superficial  knowledge 
is  the  worst  enemy  of  accurate  knowledge.  For  the 
first  condition  of  knowing  a  thing  is  to  know  that  we 
do  not  know  it.  And  so  there  are  a  great  many  of  us 
who,  having  picked  up  since  childhood  vague  and 
partially  inaccurate  notions  about  Christ  and  His 
Gospel,  and  what  He  has  done,  are  so  satisfied  on  the 
strength  of  these  that  w^e  know  all  about  it,  that 
we  listen  to  its  preaching  about  it  with  a  very  languid 
attention.  The  ground  in  our  minds  is  preoccupied 
with  our  own  vague  and  imperfect  apprehensions.  I 
believe  that  there  is  nothing  that  stands  more  in  the  way 
of  hundreds  of  people  (among  whom  I  have  no  doubt 
that  there  are  scores  in  this  chapel~to-night)  coming 
into  real  intelligent  contact  with  Gospel  truth  than 
the  half  knowledge  that  they  have  had  of  it  ever  since 
they  were  children.  You  fancy  that  you  know  all 
that  I  can  tell  you.  Very  probably  you  do.  Eut 
have  you  ever  taken  a  firm  hold  of  the  ^^lain  central 
facts  of  Christianity— your  own  sinfulness  and  help- 
lessness, your  need  of  a  Saviour,  the  perfect  work  of 
Jesus  Christ  who  died  on  the  Cross  for  you,  and  the 
power  of  simple  faith  therein  to  join  you  to  Him,  and 


ME  A  CHRISTIAN  !"  191 


if  followed  by  consecration  and  obedience  to  make 
you  partakers  of  His  nature,  and  heirs  of  the  inherit- 
ance that  is  above  ?  These  are  but  the  fundamentals, 
the  outlines  of  Gospel  truth.  But  you  see  them,  far 
too  many  of  you,  in  such  a  manner  as  you  see  the 
iigures  cast  upon  a  screen  when  the  lantern  is  not 
rightly  focussed,  a  blurred  outline.  And  the  blurred 
outline  keeps  you  from  seeing  the  sharp-cut  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus.  In  all  regions  of  thought  inaccurate 
knowledge  is  the  worst  foe  to  further  understanding. 
And  eminently  is  this  the  case  in  religion.  Brethren, 
some  of  you  are  in  that  position. 

Then  there  is  another  way  in  which  such  knowledo-e 
as  that  of  which  the  man  in  our  text  is  an  example  is 
a  hindrance,  and  that  is,  that  it  is  knowledge  which 
has  no  effect  on  character.  What  do  hundreds  of  us 
do  with  our  knowledge  of  Christianity  ?  Our  minds 
seem  built  in  watertight  compartments,  and  w^e  keep 
the  doors  of  them  shut  very  close,  so  that  truths  in 
the  understanding  have  no  influence  on  the  will. 
Plenty  of  you  believe  the  Gospel  intellectually,  and  it 
does  not  make  a  hair's  breadth  of  difference  to  any- 
thing that  you  ever  either  thought  or  wished  or  did. 
And  because  you  so  believe  it,  it  is  utterty  impossible 
that  it  should  ever  be  of  any  use  to  you.  "  Agrippa  I 
believest  thou  the  prophets  ?  I  know  that  thou 
believest."  "  Yes  !  believest  the  prophets ;  and  Bernice 
sitting  by  thy  side  there — believest  the  prophets,  and 
livest  in  utter  bestial  godlessness."  What  is  the  o'ood 
of  a  knowledge  of  Christianity  like  that  ?  And  is  it 
not  such  knowledge  of  Christianity  that  blocks  the 
way  with  some  of  you  for  anything  more  real  and 


192  "  ME  A  CHRIST  I A  N I " 

more  operative?  There  is  nothing  more  impotent 
than  a  firmly  beUeved  and  utterly  neglected  truth. 
And  that  is  what  the  Christianity  of  some  of  you  is, 
■when  it  is  analyzed. 

II. — Xow,  secondly,  notice  how  wo  have  here  the 
example  of  a  proud  man  indignantly  recoiling  from 
submission. 

There  is  a  world  of  contempt  in  Agrippa's  words,  in 
the  very  putting  side  by  side  of  the  two  things.  "Me  ! 
il/e,"  with  a  very  large  capital  M — "  Me  a  Christian  ?  " 
He  thinks  of  his  dignity,  poor  creature.  It  was  not 
such  a  very  tremendous  dignity  after  all.  He  was  a 
petty  kinglet,  permitted  by  the  grace  of  Rome  to  live 
and  to  pose  as  if  he  were  the  real  thing.  And  yet  he 
struts  and  claps  his  wings  and  crows  on  his  little 
hillock  as  if  it  were  a  mountain.  '•'  Me  a  Christian  ?  " 
"  The  great  Agrippa  a  CJtristicpi ! "  And  he  uses 
that  w^ord  "Christian"  with  the  intense  contempt 
which  coined  it  and  adhered  to  it  until  the  men  to 
whom  it  was  applied  were  wise  enough  to  take  it  and 
bind  it  as  a  crown  of  honour  upon  their  head.  The 
wits  at  Antioch  first  of  all  hit  upon  the  designation. 
They  meant  a  very  exquisite  piece  of  sarcasm  by  their 
nickname.  These  people  were  "Christians,"  just  as 
some  other  people  were  Herodians — Christ's  men ;  the 
men  of  this  impostor  who  pretended  to  be  a  Messiah. 
That  seemed  such  an  intensely  ludicrous  thing  to  the 
wise  people  in  Antioch  that  they  coined  the  name  ; 
and  no  doubt  thought  they  had  done  a  very  clever 
thing.  It  is  only  used  in  the  Bible  in  the  notice 
of  its  origin;  here,  with  a  very  evident  connota- 
tion of  contempt ;  and  once  more,  when  Peter  in  his 


ME  A  CHRISTIAN!''  193 


letter  refers  Lo  it  as  being  the  indictment  on  which 
certain  disciples  suffered.  So  when  Agrippa  says, 
"  Me  a  Christian,"  he  puts  all  the  bitterness  that  he 
can  into  that  last  word.  As  if  he  said,  "  Do  you  really 
think  that  I — I — am  going  to  bow  myself  down  to  be 
a  follower  and  adherent  of  that  Christ  of  yours  ?  The 
thing  is  too  ridiculous !  With  but  little  persuasion 
you  would  fain  make  me  a  Christian.  But  you  will 
find  it  a  harder  task  than  you  fancy." 

Now,  my  dear  friends,  the  shape  of  this  unwilling- 
ness is  changed,  but  the  fact  of  it  remains.  There 
are  two  or  three  features  of  what  I  take  to  be  the 
plain  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  which  grate  very  much 
against  all  self-importance  and  self-complacency,  and 
operate  very  largely,  though  not  always  consciously,, 
upon  very  many  amongst  us.  I  just  run  them  over, 
very  briefly. 

The  Gospel  insists  on  dealing  with  everybody  in 
the  same  fashion,  and  regarding  all  as  standing  on 
the  same  level.  Many  of  us  do  not  like  that.  Let  us 
get  away  from  Agrippa  and  Palestine.  "  I  am  a  well-' 
to-do  Manchester  man.  Am  I  to  stand  on  the  same 
level  as  my  ottice  boy  ?  "  Yes  1  the  very  same.  "  I, 
a  student,  perhaps  a  teacher  of  science,  or  a  cultivated 
man,  a  scholar,  a  lawyer,  a  professional  man — am  I  to 
stand  on  the  same  level  as  people  that  scarcely  know 
how  to  read  and  write  ?  "  Yes  !  exactly.  So,  like  the 
man  in  the  Old  Testament,  "  he  turned  and  went 
aw\ay  in  a  rage."  Many  of  us  would  like  that  there 
ought  to  be  a  little  private  door  for  us  in  considera- 
tion of  our  position  or  acquirements  or  respectability, 
or  this,  that,  or  the  other  thing.     At  any  rate,  we  are 

o 


194  ''3IE  A  CHRIST  TAN ! " 

not  to  be  classed  in  the  same  category  with  the  poor 
and  the  io^norant  and  the  sinful  and  the  savao^e  all 
over  the  world. 

But  we  are  so  classed.  Do  not  you  and  the  men 
in  Patagonia  breathe  the  same  air  ?  Are  not  your 
bodies  subject  to  the  same  laws  ?  Have  you  not  to 
be  contented  to  be  fed  in  the  same  fashion,  and  to 
sleep  and  eat  and  drink  in  the  same  way  ?  "  We 
have  all  of  us  one  human  heart "  ;  and  "  there  is  no 
difference,  for  all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the 
glory  of  God."  The  identities  of  humanity,  in  all  its 
examples,  are  deeper  than  its  differences  in  any.  We 
have  all  the  one  Saviour,  and  are  to  be  saved  in  the 
same  fashion.  It  is  a  humbling  thing  for  those  of  us 
that  stand  upon  some  little  elevation,  real  or  fancied, 
but  it  is  only  the  other  side  of  the  great  truth  that 
God's  love  is  world-wide,  and  that  Christ's  Gospel  is 
meant  for  humanity.  Naaman,  to  whom  I  have 
already  referred  in  passing,  wanted  to  be  treated  as  a 
great  man  who  happened  to  be  a  leper;  Elisha  in- 
sisted on  treating  him  as  a  leper  who  happened  to  be 
a  great  man.  And  that  makes  all  the  difference.  I 
remember  seeing  somewhere  that  a  great  surgeon  had 
said  that  the  late  Emperor  of  Germany  would  have 
had  a  far  better  chance  of  being  cured  if  he  had  gone 
incognito  to  the  Hospital  for  Throat  Diseases.  We 
all  need  the  same  surgery,  and  we  must  be  contented 
to  take  it  in  the  same  fashion.  So  some  of  us  recoil 
from  humbling  equality  with  the  lowest  and  vrorst. 

Then,  again,  another  thing  that  makes  people 
shrink  back  from  the  Gospel  sometimes  is  that  it 
insists   upon   cverybodj'   being   saved    solely   by   de- 


"  ME  A  CHRISTIAN! "  195 

pendence  on  Another.  We  would  like  to  have  a 
linger  in  it  ourselves,  and  most  of  us  would  rather  do 
anything  in  the  way  of  sacrifice  or  suffering  or 
penance  than  take  this  position : 

NotMng  ia  my  hand  I  bring, 
Simply  to  Thy  Cross  I  cling. 

Corrupt  forms  of  Christianity  have  taken  a  wise 
measure  of  the  worse  parts  of  human  nature  when 
they  have  taught  men  that  they  can  eke  out  Christ's 
work  by  their  own,  and  have  some  kind  of  share  in 
their  own  salvation.  Dear  brethren,  I  have  to  bring 
to  you  another  gospel  than  that,  and  to  say,  All  is 
done  for  us,  and  all  will  be  done  in  us,  and  nothing 
has  to  be  done  by  us.  Some  of  you  do  not  like  that. 
Just  as  a  man  drowning  is  almost  sure  to  try  to  help 
himself,  and  get  his  limbs  inextricably  twisted  round 
his  would-be  rescuer,  and  drown  them  both,  so  men 
will  not,  without  a  struggle,  consent  to  owe  every- 
thino'  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  let  Him  draw  them  out 
of  many  waters,  and  set  them  on  the  safe  shore.  But 
unless  we  do,  we  have  Kttle  share  in  His  Gospel. 

And  another  thing  stands  in  the  way — namely,  that 
the  Gospel  insists  upon  absolute  obedience  to  Jesus 
Christ.  Agrippa  fancied  that  it  was  an  utterly  pre- 
posterous thing  that  he  should  lower  his  flag,  and  doff 
his  crown,  and  become  a  servant  of  a  Jewish  peasant. 
A  great  many  of  us,  though  we  have  a  higher  idea  of 
our  Lord  than  that,  do  yet  find  it  quite  as  hard  to 
submit  our  wills  to  His,  and  to  accept  the  condition 
of  absolute  obedience,  utter  resignation  to  Him,  and 
entire  subjection  to  His  commandment.  We  say, 
"  Let  my  own  will  have  a  little  bit  of  play  in  a  corner.' 

13* 


196  "  ME  A  CHRISTIAN ! " 

Some  of  us  find  it  very  hard  to  believe  that  we  are 
to  bring  all  our  thinking  upon  religious  and  moral 
subjects  to  Him,  and  to  accept  His  word  as  conclusive, 
settling  all  controversies.  "  I,  with  my  culture  ;  am  I 
to  accept  what  Christ  says  as  the  end  of  strife  ? " 
Yes !  absolute  submission  is  the  plainest  condition  of 
real  Christianity.  The  very  name  tells  us  that.  We 
are  Christians,  Christ's  men ;  and  unless  we  are  we 
have  no  right  to  the  name.  And  some  of  us  had 
rather  be  our  own  masters,  and  enjoy  the  miseries  of 
independence  and  self-will,  and  so  be  the  slaves  of  our 
worse  selves,  than  bow  ourselves  utterly  before  that 
dear  Lord,  and  so  pass  into  the  freedom  of  a  service 
love- inspired,  and  by  love  accepted.  "  Thou  wouldst 
fain  persuade  me  to  be  a  Christian,''  is  the  recoil  of  a 
proud  heart  from  submission.  Brethren,  let  me 
beseech  you  that  it  may  not  be  yours. 

III. — Again,  we  have  here  an  example  of  instinctive 
shrinking  from  the  personal  application  of  broad 
truths. 

Agrippa  listened  half  amused,  and  a  good  deal 
interested,  to  Paul,  as  long  as  he  talked  generalities, 
and  described  his  own  experience.  But  when  he 
came  to  point  the  generalities  and  to  drive  them 
home  to  the  hearer's  heart,  it  was  time  to  stop  him. 
That  question  of  the  Apostle's,  keen  and  sudden  as 
the  flash  of  a  dagger,  went  straight  home.  And  the 
king  at  once  gathers  himself  together  into  an  attitude 
of  resistance.  Ah  !  That  is  what  hundreds  of  people 
do.  You  will  let  me  preach  as  long  as  I  like — only 
you  will  get  a  little  weary  sometimes — you  will  let  me 
preach  generalities  ad  libitmn.     But  when  I  come  to 


''ME  A  CHRIST  I  A  N  ! "  197 

*'  And  thou  ?  "  then  I  cam  "  rude,"  and  ''  inquisitorial," 
and  "  personal,"  and  "  trespassing  on  a  region  where  I 
have  no  business,"  and  so  on,  and  so  on.  And  so 
you  shut  up  your  heart  if  not  your  ears. 

And  yet,  brethren,  what  is  the  use  of  toothless 
generalities  ?  What  am  I  here  for  if  I  am  not  here 
to  take  these  broad  blunt  truths,  and  sharpen  them  to 
a,  point,  and  try  to  get  them  in  between  the  joints  of 
your  armour  ?  Can  any  man  faithfully  preach  the 
Gospel  who  is  always  flying  over  the  heads  of  his 
hearers  with  universalities,  and  never  goes  straight 
to  their  hearts  with  "  Thou — thou  art  the  man  !  " 
''  Belie  vest  thou  ?  " 

And  so,  dear  friends,  let  me  press  that  question 
upon  you.  Never  mind  about  other  people.  Suppose 
you  and  I  were  alone  together  and  my  words  were 
coming  straight  to  thee.  Would  they  not  have  more 
power  than  they  have  now  ?  They  are  so  coming. 
Think  away  all  these  other  people,  and  this  place,  a}^ ! 
and  me  too,  and  let  the  word  of  Christ,  which  deals 
with  no  crowds,  but  with  single  souls,  come  to  you  in 
its  individualizing  force.  "  Believest  thou  ?-  "  You 
will  have  to  answer  that  question  one  day.  Better  to 
face  it  now,  and  try  to  answer  it,  than  to  leave  it  all 
vague  until  you  get  yonder,  where  "  each  one  of  us 
shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God." 

lY. — Lastly,  we  have  here  an  example  of  a  soul 
close  to  the  light,  but  passing  into  the  dark. 

Agrippa  listens  to  Paul ;  Bernice  listens  to  Paul ; 
Festus  listens.  And  what  comes  of  it  ?  Only  this, 
''  And  when  they  were  gone  aside  they  talked  between 
themselves,    saying.    This   man   hath   done    nothing 


ME  A  CHrJSTIAX 


worthy  of  death  or  of  bonds."  May  1  translate  into  a 
modern  analogy : — And  when  they  were  goAe  aside 
they  talked  bet^veen  themselves,  saying,  "  This  man 
preached  a  very  impressive  sermon,"  or,  "  This  man 
preached  a  very  wearisome  sermon,"  and  there  an  end. 

Agrippa  and  Bernice  went  their  wicked  way,  and 
Festus  went  his,  and  none  of  them  knew  what  a  fate- 
ful moment  they  had  passed  through.  Ah,  brethren^ 
there  are  many  such  in  our  lives  when  we  make 
decisions  that  influence  our  whole  future,  and  no  sign 
shows  that  the  moment  is  any  way  different  from 
millions  of  its  undistinguished  fellows.  It  is  eminently 
so  in  regard  to  our  relation  to  Jesus  Christ  and  His 
Gospel.  These  people  had  been  in  the  light ;  they 
were  never  so  near  it  again.  Probably  they  never 
heard  the  Gospel  preached  any  more,  and  they  went 
away,  not  knowing  what  they  had  done  when  they 
silenced  Paul  and  left  him. 

Now  you  will  probably  hear  plenty  of  sermons  yet. 
You  may,  or  you  may  not.  But  be  sure  of  this,  that 
if  you  go  away  from  this  one,  unmelted  and  un- 
believing, you  have  not  done  a  trivial  thing.  You 
have  added  one  more  stone  to  the  barrier  that  yoii 
yourself  build,  to  shut  you  out  from  holiness  and 
happiness,  from  hope  and  heaven.  It  is  not  I  that 
ask  you  the  question.  It  is  not  Paul  that  asks  it. 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  says  to  you,  as  He  said  to  the 
blind  man,  "  Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ? " 
or,  as  He  said  to  the  weeping  sister  of  Lazarus, 
"  Believest  thou  this  ? "  Oh,  dear  friends,  do  not 
answer  like  this  arrogant  bit  of  a  king,  but  cry  with 
tears,  "  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief." 


XX. 

^be  Cbrietiau  Sacrifice* 

"By  Him  therefore  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  Goi  con- 
tinually, that  is,  the  fruit  of  our  lips  giving-  thanks  to  His 
name.  But  to  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not :  for 
with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased." — Heb.  xiii.  15,  10. 

UCH  attention  is  given  now  to  the  study 
of  comparative  religion.  The  behefs 
and  observances  of  the  rudest  tribes 
are  narrowly  scrutinized,  in  order  to 
discover  the  underlying  ideas.  And 
many  a  practice  which  seems  to  be  trivial,  absurd,  or 
sanguinary  is  found  to  have  its  foundation  in  some 
noble  and  profound  thought.  Charity  and  insight 
have  both  gained  by  the  study. 

But,  singularly  enough,  the  very  people  who  are  so 
interested  in  the  rationale  of  the  rights  of  savages 
Avill  turn  away  when  anybody  applies  a  similar  process 
to  the  ritual  of  the  Jews.  That  is  what  this  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  does.  It  translates  altar,  ritual 
festivals,  priests,  into  thoughts ;  and  it  declares  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  adequate  and  abiding  em- 
bodiment of  these  thoughts.  Vs^e  are  not  dressing 
Christian  truth  in  a  foreign  garb  when  we  express  the 
substance  of  its  revelation  in  language  borrowed  from 


200  THE  CHRISTIAN  SACRIFICE. 

the  ritualistic  sj^stem  that  preceded  it.  But  we  are 
extricating  truths,  which  the  world  needs  to-day  as 
much  as  ever  it  did,  from  the  form  in  which  they 
were  embodied  for  one  stage  of  religion,  when  we 
translate  them  into  their  Christian  equivalents. 

So  the  writer  here  has  been  speaking  about  Christ 
as,  by  His  death,  sanctifying  His  people.  And  on 
that  great  thought,  that  He  is  what  all  priesthood 
symbolizes,  and  what  all  bloody  sacrifices  reach  out 
towards,  he  builds  this  grand  exhortation  of  my  text, 
which  is  at  once  a  lofty  conception  of  what  the 
Christian  life  ought  to  be,  and  a  directory  as  to  the 
method  by  which  it  may  become  so.  "  By  Him  let  us 
offer  sacrifices  continually,  for  with  such  sacrifices 
God  is  well  pleased." 

Now,  it  seems  to  me  that  there  are  here  mainly 
three  points  to  be  looked  at.  First,  the  basis  of; 
second,  the  material  of ;  and  third,  the  Divine  delight 
in,  the  sacrifices  of  the  Christian  life.  And  to  these 
three  points  I  ask  your  attention. 

I.— First,  then,  note  here  the  emphatic  way  in 
which  the  one  basis  of  Christian  sacrifice  is  laid 
down. 

Anybody  who  can  consult  the  original  will  see, 
what  indeed  is  partially  expressed  in  our  translation, 
that  the  position  of  these  two  words  "  through  "  (or  by) 
"  Him "  underscores  and  puts  great  emphasis  upon 
them.  There  are  two  thoughts  which  may  be  in- 
cluded in  them ;  the  one,  that  Jesus  is  the  Priest  by 
whose  mediation  we  come  to  God,  and  the  other 
that  He  is  the  Sacrifice,  on  the  footing  of  which  we 
can  present  our  sacrifices.     It  seems  to  me,  however 


THE  CHRISTIAN  SACRIFICE.  201 


that  it  is  the  latter  idea  principally  that  is  in  the 
writer's  mind  here.  And  on  it  I  touch  lightly  in  a 
few  words. 

Now,  let  me  recall  to  you,   as   a  world-wide   fact 
which  is  expressed  in  the  noblest  form  in  the  ancient 
Jewish  ritual,  that  there  was  a  broad  line  of  distinc- 
tion drawn  between  two  kinds  of  sacrifices,  ditfering 
in  their  material  and  in  their  purpose.     If  I  wanted 
to  use  mere  theological  technicalities,  which  I  do  not, 
I  should  talk  about  the  difference  between  sacritices 
of  propitiation  and  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving.    But  let 
us  put  these  well-worn  phrases  on  one  side,  as  far  as 
we  can,  for  the  moment.     Here,  then,  is  the  fact  that 
all  the  world  over,  and  in  the  Mosaic  ritual,  there  was 
expressed  a  double    consciousness  —  one,  that  there 
was,  somehow   or  other,  a   black  dam   between   the 
worshipper  and  his  Deity,  which  needed  to  be  swept 
away;    and   the   other,  that   when  that  barrier  was 
removed   there   could    be  an   uninterrupted   fiow   of 
thanksgiving   and   of  service.     So  on   one  altar  was 
laid  a  bleeding  victim,  and  on  another  were  spread  the 
flowers  of  the  field,  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  all  things 
o-racious,  lovely,  fair,  and  sweet,  as  expressions  of  the 
thankfuhiess  of  the  reconciled  worshippers.     One  set 
of  sacrifices  expressed  the  consciousness  of  sin ;  the 
other  expressed  the  joyful  recognition  of  its  removal. 

Now  I  want  to  know  whether  that  world-wide  confes- 
sion of  need  is  nothing  more  to  us  than  a  mere  piece 
of  interesting  reminiscence  of  a  stage  of  develop- 
ment beyond  which  we  have  advanced.  I  do  not 
believe  that  there  is  such  a  gulf  of  difierence  between 
the  lowest  savage  and  the  most  cultivated  nineteenth 


202  THE  CHRISTIAN  SACRIFICE. 

century  Englishman,  but  that  the  fundamental  needs 
of  the  one,  in  spirit,  are  almost  as  identical  as  are  the 
fundamental  needs  of  the  one  and  the  other  in  regard 
of  bodily  wants.  And  sure  I  am  that,  if  the  voice  of 
humanity  has  declared  all  the  world  over,  as  it  has 
declared,  that  it  is  conscious  of  a  cloud  that  has  come 
between  it  and  the  awful  Power  above,  and  that  it 
seeks  by  sacrifice  the  removal  of  the  cloud,  the  pro- 
bability is  that  that  need  is  your  need  and  mine  ;  and 
that  the  remedy  which  humanity  has  divined  as 
necessary  has  some  affinity  with  the  remedy  w^hich 
God  has  revealed  as  provided. 

I  am  not  going  to  attempt  theorizing  about  the 
manner  in  which  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ 
sweep  away  the  barrier  between  us  and  God,  and  deal 
ivith  the  consciousness  of  transgression,  which  lies 
coiled  and  dormant,  but  always  ready  to  wake 
and  sting,  in  human  hearts.  But  I  do  venture  to 
appeal  to  each  man's  and  woman's  own  conscious- 
ness, and  to  ask.  Is  there  not  somethins^  in  us  which 
recognizes  the  necessity  that  the  sin  which  stands 
between  God  and  man  shall  be  swept  away  ?  Is  there 
not  something  in  us  which  recognizes  the  blessedness 
of  the  message,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth 
from  all  sin  "  ?  Oh,  brethren,  do  not  fancy  that  it  is 
a  mere  theological  doctrine  of  an  atonement  that  is  in 
question.  It  is  the  possibility  of  loving  access  to 
God,  as  made  possible  through  Jesus,  and  through 
Him  alone,  that  I  want  to  press  upon  your  hearts. 
"  Through  Him  let  us  offer." 

II. — Secondly,  notice  the  light  which  our  text  throws 
upon  the  material  or  contents  of  the  Christian  sacrifice. 


THE  CHRIS TIAN  SA ORIFICE.  203 


I  need  not  dwell  at  all,  I  suppose,  upon  the  expla- 
nation of  the  words,  which  are  plain  enough.  The 
writer  seems  to  me  to  divide  the  sacrifice  of  praise, 
which  he  prescribes,  into  two  parts,  the  praise  of  the 
lip  and  the  praise  of  the  life. 

But  before  I  deal  with  this  twofold  distribution  of 
the  thought,  let  me  fix  upon  the  main  general  idea  that 
is  expressed  here,  and  that  is  that  the  highest  notion, 
the  noblest  and  purest  of  what  a  Christian  life  is,  is 
that  it  is  one  long  sacrifice.  Have  we  risen  to  the 
height  of  that  conception  ?  I  do  not  say.  Have  we 
attained  to  the  fulfilment  of  it  ?  The  answer  to  the 
latter  question  one  knows  only  too  well.  But  has  it 
ever  dawned  upon  us  that  the  true  ideal  of  the 
Christian  life  which  we  profess  to  be  living  is  this — a 
sacrifice  ? 

Now  that  thought  involves  two  things.  One  is 
the  continuous  surrender  of  self,  and  that  means  the 
absolute  suppression  of  our  own  wills  ;  the  bridling  of 
our  own  inclinations  and  fancies :  the  ceasino'  obsti- 
nately  to  adhere  to  our  own  purposes  and  conceptions 
of  what  is  good;  the  recognition  that  there  is  a 
higher  will  above  us,  ruling  and  guiding,  to  which  we 
are  to  submit.  Sacrifice  means  nothing  if  it  does  not 
mean  surrender ;  and  surrender  is  nothing  if  it  is  not 
the  surrender  of  the  will.  It  was  a  great  deal  easier 
for  Abraham  to  take  the  knife  in  his  hand,  and  climb 
the  hill  with  the  fixed  intention  of  thrusting  it  into 
his  son's  heart,  than  it  is  for  us  to  take  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit  in  our  hands  and  slay  our  own  wills.  And 
I  am  here  to  say  that  unless  we  do  we  have  very 
little  rioht  to  call  ourselves  Christians. 


2Ci  THE  CHRISTIAN  SACRIFICE. 

Bat,  then,  surrender  is  only  half  the  conception  of 
the  sacrifice  which  has  to  be  accomplished  in  our 
whole  days  and  selves.  Surrender  to  God  is  the  full 
meaning  of  sacrifice.  And  that  implies  the  distinct 
reference  of  all  that  I  am,  and  all  that  I  do,  to  Him, 
as  not  only  commanding,  but  as  being  the  aim  and 
end  of  my  life.  We  are  to  labour  on  as  at  His 
command.  You  in  your  counting-houses,  and  mills, 
and  shops,  and  homes ;  and  we  students  in  our 
studies,  and  laboratories,  and  lecture-rooms,  are  to 
link  everything  with  Him,  with  His  will,  and  with  the 
thouorhfc  of  Him.  What  A'ice  could  live  in  that  lio^ht  ? 
What  meanness  would  not  be  struck  dead  if  we  were 
connected  with  that  great  reservoir  of  electric  force? 
What  slothfulness  would  not  be  spurred  into  unhast- 
ing  and  unresting  zeal  if  all  our  work  were  referred 
to  God  ?  Unless  thus  our  lives  be  sacrifice,  in  the  i'ull 
sense  of  conscious  surrender  to  Him,  we  have  3'et  to 
learn  what  is  the  meaning  and  the  purpose  of  the 
propitiatory  sacrifice  on  which  we  say  our  lives  are 
built. 

I  need  not,  I  suppose,  remind  you  at  any  length  of 
how  our  text  draws  broad  and  deep  the  distinction 
between  the  nature  and  the  scope  of  the  fundamental 
offering  made  by  Christ,  and  the  offerings  made  by  us. 
The  one  takes  away  the  separating  barrier ;  the  other 
is  the  flow  of  the  stream  where  the  barrier  had  stood. 
The  one  is  the  melting  away  of  the  cloud  that  hid  the 
sun;  the  other  is  the  flashing  of  the  mirror  of  my 
heart  when  the  sun  shines  upon  it.  Our  sacrifice  is 
thanksgiving.  Then  there  will  be  no  reluctance  be- 
cause duty  is   heavy.      There   will   be   no   grudging 


THE  CHRISTIAN  SACRIFICE.  205 


because  requirements  are  great.  There  will  be  no 
avoiding  of  the  obligations  of  the  Christian  life,  and 
rendering  as  small  a  percentage  by  way  of  dividend  as 
the  creditor  up  in  the  heavens  Avill  accept.  If  the 
offering  is  a  thankoffering,  then  it  will  be  given  gladly. 
The  grateful  heart  does  not  hold  the  scales  like  a 
scrupulous  retail  dealer  afraid  of  putting  the  thou- 
sandth part  of  an  ounce  more  in  than  can  be  avoided. 

Give  all  thou  canst,  high  heavea  rejects  the  love 
Of  nicely  calculated  less  or  more. 

Power  is  the  measure  of  duty,  and  they  whose 
offering  is  the  ex^Dression  of  their  thankfulness  will 
heap  incense  upon  the  brazier,  and  cover  the  altar 
Avith  flowers. 

Ah,  brethren,  what  a  blessed  life  it  would  be  for  us, 
if  indeed  all  the  painfulness  and  harshness  of  duty, 
with  all  the  efforts  of  constraint  and  restriction  and 
stimulus  which  it  so  often  requires,  were  transmuted 
into  that  glad  expression  of  infinite  obligation  for  the 
great  sacrifice  on  which  our  life  and  hopes  rest ! 

I  do  not  purpose  to  say  much  about  the  two  classes 
of  sacrifice  into  which  our  writer  divides  the  whole. 
Words  come  first,  work  follows.  That  order  may  seem 
strange,  because  we  are  accustomed  to  think  more  of 
work  than  word.  But  the  Bible  has  a  solemn  rever- 
ence for  man's  utterances  of  speech,  and  many  a  pro- 
test against  "  God's  great  gift  of  speech  abused."  And 
the  text  rightly  supposes  that  if  there  is  in  us  any 
deep,  real,  abiding,  life-shaping  thankfulness  for  the 
gift  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  impossible  that  our  tongues 
should  cleave  to  the  roofs  of  our  mouths,  and  that  we 


206  THE  CHRISTIAN  SACRIFICE. 

should  be  contented  to  live  in  silence.  Loving  hearts 
must  speak.  What  would  you  think  of  a  husband 
that  never  felt  any  impulse  to  tell  his  wife  that  she 
was  dear  to  him ;  or  a  mother  that  never  found  it 
needful  to  unpack  her  heart  of  its  tenderness,  even  in 
perhaps  inarticulate  croonings  over  the  little  child 
that  she  pressed  to  her  heart  ?  It  seems  to  me  that  a 
dumb  Christian,  a  man  that  is  thankful  for  Christ's 
sacrifice  and  never  feels  the  need  to  say  so,  is  as  great 
an  anomaty  as  either  of  these  I  have  described. 

Brethren,  the  conventionalities  of  our  modern  life, 
the  proper  reticence  about  personal  experience,  the 
reverence  due  to  sacred  subjects,  all  these  do  prescribe 
caution  and  tact,  and  many  another  thing,  in  limiting 
the  evangelistic  side  of  our  speech ;  but  is  there  any 
such  limitation  needful  for  the  eucliaristic,  the  thanks- 
giving side  of  our  speech  ?  Surely  not.  In  some 
monasteries  and  nunneries  there  used  to  be  a  pro- 
vision made  that  at  every  hour  of  the  four  and  twenty, 
and  at  every  moment  of  every  hour,  there  should  be 
one  kneeling  figure  before  the  altar,  repeating  the 
psalter,  so  that  night  and  day  prayer  and  praise  went 
up.  It  was  a  beautiful  idea,  beautiful  as  long  as  it 
was  an  idea,  and,  like  a  great  many  other  beautiful 
ideas,  made  vulgar  and  sometimes  ludicrous  when  it 
was  put  into  realization.  But  it  is  the  symbol  of  what 
we  should  be,  with  hearts  ever  occupied  with  Him, 
and  the  voice  of  praise  rising  unintermittently  from 
our  hearts,  singing  a  quiet  tune,  all  the  day  and  night 
long,  to  Him  that  has  loved  us  and  given  Himself 
for  us. 

And  then  the  other  side  of  this  conception  of  sacri- 


THE  CHRISTIAN  SACRIFICE.  207 

fice  that  my  text  puts  forth  is  that  of  beneficence 
amongst  men,  in  the  general  form  of  doing  good,  and 
in  the  specific  form  of  giving  money.  Two  aspects 
of  this  combination  of  word  and  work  may  be  sug- 
gested. It  has  a  message  for  us  professing  Christians. 
All  that  the  world  says  about  the  uselessness  of 
singing  psalms,  and  praying  prayers,  while  neglecting 
the  miserable  and  the  weak,  is  said  far  more  emphati- 
cally in  the  Bible,  and  ought  to  be  laid  to  heart,  not 
because  sneering,  godless  people  say  it,  but  because 
God  Himself  says  it.  It  is  vain  to  pray  unless  you 
work.  It  is  sin  to  work  for  yourselves  unless  you 
own  the  bond  of  sympathy  with  all  mankind,  and 
live  "  to  do  good  and  to  communicate."  That  is  a 
messaoje  for  others  than  Christians.  There  is  no  real 
foundation  for  a  broad  philanthropy  except  a  deep 
devotion  to  God.  The  service  of  man  is  never  so  well 
secured  as  when  it  is  the  corollary  and  second  form 
of  the  service  of  God. 

III. — And  so,  lastty — and  only  a  word — note  the 
Divine  delicfht  in  such  sacrifice. 

Ah  !  that  is  a  w^onderful  thou^'ht, "  With  such  sacri- 
fices  God  is  well  pleased."  Now  I  take  it  that  that 
"  such"  covers  both  the  points  on  which  I  have  been 
dwelling,  and  that  the  sacrifices  which  please  Him 
are,  first,  those  Avhich  are  offered  on  the  basis  and 
footing  of  Christ's  sacrifice,  and,  second,  those  in  which 
word  and  work  accord  well,  and  make  one  music. 
"  With  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased." 

We  are  sometimes  too  much  afraid  of  believing?  that 
there  is  in  the  Divine  heart  anything  corresponding 
to  our  delight  in  gifts  that  mean  love,  because  wc  arc 


203  THE  CHRISTIAN  SACRIFICE. 

SO  penetrated  with  the  imperfection  of  all  that  we  can 
do  and  give ;  and  sometimes  because  we  are  influenced 
by  grand  philosophic  ideas  of  the  Divine  nature,  so 
that  we  think  it  degrading  to  Him  to  conceive  of  any- 
thing corresponding  to  our  delight  as  passing  across 
it.  But  the  Bible  is  wiser  and  more  reverent  than 
that.  And  it  tells  us  that,  however  stained  and  im- 
perfect our  gifts,  and  however  a  man  might  reject 
them  with  scorn,  God  will  take  them,  if  they  are  "  such  " 
— that  is,  offered  through  Jesus  Christ.  I  daresay 
there  are  many  parents  in  this  congregation  who  have 
laid  away  amongst  their  treasures  some  utterly  useless 
thinof  that  one  of  their  little  children  once  Q^ave  them. 
No  good  in  it  at  all !  No.  But  it  meant  love.  And, 
depend  upon  it,  "  if  ye,  being  evil,  know  how  to  take 
good  gifts  " — though  they  are  useless — "  from  3^our 
children,  much  more  will  your  Heavenly  Father 
accept "  your  stained  sacrifices  if  they  come  through 
Christ. 

Dear  brethren,  my  text  preaches  to  us  what  is  the 
true  sacrifice  of  the  true  priesthood  in  the  ChristiPvn 
Church.  There  is  one  Priest  who  stands  alone,  offering 
the  one  Sacrifice,  that  has  no  parallel  nor  second.  No 
other  shares  in  His  priesthood  of  expiation  and  inter- 
cession. But  around,  and  deriving  their  priestly 
character  from  Him,  and  made  capable  of  rendering 
acceptable  sacrifices  through  Him,  stand  the  whole 
company  of  Christian  people.  And  besides  these 
there  are  no  priesthoods  and  no  sacrifices  in  the 
Christian  vocabulary  or  in  the  Christian  Church. 
Would  that  a  generation  that  seems  to  be  reeling 
backwards   to   the    beggarly   elements   of  an   oflicial 


THE  CHRISTIAN  SACRIFICE.  209 

priesthood,  with  all  its  corruptions  and  degradations 
of  the  Christian  community,  would  learn  the  lesson  of 
my  text  1  "  Ye  " — all  of  you,  and  not  any  selected 
number  from  amongst  you — "  ye,  all  of  you  are  a  royal 
priesthood."  There  are  only  two  sacrifices  in  the 
Christian  Church :  the  one  offered  once  for  all  on 
Calvary,  by  the  High  Priest  Himself;  the  other  the 
sacrifices  of  ourselves,  by  ourselves,  thank  offerings 
for  Christ  and  His  name,  which  are  the  true 
Eucharist. 


14 


XXL 

^be  p5almi6t'6  IRemonetrance  witb  bia 
SouK 

"  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  ?  and  why  art  thou  disquieted 
within  me  ?  Hope  in  God  ;  for  I  shall  yet  praise  Him,  the  health 
of  my  countenance,  and  my  Grod." — Psalms  xliii.  5. 

HIS  verse,  which  closes  this  psalm, 
occurs  twice  in  the  previous  one.  It 
is  a  kind  of  refrain.  Obviously  this 
little  psalm,  of  which  my  text  is  a  part, 
was  originally  united  with  the  pre- 
ceding one.  That  the  two  made  one  is  clear  to 
anybody  that  will  read  them,  by  reason  of  structure, 
and  tone,  and  similarity  of  the  singer's  situation,  and 
the  recurrence  of  many  phrases,  and  especially  of 
these  significant  words  of  my  text. 

The  Psalmist  is  in  circumstances  of  trouble  and 
sorrow.  We  need  not  enter  upon  them  particularly, 
but  the  thing  that  I  desire  to  point  out  is  that  three 
times  does  the  Psalmist  take  himself  to  task  and 
question  himself  as  to  the  reasonableness  of  the 
emotions  that  are  surging  in  his  soul,  and  checks  these 
by  higher  considerations.  Thrice  he  does  it ;  twice 
in  vain,  for  the  trouble  and  anxiety  come  rolling  back 
upon  him  in  spite  of  the  moment's  respite,  but  the 
third  time  he  triumphs. 


THE  PSALMISTS  REMONSTRANCE  WITH  HIS  SOUL.  211 

I. — We  note,  then,  first,  that  moods  and  emotions 
should  be  examined  and  governed  by  a  higher  self. 

In  the  Psalmist's  case,  his  gloom  and  despondency, 
which  could  plead  good  reasons  for  their  existence, 
had  everything  their  own  way  at  first,  and  swept  over 
his  soul  like  the  first  rush  of  waters  Avhich  have  burst 
their  bounds.  But,  presently,  the  ruling  part  of  his 
nature  wakes,  and  brings  the  feebler  lower  soul  to  its 
tribunal,  and  says,  in  effect,  ''  Now  !  now  that  I  am 
here,  what  hast  thou  to  say  about  these  sorrows  that 
thou  hast  been  complaining  about  ?  Why  art  thou 
cast  down,  0  my  soul  ?  Why  art  thou  disquieted  ? 
,     .     .     Hope  in  God  ! " 

I  shall  have  a  word  or  two  to  say  presently  about 
the  details  of  this  remonstrance,  but  the  main  point 
that  I  make,  to  begin  with,  is  just  this,  that  however 
strong  and  reasonably  occasioned  by  circumstances  a 
man's  emotions  and  feelings,  either  of  the  bright  or  the 
dark  kind,  may  be,  they  are  not  to  be  indulged,  unless 
they  have  passed  muster  and  examination  by  that 
higher  and  better  self.  It  is  necessary  to  keep  a  very 
tight  hand  upon  all  our  feelings,  whether  they  be  the 
natural  desires  of  the  sensuous  part  of  our  nature,  or 
whether  they  be  the  sentiments  of  sadness,  or  doubt, 
or  anxiety,  or  perplexity,  which  are  the  natural  results 
of  outward  circumstances  of  trial ;  or  whether,  on  the 
contrary,  they  be  the  bright  and  buoyant  ones  which 
come,  like  angels,  alojig  with  prosperous  hours.  But 
that  necessity,  commonplace  as  it  is  of  all  morals  and 
all  religion,  is  yet  a  thing  which,  day  by  day,  we 
so  forget  that  we  need  to  be  ever  and  anon  reminded 
of  it. 

14* 


212  TEE  PSALMIST'S  EEMONSTnAKCE  IVITII  HIS  SOUL. 

There  are  plenty  of  peojDle  who,  making  profession 
of  heing  Christians,  do  not  habitually  put  the  break 
on  their  moods  and  tempers,  and  who  seem  to  think 
that  it  is  a  sufficient  vindication  of  gloom  and  sadness 
to  sa}^  that  things  are  going  badly  with  them  in  the 
outer  world,  and  w^ho  act  as  if  they  supposed  that  no 
joy  can  be  too  exuberant  and  no  elation  too  lofty  if, 
on  the  other  hand,  things  are  going  rightly.  It  is  a 
miserable  travesty  of  the  Christian  faith  to  suppose 
that  its  prime  purpose  is  anything  else  than  to  put 
into  our  hands  the  power  of  ruling  ourselves  because 
we  let  Christ  rule  us. 

And  so,  dear  brethren,  though  it  be  the  ABC  of  ^ 
€hristian  teaching,  suffer  this  word  of  exhortation.  It 
is  only  "  milk  for  babes,"  but  it  is  milk  that  the  babes 
are  very  unwilling  to  take.  Learn  from  this  verse 
before  us  the  solemn  duty  of  rigid  control,  by  the 
higher  self,  of  the  tremulous,  emotional  lower  self 
which  responds  so  completely  to  every  change  of 
temperature  or  circumstances  in  the  world  without. 
And  remember  that  there  should  be  a  central  heat 
which  keeps  the  temperature  substantially  the  same, 
whatever  be  the  weather  outside. 

As  the  wheelhouse,  and  the  steering  gear,  and  the 
rudder  of  the  ship  proclaim  their  purpose  of  guidance 
and  direction,  so  eloquently  and  unmistakably  does 
the  make  of  our  inward  selves  tell  us  that  emotions 
and  moods  and  tempers  are  meant  to  be  governed, 
often  to  be  crushed,  always  to  be  moderated,  by 
sovereign  will  and  reason.  In  the  Psalmist's  language, 
"my  soul"  has  to  give  account  of  its  tremors  and 
flutterings  to  "Me,"  the  ruling  Self,  who  should  be 


THE  PSALMIST'S  REMONSTRANCE  WITH  HIS  SOUL.  213 

Lord  of  temperament,  and  control  the  fluctuations  of 
feeling-. 

II. — Note  that  there  are  two  ways  of  looking  at 
causes  of  dejection  and  disquiet. 

The  whole  preceding  parts  of  both  the  psalms,  before 
this  refrain,  are  an  answer  to  the  question  which  my 
text  puts.  "  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  ? " 
"My  soul"  has  been  talking  two  whole  psalms,  to 
explain  why  it  is  cast  down.  And  after  all  the  elo- 
quent torrent  of  words  to  vindicate  and  explain  its 
reasons  for  sadness  — separation  from  the  sanctuary, 
bitter  remembrances  of  bright  days,  which  the  poet 
tells  us  are  "  a  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow,"  taunts  of 
enemies  and  the  like — after  all  these  have  been  said 
over  and  over  again,  the  Psalmist  says  tc  himself: 
"  Come  now,  let  us  hear  it  all  once  more.  Why  art 
thou  cast  down  ?  Why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me  ? 
Thou  hast  been  telling  the  reasons  abundantly.  Speak 
them  once  again,  and  let  us  have  a  look  at  them." 

There  is  a  court  of  appeal  in  each  man,  Avhich 
tests  and  tries  his  reasons  for  his  moods  :  and  these, 
which  look  very  sufficient  to  the  flesh,  turn  out  to  be 
very  insufficient  when  investigated  and  tested  by  the 
higher  spirit  or  self.  AVe  should  "  appeal  from  Philip 
drunk  to  Philip  sober."  And  if  a  man  will  be  honest 
with  himself,  and  tell  himself  why  he  is  in  such  a 
pucker  of  terror,  or  why  he  is  in  such  a  rapture  of  joy, 
nine  times  out  of  ten  the  attempt  to  tell  the  reasons 
will  be  the  condemnation  of  the  mood  which  they  are 
supposed  to  justify.  If  men  would  only  bring  the 
causes  or  occasions  of  the  tempers  and  feelings, 
which  they  allow  to  direct  them,  to  the  bar  of  com- 


214  THE  PSALMISTS  REMONSTEAXCE  WITH  HIS  SOUL. 

mon  sense,  to  say  nothing  of  religious  faith,  half 
the  furious  boilings  in  their  hearts  would  stop  their 
ebullition.  It  would  be  like  pouring  cold  water  into 
a  kettle  on  the  fire.     It  would  end  its  bubbling. 

Everything  has  two  handles.  The  aspect  of  any 
event  depends  largely  on  the  beholder's  point  of  view. 
"  There's  nothing  either  good  or  bad,  but  thinking 
makes  it  so."  "  ^Vhy  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul  ? 
and  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me  ? "  The 
answer  is  often  very  hard  to  give;  the  question  is 
always  very  salutary  to  ask. 

III. — Note  that  no  reasons  for  being  cast  down 
are  so  strong  as  those  for  elation  and  calm  hope. 

"Hope  thou  in  God,  for  I  shall  3'et  praise  Him, 
who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance  and  my  God." 
I  need  not  deal  here  with  the  fact  that  the  first 
of  the  three  occurrences  of  this  refrain  is,  in  our 
Bible,  a  little  different  from  the  other  two.  That 
is  probably  a  mistake  in  the  text.  In  all  three  cases 
the  words  ought  to  stand  the  same. 

Try  to  realize  what  God  is  to  yourselves — "My 
God  "  and  "  the  health  of  my  countenance."  That 
will  stimulate  sluggish  feeling ;  that  will  calm  dis- 
turbed emotion.  He  that  can  sa}^  "  My  God !  "  and 
in  that  possession  can  repose,  will  not  be  easily 
moved,  by  the  trivialities  and  transitorinesses  of 
this  life,  to  excessive  disquiet,  whether  of  the  exu- 
berant or  of  the  woeful  sort.  There  is  a  wonderful 
calming  power  in  realizing  our  possession  of  God 
as  our  portion — not  stagnating,  but  quieting.  I  am 
quite  sure  that  the  troubles  of  our  lives,  and  the 
gladnesses  of  our  lives,  which  often  distract,  would 


THE  PSALMIST'S  REMONSTRANCE  WITH  HIS  SOUL.  215 


be  far  less  operative  in  disturbing,  if  we  felt  more 
that  God  was  ours  and  that  we  were  God's. 

Brethren,  "  there  is  no  joy  but  cahn."  To  be  at 
rest  is  better  than  rapture.  And  there  is  no  way 
of  getting  and  keeping  a  fixed  temper  of  still  tran- 
quiUity  unless  we  go  into  that  deep  and  hidden 
chamber,  in  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High, 
where  Ave  cannot  ''hear  the  loud  winds  when  they 
call,"  but  dwell  in  security,  whatever  storms  harass 
the  land.  "  Why  art  thou  cast  down, "  or  lifted 
"  up, "  and,  in  either  case,  "  disquieted  ? "  "  Hope  in 
God, "  and  be  at  rest. 

IV. — Xote  that  the  effort  to  lay  hold  on  the  truth 
which  calms  is  to  be  repeated  in  spite  of  failures. 

The  words  of  our  text  are  thrice  repeated  in  these 
two  psalms.  In  the  two  former  instances  they  are 
followed  by  a  fresh  burst  of  pained  feeling.  A 
moment  of  tranquillity  interrupts  the  agitation  of  the 
Psalmist's  soul,  but  is  soon  followed  by  the  recur- 
rence of  "  the  horrible  storm  "  that  "  bes^ins  afresh."  A 
tiny  island  of  blue  appears  in  his  sky,  and  then  the 
pale,  ugly,  grey  rack  drives  across  it  once  more.  But 
the  guiding  self  keeps  the  hand  firm  on  the  tiller, 
notwithstanding  the  wash  of  the  water  and  the 
rolling  of  the  ship,  and  the  dominant  will  conquers  at 
last.  And  at  the  third  time  the  jdelding  soul  obeys 
and  is  quiet,  because  the  Psalmist's  will  resolved  that 
it  should  be  quiet,  and  it  hopes  in  God  because  He* 
by  a  dead  lift  of  effort,  lifts  it  up  to  hope. 

No  effort  at  tranquillizing  our  hearts  is  wholly  lost ; 
and  no  attempt  to  lay  hold  upon  God  is  wholly  in 
vain.     ]Men  build  a  dam  to  keep  out  the  sea,  and  the 


216  THE  PSAUIIST'S  REMONSTRANCE  WITH  HIS  SOTL. 

winter  storms  make  a  breach  in  it,  but  it  is  not 
washed  away  altogether,  And  next  season  they  will 
not  need  to  begin  to  build  from  quite  so  low  down ; 
but  there  will  be  a  bit  of  the  former  left,  to  put  the 
new  structure  upon.  And  so  by  degrees  it  will  rise 
above  the  tide,  and  at  last  will  keep  it  out. 

Did  you  ever  see  a  child  upon  a  swing,  or  a  gymnast 
upon  a  trapeze  ?  Each  oscillation  goes  a  little  higher ; 
each  starts  from  the  same  lowest  point,  but  the  elevation 
on  either  side  increases  with  each  renewed  effort,  until 
at  last  the  destined  height  is  reached  and  the  daring 
athlete  leaps  on  to  a  solid  platform.  So  we  may,  if  I 
miglit  so  say,  by  degrees,  by  reiterated  efforts,  swing 
ourselves  up  to  that  steadfast  floor  on  which  we  may 
stand  high  above  all  that  breeds  agitation  and  gloom. 

It  is  possible,  in  the  midst  of  change  and  circum- 
stances that  excite  sad  emotions,  anxieties,  and  fears 
— it  is  possible  to  have  this  calmness  of  hope  in  God. 
The  rainbow  that  spans  the  cataract  rises  steadfast 
above  the  white,  tortured  water  beneath,  and  persists 
whilst  all  is  hurrying  change  below.  And  there  are 
flowers  on  the  grim  black  rocks  by  the  side  of  the  fall, 
whose  verdure  is  made  o-reener  and  whose  brio'htness 

o  o 

is  made  brighter,  by  the  freshening  of  the  spray  of  the 
waterfall.  And  so  we  may  be  "  as  sorrowful,  yet 
always  rejoicing,"  and  may  bid  dejected  and  disquieted 
souls  to  hope  in  God  and  be  still. 


XXII. 

H  (5oo&  flDan'6  Eetintatc  of  1I:)ini6elt 

'  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am  ;  and  the  grace  which  was 
bestowed  upon  me  was  not  in  vain."— 1  CoK,  xv.  10. 

f|HE  Apostle  was,  all  his  life,  under  the 
hateful    necessity   of    vindicating    his 
character  and  Apostleship.    Thus  here, 
though  his  main  purpose  in  the  con- 
text is  simply  to  declare   the  Gospel 
which  he  preached,  he  is  obliged  to  turn  aside  in  order 
to  assert,  and  to  back  up  his  assertion,  that  there  Avas 
no  sort  of  difference  between  him  and  the  other  recog- 
nized teachers  of  Christian  truth.     He  was  f. -reed  to 
do  this   by  persistent   endeavours  in  the  Corinthian 
Church  to  deny  his  Apostleship,  and  the  faithfulness 
of  his  representation  of  the  Christian  verities.     The 
w^ay  in  which  he  does  it  is  eminently  beautiful  and 
remarkable.     He  fires  up  in  vindication  of  himself, 
and  then  he  checks  himself.     "  By  the  grace  of  God  I 
am"— and  he  is  going  to  say  what  he  is,  but  he  be- 
thinks himself,  as  if  he  had  reflected,—"  No !   I  will 
leave  other  people  to  say  what  that  is  !     By  the  grace 
of  God  I  am— what  I  am  ;  whatever  that  be.     And  all 
that  I  have  to  say  is  that  God  made  me,  and  that  I 


218 


A  GOOD  MAN'S  ESTIMATE  OF  HIMSELF. 


helped  Him.  For  the  grace  of  God  which  was  be- 
stowed  upon  me  u^as  not  in  vain.  Vou  Corinthians 
may  judge  what  the  product  is.  I  tell  you  how  it  has 
come  about."  So  there  are  thoughts  here,  I  think 
well  worth  our  pondering  and  taking  into  our  hearts 
iind  lives. 

I-Krst,  as  to  the  one  power  that  makes  men. 
By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  Xow 
that  word  "grace"  has  got  to  be  worn  threadbare 
aiid  to  mean  ne.xt  door  to  nothing,  in  the  ears  and 
mmds  of  a  great  many  continual  hearers  of  the 
Gospel.  But  Paul  had  a  very  definite  idea  of  what 
he  meant  by  it;  and  what  he  meant  by  it  was  a 
very  lai-ge  thing,  which  we  may  well  ponder  fo  a 
moment  as  being  the  only  thing  which  will  trans- 
form and  ennoble  character  and  wiU  produce  fruit 
that  a  man  need  not  be  ashamed  of.     The  grace  of 

tmal  use  of  them  generally,  implies  these  two  things 
which  are  connected  as  root  and  product-the 
active  love  of  God,  in  exercise  towards' us  low  and 
smful  creatures,  and  the  gifts  with  which  that  love 

at  bo  tomare  one,  love  and  its  gifts,  are  all,  in  the 
Apostles  judgment,  gathered  up  and  stored,  as  in  a 
great  storehouse,  in  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  and  through 
Him  are  made  accessible  to  us,  and  brouriit  to  be!ar 
npon  us  for  the  ennobling  of  our  natures,  "and  the  in- 
ves  ing  of  us  with  graces  and  beauties  of  character, 
all  strange  to  us  apart  from  these 

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  these  two  things,  which 
come  from  one  root,  are  the  precise  things  which  you 


A  GOOD  MAN'S  ESTIMATE  OF  HIMSELF.  219 

and  I  need  in  order  to  make  us  nobler  and  purer  and 
more  Godlike  men  than  otherwise  we  could  ever 
become.  For  what  is  it  that  men  need  most  for 
noble  and  pure  living  ?  These  two  things  precisely : 
motive  and  power  to  carry  out  the  dictates  of  con- 
science. 

Every  man  in  the  world  knows  enough  of  duty  and 
of  right  to  be  a  far  nobler  man  than  any  man  in  the 
world  is.  And  it  is  not  for  want  of  clear  convictions 
of  duty,  it  is  not  for  want  ot  recognized  models  and 
patterns  of  life,  that  men  go  wrong  ;  but  it  is  because 
there  are  these  two  things  lacking :  motives  for  nobler 
service,  and  power  to  do  and  be  wdiat  they  know  they 
ought  to  be.  And  precisely  here  Paul's  Gospel 
comes  in,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am." 
That  o'race,  considered  on  its  two  sides  of  love  and  of 
giving,  supplies  all  that  we  want. 

It  supplies  motives.  There  is  nothing  that  will 
bend  a  man's  will  like  the  recognition  of  Divine 
love,  which  it  is  blessedness  to  come  in  contact  with 
and  to  obey.  You  may  try  to  sway  him  by  motives 
of  advantage  and  self-interest,  and  to  thunder  into 
his  ears  the  pealing  words  of  Duty  and  Right  and 
''ought,"  and  there  is  no  adequate  response.  You 
cannot  soften  a  heart  by  the  hammers  of  the  law. 
You  cannot  force  a  man  to  do  right  by  brandishing 
before  him  the  whip  that  punishes  doing  wrong. 
You  cannot  sway  the  will  by  anything  but  the 
heart ;  and  when  you  can  touch  that  deepest  spring- 
it  moves  the  whole  mass. 

You  have  seen  some  ponderous  piece  of  machinery, 
which  resists  all  attempts  of  a  puny  hand  laid  upon  it 


220  A  GOOD  MAN'S  ESTIMATE  OF  HUISELF. 


to  make  it  revolve.  Bat  down  in  one  corner  is  a  little 
hidden  spring.  Touch  that,  and  with  majestic  slow- 
ness and  certainty  the  mighty  bulk  turns.  You 
know  those  rocking-stones  down  in  the  South  of 
England;  tons  of  weight  poised  upon  a  pin  point, 
and  so  exquisitely  balanced  that  a  child's  finger 
rightly  applied  may  move  the  mass.  So  the  whole 
man  is  made  mobile  only  by  the  touch  of  love ;  and 
the  grace  that  comes  to  us,  and  says,  "  If  ye  love 
Me,  keep  My  commandments, "  is,  as  I  believe,  the 
sole  motive  which  will  continuously  and  adequately 
sway  the  rebellious,  self-centred  wills  of  men,  to 
obedience  resulting  in  nobihty  of  hfe. 

The  other  aspect  of  this  same  great  word  is,  in  like 
manner,  that  which  we  need.  What  men  want  is,  first 
of  all,  the  will  to  be  noble  and  good ;  and,  second,  the 
power  to  carry  out  the  will.  It  is  God  that  worketh 
in  us  both  the  willing  and  the  doing.  I  venture 
to  affirm  that  there  is  no  power  known,  either 
to  thinkers,  or  philanthropists,  or  doctrinaires,  or 
strivers  after  excellence  in  the  world  —  no  power 
known  and  available  which  will  lift  a  life  to  such 
heights  of  beauty  and  self-sacrificing  nobility  as  will 
the  power  that  comes  to  us  by  communication  of  the 
grace  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ 

I  am  perpetually  trying  to  insist,  dear  brethren, 
upon  this  one  thought,  that  the  communication  of 
actual  new  life  is  the  central  gift  of  the  Gospel ;  and 
this  new  life  it  is,  this  nature  endowed  with  new 
desires,  hopes,  aims,  capacities,  which  alone  will  raise 
the  whole  man  into  unwonted  regions  of  beauty  and 
serenity.      It  is  the  grace  of  God,  the  gift   of  His 


A  GOOD  MAN'S  ESTIMA  TE  OF  HIMSELF.  221 


Divine    Spirit  that  Avill  dwell  with  all  of  us,  if  we 
will,  which  alone  can  be  trusted  to  make  men  good. 

And  now,  if  that  be  true,  what  follows  ?  Surely 
this,  that  for  all  you  who  have,  in  any  measure,  caught 
a  glimpse  of  what  you  ought  to  be,  and  have  been 
more  or  less  vainly  trying  to  realize  your  ideal,  and 
reach  your  goal,  there  is  a  better  way  than  the  way 
of  self-centred  and  self-derived  and  self-dependent 
effort.  There  is  the  way  of  opening  your  hearts  and 
spirits  to  the  entrance  and  access  of  that  great  power, 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  will  do  in 
U3  and  for  as  all  that  we  know  we  ought  to  do,  and 
yet  feel  hampered  and  hindered  in  performing. 

Oh,  dear  friends,  there  are  many  of  you,  I  believe, 
who  have  more  or  less  spasmodically  and  interrupt- 
edly, but  with  a  continual  recurrence  to  the  effort, 
sought  to  plant  your  feet  firmly  in  the  paths  of 
righteousness,  and  have  more  or  less  failed.  Listen 
to  this  Gospel,  and  accept  it,  and  put  it  to  the  proof. 
The  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  the 
life  which  that  love  brings  in  its  hands,  for  all  of 
us  who  will  trust  it,  will  dwell  in  you  if  you  will, 
and  mould  you  into  His  own  likeness.  And  the 
law  of  spirit  of  life  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus  will 
make  us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death. 

All  noble  living  is  a  battle.  Can  you  and  I, 
with  our  ten  thousand,  meet  him  that  cometh  against 
us  with  his  twenty,  the  temptations  of  the  world, 
and  of  its  Prince  ?  Send  for  the  reinforcements,  and 
Jesus  Christ  Avill  come  and  teach  your  hands  to  war 
and  your  fingers  to  fight.  All  noble  life  is  self-denial, 
coercion,  restraint;   and   can  my  poor  feeble   hands 


222 


A  GOOD  MAN'S  ESTIMATE  OF  HIMSELF. 


apply  muscular  force  enough  to  the  brake  to  keep  the 
wheels  clogged,  and  prevent  them  from  whirlino-  me 
downhill  into  ruin  ?  Let  Him  come  and  put  His  great 
gentle  hand  on  the  top  of  yours,  and  that  will  enable 
you  to  scotch  the  wheels,  and  make  self-denial  pos- 
sible    All  noble  life  is  a  building  up  by  slow  degrees 
from  the  foundation.    And  can  you  and  I  complete 
the  task  with  our  own  limited  resources  and  our  own 
feeble  strengths?    AViU  not  "all  that  pass  by  be^in 
to  mock  'us  and  say,  "  This  man  began  to  build  and 
was  no    able  to  finish  "  1     That  is  the  epitaph  written 
over  al    morahties,  and  over  all  lives  which,  catchin<. 
some  glimpse  of  the  good  and  the  true  and  the  noble 
have  tried,  apart  from  Christ,  to  reproduce  them  in 
themselves.     Frightful  gaps,  and  an  unfinished,  how- 
ever fair,  structure  end  them  all.    Go  to  Him  '■    "  His 
hand  hath  laid  the  foundation  of  the  house,  His  hand 
shall  also  finish  it."    He  who  is  Himself  the  founda- 
tion-stone is  also  the  headstone  of  the  corner,  which 
IS  brought  forth  with  shouting  of  "Grace!    Grace 
unto  It ! 

_    I  need  not  I  suppose,  linger  to  remind  you  what 
important  and  large  lessons  these  thoughts  carry,  not 
only  for  men  who  are  trying  to  work  at  the  task  of 
mending  and  making  their   own  characters,  but,  on 
thelarger  scale,  for  all  who  seek  to  benefit  and  elevate 
their  fellows.     Brethren,  it  is  not  for  me  to  depreciate 
any  workers  who,  in  any   department,   and   by  any 
methods,  seek,  and  partially  eftect,  the  elevation  of 
humanity.   But  I  should  be  untrue  to  my  own  deepest 
conv,etions    and    unfaithful  to   the  message  which 
Gods  providence  has  given  it  to  me  as  my  life's  task 


A  GOOD  MAN'S  ESTIMATE  OF  HIMSELF.  223 

to  proclaim,  if  I  did  not  declaro  that  nothing  will 
truly  re-form  humanity,  society,  the  nation,  the  city, 
except  that  Avhicli  re-creates  the  individual:  "the 
srace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  entering  into  their 
midst. 

II. — And  so,  secondly,  and  very  briefly,  notice  the 
lesson  we  get  here  as  to  how  we  should  think  of  our 
own  attainments. 

I  have  already  pointed  out  that  there  are  two 
beautiful  touches  in  my  text.  The  Apostle  traces 
everything  that  he  is,  in  his  character  and  in  his 
Christian  standing  and  in  his  Apostolic  work  and 
success,  to  that  grace  that  has  come  down  upon  him, 
and  clothed  his  nakedness  with  so  glorious  a  garment. 
And  then,  in  addition  to  that,  he  modestly,  and  with  a 
fine  sense  of  dignity,  refrains  from  parading  his 
attainments  or  his  achievements,  and  says,  "  It  is  not 
for  me  to  estimate  what  I  am  ;  it  is  for  you  to  do  it." 
True,  indeed,  in  the  next  verse  he  does  set  forth,  in 
very  lofty  language,  his  claims  to  be  in  nothing 
behind  the  very  chiefest  of  the  Apostles,  and  "  to 
have  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all."  But 
still  the  spirit  of  that  humble  and  yet  dignified  silence 
runs  through  the  whole  context.  "  By  the  grace  of 
God  I  am— what  I  am." 

AVell,  then,  it  is  not  necessary  for  a  man  to  be 
io-norant,  or  to  pretend  that  he  is  ignorant,  of  what  he 
can  do.  We  hear  a  great  deal  about  the  uncon- 
sciousness of  genius.  There  is  a  partial  truth  in  it ; 
and  possibly  the  highest  examples  of  power  and 
success,  in  any  department  of  mental  or  intellectual 
effort,  are  unaware  of  their  achievements  and  stature. 


224  A  GOOD  MAN'S  ESTIMATE  OF  HIMSELF. 

But  if  a  man  can  do  a  certain  kind  of  service,  there  is 
no  harm  whatever  in  his  recognizing  the  fact  that  he 
can  do  it.  The  only  harm  is  in  his  thinking  that 
because  he  can,  he  is  a  very  fine  fellow,  and  that  the 
work  itself  is  a  great  work  ;  and  so  setting  himself  up 
above  his  brethren.  There  is  a  vast  deal  of  hypocrisy 
in  what  is  called  unconsciousness  of  power.  Most 
men  who  have  been  chosen  and  empowered  to  do  a 
great  work  for  God  or  for  men,  in  any  department, 
have  been  aware  that  they  could  do  it.  But  the  less 
we  think  about  ourselves,  in  any  way,  the  better. 
The  more  entire  our  recognition  of  the  influx  of  grace 
on  which  we  depend  for  keeping  our  reservoir  full, 
the  less  likelihood  there  will  be  of  touchy  self-asser- 
tion, the  less  likelihood  of  the  misuse  of  the  powers 
that  we  have.  If  we  are  to  do  much  for  God ;  if  we 
are  to  keep  what  we  have  already  attained ;  if  we  are 
to  make  our  own  lives  sweet  and  beautiful ;  if  we  are 
to  be  invested  with  any  increase  of  capacity,  or  led  to 
any  higher  heights  of  nobleness  and  Christlikeness,  we 
must  copy,  and  make  a  conscious  effort  to  copy,  these 
two  things,  which  marked  the  Apostle's  estimate  of 
himself —  a  distinct  recognition  that  we  are  onty 
reservoirs  and  nothing  more — "  What  hast  thou  that 
thou  hast  not  received  ?  Why  then  dost  thou  glory  as 
if  thou  hadst  not  received  it  ? " — and  a  humble  waiv- 
ing aside  of  the  attempt  to  determine  what  it  is  that 
we  are.  For  however  clearly  a  man  may  know  his 
own  powers  and  achievements,  it  is  hard  for  him  to 
estimate  the  relations  of  these  to  his  whole  character. 
So,  dear  brethren,  although  it  is  a  very  homely 
piece   of  advice,  and    may   seem  to  be  beneath   the 


A  GOOD  MANS  ESTIMATE  OF  HIMSELF.  225 

so-called  dignity  of  the  pulpit,  let  me  venture  just  to 
remind  you  that  self-conceit  is  no  disease  peculiar  to 
the  ten-talented  people,  but  is  quite  as  rife,  if  not  a 
good  deal  rifer,  among  those  with  one  talent.  They 
iire  very  humble  when  it  comes  to  work,  and  are 
quite  contented  to  Avrap  the  one  talent  up  in  a 
napkin  then ;  but  when  it  comes  to  self-assertion,  or 
Avhat  they  expect  to  receive  of  recognition  from  others, 
they  need  to  be  reminded  quite  as  much  as  their 
betters  in  endowment  that  "  by  the  grace  of  God  I 
nm  what  I  am." 

III. — And  so,  lastly,  one  word  about  the  responsi- 
bility for  our  co-operation  with  the  grace,  in  order  to 
the  accomplishment  of  its  results. 

"  The  grace  which  was  bestowed  upon  me  was  not 
in  vain,"  says  Paul.  "  Not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God 
which  was  with  me,  and  so  I  laboured  more  abund- 
antly than  they  all."  That  is  to  say,  God  in  His 
giving  love,  Christ  with  His  ever  out-flowing  Spirit, 
play  round  our  hearts,  and  desire  to  enter.  But 
the  grace,  the  love,  the  gifts  of  the  love  may 
all  be  put  away  by  our  unfaithfulness,  by  our 
non-receptivity,  by  our  misuse,  and  by  our  negli- 
gence. Paul  yielded  himself  to  the  grace  that  was 
brought  to  work  upon  him.  Have  you  yielded  your- 
selves ? 

Paul  said,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am." 
He  could  not  have  said  that,  could  he,  if  he  had 
known  that  the  most  part  of  what  he  was  was  dead 
against  God's  will  and  purpose  ?  Has  God  anything 
to  do  with  making  you  Avhat  you  are,  or  has  it  been 
the  devil  that  has  had  the  most  share  in  it  ?     This 

15 


226  A  GOOD  MAN'S  ESTIMATE  OF  HIMSELF. 

man,  because  lie  knew  that  he  had  submitted  him- 
self to  the  often  painful  searching,  crucifying, 
self-restraining  and  stimulating  influences  of  the 
Gospel  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  could  say,  "  God's 
grace  has  made  me  what  I  am,  and  I  helped 
Him  to  make  me."  And  can  you  say  anything  like 
that  ? 

Take  your  life.  In  how  many  of  its  deeds  has  there 
been  present  the  consciousness  of  God  and  His  love  ? 
Take  your  character.  How  much  of  it  has  been  shot 
through  and  through,  so  to  speak,  by  the  fiery  darts 
of  that  cleansino',  warminof,  consuminor  ofrace  of 
God  ?  Are  you  daily  being  baptized  in  that  Spirit, 
searched  by  that  Spirit,  condemned  by  the  grace  ? 
Is  it  the  grace  of  God,  or  nature  and  self  and  the 
world  and  the  flesh  that  have  made  you  what  you 
are? 

Oh,  brethren,  let  us  cultivate  the  sense  of  our  need 
of  this  Divine  help,  for  it  does  not  come  where  men 
do  not  know  how  weak  they  are,  and  hoAV  much  they 
want  it.  The  mountain  tops  are  high.  Yes  !  and 
they  are  dry ;  there  is  no  water  there.  The  rivers 
run  in  the  green  valleys  deep  down.  "  God  resisteth 
the  proud,  and  giveth  grace  to  the  humble."  Let  us 
see  that  we  open  our  hearts  to  the  reception  of  these 
quickening  and  cleansing  influences,  for  it  is  possible 
for  us  to  cover  ourselves  over  with  such  an  impene- 
trable covering  that  that  grace  cannot  pass  through 
it.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  keep  ourselves  in  close 
contact  with  the  foundation  of  all  this  grace,  even 
Jesus  Christ  Himself,  by  desire,  by  faith,  by  love, 
by   communion,   by    meditation,    approximation,   by 


A  GOOD  MAN'S  ESTIMATE  OF  HIMSELF.  227 

sympathy,  by  service.  And  let  us  see  that  we  use 
the  grace  that  we  possess.  "For  to  hira  that  hath 
shall  be  given,  and  from  him  that  hath  not" — 
not  possessing  in  any  real  sense  because  not 
utilising  for  its  appointed  purpose — "  shall  be  taken 
away  even  that  he  hath."  AVherefore,  brethren,  I 
"  beseech  you  that  ye  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in 
vain." 


^ 


XXIII. 

''  Ibat  Mbicb  wae  Xoet" 

A  HUNDRED  sheep    ....    ten  pieces  of  silver    ....    two 
sons."— Luke  xv.  4,  8,  11. 

^=^=^HE  immediate  occasion  of  these  three 
inimitable  parables,  which  have  found 


their  way  to  the  heart  of  the  world, 
needs  to  be  remembered  in  order  to 
grasp  their  import  and  importance. 
They  are  intended  to  vindicate  Christ's  conduct  in 
iissociating  with  outcasts  and  disreputable  persons 
whom  His  Pharisaical  critics  thouo'ht  a  orreat  deal  too 
foul  to  be  touched  by  clean  hands.  They  were  not 
meant  to  set  forth  with  anything  like  completeness 
-either  what  wanderers  had  to  do  to  go  back  to  God, 
or  what  God  had  done  to  bring  wanderers  back  to 
Himself.  If  this  had  been  remembered,  many  mis- 
conceptions, widespread  and  mischievous,  especially 
affecting  the  meaning  of  the  last  of  the  three  parables 
— that  of  the  Prodigal  Son — would  have  been  avoided. 
The  purpose  of  the  parables  accounts  for  Christ's  accept- 
inof  the  division  which  His  antao'onists  made  of  men, 
into  "  righteous,"  like  themselves,  and  "  unclean,"  like 
the  publicans  and  sinners.  There  was  a  far  deeper  truth 
to  be  spoken  about  the  condition  of  humanity  than 


"  THAT  WHICH  WAH  LOST."  22  > 

that.  But  for  the  purposes  of  His  argument  Christ 
passes  it  b}^  The  remembrance  of  the  intention  of  the 
parables  explains  their  incompleteness  as  a  statement 
of  what  people  call  "  the  way  of  salvation."  They 
were  not  meant  to  teach  us  that,  but  they  were 
meant  to  show  us  that  a  human  instinct  which  prizes 
lost  things  because  they  are  lost  has  something 
corresponding  to  it  in  the  Divine  nature,  and  so  to 
vindicate  the  conduct  of  Christ. 

I  venture  to  isolate  these  three  statements  of  the 
subjects  of  the  parables,  because  I  think  that  looking 
at  the  threefold  aspect  in  which  the  one  general 
thought  is  presented  may  help  us  to  some  useful 
considerations. 

I. — I  ask  you,  then,  to  look  with  me,  first,  at  the 
varying  causes  of  loss. 

The  sheep  was  lost,  the  drachma  was  lost,  the  son 
was  lost.  But  in  each  case  the  reason  for  the  loss  was 
different.  Whilst  I  should  avoid  all  fanciful  insertinof 
into  our  Lord's  words  of  more  than  they  can  fairly 
bear,  I  should  also  avoid  superficial  evacuating  them 
of  any  of  their  depth  of  significance.  So  I  think  it  is 
not  unintentional  nor  unimportant  that  in  these  three 
metaphors  there  are  set  forth  three  obviously  distinct 
operative  causes  for  man's  departure  from  God. 

The  sheep  did  not  intend  to  go  anywhere,  either  to 
keep  with  or  to  leave  the  shepherd.  It  simply  knew 
that  grass  was  sweet,  and  that  there,  ahead  of  it,  was 
another  tuft,  and  it  Avent  after  that.  So  it  nibbled 
itself  away  out  of  the  path,  out  of  the  shepherd's  care^ 
out  of  the  flock's  companionship.  It  was  heedless ; 
and  therefore  it  was  lost. 


230  "  THAT  WHICH  WAS  LOST." 

Now  that  is  a  fair  statement  of  facts  in  regard  to 
thousands  of  men,  of  whom  I  have  no  doubt  there  are 
some  hstening  to  me  now.  They  do  not  intend 
any  mischief,  they  have  no  purpose  of  rebeUion  or 
transgression,  but  they  Uve  what  we  call  animal  lives. 
The  sheep  knows  only  where  the  herbage  is  abundant 
and  fresh  :  and  it  goes  there.  An  animal  has  no  fore- 
sight, and  is  the  happier  because  it  cannot  look  before 
and  after.  It  has  only  a  rudimentary  conscience,  if  it 
has  that.  Its  inclinations  are  restrained  by  no  sense 
of  obligation.  Many  men  live  just  so,  without 
restraint  upon  appetite,  without  checking  of  inclina- 
tion, without  foresight  except  of  the  material  good 
which  a  certain  course  of  conduct  may  get.  So,  all 
unwitting,  meaning  no  mischief,  they  wander  further 
and  further  from  the  right  road,  and  find  themselves 
at  last  in  a  waterless  desert. 

Dear  friends,  am  I  speaking  to  any  now  who 
have  too  much  yielded  to  inclinations,  who  have  been 
unwilling  to  look  forward  to  the  end,  and  ask  them- 
selves what  all  will  come  to  at  the  last,  and  who 
scarcely  know  what  it  is  to  take  heed  unto  their  waj^s, 
except  in  so  far  as  worldly  prudence  may  dictate 
certain  courses  of  conduct  for  the  purpose  of  securing 
certain  worldly  and  perishable  ends  ?  I  would  plead, 
especially  with  the  younger  portion  of  my  congre- 
gation, to  take  the  touching  picture  of  this  first 
parable  as  a  solemn  prophecy  of  what  certainly  befalls 
every  man  who  sets  out  upon  his  path  without  careful 
consideration  of  whither  it  leads  to  at  the  last ;  and 
who  lives  for  the  present,  in  any  of  its  forms,  and  who 
lets  himself  be  led  by  inclinations  or  appetites.     The 


"  TEAT  WHICH  WAS  LOSTr  231 

animal  does  so,  and,  as  a  rule,  its  instincts  are  its 
sutHcient  guide.  But  you  and  I  are  blessed  or  cursed, 
as  the  case  may  be,  with  higher  powers,  which,  if  we 
do  not  use,  we  shall  certainly  land  in  the  desert.  If 
a  man  who  is  meant  to  guide  himself  by  intelligence, 
reason,  will,  foresight,  conscience,  chooses  to  go  down 
to  the  level  of  the  beast,  the  faculties  that  serve  the 
beast  will  not  serve  the  man.  And  even  the  sheep  is 
lost  from  the  flock  if  it  yields  only  to  these. 

But  how  it  speaks  of  the  Lord's  tender  sympathy 
for  the  wanderers  that  He  should  put  in  the  forefront 
of  the  parables  this  explanation  of  the  condition  of 
men,  and  should  not  at  first  charge  it  upon  them  as 
sin,  but  only  as  heedlessness  and  folly!  There  is 
much  that  in  itself  is  wrong  and  undesirable,  the 
criminality  of  which  is  diminished  by  the  fact  that  it 
was  heedlessly  done,  though  the  heedlessness  itself  is 
a  crime. 

Now  turn  to  the  second  parable.  The  coin  was 
heavy,  so  it  fell ;  it  was  round,  so  it  rolled ;  it  was 
dead,  so  it  lay.  And  there  are  people  who  are  things 
rather  than  persons,  so  entirely  have  they  given  up 
their  wills,  and  so  absolutely  do  they  let  themselves 
be  determined  by  circumstances.  It  was  not  the 
drachma  that  lost  itself,  but  it  was  the  law  of  gravita- 
tion that  lost  it,  and  it  had  no  power  of  resistance. 
This  also  is  an  explanation — partial,  as  I  shall  have 
to  show  you  in  a  moment,  but  still  real — of  a  great 
deal  of  human  wandering.  There  are  uiasses  of  men 
who  have  no  more  power  to  resist  the  pressure  of 
circumstances  and  temptations  than  the  piece  of  silver 
had  when  it  dropped  from  the  woman's  open  palm 


232  "  THAT  WHICH  WAS  LOST:' 

and  trundled  caway  into  some  dark  corner.  That 
lightens  the  darkness  of  much  of  the  world's  sin. 

But  for  you  to  abnegate  the  right  and  power  of 
resisting  circumstances  is  to  abdicate  the  sovereignty 
with  which  God  has  crowned  you.  All  men  are 
shaped  by  externals,  but  the  shape  which  the  exter- 
nals impose  upon  us  is  settled  by  ourselves.  Here 
are  two  men,  for  instance,  exposed  to  precisely 
the  same  conditions:  but  one  of  them  yields,  and 
is  ruined ;  the  other  resists,  and  is  raised  and 
strenofthened.  As  Jesus  Christ,  so  all  thinofs  have  a 
double  operation.  They  are  "  either  a  savour  of  life 
unto  life  or  a  savour  of  death  unto  death."  There  is 
the  stone.  You  may  build  upon  it,  or  you  may 
stumble  over  it :  3'ou  take  your  choice.  Here  is  the 
adverse  circumstance.  You  may  rule  it,  or  you  may 
let  it  rule  you.  Circumstances  and  outward  tempta- 
tions are  the  fool's  masters,  and  the  wise  man's 
servants.  It  all  depends  on  the  set  of  the  sail  and 
the  firmness  of  the  hand  that  grasps  the  tiller,  which 
way  the  wind  shall  carry  the  ship.  The  same  breeze 
speeds  vessels  on  directly  opposite  courses,  and  so  the 
same  circumstances  may  drive  men  in  two  contrary 
directions,  sending  the  one  further  and  further  away 
from,  and  drawing  the  other  nearer  and  nearer  to,  the 
haven  of  their  hearts. 

Dear  friends,  as  we  have  to  guard  against  the 
animal  life  of  yielding  to  inclinations  and  inward 
impulse,  of  forgetting  the  future,  and  of  taking  no 
heed  to  our  paths,  so,  unless  we  wish  to  ruin  our- 
selves altog^ether,  we  have  to  fio^ht  ao-ainst  the 
mechanical  life  Avhich,  with  a  minimum  of  volition. 


"  THAT  WHICH  WAS  LOSTr  233 

lets  the  world  do  with  us  Avhat  it  will.  And  sure  I 
am  that  there  are  men  and  women  in  this  audience 
at  this  time  who  have  let  their  lives  be  determined 
by  forces  that  have  swept  them  away  from  God. 

In  the  third  parable  the  foolish  boy  had  no  love  to 
his  father  to  keep  him  from  emigrating.  He  wanted 
to  be  his  own  master,  and  to  get  away  into  a  place 
where  he  thought  he  could  sow  his  wild  oats  and  no 
news  of  it  ever  reach  the  father's  house.  He  wanted 
to  have  the  lingering  of  the  money,  and  to  enjoy 
the  sense  of  possession.  And  so  he  went  off  on  his 
unblessed  road  to  the  harlots  and  the  swine's 
troug^h. 

And  that  is  no  parable;  that  is  a  picture.  The 
other  two  were  parabolical  representations  ;  this  is  the 
thing:  itself.  For  carelessness  of  the  bonds  that  knit 
a  heart  to  God  ;  hardness  of  an  unresponsive  heart 
unmelted  by  benefits  ;  indifference  to  the  blessedness 
of  living  by  a  Father's  side  and  beneath  His  eye ;  the 
uprising  of  a  desire  of  independence  and  the  impatience 
of  control ;  the  exercise  of  selfwill — these  are  causes 
of  loss  that  underlie  the  others  of  which  I  have  been 
speaking,  and  which  make  for  every  one  of  us  the 
essential  sinfulness  of  our  sin.  It  is  rebellion,  and  it 
is  rebellion  against  a  Father's  love. 

Now,  notice,  that  whilst  the  other  two  that  we  have 
been  speaking  about  do  partially  explain  the  terrible 
fact  that  we  go  away  from  God,  their  explanation  is 
only  partial,  and  this  grimmer  truth  underlies  them. 
There  are  modern  theories,  as  there  were  ancient  ones, 
that  said  :  "  Oh  I  sin  is  a  theolocf-ical  buc^bear.  'There 
is  not  any  such  thing.   It  is  all  indifference,  ignorance, 


234  '•  TEAT  WHICH  WAS  LOST:' 


error."  And  then  there  are  other  theorists  that  say : 
"  Sin !  There  is  no  sin  in  following  natural  laws 
and  impulses.  Circumstances  shape  men ;  heredity 
shapes  them.  The  notion  that  their  actions  are 
criminal  is  a  mere  figment  of  an  exploded  supersti- 
tion." 

Yes  !  and  down  below  the  ignorance,  and  inadvert- 
ence, and  error,  and  heredity,  and  domination  of 
externals,  there  lies  the  individual  choice  in  each  case. 
The  man  knows — however  he  sophisticates  himself,  or 
wishes  other  people  to  provide  him  with  sophistries — 
that  he  need  not  have  done  that  thino:  unless  he  had 
chosen  to  do  it.  You  cannot  get  beyond  or  argue 
away  that  consciousness.  And  so  I  say  that  all  these 
immoral  teachings,  which  are  very  common  to-day, 
omit  from  the  thing  that  they  profess  to  anal^^se  the 
very  characteristic  element  of  it,  which  is,  as  our  Lord 
taught  us,  not  the  following  inclination  like  a  silly 
sheep ;  not  the  rolling  away,  in  obedience  to  natural 
law,  like  the  drachma ;  but  the  rising  up  of  a  rebellious 
will  that  desires  a  separation,  and  kicks  against  con- 
trol, as  in  the  case  of  the  son. 

So,  dear  friends,  whilst  I  thankfully  admit  that 
much  of  the  darkness  of  human  conduct  may  be 
lightened  by  the  representations  of  our  two  first 
parables,  I  cannot  but  feel  that  we  have  to  leave  to 
God  the  determination  in  each  case  of  how  far  these 
have  diminished  individual  criminality :  and  that  we 
have  to  remember  for  ourselves  that  our  departure 
from  God  is  not  explicable  unless  we  recognize  the 
fact  that  we  have  chosen  rather  to  be  away  from 
Him  than  to  be  with  Him ;  and  that  we  like  better 


"  THAT  WHICH  WAS  LOST."  235 


to  have  our  goods  at  our  own  disposal,  and  to  live  as 
it  pleases  ourselves. 

11. — So  note,  secondly,  the  varying  proportions  of 
loss  and  possession. 

A  hundred  sheep;  ten  drachmas;  two  sons.  The 
loss  in  one  case  is  1  per  cent.,  a  trifle ;  in  the  other 
case  10  per  cent.,  more  serious ;  in  the  last  case  50 
per  cent.,  heartbreaking.  Now,  I  do  not  suppose  that 
our  Lord  intended  any  special  significance  to  be 
attached  to  these  varying  numbers.  Rather  they 
were  simply  suggested  by  the  cast  of  the  parable  in 
which  they  respectively  occurred.  A  hundred  sheep 
is  a  fair  average  flock;  ten  pieces  of  silver  are  the 
modest  hoard  of  a  poor  woman ;  two  sons  are  a  family 
large  enough  to  represent  the  contrast  which  is  neces- 
sary to  the  parable.  But  still  w^e  may  permissibly 
look  at  this  varying  proportion  in  order  to  see  whether 
it;  too,  cannot  teach  us  something. 

It  throws  light  upon  the  owner's  care  and  pains 
in  seeking.  In  one  aspect,  these  are  set  forth  most 
strikingly  by  the  parable  in  which  the  thing  lost 
bears  the  smallest  proportion  to  the  thing  still  re- 
tained. The  shepherd  might  well  have  said :  "  One  in 
a  hundred  does  not  matter  much.  I  have  got  the 
ninety  and  nine."  But  he  w^ent  to  look  for  it.  But, 
in  another  aspect,  the  w^oman,  of  course,  has  a  more 
serious  loss  to  face,  and  possibly  seeks  wdth  more 
anxiety.  And  when  you  come  up  to  the  last  case, 
where  half  the  household  is  blotted  out,  as  it  were, 
then  we  can  see  the  depth  of  anxiety  and  pains  and 
care  which  must  necessarily  follow. 

But  beyond   the  consideration  that  the  ascending 


236  "  THAT  WHICH  WAS  LOSTr 

proportion  suggests  increasing  pains  and  anxiety, 
there  is  another  lesson,  which  seems  to  me  even  more 
precious,  and  it  is  this,  that  it  matters  very  little  to 
the  loser  how  much  he  keeps,  or  what  the  worth 
of  the  lost  thing  is.  There  is  something  in  human 
nature  which  makes  anything  that  is  lost  precious  by 
reason  of  its  loss.  Nobody  can  tell  how  large  a  space 
a  tree  fills  until  it  is  felled.  If  you  lose  one  tiny 
stone  out  of  a  ring,  or  a  bracelet,  it  makes  a  gap,  and 
causes  annoyance  altogether  disproportionate  to  the 
lustre  that  it  had  when  it  was  there.  A  man  loses  a 
small  portion  of  his  fortune  in  some  unlucky  specula- 
tion, and  the  loss  annoys  him  a  great  deal  more  than 
the  possession  solaced  him,  and  he  thinks  more  about 
the  hundreds  that  have  vanished  than  about  the 
thousands  that  remain.  Men  are  made  so.  It  is  a 
human  instinct,  that  apart  altogether  from  the  con- 
sideration of  its  intrinsic  worth,  and  the  proportion  it 
bears  to  that  which  is  still  possessed,  the  lost  thing 
draws,  and  the  loser  will  take  any  pains  to  find  it. 

So  Christ  says  if  a  woman  will  light  a  candle  and 
sweep  the  house  and  search  diligently  till  she  finds 
her  lost  sixpence  (for  the  drachma  was  worth  little 
more),  and  will  bring  in  all  her  neighbours  to  rejoice 
with  her,  that  is  like  God ;  and  the  human  instinct 
which  prizes  lost  things,  not  because  of  their  value, 
but  because  they  are  lost,  has  something  correspond- 
ing to  it  in  the  heart  of  the  Majesty  of  the  heavens. 
It  is  Christ's  vindication,  of  course,  as  I  need  not 
remind  you,  of  His  own  conduct.  He  says  in  effect, 
to  these  Pharisees,  "  You  are  finding  fault  with  Me 
for   doing   what   we   all   do.     I   am    only   acting   in 


THAT  WHICH  JVAS  LOSTr  237 


ivccordance  with  a  natural  human  instinct ;  and  when 
I  thus  act  God  Himself  is  acting  in  and  through  Me." 

If  I  had  time  I  think  I  could  show  that  this  prin- 
ciple, brought  out  in  my  texts,  really  sweeps  away  one 
of  the  difficulties  which  modern  science  has  to  suggest 
against  Evangelical  Christianity.  We  hear  it  said, 
''  How  can  you  suppose  that  a  speck  of  a  world  hke 
this,  amidst  all  these  flaming  orbs  that  stud  the  in- 
finite depths  of  the  heavens,  is  of  so  much  importance 
in  God's  sight  that  His  Son  came  down  to  die  for  it?" 
The  magnitude  of  the  world,  as  compared  with  others, 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  question.  God's  action  is 
determined  by  its  moral  condition.  If  it  be  true  that 
here  is  sin,  Avhich  rends  men  away  from  Him,  and 
that  so  they  are  lost,  then  it  is  supremely  natural  that 
all  the  miracles  of  the  Christian  revelation  should 
follow.  The  rationale  of  the  Incarnation  lies  in  this, 
''  A  certain  man  had  a  hundred  sheep.  .  .  .  One 
of  them  went  astray  .  .  .  and  He  went  into  the 
wilderness  and  found  it." 

III. Now  I  meant  to  have  said  a  word  about  the 

varying  glimpses  that  we  have  here,  into  God's  claims 
upon  us,  and  His  heart. 

Ownership  is  the  word  that  describes  His  relation 
to  us  in  the  first  two  parables ;  love  is  the  word  that 
describes  it  in  the  third.  But  the  ownership  melts 
into  love,  because  God  does  not  reckon  that  He  pos- 
sesses men  by  natural  right  of  creation  or  the  like, 
unless  they  yield  their  hearts  to  Him,  and  give  them- 
selves, by  their  own  joyful  self-surrender,  into  His 
hands.  But  I  must  not  be  tempted  to  speak  upon 
that  matter ;   only,  before  I  close,  let  me  point  you  to 


238  "  THAT  WHICH  WAS  LOST: 


that  most  blessed  and  heart-melting  thought,  that 
God  accounts  Himself  to  have  lost  something  when  a 
man  goes  away  from  Him. 

That  word  "the  lost"  has  another,  and  in  some 
senses  a  more  tragical,  significance  in  Scripture.  The 
lost  are  lost  to  themselves  and  to  blessedness.  The 
word  implies  destruction;  but  it  also  carries  with 
it  this,  that  God  prizes  us,  is  glad  to  have  us,  and,  I 
was  going  to  say,  feels  an  incompleteness  in  His  pos- 
sessions when  men  depart  from  Him. 

Oh,  brethren,  surely  such  a  thought  as  that  should 
melt  us;  and  if,  as  is  certainly  the  case,  we  have 
strayed  away  from  Him  into  green  pastures,  which 
have  ended  in  a  wilderness,  without  a  blade  of  grass  ; 
or  if  we  have  rolled  away  from  Him  in  passive  sub- 
mission to  circumstances ;  or  if  we  have  risen  up  in 
rebellion  against  Him,  and  claimed  our  separate  right 
of  possession  and  use  of  the  goods  that  fall  to  us,  if 
we  would  only  think  that  He  considers  that  He  has 
lost  us,  and  prizes  us  because  we  are  lost  to  Him,  and 
wants  to  get  us  back  again,  surely,  surely  it  would 
draw  us  to  Himself.  Think  of  the  greatness  of  the 
love  into  which  the  ownership  is  merged,  as  measured 
by  the  infinite  price  which  He  has  paid  to  bring  us 
back.  And  let  us  all  say,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my 
Father." 


XXIV. 

Zbc  fruit  of  tbe  Xigbt 

"  The  fruit  of  the  light  is  in  all  goodness  and  rig-hteousness  and 
truth."— Eph.  v.  9  (Revised  Version). 

HIS  is  one  of  the  cases  in  which  the 
Revised  Version  has  clone  service  by 
giving  currency  to  an  immistakabl}- 
accurate  and  improved  reading.  That 
which  stands  in  our  Authorized  Ver- 
sin,  "  the  fruit  of  the  spirit,"  seems  to  have  been  a 
correction  made  by  someone  who  took  oft'ence  at  the 
violent  metaphor,  as  he  conceived  it,  that  "  light " 
shoukl  bear  "  fruit,"  and  desired  to  tinker  the  text  so 
as  to  bring  it  into  verbal  correspondence  with  another 
passage  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  where  "  the 
fruits  of  the  spirit "  are  enumerated.  But  the  reading, 
'■'  the  fruit  of  the  light,''  has  not  only  the  preponder- 
ance of  manuscript  authority  in  its  favour,  but  is 
preferable  because  it  preserves  a  striking  image,  and 
is  in  harmony  with  the  whole  context. 

The  Apostle  has  just  been  exhorting  his  Ephesian 
friends  to  walk  as  "  children  of  the  light,"  and  before 
he  goes  on  to  expand  and  explain  that  injunction,  he 
interjects  this  parenthetical  remark,  as  if  he  would 


240  THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  LIGHT. 

say,  To  be  true  to  the  light  that  is  in  you  is  the  sum 
of  dut}^,  and  the  condition  of  perfectness,  ''for  the 
fruit  of  the  Kght  is  in  all  goodness  and  righteousness 
and  truth."  That  connection  is  entirely  destroyed  by 
the  substitution  of  "  spirit."  The  whole  context,  both 
before  and  after  my  text,  is  full  of  references  to  the 
light  as  working  in  the  life  ;  and  a  couple  of  verses 
after  it  we  read  about  "  the  unfruitful  works  of  dark- 
ness," an  expression  which  evidently  looks  back  to 
my  text. 

So  please  to  understand  that  our  text  in  this  ser- 
mon is — "  The  fruit  of  the  light  consists  in  all  goodness 
and  righteousness  and  truth." 

I. — Now,  first  of  all,  I  have  just  a  word  to  say  about 
this  light  which  is  fruitful. 

Note— for  it  is,  I  think,  not  without  significance — a 
minute  variation  in  the  Apostle's  language  in  this 
verse  and  the  context.  He  has  been  speaking  of 
"  light,"  now  he  speaks  of  "the  light";  and  that,  I 
think,  is  not  accidental.  The  expression  "walk  as 
children  of  light "  is  more  general  and  vague.  The 
expression  "  the  fruit  of  the  hght "  points  to  some 
specific  source  from  w^hich  all  light  flows.  And  ob- 
serve, also,  that  we  have  in  the  previous  context,  "  Ye 
were  sometime  darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the 
Lord,"  which  evidently  implies  that  the  light  of  which 
my  text  speaks  is  not  natural  to  men,  but  is  the  result 
of  the  entrance  into  their  darkness  of  a  new  element. 

Now  I  do  not  suppose  that  w^e  should  be  entitled 
to  say  that  Paul  here  is  formally  anticipating  the  deep 
teaching  of  the  Apostle  John  that  Jesus  Christ  is  "  the 
Light  of  men,"  and  especially  of  Christian  men.     But 


THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  LIGHT.  211 


he  is  distinctly  asserting,  I  think,  that  the  hght  which 
blesses  and  hallows  humanity  is  no  diffused  glow,  but 
is  all  gathered  and  concentrated  into  one  blazing 
centre,  from  which  it  floods  the  hearts  of  men.  Or 
to  put  away  the  metaphor,  he  is  here  asserting  that 
the  only  way  by  which  any  man  can  cease  to  be,  in 
the  doleful  depths  of  his  nature,  darkness  in  its 
saddest  sense  is  by  opening  his  heart  through  faith, 
that  into  it  there  may  rush,  as  the  light  ever  does 
Avhere  an  opening— be  it  only  a  single  tiny  cranny — is 
made,  the  light  which  is  Christ,  and  without  Whom 
is  darkness. 

I  know,  of  course,  that,  apart  altogether  from  the 
exercise  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  there  do  shine  in 
men's  hearts  rays  of  the  light  of  knowledge  and  of 
purity;  but  if  we  believe  the  teaching  of  Scripture, 
these,  too,  are  from  Christ,  in  His  universally-diffused 
w^ork,  by  which,  apart  altogether  from  individual 
faith,  or  from  a  knowledge  of  revelation.  He  is 
"  the  light  that  lighteth  every  man  coming  into  the 
world."  And  I  hold  that,  wheresoever  there  is 
conscience,  wheresoever  there  is  judgment  and  reason, 
wheresoever  there  are  sensitive  desires  after  excellence 
and  nobleness,  there  is  a  flickering  of  a  light  which  I 
believe  to  be  from  Christ  Himself.  But  that  light, 
widely  diftused  as  humanit}^  fights  with,  and  is 
immersed  in,  darkness.  In  the  physical  world,  light 
and  darkness  are  mutually  exclusive :  where  the  one  is 
the  other  comes  not ;  but  in  the  spiritual  world  the 
paradox  is  true  that  the  two  co- exist.  Apart  from 
revelation  and  the  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ's  person 
and  work  by  our  humble  faith,  the  light  struggles 


212  THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  LIGHT. 


with  the  darkness,  and  the  darkness  obstinately 
refuses  to  admit  its  entrance,  and  "  comprehendeth  it 
not."  And  so,  ineffectual  but  to  make  restless  and 
to  urge  to  vain  efforts  and  to  lay  u^  material  for 
righteous  judgment,  is  the  light  that  shines  in  men 
whose  hearts  are  shut  against  Christ.  The  fruitful 
light  is  Christ  within  us.  And,  unless  we  know  and 
possess  it  by  the  opening  of  heart  and  mind  and  will, 
the  solemn  words  before  my  text  are  true  of  us  :  "  Ye 
were  sometime  darkness."  Oh,  brother  !  do  you  see 
to  it  that  the  subsequent  words  are  true  of  you: 
"  Now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord."  Only  if  you  are  in 
Christ  are  you  truly  light. 

IT. — Now,  secondly,  notice  the  fruitfulness  of  this 
indwell] nof  lio-ht. 

Of  course  the  metaphor  that  light,  like  a  tree,  grows 
and  blossoms  and  puts  forth  fruit,  is  a  very  strong 
one.  And  its  very  violence  and  incongruity  help  its 
force.  Fruit  is  generally  used  in  Scripture  in  a  good 
sense.  It  conveys  the  notion  of  something  which  is 
the  natural  outcome  of  a  vital  power.  And  so,  when 
we  talk  about  the  light  being  fruitful,  we  are  setting, 
in  a  striking  image,  the  great  Christian  thought  that, 
if  you  want  to  get  right  conduct,  you  must  have  re- 
newed character;  and  that  if  you  have  renewed  character 
you  will  get  right  conduct.  This  is  the  principle  of 
my  text.  The  light  has  in  it  a  productive  power; 
and  the  true  way  to  adorn  a  life  with  all  things 
beautiful,  solemn,  lovely,  is  to  open  the  heart  to  the 
entrance  of  Jesus  Christ. 

God's  way  is— first,  new  life,  then  better  conduct. 
Men's  way  is,  ''  cultivate  morality,  seek  after  purity, 


THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  LIGHT.  243 

try  to  be  good."  And  surely  conscience  and  ex- 
perience alike  tell  ns  that  that  is  a  hopeless  effort. 
To  begin  with  what  should  be  second  is  an  anachron- 
ism in  morals,  and  will  be  sure  to  result  in  failure  in 
practice.  He  is  not  a  wise  man  that  tries  to  build  a 
house  from  the  chimneys  downwards.  And  to  talk 
about  making  men's  doings  good  before  you  have 
secured  a  radical  change  in  the  doer,  by  the  infusion 
into  him  of  the  very  life  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  is  to 
begin  at  the  top  story,  instead  of  at  the  foundation. 
Many  of  us  are  trying  to  put  the  cart  before  the  horse 
in  that  fashion.  Many  of  us  have  made  the  attempt 
over  and  over  again,  and  the  attempt  alwa3^s  has 
failed  and  always  will  fail.  You  may  do  much  for  the 
mending  of  your  characters  and  for  the  incorporation 
in  your  lives  of  virtues  and  graces  which  do  not  grow 
there  naturally  and  without  effort.  I  do .  not  want 
to  cut  the  nerves  of  any  man's  strugglings,  I  do 
not  want  to  darken  the  brightness  of  any  man's 
aspirations,  but  I  do  say  that  the  people  who,  apart 
from  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  entrance  into  their  souls 
by  faith  of  His  quickening  power,  are  seeking,  some 
of  them  nobly,  some  of  them  sadly,  and  all  of  them 
vainly,  to  cure  their  faults  of  character,  will  never 
attain  anything  but  a  superficial  and  fragmentary 
goodness,  because  they  have  begun  at  the  wrong  end. 
But  "make  the  tree  good,"  and  its  fruit  will  be 
good.  Get  Christ  into  your  heart,  and  all  fair  things 
will  grow  as  the  natural  outcome  of  His  indwelling. 
The  fruitfulness  of  the  light  is  not  put  upon  its  right 
basis  until  we  come  to  understand  that  the  light  is 
Christ  Himself,  who,  dwelling  in  our  hearts  by  faith, 

16* 


244  TEE  FRUIT  OF  TEE  LIGET. 

is  made  in  us  as  well  as  "unto  us  wisdom,  and 
righteousness,  and  salvation,  and  redemption."  The 
beam  that  is  reflected  from  the  mirror  is  the  very- 
beam  that  falls  on  the  mirror.  And  the  fair  things  in. 
life  and  conduct  which  Christian  people  bring  forth 
are  in  very  deed  the  outcome  of  the  vital  power  of 
Jesus  Christ  which  has  entered  into  them.  '•  I  live,, 
yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me,"  is  the  Apostle's 
declaration  in  the  midst  of  his  struggles  ;  and  the 
perfected  saints  before  the  throne  cast  their  crowns  at 
His  feet,  and  say,  "  Not  unto  us !  not  unto  us,  but 
unto  Thy  name  be  the  glory."  The  talent  is  the 
Lord's,  the  spending  of  it  alone  is  the  servant's.  And 
so  the  order  of  the  Divine  appointment  is,  first,  the 
entrance  of  the  light,  and  then  the  conduct  that  flows 
from  it. 

Note,  too,  how  this  same  principle  of  the  fruitful- 
ness  of  the  light  gives  instruction  as  to  the  true  place 
of  effort  in  the  Christian  life.  The  main  effort  ought 
to  be  to  o'et  more  of  the  lio^ht  into  ourselves.  "  Abide 
in  Me,  and  I  in  you."  And  so,  and  only  so,  will  fruit 
come. 

And  such  an  effort  has  to  take  in  hand  all  the  cIy- 
cumference  of  our  beino-  and  to  fix  thou^'hts  that 
wander,  and  to  still  wishes  that  clamour,  and  to  empty 
hearts  that  are  full  of  earthly  loves,  and  to  clear  a 
space  in  minds  that  are  crammed  with  thoughts  about 
the  transient  and  the  near,  in  order  that  the  mind 
may  keep  in  steadfast  contemplation  of  Jesus,  and  the 
heart  may  be  bound  to  Him  by  cords  of  love  that  are 
not  capable  of  being  snapped,  and  scarcely  of  being- 
stretched,  and  the  will  may  in  patience  stand  saying. 


THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  LIGHT.  245 


■"  Speak,  Lord  !  for  Thy  servant  heareth  " ;  and  the 
whole  tremulous  nature  may  be  rooted  and  built  up 
in  and  on  Him.  Ah,  brother !  if  we  understand  all 
that  goes  to  the  fulfilment  of  that  one  sweet  and 
merciful  injunction,  "  Abide  in  Me,"  we  shall  recognise 
that  there  is  the  field  on  which  Christian  effort  is 
mainl}'  to  be  occupied. 

But  that  is  not  all.  For  there  must  be  likewise  the 
effort  to  appropriate,  and  still  more  to  manifest  in 
conduct,  the  fruit-bringing  properties  of  that  indwell- 
ing light.  '•'  Giving  all  diligence  add  to  your  faith." 
^'  Having  these  promises,  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from 
all  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in 
the  fear  of  the  Lord."  We  are  often  told  that  just  as 
we  trust  Christ  for  our  forgiveness  and  acceptance,  so 
we  are  to  trust  Him  for  our  sanctifying  and  perfecting. 
It  is  true,  and  yet  it  is  not  true.  We  are  to  trust 
Him  for  our  sanctifying  and  our  perfecting.  But  the 
faith  which  trusts  Him  for  these  is  not  a  substitute 
for  effort,  but  it  is  the  foundation  of  effort.  And  the 
more  we  rely  on  His  power  to  cleanse  us  from  all  evil, 
the  more  are  we  bound  to  make  the  effort  in  His 
power  and  in  dependence  on  Him,  to  cleanse  ourselves 
from  all  evil,  and  to  secure  as  our  own  the  natural 
outcomes  of  His  dwelling  within  us,  which  are  "  the 
fruits  of  the  light." 

IIL — And  so,  lastly,  notice  the  specific  fruits  which 
.the  Apostle  here  dwells  upon. 

They  consist,  says  he,  in  all  goodness  and  righteous- 
ness and  truth.  Now  "  goodness  "  here  seems  to  me 
to  be  used  in  its  narrower  sense,  just  as  the  same 
Apostle  uses  it  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  in  con- 


246  THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  LIGHT. 

trast  with  "  righteousness/'  where  he  says,  "  for  a  good 
man  some  would  even  dare  to  die."  There  he  means 
by  "  good/'  as  he  does  here  by  "  goodness/'  not  the 
general  expression  for  all  forms  of  virtue  and  gracious 
conduct,  but  the  specific  excellence  of  kindliness^ 
amiability,  or  the  like.  "Righteousness/'  again,  is 
that  which  rigidly  adheres  to  the  strict  law  of  duty,, 
and  carefully  desires  to  give  to  every  man  what 
belongs  to  him,  and  to  every  relation  of  life  what 
it  requires.  And  "truth"  is  rather  the  truth  of 
sincerity,  as  opposed  to  hypocrisy  and  lies  and 
shams,  than  the  intellectual  truth  as  opposed  to 
error. 

Now,  all  these  three  types  of  excellence — kindli- 
ness, righteousness,  truthfulness — are  apt  to  be  sepa- 
rated. For  the  first  of  them — amiability,  kindliness, 
gentleness — is  apt  to  become  too  soft,  to  lose  its  grip 
of  righteousness.  And  it  needs  the  tonic  of  the  addi- 
tion of  those  other  graces,  just  as  you  need  lime  in 
water  if  it  is  to  make  bone.  Rio^hteousness,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  apt  to  become  stern,  and  needs  the 
softening  of  goodness  to  make  it  human  and  attrac- 
tive. The  rock  is  grim  when  it  is  bare ;  it  wants 
verdure  to  drape  it  if  it  is  to  be  lovely.  Truth  needs 
kindliness  and  righteousness,  and  they  need  truth. 
For  there  are  men  who  pride  themselves  on  "  speak- 
ing out,"  and  take  rudeness  and  want  of  regard  for 
other  people's  sensitive  feelings  to  be  sincerity.  And, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  amiability  may 
be  sweeter  than  truth  is,  and  that  righteousness  may 
be  hypocritical  and  insincere.  So  Paul  says,  "Let 
this  white  light   be  resolved  in  the   prism  of  your 


THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  LIGHT.  247 

characters    into    the    threefold    rays    of    kindliness, 
righteousness,  truthfulness." 

And  then,  again,  he  desires  that  each  of  us  should 
try  to  make  our  own  a  fully  developed,  all-round 
perfection — all  goodness  and  righteousness  and  truth  ; 
of  every  sort,  that  is,  and  in  every  degree.  We  are 
all  apt  to  cultivate  graces  of  character  which 
correspond  to  our  natural  disposition  and  make.  We 
are  all  apt  to  become  torsos,  fragmentary,  one-sided, 
like  the  trees  that  grow  against  a  brick  wall,  or  those 
which  stand  exposed  to  the  prevailing  blasts  from 
one  quarter  of  the  sky.  But  we  should  seek  to 
appropriate  types  of  excellence  to  which  we  are  least 
inclined,  as  well  as  those  which  are  most  in  harmony 
with  our  natural  dispositions.  If  you  incline  to  kind- 
liness, try  to  brace  yourselves  with  righteousness ;  if 
you  incline  to  righteousness,  to  take  the  stern,  strict 
view  of  duty,  and  to  give  to  every  man  what  he 
deserves,  remember  that  you  do  not  give  men  their 
dues  unless  you  give  them  a  great  deal  more  than 
their  deserts,  and  that  righteousness  does  not  perfectly 
allot  to  our  fellows  what  they  ought  to  receive  from 
us,  unless  we  give  them  pity  and  indulgence  and  for- 
bearance and  forgiveness  when  it  is  needed.  The  one 
light  breaks  into  all  colours — green  in  the  grass, 
purple  and  red  in  the  flowers,  flame-coloured  in  the 
morning  sky,  blue  in  the  deep  sea.  The  light  that  is 
in  us  ought,  in  like  manner,  to  be  analysed  into,  and 
manifested  in,  "  whatsoever  things  are  lovely  and  of 
good  report." 

And   so,   dear  friends,   here  is  a  test   for   us   all. 
Devout  emotion,  orthodox  creed,  practical  diligence 


2^8  THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  LIGHT. 


m  certain  forms  of  benevolence  and  philanthropic 
work,  are  all  very  well;  but  Jesus  Christ  came  to 
make  us  like  Himself,  and  to  turn  our  darkness  into 
light  that  betrays  its  source  by  its  resemblance, 
though  it  be  a  weakened  one,  to  the  sun  from  which 
it  came.  We  have  no  right  to  call  ourselves  Christ's 
followers  unless  we  are,  in  some  measure,  Christ's 
pictures. 

Here  is  a  message  of  cheer  and  hope  for  us  all.   We 
have  all  tried,  and  tried,  and   tried,  over  and  over 
again,  to  purge  and   mend  these  poor  characters  of 
ours.     How  long  the  toil,  how  miserable  and  poor  the 
results  :     A  million  candles  will  not  light  the  night ; 
but  when  God's  mercy  of  sunrise  comes  above'^the 
hills,  beasts  of  prey  slink  to  their  dens,  and    birds 
begin  to  sing,  and  flowers  open,  and  growth  resumes 
<agam.     We  cannot  mend  ourselves  except  partially 
and  superficially;  but  we  can  open  will,  heart    and 
mind,   by   faith,   for   His    entrance:   and   where    He 
comes,  there  He  slays  the  evil  creatures  that  live  in 
and  love  the  dark,  and  all  gracious  things  will  blossom 
into  beauty.     If  we  are  in  the  Lord  we  shall  be  H^ht  • 
and  if  the  Lord,  who  is  the  Light,  is  in  us,  we,  too' 
shall  bear  fruits  of  "all  righteousness  and  goodness 
and  truth."  ^ 


XXV. 

ipieasiug  Cbriet. 

"  Proving  wliat  is  acceptable  unto  the  Lord." — Eph.  v.  10. 

HESE  words  are  closely  connected  with 
those  which  precede  them  in  the  8th 
yerse — "Walk  as  children  of  light." 
They  further  explain  the  mode  by 
which  that  commandment  is  to  be  ful- 
filled. They  who,  as  children  of  light,  mindful  of  their 
obligations  and  penetrated  by  its  brightness,  seek  to 
conform  their  active  life  to  the  light  to  which  they 
belong,  are  to  do  so  by  making  experiment  of,  or 
investigating  and  determining,  what  is  "  acceptable  to 
the  Lord."  It  is  the  sum  of  all  Christian  duty,  a  brief 
compendium  of  conduct,  an  all-sufficient  directory 
ofhfe. 

There  need  only  be  two  remarks  made  by  way  of 
explanation  of  my  text.  One  is  that  the  expression 
rendered  "  acceptable  "  is  more  accurately  and  forcibly 
given,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  by  the  plainer  word 
"well-pleasing."  And  the  other  is  that  " the  Lord " 
here,  as  always  in  the  New  Testament— unless  the 
context  distinctly  forbids  it— means  Jesus  Christ. 
Here  the  context  distinctly  demands  it.     For  only  a 


250  PLEASING  CHRIST. 

sentence  or  two  before  the  Apostle  has  been  speaking 
about  "those  who  w^ere  sometime  darkness  haying 
been  made  Hght  in  the  Lord  " — which  is  obviously  in 
Jesus  Christ. 

And  here,  therefore,  what  pleases  Christ  is  the 
Christian's  highest  duty,  and  the  one  prescription 
which  is  required  to  be  obeyed  in  order  to  walk  in  the 
light  is,  to  do  that  which  pleases  Him. 

I. — So,  then,  in  these  brief  words,  so  comprehensive, 
and  going  so  deep  into  the  secrets  of  holy  and  noble 
living,  I  want  you  to  notice  that  we  have,  first,  the 
only  attitude  which  corresponds  to  our  relations  to 
Christ. 

How  remarkable  it  is  that  this  Apostle  should  go 
on  the  presumption  that  our  conduct  affects  Him, 
that  it  is  possible  for  us  to  please,  or  to  displease 
Jesus  Christ  now.  AVe  often  wonder  whether  the 
beloved  dead  are  cognizant  of  what  Ave  do ;  and 
whether  any  emotions,  of  something  like  either  our 
earthly  complacency  or  displeasure,  can  pass  across 
the  undisturbed  calm  of  their  hearts,  if  they  are  aware 
of  what  their  loved  ones  here  are  doing.  That  ques- 
tion has  to  be  left  very  much  in  the  dark,  however 
our  hearts  may  sometimes  seek  to  enforce  answers. 
But  this  we  know,  that  that  loving  Lord,  not  merely 
by  the  omniscience  of  His  divinity,  but  by  the  per- 
petual knowledge  and  sympathy  of  His  perfect  man- 
hood, is  not  only  cognizant  of,  but  is  affected  by,  the 
conduct  of  His  professed  followers  here  on  earth- 
And  since  it  is  true  that  He  now  is  not  swept  away 
into  some  oblivious  region  where  the  dead  are,  but  is 
close  beside  us  all,  cognizant  of  every  act,  watching 


PLEASING  CHRIST.  251 


every  thought,  and  capable  of  having  something  Hke 
a  shadow  of  a  pang  passing  across  the  Divine  depth 
of  His  eternal  joy  and  repose,  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  then,  surely,  the  only  thing  that  corresponds 
to  such  a  relationship  as  at  present  subsists  be- 
tween the  Christian  soul  and  the  Lord  is  that  we 
should  take  as  our  supreme  and  continual  aim 
that  "whether  present  or  absent,  we  should  be 
well-pleasing  to  Him."  Nor  does  that  demand  rest 
only  upon  the  realities  of  our  present  relation  to  that 
Lord,  but  it  goes  back  to  the  p^st  facts  on  which  our 
present  relation  rests.  And  the  only  fitting  response 
to  what  He  has  been  and  done  for  us  is  that  we 
should,  each  of  us,  in  the  depths  of  our  hearts,  and  in 
the  Avidest  circumference  of  the  surface  of  our  lives, 
enthrone  Him  as  absolute  Lord,  and  take  His  good 
pleasure  as  our  supreme  law.  Jesus  Christ  is  King 
because  He  is  Redeemer.  The  only  adequate  response 
to  what  He  has  done  for  me  is  that  I  should  abso- 
lutely submit  myself  to  Him,  and  say  to  Him,  "0 
Lord  !  truly  I  am  Thy  servant !  Thou  hast  loosed 
my  bonds."  The  one  fitting  return  to  make  for 
that  Cross  and  Passion  is  to  enthrone  His  will  upon 
my  will,  and  to  set  Him  as  absolute  Monarch  over  the 
Avhole  of  my  nature.  Thoughts,  aftections,  purposes? 
eftbrts,  and  all  should  crown  Him  King,  because  He 
has  died  for  me.  The  conduct  which  corresponds  to 
the  relations  which  we  bear  to  Christ  as  the  present 
Judge  of  our  work,  and  the  Redeemer  of  our  souls  b}'' 
His  mighty  deed  in  the  past  is  this  of  my  text,  to 
make  my  one  law  His  will,  and  to  "please  Him  that 
hath  called  me  to  be  His  soldier." 


252  I'LEASING  CHRIST. 


The  meaning  of  being  a  Christian  is  that,  in  return 
for  the  gift  of  a  whole  Christ,  I  give  my  whole  self  to 
Him.  "  Why  call  ye  me  Lord  1  Lord  !  and  do  not  the 
things  which  I  say  ? "  If  He  is  what  He  assuredly  is 
to  every  one  of  us,  nothing  can  be  plainer  than  that 
we  are  thereby  bound  by  obligations  which  are  not 
iron,  but  are  more  binding  than  if  they  were,  because 
they  were  woven  out  of  the  cords  of  love  and  the 
bands  of  a  man,  bound  to  serve  Him  supremely,  Him 
only.  Him  always.  Him  by  the  suppression  of  self,  and 
the  making  His  pleasure  our  law. 

IL— Now,  secondly,  let  me  ask  you  to  notice  that 
we  have  here  the  all-sufficient  guide  for  practical  life. 

It  sounds  very  mystical,  and  a  trifle  vague,  to  say, 
Do  everything  to  please  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  all-com- 
prehensive; it  is  mystical  in  the  sense  that  it  goes 
down  below  the  mere  surface  of  prescriptions  about 
conduct.  But  it  is  not  vague,  and  it  is  capable  of  im- 
mediate application  to  every  part,  and  to  every  act,  of 
€very  man's  life. 

^  For  what  is  it  that  pleases  Jesus  Christ  ?  His  own 
likeness ;  as,  according  to  the  old  figure— which  is,  I 
suppose,  true  to  spiritual  facts,  whether  to  external 
facts  or  not  —  the  refiner  knows  that  the  metal  is 
ready  to  flow  when  he  can  see  his  own  face  in  it. 
Jesus  Christ  desires  most  that  we  should  all  be  like 
Him.  That  we  are  to  bear  His  image  is  as  compre- 
hensive, and  at  the  same  time  as  specific,  a  way  of 
setting  forth  the  sum  of  Christian  duty,  as  are  the 
words  of  my  text.  The  two  phrases  mean  the  same 
thing. 

And  what  is  the  likeness  to  Jesus  Christ  which  it 


PLEAS IXG  CHRIST.  253 

is  thus  our  supreme  obligation  and  our  truest  wisdom 
and  perfection  to  bear  ?     Well !  we  can  put  it  all  into 
two     words— self-suppression     and     continual     con- 
sciousness of  obedience  to  the  Divine  will.     The  life 
of  Jesus  Christ,  in  its  brief  records  in  Scripture,  is- 
felt  by  every  thoughtful  man  to  contain  within  its 
narrow  compass  adequate  direction   for,  and   to   set 
forth  the  ideal  of,  human  life.     That  is  not  because 
He  went  through  all  varieties  of  earthly  experience, 
for  He  did  not.     The  life  of  a  Jewish  peasant  nineteen 
centuries   ago   was    extremely   unlike   the   life   of   a 
Manchester   merchant,    of  a   college   professor,   of  a 
successful  barrister,  of  a  struggling  mother,  in  this 
present  day.     But  in  the  narrow  compass  of  that  life 
there  are  set  forth  these  two  things,  which  are  the 
basis  of  all  human  perfection — the  absolute  annihila- 
tion of  self-regard,  and  the  perpetual  recognition  of  a 
Divine  will.  These  are  the  things  which  every  Christian 
man  and  woman  is  bound  by  the  power  of  Christ's 
Cross  to  translate  into  the  actions  correspondent  with 
their  particular  circumstances.     And  so  the  student 
at  his  desk  and  the  sailor  on  his  deck,  the  miner  in 
his   pit,    the   merchant    on   Change,    the    worker   in 
various  handicrafts,  may  each  be  sure  that  they  are 
doing  what  is  pleasing  to  Christ  if,  in  their  widely- 
different  ways,  they  seek  to  do  what  they  can  do  in 
all  the  varieties  of  life — crucify  self,  and  commune 
with  God. 

That  is  not  eas3\  Whatever  may  be  the  objections 
to  be  brought  against  this  summary  of  Christian  duty, 
the  objection  that  it  is  vague  is  the  last  that  can  be 
sustained.     Ton  try  it,  and  you  will  find   out  that 


254  FLEASING  CHRIST. 


it  is  anything  but  vague.  It  will  grip  tight  enough, 
depend  upon  it.  It  will  go  deep  enough  down  into 
all  the  complexities  of  our  varying  circumstances.  If 
it  has  a  fault  (which  it  has  not)  it  is  in  the  direction 
of  too  great  stringency  for  unaided  human  nature. 
But  the  stringency  is  not  too  great  when  we  depend 
upon  Him  to  help  us,  and  an  impossible  ideal  is  a 
certain  prophet  of  its  own  fulfilment  some  day. 

So,  brethren,  here  is  the  sufficient  guide,  not  because 
it  cumbers   us   with  a  mass  of  wretched    little  pre- 
scriptions such  as  a  martinet  might  give,  about  all 
sorts  of  details  of  conduct.     That  is  left  to  profitless 
casuists    like   the   ancient   rabbis.      But    the    broad 
principles  will  effloresce  into  all  manner  of  perfect- 
nesses  and  all  fruits.     He  that  has  in  his  heart  these 
thoughts,  that  the  definition  of  virtue  is  pleasing  Jesus 
Christ,  that  the  concrete  form  of  goodness  is  likeness 
to  Him,  and  that  the  elements  of  likeness  to  Him  are 
these  two,  that  I  should  never  think  about  myself,  and 
always   think  about  God,  needs  no  other   guide    or 
instructor  to  fill  his  life,  with  "  whatsoever  things  are 
lovely  and  of  good  report,"  and  to  make  his  own  all 
that  the  world  calls  virtue,  and  all  which  the  con- 
sciences of  good  men  have  conspired  to  praise. 

But  not  only  does  this  guide  prove  its  sufficiency 
by  reason  of  its  comprehensiveness,  but  also  because 
there  is  no  difficulty  in  ascertaining  what  at  each 
moment  it  prescribes.  Of  course,  I  know  that  such  a 
precept  as  this  cannot  contain  in  itself  guidance  in 
matters  of  mere  practical  expediency.  But,  apart 
from  these— which  are  to  be  determined  by  the 
ordinary  exercise  of  prudence  and  common  sense— in 


PLEASING  CHRIST.  255 


regard  to  the  right  and  the  Avrong  of  our  actions,  I 
believe  that  if  a  man  wants  to  know  Christ's  will,  and 
takes  the  way  of  knowing  it  which  Christ  has 
appointed,  he  shall  not  be  left  in  darkness,  but  shall 
have  the  light  of  life. 

For  love  has  a  strange  power  of  divining  love's 
wishes,  as  we  all  know,  and  as  many  a  sweetness  in 
the  hearts  and  lives  of  many  of  us  has  shown  us.     If 
we  cherish  sympathy  with  Jesus  Christ  we  shall  look 
on  things  as  He  looks  on  them,  and  we  shall  not  be 
left  without  the  knowledge  of  what  His  pleasure  is. 
If  we  keep  near  enough  to  Him  the  glance  of  His  eye 
will  do  for  guidance,  as  the  old  psalm  has  it.     They 
are  rough  animal  natures  that  do  not  understand  how 
to  go,  unless  their  instructors  be  the  crack  of  the  whip 
or  ^the  tug  of  the  bridle,     "  I  will  guide  thee  with 
Mine   eye."     A   glance   is   enough   where   there   are 
mutual  understanding   and   love.     Two   musical  in- 
struments  in    adjoining  rooms,   tuned   to  the  same 
pitch,  have  a  singular  affinity,  and  if  a  note  be  struck 
on  the  one  the  other  will  vibrate  to  the  sound.     And  so 
hearts  here  that  love  Jesus  Christ  and  keep  in  imison 
with  Him,  and  are  sympathetic  with  His  desires,  will 
learn  to  know  His  will,  and  will  re-echo  the  music  that 
comes  from  Him.   And  if  our  supreme  desire  is  to  know 
what  pleases  Jesus  Christ,  depend  upon  it  the  desire 
will  not  be  in  vain.     "  If  any  man  wills  to  do  His  will 
he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."     Ninety  per  cent,  of 
all  our  perplexities  as  to  conduct  come  from  our  not 
having  a  pure  and  simple  wish  to  do  what  is  right  in 
His  sight,  clearly  supreme  above  all  others.     When  we 
have  that  wish  it  is  never  left  unsatisfied. 


256  TLEASING  CRIilST. 

And  even  if  sometimes  we  do  make  a  mistake  as  to 
what  is  Christ's  pleasure,  if  our  supreme  wish  and 
honest  aim  in  the  mistake  have  been  to  do  His  plea- 
sure, we  may  be  sure  that  He  will  be  pleased  with  the 
deed.  Even  though  its  body  is  not  that  which  He 
willed  us  to  do,  its  spirit  is  that  which  He  does  desire. 
And  if  we  do  a  wrong  thing,  a  thing  in  itself  dis- 
pleasing to  Him,  whilst  all  the  while  w^e  desired  to 
please  Him,  we  shall  j)lease  Him  in  the  deed  which 
would  otherwise  have  displeased  Him.  And  so  two- 
Christian  men,  for  instance,  who  take  opposite  sides  m 
a  controversy,  may  both  of  them  be  doing  what  is 
well-pleasing  in  His  sight,  whilst  they  are  contradict- 
ing one  another,  if  they  are  doing  it  for  His  sake. 
And  it  is  possible  that  the  inquisitor  and  his  victim 
may  both  have  been  serving  Christ.  At  all  events,  let 
us  be  sure  of  this,  tbat  whensoever  we  desire  to  please 
Him,  He  will  help  us  to  do  it,  and  ordinarily  will  help 
us  by  making  clear  to  us  the  path  on  which  His  smile 
rests. 

in. — Again,  notice  that  Ave  have  here  an  all- 
powerful  motive  for  Christian  life. 

The  one  thing  which  all  other  summaries  of  duty  lack 
is  motive  power  to  get  themselves  carried  into  practice. 
But  we  all  know,  from  our  own  happy  human  ex- 
perience, that  no  motive  which  can  be  brought  to  bear 
upon  men  is  stronger,  when  there  are  loving  hearts 
concerned,  than  this  simple  one,  "  Do  it  to  please  me." 
And  that  is  what  Jesus  Christ  really  says.  That  is  no 
piece  of  mere  sentiment,  brethren,  nor  of  mere  pulpit 
rhetoric.  That  is  the  deepest  thought  of  Christian 
morality,  and  is  the  distinctive  pecularity  which  gives 


PLEASING  C HEIST.  257 


the  morality  of  the  New  Testament  its  clear 
supremacy  over  all  other.  There  are  precepts  in  it 
far  nobler  and  loftier  than  can  be  found  elsewhere. 
The  perspective  of  virtues  and  graces  in  it  is  different 
from  that  which  ordinarily  prevails  amongst  men. 
But  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  in  the  details  of  its 
precepts  so  much  as  in  the  communication  of  power  to 
obey  them,  and  in  the  suggestion  of  the  motive  which 
makes  them  all  easy,  that  the  difterence  of  Christ's 
ethics  from  all  the  teaching  of  the  world  beside  is 
most  truly  to  be  found. 

And  here  lies  the  excellence  thereof.  It  is  a  poor, 
cold  thing  to  say  to  a  man,  "Do  this  because  it  is 
right."  It  is  a  still  more  powerless  thing  to  say  to 
him,  "Do  this  because  it  is  expedient."  "Do  this 
because,  in  the  long  run,  it  leads  to  happiness."  It  is 
4x11  different  when  you  say,  "  Do  this  to  please  Jesus 
Christ,  to  please  that  Christ  who  pleased  not  Himself 
but  gave  Himself  for  you."  That  is  the  fire  that 
melts  the  ore.  That  is  the  heat  that  makes  flexible 
the  hard,  stiff  material.  That  is  the  motive  which 
makes  duty  deHght,  which  makes  "  the  rough  places 
plain"  and  "the  crooked  things  straight."  It  does 
not  abolish  natural  tastes,  it  does  not  supersede 
natural  disinclinations,  but  it  does  smooth  and  soften 
unwelcome  and  hard  tasks,  and  it  invests  service  with 
a  halo  of  glory,  and  changes  the  coldness  of  duty  into 
rosy  light ;  as  when  the  sunrise  strikes  on  the  peaks 
of  the  frozen  mountains.  The  one  motive  which 
impels  men,  and  can  be  trusted  to  secure  in  them 
whatsoever  things  are  noble,  is  to  please  Him. 

So  we  have  the  secret  of  blessedness  in  these  words. 

17 


258  PLEASING  CHRIST. 

For  self-submission  and  suppression  are  blessedness. 
Our  miseries  come  from  our  unbridled  wills,  far  more 
than  from  our  sensitive  organizations.  It  is  because 
we  do  not  accept  providences  that  providences  hurt. 
It  is  because  we  do  not  accept  the  commandments 
that  the  commandments  are  burdensome.  Those  who 
have  no  will,  except  as  it  is  vitahsed  by  God's  will, 
have  found  the  secret  of  blessedness,  and  have  entered 
into  rest.  In  the  measure  in  which  we  approximate 
to  that  condition,  our  wills  will  be  strengthened  as 
well  as  our  hearts  set  at  ease. 

And  blessedness  comes,  too,  because  the  approbation 
of  the  Master,  which  is  the  aim  of  the  servant,  is 
reflected  in  the  satisfaction  of  an  approving  conscience, 
which  points  omvards  to  the  time  when  the  Master's 
approval  shall  be  revealed  in  the  servant's  glory. 

I  was  reading  a  day  or  two  ago  about  a  religious 
reformer  who  arose  in  Eastern  lands  a  few  years  since, 
and  gathered  many  disciples.  He  and  his  principal 
follower  were  seized  and  about  to  be  martyred.  They 
were  suspended  by  cords  from  a  gibbet,  to  be  fired  at 
by  a  platoon  of  soldiers.  And  as  they  hung  there,  the 
disciple  turned  to  his  teacher,  and  as  his  last  word  on 
earth  said,  "  Master  !  are  you  satisfied  with  me  ? " 
His  answer  was  a  silent  smile ;  and  the  next  minute 
a  bullet  was  in  his  heart.  Dear  brethren,  do  you  turn 
to  Jesus  Christ  with  the  same  question,  "  Master  !  art 
Thou  satisfied  with  me  ? "  and  you  will  get  His  smile 
here ;  and  hereafter,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful 
servant." 


XXYI. 

^be  Cbrietian  attitube  to  Social  Qine. 

"AxD  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness, 
but  rather  reprove  them." — Eph,  v.  11. 


E  have  seen  in  a  former  sermon  that 
"  the  fruit,"  or  outcome,  "  of  the  Light  " 
is  a  comprehensive  perfection,  consist- 
ing in  all  sorts  and  deoTces  of  cfoodness 
and  righteousness  and  truth.  There- 
fore, the  commandment,  "  Walk  as  children  of  the 
light,"  sums  up  all  Christian  morality.  Is  there  need, 
then,  for  any  additional  precept  ?  Yes ;  for  Christian 
people  do  not  live  in  an  empty  Avorld.  If  there  were 
no  evil  round  them,  and  no  proclivity  to  evil  Avithin 
them,  it  would  be  amply  sufficient  to  say  to  them, 
"  Be  true  to  the  light  which  you  behold."  But  since 
both  these  things  are,  the  commandment  of  my  text 
is  further  necessary.  AVe  do  not  work  in  vacuo,  and 
therefore  friction  and  atmosphere  have  to  be  taken 
account  of;  and  an  essential  part  of  "  walking  as  chil- 
dren of  the  light  "  is  to  know  how  to  behave  ourselves 
when  confronted  with  "  the  works  of  darkness." 

These  Ephesian  Christians  lived  in  a  state  of  society 
honeycombed  with  hideous  immorality,  the  centre  of 
which  was  the  temple,  which  was  their  city's  glory 

17* 


2G0       TEE  CEEISTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS. 

and  shame.  It  was  all  but  impossible  for  them  to 
have  nothing  to  do  with  the  works  of  evil,  unless,  in- 
deed, they  went  out  of  the  world.  But  the  difficulty 
of  obedience  does  not  affect  the  duty  of  obedience,  nor 
slacken  in  the  smallest  degree  the  stringency  of  a  com- 
mand. This  obligation  lies  upon  us  as  fully  as  it  did 
upon  them,  and  the  discharge  of  it  by  professing  Chris- 
tians would  brinof  new  life  to  moribund  churches. 

I. — Let  me  ask   you  to  note  with  me,  first,  the 
fruitlessness  inherent  in  all  the  works  of  darkness. 

You  may  remember  that  I  pointed  out,  in  a  former 
discourse,  on  the  context,  that  the  Apostle,  here  and 
elsewhere,  draws  a  very  significant  distinction  between 
'•'works"  and  "fruit,"  and  that  distinction  is  put  very 
strikingly  in  the  Avords  of  my  text.  There  are  works 
which  are  barren.  It  is  a  grim  thought  that  there 
may  be  abundant  activity  which,  in  the  eyes  of  God, 
comes  to  just  nothing;  and  that  pages  and  pages  of 
laborious  calculations,  when  all  summed  up,  have  for 
result  a  great  round  0.  Men  are  busy,  and  hosts  of 
them  are  doing  what  the  old  fairy  stories  tell  us  that 
evil  spirits  were  condemned  to  do — spinning  ropes  out 
of  sea-sand  ;  and  their  life-work  is  naught  when  you 
come  to  reckon  it  up. 

I  have  no  time  to  dwell  upon  this  thought,  but  I 
^vish,  just  for  a  moment  or  two,  to  illustrate  it. 

All  godless  life  is  fruitless,  inasmuch  as  it  has  no  j)er- 
manent  results.  Permanent  results  of  a  sort,  indeed, 
follow  everything  that  men  do,  for  all  our  actions  tend 
to  make  character,  and  they  all  have  a  share  in  fixing 
that  which  depends  upon  character — viz.,  destiny,  both 
here  and  yonder.     And  thus  the  most  fleeting  of  our 


THE  CHRISTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS.     261 


deeds,  which  in  one  aspect  is  as  transitory  as  the 
snow  upon  the  great  plains  when  the  sun  rises,  leaves 
everlasting  traces  upon  ourselves  and  upon  our 
condition.  But  yet  acts  concerned  with  transitory 
things  may  have  permanent  fruit,  or  may  be  as 
transient  as  the  things  with  which  they  are  con- 
cerned. And  the  ditterence  depends  on  the  spirit  in 
which  they  are  done.  If  the  roots  are  only  in  the 
surface-skin  of  soil,  when  that  is  pared  off  the  plant 
croes.  A  life  that  is  to  be  eternal  must  strike  its 
roots  through  all  the  superficial  humus  down  to  the 
very  heart  of  things.  When  its  roots  twine  them- 
selves round  God,  then  the  deeds  wdiich  blossom  from 
them  will  blossom  unfading  for  ever. 

Think  of  men  going  empty-handed  into  another 
world,  and  saying,  "  0  Lord  1  I  made  a  big  fortune  in 
Manchester  when  I  lived  there,  and  I  left  it  all 
behind  me " ;  or,  "  I  mastered  a  science,  and  one 
gleam  of  the  light  of  eternity  has  antiquated  it  "  ;  or, 
"  I  gained  prizes,  won  my  aims,  and  they  have  all 
dropped  from  my  hands,  and  here  I  stand,  having 
to  say  in  the  most  tragic  sense:  Nothing  in  my 
hands  I  bring."  And  another  man  dies  in  the  Lord, 
and  his  ''works  do  follow"  him.  It  is  not  every 
vintage  that  bears  exportation.  Some  wines  are 
mellowed  by  crossing  the  ocean;  some  are  turned 
into  vinegar.  The  works  of  darkness  are  unfruitful 
because  they  are  transient. 

And  they  are  unfruitful  because,  whilst  they  last, 
they  yield  no  real  satisfaction.  The  Apostle  could 
say  to  another  Church  Avith  a  certainty  as  to  what 
the  answer  would  be,  "  AVhat  fruit  had   ye  iJten  " — 


262       THE  CHRISTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS. 

when-  ye  were  doing  them — ''in  the  things  whereof 
ye  are  now  ashamed  ? "  And  the  answer  is  "  None ! " 
Of  course,  it  is  true  that  men  do  bad  things  because 
they  Hke  them  better  than  good.  Of  course,  it  is  true 
that  the  misery  of  mankind  is  that  they  have  no 
appetite  in  the  general  for  the  only  real  satisfaction. 
But  it  is  also  true  that  no  man  who  feeds  his  heart 
and  mind  on  anything  short  of  God  is  really  at  rest 
in  anything  that  he  does  or  possesses.  Occasional 
twinges  of  conscience,  dim  perceptions  that  after  all 
they  are  walking  in  a  vain  show ;  glimpses  of  nobler 
possibilities,  a  vague  unrest,  an  unwillingness  to 
reflect  and  look  the  facts  of  their  condition  in  the 
face,  like  men  that  will  not  take  stock  because  they 
half  suspect  that  they  are  insolvent — these  are  the 
conditions  that  attach  to  all  godless  men's  lives. 
There  is  no  real  fruit  for  their  thirsty  lips  to  feed 
upon.  The  smallest  man  is  too  large  to  be  satisfied 
with  anything  short  of  Infinity.  The  human  heart  is 
like  some  narrow  opening  on  a  hill-side,  so  narrow 
that  it  looks  as  if  a  glassful  of  water  would  fill  it. 
But  it  goes  away  down,  down,  down  into  the  depths 
of  the  mountain,  and  you  may  pour  in  hogsheads  and 
no  effect  is  visible.  God,  and  God  alone,  briiio-s  to 
the  thirsty  heart  the  fruit  that  it  needs. 

Another  solemn  thought  illustrates  the  unfruitful- 
ness  of  a  godless  life.  There  is  no  corresjDondence 
between  what  such  a  man  does  and  what  he  is  in- 
tended to  do.  Think  of  what  the  most  des^raded  and 
sensuous  wretch  that  shambles  about  the  slums  of  a 
city,  sodden  with  beer  and  rotten  with  profligacy, 
could  be.    Think  of  the  raptures  of  devout  contempla- 


THE  CHRISTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS.     263 


tion  and  the  energies  of  holy  work  which  are  possible 
for  that  soul,  and  then  say-though  it  is  an  extreme 
case,  the  principle  holds  in  less  extreme  cases-Are 
these  things  that  men  do  apart  from  God,  however 
shinino',  noble,  illustrious  they  may  be  m  the  eyes  ot 
the  wo^rld,  and  trumpeted  forth  by  the  mouthpieces 
of  popular   opinion,  are   these   things  worth  calling 
fruits  fit  to  be  borne  by  such  a  tree  ?     No  more  than 
the  cankers  on  a  rose-bush  or  the  galls  on  an  oak-tree 
are  worthy  of  being  called  fruit  are  these  works  that 
some  of  you  have  as  the  only  products  of  a  life's 
activity.     "'  Wherefore,  when  I  looked  that  it  should 
brino-  forth  grapes,  brought  it  forth  wild  grapes." 

IL— And  now,  secondly,  notice  the  plain  Christian 
duty  of  abstinence. 

"  Have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  ot 
darkness."     Now,  the  text,  as  it  stands  in  our  version, 
seems  to  suggest  that  these  dark  works  are  personified 
as    companions   whom  a  good  man  ought  to  avoid; 
and  that,  therefore,  the  bearing  of  the  exhortation  is, 
"  Have  nothing  to  do,  in  your  own  individual  lives, 
with  evil  things  that  one  man  can  commit."     But  I 
take  it  that,  important  as  that  injunction  and  pro- 
hibition   is,     the     Apostle's    meaning    is    somewhat 
diti'erent,  and  that  my  text  would  perhaps  be  more 
accurately  translated  if  another  word  were  substituted 
for    "  have    no   fellowship    with."     The  original  ex- 
pression seems  rather  to  mean,  "  Do  not  go  partners 
with  other  people  in  works  of  darkness,  which  it  takes 
more  than  one  to  commit."     Or,  to  put  it  into  other 
language,  the  Apostle  is  regarding  Christian  people 
hei^  as  members  of  society,  and  exhorting  them  to  a 


264       THE  CHRISTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS. 

certain  course  of  conduct  in  reference  to  plain  and 
palpable  existing  evils  around  them.  And  such  aii 
exhortation  to  the  duty  of  plain  abstinence  from 
things  that  the  opinion  of  the  world  around  us  has 
no  objection  to,  but  which  are  contrary  to  the  lights 
is  addressed  to  all  Christian  people. 

The  need  of  it  I  do  not  require  to  illustrate  at  any 
length.  But  let  me  remind  you  that  the  devil  has  no* 
more  cunning  way  of  securing  a  long  lease  of  life  for 
any  evil  than  getting  Christian  people  and  Christian 
churches  to  give  it  their  sanction.  What  was  it  that 
kept  slavery  alive  for  centuries  ?  Largely,  that 
Christian  men  solemnly  declared  that  it  was  a  Divine 
institution.  What  is  it  that  has  kept  war  alive  for  all 
these  centuries  ?  Largely,  that  bishops  and  preachers 
have  always  been  ready  to  bless  colours,  and  to  read  a 
Christening  service  over  a  man-of-war — and,  I 
suppose,  to  ask  God  that  an  eighty-ton  gun  might  be 
blessed  to  smash  our  enemies  to  pieces,  and  not  to 
blow  our  sailors  to  bits.  And  what  is  it  that  preserves 
the  crying  evils  of  our  community,  the  immoralities, 
the  drunkenness,  the  trade  dishonesty,  and  all  the 
other  things  that  I  do  not  need  to  remind  you  of  in 
the  pulpit  ?  Largely  this,  that  professing  Christians 
are  mixed  up  with  them.  If  only  the  whole  body 
of  those  who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians 
would  shake  their  hands  clear  of  all  complicity  with 
such  things,  they  could  not  last.  Individual  responsi- 
bility for  collective  action  needs  to  be  far  more 
solemnly  laid  to  heart  by  professing  Christians  than 
ever  it  has  been. 

Nor  need  I  remind  you,  I  suppose,  with  what  fatal 


THE  CHRISTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS.      26i 


ettects  on  the  Gospel  and  the  Chiirsh  itself  all  such 
complicity   is   attended.     Even   the     companions   of 
wrongdoers  despise,  whilst  they  fraternise  with,  the 
professing  Christian  who  has  no  higher  standard  than 
their   own.      What   was   it   that   made   the   Church 
victorious  over  the  combined  forces  of  imperial  per- 
secution, pagan  superstition,  and  philosophic  specula- 
tion ?     I  believe  that  among  all  the  causes  that  a  well- 
known  historian  has  laid  down  for  the  triumph  of 
Christianity  what  was  as  powerful  as— I  was  going 
to   say  even  more   than — the  gospel   of  peace   and 
love  which  the  Church  proclaimed  Avas  the  standard 
of  austere  morality  which  it  held  up  to  a  world  rotting 
in  its  own  filth.     And  sure  I  am  that  wherever  the 
Church  says,  "  So  do  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  the 
Lord,"  it  will  gain  a  power,  and  will  be  regarded  with 
a  possibly  reluctant,  but  a  very  real,  respect  which 
no  easy-going  coming  down  to  the  level  of  popular 
moralities  will  ever  secure  for  a  silver-slippered  Chris- 
tianity.    And  so,  brethren,  I  would  say  to  you,  Do  not 
be  afraid  of  the  old  name  Furitan.     Ignorant  people 
use   it  as  a  scoff'.      It  should  be  a  crown  of  glory. 
*'  Have  no  fellowship    with   the   unfruitful  works  of 
darkness." 

But  how  is  this  to  be  done  ?  AVell,  of  course,  there 
is  only  one  way  of  abstaining,  and  that  is,  to  abstain. 
But  there  are  a  great  many  different  ways  of  abstain- 
ing. Light  is  not  fire.  And  the  more  that  Christian 
people  feel  themselves  bound  to  stand  aloof  from 
common  evils,  the  more  are  they  bound  to  see  that 
they  do  it  in  the  spirit  of  the  Master,  Avhich  is  meek- 
ness.    It  is  always  an  invidious  position  to  take  up. 


266       THE  CHRISTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS. 

And  if  we  take  it  up  with  any  heat  and  temper,  with 
any  lack  of  moderation,  with  any  look  of  ostentation 
of  superior  righteousness,  or  with  any  trace  of  the 
Boanerges  spirit  which  says,  ''Let  us  call  down  fire 
from  heaven  and  consume  them,"  our  testimony  will 
be  weakened,  and  the  world  will  have  a  right  to  say 
to  us,  "  Jesus  we  know,  and  Paul  we  know ;  but  who 
are  ye  ? "  "  Who  made  this  man  a  judge  and  a  divider 
over  us?"  "In  meekness  instructing  them  that 
oppose  themselves." 

in. — Lastly,  note  the  still  harder  Christian  duty  of 
vigorous  protest. 

The  further  duty  beyond  abstinence  which  the  text 
enjoins  is  inadequately  represented  by  our  version, 
"  but  rather  reprove  them."  For  the  word  rendered 
in  our  version  "  reprove  "  is  the  same  which  our  Lord 
employed  when  He  spoke  of  the  mission  of  the  Com- 
forter as  being  to  "  convince  (or  convict)  the  world  of 
sin."  And  it  does  not  merely  mean  "  reprove,"  but  so 
to  reprove  as  to  produce  the  conviction  which  is  the 
object  of  the  reproof. 

This  task  is  laid  on  the  shoulders  of  all  professing 
Christians.  A  silent  abstinence  is  not  enough.  No 
doubt,  the  best  way,  in  some  circumstances,  to  convict 
the  darkness  is  to  shine.  Our  holiness  will  convict 
sin  of  its  ugliness.  Our  light  will  reveal  the  gloom. 
The  presentation  of  a  Christian  life  is  the  Christian 
man's  mightiest  weapon  in  his  conflict  with  the 
world's  evil.  But  that  is  not  all.  And  if  Christian 
people  think  that  they  have  done  all  their  duty,  in 
regard  of  clamant  and  common  iniquities,  by  simply 
abstaining    from    them    and     presenting    a    nobler 


THE  CEETSTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS.      267 


example,  they  have  yet  to  learn  one  very  uTiportant 
chapter  of  thek  duty.  A  dumb  church  is  a  dymg 
church,  and  it  ought  to  be.  For  Christ  has  sent  us 
here  in  order,  amongst  other  things,  that  we  may 
bring  Christian  principles  to  bear  upon  the  actions  of 
the  community  ;  and  not  be  afraid  to  speak  when  we 
are  called  upon  by  conscience  to  do  so. 

Now  I  am  not  going  to  dwell  upon  this  matter,  but 
I  want  just  to  point  out  to  you  how,  in  the  context 
here,  there  are  two  or  three  very  important  prmciples 
glanced  at  which  bear  upon  it.     And  one  of  them  is 
this,  that  one  reason  for  speaking  out  is  the  very  fact 
that  the  evils  are  so  evil  that  a  man  is  ashamed  to 
speak  about  them.     Did  you  ever  notice  this  context, 
in  which  the  Apostle,  in  the  next  verse  to  my  text, 
gives  the  reason  for  his  commandment  to  "reprove" 
thus— "i^or  it  is  a  shame   even  to   speak   of  those 
things  which  are  done  of  them  in  secret "  ?     Did  you 
ever^'hear  of  a   fantastic  tenderness  for  moraUty  so 
very  sensitive  that  it  is  not  at  all  shocked  when  the 
immoral   things  are  clone,  but   glows   with   virtuous 
indicrnation  when  a  Christian  man  speaks  out  about 
them  ?     There  are  plenty  of  people   nowadays  who 
tell  us  that  it  is  "indelicate"  and  "indecent"  and 
"  improper,"    and    I    do  not    know   how   much   else 
for   a   Christian   teacher  or  minister  to  say  a  word 
about  certain  moral  scandals.     But  they  do  not  say 
anythino-   about   the   immorality  and   the  mdelicacy 
and  the'indecency  of  doing  them.     Let  us  have  done 
with  that  hypocrisy,  brethren.     I  am  arguing  for  no 
disregard  for  proprieties;  I  want  all  fitting  reticence 
observed,  and  I  do  not  wish  indiscriminate  rebukes 


268       THE  CHRISTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS. 

to  be  flung  at  foul  things;  but  it  is  too  much  to 
require  that,  by  reason  of  the  very  inky  cloud  of  filth 
that  they  fling  up  like  cuttlefish,  they  should  escape 
censure.  Let  us  remember  Paul's  exhortation,  and 
reprove  because  the  things  are  too  bad  to  be  spoken 
about. 

Further,  note  in  the  context  the  thought  that  the 
conviction  of  the  darkness  comes  from  the  flashing: 
upon  it  of  the  light.  "All  things  when  they  are 
reproved  are  made  manifest  by  the  light."  Which, 
being  translated  into  other  words,  is  this  : — Be  strong 
in  your  brave  protest,  because  it  only  needs  that  the 
thing  should  be  seen  as  it  is,  and  called  by  its  right 
name,  in  order  to  be  condemned. 

The  Assyrians  had  a  belief  that  if  ever,  by  any 
chance  a  demon  saw  himself  in  a  mirror,  he  was. 
frightened  at  his  own  ugliness  and  incontinently  fled. 
And  if  Christian  people  would  only  hold  up  the 
mirror  of  Christian  principle  to  the  hosts  of  evil 
things  that  afilict  our  city  and  our  country,  they 
would  vanish  Hke  ghosts  at  sunrise.  They  cannot 
stand  the  light,  therefore  let  us  cast  the  hght  upon 
them. 

And  do  not  forget  the  other  final  principle  here, 
which  is  imperfectly  represented  by  our  transla- 
tion. We  ought  to  read,  '•'  Whatever  is  made 
manifest  is  light."  Yes.  In  the  physical  world 
Avhen  light  falls  upon  a  thing  you  see  it,  because 
there  is  on  it  a  surface  of  light.  And  in  the  moral 
world  the  intention  of  all  this  conviction  is  that  the 
thing  disclosed  to  be  darkness  should,  in  the  very  dis- 
closure, cease  to  be  dark,  should  forsake  its  nature 


THE  CHRISTIAN  ATTITUDE  TO  SOCIAL  SINS.     269 

and  be  transformed  into  light.  Such  transformation 
is  not  alwavs  the  case.  Alas !  there  are  ebon  glooms 
on  ^vhich  tire  hght  falls,  and  it  does  nothmg.  But 
the  purpose  in  all  cases  should  be,  and  the  issue  m 
many  will  be,  that  the  merciful  conviction  by  the 
lio-lit  will  be  followed  by  the  conversion  of  darkness 

into  lii(lit. 

And  so,  dear  brethren,  1  bring  this  text  to  your 
hearts,  and  lay  it  upon  your  consciences.    \\  e  may 
not  all  be  called  upon  to  speak ;  we  are  all  called  upon 
to  he     You  can  shine,  and  by  shining  show  how  dark 
the  darkness  is.    The  obligation  is  laid  upon  us  all; 
the   commandment  still    comes  to  every  Christian 
which  was  given  to  the  old  prophet,  "Declare  unto 
My  people  their  transgression,  and  to  the  house  of 
Jacob  their  sin."    A  quaint  old  writer  says  that  the 
presence  of  a  saint  "hinders  the  devil's  elbowroom 
to  do  his  tricks."    We  can  all  rebuke  sm  by  our 
riohteousness,  and  by  our  shining  reveal  the  darkness 
to  itself.    AVe  do  not  walk  as  children  of  the  light 
unless  we  keep  ourselves  from  all  connivance  with 
works  of  darkness,  and  by  all  means  at  our  disposal 
reprove  and  convict  them.    "Come  out  from  among 
them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  no  unclean  thing, 
saith  the  Lord." 


XXVII. 

"  By   Sylvanus,  our  faithful .  brother,  as  I  account  him,  I  have 
written  unto  you  briefly." — 1  Peter  v.  12  (R.  V.). 

ADOPT  the  Revised  Version  because, 
in  one  or  two  small  points,  it  brings 
out  more  clearly  the  Apostle's  meaning. 
This  Sylvanus  is,  beyond  all  reasonable 
doubt,  the  same  man  who  is  known  to 
us  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  by  the  name  of  Silas. 
A  double  name  was  very  common  amongst  Jews, 
whose  avocations  brought  them  into  close  connection 
with  Gentiles.  You  will  find  other  instances  of  it 
amongst  the  Apostles :  in  Paul  himself,  whose  Hebrew 
name  was  Said;  Simon  and  Peter;  and  probably  in 
Bartholomeiu  and  Kathanael.  And  there  is  no  reason- 
able doubt  that  a  careful  examination  of  the  various 
places  in  which  Silas  and  Sylvanus  are  mentioned 
shows  that  they  were  borne  by  one  person. 

Now  let  me  put  together  the  little  that  we  know 
about  this  man,  because  it  will  help  us  to  some  lessons. 
He  was  one  of  the  chief  men  in  the  church  at  Jerusa- 
lem when  the  dispute  arose  about  the  necessity  for 
circumcision  for  the  Gentile  Christians.  He  was 
despatched  to  Antioch  with  the  message  of  peace  and 


SYLVANUS.  2^1 


aood  feelin?  which  the  church  at  Jerusalem  wise  y 
sent  forth  to  heal  the  strife.    He  remained  in  Antioch 
although  his  co-deputy  went  back  to  Jerusalem;  and 
the  attraction  of  Paul-the  great  mass  of  that  star- 
drew  this  lesser  light  into  becoming  a  satellite,  moving 
round  the  greater  orb.      So,  when  the  unfortunate 
quarrel  broke  out  between  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  the 
latter  went  sulkily  away  by  himself  withhis  dear 
John   ilark,   without  his    brethren's    blessing,   Paul 
chose  Silas  and  set  out  upon  his  first  missionary  tour. 
He  was  Paul's  companion  in  the  prison  and  stripes  at 
Philippi,  and  in  the  troubles  at  Thessalonica ;  and 
thou.^h  they  were  parted  for  a  little  while,  he  rejoined 
the  Apostle  in  the  city  of  Corinth.     From  thence 
Paul  wrote  the  two  letters  to  the  Thessalonians,  both 
of  which  are  sent  in  the  name  of  himself  and  Silas, 
or  Sylvanus.    There  is  one  more  reference  to  Sylvanus 
in  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  which  men- 
tions him  as  having  been  associated  with  Paul  m  the 
evan<^elization  of  the  church  there. 

Then  he  drops  out  of  the  book  altogether,  and  we 
never  hear  anything  more  about  him,  except  this  one 
passing'   reference,   which    shows    us    to   him   in   an 
altoo-ether  new  relation.     He  is  no  longer  attached  to 
Paul    but   to   Peter.      Paul   was   probably  either   in 
prison,  or,  possibly,  martyred.     At  all  events,  Sylvanus 
now  stood  to  Peter  in  a  relationship  similar  to  that 
in  which  he  formerly  stood  to  Paul.     He  was  evidently 
acquainted    with    and    known    to   the   churches   to 
Avhom   this  letter  was  addressed,  and,  therefore,  is 
chosen  to  carry  Peter's  message  to  them. 

Now  I  would  suggest,  in  passing,  how  Sylvanus' 


272  SYLVAN  US. 


relations  to  the  two  Apostles  throws  light  upon  the 
perfectly  cordial  alliance  between  them,  and  how  it 
shatters  into  fragments  the  theory  which  was  thought 
to  be  such  a  wonderful  discover}^  some  years  ago,  as 
to  the  '  great  schism "  in  the  early  Church  between 
one  section,  led  by  Peter,  and  the  more  liberal  party, 
headed  by  Paul.  Instead  of  that,  we  find  the  two 
men  working  together,  and  the  only  division  between 
them  was  not  as  to  the  sort  of  Gospel  they  preached, 
but  as  to  the  people  to  whom  they  preached.  This 
little  incident  helps  us  to  realise  how  natural  it  was 
for  a  man  steeped  in  Paul's  teaching  to  attach  him- 
self, if  circumstances  suggested  it,  to  the  person  who 
has  been  said  to  have  been  antagonistic  in  the  whole 
drift  of  his  conceptions  of  Christianity  to  that  Apostle. 

But  I  do  not  wish  to  speak  about  that  now.  I  take 
this  figure  of  a  man  who  so  contentedly  and  con- 
tinually took  such  a  subordinate  place — played  second 
fiddle  quite  willingly  all  his  days,  and  who  toiled  on 
without  any  notice  or  record,  and  ask  whether  it  does 
not  teach  one  or  two  things. 

I. — First,  then,  I  think  we  may  see  here  a  hint  as 
to  the  worth  and  importance  of  subordinate  work. 

Not  a  sjilable  that  Silas  ever  said  is  recorded  in 
Scripture.  He  had  been  a  chief  man  among  the 
brethren  when  he  was  in  Jerusalem,  but,  like  some 
other  chief  men  in  little  spheres,  he  came  to  be  any- 
thing but  a  chief  man  when  he  got  alongside  of  Paul, 
and  found  his  proper  work.  He  did  not  say,  "  I  have 
always  pulled  the  stroke  oar,  and  I  am  not  going  to 
be  second.  I  do  not  intend  to  be  absorbed  in  this 
man's  brilliant  lustre.     I  would  rather  have  a  smaller 


SYLVAN  us.  273 


sphere  where  my  Hght  may  not  suft'er  by  comparison 
than  be  overshone  by  him."  By  no  means!  He 
could  not  do  Paul's  work,  but  he  could  endure 
stripes  along  with  him  in  the  prison  at  Philippi,  and 
he  took  them.  He  could  not  write  as  Peter  could  ;  it 
was  not  his  work  to  do  that.  But  he  could  carry  one 
of  Peter's  letters.  And  so,  "by  Sylvanus,  a  faithful 
brother,  I  have  written  to  you."  Perhaps  Sylvanus 
was  amanuensis  as  Avell  as  letter-carrier,  for  I  daresay 
Peter  was  no  great  hand  with  a  pen ;  he  was  better 
accustomed  to  haul  nets.  At  all  events,  subordinate 
work  was  Avhat  God  had  set  him  to  do,  and  so  he 
found  joy  in  it. 

Well,  then,  is  not  that  a  pattern  for  us  ?  People  in. 
the  world  or  in  the  Church  who  can  do  prominent 
work  are  counted  by  units;  and  those  who  can  do 
valuable  subordinate  work  are  counted  by  thousands 

by  millions.     "  Those  members  which  seem  to  be 

more  feeble  are  the  more  necessary,"  says  Paul.  It 
is  a  great  truth,  which  it  would  do  us  all  good  to  lay 
more  to  heart. 

It  is  hard  to  tell  what  is  superior  and  what  is 
subordinate  work.  I  suppose  that  in  a  steam  engine 
the  smallest  rivet  is  quite  as  essential  as  the  huge- 
piston,  and  that  if  the  rivet  drops  out  the  piston-rod 
is  very  likely  to  stop  rising  and  falling.  So  it  is  a 
very  vulgar  way  of  talking,  to  speak  about  A.'s  work 
beinf*"  large  and  B.'s  work  being  small,  or  to  assume 
that  wc  have  eyes  to  settle  which  work  is  principal 
and  which  subordinate. 

The  Athenians,  who  deemed  themselves  wisest  in 
the   world,  thought   there   were   few   people   of   less 

18 


274  SYLVANUS. 


importance  than  the  fanatical  Jew  who  w^as  preaching 
a  strange  story  about  what  they  knew  so  httle  of  that 
they  took  Jesus  and  Eesurrection  to  be  the  names 
of  a  pair  of  gods,  one  male  and  one  female.  But  in 
the  ej^es  that  see  truly — the  eyes  of  God — the  relative 
importance  of  Apostle  and  Stoic  was  otherwise 
appraised. 

We  cannot  tell,  as  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes  has  it, 
^'  which  shall  prosper — this  or  that."  And  if  we 
begin  to  settle  which  is  important  work,  w^e  shall  be 
sure  to  make  mistakes,  both  in  our  judgment  about 
other  people,  and  in  our  sense  of  the  obligations  laid 
upon  ourselves.  Let  us  remember  that  when  a  thing  is 
to  be  done  by  the  co-operation  of  a  great  many  parts, 
each  part  is  as  important  as  any  other,  and  each  is 
indispensable.  Although  more  glory  may  come  to 
the  soldiers  who  go  to  the  front  and  do  the  fighting, 
the  troops  miles  in  the  rear,  that  are  quietly  in  camp, 
looking  after  the  stores  and  keeping  open  the  lines  of 
communication,  are  quite  as  essential  to  the  success 
of  the  campaign.  Their  names  will  not  get  into  the 
gazette ;  there  will  probably  not  be  any  honours  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  war  showered  upon  them ;  but, 
if  they^liad  not  been  doing  their  subordinate  work, 
the  men  at  the  front  would  never  have  been  able  to 
do  theirs.  Therefore,  the  old  wise  law  in  Israel  was  : 
"  As  his  part  is  that  goeth  down  into  the  battle,  so 
shall  his  part  be  that  tarrieth  by  the  stuff;  they  shall 
part  alike." 

And  so  it  is  good  for  people  that  have  only  one 
talent,  and  cannot  do  much,  and  must  be  contented 
to  help  somebody  else  that  can  do  more,  to  remember 


SYLVANUS.  21  o 


this  pretty  little  picture  of  Sylvanus,  "  the  faithful 
brother,"  contented  all  his  life  to  be  a  satellite  of 
somebody ;  tirst  of  all  helping  Paul,  and  then  helping 
Paul's  brother  Peter.  Let  us  not  be  too  lazy,  or  too 
proud  with  the  pride  that  apes  humility,  to  do  the 
little  that  we  can  do  because  it  is  little. 

II. — Another  lesson  which  is  own  sister  to  that  first 
one,  but  which  maybe  taken  for  a  moment  separately ' 
is,  the  importance  and  obligation  of  persistently  doing 
our  task,  though  nobody  notices  it. 

As  I  remarked,  there  is  not  one  word  of  anything 
that  Sjdvanus  said,  or  of  anything  that  he  did  apart 
from  Paul  or  Peter,  recorded.  And  for  all  the  long 
stretch  of  years — we  do  not  know  how  many,  but  a 
very  large  number — that  lie  between  this  text  of  mine, 
where  we  find  him  in  conjunction  with  Peter,  and  that 
day  at  Corinth,  where  we  left  him  with  Paul,  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  does  not  think  it  worth  w^hile  to 
mention  his  name.  Was  he  sitting  with  his  hands 
in  his  pockets  all  the  wdiile,  do  you  think,  doing  no 
Christian  work  ?  Did  he  say,  as  some  good  people 
are  apt  to  say  now,  "  Well,  I  went  to  teach  in 
Sunday-school  for  awhile,  and  I  took  an  interest  in 
this,  that,  or  the  other  thing  for  a  bit,  but  nobody 
took  any  notice  of  me ;  and  I  supposed  I  was  not 
wanted,  and  so  I  came  away  !  " 

Xot  he.  That  is  what  a  great  many  of  us  do. 
Though  we  sometimes  are  not  honest  enough  to  say 
it  to  ourselves,  yet  we  do  let  the  absence  of  "  recog- 
nition "  (save  the  mark)  influence  us  in  the  earnest- 
ness of  our  Christian  work  to  far  too  great  an  extent. 
And  I  dare  say  there  are  good  friends  in  this  audience 

IS* 


276  SYLVAN  US. 


who,  if  they  would  be  quite  honest  with  themselves, 
would  take  the  hint,  and,  if  I  may  use  such  a  word, 
the  rebuke,  to  themselves. 

Dear  brethren,  all  the  work  that  any  of  us  do  has- 
to  become  unnoticed  after  a  little  while.  It  will  nat 
last.  Nobody  will  know  about  you  or  me  thirty  years- 
after  we  are  dead.  AVhat  does  it  matter  whether  they 
know  anything  about  us,  or  say  anything  about  us,  or 
pat  us  on  the  back  for  anything  that  we  do,  or  recog- 
nize our  service  whilst  we  live  ?  Surely,  if  we  are 
Christian  men  and  women,  we  have  a  better  reason 
for  Avorking  than  that.  "  /  will  never  forget  any  of 
their  works."  That  ought  to  be  enough  for  us,  ought 
it  not  ?  Whoever  forgets,  He  remembers  ;  and  if  He 
remembers,  He  will  not  remain  in  our  debt  for  any- 
thing that  we  have  done. 

So  let  us  keep  on,  noticed  or  unnoticed ;  it  matters 
very  little  which  it  is.  There  is  a  fillip,  no  doubt — 
and  we  should  not  be  men  and  women  if  we  did  not 
feel  it — in  the  recognition  of  what  we  have  tried  to 
do.  And  sometimes  it  comes  to  us  ;  but  the  absence 
of  it  is  no  reason  for  slackening  our  work.  And  this 
man,  so  patiently  and  persistently  "  pegging  away  "  at 
his  obscure  task  during  all  these  j^ears  which  have- 
been  swallowed  up  in  oblivion,  may  preach  a  sermon 
to  us  al]. 

Only  let  us  remember  that  he  also  shows  us  that 
unnoticed  work  is  noticed,  and  that  unrecorded  ser- 
vices are  recorded.  Here  are  you  and  I,  nineteen 
centuries  after  he  is  dead,  talking  about  him,  and  his 
name  will  live  and  last  as  long  as  the  world,  because, 
though  written  in  no  other  history,  it  has  been  re- 


SVirAXl'S.  2// 


<;orded  here.  Jesus  Christ's  record,  the  Book  of  Life, 
<iontains  the  names  of  ''fellow-labourers"  whose  names 
have  dropped  out  of  every  other  record;  and  that 
•should  be  enough  for  us.  Sylvanus  did  no  work  that 
Christ  did  not  see,  and  no  work  that  Christ  did  not 
remember,  and  no  work  of  which  he  did  not,  eighteen 
hundred  years  since,  enter  into  the  enjoyment  of  the 
fruit,  and  which  he  enjoys  up  there,  whilst  we  are 
thinkino:  about  him  down  here. 

III— The  last  thing  that  I  would  suggest  is— here 
is  an  example  to  us  of  a  character  which  we  can  all 
€arn,  and  which  will  be  the  best  that  any  man  can 
get. 

A  great  genius,  a  wise  philosopher,  an  eloquent 
preacher,  a  statesman,  a  warrior,  poet,  painter  ?  No  1 
''  A  faithful  brother."  He  may  have  been  a  common- 
place one.  We  do  not  know  anything  about  his  intel- 
lectual capacity.  He  may  have  had  very  narrow  hmita- 
tions  and  very  few  powers,  or  he  may  have  been  a  man 
•of  large  faculty  and  acquirements.  But  these  things 
■drop  out  of  sight;  and  this  remains — that  he  was 
faithful.  I  suppose  the  eulogium  is  meant  in  both 
senses  of  the  word.  The  one  of  these  is  the  root  of 
the  other ;  for  a  man  that  is  full  of  faith  is  a  man  who 
may  be  trusted,  is  reliable,  and  will  be  sure  to  fulfil  all 
the  obligations  of  his  position,  and  to  do  all  the  duties 
that  are  laid  upon  him. 

You  and  I,  whether  w^e  are  wise  or  not,  whether  we 
are  learned  or  not,  v/hether  we  have  large  faculties  or 
not,  whether  we  have  great  opportunities  or  very  small 
ones,  can  all  equally  earn  that  name  if  we  like.  If 
the  perfect  judgment,  the  clear  eye,  of  Jesus  Christ, 


278  SYLVANUS. 


beholds  in  us  qualities  which  permit  Him  to  call  us 
by  that  name,  what  can  we  w^ant  better  ?  "A  faithful 
brother."  Trust  in  Christ ;  let  that  be  the  animating 
principle  of  all  that  we  do,  the  controlling  power  that 
restrains  and  limits  and  stimulates  and  impels.  And 
then  men  will  knov/  where  to  have  us,  and  wdll  be 
sure,  and  rightly  sure,  that  we  shall  not  shirk  our 
obligations,  nor  scamp  our  work,  nor  neglect  our 
duties.  And  being  thus  full  of  faith,  and  counted 
faithful  by  Him,  we  need  care  little  what  men's  judg- 
ments of  us  may  be,  and  need  desire  no  better  epitaph 
than  this — a  faithful  brother. 


XXVIII. 

an  Hpostolic  ^eetimon^  anb 
leybortation. 

"I  HAVE  written  briefly,  exliorticg-,  and  testifying  that  this  is  the 
true  grace  of  God,  wherein  ye  stand."— 1  Peter  v.  12. 

HAA^E  written  briefly,"  says  Peter. 
But  his  letter,  in  comparison  with  the 
other  epistles  of  the  X'ew  Testament,  is 
not  remarkably  short ;  in  fact,  is  longer 
than  many  of  them.  He  regards  it  as 
short  when  measured  by  the  greatness  of  its  theme. 
For  all  words,  which  are  devoted  to  witnessing  to  the 
glory  of  God  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  must  be  narrow 
and  insufficient  as  compared  with  that,  and  after  every 
utterance  the  speaker  must  feel  how  inadequate  his 
utterance  has  been.  So  in  that  word  'briefly"  we 
get  a  glimpse  of  the  Apostle's  conception  of  the 
t'ranscendent  greatness  of  the  Gospel  which  he  had  to 
proclaim.  This  verse  seems  to  be  a  summary  of  the 
contents  of  the  Epistle.  And  if  we  observe  the 
altered  translation  of  the  latter  portion  of  my  text 
which  is  given  in  the  Revised  Version,  we  shall  see 
that  the  verse  is  itself  an  example  of  both  ''testifying" 
and  exhorting.  For  the  last  clause  is  not,  as  our 
Authorized  Version  renders  it,  "Wherein  ye  stand"— 


-'SO    AN  AFOSTOLIC  TESTIMONY  AND  EXHORTATION. 


a  Statement  of  a  fact,  however  true  that  may  be— but 
a  commandment,  "  In  which  stand  fast."  And  so  we 
have  here  the  Apostle's  all-sufficient  teaching,  and 
this  all-comprehensive  exhortation.  He  "  witnesses  " 
that  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God,  and  because  it  is, 
he  exhorts,  "stand  fast  therein."  Let  us  look  at  these 
two  points. 
I- — Peter's  testimonj'. 

Now,  there  is  a  very  beautiful,  though  not  to  super- 
ficial readers  obvious,  significance  in  this  testimony 
"  This  is  the  true  grace  of  God."    What  is  meant  by 
"this  "  ?    Not  merely  the  teaching  which  he  has  been 
giving  in  the  preceding  part  of  the  letter,  but  that 
which  somebody  else  had   been  giving.     Now   these 
churches  m  Asia  -Minor,  to  whom  this  letter  was  sent 
were  m  all  probability  founded  by  the  Apostle  Paul' 
or  by  men  working  under  his  direction  :  and  the  type' 
of  doctrine  preached  in  them  was  what  people  now- 
adays call  Pauline.     And  here  Peter  puts  his  seal  on 
the  teaching  that  had  come  from  his  brother  Apostle 
and  says:    "The  thing  that  you  have  learned,  and 
that  I  have  had  no  part  in  communicating  to  you 
this  IS  the  true  grace  of  God."   If  such  be  the  primary 
application  of  the  words  (and  I  think  there  can  be 
httk  doubt  that  it  is),  then  we  have  an  interesting 
evidence,  a  1  the  stronger  because  unobtrusive,  of  the 
cordial  imdeKtanding  between  the  two  great  leaders 
ot  the  Church  in  apostolic  times;  and  the  figments 
that   have   been   set   forth,  with  great  learning  and 
httle  common  sense,  about  the  ditterences  that  divided 
these  great  ieachers  of  Christianity  melt  away  into 
thin  air.     Their  division  was  only  a  division  of  the 


AN  APOSTOLIC  TESTIMONY  AND  EXHORTATION.    281 

iiekl  of  labour.  "  They  would  that  I  should  go  unto 
the  Gentiles,  and  they  unto  the  circumcision."  All 
the  evidence  confirms  what  Paul  says,  "  Whether  it 
were  they  or  I,  so  we  preach,  and  so  "  all  the  converts 
''  believed."  Thus  it  is  not  without  significance  and 
beauty  that  we  here  see  dimly  through  the  ages  Peter 
stretching  out  his  hands  to  Paul's  convert,  and  saying, 
''  This— which  my  beloved  brother  Paul  taught  you — 
this  is  the  true  grace  of  God." 

But,  apart  altogether  from  that  thought,  note  two 
things  ;  the  one,  the  substance  of  this  witness-bearing ; 
iind  the  other,  Peter's  right  to  bear  it.  As  to  the 
substance  of  the  testimony;  "grace,"  which  has 
become  a  threadbare  word  in  the  minds  of  many 
people,  used  with  very  little  conception  of  its  true 
depth  and  beauty  of  meaning,  is  properly  love  in 
exercise  towards  inferior  and  sinful  creatures  who 
deserve  something  else.  Condescending,  pardoning, 
and  active  love,  is  its  proper  meaning.  And,  says 
Peter,  the  inmost  significance  of  the  Gospel  is  that  it 
is  the  revelation  of  such  a  love  as  being  in  God's  heart. 

Another  meaning  springs  out  of  this.  That  same 
message  is  not  only  a  revelation  of  love,  but  it  is  a 
communication  of  the  gifts  of  love.  And  the  "true 
orace  of  God  "  is  shorthand  for  all  the  rich  abundance 
and  variety  and  exuberant  manifoldness  and  all- 
sufiiciency  of  the  sevenfold  perfect  gifts  for  spirit  and 
heart  which  come  from  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  The 
truths  that  lie  here  in  the  Gospel,  the  truths  which 
<rlow  and  throb  in  this  letter  of  Peter's,  are  the  revela- 

■o 

tion  and  the  communication  to  men  of  the  rich  gifts 
of  the  Divine  hear:,  which  will  all  flow  into  that  soul 


2S2    AN  APOSTOLIC  TESTIMONY  AND  EXHORTATION. 


which  opens  itself  for  the  entrance  of  God's  word. 
And  what  are  these  truths  ?  The  main  theme  of  this* 
letter  is  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  was 
slam.  -Ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray,  but  are  now 
returned  unto  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  your 
souls."  He  dwells  upon  Christ's  innocence,  upon 
Christ's  meekness;  but  most  of  all  upon  the  Christ 
that  died,  "  whom,  having  not  seen,  we  love,  and  in 
whom,  though  unseen,  we  believing,  receive  the  end 
of  our  faith  "—and  the  end  of  the  Gospel— "even  the 
salvation  of  our  souls." 

Thus,  dear  brethren,  this  Gospel,  the  Gospel  of  the 
Divme  Christ  that  died  for  our  sins,  and  lives  to  give 
His  Spirit  to  all  waiting  hearts ;  this  is  the  true  grace 
of  God.     It  is  very  needful  for  us  to  keep  in  view 
always  that  lofty  conception  of  what  this  Gospel  is, 
that  we  may  not  bring  it  down  to  the  level  of  a  mere 
theory  of  religion;  nor  think  of  it  as  a  mere  publica- 
tion of  dry  doctrines  ;  that  we  may  not  lose  sight  of 
what  is  the  heart  of  it  all,  but  may  recognise  this  fact, 
that  a  Gospel  out  of  which  are  struck,  or  in  which  are 
diminished,  the  truths  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  and 
His  ever-living  intercession  for  us,  is   not   the  true 
grace  of  God,  and  is  neither  a  revelation  of  His  love  to 
inferior  and  sinful  men,  nor  a  communication  of  His 
gifts  to  our  weakness.      Let  us   remember   Peter's 
witness.     This-the  full  Gospel  of  incarnation,  sacri- 
fice,  resurrection,  ascension,  and  reign  in  glory  and 
return  as  Judge— this,  and  nothing  else,  "is  the' true 
grace  of  God."     And  this  Gospel  is  not  exalted  to  its 
highest  place  unless  it  is  regarded  as  such  by  our 
waiting  and  recipient  hearts. 


AN  APOSTOLIC  TESTIMONY  AND  EXHORTATION.   233 


Further,  what  right  had  this  man  to  take  this 
position  and  say,  "  I  testify  that  this  is  the  true  grace 
of  God  "  ?  He  was  no  great  genius  ;  he  did  not  know 
anything  about  comparative  rehgion,  which  is  nowa- 
days supposed  to  be  absohitely  essential  to  under- 
standing any  one  rehgion.  He  was  not  a  scholar  or  a 
philosopher.  What  business  had  he  to  bring  in  his 
personahty  thus,  as  if  he  were  an  authority,  and  eay, 
"  I  testify  that  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God  "  ? 

Well,  there  are  two  or  three  answers :  one  peculiar 
to  him'  and  others  common  to  all  Christian  people. 
The  one  peculiar  to  him  is,  as  I  beheve,  that  he  was 
conscious,  and  rightly  conscious,  that  Jesus  Christ  had 
bestowed  upon  him  the  power  to  witness,  and  the 
authority  to  impose  his  testimony  upon  men  as  a 
word  from  God.  In  the  most  inartificial  and  matter- 
of-course  way  Peter  here  lets  us  see  the  Apostolic  con- 
ception of  Apostolic  authority.  He  had  a  right— not 
because  of  what  he  was  himself,  but  because  of  the 
authority  which  Christ  had  conferred  on  him— to  say 
to  men,  "  I  do  not  ask  you  to  give  heed  to  me,  Peter. 
I  myself  also  am  a  man  (as  he  said  to  Cornelius),  but 
I  call  on  you  to  accept  Christ's  word,  spoken  through 
me,  His  commissioned  messenger,  when  I  testify,  and 
through  me  Christ  testifies,  that  this  is  the  true  grace 

of  God." 

Now,  no  one  but  an  Apostle  has  the  right  to  say 
that ;  but  we  Christian  people  have  a  right  to  say 
something  like  it,  and,  if  we  have  not  Apostolic 
authority,  we  may  have  what  is  very  nearly  as  good, 
and  sometimes  as  powerful  in  its  effect  upon  other 
people,  and  that  is  authority  based  on  personal  ex- 


2St    AN  APOSTOLIC  TESTIMONY  AND  EXHORTATION 


perience.     If  we  have  plunged  deep  into  the  secrets  of 
•God,  and  hved  closely  and  faithfully  in  communion 
with  Him,  and  for  ourselves  have  found  the  grace  of 
God,  His  love  and  the  gifts  of  His  love,  coming  into 
•our  lives,  and  ennobling,  calming,  elevating  each  of 
us  ;   then  we,  too,  have  a  right  to  go  to  men  and  say, 
''  Never  mind  about  me ;  never  mind  about  whether  I 
am  wise  or  foolish,  I  do  not  argue,  but  I  tell  you  I 
have  tasted  the  manna,  and  it  is  sweet.     I  have  drunk 
of  the  water,  and  it  comes  cool  and  fresh  from  the 
rock.     One  thing  I  know,  that  whereas  I  was  blind, 
now  I  see.     I  believed,  and  therefore  have  I  spoken, 
and  on  the  strength  of  my  own  tasting  of  it,  I  testify 
that  this,  which  has  done  so  much  for  me,  is  the  true 
grace  of  God."     If  we  testify  thus,  and  back  up  our 
witness  with  lives  corresponding,  some  who  are  wholly 
untouched   by   a   preacher's    eloquence   and   contro- 
versiahsts'   arguments,  will   probably  be   led  by  our 
attestation  to  make  the  experiment  for  themselves. 
''  Ye  are  My  witnesses,"  says  God.      He  did  not  say, 
"'  Ye  are  My  advocates."     He  did  not  bid  us  argue  for 
Him,  but  He  bid  us  witness  for  Him. 
II- — Further,  notice  Peter's  exhortation. 
According  to  the  right  rendering  the  last  clause  is, 
as  I  have  already  said,  "  in  which  stand   fast."     The 
translation  in  the  Authorised  Yersion,  "  in  which  ye 
stand,"  gives  a  true  thought,  though  not  the  Apostle's 
intention  here.     For,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  men  cannot 
stand  upright  and  firm  unless  their  feet  are  planted 
on  the  rock  of  that  true  grace  of  God.     If  our  heels 
are  well  fixed  on  it,  then  our  goings  will  be  established. 
It  is  no  use   talking  to  men  about   steadfastness  of 


AN  APOSTOLIC  TESTIMONY  AND  EXHORTATION.    2&;> 

purposs,  stability  of  life,  erect  independence,  resistance 
to  antagonistic  forces,  and  all  the  rest,  unless  you  give 
them  something  to  stand  upon.  If  you  talk  so  to  a 
man  who  has  his  foot  upon  shifting  sands  or  slippery 
clay ;  the  more  he  tries  the  deeper  will  he  sink  into 
the  one,  or  slide  the  further  upon  the  other.  The 
best  way  to  help  men  to  stand  fast  is  to  give  them 
something  to  stand  upon.  And  the  only  standing 
ground  that  will  never  yield,  nor  collapse,  nor,  like 
the  quicksand  with  the  tide  round  it,  melt  away,  we 
do  not  know  how,  from  beneath  our  feet,  is  "the  grace 
of  God."  Or,  as  Dr.  Watts  says,  in  one  of  his  now 
old-fashioned  hymns : 

*'  Lo  !  on  the  solid  Rock  I  stand, 
And  all  beside  is  shifting  sand." 

However,  that  is  not  what  the  Apostle  Peter  meant. 
He  says,  "  See  that  you  keep  firmly  your  position  in 
reference  to  this  true  grace  of  God."  Now  I  am  not 
o-oino-  to  talk  to  this  audience  about  intellectual  ditfi- 
culties  in  the  way  of  hearty  and  whole-souled  accept- 
ance of  the  Gospel  revelation— difticulties  which  are 
very  real  and  very  widespread  in  these  days,  but 
which  possibly  very  slightly  affect  us,  at  least  I  hope  so. 

But  whilst  these  slay  their  thousands,  the  difficulties, 
that  affect  us  all  in  the  way  of  keeping  a  firm  hold 
on,  or  firm  standing  in  (for  the  two  metaphors  coalesce) 
the  Gospel,  which  is  the  true  grace  of  God,  are  those 
that  arise  from  two  causes  working  in  combination. 
One  is  our  own  poor  weak  hearts,  wavering  wills, 
strong  passions,  unbridled  desires,  forgetful  minds  ; 
and  the  other  is  all  that  army  and  babel  of  seductions 


286    AK  APOSTOLIC  TESTIMONY  AND  EXHORT  A  TION. 

and  inducements,  in  occupations  legitimate  and  ne- 
cessary, in  enjoyments  which  are  in  themselves  pure 
and  innocent,  in  family  delights,  in  home  engagements, 
in  pursuits  of  commerce  or  of  daily  business — all  that 
crowd  of  things  that  tempt  us  to  forget  the  true  grace 
and  to  wander  away  in  a  foolish  and  vain  search  after 
vain  and  foolish  substitutes. 

Dear  brethren,  it  is  not  so  much  because  there  are 
many  adversaries  in  the  intellectual  world  as  because 
we  are  such  weak  creatures  ourselves,  and  the  world 
around  us  is  so  strong  against  us,  that  w^e  need  to  say 
to  one  another  and  to  ourselves,  over  and  over  again, 
"  Stand  ye  fast  therein."  You  cannot  keep  hold  of  a 
rope  even,  without  the  act  of  grasping  tending  to 
relax,  and  there  must  be  a  conscious  and  repeated 
tightening  up  of  the  muscles,  or  the  very  cord  on 
w^hich  we  hang  for  safety  will  slip  through  our  relaxed 
palms.  And  however  we  may  be  convinced  that 
there  are  no  hope  and  no  true  blessedness  for  us 
except  in  keeping  hold  of  God,  we  need  that  grasp  to 
be  tightened  up  by  daily  renewed  efforts,  or  else  it 
will  certainly  become  slack,  and  we  shall  lose  the 
thing  that  we  should  hold  fast.  So  my  text  exhorts 
us  against  ourselves,  and  against  the  temptations  of 
the  world,  which  are  always  present  with  us,  and  are 
far  more  operative  in  bringing  down  the  temperature 
of  the  Christian  Church,  and  of  its  individual  mem- 
bers, than  any  chilHng  that  arises  from  intellectual 
doubts. 

And  how  are  we  to  obey  the  exhortation  ?  Well, 
plainly,  if  "this"  is  the  revelation  of  God  in  Jesus 
Christ,  "  the  true  grace  of  God  "  which  alone  will  give 


AN  APOSTOLIG  TESTIMONY  AND  EXHORTATION.   287 


Stability  to  our  feet,  then  we  '•'  shall  not  stand  fast "  in 
it  unless  we  make  conscious  efforts  to  apprehend,  and 
comprehend,  and  keep  hold  of  it  in  our  minds  as^well 
as  in  our  hearts.  May  I  say  one  very  plain  word  ?  I 
am  very  much  afraid  that  people  do  not  read  their 
Bibles  very  much  now  (or  if  they  do  read  them,  they 
do  not  study  them),  and  that  anything  like  an  intelli- 
gent familiarity  with  the  whole  sweep  of  the  great 
system  (for  it  is  a  system)  of  Divine  truth,  evolved 
"at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners,"  in  this 
Word,  is  a  very  rare  thing  amongst  even  good  people. 
They  listen  to  sermons,  with  more  or  less  attention  ; 
they  read  newspapers,  no  doubt ;  they  read  good  little 
books,  and  magazines,  and  the  like ;  and  volumes  that 
profess  to  be  drawn  from  Scripture.  These  are  all 
right  and  good  in  their  place.  But  sure  I  am  that  a 
robust  and  firm  grasp  of  the  Gospel  "  which  is  the 
grace  of  God,"  is  not  possible,  with  a  starvation  diet 
of  Scripture.  And  so  I  would  say,  try  to  get  hold  of 
the  depth  and  width  of  meaning  in  the  Word. 

Ap-ain,  try  to  keep  heart  and  mind  in  contact  with 
it  amidst  distractions  and  daily  duties.  Try  to  bring 
the  principles  of  the  New  Testament  consciously  to 
bear  on  the  small  details  of  everyday  life.  Do  you  look 
at  your  day's  work  through  these  spectacles  ?  Does  it 
ever  occur  to  you,  as  you  are  going  about  your 
business,  or  your  profession,  or  your  domestic  work,  to 
ask  yourselves  what  bearing  the  Gospel  and  its  truths 
have  upon  these  ?  If  my  ordinary,  so-called  secular, 
avocations  are  evacuated  of  reference  to,  and  govern- 
ment by,  the  AVord  of  God,  I  want  to  know  what  of 
my  life  is  left  as  the  sphere  in  which  it  is  to  work. 


288    Ay  APOSTOLIC  TESTIMONY  AND  EXHORTATION. 

There  is  no  need  that  rehgion  and  daily  hfe  should  be 
kept  apart  as  they  are.  There  is  no  reason  why  the 
experience  of  to-day,  in  shop,  and  counting-house,  and 
kitchen,  and  study,  should  not  cast  light  upon,  and 
make  more  real  to  me,  "  the  true  grace  of  God."  Be 
sure  that  you  desire,  and  ask  for,  and  put  yourself  in 
the  attitude  of  receiving,  the  gifts  of  that  love,  which 
are  the  graces  of  the  Christian  life.  And  when  you 
have  got  them,  apply  them,  "  that  you  may  be  able  to 
withstand  in  the  evil  day ;  and,  having  done  all,  to 
stand." 


XXIX. 

Zhc  Cburcb  in  ffiabi^lon. 

'  The  church  that  is  at  Babylon,  elected  together  with  you,  saluteth 
you."— 1  Peter  v.  13. 

E  have  drawn  lessons  in  previous  ad- 
dresses from  the  former  parts  of  the 
closing  salutations  of  this  letter.  And 
now  I  turn  to  this  one  to  see  what  it 
may  yield  us.  The  Revised  Version 
omits  "  the  church,"  and  substitutes  "  she  "  ;  explain- 
inof  in  a  marofinal  note  that  there  is  a  difference  of 
opinion  as  to  whether  the  sender  of  the  letter  is  a 
community  or  an  individual.  All  the  old  MSS.,  with 
one  weighty  exception,  follow  the  reading  "  she  that 
is  at  Babylon."  But  it  seems  so  extremely  unlikely 
that  a  single  individual,  with  no  special  function, 
should  be  bracketed  along  with  the  communities  to 
whom  the  letter  was  addressed,  as  "elected  together 
with "  them,  that  the  conclusion  that  the  sender  of 
the  letter  is  a  church,  symbolically  designated  as  a 
"  lady,"  seems  the  natural  one. 

Then  there  is  another  question — where  was  Babylon? 
An  equal  diversity  of  opinion  has  arisen  about  that. 
I  do  not  venture  to  trouble  you  with  the  arguments 

19 


290  THE  CUURCH  IN  BABYLON. 


jjTo  and  con,  but  only  express  my  own  opinion  that 
"  Babylon  "  means  Rome. 

We  have  here  the  same  S3^mbolical  name  as  in  the 
Book  of  Revelation,  where,  whatever  further  mean- 
ings are  attached  to  the  designation,  it  is  intended 
primarily  as  an  appellation  for  the  imperial  city,  Avhich 
has  taken  the  place  filled  in  the  Old  Testament  by 
Babylon,  as  the  concentration  of  antagonism  to  the 
Kingdom  of  God. 

If  these  views  of  the  significance  of  the  expression 
are  adopted  we  have  here  the  Church  in  Rome,  the 
proud  stronghold  of  worldly  power  and  hostility, 
sending  its  greetings  to  the  scattered  Christian  com- 
munities in  the  provinces  of  what  is  now  called  Asia 
Minor.  The  fact  of  such  cordial  communications 
between  communities  separated  by  so  many  contrarie- 
ties as  well  as  by  race  and  distance,  familiar  though 
it  is,  may  suggest  several  profitable  considerations,  to 
which  I  ask  your  attention. 

I. — We  have  here  an  object  lesson  as  to  the  uniting 
power  of  the  Gospel. 

Just  think  of  the  relations  which,  in  the  civil 
Avorld,  subsisted  between  Rome  and  its  subject 
provinces ;  the  latter,  with  bitter  hatred  in  their 
hearts  to  everything  belonging  to  the  oppressing  city, 
having  had  their  freedom  crushed  down  and  their 
aspirations  ruthlessly  trampled  upon  ;  the  former,  with 
the  contempt  natural  to  metropolitans  in  dealing  with 
far-off  provincials.  The  same  kind  of  relationship 
subsisted  between  Rome  and  the  outlying  provinces 
of  its  unvvieldy  empire  as  between  England,  for 
instance,  and  its  Indian  possessions.     And  the  same 


THE  CHURCH  IN  BABYLON.  291 

uniting  bond  came  in  Avliicli  binds  the  Cliristian 
converts  of  these  Eastern  lands  of  ours  to  England  by 
a  far  firmer  bond  than  any  other.  There  was 
springing  up  amidst  all  the  alienation  and  hatred  and 
smothered  rebellion  a  still  incipient,  but  increasing, 
and  even  then  strong  bond  that  held  together  Roman 
Christians  and  Cappadocian  believers.  They  were  both 
"one  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  separating  walls  were 
high,  but,  according  to  the  old  saying,  you  cannot 
build  walls  high  enough  to  keep  out  the  birds ;  and 
spirits,  winged  by  the  common  faith,  soared  above  all 
earthly-made  distinctions  and  met  in  the  higher 
regions  of  Christian  communion.  When  the  tide 
rises  it  fills  and  unifies  the  scattered  pools  on  the 
beach.  So  the  uniting  power  of  Christian  faith  was 
manifest  in  these  early  days,  when  it  bound  such 
discordant  elements  tog^ether,  and  made  "  the  church 
that  was  in  Babylon  "  forget  that  they  were  to  a  large- 
extent  Romans  by  birth,  and  stretch  out  their  hands^ 
with  their  hearts  in  them,  to  the  churches  to  whom 
this  letter  was  sent. 

Xow,  brethren,  our  temptation  is  not  so  much  to 
let  barriers  of  race  and  language  and  distance  weaken 
our  sense  of  Christian  community,  as  it  is  to  let  even 
smaller  things  than  these  do  the  same  tragical  office 
for  us.  And  we,  as  Christian  people,  are  bound  to  try 
and  look  over  the  fences  of  our  "  denominations  "  and 
churches,  and  recognise  the  wider  fellowship  and 
larger  company  in  which  all  these  are  merged.  God 
be  thanked !  there  are  manifest  tokens  all  round  us 
to-day  that  the  age  of  separation  and  division  is  about 
coming  to  an  end.     Yearnings  for  unity,  which  must 

19* 


292  THE  CHURCH  IN  BABYLON. 

not  be  forced  into  acts  too  soon,  but  which  will  fulfil 
themselves  in  ways  not  yet  clear  to  any  of  us,  are 
beginning  to  rise  in  Christian  hearts.  Let  us  see  to 
it,  dear  friends,  that  we  do  our  parts  to  cherish  and  to 
increase  these,  and  to  yield  ourselves  to  the  uniting 
power  of  the  common  faith. 

II. — We  note,  further,  the  clear  recognition  here  of 
what  is  the  strong  bond  uniting  all  Christians. 

Peter  would  probably  have  been  very  much 
astonished  if  he  had  been  told  of  the  theological 
controversies  that  were  to  be  waged  round  that  word 
^'  elect."  The  emphasis  here  lies,  not  on  "  elect,"  but 
on  "  together."  It  is  not  the  thing  so  much  as  the 
common  possession  of  the  thing  which  bulks  largely 
before  the  Apostle.  In  effect  he  says,  ''The  reason 
why  these  Roman  Christians  that  have  never  looked 
you  Bithynians  in  the  face  do  yet  feel  their  hearts 
going  out  to  you,  and  send  you  their  loving  messages, 
is  because  they,  in  common  with  you,  have  been 
recipients  of  precisely  the  same  Divine  act  of  grace." 
We  do  not  now  need  to  discuss  the  respective  parts 
of  man  and  God  in  it,  nor  any  of  the  interminable 
controversies  that  have  sprung  up  around  the  word. 
God  had,  as  the  fact  of  their  possession  of  salvation 
showed,  chosen  Romans  and  Asiatics  together  to  be 
heirs  of  eternal  life.  By  the  side  of  these  transcendent 
blessings  which  they  possessed  in  common,  how 
pitiably  small  and  insignificant  all  the  causes  Avhich 
kept  them  apart  looked  and  were  ! 

And  so  here  we  have  a  partial  parallel  to  the  present 
state  of  Christendom,  in  which  are  seen  at  work,  on 
one  hand,  superficial  separation ;  on  the  other,  under- 


THE  CHURCH  IN  BABYLON.  293 

lying   unity.     The   splintered   peaks   may   stand,   or 
seem  to  stand,  apart  from  their  sister  summits,  or  may 
frown  at  each  other  across  impassable  gorges,  but  they 
all  belono:  to  one  o-eolosfical  formation,  and  in  their 
depths  their  bases  blend  indistinguishably  into  a  con- 
tinuous   whole.      Their    tops    are   miles    apart,   but 
beneath  the  surface  they  are  one.     And  so  the  things 
that  bind  Christian  men  together  are  the  great  things 
and  the  deepest  things ;  and  the  things  that  part  them 
are  the  small  and  superficial  ones.     Therefore,  it  is 
our  wisdom — not  only  for  the  sake  of  the  fact  of  our 
unity  and  for  the  sake  of  our  consciousness  of  unity, 
but   because  the   truths  which   unite   are   the  most 
important  ones — that  they  shall  bulk  largest  in  our 
hearts  and  minds.     And  if  they  do,  we  shall  know 
our  brother  in  every  man  that  is  like-minded  with  us 
towards  them,  whatever  shibboleth  may  separate  us 
I  spoke  a  moment  ago  about  the  separate  pools  on 
the  beach,  and  the  tide  rising.     When  the  tide  goes 
down,  and  the  spiritual  life  ebbs,  the  pools  are  parted 
again.     And  so  ages  of  feeble  spiritual  vitality  have 
been  ages  of  theological  controversy  about  secondary 
matters ;    and    ages   of  profound  realization   by  [the 
Church  of  the  great  fundamentals  of  Gospel   truth 
have   been    those    when    its   members   were    drawn 
together,  they  knew  not  how.     Hence  they  can  say  of 
and  to  each  other,  "  Elect  together  with  you." 

Brethren,  for  the  sake  of  the  strength  of  our  own 
reliofious  life,  do  not  let  us  fix  our  attention  on  the 
peculiarities  of  our  sects,  but  upon  the  catholic  truths 
believed  everywhere,  always,  by  all.  Then  we  shall 
''  walk  in  a  large  place,"  and  feel  how  many  there  are 


294  THE  CHURCH  IN  BABYLON, 

that  are  possessors  of  "like  precious  faith"  with  our- 
selves. 

III. — Then,  lastly,  we  may  find  here  a  hint  as  to 
the  pressing  need  for  such  a  realization  of  unity. 

''  The  church  that  is  in  Babylon  "  was  in  a  very 
uncongenial  place.  Thank  God,  no  Babylon  is  so 
Babylonish  but  that  a  Church  of  God  may  be  found 
planted  in  it.  No  circumstances  are  so  unfavourable 
to  the  creation  and  development  of  the  religious  life 
but  that  the  religious  life  may  grow  there.  An  orchid 
will  find  footing  upon  a  bit  of  stick,  because  it  draws 
nourishment  from  the  atmosphere ;  and  they  who  are 
fed  by  the  influx  of  the  Divine  Spirit  may  be  planted 
anywhere,  and  yet  flourish  in  the  courts  of  our  God. 
So  "  the  church  that  is  in  Babylon  "  gives  encourage- 
ment as  to  the  possibility  of  Christian  faith  being 
triumphant  over  adverse  conditions. 

But  it  also  gives  a  hint  as  to  the  obligation  springing 
from  the  circumstances  in  which  Christian  people  are 
set,  to  cultivate  the  sense  of  belonging  to  a  great 
brotherhood.  Howsoever  solitary,  and  surrounded  by 
uncongenial  associations  any  Christian  man  may  be, 
he  may  feel  that  he  is  not  alone,  not  only  because  his 
Master  is  with  him,  but  because  there  are  many  others 
whose  hearts  throb  with  the  same  love,  whose  lives 
are  surrounded  by  the  same  difficulties.  It  is  by  no 
means  a  mere  piece  of  selfish  consolation  which  this 
same  Apostle  gives  in  another  part  of  this  letter,  when 
he  bids  the  troubled  to  be  of  ofood  cheer,  as  remem- 
bering  that  the  "  same  afflictions  were  accomplished  in 
the  brotherhood  which  is  m  the  world."  He  did  not 
mean  to  say,  "  Take  comfort,  for  other  people  are  as 


THE  CHURCH  IN  BABYLON.  295 

badly  oti'  as  you  are,"  but  he  meant  to  call  to  the 
remeiubrance  of  the  solitary  sufferer  the  thousands  of 
his  brethren  who  were  "  dreeincr  the  same  weird  "  in 
the  same  uncongenial  world. 

If  thus  you  and  I,  Christian  men,  are  pressed  upon 
on  all  sides  by  such  worldly  associations,  the  more  need 
that  we  should  let  our  hearts  go  out  to  the  innumer- 
able multitude  of  our  fellows,  companions  in  the 
tribulation,  and  patience,  and  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Precisely  because  the  Roman  believers  were  in  Babylon, 
they  were  glad  to  think  of  their  brethren  in  Asia. 
Isolated  amidst  Rome's  splendours  and  sins,  it  was 
like  a  breath  of  cool  air  stealing  into  some  banquet- 
ing house  heavy  with  the  fumes  of  wine,  or  some 
slauQfhter-house  reekino:  with  the  smell  of  blood,  to 
remember  these  far-off*  partakers  of  a  purer  life. 

But  if  I  mio^ht  for  a  moment  divero^e,  I  would 
venture  to  say  that  in  the  conditions  of  thought,  and 
the  tendencies  of  thinofs  in  our  own  and  other  lands, 
it  is  more  than  ever  needful  that  Christian  people 
.should  close  their  ranks,  and  stand  shoulder  to 
shoulder.  For  men  who  believe  in  a  supernatural 
revelation,  in  the  Divine  Christ,  in  an  atoning  Sacri- 
fice, in  an  indwelling  Spirit,  are  guilty  of  suicidal  folly, 
if  they  let  the  comparative  trivialities  that  part  them, 
separate  God's  army  into  isolated  groups,  in  the  face 
of  the  ordered  battalions  that  are  assaulting  these 
i^reat  truths. 

Because  persecution  was  beginning  to  threaten  and 
rumble  on  the  horizon,  like  a  rising  thundercloud,  it 
was  the  more  needful,  in  Peter's  time,  that  Christians 
parted  by  seas,  by  race,  language,  and  customs,  should 


296  THE  CHURCH  IN  BABYLON. 

draw  together.  And  for  us,  fidelity  to  our  testimony,, 
and  loyalty  to  our  Master,  to  say  nothing  of  common 
sense,  and  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  command 
Christian  men  in  this  day  to  think  more,  and  to  speak 
more,  and  to  make  more,  of  the  great  verities  which 
they  all  possess  in  common. 

Thus,  brethren,  living  in  Babylon,  we  should  open 
our  windows  to  Jerusalem ;  and  though  we  dwell  here 
as  aliens,  we  may  say,  "  AYe  are  come  unto  the  city  of 
the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem ;  to  an  innu- 
merable company  of  angels;  to  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect ;  and  to  the  Church  of  the  first-born 
whose  names  are  written  in  Heaven." 


XXX. 

''flDarcue,  m^  Son/' 

'•  So  doth  Marcus,  my  son."— 1  Peter  v.  IB. 


:    as 

recorded  in  Scripture,  are  familiar. 
He  was  the  son  of  Mary,  a  woman  of 
some  wealth  and  position,  as  is  implied 
by  the  fact  that  her  house  was  large 
enough  to  accommodate  the  "  many "  who  were 
gathered  together  to  pray  for  Peter's  release.  He  was> 
a  relative,  probably  a  cousin  (Col.  iv.  10,  Revised 
Version),  of  Barnabas,  and,  possibly,  like  him,  a  native 
of  Cyprus.  The  designation  of  him  by  Peter  as  "  my 
son  "  naturally  implies  that  the  Apostle  had  been  the 
instrument  of  his  conversion.  An  old  tradition  tells 
us  that  he  was  the  "  young  man  "  mentioned  in  his. 
Gospel  who  saw  Christ  arrested,  and  fled,  leaving  his 
only  covering  in  the  captor's  hands.  However  that 
may  be,  he  and  his  relatives  were  early  and  prominent 
disciples,  and  closely  connected  with  Peter,  as  is 
evident  from  the  fact  that  it  was  to  Mary's  house 
that  he  went  after  his  deliverance.  Mark's  relation- 
ship to  Barnabas  made  it  natural  that  he  should  be 
chosen  to  accompany  him   and  Paul   on   their  first 


298  '' MARCUS,  MY  son: 


missionary  journey,  and  his  connection  with.  Cyprus 
helps  to  account  for  his  willingness  to  go  thither,  and 
his  unwillinofness  to  ^o  further  into  less  known 
ground.  AVe  know  how  he  left  the  Apostles,  when 
they  crossed  from  Cyprus  to  the  mainland,  and 
retreated  to  his  mother's  house  at  Jerusalem.  We 
have  no  details  of  the  inglorious  inactivity  in  which 
he  spent  the  time  until  the  proposal  of  a  second 
journey  by  Paul  and  Barnabas.  In  the  preparations 
for  it,  the  foolish  indukence  of  his  cousin,  far  less 
kind  than  Paul's  wholesome  severity,  led  to  a  rupture 
between  the  Apostles,  and  to  Barnabas  setting  off  on 
an  evangelistic  tour  on  his  own  account,  which  received 
no  sympathy  from  the  church  at  Antioch,  and  has 
been  deemed  unworthy  of  record  in  the  Acts. 

Then  followed  some  twelve  years  or  more,  during 
which  Mark  seems  to  have  remained  quiescent ;  or, 
at  all  events,  he  does  not  appear  to  have  had  any 
work  in  connection  with  the  great  Apostle.  Then  we 
find  him  re- appearing  amongst  Paul's  company  when 
he  was  in  prison  for  the  first  time  in  Rome  ;  and  in 
the  letters  to  Colossal  he  is  mentioned  as  beinof  a 
comfort  to  the  Apostle  then.  He  sends  salutations 
to  the  Colossians,  and  is  named  also  in  the  nearly 
contemporaneous  letter  to  Philenj.a.  According  to 
the  reference  in  Colossian?,  he  was  contemplating  a 
journey  amongst  the  Asiatic  churches,  for  that  in 
Colossre  is  bidden  to  welcome  him.  Then  comes  this 
mention  of  him  in  the  text.  The  fact  that  Mark  was 
beside  Peter  when  he  wrote  seems  to  confirm  the  view 
that  Babylon  here  is  a  mj^stical  name  for  Rome  ;  and 
that  this  letter  falls  somewhere  about  the  same  date 


"  MARCUS,  MY  SONr  299 


as  the  letters  to  Coloss?e  and  Philemon.  Here  again 
he  is  sending  salutations  to  Asiatic  churches.  We 
know  nothing  more  about  him,  except  that  some 
considerable  time  after,  in  Paul's  last  letter,  he  asks 
Timothy,  who  was  then  at  Ephesus,  the  headquarters 
of  the  Asiatic  churches,  to  "  take  Mark/'  who,  there- 
fore, was  apparently  also  in  Asia,  "  and  bring  him  " 
with  him  to  Rome;  "for,"  sa3^s  the  Apostle,  beautifully 
referring  to  the  man's  former  failure,  "  he  is  profitable 
to  me  for  " — the  very  office  that  he  had  formerly  flung 
up — "  the  ministry." 

So,  possibly,  he  was  with  Paul  in  his  last  days. 
And  then,  after  that,  tradition  tells  us  that  he 
attached  himself  more  closely  to  the  Apostle  Peter ; 
and,  flnalty,  at  his  direction  and  dictation,  became  the 
evangelist  who  wrote  the  "  Gospel  according  to 
Mai-lv." 

Now  that  is  his  story ;  and  from  the  figure  of  this 
"  Marcus,  my  son,"  and  from  his  appearance  here  in 
this  letter,  I  wish  to  gather  two  or  three  very  plain 
and  familiar  lessons. 

I. — The  first  of  them  is  the  working  of  Christian 
sympathy. 

Mark  was  a  full-blooded  Jew  when  he  began  his 
career.  "John,  whose  surname  was  Mark,"  like  a 
great  many  other  Jews  at  that  time,  bore  a  double 
name— one  Jewish,  "John,"  and  one  Gentile,  "Marcus." 
But  as  time  goes  on  we  do  not  hear  anything  more 
about  "John,"  nor  even  about  "John  Mark,"  which 
are  the  two  forms  of  his  name  when  he  is  first  in- 
troduced to  us  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  but  he 
finall}'  appears  to  have  cast  aside  his  Hebrew,  and  to 


300  "  MARCUS,  MY  SON." 

have  been  only  known  by  his  Koman  name.  And 
that  change  of  appellation  coincides  with  the  fact  that 
so  many  of  the  allusions  w^hich  we  have  to  him 
represent  him  as  sending  messages  of  Christian  greet- 
ing across  the  sea  to  his  Gentile  brethren.  And  it 
further  coincides  Avith  the  fact  that  his  gospel  is 
obviously  intended  for  the  use  of  Gentile  Christians^ 
and,  according  to  an  old  and  reliable  tradition,  was 
written  in  Rome  for  Roman  Christians.  All  of  which 
facts  just  indicate  two  things,  that  the  more  a  man 
has  real  operative  love  to  Jesus  Christ  in  his  heart;, 
the  more  he  will  rise  above  all  limitations  of  his 
interests,  his  sympathy,  and  his  efforts,  and  the  more 
surely  will  he  let  himself  out,  as  far  as  he  can,  in 
affection  towards  and  toils  for  all  men. 

This  change  of  name,  though  it  is  a  mere  trifle,  and 
may  have  been  adopted  as  a  matter  of  convenience, 
may  also  be  taken  as  reminding  us  of  a  very 
important  truth,  and  that  is,  that  if  w^e  wish  to  help 
people,  the  first  condition  is  that  we  go  down  and 
stand  on  their  level,  and  make  ourselves  one  wdth 
them,  as  far  as  we  can.  And  so  Mark  may  have  said, 
''  I  have  put  away  the  name  that  parts  me  from  these 
Gentiles,  for  whom  I  desire  to  work,  and  whom  I  love  : 
and  I  take  the  name  that  binds  me  to  them."  Why, 
it  is  the  very  same  principle,  in  a  small  instance — 
just  as  a  raindrop  that  hangs  on  the  thorn  of  a  rose- 
bush is  moulded  by  the  same  laws  that  shape  the 
great  sphere  of  the  central  sun — it  is  a  small  instance 
of  the  great  principle  which  brought  Jesus  Christ  down 
into  the  world  to  die  for  us.  You  must  become  like 
the  people  that  you  want  to  help.     "Forasmuch  as. 


MARCUS,  MY  son:'  301 


the  children  were  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  He 
iilso  Himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same,  that  He 
might  deliver  them."  And  so,  not  only  the  duty  of 
widening  our  sympathies,  but  one  of  the  supreme 
conditions  of  being  of  use  to  anybody,  are  set  forth  in 
the  comparatively  trifling  incident,  which  we  pass  by 
without  noticing  it,  that  this  man,  a  Jew  to  his  finger- 
tips, finally  found  himself — or,  rather,  finally  was 
carried,  for  it  was  no  case  of  unconscious  drifting — 
into  the  position  of  a  messenger  of  the  Cross  to  the 
Gentiles  ;  and,  for  the  sake  of  efficiency  in  his  work, 
and  of  getting  close  by  the  side  of  people  whom 
he  wanted  to  influence,  flung  away  dehberately  that 
which  parted  him  from  them.  It  is  a  small  matter, 
but  a  little  window  may  show  a  very  wide  prospect. 

II. — The  history  of  Mark  suggests  the  possibility  of 
overcoming  early  faults. 

AVe  do  not  know  why  he  refused  to  bear  the  burden 
of  the  work  that  he  had  so  cheerily  begun.  Probably 
the  reason  that  I  have  suggested  may  have  had 
something  to  do  with  it.  When  he  started  he  did 
not  bargain  for  going  into  unknown  lands,  in  which 
there  were  many  toils  to  be  encountered.  He  was 
willing  to  go  where  he  knew  the  ground,  and  w^here 
there  were  people  that  would  make  things  easy  for 
him;  but  when  Paul  went  further  afield,  Mark's 
oourage  ebbed  out  at  his  finger  ends,  and  he  slunk  back 
to  the  comfort  of  his  mother's  house  in  Jerusalem. 
At  all  events,  whatever  his  reason,  his  return  was  a 
fault ;  or  Paul  would  not  have  been  so  hard  upon  him 
as  he  was.  The  writer  of  the  Acts  puts  Paul's  view 
of  the  case  strongly  by  the  arrangement  of  clauses  in 


302  '' MARCUS,  MY  SOX. 


the  sentence  in  which  he  tells  us  that  the  Apostle 
"  thought  not  good  to  take  him  with  them  who 
withdrew  from  them  from  Pamphylia,  and  went  not 
with  them  to  the  work."  If  he  thus  threw  down  his 
tools  whenever  he  came  to  a  little  difficulty,  and  said, 
*-'As  long  as  it  is  easy  work,  and  close  to  the  base  of 
operations,  I  am  your  man,  but  if  there  is  any 
sacrifice  wanted  you  must  look  out  for  somebody  else," 
he  was  not  precisely  a  worker  after  Paul's  own  heart. 
And  the  best  way  to  treat  him  was  as  the  Apostle 
did;  and  to  say  to  Barnabas'  indulgent  proposal,  "No! 
he  would  not  do  the  work  before,  and  now  he  shall 
not  do  it."  That  is  often  God's  way  with  us.  It 
brings  us  to  our  senses,  as  it  brought  Mark  to  his. 

AVe  do  not  know  how  long  it  took  to  cure  Mark  of 
his  early  fault,  but  he  was  thoroughly  cured.  The 
man  that  was  afraid  of  dangers  and  difficulties  and 
hypothetical  risks  in  Asia  Minor  became  brave  enough 
to  stand  by  the  Apostle  when  he  was  a  prisoner,  and 
was  not  ashamed  of  his  chain.  And  afterwards,  so 
much  had  he  won  his  way  into  the  Apostle's  con- 
fidence, and  made  himself  needful  for  him  by  his 
services  and  his  sweetness,  that  the  lonely  prisoner, 
Avith  the  gibbet  or  headsman's  sword  in  prospect,  feels 
that  he  would  like  to  have  Mark  with  him  once  more, 
and  bids  Timothy  bring  him  with  himself,  for  "  he  is 
profitable  to  me  for  the  ministry."  "  He  can  do  a 
thousand  things  that  a  man  like  me  cannot  do  for 
himself,  and  he  does  them  all  for  love  and  nothing  for 
reward."  So  he  wants  Mark  once  more.  And  thus 
not  only  Paul's  generosity,  but  Mark's  own  patient 
effort  had  pasted  a  clean  sheet  over  the  one  that  was 


''MARCUS,  MY  SOXr  303 

inscribed  with  the  black  story  of  his  desertion,  and  he 
became  "  profitable  for  "  the  task  that  he  had  once,  in 
so  petulant  and  cowardly  a  way,  flung  up. 

Well,  translate  that  from  the  particular  into  the 
general  and  it  comes  to  this.  Let  no  man  set  limits 
to  the  possibilities  of  his  own  restoration,  and  of  his 
curing  faults  which  are  most  deeply  rooted  within 
himself.  Hope  and  eftbrt  should  be  boundless.  There 
is  nothing  that  a  Christian  man  may  not  reach,  in  the 
way  of  victory  over  his  worse  self,  and  ejection  of 
his  most  deeply-rooted  faults,  if  only  he  will  be  true 
to  Jesus,  and  use  the  gifts  that  are  given  to  him. 
There  are  many  of  us  whose  daily  life  is  pitched  in  a 
minor  key  ;  vv^hose  whole  landscape  is  grey  and  mono- 
tonous and  sunless  ;  who  feel  as  if  yesterday  must  set 
the  tune  for  to-day,  and  as  if,  because  we  have  been 
beaten  and  baftied  so  often,  it  is  useless  to  try  again. 
But  remember  that  the  field  on  which  the  Stone  of 
Help  was  erected,  to  commemorate  the  great  and 
decisive  victory  that  Israel  won,  was  the  very  field  on 
which  the  same  foes  had  before  contended,  and  then 
Israel  had  been  defeated. 

So,  brethren,  we  may  win  victories  on  the  very  soil 
where  formerly  we  were  shamefully  put  to  the  rout ; 
and  our  Christ  with  us  will  make  anything  possible 
for  us,  in  the  Avay  of  restoration,  of  cure  of  old  faults, 
of  ceasing  to  repeat  former  sins.  I  suppose  that  wdien 
a  spar  is  snapped  on  board  a  vessel,  and  lashed 
together  with  spun  yarn  and  lanyards,  as  a  sailor 
knows  how  to  do,  it  is  stronger  at  the  point  of  fracture 
than  it  was  before.  I  suppose  that  it  is  possible  for  a 
man  to  be  most  impregnable  at  the  point  where  he  is 


304  "  MARCUS,  MY  SON: 


naturally  weakest,  if  he  chooses  to  use  the  defences 
that  Jesus  Christ  has  given. 

HI. — Take  another  lesson— the  greatness  of  little 
service. 

We  do  not  hear  that  this  John  Mark  ever  tried  to 
•do  any  work  in  the  way  of  preaching  the  Gospel. 
His  business  was  a  very  much  humbler  one.  He  had 
to  attend  to  Paul's  comfort.  He  had  to  be  his  factotum, 
man  of  all  work;  looking  after  material  things,  the 
•commissariat,  the  thousand  and  one  trifles  that 
someone  had  to  see  to  if  the  Apostle's  great  work  was 
to  get  done.  And  he  did  it  all  his  life  long.  It  was 
enough  for  him  to  do  thoroughly  the  entirely 
"  secular  "  work,  as  some  people  would  think  it,  which 
it  was  in  his  power  to  do.  That  needed  some  self- 
suppression.  It  would  have  been  so  natural  for  Mark 
to  have  said,  "  Paul  sends  Timothy  to  be  bishop  in 
Crete ;  and  Titus  to  look  after  other  churches ; 
Epaphroditus  is  an  ofiicial  here;  and  Apollos  is  a 
great  preacher  there.  And  here  am  I,  grinding  away 
at  the  secularities  yet.  I  think  I'll  '  strike,'  and  try 
and  get  more  conspicuous  work."  Or,  he  might 
perhaps  deceive  himself,  and  say,  "more  directly 
religious  work,"  like  a  great  many  of  us  that  often 
mask  a  very  carnal  desire  for  prominence  under  a 
very  saintly  guise  of  desire  to  do  spiritual  service. 
Let  us  take  care  of  that.  This  "  minister,"  who  was 
not  a  minister  at  all,  in  our  sense  of  the  word,  but 
only  in  the  sense  of  being  a  servant,  a  private 
attendant  and  valet  of  the  Apostle,  was  glad  to  do 
that  work  all  his  days. 

That  was  self-suppression.     But  it  was  something 


'' MARCUS,  MY  SON."  30.5- 

more.  It  was  a  plain  recognition  of  what  w^e  all  ought 
to  have  very  clearly  before  us,  and  that  is,  that  all 
sorts  of  work  which  contribute  to  one  end  are  one 
sort  of  work ;  and  that  at  bottom  the  man  who 
carried  Paul's  books  and  parchments,  and  saw  that  he 
was  not  left  without  clothes,  though  he  was  so  negli- 
gent of  cloaks  and  other  necessaries,  was  just  as 
much  helping  on  the  cause  of  Christ  as  the  Apostle 
when  he  preached. 

I  wonder  if  any  of  you  remember  the  old  story 
about  an  organist  and  his  blow^er.  The  blower  was 
asked  who  it  was  that  played  that  great  sonata  of 
Beethoven's,  or  somebody's.  And  he  answered,  "  I  do 
not  know  Avho  played,  but  I  blew^  it."  There  is  a 
great  truth  there.  If  it  had  not  been  for  the 
unknown  man  at  the  bellow^s,  the  artist  at  the  keys 
w^ould  not  have  done  much.  So  Mark  helped  PauL 
And  as  Jesus  Christ  said,  "  He  that  receive th  a 
prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet,  shall  receive  a 
prophet's  reward." 

IT. — Take  as  the  last  lesson  the  enlarged  sphere 
that  follows  faithfulness  in  small  matters. 

"What  a  singular  change !  The  man  who  began 
with  being  a  servant  of  Paul  and  of  Barnabas  ends  by 
being  the  evangelist,  and  it  is  to  him,  under  Peter's 
direction,  that  w^e  owe  what  is  possibly  the  oldest, 
and,  at  all  events,  in  some  aspects,  an  entirely  unique, 
narrative  of  our  Lord's  life.  Do  you  think  that  Peter 
would  ever  have  said  to  him  :  "  Mark !  come  here  and 
sit  down,  and  write  what  I  tell  you,"  if  there  had  not 
been  beforehand  these  long  years  of  faithful  service  ? 
So  is  it  always,  dear  friends.     "  He  that  is  faithful  in 

20 


306  '^  MARCUS,  MY  SON. 


/ 


that  which  is  least  is  faithful  also  in  much."  That  is 
not  only  a  declaration  that  faithfulness  is  one  in  kind, 
whatever  be  the  diameter  of  the  circle  in  which  it  is 
exercised,  but  it  may  also  be  taken  as  a  promise, 
though  that  was  not  the  original  intention  of  the 
saying. 

For  quite  certainly,  in  God's  providence,  the  tools 
do  come  to  the  hand  that  can  wield  them,  and  the 
best  reward  that  we  can  get  for  doing  Avell  our  little 
work  is  to  have  larger  work  to  do.  The  little  tapers 
are  tempted,  if  I  may  use  so  incongruous  a  figure,  to 
wish  themselves  set  up  on  loftier  stands.  Shine  your 
brightest  in  your  corner,  and  you  will  be  "  exalted  "  in 
due  time.  It  is  so,  as  a  rule,  in  this  world ;  some- 
times too  much  so,  for,  as  they  say  is  the  case  at  the 
English  bar,  so  it  is  sometimes  in  God's  Church, 
*'  There  is  no  medium  between  having  nothing  to  do 
and  being  killed  with  work."  Still,  the  reward  for 
work  is  more  work.  And  the  law  will  be  exempli- 
fied most  blessedly  when  Christ  shall  say,  "  "Well 
done  !  f^ood  and  faithful  servant.  Thou  hast  been 
faithful  over  a  few  thino's,  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over 
many  things." 

So  this  far-away  figure  of  the  minister-evangelist 
salutes  us  too,  and  bids  us  be  of  good  cheer,  notwith- 
standing all  faults  and  failures,  because  it  is  possible 
for  us,  as  he  has  proved,  to  recover  ourselves  after  them 
all.  God  will  not  be  less  generous  in  forgiveness  than 
Paul  was  ;  and  even  you  and  I  may  hear  from  Christ's 
lips,  "  Thou  art  profitable  to  Me  for  the  ministry." 

Alkxandkr  <t  Shepheard,  Printers,  27,  Chancery  Lane,  London,  W.C, 


Date  Due 


^Mt\\ftm^^lSi 


