n 


(I 


3. as. I 


^^  PRINCETON,  N.  J.  4h 


Presented 

by     A. 

G.  CoN-nnenron  ,  PV^.I). 

BV    651 

.J3 

1829 

JTaznes  , 

John 

Angel 1 , 

L785- 

1859. 

Christ 

ian    fellowship 

,    or. 

The    church 

member's 

guide 

TlECEi 


. Srt  a/'ijri  liwi  lift  iirii\  loi  naJiiiii 

bill  stiij\  lilt/  tlir  stnpbirfs.  p        aj 

bostoit: 


1^  if  fSM^ 

CHRISTIAN  lfeLL0M4ftA8   1911      ^ 


OR    THE^^^/CAL    SIV^ 


CHURCH  MEMBER'S  GUIDE, 


/ 

BY  J.  A.  JAMES,  A.  M. 

BIRMI>'GHAM,    E-VGLAND. 


'■^  And  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets, 
Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  corner  stone."  .  .  .  Eph.  ii.  20. 


EDITED 

BY  J.  O.  CHOULES,  A.  M. 

Paster  of  the  Second  Baptist  Church  in  Newport,  R.  I. 


iJo.titon: 

LINCOLN  &  EDMANDS,  PRINTERS  AND  PUBLISHERS, 
No.  59  Washington- Street. 

1829. 


DISTRICT  OF  MASSACHUSETTS,  to  -wit: 

District  Cleric's  Office, 

BE  IT  REMEMBERED,  That  on  the  third  day  of  April,  A.  D. 
1829,  in  the  fifty  third  year  of  the  Independence  of  the  United  States 
of  America,  Lincoln  k.  Edmands,  of  the  said  district,  have  deposited 
in  this  office  the  title  of  a  Book,  the  right  whereof  they  claim  as  Pro- 
prietors, in  the  words  following,  to  wit  : 

"Christian  Fellowship,  or  The  Church  Member's  Guide.  By  J.  A. 
James,  A.  M.  Birmingham,  England.  'And  are  built  upon  the  foun- 
dation of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the 
chief  corner  stone.'  Eph.  ii.  20.  Edited  by  J.  0.  Choules,  A.  M.  Pas- 
tor of  the  Second  Baptist  Church,  Newport,  R.  I." 

In  Conformity  to  the  Act  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  en- 
titled, "An  Act  for  the  encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securing  the 
copies,  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of 
such  copies  during  the  times  therein  mentioned  ;  "  and  also  to  an  Act, 
entitled,  "  An  Act  supplementary  to  an  Act,  entitled,  An  Act  for  the 
encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securing  the  co])ies  of  Maps,  Charts, 
and  Books  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such  copies  during  the 
times  theiein  menti  5ned  :  and  extending  the  benefits  thereof  to  the 
arts  of  Designing,  Engraving,  and  Etching  Historical  and  other  Prints." 
JNO.  W.  DAVIS,  Clerk  of  the  District  of  3Iassachusetts. 


PREFACE 

TO    THE     AMERICAN    EDITION. 


IN  presenting  the  following  pages  to  the  no- 
tice of  the  American  churches,  it  is  necessary 
to  offer  some  remarks. 

During  the  few  past  years,  God  has  gra- 
ciously poured  out  his  Holy  Spirit  upon  various 
regions  of  our  country.  Zion  has  broken  forth 
on  the  right  hand  and  upon  the  left,  and  has 
received  a  vast  accession  of  converts  from  those 
who  were  once  aliens  from  the  commonwealth 
of  Israel.  The  church  has  gazed  upon  her 
new-born  children  with  dehght,  and  inquired, 
"  As  for  these,  whence  did  they  come  ?  "  They 
are  recruits  from  the  world,  they  are  deserters 
from  the  army  of  the  prince  of  the  powers  of 
darkness,  they  have  sworn  allegiance  to  another 
Sovereign,  one  Jesus.  They  have  identified 
themselves  with  his  cause,  they  are  the  subjects 
of  his  kingdom,  they  have  become  strangers 
upon  the  earth,  that  they  may  be  citizens  in 
heaven,  and  they  seek  that  better  country. 

It  has  been  frequently  lamented,  that  there 
was  no  work  upon  Church  Fellowship,  which 


IV  editor's  preface. 

could  be  put  into  the  hands  of  church  membefsf, 
and  especially  of  our  youthful  brethren  and  sis- 
ters, embodying  under  separate  heads  those  scrip- 
tural instructions  which  lie  dispersed  through 
the  Sacred  Volume.  I  have  frequently  heard 
the  complaint  from  ministers,  "  O  that  we  had  a 
directory  for  our  members,  that  all  our  churches 
and  all  our  brethren  might  be  one  in  disciphne 
and  feeling,  as  well  as  in  doctrine  and  prac- 
tice." And  since  my  engagement  in  pastoral 
labours,  and  more  especially  when  lately  call- 
ed to  receive  a  large  number  of  young  and  inex- 
perienced persons  to  the  fellowship  of  the 
church,  I  have  felt  that  a  Church  Member's 
Guide  was  a  desideratum.  After  a  careful  ex- 
amination of  the  various  works  on  this  subject, 
which  are  in  circulation  in  the  English  church- 
es, I  am  persuaded  that  I  can  render  no  great- 
er benefit  to  the  Christian  church,  than  by 
presenting  to  its  attentive  regard,  the  treatise 
entitled,  "Christian  Fellowship,  or  The  Church 
Member's  Guide,"  by  the  Rev.  J.  A.  James  of 
Birmingham.  On  a  careful  perusal  of  the  Eng- 
lish edition,  I  was  convinced,  that  though  admi- 
rably adapted  to  the  state  of  the  British  church- 
es, yet  it  required  considerable  alteration  to  render 
it  extensively  useful  in  our  western  churches, 
which  have  so  happily  come  up  from  the  bond- 
age of  National  Establishment,  passed  through 
the  wilderness  of  persecution,  and    are   plant- 


EDITOR'S    PREFACE.  V 

ed  in  this  thrice  happy  land,  where  govern- 
ment does  all  for  rehgion  which  she  asks, 
wishes,  or  wants  ;     and  that  is, — lets  her  alone. 

Mr.  James  has  displayed  singular  abihty  in 
his  defence  of  the  churches  which  have  dissent- 
ed from  the  National  Establishment ;  and  it  is 
gratifying  to  see  so  able  a  champion,  wielding 
such  powerful  weapons,  with  so  fearless  a  tem- 
per, in  a  cause  so  good  and  holy  as  that  of 
Protestant  Nonconformity.  But  the  existing 
relation  of  Episcopacy  and  dissent  in  England, 
which  folly  justify  Mr.  James  in  carrying  his 
remarks  on  Law  Establishments  throughout  the 
volume,  having  no  place  among  us,  it  is  desira- 
ble and  indeed  necessary,  that  all  passages  of 
reference  to  these  subjects  should  be  expunged. 
I  may  be  exposed  to  the  cavils  of  a  few  who 
would  blame  me  for  altering  an  author's  work, 
adding  to,  or  diminishing  from  it ;  but  I  find 
all  the  shelter  that  I  need  from  such  censure, 
in  the  opening  remark  of  Mr.  James'  Preface : 
"  The  chief  value  of  a  book  consists  in  its  utility." 
The  entire  civil  and  religious  liberty  which  we 
enjoy  in  this  country,  has  produced  habits  and 
sentiments  very  dissimilar  to  those  which  are 
the  result  of  a  diflferent  state  of  society  in  our 
fatherland. 

Bearing  this  fact  in  view,  I  have  omitted  many 
expressions,  left  out  whole  lines  and  paragraphs, 


Vm  PREFACE. 

through  channels  which  although  intricate,  are 
certainly  not  new. 

The  author  has  treated  the  subject  of  church 
govermnent,  more  in  a  practical,  than  in  a 
controversial  manner.  Numerous  are  the  votive 
offerings  which  ah'eady  hang  around  this  com- 
partment of  the  temple  of  truth  ;  but  they  are 
too  generally  composed  of,  or  attended  with,  a 
chaplet  of  thorns.  In  this  treatise,  the  author 
has  endeavoured  to  sacrifice  at  the  same  time, 
to  both  truth  and  love,  whose  altars  should  ever 
be  near  to  each  other.  He  has  endeavoured 
to  state  his  own  opinions  with  clearness  and 
boldness,  but  at  the  same  time,  without  dogma- 
tism or  asperity.  His  aim  has  been  rather  to 
regulate  the  spiritual  pohce  of  our  Zion,  than 
either  professedly  to  strengthen  its  bulwarks,  or 
to  increase  its  means  of  spiritual  conquest  : 
assured  that  it  is  most  mighty,  when  it  is  most 
holy  and  most  peaceful ;  and  that  love  and  puri- 
ty render  our  churches  "  bright  as  the  sun,  fair 
as  the  moon,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with 
banners." 

As  the  form  of  church  government  here  ex- 
hibited, so  far  as  human  direction  is  concerned, 


PREFACE.  IX 

allows  of  a  considerable  share  of  popular  influ- 
ence, the  author  has  adopted  two  general 
principles,  to  which  he  has  given  great  promi- 
nence in  the  following  pages,  and  these  are,  the 
absolute  impropriety  of  a  few  rich  men  attempt- 
ing to  lord  it  over  God's  heritage,  and  the  equal 
impropriety  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  young, 
or  immature  in  knowledge  and  experience, 
jiractically  asserting  then-  claim  to  equal  rights, 
upon  every  occasion,  in  a  vehement,  contentious 
manner.  In  all  societies,  there  necessarily 
must  be  some  individuals,  of  greater  influence 
than  the  rest ;  but  this  influence  should  ever 
be  the  result  of  character  and  usefulness,  rather 
than  of  station ;  and  should  be  most  cheerflilly 
conceded  by  others,  but  never  forcibly  taken  by 
themselves. 

If  the  author  had  been  acquainted  with  any 
treatise  on  this  subject,  in  which  the  principles 
here  laid  down  and  illustrated,  had  been  sufii- 
ciently  developed,  he  would  have  spared  himself 
(the  trouble  of  this  production.  The  httle  tract 
of  Dr.  Owen's,  entitled  "  Eshcol,"  the  addresses 
of  Dr.  Harris,  and  Mr.  Hackett,  and  the  Cat- 
echism of  Mr.  Miller,  are  exceedingly  excellent ; 


X  PREFACE. 

and  the  only  fault  belonging  to  them,  which 
the  author  has  any  hope  of  correcting  in  his  book, 
is  their  brevity.  The  compendium  of  the  late 
Rev.  Daniel  Turner,  of  Abington,  is  very  useful 
as  a  skeleton ;  but  a  mere  unclothed  synopsis 
of  principles,  unaccompanied  by  much  illustra- 
tion, is  not  sufficiently  attractive  for  ordinary 
readers,  who  need  not  only  to  be  informed  w^hat 
is  their  duty,  but  allured  to  its  performance. 
Mr.  Inne's  Sketches  of  Human  Nature  are 
judicious  to  admiration,  and  have  furnished  many 
valuable  remarks  to  enrich  the  following  work  ; 
but  do  not  so  directly  and  comprehensively  treat 
on  the  subject  of  church  government,  as  to  ren- 
der this  volume  unnecessary. 


CHURCH  MEMBER'S  GUIDE, 


CHAPTER  I. 

ON  THE  NATURE  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH. 

It  is  obviously  incumbent  on  the  members  of 
any  community,  whetlier  civil  or  sacred,  to 
acquaint  themselves  with  its  constitution  and 
design ;  without  this,  they  can  neither  adequate- 
ly enjoy  the  privileges,  nor  properly  discharge 
the  duties  wloich  their  membership  brings  with 
it.  Such  persons  are  held  more  by  feeling  than 
by  principle  ;  a  tenure  quite  insufficient,  as  a 
bond  of  religious  connexion. 

It  is  admitted  that  as  in  the  human  frame,  so 
in  the  system  of  divine  truth,  there  are  parts 
of  greater  and  less  importance  ;  and  the  man 
who  would  put  the  principles  of  church  govern- 
ment upon  a  level  with  the  doctrine  of  the 
atonement,  and  represent  a  belief  in  the  former 
as  no  less  essential  to  salvation  than  a  rehance 
upon  the  latter,  betrays  a  lamentable  ignorance 
of  both.  Still,  however,  although  the  hand  is 
of  less  consequence  to  vitahty  than  the  head  or 


12  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

the  heart,  is  it  of  no  value  ?  Will  any  one  be 
reckless  of  his  members,  because  he  can  lose 
them  and  yet  live  ?  So  because  church  govern- 
ment is  of  less  moment  to  spiritual  and  eternal 
life  than  faith  in  Christ,  will  any  one  abandon  it 
as  a  vain  and  profitless  subject  ?  Whatever  God 
has  made  the  subject  of  revealed  truth,  should 
be  guarded  on  that  account,  from  being  con- 
sidered as  too  frivolous  to  deserve  our  jlttention. 
It  will  probably  be  contended  by  some,  in 
apology  for  their  neglect,  that  the  New  Testa- 
ment has  laid  down  no  specific  form  of  church 
government,  and  that  where  we  are  left  without 
a  guide,  it  is  useless  to  inquire  if  we  are  follow- 
ing his  directions.  If  by  this  it  be  meant  to  say, 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  left  us  no  apos- 
tolic precept  or  example,  which  is  either  direc- 
tory for  our  practice,  or  obligatory  upon  our 
conscience,  in  the  formation  of  Christian,  socie- 
ties, nothing  can  be  more  erroneous.  It  might 
be  presumed  a  priori,  that  a  matter  of  such  mo- 
ment would  not  be  left  so  unsettled,  and  we  have 
only  to  look  into  the  Word  of  God  to  see  how 
groundless  is  the  assertion.  It  is  true  that  we 
shall  search  the  New  Testament  in  vain  for 
either  precedent  or  practice,  which  will  support 
all  the  usages  of  our  churches,  any  otherwise 
than  as  these  usages  are  deduced  from  the 
spirit  and  bearing  of  general  principles.  Theso 
alone  are  laid  down  by  the  Apostles,  but  still 


13 

with  sufficient  precision  to  enable  us  to  deter- 
mine whether  the  Episcopal,  the  Presbyterian, 
or  Independent  form  of  church  government, 
be  most  consonant  with  the  mhid  and  will  of 
Christ. 

What  is  a  Christian  church  ? 

The  woi-d  church  signifies  an  assembly.  In 
the  New  Testament  it  invariably  applies  to  per- 
sons, not  to  places.  It  means  not  the  building 
in  which  the  assembly  is  convened,  but  the  as- 
sembly itself.  It  has  an  enlarged  and  also  a 
more  confined  signification  in  the  Word  of  God. 
In  some  places  it  is  employed  to  comprehend 
the  aggregate  of  believers  of  every  age  and  na- 
tion ;  hence  we  read  of  the  "  general  assembly 
and  church  of  the  firstborn,"  and  of  the  church 
which  "  Christ  loved  and  purchased  with  his 
blood."*"  In  its  more  confined  acceptation,  it 
means  a  congregation  of  professing  Christians, 
meeting  for  worship  in  one  place  ;  hence  we 
read  of  the  church  at  Rome,  Coiosse,  Philip- 
pi,  &c.  These  are  the  only  two  senses  in  which 
the  word  is  ever  employed  by  the  sacred  writers  ; 
consequently  all  provincial  and  national  church- 
es, or  in  other  words  to  call  the  people  of  a  pro- 
vince or  nation  a  church  of  Christ,  is  a  most 
gross  perversion  of  the  term,  and  rendering  the 
kingdom  of  Jesus  more  a  matter  of  geography 

*  Acts  XX.  28. 


14  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

than  of  religion.  The  sacred  writers,  when 
speaking  of  the  Christians  of  a  whole  province, 
never  employ  the  term  in  the  singular  number  ; 
but  with  great  precision  of  language  speak  of 
the  churches  of  Galatia,  Syria,  Macedonia, 
Asia,  &c. 

A  church  of  Christ,  then,  in  the  latter  or  more 
usual  acceptation  of  the  term,  means  "  a  number 
of  professing  Christians,  united  to  each  other  by 
their  own  voluntary  consent,  having  their  pro- 
per officers,  meeting  in  one  place  for  the  obser- 
vance of  religious  ordinances,  and  who  are  inde- 
pendent of  all  other  control  than  the  authority 
of  Christ  expressed  in  his  word."  This  com- 
pany of  professing  Christians  may  be  few  or 
many  in  number,  rich  or  poor  in  their  circum- 
stances, and  may  meet  either  in  a  mean  or  mag- 
nificent building,  or  in  no  building  at  all.  These 
things  are  purely  adventitious  ;  for  provided 
they  answer  to  the  above  definition,  they  are 
still  to  all  intent  and  purpose  a  church  of  Christ. 

I.  The  members  of  the  church  should  be  such 
as  make  a  credible  profession  of  their  faith  in 
Christ  ;  or  in  other  words,  such  as  appear  to  be 
regenerated  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  have  believ- 
ed in  the  Lord  Jesus  for  salvation,  and  to  have 
submitted  themselves  in  their  conduct  to  the 
authority  of  his  word.  To  these  the  Head  of 
the  church  has  limited  the  privileges  of  his  king- 
dom ;  they  alone  can  enjoy  its  blessings  and  per- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  15 

form  its  duties  :  and  to  such  the  Epistles  are 
uniformly  addressed,  Romans  i.  7.  Cor.  i.  2.  &:c. 
If  these  passages  are  read,  it  will  be  found  that  the 
members  of  the  first  churches  are  not  merely 
admonished  to  he  saints,  but  are  addressed  as 
such  :  which  is  a  circumstance  of  great  weight 
in  determining  the  question  upon  proper  subjects 
of  fellowship.  But  who  is  to  judge  in  this 
case  ?  It  is  generally  thought  the  church  ;  for 
although  no  instance  can  be  brought  from  the 
New  Testament  in  which  any  one  of  the  primi- 
tive churches  can  be  proved  to  have  exercised 
this  power,  yet  as  it  is  a  voluntary  society,  found- 
ed on  the  principle  of  mutual  afiection,  it  seems 
reasonable  that  the  chiu*ch  should  judge  of  the 
existence  of  those  quahfications  which  are  neces- 
sary to  the  enjoyment  of  communion.  The  very 
act  of  obtruding  upon  them  any  one  without 
their  own  consent,  whether  by  a  minister  or 
by  elders,  is  destri?ctive  of  one  purpose  of  christ- 
ian association,— i.  e.  the  fellowship  of  the 
brethren.  Nor  is  the  power  of  searching  the 
heart  requisite  for  those  who  exercise  the  right 
of  admitting  others,  since  -ve  are  to  judge  of  each 
other  by  outward  conduct. 

II.  This  company  of  professing  Christians 
must  meet  in  one  place  for  the  observance  of 
rehgious  institutes.  A  society  that  cannot  asso- 
ciate, an  assembly  that  cannot  assemble,  are 
perfect  solecisms.    When,  therefore,  a  church 


16  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

becomes  too  large  to  communicate  at  one  table, 
and  divides  to  eat  the  Lord's  supper  in  two  dis- 
tinct places  of  worship,  there  are  two  churches, 
and  no  longer  one  only. 

III.  These  persons  must  be  formed  into  a 
society  upon  the  principle  of  mutual  voluntary 
consent.  They  are  not  to  be  associated  by  act 
of  civil  government,  by  ecclesiastical  decree, 
by  ministerial  authority,  or  by  any  other  power 
tlian  that  of  their  own  unconstrained  choice. 
They  are  to  give  themselves  first  to  the  Lord, 
and  then  to  each  other.  No  authority  whatever 
of  an  earthly  nature,  is  to  constrain  them  to  unite 
themselves  in  fellowship,  nor  to  select  for  them 
any  particular  company  of  believers  with  whom 
they  shall  associate.  All  is  to  be  the  result  of 
their  own  selection.  Parochial  limits,  ecclesias- 
tical divisions  of  country,  together  with  all  the 
commands  of  the  ministerial  authority,  have 
nothing  to  do  in  regulating  the  fellowship  of  the 
saints.  The  civil  power,  or  the  power  of  the 
magistrate,  when  employed  co  regulate  the  affairs 
of  the  church  of  Christ,  is  manifestly  out  of  place. 
It  is  as  much  at  a  man's  own  option,  so  far  as 
human  authority  is  concerned,  to  say  with 
whom  he  will  associate  in  matters  of  rehgion,  as 
it  is  in  those  of  philosophy,  learning,  or  pecunia- 
ry help,  to  decide  who  shall  be  his  fellows. 

IV.  A  chu:ch  of  Christ  has  its  scriptural  officers. 
Here  two  questions  arise: — First,  How  many 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  17 

kinds  of  officers  does  the  New  Testament  men- 
tion ?  Secondly,  How  are  they  to  be  chosen  ? 
As  to  the  kinds  of  office  bearers  in  the  primitive 
churches,  there  can  be  neither  doubt  nor  diffi- 
culty with  any  one  who  will  impartially  consult 
the  Word  of  God.  With  all  that  suuplicity 
which  characterizes  the  works  of  Go^i,  which 
neither  disfigures  his  productions  ^*ith  what  is 
excrescent,  nor  incumbers  thei>?  with  what  is 
unnecessary,  he  has  institutef?  but  two  kinds  of 
permanent  officers  in  hi*- church,  bishops  and 
deacons ;  the  former  «o  attend  to  its  spiritual 
affairs,  and  the  latt*^  to  direct  its  temporal  con- 
cerns. That  th<^e  were  but  two,  is  evident,  be- 
cause we  ha'G  no  information  concerning  the 
choice,  qj.'<alifications  or  duties  of  any  other. 
The  bislfops  of  the  primitive  churches  corres- 
pond exactly  to  the  pastors  of  modern  ones. 
THt  bishop,  elder,  and  pastor,  are  only  differ- 
fflt  terms  for  the  same  office,  is  evident  from 
Acts  XX.  17,  compared  with  the  28 ;  Titus  i.  5,  7, 
and  1st  Peter  v.  1,  2.  "  They  are  called  bishops, 
which  signifies  overseers,  because  they  overlook 
the  spiritual  concerns,  and  watch  for  the  souls 
of  their  brethren,"  Acts  xx.  28,  1st  Tim.  iii.  1. 
Pastors  or  shepherds,  because  they  feed  the 
flock  of  God  with  truth,  Ephes.  iv.  11.  Rulers, 
because  they  guide  the  church,  Heb.  xiii.  7. 
"Elders,  because  of  their  age,  or  of  their  pos- 
sessing those  quahties  which  age  supposes,"  Tit. 
B 


18  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

i.  5.  "  Ministers,  because  they  are  the  servants 
of  Christ  and  the  gospel,"  Ephes.  vi.  21. 

The  Deacon  is  appointed  to  receive  and  dis- 
tribute the  funds  of  the  cliurch,  especially  those 
whith  are  raised  for  the  relief  of  the  poor.  All 
other  kinds  of  officers  than  these  two,  are  the 
inventions  of  men,  and  not  the  appointment  of 
Christ  ;  and  nhich,  by  intending  to  add  splen- 
dour to  the  kit.ffdom  of  Jesus,  have  corrupted 
its  shnplicity,  destroyed  its  s])irituality,  and  caus- 
ed it  to  symbohze  whh  the  kingdoms  of  this 
world. 

On  the  mode  of  electiijg  i\»em  to  their  office 
the  Scripture  is  sufficiently  exph^it,  to  justify  the 
practice  of  those  denominations  \i\\o  appeal  to 
the  sutfrages  of  the  people.  If  the  iw-ts  of  the 
Apostles  be  studied  ^^  ith  care,  a  book  which 
seems  given  us  more  for  the  regulation  of  t^^cle- 
siastical  practices,  than  the  revelation  of  thto- 
logical  opiuions,  we  shall  find  that  nothing  wa^ 
done  in  the  primitive  churches  without  the 
co-operation  of  the  members  ;  no,  not  even  icheyi 
the  apostles  thejnselves  were  present.  Even  the 
election  of  a  new  apostle  was  made  by  brethren 
and  not  by  the  ministers  exclusively.  *  The 
deacons  were  chosen  by  the  same  persons,  f 
The  decrees  of  the  council  at  Jerusalem  were 
passed   also  by  them,  and  went  forth  with  their 

*  Acts  i.  21,  26.  t  Acts  vi. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  19 

name.*  From  hence  we  infer,  that  although  no 
case  occurs  in  the  inspired  history,  where  it  is 
mentioned  that  a  church  elected  its  pastor,  yet 
it  so  entirely  accords  with  the  practice  of  the 
church  in  other  respects,  that  an  exception  in 
this  particular  would  have  been  a  singul^  anom- 
aly which  nothing  could  justify  but  the  plain- 
est and  most  express  provision.  The  decisions 
of  reason  harmonize  on  this  subject,  with  the 
testimony  of  revelation ;  for,  if  we  have  an  un- 
doubted right  to  choose  our  own  lawjer,  or 
physician,  hfw  much  more  so,  to  elect  the  man 
to  whom  we  shall  intrust  the  care  of  our  souL 
If  we  should  feel  it  hard  to  be  obhged  to  take 
the  medicines  of  the  parish  doctor  whether  we 
liked  them  or  not,  how  much  more  oppressive  is 
it,  that  we  should  be  obhged  to  hear  the  opin 
ions  of  the  parish  minister,  who  may  have  been 
appointed  by  the  patron  for  other  quahfications 
than  those  of  a  spiritual  nature,  and  whose  sen- 
timents may  be  as  much  opposed  to  the  doc- 
trines of  the  gospel,  as  his  conduct  is  to  its 
holiness.  What  I  are  we  to  be  obliged  to  look 
up  to  such  a  man  as  our  spiritual  instnicter 
because  some  profligate,  who  has  the  hving  in 
liis  gift,  chooses  to  introduce  him  to  the  vacant 
pulpit  ? 

V.  A  Christian  church  with  its  office  bearers, 
is  complete   within  itself,  for  the   observance  of 

*  Acts  XV.  23. 


20  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

divine  ordinances,  and  the  exercise  of  discipline  ; 
and  is  subject  to  no  authority  or  tribunal  on 
earth.  This  is  the  Congregational  or  Indepen- 
dent form  of  church  government,  and  it  is  thus 
denominated,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Episco- 
pal, or*he  government  of  a  bishop,  and  from 
the  Presbyterian,  br  the  government  of  the 
churches  by  the  authority  of  their  assembled 
pastors  and  elders.  No  trace  of  any  foreign 
control  over  a  church  of  Christ,  can  be  found  in 
the  New  Testament,  except  sych  as  was  exer- 
cised by  the  apostles  as  the  representatives  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

VI.  Such  a  church  is  bound  by  the  authority 
of  Christ  in  their  associated  capacity,  to  observe 
all  the  institutes,  to  obey  all  the  commands,  and 
to  cherish  all  the  dispositions  which  relate  to 
their  social  union,  in  the  time,  order,  and  man- 
ner in  which  they  are  enjoined  by  Christ  Jesus. 
They  are  to  assemble  in  public  on  the  first  day 
of  the  week  for  prayer,  praise,  hearing  the 
Scriptures  read  and  expounded,  celebrating  the 
Lord's  supper,  and  exercising  mutual  affection. 
They  are  also  bound  by  divine  authority  to 
maintain  the  purity  of  the  church,  by  receiving 
only  such  as  give  evidence  of  true  faith,  and  by 
excluding  from  their  communion  all  those  whose 
life  is  opposed  to  the  doctrine  which  is  accord- 
ing to  godliness.  They  are  to  live  in  the  exer- 
cise of  mutual  submission  and  brotherly  love, 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  21 

and  ever  to  consider  themselves  amenable  to  the 
tribunal  of  Christ,  for  their  conduct  in  their 
church  capacity. 

Such  is  a  very  concise  view  of  the  nature  of  a 
Christian  church. 

Hence  what  might  be  termed  the  general  prin- 
ciples of  the  New  Testament  on  this  topic,  are, 
the  all-sufficiency  and  exclusive  authority  of  the 
Scriptures  as  a  rule  of  faith  and  practice  in  mat- 
ters of  religion ; — the  consequent  denial  of  the 
right  of  legislatures  and  ecclesiastical  conven- 
tions to  impose  any  rights,  ceremonies,  observan- 
ces, or  interpretations  of  the  Word  of  God, 
upon  our  belief  or  practice  ; — the  unlimited  and 
inalienable  right  of  every  man  to  expound  the 
Word  of  God  for  himself,  and  to  worship  his 
Maker  in  that  place  and  manner  which  he  deems 
to  be  most  accordant  with  the  directions  of  the 
Bible ; — the  utter  impropriety  of  any  alliance  or 
incorporation  of  the  church  of  Christ  with  the 
governments  or  the  kingdoms  of  this  world ; — 
the  duty  of  every  Christian  to  oppose  the  au- 
thority which  would  attempt  to  fetter  his  con- 
science with  obligations  to  religious  obsei-vances 
not  enjoined  by  Christ.  These  are  general  prin- 
ciples which  should  lead  the  thinking  Christian 
to  separate  from  all  national  establishments  of 
rehgion  whatever. 

It  is  not  enough  to  plead  the  authority  of  ex- 
ample, or  of  mere  feehng,  as  a  reason  for  any 


22  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

religious  service.  These  are  insufficient  pilots 
on  the  troubled  ocean  of  theological  opinion, 
where  opposing  currents,  stormy  winds,  and 
concealed  rocks,  endanger  the  safety  of  the  voy- 
ager to  eternity.  Our  compass  is  the  word  of 
God,  reason  must  be  the  steersman  at  the  helm 
to  guide  the  vessel  by  the  direction  of  tlie  needle, 
and  that  mariner  is  accountable  for  the  conse- 
quences, who  is  too  ignorant  or  too  indolent  to 
examine  his  course. 

Away  with  that  morbid  insensibility  which 
exclaims,  "It  is  of  no  consequence  to  what 
church  or  denomination  a  man  belongs,  pro- 
vided he  be  a  Christian."  Such  a  spirit  is  a  con- 
spiracy against  the  throne  of  truth,  and  is  the 
first  step  towards  a  com])lete  abandonment  of 
the  importance  of  right  sentiments.  Admitting 
that  error  is  to  be  measured  by  a  graduated 
scale,  who  will  undertake  to  fix  upon  the  point 
where  harmless  mistakes  end  and"  mischievous 
ones  begin.  Every  thing  relating  to  religion  is 
of  consequence.  In  the  temple  of  truth  not  only 
the  foundation  is  to  be  valued  and  defended, 
but  every  point  and  every  pinnacle. 

It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  an  inquiry 
into  the  grounds  of  oiu'  conduct  should  imbitter 
our  temper.  The  mist  of  passion  obscures  the 
splendour  of  truth,  as  much  as  fogs  do  the  ef- 
fulgence of  the  solar  orb.  Let  us  contend 
earnestly  for  right  principles,  but  let  it  be  in  the 


CHURCH  member's    GUIDE.  23 

exercise  of  right  feelings.  Let  us  hold  the  truth 
in  love.  Then  do  our  sentiments  appear  to 
greatest  advantage,  and  Mke  gems  set  in  gold, 
when  they  are  supported  by  a  spirit  of  Christian 
charity. 

*'  O  divine  love  !  the  sweet  harmony  of  souls  ! 
the  music  of  angels !  the  joy  of  God's  own 
heart !  the  very  darling  of  his  bosom !  the  source 
of  true  happiness !  the  pure  quintessence  of 
heaven !  that  which  reconciles  the  jarring  prin- 
ciples of  the  world,  and  makes  them  all  chime 
together!  that  which  melts  men's  hearts  into 
one  another !  See  how  St.  Paul  describes  it, 
and  it  cannot  choose  but  enamour  your  affections 
towards  it ; — "  Lote  envieth  not,  it  is  not  puffed 
up,  it  doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly,  seeketh 
not  her  own,  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no 
evil,  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity;  beareth  all  things, 
believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  en- 
dureth  all  things."  I  may  add,  it  is  the  best 
natured  thing,  the  best  complexioned  thing  in 
the  world.  Let  us  express  this  sweet  harmonious 
affection  in  these  jarring  times  ;  that  so,  if  it  be 
possible,  we  may  tune  the  world  into  better 
music.  Especially  in  matters  of  rehgion,  let  us 
strive  with  all  meekness  to  instruct  and  convince 
one  another.  Let  us  endeavour  to  promote  the 
gospel  of  peace,  the  dove-like  gospel,  with  a 
dove-like  spirit.  This  was  the  way,  by  which 
the  gospel  at  first  was  propagated  in  the 
world.     "  Christ  did  not  cry,  nor  lift  up  his  voice 


24  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

in  the  streets ;  a  bruised  reed  he  did  not  break, 
and  the  smoking  flax  he  did  not  quench  ;  and 
yet  he  brought  forth  judgment  unto  victory." 
He  whispered  the  gospel  to  us  from  mount  Sion, 
in  a  still  voice  ;  and  yet  the  sound  thereof  went 
out  quickly  throughout  all  the  earth.  The  gos- 
pel at  first  came  down  upon  the  world  gently 
and  softly,  like  the  dew  on  Gideon's  fleece  ;  and 
yet  it  quickly  penetrated  through  it ;  and  doubt- 
less, this  is  still  the  most  effectual  way  to  pro- 
mote it  farther.  Sweetness  and  ingenuity  will 
more  command  men's  minds,  than  passion, 
sourness,  and  severity ;  as  the  soft  pillow  sooner 
breaks  the  flint  than  the  hardest  marble.  Let 
us  "  follow  truth  in  love ;"  aftd  of  the  two  in- 
deed, be  contented  rather  to  miss  of  the  convey- 
ing a  speculative  truth,  than  to  part  with  love. 
When  we  would  convince  men  of  any  error  by 
the  strength  of  truth,  let  us  withal  pour  the 
sweet  balm  of  love  upon  their  heads.  Truth 
and  love  are  two  of  the  most  powerful  things  in 
the  world ;  and  when  they  both  go  together, 
they  cannot  easily  be  withstood.  The  golden 
beams  of  truth,  and  the  silken  cords  of  love, 
twisted  together,  will  draw  men  on  with  a  sweet 
violence,  whether  they  will  or  no. 

"  Let  us  take  heed  we  do  not  sometimes  cail 
that  zeal  for  God  and  his  gospel,  which  is  noth- 
ing else  but  our  own  tempestuous  and  stormy 
passion.    True  zeal  is  a  sweet,  heavenly,  and 


25 

gentle  flame,  which  maketh  us  active  for  God, 
but  always  within  the  sphere  of  love.  It  never 
calls  for  fire  from  heaven  to  consume  those  that 
differ  a  little  from  us  in  their  apprehensions.  It 
is  like  that  kind  of  lightning,  (which  the  philos- 
ophers speak  of)  that  melts  the  sword  within, 
but  singeth  not  the  scabbard :  it  strives  to  save 
the  soul,  but  hurteth  not  the  body.  True  zeal  is 
a  loving  thing,  and  makes  us  always  active  to 
edification,  and  not  to  destruction.  If  we  keep 
the  fire  of  zeal  within  the  chimney,  in  its  own 
proper  place,  it  never  doth  any  hurt ;  it  only 
warmeth,  quickeneth,  and  enliveneth  us  ;  but  if 
once  we  let  it  break  out,  and  catch  hold  of  the 
thatch  of  our  flesh,  and  kindle  our  corrupt  na- 
tm*e,  and  set  the  house  of  our  body  on  fire,  it  is 
no  longer  zeal,  it  is  no  heavenly  fire,  it  is  a 
most  destructive  and  devouring  thing.  True 
zeal  is  an  ignis  lamhens^  a  soft  and  gentle  flame, 
that  will  not  scorch  one's  hand ;  it  is  no  preda- 
tory or  voracious  thing ;  but  carnal  and  fleshly 
zeal  is  like  the  spu'it  of  gunpowder  set  on  fire, 
that  tears  and  blows  up  all  that  stands  before 
it.  True  zeal  is  like  the  vital  heat  in  us  that 
we  live  upon,  which  we  never  feel  to  be  angry 
or  troublesome  ;  but  though  it  gently  feed  upon 
the  radical  oil  within  us,  that  sweet  balsam  of 
our  natural  moisture,  yet  it  fives  lovingly  with 
it,  and  maintains  that  by  which  it  is  fed ;  but 
C 


26  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP. 

that  other  furious  and  distempered  zeal,  is  noth- 
ing else  but  a  fever  in  the  soul. 

To  conclude,  we  may  learn  what  kind  of  zeal 
it  is,  that  we  should  make  use  of  in  promoting 
the  gospel,  by  an  emblem  of  God's  own,  given 
us  in  the  Scripture,  those  fiery  tongues,  that 
upon  the  day  of  Pentecost  sat  upon  the  Apos- 
tles ;  which  sure  were  harmless  flames,  for  we 
cannot  read  that  they  did  any  hurt,  or  that  they 
did  so  much  as  singe  an  hair  of  their  heads."  * 

*  Cudworth's  Sermon  before  the  House  of  Com- 
monsj  1647. 


CHAPTER  II. 

ON  THE  NATURE  AND  DESIGN  OF  CHURCH 
FELLOWSHIP. 

I.  Church  fellowship  is  the  exercise  of  the 
social  principle  in  matters  of  religion,  and  in 
obedience  to  the  authority  of  Christ. 

Many  persons  seem  to  imagine  that  the  only 
end  and  object  of  chm-ch  fellowship,  is  the  par- 
ticipation of  the  Lord's  supper.  Hence  they 
attach  no  other  idea  to  a  church,  than  a  company 
of  Christians  going  together  to  the  sacramental 
table ;  who  have  nothing  to  do  with  each  other, 
till  they  arrive  there,  and  whose  reciprocal 
duties  end  where  they  begin.  The  observance 
of  the  Lord's  supper  it  is  confessed  is  one  design 
and  exercise  of  fellowship ;  but  it  is  not  the  only 
one.  Man  is  a  social  being,  by  which  we  mean 
that  he  instinctively  seeks  the  company  of  his 
fellows ;  is  capable  of  enjoying  their  society,  and 
derives  from  their  communion  no  small  portion 
of  his  improvement  and  fehcity.  The  aphorism 
of  Solomon  is  as  just  as]  it  is  beautiful, — "  As 
iron  sharpeneth  iron,  so  a  man  sharpeneth   the 


28  CHRISTIAN  FELLOWSHIP,  OH 

countenance  of  his  friend."  Social  bliss  was  the 
finish  of  paradisaical  happiness ;  its  influence 
has  survived  the  shock  of  our  apostasy,  and  will 
be  felt  amidst  the  fehcities  of  the  heavenly  state. 
It  is  not  matter  of  surprise,  therefore,  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  should  recognise  the  social  principle 
in  the  arrangements  of  his  wise  and  merciful 
economy.  He  might  have  left  his  people  uncon- 
nected by  any  visible  social  bond,  or  at  best  with 
no  other  guide  to  each  other  thaq  the  natural 
workings  and  affinities  of  the  human  bosom. 
Instead  of  this,  however,  he  has  by  explicit  au- 
thority grafted  the  duties  of  his  religion  upon 
the  propensities  of  our  social  nature.  The  iden- 
tifying law  of  Christ's  kingdom  is  love  to  one 
another ;  and  in  order  that  this  love  may  be  more 
perfect  in  its  exercise,  we  are  united  in  visible 
communion.  When  therefore  we  join  a  Christian 
church,  we  enter  a  society  of  believers,  for  the 
purpose  of  giving  and  receiving  every  suitable 
expression  of  mutual  love.  We  then  associate 
ourselves  with  those  towards  whom  we  are  to 
cherish,  inconsequence  of  a  common  relation- 
ship, the  kindest  emotions.  We  are  not  only  to 
worship  with  them  in  the  same  place,  not  only 
to  sit  with  them  at  the  same  sacramental  board, 
but  we  are  to  consider  ourselves  as  one  of  their 
fellowship,  to  identify  our  best  feelings  with 
theirs,  and  in  all  things  to  consider  ourselves 
members  one  of  another.    Our  fellowship  is  not 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  29 

intended  for,  nor  is  it  to  be  expressed  by,  any 
one  exclusive  act ;  but  it  is  to  extend  itself  to 
every  possible  way  of  having  communion  with 
each  other.  We  are  to  rejoice  together  in  the 
common  salvation  ;  and  to  bring  forth  together 
the  fruits  of  a  like  precious  faith.  Dr.  Watts 
has  very  beautifully  expressed  the  feelings 
which  every  church  member  who  understands 
his  relationship,  constantly  recognises. 

**  My  soul  shall  pray  for  Zion  still, 

While  life  or  breath  remains  ; 
There  my  best  friends,  my  kindred  dwell, 

There  God  my  Saviour  reigns." 

This  exercise  of  the  social  principle  is  conduct- 
ed with  direct  reference  to  the  authority  of 
Christ.  He  who  is  our  Lord  has  commanded  it. 
It  is  his  will  that  his  people  should  not  hve  soU- 
tarily  and  unconnected,  but  in  visible  associa- 
tion. To  the  question,  therefore.  Why  are  you 
a  church  member  ? — the  first  answer  must  be, 
because  Jesus  Christ  has  commanded  it.  Inde- 
pendently of  the  advantages  arising  from  this 
practice,  the  true  ground  of  it  is  the  authority  of 
our  divine  Lord.  It  is  not  only  a  privilege  which 
he  has  permitted  us  to  enjoy,  but  a  duty  which 
he  has  commanded  us  to  perform.  If  we  were 
unable  to  perceive  its  advantages,  it  would  still 
be  our  duty  to  comply  with  it.  Church  fellow- 
ship is  no  less  a  duty  than  the  observance  of  the 


30  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

first  day  Sabbath,  as  the  same  reasons  may  be 
advanced  for  the  one  as  for  the  other. 

From  not  viewing  it  in  this  light  it  is,  that  so 
many  refuse  to  join  themselves  to  the  church; 
they  consider  membership  merely  in  the  light  of 
a  privilege,  which  it  is  at  their  option  to  receive 
or  refuse.  This  is  a  veiy  great  and  a  very  inju- 
rious error.  If  a  beUever  remain  without  visible 
connexion  with  some  christian  society,  he  is 
guilty  of  direct  disobedience  against  his  rightful 
Lord. 

II.  Fellowship  is  the  instituted  way  of  mak- 
ing a  public  profession  of  the  faith  and  hope  of 
the  gospel. 

A  man  may  hold  the  opinions  and  approve 
the  practices  of  some  voluntary  worldly  society  ; 
but  until  he  has  united  himself  with  it,  he  is  not 
considered  either  by  its  members  or  the  public, 
as  one  of  their  number.  His  actually  joining 
hunself  to  them  according  to  the  established 
usage,  is  his  profession.  Thus  a  man  may  be  a 
sincere  believer  of  the  gospel,  and  so  far  as  re- 
spects his  own  private  conduct,  an  exemplary 
example  of  genuine  piety ;  but  until  he  has  con- 
nected himself  with  a  christian  church,  he  has 
not  professed  himself  to  be  a  Christian.  It  is  by 
that  act  he  declares  to  the  world  his  faith  and 
hope  as  a  believer  in  Christ.  It  is  thus  he  vir- 
tually says,  "  I  receive  the  opinions,  possess  the 
dispositions,  submit  to  the  obligations,  and  ob- 


31 

serve  the  practices  of  the  church  of  God  with 
which  I  now  connect  myself."  Jesus  Christ 
has  made  it  our  duty  not  only  to  receive  his 
truth  into  our  hearts,  but  to  confess  him  before 
men  ;  and  it  is  a  duty  on  which  very  considera- 
ble stress  is  laid.  This  is  to  be  done,  not  in  any 
ostentatious  w^ay,  but  by  joining  ourselves  to  his 
people  :  which  is  a  confession,  that  both  the 
church  and  the  world  clearly  understand.  Hence 
it  is  apparent,  that  church  membership  is  no 
trifling  matter,  since  it  is  calMng  heaven, 
earth,  and  hell,  to  witness  our  solemn  declara- 
tion of  submission  to  the  authority  of  Christ. 
It  is  saying  in  the  hearing  of  more  worlds  than 
one,  "  I  am  a  Christian." 

III.  It  is  the  visible  bond  of  union  with  the 
disciples  of  Jesus. 

Christians  are  not  only  to  be  united,  but  to 
exhibit  their  union.  Their  oneness  of  sentiment, 
of  aflfection,  of  purpose,  is  to  be  seen.  We  are 
not  only  to  love  one  another,  but  our  love  is  to 
be  known,  which  is  impossible  without  member- 
ship. In  its  collective  capacity,  a  church  con- 
centrates, as  in  a  focus,  the  light  and  love  that 
exist  in  her  individual  members.  Without  being 
combined  in  a  visible  union,  its  splendour  would 
be  only  as  the  dim  and  scattered  hght  which 
was  diffused  over  the  chaos  in  the  twilight  of 
creation,  while  the  fellowship  of  the  saints  is  the 
same  hght  gathered   up   and  embodied  in  the 


32  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

Bolar  orb.  We  are  indeed  united  in  spirit  with 
the  church  of  Christ,  from  the  moment  we  have 
beheved  his  gospel ;  but  our  union  is  neither  ex- 
pressed nor  recognised,  until  we  have  joined  it 
in  the  usual  way.  We  are  citizens  in  feeling 
and  intention,  but  not  yet  known  from  enemies, 
aliens,  and  spies.  Membership,  therefore,  is  the 
bond  of  visible  union  with  the  brethren  in 
Christ. 

IV.  It  is  an  explicit  declaration  of  our  deter- 
mination to  submit  to  the  government  and  disci- 
pline of  the  church. 

Every  society  has  laws  for  the  regulation  of 
its  affairs.  Without  these  it  could  not  exist ; 
and  to  which  every  member  professes,  at  the 
time  of  his  entrance,  his  determination  to  sub- 
mit. The  church  of  the  Redeemer  has  in  like 
manner  its  social  rules,  which  respect  the  mem- 
bers in  their  associated  capacity.  We  are  there- 
fore not  only  amenable  to  the  direct  authority 
of  Christ,  but  also  to  that  authority  expressed  by 
the  voice  of  the  church  ;  we  must  submit  to  all 
its  regulations,  observe  all  its  injunctions,  sup- 
port its  decisions,  or  we  can  no  longer  remain  in 
its  communion.  If  we  are  called  before  it,  we 
must  appear  ;  if  required  to  explain  any  part  of 
our  conduct,  we  must  comply ;  if  censured,  we 
must  submit.  We  are  in  no  case  haughtily  to 
exclaim,  "  What  is  the  church,  that  I  should 
obey  it  ?    to   my  own  master  I  stand  or  fall." 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  33 

Oiir  act  of  joining  the  society  is  an  explicit  dec- 
laration of  our  willingness  to  submit  to  the  laws 
by  which  it  is  governed.  We  can  voluntarily 
secede  when  there  is  just  occasion,  or  in  case  of 
a  false  decision,  we  can  mildly  protest ;  but  as 
long  as  we  continue  members  we  must  submit, 
for  our  very  membership  professes  and  re- 
quires it. 

V.  It  is  to  exhibit  upon  a  smaller  scale  that 
sublime  and  glorious  union  and  communion 
which  subsist,  not  only  between  all  real  Christ- 
ians of  every  country,  name,  and  age,  but  be- 
tween the  whole  redeemed  church  and  their 
Divine  Head. 

Passages  of  a  very  striking  import  speak  of 
tliis  most  comprehensive  confederation. — "  That 
in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times,  he 
might  gather  together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ, 
both  which  are  in  heaven  and  which  are  on 
earth  ;  even  in  him."  Ephes.  i.  10.  "  There  is 
one  body  and  one  spirit."  Ephes.  iv.  4.  "  That 
which  we  have  seen  and  heard,  declare  we  unto 
you,  that  ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us ;  and 
truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father  and  with 
his  Son  Jesus  Christ."  1  John  i.  3.  From  these 
passages  we  learn  that  the  aggregate  of  believ- 
ers, united  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  through  him  to 
the  Father,  form  one  vast  harmonious  fellowship 
of  holiness  and  benevolence.  They  are  united 
in  the  same  pursuit,  which  is  the  divine  glory ; 


34  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP. 

in  the  same  means  for  the  attainment  of  that 
object,  which  is  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  The 
church  universal  will  ever  remain  the  one  grand 
monument  on  which  are  recorded  all  the  praises 
of  the  living  God.  Of  this  general  assembly 
every  particular  society  is  the  miniature  resem- 
blance. By  its  public  worship,  its  beautiful 
subordination,  its  mutual  affection,  its  truth,  its 
hohness,  its  peace,  it  is  an  exhibition  to  the  world 
of  that  fellowship  which  has  God  in  Christ  for 
its  head,  all  believers  for  its  members,  heaven 
for  its  temple,  and  eternity  for  its  duration  ;  while 
every  time  it  assembles  for  worship,  it  shows 
forth  the  unity  of  the  church,  and  the  commu- 
nion of  saints. 


CHAPTER  III. 


THE  PRIVILEGES  OF    MEMBERSHIP. 

I.  The  participation  of  the  Lord's  supper. 

That  a  reception  of  the  appointed  memorials 
of  the  Saviour's  dying  love,  is  indeed  a  priv- 
ilege, requires  no  proof.  As  creatures,  whose 
minds  are  instructed  and  whose  hearts  are  im- 
pressed through  the  medium  of  our  senses,  how 
affecting  are  the  emblems  of  the  body  and  blood 
of  Christ.  Enough  of  resemblance  may  be  ob- 
served by  the  fancy  between  the  sign  and  the 
thing  signified  to  aid  the  exercise  of  the  affec- 
tions, while  enough  of  simplicity  remains  to  pre- 
vent the  excursions  of  the  imagination  from  in- 
terfering with  the  more  sublime  and  scriptural 
operations  of  our  faith.  That  sacramental  sea- 
sons are  commonly  the  most  happy  and  most 
profitable  which  a  believer  ever  spends  amongst 
the  means  of  grace,  is  a  fact  not  to  be  denied. 
It  is  no  wonder  that  it  should  be  so.  It  is  at  the 
sacred  supper  that  the  attention  is  more  power- 
fully arrested  and  fixed,  and  the  heart  impressed 
and  affected.     It  is  there,  that  the  scheme  of  re- 


36  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

deeming  mercy  seems  peculiarly  to  expand  upon 
the  understanding,  and  to  excite  the  emotions  of 
the  bosom  in  a  degree  almost  unknown  else- 
where. It  is  there  that  the  glory  of  the  divine 
character  has  been  most  clearly  discovered  by 
our  mind  ;  there,  that  Jesus  has  unfolded  to  us 
the  wonders  of  his  mediation ;  and  there,  that 
the  eternal  Spirit  has  descended  into  our  souls, 
in  the  most  munificent  communications  of  his 
sanctifying  and  consoling  influence.  How  have 
our  icy  hearts  there  melted  beneath  the  ardour 
of  celestial  love,  and  flowed  down  in  streams  of 
godly  sorrow.  How  have  our  grovelling  earthly 
minds  soared  on  the  wings  of  faith  and  hope, 
till  we  have  lost  sight  of  earthly  scenes  and 
sounds,  amidst  the  glory  of  such  as  are  divine. 
It  is  there,  that  we  have  felt  ourselves  crucified 
with  Christ,  and  have  risen  with  him  into  new- 
ness of  life.  It  is  there,  that  brotherly  love  has 
glowed  with  its  most  perfect  fervour,  and  the 
communion  of  saints  has  yielded  its  most  pre- 
cious delights.  Happier  hours  than  those  which 
have  been  there  spent,  we  never  expect  to  know 
in  this  world.  They  have  left  a  relish  and  a  fra- 
grance upon  the  mind ;  the  remembrance  of 
them  is  sweet,  and  the  anticipation  of  their  re- 
turn is  amongst  the  brightest  hopes  we  have  this 
side  the  vail. 

II.  Another   privilege   connected  with  mem- 
bership is  the  right  of  assisting  in  the  choice  of 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  37 

a  pastor,  in  the  election  of  deacons,  and  in  the 
admission  and  exclusion  of  members. 

It  must  surely  be  accounted  no  inconsiderable 
privilege  to  have  a  voice  in  the  election  of  an 
individual  on  whose  ministrations  so  much  of 
our  own  spiritual  welfare,  and  that  of  our  fami- 
lies depends  ;  nor  is  it  a  light  thing  to  be  ad- 
mitted to  a  participation  of  the  other  business 
connected  with,  and  arising  from,  the  history  of 
a  church. 

III.  A  church  member  has  the  advantage  of 
pastoral  oversight  and  supphcation. 

"  They  watch  for  your  souls,"  said  the  apostle 
to  the  ancient  Christians,  when  speaking  of 
their  pastors  ;  evidently  implying  that  it  was  a 
great  privilege  to  be  the  subjects  of  such  inspec- 
tion. A  faithful  friend  that  will  instruct,  warn, 
comfort,  or  reprove,  as  circumstances  may  re- 
quire, is  a  great  treasure  ;  and  such  an  one  a 
Christian  will  find,  or  ought  to  find,  in  his  min- 
ister. In  him  he  has  a  right  to  expect  a  steady, 
active,  and  vigilant  guardian  of  his  eternal  in- 
terests. One  who  will  follow  the  individuals 
of  his  charge  as  far  as  can  be,  through  all  their 
spiritual  career,  comforting  them  when  in  dis- 
tress, rousing  them  when  lukewarm,  reproving 
them  when  their  conduct  needs  rebuke,  lending 
his  ear  to  their  every  complaint,  and  opening  his 
heart  to  receive  their  every  grief  A  faithfiil 
pastor  will  consider  himself  as  the  guide  and 


3b  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

the  shield  of  the  souls  committed  to  his  care. 
A  shepherd  to  provide  for  their  wants,  a  watch- 
man to  observe  the  approach  of  their  dangers. 
He  will  visit  tliem  in  the  afflictions  which  at- 
tend their  pilgrimage  ;  will  hasten  to  their  bed- 
side when  the  sorrows  of  djath  encompass 
them  ;  will  disclose  to  the  eye  of  faith  the  visions 
of  immortality,  which  irradiate  the  dark  valley 
itself;  and  will  never  cease  his  solicitude  until 
the  portals  of  heaven  have  closed  upon  their 
disembodied  spirits. 

In  addition  to  this,  the  pastor  bears  the  church 
in  the  arms  of  his  affection,  and  presents  them 
in  his  prayers  before  the  throne  of  grace.  Like 
the  high  priest  of  the  Jews,  he  approaches  the 
mercy  seat,  not  with  the  names  of  the  people 
merely  engraven  upon  his  breastplate,  but  written 
upon  his  heart.  Nor  does  he  confine  himself  to 
general  supplications  for  the  society  in  the  ag- 
gregate ;  its  individual  members,  in  their  separ- 
ate capacity  and  jDeculiar  circumstances,  are  often 
the  subjects  of  his  intercession  before  the  foun- 
tain of  life.  As  he  takes  a  deep  interest  in  their 
personal,  no  less  than  in  their  collective  capacity, 
he  expresses  his  concern  by  definite  and  special 
supplication.  Not  only  are  sermons  composed, 
but  prayers  presented,  which  are  adapted  to  the 
various  cases  of  his  flock.  The  afflicted,  the 
backshding,  the  tempted,  the  novice,  are  all  in 
turn  remembered  in  his  holiest  moments  before 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  39 

God.  Nor  can  any  of  these  individuals  say  to 
which  they  are  most  indebted,  to  his  labours  in 
the  pulpit,  or  to  his  supplications  in  the  closet ; 
for  if  "  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  the  right- 
eous man  availeth  much,"  w^e  certainly  may  be- 
Meve  that  the  entreaty  of  the  righteous  minister 
is  not  less  availing. 

IV.  The  watchfulness,  sympathy,  and  prayers 
of  the  church  are  no  mconsiderable  privilege  of 
membership. 

In  what  way  these  duties  should  be  performed 
will  be  matter  of  consideration  hereafter  ;  and 
therefore  we  shall  not  enter  minutely  into  the 
subject  now,  any  farther  than  to  show  how 
great  a  mercy  it  is  to  enjoy  an  interest  in  the 
affection  and  the  intercession  of  a  Christian  so- 
ciety. We  are  commanded  to  exhort  one 
another  daily ;  and  amidst  such  temptations, 
such  weakness,  such  corruptions  as  ours,  is  it 
not  an  unspeakable  mercy  to  be  surrounded 
by  those  who  will  watch  over  and  assist  us? 
With  every  help,  how  hard  a  thing  is  it  to  be  a 
consistent  Christian ;  how  difficult  to  maintain 
the  purity  and  vigour  of  true  godliness ;  how 
often  do  our  steps  slijj,  and  our  exertions  relax; 
and  sometimes  through  the  deceitfulness  of  the 
human  heart  others  may  perceive  our  danger 
before  we  ourselves  are  aware  of  its  existence. 
It  may  often  be  said  of  us  as  of  Israel  of  old, 
"  Strangers  have  devoured  his  strength,  yet  he 


40  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

knoweth  it  not ;  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there 
upon  him,  yet  lie  knoweth  it  not."  In  such 
cases,  none  can  estimate  the  value  of  those 
Christian  friends,  wlio  with  faithful  love  Avill 
remind  us  of  our  danger  and  affectionately  ad- 
monish us.  How  inestimable  the  privilege  of 
having  those  who  will  tenderly  reprove  us,  and 
draw  us  back  with  the  cords  of  a  man  and  the 
bands  of  love.  In  the  case  of  our  soul's  salva- 
tion more  than  worlds  are  at  stake  ;  and  he  who 
will  give  himself  the  trouble  to  admonish  us  and 
exhort  us  to  diligence,  performs  a  service  of  in- 
finite value,  for  which,  if  we  improve  by  it,  we 
shall  offer  him  our  gratitude  in  eternit5^ 

And  then  think  of  the  value  of  Christian  symn 
pathy.  How  consolatory  is  it  in  our  troubles  to 
recollect,  that  there  are  those  who  are  thinking 
of  our  situation  and  pitying  our  distress.  Even 
when  they  visit  us  not,  they  are  probably  talk- 
ing to  each  other  about  us.  We  have  their  af- 
fectionate remembrance,  their  tenderest  in- 
terest. 

Nor  are  their  prayers  withheld  when  they 
meet  in  the  temple,  or  when  they  retire  to  the 
closet.  When  they  join  with  one  accord  in  sup- 
plication, and  when  they  pray  to  their  Father 
in  secret,  they  mention  their  suffering  brother  or 
sister,  to  Him  who  lovetli  the  church.  Ah !  how 
often  has  the  troubled  behever  felt  it  hghten 
his  load,  and  irradiate  his  gloom,  as  he  groaned 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  41 

away  the  hour  when  the  church  was  assembled, 
to  beheve  that  they  were  thinking  of  him,  and 
blessing  him  with  their  prayers.  It  has  been  as 
if  an  angel  were  despatched  to  inform  him  that 
supplication  was  being  made  for  him,  and  that 
therefore  he  ought  to  dry  up  his  tears.  Yee, 
and  the  sweet  remembrance  has  in  some  cases 
made  the  tears  forget  to  fall,  and  the  half  ut- 
tered groan  to  die  away  with  silent  submission. 
He  has  laid  down  upon  his  restless  couch  agair, 
and  it  seemed  as  if  it  had  been  smoothed  afresli 
for  him  by  some  viewless  agent ;  and  so  it  has, 
for  God  has  heard  the  prayers  of  the  church  on 
his  behalf,  and  has  made  "  all  his  bed  in  his 
sickness." 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE    GENERAL    DUTIES    OF    CHURCH    MEMBERS    IS 
THEIR    I^'DIVIDUAL    CAPACITY. 

I.  Thet  should  seek  to  acquire  clear  and  en- 
larged views  of  divine  trutli. 

It  is  a  fact  which  cannot  be  questioned,  that  a 
very  large  proportion  of  those  whom  we  believe 
to  be  real  Christians,  are  mere  babes  in  knowl- 
edge. They  have  just  enough  instruction  to 
know  that  they  are  sinners,  and  that  salvation  is 
all  of  grace  through  Christ  Jesus.  But  ask  them 
to  state,  prove,  and  defend,  in  a  scriptural  man- 
ner, any  one  of  the  leading  doctrines  of  the 
gospel,  and  you  would  immediately  discover, 
how  contracted  is  their  view,  and  how  feeble  is 
their  perception  of  divine  truth.  Instead  of 
walking  amidst  the  splendid  hght  and  varied 
scenery  of  revelation,  with  the  confidence  and 
joy  of  men  whose  vision  is  clear  and  strong, 
they  are  groping  along  with  the  fear  and  hesita- 
tion of  those  who  are  partially  blind.  This,  in 
most  cases,  is  their  fault,  and  not  their  misfor- 
tune merely.     We   are  commanded  to  grow  in 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  43 

knowledge ;  and  the  Apostle  in  the  following 
very  sev-^ere  language,  reproved  the  believing 
Hebrews  for  their  ignorance. — "  AMien  for  the 
tune  ye  ought  to  be  teachers,  ye  have  need  that 
one  teach  you  again,  which  be  the  first  princi- 
ples of  the  oracles  of  God."  After  this  he  ex- 
horts them  to  leave  the  principles  of  the  doctrine 
of  Christ,  and  go  on  to  perfection.  How  earnest- 
ly in  other  parts  of  his  writings,  did  he  suppli- 
cate for  the  churches,  an  increase  of  their  rehgious 
knowledge.  Eph.  i.  17,  18.  Colos.  i.  9.  It  is 
very  common  for  ministers  to  complain  that  they 
are  almost  afraid  to  ascend  to  the  loftier  parts 
of  revealed  truth,  lest  a  great  portion  of  their 
hearers  should  be  unable  to  follow  them,  and 
reproach  them  with  ascending  to  barren  and 
almost  inaccessible  summits. 

The  causes  of  this  deficiency  of  religious 
knowledge  in  our  members,  are  numerous  and 
various.  In  many  cases  the  want  of  a  religious 
education  contributes  to  it.  Not  a  few  of  them 
are  brought  in  from  the  world,  when  they  are 
far  advanced  in  life.  There  is  with  many,  a 
more  culpable  cause  ;  I  mean  a  systematic  neg- 
lect of  the  subject.  "  What,"  they  exclaim,  "  will 
head  knowledge  do  for  us  ;  we  are  for  experi- 
ence ;  experience  is  every  thing  in  rehgion." 
What  kind  of  experience  that  is  which  is  not 
founded  on  knowledge,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  con- 
ceive.    With  such  people,  ignorance  appears  to 


44  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

be  the  mother  of  devotion.  It  should  be  recol- 
lected that  it  is  in  the  spiritual  world,  as  it  is  in 
the  natural ;  the  seed  of  the  kingdom  is  sown  in 
the  light,  and  light  is  essential  to  every  stage  of 
its  growth.  If  that  be  not  right  knowledge, 
which  does  not  produce  feeling,  certainly  that  is 
not  right  feehng  which  is  not  produced  by 
knowledge.  They  who  have  only  head  knowl- 
edge, dwell  in  the  frigid  zone  of  Christianity ;  and 
they  who  have  only  feeling,  occupy  the  torrid 
zone.  The  former  are  frozen  amidst  mere  cold 
and  heartless  speculation  ;  the  latter  are  scorch- 
ed amidst  wild  fanaticism. 

How  much  more  real  enjoyment  of  the  truth 
is  possessed  by  him  who  clearly  and  compre- 
hensively understands  it ;  and  how  much  more 
useful  is  he  likely  to  be  in  communicating  in- 
struction, than  the  individual  who  barely  under- 
stands first  principles.  Every  professing  Chris- 
tian, at  least  all  those  who  have  leisure  for  read- 
ing, should  endeavour  to  unite  the  knowledge  of 
a  good  theologian,  with  the  experience  of  a  real 
believer. 

In  order  to  this,  let  Christians  set  apart  time 
not  only  for  reading,  but  studying  the  scriptures  ; 
let  them  read  theological  books  which  explain 
and  prove  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel ;  let  them 
commit  to  memory  the  admirable  definitions  of 
these  doctrines  contained  in  the  Assembly's 
Shorter  Catechism;  let  them  attend  upon  the 


45 

preaching  of  the  word  with  a  view  not  only  to 
be  comforted,  but  to  be  instructed.  The  ex- 
clusive object  for  which  some  persons  hear  ser- 
monsj  is  to  obtain  a  Httle  comfort.  They  sit 
waiting  and  watching  for  some  sweet  and  sa- 
voury assurance,  some  well  known  hacknied 
consolatory  topic,  some  lively  appeal  to  the  ex- 
perience, and  until  this  comes,  they  think  lightly 
of  every  thing  else.  The  minister  may  have 
given  the  clearest  elucidation  of  some  dark  and 
doubtful  passage,  the  most  profound  discussion 
of  some  sublime  doctrine,  the  most  masterly  de- 
fence of  some  disputed  truth  ;  but  to  the  mere 
comfort  hunters,  all  this  is  nothing  else  than  the 
husk  or  the  shell,  which  is  to  be  cracked  and 
thrown  away  for  the  kernel  of  a  httle  Christian 
experience.  From  such  sermons  they  go  home, 
with  hungry  and  cheerless  appetites,  complain- 
ing that  they  have  found  it  a  lost  opportunity. 

Let  me  not  be  mistaken.  Comfort  ought  to 
be  sought  for,  but  always  through  the  medium 
of  knowledge.  The  best  warmth  is  that  which 
comes  not  from  ardent  spirits,  but  from  the  sun, 
which  sends  his  heat  to  the  frame,  in  those 
beams  which  convey  hght  to  the  eye.  The  fact 
is,  that  some  people's  religion  is  of  that  weak 
unhealthy  kind,  which  is  supported  only  by  ehx- 
irs  and  cordials. 

After  all,  I  am  constrained  to  confess,  that  the 
darkness   which  rests   upon  the    mind  of  the 


46  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,   OR 

ehurch  member,  is  the  result  in  some  cases,  of 
that  cloudiness  which  envelopes  the  mind  of  the 
pastor ;  if  there  is  ignorance  in  the  pew,  it  is  be- 
cause there  is  so  little  knowledge  in  the  pulpit. 
When  the  preacher  dwells  on  nothing  but  a  few 
hacknied  common  place  topics  of  an  experiment- 
al or  consolatory  nature ;  when  all  the  varied 
and  sublime  parts  of  revealed  truth  are  neglected 
for  one  unceasing  round  of  beaten  subjects  ; 
when  a  text  is  selected  from  time  to  time  which 
requires  no  study  to  understand,  no  ability  to 
expound ;  when  nothing  is  heard  from  one  Sab- 
bath to  another,  but  the  same  sentiments  in  the 
same  words,  until  the  introduction  of  a  new  or 
oi'iginal  conception  would  startle  the  congrega- 
tion almost  as  much  as  the  entrance  of  a  spectre  ; 
who  can  wonder,  if,  under  such  circumstances, 
the  congregation  should  grow  tired  of  their 
preacher ;  or  if  such  drowsy  tinklings  should  lull 
the  fold,  till  with  their  shepherd  they  sink  to  the 
slumbers  of  indifference,  amidst  the  thickening 
gloom  of  religious  ignorance  ? 

II.  Advancement  in  religion  is  incumbent  on 
every  professing  Christian. 

As  the  usual  mode  of  admission  to  our  church- 
es, subjects  their  members  to  a  scrutiny  of  their 
conduct,  it  is  considered  by  many  as  a  kind  of 
ordeal,  which  being  passed  with  success,  remits 
them  from  any  solicitude  about  farther  improve- 
ment.   A  kind  of  indelible  character  is  then  im- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  47 

pressed  upon  them,  whicb  is  susceptible  of 
neither  increase  nor  improvement.  I  do  not 
mean  to  say  that  they  come  dehberately  to  such 
a  conckision,  or  that  they  are  aware  of  any  such 
opinion  being  in  their  mind  ;  but  having  passed 
their  trials  with  honour,  they  insensibly  acquire 
the  idea,  that  now  they  are  professed  and  ac- 
knowledged Christians,  that  their  religion  is 
admitted  to  be  genuine,  that  they  are  put 
amongst  the  disciples,  and  therefore  the  same 
anxiety  is  no  longer  necessaiy.  Often  and  often 
have  we  seen,  especially  in  the  case  of  young 
persons,  that  the  act  of  joining  the  church,  has 
in  some  measure  diminished  the  earnestness 
with  which  their  minds  were  formerly  directed 
to  the  subject  of  religion.  They  were  growing 
rapidly  as  babes  in  Christ,  till  the  consciousness 
of  being  a  church  member,  and  acknowledged  a 
Christian,  either  by  generating  pride,  or  relaxing 
diligence,  has  paralyzed  their  piety,  arrested 
their  groAvth,  and  left  them  dwarfs  in  grace  for 
ever  after. 

We  should  consider  that  rehgion  is  not  an  ab- 
stract thing  of  times,  places,  and  ceremonies  ; 
nor  is  the  religious  character  formed  by  any 
single  compliance,  however  public  or  however 
solemn.  If  it  were  admitted  that  regeneration 
is  an  instantaneous  change,  in  which  the  whole 
character  of  a  child  of  God  is  formed  at  once, 
this  will  not  apply  to  membership.     Instead  of 


48  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

considering  our  union  with  the  church  as  the 
goal  of  our  rehgious  career,  where  improvement 
may  cease  and  progress  be  stopped,  we  should 
view  it  as  but  the  very  starting  point,  from 
whence  we  are  to  forget  the  things  that  are  be- 
hind, and  press  towards  the  mark  for  the  prize 
of  our  high  calling.  From  that  moment  we  are 
under  more  solemn  obligations  than  ever  to  grow 
in  grace,  inasmuch  as  the  means  of  growth  are 
increased.  Till  then,  we  have  been  as  trees 
growing  in  obscurity  without  the  aid  of  human 
culture  ;  but  when  we  associate  with  a  church, 
we  are  transplanted  into  a  garden,  and  have 
the  advantage  of  the  gardener's  care,  and 
should  therefore  abound  more  than  ever  in  all 
the  fruits  of  righteousness  which  are  by  Jesus 
Christ  unto  the  glory  of  God. 

III.  Consistency  in  their  conduct,  as  profess- 
ing Christians,  is  a  most  obvious  and  pressing 
obligation  of  church  members. 

If  this  page  was  written  in  tears,  printed  in 
blood,  enclosed  in  black  lines,  and  read  with 
groanings  that  could  not  be  uttered,  even  this 
would  be  too  feeble  an  expression  of  the  author's 
grief  for  that  want  of  Christian  consistency, 
which  it  has  been  his  calamity  to  witness  in 
what  is  called  the  religious  world,  and  which 
renders  it  so  necessary  for  him  to  insist  on  the 
importance  of  uniform  piety.  The  want  of  this 
in  the  conduct  of  professing  Christians,  has  done 


CHURCH  member's    GUIDE.  49 

more  harm  to  Christianity  than  all  the  ravings 
of  infidelity  from  the  time  of  Cain  to  the  death 
Paine.  This  sacred  and  deathless  cause  lifts  her 
venerable  form  bearing  the  scars  of  many  a 
wound,  not  inflicted  by  arrows  plumed  with  the 
pen  of  Voltaire  or  Hume  ;  oh,  no,  such  weapons 
bounded  from  her  bosom,  as  from  a  shield  of 
triple  brass,  and  dropped  at  her  feet  to  be  depos- 
ited with  the  spoils  of  her  victories  ;  but  the 
darts  that  lacerated  her,  and  left  the  memorials 
of  their  mischief  upon  her  form,  were  the  vices 
and  follies  of  her  votaries.  O  Christians,  will 
ye  scourge  and  lacerate  her,  will  ye  array  her  in 
the  costume  of  scorn,  and  leading  her  forth 
bleeding  and  dejected  to  meet  her  enemies  in 
the  gate,  proclaim,  "Behold,  an  impostor!"  Will 
ye  assist  to  raise  the  clamour  which  infidel  phi- 
losophers endeavoured  to  excite,  and  stir  up  the 
multitude  to  exclaim,  "Away  with  her,  away 
with  her !  Crucify  her,  crucify  her ! "  Tremble 
at  the  thought.  If  Christianity  ever  die,  it  will 
not  be  in  the  field  of  conflict,  by  the  power  of 
her  enemies,  but  hke  Cesar  in  the  capitol,  by 
the  hand  of  her  friends  ;  and  which  of  us  would 
hke  to  meet  the  look  of  her  expiring  eye,  or  the 
mild  reproach  of  her  faltering  tongue,  "  What, 
thou  my  son  ! "  But  she  cannot  die  ;  wounded 
she  may  be,  and  has  been ;  but  the  memorials  of 
her  injury  are  the  proofs  of  her  immortahty,  and 
E 


50  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

proclaim  her  to  be  of  heavenly  origin :  like  the 
fabled  scars  of  the  heathen  gods  of  Greece  and 
Rome,  her  wounds  demonstrably  show  that  a 
divinity  sustained  her. 

Still,  however,  the  inconsistencies  of  profess- 
ing Christians  may  limit  her  reign,  although  they 
cannot  destroy  her  existence.  By  these  things 
sinners  are  hardened  in  their  courses,  the  access 
to  hfe  is  rendered  more  difficult,  while  the  ave- 
nues of  eternal  death  are  made  more  wide  and 
easy.  That  man,  whose  conduct  opposes  his 
profession,  may  be  certainly  arraigned  for  the 
crime  of  murder.  Let  him  not  go  quietly  to  his 
pillow  as  if  blood  guiltiness  were  not  upon  his 
conscience,  for  it  is  there,  and  a  voice  is  contin- 
ually saying  to  him,  "  Thy  brother's  blood  crieth 
to  me  from  the  ground."  He  has  not  slain  the 
body  of  a  fellow  mortal,  but  has  been  accessory 
to  the  death  of  souls.  Some  that  sought  for  an 
apblogy  for  their  sins,  an  opiate  for  their  con- 
sciences, found  it  in  his  misconduct. 

I  have  no  need  to  specify  the  duties  included 
in  the  general  idea  of  consistency ;  these  are 
known  well  enough.  The  apostle's  beautiful 
and  comprehensive  admonition  is  a  sufficient 
dh'ectory.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  true,  what- 
soever things  are  honest,  whatsoever  things  are 
just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever 
things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good 


51 

report,  if  there  be  any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any 
praise,  think  on  these  things." 

I  particularly  exhort  church  members  to  be- 
ware of  what  might  be  denominated  the  minor 
breaches  of  consistency.  We  are  not  to  con- 
clude that  nothing  breaks  the  uniformity  of  our 
character,  but  what  subjects  us  to  the  discipline 
of  the  church.  Overt  acts  of  immorality  are 
comparatively  rare,  while  ten  thousand  instan- 
ces of  less  dehnquency,  such  as  the  church 
cannot  take  cognizance  of,  are  continually  oc- 
curring in  the  conduct  of  Christians,  to  the  dis- 
grace of  religion  and  the  injury  of  men's  souls. 
Those  things  are  seen  in  us,  which  would  pass 
unnoticed  in  others  who  make  no  profession  of 
religion  ;  just  as  a  spot  which  would  be  lost  on 
canvass,  is  visible  on  cambric.  A  Christian's 
character  is  like  polished  steel,  which  may  have 
its  lustre  destroyed,  not  only  by  broad  spots  of 
rust,  but  by  an  assemblage  of  innumerable 
specks. 

More  scandals  have  occurred  in  the  Christian 
church  from  dishonourable  pecuniary  transac- 
tions than  from  any  other  source.  Instances  of 
drunkenness,  dishonesty,  and  imposition,  are 
seldom,  compared  with  those  of  an  artful,  im- 
posing, dishonest  way  of  conductmg  business. 
The  world  is  a  dangerous  and  successful  foe  to 
grace  ;  and  although  every  church  member  pro- 
fesses himself  to  be  through  faith  a  conqueror, 


52  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

how  many  by  their  over-reaching,  ungenerous 
conduct,  prove  that  they  are  yet  enslaved  by  this 
sordid  enemy.  Some  there  are  who  betray 
their  Master  for  a  less  sum  than  that  which 
Judas  set  upon  his  blood ;  and  for  a  tithe  of 
thirty  pieces  of  silver,  will  be  guilty  of  an  action 
which  they  must  know,  at  the  time,  will  provoke 
the  severest  invective  a:nd  bitterest  sarcasm 
against  all  religion. 

IV.  Church  members  should  excel  in  the 
manifestation  of  the  Christian  temper. 

The  mind  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  should 
be  in  them.  They  sliould  consider  his  character 
as  the  model  of  their  own ;  and  be  conspicuous 
for  their  poverty  of  spirit,  meekness,  gentleness, 
and  love.  They  should  seek  a  large  portion  of 
the  "  wisdom  which  cometh  from  above  ;  which 
is  first  pure,  then  peaceable,  gentle,  easy  to  be 
entreated,  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  with- 
out partiality  and  without  hypocrisy."  It  is 
matter  of  surprise  and  regret,  that  many  persons 
seem  to  think  that  religion  has  nothing  to  do 
wqtli  the  temper ;  and  that  provided  they  are 
free  from  gross  sins,  and  have  lively  feelings  in 
devotional  exercises,  they  may  be  as  petulant, 
irritable,  and  implacable  as  they  please.  This 
is  a  dreadful  error,  and  has  done  great  mischief 
to  the  cause  of  God.  A  sour,  ill-natured  Chris- 
tian, if  I  may  describe  him  by  a  resemblance  aa 
fabulous  as  the   centaurs,  is  hke  a  lamb  with  a 


53 

dog's  head,  a  dove  with  a  vulture's  beak,  a  rose 
with  leaves  of  nettles.  If  there  be  any  one  word 
which  above  all  others  should  describe  a  Chris- 
tian's character,  it  is  that  which  represents  his 
divine  Father ;  and  as  it  is  said,  God  is  love,  so 
should  it  be  also  affirmed,  a  Christian  is  love — 
love  embodied,  an  incarnation  of  love.  His 
words,  conduct,  nay,  his  very  looks,  should  be 
so  many  expressions  of  love. 

V.  Church  members  should  be  very  eminent 
for  a  right  discharge  of  all  their  social  duties. 

The  apostles  have  given  this  great  importance 
by  the  frequency  with  which  they  have  introduc- 
ed it.*  Christianity,  so  far  from  loosening  the 
bands  of  society,  adds  to  them  incredible 
strength  and  firmness,  by  motives  drawn  from 
the  eternal  world.  One  part  of  the  design  of 
revelation  is  to  purify  and  strengthen  the  social 
principle,  and  carry  it  to  its  greatest  elevation 
and  perfection. 

A  good  Christian,  and  yet  a  bad  husband, 
father,  brother,  neighbour,  or  subject,  is  an  ano- 
maly which  the  world  never  yet  beheld.  Pro- 
fessing Christians  should  excel  all  others  in  the 
beauties  of  social  virtue.  ReUgion  should  give 
additional  tenderness  to  the  conjugal  relation- 
ship; greater  love  to  the  parent,  and  obedience 

*  Ephes.  v.  22,  vi.  1—9.  Col.  iU.  X8.  X  Tim.  vi.  1—4- 
1  Pet.  iii.  1,  2.    1  Pet.  u.  18, 


54  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

to  the  child ;  fresh  kindness  to  the  master,  and 
dihgence  to  the  servant.  The  world  should  look 
to  the  church  with  this  conviction,  "Well,  if 
social  virtue  were  driven  from  every  other  por- 
tion of  society,  it  would  find  an  asylum,  and  be 
cherished  with  care,  upon  the  heights  of  Zion." 
Then  will  religion  have  attained  its  highest 
credit  upon  earth,  when  it  shall  be  admitted  by 
universal  consent,  that  to  say  a  man  is  a  Chris- 
tian, is  an  indisputable  testimony  to  his  excel- 
lence in  all  the  relations  he  bears  to  society. 

VI.  There  are  duties  to  be  discharged  in  re- 
ference to  the  world. 

By  the  world,  I  mean  all  those  of  every  party 
and  denomination  who  are  destitute  of  true 
godhness.  The  apostle  has  summed  up  our 
obligations  towards  them  under  the  comprehen- 
sive injunction,  "  Walk  in  wisdom  towards  them 
which  are  without."*  In  another  place,  we 
are  commanded  to  "Let  our  light  shine  be- 
fore men,  that  they,  seeing  our  good  works,  may 
glorify  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  f  We 
are  also  exhorted  "to  have  our  conversation 
honest  (this  word  signifies  beautiful,  honourable) 
amongst  the  Gentiles."  J  In  order  to  comply 
with  this,  we  must  act  consistently  with  our 
profession ;  excel  in  the  observance  of  social 
duties;  abound  in  mercy;  bear  a  prudent  testi- 

*  Col.  iv.  5.  t  Matt.  v.  16.  1 1  Pet.  ii.  12. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  55 

mony  against  evil  practices  ;  be  most  punctili- 
ously exact  in  fulfilling  all  our  engagements,  and 
performing  all  our  promises;  live  in  a  most 
peaceable  and  neighbourly  manner ;  perform 
every  office  of  kindness  and  charity  which  can 
please  or  benefit ;  and  set  an  example  of  indus- 
try, honesty,  and  generosity. 

VII.  We  should  as  professing  Christians  be 
exemplary  in  our  obedience  to  the  civil  mag- 
istrate. 

The  Scriptures  which  enjoin  this  are  too 
numerous  to  be  quoted  at  length.  *  One  only 
shall  be  given,  but  that  is  a  very  striking  one. 
"  Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers ; 
for  there  is  no  power  but  of  God ;  the  powers 
that  be,  are  ordained  of  God.  Whosoever 
therefore  resisteth  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordi- 
nance of  God :  and  they  that  resist  shall  receive 
to  themselves  damnation."  This  injunction 
must  of  course  be  understood  as  relating  to 
matters  purely  civil ;  or  in  other  words  to  those 
laws  which  are  not  in  opposition  to  the  spirit 
and  letter  of  divine  revelation.  If  rulers  enjoin 
any  thing  which  is  condemned  by  the  word  of 
truth,  it  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian,  without  hes- 
itation, and  at  all  hazards,  to  act  upon  the 
principles,  and  follow  the  example  of  the  apos- 
tles, and  "  obey  God  rather  than  man." 

*  Rom  xiii.  1,  2.  Acts  xxiii.  5.  Titus  iii.  1.  1  Pet. 
ii.  13, 14.    1  Tim.  ii.  1—3. 


56  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,   OR 

God  forbid  I  shoidd  teach  a  doctrine  so  per- 
nicious as  that  one  of  the  first  efforts  of  true 
piety  when  it  enters  the  soul  is  to  extinguish  the 
love  of  civil  liberty;  or  that  having  broken  the 
fetters  of  vice,  it  immediately  bows  the  regener- 
ated soul  into  submission  to  the  yoke  of  despot- 
ism. No  such  thing ;  religion  is  a  noble,  and 
sublime,  and  elevating  principle.  It  expands, 
not  contracts  the  mind  ;  it  is  not  a  spirit  of 
bondage  which  makes  its  possessor  again  to 
fear,  but  it  is  a  spirit  of  power,  and  of  a  sound 
mind ;  it  lifts  the  soul  from  the  dust,  and  does 
not  chain  it  there  ;  it  has  raised  a  noble  army  of 
martyrs,  every  one  of  whose  millions  was  a  hero 
that  defied  the  tyrant's  rage,  and  spurned  his 
yoke  ;  religion  therefore  is  no  friend  of  slavery, 
nor  can  any  of  its  precepts  be  quoted  by  the 
tyrant  as  an  excuse  for  his  trampling  on  the  lib- 
erties of  mankind. 

Avowing  thus  much,  and  admitting  that  the 
most  spiritual  Christian  may  take  an  interest, 
and  ought  to  take  an  interest  in  public  affairs  ; 
nay,  that  he  ought  to  maintain  a  ceaseless  jealousy 
over  the  constitution  and  freedom  of  his  country, 
still  I  contend  that  a  constant,  and  noisy,  and 
factious  meddling  in  party  politics,  is  as  injuri- 
ous to  his  own  personal  religion,  as  it  is  to  the 
interest  of  piety  in  general.  We  do  not  cease 
to  be  citizens,  when  we  become  Christians  ;  but 
we  are  in  danger  of  ceasing  to  be   Christians, 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  57 

when  we  become  politicians.  It  is  with  politics 
as  with  money  ;  it  is  not  the  temperate  use,  but 
the  unmoderate  love  of  it,  that  is  the  root  of  ail 
evil.  Thousands  of  professors  of  rehgion  have 
made  shipwreck  of  their  faith  and  a  good  con- 
science, during  the  tempests  of  pohtical  agita- 
tion ;  let  us  then,  as  we  value  our  lives,  be 
cautious  how  we  embark  on  this  stormy  and 
troubled  ocean. 

There  is  one  way  in  which  many  Christians 
offend  against  the  laws  of  their  country  without 
scruple,  and  without  remorse ;  I  mean  by  en- 
deavouring to  evade  the  payment  of  taxes.  Had 
there  been  no  Christian  statute  to  condemn  this 
practice,  the  general  principles  of  reason  would 
be  quite  sufficient  to  prove  its  criminality.  But 
the  New  Testament  has  added  the  authority  of 
revelation  to  the  dictates  of  reason ;  and  thus 
made  it  a  sin  against  God,  no  less  than  a  crime 
against  society,  to  defraud  the  revenue,  "  Ren- 
der unto  Cesar  the  things  that  are  Cesar's ; 
tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  due,  and  custom  to 
whom  custom,"  is  the  authoritative  language 
of  St.  Paul.  This  precept  derives  great  force 
from  the  consideration  that  it  was  dehvered  at  a 
time,  and  under  a  government,  in  which  the 
taxes  were  not  imposed  by  the  people  themselves, 
but  by  the  arbitrary  power  of  a  despot.  Cer- 
tainly if,  under  these  circumstances,  it  was  the 
duty  of  a  Christian  to  pay  the   tribute   money, 


58  CHRISTIA.N    FELLOWSHIP. 

any  effort  which  we  make  to  evade  it,  must  be 
additionally  criminal,  since  we  are  taxed  by  the 
will  of  our  representatives.  The  excuses  usually 
made  in  justification  of  this  practice,  only  serve 
to  show  how  far  even  some  good  people  may  be 
imposed  upon,  by  the  deceitfulness  of  the  human 
heart.  Every  time  we  have  made  a  false  return 
on  the  schedule  which  regulates  our  quota  of 
taxation,  or  that  we  have  purchased  knowingly  a 
contraband  article  of  food,  beverage,  or  dress, 
we  have  committed  a  fraud  upon  society,  have 
assumed  a  power  to  dispense  with  the  laws  of 
our  country,  have  violated  the  precepts  of  the 
New  Testament,  have  brought  the  guilt  of  a 
complicated  crime  upon  our  conscience,  and 
have  subjected  ourselves  to  the  displeasure  of 
God,  and  the  discipline  of  his  church. 


CHAPTER  V. 


ON     THE     DUTIES     OF     CHURCH     MEMBERS     TO 
THEIR    PASTORS. 

I.  Submission  to  their  just  and  scriptural  au- 
thority. 

It  is  readily  admitted  that  the  unscriptural, 
and  therefore  usurped  domination  of  the  priest- 
hood is  the  root  from  whence  arose  the  whole 
system  of  papal  tyranny ;  which,  springmg  up 
like  a  poison  tree  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord, 
withered  by  its  shadow,  and  blighted  by  its  in- 
fluence, almost  every  plant  and  flower  of  genu- 
ine Christianity.  It  is  matter  of  no  regret,  there- 
fore, nor  of  surprise,  if  a  ceaseless  jealousy  should 
be  maintained  by  those  who  understand  the  prin- 
ples  of  religious  liberty,  against  the  encroach- 
ments of  pastoral  authority.  Priestly  dominion, 
as  it  appears  in  the  Vatican,  is  the  most  detest- 
able and  the  most  mischievous  of  all  tyranny  ; 
but  when  it  appears  in  the  pastor  of  an  inde- 
pendent church,  divested  at  once  of  the  elements 
of  power  and  the  trappings  of  majesty,  the  mere 
mimicry  of  authority,  it  is  rather  ridiculous  than 


60  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

alarming,  and  bears  no  nearer  resemblance  to 
its  prototype  at  Rome,  than  the  httle  croaking, 
hopping  animal  of  the  pond,  did  to  the  ox  of  the 
field,  which  his  pride  led  him  to  emulate,  until 
he  burst. 

Still,  however,  there  is  authority  belonging  to 
the  pastor  ;  for  office  without  authority  is  a  sole- 
cism. "Remember  them  that  have  the  rule  over 
you"  said  St.  Paul  to  the  Hebrews,  xiii.  7.  "  Obey 
them  that  have  the  rule  over  you.  Submit  your- 
selves, for  they  watch  for  your  souls,"  17.  "They 
addicted  themselves  to  the  ministry ;  submit  your- 
selves to  such."  1  Cor.  xvi.  15,  16.  These  are 
inspired  injunctions,  and  they  enjoin  obedience 
and  submission  on  Christian  churches  to  their 
pastors.  The  authority  of  pastors,  however,  is 
not  legislative  or  coercive,  but  simply  declara- 
tive and  executive.  To  define  with  precision 
its  limits,  is  as  difficult  as  to  mark  the  bounda- 
ries of  the  several  colours  of  the  rainbow,  or  of 
light  and  darkness  at  the  hour  of  twihght  jn  the 
hemisphere.  The  minister  is  to  command,  yet 
he  is  not  to  "  lord  it  over  God's  heritage."  This 
is  not  the  only  case,  in  which  the  precise  limits 
of  authority  are  left  undefined  by  the  scriptures. 
The  duties  of  the  conjugal  union  are  laid  dovm 
in  the  same  general  manner  :  the  husband  is  to 
rule  and  the  wife  to  obey ;  yet  it  is  difficult  to  de- 
clare where  in  this  instance  authority  and  sub- 
mission end.      In  each  of  these  instances  tho 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  61 

union  is  founded  on  mutual  love,  confidence  and 
esteem,  and  it  might  therefore  be  rationally 
supposed,  that  under  these  circumstances  gene- 
ral terms  are  sufficient,  and  that  there  would 
arise  no  contests  for  power.  If  the  people  see 
that  all  the  authority  of  their  pastor  is  employ- 
ed for  their  benefit,  tliey  will  not  be  inclined  to 
ascertain  by  measurement  whether  he  has  pass- 
ed its  limits.  The  very  circumstance  of  his  pre- 
rogative being  thus  undefined,  should  on  the 
one  hand  make  him  afraid  of  extending  it.  and 
on  the  other,  render  his  church  cautious  of  di- 
minishing it.  It  is  my  decided  conviction,  that 
in  many  of  our  churches,  the  pastor  is  depressed 
far  below  his  just  level.  He  is  considered  mere- 
ly in  the  light  of  a  speaking  brother.  He  has 
no  official  distinction  or  authority.  He  may  flat- 
ter like  a  sycophant,  he  may  beg  like  a  servant, 
he  may  woo  like  a  lover  ;  but  he  is  not  permit- 
ted to  enjoin  like  a  ruler.  His  opinion  is  receiv- 
ed with  no  deference,  his  person  treated  with 
no  respect,  and  in  the  presence  of  some  of  his 
lay  tyrants,  if  he  say  any  thing  at  all,  it  must 
be  somewhat  similar  to  the  ancient  soothsay- 
ers, for  he  is  only  permitted  to  peep  and  mut- 
ter fi-om  the  dust. 

Those  persons  who  are  anxious  to  strip  their 
pastors  of  all  just  elevation,  cannot  expect  to 
derive  much  edification  from  their  labours ;  for 
instruction  and  advice,  hke  substances  falling  to 


62  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

the  earth,  impress  the  mind  with  a  momentum, 
proportionate  to  the  height  from  which  they  de- 
scend. 

II.  Church  members  should  treat  their  pas- 
tor with  distinguishing  honour,  esteem,  and  love. 

"  Let  the  elders  that  rule  well  be  accounted 
worthy  of  double  honour,  especially  they  that 
labour  in  the  word  and  doctrine."*  1  Tim.  v. 
17.  "  Know  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you, 
and  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love,  for  their 
works'  sake."  1  Thes.  v.  11,  12.  To  prescribe 
in  what  way  our  love  should  express  itself,  is  al- 
most needless,  as  love  is  the  most  inventive  pas- 
sion of  the  heart,  and  will  find  or  make  a  thou- 
sand opportunities  for  displaying  its  power. 
Love  is  also  practical,  as  well  as  ingenious,  and 
does  not  confine  itself  either  to  the  speculations 
of  the  judgment  or  the  feehngs  of  the  heart.  It 
breathes  in  kind  words,  and  lives  in  kind  deeds. 
Where  a  minister  is  properly  esteemed  and  lov- 

*  It  is  surprising  to  me  that  an  attempt  should  have 
been  made  to  found  on  no  other  basis  than  this  passage, 
a  double  office  of  eldership  in  the  church,  and  to  es- 
tablish a  distinction  between  ruling  and  preaching  el- 
ders, when  nothing  more  can  be  fairly  inferred  from 
the  passage,  than  that  the  apostles  intended  to  show  the 
whole  design  and  duties  of  the  elder's  office,  and  to 
pronounce  him  entitled  to  peculiar  respect,  who  fulfill- 
ed them  all,  and  who,  to  ruling  well,  added  much  dili- 
gence in  preaching  the  word. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  63 

ed,  there  will  be  the  greatest  deference  for 
his  opinions,  the  most  deUcate  attention  to 
his  comfort,  a  scrupulous  respect  for  his 
character.  Some  people  treat  their  minister  as 
if  he  could  feel  nothing  but  blows.  They  are 
rude,  uncourteous,  churlish.  Instead  of  this, 
let  him  see  the  most  studious  and  constant  care 
to  promote  his  happiness  and  usefulness.  When 
he  is  in  sickness,  visit  him ;  in  trouble,  sympa- 
thise with  him ;  when  absent  from  home,  take  a 
kind  interest  in  his  family  ;  when  he  returns, 
greet  him  with  a  smile ;  at  the  close  of  the  la- 
bours of  the  Sabbath,  let  the  deacons  and  lead- 
ing members  gather  round  him  in  the  vestry, 
and  not  suffer  him  to  retire  from  his  scene  of 
public  labours  without  the  reward  of  some  to- 
kens of  their  approbation,  if  it  be  only  one 
friendly  pressure  of  the  hand.  Let  him  see  that 
his  prayers,  and  sermons,  and  solicitude,  render 
him  dear  to  the  hearts  of  his  flock.  It  is  aston- 
ishing what  an  influence  is  sometimes  produc- 
ed upon  a  minister's  mind  and  comfort,  even  by 
the  least  expression  of  his  people's  regard.  Of 
this  we  have  a  beautiful  instance  in  the  life  of 
St.  Paul.  On  that  important  journey  to  Rome, 
which  was  to  decide  the  question  of  hfe  or  death, 
he  appears  to  have  felt  a  season  of  temporary 
depression  when  the  imperial  city  presented  it- 
self to  his  view.  In  silent  meditation  he  re- 
volved, not  without  some  degree  of  dismay,  his 
approaching  appeal  to  a  tribunal  from  which  he 


64  CHRISTIAN     FELLOWSHIP,     OR 

had  nothing  in  the  way  of  clemency  to  expect. 
For  a  httle  while  the  heroism  of  this  exalted 
man  was  somewhat  affected  by  his  situation. 
At  this  juncture  some  of  the  Roman  Christians, 
who  had  been  apprized  of  his  approach,  came 
out  as  far  as  the  Appii-forum,  and  the  three  tav- 
erns, to  meet  him,  "whom,  when  Paul  saw,  he 
thanked  God,  and  took  courage."  From  that 
moment  fears  of  Nero,  of  prison,  and  of  death, 
all  left  him.  He  sprung  forward  with  new  ar- 
dour in  his  career,  prepared  to  offer  himself  in 
sacrifice  on  the  altar  of  martyrdom.  If  then 
the  love  of  these  brethren,  who  had  travelled  a 
few  stages  to  meet  St.  Paul,  produced  so  happy 
an  effect  upon  the  mind  of  this  illustrious  apos- 
tle, how  certainly  might  the  members  of  our 
churches  calculate  upon  a  similar  influence  be- 
ing produced  upon  the  hearts  of  their  pastors, 
by  even  the  smaller  expressions  of  their  affec- 
tion. 

III.  Attendance  upon  their  ministration,  is 
another  duty  which  church  members  owe  their 
pastors. 

This  attendance  should  be  constant,  not  occa* 
sional.  Some  of  our  members  give  unspeakable 
pain  to  their  pastors  by  the  irregularity  of  their 
visits  to  the  house  of  God.  A  little  inclemency 
of  weather,  or  the  shghtest  indisposition  of  body, 
is  sure  to  render  their  seats  vacant.  Sometimes 
a  still  more  guilty  cause  than  this  exists.    Oh  1 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  65 

"  Tell  it  not  in  Gath,  publish  it  not  in  Askelon, 
lest  the  daughters  of  the  Phihstines  triumph." 
Many  professors  do  not  scruple  to  devote  a  part 
of  the  Sabbath  to  travelling.  They  do  not  prob- 
ably set  off  upon  a  journey  in  the  morning  of 
the  Sabbath,  and  travel  all  day,  but  they  set  off 
perhaps  on  Saturday  evening,  and  arrive  at 
home  late  on  Sunday  morning ;  or  they  leave 
home  after  tea  on  Sunday  evening,  and  thus 
take  only  apart  of  the  hallowed  day  from  its 
destined  purpose.  This  practice,  it  is  to  be 
feared,  has  much  increased  of  late,  and  is  be- 
come one  of  the  prevailing  sins  of  the  religious 
world.  Such  persons  deserve  to  be  brought  un- 
der the  censures  of  the  church. 

Some   persons  are  irregular  in  their  attend- 
ance through  the  distance  at  ivhich  they  live  front 
their  place  of  pnhlic  ivorship.     Oftentimes  this  is 
unavoidable ;  but  it  is  a  great  inconsistency  for 
professing  Christians  voluntarily  to  choose  a  res- 
idence which  from  its  remoteness  from  the  house 
of  God,  must  often  deprive  them  of  the  com- 
munion of  the  saints.     Such  a  disposition  to  sac- 
rifice  spiritual  privileges  to  mere  temporal  en- 
joyment, does  not  afford  much  evidence   that 
religion  is  with  them  the  one  thing  needful,  or 
that  they  have  the  mind  of  David,  who  thought 
the  threshold  of  the  sanctuary  was  to  be  prefer- 
red to  the  saloon  and  the  park  of  the  palace. 
F 


66  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

Injurious  as  the  practice  necessarily  must  be  to 
the  individuals  themselves,  it  is  still  more  so  to 
their  servants  and  children. 

In  the  families  of  the  poor,  and  in  others  in- 
deed where  no  servant  is  kept,  the  mother  is 
detained  from  public  worship  far  more  than  she 
ought  to  be,  in  consequence  of  her  husband  not 
taking  his  share  of  parental  duty.  Many  fathers 
will  suffer  their  wives  to  be  kept  from  the  sanc- 
tuaiy  for  weeks  together,  rather  than  take 
charge  of  their  children,  even  for  one  part  of 
the  Sabbath.  This  is  most  unkind,  and  most 
unjust.  A  mother,  it  might  be  thouglit,  has 
pain  and  toil  enough  already,  without  being 
called  to  suffer  unnecessary  privations  in  relig- 
ious matters.  That  must  be  an  unfeeling  hus* 
band,  who  would  not  gladly  afford  an  hour's 
rest  and  respite  to  his  wife,  on  the  day  set  apart 
for  sacred  repose. 

Professing  Christians  should  feel  the  obliga- 
tions to  attend  week  day  services.  Most  minis- 
ters have  often  to  complain,  that  they  are  half 
deserted  on  these  occasions.  Surely,  with  such 
hearts  and  amidst  such  circumstances  as  ours,  it 
is  too  long  to  go  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  with- 
out the  aid  of  public  worship.  All  persons  have 
not  the  command  of  then-  own  time ;  but  in  the 
case  of  those  wholiave,  the  neglect  is  inexcusa- 
ble, and  argues  a  very  low  state  of  religion  in 
the  soul.    And  what  shall  be  said  of  those  mem- 


CHURCH    MEMBER^S    GUIDE.  67 

beis  whom  their  pastor  on  his  way  to  the  house 
of  God,  either  meets  going  to  parties  of  pleasure, 
or  sees  in  the  very  circles  of  gaiety. 

A  minister  has  a  right  to  expect  his  members 
at  the  meetings  for  social  prayer.*     The  Chris- 

*  Unfortunately  for  the  interests  of  our  prayer  meet- 
ings, some  brethren  who  lead  our  devotions  are  so  out- 
rageously long,  that  after  enjoying  the  first  half  of  their 
prayers,  the  congregation  are  anxiously  waiting  for  the 
close  of  the  other  half.  We  are  often  prayed  into  a 
good  frame,  and  then  prayed  out  of  it  again  by  those 
who  extend  their  supplications  to  the  length  of  twenty 
or  five  and  twenty  minutes  at  a  time.  A  prayer  on 
these  occasions  should  rarely  exceed  ten  minutes.  I 
do  most  earnestly  recommend  this  to  the  consideration 
of  those  brethren  who  are  in  the  habit  of  engaging  in 
public  prayer.  Devotion  ends  when  weariness  begins. 
Brevity,  fervour,  and  variety,  are  the  qualities  which 
all  should  seek.  It  is  also  to  be  regretted  that  the 
prayers  are  so  much  alike  in  the  arrangement  of  their 
parts.  Each  individual  seems  to  think  it  necessary  that 
he  should  pursue  a  regular  routine.  How  much  more 
edifying  would  it  be,  if  one  were  to  confine  himself  to 
one  topic,  and  the  next  were  to  enlarge  on  what  the 
preceding  one  had  omitted.  If  a  person  feels  his  mind 
impressed  and  drawn  out  by  any  particular  subject,  let 
him  confine  himself  to  that  subject,  and  not  suppose 
that  his  supplications  will  be  unacceptable  either  to 
God  or  man  because  he  has  not  brought  in  the  sick,  the 
church,  the  minister,  the  nation,  the  world,  &.c.  &c. 
How  affecting  and  impressive  would  it  be  to  hear  a 


68  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

tian  that  neglects  these,  betrays  such  an  utter  in- 
difference to  the  interests  of  the  church,  and  the 
comfort  of  the  pastor,  as  well  as  so  much  luke- 
warmness  in  his  own  personal  religion,  as  to  be 
a  fit  subject  for  the  exercise  of  discipline. 

IV.  Earnest  prayer. 

How  often  and  how  earnestly  did  the  great 
apostle  of  the  Gentiles  repeat  that  sentence, 
which  contained  at  once  the  authority  of  a  com- 
mand and  the  tenderness  of  a  petition — "  Breth- 
ren, pray  for  us."  In  another  place,  he  ascribes 
his  deliverance  and  preservation  to  the  prayers 
of  the  churches — "You  also  helping  together  by 
prayer  for  us."  2  Cor.  i.  11.  Surely  then  if  this 
illustrious  man  was  dependent  upon,  and  indebt- 
ed to  the  prayers  of  Christians,  how  much  more 
so  the  ordinary  ministers  of  Christ !  Pray  then 
for  your  ministers ;  for  the  increase  of  their  in- 
tellectual attainments,  spiritual  quahfications, 
and  ministerial  success.  Pray  for  them  in  your 
private  approaches  to  the  throne  of  grace  ;  pray 
for  them  at  the  family  altar,  and  thiiis  teach  your 
servants  and  children  to  respect  and  love  them. 
Prayer  is  a  means  of  assisting  a  minister  within 

brother  sometimes  confine  his  whole  intercession  to  his 
minister's  usefulness;  sometimes  to  the  church;  some- 
times to  the  spread  of  the  gospel  in  the  world.  See  a 
most  admirable  letter  of  Mr.  Newton's  on  this  subject 
in  his  Omicron. 


the  reach  of  all.  They  who  can  do  nothing 
more,  can  pray.  The  sick^  who  cannot  encour- 
age their  minister  by  their  presence  in  the  sanc- 
tuary, can  bear  him  upon  their  hearts  in  their 
lonely  chamber :  the  poor^  who  cannot  add  to 
his  temporal  comfort  by  pecuniary  donations, 
can  supplicate  their  God  "to  supply  all  his  needs 
according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus:" 
the  timid,  who  cannot  approach  to  offer  him 
the  tribute  of  their  gratitude,  can  pour  their 
praises  into  the  ear  of  Jehovah,  and  entreat  him 
still  to  encourage  the  soul  of  his  servant :  the 
ignorant,  who  cannot  hope  to  add  one  idea  to^ 
the  stock  of  his  knowledge,  can  place  him  by 
prayer  before  the  fountain  of  celestial  radiance  : 
even  the  dying,  who  can  no  longer  busy  them- 
selves as  aforetime  for  his  interests,  can  gather 
up  their  remaining  strength,  and  employ  it  in 
the  way  of  prayer  for  their  pastor. 

Prayer,  if  it  be  sincere,  always  increases  our 
affection  for  its  object.  We  never  feel  even  our 
dearest  friends  to  be  so  dear,  as  when  we  have 
commended  them  to  the  goodness  of  God.  It 
is  the  best  extinguisher  of  enmity,  and  the  best 
fuel  for  the  flame  of  love.  If  some  professing 
Christians  were  to  take  from  the  time  they 
spend  in  praising  their  ministers,  and  others 
from  that  which  they  employ  in  blaming  them, 
and  both  were  to  devote  it  to  the  act  of  pray- 
ing for  them,  the  former  would  find  still  more 


70  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

cause  for  admiration,  and  the  latter  far  less 
reason  for  censure. 

V.  Members  should  encourage  others  to  at- 
tend upon  the  ministry  of  their  pastors. 

Let  us  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  is  an 
invitation  which  they  should  often  address  to 
the  people  of  the  world,  who  either  attend  no 
place  of  worship  at  all,  or  where  the  truth  is  not 
preached.  A  minister  cannot  himself  ask  peo- 
ple to  attend  his  place  of  worship,  but  those  who 
are  in  the  habit  of  hearing  him  can  ;  and  it  is 
astonishing  to  what  an  extent  the  useftdriess  of 
private  Christians  may  be  carried  in  this  way. 
I  have  received  very  many  into  the  fellowship 
of  the  church  under  my  care,  who  were  first 
brought  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel  by  the 
kind  solicitations  of  a  pious  neighbour.  To 
draw  away  the  hearers  of  one  faithful  preacher 
to  another,  is  a  despicable  ambition — mere  sec- 
tarian zeal ;  but  to  invite  those  who  never  hear 
the  gospel  to  listen  to  the  joyful  sound,  is  an  ef- 
fort worthy  the  mind  of  an  angel.  Shall  sinners 
invite  one  another  to  iniquity — to  the  brothel,  the 
theatre,  the  tavern — and  Christians  not  attempt 
to  draw  them  to  the  house  of  God  ?  This  is  one 
way  in  which  every  member,  of  every  church,  may 
be  the  means  of  doing  great  good  ;  the  rich,  the 
poor,  male  and  female,  masters  and  servants, 
young  and  old,  have  all  some  acquaintance  over 
whom  they  may  exert  their  influence  ;  and  how 


71 

can  it  be  better  employed  than  in   attracting 

them  to  those   places 

"  Where  streams  of  heavenly  mercy  flow. 
And  words  of  sweet  salvation  sound." 

VI.  It  is  incumbent  on  church  members  to 
make  known  to  their  pastor  any  thing  that  oc- 
curs within  the  scope  of  their  observation,  or 
the  course  of  their  experience,  relating  to  his 
church  and  congregation. 

For  instance,  their  own  spiritual  embarrass- 
ments, trials,  temptations  ;  the  declensions^back- 
shdings,  and  sins  of  others,  which  they  imagine 
may  have  escaped  his  notice,  and  which  they 
have  first  tried  by  their  own  personal  efforts  to 
remove.  If  they  perceive  any  root  of  bitterness 
growing  up,  which  they  have  not  strength  or 
skill  enough  to  eradicate,  it  is  then  manifestly 
their  duty  to  inform  him  of  the  circmnstance. 
lAhey  perceive  any  individual  whose  case  has 
been  overlooked,  any  one  in  circumstances 
which  need  sympathy  or  relief,  any  who  are 
struggling  with  affliction,  but  are  too  modest  or 
J;imid  to  disclose  their  situation ;  they  should 
bring  all  such  occurrences  under  his  notice. 
Especially  should  they  encourage  any  persons  in 
the  congregation  who  appear  to  he  under  religious 
concern ;  in  such  cases  they  should  put  forth  all 
their  tenderest  solicitude  to  shelter  and  cherish 
these  hopeful  beginnings,  and  introduce  the 
subjects  of  them   to  their  minister.     There   are 


72  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

some  Christians — but  do  they  mdeed  deserve  the 
name  ? — who  would  see  all  the  process  of  con- 
version going  on  in  the  very  next  seat  to  theirs, 
and  observe  the  fixed  attention,  the  anxious 
look,  the  tearful  eye,  the  serious  deportment — 
and  all  this  repeated  one  Sabbath  after  another 
— ^without  the  least  possible  interest,  or  ever 
exchanging  a  single  syllable  with  the  inquiring 
penitent !  Shame,  shame  on  such  professors  ! ! 
Can  the  love  of  Christ  dwell  in  such  cold  and 
careless  hearts  ?  Can  they  have  ever  felt  convic- 
tion of  sin  ?  How  easy  and  how  incumbent  is 
it  to  introduce  ourselves  to  such  individuals  ;  a 
word,  a  look,  w^ould  be  received  with  grat- 
itude. 

I  am  aware  that  the  part  of  a  member's  duty, 
enforced  under  this  division  of  the  subject,  re- 
quires extreme  caution  and  dehcacy,  not  to 
degenerate  into  a  busy,  meddling,  officious  dis- 
position. All  impertinent  obtrusion,  all  fawning 
activity,  should  be  carefully  avoided  by  the 
people,  and  as  carefully  discouraged  by  the 
pastor. 

VII.  Zealous  co-operation  in  all  schemes  of 
usefulness  proposed  by  the  pastor,  whether  for 
the  benefit  of  their  own  society  in  particular,  or 
the  welfare  of  the  church,  and  the  world  at 
large,  is  the  duty  of  Christians. 

This  is  an  age  of  restless  activity,  practical  be- 
nevolence, and  progressive  improvement.    One 


73 

scheme  of  benefit  often  contains  the  germs  of 
many  more.  The  love  of  innovation  and  the 
dread  of  it,  are  equally  remote  from  true  wisdom. 
Zeal,  when  guided  by  wisdom,  is  a  noble  element 
of  character,  and  the  source  of  incalculable  good. 
A  church  ought  always  to  stand  ready  to  sup- 
port any  scheme  which  is  proved  to  their  judg- 
ment to  be  beneficial  either  to  themselves  or 
others.  It  is  most  disheartening  to  ministers  to 
fijid  all  their  eflTorts  counteracted  by  that  igno- 
rance which  can  comprehend  nothing  strange, 
that  bigotry  which  is  attached  to  every  thing 
old,  that  timidity  which  starts  at  every  thing 
new,  or  that  avarice  which  condemns  every 
thing  expensive.  Usages  and  customs  that  are 
venerable  for  their  antiquity,  I  admit,  should 
not  be  touched  by  hot  spirits  and  rude  hands, 
lest  in  removing  the  sediment  deposited  by  the 
stream  of  time  at  the  base  of  the  fabric,  they 
should  touch  the  foundation  itself:  But  where 
the  word  of  God  is  the  hne  and  the  plummet ; 
where  this  line  is  held  by  the  hand  of  caution, 
and  watched  by  the  eye  of  Avisdom ;  in  such 
cases,  innovation  upon  the  customs  of  our 
churches  is  a  blessing,  and  ought  to  receive  the 
support  of  the  people.  It  is  a  scandal  to  any 
Christian  society,  when  the  flame  of  ministerial 
zeal  is  allowed  to  burn,  without  enkindUng  a 
similar  fire. 

G 


74  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

VIII.  A  most  delicate  and  tender  regard  for 
the  pastor's  reputation. 

A  minister's  character  is  the  lock  of  his 
strength;  and  if  once  this  be  sacrificed,  he  is  like 
Samson  shorn  of  his  hair,  a  poor,  feeble,  falter- 
ing creature,  the  pity  of  his  friends  and  the  deri- 
sion of  his  enemies.  I  would  not  have  bad  min- 
isters screened,  nor  would  I  have  good  ones  ma- 
ligned. When  a  preacher  of  righteousness  has 
stood  In  the  way  of  sinners,  and  walked  in  the 
counsel  of  the  ungodly,  he  should  never  again 
open  his  lips  in  the  great  congregation,  until  his 
repentance  is  as  notorious  as  his  sin.  But  while 
his  character  is  unsullied,  his  friends  should  pre- 
serve it  with  as  much  care  against  the  tongue 
of  the  slanderer,  as  they  would  his  hfe  against 
the  hand  of  the  assassin. 

When  I  consider  the  restless  malignity  of  the 
great  enemy  of  God  and  hohness,  and  add  to 
this  his  subtlety  and  craft;  when  I  consider 
how  much  his  malice  would  be  gratified,  and 
his  schemes  promoted,  by  blackening  the  char- 
acter of  the  ministers  of  the  gospel ;  when  I 
consider  what  a  multitude  of  creatures  there 
are  who  are  his  vassals,  and  under  his  influence, 
creatures  so  destitute  of  moral  princi})le,  and  so 
filled  with  venomous  spite  against  religion,  as  to 
be  prepared  to  go  any  lengths  in  mahgning  the 
righteous,  and  especially  their  ministers,  I  can^ 
account  for  it  on  no  other  ground,  than  a  spe- 


75 

cial  interposition  of  providence,  that  the  reputa- 
tion of  Christian  pastors  is  not  more  frequently 
attacked  by  slander,  and  destroyed  by  calumny. 
But  probably  we  see  in  this  as  in  other  cases, 
that  wise  arrangement  of  Providence  by  which 
things  of  delicacy  and  consequence  are  preserv- 
ed, by  calling  forth  greater  solicitude  for  their 
safety.  Church  members  should  therefore  be 
tremblingly  alive  to  the  importance  of  defend- 
ing their  minister's  character.  They  should 
neither  expect  to  see  him  perfect,  nor  hunt  after 
his  imperfections.  When  they  cannot  but  see 
his  imperfections — imperfections  which  after  all 
may  be  consistent  with  not  only  real,  but  eminent 
piety — they  should  not  take  pleasure  in  either 
magnifying  or  looking  at  them ;  but  make  all 
reasonable  excuse  for  them,  and  endeavour 
to  lose  sight  of  his  infirmities  in  his  virtues, 
as  they  do  the  spots  of  the  sun  amidst  the  ra- 
diance with  which  they  are  surrounded.  Let 
them  not  be  the  subject  of  conversation  even 
between  yourselves,  much  less  before  your  chil- 
dren, servants,  and  the  world.  If  you  talk  of 
his  faults  in  derision,  who  will  speak  of  his  ex- 
cellencies with  admiration  ?  Do  not  look  at 
him  with  suspicion,  but  repose  an  honourable 
confidence  in  his  character.  Do  not  make  him 
an  offender  for  a  word,  and  refuse  to  him  that 
charity  and  candour  of  judgment,  which  would 
be  granted  to  every  one  else.  Do  not  magnify 
indiscretions  into  immoralities,  and  exact  fi-om 


76  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

him  that  absolute  perfection,  which  in  your  own 
case  you  find  to  be  unattainable.  Beware  of 
whispers,  inuendoes,  significant  nods,  and  that 
slanderous  silence,  which  is  more  defamatory 
than  the  broadest  accusation. 

Defend  him  against  the  groundless  attacks  of 
others.  Never  hear  him  spoken  of  with  unde- 
served reproach,  without  indignantly  repelling 
the  shafts  of  calumny  from  the  wittling  that 
would  make  him  ridiculous,  the  scorner  that 
would  render  him  contemptible,  and  the  defa- 
mer  that  would  brand  him  as  immoral. 

Especially  guard  against  those  creeping  rep- 
tiles which  infest  our  churches,  and  are  perpet- 
ually insinuating  that  their  ministers  do  not 
preach  the  gospel,  merely  because  they  do  not 
incessantly  repeat  the  same,  truths  in  the  same 
words  ;  because  they  do  not  allegorize  and  spir- 
itualize all  the  facts  of  the  Old  Testament,  until 
they  have  found  as  much  gospel  in  the  horses 
of  Pharoah's  chariot  as  they  can  in  St.  Paul's 
epistles ;  and  because  they  have  dared  to  en- 
force the  moral  law  as  the  rule  of  the  believer's 
conduct.  This  antinomian  spirit  has  become 
the  pest  of  many  churches.  It  is  the  most  mis- 
chievous and  disgusting  of  all  errors.  If  the 
heresies  which  abound  in  the  spiritual  world 
were  to  be  represented  by  the  noxious  animals 
of  the  natural  world,  we  could  find  some  errors 
that  would  answer  to  the  vulture,  the  tyger,  and 


77 

the  serpent ;  but  we  could  find  nothing  that 
would  be  an  adequate  emblem  of  antinomian- 
ism,  except  by  a  creation  of  our  own,  we  had 
united  in  some  monstrous  reptile,  the  venom  of 
the  wasp,  with  the  deformity  of  the  spider,  and 
the  slime  of  the  snail. 

IX.     Liberal  support. 

The  Scripture  is  very  explicit  on  this  head, 
"Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  word  communi- 
cate unto  him  that  teacheth  in  all  good  things." 
Gal.  vi.  6.  "  Who  goeth  a  warfare  any  time  at 
his  own  charges  ? — even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordain- 
ed, that  they  which  preach  the  gospel,  should 
live  of  the  gospel."  1  Cor.  ix.  7,  14.  The  ne- 
cessity of  this  appears  from  the  injunctions  de- 
livered to  ministers  to  devote  themselves  exclu- 
sively to  the  duties  of  their  office.  2  Tim.  ii.  4^ 
1  Tim.  iv.  1-3,  15.  I  by  no  means  contend  that 
it  is  unlawful  for  a  minister  to  engage  in  secu- 
lar concerns;  for  necessity  is  a  law  which  su- 
persedes the  ordinary  rules  of  human  conduct ; 
and  what  are  they  to  do,  whose  stipend  is  too 
small  to  support  a  family,  and  who  have  no 
private  source  of  supply  ?  A  minister  is  un- 
der additional  obligations  to  i)rovide  for  things 
honest,  not  only  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  but  of 
men  ;  to  owe  no  man  any  thing,  to  provide  for 
his  own  house ;  and  if  he  is  not  enabled  to  do 
this  by  the  liberality  of  his  flock,  and  has  no 
private  fortune,  he  must  have  recourse  to  the  la- 


78  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

bour  of  his  hands.  It  is  to  the  deep,  and  wide, 
and  endless  reproach  of  some  churches,  that  al- 
though possessed  of  abihty  to  support  their  pas- 
tors in  comfort,  they  dole  out  but  a  wretched 
pittance  from  their  affluence,  leaving  them  to 
make  up  the  deficiency  by  a  school,  and  then 
with  insulting  cruelty  complain  that  their  ser- 
mons are  very  meagre,  and  have  a  great  same- 
ness. Such  congregations,  if  they  were  treated 
as  they  deserve,  would  be  put  upon  abstinence 
for  at  least  a  twelve  month,  or  until  they  were 
willing  to  support  their  pastor  in  comfort.  They 
love  him  dearly  with  their  lips,  but  hate  him  as 
cordially  with  their  pockets.  They  keep  him 
poor  to  keep  him  humble,  forgetting  that  as  hu- 
mility is  no  less  necessary  for  themselves  than 
for  him,  this  is  an  argument  why  the  articles 
which  minister  to  their  pride,  should  be  retrench- 
ed in  order  to  support  his  comfort.  This  is  cer- 
tainly not  drawing  them  with  the  cords  of  love 
and  the  bands  of  a  man,  but  treating  them  like 
animals  who  are  tamed  into  submission  by  hun- 
ger, and  kept  humble  by  being  kept  poor.  It  is 
curious  to  hear  how  some  persons  will  entreat 
of  God  to  bless  their  minister  in  his  basket  and 
his  store,  while  alas !  poor  man,  they  have  taken 
care  that  his  basket  should  be  empty,  and  his 
store  nothingness  itself.  Is  not  this  mocking 
both  God  and  his  minister  with  a  solemn  sound 
upon  a  thoughtless  tongue  ? 


79 

Many  rich  Christians  spend  more  in  the  need- 
less wine  they  individually  drink,  than  they  con- 
tribute towards  the  support  of  their  pastor  ;  and 
others  give  more  for  the  sugar  that  sweetens 
their  tea,  than  they  do  for  all  the  advantages  of 
public  worship.  A  reproach  of  this  kind  yet 
rests  upon  multitudes,  which  it  is  high  time 
should  be  rolled  away. 

It  is  extremely  difficult,  where  a  matter  of  this 
kind  must  be  left  to  voluntary  contribution,  and 
the  dictates  of  individual  liberahty,  to  lay  down 
particular  rules ;  all  that  can  be  done,  is,  to  state 
general  principles,  and  leave  these  to  operate  in 
particular  cases.  Let  all  Christians  therefore 
consider  what  is  a  just  and  generous  reward  for 
the  labours  of  a  man,  who  is  devoting  his  hfe 
to  ^ssist  them  in  obtaining  an  inheritance  incor- 
ruptible, undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away  : — 
who,  in  assisting  them  to  gain  eternal  life,  ex- 
erts at  the  same  time  an  indirect,  but  a  benefi- 
cial influence  upon  all  their  temporal  prosperity 
— ^who,  by  his  ministrations,  sooths  their  cares, 
lightens  their  sorrows,  mortifies  their  sins, 
throws  a  radiance  over  their  darkest  scenes,  and 
gilds  their  brightest  ones  with  additional  splen- 
dour ? 

Let  it  not  be  thought  that  what  is  given  to  a 
minister  is  a  charitable  donation  ;  it  is  the  pay- 
ment of  a  just  debt.     It  is  what  Christ  claims 


80  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP. 

for  his  faithful  servants,  and  which  cannot  be 
withheld  without  robbery.  I  spurn  for  myself 
and  for  my  brethren,  the  degrading  apprehen- 
sion that  we  are  supported  by  charity.  We  are 
not  clerical  pensioners  upon  mere  bounty.  Our 
appeal  is  to  justice  ;  and  if  our  claims  are  denied 
on  this  ground,  we  refuse  to  plead  before  any 
other  tribunal,  and  refer  the  matter  to  the  great 
assize. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

DUTIES  OF  CHURCH  MEMBERS  TOWARDS  EACH 
OTHER. 

I.  The  first,  and  that  which  indeed  seems  to 
include  every  other,  is  love. 

The  stress  which  is  laid  on  this  in  tlie  Word 
of  God,  both  as  it  respects  the  manner  in  which 
it  is  stated,  and  the  frequency  with  which  it  is 
enjoined,  sufficiently  proves  its  vast  importance 
in  the  Christian  temper,  and  its  powerful  influ- 
ence on  the  communion  of  believers.  It  is  en- 
forced by  our  Lord  as  the  identifying  law  of  his 
kingdom.  "  This  is  my  bommandment,  that  ye 
love  one  another  as  I  have  loved  you."  John  xv. 
12.  By  this  we  learn  that  the  subjects  of  Christ 
are  to  be  known  and  distinguished  amongst  men, 
by  their  mutual  affection.  This  injunction  is 
denominated  the  new  commandment  of  the  Chris- 
tian economy ;  not  that  love  was  no  duty  before 
the  coming  of  Christ ;  but  it  is  now  placed  more 
prominently  amongst  the  duties  of  behevers ;  is 
urged  on  fresh  grounds,  enforced  by  a  more  per- 


82  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

feet  example,  and  constrained  by  stronger  mo- 
tives. The  dispensation  of  Jesus  Christ  is  a 
system  of  most  wonderful,  most  mysterious 
grace.  It  is  the  manifestation,  commendation, 
and  perfection  of  divine  love.  It  originated  in 
the  love  of  the  Father,  and  is  accomphshed  by 
the  dove  of  the  Son.  Jesus  Christ  was  an  incar- 
nation of  love  in  our  world.  He  was  love  living, 
breathing,  speaking,  acting,  amongst  men.  His 
birth  was  the  nativity  of  love,  his  sermons  the 
words  of  love,  his  miracles  the  wonders  of  love, 
his  tears  the  meltings  of  love,  his  crucifixion  the 
agonies  of  love,  his  resurrection  the  triumph  of 
love.  Hence  it  was  natural,  that  love  should  be 
the  cardinal  virtue  in  the  character  of  his  saints, 
and  that  it  should  be  the  law  which  regulates 
their  conduct  towards  each  other. 

The  Apostles  echoed  the  language  of  their 
Master,  and  continually  enjoined  the  churches 
which  they  had  planted,  to  love  one  another, 
and  to  let  brotherly  love  abound  and  increase. 
It  is  a  grace  so  important  that,  like  holiness,  no 
measure  of  it  is  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  require- 
ment of  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  the  basis,  and 
cement,  and  beauty  of  the  Christian  union.  The 
church  where  it  is  wanting,  whatsoever  may  be 
the  number  or  gifts  of  its  members,  is  nothing 
better  than  a  heap  of  stones,  which,  however 
pohshed,  want  the  coherence  and  similitude  of  a 
palace. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  83 

In  the  best  and  purest  ages  of  the  church,  this 
vh-tue  shone  so  brightly  in  the  character  of  its 
members,  was  so  conspicuous  in  all  their  con- 
duct, was  expressed  in  actions  so  replete  with 
noble,  disinterested,  and  heroic  affection,  as  to 
become  a  proverb  with  surrounding  pagans, 
and  call  forth  the  well  known  exclamation, 
"  See  how  these  Christians  love  one  another.'* 
A  finer  eulogium  was  never  pronounced  on  the 
Christian  church ;  a  more  valuable  tribute  was 
never  deposited  on  the  altar  of  Christianity. 
Alas  !  that  it  should  so  soon  have  ceased  to  be 
just,  and  that  the  church  as  it  grew  older  should 
have  lost  its  loveliness  by  losing  its  love. 

But  it  will  be  necessary  to  point  out  the  man- 
ner in  which  brotherly  ove  wherever  it  exists 
will  operate. 

1.  In  a  peculiar  complacency  in  ourfelloiv  mem- 
bers, as  the  objects  of  divine  love. 

Complacency  is  the  very  essence  of  love  ;  and 
the  ground  of  all  proper  complacency  in  the 
saints,  is  their  relation  and  likeness  to  God.  We 
should  feel  peculiar  dehght  in  each  other  as  fel- 
low heirs  of  the  grace  of  God,  partakers  of  like 
precious  faith,  and  joint  sharers  of  the  common 
salvation.  We  must  be  dear  to  each  other  as 
the  objects  of  the  Father's  mercy,  the  Son's  dy- 
ing grace,  and  the  Spirit's  sanctifying  influence. 
The  love  of  Christians  is  of  a  very  sacred  nature, 
and  is  quite  peculiar.    It  is  not  the  love  of  con- 


84  CHRISTIAN    FEI/LOWSHIP,  OR 

sanguinity,  or  friendship,  or  interest,  or  general 
esteem ;  but  it  is  an  affection  cherished  for 
Christ's  sake.  They  may  see  many  things  in 
each  other  to  admire,  such  as  an  amiable  tem- 
per, pubhc  spirit,  tender  sympathy ;  but  Chris- 
tian love  does  not  rest  on  these  things,  although 
they  may  increase  it,  but  on  the  ground  of  a 
common  relationship  to  Christ.  On  this  account 
they  are  to  take  peculiar  delight  in  each  other, 
as  being  one  in  Christ.  "  These,"  should  a  be- 
liever exclaim,  as  he  looks  on  the  church,  "are 
the  objects  of  the  Redeemer's  living  and  dying 
love,  whom  he  regards  w^ith  complacency ;  and 
out  of  affection  to  him,  I  feel  an  inexpressible 
delight  in  them.  I  love  to  associate  with  them, 
to  talk  with  them,  to  look  upon  them,  because 
they  are  Christ's." 

2.  Love  to  our  brethren  will  lead  us  to  hear 
one  another^s  burthens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of 
Christ.     Gal.  vi.  2. 

When  we  see  them  oppressed  with  a  weight 
of  anxious  care,  instead  of  carrying  ourselves 
with  cold  indifference  and  unfeeling  distance 
towards  them,  we  should  cherish  a  tender  solic- 
itude to  know  and  reheve  their  anxieties.  How 
touching  would  such  a  salutation  as  the  follow- 
ing be  from  one  Christian  to  another  :  "  Brother, 
I  have  observed  with  considerable  pain,  that 
your  countenance  has  been  covered  with  gloom, 
as  if  you  were  sinking  under  some  inward  solic- 


85 

itude.  I  would  not  be  unpleasantly  officious, 
nor  wish  to  obtrude  myself  upon  your  attention, 
farther  than  is  agreeable  ;  but  I  offer  you  the 
expressions  of  Christian  sympathy,  and  the 
assistance  of  Christian  counsel.  Can  I  in  any 
way  assist  to  mitigate  your  care,  and  restore 
your  tranquilhty  ?"  At  such  sounds,  the  loaded 
heart  would  feel  as  if  half  its  load  were  gone. 
It  may  be,  the  kind  inquirer  could  yield  no  ef- 
fectual relief,  but  there  is  balm  in  his  sympathy. 
The  indifference  of  some  professing  Christians 
to  the  burthens  of  their  brethren  is  shocking  ; 
they  would  see  them  crushed  to  the  very  earth 
with  cares  and  sorrows,  and  never  make  one 
kind  inquiry  into  their  situation,  nor  lend  a 
helping  hand  to  lift  them  from  the  dust.  Love 
requires  that  we  should  take  the  deepest  inter- 
est in  each  other's  case,  that  we  should  patiently 
Hsten  to  the  tale  of  wo  which  a  brother  brings 
us,  that  we  should  mingle  our  tears  with  his, 
that  we  should'offer  him  our  advice,  that  we 
should  suggest  to  him  the  consolations  of  the 
gospel ;  in  short,  we  should  let  him  see  that  his 
troubles  reach  not  only  our  ear  but  our  heart. 
Sympathy  is  one  of  the  finest,  the  most  natural, 
the  most  easy  expressions  of  love. 

3.  Love  requires  that  we  should  visit  our  breth- 
ren in  their  affliction. 

"  I  was  sick  and  ye  visited  me,  I  was  in  prison 
and  ye  came  unto  me ; — for  as  much  as  ye  did  it 


00  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

unto  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  did  it 
unto  me;"  such  is  the  language  of  Jesus  Christ 
to  his  people,  by  which  he  teaches  us  how  im- 
portant and  incumbent  a  duty  it  is  for  church 
members  to  visit  each  other  in  their  afflictions. 
Probably  there  is  no  duty  more  neglected  than 
this.  Christians  often  lie  on  beds  of  sickness 
for  weeks  and  months  successively,  without 
seeing  a  fellow  member  cross  the  threshold  of 
their  chamber  door.  How  often  have  I  been 
shocked,  when  upon  inquiring  of  the  sufferer 
whether  such  and  such  an  individual  residing  in 
their  neighbourhood  had  been  to  visit  them,  it 
has  been  said  in  reply,  "  Oh  ^  no  sir,  I  have  now 
been  stretched  on  this  bed  for  days  and  weeks. 
My  pain  and  weakness  have  been  so  great,  that 

1  have  scarcely  been  able  to  collect  my  thoughts 
for  meditation  and  prayer.  The  sight  of  a  dear 
Christian  friend  would  indeed  have  reheved 
the  dull  monotony  of  this  gloomy  scene,  and  the 
voice  of  piety  would  have  been  £fs  music  to  blunt 
my  sense  of  pain,  and  lull  my  troubled  heart  to 
short  repose  ;  but  such  a  sight  and  such  a  sound 
have  been  denied  me.  No  friend  has  been  near 
me,  and  it  has  aggravated  sorrows  already 
heavy,  to  be  thus  neglected  and  forgotten  by  a 
church,  which  I  joined  with  the  hope  of  finding 
amongst  them  the  comfort  of  sympathy.  But 
alas !  alas !  I  find  them  too  much  occupied  vrith 
the  things  seen  and  temporal,  to  think  of  a  su^ 


87 

fering  brother,  to  whom  wearisome  nights  and 
months  of  vanity  are  appointed."  How  could  I 
help  exclaiming,  "  O,  Christian  love,  bright  im- 
age of  the  Saviom-'s  heart !  whither  hast  thou 
fled,  that  thou  so  rarely  visitest  the  church  on 
earth,  to  shed  thine  influence,  and  manifest  thy 
beauties  there  ? "  There  have  been  ages  of 
Christianity,  so  historians  inform  us,  in  which 
brotherly  love  prevailed  amongst  Christians  to 
such  a  degree,  that,  fearless  of  the  infection  dif- 
fused by  the  most  malignant  and  contagious 
disorders,  they  have  ventured  to  the  bed  side  of 
their  brethren  expiring  in  the  last  stages  of  the 
plague,  to  administer  the  consolations  of  a  hope 
full  of  immortality.  This  ivas  love  ;  love  strong- 
er than  death,  and  which  many  waters  could 
not  quench.  It  was  no  doubt  imprudent,  but 
it  was  heroic,  and  circulated  far  and  wide  the 
praises  of  that  dear  name  which  was  the  secret 
of  the  wonder. 

How  many  are  there,  now  bearing  the  Chris- 
tian name,  who  scarcely  ever  yet  paid  one  visit 
to  the  bed  side  of  a  suffering  brother.  Shame 
and  disgrace  upon  such  professors ! !  Let  them 
not  expect  to  hear  the  Saviour  say,  "I  was 
sick,  and  ye  visited  me." 

That  this  branch  of  Christian  love  may  be 
performed  with  greater  dihgence,  it  would  be  a 
good  plan  for  the  pastor,  at  every  church  meet- 
ing, to  mention  the  names  of  the  afflicted  mem- 


88  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

« 

bers,  and  stir  up  the  brethren  to  visit  them.  It 
would  be  particularly  desirable  for  Christians  to 
go  to  the  scene  of  suffering  on  a  Sabbath  day, 
and  read  the  Bible  and  sermons  to  the  afflicted, 
at  that  time,  as  they  are  then  peculiarly  apt  to 
feel  their  sorrows,  in  consequence  of  being  cut 
off  from  the  enjoyments  of  public  worship. 

4.  "  Pray  one  for  another,''''  James  v.  16. 

Not  only  with  but /or  one  another.  A  Chris- 
tian should  take  the  interests  of  his  brethren  into 
the  closet.  Private  devotion  is  not  to  be  selfish 
devotion.  It  would  much  increase  our  affection 
did  we  devote  more  of  our  private  prayers  to 
each  other's  welfare. 

5.  Pecuniary  relief  should  he  administered  to 
those  who  need  it. 

"Distributing  to  the  necessities  of  the  saints," 
Rom.  xii.  13,  is  mentioned  amongst  the  incum- 
bent duties  of  professing  Christians.  How  just, 
how  forcible  is  the  interrogation  of  the  Apostle, 
1  John  iii.  17,  "  Whoso  hath  this  world's  good, 
and  seeth  hisbrother  have  need,  and  shutteth  up 
his  bowels  of  compassion  from  him,  how  dwell- 
eth  the  love  of  God  in  him  ?  "  Nothing  can  be 
more  absurd,  than  those  pretensions  to  love, 
which  are  not  supported  by  exertions  to  relieve 
the  wants  of  the  object  beloved.  It  must  be  a 
singular  affection  which  is  destitute  of  mercy. 
So  powerfully  did  this  holy  passion  operate  in 
the  first  ages  of  the  church,  that    many  rich 


Ifc 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  89 

Christians  sold  their  estates,  and  shared  their 
affluence  with  the  poor.  What  rendered  this 
act  the  more  remarkable  is,  that  it  was  purely 
voluntary.  It  is  not  our  didy  any  more  than  it 
was  theirs,  to  go  this  length ;  still,  however,  it  is 
evident  both  from  general  principles  as  well  as 
from  particular  precepts,  that  we  are  under  ob- 
hgation  to  make  some  provision  for  the  poor. 
This  duty  must  be  left  m  the  statement  of  gen- 
eral terms,  as  it  is  impossible  to  define  its  pre- 
cise limits.  It  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  at 
all  incumbent  to  make  regular  periodical  distri- 
butions to  the  poor,  whether  in  circumstances 
of  distress  or  not.  Some  churches  have  a  reg- 
istered list  of  pensioners,  who  come  as  regular- 
ly for  their  pay,  as  if  they  were  hired  servants. 
If  they  are  old,  infirm,  or  unprovided  for,  this 
is  very  well ;  but  for  those  to  receive  relief,  who 
are  getting  a  comfortable  subsistence  by  their 
labour,  is  an  abuse  of  the  charity  of  the  church. 
The  money  collected  at  the  Lord's  supper  should 
be  reserved  for  times  of  sickness  and  pecuUar 
necessity. 

It  should  be  recollected,  also,  that  public  con- 
tributions do  not  release  the  members  from  the 
exercise  of  private  liberality.  The  shilhng  a 
month  which  is  given  at  the  sacrament,  seems, 
in  the  opinion  of  many,  to  discharge  them  from 
all  further  obligation  to  provide  for  the  comfort 
H 


90    -  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

of  their  poorer  brethren,  and  to  be  a  sort  of 
composition  for  the  full  exercise  of  religious 
charity.  This  is  a  great  mistake  ;  it  ought  rath- 
er to  be  considered  as  a  mere  earnest,  or  pledge 
of  all  that  more  effective  and  abundant  liberality 
which  they  should  exercise  in  secret. 
6.  Forbearance  is  a  great  part  of  love.  :\ 
"  Forbearing  one  another  in  love."  Eph.  iv.  4. 
In  a 'Christian  church,  especially  where  it  is  of 
considerable  magnitude,  we  must  expect  to  find 
a  very  great  diversity  of  character.  There  are 
all  the  gradations  of  intellect,  and  all  the  varie- 
ties of  temper.  In  such  cases  great  forbearance 
is  absolutely  essential  to  the  preservation  of  har- 
mony and  peace.  The  strong  must  bear  with 
the  infirmities  of  the  weak.  Christians  of 
great  attainments  in  knowledge  should  not 
in  their  hearts  despise,  nor  in  their  conduct  ridi- 
cule the  feeble  conceptions  of  those  who  are 
babes  in  Christ ;  but  most  meekly  correct  their 
errors,  and  most  kindly  instruct  their  ignorance. 
This  is  love.  In  very  many  persons  there  will 
unhappily  be  found  some  things,  which  although 
they  by  no  means  affect  the  reality  and  sincerity 
of  their  religion,  considerably  diminish  its  lustre, 
and  have  a  tendency,  without  the  caution  of 
love,  to  disturb  our  communion  with  them. 
Some  have  a  forward  and  obtrusive  manner ; 
Others  are  talkative  ;  others  indulge  a  complain- 
ing, whining,  begging    disposition ;  others  are 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  91 

abrupt,  almost  to  rudeness,  in  their  address. 
These,  and  many  more,  are  the  spots  of  God's 
children — with  which  we  are  sometimes  so 
much  displeased,  as  to  feel  an  alienation  of 
heart  from  the  subjects  of  them,  although  we 
have  no  doubt  of  their  real  piety.  Now  here  is 
room  for  the  exercise  of  love.  These  are  the 
cases  in  which  we  are  to  employ  that  charity 
which  covereth  all  things.  Are  we  to  love  on- 
ly amiable  Christians?  Perhaps,  after  all,  in 
the  substantial  parts  of  religion,  these  rough 
characters  far  excel  others,  whom  courtesy  and 
amiableness  have  carried  to  the  highest  degree 
of  polish.  I  do  not  say  we  are  to  love  these  m- 
dividuals /or  their  pecuharities,  but  in  spite  of 
them.  Not  on  their  own  account,  but  for 
Christ's  sake,  to  whom  they  belong.  And  what 
can  be  a  greater  proof  of  our  affection  for  him, 
than  to  love  an  unlovely  individual  on  his  ac- 
count ? 

If  you  had  the  picture  of  a  valued  friend, 
would  you  withdraw  from  it  your  affection,  and 
throw  it  away,  because  there  was  a  spot  upon 
the  canvas,  which  in  some  degree  disfigured 
the  painting  ?  No  ;  you  would  say,  it  is  a  like- 
ness of  my  friend  still,  and  I  love  it  notwith- 
standing its  imperfection.  The  believer  is  a 
picture  of  your  best  friend  ;  and  will  you  dis- 
card him,  neglect  him,  because  there  is  a  speck 
upon  the  painting  ? 


92  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

II.  Church  members  should  cuhivate  peace 
and  HARMONY  one  with  another. 

"  Keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of 
peace.  Ephes.  iv.  3.  Be  of  one  mind,  live  in 
peace.  2  Cor.  iii.  11.  Follow  after  the  things 
w^hich  make  for  peace.  Rom.  xiv.  19."  It  is 
quite  needless  to  expatiate  on  the  value  and  im- 
portance of  peace.  What  society  can  exist 
without  it  ?  I  shall  therefore  proceed  to  state 
what  things  are  necessary  for  the  attainment  of 
this  end. 

1.  Members  sJiould  he  subject  one  to  another  in 
hiwiility.  1  Pet.  V.  5,  "Likewise,  ye  younger, 
submit  yourselves  unto  the  elder.  Yea,  all  of 
you,  be  subject  one  to  another,  and  be  clothed 
with  humility."  Now  from  hence  we  learn,  that 
some  kind  of  mutual  subjection  ought  to  be 
established  in  every  Christian  church.  This  of 
course  does  not  mean,  that  some  members  are 
to  make  an  entire  surrender  of  their  opinions 
and  feelings  to  others,  so  far  as  never  to  oppose 
them,  and  always  to  be  guided  by  them.  It  is 
not  the  subjection  of  an  inferior  to  a  superior, 
but  of  equals  to  one  another  ;  not  that  which  is 
extorted  by  authority,  but  voluntarily  conceded 
by  affection  ;  not  yielded  as  matter  of  right,  but 
given  for  the  sake  of  peace  :  in  short,  it  is  the 
mutual  subjection  of  love  and  humility.  Young 
and  inexperienced  persons  ought  to  be  subject 
to  the  aged  ;  for  what  can  be  more   indecorous 


U 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  93 

than  to  see  a  stripling  standing  up  at  a  church 
meeting,  and  with  confidence  and  flippancy,  op- 
posing his  views  to  those  of  a  disciple  old  enough 
to  be  his  grandfather  ?  Youth  loses  its  loveli- 
ness when  it  loses  its  modesty.  They  should 
hearken  with  deference  and  most  reverential 
attention  to  the  opinion  of  the  aged.  Nor  does 
tlie  obhgation  rest  here  ;  it  extends  to  those  who 
are  equal  in  age  and  rank :  church  members 
also  should  be  subject  to  each  other ;  they  should 
not  be  determined  at  all  events  to  have  their 
own  way,  but  should  go  as  far  as  principle 
would  let  them,  in  giving  up  their  own  views 
and  predilections  to  the  rest.  Every  one  should 
hearken  with  respectful  attention  to  the  opin- 
ions of  others,  and  be  willing  to  sacrifice  his 
own.  The  contention  ought  not  to  be  for  rule, 
but  for  subjection.  Instead  of  haughtily  exclaim- 
ing, "  I  have  as  much  right  to  have  my  way  as 
any  one  else,"  we  should  say,  "  I  have  an  opin- 
ion, and  will  mildly  and  respectfully  state  it ; 
yet  I  will  not  force  it  upon  the  church,  but  give 
way  to  the  superior  wisdom  of  others,  if  I  ara 
opposed."  There  should  be  in  every  member  a 
supposition  that  others  may  see  as  clearly,  prob- 
ably more  so,  than  himself 

The  democratic  principle  in  our  system  of 
church  government  must  not  be  stretched  too 
far.  The  idea  of  equal  rights,  is  soon  abused 
and  converted  into  the  means  of  turbulence  and 


94  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

faction.  Liberty,  fraternity,  and  equality,  are 
words  which  both  in  church  and  state  have  often 
become  the  signals  in  the  mouths  of  some,  for 
the  lawless  invasion  of  the  rights  of  others.  It 
has  been  strangely  forgotten,  that  no  man  in 
social  life  has  a  right  to  please  only  himself;  his 
will  is,  or  ought  to  be,  the  good  of  the  whole. 
And  that  individual  violates  at  once  the  social 
compact,  whether  in  ecclesiastical  or  civil  soci- 
ety, who  pertinaciously  and  selfishly  exclaims, 
"  I  will  have  my  way."  Such  a  declaration  con- 
stitutes him  a  rebel  against  the  community.  Yet, 
alas!  how  much  of  this  rebellion  is  to  be  found 
not  only  in  the  world,  but  in  the  church ;  and 
what  havoc  and  desolation  has  it  occasioned  in 
the  churches  of  Christ.  Unfortunately  for  the 
peace  of  our  societies,  it  is  sometimes  disguised, 
through  the  deceitfulness  of  the  human  heart, 
under  the  cloak  of  zeal  for  the  general  good. 
Let  church  members  enter  into  these  sentiments, 
and  thus  comply  with  the  apostolic  admonitions, 
"Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vain 
glory,  but  in  lowliness  of  mind  let  each  esteem 
others  better  than  themselves."  Phil.  ii.  3.  "  In 
honour  preferring  one  another."     Rom.  xii.  10. 

2.  To  the  preservation  of  peace,  a  right  treat- 
ment of  offencts  is  essentially  necessary. 

We  should  ever  be  cautious  not  to  give  offence. 

Some  persons  are  rude,  dogmatical,  or  indis- 
creet ;  they  never  consult  the  feeUngs  of  those 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  95 

around  them,  and  are  equally  careless  whom 
they  please  and  whom  they  offend.  They  say 
and  do  just  what  their  feelings  prompt,  without 
the  least  regard  to  the  consequences  of  their 
words  and  actions.  They  act  like  an  individual 
who,  because  it  pleases  him,  discharges  a  load- 
ed musket  in  a  crowded  street,  where  some  are 
almost  sure  to  be  wounded.  This  is  not  the 
charity  which  is  kind,  courteous,  and  civil.  A 
Christian  sliould  be  ever  afraid  of  giving  offence ; 
he  should  be  anxious  not  to  injure  the  wing  of 
an  insect — much  more  the  mind  of  a  brother. 
The  peace  of  his  brethren  should  even  be  more 
sacred  than  his  own.  It  should  be  his  fixed  de- 
termination never,  if  possible,  to  occasion  a 
moment's  pain.  For  this  purpose  he  should 
be  discreet,  and  mild,  and  courteous  in  all  his 
language,  weighing  the  import  of  words  before 
he  utters  them,  and  calculating  the  consequence 
of  actions  before  he  performs  them.  He  should 
remember  that  he  is  moving  in  a  crowd,  and  be 
careful  not  to  trample  on,  or  jostle  his  neigh- 
bours. 

We  should  all  be  backward  to  receive  offence. 

Quarrels  often  begin  for  want  of  the  caution 
I  have  just  stated,  and  are  then  continued  for 
want  of  the  backwardness  I  am  now  enforc- 
ing. An  observance  of  these  two  principles 
would  keep  the  world  in  peace.  There  are 
some  people  whose  passions  are  hke  tow,  kin- 


yo  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

died  into  a  blaze  in  a  moment  by  the  least  spark 
which  has  been  designedly  or  accidentally 
thrown  upon  it.  A  word,  a  look,  is  in  some 
cases  quite  enough  to  be  considered  a  very  seri- 
ous injury.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  such 
persons  to  excuse  themselves  on  the  ground  that 
their  feelings  are  so  delicately  sensible  that  they 
are  offended  by  the  least  touch.  This  is  a 
humiliating  confession,  for  it  is  acknowledging 
that  instead  of  being  like  the  cedar  of  Lebanon, 
or  the  oak  of  the  forest  which  laughs  at  the  tem- 
pest and  is  unmoved  by  the  boar  of  the  wood, 
they  resemble  the  sensitive  plant,  a  little  squeam- 
ish shrub,  which  trembles  before  the  breeze,  and 
shrivels  and  contracts  beneath  the  pressure  of  an 
insect.  Delicate  feelings  ! !  In  plain  English, 
this  means  that  they  are  petulant  and  irascible. 
I  would  have  a  text  of  Scripture  written  upon  a' 
label,  and  tied  upon  the  forehead  of  such  per- 
sons, and  it  should  be  this — "  Beware  of  dogs." 
We  should  never  softer  ourselves  to  be  offend- 
ed, until,  at  least,  we  are  sure  that  offence  was 
intended ;  and  this  is  really  not  so  often  as  we 
are  apt  to  conclude.  Had  we  but  patience  to 
wait,  or  humility  to  inquire,  we  should  find  that 
many  things  were  done  by  mistake,  which  we  are 
prone  to  attribute  to  design.  How  often  do  we 
violate  that  charity  which  thinketh  no  evil,  and 
which  imperatively  demands  of  us  to  attribute  a 
good  motive  to  another's  conduct,  except  a  bad 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  97 

one  is  proved.  Let  us  then  deliberately  deter- 
mine, that,  by  God's  grace,  we  will  not  be  easily 
offended.  If  such  a  resolution  were  generally 
made  and  kept,  offences  would  cease.  Let  us 
first  ascertain  whether  offence  was  intended,  be- 
fore we  suffer  the  least  emotion  of  anger  to  be 
indulged  ;  and  even  then,  when  we  have  proved 
that  the  offence  was  not  committed  by  accident, 
let  us  next  ask  ourselves  whether  it  is  worth 
while  to  notice  it.  What  wise  man  wiU  think 
it  worth  while,  when  an  insect  has  stung  him, 
to  pursue  and  punish  the  aggressor  ? 

When  we  have  received  an  injuiy  which  is 
too  serious  to  be  passed  over  unnoticed,  and 
requires  explanation  in  order  to  our  future 
pleasant  intercourse  with  the  individual  who 
inflicts  it,  ive  should  neither  hrood  over  it  in  silence^ 
nor  communicate  it  to  a  third  person,  but  go  direct- 
ly to  the  offender  himself,  and  state  to  him  in  private 
our  views  of  his  conduct.  This  is  most  clearly 
enjoined  by  our  divine  Lord — "Moreover,  if  thy 
brother  trespass  against  thee,  go  and  tell  him  his 
fault  between  thee  and  him  alone :  if  he  shall 
hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  brother."  Matt, 
xviii.  15.  Many  persons  lock  up  the  injury  in 
their  own  bosom  ;  and  instead  of  going  to  their 
offending  brother,  dwell  upon  his  conduct  in 
silence,  until  their  imagination  has  added  to  it 
every  possible  aggravation,  and  their  minds  have 
I 


yo  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP^  OR 

come  to  the  conclusion  to  separate  themselves 
forever  from  his  society.  From  that  hour,  they 
neither  speak  to  him,  nor  think  well  of  him  ;  but 
consider  and  treat  him  as  an  alien  from  their 
hearts.  Thi&  is  not  religion.  Our  duty  is  to  go, 
and  to  go  as  speedily  as  possible,  to  the  offender. 
The  longer  we  delay,  the  more  serious  will  the 
offence  appear  in  our  eyes,  and  the  more  difficult 
will  it  be  to  persuade  ourselves  to  obtain  the 
interview. 

Others,  when  they  have  received  an  offence, 
set  off  to  some  friend,  perhaps  to  more  than  one, 
to  lodge  tlieir  complaint,  and  tell  how  they  have 
been  treated.  The  report  of  the  injury  spreads 
farther  and  wider,  exaggerated  and  swelled  by 
those  circumstances,  which  every  gossip  through 
whose  hands  it  passes,  chooses  to  add  to  the  orig- 
inal account,  till  in  process  of  time  it  comes 
round  to  the  offender  himself,  in  its  magnified 
and  distorted  form,  who  now  finds  that  he  in  his 
turn  is  aggrieved  and  calumniated  ;  and  thus,  a 
difficult  and  complicated  case  of  offence,  grows 
out  of  what  was  at  first  most  simple  in  its  nature, 
and  most  capable  of  being  adjusted.  Wc  ought 
to  go  at  once  to  the  party  offending  us^  before  a 
syllable  has  past  our  hps  on  the  subject  to  a  third 
person :  and  we  should  also  close  our  ears  against 
the  complaints  of  any  individual,  who  would  in- 
form us  of  the  fault  of  a  brother,  before  he  has 
told  the  offender  himself. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  99 

Sometimes  when  persons  have  received  a  sup- 
posed offence,  they  will  endeavour  to  gain  infor- 
mation from  others  in  a  circuitous  and  clandestine 
manner,  in  order,  as  they  think,  to  conduct  the 
affair  with  prudence.  This  is  crooked  poHcy, 
and  rarely  succeeds.  It  is  next  to  impossible  to 
creep  with  a  step  so  soft,  and  to  speak  with  a 
voice  so  muffled,  as  to  escape  detection  ;  and  if 
the  individual  surprise  us  in  the  act  of  ferreting 
into  holes  and  corners  for  evidence,  it  will  be  sure 
to  excite  his  indignation  and  disgust.  No,  go  to 
him  at  once,  and  alone.  This  is  the  command 
of  Scripture,  and  it  is  approved  by  reason,  Matt, 
xviii.  15 — 17.  This  single  admonition  is  worth 
all  the  volumes  that  philosophy  ever  wrote,  and 
ought  to  be  inscribed  in  letters  of  gold.  It 
cannot  be  too  often  repeated,  nor  can  too  much 
stress  be  laid  upon  it.  Third  persons,  whose 
ears  are  ever  open  to  catch  reports,  should  be 
avoided  as  the  plague  ;  they  are  the  mischief- 
makers  and  quarrel-m.ODgers,  and  are  the  pests 
of  our  churches. 

Great  caution,  however,  should  be  observed 
fW  to  the  spirit  in  which  ive  go  to  the  offending 
brother.  All  the  meekness  and  gentleness  of 
Christ  should  be  in  our  temper  and  manner. 
We  should  dip  our  very  tongue  in  the  fountain 
of  love.  Every  feeling,  every  look,  every  tone  of 
anger,  should  be  suppressed.  We  should  not  at 
once  accuse  our  brother  of  the  injury,  for  the  re- 


100  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

port  may  be  false  ;  but  modestly  ask  him  if  it  be 
correct.  All  attempts  to  extort  confession  by 
threatenings  should  be  avoided  ;  and  instead  of 
these,  nothing  should  be  employed  but  the  ap- 
peals of  wisdom,  the  gentle  persuasions  of  love.* 


*  There  is  a  !very  interesting  description  of  the 
manner  in  which  private  offences  should  be  treated,  in 
that  inimitable  book,  "  Social  Religion  Exemplified;  " 
a  book  which  every  professing  Christian  ought  to  read, 
and  which  having  begun  to  read,  he  will  never  lay 
aside,  till  he  has  finished  it.  Part  of  a  dialogue,  I  here 
transcribe,  as  shewing  the  manner  and  spirit  in  which 
this  very  difficult  matter  ought  to  be  managed : — 

"Neophytus.  If  Epenetus  please,  and  with  the 
good  leave  of  the  company,  I  would  further  request  a 
brief  account  oi  private  offences,  that  probably  occurred 
among  these  professing  brethren. 

"  Epenetus.  I  shall  then  gratify  my  young  friend, 
which  I  am  persuaded  will  not  be  ungrateful  to  the 
company.  Upon  a  time,  in  some  discourse  which  Eg- 
wan  (of  whom  you  have  heard  something  before)  and 
one  Hyderus  had,  wherein  they  differed  in  opinion, 
the  latter  told  the  former  that  he  was  an  insignificant 
fellow,  whose  thoughts  were  not  to  be  regarded.  Eg' 
wan  said  in  answer,  that  he  took  it  very  ill  of  him. 
The  other  replied.  You  may  take  it  as  you  please.  So 
their  conversation  ended  in  a  cloud.  Egwan  had  but 
little  rest  that  night.  Is  it  so,  then,  he  says  to  himself; 
and  yet  did  Christ  redeem  me  ?  Did  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  visit  my  heart  ?  Did  the  church  of  Christ  receive 
me  ?  And  must  I  (though  weak  and  feeble)  be  called 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  101 

If  we  succeed  in  this  private  interview  to  gain 
our  brother  so  far  as  to  produce  a  httle  relenting, 
we  ought  to  cherish  by  the  kindest  expressions, 
these  beginnings  of  repentance,  and  to  avoid  all 


insignificant?  Tossed  through  the  night  in  much  un- 
easiness, he  thought  to  go  in  the  morning  to  one  of  the 
elders  to  complain.  He  got  up,  and  as  usual,  in  the 
first  place  committed  himself  to  God  :  but  while  he  was 
at  prayer,  mourning  over  his  present  uneasiness,  that 
word  came  into  his  mind,  If  thy  brother  shall  trespass 
against  thee,  go  and  tell  him  his  fault  between  thee 
and  him  alone.  He  quickly  saw,  that  it  was  not  his 
immediate  business  to  divulge  it  to  any  body, — no,  not 
to  an  elder  ;  but  to  go  directly  to  the  brother  who  gave 
him  the  offence.  Accordingly,  he  desired  God  to  give 
him  meekness  of  wisdom  from  above,  and  to  bless  his 
design.  So  he  went  to  Hyderus,  and  spoke  to  him  as 
follows  : 

Egwon.  Brother,  I  have  had  a  very  uneasy  night ; 
you  spoke,  I  think,  very  unadvisably  with  your  lips,  to 
gay  no  worse  of  it ;  you  have  grieved  me  much, 
and  surely  you  have  sinned  against  God.  I  have 
judged  it  my  duty  to  come  and  have  some  talk  with 
you  about  it ;  and  have  mentioned  it  to  none  but 
the  Lord.  You  know  you  called  me,  in  disdain.  An 
insignificant  fellow.  Pray,  what  do  you  think  of  the 
expression^  and  of  the  spirit  in  which  it  was  spoken  ? 

Hyderus.  Truly,  I  think  it  was  not  worth  your 
while  to  come  to  me  about  it.  I  charge  you  not  with 
pride  ;  yet  pray  does  it  not  look  very  much  that  way, 
that  you  should  make  it  your  business  to  come  hither 
to  prove  yourself  valuable  and  significant  ? 


102  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

demands  of  unnecessary  concession,  all  haughty 
airs  of  conscious  superiority,  all  insulting  meth- 
ods of  dispensing  pardon.  "  Brother,"  we  should 
say,  "  my   aim  was  not  to   degrade  you,  but  to 


Egwan.  I  came  with  no  other  design  than  to  tell 
you  my  grievance.  For  if  I  am  such  a  person  as,  with 
disdain,  you  described  me,  then  am  I  not  regarded  by 
the  Redeemer;  have  no  portion  in  him,  nor  doth  his 
Spirit  dwell  in  me  ;  nor  hath  he  ever  taken  notice  of 
me ;  otherwise,  sure,  I  should  be  entitled  to  a  place  in 
the  esteem  of  his  children.  Why  did  the  church  re- 
ceive me  ?  You  have  censured  the  whole  church  and 
its  elders,  as  well  as  myself. 

Hyderus.  I  do  not  pretend  to  justify  what  I  said ; 
but  think  you  greatly  aggravate  it;  whereas,  you 
might  as  well  have  been  easy  without  taking  any 
notice  of  it. 

Egwan.  And  suffer  the  sin  to  lie  upon  you  ?  Broth- 
er, nothing  is  desired  but  repentance  for  sinning  against 
God.  I  hope  I  am  willing  to  think  meanly  of  myself, 
but  am  not  so  willing  that  any  thing  appertaining  to  the 
Redeemer's  kingdom  should  be  treated  with  derision  or 
disdain. 

Hyderus.  Dear  brother,  I  disdain  you  not;  you  dis- 
cover yourself  to  be  a  Christian  of  good  improvement. 
I  am  sorry  to  have  so  sinned  against  God  and  you,  and 
desire  that  brotherly  love  and  tender  respect  may 
continue. 

Egwan.    Amen  ;  I  am  satisfied,  dear  brother. 

Christophilus.  What  a  speedy,  happy  end  was 
put  to  this  offence  !  Oh,  what  endless  strife  of  tongues. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  103 

convince  you  ;  and  since  you  see  and  acknowl- 
edge your  fault,  I  am  satisfied,  and  shall  forgive 
and  forget  it  from  this  moment," 

If  the  oflfender  should  refuse  to  acknowledge 
his  fault,  and  it  should  be  necessary  for  us  to 
take  a  witness  or  two,  which  is  our  next  step  in 
settling  a  disagreement,  we  must  be  very  careful 
to  select  men  of  great  discretion  and  calmness; 
men  who  will  not  be  likely  to  inflame,  instead 
of  healing  the  wound  ;  men  who  will  act  as  me- 
diators, not  as  partizans. 

It  is  absolutely  necessary  in  order  to  offences 
being  removed,  that  the  offender,  upon  his  be- 
ing convicted  of  an  injury,  should  make  all 
suitable  concession;  and  it  will  generally  be 
found,  that  in   long  continued  and  complicated 


evil  surmisings,  auimosities,  and  popular  clamour,  spring 
and  prevail  in  some  places,  for  want  of  observing  such 
a  method  as  this  I 

Neophytus.  But  what  if  Egwan  had  gone  to  the 
€lder^rs^,  as  he  thought  once  to  do  ? 

Epen^etus.  Why  then  he  would  have  been  re- 
proved for  taking  such  a  wrong  step  ;  would  have  been 
better  informed,  and  sent  about  his  business. 

Neophyttjs.  But  what  if  Hyderus  had  justified 
bimselt  and  persisted  in  his  sin  ? 

Epenetus.  Then  Egwan  must  have  taken  anoth- 
er opportunity,  and  desired  a  brother  or  two  to  go 
along  with  him  ;  that  they  might  use  their  joint  en- 
deavours to  bring  the  offender  to  repentance. 


104  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

Strifes,  this  obligation  becomes  mutual.  Whoever 
is  the  ORIGINAL  aggressor,  a  feud  seldom  contin- 
ues long,  ere  both  parties  are  to  blame.  Even 
the  aggrieved  individual  has  something  to  con- 
cede ;  and  the  way  to  induce  the  other  to 
acknowledge  his  greater  offence,  is  for  him  to 
confess  his  lesser  one.  It  is  the  mark  of  a  noble 
and  ingenuous  mind  to  confess  an  error,  and 
solicit  its  forgiveness.  "  Confess  your  faults  one 
to  another,"  is  an  inspired  injunction.  The 
man  who  is  too  proud  to  acknowledge  his  fault, 
when  his  conduct  demands  it,  has  violated  his 
duty,  and  is  a  fit  subject  for  censure.  There  are 
some  persons,  so  far  forgetful  of  their  obligations 
to  Christ  and  to  their  brethren,  as  not  only  to 
refuse  to  make  concession,  but  even  to  give  ex- 
planation. Their  proud  spirits  disdain  even  to 
afford  the  least  satisfaction  in  the  way  of  throw- 
ing hght  upon  a  supposed  offence.  This  is 
most  criminal,  and  is  such  a  defiance  of  the 
authority  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  ought  to  bring 
the  individual  before  the  bar  of  the  church. 

We  should  be  very  cautious  not  to  exact  unrea- 
sonable concession.  A  revengeful  spirit  is  often 
as  effectually  gratified  by  imposi^'^  hard  and 
humiliating  terms  of  reconciliatioi^,  as  it  possibly 
could  be  by  making  the  severest  retahation.  No 
offender  is  so  severely  punished,  as  he  who  is 
obliged  to  degrade  himself  in  order  to  obtain  a 
pardon.    And  as  all  revenge  is  unlawful,  we 


105 

should  be  extremely  careful  not  to  gratify  it  at 
the  very  time  and  by  the  manner  in  which  we 
are  dispensing  pardon.  To  convince  a  brother, 
not  to  degrade  him,  is  the  object  we  are  to  seek; 
and  especially  should  we  endeavour  to  show 
him,  that  his  offence  is  more  against  Christ  than 
against  ourselves. 

When  suitable  acknowledgments  are  made, 
the  act  of  forgiveness  is  no  longer  optional  with  us. 
From  that  moment  every  spark  of  anger,  every 
feehng  of  a  revengeful  nature,  is  to  be  quench- 
ed. "  Let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath, 
neither  give  i>lace  to  the  devil."  Ephes.  iv.  26, 
27.  If  we  suffer  sleep  to  visit  our  eyes  before 
we  have  forgiven  an  offending,  but  penitent 
brother,  we  are  committing  a  greater  offence 
against  Christ,  than  our  brother  has  committed 
against  us.  The  man  that  takes  a  revengeful 
temper  to  his  pillow,  is  inviting  Satan  to  be  his 
bedfellow.  Such  a  man  would  probably  trem- 
ble at  the  thought  of  taking  a  harlot  to  his  bed ; 
but  is  it  no  crime  to  sleep  in  the  embrace  of  a 
fend  ?  The  word  revenge  should  be  blotted 
from  the  Christian's  vocabulary  by  the  tears 
which  he  sheds  for  his  own  offences.  How  can 
an  implacable  Christian  repeat  that  petition  of  our 
Lord's  prayer,  "  Forgive  me  my  tres])asses  as  I 
forgive  them  that  trespass  against  me  ?  "  Does 
he  forget  that  if  he  uses  such  language  while 
be  is  Uving  in  a  state  of  resentment  against  a 


106  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

brother,  he  is  praying  for  perdition  ?  for  how 
does  he  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  him  ? 
By  revenge.  How  strong  is  the  language  of  St. 
Paul,  "  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God, 
whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemp- 
tion. Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  clam- 
our, and  evil  speaking,  be  put  away  from  you, 
with  all  malice :  and  be  kind  one  to  another, 
and  tender  hearted,  forgiving  one  another,  even 
as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you." 
Ephes.  iv.  30 — 32.  What  motives  to  a  forgiving 
spirit ! !  Can  that  man  have  ever  tasted  the 
sweets  of  pardoning  mercy,  who  refuses  to  for- 
give an  erring  brother  ?  Go,  Ciiristian  profes- 
sor, go  first  to  the  law,  and  learn  thy  twice  ten 
thousand  sins  \,  go  in  imagination  to  the  brink  of 
the  bottomless  pit,  and  as  thou  hearkenest  to 
the  bowlings  of  the  damned,  remember  that 
those  bowlings  might  have  been  thine ;  then  go 
to  the  cross,  and  while  thou  lookest  on  the  bleed- 
ing victim,  which  is  nailed  to  it,  hearken  to  the 
accents  of  mercy  which  breathe  like  soft  music 
in  thine  ear,  "  Go  in  peace,  thy  sins  are  all  for- 
given thee."  What,  ivill  you,  can  you  return 
from  such  scenes,  with  purposes  of  revenge  ? 
No ;  impossible.  An  implacable  Christian  is  a 
contradiction  in  terms.  "Bigots  there  maybe, 
and  have  been  of  all  denominations  ;  but  an  im- 
placable, irreconcilable,  unforgiving  Christian,  is 
of  the  same  figure  of  speech,  as  a  godly  adul- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  107 

terer,  a  religious  drunkard,  a  devout  murder- 
er."* 

The  last  step  in  reclaiming  an  offender,  is  to 
bring  him  before  the  assembled  church.  "  If  he  will 
not  hear  thee,  then  take  with  thee  one  or  two 
more,  that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses, 
every  word  may  be  established  ;  and  if  he  shall 
neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  church ; 
but  if  he  neglect  to  hear  the  church,  let  him  be 
unto  thee  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  pubhcan." 
Every  effort  that  ingenuity  can  invent,  affection 
prompt,  or  patience  can  conduct,  ought  to  be 
made,  before  it  be  brought  to  be  investigated  by 
the  brethren  at  large.  If  every  trivial  disagree- 
ment be  laid  before  the  church,  it  will  soon  be- 
come a  court  of  common  pleas,  and  have  all  its 
time  consumed  in  adjusting  matters  of  which  it 
ought  never  to  have  heard.  Before  a  pubhc  in- 
quiry takes  place,  the  pastor  should  be  made  ac- 
quainted with  the  matter ;  who,  if  he  pos- 
sess the  confidence  and  affection  of  his  people, 
will  have  sufficient  influence,  at  least  in  all  ordi- 
nary cases,  to  terminate  the  difference  in  an  ami- 
cable manner.  It  is  best  to  settle  it  even  with- 
out his  interference,  if  possible  ;  but  it  is  better 
to  consult  him  in  every  case,  before  the  affair  is 
submitted  to  the  last  tribunal. 


*  Dr.  Grosvenor's  most    pathetic   Sermon    on  the 
Temper  of  Jesus." 


108  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

An  offence  ought  never  to  he  considered  as  remoV' 
ed,  until  love  is  restored.  We  should  never  rest 
until  such  an  explanation  has  been  given  and 
received,  as  will  enable  us  to  return  to  harmony 
and  confidence.  A  mere  cessation  of  actual 
hostilities  may  do  for  the  intercourse  of  the 
world,  but  not  for  the  fellowship  of  the  saints. 
There  is  no  actual  strife  between  the  tenants  of 
the  sepulchre ;  but  the  cold  and  gloomy  still- 
ness of  a  church-yard  is  an  inappropriate  em- 
blem of  the  peace  of  a  Christian  church.  In 
such  a  community  we  expect,  that  not  only  will 
the  discords  and  sounds  of  enmity  be  hushed, 
but  the  sweet  harmonies  of  love  be  heard  ;  not 
only  that  the  conflict  of  rage  will  terminate, 
but  be  succeeded  by  the  activity  of  genuine  af- 
fection. 

When  once  an  offence  has  been  removed^  it 
should  never  be  adverted  to  in  future.  Its  very  re- 
membrance should  if  possible  be  washed  from 
the  memory  by  the  waters  of  Lethe.  Other 
causes  of  disagreement  may  exist,  and  fresh  feuds 
arise  ;  but  the  old  one  is  dead  and  buried,  and 
its  angry  ghost  should  never  be  evoked  to  add 
fury  to  the  passion  of  its  successor.  Nor  should 
we^  when  in  our  turn  we  are  convicted  of  an 
error,  shelter  ourselves  from  reproof,  by  remind- 
ing our  reprover,  that  he  was  once  guilty  of  a 
similar  offence.  This  is  mean,  dishonourable, 
unchristian,  and  mischievous. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  109 

'  Every  Christian  should  hear  reproof  with  meek- 
ness. Few  know  how  to  give  reproof  with  pro- 
priety, still  fewer  how  to  bear  it.  "  Let  the 
righteous  smite  me,  it  shall  be  a  kindness  ;  and 
let  him  reprove  me,  it  shall  be  as  excellent  oil, 
which  shall  not  break  my  head."  How  small 
is  the  number  who  can  adopt  this  language  in 
sincerity.  What  wounded  pride,  what  mortifi- 
cation and  resentment  are  felt  by  many  when 
their  faults  are  told  to  them.  When  we  have 
so  far  sinned  as  to  deserve  rebuke,  we  ought  to 
have  humility  enough  to  bear  it  with  meekness; 
and  should  it  be  deUvered  in  greater  weight,  or 
with  less  affection,  than  Ave  think  is  proper,  a 
penitential  remembrance  of  our  offence  should 
prevent  all  feelings  of  irritation  or  resentment. 

2.  If  the  peace  of  the  church  be  preserved, 
the  members    must  watch  against,  and  repress,  a 

TATTLING  DISPOSITION. 

There  are  few  circumstances  which  tend  more 
to  disturb  the  harmony  and  repose  of  our  socie- 
ties, than  a  proneness  in  some  of  their  members 
to  a  gossipping,  tattling  disposition.  There  are 
persons  so  deeply  infected  with  the  Athenian 
passion  to  hear  or  tell  some  new  thing,  that  their 
ears  or  lips  are  always  open.  With  insatiable 
appetite  they  devour  all  the  news  they  can  by 
any  means  collect,  and  are  never  easy  until  it  is 
all  disgorged  again,  to  the  unspeakable  annoy- 
ance and  disgust  of  others  aroimd  them.    It  is 


110  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

one  of  the  mysteries  of  God's  natural  government, 
that  such  should  gain  a  sort  of  adventitious  conse- 
quence by  the  mischief  they  occasion,  and  be  thus 
sheltered  from  scorn  by  being  regarded  with 
dread.  The  tattler  is  of  this  description  :  I  mean 
the  individual  who  loves  to  talk  of  other  men's 
matters,  and  especially  of  their /ait^^5  ;  for  it  will 
be  found,  that  by  a  singular  perversity  of  dispo- 
sition, those  who  love  to  talk  about  the  circum- 
stances of  others,  rarely  ever  select  their  excellen- 
cies as  matter  of  discourse,  but  almost  always 
fix  upon  their  failings  ;  and  thus,  to  borrow  a 
simile  of  Solomon's,  they  resemble  the  fly  which 
neglects  the  healthful  part  of  the  frame  to  pitch 
and  luxuriate  on  the  sore. 

In  the  case  of  tatthng  there  are  generally  three 
parties  to  blame  ;  there  is  first  the  gossip,  then 
the  person  who  is  weak  enough  to  listen  to,  and 
report  the  tales  ;  and  lastly,  the  individual  who 
is  the  subject  of  the  report,  who  suffers  his  mind 
to  be  irritated,  instead  of  going,  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness,  to  require  an  explanation  from  the 
original  reporter. 

Now  let  it  be  a  rule  with  every  church  mem- 
ber, to  avoid  speaking  of  the  circumstances,  and 
especially  of  the  faults  of  others.  Let  this  rule 
have  the  sanctity  of  the  laws  of  Heaven,  and 
the  immutability  of  those  of  the  Medes  and  Per- 
sians. Let  every  individual  resolve  with  himself 
thus  :  "  I  will  be  slow  to  speak  of  others.    I  will 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  Ill 

neither  originate  a  report  by  saying  what  I  think, 
nor  help  to  circulate  a  report  by  repeating  what 
I  hear."  This  is  a  most  wise  regulation,  which 
would  at  once  preserve  our  own  peace  and  the 
peace  of  society.  We  should  beware  of  saying 
any  thing,  which  by  the  perverted  ingenuity  of 
a  slanderous  disposition,  may  become  the  basis 
of  a  tale  to  the  disadvantage  of  another.  It  is 
not  enough,  as  I  have  hinted,  that  we  do  not 
originate  sl  report,  but  we  ought  not  to  circulate 
it.  When  it  reaches  us,  there  it  should  stop  and 
go  no  farther.  We  should  give  it  to  prudence, 
to  be  buried  in  silence.  We  must  never  appear 
pleased  with  the  tales  of  gossips  and  news- 
mongers, much  less  with  the  scandals  of  the  back- 
biter ;  our  smile  is  their  reward.  If  there  were 
no  listeners,  there  would  be  no  reporters.  In  com- 
pany let  us  always  discourage  and  repress  such 
conversation.  Talkers  know  where  to  find  a 
market  for  their  stuff;  and  like  poachers  and 
smugglers,  who  never  carry  theix  contraband  ar- 
ticles to  the  house  of  an  exciseman,  they  never 
offer  their  reports  to  an  individual  Avho  they 
know  would  reprove  them  in  the  name  of  Jesus. 

Let  us  beware  of  in  ourselves,  and  discourage  in 
others,  the  holloio  deceitful  practice  of  indulging  a 
tattling  disposition,  by  professedly  lamenting  over 
the  faults  of  our  brethren. 

Many  who  would  be  afraid  or  ashamed  to  men- 
tion the  faults  of  a  brother  in  the  way  of  direct 


112  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

affirmation  or  report,  easily  find,  or  attempt  to 
find,  a  disguise  for  their  backbiting  disposition 
in  affected  lamentations.  "  What  a  pity  it  is,"  they 
exclaim,  "  that  brother  B.  should  have  behaved 
so  ill.  Poor  man,  I  am  sorry  that  he  should 
have  committed  himself.  The  petulance  of  his 
temper  is  exceedingly  to  be  regretted.  He  does 
not  much  honour  religion."  "  And  then,"  re- 
plies a  second, "  how  sorry  I  am  to  hear  this  re- 
port of  sister  C.  ;  how  the  world  will  talk,  and 
the  cause  of  Christ  suffer  by  such  unwarrantable 
things  in  the  conduct  of  a  professor.  It  will  not 
be  a  secret  long,  or  I  would  not  mention  it." 
"  Oh,"  says  a  third,  "  I  have  heard  whispers  of 
the  same  kind  in  times  past.  I  have  long  sus- 
pected it,  and  mentioned  my  fears  some  months 
ago  to  a  friend  or  two.  I  thought  she  was  not 
the  person  she  appeared  to  be.  I  am  very  sorry 
for  her,  and  for  the  cause  of  Christ.  I  have  long 
had  my  suspicions,  and  now  they  are  all  con- 
firmed. I  shall  tell  the  friends  to  whom  I  ex- 
pressed my  fears  what  I  have  now  heard."  In 
this  way  is  a  tattling  disposition  indulged  in  the 
circles  of  even  good  people,  under  the  guise  of 
lamentation  for  the  sins  of  others.  "  Odious  and 
disgusting  cant,"  would  a  noble  and  honourable 
Christian  exclaim,  with  hallowed  indignation, 
"  which  of  you,  if  you  really  lamented  the  fact, 
would  report  it  ?  which  of  you  has  gone  to  the  err- 
ing individual,  inquired  into  the  truth  of  the  mat- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  113 

ter,  and, finding  it  true, has  mildly  expostulated? 
Let  your  lamentations  be  poured  out  before  God 
and  the  offender,  but  to  none  else." 

Others,  again,  indulge  this  disposition  hy  run- 
ning about  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of  a  report  which 
they  say  has  reached  them,  respecting  a  brother. 
"  Have  you  heard  any  thing  of  brother  H.  lately? 
they  ask  with  a  significant  look.  "No  ;"  replies  the 
person.  "  Then  I  suppose  it  is  not  true."  "Why, 
what  have  you  heard  ?  Nothing  I  hope  aflfect- 
ing  his  moral  character."  "  Not  very  materially ; 
but  I  hope  it  is  false."  The  tattler  cannot  go, 
however,  without  letting  out  the  secret,  and 
then  sets  off  to  inquire  of  another  and  another. 
Mischief  making  creature  I  Why  had  he  not 
gone,  as  was  his  obvious  duty,  to  the  individual 
who  was  the  subject  of  the  report,  and  inquired 
of  him  the  truth  of  it?  Aye,  but  then  the  story 
would  have  been  contradicted  at  once,  and  the 
pleasure  of  telling  it  would  have  been  ended. 

There  are  cases  in  which  a  modest  disclosure 
of  the  failings  of  others  is  necessary.  Such,  for 
example,  as  when  a  church  is  likely  to  be  de- 
ceived in  the  character  of  an  individual,  whom 
it  is  about  to  admit  to  communion.  In  such 
instances,  the  person  who  is  aware  of  the  impo- 
sition that  is  likely  to  be  practised,  should  go 
directly  to  the  pastor,  and  make  him  acquaint- 
ed with  the  fact ;  instead  of  which,  some  persons 
K 


114  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

whisper  their  suspicions  to  any  and  to  many, 
except  the  pastor.  It  is  perfectly  lawful  also  to 
prevent  any  brother  from  being  betrayed  into  a 
ruinous  confidence  in  pecuniary  matters,  by  in- 
forming him  of  the  character  of  the  individual 
by  whom  he  is  about  to  be  deceived.  Silence, 
in  such  cases,  would  be  an  obvious  injury. 

Be  slow  to  speak,  then,  is  a  maxim  which 
every  Christian  should  always  keep  before  his 
eyes.  Silent  people  can  do  no  harm  ;  but  talk- 
ers are  always  dangerous. 

III.  Besides  these  things,  there  are  duties 
which  members  owe  to  the  church  in  its  collect- 
ive capacity. 

1.  They  are  bound  to  take  a  deep  interest  in 
its  concerns,  and  to  seek  its  prosperity  by  all 
lawful  means. 

Every  one  should  feel  that  he  has  a  personal 
share  in  the  welfare  of  the  society.  He  should 
consider  that  having  selected  that  particular  com- 
munity with  which  he  is  associated,  as  his  religious 
home,  he  is  under  a  solemn  obligation  to  promote 
by  every  proper  effort,  its  real  interest.  He  is  ta 
be  indifferent  to  nothing  which  at  any  time  affects 
its  prosperity.  Some  members,  from  the  moment 
they  have  joined  a  Christian  church  take  no  con- 
cern in  any  of  its  affairs.  They  scarcely  ever  at- 
tend a  church  meeting  ;  they  know  neither  who 
are  excluded,  nor  who  are  received.  If  members, 
are  added,  they  express  no  delight ;  if  none  sre 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  115 

admitted,  they  feel  no  grief.  They  fill  up  their 
places  at  the  table,  and  in  the  house  of  God ;  and 
beyond  this,  seem  to  have  nothing  else  to  do 
with  the  church.  This  is  a  most  criminal  apa- 
thy; a  Christian  ought  to  be  as  trembhngly 
alive  to  the  welfare  of  the  religious  society  to 
which  he  is  united,  as  he  is  to  the  success  of  his 
worldly  affairs. 

2.  They  are  bound  to  attend  all  the  meetings 
of  the  church,  at  least  so  far  as  their  circum- 
stances will  allow.  They  had  better  be  absent 
from  sermons  and  prayer-meetings,  than  from 
these.  How  can  they  know  the  state  of  the  so- 
ciety, if  they  are  not  present  when  its  affairs  are 
exhibited  and  arranged  ?  or  how  can  they  exer- 
cise that  proper  confidence  in  the  piety  of  the 
brethren,  which  is  essential  to  fellowship,  if  they 
are  absent  at  the  time  of  their  admission  ? 

3.  They  should  most  conscientiously  devote 
their  gifts,  graces,  and  abilities  to  the  service  of 
the  church,  in  an  orderly  and  modest  way ; 
neither  obtruding  their  assistance  when  it  is  not 
required,  nor  withholding  it  when  it  is  solicited. 
Those  who  have  gifts  of  prayer,  should  not  be 
backward  to  exercise  them  for  the  edification  of 
their  brethren.  Those  who  have  penetration 
and  sound  judgment^  should  render  their  counsel 
and  advice  upon  every  occasion.  Persons  of 
large  and  respectable   worldly  connexions  may 


316  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

often  use  their  influence   with   great  benefit  to 
the  temporal  affairs  of  the  society. 

And  there  is  one  hne  of  charitable  exertion, 
which  would  be  pecuharly  beneficial,  and  which 
has  been  too  much  neglected  in  all  our  societies  ; 
I  mean  the  practice  of  respectable  members  read- 
ing the  Scriptures,  religious  tracts,  and  sermons, 
in  the  habitations  of  the  poor.  I  am  aware  that 
this  is  an  age  when  many  run  to  and  fro,  and 
when  lay  preaching  is  carried  to  a  very  improp- 
er and  mischievous  extent.  Some  who  have  no 
other  qualification  for  preaching  than  boldness 
and  ignorance,  are  every  Sabbath  employed,  of 
whom  it  might  be  said,  that  it  is  a  pity  they 
have  not  the  gift  of  silence.  Unfortunately, 
those  who  are  most  qualijied,  are  frequently  least 
disposed ;  while  the  least  qualified,  are  the  most 
zealous.  But  how  many  wise,  judicious,  holy 
men,  are  there  in  our  churches,  who  would  be 
most  honourably  and  most  usefully  employed,  in 
reading  the  words  of  life,  and  short  evangelical 
sermons,  in  the  cottages  of  the  poor.  Let  a 
convenient  house  be  selected,  and  the  neigh- 
bours invited  to  attend  ;  and  who  can  tell  what 
vast  benefit  would  accrue  from  such  a  scheme  ? 
By  the  blessing  of  God  upon  these  efforts,  re- 
formation would  be  wrought  in  the  lower  class- 
es; religion  would  gain  an  entrance  where  it 
could  be  introduced  by  no  other  means  ;  and 
our  churches  be  replenished  with  holy,  consist- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  117 

ent  members.  Persons  of  respectable  circum- 
stances in  life,  especially,  should  thus  employ 
themselves,  as  their  situation  gives  them  greater 
influence.  Females  may  be  thus  engaged, 
without  transgressing  either  against  the  injunc- 
tion of  the  apostle,  or  the  modesty  which  is  so 
becoming  their  sex.  I  am  astonished  that 
means  of  usefulness  so  simple,  so  easy,  and  so 
efficient,  are  not  more  generally  employed. 

4.  It  is  due  to  the  authority  of  the  church, 
that  every  member  should  cordially  submit  to  its 
discipline.  Without  this,  order  would  be  de- 
stroyed, and  the  reign  of  anarchy  introduced. 
This,  indeed,  as  we  have  already  considered,  is 
essentially  implied  in  the  very  act  of  joining  the 
church ;  and  no  one  ought  to  think  of  such  an 
act  of  union,  who  is  not  determined  to  submit 
to  its  rules  and  its  decisions. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


THE    DUTIES     OF    CHURCH     MEMBERS    TO    THE 
MEMBERS  or  OTHER    CHRISTIAN    SOCIETIES. 

First.  In  those  cases  where  the  churches 
are  of  a  different  denomination. 

1.  We  should  not  deride  their  rehgious  opin- 
ions and  practices. 

They  act  conscientiously;  and  whatever  is  done 
at  the  dictate  of  conscience,  is  too  sacred  to  be 
made  the  matter  of  ridicule.  The  way  to  bring 
the  scorn  of  ungodly  men  upon  all  religion,  is 
for  rehgious  people,  differing  upon  minor  points, 
to  jest  with  each  other's  practices. 

2.  Let  us  avoid  religious  bigotry  and  preju- 
dice. 

By  bigotry,  I  mean  such  an  overweening  at- 
tachment to  our  opinions  and  denomination,  as 
alienates  our  affections  from  Christians  of  oth- 
er name,  and  leads  us  to  conclude  there  is  little 
excellence  or  piety,  except  in  our  own  commu- 
nion. Some  Christians  are  so  shortsighted  by 
prejudice,  that  they  cannot  discern  the  most 
splendid  exhibitions  of  moral  excellence,  if  they 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  119 

are  at  the  least  removed  from  their  own  denom- 
ination. Tlie  consideration,  that  a  man  is  not 
of  their  party,  is  sufficient  in  their  evil  eye,  to 
dim  the  lustre  of  an  example  which  angels  ad- 
mire, and  to  echpse  that  living  luminary,  which, 
to  the  eye  of  Heaven,  shines  with  most  radiant 
glory.  Their  moral  vision  has  so  long  and  so 
intently  poured  over  the  minute  distinctions  of 
party,  as  to  have  acquired  a  contraction  of  pow- 
er, which  prevents  them  from  comprehending 
and  admiring  as  they  would  otherwise  do,  the 
grander  features  of  religion  in  general. 

I  know  not  a  proof  of  true  piety  more  deci- 
sive, and  more  pleasing,  than  that  quick  percep- 
tion, and  fervent  admiration  of  the  beauties  of 
holiness,  which  lead  a  man  to  recognise  and 
love  them,  wherever  they  are  seen,  whether  in 
his  own  denomination  or  in  others.  "  The  evil 
to  be  deplored  in  the  present  state  of  the  church, 
is  the  unnatural  distance  at  which  Christians 
stand  from  each  other,  the  spirit  of  sects,  the 
disposition  to  found  their  union  on  the  wood, 
hay,  and  stubble  of  human  inventions  or  dis- 
putable tenets,  instead  of  the  eternal  Rock,  the 
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.  Surely,  sure- 
ly, we  shall  find  a  sufficient  bond  of  union,  a 
sufficient  scope  for  all  our  sympathies  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  cross."* 

*  Robert  Hall. 


120  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

Secondly.  I  shall  now  speak  of  the  con- 
duct of  Christians  to  the  members  of  other 
churches  of  their  own  denomination. 

It  does  not  unfrequently  happen,  that  where 
two  or  more  churches  of  the  same  denomina- 
tion exist  in  a  town,  a  most  unhappy,  unscriptur- 
al,  disgraceful  temper,  is  manifested  towards  each 
other.  All  the  feelings  of  envy,  jealousy,  and 
ill  will,  are  cherished  and  displayed  with  as 
much,  or  more  bitterness,  than  two  rival  trades- 
men would  exhibit  in  the  most  determined  op- 
position of  interests.  This  is  peculiarly  the 
case,  where  two  churches  have  been  formed,  by  a 
schism,  out  of  one.  Oftentimes  the  feud  has 
been  perpetuated  through  one  generation,  and 
hasbeenbequeathed  to  the  generation  following. 
Can  it  be  that  these  are  churches  of  saints? 
Can  it  be  that  these  are  all  one  in  Christ?  Can 
it  be  that  these  are  societies,  whose  rule  is  the 
word  of  Christ,  whose  conduct  is  the  image  of 
Christ,  whose  end  is  the  glory  of  Christ ! ! 

Shame,  public,  deep,  indelible  shame  on  such 
societies  !  Is  it  thus  that  churches  quarrel,  to 
find  sport  for  their  enemies  ?  By  all  the  regard 
which  is  due  to  the  authority  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
by  all  the  constraining  influence  of  his  love,  let 
such  societies  be  impelled  to  terminate  their 
hateful  strifes,  which  are  not  more  dishonoura- 
ble to  the  cause  of  rehgion  in  general,  than 
they  are  injurious  to  the  interests  of  piety  with- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  121 

in  their  own  immediate  sphere  of  action.  With 
what  bitter  taunts,  with  what  sarcastic  triumph, 
do  profane  and  infidel  spectators  point  to  such 
scenes,  and  ironically  exclaim,  "  See  how  these 
Christians  love  one  another!" 

Let  us  guard  against  this  evil  where  it  does 
not  exist,  and  endeavour  to  suppress  it  where  it 
does.  Let  us  not  look  Avith  envy  and  jealousy 
on  the  growing  prosperity  of  other  societies. 
Let  us  not  consider  their  success  as  in  any  de- 
gree encroaching  upon  ours.  If  we  succeed 
more  in  our  own  church,  let  us  be  thankful,  but 
not  boastful;  if  others  take  precedence,  let  us 
be  stirred  up  to  affectionate,  holy  emulation,  but 
not  to  envy  and  jealousy. 

A  worthy  minister,  who  used  to  preach  a 
week  day  lecture  in  the  city  of  London,  heard 
a  friend  expressing  his  regret  that  it  was  so  ill 
attended.  "  Oh,  that,"  replied  the  minister,  "  is 
of  little  consequence,  as  the  gospel  is  preached 
by  several  others  in  the  same  neighbourhood ; 
and  in  such  a  situation,  for  any  one  to  be  very 
desirous  that  people  should  come  and  hear  the 
gospel  from  him,  instead  of  others,  seems  as  un- 
reasonable, as  it  would  be  for  one  of  the  shop- 
men in  a  large  shop,  to  wish  all  the  customers 
to  come  to  his  particular  part  of  the  counter. 
If  the  customers  come  at  all,  and  the  goods  go 
off,  in  so  far  as  he  feels  an  interest  in  the  pros- 
L 


122  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

perity  of  the  shop,  he  will  rejoice."  Lovely  and 
rare  example  of  true  humility,  pure  zeal,  and 
genuine  love  to  Christ !  Look  at  this,  ye  minis- 
ters and  churches,  who  quarrel  with  your  neigh- 
bours, and  scarcely  speak  well  of  them,  because 
they  prosper  no  less  than  you !  Shall  we  feel 
mortified  when  immortal  souls  are  saved,  be- 
cause we  were  not  the  instruments  of  their  con- 
version ?  Shall  we  say,  if  loe  cannot  gather 
them  into  aur  church,  let  them  not  be  gather- 
ed ?  If  two  rival  physicians,  w^ho  had  each  as 
much  as  he  could  do,  when  the  plague  was  rag- 
mg  in  a  town,  looked  with  envy  and  grudging 
on  each  other's  success,  what  should  we  say  of 
their  spirit  ?  But  such  a  temper  in  these  circum- 
stances is  far  less  criminal  than  the  envious  dis- 
position of  some  ministers  and  their  flocks. 

There  should  be  a  spirit  of  mutual  affedionhe- 
tween  the  members  of  different  churches.  They 
should  love  as  brethren ;  and  that  this  might 
not  be  disturbed,  they  should  avoid,  when  they 
meet  in  their  respective  social  circles,  all  invidi- 
ous and  uncharitable  reference  to  the  others.  No- 
thing is  more  common  than  for  the  Christians 
of  one  society  to  make  the  circumstances  and 
faults  of  those  of  another,  the  leading  topics  of 
conversation.  Thus  the  coals  of  strife  are  kin- 
dled in  these  Christian  parties,  and  every  one 
present  lends  his  breath  to  fan  the  flame.  It  is 
melancholy  indeed,  when  our  houses  are  thus 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  123 

converted  into  temples  for  the  God  of  this 
world,  the  divider  of  the  brethren ;  and  our 
family  altar  is  lent  for  an  offering  of  scandal  at 
his  shrine.  Ministers,  and  leading  persons  in 
the  company,  should  always  set  their  faces 
against  this  mischievous  gossip.  Ml  compari- 
sons between  the  talents  of  the  ministers,  and  the 
respectability  of  their  churches,  should  be  carefully 
abstained  from.  This  is  sure  to  do  harm.  It  is 
right  for  every  church  member  to  l^e  attached! 
to  his  ow^n  pastor,  and  he  may  ver^  innocently 
think  that  his  minister  is  the  best  preacher  in 
the  town  ;  but  it  is  insulting  ard  mischievous 
to  express  his  opinion  to  those  who  prefer  an- 
other. It  is  not  unusual  for  the  pulpit  to  be 
converted  into  a  source  of  the  most  disgusting- 
adulation,  and  for  a  ministerial  sycophant  tx> 
flatter  the  pride  of  his  flock,  by  telling  them; 
how  superior  they  are  to  all  others  in  affluence^ 
hberaljty,  and  influence.  Such  fawning,  to  say 
nothing  of  its  littleness, is  exceedingly  injurious. 
What  is  intended  as  a  compliment  to  one  church, 
is  felt  as  an  insult  by  all  others  in  its  vicinity.  ^ 
All  boasting  should  be  most  conscientiously  re- 
frained from,  both  on  the  part  of  ministers  and 
people.  If  they  are  in  a  state  of  spiritual  pros- 
perity, let  them  be  thankful,  but  not  vain-glori- 
ous. "  Charity  vaunteth  not  itself,  is  not  puffed 
up."  The  apostle  delivered  a  very  keen  rebuke 
on  those  who  are  the  trumpeters  of  their  own 


124  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

fame,  when  he  said,  "  I  speak  not  after  the  Lord, 
but  as  it  were  foohshly  in  the  confidence  of 
boasting.  Seeing  that  many  glory  after  the 
flesh,  I  will  glory  also,  for  ye  suffer  fools  gladly." 
Church  members  should  never  resent  by  coldnesSy 
and  distance  of  behaviour,  the  conduct  of  those 
who  leave  their  society,  to  join  another  in  the 
same  toym.  They  have  a  right  to  exercise  their 
own  judgment  as  well  as  we,  and  in  their  view 
at  least,  have  as  good  reason  for  preferring  the 
pastor  to  ^v^.iom  they  go,  as  we  have  for  contin- 
uing with  th'i  one  they  leave.  They  may  sepa- 
rate too  hastily,  and  not  on  sufficient  grounds; 
but  that  is  their  concern,  not  ours.  I  have 
known  cases  in  which  both  the  minister  and  his 
flock  have  refused  even  the  civilities  of  ordina- 
ry intercourse  to  those  who  have  left  their 
church  to  associnle  with  another.  This  is  a 
most  pitiful  and  unchristian  disposition. 

There  are  duties  to  be  performed  by  the 
church  in  its  collective  capacity  towards  other 
societies  of  the  same  denomination. 

1.  We  should  own  them  as  churches  of 
Christ,  cherish  the  most  friendly  and  fraternal 
feelings  towards  them,  and  hold  Christian  com- 
munion with  them,  in  all  the  duties  of  our 
common  faith  and  practice. 

Such  appears  to  have  been  the  feehngs  of  the 
primitive  churches.  "  The  churches  of  Christ 
salute  you."    Rom.  xvi.  16.    "  The  church  that 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  125 

is  at  Babylon,  elected  together  with  you,  saluteth 
you."  1  Pet.  V.  13.  "Ye  arc  taught  of  God  to 
love  one  another,  and  ye  do  it  toward  all  the 
the  brethren  in  Macedonia."     1  Thes.  iv.  9,  10. 

2.  We  should  receive  their  members  when  re- 
commended to  us,  and  freely  grant  honourable 
recommendations  of  our  members  to  them. 

"  I  commend  unto  you  Phebe  our  sister,  a  ser- 
Tant  of  the  church  at  Cenchrea  ;  receive  her  in 
the  Lord  as  becometh  saints,  and  assist  her  in 
whatsoever  business  she  hath  need  of  you." 
Rom.  xvi.  1.  "  They  are  the  messengers  of  the 
churches ;  shew  ye  to  them,  and  before  the 
churches,  the  proof  of  your  love."  2  Cor.  viii. 
23,24. 

3.  We  should  ^co-operate  with  neighbouring 
churches  for  promoting  the  spread  of  the  gospel, 
either  by  local  or  general  institutions. 

Many  objects,  of  vast  importance  to  the  spread 
of  the  gospel  in  the  world,  can  be  accomplished 
by  the  union  of  churches,  which  cannot  be  effect- 
ed without  it.  Union  is  power.  Places  of  wor- 
ship may  be  opened,  the  faithful  ministry  of  the 
word  introduced,  and  churches  planted  in  dark 
benighted  villages  ;  while  all  the  grand  and  noble 
institutions  organized  to  save  a  perishing  world, 
may  by  this  means  receive  additional  support. 
United  fires  brighten  each  Other's  blaze,  and  in- 
crease each  other's  intensity ;  and  thus  the  asso- 
ciation of  churches,  enkindles  each  other's  zeal, 


126  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

and  provokes  one  another  to  love  and  to  good 
works.  Nor  is  zeal  the  only  Christian  virtue 
promoted  by  such  unions  ;  brotherly  love  is  cher- 
ished and  excited.  The  presence  of  messengers 
from  other  churches  at  the  annual  meetings  of  our 
societies,  produces  a  friendly  feeling  and  brotherly 
interest,  not  unlike  that  which  a  family  experi- 
ences, when  gathered  together  at  their  Christ- 
mas party.  One  great  end  of  assembling  the 
males  of  the  Jewish  nation  three  times  a  year 
before  the  ark,  was  to  keep  up  a  brotherly  feel- 
ing between  the  different  and  distant  parts  of  the 
nation.  Nothing  is  so  hkely  to  cherish  the  fire 
of  love,  as  the  fuel  supplied  by  works  of  zeal. 

4.  We  should  be  willing  to  give  and  receive 
ADVICE  in  cases  of  difficulty  and  importance. 

Of  course,  the  independence  of  the  churches, 
and  the  right  of  private  judgment,  should  be 
vigilantly  watched,  and  sacredly  })reserved.  We 
have  no  dominion  over  each  other's  conduct, 
any  more  than  over  each  other's  faith.  The 
idea  of  control,  is  as  repugnant  to  revelation,  as 
it  is  to  reason.  And  we  are  to  resist  unto  blood, 
striving  against  the  usurpation  of  foreign  com- 
pulsory interference.  But  advice  does  not  imply 
control.  The  dread  which  has  been  felt  of  the 
simple  act  of  one  church's  asking  the  advice  of 
a  neighbouring  minister,  or  an  association  of 
ministers,  in  cases  of  extreme  difficulty,  discovers 
a  fear  of  domination,  which  is  perfectly  childish. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  127 

How  consonant  with  all  the  dictates  of  reason, 
and  all  the  proceedings  of  civil  life,  is  it,  for  two 
parties  in  a  state  of  litigation,  to  ask  the  opinion 
of  a  third  ;  or  for  one  individual  in  difficulty,  to 
solicit  the  advice  of  another.  When  a  minister 
and  his  flock  are  in  some  critical  situation,  let 
them  jointly  agree  to  lay  their  affairs  before  some 
two  or  three  neighbouring  ministers  and  laymen 
of  sound  judgment,  for  counsel  and  direction ; 
and  how  often,  by  this  simple,  rational,  scriptural 
process,  would  a  society  be  brought  back  from 
the  brink  of  ruin  to  peace  and  safety.  But  what 
if  they  should  not  take  the  advice  thus  given  ? 
They  must  then  be  left  to  themselves,  and  would 
be  but  where  they  were  before.  The  disposi- 
tion which  scorns  to  ask,  and  refuses  to  take 
advice,  savours  far  more  of  the  pride  of  inde- 
pendence, than  the  love  of  peace  ;  and  of  the 
temper  which  courts  interminable  anarchy  rath- 
er than  be  indebted  for  the  restoration  of  order, 
to  the  opinions  and  persuasions  of  another. 
Men  which  stand  out  of  the  mist  of  passion,  can 
see  more  clearly  than  those  enveloped  in  the 
fog. 

5.  We  should  take  a  deep  interest  in  the  wel- 
fare of  other  chui-ches,  and  in  a  suitable  and 
proper  manner  express  our  sympathy,  and  afford 
to  them  our  assistance. 

We  should  at  Qur  church  meetings  remember 
in  prayer,  the  cases  of  such  as  are  in  circum- 
etances  of  affliction  ;    and  in  the  event  of  the 


128  CHRISTIAN     FELLOWSHIP,     OR 

death  of  a  pastor,  how  consohng  would  it  be  to 
a  bereaved  church,  to  receive  letters  of  condo- 
lence from  neighbouring  societies.  There  is 
one  way,  in  which  the  most  effectual  help  may 
be  rendered  by  one  church  to  another :  I  mean, 
pecuniary  assistance  granted  from  such  as  are 
wealthy  to  those  who  are  poor.  We  are  inform- 
ed. Acts  xi.  29,  30,  that  the  disciples  at  Anti- 
och  sent  relief,  according  to  their  abilities, 
to  the  poor  saints  in  Judea.  "Concerning 
the  collection  for  the  saints,  as  I  had  giv- 
en orders  to  the  churches  at  Galatia :  Even 
so  do  ye."  1  Cor.  xvi.  1.  I  am  aware  that 
this  is  sometimes  done  out  of  a  fund,  rais- 
ed by  the  joint  contributions  of  the  churches 
in  a  county  or  district  association  ;  but  how 
great  would  be,  the  effect  produced,  if  a  church, 
in  its  individual  capacity,  were  from  year  to 
year  to  send  a  donation  to  some  })oor  communi- 
t}'  in  its  neighbourhood.  What  a  lovely  display 
of  Christian  feeling  would  this  be  !  How  would 
it  endear  the  societies  to  each  other !  It  would 
assist  those  to  gain  an  efficient  and  settled  min- 
ister, who,  probably,  but  for  such  help,  would 
only  enjoy  the  precarious  labours  of  occasional 
and  incompetent  preachers.  The  comfort  of 
many  faithful  and  laborious  ministers  would  be 
thus  promoted,  and  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ 
enlarged. 

Ye  rich  churches  in  our  large  cities,  and  in  the 
country,  who,  without  effort,  can  raise  for  your 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  129 

own  pastors  ample  salaries,  I  appeal  to  your  lib- 
erality, on  behalf  of  those  many  churches  scat- 
tered up  and  down  the  land,  which  are  wither- 
ing for  the  want  of  a  little  of  that  wealth,  which 
you  could  spare,  without  lessening  the  comfort, 
either  of  your  minister,  or  your  families.  I 
would  not  rob  the  funds  of  Missionary,  or  Bible 
Societies,  to  replenish  the  little  store  of  gospel 
ministers  at  home ;  but  I  will  say,  that  no  for- 
eign objects  should  be  allowed  to  interfere  with 
the  claims  of  those  deserving  and  holy  men, 
who  are  labouring  for  souls  amidst  all  the  ills  of 
poverty,  and  all  the  cares  and  woes  which  such 
ills  must  necessarily  entail. 

Where  is  the  favoured  individual,  into  whose 
lap  the  bounty  of  heaven  has  poured  the  abun- 
dance of  riches,  and  into  whose  heart  divine 
grace  has  introduced  the  mercy  that  is  full  of 
good  fruits  ?  here  let  him  find  an  object  worthy 
of  his  wealth  and  of  his  zeal.  Let  him  become 
the  nursing  father  of  our  poor  churches.  If  he 
spend  two  thousand  a  year  in  this  way,  he  may 
give  forty  dollars  a  year  to  fifty  ministers.  What 
a  means  of  usefulness !  How  many  infant 
churches  would  smile  upon  him  from  their  cra- 
dle ;  and  as  they  turned  upon  him,  their  eyes 
gUstening  with  gratitude,  would  exclaim,  "  My 
Father,  my  Father ! "  In  how  many  church- 
books  would  his  name  be  enrolled,  amidst  the 
benedictions  and  prayers  of  the  saints ! 


CHAPTER  Vlll. 


THE  DUTIES  OF  CHURCH   MEMBERS  IN  THEIR  PE- 
CULIAR    CHARACTER   AND    STATION. 

I.     The  pastor's  wife. 

A  station  so  lionourable,  so  important,  so  re- 
sponsible, must  necessarily  be  attended  with  du- 
ties numerous,  difficult,  and  of  great  conse- 
quence. Her  situation  stands  next  in  influence, 
and  therefore  in  responsibility,  to  that  of  her 
husband ;  the  minister  excepted,  she  has  the 
greatest  opportunity  of  any  member  of  the 
church,  to  do  good  or  harm.  As  a  loife,  she 
should  be  a  bright  pattern  of  all  that  tender  af- 
fection, that  unsuspicious  confidence,  that  cheer- 
ful obedience,  that  undivided  devotedness  to 
her  husband's  comfort,  which  such  a  relationship 
implies ;  a  lovely,  spotless  exhibition  of  connu- 
bial virtue.  No  man  is  in  greater  need  of  alL 
the  force  of  conjugal  sympathy  and  love,  than  a 
faithful  minister. 

As  the  female  head  of  a  family,  she  should  direct 
her  household  affairs  with  judgment,  and  he  a  model 
of  order,  neatness,  and  domestic  discipline,  A  minis- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  131 

ter  derives  some  degree  of  respectability  from  the 
state  of  his  family.  Home  scenes,  according  as 
they  are  lovely  or  repulsive,  form  a  beauteous 
halo  round,  or  dark  specks  upon,  the  orb  of  his 
public  character.  It  is  required  of  him  that  he 
should  rule  well  his  own  household  ;  but  in  this 
he  is  dependent  upon  his  tvife.  What  a  disgrace 
is  it  that  his  house  should  be  such  a  scene  of 
disorder,  as  to  disgust,  by  its  confusion,  the  more 
respectable  part  of  his  friends  !  Some  people, 
if  we  were  to  judge  from  their  habits,  and  their 
homes,  seem  to  have  been  born  out  of  due  time; 
they  look  as  if  the  era  of  their  existence  were 
the  reign  of  chaos.  Order  is  heaven's  first  law, 
and  the  laws  of  heaven  certainly  should  govern 
the  habitations  of  its  ministers.  If  a  mother,  a. 
minister's  wife  should  strive  to  excel  in  every  ma- 
ternal excellence.  How  often  is  it  the  case,  that 
a  minister's  children  are  talked  of  almost  to  a 
proverb,  for  their  rudeness,  ill  behaviour,  and 
wickedness ;  in  such  instances,  much  blame 
must  be  attached  to  the  mother. 

In  her  own  personal  character,  there  are  two 
traits  which  should  appear  with  peculiar  promi- 
nence, and  shine  with  attractive  lustre  in  a  min- 
ister's wife ;  these  are  piety  and  prudence. 
Her  piety  should  not  only  be  sincere,  but  ardent: 
not  only  unsuspected,  but  eminently  conspicu- 
ous. Her  habits,  her  conversation,  her  whole 
deportment,  should  bear  the  deep,  bright  impress 


132  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

of  heaven.  She  should  be  the  hohest,  most 
sph*itual  woman  in  the  church.  Her  prudence 
should  equal  her  piety.  Without  the  former, 
even  the  latter,  however  distinguished,  would 
only  half  qualify  her  for  her  important  station. 
Her  prudence  should  display  itself  in  all  her 
conduct  towards  her  husband.  She  should  be 
very  careful  not  to  render  him  dissatisfied  with 
the  situation  he  occupies.  Many  a  minister  has 
been  rendered  uncomfortable  in  a  situation  of 
considerable  usefulness,  or  has  been  led  to  quit 
it  against  the  convictions  of  his  judgment,  by  the 
capricious  prejudices  of  his  wife  ;  whose  ambi- 
tion has  aspired  to  something  higher,  or  whose 
love  of  change  has  coveted  something  new.  A 
minister's  wife  should  consult  her  husband's 
usefulness,  and  be  willing  to  live  in  any  situa- 
tion, however  self-denying  its  circumstances 
may  prove,  where  this  is  promoted  ;  and  consid- 
ering the  influence  she  has  over  his  decisions, 
she  should  be  very  careful  how  she  employs  it 
in  those  seasons  when  a  change  is  meditated.  Her 
prudence  should  render  her  extremely  careful, 
not  to  prejudice  her  hushand^s  mind  against  any 
individual  ivho  may  have,  designedly  or  uninten- 
tionally, injured  her.  In  not  a  few  cases,  have 
pastors  been  drawn  into  contention  with  some 
of  their  friends,  by  the  imprudent  conduct  of 
their  wives,  who,  possessing  a  morbid  sensibility 
of  offence,  have  reported,  amidst  much  exagger- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  133 

ation,  affronts  which  they  ought  not  to  have  felt 
— or  feeUng,  ought  to  have  concealed.  Instead 
of  acting  as  a  screen,  to  prevent  these  petty  vex- 
ations from  reaching  his  ear,  they  have  rendered 
their  tongues  a  conductor,  to  convey  them  to  his 
bosom.  They  should  hide  many  things  of  this 
kind,  which  it  is  not  important  he  should  know, 
and  soften  others  of  which  he  cannot  be  ig- 
norant. 

In  all  cases  where  her  husband  is  the  direct 
object  of  a  supposed  or  real  injury,  a  minister's 
wife  should  be  very  cautious  how  she  acts.  In- 
tended by  nature,  and  inclined  by  affection,  to 
be  a  partisan  and  an  advocate  in  her  husband's 
case,  so  far  as  truth  and  hohness  will  allow,  she 
should  at  the  same  time  endeavour,  rather  to 
mitigate  than  exasperate  the  displeasure  of  his 
mind.  Her  breath  in  such  cases,  if  imprudently 
employed,  may  fan  a  flame  which  in  its  progress 
may  consume  all  the  prosperity  of  the  church, 
and  half  the  reputation  of  her  husband.  Let  her 
therefore  govern  her  own  spirit,  as  the  best  means 
of  aiding  to  govern  his.  Let  her  calm,  concili- 
ate, and  direct  that  mind,  which  may  be  too 
much  enveloped  in  the  mist  of  passion,  to  guide 
itself  Let  her  not  go  from  house  to  house, 
dropping  sparks  and  scintillations  from  a  tongue 
set  on  fire  of  hell.  If  her  husband  be  the  head 
of  a  party,  let  her  not  envenom  their  minds  with 
bitter  words,  which  are  sure  to  be  rendered  stiU 


134  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

more  bitter,  by  the  lying  reporters  who  carry 
them  to  the  opposite  party.  Prudence  in  a  pas- 
tor's wife  would  have  often  saved  a  church  from 
division. 

A  minister's  wife  should  never  betray  the  confi- 
dence reposed  in  her  by  her  husband,  and  report 
the  opinions,  views,  and  feelings,  which  he  has 
communicated  in  the  seasons  of  their  private  con- 
versation. The  secrets  he  deposits  in  her  bo- 
som, are  to  be  as  sacredly  preserved  and  guard- 
ed, as  the  ring,  which,  on  the  morning  of  their 
union,  he  placed  upon  her  finger. 

Prudence  is  to  be  displayed  in  all  her  conduct 
towards  ike  church.  Probably,  the  chief  part  of 
prudence  lies,  in  a  proper  government  of  the  tongue  ; 
a  virtue  in  which  the  female  part  of  the  human 
race  have  not  been  supposed  greatly  to  excel. 
A  very  large  proportion  of  the  disturbances 
•which  agitate  the  surface,  and  extend  their 
influence  to  the  very  depths  of  society,  arise 
from  imprudent  language.  There  appears  to 
be  in  one  half  of  society,  an  incurable  propensity 
to  relate  what  is  to  the  disadvantage  of  their 
neighbours ;  and  in  the  other  half,  an  inde- 
structible appetite  to  rehsh  the  slander,  when  it 
is  reported.  Now  a  minister's  wife  should  most 
anxiously  guard  against  this  propensity  in  herself, 
and  most  assiduously  labour  to  abate  this  appe- 
tite in  others.  Let  her,  wherever  she  goes,  re- 
member,  that  there   are    many    waiting    and 


CHURCH    MZMBER's    GUIDE.  135 

watching  for  her  words,  which  ihey  will  be 
sure  to  reverberate  with  the  mimicry,  though 
not  with  the  fidehty,  of  an  echo.  Let  her 
tongue  never  deal  in  sarcasm,  satire,  invective, 
censure,  or  slander.  Let  it  be  an  invariable 
rule  with  her,  to  speak  ill  or  >-o  one.  She 
should  never  apptar  fond  of  receiving  ill  reports 
from  others.  If  she  have  a  taste  of  this  kind, 
gratification  enough  will  be  found  her.  Like  a 
queen  bee,  she  has  no  need  to  roam  abroad  in 
quest  of  honey — she  may  sit  at  home  in  indo- 
lent repose,  while  the  whole  hive  of  gossips 
and  tattlers  will  collect  for  her  an  exuberant 
supply.  Let  her  rather  discourage  these  hum- 
ming, busy  insects,  and  convince  them  that  she 
has  neither  ear  for  their  buzz,  nor  taste  for  their 
honey. 

Let  her  never  betray  a  secret,  which  she  has 
been  compelled  to  receive  :  nor  become  umpire 
between  two  contending  parties,  since,  in  what- 
ever way  her  decision  is  pronounced,  she  is  al- 
most sure  to  offend  one  of  them.  She  should 
avoid,  as  much  as  possible,  the  appearance  of 
favouritism.  Some  there  must  be,  witli  whom 
she  will  be  more  intimate  than  otliers  :  but  this 
fact,  if  it  be  known,  should  be  but  httle  seen : 
and  her  friends  should  be  always  such,  as  by  the 
common  consent  of  the  society  would  be  allotted  to 
Tier;  of  course,  they  should  not  be  minions  se- 
lected to  sustain  the  character  of  fawning  syco- 


136  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

phants,  purveyors  of  news,  or  tools  of  selfish- 
ness. In  all  her  deportment  towards  the  church, 
she  should  maintain  a  dignified,  though  not  a 
proud  consciousness  of  her  station,  hlended  with 
the  greatest  affability  and  affection.  The  law  of 
kindness  should  be  on  her  lips,  and  all  her  con- 
duct should  be  so  many  displays  of  the  meek- 
ness of  wisdom.  Her  dignity  should  prevent 
the  highest  from  being  obtrusive,  her  kindness 
should  make  the  lowest  feel  that  she  is  accessi- 
ble. Without  being  a  busy  body  and  meddling 
with  the  concerns  of  others,  she  should  make 
the  interests  of  her  friends  her  own.  Her  advice 
and  assistance  should  always  be  granted  when 
asked,  but  never  distributed  in  a  way  that  would 
render  it  unwelcome  and  little  valued.  Over  all 
institutions  which  have  been  formed  in  the  con- 
gregation, with  a  more  direct  reference  to  the 
relief  of  female  necessities,  she  ought  to  preside 
with  wisdom,  meekness,  and  zeal.  Her  influ- 
ence should  be  discreetly  exerted  informing  the 
general  and  pious  habits  of  the  younger  females. 
She  should  be  the  friend  of  the  poor,  and  be  of- 
ten seen  in  the  chambers  of  those  of  her  own 
sex,  when  they  are  visited  with  sickness.  With 
so  much  to  engage  her  attention,  she  will  have 
little  leisure  for  visits  of  useless  show,  or  expensive 
intercourse.  Such  she  ought  not  to  be  expect- 
ed to  keep  up,  for  her  time  can  be  more  usefully 
and  piously  employed.   For  visits  of  mere  gossip, 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  137 

or  etiquette,  she  ought  not  to  be  put  in  requisi- 
tion ;  and  if  she  is,  she  should  resist  the  attempt 
which  is  thus  made  to  enslave  her  by  the 
bonds  of  fashion  or  of  folly.  She  is  the  wife  of 
a  man,  whose  master  is  God — whose  business,  the 
salvation  of  souls — whose  scene  of  labour,  the 
church  of  Christ — and  the  consequences  of  whose 
exertions,  whether  they  succeed  or  fail,  are  infinite 
and  eternal ;  let  her  act  accordingly. 

II.     The  deacons. 

The  institution  of  the  deacon's  office  arose 
from  a  seemingly  accidental  circumstance  which 
occurred  in  the  church  at  Jerusalem,  the  particu- 
lars of  which  are  recorded  in  the  6th  chapter  of 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.*  The  original  design  of 
this  office,  was  to  administer  the  bounty  of  the 
church.  The  first  deacons  were  simply  the  al- 
moners of  their  brethren.      They  dispensed  the 


*  Some  persons  are  of  opinion  that  this  occurrence 
was  not  the  origin  of  the  deacon's  office,  and  that  the 
individuals  there  mentioned,  are  to  be  viewed,  not  as 
officers  of  the  church,  but  merely  as  stewards  of  a 
public  charity,  who  were  appointed  for  a  special  occa- 
sion, and  not  as  a  general  and  authoritative  precedent.  It 
is  said,  in  support  of  this  opinion,  that  these  individuals 
are  not  called  deacons  by  the  sacred  historian,  and  that,  in 
consequence,  they  cannot  be  proved  to  have  been  such. 
It  is  also  contended,  that  St.  Paul  doe's  not  specify,  in 
his  epistle  to  Timothy,  the  duties  of  a  deacon  in  such 
a  way  as  to  identify  the  office,  with  what  Luke,  in  6th 
M 


138  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

charities  of  the  rich,  for  the  rehef  of  the  poor. 
And  this,  whatever  has  been  added  by  the  usa- 
ges of  the  churches,  must  still  be  considered  as 
i\.s  paramount  duty.  What  a  lovely  and  attrac- 
tive view  does  it  give  us  of  Christianity,  and 
how  strikingly  characteristic  of  its  merciful  ge- 
nius, to  behold  it  solemnly  instituting  an  office, 
the  chief  design  of  which  is,  the  comfort  of  its 
poorer  followers !  Where  shall  we  find  any 
thing  analogous  to  this  in  other  systems?  Pa- 
ganism and  Mahometanism  have  nothing  like  it. 


of  Acts,  has  stated  to  be  the  duties  of  the  individuals 
there  selected  for  the  primitive  church. 

In  reply  to  this,  I  contend  that  this  icas  the  origin  of 
the  deacon's  office,  and  on  tlte  following  grounds  : 

1st.  Ecclesiastical  history  informs  us,  that  the  office 
was  always  considered  from  the  very  earliest  ages,  as 
designed  for  the  relief  of  the  poor.  If  so,  how  nat- 
ural is  it  to  trace  up  its  oiigin  to  the  circumstance  allud- 
ed to,  which  so  easily  accounts  for  it. 

2nd.  The  solemnity  with  which  the  seven  persons 
were  set  apart  to  their  office,  i.  e.  with  prayer  and  im- 
position of  hands,  looks  as  if  their  appointment  was  to 
be  considered  as  a  standing  and  authoritative  prece- 
dent. 

3d.  If  this  be  not  the  origin  of  the  deacon's  office, 
where  shall  we  find  the  account  ?  and  what  is  still 
stronger,  if  this  be  not  the  institution,  St.  Paul  has  giv- 
en directions  about  an  ofhce,  the  duties  of  which  are, 
in  that  case,  not  mentioned  in  the  Word  of  God.  He 
has  certainly  said  nothing  himself  of  its  design,  a  cir- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  139 

By  a  reference  to  the  origin  of  the  office,  we 
shall  learn  how  widely  some  religious  commu- 
nities have  departed  from  the  design  of  this 
simple,  merciful,  and  useful  institution.  "  Those 
who  perverted  all  church  order,"  says  Dr.  Owen, 
"  took  out  of  the  hands  and  care  of  the  deacons, 
that  work  which  was  committed  to  them  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  the  apostles,  and  for  which  end 
alone  their  office  was  instituted  in  the  church, 
and  assigned  other  work  unto  them,  whereunto' 
they  were  not  called,  and  appointed.  And  where- 
as, when  all  things  were  swelling   with   pride 


cumslance,  which  is  strongly  presumptive  of  the  truth 
of  my  view  of  the  case,  since  his  silence  seems  to  im- 
ply that  the  duties  of  the  deacon  were  ah-eady  too  well 
known  to  need  that  he  should  specify  them.  His  very 
omission  is  grounded  on  some  preN'ious  institution. 
Where  shall  we  find  this,  but  in  Acts  vi,  ? 

4th.  The  reason  of  the  appointment  in  question,  is 
of  permanent  force,  i-  e.  that  those  who  minister  in  the 
Word,  should  not  have  their  attention  diverted  by  tem- 
poral concerns;  and,  therefore,  seems  as  if  a  perma- 
nent office  was  then  established. 

5th.  I  would  ask  any  one  who  takes  a  different 
view  from  that  which  I  hold,  what  are  the  duties  of 
the  deacons  mentioned  by  Paul  ?  If  he  reply,  as  I 
think  he  must,  "  To  attend  to  the  concerns  of  the 
poor,"  I  would  still  inquire  how  he  knows  that.  If  he 
answer.  The  testimony  of  ecclesiastical  history — I 
would  still  ask,  On  what  the  immemorial  usage  of  the 
church  could  be  founded,  if  not  on  the  fact  mentioned 
by  Luke  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  ? 


140  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

and  ambition  in  the  church,  no  sort  of  its  offi- 
cers contenting  themselves  with  their  primitive 
institution,  but  striving  by  various  degrees  to  be 
somewhat  in  name  and  thing,  that  was  high 
and  aloft,  there  arose  from  the  name  of  this  of- 
fice the  meteor  of  an  arch  deacon^  with  strange 
power  and  authority  never  heard  di  in  the 
church  for  many  ages.  But  this  belongs  to  the 
mystery  of  iniquity,  whereunto  neither  the 
scripture  nor  the  practice  of  the  primitive 
churches,  do  give  the  least  countenance.  But 
some  think  it  not  inconvenient  to  sport  them- 
selves in  matters  of  church  order  and  constitu- 
tions."* 

The  church  of  England,  which  retains  many 
of  the  corruptions  of  her  relation  at  Rome,  has 
imitated  her  in  the  total  alteration  of  this  office. 
In  that  communion  the  deacon  is  not  a  secular 
but  a  spiritual  officer,  and  his  post  is  considered 
as  the  first  grade  in  the  ascent  to  the  episcopal 
throne.  He  is  a  preacher,  and  may  baptize,  but 
not  administer  the  eucharist.  He  is,  in  fact, 
half  priest,  half  layman,  and  does  not  altogeth- 
er put  off  the  laic,  nor  put  on  the  cleric  charac- 
ter, till  his  second  ordination  to  the  full  orders 
of  the  priesthood.  The  church-warden  and 
the  overseer  share  between  them  the  office  of 
the  deacon. 


Dr.  Owen  on  Church  Government,  4to.  184. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  141 

Abuses  of  this  office,  however,  are  not  confin- 
ed to  the  churches  of  Rome  and  of  England,  but 
may  be  found  in  the  ecclesiastical  polity  of  those 
who  separate  from  both.  What  is  the  deacon 
of  some  of  our  independent  communities?  Not 
simply  the  laborious,  indefatigable,  tender-heart- 
ed dispenser  of  the  bounty  of  the  church,  the 
inspector  of  the  poor,  the  comforter  of  the  dis- 
tressed ;  no,  but  "  the  bible  of  the  minister,  the 
patron  of  the  living,  and  the  wolf  of  the  flock;" 
an  individual,  who,  thrusting  himself  into  the 
seat  of  government,  attempts  to  lord  it  over 
God's  heritage,  by  dictating  ahke  to  the  pastor 
and  the  members ;  who  thinks  that  in  virtue  of 
his  office,  his  opinion  is  to  be  law  in  all  matters 
of  church  government,  whether  temporal  or 
spiritual.  This  man  is  almost  as  distant  from 
the  deacon  of  apostolic  times,  as  the  deacon  of 
the  Vatican.  Such  men  there  have  been,  whose 
spirit  of  domination  in  the  church  has  produced 
a  kind  of  diaconophobia  in  the  minds  of  many 
ministers,  who  have  suffered  most  wofully  from 
their  bite,  and  have  been  led  to  resolve  to  do 
without  them  altogether,  rather  than  be  worried 
any  more.*    Hence  it  is,  that  in  some  cases  the 


*  The  author  writes  from  observation,  not  from  ex- 
perience ;  besides  the  eight  deacons  with  whom  he 
acts  at  present,  he  has  already  outlived  eight  more,  and 
both  the  dead  and  the  living  have  been  his  comfort  and 
joy. 


142  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

unscriptural  plan  of  committees  have  been  re- 
sorted to,  that  the  tyranny  of  deacons  might  be 
avoided. 

I  do  beseech  those  M^ho  bear  this  office  to 
look  to  its  origin,  and  learn  that  it  is  an  office  of 
service,  which  gives  no  authority,  or  power,  or 
rule  in  the  church,  beyond  the  special  work  for 
which  it  is  appointed,  and  that  is,  to  provide  for 
the  comfort  of  the  poorer  brethren.  This  is  their 
business.  It  is  true,  that  by  the  usages  of  our 
churches,  many  things  have  been  added  to  the 
duties  of  the  office,  beyond  its  original  design  ; 
but  this  is  mere  matter  of  expediency. 

It  is  often  said  that  the  duty  of  the  office  is  to 
serve  tables :  the  table  of  the  Lord,  the  table  of 
the  minister,  and  the  table  of  the  poor.  If  it  be 
meant  that  this  was  the  design  of  its  appoint- 
ment, I  deny  the  statement,  and  affirm  that  the 
table  of  the  poor,  is  the  deacon's  appropriate  and 
exclusive  duty.  Whatever  is  conjoined  with 
this,  is  extra  diaconal  service,  and  vested  in  the 
individual,  merely  for  the  sake  of  utihty.  Such 
increase  of  their  duties  I  admit  is  wise  and  prop- 
er. We  need  persons  to  take  care  of  the  com- 
fort of  the  minister — to  provide  for  the  holy 
feast  of  the  Lord's  supper — to  superintend  the 
cleaning  and  lighting  of  the  house  of  God — to 
direct  the  arrangements  of  all  matters  connected 
with  public  worship  ;  and  who  so  proper  for 
this,  as  the  brethren  who  already  fill  an  office, 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  143 

which  is  secular  in  its  nature  and  design  ?  But 
these  are  all  additions  to  the  paramount  duty  of 
the  deacon,  which  is  to  take  care  of  the  poor. 

Let  it  not  be  thought,  that  this  is  exhibiting 
the  office  in  a  naked,  and  meagre,  and  degrad- 
ing point  of  view  ;  or  as  shorn  of  the  beams  of 
its  brightest  glory.  What  can  be  a  more  happy 
or  more  honourable  employment,  than  to  dis- 
tribute the  alms  of  the  brethren,  and  visit  the 
habitations  of  the  poor,  like  angels  of  mercy, 
with  words  of  peace  upon  their  hps,  and  the 
means  of  comfort  in  their  hands  ?  A  faithful, 
laborious,  affectionate  deacon,  must  necessarily 
become  the  object  of  justly  deserved  regard  in 
the  church,  and  be  looked  up  to  with  the  esteem 
and  veneration,  which  are  paid  by  a  grateful 
dependent  family  to  their  sire.  The  poor  will 
tell  him  their  wants  and  woes,  spiritual  and 
temporal  ;  and  ask  his  advice  with  implicit  con- 
fidence. He  will  move  through  the  orbit  of  his 
duty  amidst  the  prayers  and  praises  of  his  breth- 
ren, and  in  measure  may  adopt  the  language  of 
Job — "  When  the  ear  heard  me,  then  it  blessed 
me  ;  and  when  the  eye  saw  me,  then  it  gave 
witn(^s  to  me ;  because  I  dehvered  the  poor 
that  cried,  and  the  fatherless,  and  him  that  had 
none  to  help  him.  The  blessing  of  him  that 
was  ready  to  perish  came  upon  me,  and  I  caus- 
ed the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy.  I  was 
eyes  to  the  blind,  and  feet  was  I  to  the  lame.    I 


144  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

was  a  father  to  the  poor,  and  the  cause  which  I 
knew  not,  I  searched  out."  Surely,  surely,  here 
is  honour,  much  pure,  legitimate,  exalted  honour, 
without  the  deacon's  endeavouring  to  gain  the 
forbidden  splendour  of  official  pride  or  tyranny. 
Such  a  man  must  be,  and  ought  to  be  a  person 
of  influence  in  the  society  ;  but  it  is  the  influ- 
ence of  character,  of  goodness,  of  usefulness. 
Let  him  have  his  periodical  visitations  of  the 
poor.  Let  him  go  and  sfee  their  wants  and  woes 
in  their  oivn  habitations,  as  well  as  bid  them 
come  and  tell  their  sorrows  in  his.  Let  him  be 
full  of  compassion  and  tender  hearted  ;  let  his 
eyes  drop  pity,  while  his  hands  dispense  bounty ; 
let  him  be  affable  and  kind  as  well  as  attentive. 
And  such  a  man  shall  want  neither  honour  nor 
power  amongst  his  brethren,  although,  at  the 
same  time,  he  be  peaceful  as  a  dove,  meek  as  a 
iamb,  and  gentle  as  a  little  child. 

I  have  already  said,  that  for  the  sake  of  expedi- 
ency, all  the  temporal  aflfairs  should  be  confided 
to  the  hands  of  the  deacons, — but  then  in  all  but 
what  relates  to  the  distribution  of  the  alms  of  the 
church,  they  ought  to  render  a  most  faithful 
account,  even  to  the  last  farthing  of  pro}>erty, 
to  the  brethren.  Their  account  ought  to  be  an- 
nually laid  before  the  subscribing  members  of 
the  church,  and  to  receive  their  approbation. 
A  regard  to  their  own  reputation  as  well  as  to 
propriety,  and  general  satisfaction,  should  die- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  145 

tate  this.  The  utmost  fairness  and  openness 
should  ever  be  manifested  by  those  who  manage 
the  temporahties  of  religious  societies. 

The  apostle  is  very  explicit  in  his  statement  of 
the  qualifications  which  the  deacons  slioidd  pos- 
sess. "Likewise  must  the  deacons  be  grave," 
i.  e.  men  of  serious  and  dignified  deportment ; 
"  not  double  tongued,"  i.  e.  sincere,  not  addicted 
to  duplicity  of  speech;  "not  given  to  much 
wine  ;  not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre  ;  holding  the 
mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  pure  conscience,"  i.  e, 
attached  to  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and  ex- 
hibiting their  holy  influence  in  a  spotless  life : 
"  and  let  them  also  first  be  proved;  then  let  them 
use  the  ofiice  of  a  deacon,  being  found  blameless. 
Let  them  be  the  husband  of  one  wife,  ruling 
their  children  and  their  own  houses  well."  1 
Tim.  iii.  8—13.  * 


*  The  allusion  made  to  the  deacon's  wives,  appears 
to  me  to  be  a  mistranslation,  and  in  the  original  refers 
to  a  class  of  female  office  bearers  in  the  primitive 
church.  "  Even  so  the  wornen."  As  the  manners  of 
the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  especially  of  the  Asiatics, 
did  not  permit  men  to  have  much  intercourse  with  wo- 
men of  character,  unless  they  were  relations,  it  was 
proper  that  an  order  of  female  assistants  should  be  in- 
stituted for  visiting  and  privately  instructing  the  young 
of  their  own  sex,  and  for  catechising  '  females  of  any 
age.  And  as  the  church  was  then  much  persecuted, 
N 


146  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

Deacons  should  remember,  that  all  these 
qualifications  should  be  found  embodied  in  each 
individual^  holding  the  office  ;  and  not  merely- 
some  in  one  and  some  in  another,  till  the  char- 
acter is  formed  by  the  joint  number,  but  not  by 
each  member  of  the  deaconry.  Some  have  con- 
tended for  plurality  of  elders  in  a  church, 
because  it  is  impossible  to  find  all  the  qualifica- 
tions of  a  Christian  bishop  stated  by  the  apostle, 
in  one  person.  We  are  to  look  for  one  excellence 
in  bne  man,  and  another  in  the  second,  and 
what  is  wanting  in  one  will  be  made  up  in  anoth- 
er, until  their  defects  and  attainments  are  made 
to  tally  and  unite,  like  the  corresponding  parts 


and  many  of  its  members  were  often  condemned  to  lan- 
guish in  a  prison,  these  holy  women  were  no  doubt 
peculiarly  useful  in  visiting  the  captive  Christians, 
and  performing  for  them  many  kind  oflBces  which 
their  sex  can  best  render.  Such  an  one,  in  all  proba- 
bility, was  Phebe,  mentioned  Rom.  xvi.  1.  Such  were 
the  widows  spoken  of  1  Tim.  v.  Such  were  Euodia 
and  Syntyche,  Phil.  iv.  3.  Clement  of  Alexandria, 
reckons  widows  amongst  ecclesiastical  persons.  "  There 
are  many  precepts  in  scripture  for  those  who  are  chos- 
en, some  for  priests,  others  for  bishops,  others  for  dea- 
cons, others  for  widows."  Pliny,  in  his  celebrated 
Epistle  to  Trajan,  is  thought  to  refer  to  deaconesses, 
when,  speakiag  of  two  female  Christians  whom  he  put 
to  the  torture,  he  says,  "  quae  ministrae  dicebantur  :^ 
i.  e.  who  were  called  deaconesses. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  147 

of  a  dovetail  joint.  I  confess,  however,  that 
this  way  of  making  church  officers,  as  it  were 
by  patch  work,  appears  to  me  a  most  absurd 
idea. 

The  deacons  from  their  being  officers  in  the 
church,  akhough  their  office  is  of  a  secular  na- 
ture, and  also  from  their  being  generally  ac- 
quainted with  the  affairs  of  the  church,  will  be 
considered  by  every  wise  and  prudent  minister, 
as  his  privy  council  in  his  spiritual  government, 
and  should  be  always  ready  to  afford  him,  in  a 
modest,  respectful,  and  unobtrusive  manner,  their 
advipe.  They  must  not^however,  dictate.  If  they 
do,  he  must  resist.  "  Christian  bretliren,"  said 
a  preacher  on  this  subject,  "give  to  the  minister 
I  love,  for  a  deacon,  a  man  in  whose  house  ho 
may  sit  down  at  ease,  when  he  is  weary  and 
loaded  with  care  ;  into  whose  bosom  he  may 
freely  pour  his  sorrows,  and  by  whose  lips  he 
may  be  soothed  when  he  is  vexed  and  perplex- 
ed ;  by  whose  illuminated  mind  he  may  be 
guided  in  difficulty  ;  and  by  whose  liberahty  and 
cordial  co-operation,  he  may  be  animated  and 
assisted  in  every  generous  undertaking."  And 
I  would  add,  who  would  do  all  this  in  the  spirit 
of  humble,  modest,  and  unauthoritative  affec-- 
tion  ;  who  would  not  make  his  kindness  and  as- 
sistance a  cloak  for  his  tyranny  ;  nor  a  silken 
web  to  wind  around  the  fetters  he  is  preparing 
for  the  slavery  of  his  pastor. 


148  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

In  the  transactions  of  church  business,  the 
deacons  should  exert  no  other  influence  than 
that  which  arises  from  the  esteem  and  affection 
in  which  they  are  held  by  the  people.  All  per- 
sonal and  official  authority  should  be  abstained 
from.  Their  opinion  should  ever  be  stated  with 
pre-eminent  modesty ;  for  if  it  be  a  wise  one, 
its  wisdom  will  commend  itself  to  the  judgment 
of  the  people,  whose  hearts  are  already  prepar- 
ed by  affection  and  esteem  to  yield  to  its  influ- 
ence. Whereas,  the  wisest  opinion,  if  deliver- 
ed with  the  dogmatism  of  official  pride,  will  of- 
ten be  resisted,  merely  because  it  is  attempted 
to  be  imposed. 

If  a  man  deserve  influence,  he  will  be  sure  to 
have  it  without  seeking  it,  or  designedly  exert- 
ing it ;  if  he  do  not  deserve  it,  and  still  seek,  he 
is  sure  to  be  resisted. 

"  The  deacon's  duty  to  the  people,  is  to  pro- 
mote, so  far  as  he  is  able,  the  happiness  of  indi- 
viduals, and  the  welfare  of  the  society.  In  his 
intercourse  with  tliem,  he  should  be  firm  and 
unbending  in  j)rinciple,  but  kind  and  conciliato- 
ry in  temper  and  in  manner.  In  those  parts  of 
his  office,  which  are  sometimes  very  irksome 
and  arduous,  from  the  difficulty  of  serving  all 
according  to  their  wishes,  he  should  guard 
against  every  thing  which  even"  appears  to  be 
harsh  and  unkind.  More  especially  should  he 
do  this,  when  he  finds  it  impossible,  in  con- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  149 

sistency  with  his  duty  to  others,  to  fulfil  their 
desires.  The  apparently  insignificant  circum- 
stance, which  will  often  occur  in  our  congrega- 
tions, of  being  unable  to  accommodate  an  indi- 
vidual, or  a  family,  with  a  seat,  may  be  mention- 
ed with  so  much  kindness,  and  with  such  un- 
feigned regret  that  it  is  so,  as  to  lead  the  indi- 
vidual, or  the  family,  patiently  to  wait  for  a 
more  favourable  opportunity;  or  it  may  be 
done,  although  without  design,  in  a  tone  of  so 
much  indifference,  as  to  lead  the  disappointed 
applicant  to  relinquish  the  hope  of  success,  and 
to  leave  the  place.  The  secret  charm  by  which 
the  deacon's  office  may  be  rendered  comfortable 
to  himself,  and  beneficial  to  others,  is  that  gold- 
en precept  of  inspiration,  "Let  all  your  things 
be  done  with  charity ; "  or  as  Dr.  Doddridge 
better  translates  the  passage,  "  Let  all  your  af- 
fairs be  transacted  in  love." — 1  Cor.  xvi.  14. 

III.  Heads  of  famihes. 

The  station  occupied  by  such  persons,  is  ex- 
ceedingly important,  and  therefore  very  respon- 
sible. We  naturally  look  to  the  families  of  pro- 
fessing Christians  for  the  materials  with  which 
the  "spiritual  house"  is  to  be  repaired  amidst 
the  spoliations  of  sin  and  death.  A  large  pro- 
portion of  our  members  are  the  children  of 
tlie  righteous,  and  our  churches  would  be  still 
more  enriched  with  the  fruits  of  domestic  piety, 
if  that  piety  itself  were  more  ardent  and  more 


150  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

exemplary.  It  is  impossible  to  urge  in  terms  too 
strong,  the  sacred  duties  of  Christian  masters, 
mistresses,  and  parents.  Their  influence  on 
the  prosperity  of  the  church  is  greater  than 
is  generally  conceived,  or  can  be  fully  stated. 
The  duties  of  such  persons  are  of  a  two-fold 
nature  : 

1.  The  primary  ones,  of  course,  relate  to  your 
CHILDREN.  It  is  the  command  of  God  to  train 
them  up  in  the  fear,  and  nurture,  and  admonition 
of  the  Lord.  Let  your  first,  and  deepest,  and 
most  lasting  solicitude  be  for  the  formation  of 
their  religious  character,  and  the  salvation  of 
their  souls.  Let  this  regulate  all  your  conduct 
towards  them.  Let  it  impel  you  to  adopt  a 
system  of  instruction  and  discif>line,  which  shall 
have  a  close  and  constant  bearing  on  their  moral 
and  religious  habits.  Let  it  guide  you  in  the 
choice  of  schools  where  they  are  to  be  educated, 
the  families  into  which  they  are  to  be  apprenticed. 
Act  so,  as  that  they  may  clearly  discern,  that 
your  most  ardent  prayer,  your  most  anxious 
concern,  is  that  they  may  be  truly  pious.  They 
should  see  this  interwoven  with  all  your  conduct 
towards  them  :  and  behold  a  uniform,  consistent, 
constant  effort  to  accomplished  this  object.  Let 
them  hear  it  expressed  in  your  advice  and 
prayers,  and  see  it  manifested  in  all  your  arrange- 
ments. Alas !  alas !  how  many  children  of 
church  members  are  there,   who,  if  they  were 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  151 

asked  the  question,  "What  is  your  father  and 
mother's  chief  concern  for  you  ?"  would  be 
obliged  to  reply,  "  That  I  might  excel  m  fashion- 
able accomplishments,  and  make  a  figure  in  the 
drawing  room."  There  appears  to  me  to  be 
at  the  present  moment,  a  most  criminal  neglect 
on  the  part  of  Christian  parents,  of  the  re- 
ligious education  of  their  children.  Every 
thing  is  sacrificed  to  the  lighter  and  more  frivo- 
lous accomplishments  of  the  female  character, 
and  to  the  hterary  and  scientific  acquisitions 
of  boys.  Religion  is  a  secondary  matter.  But 
ought  it  to  be  so  ?  Ought  it  not  rather  to  be, 
the  one  thing  needful  for  our  children  as  well  as 
for  ourselves  ? 

That  Christian  who  would  carry  on  a  system 
of  religious  education  with  success,  should  en- 
force it  with  all  the  commanding  influence  of  a 
HOLY  EXAJiPLE.  Let  your  children  see  all  the 
*' beauties  of  holiness"  reflected  from  your  char- 
acter, and  the  grand  outline  of  Christian  moral- 
ity filled  up  with  all  the  delicate  touches  and 
varied  colouring  of  the  Christian  temper.  The 
heathens  had  their  Penates,  or  little  shrines  of 
their  gods,  which  they  kept  in  their  own  habita- 
tion, to  remind  them  of  the  objects  of  their  reli- 
gious veneration  and  trust.  Be  you  to  your  fam- 
ilies, instead  of  these  household  gods,  by  being 
lovely  images  of  the  great  Jehovah.  Let  your 
children  have  this    conviction   in  their  hearts, 


152  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

"If  there  be  but  two  real  Christians  in  the 
world,  my  father  is  one,  and  my  mother  is  the 
other."  It  is  dreadful,  but  not  uncommon  for 
children  to  employ  themselves,  in  contrasting 
the  appearance  which  their  parents  make  at  the 
Lord's  table,  and  at  their  own ;  in  the  house  of 
God,  and  at  home. 

Family  prayer  should  be  performed  with 
great  punctuality,  constancy,  and  seriousness.  It 
is  of  course  presumed  that  every  Christian  does 
pray  with  his  household.  It  should  not  be  per- 
formed so  late  in  the  evening  that  the  family 
are  more  fit  for  sleep  than  devotion,  nor  so  late 
in  the  morning,  as  for  business  to  interrupt  it. 
It  should  ever  be  conducted  with  the  most  sol- 
emn devotion,  and  never  rendered  tedious  by  ex- 
treme  length.  It  should  be  very  simple,  and  have 
special  reference  to  the  case  of  the  children  and 
the  servants.  That  it  might  be  performed  with 
regularity,  heads  of  families  should  rarely  sup 
from  home.  It  is  a  disgrace  for  a  Christian  mas- 
ter or  parent  to  be  often  seen  in  the  streets  at 
eleven  o'clock  at  night. 

Professing  Christians  should  resist  the  en- 
trance of  ivorldly  conformity  into  their  families. 
Expensive  entertainments,  gay  parties,  vain  and 
frivolous  amusements,  showy  modes  of  dress, 
should  be  most  cautiously  avoided.  .  Religion 
will  not  dwell  amidst  such  scenes ;  her  refin- 
ed and  spiritual  taste  is  soon  offended,  and  she 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  153 

retires.  A  Christian's  habits  should  be  simple 
and  spiritual.  If  it  be  his  aim,  to  approach  as 
nearly  as  possible,  to  the  manners  of  the  world 
without  actually  being  numbered  with  its  vota- 
ries, his  children  will  be  restrained  with  diffi- 
culty on  the  right  side  of  tlie  line  of  demarca- 
tion, and  be  perpetually  longing  and  trying  to 
push  onward.  The  miserable  efforts,  made  by 
some  professing  Christians,  to  be  thought  peo- 
ple of  taste  and  fashion ;  to  live  half  way  be- 
tween tlie  tradesman  and  the  gentleman,  show 
how  ill  they  bear  the  Christian  yoke,  and  how 
nearly  tiiey  are  resolved  to  cast  it  away  as  an 
encumbrance.  We  should  despise  these  things 
wherever  we  see  them,  if  they  did  not  prefer 
claims  upon  our  pity,  still  stronger  than  those 
upon  our  scorn.  When  a  worldly  temper  has 
crept  into  the  circle  of  a  Christian  church,  pie- 
ty retires  before  it,  and  the  spirit  of  error  soon 
enters  to  take  possession  of  the  desolate  heri- 
tage. 

2.  There  is  another  duty  which  devolves  on 
those  whom  Providence  has  placed  at  the  head 
of  a  family,  and  that  relates  to  their  domestics. 

Heads  of  families  should  manifest  a  kind  so- 
hcitude  for  the  temporal  comfort  of  their  domes- 
tics, and  especially  a  deep  solicitude  for  their 
spiritual  welfare.  They  should  take  care  that 
they  are  provided  with  Bibles,  and  furnished 
witli  a  few  rehgious  books  to  peruse  on  the  Sab- 


154  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

bath,  and  at  other  intervals  of  leisure.  In  eve- 
ry respectable  habitation,  there  should  certainly 
be  a  kitchen  library,  comprising  a  few  plain,  in- 
teresting, moral,  and  religious  treatises.  Great 
care  should  be  taken,  in  the  arrangement  of  do- 
mestic affairs,  to  afford  opportunities  to  their 
households,  to  attend  the  solemnities  of  public 
worship.  It  is  too  common  to  allow  them  this 
privilege,  only  in  the  afternoon,  which  is  a 
part  of  the  day  least  favourable  to  religious  in- 
struction and  impression.  Is  not  this  a  most 
cruel  deprivation  ?  If  the  heads  of  a  family 
find  the  afternoon  a  dull  and  profitless  season, 
how  much  more  so  must  it  be  to  them,  who,  to 
the  labour  of  the  week,  have  added  that  of  the 
Sabbath  morning ! 

And  why  cannot  the  domestics  be  permitted 
to  go  to  worship  on  the  Sabbath  morning  ?  O  ! 
tell  it  not  in  Gath,  because  they  are  kept  at  home 
to  cook  a  dinner  for  the  parlour.  Shame  and  dis- 
grace on  that  professing  Christian,  who  will  not 
forego  the  gratifications  of  liis  palate,  though  it 
be  to  aid  in  the  salvation  of  souls. .  How  can  he 
enjoy  the  roasted  joint,  when  he  remembers 
that  one  of  the  family  has  been,  at  his  command, 
devoting  the  Lord's  day  to  prepare  the  feast  .^ 
He  comes  from  the  house  of  God,  perhaps  from 
the  sacramental  table,  and  in  the  hearing  of  his 
domestics,  talks  of  the  precious  season  he  has 
experienced ;  while  they  revile,  as  mere  disgust- 


155 

ing  cant,  the  religious  conversation  of  a  man, 
who  would  rob  the  souls  of  others,  to  pamper 
his  appetite.  Such  men  are  worse  than  Esau  ; 
he  sold  his  own  birthright  for  the  gratification 
of  his  palate,  but  they  sell  the  birthright  of  oth- 
ers. Yes,  the  Sabbath  is  their  birthright,  or 
rather  is  granted  to  them  by  charter  from  God ; 
and  no  man  can  alienate  the  sacred  gift  from 
them,  without  committing  a  felony  of  the  worst 
kind.  Is  it  not  enough,  that  they  labour  for  our 
comfort  six  days  in  the  week,  but  they  must  al- 
so have  the  seventh,  the  season  of  repose,  taken 
from  them  ? 

Great,  very  great  reproach  is  frequently  brought 
upon  religion,  by  the  manner  in  which  many 
professors  conduct  themselves  towards  those, 
who  have  claims  upon  them  for  something  more 
than  their  wages.  It  has  been  said  that  no  man 
is  great  in  the  eyes  of  his  valet.  I  am  afraid 
that  the  sentiment  admits  of  extension,  and  that 
it  might  be  said,  that  few  men  are  exemplary  for 
piety  in  the  eyes  of  their  servants. 

IV.     Domestics. 

There  is  no  class  of  church  members,  for  whom 
I  feel  more  anxious,  than  for  domestics.  Cut 
oflf  in  a  considerable  degree,  by  their  verj"  situ- 
ation, from  pastoral  attentions;  urged  forward 
in  a  course  of  labour,  which  in  many  cases  has 
no  intervals  of  rest ;  often  most  cruelly  depriv- 
ed of  the  repose  of  the  Sabbath  ;   it  is  difficult, 


156  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

indeed,  for  them  to  keep  up  the  power,  or  enjoy 
the  consolations  of  personal  religion.  They 
have  pecuHar  need  to  watch,  lest  the  flame  of 
piety  should  languish  and  expire  in  their  hearts. 
It  is  quite  interesting  to  observe  how  particu- 
lar the  apostle  is  in  his  direction  to  servants. 
"  Servants,  be  obedient  to  them  that  are  your 
masters  according  to  the  flesh,  with  fear  and 
trembling,  in  singleness  of  your  heart  as  unto 
Christ :  not  with  eye  service,  as  men  pleasers, 
but  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  will  of 
God  from  the  heart ;  with  good  will  doing  ser- 
vice as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men."  Eph.  vi. 
,5 — 7.  The  same  sentiments  are  repeated.  Col. 
iii.  22—25.  Titus  ii.  9,  10.  It  is  to  such  that 
the  solemn  and  striking  admonition  is  address- 
ed, "  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour 
in  all  things."  Even  the  sublime  doctrine  of  a 
redeeming  God,  that  bright  eff^ulgence  which 
has  issued  from  the  fountain  of  light,  is  suscep- 
tible of  decoration,  and  receives  its  adorning  from 
the  consistent  conduct,  not  merely  of  a  religious 
monarch,  philosopher,  or  scholar,  but  of  a  Chris- 
tian servant.  The  most  scrupulous  honesty,  the 
most  unwearied  diligence,  the  most  humble  sub- 
mission, the  most  inviolable  truth,  are  necessary 
to  this.  Servants  should  make  the  interests  of  the 
family  their  own,  and  act  in  all  things  towards 
their  employer's  property  as  if  they  were  its  pos- 
sessors.    The  apostle  has  laid  uncommon  stress 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  157 

upon  servants  being  uniformly  the  same  for  fidel- 
ity, and  honesty,  and  diligence,  whether  in  the 
presence  or  absence  of  their  employers.  All  they 
do,  even  the  most  ordinary  duties  of  their  sta- 
tion, is  to  be  done  as  to  the  Lord,  and  he  is  every 
where  present.  Their  rehgion  should  be  dis- 
tinctly see?i  in  the  manner  of  performing  the 
duties  of  their  station ;  audit  should  be  obvious 
that  their  piety  has  improved  them  as  servants. 

Where  they  are  placed  in  irreligious  families^ 
"  let  them  count  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all 
honour,  that  the  name  of  God  and  his  doctrine 
be  not  blasphemed."  1  Tim.  vi.  1.  Let  them 
not  feel  at  liberty  to  treat  their  employers  with 
contempt  and  neglect,  as  mere  carnal  persons ; 
for  rehgion  does  not  abolish  the  distinctions  of 
society,  nor  the  rights  connected  with  them.  I 
scarcely  know  one  character  in  the  private  walks 
of  hfe,  that  has  a  fairer  opportunity  to  glorify 
God,  than  a  religious  servant  in  an  ungodly  fam- 
ily. It  will  be  a  fine  testimony  to  the  excellence 
of  piety,  when  we  shall  hear  even  irreligious 
persons  generally  say,  "  We  will  never  have,  if 
we  can  help  it,  any  but  religious  servants,  for  we 
have  seen  that  piety  renders  them  faithful,  hum- 
ble, dihgent,  and  trust  worthy." 

"  They  that  have  believing  masters,  let  them 
not  despise  them  because  they  are  brethren,  but 
rather  do  them  service  because  they  are  faith- 
ful   and  beloved,  partakers  of  the  benefit."    1 


158  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

Tim.  vi.  2.  They  are  not  in  such  circumstances 
to  abate  one  iota  of  that  reverence  and  obedi- 
ence which  are  due  to  them  :  for  though  by  the 
law  of  Christ  they  are  brethren,  this  does  not 
destroy  their  superiority.  It  is  no  uncommon 
thing  for  rehgious  servants  to  manifest  such  a 
degree  of  consequence,  and  to  expect  so  much  defer- 
ence, as  to  lead  some  heads  of  famihes  to  say, 
that  they  would  rather  have  good  moral  servants, 
than  religious  ones.  In  some  cases  where  they 
have  been  deprived,  not  by  any  capricious,  or 
arbitrary  arrangement,  but  the  unavoidable 
necessities  of  the  family,  from  enjoying  so  many 
opportunities  as  they  could  wish ;  when  they 
have  been  unexpectedly  deprived  of  the  privi- 
lege of  attending  public  worship,  perhaps  only 
for  a  single  season,  they  have  manifested  so 
much  petulance,  and  entered  upon  their  home 
duties  with  so  much  sullen  reluctance  and  ill 
humour,  that  their  religion,  or  rather  I  ought  to 
say,  their  want  of  it,  has  become  a  squrce  of  dis- 
gust and  uneasiness.  The  means  of  grace  ought 
to  be  valued  and  improved,  but  the  occasional 
and  unavoidable  loss  of  them  should  not  be  at- 
tended with  the  destruction  of  the  Christian  tem- 
per. 

It  would  be  well,  on  entering  upon  a  place, 
to  have  an  understanding  with  employers,  on 
the  subject  of  attendance  at  public  worship. 
This  would  prevent  all  disagreement  afterwards, 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  159 

or  would  at  least  furnish  a  compact  to  which 
reference  might  be  made  in  future.  It  cannot 
surely  be  necessary  to  admonish  such  as  make 
a  profession  of  religion,  never  to  go  into  any 
situation,  whatever  pecuniary  advantages  may 
present  themselves,  in  which  they  are  prevented 
from  attending  the  public  means  of  grace.  That 
person  cannot  really  seek,  first  the  kingdom  of 
God,  who,  for  the  sake  of  higher  wages,  would 
go  into  a  place,  which  excludes  all  enjoyment 
of  the  Sabbath,  and  the  house  of  God,  and  almost ' 
all  opportunities  of  pn'uafe^ra^/er.  Those  who 
have  obtained  comfortable  situations,  should  be 
anxious  to  retain  them^  for  it  is  not  creditable  to 
their  profession,  to  be  often  changing  places.  It 
would  also  be  honourable  to  their  characters,  to 
be  ever  distinguished  for  neatness  rather  than 
gaudiness  of  attire.  A  love  for  dress  is  censur- 
able in  all  professing  Christians,  but  most  of  all, 
in  those  whose  means  scarcely  enable  them  to 
command  the  vanities  of  this  world.  How  much 
more  would  it  be  to  their  honour  and  comfort, 
to  lay  by  a  portion  of  their  wages  for  a  time  of 
need. 

V.  Young  persons. 

These  generally  form  a  very  considerable  class 
of  our  members,  and  have  duties  to  perform  ap- 
propriate to  their  age  and  station.  They  should 
be  very  watchful  against  the  sins  to  which  the 
ardour  and  inexperience  of  their  years  may  ex- 


160  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

pose  them.  They  should  flee  youthful  lusts,  and 
be  very  cautious  to  abstain  from  vajiity  and  self 
conceit.  Their  introduction  at  so  early  a  period 
to  the  church,  is  very  apt  in  some  cases,  to  in- 
flate them  with  pride,  to  invest  them  with  self- 
importance,  and  impair  that  modesty  of  deport- 
ment, which  is  the  loveliest  ornament  of  their 
character.  In  all  their  conduct  towards  the 
church,  there  shoidd  be  an  amiable  retiredness 
of  disposition.  They  should  be  seen  at  the 
church  meetings,  but  very  rarely  heard.  It  is 
difficult  to  conceive  of  a  more  disgusting  or  mis- 
chievous spectacle,  than  a  young  member  dog- 
matically stating  his  opinion,  and  pertinaciously 
enforcing  it,  before  men,  who  were  grey  in  the 
service  of  God,  before  his  head  was  covered  with 
the  down  of  infancy. 

Young  Christians  should  be  very  careful  not 
to  form  matrimonial  connexio7is,  in  opposition  to 
the  apostolic  injunction,  "not  to  be  unequally 
yoked  together  with  unbelievers."  Both  reason 
and  revelation  unite  their  testimony  against  the 
practice  of  Christians  marrying  irreligious  per- 
sons. What  an  interruption  to  conjugal  com- 
fort, what  an  obstacle  to  domestic  piety,  what 
an  injury  to  the  cause  of  rehgion,  does  such  a 
practice  bring  with  it  I 

There  is  one  way,  in  which  young  Christians 
may  bring  great  reproach  upon  the  cause  of  God, 
and  that  is  by  engaging  the  affec«tions  of  a  fe- 


161 

male,  and  then  abandoning  her.  This  is  a  spe- 
cies of  cruelty  which  certainly  deserves,  and 
always  receives  the  severest  reprobation.  It  is 
dishonourable  in  a  man  of  the  world,  much  more 
in  a  church  member. 

VI.  Rich  members. 

It  is  true  our  churches  do  not  abound  with 
such  persons ;  but  enriched  as  our  cause  is,  with 
the  principles  of  divine  truth,  and  patronised  by 
the  smiles  of  Heaven,  we  can  dispense  with  the 
blazonry  and  patronage  of  secular  distinctions. 

There  are  men,  however,  who  amidst  the  ac- 
cumulations of  increasing  wealth,  remain  firmly 
attached  to  the  principles  of  the  gospel,  and  who 
delight  to  lavish  their  fortunes  in  supporting  the 
cause  they  love  and  espouse.  Let  tiiem  consider 
it  as  their  incumbent  duty,  to  consecrate  no 
small  portion  of  their  affluence,  not  merely  in 
propagating  the  principles  of  Christianity  abroad, 
but  upholding  the  cause  of  truth  at  liome.  The 
erection  of  chapels,  the  support  of  seminaries, 
the  maintenance  of  poor  ministers,  the  estabhsh- 
ment  of  churches,  should  with  them  be  an  object 
of  deep  anxiety. 

Let  them,  in  order  to  abound  more  and  more 
in  such  efforts,  as  well  as  to  exhibit  a  bright  ex- 
ample of  pure  and  undefiled  religion,  avoid  all 
unnecessary  ivorldly  conformity^  and  all  expensive 
modes  of  living.  Something  is  due  to  their  rank 
O 


162  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

and  station,  but  more  than  is  necessary,  ought 
not  to  be  conceded.  There  is  in  the  present  age 
a  disposition,  even  in  professing  Christians,  to  a 
showy  and  expensive  style  of  Hving,  which  can- 
not be  more  effectually  repressed,  than  by  the 
plain  and  simple  habits  of  those  who  are  known 
to  have  an  easy  access  to  all  the  elegancies  and 
splendours  of  life.  "Charge  them  that  are  rich 
in  this  world,  that  they  be  not  high-minded,  nor 
trust  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in  the  living  God, 
who  giveth  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy; 
that  they  do  good,  that  they  be  rich  in  good 
works,  ready  to  distribute,  willing  to  communi- 
cate." Such  was  the  admonition  of  St.  Paul  to 
Timothy,  from  which  we  gather,  that  rich  Chris- 
tians ought  to  be  far  more  anxious  to  lay  out 
than  to  lay  up  their  fortunes.  When  we  enter 
their  mansions  and  see  magnificence  in  every 
room,  luxury  on  every  table ;  when  we  see  their 
gay  equipage,  we  cannot  help  saying,  "How 
much  ought  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  who  lives  in  this 
manner,  to  give  away  to  the  cause  of  religion 
and  humanity,  before  he  is  justified  in  such  an 
expenditure."  There  appears  to  me  to  be  yet 
wanting,  o.  proportionate  liberality  on  the  part  of 
the  rich.  Their  efforts  bear  no  comparison  with 
those  of  the  middUng  classes,  and  of  the  poor. 
The  former  give  of  their  abundance,  the  latter 
of  their  Uttle  ;  at  most,  the  former  only  tax  their 


163 

luxuries,  but  the  latter,  their  comforts  and  neces- 
saries. 

Rich  Christians  should  be  exceedingly  attentive 
to  the  wants  and  comforts  of  their  poorer  brethren. 
There  is  a  great  lack  of  this,  in  the  churches  of 
Christ.  "  Whoso  hath  this  world's  goods,  and 
seeth  his  brother  have  need,  and  shutteth  up  his 
bowels  of  compassion  from  him,  how  dwelleth 
the  love  of  God  in  him?"  1  John  iii.  17.  Such 
persons  should  carefully  and  tenderly  inquire 
into  the  condition  of  the  poor,  and  not  content 
themselves  with  a  monthly  contribution  at  the 
Lord's  supper,  to  be  disposed  of  by  the  deacons. 
And  it  would  be  well  if  the  deacons  were  often 
to  go  to  the  habitations  of  the  more  affluent  mem- 
bers of  the  church,  and  lay  before  them  the  case 
of  their  destitute  brethren. 

The  more  wealthy  members  should  l)e  very 
cautious  not  to  assume  undue  power  in  the  govern- 
ment of  the  church.  The  distinctions  of  wealth 
have  no  place  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  No 
haughty  airs,  no  proud  scorn  of  the  opinions  of 
others  less  affluent  than  themselves,  no  over- 
bearing urgency  in  stating  their  own  views, 
should  ever  be  discovered  in  their  conduct  in 
the  transaction  of  church  business.  Their  su- 
perior wealth,  if  not  attended  with  a  spirit  of 
domination,  is  sure  in  every  case  to  procure  for 
them  all  the  deference  that  is  compatible  with 
the  independence  of  the  church. 


164  CHRISTIAN  FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

In  short,  the  vices  to  which  the  rich  are  more 
particularly  exposed,  and  against  which  they 
should  vigilantly  guard,  are,  pride,  haughtiness, 
love  of  money,  idleness,  self-indulgence,  luxury, 
worldly  conformity,  ecclesiastical  domination, 
and  oppression  of  the  poor.  The  virtues  they 
are  called  to  exercise  are,  gratitude  to  God, 
humility  and  condescension  to  men,  economy, 
temperance,  and  liberality,  together  with  tender 
sympathy  to  their  poorer  brethren,  and  a  gener- 
ous regard  to  the  support  of  the  cause  of  ptire 
religion,  and  general  benevolence. 

VII.  The  poor. 

Contentment  with  such  things  as  they  have, 
and  an  unmurmuring  submission  to  the  appoint- 
ment of  Providence,  are  most  obviously  their 
duty,  and  should  be  conspicuously  manifested  in 
all  their  deportment.  It  should  not  appear  as 
if  they  thought  it  hard,  that  their  lot  was  cast 
in  the  humble  vale  of  poverty.  A  cheerful  resig- 
nation to  the  irremediable  ills  of  their  station,  a 
frame  of  mind  that  looks  as  if  they  were  so 
grateful  for  the  blessings  of  grace,  as  to  be  al- 
most insensible  to  the  privations  of  poverty,  is 
one  of  the  ways  in  which  poor  Christians  may 
signally  glorify  God. 

The  poor  should  watch  against  an  envious 
spirit.  "  Grudge  not  one  against  another,"  said 
the  apostle.    They  should  be  conspicuous  for 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  165 

their  industry,  nor  wish  to  eat  the  bread  of  idle- 
ness. "  For  this  is  commanded  you,  that  if  any 
would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat.  For 
some  walk  among  you  disorderly,  working  not 
at  all,  but  are  busy  bodies.  Such  we  command 
and  exhort  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  with 
quietness  they  work  and  eat  their  own  bread." 
2  Thes.  iii.  10 — 12.  The  poor  have  no  right, 
therefore,  to  expect,  that  in  consequence  of  their 
association  with  a  Christian  church,  they  are  in 
any  measure  released  from  the  obligation  of  the 
most  unwearied  industry.  They  are  not  to  be 
supported  by  the  society,  in  idleness,  nor  ought 
they  to  look  for  any  pecuniary  allowance  while 
able  to  provide  for  themselves  and  their  family.  The 
rehgion  of  Jesus  Christ  was  never  intended  to 
establish  a  system  of  religious  pauperism.  It  is 
to  be  feared,  that  not  a  few  have  entered  into 
Christian  fellowship,  on  purpose  to  share  its  funds. 
This  is  an  awful  case,  wherever  it  occurs,  and 
should  make  all  the  poor  members  of  our 
churches  tremble  at  the  most  distant  approxima- 
tion to  such  a  crime. 

The  only  times  in  which  members  should  feel 
that  they  have  claims  upon  the  funds  collected 
at  the  Lord's  supper,  are,  when  sickness  has  en- 
tered their  dwelling,  when  age  has  incapacitated 
them  for  labour,  or  when  the  produce  of  their 


166  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

industry  is  too  scanty  to  procure  the  necessary 
comforts  of  life.* 


*  It  is  a  question  that  has  been  sometimes  agitated, 
whether  it  is  right  for  a  church  to  allow  the  members 
to  apply  for  assistance  from  the  town.  Such  a  question 
however  may  be  set  at  rest  by  a  law,  which,  where  it 
really  exists,  allows  of  no  farther  appeal ;  I  mean  the 
law  of  necessity.  Some  churches  are  composed  in  a 
great  measure  of  poor  persons,  and  even  of  the  remain- 
der who  are  not  poorj,  there  are  few  above  the  rank  of 
small  tradesmen.  In  this  case,  when  trade  is  bad,  and 
disease  is  prevalent,  it  is  next  to  impossible,  if  not  quite 
80,  for  the  church  to  relieve  all  the  wants  of  its  mem- 
bers. But  setting  aside  this  extreme  case,  what  law 
is  violated,  what  obligation  is  broken  through,  by  our 
members  applying  for  a  portion  of  that  property,  which 
is  collected  for  them  no  less  than  others,  and  to  which 
Ihey  are  legally  entitled  in  common  with  others  ?  There 
can  be  nothing  wrong  on  the  part  of  the  poor  them- 
selves in  applying  for  this  relief,  unless  they  are  so  well 
provided  for  by  the  church  as  not  to  need  it.  In  this 
case  their  application  would  be  manifestly  an  imposi- 
tion. The  only  question  is,  whether  a  church,  tolera- 
bly favoured  with  affluent  numbers,  ought  to  allow  such 
application.  It  would  certainly  be  an  act  of  great  gene- 
rosity in  such  a  church,  to  render  their  members  indepen- 
dent of  assistance  from  the  town  :  but  I  do  not  see  by 
whatlawthisis  actually  their  duty.  We  stand  in  a  double 
relationship  to  the  poor,  as  fellow-citizens  and  fellow- 
Christians  ;  in  our  former  connexion  we  may  ask  for 
them  a  share  of  a  civil  fund,  while  in  the  latter  we  re- 
lieve them  from  a  still  more  sacred  source.     The  poor 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  167 

The  poor  should  not  be  exorbitant  in  their  ex- 
pectations of  rehef ;  and  should  the  bounty  of 
the  church  flow  less  freely  towards  them  than 
they  have  reason  and  right  to  look  for,  they 
should  not  indulge  in  the  language  of  reproach 
and  complaint.  Not  that  they  are  forbidden  in 
mild  and  modest  language  to  represent  their 
situation  to  the  deacons. 

They  should  be  particularly  careful  not  to 
manifest  an  encroaching  and  begging  disposition. 
I  have  known  cases,  in  which  the  greatest  dis- 
gust and  the  most  unconquerable  prejudice, 
have  been  excited  against  individuals,  by  their 
proneness  to  beg  of  every  one  who  visited  them, 
till  at  length  their  fellow-members,  wearied  too 
soon  it  must  be  admitted,  with  the  language  of 
perpetual  complaint  and  petition,  have  left  oflfto 
visit  them  altogether. 

Cleanliness  is  a  very  incumbent  duty  of  the  poor. 
Their  cottages  may  be  lowly,  but  certainly 
need  not  be  dirty.  Filthiness  is  one  species  of 
vice,  and  cleanliness  is  not  only  next  to  godliness, 
hut  a.  part  of  it.  The  credit  of  rehgion  often 
depends  on  little  things,  and  this  is  one  of  them. 


by  entering  our  churches  do  not  forfeit  any  of  their 
civil  rights,  and  since  they  are  legally  eniitled  to  the 
assistance  of  their  fellow-subjects,  it  is  not  necessary 
that  we  should  take  upon  ourselves  as  Christians,  those 
burdens  which  others  are  bound  to  sustain  as  citizens. 


168  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

VIII.  Tradesmen. 

A  very  large  number  of  our  church  members 
are  engaged  in  the  pursuits  of  trade,  manufac- 
ture, or  commerce  ;  and,  from  their  very  calUng, 
are  exposed  to  pecuhar  dangers,  which  must  be 
met  with  proportionate  vigilance. 

It  is  highly  incumbent  upon  them  to  take 
care  against  a  ivorldly  spirit.  They  are  in 
extreme  peril  of  losing  the  power  of  godliness 
from  their  hearts,  and  joining  the  number  of 
those,  of  whom  it  is  said  in  the  expressive  lan- 
guage of  St.  Paul,  that  "  they  mind  earthly 
things."  Such  persons  look  upon  the  possession 
of  wealth  as  "the  one  thing  needful."  It  is 
their  chief  object  of  pursuit,  the  chief  source  of 
happiness.  Nothing  modifies  or  mitigates  the 
desire  of  riches.  They  are  of  the  earth,  earthy. 
Now  certainly  a  Christian  tradesman  is,  or  ought 
to  be,  of  another  spirit  than  this.  He  should  be 
industrious,  frugal,  and  persevering  in  his  atten- 
tion to  the  concerns  of  this  world  ;  but  still  there 
should  be  in  his  mind  an  ultimate  and  supreme 
regard  to  the  possession  of  everlasting  life.  He 
ought  not  to  be  slothful  in  business,  but  then  he 
must  be  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord.  He 
should  be  seen  to  unit  the  clever  tradesman  and 
sincere  Christian ;  and  to  be  busy  for  both  worlds. 
The  men  of  this  world  should  be  constrained  to 
Bay  of  him,  "  This  man  is  as  attentive  to  busi- 
ness, and  as  clever  in  it  as  we  are ;   but  we  can 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  169 

perceive  in  all  he  does,  an  inflexible  regard  to 
principle,  an  invariable  reference  to  religion. 
We  can  discover  no  lack  of  diligence  or  pru- 
dence ;  but  it  is  perfectly  evident,  that  his  heart 
and  highest  hope  are  in  heaven.  He  is  neither 
so  elated  in  prosperity,  nor  so  depressed  in  ad- 
versity, as  we  are.  He  has  some  secret  source 
of  happiness,  of  wliich  we  are  not  possessed; 
and  his  eye  is  upon  some  standard  of  action, 
which  we  do  not  recognise.  He  is  a  ChriMian 
as  well  as  tradesman." 

What  a  testimony  !  who  can  obtain  a  higher 
one  ?  who  should  seek  less  ? 

There  are  many  snares  to  which  a  Christian 
tradesman  is  pecuharly  exposed  in  the  present 
mode  of  conducting  business.  The  stream  of 
trade  no  longer  glides  along  its  old  accustomed 
channel,  where  established  and  ordinary  causes 
impelled  its  motions  and  guided  its  course ;  but 
under  the  violent  operation  of  new  and  power- 
ful impulses,  it  has  of  late  years  started  from 
its  course,  and  with  the  rapidity  of  a  torrent 
or  the  force  of  an  inundation,  has  swept  away  the 
restraint  of  religious  principle,  and  carried  a 
deluge  of  dishonesty  over  the  moral  world. 

It  is  quite  tune   for  Christian   tradesmen,   to 

return  iu  their  mode  of  conducting  business,  to 

the  sound  principles  of  Christian  morality.     Let 

them  beware  of  excessive  speculation^  and  where 

P 


170  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

the  property  with  which  they  trade,  is  scarcely 
their  own,  let  them  err  rather  on  the  side  of 
caution  than  of  enterprise.  Let  them  beware 
of  all  dishonourable  means  of  proping  up  a 
sinking  credit.  Let  them  view  with  abhor- 
rence, those  practices  which  are  resorted  to  only 
by  rogues  and  swindlers.  Let  them  tremble  and 
blush  at  a  single  effort  to  extricate  themselves 
from  difficulty,  which  the  world  would  condemn 
as  unfair  or  dishonourable.  Let  their  motto  be, 
"  whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things 
are  honest,  whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatso- 
ever things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are 
lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report,  if 
there  be  any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise^ 
think  on  these  things."*     Phil.  iv.  7. 

A  Christian  should  be  careful  not  to  conceal 
too  long,  the  fact  of  his  being  in  a  state  of  insol- 
vency. A  false  pride,  or  a  foolish  hope,  has  led 
many,  to  the  dishonour  of  their  profession,  to 
go  on  floundering  in  difficulties,  while  every 
struggle  has  only  carried  them  farther  and  far- 
ther into  the  current  of  ruin,  till  at  length  their 
fortune  and  their  character  have  sunk  together, 
to  rise  no  more.  I  do  not  say  that  a  man  ought 
in  every  case  to  call  his  creditors  together  the 
moment  that  he  discovers  he  cannot  pay  twenty 


*  See  Dr.  Chalmer's  admirable  sermons  on  the  moral 
principles  of  trade. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  171 

shillings  in  the  pound  ;  but  he  certainly  ought 
to  do  it  without  delay,  as  soon  as  he  ceases  tq 
hope  that  he  shall  ultimately  do  so.^ 

Every  Christian  tradesman  should  be  very 
watchful  against  those  artifices,  violations  of  truth, 
and  unfair  advantages,  which  many  resort  to  in  the 
disposalof  their  articles.  It  might  indeed  have 
become  the  general  practice  ;  but  tricks  of  trade, 
if  contrary  to  truth  and  honesty,  are  clear  and 
flagrant  violations  of  religious  duty.  No  preva- 
lence of  custom  can  make  that  right,  which  in 
itself  is  wrong.  The  standard  of  a  Christian's 
morality  is  the  Bible  ;  and  whatever  is  opposed 
to  that,  he  must  avoid  and  abhor. 

A  tradesman  who  makes  a  profession  of  reli- 
gion, should  he  most  eminent  for  justice,  truth,  hon- 
our, and  generosity,  in  all  his  dealings.  His  reli-' 
gion  should  be  seen  in  all  his  conduct.  "  I  know 
nothing  of  that  man's  creed,"  said  a  person,  of 
a  rehgious    tradesman    with   whom  he   dealt. 


*  I  think  there  should  be  a  standing  rule  in  every 
church,  that  any  member  who  becomes  insolvent, 
should  be  suspended  from  communion,  till  opportunity 
has  been  afforded,  to  inquire  whether  his  failure  has 
been  attended  with  circumstances  dishonourable  to  his 
Christian  profession.  This  may  be  very  soon  and  very 
easily  ascertained.  If  three  or  four  of  the  principal 
creditors  are  satisfied  that  his  conduct  has  not  been  dis- 
honourable, this  might  be  sufl&cient  to  satisfy  the  church 
in  ordinary  cases. 


172  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP. 

"  because  I  never  asked  him  what  he  beUeved ; 
but  a  more  honourable,  punctual,  generous 
tradesman,  I  never  met  with  in  my  Hfe.  I  would 
as  soon  take  his  word  for  a  thousand  pounds, 
as  I  would  another  man's  bond  for  a  shilling. 
Whatever  he  promises  he  performs,  and  to  the 
time  also."  This  is  adorning  the  doctrine  of  God 
his  Saviour  in  all  things. 

It  is  very  dishonourable,  when  a  Christian 
tradesman  is  actuated  by  a  spirit  of  envy  and  jeal- 
ousy towards  others,  and  when  he  employs  ungen- 
erous means  to  prevent  their  success.  No  one 
has  an  exclusive  monopoly,  except  in  the  case 
of  patents.  Others  have  as  much  right  to  live 
where  they  like,  as  we  have.  It  is  their  world 
as  well  as  ours  :  and  to  employ  our  wealth  in 
any  case  to  ruin  them,  by  underselling,  is  a  spirit 
perfectly  incompatible  with  the  genius  of  reli- 
gion, and  the  nature  of  Christian  fellowship. 
Such  an  envious  person  deserves  excommuni- 
cation, not  only  from  the  church  of  God,  but 
from  the  society  of  rational  creatures. 

It  is  perfectly  obvious,  that  the  tradesman 
ought  to  regulate  his  expenditure  hy  his  income. 
The  man  that  lives  beyond  his  resources  is  a 
robber  and  a  thief.  His  extravagance  is  sup- 
ported by  the  property  of  others,  and  as  it  is 
taken  without  their  consent,  it  is  a  felony,  for 
which  he  is  answerable,  if  not  at  the  bar  of  man, 
yet  certainly  at  the  tribunal  of  God. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS. 

On  the  true  JVature  of  Church  Power. 

In  our  conversation  upon  the  subject  of  church 
government,  it  is  very  common  to  talk  of  the 
power,  or  authority  of  our  churches.  But  in 
what  does  this  power  really  consist,  and  how  far 
does  it  extend  ?  Every  society  has  certainly  an 
unquestionable  right  to  regulate  all  its  own  tem- 
poral and  spiritual  affairs,  to  the  entire  exclusion 
of  all  human  interference  and  control  whatever. 
But  we  must  be  careful,  not  to  carry  the  idea  of 
independence  so  far  as  to  trench  upon  the  do- 
minion of  .Jesus  Christ.  The  power  of  a  church 
is  simply  a  right  to  put  their  own  construction 
upon  the  laws  of  Christ,  and  to  obey  his  laws, 
in  the  way  in  which  they  think  will  be  most 
agreeable  to  him.  This  is  neither  understood 
nor  remembered  with  as  much  distinctness  as 
it  should  be.  Hence  it  is  a  very  usual  thing  for 
churches  at  their  stated,  or  occasional  meetings, 


174  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

to  cbiisider  themselves  as  met  to  make  laws,  and 
set  in  order  the  affah's  of  the  spiritual  kingdom ; 
and  a  great  deal  is  said  about  "  our  church,"  and 
"  the  rules  that  ive  have  established  in  oitr  church." 
Our  church  I !  How  came  it  ours  ?  The  church 
is  Christ's.  The  rules  we  have  established ! ! 
The  sole  right  of  making  laws,  is  with  Him  to 
whom  the  church  belongs.  The  church  is  a 
kingdom,  of  which  Christ  is  sole  monarch,  the 
New  Testament  is  his  spiritual  code^  and  all  the 
power  we  have,  is  to  execute  the  laws  which 
he  has  already  established.  In  the  whole  bu- 
siness of  church  government,  we  are  to  ac- 
knowledge the  authority,  and  consider  ourselves 
as  doing  the  will  of  Christ.  Nothing  is  left  to 
oiisr  will,  to  our  wisdom,  to  our  caprice ;  but  in 
all  things  we  are  to  be  guided  by  the  law  of  Je- 
sus, laid  down  in  his  word. 

In  the  choice  of  officers,  in  the  admission  of 
members,  in  the  exercise  of  discipline,  we  are 
not  to  act  upon  views  and  principles  of  our  own, 
but  are  to  be  guided  by  those  we  find  in  the 
New  Testament.  We  have  no  power  to  legis- 
late, but  merely  to  interpret  the  law  and  obey. 
When  we  meet,  Christ  is  in  the  midst  of  us,  not 
only  by  his  essential  presence,  but  by  his  reveal- 
ed will :  and  every  authoritative  voice  is  hush- 
ed, but  that  which  speaks  to  us  from  the  sacred 
canon.  When  a  member  is  proposed,  we  are 
not  to  ask,  "  Is  he  such  an  one  as  we  think  will 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  175 

add  respectability  to  our  communion  ;  is  he  of 
long  standing  in  the  ways  of  God  ;  is  he  pecu- 
liar in  his  habits  ?  "  but,  "  Is  he  such  an  one  as 
Christ  has  received  ?  "  When  a  measure  is  sub- 
mitted for  our  adoption,  we  are  not  first  to  in- 
quire into  its  pohcy,  but  whether  it  is  in  exact 
accordance  with  the  general  principles  and  spir- 
it of  the  New  Testament.  Every  act  of  church 
government  must  be  an  explicit  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  authority  of  Jesus,  as  King  in  Zion, 
and  an  act  of  obedience  to  his  laws.  With  re- 
spect to  all  human  authority,  our  power  is  legis- 
latorial, but  in  reference  to  Christ  purely  execu- 
tive. 

On  the  Mode  of  conducting  Church  Meetings. 

Eveiy  well  regulated  church  will  have  its 
solemn  and  stated  meetings  for  conducting  the 
business  necessarily  connected  with  its  existence 
and  progress.  Many  ministers  have  imbibed  a 
prejudice  against  these  meetings,  and  like 
Charles  the  First,  who,  not  finding  the  parlia- 
ment as  suppliant  as  he  could  ^vish,  determin- 
ed to  govern  without  parliaments  altogether, 
they  have  resolved  to  rule  without  calling  the 
church  together,  except,  at  least,  on  extraordi- 
nary emergencies.  I  admit  that  church  meet- 
ings have  been  abused  ;  but  this  has  been  more 
firequently  the  fault  of  the  pastor,  than  the  peo- 


176  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

pie.  They  have  sometmies  exhibited  scenes  of 
confusion,  httle  recommendatory  of  the  demo- 
cratic form  of  chm-ch  government.  This,  how- 
ever, is  not  the  error  of  the  system,  but  the  im- 
proper way  ill  which  it  is  administered.  When 
ignorance  or  imprudence  is  elevated  to  the 
chair,  order  and  decorum  cannot  be  looked  for 
in  the  assembly. 

It  would  conduce  to  the  order  of  church  meet- 
ings, if  it  were  much  inculcated  by  the  pastor, 
and  generally  understood  by  the  people,  that 
they  were  meetings  for  devotion,  and  not  for  de- 
bate. They  should  ever  be  attended  with  the 
usual  services  of  a  prayer-meeting,  i.  e.  with 
singing,  supplication,  and  ministerial  exhorta- 
tion. If  business  is  to  be  done,  it  should  be 
thus  introduced,  and  transacted  in  the  spirit, 
and  amidst  the  services  of  devotion.  These 
times  of  assembling  should  be  periodical ;  for 
when  they  are  only  occasional,  they  lose  the 
character  of  devotional  seasons,  assume  the 
form  of  business  meetings,  to  which  the  mem- 
bers come  prepared  for  protracted  and  general 
discussion. 

All  the  proceedings  at  a  church  meeting  should 
either  emanate  directly  from  the  pastor,  or  from 
others  by  Ms  previous  knowledge  and  consent. 
The  president  of  every  society,  and  of  every 
meeting,  ought  to  be  acquainted  with  all  the  bu- 
siness which  is  to  be  transacted  by  the  assem- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  177 

bly.  He  announces  and  explains  the  object  of 
their  being  convened,  and  regulates  the  discus- 
sions which  ensue.  Every  case,  therefore,  that 
is  to  be  laid  before  the  church,  should  be  stated 
by  the  pastor,  who,  like  the  judge  upon  the 
bench,  is  to  show  what  the  law  saith  touching  the 
business  in  hand.  If  this  be  neglected,  and  the 
members  are  allowed  to  introduce  any  business 
which  they  please,  our  church  meetings  would 
very  soon  resemble  the  scene  which  was  exhib- 
ited at  the  base  of  the  tower  of  Babel.  An  at- 
tention to  this  single,  simple  circumstance,  will 
very  much  tend  to  ensure  the  order  and  harmo- 
ny of  our  meetings. 

As  LITTLE  DISCUSSION  AS  IS  REALLY  POSSI- 
BLE, should  take  place  at  our  church  meetings. 
The  admonition  of  the  apostle  is  always  in  sea- 
son, but  never  more  so  than  in  reference  to  the 
times  of  the  assernbhng  of  the  saints:  "  Let  ev- 
ery man  be  slow  to  speak."  Nothing  but  the 
most  obvious  necessity,  should  induce  a  single 
individual  to  utter  a  syllable  ;  and  when  any  one 
does  deliver  his  opinion,  it  should  not  be  in  a 
prating,  dogmatical  manner,  but  in  few  words 
modestly  spoken.  Not  only  the  pastor,  but  the 
people  themselves,  should  discourage  those  for- 
ward, obtrusive  spirits,  to  whom  no  music  or 
melody  is  so  pleasant  as  the  sound  of  their  own 
voice.  Talking  assemblies,  soon  become  disor- 
derly ones.    A  wise  and  prudent  minister  will 


178  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

set  his  face  against  them  ;    and  a  wise  and  pru- 
dent church  will  support  him  in  this  conduct. 

It  is,  of  course,  no  less  the  interest  than  the 
duty  of  the  society,  to  support,  at  all  its  meetings, 
the  just  and  scriptural  authority  of  the  pastor. 
He  should  never  be  addressed  but  in  the  most 
courteous  and  respectful  manner,  and  every  ex- 
pression of  rudeness  or  insult  should  be  marked 
with  the  disapprobation  of  the  members  pres- 
ent. 

On  the  Admission  of  Members  to  the  Church. 

When  an  individual  is  known  to  be  desirous 
of  fellowship,  information  of  this  should  be  con- 
veyed without  delay  to  the  pastor,  who  upon 
conversing  with  the  person,  and  making  suita- 
ble inquiries  about  his  character  and  conduct, 
must  be  considered  at  liberty,  either  to  mention 
him  as  a  candidate  for  fellowship,  Or  not,  ac- 
cording as  his  views  shall  dictate.  No  member 
should  presume  to  bring  forward  a  candidate, in 
opposition  to  the  ophiion  of  the  pastor.  It  is  of 
course  to  be  expected,  that  he  will  never  reject 
an  individual,  but  upon  grounds,  which  appear 
to  him  to  be  quite  sufficient,  and  which  he  will, 
without  hesitation  or  reserve,  communicate  to 
the  person  himself. 

On  the  part  of  the  church,  there  is  sometimes 
a  very  unscriptural  reluctance  to  receive  persons 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  179 

into  membership,  till  after  they  have  had  a  long 
trial  of  their  Christian  steadfastness  and  integri- 
ty. It  is  very  common  for  some  members  to  ex- 
claim in  surprise,  when  the  name  of  a  candi- 
date is  mentioned  to  them  in  secret,  "AVh  at,  is 
he  going  to  be  proposed  to  the  church  ?  why,  he 
he  has  not  been  converted  three  months."  I 
wish  these  over-cautious  Christians  to  tell  me, 
what  length  of  time  ought  to  elapse  after  con- 
version, and  before  the  individual  is  introduced 
to  communion  ?  Has  Jesus  Christ  stated  any 
term  of  probation,  which  we  must  pass  through 
before  we  are  received  into  the  church  ?  Cer- 
tainly not.  What  right  then  have  we  to  fix  up- 
on any  ?  Is  it  not  establishing  terms  of  com- 
munion, which  he  has  not  established  ?  Is  not 
this  a  direct  invasion  of  his  authority  ?  If  we 
consult  the  precedents  furnislied  by  the  prac- 
tice of  the  apostles,  they  most  decisively  con- 
demn the  overstrained  caution  of  those,  who 
would  put  a  Christian  upon  the  trial  of  a  year 
or  two,  before  he  is  admitted  to  communion. 
The  very  day  in  which  a  man  professed  himself 
a  Christian,  he  was  added  to  the  church.  In 
fact,  his  joining  himself  to  the  church,  was  his 
profession.  I  would  have  every  step  taken  to 
inquire  into  the  knowledge,  faith,  and  conduct 
of  an  individual  who  proposes  himself  for  fel- 
lowship ;  and  if  they  are  satisfactory,  I  would 
admit  him,  although  he  had  been  converted  but 


180  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

a  single  month ;  and  I  call  upon  the  person 
who  would  refuse  to  join  in  such  admission,  to 
show  on  what  ground  he  acts.  Let  him  not 
talk  about  the  necessity  of  caution,  and  the  pos- 
sibility of  being  deceived ;  this  is  very  true,  but 
it  must  not  be  allowed  to  interfere  with  the 
rules,  vrhich  Christ  has  laid  down  for  the  gov- 
ernment of  his  church.  Our  views  of  policy 
cannot  improve  his  institutions,  and  ought  not 
to  oppose  the  practice  of  his  apostles.  The 
rule  of  our  proceeding  is  simply  this,  "  We  must 
receive  those  whom  we  think  the  Lord  hath  re- 
ceived." Abandon  this  rule,  and  we  have  no 
directory  for  our  conduct.  One  person  may 
think  a  year's  trial  enough,  but  another  may 
think  two  years'  necessary.  It  is  truly  shock- 
ing, to  see  how  many  excellent  and  exemplary 
Christians  are  kept  by  some  churches  month 
after  month  at  a  distance  from  the  fellowship 
of  the  faithful,  under  the  pretence  of  trying 
their  steadfastness.  "  We  must  not  take  the 
children's  bread,"  say  these  ultra  cautious  disci- 
ples, "  and  cast  it  to  the  dogs."  Nor  have  you 
a  right  to  starve  the  children,  any  more  than 
you  have  to  pamper  the  dogs.  Our  rule  is  this, 
"evidence  of  personal  rehgion,  whether  that  ev- 
idence be  the  result  of  a  month  or  a  year." 

The  Lord's  supper  is  intended  no  less  for 
babes,  than  fathers  in  Christ;  and  who  will 
contend  that  the  right  way  to  treat  a  new  bom 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  181 

infant,  is  to  neglect  him,  and  leave  him  to  him- 
self, to  see  whether  he  will  hve  ? — to  nurse  and 
feed  him  is  the  ordained  means  to  preserve  his 
life.  It  is  precisely  the  same  in  spirituals  as  in 
temporals.  And  if  it  be  proper  to  say  of  a  child 
that  died  in  consequence  of  neglect,  that  he 
would  have  lived  if  proper  care  had  been  taken, 
it  is  not  less  correct  to  say  of  some  persons  that 
once  appeared  hopeful,  but  afterwards  returned 
to  the  world,  they  would  have  proved  honoura- 
ble Christians,  had  they  not  been  neglected  by 
the  church. 

The  same  unscriptural  caution  is  sometimes 
displayed  towards  those  converts,  who  are  young 
in  years.  It  is  surprising  to  see  what  a  panic 
some  members  are  thrown  into,  when  a  young 
person  is  proposed  as  a  candidate  for  fellow- 
ship ;  and  if  they  happen  to  discover  that  the 
youth  is  only  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  of  age, 
they  seem  to  feel  as  if  the  church  was  either 
going  to  be  profaned  or  destroyed.  Is  there, 
then,  a  canonical  age  of  membership  ?  Is  the 
same  rule  established  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ, 
which  is  observed  in  the  kingdoms  of  the 
world,  and  every  one  considered  as  unfit  for  the 
privileges  of  citizenship,  till  he  arrive  at  the 
age  of  one  and  twenty  ?  If  not,  what  right 
have  we  to  speak  or  think  about  the  age  of  a 
candidate  ?  Piety  is  all  we  have  to  inquire  in- 
to ;  and  whether  the  individual  be  fourteen,  or 


182  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

fourscore,  we  are  to  receive  him,  provided  we 
have  reason  to  suppose,  "  that  Christ  has  receiv- 
ed him." 

The  MODE  OF  ADMISSION  is  various  in  differ- 
ent churches.  The  church  is  to  receive  the 
member,  and  any  mode  which  they  may  adopt 
to  ascertain  the  sincerity  of  his  piety,  is  lawful, 
provided  that  it  is  not  so  rigid,  as  to  deter  per- 
sons from  applying  for  admission.  In  every 
case,  the  church  ought  to  have  the  means  of  as- 
certaining the  piety  of  the  individuals ;  without 
this  there  can  be  no  real  communion.  In  some 
churches  the  pastor  only,  examines  the  candi- 
date :  But  this  is  too  great  a  power  to  delegate 
to  a  man,  and  too  great  a  responsibility  for  any 
man  willingly  to  incur.*  It  is  deeply  interest- 
ing to  hear  a  simple,, artless  account  of  sinner's 
conversion  from  his  own  lips  ;  and  then  by  his 
particularizing  the  very  sermons  which  were 
the  means  of  his  conversion,  he  helps  in  no 
small  degree  to  raise  the  pastor  in  the  estima- 
tion of  the  church,  by  these  proofs  of  his  use- 
fulness and  success,  and  to  endear  him  to  their 
hearts. 


*  In  most  of  our  American  churches,  candidates  are 
required  to  appear  before  the  assembled  church,  and 
detail  the  methods  of  grace  by  which  God  brought 
them  to  his  knowledge  and  service.  Ed. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  183 

On  Discipline. 

By  discipline,  is  meant,  the  right  treatment  of 
offending  members.  The  church  which  neglects 
this  dut}^,  resembles  a  state  in  which  the  admin- 
istration of  justice  is  omitted,  and  crime  is  per- 
mitted to  be  practised  with  impunity.  That 
part  of  the  design  of  church  union,  which  con- 
sists in  mutual  watchfulness,  is  lost ;  backsliders 
are  encouraged  to  go  farther  astray,  hypocrites 
are  patronized  in  their  self-delusion,  the  ruin  of 
men's  souls  abetted,  the  society  is  corrupted, 
and  the  honour  of  religion  is  compromised.  It 
is  this  sin  which  the  apostle  describes  in  those 
awful  words,  "If  any  man  defile  the  temple  of 
God,  him  shall  God  destroy."  The  church  is 
that  temple,  and  to  defile  it,  is  to  introduce  im- 
proper members  to  its  communion,  or  to  toler- 
ate them  in  the  practice  of  sin.  To  suffer  of- 
fences to  be  committed  from  time  to  time,  with- 
out being  noticed  and  removed,  must  be  as  dis- 
pleasing in  the  sight  of  God,  as  it  would  have 
been,  if  the  Jews  had  permitted  any  filthy  sub- 
stances to  remain  in  the  temple  of  Solomon,  or 
had  swept  the  impurities  of  the  sacrifices  into 
the  holy  of  holies.  A  single  unpunished  trans- 
gressor troubled  the  whole  camp  of  Israel,  and 
brought  calamity  upon  a  nation  ;  nor  could  the 
favour  of  God  rest  upon  the  people,  till  Achan 
was  discovered  and  destroyed.      Nothing  can 


184  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

be  conceived  of,  more  likely  to  grieve  the  Holy 
Spirit,  or  to  induce  him  to  withdraw  his  gracious 
influence  from  a  church,  than  a  neglect  of  scrip- 
tural discipline.  And  it  is  worth  while  to  ex- 
amine, whether  this  is  not  one  of  the  causes  of 
the  dechning  state  of  many  Christian  societies. 

The  advantages  of  discipline  are  obvious  and 
numerous.  It  reclaims  backsliders,  it  detects 
hypocrites,  it  circulates  a  secret  and  salutary 
awe  through  the  church,  supplies  an  additional 
incentive  to  watchfulness  and  prayer,  by  exhibit- 
ing at  once  the  most  affecting  proofs  of  human 
frailty,  and  the  painful  consequences  resulting 
from  its  exposure ;  while  in  addition,  it  is  a  pub- 
lic testimony,  borne  by  the  church,  against  all 
unrighteousness. 

Here  several  things  deserve  particular  consid- 
eration. 

I.  What  offences  should  become  subject  to 
discipline. 

1.  Of  course,  all  scandalous  vices  and  immor- 
alities. "  Not  to  keep  company,  if  any  man  that 
is  called  a  brother,  be  a  fornicator,  or  covetous, 
or  an  idolater,  or  a  railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an 
extortioner,  with  such  an  one,  no  not  to  eat — 
put  away  from  yourselves  that  wicked  person," 
(mentioned  verse  1,)  1  Cor.  v.  11 — 13. 

2.  The  denial  of  essential  articles  of  the 
Christian  faith,  and  persisting  in  the  elrror. 


185 

"  But  though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven, 
preach  any  other  gospel  to  you  than  that  we  have 
preached,  let  him  be  accursed."  Gal.  i.  8.  "  Of 
whom  is  Hymeneus  and  Philetus,  who,  concern- 
ing the  truth,  have  erred,  saying  the  resurrec- 
tion is  past  already,  and  overthrow  the  faith  of 
some — whom  I  deliver  to  Satan."  2  Tim.  ii. 
17,  18.  "If  any  man  teach  otherwise,  and  con- 
sent not  to  the  words  of  Christ  and  sound  doc- 
trine, according  to  godliness — from  such  with- 
drawthyself"  lTim.vi.3 — 5.  "If  there  come  any 
unto  you  and  bring  not  this  doctrine,  receive  him 
not  into  your  house,  neither  bid  him  God  speed; 
for  he  that  biddeth  him  God  speed,  is  a  partaker 
of  bis  deeds."  2  John  10,  11.  Nothing  can  be 
more  plain  than  that  these  passages  require  us 
to  separate  from  our  communion  those  who 
deny  what  we  consider  to  be  the  essential  ar- 
ticles of  our  faith.  Every  church  has  an  indu- 
bitable right  of  determining  for  themselves,  what 
they  consider  to  be  fundamental  truths ;  they 
should,  however,  be  extremely  cautious,  not  to 
set  up  other  truths  than  those  which  are  estab- 
lished in  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  difficult  to  say, 
where  forbearance  should  terminate,  and  disci- 
phne  begin ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the 
path  of  duty,  when  a  member  denies  the  divini- 
ty, atonement,  and  spiritual  influence  of  our 
blessed  Lord.  With  such  a  person,  it  is  impoa* 
Q 


186  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

sible  to  have  any  spiritual  communion,  and  we 
ought  not  to  hold  with  him  any  visible  union. 
Reason  as  well  as  revelation  forbids  it. 

3.  Disturbing  the  peace  of  the  church  in  any 
way,  is  an  offence  that  imperatively  demands 
the  exercise  of  discipline. 

"A  man  that  is  a  heretic,'^'  after  the  first  and 
second  admonition  reject."  Titus  iii.  10.  "I 
would  they  were  cut  off  that  trouble  j'ou."  Gal. 
V.  12.  "  Mark  them  which  cause  divisions,  and 
avoid  them."  Rom.  xvi.  17.  "We  command 
you,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  that  ye  withdraw  yourselves  from  every 
brother  tliat  Avalks  disorderly."     2  Thes.  iii.  6. 

We  are  here  taught,  that  if  any  man  disturb 
the  peace,  or  break  the  unity  of  the  church,  no 
matter  in  what  way,  whether  by  insinuating 
that  the  pastor  does  not  preach  the  gospel,  or 
by  forming  a  party  against  him,  or  by  raising  up 
a  division  to  oppose  the  proceedings  of  the  so- 
ciety in  a  factious  and  contentious  manner,  he 
must  without  delay  be  dealt  with  as  an  offender. 
He  may  be  a  moral,  and  in  appearance  a  holy  man, 
but  this  is  not  to  screen  him  from  discipline:  on 


*  The  word  here  translated  heretic  signifies,  rather 
the  author  and  leader  of  a  party,  whatever  his  opinions 
may  be,  than  one  who  holds  erroneous  sentiments.  It 
means  a  factious  person,  who  raises  a  sect  in  the  so- 
ciety, whether  the  ground  of  their  association  be  a  mat- 
ter of  feeling  or  opinion. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  187 

the  contrary,  these  very  qualities  enable  him,  if 
suffered  to  continue,  to  do  the  greater  mischief 
A  factious  temper,  when  united  with  reputed 
sanctity,  is  the  most  dangerous  character  that 
can  exist  in  a  Christian  society.  An  immoral 
man  can  do  little  harm ;  his  vices  have  a  repel- 
lent power  to  drive  away  from  him,  all  who 
have  a  regard  for  their  own  reputation  ;  but  a 
iiian  who,  under  the  guise  of  piety,  becomes  a 
troubler  of  Israel,  will  be  a  troubler  indeed.  He 
should  be  instantly  called  to  account  for  his  con- 
duct, and  if  not  reclaimed  by  mild  and  affection- 
ate adraouition,  separated  from  communion. 
As  long  as  the  church  contains  such  an  indi- 
vidual, it  is  cherishing  a  viper  in  its  bosom. 

4.  Suffering  near  relatives  to  want  the  neces- 
saries of  life,  when  able  to  relieve  them. 

"If  any  man  provide  not  for  his  own  house, 
he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an 
infidel."  1  Tim.  v.  8. 

5.  Living  in  a  state  of  irreconcileable  enmity 
with  any  of  the  brethren,  and  refusing  to  make 
suitable  concessions  for  an  injury  inflicted.  "If 
he  will  not  hear  the  church,  let  him  be  unto 
thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican."  Matt, 
xviii.  17. 

II.  The  manner  of  proceeding  in  cases  of 
discipline. 

There  are  many  things,  of  which  no  other 
notice  should  be  taken  than  the  private  admo- 


188  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

nition  of  one  member  to  anothef.      When  the 
offence  is  comparatively  trivial,  and  known  only 
to  an  individual  or  two,  nothing  more  is  neces- 
sary than  for  these  individuals,  without  saying  a 
syllable  about  the  matter  to  any  one  else,  to  go  in 
a  spirit  of  great  meekness  and  affection  to  the  of- 
fender, and  to  admonish  him.      If  the  desired  ef- 
fect is  not  produced,  they    should  then  acquaint 
the  pastor  with  the  fact,  who  will  join  his  admo- 
nition to  theirs,  and  this  will  in  most  cases  be  suf- 
ficient to  produce  a  spirit  of  contrition.      It  is 
very  undesirable  to  bring  any  thing  more  into 
our  church  meetings  than  is  absolutely  necessa- 
ry;   they  will  otherwise  become  the    scene  of 
endless  contention.      It  must  be  intrusted  to  the 
pastor's  discretion,  to  decide  what  matters  shall 
be  brought  under  the  review  of  the  society.     If 
the  sin  be  attended  with  much  aggravation,  and 
be  generally  known,  it  is  his  duty  to  mention  it 
to  the  church.     Should  the  offender  confess  the 
fact,  and  manifest  satisfactory  proofs  of  contri- 
tion, a  simple   and   affectionate    admonition  to 
him  to  go  and  sin  no  more,  is  sufficient.      The 
church  should  be  satisfied,  and  restore  him  forth- 
with to  their  confidence.     But  if  he  be  obstinate 
— if  he  either  deny  the  charge,  or  palhate  his 
sin,  it  would  be  proper  to  appoint  two  or  three 
discreet  individuals  to  inquire  into  the  fact,  and 
to  endeavour  to  bring  him  to  repentance.     At 
the  time  the  deputation  is  appointed,  a  resolu- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  189 

tion  ought  to  be  passed,  suspending  the  individ- 
ual from  the  privileges  of  communion.^  Time 
after  time  be  should  be  visited  by  the  pastor, 
and  admonished ;    and  if  after  one,  or  twoj  or 


*  The  suspension  from  the  table,  which  is  denomin- 
ated the  lesser  excommunication,  is  opposed  by  some 
as  a  measure  that  has  no  Scripture  warrant.  But  may 
it  not,  hke  many  other  of  our  practices,  be  fairly  deduc- 
ed from  general  principles,  and  be  as  proper  as  though 
it  were  expressly  enjoined  ?  Does  not  reason  and  the 
very  nature  of  things  require  it  ?  Is  there  no  medium 
between  a  mere  admonition  and  the  awful  extremity  of 
expulsion  ?  What  is  to  be  done  in  those  cases,  where 
neither  the  guilt  nor  the  innocence  of  an  individual  is 
at  once  apparent  to  the  church ;  but  still  a  strong,  very 
strong  case,  so  far  aspriijia/acie  evidence  goes,  is  made 
out  against  him;  or  where  there  is  some  appearance 
of  penitence,  but  yet  that  penitence  is  equivocal  ?  Are 
we  to  admit  that  individual  to  the  full  privileges  of  com- 
munion ?  what,  while  his  conduct  is  under  examination, 
and  his  character,  to  say  the  best,  suspicious  ?  It  is 
useless  to  affirm  that  he  is  innocent  till  proved  guilty ; 
this  may  do  in  worldly  matters,  where  no  communion 
of  heart  is  necessary ;  but  not  in  the  church  of  God, 
where  the  very  act  of  sitting  down  at  the  sacred  table 
is  an  expression  of  mutual  confidence,  esteem  and  love. 
Besides,  even  in  civil  affairs,  a  man  is  denied  the  rights 
of  innocence  before  he  is  proved  guilty;  I  mean  during 
the  interval  between  his  arrest  and  trial.    He  is  thenia 


190  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

discover  satisfactory  contrition,  he  should  with- 
out delay  be  restored  to  the  confidence  and 
communion  of  the  church.  But  after  waiting 
a  reasonable  time,  and  waiting  in  vain,  for  any 
marks  of  repentance,  the  church  should  pro- 
ceed to  separate  him  from  their  communion. 
His  contumacy  has  immeasurably  aggravated 
his  original  offence.  He  has  now  resisted 
pertinaciously,  the  command  and  will  of  Christ, 
declared  through  the  church,  and  must  be  treat- 
ed as  a  heathen  man  and  a  publican.  If  he  ne- 
glect to  hear  the  church,  he  must,  what  ever 
might  have  been  his  original  transgression,  be 
expelled  from  its  fellowship. 


a  state  of  suspension.  Analogous  to  his,  is  the  case  of  a 
suspected  member,  and  who  must  therefore  be  suspend- 
ed till  proved  innocent  or  penitent.  Still  more  culpable, 
would  it  be,  to  proceed  to  ex-comnumication,  while  there 
arc  signs  of  penitence,  even  though  those  signs  were  not 
quite  satisfactory.  Exclude  the  act  of  suspension  from 
discipline,  and  the  churches  will  often  be  involved  in 
the  dilemma  of  either  having  their  confidence  impaired 
by  retahiing  suspicious  members,  or  being  obliged  to 
expel  those  who  are  not  so  hopeless  as  to  be  consigned 
to  this  awful  condition.  To  say  that  they  may  be  ad- 
mitted again  as  soon  as  they  are  proved  to  be  penitent, 
is  to  destroy  the  salutary  terrors  of  a  sentence,  which 
ought  not  to  be  pronounced,  but  in  the  last  extremity, 
and  the  solemnity  of  which,  nothing  should  be  allowed 
to  impair.  ! 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  191 

In  some  cases,  where  the  crime  is  liighly 
scandalous,  and  very  notorious,  it  is  necessary, 
for  the  honour  of  rehgion,  the  credit  of  the  so- 
ciety, and  the  good  of  the  offender,  to  proceed 
immediately  to  excommunication,  as  soon  as  the 
fact  is  clearly  proved. 

By  excommunication,  we  mean  nothing  more 
than  an  entire  separation  of  the  offender  from 
all  relation  to  the  church  whatever,  and  an  ut- 
ter exclusion  from  its  privileges.  The  sol- 
emn sentence  is  purely  spiritual,  designed  to 
maintain  the  purity  of  the  church;,  and  to  mani- 
fest the  glory  of  Christ's  holiness  in  the  govern- 
ment of  his  kingdom,  and  cannot  extend  to  the 
person,  estate,  liberty,  or  any  civil  rights  what- 
ever, of  the  excluded  member.^ 


*  There  is  some  difficulty,  and  consequently  has  been 
much  dispute,  about  the  precise  import  of  the  apostle's 
expression,  1  Cor.  v.  5,  "  To  deliver  such  an  one  un- 
to Satan  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh."  The  same 
expression  is  used  in  reference  to  Hymeneus  and  Phi- 
letus,  1  Tim.  i.  20.  "  Whom  I  have  delivered  unto 
Satan,  that  they  may  learn  not  to  blaspheme."  Some 
have  supposed,  that  nothlno:  more  is  intended  than  their 
being  delivered  over  again  to  the  kingdom  of  Satan, 
from  which  they  were  translated  into  the  kingdom  or 
church  of  Christ.  In  other  words,  that  they  were  sent 
back  again  to  the  state  of  unconverted  men,  to  be  sub- 
ject to  the  usurped  dominion  of  the  god  of  this  world, 
and  led  captive  by  him  at  his  will.    But  I  do  not  see 


192  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

The  sentence  of  excommunication  should  nev- 
er be  proceeded  to  by  the  church,  but  with  the 
greatest  caution  and  seriousness  ;  it  should  be 
accompanied  with  sorrowful  and  humble  con- 
fession   of    the  delinquent's    sin,  and    earnest 


how  by  this  means  they  were  to  learn  "  not  to  blas- 
pheme," or  to  have  "  the  flesh  destroyed,"  which  are 
stated  by  the  Apostle,  as  the  end  and  design  of  his  thus 
dealing  with  them.  To  get  over  this,  some  have  sup- 
posed that  the  offender's  pride,  lust,  and  other  fleshly 
passions,  would  be  mortified  when  he  found  himself 
despised  and  shunned  by  all.  This  view  of  the  case, 
is  rather  far-fetched,  and  does  not  agree  so  well  with 
the  more  natural  interpretation  of  the  words  given  by 
others,  nor  with  the  threatenings  denounced  by  the 
Apostle  in  other  places.  1  Cor.  iv.  21.  2  Cor.  xiii.  1. 
It  is  certain  the  Apostles  bad  power  to  punish  notorious 
offenders  with  disease  and  death.  If  so,  may  we  not 
beliere  that  the  command  which  the  Apostle  gave  on 
this  occasion  to  the  Corinthians,  "  to  deliver  the  inces- 
tuous person  to  Satan  for  the  destruction  of  his  flesh," 
was  an  exertion  of  that  power  ?  The  only  difficulty 
which  occurs  in  regard  to  this  interpretation  is,  that  it 
ascribes  to  Satan  an  instrumentality  in  the  infliction  of 
disease,  which  is  no  where  acknowledged  in  the  word 
of  God.  More  than  hints,  however,  are  to  be  found 
both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  New,  that  such  an  in- 
fluence is  possessed  by  him.  The  case  of  Job,  and  the 
woman  whose  case  is  mentioned,  Luke  xiih  16,  "  whom 
Satan  hath  bound,  lo  these  eighteen  years,"  are  quite 
in  point. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  193 

prayer  that  it  may  have  a  suitable  effect  upon 
his  mind,  and  the  mind  of  others ;  it  should  be 
done  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  not  as 
an  act  of  the  church's  own  authority  ;  it  should 
have  an  immediate  reference  to  the  ends  of 
church  fellowship,  and  the  benefit  of  the  offen- 
der ;  it  should  be  unattended  by  any  emotions 
of  wrath,  malice,  party  spirit,  or  personal  re- 
sentment ;  in  short,  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end  of  the  fearful  proceeding,  there  should  be  a 
manifestation  of  all  that  deliberation,  discre- 
tion, seriousness,  grief,  and  awe,  which  this  sol- 
emn act  of  excision  seems  naturally  to  demand. 
There  appears  in  this  act,  a  reference  to  the  fu- 
ture judgment  of  Christ.  In  one  sense,  the 
church  now  judges  for  Christ  in  matters  of  his 
kingdom ;  and  wo  to  them  who  dare  to  pro- 
nounce this  sentence,  without  being  persuaded 
on  good  grounds,  that  it  is  the  sentence  of  Christ 
himself  It  is  the  echo  of  his  awful  voice,  say- 
ing even  now  to  the  offender,  "  Depart  from  my 
house  ; "  and  unless  the  offender  repent,  an  an- 
ticipation of  his  sentence,  saying  at  the  last  day, 
"  Depart  from  my  heaven." 

Mr.  Hall's  description  of  the  nature  and  use- 
fulness of  excommunication,  is  very  striking. 
"  I  am  far  from  thinking  lightly  of  the  spiritual 
power,  Avith  which  Christ  has  armed  his  church. 
It  is  a  high  and  mysterious  one,  which  has  no 
R 


194  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

parallel  on  earth.  Nothing  in  the  order  of 
means,  is  equally  adapted  to  awaken  compunc- 
tion in  the  guilty,  with  spiritual  censures  im- 
partially administered ;  the  sentence  of  excom- 
munication in  particular,  harmonizing  with  the 
dictates  of  conscience,  and  re-echoed  by  her 
voice,  is  truly  terrible :  It  is  the  voice  of  God, 
speaking  through  its  legitimate  organ,  which  he 
who  despises,  or  neglects,  ranks  with  '^ heathen 
men  and  publicans,' joins  the  synagogue  of  Sa- 
tan, and  takes  his  lot  with  anunbeheving  world, 
doomed  to  perdition.  Excommunication  is  a 
sword,  which,  strong  in  its  apparent  weakness, 
and  the  sharper,  and  the  more  keenly  edged  for 
being  divested  of  all  sensible  and  exterior  en- 
velopements,  lights  immediately  on  the  spirit, 
and  inflicts  a  womid  which  no  balm  can  cure,  no 
oiijtment  can  mollify,  but  which  must  continue 
to  ulcerate  and  burn,  till  healed  by  the  blood 
of  atonement,  applied  by  penitence  and  prayer. 
In  no  instance  is  that  axiom  more  fully  verified, 
'The  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men, 
and  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men,' 
than  in  the  discipline  of  his  church.  By  encum- 
bering it  with  foreign  aid,  they  have  robbed  it 
of  its  real  strength;  by  calling  in  the  aid  of  tem- 
poral pains  and  jienalties,  they  have  removed  it 
from  the  spirit  to  the  flesh,  from  its  contact  with 
eternity,  to  unite  it  to  secular  interests  ;  and  as 
the  corruption  of  the  best   things  is  the  worst, 


195 

have  rendered  it  the  scandal  and  reproach  of 
our  holy  religion. 

"While  it  retains  its  character,  as  a  spiritual 
ordinance,  it  is  the  chief  bulwark  against  the 
disorders  which  threaten  to  overturn  religion, 
the  very  nerve  of  virtue,  and  next  to  the  preach- 
ing of  the  cross,  the  principal  antidote  to  the 
'corruptions  that  are  in  the  world  through  lust.' 
DiscipUne  in  a  church  occupies  the  place  of  laws 
in  a  state  ;  and  as  a  kingdom,  however  excellent 
its  constitution,  will  inevitably  sink  into  a  state 
of  extreme  wretchedness,  in  which  laws  are 
either  not  enacted,  or  not  duly  administered  ; 
so  a  church  which  pays  no  attention  to  disci- 
pline, will  either  fail  into  confusion,  or  into  a 
state  so  much  worse,  that  little  or  nothing  re- 
mains worth  regulating.  The  right  of  inflict- 
ing censures,  and  of  proceeding  in  extreme 
cases  to  excommunication,  is  an  essential 
branch  of  that  power  with  which  the  church 
is  endowed,  and  bears  the  same  relation  to 
discipline  that  the  administration  of  criminal 
justice  bears  to  the  general  principles  of  gov- 
ernment. When  this  right  is  exerted  in  up- 
holding the  '  faith  once  dehvered  to  the  saints,' 
or  enforcing  a  conscientious  regard  to  the  laws 
of  Christ,  it  maintains  its  proper  place,  and 
is  highly  beneficial.  Its  cognizance  of  doc- 
trine is  justified  by  apostolic  authority  ;  *  a  here- 
tic, after  two  or  three  admonitions,  reject :'  nor 


196  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

is  it  to  any  purpose  to  urge  the  difference  be- 
twixt ancient  heretics  and  modern,  or  that  to 
pretend  to  distinguish  truth  from  error,  is  a  prac- 
tical assumption  of  infalhbihty." 

It  is  a  question  worthy  of  consideration,  "How 
church  members  should  conduct  themselves  to- 
ward those  who  are  thus  separated  from  their 
communion.''''  We  are  not  left  without  instruc- 
tions on  this  head.  "  If  any  man  obey  not  our 
word  by  this  epistle,  note  that  man,  and  have 
no  company  with  him,  that  he  may  be  ashamed. 
Yet  count  him  not  as  an  enemy,  but  admon- 
ish him  as  a  brother."  2  Thes.  iii.  14,  15.  "  I 
have  written  unto  you,  not  to  keep  company, 
if  any  man  that  is  called  a  brother,  be  a 
fornicator,  or  covetous,  or  an  idolater,  or  a 
railer,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner,  with 
such  an  one,  no  not  to  eat."  1  Cor.  v.  11. 
Two  things  are  here  evident :  first — We  are  ex- 
pressly commanded,  to  withdraivfrom  all  volunta- 
ry association  with  such  individuals.  We  are  to 
shun  their  company.  We  are  not  even  to  sit 
down  with  them  at  an  ordinary  meal,  nor  freely 
to  converse  with  them  on  secular  affairs,  except 
they  are  our  relations,  or  we  are  necessarily 
thrown  by  the  contingencies  of  business  into 
their  society.  Of  course,  none  of  the  relative 
ties  are  to  be  dissolved,  nor  any  of  the  social 
duties  to  be  neglected ;  but  all  voluntary  inter- 
course with  excommunicated  persons,  who  are 
not  related  to  us  by  the  ties  of  nature,  is  to  be 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  197 

cautiously  avoided  :  and  this  is  to  be  done,  to 
testify  our  abhorrence  of  the  siu,  and  that  the 
offender  himself  may  be  asliamed,  and  feel  the 
awful  situation  in  which  his  transgression  has 
placed  him. 

But  it  is  equally  evident  from  the  apostolic  in- 
junction, that  excommunicated  persons  are  not 
to  be  utterly  forsaken  and  abandoned.  "  Count 
him  not  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a 
brother."  Pains  should  be  taken  to  bring  them 
to  repentance.  They  should  not  be  given  up  to 
their  sins,  and  given  over  as  it  were,  to  become 
more  and  more  vile.  The  pastor  and  members 
should  seek  opportunities  to  admonish  and  warn 
them:  "Peradventure  God  may  give  them  re- 
pentance to  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth." 
Upon  their  penitence  and  reformation,  they 
should  be  again  received  into  communion  with 
compassion  and  love,  joy  and  gratitude.  "  Bet- 
ter," says  Dr.  Owen,  "never  excommunicate  a 
person  at  all,  than  forsake  and  abandon  him 
when  he  is  expelled,  or  refuse  to  receive  him 
back  again  upon  his  repentance  ;  but  there  is  a 
class  of  persons  unto  whom,  if  a  man  be  an  of- 
fender, he  shall  be  so  for  ever." 

Great  care  should  be  taken  by  a  church,  to 
display  the  most  inflexible  inpartialpty  in  the 
exercise  of  discipline.  To  allow  the  riches,  tal- 
ents, or  influence  of  any  offender,  to  blind  the 
eyes  of  the  society,  and  to  screen  him  from  pun- 


198  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

ishment,  is  a  most  flagrant  crime  against  the  au- 
thority of  Christ,  and  the  laws  of  his  kingdom. 
We  can  scarcely  conceive  of  any  thing  more 
displeasing  in  his  sight,  any  thing  more  likely  to 
bring  down  his  fearful  indignation  upon  a  church, 
than  to  allow  his  temple  to  be  defiled,  owfo/com- 
pliment  to  secular  distinctions. 

No  member  should  be  allowed  to  resign,{n  or^ 
der  to  avoid  expulsion.  If  he  has  done  any  thing 
worthy  of  censure  or  separation,  he  should  not  be 
allowed  to  retire  with  his  conduct  unnoticed* 
"It  becomes  not  the  wisdom  and  order  of  any 
society,  intrusted  with  authority  for  its  own 
preservation,  as  the  church  is  by  Christ  himself, 
to  suffer  persons  obnoxious  to  censure  by  the 
fundamental  rules  of  that  society,  to  cast  off  all 
respect  unto  it,  to  break  their  order  and  relation, 
without  animadverting  thereupon,  according  to 
the  authority  wherewith  they  are  intrusted. 
To  do  otherwise  is  to  expose  their  order  unto 
contempt,  and  proclaim  a  diffidence  in  their  own 
authority  for  the  spiritual  punishment  of  offend- 


On  the  Removal  of  Memhers  from  one  Church  to 
another  in  the  same  Town. 

This  of  course  can  happen  only  in  those 
places  where  there  are  more  than  one  church  of 


*  Dr.  Owen  on  Church  Government,  p.  222. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  199 

the  same  denomination,  and  in  such  places  it  is 
a  very  common  occurrence.  Church  fellowship 
is  a  very  sacred  bond,  which  ought  not  to  be 
formed  without  serious  deliberation,  nor  broken 
without  just  cause.  No  member  should  dissolve 
his  connexion  with  a  Christian  society,  but  up- 
on such  grounds  as  will  stand  the  test  of  reason 
and  revelation.  The  slight  pretexts  on  which 
some  persons  transfer  themselves  from  one 
church  to  another,  betrays  a  frivolity  and  vola- 
tility of  mind,  which  looks  like  trifling  with  sa- 
cred things.  On  the  least  oflfence,  either  imag- 
inary or  real,  produced  either  by  minister  or 
people,  they  send  for  their  dismission  to  another 
communion,  and  are  off. 

Sometimes  a  disagrtement  with  one  of  the  mem- 
bers, is  the  cause  of  secession.  This  is  man- 
ifestly wrong.  The  scripture  is  very  exphcit 
on  the  subject  of  offences.  Instead  of  leaving 
a  church  on  this  ground,  we  ought  to  take  im- 
mediate steps  towards  reconciUation.  It  is  no 
justification  to  say,  "If  I  cannot  sit  down  at  the 
Lord's  Supper  in  love  with  a  person,  I  had  bet- 
ter not  sit  down  at  all;"  because  we  ought 
without  delay  to  have  the  offence  removed,  and 
come  to  an  agreement  with  the  offender. 

Some  persons  break  their  connexion  with  a 
church,  because  they  think  that  there  are  sinful 
members  retained  in  its  communion.  Instead  ot 
removing,  their  duty  is  either  by  private  admo- 
nition to  reclaim  such  supposed  delinquents,  or 


200  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

by  informing  the  pastor,  to  take  the  proper  meas- 
ures for  their  expulsion.  If  the  matter  should 
be  brought  before  the  church,  and  the  brethren 
should  not  be  convinced  that  there  is  sufficient 
ground  to  proceed  to  discipline,  we  ought  imme- 
diately to  acquiesce,  and  to  suppose  that  through 
want  of  information,  or  some  secret  prejudice,  we 
had  formed  an  incorrect  opinion,  and  from  that 
time  should  feel  charitably  toward  the  individu- 
als in  question.  And  even  if  we  were  persuad- 
ed that  the  church  had  erred  in  its  judgment, 
yet  as  they  examined  the  evidence  and  acted 
upon  conviction,  it  is  not  our  duty  to  retire. 
They  endeavoured  to  decide  impartially,  and 
as  they  did  not  connive  at  wickedness,  their 
communion  is  not  defiled.  Societies  must  be 
governed  by  fixed  general  laws,  which  may 
sometimes  fail  to  reach  particular  cases.  We 
must  always  act  upon  evidence,  and  if  this  fail 
to  prove  a  member  guilty,  we  must  still  consid- 
er ourselves  bound  to  continue  him  in  the  privi- 
leges of  communion. 

If  a  church  refuses  to  take  cognizance  of  fla- 
grant immorality,  or  in  order  to  screen  some 
rich  and  powerful  member,  declines  to  receive  tes- 
timony, or  acts  in  direct  opposition  to  the  clearest 
evidence,  a  case  which  rarely  happens,  then  the 
communion  is  defiled,  and  a  member  may  con- 
scientiously withdraw. 

It  happens  not  unfrequently  that  members  se- 
cede, because  a  pastor  is  chosen,  whose  election  they 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  201 

cannot  approve.  This  forms  a  difficult  case  of 
casuistry.  It  ought,  however,  to  be  a  last  resort. 
We  should  never  form  a  separation  on  this  ground 
in  haste.  We  should  give  a  patient  and  impar- 
tial hearing  to  the  minister,  and  strive,  by  every 
possible  effort,  to  have  our  prejudices  removed. 
We  should  not  suffer  ourselves  to  be  disaffected 
towards  him,  by  circumstances  trivial  and  indif- 
ferent. We  should  not  lend  our  ear  to  those 
who  have  similar  views,  nor  suffer  a  i>arty  feel- 
ing to  be  excited;  but  acting  singly  and  for  our- 
selves, strive  to  edify  so  far  by  his  ministry,  as 
to  render  a  secession  unnecessary.  If,  howev- 
er, after  earnest  prayer  for  direction,  coupled 
with  great  efforts  to  subdue  every  thing  of  pre- 
judice, we  still  find  our  religious  edification  not 
promoted  by  his  preaching,  then  we  may  quietly 
and  peaceably  retire,  provided  there  are  num- 
bers and  proi)erty  sufficient  to  found  another 
congregation,  and  erect  another  place  of  wor- 
ship. We  should  never  attempt  to  prejudice 
the  minds  of  others  ;  a  step  which  is  not  unfre- 
quently  taken  by  some  to  justify  their  own  con- 
duct; but  which  is  attended  with  more  guilt 
tlian  words  can  describe. 

It  is  quite  unlawful  to  separate,  merely  on  the 
ground  of  dissatisfaction  with  the  decision  of  the 
church,  in  its  ordinary  affairs. 

It  is  equally  sinful  to  retire,  because  of  some 
imaginary  or  real  offence  given  us  by  the  pastor. 


202  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

The  same  steps  of  explanation  and  reconcilia- 
tion are  to  be  taken  in  this  case,  as  in  that  of  a 
private  member.  We  should  go  to  him  alone, 
but  in  the  spirit  of  the  greatest  meekness  and 
respect,  on  account  of  his  office.  Nothing 
should  be  said  in  the  way  of  accusation,  crimi- 
nation, or  demand :  but  a  kind,  respectful,  mod- 
est statement  of  the  supposed  offence  should  be 
given,  which,  with  any  reasonable  man,  will  be 
always  sufficient  to  lead  to  a  satisfactory  explana- 
tion. 

A  member  ought  not  to  retire,  even  on  the 
ground  of  supposed  misconduct  on  the  part  of 
the  pastor.  If  his  inconsistencies  affisct  his 
Christian  character,  they  should  become  matter 
of  church  investigation :  if  they  are  but  impru- 
dences, or  the  hghter  imperfections  to  which 
even  the  best  of  men  are  subject,  we  should  be 
rather  disposed  to  treat  them  with  all  reasonable 
candour,  and  cover  them  with  the  veil  of  love ; 
at  the  same  time  it  would  be  proper,  that  a  re- 
spectful and  kind  expostulation  should  be  deliv- 
ered to  him  by  the  deacons,  or  senior  members 
of  his  flock. 

In  cases  where  a  newly  married  couple  are 
members  of  two  churches,  it  is  quite  lawful  for 
the  wife  to  withdraw  from  her  own  church  to 
that  of  her  husband,  provided  she  can  edify  by 
his  minister ;  if  not,  the  husband  ought  not  to 
desire  her  to  accompany  him.     If  by  a  removal 


CHURCH    3IEMEEr'5    GUIDE.  203 

of  our  dwelling  place,  we  are  siru&:e  i  at  an  in- 
convenient distance  from  the  houie  of  God,  it  is 
quite  justifiable  in  this  case,  to  connect  ourselves 
with  a  religious  society  nearer  to  our  abode. 

On  the  Conduct  to  he  observed  by  a  Church  in 
the  EUdion  of  a  Pastor. 

Whex  a  ChrL«tian  minister  is  removed,  either 
to  his  eternal  rest,  or  to  some  other  sphere  of 
labor  in  the  present  world,  the  choice  of  a  suc- 
cessor always  brings  on  a  crisis  in  the  history  of 
the  church  of  which  he  was  the  pastor.  No 
event  that  could  happen,  can  place  the  interests 
of  the  society  in  greater  peril-  Distraction  and 
division  have  so  frequently  resulted  from  this 
circumstance,  so  many  churches  have  been  rent 
by  it,  that  an  argument  has  been  founded  upon 
it,  if  not  against  the  right  of  popular  election  to 
the  pastoral  office,  yet  against  the  expediency  of 
using  it.  It  must  be  adtuitted  that  on  these  oc- 
casions, our  principles  as  dissenters,  and  our 
practices  as  Christians,  have  not  been  unfre- 
queutly  brought  into  disrepute.  We  have  been 
accused  of  wrangling  about  a  teacher  of  reli- 
gion, till  we  have  lost  our  religion  itself  in  the 
affray :  and  the  state  of  many  congregations 
proves,  that  the  charge  is  not  altogether  with- 
out foundation.  God  sometimes  overrules  these 
divisions  for  the  ftirtherance  of  the  gospel,  even 
as  he  has  made  the  introduction  of  evil  into  the 


I 


204  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

moral  world,  an  occasion  of  displaying  his  glo- 
ry ;  but  this  alters  not  the  character  of  the  event. 
Schisms  are  altogether  evil  in  themselves,  and 
are  always  to  be  deprecated,  and  if  possible, 
avoided.  This  occurrence  forms  no  solid  ob- 
jection, however,  against  the  great  principle — 
the  right  of  every  Christian  to  choose  his  own 
spiritual  instructor.  We  must  carefully  sepa- 
rate in  a  system,  between  what  is  accidental, 
and  what  is  essential ;  and  if  through  the  infir- 
mity of  our  nature,  some  evils  of  an  adventi- 
tious kind,  arise  in  the  administration  of  a  sys- 
tem clearly  founded  on  reason  and  revelation, 
we  are  no  more  authorized  to  subvert  the  latter 
on  account  of  the  former,  than  we  should  be,  to 
demolish  a  hospital,  in  order  to  suppress  the  lit- 
igations which  arise  in  its  committee,  about  the 
direction  of  its  concerns.  What  we  have  to 
do  in  one  case  and  the  other,  is  to  leave  the  in- 
stitution untouched,  and  endeavour  to  avoid 
these  evils,  which  arise  from  our  imperfections, 
to  obscure  its  excellence,  and  limit  its  benefits. 

Under  these  views,  I  shall  proceed  to  point 
out  in  what  way  a  church  should  conduct  itself, 
when  called  upon  to  exercise  its  right  in  the 
choice  of  a  minister. 

Let  all  the  members  as  soon  as  their  pastor  is 
removed  or  dead,  seriously  reflect  on  the  cHsis  in- 
to  which  the  church  is  brought,  the  great  import- 
ance of  preserving  its  peace,  and  the  influence 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  205 

that  their  individual  conduct  may  have  upon  the 
future  prosperity  of  the  society.  Let  them  de- 
Hberately  reflect  thus,  "The  church  is  now 
coming  into  circumstances  of  peril,  and  I,  as  an 
individual,  may  be  accessory,  according  as  my 
conduct  shall  be,  to  its  injury  or  prosperity. 
God  forbid  our  harmony  should  be  disturbed,  or 
our  Zion  become  otherwise  than  a  quiet  habita- 
tion. So  far  as  depends  upon  myself,  I  will  sa- 
crifice any  thing  but  principle,  rather  than  have 
those  scenes  of  distraction  and  division  amongst 
us,  which  are  so^ommon  in  the  religious  world." 

Let  the  members  instantly  make  it  an  object  of 
fervent  and  constant  prayer,  that  the  church  may 
he  kept  in  harmony  and  peace,  guided  in  the 
choice  of  a  minister,  and  that  they  may  be  ena- 
bled, each  in  their  private  capacity,  to  conduct 
themselves  in  a  spirit  of  quietness  and  brother- 
ly love.  Each  one  alone  should  pray  for  the 
Christian  temper ;  and  periodical  seasons  should 
be  appointed,  when  these  objects  should  be  rec- 
ognized, and  their  desires  expressed  by  social 
prayer.  Prayer  is  the  best  bulwark  against 
strifes.  The  spirit  of  healing  and  union,  de- 
scends in  the  cloud  of  incense  formed  by  the 
church's  prayers. 

Let  the  members  recollect,  that  the  choice  of 
a  pastor  is  one  of  those  occasions,  which  render 
pre-eminently  necessary  the  exercise  of  that  love, 
which  St.  Paul  has  so  beautifully  described  in 


206  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

the  first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  This  chap- 
ter should  be  devoutly  read  at  every  church 
meeting,  together  with  the  122d  and  the  133d 
Psalms.  These  should  form  the  standing  les- 
sons for  the  occasion.  The  business  now  under 
consideration  will  require  on  all  hands  the  ut- 
most caution,  candour,  patience,  and  mutual 
forbearance.  Many  opinions  are  now  to  be 
consulted,  many  tempers  to  be  tried,  and  each 
one  should  subject  the  passions  of  his  own  mind 
to  the  government  of  the  word  of  God.  If 
LOVE  were  elevated  to  the  throne  of  the  church, 
all  would  go  right.  No  division  would  then 
take  place.  Difference  of  opinion  might  be  ex- 
pressed, but  it  would  produce  no  alienation  of 
heart.  Directly  therefore  as  it  becomes  neces- 
sary to  elect  a  new  pastor,  the  relationship  of 
the  church  as  brethren,  and  the  neiv  command- 
ment of  Christ,  as  the  law  of  his  kingdom, 
should  by  a  solemn  act  of  the  church  be  recog- 
nized afresh. 

The  members  should  study  St.  PauVs  Epistles 
to  Timothy  and  Titus,  to  learn  what  are  the 
qualifications  of  a  Christian  minister.  They 
should  well  consider  and  settle  with  themselves, 
what  objects  should  direct  their  choice.  It  ap- 
pears to  me,  they  should  unite  in  their  view, 
personal  edification  and  general  benefit.  They 
should  seek  for  a  man,  whom  they  can  hear  with 
pleasure,  and  who  is  likely  to  prove  attractive  to 


207 

others.  The  benefit  of  the  society  at  large,  is 
the  ultimate  standard,  to  which  private  and  per- 
sonal taste  must  ever  give  way. 

Great  care  should  be  taken  by  those  to  whom 
the  church  has  delegated  the  power  of  procuring 
candidates,  not  to  invite  upon  probation^  any  in- 
dividual of  whose  suitableness  they  have  not  re- 
ceived previous  and  satisfactory  testimony.  Let  it 
by  no  means  be  thought  necessary  to  wait  long 
after  the  decease  of  a  pastor^  before  a  successor  is 
elected.  Respect  for  his  memory,  does  not  re- 
quire that  the  pulpit  should  be  continued  vacant, 
or  that  the  weeds  of  widowhood  should  be  worn 
by  the  church,  for  any  given  period.  When  an 
officer  falls  in  battle,  the  welfare  of  the  army 
requires  that  a  successor  should  be  immediately 
appointed. 

Neither  is  it  necessary,  that  a  church  should 
hear  a  great  vaHety  of  candidates,  before  an  elec- 
tion is  made.  To  set  out  with  the  intention  of 
hearing  many,  in  order  to  choose  one,  is  of  all 
plans  the  most  injudicious  and  mischievous. 
The  very  idea  that  others  are  to  follow,  will 
suspend  the  impartial  exercise  of  the  judg- 
ment concerning  every  one,  will  in  all  probabil- 
ity lead  to  a  variety  of  opinions,  and  ensure  a 
repetition  of  the  state  of  things  at  Corinth, 
where  one  said,  "I  am  for  Paul ;  another,  I  am 
forApoUos;  and  a  third,  I  am  for  Cephas."  As 
soon  as  an  individual  is  found  who  possesses  the 


208  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

scriptural  qualifications  of  a  Christian  pastor, 
and  in  whom  the  great  body  of  the  church  is 
united,  he  should  be  immediately  chosen,  even 
if  he  be  the  first  that  has  presented  himself. 

Great  caution,  however,  ought  to  be  exercis- 
ed, in  forming  a  judgment  upon  the  suitableness 
of  an  individual.  That  a  proper  opportunity 
might  be  aftorded  to  the  church  for  coming  to 
this  opinion,  the  probationary  term  of  a  candi- 
date's labours  should  not  be  too  shoj-t.  Preach- 
ing is  not  the  only  thing  to  be  judged  of;  piety, 
prudence,  diligence,  general  deportment,  are  all 
to  be  taken  into  the  account :  and  for  a  trial  on 
all  these  points,  a  period  of  three  jrionths  cannot 
be  thought  too  long. 

Especial  deference  should  be  paid  by  the 
younger  and  inexperienced  members  of  the 
church,  to  the  opinion  of  their  senior  and  more 
experienced  brethren.  The  sentiments  of  the 
deacons,  and  those  individuals  who  have  grown 
grey  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  and  the  church, 
should  be  received  with  great  attention,  and 
have  great  weight.  A  youth  of  seventeen  is  a 
very  incompetent  judge  of  ministerial  qualifica- 
tions, compared  with  a  venerable  father  of  sev- 
enty. That  haughty  spirit  which  leads  a  young 
person,  or  a  novice  to  say,  "  I  have  a  vote  as 
well  as  the  oldest  and  richest,  and  have  as  much 
right  to  be  heard  and  consulted  as  they,"  is  not 
the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  but  of  turbulence  and 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  209 

faction.  How  much  more  amiable  and  lovely  is 
such  a  declaration  as  the  following :  "  I,  young 
and  inexperienced,  am  a  very  inadequate  judge 
of  the  suitableness  of  a  minister  for  this  situa- 
tion, and  therefore  shall  be  pretty  much  guided 
in  my  decision,  by  the  opinion  of  others,  older 
and  wiser  than  myself"  This  is  independency 
exercised  in  the  spirit  of  the  gospel. 

All  secret  canvassing^  and  attempts  to  influence 
the  minds  of  others  should  be  studiously  avoid- 
ed. To  see  the  mean,  petty  arts  of  a  contested 
election,  carried  into  the  church  of  God,  is  dread- 
ful. 

It  would  be  well  for  every  church  to  have  a 
standing  rule,  that  no  pastor  should  be  chosen,  but 
by  the  suffrages  of  two  thirds,  or  three  fourths  of 
the  members  present.  This  would  preclude  much 
of  that  cabal  and  intrigue,  which  are  sometimes 
employed  in  cases,  where  the  matter  is  decided 
by  a  mere  majority.  Besides  which,  the  choice 
of  a  pastor  is  a  business  of  too  much  importance, 
to  be  carried  simply  by  a  majority. 

It  would  be  well,  if  in  every  case,  the  church 
could  be  unanimous ;  but  this  is  more  than  can 
be  looked  for.  It  should  certainly  be  sought  for 
in  the  use  of  all  proper  means.  The  majority 
should  exercise  peculiar  forbearance  and  ae- 
FECTioN  towards  those  who  are  opposed  to 
them,  carefully  avoiding  to  impute  their  objec- 
S 


210  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

tions  to  any  improper  motives ;  listening  to  their 
statements  with  patience ;  treating  them  with 
candour;  reasoning  with  them  in  the  spirit  of 
love;  and  giving  them  time  to  have  their  diffi- 
culties removed.  The  happiest  results  have 
been  often  the  issue  of  such  kind  and  Christian 
conduct.  If,  however,  instead  of  this,  the  dis- 
sentients are  treated  with  harshness  and  intoler- 
ance ;  if  their  o])position  he  attributed  to  a  fac- 
tious and  cavilling  temper  ;  if  they  are  regarded 
with  contempt,  as  a  despicable  minority,  of 
which  no  notice  should  be  taken ;  and  are  left 
immediately  to  themselves,  without  any  concili- 
atory measures  being  taken,  while  the  majority 
proceeds  immediately  to  decide,  a  schism  is  sure 
to  be  the  consequence,  as  mischievous  to  the 
church,  as  it  is  disgraceful  to  religion. 

The  party  who  wish  a  minister  to  be  elected, 
should  seriously  reflect  thus:  "If  we  choose 
this  man,  we  may  give  pain  to  the  minds  of  a 
large  body  of  our  brethren,  which  we  most  anx- 
iously deprecate,  and  cannot  allow  ourselves  to 
do,  but  under  the  conviction  that  we  are  pro- 
moting the  permanent  welfare  of  the  church  at 
large."  While  the  party  opposing  should  say, 
"The  general  body  appear  to  consider  this  min- 
ister as  possessing  the  requisite  qualification  for 
their  pastor,  and  this  has  been  so  satisfactorily 
ascertained,  that  it  ought  not  to  be  with  us  a 
light  matter  to  obstruct  the  general  edification. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  211 

Nothing  but  the  good  of  the  church  shall  lead 
us  to  set  up  our  opinion  in  opposition  to  that  of 
a  large  majority  of  its  members."  Sucli  a  love- 
ly temper  would  generally  lead  to  beneficial  re- 
sults. 

It  would  be  very  advisable  in  some  cases,  for 
even  so  large  a  majority  as  two  thirds,  or  even 
three  fourths,  to  give  up  the  point,  rather  than 
carry  it  in  opposition  to  a  minority,  whicii  in- 
cludes in  it  the  deacons,  and  many  of  the  most 
experienced  and  respectable  members  of  the  so- 
ciety. The  majority,  in  such  instances,  have  the 
right  to  decide;  but  it  is  a  question  whether  they 
ought  not,  for  the  sake  of  peace,  to  waive  the 
exercise  of  it.  , 

Persons  of  property  and  influenc%should  he  very 
careful  how  they  conduct  themselves,  on  these  occa- 
sions. 

There  are  in  many  churches  individuals  whose 
circumstances  must  necessarily  give  peculiar 
weight  to  their  opinions.  Let  them,  however, 
not  assume  the  office  of  dictators.  Let  them 
not  robe  themselves  in  the  dress  of  Diotrephes, 
nor  display  amongst  the  brethren  the  love  of  pre- 
eminence. The  system  of  independency  admits 
of  influence,  but  not  of  patronage  ;  men  may 
lead,  but  not  driv^e.  Democracies  are  as  liable 
to  the  control  of  a  few  leading  individuals,  prob- 
ably more  so,  than  any  other  system  ;  but  then 
these  individuals   should    act,    by    causing    the 


212  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

people  to  act  for  them.  If  such  an  application  of 
the  words  of  scripture  were  admissible,  I  would 
say,  "  Tliey  should  render  the  people  willing  in 
the  day  of  their  power."  An  attempt  to  exert 
their  influence,  in  opposition  to  the  wishes  of 
the  people,  is  a  most  irrational,  unscriptural 
assumption  of  power.  To  sacrifice  the  interests 
of  the  church  for  the  gratification  ©f  their  taste  ; 
to  attempt  to  force  upon  a  society  a  man  not 
approved  by  it,  or  to  reject  one  who  is  chosen 
by  it,  is  the  most  disgusting  exercise,  of  the 
most  disgusting  tyranny. 

It  unfortunately  happens,  that  when  one  party 
has  given  up  a  minister  in  comphment  to  the  other, 
they  almost  insensibly  oppose  an  individual,  ivhoj 
in  future,  may  M  the  favourite  of  their  opponents. 
It  is  most  sinful  to  allow  the  corrupt  passions 
of  our  nature,  thus  far  to  prevail  in  our  hearts, 
as  to  turn  aside  our  judgment  in  affairs  so  sa- 
cred and  so  important. 

When  a  minister  is  at  length  brought  in  by 
a  large  majority,  it  then  becomes  a  question, 
what  ought  to  be  ,the  conduct  of  the  minority. 
Should  they  separate  and  form  another  rehgious 
society  ?  Certainly  not,  except  as  a  dernier 
resort.  Let  them  consider  the  evils  connected 
with  such  a  state  of  things.  What  ill  will  is 
often  produced  between  the  two  societies; 
how  much  anti-christian  feehng  is  excited  ;  how 
it  injures  the  spirit  of  both  parties;  what  envies, 


213 

and  jealousies,  and  evil  speakings,  commence 
and  continue,  to  the  injury  of  religion,  and  the 
triumph  of  its  enemies!  Let  them,  before  they 
separate,  endeavour  to  lay  aside  their  prejudice, 
and  hear  for  a  season,  vv^ith  as  much  impartiality 
as  possible,  the  man  to  whom  they  object.  On 
his  part,  much  consummate  prudence  is  necessary, 
and  the  most  conciliatory  conduct.  All  he  does 
and  says  should  have  a  healing  tendency. 
Much  depends  upon  himself.  Great  credit  is 
due  to  that  minister,  who  has  conciliated  his 

OPPONEXTS  WITHOUT  ALIENATING  HIS    FRIENDS, 

and  who  has  become  the  reconciling  medium 
OF  two  parties,  once  at  variance  about 
himself. 

In  some  cases,  a  division  is  necessary.  Where 
this  is  unavoidable,  great  efforts  should  be  made 
to  affect  it  in  love.  If  the  two  parties  cannot 
unite  in  peace,  at  least  let  them  separate  in 
peace.  Let  the  separation  take  place  without 
ahenation.  Alas  !  that  this  should  so  rarely  be 
the  case  ! 

What  we  want,  to  preserve  the  peace  of  our 
churches  unbroken,  is  a  more  distinct  recogni- 
tion, and  a  more  powerful  influence  of  the  pnn- 
dples  of  the  gospel :  More  humility,  more 
spirituality,  more  zeal  for  the  divine  glory.  We 
carry  into  the  sanctuary,  and  into  the  church, 
our  pride,  our  self-will,  our  personal  taste. 
That  spirit  of  mutual  submission,  brotherly  love, 


214  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

and  surrender  of  our  own  gratification  to-  the 
good  of  others,  which  the  word  of  God  enjoins, 
and  our  profession  avows,  would  keep  the  church 
always  happy  and  harmonious,  and  enable  it  to 
pass  in  safety  through  the  most  critical  circum- 
stances in  which  it  can  b'e  placed.  Instead  of 
seeking  the  good  of  the  whole,  the  feehng  of 
too  many  of  our  members  may  be  thus  summa- 
rily expressed — "  I  will  have  my  way."  Such 
a  spirit  is  a  source  of  all  the  evils  to  which  our 
churches  are  ever  exposed,  and  of  which  it 
must  be  confessed  they  are  but  too  frequently 
the  miserable  victims. 

On  the  Propriety  of  occasionally  administering  the 
Lord^s  Supper  in  private  Houses,  for  the  Sake  of 
sick  Persons  ivho  are  incapable  of  attending  the 
Solemnities  of  Puhlick  Worship. 

I  do  not  now  allude  to  the  practice  so  common 
in  the  Church  of  England,  of  administering  the 
sacrament  to  dying  persons,  as  a  preparative  for 
eternity ;  tliis  custom,  so  unscriptural  in  its 
nature,  and  so  delusory  in  its  te-ndency,  is  un- 
known, I  beheve,  amongst  our  churches.  But 
instances  have  occurred,  in  which  our  ministers, 
for  the  sake  of  some  of  their  members,  who  have 
been  long  confined  to  their  own  habitations  by 
chronic  diseases,  without  the  prospect  of  ever 
going  to  the  house  of  God  again,  have  assembled 
a  few  others  in  the  chamber  of  the  afflicted  per- 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  215 

son,  and  administered  to  tbeni  the  Lord's  supper. 
The  infirm  individual  is  supposed  to  be  a  real 
Christian  in  church  fellowship  ;  the  others,  join- 
ing in  the  act,  are  also  members  of  the  same, 
church,  or  Christians  of  undoubted  piety  ;  and 
the  design  of  the  act  is  not  to  countenance  any 
Pharisaic  notions  of  human  merit,  which  the  sick 
person  might  have  connected  with  the  reception 
of  the  sacrament,  but  simply  to  give  him  an 
opportunity  of  expressing  his  obedience,  and 
gratifying  his  love  to  Christ,  by  an  observance 
of  our  Lord's  own  institution.  Is  it  right  under 
these  circumstances  to  gratify  his  request,  and 
observe  with  him  the  sacred  supper  ?  I  think 
not ;  and  on  the  following  grounds  : 

1.  The  Lord's  supper  is  strictly  a  church  or- 
dinance, and  not  an  exercise  of  mere  social  reli- 
gion, such  as  joint  prayer,  and  therefore  ought 
not  be  observed  but  when  the  church  is  profess- 
edly assembled.  It  is  not  an  act  of  social  reli- 
gion which  may  be  performed  in  any  place, 
where  two  or  three  Christians  are  convened  to- 
gether, by  accident  or  design,  but  in  the  place 
of  their  public  convention,  and  at  the  time  when 
they  are  so  convened.  All  the  directions  of  the 
apostle,  concerning  this  institution,  are  given  to 
the  church  in  its  collective  capacity ;  and  be- 
sides this,  there  are  many  incidental  expressions, 
which  plainly  show  that  this  was  the  view,  which 
he  took  of  it,  under  the   guidance  of  the  Holy 


216  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

Ghost.  In  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  first 
epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  he  interferes  to  regu- 
late the  abuses  which  upon  this  subject  had 
crept  into  the  Corinthian  church.  He  begins 
the  subject  thus,  "When  ye  come  together 
in  one  place,  this  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  sup- 
per." Now  his  meaning  in  this  language  must 
evidently  be,  that  merely  coming  into  one  place 
together  for  a  feast,  was  not  enough,  but  in  that 
one  place  conforming  to  all  the  other  Regula- 
tions delivered  by  our  Lord  concerning  it.  The 
act  of  coming  together  into  one  place  was  right 
so  far  as  it  went,  but  it  was  not  enough.  In  1 
Cor.  V.  8,  the  apostle  says,  "  Let  us  keep  the 
feast,"  i.  e.  the  Lord's  supper,  "not  with  old 
leaven :  "  in  the  7th  verse  they  were  command- 
ed to  purge  out  the  old  leaven,  i.  e.  to  put  away 
the  offending  member ;  and  this  was  to  be  done 
when  they  were  gathered  together ;  the  feast 
was  to  be  observed  then,  when  the  church  were 
gathered  together. 

It  is  plain  therefore  that  the  Lord's  supper  is 
a  church  ordinance,  and  can  with  propriety  be 
only  observed  by  the  church  in  its  assembled 
form.  But  it  will  probably  be  said,  "  Do  not  two 
or  three  persons  convened  together  at  any  time, 
or  in  any  place,  constitute  a  church  ?"  The 
answer  to  this  question  depends  on  circumstan- 
ces. If  these  two  or  three  meet  together  for  the 
purposes,  and  in  the  character  of  a  distinct  and 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  217 

separate  society  of  Christians,  and  in  the  usual 
tinie  and  place  of  assembly,  they  are  a  church, 
notwithstanding  the  smallness  of  their  number ; 
but  if  they  meet  together  as  the  acknowledged 
members  of  another  societ}' ,  which  in  its  general 
capacity  neither  do,  nor  can  assemble  with  them 
in  that  place,  they  are  not  a  church,  but  merely 
a  part  of  one  ;  and  as  such  have  no  right  to  per- 
form acts  which  belong  to  the  whole  number. 
This  does  not  imply  that  it  is  necessary  for 
every  member  to  be  present  in  order  to  a  meet- 
ing of  the  church,  for  provided  all  be  invited  to 
assemble  in  one  place,  those  who  meet  con- 
stitute the  church,  however  few  may  attend. 
This  may  be  illustrated  by  a  reference  to  the 
British  parliament.  Two  or  three  members 
meeting  together  in  one  place,  do  not  consti- 
tute the  senate,  nor  are  their  acts  legislatorial. 
The  parliament,  are  the  members  assembled  by 
appointment,  whether  few  or  many,  in  the  speci- 
fied place  of  meeting.  Such  is  the  church,  not 
a  casual,  ambulatory  or  private  meeting  of  a 
few  of  its  members,  but  the  body  of  Christians 
convened  by  general  notice.  The  words  of 
Christ,  "Wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered 
together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the -midst  of 
them,"  more  immediately  refer  to  the  exercise 
of  social  prayer  ;  but  viewed  in  their  most  ex- 
tensive sense,  will  by  no  means  countenance  the 
idea,  that  two  or  three  members  of  a  church 
T 


218  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

constitute  of  themselves  a  church,  until  they 
have  separated  from  their  late  connexion,  and 
formed  themselves  into  another  distinct  society. 

2.  The  practice  in  question  is  contrary  to 
one  of  the  ends  of  the  Lord's  supper,  which  is 
to  be  a  visible  sign  of  the  oneness  of  the  church, 
of  the  union  of  all  its  members  in  one  body. 
Hence  said  the  apostle,  "  We  being  njany  are 
one  bread  (loaf)  and  one  body :  for  we  are  all 
partakers  of  that  one  bread  (loaf.)"  1  Cor.  x.  17. 
The  loaf  by  its  unity  shows  the  oneness  of  the 
church  ;  by  its  division  into  many  parts,  its  many 
members.  But  is  not  this  design  of  the  Lord's 
supper  defeated  by  its  private  celebration 
amongst  a  few  members  of  the  church  ?  Are 
the  two  or  three  assembled  in  private,  detached 
from  the  public  body,  a  representation  of  its 
unity  ? 

3.  There  is  not  a  single  instance  of  any  com- 
pany of  Christians  whose  meetings  were  merely 
occasional,  and  who  were  not  united  for  the 
purpose  of  stated  fellowship  as  a  church,  in  a 
particular  place,  observing  the  ordinance  of  the 
Lord's  supper.  And  as  we  have  no  example, 
so  we  have  no  precept  for  such  things,  not  so 
much  as  a  hint  that  they  may  be  done.  Should 
ministers,  therefore,  without  the  shadow  of 
scriptural  authority,  consent  to  them  ? 

4.  As  a  precedent,  the  practice  is  dangerous  ; 
for  if  the  scripture  mode  of  observing  the  Lord's 
supper  be  departed  from  in  one  way,  it  may  in 


219 

'  another.  If  ministers  depart  from  the  regnla- 
tions  of  the  New  Testament  for  the  advantage 
of  the  sick,  may  they  not  be  led  on  to  do  it  in 
other  cases,  till  even  the  purposes  of  faction 
shall  be  promoted  by  the  practice  ? 

It  is  not  enough  to  justify  it,  to  say  that  it  is 
a  great  loss  to  the  individual  who  is  deprived  of 
the  possibility  of  attending  public  worship,  and 
therefore  it  is  an  act  of  Christian  love  to  make 
up,  in  this  way,  the  privation.  We  must  not, 
in  any  instance,  exercise  charity  at  the  expense 
of  principle.  The  regulations  of  the  word  of 
God  are  not  to  be  violated,  even  for  the  pious 
consolation  of  his  people.  Every  one  who  is 
visited  by  an  affliction  which  confines  him  to  his 
house,  is  released  from  all  obligation  to  observe 
this  command  of  Christ,  "Do  this  in  remem^ 
brance  of  me."  The  duty  to  him  is  impossible^ 
at  least  in  the  scriptural  mode  of  it,  and  impos- 
sibility always  supersedes  obhgation.  If  it  ceases 
to  be  his  dutj',  it  ought  no  longer  to  be  con- 
sidered a  privilege.  All  he  has  to  do,  is  to  sub- 
mit to  the  privation,  and  not  attempt  to  supply  it 
in  a  manner  unauthorized  by  the  Word  of  God» 

On  the  Causes  of  those  Schisms  which  sometimes 
distract  and  disturb  the  Churches. 

The  existence  of  this  evil,  truth  will  not  allow 
us  to  deny,  nor  ingenuity  enable  us  to  conceal. 

Divisions  in  our  churches  produce  incalcula- 
ble mischief,  since  they  not  only  prevent  the 


220  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

growth  of  religion,  in  the  distracted  societies,  but 
they  impair  and  destroy  it ;  they  excite  a  preju- 
dice, a  fearful  and  destructive  prejudice,  against 
the  principles  of  independent  churches,  and 
extend  their  mischief  still  farther,  by  obscuring 
the  glory  of  religion  itself.  Infidels,  like  vultures, 
•drawn  by  the  scent  of  battle,  hover  over  the 
scenes  of  these  lamentable  conflicts,  ever  ready 
to  gorge  their  sanguinary  appetite,  with  the 
blood  of  the  slain.  A  distracted  church  is  a 
feast  to  which  the  fiends  of  one  world  invite  the 
fiends  of  another,  where  infidels  and  devils  join 
in  thechorusof  infernal  irony, — "See  how  these 
Christians  love  one  another." 

In  searching  for  the  causes  of  these  divisions, 
we  are  not  to  suppose,  for  a  moment,  that  they 
are  inseparably  connected  with  the  congrega- 
tional form  of  church  government.  Even  if  it 
were  attempted  to  be  proved,  that  these  princi- 
ples give  more  opportunity  than  some  others, 
for  the  developement  of  the  imperfection  yet 
remaining  in  the  Christian  character;  yet  as 
long  as  it  can  be  shown,  that  they  are  fairly  de- 
ducible  from  scripture,  we  are  not  to  reject 
them,  but  only  double  our  vigilance  against  the 
depravity  of  our  own  nature.  Even  these  evils 
are  less  than  others  which  are  connected  with 
the  systems  of  national  establishments.  That 
uniformity  which  is  produced  by  legislative  en- 
actments, is  far  more  fatal  to  the  interests  of 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  221 

piety,  than  the  occasional  disturbances  of  those 
churches  which  are  formed  upon  the  ground 
of  voluntary  consent.  The  occasional  storm  is 
less  mischievous  in  its  effects,  than  the  stagnant 
and  quiescent  atmosphere  which  is  purified  by 
no  breeze,  and  settles  in  the  form  of  fever  and 
pestilence  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  But  what 
are  the  causes  of  these  schisms  ? 

I.     Some  of  these  lie  with  ministers. 

1.  A  defective  education^  not  unfrequently 
prepares  a  minister  to  be  the  cause  of  much  un- 
easiness in  a  Christian  church. 

Deprived  by  the  circumstances  of  his  bu'th, 
of  the  advantages  of  education  and  cultivated 
society,  he  enters  upon  his  academic  pursuits 
with  little  knowledge  both  of  books  and  of  the 
world.  When  he  has  been  a  student  but  two 
or  three  years,  some  injudicious  congregation, 
captivated  by  a  few  sermons,  solicits  him  to  be- 
come their  pastor.  He  accepts  their  invitation, 
and  with  little  information,  still  less  acquaint- 
ance with  the  habits  of  society,  he  enters  upon 
the  duties  of  his  office.  He  soon  betrays  his  ig- 
norance, incompetence,  and  want  of  all  those 
qualifications,  which  fit  a  person  for  govern- 
ment in  the  church,  and  prepare  him  for  esteem 
in  the  world.  At  length,  by  the  meagreness  of 
his  preaching,  and  the  want  of  prudence  and 
respectability  in  his  conduct,  he  disgusts  his 
flock,  and  a  conflict  ensues.  Both  parties  are 
to  blame ;  they  in  tempting  him  so  soon  to  leave 


222  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

his  preparatory  studies,  and  7ie,  in  acceding  to 
their  wishes.  They^  however,  are  mostly  to 
be  censured ;  and  so  far  as  their  own  comfort 
is  concerned,  are  rightly  punished  for  plucking 
that  fruit  wliich,  had  it  been  permitted  to  hang 
till  it  was  ripe,  would  have  done  them  much 
service.  A  longer  term  of  education  would  not 
only  have  given  him  more  information,  but  more 
knowledge  of  men  and  things,  and  more  capacity 
to  conduct  himself  with  propriety.  Knowledge 
is  power,  by  increasing  a  man's  weight  of  charac- 
ter and  degree  of  influence. 

The  churches  ought  to  be  very  cautious  of 
tempting  students  to  leave  the  schools  of  the 
prophets,  before  the  term  of  education  has  been 
completed ;  and  this  term  in  the  present  age 
ought  to  be  lengthened  rather  than  diminished. 
This  is  an  age  of  activity,  more  than  of  study, 
and  therefore  a  young  man  should  be  well  in- 
structed at  the  academy,  for  he  is  sure  to  meet 
with  many  interruptions  to  self-improvement, 
when  he  becomes  a  pastor.  An  inefficient  min- 
ister is  the  cause  of  many  disturbancies  ;  and 
that  inefficiency,  where  it  does  exist,  is  to  be 
often  traced  up  to  a  contracted  term  of  educa- 
tion. 

Much,  very  much  pains  should  be  bestowed 
by  all  our  tutors,  not  only  to  form  the  scholar, 
the  divine,  the  preacher,  but  also  the  pastor. 

2.  In  some  cases,  the  evil  is  to  be  traced  to  the 
want  of  ministerial  diligence. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  233 

Instead  of  devoting  their  time  and  their  ener- 
gies to  the  pursuits  of  the  study,  they  spend  one 
half  of  their  weeks  in  running  about  the  country 
to  attend  pubhc  meetings,  and  the  other  in  gos- 
sipping  either  at  their  own  house,  or  the  houses 
of  their  friends.  The  natural  consequence  is, 
that  their  sermons  are  poverty  itself,  or  mere 
repetition  of  the  same  sentiments,  in  the  same 
words.  The  people  become  dissatisfied,  perhaps 
remonstrate  in  a  disrespectful  way ;  the  minister 
takes  offence ;  forms  a  party  of  his  own ;  and 
the  consequence  is,  a  divided,  distracted  church. 
I  believe  one  half  of  our  church  quarrels  origin- 
ate in  lazy,  loitering  ministers. 

3.     Others  are  imprudent. 

They  live  beyond  their  income,  involve  them- 
selves in  debt,  and  their  people  in  disgrace ;  or 
they  speak  unadvisedly  with  their  hps,  and  in- 
volve themselves  in  litigation,  with  either  their 
own  friends,  or  persons  of  other  denominations; 
or  they  hastily  engage  in  paper  wars  with  their 
neighbours;  or  they  marry  persons  unsuitable 
to  their  character,  and  offensive  to  their  con- 
gregation, and  thus  lay  the  foundation  of  un- 
easiness and  dislike  ;  or  they  become  involved 
in  politics,  or  public  business,  and  thus  neglect 
the  interests  of  the  church ;  or  they  speak  ill  of 
some  members  to  others,  and  thus  raise  a  preju- 
dice and  party  against  them  in  the  society  ;  or 
they  let  down  their  dignity  by  becoming  the  go9- 
sipping  companions  of  some  of  their  congrega- 


224  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

tion.  In  all  these,  and  many  other  ways,  do 
ministers  often  prepare  the  way  for  dissatisfac- 
tion or  schism.  Piety  and  prudence  in  the  min- 
isterial character  would  prevent  many  of  the 
divisions  of  our  churches. 

4.  Others  are  men  of  6ac?  fem^jer :  hasty,  im- 
petuous, and  peculiarly  susceptible  of  offence. 

They  are  easily  offended,  and  frequently 
where  no  intention  really  existed  to  wound  their 
minds.  They  then  show  their  resentment  in  a 
w-ay  very  unpleasing  to  the  people.  Many  hard 
speeches,  and  disrespectful  terms  drop  from  their 
lips,  which  are  by  some  mischief-makers,  con- 
veyed to  the  individuals  against  whom  they  were 
uttered.  A  fire  of  contention  is  soon  kindled, 
and  the  whole  church  is  enveloped  in  the  flames. 

5.  Others  are  immoral. 

They  commit  sin,  and  yet,  attaching  to  them- 
selves a  party,  they  introduce  great  disorder  and 
confusion  into  the  society. 

It  is  a  point  in  casuistry,  which  I  do  not  take 
upon  me  to  decide,  how  far  a  minister  might  go 
in  sin,  and  yet,  upon  his  repentance,  be  authoriz- 
ed to  continue  his  office  as  a  preacher  and  pas- 
tor. I  am  inclined,  however,  to  think,  that  if 
his  transgression  has  been  very  flagrant,  no  pen- 
itence, however  deep,  no  reformation,  however 
manifest,  can  justify  him  in  continuing  an  oflfice, 
one  qualification  of  which  is,  that  he  who  holds 
it  should  be  "blameless,"  and  another,  that  he 
should  have  "  a  good  report  of  them  that  are 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  225 

without."  Instances  have  occurred,  in  which 
men  who  have  fallen  into  gross  sin,  have  been 
restored  to  penitence,  and  with  it  to  their  ac- 
customed labour  and  success  ;  but  whether  these 
are  sufficient  to  justify  the  practice  admits  of  a 
doubt.  It  has  been  alleged,  that  Peter  was  not 
discharged  from  the  apostleship  because  of 
his  crime,  which  was  a  very  great  one.  But  it 
may  be  questioned  if  our  Lord's  conduct  in  this 
instance  can  be  drawn  out  into  a  precedent  for 
ours.  This  was  an  extraordinary  case  under 
his  own  direction.  Moreover,  if  our  Lord's  con- 
duct in  retaining  Peter  after  his  fall,  is  a  prece- 
dent for  our  retaining  ministers  who  have  com- 
mitted "  presumptuous  sins,"  his  conduct  in  em- 
ploying Judas,  whom  he  knew  to  be  a  bad  man, 
may  be  quoted  as  authority  for  employing  such 
as  are  wicked. 

The  wonder  is,  that  any  church  should  wish 
to  retain  a  minister,  whose  conduct  has  been 
grossly  immoral,  whatever  fruits  of  repentance 
he  might  bring  forth.  It  appears  to  me,  there- 
fore, upon  the  whole,  for  the  interests  of  true 
piety,  that  he  who  has  grossly  violated  the  prin- 
ciples of  Christian  morality,  should  think  no 
more  of  the  ministerial  office.  It  is  of  infinite 
importance  to  the  interests  of  religion,  that  the 
ministry  be  not  blamed,  but  its  honour  maintain- 
ed with  singular  care. 

6.  The  tenacity  with  which  some  ministers 
retain  their  situation,  when  their  labours  are  no 


226  CHRISTEN    FELLOWSHIP,     OR 

longer  acceptable  to  their  people,  is  another 
c-ause  of  uneasiness. 

When  from  any  cause  a  minister's  services  are 
no  longer  desired  by  his  people,  or  the  bulk  of 
them,  it  is  manifestly  his  duty  to  give  up  his  sit- 
uation as  soon  as  he  can  procure  another.  Any 
attempt  to  remain  in  opposition  to  their  wishes, 
is  certainly  wrong,  as  the  union  is  not  only 
formed  on  the  ground  of  mutual  consent,  but 
for  the  purpose  of  mutual  edification. 

Let  all  ministers  consider  how  much  the  peace 
and  prosperity  of  the  churches  depend  on  their 
diligence,  prudence,  temper,  and  piety.  Let 
them  tremble  at  the  thought  of  introducing 
strife  and  division  to  any  part  of  the  kingdom 
of  Christ. 

n.  Other  causes  of  division  are  to  be  found 
amongst  the  people. 

1.  A  very  large  proportion  of  our  schisms 
arise  at  the  time  of  choosing  a  minister.  This 
has  ah-eady  received  a  distinct  and  separate  con- 
sideration. 

2.  A  hasty  choice  of  an  unsuitable  person  to  fill 
the  pastoral  office,  has  frequently  ended  in  great 
uneasiness. 

The  people  have  discovered  their  error,  when 
its  rectification  was  sure  to  cause  much  trouble 
to  the  society.  Upon  our  system  of  church  gov- 
ernment, it  is  not  easy  to  displace  an  unsuitable 
individual,  and  therefore  great  caution  should 
be  observed  in  choosing  him.     Few  men  will 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  227 

venture  to  remain  in  opposition  to  the  wishes  of 
a  whole  society ;  but  how  rarely  does  it  happen 
that  an  individual  has  no  party  in  his  favour. 

3.  A  peculiar  and  dishonourable  fickleness  of 
disposition  on  the  part  of  the  church,  is  in  some 
instances  the  cause  of  division. 

They  soon  grow  tired  of  the  man  whom  they 
chose  at  first  with  every  demonstration  of  sin- 
cere and  strong  regard.  They  seldom  approve 
a  minister  beyond  a  period  of  seven  years,  and 
are  so  uniform  in  the  term  of  their  satisfaction, 
as  to  make  their  neighbours  look  out  for  a 
change,  when  that  term  is  about  to  expire. 

4.  Uneasiness  has  often  arisen  between  a 
minister  and  his  people,  by  the  unwillingness  of 
the  latter  to  raise  the  necessary  support  for  their 
pastor. 

They  have  seen  him  struggling  with  the  cares 
of  an  increasing  family,  and  marked  the  cloud 
of  gloom,  as  it  thickened  and  settled  upon  his 
brow ;  they  knew  his  wants,  and  yet,  though 
able  to  double  his  salary,  and  dissipate  every 
anxious  thought,  they  have  refused  to  advance 
his  stipend,  and  have  robbed  him  of  his  com- 
fort, either  to  gratify  their  avarice,  or  indulge 
their  sensuality.  He  remonstrates  ;  they  are  of- 
fended: love  departs,  esteem  is  diminished,  con- 
fidence is  destroyed ;  while  ill  will,  strife,  and 
alienation,  grovr  apace.  How  easily  might  all 
this  have  been  prevented.  A  few  pounds  a  year 
more,  given  by  some  individuals  who  could  not 


228  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,   OR 

have  missed  the  sum,  would  have  spared  the 
peace  of  a  faithful  servant  of  Christ,  and  what 
is  of  still  greater  consequence,  the  harmony  of 
a  Christian  church.  Can  those  persons  be  dis- 
ciples of  Jesus,  who  would  put  a  religious  soci- 
ety in  peril,  rather  than  make  so  small  a  sacri- 
fice ?  Let  not  the  voice  of  avarice  reply,  "  Can 
that  man  be  a  minister  of  Christ,  who  would 
feel  offended  with  his  church,  for  not  increasing 
his  salary?"  But  what  is  a  minister  to  do? 
Starve  ?  or  beg  ?  or  steal  ?  If  he  is  already  liv- 
ing in  luxury,  and  expects  more,  he  deserves  to 
be  denied.  But  I  am  supposing  a  case,  where, 
in  the  judgment  of  candour,  he  has  not  enough 
to  support  his  family  in  comfort. 

5.  An  improper  meihod  of  expressing  dissatis- 
faction with  a  mi}iiste7-''s  labours  or  conduct,  has 
often  led  to  trouble  in  a  church. 

I  do  not  pretend  to  say,  that  a  minister  oc- 
cupies a  seat  too  elevated  for  the  voice  of  com- 
plaint to  reach  him,  or  that  he  is  entitled  (like 
his  Master)  to  an  entire  exemption  from  all  that 
interference  which  would  say  unto  him,  "  What 
doest  thou  ?  "  There  are  times  when  it  might 
be  proper  to  remind  a  minister  of  some  duty 
neglected,  some  pastoral  avocation  overlooked. 
But  if  anonymous  and  insolent  letters  are  sent 
him;  if  young,  impertinent,  or  dictatorial  per- 
sons wait  upon  him  ;  if,  instead  of  the  mod- 
est, respectful  hint  of  some  individual  whose 
age  and  station  give  him  a  right  to  be  heard,  ho 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  229 

is  schooled  in  an  objurgatory  strain,  by  those 
who  have  nothing  to  recommend  them  but  their 
impudence  and  officiousuess,  no  wonder,  con- 
sidering that  he  is  but  an  imperfect  man,  if  he 
feel  offended  with  the  hberty,  and  almost  com- 
mand the  intruders  from  his  presence.  The 
apostle  has  spread  over  the  ministerial  charac- 
ter the  shield  of  his  authority,  to  defend  it 
from  the  rude  attacks  of  those  who  would  act 
the  part  of  self-elected  accusers.  "  Rebuke  not 
an  elder,  but  entreat  him  as  a  father."  1  Tim.  v.  1. 

6.  The  domineering  spirit  and  conduct  of  some 
leading  members,  has  often  been  the  source  of 
very  considerable  uneasiness  to  our  churches. 

If  amongst  the  first  disciples  of  Christ,  there 
existed  a  strife  for  pre-eminence,  and  in  the 
churches  planted  by  the  apostles  there  was  to 
be  found  a  Diotrephes  ;  it  is  not  to  be  wonder- 
ed at,  however  much  it  is  to  be  regretted,  that 
there  should  be  individuals  in  our  days,  who 
carry  the  spirit  of  the  world  into  the  church, 
manifest  a  love  of  power,  and  struggle  with 
others  for  its  possession.  Their  property,  and 
perhaps  their  standing,  give  them  influence,  and 
this  unhappily  is  employed  in  endeavouring  to 
subjugate  both  the  minister  and  the  people. 
No  scheme  is  supported  unless  it  originates  with 
them  ;  while  every  plan  of  theirs  is  introduced, 
almost  with  the  authority  of  a  law.  They  ex- 
pect to  be  consulted  on  the  most  trivial  occa- 
sions, and  if  in  any  thing  opposed,  become  re- 


230  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

sentful,  sullen,  and  distant.  Little  by  little,  they 
endeavour  to  gain  a  complete  ascendency  in  the 
society,  and  watch  with  peculiar  jealousy  every 
individual  who  is  likely  to  become  a  rival.  The 
minister  at  length  scarcely  dare  leave  home 
for  a  Sabbath,  without  asking  their  leave,  nor 
can  the  people  form  the  least  scheme  of  useful- 
ness without  their  permission.  When  they  are 
at  any  tinie  resisted,  they  breathe  out  threats  of 
giving  up  all  interest  in  church  affairs,  at  which 
the  terrified  and  servile  society,  end  their  resist- 
ance, consolidate  the  power  of  their  tyrant,  and 
rivet  the  fetters  of  slavery  upon  their  own 
necks.  At  length,  however,  a  rival  power 
springs  up :  a  family  of  growing  reputation  and 
influence  refuse  any  longer  to  submit  to  the 
thraldom ;  o]jposition  to  unlawful  domination 
commences,  the  church  is  divided  into  factions, 
the  minister  becomes  involved  in  the  dispute, 
distraction  follows,  and  division  finishes  the 
scene.  Lamentable  state  of  things!  Would 
God  it  rarely  occurred.  Let  the  leading  indi- 
viduals of  our  churches,  the  men  of  property, 
and  the  deacons,  consider  what  mischief  may 
be  occasioned  by  the  least  assumption  of  undue 
influence.  Let  them  watch  against  the  lust  of 
power:  it  is  a  passion  most  guilty  and  most 
mischievous:  it  arises  almost  imperceptibly 
fi'om  their  situation,  and  its  progress,  like  that 
of  sin  in  general,  is  slow  but  certain.  Let  them 
conduct  themselves  with  humiUty,  and  dehver 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  231 

their  opinions  with  modesty,  and  remember  that 
every  exertion  of  illegal  authority  is  an  invasion, 
not  only  of  the  liberty  of  the  church,  but  of  the 
prerogative  of  its  Divine  Head.  Let  them  con- 
sider themselves  as  persons,  whose  opinion  is  to 
have  no  other  influence  than  that  which  its  own 
wisdom  gives  it ;  and  that  the  measure  of  this 
wisdom  is  to  be  estimated,  not  by  them,  but  by 
their  brethren.  Let  them  seek  for  that  humility, 
wliich  can  bear  to  be  opposed,  and  that  gentle- 
ness of  temper  which  can  submit  to  contradic- 
tion. Let  them  distinctly  bear  in  recollection 
that  the  church  of  God  is  a  society,  where  all 
are  equals,  all  are  brethren  ;  where  the  govern- 
ment of  terror,  or  interest,  or  property,  is  un- 
known, but  where  love  and  humility  are  to 
prevail,  and  no  other  rule  is  to  be  acknowledged 
but  that  of  Jesus  Christ. 

7.  The  relaxation  of  scriptural  discipline,  may 
be  mentioned  as  another  source  of  evil. 

Where  the  church  is  unscripturally  lax  in  the 
admission  of  members,  and  for  the  sake  of  en- 
larging its  bulk,  admits  improper  materials,  it  is 
certainly  multiplying  the  causes  of  schism  and 
decay.  If  a  wall  is  built  with  unsound  bricks 
and  untemjjered  mortar,  it  may  stand  for  a 
while,  but  cracks  and  delapidations  must  sooner 
or  later  be  visible  in  its  structure.  Thus  if  men 
of  unsanctified  dispositions  be  admitted  to  the 
church,  what  can  be  expected  from  such  indi- 
viduals in  a  time  of  conflicting  opinion,  but  fuel 


232  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

for  the  flame  of  contention?  The  danger  is 
considerably  increased,  where  the  individuals, 
improperly  admitted,  are  persons  of  property. 
If  the  ordinary  rules  of  admission  are  dispensed 
with  for  the  sake  of  bringing  into  fellowship  the 
wealthy  and  the  worldly  ;  if  a  less  rigid  examin- 
ation of  their  personal  religion  take  place,  it  is 
little  to  be  wondered  at,  that  mischief  should 
ultimately  ensue.  For  the  sake  of  its  glittering 
exterior,  many  a  church  has  taken  a  serpent  to 
its  bosom  ;  or  to  adopt  a  scriptural  allusion,  has 
welcomed  an  Achan  to  the  camp,  for  the  sake 
of  his  Babylonish  vest  and  golden  wedge.  If  a 
rich  member  be  an  unsanctified  man,  he  has  a 
double  power  of  mischief,  and  in  the  time  of 
trouble,  this  will  be  felt  to  the  bitter  experience 
of  the  church.  "  Whence  come  wars  and  fight- 
ings amongst  you  ?  Come  they  not  hence,  even 
of  your  lusts  that  war  in  your  members  ?"  James 
iv.  1.  Of  course,  then,  if  we  are  careless  in  the 
admission  of  members,  and  receive  those  who 
do  not  give  satisfactory  evidence  of  personal  re- 
ligion, we  are  multiplying  the  sources  of  conten- 
tion within  our  societies.  Civil  wars  are  to  be 
expected  in  that  country,  which  extends  with- 
out caution  the  rights  of  citizens  to  aliens  and  en- 
emies. Wolves  admitted  in  sheep's  clothing  will 
worry  and  scatter  the  flock.  As,  therefore,  we 
would  not  prei)are  for  division  and  distraction, 
let  us  act  upon  scriptural  principles,  in  the  ad- 
mission of  members. 


233 

8.  The  existence  and  prevalence  of  an  Antino- 
mian  spirit,  is  a  fruitful  source  of  schism  in  our 
churches. 

"  As  every  age  of  the  church  is  marked  by  its 
appropriate  visitation  of  error,  so  httle  penetra- 
tion is  requisite  to  perceive  that  Antinomianisni 
is  the  epidemic  malady  of  the  present,  and  that 
it  is  an  evil  of  deadly  malignity.  It  is  qualified 
for  mischief  by  the  very  properties  which  might 
seem  to  reader  it  merely  an  object  of  contempt — 
its  vulgarity  of  conception,  its  paucity  of  ideas, 
its  determined  hostihty  to  taste,  science,  and 
letters.  It  includes  within  a  compass  which 
every  head  can  contain,  and  every  tongue  can 
utter,  a  system  which  cancels  every  moral  tie, 
consigns  the  whole  human  race  to  the  extremes 
of  presumption  or  despair ;  erects  religion  on 
the  ruins  of  morality,  and  imparts  to  the  dregs 
of  stupidity  all  the  powers  of  the  most  active 
poison."* 

This  ruinous  spirit  has  already  disorganized 
or  convulsed  so  many  churches,  that  it  is  high 
time  the  tocsin  should  be  sounded  against  it,  and 
all  good  citizens  of  Zion  take  the  alarm.  It 
must  be  confessed,  however,  that  it  does  not 
always  onginate  amongst  the  people.  A  perver- 
sion of  divine  truth  so  monstrous,  so  mischievous, 
and  absurd,  would  hardly  have  acquired  such 
power  and  prevalence,  if  it  had  not  received  the 

*  Robert  Hall. 

U 


234  CHRISTIAN   FELLOWSHIP,    OR 

sanction  of  ministerial  authority.  I  speak  not 
now  of  those  ministers  who  are  tlie  avowed  and 
consistent  patrons  of  the  system,  but  of  men 
more  reputable,  and  whose  strain  of  preaching 
is  in  general  more  scriptural;  men  who  abhor 
the  tenets  of  Antinomianism,  but  who  are  igno- 
rantly  the  abettors  of  these  tenets.  When  such 
ministers  dwell  only  on  the  doctrinal  parts  of 
revealed  truth,  and  state  these  in  a  phraseology 
capable  of  misconstruction  ;  when  their  preach- 
ing is  exclusively  confined  to  a  few  topics,  and 
to  a  stiff  systematic  exhibition  of  them ;  when 
a  wretched  taste  for  spiritualizing  and  allegoriz- 
ing pervades  their  pulpit  discussions  ;  when  the 
facts  and  doctrines  of  the  gospel  are  ahstractly 
stated,  without  being  made  the  grounds  and 
motives  of  social  duty  and  moral  excellence ; 
when  terms  obviously  scriptural  are  avoided,  in 
comphment  to  a  system  which  reprobates  with- 
out understanding  them,  and  their  sermons  are 
encumbered  and  disfigured  with  the  phraseology 
of  a  false  experience  ;  when  believers  are  flatter- 
ed and  caressed  into  a  high  conceit  of  their  pecu- 
liar excellence  ;  then,  whatever  be  the  preacher's 
tenets  or  intentions,  must  Antinomianism  be 
generated  and  cherished.  Ofttimes  has  this 
elfish  spirit  risen  up  to  be  the  tormentor  of  the 
father  that  begat  him  ;  but  if  quiet  till  his  head 
was  beneath  the  «lods  of  the  valley,  he  has  pos- 
sessed and  convulsed  the  church  during  the 
time  of  his  successor. 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  235 

To  cure  this  evil,  then,  let  ministers  be  cautious 
how  they  preach.  Let  them  give  a  full  exhibition 
of  the  doctrines  of  grace  ;  but  at  the  same  time 
let  them  exhibit  these  doctrines  in  a  scriptural 
manner,  as  the  basis  of  holiness  and  moral 
excellence  :  let  them  introduce,  in  their  preach- 
ing, all  the  varieties  of  revealed  truth  ;  let  them 
avoid  the  trammels  of  system,  nor  ever  attempt 
to  corrupt  the  testimonies  of  scripture  by  mak- 
ing a  text  say  what  it  was  never  intended  to 
•affirm.  The  chief  source  of  Antinomianism  is 
in  the  pulpit,  and  let  the  first  effort,  therefore,  be 
employed  on  the  fountain,  to  render  this  pure  and 
salutary  ;  and  the  next  be  devoted  to  drain  off 
these  streams,  which  are  corrupting  the  churches. 
When  an  individual,  or  any  individual?,  are 
known  to  cavil  at  the  sermons  of  the  minister, 
and  to  be-  employed  in  exciting  a  prejudice 
against  him,  by  insinuating  that  he  does  not 
preach  the  gospel,  they  should  be  reasoned  and 
expostulated  with,  both  by  the  minister  and 
the  more  judicious  members  of  his  flock.  Ev- 
ery mild  and  persuasive  method  should  be 
adopted  and  employed  either  to  convince,  or  si- 
lence them.  If  they  cannot  be  convinced,  they 
should  at  least  be  bound  over  to  keep  the  peace,  and 
brought  under  promise  not  to  trouble  the  church, 
or  attempt  to  sow  the  seeds  of  disaffection  in 
the  minds  of  the  brethren.  If  they  consent,  ou 
these  terms,  to  remain  in  communion,  they 
should  of   course  be  retained ;    but  if  again 


236  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

detected  in  the  act  of  disturbing  the  society, 
they  should  forthwith  be  put  away,  as  the 
troublers  of  Israel.  I  have  known  instances,  in 
which  ministers  of  great  eminence  and  influence 
have  suffered  such  individuals  to  remain  in  com- 
munion, for  the  sake  of  peace,  and  have  trusted 
to  their  own  authority  to  prevent  the  mischief 
from  spreading.  This,  however,  is  chaining  the 
fiend,  not  casting  him  out,  and  leaving  him  to 
burst  his  fetters,  when  the  hand  that  held  him 
in  vassalage  is  paralysed  by  death,  and  permit-' 
ting  him  to  waste  and  devour  the  church,  under 
the  rule  of  a  younger  or  inferior  minister.  An 
act  of  authority,  scripturally  and  seasonably  ex- 
erted, would  thus  have  destroyed  an  evil,  which 
by  a  temporizing  policy,  is  bequeathed  to  a  suc- 
cessor, who  can  neither  destroy  nor  control  it. 

9.  After  all  that  has  been  said  upon  distinct 
and  specific  causes  of  disturbance,  it  must  be  ad- 
mitted that  the  grand  source  of  ecclesiastical, 
distraction,  is  the  very  feeble  operation  of  Chris- 
tian principles  on  the  hearts  of  church  members^. 
There  is  not  that  solemn  recognition  and  pow- 
erful influence  of  these  principles  which  there 
ought  to  be.  The  two  virtues  of  love  and  hu- 
mility, if  prevalent,  would  effectually  preserve 
the  peace  of  the  church  against  the  evils  of  in- 
testine commotion.  Without  these,  even  the 
kingdom  of  Christ,  no  less  than  the  kingdoms 
of  this  world,  is  sure  to  be  convulsed  with  fac- 
tion, and  torn  by  schism.     As  long  as  Christians 


237 

suffer  the  passions  of  men  to  agitate  their  minds 
and  direct  their  conduct  in  the  assembly  of  the 
saints^  so  long  must  we  expect  to  see  even  that 
holy  convention  liable  to  the  distractions  of  mere 
worldly  communities.  Pride  is  the  polluted  and 
polluting  fountain  of  faction.  It  is  pride  that 
makes  men  turbulent  and  contentious;  that 
renders  them  imperious,  dogmatical  and  over- 
bearing ;  that  drives  them  upon  the  inflexible 
determination  to  have  their  own  way,  and  that 
makes  them  regardless  of  the  opinions  and  feel- 
ings of  others.  Humility  and  love  would 
keep  all  quiet  and  orderly.  There  is  one  single 
passage  of  scripture,  which,  if  sacredly  observed, 
would  forever  shut  out  the  divider  of  the 
brethren.  "  If  there  be,  therefore,  any  conso- 
lation in  Christ,  if  any  comfort  of  love,  if  any 
fellowship  of  the  spirit,  if  any  bowels  and 
mercies,  fufil  ye  my  joy,  that  ye  be  Uke  minded, 
having  the  same  love,  being  of  one  accord,  of 
one  mind.  Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife, 
or  vain  glory  ;  but  in  lowliness  of  mind  let  each 
esteem  others  better  than  themselves.  Look  not 
every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also 
on  the  things  of  others.  Let  this  mind  be  in  you, 
which  also  was  in  Christ  Jesus."*  The  observ- 
ance of  this  single   injunction  would   ever  pre- 


*  This  passage  of  Scripture  should  be  printed  in 
large  letters,  and  hung  up  in  the  full  view  of  the  con- 
gregation, every  time  they  meet  as  a  Christian  church, 
that  it  might  be  referred  to  as  the  rule  of  their  conduct 
and  their  spirit. 


238  CHRISTIAN    FELLOWSHIP,  OR 

serve  our  harmony,  and  make  our  church  meet- 
ings to  be  scenes  where  all  the  air  is  love,  and 
all  the  region  peace. 

And  where  is  our  rehgion,  if  we  do  not  obey 
this  apostolic  command  ?  We  must  come  back 
to  the  first  principles  of  practical  piety,  and  cul- 
tivate the  passive  virtues  of  the  christian  temper. 
We  must  remember  that  Christianity  is  being 
like  Christ,  and  that  unless  we  partake  of  that 
love  "  which  sufFereth  long  and  is  kind  ;  which 
envieth  not,  vaunteth  not  itself,  is  not  puffed  up  ; 
which  doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly,  seeketh 
not  her  own,  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no 
evil,  rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the 
truth ;  which  believeth  all  things,  beareth  all 
things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things ;" 
we  are  only  "  as  sounding  brass  or  a  tinkling 
cymbal."  The  necessity  of  the  Christian  temper 
as  a  personal  possession,  and  its  importance  as 
a  relative  blessing,  has  hitherto  been  but  fee- 
bly perceived,  and  reluctantly  acknowledged. 
Amidst  the  controversies  which  have  been  carried 
on  about  the  doctrines  of  revelation,  the  spirit  of 
religion  has  been  too  much  lost  sight  of :  And 
what,  after  all,  is  the  doctrine  without  the  spirit, 
but  the  body  v/ithout  the  soul  ?  Strange  indeed 
it  is,  that  men,  who  by  their  own  confession 
are  apostate,  ruined,  helpless  sinners,  should 
want  humility;  and  that  they  who  believe 
themselves  to  be  saved  from  hell  by  unmerited 
mercy,  should  be  destitute  of  love  ! 


CHURCH    member's    GUIDE.  239 

Never  until  we  are  brought  to  a  more  implicit 
submission  to  the  authority  of  Christ,  and  to  a 
more  distinct  and  practical  recognition  of  the 
principles  of  true  religion,  can  we  rationally 
expect  to  see  Zion  a  quiet  and  peaceable  habita- 
tion. Heaven  itself  would  be  a  region  of  storms 
if  pride  could  enter,  or  love  diminish,  in  those 
realms  of  perfect  peace.  We  must  crucify  that 
selfishness,  which  fixes  its  exclusive  observation 
on  our  own  gratification,  and  cherish  that  expan- 
sive benevolence  which  looks  upon  the  good  of 
others.  We  must  contend  who  shall  be  lowest, 
not  who  shall  be  highest.  AVe  must  seek  to 
please,  and  not  merely  to  be  pleased.  In  these 
things  must  our  efibrts  begin,  to  suppress  and 
prevent  the  division  of  our  churches.  Let  min- 
isters inculcate  this  temper  from  the  pulpit,  and 
exhibit  it  in  their  conduct ;  let  private  Christians 
receive  the  instructions,  and  copy  the  example 
of  their  pastors.  Let  both  remember  that  hu- 
mility and  LOVE  are  the  necessary  fruits  of  our 
doctrines,  the  highest  beauty  of  our  character, 
and  the  guardian  angels  of  our  churches. 


INDEX. 


CHAPTER  I.     On  the  Nature  of  a  Christian  Church    .    .    ,    ,    .     11 
„  II.     On  the  Nature  and  Design  of  Church  Fellowship    .    27 

y,         III.     The  Privileges  of  Membership ,35 

„  IV.    The  General  Duties  of  Church  Members  in  their 

Individual  Capacity ,42 

^  V.     On  the  Duties  of  Church  Members  to  their  Pastors  .     59 

^         VI.     Duties  of  Church  Members  towards  each  other   .     .     81 
^       VII.     The  Duties  of  Church  Members  to  the  Members 

of  other  Christian  Societies 118 

„     VIII.     The  Duties  of  Church  Members  in  their  peculiar 

Character  and  Station .  130 

„         IX.    Miscellaneous  Subjects. 

On  the  true  Nature  of  Church  Power     .     .     ...     .173 

On  the  Mode  of  conducting  Church  Meetings     .     .  175 
On  the  Admission  of  Members  to  the  Church     .     .  178 

On  Discipline 183 

On  the  Removal  of  Membeis  from  one  Church  to 

another  in  the  same  Town 198 

On  the  Conduct  to  be  observed  by  a  Church  in 

the   Election  of   a  Pastor 203 

On  the  Propriety  of  occasionally  administering 
the  Lord's  Supper  in  Private  Houses  for  the 
sake  of  sick  Persons  who  are  incapable  of  attend- 
ing the  Solenftiities  of  Public  Worship  .  .  .  214 
On  the  causes  of  those  Schisms  which  sometimes 
distract  and  disturb  the  Chuich    ......  219 


Princeton  Theoloqical  Seminary   Libraries 


2886 


1    1012  01 


