“HLT 


100114 4 








© 


The Library | 


of the 


CLAREMONT | 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 


1325 North College Avenue 
Claremont, CA 91711-3199 
1/800-626-7820 












CHRIST IN ISAIAH 
oe 7 


“ 
a4 








a 
SAO 


M49 | | 
| CHRIST IN ISAIAH 


BY 


Fo BS MEV ER, BA. 


Author of 


“The Life and Light of Men”; “ The Way into the Holiest" 
‘Tried by Fire” ; etc., etc. 


MORGAN AND SCOTT Lt. 


(Office of Ghe Christian) 
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS 
LONDON MCMXI 


Morgan & Scott’s “Golden Treasury” Series. 


Without taking into account the enormous unrecorded circulation 
of Bogatzsky’s ‘‘Golden Treasury,” the volumes comprised in this 
Series are now in their 


One million seven hundred and twenty-sixth thousand 
(1,726th thousand). 


A GOLDEN TREASURY for the Children of God. Based upon the well-known work 
of C, H. v. BOGATZSKY. 


CHRIST AND THE SCRIPTURES. By Rev. ADOLPH SAPHIR, D.D, 
DAVID: Shepherd, Psalmist, King. By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 
ELIJAH: And the Secret of his Power. By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 
ISRAEL: A Prince with God. By Rev. F. B, MEYER, B.A. 

JOHN, WHOM JESUS LOVED. By Rev. JAMES CULROsS, D.D 
JOSEPH : Beloved—Hated—Exalted. By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 
MOSES: The Servant of God. By Rev. F., B. MEYER, B.A. 

PAUL: A Servant of Jesus Christ. By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 


THE CATACOMBS AT ROME. A Vindication of Pure and Primitive Christianity. 
By BENJAMIN SCOTT, F.R.A.S. 


JOSHUA: And the Land of Promise, By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 
TELL JESUS: And Poems. By ANNA SHIPTON. 

JEREMIAH: Priest and Prophet. By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 
ABRAHAM: Or, The Obedienve of Faith. By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 
JOHN THE BAPTIST. By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 

CHRIST IN ISAIAH. By Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. 

FINDERS OF THE WAY. By Rev. JAMES STIRLING, 


{ PLEASURE AND PROFIT IN BIBLE STUDY, and 


ANECDOTES, INCIDENTS, AND ILLUSTRATIONS. By D. L. Moopy. 


TWO VOLUMES BOUND TR. 
THE WAY TO GOD, and BOUND IN ONE 


HEAVEN; OR THE LIFE BEYOND. By D. L. Moopy, 
TWO VOLUMES B 'D 
THE ORATIONS OF JOHN B. GOUGH. _ gl te Rs od 





Cloth, Full Gilt Back, 1s, net each. | 





Theology LPT Ipe SCOTT LTD. LONDON. 


ae OF THEOLOGY 
T CLAREMONT F 


iforni ta 


Ree PF ACE: 


S83 


a|HE Exodus from Egypt is one of the most 
conspicuous landmarks of the past; not only 
because of its historical value, but because it 
inaugurated a religious movement which is the 





most important factor in our modern world. 


The Exodus from Babylon has never succeeded in 
arousing equal interest, largely because it was more 
gradual and uneventful. Yet it was a marvellous episode, 
and bore upon its face the evident interposition of Jehovah 
on behalf of his people. Its results, which culminated 
in the advent of the Servant of the Lord, were in the 


highest degree momentous. 


The story of this Exodus is anticipated in chap- 
ters xl. to lv. of the Book of Isaiah, which form the subject 
of this volume. But the story of the Exodus itself is 


subsidiary and introductory to another theme, which soon 


vi Preface. 


absorbs our: attention. Before us pass, in vivid outlines, 
the scenes by which our redemption was secured. The 
humiliation and suffering, sorrow and anguish of soul, 
substitution and death, exaltation and satisfaction of the: 
Saviour are portrayed, with the minuteness and accuracy 
of a contemporary ; and there is hardly a sentence from 
which we cannot begin and preach Jesus, as Philip did 
to the Ethiopian eunucn. 


7 3, ney. 


1s 
III. 
IV. 


Ae 
VII. 
VELT: 
IX, 


XI. 
XII. 
XIII. 
XIV. 
XV. 
XVI. 
XVII. 
XVIII. 
XIX. 


CONT ENTS; 


“COMFORT YE, COMFORT YE” ... 


VOICES THAT SPEAK TO THE HEART... 


“Wuy SAYEST THOU?” ... mee 
THE CONVOCATION OF THE NATIONS 
“BEHOLD My SERVANT” He 
“YE ARE My WITNESSES” ae 
THE ALTERING OF GOD’S PURPOSE 
A PERVERTED APPETITE... ane 
THE GIRDINGS OF JEHOVAH 
ASKING AND COMMANDING aay 
GOD OUR BURDEN-BEARER ... 
SUMMONED TO AN Exopus 


A POLISHED SHAFT a2 re 


THE LOVE THAT WILL NOT LET US GO 


WORDS IN SEASON FOR THE WEARY... 


THE THRICE “ HEARKEN” ae 
“AWAKE, AWAKE!” aes ee 
“DEPART YE, DEPART YE!” ... 


THE VINDICATION OF CHRIST ... 


PAGE 


I 
uw 


td iS) 
[o-e) No 


isp) 
ur 


viii Contents. 


PAGE 


XX. FAITH AS A SWITCH ... A aan ..» 146 
XXI. MAKE His SouL THY SIN-OFFERING he eS 
XXII. THE SATISFACTION OF THE MESSIAH sex TOE> 
XXIII. THE GREATNESS OF THE SIN-BEARER ... 168 
XXIV. “SING, O BARREN!” ... abs an eae TG 

XXV. THE CITY OF GoD ne oe ee wen FOZ 
XXVI. OUR GLORIFIED LEADER ... ues ase LOO 
XXVII. THE NEAR AND HEAVENLY HORIZONS ... 197 


XXVIII. THE TRANSFORMATIONS OF GOD’S GRACE 204 


CHRIST IN ISAIAH. 


2 





es 


I. 
“Comfort pe, Comfort ye.” 


“* Ask God to give thee skill 
In comfort’s art ; 
That thou mayst consecrated be 
And set apart 
Into a life of sympathy. 
For heavy is the weight of ill 
In every heart ; 
And comforters are needed much 
Of Christlike touch.” 
A. E. HAMILTON. 


(ISAIAH xl. 1.) 


HINK it not strange, child of God, concerning the 
fiery trial that tries thee, as though some strange 
thing had happened. Rejoice! for it is a sure sign 
that thou art on the right track. If in an unknown 
country, I am informed that I must pass through a 
valley where the sun is hidden, or over a stony bit 

of road, to reach my abiding-place—when I come to it, each 

moment of shadow or jolt of the carriage tells me that I am 
on the right road. So when a child of God passes through 
affliction he is not surprised. 

In the case of the chosen people, who for nearly seventy 
years had been strangers in a strange land, and had drunk the 
cup of bitterness to its dregs, there was thus added weight to 
their sorrow—the conviction of their captivity being the result 
of their own impenitence and transgression. This is the 
bitterest of all—to know that suffering need not have been; 
that it has resulted from indiscretion and inconsistency ; that 
it is the harvest of one’s own sowing ; that the vulture which 





10 “Comfort pe, Comfort ne.” 


feeds on the vitals is a nestling of one’s own rearing. Ah me! 
this is pain! There is an inevitable Nemesis in life. The laws 
of the heart and home, of the soul and human life, cannot be 
violated with impunity. Sin may be forgiven; the fire of 
penalty may be changed into the fire of trial ; the love of God. 
may seem nearer and dearer than ever—and yet there is the 
awful pressure of pain ; the trembling heart ; the failing of eyes 
and pining of soul; the harp on the willows ; the refusal of the 
lip to sing the Lord’s song. 

We cannot wonder at the troubles that afflict us. Look up. 
Thou art to be like the Son of God, who Himself passed through 
the discipline of pain, as the participator with the children of 
flesh and blood. If He needed to come to earth to learn 
obedience by the things that He suffered, surely thou canst 
not escape. Couldst thou be quite like Him, unless thou wert 
perfected by suffering? Thou must endure the file of the 
lapidary ; the heat of the crucible ; the bruising of the flail— 
not to win thy heaven, but to destroy thy unheavenliness. The 
spirits gathered on the frontiers of the heavenly world, to en- 
courage thee in thy journey thither, tell thee that the brilliance 
of their reward has been in the measure of the vehemence of 
their sorrows, giving scope and opportunity for the heroism of 
their faith. 

Look down. ‘Thinkest thou that the prince of hell was 
pleased when thou didst forsake him for thy new Master, 
Christ? Verily not! At the moment of thy conversion, thy 
name was put on the proscribed list; and all the powers of 
darkness pledged themselves to obstruct thy way. Remember 
how Satan hated Job ; does he not hate thee? He would vent 
on thee the hatred he has to thy Lord, if he might. There is, 
at least, that one case on record of hell being permitted to test 
a saint, within a defined limit. 

Look around. Thou art still in the world that crucified thy 
Lord, and would do the same again, if He were to return to it. 
It cannot love thee. It will call thee Beelzebub. It will cast 
thee out of its synagogue. It will count it a religious act to 
slay thee. In the world thou shalt have tribulations, though J in 
the midst of them thou mayest be of good cheer. 


A Bibine Art. It 
When the soul is in the period of its exile and bitter pain, it 


should do three things : Look out for comfort ; store it up; and 
pass it on. 


I. LOOK OUT FOR COMFORT.—It will come certainly. Wher- 
ever the nettle grows, beside it grows the dock-leaf ; and wher- 
_ ever there is severe trial, there is, somewhere at hand, a suf- 
ficient store of comfort, though our eyes, like Hagar’s, are 
often holden that we cannot see it. But it is as sure as the 
faithfulness of God. “I never had,” says Bunyan, writing of 
his twelve years’ imprisonment, “in all my life, so great an 
insight into the Word of God as now; insomuch that I have 
often said, Were it lawful, I could pray for greater trouble, for 
the greater comforts’ sake.” God cannot forget his child. He 
cannot leave us to suffer, unsuccoured and alone. He rums to 
meet the prodigal ; but He rides on a cherub, and He /ves on 
the wings of the wind to the sinking disciple. 

It will come proportionately. Thy Father holds a pair of 
scales. This on the right is called As, and is for thine afflic- 
tions ; this on the left is called So, and is for thy comforts. 
And the beam is always kept level. The more thy trial, the 
more thy comfort. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so 
our consolation also aboundeth through Christ. 

It will come Dzvinely. It is well, when meeting a friend at 
the terminus, to know by what route to expect him, lest he 
arrive on one platform, whilst we await him on another. It is 
equally important to know in what quarter to look for comfort. 
Shall we look to the hills, the stable and lofty things of earth? 
No; in vain is salvation looked for from the multitude of the 
mountains. Shall we look to man? No; for he cannot reach 
low enough into the heart. Shall we look to angels? No; 
among the many ministries that God entrusts to them, He 
seldom sends them to comfort: perhaps they are too strong, or 
they have never suffered. To bind up a broken heart requires 
a delicacy of touch which a Gabriel has not. God reserves to 
Himself the prerogative of comfort. It is a Divine art. The 
choice name of the Son and the Spirit is Paraclete (the Con- 
soler, or Comforter). Thine is the God of all comfort. It is 


12 “@omiort ge, Comfort pe.” 


when Israel is in the extremity of her anguish, that the Divine 
Voice sounds from heaven in strains of music, “Comfort ye, 
comfort ye, My people, saith your God. Speak ye comfortably 
to Jerusalem.” “I am He that comforteth you.” “As one 
whom his mother comforteth, will I comfort you.” 

It will come mediately. What the prophet was as the spokes- 
man of Jehovah, uttering to the people in human tones the 
inspirations that came to him from God, so to us is the great 
Prophet, whose shoe-latchet the noblest of the prophetic band 
was not worthy to unloose ; and our comfort is the sweeter 
because it reaches us through Him. In these words we hear 
the Father calling to the Son, and saying, “Comfort ye, 
comfort ye, my people.” “Our comfort aboundeth ‘hrough 
SCLrish” 

It will come variously. Sometimes by the coming of a 
beloved Titus; a bouquet; a bunch of grapes; a letter; a 
message ; a card. Sometimes by a promise; the laying of an 
ice-cold cloth on our fevered brows; sometimes by God 


coming near. See in this chapter the variety of considerations. 


by which God would comfort the despondent soul. That the 
term of sorrow is nearly accomplished ; that herald voices 
announce the levelling of difficulties, and the approach of 
dawn ; that the covenant stands sure; that the God of stars 
and worlds is the tender Shepherd, who will not overdrive His 
flock ; that man at his strongest is but the flower of grass, 
whilst God’s Word is like the great mountains. There are 
many strings in the dulcimer of consolation. 

In sore sorrow it is not what a friend says, but what he is, 
that helps us. Ye comforts best who says least, but simply 
draws near, takes the sufferer’s hand, and sits silent in his 
sympathy. This is God’s method. ‘Thou drewest near in the 
day that I called upon Thee :.Thou saidst, Fear not !” 


II. STORE UP COMFORT.—This was the prophet’s mission. 
He had to receive before he could impart. He had to be 
schooled himself before he could teach others. 

The world is full of comfortless hearts. Orphan children 
are crying in the night. Rachels are weeping for their 


+ oe~stieeel 


——oe 


A Tiwo-fold Blessing. - 13 


children. Strong men are crushed in the wine-press, because 
their blood is the life of the world. Our God pities them. He 
cannot stay the progress of these awful years, until the mystery 
of iniquity is finished. Still He pities, and would assuage the 
anguish of the world through thee. But ere thou art sufficient 
for this lofty ministry, thou must be trained. And thy training 
is costly in the extreme; for to render it perfect, thou must pass 
through the same afflictions as are wringing countless hearts 
of tears and blood. Thus thy own life becomes the hospital 
_ward where thou art taught the Divine art of comfort. Thou 
art wounded, that in the binding up of thy wounds by the Great 
Physician thou mayest learn how to render first aid to the 
wounded everywhere. Thy limbs are broken, that in the 
setting of them thou mayest have a personal acquaintance with 
the anatomy and surgery of the heart. 

Dost thou wonder why thou art passing through some special 
time of sorrow? Wait till ten years are passed. I warrant 
thee, that in that time thou wilt find some, perhaps ten, afflicted 
as thou art. Thou wilt tell them some day how thou hast 
suffered and hast been comforted ; then as the tale is unfolded, 
and the anodynes applied which once thy God had wrapped 
around thee, in the eager look and glistening eye, and the 
gleam of hope that shall chase the shadow of despair across 
the soul, thou shalt know why thou wast afflicted, and bless 
God for the discipline that stored thy life with such a fund of 
experience and helpfulness. 

Store up a careful memory of the way in which God comforts 
thee. Watch narrowly how He does it. Keep a diary, if thou 
wilt, and note down all the procedure of his skill. Ponder the 
length of each splint, the folds of each bandage, the effect of 
each opiate, cordial, or drug. This will bring a twofold 
blessing. It will divert thy thoughts from thy miseries to the 
outnumbering mercies ; and it wil] take away that sense of 
useless and aimless existence which is often’ the sufferer’s 
weariest cross. 


III. PAss ON THE COMFORT YOU RECEIVE.—At a railway- 
station a kind-hearted man found a schoolboy crying, because 


14 “Comfort pe, Comfort pe.” 


he had not quite enough money to pay his fare home. Sud- 
denly, he remembered how, years before, Ze had been in the 
same plight, hut had been helped by an unknown friend, who 
enjoined him some day to pass the kindness on. Now he saw 
that the anticipated moment had arrived. He took the weeping 
boy aside, told himn the story, paid his fare, and asked him, in 
his turn, to pass the kindness on. And as the train moved 
from the station, the lad cried cheerily, “I will pass it on, sir.” 
So that act of wonderful love is being passed on through the 
world, nor will it stay till its ripples have circled the globe and 
met again. 

“Go, and do thou likewise.” “Speak comfortably to Jeru- 
salem, and cry unto her.’ God comforteth thee, that thou 
mightest comfort those who are in any trouble. Thou canst 
not miss them; they are not scarce. Thine own sad past will 
make thee quick to detect them, where others might miss them. 
If thou findest them not, seek them; the wounded hart goes 
alone to die. Sorrow shuns society. Get from the Man of 
Sorrows directions where the sorrowing hide. He knows their 
haunts, from which they have cried to Him. He has been 
there before thee. And when thou comest where they are, do 
for them as the Good Samaritan did for thee, when He bound 
up thy wounds, pouring in oil and wine. “Comfort ye, comfort 
ye, My people, saith your God.” 


II. 
Voices that Speak to the Feart. 


‘* The word were but a blank, a hollow sound, 
If He that spake it were not speaking still ; 
If all the light, and all the shade around 
Were aught but issues of Almighty will. 


‘* Sweet girl, believe that every bird that sings, 
And every flower that stars the elastic sod, 
And every thought that happy summer brings 
To thy pure spirit, is a word of God.” 
H. COLERIDGE, 


(ISAIAH xl. 2.) 


HEN the heart is sad, and the years bring no 
relief, be sure to turn from the fret of circum- 
stance, the confused murmur of human life, the 
many voices that speak from the crowds around; 
and listen with ear attent, until the soul dis- 
tinguishes those other deeper voices that pene- 

trate the barrier of sense from the land of the unseen, where 
God is, and life is at the full. There may be no shape or form, 
no speaker that can be recognised, no angel-messenger with 
radiant glory and wing of noiseless strength ; but there will be 
voices, not one or two only, but sometimes, as in this marvellous 
paragraph, four at least. Each the voice of God, but each 
with a different accent, a different tone. / 

The anonymity of the voices is unimportant. The multipli- 
cation table is anonymous; but it is not less true. Some of 
the sweetest of the Psalms, and the Epistle to the Hebrews are 
anonymous ; but they carry their credentials on their face, 
everywhere in their fabric is the hall-mark of inspiration. 
That these voices speak out of the void, borne down the wind 
from eternity, whilst the heralds themselves are veiled in 
twilight which is slowly opening to dawn, makes nothing 





16 Poices that Speak to the Beart. 


against their credibility and comfort. A strain is sweet, though 
we know not the composer; a picture is noble, though we 
know not the artist ; a book is true and helpful, though no 
name stands on the title-page. The heart of man, made in 
the image of God, recognises instinctively the voices that speak 
from God; as a child, far from home in the blackest night, 
would recognise instantly any of the voices that it had been 
wont to hear from its cradle-days. 

This is one characteristic of the voices that reach us from 
God: They speak home to the heart (R.V., marg.) The phrase 
in the Hebrew is the ordinary expression for wooing, and 
describes the attitude of the suppliant lover endeavouring to 
woo a maiden’s heart. Love can detect love. The heart 
knows its true affinity. Many voices may speak to it, but it 
turns from them all; it heeds them not ; till one day the true 
prince sounds on the horn the blast for which all was waiting— 
the spell is broken, and the sleeping maiden awakes to welcome 
her true lover. So thy heart will recognise its Immortal Lover 
by this token. “I was asleep, but my heart waked ; it is the 
voice of my Beloved that knocketh.” 


I. THE VOICE OF FORGIVENESS.—The first need of the soul 
is forgiveness. It can endure suffering ; and if that suffering, 
like the Jewish exile, has been caused by its own follies and 
sins, it will meekly bow beneath it, saying with Eli, under 
similar circumstances, “It is the Lord; let Him do what 
seemeth good to Him.” But the sense of being unforgiven ! 
God’s clouded face! The dark shadow on the heart! Neither 
sun nor star shining for many days! The oppressive weight 
of unforgiven sin! The question whether God’s mercy may 
not be clean gone for ever, and that He will be favourable no 
more! This bitterness of heart for sin is the first symptom of 
returning life. It does not justify, but it prepares the soul 
eagerly to seek and tenaciously to hold God’s method of 
righteousness. And before God can enter upon his great 
work of salvation, before He can clear away the débris and 
restore the ruined temple, before He can reproduce his image, 
it is needful to assure the penitent and believing soul that its 


“Speak ve Comfortably.’ 17 


time of service is accomplished, that its iniquity is pardoned, 
and that it hath received at the Lord’s hand double for all 
its sins. 

In dealing with the question of sin and its results, let us 
always distinguish between its penal and natural consequences. 
The distinction comes out clearly in the case of drunkenness or 
criminal violence. Society steps in and inflicts the penalties of 
the fine, the prison, or the lash ; but in addition to these, there 
is the aching head, the trembling hand, the shattered nervous 
system. So in respect to all sin. Its violation of the holy law 
of God ; its affront to the majesty of Divine government ; its 
personal injury to the Lawgiver—could only be atoned for by 
the death of the Second Man, the Lord from heaven. He bore 
our sins in His own body on the tree—He put away sin by the 
sacrifice of Himself. He was made sin, therefore our trespasses 
cannot be imputed to us; and God in Him has reconciled the 
world unto Himself. 

But the natural consequences remain. David was forgiven, 
but the sword never left his house. The drunkard, the dissolute, 
the passionate, may be pardoned, and yet have to reap as they 
sowed. The consequences of forgiven sin may be greatly 
sanctified ; the Marah waters cured by the tree of the cross— 
yet they must be patiently and inevitably endured. It was thus 
that Jerusalem was suffering, when these dulcet notes reached 
her. She was loved with an everlasting love. Though the 
literal city was in ruins, and her sons in exile, yet to God they 
were Jerusalem still—‘‘ Speak ye comfortably to /erusalem.” 
But, nevertheless, the backsliding and rebellious people were 
doomed to serve their appointed time and captivity, and suffer 
the natural and inevitable results of apostasy. Hence the 
double comfort of this first announcement ; not only that all 
iniquity was pardoned, but that warfare was accomplished, and 
that she had suffered double enough of natural punishment to 
serve the Divine purpose of sanctification. 

Thou too hast been suffering bitterly. Those early in- 
discretions and errors of thy life have brought a terrible 
revenue of pain. Thou hast passed many days over a path 


paved by burning cinders, and thy feet are blistered. But 
B 


18 Boices that Speak to the Beart. 


God will not always be threshing thee. The sword shall not 
devour for ever. The billows of the sea shall pursue thee to 
their limit, but not beyond. Thy time of hard service as 
a conscript (lit. rendering) is accomplished, thine iniquity 
pardoned, thou hast received double for all thy sins. It has 
appeared to come from thy foes; but it has been meted out 
by the Lord’s hand, and He says, It is more than enough. 


Il. THE VOICE OF DELIVERANCE.—Between Babylon and 
Palestine lay a great desert of more than thirty days’ journey. 
But the natural difficulties that seemed to make the idea of 
return chimerical, were small compared with those that arose 
from other circumstances. The captives were held by as 
proud a monarchy as that which refused to let their fathers 
go from the brick-kilns of Egypt. Mountains arose in ranges 
between them and freedom, and valleys interposed their 
yawning gulfs. But when God arises to deliver his people 
who cry day and night unto Him, mountains swing back, as 
did the iron gate before Peter; valleys lift their hollows into 
level plains; crooked things become straight; and rough 
places smooth. 

When Eastern monarchs travel through their dominions, 
they are preceded by couriers, who require the towns through 
which they pass to repair the roads and highways. This is 
the purport of the herald voice, which rings out on the startled 
and trembling silence, ‘‘ Prepare ye in the wilderness the way of 
the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God” ; 
and which foretells the levelling of obstacles, as a woman’s 
hand may smooth creases out of linen, or the steam roller level 
the sand. 

If thou hadst ears to hear, thou too shouldst hear it. Thou 
art sitting solitary and desolate ; the Lord’s song has long been 
hushed on thy tongue; the hand of the oppressor is heavy ; 
and it seems useless to expect other deliverance than that of 
death. Thou hast, like Job, courted and fondled the idea of 
dying. “Now should I have lien down and been quiet; I 
should have slept ; then had I been at rest.” But God has 
some better thing awaiting thee in the near future, when his 


“@ait only upon God.” 19 


glory is revealed. Dawn is at hand, and with dawn de- 
liverance. 

It seems impossible. The tangle is so great, the obstacles so 
many, the hold of captivity so tenacious. There are, doubtless, 
smiling Italian landscapes; but the Alps stand as an impassable 
barrier, with inaccessible crags, and walls of ice, and yawning 
crevasses. Things are too crooked ever to be straightened in 
this world ; too rough to admit of further progress, which is as 
impossible as of sledges over hummocks of ice. But wait only 
upon God ; let thine expectation be from Him. He will come 
with a strong arm; and as He leads thee forth—as the angel 
led Peter—to thine amazement insuperable obstacles shall dis- 
appear: Red Seas and Jordans shall yield pathways ; mountains 
shall fill valleys ; ropes shall be as tow in fiame; and netted 
snares shall be like cobwebs, which a touch destroys. 


III. THE VOICES OF DECAY AND IMMORTAL STRENGTH.— 
As man’s soul is still, and becomes able to distinguish the 
voices that speak around him in that eternal world to which he, 
not less than the unseen speakers, belongs, it hears first and 
oftenest the lament of the angels over the transcience of human 
life and glory. Ina stillness, in which the taking of the breath 
is hushed, the soul listens to their conversation as they speak 
together. “Cry,” says one watcher to another. “What shall 
I cry?” is the instant inquiry. “There is,” continues the first, 
“but one sentiment suggested by the aspect of the world of 
men. All flesh is grass, and all its beauty like the wild flowers 
of the meadow-lands, blasted by the breath of the east wind, or 
lying in swathes beneath the reaper’s scythe.” 

The words meet with a deep response in the heart of each 
thoughtful man. “Man cometh forth as a flower, and is cut 
down.” “As for man, his days are as grass; as the flower of 
the field, so he flourisheth.” We have all seen it. Our goodly 
sons, our sweet, fair girls, our little babes, have faded beneath 
our gaze, and lie among the grass of ordinary folk. Jerusalem 
had long been in exile ; one by one her heroes and defenders, 
her statesmen and prophets, had died in captivity. Her sons 
were now of a smaller type. Nehemiahs. in the place of 


20 Hoices that. Speak to the Geart. 


Isaiahs ; Ezras instead of Jeremiahs; Zerubbabels for Heze- 
kiahs. Where was the Moses to lead this second Exodus ; the 
Joshua to settle them in their land ; the Solomon to build their 
temple? There seemed no reply, save that given by the sigh 
of the wind from the great Lone-land, and the edge of Death’s 
sharp reaping-hook. Thus the deliverers and champions of 
earlier days have passed away. Who now shall succour? 

But listen further to the voices of the heavenly watchers. 
The failure of man shall not frustrate the Divine purpose. 
Lover and friend may stand aloof, or be powerless to help; the 
strong arm may be powerless to fulfil its olden promises; the 
prop of the family may have fallen; the bread-winner may be 
on his bed, unable to do aught to maintain wife and children : 
but God will do as He has said. He is independent of men 
and means. He can make ravens bring food. “The grass 
withereth, the flower fadeth ; but the Word of the Lord shall 
stand for ever.” 

It is good to hear this angelic testimony to the permanence 
of the Word of God. Of course we could not doubt it. By it 
were the heavens made, and all the host of them; and by it 
the wheel of natural revolution is ever kept in motion ; and yet 
since our all depends on it, since it is the basis of our hope in 
the Gospel, we may be forgiven for hailing gladly the confirma- 
tion of heavenly testimony, that the Word of our God shalJ 
stand for ever. 


IV. VoIcEs TO HERALD THE SHEPHERD-KING.—The Old 
Version and the margin of the R.v. are perhaps preferable to 
the R.v. Zion, the grey fortress of Jerusalem, is bidden to 
climb the highest mountain within reach, and to lift up her 
voice in fearless strength, announcing to the cities of Judah 
lying around in ruins that God was on his way to restore them. 
“Say unto the cities, Behold your God! Behold the Lord God 
will come.” 

All eyes are turned to behold the entrance on the scene of 
the Lord God, especially as it has been announced that He will 
come as a mighty one. But, lo! a Shepherd conducts His 
flock with leisurely steps across the desert sands, gathering the 


The Shepherd-Bing. - 21 


lambs with His arm, and carrying them in His bosom, and 
gently leading those that give suck. It is as when, in after 
centuries, the beloved apostle was taught to expect the Lion of 
the tribe of Judah, and, lo! in the midst of the throne stood a 
Lamb as it had been slain. 

Do not be afraid of God. He has a shepherd’s heart 
and skill. He will not over-drive. When He puts forth his 
own sheep, He will certainly go before them, and they shall 
follow Him. He will suit his pace to theirs. Words can 
never tell his tender considerateness. If the tract lies over 
difficult and stony roads, it is because there is no other way of 
reaching the rich meadow-lands beyond. When strength fails, 
He will carry thee. When heavy demands are made, He will 
be gentleness itself. He is the Good Shepherd, who knows 
his sheep, as the Father knows Him. 

These are the voices that speak to us from the Unseen. 
Happy is he who makes a daily parenthesis of silence in his 
heart, that he may hear them speak! It was a good habit of 
a devout servant of God to sit before the Lord for an unbroken 
period at the end of each day, that he might hear what God the 
Lord might speak. Ours be the cry of Samuel, “Speak, Lord, 
for thy servant heareth,” 


IIL. 
“Why Savest Thou?” 


‘*Go, count the sands that form the earth, 
The drops that make the mighty sea ; 
Go, count the stars of heavenly birth, 
And tell me what their numbers be ; 
And thou shalt know love's mystery.” 
T. C. UPHAM. 


(ISAIAH xl. 12-31.) 


PES Se LHe . 

y ae is well in times when feeling is strong to say little, lest 
K we speak unadvisedly with our lips, murmuring at our 

Py we lot, or complaining against God, as though He had 

eh Y) forgotten to be gracious, and had shut up his tender 

a mercies in anger. Speech often aggravates sorrow. 

43 We say more than we mean ; we drown in the torrent 
of our words the still small voice of the Holy Ghost whispering 
comfort ; we speak as though we had not known or heard. It 
is wise, therefore, not to pass grief into words. Better let the 
troubled sea within rock itself to rest. ‘‘Why sayest thou, O 
Jacob, and speakest, O Israel?” 

Was it a true thing these exiles said? They suggested that 
they had worn out the Divine patience; that their way was 
no longer open to his view; and that their judgment had 
ceased to be his care. They were ready to admit that He 
had been the God of their fathers ; but He had now withdrawn 
from his covenant relationship, and would be favourable no 
more. That, they said, was the reason why they were allowed 
to languish year after year on the plains of Babylon. They 
spoke as though they had never known nor heard some of the 
most rudimentary facts about the nature and ways of God. 
“ Hast thou not known? Hast thou not heard ?” 

In our dark hours we should revert to considerations which 





Whe Resort of the Suffering. 23 


have been familiar to us from childhood, but have of late 
ceased to exert a definite impression. It is remarkable what 
new meaning sorrow discovers in truths familiar as household 
words. It looks for the hundredth time into their abyss, and 
suddenly sees angels sitting. Let us recount some of these 
familiar facts : and perchance, as thy troubled soul turns from 
men and things, from what depresses and what threatens, to 
the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator, thou wilt dare to 
believe that He has neither forgotten nor forsaken thee ; that 
He delights still in thy way, which is leading through the 
tangled thicket into the sunlight; that He is weighing thy 
case with infinite solicitude. 

Nature has always been the resort of the suffering. Elijah 
to Horeb ; Christ to Olivet. And in these glowing paragraphs, 
which touch the high-water mark of sacred eloquence, we are 
led forth to stand in the curtained tent of Jehovah, to listen 
to the beat of the surf, and watch the march of the stars. 

_A passage from the journal of a sad and lonely thinker, with 
singular beauty of language, tells the effect of Nature upon 
him. He is speaking of the month of April; and after alluding 
to the moist freshness of the grass, the fragrance of the flowers, 
the transparent shadows of the hills, the breath of the spring, 
he says: “ There have been so many weeks and months when 
I thought myself an old man, but I have given myself up to 
the influence of my surroundings. I have felt the earth floating 
like a boat in the blue ocean of ether. On all sides stretched 
mysteries, marvels, and prodigies, without limit, without num- 
ber, and without change. I kissed the hem of the garments 
of God, and gave Him thanks for being Spirit, and being Life. 
Such moments are glimpses of the Divine, they make one 
conscious of eternity. They assure one that eternity itself is 
not too much for the study of the thoughts and works of the 
Eternal ; they awake in us an adoring ecstasy, and the ardent 
_ humility of love.” 

The devout thought of these paragraphs passes in survey, 
first the EARTH (12—20) ; then the HEAVENS (21—26) ; and 
finally, the EXPERIENCE OF THE CHILDREN OF GOD in all 


ages (27—31). 


24 “Why Sapest Thou?” 


I. THE TESTIMONY OF THE EARTH.—It seems as though 
we are conducted to the shores of the Mediterranean, and 
stationed somewhere near the site of ancient Tyre. Before us 
spreads the Great Sea, as the Hebrews were wont to call it. 
Far across the waters, calm and tranquil, or heaving in memory 
of recent storms, sea and sky blend in the circle of the horizon. 
Now remember, says the prophet, God’s hands are so strong 
and great that all that ocean and all other oceans lie in them 
as a drop on a man’s palm. His fingers are so wide in their 
reach that their measure when outstretched can compass the 
breadth of heavén. His arms are so strong that they can hold 
balances and scales in which the loftiest mountains and the 
multitudinous isles of the Archipelago lie as small dust might 
do in the brass scales of a salesman. And this God is our God 
for ever and ever. He has taken not Israel only, but Jacob, 
into eternal union with Himself. The Creator of the ends of 
the earth is our Father. Creation is only one of his thoughts ; 
but thou art his son, his heir, his beloved. See how careful 
He is of lilies and birds, of the delicate down on an insect’s 
wing, and of the lichen traceries upon the stones. He cannot 
then fail thee, nor forsake thee. ‘ 

Behind us lie the hills, and beyond them the mountains, and 
above them all Lebanon rears her snow-capped peaks like a 
bank of cumuli-clouds built up in the sky. But all the wood on 
Lebanon, its cedars riven with tempest and rugged with age, 
would not be too much to lay on the altar of Jehovah. And if 
all its beasts could be collected, and laid on the wood in 
sacrifice ; and if Lebanon itself were the mighty altar of earth,. 
there would be no extravagance in the vast burnt-offering that 
would fill the vault of heaven with fire and smoke. So great is 
God that the greatest gifts of human self-denial, which have 
cost men most, are not too great. How preposterous, there- 
fore, it is to liken Him to any graven image or carving of 
wood! How needless to dread what man can do! How 
certain it is that He who spared not his own Son, but gave 
Him to a greater altar and fiercer flame, will with Him also 
freely give us all.things ! 

All men may be in arms against thee, encircling thee with 


The Standpoint of Vision. a5 


threats, and plotting to swallow thee up. But the nations are 
to Him as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small 
dust of the balance. The isles are very little things in his 
esteem, and their inhabitants as grasshoppers. Thou hast no 
reason therefore to be afraid. When thine enemies come upon 
thee, they shall stumble and fall. The Lord is thy Judge, thy 
Lawgiver, and thy King. He will save thee. 


I], THE TESTIMONY OF THE HEAVENS.—The scene shifts 
to the heavens, and all that is therein. With a marvellous 
prevision of the earth’s circuit around the sun, Jehovah is 
depicted as sitting on the circle of its orbit, and looking thence 
on the populations of the earth. From that distance the 
teeming multitudes of mighty Babylon would seem insignificant 
enough, and there would be no appreciable difference between 
the monarch and the slave grinding at the mill. This is the 
antidote of fear. Sit in the heavenlies. Do not look from 
earth towards heaven, but from heaven towards earth. Let 
God, not man, be the standpoint of vision. 

But this is not all. To this inspired thinker, it seemed as 
though the blue skies were curtains that God had stretched out 
as a housewife gauze (see R.V., marg.), or the fabric of a tent 
within which the pilgrim rests. If creation be His tent, which 
He fills in all its parts, how puny and pigmy are the greatest 
potentates of earth! ‘He bringeth princes to nothing, and 
maketh the judges of the earth as vanity.” The child of God 
need not be abashed before the greatest of earthly rulers. 
Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and all the people 
of Israel, may be gathered together ; but they do whatsoever 
His hand and His counsel foreordained to come to pass. They 
are but stubble withered by the blast. 

And even this is not all—day changes to night, and as the 
twilight deepens, the stars come out in their hosts; and 
suddenly, to the imagination of this lofty soul, the vault of 
heaven seems a pasture-land over which a vast flock is 
following its Shepherd, who calls each by name. What a 
sublime conception! Jehovah, the Shepherd of the stars, 
leading them through space ; conducting them with such care 


26 “Why Savest Thon?” 


and might that none falls out of rank, or is lacking. And will 
Jehovah do so much for stars, and nought for sons? Will He 
not have a name for each? Will He not guide and guard 
each? Will He not see to it that none are lacking, when He 
brings his flock home at the end of the day? He who has 
kept the stars full of light for millenniums, and sustained them 
in their mighty rounds, will not do less for thee, his child. 
If thou wert reconciled to God by the death of his Son, thou 
wilt be surely saved by his life ! 


II]. THE TESTIMONY OF THE SAINTS.— Hast thou not 
heard? Where have been thine ears? This has not been 
told in secret, nor whispered in the dark places of the earth. 
It has been a commonplace with every generation of God’s 
people, that the Lord fainteth not, neither is weary. He never 
takes up a case to dropit. He never begins to build a character 
to leave it when it is half complete. He cannot be exhausted 
by the rebellion, backsliding, or fickleness of his children. 
Were this not so, heaven would have missed some of its noblest 
inhabitants. Jacob, David, Peter, and myriads more, are 
trophies of the unwearied pains which God takes with those 
whom He adopts into his family. 

It is quite true that He may seem to forsake and to plunge the 
soul into needless trial; this however is no indication that He 
has tired of his charge, but only that He could not fulfil the 
highest blessedness of some soul He loved, save by the sternest 
discipline. “ There is no searching of his understanding.” 

There is another point on which all the saints are agreed, 
that neither weariness nor fainting are barriers to the forth- 
putting of God’s might. On the contrary, they possess an 
infinite attractiveness to his nature. We have seen a little 
weakling child draw to its cot some strong and burly man, 
the champion athlete of the countryside. Such a spell can 
weakness exert over might, and helplessness over helpfulness. 
It is the burden of Scripture that the strong should bear the 
infirmities of the weak, and not please themselves. Such is the 
law of God’s existence. All that He is and has He holds in 
trust for us, and most for those who need most. 


“God ts All-sutticient.”’ . 27 


In point of fact, many of us are too strong, self-reliant, and 
resourceful to get the best that God can do. Wait a little, till 
thy strength begins to faint beneath the burdens and the noon- 
tide heat, till the energy that was thy boast has slowly ebbed 
away, and thou art left without might. Then the Mighty One 
of Jacob will draw nigh thee, and impart both power and 
strength. Jacob must halt on his thigh ere he can prevail 
with God and man. 

They that wait on God venmew their strength. It is new 
strength for each new duty and trial. As each fresh demand 
is made on them, they receive some fresh baptism, some 
unrealized enduement. Ah, happy art, nearly forgotten in 
these busy days! Nothing, not even youthful genius and 
vigour, can be a substitute for this ! 

The gradation is a remarkable one. At first sight it would 
appear that it should pass from walking to running, and from 
this to flying; but the order is reversed, as though it were 
easier to mount with wings than walk without fainting. And 
so, indeed, it is. Any racehorse will start at full speed; but 
how few have staying power! The tyro in cycling will go at 
full pelt; but only the experienced rider can walk or stand. 
To pursue the common track of daily duty—not faltering nor 
growing weary—to do so when novelty has worn off, when the 
elasticity of youth has vanished, when the applause of the 
crowd has become dim and faint—this is the greatest achieve- 
ment of the Christian life. For this earthly and human 
strength will not avail. But God is all-sufficient. Never faint 
or weary Himself, He is able to infuse such resistless energy 
into the soul that waits on Him, that if it mounts, it shall be on 
eagle-wing ; if it runs, it will not weary ; if it walks, it will not 
faint. 


IV. 
he Conboration of the Mations. 


‘«Triumphant Faith ! 
Who from the distant earth looks up to heaven, 
Seeing indivisibility suspending 
Eternity from the breath of God. 
Lo! with step erect 
She walks o’er whirlpool waves and martyr fires, 
And depths of darkness and chaotic voids.” 

E. TATHAM. 


(ISAIAH xli. 1.) 


4{HE conception of this passage is superb. Jehovah is 
represented as summoning the earth, as far as the 
remote isles of the west, to determine once and for 
ever who is the true God: whether He, or the idols 
and oracles of which there were myriads worshipped 
and believed in by every nation under heaven. 

The test proposed is a very simple one. The gods of the 
nations were to predict events in the near future, or to show 
that they had had a clear understanding of the events of former 
days. ‘Produce your cause, saith the Lord ; bring forth your 
strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob. Let them bring them 
forth, and declare unto us what shall happen ; declare ye the 
former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and 
know the latter end of them; or show us things for to come.” 
On the other hand, the servant of Jehovah was prepared to 
show how fast-sealed prophecies, committed to the custody of 
his race, had been precisely verified in the event, and to utter 
minute predictions about Cyrus, “the one from the East,” 
which should be fulfilled before that generation had passed 
away. Not, as in Elijah’s case, would the appeal be made to 
the descending flame; but to the fitting of prophecy and 
historical fact. 





Ghe Prophecies of Scripture. 29 


Immediately there is a great commotion, the isles see and 
fear, the ends of the earth tremble, they draw near and come to 
the Judgment-seat. On their way thither each bids the other 
take courage. There is an industrious furbishing up of the 
dilapidated idols, and manufacturing of new ones. The car- 
penter encourages the goldsmith; and he that smooths with 
the hammer him that smites the anvil. They examine the 
soldering to see if it will stand, and drive great nails to render 
the idols steadfast. The universal desire is to make a strong 
set of gods who will be able to meet the Divine challenge— 
much as if a Roman Catholic priest were to regild and 
repaint the images of the saints on the time-worn altar of a 
fishing hamlet, in the hope of securing from them greater help 
in quelling the winter storms. 

History furnishes some interesting confirmations of this 

‘contrast between the predictions of heathen oracles and the 
clear prophecies of Old Testament Scripture, which were so 
literally and minutely realized. For instance, Herodotus tells 
us that when Croesus heard of the growing power of Cyrus, he 
was so alarmed for his kingdom, that he sent rich presents to 
the oracles at Delphi, Dodona, and elsewhere, asking what 
would be the outcome of his victorious march. That at Delphi 
gave this ambiguous reply, “That he would destroy a great 
empire,” but whether the empire would be that of Cyrus or of 
Croesus was left unexplained: thus, which ever way the event 
turned, the oracle could claim to have predicted it. This is a 
fair illustration of the manner in which the oracles answered 
the appeals made to them by men or nations when in the 
agony of fear. How striking a contrast the precise prediction 
of these pages, which give us the name of the conqueror ; the 
quarter from which he would fall upon Babylon; the marvellous 
series of successes, that gave kings as dust to his sword, and 
as the driven stubble to his bow; his reverence towards God, 
his simplicity and integrity of purpose (verses 2, 3, 25; xlv. 1). 

We are learning to lay increasing stress on prophecy. What 
miracles were to a former age, the predictions of the Bible are 
to this; and, unlike the miracles, the evidence of prophecy 
becomes stronger with every century that passes between its 


30 Ghe Conboration of the Mations. 


first utterance and its fulfilment. Probably there is an un- 
realized wealth of attestation lying in the ancient records of 
Egypt and Babylon, which is on the eve of being made avail- 
able against the attacks of infidelity. 

How sad, on the other hand, it is to mark the trend of 
opinion, in quarters where we should least expect it, towards 
the muttering of oracle and the whispering of familiar spirits ; 
the rehabilitation of that lying system which filled the world at 
the incarnation of Christ, but which Milton at least supposed 
had for ever vanished before the rising beams of the Sun of 
Righteousness. 


‘‘So when the sun in bed, 
Curtained with cloudy red, 
Pillows his chin upon an Orient wave, 
The flocking shadows pale 
Troop to the infernal jail, 
Each fetter’d ghost slips to his several grave ; 
And the yellow skirted fayes 
Fly after the night-steed, leaving their moon-loved maze.” 


Amidst the excitement of this vast convocation the idols are 
dumb. We can almost see them borne into the arena by their 
attendant priests, resplendent in gold and tinsel, flashing with 
jewels, bedizened in gorgeous apparel. They are set in a row, 
their acolytes swing high the censer, the monotonous drawl of 
their votaries arises in supplication. Silence is proclaimed, 
that they may have an opportunity of pronouncing on the 
subject submitted to them ; but they are speechless. Jehovah 
pronounces the verdict against which there can be no appeal, 
“Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an 
abomination is he that chooseth you” (verse 24). As Jehovah 
looks, there is no one. When He asks of them, there is no 
counsellor that can answer a word. “Behold they are all 
vanity ; their works are nought ; their molten images are wind 
and confusion.” 

Whilst this great cause is being decided, the people of God 
are addressed in words of tender comfort, which are as fresh 
and life-giving to-day as when first spoken by lip, or written 
by pen. 


“ Fear thou Not!” . 31 


I. THE CIRCUMSTANCES IN WHICH GOD ADDRESSES HIs 
PEOPLE.—They are poor and needy; they seek water, and 
there is none; the heights are bare, and the valleys verdure- 
less ; the track of their life lies through the wilderness ; they 
are surrounded by incensed enemies who strive with them ; 
they are powerless as a worm. It is amongst such that God 
has always found his chosen. Not the wise and prudent, but 
the babes ; not the high and mighty, but the lowly and obscure; 


_ not the king, but the shepherd-lad ; not Eli, but Samuel. He 


. 


finds them in their low estate, cast aside and disowned by the 
world, and adopting them, He makes for Himself a name and a 
praise. 

It is necessary that God should have room in which to work. 
Emptiness to receive Him; weakness to be empowered by 
Him. It is into the empty branch that the vine-sap pours ; to 
the hollowed basin that the water flows ; the weakness of the 
child gives scope for the man’s strength. The need of the 
countless multitudes that thronged Christ’s earthly life gave 
Him opportunity for the working of his miracles, and the 
putting forth of his power. The lower the platform, the greater 
the proof of what God can be and do to those who trust Him. 
Take heart, therefore, if thou canst discover thyself in any of 
those that are summoned to thy view by the enumeration of 


_ want, and weariness, and sin. The prime blessedness of the 


kingdom of heaven is for the poor in spirit, the persecuted 
and the tempted, the wandering sheep, and the famishing 
child. 


Il. THE ASSURANCES THAT HE MAKES TO THEM.—No 
height, however bare, nor depth, however profound, can separate 
us from His love. He whispers, amid the gloom that has 
settled down upon the landscape of our life, “ Fear thou not, 
for I am with thee.” No enemies, however numerous or en- 
raged, need dismay us ; for He is still our God, bound to us 
by covenant relationship, able to throw reinforcements into 
the citadel of our heart, succouring us with horses and chariots 
of fire. Heart and flesh may fail; but He will strengthen. 
Difficulties may seem insurmountable ; but He will help. The 


32 Ghe Convocation of the Nations. 


feet may be cut and bleeding with the desert march ; but He 
will uphold with his strong right hand (13, 14). 

There is a striking passage in one of the psalms which 
dilates with all the pride of the Jew-patriot upon the glories 
of Jerusalem, the city of the great King, in which God had 
made Himself known as a refuge. The kings of the nations, 
intent upon her destruction, assemble themselves and pass 
by her frowning battlements ; but as they see the inviolable 
protection of God flung around them, they are dismayed, 
trembling takes hold of them, and they haste away. So, when 
strong enemies threaten the life, the purity, the well-being of 
God’s elect, He flings around them so complete and inviolable a 
defence that foes become as nothing, and as a thing of nought. 
And the beleaguered soul entrenched within its strong forti- 
fications is reassured by the repeated refrain of Jehovah’s voice, 
“Fear not; I will help thee.” 

And when God sets his hand to save any of his saints, He 
does not stay with this; but goes on to use the saved one for 
the blessing of others. Hence He not only comforts the few 
men of Israel with the assurance of his ready help, reiterating 
the words, as though never weary of repeating them; but He 
promises to make of them, worms though they were, a new 
sharp threshing-instrument, having teeth which would thresh 
the mountains and beat them small, and make the hills as 
chaff. This prediction has been marvellously fulfilled in the 
history of the Jewish nation, which has exercised such a 
formative influence on the history of the world ; and there is a 
similar experience awaiting all who will surrender themselves 
absolutely to the hands of God. In thine own estimation thou 
mayest be nothing more than a worm; yet if thou dost yield 
thyself absolutely to God, He will make thee a new sharp 
threshing instrument having teeth (15, 16). 

Who is there that does. not long to be renewed, to have a 
fresh baptism, a fresh beginning in work and energy of life? 
Who is there that does not wish to be delivered from the blunt- 
ness and obtuseness which come from long use? Who is there 
that does not desire power to thresh the mountains of sin 
and evil, until they are dissipated, like the heaps of chaff on 


The Dibine Secret.  - 33 
the threshing-floor before the evening breeze? Let such take 
to their comfort the assertion of Jehovah, “J wll make.” 


There is nothing that thou canst not do, O worm of a man, 
if Jehovah, thy Redeemer, the Holy One, takes thee in hand. 


III. THE DIVINE PROVISION FOR THEIR NEED.—Life is 
not easy for any of us, if we regard the external conditions 
only: but directly we learn the Divine secret, rivers flow 
over bare heights in magnificent cascades ; fountains arise in 
the rock-strewn sterile valleys ; the wilderness becomes a pool, 
and the dry land springs; the plain is covered with noble 
trees, and the desert with the beautiful undergrowth of a 
forest-glade (17, 18). 

To the ordinary eye it is probable that there would appear 
no difference. Still the tiny garret, and the wasting illness ; 
still the pining child, with its low moan of continued pain ; 
still the monotony and lovelessness of a lonely desolate life ; 
still the straitened circumstances—still the deferred hope. But 
the eye of faith beholds a paradise of beauty, murmuring 
brooks filling the air with melody, leafy trees spreading their 
shade. 

What makes the difference? What does faith see? How is 
she able to work such transformations ? 

(1) Faith is conscious that God is there, and that his 
presence is the complement of every need. To her eye 
common desert bushes burn with his shekinah. 

(2) Faith recognises the reality of an eternal choice, that 
God has entered into a covenant which cannot be dissolved, 
and that his love and fidelity are bound to finish the work He 
has commenced. 

(3) Faith knows that there is a loving purpose running 
through every moment of trial, and that the Great Refiner 
has a meaning in every degree of heat to which the furnace is 
raised ; and she anticipates the moment when she will see what 
God has foreseen all the time, and towards which He has been 
working. 

(4) Faith realizes that others are learning from her ex- 


periences lessons which nothing else would teach them ; and 
Cc 


34 @G@bhe Conbocation of the Mations. 


that glory is accruing to God in the highest, because men and 
angels see and know and consider and understand together 
that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of 
Israel hath created it (20). 

Some readers of these words may be wearily traversing the 
wilderness in their daily experience. They seek water, and 
there is none; and their tongue faileth for thirst. But if only 
they would look up with the eyes of faith, they would behold, as 
Hagar did, wells of water, and the fertility of the Land of 
Beulah. Many pilgrims pass through that land and see nothing 
like what Bunyan describes—no sun shines for them; nor 
birds sing; nor ravishing beauty charms the sense. These 
entrancing delights are all around ; but they are unseen, un- . 
known. While others find paradise in the unlikeliest sur- 
roundings. The difference between these experiences arises 
from the presence or absence of the faith that takes 


‘soa « true meastire 
Of its eternal treasure.” 


Therefore comfort thy heart: Wait patiently. Let faith 
have her way. Hope to the end for the grace to be brought 
unto thee. Ponder these things till, in thy case also, what 
seems only a desert to other eyes, to thine shall be as the 
garden of the Lord. 


Vv. 
“Behold My Serbant.” 


“He does not fail 
For thy impatience, but stands by thee still; 
Patient, unfaltering—till thou too shalt grow 
Patient,—and wouldst not miss the sharpness grown 
To custom, which assures Him at thy side.” 
H. HAMILTON KINc. 


(ISAIAH xiii. 1.) 








HEN our Lord took on Himself the form of a 
7 i servant, girded Himself, and began to wash the 

feet of his disciples, it was no new office that He 
performed ; for the life of God is ever one of 
service, of ministry. He rules all, because He 
g serves all. Inasmuch as He is the highest, He 
must also be the lowliest, according to the everlasting order of 
the spiritual realm. The ministry of Jesus was therefore the 
revelation of the life that God had ever been living in the blue 
depths of heaven ; and if once we can learn the principles of 
that life which filled hundreds and thousands of homes with 
blessing and joy during those marvellous years of earthly 
ministry, we shall have a model’ on which to form our own 
service to God and man. Our Lords life and ministry revealed 
the ideal of service. 

There is no doubt as to the applicability of this passage 
to our Lord. The Holy Ghost, by the evangelist Matthew, 
directly refers it to Him, and says its meaning was filled to 
the brim by that matchless life which for a brief space cast its 
radiance on our world (Matt. xii. 18). Oh that He who took 
upon Him the form of a servant—who was amongst his dis- 
ciples as one that served, and who proposes some day to wait 


36 “Behold Aty Serbant.”’ 


on his wearied workers as they sit together at his table in his 
kingdom—may so incarnate Himself in us, that we in our 
measure may repeat those features of his earthly ministry, 
which God can crown with the enduement of his Holy Spirit, 
and with which He can co-operate! “I have put my Spirit 
upon Him.” “YT will hold thine hand.” 

They are rare qualities which Jehovah calls us to behold in 
the elect Servant in whom his soul delights : a Divine modesty ; 
a Divine humility ; a Divine perseverance. 


I. THE MODESTY OF THE BEST WORK.—God is always at 
work in our world, leading the progress of suns, refreshing 
grass with dew, directing the flight of the morning beams, and 
the glancing light of the firefly ; compassing our path and our 
lying down, and determining the fail of the shell on the sand of 
the ocean bottom. But all his work is done so quietly, so 
unobtrusively, with such reticence as to his personal agency, 
that many affirm there is no God at all. 

He spreads the breakfast table each morning for myriads in 
wood, and ocean, and the homes of men; but steals away 
before we catch a sight of Him to whom we owe all. We 
know that He has been at work; but He is gone without a 
sound, without a footmark, leaving only the evident touch of 
his hand. 

Thus was it with the work of Christ. He put his hand on 
the mouths of those who proclaimed his deity, or blazoned 
abroad his fame. He repeatedly told the recipients of his 
bounty that they must not make Him known. He stole away 
from the multitudes that filled the porches of Bethesda ; so that 
the healed paralytic wist not who had healed him. He lingered 
as long as He could in the highlands of Galilee, until his 
brethren remonstrated with Him. He did not strive, nor cry, 
nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. 

This quality is God’s hall-mark upon the best work. His 
highest artists do not inscribe their names upon their pictures, 
nor introduce their portraits amongst their groups. It is enough 
for them to have borne witness to the truth and beauty of the 
universe ; they wish for nothing more than to reveal what they. 


The Work that God Approkes. 37 


have seen in nature’s holiest shrines, or in the transient gleams 
_of beauty in the human face. To win a soul for God; to cleanse 
the scar of the leper ; to make blind eyes see ; to give back the 
dead to mother, sister, friend—this is recompense enough. To 
look up from the accomplished work into the face of God; to 
catch his answering smile ; to receive the reward of the Father 
who is in secret—this is heaven, compared with which the 
praise of man is as valueless as his censure. 

Art thou conscious, fellow servant, that this is the temper of 
thy soul, the quality of thy work? For if not, if in thy secret 
soul thou seekest the sweet voice of human adulation, if thou 
art conscious of a wish to pass the results of thy work into 
newspaper paragraph or to common talk of men, be sure that 
deterioration is fast corrupting thy service, as rottenness the 
autumn fruit. It is high time that thou shouldest withdraw 
thyself to some lonely spot, where the silt that darkens the 
crystal waters of thy soul may drop away, and again they 
mirror nothing but the sky with its depths of blue, its hosts of 
stars. The only work that God approves, that is permanent 
and fruitful, that partakes of the nature of Christ, is that which 
neither seeks nor needs advertisement. The bird is content 
to sing; the flower to be beautiful ; the child to unfold its 
nature to the eye of love; and the true worker to do the will 
of God. 


II. THE HUMILITY OF THE BEST WORK.—God’s choicest 
dealings have been with shepherd boys taken freshly from their 
flocks; with youngest sons without repute; with maidens 
growing to mature beauty in the obscurity of some highland 
village. He has put down the mighty from their seat, and 
exalted the humble and meek. And so was it with our Lord. 
He passed by Herod’s palace, and chose Bethlehem and its 
manger bed. He refused the empires of the world, and took 
the way of the cross. He selected his apostles and disciples 
from the ranks of the poor. He revealed his choicest secrets 
to babes. He left the society of the Pharisee and Scribe, and 
expended Himself on bruised reeds and smoking flax, on dying 
thieves and fallen women, and the peasantry of Galilee. 


38 “Bebolt Mn Serbant.” 


A veed! How typical it is of the broken heart crushed by 
the tread of unkindness and tyranny! There is no beauty in its 
russet plume. There is no strength in its slender stem. There 
is no attractiveness in the fever-breeding swamp where it grows. 
And if none would journey far in search of a reed, how much 
less of one that had been crushed by the boisterous frolic of the 
river-horse, or by the tread of the peasant! So hearts get 
broken. Too fragile to resist the pressure of the mad rush of 
selfishness and the tread of unfeeling cruelty, without a sound. 
they break, and thenceforth are cast aside as some useless 
thing, not worth a thought. 

The smoking flax! Wow it smoulders! How slowly the 
sparks follow one another along its fibres! How powerless it 
is to kindle the slightest gauze to a flame! So feebly does love 
burn in some hearts, that only He who knows all things can 
know that love is there at all. So fitful, so irregular, so desti- 
tute of kindling power. Ah me! reader, you and I have known 
hours when not the coals of juniper, but the smoking flax, have 
been the true emblem of our love. 

The superficial worker ignores these in rude haste. He 
passes them by to seek an object more commensurate with his 
powers. Give me, he cries, a sphere in which I may influence 
strong, noble, and heroic souls! Give me an arena where I 
may meet foemen worthy of my steel! Give me a task where 
my stores of knowledge may have adequate scope! And if 
these fail, he counts himself ill-used. “I will do nought, if I 
cannot do the best.” Oh, foolish words! The best, the 
noblest, is to bend with a Divine humility over those whom 
the world ignores, exercising a holy ingenuity, a sacred inven- 
tiveness ; making of bruised reeds pipes of music or measuring 
rods for the New Jerusalem ; fanning the spark of the smoking 
flax until that which had nearly died out in the heart of a 
Peter, sets on fire three thousand souls within seven weeks ot 
its threatened extinction. 

This also is the test of true work. Where does it find thee, 
fellow-worker? Art thou ambitious for a larger sphere ; 
grudging the pains needed to explain the gospel to the 
ignorant ; to cope with the constant relapses and backslidings 


@he Test of True Work.. 39 


of the weak; to combat the fears of the timorous and mis- 
trustful ; to adjust the perpetual disputes and quarrellings of 
new-made disciples; to suit thy pace to the weakest and 
youngest of the flock? Beware! Thy work is in danger of 
losing its noblest quality ; the hue is passing off the summer 
fruit; the tender tone which God loves is fading from thy 
picture ; the grace of the day is dying. Before it is too late, 
get alone with God to learn that the noblest souls are some- 
times found within bruised bodies, and the greatest work often 
emanates from the most inconspicuous sparks. 


III.. DivINE PERSEVERANCE.—Though our Lord is prin- 
cipally concerned with the bruised and the dimly-burning wick, 
He is neither one nor the other (see R.V., marg.). He is 
neither discouraged nor does He fail. In the primeval world, 
the successive platforms on which He wrought in the ascending 
scale of creation were perpetually submerged by waves of 
chaos that swept them clear of his handiwork ; but through 
all He persevered until the heavens and earth which now exist 
stood forth apparelled in beauty that elicited from the lips of 
the Creator the verdict, “It is very good.” Thus it shall be in 
the spiritual world. The centuries which have followed on 
Calvary’s supreme sacrifice have witnessed alternations of 
chaos with cosmos ; of disorder with order; of confusion with 
advancing civilisation. In the eighth, ninth, and tenth cen- 
turies especially, it seemed as though the results of the tears 
and martyrdoms and witnessing of the earlier age were entirely 
lost. But the Master was never once discouraged, nor slacked 
his hand; but through good report and evil pursued his 
purpose. 

This, again, is the quality of the best work. That which 
emanates from the flesh is full of passion, fury, and impulse. 
It essays to deliver Israel by a spasm of force that lays an 
Egyptian dead in the sand; but it soon exhausts itself, and 
sinks back nerveless and spent. The renunciation of an enter- 
prise, undertaken in hot haste, proves that it was assumed in 
the energy of the flesh, not given by the suggestion of the 
Spirit. Perseverance in the face of scorn and difficulty—in the 


40 “Bebols My Serbant.’’- 


teeth of pitiless criticism and obstinate hate, up the hill-brow, 
or across the trembling quag —is a proof that the task has been 
Divinely given, and that the ardent soul is feeding its strength 
from the Divine resources. If this perseverance is failing thee, 
bethink thee whether thy task is Heaven’s or of thine own 
choosing: if the latter, abandon it; but if indeed the former, 
then wait on the Lord till thy strength is renewed, and thou, 
too, shalt neither be discouraged nor fail. 

But qualities like these, however excellent, cannot avail, with 
us at least, until there has been added, the enduement of the 
Holy Ghost. “1 will put my Spirit upon Him.” At the waters 
of baptism that promise was fulfilled ; for as the Lord emerged 
from them, the heavens were opened, and the Spirit in a bodily 
shape descended upon Him and abode. Then his mouth was 
opened, and his public ministry commenced. For thirty years 
He had been content with the obscure and contemplative life of 
Nazareth ; now He stepped forth into the world, saying, “The 
Spirit of the Lord God is upon Me, and He has anointed Me to 
preach.” 

What that scene was in the life of the Lord, Pentecost was 
for the Church. Then she was anointed for her Divine mission 
among men ; the unction of the Holy One rested upon her, to 
be continued and renewed as the centuries slowly passed. 
What happened for the Church should take place in the history 
of each member of it. This anointing is for all, is to be 
received by faith, and is specially intended to equip us for 
work. Hast thou had thy share? If not, art thou not making 
a mistake in attempting God’s work without it? Tarry till thou 
art endued. Hast thou known it? Seek it on the threshold of 
each new enterprise. Be satisfied with nothing less than to be 
anointed with fresh oil. 

And even this is not all. In the words, “I will hold thy hand 
and keep thee,” a suggestion is made of the co-operation of the 
Holy Ghost with every true servant of God. As we begin to 
speak, He falls on them that hear the Word. As we witness to 
the death, resurrection, and glory of Jesus, He witnesses also 
to the conscience and heart. When the voice from heaven 
speaks by our lips, the Holy Spirit says, Yea. Thus all-the 


Whe Demonstration of the Spirit. 4I 


words of God through us receive the demonstration of the Holy 
Spirit, as though one were to demonstrate by experiments, 
optically, what a lecturer was expounding orally to the ear of 
his audience. 

It is impossible too strongly to emphasize the necessity of 
relying in Christian work on the co-witness of the Spirit of 
God. It not only relieves the worker of undue and exhausting 
strain by dividing his responsibilities with his Divine Partner ; 
but it reinforces him with immeasurable power. This is what 
the apostle means by “the communion of the Holy Ghost,” 
which signifies the having in common. Happy is he who has 
learnt such community of aim and method with the Divine 
Spirit, as to be able to derive the greatest possible assistance 
from his co-operation. 

Such are the Divine principles of service ; and they need to 
be studied by each of us, if we would hear God say of us, in our 
measure, “ Behold my servant whom I uphold; mine elect, in 
whom my soul delighteth.” 


Va 
“Me are Mp Witnesses.” 


‘Out of that weak, unquiet drift, 
That comes but to depart, 
To that pure Heaven my spirit lift 
Where Thou unchanging art ! 
Thy purpose of eternal good 
Let me but surely know : 
On this I'll lean, let changing mood 
And feeling come or go!" 
J. CAMPBELL SHAIRP. 


(ISAIAH xliii. Io.) 







=, inte magnificent conception with which chapter xli. 

<': opens underlies this. We have still the vast con- 
vocation of the world, summoned to decide whether 
Jehovah, or some idol god, should henceforth be 
PULLS regarded as the supreme Deity. In the arena are 
the rows of helpless images, rich in paint and tinsel, 
but mute, only waiting to be carried home by their attendant 
priests. Before the assembly disperses, Jehovah must vindicate 
his claims ; and therefore calls into the witness-box his chosen 
people, that they may tell men what they know, and testify 
what they have seen. 

It is a remarkable appeal. In chapter xlii. 19 they are 
blamed for being blind and deaf; but for all that they are 
addressed as capable of giving evidence. Though they had 
misused their opportunities, and had made less progress than 
they might have done in the knowledge of God, yet they knew 
more of Him than any nation beside upon the face of the 
earth, and could tell secrets which the profoundest thinkers 
had missed. “Ye are My witnesses, and My servant whom I 
have chosen.” 

See, they come into court and take their stand face to face 
with monarchies that had ruthlessly despoiled and ravaged 
them, to speak for Him whose character had been so often 


“ 


Prophecies Fulfilled. 43 


maligned and misrepresented by their sins. At the period 
in which they were summoned to give evidence, they were 
actually in captivity, diminished in numbers, brought low 
through affliction and oppression ; and yet, such is the power 
of witness to truth, their testimony was to silence all other 
voices ; to bear down all rival claims; and to establish Jehovah 
as the one and only God. They might be vanquished and 
broken in the realm of physical force ; but they were supreme 
and imperial in the realm of truth. Thus, in after days, the 
Lord Jesus stood bound before the representative of mighty 
Rome, bearing witness to a Kingdom which did not emanate 
from this world, but before which that of Rome was to pass 
into the land of shadows. 

See, then, the Jews enter the arena, carrying with them their 
venerable sacred books. The test, as we have~seen, being 
whether Jehovah had uttered predictions which had been 

fulfilled. 

’ Has your God foretold the future ?” 

“ Certainly !” they reply. 

“ Give some instances.” 

“In our oldest record, centuries before it took place, He 
told our ancestor and progenitor Abraham, that his descendants 
would spend a protracted period in Egyptian bondage; and 
that afterwards they should come forth amid great judgments, 
to inhabit the land in which he was a stranger. This was 
precisely fulfilled. 

“ Again, Jehovah foretold that Hagar’s son, Ishmael, should 
be as a wild ass, at feud with all his neighbours. This, too, has 
been realised in the history of Edom. 

“ Again, through His prophet Isaiah, on the fatal day when 
our great king Hezekiah showed the ambassadors of the king 
of Babylon his treasures, Jehovah foretold that we should be 
captives in this land, and our princes chamberlains in the 
palace of our conqueror—as it is this day.” 

The Jews have maintained this witness through the ages. 
Think of Babylon to-day, wrapt in the sand-drifts in the desert. 
No Arab pitches his tent there, neither do shepherds fold their 
flocks. It is the haunt of wild beasts, a possession for the 


44 “Pe are Aly Witnesses.” 


bittern, and a dwelling-place for dragons. Think of Tyre, on 
whose site a few fisher-folk get a scanty livelihood, drying their 
nets on its ruins; whilst the noble harbour in which, when 
Nahum wrote, the wealth of the world proudly floated, is 
choked up with sand. Think of Edom, from whose rock-hewn 
houses, situated in vast solitudes and seldom visited by man, 
arise vast flocks of birds, which almost darken the air at the 
approach of a stranger. No unprejudiced mind could compare 
the condition of these sites with the predictions of the Old 
Testament, without being impressed with their strong evidence 
to the truth of Scripture. 

The very existence of the Jewish people scattered throughout 
the world, and yet preserved from absorption amid the popu- 
lations that surround them—that they have no rest for the sole 
of their foot ; that they have a trembling heart, and failing of 
eyes, and pining of soul; that they fear night and day, and 
have none assurance of life ; that they are evidently being kept 
for their land, as their land is being kept for them—all this 
is in exact conformity to the words of Moses in the Book of 
Deuteronomy. 

The special function of witness-bearing for God is not, how- 
ever, confined to the Jewish people; but by the express words 
of the Lord it is shared by the Church. The Church and the 
Holy Spirit together bear joint witness to the death, resurrec- 
tion, and eternal life of the Divine Man. “Ye shall be My 
witnesses, both in Jerusalem and in all Judzea and Samaria, 
and unto the uttermost parts of the earth.” As the King bore 
witness to truth, his subjects bear witness to the truth as it is in 
Jesus. When his matchless life set from the eyes of men be- 
hind Calvary, the Church, illumined by fellowship with Him 
across the spaces which no mortal eye can fathom, testified 
that He lived for evermore. It may be said of her, as the 
psalmist did of the heavenly bodies, Day unto day she uttereth 
speech, night unto night showeth knowledge. There is no 
speech or utterance, her voice cannot be heard ; but her line is 
gone out through all the earth, and her words to the end of the 
world. 

This is also the function of the individual believer : not. to 


Ghe Hobe that Never Tires. 45 


argue and dispute, not to demonstrate and prove, not to per- 
form the part of the advocate ; but to live in direct contact 
with things which the Holy Ghost reveals to the pure and 
childlike nature. And then to come forth attesting that these 
things are so. Just as mathematical axioms have no need to 
be argued, but simply to be stated, and the statement is 
sufficient to establish them, because of the affinity between 
them and the construction of the human mind; so it is sufficient 
to bear witness to truth, amid systems of falsehood and errox. 
And directly it is uttered, there is an assent in the conscience 
illumined by the Holy Spirit, which rises up and declares it to 
be the very truth of God. 

There are three points on which the Christian soul is called 
to give witness. They are suggested by the glowing words of 
which this call for witnesses is the climax; and we need have 
no hesitation in appropriating such words—addressed primarily 
to the Jews—to ourselves, because we are so distinctly told 
that we are no longer strangers from the covenant of promise, 
but are part of the household of God (Eph. ii. 12—19). It is 
also affirmed by the apostle that those which be of faith are 
blessed with faithful Abraham, and that the blessing of 
Abraham in Christ Jesus comes upon the Gentiles (Gal. 11. 


9—14). 


I. LET US WITNESS TO A LOVE THAT NEVER TIRES.—At 
the close of the previous chapter we have a terrible picture of 
Israel as a people robbed and spoiled, snared in holes, and hid 
in prison-houses ; upon whom God was pouring the fury of his 
anger, and the strength of battle. Then most unexpectedly 
God turns to them, and says, “Fear not! thou art mine; 
thou hast been precious in my sight, and honourable and 
beloved.” 

Thou art Mine. The words are very simple. They would 
come to a little lost child from a mother’s lips as she again 
embraced it. Our deepest emotions express themselves in the 
simplest words. Depth and intensity of feeling select the 
monosyllables of the mother-tongue. It is much for thee, O 
exiled soul, robbed and spoiled, that God still calls thee his ; 


46 “Be are Sly Witnesses.” 


and He will not stay his hand until He elicits the response, 
“Great and good God, Thou art mine!” Neither sin nor 
sorrow can cut with their accursed shears the knot of union 
which the Divine fingers have tied between thy weak soul and 
the everlasting Lover of men. 

Precious. Israel hardly dared to think it ; and certainly no 
observer unacquainted with the ways of God could dare sup- 
pose that Jehovah counted his people as his priceless treasure. 
But, nevertheless, the words stand out clearly upon the page, 
“Thou hast been Jrectous in My sight.” Yes, soul of man, 
thou art the pearl of great price to obtain which the merchant- 
man in search of priceless jewels sold all that He had, and 
bought the world in which thou didst lie like a common pebble. 
Preciousness is due to hardships undergone, purchase money 
and time expended, or pains of workmanship ; and each of 
these three conditions has been marvellously exemplified in the 
dealings of thy God. 

Honourable. Our origin was in the dust. Our father was an 
Amorite, our mother a Hittite. In the day of our birth none 
pitied ; but we were cast out in the open field and abhorred. 
It is marvellous to know that God is prepared to raise such out 
of the dust, and lift them from the dunghill ; to make them sit 
with princes, and inherit the throne of glory. Ah! how little 
do the titles of the world appear to those whom God dubs 
“right honourable”! On them the loftiest angels are proud 
to wait. Their nursing-fathers are kings. Demean thyself as 
one whom God delights to honour. It ill-becomes princes of 
the blood-royal to lie in the gutter. 

Beloved. “1 have loved thee.” These are words which no 
explanation is needed to elucidate. We must sit down to muse 
on them, and let their quiet influence steal over us, like that of 
a superb painting, a strain of music, a landscape. But oh, 
believe them ; and in the darkest hours of life, when thy feet 
have almost gone from under thee, and no sun, or moon, or 
stars appear, never doubt that God’s love is not less tenacious 
than that which suggested the epitaph on Kingsley’s tomb, 
“ We love ; we have loved ; we will love.” 

To know all this, and to bear witness to it ; to attest it. in 


=x Purpose that Meber Falters. 47 


the teeth of adverse circumstances, of bitter taunts, and ot 
utter desolation ; to persist in the affirmation amid the cross- 
questioning of a cynical age ; never to falter, never to listen 
to the suggestion of doubt rising like a cold mist to enwrap 
the soul ; never to allow the expression of the face to suggest 
that God is hard in his dealings—this is the mission of the 
believer. 


I]. LET US WITNESS TO A PURPOSE THAT NEVER FAL- 
TERS.—God does not say, “ Think of what was done yester- 
day” ; He goes back on the purposes of eternity ; the deeds 
of Bethlehem and Calvary; the everlasting covenant; the 
whole trend of his dealings with us. He says, “Read the 
whole book ; step back and consider the perspective ; get a 
glimpse of the mighty roots that moor the slight tree of thy 
life.” “Fear not! for I have redeemed thee; I have called 
thee by thy name; I have created thee for my glory; I have 
formed thee, yea, I have made thee” (verses I, 7). 

Is it likely that a purpose reaching back into the blue azure 
of the past will be lightly dropped? The love of yesterday 
may pass, as the dew from the earth; the hastily-formed pur- 
pose may be as hastily abandoned ; the gourd of the night 
perishes in the night : but thine election is the outworking of 
an ideal which filled the mind of God before ever the sun 
began to glimmer, or seraph’s voice to strike across the depths 
of the infinite. 

This, too, demands our witness. Men misjudge God, because 
they look at his work in fragments, and criticize half-finished 
designs. Short-sighted, premature, hasty, the adverse criticism 
of man must be corrected by the mature, calm judgment which 
shall view the finished scheme of creation and of the moral 
government of the universe. It is our duty to appeal for this, 
and bear our witness to the far-reach of a purpose that moves 
in a slowly-ascending spiral to its end. 


III. LET US WITNESS TO A DELIVERANCE THAT NEVER 
DISAPPOINTS.—God does not keep his children from the waters 
and the fire. We might have expected the verse would run, 


48 “Pe are My Witnesses.” 


“Thou shalt never pass through the waters, or through the 
river; thou shalt never have to walk through the fire!” But 
so far from this, it seems taken as a matter of course that there 
will be the waters and the fire; the overflowing floods of 
sorrow ; the biting flame of sarcasm and hate. God’s people 
are not saved from trial, but in it. Fire and water are cleansing 
agents that cannot be dispensed with. The gold and silver, 
the brass, iron, and tin, everything that can abide the fire, must 
go through the fire, that it may be clean ; and that which can- 
not abide the fire must go through the water (Num. xxxi. 23). 

Sometimes the world wonders at seeing God’s people in 
trouble as other men—not knowing that the King Himself has 
passed through flood and flame ; not knowing also that there 
are fords for the floods and paths through the fire. God does 
not ‘take us to the city that hath foundations by a way which 
will mock our faltering footsteps. We must bear our testimony 
to this also, that we may clear the character of God from the 
aspersions of the ungodly. He will not break the silence to 
speak for Himself; but we must bear witness for Him. 

The witness-box is the home, the place of business, the 
society salon, anywhere and everywhere where the right is 
being travestied and misunderstood. There, in the power of 
the witnessing Spirit, we are called to be witnesses for the Lord 
our God. 


Wik 
The Altering of God's Purpose. 


‘*To the spirit select there is no choice ; 
He cannot say, This will I do, or that. 


A hand is stretched to him from out the dark, 

Which grasping without question, he is led 

Where there is work that he must do for God.” 
LOWELL. 


(ISAIAH xliii. 21.) 


| HIS refers primarily to Israel. It is the burden of 
the Book of Deuteronomy, that God chose the seed 
of Abraham to be a peculiar nation unto Himself, 
above all peoples on the face of the earth. It was for 
this He brought them out from Egypt, the house of 
: bondage, and separated them amid the highlands of 
iigsan They were to be his own inheritance. Those two words, 
people and inheritance, are perpetually linked together in the 
Bible. “The Lord hath taken you, and brought you forth 
out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be unto Him a people 
of inheritance as at this day.” It was as though He viewed 
his people as a plot of land, which after careful tendance 
would yield to Him crop after crop of delight (Deut. iv. 20; 
vii. 6). 

In his swan-song, the great lawgiver went so far as to say 
that when the Most High gave the nations their inheritance, 
He apportioned their lot, and fixed their bounds with reference 
to the nation which was as the apple of his eye. Thus a 
market-gardener will separate a few choice plants, and con- 
centrate on them his most eager attention—not for their sakes 
alone; but that he may procure seed and slips to sow and 


plant over all the acres that belong to him. “The Lord’s 
D 





50 The Altering of God's Purpose. 


portion is His people ; Jacob is the lot of His inheritance” 
(Deut. xxxii. 9). 

Jehoyah’s design is clearly declared in the significant passage 
that heads this chapter—‘ They shall show forth My praise.” 
‘By a long process of careful training, it was his intention so to 
form the people that their history should turn men’s thoughts to 
the glory and beauty of his own nature, and elicit perpetual © 
adoration and praise. They were to go forth throughout the 
world teaching men the love and goodness of Him who had 
found them in the waste howling wilderness, a race of untutored 
slaves, and had made them a nation of priests, of sweet 
psalmists, and of seers proclaiming the transcendent beauty 
of the only God. By repeated failure the Jews set themselves 
against the accomplishment of the Divine plan. On three 
separate occasions they thwarted Jehovah. They came nigh 
unto cursing instead of praising. They gave men false con- 
ceptions of his character. And on three separate occasions 
they had to learn the temporary suspension and postponement 
of his purpose (Numbers xiv. 34). 

First, in the wilderness they murmured against Him, and 
were sent back to wander in the waste for forty years. Next, 
after nineteen kings had ruled from David’s throne, they were 
exiled to Babylon for seventy years. And lastly, since the 
rejection of the Beloved Son, they have been driven into all 
the world, to be a by-word and a proverb. For eighteen 
hundred years God’s purpose has been under arrest. It shall, 
no doubt, be ultimately fulfilled. The chosen people shall yet 
be for a name, for a praise, and for a glory ; but in the mean- 
while the Gentiles have been called in to take their place, 
temporarily indeed, but with blessed results for them, until the 
branches which were broken off are again grafted into their olive- 
tree, and all Israel shall be saved (Jer. xiii. 11 ; Rom. xi. 23). 

This change of purpose on the part of God has been the 
opening of the door for us; and the words which were originally 
addressed to Israel are now applicable to ourselves. Twice at 
least in the epistles, and by the lips of the apostles Paul and 
Peter, we are told that Jesus gave Himself for us, to redeem us 
and to purify us unto Himself, a people for his own possession; 


Obe Praise of Gov. . eI 


so that we are an elect race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, 
a people for God’s own possession, that we may show forth the 
praises of Him who called us out of darkness into his mar- 
vellous light. We are what we are, that we may show forth 
God’s praise ; but if we fail to realize his ideal, for us too there 
will be the inevitable postponement of his purpose. Instead of 
being realized easily, and blessedly, it will be wrought out, as 
has repeatedly been the case with Israel, through tears and 
blood (Titus ii. 14; 1 Peter ii. 9). 


I. THE PURPOSE OF Gop.—“ That they should show forth 
My praise.” It has been said that the word translated frazse is 
from the same root as Ha//e/ in “Hallelujah”; and that it 
means, first, a clear and shining light ; next, a sweet flute-like 
sound: from which we learn that the people of God are to 
reflect his glory until it shines from their lives, attracting 
others to it; and that they are to speak his praise in resonant 
and harmonious sounds that shall arrest and attract the listen- 
ing ear. “How fair He must be whose service has filled these 
souls with such delight! Come, let us seek Him, that He may 
do as much for us !” 

We may promote God’s praise by suffering, as much as by 
active service. To lie still day after day, without complaining— 
satisfied with what pleases Him, and resolute to suffer accord- 
ing to the will of God, though no word fall from our lips—may 

be more provocative of praise, than to write psalms which stir 
successive generations to praise and bless Him whose mercy 
endureth for ever. 

In every life there are three regions. That of the light, 
where duty is clearly defined ; that of the dark, where wrong 
is no less clearly marked ; and a great borderland of twilight, 
where there is no certainty, where dividing lines are not dis- 
tinct, and where each man must be fully persuaded for himself. 
It is here, however, that the temper of the soul is tested. Here 
the decisions are come to that make us weak or strong. Here, 
that we may drift into the dark, or start a path of upward 
climbing that will conduct to the table-lands where the light 
never wanes. In threading a difficult way through these 


52 — Ghe Altering of God's Purpose. 


devious tracks, there is no clue so helpful or certain as to ask 
what will conduce to the praise of God. All that would hinder 
this must be avoided ; all that would promote and enhance it 
must be followed at any cost. 

We must also s#zze—arid there is more in that expression 
than simply to do right—that men who see our good works may 
glorify our Father and give Him praise. It is through the 
Church that the principalities and powers of heavenly places 
learn the manifold wisdom of God (Eph. iii. 10). 

We are disposed to dwell too exclusively on what God is to 
us—and indeed we can never make too much of the fact that 
the entire resources of his being, which the apostle Paul calls 
His fulness, are at our disposal. But let us not forget the other 
side of this great truth, and go on to know the riches of the 
glory of his inheritance in us his saints. Let us not forget so 
to yield Him every acre of our inner life, and every fragment of © 
our time, that from these the great Husbandman may get for 
Himself crop after crop of praise ; bringing all under cultiva- 
tion, till the cornfields of the lowlands, the pomegranates of the 
orchards, the vineyards of the terraced heights, yield each in its 
measure their meed of adoration. 


II. THE POSSIBLE THWARTING OF HIS PURPOSE.—“ Ye shall 
know the revoking of My promise” (Num. xiv. 34, R.V., marg.). 
There is nothing more terrible in the history of a soul than to 
frustrate the Divine ideal in its creation and redemption, and 
to prevent God deriving from us that for which He saved us. 
Such may be thy lot, O fig-tree, standing straight in the path- 
way of the Son of Man, to which He comes, hungry for fruit : 
therefore, beware, and learn from this paragraph the symptoms — 
of Israel’s declension. Be warned by these, lest for thee also 
there come the suspension of the Divine purpose. 

(1) Prayerlessness. “Thou hast not called upon Me, O 
Jacob ; but thou hast been weary of Me, O Israel” (verse 22). 
Nothing is a surer gauge of our spiritual state than our prayers. 
There may be a weariness of the brain which is the reaction of 
overstrain, and against which it is not wise to struggle. When 
mind and heart are so overpowered by the fatigues of the body 


The Importance of Little Things. 53 


that an inevitable drowsiness closes the eye and restrains the 
flow of thought, it is better to say with the great Bengel, as we 
yield ourselves to sleep, “O Lord, we are on the same terms as 
yesterday.” But this is very different from the perfunctory and 
hurried devotions which arise from the preoccupation of the 
mind in things of time and sense, or the alienation of the 
heart from God by sin. If this lethargy is stealing over thee, 
beware ! : 

(2) Neglect of little things. “Thou hast not brought Me 
the small cattle of thy burnt-offerings” (verse 23). _ The 
emphasis is on the word smal/. The people were probably 
careful of the larger matters of Jewish ritual, but neglectful of 
the smaller details. None of us goes wrong at first in the 
breach of the great obligations of the law. It is the little rift 
in the lute, the tiny speck in the fruit, the small orifice in the 
bank, where deterioration begins. Nothing is really small that 
concerns God or the soul. Let us be careful about slight 
inaccuracies ; small deviations from the strict integrity of a 
holy character ; tampering with the gentler admonitions of 
conscience. Insensibility and carelessness in little things in a 
child are immediately corrected by the wise parent, who knows 
to what they may lead. 

(3) Lack of sweetness. “Thou hast brought Me no sweet 
cane” (verse 24). It is possible to do right things from a hard 
sense of legalism, in which the sweetness and lovableness of 
true religion are painfully wanting. How often we do things 
because we must, or because we will, and not because we are 
led by the silken chains of love to our dear Lord! This is 
what the apostle calls being married to the law; instead of 
being united to the Man who was raised from the dead, and 
whose love should be the supreme constraint. His service is 
perfect freedom ; his yoke is easy, and his burden is light. 

Many are the instances of this change of purpose. David 
substituted for Saul; Solomon for Adonijah ; the Church for 
the Hebrew people; Western for Eastern Christianity ; the 
Moravians and Lollards for the established churches of their 
time. An instance was narrated recently of a church in the 
United States, which, by an immense majority, refused to 


54 The Altering of God's Purpose. 


receive coloured people into its communion. A few years after, 
it had so utterly declined that its building was for sale, and 
was purchased by the coloured congregation which had 
gathered around the members it~had driven forth. So God 
takes away his kingdom from those that prove themselves un- 
worthy of it, and gives it to such as will fulfil his purpose and 
set forth his praise. “Be not high-minded, but fear; for if 
God spared not the natural branches, neither will He spare 
thee.” 


Il]. THE FULFILMENT OF GOD’S PURPOSE THROUGH OUR 
PaIn.—“ They siadZ/ show forth My praise.” God’s purpose 
cannot be ultimately set aside. It may be brought to a stand 
by some mountain of prejudice or unbelief; but it will be 
found pursuing its chosen path on the other side, having 
tunnelled, or climbed, or gone around it. So it shall be with 
Israel and with each of us. But the cost—how enormous ! 

In the case of mankind, God’s purpose to give Adam and 
his race dominion over the works of His hands, was exposed to 
the terrific interruption of sin, which has cost four thousand 
years of untold anguish, besides the bloody sweat of Geth- 
semane, and the broken heart of Calvary. But, though sus- 
pended for four millenniums, the Divine thought in our creation 
shall yet take effect. The righteous shall have dominion in 
the morning. All enemies shall be put under our feet. The 
seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent’s head. But, ah! 
the cost to God, to man, and to the travailing creation ! 

So in the case of Israel. She shall yet shine as a star, and 
sing God’s praise like an angel chorister. But again the cost 
has been excessive. Sorrow such as this world has never seen 
has been the purifying furnace through which she has been 
purged from her dross, and poured into the mould, which from 
the first days of her history was waiting to give her her pre- 
destined shape. 

So with each child in the family of God. The thoughts of 
his heart must stand; his ideal shall be realized; his 
purposes finally achieve their aim. This may be through the 
willing obedience and acquiescence of the soul; then ‘there 


Strength for Eberg Task. 55 


need be no great strain, or pressure, or anguish. Strength will 
be proportionate for every task; the back suited for every 
burden ; the gradient adapted to the engine that has to climb 
its steep ascent. But if there is obstinacy, rebellion, mur- 
muring complaint, like that which so often filled the camp of 
Israel, there will be suffering, exile ;-the wilderness with its 
. desolation and monotony ; the long waiting: and only after 
years of such discipline shall the soul come back again to stand 
at the gate of Canaan, and enter upon its inheritance, and give 
to the great Husbandman that praise and glory for which it 
was originally made. 

Has this been thy history up till now? Then turn and 
repent. God declares that He will not remember the past with 
all its bitter disappointment and misappropriation of opportu- 
nity ; that He will outdo the wonders of the bygone times by 
the mercies He will bestow; and that He will make a way 
through the wilderness, with flowing streams and waving 
verdure. What though thou hast brought thyself into the 
waste !—He will find a way forth into Canaan again. He will 
give thee thy vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor 
for a door of hope; and thou shalt sing as in the days of thy 
youth. Formed for Himself, thou shalt yet show forth his 
praise. Yield to Him, that He may win from thee all on which 
He has set his heart, at once and easily. It shall be best 
for thee. 


VED. 
A Pertrerted Appetite. 


‘All partial beauty was a pledge 
Of beauty in its plenitude : 
But since the pledge sufficed thy mood, 
Retain it! Plenitude be theirs 


Who looked above!” 
E. B. BROWNING. 


(ISAIAH xliv. 20.) 


q/WO lessons were learnt by Israel in captivity—the 
t' all-sufficiency of God, and the absurdity of idols. 
Each of these themes is dealt with in the glowing 
sentences of the paragraph which commences at 
the sixth verse of this chapter and culminates with 
the twentieth verse. 

The all-sufficiency of God is the subject of verses 6, 7, 8. 

The absurdity of idols, verses 9 to 20. 

It is on the latter of these that we are new to dwell. We are 
conducted into the idol-factories of the day. As we begin our 
exploration, we are forewarned that we shall find the manu- 
facturers vain, and their delectable things unprofitable ; and 
that though the whole assembly of them stand together in solid 
phalanx, they shall be put to utter confusion and shame. 

With this caution we enter the workshop where a molten 
image is being made from glowing metal, beneath the heavy 
blows of the hammer, wielded by the strong arm of the swarthy 
smith. Surely the product of such strength should be strong to 
help. But see, the smith himself is tired and thirsty after a few 
hours of work; how evidently, then, is he unable to produce 
that which can help other men in the extremity of their need ! 





Inconceibable Folly. — 57 


The effect cannot be greater than its cause. An idol cannot 
give perennial strength, when its manufacturer is so easily ex- 
hausted (verse 12). 

Next, we are led into a factory of wooden idols, where a 
carpenter is at work, stretching out a line of measurement, 
drawing a pattern with red ochre on the block of timber, and 
shaping the figure of a man. The floor is littered with crisp 
shavings, the furniture is heavy with sawdust, and the idol that 
is to fill its votaries with such awful dread is being very un- 

_ceremoniously handled in its process of manufacture (verse 13). 

Lastly, we follow some private individual into the forest.- He 
levels cedar or oak ; or an ash tree, planted long before, because 
its durable wood, when grown, would well suit his purpose. 
Part of the tree is sawn into logs and stacked for firing, and the 
remainder is fashioned into an idol, before which he prostrates 
himself. How graphically are these contrasts portrayed! We 
can hear the chuckle of delight, as the man warms his hands 
or roasts his food by the crackling logs ; and immediately after 
we can see him in prayer, pleading with the remainder of the 
trunk to deliver him as his god. 

Why do men act thus, with such inconceivable folly? How 
is it that they do not realize the incongruity of their actions? 
The prophet knows nothing of the modern theory that men do 
not worship the stone or wood, but accept the effigy as a help 
to fixedness of thought and prayer; he would affirm that with 
the mass of men this is a fiction, and that the worship of the 
devotee stops short with what he can see and touch. The cause 
of idolatry lies deeper. “He feedeth on ashes; a deceived 
heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, 
nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?” 


I. THERE IS A HUNGER FOR THE DIVINE IN MAN.—Z¢ és 
Universal. All men are made on the same plan, whether 
physically or morally. As the body needs food, so does the 
mind demand truth, and the spirit God. This is true of every 
age and clime. Always and everywhere these appetites de- 
mand satisfaction. Hence, beside the homes of men you will 
always find the corn-field, the mango-field, or the bread-fruit 


58 A Perberted Appetite. 


tree ; and within a stone’s throw a church, or chapel, or temple, 
the path to which is trodden hard by repeated steps. 

It is significant. We can tell something of the composition 
of the human body by the materials which it needs for its 
sustenance. Similarly the true dignity of man betrays it- 
self in the hunger which perpetually preys upon him. The 
cattle, when they have taken their fuli meal, repose contentedly 
on the grass; but man is not satisfied to have eaten his roast 
or warmed at his fire, he must needs go forth in search of the 
beautiful, the sublime, the harmony of sweet colours and sounds, 
the discovery of truth, the presence of God. Does not this 
disprove the materialistic philosophy in vogue in some quar- 
ters? If man is only matter, if thought is only the movement 
of the gray matter of the brain, if there is no spirit and no 
beyond, how is it that the material world cannot supply the 
supreme good? and that when, as in the case of Solomon, life 

‘is filled with all that wealth and power can yield, man turns 
_ from it all as a vain and empty bubble, the mirage of the 
desert, the apples of Sodom, the chaff which cannot appease 
hunger? Does not this show that there are component parts 
of man’s nature, and these the noblest, which, because they can- 
not be appeased by the contents of the time-sphere, are above 
time, and belong to the eternal and unseen? Must not there 
be something Divine in man, if he hungers for the Divine; 
something spiritual and eternal, since the spiritual and eternal 
alone can meet his need ? 

It is inevitable. The functions which food performs in our 
system are threefold. It is needed to replace the perpetual 
waste which is always wearing down the natural tissues ; to 
maintain the temperature at some 98°; and to provide 
materials for growth. And each of these has a spiritual analogy. 
We need God, for the same three reasons as the body needs 
food. 

(1) We need God, to replace the perpetual waste of our 
spiritual forces. Each time we act or speak we expend some 
portion of our nature; we break off, so to speak, some tiny 
fragment of nerve or muscle ; we wear thinner some string or 
wheel in the complex physical machine. This needs to be 


Our eed of God. © 59 


renewed and replaced. Hence life is a perpetual struggle 
against the forces of disintegration and decay at work within 
us, Thus it is in the spiritual sphere also: each unselfish act ; 
each remonstrance against wrong, or effort on the behalf of purity, 
peace, or righteousness ; all right thinking, living, and working; 
all visits to the sick, discourses, acts of moral heroism, expend 
our spiritual forces. We are subject to a perpetual wearing 
down, and consumption of spiritual energy. And therefore there 
must be hours of quiet fellowship with God, in which to recruit 
ourselves and regain our spent vigour. 

(2) We need God for warmth and heat. In cold, the body 
requires a good supply of carbon; it must be well fuelled. At 
every point of the immense system of blood-circulation there 
must be fires kept burning, to consume the waste products that 
choke the veins, and to maintain animal heat. So we need the 
comfort of the Comforter, the renewal of love and faith and 
hope, the blessed glow of those coals of juniper of which the 
Spouse speaks. And this, again, can only be met with in - 
fellowship with God. 

(3) We need God for growth. As the young child must have 
milk that it may grow thereby, and as the ravenous appetite of 
the growing lad or girl betrays the immense demand that nature 
is making for materials, out of which to build up her temple ; 
so our spiritual growth depends on how much of God we can 
take into our being. For want of this Divine Food, some never 
get beyond the babe stage, to become strong men and women 
in Christ. That which builds up the inner life is deep and 
intimate fellowship with God; and the more direct it is the 
better, 


II. THis APPETITE MAY BE PERVERTED.—“ He feedeth on 
ashes.” An appetite may be perfectly healthy in itself, but it 
may be supplied with unsuitable materials, In times of scarcity 
the Chinese use a kind of edible earth as a substitute for food. 
Negroes on the West Coast of Africa have been known to 
sustain life on a yellowish earth, used with coarse flour to make 
it go further; whilst the natives of Java are said to knead clay 
into balls for eating, as a luxury. In these ways men tamper 


60 A HPerberied Appetite. 


with their natural appetite. They literally spend money for 
that which is not bread, and labour for that which satisfieth 
not. 

But there is a close similarity in their treatment with that — 
wonderful yearning after the unseen and eternal which is part 
of the very constitution of our being—a hunger after the ideal 
Food, the ideal Beauty, the ideal Truth, which may be resisted 
and ignored, but still claims satisfaction ; and if it does not get 
it in God, it will seek it in the ashes of idolatry. 

Men worship idols yet. The sensualist worships in the old 
Temple of Venus, though he has never heard the murmur of 
the blue A2gean around the island dedicated to the grossest 
impurity under the name of religion. He tries to satisfy his 
hunger for Divine love with the ashes of physical gratification. 

The man of the world worships money, rank, high office ; 
he is prepared to sacrifice everything to win them. Morning, 
noon, and night, he is expending his choicest gifts at the shrine 
of the god of this world, invoking his help, propitiating his 
wrath, endeavouring to win his smile. The golden calf is still 
the centre of worship, decorated by garlands, encircled by the 
merry crowds. Costly sacrifices smoke before it, though in.the 
solemn heights of Sinai the cloud pavilion glows with the 
Shekinah. 

The child of fashion worships in the temple of human 
opinion, and feeds on the ashes of human applause an appetite 
which was meant to satisfy itself on the “ Well done!” of the 
Almighty. 

The student who questions or denies the Being of God, wor- 
ships in the temple of learning ; and feeds with the ashes of 
human opinion an appetite which was intended to be nourished 
by eternal truth. 

The soldier, in whom the love of adventurous deeds is 
strong, is apt to worship in the Temple of Mars, and to feed 
with the ashes of military excitement an appetite which was 
intended to lead to great exploits on behalf of the oppressed 
and wronged. In one shape or another, idolatry is as rife 
among us as ever, though material emblems are in small 
request. And in every case these substitutes for God, with 


“@he True Bread.” - 61 


which men try to satisfy themselves, are as incapable of satis- 
fying the heart, as ashes of supporting the physical life. 


III]. THE TRUE BREAD.—/? zs the Gift of God. “My Father 
giveth the true bread from heaven.” God who made thee 
hunger for Bread, made Bread to grow for its appeasement. 
There is, of course, the human side in the cultivation and 
preparation of food; but it is a small thing compared with 
the Divine. “Thou providest them corn, for so preparest 
Thou the earth” (Psa. Ixv. 9, R.V. marg.). In every land there 
is the bread-stuff indigenous to the soil. Other vegetables 
have their peculiar habitat. The olive will not grow in Labra- 
dor, and the fir does not flourish on the banks of the Amazon. 
But the corn-plant will make its home in every land, and grow 
on every soil. 

He has also provided Beauty for our taste, Truth for our 
thought, Love for our heart ; and has gathered all these and 
‘much more into his one Gift, Jesus Christ our Lord, who 
contains within Himself all that is required for our inner life, 
as corn contains all that is needful for the nourishment of the 
body. 

Nature yields her provision to man through death. The 
armies of standing corn are mowed down by the sickle. The 
tender plants yield up their stores, through the edge of steel, 
the grind of mill-stones, the scorch of fire, to minister to 
man. The cattle fall beneath the staggering blow, or the 
gash of the knife. For the wild things of the forest there are 
the rifle and swift death. So it is through death that Jesus has 
become the Food of men. The Lord’s Supper perpetually 
reminds us of this. The bread and wine that nourish us there 
are the emblems of the flesh and the blood of One who has 
died and is risen again. At that holy feast we commemorate 
the death of One who lives for ever ; and show forth that the 
life which nourishes our spirits has passed through the sharp- 
ness of death, that it might nourish within our spirits the eternal 
life. Our Lord’s repeated reference to flesh and blood, which 
are so significant of death, enforces and accentuates this truth— 
that it is only through his death, and through our participation 


62 A Perberted Appetite. 


with Him of death, that He can become the true meat and 
the true drink (John vi. 53-57). 

Let it never be forgotten, that it is not by the words, nor 
example, nor deeds of Jesus Christ, alone and apart from his 
death, that we can grow into the stature of perfect men ; but by 
’ fellowship with Him in death, and by the passage of all these 
qualities through death, and by the careful pondering of his own 
words, “I was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore.” It 
is through death and resurrection that the Lord Jesus has be- 
come the food-stuff of the spiritual nature of man. 

We must assimilate our food. It is not enough that the Lord 
Jesus should be set forth evidently crucified for us. We must 
feed on Him by faith. We must meditate on all that He is, and 
all that He has done. We must receive Him into our hearts by 
an act of spiritual apprehension. We must reckon that we have 
received and do possess. We must especially appropriate Him 
in respect of those special requirements which may have re- 
vealed themselves in moments of temptation and failure. 

So shall we become strong and glad. Life in full measure 
will be meted out to us. We shall eat of the Tree of Life, 
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. We shall know 
even as we are known. 


IX. 
Ghe Girdings of Jehovah. 


‘Ere suns and moons could wax and wane, 
Ere stars were thunder girt, or piled 
The heavens, God thought on me His child, 
Ordained a life for me, arranged 
Its circumstances every one 
To the minutest ; aye, God said, 
This head this hand shouldest rest upon 
Thus, ere He fashioned star or sun.” 
E. B, BROWNING. 


(ISAIAH xlv. 5.) 






iS 


= <i YRUS, who is named here for the first time, is one of 
the noblest figures in ancient history. Herodotus 
and Xenophon are loud in his praise. A century 
after his death, as the latter travelled through Asia 
Minor, the impression of his noble personal character 
and wise statesmanship was fresh and clearly de- 
fined. He must, indeed, have been a good and great man, 
whose character became a model for the Greek youth, in 
strength, simplicity, humanity, purity, and self-restraint. Such 
was God’s chosen instrument for the great work of emancipating 
the chosen people and reinstating them in their own land. 

We have seen that Jehovah assured the people graciously 
of their return from captivity at the end of the seventy years. 
Jerusalem should be built, and the cities of Judah inhabited 
(xliv. 26). And they probably expected that the return would 
be signalized by miracles as stupendous as those which opened 
the door to freedom from the bondage of Egypt. Again the 
waters would start back, and the river divide; the floor of the 
desert would be strewn with manna, and rocks would gush with 
water-springs. But their deliverance was not to be on this 


64 The Girdings of Jehobah. 


wise. The miracle was to be wrought in the world of mind, 
not of matter. By a series of unexpected providences, the 
Divine purpose was to be realized through a heathen monarch, 
who did not know Him by whom his strength was girded and 
his path prepared. 

At the beginning of his career, Cyrus was chieftain of an 
obscure Persian tribe. His first success was in obtaining, 
whether by diplomacy or force, the leadership of two tribes of 
hardy mountaineers, at that time unknown beyond the narrow 
confines of their native hills. With these he began a course of 
conquest which swept from the frontier of India to the blue 
waters of the A’gean, subjugating even Croesus, king of Lydia, 
whose wealth has passed into a proverb. Doors of opportunity 
opened before him quite marvellously ; rough difficulties were 
levelled ; hidden treasures fell into his hands, and the brazen 
doors stood open before his triumphant progress. All this 
time, though religious according to his light, and punctilious in 
acknowledging the gods of his people, he did not know 
Jehovah, by whom he was being girded and used. 

At last, after years of unbroken victory, he stood knocking at 
the gates of Babylon, demanding from the son and grandson of 
Nebuchadnezzar the recognition of his supremacy. How little 
did he or they realize that this summons was the result of a 
Divine purpose, bent on securing the emancipation of the 
captive Jews, and their return to their sacred city, to become 
the religious leaders of the world—the stock from which the 
true Servant and Anointed of the Lord was to proceed ! 

For weary months Babylon withstood the siege, and laughed 
to scorn the attempt of barbarous tribes to scale her massive 
walls, or force her mighty gates. But one night when, in 
fancied security, Belshazzar made a feast to a thousand of his 
lords, and the vigilance of the guards was relaxed, the mystic 
hand on the walls of the royal banqueting-hall traced the 
decree that the kingdom was at an end, and had passed into 
the hands of the Medes and Persians. That night Cyrus 
diverted the mighty river that traversed the lordly city into a 
vast reservoir, arranged for the storage of water ; and as it left 
its ancient course, his troops marched along the oozy channel, 


The Prophet Daniel. - 65 


and burst into the city with wild cries that startled the revellers 
at their cups, and the sleepers in their dreams, inaugurating 
days of slaughter, rapine, and pillage. 

Daniel, venerable with age, was beyond controversy the 
greatest subject of the realm. On the night of the capture he 
had rebuked Belshazzar for his sins, and announced the con- 
clusion of the siege. He held in his hand the keys to the 
policy of the empire, and was therefore at once sought after by 
Cyrus and his uncle Darius (Dan. vi. 2; x. 1). He had come 
to see that the period of seventy years was now nearly ended 
(Dan. ix. 2); and he appears to have taken an early opportunity, 
at least so Josephus says, of acquainting Cyrus with the history 
of his people, and with those wonderful predictions that had 
stood so long on the pages of their sacred books, minutely 
predicting his career, and even his name. They also gave 
forecast of what he was next to do. Notwithstanding the 
predictions of Chaldean astrologers, God had brought him to 
the throne of Babylon ; and, in spite of all apparent unlikeli- 
ness, he would perform the counsel of inspired messengers, 
saying of Jerusalem, “‘ She shall be inhabited ; and of the cities of 
Judah, they shall be built” (Isa. xliv. 26). How startling it must 
have been, when the aged prophet brought under the notice of 
the young conqueror such words as these: “I have raised him 
up in righteousness, and I will make straight all his ways: he 
shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for 
price nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts” (xlv. 13). 

It is therefore not to be wondered at, that in the first year of 
his reign he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, 
and put it also in writing, saying, “Thus saith Cyrus, king of 
Persia: All the kingdoms of the earth hath the Lord, the God 
of heaven, given me; and He hath charged me to build Him 
an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whosoever there 
is among you of all his people, his God be with him, and let 
him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house 
of the Lord, the God of Israel” (Ezra i. 1-4, R.V.). 

What a vast conception is here unfolded to us of the Provi- 
dence that shapes man’s ends, “rough-hew them as he will”! 


There is a plan which underlies the apparent chaos of worldly 
E 


66 Che Girdings ot Jebobah. 


affairs, and is slowly achieving its ends; though the agents 
through which it is being executed are largely unaware of what 
is afoot. In the words of the greatest monarch of his time, 
whom Jehovah likened to a head of gold, and who had ample 
opportunity of verifying his conclusions, God does as He will 
among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his 
hand, or say, What doest Thou? (Dan. iv. 35). 


I. Gop’s PLAN, AS IT AFFECTS SOCIETY.—(1) /¢ ts com- 
prehensive, sweeping from age to age, threading millenniums, 
building its structure from the dust of earth’s earliest age 
to the emergence of the new heavens and earth at the close 
of time. 

But it ts minute and particular. No great general can 
carry through a successful campaign who is not patient enough 
to attend to details. Wellington rode over to see Blucher the 
night before Waterloo, to know for himself when the Prussian 
legions would come through the forest of Soignies. God or- 
dained the succession of William of Orange to the throne of 
England, in the place of the Stuarts ; and it was his hand that 
made the wind veer from west to east at one critical moment 
in the night of his landing, or he had missed Torbay and been 
carried into the heart of the English fleet. Nothing is small 
with God. The sparrow does not fall to the ground without 
Him ; and the tiniest events are woven into the scheme of 
his all-embracing providence. He makes even the sin and 
wrath of man to subserve his purposes. 

(2) He works through individuals. The story of man is for 
the most part told in the biographies of men. It is through 
human instruments that God executes his beneficent purposes, 
his righteous judgments. Through Columbus, He draws aside 
the veil from the coast line of America. Through a Watt and 
a Stephenson, He endows men with the co-operation of steam ; 
through a Galvani and an Edison, with the ministry of 
electricity. Through a De Lesseps, He unites the waters 
of the eastern and western seas, and brings the Orient and 
Occident together. Through a Napoleon He shatters the 
temporal power of the Pope ; and by a Wilberforce strikes the 


The Dibine Plan. . 67 


fetters from the slave. Men do not know the purpose of God in 
what they are doing. They arise and move onward in a course 
of unbroken success. They become accustomed to the opening 
of barred gates, the unclosing of closed doors. They expect 
and win the highest positions, honours, and prizes of the world. 
They credit themselves with what they achieve; and their 
fellows eagerly analyse their make-up and methods to ascertain 
the secret of their great strength. They know not that they 
are really instruments in the Divine hand, surnamed and girded 
by One whom they know not. 

(3) God’s use of men does not interfere with their free action. 
This is clearly taught in more than one significant passage in 
Scripture. Joseph’s brethren acted on the promptings of their 
malicious hearts, and meant only evil ; but God, all the while, 
was meaning and achieving good to Joseph, to themselves, and 
to the land of Egypt. Herod, Pilate, and the religious leaders 
of the Jews, were swept before a cyclone of passion and 
jealousy ; and it was with wicked hands that they crucified and 
slew the Lord of Glory: but they were accomplishing the 
determinate counsel of God, and doing whatsoever his hand 
and his counsel foreordained to come to pass. We cannot 
understand this mystery, nor reconcile the movements of the 
far-distant planets of this great system. This arises from the 
limitation of our faculties in this our nursery life. But we must 
accept it as true. It is incontestably the teaching of Scripture, 
that a man like Cyrus might be engaged in the pursuance of 
his own schemes and ambitions, whilst, all the time, he was 
being girded and used by One whom he did not know. 

All these principles should be carefully conned and prayer- 
fully pondered. They underpin the life of society and of 
individuals also. 


II. Gop’s PLAN, AS IT AFFECTS INDIVIDUALS.—We are all 
conscious of an element in life that we cannot account for. 
Other men have started life under better auspices, and with 
larger advantages than we, but somehow they have dropped 
behind in the race, and are nowhere to be seen. Our health 
has never been robust, but we have had more working-days in 


68 Dhe Girdings of Jehobah. 


our lives than those who were the athletes of our school. 
We have been in perpetual peril, travelling incessantly, and 
never involved in a single accident ; whilst others were shat- 
tered in their first journey from their doorstep. Why have we 
escaped, where so many have fallen? Why have we climbed 
to positions of usefulness and influence, which so many more 
capable ones have missed? Why has our reputation been 
maintained, when better men than ourselves have lost their 
footing and fallen beyond recovery? 

There is not one of. us who cannot see points in the past 
where we had almost gone, and our footsteps had well-nigh 
slipped: precipices along the brink of which we went at night- 
fall, horrified in the morning to see how near our footprints 
had been to the edge. Repeatedly we have been within a 
hair-breadth of taking some fatal step, yielding to some im- 
perious temptation, striking a Faust-like bargain with the devil. 
How nearly we were caught in that eddy! How strangely we 
were plucked out of that companionship! How marvellously 
we were saved from that marriage, from that investment, from 
embarking in that ship, travelling by that train, taking shares 
in that company ! 

There is something to be explained in the lives of men which 
they cannot account for. They describe their consciousness 
of this anonymous element, as it has been called, by the words 
“luck,” “fortune,” “chance”; but these are mere subterfuges, 
sops thrown to silence the appeals of their common sense. We 
know better. It is God who has girded us, though we did 
not know Him. 

It was God who opened those doors of opportunity ; who 
smoothed those rough places, so that not a pebble remained 
at which to stumble; who gave treasures, where all had been 
dark ; who unlocked gates of brass, which had threatened to 
bar the way. This is one of the luxuries of our mature years, 
to see all the way by which He has led us; it will be a cause 
of adoring gratitude as we review our life-course from the 
heights of heaven. As we stand there with God, He will show 
us how often our girdings to great tasks were due to his strong 
hands being placed around and upon us. He ever girds for 


Be twill Neber Fail. - 69 


tasks to which He calls. God cannot desert what has cost Him 
so much. He will finish what He has begun. He will lead 
thee o’er crag and torrent till the night is gone. He will not let 
one good thing fail. And, like the dying patriarch, standing on 
the verge of another world, thou wilt see the Angel who has 
redeemed thee from all evil. 

When Peter stood with Jesus by the shores of the lake of 
Galilee He contrasted the independence of his earliest days, 
when he girded himself, and walked whither he would, with 
the dependence of those later days when he should stretch forth 
his hands, and another should gird and carry him. With these 
words our Lord signified the manner of death in which he 
should glorify God. What was true of the helplessness of 
Peter’s old age, and martyrdom, should be true of each of us 
in the intention and choice of the soul. Let us give up girding 
ourselves in the assertion of our own strength, and stretch 
forth our hands, asking our Lord to gird us and carry us 
whither He will, even to death, if thereby we may the better 
glorify God. 


X. 
Asking and Commanding. 


‘‘Say what is Prayer, when it is Prayer indeed? 
The mighty utterance of a mighty need. 
The man is praying, who doth press with might 
Out of his darkness into God's own light.” 
TRENCH. 


(ISAIAH xlv. 11.) 


N exquisite image stands like an initial letter at the 
beginning of the paragraph of which these words 
form part. To the eye of the seer the earth lies open 
to heaven as a wide corn-land over which the clouds 
of heaven hang, the air breathes, and the sun sheds 
sheets of light. Those clouds are big with righteous- 

ness, the special term used throughout this book of the faithful- 
ness of Jehovah. At the call of prayer the skies pour down 
their precious treasure, and the earth opens every pore to 
receive the plentiful rain; presently, every acre brings forth 
salvation, and righteousness springs up in the hearts of men, as 
their answer to the descent of the righteousness of God. It is 
the bridal of heaven and earth, a fulfilment of the prediction of 
the psalm—“ Truth springeth out of the earth ; and righteous- 
ness hath looked down from heaven.” 

The conception is one of surpassing beauty. The brooding 
of heaven; the response of earth. Deep calling unto deep. 
The nature of God originating and inspiring; the nature of 
man responding. And when the descending grace of God is 
thus received by the believing yearning heart of man, the 
result is salvation. As the margin of R.V. reads: “Let the 
skies be fruitful in salvation, and let the earth cause righteous- 
ness to spring up together.” The whole paragraph to the 
close of the chapter rings with sa/vation as its keynote. Does 
God hide Himself? He is the God of Israel, the Saviour. 





SOR 


A Ohbree-fold Description of God. 71 


Are the makers of idols ashamed and confounded? Yet Israel 
is saved with an everlasting salvation. Are graven images held 
up to contempt? It is because they are gods that cannot save. 
Does God assert his unrivalled Deity? It is because He is a 
just God, and a Saviour. Are men bidden to look to Him, 
though they be far removed as the ends of the earth? It is 
that they may be saved. . 

Primarily, no doubt, this salvation concerns the emancipation 
of the chosen people from the thraldom of Babylon, and their 
restoration to Jerusalem. “He shall build my city; he shall 
let my exiles go free, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord 
of Hosts.” This deliverance, which is a type of the greater 
deliverance from the guilt and power of sin, was, in the fixed 
purpose of God, sure as the creation of the earth and man ; 
guaranteed by the hands that stretched out the heavens, and 
by the word that commanded all their host. As certainly as 
God was God, He would bring his people again to the land 
which He gave to their fathers to inherit. 

But now, side by side with this avowal of the Divine de- 
termination, this strange command breaks in, the importance 
of which is accentuated by the threefold description of the 
speaker. “The LORD”—that is, God in his everlasting re- 
demptive purpose ; “the Holy One of Israel ”—that is, the moral 
perfections of Israel’s God, as contrasted with the abominations 
perpetrated under the sanction of heathen religions; “his 
Maker ”—suggesting the purpose which from the clay, gathered 
in Abraham’s time from the highlands of Mesopotamia, was 
fashioning a fair vessel meet fer His use, This threefold 
description of God introduces the august command which bade 
the people seek by prayer the fulfilment of the purpose on 
which the Divine heart was set. 

In launching an ironclad, the pressure of a baby’s finger 
is not infrequently required to put in operation the ponderous 
machinery by which the iron leviathan glides evenly and 
majestically on to the ocean wave. So, if we may dare to 
say it, all the purposes of God, and the providential machinery 
by which they were to be executed, stood in suspense until 
the chosen people had asked for the things which He had 


72. Asking and Commanding. 


promised, and had even commanded Him concerning the work 
on which his heart was set. The victorious career of Cyrus ; the 
dissatisfaction of the priestly caste with the king of Babylon ; 
the evident signs of the disruption of the mighty empire ; the 
near completion of the seventy years, foretold by Jeremiah—all 
were in vain, unless, like Daniel, the people set their face unto 
the Lord God, to seek the fulfilment of his word, by prayer 
and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes 
(Dan. ix. 3). 


I. PRAYER IS A NECESSARY LINK IN THE PERFORMANCE 
OF THE DIVINE PRomIsEs.—-“ Ask Me of things to come.” 
God is always saying, “ Ask, seek, knock.” Even to the Son, 
Jehovah says, “Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the nations 
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for 
thy possession.” And to the chosen people, at the end of a 
paragraph begemmed with “TI wills,” and unfolding the work 
which He is prepared to do—not for their sakes, but for his 
own—He says, “ For this, moreover, will I be inquired of by 
the house of Israel, to do it for them.” Our Lord is unremitting 
in the stress He lays on prayer, and pledges Himself to do 

*only whatsoever is asked in his name. The apostle James 
insists that one reason why we have not, is that we ask not 
(Psa. ii. 8 ; Ezek. xxxvi. 37 ; John xiv. 13 ; James iv. 2). 

The declaration of our text is therefore supported by a 
wealth of Scripture testimony for the necessity of prayer, as 
a link in the accomplishment of the Divine purpose. 

(1) Prayer is part of the system of co-operation between God 
and man, which pervades nature and life. No crop waves over 
the autumn field, no loaf stands on our breakfast-table, no 
metal performs its useful service, no jewel sparkles on the 
brow of beauty, no coal burns in hearth or furnace—which 
does not witness to this dual workmanship of God and man. 
So in the spiritual world, there must be co-operation, though 
on the part of man it is often limited to prayers, which may 
seem faint and feeble, but which touch the secret springs of 
Deity ; as the last pick of the miner may break open a fountain. 
of oil, or a cavern set with dazzling jewels, 


The Symptom of Soul-Gealth. 73 


(2) Prayer, when genuine, indicates the presence of a dis- 
position to which God can entrust his best gifts without injury 
to the recipient. To bless some men, apart from humility, and 
submission, and weanedness of soul from creature aid, would 
only injure. And so, in his dear love, God withholds his 
choicest gifts until the heart is sore broken, and cries to Him. 
That cry is the blessed symptom of soul-health. Like the 
sneeze of the child on which the prophet stretched himself, it 
indicates returning life ; and such a temper of heart as may 
receive, without danger, blessings whose height was never 
reached by the majestic flight of eagle, and whose depths are 
beyond the fathoming line of the profoundest thought. 


(3) Prayer is also in its essence, when inspired by faith, an 
openness towards God, a receptiveness, a faculty of apprehend- 
ing with open hand what He would impart. Standing upon 
His promises, the suppliant cries to the heavens to drop down 
their blessings ; whilst heart, and hands, and mouth are open 
wide to be filled with good. Therefore, let us pray. 


Let us pray wuztedly. God loves the gates of Zion where the 
throngs gather, more than the dwellings of Jacob where single 
families join in prayer. He would be inquired of by the house 
of Israel. If, when a petition is being prepared by a com- 
munity to the sovereign, only two or three put their hands to 
it, it is set aside as undeserving of attention. And what does 
God think of the earnestness of his people for the realization 
of his promises when only two or three gather in the place 
of prayer? 

Let us pray sympathetically. The gathering for prayer must 
not be of bodies only, but of souls. When one prays audibly, 
all should pray silently. A prayer offered in the presence of 
others should receive their endorsement. Soliloquy, disputa- 
tion, enforcement of some special view of truth, are out of 
place in the offerer of prayer; whilst listlessness, wandering 
thought, and the mere attitude of attention, are out of place in 
those who, with bowed forms and covered faces, assume the 
posture of devotion. 

Let us pray earnestly. Prayer is measured, not by length, 


74 Asking ant Commanding. 


but by strength. The Divine gauge of the worth of. prayer is 
its pressure on the heart of God. The lock of prayer some- 
times goes hard, and calls for strength of purpose. The 
Kingdom of Heaven has to be taken by force. There is such 
a thing as labouring and striving in prayer. Thus Jesus 
prayed in the garden; and Daniel in Babylon ; and Epaphras 
in Paul’s hired house. Such were the prayers offered of old in 
the catacombs as the torchlight flickered ; in Alpine caves 
where Waldenses cowered ; on hillsides where the Covenanters 
sheltered under the cliffs. Let us pray so that our prayers may 
reverberate with repeated blows on the gates of God’s presence- - 
chamber, “ Praying always with all prayer and supplication, 
and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication 
for all saints.” Let us pray, remembering that everything 
depends on the gracious promise of God, but as if the answer 
depended on the strength and tenacity of our entreaty. 

Let us pray in the name of Jesus. It is possible to be so 
absorbed in the cause of our Lord, to be so eaten up with the 
zeal of his house, so one with Him, that his interests and ours 
become identical. Then, when we pray, it is almost as though 
the Son were addressing the Father through our lips, and 
pouring forth a stream of intercession and petition by us. This 
is what He meant when He repeatedly insisted on our praying 
in his name. The filial spirit, that looks into the face of God, 
and says, “Father”; the unselfish spirit, which is quite pre- 
pared to renounce all if only God is exalted ; the loving spirit, 
which has its centre in the interests of its Lord—all this is 
comprehended in the prayer we offer in the name of Jesus. 
And when we pray thus, we secure the accomplishment of the 
things to come which God has promised. 


IJ. THE IMPERATIVE ACCENT IN FAITH.—“ Concerning my 
sons, and concerning the work of my hands, command ye Me.” 
Our Lord spoke in this tone when He said, “Father, I will.” 
Joshua used it, when in the supreme moment of triumph, he 
lifted up his spear towards the setting sun, and cried, “Sun, 
stand thou still!” Elijah used it, when he shut the heaven 
for three years and six months, and again opened it. Luther 


A Marbellous Relationship. 75 


used it, when, kneeling by the dying Melanchthon, he forbade 
death to take his prey. 

It is a marvellous relationship into which God bids us enter. 
We are accustomed to obey Him. We are familiar with words 
like those which follow in this paragraph : “I, even My hands 
have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I com- 
manded.” But that God should invite us to command Him! 
This is a change in relationship which is altogether startling. 
But there is no doubt as to the literal force of these words. 
With the single limitation that our biddings must concern his 
sons, and the work of his hands, and must be included in his 
word of promise, Jehovah says to us, his redeemed children in 
Jesus Christ, “Command ye Me!” 

What a difference there is between this attitude and the 
hesitating, halting, unbelieving prayers to which we are ac- 
customed, and which by their perpetual repetition lose edge 
and point! We do not expect that God will answer them 
now and here ; but some day, on the far horizon of time, we 
imagine that they may achieve something, as waters, by con- 
tinual lapping, wear a channel through the rocks. 

How often during his earthly life did Jesus put men into a 
position to command Him! When entering Jericho, He stood 
still, and said to the blind beggars, ‘‘ What will ye that I should 
do unto you?” It was as though He said, I am yours to com- 
mand. And can we ever forget how He yielded to the Syro- 
phoenician woman the key to his resources, and told her to 
help herself even as she would? Long familiarity with Him 
even affected the speech of the apostles ; for in their Spirit- 
inspired prayers we can detect this same tone of command, 
“ And now, Lord, look upon their threatenings ; and grant unto 
thy servants to speak thy word with all boldness.” 

What mortal mind can realize the full magnificence of the 
position to which our God lovingly raises his little children? 
He seems to set them beside Himself on his throne, and says, 
while the fire of his Spirit is searching and ridding them of 
sordid and selfish desire, “ All my resources are at your com- 
mand, to accomplish anything which you have set your hearts 
upon. Whatsoever ye shall ask, that will I do.” 


76 Asking and Commanding. 


The world is full of mighty forces which are labouring for 
our weal. Light, that draws our pictures for us; magnetism, 
that carries our messages ; heat, that labours in our locomotives 
and foundries ; nitrogen, that blasts the rocks—these and many 
more. So much is this the age of machinery and contrivance, 
that the physical faculties of civilized races are deteriorating 
through disuse. Man is becoming increasingly proficient in 
the art of controlling the mighty forces of the universe, and 
yoking them to the triumphal car of his progress. Thus his 
old supremacy over the world is being in a measure restored to 
him. 

How is it that these great natural forces—which are mani- 
festations of the power of God—so absolutely obey man? Is it 
not because, since the days of Bacon, man has so diligently 
studied, and so absolutely obeyed, the conditions under which 
they work? ‘“ Obey the law of a force, and the force will obey 
you,” is almost an axiom in physics. If you will study, for 
instance, the laws of electricity, and carefully obey them, laying 
down the level track along which its energy may proceed, you 
can lead the stream whither you choose, and make it do what- 
ever you appoint. All that is required from you is exact 
compliance with the requirements of its nature. So God gives 
the Holy Spirit to them that obey Him. 

All the resources of God dwell bodily in the risen and 
glorified Lord. They are imparted to us through the com- 
munion of the Holy Spirit, who goes between the unsearchable 
riches of Christ and our poverty ; bringing the one to the other, 
as the ocean brings the wealth of the world up to the wharves 
of London or New York. We have then to deal with the Holy 
Spirit, to study the methods of his operation—what hinders or 
helps, what accelerates or retards. Obey Him, and He pours 
such mighty energy into and through the spirit, that men are 
amazed at the prodigality of its supply ; resist or thwart Him, 
and He retires from the spirit, leaving it to struggle as best it 
may with its difficulties and trials. 

Yield thyself to God, O soul of man! Whatsoever He saith 
unto thee, do it. Be careful, even to punctiliousness, in thine 
obedience, Let God have his way with thee. In proportion as 


Intimacy tith God. . 77 


thou wilt yield to God, thou shalt have power with God. The 
more absolutely thou art a man under authority to the Com- 
mander-in-chief, the more thou shalt be able to say to this and 
the’other of his resources, Go, or Come, or Do this. God will 
be able to trust thee and give thee his key, bidding thee help 
thyself. Thou wilt be admitted to terms of such intimacy with 
God, that thou shalt hear Him bidding thee command Him. 
And, whilst never forgetting the reverence that becomes a 
subject, and the attitude that befits a saved sinner, thou shalt 
speak with Him concerning his sons and concerning the work 
of his hands. 

But after our greatest deeds of prayer and faith, we shall 
ever lie low before God; as Elijah did, who, after calling fire 
from heaven, prostrated himself on the ground, with his face 
between his knees. The mightiest angels of God’s presence- 
chamber bend the lowest ; the holiest souls present perpetually 
the sacrifice of the broken and contrite spirit; the power to 
move the arm that moves the world is wielded by those who 
can most humbly adopt the confesssion, “I am a worm, and 
no man.” 


XI. 
God our Burden-Bearer. 


“ Faint not! There is who rules the storm—Whose hand 
Feeds the young ravens, nor permits blind chance 
To close one sparrow’s flagging wing in death. 
Trust in the Rock of Ages. Now, even now 
He speaks and all is calm.” 
GISBORNE. 


(ISAIAH xlvi. 4.) 





#‘HIS is an incident in the Fall of Babylon. Cyrus 
has broken in, and the mighty city lies open to the 
Persian army, exasperated by long waiting at her 
gates. The blood of her nobles has flowed freely 
over the marble floors of her palaces; most of her 
defenders are slain. Women and children are 
cowering in the inmost recesses of their homes, or filling the 
streets with screams of terror and appeals for help, as they fly 
from the brutal soldiery. The final and most sanguinary con- 
flicts have taken place within the precincts of the idol temples ; 
but all is still now. The priests have fallen around the altars 
which they served; their blood mingling with that of their 
victims, and their splendid vestments are become their winding 
sheets. And now, down the marble staircases, trodden in 
happier days by the feet of myriads of votaries, lo, the soldiers 
are carrying the helpless idols. The stern monotheism of 
Persia would have no pity for the many gods of Babylon ; there 
are no idol-shrines in the land of the sun-worshippers where 
they could find a niche: but they are borne away as trophies of 
the completeness of the victory. 

There is Bel, whose name suggested that of the capital itself! 
How ignominiously it is handed down from its pedestal! And 
Nebo follows. The hideous images lavishly inset with jewels, 


A Perpetual Contrast. | 79 


and richly caparisoned, are borne down the stately steps, their 
bearers laughing and jeering as they come. The gods get little 
respect from their rude hands, which are only eager to despoil 
them of a jewel. And now at the foot of the stairs they are 
loaded up on the backs of elephants, or pitched into the ox- 
waggons. In more prosperous days they were carried with 
excessive pomp through the streets of Babylon, wherever there 
was plague or sickness. Then the air had been full of the 
clang of cymbals and trumpets, and the streets thronged with 
worshipping crowds ; but all that is altered. “The things that 
ye carried about are made a load, a burden to the weary beast. 
They stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver 
the burden, but themselves are gone into captivity” (xlvi. I, 2, 
R.V.). So much for the gods of Babylon being borne off into 
captivity. 

Close on this graphic picture of the discomfiture of the gods 
of Babylon, we are invited to consider a description of Jehovah, 
in which the opposite to each of these items stands out in clear 
relief. He speaks to the house of Jacob, and to all the 
remnant of the house of Israel, as children whom He had 
borne from the birth, and carried from earliest childhood. 
Their God needed not to be borne, He bore; needed no 
carriage, since his everlasting arms made cradle and carriage 
both. Such as He had been, He would be. He would not 
change. He would carry them, even to hoar hairs. He had 
made and He would bear ; yea, He would carry, and deliver. 

This contrast is a perpetual one. Some people carry their 
religion ; other people are carried by it. Some are burdened by 
the prescribed creeds, ritual, observances, exactions, to which 
they believe themselves to be committed. Others have neither 
thought nor care for these things. They have yielded them- 
selves to God, and are persuaded that He will bear them and 
carry them, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that 
they go, until they come to the place of which God has spoken 
to them (Deut. i. 31; Isa. Ixiii. 9). 


Il. THE BURDENS FOR WHICH GOD MAKES HIMSELF 
RESPONSIBLE:—The lives of most of us are heavily weighted. 


80 God onr Burden- Bearer. 


We began our race unencumbered, but the years as they have 
passed have added burdens and responsibilities. We run 
heavily ; we walk with difficulty ; we carry weights as well as 
sins. 

Foremost there is the burden of existence. We must live. 
We were not asked if we would live; we are. We had 
no option than to live, and we have none to-day. The 
physical phenomenon, which men call death, may insert a 
comma, or draw a line; but life continues yonder if not here, 
somehow if not thus, and for ever. Just because the spark on 
our heart-altars has been kindled at the eternal fires of the 
Divine nature, it will exist when the moon is withered with 
age, and the stars have burnt out in night. 

There is the burden of sin. The word used of bearing is the 
same as Isaiah uses of the Sin-bearer, who bore our sins in 
his own body on the tree (lili. 4). Though the atmosphere 
presses upon us at the rate of several pounds for every. square 
inch of bodily surface, we are yet unconscious of its weight. 
So, till Jesus came, man hardly realized the burden of sin, 
and groaned not beneath its intolerable weight. But as his 
pure image has passed from land to land, from age to age, it 
has convinced men of the awful burden of sin. This is shown 
to be the reason why they are weary and heavy-laden ; why 
their spirits lack joy and elasticity ; why the step tires so soon ; 
and the day of life drags so wearily to a close. And as the 
reason is given, we know it is so, and assent to Peter’s cry, 
“Tam a sinful man, O Lord.” 

There is the burden of responsibility for others. Our life is 
so closely entwined with that of others, that we cannot live 
long without becoming weighted with care for them. The son 
must care for mother and sisters. The young man is linked 
in imperishable bonds to the twin-soul, which is dearer than 
himself, and whose sorrows and anxieties mean more than his 
own. Then the sweet children who come into our lives, with 
their guileless trust; the charge of others bequeathed with 
dying breath ; the care of employés, lonely ones, tempted and 
persecuted ones. Ah, it is impossible for thee or me to move 
so quickly as we did years ago ! - 


Indibidual Responsibility. 81 


There is also the burden of our life-work. That we have 
been sent to do what no one else can do; that we have talents 
intrusted of which we must give an account; that we are 
called to cultivate one patch in the vineyard ; to build one bit 
in the wall ; to utilize one talent of the Master’s capital—this 
makes us sensible of the importance and urgency of life. It is 
not possible to realize what our life may mean of blessing or 
sorrow to others, and not feel the solemn weight of responsi- 
bility impinging on us. 

In all these things we are doomed to be solitary. It cannot 
be otherwise. Each man and woman in our circle is similarly 
weighted. All have as much hill-climbing, burden-bearing, 
and fighting, as they can manage. None can share aught of 
his oil, or strength, or courage. We can give sympathy, but 
that is all. Each human soul must bear his own burden of 
existence, sin, responsibility, and work. But it is just here 
that Jehovah steps in. He does not distinguish between our 
burdens and ourselves; but takes us and them up in his 
almighty arms, and bears us with no sense of fatigue, no fear 
of failure. We are a dead-weight ; but it matters nought to 
Him. He has borne us all the days of old: He daily beareth 
our burdens. He will bear us and carry us till He sets us down 
in the land where no burdens can enter; the city through 
whose gates they are never borne; the world, where the 
heavy-laden leap as an hart, and the weary are at rest. 


II. THE REASON WHY GOD ASSUMES THIS RESPONSI- 
BILITY.—‘I have made, and I will bear.” When a parent 
sees his own evil nature re-appearing in his child—the same 
temper, the same passions, the same peculiarities—so far from 
casting that child aside, and quoting its faults as reasons for 
disowning it, he draws nearer to it, filled with a great pity, and 
murmurs, “I have made, and I will bear.” 

When a man has elicited in another a love which will never be 
at rest till it has nestled to his heart, even though considera- 
tions arise which make it questionable whether he has been 
wise, yet, as he considers the greatness of the love which he has 


evoked, he says to himself, “I have made, and I will bear.” 
F 


82 God our Burden- Bearer. 


When a Christian minister has gathered around him a large 
congregation, and many have been converted from the world, 
as he looks around on those who count him captain or father, 
he says to himself, when voices summon him elsewhere, unless 
some overmastering consideration is pressed upon him, “I 
have made, and I will bear.” 

Now let us ascend, by the help of these reflections, to the 
Divine nature, which is not above similar considerations. He 
has made and fashioned us; He has implanted within us 
appetites that only He can satisfy; He has placed us amid 
circumstances of unusual difficulty, and intrusted to us work of 
unwonted importance ; He has committed to us the post of 
duty which taxes us to the uttermost: and because He has 
done all this, He is responsible for all that is needed for the 
accomplishment of his purposes. Since all things are of Him, 
we may rest assured that they will be through Him and to Him 
for ever. He has made, and He will bear. He has incurred 
the responsibility of making us what we are, and placing us 
where we are; then He must perfect that which concerneth us, 
since his mercy endureth for ever—and He cannot forsake the 
work of his own hands. 

There are several corroborations of this thought in the Bible. 
There is that word of our Lord, in which He tells us that our 
heavenly Father is bound to give meat for the hunger, and | 
clothes for the body which He has given. There is the state- 
ment that what God has wrought us for, and given the earnest 
of, He must complete. There is the golden chain of Rom. viii., 
each link in which postulates the next, and that the next ; pre- 
destination involves calling, and this justification, and this 
again glory. When God thinks of building a character He 
first considers whether He can complete it ; and if He begin, it 
is a positive assurance that He will carry out his plan. What 
He makes, He will bear. | 

Jt was so with Israel. He made the chosen people by his 
election and grace. From an obscure tribe of Bedawin, He 
made them his peculiar people, his own inheritance, his mes- 
sengers to the world. Notwithstanding their many wanderings 
and provocations, He has never put away the people whom > 


Fe will Full Bis Promise. 83 


He foreknew ; through all these weary centuries He has been 
deeply solicitous for them, and He will yet bring them on 
eagles’ wings to their own city and land. 

Zt is so with our world. He made it. It was the nurseling 
of his love and power, and bore the early imprint of his bene- 
diction. Through the depths of space He has never ceased 
to bear it, although it has been dark with sin and red with 
crime. He bore its contumely and shame when they cast Him 
forth with contempt to the cross. He bore its sin in the agony 
of Calvary. And the end is sure. He bears it on his heart, 
and will never put it away until its evil is overcome with his 
good, and it shines again in its early beauty and sings in 
unison with its sister spheres. 


III. THE CONSOLATION WHICH ARISES FROM THESE 
CONSIDERATIONS. 

In hours of anguish for recent sin. The sin is our own. 
In no sense can the sinner lay it on God. “I have sinned,” 
he cries, “and perverted that which was right, and it did not 
profit me. The sin is mine.” And yet from the depth of sin- 
consciousness there is an appeal to God. He created, per- 
mitted us to be born as members of a sinful race. He knew 
all we should be, before He set his heart upon us and made 
us his own. May we not ask Him to bear with us whom He 
made, redeemed, and took to be his children by adoption and 
grace? And will He not answer, “I have made, and I will 
bear”? 

In moments of great anxiety. When burdened with care 
for ourselves or others, we fall at the foot of the altar-steps that 
slope through darkness up to God ; when our circumstances are 
beyond measure perplexing, and the knots refuse to be untied ; 
when we have no idea what to do, or how to act for the best—is 
there not every reason to look into the face of God, and say, 
“Thou hast permitted me to come hither, Thou alone knowest 
what I should do, Thou hast made me: wilt Thou not bear me 
through this swelling tide and bring me on to firm standing- 
ground?” And will He not again answer, “I have made, 
and I will bear”? 


84 God our Burden-Bearer. 


In days of anxious foreboding. Sometimes, as we have 
climbed to an Alpine summit, the gaunt black rocks have risen 
around us from an ocean-surface of fleecy clouds, which have, 
so to speak, washed up against them, filling the whole inter- 
mediate valley. The hamlet where we were to spend the 
night, and the road to it, were alike hidden. So the future is 
hidden from our view, and with the fear born of ignorance 
we dread what may be awaiting us. The veil is slight, but 
impenetrable. What may it not conceal? Then again, we 
turn to the ineffable God. He knows all that we can bear, for 
He made us. It is not likely that He will imperil that on 
which He has spent time and thought. He cannot fail or for- 
sake. We may freely cast on Him the responsibility. 

O our Maker! bear us, as a mother her infant ; as a father 
his tired boy ; as a guide the fainting woman turned dizzy at 
the vision of sheer depth beneath : Thou hast made, wilt Thou 
not bear? Again the answer returns, “Even to old age I am 
He, and to hoary hairs will I carry you; I have made, and I 
will bear, I will carry and will deliver.” 


IC 
Summoned to an Exodus. 


‘Think not of rest, though dreams be sweet ; 
Start up, and ply your heavenward feet ! 
Is not God's oath upon your head, 
Ne’er to sink back on slothful bed ; 
Never again your loins untie 
Nor let your torches waste and die?” 
KEBLE, 
(ISAIAH xlviii. 20.) 


J) 
a 


E now reach the close of the first part of these 
wonderful prophecies. It really concludes at the 
end of the forty-eighth chapter, with the sum- 
mons to the house of Jacob, called by the name 
Israel, which had come forth from the waters of 
Judah, to arise and go forth from Babylon. 
There has never been an era in which God’s people have not 

been face to face with a great principle of evil, embodied in a 
city, confederation, or conspiracy of darkness. Always the 
same spirit under differing forms; always the deification of 
the human against the Divine ; always the pride and vainglory 
of intellect against moral worth; always the effort of man’s 
prowess and scheming to build a fabric without the Divine key- 
stone which alone can give solidity and permanence. 

This great system is as strong to-day as when the mas- 
sive walls of Babylon enclosed their millions, and proudly 
dominated the world. Some have identified it with the Church 
of Rome, or the spirit of ecclesiastical assumption ; but it is 
better to consider it as that element which is ever working 
through human society, which is spoken of as “the world,” and 
of which the apostle said, ‘It is without hope and without 





> 


86 Summoned to an Exodus. 


God.” We are therefore warranted in applying to present 
surroundings every item in the description given of the olden 
foe of Israel, and of heeding the summons to go forth. 


I. SENT TO BABYLON.—God’s ideal for the chosen people is 
set forth under a beautiful similitude (18). 

Their peace might have been as a river. Not as the brook, 
as it gushes rapturously forth, breaking musically on the stones, 
and flashing in the glee of its early life; not as a streamlet 
hardly filling its wide bed, and scarcely affording water enough 
for the fish to pass to its higher reaches: but like a river far 
down its course, sweeping along with majestic current, deep 
and placid, able to bear navies on its broad expanse, to collect 
and carry with it the refuse of towns upon its banks without 
contamination, and approaching the sea with the sympathy 
begotten of similarity in depth and volume and service to man- 
kind. Oh, rivers that minister perpetually to man—not swept 
by storm, not drained by drought, not anxious about con- 
tinuance, always mirroring the blue of the azure sky, or the 
stars of night, and yet content to stay for every daisy that sends 
its tiny root for nourishment—in your growth from less to more, 
your perennial fulness, your beneficent ministry, your volume, 
your calm, ye were meant to preach to man, with perpetual 
melody, of the infinite peace that was to rise, and grow, and 
unfold with every stage of his experience! Such at least was 
God’s ideal for Israel, and for all who swear by his name and 
make mention of Jehovah as God. 

Their righteousness might have been as the waves of the sea. 
Walk along the coast-line when the tide has ebbed, mark the 
wastes of sand, the muddy ooze, the black unsightly rocks. 
Not thus did God intend that any of his children should be. 
It was never his will that. their righteousness should ebb, 
that there should be wastes, and gaps, and breaks in their 
experience, that there should be the fatal lack of strength, 
and purity, and virtue. The Divine ideal of the inner life is 
mid-ocean, where the waves reach to the horizon on every 
side, and there are miles of sea-water beneath. No one can 
look upon the majestic roll of the Atlantic breakers, in purple 


he Secret of Peace. 87 


glory, crowned with the white crest of foam, chasing one 
another as in a leviathan game, without realizing the mag- 
nificence of the Divine intention that all who have learnt to 
call God Father, should be possessed of a moral nature as 
fresh, as multitudinous, as free in its motion, as pure in its 
character, as those waves which, far out to sea, lift up their 
voice and proclaim the wealth of the power of God. 

What a contrast this to the troubled sea to which the wicked 
are compared—sighing, chafing, moaning along the shore, and 
casting up mire and dirt! Give mea thousand times rather mid- 
ocean, where the breezes blow fresh over miles of sea, than the 
melancholy break of the waves on a low and sandy shore. 
The one is as the righteous man in the strength and glory of 
his regenerate and justified manhood ; the other as the wicked, 
always churning, fretting, bringing forth that which will profit 
him nothing. 

This ideal is within the reach of every one who will hearken 
to God’s commandments. There is a short and easy method 
by which that peace may begin to flow for thee and me, and the 
waves of that righteousness sweep in jubilant measure over our 
souls. Hearken and do. Have his commandments and keep 
them. Level your life to your light. But if we refuse, and turn 
aside and follow the devices and desires of our evil hearts, we 
shall miss inevitably and utterly the realization of that purpose 
which otherwise would make music in our hearts and melody to 
our God. Obedience to the least wish of the Lord, however 
and wherever expressed, is the golden secret, by the practice of 
which we may attain to this peace and this righteousness. 

But if we refuse, we may have to pass, as Israel did, into the 
furnace of suffering in the Babylon of the world. God cannot 
be thwarted in the realization of his purpose. If we are 
obstinate, and our neck an iron sinew, and our brow brass (4) ; 
if we trust in our idol and graven image (5) ; if we will not hear, 
nor know, nor open our ear (8)—then we must go by a more 
circuitous and painful route, via Babylon, with its bitter 
anguish, where, as in a furnace for silver, the dross and alloy 
will be purged away. How many of God’s people are at this 
moment in the furnace, which would not have been required if 


88 Summoned to an Exodus. 


they had been willing and obedient! Not that the furnace 
always indicates unfaithfulness ; but if we are unfaithful, we 
must expect the furnace. 


II. Lir—E in BaByLon.—The mighty city was called the 
Lady of Kingdoms. We must think of her with massive walls, 
broad spaces, colossal bulls guarding the entrances to vast 
temples with flights of stairs and terraces; with pyramids, 
towers, and hanging-gardens; her wharves receiving the 
freights of the Indian Ocean; her marts thronged with the 
merchants of the world; her streets teeming with tributary 
populations. But right across her splendour ran the fatal bars 
of cruelty, luxury, wickedness, and devil-worship. 

Cruelty. When God gave his people into her hand, she 
showed them no mercy ; but laid her yoke very heavily upon 
the aged, who staggered beneath their loads, or fainted in the 
horrors of the march to Babylon, whilst multitudes of the 
young were crucified among the smoking remnants of their 
city (xlvii. 7). 

Luxury. She was given to pleasures, and dwelt very care- 
lessly. Her citizens were arrayed in fine linen and purple and 
scarlet, and decked with gold, precious stones, and pearls. 
Her merchandise was of gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, 
fine linen, purple, silk, and scarlet, ivory and brass, cinnamon 
and spice (8). 

Wickedness. In this she trusted : in violence and oppression, 
in drunkenness and excess, in the impurities of nature-worship ; 
so that she made all the nations drunk with the wine of her 
abominations (10). 

Devil-worshtf. She laboured with her enchantments and 
with the multitudes of her sorceries (12). 

Amid such scenes the Jews spent the weary years of their 
captivity. Very bitter was their lot. They were for a prey or 
a spoil. Bills of slave-sales which have been recently de- 
ciphered contain Jew-names. The majority of them were 
probably employed in exacting toils, in building up the material 
strength and prosperity of Babylon, as their fathers had done 
for Egypt centuries before. 


Ghe Discipline of the Captibity. 89 


But through this awful discipline there was slowly emerging a 
nobler, loftier ideal, which was fostered by the ancient words 
that foretold their destiny. It was not possible that they should 
be long holden by their captors. Were they not the elect 
people of God, destined to bless the world? Were they not 
called to bear the Ark of God in the march of the race? Was 
not the Covenant, made of old with Abraham, still vital in 
all its provisions? Yes, they might be in Babylon like many 
another captive people, but they had a great hope at their 
heart. And in the light of that hope, under the searching 
fires of their anguish, they for ever abandoned their love for 
idolatry ; they turned from the outward rites of worship, to 
cultivate a strong moral and religious life; and they gave 
themselves up to the study of their inspired Scriptures with an 
ardour which, from that moment, made the synagogue and the 
scribe an indispensable adjunct of their national life. Never 
again was the Jew an idolater. Always after conscience was 
quick and sensitive. Without exception, the Jewish Scriptures, 
kept with the most exact and scrupulous care, and the Jewish 
synagogue, accompanied the movements of the scattered race. 
In addition, there was a breadth of view, enlarged conceptions 
of the dealings of God with man, an expansion of interests, 
which prepared the way for the further revelations of the 
Gospel as to the catholicity of the love of God, and the brother- 
hood of man. As a river, in its flow over various soils, becomes 
impregnated with their products, so did the Jewish people 
receive lasting benefits from their painful sojourn in Babylon, 
with those waters they so often mingled their tears. 

Some who read these words are now in their Babylon. They 
look back to a sunny past, which might have continued had 
they not stepped out of the narrow path of obedience. Their 
peace was then as a river, their righteousness as the waves 
of the sea; but, alas! all this is buta memory. They involved 
themselves in coils of difficulty and suffering, from which 
deliverance appears hopeless. The weary years seem destined 
to run out their slow and painful course without remedy. Yet 
let such still hope in God: they shall still praise Him ; let them 
repent of their sins and put them away; let them learn the deep 


go Summoned to an Exodus. 


lessons which God’s Spirit is endeavouring to teach ; let them 
dare to praise God for the discipline of pain. In these dark 
hours light is being sown for the righteous, and gladness for the 
upright in heart. Presently the clarion call of the Exodus will 
ring out: “Arise and depart, for this is not your rest; cry unto 
her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is par- 
doned; go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans.” 


II]. ExopuS FROM BABYLON.—The old order was changing 
and giving place to the new. In a magnificent apostrophe, 
the virgin daughter of Babylon had been summoned to come 
down from her imperial throne and sit on the ground. She 
was no more to be called tender and delicate. She must step 
down to ‘the level of the common household drudge, who grinds 
the meal and carries the burdens of the house. Loss of children 
and widowhood were to come to her in a moment—in one day ; 
and neither the enchantments of magicians, nor the efforts of 
those who had traded with her, would avail to avert her 
calamities (xlvii. I, etc.). 

From the ruins of the mightiest city that, perhaps, the world 
has ever seen the Jews are bidden to go forth. ‘“ Go ye forth of 
Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans.” The edict of Cyrus was 
only the countersigning of the Divine edict, which had already 
gone forth. And it is very remarkable that whilst Babylon has 
vanished, leaving no trace, save in the records of the past, 
the people whom they held for seventy years in thrall are 
not only in existence still, but have the control of the secret 
springs of the world, and are destined to play a great part 
in its future history. Amid the removing of those things which 
could be shaken, because they were made by the wit or power 
of man, they have received a kingdom that could not be shaken— 
the kingdom of moral force, of character, of spiritual power. 

This summons for an Exodus rings out to the Church of the 
Living God from the heavenly watchers. “I heard another 
voice from heaven,” says the seer, “‘saying, ‘Come forth out of 
her, My people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that 
ye receive not of her plagues.’” And in the words that follow 
there is an evident reference to the overthrow of Babylon, with 


“Gome Out, and be Separate.” gt 


an application to the Godless system of human society which 
confronts the Church in every age. In the early centuries it 
was represented by the Roman Empire ; now it is present in 
the spirit of the world. The race of Babel-builders is not 
extinct. By his intellect and energy man is still endeavouring 
to rear a structure, independently of God ; to make himself a 
name ; and defy the waters of Time’s deluge from sweeping 
away his work. All human imaginings, strivings, energizings, 
man’s ceaseless activities, the outcome of human life, apart 
from the Spirit of God, constitute a fabric as real as that of 
Babel, or Babylon the Great ; though no material fabric arises 
as its visible memorial. 

From all this we are bidden to “come out and be separate.” 
“Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world.” 
“Touch no unclean thing.” Let the spirit of a Divine love burn 
out the spirit of worldliness and self-hood. Come out—out from 
all fellowship with iniquity ; out from all communion with dark- 
ness ; out from all concord with Belial; out from partnership 
with unbelievers! Beyond Babylon lies the desert which must 
be traversed ere Jerusalem is reached, and we dread the pri- 
vations through which we may be called to pass. The fear of 
these withheld large numbers of the Jews from obeying the edict 
of Cyrus. They remained in the land of their captivity till they 
lost their autonomy, and became the people of the Dispersion. 

Let no such fear withhold thee, O Christian soul! It may 
seem as though the desert were to be traversed by thee, 
without break or intermission for many a weary year. But 
take heart! He will lead thee through the deserts; He will 
cause waters to flow from the rocks ; He will cleave the rock, 
and the waters shall gush out. Supplies of which thou hast no 
conception shall surprise thee with their fitness and abund- 
ance. ‘Thy track shall be marked with flowers and trees, glades 
where now are wastes, wells where now are the dunes of the 
desert. The time is fulfilled. Thy discipline is complete. The 
year of thy redemption is come. Go ye forth from the captivity 
which has so long held thee, to a freer, nobler, diviner life. 


XIII. 
A Polished Shaft. 


‘<The best men, doing their best, 
Know peradventure least of what they do: 
Men usefullest i’ the world are simply used ; 
The nail that holds the wood must pierce it first, 
And He alone who wields the hammer sees 
The work advanced by the earliest blow. Take heart!” 
E. B. BROWNING. 


(ISAIAH xlix. 2.) 


ISLES of Greece, famed as the home of verse and 
song, ye were never summoned to listen to a voice 
so sweet as that which speaks in these words! Not 
Sappho, nor Homer himself, so well deserved your 
heed. And you, ye people of the world, though the 
speech be that of one of your obscurest tribes, an 
alien in a land of strangers, and itself falling into disuse, yet 
it contains words, which, once heard, shall be absorbed into all 
your many tongues, and recited in every dialect and language, 

the world over: “Listen, O Isles, unto Me; and hearken, ye 

peoples from far !” 

And who is this that speaks in the Hebrew tongue, and 
presumes to address the world as his audience? We had 
thought the Jew-speech too exclusive, too conservative, too 
intolerant of strangers, to care to make itself heard beyond the 
limits of Judaism. The Jews have no dealings with the Sama- 
ritans. To the Jewish mind, Gentiles are dogs beneath the 
table. Whence these world-wide sympathies? Whence this 
sudden interest in the great family of man? Ah! these are 
the words of the Messiah, the ideal Jew ; speaking in the name 
of the elect race, and representing its genius, not as warped by 
human prejudice, but as God intended it to be. “ He said 





The Mission of Jesus. . 93 


unto me, Thou art My servant; Israel, in whom I will be 
glorified.” 

There can be no doubt that this is the true way of considering 
these noble words. They were expressly referred to Jesus 
Christ by his greatest apostle on one of the most memorable 
occasions in his career. The little synagogue at Antioch was 
crowded to its doors. All the city was eager to hear the 
stranger, who had dropped down, so to speak, “from the snows 
of the Taurus.” But this seriously affected the Jews, with their 
proud susceptibilities, and galled their pride. ‘They were 
filled with jealousy, contradicted the things which were spoken 
by Paul and Barnabas, and blasphemed.” After awhile the 
preacher realized that the terms of his commission did not 
require him to expend his words on those who, at every 
syllable, refused them ; so he suddenly changed his note. He 
had made an offer of eternal life, which had been rejected with 
disdain ; there was nothing left but to turn to the Gentiles, and 
he quoted the climax words of this paragraph in defence of the 
course he thereupon adopted. “For so hath the Lord com- 
manded us, saying, I have set thee for a light of the Gentiles, 
that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the uttermost part of 
the earth” (Acts xiii. 47, R.V.). 

But, it may be asked, how can words, so evidently addressed 
to Israel, be appropriated, with equal truth, to Jesus Christ? 
To reply to this in full would take us too far afield. It is 
sufficient here to say that He was the epitome and personifica- 
tion of all that was noblest and divinest in Judaism. When, in 
spite of all that they had suffered in their exile, they for a 
second time failed to realize or fulfil their great mission to the 
world ; when under the reign of Pharisee and Scribe they 
settled down into a nation of legalists, casuists, and hair- 
splitting ritualists—He assumed the responsibilities which they 
had evaded, and fulfilled them by the Gospel He spoke and the 
Church He formed. In the mission of Jesus, the heart of 
Judaism unfolded itself. What He was and did, the whole 
nation ought to have been and done. As the white flower on 
the stalk, He revealed the essential nature of the root. The 
very life of Jesus had a striking similarity to the history of the 


94 A Polished Shaft. 


chosen people ; and, therefore, Matthew with perfect propriety 
applies to Him a text, which Hosea wrote of the entire nation : 
“Joseph arose and took the young child and his mother by 
night, and departed into Egypt, and was there until the death 
of Herod ; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the 
Lord through the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt did I call My 
Son” (Hos. xi. 1; Matt. il. 14, 15, R.V.). 

We are justified, therefore, in referring this paragraph to the 
Lord Jesus, as the ideal servant of God. And we may get 
some useful teaching as to the conditions of the loftiest and 
best service which, following his steps, we may render to his 
Father and our Father, to his God and ours. 


I. THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE IDEAL SERVANT.—(1) 4 
holy motherhood. ‘The Lord hath called me from the womb.” 
The greatest and best of men have confessed their indebtedness 
to their mothers ; and not a few have, without doubt, enshrined 
in their character, and wrought out in their life, inspirations 
which ‘had thrilled their mothers’ natures from early girlhood. 
It is from their mothers that men get their souls. Many an 
obscure woman has ruled the world through the child in which 
her noblest self has been reproduced in masculine deeds and 
words. Rachel in Joseph; Jochebed in Moses; Hannah in 
Samuel; Elizabeth in John the Baptist ; Monica in Augustine ; 
the mother of the Wesleys in her illustrious sons. With all 
reverence we say it, Mary of Nazareth has attained an influence 
which the Church of Rome could never give her, through her 
Son who rules the ages. We know that in Him the male 
and female blend in perfect symmetry; and yet sometimes 
we think, in the human side of his wondrous nature, we trace 
the Virgin Mother—her delicate and quick sympathy ; her 
keen appreciation of beauty; her reverent and accurate 
knowledge of the Old Testament Scriptures. 

To make a man, God begins with his mother. How 
necessary it is, then, that young girls should be carefully 
trained to lofty thoughts and pure imaginings, that shall 
afterwards reappear in the strongest, fairest characters; and 
how important it is that young women should carefully watch 


The Potwer of Speech. — 95 


their hearts, restraining what is vain and evil, and reaching out 
after whatsoever things are true, just, pure, lovely, and of good 
report, not only in outward seeming, but in the inner chambers 
of the heart : for there the formative influences are ever brood- 
ing and maturing. 

Few of us realize the immense importance attaching to thie 
education of girls. Those who bear the children make our 
times. She that rocks the cradle rules the world. The Zenanas 
of India must be taken for Christ before that great continent 
will yield to the Gospel. Any one, therefore, that can influence 
women by speech or pen, by education or example, has an 
almost unrivalled power over the destinies of our race. It is 
only a shallow and superficial critic who will sneer at a con- 
gregation of servant-girls. The tendency of the present day 
notwithstanding, the highest function of woman is to give 
noble children to the world ; in this she gives herself, and for 
this all education and environment should prepare her. 

(2) Incisive speech. “ He hath made my mouth like a sharp 
sword.” Speech is the most God-like faculty in man. Christ 
did not scruple to be called the Word or Speech of God. 
“The tongue of man,” says Carlyle, “is a sacred organ. Man 
himself is definable in philosophy as an incarnate word; the 
word not there, you have no man there either, but a phantasm 
instead.” At the bidding of the human voice conceptions of 
beauty and thought emerge, darkness is dispelled, truth is un- 
folded, resolutions are born, inspirations conceived, crusades 
set on foot. Before the voice of man the lower creation 
trembles ; and with his voice man joins in the ascriptions of 
adoration and praise which are ever arising around the eternal 
throne. 

This regal faculty is God’s chosen organ for announcing and 
establishing his Kingdom over the earth. He uses silence, 
the uncomplaining passivity of the down-trodden and op- 
pressed; He uses deeds, erecting vast structures as their 
monument ; He uses books, the seed-baskets of thought: but 
He especially uses words. When John was cast into prison, 
Jesus came preaching. He opened his mouth and taught ; 
He bade his disciples go into all the world and preach his 


96 A Polished Shaft. 


Gospel to every creature. By the foolishness of preaching, it 
is God’s pleasure to save them that believe. And so long as the 
pulpit is content to be the mouthpiece of the living Spirit, it 
cannot be superseded by the press. 

Our mouth must be surrendered to God, that He may im- 
plant there the sharp two-edged sword that proceeds from his 
own lips (Rev. i. 16). We must see to it that we do not speak 
our own words, nor think our own thoughts ; but open our mouths 
wide, that He may fill them with the Word of God, which is 
quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword 
(Heb. iv. 12). “ He hath made”—precious words, denoting on 
the one hand the submissive attitude which yields itself to 
receive ; and on the other, the touch of the living God, who 
promises to be with the mouth, and teach what we should say. 
Who does not want to speak as Peter did, when, on the day of 
Pentecost, many were pricked in their heart ?—or as Stephen 
did, when, in the Sanhedrim, we are told that his opponents 
were cut to the heart by his incisive speech? We do not want 
to give mere sword-play to delight the eyes of our hearers ; 
but to pierce to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, so that 
those who are unbelieving may be convicted and judged, and 
the secrets of their hearts revealed. 

(3) Seclusion. “In the shadow.” We must all go there 
sometimes. The glare of the daylight is too brilliant ; our eyes 
become injured, and unable to discern the delicate shades of 
colour, or appreciate neutral tints—the shadowed chamber of 
sickness ; the shadowed house of mourning ; the shadowed life 
from which the sunlight has gone. But, fear not !—it is the 
shadow of God’s hand. He is leading thee. There are lessons 
that can only be learnt there. The photograph of his face can 
only be fixed in the dark chamber. But do not suppose that 
He has cast thee aside. Thou art still in his quiver; He has 
not flung thee away as a worthless thing. He is only keeping 
thee close till the moment comes, when He can send thee most 
swiftly and surely on some errand in which He will be glorified. 
Oh, shadowed solitary ones, remember how closely the quiver is 
bound to the warrior, within easy reach of the hand, and 
guarded jealously ! 


“§ babe Laboured in ain.” 97 


(4) Freed from rust. “A polished shaft.” Weapons of war 
soon deteriorate. A breath of damp leaves its corroding mark; 
and the rust shows where the metal is slowly burning away. 
In archery, a rusted arrow-point will fail to penetrate, and 
glance away from the target ; and so, in war, a sword or spear 
corroded by rust would not cleave its way through helmet or 
shield. 

Rust can best be removed by sand-paper or the file. Simi- 
larly we must be kept bright and clean. There must be no 
rust on our hearts resulting from inconsistency or permitted 
sin. To keep us from thus deteriorating is God’s perpetual 
aim ; and for this purpose He uses the fret of daily life, the 
chafe of small annoyances, the wear and tear of irritating 
tempers and vexing circumstances. Nothing great or crush- 
ing, but many things that gall and vex—these are the sand- 
paper and the file that God perpetually employs to guard 
against whatever would blunt the edge or diminish the effect 
of our work. 


Il. APPARENT FAILURE.—“ But I said, I have laboured in 
vain; I have spent my strength for nought and vanity.” This 
heart-break seems inevitable to God’s most gifted and useful 
servants. It is in part the result of nervous overstrain ; as, 
after the great day of Carmel, Elijah threw himself down be- 
neath the juniper-tree, and asked that he might die. But in 
part it results from the expanding compassion of the soul, 
becoming aware how little one man can do to mitigate the 
anguish of the world. We are so long in learning how to 
work, we have to unlearn so much, we have to return from so 
many paths that lead nowhere ; it is already afternoon when 
we commence to use the experience we have gotten, and pursue 
the right tracks that we have at last discovered ; then, after an 
hour or two of bright labour, our strength begins to wane, the 
sun of our brief day to near the western hills, and all is over. 
The night has come, in which no man can work. How often 
we thought our mothers hard when in childhood they said 
that we must come in and go to bed! And the most strenuous 


workers will feel like that when God calls them home; unless 
G 


98 A Polished Shaft. 


they are very tired and lonely because so many of their com- 
panions have left them—shez they will perhaps be glad. 

The heart is capable of infinite yearnings and compassion, 
while the physical strength is limited and finite. Evil is so 
hydra-headed and Protean. The bias to evil in each genera- 
tion is so strong and inveterate. The restless sea of which the 
prophet spoke is so constantly sweeping away the embank- 
ments and walls reared against its incursions. It seems so 
impossible to reach the root, the secret spring, the heart. The 
circle of light only makes the surrounding darkness more pitch- 
black. What can one weak man effect against such over- 
whelming odds ! 

There are three sources of consolation. First, that failure 
will not forfeit the bright smile of the Master’s welcome nor the 
reward of his Judgment-seat. He judges righteously ; and 
rewards, not according to results, but to faithfulness. “ Yet, 
surely, my judgment is with the Lord, and my recompense with 
my God” (4). .Secondly, the soul leans more heavily upon 
God: “my God is become my strength” (5). Thirdly, we 
turn to prayer. How sweetly God refers to this, saying, “In an 
acceptable time have I answered thee, and in a day of salvation 
have I helped thee” (8). 

Thus God deals with us all. He is compelled to take us to 
the back side of the desert, where we sit face to face with the 
wreck of our fairest hopes. There He teaches us, as He only 
can, weaning us from creature-confidence, and taking pride 
from our hearts. Then from the stump of the tree, hewn 
almost to the ground, comes the scion of a new life, which 
fulfils the promise that seemed for ever annulled. 


III]. ULTIMATE SUCCESs.—When Jesus died, faz/ure seemed 
written across his life-work. A timid handful of disciples was 
all that remained of the crowds that had thronged his pathway, 
and they seemed disposed to go back to their fishing-boats. 
Man despised Him; the nation abhorred Him; and the rulers 
set Him at nought. But that very cross, which man deemed 
His supreme disgrace and dethronement, has become the 
stepping-stone of universal dominion. Israel shall yet be 


The Faithful Gob. - 99 


gathered, and the Gentile Church become as the sand of 
the sea. 

Thus it may be with some who peruse this page. They are 
passing through times of barrenness, and disappointment, and 
suffering. But let them remember that the Lord is faithful (7). 
He will not suffer one word to fail, one seed to be lost, one 
effort to prove abortive, one life to be wasted. And Jdecause of 
this, they shall be preserved ; lands which they have discovered 
* and cultivated shall teem with men; measures that they have 
concerted shall effect the liberation of the blind and the 
enslaved ; trees they have planted shall become forests, and 
beneficially affect the climate of the world. Yea, these shall 
be light things, to be succeeded by greater and yet greater, as 
the circle of their influence widens through the universe, and 
the throb of their life reacts on coming ages. 

Whilst Christ from the throne of his glory sees the travail of 
his soul, He is assuredly satisfied ; and when, from the hills of 
glory, as from another Pisgah, we behold the results of our life- 
work, the way by which God led us, and answered our prayers, 
and blessed our feeble attempts to serve Him, we shall forget 
the pain and disappointment amid the gladness of the over- 
whelming and transporting spectacle. 


XIV. 
The Lobe that twill not let ws ge. 


“My God, Thou art all Love! 
Not one poor minute ‘scapes Thy breast 
But brings a favour from above— 
And in this Love—I rest.” 
HERBERT. 


(ISAIAH xlix. 16.) 






Bi chapter is strewn with assurances to the chosen 

people on the eve of their return from Babylon. 
They were timid, and reluctant to quit the familiar 
scenes of their captivity; they dreaded the dangers 
and privations of the journey back ; and questioned 
whether the great empire of their captors would 
ever let them go, or permit their city to arise from her ruins. 
Therefore Jehovah’s voice takes on a tone of unusual tender- 
ness, and speaks as He only can. Let us heed his successive 
assurances of comfort and compassion, “for the Lord hath 
comforted his people, and will have compassion upon his 
afflicted.” 


I. HE WILL LEAD WITH A SHEPHERD'S. CARE.—The 
prevailing characteristic of the early Hebrews was pastoral ; 
“Jacob kept sheep.” The patriarchs of the nation were “the 
stateliest shepherds of all time.” Its ideal king and its earliest 
prophet were taken from following the flocks. The imagery 
of the flock, therefore, deeply dyed the national speech, and 
enriched it with striking analogies. The king, and every true 
leader, and above all, Jehovah, was called the Shepherd of 
his people. ‘We are the sheep of his pasture.” This is the 
conception that underlies these tender assurances: ‘‘ They shall 
not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite 


Ghe Gentle Shepherd. ~ IOI 


them: for He that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even 
by the springs of water shall He guide them” (10). 

The life of the eastern shepherd is very different from 
anything we are accustomed to in these northern climes. He 
occupies some rocky coign of vantage, whence he looks out 
on his sheep thinly scattered over the moorland ; or leads them 
down to the valleys with their strips of green pasture and 
waters of rest; or conducts them through gloomy gorges 
where wild beasts have their lairs, they huddling close to his 
heels, wakeful, far-sighted, weather-beaten, armed with club and 
staff, always thoughtful for the defenceless, helpless creatures of 
his charge. You detect the accent of the true shepherd in 
Jacob’s excuse for not accompanying the rapid march of 
Esau and his warriors. “The flocks and herds with me give 
suck, and if they overdrive them one day, all the flocks will 
die. I will lead on softly, according to the pace of the cattle 
that is before me.” 

All this, and much more, is summed up in the exceedingly 
beautiful words, “He that hath mercy on them shall lead 
them.” What comfort is here! He knows our frame. He is 
touched with the feeling of our infirmities ; He will not over- 
drive us. He will go before and lead us, but He will suit his 
pace to ours. The longest day’s march shall be adjusted to 
our capacities. The severest strain shall not overtax our 
powers. However rough and difficult the path, ever remember 
that thou art being led by Him who has mercy on thee. 
Hunger and thirst will be impossible for those who abide in 
his care and fellowship. Art thou enveloped in shadow? It 
is only lest heat or sun smite thee. Is the descent swift and 
precipitous? It is only that He may bring thee to the springs 
of water of life (Rev. vii. 17). 

Do not murmur, Christian soul; but ever repeat to thyself, 
like a sweet, soft refrain, “He that hath mercy on me is lead- 
ing me; even to springs of water is He guiding me. Sing, O 
heavens ; oh, be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, 
O mountains !” 


II], HE WILL MAKE OBSTACLES SERVE HIS PURPOSE.— 


102 Ghe Lobe that twill not let us go. 


“J will thake all my mountains a way.” Mountains are pro- 
hibitory. The student of the geography of Palestine cannot 
fail to be impressed with the strong barricade of mountains 
with which God fenced in the Land of Promise on its southern 
frontier. “South of Beersheba, before the level desert is 
reached, and the region of roads from Arabia to Egypt and 
Philistia, there lie sixty miles of mountainous country, mostly 
disposed in steep ridges running east and west. The vegetation 
even after rain is very meagre, and in summer totally dis- 
appears. No great route leads, or ever has led, through this dis- 
trict. Its steep and haggard ridges are utterly inaccessible.” 

Similarly, the mountains of Switzerland have sheltered 
liberty, and those of Afghanistan have made conquest difficult 
to impossibility. There were great mountains between Israel 
and home, yet God does not say that He would remove them; : 
but that they should form a pathway, as though contributing 
to the ease and speed of the return. “I will make all my 
mountains a way.” : 

We all have mountains in our lives. There are people 
and things that threaten to bar our progress in the Divine life. 
That trying temperament; that large family; those heavy 
claims ; that uncongenial occupation ; that thorn in the flesh; 
that daily cross. We think that if only these were removed, 
we might live purer, tenderer, holier lives ; and often we pray 
for their removal. O fools and slow of heart! These are the 
very conditions of achievement ; they have been put into our 
life as the means to the very graces and virtues for which we 
have been so long praying. 

Thou hast prayed for patience through long years, but there 
is something that tries thee beyond endurance ; thou hast fled 
from it, evaded it, accounted it an insurmountable obstacle te 
the desired attainment, and supposed that.its removal would 
secure thy immediate deliverance and victory. Notso! Thou 
wouldest only gain the cessation of temptations to impatience. 
But this would not be patience. Patience can only be acquired 
through just such trials as now seem unbearable. Go back, 
and submit thyself. Claim to be a partaker in the patience of 
Jesus. Meet thy trials in Him. Thus shall the mountains 


A Mother's Lote. | 103 


that stand between thee and thy promised land become thy 
way to it. 

Note the comprehensiveness of this promise. “1 will make 
all my mountains a way.” There is nothing in life which 
harasses and annoys that may not become subservient to the 
highest ends. No exception can obtain against this great 
though small word, a//. Consider also that possessive pronoun. 
They are Hs mountains. He put them there. 

But do not forget that the promise is in the future tense. 
“T will make.” We do not see the pathway from afar ; but 
in the distance only a tumbled mass of rocks. The keenest 
sight cannot discern the point at which the threading path 
shall intersect them. But why anticipate? We know that 
God will not fail his promise. ‘He understandeth the way 
thereof and knoweth the place thereof ; for He looketh to the 
ends of the earth, and seeth under the whole heaven.” And 
when we come to the foot of the mountains, sve shall find the 
way. 


III. Gop’s LovE Is MORE THAN MOTHERHOOD.—Many de- 
vout but misguided souls have placed the Virgin Mother on a 
level with God, and worship her, because they think that woman 
is more tender, more patient, more forgiving than man. “The 
love of woman” was David’s high-water-mark of love. And of 
woman’s love, none is so pure, so unselfish, so full of patient 
brooding pity, as a mother’s. Oh, heart of woman, it is in the 
first ecstasy of motherhood that thou art betrayed. Bending 
over the laughing babe, returning thy kisses and sallies, in an 
ecstasy of delight ; soothing the suffering and wakeful one 
with snatches of lullabies and broken bits of baby-talk ; watch- 
ing beside the little flickering taper that will soon go out, 
leaving thee cold and dark ; giving nights and days without a 
murmur or regret ; prepared to surrender sleep, food, life, for 
thy child—that is what motherhood means. And that love 
follows us through life ; often repelled and unrequited, it lingers 
near us in prayers and tears and holy yearnings ; at the first 
symptom of illness, or summons of distress, it hurries to our 
side ; it schemes and plans ; it will stand by the felon in the 


104 Gbhe Hobe that twill not let us ge. 


dock, and hunt for a girl through Sodom; it sheds over our 
graves tears not less scalding than those of husband or wife. 

Such love is God’s. Indeed it is a ray from his heart. If a 
mother’s love is but the ray, what must His heart be! But 
there is sometimes a failure in motherhood. “They may 
forget.” Maddened with frenzy, soddened with drink, flushed 
with unholy passion, infatuated with the giddy round of gaiety, 
a woman has been known to forget her sucking child. Indeed, 
as is recorded of the siege of Samaria, there have been times 
when women have stayed their hunger with the flesh of their 
children. But God can never so forget. 

We may fall into the slough, so that our dearest will disown 
us ; but He will not forget. We may become scarred and sin- 
pocked, so as to be almost unrecognisable ; but He will not 
forget. We may be away in the far country so long that the 
candle will cease to burn at night in the window of the most 
faithful friend ; but He will not forget. The fires on all human 
altars may have burnt to white ash ; but his love will be what 
it was when first we knew Him. ‘ 


IV. GoD TREASURES THE THOUGHT OF HIS OWN.—The 
Orientals have a custom of tattooing the name of beloved 
friends on the hand. That is the reference here; but notice 
the emphasis. Not the name of Zion merely ; but Zion herself, 
the city where David dwelt, and Solomon built his temple. 
This was engraved on the Divine hand. Yes, child of God, 
thou art photographed where God must ever behold thee, on 
his hands, on his heart. Thou art never for a moment out of 
his thought, nor hidden from his eye. 

Not on one hand only, but on both. It is the plural in each 
case, “ On the palms of my hands.” 

Not tattooed or photographed, the marks of which might be 
obliterated and obscured ; but graven. The graving tool was 
the spear, the nail, the cross. “Don’t write there,” said an 
urchin to a young exquisite scratching with a diamond on the 
window of a waiting-room. “Why not?” was the startled 
inquiry. ‘ Because you can’t rub it out,” was the instant retort. 
Glass will not give up its inscriptions, nor the onyx stone its 


God's Tender Regard for us. 105 


seal, nor the cameo its profile ; but sooner might they renounce 
their trust, than the hands of Christ. ‘In the midst of the 
throne a Lamb as it had been slain.” “He showed unto them 
his hands and his side.” 

Not Zion’s ruins; but her walls, as they were before Nebu- 
chadnezzar broke them down—as they were meant to be. For 
fifty or sixty years those walls had been in ruins. Nehemiah 
tells us that the débris forbad the beast he rode to pass, when 
he made by moonlight his first sad tour of inspection. San- 
ballat mocked about the heaps of rubbish. But God did not 
keep those ruins in mind, associated as they were with Israel’s 
follies and sins. Zion’s wad/s were ever before Him. Our 
ideal self; what we are in Jesus; what we long to be in our 
best moments ; what we will be when grace has perfected its 
work and we are comely in the comeliness He shall put upon 
us—this is the ineffaceable conception of us that is ever before 
God. 

What a contrast between Zion’s wail about being forsaken 
and forgotten, and God’s tender regard! So the believer, con- 
sidering the desolations of his soul and the ruins of past joys, 
is apt to think himself a castaway. But it is not so. At the 
time of his deepest despair, God is thinking of him, as a mother 
of her first-born babe ; and his need is ever before Him. 


V. Gop’s LOVE 1S STRONG ENOUGH TO CARRY OUT ITS 
PURPOSE.—“ Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the 
lawful captive delivered?” (24). Such is the question of 
despondency, asked by Israel, from the heart of the mighty 
empire, in which she was a helpless captive. 

But Jehovah had well calculated his resources. Let but his 
hand be uplifted, and his people would be restored, brought 
back to their land by the solicitude of kings and queens. Do 
not consider the difficulties of thy deliverance, nor brood over 
past failure and mighty foes ; look away from these to Him! 
He will become thy Greatheart, thy Champion; He will 
espouse thy cause and carry it through; He will show Himself 
strong on thy behalf. ‘Thus saith the Lord, Even the captives 
of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible 


106 Ghe Lobe that twill not let us go. 


shall be delivered ; for I will contend with him that contendeth 
with thee, and I will save thy children.” 


VI. Gop’s LOVE WILL NOT PUT AWAY.—When the Jew put 
away his wife, he gave her a bill of divorcement (Mark x. 4). 
Without this piece of writing the divorce was not complete ; 
and the husband could take his wife again without blame. 
Israel, away in the land of exile, thinks herself a divorced wife. 
She does not say as much; but she thinks, she fears it. 
Jehovah answers those unspoken questionings, by reminding 
her that she cannot produce a bill of divorce. “Thus saith the 
Lord, Where is the bill of your mother’s divorcement, where- 
with I have put her away?” He may well ask where it is: 
He knows that it cannot be found, for He has never given it. 

God cannot divorce those whom He has once taken into 
covenant with Himself. Backsliding, rebellious, and faithless 
they may be; but they are his still. Though the universe be 
ransacked, the bill of divorce cannot be produced. The devil 
himself cannot confront us with it. And the love of God will 
yet win back. the souls on which it has set itself. In a little 
wrath He hid his face for a moment; but with everlasting 
kindness will He forgive and gather and have mercy. 


XV. 
Words in Season for the Wearp. 


‘Thou knowest, not alone as God, all-knowing ; 
As Man, our mortal weakness Thou hast proved : 
On earth, with purest sympathies o’erflowing, 
O Saviour, Thou hast wept, and Thou hast loved : 
And love and sorrow still to Thee may come, 
And find a hiding-place, a rest, a home.” 
Ho Lak: 


(ISAIAH I. 4.) 








aX VER since the world began, men have been weary. 
4 “Weary” denotes a class to which a multitude 
/ belong that no man can number, of every nation, 


“Oy kindred, tribe, and people. Physzcal weariness—of 
t 
oy 





» the slave on the march ; of the toiler in the sweating 
den ; of the seamstress working far into the night 
by the wasting taper; of the mother worn with watching her 
sick child. Mental weariness—when the fancy can no longer 
summon at will images of beauty; and the intellect refuses to 
follow another argument, master another page, or cast up 
another column. Aear¢ weariness—waiting in vain for the 
word so long expected but unspoken ; for the returning step of 
the prodigal; for the long-delayed letter. The weariness of 
the inner confiuct of striving day by day against the selfishness 
and waywardness of the soul on which prolonged resistance 
makes so slight an impression. The weariness of the Christzan 
worker, worn by the perpetual chafe of human sorrow, sin, and 
need. 

If only we could make one brilliant assault on the powers of 
evil, which should for ever quell their might, so that they would 
perforce retreat, leaving the field with us—who would not 
accept it as the most blessed gift of God? But, instead of this, 


108 Words in Season for the Wearg. 


we are engaged in a conflict which is tedious, incessant, and 
terribly wearing. If we defeat our enemy to-day, he will be 
ready to meet us to-morrow with equal force. If we conquer 
him in one thing, he will straightway disguise himself in 
another. Thus beneath the long ordeal, heart and flesh fail ; 
and we sigh for the place over whose portal Christ has written, 
“Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest.” 

Thus, in one way or another, all souls at some part of their 
life get weary. There is nothing novel in this ; but the novelty, 
the great novelty, consists in the infinite care that God takes of 
the weary. There is nothing like it outside the Bible, and the 
literature to which it has given birth. Man hears with com- 
posure that scores of weary ones have fallen out of the march 
of human life, and lie stretched on the scorching sand, doomed 
to expire of fatigue and thirst. God, on the other hand, the 
High and Holy One, inhabiting Eternity, stoops to the need of 
the weakling ; expends his care on the lame, halt, maimed, and 
blind ; adopts into his family those who had been rejected for 
their deformities and ugliness; gathers up the broken frag- 
ments ; tills the sterile ground ; ransacks the highways and 
byways for the waifs and strays whom no one invites to his 
board ; and is .perpetually engaged in brooding over each 
weary heart with its sore, its tears, its yearnings, its despair. 
This God is our God for ever and ever, unrivalled in his tender 
pity, the God of the fatherless and the widow. 

But the deep tenderness of God for every tired atom of 
humanity had been hidden from our knowledge, had it not 
been for the Great Servant who speaks in these paragraphs, 
and who combines the form of the Servant and equality with 
Jehovah. No one ever comforted the weary as He did. He 
could not look upon a great multitude, distressed and scattered 
as sheep not having a shepherd, without being moved with 
compassion towards them, and beginning to speak as only He 
could. How many weary souls did He sustain with his words 
(R.V.); to how many did He speak a word in season (A.V) ! 
Ask Him, speaking after the manner of men, whence He 
derived this matchless power ; and He will answer, “The Lord 


Ge Servant of Jehotah. 109 


God gave it Me. In his great love for weary souls everywhere, 
He raised Me up to be their Shepherd. Through days and 
nights, He taught Me, wakening Me morning by morning to 
some new lesson of sympathy and mercy, comforting Me amid 
the assaults of my foes and the darkness of dark hours, that 
I might be able to comfort others with the comfort wherewith I 
Myself had been comforted by my Father.” 

We are brought then to consider the education, resolution, 
vindication, and entreaty of the true Servant of Jehovah, 
Himself God over all. 


I. THE EDUCATION OF THE DIVINE SERVANT.—We must 
notice the difference between the authorized version and the 
new. In the one, “the Lord God hath given Me the tongue of 
the learned, that I should know.” In the other, “of them that 
are taught”—or, as the margin reads, “of disciples.” The 
thought being that the Lord Jesus in his human life was a pupil 
in the schoo! of human pain, under the tutelage of his Father, 
of whom He said, “I do nothing of Myself, but as the Father 
taught Me I speak these things.” “I ama Man that hath told 
you the truth which I heard from God” (John viii. 28, 40). 
This is in keeping also with that marvellous word of the Epistle 
to the Hebrews, “Though He were a Son, yet learned He 
obedience by the things which He suffered ; and, having been 
made perfect, He became unto all them that obey Him the 
Author of Eternal Salvation.” 

His education was by God Himself. “The Lord God hath 
given Me. . . He wakeneth morning by morning. . . The 
Lord God hath opened mine ear.” 

It was various. He passed through each class in the school 
of weariness. Being wearied with his journey, He sat by 
Sychar’s well; they took Him, even as He was, in the ship ; 
He looked up to heaven and sighed, because of the pressure of 
human pain, and the obstinacy of unbelief; He suffered being 
tempted ; He once cried in the bitterness of his soul, “ How 
long shall I be with you, and suffer you?” He was glad when 
the hour came that He should go home to his Father. The 
waves of human sorrow broke over his tender heart, and 


110 Words in Season for the Weary. 


though possessed of an inexhaustible patience, there was an 
incessant waste of the physical tissues, beneath which at last 
He fainted on the way to Calvary. 

It was constant. “Morning by morning” the Father woke 
Him. After his brief snatch of sleep, amid the thyme of the 
hill-side, or in the storm of the fishing-smack, or on the couch 
that the sisters’ love had spread for Him at Bethany, the Spirit 
touched and summoned Him to the new lesson of the fresh 
young day. Morning by morning He was wakened to learn, 
by the ever-changing circumstances of daily providence, some 
deeper phase of the world’s suffering and its medicine. Would 
that we were quicker to detect that same awakening touch; and 
to learn the lessons taught by the circumstances of our lot as 
to the treatment of the weary and suffering ! 

Lt dealt with the season for administering comfort. “That I 
should know how to speak a word in season.” It is not enough 
to speak the right word; you must speak it at the right 
moment, or it will be in vain. Many a word spoken out of 
season has fallen like a seed on the wayside to be devoured by 
birds ; whilst the same word, uttered at the right time by a 
voice with less quality of tone, has been God’s balm. It is not 
easy to know just when to speak to the weary. There are 
times when the nervous system is so overstrained that it cannot 
bear even the softest words. It is best then to be silent. A 
caress, a touch, or the stillness that breathes an atmosphere of 
calm, will then most quickly soothe and heal. This delicacy 
of perception can only be acquired in the school of suffering. 
Our Master knows when to speak, and when to be still, be- 
cause He has graduated there. 

It embraced the method. “That I should know how.” The 
manner is as important as the season. A message of goodwill 
may be uttered with so little sympathy, and in tones so gruff 
and grating, that it will repel. The psalmist speaks of words 
so soft that they do not break the head! The touch of the 
comforter must be that of the nurse on the fractured bone— 
of the mother with the frightened child. God knows how 
delicately strung our system is, and how it demands the gentle 
tread across the floor; movements like the fall of rose-petals 


Che Object of Christ's Lite. III 


on the grass ; methods of perfect sympathy. All these He has 
provided, who made the snow descend in noiseless flakes, and 
the ocean break in silvery ripple on the sand. Thy King hath 
been trained to this ; lo! He comes, meek and lowly, sitting 
on the ambling foal. He will not break the bruiséd reed, nor 
quench the smoking flax. 

It seems to me as if the education of our High Priest has 
not ceased with his transference from this world of sorrow to 
the realm where weariness is never felt. His ministry to weary 
hearts through succeeding ages has made his eye more quick, 
his touch more delicate. 

O weary soul! I have seen Him coming to thy help. The 
voice of the Shepherd lifts itself, calling thy name. He is 
searching for thee by crag, and brake, and torrent-bed. He 
knows just how to take thee. He will cast thee about his 
shoulders rejoicing, and so bring thee home. 


II. His RESOLUTION.—From the first, Jesus knew that He 
must die. The Lord God poured the full story into his opened 
ear. With all other men, death is the close of their life ; with 
Christ it was the object. We die because we were born; 
Christ was born that He might die. From his birth the 
shadow of the Cross fell athwart his soul, as the young pigeons 
shed their blood for Him in the temple courts. To Nicodemus 
He said, “The Son of Man must be lifted up.” The scenes in 
the halls of Caiaphas, Herod and Pilate, were as present to 
his prevision as the scenes of the past are to our memory! 
Frequently He took his disciples apart, and told them that the 
Son of Man would be delivered into the hands of men who 
would handle Him shamefully—mock, spit upon, scourge, and 
kill Him (Mark x. 34). But though He anticipated all, yet He 
was not rebellious, neither turned away back. 

On one occasion towards the close of his earthly career, 
when the fingers on the dial-plate were pointing to the near 
fulfilment of the time, we are told He set his face steadfastly 
to go to Jerusalem. What heroism was here! Men sometimes 
speak of Christ as if He were effeminate and weak, deficient 
in manly courage, and remarkable only for passive virtues. 


112 Words in Season for the Weary. 


But such conceptions are refuted by the indomitable resolution 
which set its face like a flint, and knew that it would not be 
ashamed. 

Note the voluntariness of Christ’s surrender. The martyr 
dies because he cannot help it ; Christ died because He chose. 
He laid down his life of Himself; no one took it from Him. 
He might have been rebellious and turned away backward, or 
called for twelve legions of angels, or pinned his captors to the 
ground by the out-flashing of his inherent God-head ; but He 
forbore. Listen to his words, as He treads the wine-press 
alone! “Thy will, not mine be done.” It is this which 
throws his resolution into such clear relief. It is this that 
stirs our hearts with admiration and devotion, as we see Him 
deliberately giving his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to 
them that pluck off the hair, and exposing to shame and 
spitting the face that angels gaze on with unceasing reverence, 
and from which, some day, heaven and earth will flee away. 

It has been thought that the opened ear refers to something 
more than the pushing back of the flowing Oriental locks in 
order to utter the secret of coming sorrow. It is supposed to 
have some reference to the ancient Jewish custom of boring 
the ear of the slave to the doorpost of the master’s house. 
Under this metaphor it is held that our Lord chose with keen 
sympathy the service of the Father, and elected all that it 
might involve, because He loved Him and would not go out 
free.. The images may be combined. Be it only remembered 
that He knew and chose all that would come upon Him, and 
that the fetters which bound Him to the cross were those of 
undying love to us and of burning passion for the Father’s 
glory. 


III. His VINDICATION.—“ He is near that justifieth Me.” 
These are words upon which Jesus may have stayed Himself 
through those long hours of trial. The Father who sent Him 
was with Him. Not for a moment did He leave Him alone. 
God was near. The triumph with which Paul quotes these 
words of the justification in which the soul which has made 
Jesus its refuge, is privileged to robe itself, is but the sigh of an 


~The Vindication of Jesus: 113 


fZolian harp, contrasted with the peal of an organ, in compari- 

_ son with the exultation that filled the heart of the Son of Man 
as He contemplated his vindication by his Father before all 
worlds. 

Who is he that condemneth Me? we hear Him say; “it is 
God that justifieth!” Justification being used here in the 
sense of vindication, not, as with us, of the imputation of 
righteousness. 

They said that He was the Friend of publicans and sinners. 
God has justified Him by showing that if He associates with 
such, it is to make them martyrs and saints. 

They said that He was mad. God has justified Him by 
making his teaching the illumination of the noblest and wisest 
of the race. 

They said He had a devil. But God has justified Him by 
giving Him power to cast out the devil and bind him with a 
mighty chain. 

They said that He blasphemed when He called Himself the 
Son of God. But God has justified Him by raising Him to 
the right hand of power, so that He will come in the clouds 
of heaven, with power and great glory. 

They said that He would destroy the temple and the 
commonwealth of Israel. God has justified Him in shedding 
the influence of the Hebrew people through all the nations of 
the world, and making their literature, their history, their con- 
ceptions dominant. Where are those who have condemned the 
Lord Jesus? Their books rot on the top shelves of libraries 
in undisturbed dust. Their names are only remembered as 
quoted in the apologetics of the defenders of the Christian 
faith. Their memory has not survived moth-eating time. 
Behold, they have all waxed old as doth a garment! The 
moth has eaten them up. They have passed away as an ill 
dream ; whilst the exalted Saviour is enthroned daily in more 
hearts, with more enthusiasm, and with growing appreciation. 
His throne is established for ever and ever. Oh, do not be 
afraid of the wrath of man, thou child of the King! for “the 
moth shall eat them up as a garment, and the worm shall eat 


them like wool.” The fate that has overtaken the adversaries 
) FE 


114 Words in Season for the Weary. 


of thy King shall overtake thine (li. 8). Only be still, as He 
was ; set thy face as a flint; commit thy cause to God ; count 
not on thy protestations, but upon his vindications—and He 
shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judg- 
ment as the noonday. He will help thee; fear not! thou shalt 
not be confounded. 


IV. His APPEAL.—To obey the Lord’s Servant is equivalent 
to fearing the Lord. He who does the one must do the other. 
What is this but to proclaim his Deity? Those who are thus 
designated, who, because they fear God, brave the wrath of 
man, who dare to obey the voice of the Servant as the voice of 
his Father, are often called to walk through darkness, where 
there is no light. It may be the valley of the shadow of death, 
or ‘the garden of Gethsemane, or the midday-midnight of 
Calvary. But from the depth of his own experience the 
Divine Servant counsels such, that they should trust where 
they cannot see, and stay themselves upon God. 

Do not stand still, or sit down, or go back, or despair ; but 
keep right onward, believing that the growing light on the 
fringe of the darkness heralds the advent of the morning. God 
will help thee. Thou shalt not be ashamed. Set thy face as a 
flint. Let thy feet hold the appointed track. 

The temptation at such an hour is to kindle a fire, and to 
gird oneself about with firebrands (R.v.); but these die out 
after a brief sparkle, leaving the darkness more intense. Then 
with dazzled eye, the Godless soul stumbles in the thicket, and 
is flung headlong into the pit of destruction. “This shall ye 
have of Mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.” How awful 
such a lot must be !—to lie down in the dying moment with 
sorrow for a wasted life behind, and a dark eternity before. 
Oh, abandon your fire with its sparks ; and avail yourselves of 
the light of the Word of God, as a lamp to your feet, and a 
light to your path, until the day dawn and the Daystar arise on 
your hearts ! 


XVI. 
Ohe Thrice “ Bearken.” 


‘Be still, sad soul ! lift thou no passionate cry, 
But spread the desert of thy being bare 
To the full searching of the All-seeing eye; 
Wait !—and through dark misgiving, blank despair, 
God will come down in pity, and fill the dry 
Dead place with light, and life, and vernal air.” 
J. C. SHAIRP. 


(ISAIAH li. 1-8.) 


HESE paragraphs are exceedingly dramatic. We 
become conscious that we are approaching a revela- 
tion of unparalleled sublimity which shall be in 
Scripture what heart or brain or eye is in the human 
body. The encasing of each of these in strong 
protecting walls convinces the most superficial of 

the priceless value of the treasure they are formed to guard. 

And as we consider the thrice “ Hearken” of this paragraph, 

and the thrice “ Awake” of the succeeding one, we realize that 

we are entering the presence-chamber of the profoundest 
mysteries of love and redemption. 

Travellers who have visited the ruined temples of Egypt 
describe the splendour of their approaches. Long corridors, 
guarded by the imperturbable and stupendous statues of defunct 
deities, avenues of pillars, and the shadow of imposing fagades 
and porticoes—everything that human art could devise pre- 
pared the mind for the magnificence of the inner shrine. 
Similarly, as we read these chapters, our mind becomes 
educated, our eye focussed and adjusted, our sense of perspec- 
tive trained, that with hushed and awful dread we may pass 
in to worship before the dying Man of Calvary. 





116 Ohe Thrice “ Hearken.” 


The people, notwithstanding the promises of deliverance 
from exile and the summons to depart, seemed unable to 
believe that they were destined to become again a great nation, 
or that Zion’s wastes would be repaired! Already the Servant 
of Jehovah had sought to answer their anxious questionings, 
and reassure them by announcing a love that would not let 
them go. And in these words He betakes Himself to the same 
strain. He prefaces his words by the thrice repeated 
“Hearken,” addressed to those “that follow after righteous- 
ness” in the first verse; and to “those that know righteous- 
ness” in the seventh. These are always the stages in the 
development of character: they that follow presently possess. 


I. THE LESSONS OF RETROSPECT.—It is wholesome for the 
pillar, with its fluted column and decorated coronal, to look 
down to the quarry whence it came; and for us all to look 
back to the lowliness and obscurity of our origin. Such 
considerations deepen our humility, and augment our thank- 
fulness for the grace of God which has made us what we are. 

Remember, O man, the rock of the first Adam, the pit of 
self-hood, passion, murder, out of which thou wast taken! She 
who plucked the tempting fruit in violation of her Maker's 
word was thy mother ; and he who cast the blame on her and 
preferred the indulgence of the flesh to the regimen of the 
spirit was thy father. For thy brother thou must take Cain, 
and for thy sister Rahab. Thou knowest the strong affinities 
by which thou art bound to each of these. Thou canst not rid 
thyself of the features of the family likeness, nor wholly escape 
the bewraying accent of the family speech! What has brought 
thee from such an origin, and made thee a pillar in the temple 
of God, but the grace which had no reason save itself, no 
measure save infinity? Boast not thyself. There is nothing in 
thee to account for such transformation. Render thy homage 
where it belongs, and reason, that if God has done so much, 
He can easily perfect it. If thou wert excavated, surely thou 
canst be shaped! If thou wert hewn, surely thou canst be 
polished! If thou wert justified, surely thou canst be sancti- 
fied! If, when an enemy, thou wert reconciled by the death of 


—— 


“Pook Back!"  - 117 


his Son, how much more, being reconciled, thou shalt be saved 
by his life ! 

It was for her encouragement that Israel was primarily 
directed to this retrospect. The nation was greatly reduced in 
numbers, and the Godly were but a handful. It seemed prepos- 
terous to suppose that they would ever attain to such prolific 
numbers as to rival the sands on the shore, or the stars of space. 
The tree had been so mercilessly cut down, and pruned, that 
they despaired of again beholding its spreading branches, laden 
with fruit. In answer to such forebodings the voice of inspira- 
tion cries, “ Look back ! Consider Abraham and Sarah. There 
was a time when they were the sole representatives of the 
Hebrew race; yet of them and of the one son of their old age 
sprang countless myriads. What little cause, then, is there for 
fear! Though you were reduced to a single aged pair, these 
might become the origin of a mighty nation! How much more 
is there reason for hope now that you may still be counted by 
your thousands!” “Look unto Abraham your father, and unto 
Sarah that bare you; for when he was but one I called him, 
and blessed him and made him many.” 

Let us recount the steps of Abraham’s pruning, on which God 
lays stress in saying, “When he was but one, I called him.” 

He stood alone. First, Terah died, after having started with 
him for the Land of Promise, emblem of those who in old age 
start on the pilgrimage of faith and hope, not too much tied by 
the conservatism of nature, or the traditions of the past. Then 
Lot dropped away, and went down to Sodom ; and it must have 
been difficult for the old man, as he saw the retreating forms 
of his camp followers, to be wholly unmoved. Then Sarah’s 
scheme miscarried, and Hagar was thrust from his tents with 
her child. Lastly, his Isaac was laid upon the altar. By suc- 
cessive strokes the shadows grew deeper and darker; and he 
stood alone, face to face with God and his purpose. But the 
fire that burned in his heart rose higher, shone brighter, and 
has ignited myriads with its flame. You only need a spark to 
light a conflagration. Chicago was burnt down by the up- 
setting of a tiny lamp. If there be heroic faith in one lonely 
heart, it shall spread to untold millions. 


118 Ghe Thrice “ Gearker.”’ 


His faith was sorely tried. First by the long delay; then 
by the growing unlikelihood that he should have a child, since 
natural force was spent ; then by the summons to offer Isaac 
on Mount Moriah: every test was applied to his power of 
endurance. To the end of his life he was a stranger and 
pilgrim, only seeing the promises from afar, and dying with an 
unfulfilled hope. He little realized the perfect work his patience 
was producing. He may not have understood how utterly God 
must reduce and cut us down before He can graft upon us his 
rarest fruit. He did not see that our proud flesh will glory, 
though it be of a strand, a smoking flax, a broken reed. To 
him the necessity for knife and fire was not so patent as to us. 
As we look back upon it all, we see that it could not have 
been otherwise. If the seed was to be a Divine gift to his 
faith, then nature herself must forfeit vitality and hope, that 
God might be all in all. 

From Abraham I turn to thee, much-suffering believer, cut 
to the quick and to the roots, brought into the dust of death, 
stripped of reputation, wealth, prestige, the gifts and graces 
of oratory, faculty to command. Yet be of good cheer !— 
Abraham passed this way before thee. It is all part of a 
necessary process. Nothing has happened to hinder, but all 
to help thee to become the parent of a great spiritual progeny, 
Because of the destruction of nature, thou mayest reckon on 
the prolific abundance of grace. 

His history is the type of God’s dealings with men. Not 
once nor twice in the record of the Church the cause of truth 
has been entrusted to a tiny handful of defenders, who have 
deemed it forlorn or lost. The prophet has stood alone lament- 
ing that he only was left. The dens and caves have sheltered 
the loyal but diminished few. Ragged, tattered, harried, 
exiled, these have gathered around the banner and followed 
it. None of the mighty, noble, or learned have been called, 
and not many of the poor. But suddenly God has called out 
from some unlikely quarter one man, and it has seemed as 
though the dust were suddenly transformed into warriors, and 
truth sprang up from the dust as luxuriantly as grass after 
spring rains. Sir Walter Scott’s picture of the apparently 


God's Bealings with Men. 119 


empty glen suddenly teeming with armed men at the sign of 
the chieftain has often had its counterpart in the great army 
which has arisen from the life, or words, or witness, of a single 
man. 

It was so in the days of the Arian heresy, when Athanasius 
stood alone against the world for the deity of Christ. It was 
so at the Reformation, when Europe lay asleep under the 
soporific of the Papacy. It was so when first the abolition of 
slavery began to be agitated. God has repeatedly shown that 
He has no taste for strong battalions ; He chooses a Gideon, 
a Judas Maccabeeus, a Luther, a Wilberforce. The history of 
the Church is largely a story of the lives of individuals. It is 
through a Livingstone, a Judson, a Carey, that whole nations 
have been brought to the feet of Jesus, to sit clothed and in 
their right mind. 

If, therefore, some lone and single-handed Christian worker 
should read these words, there is no reason for despair. Art 
thou a cypher? but thou mayest have God in front of thee! 
Art thou but a narrow strait ? yet the whole ocean of Godhead 
is waiting to pour through thee! The question is not what 
thou canst or canst not do, but what thou art willing for God 
to do. When God makes use of one man, he becomes the 
father of a vast multitude, as Abraham of Israel. The only 
condition is the presence of God in us, with us, through us. 
Open thy whole being to God; for God is about to comfort 
the waste places of Zion. He will make her wilderness like 
Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and 
gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of 
melody. 


II. THE IMPERISHABLENESS OF SPIRITUAL QUALITY.—In 
the following verses there is a marvellous contrast between the 
material and the un-material, the temporal and the eternal. 
The gaze of the people is directed to the heavens above and 
the earth beneath. Those heavens seem stable enough, far 
removed from the convulsions and shocks of time. To them 
surely no change can come. Yet they shall vanish like a puff 
of smoke borne down the wind. And as for the earth, it shall 


120 Ghe Chrice “ Bearken.” 


wax old. Nature has often been described as God’s vesture, 
the veil under which He hides. But the day shall come when 
it shall be laid aside. There shall be new heavens and a new 
earth, for the first heavens and the first earth shall pass away. 
But amid the general wreck, spiritual qualities will remain 
imperishably the same. “My salvation shall be for ever, and 
my righteousness shall not be abolished” (6). 

This shall be for ever true of God. We cannot discern what 
awaits us in the near future. This world is destined to see— 
and perhaps soon—the sudden unveiling of the Divine plan, 
to which God has been working through the ages; vast 
national convulsions; nature in the throes of travail; the 
advent of the King; the setting up of the Judgment; the 
Resurrection. But though such things take place around us, 
we need not doubt that God will remain the same—his love 
and faithfulness, his covenant and promise, his purpose and 
choice. Our friend’s heart is the same when he appears in a 
new attire; and God will be the same in his feelings and 
dealings towards us amid the crash of matter and the wreck of 
worlds as He is to-day. We shall still be his adopted children, 
still accepted in the Beloved, still included in his everlasting 
covenant, still one with his Son, as members of his Body and 
his Bride. 

The Jews took great comfort in the thought of God’s un- 
changeableness. Had He not said that his righteousness was 
near and his salvation gone forth ; that his arms should judge 
the people, and the isles wait for Him? Then Babylon might 
fall beneath the assault of Cyrus, and the whole world be in 
confusion ; floods of anarchy might burst on the nation, yet 
God’s word would be fulfilled ; He could not recede from his 
purpose or alter it ; they might possess their souls in the sure 
confidence that, as He had promised, so He would perform. 
Some such assurance may well steal into our hearts, as we 
anticipate the changes that are always coming over ourselves, 
our homes, our churches, and our time. Everything else 
alters—the most stable foundations of our trust give way—but 
God is unchangeably the same; the qualities of his character 
are as permanent as his throne. : 


\ Working for Gternity. © 121 
4, 
\ This shall be for ever true of man. When we partake of 
God’s righteousness, and assimilate it, we acquire a permanence 
which defies time and change. The love we derive from the 
heart of God, and have to each other, abideth for ever. The 
peace we receive deepens in its perennial flow. The patience, 
courage, strength of character, which we acquire here with so 
much pain, are not to go out as a candle, nor vanish as a puff of 
smoke. If it were so, what would become of God’s infinite 
painstaking ! No; our school-house may be in ruins, and not 
a vestige of it left ; the horn-books from which we read, the 
hard forms on which we sat, may vanish, but the characters 
we acquired shall outlive the world of matter. These shall be 
for ever, and shall not be abolished. Oh, let us not murmur at 
the slow progress of our education, and at the care that God 
takes for us thoroughly to master each lesson—turning it back, 
making us review it again and again. He is working for 
eternity. 

What a lesson is given in these words of the relative value of 
things! To the man of the world the Zaving is all-important ; 
to the man of faith the deinmg. The child of sense sacrifices all 
for what is but a puff of smoke, or a moth-eaten garment at 
the best ; but the child of eternity looks for a kingdom that 
hath foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God—where the 
moth does not eat, nor rust corrupt, nor fire consume, nor . 
change intrude. A man’s life consisteth not in the abundance 
of the things that he possesses, but in meekness, faith, fidelity, 
devotion, love. 


Il]. THE IMPOTENCE OF MAN.—These exiled Jews hardly 
dared to hope that they would be able to break away from their 
foes. The air was laden with their reproaches and revilings. 
What mercy could they hope for from those who refused to 
stint their bitter words? When their oppressors passed from 
malignant threats to action, there would be little shrift or 
quarter. We have all known something of this fear of man, 
who seemed waiting to destroy. But to us, as to the exiles in 
Babylon, the Divine word comes, “Fear ye not, neither be 
dismayed” (7). 


122 Ohe Thrice “‘ Bearken.”’ 


The paragraph closes with an application of the word used by 
the great Servant of Himself.” “The moth shall eat them up,” 
we heard Him saying to Himself; “they shall all wax old as a 
garment” (I. 9). But now we are bidden to apply those same 
expressions to ourselves. ‘The moth shall eat them up like a 
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool” (li. 8). With 
these assurances behind us, we may face a world in arms. 
Men may try to wear out the saints, but they must fail; 
because our souls are fed from the perennial springs of the 
Divine nature, and because God has imparted to us Loth 
patience and courage which are eternal in their nature. He 
will take care of his own. 


XVII. 
“Atvake, Atvake!” 


“Oh, quickly come, dread Judge of all! 
For, awful though Thine advent be, 
All shadows from the truth will fall, 
And falsehood die, in sight of Thee. 
Oh, quickly come! for doubt and fear 
Like clouds dissolve when Thou art near.” 
TUTTIETT. 


_ 


(ISAIAH lii. 1.) 


(HE thrice “ Hearken” of the preceding paragraphs is 
followed by the thrice “Awake” of these. The 
first is addressed to the arm of Jehovah, which, 
with rich poetic licence, is imaged as asleep; the 
other two to Jerusalem, whether to the ruined city, 
or to her sons then by “the waters of Babylon” 
inion 17.3. hivsn): 

Let us take the central paragraph first (li. 17). There Jeru- 
salem is addressed as stupefied by some intoxicating potion. 
She has drained it to its dregs, and lies as one asleep. But her 
drunkenness is not of wine, nor of strong drink ; she has drunk 
at the hand of the Lord “the cup of his fury.” Such imagery 
is often used by the prophets, of the cup of God’s wrath drunk 
down by those on whom it descends, and inflicting on them the 
insensibility and stupefaction with which we are but too familiar 
as the effect of excessive drinking. 

The whole city has succumbed under the spell. Her sons 
have fainted, and lie strewn in all the streets, like antelopes 
snared in the hunters’ nets, from which their struggles have 
failed to extricate them. Amid such circumstances, the servant 





124 “Atuake, Atake!” 


of Jehovah is introduced, crying, “Awake, awake! stand up, O 
Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of 
his fury.” 

As the tremor of light in the eastern sky stirs the life of the 
sleeping city ; as the warm breath of the south wind dissipates 
the snow and frost of winter ; as the whisper, “Talitha cumi,” 
aroused the sleeping maiden in the house of Jairus—so did that 
call awake the stupefied city of Zion, and all suddenly the pulse 
of life began to throb. Arousing herself, she thought God had 
been asleep, and called on Him to awake. She had to learn 
that it was not so. It was she that had been sleeping ; and 
therefore the appeal was flashed back from God to her, “Awake, 
awake ! put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful 
garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city.” 

There are other soporifics than the wrath of God: the air of 
the enchanted ground ; the laudanum of evil companionship ; 
the drugs of worldly pleasure, of absorption in business, of 
carnal security. By these we are all liable to be thrown into a 
deep sleep. The army of the Lord is too apt to put off the 
armour of light, and resign itself to heavy slumbers, till the 
clarion voice warns it that it is high time to awake. Not once 
nor twice in the life of the disciples did they become heavy with 
sleep. And we, too, lose the ardour of our zeal, the warmth of 
our love, the certainty of our faith, the enthusiasm of our ser- 
vice, and become benumbed and insensible. Merciful Awakener 
of souls, we adore Thee for so often standing beside us, and 
saying, “ Awake, awake!” Often we have started from 
slumber, thinking that Thou hadst been asleep, whereas it 
was ourselves ! 


I, ZIon’s APPEAL TO Gop.—“ Awake, awake! put on 
strength, O arm of the Lord.” 

The first sympton of awaking is a cry. It is so with a child. 
Wherever the mother may be engaged about the house, she is 
on the alert for the first sounds of her babe’s awakening. She 
says, “Did you hear the child cry?” it is so with the soul. 
When Saul of Tarsus was converted, the heavenly watchers 
said, “ Behold, he prayeth.” It is so with the Church. The 


Arguments for Faith. © 125 


outpouring of the spirit of prayer is the first symptom of 
renewal and revival, just as the murmur of the streams in the 
valleys shows that the snows are melting on the Upper Alps. 

The cry in this case was founded on a mistake. The prayer 
refers to what is familiar to us all in the Divine life. There are 
ebbs and flows ; the winter and summer; the Transfiguration 
height, and the valley with its demoniac child. Sometimes 
God seems alert, alive, and energetic ; the pulse of his energy 
stirs in us ; his voice summons us to new and heroic tasks. At 
other times a heavy lethargy hangs over the landscape of earth, 
and intercepts our view of heaven. But our mistake is to 
attribute the cause to God instead of finding it in ourselves. If 
there are variations in our inner life, it is because our rate of 
reception differs from time to time. It is not God who sleeps, 
but we. It is not for God to awake, but for us. It is not 
necessary for the Divine arm to gird on strength, but for the 
human to take that which is within its easy reach. 

The cry ts short and earnest. Thrice the suppliant cries, 
“Awake!” When we are suddenly startled from sleep, 
conscious that something is wrong and needs mending, we 
cry vigorously to God. This is well, even though we shall 
learn presently that we are ourselves to blame because there 
has been a pause, a break in our receptivity. Still, earnestness 
is good, even though at first it may be in a wrong direction. 

The best basis for our cry ts memory of the past. “ Art thou 
not it that cut Rahab (ze. Egypt) in pieces, that pierced the 
dragon” (ze. of the Nile)? (9). It is well to quote past 
experiences as arguments for faith. Our past life will have 
missed its aim if it has not revealed God to us. Each incident 
is intended to show us some new trait in his character for us to 
treasure for all coming time. Not that we expect God to 
repeat Himself; but that we learn to say, if He did all this, 
He is resourceful, tender-hearted, wise, and strong: there is 
no emergency with which He cannot grapple, no need He 
cannot fulfil, He gave manna—He surely can provide water. 
He delivered from Egypt—He can certainly emancipate from 
Babylon. He dried up the waters of the great deep, and made 
the depths of the sea a way for his ransomed—then surely He 


126 “Atuake, Afvake!”’ 


can make the wilderness a pool of water, and all the mountains 
a way. 

The arm of God ts strong. It stretched forth the heavens 
and laid the foundation of the earth (13). The same energy 
has left a lasting monument of its might in the works of nature. 
Surely, child of God, it is able to defend thee; to be thy 
bulwark and defence; thy fortress against thy mightiest foes. 
The fury of the oppressor may seem ready to destroy, but it 
shall break in vain on the arm of God; as the sea breaks on 
the long harbour wall, which is built out into the angry 
breakers, and behind which the smallest craft may shelter. 

The arm of God ts far-reaching. It reaches down into the 
pit (14). There is no depth so profound to which it will not 
stoop. The psalmist said—‘If I make my bed in hell, Thou 
art there.” Like Jonah, we may go down to the bottom of 
the mountains, compassed with the waters, and wrapped 
about with weeds; yet thence shall God bring us. “Nor 
depth . . . can separate us from the love of God which is 
in Jesus Christ our Lord.” However low we sink, underneath 
are the everlasting arms. They are always underneath. 

The arm of God ts tender. It comforts us (12). It is what 
the arm of the mother is to the sick and tired child ; what the 
arm of love is to the beloved, who leans on it with a sense of 
happy security! Those arms were stretched out on the cross, 
spread wide to encompass the world. They welcome to the 
tenderest bosom that heaves anywhere in the universe. John 
found it a soft place at the Last Supper. Let us not hesitate to 
lean back in that embrace and near that heart, to be comforted 
when our heart is sick and the flesh faints. None can pluck us 
thence. . 
‘Safe in the arms of Jesus, 

Safe on his loving breast, 


There by his love o’er-shaded 
Sweetly my soul shall rest.” 


We are too apt to forget all this, to forget the Lord our 
Maker and Redeemer (13). We think more of the earth than 
of the over-arching heavens ; more of the fading grass than of 
the tree of life; more of man than of God. The near. has 


“ut on the Lord Jesus.” - ray 


obscured the distant ; the flaring gas-lamps have dimmed the 
shine of the stars; the human has eclipsed the Divine. Oh, 
think of Him who sits at the right hand of God, the seat of 
his resistless and unceasing energy; and believe that He is 
between thee and all adverse circumstances, though they be 
ready to destroy. To fear continually all the day because of 
the fury of the oppressor, is impossible for those who dwell all 
day between the shoulders of Emmanuel, and are hidden in the 
shadow of his hand (16). 


II, THE APPEAL TO ZION.—When we become thoroughly 
awake, and have time for reflection, we discover that the fault 
and blame lie entirely with ourselves. It is not God who has 
been lethargic: He can neither slumber nor sleep ; we have 
slept. 

It is blessed to be awaked out of sleep. Life is passing by 
so rapidly ; the radiant glory of the Saviour may be missed 
unless we are on the alert, or we may fail to give Him the 
sympathy He needs, and an angel will be summoned to do our 
work. Besides, the world needs the help of men who give no 
sleep to their eyes nor slumber to their eyelids, but are always 
eager to help it in its need. Being awake, we shall discover 
two sets of attire awaiting us. The first is strength, the other 
beauty ; and each has its counterpart in the New Testament, 
the one in Eph. vi., the other in Col. iii, Put on the whole 
armour of God. Put on the Lord Jesus Christ—his temper, 
spirit, and character. 

We must put on our beautiful garments. There should be a 
bloom and beauty about us. Not only garments, but deaudzful 
garments. The emblem of the life to which we are called is 
the bridegroom decked with a garland, or the bride with her 
jewels, or the garden filled with blossom (Ixi. 10, 11). We 
must not only do right things, we must do them beautifully ; 
not only speak the truth, but speak it in love; not only give to 
the poor, but do it unobtrusively, without the appearance of 
patronage or ostentation. The beauty of the Lord our God 
must be upon us. The apostle’s enumeration of the clothing 
of the redeemed soul is largely occupied with its temper and 


128 “Atuake, Atvake!” 


disposition, what might be called its bloom—“ compassion, 
kindness, humility, meekness, long-suffering.” 

We cannot weave these. We are not able to spin such a 
cocoon out of our own nature, nor are we required to do so. 
They are all prepared for us in Jesus; we have only to put 
them on, by putting Him on. Assume the meekness, gentle- 
ness, and purity of Jesus. Be a partaker of the kingdom and 
patience which are in Jesus (Rev. i. 9). Or, to state the same 
truth in a different way, take Jesus to be what God has made 
Him—wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. 

This can only be done when the heart is at leisure. There 
must be deep recollection of soul in the Master’s presence ; 
then the reverent and glad attiring of the soul with the qualities 
of his glorious nature, and the reckoning that they are assumed 
in response to the act of faith. The beautiful garments await 
the poorest, weakest, unlikeliest. None of God’s own need go 
in rags; none need be arrayed in anything else than the light 
with which God is said to cover Himself. “Thou coverest 
Thyself with light, as with a garment.” “Let us put off the 
works of darkness, and put on the armour of light.” 

We must put on strength. “Put on thy strength, O Zion.” 
God provides strength for every possible emergency or demand 
in life. Whatever call is made upon us, there is always a 
sufficiency of grace by which it may be met. Undoubtedly, 
temptation and trial are permitted to come so that we may be 
compelled to appropriate supplies which lie within our reach, 
but of which we should not have availed ourselves, unless hard 
pressed and put to it. Always the danger is that, even under 
such circumstances, we should fail to put on the strength which 
is stored for us in Jesus Christ our Lord. 

We are not bidden to purchase strength, or generate it by 
our resolutions, prayers, and agonizings ; dwt fo put zt on. It 
is already prepared, and only awaits appropriation. Put on 
thy strength, O tempted one! Before passing from the quiet 
morning hour into the arena which has so often witnessed 
failure and defeat, put on the might of the risen Saviour. Do 
not simply pray to be kept, or to be helped, but arm thyself 
with the whole armour of God; take hold of his strength and 


“@be Boly City.” 129° 


be at peace ; wrap thyself about with the mail of Him who is 

stronger than the strong man armed. Reckon that it is thine. 

Dare to believe that thou art more than a match for thy worst 

foes. Say with David, “I will not be afraid of ten thousands 

of people who set themselves round about. The Lord is my 
light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the 
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?” 
We must expect to be delivered from the dominion of sin. 
_ Babylon had been bidden to descend from her throne and sit in 
the dust ; Jerusalem is commanded to arise from the dust and 
sit on her throne. The bands of her neck were to be unloosed, 
her gates were never again to be passed by the uncircumcised 
and the unclean. So entire was to be the deliverance of 
Jehovah, that she was henceforth to be “the holy city,” 
separate for the exclusive service of God. 

These words have an application for us. The inner citadel 
of the heart is intended to be God’s alone. He purchased 
the site ; He built and reared its walls ; He claims it as the 
seat of the royal residence. The heart is the Holy See. 
And if we are thoroughly yielded to Him as our Judge, our 
Lawgiver, and our King, He will save us. The walls shall be 
salvation, and the gates praise. There shall not enter the 
abominable, the unclean, nor the lying thought. Diabolus 
shall be driven from Mansoul, and Emmanuel shall be en- 
throned in His glory and beauty. Then the bells shall ring, 
and the streets shall be filled with chorister-bands, and white- 
robed priests, and shining ones with harps and vials full of 
odours. 


s 


XVIII. 
“Depart pe, Depart pe!” 


“ Break up the heavens, O Lord! and far 
Thro’ all yon starlight keen, 
Draw me, thy bride—a glittering star 
In raiment white and clean!" 
TENNYSON. 


(ISAIAH li. 7-12.) 


T last the climax of the long prophetic stairway is 
gained. The prophet had anticipated it in a previous 
passage (xlix. 20), but had been diverted by the 
objections urged against the possibility of such an 

ps issue of the long captivity. It could not be, Israel 
= argued. It was unheard of, that a strong nation like 

Babylon should let one of its captive peoples go free without 

fee or reward. The archives of all nations might be searched 

in vain for a precedent. One by one, the servant of God 
had met and answered these objections; had declared his 
own unalterable resolve ; had startled their lethargy with the 
thrice “ Hearken !” and the thrice “Awake!” And now again 
he puts the trumpet to his lips, and announces the Exodus— 

“Depart ye, depart ye! go ye out from thence, touch no 

unclean thing.” 

From the glowing periods of this paragraph we can recon- 
struct the picture of the return from exile, as it presented itself 
to the seer. It was notably the return of the Lord to Zion 
(8, R.V.). The stately procession moves slowly and fearlessly. 
It is not the escape of a band of fugitive slaves, dreading 
pursuit and recapture: “Ye shall not go out in haste, neither 





Ge Return of the Word to Zion. 131 


shall ye go by flight.” Before it speed the messengers, appear- 
ing on the sky-line of the mountains of Zion, with good tidings 
of good, publishing peace, and publishing salvation (7). 

The main body is composed of white-robed priests, bearing 
with reverent care the holy vessels, which Nebuchadnezzar 
carried from the temple, which Belshazzar introduced with 
mockery into his feast, but which Cyrus restored. -Their 
number and weight are carefully specified, 5,400 in all (Ezra 
i. 7-11). 

As the procession emerges from its four months of wilderness 
march on the mountains which were about Jerusalem, her 
watchmen, who had long waited for the happy moment, lift 
up their voice ; with the voice together do they sing. They 
see eye to eye. And the waste places of Jerusalem, with 
their charred wood and scorched stones, break forth into 
joy and sing together. The valleys and hills become vocal, 
constituting an orchestra of praise; and the nations of the 
world are depicted as coming to behold, and acknowledge that 
the Lord had made bare his holy arm. But they do not see— 
what is hidden from all but anointed eyes—that the Lord goes 
before his people, and comes behind as their rearward ; so that 
their difficulties are surmounted by Him before they reach them, 
and no foe can attack them from behind. 

_ The literal fulfilment of this splendid prevision is described 
in the Book of Ezra. There we find the story of the return of 
a little band of Jews, 1,700 only in number. They halted at the 
River Ahava, the last station before they entered the desert, for 
three days, to put themselves with fasting and prayer into 
God’s hand. They had no experience of desert marching. 
Their caravan was rendered unwieldy by the number of women 
and children in it. They had to thread a district infested by 
wild bands of robbers. But they scorned to ask for an escort 
of soldiers and horsemen to protect them, so sure were they 
that their God went before them to open up the way, and came 
behind to defend against attack. In the midst of the march 
were priests and Levites, with their sacred charge of which 
Ezra had said, “* Watch and keep them, until ye weigh them in 
the chambers of the house of the Lord.” 


132 “ Depart pe, Depart ye!” 


We do not read of the songs of the pilgrim-host, as here 
foreshadowed. But they may have risen morning and evening 
on the desert air, enlivening the monotony of the march. There 
are many psalms which date from this period ; and these may 
have been favourites with the pilgrim-host, as they passed over 
the dunes of the desert or sat around the camp-fires. In several 
respects there seems a falling short between the radiant ex- 
pectation of the prophet, and the actual accomplishment in the 
story of Ezra: but we must remember that it is the business of 
the historian to record the facts, rather than the emotions that 
coloured them, as the warm colours of the sun colour the hard 
gray rocks. And is it not always so, that through our want of 
faith and obedience we come short of the fulness of blessing 
which our God has prepared for us? 

We may learn some of those qualities which should char- 
acterize us in our march through this desert world to the city 
of God. 


I, THERE SHOULD BE PERPETUAL Exopus.—The Jews 
had become habituated to Babylon. Custom makes most 
things endurable. In the days of Ezra, few were left who 
remembered the anguish of the captivity. The people, born in 
the land of their conquerors, had conformed their methods of 
life to the conditions of that great civilization, which was 
destined to exert an influence upon them in all after-days. 
Some of them probably longed for the expiry of the allotted 
years of captivity. But the majority were settled in comfortable, 
and in some cases opulent, circumstances, and not at all 
anxious to exchange Babylon for the ruins of Zion. The result 
was, that they became dispersed throughout the Orient, building 
synagogues, enjoying material prosperity ; but becoming lost 
as a river in the sand. 

In all lives there are Babylons, which have no claim on the 
redeemed of Jehovah. We may have entered them, not without 
qualms of conscience ; but, as time has passed, our reluctance 
has been overcome. A comradeship has grown up between us 
and one from whose language and ways we once shrank in 
horror. An amusement now fascinates us, which we regarded 


“He shall not go ont in Baste.” 133 


with suspicion and conscientious scruple. A habit of life 
dominates us from which we once shrank as from infection. A 
method of winning money now engrosses us; but we can well 
remember how difficult it was to coax conscience to engage 
in it. These are Babylons, which cast their fatal spell over the 
soul, and against which the voice of God urgently protests : 
“Depart ye, depart ye ! go ye out from thence.” 

When stepping out from Babylon to an unwonted freedom, 
we naturally shrink back before the desert march, the sandy 
wastes, the ruined remnants of happier days. Those who 
remembered the first temple, wept when the foundations of 
the second were laid ; and Nehemiah could not restrain his 
_ tears at the sight of the heaps of rubbish. But we shall receive 
more than we renounce. Forsaking the outward and temporal, 
we shall find ourselves possessed of the inner and eternal. In 
the desert we see the eternal constellations burning above us ; 
we feel the breath of God upon our faces ; we have a reward 
which would compensate for a hundred such renunciations : 
“T will receive you, and be a Father unto you.” 


II. IT SHOULD BE WITHOUT HASTE.—“ Ye shall not go out 
in haste.” There are many English proverbs which sum up 
the observation of former days and tell how foolish it is to be 
in a hurry. But, outside of God, there is small chance of 
obeying these wise maxims. The age is so feverish. Men 
haste to be rich; they rush from pleasure to pleasure; they 
make the tour of the world in six months; they do Rome in 
a week. Wecram children’s minds with undigested knowledge. 
And this feverish, unresting spirit has invaded our religious 
life, our closets, our musings, our worship. It is impossible 
to give ourselves thoroughly to anything, because our watch is 
always in our hand lest we miss our train. 

No great picture was ever painted in a hurry. No great 
book was ever written against time. No great discovery was 
ever granted to the student who could not watch in Nature’s 
antechamber for the gentle opening of her door. The 
greatest naturalist of our time devoted eight whole years 
almost entirely to barnacles. Well might John Foster long 


134 “ Depart pe, Depart ye!” 


for the power of touching mankind with the spell of “ Be gucet, 
be quiet.” 

In this our Lord is our best exemplar. He moved slowly 
and deliberately through his crowded years. He had leisure 
for every appeal, for the touch of each wan hand. There was 
no trace of feverishness or unrest. Men were always urging 
Him onward ; but He answered, “ Your time is always ready ; 
mine is not yet.” His secret, using our human phrase, lay in 
his simple faith. He believed, and therefore did not make 
haste. Every incident in his life had been arranged by his 
Fathers unfailing care. There was time for everything, and 
everything must be fitted to its time. If there were work to be 
done, He was secure against arrest till it was finished. Herod 
could not kill Him till He was perfected. 

This hastelessness was possible to Israel so long as the 
people believed that God was ordering, preceding, and follow- 
ing their march. Why should they go by flight, as though the 
foe were about to fall on the hindmost, when God was their 
rearward ! Why rush forward to gain some advantage, if God 
went in front to seek out their resting place! When we really 
believe in God, his providence, and his arrangement of our 
lives, to us too there will come this blessed calm ; and whenever 
we are tempted to get feverish and fretful, we shall compel 
ourselves to go out beneath the arch of God’s eternal years, 
saying, “ Return, my soul, unto thy rest. God is behind, inter- 
cepting pursuit from past failure and sin.” 


III. WE MUST BE AT PEACE ABOUT THE WAY.—In early 
life our path seems clearly defined. We must follow the steps 
of others, depend on their maxims, act on their advice; till 
suddenly we find ourselves at the head of the march ; no foot- 
prints before us on the expanse of moorland, or of sand. It 
is only when the years grow upon us that this sense of way/ess- 
ness, aS it has been termed, oppresses us. So the exiles must 
have felt when they left Ahava and started on the desert 
march. 

At such times the lips of Christ answer, “I am the Way.” 
Throughout the Acts of the Apostles, we find that the almost 


“J am the Wap.” - 135 


invariable term by which the Gospel was known was “the 
Way”; as if those first believers were intoxicated with the 
rapture of feeling that at last they had discovered the track of 
the blessed life, the pathway which would thread the per- 
plexities of earth, and bring them to the city of God. And if 
we had asked any one of them to give an equivalent for the 
term they so constantly employed, they would have answered, 
without a moment’s hesitation, JESUS. Probably there is no 
better way of ascertaining the true method of life, than by 
asking ourselves how Jesus would have acted under similar 
circumstances. His temper, his way of looking at things, his 
will, resolve all perplexities. 
_ All this was set forth in the figure before us. “The Lord 
will go before you.” When the people came out of Egypt, 
Jehovah preceded the march in the Shekinah cloud that moved 
softly above the ark. When it advanced, they struck their 
tents and followed ; when it brooded, they halted and fixed 
the camp. It was the one visible and unerring guide through 
those trackless wastes. There was nothing of this sort when 
Ezra led the first detachment of exiles to Zion ; but, though 
unseen, the Divine Leader was equally in the forefront of the 
march. Thus is it also in daily experience. When the way 
forks, when the track dies in the grass, when the expanse of 
desert lies in front without a beaten pathway—stand still ; take 
an observation ; hush all voices in the presence of Christ ; ask 
what He would have done; ask what He would wish you to 
do. Remember that the Good Shepherd, when He puts forth 
his sheep, goes before them, and they follow Him. Jesus is 
ever going before us in every call to duty, every prompting to 
self-sacrifice, every summons to comfort, help, and save. With 
God behind as Rearguard, and God in front as Leader, and 
God encompassing us with songs of deliverance, there can be 
no doubt that we shall at last reach that Zion in which there 
are no waste places, and whose walls have never reeled before 
the shock of armed men. 


IV. WE MUST BE PURE.—“ Touch no unclean thing. Be ye 
clean, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord.” Those vessels, as 


136 “Depart pe, Depart pe!” 


we have seen, were very precious. The enumeration is made 
with minute accuracy (Ezra viii. 26). But they were above all 
things holy unto the Lord. For generations they had been 
employed in temple service. Those that bore them were no 
common men; but Levites specially summoned to the work, 
and possessed at least of a ceremonial cleanliness. Thus they 
passed across the desert, holy men bearing the holy vessels. 

Through this world, unseen by mortal eye, a procession is 
passing, threading its way across continents of time. It bears 
holy vessels. The forms of expression in which Divine truth 
is enshrined may be compared to the vessels of the old dis- 
pensation, set apart to serve the purposes >f the sanctuary. 
Testimony to God’s truth, the affirmation of things unseen and 
eternal, the announcement of the facts of redemption—such are 
our sacred charge. We must contend earnestly for the faith 
once delivered to the saints. Take heed to thyself, and ¢o the 
doctrine. The greatest service the Church can give to the 
world is its perpetual witness to the truth of God’s being ; to 
the facts of redemption, of judgment, and of the world to come. 
Concerning all these, the olden charge is given us, “Watch ye and 
keep them, until ye weigh them before the chiefs of the priests 
and of the Levites, in the chambers of the house of the Lord.” 

What manner of persons ought we not to be, to whom so 
high a ministry is entrusted! How careful that our holy trust 
should not be forfeited because of our unholy life! How eager 
lest the glistening glory of our charge be blurred or dimmed 
by our thumb-marks! How watchful that the testimony of a 
doctrine be not traversed by the life of those that profess it! 
Men estimate the worth of the truths to which we bear witness 
by the worth of our personal character. Let us commend the 
Gospel by the holiness and elevation of our lives. 

Before that procession we are told that waste places would 
break forth into song. It is a fair conception, as though their 
feet changed the aspect of the territories through which they 
passed. What was desert when they came to it, was paradise 
as they left it! What were ruins, became walls! Where there 
had been hostility, suspicion, and misunderstanding, there came 
concord and peace, the watchmen seeing eye to eye, 


Ghe Lord’s Witnesses. 137 


This is a true portraiture of the influence of the religion of 
Jesus over the hearts and lives of men. Creation herself, which 
now groans and travails, shall presently burst into hallelujahs 
like those with which the Psalter closes. God give us grace to 
join in that procession, and with beautiful array pass onward 
without haste, under Divine convoy, till the glowing predic- 
tions of prophecy and psalm be realized in an emancipated 
universe ! 

But let us never forget the importance of prayer, as a 
necessary link in the achieving of these marvels. In the 
former chapter, there had been one eager and intense petition, 
“ Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord. Awake 
as in the ancient days!” That prayer had entered into the ear 
of the Lord God of Sabaoth, and here we are told that “the 
Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the 
nations.” Pray on, O child of God! thy breath is not mis- 
spent ; thy tears are not wasted ; “ Behold, the Lord God will 
come as a mighty one, and his arm shall rule for Him.” 


DORK? 
Ghe Windication of Christ. 


“Tt is the Day; 
No more sad watchings by the midnight sea, 
No twilight gray, 
But, crowned with light and immortality, 
He stands from henceforth, triumphing alway 
In God’s own Day.” 
B. M. 


(ISAIAH lii. 13-15.) 


HERE is only one brow which this crown of thorns 
will fit. As the eunuch sat in his chariot and read 
this wonderful lyric of sorrow even unto death, which 
in its rhythm and diction stands alone amongst these 
marvellous chapters, he questioned of whom the 
: writer spake. ‘I pray thee,” he said to Philip, “ of 

whom speaketh the prophet thus? of himself, or of some 

other?” The evangelist, in reply, commenced to preach from 
this same scripture, Jesus. 

Jesus is the Key which the whole New Testament, in many 
allusions, puts into our hands to unlock these mysteries, in 
which heaven and earth, the eternal and the temporal, the love 
of God and the weakness of man blend, with no apparent 
horizon line. But even apart from this precise testimony of the 
Holy Ghost, we could have found none worthy to take this 
scroll and open it seal by seal, but the Lamb in the midst of 
the throne, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Son of God 
Himself. 

Efforts have been made to apply this or the other line and 
fragment of this prophecy to one and another of the great 
sufferers of history: to Jeremiah, to Ezekiel, to some unkhown 
martyr in the days of the captivity ! and it is quite likely, since 





The Mysteries of Life. 139 


sorrow and pain are the heritage of all, that in some particulars 
this vision was realized by lesser men than the Son of Man. 
A child’s hand may strike notes on the Freyburg organ! But 
who of woman born, but the Christ, could take these words in 
their entirety and say?—“I claim that all this was realized in 
myself; this portraiture is mine; there is neither line nor 
lineament here which has not its correspondence in me.” 
Should any of the sons of men put in such a claim, he would 
encounter at once the full force of a world’s ridicule and 
contempt. But when the Man of Nazareth approaches, and 
claims to have fulfilled this dark and bitter record ; when He 
opens his heart and shows its scars; when He enumerates his 
unknown sufferings, and asks if there were ever grief like his— 
no one dares to challenge his right to claim and annex this 
empire as his own ; nay, deep down in the heart, there is a 
tacit confession that probably He touched yet profounder 
depths, and drank more bitter draughts, than even these words 
record. 

This elegy of sorrow is unfortunately divided by the arbitrary 
arrangement of the chapters in our Bibles. Really, it begins at 
lii. 13, with the word, which so often arrests attention in this 
Book, “Behold.” It consists of five stanzas of three verses 
each, the closing paragraphs being somewhat longer. No 
English translation can give a conception of the cadence and 
sad minor tones which sob through its chords. 

The theme is the sufferings of the Servant of God; the 
wrong conclusions which his fellows formed of them ; and the 
triumphant vindication which He has received. 


I. A StoRY OF SORROW AND PaIN.—Three mysteries meet 
here; as clouds brood darkly over the mountains when a 
thunder-storm is imminent. 

The mystery of humiliation. The tender plant; the sucker 
painfully pushing its way through the crust of the caked 
ground ; the absence of natural attractiveness. Such imagery 
awaits and receives its full interpretation from the New Testa- 
ment, with its story of Christ’s peasant parentage, his manger- 
bed, and lowly circumstances—fisherfolk his choice disciples ; 


140 Gbhe Vindication of Christ. 


poverty his constant lot; the common people his devoted 
admirers ; thieves and malefactors on either side of his cross ; 
the lowly and poor the constituents of his Church. This were 
humiliation indeed, though the irregularities of human lot are 
scarce distinguishable from the heights whence He came. 

The profoundest stoop of his humility was that He became 
man at all. He was Infinite in his unstinted blessedness ; rich 
with the wealth that has flowered out into the universe ; radiant 
in the dazzling beauty of perfect moral excellence. What 
agony, therefore, must have been his to breathe our tainted air, 
to live in daily contact with sinners, and to be perpetually 
surrounded by the most miserable and plague-stricken of the 
race! And that He should die! That the Life-Giver should 
pass under.the dark portal of the grave! That the Son of God 
should become obedient to a death of ignominy and shame at 
the hands of men! This is a mystery of humiliation indeed. 

The mystery of sorrow. You can see its ineffaceable mint- 
mark on that marred face. We need no further proof that He 
was a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with grief. But what is 
sorrow? Each of us knows by experience what it is; but who 
can define it, or say in a sentence of what it consists? It is 
that emotion which results when love meets with dark shadows 
threatening its beloved. There is doubtless a selfish kind of 
sorrow which repines at losses that can be counted in gold, 
and bewails the curtailing of sensual gratification. But this 
may not be mentioned here, where we are within the precincts 
of the sorrow of the world’s Redeemer. We are treating 
sorrow as it might exist in his peerless heart, and in those who 
are being moulded in his image. 

Such are capable of a Divine love ; and by the very measure 
of that capacity they are liable to supreme sorrow. When love 
beholds its objects eluding its embrace—their love turning cold, 
their souls poisoned by misunderstanding and misrepresenta- 
tion, their lives engulfed by eddies from which it would save 
them if it could, but they refuse its aid—then there is sorrow; 
as rain meeting a blast of frosty air will turn to snow, and fall 
in white flakes. 

We need go no further for the reason why Jesus sorrowed as 


The AMtan of Sorrotes. - 141 


He did. It could not have been otherwise. Men could not be 
loved by Him without causing Him infinite pain. Hast ¢hou 
not wounded Him, crucified Him, wrung his heart, just because 
thou wert not able to appreciate the delicacy and sensitiveness 
of the heart which was pouring out its stores for thee with 
prodigal lavishness? Throughout the ages He has come to 
his own, and they have barred the door to his entrance; He 
has desired to gather them, as a hen her chicks, but they have 
refused Him; He has come into his garden to gather the 
precious fruit and spices that would refresh his soul, but He 
has found the walls in ruins, and the choice stores rifled; 
slights, where there should have been tenderness; rebuffs, 
where He looked for a welcome; put to open shame, instead 
of in the inner shrine of esteem and love. Surely this will 
account for this mystery of sorrow. 

The mystery of pain. ‘Nounded, bruised, chastised; the 
spittle of the soldiery on his face; the scourge ploughing long 
red seams in his flesh ; the bloody sweat beading his brow; the 
cry “Forsaken!” ; the sigh of the broken heart wrung from 
his lips. There is suffering here! Well might Pilate cry, 
as though to move the pity of the crowd with such a spectacle 
of misery, “ Behold the Man !” 

A suggestion of the anguish which our blessed Lord endured, 
and which the liturgy of the Greek Church refers to as “his 
unknown sufferings,” is given in those remarkable words of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, which tell us that after pouring out 
his prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto 
Him who was able to save Him from death, He was heard in 
that He feared. In every age Christian men have pondered 
those words, asking what they meant. Is it not at least 
possible for Jesus to have meant that He was so wrung with 
anguish, that He thought He must die in the garden before 
ever He reached his cross? The pressure of pain was almost 
unendurable ; and there was every fear that his nature would 
collapse ere the expiatory sacrifice could be offered. If this is 
the right rendering of the passage, what a marvellous concep- 
tion is afforded of the sea-billows of suffering which surged up 
and rolled over the human nature of the Redeemer! If the 


142 The Vindication of Gbrist. 


anticipation of Calvary so wrung his heart, what must not 
the endurance have been! Such was the mystery of pain. 

O King of suffering and sorrow! Monarch of the marred 
face, none has ever approached Thee in the extremity of thy 
grief ; we bow the knee, and bid Thee “All Hail!” We are 
conquered by thy tears and woes; our hearts are enthralled ; 
our souls inspired; our lives surrendered to thy disposal for 
the execution of purposes which cost Thee so dear. 


II. WRONG SUPERFICIAL CONCLUSIONS.—Every age has 
connected misery with guilt, anguish with iniquity, suffering 
with sin. Special pain has been regarded as the indication 
of special wrong-doing. It was in vain that Job protested his 
innocence ; his friends insisted that the reason of his awful 
sufferings must be sought in evils, which, though he had 
screened them from the gaze of men, were doubtless well 
known to himself and God. The awful absence of sight which 
the blind man had suffered from his birth made the disciples 
speculate on the likelihood of his having perpetrated some 
terrible crime in a previous state of existence, of which that 
privation was the evidence and the result. And when, on the 
storm-swept shore of Malta, the apostle’s hand was suddenly 
encircled by the viper, creeping out of the heat, the natives 
concluded that he was a murderer, who, though he had escaped 
the sea, could not escape the penalty which justice demanded. 
So the verdict which the thoughtless crowd might be disposed 
to pass on the unique sufferings of Christ would be that they 
were, without doubt, richly merited. This, in point of fact, is 
the explanation put into the mouth of his own people by the 
prophet : “We did esteem Him stricken, smitten of God, and 
afflicted.” 

Perhaps the members of the Pharisee party, who consented 
to his death, swept on against their better judgment by the 
virulence of Caiaphas and Annas, may have comforted them- 
selves, as the shadows of that memorable day fell on the empty 
crosses, that such sufferings could not have been permitted by 
God to overtake the Nazarene had He not been guilty of the 
blasphemy for which He was adjudged worthy of death. 


The Silence of Jesus. 143 


But all this while Jesus opened not his mouth. Silent before 
Caiaphas, except when his refusal to speak might appear to 
compromise his claims to death; silent before Herod, as one 
to whom speech was vain; silent before Pilate, except when 
the Roman governor seemed really eager to know the truth— 
“He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep, 
dumb before her shearers, so He opened not his mouth.” 

Why this speechlessness? In part it was due to the Saviour’s 
clear apprehension of the futility of arguing with those who 
were bent on crucifying Him. It was also due to the quiet rest 
of his soul on God, as He committed Himself to Him that 
judgeth righteously, and anticipated the hour when the Father 
would arise to give Him a complete vindication. But it was due 
also to his consciousness of carrying in his breast a golden 
secret, another explanation of his sufferings than men were 
aware of, a Divine solution of the mystery of human guilt.- 

We give our highest eulogy to those who suffer for others 
without a murmur of complaint ; carrying silently a load of pain 
and grief which these have caused them ; misunderstood and 
maligned, but keeping their lips fast sealed, lest the true reason 
should escape until the best moment had come for its revela- 
tion: for such strength of purpose we reserve our highest 
praise. With what reverence then should we not regard the 
Lord’s reticence! He knew the secret that underlay the 
Levitical dispensation, and that gave all its meaning to his 
own approaching death—the great law of the transference of 
suffering. He realized that He was God’s Lamb, on whom the 
sin of the world was lying ; the scapegoat carrying guilt into 
a land of forgetfulness ; the antitype of bull, and calf, and dove. 
His soul was quieted under the conviction of these sublime 
conceptions, and He could afford to be dumb until He had put 
away sin by the sacrifice of Himself. What though men judged 
Him falsely, God the Father knew all that was in his heart. 
Time would vindicate Him presently: what He carried as a 
secret in his heart would be proclaimed from the housetops of 
the world. 

We all need to learn this lesson. We are so quick to pour 
the story of our wrongs into the ears of men, complaining of 


144 Ghe Vindication of Christ. 


every injury and slight. We are prone to rush into speech or 
print, justifying our conduct, rebutting false accusations, and 
demanding justice. All this is unworthy of those who know 
that God is waiting in the shadow, “keeping watch upon his 
own,” and sure to bring their righteousness to the light, their 
judgment to the noonday. For the sake of the wrong-doer we 
should endeavour to arrest the commission of wrong; as Jesus 
did when He remonstrated with the high priest for his flagrant 
violation of the principles of Jewish jurisprudence. But where 
high-handed evil rushes forward, as a wild beast crashes through 
the slight resistance of osier-beds to reach his prey, then our 
wisest and most Christ-like attitude is not to revile again, nor 
threaten, but to lift up our eyes to the hills from whence our 
help comes. 


II]. THE SUFFERER’S VINDICATION.—It may tarry, but it 
surely comes at length. It came, and is always coming, to 
Christ. Each age has only established more completely his 
absolute moral beauty ; the dignity and majesty of his bearing 
under the sufferings of his last hour; and the infinite value of 
his cross and passion. 

Vindicated by the growing convictions of men. We, the 
prophet says, speaking of men generally—we esteemed Him 
not, because we thought that God was punishing Him for his 
sins, but now we have discovered that He bore our griefs, and 
carried our sorrows ; that He was wounded for our trans-. 
gressions, bruised for ovr iniquities, chastened for our peace. 
In other words, the great truth of substitution is looming ever 
clearer on the conscience and heart of man. As never before, 
light is breaking on the heights of the doctrine of vicarious 
suffering, bringing into distinctness that wondrous line of virgin 
peaks which no human foot but One has ever scaled. Not 
that we can fully measure or define what Jesus did for us on 
the cross; but that we are coming to understand that his 
sufferings there have secured redemption for mankind, and 
laid the foundation of a temple whose walls are salvation and 
its gates praise. The growing conviction of this fact is, in 
part, Christ’s vindication. : 


“* Satisfied!” 45 


Vindicated by the trust of each individual soul. Each time 
one comes to Him, and finds healing, peace, and salvation in 
his wounds, cleansing in his precious blood, shelter beneath 
the outspread arms of his cross ; whenever thou, and thou, 
and thou, makest his soul a guilt-offering for thy sin, He sees 
his seed, He sees of the travail of his soul, and is satisfied ; 
He is vindicated, and recompensed for all his pain. 

Vindicated by his exaltation to the right hand of power. 
“Ye denied the Holy and Righteous One, and killed the Prince 
of Life, whom God raised from the dead.” That is his vindi- 
cation, that He is seated on his Father’s throne, entrusted with 
all authority, and able to save to the uttermost all who come. 
Every cry of angel or seraph that He is worthy ; every note 
of adoration, and tribute from orders of being to us unknown ; 
every crown cast at his feet, or palm waved in his train ; every 
accession of honour and glory as the ages roll ; his raising of 
the dead; his session on the great white throne ; his eternal 
reign—attest the vindication of his Father. “ He shall divide a 
portion with the great, and a spoil with the strong.” 


‘* Heaven is comforted, — 
For that strange warfare is accomplished now, 
Her King returned with joy.” 


XX 
Faith as a Stuitch. 


“Tf thou couldst trust, poor soul, 
In Him who rules the whole, 
Thou wouldst find peace and rest. 
Wisdom and sight are well ; but Trust is best.” 
A. PROCTER. 


(ISAIAH hii. 1; JOHN x1. 40.) 


LAWYER whom I know took me the other day to 
see the fire-proof strong room in which he keeps 
valuable deeds and securities. It is excavated 


under the street, and a passage leads far into the 





interior, lined on either side with receptacles for 

: the precious documents. On entering, he took up 
what appeared to be a candle, with a cord attached to it; the 
other end he deftly fastened to a switch at the entrance, by 
means of which the electricity which was waiting there poured 
up the wire hidden in the cord, glowed at the wick of the china- 
candle, and we were able to pass to the end of the passage, 
uncoiling cord and wire as we went. That unlighted candle 
resembles the Christian worker, apart from the power of the 
Holy Ghost. Faith may be compared to the switch by means 
of which the saving might of God pours into our life and 
ministry. 

It cannot be too strongly insisted on, that our faith is the 
absolute condition and measure of the exertion of God’s saving 
might. No faith, no blessing ; little faith, little blessing ; great 
faith, great blessing. According to our faith, so it is always 
done tous. The saving might of God’s glorious arm may be 
waiting close against us; but it is inoperative unless we are 
united to it by faith. ; 


ar 


as 


The Arm of God. 147 


The negative and positive sides of this great and important 
truth are presented in the texts before us: one of which 
complains that the arm of God is not revealed, because men 
have not believed the inspired report ; the other affirms from 
the lips of the Master, that those who believe shall see the 
glory of God. The texts between them will help us to under- 
stand why some, who are best equipped for service, fail ; while 
others, with very indifferent equipment, achieve great and 
lasting success. 


I. THE ARM OF GOD.—This expression is often used in the 
older Scriptures, and everywhere signifies the active, saving 
energy of the Most High. We first meet with it in his own 
address to Moses: “I will redeem them with a stretched-out 
arm.” Then, in the triumphant shout that broke from two 
million glad voices beside the Red Sea—and frequently in the 
book of Deuteronomy,——-we read of the stretched-out arm of 
Jehovah. It is a favourite phrase with the poets and prophets 
of Israel—the arm that redeems ; the holy arm ; the glorious 
arm ; the bared arm of God. We have already noticed how it 
is bidden awake, and put on strength. This metaphor is some- 
what different. The conception is that, owing to the unbelief of 
Israel, it lies inoperative, hidden under the heavy folds of 
Oriental drapery ; whereas it might be revealed, raising itself 
aloft in vigorous and effective effort. 

All that concerns us now ts the relation between faith and the 
Jorth-putting of God’s saving might. God’s arm was revealed 
at the Red Sea, making a path through its depths by which his 
ransomed might pass over. Then Moses’ faith was in eager 
and triumphant exercise, and the people believed the report 
which he had given of the words of Jehovah. But it sank into 
repose during the long forty years of wandering, because Israel 
believed not his word. 

God’s arm was revealed at the Jordan, and through the 
remarkable career of Joshua; it cleft the river at flood, over- 
threw the walls of Jericho, chased in flight the armies of the 
aliens, restrained the deepening shadows of the night, and 
gave the Land of Promise to the chosen race ; and this, 


148 Faith as a Stitch. 


because Joshua never wavered in his strong, heroic confidence. 
But again it sank paralysed and powerless to rest, when, in the 
days of the judges, the people ceased to exercise the faith to 
which nothing was impossible. Whenever the fire gleamed up 
from the dull, white ash, as in the days of Gideon, Barak, 
Jephthah, and Samson, instantly the arm of the Lord was 
made bare. 

The arm of the Lord was revealed in the days when David's 
faith realized that the living Lord was still amongst his people, 
well able to save without mail, or spear, or shield. What a 
springtide was that! The birds of holy song warbled sweetly 
under a clear heaven of love; the flowerets of nobility, 
righteousness, and truth begemmed the soil: the light was 
that of a morning without clouds. There was no standing 
against the onset of the soldiers, who‘in the cave of Adullam 
had acquired lessons of heroic faith as well as those of knightly 
chivalry. But again the arm of God relapsed into quiescence, 
and allowed the foes of his people to work their will even to 
their captivity, because Israel’s faith had become like the 
Temple of Solomon, a desecrated and ruined shrine. 

As we are taught in the Epistle to the Hebrews, all the great 
exploits and episodes of Hebrew story were due to the faith 
which believed that God is a present force in history, and a 
Rewarder of those who diligently seek Him. 


II. THE LIFE OF THE SON OF Man.—As this chapter 
suggests, it seemed, from many points of view, a failure. The 
arm of the Lord was in Him, though hidden from all save the - 
handful who believed. Probably our Lord never wrought a 
miracle, unless faith was in exercise on the part either of the 
recipients or spectators of his saving help. The centurion, 
though a Gentile; the Syrophcenician woman, though accounted 
a dog; the leper, though an outcast pariah—drew from Him 
virtue that healed and saved: whilst the bulk of the nation, 
and especially the companions of his early life, missed the 
benediction, which had come so nigh them, because they 
enwrapt themselves in proud indifference. Through unbelief 
the branches were deprived of the richness of the Root of 


Martha's Faith.  - 149 


David. And the condition of Israel in the world to-day is due 
to persistent unbelief, which has cut them off from the help of 
the right arm of the Lord. 


III. A SPECIMEN CASE.—For two days Christ had lingered 
beyond the Jordan, though urgently needed in Bethany, where 
life was ebbing fast, and tears were flowing which were not 
wholly due to the sickness and death of him whom Jesus loved. 
A sense of forlornness ; an inability to account for the delayed 
advent of the dearest Friend, who neither came nor sent 
word—made those tears more bitter. The Master, however, 
was keenly sensitive to all that was taking place. He knew 
that sickness had become death, and said presently, “ Our 
friend Lazarus sleepeth.” That interval of silence and absence 
seems to have been filled with prayer ; to which He referred in 
the words He spoke aloud at the grave, that the people might 
be led to attribute all the glory to his Father, and to appreciate 
the love and beauty of his character. Before our Lord left his 
hiding-place He knew that the Father had granted Him, in his 
human nature, the life of his friend. “I go,” said he, “to 
awake him out of sleep. I was glad that I was not there to 
stay the fall of life’s ebbing tide ; because, in raising him from 
the dead, such a proof will be furnished of my oneness with 
Jehovah, as to compel your faith, and be a comfort and inspira- 
tion in all after days.” 

But even though our Lord went to Bethany with the 
assurance that the arm of the Lord would certainly be made 
bare, yet He must of necessity have the co-operation and 
sympathy of some one’s faith. 

Such faith He discovered in Martha. This is startling, and 
helpful. We should not have been surprised to learn that it 
was found in Mary ; because her still and spiritual nature was 
so closely akin to his own—she had drunk so deeply into his 
words ; she was capable of such a white-heat of love, consecra- 
tion, and self-forgetting devotion. But we should not have 
expected Martha to manifest faith, to connect the stored life of 
Jesus with the charnel-house where Lazarus lay, four days dead. 
Yet so it befell. She met Jesus with the assurance that He 


150 Faith as a Stitch. 


possessed power enough to have averted death, had He only 
been in time; she declared her belief that his prayer could 
secure its will from God, and.confessed that for long, in her 
secret soul, she had believed that Jesus was the Messiah, the 
Son of God, the long-expected Redeemer. These admissions 
on her part showed that faith was already within her soul, as 
a grain of mustard-seed, awaiting ihe summertide of God’s 
presence, the education of his grace. 

There are many earnest Christians, whose energies are taxed 
to the uttermost by their ministry to others. Philanthropists, 
housewives, workers in every department of Christian service—- 
such are their engagements that they have no time to sit 
quietly at the feet of Christ, or mature great schemes of loving 
sympathy with his plans, as Mary did when she prepared her 
anointing-oil for her Lord’s burial. And yet they are capable of 
a great faith. Beneath the bustle and rush of life, the impulses 
of the Divine are being responded to ; faith in the living Saviour 
is ripening to a golden harvest ; forces are being generated 
which will surprise themselves and others. Christ will one day 
discover, reveal, and educate that faith to great exploits. 

fle put a promise before her. “Thy brother shall rise again.” 
Faith feeds on promises, as the spark that trembles on the 
hearth grows by the fuel heaped on and around it. if we 
consider circumstances, we stagger and faint. But if we look 
away to the strong clear words of God, and through them to 
the Promiser, we become, like Abraham, strong in faith, and 
sure that what God has promised He is able also to perform. 
Make much of God’s Word : faith cometh by hearing. Listen 
to the report—it will induce belief, and this will secure the 
revelation of the Almighty arm. 

He showed that its fulfilment might be expected here and 
now. Martha was quite prepared to believe that Lazarus 
would rise again at the last day ; but she had no faith in the 
immediate vivification of the body that lay in its niche behind 
the stone. Jesus said, ‘‘I AM the Resurrection and the Life. 
Here and now is the power which, on that day of which you 
speak, shall awaken the dead ; do but believe, and you shall 
see that resurrection anticipated.” 


“Gbe Resurrection and the Wife.” 151 


Ponder the force of this I aM. It is the present tense of 
_ the Eternal. At the burning bush, it was the first lesson that 
Moses had to learn. God is the I AM. He is; He is here; 
He is able and willing to do now all that He ever will do in 
the days that are yet to be. Man is so apt to postpone the 
miraculous and Divine, till some dim horizon-line has been 
attained and passed. God has blessed, and He will bless. 
God did marvels at the first Advent, and He will repeat them 
at the second. But the present is the period of Divine ab- 
senteeism—so we think. Oh to believe that Jesus is waiting 
to be all that He has ever been to souls, or will be! Oh to 
hear Him say, “I am Resurrection to the dead: I am the 
more abundant Life to all who live and believe in Me” ! 

fle aroused her expectancy. For what other reason did He 
ask that the stone might be rolled away? It is certain that it 
would have been perfectly easy for his voice to reach the ear 
of the dead through the stony doorway ; and had He willed it, 
Lazarus could have emerged from the grave, though the stone 
still sealed its mouth. Almost certainly the direction to remove 
the stone was intended to awaken Martha’s expectation and 
hope that the arm of the Lord would presently be revealed. 
And it had the desired result. With quickened eagerness she 
endeavoured to arrest obedience to his mandate ; and when 
the Lord persisted, and reminded her that this was the oppor- 
tunity for her faith, her soul leaped up to receive with ardour 
the blessing He was there to give. She believed, and she be- 
held the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 

The one aim for each of us should be to bring Christ and the 
dead Lazarus together. Death can no more exist when He 
is present, than night when the sun is rising. Corruption, 
impurity, sin, flee before Him to whom the Father gave to 
have life in Himself, and who came that we might have life, 
and have it more abundantly. Let your faith make an inlet 
for the Life-giver into your circle of society, your church, your 
class, your home. Nothing will suffice if this is lacking. 
Eloquence, learning, position, these will fail. But faith, though 
it be of the weakest, simplest nature, will link the Saviour, who 
is alive for evermore, and has the keys of death and Hades, 


152 Faith as a Switch. 


with those who have been in the graves of sin so long that 
corruption has asserted its foul dominion over every part of 
their nature. 

Let us ask Christ, our Saviour, to work such faith in us; to 
develop it by every method of education and discipline ; to 
mature it by his nurturing Spirit, until the arm of God is 
revealed in us and through us, and the glory of God is mani- 
fested before the gaze of men. 

At the same time, it is not well to concentrate our thought 
too much on /az¢h, lest we hinder its growth. Look away from 
faith to the object of faith, and faith will spring of itself. It is 
the bloom of the soul’s health. See to it that thy soul is 
nourished and at rest : then faith will be as natural as scent to 
a flower, or bloom to a peach. Do not ask if thy faith is of 
the right sort; all faith is right, which is directed towards 
Him, whom God hath set forth to receive the loving devotion 
of all human hearts. 


XXI. 
Make Gis Soul thy Sin-Offering. 


*©To the cross He nails thine enemies— 
The law that is against thee, and the sins 
Of all mankind, with Him there crucified— 
Never to hurt them more, who rightly trust 
In this His satisfaction." 
MILTON. 


(ISAIAH liii. 10.) 


T is strange, but it is true, that the saddest, darkest day 
that ever broke upon our world is destined to cure 
the sadness, and dissipate the darkness for evermore. 
It is to the passion of the Redeemer that loving 
hearts turn in their saddest, darkest, most sin-con- 
scious hours to find solace, light, and help. It is for 

this reason, doubtless, that Scripture lays such stress on the 

wondrous cross; and that prophets and evangelists proceed 
with such deliberation to tell the story of that death, which is 
the death of death for all who understand its inner meaning. 
With what elaborate care the meaning of the cross is wrought 
out in the chapter under our consideration! As though to 
obviate the possibility of mistaking its meaning, we are reminded 
again, and yet again, that the death of the Divine Servant was 
no ordinary episode ; but distinguished from all other deaths, 
from all martyrdoms and sacrifices, in its unique and lonely 
grandeur—the one perfect and sufficient sacrifice and oblation 
for the sins of the whole world. Every form of expréssion is 
used to accentuate the thought, that its excessive agony was 
not the symptom of special sin on the part of the Sufferer, 
as the superficial spectator might be disposed to think ; but 





154 Make His Soul thy Sin- Offering. 


that He was wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our 
iniquities, stricken with our stripes, and involved in the penalty 
which we deserved. 

The prophet’s thought will become apparent, if we notice, 
first, the common lot of man ; then the one point in which the 
experience of Jesus was unique ; and, lastly, apply the sentiment 
of the text to our own experience. 


I. THE.CoMMON Lot oF MAN.—It may be summed up in 
three words—suffering, sin, death. (1) Suffering. Nature is 
fair, but her gladdest scenes lightly cover the suffering that 
pervades ocean and land. In the woodland glade, where spring 
has scattered her first wild flowers, you may detect the scream 
of the rabbit captured by the stoat. From the blue summer 
sky the eagle swoops down on the pasture lands. The placid 
surface of the mere is ruffled by the struggles of the minnow to 
escape the pike. Nature groans and travails in pain; much 
more human life. 

The boys and girls with their merry laugh and frolic to-day, 
will to-morrow be bending over the cradle where the wee babe 
is dying ; or presently bearing the stern discipline which seems 
an inevitable part of human destiny. You cannot traverse a 
street without hearing an infant’s wail, or visit a home on which 
there is no shadow. Sooner or later each man has to say, 
Either I must master or be mastered, either I must vanquish or 
succumb, in this bitter conflict with the mysterious, all-pervasive, 
impalpable, yet deadly antagonist, suffering—pain—sorrow unto 
death. “Man is born to sorrow, as the sparks fly upward.” 
That was the reflection of the wise pensive East, centuries 
before the wear and tear of modern life began. 

(2) Siz. We all know this also—the sense of sin, of discord, 
of distance and alienation from God. Behind all our suffering 
we feel there is a secret, which somehow explains and accounts 
for it. We have scorned and perverted that which was right. 
We have done things we ought not, or left undone things we 
ought to have done. Men try to evade this consciousness of 
sin. They plunge into affairs, travel from land to land, go 
far afield in search of adventure and ceaseless change, give 


Suttering—Sin—Beath. | 155 


themselves up to gaiety and dissipation. In fact, they are 
ever eluding the fixed sad gaze of conscience, and adopting 
any subterfuge which promises a moment’s cover. But it comes 
back again and again. The prophet-voice arraigns us; the 
inerrant sleuth-hound runs us down. “Thou art the man !” 

This sense of sin has covered the world with altars, temples, 
and churches. Wherever men are found, some religious rite 
betrays the heavy sense of sin, which is prepared to give rivers 
of oil or flocks of sheep, yea the very fruit of the body, to stay 
the gnawings at the heart. 

(3) Death. The conscience of man connects sin and death 
by an inevitable sequence. Prior to the writing of the Epistle 
to the Romans, the older scripture of human experience and 
observation asserted that death had passed upon all men, for 
that all had sinned. For this cause, we can never get recon- 
ciled to death. Call it by euphemistic titles ; talk of it lightly 
as a transition, a passage, an exodus; speak of the victory 
which Jesus Christ achieved when He abolished death, and 
brought life and immortality to light—still we can never disso- 
ciate from death the idea of the sin, except for which it need 
not have been : “In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt 
surely die.” 

These three are inevitable factors in human life. 


II. THE NOTABLE EXCEPTION OF THIS CHAPTER.— The 
Divine Servant presents a notable exception to the lot of man ; 
not in his sufferings, for He was “a Man of Sorrows, and 
acquainted with grief”; nor in his death, for He died many 
deaths in one (9, R.V., marg.) ; but in his perfect innocence and 
goodness. ‘He had done no violence, neither was any deceit 
in his mouth.” Let us consider this, and the conclusion to be 
derived from it. There is sorrow in this chapter, as in all the 
world. The marred face tells a true tale; for the turbid 

streams of unknown sorrows have poured into the Sufferer’s 
heart, until it has brimmed to high-water mark. Despised and 
rejected, wounded and bruised, led to the slaughter and cut off 
from the land of the living, amid degradation and cruelty, the 
Divine Servant has passed through every painful experience ; 


156 Make Bis Soul thy Sin- Offering. 


has drunk to its dregs every cup; has studied deeply every 
black-lettered volume in the library of pain. 

In his case, at least, man’s hastily-formed conclusions are 
falsified. Generally we pass from singular suffering to discover 
its cause in some hidden or remote transgression. ‘ Who did 
sin, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?” Untold 
anguish has been inflicted through the indiscriminate applica- 
tion of this method. Myriads, like Job, have winced, as the 
probing knife, wielded by unsympathizing hands, has searched 
the most secret passages of life to discover where the wrong 
lay that was being avenged. And the sufferer has been made 
to fear lest he had been unwittingly guilty of an offence against 
the Infinite God, which could only be expiated by the infliction 
of excessive chastisement. 

In the case of Jesus Christ, however, this explanation of his 
unique sufferings was altogether at fault. His life was searched 
with microscopic care, to discover a single flaw to justify his 
condemnation. The most secret passages of his intercourse 
with his disciples and friends were ransacked by the keen eye 
of the traitor, with the object of discovering an excuse for his 
dark deed. But all was in vain. Pilate and Herod asserted his 
absolute faultlessness. Finally, He, who of all men was most 
humble and meek, bared his life to the world with the challenge 
He knew could never be taken up, “ Which of you convinceth 
Me of sin?” Another explanation must, therefore, be forthcoming 
to account for the sufferings of the innocent and spotless Saviour. 

This explanation lay hid, as a secret concealed in a 
hieroglyph, in the vast system of Levitical sacrifice, which fore- 
shadowed the “ offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for 
all.” Year by year, myriads of innocent and spotless victims 
surrendered their lives prematurely, their life-blood flowing 
freely for no fault of theirs, but on account of the sins of those 
who brought them to tiie altar of God. To the most casual 
observer, and altogether apart from the disclosures of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, it was clear that their sufferings were 
altogether due to sins not their own. This was a light on the 
one act of Calvary (Rom. v. 8). 

Does not the father suffer for his son, as he strips himself to 


Che Guilt-Oftering tor Sinners. 157 


penury to pay his profligate debts? Does not the physician 
suffer for the sins of others, when he is stricken down in his 
effort to rescue another from the incidence of disease caused by 
violating the elementary laws of health? Have not thousands 
perished in rescuing others from fire and flood? Such actions 
as these illustrate, though very imperfectly, that of the sinless 
Saviour pouring out his soul unto death. 

So, under the Divine guidance, men were led from the con- 
clusions of verse 4 to those of verse 5. Instead of accounting 
Christ as stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted, they came to 
see that He had borne their griefs, carried their sorrows, and 
died for their sins ; that He was the Lamb of God, taking away 
the sins of the world : that his death was the voluntary substi- 
tution of Himself for a world of transgressors. These con- 
clusions, expressed here as the verdict of the human conscience, 
after scanning the facts in the light of history, are confirmed 
and clenched by the unanimous voice of the New Testament : 
“He was made sin for us, though He knew no sin.” “Through 
His one act of righteousness, the free gift came unto all men to 
justification of life.” 

This is the great exception which has cast a new light on the 
mystery of pain and sorrow. It may be that there is other 
suffering, which, in a lower sense and in a smaller measure, is 
also redemptive, fulfilling Divine purposes in the lives of others; 
_ though no sufferer is free from sin as Christ was, and none has 
ever been able to expiate sin as He. None can ransom his 
brother’s soul. 


III. THE PERSONAL APPLICATION OF THESE TRUTHS.— 
“Thou must make his soul a’ guilt-offering” (R.V., marg.). 
This term, “ guilt-offering,” occurs in the Book of Leviticus.” If 
a man committed a trespass in the holy things of the Lord, he 
was directed to select and bring from his flock a ram without 
blemish. This was his gwz/t-ofering—the word used here. He 
was to make a money restitution for his offence; but the 
atonement was made through the ram. “The priest shall 
make atonement for him with the ram of the guilt-offering, and 
he shall be forgiven” (Lev. v. 1-16). 


158 Make His Soul thy Sin- Offering. 


Similarly, if a man sinned against his neighbour, either in 
oppressing him or withholding his dues, or neglecting to restore 
property which had been entrusted to him, he was not only to 
make restitution, but to bring his guilt-offering to the Lord—a ram 
without blemish out of the flock—and the priest made an atone- 
ment before the Lord, and he was forgiven concerning whatso- 
ever he had done to be made guilty thereby (Lev. vi. 1-7). 

Is there one of us who has not committed a trespass and 
sinned in the holy things of the Lord? Failures in fulfilling 
his sacred commissions ; in yielding time and thought to the 
cultivation of his holy friendship ; in maintaining inviolate the 
temple of the soul—these come to mind and stop our mouths, 
so that we stand guilty before God. 

Is there one who has not failed in his obligations to neighbour 
and friend? .Even if we have not failed in those specific in- 
stances named in the old law ; even if our conscience does not 
accuse us of oppression, or withholding dues, or neglecting to 
restore—still there may have been serious defalcations from the 
standard of perfect love. It is so easy to say some contemptuous 
word which robs another of his meed of honour ; or to be silent 
when we ought to speak in defence and vindication of those 
who are wrongfully accused. Moses taught that this was sin 
not against man only, but against God. Restitution was to be 
made to the one; but an atonement had also to be made to 
Jehovah. Did not this lead David to cry, when his sin had 
robbed Uriah’s home of its choice jewel, “Against Thee, Thee 

only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight”? 

How certainly we need to present the guilt-offering! If in 
his dimmer light the Jew felt his need, how much more we, who 
know that every sin is not only a mistake but a crime, violating 
the eternal law of righteousness, and bringing an inevitable 
penalty, unless it be intercepted and averted by the interposition 
of another. Explain it how we may, it is a fundamental fact in 
our inner consciousness, that the sense of sin points to the bar 
of eternal justice, summons us there, and threatens that we 
shall not go till we have paid the uttermost farthing. Then we 
look around for a daysman, a mediator, for one who will not 
only plead our cause before that high tribunal, but who: will 


Our Priest and Sacrifice. 159 


interpose to avert the deserved penalty by receiving it into His 
own bosom. It is at such times that we make His soul an 
offering for sin. 

When the weight of remembered sin presses thee to the 
earth ; when awful sorrow calls to remembrance the almost- 
forgotten sins of early years; when the search-light of God’s 
truth shines clear into the dark cave of the soul, revealing the 
evils that lurk there, as slimy things under the covert of thick 
darkness ; when some terrible fall has mastered thee; when 
perpetual failure makes thee think that forgiveness is im- 
possible—then approach the mercy-seat, where the uncreated 
light shines between the cherubim, and make His soul an 
offering for sin. He poured it out unto death ; do thou pour it 
out unto life. 

There is no mention made of the necessity of summoning 
priestly aid. This is the more remarkable, when we consider 
the strict Levitical system in which Israel was cradled. It 
would seem that in the great crisis of its need, the soul of man 
reverts to an earlier cult, and goes back beyond the elaborate 
system of the temple to the practice of the patriarchal tent, 
where each man acted as his own priest, and offered the guilt- 
offering with his own hand. No third person is needed in thy 
transactions with God. Jesus is Priest as well as Sacrifice. 
There is no restriction to thine approach ; no barrier against 
thine intrusion ; no veil to be passed by the initiated few. The 
way into the holiest is made manifest; enter, and make his 
soul an offering for thy sin. 

To do so is to secure peace. The proof of the truth of the 
Gospel is to be found in the absolute rest which overspreads the 
soul which avails itself of its provisions, and adjusts itself on 
its strong and steadfast principles. Let a man believe in Jesus 
Christ—not about Him, but zz Him; not in his death, but 
in Him who died and rose again—and he will be instantly 
conscious of a peace that passeth understanding, arising from 
the depths of his nature, and overspreading it like an evening 
calm. The peace of the world is from without and superficial ; 
the peace of God is from within and is all-pervading. If thou 
wouldst have that peace, make his soul an offering for sin. 


160 Make His Soul thy Sin-Offering. 


In that peace much else is included. Sorrow is not banished 
from the life, but it becomes radiant with light; suffering is 
borne with a new resignation and fortitude; pain is welcomed 
with the blessed conviction that it may have a redemptive 
quality which shall operate somehow, somewhere ; and death is 
contemplated without alarm. Thus from the darkest day that 
ever dawned upon our world, have come rays of hope and 
joy which are ushering in the world in which there is no 
night, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, nor death; and 
where God shall wipe the tears from all faces, and destroy 
the covering cast on all nations. 

And that darkest day in the experience of our blessed Lord 
has won for Him a revenue of gladness, which can never be 
exhausted : for as each new soul steps up and makes Him its 
sin-offering, and as the blessed harvest of his tears and blood 
is reaped by individuals and worlds, He sees his spiritual seed, 
He finds a multiplication of his life, He realizes that the 
scheme of redemption, which is also the pleasure of his Father, 
is prospering in his hands. 


XXII. 
Che Satisfaction of the Messiah. 


‘*He shall reign from pole to pole 
With illimitable sway ; 
He shall reign, when like a scroll 
Yonder heavens have passed away. 
Then the end; beneath His rod 
Man's last enemy shall fall. 
Hallelujah! Christ in God, 
God in Christ, is all in all.” 
MONTGOMERY. 


(ISAIAH liii. 11.) 





ATISFIED! Very few can say that word on this 
side of heaven. The alpine climber cannot, so long 
as inaccessible summits rear themselves beyond his 
reach. The conqueror who has overrun the world 
cannot ; he weeps because there are no more worlds 
to conquer. The philosopher cannot, though he 
has discovered the hidden harmonies of Nature, and unveiled 
her ancient order; for his circle of light only extends the cir- 
cumference of the dark unknown. Even the Christian cannot 
say it, since he has not yet attained, neither is already per- 
fect. But Christ shall be satisfied, and is already drinking 
deep draughts of the joy set before Him when He endured 
the cross, despising its shame. 

There is no satisfaction for those who are self-centred ; and 
we say reverently that God Himself could not have known 
perfect blessedness unless He had been able to pour Himself 
forth in blessing upon others. We are therefore conscious of 
a fitness in meeting this allusion to the satisfaction of Christ 
amidst these words that speak of his sacrifice unto death. 


Whatever may be the character of that joy which He had 
L 


162 The Satistaction of the Messiah. 


with the Father before the worlds were made, it surely will 
pale in intrinsic value before that joy which for evermore 
will accrue to Him as the interest upon his expenditure at 
Calvary. 

We might put the truth into four sentences. There is no 
satisfaction apart from love. There cannot be love for sinning 
suffering souls without travail. There cannot be travail with- 
out compensating joy. In proportion to the travail, with its 
pangs and bitterness, will be the resulting blessedness. 


I. THE TRAVAIL OF CHRIST’S SOUL.—He suffered because 
of his quick sympathy with the anguish that sin had brought 
to man. He probably saw, as we cannot, the timid oppressed 
by the strong; the helpless victim pursued by rapacity and 
passion ; mothers weeping over the children that had been torn 
from their forlorn and desolate hearts. He heard the wail of 
the world’s sorrow, in which cries of little children, the shriek 
or moan of womanhood, and the deep bass of strong men 
wrestling with the encircling serpent-folds, mingle in one 
terrible medley. He sighed over the deaf and dumb, had 
compassion on the leper, wept at the grave. As the thorn- 
brake to bare feet, so must this world have been to his 
compassionate heart. 

He must also have suffered keenly by the rejection of those 
whom He would have gathered, as a hen gathers her chickens 
under her wing, but they would not. Was there’ a con- 
temptuous name they did not hurl at Him; an insult that did 
not alight upon his head; an avenue along which man’s hate 
can reach the heart of his fellow-man, which was not trodden 
bare by those who repaid his love by a hate which had the 
venom of hell in it, as his love the fragrance of Paradise? 

But these elements of pain are not to be compared with that 
more awful sorrow which He experienced as the substitute and 
sacrifice of human guilt. In a following verse we are told that 
“He poured out his soul unto death.” It was a voluntary act 
to which He was nerved by the infinite love that dared to make 
his soul an offering for sin. What did Jesus suffer on the 
cross? The physical pain that racked his body was probably 


Soul- Grabail. 163 


hardly perceptible to Him amid the pressure of those stripes 
with which we are healed. He was wounded, not in his tender 
flesh only, but in his holy loving heart. He was bruised 
between the millstones of God’s justice and unswerving fidelity 
to truth. He was stricken because He received into his soul 
the penalty of human guilt. He stood before the universe 
charged with the sins of the race, and their consequence. He 
tasted death for every man. He was so identified with sin, 
its shame, suffering, and penalty, that He deemed Himself 
forsaken by God. In that one act of the cross: He put 
away sin, exhausted the penalty, wiped out the guilt, and laid 
the foundation of a redemption which includes the whole 
family of man. 

It could not be otherwise. He could not have loved us per- 
fectly without becoming one with us in the dark heritage of our 
first parent. Son of Man as He was, though Himself sinless, 
He could not but be involved in the entail of condemnation 
which was the lot of the human family. With us, and for us, 
He must suffer. With us, and for us, He must die. With us, 
and for us, He must meet the demands of a broken law, and 
satisfy them eternally. 

Dost thou love Christ? The first duty He will lay on thee 
will be love to others. He will tell thee there is no true love 
for Himself which does not go out for those whom He has 
loved. The same sentiment of the human heart, which has an 
aspect towards Him, has at the same time an aspect towards 
all. And if thou dost truly love, thou too shalt find thy meed 
of soul-travail. Thou too wilt have to go without the camp, 
bearing his reproach. Thou canst not love men into life 
without suffering with them, and for them—not to the same 
extent that Christ suffered, but in thy measure. Think it 
not strange when that fiery trial comes; but rejoice that 
thou art called to be a partaker of the sufferings of Christ, 
that at the revelation of his glory thou mayest rejoice with 


exceeding joy. 


II. THE CERTAINTY OF INFINITE COMPENSATION.—* He 
shall see.” It is impossible to suffer voluntarily for others, and 


164 Ghe Satisfaction of the Messiah. 


not in some way benefit them. Of course, there is pain in the 
world which is punitive, deadly. The pain which is the result 
of pride, that frets and chafes against the rule of the Almighty ; 
like the sea churning itself in yeasty rage at the foot of the 
cliffs. The pain of those that fling themselves on the serried 
ranks of God’s order and law; like the French cuirassiers on 
the English squares on the field of Waterloo. The pain of 
those that suffer for the pain they have themselves inflicted. 

There is other pain which is remedial and life-giving. The 
pain of the mother bringing forth her first-born. The pain of 
the woman’s nature that clings to a prodigal—husband, brother, 
or son—sharing his shame; agonizing in his repeated out- 
breaks ; and by tears, prayers, and sacrifice, winning him for 
God. The pain of nature, groaning and travailing with the 
genesis of the new heavens and earth. The pain of the 
Saviour, giving life and salvation to myriads born again into 
the Kingdom. The pain of the Spirit, groaning within the 
saints, and ushering in the Church of the First-born. The pain 
of the children of God, who groan within themselves, waiting 
for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of the body. 

The earth is full of each kind of pain; but the first is 
characteristic of the first Adam ; the last, of the Second. The 
first belongs to an order which is destined to vanish away ; the 
last to an age, the dawn of which, as sighted from the highest 
peaks of saintliness, is fairer than any light which has ever 
broken on the eyes or hearts of man. Woe be to thee, O son 
of man, if thou knowest nothing of this blessed travail ; if thou 
hast never known what it is to be in anguish for the souls of 
others ; if thy bosom has never been rent with strong cryings 
and tears ; if thou hast never known the wish to be accurst 
from God, so that thou mightest win thy brethren according to 
the flesh! Blessed art thou if thou knowest aught hereof! 
Thy pain may sometimes seem abortive—the mighty throes 
that rend thee for the souls of others appear in vain ; but it is 
not really so. Drop by drop thy tears shall presently turn the 
scale. Patience shall have her perfect work. The laws of the 
harvest in this sphere are as certain in their operation as in 
that of nature. God guarantees the results. He is faithful. 


3ts Nature. 165 


_ Thou shalt come again, bringing thy sheaves with thee : they 
_ that sow in tears shall reap in joy. In the golden future, if not 
_ before, thou shalt meet again each tear and sigh, and pang and 
prayer, transfigured in the result. 


III. THE NATURE OF CHRIST'S COMPENSATION.—It will 
come : (1) Ju the glory that shall accrue to the Father. \t has 
been the one aim of the Second Person in the Holy Trinity, to 
reveal the character and glory of the First, that all intelligent 
and holy beings may love Him. He has done this in creation ; 
in the government of the worlds ; but, above all, in his cross. 
There we behold righteousness and peace kissing each other; 
the wisdom that invented a way of salvation consistent with the 
claim of moral law ; the faithfulness which, in the fulness of the 
times, fulfilled the earliest promise ; and, above all, God’s love. 
To Calvary shall wend the intelligences of every sphere, to 
acquire new and enlarged conceptions of the Divine character. 
And as age after age increased powers of yision reveal fresh 
wonders in the Cross, Christ shall see of the travail of his 
soul. 

(2) In the redemption of untold myriads. Great as the 
harvest of sin has been, we believe that the saved shall vastly 
outnumber the lost. Nothing less will satisfy Christ. Re- 
member that in the first age, before mention is made of the 
latter triumphs of the Gospel, John beheld in heaven a multi- 
tude which no man could number. This was but the first-fruit 
sheaf: let who will compute the full measure of the harvest ! 
The martyr throng ; the Christians who were recognised by no 
fellow-believer, and numbered in no church ; the babes caught 
‘to his bosom ; the Godly souls in every nation, like Cornelius, 
‘who have been saved by virtue of a death of which they never 
heard ; the myriads that shall be gathered in during the 

Millennial age—/hese are streamlets that shall swell the river 
of the ransomed to overflowing. In them shall Christ see of 
the travail of his soul, and be satisfied. 

(3) Jn the character of the redeemed. He shall present them 
to Himself without spot, or wrinkle, or any.such thing. He 
shall present them to his Father with exceeding joy ; the devil’s 


166 The Satisfaction of the Messiah. 


handmark obliterated from their character ; the Father’s image 
complete. Think you when Jesus takes to Himself his peerless 
Bride, purchased by his Blood, sanctified by his spirit, adorned 
in her marriage array—that He will not see of the travail of his 
soul, and be satisfied ? 

(4) In the destruction of the devil’s work. What is involved 
in the majestic promise that He should destroy the works 
of the devil, is not yet made manifest. In due time we 
shall see it all. The mists that now veil the landscape, the 
scaffolding which hides the building, will be removed. We 
shall see what God means. The curse gone from nature. 
Grace abounding much more where sin and death had reigned. 
Man lifted nearer God than he could have been had he dwelt 
for ever in an unsullied paradise. The kingdoms of this world, 
and of all other worlds, become the kingdoms of our God 
and of his Christ. Then, as the hallelujah chorus breaks 
from millions—like the triumphant shout from the lips of the 
emancipated Israel; as the waves of harmony break around the 
sapphire throne in tumultuous melody ; as the forms of monster 
evils lie strewn around the shores of the crystal sea mingled 
with fire—Christ shall see of the travail of his soul, and be 
satisfied. 


IV. THE GREATNESS OF THOSE RESULTS.—(1) They must 
be proportionate to the glory of his nature. It is not difficult to 
satisfy, at least temporarily, a little child. Imperfect knowledge 
will hush its curiosity, trifling toys please its fancy. But as its 
nature develops, it becomes increasingly hard to content it. 

But surely there is more difference between the capacity of an 
angel and that of a man, than between the capacities of a man 
and a babe. If a man requires for his satisfaction more than 
a child, how much must not the capacious bosom of an angel 
need! The power for which men contend is child’s play, to 
those who control the rush of winds, and regulate the motion of 
worlds! The knowledge that men esteem as marvellous, to an 
angel is but the prattling of a babe. How much would have to 
be accumulated, ere an angel could say, “It is enough, I am 
satisfied”! But, great as an angel is, his capacity is limited 


The Results of Redemption. 167 


and finite. What then must be the measure of that blessedness, 
of that harvest of souls, of that result of his travail, which can 
content the Divine Redeemer? His nature is so vast that 
nothing short of a seed like the stars in the sky, or the sand on 
the shore, can satisfy. 

The immeasurableness of the results of redemption can only 
be estimated by those who consider the immeasurableness of 
the Divine nature of the Redeemer. 

(2) They must be proportionate to the intensity of his 
suffering. The results of God’s work are always commensurate 
to the force He puts forth. You cannot imagine the Divine 
Being going to an immense expenditure without a sure pre- 
science that He would be recouped. When He puts his hands 
to a work, it is because He knows that He can carry it through, 
and that the golden gain will be satisfactory remuneration. 
When therefore we behold the Son of God emptying Himself, 
stooping to the humiliation of Bethlehem, the anguish of 
Golgotha, the death of Calvary, we know that the spoils which 
will fall to his share, when He divides them with the strong, 
will not be unworthy or inadequate. 

Satisfied! We shall hear his sigh of deep content, and see 
the triumph on his face. We shall witness the sublime trans- 
ference of the kingdom to God, even the Father. We shall see 
the satisfactory termination of the mystery of evil. And if 
Christ is satisfied, we shall be. On this let us rest. And when 
our hearts misgive us because of the waste and havoc, the tears 
of blood, the awful suffering, that sin has brought into the 
universe of God, let us assure ourselves that all will yet be 
well; and that we shall drink deep draughts of the satisfaction 
of our Lord, when we see of the travail of his soul, and are 
satisfied. 


XXIIL 
Ghe Greatness of the Sin-Bearer. 


‘‘We must not stand to gaze too long, 
Though on unfolding Heaven our gaze we bend, 
Where lost behind the bright angelic throng 
We see Christ's entering triumph slow ascend. 


‘*No fear but we shall soon behold, 
Faster than now it fades, that gleam revive, 
When issuing from his cloud of fiery gold 
Our wasted frames feel the true Sun, and live.” 
KEBLE, 


(ISAIAH lili. 12.) 
ry, . . | 
7. I is impossible to mistake the majestic Personality 
speaking through the pronoun “I.” It is the voice 
of God Himself; and it is befitting that, as He 
introduced his Servant in the opening verses of this 
marvellous portraiture, so, in these closing words, He 
should pronounce his verdict on His career. We 
have watched, as the chapter has unfolded, how the opinion of 
the speaker and others, being represented by this we, passed 
through many phases—hostility, criticism, pity—before it settled 
to penitence and faith. In this respect it is a true delineation 
of the attitude of the world generally towards Jesus of Nazareth, 
who realized this unique ideal; and, surely, the words on which 
we are now to dwell anticipate the verdict of the Eternal, when 
the mystery of sin and suffering is over for ever, and time is 
running out to its last day. 
Two things are clearly predicated of the Sin-Bearer. First, 
that He should be great ; and secondly, that He should attain 
his commanding position, not as the founder of a new school 
of thought, nor as the leader of a social reformation, nor as 
possessed of exceptional saintliness—-but as a Sufferer, , 





Christ's Obedience to Death. 169 


This should be clearly noted. It is because “He poured out 
his soul unto death ”—a phrase which calls attention to the 
voluntary and moral aspects of his sufferings; because He 
allowed Himself to be numbered among the transgressors, not 
as naturally, but as sympathetically, one with them ; because 
He interceded for them, as standing beside them and identified 
in their interests—that the Almighty Father gives Him a 
portion with the great, and causes Him to divide the spoil with 
the strong. 

We are not dealing here with the glory He had with the 
Father before the worlds were made. Of this He emptied 
Himself when He became obedient unto the death of the 
cross ; and though now He has resumed it, yet the greatness 
which He obtained through death is not only his greatest 
boast, but must always have the greatest intrinsic interest for 
us. 


I. THE GREATNESS GIVEN BY THE FATHER AS THE RE- 
WARD FOR CHRIST’S OBEDIENCE TO DEATH.—It was meet 
that such a reward should be bestowed, for the sake of those 
who should afterwards follow in the footsteps of their Divine 
Master. Here was One who never swerved from the narrow 
track of obedience, whose course glorified and magnified the 
character of God ; if it could be shown that such unparalleled 
devotion was fruitless and unrecognised, that it was treated 
with complete indifference, whilst the faithful Servant was per- 
mitted to lie in an unknown and dishonoured grave, would it 
not daunt other ardent souls, bent on following his example, 
forcing them to feel that the interests of God were antagonistic 
to those of man? None could ever deserve more or better than 
Christ ; and if He were without recognition or reward, might 
it not be thought that heaven had no prize to give for faithful 
service? Surely He must have a reward, or the very order of 
the universe might be deemed at fault ! 

But what reward should He have? What could compensate 
Him for having laid aside the exercise of his Divine pre- 
rogative ; for having assumed our nature; for having passed 
through the ordeal of temptation, sorrow, and pain ; for having 


170 Ghe Greatness of the Sin-Bearer. 


become obedient to death, even the death of the cross? All 
worlds were his by native right; all holy beings owned his 
sway as Creator and God; all provinces of thought, emotion, 
power, and might, sent Him their choicest tribute. What 
reward could He claim, or have? 

The answer may be suggested by recalling our own pleasure 
in conferring pleasure, our joy in giving joy. To bless, to save, 
to help another, will fill our bosom with the most unalloyed 
blessedness of which the heart of man is capable. But our 
power, as well as our capacity, is limited ; we cannot do as we 
would. Let, however, the limitations imposed by our mortality 
or circumstances be removed ; let us be able to realize to the 
full the yearnings and promptings of our noblest hours ; let the 
wish to help be accompanied by a sympathy that cannot hurt 
the most sensitive, a wisdom that cannot mistake, a power that 
cannot be daunted or thwarted; and probably we should at 
once drink deep draughts of blessedness like God’s. 

This is the blessedness of Christ, and this the reward which 
‘the Father has given Him. All power is given Him, in heaven 
and on earth, because He is the Son of Man, and can use it 
for the unmixed benefit of those whom He has, in such won- 
derful condescension, made his brothers. He is raised to the 
right hand of the Father, that He may requite with coals of fire 
the nation that rejected and crucified Him, by giving repentance 
and remission of sins. God has given Him a name—the name 
Jesus, Saviour—which is above every name, that in it and 
through it every knee should bow, and every tongue confess 
that He is Lord, to the glory of the Father. All that come to - 
Him may now be saved, even to the uttermost. All that yield 
to Him are delivered from the power of darkness, and trans- 
lated into the Kingdom of God’s love. To the furthest limit 
of its meaning, He is able to realize his own prayer, that the 
essential oneness and blessedness of the Divine nature should 
be realized in those who believe. 

God Himself could not give, nor the Saviour ask for, a 
greater reward than this. And, in its magnificence, it appeals 
to all who would tread in his steps. The closer we approach 
Him in his self-sacrifice, the more fully we shall attain to his 


Geaben’s Supreme Retard. 71 


recompense. The deeper we drink of his cup, and are baptized 
with his baptism, the more we shall be able, in our measure, to 
assist Him in his redemptive purpose. This is what He meant 
when He spoke of sitting with Him on his throne, and ruling 
the cities of men in the interests of purity, righteousness, and 
peace. 

Ask Paul why he was so eager to keep under his body, in 
his zeal making it black and blue with blows ; why he denied 
himself legitimate gratification; why he was so abstemious 
and self-denying : and he will confess that it arises from his 
supreme desire, lest, having proclaimed as a herald the rules 
of the contest for others, he may miss the prize. And if you 
inquire further of what that prize consisted, he will modestly 
tell you that its charm and value to him lie in the greater power 
that it will confer of saving others (1 Cor. ix. 20-27). 

This is Heaven’s supreme reward: that all who pour out 
their souls to death shall obtain enlarged opportunities and 
possibilities of service. It is clear that they will not abuse 
them to their own hurt. It is equally certain that the exercise 
of such prerogatives will ensure the richest and most unalloyed 
blessedness for those by whom they are exerted. 


II. THE GREATNESS THAT CHRIST’S DEATH HAS SECURED 
HIM AMONG MEN.—He is worthy to take the mysterious scroll 
of destiny, and break its seals, because of the light He has 
cast on the great mysteries by which our lot is shadowed. 

(1) Pain. As we have sadly learnt, it is ubiquitous. Sooner 
or later it finds us out. And when it enwraps us in its fiery 
baptism, we are apt to accuse ourselves or to doubt God. 
“ Hast thou come, O sting of fire, to bring my sin to remem- 
brance, and avenge the sins of my youth?” Such is our cry 
under the first of these impressions. “God is unjust or care- 
less, or He would never let one of his innocent children suffer 
thus. There is no righteousness in his government of the 
world. I will curse Him and die.” Such is our cry under the 
second. 

But Jesus has taught us that there is yet a third way of re- 
garding pain. He had not sinned, yet He suffered as none of 


172 The Greatness of the Sin- Bearer. 


woman-born ever did. Evidently, then, pain is not always 
symptomatic of special sin. He was once so submerged in 
anguish that for a time He lost the sense of his Father’s love; 
but He never suggested that there was failure or obliquity in 
the moral government of the world. The death of Jesus has 
therefore robbed death of these two implications, and has 
taught us that it is often sent, and must be borne, with the 
view of benefiting others. Just because God loves our race, 
and desires to save and enrich it, He calls some, yea, many, 
apart from its ranks, and causes them to drink the cup of pain, 
so that inestimable benefits may accrue to all. 

Whenever, therefore, we are called to suffer, especially if 
unconscious of special sinnership, let us not charge God 
foolishly ; but consider that somehow and somewhere our 
patient and heroic endurance of anguish, whether physical or 
mental, will certainly conduce to the furtherance of those re- 
demptive purposes which fill the heart of Jesus—purposes in the 
sacred partnership of which He has called us to take a share. 

What a priceless service was this—to transform pain; to 
persuade sufferers that by their travail of soul they were 
enriching the whole world of men; to show the persecuted, 
the victims of human passion and lust, the paralyzed, cancer- 
eaten, and bedridden, that they had an opportunity of co- 
operating with the Prince of Sufferers in the overthrow of the 
dark tyranny which has been fraught with such unutterable 
agony for them and for myriads! For this we count Christ 
great, that through his death He has transfigured pain. 

(2) Death. Men dread it. It is the inevitable shadow which 
creeps over the warmest sunshine, and silences the gladdest 
joy. But He, by his dying, has abolished death, and brought 
life and immortality to light. He spoke of going to his Father; 
of reunion with his own, on the other side of death, in paradise ; 
of coming again to receive his own to Himself. He showed 
that there was a track threading the drear valley, which He 
could pass and repass until all his sheep were safely folded. 
He had no fear Himself, and taught us to have none. It was 
the way home, that was all. 

Before Jesus came, men had hoped and dreamt that this was 


Ghe Lamb of God. : 173 


so. Stillno one knew. Their prognostications were like those 
of Columbus before he turned his prow westwards, and 
ploughed the first furrow across the Atlantic. But when Jesus 
rose, death and resurrection were no longer matters for reason- 
ing or speculation ; that fact spoke to all ages as the guesses of 
philosophers never could have done. Life and immortality 
were brought to light. For this, therefore, we count Him 
great, that through death He undid death. 

(3) Szz. When Jesus died on the cross, He was numbered 
with transgressors ; but He stood over against all transgressors, 
distinct from them and bearing their sin. The sin of the race 
was imputed to Him. The guilt and penalty accruing to us all, 
in consequence of our connection with Adam’s fallen family, 
were borne by Him. As God’s Lamb, He bore the sin of the 
world. As man’s scapegoat, He bore it into a land of forget- 
fulness, whence it could be never again recovered. 

Nay, more, He bore our sins in his own body on the tree. 
Not szz alone, as the common heritage of the race; but szus 
also—thine and mine : so that if we confess them with humility 
and penitence, we may receive immediate and abundant par- 
don—a pardon which does not violate, but is guaranteed by the 
faithfulness and justice of God. He must be faithful to his 
promises, and just to his Son. The natural and secondary 
consequences remain, although transfigured ; but the penal 
ones are for ever gone, having been exhausted when He gave 
Himself a ransom and sacrifice for us all. This surely con- 
stitutes an overmastering claim for us to count Christ great. 
In his death He finished transgression ; made an end of sins ; 
purged away iniquity ; and brought in everlasting righteous- 
ness. Thou art worthy, O Lamb of God ; for Thou wast slain, 
and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood. 


II]. THE GREATNESS WHICH HIS DEATH WILL WIN FOR 
CHRIST IN THE ESTIMATION OF OTHER RACES OF BEING.— 
Not to the Mount of Beatitudes, but to the Cross, will distant 
worlds send their deputations in all coming ages, to learn the 
manifold lessons which it alone can teach. There they will 
learn to know the very heart of God, his hatred against sin, 


174 The Greatness of the Sin- Bearer. 


his love for the sinner, his fidelity to covenant engagements, 
his righteousness, his truth. The Cross is the heavenly prism 
that enables us to distinguish the constituents of the Divine 
nature. There they will be amazed to discover the devotion of 
Divine love, which could stoop to such humiliation and suffer- 
ing to win its Bride. There they will gladly recognise the 
victory of the Son of God over all the malice and power of 
the enemy. 

The volcano of hell has, perhaps for ages, belched out its 
fury on the universe, to its great detriment and misery ; but 
since Jesus died and rose, it has been made manifest that its 
power is broken—its empire at an end. What a relief to the 
whole moral universe! For what Jesus did on his cross 
pertains not to men only, but to all races and orders of beings, 
to whom it proclaims peace. Having made peace through the 
blood of his cross, He shall finally reconcile all things to 
Himself ; whether things upon the earth, or things in the 
heavens. 


XXIV. 
* Sing, © Barren!” 


“‘ Howbeit, all is not lost. 
The warm noon ends in frost... 
Yet through the silence shall 
Pierce the Death-Angel’s call, 
And ‘Come up hither,’ recover all. 
Heart, wilt thou go?——‘ I go: 
Broken hearts triumph so !’” 
E. B. BROWNING, 


(ISAIAH liv. 1.) 


N the previous chapters we have heard the exiles 
summoned to leave Babylon, and beheld the Divine 
Servant becoming the Sin-Bearer for them and for 
the world. Here our attention is startlingly recalled 
to the desolate city of Jerusalem. “ Barren”; “ For- 
saken” ; “ Desolate ””—such are the terms applied to 
her by One who cannot err. And they are corroborated by the 
testimony of a contemporary. “Then said I unto them,” is 
the faithful record of Nehemiah, “ Ye see the evil case that we 
are in, how Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are 
burned with fire” (Neh. i. 3; ii. 3, 13-17). 

But how is this? Have we not learnt that the Mediator has 
put away sin at the cost to Himself of wounds and bruises, 
stripes and death? How then does this city lie as an open 
sore on the face of the earth? Cannot God’s forgiveness, that 
has triumphed over sin, also triumph over the wreck and ruin 
that sin has caused? Is that redemption complete which fails to 
grapple with all the results and consequences of wrong-doing? 

This opens up a great subject, and one that touches us all. 
We are conscious that though our sin is forgiven, yet certain 
consequences remain, of which that ruined city isatype. We 





176 “ Sing, © Barren!” 


cannot undo the past; God Himself cannot undo it. It cari 

never be as though it had never been. The seventy years of 
captivity, the shame, the sorrow, the anguish to God, the for- 

feited opportunities, the thistledown so thoughtlessly scattered ! 

Ah me! God can forgive ; but these things cannot be altered 

now. But what is meant by that word Redeemer? What is 

the meaning of the passage which asserts that where sin 

reigned unto death, ¢Heve grace would reign unto eternal life? 

What is meant by the promise of fir-trees instead of thorns, of 
myrtles instead of briars? These questions are often asked in 

spirit, if not in so many words ; and it is well to attempt an 

answer. They open up the great subject of the natural conse- © 
quences of sin, and how God deals with them. 


I, THE NATURAL CONSEQUENCES OF SIN.—(1) We must 
distinguish between them and the punitive or penal. Suppose 
that a man is taken into custody for being drunk and dis- 
orderly. There are two results of that outbreak of uncontrolled 
passion ; on the one hand he has broken the law of his country, 
for which a penalty of imprisonment or fine must be inflicted ; 
but on the other, and in addition, he has brought on himself the 
racking headache, the depression of spirits, the awful nervous 
reaction, which is the natural and inevitable result. These will 
pursue and scourge him as with the whip of the furies, even 
when his standing is adjusted with his country’s laws. 

So, when we sin against God, two consequences accrue. 
Our sin cries against us, as Abel’s blood against Cain; its 
voice goes up to high heaven, and can only be stilled and 
hushed by the pleading of the blood of Jesus. It is only as 
we take that precious blood in hand, and bear it with us into 
the holiest, presenting it as our propitiation, that we find peace, 
and rest, and deliverance, both from the guilt and the penalty 
that would otherwise accrue to us. But when this has been 
effected, and we are forgiven, accepted, and blessed, there are 
yet other results to be faced. The drunkard may be forgiven ; 
but his health is undermined, his fortune impaired: he can_ 
never be what he would have been had he lived soberly. - 

Take the case of a man who, in his devotion to politics or 


s 


Solving and Reaping. 177 


society, has sinned against the laws of the home. Night after 
night he has been away from his young children, till they 
regard him as a stranger. There is none of that wholesome 
companionship, that abandonment of trust, which are such 
sacred ties, and make the man the house-band. The mother 
cannot supply the firmness and strength which the young life 
needs. Almost insensibly the family grows away from him; 
and after a few years, when disappointment drives him back, 
he finds, to his infinite regret, that the love of the children has 
gone beyond recall. The boys are now men, and seek their 
pleasures outside the home; the girls think it irksome to while 
away his weary hours by their society. Now he sees his mis- 
take, and tries to remedy it ; but he is too late. He is forgiven 
by his God, and his wife, who never ceased to cling to him; 
but he cannot get back that forfeited love. This is his ruined 
Jerusalem. 

(2) This distinction ts Scriptural. One illustration will be 
sufficient. When, in response to Nathan’s parable, David 
broke the long silence, and cried, “I have sinned!” the pro- 
phet immediately answered, “The Lord hath put away thy 
sin”; but he added, “The sword shall never depart out of thy 
house.” So far as the sin lay between God and David’s soul, 
it was removed immediately on his confession ; but, so far as 


the natural consequences were concerned, they followed him 


for many a long year. The death of Bathsheba’s babe, the 
murder of Amnon, the revolt of Absalom, the rending of the 
kingdom, were the harvest of which that sin was the autumn 
sowing. 

We need not reiterate tie lesson of this chapter; but only 
recall the assurance of the fortieth chapter, that Jerusalem’s 
iniquity has been pardoned, and contrast it with the allusions 
of this chapter to its desolate ruins and waste. It is clear 
then that we may; through penitence and faith, realize the 
perfect pardon of our Saviour; and yet there may be the 
hideous waste, the scar, the lost years, of which this ruined 
city was so significant. 

(3) These natural consequences are bitter to bear. The 


enumeration, as given here, reminds us of Marah, before the 
M 


178 “ Sing, © Barren!” 


tree—true emblem of the cross—had, by the Divine direction, 
been cast into the waters. To bear no children; to work 
without result ; to have little sense of the presence of God ; to 
suffer in mind, or nerve, or circumstance, or, worse than all, 
in the lives of others—these are among the natural conse- 
quences of sin, and are fraught with anguish sometimes through 
long years. Let us remember the inevitableness and bitterness 
of these results, when tempted to the indulgence of passion. It 
is quite true that one look of confession and faith will secure 
reinstatement in the favour of God; but it is also true that 
what a man sows he must reap. And though he be a Christian, 
accepted and forgiven, if he sows of the flesh, he must reap. 


II. How GoD OVERRULES SIN’s NATURAL CONSE- 
QUENCES.—Jehovah says, “ Szug.” “Sing, O barren; break 
forth into singing, and cry aloud !” 

“How can I sing?” says Israel; “my city is in ruins; 
my temple burned with fire; my precious things laid waste. 
How can I sing?” 

“Nevertheless,” is the Divine reply, “the time for singing 
is come. Sing, not because of what thou hast; but of what 
I have promised to give. Enlarge the place of thy tent; 
lengthen thy cords; strengthen thy stakes; make room for 
the incoming of a great host that shall own thee mother.” 

“ But the results of our backslidings remain. Thou canst not 
undo them, though Thou mayest forgive. Thou canst not give 
us back the seventy years of exile. Thou canst not obliterate 
the scar of bruise and wound and sore. Thou canst not 
intercept the inevitable recoil of our sins.” 

Yet Jehovah answers, “O barren one! thou must sing 
as thou didst when thou camest from Egypt. Not with the 
same exuberant joy ; but with a deeper insight into that grace 
which, in addition to its abundant pardon, can transform the 
irreparable past, transmuting its briars to myrtles, and its 
thorns to fir-trees, bringing good out of evil, transforming 
‘Benonis,’ sons of sorrow, into ‘Benjamins,’ sons of the 2 Tight 
hand.” 

So God our Father is able to make men and women in 


The Results of the Exile. 179 


middle life sing again, as in the days of their youth, with a joy 
chastened by their memory of the failures and transgressions, 
which yet have yielded honey like the carcase of Samson’s lion. 
As in the great world, Adam’s sin has been overruled to the 
great enrichment of the race, so in the small world of our 
individual experience, we rise by our falls; triumph in our 
defeats ; and through the experience of the wilderness enter 


- into the land of rest. 


Let us illustrate this in the history of the exile. Terrible as 


-was the immediate loss inflicted by the national backsliding, 


demanding the penalty of the captivity, yet in three respects 
that captivity was overruled to enrich the religious life of the 
chosen people, and ultimately of the world. 

(1) They conceived new and enlarged ideas of God. Before 
that time, they had thought of Him as a local and national 
Deity, like the gods of the nations around ; now they learnt 
that the Holy One of Israel should be called the God of the 
whole earth (verse 5). 

(2) They understood better the nature of true religion. 
Before the captivity, in the estimation of the majority of the 
Jewish people, it consisted in rites and ceremonies and outward 
observances ; but when there was no temple, altar, or priest, 
and still the prophets exhorted them to godliness, it became 
apparent to the least thoughtful, that true and undefiled 
religion was independent of the material and sensuous, and 
demanded only God and the soul. In the captivity we first 
meet with the institution of the synagogue, where devout souls 
could worship God in simplicity and spirituality. 

(3) They realized their world-wide mission. On the thought 
of the chosen people rose the dawn of a new conception of the 
purposes of God in their calling and discipline : they were to be 


as the dew of the Lord on the earth, disseminating everywhere 


those blessed truths of which they were the Divinely-chosen 
custodians, and enlarging their tent to include the Gentiles 
(Gal. iv. 27). There was a sense, therefore, in which their 
casting-away was the reconciling of the world. 

Such were the results of their exile, God’s grace touched the 
darkness and blackness of their righteously-deserved afflictions, 


180 “ Sing, © Barren!” 


and transmuted them to gold. So, still; the forgiven drunkard 
can never undo the ravage to health or fortune ; but he is made 
humble, thoughtful, intent on saving those who are under the 
same spell as he was. The violator of the laws of the home- 
life becomes more tender, more unselfish, more refined and 
sensitive in the love he gives, than he would have been till 
disappointment and heart-hunger had done their perfect work. 
In those who have suffered from the results of their sins, there 
is a humility, tenderness, softness in speech, delicacy in under- 
standing the temptations and failures of others, the soul of the 
prophet, the intercession of the priest, which are beyond price. 
The pardoned prodigal can talk of his Father’s love in a way 
that the elder son could never do; and as we hear him speak, 
we know that he is enriching us with spoils gathered by his 
experiences in the far country. 

Whilst we mourn our sins, and bitterly lament their cost and 
pain, yet we can see how God is at work taking up the very 
waste of our lives and making it up again into the fairest 
fabrics ; as rich dyes are made from the produce of gas-retorts, 
and white paper from old and disused rags. In our exile we 
get new thoughts of God, of religion, and of our mission among 
men. Probably we should have reached them in some other 
way had we never wandered ; but we may have learnt them 
under conditions which will for ever give a special flavour and 
tone to our affirmation of these mighty truths. 


III. Worpbs OF HELP TO ANY WHO MAY BE SUFFERING 
FROM THE RESULTS OF PAST WRONG-DOING.—The past 
cannot be altered ; but it is a comfort to know that it can be 
forgiven, and the soul made white and clean. These great 
blessings should not be lost sight of amid the outburst of an 
infinite regret. 

There is a world of difference also between punishment and 
chastisement. The one is for the Saviour, who bore the guilt 
and penalty for man on the cross ; the other only is for us who 
are one with Him by a living faith. Let us not say we are 
being punished, when the recoil of past transgression strikes us 
with mailed hand: but that we are being chastened so as to 


* Gberlasting Bindness.”’ 181 


escape condemnation with the world. The same circumstances 
that are punitive to the ungodly, are disciplinary to the child of 
God. Our Father chastens us for our profit, using as his rod 
the natural consequences of our sins. 

At such times, God calls us back to Himself as a wife for- 
saken and grieved in spirit. He knows the disappointment and 
shame of the downcast soul (6). He waits to gather with great 
mercies, and to show mercy with everlasting kindness (7, 8). 
Let us heed his call, and return to Him; not allowing the 
sorrows and sufferings we endure to alienate us, but counting 
them as opportunities for claiming more of his aid. 

We must also believe in his inalienable love. He is our 
Husband still, and cannot put us away from Him; the 
kindness with which He has had mercy on us is everlasting ; 
He has even sworn that the waters of death and destruction 
shall not for ever separate us from Him; He has entered into a 
covenant of peace with us which shall outlast the mountains 
and the hills. We may grow apathetic and careless, bringing 
to ourselves pain and woe; grieving and dishonouring Him, 
and hindering the development of his purposes. But He 
cannot cease to love. His tender pity will still embrace us; 
grieving to see our self-inflicted sorrows, but using them as a 
furnace, the fervent heat of which will consume our bonds, 
whilst it leaves our skin unscorched, and the hairs of our head 
unsinged. 

If I ascend into heaven, Thy love is there ; but if I make my 
bed in hell, it is there also. If I take the wings of the morning, 
and dwell in the uttermost part of the sea, placing it as a great 
gulf of separation between Thee and me, there shall Thy hand 
lead me, and Thy right hand uphold me. If I say, Surely the 
darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be light around 
me; and through it Thou shalt follow every step, leading me 
back to Thyself, and through my very wanderings accomplish- 
ing the loftiest purposes for my purity and holiness. Such love 
is too wonderful for me, I cannot attain unto it; but I will 
lie down and rest in its everlasting arms. 


XXV. 
he City of God. 


‘« Far o’er yon horizon 
Rise the city towers, 
Where our God abideth ; 
That fair home is ours ! 
Flash the streets with jasper, 
Shine the gates with gold, 
Flows the gladdening river, 
Shedding joys untold.” 
DEAN ALFORD. 


(ISAIAH liv. 11.) 


HE reference is still to Jerusalem. In the former 
paragraph, she was addressed as a barren wife ; 
here as destined to arise from her encumbering ruins, 
and become the joy of the whole earth. Of course, 
the primary reference is to that actual rebuilding 
which took place under the direction of the good 

Nehemiah. But there is a further and more spiritual meaning. 
These words must refer to that city of God which is ever 
arising amid the ruins of all other structures. Watched by 
the ever-attentive eye of the great Architect, wrought by unseen 
hands, tested by the constant application of the line of truth 
and the plummet of righteousness, and emerging slowly from 
heaps of rubbish into strength and beauty. 

A description is given of the pricelessness of the structure, 
the privileges of the inhabitants, and the safety which is assured 
by the Word of God ; and let us not hesitate to appropriate 
this blessed vision. It is put clearly within our reach by the 
assurance with which the chapter closes, that this is the heritage 
of all the servants of the Lord. 





Its Foundations. 183 


I. THE PRICELESSNESS OF THE STRUCTURE.—What an 
enumeration of precious stones! The sapphire, the ruby, the 
agate, and the carbuncle, vie with each other, and flash with 
varied but resplendent colour. Now, let us consider what 
jewels are. They are by nature only lumps of dull and inert 
matter : the sapphire is clay, the diamond carbon. But why 
the difference between their appearance and that of the 
ordinary soil? The answer is not easy to give; but this 
exquisite effect is probably due to crystallization, conducted 
under exceptional circumstances of convulsion, pressure, and 
fire. A jewel is a bit of ordinary earth which has passed 
through an extraordinary experience. Thus there is a special 
fitness in this address to the afflicted people of God—theirs are 
the convulsions ; theirs the awful pressure ; theirs the fiery 
baptism. They count it hard—they cannot understand why 
they are treated thus. But they will see it all one day, when 
they learn that God was making agates for windows, carbuncles 
for gates, and sapphires for foundations. 

Foundations of sapphires. The sapphire is one of the fairest 
of jewels. It is born in the darkness ; but it hides the secret of 
the rarest beauty at its heart. The blue of the sapphire per- 
petuates in unfading hues the loveliness of the gentian, the 
violet, and the forget-me-not ; of the summer-sky and the 
- summer-sea ; and of the glacier-depth, where perhaps the 
deepest blue is to be seen in the walls of ice-rock. It is 
frequently mentioned in Scripture. The elders saw a pavement 
of sapphire under the feet of the God of Israel. It was fifth 
among the precious stones in the breastplate, and second 
among the foundations of the New Jerusalem. Blue is the 
most prevalent colour in Nature, forming the background of 
sea, and sky, and distance ; it also predominated in the taber- 
nacle and temple, when it was always coupled with gold in the 
description of the sacred furniture. As the gold was em- 
blematic of the glory and majesty of God, so was blue of ek 
love and grace in Jesus. 

It is very suggestive to be told that the foundations of the 
Divine structure are laid with sapphires. TZhey are full of 

Jove: the sapphire is the emblem of love ; and underneath our 


184 2 Ohe City of God. 


lives, underpinning the history of the world of men, the one 
ultimate fact for us all is the love of God. Go down as deep 
and as far as you will, you must come at last to the bed-rock of 
God’s love in Christ. They are stable: jewels are the most 
lasting of all earthly objects, as imperishable as they are 
beautiful. Such is the basis of Christian hope. Not a dream 
of the fancy; not a structure of clouds, which a puff of wind 
may hurl into red ruin ; or a pictured reflection of giant moun- 
tain forms on the bosom of the lake, which may be destroyed 
by the fitful breeze : but enduring afd eternal as the throne of 
God. TZhey are fair: the loveliness of God’s world is not 
only in what meets the eye, but reaches into the unseen. Not 
only does He lavish beauty on flowers, and woodlands, and 
outspread landscapes ; but on the massive foundations of the 
earth, where lie the pure white quartz, the granite and porphyry, 
with their rich veins and colours. But how fair are the founda- 
tions of our religion!—the covenant made in the council 
chamber of eternity ; the blood of the atonement ; the identifi- 
cation of the Redeemer with the lost; the eternal purpose 
which from all ages God has purposed in Himself that grace 
should conquer sin. 

Windows of agates. Agates are varieties of quartz, and bear 
evidently in their texture the mark of fire. Indeed, they are. 
always found in the igneous rocks, from which they drop out 
when such rocks decompose under the action of water and air. 
The agate is partially transparent: not opaque, as flint ; not 
transparent, as rock-crystal—it admits light, tempering it as it 
passes. 

God makes windows of agates ; that may be interpreted to 
mean that He takes our sorrows and makes them windows 
through which we may gaze into the unseen. We shall not in 
this world see eye to eye, or know as we are known. The 
medium of our seeing will always be partially obscured. But 
let us be very grateful that we can see at all. In sorrow we see 
the unsatisfying nature of the world, and the reality of the 
unseen ; we learn to appreciate the tenderness and delicacy 
of human love; we have insight into the meaning of God’s 
providences; we behold the value and truth of Scripture. 


Its Gates. 185 


Windows of agates, but still windows. O tossed with tem- 
pest and not comforted, thou wilt yet have to praise thy God 
that thou wert passed through the fire, if only that thou 
mightest see ! 

Gates of carbuncles. There is a good deal of uncertainty as 
to the precise stone indicated by the Hebrew word rendered 
“carbuncle.” It seems better, therefore, to take the suggestion 
of the duplicate vision in the Apocalypse, and to think of 
Gates of pearl. The pearl is said to result from the infliction 
of a wound in the oyster, which leads it to throw out the 
precious fluid that congeals into a pearl. If so, every pearl on 
the neck of beauty is the lasting memento of a stab of pain. 
At any rate, each pearl commemorates the hazard of human 
life in the divers descent into the ocean depths. Think of 
gates brought from the heart of the sea, each due to the action 
of suffering and at the risk of precious life. It is true of life; 
all our outgoings into wider ministry, nobler life, greater 
responsibility of blessedness, are due to the precious action of 
sorrow, self-sacrifice, and pain. There is no gate into the life, 
which is life indeed, which has not cost us dear. God makes 
our pearls into gates, and our gates of pearls. 

When next thou art overwhelmed in sorrow and pain, or 
tossed with tempest and not comforted, dare to look to the 
outcome of thy stern discipline. It is not for the present joyous, 
but grievous ; nevertheless afterward. . ... . Our light 
affliction, which is for the moment, is like a shaft which it is 
difficult to turn—it strains thy every nerve ; but on the other 
side of the wall it is grinding golden grain, the quality and 
weight of which will more than compensate thee. Learn, then, 
to look on God as making pleasant stones for the borders of 
thy life—the walls of salvation and the gates of praise. Is it 
not a blessed thing to realize that God is making jewels out of 
very common materials through the fire of trial and pain ? 


II. THE PRIVILEGES OF THE CHILDREN OF THE CITY: 
THEY SHALL BE ALL TAUGHT OF Gop.—Our blessed Lord, 
quoted this promise in one of his greatest utterances. “It is 
written in the prophets,” He said, “And they shall be all taught 


186 Ghe City of God. 


of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned 
of the Father, cometh unto Me” (John vi. 45). It is a deep 
and helpful thought that God has opened a school in this dark . 
world, and has Himself undertaken to act as Schoolmaster. 
He delegates to no inferior hand the sublime work of educating 
the human soul. But, fear not! it is the Hather who teaches. 
He knows our frame, and remembers that we are dust. Alas, 
that so many hear and do not learn! There is a great contrast 
between these two. 

How often, when we were at school, in the long summer 
days—far away now, when days were long—and the door 
stood open into the garden, our eyes have strayed from book, 
or copy, or slate, after the butterflies hovering over the flowers, 
and the big bees droning lazily past ; attracted by the rabbits 
running across the path, and the birds flitting to and fro! We 
have heard, but not learned ; and the lesson has been turned 
back. Oh, the irksomeness of those turned lessons, when all 
Nature awaited us outside! So do we evade those Divine 
lessons, given on the pages of Scripture, of conscience, or of 
human life, and inculcated by the Divinest tenderness. Did 
we truly learn of the Father, we should inevitably get to the 
feet of Jesus. When men say that they believe in God, but not 
in Jesus Christ whom He has sent, they consciously or un- 
consciously depart from the truth. The sincere Deist, when 
Christ is presented, must come to Him. 

To be taught of God, to be led by his own hand into a perfect 
knowledge of the mysteries of Redemption, to sit at the foot- 
step of his throne, to be a pupil in his school, to be his disciple, 
to have all that the psalmist so repeatedly asked when he cried, 
“Teach me Thy statutes ; lead me in Thy way and teach 
me ”—this is the first of the blessed privileges of the children 
of the city of God. 

Great shall be the peace of thy children. We have first peace 
with God, through faith in the blood and righteousness of 
Christ ; then the peace of God, which here is called “great,” 
and elsewhere “that passeth understanding.” Some parts of 
the ocean laugh the sounding-line to scorn. You may let out 
1,000, 2,000, even 6,000 fathoms, and still the plumb falls clear. 


Its Children. 187 


So it is when God’s peace, driven from all the world, comes to 
fold its wings of rest in the heart. It is better than joy, which 
falters and fluctuates ; better than the ecstasy which may have 
its reactions. Deep, sweet, still, all-pervading—eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, nor heart conceived its like. 

And these two rest on each other. The more you know God, 
the more peace you have ; because you find Him more worthy 
of your trust. We have peace in each other, when we know 
that each is worthy of all our confidence. Peace grows from 
less to more ; from a condition which is largely experimental to 
one which is fixed and everlasting ; and always in proportion to 
the extended area of our acquaintance with God. Acquaint 
then thyself with Him, and-be at peace ; thereby good shall 
come to thee. Great peace have they that love His law; and 
nothing shall offend them. 


III. THEIR SAFETY.—The waster fulfils a useful function : 
the knife that cuts away the dead wood; the fire that eats 
out the alloy; the winnowing fan that rids the wheat of the 
chaff; the east wind tearing through the forest; the frost 
crumbling up the soil; the vast army of animals that devour 
and destroy. “I have created the waster to destroy.” This 
is the strong Hebrew way of saying that God permits, and 
overrules, and brings out good by means of the evil that had 
seemed destructive of all good. 

Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try 
thee. Be not afraid, when thou seest the smith blowing up the 
fire in his forge, and bringing forth a weapon, the teeth of which 
might send a shudder through a stouter heart than thine. Thy 
God created, and can control him. Nothing which God has 
made can do more than He permits. Thy Father is over all ; 
and He has said, without hesitation or reserve, that no weapon 
formed against his own shall prosper, and that they shall con- 
demn all tongues raised against them in judgment. 

It is impossible to escape the ordeal. It would not be good 
for us, if we could. “They shall surely gather against thee.” 
“In the world,” said the Master, “ye shall have tribulation. If 
they have hated and persecuted Me, they will hate and persecute 


188 ~ Ghe City of God. 


you.” But they cannot really hurt. Keep on doing what is 
right in his sight, with a single eye for his glory, and a simple 
resolve to do his will. The fire may burn around thee, but only 
to consume thy bonds; the storm may arise against thee, but 
the billows which break in thunder on the beach, shall not 
break one splinter from the cliffs. Do not seek to vindicate or 
avenge thyself. Be still and know that thy God reigns. He 
will interpose at the exact hour of need; He will vindicate; He 
will turn the edge of the weapons of thy foes against themselves, 
and silence every accusing, whispering, calumniating voice. 
This is thy heritage ; if thou art his servant, thine honour is in 
the Divine keeping. 

This is the City of God, and we walk its streets day by day. 
We have come to Mount Zion, the city of the living God, the 
heavenly Jerusalem ; its breeze fans our faces, its music fills our 
ears, its bright and holy inhabitants touch us in the streets, its 
interests and employments engage our hands. The New Jeru- 
salem, for us at least, has come down from God out of heaven, 
and. is here. 


SOV Ly 
Our Glorified Leader. 


‘He is gone—and we remain 
In this world of sin and pain ; 
In the void which He has left, 
On this earth of Him bereft. 
‘We have still his work to do; 
We can still his path pursue; 
Seek Him both in friend and foe, 
In ourselves his image show.”’ 
STANLEY, 


(ISAIAH lv. 4.) 





HERE are things which money cannot buy. It 
were absurd to bring gold or silver, or any such 
equivalent for them; they are without price. They 
therefore elude the rich, who have acquired the 
habit of supposing that money is the only medium 
ale of exchange, and who find it hard to think of 
wealth other than that which passes current in the market ; 
whilst they are within the reach of those who have no money, 
but who are sorely athirst. What things these are will appear 
presently. Suffice it only to say that they are contained in a 
Person, and that it is impossible to have them unless we enter 
into living union with Him. 

It was highly necessary that God should call the attention of 
the Jewish people to these unpurchasable possessions. Their 
life in Babylon had become so luxurious. . They had so suddenly 
acquired wealth; they had so easily bartered their spiritual 
prerogative, as the priests of men, for mercenary consideration, 
that there was every danger of their losing sight of the great 
facts of the spiritual world. It was needful, therefore, for them 


190 Our Glorified Leader. 


to be reminded that the immortal thirst of the soul cannot be 
quenched by waters whose source is in the depth of the earth, 
though the wells be deep as Sychar’s; and that its hunger 
cannot be satisfied with the provision beneath which the tables 
of a Dives groan. True satisfaction—that which is really 
bread, the fatness that delights the soul—can only be obtained 
where the coins of this world do not pass current; in fellowship 
with Him whose voice is ever speaking in the marts of com- 
merce, saying, “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye! hearken 
unto Me! buy wine and milk! eat ye that which is good !” 

These gifts of the spiritual world by which the soul lives are 
- given in covenant; each man must enter for himself into 
covenant-relationship with God. Yet, in the deepest sense, the 
covenant has been already made on the behalf of all faithful 
souls, by their Representative, who here looms out amid the 
mists of the far past in the unmistakable glory of the Son of 
Man. 

Thus we have three clear issues before us: The Prince of — 
Life; the Everlasting Covenant; the Abundant Provision 
which is ours in Him. 


I. THE PRINCE OF LiFE.—“ Behold, I have given Him for 
a Leader and Commander to the people.” 

(1) He was typified in David. The shepherd boy was God’s 
gift to Israel, to save his people from the anarchy into which 
Saul’s wilfulness had plunged them; to deliver the land from 
the incursions of the Philistines ; and to lead them like a flock. 
God entered into a covenant with him to make him a house, 
and that his son should sit upon his throne, assured of the 
living presence of Jehovah, and of the certainty of an 
established throne for ever. These were the sure mercies 
of David, when God appointed him prince over his people. 
(2 Sam. vii. 8-17). 

In each of these respects the Almighty entered into cov- 
enant with great David’s Greater Son. He has been con- 
stituted Prince. His name is made great. His throne shall be 
for ever. His kingdom shall be made sure. For a great. while 
to come his house shall stand. His name shall be continued as 


: The Prince of Wife. 19! 


long as the sun, and men shall be blessed in Him. All nations 
shall call Him happy (Psa. Ixxii.). The type was spoilt by 
David’s infidelity and sin. The patterns of things in the 
heavens always bear the soil, the fret, and the tarnish of this 
world. But even though this was so, on God’s side there was 
no vacillation, no swerving from his purpose. His mercies 
were sure. Much more in the case of Jesus Christ, the eternal 
purpose cannot miscarry. There can be no failure upon his 
part to perform the conditions of the covenant; and God 
will not run back from his word.. He hath made with his 
Son a covenant which is ordered in all things and sure. It 
were easier to break the procession of day and night, than that 
one item of its provisions should be invalidated. 

(2) This title ts applied to Christ after his resurrection. 
Four times only in the New Testament is Christ called Leader 
or Prince, and always in resurrection. In his sermon in the 
temple, Peter accuses the Jews of having killed ‘“‘the Prince of 
Life,” and immediately adds, “whom God raised from the 
dead” (Acts ili. 14, 15). Again, before the Sanhedrim, he 
affirms that “God exalted Him with his right hand to be a 
Prince and a Saviour,”—that exaltation evidently referring to 
the Ascension from the depth of the grave to the right hand of 
power (Acts v. 31). Inthe Epistle to the Hebrews we are told 
that God hath made “the Leader of our salvation perfect 
through sufferings, and hath crowned Him with glory and 
honour” (Heb. ii. 9, 10). And yet again in the same Epistle we 
are told to look to Jesus, who has sat down at the right hand 
of the throne of God, as “the Author of faith” (Heb. xii. 2). 
However translated, whether by Author, Prince, Captain, or 
Leader, it is the same Greek word, and is applied to Christ 
as risen. 

(3) The original meaning of the word is very interesting. 
Etymologically, it means the first of a file of men, and therefore 
their leader and commanding officer. This conception there- 
fore is presented to our mind, that our Lord is the first of a 
long procession of souls whom He is leading up from the grave, 
with its darkness and corruption, through the steeps of air, past 
principalities and powers, to the very throne of God. He is the 


192 Our Glorified Leader. ; 


First-born from the dead, and therefore Ruler of the kings of 
the earth. He first, by the resurrection from the dead, has 
obtained the right to proclaim light to the Gentiles. 

If this thought of Christ being the first of a long procession 
is carried out, in respect to the passages mentioned above, it 
yields great results. He leads the dead out of death into life. 
There is a close analogy between the life and work of Joshua 
and of Jesus. After the death of Moses, God gave Joshua to 
be a witness to the people of truth and righteousness—to be 
their leader and commander. To make the analogy perfect, 
we may well suppose that Joshua first passed across the dried 
bed of the Jordan, hard by the little group of priests standing 
there, ark on shoulder, and that the long procession of Israel 
trod in his steps. Whether that were so or not, it is impossible 
to say. But this, at least, is true, that Christ has preceded us 
through the waters of Jordan, which always stand for death ; 
and that He will hold them back until every one of the ran- 
somed has passed “‘clean over Jordan.” 

fe leads the vanguished into the victory of the heavenilies. 
In his exaltation as Man to the right hand of the throne, He 
opened a path to be trodden in after ages by a company which 
no man can number. Where He is, they are to be; as He 
has overcome, they are to overcome ; as He is regnant over 
principality and power, they are to sit on his throne till their 
enemies are made the footstool of their feet. 

He leads sufferers through suffering to the perfection, which is 
only possible as the effect of grievous pain, sanctified through 
the grace of the Holy Ghost. Son though He were, He learned 
obedience by the things that He suffered ; and transformed 
suffering, showing that it was an alembic, a purifying furnace, a 
means of discipline, strength, and ennoblement—all of which 
have become the heritage of the suffering people of God. All 
who suffer meekly according to the will of God are following in 
the long procession which He headed. 

Fe leads also the ranks of believers. In the eleventh chapter 
of the marvellous treatise already quoted we have a roll-call of 
the heroes of faith ; but the writer takes care to tell us that not 
Abel, though he were the first in time, not Abraham, though 


: A Glorious Aame. 193 


_ first as progenitor, not Moses, though first in the marvels 


wrought, but Jesus is the true file-leader of faith. 

(4) These conclusions suggested by the New Testament are sub- 
stantiated and confirmed by the expression used here. “Thou 
shalt call a nation that Thou knowest not.” To whom can this 
refer, save to the Gentiles, who were once far off? ‘Nations 
that knew not Thee, shall run unto Thee.” Of whom can this 
be true, save of that vast ingathering suggested to our Lord by 


the Greeks who came to Him before He died, and concerning 


whom He said, “I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto 
Me”? These words are a direct address from the people of 
God to their directly-given Leader. Thankfully they remind 
Him that the Holy One of Israel has glorified Him. And 
when did our Lord receive honour and glory save when, for his 
obedience unto death, He received a name which is above 
every name, and in which every knee shall bow, and every 
tongue confess. 

O Glorious Leader of faithful souls! who hast conducted so 
great an exodus from the grave and the dark domain of selfish- 
ness and sin, and from the realm of the transient and material 
to the unseen and eternal, the sinless and sorrowless world, we, 
who follow Thee, pray that nations who have not known Thee 
may run to Thee; that there may be a great gathering of the 


peoples around Thy banner; and that many who are wasting 


their energy for waters that cannot quench their thirst, and for 
bread that cannot satisfy their hunger, may follow Thee to the 
River of the Water of Life, and to the Tree of Life which is in 


the midst of the Paradise of God ! 


God has given—wilt thou accept his gift? He gave his only- 


begotten Son, and with Him will freely give all things. Draw 
near and take; and let Him be for thy comfort, sustenance, 


and salvation, world without end. 


Il. THE EVERLASTING COVENANT.—Towards the close of 


David’s life, he sang one brief strain concerning which he was 


very sure that the Spirit of the Lord was speaking by him, and 

that His word was upon his tongue. He seems to have had a 

glimpse of the lost opportunities of his life. He says sadly, 
N 


194 Our Glorified Leader. 


that one who rules over men righteously would be like sunrise, 
as a cloudless dawn, as the tender grass, the joint product of 
rain and sun. That was what his reign might have been, but 
the fair ideal had never been realized. He had not always 
ruled in the fear of God. He had committed iniquity, for which 
he had been chastened by the rod of men, and with the stripes 
of the children of men (2 Sam. vii. 14, 15 ; 2 Sam. xxiii. 3). 

He had been forgiven ; but the natural consequences had 
remained. His house had not been so with God. Incest, ~ 
murder, hatred, had rent it ; and his last words make mention 
of the ungodly who could not be taken unless the hand were 
armed with sword and spear. Adonijah, Joab, Shimei, and 
others, were as thorns in the side of the aged king. But in 
spite of all he knew that God’s covenant with himself was sure. 
He had said, “ My mercy shall not depart, as I took it from 
Saul whom I put away before thee.” In his own words, the 
“ covenant was ordered in all things and sure.” 

A similar covenant has been enacted between the Father 
and the Son as the Representative of the redeemed. God will 
never be unfaithful to its provisions. The work of the Cross 
has been definitely accepted on our behalf. The precious 
Blood has been accounted a sufficient atonement. The obedi- 
ence and death of Jesus Christ are enough. Those that believe 
in Him shall never perish. God’s mercies to us in Christ are 
sure. But we must definitely enter into that covenant for 
ourselves. Note the emphasis. Listen! come! hear! and— 
I will make an everlasting covenant with you. 

Men talk much in the present day of the solidarity of the 
race ; and are accustomed to group men in one great family, 
to the obscuring of the equally true doctrine of individualism. 
We must not allow these two to collide. Each is necessary to 
the true development of the soul. It is true that all who repent 
and believe are included in the provisions of the eternal cov- 
enant—entered into in the council-chamber of eternity ; but it 
is equally true there is a personal transaction between God and 
each soul, by virtue of which it enters into a relationship with 
God, which neither life nor death, things present nor things to 
come, can violate or interrupt. 


Absolute Obedience. 195 


III. THE ABUNDANT PROVISION.—It is described under 
several terms—waters, wine, milk, satisfying bread, the good, 
fatness. We are invited to come for water, and lo! we find a 
feast prepared at which we sit to eat. All this reminds us of 
words in the Epistles, the wealth of which surpasses thought. 
“ Blest with all spiritual blessings in the heavenlies in Christ.” 
“All things are yours.” “His Divine power hath given to us 
all things that pertain to life and godliness.” 

It is too much our habit to pray as though by our entreaty we 
should obtain for ourselves what we need for life or service. 
We cry, “Go to! I will pray day and night for this or the 
other grace; I will buy this power by tears and sighs and 
many prayers.” Oh that we could realize that the table is 
spread, that there is enough for us, that our name lies between 
the knife and fork, that the doors stand open, and that we have 
only to take! Everything that the apostles had is ours. All 
that God can give is given. » All that the soul wants is ready to 
hand. We have not to ascend into heaven to bring down 
the grace of God; orto descend into any depth to bring it 
up. It is nigh, it is here. Eat, O beloved, eat and drink 
abundantly ; there can be no stint for those whom God calls as 
his guests to sit at the table of his Son. We talk as though the 
feast were at the end of this dispensation ; but the oxen and 
fatlings are already killed, and all things are now ready. Come 

e! 

4 Without money, and without price. And is it really so? 
Is there indeed nothing to pay? Not after men’s usage. We 
buy by confessions of our need ; by bringing our emptiness and 
want ; by being willing to be the pensioners on the bounty of 
God. To give up yourself, to renounce all faith in prayers and 
tears and entreaties, to be willing to take as a little child 
from the open hand of God—this is the purchase money for 
the priceless wealth of heaven. 

Let it never be forgotten that the rich provisions of God's 
grace can only be enjoyed by those who follow their Leader, 
Christ, and obey his commands. This Captain of ours demands 
absolute obedience. If He says, “Come!” we must come, 
whatever we leave. If He says, “Go!” we must go, into 


196 Our Glorified Leader. 


whatever difficulty we plunge, or whatever peril we incur. If 
He says, “ Do this !” there is no appeal. Run to Him, abide in 
Him, sit with Him in the heavenlies, obey Him! Take Him 
as God’s best gift; give Him the glory of thy homage as the 
Father has given Him the glory of his own bright home. So 
shalt thou drink wine and milk, and eat bread that satisfies, and 
delight thyself in the fatness of his holy temple. 

Thus earth may partake somewhat of the blessedness of that 
eternal world, where it is said that “they follow the Lamb 
whithersoever He goeth; and they hunger no more, neither 
thirst any more, neither does the sun strike on them, nor any 
heat.” In fact, the whole Church drinks of the same river, 
and upon the same conditions. In each world the flock must 
follow the lead of Christ. In each world they drink of the river 
of the water of life, proceeding from the throne of God and the 
Lamb ; the one near its source, the other in the lowlands of 
this world. 


XXVII. 
he Near and Beabenly Borizons. 


‘* Mine is an unchanging love, 
Higher than the heights above, 
Deeper than the depths beneath, 
Free and faithful, strong as death.” 
COWPER, 


(ISAIAH lv. 9.) 





GIHE thoughts of God! We can form some conception 
of them through the works of his hand, whether in 
nature, providence, or redemption. The psalmist 
describes them as permanent in their endurance ; as 
surpassing the reckoning of human arithmetic ; and 
as being a fathomless deep. It is told of Kepler 
that, one night, after hours spent in observing the motions 
of the heavenly bodies, he exclaimed, “I have been thinking 
over again the earliest thoughts of God.” But there are earlier 
thoughts than those impressed on nature. The love that led to 
the choice of man in Christ, and will culminate in the glory, is 
older far. Let us think more often of these thoughts of God, 
until we cry, ‘‘How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O 
God! How great is the sum of them !” 

The ways of God/ He made them known unto Moses ; as 
though He could communicate a more intimate knowledge 
of his dealings to his favoured servant than was possible to the 
children of Israel, who were only made cognizant of his acts. 
God’s way is in the sea of mystery ; his path lies through the 
great waters of sorrow. It was the cry of the psalmist that he 
should be taught His ways; it was the Divine complaint 
against Israel that they had not known them. 

It is of these thoughts and ways that we are told that they 


198 The Mear and Heabenly Horizons. 


are as much above ours as the heavens are above the earth. 
First, the heavens are so far above the earth, and therefore 
so pure. Second, they are so far, and therefore so abundant. 
Third, they are so far, and therefore so beneficent. And in each 
of these respects they are emblems of the nature and the mercy 
of God. 


I. So FAR, AND THEREFORE SO PURE.—In the firmament 
of heaven there entereth nothing that worketh abomination or 
defiles. The miasma with its poison, the smoke belched from 
the chimney with its dark stain, are powerless to sully the 
purity of the azure. Meet emblem this of the purity of God, 
whose name is Holy, and who dwells in the high and holy 
place. The contrast between heaven and earth in this respect 
is the contrast between God’s thoughts and ways, and man’s. 
Such is evidently the teaching of this passage: “Let the 
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts 
. . . . For My ¢houghts are not your thoughts, neither are 
your ways My ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens,” etc. 

Of course, man could never emulate the thoughts and ways 
of God in their measure and movement, their infinitude, or 
their incomprehensible extent. This is not required ; nor is it 
accounted a sin that we should fall short in the measure and 
quantity. But since we are made in the image of God, it 
is evidently possible that we should manifest a strong likeness 
to his thoughts and ways, so far at least as their gua/ity and 
essential nature are concerned. 

The calculations of astronomers prove that there is an iden- 
tity between the Divine and human mind in arithmetic and 
mathematics. The transcription of the work of God by the 
artist or sculptor proves that there is an identity in the apprecia- 
tion of beauty. The perpetual tendency on the part of man to 
produce, whether it be a poem or a minster, proves an identity 
in the creative faculty. Similarly, there must be an identity in 
the moral and spiritual. What is true to God, is so to us. 
Love, purity, compassion, humility, are the same in the Divine 
and in the human. It is by the spectroscope of our own hearts 
that we are able to determine the elements that compose the 


God's Thoughts, and Ours. 199 


being of God. The original creation of man in God’s image, 
and the incarnation, which showed that it was possible for God 
to think and act through our nature, establish beyond con- 
troversy that man can and should think God’s thoughts, and 
tread God’s ways. Though his home is on the earth, he is not 
the child of earth, but of heaven ; and is called to seek, not the 
things below, but those above, the things of God, and eternity. 

The entrance of sin into our world has altered all this. 
Earth’s attraction has proved too strong. The transient and 
visible, with their appeal to the senses, have ruptured the 
harmony which the Creator intended to subsist between the 
Divine and the human, like noble words married to celestial 
music. It is but too evident that the imagination of the 
thoughts of man’s heart is only evil continually, and his ways 
corrupt. By nature, the trend of our thinkings and activities 
is downward, earthly, sensual, devilish. Hence the awful 
disparity between the ways and thoughts of God and ours. 

It is impossible, therefore, for the natural man to understand 
God. We can only know one another through the spirit of 
man which is in us. Our quick human sympathy reveals 
instantly, and by a flash, what no words could tell. But we 
must be likeminded before we can read each other. It is 
equally so as between ourselves and God. The natural man, 
whose tastes and ways are foreign to God’s, can no more 
receive the things of the Spirit of God, than can a savage 
understand the thoughts and ways of a highly-cultured, refined, 
and spiritual man amongst ourselves. “They are foolishness 
unto him, neither can he know them ; because they are spirit- 
ually discerned.” 

It is impossible, also, for the natural man to please God. 
God’s thoughts are holiness, his ways purity ; but those of the 
unregenerate are unholy and impure. God’s thoughts are 
love, his ways tenderness ; but those of the unregenerate are 
self-centred and injurious. God’s thoughts are truth, his ways 
faithful ; whilst those of the unregenerate are insincere and 
deceptive. How impossible it is, therefore, for those who are 
in the flesh to please God! They are not subject to the law of 
God, neither indeed can be, 


200 The Mear and Beabenly Horizons. 


It is impossible, also, for the natural man to live with God 
for ever, unless the wicked forsake his ways, and the un- 
righteous man his thoughts. Whatever the sufferings of the 
outer darkness may be, those of the inner chamber, to the evil 
and profane, would be incomparably worse. To the diseased 
eye, nothing is so excruciatingly painful as the floods of 
summer sunshine in which age and youth rejoice. And to the 
unholy soul, no suffering would be more awful than to be 
compelled to live for ever amid the blaze of God’s presence, 
with which it was in perpetual opposition and contrariety. If 
it were possible for such an one to enter the city of God, with 
its light above the brightness of the sun, its music, its festal 
crowds, its holy exercises, the olden cry would be heard 
exclaiming, “What have I to do with Thee, the Holy One? 
thy presence torments me.” 

It is imperative, then, that the ways and thoughts of the 
wicked and unrighteous should be forsaken. They must return 
from By-path Meadow, and reverse the current of their thinking. 
The eyes that had been fixed on vanity must be lifted in the 
track of the ascending Lord ; the feet that had almost gone 
over the precipice to perdition must run in the way of God’s 
commandments ; and the will must be so put in the line of 
God’s will, that God may work in it that which is well pleasing 
in his sight, for the glory of his Holy Name. The Ascension 
gives us the direction, and the Holy Ghost the power, by which 
the new and better life shall henceforth be lived (Col. iii. 1-4). 
Thus the pure life of the heavens may be brought down to our 
earth, even as it was in the life of our Lord, who during his - 
earthly sojourn did not hesitate to speak of Himself as yet 
being in heaven (John iii. 13). 


II. SO FAR, AND THEREFORE SO ABUNDANT.—Measure the 
height of the heavens above the earth ; attach yourself to some 
angel-aeronaut, and let him pilot you through their ample 
spaces to the confines of our system, where Neptune and 
Uranus burn with brilliant glory ; then across the dark, silent 
gulf which intervenes between them and the nearest fixed star— 
a space so great that, supposing our sun were represented by a 


“ Be will Abundantly Pardon.” 201 


two-foot globe, it would be equivalent to the distance between 
our shores and Australia. From that distant point you might 
pass on to worlds so inconceivably distant, that though their 
light has been travelling towards us for millenniums, it has 
never yet reached our world. Thence you might pass to the 
margin of the ocean of space, where the waves of ether break 
in music on their shores. Such are the heavens. In truth, 
they are higher than the earth; and in precisely the same 
proportion is the abundance of God’s pardon beyond the 
furthest reach of our imaginings. “ He will abundantly pardon. 
For my thoughts are not your thoughts ; neither are your ways 
my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher,” etc. 
' This is the thought which the apostle expands in one of the 
most glowing passages on the page of revelation (Rom. v. 12-21). 
His point is, that whatever was done by sin, and through sin, 
must be paralleled and outdone by the grace of God. If death 
came to all men through the trespass of a sinner, of course 
grace must come to them all through the person and work of 
the one glorious and unfallen Man, Jesus Christ. If it was 
possible for death to get such a foothold through one act of 
selfishness as to reign, it must be equally possible for eternal 
life to reign through the matchless act of self-denial which 
shines from the cross. If sin reigned in death, much more 
must grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life. He 
goes so far as to say that God gave the law that the full 
virulence and violence of sin might be discovered. It was as 
though He gave carte blanche to sin to do its worst. At the 
cross, where the dispensation of law culminated, there was an 
apocalypse, an unveiling, of the exceeding sinfulness of sin. 
Only God before that had known what sin really was in its 
essence and possibilities: from that moment the dark secret 
was revealed to the universe. But if sin, like the dark waters 
of the Deluge, covered earth’s highest mountains, grace in 
its abundant provisions was as much above it as the heavens 
were above the floods when they were at their worst. 

There is no parallel between our forgiveness and God’s. We 
must not measure his by ours. We say we would forgive if 
there were more adequate contrition, more complete confession ; 


202 The Near and Beabenly Horizons. 


or we would forgive if the sin were not so wilful and unpro- 
voked ; or we will forgive, but we cannot forget. Our for- 
giveness is not ready, and we are often cautious and chilly 
towards those who have offended us, but to whom we have 
become reconciled. With such memories as these, is it 
wonderful that we cannot realize the completeness of God’s 
forgiveness, nor the full meaning of his assurance that He will 
remember our sins no more? Leave your miserable standards 
behind, whether of your own forgiveness, or of those of others : 
they positively will not help you here ; your fathoming lines 
are utterly useless ; your estimates futile. Measure the height 
of yonder heavens above the earth ; and then begin to compute 
the abundance of God’s pardon to those who return to Him, 
with words of confession on their lips, and true penitence in 
their hearts. : 

The prodigal thinks at the very most that he can only expect 
a stinted pardon, and a servant's fare. That is because his 
notions of forgiveness range no higher. But the father runs, 
falls on his neck, kisses him, clothes him with the most sump- 
tuous dress, and seats him at the table with the most royal 
provision. That is the difference between man’s notions of 
pardon and Christ’s. 

When God forgives, He ceases to remember; He blots out 
iniquities as a cloud, and sins as a thick cloud; He does not 
treat us simply as pardoned criminals, but takes us to his heart 
as beloved sons ; He imputes to us a perfect righteousness ; He 
treats us as though we were credited with the perfect loveliness 
of the Best-Beloved ; He transforms the sad consequences of 
our sins into blessings, so that as we return from the far country, 
the mountains break forth into song, the trees of the wood clap 
their hands ; instead of the thorn comes up the fir tree, and 
instead of the briar the myrtle tree ; and these transformations 
become everlasting memorials of what God’s love can do for 
the repentant sinner. This surely is as much above man’s 


notions of forgiveness as the heavens are high above the 
earth. 


III. SO FAR, AND THEREFORE SO BENEFICENT.—-Because 


Ghe Beneficence of God. 203 


the heavens are so far above the earth, they are able to collect 
in their ample bosom the moisture of the earth. The clouds, 
like barges, bear their precious cargo of rain and snow over the 
parched earth, to drop the one in fertilising streams, and the 
other as a warm mantle on the upturned furrows. Thus, 
because the heavens are higher than the earth, the rain cometh 
down and the snow from heaven, and watereth the earth, and 
maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the 
sower and bread to the eater. 

The very greatness of God is an obligation. Just because 
He dwells in the ample pavilion of heaven, He is under a moral 
indebtedness to help us in our low and fallen estate. The pos- 

session of power among all right-minded men constitutes an 
irresistible argument for the relief of sorrow and distress ; how 
much more with the Infinite One, who is Love! If Paul held 
himself as debtor to all men, how much more God ! 

And how graciously and generously He has met the demand! 
His word distils as the tender dew, and is pure and warmth- 
giving as the snow. Who can tell-the number, or pricelessness, 
or glory of his gifts in Jesus Christ ? 

Streams of mercy, never ceasing, 
Call for songs of loudest praise. 

The one question for us all to answer is our response to these 
descending influences from the heart of God. We read, that 
land which hath drunk the rain that cometh oft upon it, and 
beareth thorns and thistles, is nigh unto a curse, and its end is 
to be burned. Have we thus recompensed the grace of God, 
which has fallen on our souls? Alas for us, if we have! yet 
even now they may be changed to myrtles and fir trees. Happy 
are they who bring forth herbs meet for Him for whose sake 
they have been tilled. Who can this be, save Jesus Christ our 
Lord, whose inheritance we are, and who has expended on us 
the bloody sweat of his brow, the labour and patience of long 


years. 


XXVIII. 
Ghe Gransformations of God's Grace. 


‘‘ Now—the spirit conflict-riven, 
Wounded heart, unequal strife ! 
Afterward—the triumph given, 
And the Victor’s crown of Life ! 
Now—the training, strange and lowly, 
Unexplained and tedious now! 
Afterward— the Service holy, 
And the Master's ‘ Enter thou !'” 
F, R. HAVERGAL, 
(ISAIAH lv. 12, 13.) 


HE wealth of God’s abundant pardon is here set forth 
in metaphors which the least imaginative can under- 
stand. Not only were the exiles forgiven, their war- 
fare accomplished, their iniquity pardoned ; but they 
would be restored to the land of their fathers—“ Ye 
shall go out . . . ye shail be led forth . . .” 

Not only were they to be restored ; but their return was to be 

one long triumphal march. Nature herself would celebrate it 

with joyful demonstration ; mountains and hills would break 
forth into singing, and all the trees of the field would clap their 
hands. 

But even this was not all. One of the necessary results 
of the depopulation of the land of Israel was the deterioration 
of the soil. Vast tracts had passed out of cultivation; the 
terraces, reared on the slopes of the hills with so much care, 
had become heaps of stones; where corn had waved in the 
rustling breeze, or luscious fruits had ripened in the autumn 
sunshine, there was the sad fulfilment of the prediction, “ They 
shall smite upon their breasts for the pleasant fields, for the 





“An Eberlasting Sign.” 205 


fruitful vine. Upon the land of My people shall come up 
thorns and briers” (Isa. xxxii. 12, 13). But this, too, was to be 
reversed. Literally and metaphorically, there was to be a com- 
plete reversal of the results of former sins and backslidings. 
Instead of the thorn would come up the fir tree, and instead of 
the briar would come up the myrtle tree ; and it would be to the 
Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign, that would not be cut 
off. An everlasting sign! That surely indicates that sacred 
lessons are hidden under this prediction, which are of per- 
manent interest and importance. Let us seek them in the light 
of other scriptures. 

“Unto Adam He said, cursed is the ground for thy sake ; in 
sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life ; thorns also, 
and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee.” 

“ And the soldiers plaited a crown of thorns, and put it on 
His head.” 

“There was given me a thorn in the flesh . . . Con- 
cerning this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might de- 
part from me. And He said unto me, My grace is sufficient for 
thee.” 

Our thought naturally divides itself thus: The Thorns and 
Briars of Life; The Royalty of Suffering them; The Trans- 
formations of Grace. 


I]. THE THORNS AND BRIARS OF LiIFE.—In many cases we 
reap what others have sown ; in some_we sow for ourselves ; in 
others we suffer from our neglect. We have failed to use our 
opportunities ; and therefore crops of rank growth cover the 
acres of the past, and thistledown hovers in clouds, threatening 
the future. 

Til-health is surely one. Many of us, through God’s good- 
ness, have known but few days of sickness in our lives ; others 
have known as few of complete health. Disease fastened on 
them in early life, has sapped their strength, is slowly working 
its way to the citadel of life. For some, the excesses of their 
ancestors—for others, their own—have sown the furrows with 
the seeds of bitter harvests, which they have no alternative than 
to reap. Dyspepsia, cancer, the slow progress of paralysis 


206 Ghe Transformations of God's Grace. 


along the spinal cord, nervous weakness and depression—these 
are some of the many ills to which our flesh is heir; and they 
are thorns indeed. . Paul’s thorn was probably ophthalmia. 

Bad children are another. Did David not mean this when 
he said that his house was not so with God; and that the 
ungodly, like thorns, must be thrust away with the armed 
hand? 

Was he not thinking of Absalom and Adonijah, and others 
in his home circle? He was certainly describing the ex- 
periences of many a parent whose life has been embittered by 
stubborn, dissolute, and extravagant children. When the 
daughters make unfortunate marriages, and sons spread their 
sails to every gale of passion, there are thorns and briars 
enough to make misery in the best-appointed and most richly- 
furnished homes. 

Strong predispositions and tendencies towards evil may be 
classed among the thorns. To be of a jealous or envious tem- 
perament ; to have an inordinate love for praise and flattery ; 
to be cursed with the clinging habit of impurity, intemperance, 
or greediness ; to be of an irascible or phlegmatic disposition ; 
and to be so liable to doubts that all the affirmations of fellow- 
disciples fall on dull and irresponsive ears—this is to be beset 
with thorns and briars, as though all the goodness of a field 
should go to waste in weeds. 

Compulsory association with uncongenial companions in the 
workshop or the home. When day and night we are obliged to 
bear the galling yoke of fellowship with those who have no love 
for God, no care for man. When the enemy daily taunts, the 
sword penetrates to the bone, and the reproach eats like acid 
into the flesh ; when we pick our way along paths thick-set 
with traps, we know something of these cruel thorns. The old 
punishment of the men of Succoth at the hands of Gideon has 
its counterpart still: “And he took the elders of the city, and 
thorns of the wilderness, and briars, and with them he thrashed 
the men of Succoth.” 

Difficulties that bar our progress, like hedges of nae 
thorns in some tangled forest, may be included in this enumera- 
tion. Competition in commercial life makes thorny the path 


All-sufltcient Grace. 207 


of many a man of business. Perplexities and worries, an- 
noyances, and vexations, fret us almost beyond endurance ; the 
tender flesh is pitilessly torn, the heart bleeds secretly, hope 
dies in the soul; we question the wisdom and goodness of 
God in having made or permitted such a world where such 
things were possible. 

Each life has experiences like these. Messengers of Satan 
come to buffet us all, making us ask the Lord—not once, nor 
twice, but often—if the stake may not be taken out of the flesh, 
and the soul set free to serve Him. Surely, we argue, we could 
live nobler and more useful lives, if only we were free. “ Not 
so,” says the Lord. “I cannot take away the thorn—it is the 
only means of royalty for thee; but I will give thee my all- 
sufficient grace.” 


II. ROYALTY THROUGH THORNS.—It is very remarkable 
that the sign of the curse became, on the brow of Christ, the 
insignia of Royalty. The lesson is obvious—that He has 
transformed the curse into a blessing ; that He has discovered 
the secret of compelling it to yield royalty. 

There was some dim hint of this in the words of the primeval 
curse on the ground, “ Cursed is the ground for thy sake; thorns 
also and thistles it shall bring forth unto thee.” What can this 
mean, except that there was an ulterior design in this infliction 
on the material world? It is not very clear what is implied in 
this sentence on the ground. Almost certainly there were 
thorns and thistles before Adam’s sin brought a blight on God’s 
fair world ; but probably from that moment they became more 
prolific, or the conditions that had been unfavourable to their 
growth became more favourable, or malign hands were per- 
mitted to scatter their seeds afar. But, however it befell, there 
can be no doubt that God’s purpose was wholly benevolent. 
Cursed is the ground for thy sake ; that is, out of the obduracy 
of the soil, and its tendency to breed thorns and thistles, will 
come to thee the best and highest blessing. 

Surely this has been verified. Where has man Bina 
his noblest development ? in lands where kindly nature has been 
most prodigal of her good gifts? where the soil has only needed 


208 Ghe Transformations of God's Grace. 


scratching to yield a bountiful return? where life has been free 
from care, as that of bees among the limes? No, not there. 
By her, the bountiful provision of all they needed for their 
sustenance and comfort, Nature has enervated her children, 
men have become inert and sensual, ease-loving and muscleless. 
But where the soil has been unkindly, the climate inhospitable, 
the struggle for existence hard, the presence of the thorn ever 
menacing the cultivated patch, and threatening to invade garden 
or field; where every endeavour has been required to wring 
subsistence from the unwilling ground—there man has arisen 
to his full height, and put forth all his glorious strength of 
brain and sinew. It is through nature’s churlishness and 
niggardliness, through man’s long wrestle with her in the dark, 
through the bearing of travail and sorrow of toil, that the 
supple, crafty, characterless Jacobs have come forth as Israels, 
crowned princes with God. 

Probably this is what is meant in the thorn-crown on the 
brow of Christ. It teaches that man can only attain his true 
royalty by meeting, enduring, and overcoming these elements 
in life, which forbode only disaster and loss. The purpose 
of God is wholly benevolent in the stern discipline to which He 
is subjecting thee. He has set thee down among those thorns 
to give thee an opportunity of changing the wilderness into a 
paradise ; and in the act of transformation thou wilt suddenly 
find thyself ennobled and transfigured. Around thy brow the 
thorns—borne, mastered, subdued—shall weave themselves into 
acrown. Thou shalt glory in thy infirmities, and find a throne 
in the cross to which thou hast been nailed amid indescribable 
agonies. 

What a magnificent conception this gives of the possibilities 
of sorrow! Too many estimable people fret against God’s 
ordering of their lives, and his permission of the evils which 
afflict them. Like Paul, they are always praying to be de- 
livered. But God is too good to answer these blind requests. 
The thorns remain ; they must grapple with them, as did the 
old monks, when they chose some tangled swamp as the site of a 
new monastery. No alternative is afforded. And in proportion 
as we patiently submit ourselves to our Father’s appointment, 


fey Pielws of Dark Things. 209 


we come to see the reasonableness and beneficence of his 
design, and find ourselves adopting the thistle as our badge; 
we discover that it has been the means of unfolding and 
perfecting our character, of giving royalty and dignity to our 
demeanour, and making us kings by right of conquest, as well 
as by right of birth. 


III]. THE TRANSFORMATIONS OF GRACE.—“ Instead of the 
thorn shall come up the fir tree ; and instead of the briar the 
myrtle tree.” ‘‘ My grace is sufficient for thee ; my strength is 
made perfect in weakness.” “I will therefore glory in my 
infirmities.” 

(1) God gives us new views of dark things. What we thought 
was punishment, turns out to be the chastening of a Father’s 
love. The knife is not of the destroyer, but of the surgeon. 
What seemed to be unto death, is shown to be achieving a fuller 
life. The fire that had threatened to consume, only shrivels our 
bonds so that we walk freely over the glowing embers. We 
are permitted to stand beside God on the Mount, while He 
passes by and proclaims his name, and gives his reasons, and 
takes us behind his providences. That illness was sent to rid 
the system of a poison-taint that had else proved fatal. That 
child was permitted to be deformed by a terrible accident, 
because in no other way could she have been saved from a 
dark temptation, to which she must have yielded. That com- 
mercial disaster befell, because the young children of the 
household would have been enervated by too much luxury. 
The thorns change to myrtles when God shows his reasons. 

(2) God makes our sorrow and losses occasions for giving 
more grace. There are two ways of helping the soul bent 
double under some crushing burden. It may be removed; or 
additional strength, equal to its weight, may be inbreathed. 
The latter is God’s choice way of dealing with his children. 
And if we were wise, we should not pray for the extraction of 
the thorn ; but claim the greater grace. Oh, how precious the 
cross is then! How many a sufferer has had to bless God for 
pain! _To how many the rack has seemed like a bed of down, 
and the torture-chamber the vestibule of heaven! Thorns, 

QO 


210 Ghe Transformations of God's Grace. 


under such emotions, are changed to fir trees, and briars to 
myitles. 

(3) The grace of God actually transforms awkward and evil 
dispositions, both in ourselves and others. Softness becomes 
meekness ; cowardice gentleness ; impulsiveness enthusiasm ; 
meanness thrift ; niggardliness generosity ; cruelty consideration 
for others ; irritability and vehemence patience and long suffer- 
ing. God did not destroy the Roman Catholic pulpits at the 
Reformation—He did better, He filled them with Gospel- 
preachers, Similarly, He does not destroy any of our natural 
characteristics, when He brings us to Himself; He only 
eliminates the evil and develops the good. The evil tenant 
goes forth, making room for the new and holy spirit. Where 
sin had reigned unto death, grace now reigns unto eternal life. 
The thorns of passion and temper are replaced by fir trees, and 
the briars by myrtles. He takes the heart of stone out of our 
flesh, and gives us a heart of flesh. “In the habitation of 
jackals, where they lay, is grass with reeds and rushes.” 

How glad is the wife, when, instead of the brute-like cruelty 
which reigned in her husband’s life, there is gentleness and 
consideration! How rejoiced is the mother Monica, when 
her Augustine is no longer the slave of passion; but clothed, 
subdued, restored to his right mind, and seated at the feet of 
Jesus! How significant of the power of Christ, to see a nation 
of savages so transformed that the arts of civilization and the 
practices of Christianity flourish, where once the cannibal dance 
and demon worship held undisputed possession. 

(5) When the discipline has done its work, it is removed. 
The Great Husbandman knows well the delicacy of the grain, 
and He will not always be threshing. Thou hast had thy full 
experience of thorns and briars, and hast borne and not 
fainted ; but now, since the lesson has been learnt with lowly 
submission, the discipline will be removed. Thy Joseph lives, 
and thou shalt see him again and clasp him to thine arms. 
Thou shalt embrace a Samuel, whose prattle will make thee 
forget the smarts of the adversary. Thou shalt receive seven 
times as much as was swept away from thee so suddenly. 
‘hou shalt come again out of the land of the enemy. Instead 


“Precious Promises.” 211 


of the thorn, the fir ; instead of the briar, the myrtle : because 
they have accomplished the purpose for which they were sent. 

These glowing predictions were partially fulfilled in the restor- 
ation of Israel under Ezra and Nehemiah ; and no doubt they 
would have been more fully realized if there had been more 
perfect faith in the Divine promises. 

These glowing words, however, shall be perfectly fulfilled in 
those coming days when Israel shall turn to the land from all 
lands whither her people have been scattered. Their con- 
version, the apostle tells us, shall inaugurate the times of 
refreshing, of which the prophets have spoken from the 
beginning of the world. Then will creation be delivered from 
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the 
children of God. Then shall the mountains be orchestras of 
songs, and the trees vocal with melody. Then shall the 
ancient curse be removed from off the earth, and the malignant 
influence of the great enemy of God’s work be for ever at an 
end. Then shall earth smile and sing, as in the day of her 
creation. It shall be to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting 
sign that shall not be cut off. And the story shall be recited 
through the universe, for evermore, of the sufficiency of God’s 
love to cope with and overcome every manifestation of evil and 
self-will that may rear itself against its sway. 





MORGAN AND SCOTT Lt. 
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, 
LONDON. 


Cloth, 2s. 6d. net. 


Cie Bible and the 
British Museum. 


By ADA R. HABERSHON,. 


Dr. KENYON, Director of the British Museum, says: 


“I think the idea of it is excellent. I am sure there are very many 
people who will be glad of a book which brings together all the 
different ways in which the collections of the British Museum 
illustrate the Bible and its History, and disentangles this subject 
from all the many other subjects with which the Museum is 
concerned.” 


Rey. F. B, MEYER, B.A,, says: 


‘Your book is a jewel. I am going to take it for a guide as soon as 
I can make time for the British Museum.” 


The Chief Rabbi, Dr. ADLER, says: 


‘«Some of the antiquities there indeed wonderfully illustrate the truth 
and authenticity of our sacred Scriptures. The facts are ably set 
forth in your book. I have also read with much interest the 
Preface written by my friend, Sir Robert Anderson.” 


H. SPENCER, Esq., British Museum, says: 


“‘T think it will meet a want among Sunday-school teachers. The 
illustrations and plans are exceptionally good.” 


OF ALL BOOKSELLERS, 


MORGAN AND SCOTT Ltp. 


OrFicE oF @he Obristian, 
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, 
LONDON. 


THE IDEAL CHRISTIAN 
HOME. 


A Book for alf on the Threshold of Life’s Duties. 


By HELEN S. DYER. Artistically Bound and Boxed. 
Admirably adapted as a Wedding Gift, or for Presentation 
to Young People contemplating Marriage. 3s. 6d. net. 


“Mrs. Dyer has already written several useful books on subjects 
connected with Indian missions. Her new work deals with such 
topics as ‘ Partners in Life,’ ‘The Sabbath in the Home,’ ‘ Enemies 
of the Home,’ ‘Recreations of the Home.’ The writer reminds us 
that behind the Revival of the eighteenth century was the influence of 
godly homes, moulding the character and inspiring the hearts of 
those who became its leaders. The book is charmingly bound in 
white, red, and gold, and will be an acceptable present.” 
The British Weekly. 


INTO THE SUNSHINE: 
SKETCHES OF GRACIOUS EXPERIENCE. 


By Mrs. HARVEY-JELLIE, Author of “In the Masters 
Service”; “The Casket”; “Cecil Langton”; “ Questions 
for Mothers”; etc. Cloth, 2s. 6d. net. 


“One of the most telling of the sketches is ‘The Echo that Saved.’ 
It sounds a dramatic note in its title, and is told with manifest power 
and convincing realism. There is a kindly human touch in ‘The 
General's Birthday,’ and in ‘ Hildah’s Folly’; but this is more or less 
evident in all Mrs. Harvey-Jellie’s work." —Dundee Advertiser. 


OF ALL BOOKSELLERS. 


MORGAN AND SCOTT Ltp. 


OrFicE oF @be Whristian, 
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, 
LONDON. 


Cloth, 3s. 6d. net, 


NEW CHINA: 
A STORY OF MODERN TRAVEL 


By W. Y. FULLERTON and C. E. WILSON, B.A. With 
Preface by Rev. RICHARD GLOVER, D.D., and Twenty- 
three Illustrations from Photos specially taken for this 
Story of Travel. 

**An interesting and instructive book, . . . brightly written, 
The book is well and extensively illustrated.”— The Foreign Field. 


“It is from beginning to end one of the most pleasant narratives of a 
trip abroad that we have ever read.""— The Missionary Record. 


Cloth Boards, 3s. 6d. net, 


UNDER THREE TSARS: 


LIBERTY Of CONSCIENCE IN RUSSIA, 1856-1909, 


By ROBERT SLOAN LATIMER, Author of ‘‘ Dr. Baedeker 
and his Apostolic Work in Russia.” With Sixteen IIlustra- 
tions and Map of Russia. 


Mr. Latimer lifts the veil from many a touching scene in a way that 
has never been done before so far as Russia is concerned, and has 
produced a book marked by such earnestness of purpose and 
powerful appeal that it cannot fail to arouse interest in a degree 
hitherto unknown toward our long-suffering fellow-believers in the 
dominions of Nicholas II, 


“A pathetic story of constancy under persecution.” —SZectator. 


‘* Full of information about the present state of religion in Russia.” 
Christian Advocate, 
‘*A thrilling story.” —Christian World. 


OF ALL BOOKSELLERS. 


MORGAN AND SCOTT Lop. 


OFFICE oF @he Wbristian, 
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, 
LONDON. 


Children’s Books by Lettice Bell. 


WHY AND WHAT AT THE 
BRITISH MUSUEM. 


Cloth boards, 1s. 6d. net. 
Dr. CAMPBELL MORGAN, writing of Lettice Bell in his 
magazine, says : 
‘« Ever since we read ‘ Tabernacle Talks with Little People,’ we have 
known that the gifted authoress had a genius all her own for making 


things, not generally considered so, most fascinating for the little 
ones,” 


GO-TO-BED STORIES. 


Cloth, with Frontispiece in Colours, and 7 Half-tone 
Illustrations. Foolscap 4to, 3s. 6d. net. Exquisitely 
Bound in White, Gilt Edges, 4s. 6d. net. 


‘'¢Tell me a story, please!’ is a request that is heard in most 
nurseries, GO-TO-BED STORIES, by Lettice Bell, comes as a wel- 
come change from the familiar fairy tales. It is an excellent collection 
of Bible Stories, arranged alternately with secular tales which illus- 
trate with great directness the truths contained in the Bible story 
preceding each. All the stories are briefly, simply, and concisely 
told. The book is well illustrated."—Record. 


TABERNACLE TALKS WITH 
LITTLE PEOPLE: 


THE STORY OF “THE WONDERFUL HOUSE.” 
With 8 Outline Illustrations for colouring. Elegantly 
Bound in White Cloth Boards, 1s. net. roth THOUSAND. 


‘«The talks are as clear as the writer’s name, the print is good, and 
so are the illustrations. They will be a tremendous help to the 
young.” — Churchman. 


“This practical little volume will provide happy occupation for 
_ Sunday hours in many nurseries."—Christian World. 





OF ALL BOOKSELLERS. 


MORGAN AND SCOTT Lt. 


Orrick OF @he @bristian, 
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, 
LONDON. 


Works by G. E. Morgan, M.A. 


R. C. MORGAN: 

HIS LIFE AND TIMES, “A VETERAN IN REVIVAL.” 
With an Introduction by Right Hon. LoRD KINNAIRD. 
With Four Photogravures, and Eight Half-Tones. Cloth 
Boards, 2s. 6d. 

‘*Mr. R. C. Morgan took for over half a century a leading and 
strenuous part in evangelical work and journalism. He was the 
Founder and Editor of ‘THE CHRISTIAN,’ started by him originally 
during the Revivalist Movement of 1859 (which occupies much 
attention in the book) as ‘ The Revival.’ Mr. George Morgan writes 
as one in keen sympathy with the religious attitude of his father; and 
his book will be welcome to all interested in Protestant evangelical 
work—its history, its personalities, and its literature.” — The Times. 


WHILE WE’RE YOUNG: 
TALKS WITH YOUNG PEOPLE, 
Cloth, 1s. 6d. net. 


These are heart-to-heart talks with youthful readers. Written ina 
friendly and sympathetic style, which is bound to win the confidence 
of young people. 


DREAMS AND REALITIES: 

PRACTICAL PAPERS ON CHRISTIAN LIVING. 
With Preface by Rev. F. B. MEYER, B.A. Cloth Boards, 
1s.; Cloth Bev. Boards, Gilt Top, 1s. 6d.; Paste Grain, 
Round Corners, Red under Gilt Edges, 2s. 6d. net ; Half- 
bound, Long Grain Persian Morocco, Cloth Sides, Panel 
Lettering, Gilt Top, 3s. 6d. net. 

‘*A first-rate little book, full of sound sense and written in a very 
attractive style. It commends the kind of religious life that one 
would most desire to see prevail amongst our young people.” 

Preachers’ Magazine. 


IN SCHOOL AND PLAYGROUND: 
FIVE-MINUTE TALKS WITH YOUNG PEOPLE, 
Cloth Boards, 1s.; Paste Grain, Round Corners, Red 
under Gilt Edges, Assorted Colours, 2s. 6d. net; Half- 
bound Long Grain Persian Morocco, Gilt Top, Assorted 
Colours, 3s. 6d. net. 


LorD OVERTOUN :—‘‘Its illustrations are homely, pointed, and 
helpful, and I am sure it will aid many in interesting the children in 
higher things.” 


OF ALL BOOKSELLERS. 
MORGAN AND SCOTT Lt. 


OFFIicE OF @he Gbristian, 
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, 
LONDON. 





Ghe Christian 


Founded as The Revival in 1859. 
Published every Thursday. Price One Penny. 


Ghe Ghristian isa paper with a purpose. Its watchword is ‘‘ First Things 
First” ; and it seeks to instruct and encourage Evangelical believers, 
regardless of denominational distinctions. 


Che Christian is a weekly record of Christian Life and Testimony, 
Evangelistic Effort and Missionary Enterprise. It endeavours to 
unite, not to divide—to speak of faith and hope in the terms of LOVE. 


The Christian is a welcome visitor in thousands of homes every week 3 
and its message is true to the Gospel, confirmatory of the Faith. In 
- other words, its pages give no hospitality to doubt and unbelief. 


@he Ghristian affords help and guidance to workers in many spheres and 
countries. Missionaries and ministers, teachers and visitors, at 
home and abroad, look to its pages for encouragement and instruc- 
tion, also for intelligence as to the progress of the Gospel cause 
throughout the world. 


Annual Subscription, at home or abroad, 6s. 6d.; to any address for 
thirteen weeks on receipt of 1s. 8d, 


NEWNESS OF LIFE. 


A Monthly Paper for the Deepening of Spiritual Life. 
ONE PENNY. 


EDITED BY THE Rev. J. MOUNTAIN, D.D. 


Subscription : 1/6 per annum, post free to any part of the world. 
OLN hi LEE EO OOOO 
A copy of “The Christian” sent every week and “ Newness of Life” 


sent every month to a friend by the Publishers would be most accept- 
able gifts, and a constant reminder of your friendship. 


MORGAN AND SCOTT Ltp. 


OFFICE OF @he Ghristian, 
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, 
LONDON. 

















1520 Meyer, Fe Be (Frederick Bro 
eM49 1847-19296 
1911 Christ in Isaiah / by FeB 
London =: Morgan and Scotty, 
211 pe 3; 18 cme 


le Biblee OeTe Isaiah XL-; 
Commentariese 2e Messiah--—] 
rey Ie Title ' 


3) | ; 
ccsc 06 APR 98 34735389 CSIMxc 


mR 
ry 






i fi ee A Hel ra 


Vo ay ne Hi i tial uty iT 
ia a ni 


oh i fh nti) Viale! 
We ees at Bi 
iti na ul i) i) . 7 We oS 
a mh at th 
1 i il i 
ti at ity ah 








i oar ui 


nt 


i 
Hl bid hi aa re 



























ae TAME Hi Ne ne a i) i rH cr iit 

} i Ralit fie : { eM Tae mii 

a ‘ti HN Hi an 7 i iit Wien i) ies Hil iN Hie Aine an 
wal ei i} a et nit tiie “i Hi ih iN With i} Ht} ahs 1H He Ny 

hd it Twi 

ca Nt rea | ey bir } i) is HN i Huh Ht Hh ait i 
SS aH MN ni Aes Ry 
aa Hel iil eta cant) NH ui) Da ue f is ia i tae na arith NE t 
tality jit Hi Men thE Ate in Pani a Is Peat Mi ih rik Mi pee 
oars ry a a Mi! . alt nd nd TH aie 
avin AM HPE RE Hg deat au iit ts, a i 
id Mh ii) Hi ite A hal 

cat hi 
Wit \ 






Wh Wy HF 


he i} ie Wi 
*¢ 


us 1 
<a is Ht Bee i 







Veun 1 This 
; i iH i 4 


His Hi 
asi} ut Hiei: ty h { 
Shei es “ue i‘ i 1 ni ie ui i 
pial ee TA i if ie int ee Ha A i 
i itt Neth oe i hi i i nn eR Gt His 
i hin Hi Hh Hh ety AN Ans 
| AAA Hy . bt 1 Writ it Hh 
a Hi i ili a TN it 
ee 
Hil a i ; fi i HW vi i it aka, 
| i i 1s s 
ul 8 
ce ri La aM nett 
a. Hit AWN 
Wl iit j 


i ie 
‘i He i 


i Hee 
Mi 















it 





Ni 
A 











———- 





